This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 
to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 
publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 

We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 



at jhttp : //books . qooqle . com/ 




rffg&fe. 



THE 'JL$j(£_S 

H IS T R Y 



OF 



AMERICA, 

WILLIAM K^OBERTSOtf, D. D. 

Principal of the Univerfity of Edinburgh, 
Historiographer to his Majesty for Scot- 
land, and Member of the royal Academy 
of History at Madrid* 



VOLUME I. 



VIENNA, 
Printed for F. A. Schr^mbl, corner In the 

Karnthner - Street , Nro. 1 05 3, 

1787* 



PRE FACE. 



XN fulfilling the engagement which I had come 
under to the Publick with refpect to the Hiftory 
of America, it was my intention not to have 
publifhed any part of the work untilthe whole 
was completed. The prefent ftate of the Bri- 
tifh Colonies has induced me to alter that re- 
folution. While they are engaged In civil war 
with Great Britain , inquiries and fpeculations 
concerning their ancient forms of policy and ? 
laws, which exift no longer, cannot be inter- 
efting. The attention and expectation of man- 
kind are now turned towards their future con- 
dition. In whatever manner this unhappy con- 
teft may terminate, a new order of things muft 
arife in North America, and its affairs will af- 
iume another afpeft. I wait, with the folici- 
tude of a good citizen, until the ferment fub- 



IV PREFACE. 

fide, and regular government be reeftablifhed , 
and then I fhall return to this part 6f my work, 
in which I had made fome progrefs. That , 
, together with the hiftory of Portuguese Ame- 
rica, and of the fettlements made by the feve- 
ral nations of Europe in the Weft India iflands, 
will complete my plan. 

The three volumes which I now publifh , 

4 

contain an account of the difcovery of the New 
World, and of the progrefs of the Spanifh artris 
and colonies there. This is not only the moft 
fplendid portion of the American ftory , but fo 
much detached, as, by itfelf , to form a perfeft 
whole , remarkable for the unity of the fubjeft. 
As the principles and maxims of the Spaniards 
in planting colonies , which have been adopted 
in fome meafure by every nation , are unfolded 
in this part of my work; it will ferve as a pro- 
per introduftion to the hillory of all the Eu- 
ropean eftablifhments in America, and convey 
fuch information concerning this important ar- 



,P R E E A G E, ¥ 

tide of policy, as may be deemed no lefs in*, 
terefting than curious. 

In . defcribing the achievements and infti- 
tutions of the Spaniards in the New World, I 
have departed in many inftances. from the ac- 
counts of preceding hiftorians , and have ofton 
related fafts which feemto have been unknown 
ta thenar.. It is a duty I owe the Publick,, tp 
mention the fources froni which I have derived 
fuch intelligence , as juftifies me either in plac- 
ing tranfaftions in a new light, or in forming 
any new opinion, with refpeft to their caufes 
and effe&s. This doty I perform with greater 
fatisfaftion , as it will afford an opportunity of 
exprefliog my % gratitude to thofe benefaftors 
who have honoured me with their oountenanoe 
and aid in my refearches. 

As it was from Spain that I had to expeft 
the raoft important information , with regard 
to this part of. my work , I confidered, it a^ja 
very fortunate circumilance for me, when Lord 



VI PREFACE. 

Gr ail th am, to whom I had the honour of being 
perfonnally known, and with* whofe liberality 
oTferitiment, and difpofition to oblige, I was 
well ^acquainted, was appointei arnbaffador to 
-the court of Madrid. Upon applying to him, 
I met with fuch a reception as fatisfied me that 
his endeavours would be employed in the moft 
'jfroper manner, in order to obtain the gratifi- 
•cation of my wifhes ; and I am perfectly fen- 
fible, that what progrefs I have made in my 
"inquiries among the Spaniards i ought to be 
afcribed chiefly to their knowing how much his 
Lordfbip interefted himfelf in my fuccefs. 
« But did I owe nothing more to Lord Gran- 
tham, than the advantages whfch I hav&e deriv- 
ed from his attention in engaging Mr. Wad- 
dilove, the chaplain, of his embafly,, to take 
the conduft of my literary inquiries in Spain , 
the obligations I lie under to him would be 
very great. During five years, that gentleman 
has carried on refearches for my behoof, with 



PREFACE. ' VII 

fuch a&ivity, perfeverance , and knowledge of 
the fubjefr, to which his attention was turned, 
as have filled me with no lefs aftonifhjnent 
than fitisfa&ion. He procured for me the 
greater part of the Spanifh books, which I have 
confulted, and as many of them were print- 
fed ejfrly in the fifteenth century , and are be- 
come extremely rare, thecplle&ing of thefe was 
fuch an occupation, as, alone, required much 
time and afliduity. To his friendly attention I 
am indebted for copies of feveral valuable ma- 
nufcripts, containing fafts and details which I 
might have fearched for in vain, in works that 
have been made publick. Encouraged by the 
inviting good -will with which Mr. Waddilove 
conferred his favours, I tranfmitted to him a 
fet of queries, with refpeft both to the cuftomS 
and policy of the native Americans, and the pa 
ture of feveral inftitutions in the Spanifh fettle- 
ments, framed in fuch a manner, that a Spa- 
niard might anfwer them, without difclofing 



VPI PREFACE. 

any thing that was improper to be communi- 
cated to a foreigner. He tranflated thefe into 
Spanifh,. apd obtained from various perfons 
who had refided in moft of the Spanifh colo- 
nies , fuch replies as have afforded me much 
inftru&ion. 

Notwithitanding thofe peculiar advantage* 
with which my inquiries were carried ok in 
Spain/ it is with regret I am obliged to add f 
that their fuccefs muft be afcribed to the bene- 
ficence of individuals , not to any communica- 
tion by publick authority. By a Angular arrange- 
ment of Philip II. the records ofthe Spanifh mo- 
narchy are depofited in the Archivo of Siman- 
cas, near Valladolid , at the diftance of a hun- 
dred and twenty miles from the feat of govern- 
ment, and the fupreme courts of juftice. The 
papers relative to America, and cbfeffy to 
that early period of its hiftory , towards which 
my attention was dire&ed, are fo numerous f 

that they alone, according to one account , filj 
« 



PREFACE^ IX 

the largeft apartment in the Arqhivo; and ac- 
cording to another, they compofe eight hundred 
and feventy-three large bundles. Confeious pf 
pofieffing, in ibme degree, the induftry which 
hejongs to an hjftoripn , the profpeflt of fuch a 
treafure excited my tnoft ardent curjtofltys JPftt 
the profpeft of it, ig all that I have enjoyed. 
Spain., with an excefs of caution , has uniformly 
thrown a y$U oyer her tranfa&ions in America. 
From ftrangers they are concealed with peculiar 
folicitude. Even to her own fubje&s the Archi- 
vp of Simancas is not opened without a parti- 
jcuiar order from the crown ; and after obtain- 
ing that, papers cannot be copied without 
paying fees of office fo exorbitant, that the ex- 
pence exceeds what it yrpuld be proper to be- 
#ow, when the gratification of literary curi- 
ofity is the only objeft. It is to be hoped , that 
the Spaniards will at laft difcover this fyftem 
ef (concealment to be no lefs impolitick than illi- 
beral. From what J have experienced in the 



X PR E.F ACE. 

cburfe of tny inquiries, I am fatisfied, that 
upon a more minute fcrutiny into their early 
operations ip the New World, however repre- 
henfible the actions of individuals may appear, 
the conduft of the nation will be placed in * 
more favourable light. 

In other parts of Europe very different fen*- 
timents prevail. Having fearched, without fuc- 
cefs , in Spain , for a letter of Cortes to Charles 
V. written foon after he landed in* the Mexican 
empire , which has not hitherto been publifhed ; 
it occurred to me, that as the Emperor was 
fetting out for Germany at the time when the 
meffengers from Cortes arrived in Europe, the 
letter with which they were intrufted might 
poflibly be preferved in the Imperial Library of 
Vienna. I communicated this idea to Sir Robert 
Murray Keith, with whom I have long had the 
honour to live in friendfhip , and I had foon 
the pleafure to learn, that, upon his appli- 
cation , her Imperial Majefty had been gracioufly 



PREFACE. XI 

pfeafed to iffue an order, that not only a copy 
of that letter ( if itwere found) , but of anyothe 
papers in the library , which could throw light 
upon, the Hiftoty of America', fhould be tran.O- 
-mitted to me. The letter from Cortes is not in. 
the Imperial Library, but an authentick copy,, 
at;tefted by a notary, of that written by the 
magiftrates of the colony planted by him at 
Vera Cruz, which I have mentioned, vbl. ii- 
. having been found; it was tranfcribed and fent 
to. me. This, no lefs curious, and as little 
known as the letter which was the objeft of 
my inquiries, I did not receive until that part 
of. the hiftory to which it relates was printed > 
but I have given fome account of what is mo(t 
worthy of notice in it, at the end of Notes and 
Illuftrations, vol. iii. Together with it, I 
received a copy of a letter from Cortes, contain- 
ing a long account of his expedition to Hon- 
duras , with refpeft to which, I did not think 
it neceflary to enter into any particular detail; 



XII PREFAC E. 

and likewife thofe curious Mexican paintings f 
which I have defcribed, voL iiL 

My inquiries at St Peterfburgh were car- 
ried on with equal facility and fuccefs. In 
examining into the neareft communication be- 
tween our continent and that of America, it be* 
came of confequence to obtain authentick infor- 
mation concerning thedifcoveries of the Ruffian* 
in their navigation from Kamchatka towards the 
coait of America. Accurate relations of their 
firft voyage, in I 741, have been pubUfhed 
by Muller and Gmelin. Several foreign authors 
have entertained an opinion , that the court of 
Ruffia ftudioufly conceals the progrefs which 
has b een made by more recent navigators , and 
fuffers the Publick to be amufed with falfe ac- 
counts of their route* Such conduft appeared 
to me unfuitable to thofe liberal fentiments , and 
that patronage offcience, for which the prefent 
fovereign of Ruffia is eminent; nor could I 
difcern any political reafon, that might render 



P&Et A C & XIII 

it lihpfoper to apply for information concern- 
ing the late attempts of the Ruffians to open 
st ^communication between Afia and America. 
My ingenious couirtrimanj Dr. Rogerfon, fiffc 
phyffciaiito theEmprefs, prefented my fequeft 
to her Imperial Majefly , who not only 
dlfcfiumedany idea of concealment , hut inftantly 
ordered the journal of captain Kreriitzifl, 
who conducted the only voyage of difcovery 
made by publick authority fince the year 1741 
to be tfanflated, and his original chart to be 
Copied for my ufe. By confulting them, 1 
have been enabled to give a more accurate view 
o£ the progrefs and extent of the Ruffian disco- 
veries, than has hitherto been communicated 
to the Publick. 

From other quarters I have received infor- 
mation of great utility and importance, M. 
le Chevalier de Pinto, the minifter from Por- 
tugal to the court of Great Britain , who com- 
manded for feveral years at Mpagroffo , a fettle- 



XIV PREFACE. 

ment of the Portuguese in the interior part 
of Brafil , where the Indians are numerous, 
and their original manners little altered by in- 
tercourfe with Europeans , was pleafed to fend 
me very full anfwers to fome queries concern- 
ing the chara&er and inftitutions of the nati- 
ves of America , which his polite reception o % f 
an application made to him in my name, en- 
couraged me to propofe. Thefe fatisfied me, 
that he had contemplated with a difcerning at- 
tention the curious objefts which his fituation 
prefented to his view , and I have often followed 
him as one of my belt inftrufted guides. 

M. Suard, to whofe elegant- tranflation 
of the Hiftory of the reign of Charles V. I owe 
the reception of that work on the continent, 
procured me anfwers to the fame queries from 
M. de Bougainville , who had opportunities 
of obferving the Indians both of North and 
South America, and from M. Godin le Jcune, 
who refided fifteen years among Indians in 



PREFACE, XV 

Quito, and twenty years in Cayenne. The 
latter are more valuable from having been exa- 
mined by M. de la Condamine, who, a few 
weeks before his death , made fome fhort ad- 
ditions to them which may be confidered as 
the laft effort of that attention to fcience which 
occupied a long life. 

My inquiries were not confined to one 
region in America. Governor Hutchinfon took 
the trouble of recommending the confideration 
of my queries to Mr. Hawley and Mr. 
Brainerd, two proteftant miflionaries , employ- 
ed among the Indians of the Five Nations , 
who favoured me with anfwers, which disco- 
ver a confiderable knowledge of the people 
whofe cuftoms they defcribe. From William 
Smith, Efq; the ingenious hiftorian of New 
York , I received fome ufelul information. 
When I enter upon the Hiftory of our Colo- 
nies in North America , I fhall have occafion 
to acknowledge how much I have been 



XVI PR E F AC U/ 

indebted to ihahy other gentleman of tha^ 
country. . . .} 

From the valuable CoUeftion of Voytfge* 
made by Alexander Dalrymple , Efq ; \rftk 
whofe attention to the Hiftory of Navigation 
. and Difcovery the Publick is well acquainted^- 
I have received fome very rare books '4 parti* 
cularly two large volumes of Memorials * partly 
manufcript , and partly prints which Were 
prefented to the court of Spain during ttte 
reigns of Philip III. and Philip IV. From 
thefe I have learned many curious particular* 
with refpett to the interior ft ate of the Spanifh 
colonies, and the various fchemes formed 
for their improvement. As this Collection 
of Memorials formerly belonged to the Col-* 
bert Library , I have quoted them by that title* 
AH thofe books and manufcripts I have 
confulted with that attention which the re£* 
peft due from an Author to the Publick re* 
quired; and by minute references to them, 

I have 



j have endeavoured to, authenticate whatever* - 
I relate* *The longer. I reJleft on. the nature > 
of» hiftorical .compofition, th« nwre^ I *m con- ? 
vinced that t^hi« fcrupulous accuracy ig/necefo .: 
iany. , The biftorian who records the, events* 
of his owb time, is credited In proportion to : 
the, opinion which the IJublick entertains with, 
reCpeft to his means of information and hii 
- vecactty. He who delineates the tranfattion& A 
of a remote period, has no: title to claim i 
affent, unlefs he produces evidence in pqoofr 
of his affertiona. Without thin , he may write 
an amufing tale, but cannot be faid to have 
compofed an authentick hiftory. In thofe . Ten- 
ements I have been confirmed by the opinion 
of an Author, *) whom ills induftry , erudition 
and difcernment, have defeoredly placed in 
^ high rank among the moft eminent hifto- 
liang of the age. Emboldened by a hint from 
Jiim, I have publifhed a catalogue of the Spa- 
ttiCh books which. I have consulted. This prac 

b -. 

*) MI, Gibbon, 



P HETiCR 1 XIX 

« fixpence of our money. It is to be remem- 

I bered, however , that in the fifteenth cen- 

| ttftyy the effeftive value of a pefo, L e. the 

i quantity of labour which it represented, or 

i of goods which it would purchase, was five 

! of fix times as much as at prefent. 



THE 

HISTORY 

s 

OF 

A M E R I C A. 

BOOK I. 

The earth flowty peopled. 

I he progrefs of men in difcoverlng and 
-*- . peopling the various parts of the earth, 
has been extremely flow. Several ages elapfed ( 
before they removed Ar from thofe mild and 
fertile regions where they were originally placed 
•by their Creator. The occa£on of their firft 
general difperfion is known ; but we are unac- 
quainted with the courfe of their migrations, or 
the time when they took poffeffion of the differ 
rent countries which they now inhabit. Neither 
hiftory nor tradition fournifh fuch information 
concerning thofe remote events , as enables us 
to trace , with any certainty , the operations of 
the human race in the infancy of fociety. 

Firft migrations by land. 

- We may conclude , however, that all the 
tarly migrations of mankind were made by land* 
Robsatson Vol. L A 



THE 

HISTORY 

OF 

AMERICA. 

BOOK I. 

The earth flowly peopled. 

I he progrefs of men in discovering and 
'■*- . peopling the various parts of the earth t 
has been extremely flow. Several ages elapfed ( 
before they removed Ar from thofe mild and 
fertile regions where they were originally placed 
by their Creator, The occafion of their firft 
general difperfion is known ; but we are unac- 
quainted with the courfe of their migrations, or 
the time when they took poffeffion of the differ 
rent countries which they now inhabit. Neither 
hiftory nor tradition fournifh fuch information 
concerning thofe remote events , as enables us 
to trace , with any certainty , the operations of 
the human race in the infancy of fociety. 

Firft migrations by land. 

. We may conclude f however, that all the 
tarly migrations of mankind were made by land* 
Robsatson Vol. L A 



a HISTORY OF AMERICA 

The ocean, which every- where furrounds the 
habitable earth , as well as the various arms of 
, the fea which feparate one region from another, 
though deftined to facilitate the communication 
between diftant countries, fecm, at firft: view, 
to be formed to check the progrefs of man , 
and to mark the bounds of that portion of the 
globe to which nature had confined him. It 
was long, we may believe, before men attemp- 
ted to pafs thefe formidable barriers , and be- 
came fo fkilful and adventruous as to commit 
themfelves to the mf rcy of the winds and wa- 
ves , or to quit their native fhores in queft of 
remote and unknown regions. 

Firft attempts towards navigation. 

• 

Navigation and fhip-building are arts fo 
nice and complicated , that they require the inge. 
nuity , as well as experience , of many fuccef- 
five ages to bring them to any degree of per- 
feftion. From the raft or canoe, which firft 
ftrved to carry a favage over the river that ob- 
ftru&ed him in the chace, to the conftruftion 
of a veJTel capable of conveying numerous crew 
with fafety to a diftant coaft, the progrefs in 
improvement is immenfe. Many efforts would 
be made, many experiments .would be tried, 
and much labour as wellas invention would be em- 
ployed, before men could accomplish this ar- 
duous and important undertaking. The rude and 



BOOK 1. 3 

imperfeft fcate in which navigation is ftill found 
among all nations which are not confiderably 
civilized , corresponds with the account of its 
progrefs, and demonftrates that, in early ti- 
mes, the art was not fo far improved as to 
enable men to undertake diftant voyages, or to 
attempt remote difcoveries. 

Introduction of commerce* 

As foon, however, as the art of navigation 
became known, a newfpecies ofcorrefpondence 
among men took place. It is from this sera, 
that we muft date the commencement of fuch 
an intercourfe between nations as deferves the 
appellation of commerce. Men are , indeed , 
far advanced in improvement before commerce 
becomes an objeft of great importance to them* 
They muft even have made fome confiderable 
progrefs towards civilization, before they ac- 
quired the idea of property, and afcertain itfo per- 
fectly, as to be acquainted with the moftfimple 
of all contrafts , that of excjrfcinging by barter 
one rude commodity for another. But as foon. 
M this important right is eftablifhed , and every 
individual feels that he has an exclufive title to 
poffefs or to alienate whatever he has acquired 
by his own labour and dexterity, the wants 
and ingenuity of his nature fuggeft to him a 
new method of increafing his acquifitions and 
enjoyments , by difpofing of what is fuper- 
A % 



4 HISTORY OF AMERICA 

fluous in his own ftores , in order to procure 
what is neceffary or defiderable inthofe of other 
men. Thus a commercial intercourfe- begins, 
and is carried on among the membres of the 
fame community. By degrees, they difcover, 
that neighbouring tribes poffefs what they them* 
felves want, and enjoy comforts of which they 
wifti to partake. In the fame mode, and upon 
the fame principles , that domeftic traffic is car- 
ried on within the fociety,an eternal commerce 
is eftablifhed with other tribes or nations. Their 
mutual intereft and mutual wants render this 
intercourfe defirable, and imperceptibly introduce 
the maxime and laws which facilitate its pro- 
grefs and render it fecure. But no very exten- 
iive commerce can take place between conti- 
guous provinces , whofe foil and climate being 
nearly the fame, yield fimilar productions. Re- 
mote countries cannot convey their commodities 
by land , to thofe places , where on account of 
their rarity they are defired , and become va- 
luable. It is no navigation that men are indebted 
for the power <*f .tranfporting the fuperfluous 
ftock of one part of the earth , to fupply the 
wants of another. The luxuries and bleffings 
of a particular climate are no longer confined to 
itfelf alone , but the enjoyment of them is com- 
municated to the moft diftant regions. 

In proportion as the knowledge of the ad- 
vantages derived from navigation and commerce 
continued to fpread 5 the intercourfe among na- 



BOOK II. § 

* tions extended. The ambition of cbnqueft, 
. or the necefllty of procuring new fejtt- 

J lemjpts , were no longer the fole motives 
of vifiting diftant lands. The defire of gain be- 
came a new incentive to a&ivity,roufed adven- 
turers , and fent them forth upon long voyages, 
in fearch of countries , whofe produfts or wants 
might increafe that circulation , which nourifhes 
and gives vigour to commerce. Trade proved a 
great fource of difcovery , it opened unknown 
feas , it penetrated into new regions , and con* 
tributed more than any other caufc^to bring men 
acquainted a with the fituation , the nature and 

[ commodities of the different parts of the globe* 
Put even after a regular commerce was eftabli- 

* fhed in the world , after nations were confide- 

* rably civilized , and the fciences and arts were 
, cultivated with ardour and fuccefs f navigation 

continued to be fo imperfeft , that it can hardly 
lt be faid to have advanced beyond the infancy of 
' its improvement in the ancient world. 

4K Imperfeftion of navigation among the ancients. 

Among all the nations of antiquity the ftru- 

^ fture of their veffels wa* extremely rude , and 

! their method [of working them very defeftivev 

* They were unacquainted with fome of the great 
principles and operations in navigation /which 
are now confidered as the ftrft elements o» 

B which that fcience is founded. Though thai 

* property ©f the magnet > by which it attrafts 



6 HISTORY OF AMERICA 

of the magnet, by which it attrafts iron, was 
well known to the ancients, its more impor- 
tant and amazing virtue of pointing to the poles 
had entirely efcaped their obfervation, Defti- 
tute of this faithful guide, which now con- 
dufts the pilot with fo much certainty in the 
unbounded ocean, during thedarknefs of night, 
and when the heavens are covered with clouds,the 
ancients had no other method of regulating their 
courfe than by obferving the fun and ftars. Their 
navigation was of confequence uncertain and 
timid. They^durft feldom quit fight of land,, 
but crept along the coaft, expofed to all the 
dangers, and retarded by all the obftru&ions p 
unavoidable in holding fuch an aukward courfe. 
An incredible lenght of time was requifite for 
performing voyages , which are now finifhed 
in a fhort fpace. Even in the mildeft climates , 
and in feas the leaft tempeftupns , it was only 
during the fummer months that the ancients 
ventured out of their harbours. The remainder 
of the year was loft in inactivity. It would 
have been deemed moft inconfiderate rafhnefs 
to have braved the fury of the winds and waves 
during winter a), * 

Navigation and commerce of tke Egyptians. 

While both the fcience and praftice of naviga- 
tion continued to be fo defeftive, it was an under- 
taking of no (mall difficulty and danger to vifit any 

•) Vegetius df Re mi lit. lib, \y % 



BOOK 1, y 

remote region of the earth. Under every difad- 
vantage , however the aftive fpirit of commerce 
exerted itfelf. The Egyptians , foon $fter the 
eftablifhment of their monarchy , are faid to 
have openeda trade between the Arabian Gulph 
or Red fea, and the weftexn coaft of the great 
Indian continent The commodities which they 
imparted from the eaft, wjere carried by land 
from the Arabian Gulph to the banks of the 
Nile, and conveyed down that river to the Me- 
diterranean, But if the Egyptians in early ti- 
mes applied themfelves to commerce, their at- 
tention to it was of fhort duration. The fertile 
foil and mild climate of Egypt produced the 
necefiaries and comforts of live with fuch pro- 
fufion , as rendered its inhabitants fo indepen- 
dent of other countries, that it became an eftab- 
lifhed maxim among that people, whofe ideas 
and inftitutions differed in almoft every point 
from thofe of other nations, to renounce all in- 
tercourfe with foreigners. In confequence of 
this, they never went out of their own country ; 
they held all fea-fearing perfons in deteftation , as 
impious and profane ; and fortifying their own. 
harbours , they denied ftrangers admittance into 
them b) ; and it was in the decline of their power , 
that they again opened their ports, and refu- 
med any communication with foreigners. 



b) Diod. Sicul. lib. I. p. 7?. Ed. WefTelingi. Amft. 1? 56. Strabo, 
lib. xvii. p. 1142. Ed. Amft. 1:75. 



S HISTORY OF AMERICA 

Of the* Phenicians. 

The character and fituation of the Pheni- 
cians were as favourable to the fpirit of com- 
merce and difcovery as thofe of the Egyptians 
were adverfe to it. They had no diftinguifhing 
peculiarity in their manners and inftitutions; 
they were not addi&ed to any lingular and un- 
focial form of fuperftition ; they could mingle 
with other nations without fcruple orreluftance- 
The territory which they poffefled was neither 
large nor fertile. Commerce was the only fource 
from which they could derive opulence or power. 
Accordingly, the trade carried on by the Pheni- 
cians of Sidon and Tyre, was more extenfive and 
enterprifing than that of any ftate in the ancient 
world. The genius of the Phenicians , as well 
as the objeft of their policy and the fpirit of their 
laws , were entirely commercial. They were a 
people of merchants who aimed at the empire 
of the fea,and a&ually poffeiTed it. Their fhips 
not only frequented all the ports in the Medi- 
ranean , but they were the firft who ventured 
beyond the ancient boundaries of navigation, 
and pafling the Streights of Gades , vifited the 
weftern coafts of Spain and Africa. In many 
of the places to which they reforted , they plan- 
ted colonies , and communicated to the rude in- 
habitants fome knowledge of their arts and im- " 
provements. While they extended their difco- 
yeries towards the north and the weft , they did 



BOOK tt 9 

not negleft to penetrate into the more opulent 
and fertile regions of the fouth and eaft. Having 
rendered themfelves matters of feveral commo- 
dious harbours towards the bottom of the Ara- 
bian Gulph , they , after the exemple of the Egy- 
ptians eftablifhed aregolar intercourfe with Ara- 
bia and the continent of India on the one hand, and 
with the eaftern coaft of Africa on the other. 
From thefe countries they imported many 
valuable commodities , unknown to the reft 
of the world , and during along period , engroffed 
that lucrative branch of commerce without a 
rival c). 

Of the Jews. 

The vaft wealth which the Phenicians ac- 
quired by monopolizing the trade carried on in 
the Red Sea; incited their neighbours the Jews, 
under the profperous reigns of David and Solo- 
mon to aim at being admitted to fome fhare of 
it. This they obtained, partly by their con- 
queft of Idumea, which ftretches along the Red 
Sea , and partly by their alliance with Hiram , 
king of Tyre. Solomon fitted out fleets , which, 
under the direftion of Phenician pilots , failed 
from the Red Sea to # Tarfhifh and Ophir. 
Thefe it is probable were ports in India and 
Africa which their conductors were accuftome4 

t) Set NOTE I. at the End of the Volume. 



so HISTORY OF AMERICA 

to frequent, and from them the Jewifh fhips re- 
turned with fuch valuable cargoes as fuddenly 
diffufedwealth and fplendour through the kingdom 
of Ifrael d). But the Angular inftitutions of the 
Jews, the obfervance of which was enjoined 
by their divine legiflator , with an intention 
of preferving them a feparate people , unin- 
fected by idolatry, formed a national charafter 
incapable of that open and liberal intercotirfe 
with ftrangers which commerce requires. Ac- 
cordingly this unfocial genius o£ the people, 
together with the difafters which befeel the 
kingdom of Ifrael, prevented the commercial 
fpirit which their monarchs laboured to intro- 
duce, and to cherifh, from fpreading among 
them. The Jews cannot be numbered among 
the nations which contributed to improve navi- 
gation, or to extend difcovery. 

Of the Carthaginians. 

But though the inftruftions and example 
of the Phenicians were unable to mould the 
manners and temper of the Jews , in oppo- 
fition to the tendency of their laws , they 
transmitted the commercial fpirit with facility f 
and in full vigour, to their own defendants 
the Carthaginians. The commonwealth of Car- 
thage applied to trade and to naval affairs, 
with no lefs ardour, ingenuity and fuccefs, than 
its parent ftate. Carthage early rivalled , andfoon 
furpafled Tyre , in opulence and power, but feems 

d) Memoire fur le Pays d'O ;'n : .r pnr M. ri'Anvilie. Mem. de 
j'Acadera. des Inf.ript. &c. turn. xxx. p. S3- 



BOOK I. 



IT 



not to have aimed at obtaining any fhare in 
the commerce with India. The Phenicians 
had engrofled this, and had fuch a command 
of the Red Sea as fecured to them the exclu- 
sive poffeflion of that lucrative branch o£ trade, 
The commercial a&ivity of the Carthaginians 
was exerted in another dire&ion. Without 
contending for the trade of the eaft with their 
mother-country, they extended their naviga- 
tion chiefly towards the weft and north. Fol- 
lowing the courfe which the Phenicians had 
opened , they paffed the ftreights of Gades , 
and pufhing their difcoveries far beyond thofe 
of the parent ftate, vifited not only all the 
coafts of Spain , but thofe of Gaul, and pene- 
'trated at laft into Britain. At the fame time 
that they acquired knowledge of new coun- 
tries in this part of the globe , they gradually 
carried their refearches towards the South. 
They made confiderable progrefs by land , into 
the interior provinces of Africa, traded with 
fome of them, and fubje&ed others to their 
empire. They failed along the weftern coaft 
of that great continent, almoft to the tropic of 
Cancer y and planted feveral colonies, in order 
to civilize the natives , and accuftom them to 
commerce. They discovered the Fortunate If- 
lands , now known by the name of the Cana- 
ries, the utmoft boundary of ancient naviga- 
tion in the weftern ocean e). 

c) PJinii Nat, Hifr. lib. vi. c 37. edit, in ufum. Delph. 4to. 1685. 



ra HISTORY OF AMERICA 

Nor was the progrefs of the Phenicians and 
Carthaginians in their knowledge of the globe f 
owing entirely to the defire of extending their 
trade from one country to another. Commerce 
was followed by its ufual efFefts among x both 
thefe people. It awakened cunofity , enlarged 
the ideas and defires of men , and incited them 
to bold enterprises. Voyages were undertaken, 
the fole objett of which was to difcover new 
countries, and to explore unknown feas. Such,, 
during the profperous age of the Carthaginian 
republic, were the famous navigations of Hanno 
and Himilco. Both their fleets were equipped 
by authority of the fenate, and at public expence, 
Hanno was direfted to fleer towards the fouth, 
along the coaft of Africa, and he feems to have; 
advanced much nearer the equinoftial line than 
any former navigator f). Himilco had it In 
charge to proceed towards the north, and to 
examine theweftern coafts of the European con- 
tinent g). Of the fame nature was the extraor- 
dinary navigation of the Phenicians round Africa. 
A Phenicians fleet, we are told, fitted out by 
Necho king of Egypt, took its departure about 
fix hundred and four years before the Chri- 
stian aere, from a port in the Red Sea, dou^ 
t>led the fouthern promontory of Africa , and 

f) Plinii Na. Hi(h lib. vi. c. I. Hannonis Periplus , ap. Geo- 
graph, minores, edit. Hudfoni, vol. 1. p. I. • 

g) Plinii Nat. Hift. lib. ii. c. 67. Fcftus Avienus apud Bo- 
' chart. Gcogr. Sacr. lib, L e. do. p. 652, Oper. vol* Hi. L. 

fcai, 1707^ 



BOOK L * 3 

after a voyage of three years , retourned by 
the ftreights of Gades ,- to the mouth of the 
Nile h). Eudoxus of Cyzicus is faid to have 
held the fame courfe, and to have accomplif- 
hed the fame arduous undertaking i). 

Thefe voyages, if performed in the man- 
ner which I have related , may juftly be re- 
ckoned the greateft effort of navigation in the 
ancient world ; and if we attend to the imper- 
feft ftate of the art at that time , it is difficult 
to determine whether we fhould moft admire 
the courage and fagacity with which the defign 
was formed, or the conduft and good fortune 
with which it was executed. But unfortunate- 
ly, all the original and authentic accounts of 
the Phenician and Carthaginian voyages , whe- 
ther undertaken by public authority, or in pro- 
fecution of their private trade , have perifhed. 
The information which we receive concerning 
them from the Greek and Roman * authors , is ' 
not only obfcure and inaccurate , b\jt , if we 
except a fhort narrative of Hanno's expedition, 
is of fufpicious authority k). Whatever ac- 
quaintance with the remote regions of the earth 
the Phenicians or Carthaginians may have ac- 
quired was concealed from the reft of mankind 
with a mercantile jealoufy. Every thing rela- 
tive to the courfe of their navigation was not 

h) Heredot. lib. iv. c. 42. 

i) Plinii Nat. Hift. lib, tf. f, 67. 

t) See NOTE U. * 



14 HISTORY OF AMERICA 

only a myftery of trade , but a fecret of ftate. 
Extraordinary fa&s are recorded concerning 
their folicitude to prevent other nations from 
penetrating into ^'hat they wifhed fhould re- 
main undivulged 1). Many of their difcoveries 
feem , accordingly , to have been Scarcely 
known beyond the precin&s of their own fta- 
tes. The navigation round Africa, in particu- 
lar, is recorded by the Greek and Roman wri- 
ters , rather as a ilrange amufing tale , which 
they either did not comprehend , or did not 
believe , than as a real tranfa&ion , which en- 
larged their knowledge and influenced their 
opinion m). As neither the progrefs of the 
Phenician and Carthaginian difcoveries , nor 
the extent of their navigation, were commu- 
nicated to the reft of mankind , all memorials 
of their extraordinary fkill in naval affairs feem, 
in a great meafure, to have perifhed, when 
the maritime power of the former was annihi- 
lated by Alexander's conqueft of Tyre , and 
the empire of the latter was overturned by the 
Roman arms. 

Of the Greeks. 

Leaving, then, the obfcure and pompous 
accounts of the Phenician and Carthaginian vo- 
yages to the curiofity and conjeftures of anti- 
quaries , hiftory mull reft fatisfied with relating 

l^Strab. Geogr. lib. Hi. p. 365. lik, xviii. p. H54. 
m) Set NO ft III. 

# 



BOOK I, 15 

the progreft of navigation and difcovery among 
the Greeks and Romans, which, though lefs fpkn- 
did, is better ascertained. It is evident that the 
Phenicians, who inftrufted the Greeks in other 
ufeful fciences and arts » did not communicate to 
them that extenfive knowledge of navigation 
which they themfelves poffeffed; nor did the Ro~ 
mans imbibe that commercial fpirit and ardour for 
difcovery , which diftinguifhed the Carthaginians. 
Though Greece be almoft encompaffed by the fea, 
which formed many fpacious bays and commo- 
dious harbours , though it be furrounded by a 
vaft number of fertile iflands, yet,notwithilan- 
-ding fuch a favourable fituation , which feemed 
to invite that ingenious people to apply them- 
felves to navigation, it was long before this art 
attained any degree of perfection among them. 
Their early voyages , the objeft of which was 
piracy rather than commerce, were foinconfide- 
rable, that the expedition of the Argonauts from, 
the coaft of Theffaly to theEuxine Sea, appea- 
red fuch an amazing effort of fkill and courage, 
as entitled the conductors of it to be ranked among 
the demigods, and exalted the veflel in which they 
failed to a place among the heavenly conftella- 
tions. Even at a later period , when the Grfceks 
engaged in their famous enterprife againftTroy, 
their knowledge in naval affairs feems not to have 
been much improved. According to the accounts 
of Homer, the only poet to whom hiftory ven- 
tures to appeal , and who , by his fcrupu- 
ious accuracy in describing the manners and 



i<5 HISTORY OF AMERICA 

arts of early ages, merits this diftin&ion, 
fcience of navigation , at that time, had ha 
advanced beyond its rudeft ftate. The Gr 
in the heroic age were unacquainted with 
ufe of iron, the moft ferviceable of all the 
tals , without which no confiderable prdf 
was ever made in the mechanical arts. T 
veflels were of inconfiderable burthen, andn 
ly without decks. Thefe hat only one n 
which they erefted or took down at pleai 
They were ftrangers to the ufe of anchors. 
their operations in failing were clurnfy and 
fkilful. They turned their obfervation tow 
liars, which were improper for regulating t 
courfe , and their mode of obferving them 
inaccurate and fallacious. When they ha< 
nifhed a voyage they drew their paltry «bi 
afhore , as favages to their canoes, and tl 
remained on dry land until the feafon of retun 
to fea approached. It is not then in the earl 
heroic ages of Greece, that we can expel 
obferve the fcience of navigation , and the f] 
of difcovery , making any confiderable progr 
During that period of diforder and ignorance 
thoufand caufes concurred in reftraining cu: 
fity and enterprize within very narrow boui 
But the Greeks advanced with rapid 
to a ftate of greater civilization and r 
nement. Government , in its moft libc 
and perfeft form , began to be eftablifl 
in the communities of Greece ; equal la 



BOOK L, 



*? 



■'and regular police were gradually introduced; 

* the fciences and arts which are ufeful orna- 
f mental in life were carried to a high pitch of 

ri improvement , and feveral of the Grecian coup- 
es inon-wealths applied to commerce with fuch 
F ardour and fuccefs , that they were confidered, 
in the ancient world, as maritime powers of the 
i firft rank. Even then , howewer , the naval 
- vi&ories of the Greecks muft be adfcribed ra- 
c ther to the native fpirit of the people ; and to 
s that courage which the enjoyment of liberty 
a infpires , than to any extraordinary progrefs in 

* the fcience of navigation. In the Perfian war f 
f thofe exploits which the eloquence of the Greek 
t hiftorians has rendered fo famous , were per-' 
i formed by fleets , comppfed chiefly of ftnall 

veflek without deecks to) ; the crews of which 
rufhed forward with impetuous valour > but little 
art, to board thofe of the ennemy* In the war 
of Peloponefus their fhips fe em ft ill to have been 
of inconfiderable burthen and force. The ex- 
tent of their trade Was in proportion to this 
low condition of their marine. The maritime 
ftates of Greece hardly carried Oh any commerce 
beyond the limits Of the Mediterranean fea. 
Their chief intercourse was with thfe colonies 
-of their countrymen, planted in the LefferAfia,. 
in Italy and Sicily. They fometimes vifited 
the ports of Egypt, of Gaul, and of Thrace, or 
jpafling through the Hellefpont, they traded with 

n) Thucyd. lib. I, c. 14. 

ttoBjcaysosr Vol I» # 



Kg HISTORY OF AMERICA 

the countries fituated around the Euxine fea. 
Amazing inftances occur of their ignorance 
even of thofe countries , which lay within the 
narrow precinfts to which their navigation wai 
confined. When the Greecks had affembled 
their combined fleet againft Xerxes at Egina, 
they thought it unadvifable to fail to Samos, 
becaufe they believed the diltance between that 
ifland and Egina to be as great as the diftance 
between Egina and the Pillars of Hercules o) 
They were either utterly unacquainted with 
all the parts of the globe beyond the Mediter- 
ranean fea , or what knowledge they had of 
them was founded on conjecture, or received 
from the information of a few perfons , whom- 
curiofity and the love of fcience had prompted 
to travel by land into the Upper Alia, or by fa 
into Egypt, the ancient feats of wifdom and arts, 
After all that the Greecks learned from theaii 
they appear to have been ignorant of the mot 
important fafts , on which an accurate and fciA- 
tific knowledge of the globe is founded. 

The expedition of Alexander the Great into 
the eaft , confiderably enlarged the fphere of 
navigation and of geographical knowledge among 
the Greeks. The extraordinary man > nothwitb 
Handing the violent paflions, which incited him* 
at fome times , to the wildeft a&iojis and the 
inoft extravagant enterprifes , poffefled talents 
Which fitted him not only to conquer, but to go* 

•) Herodot, lib. yiii, c, 133. 



BOOK L ip 

Vera the world* HI was capable of framing 
thofe bold and original fchemes of policy , which 
give a new form to human affairs. The revo- 
lution in commerce, brought, about by the force 
of his genius, is hardly inferior to that revolution 
in empire, occafioned by the fuccefs of his arms, 
It is probable , that the oppofition and efforts of 
the republic Tyre, which checked him fo long in 
the career of his viftories , gave Alexander an 
oportunity of obferving the vaft refources of a 
maritime power, and conveyed to him fome idea 
of the immenfe wealth which the Tyrians deri- 
ved from their commerce , efpecially that with 
the Eaft Indies. As foon as he had accomplifhed 
the deftruftion of Tyre , and reduced Egypt to 
fubje&ion, he formed the Plan of rendering the 
empire which he purpofed to eftablifh , the 
centre of commerce as well as the feat of do- 
minion. With this view he founded a great 
city, which he honoured vtith his own name, 
near one of the mouths of the river Nile , that 
by the Mediterranean fea, and the neighbour- 
hood of the Arabian Gulf , it might com-, 
mand the trade both of the eaft and weft q). 
This fituation was chofen with fuch difcern- 
ment that Alexandria foon became , the chief 
commercial city in the world. Not only du- 
ring the fubfiftence of the Grecian empire 
in Egypt and in the eaft , but amidft all 
the fucceffive revolutions in thofe countries 

p) Stm)>, Geogr. lib, xyii. ?, H43- "49- 

B % 



2o HISTORY OF AMERICA 

from the time of the Ptofctnies to the difcove- 
ry of the Navigation by the Cape of Good Hope, 
commerce, particularly that of the Eaft Indies, 
Continued to flow iii the channel with the fa- 
gacity and forfight of Alexander had marked 
out for it. 

His ambition was not fatisfied with having 
opened to the Greeks a communication with 
India by fea ; he afpired to the fovereignty of 
thofe regions which furnifhed the reft of man- 
kind with fo many precious commodities, and 
conducted his army thither by land, Enterpri- 
fmg, howewer, as he .was, he may be faid ra- 
ther to have discovered , than to have conquered 
,that country. He did not , in his progrefs to- 
wards the eaft , advance beyond the banks of 
the rivers that fall into the Indus, which i* now 
the weftern boundary of the vaft continent of 
India. Amidft the wild exploits which diftin- 
guifh this part of his hiftory , he purfued mea- 
fures that mark the fuperiority of his genius, 
as well as the extent of his views, He had 
penetrated as far into India as to confirm his opi- 
nion of its commercial importance , and to per- 
ceive , that immenfe wealth might be derived 
from intercourfe with a country r where the art* 
of elegance having been more early cultivated, 
were arrived at greater perfeftian than in any 
other part of the earth q). Full of this 
idea he refolved to examine the eourfe of navi- 

9) Str»b, Gtogr. lifc, xr, f. 4 K>3k Q. Curtiu* lifc» xyiii. c*jr. 



BOOK L ** 

gation from the mouth of the Indus to the bot- 
tom of the Perfian Gulf ; and if it fhould be 
found practicable, to >eftablifh a regular commu- 
nication between them. In order to effeft this, 
hepropofedto remove the c*tara6ts, with which, 
the jealoufy of the Perfians f and their averfion 
to correfpondence with foreigners , had obftru- 
fted the entrance into the Euphrates r) ; to 
carry the commodities of the eaft up that river, 
and the Tygris , which unites with it % into the 
interior parts of his Afiatic dominions : .while , 
by the way of the Arabian Gulf, and the rirer 
Nile , they might be conveyed to Alexandria 9 
and diftribut^d to the reft of the world. Nearchus, 
an officer of eminent abilities , w*» entrufted 
with the command of the fleet fitfed out for this 
expedition. He performed this voyage , which 
was deemed an eAterprife To arduous and un- 
important , that Alexander reckoned it one of 
the moft extraordinary events which diftinguifhed 
his reign. Inconfiderable as it may now appear, 
it was , at that time, an undertaking of no little 
merit and difficulty. In the profecution of it, 
ftriking inft'ancet occiir of the' fmall progrefs 
which the Greeks had made in naval know- 
ledge s). Having never failed beyoitd th boifnds 
of the Mediterranean , where the ebb and flow 
«f the fea are hardly perceptible , wheti they 
firft obferved this phenomenon at the mouth of 

r) Strab. Geogr. lib. xvl p. 1075. 
s) See NOTE IV, 



t* HISTORY OF AMERICA 

the Indus, it appeared to them a prodigy , by 
which the gods teftified the difpleafure of Hea-, 
ven againft their enterprife t). During their 
whole courfe, they feem never to have loft fight 
of land, but followed the bearings of the coaft fa 
fervively, that they could not much avail them- 
felves of thofe periodical winds, which facilitate 
navigation in the Indian ocean. Accordingly, 
they fpent no lefs than ten months in u) per-* 
forming this voyage, which, from the mouth of 
the Indus to that of the Perfian Gulf, does not 
exceed twenty degrees. It is probable, that 
amidft the violent convulfions , and frequent re T 
volutions in the Eaft, occafioned by the contells 
among the fucceffors of Alexander, the naviga- 
tion to India, by the courfe which Nearchus had 
opened , was discontinued. The Indian trade 
carried on at Alexandria, not only fubfifted, but 
was fo much extended under the Grecian mo- 
narchs of Egypt, that it proved a great fource of 
the wealth which diftinguifhed their kingdom. 

Of the Romans. 

The progrefs which the Romans made in na- 
vigation and difcovery, was ftill more inconfide- 
rable than that of the Greeks. The genius of 
the Roman people, their militairy education, and 
the fpirit of their laws, concurred in eftranging- 
them from commerce and naval affairs* It was 

t) See NOTE V. 

u) Plin. Hift. Nat. lib. vl t. 13. ♦ 



BOOK t 



3S 



the neceffity of oppofing a formidable rival, no| 
the defire of emending trade, which firft prom- 
pted them to aim at maritime power. Though 
they foon perceived that, in order to acquire 
univerfal dominion after which they afpired, it 
was neceffary to render themfelves mailers of 
the fea, they ftill confidered the naval fervice 
as a fubordinate ftation, and referved for it fuch 
citizens as were not of a rank to be admitted 
into the legions x). In the hiftory of the Ro- 
man republic, hardly one event occurs, that 
marks attention to navigation any farther than 
as it was inftrumental towards conqueft. When 
the Roman valour and difcipline had fubdued ail 
the maritime ftates known in the ancient World ; 
when Carthage, Greece', and Egypt, had fub- 
mitted to their power, the Romans did not im- 
bibe the commercial fpirit of the conquered na~ 
tions» Among that people of foldiers , to have 
applied to trade would have been deemed » 
degradation of a Roman citizen* They abando- 
ned the mechanical arts , commerce and naviga-* 
tion , to flaves, to freedmen, to provincials, and 
to citizens of the loweft claf$. Even after the 
fubverfion of liberty, when the feverity and 
haughtinefs of ancient manners began to abate, 
commerce did not rife into high eftimation 
among the Romans. The trade of Greece, Egypt* 
and the other conquered countries , continued 

x) Polyb. lib. r* 



,34 HISTORY OF AMERICA 

to be carried on in its ufual channels , after they 
were reduced into the form of Roman provin- 
ces. As Rome was the capital of the world f 
and the. feat of government, all the wealth and 
valuable productions of the provinces flowed na- 
turally thither. The Romans > fatisfied with 
this, feem to. have differed commerce to remain 
almoft entirely in the hands of the natives of the 
refpeftive countries. The extent, howewer, of the 
Roman power, which reached over the greateft 
part of the known world , the vigilant infpeftion 
of r the Roman magiftrates , and the fpirit of the 
Roman government, no lefs intelligent than a&ive, 
gave fuch additional fecurity to commerce , as 
animated it with new vigour. The union among 
nations was never fo entire, nor the intercourfe 
fo perfeft, as within the bounds of this vaft em- 
pire. Commerce under the Roman dominion, 
was not obifcru&ed by the jealoufie of rival ftates, 
interrupted by frequent hoftilities, or limited by 
partial reftriftions. One fnperintending power 
moved and regulated die induftry of mankind, 
and enjoyed the fruits of. their joint efforts. 

Navigation felt this, influence , and im- 
proved under it. At foon as the Romans 
acquired a tafte for the luxuries of the Eaft, 
the trade with India through Egypt was 
pufhed with new vigour , and carried on to 
greater extent By frequenting the Indian 
continent, navigators became acquainted with 
the periodical courfe of the winds , which, 



BOOK I, 35 

in the ocean that feparates Africa from India 9 
blow with little variation during one half of the 
year from the eaft , and during the other half 
fix with equal fteadinefs from the weft. En- 
couraged by obferving this , they abandonned 
their ancient flow and dangerous courfe along 
the coaft, and as foon as the weftern monfoon 
fet in , took their departure from Ocelis , at the 
mouth of the AraUan Gulf, and ftretched boldly 
fccrofe the ocean y). The uniform direttion of 
the wind , fupplying the place of the compafs , 
and rendering the guidance of the ftars lefs ne- 
ceffary, condufted them to the port of Mufiris, 
on the weftern fhore of the India continent. There 
they took on board their cargo , and returning 
with the eaftern inonfoon, finifhed their voyage 
to the Arabian Gulf within the year. This part 
of India , now known by the name of the Ma- 
labar coaft , feeras to have been the utmoft limit 
of ancient navigation in that quarter of the glo-* 
be. What imperfeft knowledge the ancients 
had of the immenfe countries which ftretch be- 
yond this towards the eaft they received from a 
few adventurers , who had vifited them by land. 
Such excurfions were neither frequent nor exten- 
sive . , and it is probable, that while the Roman, 
intercourfe with India fubfifted , no traveller 
ever penetrated further than to the banks of the 
Ganges z). The fleets from Egypt which traded 

y) Plin. Hi£. Nat lib' vi. cap. 23. 

z) Stub. Geogr. lib. xv. p. 1006. 1010. Sec NOTI VI* 



>6 HISTORY OF AMERICA 

at Mufiris, were loaded, it is true, with the fpi- 
ces and other rich commodities of the continent 
and iflands of the farther India; but thefe were 
brought on that port, which became the ftable 
of this commerce , by the Indians themfelves , 
in canoes hollowed out of one tree a). The 
Egyptian and Roman merchants, fatisfied with 
acquiring thofe commodities in this manner, did 
not think it neceflary to explUe unknown feas , 
and venture upon a dangerous navigation, in 
queftof the countries which produced them. Bat 
though the difcoveries of the Romans in India 
werefo limited, their commerce there was fuch 
as will appear confiderable , even to the prefent 
age , in which the Indian trade has been exten- 
ded far beyond the praftice of conception of 
any preceding period. We are informed by one 
author of credit b) , that the commerce with India 
drained the Roman empire every year of more 
than four hundred thoufand pounds ; and by an 
other, that one hunderd and twenty fhips failed 
annually from the Arabian Gulf to that country c). 

Difcoveries of the ancients by land. 

The difcovery of this new method 
of failing to India ; is the moft confiderable 
improvement in navigation made during the 
continuance of the Roqian power. But in 
ancient times , the knowledge of countries 

a) Plin. Nat. Hift. 1 b. vi. c. a6. 

b) Plin. Nat. Hift. lib. vi. c. 3& 
Strab. Geogr, lib* ii. 170. ' 



BOOK'L 27 

was acquired more by land than by fea. d) ; and 
the Romans , from their peculiar disinclination 
to naval affairs , may be faid to have negle&ed 
totally the latter, though a more eafy andexpe- 
4itiaus method of difcovery. The progrefs t 
howewer , of their vi&orious armies contribute4 
greatly to extend difcovery by land , and even 
opened the navigation of new and unknown 
feas. Previous to the Roman conquefts , the 
civilized nations of antiquity had no commu- 
nication with thofe countries in Europe, which 
now form its moft. opulent and powerful king- 
doms. The interior parts of Spain and Gaul were 
little known. Britain, feparated from the reft 
of the world, had never been vifited, except: 
tiy its neighbours the Gauls, and by a few 
Carthaginian merchants. The name of Germany 
Jiad fcarcely been heard of. Into all thefe coun- 
tries the arms of the Romans penetrated. They 
entirely fubdued Spain anckGaul ; the conquere4 
the greateft and moft % fertile part of Britain j 
they advanced into Germany , as far as the 
banks of the. river Elbe. In Africa, they acquired 
a confiderable knowledge of the provinces r 
which ftretch along the Mediterranean fea, from 
Egypt weftward to the ftreights of Gades. In 
Afia , they not only fubjefted to their power 
moft of the provinces which compofed the Perfian 
and Macedonian empires , but , after their vi r 
ftories over Mithridates and Tigranes } they 
ip See NOTE, VII. 



a8 HISTORY OF AMERICA 

feem to have made a more accurate furvey of 
the countries contiguous to the Euxine and 
Cafpian feas , and to have carried on a mere 
.extenfive trade than that of the Greeks with 
the opulent and commercial nations , then fea- 
ted around the Euxine fea. 

Imperfeftlon of geographical knowledge among the Ancient! 

From this fuccinft furvey of difcovery and 
navigation , which I have traced from the ear- 
lieft dawn of hiftorical knowledge to the full 
eftablifhment of the Roman dominion., their pro- 
grefs appears to have been wonderfully flow. 
It feems neither adequate to what we might 
have expetted from the a&ivity and enterprife 
of the human mind , nor to what might have 
been performed by the power of the great em- 
pires wfiich fucceflively governed the world. 
If we reject accounts that are fabulous and 
obfeure; if we adhere fteadily to the light and 
information of authentic hiftory, withhout fub- 
ftituting in its place the conje&ures of fancy, 
or the dreams of etymologifts , we muft con- 
clude , that the knowledge which the an- 
cients had acquired of the habitable globe was 
extremely confined. In Europe, the extenfive 
provinces in the eaftern part of Germany 
were little known to them. They wera almoft 
totally unacquainted with the vaft countries 
which are now* fubjeft to the kings of Den- 
mark # Sweden, PruiTia , Poland, and the 



B O O K I, 29 

Ruffian empire. The more barren regions * jjbat 
ftretch within the arttic circle, were quite un- ^ 
explored. In Africa, their refearches did not 
extend far beyond the provinces which border 
on the Mediterranean, and thofe fituated on the 
weftern fhore of the Arabian Gulf. In Afia , 
they were unacquainted , as I formerly ob- 
ferved, with all the fertile and opulent coun- 
tries beyond the Ganges , which furnifh the 
moft valuable commodities that f in modern 
times, have been the great objeft of the Eure- 
pean commerce with India ; nor do they feem 
to have ever penetrated into thofe immenfe re- 
gions occupied by the wandering tribes , which 
they called by the general name of Sarmatians 
or Scythians , and now poffefled by Tartars of 
various denominations # and by the Aiiatic fub- 
jefts of Ruffia. 

A rmirtiMn proof of thi*. 

But there is one opinion , that univerfally 
prevailed among the ancients, which conveys 
a more ftriking idea -of the Cmall progrefs they 
had inade in the knowledge of the habitable globe, 
than cah be derived from any detail of their 
difcoveries, - They fuppofed the earth to be di- 
vided into five regions , which, they difttnguifhed 
by the name of zones. Two of thefe, which 
were neareft - the poles , they termed the fri- 
gid zones , and believed that the extreme cold 
which jeiguod pergttjjJillx thcac ^rendered them 



3 o HISTORY OF AMERICA 

t 

uninhabitable. Another , feated under the line 
« and extending oh either fide towards the tro* 
pics , they called the torrid zone , and ima- 
gined it to be fo burnt up With Unremitting heat, 
as to be equally deftitute of inhabitants. On the 
two other zones , which occupied the remain- 
der of the earth , they beftowed the appellation 
of temperate , and taught that thefe , being the 
only regions in which life could fubfift > wert 
allotted to man for his habitation. This wild 
opinion was not a conceit of the uninformed 
Vulgar, or a fanciful fiftion of the poets, but a 
fiftem adopted by the moft enlightened philofo- 
phers, the moft accurate hiftorians and geogra- 
phers in Greece and Rome. According to this 
theory , a vaft portion of the habitable earth was 
pronounced to be unfit for fuftaining the human 
fpecies. Thofe fertile and populous regions wit- 
hin the torrid zone , which are now known not 
only to yield their own inhabitants the neceffa- 
ties and comforts of life, with moft luxuriant 
profufion , but to communicate their fuperfluous 
ftores to the reft of the world , were fuppofed 
to be the manfion of perpetual fterility and 
, defolation. As all the parts of the globe, which 
the ancients had difcovered , lay within the nor- 
thern temperate zone , their opinion that the. 
other temperate zone was filled with inhabi- 
tants, was founded on reafoning and conjetture, 
Hot on difcovery. They even believed that, by 
the intolerable heat of the torrid zone, frchatt 



.BOOK L $r 

infuperable barrier was placed between the two 
temperate region of the earth , as would prevent 
for ever any intercourfe between their refpettive 
inhabitants. Thus this extravagant theory not 
only proves that the ancients were unacquain- 
ted with the true ftate of the globe, but it tended 
to render their ignorance perpetual, by reprefen- 
ting all attempts towards opening a communica- 
tion Vith the remote regions of the earth , as 
utterly imptafticable e). 

But, however imperfeft or inaccurate the geo- 
graphical knowledge which the Greeks and Ro- 
mans had acquired may appear , in refpeft of 
.the prefent improved ftate of that fcience, their 
progrefs in dfcovery will feem confiderable , and 
the extent to .which they carried navigation and 
commerce muft be reckoned great, when com- 
pared with the ignorance of early times. As 
long as the Roman empire retained fuch vigour 
as to preferve its authority over the conquered 
nations , and to keep them united , it was an 
objeft of public police, as well as of private cu- 
riofity , to examine and defcribe the countries 
which compofed this great body. Even when the 
other fciences began to decline, geography , en- 
riched with new obferyations , and receiving 
fome acceflion from 'the experience of every 
age, and the reports of every traveller * con* 
tinued to improve* 

•> Sec NOTE VIII, 



3» HISTORY OP AMERICA 

Improvements in geography by Ptolemy;- 

It attained to the higheft point of perfeftion 
and accuracy to which it ever arrived in the an- 
cient world, by the induftry and genius of Pto- 
lemy the philofopher. He flourifhed in thefecond 
century of the Chriilian aera,and published a de- 
fcriptionof the terreftrial globe, more ample an4 
exaft than that of any of his predeceffors. 

The invafion of the Roman empire by barbarous nations. 

But , foon after , violent convuliions began to 
fhake the. Roman ftate;the fatal ambition or ca- 
price of Conftantine , by changing th6 feat of 
government , divided and weakened its force ; the 
barbarous nations , which Providence prepared as 
its inftruments to overturn the mighty fabric of 
the Roman power , began to aflemble and to 
mufter their armies on its frontier ; the empire 
tottered to its fall. During this decline and old 
age of the Roman ftate , it was impoffible that 
the fciences fhould go on improving. The efforts 
of genius were at that period , as languid and 
feeble as thofe of government. From the time of 
Ptolemy , no confiderable addition feems to have 
been made to geographical knowledge, nor did 
any important revolution happen intrade , excep- 
ting that Conftantinople , by its advantageous 
fituation, and the encouragement of the eafterh 
emperors , became a commercial city of the firft 
note. 

fiffeat 



B O O K I, 33 

Effefts of their cooquefts on commercial intercourfe. 

At length j the clouds which had been fo 
long gathering round the Roman empire, burfl: 
into a ftorm. Barbarous nations rufhed in from 
feveral quarters with irrefiftible impetuofity , and, 
in the general wreck , occafioned by the inun- 
dation which overwhelmed Europe , the arts , 
fciences , inventions and difcoveries of the 
Romans , perifhed in a great meafure , and dis- 
appeared f). All the various tribes, which fettled 
in the different provinces of the Roman empire , 
were incivilized , ftrangers to letters , deftitute 
of arts , unacquainted with regular government, 
fubordination, or laws. The manners and infti- 
tutions of fome of them were fo rude, as to 
be hardly compatible with a ftate of focial union. 
Europe, when occupied by fuch inhabitants, 
may be faid to have returned to a fecond infancy, 
and had to begin a new its career in improvement , 
fcience , and civility. The firft effeft of the fett- 
lement of thole barbarous invaders was to diffolve 
the union which the Roman power had cemented 
mankind together. They parcelled out Europe 
into many fmall and independent ftates , differing 
from each other in language and cuftoms. No 
intercourfe fubfifted between the members of 
thofe divided and hoftile communities. Accufto- 
med to a fimple modeof life, and averfe to induftry 
they had few wants to fupply,and no fuperfluities* 

f) Hift. of Charles V. vol. I. p. 18. 7«. 

Robertson Vol I. C 



84 HISTORY-OF AMERICA 

to difpofe of. The names of ftranger and of 
enemy became once more words of the fame 
import. Cuftoms every-where prevailed, and even 
laws were eftablifhed, which rendered it dif- 
agreeable and dangerous to vifit any foreign 
country g). Cities , in which alone an extenfive 
commerce can be carried on, were few, incon- 
siderable and deftitute of thofe immunities which 
produce fecUrity or excite enterprife. The fcien* 
ces , on which geography' and navigation are 
founded, were not cultivated. The accounts of 
ancient improvements and difcoveries , contained 
in the Greek and Roman authors , were negle&ed 
or mifunderftood. The knowledge of remote 
regions was loft, their iituation, their comm^ 
ties , and almoft their names , were unknown* 

Commercial intercourfe ftill preferved in ihe taftern empire* 

One circumftance prevented commercial in- 
tercourfe with diftant nations from ceafing alto- 
gether'. Conftantinople , though often threatened 
by the fierce invaders , who fpread defolatiott 
over the reft of Europe , was fo fortunate as to 
efcape their deftru&ive rage. In that city, the 
knowledge of ancient arts afid difcOveries was 
preferved; a tafte for fplendoui* and elegance 
fubfifted; the productions and luxuries of foreign 
countries were in requeft; and commerce con- 
tinued to flourifh there, when it was almoft 

«} Hift. of Charles V. voj. I. f. 77. 327, 



BOOK I ^ ss 

extinft in every other part of Europe. The 
citizens of Conftantinople did not confine their 
trade to the iflands of the Archipelago , Or to 
adjacent coafts of Alia ; they took a wider rahge , 
and following the courfe which the ancients 
had marked out , imported the commodities of 
the Eaft Indies from Alexandria. When Egypt 
was torn from the Roman empire by the Arabians, 
the induftry of the Greeks difcovered a new 
channel , by which the productions of India might 
be conveyed to Conftantinople. They were 
carried up the Indus, as far as that great river is 
navigable; thence they were .tranfported by land 
to the banks of the river Oxus , and proceed 
4Dprn its ftream to the Cafpian fea. There they 
entered the Volga , and failing up it , were 
carried by land to the Tanais , which cohdufted 
them into the Euxine fea , where veffels from 
Conftantinople waited their arrival h). This 
extraordinary and tedious mode of conveyance 
merits attention , not only as a proof of the violeht 
pailion which the inhabitants of Conftantinople 
had conceived for the luxuries of the eaft , and 
as a fpecimen of the ardour and ingenuity with 
which they carried On commerce ; but becaufe it 
demonftrateg, that , during the igqf ranee which 
reigned in the reft of Europe ,an extenfive know- 
ledge of remote countries was ftill prefer ved in 
the capital of the Greeck empire, 
^ b) Raiflufi©, yo.1 I, p. 379. F. 

C a 



S 6 HISTORY OF AMERICA 

Among the Arabians. 

At the fame time , a gleam of light and know- 
ledge broke in upon the eaft. The Arabians 
having contra&ed fome relifh for the fcience* 
of the -people whofe empire they had contributed 
to overturn , tranflated the books of feveral of 
theGreeck philofophers into their own language* 
One of the firli was that valuable work of Pto- 
lemy , which I have already mentioned. The 
ftudy of geography became, of confequence, an 
early objeft of attention to the Arabians. But 
that acute and ingenious people cultivated 
chiefly the fpeculative and fcientific part of geo- 
graphy. In order to afcertain the figure and 
dimenfions of the terreftrial globe, they applied 
the principles of geometry, they had recourfe 
to aftronomical obfervations , they employed 
experiments and operations , which Europe , in 
more enlightened times , has been proud to adopt 
and tQ imitate. At that period , howewer the 
fame of the improvements made by the Arabians 
did not reach Europe. The knowledge of their 
difcoveries was referved for ages capable of com- 
prehending and of perfefting them. 

* 

Revival of commerce and navigation in Europe. 

By degrees , the calamities and defolation 
brought upon the weftern provinces of the Ro- 
man empire by its barbarous conquerors , were 
forgotten , and in fome meafure repaired. The 



• BOOK I, J7 

rude tribes which fettled there acquiring infen- 
n fibly fome idea of regular government , and fome 
i relifh for the functions and comforts of civil 
b life, Europe began to awake from its torpid 
k and inaftiye ftate. The firft fymptons of re- 
i vival were difcerned in Italy, The northern tribes 

■ which took poffeffionof this country, made pro- 

■ grefs in improvement with greater rapidity than 
F the people fettled in other parts of Europe. Va- 

. rious caufes , which it is not the objeft of this 
: ; work to enumerate or explain , concurred in 
-" rejloring liberty and independence to the cities 
j of Italy i). The acquifition of thefe roufed indu- 
flxy , and gave motion and vigour to all the aftive 
?. powers of the human mind. Foreign commerce 
■*' revived , navigation was attended to and impro- 
ved. Conftantinople became the chief mart to 
which the Italians reforted. There they not 
. only met with a favourable reception , butobtai- 
- ned fuch mercantile privileges as enabled them 
to carry on trade with great advantage. They 
were fupplied both with the precious commo- 
dities of the eaft, and with many curious manu- 
factures , the produdt of ancient arts and inge 
nuity , which ftill fubfifted among the Greeks. 
As the labour and expence of conveying the 
produ&ions of India to Conftantinople by that 
long and indireft courfe which I have defcribed^ 
rendered them extremely rare , and of an exor.. 
bitant price, the Indaftry of the Italians difco. 

1 *) Hift. of Charles V. vol. i p. 33* 



8 g HISTORY OF AMERJCA 

-vered other methods of procuring them in grea« 
ter abundance, and at an eafier rate. They fometi-r 
mes purchafed them in Aleppo, Tripoli, and other 
ports on the coaft of Syria , to which they were 
brought by a route not unknown to the ancients. 
They were conveyed from India by fea , up 
the Perfian Gulph , and afcending the Euphrates 
and Tigris , as far as Bagdad , were carried by 
land acrofs the Defert to Palmyra , and from 
thencfe'to the towns on the Mediterranean. But 
from the lengt of the journey, and the dan- 
gers to which the caravans were expofed , this 
proved always a tedious , and often, a preca* 
rious mode of conveyance. At lenght , the 
Soldans of Egypt , having renewed the commerce 
with India in its ancient channel, by the Arabian 
Gulf , the Italian merchants , notwithftanding 
the violent antipathy to each other with which 
Chriftians and the followers of Mahomet were 
then poffeffed , repaired to Alexandria, and endu- 
ring , from the love of gain , the infolence and 
exa&ions of the Mahometans , eftablifhed a lucra- 
tive trade in that port. From that period the 
commercial fpirit of Italy became a&ive and en-> 
terprifing. Venice,Genoa , Pifa , rofe from incon- 
fiderable towns to be populous and whealty cities. 
Their naval power increafed ; their veffels fre- 
quented not only all the ports in the Mediter* 
ranean , but venturing fometimes beyond the 
Streights , vifited the Maritime towns of Spain, 
France , the Low Countries and England ; and 



BOOK I. 



39 



x fcy diftributing their commodities over Europe , 
began to communicate to its various nations fome 
tafte for the valuable produ&ions of the eaft , as 
well as fome ideas of manufa&ures and arts, 
which were then unknown beyond the precinfts 
of Italy, 

Their progrefe favoured by the Crufades* 

While the cities of Italy were thus advancing 
in their career of improvement , an event hap- 
pened , the moft extraordinary perhaps in the 
hiftory of mankind , which, inftead of retarding 
the commercial progrefs of the Italians , rendered 
it more rapid. The martial fpirit of the Euro- 
peans , heightened and inflamed by religious 
zeal , prompted them to deliver the Holy Land 
from the dominion of infidels. Vaft armies , 
compofed of all the nations in Europe , marched 
towards Afia , upon this wild enterprife. The 
Genoefe, the Pifans, and Venetians furnifhed 
the tranfports which carried them thither. They 
fupplied them with provifions and military ft ores. 
Befide the immenfe fums which they received 
on this account , they obtained commercial pri- 

*' vileges and eftablifhments , of great confequence 
in the fettlements which the Crufaders made in 
Paleftine , and in other provinces of Afia. From 
tbofe fources , prodigious wealth flowed into the 
cities which I have mentioned. This was accom- 

- panied with a proportional increafe of power, 
arid by the end of the Holy War , Venice , in 



4 q HISTORY OF AMERICA 

particular, became a great maritime ftate,poffeC 
fing an extenfive commerce , and ample territo- 
ries k). Italy was not the only country in which 
the Crufades contributed to revive and diffufe 
fuch a fpirit as prepared Europe for future disco- 
veries. By their expeditions into Afia , the other 
European nations became well acquainted with 
remote regions , which formerly they knew only 
by name , or by the reports of ignorant and cre- 
dulous pilgrims. They had an opportunity of 
obferving the manners, the arts, and the accom- 
modations of people more polifhed than themfel- 
ves. This intercourfe between the eaft and weft 
fubfifted almoft two centuries, The adventurers , 
who returned from Afia, communicated to their 
countrymen the ideas which they had acquired, 
and the habits of life they had contrafted by 
vifiting more refined nations. The Europeans 
began to be fenfible of wants with which they 
were formerly unacquainted ; new defires were 
excited ; and fuch a tafte for the commodities 
and arts of other countrys gradually fpread 
among them , that they not only encouraged the 
refort of foreigners to their harbours , but began 
to perceive the advantage and neceflity of ap- * 
plying to commerce themfelves 1). 

By the difcoveries of travellers by land. 

The communication , which was opened be- 
tween Eiirope and the weftern provinces of 

k) Eflai de l'Hiftoire du Commerce deVeoife p. 52. &c. 
1) Hill. Charles V. vol. 1, p. 25, &c. 



BOOK I. 41 

Alia, encouraged feveral perfons to advance far 
beyond the countries in which the Crufaders car-r 
yied on their operations % and to travel by land 
into the more remote and opulent regions of the 
eaft. The wild fanaticifm , which feems at that 
period to have mingled in all the fchemes of indi- 
viduals , no lefs than in all the counfels of 
nations , firft incited men to enter upon thofe long 
and dangerous peregrinations. They were after- 
wards undertacken from profpe&s of commercial 
advantage , or from motives of more curiofity. 
Penjamin , a Jew of Tudela, in the kingdom of 
Navarre poffeffed with a fuperftitious veneration 
for the law of Mofes , and folicitous to vifit his 
countrymen in the eaft, whom he hoped to- find 
in fuch a ftate of power and opulence as might 
redound to the honour of his feft , fet out from 
Spain in the year 1160, and travelling by land 
to Conftantinople , proceeded through the coun- 
tries to the north of theEuxineandCafpian feas, 
as far as.Chinefe Tartary. From thence he took 
his route towards the fouth, and after traver- 
sing various provinces of the farther India , he 
•eriibarked on the Indian Ocean , vifited feveral 
pf its iflands , and returned at the end of thirteen 
years, by the way of Egypt, toEurope, with 
much, information concerning a large diftrift of 
.the globe, altogether unknown at that time to 
the weftern world m). The zeal of the head of 
the Chriftian church cooperated with the fuper- 

xn) Bergerou Recueil des Voyages, &c, torn. 1. p. X. 



4 a HISTORY OF AMERICA 

ftition of Benjamin the Jew, in discovering the 
interior and remote provinces of Afia. All Chri- 
Itendom having been alarmed with accounts of 
the rapid progrefs of the Tartar armg under Zen- 
gis Khan, Inndeent IV, who entertained moft 
exalted ideas concerning the plenitude of his o\tm 
power, and the fubmiflion due to hisanjunftions, 
fent Father John de Piano Carpini , at the head 
of a million of Francifcan monks , and Father Afco- 
lino , at the head of another of Dominicans , to 
exhort KayukKhan, the grandfon ofZengis, 
Avho was then at the head of the Tartar empire, 
to embrace the Chriftian faith , and to defift from 
defolating the earth by his arms. The haughty 
defceridant of the greateft conqueror Afia had 
ever beheld, aftonifhed at this ftrange mandate 
from an Italian prieft , whofe name and jurifdi- 
ftion were alike unknown to him , received it 
with the contempt which it merited , though he 
difmiffed the mendicants who delivered it with 
impunity. But as they had penetrated into the 
country by different routes , and followed for 
forne time the Tartar camps, which were always 
in motion , they had an opportunity of vifiting 
a great part of Ada. Carpini, who prdceeded by 
the way of Poland and Ruffia, travelled through 
its northern provinces as far as the extremities 
of Thibet. Afcolino , wo feems to have landed 
fomewhere in Syria, advanced through Its fou- 
thern provinces, into the interior parts of Per- 
fia n). 

n) Hakluyt. j, p. ai. Bergeron torn. I, 



B O O K I. 4$ 

Not long after, St Louis of France contribu- 
ted farther towards extending the knowledge 
which Europeans had begun to acquire of thofe 
diftant regions. (1253) Some defigning impo- 
itor, who took advantage of the (lender acquain- 
tance of Chriftehdom with the ftate and character 
of the Afiatic nations , having informed him that; 
a powerful Chan of the Tartars had embraced 
the Chriftian faith , the monarch liftened to the 
tale with pious credulity, and inftantly refolved 
to fend ambaffadors to 'this illuftrious convert, 
with a view of inciting him to attack their com- 
mon enemy the Saracens in one quarter, while 
he fell upon them in another. As monks were 
the only 'perfons in that age who polTefled fuch 
a degree of knowledge as qualified them for a fer-» 
vice of this kind , he employed in it Father An- 
drew, a Jacobine, who was follovittd by Father 
William de Rubruquis , a Francifcsm. With re- 
fpeft to the progrefs of the former g there is no 
memorial extant The journal of the latter has 
been publifhed. He was admitted into the pre- 
fence of Mangu, the third Khan in fucceflion from 
Zengis, and made a circuit through the interior 
jjarts of Afia , more extenfive than that of any 
European who had hitherto ex|4ored them o). 

To thofe travellers , whom religious zeal fent 
forth to viiit Afia , fucceeded others who ventu- 
red into remote conntries , from the profpeft of 
commercial advantage , or from motives of mere 
«) Hajduyt, u 91. Pergerom to**, i« ' 



44 HISTORY OF AMERICA. 

curiofity. The jfirft and moft eminent of thefe 
was Marco Polo , a Venetian of a noble family, 
(1269.) Having engaged early in trade, accor- 
ding to the cuftom of his country , his afpiring 
mind wifhed for a fphere of aftivity more exten- 
live than was afforted to it by the eftablifhed 
traffic carried in thofe ports of Europe and Alia, 
which the Venetians frequented. This promted 
him to travel into unknown countries , in expe- 
ftation of opening with them a commercial in- 
tercourfe , more fuited to the fanguine ideas and 
hopes of a young adventurer,* 

As his father had already carried fome Eu- 
ropean commodities to the court of the great 
Chan of the Tartars , and had difpofed of them 
to advantage , he reforted thither. Under the 
prote&ion of Kublay Chan , the moft powerfull 
of all the SiMpeffors ofZengis,he continued his 
mercantile peregrinations in Afia upwards of 
twenty-fix years ; and during that time advan- 
ced towards the eaft, far beyond the utmoft boun- 
daries to which any European traveller had ever 
proceeded. Inftead of following the courfe of 
Carpini and Rubruquis , along the vaft unpeopled 
plains of Tartary , he paffed through the chief 
trading cities in tfie more cultivated parts of Afia, 
and penetrated to Cambalu, or Pecking, the ca- 
pital of the great kingdom of Cathay, or China, 
fubjeft at that time to the fucceffors of Zengis, 
He made more than one voyage on the Indian 
ocean, fie traded in many of the iflands, from 



BOO K t 45 

which Europe had long received fpiceries and 
other commodities , which it held in high efti- 
tnation . though unacquainted with the particu- 
lar countries to which it was indebted for thofe 
precious produ&ions ; and he obtained informa- 
tion concerning feveral countries , which he did 
not vifit in perfon , particularly the ifland Zigan- 
gry, probably the fame now known by the name 
of Japan p). On his return , he aftonifhed his 
contemporaries with his defcriptions of vaft re- 
gions , whofe names had never been heard of 
in Europe , and with fuch pompous accounts of 
their fertility , their populoufnefs , their opulence, 
the variety of their manufaftures , and the ex- 
tent of their trade , as rofe far above the con- 
ception of an uninformed age. 

(1322) About half a century after Marco Polo, 
SirJohnMandeville, an Englifhman , encouraged 
by his example, vifited moft of the countries in 
the eaft wich he had defcribed , and , like him , 
published an account of them q). The narrations 
of thofe early travellers abound with many wild 
incoherent tales , concerning giants , enchanters, 
and monfters. But they were not , from that 
circumftance , lefs acceptable to an ignorant age, 
which delighted in what was marvellous. The 
wonders which they told, moftly on hearfey, 
filled the multitude with admiration. The fafts 
which they related from their own obfervation, 

f>.) Viaggi di Marco Polo. Ramuf. tt. 2. Bergeron, torn. il. 
q) Voyages and Travels, by Sir John Mandeville, 



46 HISTORY OF AMERICA 

attrafted the attention of the more difcerning, 
The former, wich may be confidered as the po- 
pular traditions and fables of the countries 
through which they had paffed, -were gradually 
difregarded as Europe advanced in knowledge* 
The latter , howewer incredible fome of them 
may have appeared in their own time , have been 
confirmed by the obfervations of modern travel* 
lers. By means of both, howewer, the curio-* 
fity of mankind was excited with refpeft to te 
remote parts of the earth , their ideas were en- 
larged , and they were not only infenfibly difpo* 
fed to attempt new difcoveries , but received fuch 
information as direfted to that particular courfe 
in which thefe were afterwards carried on, 

And by the invention of the mariners compafs, 

While this fpirit was gradually forming in 
Europe , a fortunate difcovery was made , which 
contributed more than all the efforts and inge- 
nuity of preceding ages, to improve and to extend 
navigation. That wonderful property -of the 
magnet by which it communicates fuch virtue 
to' a needle or flender rod of iron , as to point 
towards the poles of the earth, , was obferved. 
The ufe which might be made of this in directing 
navigation was immediately perceived. That 
moft valuable , but now familiar inftrument , the 
mariners compafs , was formed. When, by mean* 
of it, navigators found that at all feafons, and in 
•very place, they could difcover the north and 



B O O K I 4? 

: fouth with fo much eafe and accuracy, It became 
\ no longer neceffary to depend merely on the light 
i ijf the ftars and the obfervation of the fea coaft* 
i They gradually abandoned their ancient timid 
I and lingering courfe along the fhore , ventured 
: boldly into the ocean, and relying on this new 
: guide , could fteer in the darkeft night, and under 
! the moll cloudy fky, with a fecurity and preci- 
i fion hitherto unknown. The compafs may be 
faid to have t>pened to man the dominion of the 
fea, and to have put him in full pofieflion of the 
earth , by enabling him to vifit every part of 
'^it. Flavio Gioia, a citizen of Amalfi , a town 
of confiderable trade in the kingdom of Naples , 
was the author of this great difcovery, about 
the year one thoufand three hundred and two. 
It hath been often the fate of thofe illuftrious 
benefactors of mankind, who have enriched faien- 
ce and improved the arts by their inventions, to 
derive more reputation than benefit from the 
happy efforts of their genius* But the lot of 
Gioia has been ftill more cruel ; through th£ 
inattention or ignorance of contemporary hiftor- 
ians, he has been defrauded even of the fame 
to which he had fuch a juft title. We receive 
from them no information with refpeft to his 
profeflion , his charafter, the precile time when 
he made this important difcovery , or the acci- 
dents and inquirieswhich led to it The know- 
ledge of this event, though produftive of greater 
V%fts than any recorded in the annals of the 



48 HISTORY OF AMERICA 

human race , is tranfmitted to us without any 
of thofe circumftances , which can "gratify the 
curiofity that it naturally awakens r). But though 
the ufe of the compafs might enable the Italians 
to perform the fhort voyages to which they were 
accuftomed , with greater fecurity and expedition, 
its influence was not fo fudden or extenfive , as 
immediately to render navigation adventurous, 
and to excite a fpirit of difcovery. Many cau- 
fes combined in preventing this benefieial inven- 
tion from producing its full effeft inftantaneoufly.' 
Men relinquifh ancient habits flowly , and with 
reluftance. They areaverfeto new experiments, 
and venture upon them with timidity. The 
commercial jealoufy of the Italians > it is pro- 
bable , laboured to conceal the happy difcovery 
of their countryman from other nations, The 
art of fleering by the compafs , with fuch fkill 
and accuracy as to infpire a full confidence in 
its direftion , was acquired gradually. Sailors y 
unaccuftomed to qnit fight of land , durft not 
launch out at once and commit themfelves to 
unknown feas. Accordingly, near half a century 
elapfed ,from the time of Gioia's difcovery , before 
navigators ventured into any feas which they had 
not been accuftomed to frequent. 

Some appearance a bolder fpirit in navigation. 

The firft appearance of a bolder fpirit may 
be dated from the voyages of the Spaniards to 

r) Collinas & Trombellus de Acns nautica? Inventor*. In* # 
Ait, Acad, Bonon,. torn, ii, part. iii. p. 373. , 



BOOK L 49 

the Canary or Fortunate Iflands. By what acci- 
dent they were led to the difcovery of thofo 
fmall ifles , which lie near five hundred mile* 
from the Spanifh coaft, and above a hundred 
and fifty miles from the coaft of Africa , con* 
temporary writers have Hot explained. But 
about the middle of the fourteenth century,, the 
people of all the different kingdoms into which 
Spain was then divided, were accuftomed to 
snake piratical excurfions thither, in order to 
plunder the inhabitants, or to carry them off- as 
ilaves. Clement VI. in virtue of the right clai- 
med by the holy fee to difpofe of all countries 
poffeffed by infidels , ere&ed thofe ifles into a 
kingdom, in the year one thoufand three hun- 
dred and forty-four, and conferred it on Lewis 
Ae la Cerda, defcended from the royal family of 
Caltile. But that unfortunate prince , deftitute 
of power to affert his nominal title, having never 
vifited the" Canaries , John de Bethencourt , a 
Norman baron, obtained a grant of them from 
Henry III, ofCaftile s). Bethencourt, with the 
valour and good fortune which diftinguifhed the 
adventurers of his country , attempted and ef- 
iefted the conqueft, and the poffefiion of the 
Canaries remained for fome time in his family^ 
as a fief held of the crown of Caftile. Previous 
to this expedition of Bethencourt, his country- 

s) Vieni y Clavijo Notic. de U Hiftor, da Can aria* I. ft68, &ty 
Glai Hilt c. x. 

BOBFRTSPK Vol. L P 



S o HISTORY OF AMERI.GA 

men fettled in Normafidy are faid to have vifited 
the coaft of Africa , and to have proceeded far 
to thefouth of the Canary iflands. (1365.) But 
their voyages thither feem not to have been un- 
dertaken in confeqtience of any public or regular 
plan for extending navigation and,attempting new 
difcoverics. They were either excurfions fugge- 
fted by that roving piratical fpirit, which defcen- 
ded to the Normans from their anceftors, or the 
commercial enterprises of private merchants, 
which attra&ed fo little notice, that hardly any 
memorial of them is to be found in contemporary 
authors. In a general furvey of the progrefs of 
difcovery, it is fufficientto have mentioned this 
event ; and leaving it among thofe of dubious 
exiftence, or of fmall importance, we may con- 
clude, that though much additional information 
concerning the remote regions of the Eaft had 
been received by travellers who vifited them by 
land, navigation, at the beginning of the fif- 
teenth century, had not advanced beyond the 
ftate to which it had attained before the down-' 
fal of the Roman empire. 

Firft regular plan of difcovery formed by the Portuguere. 

At length the period arrived, when Provi- 
dence decreed that men were to pafs the litiiits 
within which they had been fo lajig doirflried, 
and open to thentfelves a more ample field whe- 
rein todifplay their talents, their ehtefpfife, and 
courage. The firft confiderable efforts towards 



BOOK!. it 

n this were not made by any of the more power- 
d ful ftates ofEurope,orbythofe who had applied 

to navigation with the greateft affiduity and fuc- 
e cefs. The glory of leading the way in this new 
3 career was referved for Portugal , one of the 
p fmalleft and moft inconfiderable of the European 
2 kingdoms. As the attempts of the Portuguefe to 
a acquire the knowledge of thofe parts of the globe 
r with which mankind were then unacquainted, 
• not only improved and extended the art of na- 
: vigation , but roufed fuch a fpirit of curiofity 
r and enterprife , as led to the difcovery of the 
1 1 New World , of which I propofe to write the hi- 
:/ ftory , it is neceflary to take a view of the rife, 
% the progrefs, and fuccefs of their various naval 
-. operations. It was in this fchool that the difco- 
: verer of America was trained ; and unlefs we' 
- trace the fteeps by which his inftra&ors and 

guides advanced, it will be impoffible to com- 
i. prehend the circumftances which fuggefted the 
? idea , or facilitated the execution of hi* great 
: defign. 

Circumftances which led to this. 

Various circumftances prompted the Portu- 
guefe to exert their a&ivity in this new dire- 
ction , and enabled them to accomplifn nnder* 
takings apparently fuper ior to the natural force 
of their monarchy* The kings ot Portugal, ha- 
ying driven the Moors out of their dominions, 
had acquired power , as well as glory , by the 



5a HISTORY OF AMERICA 

fuccefs of their arms againft the infidels. By 
their victories over them , they had extended 
the royal authority beyond the Harrow limits 
■within which it was originally circumfcribed in 
Portugal, as well as in other feudal kingdoms. 
They had the command of the national force* 
could roufe it to aft with united vigour, and* 
after the expulfion of the Moors,' could em- 
ploy it without dread of interruption from any 
domeftic enemy. By the perpetual hoftilities 
carried on for feveral centuries againft the Ma- 
hometans , the martial and adventurous fpirit 
which diftinguifhed all the European nations 
during the middle ages , was improved and heigh- 
tened among the Portuguefe. A fierce civil war 
towards the clofe of the fourteenth century, 
occafioned by a difputed fucceflion, augmented 
the military ardour of the nation , and formed 
or called forth men of fuch aftive and daring 
genius , as are lit for bold unterdakings. The 
fituation of the kingdom . bounded on every fide 
by the dominions of a more powerful neighbour, 
did not afford free fcope to the aftivity of the 
Portuguefe by land, as the ftrength of their 
monarchy was no match for that of Caftile. But 
Portugal was a maritime ftate , in which there 
were many commodious harbours ; the people 
had begun to make fome progrefs in the know- 
ledge and pra&ice. of navigation ; and the fea 
was open to them, prefenting the only field of 



BOOK I: 53 

enterprife in which they could diftinguifh them* 
felves. 

Firft attempt. 

Such was the ftate of Portugal 9 and fuch 
the difpofition of the people , when John I. fur- 
named; the Baftard obtained fecure poffeflion, 
of the crown by the peace concluded with Ca- 
ilile in the year one thoufand four hundred and 
eleven. He was a prince of great merit, who, 
by fuperior courage and abilities had opened hi* 
way to a throne which of right did not belong 
to him, He inftantly perceived that ,it would 
be impoffible to preferve public order, or dome- 
stic tranquility , without finding fome employ- 
ment for the reftlefs fpirit of his fubjefts. With 
this view, he affembled a numerous fleet atLif- 
bon, compofed of all the fhips that he could fit 
out in his own kingdom , and of many hired 
from foreigners. This great armament was de- 
fined to attack the Moors fettled on the coafi: 
of Barbary. (141a,) While it was equipping f 
a few veJTels were appointed to fail along the 
weftern fhore of Africa bounded by the Atlantic 
ocean , and to difcover the unknown countries 
fituated there. From this inconfiderable attempt „ 
we may date the commencement of that fpirit 
of difcovery which opened the barriers that had 
fo long fhut out mankind from the knowledge 
of one half of .the terreftrial globe. 

At the time when John fent forth thefe fhips 
on this new Voyage . -the art of navigation was 



54 HISTORY OF AMERICA 

ftill very imperfeft. Though Africa lay fo near 
to Portugal, and the fertility of the countries 
already known on that continent invited men to 
explore it more fully , the Portuguese had ne- 
ver ventured to fail beyond Cape Non. That 
promontory , as its name imports , was hitherto 
confidered as a boundary Which could not be 
paffed. But the nations of Europe had now ac- 
quired as much knowledge, as emboldened them 
to difregard the prejudices and to correft the 
errors of their, anceftors. The long reign of 
ignorance, the conftant enemy of every curibus 
inquiry , and of every new undertaking, was 
approaching to its period. The light of fcience 
began to dawn. The works of the ancient Greeks 
and Romans began to be read with admiration 
and profit. The fciences cultivated by the Ara- 
bians were introduced into Europe by the Moors 
fettled in Spain and Portugal , and by the Jews, 
who were very numerous in both thefe king- 
doms. Geometry, aftronomy, and geography, 
the fciences on which the art of navigation is 
founded, became objefts of ftudious attention. 
The memory of the difcoveries made by the an- 
cients was revived , and the progrefs of their 
navigation and commerce began to be traced. 
Some of the caufes which have obftrufted the 
cultivation of fcience in Portugal, during this 
century and the laft , did not exift , or did not 
operate in the fame manner, in the fifteenth 



BOOK I, 55 

century t); and the Portuguefe, at that period, 
fcem to have kept pace with other nations on 
this fide of the Alps in literary purfuits. 

Its fucccfs. • 

As the genius of the age favoured the exe*- 
cution of that new undertaking, to which the 
peculiar ftate of their country invited the Por- 
tuguefe . it proved fuccefsful. The yeflels fent 
on the difcovery doubled that formidable Cape, 
which had terminated the progrefs of former 
navigators, and proceeded a hundred and fixty 
miles beyond it, to CapeBojador. As its rocky 
cliffs, which ftretched a confiderable way into 
the Atlantic , appeared i»ore dreadful thau the 
promontory which they had paffed , the Portu- 
guefe commanders durft not attempt to fail round 
it, but returned to Lifbon, more fatisfied witk 
having advanced fo far, than afhamed at having 
ventured no farther. 

Prince Henry the dire&or of the Pdrtuguefe difcoveries. 

In confiderable as this voyage 'was, Lt in- 
creased the paflion for difcovery, which began 
to arife in Portugal. The extraordinary fuceefs 
of the king's expedition againft the Moors of Rar- 
bary, added ftrength to that fpirit in tfie n&tiofl, 
and pufhed it on to new undertakings. (1415) 
In order to render thefe fuccefsful , it was me- 
ceffary that they fhould be conduced by a per- 

t) See NOTE IX. 



55 HISTORY OF AMERICA 

fpn who poffeffed abilities capable of difcerning 
what was attainable, who enjoyed leifure to 
form a regular fyftem for profecuting difcovery, 
and who was animated with ardour that would 
perfevere in fpite ofobftaclesandrepulfes. Hap- 
pily for Portugal, fhe found all thofe qualities 
in Henry duke of Vifeo , the fourth fon of king 
John by Philippa of Lancafter, fifter of Henry IV# 
king of England. That prince, in his early youth, 
having accompanied his father in his expedition 
to barbary , diftinguifhed himfelf by many deeds 
of valour. To the martial fpirit," which was 
the ehara&eriftic of every man of noble birth at 
that time , he added all the accomplifhments of 
a more englightened and polifhed age. He cul- 
tivated the arts and fciences , which were then 
unknown and defpifed by perfons of his rank. 
He applied with peculiar fondnefs to the ftudy 
of geography; and by the inftru&ion of able 
mafters , as well as by the accounts of travel- 
lers, he early acquired fuch knowledge of the 
habitable globe, as difcovered thejgreat proba- 
bility of finding new and opulent countries, by 
failing along the coaft of Africa. Such an ob- 
jeft was formed to awaken the enthufiafm and 
ardour of a youthful mind, and he engaged with 
the utmoft zeal to patronize a defign which might 
prove as beneficial , as it appeared to be fplen- 
did and honourable. In order that he might pur- 
fue this great fcheme without interruption , he 
retired from court immediately after his return 



BOOK I. 



I 



57 



from Africa , and fixed his refidence at Sagres , 
near Gape St. Vincent, where the profpeft of 
the Atlantic ocean invited his thoughts conti- 
nually towards his favourite projeft , and en- 
couraged him to execute it. In this retreat he 
was attended by fome of the moft learned men 
in his country, who aided him in his refearchetf. 
He applied for information to the Moors of Bar- 
bary, who were accuftomed to travel by land 
intcvthe interior provinces of Africa , in queft of 
ivory, gold-duft, and other rich commodities. 
He confulted the Jews fettled in Portugal. By 
promifes , rewards , and marks of refpeft , he 
allured into his fervice feveral perfons , foreign 
ners as well as Portuguefe , who were eminent 
for their fkill in navigation. In taking thofe 
preparatory fteps, the great abilities of the prin- 
ce were feconded by his private virtues. His 
integrity, his affability, his refpeft for religion, 
his zeal for the honour of his country, engaged 
perfons of all ranks to applaud his defign, and 
to favour the execution of it. His fchemes were 
allowed by the greater part of his countrymen 
to preceed neither from ambition, nor the de T 
'fire of wealth , but to flow from the warm be- 
nevolence of a heart eager to promote the hap^ 
pinefs of mankind, and which juftly intitled him 
to affume a motto for his device , that defcribed 
the quality, by which he wifhed to be diking 
guifhed, the talent of doing good. 



58 HISTORY OF AMERICA 

Difcovery of Porto Santo. 1418. 

His firft effort, as is ufual at the commen- 
cement of any new undertaking, was extre- 
mely inconfiderable. He fitted out a fingle fhip, 
and giving the command of it to John Gonza- 
lez Zarco and Triftan Vaz , two gentlemen of 
his houfehold, who voluntarily offered to con- 
duft the enterprife, he inftrutted them to ufe 
their utmoft efforts to double Cape Bojador, and 
thence to fteer towards the fouth. They^ ac- 
cording to the mode of navigation which ftill 
prevailed, held their courfe along the fhore; 
and by following that direction, they muft have 
encountered almoft infuperable difficulties in at- 
tempting to pafs Cape Bojador. But fortune 
came in aid to their want of f kill , and preven- 
ted the voyage from being altogether fruitlefs. 
A fudden fquall of wind arofe , drove them out 
to fea , and when they expefted every moment 
to perifh , landed them on an unknown ifland, 
which from their happy efcape they named Por- 
to Santo. In the infancy of navigation , the 
difcovery of this fmall ifland appeared a matter 
of fuch moment, that they inftantly returned 
to Portugal with the good tidings, and were 
received by Henry with the applaufe and ho- 
nour due to fortunate adventurers. This faint 
dawn of fuccefs filled a mind ardent in the pur- 
fuit of a favourite obje& with fuch fanguine ho- 
pes as were fufficient incitements to proceed. 
(14 19) Next year, Henry fent out three Chips 



B O O K I, 59 

under the fame commanders, to whom he joi- 
* ned Bartholomew Pereftrello, in order to take 
s * pofleflion of the if land which they had difcove- 
j* red. When they began to fettle in Porto San* 
& to, they obferved towards the fouth a fixed fpot 
■ in the horizon, like a fmall black cloud. 



Of Madeira. 



$ By degrees, they were led to conjecture 

h that it might be land , and fleering towards it, 
■■ they arrived at a confiderable ifland , uninhabi- 
> * ted and covered with wood , which ;on ihat ac- 
• count they called Madeira u). (1420) As it 
was Henry's . chief objeft to render his disco- 
veries ufeful to -his country, he immediately 
equipped a fleet to carry a colony of Portuguese 
r to thefe iflands. By his provident care, they 
were furhifhed not only with the feeds, plants, 
and domeftic animals common in Europe ; but 
as he forefaw that the warmth of the climate 
' and fertility of the foil would prove favourable 
to the rearing of other produ&ions , he procu- 
red flips of the wine from the ifland of Cyprus* 
the rich wines of which were then in great re- 
queft, and plants of the fugar cane from Sici- 
ly, into which it had been lately introduced. 
Thefe throve fo profperoufly in this new coun- 
try , that the benefit of cultivating them was 
immediately perceived, and the fugar and wine 

-b) Historical relation of the firft difcovery of Madeira, tranf- 
Uttftfrom the Portuguefe of Fran. Alcafarano, p. 15. &c. 



6o HISTORY OF AMERICA 

of Madeira quickly became confiderable articles 
in the commerce of'Portugal x). 

Double Cape Bojador. 

As foon as the advantages derived from this 
firft fettlement to the weft of the European con- 
tinent began to be* felt, the fpirit of difcovery 
appeared lefs chimerical , and became more ad- 
venturous. By their voyages to Madeira , the 
Portuguese were gradually accuftomed to a bol- 
der navigation, and inftead of creeping fervilely 
along the coaft , ventured into the open fea. In 
confequence of taking this courfe, Gilianez, who 
commanded one of prince Henry's Chips , doubt- 
led Cape Bojador , the boundary of the Portu* 
guefe navigation upwards of twenty years, and 
which had hitherto been deemed unpayable, 
(1433) This fuccefsfull voyage, which the ig- 
norance of the age placed on a level with the 
moft famous exploits recorded in hiftory, open- 
ed a new fphere to navigation , as it difcovered 
the vaft continent of Africa, ftill wafhed by the 
Atlantic ocean, and ftretching towards the fouth. 

Advance withiq tUe tropics. 

Part of this was foon explored ; the Portu- 
guese advanced within the tropics , and in the 
fpace of a few years they difcovered the river 
Senegal, and all the coaft extending from Cape 
Blanco to Cape de Verd. 

x) Lud, Guicciardiai Defcritt, de Paefi Bafli, p. igo f 4k« 



B O O K I. 61 

Aftohifhed at what they difcovered there. 

Hitherto the Portuguefe had been guided 
In their difcoveries, or encouraged to atte<npt 
them , by the light and information which they 
received from the works of the ancient mathe- 
maticians and geographers^ But, when they 
began to enter the torrid zone, the notion 
which prevailed among the ancients, that the 
heat, which reigned perpetually there, was 
fo exceffive as to render it uninhabitable , ' de- 
terred them , for fome time , from proceeding. 
Their own obfervations , when they firft ven- 
tured into this unknown and formidable region, 
tended to confirm, the opinion of antiquity con- 
cerning the violent operation of the direft rays 
of the fun. As far as the fiver Senegal , the 
Portuguefe had found the coaft of Africa inha- 
bited by people nearly refembling the Moors of 
Barbary. When they advanced to the Tnuth 
of that river, the human form feemed to put 
on a new appearance. They beheld men with 
fkins black as ebony, with fhort curled hair, 
flat nofes , thick lips , and all the peculiar fea- 
tures which are now known to diftinguifh the 
race of negroes. This furpri£ng alteration 
they naturally attributed to the influence of 
beat , and if they fhould advance nearer to the 
line , they began to dread that' its effefts would 
be ftill more violent. Thofe dangers, were exag- 
gerated , «and many other obje&ions againft 
attempting farther difcoveries were propofed by 



6z HISTORY OF AMERICA. 

fome of the grandees, who, from ignorance, 
from envy, or from that cold timid prudence 
which reje&s whatever has the air of novelty 
or enterprife, had hitherto condemned all prin- 
ce Henry's fchemes. They reprefented, that 
it was altogether chimerical to expeft any ad- 
vantage from countries fituated in that region 
which the wifdom and experience of antiquity 
had pronounced to be unfit for the habitation 
of men; that their forefathers, fatisfied with 
cultivating the territory which Providence had 
allotted them, did not wafte the ftrength of 
the kingdom by fruitlefs proje&s, in queft of 
new fettlements ; that Portugal was already ex- 
hautted by the expence of attempts to difcover 
lands which either did not exift , or which na- 
ture deftined to remain unknown ; and was 
drained of men, who might have been em- 
ployed in undertakings attended with more cer- 
tain- fuccefs , and produftive of greater benefit. 
But neither their appeal to the authority of the 
ancients , nor their reafonings concerning the 
intereft of Portugal, made any impreflion upon 
the determined philofophic mind of prince 
Henry. The 4ifcoveries which he had already 
made convinced him that the ancients had little 
more than a conjeftural knowledge of the tor- 
rid zone. He was no lefs fatisfied that the 
political arguments of his opponents with re- 
ipeft to the intereft of Portugal \i|pre ma- 
levolent and illfounded. In thofe fend- 



BOOK I, 63 

ments he was ftrenuoufly fupported by his 
brother Pedro, who governed the kingdom as 
•guardian of their nephew Alphonfo V. who . 
had fucceeded to the throne .during his mino- 
rity; and inftead of flackening his efforts, Hen- 
ry contiriued to purfue his difcoveries with 
frefh ardour. (1438) 

Papal grant to Portugal of what countries It fhould difcover. 

But in order to filence all the murmurs 
of oppofitioii , he endeavoured to obtain the 
► fanftion of the higheft authority in favour of 
his operations. With this view , he applied 
fo the Pope , and reprefented , in pompous 
terms, the pious and unwearied zeal, with 
which he had exerted himfelf during twenty 
years, in difcovering unknown countries, the 
wretched inhabitants of which were utter Gran- 
gers to true religion , wandering in heathen 
darknefs , or led aftray by the delufions of Ma- 
homet. He befought the holy father , to 
whom , as the -vicar of Chrift , all the king- 
doms of the earth were fubjeft, to confer on 
the crown of Portugal a right to all the coun- 
tries poiTefred by Infidels, which fhould be di- 
fcovered by the induftry of its fubjefts, and 
fubdued by the force of its arms. He intrea- 
ted him to enjoin all Chriftian powers, under 
the higheft penalties, not to moleft Portugal 
while engaged in this laudable enterprife, and 
to prohibit them from fettling in any of the 



64 HISTORY OF AMERICA 

countries which the Portuguefe fhoud difcover 
Ke promifed that* in all their expeditions , i 
fhottld be the chief objeft of his countrymen t< 
fpread the knowledge of the Chriftian religion 
to eftablifh the authority of the holy fee , am 
to increafe the flock of the uniyerfal paftor. A 
it was by improving with dexterity every favou 
arable conjuncture for acquiring new powers 
that the court of Rome had gradually extend- 
ed its ufurpations , Eugene IV. the pontiff , tc 
whom this application was made, eagerly feized 
the opportunity which now prefented itfelf. 
He inftantly perceived , that by complying with 
prince Henry's requeft, he might exercife I 
prerogative no lefs flattering in its own nature, 
than likely to prove beneficial in its confequen- 
ces. A Bull was accordingly iffued, in which, 
after applauding in the ftrongeft terms the paft 
eiubrts of the Portuguefe, and exhorting them 
to proceed in that laudable career on Which 
they had entered, he granted them an exclufi- 
ve right to all the countries which they fhould 
difcover, frotn Cape Non to the continent of 
India. 

Extravagant as this donation , comprehen- 
ding fuch a large portion of the habitable glo- 
be, would now appear even in Catholic coun- 
tries , no perfon in the fifteenth century doub- 
ted that the Pope, in the plenitude of his apo- 
ftolic power, had a right to confer it Prince 
Henry was foon fenfible of the advantages which 

he 



BOOK !, 65 

he derived from this tranfa&Ko. His fchemes 
were authorifed and fan&ified by the bull ap- 
proving of them. The fpirit of difcovery was 
connected with zeal for religion , which , in 
that age , was a principle of fuch aftivity and 
vigour, as to influence the conduft of nations. 
All Chriftian princes were deterred from intru- 
ding into thofe countries which the Portuguefe 
had discovered, or from interrupting the pro- 
grefs of their navigation and conquefts (y). 

Fame and progrefs of the Portuguefe difcovcries. 

The fame of the Portuguefe voyages foott 
fpread over Europe. Men , long accuftomed 
to circumfcribe the aftivity and knowledge of 
the human mind within the limits to which 
they had been hitherto confined,, were aftd- 
nifhed to behold the fphere of navigation fo 
fuddenly enlarged, and a profpeft opened of 
ijifiting regions of the globe , the exiftence of 
which was unknown in former times. The 
learned and fpeculative reafoned and forined the- 
ories concerning thofe unexpe&ed difcoveries. 
The vulgar inquired and wondered ; while en- 
terprifing adventurers crouded from every part 
of Europe , foliciting prince Henry to employ 
them in this honourable fervice. Many Vene- 
tians andGenoefe, in particular, who were, 
at that time, fuperior to all other nations in 
the fcience of naval affairs , entered aboard the 

y) See J*OTE X. 

Robertson Vol.L E 



66 HISTORY OF AMERICA 

Portuguefe fhips ^ and acquired a more per- 
fect and extenfive knowledge of therf^rofef- 
iion in that new fchool of navigation. In 
emulation df thefe foreigners > the Portugue- 
fe exerted their own talents. The nation fe- 
conded the defigns of the prince, Private 
merchants formed companies, with a view to 
fearch for unknown countries, (1446.) The 
<Jape de Verd iflands, which lie off the pro- 
montory of that name, were difcovered, and 
foon after, the ifles called Azores. (1449). 
As the former of thefe are . above three hun- 
dred miles from the African coaft r and the .lat- 
ter nine hundred miles from any continent , it 
is evident, by their venturing fo boldly into 
the open feas, that the Portuguefe had, by 
this time , improved greatly in the art of na- 
vigation. 

Death of priuce Henry. (1463.) 

While the pailion for engaging in new. un- 
dertakings was thus warm and aftive, it re* 
ceived an unfortunate check by the death of 
prince Henry, whofe fuperior knowledge bad 
hitherto directed all the operations of the 
difcoverers , and whofe patronage had en- 
couraged and prote&ed them. But nothwith- 
ilanding all the advantages which they deri- 
ved from thefe , the Portuguefe , during his 
life , did not advance, in their utmoft pro* 
jrefs towards the fouth, within five degrees 



BOOK L 67 

of the equinoftial line ; and, after their con- 
tinued exertions for half a century, hardly fif* 
teen hundred miles of the coaft of •Africa we- 
re difcovered. To an age acquainted with 
the efforts of navigation in its ftate of maturity 
and improvement, th^p effays of its early 
years muft neceflarily appear feeble and unfkil- 
ful. (From 141a. to 1463.) ^t, inconfiderab- 
le as they may be ddemed^ they were fuf- 
ficient to turn the cunofity of the European 
nations into a new channel, to excite an en-* 
terprifing fpirit, and to point the way to future 
difcoveries. 

The paflfan for dlfcovery languifhes for fome time* 

Alphonfo, who poflefled the throne of Por- 
tugal at the time of prince Hejiry's death . was 
fo much engaged in fupporting his own pre- 
tenfions to the. crown of Caftile , or in car- 
rying on his expeditions againft the Moors in 
Barbary, that the force of his kingdom being 
exerted in other operations, he could not pro- 
fecute the difcoveries in Africa with ardour. 
He committed the conduft of them to Fernan- 
do Gomez, a merchant in Lifoon, to whom he 
granted an exclufive right of commerce with. 
all the countries of which prince Henry had 
taken poffeljion. Under the reftraint and op- 
preffion of a monopoly , the fpirit of difcovery 
languifhed. It ceafed to be a national objeft, 
and becamf the concern of a private man , mo- 
E a 



tfg HISTORY OF AMERICA. 

re attentive to his own gain , than to the glo- 
ry of his country. Some progrefc , however , 
was made. (1471.) The Portuguefe ventured 
at length to crofs the line, and, to their afto- 
nifhment, found that region of the torrid zone, 
which was fuppofed to be fcorched with into- 
lerable heat, to be noronly habitable, but po- 
pulous and fertile. 

Revive* with additional ardour. (14SD 

John II. who fucceeded his father Alphonfo 
poffeffed talents capable both of forming and 
executing great defigns. As part of his reve- 
nues , wfiile prince , had arifen from duties on 
the trade with the newly difcovered countries , 
this naturally turned his attention towards them, 
and Satisfied him with refpeft to their utility 
and importance. In proportion as his know* 
ledge of thefe countries extended, the poffeffion 
of them appeared to be of greater confequence. 
While the portuguefe proceeded along the coaft 
of Africa, from Cape Non to the river of Se- 
negal, they found all that extenfive traft to 
be fandy, barren, and thinly inhabited by a 
wretched people profefling the Mahometan re- 
ligion , and fubjeft to the vaft empire of Mo- 
rocco. But to the fouth of that river, the po- 
wer and religion of the Mahometans were un- 
known. The country was divided into {mail 
independent principalities* the population was 



B O O K 1. * 69 

confiderable , the foil fertile z) , and the Por- 
tuguese foon difcovered that it produced ivory, 
rich gums, gold, and other valuable commo- 
dities. By the acquifitioh of thefe , , commer- 
ce was enlarged , and became more adventu- 
rous. Men, animated and rendered aftive by 
the certain profpeft of gain, purfued difcove- 
ry with greater eagernefs , than when they 
Were excited only by curiofity and hope. 

Its progrefs. 

This fpirit derived no finall reinforcement 
of vigour from the countenance of fuch a mo- 
narch as John. Declaring himhelf the patron 
of every attempt towards difcovery, he pro- 
moted it with all the ardour of his grand uncle 
.prince Henry, and with fuperior power. (1484) 
The effefts of this were immediately felt, A 
powerful fleet was fitted out, which, after 
difcovering the kingdoms of Benin and Congo, 
advanced above fifteen hundred miles beyond 
the line, and the Portuguefe, for the firft time, 
beheld a new heaven, and obferved the ftars 
of another hemifphere. John was not only fo- 
Hcitous to difcover, but attentive to fecure the 
poffeflion of thofe countries. He built forts 
on the coaft of Guinea ; he fent out colonies 
to Tettle there ; he eftabliflied a commercial in- 

2) Navigatio Aloyfii Cadamufti apud Novum Orbem Grynaei' 
p. 2. 18. T Nwigaz. all lfol* «"i San Tome per un Pilott* 
Portugh. Ramufio. I. X15. 



7 o HISTORY OF AMERICA 

tercourfe with the more powerful kingdoms; 
he endeavoured to render fuch as were feeble 
or divided , tributary to the crown of Portugal. 
Some of the petty princes voluntarily acknow- 
ledged themfelves his vaffals. Others 'were 
compelled to do fo by force of arms. A re- 
gular and well digefted fyftem was formed 
with refpeft to this new obj eft of policy, and 
by firmly adhering to it , the Portuguefe power 
and commerce in Africa were eftablifhed upiffc. 
a folid foundation. 

Hopes of difcovering a new route to Che Eaft Indies. 

By their conftant intercourfe with the 
people of Africa, the Portuguefe gradually 
acquired fome knowledge of thofe parts of that 
country which they had not vifited. The in- 
formation which they received from the natives, 
added to what they had obferved in their own 
voyages , began to open profpefts more exten- 
five , and to fuggeft the idea of fchemes more 
important, than thofe which had hitherto allu- 
red and occupied them. They had detefted 
the error of the ancients concerning the nature 
of the torrid zone. They found, as they pro* 
ceeded fouthwards , that the continent of Afri- 
ca , inftead of extending in breadth , according 
to the doftrine of Ptolemy a) , at that time tjie 
oracle and guide of the learned in the fcienct 

») Vide Nov. Orbls Tabul. Geogrtph, fecund, rtolem. Am*. 
1730. 



BO OK I ?r 

jof geography , ' appeared fenfibly to contrafr 
itfelf, and to bend towards the eaft. This in- 
duced fern to give credit to the accounts of 
the ancient Phenician voyages round Africa* 
which had long been deemed fabulous r and 
led them to conceive hopes that by following 
the fame route, they might arrive at the Eaft 
Indies, and engrofs that commerce* which 
has been the fource of wealth and power to 
every nation poffeffed of it The comprenenfive 
genius of prince Henry, as we may conjefture 
from the words of the pope's bull , had early 
formed fome idea of this navigation. All the 
Portuguefe pilots and mathematicians now con- 
curred in representing it as pra&icable* The 
king entered with warmth into their fentiments* 
atid began to concert m'eafures for this arduous 
and important voyage. 

Schemes for tccomplifhing this* 

Before his preparations for this expedition 
were finifhed, accounts were tranfmitted from 
Africa, that various nations along the coaft had 
mentioned a mighty kingdom fituated on their 
continent, at a great diftance towards the eaft, 
the king of which, according to their descri- 
ption, profefled the Chriftian religion. The 
Portuguefe monarch immediately concluded,, 
that this muft be the empelfcr of Abyfiinia* to 
whom the Europeans , feduced by a miftake of 
Rubruquis, Marco Polo, and other travellers 



7 a HISTORY OF AMERICA 

to the eaft, abfurdly gav? the name Prefter or 
Prefbyter John; and as he hoped to receive in- 
formation and aflift^nce from a Chriftia^fcjrince, 
in profecuting a fcheme that tended to propa- 
gate their common faith, he refolved to open, 
if poflible, fome intercourfe with his court* 
With this view, he made choice of Pedro de 
Covillam and Alphonfo de Payva, who were 
perfeft matters of the Arabic language, and fent 
them iifto the eaft, to fearch for the refidence 
of this unknown potentate , and to make him 
proffers df friendfhip. They had it in charge 
likewife, to procure whatever intelligence the 
nations which they viiited could fupply, with 
rcfpeft to- the trade of India, and the courfe of 
navigation to that continent b). 

Voyage of Bartholomew Diaz. J48& 

\ 

While John made this new attempt by land, 
to obtain fome knowledge of the Country, which 
he wifhed fo ardently to difcover, he did not 
negleck the profecution of this great defign by* 
fea. The conduft of a voyage for this purpofe, 
the molt arduous and important which the Por- 
tuguese had ever projefted , was committed to 
Bartholomew Diaz, an officer whofe fagacity, 
experience, and fortitude, rendered bim equal 
to the undertaking. He ftretched boltly to- 
wards the fouth, and proceeding beyond the 

b) Faria y Soufa Port. Afia, vol. 1. p. 46. Lafitau Decouv. de* 
Ports. 1. 46. 



BOOK I. 73 

utmoft limits to which his countrymen had hi- 
therto advanced, difcovered near athoufand mi- 
les of a new country. Neither the danger to 
which he was expofed , by a fuccefljon of vio- 
lent tempefts in unknown feas, and by the fre- 
quent mutinies of his crew, nor the calamities 
of famine which he fuffered from lofing his fto- 
xefhip, could deter him from profecuting his 
enterprife. In recompence of his labours and 
jperfeverance , he at laft defcried that lofty pro- 
inontory which bounds Africa to the fouth. But 
"to defcry it, was all that he had in his power 
"to accomplifh. The violence of the winds, the 
Shattered condition of his fhips , and the turbu- 
lent fpirit of his failors, compelled him to re- 
ctum, after a voyage of fix teen months, in 
^jrhich he difcovered a far greater extent of 
country than 'any former navigator. Diaz had 
called the promontory which terminated his 
Voyage Capo tormentofo , or the ftormy Cape ; 
!>ut the king, his mafter, as he now entertai- 
ned no doubt of having found the long defired 
route to India , gave it a name more inviting, 
and of better omen, The Cape of Good Hope c), 

More certain profpe&s of fuccefs. 

Thofe fanguine expe&ations of fuccefs we- 
re confirmed by the intelligence which John 
received over land , in confequence of his em- 
bafiy to Abyflinia. Covillam and Payva , in 

c) F stria y Soufa Port Afia , vol. I. p. «6, 



74 HISTORY OF AMERICA 

obedience to their mailer's inftru&ions , had 
repaired to Grand Cairo. From that city, they 
travelled along with a caravan of Egyptian mer- 
chants , and embarking on the Red Sea , arri- 
ved at Aden in Arabia. There they feparated; 
Payva failed direftly towards Abyffinia ; Covil- 
lam embarked for the Eaft Indies , and having 
vifited Calecut, Goa, and other cities on the 
Malabar coaft, returned to Sofala, on the eaft 
fide of Africa 9 and thence to Grand .Cairo, 
which Payva and he had fixed upon as their 
place of rendez vous. Unfortunately the former 
was cruelly murdered in Abyffinia, bat Covil- 
lam found at Cairo two Portuguefe Jews, whom 
John , whofe provident fagacity attended to 
every circumftance. that could facilitate the exe- 
cution of his fchemes , had difpatched after 
them , in order to receive a detail of their pro- 
ceedings , and to communicate to them new 
inftrufitions. By one ofthefejews, Covillam 
tranfmitted to Portugal a journal of his travels 
by fea and land, his remarks upon the trade 
of India, together with exaft maps of the coafts 
on which he had touched ; and from what he 
himfelf had obferved , as well as from the in- 
formation of fkilful feamen in different conn- 
tries , he concluded , that by failing round Afri- 
ca , a pallage might be found to the Eaft 
Indies d). 

4) FariaySoufa Tort. Alia, Vol. ). p. a?. LafitauDecouv.i.41* 



b a o k r. 7s 

Preparations for another voyagt. 

The happy coincidence of Covillam's opi- 
nion and report, with the difcoveries which 
Diaz had lately made , leftTflardly any fhadow 
of doubt with refpeft to the poffibility of failing 
from Europe to India. But the vaft length of 
the voyage, and the furious ftorms which Diaz: 
had encountered near the Cape of Good Hope, 
alarmed and intimidated the Portuguefe to fuch 
a degree, although by long experience they 
were now become adventurous and fkilful ma- 
riners , that fome time was requifite to prepare 
their minds for this dangerous and extraordinary 
voyage.* The courage, however, and autho- 
rity of the monarch, gradually difpelled the 
vain fears of his fubjefts , or made it neceffary 
to conceal them. As John thought himfelf now 
upon the eve of accomplishing that great defign, 
which had been the principal objeft of his reign, 
his earneftnefs in profecuting it became fo ve- 
hement, that it occupied his thoughts by day, 
and bereaved him of fleep through the night. 
While he was taking every precaution that his 
wifdom and experience could fuggeft, in order 
to endure the fuccefs of the expedition, which 
was to decide concerning the fate of his favou- 
rite ^rojeft, the fame of the vaft difcoveries 
which the PortugUefe had already made, the 
reports concerning the extraordinary intelli- 
gence which they had received from the Eaft, 
and the profpeft of the voyage which they now 



7 6 HISTORY OF AMERICA. 

meditated , drew the attention of all the Euro- 
pean nations , and held them in fufpence and 
expe&ation. ^ 

The attention of mankind fixed upon it. 

By fome, the maritime fkill and naviga- 
tions of the Portuguefe were compared with 
thofe of the Phenicians and Carthaginians , and 
exalted above them. Others formed cony&u- 
res concerning the revolutions which the fuccefs 
of the Portuguefe fchemes might occafion in the 
courfe of trade , and the political ftate of Eu- 
rope. The Venetians began to be difquieted 
with the apprehenfion of lofing their Indian 
commerce, the monopoly of which was the 
chief fource of their power as well as opulence, 
and the Portuguefe already enjoyed in fancy, 
the wealth of the Eaft. 

Suddenly turned to a new objeft. 

But, during this interval, which gave fuch 
fcope to the various workings of curiofity, of 
hope and of fear, an account was brought to 
Europe of an event no lefs extraordinary than 
unexpefted , the difcovery of a New World fi- 
liated in the weft; and the eyes and admira- 
tion of mankind turned immediately towards 
that great objeft. 



.77 
BOOK n, 

Birth and education of Columbus." 

r\ mong the foreigners whom the fame of 
-*- -^ the difcoveries made by the Portuguefe 
had alluded into their fervice, was Chriftopher 
*Colon or Columbus, a fubjeft of the republic 
of Genoa. Neither the time nor place of his 
birth are known with certainty (a) ; but he was 
defcended of an honourable family , though re- 
#iced to indigence by various misfortunes. His 
anceftors having betaken themfelves for fubfi- ' 
ftence to a # fea faring life, Columbus discovered, 
in his early youth , the peculiar chara&er and 
talents which mark out a man for thatprofeffion. 
His parents , inftead of thwarting this original 
propenfity of his mind , feem to have encoura- 
ged and confirmed it, by the education which 
they gave him. After awuiiring fonie know- 
ledge of the Latin tongue*pfche only language 
in which fcience was taught at that time, h# 
was inftru&ed in geometry , cofmography , 
aftronomy, and the art of drawing. To thefe* 
he applied with fuch ardour and predileftion, 
on account of their connection with navigation , 
his favourite objeft, that he advanced with ra- 
pid proficiency in the ftudy of them. (146 1) Thus 
qualified, he went to fea at the age of fourteen, 

*) See NOTE XI, 



78 V HISTORY OF AMERICA 

and began his career on that element which con* 
drifted him to fo much glory- His early voya- 
ges were to thofe ports in the Mediterranean 
which his countrymen the Genoefe frequented, 
(1467.) This being a fphere to narrow for his 
aftive mind, he made an excurfion to the nor- 
thern feas, and viiited the coafts of Iceland, to 
which the Englifh and other nations had* begun ta 
refort on account of its fifhery. As navigation* 
in every dire&ion, was now become enterpri- 
fing , he proceeded beyond that ifland , the 
Thule of the ancients , and advanced feveral de- 
grees within the polar circle. Having fatisfiod 
his curiofity by a voyage which tended more 
to enlarge his knowledge of naval affairs , than 
to improve his fortune, he entered into thefer- 
vice of a famous fea captain , of his own name 
and family. This man commanded a fmall 
fquadron , fitted out at his own expence , t and 
by cruifing fometimes againft the Mahometans, 
fometimes againft the Venetians , the rivals of 
his country in tradtf* had- acquired both wealth 
3nd reputation. With him Columbus continued 
for feveral years , no lefs diftinguifhed for his 
courage, than for his experience as a failor. 
At length, in an obftinate engagement, of the 
coaft of Portugal, with fome Venetian caravfels, 
returning richly laden from the Low Countries , 
the veffel on board which he ferved took fire, 
together with one of the enemy's fhips , to 
which it was faft grappled. In this dreadful 



% BOOK tt 79 

extremity his intrepidity and prefence of mind 
,did not forfake hinu He threw himfelf into the 
fea, laid hold of a floating oar, and by the 
fupport of it, and his dexterity in fwimntfng, 
he reached the fhore, though above two leagues 
cliftant, and faved a life referved for great un- 
dertakings b), 

He enters into the Portaguefe fervice. 

As foon as he recovered ftrength for the 
journey, he repaired to Llfbon, where many 
of his countrymen were fettled. They foon 
conceived fuch a favourable opinion of his me- 
rit, as well as talents, that they warmly|(b- 
liqited him to remain in that kingdom, where 
his naval fkill and experience could not fail of 
rendering him confpicuous, To -every adventu- 
rer, animated either with curiofity to vifit new 
countries, or with ambition to diftinguifh him- 
felf, the Portuguefe fervice was at that time 
extremely inviting. Columbus liftened with a 
favourable ear to the advice of his friends , and 
havingngained the eftpem of a Portuguefe lady; 
whom he married, fixed hiirefidence in Lifbon. 
This alliance, inftead of detaching him from 
a fea faring life , contributed to enlarge the 
fphere of his naval knowledge, and to excite 
a defire of extending it ftill farther. His wife 
was a daughter of Bartolomew Pereftrello, one 
. of the ctfptains employed by prince Henry in: 
his navigations • and who * undec bis profce&ioa 
kX Lift tf Coium>u* c ^ 



go HISTORY OF AMERJCA 

had discovered and planted the iflands of Por- 
to Santo and Madeira. Columbus got poffeflion 
of the journals and charts of this experienced 
navigator , and from them he learned the cour- 
fe ; which the Portuguefe had held in making 
their difcoveries , as well as the various cir- 
cumftances which guided or encouraged them 
in their attempts. The ftudy of thefe foathed 
and inflamed his favourite paffion ; and while 
he contemplated the maps , and read the de- 
scriptions of the new countries which Pereftrel- 
lo had feen, his impatience to vifit them be- 
bdfeune irrefiftible. In order to indulge it , he 
made a voyage to Madeira, and continued du- 
ring feveral years to trade with that ifland , 
with the Canaries , the Azores , the fettlements 
in Guinea , and all the other places whicji the 
Portuguefe had discovered on the continent of 
Africa c). 

The cffefts of their difcoveries upon him. 

By the experience ^liich Coiumbus acqui- 
red , during fuch a variety of voyages to almoft 
every part of the globe with which , at that ti- 
me, any intercourfe was carried on by fea, he 
was now become one of the moft fkilful navi- 
gators in Europe^. But, not fatisfied with that 
praife, his ambition aimed at fomething more. 
The fuccefsful progrefs of the Portuguefe navi- 
gators had awakened a fpirit of curiolity and 
c) Life of Columbus , civ, v. 



BO O K n, si 

ethulation, which fed every man of faience 
upon examining all the circumftances that led 
to the difcoveries which they had made, or that 
afforded a profpeft of fucceeding in any new 
and bolder undertaking. The mind of Colum- 
bus , naturally inquifitive , capable of deep re- 
flection, and turned to fpeculations of this kind, 
■was fo often emph^ed in revolving the princi- 
ples upon which the Portuguefe had founded 
their fchemes of difcovery, and the mode in 
which they had carried them on, that he gra- 
dually began to form an idea of improving upon 
. their plan, and of accomplifhing difcoveries 
which hitherto they had attempted in vain. 

He forms the idea of a new courfe to India* 

To find out a paffage by fea. to the Eaft In- 
dies , was the great objeft in view at that pe- 
riod. From the time that the Portuguefe doub- 
led Cape de Verd , this was the point at which 
they aimed in all their navigations , and , in 
comparifon with it, all their difcoveries in Af- 
rica, appeared inconfiderable. The fertility and 
riches of India had been known for many ages - T 
its fpices and other valuable commodities were 
in high requeft through out Europe, and the vaft 
wealth of the Venetians arifing from their hav- 
ing engroffed this trade , had raifed the envy of 
all nations. But how intent fo ever the Portu- 
guefe were upon difcovering a new route to 
thofe defirable regions , they fearched for it on- 
Robertson Vol. It F 



S* HISTORY OF'AMERICA 

ly by fleering towards the fouth, in hopes of 
arriving at India, by turning to the eaft, after 
they had failed round the farther extremity of 
Africa. This courfe was ftill unknown , and, 
even if difcovered, was of fuch immenfe length, 
that a voyage from Europe to India mufl; have 
appeared an undertaking exttemely arduous, and 
of very uncertain iffue. Brore than half a cen- 
tury had been employed in advancing from Cape 
Ron to the equator; a much longer fpace of ti- 
me might elapfe before the more extenfive na- 
vigation from that to India could be accom- 
plished. Thefe reflections upon the uncertain- 
ty, the danger and tedioufnefs of the courfe 
which the Portuguese were purfuing, naturally 
led Columbus to confider whether a fhorter and 
more direct pa&ige to the Eaft Indies might not 
be found out. After revolving long and feriouf- 
ly every circumftance fuggefted by his fuperior 
knowledge in the theoiy as well as pra&ice of 
navigation, after comparing attentively the ob- 
fervations of modem pilots which the hints and 
ci noctures of ancient authors, he at laft con- 
cluded, that by tailing diretV.y cowards theweftv 
acrxMs the Atlantic ocean, new countries, which 
probably formed a part of the vaft continent of 
India, mutr infallibly be discovered. 

Friccirtes and argumerts of various kinds. 
•fid derived tnwn different Sources, induced hint 



J BOOK tt g? 

Ifeb adopt this opinion , feemingly as chimerical 
**,& it was new and extraordinary. The fpheri- 
*teal figure of the earth was kifbwn, and its mag- 
nitude afcertained with ftme degree of accura- 
?fcy^ From this it was evitftnt, that the conti- 
nent of Europe, Afia, and Africa, formed but 
% fmall portion of the terraqueous globe. It 
(was fuitable to our ideas concerning the wifdom 
*pnd beneficence of the Author of Nature, to be- 
tUeve that the vaft fgace , ftill unexplored , was 
mot covered entirely by a wafte unprofitable 
uocean, b\it occupied by countries fit for the ha- 
bitation of man. It appeared like wife extreme* 
iy probable, that the continent, on this fide of 
^fhe globe, was balanced by a proportional quan- 
ddty of land in the other hemifphere. Thefe 
rxonclufions concerning the exiftence of another 
.continent, drawn from the figure and ftrufture 
-of the globe , were confirmed by the obferva- 
. tions and conjeftures of modern navigators. A 
.Portuguese pilot, having ftretched farther to the 
jweft than was ufual at that time, took up apieca 
of timber artificially carved , floating upon the 
Xea; and as it was driven towards him by awe* 
fterly wind, he concluded that it came from fa- 
me unknown land, fituated in that quarter. Co- 
lumbus brother in law had found , to the weft 
of the Madeira iflej , a piece of timber fafiiioned 
in the lame manner, and brought by the fama 
wind; and had feen like wife canes of an enorm- 
ous fize. floating upon the waves 9 which rt« 



« + HISTORY Or AMERICA 

fembled thofe defcribed by Ptolemy as prod 
tions peculiar to the Eaft Indies d). Afa 
«ourfe of wefteri^ winds, trees torn up by 
roots , were often drfVen upon the coafts of 
Azores, and at onetime the dead bodies oft 
men , with lingular features , refembling neit 
the inhabitants of Europe nor of Africa, v 
call afhore tljere. 

As the force of this united evidence, aril 
from theoretical principles and pra&ical obi 
vations, led Columbus to expeft the difcovt 
of new countries in the Weftern Ocean, otl 
reafons induced him to believe that thefe n 
be connefted with the continent of India* Thou 
the ancients had hardly ever penetrated into! 
dia farther than the banks of the Ganges, ] 
fome Greek authors had ventured to defcribet 
provinces beyond that riven As men are pnil 
and in liberty, to magnify what is remote 
unknown, they reprefented them as regions 
an immenfe extent Ctefias affirmed that Ln 
was as large as all the reft of Afia. Oneficrit 
whom Pliny the naturalift follows e), contend 
that it was equal to a third part of the habital 
earth. Nearchus aflerted, that it would ti 
four months to march in a ftraightline fromc 
extremity of it to the other f). The Journal 
Marco Polo, who had proceeded towards 1 

d) Lib. I. c. 17, 

•) Nat. Hift. lib. yL c. 17. 

D Strab. Geo jr. lib* xv, p. toll. 



n 



B O K n. $5 



r fcaft far beyond the limits to which any Euro- 
Opean had ever advanced*, feemed to confirm thefe 
■Exaggerated accounts of the ancients. By his 
^hagntiicent defcriptions of the kingdoms of Ca- 
■%bay and Cipango, and of many other countries, 
S&e names of -which were unknown in Europe, 
■India appeared t# be a region of vaft extents 
From thefe accounts , which, however defe&ive, 
■%eere the moft accurate that the people of Eu- 
-i*ope had at that period received, with refpeft 

* ko the remote parts orthe Eaft, Columbus drew 
a* juft conclufion. He contended, that, in pro-, 
dfcportion as the continent of India ftretched out 
-cowards the Eaft, it muft, in confequence of 
^the fpherical figure of the earth, approach nea- 
■grer to the iflands which had lately been difco-* 
fiVered to the weft of Africa; that the diftance 
nrom the one to the other was probably not very 
SKConfiderable , and that the riioft direft, as well 
qf-fcs fhorteft courfe, to the remote regioiftof the 
■Eaft, was to be found by failing to the weft g)« 

# This notion concerning the vicinity of India to 
vthe weftern parts of our continent, was coun- 
1 tenanced by fome eminent writers among the 
B ancients f the fanftion of whofe authority was 
i neceflary in that age, to procure a favourable 
r reception to any tenet. Ariftotle thought it pro- 
r bable that the Columns of Hercules , or Straits 

of Gibraltar, were not far removed from the Eaft 
Indies , and that there might be a communica- 

g) Set NOTE XII. 



t6 HISTORY OF AMERICA 

tion by fea between them h). Senecji, in terms 
ftill more explicit, affirms, that, with a fair 
, wind , one might fail from Spain to India in a 
few c(ays i). The famous Atlantic ifland de- 
fcribed by Plato , and fuppofed by many to be a 
real country, beyond which a vaft unknown 
continent was lituated, is represented by him 
as lying at no great diftance from Spain* After 
weighing all thefe particulars , Columbus , in 
whofe character the modefty and diffidence of 
true genius was united foth the ardent enthu- 
fiafm of a projector, did not reft wkh fuch ab- 
solute afiurance either upon his own arguments, 
or upon the authority of the ancients, as not 
to confult fuch of his contemporaries as were 
capable of comprehending the nature of the evi- 
dence which he produced in fupport of his opi- 
nion. As early as the year one thoufand four 
hundred and feventy-four, he communicated his 
ideas Ancerning the probability of difcovering 
new countries, by failing weftwards , to Paul, 
a phyfician of Florence , eminent for his know- 
ledge of cofmography, and who, from the learn- 
ing as weil as candour which he difcovers inhil 
reply , appears to have been well intitled to the 
confidence which Columbus placed in hinu Ht 
warmly approved of the plan, fuggefted feveral 
fafts in confirmation of it, and encouraged Co- 
fa) Ariftot. de coelo, lib. iL c. 14. edit. Du Val, Par. 16:9* 

vol. l, p. 472. 
I) Seuec Quaeft. Natur. lib. I. in proam. 



i BOOK.tt 87 

Iambus to perfevere in an undertaking fo lauda- 
ble, and which muft redound fo much to the 
honour of his country, and the benefit of Eu- 
rope k). 

His fchemes for carrying it into execution. 

To a mind lefs capable of forming ^tnd of 
executing great defigns than that of Colum- 
bus , all thofe reafonings , obfervations , and au- 
thorities , would have ferved only as the foun- 
dation of fome plaufible and fruitlefs theory, 
which* might have furnifhed matter for inge- 
nious difcourfe, or fanciful conje&ure. But 
with his fanguine and enterprifing temper 9 
fpeculation led dire&ly to aftion. Fully fa*- 
tisfied himfelf with refpett to the truth of 
his fyftem, he was impatient to bring it to 
theteft of experiment, 9 and to fet out upon & 
voyage of difepvery. The firft ftep towards 
this was to fecure the patronage 4>f fome of 
the confiderable powers in Europe , capable of 
undertaking fuch an enterprise. His long ab^ 
fence had not extinguifhed the affeftion which 
he bore to his native country, he wifhed that 
it fhould reap the fruits of his labours and in- 
vention* 

He applies to the Genoefe, 

With this view, he laid his fcheme befo- 
re the fenate of Genoa, and making his cour- 

k) Life of Columbus 4 c viii. 



88 HISTORY OF AMERICA 

try the firft tender of his fenrice, offered to 
fail under the banners of the republic, in queft 
of the new regions which he expefted to dis- 
cover. But Co Tumb as had refided for fo many 
years in foreign parts , that his countrymen 
were unacquainted with his abilities and cha- 
racter; and, tiioogh a maritime people, they 
were fo little accuftomed to diftant voyages , 
that they could form no juft idea of the prin- 
ciples on which he founded his hopes of fuc- 
cefs. They inconfiderately rejefted his propo- 
fal , as the dream of a chimerical projector , 
and loft for ever the opportunity of reftoring 
their commonwealth to its ancient fplendour 1}. 

To die king of Portugal. 

Having performed what was due to his 
country , Columbus was fo little dicouraged by 
the repulfe which he had received, that, in- 
Head of relinquifhing his undertaking, he pur- 
fued it with frefh ardour. He made his next 
overture to John IL king of Portugal , in who 
fe dominions he had been long eftablifhed, and 
whom he confidered on that account, as ha- 
ving the fecond claim to his fervice. Here 
every circumftance feemed to promife him a 
more favourable reception. He applied to a 
monarch of an enterprifing genius, no incom- 
petent judge in naval affairs, and proud of pa- 
tronifing every attempt to difcover new conn* 

M«rrera Hift. de 1m India* Occid. Dec. i, lib. t «, 7. 



B O OKU. m sp 

s tries. His fubje&s were the moft experienced 
t navigators in Europe , fnd the feaft apt to 
i be intimidated either by the novelty or bold- 
i nefs of any maritime expedition. In Portu- 
? gal , the profefllonal fkill of Columbus , as well 
i as his perfonal good qualities , were thorough- 
ly known ; and as the former rendered it pro- 
i bable that his fcheme was not altogether chi- 
: merical, the latter exempted him from the fuf- 
picion of any finifter intention in propofing it. 
! Accordingly, the king liftened to him in the 
I moft gracious manner, and referred the confi- 
; deration of his plan to Diego Ortiz, bifhop of 
Ceuta , and two J'ewifh phyficians , eminent 
cofmographers , whom he was accuftomed to 
confult in matters of this kind. As in Genoa, 
ignorance had oppofed and difapointed Colbm- 
bus , in Lifbon he had to combat with preju- 
dice, an enemy no lefs formidable. The per- 
fons, according to whofe decifyn his fcheme 
was to be adopted or rejefted, had been the 
chief direftors of the Portuguefe navigations 
and had advifed to fearch for a paffage to In- 
dia, by fleering a coiirfe direftly oppofite to 
that which Columbus recommended as fhorter 
and more certain.. They could not, therefore, 
approve of his propofal, without fubmitting to 
the double mortification of condemning their 
own theory, and of acknowledging his fupe- 
rior fagacity. 



9 o HISTORY OF AMERICA. 

By whom he is deceived. 

After teafing him with captions que- 
stions , and ftartlng innumerable objeftions 
with a view of betraying him into fuch a par- 
ticular explanation of his fyftem, as might draw 
from him a full difcovery of Its nature, they 
deferred pafling a final judgment with refpeft 
to it Iu the mean time, they confpired to rob 
him of the honour and advantages which he 
expe&ed from the fuccefs of his fcheme, ad- 
vifing the king to difpatch a veffel, fecretly, 
In order to attempt the propofed difcovery , by 
following exaftly the courfe which Columbus 
feemed to point out. John , forgetting on this 
occafion the fentiments becoming a monarch, 
meanly adopted this perfidious cotmfel, But 
the pilot 9 chofen to execute Columbus plan, 
had neither the genius , nor the fortitude of 
its author. Contrary winds arofe, no fight of 
approaching land appeared, his courage failed* 
and he returned to Lifbon, execrating the pro- 
ject as equally extravagant and dangerous m). 

He leaves Portugal, and repairs to the court of Spain, 

Upon discovering this difhonourable trans- 
aftion , Columbus felt the indignation natural 
to an ingenuous mind, and in the warmth of 
his refentment determined to break off all in- 
tercourfe with a nation capable of fuch flagrant 

to) Life of Coiumbns, e. xi. Herrera, deitd, I. lib i. * 7. 



BOOK n. 9 i 

treachery, Bte inftantly quitted the kingdom, 
and landed ip Spain towards the cfefe of the 
year one thoufand four hundred and eighty 
four, As he was now at liberty to court the 
. prote&ion of any patron . whom he could en- 
gage to approve of his plan , and to carry it 
into execution, he cefolved to propofe it in 
perfon to Ferdinand and Ifabella. who at that 
time governed the united kingdoms of Caftile 
and Aragon. 

Sends his brother into England. 

♦ But , as he had already experienced the 

uncertain iffue of applications to kings and mi-* 
nifters , he took the precaution of fending in- 
to England his brother Bartholomew, to whom 
he had fully communicated his ideas , in or- 
der that he might fiegociate , at the fame tU 
me with Henry VTL who was reputed one 
of the nioft fagacious as well as opulent prin- 
ces in Europe. 

. '? Obftftcles to his fuccefs in Spain* 

It was not without reafon that Ctlumbus 
entertained doubts and fears "with refpeft to 
the reception of his propofals in the Spanifh 
court. Spain was, at thatjunfture, engaged 
in a dangerous \tat with Granada, the laft of 
the Moorifh kingdoms. Tike wary and fufpi- 
cious temper of Ferdinand was not formed to 
j-elifh bold or uncommon defigns. Ifabella , 



9 % HISTORY OF AMERICA 

though more generous and enterprifing , was 
under the fcfluence of her hufband In all her 
aft ions. The Spaniards had hitherto made no 
efforts to extend navigation beyond its ancient 
limits , and had beheld the amazing progrefs of 
difcovery among their neighbours the Portugjie- 
fe , without one attempt to imitate or to rival 
them. The war with the Infidels afforded an 
ampffe field, to the national activity and love 
of glory. Under circumftances fo infavourab- 
le , it was impoflible for Columbus to make ra- 
pid progrefs with a nation , naturally flow and 
dilatory in forming all its .resolutions. His 
chara&er, however, was admirably adapted to 
that of the people, whofe .confidence and pro- 
teftlon he follicited, He was grave, though 
courteous in his deportment , circumfpeft in 
his words and a&ions , irreproachable in his 
morals, and exemplary in his attention to all 
the duties and fun&ions of religion. By qua- 
lities fo refpeftable, he not only gained many 
private friends , but acquired fuch general efteem, 
that, notwithftanding the plainnefs of his ap- 
pearance, fuitable to the mediocrity of his for- 
tune, he was not confidered as a mere adven- 
turer, to whom indigence had fuggefted a vifi- 
onary projeft, but was received as a perfonto 
whofe proportions ferious attention was due. 

His fcheroe examined by unfkinful judges. 

Ferdinand and Ifabe!!a, though fully occu- 
pied by their operations afainft the Moors » 



BOOK.H. • 93 

paid fo much regard to Columbus, as to remit 
the confideration of his plan to the queen's 
confeffor* Ferdinand de Talavera. He confute 
ted fuch of his countrymen , as were fuppofed 
beft qualified to decide with jefpeft to a fubjeft 
of this kind. But true fcience had hitherto, 
made fo little progrefs in Spain , that the pre- 
tended philofophers, fele&ed to judge in a mat- 
ter of fuch moment, did not comprehend the 
iirft principles upon which Columbus founded 
his conje&ures and hopes. Some of them, 
.from miftaken notions concerning the dimen- 
fions of the globe , contended that a voyage to 
thofe remote parts of the eaft, which Columbus 
expe&ed to difcover, could not be performed 
in lefs than three years* Others concluded , 
that either he would find the ocfean to be of in- 
finite extent, according to the opinion of fome 
ancient philofophers; or, if he fhould perfift in 
fleering towards the weft beyond a certain 
point, that the convex figure of the globe would 
prevent his return, and that he mull inevitab- 
ly perifb t in the vain attempt to open a com- 
munication between the two oppofite heftifpbe- 
res , which nature had for ever disjoined. 
Even without deigning to enter into any par- 
ticular difcuffion , many rejefted the fcheme 
in general, upon the credit of a maxim,. un- 
der which the ignorant and unenterprifing fhel- 
ter themfelves in every age* „ That it is pre- 
fumptuous ia any perfon f to fyppofe that he 



94 HISTORY OF AMERICA. 

alone poffeffes knowledge fuperior to all the 
reft of mankind united. " They maintained, 
Viat if there were really any fuch countries as 
Columbus pretended, they could not have re- 
mained fo long concealed, nor would the wif- 
dom and fagacity of former ages have left the 
glory of this invention to an obfcure Genoefe 
pilot. 

Who make an unfavourable report concerning it. 

It required all Columbus patience and ad- 
drefs to negociate with men capable, of ad van-. 
cing fuch ftrange propofitions. He had to con- 
tend not only with the obftinacy of ignorance, 
but with what is ftill more intraftable,s the pri- 
de of falfe knowledge. After innumerable con- 
ferences , and wafting five years in fraitlefs 
endeavours to inform and to fatisfy judges fo 
little capable of deciding with propriety, Talfr- 
vera, at laft, made fuch an unfavourable re- 
port to Ferdinand and Ifabella, as induced them 
to acquaint Columbus , that until the war with 
the Moors fhoufa be brought to a period, it 
woulcf be imprudent to engage in any new and 
expenfive enterprife. 

Whatever care was taken to foften the harfh- 
nefs of this declaration , Columbus confidered it 
as a final rejeftion of his propofals. But hap- 
pily for mankind , that fuperiority of genius, 
which is capable of forming great and uncom- 
mon defigns , is ufually accompanied with* all 



B O O K* II. p5 

j ardent enthufiafm, which can neither be cooled 
i by delays , nor damped by difappointment. Co- 
j lumbus was of this fanguine temper. Though 
x he felt deeply the cruel blow given to his hopes, 
F and retired immediately from a court, where 
j he had been amufed fo long with vain expefta- 
i tions , his confidence in the juftnefs of his own 
fyftem did not diminifh, and his impatience to 
jltmonftrate the truth of it by an aftual experi- 
ment became greater than ever. Having court- 
ed the prote&ion of fovereign ftates without 
fuccefs , he applied , next, to perfons of infe- 
' rior rank , and addreffed fucceflively the dukes 
. of Medina Sidonia, and Medina Celi, who, though 
\ fubje&s, were poffeffed of power and opulence 
' more than equal to the enterprife which he pro- 
jected. His negociations with them proved as 
fruitlefs as thofe in which he had been hitherto 
„ engaged ; for thefe noblemen were either as litt- 
le convinced by Columbus arguments as their 
iuperiors , or they were afraid of alarming the 
jealoufy, and offending the pride of Ferdinand, 
by countenancing a fcheme which he had re- 
jected n> 

Negotiation of his brother in England, 

Amid the painful fenfations occafioned by 
fuch a fucceffion of difappointments , Columbus 
bad to fuftain the additional diftrefe , of having 
received no accounts of his brother, whom h» 

s) Lift of Columb, «, 13, Htrrer* , cite. 1, life, I, •, ?» 



9 6 HISTORY OF AMERICA 

had fent to the court of England. In his voyage 
to that country , Bartholomew had been fo un- 
fortunate as to fall into the hands of pirates, 
who having ftripped him of every thing, de- 
tained him a prifoner for feveral years. At length, 
he made his efcape , and arrived in London, but 
in fuch extreme indigence, that he was obliged 
to employ himfelf during a confiderable time, 
in draving and felling maps , in order to pick 
up as much money as would purchafe a decent 
drefs , in which he might venture to appear at 
court. He then laid before the king the pro- 
pofals with which he had been entrufted by his 
brother, and, notwithftanding Henry's exceffive 
caution and pariimony, which rendered him 
averfe to new or expenfive undertakings , he 
received Columbus overtures , with more ap- 
probation than any monarch to whom they had 
hitherto been prefented. 

Columbus has fomc profpefts of encouragement in Spain, 

Mean while , Columbus being unacquainted 
with his brother's fate, and having now no pro- 
fpeft of encouragement in Spain , refolved to 
vilit the court of England in perfon , in hopes 
of meeting with a more favourable reception 
there. He had already made preparations for 
this propofe , and taken meafures for the difpo- 
fal of his children during his abfence, when Juan 
Perez , the guardian of the monaftery of Rabida, 
near Palos, in which they had been educated, 

earneftly 



a B O O K IL 97 

il earneftly folicited him to defer his journey for 
a a fhort time. Perez was a man of confiderable 
ii learning, and of fome credit by Queen IfabeUa, 
^ to whom he was known personally. He was 
jr warmly attached to Columbus , with whofe abi- 
gj lities as well as integrity he had. many oppor- 
n tunities of being acquainted. Prompted by cu-- 
j riofity or by friendfhip , he entered upon an ac- 
^ 'cerate examination of his fyftem, in conjun&ion 
rJ with a phyfician fettled in the neighbourhood, 
e who was a confiderable proficient in mathema- 
r \ tical knowledge. This inveftigation fatisfied 
j them fo thoroughly, with refpeft to the folidity 
ff of the principles on which Columbus founded 
£ . his opinion , and the probability of fuccefs in 

executing the plan which he propofed, that Pe- 
f rez, in order to prevent his country horn being 
J deprived of the glory and benefit, which muft 
' accrue to the patrons of fuch a great enterprize, 

ventured to write to Ifabella, conjuring hen to 
fr cottfider the matter a new, with the attention 

* which it merited. 

Moved by the reprefentations of a pcyrfon 
whom fhe refpefted, Ifabella defired Perez to 

• repair immediately to the village of Santa ¥i ; 
in which , on account of the fiege of Granada, 
the court refided at that time , that fhe might 
confer with him upon this important fubjeft. 
(1491) The firft effett of their interview was a 
gracious invitation of Columbus back to court, 
accompanied with the prefent of a fmall fum to 

Robertson Vol. I* G 



98 HISTORY OF AMERICA 

equip him for the journey. As there was now 
a certain profpeft, that the war with the Moors 
would" fpeedily be brought, to an happy iffueby 
the reduction of Granada, which would leave 
the nation at liberty to engage in new under- 
takings ; this , as well as the mark of royal fa- 
vour, with which Columbus had been lately ho- 
noured, encouraged his friends to appear with 
greater confidence than formerly in fupport of 
his fchenie. The chief of thefe, Aionfo de Quin- 
tanilla, comptroller of the finances in Caftile, 
and Louis de Santangel, receiver of the eccle- 
fiaftical revenues in Aragon, whofe meritorious 
zeal in promoting this great defign entitles their 
names to an honourable place in hiftory, untro- 
duced Columbus to many perfons of high rank, 
and interefted thein warmly in his behalf. 

Is again difappointed. 

But it was not an eafy matter to infpire Fer- 
dinand with favourable fentiments. He ftill re- 
garded Columbus projeft as extravagant and 
chhnerical, and in order to render the efforts 
of his partizans ineffe&ual, he had the addrefc 
to employ in this new negotiation with him, 
fome of the perfons who had formerly pronoun- 
ced his fcheme to be inprafticable. To their 
aftonifhment, Columbus appeared before them 
with the fame confident hopes of fuccefs as for- 
merly, and infifted upon the fame high recom- 
pence. He propofed that a fmall fleet fhould 



BOOK H. g9 

be fitted out, under his command, to attempt 
the difcovery, and demanded to be appointed 
" heredit ry admiral, and viceroy of all. the feas 
and lands which he fhould difcover, and to have 
the tenth of the profits arifing from them, fett- 
led irrevocably upon himfelf and his descendants. 
At the fame time, he offered to advance the 
eighth part of the fum neceffary for accomplifh- 
ing his defign, on condition that he fhould be 
entitled to a proportional fhare of benefit from 
the adventure. If the enterprise fhould totally 
tnifcarry, he made' no ftipulation for any reward 
or emolument whatever. Inftead of viewing this 
£? conduft as the cleareft evidence of his full per- 
& fuafion with refpeft to the truth of his own fy- 
^ ftem, or being ftruck with that magnanimity, 
I which, after fo many delays $nd repulfes, could 

Jftoop to nothing inferior to its original claims , 
the perfons with whom Columbus treated , be- 
gan meanly to calculate the expence of the ex- 
sT pedition , and tflfe value«of the reward which he 
w[ demanded. The expence, moderate as it was, 
^ they reprefented ty be to great for Spain , in 
r the prefent exhaufted ftate of its finances. They 
i contended, that the honours and emoluments 
r claimed by Columbus, were exorbitant, even 
i if he fhould perform the utmoft of what he had 
promifed; and if all his fanguine hopes fhould 
prove illufive, fuch vaft conceffions to an ad- 
venturer would be deemed not only inconfide- 
rate, but ridiculous. In this impofing garb of 
G a 



ioo HISTORY OF AMERICA 

caution and prudence, their opinion appeared 
fo plaufible , and was fo warmly fupported by 
Ferdinand , that Ifabella declined giving any 
countenance to Columbus, and abruptly broke 
off the negociation with him which fhe had 
begun. 

This was more mortifying to Columbus than 
all the disappointment which he had hitherto 
met with. The invitation to court from Ifabella, 
like an unexpected ray of light , had opened 
fuch profpe&s of fuccefs, as encouraged him 
to hope that his/labours were at an end ; but 
now darknefs and uncertainty returned , and 
his mind, firm as it was , could hardly fupport 
the fhoci of fuch an unforefeen reverfe. He 
withdrew in deep anguifh from court, with an 
intention of profecuting his voyage to England, 
as his laft refource. 

Proves at laft fuccefsful January 2. 149s* 

About that time Granada furrendered, and 
Ferdinand and Ifabella in triumphal pomp, took 
pofleflion of a city, the reduftion of which ex- 
tirpated a foreign power from the heart of their 
dominions, and rendered them mailers of all 
the provinces, extending from the bottom of the 
Pyrenees to the frontiers of Portugal. As the 
flow of fpirits which accompanies fuccefs ele- 
vates the mind, and renders it enterprifingt 
Quintanilla and Santangel, the vigilant and dis- 
cerning patrons of Columbus, took advantage 



BOO K II. ior 

of this favourable fituation, in order to make 
one effort more in behalf of their friend. They 
addrefled themfelves to Ifabella, and, after ex- 
prefling fome furprife, that fhe, who had al- 
ways been the munificent patronefs of generous 
undertakings , fhould hefitate fo long to coun- 
tenance the moft fplehdid fcheme that had ever 
been propofed to any monarch ; they reprefen- 
ted to her, that Columbus was a man of a found 
underftanding and virtuous chara&er, well qua- 
lified by his experience in navigation , as well 
as his knowledge of geometry, to form juft 
ideas with refpeft to the ftrufture of the globe 
and the fituation of its various regions; that, 
by offering to rifk his own life and fortune in 
the execution of his fcheme, he gave the moft 
fatisfying evidence botl* of his integrity and 
hope of fuccefs ; that the fum requifite for 
equipping fuch an armament as he demanded 
was inconfiderable , and the advantages which 
might accrue from his undertaking were im- 
menfe ; that he demanded no recompence for 
his invention and labour, but what was to arife 
from the countries which he fhould difcover; 
that , as it was worthy of her magnanimity to 
make this noble attempt to extend the fphere of 
human knowledge f and to open an intercourfe 
with regions hitherto unknown, fo it would 
afford the higheft fatisfaftion to her piety and 
zeal, after reeftablifhing the Chriftian faith in 



10* HISTORY OF AMERICA 

thofe provinces of Spain from which it had been 
long banifhed, to difcover a new world, to 
which fhe might conlmunicate the light and 
Weffings of divine truth; that if now fhe did 
not decide inftantly, the opportunity would be 
irretrievably loft ; that Columbus was on his 
way to foreign countries, where fome prince, 
more fortunate or adventurous, would clofe 
with his propofals, and Spain would for ever 
bewail the fatal timidity which had excluded 
her from the glory and advantages that fhe had 
once in her power to have enjoyed. 

Thefe forcible arguments, urged by per- 
fons of fuch authority, and at a junfture fa 
well chofen, produced the defired effeft. They 
diQ>elled all Isabella's doubts and fears ; fhe or- 
dered Columbus to be inftantly recalled , decla- 
red her refolution of employing him on his own 
terms , and regretting the low ftate of her fi- 
nances , generoufly offered to pledge her owa 
jewels , in order to raife as much money as 
might be needed in making preparations for the 
voyage. (1492) Santangel, in a tranfport of 
gratitude, kitted the queen's hand, and in on 
der to fave her from having recourfe to fuch a 
mortifying expedient for procuring money , en- 
gaged to advance immediately the fum that was 
requifite o). 

ip) Herrera , d««. x. lib, X, «• 9, 



boo? n. xoj 

The conditions of his agreement with Spain. 

Columbus had proceeded fome leagues on 
bis journey, when the meffenger from Ifabella 
overtook hinu Upon receiving an account of 
the unexpe&ed revolution in his favour, he re- 
turned dire&ly to Santa F6, though fome re- 
. mainder of diffidence ftill mingled itfelf with 
his joy. But the cordial reception which he 
met with from Ifabella, together with the near 
profpeft of fetting out upon that voyage which 
had fo long been the objeft of lys thoughts and 
wifhes, foon effaced the remembrance of all that 
he had fufFere4 in Spain, during eight tedious 
years of felicitation and fufpence. The nego- 
e ciation now went forward with facility an4 di- 
fpatch , and a treaty or capitulation with Co- 
-: lumbus was figned on the feventeenth of April, 
I one thoufand four hundred and ninety-two. The 
| chief articles of it were, i. Ferdinand and Ifa- 
j, bella, as fovereigns of the ocean, coaftituted 
? Columbus their high admiral in all the feas , in- 
lands and continents, which fbould be difco- 
yered by his induftry ; and ftipulated, that he 
and his heirs for ever fhould enjoy this office, 
with the fame powers and prerogatives which 
belonged to the high admiral of Caftile , within 
the limits of his jurifdi&ion. a. They appoin- 
ted Columbus their viceroy in all the iflands 
and continents which he fhould difcover; but 
if, for the better adminiftration of affairs, it 
faould hereafter be neceffary to eftablifh a fe- 



* 



io 4 HISTORY OF AMERICA 

parate governor in any of thofe countries, they 
authorised Columbus to name three perfons , of 
whom they would chufe one for that office ; 
and the dignity of viceroy, with all its immu- 
nities, was likewife to be hereditary in the fa- 
mily of Columbus. 3. They granted to Colum- 
bus and his heirs for ever the tenth of the free 
profits accruing from the productions and com- 
merce of the countries which he fhould difco- 
ver. 4. They declared, that if any controver- 
sy or law-fuit fball arife with refpeft to any 
mercantile tranfaftion in the countries which 
fhould be difcovered, it fhould be determined 
by the fole authority of Columbus, or of judges 
to be. appointed by him. 5. They permitted 
Columbus to advance one eighth part of what 
fhould be expended in preparing for the expe- 
dition , and in carrying on commerce with the 
countries which he fhould difcover, and intitled 
him , in return to an eighth part of the pro- 
fic p). 

(1492). Though the name of Ferdinand 
appears conjoined with that of Ifabella in this 
tranfaftion, his diftruft of Columbus was ftill fo 
violent, that he refufed ta take any part in the 
ent-erprife, as king of Aragon. As the whole 
expetice of the expedition was to be defrayed 
by the crown of Castile, Ifabella referved for 
her fubjefts of that kingdom an exclufive right 

j?) Lite of Columbus, 0,15, Herrera, dec. 1. lib. I, c*9» 



BOOK II. xo$ 

to all the benefits which might redound from 
its fuccefs. 

The preparations for his voyage. 

As foon as the treaty was figned, Ifabella, 
by her attention and aftivity in forwarding the 
preparations for the voyage , endeavoured to 
make fome reparation to Columbus for the time 
which he had loft in fruitlefs folicitation. By 
the twelfth of May, all that depended upon her 
was adjufted, and Columbus waited on the king 
and queen , in order to receive their final in- 
ftruftions. Every thing refpe&ing the deftina- 
tion and conduftofthe voyage, they commit- 
ted implicitly to the difpofal of his prudence* 
But, that they might avoid giving any juft cau- 
fe of offence to the king of Portugal , they 
ftriftly enjoined him not to approach near to the 
Portuguefe fettlements on the coaft of Guinea % 
nor in any of the other countries to which the 
Portuguefe claimed right as difcoverers. Isa- 
bella had ordered the fhips, of which Colum- 
bus was to take the command, to be fitted out 
in the port of Palos , a fmall maritime town in 
the province of Andalufia. As the guardian 
Juan Perez, to whom ColumbusWhad already 
been fo much indebted , refided in the neigh- 
bourhood of this place, he, by the influence of 
that good ecclefiaftic , as well as by his own 
conneftionwith the inhabitants, not only raifed 
among them what he wanted of the fum that 



io8 HISTORY OF AMERICA. 

mand , marched in folemn proceflion to the 
monaftery of Rabida. After confefiing their 
fins , and obtaining abfolution , they received 
the holy facrament from the hands of the guar- 
dian , who joined his prayers to theirs for the 
fuccefs of an enterprife which he had fo zea- 
loufly patronized. 

His departure from Spain, 

Next morning , being Friday the third day 
of Auguft , in the year one thoufand four hun- 
dred and ninety two, Columbus fet fail, a litt- 
le before fun rife , in prefence of a vaft crowd 
of fpe&ators , -who fent up their fupplications 
to Heaven for the profperous iffue of the voya- 
ge*, which they wifhed, rather than expe&ecL 
1492. Columbus fteered direttly for the Ca- 
nary Iflands, and arrived there without any 
occurrence that would have deferved notice 
on any other occafion. 13 Auguft. But, in a 
voyage of fuch expedition and importance, 
every circumftance was the objeft of attention. 
The rudder of the Pinta broke loofe, the day 
after fhe left the harbour, and that accident 
alarmed the crew , no lefs fuperftitious thaij 
unf kilful , as a certain omen of the unfortunate 
deftiny of the expedition. Even in the fhort 
run to the Canaries , the fhips were found to 
be fo crazy and ill appointed, as to be very 
improper for a navigation which was expe&ed 
to be both long and dangerous* Columbus re- 



j 



V 



O K IL roj> 



fitted them, however, to the beft of his power, 
md having fupplied himfelf with frefii provi- 
fions, he took his departure from Gomera, one 
of the moft wetterly of the Canary iflands , on 
the iixth day of September. 

The courfe which he held. 

Here the voyage of difcovery may properly 
be faid to begin ; for Columbus holding his 
courfe to the weft , left immediately the ufual 
track of navigation , and ftretched into unfre- 
quented and unknown feas. The firft day , 
as it was very calm , he made but little way ; 
but on the fecond, he loft fight of the Cana- 
ries , and many of the failors , dejefted already 
and difinayed , when they contemplated the 
boldnefs of the undertaking , began to beat 
their breafts, and tho fhed tears, as if they were 
never more to behold land. Columbus comfor- 
ted them with affurances of fuccefs, and the 
profpeft of paft wealth, in thofe opulent regions 
whither he was conducting them. This early 
difcovery of the fpirit of his followers taught 
Columbus , that he muft prepare to ftruggle , 
not only* with unavoidable difficulties which 
might be expefted from the n.ature of his un- 
dertaking, but with fuch as were likely to arife 
from the ignorance and timidity of the people 
Tinder his command ; and he perceived that the 
art of governing the minds of men would be no 
lefs reguifite for accomplishing the difcoveries 



108 HISTORY OF AMERICA. 

mand , marched in folemn proceflion to the 
monaftery of Rabida. After confefling their 
fins , and obtaining abfolution , they received 
the holy facrament from the hands of the guar- 
dian , who joined his prayers to theirs for the 
fuccefs of an enterprife which he had fo zea- 
loufly patronized. 

His departure from Spain, 

Next morning , being Friday the third day 
of Auguft , in the year one thoufand four hun- 
dred and ninety two, Columbus fet fail, a litt- 
le before fun rife , in prefence of a vaft crowd 
of fpe&ators , -who fent up their fupplications 
to Heaven for the profperous iffue of the voya- 
ge-, which they wifhed, rather than expe&ed. 
1492. Columbus fleered direftly for the Ca- 
nary Iflands, and arrived there without any 
occurrence that would have deferved notice 
on any other occafion. 13 Auguft. But, in a 
voyage of fuch expeftation and importance, 
every circumftance was the objeft of attention. 
The rudder of the Pinta broke loofe, the day 
after fhe left the harbour, and that accident 
alarmed the crew , no lefs fuperftitious thaq 
unfkilful , as a certain omen of the unfortunate 
deftiny of the expedition. Even in the fhort 
run to the Canaries , the fhips were found to 
be fo crazy and ill appointed, as to be very 
improper for a navigation which was expefted 
to be both long and dangerous* Columbus re- 



lyD OK IL 109 

fitted them, however, to the beft of his power, 
and having fupplied himfelf with frefh provi- 
fions, he took his departure from Gomera, one 
of the moft wetterly of the Canary iflands , on 
the iixth day of September. 

The courfe which he held. 

Here the voyage of djfcovery may properly 
be faid to begin ; for Columbus holding his 
courfe to the weft , left immediately the ufual 
track of navigation , and ftretched into unfre- 
quented and unknown feas. The firft day , 
as it was very calm , he made but little way ; 
but on the fecond, he loft fight of the Cana- 
ries , and many of the failors , dejefted already 
and difinayed , when they contemplated the 
boldnefs of the undertaking , began to beat 
their breafts, and tho fhed tears, as if they were 
never more to behold land. Columbus comfor- 
ted them with affurances of fuccefs, and the 
profpeft of paft wealth , inthofe opulent regions 
whither he was condutting them. This early 
difcovery of the fpirit of his followers taught 
Columbus , that he muft prepare to ftruggle , 
Dot only with unavoidable difficulties which 
might be expefted from the n.ature of his un- 
dertaking, but with fuch as were likely to arife 
from the ignorance and timidity of the people 
tinder his command ; and he perceived that the 
art of governing the minds of men would be no 
lefs reguifite for accomplishing the difcoveri* 



2io HISTORY OF AMERICA 

which he had in view, than naval fkill and un- 
daunted courage. Happily for himfelf, and for 
the country by which he was employed, he 
joined to the ardent temper and inventive ge- 
nius of a projeftor, virtues of another fpecies 9 
•which are rarely united with them. He poffef- 
fed a thorough knowledge of mankind, an infi- 
nuating adrefs , a patient perfeverance. in exe- 
cuting any plan, the perfeft government of his 
own paflions , and the talent of acquiring air 
afcendant over thofe of other meiu 

Vigilance and attention of Columbof. 

(149a) All thefe qualities, which formed 
him for command , were accompanied with that 
fuperior knowledge of his profeffion , which be- 
gets confidence in times of difficulty and danger. 
To unfkilful Spanifh failors, accuftomed only 
to coafting voyages in the Mediterranean , the 
maritime fcience of Columbus , the fruit of thir- 
ty years experience , improved by an acquaint- 
ance with all the inventions of the Portuguefe, 
appeared immenfe. As foon as they put to fea, 
he regulated every thing by his fole authority; 
he fuperintended the execmtion of every order ; 
and allowing himfelf only a few hours for fleep, 
he was at all other times upon deck. As his 
courfe lay through feas which had not formerly 
been vifited, the founding-line or iftftrumeuts 
for observation , were continually in his hands. 
After the example of the Portuguefe difcovereri*. 



BOOK E xii 

f 

lie attended to the motion of tides and corrents, 
watched the flight of birds , the appearance of 
fifties, of feaweeds, and of every thing that 
floated on the waves , and entered every occur- 
rence , with a minute exaftnefs , in the journal 
which he kept As the length of the voyage 
could not fail of alarming failors habituated only 
to fhort excurfions , Columbus endeavoured to 
conceal from them the real progrefs which they 
made. With this visw, though they run eigh- 
teen leagues on the fecond day after they left 
Gomera, he gave out that they had advanced 
only fifteen, and he uniformly employed the 
fame artifice of reckoning fhort during the whole 
voyage. By the fourteenth of September , the 
fleet was above two hundred leagues to the weft 
of the Canary Ifles , at a greater diftance from 
land than any Spaniard had been before that time* 

Apprehenfioos and alarms of his crew* 

Then} they were ftruck with an appearance 
no lefs aftonifhing than new* They obferved, 
that the magnetic needle, in their compares, 
did not point exaftly to the polar ftar, but va- 
ried towards the weft ; and as they proceeded * 
this variation increafed. This appearance, which 
is now familiar, though it ftill remains one Of 
the myfteries of nature, into the caufe of which 
the fagacity of man hath not been able to pene- 
trate , filled the companions of Columbus with 
terror* ,They were now to a boundlefk unknown 



na HISTORY OF AMERICA 

ocean, far from the ufual courfe of navigation; 
nature itfelf feemed to be altered , and the only 
guide which they had left was about to fail them. 
Columbus, with no lefs quicknefs than inge- 
nuity, invented a reafon for this appearance, 
which , though it did not fatisfy himfelf , feem- 
ed fo plaufible to them , that it difpelled their 
fears , or filenced, their murmurs. 

(149a) He ftill continued to fteerto the weft, 
nearly in the fame latitude with the Canary if- 
lands. In this courfe he came within the fphe- 
re of the trade wind, which blows invariably 
from eaft to weft between the tropics, and a 
few degrees beyond them. He advanced be- 
fore this fteady gale with fuch uniform rapidity 
that it was feldom neceflary to fhift a fail. When 
about four hundred leagues to the weft of thy 
Canaries, he found the fea fo covered with weeds, 
that it refembled a meadow of vaft extent ; and 
in fome places they were fo thick , as to retard 
the motion of the vMTels. This ftrange appear- 
ance occafioned new larm and difquiet. The 
failors imagined that they were now arrived at 
the utmoft boundary of the navigable ocean; 
that thefe floating weeds would obftruft their 
farther progrefs, and concealed dangerous rocks, 
or fome large traft of land, which had funk, 
they knew not how, in that place. Columbus 
endeavoured to perfuade them, that what had 
alarmed, ought rather to have encouraged them, 
and was to be coniidered as a fign of approach- 
ing 



B K IL X13 

ing land. At the fame time, a brifk gele arofe, 
and carried them forward. Several birds were 
feen hovering about the fhip q), and diretted 
their flight towards the well. The defponding 
crew refumed fome degree of fpirit, and began 
to ^ntertain frefh hopes. 

The increafe. 

Upon the firft of Oftober they were, ac- 
cording to the admiral's reckoning, feven hun- 
dred and feventy leagues to the weft s of the Ca- 
naries ; but left his men fhould be intimidated 
by the prodigious length of the navigation , he 
gave out that they had proceeded only five hun- 
dred and eighty-four leagues ; and , fortunately 
for Columbus, neither his own pilot, not thofe 
of the other fhips , had fkill fufficient to correft 
this error, and difcover the deceit. They had 
now been above three -weeks at fea ; they had 
proceeded far beyond what former navigators 
had attempted or deemed poflible; all their pro- 
gnoftics of difcovery, drawn from the flight of 
birds and other circumftances , had proved falla- 
cious ; the appearances of land , with which 
their own credulity or the artifice of their com- 
mander had from time to time flattered and 
amufed them , had been altogether illufive , and 
their profpeft of fuccefs feemed now to be as 
jliftant as ever. Thefe reflexions occurred of- 

q) See NOTE XUI. 

Eqbmtson Vol. I. X 



U4 HISTORY OF AllERICA 

ten to men, who had no other objeft or occu- 
pation,- than to reafon and difcourfe concerning 
the intention and circumfcances of their ex- 
pedition. They made impreflion, at firft, 
upon the ignorant and timid, and extending, 
by degrees , to fuch as were better informed or 
more refolute, the contagion fpread at length 
from fhip to fnip. From fecret whifpers or mur- 
Biurings , they proceeded to open cabals and 
public complaints. They taxed their fovereign 
with incon&derate credulity, in paying fuch re- 
gard to the vain promifes and rafh conjectures 
of an indigent foreigner, as to hazard the lives 
of fo many of her own fubjefts, in profecut- 
ing a chimerical febeme. They affirmed that 
they had fully performed their duty, by ven- 
turing fo far in an unknown and hopelefs 
courfe, and could incur no blame for refilling 
to follow , any longer , a defperate adventurer 
to certain deftruftion. Thev contended, that 
it was neceffary to think of returning to Spain, 
while their crazy veftelswere ftill in a condition 
to keep the fea , but exprefied their fears that 
the attempt would prove vain, as the wind, 
which had hitherto been fo favourable to their 
courfe , mult render it impoffible to fail in die 
oppolite direction. All agreed that Columbus 
fhould be compelled by force to adept a mea~ 
fure on which their common lafety depended. 
Some of the more audacious propofed, as the 
moll expeditious and certain method for getting 



» 



BOOK II. us 

rid at once of his remonftrances , to throw him 
into the fea, being perfuaded that, upon their 
return to Spain, the death of an unfuccefsful 
projeftor would excite little concern, and be in- 
quired into with no curlofityv 

The addrefo of Columbus in Toothing them. 

Columbus was fully fenfible of his perilous 
fituation. He had obferved , with great concern, 
the fatal operation of ignorance and of fear 
in producing difaffeftion among his crew, and 
faw that it was now ready to burft out into open 
mutiny. He retained, however, perfect pre- 
sence of mind. He affe&ed to feem ignorant of 
their machinations. Notwithftanding the agita- 
tion and folicitude of his own mind, he appear- 
ed with a cheerful countenance, like * man fa- 
tisfied with the progrefs which he had made, 
and confident of fuccefs. • Sometimes he em- 
ployed all the arts of infinuation to foothe his 
men. Sometimes he endeavoured to work upon 
their ambition or avarice, by magnificent de- 
fcriptions of the fame and wealth which they 
were about to acquire. On other occafion9, h.e 
affumed a tone of authority, and threatened 
them with vengeance from their fovereign, if, 
by their daftardly behaviour, they fhould defeat 
this noble effort to promote the glory of God , 
and to exalt the Spanifh name above that of 
every other nation. Even with feditious failors, 
the words of a man whom they had been accu* 
H % 



w%6 HISTORY OF AMERICA 

ftomed to reverence, were weighty and per* 
fuafive , and not only reftrained them from tho- 
fe violent exceffes, which they meditated, but 
prevailed with them to accompany their admi* 
ral for fome time longer. 

•JL. 

Their fears return* • 

As they proceeded, the indications of ap- 
proaching land feemed to be more certain, and 
excited hope in proportion. The birds began 
to appear in flocks , making towards the fouth- 
weft. Columbus , in immitation of the Portu- 
guefe navigators , who had been guided , in fe- 
Veral of their difcoveries , by the motion of. 
birds , altered his courfe from due weft to- 
wards that, quater whither they pointed their 
flight. But, after holding on for feveral days 
In this new direftion, without any better fiic- 
cefs than formerly, having feen no objeft, du- 
ring thirty days, but the fea and the fky, the 
hopes of his companions fubfided fafter than 
they had rifen; their fears revived with addi- 
tional force; impatience, rage, and defpair, 
appeared in every countenance. 

Danger of a mutiny. 

All fenfe of fubordination was loft: the of- 
ficers , who had hitherto concurred with Co- 
lumbus in opinion , and fupported his authori- 
ty, now took part with the private men; they 
affembled tumultuoufly on the deck , expoftu- 



BOOK II, tlj 

lated with their commander, mingled threats 
with their expoftulations , and required him in- 
ftantly to tack about and to return to Europe. 
Columbus perceived that it would be of no avail 
to have recourfe to any of his former arts, which 
having been tried fo often , had loft their ef- 
fect; and that it was impoffible to rekindle any 
zeal for the fuccefs of the expedition among 
jnen , in whofe breaft fear had extinguished eve* 
Vy generous fentiment. 

Diftrefs of Columbus* * 

He faw that it was no lefs vain to think 
of employing either gentle or fevere meafures, 
to quell a mutiny fo general and fo violent. 
It was neceffary, on all thefe accounts, to foo- 
the paflions which he could no longer command 
and to give way to a torrent too impetuous to 
be checked. He promifed folemnly to his men 
that he would comply with their requeft, pro- 
vided they would accompany him , and obey 
liis commands for three days longer, and if, 
during* that time, land were not difcovered, 
lie would then abandon the enterprife , and di- 
rect his courfe towards Spain r). 

Encouraging appearances of fuccefs. 

Enraged as the failors were, and impatient 
to turn their faces again towards their native 
country, this propofition did. not appear to them 

r* Ovltde , Hift; ap. Ramuf. vol. iii. p. gi. E. 



ii$ HISTORY OF AMERICA 

unreafonable. Nor did Columbus hazard much 
in confining himfelf to a term fo fhort. The 
prefaces of difcovering land were now fo nu- 
merous and promising , that he deemed them 
infallible. For fome days the founding line rea- 
ched the bottom , and the foil which it brought 
up indicated land to be at no great diftan- 
ce. The flocks of birds increafed , and we- 
re compofed not only of fea fowl , but of 
fuch land birds as could not be fuppofed to fly 
far from the fhore. The crew of the Pinta ob- 
served a cane floating , which feemed to have 
been newly cut, and Hkewife a piece of timber 
artificially carved. The failors aboard the Ni- 
gna took tip the branch of a tree with red ber- 
ries , perfeftly frefh. The clouds around the 
fetting fun affumed a new appearance ; the air 
was more mild and warm, and, during night, 
the wind became unequal and variable. From 
all thefe fymptoma, Columbus was fo confident 
of being near land, that on the evening -of the 
eleventh of Oftober , after public prayers for 
fuccefs , he ordered the fails to be furlell , and 
the fhips to lie by, keeping ftrift watch , left 
they fhould be driven afhore in the night. Dur 
ring this interval of fufpence and expeftatlon, 
no man fhut his eyes , all kept upon deck , ga- 
zing* intently towards that quarter where they 
expefted to difcover the land f which had been 
fo long the objeft of their wifhes. 



BOOK II. sxf 

Xftnd difcovercd. 

About two hours before midnight, Colum* 
bus ftanding on the forecaftle , obferved a light 
at a diftance , and privately pointed it out to 
Pedro Guttierez , a page of the queen's ward- 
robe. Guttierez perceived it , and calling to 
Salcedo , comptroller of the fleet , all three 
faw it in motion as if it were carried from pla* 
ce to place. A little after midnight, the joy- 
ful found of land , land , was heard from the 
Pinta, which kept always ahead of the other 
fhips. But, having been fo often deceived by 
fallacious appearances , every man was now 
become How of belief , and waited, in all the 
anguifh of uncertainty and impatience, for the 
return of day. 

Friday Oft. I*. 

As foon as morning dawned, all doubt* 
and fears were difpelled. From every fhip att 
iffland was feen about two leagues to the north, 
Whofe flat and verdant fields, well ftored with 
wood , and watered with many rivulets , pre* 
fented the afpeft of a deligthful country. The 
crew of the Pinta inftantly began Te Deum, 
as a hymn of thankfgiving to God , and were 
joined by thofe of the other fhips , with tears 
of joy and tranfports of congratulation. ThU 
office of gratitude to Heaven was followed by 
am aft of juftice to their commander. They 



«ao HISTORY OF AMERICA 

threw themfelves at the feet of Columbus, with 
feelings of felf- condemnation mingled with re- 
verence. They implored him to pardon their 
ignorance, incredulity; and infolence, which 
had created him fo much unneceflary difquiet, 
and had fo often obftrufted the profecution of 
his well - concerted plan; andpafling, in the 
warmth of their admiration, from one extreme 
to another, they now pronounced the man, 
whom they had fo lately reviled and threate- 
ned, to be a perfon infpired by Heaven with 
fagacity and fortitude more than human, in or- 
der to accomplifh a defign, fo far beyond the 
ideas and conception of all former ages. 

Firft interview with the natives. 

As foon as the fun arofe, all their boats 
were manned and armed. They rowed to- 
wards the ifland with their colours difplayed, 
with warlike mufic, and other martial pomp. 
As they approached the coaft , they faw it co- 
vered with a multitude of people, whom the 
novelty of the fpeftacle had drawn together, 
Whofe attitudes and geftures exprefied wonder 
and aftonifhment at the Grange objefts which 
prefented themfelves to their view. Columbus 
was the firft European who fet foot in the 
New World which he had difcovered. He lan- 
ded in a rich drefs, and with a naked fword 
in his hand. His men followed, and kneeling 
down, they all tiffed the ground which they 



♦ BOOK IL *ai 

had fo long defired to fee. They next ere&ed 
a crucifix, and proftratting themfelves before 
id , returned trhanks to God for condu&ing their 
voyage to fuch an happy iffue. They then 
took folemn pofleflion of the country for the 
crown of Caftile and Leon, with all the for- 
malities which the Portuguefe were accuftomed 
to obferve in afts of this kind, in their new 
difcoveries s). 

Their mutual aftonifhmcnt. 

The Spaniards , while thus employed , we- 
re furrounded by many of the natives, who 
gazet, in filent admiration, upon aftions which 
they could not comprehend, and of which they 
did not forefee the confequences. The drefs 
of the Spaniards, the whitenefs of their fkins, 
their beards, their arms, appeared ftrange and 
furprifing. The vaft machines in which they 
had traverfed the ocean, that feemed to move 
upon the waters with wings, and uttered a 
dreadful found refembling thunder, accompa- 
nied with lightning and fmoke, ftruck them 
with fuch terror, that they began to refpeft 
their new guefts as a fuperior order of beigns, 
and concluded that they were children of the 
Sun, who had defcended to vifit the earth. 

The Europeans were hardly lefs amazed at 
the fcene now before them. Every herb, and 
fhrub, and tree, was different from thofe which 

«) Mfe of Columbus , e.2*. 13. H«rma, d«c. i, lib. 1. e. 13. 



i2* HISTORY OF AMERICA 

llourifhed in Europe. The foil feemed to be 
rich , but bore few marks of cultivation. The 
climate , even to Spaniards , felt warm £hough 
extremely delightful. The inhabitants appea- 
red in the fimple innocence of nature , entirely 
naked. Their black hair , long and uncurled, 
floated upon their fhoulders , or was bound in 
trefles around their heads. They had no beards, 
and every part of their bodies was perfeftly 
fmooth. Their complexion was of a dufky 
copper colour, their features lingular, rather 
than difagreeable, their afpeft gentle and timid. 
Though not tall, they were well fhaped, and 
attive. Their faces , and feveral parts of their 
body, were fantaftically painted with glaring 
colours. They were fhy at firft through fear, 
but foon became familiar with the Spaniards, 
and with tranfports of joy received from them 
hawks-bells, glafs beads, or other baubles , in 
return for which they gave fuch provifions as 
they had, and fome cotton yarn, the only com- 
modity of value that they could produce. To- 
wards evening, Columbus returned to his Chips, 
accompanied by many of the iflanders in their 
boats , which they called canoes , and though 
rudely formed out of the trunk of a fingle tree, 
they rowed them with furprifing dexterity. 
Thus , in the firft interview between the inha- 
bitants of the old and new worlds, every thing 
was condufted amicably, and to their mutual 
fatisfaftiom The former , enlightened and am* 



BOOK II. 1*3 

bitious, formed already vaft ideas with refpeft 
to the advantages which they might derive from 
the regions that began to open to their view. 
The latter, fimple and undifcerning, had na 
forefight of the calamities and defolation which 
were approaching their country. 

Columbus affumes the title of admiral and viceroy. 

Columbus, who now affumed the title and 
authority of admiral and viceroy, called the if- 
land which he had difcovered San Salvador. It 
is better known by the name of Guanahani, 
which the natives gave to it, and is one of that 
large clufter of iflands called the Lucaya or Ba- 
hama ifles. It is fituated above three thoufand 
miles to the weft of Gomera, from which the 
fquadron took its departure , and only four de- 
grees to the fouth of it ; fo little had Columbus 
deviated from the wefterly courfe, which he 
had chofen as the moft proper, - 

Proceeds towards the fouth. 

Columbus employed the next day in vifiting 
the coafts of the iflaiid ; and from the univerfal 
poverty of the inhabitants, he perceived that 
this was not the rich country for which he 
fought. But, conformably to his theory con- 
cerning the difcovery of thofe regions of Afia 
which ftretched towards the eaft, he concluded 
that San Salvador was one of the ifles which 
geographers defcribed as fituated in the vaft 



<ra 4 HISTORY OF AMERICA 

ocean adjacent to India t). Having obferved 
that moft of the people whom he had feen more 
imali plates of gold, by way of ornament, in 
their noftrils, he eagerly inquired where they 
got that precious metah They pointed towards 
the fouth , and made him comprehend by figns, 
that gold abounded in conn tries fituated in that 
quarter. Thither he immediately determined 
to direft his courfe, in full confidence of find- 
ing there thofe opulent regions which had been 
the objeft of his voyage , and would be a re- 
compence for all his toils and dangers. He took 
along with him feven of the natives of San Sal- 
vador, that, by acquiring the Spanifh language, 
they might ferve as guides and interpreters ; and 
thofe innocent people confidered it as a mark of 
diftin&ion when they were felefted to accom- 
pany him* 

Difcovers Cuba. 

He faw fcveral if ands, and touched at three 
of the largeft , on which he beftowed the na- 
mes of St. Mary of the Conception, Fernandina, 
and Ifabella. But as their foil, produftions, 
and inhabitants nearly refembled thofe of San 
Salvador, he made no ftay in any of them. He 
inquired every where for gold, and received 
uniformly for anfwer, that it was brought from 
the fouth. He followed that courfe, and foon 
difcovered a country of vaft extent, not perfeft- 

3 Pet, Mart, epift. 135, 



BOOKS. X2$ 

iy level, like thofe which he had already vlfit- 
ed , but fo diverfified with riling grounds , hills* 
rivers , woods , and plains , that he was uncer- 
tain whether it might prove an ifland , or part 
of the continent. The natives of San Salvador, 
whom he had on board, called it Cuba; Co- 
lumbus gave it the name of Juanna. He enter- 
ed the mouth of a large river with his (quadron, 
and all the inhabitants fled to the mountains as 
he approached the fhore. But as he refolved 
to careen his fhips in that place , he fent fome 
Spaniards , together with one of the people of 
San Salvador, to view the interior parts of the 
country. They, having advanced above fixty 
miles from the fhore, reported, upon their re- 
turn , that the foil was richer and more culti- 
vated than any they had hitherto difcovered; 
that, befides many Scattered cottages, they had 
found one village, containing above a thoufand 
inhabitants ; that the people though naked, 
feemed to be more intelligent than thofe of San 
Salvador, but had treated them with the fame 
refpeftful attention , killing their feet, and ho- 
nouring them as facred beings allied to Heaven ; 
that they had given them to eat a certain root* 
the tafte of which refembled roafted chefnuts, 
and likewife a Angular fpecies of corn called 
maize, which, either when roafted whole, or 
ground into meal, was abundantly palatable; 
that there feemed to be no four-footed anifnal$ 
In the country, but a fpecies of dogs, which 



*a« HISTORY OF AMERICA 

rould not bark, and a creature refembling a rab- 
bit, but of a much fmaller fize ; that they had 
obferved fome ornaments of gold among the peo- 
ple, but of no great value u). 

His copjeftures with regard to it. 

Thefe melTengers had prevailed with fome 
of the natives to accompany them, who inform- 
ed Columbus, that the gold of which they made 
their ornaments was found in Cubanacan. By 
this word they meant the middle 'or inland part 
of Cuba; but Columbus, being ignorant- of their 
language, as well as unaccuftomed to their pro- 
nunciation, and his thoughts running continual- 
ly upon his own theory concerning the difcove- 
ry of the Eaft Indies, he was led, by the re- 
femblance of found , to fuppofe that they fpoke 
of the Great Khan , and imagined that the opu- 
lent kingdom of Cathay, defcribed by Marco 
Polo , was not very remote. This induced him 
to employ fome time in viewing the country. 
He vifited almoft every harbour, from Porto del 
Principe, on the north coaft of Cuba, to the 
eaftern extremity of the ifland ; but, though de- 
lighted with the beauty of the fcenes, which 
every where prefented themfelves , and amazed 
at the luxuriant fertility of the foil , both which, 
from their novelty, made a more lively impref- 
fion upon his imagination x) , he did not find 

u) Life of Columbui , c. 24 - sg. Herrera , decad* 1. lib. !• 

c. 14. 
«) Stc NOTE XIV. 



BOOK IL xa?, 

gold in fuch quantity as was fufficient to fatfc- 
fy either the* avarice of his followers, or the 
expe&ations of the court to which he was to 
return. The people of the country , as. much, 
aftonifhed at his eagernefs in queft of gold , a* 
the Europeans were at their ignorance and fim- 
plicity, pointed towards the eaft, where an if- 
land which they called Hayti was fituated, in 
which that metal was more abundatitthan among 
them, Columbus ordered his fquadron to bend 
its courfe thither; but Martin Alonfo Pinzon, 
impatient to be the firfl: who fhould take poffef- 
iion of the treafures which this country wan 
fuppofed to contain , quitted his companions a 
regardlefs of all the admiral's fignals to flacken 
fail until they fhould come up with him. 

Dlfcovers the ifland Hifpaniola. 

Columbus, retarded by contrary winds, did 
not reach Hayti till the fixth of December. He 
called the port where he firft touched St. Nicho-* 
las, and the ifland itfelf Efpagnola, in honour 
of the kingdom by which he was employed; 
and it is the only country, of thofe he had yet 
difcovered, which has retained the name that 
he gave it. As he could neither meet with the 
Pinta, nor have any intercourfe with the inha- 
bitants , who fled in great confternation toward* 
the woods, he foon quitted St. Nicholas and 
failing along the northern coaft of the if and, 
tie -entered another harbour > which to sailed 



*28 HISTORY OF AMERICA 

Conception. Here he was more fortunate; his 
people overtook a woman who w%s flying from 
them , and after treating her with great gentle- 
nefs , xUfmiffed her with a prefent of fuch toys, 
as they knew were moft valued in thofe regions. 
The description which fhe gave to her country- 
men of the humanity and wonderful qualities 
of the ftrangers; their admiration of the trinkets, 
which fhe fhewed with exaltation; and their 
eagernefs to participate of the fame favours; 
removed all their fears , and induced many of 
them to repair to the harbour. The ftrange ob- 
jefts which they beheld , and the baubles which 
Columbus bellowed upon them , amply gratified 
their curiofity and their wifhes. They nearly 
refembled the people of Guanahani and Cuba* 
They were naked like them, ignorant, and Am- 
ple, and feemed to be equally unacquainted with 
all the arts which appear moft neceffary in po- 
liflied focieties; but they were gentle, credu- 
lous, and timid, to a degree which rendered it 
eafy to atquire the afcendant over them efpe- 
cially as their exceflive admiration led them in- 
to the fame error with the people of the other 
iflands , in believing the Spaniards to be more 
than mortals , and defcended immediately from 
Heaven. They poffefled gold in greater abun- 
dance than their neighbours, which they rea- 
dely exchanged for bells , beads , or pins ; and, 
in this unequal traffic , both parties were highly 
pleafed, each considering themfelves 4s gainers 

by 



BOOK It X2? 

by the tranfaftion. Here Columbus was vifitel 
by a prince or cazique of the country. He ap- 
peared with all the pomp known anumg a fimple 
people, being carried in a fort of palanquin upon 
the fhoulders of four men , and^ attended by ma- 
ny of his fubje&s , who * ferved him with great 
refpeft. His deportment was grave and {late- 
ly, very referved towards his own people, but 
with Columbus and the Spaniards extremely 
courteous. He gave the admiral fome thin pla- 
tes of gold, and a girdle of curious workman- 
fhip, receiving in return prefents of fmall value, " 
but highly acceptable to him y). 

Columbus, ftill intent on difcovering the 
mines which yielded gold, continued to inter- 
rogate all the natives with whom he had any 
intercourfe concerning their fituation. They 
concurred in pointing out a mountainous coun- 
try, which they called Cibao, at fome diftance 
from the fea, and farther towards the eaft. Struck 
■with this found, which appeared to him the fa- 
* me with Cipango , the name by which Marco 
Polo, and other traveller? to the eaft, diftin- 
guifhed the iflands of Japan, he no longer doub- 
ted with refpeft to the vicinity of the countries 
which he had difcovered to the remote parts of 
Afia; and, in full expeftatiori of reaching fooa 
thofe regions which iad been the objeft of hii 
voyage, he direfted his courfe towards the eaft, 

y) Life of Columbus , c. 32. Herrera , dec. X. lib. i. c. 15. &* 

Robertson Vol. I. I 



53° HISTORY OP AMERICA 

He put Into a commodious harbour, which lit 
called St. Thomas , and found that diftrift to be 
under the government of a powerful cazique, 
named Guacanahari , who , as he afterwards 
learned , was one of the five fovereigns among 
whom the whole ifland was divided. He im- 
mediately fent meffengers to Columbus, who, 
in his name, delivered to him the prefent of t 
mafk curioufly fafhioned, with the ears, nofe, 
and mouth of beaten gold , and invited him to 
the place of his refidence, near the harbour now 
called Cape Francis , fome 4 leagues towards the 
eaft. Columbus difnatched fome of his officen 
to vifit this prince, who, as he behaved himfelf 
with greater dignity , feemed to claim more at- 
tention. They returned, with fuch favourable 
accounts both of the country and of the people, 
as made Columbus impatient for that interview 
with Guacanahari to which he had been invited. 

One of his fhlps loft. 

He failed for this purpofe from St. Thomas* 
on the twenty-fourth of December, with a feif 
wind, and the fea perfeftly calm; and as, amidft 
the multiplicity of his occupations, he had not 
f hut his eyes for two days , he retired at mid- 
night , in order to take fome repofe , having 
committed the helm to the pilot, with ftrift in- 
junftions not to quit it for a moment-.' The pi- 
lot, dreading no danger, carelefsly left the helm 
to an unexperienced cabin-boy , and the fiiip, 



BOOK n, 131 

tarried away by a current, was dafhed againft 
a rock. The violence of the fhock awakened 
Columbus, He ran up to the deck. There, all 
was confufion and defpair. He alone retained 
prefence of mind. He ordered fome of the fai- 
lors to take a boat, and carry out an anchor 
aftern; but, inftead of obeying, they made off 
towards the Nigna, which was about half a lea- 
gue diftant. He then commanded the mails to 
be cut down, in order to lighten the fhip, but 
all his* endeavours were too late ; the veffel open- 
ed near the keel , and filled fo faft with water, 
that its lofs was inevitable. The fmoothnefs 
of the fea, and the timely afliftance of boats 
from the Nigna, enabled the crew to fave their 
lives. As foon as the iflanders heard of this 
difafter, they crowded to the fhore, with their 
prince Guacanahari at their head. Inftead of 
taking advantage of the diftrefs in which they 
beheld the Spaniards, to attempt any thing to 
their detriment, they lamented their misfortune 
with tears of fincere condolance. Not fatisfied 
with this unavailing expreffion of their fympa- 
thy, they put to fea a vaft number of canoes, 
and, under direction of the Spaniards, affifted 
m in faying whatever could be got out of the wreck, 
and, by the united labour of fo many hand, aU 
moft every thing of value was carried afnore. 
As faft as the goods were landed, Guacanahari. 
in perfon took charge of them. By his orders, 
they were all depofited in one place, and armed 
I % 



i 3 * HISTORY OF AMERICA 

centinels were pofted, who kept the multitude 
at a diftance, in order to prevent them not only 
from embezzling, but from infpefting too cu- 
rioufly what belonged to their guelts z). Next 
morning this prince vifited Columbus, who was 
now on board the Nigna, and endeavoured to 
confole him for his lofs, by offering all that he 
poffeffed to repair it a). 

• 

Diftrefs of Columbus, 

% 

The Condition of Columbus was fucfc , that 
he ftood in need of confolation. He had hitherto 
procured no intelligence of the Pinta, and no 
longer doubted but that his treacherous affociate 
had fet fail for Europe , in order to have the 
merit of carrying the firft ridings of the extra- 
ordinary difcoveries which had been made, and 
to preoccupy fo far the ear of their fovereign, 
as to rob him of the glory and reward to which 
he was juftly intitled. There remained but one 
veflel , and that, the fmalleft and moft crazy of 
the fquadron , to traverfe fuch a vaft ocean, and 
carry fo many men back to Europe. Each of 
thofe circumftances was alarming, and filled the 
mind of Columbus with the utmoft folicitude. 
The defire of overtaking Pinzon, and of effacing 
the unfavourable impreflions which his mifre- 
prefentations might make in Spain, made it nt- 
ceffary to return thither without delay. 

a) See NOTE XV. 

«) hcrrert , dec. x. lib. i, c. Jg. 



BOOK II. 135 

Refolves to leaves a part of his crew in the ifland. 

The difficulty of taking fuch a number of 
perfons aboard the Nigna, confirmed him in an 
opinion , which the fertility of 'the country f 
and the gentle temper of the people, had alrea- 
dy induced him to form. He refolved to leave 
a part of his crew in the ifland, that, by refid* 
ing there f they might learn the language of the 
natives , itudy their difpofition , examine the 
nature of the country, fearch for mines, pre- 
pare for the commodious fettlement of the co- 
lony, with which he purpofed to return, and 
thus fecure and facilitate the acquifition of thofe 
advamages which he expefted from his difcove- 
xies. When he mentioned tliis to his men, all 
approveg! of the defign ; and from impatience 
under the fatigue of a long voyage, from the 
levity natural to failors , or from the hopes of 
amaffing vaft wealth in a country which afforded 
fuch promifing fpecimens of its riches , many 
offered voluntarily to be among the number of 
thofe who fhould remain. 

Obtains the confent of the natives* 

Nothing was now wanting towards the exe- 
cution of this fcheme, but to obtain the confent 
o&Guacanahatfi; and his unfufpicious fimplicity 
foon prefented to th* admiral a favourable op- 
portunity of propofing it. Columbus havings 
in the beft manner he could , by broken words. 
and figns, expreffed fome curiofity to know the 



i 3 4 HISTORY OF AMERICA 

caufe which had moved the iflandefs to fly with 
fuch precipitation upon the approach of his fhips, 
the cazique informed him that the country was 
much infefted by the incurfions of certain peo- 
ple , whom he called Carribeans, who inhabited 
feveral iflands to the fouth eaft. Thefe he de- 
fcribed as a fierce and warlike race of men, who 
delighted in blood, and devoured the flefh of 
the prifoners who were fo unhappy as to fall 
into their hands ; and as the Spaniards, as their 
firtt appearance, were fuppofed to be Carribeans,, 
whom the natives, however numerous, durft 
not face in battle , they had recourfe to their 
ufual method of fecuring their fafety, by tying 
into the thickeft and molt impenetrable woods. 
Guacanahari, while fpeaking of thofe dreadful 
invaders, discovered fuch fymptoms of terror, 
as well as fuch confcioufnefs of the inability of 
his own people to refill them, as led Colum- 
bus to conclude that he would not be alarmed 
at the propofition of any fcheme which afforded 
him the profpeft of an additional fecurity againft 
their attacks. He inftantly offered. him the af- , 
fiftance of the Spaniards to repel his enemies; 
he engaged t# take him and his, people under 
the protection of, the powerful monarch whom 
he ferved, and offered to leave in, the ifland fnffi 
a number of his men, as fboulH be fufficient, 
not only to defend the inhabitants from future 
incurfions , but to avenge their paft* wrongs. 



BOOJ.n. ;; • 

Builds a fort* 

\ The credulous pritice clofed eagerly with 
the prppofal, and thought himfelf already fafe 
tinder the patronage of beings fprung from Hea* 
ven, and fuperior in power to mortal men. The 
grouiwi was marked out for a fmall fort, which 
Columbus called Navidad , becaufe he had land-* 
ed there on Chriftmas day. A deep ditch was 
drawn around it. The ramparts were fortified 
•with pallifades, and the great guns, faved out 
of the admiral's fhip , -were planted upon thepi. 
In ten days the work was finifhed ; that finiple 
race of men labouring with inconiiderate affi- 
duity in erefting this firft monument of their 
own fervitude. During this time Columbus, by 
liis careffes and liberality , laboured to increafe 
the high opinion which the natives entertained 
of the Spaniards. But while he endeavoured 
to infpire them with confidence in their difpo- 
fition to do good , he wifhed likewife to give 
them fome ftriking idea of their power to pu* 
nifh and deftroy fuchaswere the objefts of their 
indignation. With his view, in prefence of z 
vaft afflembly, he drew up his men in order of 
battle , and made an oftentatious but innocent 
difplay of the fharpnefs of the Spanifh fwordi f 
of the force of their fpears , and the operation 
of their crofsbows. Thefe rud^people , ft ran- 
gers A the ufe of iron , and unacquainted with 
any hoftile weapons, but arrows of reeds point* 
ed with the bones of fifties, wooden fwords* 



r$6 HISTORY OF AMERICA 

and javelins hardened in the iire, wondered and 
trembled. Before this furprife or fear had time 
to abate , he ordered the great guns to be fired. 
The fudden explofion ftruck them with fuch ter- 
ror, that they fell flat to the ground, covering 
their faces with their hands ; and when they be- 
held the aftonifhing effeft of the bullets among 
the trees, towards which the cannon had been 
pointed , they concluded that it was impoffible 
to refift men , who had the command of fuch 
deftruftive inftruments, and who came armed 
with thunder and lightning a gain ft their enemies. 

His inftcuftions to thofe be left in it. 

After giving fuch impreffions both of the 
beneficence and power of the Spaniards, as 
might have rendered it eafy to preferve an 
afcendant over the minds of the natives , Co- 
lumbus appointed thirty - eight of his people to 
remain in the ifland. He entrufted the com- 
mand of thefe to Diego de Arada , a gentleman 
of Cordova, invefting him with the fame po- 
wers which he himfelf had received from Fer- 
dinand ;nd Ifabella, and furnifhed him with 
every thing requifite for the fubfiftence or de- 
fence of this infant colony. He ilriftly enjoi- 
ned them to maintain concord among themfel- 
ves , to yield %n unreferved obedience tp their 
commander, to avoid giving offence to the na- 
tives by any violence or exaftion, to cultivate 
the friendfhip of Guacanahari, but not to put 



BOO K It x 37 

themfelves in his power by ftraggling in fmall 
parties , or marching to far from the fort. He 
promifed to revifit them foon, with fuch a rein- 
forcement of ftrenght as might enable them to* 
take full pdfleffion of the country, and to reap 
all the fruits of their difcoveries. In the -mean 
time, he engaged to mention their names to 
the king and queen, and to place their merit 
and fervices in the moft advantageous light b). 

(1493) Having thus taken every precau- 
tion for the fccurity of the Colony, he left Na- 
vidad on the fourth of January, one thoufand 
four hundred and ninety - three , and fteering 
towards the eaft , difcovered , and gave names 
to moft of the harbours on the northern coaft 
of the ifland. On the iixth , he defcried the 
Pinta, and foon came up with % her, after a fe- 
paration of more than fix weeks. Pinzon en- 
deavoured to juftify his conduct, by pretending 
that he had been driven from his courfe by ftreft 
of weather, and prevented from returning by 
contrary winds. The admiral, though he ftill 
fufpefted his perfidious intentions, and knew 
well what he urged in his own defence to be 
frivolous as well as falfe, was fo fenfible that 
this was not a proper time for venturing upon 
any high ftrain of authority, and felt fuch fa- 
tisfaftion in this junftion with his confort, 
which delivered him from many difquieting ap*. 

fr) O vie do ap. Ramufio f in. p. 82, E. Herrera, dec. I. lib. i, 
«. ao, l*ife of Columbus , c. 34. 



i 3 8 HISTORY OF AMERICA 

prehenfions, that, lame as Pinzon's apology 
was, he admitted of it without difficulty, and 
reftored him to favour. During his abfence 
from the admiral , Pinzon bad viiited feveral 
harbours in the ifland, bad acquired fome gold 
by trafficking with the natives , but bad made 
no difcovery of any importance, 

Refolves to return to Europe. 

From the condition of his fhips, as well 
as the tamper of his men, Columbus now found 
it neceffary to haften his return to Europe. The 
former, having fuffered much during a. voyage 
of fuch an unufual length, were %xtremely lea- 
ky. The latter expreffed the utmoft impatience 
to revifit their native country, from which they 
had been fo long abfent, and where they had 
things fo wonderful and unheard of to relate. 
Accordingly, on the fixteenth of January, he 
directed his courfe towards the 'north -eaft, and 
foon loft light of land. He had on board fome 
of the natives , whom he had taken from the 
different iflands which he difcovered ; and befi- 
des the gold, which was the chief objeft of re- 
fearch, he had collected fpecimens of all the 
productions which were likely to become fub- 
jefts of commerce in the feveral countries , as 
well as many unknown birds , and other natural 
curiofities , which might attraft the attention of 
the learned, or excite the wonder of the people. 



BOOK H. 139 

A violent ftorm arifes. 

The voyage was profperous to the four* 
teenth of February , and he had advanced near 
five hundred leagues acrofs the Atlantic Ocean, . 
•when the wind began to rife, and continued to 
blow with increafing rage , which terminated in 
a furious hurricane. Every expedient that the 
naval fkill and experience of Columbus could 
devife was employed, in order to fav'e thefhips. 
But it was impoffible to withftand the violence 
of the ftorm, and as they were ftill far from any 
land , deftruftion feemed inevitable. The fai- 
lors had recourfe to prayers to Almighty God, 
to the invocation of faints, to vows and charms, 
to everything that religion 1 dictates, or fuper- 
ftition fuggefts, to the affrighted mind of man. 
No profpeft of deliverance iappearinj* , they ab- 
andoned themfelves to defpair, anil expefted 
every moment to be fwallowed up in the wa- 
ves. Belides the paflions which naturally agi- - 
tate and alarm the human mind in fuch awful 
fituations , when certain death , in one of his 
moft terrible forms is before it, Columbus had 
to endure feelings of diftrefs peculiar to himfelf. 

The conduft of Columbus. 

He dreaded that all knowledge of the amazing 
difcoveries which he had madf was now to pe- 
tifh ; mankind were to be deprived of every be* 
Befit that might have been derived from the 
fcappy fuccefs of his fchemes, and his own na- 



x 4 o HISTORY OF AMERICA 

me would defcend to pofterity as that of a ralh 
deluded adventurer, inftead of being tranfmitted 
with the honour due to the author and condu- 
ctor of the moft noble enterprife that had ever 
been undertaken. Thefe reflexions extinguifhed 
all fenfe of his own perfonal danger. Lefs af- 
fefted with the lofs of life , than folicitous to 
preferve the memory of what he had attempted 
and achieved , he rotired to his cabin, and wro- 
te upon parchment, a fhort account of the 
voyage which he had made, of the courfe which 
he had taken , of the iituation and riches of the 
countries which, he had difcovered , and of the 
colony that he had left there. Having wrapt 
up this in an oiled cloth , which he inclofecT in 
a cake of wax , he put it into a cafk carefully 
flopped up^ and threw it into the fea, in ho- 
pes that fome fortunate accident might preferve 
a depofit of fo much importance to the world c). 

Takes fhcltcr in the Azores. 

At length Providence interpofed, to fave a 
life referved for other fervices. The wind aba- 
ted, the fea became calm, and on the evening 
of the fifteenth , Columbus and his companions 
difcovered land ; and though uncertain what it 
was , they made towards it. They foon knew 
it to be St. Mary% one of the Azores or we- 
ftern ifles, fubjeft to the crown of Portugal. 

o) Life of Columbus, C37. Herrera, dec, 1. lib.ii. cl.t. 
See NOTE XVI. 



BOOK D. 141 

There f after a violent conteft with the gover- 
nor, in which Columbus difplayed no left fpirit 
than prudence, he obtained a fupply of frefii 
provifions, and whatever elfe he needed. One 
circumftance, however, greatly difquieted him. 
The Pinta, of which he hnd loft fight on the 
firft day of the hurricane, did not appear; he 
dreaded for fome time that flie had foundered 
at fea , and that aH her crew had perifhed : af- 
terward^, his former fufpicions recurred, and 
he became apprehenfive that Pinzon had borne 
away for Spain , that be might reach it before 
him, and by giving the firft account of his dif- 
coveries, might obtain fome f hare of his fame* 

Feb. 04. Arrives at Lifbon. 

In order to prevent this , he left the Azores 
as foon as the weather would permit. At no 
great diftance from the coaft of Spain, when 
near the end of his voyage, and feemingly 
beyond the reach of any dilafter , another ftorm 
arofe , little inferior to the former in violence ; 
and after driving before it during two days and 
two nights, he was forced to take f belter in 
the river Tagus. (March. 4.) Upon application 
to the king of Portugal, he was allowed to co- 
me up to Lifbon; and, notwithftanding the en- 
vy which it was natural for the Portuguefe to 
'feel , when they beheld another nation entering 
Upon that province ofdifcovery which they had 
iitherto deemed peculiarly their own, and i% 



*4* HISTORY OF AMERICA 

its firft efiay, not only rivalling but eclipfing 
their fame. Columbus was received with all the 
marks of diftinftion due to a man who had per- 
formed things fo extraordinary and unexpe&ed. 
The king admitted him into his prefence, treat- 
ed him with the higheft refpeft, and liftened to 
the account which he gave of his voyage with 
admiration mingled with regret. While Colum- 
bus , on his part, enjoyed the fatisfa&ion of de- 
fcribing the importance of his difcoveries , and 
of being now able to prove the folidity of his 
fchemes to thofe very perfons, who, with an 
ignorance di {graceful to themfelves, and fatal to 
their country, had lately reje&ed them as the 
projefts of a vifionary or defigning adventu- 
rer d). 

Returns to Spain* 

Columbus was fo impatient to return to 
Spain, that he remained only five days in Lif- 
bon. On the fifteenth of M*rch he arrived in 
the port of Palos , feven months and eleven 
days from the time when he fet out thence upon 
his voyage. As foon as his fhip was difcovered 
approaching the port, all the inhabitants of Pa- 
los ran eagerly to the Chore , in order to wel- 
come their relations and fellow-citizens , and , 
to hear tidings of their voyage. When the pro- 
fperous ifiue of it was known, when they be- 
held the ftrange people, the unknown animals, 

4) Lift of Columbus, c, 40. 41, Hcrrtrt, 4cc I. lib. ii. •.$. 



BOOK H MS 

and lingular produftions brought from the coun- 
tries which had been discovered, the effufion 
of joy was general and unbounded. The bells 
^vere rung, the cannon fired; Columbus was re- 
ceived at landing with royal honours , and all 
the people, in folemn procefiion, accompanied 
him and his crew to the church , where they 
returned thanks to Heaven, which had fo won- 
derfully condufted and crowned with fuccefs,. 
a voyage of greater length and of more impor- 
tance , than had been attempted in any former 
age. On the evening of the fame day , he had 
the fatisfattion of feeing the Pinta, which the 
violence of the tempeft had driven far to the 
north , enter the harbour, 

His reception. 

The firft care of Columbus was to inform 
the king and queen , who were then at Bar- 
celona, of his arrival and fuccefs. Ferdinand 
and Ifabella, no lefs aftonifhed than delighted 
with this unexpefted event, defired Columbus, 
in terms the moft refpeftful and flattering, to 
repair immediately to court, that from his own 
mouth , they might receive a full detail of his 
extraordinary fervices and discoveries. During 
his journey to Barcelona, the people crowded 
from the adjacent country, following him eve- 
ry where with admiration and applaufe. His 
entrance into the city was condufted , by or- 
der of Ferdinand and I&bella, with pomp fuit- 



i 4 4 HISTORY OF AMERICA 

able to the great event, which added fuch dl- 
ftinguifhing luftre to their reign. The people 
■whom he brought along with him from the coun- 
tries which he had . discovered , marched firft, 
and by their Angular complexion , the wild pe- 
culiarity of their features, an uncouth finery, 
appeared like men of another fpecies. Next to 
them were carried the ornaments of gold , fa- 
fhioned by the rude art of the natives, the grain* 
of gold found in the mountains, and duft of the 
fame metal gathered in the rivers. After, thefe 
appeared the various commodities of the new- 
difcovered countries , together with their cu- 
rious productions. Columbus himfelf clofed the 
proceffion, and attrafted the eyes of all the fpec- 
tators , who gazed with admiration ori" the ex- 
traordinary man , whofe fuperior fagacity and 
fortitude had condufted their countrymen , by 
a route concealed from pad ages , to the know* 
ledge of a new world. Ferdinand and Iiabellji 
received him clad in their royal robes, and feat- 
ed upon a throne , under a magnificent canopy. 
When he approached they ftood up, and raLf- 
ing him as he kneeled to kifs their hands, com- 
manded him to take his feat upon a chair pre- 
pared for him, Snd to give a circumftantial ac- 
count of his voyage. He delivered it with a 
gravity and compofure«no lefs fuitafcle to the 
difpofition of the Spanifh nation, than to the 
dignity of the audience in which he fpoke, and 
with that modeft fimplicity which charafterifef 

men 



BOOK EL 



*45 



men of fuperior minds ; who, fatisfied with hav- 
ing performed great aftions , court not vajui ap- 
plaufe by an oftentatious difplay of their exploits. 
When he had finifhed his narration, the king 
and queen, kneeling down, offered up folemn 
thinks to almighty God for the difcovery of 
thofe new^ regions , .from which they expefted 
fo many advantages to flow in upon the king- 
doms fubjeft to their government e). jEvery 
mark of honour that gratitude or admiration could 
fuggeft was conferred upon Columbus. Letters 
patent were iffued, confirming to him and to 
his heirs all the privileges contained in the ca- 
pitulation concluded at Santa Fe ; his family was 
ennobled ; the king and queen , and, after their 
example, the cqurtiers treated him, on every 
occafion , with all the qeretnpnious refpeft paid 
to perfons of the higheft .rank. Bitf what pleafed 
him moft , as it gratified his active mind , bent 
continually upon great objects , wa$ an order to 
equip , without delay, an armament of fuch for- 
ce , as might. enable him ot only to take poflef- 
fion of the countries whiqh he had already dif- 
covered, but. to go in fearch of thofe more opu- 
lent regions, which he fljpl confidently expect- 
ed to find f). 

«) See NOTE XVII. 

f) Life of Columbus, c.43. 43. Hewera , 4?c. 1. lib. ii, 
c. 3. 



Robertson Vol. I, K 



%A 6 HISTORY OF AMERICA 

Aftonifhment of mankind at his difcoverief. 

While preparations were making for this 
expedition ,. the fame of Columbus fuccefsful 
voyage fpread over Europe, and excited gene- 
ral attention. The multitude, ftruck with ama- 
zement when they heard that a new world had 
been found, could hardly believe an event fo 
much above their conception. Men of fcience, 
capable of comprehending the nature f and o( 
difcerning the effefts, of this great difcovery, 
received the account of it with admiration and 
joy. They fpoke of his voyage with rapture, 
and congratulated one another upon their feli- 
city, in having lived at the period when, by 
this extraordinary event, the boundaries of hu- 
man knowledge were fo much extended, and 
fuch a new field of inquiry and obfervation open- 
ed, as would lead mankind to a perfeft acquaint- 
ance with the ftrufture and produftions of the 
habitable globe g). Various opinions and con- 
jectures were formed concerning the new-found 
countries , and what divifion of the earth they 
belonged to. Columbus adhered tenacioufly to 
his original opinion, that they fhould be reckop- 
ed a part of thofe vaflf regions in Alia, compre- 
hended under the general name of India. This 
fentiment was confirmed by the observation! 
which he made concerning the produftions of 
the countries he had di {covered. Gold W*S 

g) P. Mart, epift. 133 -*I5. See NOTE XVIII, 



i < B O O K 0. X47 

; known to abound in India, and he had met with 
fuch promising famples of it in the iflands which 
he vifited, as led him to believe that rich mi- 
nes of it might be found. Cotton, another pro- 
duction of the Eaft Indies , was common there. 
The pimento of the iflands he imagined to be a 
fpecies of the Eaft Indian pepper. He miftook 
a root, fome what refembling rhubarb, for that 
valuable drug, which was then fuppofed to be 
a plant peculiar to the Eaft Indies h). The 
birds brought home by him were adorned with 
the fame rich plumage which diftinguifhes thofe 
of India. The alligator of th% one country ap- 
peared to be the fame wfth the crocodile of the 
other. After weighing all thefe circumftances f 
not only the Spaniards , but the other nations 
x)f Europe, feem to have adopted the opinion 
of Columbus. The countries which he had dif- 
covered were considered as a part of India. In 
confequence of this notion , the name of Indies 
is gives to. them by Ferdinand and Ifabella , in 
a ratification of their former agreement, which 
was granted to Columbus upon his return i)» 

Diftinguifhed by the name of the Weft Indies. 

Even after the error which gave rife to this 

m opinion was detefted , and the true pofition of 

the New World was ascertained , the name has 

remained, and the appellation of Weft Indies is 

h) Herrera, dec. 1. lib. i. c. 20. Gomara Hift. c. 17, 
i) Life j& Columbus , c. 44. 

K a 



i 4 8 HISTORY OF AMERICA 

given by all the people of Europe to the coun- 
try , and that of Indians to its inhabitants. 

Preparations for a fecond voyage. 

The name by which Columbus diftinguxfhed 
the countries which he had difcovered was fo 
inviting, the fpecimens of their riches and fer- 
tility, -which he produced, were fo confiderable, 
and the reports of his companions , delivered 
frequently with the exaggeration natural to tra- 
vellers, fo favourable-, as to excite a wonderful 
fpirit of enterprile among the Spaniards. Though 
litrie accuftomed to naval expeditions, they were 
impatient to fet out upon the voyage. Volun- 
teers of -every rank folicited to be employed. 
Allured by the vatft profpefts which opened to 
their ambition and avarice, neither the length 
nor danger of the navigation intimidated them. 
Cautious as Ferdinand was , and averfe to every 
thing new or adventurous, he feems to have 
catched the fame fpirit with his fubjefts. Un- 
der its influence , preparations for a fecond ex- 
pedition were carried on with a rapidity unufual 
in Spain, and to an extent that would be deem- 
ed not inconfiderable in the prefent age. The 
fleet confifted of feventeen fhips, fome of which 
were of good burden. It had on board fifteen 
hundred per Ions., among whom were many of 
noble families, who had ferved in honourable 
ftations. The greater part of thefe being de- 
fiined to remain in the country, were fcmifhed 



B O O K II. . i 49 

with every thing requifite for conqneft or fett> 
lement, with all kinds of European domeftic 
animals , with fuch feeds and plants as were 
moft likely to thrive in the climate of the Weft 
Indies , with utenfils and inftruments of every 
- fort , and with fuch artificers as might be moft 

1 ufeful in an infant colony k). 

■ 

g The right of Spain to the New World confirmed by the Pope* 

But, formidable and well provided as this 
" fleet was, Ferdinand and Ifabella did not reft 

* their title to the poffeflion of the «ewly-difco- 
J - vered countries upon its operations alone. The 
f example of the Portuguefe, as well as the fu- 

* perftition of the age , made it neceffary to ob- 
T tain from the Roman pontiff a grant of thofe ter- 

* ritories which they wifhed to occupy 1). The Po- 
r pe , as the vicar and reprefentative of Jefus Chrift, 

was fuppofed to have a right of dominion over 
all the kingdoms of the earth. Alexander VI. a 
pontiff infamous for every crime which difgra- 
ces humanity, filled the papal throne tt that ti- 
me. As he was born Ferdinand's fubjeft , ana 
very Colieitous to fecure the protection of Spain, 
in order to facilitate the execution of his ambi- 
tious fchemes in favour of his own family , he 
was extremely willing to gratify the Spanifh 
monarchs. By an aft of liberality which coft 
him nothing, and that ferved to eftatyifh the 

k) Herrera , dec. I. lib. ii. c. 5. 
I) Life of Columbus, c. 45. 



ISO HISTORY OF AMERICA 

jurisdiction and pretenfions of the papal fee, he 
granted in full right to Ferdinand and Ifabella 
all the countries inhabited by Infidels, which 
they had discovered, or fhould difcover; and, 
in virtue of that power which he derived from 
Jefus Chrift , he conferred on the crown of Ca- 
ftile vaft regions , to the poffefiion of which he 
himfclf was fo far from having any title ; that 
he was unacquainted with their Ctuation, and 
ignorant even of their exiftence. As it was ne- 
ceffary to prevent this grant from interfering 
with that formerly made to the crown of Por- 
tugal , he appointed that a line , fuppofed to be 
drawn from pole to pole , a hundred leagues to 
the weftward of the Azores , fhould ferve as 
the limit between them; and, in the plenitude 
of his power, beftowed all to the eaft of this 
imaginary line upon the Portuguefe , and all 
to the weft of it upon the Spaniards m). Zeal 
for propagating the Chriftian faith was the qon- 
fideration employed by Ferdinand in foliciting 
this bull ,• and is mentioned by Alexander as his 
chief motive for ifluing it. In order to xnanifeft 
fome concern- for this laudable objeft, feveral 
friars , under the direftion of Father Boyl , a 
Catalonian monk of great reputation, as apofto- 
lical vicar, were appointed to accompany Co- 
lumbus, and to devote themfelves to the inftru- 
ftion of the natives. The Indians , whom Co- 
id) Herrera , dec. i. lib. ii. c. 4. Torquemada Mon. in«*« 
lib. xviii. c. 3. 



B O O K. n. * s * 

lumbus had brought along with him, having 
received fome tinfture of Chriftian knowledge, 
were baptized with much folemnity, the king 
himfelf , the prince his fon , and the chief per- 
fons of his court, franding as their godfathers. 
Thofe firft fruits of the New World have not 
been followed by fuch an increafe as pious men 
Wifhed , and had reafon to expett. 

Second voya^ of Columbus. 

Ferdinand and Ifabella having thus acquired 
a title, which was then deemed completely va- 
lid , to extend their difcoveries , and to eftablifti 
their dominion over fuch a vaft portion of the 
globe, nothing now retarded the departure of 
the fleet. Columbus was extremely impatient 
to revifit the colony which he had left, and to 
purfue that career of glory upon which he had 
entered. He fet fail from the bay of Cadiz on 
the twenty -fifth of September, and touching 
again at the ifland of Gomera , he fteered far- 
ther towards the fouth than in his former voy- 
age. By holding this courfe , he enjoyed more 
fteadily the benefit of the regular winds, which 
reign within the tropics , and was carried to- 
wards a large clufter of iflands , fituated confi- 
derably to the eaft of thofe which he had already 
discovered. (Nov. a.) On the twenty-fix th day af- 
ter his departure from Gomera, he made land n). 
It was one of the Caribbee or Leeward iflan^ 

b) Oviedo ap. Ramuf. iii. 85- B. 



15* HISTORY OF AMERICA 

to which he gave the name of Defeada, on ac- 
count of the impatience of his crew to difcover 
' fome part of the New World. After this he 
vifited fucceflively Dominica, Marigalante , Gua- 
dalupe, Antigua, San Juan de Puerto Rico, and 
feveral other iflands fcattered in his way as he 
advanced towards the north - weft. All thefe 
he found to be inhabited by that fierce race of 
people whom Guacanahari had painted in fuch 
frightful colours. Hid* descriptions appeared 
riot to have been exaggerated. The Spaniards 
never attempted to land without meeting with 
fuch a reception, as difcovered the martial and 
daring fpirit of the natives ; and in .their habi- 
tations were found relics of thofe horrid feafts 
which they had made upon the bodies of their 
enemies taken in war. . 

Arrives at Hifpaniola, Nov. SI. 

But as Columbus was eager to know the 
ftate of the colony which he had planted , and 
to fupply it with the neceflaries of which he 
fuppofed it to be in want, he made no ftay in 
any of thofe iflands , and proceeded direftly to 
Hifpaniola o). When he arrived to Navidad, 
the ftation in which he had left the thirty-eight 
men under the command of Arada, he wa» 
aftonifhed that none of them appeared , and ex- 
pefted every moment to fee them running with 

o) P. Martyr, dec. p. 15. 18. Herrera, dec. 1. lib. ii. c. 7. Lift 
of Columbus, c.46. fee. 



BOOK H. *5$ 

tranfports of joy to welcome their countrymen. 
Full of folicitude about their fafety, and fore- 
boding in*his mind what had befallen them, he 
rowed inftantly to land. All the natives from 
whom he might have received information had 
flet But the fort which he had built was en- 
tirely demolifhed, and the tattered garments, 
the broken arms and utenfils fcattered about it, 
left no room to doubt concerning the unhappy 
fate of the garrifon p). While the Spaniards 
were fhedding tears over thofe fad memorials 
of their fellow - citizens , a brother of the cazi- 
que Guacanahari arrived. 

The fate of the men whom he nft there. 

From him Columbus received a particular 
detail of what had happened after his departure 
fi^om the ifiand. The familiar intercourfe of the 
Indians with the Spaniards tended gradually to 
diminifh the fuperftitious veneration with which 
their firft appearance had infpired that fimple 
people. By their own indifcretion and.-ill con- 
duft the Spaniards fpeedily effaced thofe favou- 
rable impreffions , and foon convinced the na- 
tives , that they had all the wants , weak- 
neffes , and paffions of men. As foon as the 
powerful reftraint which the prefence and au- 
thority of Columbus impofed was withdrawn, 
the garrifon threw off all regard for the officer 
whom he had ihvefted with command. Re- 

p) Hi& dt Cura de los Palacios. MS. 



i 5 4 HISTORY OF AMERICA 

gardlefs of the prudent inftru&ions which he 
had given them, every man became indepen- 
dent, and gratified his defires without controul. 
The gold, the women, the provifions of the 
natives, were all the prey of thofe licentious 
oppreflbrs. They roamed in fmall parties over 
the ifland, extending their rapacity and info- 
lence to every corner of it Gentle and timid 
as the people were , thofe unprovoked injuries 
at lenght exhaufted their patience , and rouzed 
their courage. The cacique of Cibao , whofe 
country the Spaniards chiefly infefted on account 
of the gold which it contained , furprifed and 
cut off feveral^flf them , while they ftraggled in 
as perfeft fecurity as if their conduft had been 
altogether inoffenfive. He then affembled hit 
fubjefts, and furrounding the fort, fet it on 
fire. Some of the Spaniards were killed in de- 
fending it, the reft perifhed in attempting to 
make their efcape by crofling an arm of the fea. 
Guacanahari, whom all their exaftions had not 
alienated from the Spaniards, took arms in their 
behalf, and , in endeavouring to pfbteft them, 
had received a wound, by which he was ftili 
confined q). 

His prudeut conduft. 

Though this account was far from removing 
the fufpicions which the Spaniards entertained 

q) P. Martyr, detad. p. 22. &c. Herrera, dccad. i. lib. U. c 7.9. 
Life of Columbus , c. 49. 50. 



BOOK II, 155 

with refpeft to the fidelity of Guacanahari , Co- 
lumbus perceived fo clearly that this was not 
9. proper jun&ure for inquiring into his conduit 
with fcrupulous accuracy , that he reje&ed the 
advice of feveral of his officers , who urged him 
to feize the perfon of that prince , and to re- 
venge the death of their countrymen by atta- 
cking his fubje&s. He reprefented to them the 
neceflity of fecuring the friendfhip of fome po- 
tentate of the country , in order to facilitate 
jthe fettlement which they intended ,^ and the 
danger of driving the natives to unite in fome 
defperate attempt againft them, by fuch an ill- 
timed and unavailing exercift of rigour. In- 
ftead of wafting his time in punifhing paft 
wrongs , he took precautions for preventing any 
future injury.' With this view, he made choice 
of a fituation more healthy and commodious 
than that of Navidad. He traced out the plan 
of a .town in a large plain near a fpacipus bay, 
and obliging every perfon to put his hand to a 
work on which tfoeir common fafety depended, 
the houfes and ramparts were foon fo far ad- 
vanced by their united labour, as to afford them 
flielter and fecurity. This riling city, the firft 
that the Europeans founded in the New World j, 
he named Ifabella , in honour of his patronefs 
the queen of Caftile r). 

r) Life of Columbus, c. 51. Herrera , dec. 1. lib. it c. 10. 



!5<S HISTORY OF AMERICA . 

Difcontent of his followers. 

' In carrying on this neceflary work, Colnm- 
1>us had not only to fuftatn all the hardfhips, 
and to encounter all the difficulties , to which 
infant colonies are expofed when they fettle in 
an uncultivated country , but he had to contend 
with what was more infuperable, the lazinefs, 
the impatience, and mutinous difpoiition of his 
followers. By the enervating influence of a 
hot climate , the natural inactivity of the Spa- 
niards feemed to increafe. Many of them were 
gentlemen , unaccuftomed to the fatigue of bo- 
dily labour, and all Bad engaged in the enter- 
prife with the fa^uine hopes excited by the 
fplendid and exaggerated descriptions of their 
countrymen who returned from the firft voyage, 
or by the miftaken opinion of Columbus , that 
the country which he had difcovered was either 
the Cipango of Marco Polo , or the Ophir s), 
from which Solomon imported thofe precious 
commodities which fuddenly diffufed fuch ex- 
traordinary riches through his kingdom. But 
when, inliead of that golden harveft which they 
had expefted to reap without toil or pains , the 
Spaniards faw that their profpeft of wealth was 
remote as well as uncertain , and that it could 
not be attained but by the flow and perfevering 
efforts of induftry, the difappointment of thofe 
chimerical hopes occafioned fuch deje&ion of 
mind as bordered on defpair, and led to gene- 

s) P. Mtrtyr, dec. p. 29. 



BOOK XL zsf 

rat difcontent. In vain did Columbus endea- 
vour to revive their fpirits by pointing out the 
fertility of the foil, and exhibiting the fpeci- 
mens of geld dailjr brought in from different 
parts of the ifland. They had not patience to 
wait for the gradual returns which the former 
might yield , and the latter they defpifed as 
fcanty and inconfiderable. The fpirit of ddfaf- 
feftion fpread , and a confpiracy was formed, 
Vhich might have been fftal to Columbus and 
the oolony. Happily he difco\iered it, and fei- 
zing the ringleaders, punifhed fome of them, 
fent crthers prifoners into Spain, whither; he 
difpatched twelve of the fhips whjch had ferved 
as tranfports, with an earneft requeft for a re- 
inforcement of men and a large fupply of pro- 
visions t). 

1494. Examines into the ftate or the country. 

Meanwhile , in order to banifh that idlenefit 
which , by allowing his people leifure to brood 
over their difappointment, nourifl ed the fpirit 
of difcontent, Columbus planned feveral expe- 
ditions into the interior part of the country. 
He fent a detachment, under .the command of 
Alonfo de Ojeda, a vigilant and enterprifing 
officer, to vifit the diftrift of Cibao, which was 
faid to yield the, greateft quantity of gold, and 
followed him in perfon with the main body of 
his troops. (March, 12.) In this expedition, 

Hertera , decad, 1, lib, w« cio. u. 



j 5 8 HISTORY OF AMERICA 

he difplayed all the pomp of military magnifi- 
cence that he could exhibit, in order to ftrike 
the imagination of the natives. He marched 
with coloursTlying, with martial mufic, and 
with a fmall body of cavalry that paraded fo- 
metimes in the front and fometimes in the rear. 
As thofe were the firfl: horfes which appeared 
in the New World, they were objefts of terror 
no lefs than of admiration to the Indians , who 
having no tame anifhals themfelves, were un-* 
acquainted with that vaft acceflion of power, 
which man hath acquired by fubjefting them to 
his dominion. They fuppofed them to be ra- 
tional creatures. They imagined that the horfe 
and the rider formed one animal , with whofe 
fpeed they were aftonifhed, and whofe impe- 
tuofity and ftrength they confidered as inrefift- 
ible. But while Columbus endeavoured to in- 
fpire the natives with a dread of his power, he 
did not negleft the arts of gaining their love 
and confidence. He adhered fcrupuloufly to 
the principles of integrity and juftice in all hit 
tranfaftions with them, and treated them, on 
every occafion, not only with humanity, but 
with indulgence. 

The diftria of Cibao anfwered the defcription 
given of it by the natives. It was mountainous - 

and uncultivated, but in every river and brook 

gold was gathered either in duft or in grains^ 
fome of which were of confiderable fize. The^^ 
Indians had never opened any mines in fearcfc* 



BOOK H %5% 

of gold. To penetrate into the bowels of the 
earth , and to refine the rude ore , were opera- 
tions too complicated for their talents and in- 
duftry, and they had no fuch high value for 
gold as to put their ingenuity and invention 
upon the ftretch in order to obtain it u). The 
fmall quantity of that precious metal which they 
poffeffed , was either picked up in the beds of 
the rivers, or wafhed from the mountains by 
the heavy rains that fall within the tropics. But, 
from thofe indications , the Spaniards could ho 
longer doubt that the country contained rich 
treafures in its bowels , of which they hoped 
foon to be mafters w). In order to fectire the 
command of this valuable province, Columbus 
erefted a fmall fort, to which he gave the na- 
me of St. Thomas, by way of ridicule upon fe- 
me of his incredulous followers, who would 
not believe that the country produced gold, un- 
til they faw it with their own eyes, and touch-- 
cd it with their hands x). 

The diftrefs and difaffe&ion of the colony increafe. 

The account of thofe promifing appearance* 
of wealth In "the country of Cibao came very 
feafonably to comfort the defponting colony, 
which was eflFe&ed with diftreffes of various 
kinds. The ftock of provifions which had beett 

u) Qviedo, lib. ii. p. 90. A. 

W) F. Martyr, dec. p. 3*. ' 

3) Herrtra, dec, l, lib, ii. c, 13, Life of Columbus, c, $%. 



160 HlSTO^lf OF AMERICA 

brought from Europe was moftly confumed; 
what remained was fo much corrupted by the 
heat and moifture of the climate , as to be al- 
moft unfit for ufe; the natives cultivated fofmall 
a portion of ground , and with fo little fkill, 
that it hardly yielded what was fufficient for 
their own fubfiftence ; the Spaniards at Ifabella 
had hitherto neither time norleifure to clear the 
foil, fo as to reap any confiderable fruits of their 
own induftry. On all thefe accounts , they be- 
came afraid of perifhing with hunger, and were 
reduced already to a fcanty allowance. At the 
fame time, the difeafes predominant in the tor- 
rid zone, and which rage chiefly in thofe un- 
cultivated countries , where the hand of indu- 
ftry has not opened the waods , drained the 
marfhes , and confined the rivers within a cer- 
tain channel , began to fpread among them. 
Alarmed at the violence and unufual fymptomsof 
thofe maladies, they exclaimed againft Colum- 
bus and his companions in the former voyage, 
who, by their fplendid but deceitful defcriptions 
of Hifpaniola, had allured them to quit Spain 
for a barbarous uncultivated land , where the; 
muft either be cut off by famine , or die of un- 
known diftempers. Several of the officers and 
perfons of note , inftead of checking, joined in 
thofe feditious complaints. Father Boyl, the 
apoftolical vicar, was one of the moil turbulent 
and outrageous. It required all the authority 
and addrefs of Columbus to reeitablifh fubordi- 

nation 



Hook 1 %6t 

nation and tranquillity in the colony* Threat* 
and promifes were alternately employed for this 
purpofe; but nothing contributed more tp foo- 
the the malcontents than the profpeft of finding, 
in the mines of Cibao , fuch a rich ftore of trea- 
fure as would be a recompence for all. their fuf- 
ferings, and efface the memory of former difap- 
pointments. 

Columbia attempts new difcoveries. 

When , by his unwearied endeavours, con* 
cord and order were fo far reftored , that he 
could venture to leave the ifland, Columbus re- 
folved to purfue his difcoveries , that he might 
be able to afcertain whether thofe new countries 
with which he had opened a communication, 
were connected with any region of the earth 
already known , or whether they were to be 
confidered as a feparate portion of the globe, 
hitherto unvifited. He appointed his brother 
Don Diego , with the afliftance of a council of 
officers, to govern the ifland in his abfence; 
and gave the command of a body of foldiers to 
Don Pedro Margarita, with which he was to 
vifit the different parts of the ifland , and en- 
deavour to eftablifh the authority of the Spa- 
niards among the inhabitants. Having left them 
very particular inftruftlons with refpeft to their 
conduit, he weighed anchor on the 24th of April, 
with one fhip and two fmall barks under hist 
command. During a tedious voyage of full five 
Robertson Vol. I. L 



*6a HISTORY OF. AMERICA 

months, he had a trial of almoft all the nume* 
rous hardfhips to which perfons of hisprofefllon 
are expofed, without making any difcovery of 
importance , except the ifland of Jamaica. As 
he ranged along the fouthern coaft of Cuba y), 
he was entangled in a labyrinth formed by aa 
incredible number of fmall iflands, to Vhich he 
gave the name of the Queen's Garden* In this 
unknown courfe , among rocks and fhelves , he 
was retarded by contrary winds, aifaulted with 
furious ftorms, and alarmed with the terrible 
thunder and lightning which is often almoft in- 
cefiant between the tropics. At length his pro- 
vifions fell fhort; his crew, exhaufted with fa- 
tigue as well as hunger, murmured and threa- 
tened , and were ready to proceed to the moft 
defperate extremities againft him. Befet with 
danger in fuch various forms, he was obliged 
to keep continual watch , to obferve every oc- 
currence with his own eyes, to iffue every or- 
der, and to fuperintend the execution of it. On 
no occafion was the extent of his fkill and ex- 
perience as a navigator fo much tried. To thefe 
the fquadron owed fts fafety. But this unre- 
mitted fatigue of body and intenfe application 
of mind , overpowering his conftitution, though 
naturally vigorous and robuft , brought on a fe- 
verifh diforder, which terminated in a lethargy, 

y) Stt NOTt xix, 



BOOK tt i«3 

hat deprived him of fenfe and memory, and 
iad almo^ proved fatal to his life z). 

Sept. 37. On his return, finds his brother Bartholomew 
aC Ifabella. 

But, on his return to Hifpaniola, the fud- 
en emotion of joy which he felt upon Meeting 
/ith his brother Bartholomew at Ifabella, oc- 
afioned fuch a flow of fpirits as contributed 
ready to his recovery. It was now thirteen 
ears fince the two brothers , whom fimilarity 
f talents united in clofe friendfhip, had fepa- 
ited from each other, and during that long 
eriod there had been no intercourfe between 
lem. ^|rtholomew, after finifhing his nego- 
iation irf^he court of England, had fet out for 
pain by the way of France. At Paris he re- 
eived an account of the extraordinary difcove- 
es which his brother had made in his fir ft 
oyage , and that he was then preparing to em- 
ark on a fecond expedition. Though this na- 
irally induced him to purfue his journey with 
le utmoft difpatch , the Admiral had failed for 
lifpaniola before he reached Spain. Ferdinand 
rid Ifabella received him with the refpeft due 
) the neareft kinfman of a perfon whofe merit 
tid fervices rendered him {o confplcuous ; and 
s they knew what confolation Jfeis prefence 

2) Life of Columbus, c. 54. &c. Herrera, dec. 1. lib. ii. 
c. 13. 14, P, Martyr, dec, p. 34. .&c, 

* 

L % 



x6+ HISTORY OF AMERICA 

would afford to his brother, Jihey perfiiaded 
him to take the command of three fhigg , which 
they had appointed to carry provifions to the 
colony at Ifabella *). 

Th« Indiam take arms agalnft th# Spaniards. 

He could not have arrived at any juncture 
when Columbus flood more in need of a friend 
capable of affiiHng him with his counfels, or of 
dividing with him the cares and burden of go- 
vernment. For although the provifions now 
brought from Europe, afforded a temporary re- 
lief to the Spaniards from the calamities of fa- 
mine, the fupply was not in fuch quantity as 
to fupport them long, and the iflanS did not 
hitherto yield what was fufficient for their fu- 
ftenance. They were threatened with another 
danger, ftill more formidable than the return of 
fcarcity , and which demanded more immediate 
attention. No fooner did Columbus leave the 
j±. if and on his voyage of difcovery, than the fol- 
"ifcejrs under Margarita, as if they had been fet 
free from difcipline and fubordination , fcornet 
all reftraint. Inftead of conforming to the pru- 
dent inftni&ions of Columbus, they difperfed 
in ftraggling parties over the ifland, lived at 
difcretion up*>n the natives, wafted their pro- 
vifions, feized 'their women, and treated that 

*) Hcrrcra , dec. i. lib. U. «. 15. 



BOOK a *6$ 

inoffenfive race of men with all the infofence 
of military oppreffion a). 

As long as the Indians had any profpeft 

that their fufferirigs might come to a period by 

the voluntary departure "of the invaders, they 

fubmitted in filence, and diffembled their for- 

row; but they now peifeived that the yoke 

would be as permanent as it was intolerable* 

The Spaniards had built a town , and furroun- 

ded it with ramparts* They had erefted forts 

In different places. They had enclofed and 

fown feveral fields. It was apparent that they 

came not to vifit the country, but to fettle in 

it. Though the number of thofe ftrangers wai 

inconfiderable, the ftate of cultivation among 

this rude people was fo imperfeft , and in fuch 

exaft proportion to their own confumption, that 

ft was with difficulty they could afford fubfi- 

ftence to their new guefts. Their own mode 

of life was fo indolent and inaftive, the warmth 

of the climate fo enervating, the conftitutioro 

of their bodies naturally fc feeble, and fo un- 

accuiiomed to the laborious exertions of indu- 

ftry , that they were fatisfied with a proportion 

«*f food amazingly fmall* A handful of maize, 

or a' little of the infipid bread made of the caf- 

fada root, was fufficient to fupport men, whofe 

ftrength and fpirits were not exhaufted by any 

vigorous efforts either of body or mind. The 

Spaniards, though the molt abftemious of all 

the European nations , appeared to them excef- 

4 P. Martyr, dec. p. 47. 



166 HISTORY OF AMERICA 

lively voracious. One Spaniard confumed as 
much as feveral Indians. This keennefs of ap- 
petite furprifed them fo much , and feemed to 
them to be fo infatiable, that they fuppofed the 
Spaniards had left their own country , becaufe 
it did not produce as much as was requifite to 
gratify their immode^te defire of food, and had 
come among them in quefi: of nourjfhment b). 
Self-prefervation prompted them to wifh for 
the departure of guefts who wafted fo faft their 
f Jender ftock of provifions. The injuries which 
they fuffered, added'to their impatience for this 
event. They had long e:;pe£ted that the Spa- 
niards would retire of their own accord. They 
now perceived that, in order to avert the de- 
ftru&ion wirh which they were threatened, ci- 
ther by the flow confumption of famine, or by 
the violence of their oppreffors, it was necef- 
fary to aflume courage, to attack thofe formi- 
dable invaders with united force, and drive 
Ihem from the fettlements of which they had 
violently taken poffeflion. 

, War with them. 

Such were the fentiments which univerfally 
prevailed among the Indians, when Columbus 
returned to Ifabella. Inflamed by the unpro- 
voked outrages of the Spaniards, with a degree 
of race of which their gentle natures , formed 
to fuOer and fubmit, feemed hardly fufceptible, 

1) ilerrera, dec. i. lib.il. c. 17. 



BOOK II. 167 

they waited only for a fignal from their lea- 
ders to fall upon the colony. Some of the ca- 
ziques had already furprifed and cut off federal 
ftragglers. The dread of this impending danger 
■united the Spaniards , and peeftablifhed the 
authority of Columbus, as they faw no pror- 
fpeft of fafety but in committing themfelves to 
his prudent guidance. • It was now ne'ceflary 
to have recourfe to arms, the employing of 
which againft the Indians, Columbus had hi- 
therto avoided with the greateftfolicitude. Un- 
equal as the conflift may feem, between the 
naked inhabitants of the New World, armed 
with clubs , (ticks hardened in the fire , wooden 
fwords , and arrows pointed with bones or 
flints; and troops accuftomed to the difciplin.e f 
and provided with the inftruments of deftru&ion 
known in the European art of war, the fitua- 
tion of the Spaniards was far from being exempt 
from danger. The vaft fuperiority of the nati- 
ves in number, compenfated many defefts. An 
handful of men was about to encounter a whole 
nation. One adverfe event, or even any unfo- 
refeen delay in determining" the fate of the war, 
might prove fatal to the Spaniards. Confcious 
that fuccefs depended on the vigour and rapidi- 
ty of his operations , Columbus inftantly affem- 
bled his forces. They were reduced to a very 
fmall number. Difeafes, engendered by th© 
warmth and humidity of the country, had ra- 
ged among them with much violence; expe- 



*68 ^HISTORY OF AMERICA 



rience had not yet taught them the art either 
of curing thefe, or the precautions requifite for 
guarding againjt them; two-thirds of the origi- 
nal adventurers were dead, and many of thofe 
who furvived were incapable of fervice c). 

1495. March. 24. 

The body which took the field confifted 
only of two hundred foot, twenty horfes, and 
twenty large dogs ; and how ftrange foever it 
may feem, to mention the laft as compofing 
part of a military force , they were not perhaps 
the leaft formidable and deftruftive of the who- 
le , when employed againft naked and timid In* 
dians. All the caziques of the ifland, Guaca- 
cahari excepted , who retained an inviolable 
attachment to the Spaniards , were in arms to 
oppofe Columbus, with forces amounting, if 
we may believe the Spanifh hiftorians, to a 
hundred thoufand men. Inftead of attempting 
to draw the Spaniards into the faflneffes of the 
woods and mountains , they were fo imprudent 
"as to take their ftation in the Vega Real, the 
mod open plain in the country. Columbus did 
not allow the time to perceive their error, or 
to alter their pofition. He attacked them du- 
ring the night, when undifciplined troops are 
leaft capable of acting with union and concert, 
and obtained an eafy and bloodlefs viftory. The 
confternation with which the Indians were fil- 

*) Life of Columbus t c. 6*. 



BOOK II. 169 

ed by the noife and havoc made by the fire-" 
irms , by the impetuous force of the cavalry, 
.nd the fierce onfefc of the dogs , \vas fo great* 
hat they .threw down their weapons, and fled 
vithout attempting refiftance. Many were flain ; 
aore were taken prifoners, and reduced to fer- 
itude d) ; and fo thoroughly were the reft in- 
Lmidated, that from that moment they aban- 
oned themfelves to defpair, relinquifhing all 
houghts of contending with aggreffors whon^ 
bey deemed invicible, 

A tax impofed upon them. 

Columbus employed feveral months in mar- 
hing through the ifland, and in fubje&ing it 
3 the Spanifh government, without meeting 
/ith any oppofition. He impofed a tribute 
pon all the inhabitants above the age of four- 
een. Each perfon who lived in thofe diftri&s 
/here gold was found, was obliged to pay quar- 
erly as much gold duft as filled a hawk's bell; 
rom thofe in other parts of the country, twen- 
y-five pounds of cotton were demanded. This 
iras the firft regular taxation of the Indians, 
nd ferved as a precedent for exa&ions ftill 
lore intolerable. Such an impofition was ex- 
remely contrary to thofe maxims which Columb- 
us' had hitherto inculcated with refpeft to the 
aod£ of treating them. • But intrigues were 
arrying on in the court of Spain at this junftu- 

4) Sep KQTE XX 



i 7 o HISTORY OF AMERICA 

re, in order to undermine his power and difcre- 
(lit his operations, which conftrained him to 
depart from his own fyftem of adminiftration. 
Several unfavourable accounts of his conduft, 
as well as of the countries difcovered by him, 
had been tranfmitted to Spain. Margarita and 
Father Boyl were now at court; and in order 
to juftify their own conduft, or to gratify their 
refentment, watched with malevolent attention. 
for every opportunity of fpreading infinuations 
to his detriment. Many of the courtiers viewed 
his growing reputation and power with envious 
eyes. Fonfeca, the archdeacon of Seville, who 
was intruded with the chief direftion of Indian 
affairs, had conceived fuch an unfavourable opi- 
nion of Columbus , for fame reafon which the 
contemporary writers have not mentioned, that 
he liftened with partiality to every inveftive 
againft him. It was not eafy for an unfriended 
ftranger , unpraftifed in courtly arts , to count- 
eract the machinations of fo many enemies. Co- 
lumbus faw that there was but one method of 
fupporting his own credit, and of filencing all 
his adverfaries. He muft produce fuch a quan- 
tity of gold, as would not only juftify whit he 
had reported with refpeft to the richnefs of the 
country, but encourage Ferdinand and Ifabella 
to perfevere in profecuting his plans. The ne- 
ceflity of obtaining it; forced him not only to 
impofe this heavy tax upon the Indians , but to 
exaft payment of it with extreme rigour; and 



BOOK II. 171 

may be pleaded in excufe for his deviating on 
this'occafion from the mildnefs and humanity 
with which he uniformly treated that unhappy 
people e). 

Fatal effefts of that n^eafurc. 

The labour, attention, and forefight which 
the Indians were obliged to employ in procur- 
ing the tribute demanded of them , appeared 
the moll intolerable of all evils, to men acru- 
fiomed to pafs their days in a carelefs, impro- 
vident indolence. They were incapable of fuch 
a regular and perfevering exertion of induftry, 
and felt it fuch a grievous reftraint up<fa their 
liberty, that they had recourfe to an expedient 
for obtaining deliverance from this yoke, which 
4.1 em on Urates the excefs of their impatience and 
defpair. They formed a fcheme of llarving thofe 
oppreffors whom they durft not attempt to ex- 
% pel; and from the opinion which they enterv 
tained with refpeft to the voracious appetite of 
the Spaniards, they concluded the execution of 
it to be v^ry practicable. With this view, they 
fufpended all the operations of agriculture; they 
fowed no maize, they pulled up the roots of the 
manioc which were planted, and retiring to the 
molt inacceflible parts of the mountains, left 
the uncultivated plains to their enemies. This 
defperate refolution produced in fome degree 
the effefts which they expefted. The Spaniards 
g) Hewer*, <Jeci, lib. ii. c.i7, 



c 
17a HISTORY OF AMERICA 

were reduced to extreme want; but they recei* 
ved fuch feafonable fupplies of provilions from 
Europe, and found fo many refources in their 
own ingenuity "and induftry, that they fuffered 
no great lofs of men. The wretched Indiana 
were the vi&ims of their own ill-concerted po- 
licy. A vaft multitude , fhup up among barren 
mountains, without any food but the fponta- 
neous productions of the earth , foon fait the 
utmoft diftreffes of famine. This brought on 
contagious difeafes ; and, in the courfe of a few 
months , more than a third part of the inhabi- 
tants of the ifland perifhed, after experiencing 
mifery in all its various forms f ). 

Intrigues againft Columbui in the court of Spain. 

But while Columbus was thus faccefsfully 
eftablifhing the foundations of the Spanifli gran- 
dour in the New World , his enemies laboured 
with unwearied afliduity to deprive him of the 
glory and rewards, which by his fervices and 
fuflerings he was intitled to enjoy. The hard- 
fhips unavoidable in a new fettlement, the ca- 
lamities occafioned by an unhealthy climate, the 
difafters attending a voyage in unknown fe*s» 
were all reprefented as the fruits of his reftlefs 
and inconiiderate ambition. His prudent atten- 
tion topreferve difcipline and fubordinationwas 

f) Herrera, dec. 1. lib. xl. c. ig. Life of Columbus* c. 4l. 
Oviedo , lib. iii. p. 93. D. Beazon Hift, a Nop Orbii , lib. i. 
«. 9. P. Martyr, dee. p. 48. " # 



BOOK n. i 7S 

ominated excefs of rigour; the punifhments 
ich he infltfted upon the mutinous anddiior- 
[y were imputed to cruelty. Thefe accufa- 
ts gained fuch credit in a jealous court, that 
ommlffioner was appointed to repair to Hi- 
riola, and to Infpeft into the conduft of Co- 
ibus. By the recommendation of his ene- 
s , Aguado , a groom of the bed-chamber , 
j the perfoh to whom this important truft 
5 committed. But in this choice they feem 
lave been more influenced by thfc obfequious 
ichment of the man to their intereft, than 
his capacity for the ftation. Puffed up with 
h fudden elevation, Aguftdo difplayed, in 

exercife of this office, all the frivolous felf- 
>ortance, and afted with all the difgufting 
)lence, which are natural to little minds, 
en raifed to unexpe&ed dignity, or employed 
funftions to which they are not equal. By 
ening with eagernefs to every accufation 
iinft Columbus, and encouraging not only the 
Icontent Spaniards, but even the Indians, to 
►duce their grievances , real or imaginary, he 
neqted the fpirit of diffention in the ifland , 
thout eftablifhing any regulation of public uti- 
r, or that tended to redrefs the many wrongs, 
th the odium of which he wifhed to load the 
tniral*s adminiftration. As Columbus felt fen- 
ly how humiliating his fituation muft be , if 

fhould remain in the country while fuch a 
rtial infpeftor obferved his motions , and con- 



i 7 4 HISTORY OF AMERICA 

trouled his jurifdiftion , he took the refolution 
of returning to Spain, in order to lay a full ac- 
count of all his tranfa&ions , particularly with 
refpeft to the points in difpute between him and 
his adverfaries, before Ferdinand and I fab ella, 
from whofe juftice and difcernment he expedted 
an equal and a favourable decifion. He com- 
mitted the adminiftration of affairs, during his 
abfence , to Don Bartholomew, his brother, with 
the title of Adelantado, or Lieutenant-Gover- 
nor. By a choice lefs fortunate, and which pro- 
ved the fource of many calamities to the colony f 
he appointed Francis Roldan chief juftice , with 
very extenfive powers g). 

Returns to Spain. 

(1496) In returning to Europe, Columbus 
held a courfe different from that which he had 
taken in his former voyage. He fleered almoft 
due eaft from Hifpaniola, in the parallel of twen- 
ty-two degrees of latitude; as experience had 
not yet difcovered the more certain and expedi- 
tious method of ftretching to the north, in or- 
der to fall in with the fouthweft winds. By 
this ill-advifed choice , which , in the infancy 
of navigation between the New and Old Worlds, 
can hardly be imputed to the admiral as a defect 
in naval fkill, he was expofed. to infinite fati- 
gue and danger , in a perpetual ftruggle with 
the tradewinds, which blow without variation 

S) Lerrcra , dec, i, lib, ii. c. 18. Lib, iii. c I, 



BOOK tt 175 

from the eaft between the tropics. Notwith- 
ft and j rig the almoft .infuperable difficulties of 
fuch a navigation, he perfifted in his courfe with 
his ufual patience and firmnefs , but made fo 
little way, that he was three months without 
feeing land. At length, his provifions began 
to fail, the crew was reduced to the feanty al- 
lowance of fix ounces of bread a day for each 
perfon. The admiral fared no better than the 
meanelt failor. But, even in this extreme di- 
ftrefs, he retained the humanity which diftin- 
guifhes his charafter , and refufed to comply 
•with the earneft folicitations of his crew , fpme 
of whom propofed to feed upon the Indian pri- 
foners whom they were carrying over, and others 
.infilled to throw them .over-board , in order to 
leflen the confumption of their fmall ftock. He 
reprefented , that they were human beings , re- 
duced by a common calamity to the fame con- 
dition with themfelves, and intitled to fliarean 
equal fate. His authority and remonfirances 
diffipated thofe wild ideas fuggefted by defpair. 
Nor had they time to recur, as be came foon 
within fight of the coaft of Spain, when alltheic 
fears and fufferings ended h). 

His reception there. 

Columbus appealed at court with the mo- 
deft but determined confidence of a man con- 
fcious not only of integrity, but of having per- 
il) Herrtra, dec, 1. lib. iii. «. 1, Life of Columbus, c. #4, 



x 7 6 HISTORY OF AMERICA 

formed great fervices. Ferdinand and Ifabella, 
afhamed of their own facility in lending too fa- 
vourable an ear to frivolous or ill - founded ac- 
cufations , received him with fuch diftinguifhed 
marks of refpe6t, as covered his enemies with 
fhame. Their cenfures and calumnies were no 
more heard of at that junfture. The gold, the 
pearls, the cotton, and other commodities of 
value which Columbus produced , feemed fully 
to refute what the malcontents had propagated * 
with refpeft to the poverty of the country. By 
reducing the Indians to obedience, and impo- 
fing a regular tax upon them, he had fecured to 
Spain a large acceflion of new fubjefts, and the 
eftablifhment of a revenue that promifed to be 
confiderable. By the mines which he had found 
out and examined, a fource of wealth ftill more 
copious was opened. Great and unexpected as 
thole advantages were, Columbus reprefented 
them only as preludes to future acquisitions, 
and as the earneft of more important difcoveries, 
which he ftill meditated, and to which thofe 
he had already made would conduct him with 
eafe and certainty i). 

A plan formed for the more regular eftablifhment of ■ colony. 

The attentive consideration of all thefe cir- 
cumftances made fuch impreffion, not only upon 
Ifabella, who was flattered with the idea of 

being 

i) Lift of Columbus , «. 65. Herrert , dccad. U ttb. iii. c l 



BOOK tt *77 

being the patronefs of all Columbus enterprifes, 
but even upon Ferdinand, who having originally 
exprefled his difapprobation of his fchemes, was 
fiill apt to doubt of their fuccefs , that they re- 
folved to fupply the colony in Hifpaniola with 
every thing which could render it a permanent 
eftablifhment , and to furnifh Columbus with 
fuch a fleet, that he might proceed to fearch for 
thofe new countries , of whofe exiftence he 
feemed to be confident. The meafures moft 
proper for accompliining both thefe defigns we- 
re concerted with Columbus. Difcovery had 
been the fole objeft of the firft voyage to the 
New World; and though, in the fecond fett- 
lement had been propofed , the precautions ta- 
ken for that purpofe had either beeninfuiFicient, 
or were rendered ineffectual by the mutinous 
fpirit of the Spaniards , and the unforefeen ca- 
lamities arifing from various caufes. Now a 
plan was to be formed of a regular colony, that 
might ferve as a model in all future eftablifhments. 
Every particular was confidered with attention, 
and the whole arranged with a fcrupulous ac- 
curacy. The precife number of adventurers who 
fhould be permitted to embark was fixed. They 
were to be of different ranks and profefiions; 
and the proportion of each was eftablifticd , ac- 
cording to their ufefulnefs and the wants of the 
colony. A fuitable number of women w: s to 
be chofen to accompany thefe new fettlers. As 
it was the firft objeft to raife provii.ons in a 
Robertson Vol. I. M 



z 7 8 HISTORY OF AMERICA 

country where fcarcity of food had been the oc- 
cafion of fo much diftrefs, a confiderable body 
of hufbandmen was to be carried over. As the 
Spaniards had then no conception of deriving 
any benefit from thofe productions of the New 
World which have fince yielded fuch large re- 
turn of wealth to Europe, but had formed mag- 
nificent ideas, and entertained fanguine hopes 
with refpeft to the riches contained in the mi- 
nes which had been discovered, a band of work- 
men, f killed in the various arts employed in 
digging and refining the precious metals , was 
provided. All thcfe emigrants were to receive 
pay and fubfiftence for fome years , at the pu- 
blic expence k). 

A defeft In it. 

Thus far the regulations were prudent, and 
well adapted to the end in view. But as it was 
foreieen that few would engage voluntarily to 
fettle in a country, whofe noxious climate had 
been fatal to fo many of their countrymen , Co- 
lumbus propofed to tranfport to Hifpaniola fuch 
malefactors as had been convifted of crimes, 
which, though capital, were of a lefs atrocions 
nature ; and that for the future a certain pro- 
portion of the offenders ufually fent to the gal-* 
lies , f hould be condemned to labour in the mi- 
nes which were to be opened. This advice 9 
given without due reflection, was as inconfide- 
k) Herrera, dec, j. lib.iii. c. a. 



BOOK -It tfy 

rately adopted. The prifons of Spain were drai- 
ned f in order to colleft members for the inten- 
ded colony; and the judges were inftrufred to 
tecruit it by their future fentences. It is not* 
however, with fuch materials, that the foun- 
dations of a fociety, deftined to be permanent* 
fhould be laid, Induftry, fobriety, patience, 
and mutual confidence are indifpenfably requi- 
fite in an infant fettlement , where purity df 
morals muft contribute more towards eftablifhing 
order, than the operation or authority of laws. 
But when fuch a mixture of what is corrupt is 
admitted into the original conftitution- of the po- 
litical body , the vices of thofe unfound and in- 
curable members will probably infeft the whole, 
and muft certainly be productive of violent and 
unhappy effe&s. This the Spaniards fatally ex- 
perienced; and tlSfe other European nations ha- 
ving fuccefflvely imitated the practice of Spain 
in this particular, pernicious confequences have 
followed in their fettlements , which can be im- 
puted to no other caufe 1). 

Executed flow. 

Though Columbus obtained, with great fa- 
cility and difpatch, the royal approbation of eve- 
ry tneafiire and regulation that he propofed , his 
endeavours to carry them into execution were fa 
long retarded, as muft have tired out the pa- 

J) Hen-era , dec. I, lib. iii. c. a. Touron Hift. Gener. de l*A* 
merique , i. p. 51. 

M a 



j«o HISTORY OP AMERICA 

tience of any man, left accuftomed to encoun- 
ter and to furmount difficulties. Thofe delays 
•were occafioned partly by that tedious formality 
and fpirit of procraftination , with which the 
Spaniards conduft bufinefs, and partly by the 
exhaufted ftate of the treafury, which was drai- 
ned by the expence of celebrating the marriage 
of Ferdinand and Ifabelia's only fon with Marga- 
ret of Auftria, and that of Joanna, their fecond 
daughter, with Philip archduke of Auftria m); 
but muft be chiefly imputed to the malicious arts 
of Columbus's enemies. Aftonif *ed at the rece- 
ption which he met with upon his return , and 
overawed by his prefence, they gave way, for 
fome time , to a tide of favour too ilrong for 
them to oppofe* Their enmity, however, wa* 
too inveterate to remain long inaftive. They 
refumed their operations , atld by the afliftance 
of Fonfeca, the minifter for Indian affairs, who 
was now promoted to the bifhopric of Badajos , 
they threw in fo many obftacles to protraft the 
preparations for Columbus's expedition, that a 
year elapfed before he n) could procure two 
fhips to carry over a part of the fupplies defi- 
ned for the colony, and almoft two years were 
fpent before the fmall fquadron was equipped 
of which he himfelf was to take the com* 
mand o). 



m) P. Mart, epifr. ifig. 

ii) Life of Columbus , c. 6$. 

e) hcrrera, dec. 1. lib, 1... #»9, 



BOOKS, *$i 

Third voyage of Columbus* 

(1498) The fquadron confifted of fix fhipt* 
only , of no great burden , and but indifferently 
-provided for a long or dangerous navigation. 
The voyage which he now meditated was in a 
courfe different from any he had undertaken. 
As he was fully perfuaded that the fertile region* 
of India lay to the fouthweft df thofe countries 
which he had difcovered, he propofed, as the 
moft certain method of finding out thefe, to 
Hand direttly fouth from the Canary or C^pe de 
Verd ifands, until he came under the equinoc- 
tial line, and then to ftretch to the weft before 
the favourable wind for fuch a courfe, which 
blows invariably between the tropics. (May 30.) 
With this idea he fet fail, and touched firft at 
the Canary, and then at the Cape de Verd iflancfs. 
(July 4.) From the former he diQpatched three 
pf his fhips with a fupply of provifions for the 
colony in Hifpaniola: with the other three, h& 
continued his voyage towards the fouth. No 
remarkable occurrence happened until they arri- 
ved within five degrees of the line. (July 19.) 
There they were becalmed, and at the fame ti- 
me the heat became fo exceflive, that many of 
their wine cafks burft, the liquor in others four- 
ed , and their provifions corrupted p). The Spa- 
niards, who had never ventured fo far to the 
fouth, were afraid that the fhips would take fire, 
and began to apprehend the reality of what the 
• p) P. Martyr, dec. p, 70. 



*8* HISTORY OF AMERICA 

ancients had taught concerning the deftruftive 
qualities of that torrid region of the globe. 
They were relieved, in fome meafure 9 ' from 
their fears by a feafonable fall of rain. This, 
however, though fo henvy and unintermitting 
that the men could hardly keep the deck, dic| 
pot greatly mitigate the intenfenefs of the heat. 
The Admiral , who with his ufuai vigilance had 
in per ion direfted every operation, from the be- 
ginning of the voyage, was fo much exhaufted 
by fatigue and want of fleep, that it brought 
on a violent lit of the gout, accompanied with 
a fever. All thefe circumftances conftrained 
him to yield to the importunities of his crew, 
and to alter his courfe to the north -weft, in 
order to reach of the Caribbee iflapds, where 
he might relit, and be fupplied with provifions. 

Difcovers the continent of America. 

On the firft of Auguft, the man ftationed 
in the round top furprifed them with the joyful 
cry of land. They flood towards it, and difco- 
vered a confiderable ifland, which the Admiral 
called Trinidad , a name it ilill retains. It lies 
on the coatt of Guiana, near the mouth of the 
Orinoco. This , though a river only of the 
third or fourth magnitude in the New World,, 
far furpafles any of the ftreams in our hemi- 
fpnere. It rolls towards the ocean fuch a vaft 
body of water, and rufhes into it with fuch 
impetuous force, that when it meets the tide, 



BOOK U. $ g 9 

which on that coaft rifes to an uncommon height, 
their collifion occafions a fwell and agitation of 
the waves no lefs furprifing than formidable. In 
this conflift , the irrefiftible torrent of the rivejr 
fo far prevails , that it frefhens the ocean many 
leagues with its flood q). Columbus, before 
Jie could perceive the danger, was entangled 
among thofe adverfe currents and tempeftuous 
^waves, and it was with the utmoft difficulty 
that he efcaped through a narrow ftrait, which 
appeared fo tremendous, that he called it La 
Poca del Drago, As foon as the confternatton 
which this occ^fioned permitted him to refleft 
upon the nature of an appearance fo extraordi- 
nary , he decerned in it a fource of comfort and 
hope. He juftly concluded, that fuch a yaft 
body of water as this river contained, could 
not be fupplied by any ifland , but muft fio\jr 
through a country of immenfe extent , and of 
confequence, that he was now arrived at that 
continent which it had long been the objedt of 
his wifhes to difcover, Full of this idea, he 
flood to the weft along the coaft of thofe pro- 
vinces \irhich are now known by the names of 
Paria and Cumana. He landed in feveral places, 
and had fome intercourfe with the people, who 
refembled thofe of Hifpaniola in their appearance 
and manner of life. They whore, as orna- 
ments, fmall plates of gold and pearls of con- 
siderable value , which they willingly exchange^ 

£ Gamiila Hift. ie. Y Orenocpie , torn, i. p. 14* 



184 HISTORY OF AMERICA 

for European toys. They feemed to poflefs 
a better underftanding, and greater courage, 
than the inhabitants of the iflands. The coun- 
try produced four-footed animals of feveral 
kinds, as well as a great variety of fowls and 
fruits r). The admiral was fo much delighted 
with its beauty and fertility, that with the 
warm enthufiafm of a dicoverer, he imagined 
it to be the paradife defcribed in Scripture, 
which the Almighty chofe for the refidence of 
man, while he retained innocence that rendered 
him worthy of fuch a habitation s). Thus Co- 
lumbus had the glory not only of difcovering to 
mankind the exiftence of a New World, but 
made confiderable progrefs towards a perfeft 
knowledge of it; and was the firft man who 
conducted the Spaniards to that vaft continent 
which has been the chief feat of their empire, 
and the fource of their treafures in this quarter 
of the globe. The fhattered condition of his 
fhips, fcarcity of provifions, his own infirmi- 
ties, together with the impatience of his crew, 
prevented him from purfuing his difcoveries any 
farther, and made it neceffary to bear away for 
Hifpaniola. In his way thither he difcovered 
the iflands of Cubagua and Margarita, which 
afterwards became remarkable for their pearl- 
lifhey. (Auguft 30.) When he arrived at Hi- 

r) Herrera, dec. I. lib. iii. c. 9. 10. 11. Life of Columbus, 

c 66-73- 
s) Herrera, dec, I. lib. iii, c. 12. Goinaft, c. 84. Sec NOTE 

XXI. 



BOOK n. i85 

fpaniola, he was wafted to an extreme degree 
with fatigue and ficknefs; but found the affairs 
of the colony in fuch actuation, as afforded 
him no profpeft of enjoying that repofe-oS 
which he flood fo much in need. 

State of Hifpaniola on his arrival there. 

Many revolutions had happened in that coun* 
try during his ab fence. His brother, the Ade- 
lantado , in confequence of an advice which the 
Admiral gave before his departure, had remo- 
ved the colony from Ifabella to. a more commo* 
dious ftation, on the oppofite fide of the ifland* 
and laid the foundation of St. Domingo u), which . 
was long the moft confiderable European town 
in the New World, and the feat of the fupreme 
courts in the Spanifh dominions there. As foon 
as the Spaniards were eftablifhed in this new 
fettlement, the Adelantado, that they might 
neither languifh in aftivity, nor have leifure to 
form new cabals, marched into thofe parts of 
the ifland which his brother hat not yet vifited 
or reduced to obedience, As the people were 
unable to refift, they fubmitted every where to 
the tribute which he impofed. But they foon 
found the burden to be fo intolerable, that, 
overawed as they were by the fuperior power 
of their oppreflbrs, they took arms againft them, 
Thofe in furreftions, however, were not formic 

u) P. Martyr, decad. p, 56. 



* 



*8<S HISTORY OF AMERICA 

dable. A conflift with timid and naked Indian* 
was neither dangerous nor of doubtful Lflfue. 

Mutiny of Roldan. 

But while the Adelantado was employed 
againft them in the field , a mutiny, of an 
afpeft far more alarming, broke out among the 
Spaniards. The ringleader of it was Francis 
Roldan, whom Columbus had placed in a fta- 
tion which required him to be the guardian of 
order and tranquillity in the colony. A turbu- 
lent and inconfiderate ambition precipitated him 
into this defperate meafure , fo unbecoming his 
rank. The arguments which he employed to 
feduce his countrymen were frivolous and ill- 
founded. He accufed Columbus and his two 
brothers of arrogance and feverity; he preten- 
ded that they aimed at eftablifhing an indepen- 
dent dominion in the country; he taxed them 
with an intention of cutting off part of the Spa- 
niards by hunger and fatigue, that they might 
more eafily reduce the remainder .to fubjeftion; 
he reprefented it as unworthy of Caftilians, to 
remain the tame and paflfive (laves of three Ge- 
noefe adventurers. As men have always a pro- 
penfity to impute the hardfhips, of which they 
feel the prcffure, to the mifconduft of their ru- 
lers ; as every nation views with a jealous eye 
the power and exaltarion of foreigners, Rol dan's 
insinuation made a deep impreilion on his coun- 
trymen. His character and rank added weight 



B O O £ II. 187 

,to them. A confiderable number of the Spa- 
niards made choice of him as their leader ; and 
taking arms againft the Adelantado and his bro- 
ther, feized the king's magazine of provifions, 
j und endeavoured to furprife the fort a St. Do- 
jningo. This was preferved by the vigilance 
' anil courage of Don Diego Columbus. The mu- 
tineers were obliged to retire to the province 
, of Xaragua, where they continued not only to 
: difclaim the Adelantado's authority themfelves, 
' but excited the Indians to thr<*w off the yoke w). 
Such was the diftrafted ftate of the colony 
when Columbus landed at St f Domingo. IJe 
was aftonifhed to find that the three fhips which 
lie had difpatched from the Canaries were not 
yet arrived. By the unfkilfulnefs of the pilots, 
$nd the violence of currents, they had been 
parried a hundred and fixty miles to the weft 
of St. Domingo , and forced to take f helter in 
£ harbour of the province of Xaragua % where 
Roldan and his feditious followers weft canto- 
ned. Roldan carefully concealed from the 
pommanders of the fhips his infurreftion againft 
the Adelantado , and employing his utmoft ad- 
drefs to gain their confidence, perfuaded them 
$0 fet on fhore a confiderable part of the neyr 
fetflers whom they brought over , that they 
^night proceed by land to St. Domingo. It re- 
quired but few arguments to prevail with thofe 

nr) Herrert, dec l lib. fit. c. 5 - 8. Life of Columbus , c. 74 - ?T« 
ixomara^ *, 33. 9. Martyr , p. 78. 



*88 HISTORY Of AMERICA 

men to efpoufe his caufe. They were, the re- 
fufe of the jails of Spain , to whom idlenefs, 
licentioufnefs, and deeds of violence , were fa- 
miliar; and they returned eagerly to a courfe 
of life nearly refembling that to which they had 
been accuftomed. The commanders of the fhips 
perceiving, when it was too late, their impru- 
dence in difembarking fo many of their men, 
flood away for St. Domingo , and got fafe into 
the* port a few days after the Admiral ; but their 
ftock of provifions*was fo wafted during a voy- 
age of fuch long continuance, that they brought 
little relief to the colony x). 

Compofed by the prudent conduft of Columbus. 

By this junftion with a band of fuch bold 
and defperate affociates, Roldan became extre- 
mely formidable, and no lefs extravagant in his 
demands. Columbus, though filled with refent- 
ment at his ingratitude , and highly exafperated 
by the infolence of his followers , made no hafte 
to take the field. He trembled at the thoughts 
of kindling the flames of a civil war, in which, 
whatever party prevailed , the power and ftrength 
of both muft be fo much wafted, as might en- 
courage the common enenfy to unite and com- 
plete their deftruftion. At- the fame time, he 
obferved, that the prejudices and paflions which 
incited the rebels to take arms, had fo far in- 
felted thofe who ft ill adhered to him, that ma- 

*) Henerft, decad. 1. lib, iii, c, 13. Life of Columbus , c. 78. 79* 



BC OK It 139 

9 

* iiy of them were adverfe, and all Cold to the 
i fervice. From fach fentiments , with refpeft to 
: the public in tereft, as well as from this view of 
; his own fituation, he chofe to negociate rather 
z than to fight. By a feafonable proclamation > 
-: offering free pardon to fuch as fhould merit it 
r by returning to* their duty, he made impreflion 
? upon fome of the malcontents. By engaging to 
i grant fuch as fhould defire in the liberty of re- 

* turning to Spain, he allured all thofe unfortu- 
. Hate adventurers , who , from ficknefs and dis- 

• appointment, were difgufted with the country. 
. By promifmg to reeftablifh Roldan in his for- 
mer office , he foothed his pride ; and by com* 

' plying with mod of his demands in behalf of his 
r followers , he fatisfied their avarice. Thus, gra- 
dually and without bloodfhed , but after many 
tedious negociations, he diflblved this dangerou* 

• combination which threatened the colony with 
ruin; and reftored the appearance of order, re- 
gular governments, and trailquillity y). 

A new mode of fettlemcnt eftablifhed, 

(1499) In confequence of this agreement 
With the mutineers, lands were allotted them 
in different parts of the ifland , and the Indian* 
fettled in each d lit rift were appointed to culti- 
vate a certain portion of ground for the ufe of 
thofe new mafters. The performance of this 

y) Hcrrera, dec. I. tib* kl «. 13. 14. Life «f frlumfcis 

«. So, fee. 



ipo HISTORY OF AMERICA 

work was fubftituted in place of the tribute for- 
merly impofed ; and how neceflacy foever fuch 
a regulation might be in a flckly and feeble co- 
lony, it introduced among the Spaniards the 
Repartimientos , or diftributions of Indians efta- 
blifhed by them in all their fettlements, which 
brought numberlefs calamities upon that unhap- 
py people, and fubjefted them to the moft griev- 
ous oppreffion z). This was not the only bad 
eflett of^ the infurreftion in Hifpaniola ; it pre- 
vented Columbus from profccuting his difcove- 
ries on the continent, as felf-p refer vation ob- 
liged him to keep near his perfon his brother 
the Adelantado, and the failors whom he intend- 
ed to have employed in that fervice. As foon 
as his affairs would permit, he fent fome of his 
fhips to Spain with a journal of the voyage which 
he had made, a defcription of the new coun- 
tries which he had difcovered , a chart of the 
coaft along which he had failed , and fpecimens 
of the gold , the pearls , and other curious or 
valuable productions which he had acquired by 
trafficking with the natives. At the fame time 
he tranfmitted an account of the infurreftion in 
Hifpaniola; he accufed the mutineers not only 
of having thrown the colony into fuch violent 
convulfions as threatened its diffolution, but of 
having obftrufted every attempt towards difco- 
very and improvement, by their unprovoked re* 
bellion again it their fuperior, and propofed fe- 

c) Herren, dec. i. lib. Hi. c. 14. &c. 



BOOK II. 29* 

■ral regulations for the better government of 
le ifland, as well as the extin&ion of that mu- 
nous fpirit, which, though fupprefled at pre- 
mt , might foon burft out with additional rage, 
oldan and his aflbciates did not negleft to con* 
?y to Spain by the fame fhips, an apology 
■r their own condutt, together with their re- 
'iminations upon the Admiral and his brothers, 
nfortunately for the honour of Spain, and the 
ippinefs of Columbus, the latter gained moft 
edit in the court of Ferdinand and lfabella, and 
■oduced unexpected effefts a), 

ie voyage df Vafco de Gam a to the Eaft Indies , by the Cape 
of Good Hope. 

But, previous to thefe events had appened 
hich merit attention, both on account of their 
vn importance, and their conneftion with the 
ftory of the New World, While Columbus 
is engaged in his fucceffive voyages to the 
;ft, the fpirit of difcovery did not languifh in 
rtugal, the ^kingdom where it firft acquired 
jour, and became enterprifing. Self-condem- 
tion and regret were not the only fenti merits 
which the fuccefs of Columbus , and refle- 
on upon their own imprudence in reje&ir.g 
s propbfals, gave rife among the Portuguefe. 
ley excited a generous emulation to furpafs 
3 performances , and an ardent defire to make 

Herrem, dec. I, liY.iii. CI4* Banzon. Hifh Nov. Or*. 
lib.i. c.9. 



i 9 a HISTORY OF AMERICA 

fome reparation to their country for their own 
error. With this view, Emmanuel, who in- 
herited the enterprifing genius of his predecef- 
fors , perfifted in their grand fcheme of opening 
a paffage to the Eaft Indies by the Cape of Good 
Hope ; and foon after his accefiion to the throne, 
equipped a fquadron for that important voyage. 
He gave the command of it to Vafco de Gama, 
a man of noble birth , poffeffed of virtue , pru- 
dence and courage, equal to the ftation. The 
fquadron, like all thofe fitted out for difcovery 
in the infancy of navigation, was extremely 
feeble, confiding only of three veifels, of nei- 
ther burden nor force adequate to the fervice. 
As the Europeans were at that time little ac- 
quainted with the courfe of the trade-winds and 
periodical monfoons, which render navigation 
in the Atlantic ocean, as well as in the fea that 
feparates Africa from India, at fomefeafons eafy, 
and at others not only dangerous, but a! moil 
inprafticable, the time chofen for Garna's de- 
parture was the moft improper during the whole 
year. (1497) He fet fail from Lifbon on the 
ninth of July, and landing towards the fouth, 
had to ftrnggle for four months with contrary 
winds, before he could reach the Cape of Good 
Hope. (Nov. so.) Here their violence began to 
abate; and during an interval of calm weather, 
Gama doubled that formidable promontory, which 
had \o long been the boundary of navigation, 
and directed his courfe towards the north-cat. 

alonj 



BOOK tt 193 

along the African coaft. He touched at feveral 
ports; and after various adventures, which the 
Portuguefe hiftorians relate with high butjuft 
encomiums upon his conduft and intrepidity , 
he came to anchor before the city of Melinda. 
Throughout all the vaft countries which extend 
along the coaft of Africa, from the river Sene- 
gal to the confines of Zanguebar, the Portu- 
guefe had found a race of men rude. and uncul- 
tivated , ftrangers to letters , to arts and com- 
merce, and differing from the inhabitants of Eu- 
rope, no lefs in their features and complexion, 
than in their manners and inftitutions. . As they 
advanced from this, they obferved , to their in- 
expreflible joy, that the human form gradually 
altered and improved , the Afiatic features be- 
gan to predominate, marks of civilization ap- 
peared, letters were known-, the Mahometan 
religion was eftablifhed , and a commerce , far 
from being inconiiderable, was carried on. At 
that time feveral vefiels from India were in the 
port of Melinda. Gama now purfued his voyage 
with almoft abfolute certainty of fuccefs , and* 
under the conduft of a Mahometan pilot, arrived 
at Calecut, upon the coaft of Malabar, on the 
twenty-fecond of May one thoufand four hun- 
dred and ninety eight. What he beheld of the 
wealth, the populoufnefs , the 'cultivation, the 
induftry and arts of this highly civilized coun- 
try , far furpaffed any idea that he had formed* 
from the imperfeft accounts which the Eurp- 
Robertson Vol. I. N 



*94 HISTORY OF AMERICA 

peans had hitherto received of it. Bat as he 
poffeffed neither fufficient force to attempt a 
fettlement, nor proper commodities with which 
he could carry on commerce of any confequence, 
he haftened back to Portugal , with an account 
of his fuccefs in performing a voyage the Ion- 
geft, as well as moil difficult, that had ever 
teen made fince the firft invention of navigation. 
He landed at Lifbon on the fourteenth of Se- 
ptember one thoufand four hundred and ninety- 
nine, two yeans two months and five days from 
the time he left that port a). 

Thus , during the courfe of the fifteenth 
century, mankind made greater progrefs in ex- 
ploring the ftate of the habitable globe, than in 
all the gges which had elapfed previous to that 
period. The fpirit of difcovery, feeble .at firft 
and cautious , moved, within a very narrow fphe- 
re , and made its efforts with hefitation and ti- 
midity. Encouraged by fuccefs , it became ad- 
venturous , and boldly extended its operations. 
In the courfe of its progreffion, it continued to 
acquire vigour, and aivanced at length with a 
rapidity and force which burft through all the 
limits within which ignorance and fear had hi- 
therto circumfcribed the nftivity or the human 
race. Almoft fifty years were employed by the 
Portugucfe in creeping along the coaft of Africa 
from Cape Non to Cape de Verd, the latter of 
which lies only twelve degrees to the fouth of 

a) Ramufio, vol, i. Up. D. 



BOOK fl. 195 

the former. In lefs than thirty years they ven- 
tured beyond the equino&ial line into another 
hemifphere , and penetrated to the fouthern ex- 
tremity of Africa, at the diftance of fourty-nine 
degrees from Cape de Verd. Daring the lafl: 
feven years of,the century, a New World was 
difcovered in the weft, not inferior in extent to 
all the parts of the earth with which mankind 
were at that time acquainted. In the eaft, un- 
known feas aod countries were found out, and 
a communication , long defired , but hitherto 
concealed, was opened between Europe and the 
opulent regions of India. In comparifon with 
events fo wonderful and unexpe&ed, all that 
had hitherto been deemed great or fplendid* 
fade : d away and difappeared. Vaft objefts now 
prefented themfelves. The human mind, rouzed 
and interefted by the profpeft, engaged with 
ardour in purfuit of them, and exerted its aftive 
powers in a new direftion. 

Difcovcries carried on in Spain by private adventurers. 

This fpirit of enterprife , though but newly 
awakened in Spain, began foon to operate ex- 
tenfively. All the attempts towards difcovery 
made in that kingdom , had hitherto been car- 
ried on \>y Columbus alone , and at the expence 
of the fovereign. But now private adventurers* 
allured by the magnificent defcriptions he gave 
of the regions which he had vifited , as well as 
by the fpecimens of their wealth which he pro- 
" N a 



t 9 6 HISTORY OF AMERICA 

duced, offered to fit out fquadrons at their own 
rifk, and to go in queft of new countries. The 
Spanifh court, whofe fcanty revenues were ex- 
hausted by the charge of its expeditions to the 
New World , which , though they opened vaft 
profpefts of future benefit, yielded a very fpar- 
ing return of prefent profit, was extremely wil- 
ling to devolve the burden of difcovery upon its 
fubjefts. It feized with joy an opportunity of 
rendering the avarice , the ingenuity and ef- 
forts of projectors, inftrumental*in promoting 
defigns of certain advantage to the public, though 
of doubtful luccefs with refpeft to themfelves. 

Ojeda the firft of thefe. 

One of the firft propofitions of this kind 
was made by Alonfo de Ojeda , a gallant and 
aftive officer, who had accompanied Columbus 
in his fecond voyage. His ranfc and charafter 
procured him fuch credit with the merchants of 
Seville , that they undertook to equip four fhips, 
provided he could obtain the royal licence, au- 
thorifing the voyage. The powerful patronage 
of the bifhop of Badajos eafily fecured fuccefe 
in a fuit fo agreable to the court. Without 
confulting Columbus, or regarding the rights 
and jurifdi&ion which he had acquired by the 
capitulation in one thoufand four hundred and 
ninety-two , Ojeda was permitted to fet out for 
the New World. . In order to direft his courfe, 
the bifhop communicated to him the Admiral'* 



B O O K H. *97 

journal of his laft voyage, and his charts of the 
countries which Jie had difcovefed. (1499 May.) 
Ojeda ftruck out into no new path of navigation, 
but adhering fervilely to the route which Co* 
lumbus had taken, arrived on the coaft of Paria. 
He traded with the natives, and Handing to the 
weft, proceeded as far as Cape de Vela, and 
ranged along a confiderable extent of coaft be-» 
yond that on which Columbus had touched. Ha- 
ving thus afcertained the opinion of Columbus, 
that this country was a part of the continent, 
Ojeda returned (1499. Oftober) by way of Hi- 
fpariiola to Spain, with fome reputation as a du 
fcoverer, but with little benefit to thofe who 
had raifed the funds for the Expedition b). 

Is accompanied by Amerigo Vefpucci. 

Amerigo Vefpucci, a Florentine gentleman, 
accompanied Ojeda in this voyage. In what fta-r 
tion he ferved , is uncertain ; but as he was an 
experienced failor , and eminently fkilfttl in all 
the fciences fubfervient to navigation* he feems 
to have acquired fuch authority among his com- 
panions, that they willingly allowed him to have 
a chief fhare in direfting their operations during 
the voyage. Soon after his return, he fcranfmit- 
ted an^iccount of his adventures and. difcoveries 
to one of his countrymen ; and labouring with 
the vanity of a traveller to magnify his own«ex- 
ploits, he had the addrefs and confidence to Jaw* 

b) Herrera , dec 1. lib. iv. c, 1-3. 



i 9 8 HISTORY OF AMERICA 

xne his narrative, fo as to make it appear that 
he had the glory of having firft difcovered the 
continent in the New World. Amerigo's account 
was drawn up not only with art, but with fo- 
me elegance. It contained an amufing hiftory 
of his voyage, and judicious obfervations upon 
the natural productions, the inhabitants, and 
the cuftoms of the countries which he. had vi- 
fited. As it was the firft description of any part 
of the New World that was publifhed , a per- 
formance fo well calculated to gratify tfie paf- 
fion of mankind for what is new and marvellous, 
circulated rapidly, and was read with admira- 
tion. 

From whom the name oFAmerica is given to the New WoiiJ. 

* The country of which Amerigo was fuppo- 
fed to be the difcoverer, came gradually to be 
called by his name. The caprice of mankind, 
often as unaccountable as unjuft , has perpe- 
tuated this error. By the univerfal cflnfent of 
nations, America is the name bellowed on this 
new quarter of the globe. The bold pretenfions 
of a fortunate impoftor have robbed the difcove- 
rer of the New World of a diftin&ion which 
belonged to him. The name of Amerigo has 
fupplanted that of Columbus ; and mantynd may 
regret an aft of injuftice, which, having recei- 
ved the fan&ion of time , it is now too late to 
reft c). ' 

let MOTE XXII. 



BOOK II. i 99 

Voyage of Alonfo Nigno. 

During the fame year, another voyage of 
difcovery was undertaken. Columbus not only 
introduced the fpirit of naval enterprife iftto 
Spain, but all the firft: adventurers who diftiri- 
guifhed themfelves in this new cateer/vvere form- 
ed by his inftruftions, and acquired in his voya- 
ges the fkill and information which qualified 
them to imitate his example. Alonfo Nigno, 
who had ferved under the Admiral in his laft 
expedition, fitted out, in conjunction withChri- 
ftopher Guerra, a merchant of Seville, a fingle 
fhip, and failed to the to aft of Paria. This voya- 
ge fcems to have been condufted with, greater 
attention to private emolument, than to any 
general or national objeft. Nigno and Guerra 
made no difcoveries of any importance; but they 
brought home fuch a return of gold and pearls , 
as inflamed their couptrymen with the defire of 
engaging in fimilar adventures d). 

Of Vincent Yaaez Pinion. 

(1500. January 13.) Soon after, Vincent Ya- 
nez Pinzon, one of the Admiral's companions in 
his firft voyage, failed from Paios with four fhips. 
He ftood boldly towards the' fouth, and was the 
firft Spaniard who ventured to crofs the equino- 
ctial line ; but he feems to have landed on no 
part of the coaft beyond the mouth of the Ma- 

* d) P. Martyr, dec. p. 87. Herrera, dec. I. lib. iy. c. 5. 



aoo HISTORY OF AMERICA 

ragnon, or river of the Amazons. 4^11 thefe 
navigators adopted the erroneous theory of Cot 
lumbus , and believed that the countries which 
tliry had difcovered were part of the vaft conr 
tinent of India e). 

r The Portugucfe difcover BrafiL 

During the laft year of the fifteenth centu- 
ry, that fertile diftrift of America, on the con- 
fines of which Pinzon had ftope fhort , was 
more fully difcovered. The fuccefsful voyage 
of Gama to the Eaft Indies having encouraged 
the king of Portugal to fit out a fleet fo power- 
ful, as not only to carry on trade, but to at- 
tempt conqueft, he gave the command of it to 
Pedro Alvarez Cabral. It order to av'oid the 
coaft of Africa , were he was certain Of meeting 
with variable breezes , or frequent calms, which 
might retard his voyage , Cabral ftcod out to 
fea, and kept fo far to the weft, that> to his 
furprife, he found himfelf upon the fhore of an 
unknown country, in the tenth degree beyond 
the line. He imagined, at firft , that it was 
fome ifland in the Atlantic ocean hitherto un- 
obferved; but, proceeding along its coaft for 
feveral days, he was led gradually to believe, 
that a country fo extenfive formed a part of fo- 
me great continent. This latter opinion was 
well founded. The country with which he fell 
in belongs to that province in South America 

«) Hcrrera , dec. I. lib. iv. c. 6. P. Ma;tyr , dec. p. 95. 



BOOK IT. aoi 

now known by the name of Brafil. He landed ; 
and having formed a very high idea of the fer- 
tility of the foil, and agreeablenefs of the cli- 
mate, he took poffeffion of it for the crown of 
Portugal, and difpatched a fhip to Lifbon with 
an account of this event, which appeared to be 
no lefs important than it was unexpe&ed f)„ 
■ Columbus's difcovery of the New World was the 
effort of an aftive genius, enlightened by fcien- 
ce, guided by experience , and afting upon a 
regular plan, executed with no lefs courage 
than perfeverance. But from this adventure of 
'the Portuguefe, it appears that chance might 
'have accomplifned that great defign, which^it 
•is now the pride of human reafon to have for- 
med and perfefted. If the fagacity of Colum- 
bus had not condufted mankind to America, Ca- 
*bral, by a fortunate accident, might have led 
them a few years latter, to the knowledge of 
that extenfive continent g). 

Machinations againft Columbus. 

While the Spaniards and Portuguefe, by 
thofe fucceffive voyages , were daily acquiring 
more enlarged ideas of the extent and opulence 
of that quarter of the globe which Columbus 
had made known to them, he himfelf, far from 
enjoying the tranquillity and honours with which 
his fervices fhould have been recompensed, wa* 

f) Herrera, dec. I. lib. iv. c. 7. 

g) Herrera, dec. 1. lib. vii. c. 5. 



202 HISTORY OF AMERICA 

Struggling with every diftrefs in which the envy 
and malevolence of the people under his com- 
mand , or the ingratitude of the court which be 
ferved, could involve him. Though the paci- 
fication with Roldau broke the union and week- 
ened the force of the mutineers , it did not ex- 
tirpate the feeds of difcord out of the ifland. 
Several of the malcontents continued in arms, 
refuting to fubmit to the Admiral. He and his 
brothers were obliged to take the field alterna- 
tely, in order to check their incurfions, . or to 
punifh their crimes. The perpetual occupation 
and difquiet which this created , prevented him 
from giving due attention to the dangerous ma- 
chinations of his enemies in the court of Spain. 
. A good number of fuch as were moft diffatisfied 
Vv ith his ad mini ft ration , had embraced the op- 
portunity of returning to Europe with the Chips 
which he difpatched from St. Domingo* The 
(inal difappointment of all their hopes inflamed 
the rage of thefe infortunate adventurers againfi 
Columbus to the utmoft pitch. Their poverty 
and diftrefs, by exciting compaffion, rendered 
their accufations credible, and their complaints 
interefting. They teazed Ferdinand and Label- 
la inceffantly with memorials, containing the 
detail of their own grievances, and the articles 
of their charge againfi Columbus. Whenever 
cither the king or queen appeared in public, 
they furrounded them in a tumultuary manner, 
infilling with importunate clamours forpaymenc 



BOOK II, ao 3 

c arrears due to them, and demanding 
ance upon the author of their fufferings. 

infulted the Admiral's fons wherever they 
:hem, reproaching them as the offering 
* projector, whofe fatal curiofity had dico- 

thoie pernicious regions which drained 

of its wealth, and would prove the grave 
people. Thefe avowed endeavours of the 
ntents front America to ruin Columbus, 
feconded by the fecret, but more dange- 
nfinuations of that party among the cour- 

which had always thwarted his fchemes, 
nvied his fuccefs and credit h),* 

Their influence on Ferdinand and lfabella. 

erdinand was difpofed to liften , not only 
a willing, but wit a partial ear, to thefe 
itions. .Notwithftanding the flattering ac- 
s which Columbus had given of the riches 
nerica, the remittances from it had hither- 
m fo fcanty , that they fell far fbdrt of de- 
g the expence of the armaments fitted out. 
;lory of the difcovery , together with the 
i& of remote commercial advantages, was 
it Spain had yet received in return for the 
\ which fhe had made. But time had al- 
diminifhedthefirftfenfations of joy which 
tlfcovery of a New World occafioned , and 
alone was not an objeft to fatisfy the cold 
Red mind of Ferdinand. The nature of 

fc of Columbus * c. &5, 



ao 4 HISTORY OF AMERICA 

commerce was then fo little uriderftood , I 
where immediate gain was not acquired, 
hope of diftant benefit, or of flow and mod* 
returns, was totally difregarded. Ferdi: 
considered Spain, on this account, as ha 
loft by the enterprife of Columbus , and it 
ted it to • his mifconduft and incapacity fol 
vernment, "that a country abounding in 
had yielded nothing of value to its conque 
Even Ifabella, who, from the favourable 
nion which fhe entertained of Columbus, 
uniformly protected him , was fbaken at lc 
by the number and boldnefs of, his accafers, 
began to fufpeft that a difaffe&ion fo ge 
rcuft have been occafioned by real grieva 
which called for redrefs. The bifhop of I 
jos , with his ufual animofity againft Coluti 
encouraged thefe fufpicions, and confirmed t 

Fatal effefts of this. 

As foon as the queen began to give w 
the torrent of calumny, a refolution fatal i 
lumbus was taken. Francis de Bovadill 
knight of Calatrava , was appointed to rep; 
Hifpaniola, with full powers to inquire int 
conduft of Columbus, and, if he fhouh 
the charge of mal - adminiftration proved , i 
.perfede him, and affume the government c 
ifland. It was impoflible to efcape conde 
tion , when, this prepofterous commifllon 
it the intereft of the judge to profliounce th< 



B O OK II. aos 

^fon whom he was fent to try, guilty. Though 
Columbus had now compofed all the dilTenfions 
in the ifland ; though he had brought both Spa- 
niards and Indians to fubmit peaceably to 0s 
government; though he had made fuch effeftual 
j>rovifion for working the mines , and cultiva- 
: ting the country, as would have fecured a con- 
fiderable revenue to the king, as well as large 
profits to individuals, Bovadilla, without deig- 
ning to attend to the ftature or merit of thole 
fervices, difcovered, from the moment that he 
landed in Hifpaniola, a determined purpofe of 
" treating him as a criminal. . He took poffeffion 
jj5.-.of the Admiral's houfe in St. Domingo, from 
Jk, which its mailer happened at that time to be 
^ftptbfent, and (eized his effe&s, as if his guilt 
bad been already fully proved; Jie rendered 
fcimfelf mafter of the fort and of the king's (lo- 
res by violence ; he require^ all perfons to 
Acknowledge him as fupreme governor ; he fet 
I at liberty the prifoners confined by the Admiral, 
I', and fummoned him to appear before his tribu- 
5 na!^ in order to anfwer for his conduft , tranf- 
} . mitting to him together with flie fummons , a 
l copy of the royal mandate , by which Columbus 
r was enjoined to yield implicit obedience to his 
commands. 

Columbui fent in chains to Spain, 

Columbus , though deeply affefted with the 
ingratitude and injuftice of Ferdinand and Ifa- 



ao6 HISTORY OF AMERICA • 

bella , did not hefitate a moment about his own 
conduct He fubmitted to the will of his fo- 
vereigns with a refpectful filence, and repaired 
dUfeftly to the court of that violent and partial 
judge whom they had authorifed to try him. Bo- 
vadilla, without admitting him into his prefence, 
ordered him inftantly to be arretted, to be loa- 
ded with chains, and hurried on board a fhip. 
Even under this humiliating reverfe of fortune, 
the firmnefs of mind ^hich diftinguifhes the 
character of Columbus, did not forfake him. 
Confcious of his own integrity, and folacing- 
himfelf with reflefting upon the great things 
which he had atchieved, he endured this infult 
offered to his character, not only with compo- 
ftire , but with dignity. Nor had he the con- 
folation of fympathy to mitigate his fufferiogs. 
Bovadilla had already rendered himfelf fo extre- 
mely popular, by granding various immunities 
to the colony, by liberal donations of Indians 
to all who applied for them , and by relaxing 
the reins of difcipline and government, that the 
Spaniards, who \vere mottly adventurers, whom 
their indigence or crimes had impelled to aban- 
don their native country, exprcfled the mod in- 
decent fatis faction with the difgrace and inpri- 
fonment of Columbus. They flattered themfel- 
ves, that now they fhould enjoy an uncontroll- 
ed liberty, more fultabie^to their difpofition 
and former habits of life. Arnpng perfons thus 
prepared to cenfure the proceedings, and to 



BOOK E 207 

afperfe the character of Columbus, Bovadilla 
collected the materials for a charge againft him. 
All accufations, the moft improbable, as well' 
as inconfiftent, were received. No informer, 
however infamous, was rejetted. The refult 
of this inqueft, no lefs indecent than partial, 
he tranfmitted to Spahv At the fame time, he 
ordered Columbus , with his two brothers , to 
be carried thither in fetters; and, adding cruel- 
ty to infult, he confined them in different fhips, 
and excluded them from the comfort of that 
friendly intercourfe which might have foothed 
their common diftrefs. But while the Spaniards 
in Hifpaniola viewed the arbitrary and infolent 
proceedings of Bovadilla with a general appro- 
bation, which reflefts difhonour upon their na- 
me and country, one man flill retained the me- 
mory of the great a&ions which Columbus had 
performed, and was touched with the fentiments 
of veneration and pity due to his rank, his age, 
and his merit. Alonfo de Vallejo, the captain 
of the veffel on board which the Admiral was 
confined , as foon as he was clear of the ifiand, 
approached his prifoner with great refpeft, and 
offered to releafe him from the fetters with 
which he was unjuftty loaded. „No, " replied 
Columbus, with a generous indignation, „I wear 
theljB irons in confequence of an order from my 
fovereigns, They fhall find me as obedient to 
this as to their other injunctions. By their 



*o8 HISTORY OF AMERICA 

command I have been confined , and their com- 
mand alone fhall fet me at liberty i). *' 

Set at liberty, but deprived of all authority. 

Fortunately, the voyage to Spain was ex- 
tremely fhort. As foon as Ferdinand and Ifa- 
bella were informed that Columbus was brought 
home a prifoner, and in chains, perceived at 
once what univerfal aftonifhment this event muft 
occafion , and what an impreffion to their difad- 
vantage it muft make. * All Europe , they fore- 
faw, would be filled with indignation at this 
ungenerous requital of a man who had perfor- 
med aftions worthy of the higheft recompence, 
and would exclaim againft the injuftice of the 
nation , to which he had been fuch an eminent 
bcnefa&or, as well as againft the ingratitude 
of the princes whofe reign he had rendered il- 
luftrious. Afhamed of their own conduft, and 
eager not only to make fome reparation for this 
injury, but to efface the ftain which it might 
fix upon their charafter, they inftantly iffued 
orders to fet Columbus at liberty, invited him 
to court, and remitted money to enable him to 
appear there in a manner fuitable to his rank. 
When he entered the royal pre fence, Columbus 
threw himfelf at the feet of his fovereigns. He 
remained for fome time filent; the various paf- 

fiow 

i) Life of Columbus, c. 86. Herrera, dec. I. lib. W. c.ft-£I» 
Ciomara Hift. c. 23. Oviedo, lib. Ui. c. 6. 



BOOK! sop 

floss which agitated his mind f up pr effing his 
power of utterance. At length he recovered 
himfelf, and vindicated his conduct in a long 
difcourfe, producing the molt fatisfying proofs 
of his own integrity as well as good intention* 
and evidence, no lefs clear, of the malevolence 
of his enemies, who, not fatisfied with having 
ruined his fortune, laboured to deprive him of 
' what alone was now left , his honour and his 
fame. Ferdinand received him with decent ci- 
vility, and Ifabella with tendernefs and refpeft* 
They both expreffed their forrow for what had 
happened , difavowed their knowledge of it, 
and joined in promifing him proteftion and fu- 
- ture favour. But though they inftantly degra- 
I &ed Bovadilla, in order to remove from them- 
: , felves any fufpicion of having authorifed his 
{ violent proceedings , they did not reftore to Co- 
j lumbus his jurifdi&ioft and privileges as viceroy 
•' of thofe countries which he had discovered. 
4 Though willing to appear the avengers of Co- 
i' lumbus's wrongs ; that illiberal jealoufy , which 
prompted them to inveft Bovadilla with fuch 
authority as put it in his power to treat the 
. Admiral with indignity , ftill fubfiiled. They 
were afraid to truft a man to whom they were 
£o highly indebted , and retaining him at court 
under various pretexts, they appointed Nicho- 
las de Ovando, a knight of the military ordes 
of Alcantara , governor of Hifpaniola k)* 

k) Herrera, dec. I. lib. iv. c, 10*13, Life of Columbus , «. $?• 

Robertson Vol. L O 



aio HISTORY OF AMERICA 

Columbus was deeply affefted with this new 
injury, which came from hands that feemed to 
be employed in making reparation for his paft 
fufferings. The fenfibility with w r hich great 
minds feel every thing that implies any fufpi- 
cion of their integrity, or that wears the afpeft 
of an affront, is exquifite. Columbus had ex- 
perienced both from the Spaniards; and their 
ungenerous conduit exafperated him to fuch a 
degree , that he could no longer conceal the 
fentiments which it excited. Wherever he 
went, he carried about with him, as a memo- 
rial of their ingratitude, thofe fetters with which 
he had been loaded. They were conftantly 
hung up in his chamber, and he gave orders 
that when he died, they fhould be buried in 
his grave 1). 

Progrefs of difcovery. January 1501. 

Meanwhile, the fpirit of difcovery, not- 
withftanding the fevere check which it received 
by the ungenerous treatment of the man who 
firft excited it in Spain, continued aftive and 
vigorous. Roderigo de Baftidas , a perfon of 
diftin&ton, fitted out two fhips in co-partnery 
with John de laCofa, who having ferved under 
the Admiral in two of his voyages, was deem- 
ed the moft fkilful pilot in Spain. They fleer- 
ed direftly towards the continent, arrived on 
the coaft of Paria , and proceeding to the weft, 

. 3) Life of Columbus , c. 86. p. 577. 



BOOK" II. ait 

discovered all the coaft of the province now 
known by the name of Tierra Firma, from Cape 
de Vela to the gulf of Darien. Not long after 
Ojeda, with his former affociate Amerigo Ve- 
fpucci fet out upon a fecond voyage , and being 
unacquainted with the deftination of Baftidas, 
held the fame courfe, and touched at the fame 

. places. The voyage of Baftidas was profperoua 
and lucrative, that of Ojeda, unfortunate. But 
both tended to increafe the ardour of difcovery ; 
for in proportion as the Spaniards acquired a 
more extenfive knowledge of the American con* 

, tinent, their idea of its opulence and fertility 
increafed m). 

O van do appointed governor of Hifpaniola, 

Before thefe adventurers returned from theic 
voyages , a fleet was equipped at the public 
^expence , for carrying over Ovando , the new 
governor, to Hifpaniola." His prefence thera 
-was extremely requifite, in order to ftop the 
inconfiderate career of Bovadilla , whofe impru- 
dent adminiftration threatened the fettlement 
-with ruin. Confcious of the violence and ini- 
quity of his proceedings againft Columbus, he 
continued to make it his^fole objeft to gain the 
favour and fupport of his countrymen, by ac- 
commodating himfelf to their paffions and pre- 
judices. With this view, he eftablifhed regu- 
lations , in every point the reverfe of thof# 

jo) Herrem, dec. I. lib. iv. c. II. 

o » 



aia HISTORY OF AMERICA 

which Columbus deemed effential to the profpe- 
rity of the colony. Inftead of the fevere difci- 
pline , neceffary in order to habituate the diffo- 
lute and corrupted members of which the focie- 
ty was compofed to the reftraints of law and 
fubordination , he fuffered them to enjoy fuch 
uncontrolled licence, as encouraged the wildeft 
exceti.es. Inftead of protecting the Indians, he 
gave a legal fan&ion to the oppreilion of that 
unhappy people* He took the exaft number 
of fuch as furvived their paft calamities, divi- 
ded them into diftintt claffes, diftributed them 
in property among his adherents, and reduced 
all the people of the ifland to a ftate of comple- 
te fervitude. As the avarice of the Spaniards 
was too rapacious and impatient to- try any me- 
thod of acquiring wealth but that of fearching 
for gold , this fervitude became as grievous as 
it was unjuft. The Indians were driven in 
crowds to the mountains , and compelled to 
work in the mines by matters, who impofed 
their tafks without mercy or difcretion. La- 
bour, fo difproportioned to their ftrength and 
former habits of life, wafted that feeble race of 
men , with fuch rapid confumption , as muft ha- 
ve foon terminated in the utter extin&ion of the 
ancient inhabitants of the country n). 

11) Hfrrera, cW. i. lib. iv, o. Jr. &c. Oviedo Hift, lib.iii. c.6. 
y. <p7- Beiizcm 1 1 i ft . lib. i. < , is. y. 51. 



B O K II. *I3 

Kcw regulations eftabiifhed. 150a. 

The neceffity of applying a fpeedy remedy 
to thofe disorders, haftened Ovando's departure. 
He had the command of the rroft refpeftable ar- 
mament hitherto fitted out for the New World. 
It confifted of thirty -two fhips, on board of 
which two thoufand five hundred perfons em- 
barked, with an intention of fettling in the 
country. Upon the arrival of the new gover- 
nor with this powerful reinforcement to the co- 
lony, Bovadilla refigned his charge, and was 
commanded to return inftantly to Spain, in or- 
der to anfwer for his conduft. Roldan, and 
the other ringleaders of the mutineers, who 
had been molt aftiye in oppofing Columbus, 
were required to leave the ifland at the fame 
time. A proclamation was ilTued, declaring the 
natives to be free fubje&s of Spain, of whom 
no fervice was to be exafted contrary to their 
own inclination , and without paying them an 
adequate price for their labour. With refpeft 
to the Spaniards themfelves , various regulations 
were made , tending to fupprefs the licentious 
fpirit which had been fo fatal to the colony, 
and to eftablifh that reverence for law and or- 
der on which fociety is founded , and to which 
it is indebted for its increafe and ftability. In 
order to limit the exorbitant gain which private 
perfons were fuppofed to make by working the 
mines, an ordinance was publifhed, directing 
all the gold to be brought to a public fmelting- 



*i 4 HISTORY OF AMERICA 

houfe, and declaring one half of it to be the 
property of the crown o). 

The difagreeable foliation of Columbus. 

While thefe fteps were taking for fecuring 
the tranquillity and welfare of the colony which 
Columbus had planted, he himfelf was engaged 
in the unpleafant employment of foliciting the 
favour of an ungrateful court, and, notwith- 
standing all his merit and fervices, he folicited 
in vain. He demanded, in terms of the origi- 
nal capitulation in one thoufand four hundred 
and ninety -two, to be reinitiated in his office 
of viceroy over the countries which he had dis- 
covered. By a ftrange fatality, the circumftance 
which he urged in fupport of his claim , deter- 
mined a jealous monarch to rejeft it. The 
greatneft of his difcoveries, and the profpeft of 
their increafing value, made Ferdinand confider 
the conceilions in the capitulation as extrava- 
gant and impolitic. He was afraid of entrusting 
a fubjeft with the exercife of a jurifdiftion that 
now appeared to be fo extremely extenfive, and 
might grow to be no lefs formidable. He infpi- 
red Ifabella with the fame fufpicions ; and un- 
der various pretexts , equally frivolous and un- 
juft, they eluded all Columbus's requifitions to 
perform that which a folemn treaty bound them 
to accomplif i . After attending the court of 

o) Solorrano Politica Indiana, lib. i. c.jS. Hcrrera, dec.x. 
lib. iv. c. 12. 



BOOK tt ai 5 

Spain for near two years, as an humble fuitor, 
he found it impoffible to remove Ferdinand's 
prejudices and apprehenfions ; and perceived, at 
length , that he laboured in vain when he urged 
a claim of juftice or merit with an interefted 
and unfeeling prince. 

He forms new fchemes of difcovery. 

But even this ungenerous return did not 
difcourage him from purfuing the great objeffc 
"which firft called forth his inventive genius, and 
excited him to attempt difcovery. To open a 
new paflage to the Eaft Indies was his original 
and favourite fcheme. This ftill engrafted his 
thoughts; and, either from his own observa- 
tions in his voyage to Paria, or from fome ob- 
fcure hint of the natives , or from the accounts 
given by Baftidas and de la Cofa of their expe- 
dition, he conceived an opinion that, beyond 
the continent of America, there was a fea 
which extended to the Eaft Indies, .and hoped 
to find fome ftrait or narrow neck of land , by 
which a communication might be opened with 
it and the part of the ocean already known. 
By a very fortunate conjefture , he fuppofed 
this ftrait or ifthmus to be fituated near the gulf 
of Darien. Full of this idea, though he was 
new of an advanced age, worn but with fati- 
gue , and broken with infirmities , he offered, 
with the alacrity of a youthful adventurer , to 
undertake a voyage which wotdd ascertain thi* 



216 HISTORY OF AMERICA 

important point, and perfeft the grand fcheme 
which from the beginning he propofed to ac- 
romplifi. Several circumftances concurred in 
difpofing Ferdinand and Ifabella to lend a favou- 
rable ear to his propofal. The were glad to 
Inve the pretext of any honourable employment 
for removing from court a man with whofe de- 
mand* they deemed it impolitic to comply, and 
whofe fervices it was indecent to negleft. ' 
Though unwilling to reward Columbus, they 
were not infenfible of his merit, and from their 
experience of his fkill and conduft, had reafon 
to give credit to his conje&ures, and to confide 
in his fuccefs. To thefe confiderations , a third 
inuft be added of ftill more powerful influence. 
About this time the Portuguefe fleet, under 
Cabral, arrived from the Indies; and, by the 
richnefs of its cargo, gave the people of Eu- 
rope a more perfeft idea than they had hitherto 
been able to form , of the opulence and fertility 
of the eaft. The Portuguefe had been more 
fortunate in their difcoveries than the Spaniards. 
They had opened a communication with coun- 
tries where induftry, arts, and elegance flou- 
rifhed; and where commerce had been longer 
eftablifhed, and carried to greater extent, than 
in any region of the earth. Their firft voyage 
thither yielded immediate, as well as vaft re- 
turns of profit, in commodities extremely pre-* 
cious and in great requefr. Lifbon became im- 
tliately the feat of commerce and of wealth; 



BOOK II, ^17 

while Spain had only the expectation of remote 
benefit, and of future gain, from the weftern 
world. Nothing, then, could be more acce- 
ptable to the Spaniards than Columbus's offer to 
conduft them to the eaft, by a route which he 
expe&ed to be frorter, as well as lefs danger- 
ous, than that which the Portuguefe had taken. 
Even Ferdinand was roufed by fuch a profpeft, 
and warmly approved of the undertaking. 

His fourth voyage. 

But, interefting as the objett of this voyage 
was to the nation , Columbus could procure on- 
ly four fmall barks, the largeft of which did not 
exceed feventy tons in burden , for performing 
it. Accuftomed to brave danger, and to engage 
in arduous undertakings with inadequate force, 
he did not hefitate to accept the command of 
this pitiful fquadron. His brother Bartholomew, 
and his fecond fon Ferdinand, the hiftorian of 
his aftions, accompanied him. He failed from 
Cadix on the ninth of May, and touched, as 
ufaal, at the Canary iflands; from thence he 
purpofed to have ftooddireftly for the continent; 
but his largeft veffel was fo clumfy and unfit for 
fervice , as conftrained him to bear away for 
Hifpaniola, in hopes of exchanging her for foma 
fhip of the fleet that had carried out Ovando. 
(June 29.) When he arrived off St. Domingo , 
lie found eighteen of thefe fhips ready loaded, 
and on the point of departing for Spain. Co- 



21$ HISTORY OF AMERICA 

lumbus immediately acquainted the governor with 
the deftination of his voyage, and the accident 
which had obliged him to alter his route. He 
requefted permiflion to enter the harbour, not 
only that he might negociate the exchange of 
his Chip , but that he might take fhelter during 
a violent hurricane , of which he difcerned the 
approach from various prognoftics, which his 
experience and fagacity had taught him to ob- 
ferve. On that account, he advifed him like- 
wife to put off for fome days the departure of 
the fleet bound for Spain. But Ovando refufed 
his requeft , and defpifed his counfel. Under 
circumftances in which humanity would have 
afforded refuge to a ftranger, Columbus was de- 
nied admittance into a country of which he had 
difcovered the exiftence , and acquired the pof- 
feflion. His falutary warning, which merited 
the greateft attention, was regarded as the dream 
of a vifionary prophet, who arrogantly pretend- 
ed to p redid an event beyond the reach of hu- 
man forefight. The fleet fet fail for Spain. Next 
night the hurricane came on with dreadful im- 
petuofity. Columbus, aware of the danger, took 
precautions againft it , and faved his little fqua- 
dron. The fleet deftined for Spain met with the 
fate which the rafhnefs and obftinacy of its com- 
manders deferved. Of eighteen fhips two or 
three only efcaped. In this general wreck pe- 
ri fhed Bovadilla, Roldan, and the greater part 
ef thofe who had been the mojk aftive in perfe- 



BOOK II. aiy 

curing Columbus, and opprefling the Indians. 
Together with themfelves, all the wealth which 
they had acquired by their injuftice and cruelty 
was fwal lowed up. It exceeded in value two 
hundred thoufand pefos ; an immenfe fum at that 
period , and fufficient not only to have fcreened 
them from any fevere fcrutiny into their c6n- 
duft, but to have fecured them a gracious re- 
ception in the Spanifh court. Among the fhips 
that efcaped, one had on board all the effefts 
of Columbus whici had been recovered from the 
wreck of his fortune, Hiftorians, ftruck with the 
exaft difcrimination of charafters, as well as the 
juft diftribution of rewards and punSfhments > 
confpicuous in thofe events, univerfally attri- 
bute them to an immediate interpofition of divine 
Providence, in order to avenge the wrongs of 
an injured man, and to punifh the oppreflbrs of 
an innocent people. Upon the ignorant and fu- 
perftitious race of men , who were witneffes of 
this occurrence, it made a different impreffion. 
From an opinion, which vulgar admiration is 
apt to entertain with refpeft to perfons who 
have diftinguifhed themfelves by their fagacity 
and inventions, they believed Columbus to be 
poffeffed of fupernatural powers , and imagined 
that he had conjured up this dreadful ftorm by 
magical art and incantations, in order to be aveng- 
ed of his enemies p). 

p) Oviedo, lib. Hi. c. 7. 9. Hcrrera , dec. 1. lib. v. c. 3. 3. 
Life of Columbus , c. 2g. 



aao HISTORY OF AMERICA 

Searches in vain for a paftage to the Indian Ocean. 

(July 34.) Columbus foon left Hifpaniola, 
where he met with fuch an inhofpitable rece- 
ption , and ftood towards the continent After 
a tedious and dangerous voyage , he difcovered 
Guanaia, an ifland not far diftant from the coaft 
of Honduras. There he had an interview with 
fome inhabitants of the continent, who arrived 
in a large canoe. They appeared to be a people 
more civilized, and who had made grea er pro- 
grefs in the knowledge of ufqfpl arts , than any 
whom he had hitherto difcovered. In return to 
the inquiries which he Spaniards made, with 
their ufual eagernefs , concerning the places 
where the Indians got the gold which they wore 
by way of ornament, they direfted them to coun- 
tries fituatcd to the weft, in which gold was 
found in fuch profufion , that in was applied to 
the moft common ufes. Inftead of ftee:ing in 
queft of a country fo inviting, which would have 
condufted him along the coaft of Yucatan to the 
rich empire of Mexico, Columbus was fo bent 
upon his favourite fcheme of finding out that 
ftrait which communicated with the Indian ocean, 
that he bore away to the eaft towards the gulf 
of Darien. In this navigation he difcovered all 
the coaft of the continent, from Cape GrAcias 
a Dios , to a harbour which , on account of its 
beauty and fecurity, he called Porto Bello. He 
fearche ', in vain, for the imaginary ftrait, through 
whicn he expefted to make his way into an on* 



BOOK IT. aai 

known fea ; and though he went on fhore feve- 
ral times, and advanced into the country, ha 
did not penetrate fo far as to crofs the narrow 
ifthmus which feparates the gulf of Mexico from 
the great fouthern ocean. He was fo much de- ' 
lighted, however, with the fertility of the coun- 
try , and conceived fuch an idea of its wealth , 
from the fpecimens of gold produced by the na- 
tives , that he refolved to leave a fmall colony 
upon the river Belem, in the province of Veragua, 
under the command of his brother, and to return 
himfelf to Spain , in order to procure what was 
requifite for rendering the eftablifnment per- 
manent. (1503.) But the ungovernable ipi- 
rit of the people under his command, deprived 
Columbus of the glory of planting the firft co- 
lony on the continent of America. Their info- 
lence and rapacioufnefs provoked the natives to 
take ar^s, and as thefe were a more hardy and 
warlike race of men than the inhabitants of the 
iflands , they cut off part of the Spaniards , and 
obliged the reft to abandon a ftation which was 
found to be untenable q). 

Shipwrecked on the coaft of Jamaica. 

This repulfe, the firft that the Spaniards 
met with from any of the American nations, 
was not the only misfortune that befel Colum- 
fcus; it was followed by a fucceffion of all the 

4) Hcrrcra , dec, i. lib. v. e, 5, &c. Life of Columlus, c. 89. 
&c. OyUdo , l.b. ii.. e. 9. 



£22 HISTORY OF AMERICA 

difafters to which navigation is expofed. Fu- 
rious hurricanes , with violent ftorms of thun- 
der and lightning, threatened his leaky veffels 
with deftru&ion ; while his difcontended crew, 
exhaufted with fatigue and deftitute of provi- 
fions, was unwilling or unable to execute bis 
commands. One of his fhips perifhed ; he was 
obliged to abandon another, as unfit for fervice; 
and with the two which remained , he quitted 
that part of the continent which in his anguifh 
he named the Coali: of Vexation r), and bore 
away for Hifpaniola. New diftrefles awaited 
him in this voyage. He was driven back by a 
violent tempeft from the coaft of Cuba, his fhips 
fell foul of one another, and were fo much Chat- 
tered by the fhock , that with the utmoft diffi- 
culty they reached Jamaica (June 24.), where 
he was obliged to run them aground, to prevent 
them from finking. The meafure of his cala- 
mities feemed now to be full. He was caft 
afhore upon an ifland at a confiderable diftance 
from the only fertlement of the Spaniards in 
America, His flips were ruined beyond the 
poilibility of being repaired. To convey an ac- 
count of his fttuation to Hifpaniola, appeared 
impracticable: and without this it was vain to 
expert relief. His genius, ferule in refources, 
and moit vigorous in thoie perilous extremities 
when feeble minds ab-ndon themfelves to de- 
(pair, discovered the only expedient which af-» 
A La Co&* ct Ice Ccaci&et, 



B O O K U. aa S 

forded any profpeft of deliverance. He had re- 
course to the hofpitable kindnefs of the natives, 
who confidering the Spaniards as beings of a 
fuperior nature, were eager on every occafion, 
to minifter to their wants. From them he ob- 
tained two of their canoes , each formed out of 
the trunk of a fingle tree, hollowed with fire, 
and fo misfhapen and aukward as hardly to me- 
rit the name of boats. In the, which were fit 
only for creeping along the coaft, or croffing 
from one fide of a bay to another, Mendez, a 
Spaniard, andFiefchi, aGenoefe, two gentle- 
men particularly attached to Columbus, gallan- 
tly offered to fet out for Hifpaniola , upon a 
voyage of above thirty leagues s). This they 
accomplifhed in ten days , after furtnounting in- 
credible dangers, and enduring fuch fatigue, 
that feveral of the Indians who accompanied 
them funk under it, and died. The attention 
paid to them by the governor of Hifpaniola was 
neither fuch as their courage merited , nor the 
diftrefs of the perfons from whom they came, 
required. Ovando, from a mean jealoufy of Co- 
lumbus, was afraid of allowing him to fet his 
foot in the ifland under his government. This 
ungenerous paflion hardened his heart againft 
every tender fentiment, which reflection upon 
the fervices and misfortunes of that great man, 
or compaflion for his own fellow-citizens invol- 
ved in the fame calamities, muft have excited. 

s) Oviedo, Jib. UK c. 9. 



aa 4 HIST t OR^ OF AMERICA 

Mendez and Fiefchi Ipent eight months in : 
citing relief for their commander and affocia 
without any pro fp eft of obtaining it* 

His diftrefs and fuffe rings there. 

During this period, various paflions ag 
ed the mind of Columbus and his coropan 
in adverfity. At firft the expeftation of fp« 
deliverance, from the fuccefs of Memiez 
Fiefchi's voyage, cheered the fpirits of the i 
defponding. After fome time the more timo: 
began to fufpeft that they had mifcarried in t 
daring attempt (1504) At length, all coacli 
they had perifhed. The ray of hope which 
broke in upon them , made their condition 
pear now more difmal. Defpair, height en e< 
difappointment, fettled in every breaft. T 
laft refource had failed , and nothing remai 
but to end their miferable days among, nakec 
yages , far from their country and their frie 
The feamen , in a tranfport of rage, rofe in 
mutiny, threatened the life of Columbus, wl 
they reproached as the author of all their c 
mities, feized ten canoes, which he had ] 
chafed from the Indians , and defpifing his 
monftrances and entreaties , made off with tl 
to a diftant part of the ifland. At the fam< 
me, the natives murmured at the long refide 
of the Spaniards in their country. As their 
duftry was not greater than that of their ne: 
hours in Hifpaniola, like them, they found 

bui 



HISTORY OF AMERICA. 223 

burden of fupporting fo many ftrangers to be 
altogether intolerable. They began to bring 
In provifions with reluftance*, they furnifhed 
them with a fparing band , and threatened to 
withdraw thofe fupplies altogether. Such a re- 
fblntion muft quickly have been fatal to the 
Spaniards. Their fafety depended upon the 
good will of the Indians; and unlefs they could 
revive the admiration and reverence with which 
that fimple people had at firft beheld them, de- 
finition was unavoidable. Though the licen- 
tious proceedings of the mutineers had, in a 
great meafure, effaced thofe impreflions which 
had been fo favourable to the Spaniards, the 
ingenuity of Columbus fuggefted a happy arti- 
fice, that not only reftored but heightened the 
high opinion which the Indians had originally 
entertained of them. By his fill in aftrono- 
my, he knew that there was fhortly 'to be a 
total eclipfe of the moon. He aiTembled all the 
principal perfons of the diftrift around him 
on the day before" it happened, and, after re- 
proaching them for their ficklenefs in withdraw- 
ing their aflfc&ion andaffiftance from men whom 
they had lately revered, he told them, that 
the Spaniards were fervants of the Great Spirit 
Who dwells in heaven , who made and governs 
the world; that he, offended at their refufing to 
fupport men who were the objefts of his pe- 
culiar favour , was preparing to punifh this 
-crime with exemplary fe verity , and that very 
Robertson Tom. II. P 



226 HISTORY OF AMERICA. 

night the moon fhonld wichhold her light, and 
appear of a bloody hue, as a fign of the divine 
wrath , and an emblem of the vengeance ready 
to fall upon them. To this marvellous predic- 
tion fome of them Hftened with the carelefs 
indifference peculiar to the people of America: 
others, with the credulous aftonifhment natural 
to barbarians. But when the moon began gra- 
dually to be darkened, and at length appeared 
of a red colour, all were ftruck with, terror. 
They ran with confternation to their houfes, 
and returning inftantly to Columbus loaded with 
provifions, threw them at his feet, conjuring 
him to intercede with the Great Spirit to avert 
the deftruftion with which they were threat- 
ened. Columbus, feeming to be moved by 
their entreaties, promifed to comply with their 
defire. The eclipfe went off, the moon reco- 
vered its fplendour, and from that day the Spa- 
niards were not only furnifhed profufely with 
provifions, but the natives, with fuperftitions 
attention, avoided every thing that could give 
them offence, t) 

A cruel addition to them. 

During thofetrania&ions, the mutineers had 
made repeated attempts to pafs over to Hifpa- 
niola in the canoes which they had feized. But, 
from their own mifconduft, or the violence of 

t) Life of Columbus, c. 103. Herrera, dec. I. lib. ji. c. 
5. 6. Benzort Hift. lib. i. c. 14* 



HISTORY OF AMERICA. 327 

the winds and currents, their efforts were all 
uniuccefsful. Enraged at this difappointment,. 
tbcy marched towards that part of the ifland 
Where Columbus remained , threatening him 
with new infults and danger. While they were 
advancing ,• an event happened, more cruel and 
afflifting than any calamity which he dreaded 
from them. The governor of Hifpaniola , whofe 
mind was ftill filled with fome dark fufpicions 
of Columbus, fent a fmall bark to Jamaica, not 
to deliver his diftreffed countrymen, but to fpy 
out their condition. Left the fympathy of thofe 
whom he employed fhould afford them re- 
lief, contrary to his intention, he gave the 
command of this veffel to Efcobar, an invete- 
rate enemy of Columbus , who adhering to 
his inftruftions with malignant accuracy, cafl: 
anqhor at fome diftance from the ifland, ap- 
proached the fhore in a fmali boat, obferved the 
wretched plight .of the Spaniards, delivered a 
letter of empty compliment to the admiral, re- 
ceived his anfwer, and departed. When the 
Spaniards firft defcried the veffel ftanding 
towards the ifland , every heart exulted , 
as if the long-expe&ed hour of their deli- 
verance had at length- arrived ; but when it 
dtfappeared fo fuddenly , they funk into the 
deepeft dejeftion , and all their hopes died 
away. Columbus alone, though he felt moft 
fenfibly this wanton infult which Ovando added 
to his paft negleft, retained fuch compofure of 
P z 



aa8 HISTORY OF AMERICA. 

mind, as to be able to cheer his followers. He 
allured them , that Mendez and Fiefchi reached 
Hifpaniola in fafety; that they would fpeedily 
procure fhips to carry them off; but as Efco- 
bar's veffel could not take them all on board, 
that he had refufed to go with her, becaufe he 
was determined never to abandon the faithful 
companions of his diftrefs. Soothed with his 
apparent generofity in attending more to their 
prefervation than to his own fafety, their fpi- 
rits revived, and he regained their confidences) 
Without this confidence, he could not have 
refilled the mutineers, who were now at hand. 
All his endeavours to reclaim thofe defperate 
men had no effeft but to increafe their frenzy. 
Their demands became every day more extra- 
vagant, and their intentions more violent and 
bloody. The common fafety rendered it necef- 
fary to oppofe them with open force. Columbus 
who had been long affli&ed with the gout, could 
not take the field. His brother, the Adelan- 
tado , marched againft them. They quickly 
met. (May ao. 1504.) The mutineers reject- 
ed with fcorn terms of accommodation , which 
were once more offered them, and rufhed oa 
boldly to the attack. They fell not upon an 
enemy unprepared to receive them. In the firft 
fhock, feveral of their 111 oft daring leaders were 
flain. The Adelantado , whofe ftrength wis 
equal to his courage, clofed with their captain, 

u) Life of Columbus, c. 104. Herrera, dec. I. lib. vi« c. I?» 



HISTORY OF AMERICA, aa* 

funded, difarmed, and took him prifoner. x) 
: fight of this, the reft fled with a daftardly 
ir, fuitable to their* former infolence. Soon 
:er'; they fabmitted in a body to Columbus , 
A bound themfelves by the molt folemn oaths 
obey ail* his commands.^ Hardly was tran- 
:illity re-eftablifhed, when the fhips appeared, 
hofe arrival Columbus had promifed with great 
drefsj though he could forefee it with little^ 
rtainty. With tranfports of joy, the Spa- 
ards quitted an ifland in which the unfeeling 
iloufly of Ovando had fuffered them to Ian* 
lifh above a year, expofed to mifery in all its 
rious forms. 

His deliverance, and arrival at Hifpaniola. 

When they arrived at St. Domingo , (Aug. 
}. 1504.) the governor, with the mean arti- 
:e of a vulgar mind , that labours to atone for 
fplence by fervility, fawned on the man whom 
? envied , and had attempted to ruin. He re- 
vived Columbus with the moft ftudied refpeft, 
dged him in his own houfe, and diftingu fhed 
imi with every mark of honour. But, amidft 
tofe over-a&ed demonftrations of regard , he 
mid not conceal the . hatred and malignity 
tent in his heart. He fet at liberty the cap- 
in of the mutineers , whom Columbus had 
fought over in chains to be tried for his crimes, 
ft4 threatened fuch as had adhered to the ad- 

x) Life of Columbus* c. 107. Herura, dec* 1. lib. vi. c. it. 



a 3 o HISTORY OF AMERICA. 

miral with proceeding to a judicial inquiry into 
their conduit. Columbus fubmitted in filence 
to what he could not redrefs, but difcovered 
an extreme impatience to quit a country which 
was under the jurifdiftion of a man who had 
treated him, on every occafion, with inhuma- 
nity and injuftice. His preparations were foon 
finifhed. and he fet fail (Septem. 12. 1504.) 
for Spain wirh two fiiips. Difafters fimilar to 
thofe which had accompanied him through life 
continued to purfue him to the end of his career. 
One of his vetTels being difabled , was foon 
forced back to St. Domingo ; the other, f natter- 
ed by Violent ftorms, (December.) failed feven 
hundred leagues with jurymafts , and reached 
with difficulty the port of St. Lucar. y) 

Death of ifabella* 

There he received the account of an event 
the moft fatal that could have befallen him, and 
which completed his misfortunes. This was 
the death of his patronefs queen Ifabella, (Nov. 
9. 1504.) in whofe juftice, humanity, and fa* 
vour, he confided as his laft refource. None 
now remained to redrefs his wrongs , or to 
reward him for his fervices and fuflferings, but 
Ferdinand , who had fo long oppofed and fo 
often injured him. To folicit a prince thus 
prejudiced again ft him, was an occupation no 
lefs irkfcme than hopelefs. In this, however, 

- ; Life of Columbus, c. 108. Hcrrera, dec. I, lib* vi. c. 12. 



HISTORY OF AMERICA. 331 

was Columbus doomed to employ the clofe of 
his days. As foon as his health was in fome 
degree re-eftablifhed, he repaired to court; and 
though he was received there with civility ba- 
rely decent, he plied Ferdinand with petition 
^fter petition , . demanding' the punifhment of 
his oppreffors , and the reftitution of all the 
privileges bellowed upon him by the capitula- 
tion of one thoufand four hundred and ninety- 
£wo. Ferdinand araufed him with fair words 
and unmeaning promifes. Inftead of granting 
his claims, he propofed expedients in order to 
delude them , and fpun out the aflfyir with fuch 
apparent art, as plainly discovered his intention 
£hat it fhould never be terminated. 

Death of Columbus, 

The declining health of Columbus flattered 
J? erdinand with the hopes of being foon de- 
livered from an importunate fuitor, and encou- 
raged him to perfevere in this illiberal plan. Nor 
was he deceived in his expectations. Difgufted 
with the ingratitude of a monarch whom he 
had ferved with fuch fidelity and fuccefs , ex- 
ihaufted with the fatigues and hardfhips which 
he had endured , and broken with the infirrni- 
.ties which thefe brought upon him , Columbus 
ended his life at Valladolid on the twentieth 
of May one thoufand five hundred and fix, in 
the fifty-ninth year of his age. He died with 
a compofure of mind fuitable to, the magnani- 



*3* HISTORY OF AMERICA. 

mity which diftinguifhed his charafter, and 
with fentiments of piety becoming that fupreme 
refpeft for religion , which he manifefted in 
every occurence of his life, z) 

B O O K ni. 

State of the colony in Hifpaniola. 

W hile Columbus was employed in his laft 
voyage, feveral events worthy of notice hap- 
pened in Hifpaniola. The colony there , the 
parent and nurfe of all the fubfequent eftablifb- 
ments of Spain in the New World, gradually 
acquired the form of a regular and profperous 
fociety. , The humane folicitude of Ifabella to 
protect the Indians from oppreflion, and parti- 
cularly the proclamation , by which the Spa- 
niards were prohibited to compel them to work, 
retarded, it is true, for fome time, the pro- 
grefs of improvement. The natives, who con- 
fidered exemption from toil as fupreme felicity, 
fcorned every allurement and reward by which 
they were invited to labour. The Spaniards 
had not a fufficient number of hands either to 
work the mines or to cultivate the foil. Several 
of the fir ft colonics, who had been accuftomed 
to the fervice of the Indians, quitted the ifland, 
when deprived of thofe inftruments, without 
which they knew not how to carry on any ope- 

z) Life of Columbus , c. 10*,. Herrera , dec. I. lib. vU c. 
13, 14. 15* 



HISTORY OF AMERICA 233 

ition. Many of the new fettlers who came 
ver with Ovando, were feized with the dif- 
smpers peculiar to the climate , and in a fhort 
3ace above a thoufand of them died. At the 
ime time, the exafting one half of the pro- 
uft of the mines as the royal fhare, was found 
3 be a demand fo exorbitant, that no adven- 
jrers would engage to work them upon fuch 
»rms. In order to fave the colony from ruin , 
>vando ventured to relax the rigour of the 
3yal edifts. He made a new diftribution of 
le Indians among the Spaniards, and compelled 
lem to labour, for a ftated time, in digging 
le mines, or in cultivating the ground; but, 
1 order to fcreen himfelf from the imputation 
f having fubjefted them again to fervitude, he 
oj.oined their mafters to pay them a certain 
im, as the price of their work. He reduced 
le royal fhare of the gold found in the mines 
om the half to the third part, and foon after 
>wered it to a fifth , at which it long re- 
iained, Notwithftanding Ifabella's tender con- 
?rn for the good treatment of the Indians, and 
ercinand's eagernefs to improve the royal re- 
erue, Ovando perfuaded the court to approve 
f both thefe regulations, a) ' 

War with the Indians* 

But the Indians f after enjoying refpite 
om oppreffion , though during a fhort interval., 

a) Herrera, dec. !♦ lib* v. c. 3» 



234 HISTORY OF AMERICA. 

now felt the yoke of bondage to be fo galling, 
that they made feveral attempts to vindicate 
their own liberty. This the Spaniards confi- 
dered as rebellion, and took arms in order to 
reduce them to fubjeftion. When war is car- 
ried on between nations whofe ftate of impro- 
vement is in any degree fimilar, the means of 
defence bear fome proportion to thofe employed 
in the attack ; and in this equal conteft fuch ef- 
forts mult be made, fuch talents are difplayed, 
and fuch paflions roufed , as exhibit mankind 
to view in a fituation no lefs linking than in- 
terelting. It is one of the nobleft functions of 
hiftory, to obferve and to delineate men at a 
juncture when their minds are mod violently 
agitated , and all their powers and paflions are 
called forth. Hence the operations of war, and 
the ftruggles between contending ftates, have 
been deemed by hiftorians, ancient as well as 
modern , a capital and important article in the 
annals of human aftions. But in a conteft be- 
tween naked favages , and one of the molt 
warlike of the European nations, where fcience, 
courage , and difcipline on one fide , were 
oppofed by ignorance, timidity, and diforder 
on the other, a particular detail of events would 
be as unpleafant as uninftru&ive. If the fim- 
plicity and innocence of the Indians had infpircd 
the Spaniards with humanity, had foftened the 
pride of fuperiority into companion, And had 
induced them to improve the inhabitants of the 



HISTORY OF AMERICA. 235 

New World, inftead of opprefling them , fome 
fudden afts of violence, like the two rigorous 
chaftifements of impatient inftruftors , might 
have been related without horror. But, un- 
fortunately , this confcioufnefs of fuperixmty 
operated in a different manner. The Spaniards 
were advanced fo far beyond the natives of 
America in improvement of every kind , that 
they viewed them with contempt. They con- 
ceived the Americans to be animals of an in- 
ferior* nature , who were not intitled to the 
rights and privileges of men. In peace, they 
fubje&ed them to fervitude. In war , they 
paid no regard to thofe laws, which, by a tacit 
Convention between contending nations, regulate 
hoftility, and fet fome bounds to its rage. They 
confidered them not as men fighting in defence 
of their liberty, hut as flaves, who had revolted 
againft their matters. Their caziques, when 
taken , were condemned , like the leaders of 
banditti , to the moft cruel and ignominious 
punifhments; and ail their fubjefts , without 
regarding the diftin&ion of ranks eftablifhed 
among them, were reduced to the fame ftate 
of abjeft fkvery. With fuch a fpirife»and fenti- 
ments were hoftilities carried on againft the 
cazique of Higuey , a province it the eaftern 
extremity of the ifland. This war was occa- 
sioned by the perfidy of the Spaniards , in 
violating a treaty which they had made with 
the natives , and it was terminated by hanging 



* 3 6 HISTORY OF AMERICA. 

up the cazique, who defended his people with 
bravery fo far fuperior to that of his coun- 
trymen, as intitled him to a better fate, b) 

The cruel and treacherous condiiS of Ovando, 

The condutt of Ovando, in another part 
of the ifland , was ftill more treacherous and 
cruel. The province anciently named Xaragua, 
which extends from the fertile plain where 
Leogane is now fituated , to the weftern extre- 
mity of the ifland, was fubjeft to a female ca- 
zique , named Anacoana, highly refpefted by 
the natives. She, from that partial fondnefs 
with which the women of America were at- 
tached to the Europeans ( the caufe of which 
l'hall be afterwards explained, ) had always 
courted the friendfhip of the Spaniards, and 
loaded them with good offices. But fome of 
the adherents of Roldan having fettled in her 
country , were fo much exafperated at her en- 
deavouring to reftrain their excefies, that they 
accufed her of having formed a plan to throw 
ofT the yoke, and to exterminate the Spaniards. 
Ovando, though he knew well how little credit 
was due to fuch profligate men 9 marched, 
without further inquiry, towards Xaragua, with 
three hundred foot and feventy horfemen. Te 
prevent the Indians from taking alarm at this 
hoftile appearance , he gave out that his fole 

b) Herrerr, dec. r. HI*, vi. c, 9, TO* 



HISTORY OF AMERICA. 237 

intention was to vifit Anacdana, to whom his 
countrymen had been fo much indebted, in thel 
moil refpeftful manner, and to regulate with 
her the mode of levying the tribute payable to 
the king of Spain. Anacoana, in order to re- 
ceive this illuftrious gueft with due honour, af- 
fembled the principal men in her dominions, to 
the number of three hundred, and advancing 
at the head of thefe, accompanied by a vaft 
crowd of perfons of inferior rank, fhe welcome 
ed Ovando with fongs and dances, according 
to the mode of the country, and conduftedhim 
to the place of her refidence. There he was 
feafted, for fome days, with all the kindnefs 
of fimple hofpitality , and amufed with the ga- 
mes and fpeftacles ufual among the Americans 
upon occafions of mirth and feftivity. But 
amidft the fecurity which this infpired, Ovan- 
do was meditating the^deftru&ion of his un- 
fufpicious entertainer and her fubjefts; and the 
mean perfidy with which he executed this 
fcheme, equalled his barbarity in forming it. 
Under colour of exhibiting to the Indians the 
parade of an European tournament, he advanc- 
ed with his troops, in battle array, towards 
the houfe in which Anacoana and the chiefs 
who attended her were affembled. The in- 
fantry took pofleffion of all the avenues which 
led to the village. The horfemen endompafled 
the houfe. Thefe movements were the objeft 
of admiration without any mixture of fear, un- 



238 HISTORY OF AMERICA. 

til, upon a fignal which had been concerted, 
the Spaniards fuddenly drew their fwords , and 
rufhed upon the Indians, defencelefs, and af- 
tonifhedat an. aft of treachery which exceeded 
the conception of undefigning men. In a mo- 
ment Anacoana was fecured. All her attend- 
ants were feized and bound. Fire was fet to 
the houfe ; and , without examination or con- 
viftion, all thefe unhappy perfons, the molt il- 
luftrious in their own country, were con fumed 
in the flames. Anacoana was referved for a 
more ignominious fate. She was carried in 
chains to Saint Domingo, and, after the for- 
mality of a trial before Spanifh judges, fhe 
was condemned, upon the evidence of tbofe 
very men who had betrayed her, to be publick- 
ly hanged, c) 

Reduction of the Indians , and its effeftf. 

Overawed and humbled by this atrocious 
treatment of their princes and nobles who were 
objefts of their higheft reverence , the people 
in all the provinces of Hifpaniola fubmitted, 
without farther refiftance , to the Spanifh yoke. 
Upon the death of Ifabella, all the regulations 
tending to mitigate the rigour of their fervitude 
were forgotten. The fmall gratuity paid to 
them as the price of their labour was withdrawn ; 

c) Oviedo,lib. iii. c. 12. Herrera dec. I. lib*, vi* c 4* 
Oviedo, lib. iii. c. 12. Relation de deftruyc. dc las In- 
dias , por Baru de las Cafas, p. g. 



HISTORY OF AMERICA. a 3 p 

and at the fame time the tafks impofed upon 
them were increafed. Ovando, without any 
reftraint , diftributed Indians among his friends 
in the ifland. Ferdinand, to whom the queen 
had left by will one half of the revenue arifihg 
from the fettlements in the New World , con- 
ferred grants of a fimilar nature upon his cour- 
tiers, as the leaft expenfive mode of rewarding 
their fervices. They farmed out the Indians , 
of whom they we, re rendered proprietors , to 
their countrymen fettled in Hifpaniola; and that 
wretched people, being compelled to labour in 
order to fatisfy the rapacity of both , the exac- 
tions of their oppreffors no longer knew any 
bounds. But, barbarous as their policy was, 
and. fatal to the inhabitants of Hifpaniola, it 
produced, for fome time, very confiderable 
•effefts. By calling forth the force of a whole 
nation, and exerting it in one dire&ion, the 
working of the mines was carried on with amaz- 
ing rapidity and fuccefs. During feveral years, 
the gold brought into the royal fmelting-houfes 
in Hifpaniola amounted annually to four hun- 
dred and fixty thoufand pefos, above a hun- 
dred thoufand pounds fterling ; which , if 
we attend to the great change in the value of 
money fince the beginning of the fixteenth cen- 
tury to the prefent times, muft appear a con- 
fiderable fum. Vaft fortunes were created , of 
a fudden, by fome. Others diflipated in often- 
tatious profufion , what they acquired with fa- 



240 HISTORY OF AMERICA. 

cility. Dazzled by both , new adventure!* 
crowded to America , with the moft eager im- 
patience , to fhare in thofe treafures which had 
enriched their countrymen; and, notwithftand- 
ing the mortality occafioned by the unheal thi- 
nefs of the climate , the colony continued to 
increafe. d) 

Frog re fs of the colony. 

Ovando governed the Spaniards with wif- 
dom and juftice, not inferior to the rigour with 
which he treated the Indians. He eftablifhei 
equal laws, and , by executing them with im- 
partiality, accuftomed the people of the colony 
to reverence them. He founded feveral new 
towns in different parts of the ifland , and al- 
lured inhabitants to them , by the conceflion of 
various immunities. He endeavoured to turn 
the attention of the Spaniards to fome branch 
of induftry more ufeful than that of fearching 
for gold in the mines. Some flips of the fugar- 
cane having been brought from the Canary if- 
Jands by way of experiment, they were found 
to thrive with fuch increafe in the rich foil and 
warm climate to which they were tranfplanted, 
that the cultivation of them foon became an ob- 
jeft of commerce. Extenfive plantations were , 
begun; fugar-works, which the Spaniards call- 
ed ingenios , from the various machinery em- 
ployed 

d) Herrera. dec. I. lib* \'u c. i8> &c* 



HISTORY OF AMERICA, 241 

.ployed in them ; were erefted, and in a few 
years the manufa&ure of this commodity was 
the great occupation of the inhabitants of Hif- 
paniola, and the moft eonfiderable fource of 
their wealth, e) 

Political regulations of FenjinancL 

The prudent endeavours of Ovando j to> 
promote the welfare of the colony, were power- 
■fully feeonded by Ferdinand. The large re- 
^mittahces which he^ received from the New 
Worlds opfened his eyes, at length/ tyith re- 
fpeft to the importance of thofe difcoveries, which 
lie had hitherto affefted to undervalue. For- 
tune, and his own addrefs* having now extri- 
cated him out of thofe difficulties in which he 
fiad been involved by the death of his queen, 
'(1507.) and by his difputes with his fori*in-law 
about the government of her dominions , f) he 
had full leifure to turn his attention to the af- 
fairs of America. To his provident fagacity* 
Spain is indebted for many of thofe regulations 
-which gradually formed^ that fyftem of pro- 
found, but jealous policy, by which* fhe go- 
verns her dominions in the New World. He 
erefted a court* diftinguifhed by the title of 
the Cafa de Contratacion , or Board of Trade, 
compofed of perfons eminent for rank and abi- 



e) Oviedo, lib. iv. c. 8- 

f) Hift. of the reign of Charles V. vol. ii. p. io, $c. 

Robertson. Tom. I. Q 



- 4 a HISTORY OF AMERICA. 

lities , to whom he committed the ad mi nift ration 
of American affairs. This board affembled re- 
gularly in Seville, and was inverted with a dif- 
tinft and extenfive jurisdi&ion. He gave a 
regular form to ecclefiaftical .government in 
America, by nominating archbifhops, bifhops, 
.deans , together with clergymen of fubordinate 
ranks, to take charge of the Spaniards efta- 
blifhed there, as well as of the natives who 
fhould embrace the Chriftian faith. But not- 
withftanding the obfequious devotion of the 
Spanifh court to the Papal See, fuch \^as Fer- 
dinand's folicitude to prevent any foreign power 
from claiming jurisdiction, or acquiring influence, 
in his new dominions, that he referved to the 
crown of Spain the fole right of patronage to 
the beneficies in America, and flip ula ted that 
no papal bull or mandate fhould be promulgated 
there until it was previoufly examined and ap- 
proved of by his council. With the fame fpirit 
of jealoufy, he prohibited any goods to be ex- 
ported to America, or any perfon to fettle there, 
without a fpecial licence from that council, g) 

The number of the Indians dirainifhes faft. 

But , nothwithftanding this attention to 
the police and welfare of the colony , a 
calamity impended which threatened its dif- 
folution. The original inhabitants, on whofe 

£) l.'erreia, dec. I, lib. \i, r. nj, :.». 



HISTORY OF AMERICA. 343 

labour the Spaniards in Hifpaniola depended 
fdr their profperity, and even their exiftence, 
wafted fo faft , that the extin&ion of the whole 
race feemed to be inevitable. When Colum- 
bus difcovered Hifpaniola , the number of inha- 
bitants was computed to be at leaft a million.h) 
They were now reduced to fixty thoufand in 
the fpace of fifteen years. This confumption 
of the human fpecies , no lets amazing than ra- 
pid , was the effeft of feveral concurring caufes. 
The natives of the American iflands were of a 
more feeble conftitution than the inhabitants of 
the other hemifphere. They could neither 
perform the fame work, nor endure the fame 
fatigue , with men whofe organs were of a 
more vigorous conformation. The liftlefs in- 
dolence in which they delighted to pafs their 
days, as it was the effeft of their debility, 
contributed ljkewife to increafeit, and rendered 
them, from habit as well as conftitution, in- 
capable of hard labour. The foot on which 
theyfubfifted, afforded little nourifhment, and 
they were accuftomed to take it in fmall quan- 
tities , not fufficient to invigorate a languid 
frame, and render it equal to the efforts of 
aftive induftry. The Spaniards, without at- 
tending to thofe peculiarities in the conftitution 
of the Americans , impofed tafks upon them fo 
Q 3 

■ h) Htrrera, <Uc, x, lib. x. c. ia. 



a 4 + HISTORY OF AMERICA. 

difproportioned to their ftrength , that many 
funk under the fatigue , and ended their wretch- 
ed days. Others , prompted by impatience and 
defpair , cut fhort their lives with a violent 
hand. Famine, brought on by compelling fuch 
numbers to abandon the culture of their lands, 
in order to labour in the mines / proved fatal 
to many. Difeafes of various kinds , force ac- 
cafioned by the hardfhips to which they were 
expofed, and others by their intercourfe with 
the Europeans , completed the defolation of the 
ifland. The Spaniards being thus deprived of 
the inftruments which they were ace u domed 
to employ, found it impoflibie to extend their 
improvements, or even to carry on the works 
which they had already begun* In order to 
provide an immediate remedy for an evil fo 
alarming, Ovando propofed (1508,) to tranf- 
port the inhabitants of the Lucayo iflands to 
Hifpaniola , under pretence that fliey might be 
civilized with more facility, and inftru&ed to 
greater advantage in the Chriftian religion , if 
they were united to the Spanifh colony, and 
under the immediate infpeftion of the mifliona- 
ries fettled there. Ferdinand , deceived by this 
artifice, or willing to connive at an aft of vi- 
olence which policy reprefented fas neceffary, 
gave his affent to the propofal. Several veffels 
were fitted out for the Lucayos, the command- 
ers of which informed the natives, with whofe 
language they were now well acquainted, that 



HISTORY OF AMERICA. 34s 

fliey came from a delicious country, in which 
the departed anceftors of the Indians refided, 
by whom they were fent to invite their defceffid- 
ents to re(brt thither, to partake cf the blifs 
enjoyed there by happy fpirits. That fimple 
people lifteried with wonder and credulity j and, 
fond bf vifiting their relations and friends in 
that happy region , followed the Spaniards with 
eagernefs. By this artifice , above forty thou- 
sand were decoyed into Hifpaniola, to fhare in 
the fufferings which were the lot of the inha- 
bitants of that ifland, and ta mingle their groans 
and tears with thofe of that wretched race of 
inen. i) 

New difcoveries and fettlemeots. 

The Spaniards had, for fome time, carried 
on their operations in the mines of Hifpaniola 
with fuch ardour as well as fuccefs, that thefe 
feeroed to have engrofied their whole attention. 
The fpirit of difcovery languifhed; and, fince 
the laft voyage of Columbus , no enterprize of 
any moment had been undertaken. But as the 
decreafe of the Indians rendered it impoflible 
to acquire wealth in that ifland with the fame 
rapidity as formerly , this urged them to fearch 
for new countries where their avarice might be 
gratified with more facility. Juan Ponce de 

i) Herrera, dec. I. lib. vii. c. 3. Oviedo , lib, iii. c. <£ 
Gomara Hift. c. 41. 



2 4 <S HISTORY OF AMERICA. 

Leon, who commandad under Ovando in the 
eaftern diftrift of Hifpaniola , paffed over to 
the ifJand of St. Jtian de Puerto Rico, which 
Columbus had difcovered in his fecond voyage, 
and penetrated into the interior part of the 
country. As he found the foil to be fertile, 
and expefted, from fotne fymptoms f as well 
as from the information of the inhabitants, to 
difcover mines of gold in the mountains, 
Ovando permitted him to attempt making a 
fettlement in the ifland. This was eaiily ef- 
fefted by an officer eminent for conduft no lefs 
than for courage, In a few years Puerto Rico 
was fubjefted to the Spanifh government, the 
natives were reduced to fervitude ; and , being 
treated with the fame inconfiderate rigour as 
their neighbours in Hifpaniola , the race of 
original inhabitants, worn out with fatigue and 
fuflerings, was foon exterminated, k) 

About the fame time , Juan Diaz de Solis, 
in conjunction with Vincent Yanez Pinzon , 
one of Columbus's original companions , made 
a voyage to the continent. They held the 
fame courfe which Columbus had taken , as 
far as the ifland of Guanaios : but, Handing 
from thence to the weft, they difcovered a new 
and extenfive province, afterwards known by 
the name of Yucatan , and proceeded a con- 



it) Herrera , dec. t. lib. vii. c. 1-4. Gomata Htft. c. 44 

Relation de B. de Us Cafos , p. 10. 



HISTORY OF AMERICA, *47 

iidei^ble way along the coaft of that country. 1) 
Though nothing memorable occurred in this 
voyage, it deferves notice , becaufe it led to 
difcoveries of greater importance. For the fame 
wafon , the voyage of Sebaftian de Ocampo 
mull be mentioned. By the command of Ovan- 
do, he failed round Cuba, and firft difcovered, 
with certainty , that this country , which Co- 
lumbus once fuppofed to be a part of the con- 
tinent, was a l^rge ifland, m) 

Diego Columbus appointed governor of Hifpaniola. 

This voyage round Cuba was one of the 
laft occurrences under the adminiftration of 
Ovando, Ever fince the death of Columbus , 
his fon Don Diego had been employed in foli- 
citing Ferdinand to grant him the offices, of 
viceroy and admiral in the New World, toge- 
ther with all the other immunities and profits 
which defcended to him by inheritance, in con- 
fequence of the original capitulation of his fa- 
ther. But if thefe dignities and revenues ap^ 
peared fo confiderable tp Ferdinand , that , at 
the expence of being deemed unjuft, as well as 
ungrateful , he had wrefted them from Colum- 
bus, it is not furprifing that he fhould be un- 
willing to confer them on his fpn. According* 
]y, Don Diego wafted two years in inceffant 

1) Herrera, dec. I. lib. vi. c. 17. 
tn) Herrera, dec. 1. lib. vii. c. 1^ 



* 4 8 HISTORY OF AMERICA. 

but fruitlefs importunity. Weary of this, he 
endeavoured at length to obtain by a legal feu- 
tence what he could not procure from the fa- 
vour of an interefted monarch. He commenced 
a fuit againft Ferdinand before the council that 
managed Indian affairs , and that court, with 
integrity which reflefts honour upon its pro- 
ceedings, decided againft the king, and fuftain- 
ed Don Diego's claim of the viceroyalty,. toge- 
ther with all the other privileges ftipulated in 
the capitulation. Even after this decree, Fer- 
dinand's repugnance to put a fubjefl: in poffef- 
fion of fuch extenfive rights, might have thrown 
in new obftacles, if Don Diego had not taken 
a ftep which interefted very powerful perfons 
in the fuccefs of his claims. The fentence of 
the council of the Indies gave him a title to a 
rank fo elevated, and a fortune fo opulent, that 
he found no difficulty in concluding a marriage 
with Donna Maria, daughter of Don Ferdinand 
de Toledo, great commendator of Leon , and 
brother of the duke of Alva, a nobleman of the 
firft rank, and nearly related to the king. The 
duke and his family efpoufed fo warmly the 
caufe of their new ally , that Ferdinand could 
not refiii: their folicitations. He recalled Ovan- 
do , and appointed Don Diego his fucceffor, 
though , even in conferring this favour , he 
could not conceal his jealoufy; for he allowed 
him to affume only the title of governor, not 



; 



HISTORY OF AMERICA. 349 

that of viceroy, which had been adjudged to 
belong to him. n) 

tje repair; to HifpanioU. 

Don Diego quickly* repaired to Hifpaniola , 
attended by his brother, his uncles , his wife, 
whom the courtefy of the Spaniards honoured 
>vith the title of vicequeen , and a numerous 
retinue of perfons of both fexes, born of good 
families. He lived with a fplendour and magni- 
ficence hitherto unknown in the New World ; 
and the family of Columbus feemed now to 
enjoy the honours and rewards due to his in- 
ventive genius of which he himfelf had been 
cruelly defrauded. The colony itfelf acquired 
new luftre by the acceffion of fo many inhabit- 
ants , of a different rank and character from 
moft of thofe who had hitherto migrated to 
America, and many of the moft illufirious fa- 
milies in the Spanish fettlements are defcended 
from the perfons who at that time accompanied 
Don Diego Columbus, o) 

No benefit accrued to the unhappy natives 
from this change of governors. Don Diego 
was not only authorized by a royal edift tcf 
continue the repartimientos , or diftribution of 
Indians; but the particular number which he 
plight grant to every perfon, according to his 

n) Herrera , dec. %. lib. vii. c. 4, &c. 
o) Oyiedo. lib. in. c. J. 



250 HISTORY OF AMERICA. 

rank in the colony, was fpecified. He availed 
himfelf of that permiffion ; and foon after he 
landed at St. Domingo , he divided fuch Indians 
as were ftill unappropriated, among his rela- 
tions and attendants, p) 

Pearl fifhery of Cubagua. 

The next care of the new governor was 
to comply with an inftru&ion which he receiv- 
ed from the king , about fettling a colony in 
Cubagua, a fmall ifland which Columbus had 
difcovered in his third voyage. Though this 
barren fpot hardly yielded fubfiftence to its 
wretched inhabitants, fuch quantities of thofe 
oyfters which produce pearls were found on 
its coaft , that it did not long efcape the in- 
quifitive avarjice of the Spaniards, and became 
a place of confiderable refort. Large fortunes 
were acquired by the fifhery of pearls , which 
was carried on with extraordinary ardour* The 
Indians , efpecially thofe from the Lucayo 
iflands , were compelled to dive for them ; and 
this dangerous and unhealthy employment was 
?n additional calamity, which contributed not 
a little to the extinction of that devoted 
race, q) 



\t) Recopilacicn de Leyes , lib. vi» tit. 8. 1. I , *. HerTeri. 
de«:. T. lib. vii. »-. 10. 

n) Herrera. dec, I. lib. vii. c, Q, Gomara Hift. ©. 78. 



HISTORY OF AMERICA. a5* 

New voyages. 

About this period , Juan Diaz de Soils and 
Pinzon fet out, in conjun&ion, upon a fecond 
voyage. They flood direftly fouth , towards 
the equino&ial line , which Pinzon had former- 
ly crofted , and advanced as far as the fortieth 
degree of fouthern latitude. They were afto- 
nifhed to find that the continent of America 
ftretched, on their right hand, through all this 
yaft extent of ocean. They landed in different 
places , to take poifeflion in name of their fo- 
vereign ; but though the country appeared to 
be extremely fertile and inviting, their force 
was fo imall , having been fitted out rather for 
difcovery than making fettlements , that they 
left no colony behind them. Their voyage 
ferved, however, to give the Spaniards more 
exalted and adequate ideas with refpeft to 
the dimenfions of this new quarter of the 
globe, r) 

A fettlement on the continent attempted. 

Though it was above ten years fince Co- 
lumbus had difcovered the main land of Ame- 
rica, the Spaniards had hitherto made no fettle- 
ment in any part of it. What had been fo long 
jieglefted was now ferioufly attempted , and ( 

r) Herrera, dec. I. lib. vii. c. 9. 



25a HISTORY OF AMERICA^ 

with confiderable vigour, though the plan for 
this purpofe was neither formed by the crown, 
nor executed at the expence of the nation , bq,t 
carried on by the enterprifing fpirit of private 
adventurers. This fcheme took its rife from 
Alonfo de Ojeda, who had already made two 
voyages as a difcoverer, by which he acquired 
confiderable reputation , but no wealth. But 
his character for intrepidity and conduft eafily 
procured him affociates , who advanced the 
money requifite to defray the charges of the 
expedition. About the fame time, Diego de 
Nicueffa, who had acquired a large fortune in 
Hifpaniola, formed a fimilar defign. Ferdinand 
encouraged both ; and though he refufed to ad- 
vance the fmalleft fum , was extremely liberal 
of titles and patents. He erefted two govern- 
ments on the continent , one extending from 
Cape de Vela to the gulf of Darien, and the 
other from that to Cape Gracias as Dios. f ne 
former was given to Ojeda , the latter to Ni- 
cueiTa. Ojeda fitted out a fhip and two brigan- 
tines, with three hundred men; Nicueffa, fix 
veflels, with feven hundred and eighty men. 
They failed about the fame time from St Do- 
mingo for their refpeftive governments. In 
order to give their title to thofe countries fonie 
appearance of validity , feveral of the mpft 
eminent divines and lawyers in Spain were 
employed to prefcribe the mode in which they 



HISTORY OF AMERICA/ 253 

iThbuld take poffefiion of theim s) There is 
hot in the hiftory of mankind any thing more 
lingular or extravagant than the fdrm \vhich 
they devifed for this ptirpofe. They inftrufted 
thofe invaders , as foon as they landed on the 
continent , td declare to the natives the prin- 
cipal articles of the Chriftian faith ; to acquaint 
them, in particular, with the fuprenie jurif- 
diftioh of the Pope over all the kingdoms of 
the earth J td inform them of the grant which 
this holy pontlf had made of their country 
to the king of Spdin ; to require them td 
Embrace the ddftrines of that religidn which 
the Spaniards made known td them ; and to 
fubmit to thfe fovfereign whofe authority they 
proclaimed. If the natives refufed to comply 
\Vith this requifition , the terms of whfch 
muft have beeri utterly incomptehenfibte to 
uninftrufted Indians, then Ojeda and Nicueffa 
^rere authorised to attack theth with fword 
and fire i to reduce them > their wives and 
children , to a ftate of fervitude ; and to 
ddmpel them by fdrce td recognize the juris- 
diction of the church , and the authority of 
the monarch , to which they woiJld not vo- 
luntarily fubjeft themfelves. t) 



s) Herrera, dec i. lib. vii. c. 15. 
t) See NOTE XXIli. 



a 54 HISTORY Of AMERICA, 

The difafters attending it. 

As the inhabitants of the continent could 
not at once yield aiTent to do&rines too refined 
for their uncultivated underftandings % and ex- 
plained to them by interpreters imperfe&ly 
acquainted with their language ; as they did not 
conceive how a foreign prieft , of whom they 
had never heard, could have any right to dif* 
pofe of their country, or how an unknown 
prince fhould claim jurifdi&ion over them as 
his fubje&s, they fiercely oppofed the new in* 
vaders of their territories. Ojeda and Nicuefla 
endeavoured to efleft by force what they could 
not accomplifh by perfuafion. The contempo- 
rary writers enter into a very minute detail in 
relating their tranfaftionsj but as they made 
no difcovery of importance , nor eflablif bed any 
permanent fettlement, their adventures are not 
intitled to any confiderable place in the general 
hiftory of a period, where ro man tick valour, 
ftruggling with incredible hardfhips, diftinguifh 
every effort of the Spanifh arms. They found 
the natives in thofe countries of which they 
went to affume the government, to be of a 
charafter very different from that of their coun- 
trymen in the iflands. They were fierce and 
warlike. Their arrows were dipped in a poifon 
fo noxious, that every wound was followed 
with certain death. In one encounter they 
flew above feventy of Ojeda's followers, and 



HISTORY OP AMERICA. 35$ 

he Spaniards, for the firft time, were taught 
dread the inhabitants of the New World* 
Iicueffa was oppofed by people equally refolute 
n defence of their poffeffions. Nothing could 
often their ferocity. Though the Spaniard* 
employed every art to foothe them, audi to gain 
heir confidence, they refufed to hold any in-* 
ercourfe, or to exchange any friendly office, 
vith men whofe refidence among them they 
:onfidered as fatal to their liberty and independ- 
ence. This implacable enmity of the na- 
ives , though it rendered it extremely difficult 
ts well as dangerous to eftablifh a fettlement 
n their country might have x been furmounted 
it length by the perfeverance of the Spaniards* 
>y the fuperiority of their arms, and their 
kill in the art of war. But every difafter 
yhich can be accumulated upon the tinfortu- 
late , combined to complete their ruin. The 
pfs of their fhips by various accidents upon an 
unknown c®aft, the difeafes peculiar to a 
Jimate the moft noxious in all America, the 
want of provifions , unavoidable in a country 
noperfe&ly cultivated, diffeiition among them- 
Pelves, and the inceffant hostilities of the nati- 
ves, involved them in a fucceflion of calami- 
ties , the bare recital of wliich ftrikes one 
with horror. Though they reoeived (151c.) 
two confiderable reinforcements from Hi£panioLi, 
the greater part of thofe' who had engaged in 
this unhappy expedition , perifhfed , in lefs than 



256 HISTORY OF AMERICA. 

a year, in the mole extreme mifery. A few 
who iurvived, fettled as a feeble colony at 
Santa Maria el Antigua • on the gulf of Dariea, 
under the command of Vafco Xugnez de Baboa, 
who, in the molt delperate exigencies, difplayed 
fuch courage and conduct, as iirft gained the 
confidence of his countrymen , and marked hint 
out as their leader in more iplendid and fuc- 
cefsful undertakings. Nor was he the only 
adventurer in this expedition who will appear 
with luftre in more important fcenes. Fran- 
cifco Pizarro was one of Ojeda's companions, 
and in this fchool of adverfity acquired or im- 
proved the talents which fitted him for the ex- 
traordinary actions which he afterwards per- 
formed. Hernan Cortes , whofe name became 
ftill more famous , had like wife engaged early 
in this enterprize, which roufed all the active 
youth of Hifpaniola to arms ; but the good for- 
tune that accompanied him in bis fubfequenc 
adventures, interpoied to fave him from the 
di falters to which his companions were expofed. 
He was taken ill at St. Domingo before die 
departure of the fleet, and detained there by a 
tedious indiipofition. u) 

Concert of Cuba. 

Notwithftanding the unfortunate iffue of 
this expedition, the Spaniards were not de- 
terred 

u) Herrer*. dec. I. ii'j. v:i. c. II, &c. Gomt* Hi*, c. 57. 
5$. 59. Bemja Hii 1:?. i. c. 19-aj. P. ftUnyr, 
it* Ad. Hi. 



HISTORY OF AMERICA. 257 

terred from engaging in new fch ernes of a fimilar 
nature. When wealth is acquired gradually 
by the perfeyering hand of induftry , or accu- 
mulated by the flow operations of regular com- 
merce , the means employed are fo proportioned 
to, the end attained, that there is nothing to 
fttfke the imagination , and little to urge on Jhe 
Active powers of the mind to uncommon efforts. 
But when large fortunes were created almoft in- 
ftantaneoufly ; when gold and pearles were pro- 
cured in exchange for baubles ; when the countries 
which produced thefe rich commodities, defended 
ionly by naked favages , might be feized by the 
;firft bold invader ; objefts fo Angular and allur- 
ing, rouzed a wonderful fpirit of enterprize 
pmong the Spaniards, who rufhed with ardour 
^Into this new path that was opened to wealth 
:fu\d diftinftion. While this fpirit continued 
jurarm and vigorous , every attempt either to- 
wards difcovery or conqueft was applauded; 
fend adventurers engaged in it with emulation. 
^The paffion for new undertakings, which cha- 
racterizes the age of difcovery in the latter part 
of the fifteenth and beginning of the fixteenth 
century, would alone have been fufficient to 
prevent the Spaniards from flopping fhort ia 
their career. But circumftances peculiar to 
Hifpaniola at this jun&ure, concurred with it 
fn extending their navigation and conquefts. 
The rigorous- treatment of the inhabitants of 
that ifland having almoft extirpated the race, 
Robertson, Tom. L R 



2 5 8 HISTORY OF AMERICA 

many of the Span if h planters, as I have already 
obferved, finding it impoflible to carry on their 
works with the fame vigour and profit , were 
obliged to look out for fettlements in feme 
country whofe people were not yet wafted by 
oppreffion. Others, with the inconiiderate 
levity natural to men upon whom wealth pours 
in with a fudden flow, had fquandered, in 
though tlefs prodigality , what they acquired 
with eafe, and were driven by neceffity to 
embark in the moil defperate fchemes * in order 
to retrieve their affairs. From all thefe caufes, 
when Don Diego Columbus propofed to con- 
quer the ifland of Cuba, and to eftablifh a co- 
lony there, many perfons of chief diftin&ionin 
Hifpaniola engaged with alacrity (1511.) in the 
meafure. He gave the command of the troops 
deftined for that fervice to Diego Velafquez, 
one of his father's companions in bis fecond 
voyage, and who, having been long fettled in 
Hifpaniola, had acquired an ample fortune, 
with fach reputation for probity and prudence, 
that he feemed to be well qualified for con- 
dufting an expedition of importance. Three 
hundred men were deemed fufficient for tht 
conqueft of an ifland above feven hundred 
miles in length, and filled with inhabitants. 
But they were of the fame unwarlike ebuifter 
with the people 'of Hifpaniola. They were not 
only intimidated by the appearance -of their new 
enemies, but unprepared to xefift then. Fof 



HISTORY Of AMERICA. a S9 

though, from the time that the Spaniards took 
poffeflion of the adjacent iffand, there \i?& 
reafon to expeft a defcent on their territories, 
none of the (mail communities into 'which Cuba 
was divided, had either made any provffitfi 
for its own defence, or had fofrned any con- 
cert for their common fafety. Thfe oriiy tfb- 
ftru&ion the Spaniards met with was from 
Hatuey, a cazique, who had fled from Hifpa- 
niola, and taken poffeflion of the eail^rn extre- 
mity of Cuba. He ftood upon the . defenfive 
at their iirft landing, and endeavoured to drivs 
them back to theif fhips. His feeble troopsj 
however, were foon broken and difperfed; and 
he himfelf being taken prifoner,. Vel^fquez, 
according to the barbarous maxim of the Spa* 
niards, confideredi him as a flave who ha4 
taken arms againft his matter, and condemned 
him to the flames* When Hatuey was fattened 
to the ftake, a Francifcan friar, labouring, to 
convert him, promifed him immediate ad-* 
mittance into the joys of heaven, if be would 
embrace the Chriftian faith. „Are there any 
^Spaniards, ^ fays he, after fome paufe, "iq 
,}that region of blifs which you defcribe?'f 
i>Yes, " replied the monk, „but only, fuch a& 
„are worthy and good*" ,/The belt of them,.*f 
returned the indignant cazique, "have neither 
„ worth nor goddnefs; I will not go to a place 
„where I may meet with one of that accurfed 
R % 



260 HISTORY Of AMERICA. 

,> race; " x) This dreadful example of vei 
ance ftruck the people of Cuba -with fuch 
ror, that they fcarcely gave any oppofitioi 
the progrefs of their invaders \ and Velafqi 
without the lofs of a man, annexed this 
tenfive and fertile ifland to the Spanifh 
narchy. y) 

Difcovery of Florida. 

The facility with which this important ( 
tjueft was completed, ferved as an inciten 
to other undertakings. Juan Ponce de Le 
having acquired both fame and wealth by 
reduftion of Puerto Rico , was impatient to 
gage in fome new enterprife. He fitted 
(15 12.) three fhips at his own expende, f< 
voyage of difcovery, and his reputation f 
drew together a refpe&able body of follow* 
He dire&ed his courfe towards the Luc 
iflands ; and after touching at feveral of the 
as well as of the Bahama ifles, be flood to 
fouth-weft, and difcovered a country hith< 
unknown to the Spaniards, which he cal 
Florida , either becaufe he fell in with it on Pi 
Sunday, or on account of its gay and beaut: 
appearance. He attempted to land in differ 
places, but met with fuch vigorous oppofit 

x) B. de la Cafas , p. 40. 

y) Herrera, dec. I. lib. ix. c. 2, $. &c. Oviedo , lib. 
«. 3. P. 119- 



HISTORY OF AMERICA. 261 

from the natives , who were fierce and warlike, 
as convinced him that an increafe of force was 
requifi^e to effeft a fettiement. Satisfied with 
haying ^opened a communication with a new 
country, of whofe value and importance he, 
conceived very fanguine hope, he returned to 
Puerto Rico, through the channel now known 
by the name of the Gulf of Florida. 

It was not merely the paflion of fearching 
for new countries that prompted Ponce de Leon 
to undertake this voyage, he was influenced by 
one of thofe vifionary ideas , which at that time 
often mingled with the fpirit of difcovery , and 
rendered it more acYive. A tradition prevailed 
among the natives of Puerto Rico, that in the 
ifle of Bimini, one of the Lucayos, there was 
a fountain of fuch wonderful virtue as to renew 
the youth, and recal the vigour of every perfon 
who bathed in its falutary waters. In hopes 
of finding this grand reftorative, Ponce de Leoa 
and his followers ranged through the iflands, 
fearching, with fruitlefs folicitude and labour, 
for the fountain , which was the chief objeft o£ 
their expedition. That a tale fo fabuloqs fhould 
gain credit among fimple uninftrufted Indians is 
not furprizinj*. That it fhould make any im- 
prefllon upon an enlightened people appears, 
in the prefent age, altogether incredible. The 
faft, however, is certaip ; and the moft au- 
thentick Spanifh hiftorians mention this extra- 
va0int fally of their credulous, countrymen. 



*6z HISTORY OF AMERICA. 

The Spaniards , at that period , were engaged 
in a career of aftivity which gave a romantick 
turn to their imagination, and daily prefented 
to them ftrange and marvellous objefts. A 
new world was opened to their view. They 
vifited iflands and continents of whofe exiftence 
mankind in former ages had no conception. In 
thofe delightful countries nature feemed to af- 
fume another form; every tree and plant and 
animal was different from thofe of the ancient 
hemifphere. They feemed to be tranfported 
into enchanted ground; and, after the wonders 
which they had feen, nothing, in the warmth 
and novelty of their admiration, appeared to 
them fo extraordinary as to be beyond belief. 
If the rapid fucceflion of new and ftriking fcenes 
made fuch impreflion even upon the found un- 
derftanding- of Columbus, that he boafted of 
having found the feat of Paradife, it will not 
appear ftrange that Ponce de Leon fhould dream 
of difcovering the fountain of youth z). 

Progrefs of Balboa in Darien. 

Soon after the expedition to Florida, a dif- 
covery of much greater importance was made 
in another part of America. Balboa having 
been raifed to the government of the fmall co- 



,.) P. Martyr , decad. y. 20:. Enfayo Chronol. pan la Hift. 
de la Florida . {.or. D. Gab. Cardenas, p. x. Oviedo, lib. 
xvi. c. 11. Herrera, dec. 1. lib. ix. c. 5. Hift. de !a 
Conq, de la Florida , por Garc. de U Vega, lib. i. c. A 



HISTORY OF AMERICA. 263 

lony at Santa Maria in Darlen, by the volun*- 
tary fuffrage of his aflbciates , was fo extre* 
xnely defirous to obtain from the crown a con*, 
firmation of their eleftion, that he difpatched 
one of his officers to Spain, in order to folicit 
a royal commiflion, which might inveft him 
with a legal title to the fupreme command, 
Con (bio us, however, that he could not ex* 
peft fuccefs from the patronage of Ferdinand's 
miniflers, with whom he was unconnected , or 
from negociating in a court to the arts of which 
he was a ftranger, he endeavoured to merit the 
dignity to which he afpired, and aiming at 
performing fome fignal fervice that would fe^ 
cure him the preference to every competitor. 
Full of this idea , he made frequent inroads 
into the adjacent country, fubdued feveral of 
the caziques, and coliefted a confiderable quan-r 
tity of gold, which abounded more in that part 
of the continent than in the iflands. In one 
of thofe excurfions, the Spaniards contended- 
with fuch eagernefs about the division of fome ' 
gold , that they were at the point of proceeding 
to afts of violence againft one another. A 
young cazique, who was prefent, aftonifhed 
at the high value which they fet upon a thing 
of which he did not difcern the ufe, tumbled 
the gold out of the balance with indignation ; 
and, turning to the Spaniards :„ Why do you 
quarrel ( fays he ) about fuch a trifle ? If you 
are fo paflionately fond of gold , as to abandon, 



z6+ HISTORY OF AMERICA. 

your own country, and to difturb the tranquil- 
lity of diftant nations for its fake, I will con- 
duct you to a region where the metal which 
feems to be the chief objeft of your admiration 
and defire, is fo common, that the meaneft 
utenlils are formed of it. " Tranfported with 
what they heard , Balboa and his companions 
inquired eagerly where this happy country lay, 
and how they might arrive at it? He informed 
them that at the diftance of fix funs , that is 
of fix days journey towards the fouth, they 
fhould difcover another ocean, near to which 
this wealthy kingdom was fituated ; but if they 
intended to attack that powerful ftate, they 
muft affemble forces far fuperior in number and 
ftrength to thofe with which they now ap^ 
feared a). 

The fchcmes which he forms. 

This was the firft information which the 
Spaniards received concerning the great fouthern 
ocean, or the opulent and extenfive country known 
afterwards by the name of Peru. Balboa had now 
before him objefts fuited to his boundlefs am- 
bition, and the enterprizing ardour of his ge- 
nius. He immediately concluded the ocean 
which the cazique mentioned, to \>e that for 
which Columbus had fearched without fuccefs 



a) H err era , dec. i. lib. ix. r. s. Goraara . c. 60. P. Martyr, 
decad. p. 140 



HISTORY OF AMERICA. 365 

in this part of America , in hopes of opening a 
more direft communication, with the Eaft-In- 
dies ; and he conjeftured that the rich territory 
which had been defcribed to him, muft be part 
of that vaft and opulent region of the earth. 
Elated with the idea of performing what fo great 
a man had attempted in Vain; and eager to ac- 
complifh a difcovery which he knew would be 
no lefs acceptable to the king than beneficial to 
his country, he was impatient until he could 
fet out upbn this enterprize , in comparifon of 
which all his former exploits appeared incon- 
iiderable. But previous arrangement and pre- 
paration were requifite to enfure fuccefs. He 
began with courting and fecuring the friendfhip 
of the neighbouring caziques. He fent fome 
of his officers to Hlfpaniola with a large quan- 
tity of gold , as a proof of his paft fuccefs, and 
an earneft of his future hopes. By a proper 
diftribution of this, they fecu red the favour of 
the governor, and allured volunteers into the 
fervice. A confiderable reinforcement from 
that ifland joined him, and he thought himfelf 
in a condition to attempt the difcovery. 

Difficulty of executing it. 

The ifthmus of Darien is not above fixty 
miles in breadth ; but this neck of land, which 
binds together the qontinents of North and 
South America, is ftrengthened by a chain of 
lofty mountains ftretchhig through its >yhole 



z66 HISTORY OF AMERICA. 

extent, which render it a barrier of folidity 
fuificient to refill the impulfe of two oppofite 
oceans. The mountains are covered with forefts 
almoft inaccellible. The valleys in that moift 
climate, where it rains during two thirds of 
the year , are marfhy , and fo frequently over- 
flowed, that the inhabitants find it neceffary, 
in many places , to build their houfes upon 
trees , in order to be elevated at fome diftance 
from the damp foil, and the odious reptiles en- 
gendered in the putrid waters, b) Large rivers 
rufh down with an impetuous current from the 
high grounds. In a region thinly inhabited by 
wandering fa v ages, the hand of induftry had 
done nothing to mitigate or correct thofe na- 
tural difad vantages. To march acrofs this un- 
explored country , with no other guides but 
Indians , whofe fidelity could be little trufted, 
was, on all thofe accounts, the boldeft enter- 
prize on which the Spaniards had hitherto ven- 
tured in the New World. But the intrepidity 
of Balboa was fuch as diftinguifhed him among 
his countrymen, at a period when every ad- 
venturer was confpicuous for daring courage. 
Nor was bravery his only merit; he was pru- 
dent in conduft, generous, affable, and pof- 
feffed of thofe popular talents which, in the 
moft defperate undertakings, infpire confidence 
and fecure attachment. Even after the junftion 

-* P. Mjrryr. decad. p. 138- 



HISTORY OF AMERICA, 267 

of the volunteers from Hifpaniola, (1513) he 
•was able to mufter only an hundred and ninety 
' men for his expedition, But they were hardy 
veterans, inured to the climate of America, 
and ready to follow him through every danger. 
>A thoufand Indians attended them to carry 
their provifions; and to complete their warlike 
grray, they took with them feveral of thofe 
fierce dogs, which were nolefs formidable than 
deftru&ive to their naked enemies, 

Difcovers the South Sea. 

Balboa fet out upon this important expe- 
dition on the firft of September, about the time 
that the periodical rains began to abate. He 
proceeded by fea , and without any difficulty g 
to the territories of a cazique whofe friendfhip 
he had gained ; but no fooner did he begin to 
advance into the interior part of the country, 
than he was retarded by every obftacle which 
he had reafon to apprehend, from the nature 
of the territory, or the difpofition of its in- 
habitants. Some of the casiques, at his ap- 
proach , fled to the mountains with all their 
people , and carried off or deftroyed whatever 
could afford fuhfiftence to his troops. Others 
collefted their fubjefts, in order to oppofe his 
progrefs , and he quickly perceived what an 
arduous undertaking it was, to conduft fuch a 
body of men through hoftile nations, acrofs 
fwamps and rivers , and woods , which had 



*6S HISTORY OF AMERICA. 

never been paffed but by draggling Indim. 
But by fharing in every hardfhip with the 
mean eft foldier , by appearing the foremoft to 
meet every danger , by promifing confidently 
to his troops the enjoyment of honour and rt 
ches fuperior to what had been attained by the 
moll fuccefsful of their countrymen, be infpir- 
ed them with fuch enthufiaftick refolution, tint 
they followed him without murmuring. Whei 
they had penetrated a good way into the 
mountains, a powerful cazique appeared in a 
narrow pafs, with a numerous body of his fnb- 
jects to obftrutt their progrefs. But men who 
had furmounted fo many obftacles , defpifed 
the oppofition of fuch feeble enemies. They 
attacked them . with impetuofity , and having 
difperfed them with' much eafe and grett 
f laughter, continued their march. Though 
their guides had reprefented the breadth of the 
ifthmtts to be only a journey of fix days, they 
had already fpent twenty-five in forcing their 
way through the woods and mountains. Many 
of them were ready to fink under fuch uninter- 
rupted fatigue in that fultry climate , feveral 
were feized with the difeafes peculiar to. the 
country, and all became impatient to reach the 
period of their labours and fufferings. At length 
the Indians allured them , that from the top of 
the next mountain they fhould difcover the 
ocean which was the objeft of their wifhes. 
When , with infinite toil, they had climbed up 



HISTORY OF AMERICA. 369 

, f tlie greater part of that fteep afcent j Balboa 
r cpmmanded his meh to halt > and advanced 
p alone to the fummit, that he might be the firft 
, who fhould enjoy a fpeftacle which he had fo 
, long defired. As foon as he beheld the South 
, Sea ftretching in endlefs profpeft below him, 
I lie fell on his knees, and lifting up his hands 
; to Heaven , returned thanks to God , who had 
, condu&ed him to a difcovery fo beneficial to 
i his country, and fo honourable to himfelf. His 
, followers obferving his tranfports of joy, rufhed 
. forward to join in his wonder, exultation and 
gratitude. They held on their courfe to the 
fhore with great alacrity , when Balboa ad- 
vancing up to the middle in the waves \vith 
his buckler and fword , took poffeJlion of that 
ocean in the name of the king his matter, and 
vowed to defend it, with thefe arms, agauift 
all his Enemies, c) 

That part of the great Pacifick or Southern 
ocean, which Balboa firft difcovered, ftill re- 
tains the name of the Gulf of St. Michael, 
which, he gave to it, and is fituated to the eaft 
of Panama. From feveral of the petty princes, 
. who governed in the diftri&s adjacent to that 
gulf, he extorted provifions and gold by force 
of arms. Others fent them to him voluntarily. 
To thefe acceptable prefents > fome of the cazi- 



c) Herrera , dec. I. lib. x. c. I , &c. Gotnara , «. 6s, &c. P.. 

Martyr, decad. p. 205, &*. 



470 HISTORY OF AMERICA, 

ques added a confiderable quantity of pearls $ 
and he learned from them, with much fatif- 
faftion i that pearl oyfters abounded in the fea 
Which he had newly discovered* 

He receives information concerning a moftf opulent 
country. 

Together with the acquifition of this wealthy 
which ferved to foothe and encourage bis fol-> 
lowers, he received accounts which confirmed 
his fanguine hopes of future and more extenfive 
benefits from the expedition. AH the people 
on the coaft of the South Sea concurred in in- 
forming him that there was a mighty and opu- 
lent kingdom fituated at a confiderable diftance 
towards the fouth-eaft, the inhabitants of which 
had tame animals to carry their burdens. In 
order to give them an idea of thefe, they drew 
upon the fand the figure of the Llamas or 
fheeps, afterwards found in Peru, which the 
Peruvians had taught to perform fuch fervices 
as they defcribed. As the Llama , in its form, 
nearly refembles a camel , a beaft of burden 
deemed peculiar to Alia, this circumftance, in 
conjun&ion with the difcovefy of the pearls, 
another noted produftion of that country, tend- 
ed to confirm the Spaniards in their miftaken 
theory with refpeft to the vicinity of the New 
World to the Eaft-lndies. d) 

4) Herrera , dec. x. lib. x, c. g. 



HISTORY OF AMERICA; 471 

Obliged to return. 

But though the information which Balboa 
received from the people on the coaft, as well 
as his owti conjeftures and hopes, rendered hint 
extremely impatient to vifit this unknown 
country , his prudence reftrained him from at- 
tempting to invade it with an handful of men * 
exbaufted by fatigue, and weakened by dit 
eafes* e) He determined to lead back his fol- 
lowers, at prefent, to their fettlement at Santa 
Maria inDarien, and to return next feafon with 
a force more adequate to fuch an arduous en-* 
terprize. In order to acquire a more extenfive* 
knowledge of the ifthmus, he marched back 
by a different route, which he found to be no 
lefs dangerous and difficult than that which he 
had formerly taken. But to men elated with 
fuccefs, and animated with hope, nothing ia 
infurmountable. Balboa returned ( 15*4*) to 
Santa Maria, from which he had been abfent 
four months, with greater glory and more 
treafure than the Spaniards had acquired in any 
expedition in the New World. None of Bal- 
boa's officers diftinguifhed himfelf more in this 
fervice than Francifco Ptearro , or affifted with 
greater courage and ardour in opening a com- 
munication With thofe countries , in which he 
afterwards afted fuch an illuftrious part, f ) 

e) See N<u* XXIV. 

f) Herrera, dec. i. lib. x, c. g .. $. .Gomara, c. 64. P. NUj- 

tyr, dec, p. 339, &*. 



a73 HISTORY OF AMERICA. 

Pedrarias appointed governor of Darien. 

Balboa's firft care was to fend information 
to Spain of the important difcovery which he 
had made; and to demand a reinforcement of a 
thoufand men, in order to attempt the conqueft 
of that opulent country , concerning which be 
had received fuch inviting intelligence* The 
firft account of the difcovery of the New World 
hardly occafioned greater joy, than the unex- 
pected tidings , that a paffage was at laft found 
to the great fouthern ocean. The communica- 
tion with the Eaft- Indies, by a courfe to the 
weftward of the line of demarcation , drawn by 
the Pope , feemed now to be certain. The vaft 
wealth which flowed into Portugal from its fettle- 
ments and conquefts in that country, excited 
the envy and called forth the emulation of other 
ftates. Ferdinand hoped now to come in for a 
fhare in this lucrative commerce, and in his 
eagernefs to obtain it, was willing to make an 
effort beyond what Balboa required. But even 
in this exertion, his jealous policy, as well as 
the fatal antipathy of Fonfeca , now bifhop of 
Burgos , to every man of merit who diftinguifh- 
ed himfelf in the New World, were confpi- 
cuous. Notwithstanding Balboa's recent fer- 
vices, which marked him out as the moft 
proper perfon to finifh that great undertaking 
which he had begun, Ferdinand was fo unge- 
nerous as to overlook thefe, and to appoint 
Pedrarias Davila governor of Darien, He gave 

him 



History of amerkja, $ 73 

hiift the cortimand of fifteen ftout veffels, and 
twelve hundred foldiers* Thefe were fitted out 
at the publick expence , with a liberality Which 
Ferdinand had never difplayed in any formei 4 
armament deftined for the New World; and 
fuch was the ardour of the Spanifn gentlemen 
to follow a leader who was about to conduct 
them to a country , where, as fame reported, 
they had only to throw their nets into the fea 
-and draw out gold, g) that fifteen hundred era- 
barked on board the fleet * and if they had not 
been reflrained , a much greater number Would 
have engaged in the fervice. h) 

Pedrarias reached the gulf of Dariert with- 
out any remarkable accident, and immediately 
jent fome of his principal officers afhore, to 
inform Balboa of his arrival, with the king'* 
commifiion, to be governor of the colony. To 
their aftonifhment , they found Balboa, of 
Whofe great exploits they had heard fo much f 
and of whofe opulence they had formed fuch 
high ideas, clad in a canvas jacket, and wear- 
ing coarfe hempen fandals ufed only by the? 
.meaneft peafants , employed together with fome 
Indians, in thatching his own hut with reeds,* 
Even in this fimple garb, which correfponded 
fo ill with the expe&ation and wifhes of hi$ 
new guefts , Balboa received them with dignity* 

g) Herrera, dec. l. lib. x. c. 1 4. 

h) Ibid. dec. 1. lib. x. c. 6, 7. P, Martyr, dec. p. 177. *9$« 

Robertson. Tom, I. S 



a :4 HISTORY OF AMERICA,. 

The fame of his difcoveries had drawn fo many 
adventurers from the illands, that he could now 
mufter four hundred and fifty men. At the 
head of thofe daring veterans , he was more 
than a match for the forces which Pedrariu 
brought with him. But though his troops mur- 
mured loudly at the injuftice of the king is 
fuperfeding their commander, and complained 
that ftrangers would now reap the fruits of 
their toil and fuccefs, Balboa fubmitted witk 
implicit obedience to the will of his fovereign, 
and received Pedrarias with all the deference 
due to his character, i) 

Diffenfion between him And Balboa* 

Notwithftanding this moderation to which 
Pedrarias owed the peaceable pofleilion of hit 
government, he appointed a judicial inquiry 
to be made into Balboa's conduct, while under 
the command of Nicuefla ; and impofed a con- 
fiderable fine upon him, on account of the ir- 
regularities of which he had then been guilty. 
Balboa felt fenfibly the mortification of being 
fubjefted to trial and to punifhment in a place 
where he had fo lately occupied the firft ftation. 
Pedrarias could not conceal his jealoufy of his 
fuperior merit; fo that the refentment of the 
one, and the envy of the other, gave rife to 
diffenfions extremely detrimental to the colony. 

i) Herreras, dec. i, lib. x. c. 13. 14* 



dtSf ORV OF AMERICA* 275 

It Was treatehed with a calamity ftill more* 
fatal. Pedrarias had landed in Darien at a 
moft unlucky time of the year, (July 15 14.) 
about the middle of the tainy feafdhj in that 
part of the torrid zone where the clouds pout 
down fuch torrents as are unknown in more* 
temperate climates, k) The village df Santa 
Maria was feated in a rich plain , environed 
with marfhes and woods. The cohftitution of 
Europeans Was unable to Withftand the pefti- 
lential influence of fuch a fituation, in a cli- 
mate naturally fo noxious, and at a feafon fd 
peculiarly unhealthy; A violent and deftruc-i 
tive malady carried off many of the foldiers 
who accompanied Pedrarias. An extreme fcaiu 
city of provifions augmented this diftrefs, as 
it rendered it impoflible to find proper refresh- 
ment for the fick , or the neceffary fufteriance 
for the healthy. 1) In the fpaeeofa month above 
fix hundred perfons perifhed in the utmoft mi- 
fery. Dejeftton and defpair fpread through the* 
colony. Many principal perfons folicited their 1 
difmiflion, and were glad to rellnquifh all their 
hopes of wealth , in order to efcape from that 
pernicious region. Pedrarias endeavoured to 
divert thofe who Remained from brooding over 
their misfortunes, by finding them employment* 
With this view, he fent feveral detachments 
S a 

10 Richard Hift. Naturelle de l'Axr, torn, i, p. 204. 
1) Herrera, dec. 1. lib. x. * 14. P. Martyr, dtc. 97a. 



276 HISTORY OF AMERICA. 

into the interior parts of the country , to levy 
gold among the natives , and to fearch for the 
mines in which it was produced. Thofe rapa- 
cious adventurers , more attentive to prefent 
gain than to the means of facilitating their fu- 
ture progrefs , plundered without diftinftion 
wherever they marched. Regardlefs of the al- 
liances which Balboa had made with feveral of 
the oaziquea, they.ftripped them of every thing 
valuable f and treated them, as well as their 
fubje&s, with the utmoft infolence and cruelty. 
By their tyranny and exaftions, which Pedra- 
rias , either from want of authority or of in- 
clination, did not reftrain, all the country from 
the gulf of Parien to the lake of Nicaragua was 
defolated, and the Spaniards were inconiider- 
ately deprived of the advantages which they 
might have derived from the friendfhip of the 
natives , in extending their conquefls to the 
South Sea, Balboa, who faw with concern 
that fuch ill-judged proceedings retarded the 
execution of his favourite febeme, fent violent 
remon ft ranees to Spain again ft the imprudent 
government of Pedrarias , which bad ruined a 
happy and flourifhing colony , Pedrarias , on 
the other hand , ace u fed him of having deceiv- 
ed the king, by magnifying his owe exploits, 
as well as. by a falfe representation of the opv- 
lence and value of the country, m) 

m) Ilerreca., dec. i. lib. x. c. 15. de«. a. c, L, &c Gobmm, c.tt. 
P. M.ircy/. dec. 3.0.10. Relation da B. dolu Ctlju., p. U. 



HISTORY OF AMERICA. 37^ 

Violent proceedings againft Balboa. 

1 Ferdinand became fenfible at length of his 
imprudence in fuperfeding the molt aftive and 
experienced officer he had in the New World, 
and by way of compenfation to Balboa, ap- 
pointed him Adelantado, or Lieutenant-governor: 
of the countries upon the South Sea, with very 
extenfive privileges and authority. At the fame 
time (15 15.) he enjoined Pedrarias to fupport 
Balboa in all his operations, and to' confulfc 
with him concerning every meafure which he 
himfelf purfued. But to effeft fuch a fudderi 
tranfltion from inveterate enmity to perfeft 
confidence, exceeded Ferdinands power, Pe-* 
drarias continued to treat his rival with negle&J 
and Balboa's fortune being exhaufted by the 
payment of his fine , and other exaftions of 
Pedrarias, he could not make fuitabte prepara- 
tion for taking poffeffion of his new govern- 
ment At length, by the interpoiitions and 
exhortations of the bifhop ofDarten, they were 
brought to a reconciliation; and In order to 
cement this union more firmly, Pedrarias agreed 
to give his daughter in marriage to Balboa. 
The firft effeft of their concord was, (1516.) 
that Balboa was permitted to make fevera! 
fmall incurfions into the country. Thefe he 
condufted with facH prudence, as added to the 
reputation which he had already Acquired. Many 
adventurers reforted to him , and, with the 
countenance and aid of Pedrarias, he began to 



278 HISTORY OF AMERICA. 

prepare for his expedition to the South Sea. 
In order to accomplifh this, it was neceffary 
to build veflels capable of conveying his troops 
to thofe provinces which he purpofed to in- 
vade. After furmounting many obftacles, and 
ensuring a variety of thofe hard Chips which 
were the portion of the conquerors of Ame- 
rica, he at length finifhed four fmall brigan- 
tincs. In thefe , with three hundred cbofen 
men, a force fuperior to that with which Pizarro 
afterwards undertook the fame expedition, he 
was ready to fail towards Peru , when he re- 
ceived an unexpected mefiage from Pedrarias. n) 
As his reconciliation with Balboa had never 
been cordial, the progrefs which he made re- 
vived his ancient enmity , and added to its ran- 
cour. He dreaded the profperity and elevation 
of a man whom he had injured fq deeply. He 
fufpecled that fuccefs would encourage him to 
aim at independence upon his jurifdi&ion ; and 
fo violently did the paflions of hatred, fear, 
and jcaloufy, operate upon his mind, that, in 
order to gratify his vengeance, he fcruplednot 
to defeat an enterprize of the greateft moment 
to his country. Under pretexts which were 
falfe , but plaufible , he defired Balboa to pofi- 
pone his voyage for a fhort time, and to repair 
to Ada, in order that he might have an in- 
terview with him. Balboa with the unfufpi- 

n) Herrera, dec, s. lib. i. c. 3. lib. it f. II, 13, si. 



HISTORY OF AMERICA. 379 

dous confidence of a man confcious of no crime , 
■ inftantly obeyed the fummons; but as foon as 
lie entered the place, he was arretted by order 
of Pedrarias, whofe impatience to fatiate bis 
revenge did not fuffer him to languifh long in 
confinement. Judges were immediately ap- 
pointed to proceed to his trial. An aceufatioi* 
of difloyalty to the king, and of an intention 
to revolt againft the governor, was preferred 
again ft him, Sentence of death was pronounced; 
. and though the judges who paffed it, feconded 
by the whole colony, interceded warmly for 
his pardon, Pedrarias continued inexorable; and 
the Spaniards beheld, with aftonifhment and 
forrow, the publick execution of a man whom 
they univerfally deemed more capable than any 
who had borne command in America, of form- 
ing and accomplifhing great defigns. 0) Upon 
his death , the expedition which he had planned 
was reltnquifhed. Pedrarias , notwithfta'nding 
the violence and injuftice of his proceedings, 
•was not only fcreened from punifhment by the 
powerful patronage of the bifhop of Burgos and 
ether courtiers, but continued in power. Soon 
after, he obtained permiflion to remove the 
colony from its unwholefome ftation at Santa 
Maria to Panama, on the oppofite fide of the 
lfthmus; and though it did not gain much in 
point of healthfulnefs by the change, the 00m- 

o) Herrcra . dec. 2. lib. H. «. 21. *a. 



280 HISTORY OF AMERICA, 

modious fituation of this new fettleinent contri-. 
buted greatly to facilitate the fubfequent cifn- 
quefts of the Spaniards in the vaft countries 
fituated upon the Southern Ocean, p) 

New difcoveries. 1515. 

During thefe tranfaftions in Darien , the 
hiftory of which it was proper to carry on in an 
uninterrupted tenour, feveral important events 
occurred with refpeft.to the difcovery, the con-r 
queft, and government of other provinces in 
the Xew World. Ferdinand was fo intent upon 
opening a communication with the Molucca or 
Spice Iflands by the weft, that, in the year 
one thouland five hundred and fifteen, he fitted 
out two fhips at his own e.\ pence, in order to 
attempt fuch a voyage, and gave the command 
of them to Juan Diaz de Solis, who was deem- 
ed one of the mo ft fkilful navigators in Spain. 
Be flood along the coaft of South America, 
and, on the fir ft of January one thoufand five 
hundred and fixteen, entered a river, which 
he called Janeiro, where an extenfive com- 
merce is now carried on. From thence be pro- 
ceeded to a fpacious bay, which he fuppofed 
to be the entrance into a ftrak that communi- 
cated with the Indian ocean; but upon advanc- 
ing farther, he found it to be the mouth of 
"Rio de Plata , one of the vaft river* fcy vbtch 

l>) Heirc -. iier. :. l:b. iv c. i. 



I HISTORY OF AMERICA; 3** 

g the fouthern continent of America is watered.' 

j$ In endeavouring to make a defcent in this 

it country, De Solis and feveral of his crew were 

l) flain by the natives , who , in fight of the fhips » 

cut their bodies in pieces , roailed and devoured 

them, Difcouraged with the lofs of their com-* 

g mander, and terrified at this {hocking fpeftacle, 

r( the furviving Spaniards fet fail for Europe, 

s without aiming at any farther difeovery. q) 

Though this attempt proved abortive, it was 

not without benefit. It turned the attention 

of ingenious men to this courfe of navigation, 

and prepared the way for a more fortunate 

voyage, in which, a few years pofterior to 

this period , the great defign that Ferdinand had 

in view was accomplifhed. 

State of the colony in HiTpaniota. 

Though the Spaniards were thus aftively etn-» 
ployed in extending their difcoveries and fettle- 
ments in America, they ftill confide red Hifpa- 
niola as their principal colony, and the feat. of 
government. Don Diego Columbus wanted 
neither inclination nor abilities to bare rendered 
the members of this colony, who were moft 
immediately under his jurifdiftion , profperous 
and happy. But he was circumfcrihed in all bis; 
operations by the fufpicious policy of Ferdinand, 
who on every occafto*, and under pretexts the 

q) Herrera, dec. %. lib, v c. 7- P. Martyr, d^cad. p. $17. 



2%2 HISTORY OF AMERICA. 

'moft frivolous, retrenched his privileges, and 
encouraged the treafurer, the judges, and other 
fubordinate officers, to counteract his meafures, 
and to difpute his authority. The moft. valuable 
prerogative which the governor poflefied , was 
that of diftributing Indians among the Spaniards 
fettled in the ifland. The rigorous fervitude 
of thofe unhappy men having been but little 
mitigated by all the regulations in their favour, 
the power of parcelling out fuch neceffary in- 
ftruments of labour at pleafure , fecured to the 
governor great influence in the colony. In order 
to ft rip him of this, Ferdinand created anew 
office , with the power of diftributing the In- 
dians, and beftowed it upon Rodrigo Albu- 
querque, a relation of Zapata, his confidential 
minifter. Mortified with the injuftice, as well 
as indignity, of this invafion upon his rights, 
in a point fo effential, Don Diego could no 
longer remain in a place where his power and 
confequence were almoft annihilated. He repaired 
to Spain with the vain hopes of obtaining re- 
drcfs. r) Albuquerque entered upon his office 
with all the rapacity of an indigent adventurer, 
impatient to amafs wealth. He began with tak- 
ing the exaft number of Indians in the ifland, 
and found, that from fixty thoufand, who, in 
the year one thoufand five hundred and eighty 
furvived after all their bufferings , they were 

r) Herrera, dec. i. lib. ix. o. 5. lib. x. c. i%. 



HISTORY OP AMERICA. 283 

now reduced to fourteen thoufand. Tfyefe he 
threw into fepar^te diviflons or lots , and befr 
towed them upon fuch %s were willing to. pur- 
. chafe them at the higheft price. By this arbir 
trary diftribution , feveral of the natives were 
removed from their original habitations , many 
were taken from their ancient mailers, and all 
pf them fubje&ed v to heavier burdens, and to 
jnore intolerable labour, in order to reimburfe 
their new proprietors. Thofe additional qala r 
fnities completed the mifery , and haftened on 
the extin&ion, of this, wretched and innocent 
face of men. s) 

Contrqver(y wify refpeft tq the treatment qf tbe 
Indians. 

The violence of thefe proceedings, toge-r 
ther with the fatal confequences which at- 
tended them , not only excited complaints 
among fuch as thought themfelves aggrieved, 
\>nt touched the hearts of all who retained any 
fentiments of humanity, From the time that 
Ecclefiafticks were fent as inftru&ors into Ame-r 
jrica, they perceived that the rigour, with which 
their countrymen treated the natives, rendered 
their miniftry altogether fruitlefs. The miflio- 
jiaries , in conformity to the mild fpirit of that 
religion which they were employed to publifh f 
early remonftrated againft the maxims of the 

• s) Herrtra, dco. i. lib. x. c. 12. 



38+ HISTORY OF AMERICA. 

planters with refpeft to the Americans and con- 
demned the repartimientos, or diftributions , by 
which they were given up as (laves to their 
conquerors, as no lefs contrary to natural juf- 
tice and the precepts of Chriftranity, than to 
found policy. The Dominicans, to whom the 
inftruftion of the Americans was originally 
committed, were moft vehement in teftifying 
againft the repartimientos. In the year one 
thoufand five hundred and eleven, Montefino, 
one of their moft eminent preachers, inveighed 
a gain ft: this praftice in the great church at 
St. Domingo, with all the impetuofity of po- 
pular eloquence. Don Diego Columbus, the 
principal officers of the colony , and all the 
laymen who had been his hearers, complained 
of the monk to his fuperiors; bat they, inftead 
of condemning, applauded his doftrine , as 
equally pious and leafonable.' The Francifcans, 
influenced by the fpirit of oppofition and ri- 
valfhip which fubfifts between the two orders, 
dtlcovered fome inclination to take part with 
the laity, and to efpoafe the defence of the re- 
partimientos. But as they could not with de- 
cency give their avowed approbation to a fyftem 
of oppreflion, fo repugnant to the fpirit of re- 
ligion, they endeavoured to palliate what they 
could not juftify, and alleged, in excofe for 
the condutt of their countrymen , that it was 
irojv.iible to carry on any improvement in 
the colony, unlets the Spaniards pofleffed 



I HISTORY OF AMERICA. a8s 

i fach dominion over the natives , that they 
i could compel them to labour, t) 

Contrary decifions concerning this point 

The Dominicans, jregardlefs of fach poll* 
tical and interefted confiderations , would not 
relax in any degree the rigour of their fenti~ 
ments, and even refufed to abfolve, or admit 
to the facraments , fuch of their countrymen 
* as held the natives in fervitude. u) Both par- 
ties applied to the king for his decifion in a 
^natter of fach importance. Ferdinand empower- 
ed a committee of his privy-council , affifted 
by fome of the mo ft eminent civilians and divi- 
lies in Spain, to hear, the deputies fent from 
Hifpaniola , in fupport of their refpeftive opi- 
nions. After a long difcuflion , the fpeculative 
point in controverfy was determined in favour 
of the Dominicans , the Indians were declared 
to be a free people, intitled to all the natirtal 
rights of men ; but, notwithstanding this d&- 
ciiion , the repartimientos were continued upon 
their ancient footing, w) Aa this determina- 
tion admitted the principle upon which the Do- 
minicans founded their opinion , it was not 
calculated either to filence or to convince them. 

t) Herrtrtt, dec. 1. lib. viii. c, xi. O vie do , Ub. iii, c, 4, 

P. 97. 
u) Oviedo , lib. iii. c. 6. p. 97, 
w) Herrera, dec. 1. lib. viii. c. id. Ub. be. c. 5. 



2%6 HISTORY OF AMERICA; 

At length , in order to quiet the colony, which 
was alarmed by their retnonftrances and cen- 
fures , Ferdinand iffued a decree of his privy* 
council ^ (1513. ) declaring, that after mature 
€onfidetatioti of the Apoftolicje Bull, and other 
titles by which the crbwh of Caftile claimed si 
right to its pdfleffions in the New World, the 
feiVitude of the Indians was warranted both by 
the laws of God and of man ; that unlefs they 
were fubjefted to the doinifcion of the Spaniards; 
and compelled to refide under their ihfpe&ion* 
it would be impoflible to reclaim tbeta from 
idolatry , or to inftruft them in the principles 
of the ChrifHan faith ; that no farther fcruple 
ought- to be entertained concerning the lawful- 
nefs of the repartimietitos , as the king and 
Council were willing to take the charge of 
that upon their own confciences ; and that 
therefore the Dominicans , and monks of other 
religious orders, fhould abilain , for the future, 
from thofe inveftives, which, from an excefs 
of charitable, but ill informed zeal, they had 
uttered againft that praftice. y) 

That his intention of adhering to this decree 
might be fully untferftood , Ferdinand conferred 
new grants of Indians upon feveral of his cour* 
tiers, z ) But , in order that he might not 
teem altogether inattentive to the rights of hu- 



y) Herrera, dec. 1. lib. i.\. c. 14. 
*) Set NOTE XXV- 



HISTORY OF AMfiRIdA. ag? 
It 

^tanity, he publifbed an edift > in which he 
■ffeejideavoured to provide for the mild treatment 
a -*of the Indians under the yoke to which he fub*. 
1 jcfted them ; he regulated the nature of the 
■ '■' Work which they fhould be required to perform, 
*he prescribed the mode in which they fhould 
}he clothed and fed, and gave direftions with 
' irefpeft to their inftruftion in the principles of 

Christianity, a) 

Eflfear of theite. 

JBut the Dominicans , whdj from their ex- 
perience of what waspaft, judged concerning 
- <ihe future j footi perceived the inefficacy of 
i^thofe proVifions* and foretold, that as lofag as 
; it was the intereft of individuals to treat th6 
Indians with rigour , no publick regulation* 
could render their fervitUde mild or tolerable. 
They confidefed it as vain to wafte their own 
. time and ftrength in attempting to communicate 
the fublime truths of religion to men, whofe 
jfpirits were broken, and their faculties impair- 
ed by oppreffiofi. Some of them , in defpair* 
requefted the permiffion of their fuperiors to 
remove to the continent , and to purfue the 
• objeft of their million , among fuch of the na- 
tives as were not hitherto corrupted by the 
example of the Spaniards, or alienated by their 
cruelty from the Chriftiau faith. Such as re- 
ft) Hcrrera, dec. I. lib. ix. c. £4. 



*88 HISTORY OF AMERICA. 

mained in Hifpaniola continued to remonftrate , 
with decent Armnefs* againft the fervitude of 
the Indians, b) 



Bartholomew de Iai Cafas appears in defence of the 
Indians. 



The violent operations of Albuquerque, the 
new diftributor of Indians, revived the zeal of 
the Dominicans againft the repartimientos * and 
called forth an advocate for that opprefled 
people , who poffeffed all the courage , the 
talents, and aftivity requifite in fupportiiig fuch 
a defperate caufe. This was Bartholomew de 
las Cafas, a native of Seville , and one of the 
clergymen fent out with Columbus in his fe- 
cond voyage to Hifpaniola , in order to fettte 
in that ifland. He early adopted the opinion 
prevalent among ecclefiafticks , with refpeft to 
the unlawfulnefs of reducing the natives to fer- 
vitude ; and that he might demonftrate the fin- 
cerity of his convi&ion , he felinquifhed all 
the Indians who had fallen to his own fhare 
in the divifion of the inhabitants among their 
conquerors , declaring that he fhould ever be- 
wail his own misfortune and guilt, in having 
exercifed for a moment this impious dominios 

over 



♦>) Herreia, dec. 1. lib. ix. c. 14. Touron. Hilt. Gener. df 
I'Ameriuue com. i. |\ 253. 



j HISTORY OF AMERICA, agp 

rr bis fellow-*creatures. c) Ftoto that time, 
was the avowed patron of the Indians ; and 
b^r his bold interpofitions ifi their behalf, as 
well as by the refpeft due to his abilities and 
rbara&er , he had often thfe merit of fetting 
Ibme bounds to the exceifes of hid countrymen. 
ffe did not fail to remofiftrate warmly againft 
ikai proceedings of Albuquerque; and, though 
|»* foon found that attention to bis own intetefc 
rendered that rapacious officer deaf to adtfiotai- 
Ifon , he did not abandon the watched people 
wbofe caufe he had efpoufed. He inftantly 
fet out for Spain, with the ntoft faftguine hopes 
ef opening the eyes and fattening the heitt o$ 
^erdinand, by that ftriking piftufe of the op- 
jreifio'n of his new fubje&s, Wbkh he would 
exhibit to his view, d) 

Solicits their caufe in the court of Spain. 

He eafily ofetalAed (1516.) admittance to 4 
tbe king , whom he found to a declining ftate 
4A health. With tnuth freedom , atfd no lefs 1 
eloquence , he reprefented t& hiiti alt the fatal 
eifefts of the repartimientos in the New World, 
boldly charging him with the guilt of having 

e) Fr. &nj,. Datflla PftdilW Hrft. dtf la Fundatftoh At la Pro* 
vincia de St. )ago de Mexico, p. 303, 304. Herrera, 
dec. 1. lib. x. c. 12. 

4) Herrera. dec. 1. lib. x. c. 12. Dec. 2. lib. i. c. 11. Da- 
vila Parfilln H\L p. 304. 

Roberts on. Tom. I. T 



z 9 o HISTORY Of AMERICA. 

authorized this impious meafure , which 1 
brought mifery and deftruftion upon a nunn 
ous and innocent race of men , whom Frov 
ence had placed under his protection. F 
dinand , whofe mind as well as body \ 
much enfeebled by his diftemper, was grej 
alarmed at this charge of impiety, which 
another jun&ure he would have defpifed, 
liftened with deep compunction to the difcoi 
of Las Cafas , and promifed to take into att 
tive confideration the means of redr effing 
evil of which he complained. But death j 
vented him from executing his refolution. Q 
les of Auftria , to whom all his crowns dev< 
ed ,- refided at that time in his paternal do 
nions in the Low Countries. Las Cafas , v 
his ufual ardour, prepared immediately to 
out for Flandres , in order to occupy the 
of the young monarch, when cardinal XL 
nes, who, as regent, aflumed the reins 
government in Caftile , commanded him to 
fiit from the journey, and engaged to hear 
complaints in perfon. 

The regulations cf cardinal Ximenet. 

He accordingly weighed the matter v 
attention equal to its importance; and as 
impetuous mind delighted in fch ernes bold 
uncommon, he foon fixed upon a plan wl 
aftonifhed the minifters , trained up under 
formal and cautious adminiftrationofFerdins 



B HISTORY OF AMERICA, 29* 

*'\#i£hout regarding either the rights of Don 
''Diego Columbus , or the regulations eftabliftxed 
*by the late king, he refolved to fend three per- 
iTons to America as fuperintendents of all the 
Colonies there, with authority > after examining 
Wll circumftances on the fpot, to decide finally 
'^ftrith refpefl: to the point in queftion. It was 
W matter of deliberation and delicacy to chufe 
tnen qualified for fuch an important ftation. As 
*11 the laymen fettled in America, or who had 
Imeen confulted in the adminiftration of that 
department, had given their opinion that the 
Spaniards could not keep pofleflion of their new 
^Settlements* unlefs they were allowed to retain 
ibeir dominion over the Indians * he faw that 
•Cie could not rely on their impartiality, and de- 
termined to commit the truft to ecclefiafticks. As 
tiie Dominicans and Francifcans had already 
Wfpoufed oppofite fides in the controverfy, he, 
terom the fam^ principle, excluded both thefe 
^fraternities from the commifiion, He confined 
tiis choice to the monks of St. Jerome, a fmall, 
fcut refpe&able order in Spain. ' With the af- 
fiftance of their general , and in concert with 
Las Cafas , he foon pitched upon three perfons , 
-whom he deemed equal to the charge. To 
'them he joined Zua2o, a private lawyer of 
diftinguifhed probity, with unbounded power 
^to regulate all judicial proceedings in the co-* 
lonies. Las Cafas was appointed to accompany 
T a 



292 HISTOHY OF AMERICA. 

them, with the title of Proteftor of the In- 
dians, e) 

The manner in which they were executed. 

To veft fuch extraordinary powers as might 
at once overturn the fyftera of government 
eftablifhed in the New World, in fourperfons, 
who , from their humble condition in life, were 
little intitled to poflefs this high authority, ap- 
peared to Zapata, and other minifters of the 
late king, a meafure fo wild and dangerous, 
that they refufed to ilfue the difpatches necef- 
fary for carrying it into execution. But Xi- 
menes was not of a temper patiently to brook 
oppofifion to any of his fchemes. He fent for 
the refractory minifters , and addreffed them in 
fuch a tone , that in the utmoft confirmation 
they obeyed his orders, f) The fnperin- 
tendents, with their aflbciate Zuazo, afid Las 
Cafas , failed for St. Domingo. Upon their ar- 
rival , the flrft aft of theif authority \tfas to fet 
at liberty all the Indians who had been granted 
to the Spanifh courtiers, of to any perfon not 
redding in America. This, together with the 
information which had been received freuh Spain 
concerning the objett of the cotfimiffion, fpread 
a general alarm. The colonifts concluded that 
they were to be deprived at once of the hands 

e) Herrera, dec. 2. lib. ii. c. 3. 

f) Ibid. dec. 2. lib. ii. c. 0. 



I 



HISTORY OF AMERICA, zpj 



With which they carried on their labour, and 
that, of confequence, ruin was unavoidable. 

^But the fathers of St, Jerome proceeded with 
, ,fuch caution and prudence , as foon diffipated 
all their fears. They difcovered, in every ftep 
of their conduft, a knowledge of the ayprld, 
.and of affairs , which is feldotn acquired in a 
cloifter; and difpl^yed a moderation and ge.ntle- 
Jiefs ftill more rare among perfons trained up 

,In the folitude and aufterity of a monaftlck life. 
Their ears were open to information from every 
quarter, they compared the different accounts 

.which they received, and, after a mature con- 

.fideration of the whole, they were fijlly fatis- 
, lied that the ftate of the colony rendered it 
itnpoffible to adopt the plan propofed by Las 
Cafas, and recommended by the cardinal. They 
plainly perceived that the Spaniards fettled in 
America were fo few in number, that they 
could neither work the mines which bad been 
opened , nor cultivate the country ; that they 
.depended for both upon the labour of the nfi- 
Jfcives, and, if deprived of it, they muft in- 
itantly relinquifh their conquefts, qt give up 
all the advantages which they derived from 
them ; that no allurement was fo powerful as 
to furmount the natural averfion of the Indians 
to any laborious effort, and that nothing but 
the authority of a mafter could compel them to 
work ; and if they were not kept contbwtly 
under the eye a#d discipline of a fuperiopj fp 



294 HISTORY OF AMERICA 

great was their natural liftleflhefs and in< 

ence , that they would neither attend tc 

gious Inftruftion, nor obferve thofe rit 

Chriftianity which they had been already ts 

Upon all thofe accounts, the fuperinten 

found it necefTary to tolerate the repartii 

tos , and to fuffer the Indians to remain i 

fubje&ion to their Spanifh mailers. The} 

their utmoft endeavours, however, to pr 

the fatal e Hefts of this eftablifhment, ai 

fecure the Indians the confolation of tht 

treatment compatible with a ftate of ferv 

For this purpofe, they revived former re 

tions, they prefcribed new ones, they 

glefted no circumftance that tended to mi! 

the rigour of the yoke ; and by their anth( 

their example, and their exhortations, 

laboured to infpire their countrymen with 

timents of equity and gentlenefs, towards 

unhappy people upon whofe induftry the] 

pefided. Zuazo, in his department, feco 

the endeavours of the fuperinten dents. 

reformed the courts of juftice, in fuch a i 

ner as to render their decifions equitabl 

well as expeditious, and introduced variou 

gulations which greatly improved the int 

police of the colony. The fatisfaftion \* 

his conduft, and that of the fuperintenc 

gave, was now univerfal among the Span: 

fettled in the New World , and all admirei 

boldnefs of Ximenes, in havipg departed* 



HISTORY OP AMERICA; 295 

the ordinary path of bufinefs iti forming his 
plan, as well as his fagacity , in pitching iipon 
perfon$ , whofe wifdom, moderation f a^nd 
difintereftednefs , rendered them worthy of this 
high truft. 1 g) .. 

Lap Cafas diflatisfied with them! 

Las Cafas alone was diflatisfied. Thepiru r 
dential considerations which influenced the fuper T 
intendents, made nq impreflion upon hinij 
He regarded their idea of accommodating their 
conduft tQ the ftate of the colopy, as the 
maxim of an unhallowed timid policy, which 
tolerated what was unjuft, becaufe it wa$ 
beneficial. He contended, that the Iqdians 
were by nature free, and, as their prote&or, 
he required the fuperintendents not to bereave 
them of the common privilege of humanity. 
They received his moft virulent remonftrances 
Without emotion, but adhered firmly to their 
own fyftem, The Spanifh planters did not bear 
with hipti fo patiently , and were re^dy to tear 
Jrim in pieces for infilling in. a requifition fo 
odious to them. Las Cafas , in order to fcreen 
himfelf from their rage , found it neceffary tQ 
take fhelter in a convent; and perceiving that 
all his efforts in America were fruitless, he 
foon fet out for Europe, with a fixed refolution 

g) Herrera , dec. 2. lib. ii. c. 15. Remefal Hift. Gener. lib, 
ii. c. 14, 15, 16. 



ap6 HISTORY OF AMERICA; 

not to abandon the proteftion of a people whom 
he deemed to be cruelly oppreffed. h) 

His negociations with the minifters of Charles V. 

Had Ximenes retained that vigour of mind 
with which he ufually applied to bufinefs, Las 
Cafas muft have met with no very gracious re- 
ception upon his return to Spain. But he 
found the cardinal languifhing under a mortal 
diftemper, and preparing to refign his authority 
to the young king, who was daily expefted 
from the Low Countries. Charles arrived , took 
poffeflion of the government, and, by the 
death of Ximenes , loft a minifter , whofe abi- 
lities , and integrity intitled him to direft his 
affairs. Many of the Flemifh nobility had ac- 
companied their fovereign to Spain. From that 
warm predileftion to his countrymen , which 
was natural at his age, he confulted them 
with refpeft to all the tranfaftions in his new 
kingdom, and they, with an intfifcreet eager- 
nefs, intruded themfelves into every bufinefs, 
and feized almoft every department of ad mini f- 
tration. i) The dire&ion of American affairs 
was an objeft too alluring to efcape their atten- 
tion. Las Cafas obferved their growing influ- 
ence, and though projectors are ufually too 
fanguine to conduit their fchemes with much 

I>) Hcrrera. dec. 2. lib. ii. c. 16. 
i> HM. of Charles V. vo!. ii. p. 49. 



HISTORY OF AMERICA, 397 

rdexterity, he poflefled a buttling indefatigable 
•aftivity, which fometimes accomplifhes its par- 
^pofes with greater fuccefs, than the raoft ex- 
quifite difcernment and addrefs. He courted 
the Flemifh minifters with affiduity. He re- 
prefented to them the abfurdity of all the 
fflaaxims hitherto adopted with refpeft to the 
government of America, and particularly the 
-defefts of that arrangement which Ximenes had 
j introduced. The memory of Ferdinand was 
,.9dious to the Flemings. The fuperior virtue 
, $nd abilities of Ximenes had long the ofcjeft 
of their envy. They fondly wifhed to 
, have a piapfible pretext for condemning the 
welfares, both of the monarch and of the 
roiptfte* , and of refle&ing fome discredit on 
their political wifdom. The friends of Don 
JHego Columbus , as well as the Spanifli cour- 
tier* , who had been diffarisfied with the car- 
dinal's admimftration , joined Las Cafas in cen- 
tring the fcheme of fending fuperintendents to 
America. This union of fo many intereft6 and 
paflions was irrefiftible; and, in confequence 
of it, the fathers of St. Jerome, and their affo- 
ciate Zua&o , were recalled. Roderigo de Fi- 
gueroa, a lawyer of fome eminence, was ap- 
pointed chief judge of the ifland , and receive4 
inftru&ions, in compliance with the requeft of 
Las Cafas , to examine once more , with the 
utmoft attention , the point in controverfy be- 
tween him ?nd the people of the colopy , with 



3 9 8 HISTORY OF AMERICA. 

refpeft to the treatment of the natives ; and in 
the mean time to do every thing in his power 
to alleviate their fuflferings, and prevent the 
extinftion of the race, i) 

Scheme of fupplying the colonies with negroes. 

This was all that the zeal of Las Cafas could 
procure , at that jun&ure, in favour of the In- 
dians. The impoffibility of carrying 1 on any 
improvement in America, unlefs the Spanifh 
planters could command the labour of the na- 
tives, was an infuperable obje&ion to his plan 
of treating them as free fubjefts. In order to 
■provide fome remedy for this , without which 
he found it was in vain to mention his fcherae, 
Les Cafas propofed to purchafe a fufficient nam* 
ber of negroes from the Portuguefe fettleraents 
on the coaft of Africa, and to tranfport them to 
America, in order that they might be employed 
as Haves in working the mines and cultivating 
the ground. One of the fir ft advantages which 
the Portuguefe had derived from their difcove- 
ries in Africa , arofe from the trade in (laves. 
Various circumftances concurred in reviving this 
odious commerce, which had long been abolifh- 
ed in Europe , and which is no lefs re* 
pugnant to the feelings of humanity, than to 
the principles of religion. As early as the 
year one thoufand five hundred and three, 

i) 1Ie:rera. dec. '?. lib. ii. c. t6. 19. 2f. lib. Hi. c. 7. |. 



HISTORY OF AMERICA. 299 

a few negroe flaves had been fent into the New 
World, k) In the year one thoufand five hun- 
dred and eleven , Ferdinand permitted the im- 
portation of them in greater numbers, 1) They 
were found to be a more robuft and hardy race 
than the natives of America. They were more 
capable of enduring fatigue, mdre patient under 
fervitude, and the labour of one negro wis 
computed to be equal to that of four Indians, m) 
Cardinal Ximenes, however, when folicited to 
encourage this commerce, peremptorily rejefted 
the propofition, becaufe he perceived the ini- 
quity of reducing one race of men to fJavery, 
while he was confulting about the means of 
reftoring liberty to another, n) But Las Cafas, 
from the inconfiftency natural to men who hurry 
with headlong impetuofity towards a favourite 
point, was incapable of making this diftinftion. 
While he contended earneftly for the liberty of 
the people born in one quarter of the globe , 
lie laboured to enflave the inhabitants of another 
region ; and in the warmth of his zeal to fave 
the Americans from the yoke, pronounced it to 
be lawful and expedient to impofe one ftill hea- 
vier upon the Africans. Unfortunately. for the 
latter, Las Cafas's plan was adopted. Charles 
granted a patent to one of his Flemifh fovoqiv 



k) Herrera , dec* I. lib. v. c. 12. 

1) Ibid. lib. viii. c. 9. 

m) Ibid. lib. ix. c. 5. 

n) Ibid. dec. 2. lib. ii. c. 8. 



.^o HISTORY OF AMERICA. 

ires, containing an exclufive right of importing 
four thoufand negroes into America. He fold 
bis patent to in me Genoefe merchants for 
twenty five thoufand ducats , and they were 
the fir ft who brought into a regular form that 
commerce for flaves between Africa and Ame- 
rica, which has fince been carried on to fuch 
an amazing extent, o) 

Las Cafas propofes feudir; bboucerf to Hifpanioia. 

But the Genoefe merchants , conducting 
their operations, at fir ft, (151S.) with the 
rapacity of monopolies, demanded fuch an high 
price for negroes, that the number imported 
into Hifpaniola made no great change upon the 
ft ate of the colony. Las Cafas , whofe zeal was 
no lefs inventive than indefatigable, had re- 
course to another expedient for the relief of the 
Indians. He obferved , that moft of the perfon? 
who had fettled hitherto in America , were £61- 
diers and failors employed in the difcoyery or 
conqueft of the country; the younger fons of 
noble families, allured by the profpeft of ac- 
quiring fudden wealth ; or defperate adven- 
turers, whom their indigence or crimes forced 
to abandon their native land. Inftefttf of £bch 
men, who were difiblute, tapftciogs, mi in- 
capable of that fober perfevering induftry which 
is requifite in forming new colonies, he pro- 

n) Herrera , dec. 1. lib. 2. c. £0. 



HISTORY OF AMERICA, goi 

pofed to fupply the new fettlements in Hifpa- 
niola and the other iflands with a fufficient 
jwfmber of labourers and hufbandmen , who 
fhould be allured by fuitable premiums to re- 
move thither. Thefe , as they Were accuftomed 
to fatigue , would be able to perform the Work 
to which the Indians, from the feeblenefs of 
their conftitution , were unequal, and might 
foon become ufefal and opulent citizens. But 
though Hifpaniola ftood much in need of a re- 
cruit of inhabitants , having been vifited at this 
time with the fmall-pox, which fwept off 
many of the natives, and though Las Cafas had 
the countenance of the Flemifh minifters, this 
fcheme was defeated by the bifhop of Burgos, 
who thwarted all his projefts. p) 

Forms the idea of a new colony. 

Las Cafas now defpaired of procuring any 
relief for the Indians in thafe places where the 
Spaniards were already fettled. The evil was 
become fo iftvetetate thefe , as riot to admit of 
a cure. But fuch difcoveties were daily making 
in the continent , as gave att high idea, both of 
its extent and populoufftefs. In all thofe vaft 
regiohs thefe was but btie feeble colony plant- 
ed ; and except a fmall fpot on the ifthmtis of 
Darien, the natives ftill occupied the whole 
country. This opened a new and more ample 

p) Herrtra , dec. a. lib. ii, c. at. 



362 HISTORY OF AMERICA. 

field for the humanity and zeal of Las Cafrf, 
who flattered himfelf that be might prevent a 
pernicious fyftem from being introduced there, 
though he had failed of fuccefs in his attempts 
to overturn it* where it was already eftablifhed. 
Full of this idea, he applied for a grant of the 
unoccupied country, ftretching along the fea- 
coaft from the gulf of Paria to the weftern fron- 
tier of that province now known by the name 
of Santa Martha. He propofed to fettle there 
with a colony compofed of hufoandmen , la- 
bourers, and ecclefiafticks. He engaged, in 
the fpace of two years , to civilize ten thou- 
fand of the natives i and to inftruft them fo 
thoroughly in the arts of focial life, that, from 
the fruits of their induftry, an annual revenue 
of fifteen thoufand ducats fhould arife to the 
king. In ten years he expefted that his im- 
provements would be fo far advanced, as to 
yield annually fixty thoufand ducats. He 
iripulated, that no failor or foldier fhould ever 
be permitted to fettle in this diftrift; and that 
no Spaniard fhould enter it without bis per- 
rniflion. He even projected to clothe the people 
whom he took along with him in fome peculiar 
garment, which did not refemble the Spanifh 
drefs , that they might appear to the natives 
u* be a different race of men from thofe who 
had brought fo many calamities upon their 
*:nijntry. q) From this fcheme, of which I have 

I licrrtr«. dec. 2 % lil\ iv. c. 3. 



HISTORY OF AMERICA* 303 

ced only the great lines, it ismanifeft that Las 
fas had formed ideas concerning the method of 
ating the Indians, fimilar tothofe by which the 
uits afterwards carried on their great operatic 
s in another part of the fame continent. He fup- 
fed that the Europeans , by availing them- 
ves of that afcendant which they poffeffed in 
nfequence of their fuperior progrefs in fcience 
d improvement, might gradually form the 
inds of the Americans to relifh thofe comforts 
which they were deftitute, might train them 
the arts of civil life, and render them capable 
its fun&ions. 

•% 

Favourably received. 

But to the bifhop of Burgos ahd the council 
:• the Indies this projeft appeared not only 
limericaly but dangerous in a high degree, 
hey deemed the faculties of the Americans to 
5 naturally fo limited , and their indolence fo 
Kceflive, that atiy attempt to inftruft or im-^ 
rove them would be fruitlefs. They contended, 
lat it would be extremely imprudent to give 
le command of a country extending above 
thoufand miles along the coaft , to a fanciful, 
refumptuous enthufiaft, & ftranger to the af- 
lirs of the world, and unacquainted with the 
rts of government. Las Cafas , far from being 
ifcouraged >frith a repulfe, which he had rea- 
bn to expeft , had recourfe once more to the 
r lemifh favourites, who zealoufly patronized 



3 o 4 HISTORY OF AMERICA. 

his fcheme, merely beeaufeit had been -r ejefted 
by the Spanifh minifters. They prevailed 
with their matter, who had lately been raifed 
to the Imperial dignity , to refer the con fid er- 
ation of this meaiure to a feleft number of his 
privy-counfellors; and as Las Cafas excepted 
againft the members of the council of the Indies 9 
as partial and in te relied, they were all excluded. 
The decifion of menchofen by recommendation 
of the Flemings , was perfeftly conformable to 
their fentiments. They warmly approved of 
Las Cafas's plan ; and gave orders for carrying 
it into execution, but reft rifted the territory 
allotted him to three hundred miles along the 
coaft of Cumana, allowing him, however, to 
extend it as far as he pleafed towafds the inte- 
rior part of the country, r) 

A folemn deliberation concerning the mode of 
treating the Indians. 

This determination did not pafs uncenfared. 
Almoft every perfon who had been in the Weft 
Indies exclaimed againft it, and fupported their 
opinion fo confidently , and with fuch plaufible 
reafons , as made it advifable to paufe and to 
review the fubjeft more deliberately. Charles 
itirnfelf, though accuftomed, at this early 
[■r-riod of his life, to adopt the fentiments of 
bis minifters, with fuch fubmiffive deference 

M 

• ) (xomara Hi ft. Gener. c. 77. Herrera, dec. a. lib. ir. c. 3. 
Oviedo, lib. xix. c. 5. 



HISTORY OF AMERICA. 305 

mi did not promife that decifiye vigour of mind 
rurhich diftinguifhed his riper years, couid mot 
tftelp fufpefting that the eagernefs with wmch 
ithe Flemings took part in every affair relating 
£0 America, flowed from fome improper motive, 
ffchd began to difcover an inclination to examine 
fin perfon into the ftate of the queftion concern* 
£fig the character of the Americans , and the 
^proper manner of treating them. An opportu- 
nity of making this inquiry, with great advan- 
tage , foon occured. Quevedo , the bifhop of 
jDarien, who had accompanied Pedrarias to the 
fContinent in the year one thoufand five hundred 
^jfcnd thirteen , * happened to land at Barcelona, 
^where the court then refided. It was quickly 
Jknown , that his fentiments concerning the 
talents and difpofition of the Indians differed 
from thofe of Las Cafas; and Charles naturally 
1 concluded, that by confronting two refpe&able 
perfons, who, during their refidence in Ame- 
*tica, had full leifure to obferve the manners of 
' ! the people whom they pretended to defcribe, 
he might be able to difcover which of them had 
-formed his opinion with the greateft difcern- 
*nent and accuracy. 

A day for this folemn audience was ap-* 
pointed. (June 20. 1517. ) The emperor 
appeared with extraordinary pomp, and took 
his feat on a throne in the great hall of the 
palace. His principal courtiers attended. Don 
Diego Columbus, admiral of the Indies, was 
Robertson. Tom. I. U 



8 o6 HISTORY. OF AMERICA. 

fummoned to be prefent. The bifhop of Di 
rien was called upoh firft to deliver his oj 
nion. He , in a fhort difcourfe » lament 
the fatal defolation of America , by the c 
tinftion of fo many of its inhabitants ; 
acknowledged that this muft be imputed , 
fome degree , to the exceflive rigour and 
confiderate proceedings of the Spaniards ; 1 
declared , that all the people of the N 
World, whom he had feen either in the o 
tinent or in the iflands, appeared to him 
be a race of men marked out , by the 
feriority of their talents , for fervitude, i 
whom it would be impoflible to inftruft or i 
prove , unlefs they were kept under the c 
tinual infpeftion of a mafter. Las Cafas, 
great length, and with more fervour* defen< 
his own fyftem. He rejefted with in4ignat 
the idea that any race of men was born to 
vitiide, as irreligious and inhuman. He aff 
ed, that the faculties of the Americans w 
not naturally defpicable, but unimproved ; 1 
they were capable of receiving inftru&ion 
the principles of religion , as well as of acq 
ing the induftry and arts which would qua 
them for the various offices of fociai life; 
the mildnefs and timidity of their nature i 
dered them fo fubmiflive and docile , that t 
might be led and formed with a gentle h: 
He profeffed, that his intentions in propo 
the fcheme now under confideration were j 



HISTORY OF AMERICA. 307 

«id difinterefted ; and though, from the ac~ 
romplifhment of his defigns, ineftimable bene- 
its would refult to the crown of Caftile , he 
aever had claimed , nor ever would receive 
any recompence on that account. 

The ftheme of Las Cafas approved of. 

Charles, after hearing both, and confulting 
with his minifters, did not think himfelf fuffi- 
ciently informed to eflablifh any general arran- 
gement with refpeft to the ftate of the Indians; 
but as he had perfeft confidence in the integri- 
ty of Las Cafas , and as even the bifhop of 
Darien admitted his fcheme to be of fuch im- 
portance , that a trial fhould be made of its ef- 
fects, he iffued a patent, (1530.) granting him 
the diftrift in Cumana formerly mentioned, with 
fall power to eflablifh a colony there according 
to his own plan, s) 

His preparations for executing it. 

Las Cafas pufhed on the preparations foe 
his voyage with his ufual ardour. But, either 
from his own inexperience in the conduft o£ 
affairs , or from the fecret oppofition of the 
Spanifh nobility, who univerfally dreaded the 
fuccefs of an inftitution that might rob them of 
U a 



1?) Herrera , dec. a. lib. iv. c. 3. 4. 5. Argenfola Annates 
d'Aragon, 74, 97. Reraifal Hift. Gener. lib. it* c, xg, %9, 



308 HlStORY OF AMERICA. 

the induftrious and ufeful hands which cultivat- 
ed their eftates , his progrefs in engaging huf- 
bandmen and labourers was extremely flow, 
and he could not prevail on more than two 
hundred to accompany him to Cumana. 

Departs for America , and meets with formidable 

obitacles. 

Nothing, however, could damp his zeal 
With this flender train, hardly fufficient to take 
paffeffion of fuch a vaft territory, and altogether 
unequal to any attempt towards civilizing its 
inhabitants , he fet fail. The firft place at 
which he touched wis the ifland of Puerto 
Rico. There he received an account of a new 
obftacle to the execution of his fcheme, more 
infuperable than any he had hitherto encounter- 
ed. When he left America in the year one 
thoufand five hundred and iixtefen , the Spa- 
niards had little intercourfe with any part of 
the continent, except the countries adjacent to 
the gulf of Darien. But as every fpecies of 
internal induftry began to ftagnate in Hifpaoio- 
la, when, by the rapid decreafe of the native* 
the Spaniards were deprived of thofe hands witk 
which they had hitherto carried on their opera- 
tions, this prompted them to try various ex- 
pedients for fupplying that lofs. Confiderablt 
numbers of negroes were . imported ; but, on 
account of their exorbitant price, many of the 
planters could not afford to purchafe them. In 



HISTORY OF AMERICA. 3 q 9 

?r to procure flaves at an eafier rate, fome 
:hefe fitted out veiFels_ to cruize .along the 
B: of the continent. In places wjie.re they 
id themfelves inferior, iti ftre.ngth , they 
Led with the natives , and ,gave European . 
s in exchange for the plates of gold .worn 
them as ornaments ; but , wherever they 
Id furprife or overpower the Ind.ians, they 
ried them off by force, and fold them as 
•es in Hifpaniola. t) In thofe predatory ex- 
lions , the moft atrocious afts of yiolence 
I cruelty were committed. The Spanifh 
ne was held in deteftarion all over the con- 
?nt. Whenever any fhips appeared, the in- 
•itants either fled to the woods , or ruined 
vn to the fhore in arms, to repel thofe hat- 
difturbers of their tranquillity. They forced 
le parties of the Spaniards to retreat .with 
cipitation; they cut off others; and in the 
lence of their refentment againft the whole 
ion, they murdered two Dominican miffio- 
ies, whofe zeal had prompted them to fettle 
the province of (Humana/ u) This outrage 
linft perfons revered for their fanftity , ex- 
id fuch indignation among the people of 
Tpaniola , who , notwithftanding all their li-r 
itious and cruel proceedings , were pol- 
led with a wonderful zeal for religion, an4 

) Herrera , dec. 3. lib. ii. c. 3. 

) Oviedo , Hift. lib. xix. c. 3. \ 



8 io HISTORY OF AMERICA. 

a fuperflitious refpeft for its minifters, • 
they determined toinflift exemplary punifhm 
not only upon the perpetrators of that crl 
but upon the whole race. With this vi 
they gave the command of five Chips and tl 
hundred men to Diego Ocampo, with or 
to lay wafte, the country of Cumana with 
and (word , and to tranfport all the inhabit 
as flaves to Hifpaniola. This armament 
Cafas found at Puerto Rico , in its way to 
continent; and as Ocampo refufed to defer 
voyage , he immediately perceived that it w< 
be impoflible, to attempt the execution of 
pacifick plan in a country deftined to be the 
of war and defolation. x) 

Labours to furmount them. 

• 

In order to provide againft the effeft: 
this unfortunate incident, he fet fail dire 
for St. Domingo , leaving his followers can 
ed out among the planters in Puerto Rico. F 
many concurring caufes, the reception wl 
Las Cafas met with (12th April 1517. ) in 
Jpaniola was very unfavourable. In his m 
ciations for the relief of the Indians, he 
cenfured the conduft of his countrymen f< 
ed there with fuch honeft feverity as rend< 
him universally odious to them. They cc 
dered their own ruin as the inevitable < 

x) Hcrrera, dec. 2. lib. ix. c. 8, 9. 



HISTORY OF AMERICA, 31* 

fequence of bis fuccefs. They were now elated 
, with hope of receiving a large recruit of flaves* 
from Cumana , which muft be relinquished if 
Las Cafas were aflifted in fettling his proje&ed 
colony there. Figueroa, in confequence of the 
inftruftions he had received in Spain, had made 
an experiment concerning the capacity of/ 
the Indians, which was reprefented as decifivei 
againft the fyftem of Las Cafas. He collefted 
in Hifpaniola a good number of the natives , 
and fettled them in two villages, leaving them 
at perfeft liberty, and with the uncontrouled 
direction of their own aftions. But that people, 
accuftomed to a mode of life extremely different, 
incapable of affuming new habits at once, and 
deje&ed with their own misfortunes as well as 
thofe of their country , exerted fo little induf* 
try in cultivating the ground , appeared fo dev 
void of folicitude or forefight in providing for- 
th eir own wants, and were fach ftrangers to 
arrangement in, condufting their affairs, that 
the Spaniards pronounced them incapable of 
being formed to live like men in focial life , and 
confidered them as children, who fhould be 
kept under the perpetual tutelage of perfonii 
fuperior to themfelvesin wifdomand fagacity.y) 

Final mi (carriage of his fohetne. 

Notwithftanding all thofe ciroumftanees , 
which alienated the people to whom Las Cafas, 

y) Herrera, dec. s. lib. x. c. 5. 



3 i2 HISTORY OF AMERICA. 

applied from himfelf and from his meafures, 
/Be by his activity and perfeverence , by fome 
conceffions, and many threats, obtained at length 
a fmall body of troops to proteft him and his 
colony at their firft landing. Bat upon his 
return tp Puerto Rico, he found that the difea- 
fes of the climate had been fatal to feveral of 
his people; and that others having got employ- 
ment in that ifland , refufed to follow him. 
With the handful that remained , he fet fail 
and landed in Cumana. Ocampo had executed 
his commiffion in that province with fuch bar- 
barous rage, having mailacred many of the in- 
habitants, fent others in chains to Hifpaniola, 
and forced the reft to ily for fhelter to the 
woods, that rhi* people of a fmall colony, 
which he had piaiusri at a place which he nam- 
ed Toledo, were ready to perifh for want in 
a defolate country. There, however, LasCa- 
fas was obliged to .fix his refidence, though 
deferted both by the troops appointed to protect 
him , and by thofe under the command of 
Ocampo, who forefaw and dreaded the calami- 
ties to which he muft be expofed in that wret- 
ched ftation. He made the beft provifion in 
his power for the fafety and fubfiftence of his 
followers ; but as his utmoft efforts availed little 
towards fecuring either the one or the other, 
he returned to Hifpaniola , in order to folicit 
more effeftual aid for the prefervation of men • 
who from confidence in him had ventured into 



HISTORY OF AMERICA. 313 

a poft of fo much danger.. Soon after his de- 
parture, the natives, having difcovered the 
feeble and defenceless ftate of the Spaniards, 
airembled fecretly, attacked them with the fury 
natural to men exafperated by many injuries, 
cut off a good number , and compelled the reft 
to fly in the utmoft confirmation to the ifland 
of Cubagua. The fmall colony fettled there, 
on account of the pearl fifhery, catching the 
panick with which their countrymen had been 
feized, abandoned the ifland, and not a Spa- 
niard remained in any part of the continent, 
or adjacent iflands, from the gulf of Paria to 
the borders of Darien. Aftonifhed at fuch a 
fucceffion of difafters , Las Cafas was afhamed 
to fhew his face after this fatal termination of 
all his fplendid fchemes. He fhut himfelf up 
in the convent of the Dominicans at St. Do- 
mingo, and foon after allumed the habit of 
that order, z) 

Though the expulfion of the colony from 
Cumana happened in the year one thoufand 
five hundred and twenty-one, I have chofen to 
trace the progrefs of Las Cafas's negociations 
from their firft rife to their final iffue without 
interruption. His fyftefn was the objeft of 
long and attentive difcuffion; and though his 
efforts in behalf of the oppreffed Americans, 



z) Ilerrera, dec. 2. lib. x. c. 5. dec. 3. lib. ii. c. 3, 4, 5. 
Oviedo, Hilt. lib. xix. c. 5. Gomara , c. 77. Davila 
Padilla, lib. i, c. 97. Remifal.Hift. Gen. lib. xi. c.22,23. 



3 i4 HISTORY OF AMERICA, 

partly from his own rafhnefs and imprudence, 
and partly from the malevolent oppofition ol 
his adverfaries , were not attended with tha 
fuccefs which he promifed with too fanguim 
confidence, great praife is due to his humam 
a&ivity, which gave rife to various regulation; 
which were of fome benefit to that unhapp; 
people. I return now to the hiftory of thi 
Spanifh difcoveries, as they occur in the orde. 
of time, a) 

New dilcoveries towards the weft. 

Diego Velafquez, who conquered Cuba it 
the year one toufand five hundred and eleven 
ftill retained the government of that ifland, at 
the deputy of Don Diego Columbus, thougl 
he feldom acknowledged his fuperior, and aime( 
at rendering his own authority altogether in 
dependent, b) Under his prudent adminiftra 
tion, Cuba became one of the moft flourifhini 
of the Spanifh fettlements. .The fame of thi 
allured many perfons from the other colonie 
thither, in hopes of finding either fome pei 
manent eftablifhment, or fome employment fc 
their activity. As Cuba lay to the weft of a 
the iflands occupied by the Spaniards, and a 
the ocean, which ftretches beyond it toward 
that quarter, had not hitherto keen explorec 

a) Herrera, dec. 2. Jib. x. c. 5. p, 329. 

b) ibid. lib. ii. c. ly. 



: HISTORY OF AMERICA. 31s 

thefe circumftances naturally invited the inha- 
bitants to attempt new difcoveries. An expe- 
dition for this purpofe, in which aftivity and 
refolution might conduct to fudden wealth, 
was more fuited to the genius of the age, than 
the patient induftry requifite in clearing ground^ 
and manufacturing fugar. Inftig&ted by this 
fpirit, feveral officers, who had ferved under 
pedrarias in Darien , entered into an affociation 
to undertake a voyage of difcovery. They 
perfuaded Francifco Hernandez Cordova, an 
opulent planter in Cuba , and a man of diftin- 
guifhed courage, to join, with them in the ad- 
venture , and chofe him to be their commander. 
Velafquez not only approved of the defign, 
but aflifted in carrying \t on. As the veterans 
from Darien were extremely indigent, he and 
Cordova advanced money for purchafing three 
fmall veflels , and furnifhing them with every 
thing requifite either for traffick or for war, 
A hundred and ten jnen embarked on board of 
them,/ and failed from St. Jago de Cuba on the 
eighth of February one tboufand five hundred 
and feventeen. By the advice of their chief 
pilot, Antonio Alaminps, who had ferved under 
the iirft admiral Columbus , they flood diredUy 
weft relying on the opinion of that gre^t na- 
vigator, who uniformly maintained that a 
wefterly courfe would lead to the moft important 
difcoveries. 



316 HISTORY OF AMERICA. 

Yucatan. 

On the twenty firft day after their depar- 
ture from St. Jago, they faw land, which 
proved to be Cape Catoche, the eafteni point 
of that large penhifula proje&ing from the con- 
tinent of America, which £1111 retains its origi- 
nal name of Yucatan. As they approached the 
fhore, five canoes came off full of people de- 
cently clad in cotton garments; an aftonifhing 
fpe&acle to the Spaniards, who had found 
every other part of America poiTeffed by naked 
favages. Cordova endeavoured by fmall pre- 
sents to gain the goodwill of thefe people. 
They, though amazed at the ftrange objefts 
now prefented for the firfl time to their view, 
invited the Spaniards to vifit their habitations, 
with an appearance of cordiality. They landed 
accordingly , and as they advanced into the 
country, they obferved with new wonder fome 
large houfes built with ftone. But they toon 
found that , if the people of Yucatan had made 
progrefs in improvement beyond their country- 
men , they were likewife more artful and 
warlike. For though the cazique received 
Cordova with many tokens of friendfhip, he 
had ported a confidcrable body of his fubjefts 
in ambufh behind a thicket, who, upon a 
fignal given by him , rufhed out and attacked 
the Spaniards with great boljlnefc, and fonie 
degree of martial order. At the firft flight of 



HISTORY OF AMERICA, 317 

their arrows, fifteen of the Spaniards were 
wounded ; but the Indians were ftruck with 
fuch terror by the fudden explofion of the fire 
arms , and fo furprifed at the execution done 
by them, by the crofs bowS, and by the other 
■weapons of their new enemies, that they fled 
precipitately. Cordova quitted ( 1520. ) acoun- 
try where he had met with fuch a fierce re- 
ception, carrying off*wo prifocers, together 
with the ornaments of a fmall temple, which 
he plundered in his retreat. 

Campeachy. 

He continued his courfe towards the weft 
without lofing fight of the coaft, and on the 
fixteenth day arrived at Campeachy. There 
<the natives received them more hofpitably; 
but the Spaniards were much furprifed , that 
on all the extenfive coaft along which they had 
failed, and which they imagined to be a large 
ifland, they had not obferved any river, c) As 
their water began to fail, they advanced, in 
hopes of finding a fupply; and at length they 
difcovered the mouth of a river at Potonchan, 
fome leagues beyond Campeachy. 

Cordova landed all his troops in order to 
proteft the failors while employed in filling the 
cafks ; but notwithstanding this precaution, the 
natives rufhed down upon them with fuch fury, 

c) See NOTE XXVI. 



3 i8 HISTORY OF AMERICA. 

and in fuch numbers, that forty-feven of the 
Spaniards were killed upon the fpot, and one 
man only of the whole body efcaped unhurt. 
Their commander, though wounded in twelve 
different places, direfted the retreat with pre- 
fence of mind equal to the courage with which 
he had led them on in the engagement, and 
with much difficulty they regained their Chips. 
After this fatal repulfe, nothing remained but 
to haften back to Cuba with their fhattered 
forces* In their paflage thither they fuflered 
the moft exquifite diftrefs for want of water, 
that men wounded and fickly , fhut up in fmall 
veilels, and expofed to the heat of the torrid 
zone, can be fuppofed to endure. Some of 
them , finking under thefe calamities , died by 
the way; Cordova, their commander, expired 
foon after they landed in Cuba, d) 

Voyage of Grijalva. 

Notwithftanding the difaftrous conclufion of 
this expedition, it contributed rather to ani- 
mate than to damp a fpirit of enterprize among 
the Spaniards. They had difcovered an exten- 
five country, fituated at no great diftance from 
Cuba , fertile in appearance , and poflefled by 
a people far fuperior in improvement to any 

d) Hcrrera, dec. c. lib. ii. c. 17. 18. Hiftor. Verdadera de 
la Conquifta de la Nuera Efpanna por Bernal Diaz del Caf- 
tillo, cap. 1.7. Oviedo, lib. xvii. c. 3. Gomiri, c. $S. 
P. Martyr de Iufulis nupcr inyemis, p. 339. 



HISTORY ,OF AMERICA. 319 

hitherto known in America. Though they 
had carried on little commercial Intercourfe with 
the natives , they had brought off fome orna- 
ments of gold, not confiderable in value, but 
of Angular fabrick. Thefe circumftances , relat- 
ed with the exaggeration natural to men de*- 
firous of heightening the merit of their own ex- 
ploits, were more than fufficient to excite ro- 
mantick hopes and expeftations. Great numbers 
offered to engage in a new expedition. Ve~ 
lafquez, folicitous to diftinguifh himfelf by fofrie 
fervice fo meritorious, as might entitle him to 
claim the government of Cuba independent of 
the admiral , not only encouraged their ardour, 
but at his own expence fitted out four fhips for 
the voyage. Two hundred and forty volun- 
teers, among whom were feveral perfons of 
rank and fortune, embarked in this enterprife. 
The command of it was given to Juan 4#€fri- 
jalva, a young man of known merit arid cour. 
rage, with inftruftions to obferve with atten- 
tion the nature of the countries which he fhould 
difcover, to barter for gold, and if circumftan- 
ces were inviting, to fettle a colony in fome 
proper ftation. 

Difcovers New Spain , Tabafco , Guaxftca , St. Juan de Ulua. 

He failed from St. Jago de Cuba on the 
eighth of April one thoufand five hundred and 
eighteen. The pilot Alaminos held the fame 
courfeas in the former voyage ; but the violence 



3 ao HISTORY OF AMERICA. 

of the currents carrying the fhips to the fouth, 
the firft land which they made was the ifland 
of Cozumel, ( 3. May 1518. ) to the eaft of 
Yucatan. As all the inhabitants fled to the 
woods and mountains at the approach of the 
Spaniards, they made no long ftay there, and, 
without any remarkable occurence, they reach- 
ed Potonchan on the oppofite fide of the 
peninfula. The defire of avenging their coun- 
trymen who had been flain there, concurred 
with their ideas of good policy, in prompting 
them to land , that they might chaftife the In- 
dians of that diftrift with fuch exemplary ri- 
gour, as would ftrike terror into all the people 
around them. But though they difembarked 
all their troops , and carried afhore fome field- 
pieces , the Indians fought with fuch courage, 
that the Spaniards gained the viftory with dif- 
ficulty , and were confirmed in their opinion, 
that the inhabitants of this country would prove 
more formidable enemies than any they 
had met with in other parts of America. From 
Potonchan, they continued their voyage to- 
wards the weft, keeping as near as poffible to 
the fhore, and cafting anchor every evening, 
from dread of the dangerous accidents to which 
they might be expofed in an unknown fea. 
During the day , their eyes were turned con- 
tinually towards land, with a mixture of fur- 
prife and wonder at the beauty of the country, 
°s well as the novelty t>f the objefts which 

they 



HISTORY OF AMERICA. 321 

they beheld. Many villages were (battered 
along the coaft , in which they could diftinguifh. 
houfes of ftpne that appeared white and lofty 
at a diftance. In the warmth of their admira- 
tion , they fancied thefe to be cities .adorned 
with towers and pinnacles; and one of thefol- 
diers happening to remark that this country 
refembled Spain m its appearance, Grijalva, 
with univerfal applaufe, called it New Spain, 
the name which ftill diftinguifhes this exten- 
five and opulent province of theSpanifh empire 
in America. They landed (9. June 1 51 8.) in a river 
which the natives called Tabafco, and the fame 
of their viftory at Potonchan having reach- 
ed this place, the cazlque not only received 
them amicably, but beftowed prefents upon 
them of fuch value, as confirmed the high ideas 
which the Spaniards had formed with refpeft 
to the wealth and fertility of the country, 
Thefe ideas were raifed ftill higher by ttiNt 
occurred at the place where they next touched* 
This was confiderably to the weft of Tabafco, 
in tfie province fince known by the name of 
Guaxaca. There they were received with re- 
fpeft paid to fuperior beings. The people per- 
fumed them as they landed withincenfeof gum 
copal , and prefented to them as offerings the. 
choiceft delicacies of their country. They were 
extremely fond of trading with their new vifiU 
ants , and in fix days the Spaniards obtained 
ornaments of gold, of curious workmanfhip, to 
Robertson. Tom. I, X 



$22 HISTORY OF AMERICA. 

the value of fifteen thoufarid pefos, inexchai 
for European toys of fmall price. The t 
prifoners whom Cordova had brought from ^ 
catan, had hitherto ferved as interpreters; I 
as they did not underftand the language oft 
country, the Spaniards learned from the n 
ves by figns, that they were fubjefts ofagi 
monarch called Montezuma , whofe domic 
extended over that and many other provim 
Leaving this place, with which he had fort 
reafon to he pleafed , Grijalva continued 
courfe towards the weft. He landed (J 
19. 1518.) on a fmall ifland, which he nai 
the Ifle of Sacrifices , becaufe there the S 
niards beheld, for the firft time , the ho 
fpeftacle of human viftims , which the I 
barous fuperftition of the natives offered 
their gods. He touched at another fmall ifls 
which he called St. Juan de Ulua. From 
pla«e he difpatched Pedro de Alvarado , 
of his officers , to Velafquez , with a full 
count of the important difcoveries which he 
made, and with all the treafure that he 
acquired by trafficking with the natives. A 
the departure of Alvarado , he himfelf, \ 
the remaining veflels , proceeded along 
coaft as far as the river Panuco , the cour 
ftill appearing to be well peopled , fertile 
opulent. 



HISTORY OF AMERICA. 3*3 

Reafons for not leaving a colony there. 

Several of Grijalva's officers contended* 
that it was not enough to have difcovered thofe 
delightful regions , or to have performed , at 
their different landing places , the empty cere-* 
mony of taking pofleffion of them for the crown 
of Caftile, and that their glory was incomplete, 
unlefs they planted a colony in fdme proper 
ftation jj which might not only fecure the Spa- 
nifh nation a footing in the country, but, with 
the reinforcements which they were certain of 
receiving, might gradually fubjeft the whole 
to the dominion of their fovereign. But the 
fquadron had now been above five months at 
fea ; the greateft part of their provifions was 
exhaufted, and what remained of their ftores 
fo much corrupted by the heat of the climate* 
as to be almoft unfit for ufe; they had loft fome 
men by death ; others were fickly ; the country 
was crowded with people who feemed to.be 
intelligent as well as brave ; and they were 
under the government of one powerful monarch, 
who could bring them to a&'againft their in- 
vaders with united force. To plant a colony 
under fo many circumftances of difad vantage t 
appeared a fcheme too perilous to be attempt- 
ed. Grijalva, though pofiefTed both of ambition , 
and courage, was deftitute of the fuperior ta- 
lents capable of forming or executing fuch a 
great plan. He judged it more prudent to 
return to Cuba, having fulfilled the purpofe of 
X % 



Ji 4 HISTORY OF AMEftWAl 

his voyage , atid accompHfbed all that-tiu 
tnametit which he commanded enabled hir 
perform. He returned to St. Jago de Cuba 
the tWenty-fixth of Oftober , from whic 
had taken his departure about fix months 
fore, e) 

Preparations for another expedition. 

This was the longeft as Well as the 
fuccefsful voyage which the Spaniards 
hitherto made in the New World. They 
difcovered that Yucatan was not an ifJar 
they had fuppofed, but part of the great 
tinent of America. From Potonchan they 
purfued their courfe for many hundred i 
along a coaft formerly unexplored , ftret( 
at firft towards the weft, add then turnii 
the north ; all the country which they 
difcovered appeared to be no lefs valuable 
extenfive. As foon as Alvarado> reached ( 
Velafquez , tranfported with faccefs f 
beyond his tnofl: fanguine expectations, ii 
diately difpatched a perfon of confidence to 
this important intelligence to Spain , to e? 
the rich productions of the countries whicl 
been difcovered by his means, and to f 
fuch an increafe of authority as might ei 
and encourage him to attempt the conque 

e) Herrera , dec. n. lib. iin c. j, 2, 9, to. Bernal 
c. 8. 17. Ovierlo Hift. lib. xvii. c. 9. 20. Go 
c. 49. 



HISTORY OF AMERICA. 3*5 

them. Without waiting for the return of his 
meflenger, or for the arrival of Grijalva, of 
whom he was become fo jealous or diftruftful 
that he refolved no longer to employ him, he 
began to prepare fuch a powerful armament, as 
might prove «qual to an enterprife of fo much 
danger and importance. 

But as the expedition upon which Velaf-, 
quez was now intent, terminated in conquefts 
of greater moment than what the Spaniards had 
hitherto achieved , and led them to the know- 
ledge of a people , who , if compared with 
fuch of the Americans as were then known „ 
may be confidered as highly pivilized 5 it is 
proper to paufe before we proceed to the hiftory 
of events extremely different from thofe which 
we have already related, in order to take a 
view of the ftate of the Ne\y World when firft 
discovered, and to contemplate the policy and 
manners qf the rude uncultivated tribes, that 
occupied all the parts of it, with which the 
Spaniards were at thisj time acquainted, 



NOTES 

AND* 

ILLUSTRATIONS, 



N T E S 

AND 

ILLUSTRATIONS. 

, Note I. p. 9, 



-I yre was fituated at fuch a diftance from the 
Arabian Gulf or Red Sea, as made it imprac- 
ticable to convey commodities from thence ta 
that city by land- carriage. This induced the 
Phenicians to render themfelves matters of 
Hhinocrura, or Rhinocolura , the neareft port 
•in the Mediterranean to the Red Sea, They 
landed the cargoes which they purchafed in 
Arabia, Ethiopia , and India at Elath, the 
fafeft harbour in the Red Sea towards the north, 
Thence they were carried by land to Rhinoco^ 
lura, the diftance not being very confiderable 5 
and being refhipped in that port, were tranf- 
ported to Tyre , and diftributed over the world. 
Strabon, Geogr. Edit. Cafaub. lib. xvi. p. 
11 $8. Piodor. SicuU Biblioth. Hiftor. Edit. 
Weffelingi, lib. i. p. 70, 

Noth; IL p f 13. 

The Periplus Hannonis is the only an then- 
tick monument of the Carthaginian ftill in naval 



? 3 o NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 

affairs , and one of the tpoft curious fragments 
tranfmitted to us by antiquity. The learned 
and induftrious Mr. Dodwell, in a c|i£Fertation 
prefixed to thePeriplus ofHanno, in the edition 
of the Minor Geographers publifhecl at Oxford, 
endeavours to prove that this is a fpurious work, 
the compofition pf fome Greek, who aflumed 
Hanqp's name. But M. de Montefquieu, in bis 
l'Efprit des Loix, liv. xxi. c. g. and M. de 
Bougainville , in a diifertation publifhed torn. 
xxvi. of theMemoires, de l'Academie des Ipfcrip- 
tions , &c. have eftablifhed its authenticity by 
arguments which to me appear unanfwerable. 
Ramufio has accompanied his tranflation of this 
curious voyage with a diflertation tending to 
illuftrate it. Racolte de Viaggi, vol. i. p. na. 
M. de Bougainville has, with great learning 
and ability, treated the fame fubjefts. It ap. 
pears that Hanno, according to the mode of 
ancient navigation, undertook this voyage in 
fmall vefTels , fo conftrufted that he could keep 
clofe in with the coaft. He failed from Gades 
to the if land of Cerne in twelve days. This is 
probably what is known to the moderns by the 
name of the Ifle of Arguim. It became the 
chief ftation of the Carthaginians on that coaft; 
and M. de Bougainville contends , that the cit- 
terns found there are monuments of the Car- 
thaginian power and ingenuity. Proceeding 
from Cerne , and {till following the windipg of 
the coaft, he arrived, in feventeen dftys, *t * 



* f NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 331 

1 promontpry which he called the Weft Horn , 
I. * probably Cape Palmas. From this he advanced 
' to another promontory , which Jie named the 
'• South Horn, and which is manifeftly Cape de 
, Tres Puntas, about five degrees north of the 
■ line. All the circumftances contained in the 
f^ort abftraft of his journal, which is handed 
down to us, concerning the appearance and ftate 
of the countries on the coaft of Africa, are con- 
firmed and illuftrated by a comparifon with the ac- 
! counts pf modern navigators. Even tfrofp circum- 
ftances, which, from their feeming improbability, 
h^v<e been produced to invalidate the credibility 
pf his relation , tend to confirm it. He pbfer- 
yes, that in the country to the fonth ofCerne, 
3, profound filence reigned through the day $ but 
during the night, innumerably fires were kindl r 
fd. along the banks of the riverp; and the ^ir 
refounded with the noife of pipes and drum?, 
, and cries of joy. Thp fame thing, as Ramufio 
p}>ferve§, ftill takps place. The excpffiye heat 
obliges the negroes to take fhelter in the woods, 
or in their houfps, during the day. As foqn 
as the fun fets, they fally out, and by torch- 
'. light enjoy the pleafpre pf mufick and dancing, 
fn which they fpend the night. Raprmf. i. 1*3. 
f. Jn another place 9 he mentions the fea as 
burning with torrents of fire. What occurred 
to M, Adanfon, on the fame coaft, may ex- 
plain this. ,, As fopn , '* fays he , v as the 
^un dipped beneath the horizon, and night over. 



33a NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 

fpread the earth with darknefs, the fea lent as 
its friendly light. While the prow of our vet- 
fel plouhged the foaming furges f it feemed to 
fet them ail on fire. Thus we failed in a lu- 
minous inclofure, which furrounded us. like a 
large circle of rays , from whence darted in the 
wake of the fhip a longftream of light. '* Voy, 
to Senegal, p. 176. 

Note III. p. 14, 

Long after the navigation of thePhenicians 
and of Eudoxus round Africa, Polybius, the 
moft intelligent and beft informed hiftorian of 
antiquity, affirms, that it was not known, in 
his time, whether Africa was a continued con- 
tinent ftretching to the fouth, or whether it 
was encompaffed by the fea. Polybii Hift. lib. 
iii. Pliny the natqralift aflerts , that there can 
be no communication between the fouthern and 
northern temperate zones, Plinii Hift. Natur. 
Edit, in ufum Delph. 4to, lib. ii. c. 68. If 
they had given full credit to the accounts of 
thofe voyages, the former could not have enter- 
tained fuch a doubt, the latter could not have 
delivered fuch an opinion. Strabo mentions 
the voyage of Eudoxus , but treats it as a 
fabulous tale; lib. ii. p. 155. and, according 
to his account of it, no other judgment can be 
formed with refpeft to it. Strabo feems not to 
have known any thing with certainty concern- 



NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 333 

tog the form and ftate of the fouthern parts of 
Africa. Geogr. lib. xvii. p. 118 0. Ptolemy, 
the moft inquifitive and learned of all the and- 
•tit geographers , was equally unacquainted 
With any part of Africa Ctuated a few degrees 
beyond the equinoctial line; for he fuppofes 
that this great continent was not furrounded 
by the fea, but that it ftretcbed, witbout in- 
terruption, towards the fouth pole: smd he fo 
far tniftakes its true figure , that he defcribes 
the continent as becoming broader and broader 
as it advances towards the fouth. Ptolemael 
Geogr. lib. iv. c. 9. Brietii Parallela Geogr. 
veteris et novae f p. 86. 

Note IV. p. 21. 

A faft , recorded by Strabo « affords a 
very ftrong and lingular proof of the ignorance 
of the ancients with refpeft to the fituation 
of the various parts of the earth. When 
Alexander marched along the banks of the 
Hydafpes and Acefine , two of the rivers 
which fall into the Indus, he obferved that 
there were many crocodiles in thofe rivers, 
and that the country produced beans of the 
fame fpecies with thofe which were common 
in Egypt From thefe circumftances , he con- 
eluded that he bad difcovered the fource of the 
Nile, and prepared a fleet to fail down the 
Hydafpes to Egypt. Strab. Geogr. lib. xv. p« 



334 NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS; 

1020; This amazing error did not arife from 
any ignorance of geography peculiar to that 
monarch; for we are informed by Strabo, that 
Alexander applied with particular attention in 
order to acquire the knowledge of this fcience, 
and had accurate maps or descriptions of the 
countries through which he marched. Lib, ii. 
p. 1 20. But, in his age* the knowledge of 
the Greeks did, not extend beyond the limits 
of the Mediterranean- 

Note V* p. 2.1. 

As the flux and reflux of the fea is re- 
.markbly great at the mouth of the river Indus, 
this would render the phenomenon more for- 
midable to the Greeks. Varen* Gepgr. vol. 
i. p. 251. 

Note VI. p- 23. 

It is probable that the ancients were feldom 
induced to advance fo far, either by motives 
of curiofity, or views of commercial advan- 
tage. In confequence of this , their idea con- 
cerning the pofition of that great river was 
very erroneous. Ptolemy places that branch 
of the Ganges which he diftinguifhes by the 
name of the Great Mouth , in the hundred and 
forty-fixth degree of longitude from his firft 
meridian in the Fortunate Iflands. But ita 



336 NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS. ' 

thofe of Mithridates king of PontUs the North, 
Lib. i. p. 26. When difcovery is carried on 
by land alone, its progrefs muft be flow, and 
its operations confined. When it is carried on 
only by fea, its fphere may be more extenfive, 
and its advances more rapid; but it labours 
under peculiar defects. Though it may make 
known the pofition of different countries , and 
afcertain their boundaries as far as thefe are 
determined by the ocean, it leaves us in ignor- 
ance with refpeft to their interior ftate. Above 
two centuries and a half have elapfed iince the 
Europeans failed round the fouthern promontory 
of Africa, and have traded in moft of its ports; 
but, in a confiderable part of that great continent, 
they have done little more than furvey its coafts, 
and mark its capes and harbours; its interiot 
regions are in a great meafure unknown. The 
ancients , who had a very imperfect knowledge 
of its coafts, except where they are wafhed by 
t-he Mediterranean or Red Sea, were accuftom- 
ed to penetrate into its inland provinces, and, 
if we may rely on the teftimony of Herodotus 
and Diodorus Si cuius, had explored many parts 
of it now altogether unknown. Unlefs both 
modes of difcovery be united , the geographical 
knowledge of the earth muft remain incomplete 
and inaccurate. 



NoTS 



NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 337 

Note VIII. p. 31. 

The notion of the ancients concerning fuch 
n exceffive degree of heat in the torrid zone, 
s rendered it uninhabitable , and their per- 
iling in this error long after they began to 
ave fome commercial intercourfe with feverai 
arts of India lying within the tropicks, muft 
ppear fo Angular and abfurd , that it may not 
e unacceptable to fome, of my readers to pro- 
uce evidence of their holding this opinion , 
nd to account for the apparent inconfiftence of 
beir theory with their experience. Cicero, 
/ho had beftowed attention upon every part 
f philofophy known to the ancients , feems 
-) have believed that the torrid zone was uninh- 
abitable , and , of confequence , that there 
ould be no intercourfe between the northern 
nd fouthern temperate zones. He introduces 
^fricanus thus addrefling the younger Scipio : 
, You fee this earth encompaffed , and as it 
vere bound in by certain zones , of *which 
wo, at the greateft diftance from each other, 
.nd fuftaining the oppofite poles of heaven , 
ire frozen with perpetual cold ; the middle 
>ne , and the largeft of all , is burnt with the 
leat of the fun ; two are habitable, the people 
n the fouthern one are antipodes to us, with 
vhom we have no connection. " Somnium 
icipionis, c. 6. Geminus , a Greek philofo- 
>her, contemporary with Cicero, delivers the 
Robertson. Tom. I. Y 



338 NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 

fame do&rine, not in a popular work, but in 
his EiGxyufyy etg (£ccr,Qyi&x 9 a treatife purely 
fcitnti ck. „ When we ipeak, " fays he, „ of 
the fou hern temperate zone, and its inhabit- 
ants , and concerning thofe who are called 
antipodes, it muft be always underftood , that 
we have no certain knowledge or information 
concerning the fou them temperate zone, whe- 
ther it be inhabited or not. But from the 
fpherical figure of the earth , and the courle 
which the fun holds between the tropicks, we 
conclude that there is another zone, iituated 
to the fouth, which enjoys the fame degree of 
temperature with the northern one which we 
inhabit. " Cap. xiii. p. 31. ap. Petavii Opus 
de Doftr. Temp, in quo Uranologium five Syfte- 
mata var. Auftorum. Amft. 1705. vol. iii. The 
opinion of Pliny the naturalift, with refpeft to 
both thefe points, was the fame : „ There are 
five divifions of the earth , which are called 
zones. All that portion w r hich lies near to the 
two oppofite poles is opprefled with vehement 
cold , and eternal froft. There, unbleft with 
the afpeft of milder ftars, perpetual darfcnefs 
reigns, or at the utmoft a feeble light reflefted 
from furrounding fnows. The middle of the 
earth , in which is the orbit of the fun , is 
fcorched and burnt up with flames and fiery 
vapour. Between thefe torrid and frozen dif- 
trifts lie two other portions of the earth, which 
•re temperate; but, on account of the burning 



I 



NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 339 

r 

* *?gion interpofed , there can be no communica- 
tion between them. Thus Heaven has deprived 

. ,us of three parts of the earth. " Lib. ii. c. 68. 
|. Strabo delivers his opinion to the fame effeft , 

* in terms no lefs explicit: „ The portion of the 
5" 'earth which lies near the equator, in the torrid 
r zone, is rendered uninhabitable by heat. " Lib. 
*. Ii. p. 154. To thefe I might add the autho- 
1 *rity of many other refpeftable philofophers and 
3.. hiftorians of antiquity. 

£ - In order to explain the fenfe in which this 
g. doftrine was generally received, we may ob- 
& ferve , that Parmenides , as we are informed 

* by Strabo , was the firft who divided the earth 
gf: into five zones, and he extended the limits of 
A the zone which he fuppofed to be uninhabitable 
gl' on account of heat, beyond the tropicks. Arif- 
||" totle, as we learn likewife from Strabo, fixed 
gf the boundaries of the different zones in the 
f fame manner as they are defined by modern 
f geographers. But the progrefs of difcovery hav- 
r ing gradually demonftrated that feveral regions 

of the earth which lay within the tropicks -were 
not only habitable , but populous and fertile , 
this induced later geographers to circumfcribe 
the limits of the torrid zone. It is not eafy to 
afcertain with precision the boundaries which 
they allotted to it. From a paflage in Stfcibo, 
who, as far^ as I know, is the only author of 
% antiquity from whom we receive any hint con- 
cerning this fubjeft, I fhould conjefture, that 
Y 2 



340 NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 

thofe who calculated according to the meafure* 
ment of the earth by Eratofthenes , fuppofed 
the torrid zone to comprehend near fixteen de- 
grees , about eight on each fide of the equator; 
whereas fuch as followed the computation of 
Pofidonius allotted about twenty-four degrees, 
or fomewhat more than twelve degrees on each 
fide of the equator to the torrid zone , Strabo 
lib. ii. p. 151. According to the former opinion, 
about two thirds of that portion of the earth 
which lies between the tropicks was confidered 
as habitable; according to the latter, about one 
half of it. With this reftri&ion, the doftrine 
of the ancients concerning the torrid zone ap- 
pears lefs abfurd ; and we can conceive the 
reafon of their afferting this zone to be unin- 
habitable, even after they had opened a com- 
munication with feveral places within the tro- 
picks. When men of fcience fpoke of the torrid 
zone, they confidered it as it was limited by 
the definition of geographers to fixteen, or at 
the utmoft to twenty -four degrees ; and as 
they knew almoft nothing of the countries 
nearer to the equator, they might ftill fuppofe 
them to be uninhabitable. In loofe and popular 
difcourfe, the name of the torrid zone continu- 
ed to be given to all that portion of the earth 
which lies within the tropicks. Cicero feems 
to have been unacquainted with thofe ideas of 
the later geographers, and adhering to the di- 
vifion of Parmenides , defcribes the torrid zone 



NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 341 

as the largeft of the five. Some of the ancients 
rejefted the notion concerning the intolerable 
heat of the torrid zone as a popular error. This, 
-we are told by Plutarch, was the fentiment of 
Pythagoras , and we learn from Strabo , that 
Eratofthenes and Polybius had adopted the fame 
opinion, lib. ii. 154, Ptolemy feems to have 
paid no regard to the ancient doftrine and opi- 
nions concerning the torrid zone. 

Note IX. p. 55. 

The court of inquifition , which effe&ually 

checks a fpirit of liberal inquiry, and of literary 

* improvement, wherever it is eftablifhed, was 

firft introduced into Portugal by John III. who 

began his reign A. D. 152 1. 



£ Note X. p. 65. 

An inftance of this is related by Hackluyt, 
upon the authority of the Portuguese hiftorian 
Garcia de Refende. Some Englifh merchants 
having refolved to open a trade with the coaft 
of Guinea, John II. of Portugal difpatched am- 
baffadors to Edward IV. , in order to lay before 
. him the right with he had acquired by the 
Pope's bull to the dominion of that country, 
and to requeft ©f him to prohibit his fubjefts to 
profecute their intended voyage. Edward was 
lb much fatisfied with the exclufive title of the 



342 NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 

Portuguefe, that he iffued his orders in the 
terms which they defired. Hackluyt, Navi- 
gations, Voyages, andTrafficks of theEnglifb, 
vol. ii. part ii. p. 2. 

Note XI. p. 77. 

The time of Columbus's birth may be nearly 
afcertained by the following circumftances. It 
appears from the fragment of a letter, addreffed 
by him to Ferdinand and Ifabella , A. D. 1501, 
that he had , at that time, been engaged forty 
years in a feafaring life. In another letter, 
he informs them, that he went to fea at the 
age of fourteen ; from thofe fa&s it follows, 
that he was born A. D. 1447. Life of Chrift. 
Columbus by his fon Don Ferdinand. Church- 
ill's Colleftion of Voyages, vol. ii. p. 484* 485« 

Note XII. p. 85- 

The fpherical figure of the earth was known 
to the ancient geographers. They invented 
the method , ftill in ufe, of computing the 
longitude of different places. According to 
their doftrine, the equator, or imaginary line 
which encompafles the earth, contained three 
hundred and fixty degrees ; thefe they divided 
into twenty-four parts, or hours, each equal 
to fifteen degrees. The country of the Seres 



NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS- 343 

or Sinoe, being the fartheft part of India known 
jfco the ancients^, was fuppofed , by Marinus 
"Tyrius the moft eminent of the ancient geogra- 
phers before Ptolemy, to be fifteen hours, or 
two hundred and twenty-five degrees to the* 
eaft of the firft meridian, pafling through the 
Fortunate Iflands. Ptolemaei Geogr. lib. i. cmi- 
If this fuppofition was well-founded the country 
of the Seres, or China, was only nine hours, 
or one hundred and thirty-five degrees weft 
from the Fortunate or Canary Iflands; and the 
navigation , in that direftion , was much fhotter 
than by the courfe which the Portuguese were 
purfuing. Marco Polo, in his travels, had de- 
fcribed countries , particularly the if land of Ci- 
pagno or Zipangri , fuppofed to be Japan , con- 
liderably to the eaft of any part of Afia. known 
to the ancients. Marcus Paulus de Region. 
Oriental, lib. ii. c. 70. lib. iii. c. 2. Of courfe, 
this country, as it extended further to the eaft, 
was ftill nearer to the Canary Iflands. The 
conclufions of Columbus, though drawn from 
inaccurate observations , were juft. If the fup- 
pofitions of Marinus had been well founded, 
and if the countries, which Marco Polo vifited, 
bad been iituated to the eaft ofthofe whofe Ion* 
gitude Marinus has afcertained, the proper and 
neareft courfe to the Eaft Indies mufthave been 
to fteer direftly Weft. Herrera, dec. 1. lib. 
L c. 2. A more extenfive knowledge of the 
globe has now difcovered the great error of 



344 NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 

Marinus , in fuppofing China to be fifteen hours, 
or two hundred and twenty-five degrees eaft 
from the Canary Iflands, and that even Ptolemy 
was miftaken, when he reduced the longitude 
of China to twelve hours , or one hundred and 
eighty degrees. The longitude of the weftern 
frontier of that vaft empire is feven hours, or 
one hundred and fifteen degrees from the meri- 
dian of the Canary Iflands. But Columbus fol- 
lowed- the light which his age afforded, and 
relied upon the authority of writers , who were, 
at that time, regarded as the inftru&ors and 
guides of mankind in the fcience of geography. 

Note XIII. p. 113. 

As the Portuguefe, in making their dif- 
coveries, did not depart far from the coaft of 
Africa, they concluded that birds, whofe flight 
the obferved with great attention, did not ven- 
ture to any confiderable diftance from land. In 
the infancy of navigation , it was not known, 
that birds often firetch their flight to an immenfe 
diftance from any fhore. In failing towards 
the Weft-Indian iflands, birds are often feen 
at the diftance of two hundred leagues from 
the neareft coaft. Sloan's Nat. Hift. of Jamaica, 
vol. i. p. 30. Catefby faw an owl at fea, when 
the fhip, was fix hundred leagues diftant from 
land. Nat. Hift. of Carolina, pref. p, 7. Hift. 
Naturelle de M. Button, torn. xvi. p. 33. From 



NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 345 

which it appears , that this indication of land, 
on which Columbus Teems to have relied with 
fome confidence, was extremely uncertain. This 
obfervation is confirmed by Captain Cook , the 
ih6ft extenfive and experienced navigator of any 
age or nation. „ No one yet knows (fays he) 
to what diftance any of the oceanick birds go to 
fea; for my own part, I do not believe that 
there is one in the whole tribe that can be 
relied on in pointing out the vicinity of land." 
Voyage towards the South Pole, vol.i. p. 275, 

Note XIV, p. 126. 

In a letter of the admiral's to Ferdinand 
andlfabella, he defcribes one of the harbours 
in Cuba, with all the enthufiaftick admiration 
of a difcoverer. — „ I difcovered a river which 
a galley might eafily enter; the beauty of it 
induced me to found, and I found from five to 
eight fathoms of water. Having proceeded a 
confiderable way up tlie river, every thing in- 
vited me to fettle there. The beauty of the 
river, the clearnefs of the water, through which 
I could fee the fandy bottom, the multitude of 
palm - trees of different kinds, the talleft and fineft 
I had feen, and an infinite number of other large 
and flourifhing trees, the birds, and the ver- 
dure of the plains, are fo wonderfully beauti- 
ful, that this country excels all others as far as 
the day furpaffes the night in brightnefs and 



346 NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 

fplendour , fo that I often faid , that it would 
be in vain for me to attempt to give your high- 
nefTes a full account of it, for neither my ton- 
gue nor my pen could Come up to the truth; 
and indeed I am fo much amazed at the light 
of fuch beauty, that I know not how to de- 
fcribe it" Life of Columbus, c. 30. 

Note XV. p. 13a. 

The account which Columbus gives of the 
humanity and orderly behaviour of the natives 
on this occafion is very ftriking. „The king 
(fays he, in a letter to Ferdinand and Ifabella) 
having been informed of our misfortune, ex- 
prefled great grief for our lofs, and immedia- 
tely fent aboard all the people in the place in 
many large canoes ; we foon unloaded the fhip 
of every thing that was upon deck, as the king 
gave us great afliftance: he himfelf, with his 
brothers and relations, took all poffible care 
that every thing fhould be properly done both 
aboard and on Chore. And, from time to time, 
he fent fome of his relations weeping, to beg 
of me not to be deje&ed, for he would give me 
all that he had. I can allure your highneffes, 
that fo much care would not have been taken 
in fecuring our effefrs in any part of Spain , as 
all our property was put together in one place 
near his palace, until the houfes which he 
wanted to prepare for the cuftody of it, were 



NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 347 

emptied. He immediately placed a guard of 
armed men, who watched during the whole 
night, and thofe on fhore lamented as if they 
t had been much interefted inourlofs. The people 
are fp afFeftionate , fo traftable , and fo peace- 
able, that I fwear to your highneffes, that 
there is not a better race of men, nor abetter 
country in the world. They love their neigh- 
bour as themfelves; their converfation is the 
fweeteft and mildeft in the world, cheerful, 
and always accompanied with a fmile. And 
although it is true that .they go naked, yet 
your highnefles may be affured that they have 
many very commendable cuftoms; the king is 
ferved with great ftate, and his behaviour is 
{0 decent, that it is pleafant to fee him, as 
it is likewife to obferve the wonderful memory 
which thefe people haye, and their defire of 
knowing every thing, which leads them to in- 
quire into its caufes and efTefts. " Life of 
Columbus, c. 32. It is probable that the Spa- 
niards were indebted for this officious atten- 
tion, to the opinion which the Indians enter- 
tained of them as a fuperior order of beings. 

Note XVI. p. 140. 

Every monument of fuch a man as Co- 
lumbus is valuable. A letter which he wrote 
to Ferdinand and Ifabella, defcribing what 
pailed on this occafion, exhibits a moft ftriking 



348 NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 

pifture of his intrepidity, his hutnanity, his 
prudence, his publick fpirit, and courtly addrefs. 
„I would have been lefs concerned for* this mis- 
fortune, had I alone been in danger, both be- 
caufe my life is a debt that I owe to the Su- 
preme Creator, and becaufe I have at other 
times been expofed to the moft imminent hazard. 
But what gave me infinite grief and vexation 
was , that after it had pleafed our Lord to give 
me faith to undertake this enterprize, in which 
I had now been fo fuccefsful, that my op- 
ponents would have been convinced, and the 
glory of your highneffes, and the extent of 
your territory increafed by me ; it fhould pleafe 
the Divine Majefty to ftop all by my death. 
All this would have been more tolerable, had 
it not been attended with the lofs of thofe men 
whom I had carried with me, upon promife of 
the greateft profperity, who feeing themfelves 
in fuch diftrefs , curfed not only their coming 
along with me, but that fear and awe of me, 
which prevented them from returning as they 
often had refolved to have done. But befides 
all this, my forrow was greatly increafed, by 
recollefting that I had left my two fons at 
lchool at Cordova, deftitute of friends, in 
a foreign country, when it could not in all 
probability be known that I had done fuch fer- 
vices as might induce your highniffes to remem- 
ber them. And though I comforted myfelf 
with the faith that our Lord would not permit 



NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS^ 349 

that, which tended fo much to the glory of 
his church , and which I had brought about 
with fo much trouble, to remain imperfedt, 
yet I confidered that, on account of my fins, 
it was his will to deprive me of that glory, 
which I might have attained in this world. 
While in this confyfed ftate , I thought on the 
good fortune whicji accompanies your high- 
neffes, and imagined, that although I fhould 
perifh , and the veffel be loft , it was poffible 
that you might fomehow come to the know- 
ledge of my voyage, and the fuccefs with 
which it was attended. For that reafon I wrote 
upon parchment with the brevity which the fi- 
tuation required, that I had aifcovered the lands 
which I promifed , in how many days I had 
done it, and what courfe I had followed. I 
mentioned the goodnefs of the country, the 
chara&er of the inhabitants , and that your high- 
neffes fubje&s were left in pofleflion of all 
that I had difcovered. Having fealed this writ- 
ing , I addreffed it to your highneffes , and pro- 
mifed a thoufand ducats to any perfon who 
fhould deliver it fealed, f6 that if any for- 
eigners found it, the promifed reward might 
prevail on them not to give the information to 
another, I then caufed a great cafk to be brought 
to me, and wrapping up the parchment in an 
oiled cloth , and afterwards in a cake of wax , 
I put it into the cafk , and having ftopt it well , 
I caft it into the fea. All the men believed thaf 



35° NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 

it was fome a& of devotion. Imagining that 
this might never change to be taken up, as the 
fhips approached nearer to Spain, I made an* 
other packet like the firft, and placed it at the 
top of the poop, fo that if the fhip funk, the 
cafk remaining above water might be com- 
mitted to the guidance of fortune. " 

Note XVII. p. 145. 

Some Spanifh authors , with the meannefs 
of national jealoufy , have endeavoured to de- 
traft from the glory of Columbus, by infinuat- 
ing that he was led to the difcovery of the New 
World, not by his own inventive or enterprifing 
genius , but by information which he had re- 
ceived. According to their account, a veffel 
having been driven from its courfe by eafterly 
winds, was carried before them far to the weft, 
and landed on the coaft of an unknown country, 
from which it returned with difficulty; the pilot, 
and three failors , being the only perfons who 
furvived the diftrelTes which the crew fuffered, 
from want of proviiions, and fatigue in this 
long voyage. In a few days after their arrival, 
all the four diet; but the pilot having been re- 
ceived into the houfe of Columbus, his intimate 
friend, difclofed to him, before his death, the 
fecret of the difcovery which he had accident- 
ally made , and left him his papers containing 
^ journal of the voyage, which ferved as a guidt 



NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 331 

to Columbus in his undertaking, Gomara, as 
Tar as 1 know, is the firft author who publifhed 
"this ftory, Hift. c. 13. Every circufoftance is 
deftitute of evidence to fupport it. Neither the 
name of the veffel nor its deftination is known. 
Some pretend that it belonged to one of the fea- 
port towns in Andalufia, and was failing either 
to the Canaries , or to Madeira ; others , that it 
was a Bifcayner in its way to England ; others , 
a Ptfrtuguefe fhip trading on the coaft of Gui- 
nea. The name of the pilot is alike un- 
known , as well as that of the port in which 
he landed on his return. According to fome, 
it was in Portugal; according to others, in 
Madeira, or the Azores. The year in which 
this voyage was made is no lefs uncertain. 
Monfon's Nav. Trafts. Churchill, iii. 371. No 
mention is made of this pilot, or h ; s difcove- 
ries, by And. Bernaldes, or Pet. Martyr, the 
contemporaries of Columbus. Herrera, with 
his' ufual judgment, paffes over it in filence. 
Oviedo takes notice of this report , but con- ' 
fiders it as a tale fit only to amufe the vulgar. 
Hift. lib. ii. c. 2. As Columbus held his courfe 
direftly weft from the Canaries, and never va- 
ried it, fome later authors have fuppofed, that 
this uniformity is a proof of his being guided 
by fome previous information. But they do 
not recolleft the principles on which he founded 
' all his hfcpes of fuccefs, that by holding a weft- 
erly courfe he muft certainly arrive at thofe 



352 NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 

regions of the eaft defcribed by the ancients. 
His firm belief of his own fyftem led him to 
take that courfe , and to purfue it without de- 
viation. 

The Spaniards are not the only people who 
have called in queftion Columbus's claim to the 
honour of having difcovered America. Some 
German authors afcribe this honour to Martin 
Behaim, their countryman. He was of the 
noble family of the Behaims of Schwartzbach, 
citizens of the firft rank in the Imperial town 
of Nuremberg. Having ftudied under the ce- 
lebrated John Muller, better known by the name 
of Regiomontanus , he acquired fuch knowledge 
of cofmography, as prompted him to explore 
thofe regions , the fituation and qualities of 
which he had been accuftomed to inveftigafe 
and defcribe. Under the patronage of the 
Duchefs of Burgundy he repaired to Lifbon, 
whither the fame of the Portuguefe difcoveries 
invited all the adventurous fpirits of the age. 
There, as we learn from Herman Schedel, of 
whofe Chronicon Mundi a German translation 
was printed at Nuremberg A. D. 1493. his me- 
rit as a cofmographer raifed him > in conjunc- 
tion with Diego Cano, to the command of a 
fquadron fitted out for difcovery in the year 
1483. In that voyage, he is faid to have dif- 
covered the kingdom of Congo. He fettled in 
the if land of Fayal, one of the Azores, and 
was a particular friend of Columbus. Herrera, 

dec. 



NdTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 353 

ec. i. lib. 1. c. 2. Magellan had a terreftrial 
lobe made by Behaim, on which he demon- 
rated the courfe that he purpofed to hold in 
jarch of the communication with the South 
eg, , which he afterwards discovered. Gomara 
Lift. c. 19. Herrera, dec. it. lib. ii. c. 19. In 
le year 1492, Behaim vifited his relations in 
Turemberg, and left with them a map drawn 
nth his own hand, which is ftill preferved 
mong the archives of the family. Thus far 
be ftory of Martin Behaim feems to be well 
uthenticated ; but the account of his having 
ifcovered any part of the New World appears 
be merely conje&ural. 

In the firft edition , as I had at that time 
lardly any knowledge of Behaim but what I 
erived from a frivolous Diflertation de vero 
Jovi Orbis Inventore, publifhed at Francfort, 
i. D. 1714. by Jo. Frid. Stuvenius, I was in- 
luced, by the authority of Herrera, to fup- 
lofe that Behaim was not a native of Germany; 
>ut from more full and accurate information, 
lommunicated to me by the learned Dr. John 
teinold Forfter, I am now fatisfied that I was 
niftaken. Dr. Forfter has been like wife fo good 
is to favour me with a copy of Behaim' s map, 
is publifhed by Doppelmayer in his Account of rf> J 
:he Mathematicians and Artifts of Nuremberg>'./ 
?rom this map, the imperfeftion of cofmogra-V 
jhical knowledge at that period is manifeft. 
Hardly one place is laid down in its true fitta* , 
Robertson. Tom. I. Z 



35+ NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 

tion. Nor can I difcover from it any reafontol 
fuppofe that B eh aim had the leaft knowledge oil 
any region in America* He delineates, indeed, I 
an ifland to which he gives the name of St.1 
Brandon. This, it is imagined , maybefomel 
part of Guiana , fuppofed at firft to be an ifland. 
He places it in the fame latitude with the Cape 
Verd Ifles , and I fufpeft it to be an imaginary 
ifland which has been admitted into fome an- 
cient maps on no better authority than the le- 
gend of the Irifh St. Brandom or Brendan, 
whofe ftory is fo childifhly fabulous as to be 
unworthy of any notice. Girald. Cambrieufis 
ap. Miffin|jham Florilegium San&orum, p. 427. 
The pretenfions of the Welfh to the difco- 
very of America feem not to reft on a founda- 
tion much more folid. In the twelfth century, 
according to Powell, a difpute having arifen 
among the fons of Owen Guyneth , king of 
North-Wales, concerning the fucceffion to bis 
crown, Madoc , one of their number, weary 
of this contention, betook himfelf to fea in queft 
of a more quiet fettlement. He fleered due 
weft, leaving Ireland to the north, and arrived 
in an unknown country, which appeared to 
him fo defirable , that he returned to Wales, 
and carried thither feveral of his adherents and 
companions. This is faid to have happened 
about the year 1170, and after that, he and 
bis colony were heard of no more. But it is 
to be obferved, that Powell, on whofe tefti- 



tfOTESAND ILLUSTRATIONS. 55$ 

niony the authenticity of this ftory refts , pu- 
blifhed his hiftory above four centuries from 
the date of the event which he relates. Among N 
a people as rude and as illiterate as the Welfh 
iit that period , the memory of a tranfaftidn fo 
remote muft have been very imperfeftly pre- 
ferved , and would require to be confirmed by 
fome author of greater credit , and nearer to 
the sera of Madoc's voyage, than Powell. Later 
antiquaries have indeed appealed to * the tef- 
timony of Meredeth ap Rhees , a Welfh bard, 
who died A. D. 1477. But he too lived at 
fuch a diftance of time from the event, that he 
cannot be confidered as a witnefs of much more 
credit than Powell. Befides, his verfes pu- 
blifhed by Hackluyt, vol. iii. p. 1. convey no in- 
formation, but that Madoc, diffatisfied with, 
his domeftick fituation, x employed himfelf in 
fearching the Ocean for .new poffeflions. But 
even if we admit the authenticity of Powell's 
ftory , it does not follow that the unknowa 
country which Madoc discovered by fleering 
weft, in fuch a courfe as to leave Ireland to 
to north , was any part of America. The fkill 
of the Welfh in the twelfth century was hardly 
equal to fuch a voyage. If he made any dif- 
covery at all, it is more probable that it was 
Madeira, or fome other of the weftern ifles. 
The affinity of the Welfh language with fome 
dialefts fpoken in America, has been mention- 
ed as a circumftance which confirms the truth 
Z a ' 



356 NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 

of Madoc's voyage. But that has been obferved 
in fo few inftances , and in fome of thefe the 
affinity is fo obfcure, or fo fanciful, that no 
conclufion can be drawn from the cafual refembl- 
anc#of a fmall number of words. There is 
a bird, which, as far as is yet known, is found 
only on the coafts of South America, from Port 
Defire to the Straits of Magellan. It is diftin- 
guifhed by the name of Penguin, This word 
in the Welfh language fignifies White-bead. 
Almoft all the authors who favour the preten- 
fions of the Welfh to the difcovery of America, 
mention this as an irrefragable proof of the af- 
finity of the Welfh language with that fpoken 
in this region of America. But Mr, Pennant, 
who has given a fcientifick defcription of the 
Penguin, obferves, that all the birds of this 
genus have black heads, „ fo that we muft re- 
fign every hope ( adds he ) founded on this 
hypothefis of retrieving the Cambrian race in 
the New World. " Philof. Tranfaft. vol. IviiL 
p. 91. &c. Befide this, if the Welfb, towards 
the clofe of the twelfth century, had fettled in 
any part of America, fome remains of the 
Chriftian doftrine and rites muft have been 
found among their defcendants, when they 
were difcovered about three hundred years pos- 
terior to their migration; a period fo fhort, 
that, in the courfe of it, we cannot \tftll fup- 
pofe that all European ideas and arts would be 
totally forgotten. Lord Lyttleton, in his notes 



NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 357 

fro the fifth book of his Hiftory of Henry II. p. 
371. has examined what Powell relates con- 
cerning the difcoveries made by Madoc , and in* 
validates the truth of his ftory by other argu- 
ments of great weight. 

The pretenfions of the Norwegians to the 
difcovery of America , feem to be better found- 
ed than thofe of the Germans or Welfh. The 
inhabitants of Scandinavia were remarkable in 
the middle ages for the boldnefs and extent of 
their maritime excurfions. In 874 > the Nor- 
wegians difcovered, and planted a colony in 
Iceland. In 98a, they difcovered Greenland, 
and eftablifhed fetfclements there. From that, 
fome of their navigators proceeded towards the 
weft, and difcovered a country more inviting 
than thofe horrid regions with which they were 
acquainted. According to their representation, 
this country was fandy on the coafts, but in the 
interior parts level and covered with wood, on 
which account they gave it the name of Helle- 
land, and Mark - land , and having afterwards 
found fome plants of the vine which bore gra- 
pes, they called it Winland. The credit of 
this ftory refts , as far as I know, on the au- 
thority of the Saga, or chronicle of king Olaus, 
compofed by Snorro Sturlonides, or Sturlufon, 
publifhed by Perinfkiold at Stockholm A. D» 
.1697. As Snorro was born in the year 1179, 
his chronicle might be compiled about two cen- 
turies after the event which he relates. Hi$ 



3S8 NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 

account of the navigation and difcoveries of 
Biorn, and his companion Lief, is a very rude 
confufed tale, p. 104. no. 326, It is impof- 
iible to difcover from him , what part of Ame- 
rica it was in which the Norwegians landed. 
According to his account of the length of the 
days and nights, it muft have been as far north 
as the fifty eighth degree of latitude, on fome 
part of the coaft of Labradore, approaching 
near to the entry of Hudfon's Straits. Grapes* 
certainly, are not the production of that country. 
Torfeifs fuppofes that there is an error in the 
text, by reftifying of which , the place were 
the Norwegians landed may be fuppofed to be 
fituated in latitude 49 °. But neither is that 
the region of the vine in America. From pe- 
rufing Snorro's tale, I fhould think that the fi- 
tuation of Newfoundland correfponds beft with 
that of the country difcovered by the Norwe- 
gians. Grapes, however, are not the pro- 
duction of that barren ifland. Other conjectu- 
res are mentioned by M. Mallet, Introd. a 
l'Hift. de Dannem. 175, &c. I am not fuffi- 
ciently acquainted with the literature of the 
north, to examine them. It feems manifeft, 
that if the Norwegians did difcover any part of 
America at that period, their attempts to plant 
colonies proved unfuccefsful, and all knowledge 
of it was foon loft. 



i 



NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 359 

Note XVIII. p. 146, , 



(* Peter Martyr ab Angleria , a Milanefe 

* gentleman, refiding at that time in the court of 
r Spain, whofe letters contain an account of the 
r tranfa&ions of that period, in the order wherein 
' they occurred, defcribes the fentiments with 
which he himfelf and his learned correfpondents 
were affefted, in very ftriking terms. „ Prse 
laetitia profiluiffe te, vixque a lachrymis prae 
gaudio temperaffe , quando literas adfpexifti 
meas quibus , de antipodum orbe latenti ha&e-, 
bus, te certiorem feci, mi fuaviflime Pomponi, 
infinuafti. Ex tuis ipfe Uteris colligo , quid 
fenferis. Senfifti autem, tantique rem fecifti, 
quanti virum fumma doftrina infignitum decuit. 
Quis namque cibus fublimibus praeftari poteft 
ingeniis, ifto fuavior? quod condimentum gra- 
tius ? A me facio conje&uram. Beari fentio 
fpiritus meos, quando accitos alloquor pruden- 
tes aliquos ex his qui ab ea redeunt provincii. 
Implicent animos pccuniarum eutnulis augendis 
miferi avari , libidinibus obfcceni ; noftras noa 
mentes, poftquam Deo pleni aliquando fueri-*' 
mus, contemplando, hujufcemodi rerum notitia 
demulciamus. 4< Epift. 152. Pomponio Lseto, 

Note XIX. p. 162, 

So finely were men of fcience , in that 
age , perfua&ed that the countries which Co- 



S 6o NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 

lumbus had difcovered were conne&ed with the 
Eaft Indies , that Bernaldes , the Cura de los 
Palacios, who feems to have been no incon- 
fiderable proficient in the knowledge of cofmo- 
graphy, contends that Cuba was not an ifland, 
but a part of the continent, and united to the 
dominions of the Great Khan. This he deli- 
vered as his opinion to Columbus himfelf , who 
was his gueft for fome time on his return from 
his fecond voyage; and he fupports it by fe- 
veral arguments , moftly founded on the autho- 
rity of Sir John Mandevilie. MS. penes me. 
Antonio Gallo, who was fecretary to the ma- 
giftracy of Genoa towards the clofe of the 
fifteenth century, publifhed a fhort account of 
the navigations and difcoveries of his country- 
man Columbus, annexed to his Opufcula Hifto- 
rica de rebus populi Genuenfis ; in which he 
informs us, from letters of Columbus which he 
himfelf had feen , that it was his opinion , 
founded upon nautical observations, that one 
of the iflands he had difcovered was diftant 
only two hours or thirty degrees from Catti- 
gara, which, in the charts of the geographers 
of that age , was laid down, upon the autho- 
rity of Ptolemy , lib. vii. c. 3. as the moft 
eafterly place in Afia. From this he concluded, 
that if fome unknown continent did not obftruft 
the navigation , there muft be a fhort and eafy 
accefs, by holding a wefterly courfe, to this 



NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 361 

extreme region of the Eaft. Muratori Scriptores 
Rer. Italicarum, vol. xxiii. p. 304. 

Note XX. p. 169. 

Bernaldes, the Cura or Re&or de los Pala- 
cios , a contemporary writer , fays , that five 
hundred of thefe captives were fent to Spain, 
and fold publickly in Seville as flaves ; but that, 
by the change of climate , and their inability 
to bear the fatigue of labour, they all died in 
a fhort time. MS. penes me. 

Note XXI. p. 184. 

Columbus feems to have formed fome very 
lingular opinions concerning the countries which 
he had now difcovered. The violent fwell and 
agitation of the waters on the coaft of Trinidad 
led him to conclude this to be the higheft part 
of the terraqueous globe, and he imagined that 
various circumftances concurred in proving that 
the fea was here vifibly elevated. Having adopt- 
ed this erroneous principle , the apparent 
beauty of the country induced him to fall in 
with a notion of Sir John Mandeville , c. 102. 
that the terreftrial paradife was the higheft land 
in the earth ; and he believed that he had been 
fo fortunate as to difcover this happy abode. Nor 
ought we to think it ftrange that a perfon of 
fo much fagacity fhould be influenced |>y the 



362 NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 

opinion or reports of fuch a fabulous author as 
Mandeville. Columbus and the other difcoverers 
were obliged to follow fuch guides as they 
could find ; and it appears from feveral paffages 
in the manufcript of Andr. Bernaldes, the friend 
of Columbus, that no inconliderable degree of 
credit was given to the teftimony of Mandeville 
in that age. Bernaldes frequently quotes him, 
and always with refpeft. 

Note XXII. p. 198. 

It is remarkable, that neither Gomara nor 
Oviedo , the moft ancient Spanifh hiftorians of 
America, nor Herrera, confider Ojeda, or his 
companion Vefpucci , as the firft difcoverers of 
the continent of America. They uniformly 
afcribe this honour to Columbus. Some have 
fuppofed that national refentment againft Ve- 
fpucci , for deferting the fervice of Spain , and 
entering into that of Portugal , may have 
prompted thefe writers to conceal the aftions 
which he performed. But Martyr and Benzoni, 
both Italians, could not be warped by ^he fame 
prejudice. Martyr was a contemporary author; 
he refided in the court of Spain, and had the 
beft opportunity to be exaftly informed with re- 
fpeft to all publick tranfaftions ; and yet, neither 
in his Decads, the firft general hiftory publifhed 
of the New World, nor in his Epiftles, which 
contain an account of all the remarkable events 



NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 363 

of his time, does he afcribe to . Vefpucci the 
honour of having firft difcovered the continent. 
Benzoni went as an adventurer to America in 
the year 154.T, and refided there a confiderable 
time. He appears to have been animated with 
a warm zeal for the honour of Italy, his native 
country, and yet does not mention the exploits 
and difcoveries of Vefpucci. Herrera , who 
compiled his general hiftory of America from 
the moft authentick records, not only follows 
thofe early writers, but accufes Vefpucci of 
falfifying the dates of both the voyages which 
he made to the New World, and of confound- 
ing the one with the other, in order that he 
might arrogate to himfelf the glory' of having 
difcovered the continent. Herrera, dec. 1. lib. 
iv. c. 2. He afferts , that in a judicial inquiry 
into this matter by the royal fifcai , it was 
proved by the teftimony of Ojeda himfelf, that 
he touched at Hifpaniola when returning to 
Spain from his firft voyage; whereas Vefpucci 
gave out that they returned dire&ly to Cadiz 
from the coaft of Paria, and touched at Hifpa- 
niola only In their fecond voyage ; and that he 
had finifhed the voyage in five months ; where- 
as , according to Vefpucci's account, he had 
employed feventeen months in performing it. 
Viaggio primo de Am. Vefpucci, p. 36. Viag. 
fecundo, p. 45. Herrera gives a more full ac- 
count of this inqueft in another part of his 
book, and to the fame effeft. Herrera, dec. 



364 NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 

i. lib. vii. c. 5. Columbus was in Hifpaniola 
when Ojeda arrived there , and had by that 
time come to an agreement with Roldan, who 
oppofed Ojeda's attempt to excite a new infur- 
reftion , and , of confequence , his voyage muft 
have been pofterior to that of the admiral. Life 
of Columbus, c. 84. According to Vefpuccfs 
account, he fet out on his firft' voyage, May 
10, 1497. Viag. primo , p. 6. At that time 
Columbus was in the court of Spain preparing 
for his voyage, and feems to have enjoyed a 
confiderable degree of favour. The affairs of 
the New World were at this junfture under 
the direftion of Antonio Torres , a friend of 
Columbus. It is not probable , that at that 
period a commiffion would be granted to another 
perfon , to anticipate the admiral , by under- 
taking a voyage which he himfelf intended to 
perform. Fonfeca, who patronized Ojeda, and 
granted the licence for his voyage, was not 
recalled to court, and reinftated in the direftion 
of Indian affairs , until the death of prince 
John , which happened September 1497, P. 
Martyr, Ep. 182. feveral months pofterior to 
the time at which Vefpucci pretends to have 
fet out upon his voyage. A life of Vefpucci 
was publifhed at Florence by the Abato Ban- 
dim , A. D. 1745, 4to. It is a work of no 
merit, written with little judgment , and lefs 
candour. He contends for his countryman's 
title to the difcovery of the continent with all 



NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 365 

the blind zeal of national partiality , but pro- 
duces no new evidence to fupport it/ We learn 
from him, that Vefpucci's account of his voyage 
-was publifhed as early as the year 1510, and 
probably fooner. Vita di Am. Vefp. p. 52. 
At what time the name of America came to 
be firft given to the New World , is not 
certain. 

Note XXIII. p. 253. 

The form employed on this occafion ferved 
as a model to the Spaniards in all their fubfe- 
quent conquefts in America. It is fo extraordinary 
in its nature , and gives us fuch an idea of the 
proceedings of the Spaniards, and the principles 
upon which they founded their right to the ex- 
tenfive dominions which they acquired in the 
New World , that it well merits the attention 
of the reader. „ I Alonfo de Ojeda , fervant 
of the moft high and powerful kings of Caftile 
and Leon , the conquerors of barbarous nations, 
their meffenger and captain , notify to you and 
declare, in as ample form as I am capable, that 
God our Lord, who is one and eternal, created 
the heaven and the earth, and one man and 
one woman, of whom you and we, and all the 
men who have been or fhall be in the world, 
are defcended. But as it has come to pafs ,, 
through the number of generations during more 
than five thoufand years , that they have beeu 



3 66 NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 

difperfed into different parts of the world , and 
are divided into various kingdoms and provinces, 
becaufe one country was not able to contain 
them, nor could they have found in one the 
means of fubfiftence and p refer vat ion ; therefore 
God our Lord gave the charge of all thofe, 
people to ode man, named St. Peter, whom 
he conftituted the lord and bead of all the 
human race, that all men, in whatever place 
they are born , or in whatever faith or place 
they are educated, might yield obedience unto 
him. He hath fubjefted the whole world to 
his jurifdiftion , and commanded him to efta- 
blifh his refidence in Rome , as the moft proper 
place for the government of the world. He 
likewife promifed and gave him power to efta- 
blifh his authority in every other part of the 
world, and to judge and govern all Chriftians, 
Moors, Jews, Gentiles, and all other people, 
of whatever feci: or faith they may be. To 
him is given the name of Pope, which figni- 
fies admirable, great father and guardian , be- 
caufe he is the father and governor of ail men. 
Thofe who lived in the time of this holy father 
obeyed and acknowledged him as their lord and 
king, and the faperior of the univerfe. The 
fame has been obferved with refpeft to them 
who, fince his time, have been chofen to the 
pontificate. Thus it now continues, and will 
continue to the end of the world. " 



NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS* 367 

„ One of thefe pontifs, as lord of the 
world , hath made a grant of the iflands , and 
of thefe Tierra Firma of the ocean fea, to the 
Catholick kings of Caftile, Don Ferdinand and 
Donna Ifabella, of glorious memory, and their 
fucceffors, our fovereigns, with all they con- 
tain , as is more fully expreffed in certain deeds 
palTed upon that occafion, which you may fee, 
if you defire it. Thus his majefty is lung and 
lord of thefe iflands , and of the continent , in 
virtue of this donation ; and , as king and lord 
aforefaid , mod of the iflands to which his title 
has been notified , have recognized his majefty , 
and now yield obedience and fubjeftion to him 
as their lord, voluntarily and without refift- 
ance and inftantly, as foon as they received 
information , they obeyed the religious men fent 
by. the king to preach to them, and to inftruft 
them in our holy faith ; and all thefe , of their 
own free-^ill, without any recompence or 
gratuity, became Chriftians, and continue to 
be fo; and his majefty having received them 
gracioufly under his prote&ion , has commanded 
that they fhould be treated in the fame manner 
as his other fubjefts and vaflals, You are bound 
and obliged to aft in the fame manner. There- 
fore I now entreat and require you to con- 
fider attentively what I have declared to you; 
and that you may more perfeftly comprehend 
it, that you take fuch time as is reafonable, 
in order that you may acknowledge the Church. 



3*8 NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 

as the fuperior and guide of the univerfe , and 
likewife the holy father called the Pope, in 
his own right, and his majefty by his appoint- 
ment, as king and fovereign lord of thefe if- 
lands, and of the Tierra Firma; and that you 
confent that the forefaid holy fathers fhall de- 
clare and preach to you the doftrines above 
mentioned. If you do this, you aft well, and 
perform that to which you are bound and oblig- 
ed; and his majefty, and I in his name, 
will receive you with love and kindnefs , and 
will leave you, your wives and children, free 
and exempt from fervitude, and in the enjoy- 
ment of all you poffefs , in the fame manner as 
the inhabitants of the iflands. Befides this, 
his majefty will beftow upon you many privi- 
leges , exemptions , and rewards. But if you 
will not comply, or malicioufly delay to obey 
my injun&ion, then, with the help of God, 
I will enter your country by force , I will carry 
on war againft you with the utmoft violence, 
I will fubjecl: you to the yoke of obedience to 
the church and the king, I will take your wives 
and children, and will make them f laves, apd 
fell or difpofe of them according to his majefty 's 
pleafure ; I will feize your goods , and do you 
all the mifchief in my power, as rebellious fub- 
jefts, who will not acknowledge or fubmit to 
their lawful fovereign. And I proteft, that all 
the bloodfhed and calamities which fhall follow 
are to be imputed to you, and not to his ma- 
jefty, 



NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS. g6g 

jefty, or to me, or the gentlemen who ferve 
under me; and as I have now made this decla- 
ration and requifition unto you, I require the 
notary here prefent to grant me a certificate of 
this, fubfcribed in proper fonb. " Herrera, 
dec. i. lib. vii. c. 14. 

Note XXIV. p. 271. 

Balboa, in his letter to the king, obferv*s, 
that of the hundred and ninety men whom he 
took with him, there were never above eighty 
fit for fervice at one time. So much did they 
fuffer from hunger, fatigue, and ficknefs. Her- 
rera, dec. i. lib. viii. c. 16. P. Mart, decad. 226. 

Note XXV. p. 286. 

Fonfeca, bifhop of Palencia, the principal 
direftor of America affairs, had eight hundred 
Indians in property; the commentator Lope de 
Conchillos, his chief aflbciate in that /depart- 
ment, eleven hundred, and other favourites 
had different numbers. They fent overfeers to 
the iflands, and hired out thofe flaves to the 
planters. Herrera, dec. 1. lib.ix. c. 14. p. 325. 

Note XXVI. p. 317. 

Though America is more plentifully fup- 
plied with water than' the other regions of the 
Robektsq*. T«*u I. £ * 



370 NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 

globe, there is no river or ftreain of water iti 
Yucatan. This peninfula projefts from the con- 
tinent a hundred leagues, but, where broad eft, 
does not extend above twenty -five leagues. It 
is a fiat plaip, without mountains. The inha- 
bitants are fupplied with water from pits, and 
wherever they dig them, -find it in abundance. 
It is probable , from all tbofe circumftances , 
th at this country was formerly covered by the 
fea. Jlerrerae Defcriptio Indiae Occidentalism 
p. 14. Hiftoire Naturelle, par M. de BufFon, 
torn, u p. 593. 



END OF THE FIRST VOLUME. 



. BOOKBINDING CO. 



' CONTROL MARK 



?J 



=r 



M 




ra 



^sbS^* 




+ + 




'*n\& 



^ 



+ 



M