Columbia  Wtmtev&itp 

THE  LIBRARIES 


THE 

WORKS 


OF 


WILLIAM  ROBERTSON,  D.D. 


-~-'->^Y, 


.  5?^^  T  TT  V"  T  < "  ^s 


i-.  j    .*..  !L  •  ^ 


"^n. 


THE 

WORKS 


OF 


WILLIAM  ROBERTSON,  D.D. 

FELLOW  OF  THE  ROYAL  SOCIETY,  AND  PRINCIPAL  OF  THE 
UNIVERSITY  OF  EDINBURGH,  ETC.  ETC. 


WITH  A 

SKETCH  OF  HIS  LIFE  AND  WRITINGS, 

BY  R:  A;  DAVENPORT. 


IN  TEN  VOLUMES, 
I. 


HISTORY  OF  SCOTLAND,  VOL.  I. 


LONDON : 

PRINTED  FOR  THOMAS  TEGG,  73,  CHEYPSIDE 
R.  M.  TIMS,  DUBLIN  ; 
AND  R.  GRIFFIN   AND  CO.  GLASGOW. 

182G. 


q  tfh 


6$ 


«& 


THE 

HISTORY  OF  SCOTLAND. 


Ag20,84        GO  10  4 


(J.  and  C.  Whitniighani,  (Jlu:-\\ick. 


THE 

HISTORY  OF  SCOTLAND 

DURING  THE  REIGNS  OF 

QUEEN  MARY,  AND  OF  KING  JAMES  VI. 

''TILL  HIS  ACCESSION  TO  THE  CROWN  OF  ENGLAND. 
WITH 

&  Ifobicfo  of  tf)e  j&cottigi)  ?£iStorg 

PREVIOUS  TO  THAT  PERIOD  : 


AND 


AN  APPENDIX,  CONTAINING  ORIGINAL  PAPERS 


BY  WILLIAM  ROBERTSON,  D.D. 

PRINCIPAL  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  EDINBURGH,  ETC. 


IN  THREE  VOLUMES. 

VOL.  I. 


LONDON: 

PRINTRD  FOR  THOMAS  TEGG,  73,  CHEAPSIDE: 

R.   M.  TIMS,  DTHLIN  ; 

AND   R.  GRIFFIN  AND  CO.  GLASGOW. 


1826. 


PREFACE 


TO 

THE   FIRST   EDITION. 


I  deliver  this  book  to  the  world  with  all  the  dif- 
fidence and  anxiety  natural  to  an  author  on  pub- 
lishing his  first  performance.  The  time  I  have 
employed,  and  the  pains  I  have  taken,  in  order  to 
render  it  worthy  of  the  public  approbation,  it  is 
perhaps,  prudent  to  conceal,  until  it  be  known  whe- 
ther that  approbation  shall  ever  be  bestowed  upon 
it. 

But  as  I  have  departed,  in  many  instances,  from 
former  historians,  as  I  have  placed  facts  in  a  diffe- 
rent light,  and  have  drawn  characters  with  new 
colours,  I  ought  to  account  for  this  conduct  to  my 
readers;  and  to  produce  the  evidence  on  which, 
at  the  distance  of  two  centuries,  I  presume  to  con- 
tradict the  testimony  of  less  remote,  or  even  of 
contemporary  historians. 

The  transactions  in  Mary's  reign  gave  rise  to  two 
parties,  which  were  animated  against  each  other 
with  the  fiercest  political  hatred,  embittered  by  reli- 
gious zeal.  Each  of  these  produced  historians  of 
considerable   merit,   who   adopted   all  their   senti- 

vol.  I.  a 


h  PREFACE. 

merits,  and  defended  all  their  actions.     Truth  was 
not  the  sole  object  of  these  authors.     Blinded  by- 
prejudices ,  and  heated  by  the  part  which  they  them- 
selves had  acted  in  the  scenes  they  describe,  they 
wrote  an  apology  for  a  faction,  rather  than  the  his- 
tory of  their  country.     Succeeding:  historians  have 
followed  these  guides  almost  implicitly,  and  have 
repeated  their  errors  and  misrepresentations.     But 
as  the  same  passions  which  inflamed  parties  in  that 
age  have  descended  to  their  posterity ;  as  almost 
every  event  in  Mary's  reign  has  become  t|ae  object 
of  doubt  or  of  dispute ;  the  eager  spirit  of  contro- 
versy soon  discovered,  that  without  some  evidence 
more  authentic  and  more  impartial  than  that  of  such 
historians,  none  of  the  points  in  question  could  be 
decided  with  certainty.      Records  have  therefore 
been  searched,  original  papers  have  been  produced, 
and  public  archives,  as  well  as  the  repositories  of 
private  men  have  been  ransacked  by  the  zeal  and 
curiosity  of  writers  of  different  parties.  •  The  atten- 
tion of  Cecil  to  collect  whatever  related  to  that 
period,  in  which  he  acted  so  conspicuous  a  part, 
hath  provided  such  an  immense  store  of  original 
papers  for  illustrating  this  part  of  the  English  and 
Scottish  history,  as  are  almost  sufficient  to  satisfy 
the  utmost  avidity  of  an  antiquary'.      Sir  Robert 
Cotton  (whose  library  is  now  the  property  of  the 
public)  made  great  and  valuable  additions  to  Cecil's 
collection ;    and  from  this  magazine,  Digges,  the 
compilers  of  the  Cabbala,  Anderson,  Keith,  Haynes, 
Forbes,  have  drawn  most  of  the  papers  which  they 
have  printed.    No  History  of  Scotland,  that  merits 
any  degree  of  attention,  has  appeared  since  these 
collections  were  published.     By  consulting  them, 
I  have  been  enabled,  in  many  instances,  to  correct 


PREFACE.  iii 

the  inaccuracies  of  former  historians,  to  avoid  their 
mistakes,  and  to  detect  their  misrepresentations. 

But  many  important  papers  have  escaped  the 
notice  of  those  industrious  collectors;  and,  after 
all  they  have  produced  to  light,  much  still  re- 
mained in  darkness,  unobserved  or  unpublished. 
It  was  my  duty  to  search  for  these ;  and  I  found 
this  unpleasant  task  attended  with  considerable 
utility. 

The  library  of  the  Faculty  of  Advocates  at 
Edinburgh  contains  not  only  a  large  collection  of 
original  papers  relating  to  the  affairs  of  Scotland, 
but  copies  of  others  no  less  curious,  which  have 
been  preserved  by  Sir  Robert  Cotton,  or  are  extant 
in  the  public  offices  in  England.  Of  all  these  the 
curators  of  that  library  were  pleased  to  allow  me 
the  perusal. 

Though  the  British  Museum  be  not  yet  open  to 
the  public,  Dr.  Birch,  whose  obliging  disposition  is 
well  known,  procured  me  access  to  that  noble  col- 
lection, which  is  worthy  of  the  magnificence  of  a 
great  and  polished  nation. 

That  vast  and  curious  collection  of  papers  rela- 
ting to  the  reign  of  Elizabeth,  which  was  made  by 
Dr.  Forbes,  and  of  which  he  published  only  two 
volumes,  having  been  purchased  since  his  death  by 
the  Lord  Viscount  Royston,  his  lordship  was  so 
good  as  to  allow  me  the  use  of  fourteen  volumes 
in  quarto,  containing  that  part  of  them  which  is 
connected  with  my  subject. 

Sir  Alexander  Dick  communicated  to  me  a  very 
valuable  collection  of  original  papers,  in  two  large 
volumes.  They  relate  chiefly  to  the  reign  of  James. 
Many  of  them  are  marked  with  Archbishop  Spotis- 
wood's  hand;  and  it  appears  from  several  passages 


iv  PREFACE. 

in  his   History,  that  he    had   perused  them  with 
great  attention. 

Mr.  Calderwood,  an  eminent  Presbyterian  cler- 
gyman of  the  last  century,  compiled  a  History  of 
Scotland  from  the  beginning  of  the  reign  of  James  V. 
to  the  death  of  James  VI.  in  six  large  volumes : 
wherein  he  has  inserted  many  papers  of  conse- 
quence, which  are  no  where  else  to  be  found.  This 
History  has  not  been  published,  but  a  copy  of  it, 
which  still  remains  in  manuscript,  in  the  possession 
of  the  church  of  Scotland,  was  put  into  my  hands  by 
my  worthy  friend  the  Reverend  Dr.  George Wishart, 
principal  clerk  of  the  church. 

Sir  David  Dalrymple  not  only  communicated  to 
me  the  papers  which  he  has  collected  relating  to 
Gowrie's  conspiracy;  but,  by  explaining  to  me  his 
sentiments  with  regard  to  that  problematical  pas- 
sage in  the  Scottish  history,  has  enabled  me  to 
place  that  transaction  in  a  light  which  dispels  much 
of  the  darkness  and  confusion  in  which  it  has  been 
hitherto  involved. 

Mr.  Goodall,  though  he  knew  my  sentiments 
with  regard  to  the  conduct  and  character  of  Queen 
Mary  to  be  extremely  different  from  his  own,  com- 
municated to  me  a  volume  of  manuscripts  in  his 
possession,  which  contains  a  great  number  of  valu- 
able papers  copied  from  the  originals  in  the  Cot- 
tonian  Library  and  Paper  Office,  by  the  late  Re- 
verend Mr.  Crawford,  Regius  Professor  of  Church 
History  in  the  University  of  Edinburgh.  I  like- 
wise received  from  him  the  original  Register  of 
letters  kept  by  the  Regent  Lennox  during  his  ad- 
ministration. 

I  have  consulted  all  these  papers,  as  far  as  I 
thought  they  could  be  of  any  use  towards  illus- 


PREFACE.  V 

trating  that  period  of  which  I  write  the  history. 
With  what  success  I  have  employed  them  to  con- 
lirm  what  was  already  known,  to  ascertain  what 
was  (Jubious,  or  to  determine  what  was  controverted, 
the  Public  must  judge. 

I  might  easily  have  drawn,  from  the  different 
repositories  to  which  1  had  access,  as  many  papers 
as  would  have  rendered  my  Appendix  equal  in  size 
to  the  most  bulky  collection  of  my  predecessors. 
l>ut  I  have  satisfied  myself  with  publishing  a  few  of 
the  most  curious  among  them,  to  which  I  found  it 
necessary  to  appeal  as  vouchers  for  my  own  vera- 
city. Noue  of  these,  as  far  as  I  can  recollect,  ever 
appeared  in  any  former  collection. 

I  have  added  A  Critical  Dissertation  concerning 
the  Murder  of  King  Henry,  and  the  Genuineness  of 
the  Queen's  Letters  to  Bothwell.  The  facts  and 
observations  which  relate  to  Mary's  letters,  I  owe 
to  my  friend  Mr.  John  Davidson,  one  of  the  Clerks 
to  the  Signet,  who  hath  examined  this  point  with 
his  usual  acuteness  and  industry. 


PREFACE 


TO 

THE   ELEVENTH   EDITION. 


It  is  now  twenty-eight  years  since  I  published  the 
History  of  Scotland.      During  that  time  I  have 
been  favoured  by  my  friends  with  several  remarks 
upon  it;  and  various  strictures  have  been  made  by 
persons  who  entertained  sentiments  different  from 
mine,  with  respect  to  the  transactions  in  the  reign 
of  Queen  Mary.     From  whatever  quarter  informa- 
tion came,  in  whatever  mode  it  has  been  communi- 
cated, I  have  considered  it  calmly  and  with  atten- 
tion.   Wherever  I  perceived  that  I  had  erred,  either 
in  relating  events,  or  in  delineating  characters,  I 
have,  without   hesitation,  corrected   those   errors. 
"Wherever  I  am  satisfied   that  my  original  ideas 
were  just  and  well  founded,  I  adhere  to  them  ;  and 
resting  upon  their  conformity  to  evidence  already 
produced,  I  enter  into  no  discussion  or  controversy 
in  order  to  support  them.  Wherever  the  opportunity 
of  consulting  original  papers,  either  in  print  or  in 
manuscript,  to  which  I  had  not  formerly  access, 
has  enabled  me  to  throw  new  light  upon  any  part 
of  the  History,  I  have  made  alterations  and  addi- 
tions, which,  I  flatter  myself,  will  be  found  to  be  of 
some  importance. 

COLLEGE  OF  EDINBURGH, 

March  5,  1787. 


A   SKETCH 

OF  THE 

LIFE  OF  DR.  ROBERTSON. 

BY 

R.  A.  DAVENPORT,  Esq. 


William  Robertson,  the  eldest  son  of  the 
Reverend  William  Robertson,  was  born  on  the  8th 
of  September,  1721,  at  Borthwick,  in  the  shire  of 
Mid  Lothian,  of  which  parish  his  father  was  the 
minister.  By  the  paternal  line  he  descended  from 
a  respectable  family  in  the  county  of  Fife,  a  branch 
of  that  which,  for  many  generations,  possessed  the 
estate  of  Struan,  in  Perthshire.  His  mother  was 
the  daughter  of  David  Pitcairn,  Esq.  of  Dreghorn. 
He  had  one  brother  and  six  sisters ;  all  of  whom 
were  well  settled  in  life,  and  most  of  whom  lived  to 
an  advanced  age. 

It  was  at  the  parochial  school  of  Borthwick  that 
Robertson  received  the  initiatory  part  of  his  educa- 
tion ;  but  as  soon  as  he  was  sufficiently  forward  to 
enter  on  the  study  of  the  learned  languages,  he  was 
removed  to  the  school  of  Dalkeith.  The  latter 
seminary  was  then  under  the  superintendence  of 
Mr.  Leslie,  whose  eminence  as  a  teacher  was  such 
as  to  attract  pupils  from  all  parts  of  Scotland ;  and 


VI11  SKETCH  OF  THE  LIFE 

the  father  of  Robertson  was  consequently  induced 
to  send  him  to  Dalkeith  rather  than  to  the  Scottisli 
metropolis. 

When  the  future  historian  was  twelve  years  old, 
his  father  was  transferred  from  Borthwick  to  one 
of  the  churches  of  Edinburgh.  In  the  autumn  of 
1733  he  joined  his  parents ;  and,  in  October,  he 
was  admitted  into  the  college  and  university  of  the 
northern  capital. 

Whatever  were  his  first  attempts  at  composition, 
and  it  is  probable  they  were  many,  nothing  has  been 
preserved  to  show  how  early  he  began  to  exercise 
his  talents,  or  with  what  degree  of  rapidity  those 
talents  were  expanded.  It  is  certain,  however,  that 
in  the  pursuit  of  knowledge  he  displayed  that  ardour 
and  perseverance  without  which  nothing  great  will 
ever  be  accomplished.  A  strong  proof  of  this  is 
afforded  by  some  of  his  early  commonplace  books, 
which  bear  the  dates  of  1735, 1736,  and  1737.  The 
motto,  vita  sine  Uteris  mars  est,  which  he  prefixed 
to  these  books,  sufficiently  indicates  by  what  an 
honourable  ambition  and  love  of  literature  he  was 
inspired  at  a  very  tender  and  generally  thoughtless 
age.  The  boy  of  fourteen,  who  can  cherish  the 
feeling  which  is  implied  by  this  motto,  gives  pro- 
mise that  his  manhood  will  reflect  lustre  on  himself 
and  on  the  country  of  his  birth. 

Among  the  men  of  eminence,  by  whose  instruc- 
tions lie  profited  at  the  university,  were  Sir  John 
Pringlo,  afterwards  President  of  the  Royal  Society, 
l)ii t  then  Professor  of  Moral  Philosophy ;  Maclau- 
rin,  justly  celebrated  for  the  extent  of  his  mathema- 
tical skill  and  the  purity  of  his  style  ;  and  Dr.  Ste- 
venson, the  learned  and  indefatigable  Professor  of 
Logic.     To  the  masterly  prelections  of  the  latter, 


OF  DR.  KOBERTSON.  IX 

especially  to  his  illustrations  of  the  Poetics  of 
Aristotle,  and  of  Longinus  on  the  Sublime,  Robert- 
son often  declared  that  he  considered  himself  to  be 
more  deeply  indebted  than  to  any  circumstance  in 
the  course  of  his  academical  career.  It  was  indeed 
not  towards  the  abstract  sciences  that  the  bent  of 
his  genius  was  directed.  To  mathematical  and  me- 
chanical speculations  he  seems  to  have  been  at  least 
cold,  perhaps  averse.  Neither  was  he  remarkable 
for  metaphysical  acuteness.  His  delight  was  to 
trace  and  elucidate  moral  and  religious  truths,  to 
apply  the  process  of  reasoning  to  subjects  more 
immediately  connected  with  the  every-day  business 
of  existence,  to  search  into  the  causes  and  effects 
of  historical  events,  to  expatiate  amidst  the  peren- 
nial beauties  of  classic  lore,  and,  by  meditating  on 
the  great  models  of  oratorical  art,  to  render  himself 
master  of  all  the  powerful  resources  of  a  ready  and 
persuasive  eloquence. 

With  respect  to  eloquence,  the  possession  of  it 
was  in  fact  indispensable  to  one  who,  as  in  all  pro- 
bability was  the  case  with  Robertson,  had  deter- 
mined to  assume  a  prominent  station  among  the 
pastors  and  leaders  of  the  Scottish  church.  The 
mere  knowledge  of  rules,  however,  or  even  a 
thorough  acquaintance  with  the  rich  stores  of  an- 
cient and  modern  oratory,  will  not  suffice  to  form 
an  orator.  It  is  by  use  alone  that  facility  of  speech 
and  promptitude  of  reply  can  be  acquired.  It 
is  the  collision  of  minds  which  strikes  out  the 
"  thoughts  that  breathe,  and  words  that  burn." 
During  the  last  years,  therefore,  of  his  residing  at 
college,  he  joined  with  some  of  his  contemporaries 
in  establishing  a  society,  the  avowed  purpose  of 
which,  as  we  are  told  by  Mr.  Stewart,  was  "  to 


X  SKETCH  OF  THE  LIFE 

cultivate  the  study  of  elocution,  and  to  prepare 
themselves,  by  the  habits  of  extemporary  discussion 
aud  debate,  for  conducting  the  business  of  popular 
assemblies." 

Of  the  colleagues  of  Robertson  in  this  society 
many  ultimately  rose,  like  himself,  to  high  reputa- 
tion. Among  them  were  Cleghorn,  subsequently 
Professor  of  Moral  Philosophy  at  Edinburgh,  Dr. 
John  Blair,  who  became  a  member  of  the  Royal 
Society,  and  a  prebendary  of  Westminster,  and  who 
gave  to  the  public  "  The  Chronology  and  History 
of  the  World,"  Wilkie,  the  author  of  the  Epigoniad, 
a  faulty  poem,  but  above  contempt,  Home,  the 
author  of  Douglas,  and  Dr.  Erskine,  who,  in  after 
life,  was  at  once  the  coadjutor,  rival,  opponent,  and 
friend  of  Robertson. 

This  society  continued  in  existence,  and,  no 
doubt,  was  beneficial  to  its  members,  till  it  was 
broken  up  by  a  quarrel,  which  had  its  rise  from  a 
religious  source,  and  which,  consequently,  was  of 
more  than  common  bitterness.  In  1741  that  ex- 
traordinary man  Whitefield,  who  was  then  in  the 
zenith  of  his  fame,  paid  a  visit  to  Scotland,  and  his 
preaching  excited  in  that  country  a  feeling  equally 
as  strong  as  it  had  excited  in  England.  On  the 
subject  of  his  merit  violent  parties  immediately 
sprang  up,  especially  among  the  clergy.  By  the 
one  side  he  was  considered  as  a  clerical  wonder,  a 
kind  of  apostle,  from  whose  evangelical  labours 
the  happiest  result  might  be  expected  ;  by  the  other 
side  he  was  calumniated  as  an  impostor,  and  a 
worthless  private  character,  while  some,  in  the  ex- 
cess of  their  holy  zeal,  did  not  scruple  to  stigma- 
tize him,  even  from  the  pulpit,  as  "  an  agent  of  the 
devil."    It  was  natural  that  this  question  should  be 


OF  DR.  ROBERTSON.  XI 

debated  by  Robertson  and  his  associates ;  and  it 
was,  perhaps,  not  less  natural  that  it  should  be 
argued  with  so  much  heat  and  asperity  as  not  only 
to  cause  the  dissolution  of  the  society,  but  even,  it 
is  said,  to  interrupt,  for  some  time,  the  intercourse 
of  the  members  as  private  individuals.  Of  those 
who  entertained  doubts  with  regard  to  the  personal 
conduct  of  Whitefield,  and  the  utility  of  his  efforts, 
Robertson  was  one.  From  his  acknowledged  mo- 
deration and  evenness  of  temper  we  may,  however, 
infer  that  his  hostility  to  the  -preacher  was  carried 
on  in  a  liberal  spirit,  and  that  he  did  not  think  it 
either  necessary  or  decorous  to  brand  him  as  an 
agent  of  the  prince  of  darkness. 

To  excel  in  his  written  style  as  much  as  in  his 
oral  was  one  object  of  his  ambition.  The  practice 
of  clothing  in  an  English  dress  the  standard  works 
of  the  ancients  has  been  often  recommended,  as 
conducive  to  the  improvement  of  style ;  and  he 
seems  to  have  believed  it  to  be  so,  for  it  was 
adopted  by  him.  He  carried  it  so  far  as  to  enter- 
tain serious  thoughts  of  preparing  for  the  press  a 
version  of  Marcus  Antoninus.  His  scheme  was, 
however,  frustrated  by  the  appearance  of  an  anony- 
mous translation  at  Glasgow.  "  In  making  choice 
of  this  author,"  says  Mr.  Stewart,  "  he  was  proba- 
bly not  a  little  influenced  by  that  partiality  with 
which  (among  the  writers  of  heathen  moralists)  he 
always  regarded  the  remains  of  the  stoical  philo- 
sophy." 

Having  completed  his  academic  course,  and 
richly  stored  his  mind,  he  quitted  the  university, 
and,  in  1741,  before  he  had  quite  attained  the  age 
of  twenty,  a  licence  to  preach  the  gospel  was  given 
to  him  by  the  Presbytery  of  Dalkeith.     This  kind 


xii  SKETCH  OF  THE  LIFE 

of  licence,  which  does  not  authorise  to  administer 
the  sacraments  or  to  undertake  the  cure  of  souls,  is 
granted  to  laymen ;  and  the  person  who  receives  it 
may  be  considered  as  being-  placed  by  it  in  a  state 
of  probation. 

After  the  lapse  of  two  years,  from  the  period  of 
his  leaving  the  university,  when  he  was  yet  little 
more  than  twenty-two,  he  was,  in  1743,  presented, 
by  the  Earl  of  Hopetoun,  to  the  living  of  Glads- 
muir.  Of  this  preferment  the  yearly  value  was  not 
more  than  one  hundred  pounds.  Scanty,  however, 
as  were  its  emoluments,  it  was  most  opportunely 
bestowed.  He  had  not  long  resided  at  Gladsmuir 
when  an  unexpected  and  melancholy  event  occurred, 
which  put  to  the  trial  at  once  his  firmness  and  his 
benevolence.  His  father  and  mother  expired  within 
a  few  hours  of  each  other,  leaving  behind  them  a 
family  of  six  daughters  and  one  son,  without  the 
means  of  providing  for  their  education  and  mainte- 
nance. On  this  occasion  Robertson  acted  in  a 
manner  which  bore  irrefragable  testimony  to  the 
goodness  of  his  heart,  and  which  was  also,  as  Mr. 
Stewart  justly  observes,  "  strongly  marked  with 
that  manly  decision  in  his  plans,  and  that  perse- 
verins;  steadiness  in  their  execution,  which  were  the 
characteristic  features  of  his  mind."  Regardless 
of  the  privations  to  which  he  must  necessarily  sub- 
mit, and  the  interruption  which  his  literary  and 
other  projects  must  experience,  he  received  his 
father's  family  into  his  house  at  Gladsmuir,  edu- 
cated his  sisters  under  his  own  roof,  and  retained 
them  there  till  opportunities  arose  of  settling  them 
respectably  in  the  world.  His  merit  is  enhanced 
by  the  circumstance  of  his  fraternal  affection  having 
imposed  on  him  a  sacrifice  far  more  painful  than 


OF  DR.  ROBERTSON.  XHI 

that  of  riches  or  fame.  He  was  tenderly  attached 
to  his  cousin  Miss  Mary  Nesbit,  daughter  of  the 
Reverend  Mr.  Nesbit,  one  of  the  ministers  of  Edin- 
burgh, and  his  attachment  was  returned  ;  but  it  was 
not  till  1751,  when  his  family  had  ceased  to  stand 
in  need  of  his  protecting  care,  that  he  thought  him- 
self at  liberty  to  complete  a  union  which  had,  for 
several  years,  been  the  object  of  his  ardent  wishes. 
It  is  pleasant  to  know  that  the  wife  whom  he  so 
tardily  obtained  was  every  way  worthy  of  such  a 
husband,  and  that  he  suffered  no  interruption  of  his 
domestic  happiness. 

While  he  was  laudably  occupied  in  promoting 
the  welfare  of  his  orphan  relatives,  the  rebellion 
broke  out  in  Scotland.  "  It  afforded  him,"  says 
Mr.  Stewart,  "  an  opportunity  of  evincing  the  sin- 
cerity of  that  zeal  for  the  civil  and  religious  liberties 
of  his  country,  which  he  had  imbibed  with  the  first 
principles  of  his  education ;  and  which  afterwards, 
at  the  distance  of  more  than  forty  years,  when  he 
was  called  on  to  employ  his  eloquence  in  the  na- 
tional commemoration  of  the  Revolution,  seemed 
to  rekindle  the  fires  of  his  youth.  His  situation  as 
a  country  clergyman  confined  indeed  his  patriotic 
exertions  within  a  narrow  sphere  ;  but  even  here 
his  conduct  was  guided  by  a  mind  superior  to  the 
scene  in  which  he  acted.  On  one  occasion  (when 
the  capital  was  in  danger  of  falling  into  the  hands 
of  the  rebels)  the  present  state  of  public  affairs  ap- 
peared so  critical  that  he  thought  himself  justified 
in  laying  aside  for  a  time  the  pacific  habits  of  his 
profession,  and  in  quitting  his  parochial  residence 
at  Gladsmuir  to  join  the  volunteers  of  Edinburgh. 
And  when,  at  last,  it  was  determined  that  the  city 
should  be  surrendered,  he  was  one  of  the  small 

vol.  i.  b 


XIV  SKETCH  OF  THE  LIFE 

band  who  repaired  to  Haddington,  and  offered 
their  services  to  the  commander  of  His  Majesty  V 
forces." 

With  the  exception  of  this  one  troubled  interval 
he  continued,  for  many  years,  in  the  tranquil  per- 
formance of  his  pastoral  duties.     The  hours  of  his 
leisure  were  devoted  to  literary  researches  and  to 
laying  the  solid  foundation  of  future  eminence.     It 
was  his  practice  to  rise  early,  and  to  read  and  wTrite 
much  before  breakfast.     The  remainder  of  the  clay 
he  devoted  to  the  claims  of  his  profession.     As  a 
minister  of  the  gospel  he  was  conscientious  and 
active;  not  confining  himself  to  the  mere  routine 
of  his  sacred  office,   but  endeavouring  by  even 
means  to  extend  the  comforts  and  influence  of  reli- 
gion.     In  the  summer  months  it  was  customary 
for   him,   previous   to  the  commencement  of  the 
church  service,  to  assemble  the  youthful  part  of  his 
flock  for  the  purpose   of  explaining  to   them  tin 
doctrines  of  the  catechism.     By  his  zeal,  his  punc- 
tuality, and  the  suavity  of  his  behaviour,  he  won 
the  love  of  his  parishioners ;  so  that,  in  all  their 
difficulties,   it  was  to  him  that  they  resorted  for 
consolation  and  for  counsel.     His  pulpit  eloquence 
was   such   as   afforded  delight   to    all   classes    of 
people;  because,  while  it  was  adorned  with  those 
graces  of  style  which  are  required  to  satisfy  men  of 
judgment  and  taste,  it  was  rendered  level  to  the 
comprehension    of  his    humblest  hearers,    by  the 
clearness  of  its  argument  and  the  perspicuity  of  its 
lan^ua^e. 

The  time  at  length  arrived  when  the  talents  of 
Robertson  were  to  be  displayed  on  a  more  exten- 
sive and  public  scene  of  action,  and  he  was  to 
assume  a  leading  share  in  the  government  of  the 


OF  DR.  ROBERTSON.  XV 

Scottish  church.  He  did  not,  however,  come  for- 
ward among  his  colleagues  till  he  had  attained  the 
mature  age  of  thirty,  and  had  thoroughly  prepared 
himself  to  sustain  his  new  and  important  part  with 
untiring  vigour  and  a  decisive  effect.  It  was  on 
the  question  of  patronage  that  he  first  exerted  his 
powers  of  eloquence  in  a  deliberative  assembly. 

To  enable  the  mere  English  reader  to  compre- 
hend this  subject,  it  may,  perhaps,  be  proper  to 
give  some  account  of  the  constitution  of  the  church 
of  Scotland,  and  also  of  the  right  of  patronage,  out 
of  which  arose  the  contentions  and  heartburnings 
by  which  the  church  was  disturbed  for  a  consider- 
able period. 

The  church  of  Scotland  is  ruled  by  a  series  of 

judicatories,  rising  by  regular  gradation  from  the 

kirk  session,  or  parochial  consistory,  which  is  the 

lowest  in  order,  to  the  general  assembly,  which  is 

the  highest.     The  kirk  session  is  composed  of  the 

ministers  and  lay  elders  of  parishes ;  a  presbytery  is 

formed  of  the  ministers  of  contiguous  parishes,  with 

certain  representatives  from  the  kirk  sessions ;   and 

a  provincial  synod  is  constituted  by  the  union  of  a 

plurality  of  presbyteries.     Crowning  the  whole  is 

the  general  assembly.    This  body  consists  of  three 

hundred  and  sixty-four  members,   of  whom   two 

hundred  and  two  are  ministers,  and  the  remainder 

are  laymen.     Of  this  number  two  hundred  and  one 

ministers  and  eighty-nine  lay  elders  are  sent  by  the 

presbyteries  ;  the  royal  boroughs  elect  sixty-seven 

laymen ;  the  universities  depute  five  persons,  who 

may  be  either  ecclesiastics   or   laymen ;    and  the 

Scottish  church  of  Campvere  in  Holland  supplies 

two  deputies,  the  one  lay  and  the  other  clerical. 

The  annual  sittings  of  the  assembly  are  limited  to 


XVI  SKETCH  OF  THE  LIFE 

ten  days ;  but  whatever  business  it  has  left  un- 
settled is  transacted  by  a  committee  of  the  whole 
house  (called  the  commission),  which,  in  the  course 
of  the  year,  has  four  stated  meetings.  Among  the 
lay  members  of  the  assembly  are  men  of  the  highest 
consequence  in  the  kingdom ;  lawyers,  judges,  and 
sometimes  nobles. 

Though  all  the  ministers  in  Scotland  are  on  a 
perfect  equality  with  each  other,  yet  each  individual 
and  each  judicatory  is  bound  to  yield  a  prompt  obe- 
dience to  the  superintending  authority,  and  each 
court  must  punctually  lay  the  record  of  its  proceed- 
ings before  the  tribunal  which  is  next  in  rank  above 
it;  but  the  general  assembly  has  the  power  of  de- 
ciding without  appeal,  of  enforcing,  uncontroled, 
its  decrees,  and,  with  the  concurrence  of  a  majority 
of  the  presbyteries,  of  enacting  laws  for  the  govern- 
ment of  the  Scottish  church. 

The  history  of  clerical  patronage  in  Scotland 
since  the  overthrow  of  Catholicism,  and  of  the 
struggles  to  which  it  has  given  rise,  has  been 
traced  with  so  much  clearness  by  Dr.  Gleig  that, 
though  the  passage  is  of  some  length,  I  shall  give 
it  in  his  own  words.  "  The  Reformation  in  Scot- 
land," says  he,  "  was  irregular  and  tumultuous ; 
and  the  great  object  of  the  powerful  aristocracy 
of  that  kingdom  seems  to  have  been  rather  to  get 
possession  of  the  tithes,  and  the  lands  of  the  digni- 
fied clergy,  than  to  purify  the  doctrine  and  reform 
the  worship  of  the  church.  Of  this  Knox  and  the 
other  reformed  clergymen  complained  bitterly  ;  and 
their  complaints  were  extorted  from  them  by  their 
own  sufferings.  Never,  I  believe,  were  the  esta- 
blished clergy  of  any  Christian  country  reduced  to 
such  indigence   as  were    those   zealous   and  well 


OF  DR.  ROBERTSON.  XVU 

meaning  men  during  the  disastrous  reign  of  Queen 
Mary,  and  the  minority  of  her  son  and  successor ; 
whilst  the  pittance  that  was  promised  to  them,  in- 
stead of  being  regularly  paid,  was  often  seized  by 
the  rapacity  of  the  regents  and  the  powerful  barons 
who  adhered  to  their  cause,  and  the  ministers  left 
to  depend  for  their  subsistence  on  the  generosity  of 
the  people. 

"  As  nearly  the  whole  of  the  ecclesiastical  pa- 
tronage of  the  kingdom  had  come  into  the  posses- 
sion of  those  barons,  partly  by  inheritance  from 
their  ancestors,  and  partly  with  the  church  lands 
which,  on  the  destruction  of  the  monasteries,  they 
had  appropriated  to  themselves,  it  is  not  wonderful 
that,  in  an  age  when  men  were  very  apt  to  confound 
the  illegal  and  mischievous  conduct  of  him  who  ex- 
ercised an  undoubted  right  with  the  natural  conse- 
cjuences  of  that  right  itself,  strong  prejudices  were 
excited  in  the  minds  of  the  clergy  and  more  serious 
part  of  the  people  against  the  law  which  vested  in 
such  sacrilegious  robbers  the  right  of  presentation 
to  parish  churches.  It  is  not  indeed  very  accu- 
rately known  by  whom  ministers  were  nominated 
to  vacant  churches  for  thirty  years  after  the  com- 
mencement of  the  Reformation,  when  there  was 
hardly  any  settled  government  in  the  church  or  in 
the  state.  In  some  parishes  they  were  probably 
called  by  the  general  voice  of  the  people ;  in  others, 
obtruded  on  them  by  the  violence  of  the  prevailing 
faction,  to  serve  some  political  purpose  of  the  day; 
and  in  others  again  appointed  by  the  superintendent 
and  his  council :  whilst  in  a  few  the  legal  patron 
may  have  exercised  his  right,  without  making  any 
simoniacal    contract  with   the   presentee;    which, 

b2 


xviii  SKETCH   OF  THE  LIFE 

however,  there  is  reason  to  suspect  was  no  uncom- 
mon practice l. 

"  Hitherto  the  government  of  the  Protestant 
church  of  Scotland  had  fluctuated  from  one  form 
to  another,  sometimes  assuming  the  appearance  of 
episcopacy  under  superintendents,  and  at  other 
times  being  presbyterian  in  the  strictest  sense  of 
the  word.  In  the  month  of  June,  159*2,  an  act  was 
passed,  giving  a  legal  sanction  to  the  presbyterian 
form  of  government,  and  restoring  the  ancient  law 
of  patronage.  By  that  act  the  patron  of  a  vacant 
parish  was  authorized  to  present,  to  the  presbytery 
comprehending  that  parish,  a  person  properly  qua- 
lified to  be  intrusted  with  the  cure  of  souls ;  and 
the  presbytery  was  enjoined,  after  subjecting  the 
presentee  to  certain  trials  and  examinations,  of 
which  its  members  were  constituted  the  judges, 
'  to  ordain  and  settle  him  as  minister  of  the  parish, 
provided  no  relevant  objection  should  be  stated  to 
his  life,  doctrine,  or  qualifications.' 

"  Though  we  are  assured  by  the  highest  autho- 
rity2 that  this  right  of  patronage,  thus  conferred  by 
the  fundamental  charter  of  presbyterian  government 
in  Scotland,  was  early  complained  of  as  a  grievance, 
it  appears  to  have  been  regularly  exercised  until  the 
era  of  the  rebellion  against  Charles  I.  during  the 
establishment  as  well  of  the  presbyterian  as  of  the 
episcopal  church.  It  was  indeed  abolished  by  the 
usurping  powers,  which  in  1649  established  in  its 
stead  what  was  then  called  '  the  gospel  right  of 

1  The  reader  will  derive  much  valuable  information  on  this 
subject  from  Dr.  Cook's  "  History  of  the  Reformation  in  Scot- 
land." 

-  Dr.  Hill,  Principal  of  St.  Mary's  College,  in  the  University 
of  St.  Andrew's. 


OF  DR.  ROBERTSON.  XIX 

popular  election  ;'  but  at  the  Restoration  it  was 
reestablished  together  with  episcopacy,  and  was 
regularly  exercised  until  the  Revolution,  when 
episcopacy  was  finally  overthrown,  and,  by  an  act 
passed  on  the  2Gth  of  May,  '  the  presbyterian 
church,  government,  and  discipline,  by  kirk  ses- 
sions, presbyteries,  provincial  synods,  and  general 
assemblies,'  established  in  its  stead.  The  act  of 
James  VI.  in  1592  was  '  revived  and  confirmed  in 
every  head  thereof,  except  in  that  part  of  it  relating 
to  patronages,'  which  were  utterly  abolished,  though 
nothing  was  substituted  in  their  stead  until  the  19th 
of  July  immediately  succeeding. 

"  It  was  then  statuted  and  declared,  to  use  the 
language  of  the  act,  '  that,  in  the  vacancy  of  any 
particular  church,  and  for  supplying  the  same  with 
a  minister,  the  Protestant  heritors  and  elders  are 
to  name  and  propose  the  person  to  the  whole  con- 
gregation, to  be  either  approven  or  disapproven  by 
them  ;  and  if  they  disapprove,  they  are  to  give  in 
their  reasons,  to  the  effect  the  affairs  may  be  cog- 
nosced by  the  presbytery  of  the  bounds  ;  at  whose 
judgment,  and  by  whose  determination,  the  calling 
and  entry  of  every  particular  minister  is  to  be  or- 
dered and  concluded.  In  recompense  of  which 
rights  of  presentation  the  heritors  of  every  parish 
were  to  pay  to  the  patron  six  hundred  merks 
(£33.  6s.  Sd.  sterling),  against  a  certain  time,  and 
under  certain  proportions.' 

"  Whether  this  sura,  which  at  that  period  was 
very  considerable,  was  actually  paid  to  the  patrons 
of  the  several  parishes,  I  know  not;  but  if  it  was, 
or  indeed  whether  it  was  or  not,  had  it  been  the 
intention  of  the  legislature  to  produce  dissension  in 
the  country,  it  could  not  have  devised  any  thing 


XX  SKETCH  OF  THE  LIFE 

better  calculated  to  effect  its  purpose  than  this 
mode  of  appointing  ministers  to  vacant  churches. 
The  heritors  or  landholders,  if  the  price  was  paid, 
would  naturally  contend  for  the  uncontroled  exer- 
cise of  the  right  which  they,  and  they  only,  had 
purchased  ;  but  it  is  not  by  any  means  probable 
that  at  such  a  period  they  could  often  agree  in 
their  choice  of  a  minister  for  a  vacant  parish.  The 
elders,  who  were  men  of  inferior  rank  and  inferior 
education,  would,  by  the  envy  of  the  low,  when 
comparing  themselves  with  the  high,  be  prompted 
to  thwart  the  wishes  of  their  landlords,  which  the 
act  of  parliament  enabled  them  to  do  effectually ; 
and  the  consequence  must  have  been  that  two  or 
three  candidates  for  every  vacant  church  were  at 
once  proposed  to  the  people  of  the  parish  for  their 
approbation  or  disapprobation.  The  people  might 
either  give  the  preference  to  one  of  the  candidates 
proposed,  or  reject  them  all,  for  reasons  of  which 
the  members  of  the  presbytery  were  constituted  the 
judges ;  and  as  it  appears  that  the  presbytery  ge- 
nerally took  part  with  the  people,  a  source  of  ever- 
lasting contention  was  thus  established  between 
the  country  gentlemen  and  the  parochial  clergy ; 
an  evil  than  which  a  greater  cannot  easily  be  con- 
ceived. For  these,  and  other  reasons,  this  ill  di- 
gested law  was  repealed  in  the  tenth  year  of  the 
reign  of  Queen  Anne,  and  the  right  of  patronage 
restored  as  in  all  other  established  churches. 

"  By  many  of  the  clergy,  however,  patronage 
seems  to  have  been  considered  as  an  appendage  of 
prelacy ;  though  it  has  obviously  no  greater  con- 
nexion with  that  form  of  ecclesiastical  polity  than 
with  any  other  that  is  capable  of  being  allied  with 
die  state  ;  and,  till  after  the  year  17o0,  ministers 


OF  DR.  ROBERTSON.  XXI 

continued  to  be  settled  in  vacant  parishes  in  the 
manner  prescribed  by  the  act  of  King  William  and 
Queen  .Mary.  '  Even  then,'  says  Dr.  Hill,  '  the 
church  courts,  although  they  could  not  entirely 
disregard  the  law,  continued,  in  many  instances,  to 
render  it  ineffectual,  and  by  their  authority  sanc- 
tioned the  prevailing  prejudices  of  the  people 
against  it.  They  admitted,  as  an  incontrovertible 
principle  in  presbyterian  church  government,  that 
a  presentee,  although  perfectly  well  qualified,  and 
unexceptionable  in  his  life  and  doctrine,  was  never- 
theless inadmissible  to  his  clerical  office,  till  the 
concurrence  of  the  people  who  were  to  be  under 
his  ministry  had  been  regularly  ascertained.'  The 
form  of  expressing  this  concurrence  was  by  the  sub- 
scription of  a  paper  termed  '  a  call ;'  to  which  many 
of  the  old  ministers  paid  greater  respect  than  to  the 
deed  of  presentation  by  the  patron  of  the  church. 

"  To  render  the  call  good,  however,  the  unani- 
mous consent  of  the  landholders,  elders,  and  people 
was  not  considered  as  necessary,  nor  indeed  ever 
looked  for.  Xav,  it  appears  that  even  a  majority 
was  not  in  all  cases  deemed  indispensable;  for  the 
presbytery  often  admitted  to  his  charge,  and  pro- 
ceeded to  ordain  the  presentee  whose  call,  by  what- 
ever number  of  parishioners,  appeared  to  them  to 
afford  a  reasonable  prospect  of  his  becoming,  by 
prudent  conduct,  a  useful  parish  minister.  On  the 
other  hand,  presbyteries  sometimes  set  aside  the 
presentation  altogether,  when  they  were  not  satis- 
fied with  the  call;  and  when  the  patron  insisted  on 
his  right,  and  the  presbytery  continued  inflexible, 
the  general  assembly  was,  in  such  cases,  under  the 
necessity  either  of  compelling  the  members  of  the 
presbytery,  by  ecclesiastical  censures,  to  do  their 


XX11  SKETCH  OF  THE  LIFE 

duty,  or  of  appointing  a  committee  of  its  own  body 
to  relieve  them  from  that  duty,  by  ordaining  the 
presentee,  and  inducting  him  into  the  vacant  church. 
To  compulsion  recourse  had  seldom  been  had;  and 
the  consequence  was  that  individuals  openly  claimed 
a  right  to  disobey  the  injunctions  of  the  assembly, 
whenever  they  conceived  their  disobedience  justi- 
fied by  a  principle  of  conscience. 

"  Such  was  the  state  of  ecclesiastical  discipline 
in  Scotland  when  Mr.  Robertson  first  took  an 
active  part  in  the  debates  of  the  general  assembly ; 
and  he  very  justly  thought  that  its  tendency  was  to 
overturn  the  presbyterian  establishment,  and  intro- 
duce in  its  stead  a  number  of  independent  congre- 
gational churches.  He  therefore  supported  the 
law  of  patronage,  not  merely  because  it  was  part 
of  the  law  of  the  land,  but  because  he  thought  it 
the  most  expedient  method  of  filling  the  vacant 
churches.  It  did  not  appear  to  him  that  the  people 
at  large  are  competent  judges  of  those  qualities 
which  a  minister  should  possess  in  order  to  be  a 
useful  teacher  of  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus,  or  of 
the  precepts  of  a  sound  morality.  He  more  than 
suspected  that  if  the  candidates  for  churches  were 
taught  to  consider  their  success  in  obtaining  a  set- 
tlement as  depending  on  a  popular  election,  many 
of  them  would  be  tempted  to  adopt  a  manner  of 
preaching  calculated  rather  to  please  the  people 
than  to  promote  their  edification.  He  thought  that 
there  is  little  danger  to  be  apprehended  from  the 
abuse  of  the  law  of  patronage ;  because  the  pre- 
sentee must  be  chosen  from  amongst  those  whom 
the  church  had  approved,  and  licensed  as  qualified 
for  the  office  of  a  parish  minister;  because  a  pre- 
sentee cannot  be  admitted  to  the  benefice   if  any 


OF  DR.  ROBERTSON.  XXlit 

relevant  objection  to  his  life  or  doctrine  be  proved 
against  him  ;  and  because,  after  ordination  and 
admission,  he  is  liable  to  be  deposed  for  improper 
conduct,  and  the  church  declared  vacant." 

\\  liatever  may  be  thought  of  the  merits  of  the 
cause  which  Robertson  espoused,  it  is  impossible 
to  doubt  that  he  was  a  conscientious  supporter  of 
it.  To  undertake  its  defence  some  strength  of 
nerve  was,  indeed,  required.  Success  seemed,  at 
the  outset,  to  be  scarcely  within  the  verge  of  pro- 
bability, and  there  was  much  danger  of  becoming 
unpopular.  The  result,  nevertheless,  gave  ample 
proof  of  what  may  be  accomplished  by  perseve- 
rance and  talents.  The  first  time  that  he  came 
forward  in  the  Assembly  was  in  May,  1751 ,  when 
a  debate  arose  on  the  conduct  of  a  minister,  who 
had  disobeyed  the  sentence  of  a  former  assembly. 
Seizing  this  opportunity  to  enforce  his  principles  of 
church  discipline,  Robertson,  in  a  vigorous  and 
eloquent  speech,  contended  that  if  subordination 
were  not  rigidly  maintained  the  Presbyterian  esta- 
blishment would  ultimately  be  overthrown,  and, 
therefore,  an  exemplary  punishment  ought  to  be 
inflicted  on  the  offending  party.  But,  though  he 
was  heard  with  attention,  his  arguments  produced 
so  little  present  effect  that,  on  the  house  being 
divided,  he  was  left  in  a  minority  of  no  more  than 
eleven  against  two  hundred. 

Though  this  decision  was  not  calculated  to  en- 
courage him,  he  determined  to  persist,  and  an 
occurrence  very  soon  took  place  which  enabled 
him  to  renew  the  contest.  The  presbytery  of 
Dumferline  having  been  guilty  of  disobedience,  in 
refusing  to  admit  a  minister  to  the  church  of  Inver- 
keithing,  the  commission  of  the  assembly,  which 


XXIV  SKETCH  OF  THE  LIFE 

met  in  November,  ordered  them  to  cease  from  their 
opposition,  and  threatened,  that,  if  they  continued 
to  be  refractory,  they  should  be  subjected  to  a 
high  censure.  Notwithstanding  this,  the  presby- 
tery again  disobeyed  the  mandate  of  the  superior 
court.  Yet,  instead  of  carrying  its  threat  into 
effect,  the  commission  came  to  a  resolution  that  no 
censure  should  be  inflicted. 

Such  a  resolution  as  this,  after  the  commission 
had  gone  so  far  as  to  resort  to  threats,  was  at 
least  absurd.  So  fair  an  opening  as  this  circum- 
stance afforded  was  not  neglected  by  Robertson. 
He  accordingly  drew  up  a  protest,  intituled, 
"  Reasons  of  Dissent  from  the  Judgment  and  Re- 
solution of  the  Commission."  This  protest,  which 
was  signed  by  himself,  Dr.  Blair,  Home,  and  a 
few  other  friends,  is  an  able  and  closely  reasoned 
production.  It  boldly  declares  the  sentence  of  the 
commission  to  be  inconsistent  with  the  nature  and 
first  principles  of  society  ;  charges  the  commission 
itself  with  having,  by  that  sentence,  £one  beyond 
its  powers,  and  betrayed  the  privileges  and  de- 
serted the  doctrines  of  the  constitution  ;  considers 
the  impunity  thus  granted  as  encouraging  and  in- 
viting contumacy;  insists  on  the  lawfulness  and 
wisdom  of  ecclesiastical  censures,  and  on  the  abso- 
lute necessity  of  preserving  subordination  and  obe- 
dience in  the  church  ;  and,  finally,  maintains  that 
the  exercise  of  no  man's  private  judgment  can  jus- 
tify him  in  disturbing  all  public  order,  that  he  who 
becomes  a  member  of  a  church  ought  to  conform 
to  its  decrees,  or,  "  if  he  hath  rashly  joined  him- 
self, that  he  is  bound,  as  an  honest  man  and  a 
good  Christian,  to  withdraw,  and  to  keep  his  con- 
science pure  and  undefilcd." 


OF  DR.  ROBERTSON.  XXV 

When  the  assembly  met,  in  1752,  the  question 
was  brought  before  it;  and  Robertson  supported 
the  principles  of  his  protest  with  such  cogency  of 
argument,  that  he  won  over  a  majority  to  his  side, 
and  achieved  a  complete  triumph.  The  judgment  of 
the  commission  was  reversed,  Mr.  Gillespie,  one 
of  the  ministers  of  the  presbytery  of  Dumferline, 
was  deposed  from  his  pastoral  office,  and  ejected 
from  his  living,  and  three  other  individuals  were 
suspended  from  their  judicative  capacity  in  the 
superior  ecclesiastical  courts.  Gillespie,  whose 
only  crime  was  that  of  being  absent  on  the  day 
appointed  for  the  induction  of  the  presentee,  was  a 
pious  and  amiable  man,  and  his  deposition  occa- 
sioned so  much  dissatisfaction,  that  it  gave  rise  to 
a  new  sect  of  dissenters,  afterwards  known  by  the 
appellation  of  "  the  Presbytery  of  Relief;"  a  sect 
which  still  exists,  and  is  of  considerable  magni- 
tude. 

From  this  time,  though  it  was  not  till  the  year 
1703  that  he  became  its  avowed  leader,  Robertson 
was,  in  fact,  at  the  head  of  the  assembly  ;  which 
body,  for  the  whole  period  of  his  ascendancy,  he 
contrived  to  keep  steady  to  his  principles.  In 
this  task  he  was  ably  seconded  by  Dr.  Drysdale, 
one  of  the  ministers  of  Edinburgh.  It  was  not, 
however,  without  many  struggles  that  he  retained 
his  preeminence.  Those  which  took  place  in  1765 
and  1768  were  peculiarly  violent;  motions  having 
then  been  made,  and  vehemently  contended  for,  to 
inquire  into  the  causes  of  the  rapid  progress  of 
secession  from  the  established  church  ;  and,  in 
order  to  counteract  them,  to  introduce  a  more  po- 
pular mode  of  inducting  the  parochial  ministers. 
From  what  is  mentioned  by  Sir  Henry  "Wellwood, 

vol.  i.  c 


XXVi  SKETCH  OF  THE  LIFE 

in  his  "  Memoirs  of  Dr.  Erskine,"  it  appears  that 
the  exertions  of  Robertson  were  kept  continually 
on  the  stretch ;  and  that  for  his  victory  he  was 
partly  indebted  to  cautious  management,  and  to 
patience  which  nothing  could  tire.  "  During  Dr. 
Robertson's  time,"  says  he,  "  the  struggle  with  the 
people  was  perpetual ;  and  the  opposition  to  pre- 
sentees so  extremely  pertinacious,  as  in  a  great 
measure  to  engross  the  business  of  the  assemblies. 
The  parties  in  the  church  were  then  more  equally 
balanced  than  they  have  ever  been  since  that  period. 
The  measures  which  were  adopted,  in  the  face  of 
such  perpetual  opposition,  it  required  no  common 
talents  to  manage  or  defend ;  especially  consider- 
ing that  the  leaders  in  opposition  were  such  men  as 
Dr.  Dick,  Dr.  Macqueen,  Dr.  Erskine,  Mr.  Ste- 
venson of  St.  Madois,  Mr.  Freebairn  of  Dumbar- 
ton, Mr.  Andrew  Crosbie,  &c.  &c. ;  men  of  the 
first  ability  in  the  country,  and  some  of  them  pos- 
sessed of  an  eloquence  for  a  popular  assembly  to 
which  there  was  nothing  superior  in  the  church  or 
in  the  state. 

"  Dr. Robertson's  firmness  wasnoteasily  shaken, 
but  his  caution  and  prudence  never  deserted  him. 
He  held  it  for  a  maxim,  never  wantonly  to  offend 
the  prejudices  of  the  people,  and  rather  to  endea- 
vour to  manage  than  directly  to  combat  them. 
Some  of  the  settlements  in  dispute  were  protracted 
for  eight  or  ten  years  together ;  and  though  the 
general  assemblies  steadily  pursued  their  system, 
and  uniformly  appointed  the  presentees  to  be  in- 
ducted, their  strongest  sentences  were  not  vindic- 
tive,  and  seldom  went  beyond  the  leading  points  to 
which  they  were  directed." 

In  17o7  an  event  happened,  which  afforded  to 


OF  DR.  ROBERTSON.  XXVII 

him  an  opportunity  of  manifesting  the  liberality  of 
his  spirit,  and  of  exercising  his  influence  over  his 
colleagues,  to  moderate  the  vengeance  which  was 
threatened  to  be  hurled  on  some  of  his  brethren, 
for  having  been  guilty  of  an  act  which  was  con- 
sidered to  be  of  the  most  profane  nature.  The 
chief  offender  was  his  friend  Home,  who  was  then 
minister  of  Athelstaneford.  The  crime  consisted 
in  Home  having  not  only  produced  the  tragedy  of 
Douglas,  but  having  also  had  the  temerity  to  be 
present  at  the  acting  of  it  in  the  Edinburgh  theatre. 
With  him  were  involved  several  of  his  clerical  in- 
timates, who,  as  much  from  a  desire  to  share  with 
him  any  odium  or  peril  which  might  be  incurred, 
as  from  a  natural  curiosity,  had  been  induced  to 
accompany  him  to  the  theatre  on  the  first  night  of 
the  performance.  The  storm  which  this  circum- 
stance raised  among  the  Scottish  clergy  can,  in 
the  present  age,  hardly  be  imagined.  It  seemed 
as  if  they  had  witnessed  nothing  less  than  the  abo- 
mination of  desolation  standing  in  the  holy  place. 
The  presbytery  of  Edinburgh  hastened  to  summon 
before  its  tribunal  such  of  its  members  as  had 
committed  this  heinous  offence,  and  it  likewise 
dispatched  circulars  to  the  presbyteries  in  the  vici- 
nity, recommending  rigorous  measures  against  all 
clergymen  who  had  desecrated  themselves  by  ap- 
pearing in  the  polluted  region  of  the  theatre.  The 
alarm  thus  sounded  awakened  all  the  bigotry  of 
the  circumjacent  presbyteries.  That  of  Hadding- 
ton, to  which  Home  belonged,  cited  him  and  his 
friend  Carlyle,  of  Inveresk,  to  answer  for  their  mis- 
conduct. That  of  Glasgow  had  no  criminals  to 
chastise,  but  it  was  resolved  not  to  remain  silent, 
and,  therefore,  with  a  zeal  which  assuredly  was  not. 


XXVill  SKETCH  OF  THE  LIFE 

according  to  knowledge,  it  fulminated  forth  a  se- 
ries of  resolutions  on  this  appalling  subject.  It 
lamented  "  the  melancholy  but  notorious  fact,  that 
one,  who  is  a  minister  of  the  church  of  Scotland, 
did  himself  write  and  compose  a  play,  entitled  the 
Tragedy  of  Douglas,  and  got  it  to  be  acted  in  the 
theatre  at  Edinburgh;  and  that  he,  with  several 
other  ministers  of  the  church,  were  present,  and 
some  of  them  oftener  than  once,  at  the  acting  of  the 
said  play  before  a  numerous  audience ;"  it  affirmed, 
in  direct  hostility  to  historical  evidence,  that  stage 
plays  had  "  been  looked  upon  by  the  Christian 
church,  in  all  ages,  and  of  all  different  communions, 
as  extremely  prejudicial  to  religion  and  morality;" 
and,  as  a  natural  consequence  from  this,  it  called 
on  the  general  assembly  to  reprobate  publicly  "  a 
practice  unbecoming  the  character  of  clergymen, 
and  of  such  pernicious  tendency  to  the  great  inte- 
rests of  religion,  industry,  and  virtue."  The  cry 
of  the  church  was  echoed  from  the  press,  angry 
disputants  were  arrayed  on  both  sides,  and  a  mul- 
titude of  ephemeral  pamphlets  and  pasquinades  was 
rapidly  produced3. 

3  The  following  list  of  some  of  the  most  remarkable  pamphlets 
will  show  what  a  strong  interest  was  excited  by  this  question. 
It  is  given  in  the  Supplement  to  the  Encyclopedia  Britannica. 

1.  Admonition  and  Exhortation  of  the  Presbytery  of  Edinburgh. 

2.  Witherspoons  Serious  Inquiry  into  the  Nature  and  Effect  of 
the  Stage.  3.  The  Immorality  of  Stage  Plays  in  general,  and  of 
the  Tragedy  called  Douglas  in  particular,  briefly  illustrated.  4. 
The  Usefulness  of  the  Edinburgh  Staqe  seriously  considered.  5. 
The  Tragedy  of  Douglas  analysed.  6.  A  Letter  to  Mr.  David 
Hume  on  the  Tragedy  of  Douglas.  7 .  An  Apology  for  the  Writers 
against  the  Tragedy  of  Douglas,  with  Remarks  on  that  Play. 
$.  The  Deposition,  or  Fatal  Miscarriage,  a  Tragedy.  9.  Douglas, 
a  Tragedy,  weighed  in  the  Balances  and  found  wanting.  10.  The 
First  Night's  Audience,  an  excellent  new  Ballad.  11.  The  Stage 
or  the  Pulpit,  two  parts.     12.   The  Apostle  to  the  Theatre  his 


OF  DR.  ROBERTSON,  xxix 

Throughout  the  whole  of  the  ecclesiastical  pro- 
ceedings, which  on  this  occasion  were  instituted  in 
the  presbyteries  and  in  the  general  assembly,  Ro- 
bertson exerted  himself  with  more  than  common 
ardour  and  eloquence  on  behalf  of  his  friends. 
Though,  being  restrained  by  a  promise  which  he 
had  given  to  his  father,  he  had  himself  never  been 
within  the  walls  of  a  theatre,  he  did  not  hesitate  .to 
avow  his  belief  that  no  culpability  attached  to  the 
persons  who  were  under  prosecution.  "  The  pro- 
mise," said  he,  "  which  was  exacted  by  the  most 
indulgent  of  parents,  I  have  hitherto  religiously 
kept,  and  it  is  my  intention  to  keep  it  till  the  day 
of  my  death.  I  am  at  the  same  time  free  to  de- 
clare, that  I  perceive  nothing  sinful  or  inconsistent 
with  the  spirit  of  Christianity  in  writing  a  tragedy, 

Garland.  13.  The  Finishing  Stroke,  or  Nothing,  a  Ballad. 
14.  The  Infernal  Council,  an  excellent  new  Ballad.  15.  A  Song 
or  Sermon,  a  new  Ballad,  Saturday  29th  January,  1757.  16.  The 
Admonition,  an  execrable  neio  Ballad.  17.  Advice  to  the  Writers 
in  Defence  of  Douglas.  18.  An  Epilogue  to  the  Tragedy  of 
Douglas,  spoke  by  the  Author.  19.  An  Argument  to  prove  that 
the  Tragedy  of  Douglas  ought  to  be  burnt  by  the  Common  Hang- 
man (ironical,  by  Dr.  Carlyle).  20.  The  Moderator,  Nos.  1 
and  2.  21.  Votes  of  the  Presbytery  of  Edinburgh,  2Qth  Decem- 
ber, 1 750.  22.  A  Letter  to  the  Reverend  the  Moderator,  Sfc.  of 
the  Presbytery  of  Haddington.  23.  A  Letter  to  the  Author  of 
the  Ecclesiastical  Characteristics.  24.  The.  Morality  of  Stage 
Plays  seriously  considered  (by  Dr.  Ferguson).  25.  Some  serious 
Remarks  on  a  Pamphlet  entitled,  The  Morality  of  Stage  Plays 
seriously  considered  (by  the  Rev.  Mr.  Harper,  an  Episcopalian 
clergyman).  2G.  The  Players'  Scourge.  27.  A  Second  Letter 
to  the  Author  of  the  Ecclesiastical  Characteristics.  28.  Unto  the 
Right  Ethereal  the  Siplers,  the  Petition  of  poor  Alexander  Mag- 
num Bonum.  Most  of  these  are  unfavourable  to  the  play  (some 
of  them  written  by  Mr.  Maclaurin,  afterwards  Lord  Dreghorn);  ' 
others  contain  very  indecorous  strictures  on  the  conduct  of  Drs. 
Cuming,  Walker,  and  Webster,  who  were  active  in  discourag- 
ing the  attendance  on  the  theatre,  and  in  prosecuting  olleudiug 
brethren. 

C  2 


XXX  SKETCH  OF  THE  LIFE 

which  gives  no  encouragement  to  baseness  or  vice, 
and  that  I  cannot  concur  in  censuring  my  brethren 
for  being  present  at  the  representation  of  such  a 
tragedy,  from  which  I  was  kept  back  by  a  promise, 
which,  though  sacred  to  me,  is  not  obligatory  on 
them." 

Wholly  to  overcome  the  prevalent  spirit  of 
bigotry  was  more  than  Robertson  could  accomplish, 
but  it  is  believed  to  have  been  at  least  greatly  miti- 
gated by  his  laudable  efforts.  To  his  persuasive 
eloquence  is  attributed,  and  no  doubt  justly,  the 
comparative  mildness  of  the  sentence  which  was 
ultimately  pronounced.  A  declaratory  act  was 
passed  by  the  assembly,  forbidding  the  clergy  to 
visit  the  theatres,  but  not  extending  the  prohibition 
to  the  writing  of  plays.  The  silence  of  the  assem- 
bly on  the  latter  head  was  at  least  one  point  gained 
in  favour  of  liberal  principles.  As  to  the  offending 
ministers,  some  of  them  were  rebuked  by  the  pres- 
byteries to  which  they  belonged,  and  one  or  two  of 
them  were  suspended  from  their  office  for  a  few 
weeks.  Home,  however,  being  disgusted  with  the 
treatment  which  he  had  experienced,  and  having, 
perhaps,  already  been  offered  patronage  in  the 
British  metropolis,  resigned  his  living  of  Athel- 
staneford  in  June,  1757,  and  fixed  his  residence  in 
London. 

By  the  departure  of  Home,  the  Select  Society, 
as  it  was  called,  lost  one  of  its  ablest  members. 
This  society  was  instituted  at  Edinburgh,  in  1754, 
by  x\llan  Ramsay,  the  painter,  who  was  son  to  the 
■poet  of  the  same  name.  The  object  of  it  was  phi- 
losophical and  literary  inquiry,  and  the  improve- 
ment of  the  members  in  the  art  of  speaking.  It 
held  its  meetings  in  the  Advocates'  Library,  and 


OF  DR.  ROBERTSOiN.  XXXi 

met  regularly  every  Friday  evening,  during  the  sit- 
tings of  the  Court  of  Session.  At  the  outset  it 
consisted  of  only  fifteen  persons,  of  whom  Robert- 
son was  one.  It,  however,  soon  acquired  such 
high  reputation,  that  its  list  of  associates  was 
swelled  to  more  than  a  hundred  and  thirty  names ; 
among  which  were  included  those  of  the  most 
eminent  literary  and  political  characters  in  the 
northern  division  of  the  kingdom.  Of  this  number 
were  Hume,  Adam  Smith,  Wedderburn,  after- 
wards Lord  Chancellor,  Sir  Gilbert  Elliot,  Lord 
Elibank,  Lord  Monboddo,  Lord  Karnes,  Lord 
Woodhouselee,  Adam  Furguson,  Wilkie,  Dr.  Cul- 
len,  and  many  others,  less  gifted  perhaps,  but 
still  rising  far  above  mediocrity  of  talent.  This 
society  flourished  in  full  vigour  for  some  years; 
and  is  said,  by  professor  Stewart,  to  have  "  pro- 
duced such  debates  as  have  not  often  been  heard 
in  modern  assemblies; — debates,  where  the  dignity 
of  the  speakers  was  not  lowered  by  the  intrigues  of 
policy,  or  the  intemperance  of  faction  ;  and  where 
the  most  splendid  talents  that  have  ever  adorned 
this  country  were  roused  to  their  best  exertions,  by 
the  liberal  and  ennobling  discussions  of  literature 
and  philosophy."  That  such  an  assemblage  of 
learning  and  genius  must  have  done  much  towards 
diffusing  through  Scotland  a  taste  for  letters,  there 
cannot  be  the  shadow  of  a  doubt.  Robertson  took 
an  active  part,  and  was  one  of  its  presidents.  As 
a  speaker,  it  was  remarked  of  him,  that  "  whereas 
most  of  the  others  in  their  previous  discourses 
exhausted  the  subject  so  much  that  there  was  no 
room  for  debate,  he  gave  only  such  brief  but  artful 
sketches,  as  served  to  suggest  ideas,  without  lead- 
ing to  a  decision." 


XXXii  SKETCH  OF  THE  LIFE 

By  a  few  members  of  the  Society,  a  Review 
was  attempted  in  1755,  the  principal  contributors 
to  which  were  Blair,  Smith,  and  Robertson.  This 
undertaking  was  designed  to  form  a  record  of  the 
progress  of  Scottish  literature,  and,  occasionally,  to 
criticise  such  English  and  foreign  works  as  might 
appear  to  be  worthy  of  notice.  After  having  pub- 
lished two  numbers,  which  appeared  in  July  and 
December,  the  reviewers  were  under  the  necessity 
of  relinquishing  their  plan.  The  failure  is  said  to 
have  arisen  from  their  having  lashed,  with  just  but 
caustic  severity,  "  some  miserable  effusions  of  fana- 
ticism, which  it  was  their  wish  to  banish  from  the 
church."  Their  attack  upon  this  mischievous  trash 
excited  such  a  vehement  party  outcry,  that  they 
thought  it  prudent  to  discontinue  labours  which, 
while  they  must  fail  of  being  useful,  could  not  fail 
to  expose  them  to  vulgar  odium,  and  involve  them 
in  endless  disputes.  Time,  the  great  worker  of 
changes,  has  since  produced  a  marvellous  altera- 
tion. At  a  period  less  than  half  a  century  later,  the 
most  prejudice-scorning  and  pungent  of  all  Reviews 
was  established  in  the  Scottish  capital,  and  was 
received  with  enthusiasm ! 

The  first  separate  literary  production  of  Robert- 
son, or  at  least  the  first  known  production,  was 
also  laid  before  the  public  in  1755.  It  is  a  sermon 
which  he  preached  in  that  year  before  the  Scotch 
Society  for  propagating  Christian  knowledge.  He 
chose  for  his  subject,  "  The  situation  of  the  world 
at  the  time  of  Christ's  appearance,  and  its  con- 
nexion with  the  success  of  his  religion."  Though 
this  discourse  never  rises  into  a  strain  of  glowing 
eloquence,  it  is  a  dignified  and  argumentative  com- 
position, in  a  chaste  and  animated  style.    If  it  does 


OF  DR.  ROBERTSON.  XXX111 

not  flash  and  dazzle,  it  at  least  shines  with  a  steady 
lustre.  Its  merit,  indeed,  affords  us  ample  cause 
to  regret  that,  before  his  removal  from  Gladsmuir, 
he  lost  a  volume  of  sermons,  on  which  much  care 
is  said  to  have  been  bestowed.  The  sole  specimen 
which  remains  of  his  talents  as  a  preacher  has 
passed  through  five  editions,  and  has  been  trans- 
lated into  the  German  language  by  Mr.  Edeling. 
Some  of  his  enemies  have,  however,  invidiously  re- 
marked, that  he  evidently  borrowed  his  ideas  and 
sentiments  from  the  introductory  chapters  to  Mos- 
heim's  Ecclesiastical  History.  Nothing  is  more 
easy  or  frequently  made,  nothing  is,  in  general, 
more  groundless  and  contemptible  than  a  charge  of 
plagiarism.  In  this  instance  there  appears  to  be 
not  a  shadow  of  evidence  to  support  the  charge ; 
the  likeness,  if  in  fact  there  be  any,  being  more  re- 
mote than,  under  the  similar  circumstances  of  the 
case,  might  naturally  be  expected. 

The  time  now  came  when  the  high  character  for 
learning  and  talent,  which  Robertson  had  acquired 
among  his  friends,  was  to  be  ratified  by  the  public 
voice.  He  had  long  been  sedulously  engaged  on 
the  History  of  Scotland,  the  plan  of  which  he  is 
said  to  have  formed  soon  after  his  settling  at  Glads- 
muir. By  his  letters  to  Lord  Hailes  we  are,  in 
some  measure,  enabled  to  trace  his  progress.  It 
appears  that  as  early  as  1753  he  had  commenced 
his  labours,  and  that  by  the  summer  of  1757  he 
had  advanced  as  far  as  the  narrative  of  Gowrie's 
conspiracy.  In  the  spring  of  1758  he  visited  Lon- 
don, to  concert  measures  for  publishing;  and  the 
History,  in  two  volumes,  quarto,  was  given  to  the 
world  on  the  first  of  February,  1759,  about  three 
months  subsequent  to  the  completion  of  it.    While 


XXXIV  SKETCH  OF  THE  LIFE 

the  last  sheets  were  in  the  press,  the  author  received, 
by  diploma,  the  degree  of  Doctor  of  Divinity  from 
the  University  of  Edinburgh. 

At  the  period  when  Dr.  Robertson  commenced 
his  career,  this  country  could  boast  of  few  histo- 
rians, possessed  of  philosophic  views  and  an  elegant 
style.      Rapin,  who,  besides,  wrote  in  his  native 
language,  Carte,  and  others,  could  not  aspire  to  a 
loftier  title  than  that  of  annalists ;    and  the  recent 
production  from  the  pen  of  Smollet,  though  dis- 
playing talent,  was  by  far  too  imperfect  to  give  him 
a  place  among  eminent  historical  writers.     Hume 
alone  had  come  near  to  the  standard  of  excellence; 
and,  after  enduring  a  doubtful  struggle,  in  the  course 
of  which  his  spirits  were  well  nigh  overpowered, 
had  at  length  begun  to  enjoy  the  literary  honours 
which  he  had  so  painfully  acquired.     For  a  con- 
siderable time  past  he  had  been  occupied  on  the 
reigns  of  the  Tudor  race ;  and,  as  this  subject  is 
inseparably  connected  with  Scottish  history,  Dr. 
Robertson  was  alarmed  lest  he  himself  should  sus- 
tain  injury  from   the  volumes  of  his  friend  being 
published  simultaneously  with  his  own.     The  new 
candidate  for  fame  endeavoured  to  induce  Hume 
to  proceed  with  some  other  portion  of  his  narrative ; 
and,  having  failed  in  this,  he  appears  to  have  been 
desirous  that  he  should  at  least  be  allowed  to  be 
the  first  to  claim  the  notice  of  the  public.     "  I  am 
(says  Hume  in  a  letter  to  him)  nearly  printed  out, 
and  shall  be  sure  to  send  you  a  copy  by  the  stage 
coach,  or  some  other  conveyance.    I  beg  of  you  to 
make  remarks  as  you  go  along.     It  would  have 
been  much   better   had  we  communicated  before 
printing,  which  was  always  my  desire,   and  was 
most  suitable  to  the  friendship  which  always  did, 


OF  DR.  ROBERTSON.  XXXV 

and  I  hope  always  will  subsist  between  us.  I 
speak  this  chiefly  on  ray  own  account.  For  though 
I  had  the  perusal  of  your  sheets  before  I  printed, 
I  was  not  able  to  derive  sufficient  benefits  from 
them,  or  indeed  to  make  any  alteration  by  their 
assistance.  There  still  remain,  I  fear,  many  errors, 
of  which  you  could  have  convinced  me  if  we  had 
canvassed  the  matter  in  conversation.  Perhaps  I 
might  also  have  been  sometimes  no  less  fortunate 
with  you."  He  adds,  "  Millar  was  proposing  to 
publish  me  about  March ;  but  I  shall  communicate 
to  him  your  desire,  even  though  I  think  it  entirely 
groundless,  as  you  will  likewise  think  after  you 
have  read  my  volume.  He  has  very  needlessly 
delayed  your  publication  till  the  first  week  of  Fe- 
bruary, at  the  desire  of  the  Edinburgh  booksellers, 
who  could  no  way  be  affected  by  a  publication  in 
London.  I  was  exceedingly  sorry  not  to  be  able 
to  comply  with  your  desire,  when  you  expressed 
your  wish  that  1  should  not  write  this  period.  I 
could  not  write  downward.  For  when  you  find 
occasion,  by  new  discoveries,  to  correct  your  opi- 
nion with  regard  to  facts  which  passed  in  Queen. 
Elizabeth's  days;  who,  that  has  not  the  best  op- 
portunities of  informing  himself,  could  venture  to 
relate  any  recent  transactions  ?  I  must  therefore 
have  abandoned  altogether  this  scheme  of  the  Eng- 
lish History,  in  which  J  had  proceeded  so  far,  if! 
had  not  acted  as  I  did.  You  will  see  what  light  and 
force  this  History  of  the  Tudors  bestows  on  that 
of  the  Stewarts.  Had  I  been  prudent  I  should 
have  begun  with  it." 

The  alarm  which  Dr.  Robertson  conceived  from 
the  rivalship  of  his  friend  was,  however,  groundless. 
His  success  was  not,  like  that  of  Hume,  the  slow 


XXXVI  SKETCH  OF  THE  LIFE 

growth  of  years.  It  was  complete  and  immediate. 
So  rapid  was  the  sale  of  the  book,  that,  before  a 
month  had  elapsed,  his  publisher  informed  him  that 
it  was  necessary  to  set  about  preparing;  for  a  second 
edition.  It  was  read  and  admired  by  a  part  of 
the  royal  family;  and  plausive  and  gratulatory 
letters  were  showered  on  him  from  all  quarters. 
Warburton,  Horace  Walpole,  Lord  Mansfield, 
Lord  Lyttelton,  Dr.  Douglas,  Hurd,  and  many 
other  men  of  eminence,  all  concurred  in  swelling 
the  chorus  of  praise.  Among  the  foremost  to 
blazon  his  merits  was  his  amicable  rival,  Hume, 
whose  letters  bear  repeated  testimony  to  the  warmth 
of  his  friendship,  and  his  noble  freedom  from  the 
base  dominion  of  envy.  "  I  am  diverting  myself," 
says  he,  "  with  the  notion  of  how  much  you  will 
profit  by  the  applause  of  my  enemies  in  Scotland. 
Had  you  and  I  been  such  fools  as  to  have  given 
way  to  jealousy,  to  have  entertained  animosity  and 
malignity  against  each  other,  and  to  have  rent  all 
our  acquaintance  into  parties,  what  a  noble  amuse- 
ment we  should  have  exhibited  to  the  blockheads, 
which  now  they  are  likely  to  be  disappointed  of! 
All  the  people  whose  friendship  or  judgment  either 
of  us  value  are  friends  to  both,  and  will  be  pleased 
with  the  success  of  both,  as  we  will  be  with  that 
of  each  other.  I  declare  to  you  I  have  not  of  a 
long  time  had  a  more  sensible  pleasure  than  the 
good  reception  of  your  History  has  given  me  within 
this  fortnight."  In  another  place,  with  a  sportive- 
ness  not  unusual  in  his  correspondence,  he  ex- 
claims, "  But  though  T  have  given  this  character 
of  your  work  to  Monsieur  Helvetius,  I  warn  you 
that  this  is  the  last  time  that,  either  to  Frenchman 
or  Englishman,  I  shall  ever  speak  the  least  good  of 


OF  DR.   ROBERTSON.  XXXV11 

it.  A  plague  take  you  !  Here  I  sat  near  the  his- 
torical summit  of  Parnassus,  immediately  under 
Dr.  Smollet;  and  you  have  the  impudence  to 
squeeze  yourself  by  me,  and  place  yourself  directly 
under  his  feet.  Do  you  imagine  that  this  can  be 
agreeable  to  me  !  And  must  not  I  be  guilty  of 
great  simplicity  to  contribute  my  endeavours  to 
your  thrusting  me  out  of  my  place  in  Paris  as  well 
as  at  London  ?  But  I  give  you  warning  that  you 
will  find  the  matter  somewhat  difficult,  at  least  in 
the  former  city.  A  friend  of  mine,  who  is  there, 
writes  home  to  his  father  the  strangest  accounts  on 
that  head ;  which  my  modesty  will  not  permit  me 
to  repeat,  but  which  it  allowed  me  very  deliciously 
to  swallow." 

The  hold  which  the  History  of  Scotland  thus 
suddenly  acquired  on  the  public  mind  it  yet  retains. 
Fourteen  editions  were  published  during  the  life- 
time of  the  author,  and  the  editions  since  his  de- 
cease have  been  still  more  numerous.  It  has  un- 
doubtedly established  itself  as  a  classical  English 
production.  For  a  while,  indeed,  the  voice  of  cri- 
ticism was  mute  ;  and  the  historian  had  only  to 
enjoy  the  luxury  of  his  triumph.  But,  at  length, 
some  of  his  opinions,  particularly  his  belief  of  the 
guilt  of  Mary,  found  opponents  in  the  candid  and 
well  informed  Tytler,  the  learned,  acute,  and  elo- 
quent Stuart,  and  the  dogmatical  Whitaker;  the 
latter  of  whom,  though  master  of  talents,  erudition, 
and  forcible  reasoning,  almost  rendered  truth  itself 
repulsive  by  the  petulance  and  overbearingness  of 
his  manner,  and  the  ruggedness  of  his  style.  Of 
his  antagonists,  however,  the  historian  took  not  the 
slightest  public  notice,  contenting  himself  with  the 
silent  correction  of  such  passages  in  his  work  as 

VOL.  T.  d 


XXXVlll  SKETCH  OF  THE  LIFE 

his  matured  judgment  had  decided  to  be  erroneous. 
In  a  letter  to  Gibbon  he  laconically  notices  Whit- 
aker.  "  You  will  see/'  says  he,  "  that  I  have 
got  in  Mr.  Whitaker  an  adversary  so  bigoted  and 
zealous,  that  though  1  have  denied  no  article  of 
faith,  and  am  at  least  as  orthodox  as  himself,  yet 
he  rails  against  me  with  all  the  asperity  of  theolo- 
gical hatred.  T  shall  adhere  to  my  fixed  maxim  of 
making  no  reply/' 

It  was  not  merely  a  harvest  of  unproductive 
fame  that  was  reaped  by  Dr.  Robertson.  He  was 
no  sooner  known  to  the  world  than  preferment  was 
rapidly  bestowed  on  him.  In  the  autumn  of  1758, 
while  his  work  was  in  the  hands  of  the  printer,  he 
was  translated  from  Gladsmuir  to  one  of  the 
churches  of  the  Scottish  metropolis.  I  believe  the 
church  to  which  he  was  removed  to  have  been  that 
of  the  Old  Gray  Friars,  in  which,  some  years  after- 
wards, his  friend  Dr.  Erskine  became  his  coadjutor. 
On  the  History  issuing  from  the  press  he  was  ap- 
pointed Chaplain  of  Stirling  Castle,  and,  in  1761, 
v,;ie  of  his  Masjesty's  Chaplains  in  Ordinary  for 
Scotland.  The  dignity  of  Principal  of  the  College 
of  Edinburgh  was  conferred  on  him  in  1762 ;  and, 
two  years  subsequently  to  this,  the  office  of  Histo- 
riographer for  Scotland,  which,  since  the  death  of 
Crawfurd,  in  1726,  had  been  disused,  was  revived 
in  his  favour,  with  an  annual  stipend  of  two  hun- 
dred pounds. 

.By  the  remuneration  which  he  had  received  for 
his  History,  and  the  salaries  which  arose  from  his 
various  appointments,  Dr.  Robertson  was  now  in 
possession  of  an  income  far  greater  than  had  ever 
before  been  possessed  by  any  Scotch  presbyterian 
minister,   and   certainly   not    falling   short  of   that 


C*F  DR.   ROBERTSON.  XXXix 

which  had  been  enjoyed  by  some  bishops  at  the 
period  when  the  church  of  Scotland  was  under 
episcopal  government.  A  few  of  his  indiscreet 
friends  seem,  however,  to  have  thought  that  his 
talents  were  not  adequately  rewarded,  and  even 
that  the  clerical  profession  in  the  northern  part  of 
our  island  did  not  afford  for  them  a  sphere  of  action 
sufficiently  extensive.  The  church  of  England  held 
forth  richer  prospects  to  ambition  and  to  mental 
endowments;  and  they  were  of  opinion  that,  by 
transferring  his  services  to  that  church,  he  might 
obtain  a  share  in  its  highest  dignities  and  emolu- 
ments. To  this  scheme  allusions  may  be  found  in 
the  letters  which,  about  this  time,  were  addressed 
to  him  by  Dr.  .John  Blair,  Sir  Gilbert  Elliot,  and 
Mr.  Hume.  But  Dr.  Robertson  had  a  larger  share 
of  foresight  and  prudence  than  his  advisers,  and 
he  rejected  their  dangerous  though  well  intended 
counsel.  It  is,  perhaps,  more  than  doubtful  whe- 
ther, had  it  been  executed,  their  plan  would  have 
produced  the  desired  effect.  This  kind  of  trans- 
planting has  often  been  tried,  but  seldom,  if  ever, 
with  any  degree  of  success.  The  plant,  vigorous 
on  its  native  bed,  languishes  and  is  dwarfed  on  an 
alien  soil.  Dr.  Robertson  had  now  reached  the 
mature  age  of  forty-one;  his  opinions,  his  habits, 
his  connexions,  had  all  been  formed  with  a  refer- 
ence to  the  circle  in  which  he  moved,  and  it  was 
not  probable  that  they  could  be  suddenly  bent  with 
advantage  in  an  opposite  direction.  In  Scotland 
he  had  no  competitors  who  could  rise  to  a  level 
with  him;  in  England  he  would,  perhaps,  have 
had  many ;  and  lie  may  be  supposed  to  have 
thought,  with  Caesar,  that  it  is  better  to  be  the 
first  man  in  a  village  than  the  second  at  Home. 


xl  SKETCH  OF  THE  LIFE 

Nor  was  there  any  room  in  England  for  the  ex- 
ercise of  that  kind  of  eloquence  in  which  he  par- 
ticularly excelled ;  the  eloquence  which  is  mani- 
fested in  debate.  By  the  force  of  his  oratory  he 
left  far  behind  all  his  rivals  and  opponents,  and 
wielded  at  will  the  general  assembly  of  the  Scottish 
church ;  but,  since  the  convocation  was  shorn  of 
its  controversial  and  declamatory  glories,  since  it 
was  smitten  with  an  incapacity  of  embarrassing  the 
government,  fostering  theological  rancour,  and  dis- 
playing the  unseemly  spectacle  of  Christian  divines 
arrayed  in  worse  than  barbarian  hostility  to  each 
other,  there  has  not  in  this  country  existed  any 
deliberative  clerical  body  in  which  Dr.  Robertson 
could  have  exerted  those  argumentative  and  rheto- 
rical powers  that,  among  his  follow  ministers,  ob- 
tained for  him  so  entire  an  ascendancy.  His  pre- 
ferment might  also  have  stopped  short  of  the  point 
which  his  sanguine  friends  expected  it  to  attain ; 
and,  whatever  its  degree,  it  would  in  all  probability 
have  been  looked  on  with  a  jealous  eye  by  many 
of  his  brethren  on  the  south  of  the  Tweed.  There 
was,  besides,  another  and  still  more  powerful  rea- 
son that  must  have  influenced  his  decision.  He 
had  for  nearly  twenty  years  been  a  leading  minister 
of  the  presbyterian  establishment ;  and  his  now 
quitting  it  to  enter  into  a  prelatical  church,  which, 
as  being  deemed  a  scion  from  the  hated  stock  of 
Rome,  was  still  held  in  abomination  by  many  of 
his  countrymen,  could  scarcely  have  failed  to  be 
considered  as  an  interested  and  base  sacrifice  of 
his  principles  and  his  character  at  the  shrine  of 
lucre  and  ambition.  To  be  branded  as  a  deserter 
by  the  zealots  of  the  one  institution,  and  by  the 
envious  of  the  other,  was  not  a  favourable  auspice 


OF  DR.  ROBERTSON.  xli 

under  which  to  commence  his  new  career;  and  he 
therefore  acted  wisely,  as  well  as  honourably,  in 
remaining  a  member  of  the  Scottish  church. 

Having  resolved  to  remain  in  Scotland,  and  to 
rely  chiefly  on  his  pen  for  the  advancement  of  his 
fortune,  Dr.  Robertson  had  now  to  choose  another 
theme  on  which  his  talents  could  be  profitably  em- 
ployed. To  the  composition  of  history,  in  which 
he  had  met  with  such  stimulating  success,  he  wisely 
determined  to  adhere.  It  was,  indeed,  in  that  de- 
partment that  he  was  peculiarly  qualified  to  excel, 
by  his  power  of  vivid  description,  and  his  happy 
delineation  of  character.  His  friends  were  con- 
sulted on  this  occasion;  each  had  some  favourite 
plan  to  suggest  to  him ;  aud  he  seems  to  have  been 
absolutely  embarrassed  by  the  affluence  of  subjects, 
many  of  which  were  worthy  of  his  best  exertions  to 
illustrate  and  adorn  them.  If  a  ludicrous  simile 
may  be  allowed,  we  may  say  that  he  found  it  no 
less  difficult  to  fix  his  choice,  than  it  was  for 
Mr.  Shandy  to  decide  to  what  purpose  he  should 
apply  the  legacy  which  was  left  to  him  by  his 
sister  Dinah.  Dr.  John  Blair  strenuously  recom- 
mended to  him  to  write  a  complete  History  of 
England,  and  assured  him  that  Lord  Chesterfield 
had  declared  his  readiness  to  move,  in  the  House 
of  Peers,  for  public  encouragement  to  him,  in  case 
of  his  undertaking  a  work  which  might  with  justice 
be  considered  as  being  a  national  one.  But  from 
adopting  this  project,  though  it  was  one  which  he 
had  early  cherished,  Dr.  Robertson  was  deterred 
by  his  honourable  unwillingness  to  interfere  with 
his  friend  Hume,  who  was  now  putting  the  finish- 
ing hand  to  his  great  labour.  Iliimo  himself  ad- 
vised  him  to  undertake  a  series  of  modern  lives, 

d'2 


xlii  SKETCH  OF  THE  LIFE 

in  the  manner  of  Plutarch.     "  You  see,"  said  he, 
"  that  in  Plutarch  the  life  of  Caesar  may  be  read 
in  half  an  hour.     Were  you  to  write  the  life  of 
Henry  the  Fourth  of  Prance  after  that  model,  you 
might  pillage  all  the  pretty  stories  in  Sully,  and 
speak  more  of  his  mistresses  than  of  his  battles. 
In  short,  you  might  gather  the  flower  of  all  modern 
history  in  this  manner.      The  remarkable   Popes, 
the  Kings  of  Sweden,  the  great  discoverers  and 
conquerors  of  the  New  World,  even  the  eminent 
men  of  letters  might  furnish  you  with  matter,  and 
the  quick  dispatch  of  every  different  work  would 
encourage  you  to  begin  a  new  one.     If  one  volume 
were  successful,  you    might   compose  another  at 
your  leisure,  and  the  field  is  inexhaustible./  There 
are  persons  whom  you   might   meet  with  in   the 
corners  of  history,  so  to  speak,  who  would  be  a 
subject  of  entertainment  quite  unexpected;  and  as 
long  as  you  live,  you  might  give  and  receive  amuse- 
ment by  such  a  work."     That  so  excellent  an  idea 
should  not  have  been  acted  upon  must  be  regretted 
by  every  one  who  is  a  lover  of  literature.      By 
Horace  Walpole  two  subjects,  of  no  trivial  inte- 
rest, were  pointed  out.    These  were  the  History  of 
Learning,  and  the  History  of  the  reigns  of  Nerva, 
Trajan,  Adrian,  and  the  two  Antonines;  the  latter 
of   which  Walpole    declared   that    he   should   be 
tempted  to  denominate  the  History  of  Humanity. 
Dr.  Robertson  himself  seems,  at  onetime,  to  have 
thought,    though    but   transiently,    of  tracing   the 
events  which  occurred  in  the  age  of  Leo  the  Tenth. 
There  is  no  reason  to  lament  that  he  did  not  under- 
take this  task,  which  was  once  meditated  on  by 
Warton,  and  has  since  been  performed  by  a  writer 
whom  nature  has  largely  gifted,  and  who  possesses 


OF  DR.  ROBERTSON.  xliii 

a  profound  knowledge  of  the  records,  arts,  and 
language  of  Italy.  But  the  two  plans  which  had 
the  ascendancy  in  his  mind,  and  between  which  he 
lonij  hesitated,  were  the  History  of  Greece,  and 
the  History  of  Charles  the  Fifth.  At  length,  not- 
withstanding the  objections  which  were  urged  by 
Hume  and  Horace  Walpole,  he  made  choice  of 
the  reign  of  Charles  as  the  subject  of  his  second 
attempt. 

When  he  had  for  about  a  year  been  engaged, 
partly  in  those  preliminary  researches  which  are 
necessary  to  give  value  to  a  work  like  that  on 
which  he  was  occupied,  and  partly  in  composition, 
his  progress  was  suddenly  suspended,  by  the  inter- 
vention of  a  personage  of  such  elevated  rank  as  to 
render  it  almost  impossible  for  him  to  decline  a 
compliance  with  that  which  was  required  from  him. 
It  has  been  seen,  that  he  was  early  desirous  to  be 
the  historian  of  his  native  island,  and  that  friend- 
ship alone  prevented  him  from  being  so.  He  was 
now  informed  that  the  wishes  of  the  British  Sove- 
reign were  in  unison  with  his  own.  In  the  latter 
part  of  July,  17G1,  he  was  written  to  on  this  head 
by  Lord  Cathcart.  "  Lord  Bute  told  me  the 
King's  thoughts  as  well  as  his  own,"  said  Lord 
Cathcart,  "  with  respect  to  your  History  of  Scot- 
land, and  a  wish  his  Majesty  had  expressed  to  see 
a  History  of  England  by  your  pen.  His  lordship 
assured  me,  every  source  of  information  which 
government  can  command  would  be  opened  to  you; 
and  that  great,  laborious,  and  extensive  as  the 
work  must  be,  he  would  take  care  your  encourage- 
ment should  be  proportioned  to  it.  He  seemed  to 
be  aware  of  some  objections  you  once  had,  founded 
on  the  apprehension  of  clashing  or  interfering  with 


xliv  SKETCH  OF  THE  LIFE 

Mr.  David  Hume,  who  is  your  friend  :  but  as  your 
performance  and  his  will  be  upon  plans  so  different 
from  each  other,  and  as  his  will,  in  point  of  time, 
have  so  much  the  start  of  yours,  these  objections 
did  not  seem  to  him  such  as,  upon  reflection,  were 
likely  to  continue  to  have  much  weight  with  you. — 
I  must  add,  that  though  I  did  not  think  it  right  to 
inquire  into  Lord  Bute's  intentions  before  I  knew 
a  little  of  your  mind,  it  appeared  to  me  plain,  that 
they  were  higher  than  any  views  which  can  open  to 
you  in  Scotland,  and  which,  I  believe,  he  would 
think  inconsistent  with  the  attention  the  other  sub- 
ject would  necessarily  require." 

A  proposition  thus  powerfully  enforced  it  would, 
under  any  circumstances,  have  been  difficult  for 
Dr.  Robertson  to  reject.  But,  in  fact,  the  reasons 
which  formerly  influenced  his  conduct  had  ceased 
to  exist.  Hume  had  now  completed  his  history, 
it  was  before  the  public,  and  its  fate  must  be  irre- 
vocably decided  before  a  line  of  the  rival  narrative 
could  be  committed  to  paper.  Dr.  Robertson  was 
convinced  of  this,  and  therefore  he  did  not  hesitate 
to  embrace  the  opportunity  which  was  offered  to 
him.  "  After  the  first  publication  of  the  History 
of  Scotland,  and  the  favourable  reception  it  met 
with,"  said  he  in  his  answer  to  Lord  Cathcart,  "  I 
had  both  very  tempting  offers  from  booksellers,  and 
very  confident  assurances  of  public  encouragement, 
if  I  Would  undertake  the  History  of  England.  But 
as  Mr.  Hume,  with  whom,  notwithstanding  the 
contrariety  of  our  sentiments  both  in  religion  and 
politics,  I  live  in  great  friendship,  was  at  that  time 
in  the  middle  of  the  subject,  no  consideration  of 
interest  or  reputation  would  induce  me  to  break  in 
upon  a  field  of  which  he  had  taken  prior  posses- 


OF  DR.  ROBERTSON.  xlv 

sion  ;  and  1  determined  that  my  interference  with 
him  should  never  be  any  obstruction  to  the  sale  or 
success  of  his  work.  Nor  do  I  yet  repent  of  my 
having  resisted  so  many  solicitations  to  alter  this 
resolution.  But  the  case  I  now  think  is  entirely 
changed.  His  History  will  have  been  published 
several  years  before  any  work  of  mine  on  the  same 
subject  can  appear ;  its  first  run  will  not  be  marred 
by  any  justling  with  me,  and  it  will  have  taken  that 
station  in  the  literary  system  which  belongs  to  it. 
This  objection,  therefore,  which  I  thought,  and 
still  think,  so  weighty  at  that  time,  makes  no  im- 
pression on  me  at  present,  and  I  can  now  justify 
my  undertaking  the  English  History,  to  myself,  to 
the  world,  and  to  him.  Besides,  our  manner  of 
viewing  the  same  subject  is  so  different  or  peculiar, 
that  (as  was  the  case  in  our  last  books)  both  may 
maintain  their  own  rank,  have  their  own  partisans, 
and  possess  their  own  merit,  without  hurting  each 
other." 

To  enable  him  to  accomplish  so  arduous  a  labour, 
he  considered  it  necessary,  not  only  that  he  should 
be  established  in  such  a  manner  as  would  divest 
him  of  all  anxiety  as  to  pecuniary  concerns,  but 
that  he  should  likewise  have  the  power  of  devoting 
to  study  a  larger  portion  of  his  time  than  it  was  now 
possible  for  him  to  allot  to  that  purpose.  "  Were 
I  to  carve  out  my  own  fortune,"  said  he,  "  I  should 
wish  to  continue  one  of  His  Majesty's  Chaplains 
for  Scotland,  but  to  resign  my  charge  as  a  minister 
of  Edinburgh,  which  engrosses  more  of  my  time 
than  one  who  is  a  stranger  to  the  many  minute 
duties  of  that  office  can  well  imagine.  I  would 
wish  to  apply  my  whole  time  to  literary  pursuits, 
which  is  at  present  parceled  out  among  innumerahh 


Xlvi  SKETCH  OF  THE  LIFE 

occupations.  In  order  to  enable  me  to  make  this 
resignation  some  appointment  must  be  assigned  me 
for  life.  What  that  should  be,  it  neither  becomes 
me,  nor  do  I  pretend  to  say.  One  thing,  however, 
I  wish  with  some  earnestness,  that  the  thing  might 
be  executed  soon,  both  as  it  will  give  me  great 
vigour  in  my  studies  to  have  my  future  fortune  as- 
certained in  so  honourable  a  manner,  and  because, 
by  allowing  me  to  apply  myself  wholly  to  my  pre- 
sent work,  it  will  enable  me  to  finish  it  in  a  less 
time,  and  to  begin  so  much  sooner  to  my  new  task." 
But  though  he  was  desirous  to  obtain  some  ap- 
pointment, in  order  that  he  might  not  be  "  reduced 
entirely  to  the  profession  of  an  author,"  he  at  the 
same  moment,  with  becoming  spirit,  declared  that 
he  did  not  wish  to  derive  any  emolument  from  it 
before  he  could  commence  the  particular  task  for 
which  the  appointment  was  to  be  given.  The  pro- 
posal that  he  should  remove  to  London,  he  was 
averse  from  complying  with,  though  he  did  not  put 
a  direct  negative  on  it;  and  he  could  not  consent 
to  begin  the  History  of  Britain  till  he  had  com- 
pleted that  of  Charles  the  Fifth. 

This  scheme,  which  seems  to  have  been  almost 
brought  to  maturity,  was,  nevertheless,  dropped  ; 
but  for  what  reason  is  unknown.  Mr.  Stewart  is 
disposed  to  believe  that  the  failure  of  it  may  in  part 
be  attributed  to  the  resignation  of  Lord  Bute.  It 
was  certainly  so  much  a  favourite  with  Dr.  Robert- 
son, that  he  long  cherished  it,  and  abandoned  it 
with  reluctance.  We  may,  perhaps,  be  allowed  to 
smile,  or  to  wonder,  that  a  sovereign  should  have 
selected  a  writer  confessedly  of  Whig  principles  to 
compose  a  History  of  England,  in  opposition  to 
one  produced  by  a  friend  of  arbitrary  power;  and 


OF  DR.  ROBERTSON.  xlvii 

we  may  also  be  allowed  to  doubt,  whether,  as  far 
as  regarded  its  sentiments,  such  a  work,  written 
by  a  Whig  under  the  auspices  of  a  court,  would 
have  proved  quite  satisfactory  either  to  the  monarch 
or  to  the  people.  There  might,  at  least,  have  been 
some  danger  that  it  would  have  justified  the  sar- 
casm which  was  uttered  by  Horace  Walpole,  on 
another  occasion.  "  You  must  know,  sir,"  said 
Dr.  Robertson  to  him,  "  that  I  look  upon  myself 
as  a  moderate  Whig." — "  Yes,  Doctor,"  replied 
Walpole,  "  I  look  on  you  as  a  very  moderate 
Whig." 

As  soon  as  this  negotiation  was  broken  off",  he 
bent  all  his  exertions  to  the  task  which  he  had 
commenced.  The  public  curiosity  was  highly 
excited,  and  it  was  long  kept  on  the  stretch  before 
it  was  gratified.  In  the  summer  of  1701,  he  stated 
that  one  third  of  the  work  was  finished,  and  that 
two  years  more  would  be  required  to  bring  the 
whole  to  perfection.  But  there  never  yet  was  an 
author  who  did  not  deceive  himself,  and  conse- 
quently deceive  others,  as  to  the  period  at  which 
his  labour  would  be  completed.  The  stupid,  the 
thoughtless,  and  the  malignant  (and  there  are  many 
persons,  not  literary,  though  connected  with  litera- 
ture, who  belong  to  these  classes)  consider  as  in- 
tended for  the  purpose  of  deception  the  erroneous 
estimate  which  authors  are  thus  apt  to  form.  They 
either  cannot  or  will  not  be  taught  that,  in  spite  of 
Dr.  Johnson's  bold  assertion  to  the  contrary,  no 
man  is  at  all  hours  capable  of  thinking  deeply,  or 
of  clothing  his  thoughts  in  an  attractive  dress;  that 
he  who  is  dependent  on  his  reputation  for  existence 
ought  not  to  be  compelled  to  hazard  it  by  crude 
and  slovenly  efforts,  the  product  of  haste ;  that  he 


Xlviii  SKETCH  OF  THE  LIFE 

who  draws  up  a  narrative  from  widely  scattered, 
numerous,  and  conflicting  documents  must  often, 
in  painful  research  and  in  balancing  evidence,  spend 
more  months  than  he  had  calculated  on  spending 
weeks;  that  the  discovery  of  a  single  paper,  the 
existence  of  which  was  previously  unknown,  may 
not  only  throw  a  new  light  upon  a  subject,  but  give 
to  it  an  entirely  new  colour,  and  may  compel  a 
writer  to  modify,  to  arrange,  and  even  to  cancel, 
much  that  he  had  supposed  to  have  received  his 
last  touches  ;  and,  therefore,  that  the  delay  which, 
as  being  a  proof  of  literary  indolence,  is  so  fre- 
quently and  so  unfeelingly  an  object  of  censure, 
ought  rather  in  many  cases  to  be  rewarded  with 
praise,  because  it  is  a  duty  which  an  author  con- 
scientiously, and  at  his  own  cost,  performs  to 
society  and  to  truth.  Impediments  of  this  kind  no 
doubt  retarded  the  progress  of  Dr.  Robertson ;  to 
which  must  be  added  his  multifarious  avocations, 
as  principal  of  the  University,  a  minister  of  one  of 
the  churches  of  the  Scottish  metropolis,  and  an 
active  member  of  the  General  Assembly,  in  which 
body,  as  Mr.  Stewart  informs  us,  faction  was  run- 
ning high  at  that  epoch.  The  transactions  relative 
to  America  he  likewise  found  to  be  of  too  vast  a 
magnitude,  to  allow  of  their  being  compressed  into 
an  episode.  He  was  under  the  necessity  of  re- 
serving them  for  a  separate  history ;  and  this  cir- 
cumstance obliged  him  in  some  degree  to  make  a 
change  in  his  original  plan.  It  is,  therefore,  not 
wonderful  that  the  publication  of  his  work  was 
protracted  six  years  beyond  the  time  which  he  had 
himself  assigned  for  it. 

At   length,  early  in   1769,  appeared,  in  three 
volumes  quarto,  the  History  of  Charles  the  Fifth. 


OF  DR.  ROBERTSON.  xlix 

It  had  been  perused,  while  in  the  press,  by  Hume, 
and  probably  by  other  friends,  and  had  gained  the 
warmest  praise.  "  I  got  yesterday  from  Strahan," 
savs  Uume,  in  one  of  his  letters,  "about  thirty 
sheets  of  your  History,  to  be  sent  over  to  Suard, 
and  last  night  and  this  morning  have  run  them  over 
with  great  avidity.  I  could  not  deny  myself  the 
satisfaction  (which  I  hope  also  will  not  displease 
you)  of  expressing  presently  my  extreme  approba- 
tion of  them.  To  say  only  they  are  very  well  writ- 
ten, is  by  far  too  faint  an  expression,  and  much 
inferior  to  the  sentiments  I  feel:  they  are  composed 
with  nobleness,  with  dignity,  with  elegance,  and 
with  judgment,  to  which  there  are  few  equals. 
They  even  excel,  and  I  think  in  a  sensible  degree, 
your  History  of  Scotland.  I  propose  to  myself 
great  pleasure  in  being  the  only  man  in  England, 
during  some  months,  who  will  be  in  the  situation 
of  doing  you  justice,  after  which  you  may  certainly 
expect  that  my  voice  will  be  drowned  in  that  of  the 
public." 

Hume's  anticipation  was  prophetic.  Soon  after 
the  work  had  come  out,  he  wrote  to  his  friend,  in 
the  following  unequivocal  terms.  "  The  success 
has  answered  my  expectations,  and  I,  who  con- 
verse with  the  great,  the  fair,  and  the  learned,  have 
scarcely  heard  an  opposite  voice,  or  even  whisper, 
to  the  general  sentiments.  Only  I  have  heard  that 
the  Sanhedrim  at  Mrs.  Macaulay's  condemns  you 
as  little  less  a  friend  to  government  and  monarchy 
than  myself."  Horace  Walpole  was  almost  equally 
laudatory;  Lord  Lyttelton  testified  his  admiration; 
and,  as  Hume  had  long  before  done,  recommended 
to  the  historian  to  write,  in  the  manner  of  Plutarch, 
the  lives  of  eminent  persons.     Voltaire,  also,  paid 

vol.  i.  e 


1  SKETCH  OF  THE  LIFE 

a  flattering  tribute.  "  It  is  to  you  aud  to  Mr. 
Hume,"  said  he,  "  that  it  belongs  to  write  history. 
You  are  eloquent,  learned,  and  impartial.  I  unite 
with  Europe  in  esteeming  you."  Xor  was  the 
fame  of  the  author  confined  to  his  native  island. 
Through  the  intervention  of  the  Baron  D'Holbach, 
M.  Suard  was  induced  to  translate  the  work  into 
French,  while  it  was  being  printed  in  England,  and 
his  masterly  translation  is  said  to  have  established 
his  own  literary  character,  and  to  have  been  the 
means  of  his  obtaining  a  seat  in  the  French  Aca- 
demy. The  remuneration  which  the  author  him- 
self received  was  magnificent ;  especially  in  an  age 
when  it  was  not  customary  to  give  a  large  sum  of 
money  for  the  purchase  of  copyright.  It  is  affirmed 
to  have  been  no  less  than  four  thousand  rive  hun- 
dred pounds. 

It  is  not  to  be  imagined,  however,  that  the  His- 
tory of  Charles  the  Fifth  could  entirely  escape  the 
severity  of  criticism,  which  appears  to  be  the  com- 
mon lot  of  all  literary  productions.  By  the  Abbe 
Mably  it  was  attacked  in  rude  and  contemptuous 
language;  which,  without  having  the  power  to  in- 
jure the  work,  was  disgraceful  to  the  person  who 
descended  to  use  it.  Gilbert  Stuart  likewise  as- 
sailed it;  but  with  more  skill  than  the  French 
critic,  and  with  a  vigour  which  was  animated  by 
personal  resentment.  That  his  acuteness  detected 
many  inaccuracies,  it  would  be  absurd  to  dispute; 
but  no  one  can  doubt  that  he  pushed  his  censure 
farther  than  was  consonant  with  justice,  when  he 
characterized  Dr.  Robertson  as  an  author  "  whose 
total  abstinence  from  all  ideas  and  inventions  of  his 
own  permitted  him  to  carry  an  undivided  attention 
to  other  men's  thoughts  and  speculations."     \Val- 


OF  DR.  ROBERTSON.  li 

pole,  too,  in  later  life,  asserted  that  the  reading;  of 
Dr.  Robertson  was  not  extensive,  that  the  Intro- 
duction to  the  History  of  Charles  abounds  with 
gross  errors,  and  that  in  many  instances  he  has 
mistaken  exceptions  for  rules.  The  work,  however, 
still  maintains  its  station ;  and,  even  admitting-  all 
that  truth  or  ingenious  prejudice  can  urge  against 
it,  who  is  there  who  will  now  have  the  boldness  to 
deny  that  it  forms  a  splendid  addition  to  our  histo- 
rical treasures  ? 

After  having  completed  this  arduous  undertak- 
ing, Dr.  Robertson  allowed  himself  some  respite 
from  literary  toil ;  a  respite  which,  in  fact,  was 
necessary  for  the  preservation  of  his  health.  His 
mind  was,  however,  too  active  to  remain  long  un- 
occupied, and  he  hastened  to  resume  the  pen.  As 
a  sequel  to  the  History  of  Charles,  he  had  pro- 
mised to  give  to  the  public  a  narrative  of  the 
Spanish  discoveries,  conquests,  and  proceedings 
in  America.  This  plan  he  soon  resolved  to  en- 
large, so  as  to  include  in  it  the  transactions  of  all 
the  European  colonizers  of  the  American  continent. 
To  the  origin  and  progress  of  the  British  empire  in 
that  quarter,  it  was  originally  his  intention  to  de- 
vote an  entire  volume.  Than  the  history  of  the 
New  World  it  was  impossible  for  him  to  have 
chosen  a  subject  more  fertile,  more  attractive,  or 
better  calculated  for  the  display  of  his  peculiar  ta- 
lents. There  was  "  ample  room  and  verge  enough" 
for  eloquence  to  expatiate  in.  The  rapidly  succeed- 
ing events  which  he  was  to  describe  were  scarcely 
less  marvellous  than  those  of  an  oriental  fiction ; 
one  of  his  heroes,  the  dauntless  explorer  of  unknown 
oceans,  will  always  excite  the  wonder,  admiration, 
and  pity  of  mankind  ;  others,  though  villains,  were 


hi  SKETCH  OF  THE  LIFE 

at  least  villains  of  no  common  powers;  and  the 
characters,  the  customs,  the  manners,  the  scenery, 
every  thing  in  short  that  was  connected  with  the 
work,  possessed  throughout  the  charm  of  novelty, 
and,  in  many  instances,  that  of  the  most  picturesque 
and  forcible  contrast. 

To  the  first  part  of  his  subject,  that  which  re- 
lates to  the  discovery  of  the  New  World,  and  the 
conquests  and  policy  of  the  Spaniards,  eight  years 
of  studious  toil  were  devoted  by  Dr.  Robertson. 
At  length,  in  the  spring  of  1777,  he  put  forth,  in 
two  quartos,  the  result  of  his  labours.  The  public 
again  received  him  with  enthusiasm,  and  his  lite- 
rary friends  again  pressed  forward  to  congratulate 
and  to  praise  him.  Hume  was  no  longer  in  exist- 
ence; but  his  place  was  supplied  by  Gibbon,  who 
testified  his  entire  approbation  of  the  volumes,  even 
before  he  had  wholly  perused  them.  "  I  have  said 
enough,"  said  he,  "  to  convince  me  that  the  present 
publication  will  support,  and,  if  possible,  extend  the 
fame  of  the  author ;  that  the  materials  are  collected 
with  care,  and  arranged  with  skill;  that  the  pro- 
gress of  discovery  is  displayed  with  learning  and 
perspicuity ;  that  the  dangers,  the  achievements, 
and  the  views  of  the  Spanish  Adventurers,  are  re- 
lated with  a  temperate  spirit ;  aud  that  the  most 
original,  perhaps  the  most  curious  portion  of  human 
manners,  is  at  length  rescued  from  the  hands  of 
sophists  and  deciaimers." 

But,  perhaps,  of  all  the  applause  which  was 
bestowed  on  Dr.  Robertson,  none  was  more  gra- 
tify ing  than  that  which  was  given  by  Burke ;  a 
man  eminent  at  once  as  a  writer,  an  orator,  and  a 
statesman.  In  sentiment  and  in  composition  his 
letter  is  so  excellent  that,  like  Mr.  Stewart,  I  am 


OF  DR.  ROBERTSON.  lili 

unwilling  to  mutilate  it.     "  I  am  perfectly  sensi- 
ble," says  he,  "  of  the  very  flattering-  distinction  I 
have  received  in  your  thinking  me  worthy  of  so 
noble  a  present  as  that  of  your  History  of  America, 
I  have,  however,  suffered  my  gratitude  to  lie  under 
some  suspicion,  by  delaying  my  acknowledgment 
of  so  great  a  favour.      But  my  delay  was  only  to 
render  my  obligation  to  you  more  complete,  and 
my  thanks,  if  possible,  more  merited.     The  close 
of  the  session  brought  a  great  deal  of  very  trouble- 
some though  not  important  business  on  me  at  once. 
I  could  not  go  through  your  work  at  one  breath  at 
that  time,  though  I  have  done  it  since.     I  am  now 
enabled  to  thank  you,  not  only  for  the  honour  you 
have  done  me,  but  for  the  great  satisfaction,  and 
the  infinite  variety  and  compass  of  instruction,   I 
have  received  from  your  incomparable  work.   Every 
thing  has  been  done  which  was  so  naturally  to  be 
expected  from  the  author  of  the  History  of  Scot- 
land, and  of  the  Age  of  Charles  the  Fifth.      I  be- 
lieve few  books  have  done  more  than  this,  towards 
clearing  up  dark  points,  correcting  errors,  and  re- 
moving prejudices.     You  have  too  the  rare  secret 
of  rekindling  an  interest  on  subjects  that  had  so 
often  been  treated,  and  in  which  every  thing  which 
could  feed  a  vital  flame  appeared  to   have  been 
consumed.     I  am  sure  I  read  many  parts  of  your 
History  with  that  fresh  concern  and  anxiety  which 
attend  those  who  are  not  previously  apprized  of 
the  event.      You   have,  besides,   thrown   quite   a 
new  light  on  the  present  state  of  the  Spanish  pro- 
vinces, and  furnished  both  materials  and  hints  for 
a  rational  theory  of  what  may  be  expected  from 
them  in  future. 

"  The  part  which  1  read  with  the  greatest  plca- 

e  2 


liv  SKETCH  OF  THE  LIFE 

sure  is  the  discussion  on  the  manners  and  charac- 
ter of  the  inhabitants  of  the  New  World.  I  have 
always  thought  with  you,  that  we  possess  at  this 
time  very  great  advantages  towards  the  knowledge 
of  human  nature.  We  need  no  longer  go  to  His- 
tory to  trace  it  in  all  its  ages  and  periods.  His- 
tory,  from  its  comparative  youth,  is  but  a  poor 
instructor.  When  the  Egyptians  called  the  Greeks 
children  in  antiquities,  we  may  well  call  them  chil- 
dren ;  and  so  we  may  call  all  those  nations  which 
were  able  to  trace  the  progress  of  society  only 
within  their  own  limits.  But  now  the  great  map  of 
mankind  is  unrolled  at  once,  and  there  is  no  state 
or  gradation  of  barbarism,  and  no  mode  of  refine- 
ment, which  we  have  not  at  the  same  moment  un- 
der our  view  ;  the  very  different  civility  of  Europe 
and  of  China;  the  barbarism  of  Persia  and  of 
Abyssinia;  the  erratic  manners  of  Tartary  and  of 
Arabia ;  the  savage  state  of  North  America  and 
New  Zealand.  Indeed  you  have  made  a  noble 
use  of  the  advantages  you  have  had.  You  have 
employed  philosophy  to  judge  on  manners,  and 
from  manners  you  have  drawn  new  resources  for 
philosophy.  I  only  think  that  in  one  or  two  points 
you  have  hardly  done  justice  to  the  savage  cha- 
racter. 

"  There  remains  before  you  a  great  field.  Peri- 
evlosce  plenum  opus  alece  tractas,  et  incedis  per  ignes 
suppositos  cineri  doloso.  When  even  those  ashes 
will  be  spread  over  the  present  fire,  God  knows. 
I  am  heartily  sorry  that  we  are  now  supplying  you 
with  that  kind  of  dignity  and  concern,  which  is 
purchased  to  History  at  the  expense  of  mankind. 
I  had  rather  by  far  that  Dr.  Robertson's  pen  were 
only  employed  in  delineating  the  humble  scenes  of 


OF  DR.  ROBERTSON.  lv 

political  economy  than  the  great  events  of  a  civil 
war.  However,  if  our  statesmen  had  read  the 
book  of  human  nature  instead  of  the  Journals  of 
the  House  of  Commons,  and  History  instead  of 
Acts  of  Parliament,  we  should  not  by  the  latter 
have  furnished  out  so  ample  a  page  for  the  former. 
For  my  part,  I  have  not  been,  nor  am  I,  very  for- 
ward in  my  speculations  on  this  subject.  All  that 
I  have  ventured  to  make  have  hitherto  proved  fal- 
lacious. I  confess,  I  thought  the  colonies  left  to 
themselves  could  not  have  made  any  thing  like  the 
present  resistance  to  the  whole  power  of  this  coun- 
try and  its  allies.  I  did  not  think  it  could  have 
been  done  without  the  declared  interference  of  the 
House  of  Bourbon.  But  I  looked  on  it  as  very 
probable  that  France  and  Spain  would  before  this 
time  have  taken  a  decided  part.  In  both  these 
conjectures  I  have  judged  amiss.  You  will  smile 
when  I  send  you  a  trifling  temporary  production, 
made  for  the  occasion  of  a  day,  and  to  perish  with 
it,  in  return  for  your  immortal  work.  But  our  ex- 
change resembles  the  politics  of  the  times.  You 
send  out  solid  wealth,  the  accumulation  of  ages, 
and  in  return  you  get  a  few  flying  leaves  of  Ame- 
rican paper.  However,  you  have  the  mercantile 
comfort  of  finding  the  balance  of  trade  infinitely  in 
your  favour ;  and  I  console  myself  with  the  snug 
consideration  of  uninformed  natural  acuteness,  that 
I  have  my  warehouse  full  of  goods  at  another's 
expense. 

"  Adieu,  sir,  continue  to  instruct  the  world;  and 
whilst  we  carry  on  a  poor  unequal  conflict  with  the 
passions  and  prejudices  of  our  day,  perhaps  with 
no  better  weapons  than  other  passions  and  preju- 
dices of  our  own,  convey  wisdom  at  our  expense  to 
uture  ge  ncrations." 


Wi  SKETCH  OF  THE  LIFE 

The  honours  which  were  paid  to  hini  by  foreign- 
ers were  equally  gratifying.  The  Royal  Academy 
of  History  at  Madrid  unanimously  elected  him  a 
member  on  the  eighth  of  August,  in  1777,  "  in 
testimony  of  their  approbation  of  the  industry  and 
care  with  which  he  had  applied  to  the  study  of 
Spanish  History,  and  as  a  recompense  for  his  merit 
in  having  contributed  so  much  to  illustrate  and 
spread  the  knowledge  of  it  in  foreign  countries." 
It  likewise  appointed  one  of  its  members  to  trans- 
late the  History  of  America  into  the  Spanish  lan- 
guage, and  considerable  progress  is  believed  to 
have  been  made  in  the  translation.  But  the  latter 
measure  excited  alarm  in  an  absurd  and  decrepit 
government,  which  sought  for  safety  in  conceal- 
ment rather  than  in  a  bold  and  liberal  policy,  and, 
like  the  silly  bird,  imagined  that  by  hiding  its  own 
head  it  could  escape  from  the  view  of  its  pursuers. 
The  translation  was,  therefore,  officially  ordered  to 
be  suppressed,  with  the  vain  hope  of  keeping  the 
world  still  in  the  dark,  with  respect  to  the  nature 
of  the  Spanish  American  commerce,  and  of  the  sys- 
tem of  colonial  administration. 

It  was  not  from  Spain  alone  that  he  received 
testimonies  of  respect.  In  1781,  the  Academy  of 
Sciences  at  Padua  elected  him  one  of  its  foreign 
members ;  and,  in  1783,  the  same  compliment  was 
paid  to  him  by  the  Imperial  Academy  of  Sciences 
at  St.  Petersburgh.  The  Empress  Catherine  also, 
who,  numerous  as  were  her  faults,  was  a  woman 
of  a  strong  and  enlightened  intellect,  also  con- 
ferred on  him  a  flattering  distinction.  She  ordered 
his  friend,  Dr.  Rogerson,  to  transmit  to  him,  as  a 
mark  of  her  esteem,  a  gold  snuffbox,  richly  set 
with  diamonds ;  observing  at  the  same  time,  that  a 
person  whose  labours  had  afforded  her  so  much 


OF  DR.  ROBERTSON.  Ivii 

satisfaction  merited  some  attention  from  her.  So 
much,  indeed,  was  she  delighted  with  the  works  of 
the  Scottish  author,  that  she  did  not  hesitate  to 
assign  to  him  the  place  of  first  model  in  historical 
composition,  to  express  much  admiration  of  the 
sagacity  and  discernment  which  he  displayed  in 
painting  the  human  mind  and  character,  and  to 
declare  that  the  History  of  Charles  the  Fifth  was 
the  constant  companion  of  her  journeys,  and  that 
she  was  never  tired  of  perusing  it,  particularly  the 
introductory  volume. 

As  soon  as  enthusiasm  had  subsided,  criticism 
began   its  labours  in  search  of  defects.      It  was 
objected  to  the  author,  that  he  had  shown  a  dis- 
position to  palliate  or  to  veil  the  enormities  of  the 
Spaniards,  in  their  American  conquests,  and  that 
he  had  shed  an  illusive  lustre  round  the  daring  and 
intelligent  but  sanguinary  and  unprincipled  Cortes. 
Even  Professor  Stewart,  notwithstanding  his  ho- 
nourable affection  for  the  memory  of  his  friend, 
shrinks  from  vindicating  him  on  this  score,  and  con- 
tents himself  with  opposing  to  the  charge  "  those 
warm    and    enlightened    sentiments    of    humanity 
which  in  general  animate  his  writings."      Unwil- 
ling to  censure  severely,  and  unable  to  exculpate, 
Bryan   Edwards  suggests,  as  an  apology  for  Dr. 
Robertson,  that  this  is  one  of  the  cases  in  which 
the   mind,    shrinking    from    the    contemplation    of 
alleged  horrors,  wishes  to  resist  conviction,  and  to 
relieve  itself  by  incredulity.      Dr.  Gleig,  however, 
the  latest  biographer  of  the  historian,  indignantly 
rejects  this  apology  as  absurd;  and,  more  enter- 
prising than   his   predecessors,    partly   labours   to 
invalidate  the  accusation,  by  lessening  the  sum  of 
Spanish  cruelties,   and   partly   to  render  it  of  no 


Iviii  SKETCH  OF  THE  LIFE 

weight,  by  pleading  that  the  writer  probably  con- 
sidered the  conquests  of  Mexico  and  Peru  as 
means  employed  by  Providence  to  accomplish  the 
noblest  and  most  beneficent  purposes.  That  Dr. 
Robertson  did  really  regard  those  conquests  in 
such  a  light  we  may  easily  believe;  since,  in  his 
Sermon,  on  the  state  of  the  world  at  the  appear- 
ance of  Christ,  he  manifests  similar  sentiments 
with  respect  to  the  measureless  and  unslumbering 
ambition  of  those  universal  robbers  the  Romans, 
whom  he  is  pleased  to  style  "  the  noblest  people 
that  ever  entered  on  the  stage  of  the  world."  But 
this  defence  is  merely  sophistical.  Though  we  are 
not  ignorant  that  a  wise  and  benignant  Providence 
educes  good  from  evil,  it  is  not  the  business  of  an 
historian  to  diminish  the  loathing  which  evil  deeds 
ought  to  excite ;  nor  does  it  appear  that  mortality 
is  likely  to  be  much  benefited,  by  teaching  tyrants 
and  murderers  to  imagine  that,  while  they  are 
giving  the  rein  to  their  own  furious  and  malignant 
passions,  they  are  only  performing  their  destined 
tasks  as  instruments  of  the  Deity. 

This  was  by  no  means  all  that  was  urged  against 
the  History  of  America.  It  is,  in  fact,  not  now 
attempted  to  be  denied  that,  in  many  instances, 
Dr.  Robertson  was  led  astray  by  his  partiality  to 
the  brilliant  but  fallacious  theories  of  De  Pauw 
and  Buffon.  Clavigero,  in  his  History  of  Mexico, 
detected  and  somewhat  harshly  animadverted  on 
several  errors,  a  part  of  which  were  subsequently 
rectified.  Bryan  Edwards,  too,  pointed  out  some 
contradictions,  and  some  erroneous  statements. 
But  the  most  severe  censor  is  Mr.  Southey,  a  man 
eminently  well  informed  on  ancient  Spanish  and 
American  events.      "  In  his  History  of  Brazil, 


OF  DR.  ROBERTSON.  lix 

after  having;  described  the  mode  of  reckoning  in 
use  among  the  transatlantic  tribes,  he  adds,  "  when 
Pauvv  reasoned  upon  the  ignorance  of  the  Ameri- 
cans in  numbers,  did  he  suppress  this  remarkable 
fact,  or  was  he  ignorant  of  it  ?  The  same  question 
is  applicable  to  Dr.  Robertson,  who,  on  this,  and 
on  many  other  subjects,  in  what  he  calls  his  His- 
tory of  America,  is  guilty  of  such  omissions,  and 
consequent  misrepresentations,  as  to  make  it  cer- 
tain either  that  he  had  not  read  some  of  the  most 
important  documents  to  which  he  refers,  or  that  he 
did  not  choose  to  notice  the  facts  which  he  found 
there,  because  they  were  not  in  conformity  to  his 
own  preconceived  opinions.  A  remarkable  exam- 
ple occurs  respecting  a  circulating  medium;  when 
he  mentions  cocoanuts,  which  were  used  as  money 
in  Mexico,  and  says,  '  this  seems  to  be  the  utmost 
length  which  the  Americans  had  advanced  towards 
the  discovery  of  any  expedient  for  supplying  the 
use  of  money.'  Now,  it  is  said  by  Cortes  himself, 
that  when  he  was  about  to  make  cannon,  he  had 
copper  enough  but  wanted  tin ;  and  having  bought 
up  all  the  plates  and  pots,  which  he  could  find 
among  the  soldiers,  he  began  to  inquire  among  the 
natives.  He  then  found,  that  in  the  province  of 
Tachco,  little  pieces  of  tin,  like  thin  coin,  were 
used  for  money,  there  and  in  other  places.  And 
this  led  him  to  a  discovery  of  the  mines  from 
whence  it  was  taken.  The  reputation  of  this 
author  must  rest  upon  his  History  of  Scotland,  if 
that  can  support  it.  His  other  works  are  grievously 
deficient." 

Such  are  the  defects  which  are  attributed  to 
Dr.  Robertson's  History.  On  the  other  hand,  it 
ought  to  be  remembered,  that  many  sources    of 


lx  SKETCH  OF  THE  LIFE 

knowledge,  which  were  then  hidden,  have  since 
become  accessible,  that  no  man  is  at  all  times 
exempted  from  the  dominion  of  prejudice,  that  the 
most  cautious  vigilance  may  sink  into  a  momentary 
slumber,  and  that  to  him  who  has  achieved  much, 
a  tribute  of  gratitude  is  due,  even  though  it  may 
be  discovered  that  he  has  left  something-  undone. 
AVere  the  History  of  the  Spanish  Conquests  proved 
to  be  merely  a  fiction,  it  would  nevertheless,  con- 
tinue to  be  read,  such  attraction  is  there  in  the 
general  elegance  of  the  language,  the  skilful  deline- 
ation of  the  characters,  and  the  sustained  interest 
and  spirit  of  the  narrative. 

In  the  preface  to  this  portion  of  his  labours,  he 
made  known  his  intention  to  resume  the  subject  at 
a  future  period ;  and  he  assigned  the  ferment  which 
then  agitated  our  North  American  colonies  as  a 
reason  for  suspending,  at  present,  the  execution 
of  that  part  of  his  plan  which  related  to  British 
America.  At  the  very  beginning,  in  truth,  of  the 
contest  with  the  colonies,  he  congratulated  himself 
on  his  not  having  completed  his  narrative.  "  It  is 
lucky,"  said  he,  in  a  letter  to  Mr.  Strahan,  "  that 
my  American  History  was  not  finished  before  this 
event.  How  many  plausible  theories  that  I  should 
have  been  entitled  to  form,  are  contradicted  by 
what  has  now  happened."  A  fragment  of  this  His- 
tory, which,  however,  was  carefully  corrected  by 
him,  and  which  he  preserved  when  he  committed 
his  manuscripts  to  the  flames,  was  all  that  he  sub- 
sequently wrote  of  the  work  ;  and  this  was  published 
by  his  son  to  prevent  it  from  falling  into  the  hands 
of  an  editor  who  might  make  alterations  and  addi- 
tions, and  obtrude  the  whole  on  the  public  as  the 
genuine  composition  of  the  author. 


OF  DR.  ROBERTSON.  lxi 

With  respect  to  a  separation  between  the  mother 
country  and  the  colonists,  Dr.  Robertson  seems 
to  have  somewhat  varied  in  his  sentiments,  and  to 
have  contemplated  the  probability  of  such  an  event 
with  much  more  dislike  in  1775  than  he  did  in 
1706.  In  the  latter  year,  speaking-  of  the  repeal 
of  the  stamp  act,  he  said,"  I  rejoice,  from  my  love 
of  the  human  species,  that  a  million  of  men  in 
America  have  some  chance  of  running  the  same 
great  career  which  other  free  people  have  held 
before  them.  I  do  not  apprehend  revolution  or 
independence  sooner  than  these  must  or  should 
come.  A  very  little  skill  and  attention  in  the  art 
of  governing  may  preserve  the  supremacy  of  Bri- 
tain as  long  as  it  ought  to  be  preserved."  But,  in 
1775,  though  he  still  acknowledged  that  the  colo- 
nies must  ultimately  become  independent,  he  was 
anxious  that  their  liberation  should  be  delayed  till 
as  distant  a  period  as  possible,  and  was  clearly  of 
opinion  that  they  had  as  yet  no  right  to  throw  off 
their  allegiance.  Nor  was  he  sparing  of  his  cen- 
sure on  the  ministers  for  the  want  of  policy  and 
firmness,  which  he  considered  them  to  have  dis- 
played at  the  commencement  of  the  quarrel.  "  I 
agree  with  you  about  the  affairs  of  America,"  said 
he,  in  a  letter,  which  was  written  in  the  autumn  of 
1775,  "  incapacity,  or  want  of  information,  has  led 
the  people  employed  there  to  deceive  the  ministry. 
Trusting  to  them,  they  have  been  trifling  for  two 
years,  when  they  should  have  been  serious,  until 
they  have  rendered  a  very  simple  piece  of  business 
extremely  perplexed.  They  have  permitted  colo- 
nies, disjoined  by  nature  and  situation,  to  consoli- 
date into  a  regular  systematical  confederacy ;  and 
when  a  few  regiments   stationed   in   each   capital 

vol.  i.  f 


lxii  SKETCH  OF  THE  LIFE 

would  have  rendered  it  impossible  for  thern  to  take 
arras,  they  have  suffered  them  quietly  to  levy  and 
train  forces,  as  if  they  had  not  seen  against  whom 
they  were  prepared.  But  now  we  are  fairly  com- 
mitted, and  I  do  think  it  fortunate  that  the  violence 
of  the  Americans  has  brought  matters  to  a  crisis 
too  soon  for  themselves.  From  the  beginning  of 
the  contest  I  have  always  asserted  that  indepen- 
dence was  their  object.  The  distinction  between 
taxation  and  regulation  is  mere  folly.  There  is 
not  an  argument  against  our  right  of  taxation  that 
does  not  conclude  with  tenfold  force  against  our 
power  of  regulating  their  trade.  They  may  pro- 
fess or  disclaim  what  they  please,  and  hold  the 
language  that  best  suits  their  purpose ;  but,  if  they 
have  any  meaning,  it  must  be  that  they  should  be 
free  states,  connected  with  us  by  blood,  by  habit, 
and  by  religion,  but  at  liberty  to  buy  and  sell  and 
trade  where  and  with  whom  they  please.  This 
they  will  one  day  attain,  but  not  just  now,  if  there 
be  any  degree  of  political  wisdom  or  vigour  remain- 
ing. At  the  same  time  one  cannot  but  regret  that 
prosperous  growing  states  should  be  checked  in 
their  career.  As  a  lover  of  mankind,  I  bewail  it; 
but  as  a  subject  of  Great  Britain,  I  must  wish  that 
their  dependence  on  it  should  continue.  If  the 
wisdom  of  government  can  terminate  the  contest 
with  honour  instantly,  that  would  be  the  most 
desirable  issue.  This,  however,  I  take  to  be  now 
impossible  ;  and  I  will  venture  to  foretell,  that  if 
our  leaders  do  not  at  once  exert  the  power  of  the 
British  empire  in  its  full  force,  the  struggle  will  be 
long,  dubious,  and  disgraceful.  We  are  past  the 
hour  of  lenitives  and  half  exertions.  If  the  con- 
test be  protracted,  the  smallest  interruption  of  the 


OF  DR.  ROBERTSON.  lxiii 

tranquillity  that  reigns  in  Europe,  or  even  the  ap- 
pearance of  it,  may  be  fatal." 

It  must  be  owned,  that  language  like  this  goes 
very  far  towards  justifying  the  sarcasm  of  Horace 
Walpole,  that  the  reverend  historian  was  "  a  very 
moderate  Whig."  Perhaps,  also,  his  belief  that, 
at  the  outset,  a  few  regiments  in  each  capital  would 
have  sufficed  to  trample  down  the  resistance  of  the 
Americans,  may  now  appear  difficult  to  be  recon- 
ciled with  a  knowledge  of  military  affairs,  or  of 
human  nature.  Yet  we  must,  at  the  same  time, 
remember  that  this  erroneous  idea  was  held  by 
him  in  common  with  many  other  men  of  intellect, 
and  that  it  was  even  brought  forward  in  the  British 
senate  as  an  undeniable  truth. 

Though  the  American  war  precluded  Dr.  Ro- 
bertson from  bringing  to  a  close  his  history  of  the 
British  settlements,  it  is  not  easy  to  discover  why 
he  could  not  continue  it  to  a  certain  point ;  or  why, 
at  least,  he  could  not  proceed  with  that  part  of  his 
narrative  which  related  to  the  colonization  of  Bra- 
zil, and  the  violent  struggles  between  the  Dutch 
and  the  Portuguese  in  that  country — an  extensive 
subject,  and  worthy  of  his  pen,  as  it  would  have 
afforded  him  abundant  opportunities  for  the  display 
of  his  delineative  talents.  Our  curiosity  on  this 
head  is  not  satisfied  by  the  reason  which,  as  we 
have  recently  seen,  he  himself  gave,  in  his  preface 
and  in  his  letter  to  Mr.  Strahan.  That  reason, 
however,  he  repeated  in  a  correspondence  with  his 
friend  Mr.  Waddilove,  and  it  is  now  in  vain  to 
seek  for  a  better.  It  is  certain  that  a  wish  to  retire 
from  literary  toil  was  not  his  motive ;  for,  at  the 
same  moment  that  he  postponed  his  History  of 
America,  he  declared  that  it  was  "  neither  his  in- 


IxiV  SKETCH  OF  THE  LIFE 

clination  nor  his  interest  to  remain  altogether  idle." 
As  a  proof  of  his  sincerity,  he  projected  a  History 
of  Great  Britain,  from  the  revolution  to  the  acces- 
sion of  the  House  of  Hanover,  and  even  began  to 
collect  the  necessary  documents.  Notwithstand- 
ing this  seems  to  have  been,  for  a  while,  a  favourite 
scheme,  it  was  speedily  relinquished ;  a  circum- 
stance which  may  justly  be  regretted.  Hume  then 
suggested  the  History  of  the  Protestants  in  France. 
"  The  events,"  said  he.  "  are  important  in  them- 
selves, and  intimately  connected  with  the  great 
revolutions  of  Europe  :  some  of  the  boldest  or 
most  amiable  characters  of  modern  times,  the 
Admiral  Coligny,  Henry  IV.,  &c.  would  be  your 
peculiar  heroes ;  the  materials  are  copious,  and 
authentic,  and  accessible ;  and  the  objects  appear 
to  stand  at  that  just  distance  which  excites  curio- 
sity without  inspiring  passion." 

The  hint  given  by  Hume  was,  however,  not 
adopted.  About  the  year  1779  or  1780  Dr.  Ro- 
bertson seems,  indeed,  to  have  seriously  resolved 
to  write  no  more  for  the  public,  but  to  pursue  his 
studies  at  leisure,  and  for  his  own  amusement. 
"  His  circumstances,"  says  Professor  Stewart, 
"  were  independent:  he  was  approaching  to  the 
age  of  sixty,  with  a  constitution  considerably  im- 
paired by  a  sedentary  life  ;  and  a  long  application 
to  the  compositions  he  had  prepared  for  the  press 
had  interfered  with  much  of  the  gratification  he 
might  have  enjoyed,  if  he  had  been  at  liberty  to 
follow  the  impulse  of  his  own  taste  and  curiosity. 
Such  a  sacrifice  must  be  more  or  less  made  by  all 
who  devote  themselves  to  letters,  whether  with  a 
view  to  emolument  or  to  fame  ;  nor  would  it  per- 
haps be  easy  to  make  it,  were  it  not  for  the  pros- 


OF  DR.  ROBERTSON.  IxV 

pect  (seldom,  alas !  realized)  of  earning  by  their 
exertions,  that  learned  and  honourable  leisure  which 
he  was  so  fortunate  as  to  attain." 

We  must  now  contemplate  Dr.  Robertson  in 
another  point  of  view — that  of  his  ecclesiastical 
and  academical  character;  in  which,  no  less  than 
in  his  literary  capacity,  he  occupied  a  prominent 
station.  The  eminence,  however,  which  he  had 
not  attained  without  difficulty,  he  did  not  hold 
entirely  without  danger.  Jn  one  instance  he  was 
near  falling  a  victim  to  his  spirit  of  liberality.  In 
1778,  thfi  British  legislature  relieved  the  English 
Roman  Catholics  from  some  of  the  severest  of  the 
barbarous  penalties  to  which  they  had  been  sub- 
jected nearly  a  century  before.  Encouraged  by 
this  event,  the  Scottish  Catholics  determined  to 
petition  parliament  to  extend  the  benefit  to  them- 
selves. To  this  measure  Dr.  Robertson  was 
friendly,  and  he  successfully  exerted  his  influence, 
and  that  of  his  partisans,  to  procure  the  rejection 
of  a  remonstrance  against  it,  which  was  brought 
forward  in  the  General  Assembly.  But  on  this 
occasion,  as,  unhappily,  on  too  many  others,  bigotry 
and  ignorance  triumphed  over  sound  policy  and 
Christian  charity.  The  trumpet  of  fanaticism  was 
immediately  sounded,  and  men  of  the  most  oppo- 
site principles  and  interests  hurried  to  obey  the 
call.  Presbyterians,  Seceders,  and  even  Episco- 
palians, the  latter  of  whom  were  themselves  under 
the  lash  of  penal  statutes,  all  combined  in  the  cru- 
sade against  Papistry.  Pamphlets  and  speeches 
were  lavished,  to  prove  that  the  constitution  in 
church  and  state  must  inevitably  perish,  if  an  iota 
of  relief  were  granted  to  the  faithless  members  of 
an  idolatrous  and  sanguinary  church.     The  Roman 

f2 


ixvi  SKETCH  OF  THE  LIFE 

Catholics  were  so  terrified  at  the  fury  that  was 
thus  aroused,  that  the  principal  gentlemen  among 
them  informed  the  ministry  that  they  would  desist 
from  appealing  to  Parliament;  and  they  endea- 
voured to  calm  the  popular  tempest,  by  publishing 
in  the  daily  papers  an  account  of  their  proceedings. 
But  the  enlightened  mob  of  Edinburgh  had  sagely 
resolved  that  the  Catholics  should  not  even  dare 
to  wish  for  the  slightest  participation  in  the  privi- 
leges of  British  subjects,  without  being  punished 
for  their  temerity.  Accordingly,  on  the  2d  of 
February,  1779,  multitudes  of  the  lowest  classes, 
headed  by  disguised  leaders,  assembled  in  the 
Scottish  capital,  burnt  the  house  of  the  Popish 
bishop  and  two  chapels:  and,  in  their  even-handed 
justice,  were  on  the  point  of  committing  to  the 
flames  an  Episcopal  chapel,  when  they  were  pro- 
pitiated, by  being  told  that  an  Episcopal  clergyman 
was  the  author  of  one  of  the  ablest  tracts  which 
had  been  published  against  Popery.  As,  how- 
ever, they  could  not  consent  to  remit  their  ven- 
geance, but  only  to  change  its  object,  they  turned 
their  wrath  upon  those  who  had  expressed  opi- 
nions favourable  to  the  claims  of  the  Catholics. 
Dr.  Robertson  was  marked  out  as  one  of  the  most 
guilty,  and  nothing  less  than  the  destruction  of  his 
property  and  life  was  considered  as  sufficient  to 
atone  for  his  crime.  Fortunately  his  friends  had 
provided  for  his  safety,  and,  when  the  self-ap- 
pointed champions  of  religion  reached  his  house, 
it  was  found  to  be  defended  by  a  military  force, 
which  they  had  not  enough  of  courage  to  look  in 
the  face.  As  they  had  come  only  to  destroy  and 
to  murder,  they,  of  course,  retreated,  when  they 
discovered  that,  to  accomplish  their  purpose,  it 


OF  DR.  ROBERTSON.  lxvii 

would  also  be  necessary  to  fight.  Dr.  Robertson 
is  said  to  have  manifested  great  firmness  and  tran- 
quillity during  this  trying  scene. 

In  selecting  Dr.  Robertson  as  the  person  most 
worthy  of  suffering  by  their  summary  process  of 
punishment  without  trial,  the  mob  of  Edinburgh 
acted  with  a  more  than  mobbish  share  of  injustice. 
Though  desirous  that  the  Catholics  should  be  re- 
leased from  their  thraldom,  he  was  not  disposed  to 
put  any  thing  to  the  hazard  for  the  furtherance  of 
that  object,  and  had  already  withdrawn  his  patron- 
age from  such  obnoxious  clients.     He  was  not  one 
of  those  who,  as   Goldsmith   says  of  Burke,  are 
"  too  fond  of  the  right  to  pursue  the  expedient." 
AVith  him   prudence    was   a   governing   principle. 
When,  therefore,  he  saw  that  his  countrymen  were 
adverse  to  the  measure,  he  advised  the  ministry  to 
forbear  from  lending  their  countenance  to  it.     In 
an  eloquent  speech,  delivered  in  the  General  As- 
sembly, he   afterwards  explained   and   vindicated 
the  view  which  he  originally  took  of  the  subject, 
and  the  manner  in  which  he  finally  acted.     The 
perusal  of  that  which  he  urged,  on  the  latter  point, 
will  not  merely  show  what  were  his  motives  in  this 
instance,  but  also  afford  some  insight  into  his  ge- 
neral character.      How  far  his  system  of  policy  is 
consonant  with  dignity  or  wisdom,  which,  indeed, 
are  inseparable,  I   shall  not  stop  to  inquire.     It 
might,  perhaps,  not  improperly,  be  objected  to  him, 
that  he  mistakes  the  voice   of  a  blind   infuriated 
multitude  for  the  voice  of  the  people ;   though  it  is 
impossible  for  any  two  things  to  be  more  different 
in  their  nature.     It  might  be  asked,  too,  why  the 
fanatical  prejudices  of  a  Scottish  mob  were  to  be 
treated  with  more  respect  than  the  complaints  of 


lxvih  SKETCH  OF  THE  LIFE 

the  American  colonists ;  why  the  one  were  to  be 
indulged  or  complied  with,  while  the  other  were  to 
be  silenced  by  "  a  few  regiments  stationed  in  each 
capital?"     "  As  soon,"  says  he,  "  as  I  perceived 
the  extent  and  violence  of  the  flame  which  the 
discussion  of  this  subject  had  kindled  in  Scotland, 
my  ideas  concerning  the  expedience  at  this  junc- 
ture of  the  measure  in  question,  began  to  alter. 
For  although  I  did  think,  and  I  do  still  believe,  that 
if  the  Protestants  in  this  country  had  acquiesced 
in  the  repeal  as  quietly  as  our  brethren  in  England 
and  Ireland,  a  fatal  blow  would  have  been  given 
to  Popery  in  the  British  dominions ;   I  know,  that 
in  legislation,  the  sentiments  and  dispositions  of  the 
people,  for  whom  laws   are   made,  should  be  at- 
tended to  with  care.     I  remembered  that  one  of 
the  wisest  men  of  antiquity  declared,  that  he  had 
framed  for  his  fellow  citizens  not  the  best  laws,  but 
the  best  laws  which  they  could  bear.     I  recol- 
lected with  reverence,  that  the  Divine  Legislator 
himself,  accommodating  his  dispensations   to  the 
frailty  of  his  subjects,  had  given  the  Israelites  for 
a  season  statutes  which  were  not  good.     Even  the 
prejudices  of  the  people  are,   in  my  opinion,  re- 
spectable ;    and  an  indulgent  legislator  ought  not 
unnecessarily  to  run  counter  to  them.    It  appeared 
manifestly  to  be  sound  policy,  in  the  present  tem- 
per of  the  people,  to  soothe  rather  than  to  irritate 
them;    and,  however   ill  founded  their  apprehen- 
sions might  be,  some  concession  was  now  requisite 
in  order  to  remove  them." 

This  was,  I  believe,  the  last  speech  which  he 
made  in  the  General  Assembly.  While  he  was 
yet  in  the  vigour  of  his  faculties,  and  in  the  exer- 
cise of  undiminished  influence  in  that  assembly,  he 


OF  DR.  ROBERTSON.  lxix 

came  to  a  resolution  to  withdraw  himself  entirely 
from  public  business.  It  was  in  the  year  1780, 
about  the  time  when  he  ceased  to  be  an  historian, 
and  when  he  was  only  fifty-nine,  that  he  adopted 
this  resolution.  Several  causes  seem  to  have  con- 
curred in  producing  his  retirement.  It  has  been 
supposed  by  some,  that  he  did  not  wish  to  remain 
on  the  scene  till  he  was  eclipsed  by  younger  rivals ; 
and  it  is  known  that  he  felt  disgusted  by  the  con- 
duct of  the  violent  men  of  his  own  party,  who, 
though  he  had  yielded  many  points  to  them  against 
his  better  judgment,  were  nevertheless  dissatisfied 
that  he  refused  to  resort  to  stronger  measures  than 
he  deemed  to  be  either  right  or  prudent,  and  who, 
in  consequence,  tormented  him  with  letters  of  re- 
monstrance and  reproach,  which,  as  from  their 
nature  may  easily  be  imagined,  were  written  in  a 
petulant  and  acrimonious  style.  In  addition,  there 
was  one  subject,  which  had  long  been  a  particular 
annoyance  to  him,  and  on  which  he  had  been  more 
pertinaciously  urged  and  fretted  than  on  every 
other.  This  was  a  scheme  for  abolishing  subscrip- 
tion to  the  Confession  of  Faith  and  Formula.  Into 
this  scheme,  which  he  had  avowed  his  determina- 
tion to  resist,  whatever  shape  it  might  assume, 
many  of  his  friends  had  zealously  entered,  and  his 
patience  was  severely  tried  by  their  "  beseeching 
or  besieging"  him  with  respect  to  so  important  an 
object.  By  his  cautious  and  persuasive  policy,  he 
had  for  a  considerable  period,  prevented  the  con- 
troversy from  being  agitated  in  the  assemblies  ;  but 
he  was  of  opinion  that  it  would  ultimately  compel 
attention,  and  would  give  rise  to  vehement  dis- 
putes; and  it  was  this  circumstance,  as  he  himself 


lxX  SKETCH  OF  THE  LIFE 

confessed,  that  "  at  least  confirmed  his  resolution 
to  retire." 

Having  rendered  triumphant  a  cause  which,  to 
say  the  least,  had  numerous  enemies,  it  was  hardly 
to  be  supposed  that  his  character  would  not  be 
aspersed  by  many  of  those  who  were  mortified  to 
witness  his  success.  Accordingly,  the  charge  of 
having  deserted  the  genuine  principles  of  the  Scot- 
tish church  was  often  urged  against  him  by  some 
of  his  antagonists.  Others,  who  had  more  of  the 
zealot  in  their  composition,  did  not  stop  here. 
These  went  so  far  as  to  accuse  him  of  being  indif- 
ferent to  Christianity  itself;  and,  in  proof  of  this, 
they  alleged  his  habits  of  intimacy  with  Hume,  and 
his  correspondence  with  Gibbon.  It  is  difficult  to 
say  whether  this  stupid  calumny  ought  to  excite 
anger  or  contempt. 

This,  however,  was  the  language  of  only  malig- 
nant hearts,  or  little  minds.  By  the  great  majo- 
rity, even  of  those  who  were  in  opposition  to  him, 
full  justice  was  done  to  his  virtues,  his  taleuts,  and 
the  purity  of  his  motives.  Among  those  who, 
believing  patronage  to  be  a  nuisance,  were  the  most 
strenuous  in  contending  with  him,  was  Dr.  Ers- 
kiue,  his  college  mate,  and  colleague  in  the  minis- 
try. That  venerable  and  learned  person  always 
preserved  for  him  a  warm  esteem,  and,  after  the 
historian  was  no  more,  paid  to  his  memory  an 
animated  and  affectionate  tribute  from  the  pulpit. 
"  His  speeches  in  church  courts,"  says  Dr.  Ers- 
kine,  "  were  admired  by  those  whom  they  did  not 
convince,  and  acquired  and  preserved  him  an  in- 
fluence over  a  majority  in  them,  which  none  before 
him  enjoyed ;  though  his  measures  were  sometimes 


OF  DR.  ROBERTSON.  lxxi 

new,  and  warmly,  and  with  great  strength  of  argu- 
ment, opposed,  both  from  the  press  and  iu  the 
General  Assembly.  To  this  influence  many  causes 
contributed :  his  firm  adherence  to  the  principles 
of  church  policy,  which  he  early  adopted;  his 
sagacity  in  forming  plans ;  his  steadiness  in  exe- 
cuting them ;  his  quick  discernment  of  whatever 
might  hinder  or  promote  his  designs ;  his  boldness 
in  encountering  difficulties;  his  presence  of  mind 
in  improving  every  occasional  advantage;  the  ad- 
dress with  which,  when  he  saw  it  necessary,  he 
could  make  an  honourable  retreat;  and  his  skill  in 
stating  a  vote,  and  seizing  the  favourable  moment 
for  ending  a  debate  and  urging  a  decision.  He 
guided  and  governed  others,  without  seeming  to 
assume  any  superiority  over  them ;  and  fixed  and 
strengthened  his  power,  by  often,  in  matters  of 
form  and  expediency,  preferring  the  opinions  of 
those  with  whom  he  acted,  to  his  own.  In  former 
times,  hardly  any  rose  up  to  speak  in  the  General 
Assembly,  till  called  upon  by  the  Moderator,  un- 
less men  advanced  in  years,  of  high  rank,  or  of 
established  characters.  His  example  and  influ- 
ence encouraged  young  men  of  abilities  to  take 
their  share  of  public  business ;  and  thus  deprived 
Moderators  of  an  engine  for  preventing  causes  being 
fairly  and  impartially  discussed.  The  power  of 
others,  who  formerly  had  in  some  measure  guided 
ecclesiastical  affairs,  was  derived  from  ministers  of 
state,  and  expired  with  their  fall.  He  remained 
unhurt  amidst  frequent  changes  of  administration. 
Great  men  in  office  were  always  ready  to  counte- 
nance him,  to  cooperate  with  him,  and  to  avail 
themselves  of  his  aid.  But  he  judged  for  himself, 
and  scorned  to  be  their  slave,  or  to  submit  to  re- 


lxxii  SKETCH  OF  THE  LIFE 

ceive  their  instructions.  Hence,  his  influence,  not 
confined  to  men  of  mercenary  views,  extended  to 
many  of  a  free  and  independent  spirit,  who  sup- 
ported, because  they  approved,  his  measures;  which 
others,  from  the  same  independent  spirit,  thought  it 
their  duty  steadily  to  oppose. 

"  Deliberate  in  forming  his  judgment,  but,  when 
formed,  not  easily  moved  to  renounce  it,  he  some- 
times viewed  the  altered  plans  of  others  with  too 
suspicious  an  eye.  Hence,  there  were  able  and 
worthy  men,  of  whom  he  expressed  himself  less 
favourably,  and  whose  later  appearances  in  church 
judicatories,  he  censured  as  inconsistent  with  prin- 
ciples they  had  formerly  professed :  while  they 
maintained,  that  the  system  of  managing  church 
affairs  was  changed,  not  their  opinions  or  conduct. 
Still,  however,  keen  and  determined  opposition  to 
his  schemes  of  ecclesiastical  policy,  neither  extin- 
guished his  esteem,  nor  forfeited  his  friendly  offices, 
when  he  saw  opposition  carried  on  without  rancour, 
and  when  he  believed  that  it  originated  from  con- 
science and  principle,  not  from  personal  animosity, 
or  envy,  or  ambition." 

Of  his  private  character,  Dr.  Erskine  adds,  that 
"  he  enjoyed  the  bounties  of  Providence,  without 
running  into  riot;  was  temperate  without  austerity; 
condescending  and  affable  without  meanness  ;  and 
in  expense  neither  sordid  nor  prodigal.  He  could 
feel  an  injury,  and  yet  bridle  his  passion;  was  grave, 
not  sullen  ;  steady,  not  obstinate;  friendly,  not  offi- 
cious ;   prudent  and  cautious,  not  timid." 

Than  the  triumph  which  the  principles  of  Dr. 
Robertson  obtained  in  the  General  Assembly  no- 
thing could  be  more  complete ;  and  it  was  the  more 
flattering,  inasmuch  as  it  was   consummated  after 


OF   DR.  ROBERTSON.  lxxiii 

he  had  ceased  to  take  a  part  in  the  debates.  It 
had,  from  the  year  1736,  been  the  custom,  annually, 
for  the  Assembly  to  instruct  the  Commission,  "  to 
make  due  application  to  the  King;  and  Parliament 
for  redress  of  the  grievance  of  patronage,  in  case  a 
favourable  opportunity  for  doing  so  should  occur." 
So  cautious  was  the  policy  of  Dr.  Robertson,  that, 
although  he  had  entirely  subverted  the  very  ground- 
work on  which  this  instruction  was  raised,  he 
never  chose  to  move  that  it  should  be  expunged. 
He  knew  that  it  was  popular  with  the  great  body 
of  the  people,  and,  therefore,  he  did  not  think  it 
expedient  to  risk  the  chance  of  dissension  in  the 
Assembly,  by  an  unnecessary  and  idle  attack  upon 
this  shadow  of  a  shade.  In  the  year  1784,  how- 
ever, it  was  omitted,  without  any  struggle  being 
made  in  its  favour,  and  it  has  never  since  been 
renewed. 

Whether  the  system  established  by  him  has  con- 
tributed to  the  harmony  and  welfare  of  the  Scottish 
church  is  a  question  which  yet  remains  undecided. 
It  is  urged,  by  the  friends  of  the  system,  that  it 
has  given  peace  to  the  church;  that  the  General 
Assembly  is  no  longer  occupied  with  angry  appeals 
and  tumultuous  disputes;  that  instead  of  there 
being,  as  formerly,  a  necessity  to  call  in  a  military 
force,  to  protect  the  Presbytery  in  the  act  of  induc- 
tion, ministers  are  now  peaceably  settled;  and  that 
the  worst  that  ever  happens  is  the  secession  of  the 
discontented  part  of  the  parishioners,  and  the  con- 
sequent erection  of  a  separate  place  of  worship, 
which  they  frequent  only  till  their  zeal  cools,  and 
then  desert,  to  rejoin  the  kirk.  But,  on  the  other 
hand,  it  is  contended,  that  the  peace  is  rather  in 
appearance  than  in  reality  ;   that,  though  the  people 

VOL.   I.  o- 


lxxiv  SKETCH  OF  THE  LIFE 

have  ceased  to  appeal  to  the  Assembly,  their  silence 
arises  from  disgust  and  weariness,  and  not  from 
satisfaction  ;  that,  grown  too  wise  to  enter  into  a 
protracted  and  fruitless  contest,  they  immediately 
set  themselves  to  rear  a  seceding  meeting  house, 
which  often  carries  off  a  large  proportion  of  the 
parishioners ;  and  that,  by  this  quiet  but  continual 
increase  of  seceding  meetings,  the  influence  of  the 
established  church  has  been  gradually  weakened 
and  contracted,  a  spirit  of  disunion  has  been  spread, 
and  a  heavy  additional  burthen  has  been  imposed 
on  property  of  every  kind. 

But,  whatever  doubt  may  exist  on  this  point, 
there  seems  to  be  none  with  respect  to  another. 
It  is  o-enerallv  acknowledged  that  Dr.  Robertson 
conduced  greatly  to  give  a  more  dignified  character 
to  the  proceedings  of  the  General  Assembly,  to 
introduce  an  impartial  exercise  of  the  judicial  au- 
thority of  the  church,  and  to  diffuse  the  principles 
of  tolerance  among  men  who  had  hitherto  prided 
themselves  on  their  utter  contempt  of  them.  In 
such  respect  are  his  decisions  held,  that  they  still 
form  a  sort  of  common  law  in  the  church  ;  and  the 
time  which  elapsed  between  his  being  chosen  Prin- 
cipal of  the  University  and  his  withdrawing  from 
public  life,  is  distinguished  by  the  name  of  Dr.  Ro- 
bertson's administration. 

It  is  in  his  capacity  of  Principal  that  he  is  next 
to  be  considered.  In  this  important  office  he  dis- 
played his  wonted  activity  and  talent.  He  began 
the  performance  of  his  duties,  as  his  predecessors 
had  done,  by  delivering  annually  a  Latin  discourse 
before  the  University.  Of  these  orations,  the  first, 
the  object  of  which  was  to  recommend  the  study  of 
classical  learning,   was  delivered  on  the  third  of 


or  DR.   ROBERTSON.  IxW 

I  Ybruary,  17o'3.  It  is  said,  among;  numerous  other 
splendid  passages,  to  have  contained  a  beautiful 
panegyric  on  the  Stoical  philosophy.  In  the  fol- 
lowing- year,  his  discourse  "  consisted  chiefly  of 
moral  and  literary  observations,  adapted  to  the  par- 
ticular circumstances  of  youth,"  and  the  style  is 
ailinned  to  be  "  uncommonly  elegant  and  impres- 
sive, and  possessed  of  all  the  distinguishing  cha- 
racteristics of  his  English  compositions."  In  1765 
and  1766,  he  chose  for  his  theme  the  comparative 
advantages  of  public  and  private  education ;  a  sub- 
ject which  he  treated  in  a  masterly  manner.  After 
17b*6  these  annual  lectures  ceased;  his  time  being 
too  fully  occupied  to  allow  of  the  continuance  of 
them. 

But,  though  his  lectures  were  of  necessity  dis- 
continued, he  never  remitted  in  his  attention  even 
to  the  minutest  duties  of  his  office.  He  appears, 
indeed,  to  have  felt  a  filial  anxiety  to  omit  nothing 
which  could  assist  in  giving  lustre  to  the  University 
at  which  his  own  talents  had  been  cultivated.  With 
very  slender  funds,  he  made  large  additions  to  the 
public  library  ;  he  planned  or  reformed  most  of  the 
literary  and  medical  societies,  which  have  raised 
Edinburgh  to  such  eminence  as  a  seminary  of  learn- 
ing, and  a  focus  of  literature;  and  he  contrived  to 
preserve  an  uninterrupted  harmony  among  the  nu- 
merous members  of  the  body  which  he  superin- 
tended. "  The  good  sense,  temper,  and  address," 
says  Professor  Stewart,  "  with  which  he  presided 
for  thirty  years  at  our  university  meetings,  were 
attended  with  effects  no  less  essential  to  our  pros- 
perity;  and  are  attested  by  a  fact  which  is  perhaps 
without  a  parallel  in  the  annals  of  any  other  lite- 
rary   community,   that    during    the  whole    of  that 


lxxvi  SKETCH  OF  THE  LIFE 

period  there  did  not  occur  a  single  question  which 
was  not  terminated  by  a  unanimous  decision." 

To  his  exertions  Scotland  is  also  chiefly  indebted 
for  its  Royal  Society,  which  received  its  charter  of 
incorporation  in  March,  1763.  The  basis  of  this 
establishment  was  the  Philosophical  Society,  the 
founder  of  which  was  the  celebrated  Maclaurin. 
In  his  zeal  to  give  all  possible  lustre  to  the  new  in* 
stitution,  by  drawing  together  men  of  every  species 
of  merit,  Dr.  Robertson  seems,  for  once,  to  have 
acted  with  less  than  his  usual  liberality.  An  Anti- 
quarian Society,  at  the  head  of  which  was  the  Earl 
of  Buchan,  had,  two  years  before,  been  formed  in 
the  Scottish  metropolis;  and  this  body  also  was 
desirous  to  obtain  the  Royal  charter.  The  appli- 
cation which  it  made  to  the  crown  was,  however, 
eagerly  opposed,  in  a  "  Memorial  from  the  Prin- 
cipal and  Professors  of  the  University  of  Edin- 
burgh." This  memorial  is  signed  by  Dr.  Robert- 
son ;  but  it  is  so  feeble  in  composition  as  well  as 
in  reasoning,  that  it  is  difficult  to  believe  it  to  have 
flowed  from  his  pen.  The  argument  on  which  it 
wholly  relies  is,  that  "  narrow  countries"  cannot 
supply  materials  for  more  than  one  society ;  that 
Scotland  is  such  a  country ;  and,  therefore;  that  it 
"  ought  not  to  form  its  literary  plans  upon  the 
model  of  the  more  extensive  kingdoms  in  Europe, 
but  in  imitation  of  those  which  are  more  circum- 
scribed." To  this  hostile  proceeding  the  Antiqua- 
ries responded,  in  a  long  memorial,  which  was 
penned  with  much  acuteness,  and  was  naturally 
expressive  of  some  degree  of  resentment.  They 
were  successful  in  the  contest,  and  their  charter 
was  granted. 

The  labours  of  Dr.  Robertson,  as  a  writer,  were 


OF  DR.  ROBERTSON.  Ixxvii 

closed  by  a  work  which  entered  largely  into  anti- 
quarian investigation,  as  connected  with  history. 
In  1791  he  published  a  quarto  volume,  containing 
his  "  Historical  Disquisition  concerning  the  Know- 
ledge which  the  Ancients  had  of  India ;  and  the 
Progress  of  Trade  with  that  Country  prior  to  the  Dis- 
covery of  the  Passage  to  it  by  the  Cape  of  Good 
Hope."  An  appendix  was  dedicated  to  observa- 
tions on  the  civil  policy,  the  laws  and  judicial  pro- 
ceedings, the  arts,  the  sciences,  and  the  religious 
institutions  of  the  Indians.  This  subject,  which 
occupied  him  twelve  months,  was  suggested  to  him 
by  the  perusal  of  Major  llenneli's  Memoirs  for 
illustrating  his  History  of  Hindostan,  and  was  ori- 
ginally taken  up  with  no  other  object  than  his  own 
amusement  and  instruction.  That  it  would  become 
as  popular  as  his  other  productions  was,  from  its 
nature,  not  to  be  expected,  but  it  obtained  an  ho- 
nourable share  of  public  approbation  ;  and,  though 
it  has  since  been  partly  superseded  by  more  elabo- 
rate inquiries,  which,  however,  were  grounded  on 
more  ample  materials,  it  will  always  retain  a  cer- 
tain degree  of  value  and  will  be  considered  as  a 
proof  of  his  industry,  of  his  habits  of  research,  and 
of  the  solidity  of  his  judgment. 

The  latter  years  of  Dr.  Robertson's  existence 
were  passed  in  the  well  earned  enjoyment  of  ho- 
nourable leisure.  But,  though  he  ceased  to  write, 
he  did  not  cease  to  be  studious.  Till  the  end  of  his 
life  he  is  said  to  have  risen  early,  and  to  have  given 
up  no  part  of  his  time  to  company  before  the  hour 
of  dinner.  What  he  was  in  the  moments  of  social 
ease  has  been  so  excellently  described  by  Profes- 
sor Stewart,  that  his  own  words  ought  to  be  used. 
"  A   rich  stock  of  miscellaneous  information,   ac- 


lxxviii  SKETCH  OF  THE  LIFE 

quired  from  books  and  from  an  extensive  inter- 
course with  the  world,  together  with  a  perfect  ac- 
quaintance at  all  times  with  the  topics  of  the  day, 
and  the  soundest  sagacity  and  good  sense  applied 
to  the  occurrences  of  common  life,  rendered  him 
the  most  instructive  and  agreeable  of  companions. 
He  seldom  aimed  at  art;  but,  with  his  intimate 
friends,  he  often  indulged  a  sportive  and  fanciful 
species  of  humour.  He  delighted  in  good  natured, 
characteristical  anecdotes  of  his  acquaintance,  and 
added  powerfully  to  their  effect  by  his  own  enjoy- 
ment in  relating  them.  He  was,  in  a  remarkable 
degree,  susceptible  of  the  ludicrous ;  but  on  no 
occasion  did  he  forget  the  dignity  of  his  character, 
or  the  decorum  of  his  profession ;  nor  did  he  ever 
lose  sight  of  that  classical  taste  which  adorned  his 
compositions.  His  turn  of  expression  was  correct 
and  pure  ;  sometimes,  perhaps,  inclining  more  than 
is  expected,  in  the  carelessness  of  a  social  hour, 
to  formal  and  artificial  periods  ;  but  it  was  stamped 
with  his  own  manner  no  less  than  his  premeditated 
style  :  it  was  always  the  language  of  a  superior  and 
a  cultivated  mind,  and  it  embellished  every  subject 
on  which  he  spoke.  In  the  company  of  strangers, 
he  increased  his  exertions  to  amuse  and  to  inform ; 
and  the  splendid  variety  of  his  conversation  was 
commonly  the  chief  circumstance  on  which  they 
dwelt  in  enumerating  his  talents ; — and  yet,  I  must 
acknowledge,  for  my  own  part,  that  much  as  I 
always  admired  his  powers  when  they  were  thus 
called  forth,  I  enjoyed  his  society  less  than  when 
I  saw  him  in  the  circle  of  his  intimates,  or  in  the 
bosom  of  his  family." 

It  is  not  one   of  the  least  amiable  features  of 
his  character,  that,  though  he  was  not  forward  to 


OF  DR.   ROBERTSON.  lxxix 

volunteer  his  advice,  yet,  when  he  was  consulted 
by  his  young-  acquaintance,  as  was  very  often  the 
case,  "  he  entered  into  their  concerns  with  the 
most  lively  interest,  and  seemed  to  have  a  pleasure 
and  a  pride  in  imparting-  to  them  all  the  lights  of 
his  experience  and  wisdom." 

It  was  about  the  end  of  the  year  1791  that  the  j 
health  of  Dr.  Robertson  began  to  manifest  indica-  I 
tions  of  decline.  Strong  symptoms  of  jaundice 
next  appeared,  his  constitution  was  sapped,  and  a 
lingering  and  fatal  illness  ensued.  His  spirits, 
however,  remained  unbroken.  Till  within  a  few 
months  of  his  death,  he  persisted  in  officiating  as 
a  minister.  When  his  decaying  strength  no  longer 
allowed  him  to  perform  his  clerical  duties,  he  re- 
tired to  Grange  House,  in  the  neighbourhood  of 
Edinburgh,  that  he  might  have  the  advantage  of 
more  quiet,  a  pure  air,  and  the  sight  of  those  rural 
and  picturesque  objects  in  which  he  had  ever  de- 
lighted. "  While  he  was  able  to  walk  abroad," 
says  Mr.  Stewart,  "  he  commonly  passed  a  part  of 
the  day  in  a  small  garden,  enjoying  the  simple 
gratifications  it  afforded  with  all  his  wonted  relish. 
Some  who  now  hear  me  will  long  remember, — 
among  the  trivial  yet  interesting  incidents  which 
marked  these  last  weeks  of  his  memorable  life — 
his  daily  visits  to  the  fruit  trees  (which  were  then 
in  blossom),  and  the  smile  with  which  he,  more 
than  once,  contrasted  the  interest  he  took  in  their 
progress,  with  the  event  which  was  to  happen  be- 
fore their  maturity."  It  was  while  he  was  thus 
lingering  on  the  verge  of  the  grave,  that  he  was 
visited  by  two  gentlemen  from  New  York,  who 
were  extremely  anxious  for  an  interview  with  him. 
He  rallied  all  his  powers  to  entertain  his  guests, 
and  to  inspire  in  their  minds  a  feeling  of  kindness 


1XXX  LIFE  OF  DR.  ROBERTSON. 

towards  the  parent  land  of  the  late  colonists;  and, 
on  their  rising  to  take  leave,  he  said  to  them,  in 
accents  at  once  dignified  and  pathetic,  "  When 
you  go  home,  tell  your  countrymen  that  yon  saw 
the  wreck  of  Dr.  Robertson."  In  less  than  two 
months  that  wreck  disappeared  in  the  ocean  of  eter- 
nity. He  expired;  with  the  fortitude  which  became 
him,  on  the  lith  of  July,  1793,  in  the  seventy-iirst 
year  of  his  age,  and  the  fiftieth  of  his  ministry. 

So  much  has  been  written  by  others,  respecting 
the  literary  merit  of  Dr.  Robertson,  that  on  this 
point  it  is  unnecessary,  even  would  my  confined 
limits  permit  me,  to  enter  into  a  lengthened  dis- 
cussion. His  style  has  less  of  careless  easy  grace, 
but  has  more  of  equable  dignity,  than  that  of  Hume ; 
it  does  not  display  the  masterly  modulation,  but  it 
has  none  of  the  occasional  obscurity  and  meretrici- 
ous ornament,  of  that  of  Gibbon  ;  it  is  well  balanced, 
unstained  by  vulgarisms,  more  idiomatically  Eng- 
lish than  might  be  expected  from  a  native  of  Scot- 
land, and  is  defective,  perhaps,  only  in  being  too 
uniformly  of  an  elevated  tone.  In  arranging  and 
linking  together  into  one  harmonious  whole  the  scat- 
tered parts  of  his  subject,  he  is  eminently  happy ; 
and  in  delineating  characters,  manners,  and  scenery, 
in  making  vividly  present  to  the  mind  that  which  he 
describes,  he  has  few  rivals,  and  no  superiors.  If 
all  that  has  been  urged  against  his  works  be  ad- 
mitted,  and  some  of  it  cannot  be  denied,  it  may 
nevertheless  safely  be  affirmed,  that  the  balance 
heavily  preponderates  in  his  favour,  and  that  he 
will  always  continue  to  rank  in  the  first  class  of 
modern  historians. 


THE 

HISTORY  OF  SCOTLAND 


BOOK  L 

CONTAINING    A    REVIEW  OF   THE  SCOTTISH  HIS* 
TORY  PREVIOUS  TO  THE  DEATH  OF  JAMES  V. 

The  first  ages  of  the  Scottish  History  are  dark 
and  fabulous.     Nations,  as  well  as  men,  arrive  at 
maturity  by  degrees,   and  the  events  which  hap- 
pened during  their  infancy  or  early  youth,  cannot 
be  recollected,  and  deserve  not  to  be  remembered. 
The  gross  ignorance  which  anciently  covered  alt 
the  north  of  Europe,  the  continual  migrations  of  its 
inhabitants,  and  the  frequent  and  destructive  revo- 
lutions which  these  occasioned,  render  it  impossible 
to  give  any  authentic  account  of  the  origin  of  the 
different  kingdoms  now  established  there.     Every 
thing  beyond  that  short  period  to  which  well  at- 
tested annals  reach  is  obscure  ;  an  immense  space 
is  left  for  invention  to  occupy;   each  nation,  with 
a  vanity  inseparable  from  human  nature,  hath  filled 
that  void  with  events  calculated  to  display  its  own 
antiquity  and  lustre.      History,  which  ought  to  re- 
cord truth  and  to  teach  wisdom,  often  sets  out  with 
retailing  fictions  and  absurdities. 
VOL.  i.  n 


•2  THE  HISTORY  B.  I. 

The  Scots  carry  their  pretensions  to  antiquity  as 
hig'h  as  any  of  their  neighbours.  Relying  upon 
uncertain  legends,  and  the  traditions  of  their  bards, 
still  more  uncertain,  they  reckon  up  a  series  of 
Kings  several  ages  before  the  birth  of  Christ ;  and 
give  a  particular  detail  of  the  occurrences  which 
happened  in  their  reigns.  But  with  regard  to  the 
Scots,  as  well  as  the  other  northern  nations,  we 
receive  the  earliest  accounts  on  which  we  can  de- 
pend, not  from  their  own,  but  from  the  Roman 
authors.  [81].  'When  the  Romans,  under  Agri- 
cola,  first  carried  their  arms  into  the  northern  parts 
of  Britain,  they  found  it  possessed  by  the  Caledo- 
nians, a  fierce  and  warlike  people  ;  and  having 
repulsed  rather  than  conquered  them,  they  erected 
a  strong  wall  between  the  Firths  of  Forth  and 
Clyde,  and  there  fixed  the  boundaries  of  their  em- 
pire. [121].  Adrian,  on  account  of  the  difficulty 
of  defending  such  a  distant  frontier,  contracted  the 
limits  of  the  Roman  province  in  Britain,  by  building 
a  second  wall,  which  ran  between  Newcastle  and 
Carlisle.  The  ambition  of  succeeding  Emperors 
endeavoured  to  recover  what  Adrian  had  aban- 
doned ;  and  the  country  between  the  two  walls 
was  alternately  under  the  dominion  of  the  Romans 
and  that  of  the  Caledonians.  About  the  beginning 
of  the  fifth  century,  the  inroads  of  the  Goths  and 
other  barbarians  obliged  the  Romans,  in  order  to 
defend  the  centre  of  their  empire,  to  recall  those 
legions  which  guarded  the  frontier  provinces ;  and 
at  that  time  they  quitted  all  their  conquests  in 
Britain. 

421].  Their  long  residence  in  the  island  had 
polished,  in  some  degree,  the  rude  inhabitants,  and 
the  Britons  were  indebted  to  their  intercourse  with 


OF  SCOTLAND.  3 

the  Romans,  for  the  art  of  writing  and  the  use  of 
numbers,  without  which  it  is  impossible  long  to 
preserve  the  memory  of  past  events. 

North  Britain  was,  by  their  retreat,  left  under 
the  dominion  of  the  Scots  and  Picts.  The  former, 
who  are  not  mentioned  by  any  Roman  author  be- 
fore the  end  of  the  fourth  century,  were  probably 
a  colony  of  the  Celtae  or  Gauls ;  their  affinity  to 
whom  appears  from  their  language,  their  manners, 
and  religious  rites  ;  circumstances  more  decisive 
with  regard  to  the  origin  of  nations  than  either 
fabulous  traditions  or  the  tales  of  ill  informed  and 
credulous  annalists.  The  Scots,  if  we  may  believe 
the  common  accounts,  settled  at  first  in  Ireland  ; 
and  extending  themselves  by  degrees,  landed  at 
last  on  the  coast  opposite  to  that  island,  and  fixed 
their  habitations  there.  Fierce  and  bloody  wars 
were,  during  several  ages,  carried  on  between  them 
and  the  Picts.  [838.]  At  length,  Kenneth  IT., 
the  sixty-ninth  King  of  the  Scots  (according  to 
their  own  fabulous  authors),  obtained  a  complete 
victory  over  the  Picts,  and  united  under  one  mo- 
narchy all  the  country  from  the  wall  of  Adrian  to 
the  Northern  Ocean.  The  kingdom  henceforward 
became  known  by  its  present  name,  which  is  de- 
rived from  a  people  who  at  first  settled  there  as 
strangers,  and  remained  long  obscure  and  incon- 
siderable. 

From  this  period  the  History  of  Scotland  would 
merit  some  attention,  were  it  accompanied  with 
any  certainty.  13ut  as  our  remote  antiquities  are 
involved  in  the  same  darkness  with  those  of  other 
nations,  a  calamity  peculiar  to  ourselves  has  thrown 
almost  an  equal  obscurity  over  our  more  recent 
transactions.    This  was  occasioned  by  the  malicious 


4  THE  HISTORY  B.  I. 

policy  of  Edward  I.  of  England.    Towards  the  end 
of  the  thirteenth  century,  this  monarch  called  in 
question  the  independence  of  Scotland  ;  pretending 
that  the  kingdom  was  held  as  a  fief  of  the  crown 
of  England,  and  subjected  to  all  the  conditions  of 
a  feudal  tenure.    In  order  to  establish  his  claim,  he 
seized  the  public  archives,  he  ransacked  churches 
and  monasteries,  and  getting  possession,  by  force 
or  fraud,    of  many  historical  monuments,  which 
tended  to  prove  the   antiquity  or  freedom  of  the 
kingdom,  he  carried  some  of  them  into  England, 
and  commanded  the  rest  to  be  burned  l,    A  univer- 
sal oblivion  of  past  transactions  might  have  been 
the  effect  of  this  fatal  event,  but  some  imperfect 
chronicles  had  escaped  the  rage  of  Edward ;  fo- 
reign writers   had  recorded  some  important  facts 
relating  to  Scotland  ;  and  the  traditions  concerning 
recent  occurrences  were  fresh  and  worthy  of  credit. 
These  broken  fragments  John  de  Fordun,  who  lived 
in  the  fourteenth  century,  collected  with  a  pious 
industry,  and  from  them  gleaned  materials  which 
he  formed  into  a  regular  history.     His  work  was 
received  by  his  countrymen  with  applause  :  and, 
as  no  recourse  could  be  had  to  more  ancient  re- 
cords, it  supplied  the  place  of  the  authentic  annals 
of  the  kingdom.     It  was  copied  in  many  monas- 
teries, and  the  thread  of  the  narrative  was  conti- 
nued, by  different  monks,  through  the  subsequent 
reigns.      In  the  beginning  of  the  sixteenth  century, 
John  Major,  and  Hector  Boethius  published  their 
Histories  of  Scotland,  the  former  a  succinct  and 
dry  writer,  the  latter  a  copious  and  florid  one,  and 
both  equally  credulous.      Not   many  years  after, 
Buchanan  undertook  the   same  work ;  and  if  his 

loocs,  Essay  552. 


OF  SCOTLAND.  5 

accuracy  and  impartiality  had  been,  in  any  degree, 
equal  to  the  elegance  of  his  taste,  and  to  the 
purity  and  vigour  of  his  style,  his  History  might 
be  placed  on  a  level  with  the  most  admired  com- 
positions of  the  ancients.  But,  instead  of  rejecting 
the  improbable  tales  of  chronicle  writers,  he  was  at 
the  utmost  pains  to  adorn  them;  and  hath  clothed, 
with  all  the  beauties  and  graces  of  fiction,  those 
legends,  which  formerly  had  only  its  wildness  and 
extravagance. 

The  History  of  Scotland  may  properly  be  di- 
vided into  four  periods.  The  first  reaches  from 
the  origin  of  the  monarchy  to  the  reign  of  Kenneth 
II.  The  second,  from  Kenneth's  conquest  of  the 
Picts  to  the  death  of  Alexander  III.  The  third 
extends  to  the  death  of  James  V.  The  last,  from 
thence  to  the  accession  of  James  VI.  to  the  crown 
of  England. 

The  first  period  is  the  region  of  pure  fable  and 
conjecture,  and  ought  to  be  totally  neglected,  or 
abandoned  to  the  industry  and  credulity  of  anti- 
quaries. Truth  begins  to  dawn  in  the  second 
period,  with  a  light,  feeble  at  first,  but  gradually 
increasing,  and  the  events  which  then  happened 
may  be  slightly  touched,  but  merit  no  particular  or 
laborious  inquiry.  In  the  third  period,  the  History 
of  Scotland,  chiefly  by  means  of  records  preserved 
in  England,  becomes  more  authentic :  not  only 
are  events  related,  but  their  causes  and  effects 
explained  ;  the  characters  of  the  actors  are  dis- 
played ;  the  manners  of  the  age  described  ;  the  re- 
volutions in  the  constitution  pointed  out:  and  here 
every  Scotsman  should  begin  not  to  read  only,  but 
to  study  the  history  of  his  country.  During  the 
fourth  period,  the  affairs  of  Scotland  were  so  min- 

B  2 


(j  THE  HISTORY  B.  I. 

gled  with  those  of  other  nations,  its  situation  in  the 
political  state  of  Europe  was  so  important,  its  in- 
fluence on  the  operations  of  the  neighbouring  king- 
doms was  so  visible,  that  its  history  becomes  an 
object  of  attention  to  foreigners  ;  and  without  some 
knowledge  of  the  various  and  extraordinary  revolu- 
tions which  happened  there,  they  cannot  form  a 
just  notion  with  respect  either  to  the  most  illustri- 
ous events,  or  to  the  characters  of  the  most  distin- 
guished personages  in  the  sixteenth  century. 

The  following  history  is  confined  to  the  last  of 
these  periods :  to  give  a  view  of  the  political  state 
of  the  kingdom  during  that  which  immediately  pre- 
ceded it  is  the  design  of  this  preliminary  Book. 
The  imperfect  knowledge  which  strangers  have  of 
the  affairs  of  Scotland,  and  the  prejudices  Scots- 
men themselves  have  imbibed,  with  regard  to  the 
various  revolutions  in  the  government  of  their  coun- 
try, render  such  an  introduction  equally  necessary 
to  both. 

The  period  from  the  death  of  Alexander  III.  to 
the  death  of  James  V.  contains  upwards  of  two 
centuries  and  a  half,  from  the  year  one  thousand 
two  hundred  and  eighty-six,  to  the  year  one  thour 
sand  live  hundred  and  forty-two. 

It  opens  with  the  famous  controversy  concerning 
the  independence  of  Scotland.  Before  the  union 
of  the  two  kingdoms,  this  was  a  question  of  much 
importance.  If  the  one  crown  had  been  consi- 
dered, not  as  imperial  and  independent,  but  as 
feudatory  to  the  other,  a  treaty  of  union  could  not 
have  been  concluded  on  equal  terms,  and  every 
advantage  which  the  dependent  kingdom  procured 
must  have  been  deemed  the  concession  of  a  sove- 
reign to  his  vassal.     Accordingly,  about  the  be* 


OF  SCOTLAND.  7 

ginning  of  the  present  century,  and  while  a  treaty 
of  union  between  the  two  kingdoms  was  nego- 
tiating, this  controversy  was  agitated  with  all  the 
heat  which  national  animosities  naturally  inspire. 
What  was  then  the  subject  of  serious  concern,  the 
union  of  the  two  kingdoms  has  rendered  a  matter 
of  mere  curiosity.  But  though  the  objects  which 
at  that  time  warmed  and  interested  both  nations 
exist  no  longer,  a  question  which  appeared  so  mo- 
mentous to  our  ancestors  cannot  be  altogether  in- 
different or  uninstructive  to  us. 

Some  of  the  northern  counties  of  England  were 
early  in  the  hands  of  the  Scottish  Kings,  who,  as 
far  back  as  the  feudal  customs  can  be  traced,  held 
these  possessions  of  the  Kings  of  England,  and  did 
homage  to  them  on  that  account.  This  homage, 
due  only  for  the  territories  which  they  held  in 
England,  was  in  nowise  derogatory  from  their  royal 
dignity.  Nothing  is  more  suitable  to  feudal  ideas 
than  that  the  same  person  should  be  both  a  lord 
and  a  vassal,  independent  in  one  capacity,  and  de- 
pendent in  another2.  The  crown  of  England  was, 
without  doubt,  imperial  and  independent,  though 
the  Princes  who  wore  it  were,  for  many  ages,  the 
vassals  of  the  Kings  of  France ;    and,  in  conse- 

2  A  very  singular  proof  of  this  occurs  in  the  Frencii  history, 
Arpin  sold  the  vicomtt:  of  the  city  of  Bourges  to  Philip  I.  who 
did  homage  to  the  Count  of  Sancerre  for  a  part  of  these  lands, 
which  held  of  that  nobleman,  A.  D.  1100.  I  believe  that  no  ex- 
ample of  a  King's  doing  homage  to  one  of  his  own  subjects  is  to 
be  met  with  in  the  histories  either  of  England  or  Scotland. 
Philip  le  Bel  abolished  this  practice  in  France,  A.  D.  1302. 
Henault  Ahrtgi  C/irunol.  Somewhat  similar  to  this,  is  a  charter 
of  the  Abbot  of  Melross,  A.  I).  1535,  constituting  James  V.  the 
Bailiff  or  Steward  of  that  Abbey,  vesting  in  him  all  the  powers 
which  pertained  to  that  ollice,  and  recpuiring  him  to  be  answerable 
to  the  Abbot  for  his  exercise  of  the  same.    Archiv.  pub  I.  Edin% 


8  THE  HISTORY  B.  I. 

quence  of  their  possessions  in  that  kingdom,  bound 
to  perform  all  the  services  which  a  feudal  sovereign 
has  a  title  to  exact.     The  same  was  the  condition 
of  the  Monarchs  of  Scotland;  free  and  independent 
as  Kings  of  their  own  country,  but,  as  possessing 
English  territories,  vassals  to  the  Kings  of  England. 
The  English  Monarchs,  satisfied  with  their  legal 
and  uncontroverted   rights,    were,    during    a  Jong 
period,   neither  capable  nor  had  any  thoughts  of 
usurping  more.     England  when  conquered  by  the 
Saxons,   being  divided  by  them  into  many  small 
kingdoms,  was  in  no  condition  to  extend  its  domi- 
nion over  Scotland,  united  at  that  time  under  one 
monarch.      And  though  these  petty  principalities 
were  gradually  formed  into  one  kingdom,  the  reign- 
ing Princes,  exposed  to  continual  invasions  of  the 
Danes,  and  often  subjected  to  the  yoke  of  those 
formidable  pirates,   seldom  turned  their  arms  to- 
wards Scotland,  and  were  little  able  to  establish 
new  rights  in   that  country.     The  first  Kings  of 
the   Norman   race,   busied  with  introducing  their 
own   laws  and  manners  into  the  kingdom  which 
they  had  conquered,  or  with  maintaining  themselves 
on  the  throne  which  some  of  them  possessed  by  a 
very  dubious  title,  were  as  little  solicitous  to  ac- 
quire new  authority,  or  to  form  new  pretensions  in 
Scotland.    An  unexpected  calamity  that  befell  one 
of  the  Scottish  Kings  first  encouraged  the  English 
to  think  of  bringing  his  kingdom  under  dependence. 
William,  surnamed  the  Lion,  being  taken  prisoner 
at  Alnwick,  Henry  II.  as  the  price  of  his  liberty, 
not  only  extorted  from  him  an  exorbitant  ransom, 
and  a  promise  to  surrender  the  places  of  greatest 
strength  in  his  dominions,  but  compelled  him  to  do 
homage  for   his  whole  kingdom.      Richard  I.,   a 


OF  SCOTLAND.  0 

generous  Prince,  solemnly  renounced  this  claim  of 
homage  ;  and  absolved  William  from  the  hard  con- 
ditions which  Henry  had  imposed.  Upon  the 
death  of  Alexander  III.,  near  a  century  after, 
Edward  I.,  availing  himself  of  the  situation  of 
affairs  in  Scotland,  acquired  an  influence  in  that 
kingdom  which  no  English  Monarch  before  him 
ever  possessed,  and  imitating  the  interested  policy 
of  Henry,  rather  than  the  magnanimity  of  Richard, 
revived  the  claim  of  sovereignty  to  which  the 
former  had  pretended. 

Margaret  of  Norway,  grandaughter  of  Alexander, 
and  heir  to  his  crown,  did  not  long  survive  him. 
The  right  of  succession  belonged  to  the  descend- 
ants of  David  Earl  of  Huntingdon,  third  son  of 
King  David  I.     Among  these,  Robert  Bruce,  and 
John  Baliol,    two   illustrious  competitors   for  the 
crown,  appeared.     Bruce  was  the  son  of  Isabel, 
Earl  David's  second  daughter;   Baliol,  the  grand- 
son of  Margaret  the  eldest  daughter.     According 
to  the  rules  of  succession  which   are    now   esta- 
blished,  the  right  of  Baliol  was  preferable;   and 
notwithstanding  Bruce's   plea   of  being  nearer  in 
blood  to  Earl  David,  Baliol's  claim,  as  the  repre- 
sentative of  his  mother  and  grandmother,  would  be 
deemed  incontestable.      But  in  that  age  the  order 
of  succession  was  not  ascertained  with  the  same 
precision.     The   question  appeared  to  be  no  less 
intricate  than  it  was  important.     Though  the  pre- 
judices of  the  people,  and  perhaps  the  laws  of  the 
kingdom  favoured  Bruce,  each  of  the  rivals  was 
supported  by  a  powerful  faction.     Arms  alone,  it 
was  feared,  must  terminate  a  dispute  too  weighty 
for  the  laws  to  decide.      But,  in  order  to  avoid  tho 
miseries  of  a  civil  war,  Edward  was  chosen  umpire. 


10  THE  HISTORY  B.  I. 

and  both  parties  agreed  to  acquiesce  in  his  decree. 
This  had  well  nigh  proved  fatal  to  the  indepen- 
dence of  Scotland ;  and  the  nation,  by  its  eager- 
ness to  guard  against  a  civil  war,  was  not  only 
exposed  to  that  calamity,  but  almost  subjected  to 
a  foreign  yoke.  Edward  was  artful,  brave,  enter- 
prising, and  commanded  a  powerful  and  martial 
people,  at  peace  with  the  whole  world.  The  anar- 
chy which  prevailed  in  Scotland,  and  the  ambition 
of  competitors  ready  to  sacrifice  their  country  in 
order  to  obtain  even  a  dependent  crown,  invited 
him  first  to  seize  and  then  to  subject  the  kingdom. 
The  authority  of  an  umpire,  which  had  been  unwa- 
rily bestowed  upon  him,  and  from  which  the  Scots 
dreaded  no  dangerous  consequences,  enabled  him 
to  execute  his  schemes  with  the  greater  facility. 
Under  pretence  of  examining  the  question  with  the 
utmost  solemnity,  he  summoned  all  the  Scottish 
Barons  to  Norham ;  and,  having  gained  some  and 
intimidated  others,  he  prevailed  on  all  who  were 
present,  not  excepting  Bruce  and  Baliol,  the  com- 
petitors, to  acknowledge  Scotland  to  be  a  fief  of 
the  English  Crown,  and  to  swear  fealty  to  him  as 
their  Sovereign  or  Liege  Lord.  This  step  led  to 
another  still  more  important.  As  it  was  vain  to 
pronounce  a  sentence  which  he  had  not  power  to 
execute,  Edward  demanded  possession  of  the  king- 
dom, that  he  might  be  able  to  deliver  it  to  him 
whose  right  should  be  found  preferable ;  and  such 
was  the  pusillanimity  of  the  nobles,  and  the  impa- 
tient ambition  of  the  competitors,  that  both  assented 
to  this  strange  demand,  and  Gilbert  de  Umfraville, 
Earl  of  Angus,  was  the  only  man  who  refused  to 
surrender  the  castles  in  his  custody  to  the  enemy 
of  his  country.     Edward,  rinding  Baliol  the  most 


OF  SCOTLAND.  11 

obsequious  and  the  least  formidable  of  the  two 
competitors,  soon  after  gave  judgment  in  his  fa- 
vour. Baliol  once  more  professed  himself  the 
vassal  of  England,  and  submitted  to  every  condi- 
tion which  the  Sovereign  whom  he  had  now  ac- 
knowledged was  pleased  to  prescribe. 

Edward,  having  thus  placed  a  creature  of  his 
own  upon  the  throne  of  Scotland,  and  compelled 
the  nobles  to  renounce  the  ancient  liberties  and  in- 
dependence of  their  country,  had  reason  to  con- 
clude that  his  dominion  was  now  fully  established. 
But  he  began  too  soon  to  assume  the  master:  his 
new  vassals,  fierce  and  independent,  bore  with  im- 
patience a  yoke  to  which  they  were  not  accusr 
tomed.  Provoked  by  his  haughtiness,  even  the 
passive  spirit  of  Baliol  began  to  mutiny.  But  Ed- 
ward, who  had  no  longer  use  for  such  a  pageant 
King,  forced  him  to  resign  the  crown,  and  openly 
attempted  to  seize  it  as  fallen  to  himself  by  the 
rebellion  of  his  vassal.  At  that  critical  period 
arose  Sir  William  Wallace,  a  hero,  to  whom  the 
fond  admiration  of  his  countrymen  hath  ascribed 
many  fabulous  acts  of  prowess,  though  his  real 
valour,  as  well  as  integrity  and  wisdom,  are  such 
as  need  not  the  heightenings  of  fiction.  He,  almost 
single,  ventured  to  take  arms  in  defence  of  the 
kingdom,  and  his  boldness  revived  the  spirit  of  his 
countrymen.  At  last,  Kobert  Bruce,  the  grandson 
of  him  who  stood  in  competition  with  Baliol,  ap- 
peared to  assert  his  own  rights,  and  to  vindicate 
the  honour  of  his  country.  The  nobles,  ashamed 
of  their  former  baseness,  and  enraged  at  the  many 
indignities  offered  to  the  nation,  crowded  to  his 
standard.  In  order  to  crush  him  at  once,  the 
English  Monarch  entered  Scotland  at  the  head  of 


12  THE  HISTORY  B.  t* 

a  mighty  army.  Many  battles  were  fought,  and 
the  Scots,  though  often  vanquished,  were  not  sub- 
dued. The  ardent  zeal  with  which  the  nobles  con- 
tended for  the  independence  of  the  kingdom,  the 
prudent  valour  of  Bruce,  and  above  all,  a  national 
enthusiasm  inspired  by  such  a  cause,  baffled  the 
repeated  efforts  of  Edward,  and  counterbalanced 
all  the  advantages  which  he  derived  from  the  num- 
ber and  wealth  of  his  subjects.  Though  the  war 
continued  with  little  intermission  upwards  of  se- 
venty years,  Bruce  and  his  posterity  kept  possession 
of  the  throne  of  Scotland,  and  reigned  with  an  au- 
thority not  inferior  to  that  of  its  former  monarchs. 

But  while  the  sword,  the  ultimate  judge  of  all 
disputes  between  contending  nations,  was  em- 
ployed to  terminate  this  controversy,  neither  Ed- 
ward nor  the  Scots  seemed  to  distrust  the  justice 
of  their  cause ;  and  both  appealed  to  history  and 
records,  and  from  these  produced,  in  their  own 
favour,  such  evidence  as  they  pretended  to  be  un^- 
answerable.  The  letters  and  memorials  addressed 
by  each  party  to  the  Pope,  who  was  then  reve- 
renced as  the  common  father,  and  often  appealed 
to  as  the  common  judge  of  all  Christian  Princes, 
are  still  extant.  The  fabulous  tales  of  the  early 
British  history,  the  partial  testimony  of  ignorant 
chroniclers,  supposititious  treaties  and  charters, 
are  the  proofs  on  which  Edward  founded  his  title 
to  the  sovereignty  of  Scotland  ;  and  the  homage 
done  by  the  Scottish  Monarchs  for  their  lands  in 
England  is  preposterously  supposed  to  imply  the 
subjection  of  their  whole  kingdom  .  Ill  founded, 
however,  as  their  right  was,   the  English  did   not 

3   Anderson's     Historical     Essay    concerning    the    Indepen 
dencv.  .Sc 


OF  SCOTLAND.  13 

fail  to  revive  it,  in  all  the  subsequent  quarrels  be- 
tween the  two  kingdoms ;  while  the  Scots  dis- 
claimed it  with  the  utmost  indignation.  To  this 
we  must  impute  the  fierce  and  implacable  hatred 
to  each  other,  which  long  inflamed  both.  Their 
national  antipathies  were  excited,  not  only  by  the 
usual  circumstances  of  frequent  hostilities,  and  re- 
ciprocal injuries;  but  the  English  considered  the 
Scots  as  vassals  who  had  presumed  to  rebel ;  and 
the  Scots,  in  their  turn,  regarded  the  English  as 
usurpers  who  aimed  at  enslaving  their  country. 

1306.]  At  the  time  when  Robert  Bruce  began 
his  reign  in  Scotland,  the  same  form  of  government 
was  established   in   all  the   kingdoms  of  Europe. 
This  surprising  similarity  in  their  constitution  and 
laws  demonstrates    that   the   nations  which  over- 
turned the  Roman  empire,  and  erected  these  king- 
doms, though  divided  into  different  tribes  and  dis- 
tinguished by  different  names,  were  either  derived 
originally  from  the  same  source,  or  had  been  placed 
in  similar  situations.      When  we  take   a  view  of 
the  feudal  system  of  laws  and  policy,  that  stupen- 
dous and  singular  fabric  erected  by  them,  the  first 
object  that  strikes  us  is  the  King.     And  when  we 
are   told  that  he  is  the  sole  proprietor  of  all  the 
lands  within  his  dominions,   that  all  his   subjects 
derive  their  possessions   from   him,   and  in  return 
consecrate  their  lives  to  his  service;  when  we  hear 
that  all  marks  of  distinction   and  titles  of  dignity 
flow  from  him  as  the  only  fountain  of  honour  ;  when 
we  behold  the  most  potent  peers,  on  their  bended 
knees,  and  with  folded  hands,  swearing  fealty  at 
his  feet,  and  acknowledging  him  to  be  their  Sove- 
reign  and  their  Liege  Lord;  we  are  apt  to   pro- 
nounce him  a  powerful,  nay,  an  absolute  monarch, 

VOL.  I.  C 


14  THE  HISTORY  B.  I. 

No  conclusion,  however,  would  be  more  rash,  or 
worse  founded.  The  genius  of  the  feudal  govern- 
ment was  purely  aristocratical.  With  all  the  en- 
signs of  royalty,  and  with  many  appearances  of 
despotic  power,  a  feudal  King  was  the  most  li- 
mited of  all  Princes. 

Before  they  sallied  out  of  their  own  habitations 
to  conquer  the  world,  many  of  the  northern  nations 
seemed  not  to  have  been  subject  to  the  government 
of  Kings4;  and  even  where  monarchical  govern- 
ment was  established,  the  Prince  possessed  but 
little  authority.  A  General,  rather  than  a  King, 
his  military  command  was  extensive,  his  civil  juris- 
diction almost  nothing5.  The  army  which  he  led 
was  not  composed  of  soldiers,  who  could  be  com- 
pelled to  serve,  but  of  such  as  voluntarily  followed 
his  standard 6.  These  conquered  not  for  their 
leader,  but  for  themselves;  and,  being  free  in  their 
own  country,  renounced  not  their  liberty  when  they 
acquired  new  settlements.  They  did  not  exter- 
minate the  ancient  inhabitants  of  the  countries 
which  they  subdued ;  but,  seizing  the  greater  part 
of  their  lands,  they  took  their  persons  under  pro- 
tection. The  difficulty  of  maintaining  a  new  con- 
quest, as  well  as  the  danger  of  being  attacked  by 
new  invaders,  rendering  it  necessary  to  be  always 
in  a  posture  of  defence,  the  form  of  government 
which  they  established  was  altogether  military,  and 
nearly  resembled  that  to  which  they  had  been  ac- 
customed in  their  native  country.  Their  General 
still  continuing  to  be  the  head  of  the  colony,  part 
of  the  conquered  lands  were  allotted  to  him  ;  the 
remainder,   under  the  name  of  bencficia  or  fiefs, 

4  Cks.  lib.  \\.  c.  23.  s  Tacit,  de  Mor.  Germ.  c.  7.  11. 

e  Cas.  lib.  vi.  c.  23. 


OF  SCOTLAND.  15 

was  divided  among  his  principal  officers.  As  the 
common  safety  required  that  these  officers  should, 
upon  all  occasions,  be  ready  to  appear  in  arms,  for 
the  common  defence,  and  should  continue  obedient 
to  their  General,  they  bound  themselves  to  take  the 
field,  when  called,  and  to  serve  him  with  a  number 
of  men,  in  proportion  to  the  extent  of  their  terri- 
tory. These  great  officers  again  parceled  out  their 
lands  among  their  followers,  and  annexed  the  same 
condition  to  the  grant.  A  feudal  kingdom  was 
properly  the  encampment  of  a  great  army  ;  military 
ideas  predominated,  military  subordination  was  es- 
tablished, and  the  possession  of  land  was  the  pay 
which  soldiers  received  for  their  personal  service. 
In  consequence  of  these  notions,  the  possession  of 
land  was  granted  during  pleasure  only,  and  Kings 
were  elective.  In  other  words,  an  officer  disagree- 
able to  his  General  was  deprived  of  his  pay,  and 
the  person  who  was  most  capable  of  conducting  an 
army  was  chosen  to  command  it.  Such  were  the 
first  rudiments  or  infancy  of  feudal  government. 

But  long  before  the  beginning  of  the  fourteenth 
century,  the  feudal  system  had  undergone  many 
changes,  of  which  the  following  were  the  most  con- 
siderable. Kings,  formerly  elective,  were  then  he- 
reditary ;  and  fiefs,  granted  at  first  during  pleasure, 
descended  from  father  to  son,  and  were  become 
perpetual.  These  changes,  not  less  advantageous 
to  the  nobles  than  to  the  prince,  made  no  alteration 
in  the  aristocratical  spirit  of  the  feudal  constitu- 
tion. The  King,  who  at  a  distance  seemed  to  be 
invested  with  majesty  and  power,  appears  on  a 
nearer  view  to  possess  almost  none  of  those  advan- 
tages which  bestow  on  monarchs  their  grandeur  and 
authority.      His  revenues  were  scanty;  he  had  not 


16  THE  HISTORY  B.  I. 

a  standing  army;  and  the  jurisdiction  he  possessed 
was  circumscribed  within  very  narrow  limits. 

At  a  time  when  pomp  and  splendour  were  little 
known,  even  in  the  palaces  of  Kings ;  when  the 
officers  of  the  crown  received  scarcely  any  salary 
besides  the  fees  and  perquisites  of  their  office  ; 
when  embassies  to  foreign  courts  were  rare;  when 
armies  were  composed  of  soldiers  who  served  with- 
out pay  ;  it  was  not  necessary  that  a  King  should 
possess  a  great  revenue ;  nor  did  the  condition  of 
Europe,  in  those  ages,  allow  its  Princes  to  be 
opulent.  Commerce  made  little  progress  in  the 
kingdoms  where  the  feudal  government  was  esta- 
blished. Institutions  which  had  no  other  object 
but  to  inspire  a  martial  spirit,  to  train  men  to  be 
soldiers,  and  to  make  arms  the  only  honourable 
profession,  naturally  discouraged  the  commercial 
arts.  The  revenues,  arising  from  the  taxes  imposed 
on  the  different  branches  of  commerce,  were  by 
consequence  inconsiderable ;  and  the  Prince's  trea- 
sury  received  little  supply  from  a  source,  which, 
among  a  trading  people,  flows  with  such  abun- 
dance as  is  almost  inexhaustible.  A  fixed  tax 
was  not  levied  even  on  land  :  such  a  burden  would 
have  appeared  intolerable  to  men  who  received 
their  estates  as  the  reward  of  their  valour,  and 
who  considered  their  service  in  the  field  as  a  full 
retribution  for  what  they  possessed.  The  King's 
demesnes,  or  the  portion  of  land  which  he  still  re- 
tained in  his  own  hands  unalienated,  furnished  sub- 
sistence to  his  court,  and  defrayed  the  ordinary 
expense  of  government'.  The  only  stated  taxes 
which  the  feudal  law  obliged  vassals  to  pay  to  the 

7  Craig,  de  Feud.  lib.  i.   Dieg.  14.     Du  Cange  Gloss,  vqc, 
Poinimcuiii. 


OF  SCOTLAND.  17 

King,  or  to  those  of  whom  they  held  their  lands, 
were  three  :  one  when  his  eldest  son  was  made  a 
knight ;  another,  when  his  eldest  daughter  was 
married  ;  and  a  third,  in  order  to  ransom  him  if 
he  should  happen  to  be  taken  prisoner.  Besides 
these,  the  King  received  the  feudal  casualties  of 
the  ward,  marriage,  &c.  of  his  own  vassals.  And, 
on  some  extraordinary  occasions,  his  subjects 
granted  him  an  aid,  which  they  distinguished  by 
the  name  of  a  benevolence,  in  order  to  declare  that 
he  received  it  not  in  consequence  of  any  right,  but 
as  a  gift  flowing  from  their  good  will8.  All  these 
added  together  produced  a  revenue  so  scanty  and 
precarious  as  naturally  incited  a  feudal  monarch 
to  aim  at  diminishing  the  exorbitant  power  and 
wealth  of  the  nobility,  which,  instead  of  enabling  him 
to  carry  on  his  schemes  with  full  effect,  kept  him  in 
continual  indigence,  anxiety,  and  dependence. 

Nor  could  the  King  supply  the  defect  of  his 
revenues  by  the  terror  of  his  arms.  Mercenary 
troops  and  standing  armies  were  unknown  as  long 
as  the  feudal  government  subsisted  in  vigour.  Eu- 
rope was  peopled  with  soldiers.  The  vassals  of 
the  King,  and  the  sub-vassals  of  the  barons,  were 
all  obliged  to  carry  arms.  While  the  poverty  of 
IVinces  prevented  them  from  fortifying  their  fron- 
tier towns,  while  a  campaign  continued  but  a  few 
weeks,  and  while  a  fierce  and  impetuous  courage 
was  impatient  to  bring  every  quarrel  to  the  deci- 
sion of  a  battle,  an  army  without  pay,  and  with 
little  discipline,  was  sufficient  for  all  the  purposes 
both  of  the  security  and  of  the  glory  of  the  nation. 
Such  an  army,  however,  far  from  being  an  engine 
at  the  King's  disposal,  was  often  no  less   formi- 

8  Du  Cange,  voc.  Auxiliura. 

c  2 


18  THE  HISTORY  B.  I. 

dable  to  him  than  to  his  enemies.  The  more  war- 
like any  people  were,  the  more  independent  they 
became  ;  and  the  same  persons  being  both  soldiers 
and  subjects,  civil  privileges  and  immunities  were 
the  consequence  of  their  victories,  and  the  reward 
of  their  martial  exploits.  Conquerors,  whom  mer- 
cenary armies,  under  our  present  forms  of  govern- 
ment, often  render  the  tyrants  of  their  own  people, 
as  well  as  the  scourges  of  mankind,  were  com- 
monly under  the  feudal  constitution  the  most  indul- 
gent of  all  Princes  to  their  subjects,  because  they 
stood  most  in  need  of  their  assistance.  A  Prince, 
whom  even  war  and  victories  did  not  render  the 
master  of  his  own  army,  possessed  hardly  any 
shadow  of  military  power  during  times  of  peace. 
His  disbanded  soldiers  mingled  with  his  other  sub- 
jects; not  a  single  man  received  pay  from  him; 
many  ages  elapsed  even  before  a  guard  was  ap- 
pointed to  defend  his  person  ;  and  destitute  of  that 
great  instrument  of  dominion,  a  standing  army,  the 
authority  of  the  King  continued  always  feeble,  and 
was  often  contemptible. 

Nor  were  these  the  only  circumstances  which 
contributed  towards  depressing  the  regal  power. 
By  the  feudal  system,  as  has  been  already  observed, 
the  King's  judicial  authority  was  extremely  circum- 
scribed. At  first,  Princes  seem  to  have  been  the 
supreme  judges  of  their  people,  and,  in  person, 
heard  and  determined  all  controversies  anions; 
them.  The  multiplicity  of  causes  soon  made  it 
necessary  to  appoint  judges,  who,  in  the  King's 
name,  decided  matters  that  belonged  to  the  royal 
jurisdiction.  But  the  barbarians,  who  overran 
Europe,  having  destroyed  most  of  the  great  cities, 
and  the  countries  which  they  seized  being  can- 


OF  SCOTLAND.  19 

toned  out  among  powerful  chiefs,  who  were  blindly- 
followed  by  numerous  dependents,  whom,  in  re- 
turn, they  were  bound  to  protect  from  every  injury  ; 
the  administration  of  justice  was  greatly  inter- 
rupted, and  the  execution  of  any  legal  sentence 
became  almost  impracticable.  Theft,  rapine,  mur- 
der, and  disorder  of  all  kinds  prevailed  in  every 
kingdom  of  Europe,  to  a  degree  almost  incredible, 
and  scarcely  compatible  with  the  subsistence  of 
civil  society.  Every  offender  sheltered  himself 
under  the  protection  of  some  powerful  chieftain, 
who  screened  him  from  the  pursuits  of  justice. 
To  apprehend  and  to  punish  a  criminal  often  re- 
quired the  union  and  effort  of  half  a  kingdom9.  In 
order  to  remedy  these  evils,  many  persons  of  dis- 
tinction were  intrusted  with  the  administration  of 

9  A  remarkable  instance  of  this  occurs  in  the  following  history, 
so  late  as  the  year  one  thousand  five  hundred  and  sixty-one, 
Mary,  having  appointed  a  court  of  justice  to  be  held  on  the  bor- 
ders, the  inhabitants  of  no  less  than  eleven  counties  were  sum- 
moned to  guard  the  person  who  was  to  act  as  judge,  aud  to  enable 
him  to  enforce  his  decisions.  The  words  of  a  proclamation, 
which  afford  such  convincing  proof  of  the  feebleness  of  the  feudal 
government,  deserve  our  notice — "  And  because  it  is  necessary 
for  the  execution  of  Her  Highness'  commandments  and  service, 
that  her  justice  be  well  accompanied,  and  her  authority  sufficiently 
fortified,  by  the  concurrence  of  a  good  power  of  her  faithful  sub- 
jects— Therefore  commands  and  charges  all  and  sundry  Earls, 
Lords,  Barons,  Freeholders,  Landed  men,  and  other  Gentlemen, 
dwelling  within  the  said  counties,  that  they  and  every  one  of 
them,  with  their  kin,  friends,  servants,  and  household  men,  well 
bodin  in  feir  of  war  in  the  most  substantial  manner,  [i.  e.  com- 
pletely armed  and  provided],  and  with  twenty  days'  victuals,  to 
meet  and  to  pass  forward  with  him  to  the  borough  of  Jedburgh, 
and  there  to  remain  during  the  said  space  of  twenty  days,  and 
to  receive  such  direction  and  commands  as  shall  be  given  by 
him  to  them  in  our  Sovereign  Lady's  name,  for  quietness  of  the 
country:  and  to  put  the  same  in  execution  under  the  pain  of 
losing  their  life,  lands,  and  goods."  Keith's  Hist,  of  Scot- 
land, 1US. 


20  THE  HISTORY  B.  I. 

justice  within  their  own  territories.  But  what  we 
may  presume  was,  at  first,  only  a  temporary  grant, 
or  a  personal  privilege,  the  encroaching  spirit  of 
the  nobles  gradually  converted  into  a  right,  and 
rendered  hereditary.  The  lands  of  some  were,  in 
process  of  time,  erected  into  Baronies,  those  of 
others  into  Regalities.  The  jurisdiction  of  the 
former  was  extensive;  that  of  the  latter,  as  the 
name  implies,  royal  and  almost  unbounded.  All 
causes,  whether  civil  or  criminal,  were  tried  by 
judges,  whom  the  lord  of  the  regality  appointed; 
and  if  the  King's  courts  called  any  person  within 
his  territory  before  them,  the  lord  of  regality  might 
put  a  stop  to  their  proceedings,  and,  by  the  privi- 
lege of  ?epledging ,  remove  the  cause  to  his  own 
court,  and  even  punish  his  vassal  if  he  submitted 
to  a  foreign  jurisdiction10.  Thus  almost  every 
question,  in  which  any  person  who  resided  on  the 
lands  of  the  nobles  was  interested,  being  deter- 
mined by  judges  appointed  by  the  nobles  them- 
selves, their  vassals  were  hardly  sensible  of  being 
in  any  degree  subject  to  the  crown.  A  feudal 
kingdom  was  split  into  many  small  principalities, 
almost  independent,  and  held  together  by  a  feeble 
and  commonly  an  imperceptible  bond  of  uuion. 
The  King  was  not  only  stripped  of  the  authority 
annexed  to  the  person  of  a  supreme  judge,  but  his 
revenue  suffered  no  small  diminution  bv  the  loss  of 
those  pecuniary  emoluments  which  were  in  that 
age  due  to  the  person  who  administered  justice. 

In  the  same  proportion  that  the  King  sunk  id 
power,  the  nobles  rose  towards  independence. 
Not  satisfied  with  having  obtained  an  hereditary 
right  to  their  fiefs,  which  they  formerly  held  during 

lu  Craig,  lib.  iii.  Dieg.  7. 


OF  SCOTLAND.  21 

pleasure,  their  ambition  aimed  at  something  bolder, 
and,  by  introducing  entails,  endeavoured,  as  far  as 
human  ingenuity  and  invention  can  reach  that  end, 
to  render  their  possessions  unalienable  and  ever- 
lasting. As  they  had  full  power  to  add  to  the  in- 
heritance transmitted  to  them  from  their  ancestors, 
but  none  to  diminish  it,  time  alone,  by  means  of 
marriages,  legacies,  and  other  accidents,  brought 
continual  accessions  of  wealth  and  of  dignity;  a 
great  family,  like  a  river,  became  considerable  from 
the  length  of  its  course,  and,  as  it  rolled  on,  new 
honours  and  new  property  flowed  successively  into 
it.  Whatever  influence  is  derived  from  titles  of 
honour,  the  feudal  barons  likewise  possessed  in  an 
ample  manner.  These  marks  of  distinction  are,  in 
their  own  nature,  either  official  or  personal,  and 
being  annexed  to  a  particular  charge,  or  bestowed 
by  the  admiration  of  mankind  upon  illustrious  cha- 
racters, ought  to  be  appropriated  to  these.  But 
the  son,  however  unworthy,  could  not  bear  to  be 
stripped  of  that  appellation  by  which  his  father  had 
been  distinguished.  His  presumption  claimed  what 
his  virtue  did  not  merit;  titles  of  honour  became 
hereditary,  and  added  new  lustre  to  nobles  already 
in  possession  of  too  much  power.  Something  more 
audacious  and  more  extravagant  still  remained. 
The  supreme  direction  of  all  affairs,  both  civil  and 
military,  being  committed  to  the  great  officers  of 
the  crown,  the  fame  and  safety  of  princes,  as  well 
as  of  their  people,  depended  upon  the  fidelity  and 
abilities  of  these  officers.  But  such  was  the  pre- 
posterous ambition  of  the  nobles,  and  so  success- 
ful even  in  their  wildest  attempts  to  aggrandize 
themselves,  that  in  all  the  kingdoms  where  the 
feudal   institutions    prevailed,    most   of  the   chief 


22  THE  HISTORY  B.  I. 

"  officers  of  state  were  annexed  to  great  families, 
and  held,  like  fiefs,  by  hereditary  right.  A  per- 
son whose  undutiful  behaviour  rendered  him  odious 
to  his  Prince,  or  whose  incapacity  exposed  him  to 
the  contempt  of  the  people,  often  held  a  place  of 
power  and  trust  of  the  greatest  importance  to  both. 
In  Scotland,  the  offices  of  Lord  Justice  General, 
Great  Chamberlain,  High  Steward,  High  Consta- 
ble, Earl  Marshal,  and  High  Admiral,  were  all 
hereditary ;  and  in  many  counties,  the  office  of 
Sheriff  was  held  in  the  same  manner. 

Nobles  whose  property  was  so  extensive,  and 
whose  power  was  so  great,  could  not  fail  of  being 
turbulent  and  formidable.  Nor  did  they  want  in- 
struments for  executing  their  boldest  designs.  That 
portion  of  their  lands,  which  they  parceled  out 
among  their  followers,  supplied  them  with  a  nume- 
rous band  of  faithful  and  determined  vassals  ; 
while  that  which  they  retained  in  their  own  hands 
enabled  them  to  live  with  a  princely  splendour. 
The  great  hall  of  an  ambitious  baron  was  often 
more  crowded  than  the  court  of  his  sovereign. 
The  strong  castles,  in  which  they  resided,  afforded 
a  secure  retreat  to  the  discontented  and  seditious. 
A  great  part  of  their  revenue  was  spent  upon  mul- 
titudes of  indigent  but  bold  retainers.  And  if  at 
any  time  they  left  their  retreat  to  appear  in  the 
court  of  their  sovereign,  they  were  accompanied, 
even  in  times  of  peace,  with  a  vast  train  of  armed 
followers.  The  usual  retinue  of  William,  the  sixth 
Karl  of  Douglas,  consisted  of  two  thousand  horse. 
Those  of  the  other  nobles  were  magnificent  and 
formidable  in  proportion.  Impatient  of  subordina- 
tion, and  forgetting  their  proper  rank,  such  potent 
and  haughty  barons  were  the  rivals  rather  than  the 


OF  SCOTLAND.  23 

subjects  of  their  prince.  They  often  despised  his 
orders,  insulted  his  person,  and  wrested  from  him 
his  crown.  The  history  of  Europe,  during  several 
ages,  contains  little  else  but  the  accounts  of  the 
wars  and  revolutions  occasioned  by  their  exorbi- 
tant ambition. 

But,  if  the  authority  of  the  barons  far  exceeded 
its  proper  bounds  in  the  other  nations  of  Europe, 
we  may  affirm  that  the  balance  which  ought  to  be 
preserved  between  a  King  and  his  nobles  was 
almost  entirely  lost  in  Scotland.  The  Scottish 
nobles  enjoyed,  in  common  with  those  of  other 
nations,  all  the  means  for  extending  their  authority, 
which  arise  from  the  aristocratical  genius  of  the 
feudal  government.  Besides  these,  they  possessed 
advantages  peculiar  to  themselves  :  the  accidental 
sources  of  their  power  were  considerable ;  and 
singular  circumstances  concurred  with  the  spirit  of 
the  constitution  to  aggrandize  them.  To  enume- 
rate the  most  remarkable  of  these  will  serve  both 
to  explain  the  political  state  of  the  kingdom,  and 
to  illustrate  many  important  occurrences  in  the 
period  now  under  our  review. 

I.  The  nature  of  their  country  was  one  cause  of 
the  power  and  independence  of  the  Scottish  nobi- 
lity. Level  and  open  countries  are  formed  for  ser- 
vitude. The  authority  of  the  supreme  magistrate 
reaches  with  ease  to  the  most  distant  corners;  and 
when  nature  has  erected  no  barrier,  and  affords  no 
retreat,  the  guilty  or  obnoxious  are  soon  detected 
and  punished.  Mountains,  and  fens,  and  rivers, 
set  bounds  to  despotic  power,  and  amidst  these  is 
the  natural  seat  of  freedom  and  independence.  In 
such  places  did  the  Scottish  nobles  usually  fix 
their  residence.      By  retiring  to  his  own  castle,  a 


24  THE  HISTORY  B.  t. 

mutinous  baron  could  defy  the  power  of  his  sove- 
reign, it  being  almost  impracticable  to  lead  an 
army,  through  a  barren  country,  to  places  of  diffi- 
cult access  to  a  single  man.  The  same  causes 
which  checked  the  progress  of  the  Roman  arms, 
and  rendered  all  the  efforts  of  Edward  I.  abortive, 
often  protected  the  Scottish  nobles  from  the  ven- 
geance of  their  Prince ;  and  ttaey  owed  their  per- 
sonal independence  to  those  very  mountains  and 
marshes  which  saved  their  country  from  being 
conquered. 

II.  The  want  of  great  cities  in  Scotland  con- 
tributed not  a  little  to  increase  the  power  of  the 
nobility,  and  to  weaken  that  of  the  Prince.  Where- 
ever  numbers  of  men  assemble  together,  order  must 
be  established,  and  a  regular  form  of  government 
instituted;  the  authority  of  the  magistrate  must  be 
recognised,  and  his  decisions  meet  with  prompt 
and  full  obedience.  Laws  and  subordination  take 
rise  in  cities :  and  where  there  are  few  cities,  as  in 
Poland,  or  none,  as  in  Tartary,  there  are  few  or  no 
traces  of  a  well  arranged  police.  But  under  the 
feudal  governments,  commerce,  the  chief  means  of 
assembling  mankind,  was  neglected;  the  nobles, 
in  order  to  strengthen  their  influence  over  their 
vassals,  resided  among  them,  and  seldom  ap- 
peared at  court,  where  they  found  a  superior,  or 
dwelt  in  cities,  where  they  met  with  equals.  In 
Scotland,  the  fertile  counties  in  the  South  lying 
open  to  the  English,  no  town  situated  there  could 
rise  to  be  great  or  populous,  amidst  continual  in- 
roads and  alarms  ;  the  residence  of  our  monarchs 
was  not  fixed  to  any  particular  place ;  many  parts 
of  the  country  were  barren  and  uncultivated  ;  and 
in  consequence  of  these  peculiar  circumstances. 


OF  SCOTLAND.  2'p 

added  to  the  general  causes  flowing  from  the  na- 
ture of  the  feudal  institutions,  the  towns  in  Scot- 
land were  extremely  few,  and  very  inconsiderable. 
The  vassals  of  every  baron  occupied  a  distinct 
portion  of  the  kingdom,  and  formed  a  separate  and 
almost  independent  society.  Instead  of  giving-  aid 
towards  reducing  to  obedience  their  seditious  chief- 
tain, or  any  whom  he  took  under  his  protection, 
they  were  all  in  arms  for  his  defence,  and  obstruct- 
ed the  operations  of  justice  to  the  utmost.  The 
Prince  was  obliged  to  connive  at  criminals  whom 
he  could  not  reach  ;  the  nobles,  conscious  of  this 
advantage,  were  not  afraid  to  offend ;  and  the 
difficulty  of  punishing  almost  assured  them  of  im- 
punity. 

III.  The  division  of  the  country  into  clans  had 
no  small  effect  in  rendering  the  nobles  considerable. 
The  nations  which  overran  Europe  were  originally 
divided  into  many  small  tribes ;  and  when  they 
came  to  parcel  out  the  lands  which  they  had  con- 
quered, it  was  natural  for  every  chieftain  to  bestow 
a  portion,  in  the  first  place,  upon  those  of  his  own 
tribe  or  family.  These  all  held  their  lands  of  him; 
and  as  the  safety  of  each  individual  depended  on 
the  general  union,  these  small  societies  clung  toge- 
ther, and  were  distinguished  by  some  common 
appellation,  either  patronymical  or  local,  long  be- 
fore the  introduction  of  surnames,  or  ejisigns  armo- 
rial. But  when  these  became  common,  the  de- 
scendants and  relations  of  every  chieftain  assumed 
the  same  name  and  arms  with  him;  other  vassals 
were  proud  to  imitate  their  example,  and  by  de- 
grees they  were  communicated  to  all  those  who 
held  of  the  same  superior.  Thus  clanships  were 
formed ;   and  in  a  generation  or  two,  that  consaa- 

vol.  i.  D 


26  THE  HISTORY  B.  I. 

guinity,  which  was  at  first  in  a  great  measure  ima- 
ginary, was  believed  to  be  real.  An  artificial  union 
was  converted  into  a  natural  one ;  men  willingly 
followed  a  leader,  whom  they  regarded  both  as  the 
superior  of  their  lands  and  the  chief  of  their  blood, 
and  served  him  not  only  with  the  fidelity  of  vas- 
sals, but  with  the  affection  of  friends.  In  the  other 
feudal  kingdoms,  we  may  observe  such  unions  as 
we  have  described,  imperfectly  formed ;  but  in 
Scotland,  whether  they  were  the  production  of 
chance,  or  the  effect  of  policy,  or  introduced  by 
the  Irish  colony  above  mentioned,  and  strengthened 
by  carefully  preserving  their  genealogies  both  ge- 
nuine and  fabulous,  clanships  were  universal. 
Such  a  confederacy  might  be  overcome,  it  could 
not  be  broken ;  and  no  change  of  manners  or  of 
government  has  been  able,  in  some  parts  of  the 
kingdom,  to  dissolve  associations  which  are  founded 
upon  prejudices  so  natural  to  the  human  mind. 
How  formidable  were  nobles  at  the  head  of  follow- 
ers, who,  counting  that  cause  just  and  honourable 
which  their  chief  approved,  rushed  into  the  field  at 
his  command,  ever  ready  to  sacrifice  their  lives  in 
defence  of  his  person  or  of  his  fame!  Against 
such  men  a  King  contended  with  great  disadvan- 
tage; and  that  cold  service  which  money  pur- 
chases, or  authority  extorts,  was  not  an  equal  match 
for  their  ardour  and  zeal. 

TV.  The  smallness  of  their  number  may  be  men- 
tioned among  the  causes  of  the  grandeur  of  the 
Scottish  nobles.  Our  annals  reach  not  back  to  the 
first  division  of  property  in  the  kingdom  ;  but  so 
far  as  we  can  trace  the  matter,  the  original  posses- 
sions of  the  nobles  seem  to  have  been  extensive. 
The  ancient  Thanes  were  the  equals  and  the  rivals 


OF  SCOTLAND.  27 

of  their  Prince.  Many  of  the  earls  and  barons, 
who  succeeded  them,  were  masters  of  territories  no 
less  ample.  France  and  England,  countries  wide 
and  fertile,  afforded  settlements  to  a  numerous  and 
powerful  nobility.  Scotland,  a  kingdom  neither 
extensive  nor  rich,  could  not  contain  many  such 
overgrown  proprietors.  But  the  power  of  an  aris- 
tocracy always  diminishes  in  proportion  to  the  in- 
crease of  its  numbers  ;  feeble  if  divided  among  a 
multitude,  irresistible  if  centred  in  a  few.  When 
nobles  are  numerous,  their  operations  nearly  resem- 
ble those  of  the  people ;  they  are  roused  only  by 
what  they  feel,  not  by  what  they  apprehend  ;  and 
submit  to  many  arbitrary  and  oppressive  acts,  be- 
fore they  take  arms  against  their  sovereign.  A 
small  body,  on  the  contrary,  is  more  sensible  and 
more  impatient ;  quick  in  discerning,  and  prompt 
in  repelling  danger,  all  its  motions  are  as  sudden 
as  those  of  the  other  are  slow.  Hence  proceeded 
the  extreme  jealousy  with  which  the  Scottish  no- 
bles observed  their  monarchs,  and  the  fierceness 
with  which  they  opposed  their  encroachments, 
liven  the  virtue  of  a  prince  did  not  render  them 
less  vigilant,  or  less  eager  to  defend  their  rights  ; 
and  Robert  Bruce,  notwithstanding  the  splendour 
of  his  victories,  and  the  glory  of  his  name,  was 
upon  the  point  of  experiencing  the  vigour  of  their 
resistance,  no  less  than  his  unpopular  descendant 
James  III.  Besides  this,  the  near  alliance  of  the 
great  families,  by  frequent  intermarriages,  was  the 
natural  consequence  of  their  small  number;  and 
as  consanguinity  was,  in  those  ages,  a  powerful 
bond  of  union,  all  the  kindred  of  a  nobleman  inte- 
rested themselves  in  his  quarrel  as  a  common- 
cause  ;   and  every  contest  the  King  had,  though 


28  THE  HISTORY  B.  I. 

with  a  single  baron,  soon  drew  upon  him  the  arms 
of  a  whole  confederacy. 

V.  Those  natural  connexions,  both  with  their 
equals  and  with  their  inferiors,  the  Scottish  nobles 
strengthened  by  a  device,  which,  if  not  peculiar  to 
themselves,  was  at  least  more  frequent  among 
them  than  in  any  other  nation.  Even  in  times  of 
profound  peace,  they  formed  associations,  which, 
when  made  with  their  equals,  were  called  leagues 
of  mutual  defence;  and  when  with  their  inferiors, 
bonds  of  manrent.  By  the  former,  the  contracting 
parties  bound  themselves  mutually  to  assist  each 
other,  in  all  causes  and  against  all  persons.  By 
the  latter,  protection  was  stipulated  on  the  one 
hand,  and  fidelity  and  personal  service  promised 
on  the  other'1.  Self-preservation,  it  is  probable, 
forced  men  at  first  into  these  confederacies ;  and, 
while  disorder  and  rapine  were  universal,  while 
government  was  unsettled,  and  the  authority  of 
Laws  little  known  or  regarded,  near  neighbours 
found  it  necessary  to  unite  in  this  manner  for  their 
security  ;  and  the  weak  were  obliged  to  court  the 
patronage  of  the  strong.  By  degrees,  these  asso- 
ciations became  so  many  alliances  offensive  and 
defensive  against  the  throne ;  and  as  their  obliga- 
tion was  held  to  be  more  sacred  than  any  tie  what- 
ever, they  gave  much  umbrage  to  our  Kings,  and 
contributed  not  a  little  to  the  power  and  indepen- 
dence of  the  nobility.  In  the  reign  of  James  II. 
William,  the  eighth  Earl  of  Douglas,  entered  into 
a  league  of  this  kind  with  the  Earls  of  Crawford, 
Ross,  Murray,  Ormond,  the  Lords  Hamilton, 
Balveny,  and  other  powerful  barons ;  and  so  for- 
midable was  this  combination  to  the  King,  that  he 
1 '  Act  30,  Pari.  1424.     Act  43,  Pai  1.  1$5$. 


OF  SCOTLAND.  29 

bad  recourse  to  a  measure  no  less  violent  than  un- 
just, in  order  to  dissolve  it. 

VI.  The  frequent  wars  between  England  and 
Scotland  proved  another  cause  of  augmenting  the 
power  of  the  nobility.  Nature  has  placed  no  bar- 
rier between  the  two  kingdoms ;  a  river,  almost 
every  where  fordable,  divides  them  towards  the 
east ;  on  the  west  they  are  separated  by  an  imagi- 
nary line.  The  slender  revenues  of  our  Kings  pre- 
vented them  from  fortifying  or  placing  garrisons  in 
the  towns  on  the  frontier;  nor  would  the  jealousy 
of  their  subjects  have  permitted  such  a  method  of 
defence.  The  barons,  whose  estates  lay  near  the 
borders,  considered  themselves  as  bound,  both  in 
honour  and  in  interest,  to  repel  the  enemy.  The 
wardenships  of  the  different  marches,  offices  of 
great  power  and  dignity,  were  generally  bestowed 
on  them.  This  gained  them  the  leading  of  the 
warlike  counties  in  the  south;  and  their  vassals, 
living  in  a  state  of  perpetual  hostility,  or  enjoying 
at  best  an  insecure  peace,  became  more  inured  to 
war  than  even  the  rest  of  their  countrymen,  and 
more  willing  to  accompany  their  chieftain  in  his 
most  hardy  and  dangerous  enterprises.  It  was 
the  valour,  no  less  than  the  number  of  their  fol- 
lowers, that  rendered  the  Douglases  great.  The 
nobles  in  the  northern  and  midland  counties  were 
often  dutiful  and  obsequious  to  the  crown,  but  our 
Monarchs  always  found  it  impracticable  to  subdue 
the  mutinous  and  ungovernable  spirit  of  the  bor- 
derers. In  all  our  domestic  quarrels,  those  who 
could  draw  to  their  side  the  inhabitants  of  the 
southern  counties,  were  almost  sure  of  victory  : 
and  conscious  of  this  advantage,  the  lords  who 
possessed  authority  there,  were  apt  to  forget  the 

D  2 


30  THE  HISTORY  B.  I. 

duty  which    they  owed    their  sovereign,    and   to 
aspire  beyond  the  rank  of  subjects. 

VII.  The  calamities  which  befel  our  Kings  con- 
tributed more  than  any  other  cause  to  diminish  the 
royal  authority.  Never  was  any  race  of  monarchs 
so  unfortunate  as  the  Scottish.  Of  six  successive 
Princes,  from  Robert  III.  to  James  VI.,  not  one 
died  a  natural  death ;  and  the  minorities,  during 
that  time,  were  longer  and  more  frequent  than 
ever  happened  in  any  other  kingdom.  From  Ro- 
bert Bruce  to  James  VI.  we  reckon  ten  Princes  ; 
and  seven  of  these  were  called  to  the  throne  while 
they  were  minors,  and  almost  infants.  Even  the 
most  regular  and  best  established  governments  feel 
sensibly  the  pernicious  effects  of  a  minority,  and 
either  become  languid  and  inactive,  or  are  thrown 
into  violent  and  unnatural  convulsions.  But  under 
the  imperfect  and  ill  adjusted  system  of  govern- 
ment in  Scotland  these  effects  were  still  more  fatal ; 
the  tierce  and  mutinous  spirit  of  the  nobles,  unre- 
strained by  the  authority  of  a  King,  scorned  all 
subjection  to  the  delegated  jurisdiction  of  a  Re- 
gent, or  to  the  feeble  commands  of  a  minor.  The 
royal  authority  was  circumscribed  within  nar- 
rower limits  than  ever ;  the  prerogatives  of  the 
crown,  naturally  inconsiderable,  were  reduced  al- 
most to  nothing ;  and  the  aristocratical  power  gra- 
dually rose  upon  the  ruins  of  the  monarchical. 
Lest  the  personal  power  of  a  Regent  should  enable 
him  to  act  with  too  much  vigour,  the  authority  an- 
nexed to  that  office  was  sometimes  rendered  incon- 
siderable by  being  divided  ;  or,  if  a  single  Regent 
was  chosen,  the  greater  nobles,  and  the  heads  of 
the  more  illustrious  families,  were  seldom  raised  to 
that  diguity.     It  was  often  conferred   upon  men 


OF  SCOTLAND.  ;>I 

vho  possessed  little  influence,  and  excited  no  jea- 
lousy. They,  conscious  of  their  own  weakness, 
were  obliged  to  overlook  some  irregularities,  and 
to  permit  others;  and,  in  order  to  support  their  au- 
thority, which  was  destitute  of  real  strength,  they 
endeavoured  to  gain  the  most  powerful  and  active 
barons,  by  granting  them  possessions  and  immu- 
nities, which  raised  them  to  still  greater  power. 
When  the  King  himself  came  to  assume  the  reins 
of  government,  he  found  his  revenues  wasted  or 
alienated,  the  crown  lands  seized  or  given  away, 
and  the  nobles  so  accustomed  to  independence 
that,  after  the  struggles  of  a  whole  reign,  he  was 
seldom  able  to  reduce  them  to  the  same  state  in 
which  they  had  been  at  the  beginning  of  his  mino- 
rity, or  to  wrest  from  them  what  they  had  usurped 
during  that  time.  If  we  take  a  view  of  what  hap- 
pened to  each  of  our  Kings,  who  was  so  unfortu- 
nate as  to  be  placed  in  this  situation,  the  truth  and 
importance  of  this  observation  will  fully  appear. 

The  minority  of  David  II.  the  son  of  Robert 
Bruce,  was  disturbed  by  the  pretensions  of  Edward 
Baliol,  who,  relying  on  the  aid  of  England,  and  on 
the  support  of  some  disaffected  barons  among  the 
Scots,  invaded  the  kingdom.  The  success  which 
at  first  attended  his  arms  obliged  the  young  King 
to  retire  to  France ;  and  Baliol  took  possession  of 
the  throne.  A  small  body  of  the  nobles,  however, 
continuing  faithful  to  their  exiled  Prince,  drove 
Baliol  out  of  Scotland  ;  and  after  an  absence  of 
nine  years  David  returned  from  France,  and  took 
the  government  of  the  kingdom  into  his  own  hands. 
But  nobles,  who  were  thus  wasting  their  blood  and 
treasure  in  defence  of  the  crown,  had  a  right  to  the 
undisturbed  possession  ot  their  ancient  privileges ; 


32  THE  HISTORY  B.  I. 

and  even  some  title  to  arrogate  new  ones.  It 
seems  to  have  been  a  maxim  in  that  age  [1320], 
that  every  leader  might  claim  as  his  own  the  terri- 
tory which  his  sword  had  won  from  the  enemy. 
Great  acquisitions  were  gained  by  the  nobility  in 
that  way  :  and  to  these  the  gratitude  and  liberality 
of  David  added,  by  distributing  among  such  as 
adhered  to  him  the  vast  possessions  which  fell  to 
the  crown  by  the  forfeiture  of  his  enemies.  The 
family  of  Douglas,  which  began  to  rise  above  the 
other  nobles  in  the  reign  of  his  father,  augmented 
both  its  power  and  its  property  during  his  mino- 
rity. 

1405].  James  I.  was  seized  by  the  English 
during  the  continuance  of  a  truce,  and  ungene- 
rously detained  a  prisoner  almost  nineteen  years. 
During  that  period  the  kingdom  was  governed, 
tirst  by  his  uncle  Robert,  Duke  of  Albany,  and 
then  by  Murdo,  the  son  of  Robert.  Both  these 
noblemen  aspired  to  the  crown  ;  and  their  unna- 
tural ambition,  if  we  may  believe  most  of  our  his- 
torians, not  only  cut  short  the  days  of  Prince 
David,  the  King's  eldest  brother,  but  prolonged 
the  captivity  of  James.  They  flattered  themselves 
that  they  might  step  with  less  opposition  into  a 
throne,  when  almost  vacant ;  and  dreading  the 
Kiug's  return  as  the  extinction  of  their  authority 
and  the  end  of  their  hopes,  they  carried  on  the  ne- 
gotiations for  obtaining  his  liberty  with  extreme  re- 
missness. At  the  same  time  they  neglected  nothing 
that  could  either  sooth  or  bribe  the  nobles  to  ap- 
prove of  their  scheme.  They  slackened  the  reins 
of  government ;  they  allowed  the  prerogative  to  be 
encroached  upon  ;  they  suffered  the  most  irregular 
acts  of  power,  and  even  wanton  instances  of  op- 


OF  SCOTLAND.  S3 

pression,  to  pass  with  impunity ;  they  dealt  out 
the  patrimony  of  the  crown  among  those  whose 
enmity  they  dreaded  or  whose  favour  they  had 
gained ;  and  reduced  the  royal  authority  to  a  state 
of  imbecility,  from  which  succeeding  monarchs  la- 
boured in  vain  to  raise  it. 

1437].  During  -the  minority  of  James  II.  the 
administration  of  affairs,  as  well  as  the  custody  of 
the  King's  person,  were  committed  to  Sir  William 
Crichton  and  Sir  Alexander  Livingston.  Jealousy 
and  discord  were  the  effects  of  their  conjunct  au- 
thority, and  each  of  them,  in  order  to  strengthen 
himself,  bestowed  new  power  and  privileges  upon 
the  great  men  whose  aid  he  courted ;  while  the 
young  Earl  of  Douglas,  encouraged  by  their  divi- 
sions, erected  a  sort  of  independent  principality 
within  the  kingdom ;  and,  forbidding  his  vassals  to 
acknowledge  any  authority  but  his  own,  he  created 
knights,  appointed  a  privy  council,  named  officers 
civil  and  military,  assumed  every  ensign  of  royalty 
but  the  title  of  King,  and  appeared  in  public  with  a 
magnificence  more  than  royal. 

14(J0].  Eight  persons  were  chosen  to  govern  the 
kingdom  during  the  minority  of  James  III.  Lord 
Boyd,  however,  by  seizing  the  person  of  the  young 
King,  and  by  the  ascendant  which  he  acquired  over 
him,  soon  engrossed  the  whole  authority.  He 
formed  the  ambitious  project  of  raising  his  family 
to  the  same  pitch  of  power  and  grandeur  with  those 
of  the  prime  nobility  ;  and  he  effected  it.  While 
intent  on  this,  he  relaxed  the  vigour  of  government, 
and  the  barons  became  accustomed  once  more  to 
anarchy  and  independence.  The  power  which 
Boyd  had  been  at  so  much  pains  to  acquire  was 
of  no  long  continuance,  and  the  fall  of  bis  family, 


34  THE  HISTORY  B.   f. 

according  to  the  fate  of  favourites,  was  sudden  and 
destructive ;  but  upon  its  ruins  the  family  of  Ha- 
milton rose,  which  soon  attained  the  highest  rank 
in  the  kingdom. 

As  the  minority  of  James  V.  was  longer,  it  was 
likewise  more  turbulent  than  those  of  the  preced- 
ing Kings.  And  the  contending  nobles,  encou- 
raged or  protected  either  by  the  King  of  France 
or  of  England,  formed  themselves  into  more  regu- 
lar factions,  and  disregarded  more  than  ever  the 
restraints  of  order  and  authority.  The  French  had 
the  advantage  of  seeing  one,  devoted  to  their  inte- 
rest, raised  to  be  Regent.  This  was  the  Duke 
of  Albany,  a  native  of  France,  and  a  grandson  of 
James  II.  But  Alexander  Lord  Home,  the  most 
eminent  of  all  Scottish  peers  who  survived  the  fatal 
battle  of  Flowden,  thwarted  all  his  measures  during 
the  first  years  of  his  administration  ;  and  the  in- 
trigues of  the  Queen  Dowager,  sister  of  Henry 
VIII.  rendered  the  latter  part  of  it  no  less  feeble. 
Though  supported  by  French  auxiliaries  the  nobles 
despised  his  authority,  and,  regardless  either  of  his 
threats  or  his  entreaties,  peremptorily  refused  two 
several  times  to  enter  England,  to  the  borders  of 
which  kingdom  he  had  led  them.  Provoked  by 
these  repeated  instances  of  contempt,  the  Regent 
abandoned  his  troublesome  station,  and,  retiring  to 
France,  preferred  the  tranquillity  of  a  private  life 
to  an  office  destitute  of  real  authority.  Upon  his 
retreat,  Douglas,  Earl  of  Angus,  became  master  of 
the  King's  person,  and  governed  the  kingdom  in 
his  name.  Many  efforts  were  made  to  deprive  him 
of  his  usurped  authority.  But  the  numerous  vas- 
sals and  friends  of  his  family  adhered  to  him,  be- 
cause he  divided  with  them  the  power  and  emolu- 


OF  SCOTLAND.  3<J 

ments  of  his  office ;  the  people  reverenced  and 
loved  the  name  of  Douglas  ;  he  exercised,  without 
the  title  of  Regent,  a  fuller  and  more  absolute  au-* 
thority  than  any  who  had  enjoyed  that  dignity ; 
and  the  ancient  but  dangerous  preeminence  of  the 
Douglases  seemed  to  be  restored. 

To  these,  and  to  many  other  causes,  omitted  or 
unobserved  by  us,  did  the  Scottish  nobility  owe 
that  exorbitant  and  uncommon  power,  of  which  in- 
stances occur  so  frequently  in  our  history.  Nothing, 
however,  demonstrates  so  fully  the  extent  of  their 
power  as  the  length  of  its  duration.  Many  years 
after  the  declension  of  the  feudal  system  in  the 
other  kingdoms  of  Europe,  and  when  the  arms  or 
policy  of  Princes  had,  every  where,  shaken  or  laid 
it  in  ruins,  the  foundations  of  that  ancient  fabric 
remained,  in  a  great  measure,  firm  and  untouched 
in  Scotland. 

The  powers  which  the  feudal  institutions  vested 
in  the  nobles  soon  became  intolerable  to  all  the 
Princes  of  Europe,  who  longed  to  possess  some- 
thing more  than  a  nominal  and  precarious  autho- 
rity. Their  impatience  to  obtain  this  precipitated 
J I  (Miry  ITT.  of  England,  Edward  II.  and  some 
other  weak  Princes,  into  rash  and  premature  at- 
tempts against  the  privileges  of  the  barons,  in  which 
they  were  disappointed  or  perished.  Princes  of 
greater  abilities  were  content  to  mitigate  evils  which 
they  could  not  cure  ;  they  sought  occupation  for 
the  turbulent  spirit  of  their  nobles  in  frequent  wars; 
and  allowed  their  fiery  courage  to  evaporate  in  fo- 
reign expeditions  which,  if  they  brought  no  other 
advantage,  secured  at  least  domestic  tranquillity. 
But  time  and  accidents  ripened  the  feudal  govern- 
ments for  destruction.      Towards  the  end  of  the 


88  THE  HISTORV  B.  I. 

fifteenth  century,  and  beginning  of  the  sixteenth, 
all  the  Princes  of  Europe  attacked,  as  if  by  con- 
cert,  the  power  of  their  nobles.      Men  of  genius 
then  undertook  with   success  what  their  unskilful 
predecessors   had  attempted  in  vain.      Louis  XI. 
of  France,  the  most  profound  and  the  most  adven- 
turous genius  of  that  age  began,  and  in  a  single 
reign  almost  completed  the  scheme   of  their  de- 
struction.   The  sure  but  concealed  policy  of  Henry 
VII.  of  England,  produced  the  same  effect.     The 
means,  indeed,  employed  by  these  monarchs  were 
very  different.     The  blow  which  Louis  struck  was 
sudden  and  fatal.     The  artifices  of  Henry  resem- 
bled those  slow  poisons  which  waste  the  constitu- 
tion but  become  not  mortal  till  some  distant  period. 
Nor  did  they  produce  consequences  less  opposite. 
Louis   boldly   added   to    the    crown    whatever   he 
wrested  from  the  nobles.      Henry  undermined  his 
barons  by  encouraging  them  to   sell  their  lands, 
which  enriched  the  commons,   and  gave  them  a 
weight  in  the  legislature  unknown  to  their  prede- 
cessors.    But  while  these  great  revolutions  were 
carrying  on  in  two  kingdoms  with  which  Scotland 
was  intimately  connected,  little  alteration  happened 
there;  our  Kings  could  neither  extend  their  own 
prerogative  nor  enable  the  commons  to  encroach 
upon  the  aristocracy ;  the  nobles  not  only  retained 
most  of  their  ancient  privileges  and  possessions, 
but  continued  to  make  new  acquisitions. 

This  was  not  owing  to  the  inattention  of  our 
Princes,  or  to  their  want  of  ambition.  They  were 
abundantly  sensible  of  the  exorbitant  power  of  the 
nobility,  and  extremely  solicitous  to  humble  that 
order.  They  did  not,  however,  possess  means  suf- 
ficient for  accomplishing  this  end.     The  resources- 


OF  SCOTLAND.  37 

of  our  monarchs  were  tew,  and  the  progress  which 
they  made  was  of  course  inconsiderable.  But  as 
the  number  of  their  followers,  and  the  extent  of 
their  jurisdiction,  were  the  two  chief  circumstances 
which  rendered  the  nobles  formidable  ;  in  order  to 
counterbalance  the  one,  and  to  restrain  the  other, 
all  our  Kings  had  recourse  to  nearly  the  same  ex- 
pedients. 

I.  Among  nobles  of  a  fierce  courage  and  of  un- 
polished manners,  surrounded  with  vassals  bold 
and  licentious,  whom  they  were  bound  by  interest 
and  honour  to  protect,  the  causes  of  discord  were 
many  and  unavoidable.  As  the  contending  parties 
could  seldom  agree  in  acknowledging  the  authority 
of  any  common  superior  or  judge,  and  their  impa- 
tient spirit  would  seldom  wait  the  slow  decisions 
of  justice,  their  quarrels  were  usually  terminated 
by  the  sword.  The  offended  baron  assembled  his 
vassals,  and  wasted  the  lands  or  shed  the  blood  of 
his  enemies.  To  forgive  an  injury  was  mean  ;  to 
forbear  revenge  infamous  or  cowardly12.      Hence 

12  The  spirit  of  revenue  was  encouraged,  not  onlv  by  the  man- 
ners, I >  1  ■  t ,  what  is  more  remarkable,  bv  the  laws  of  those  ages.  If 
imy  person  thought  the  prosecution  of  an  injury  offered  to  his 
family  tun  troublesome  or  too  dangerous,  the  Saliqoe  laws  per- 
mitted him  publiriyto  desist  from  demanding  vengeance;  but 
the  same  laws,  in  order  to  punish  his  cowardice  and  want  of 
affection  to  bis  family,  deprived  him  of  the  ri^bt  of  succession. 
Hena alt's  Abrege  Chronol.  p.  81.  Amont;  the  Anglo-Saxons  we 
find  a  singular  institution  distinguished  by  the  name  of  soda' 
Hi  him;  a  voluntary  association,  the  object  whereof  was  the  per- 
sonal security  of  those  \\  bo  joined  in  it,  and  which  the  feebleness 
of  government  at  that  time  rendered  necessary.  Among  other 
regulations,  which  are  contained  in  one  of  these  still  extant,  the 
following  deserves  noti'-e  :  "  If  any  associate  shall  either  eat  or 
drink  with  a  person  who  lias  killed  any  member  of  the  aodalitium, 
unless  in  the  presence  of  the  King,  the  bishop,  or  the  count,  and 
unless  he  can  prove  that  he  did  not  know  the  person,  let  him  pay 
a  great  fine."  Ilickes,  Dissert.  Epistolar.  apud  Tbesaur.  Ling. 
Septentr.  vol.  i.  p.  21 . 

VOL.  I.  E 


38  THE  HISTORY  B.  I. 

quarrels  were  transmitted  from  father  to  son,  and, 
under  the  name  of  deadly  feuds,  subsisted  for  many 
generations  with  unmitigated  rancour.  It  was  the 
interest  of  the  crown  to  foment  rather  than  to  ex- 
tinguish these  quarrels  ;  and  by  scattering  or  che- 
rishing the  seeds  of  discord  among  the  nobles,  that 
union,  which  would  have  rendered  the  aristocracy 
invincible,  and  which  must  at  once  have  annihilated 
the  prerogative,  was  effectually  prevented.  To 
the  same  cause  our  Kings  were  indebted  for  the 
success  with  which  they  sometimes  attacked  the 
most  powerful  chieftains.  They  employed  private 
revenge  to  aid  the  impotence  of  public  laws,  and 
arming  against  the  person  who  had  incurred  their 
displeasure  those  rival  families  which  wished  his 
fall,  they  rewarded  their  service  by  sharing  among 
them  the  spoils  of  the  vanquished.  But  this  ex- 
pedient, though  it  served  to  humble  individuals, 
did  not  weaken  the  body  of  the  nobility.  Those 
who  were  now  the  instruments  of  their  Prince's 
vengeance  became,  in  a  short  time,  the  objects  of 
his  fear.  Having  acquired  power  and  wealth  by 
serving  the  crown,  they,  in  their  turn,  set  up  for 
independence :  and  though  there  might  be  a  fluc- 
tuation of  power  and  of  property ;  though  old  fa- 
milies fell,  and  new  ones  rose  upon  their  ruins  ; 
the  rights  of  the  aristocracy  remained  entire,  and 
its  vigour  unbroken. 

II.  As  the  administration  of  justice  is  one  of 
the  most  powerful  ties  between  a  King  and  his 
subjects,  all  our  Monarchs  were  at  the  utmost  pains 
to  circumscribe  the  jurisdiction  of  the  barons,  and 
to  extend  that  of  the  crown.  The  external  forms 
of  subordination  natural  to  the  feudal  system  fa- 
voured this  attempt.  An  appeal  lay  from  the 
judges  and  courts  of  the  barons  to  those  of  the 


OF  SCOTLAND.  39 

King.  The  right,  however,  of  judging  in  the  first 
instance  belonged  to  the  nobles,  and  they  easily 
found  means  to  defeat  the  effects  of  appeals,  as 
well  as  of  many  other  feudal  regulations.  The 
royal  jurisdiction  was  almost  confined  within  the 
narrow  limits  of  the  King's  demesnes,  beyond 
which  his  judges  claimed  indeed  much  authority, 
but  possessed  next  to  none.  Our  Kings  were  sen- 
sible of  these  limitations,  and  bore  them  with  im- 
patience. But  it  was  impossible  to  overturn  in  a 
moment  what  was  so  deeply  rooted  ;  or  to  strip  the 
nobles  at  once  of  privileges  which  they  had  held 
so  long,  and  which  were  wrought  almost  into  the 
frame  of  the  feudal  constitution.  To  accomplish 
this,  however,  was  an  object  of  uniform  and  anxious 
attention  to  all  our  Princes.  James  I.  led  the  way 
here,  as  well  as  in  other  instances,  towards  a  more 
regular  and  perfect  police.  He  made  choice,  among 
the  estates  of  parliament,  of  a  certain  number  of 
persons,  whom  he  distinguished  by  the  names  of 
Lords  of  Session,  and  appointed  them  to  hold  courts 
for  determining  civil  causes  three  times  in  the  year, 
and  forty  days  at  a  time,  in  whatever  place  he 
pleased  to  name.  Their  jurisdiction  extended  to 
all  matters  which  formerly  came  under  the  cog- 
nizance of  the  King's  council,  and,  being  a  com- 
mittee of  parliament,  their  decisions  were  final. 
James  II.  obtained  a  law,  annexing  all  regalities 
which  should  be  forfeited  to  the  crown,  and  declar- 
ing the  right  of  jurisdiction  to  be  unalienable  for 
the  future.  James  III.  imposed  severe  penalties 
upon  those  judges  appointed  by  the  barons,  whose 
decisions  should  be  found  on  a  review  to  be  un- 
just;  and,  by  many  other  regulations,  endeavoured 


40  THE  HISTORY  B.  I. 

to  extend  the  authority  of  his  own  court13.    James 
IV.  on  pretence  of  remedying-  the  inconveniences 
arising  from  the  short  terms  of  the  Court  of  Session, 
appointed  other  judges  called  Lords  of  Daily  Coun- 
cil.    The  Session  was  an  ambulatory  court,  and 
met  seldom ;    the  Daily  Council  was  fixed,  and 
sat  constantly  at  Edinburgh ;  and,  though  not  com- 
posed of  members  of  parliament,  the  same  powers 
which  the  Lords  of  Session  enjoyed  were  vested 
in  it.     At  last  James  V.  erected  a  new  court  that 
still  subsists,  and  which  he  named  the  College  of 
Justice,    the  judges   or  Senators  of  which    were 
called  Lords  of  Council  and  Session.     This  court 
not  only  exercised  the  same  jurisdiction  which  for- 
merly belonged  to  the  Session  and  Daily  Council, 
but  new  rights  were  added.     Privileges  of  great 
importance  were  granted  to  its  members,  its  forms 
were   prescribed,   its  terms  fixed,    and  regularity, 
power,   and   splendour  conferred  upon  it14.     The 
persons   constituted  judges   in   all   these   different 
courts  had,  in   many   respects,   the  advantage  of 
those  who  presided  in  the  courts  of  the  barons ; 
they  were  more  eminent  for  their  skill  in  law,  their 
rules  of  proceeding  were  more  uniform,   and  their 
decisions  more  consistent.      Such  judicatories  be- 
came the  objects  of  confidence  and  of  veneration. 
Men  willingly  submitted  their  property  to  their  de- 
termination, and  their  encroachments  on  the  juris- 
dictions of  the  nobles  were  popular,  and  for  that 
reason  successful.     By  devices  of  a  similar  nature, 
(he  jurisdiction    of  the   nobles  in  criminal   causes 
was  restrained,  and  the  authority  of  the  Court  of 

»a  Act  20.  P.  1  169.     Act  94.  P.  1493.     Act  99.  P.  1487. 
M  Keith,  A  pp.  7/3,  fiep. 


OF  SCOTLAND.  41 

Justiciary  extended.  The  crown,  in  this  parti- 
cular, gaining  insensibly  upon  the  nobles,  reco- 
vered more  ample  authority ;  and  the  King,  whose 
jurisdiction  once  resembled  that  of  a  baron  rather 
than  that  of  a  sovereign 15,  came  more  and  more  to 

15  The  most  perfect  idea  of  the  feudal  system  of  government 
may  be  attained  by  attending  to  the  state  of  German)1,  and  to  the 
History  of  France.     In  the  former,  the  feudal  institutions  still 
subsist  with  great  vigour  ;  and  though  altogether  abolished  in 
the  latter,  the  public  records  have  been  so  carefully  preserved, 
that  the  French  lawyers  and  antiquaries  have  been  enabled,  with 
more  certainty  and  precision  than  those  of  any  other  couutry  in 
Europe,  to  trace  its  rise,  its  progress,  and  revolutions.     In  Ger- 
many every  principality  may  be  considered  as  a  fief,  and  all  its 
great  princes  as  vassals,  holding  of  the  Emperor.     They  pos- 
sess all  the  feudal  privileges;  their  fiefs  are  perpetual;  their 
jurisdictions  within  their  own  territories  separate  and  extensive  ; 
and  the  great  offices  of  the  empire  are  all  hereditary,  and  annexed 
to  particular  families.     At  the  same  time  the  Emperor  retains 
many  of  the  prerogatives  of  the  feudal  monarchs.     Like  them, 
his  claims  and  pretensions  are  innumerable,  and  his  powers  small ; 
his  jurisdiction  within  his  own  demesnes  or  hereditary  countries 
is  complete  ;  beyond  the  bounds  of  these  it  is  almost  nothing  ; 
and  so  permanent  are  feudal  principles,  that  although  the  feudal 
system  be  overturned  in  almost  every  particular  state  in  Ger- 
many, and  although  the  greater  part  of  its  princes  have  become 
absolute,  the  original  feudal  constitution  of  the  Empire  still  re- 
mains, and  ideas  peculiar  to  that  form  of  government  direct  all 
its  operations,  and  determine  the  rights  of  all  its  princes.     Our 
observations,  with  regard  to  the  limited  jurisdiction  of  kings  un- 
der the  feudal  governments,  are  greatly  illustrated  by  what  hap- 
pened in  France.     The  feebleness  and  dotage  of  the  descendants 
of  Charlemagne  encouraged  the  peers  to  usurp  an  independent 
jurisdiction.     Nothing  remained  in  the  hands  of  the  crown  ;  all 
was  seized  by  them.     When  Hugh  Capet  ascended  the  throne, 
A.  D.  987,    he  kept  possession  of  his   private  patrimony,  the 
Comte  of  Paris;  and  all  the  jurisdiction  which   the  Kings  his 
successors  exercised  for  some  time,  was  within  its  territories. 
There  were  only  four  towns  in  France  where  he  could  establish 
(irands  Jiaillis,  or  royal  judges  :  all  the  other  lands,  towns,  and 
bailliages,  belonged  to  the  nobles.     The  methods  to  which  the 
French  monarchs  had  recourse  for  extending  their  jurisdiction 
were  exactly  similar  to  those  employed  by  our  princes.     He- 
naalt's  Abrege,  p. G17,  &c.     De  ['Esprit  des  Loix,  liv.  xxx.  ch. 
20,  &C. 

E2 


42  THE  HISTORY  B.  I. 

be  considered  as  the  head  of  the  community,  and 
the  supreme  dispenser  of  justice  to  his  people. 
These  acquisitions  of  our  Kings,  however,  though 
comparatively  great,  were  in  reality  inconsiderable  ; 
and,  notwithstanding  all  their  efforts,  many  of  the 
separate  jurisdictions  possessed  by  the  nobles  re- 
mained in  great  vigour;  and  their  final  abolition 
was  reserved  to  a  distant  and  more  happy  period. 

But  besides  these  methods  of  defending  their 
prerogative  and  humbling  the  aristocracy,  which 
may  be  considered  as  common  to  all  our  Princes, 
we  shall  find,  by  taking  a  view  of  their  reigns, 
that  almost  every  one  of  our  Kings,  from  Robert 
Bruce  to  James  V.  had  formed  some  particular 
system  for  depressing  the  authority  of  the  nobles, 
which  was  the  object  both  of  their  jealousy  and 
terror.  This  conduct  of  our  monarchs,  if  we  rest 
satisfied  with  the  accounts  of  their  historians,  must 
be  considered  as  flowing  entirely  from  their  resent- 
ment against  particular  noblemen;  and  all  their 
attempts  to  humble  them  must  be  viewed  as  the 
sallies  of  private  passion,  not  as  the  consequences 
of  any  general  plan  of  policy.  But  though  some  of 
their  actions  may  be  imputed  to  those  passions, 
though  the  different  genius  of  the  men,  the  temper 
of  the  times,  and  the  state  of  the  nation,  neces- 
sarily occasioned  great  variety  in  their  schemes  ; 
yet,  without  being  chargeable  with  excessive  re- 
finement, we  may  affirm  that  their  end  was  uni- 
formly the  same;  and  that  the  project  of  reducing 
the  power  of  the  aristocracy,  sometimes  avowed 
and  pursued  with  vigour,  sometimes  concealed  or 
seemingly  suspended,  was  never  altogether  aban- 
doned. 

No  Prince  was  ever  more  indebted  to  his  nobles 
than  Robert  Bruce.     Their  valour  conquered  the 


OF  SCOTLAND.  43 

kingdom,  and  placed  him  on  the  throne.  His  gra- 
titude and  generosity  bestowed  on  them  the  lands 
of  the  vanquished.  Property  has  seldom  under- 
gone greater  or  more  sudden  revolutions  than  those 
to  which  it  was  subject  at  that  time  in  Scotland. 
Edward  I.  having  forfeited  the  estates  of  most  of 
the  ancient  Scottish  barons,  granted  them  to  his 
English  subjects.  These  were  expelled  by  the 
Scots,  and  their  lands  seized  by  new  masters. 
Amidst  such  rapid  changes  confusion  was  unavoid- 
able ;  and  many  possessed  their  lands  by  titles 
extremely  defective.  During  one  of  those  truces 
between  the  two  nations,  occasioned  rather  by  their 
being  weary  of  war  than  desirous  of  peace,  Robert 
formed  a  scheme  for  checking  the  growing  power 
and  wealth  of  the  nobles.  He  summoned  them  to 
appear  and  to  show  by  what  rights  they  held 
their  lands.  They  assembled  accordingly ;  and  the 
question  being  put,  they  started  up  at  once,  and 
drew  their  swords  :  "  By  these,"  said  they,  "  we 
acquired  our  lands,  and  with  these  we  will  defend 
them."  The  King,  intimidated  by  their  boldness, 
prudently  dropped  the  project.  But  so  deeply  did 
they  resent  this  attack  upon  their  order,  that,  not- 
withstanding Robert's  popular  and  splendid  vir- 
tues, it  occasioned  a  dangerous  conspiracy  against 
his  life. 

David  his  son,  at  first  an  exile  in  France,  after- 
ward a  prisoner  in  England,  and  involved  in  con- 
tinual war  with  Edward  III.  had  not  leisure  to 
attend  to  the  internal  police  of  his  kingdom,  or  to 
think  of  retrenching  the  privileges  of  the  nobility. 

Our  historians  have  been  more  careful  to  relate 
the  military  than  the  civil  transactions  of  the  reign 
of  Robert  11.      Skirmishes  and  inroads  of  little 


44  THE  HISTORY  B.  I. 

consequence  they  describe  minutely :  but  with  re- 
gard to  every  thing  that  happened  during  several 
years  of  tranquillity,  they  are  altogether  silent. 

The  feeble  administration  of  Robert  III.  must 
likewise  be  passed  over  slightly.  A  Prince  of  a 
mean  genius,  and  of  a  frail  and  sickly  constitu- 
tion, was  not  a  fit  person  to  enter  the  lists  with 
active  and  martial  barons,  or  to  attempt  wresting 
from  them  any  of  their  rights. 

The  civil  transactions  in  Scotland  are  better 
known  since  the  beginning  of  the  reign  of  James  I. 
and  a  complete  series  of  our  laws  supplies  the  de- 
fects of  our  historians.  The  English  made  some 
amends  for  their  injustice  in  detaining  that  Prince 
a  prisoner,  by  their  generous  care  of  his  education. 
During  his  long  residence  in  England,  he  had  an 
opportunity  of  observing  the  feudal  system  in  a 
more  advanced  state,  and  refined  from  many  of  the 
imperfections  which  still  adhered  to  it  in  his  own 
kingdom.  He  saw  there,  nobles  great,  but  not 
independent ;  a  king  powerful,  though  far  from  ab- 
solute :  he  saw  a  regular  administration  of  govern- 
ment; wise  laws  enacted;  and  a  nation  flourishing 
and  happy,  because  all  ranks  of  men  were  accus- 
tomed to  obey  them.  Full  of  these  ideas,  he  re- 
turned into  his  native  country,  which  presented  to 
him  a  very  different  scene.  The  royal  authority, 
never  great,  was  now  contemptible,  by  having  been 
so  long  delegated  to  Regents.  The  ancient  patri- 
mony and  revenues  of  the  crown  were  almost  to- 
tally alienated.  During  his  long  absence  the  name 
of  King  was  little  known,  and  less  regarded.  The 
license  of  many  years  had  rendered  the  nobles  inde- 
pendent. Universal  anarchy  prevailed.  The  weak 
were  exposed  to  the  rapine  and  oppression  of  the 


OF  SCOTLAND.  45 

strong.  Iii  every  corner  some  barbarous  chieftain 
ruled  at  pleasure,  and  neither  feared  the  King  nor 
pitied  the  people16. 

James  was  too  wise  a  Prince  to  employ  open 
force  to  correct  such  inveterate  evils.  Neither  the 
men  nor  the  times  would  have  borne  it.  He  ap- 
plied the  gentler  and  less  offensive  remedy  of  laws 
and  statutes.  In  a  parliament  held  immediately 
after  his  return,  he  gained  the  confidence  of  his 
people  by  many  wise  laws,  tending  visibly  to  re- 
establish, order,  tranquillity,  and  justice  in  the 
kingdom.  But  at  the  same  time  that  he  endea- 
voured to  secure  these  blessings  to  his  subjects,  he 
discovered  his  intention  to  recover  those  posses- 
sions of  which  the  crown  had  been  unjustly  be- 
reaved ;  and  for  that  purpose  obtained  an  act  by 
which  he  was  empowered  to  summon  such  as  had 
obtained  crown  lands  during  the  three  last  reigns, 
to  produce  the  rights  by  which  they  held  them17. 
As  this  statute  threatened  the  property  of  the 
nobles,  another  which  passed  in  a  subsequent  par- 
liament aimed  a  dreadful  blow  at  their  power.  By 
it  the  leagues  and  combinations  which  we  have 
already  described,  and  which  rendered  the  nobles 
so  formidable  to  the  crown,  were  declared  unlaw- 
ful18. Encouraged  by  this  success  in  the  begin- 
ning of  his  enterprise,  James's  next  step  was  still 

16  A  coteuiporary  monkish  writer  describes  these  calamities 
very  feelingly  in  his  rude  Latin  :  "  In  diebus  illis,  non  erat  lex 
in  Scotia,  sed  quilibet  potentiorum  juniorem  oppressit ;  et  totum 
regnum  fuit  unum  latrocinium;  homicidia,  deprsedationes,  incen- 
dia,  et  camera  maleficia  remanserunt  impunita  ;  et  justitia  rele- 
gata  extra  terminos  regni  exulavit."  Chartular.  Morav.  apud 
Innes  Essay,  vol.  i.  p.  272. 

17  Act  'J.*  P.  1421.  IH  Act  30.  P.  1124. 


46  THE  HISTORY  B.  I. 

bolder  and  more  decisive.  During  the  sitting  of 
parliament  he  seized,  at  once,  his  cousin  Murdo, 
duke  of  Albany,  and  his  sons;  the  Earls  of  Doug- 
las, Lennox,  Angus,  March,  and  above  twenty 
other  peers  and  barons  of  prime  rank.  To  all  of 
them,  however,  he  was  immediately  reconciled, 
except  to  Albany  and  his  sons,  and  Lennox.  These 
were  tried  by  their  peers,  and  condemned ;  for 
what  crime  is  now  unknown.  Their  execution 
struck  the  whole  order  with  terror,  and  their  for- 
feiture added  considerable  possessions  to  the  crown. 
He  seized,  likewise,  the  earldoms  of  Buchan  and 
Strathern,  upon  different  pretexts ;  and  that  of 
Mar  fell  to  him  by  inheritance.  The  patience  and 
inactivity  of  the  nobles,  while  the  King  was  pro- 
ceeding so  rapidly  towards  aggrandizing  the  crown, 
are  amazing.  The  only  obstruction  he  met  with 
was  from  a  slight  insurrection  headed  by  the  Duke 
of  Albany's  youngest  son,  and  that  was  easily  sup- 
pressed. The  splendour  and  presence  of  a  King, 
to  which  the  great  men  had  been  long  unaccus- 
tomed, inspired  reverence  :  James  was  a  Prince  of 
great  abilities,  and  conducted  his  operations  with 
much  prudence.  He  was  in  friendship  with  Eng- 
land, and  closely  allied  with  the  French  King :  he 
was  adored  by  the  people,  who  enjoyed  unusual 
security  and  happiness  under  his  administration  : 
and  all  his  acquisitions,  however  fatal  to  the  body 
of  the  nobles,  had  been  gained  by  attacks  upon 
individuals ;  were  obtained  by  decisions  of  law, 
and,  being  founded  on  circumstances  peculiar  to 
the  persons  who  suffered,  might  excite  murmurs 
and  apprehensions,  but  afforded  no  colourable  pre- 
text for  a  general  rebellion.     It  was  not  so  with 


OF  SCOTLAND.  47 

the  next  attempt  which  the  King-  made.  Encou- 
raged by  the  facility  with  which  he  had  hitherto 
advanced,  he  ventured  upon  a  measure  that  irritated 
the  whole  body  of  the  nobility,  and  which  the 
events  show  either  to  have  been  entered  into  with 
too  much  precipitancy,  or  to  have  been  carried  on 
with  too  much  violence.  The  father  of  George 
Dunbar,  Earl  of  March,  had  taken  arms  against 
Robert  III.  the  King's  father;  but  that  crime  had 
been  pardoned,  and  his  lands  restored  by  Robert 
Duke  of  Albany.  James,  on  pretext  that  the 
Regent  had  exceeded  his  power,  and  that  it  was 
the  prerogative  of  the  King  alone  to  pardon  trea- 
son, or  to  alienate  lands  annexed  to  the  crown, 
obtained  a  sentence  declaring  the  pardon  to  be 
void,  and  depriving  Dunbar  of  the  earldom.  Many 
of  the  great  men  held  lands  by  no  other  right  than 
what  they  derived  from  grants  of  the  two  Dukes 
of  Albany.  Such  a  decision,  though  they  had 
reason  to  expect  it  in  consequence  of  the  statute 
which  the  King  had  obtained,  occasioned  a  general 
alarm.  Though  Dunbar  was  at  present  the  only 
sufferer,  the  precedent  might  be  extended,  and 
their  titles  to  possessions  which  they  considered  as 
the  rewards  of  their  valour,  might  be  subjected  to 
the  review  of  courts  of  law,  whose  forms  of  pro- 
ceeding and  jurisdiction  were  in  a  martial  age 
little  known,  and  extremely  odious.  Terror  and 
discontent  spread  fast  upon  this  discovery  of  the 
King's  intentions  ;  the  common  danger  called  on 
the  whole  order  to  unite,  and  to  make  one  bold 
stand  before  they  were  stripped  successively  of 
their  acquisitions,  and  reduced  to  a  state  of  poverty 
and  insignificance.  The  prevalence  of  these  senti- 
ments among  the  nobles  encouraged  a  few  despe- 


48  THE  HISTORY  B.  I. 

rate  men,  the  friends  or  followers  of  those  who 
had  been  the  chief  sufferers  under  the  King's  ad- 
ministration,  to  form  a  conspiracy  against  his  life. 
The  first  uncertain  intelligence  of  this  was  brought 
him  while  he  lay  in  his  camp  before  Roxburgh 
Castle.  He  durst  not  confide  in  nobles,  to  whom 
he  had  given  so  many  causes  of  disgust,  but  in- 
stantly dismissed  them  and  their  vassals,  and  re- 
tiring to  a  monastery  near  Perth,  was  soon  after 
murdered  there  in  the  most  cruel  manner.  All  our 
historians  mention  with  astonishment  this  circum- 
stance, of  the  King's  disbanding  his  army  at  a 
time  when  it  was  so  necessary  for  his  preservation. 
A  King,  say  they,  surrounded  with  his  barons,  is 
secure  from  secret  treason,  and  may  defy  open 
rebellion.  But  those  very  barons  were  the  per- 
sons whom  he  chiefly  dreaded ;  and  it  is  evident, 
from  this  review  of  his  administration,  that  he  had 
greater  reason  to  apprehend  danger  than  to  expect 
defence  from  their  hands.  It  was  the  misfortune 
of  James,  that  his  maxims  and  manners  were  too 
refined  for  the  age  in  which  he  lived.  Happv  ! 
had  he  reigned  in  a  kingdom  more  civilized  ;  his 
love  of  peace,  of  justice,  and  of  elegance  would 
have  rendered  his  schemes  successful ;  and,  instead 
of  perishing  because  he  had  attempted  too  much,  a 
grateful  people  would  have  applauded  and  se- 
conded his  efforts  to  reform  and  improve  them. 

Crichton,  the  most  able  man  of  those  who  had 
the  direction  of  affairs  during  the  minority  of  James 
II.  had  been  the  minister  of  James  I.  and  well 
acquainted  with  his  resolution  of  humbling  the  no- 
bility. He  did  not  relinquish  tho  design,  and  he 
endeavoured  to  inspire  his  pupil  with  ihe  same  sen- 
timents.    But  what  .lames  had  attempted  to  effect 


OF  SCOTLAND.  4D 

slowly  and  bv  legal  means,  his  son  and  Crichton 
pursued  with  the  impetuosity  natural  to  Scotsmen, 
and  with  the  fierceness  peculiar  to  that  age.  Wil- 
liam, the  sixth  Earl  of  Douglas,  was  the  first  vic- 
tim to  their  barbarous  policy.  That  young  noble- 
man (as  we  have  already  observed),  contemning  the 
authority  of  an  infant  Prince,  almost  openly  re- 
nounced his  allegiance,  and  aspired  to  indepen- 
dence. Crichton,  too  high  spirited  to  bear  such  an 
insult,  but  too  weak  to  curb  or  bring  to  justice  so 
powerful  an  offender,  decoyed  him  by  many  pro- 
mises to  an  interview  in  the  castle  of  Edinburgh, 
and,  notwithstanding  these,  murdered  both  him 
and  his  brother.  Crichton,  however,  gained  little 
by  this  act  of  treachery,  which  rendered  him  uni- 
versally odious.  William,  the  eighth  Earl  of  Doug- 
las, was  no  less  powerful,  and  no  less  formidable 
to  the  crown.  By  forming  the  league  which  we 
already  mentioned  with  the  Earl  of  Crawford  and 
other  barons,  he  had  united  against  his  sovereign 
almost  one  half  of  his  kingdom.  But  his  credulitv 
led  him  into  the  same  snare  which  had  been  fatal 
to  the  former  Earl.  Belying  on  the  King's  pro- 
mises, who  had  now  attained  to  the  years  of  man- 
hood, and  having  obtained  a  safe  conduct  under 
the  great  seal,  he  ventured  to  meet  him  in  Stirling 
Castle.  James  urged  him  to  dissolve  that  dan- 
gerous confederacy  into  which  he  had  entered ;  the 
Earl  obstinately  refused.  "  If  you  will  not,"  said 
the  enraged  Monarch,  drawing  his  dagger,  "  this 
shall;"  and  stabbed  him  to  the  heart.  An  action 
so  unworthy  of  a  King  filled  the  nation  with  asto- 
nishment and  with  horror.  The  Earl's  vassals  ran 
to  arms  with  the  utmost,  fury,  and  dragging  tin 
safe  conduct,  which  the  King  had  granted  and 
VOL.  i.  f 


50  THE  HISTORY  B.  I. 

violated,  at  a  horse's  tail,  they  marched  toward? 
Stirling,  burned  the  town,  and  threatened  to  besiege 
the  castle.  An  accommodation  however  ensued; 
on  what  terms  is  not  known.  But  the  King's  jea- 
lousy, and  the  new  Earl's  power  and  resentment, 
prevented  it  from  being  of  long  continuance.  Both 
took  the  field  at  the  head  of  their  armies,  and 
met  near  Abercorn.  That  of  the  Earl,  composed 
chiefly  of  borderers,  was  far  superior  to  the  King's 
both  in  number  and  in  valour ;  and  a  single  battle 
must,  in  all  probability,  have  decided  whether  the 
house  of  Stuart  or  of  Douglas  was  henceforth  to 
possess  the  throne  of  Scotland.  But  while  his 
troops  impatiently  expected  the  signal  to  engage, 
the  Earl  ordered  them  to  retire  to  their  camp ;  and 
Sir  James  Hamilton  of  Cadyow,  the  person  in 
whom  he  placed  the  greatest  confidence,  convinced 
of  his  want  of  genius  to  improve  an  opportunity, 
or  of  his  want  of  courage  to  seize  a  crown,  de- 
serted him  that  very  night.  This  example  was 
followed  by  many ;  and  the  Earl,  despised  or  for- 
saken by  all,  was  soon  driven  out  of  the  kingdom, 
and  obliged  to  depend  for  his  subsistence  on  the 
friendship  of  the  King  of  England.  The  ruin  of 
this  great  family,  which  had  so  long  rivaled  and 
overawed  the  crown,  and  the  terror  with  which 
such  an  example  of  unsuccessful  ambition  filled  the 
nobles,  secured  the  King,  for  some  time,  from  op- 
position ;  and  the  royal  authority  remained  uncon- 
trolled and  almost  absolute.  James  did  not  suffer 
this  favourable  interval  to  pass  unimproved  ;  he 
procured  the  consent  of  parliament  to  laws  more 
advantageous  to  the  prerogative,  and  more  subver- 
sive of  the  privileges  of  the  aristocracy,  than  were 
ever  obtained  by  any  former  or  subsequent  mo- 
narch of  Scotland. 


OF  SCOTLAND.  51 

By  one  of  these,  not  only  all  the  vast  posses- 
sions of  the  Earl  of  Douglas  were  annexed  to  the 
crown,  but  all  prior  and  future  alienations  of  crown 
lands  were  declared  to  be  void  ;  and  the  King  was 
empowered  to  seize  them  at  pleasure,  without  any 
process  or  form  of  law,  and  oblige  the  possessors 
to  refund  whatever  they  had  received  from  them19. 
A  dreadful  instrument  of  oppression  in  the  hands 
of  a  Prince  ! 

Another  law  prohibited  the  wardenship  of  the 
marches  to  be  granted  hereditarily  ;  restrained,  in 
several  instances,  the  jurisdiction  of  that  office  ; 
and  extended  the  authority  of  the  King's  courts-0. 

By  a  third,  it  was  enacted  that  no  Regality,  or 
exclusive  right  of  administering  justice  within  a 
man's  own  lands,  should  be  granted  in  time  to 
come,  without  the  consent  of  parliament21;  a  con- 
dition which  implied  almost  an  express  prohibition. 
Those  nobles  who  already  possessed  that  great 
privilege  would  naturally  be  solicitous  to  prevent 
it  from  becoming  common,  by  being  bestowed  on 
many.  Those  who  had  not  themselves  attained  it 
would  envy  others  the  acquisition  of  such  a  flatter- 
ing distinction,  and  both  would  concur  in  rejecting 
the  claims  of  new  pretenders. 

By  a  fourth  act,  all  new  grants  of  hereditary 
offices  were  prohibited,  and  those  obtained  since 
the  death  of  the  last  King  were  revoked22. 

Each  of  these  statutes  undermined  some  of  the 
great  pillars  on  which  the  power  of  the  aristocracy 
rested.  During  the  remainder  of  his  reign  this 
Prince  pursued  the  plan  which  he  had  begun  with 
the  utmost  vigour  ;   and  had  not  a  sudden  death, 

19  Act  11.  P.  1 155.  °°  Ibid.  Act.  12. 

21  Act 43.  P.  1455.  "Act  11. 


5*2  THE  HISTORY  B.  I. 

occasioned  by  the  splinter  of  a  cannon  which  burst 
near  him  at  the  siege  of  Roxburgh,  prevented  his 
progress,  he  wanted  neither  genius  nor  courage  to 
perfect  it ;  and  Scotland  might,  in  all  probability, 
have  been  the  first  kingdom  in  Europe  which  would 
have  seen  the  subversion  of  the  feudal  system. 

James  III.  discovered  no  less  eagerness  than  his 
father  or  grandfather  to  humble  the  nobility ;  but, 
far  inferior  to  either  of  them  in  abilities  and  address, 
he  adopted  a  plan  extremely  impolitic,  and  his 
reign  was  disastrous,  as  well  as  his  end  tragical. 
Under  the  feudal  governments,  the  nobles  were 
not  only  the  King's  ministers,  and  possessed  of  all 
the  great  offices  of  power  or  of  trust ;  they  were 
likewise  his  companions  and  favourites,  and  hardly 
any  but  they  approached  his  person  or  were  enti- 
tled to  his  regard.  But  James,  who  both  feared 
and  hated  his  nobles,  kept  them  at  an  unusual  dis- 
tance, and  bestowed  every  mark  of  confidence  and 
affection  upon  a  few  mean  persons,  of  professions 
so  dishonourable  as  ought  to  have  rendered  them 
unworthy  of  his  presence.  Shut  up  with  these  in 
his  castle  of  Stirling,  he  seldom  appeared  in  public, 
and  amused  himself  in  architecture,  music,  and 
other  arts,  which  were  then  little  esteemed.  The 
nobles  beheld  the  power  and  favour  of  these  mi- 
nions with  indignation.  Even  the  sanguinary  mea- 
sures of  his  father  provoked  them  less  than  his 
neglect.  Individuals  alone  suffered  by  the  former; 
by  the  latter,  every  man  thought  himself  injured 
because  all  were  contemned.  Their  discontent 
was  much  heightened  by  the  King's  recalling  all 
rights  to  crown  lands,  hereditary  offices,  regalities, 
and  every  other  concession  which  was  detrimental 
to  his  prerogative,  and  which  had  been  extorted 


OF  SCOTLAND.  53 

timing  his  minority.     Combinations  among  them- 
selves, secret  intrigues  with  England,  and  all  the 
usual  preparatives  for  civil  war,  were  the  effects  of 
their   resentment.      Alexander    Duke    of  Albany, 
and  John  Earl  of  Mar,  the  King's  brothers,   two 
young  men  of  turbulent  and  ambitious  spirits,  and 
incensed  against  James,  who  treated  them  with  the 
same  coldness  as  he  did  the  other  great  men,  en- 
tered deeply  into  all  their  cabals.     The  King  de- 
tected their  designs  before  they  were  ripe  for  exe- 
cution, and,  seizing  his  two  brothers,  committed  the 
Duke  of  Albany  to  Edinburgh  Castle.     The  Earl 
of  Mar,  having  remonstrated  with  too  much  bold- 
ness against  the  King's  conduct,  was  murdered,  if 
we  may  believe  our  historians,  by  his  command. 
Albany,  apprehensive  of  the  same  fate,  made  his 
escape  out   of  the  Castle  and    fled    into   France. 
Concern  for  the  King's  honour,  or  indignation  at 
his  measures,  were  perhaps  the  motives  which  first 
induced  him  to  join  the  malcontents.     But  James's 
attachment  to  favourites  rendering  him  every  day 
more  odious    to  the   nobles,   the  prospect  of  the 
advantages  which  might  be  derived  from  their  ge- 
neral disaffection,  added  to  the  resentment  which 
he  felt  on  account  of  his  brother's  death  and  his 
own  injuries,  soon  inspired  Albany  with  more  am- 
bitious and  criminal   thoughts.      He   concluded   a 
treaty  with  Edward  IV.  of  England,  in  which  he 
assumed  the  name  of  Alexander  King  of  Scots  ; 
and,  in  return  for  the  assistance  which  was  pro- 
mised   him    towards    dethroning   his    brother,    he 
bound  himself,  as  soon  as  he  was  put  in  possession 
of  the  kingdom,  to  swear  fealty  and  do  homage  to 
the  English  monarch,  to  renounce  the  ancient  alli- 
ance with   France,    to  contract  a  new  one   with 

F  2 


54  THE  HISTORY  B.  I. 

England,  and  to  surrender  some  of  the  strongest 
castles  and  most  valuable  counties  in  Scotland23. 
That  aid,  which  the  Duke  so  basely  purchased  at 
the  price  of  his  own  honour  and  the  independence 
of  his  country,  was  punctually  granted  him,  and 
the  Duke  of  Gloucester  with  a  powerful  army  con- 
ducted him  towards  Scotland.     The  danger  of  a 
foreign  invasion  obliged  James  to  implore  the  as- 
sistance  of  those   nobles  whom   he   had  so  long 
treated  with  contempt.      Some  of  them  were  in 
close  confederacy  with  the  Duke  of  Albany,  and 
approved  of  all  his  pretensions.      Others  were  im- 
patient for  any  event  which  would   restore  their 
order  to  its   ancient  preeminence.     They  seemed, 
however,  to  enter  with  zeal  into  the  measures  of 
their    sovereign  for  the   defence  of  the   kingdom 
against  its  invaders24,  and  took  the   field  at  the 
head  of  a  powerful  army  of  their  followers,  but  with 
a  stronger  disposition  to  redress  their  own  griev- 
ances than  to  annoy  the  enemy ;  and  with  a  fixed 
resolution  of  punishing  those  minions  whose  inso- 
lence they  could  no  longer  tolerate.     This  resolu- 
tion they  executed  in  the  camp  near  Lauder,  with 
a  military  dispatch  and  rigour.    Having  previously 
concerted  their  plan,  the  Earls  of  Angus,  lluntly, 
Lennox,  followed  by  almost  all  the  barons  of  chief 
note  in  the  army,  forcibly  entered  the  apartment  of 
their  sovereign,  seized  all  his  favourites  except  one 
Ramsay,  whom  they  could  not  tear  from  the  King, 
in   whose  arms  he  took  shelter,  and,  without  any 
form  of  trial,  hanged  them  instantly  over  a  bridge. 
Among  the   most   remarkable  of  those   who    had 
engrossed   the  King's   affection,  were  Cochran,  a 

23  Abercr.  Mart.  Atch.  vol.  ii.  p.  443. 
-'  Black  Acts,  fol.  GJ. 


OF  SCOTLAND.  5t> 

mason  ;  Hommil,  a  tailor;  Leonard,  a  smith; 
Rogers,  a  musician  ;  and  Torsifan,  a  fencing  mas- 
ter. So  despicable  a  retinue  discovers  the  capri- 
ciousness  of  James's  character,  and  accounts  for 
tliu  indignation  of  the  nobles  when  they  beheld  the 
favour  due  to  them  bestowed  on  such  unworthy 
objects. 

James  had  no  reason  to  coniide  in  an  army  so 
little  under  his  command,  and,  dismissing  it,  shut 
himself  up  in  the  castle  of  Edinburgh.  After  vari- 
ous intrigues,  Albany's  lauds  and  honours  were  at 
length  restored  to  him,  and  he  seemed  even  to 
have  regained  his  brother's  favour  by  some  impor- 
tant services.  But  their  friendship  was  not  of  long 
duration.  James  abandoned  himself  once  more  to 
the  guidance  of  favourites  ;  and  the  fate  of  those 
who  had  suffered  at  Lauder  did  not  deter  others 
from  courting  that  dangerous  preeminence.  Al- 
bany, on  pretext  that  an  attempt  had  been  made  to 
take  away  his  life  by  poison,  fled  from  court,  and, 
retiring  to  his  castle  at  Dunbar,  drew  thither  a 
greater  number  of  barons  than  attended  on  the 
King  himself.  At  the  same  time  he  renewed  his 
former  confederacy  with  Edward;  the  Earl  of  An- 
gus openly  negotiated  that  infamous  treaty ;  other 
barons  were  ready  to  concur  with  it;  and  if  the 
sudden  death  of  Edward  had  not  prevented  Alba- 
ny's receiving  any  aid  from  England,  the  crown  of 
Scotland  would  probably  have  been  the  reward  of 
this  unworthy  combination  with  the  enemies  of  his 
country.  But,  instead  of  any  hopes  of  reigning  in 
Scotland,  he  found,  upon  the  death  of  Edward,  that 
he  could  not  reside  there  in  safety;  and  flying  first 
to  England  and  then  to  France,  he  seems  from  that 
time  to  have  taken  no  part  in  the  affairs  of  his  na- 


66  THE  HISTORY  B.  I. 

tive  country.  Emboldened  by  his  retreat,  the  King 
and  his  ministers  multiplied  the  insults  which  they 
offered  to  the  nobility.  A  standing  guard,  a  thing 
unknown  under  the  feudal  governments,  and  incon- 
sistent with  the  familiarity  and  confidence  with 
which  monarchs  then  lived  amidst  their  nobles, 
was  raised  for  the  King's  defence,  and  the  com- 
mand of  it  given  to  Ramsay,  lately  created  Earl  of 
Bothwell,  the  same  person  who  had  so  narrowly 
escaped  when  his  companions  were  put  to  death 
at  Lauder.  As  if  this  precaution  had  not  been  suf- 
ficient, a  proclamation  was  issued,  forbidding  any 
person  to  appear  in  arms  within  the  precincts  of 
the  court25;  which,  at  a  time  when  no  man  of  rank 
left  his  own  house  without  a  numerous  retinue  of 
armed  followers,  was,  in  effect,  debarring  the  no- 
bles from  all  access  to  the  King.  James,  at  the 
same  time,  became  fonder  of  retirement  than  ever, 
and  sunk  in  indolence  or  superstition,  or  attentive 
only  to  amusements,  devolved  his  whole  authority 
upon  his  favourites.  So  many  injuries  provoked 
the  most  considerable  nobles  to  take  arms;  and 
having  persuaded  or  obliged  the  Duke  of  Rothesay, 
the  King's  eldest  son,  a  youth  of  fifteen,  to  set  him- 
self at  their  head,  they  openly  declared  their  inten- 
tion of  depriving  James  of  a  crown,  of  which  he 
had  discovered  himself  to  be  so  unworthy.  Roused 
by  this  danger,  the  King  quitted  his  retirement, 
took  the  field,  and  encountered  them  near  Ban- 
nockburn  ;  but  the  valour  of  the  borderers,  of  whom 
the  army  of  the  malcontents  was  chiefly  composed, 
soon  put  his  troops  to  flight,  and  he  himself  was 
slain  in  the  pursuit.  Suspicion,  indolence,  immo- 
derate attachment  to  favourites,  and  all  the  vices 

25  Ferrcrius,  398. 


OF  SCOTLAND.  57 

of  a  feeble  mind,  are  visible  in  his  whole  conduct; 
but  the  character  of  a  cruel  and  unrelenting  tyrant 
seems  to  be  unjustly  affixed  to  him  by  our  histo- 
rians. His  neglect  of  the  nobles  irritated,  but  did 
not  weaken  them ;  and  their  discontent,  the  immo- 
derate ambition  of  his  two  brothers,  and  their  un- 
natural confederacies  with  England,  were  sufficient 
to  have  disturbed  a  more  vigorous  administration, 
and  to  have  rendered  a  Prince  of  superior  talents 
unhappy. 

The  indignation  which  many  persons  of  rank  ex- 
pressed against  the  conduct  of  the  conspirators,  to- 
gether with  the  terror  of  the  sentence  of  excommu- 
nication which  the  Pope  pronounced  against  them, 
obliged  them  to  use  their  victory  with  great  mode- 
ration and  humanity.  Being  conscious  how  detes- 
table the  crime  of  imbruing  their  hands  in  the  blood 
of  their  Sovereign  appeared,  they  endeavoured  to 
regain  the  good  opinion  of  their  countrymen,  and  to 
atone  for  the  treatment  of  the  father  by  their  loy- 
alty and  duty  towards  the  son.  They  placed  him 
instantly  on  the  throne,  and  the  whole  kingdom 
soon  united  in  acknowledging  his  authority. 

James  IV.  was  naturally  generous  and  brave ; 
he  felt  in  a  high  degree  all  the  passions  which 
animate  a  young  and  noble  mind.  Me  loved  mag- 
nificence, he  delighted  in  war,  and  was  eager  to 
obtain  fame.  During  his  reign  the  ancient  and  he- 
reditary enmity  between  the  King  and  nobles  seems 
almost  entirely  to  have  ceased.  He  envied  not 
their  splendour,  because  it  contributed  to  the  orna- 
ment of  his  court ;  nor  did  he  dread  their  power, 
which  he  considered  as  the  security  of  his  kingdom, 
not  as  an  object  of  terror  to  himself.  This  confi- 
dence on   his   part  met  with  the  proper  return  of 


58  THE  HISTORY  B.  I. 

duty  and  affection  on  theirs ;  and,  in  his  war  with 
England,  he  experienced  how  much  a  King'  be- 
loved by  his  nobles  is  able  to  perform.  Though 
the  ardour  of  his  courage  and  the  spirit  of  chivalry, 
rather  than  the  prospect  of  any  national  advantage, 
induced  him  to  declare  war  against  England,  such 
was  the  zeal  of  his  subjects  for  the  King's  glory, 
that  he  was  followed  by  as  gallant  an  army  as  ever 
any  of  his  ancestors  had  led  upon  English  ground. 
But  though  James  himself  formed  no  scheme  dan- 
gerous or  detrimental  to  the  aristocracy,  his  reign 
was  distinguished  by  an  event  extremely  fatal  to  it; 
and  one  accidental  blow  humbled  it  more  than  all 
the  premeditated  attacks  of  preceding  Kings.  In 
the  rash  and  unfortunate  battle  of  Flowden  a  brave 
nobility  chose  rather  to  die  than  to  desert  their  so- 
vereign. Twelve  earls,  thirteen  lords,  five  eldest 
sons  of  noblemen,  and  an  incredible  number  of 
barons,  fell  with  the  King26.  The  whole  body  of 
the  nobles  long  and  sensibly  felt  this  disaster;  and 
if  a  Prince  of  full  age  had  then  ascended  the 
throne,  their  consternation  and  feebleness  would 
have  afforded  him  advantages  which  no  former 
monarch  ever  possessed. 

But  James  V.  who  succeeded  his  father,  was  an 
infant  of  a  year  old ;  and  though  the  office  of  He- 
gent  was  conferred  upon  his  cousin  the  Duke  of 
Albany,  a  man  of  genius  and  enterprise,  a  native 
of  France,  and  accustomed  to  a  government  where 
the  power  of  the  King  was  already  great ;  though 
he  made  many  bold  attempts  to  extend  the  royal 
authority  ;  though  he  put  to  death  Lord  Home, 
and  banished  the  Earl  of  Angus,  the  two  noblemen 
of  greatest  influence   in  the  kingdom,   the  aristo- 

36  Aber.  ii.  540. 


OF  SCOTLAND.  59 

cracy  lost  no  ground  under  his  administration.  A 
stranger  to  the  manners,  the  laws,  and  the  language 
of  the  people  whom  he  was  called  to  rule,  he  acted, 
on  some  occasions,  rather  like  a  Viceroy  of  the 
French  King  than  the  Governor  of  Scotland  ;  but 
the  nobles  asserted  their  own  privileges,  and  con- 
tended for  the  interest  of  their  country  with  a  bold- 
ness which  convinced  him  of  their  independence, 
and  of  the  impotence  of  his  own  authority.  After 
several  unsuccessful  struggles,  he  voluntarily  re- 
tired to  France;  and  the  King  being  then  in  his 
thirteenth  year,  the  nobles  agreed  that  he  should 
assume  the  government,  and  that  eight  persons 
should  be  appointed  to  attend  him  by  turns,  and  to 
advise  and  assist  him  in  the  administration  of  public 
affairs.  The  Earl  of  Angus,  who  was  one  of  that 
number,  did  not  long  remain  satisfied  with  such 
divided  power.  He  gained  some  of  his  colleagues, 
removed  others,  and  intimidated  the  rest.  "When 
the  term  of  his  attendance  expired,  he  still  re- 
tained authority,  to  which  all  were  obliged  to  sub- 
mit, because  none  of  them  was  in  a  condition  to 
dispute  it.  The  affection  of  the  young  King  was  the 
only  thing  wanting  to  fix  and  perpetuate  his  power. 
But  an  active  and  high-spirited  Prince  submitted 
with  great  impatience  to  the  restraint  in  which  he 
was  kept.  It  ill  suited  his  years  or  his  disposition 
to  be  confined  as  a  prisoner  within  his  own  palace ; 
to  be  treated  with  no  respect,  and  to  be  deprived 
of  all  power.  He  could  not  on  some  occasions 
conceal  his  resentment  and  indignation.  Angus 
foresaw  that  he  had  much  to  dread  from  these; 
and  as  he  could  not  gain  the  King's  heart,  he  re- 
solved to  make  sure  of  his  person.  James  was 
continually  surrounded   by  the    Earl's    spies    and 


(>0  THE  HISTORY  B.  I. 

confidants  ;  many  eyes  watched  all  his  motions, 
and  observed  every  step  he  took.  But  the  King's 
eagerness  to  obtain  liberty  eluded  all  their  vigi- 
lance. He  escaped  from  Falkland,  and  fled  to 
the  castle  of  Stirling,  the  residence  of  the  Queen 
his  mother,  and  the  only  place  of  strength  in  the 
kingdom  which  was  not  in  the  hands  of  the  Doug- 
lases. The  nobles,  of  whom  some  were  influ- 
enced by  their  hatred  to  Angus,  and  others  by 
their  respect  for  the  King,  crowded  to  Stirling,  and 
his  court  was  soon  filled  with  persons  of  the  great- 
est distinction.  The  Earl,  though  astonished  at 
this  unexpected  revolution,  resolved  at  first  to  make 
one  bold  push  for  recovering  his  authority,  by 
marching  to  Stirling  at  the  head  of  his  followers  ; 
but  he  wanted  either  courage  or  strength  to  execute 
this  resolution.  In  a  parliament  held  soon  after, 
he  and  his  adherents  were  attainted,  and,  after 
escaping  from  many  dangers  and  enduring  much 
misery,  he  was  at  length  obliged  to  fly  into  Eng- 
land for  refuge. 

James  had  now  not  only  the  name,  but,  though 
extremely  young,  the  full  authority  of  a  King.  He 
was  inferior  to  no  Prince  of  that  age  in  graceful- 
ness of  person,  or  in  vigour  of  mind.  His  under- 
standing was  good,  and  his  heart  warm ;  the  former 
capable  of  great  improvement,  and  the  latter  sus- 
ceptible of  the  best  impressions.  But,  according 
to  the  usual  fate  of  Princes  who  are  called  to  the 
throne  in  their  infancy,  his  education  had  been 
neglected.  His  private  preceptors  were  more  ready 
to  flatter  than  to  instruct  him.  It  was  the  interest 
of  those  who  governed  the  kingdom  to  prevent 
him  from  knowing  too  much.  The  Earl  of  Angus, 
in  order  to  divert  him  from  business,  gave  him  an 


OF  SCOTLAND.  CI 

early  taste  for  such  pleasures  as  afterwards  occu- 
pied and  engrossed  him  more  than  became  a  King. 
Accordingly,  we  discover  in  James  all  the  features 
of  a  great  but  uncultivated  spirit.  On  the  one 
hand,  violent  passions,  implacable  resentment,  an 
immoderate  desire  of  power,  and  the  utmost  rage  at 
disappointment.  On  the  other,  love  to  his  people, 
zeal  for  the  punishment  of  private  oppressors,  con- 
fidence in  his  favourites,  and  the  most  engaging 
openness  and  affability  of  behaviour. 

What  he  himself  had  suffered  from  the  exorbi- 
tant power  of  the  nobles  led  him  early  to  imitate 
his  predecessors  in  their  attempts  to  humble  them. 
The  plan  he  formed  for  that  purpose  was  more  pro- 
found, more  systematic,  and  pursued  with  greater 
constancy  and  steadiness,  than  that  of  any  of  his 
ancestors  :  and  the  influence  of  the  events  in  his 
reicn  upon  those  of  the  subsequent  period  renders 
it  necessary  to  explain  his  conduct  at  greater  length, 
and  to  enter  into  a  more  minute  detail  of  his  ac- 
tions. He  had  penetration  enough  to  discover 
those  defects  in  the  schemes  adopted  by  former 
Kings,  which  occasioned  their  miscarriage.  The 
examples  of  James  I.  had  taught  him  that  wise 
laws  operate  slowly  on  a  rude  people,  and  that  the 
fierce  spirit  of  the  feudal  nobles  was  not  to  be  sub- 
dued by  these  alone.  The  effects  of  the  violent 
measures  of  James  II.  convinced  him  that  the  op- 
pression of  one  great  family  is  apt  either  to  excite 
the  suspicion  and  resentment  of  the  other  nobles, 
or  to  enrich  with  its  spoils  some  new  family,  which 
would  soon  adopt  the  same  sentiments,  and  become 
equally  formidable  to  the  crown.  He  saw,  from 
the  fatal  end  of  James  III.  that  neglect  was  still 
more  intolerable  to  the  nobles  than  oppression,  and 

vol.  i.  G 


62  THE  HISTORY  B.  I. 

that  the  ministry  of  new  men  and  favourites  was 
both  dishonourable  and  dangerous  to  a  Prince.  At 
the  same  time,  he  felt  that  the  authority  of  the 
crown  was  not  sufficient  to  counterbalance  the 
power  of  the  aristocracy,  and  that  without  some 
new  accession  of  strength  he  could  expect  no  better 
success  in  the  struggle  than  his  ancestors.  In  this 
extremity  he  applied  himself  to  the  clergy,  hoping 
that  they  would  both  relish  his  plan,  and  concur, 
with  all  their  influence,  in  enabling  him  to  put  it 
in  execution.  Under  the  feudal  government,  the 
church,  being  reckoned  a  third  estate,  had  its  re- 
presentatives in  parliament;  the  number  of  these 
was  considerable,  and  they  possessed  great  influ- 
ence in  that  assembly.  The  superstition  of  former 
Kings,  and  the  zeal  of  many  ages  of  ignorance, 
had  bestowed  on  ecclesiastics  a  great  proportion 
of  the  national  wealth ;  and  the  authority  which 
they  acquired  by  the  reverence  of  the  people  was 
superior  even  to  that  which  they  derived  from  their 
riches.  This  powerful  body,  however,  depended 
entirely  on  the  crown.  The  Popes,  notwithstand- 
ing their  attention  to  extend  their  usurpations,  had 
neglected  Scotland  as  a  distant  and  poor  kingdom, 
and  permitted  its  Kings  to  exercise  powers  which 
they  disputed  with  more  considerable  Princes. 
The  Scottish  monarchs  had  the  sole  right  of  nomi- 
nation to  vacant  bishoprics  and  abbeys27;  and 
James  naturally  concluded,  that  men  who  ex- 
pected preferment  from  his  favour  would  be  willing 
to  merit  it  by  promoting  his  designs.  Happily  for 
him,  the  nobles  had  not  yet  recovered  the  blow 
which  fell  on  their  order  at  Flowden ;  and  if  we 
may  judge  either  from  their  conduct  or  from  the 
27  Epist.  Reg.  Scot.  i.  197,  <Scc     Act  125.  P.  1540. 


OF  SCOTLAND.  6'3 

character  given  of  them  by  Sir  Ralph  Sadler,  the 
English  envoy  in  Scotland,  they  were  men  of  little 
genius,  of  no  experience  in  business,  and  incapable 
of  acting  either  with  unanimity  or  with  vigour. 
Many  of  the  clergy,  on  the  other  hand,  were  distin- 
guished by  their  great  abilities,  and  no  less  by  their 
ambition.  Various  causes  of  disgust  subsisted 
between  them  and  the  martial  nobles,  who  were 
apt  to  view  the  pacific  character  of  ecclesiastics 
with  some  degree  of  contempt,  and  who  envied 
their  power  and  wealth.  By  acting  in  concert  with 
the  King,  they  not  only  would  gratify  him,  but 
avenge  themselves,  and  hoped  to  aggrandize  their 
own  order  by  depressing  those  who  were  their  sole 
rivals.  Secure  of  so  powerful  a  concurrence,  James 
ventured  to  proceed  with  greater  boldness.  In  the 
first  heat  of  resentment  he  had  driven  the  Earl  of 
Angus  out  of  the  kingdom;  and,  sensible  that  a 
person  so  far  superior  to  the  other  nobles  in  abili- 
ties, might  create  many  obstacles  which  would 
retard  or  render  ineffectual  all  his  schemes,  he 
solemnly  swore  that  he  would  never  permit  him 
to  return  into  Scotland;  and,  notwithstanding  the 
repeated  solicitations  of  the  King  of  England,  he 
adhered  to  his  vow  with  unrelenting  obstinacy. 
He  then  proceeded  to  repair  the  fortifications  of 
Rdinburgh,  Stirling,  and  other  castles,  and  to  fill 
his  magazines  with  arms  and  ammunition.  Having 
taken  these  precautions  by  way  of  defence,  he 
began  to  treat  the  nobility  with  the  utmost  coldness 
and  reserve.  Those  offices  which  they  were  apt 
from  long  possession  to  consider  as  appropriated 
to  their  order,  were  now  bestowed  on  ecclesiastics, 
who  alone  possessed  the  King's  ear,  and,  together 
with  a  few  gentlemen  of  inferior  rank  to  whom  he 


G4  THE  HISTORY  B.   I. 

had  communicated  his  schemes,  were  intrusted 
with  the  management  of  all  public  affairs.  These 
ministers  were  chosen  with  judgment;  and  Cardinal 
Beatoun,  who  soon  became  the  most  eminent 
among  them,  was  a  man  of  superior  genius.  These 
served  the  King  with  fidelity ;  they  carried  on  his 
measures  with  vigour,  with  reputation,  and  with 
success.  James  no  longer  concealed  his  distrust 
of  the  nobles,  and  suffered  no  opportunity  of  mor- 
tifying them  to  escape.  Slight  offences  were  ag- 
gravated into  real  crimes,  and  punished  with  seve- 
rity. Every  accusation  against  persons  of  rank 
was  heard  with  pleasure,  every  appearance  of  guilt 
was  examined  with  rigour,  and  every  trial  proved 
fatal  to  those  who  were  accused  :  the  banishing 
Hepburn,  Earl  of  Bothwell,  for  reasons  extremely 
frivolous,  beheading  the  eldest  son  of  Lord  Forbes 
without  sufficient  evidence  of  his  guilt,  and  the 
condemning  Lady  Glamis,  a  sister  of  the  Earl  of 
Angus,  to  be  burned  for  the  crime  of  witchcraft,  of 
which  even  that  credulous  age  believed  her  inno- 
cent, are  monuments  both  of  the  King's  hatred  of 
the  nobility,  of  the  severity  of  his  government,  and 
of  the  stretches  he  made  towards  absolute  power. 
By  these  acts  of  authority  he  tried  the  spirit  of  the 
nobles,  and  how  much  they  were  willing  to  bear. 
Their  patience  increased  his  contempt  for  them, 
and  added  to  the  ardour  and  boldness  with  which 
he  pursued  his  plan.  Meanwhile  they  observed 
the  tendency  of  his  schemes  with  concern  and  with 
resentment;  but  the  King's  sagacity,  the  vigilance 
of  his  ministers,  and  the  want  of  a  proper  leader, 
made  it  dangerous  to  concert  any  measures  for 
their  defence,  and  impossible  to  act  with  becoming 
vigour.     James  and  his  counsellors,  by  a  false  step 


OF  SCOTLAND.  65 

which  they  took,  presented  to  them,  at  length,  an 
advantage  which  they  did  not  fail  to  improve. 

Motives,  which  are  well  known,  had  prompted 
Henry  VIII.  to  disclaim  the  Pope's  authority, 
and  to  seize  the  revenues  of  the  regular  clergy. 
His  system  of  reformation  satisfied  none  of  his 
subjects.  Some  were  enraged  because  he  had 
proceeded  so  far,  others  murmured  because  he 
proceeded  no  farther.  By  his  imperious  temper, 
and  alternate  persecutions  of  the  zealots  for  Popery 
and  the  converts  to  the  Protestant  opinions,  he  was 
equally  formidable  to  both.  Henry  was  afraid  that 
this  general  dissatisfaction  of  his  people  might  en- 
courage his  enemies  on  the  continent  to  invade  his 
kingdom.  He  knew  that  both  the  Pope  and  the 
Emperor  courted  the  friendship  of  the  King  of 
Scots,  and  endeavoured  to  engage  him  in  an  al- 
liance against  England.  He  resolved,  therefore, 
to  disappoint  the  effects  of  their  negotiations,  by 
entering  into  a  closer  union  with  his  nephew.  Tn 
order  to  accomplish  this,  he  transmitted  to  James 
an  elaborate  memorial,  presenting  the  numerous 
encroachments  of  the  See  of  Home  upon  the  rights 
of  sovereigns  M ;  and  that  he  might  induce  him  more 
certainly  to  adopt  the  same  measures  for  abolishing 
Papal  usurpation,  which  had  proved  so  efficacious 
in  England,  he  sent  ambassadors  into  Scotland,  to 
propose  a  personal  interview  with  him  at  York.  It 
was  plainly  James's  interest  to  accept  this  invita- 
tion ;  the  assistance  of  so  powerful  an  ally,  the 
high  honours  which  were  promised  him,  and  the 
liberal  subsidies  he  might  have  obtained,  would 
have  added  no  little  dignity  to  his  domestic  govern- 
ment, and  must  have  greatly  facilitated  the  execu- 

•!rvpe,  Eccles.  Mem.  1.  App.  155. 

G  2 


OH  THE  HISTORY  B.  I. 

tion  of  his  favourite  plan.  On  the  other  hand,  a 
war  with  England,  which  he  had  reason  to  appre- 
hend if  he  rejected  Henry's  offers  of  friendship, 
was  inconsistent  with  all  his  views.  This  would 
bring-  him  to  depend  on  his  barons ;  an  army  could 
not  be  raised  without  their  assistance :  to  call  no- 
bles incensed  against  their  Prince  into  the  field 
was  to  unite  his  enemies,  to  make  them  sensible  of 
their  own  strength,  and  to  afford  them  an  opportu- 
nity of  revenging  their  wrongs.  James,  who  was 
not  ignorant  that  all  these  consequences  might  follow 
a  breach  with  England,  listened  at  first  to  Henry's 
proposal,  and  consented  to  the  interview  at  York. 
But  the  clergy  dreaded  a  union  which  must  have 
been  established  on  the  ruins  of  the  church.  Henry 
had  taken  great  pains  to  infuse  into  his  nephew  his 
own  sentiments  concerning  religion,  and  had  fre- 
quently solicited  him,  by  ambassadors,  to  renounce 
the  usurped  dominion  of  the  Pope,  which  was  no 
less  dishonourable  to  Princes  than  grievous  to  their 
subjects.  The  clergy  had  hitherto,  with  great 
address,  diverted  the  King  from  regarding  these 
solicitations.  But  in  an  amicable  conference  Henry 
expected,  and  they  feared,  that  James  would  yield 
to  his  entreaties,  or  be  convinced  by  his  arguments. 
They  knew  that  the  revenues  of  the  church  were 
an  alluring  object  to  a  Prince  who  wanted  money, 
and  who  loved  it;  that  the  pride  and  ambition  of 
ecclesiastics  raised  the  indignation  of  the  nobles ; 
that  their  indecent  lives  gave  offence  to  the  people; 
that  the  Protestant  opinions  were  spreading  fast 
throughout  the  nation  ;  and  that  a  universal  defec- 
tion from  the  established  church  would  be  the 
consequence  of  giving  the  smallest  degree  of  en- 
couragement lo  these  principles.      For  these  rea- 


OF  SCOTLAND.  67 

sons  they  employed  all  their  credit  with  the  King, 
and  had  recourse  to  every  artifice  and  insinuation, 
in  order  to  divert  him  from  a  journey  which  must 
have  been  so  fatal  to  their  interest.  They  endea- 
voured to  inspire  him  with  fear,  by  magnifying  the 
danger  to  which  he  would  expose  his  person  by 
venturing  so  far  into  England  without  any  security 
but  the  word  of  a  Prince,  who,  having  violated 
every  thing  venerable  and  sacred  in  religion,  was 
no  longer  to  be  trusted;  and  by  way  of  compensa- 
tion for  the  sums  which  he  might  have  received 
from  Henry,  they  offered  an  annual  donative  of 
fifty  thousand  crowns ;  they  promised  to  contribute 
liberally  towards  carrying  on  a  war  with  England, 
and  flattered  him  with  the  prospect  of  immense 
riches,  arising  from  the  forfeiture  of  persons  who 
were  to  be  tried  and  condemned  as  heretics.  In- 
fluenced by  these  considerations,  James  broke  his 
agreement  with  Henry,  who,  in  expectation  of  meet- 
ing him,  had  already  come  to  York ;  and  that 
haughty  and  impatient  monarch  resented  the  af- 
front, by  declaring  war  against  Scotland.  1 J  is 
army  was  soon  ready  to  invade  the  kingdom, 
•lames  was  obliged  to  have  recourse  to  the  nobles 
for  the  defence  of  his  dominions.  At  his  command 
they  assembled  their  followers,  but  with  the  same 
dispositions  which  had  animated  their  ancestors  in 
the  reign  of  James  [II.,  and  with  a  full  resolution 
of  imitating  their  example  by  punishing  those  to 
whom  they  imputed  the  grievances  of  which  they 
had  reason  to  complain  ;  and  if  the  King's  minis- 
ters had  not  been  men  of  abilities,  superior  to  those 
of  James  Til.,  and  of  considerable  interest  even 
with  their  enemies,  who  could  not  agree  anion n 
themselves  what  victims  to  sacrifice,  the  camp  of 
Fala  would   have   been   as  remarkable  as  that  o( 


08  THE  HISTORY  B.  I. 

Lauder,  for  the  daring  encroachments  of  the  nobi- 
lity on  the  prerogative  of  the  Prince.  But  though 
his  ministers  were  saved  by  this  accident,  the 
nobles  had  soon  another  opportunity  of  discovering 
to  the  King  their  dissatisfaction  with  his  govern- 
ment, and  their  contempt  of  his  authority.  Scarcity 
of  provisions,  and  the  rigour  of  the  season,  having 
obliged  the  English  army  which  had  invaded  Scot- 
land to  retire,  James  imagined  that  he  could  attack 
them  with  great  advantage  in  their  retreat :  but  the 
principal  barons,  with  an  obstinacy  and  disdain 
which  greatly  aggravated  their  disobedience,  re- 
fused to  advance  a  step  beyond  the  limits  of  their 
own  country.  Provoked  by  this  insult  to  himself, 
and  suspicious  of  a  new  conspiracy  against  his 
ministers,  the  King  instantly  disbanded  an  army 
which  paid  so  little  regard  to  his  orders,  and  re- 
turned abruptly  into  the  heart  of  the  kingdom. 

An  ambitious  and  high-spirited  Prince  could 
not  brook  such  a  mortifying  affront.  His  hopes 
of  success  had  been  rash,  and  his  despair  upon  a 
disappointment  was  excessive.  He  felt  himself 
engaged  in  an  unnecessary  war  with  England, 
which,  instead  of  yielding  him  the  laurels  and  tri- 
umphs that  he  expected,  had  begun  with  such  cir- 
cumstances as  encouraged  the  insolence  of  his  sub- 
jects, and  exposed  him  to  the  scorn  of  his  enemies. 
He  saw  how  vain  and  ineffectual  all  his  projects 
to  humble  the  nobles  had  been ;  and  that,  though 
in  times  of  peace  a  Prince  may  endeavour  to 
depress  them,  they  will  rise  during  war  to  their 
former  importance  and  dignity.  Impatience,  re- 
sentment, indignation,  filled  his  bosom  by  turns. 
The  violence  of  these  passions  altered  his  temper, 
and  perhaps  impaired  his  reason.  He  became 
pensive,  sullen,  and  retired.      He  seemed  through 


OF  SCOTLAND.  <>!.' 

tiie  day  to  be   swallowed  up  in  profound  medita- 
tion, and  through  the  night  he  was  disturbed  with 
those  visionary  terrors  which  make  impression  upon 
a  weak  understanding  only,  or  a  disordered  fancy. 
In  order  to  revive  the  King's  spirits,  an  inroad  on 
the  western  borders  was  concerted  by  his  minis- 
ters, who  prevailed  upon  the  barons  in  the  neigh- 
bouring provinces  to  raise  as  many  troops  as  were 
thought  necessary,  and  to  enter  the  enemy's  coun- 
try.    But  nothing  could  remove  the  King's  aver- 
sion to  his  nobility,  or  diminish  his  jealousy  of  their 
power.     He  would  not  even  intrust  them  with  the 
command  of  the  forces  which  they  had  assembled ; 
that  was  reserved  for  Oliver  Sinclair  his  favourite, 
who  no  sooner  appeared  to  take  possession  of  the 
dignity  conferred  upon  him,  than  rage  and  indigna- 
tion occasioned  a  universal  mutiny  in  the   army. 
Five  hundred  English,  who  happened  to  be  drawn 
up  in   sight,  attacked  the  Scots  in   this  disorder. 
Hatred  to  the  King  and  contempt  of  their  general 
produced  an  effect  to  which  there  is  no  parallel  in 
history.     They  overcame  the  fear  of  death,  and  the 
love  of  liberty  ;   and  ten  thousand  men  fled  before 
a  number  so  far  inferior,  without  striking  a  single 
blow.     No  man  was  desirous  of  a  victory  which 
would  have  been  acceptable  to  the  King  and  to  his 
favourite ;  few  endeavoured  to  save  themselves  by 
flight;   the  English  had  the   choice   of  what  pri- 
soners they  pleased  to  take;  and  almost  every  per- 
son of  distinction  who  was  engaged  in  the  expedi- 
tion remained  in  their  hands29.     This  astonishing 

29  According  to  an  account  of  this  event  in  the  Hamilton  MSS. 
about  thirty  were  killed,  above  a  thousand  were  taken  prisoners  ; 
and  among  them  a  hundred  and  liftv  persons  of  condition.  Vol, 
ii.  2SG.  The  small  number  of  the  English  prevented  their  taking 
wore  prisoners. 


70  THE  HISTORY.  B.  I. 

event  was  a  new  proof  to  the  King  of  the  general 
disaffection  of  the  nobility,  and  a  new  discovery  of 
his  own  weakness  and  want  of  authority.     Inca- 
pable of  bearing  these  repeated  insults,  he  found 
himself   unable    to   revenge   them.      The   deepest 
melancholy  and  despair  succeeded  to  the  furious 
transports  of  rage,  which  the  first  account  of  the 
rout  of  his  army  occasioned.     All  the  violent  pas- 
sions which  are  the  enemies  of  life  preyed  upon  his 
mind,  and  wasted  and  consumed  a  youthful  and 
vigorous  constitution.     Some  authors  of  that  age 
impute  his  untimely  death  to  poison ;  but  the  dis- 
eases of  the  mind,  when  they  rise  to  a  height,  are 
often  mortal ;  and  the  known  effects  of  disappoint- 
ment, anger,  and  resentment  upon  a  sanguine  and 
impetuous  temper  sufficiently  account  for  his  un- 
happy fate.    "  His  death  (says  Drummond)  proveth 
his   mind   to  have  been   raised   to  a  high  strain, 
and  above  mediocrity :  he  could  die,  but  could  not 
digest  a  disaster."     Had  James  survived  this  mis- 
fortune, one  of  two  things  must  have  happened: 
either  the  violence  of  his  temper  would  have  en- 
gaged him  openly  to  attack  the  nobles,  who  would 
have  found  in  Henry  a  willing  and  powerful  pro- 
tector, and  have  derived  the  same  assistance  from 
him  which  the  malcontents,  in  the  succeeding  reign, 
did  from  his  daughter  Elizabeth;  in  that  case,  a 
dangerous   civil   war  must  have  been  the  certain 
consequence.     Or,  perhaps,  necessity  might  have 
obliged  him  to  accept  of  Henry's  offers,  and  be  re- 
conciled to  his  nobility.     In  that  event,  the  church 
would  have   fallen   a   sacrifice   to  their   union  ;    a 
reformation,   upon  Henry's  plan,  would  have  been 
established  by  law  ;   a  great  part  of  the  tempora- 
lities of  the  church  would  have  been  seized;   and 


OF  SCOTLAND.  71 

the  friendship  of  the  King  and  barons  would  have 
been  cemented  by  dividing1  its  spoils. 

Such  were  the  efforts  of  our  Kings  towards  re- 
ducing the  exorbitant  power  of  the  nobles.  If  they 
were  not  attended  with  success,  we  must  not  for 
that  reason  conclude  that  they  were  not  conducted 
with  prudence.  Every  circumstance  seems  to  have 
combined  against  the  crown.  Accidental  events 
concurred  with  political  causes,  in  rendering  the 
best  concerted  measures  abortive.  The  assassina- 
tion of  one  King,  the  sudden  death  of  another,  and 
the  fatal  despair  of  a  third,  contributed,  no  less 
than  its  own  natural  strength,  to  preserve  the  aris- 
tocracy from  ruin. 

Amidst  these  struggles,  the  influence  which  our 
Kings  possessed  in  their  parliaments  is  a  circum- 
stance seemingly  inexplicable,  and  which  merits 
particular  attention.  As  these  assemblies  were 
composed  chiefly  of  the  nobles,  they,  we  are  apt  to 
imagine,  must  have  dictated  all  their  decisions; 
but,  instead  of  this,  every  King  found  them  obse- 
quious to  his  will,  and  obtained  such  laws  as  he 
deemed  necessary  for  extending  his  authority. 
All  things  were  conducted  there  with  dispatch  and 
unanimity  ;  and  in  none  of  our  historians  do  we 
find  an  instance  of  any  opposition  formed  against 
the  court  in  parliament,  or  mention  of  any  difficulty 
in  carrying  through  the  measures  which  were  agree- 
able to  the  Kin*;.  In  order  to  account  for  this 
singular  fact,  it  is  necessary  to  inquire  into  the 
origin  and  constitution  of  parliament. 

The  genius  of  the  feudal  government,  uniform  in 
all  its  operations,  produced  the  same  effects  in 
small  as  in  great  societies ;  and  the  territory  of  a 
baron  was,  in  miniature,  the  model  of  a  kingdom. 


72  THE  HISTORY  B.  I. 

He  possessed  the  right  of  jurisdiction  ;  but  those 
who   depended  on  him  being  free  men,    and  not 
slaves,   could  be  tried  by  their  peers  only  ;   and, 
therefore,    his   vassals   were   bound  to  attend  his 
courts,  and  to  assist  both  in  passing  and  executing 
his  sentences,      When  assembled  on  these  occa- 
sions,  they  established,  by  mutual  consent,  such 
regulations  as  tended  to  the  welfare  of  their  small 
society ;   and  often  granted,  voluntarily,  such  sup- 
plies to  their  Superior  as  his  necessities  required. 
Change  now  a  single  name ;  in  place  of  baron  sub- 
stitute king,  and  we  behold  a  parliament  in  its  first 
rudiments,  and  observe  the  first  exertions  of  those 
powers  which  its  members  now  possess  as  judges, 
as  legislators,  and  as  dispensers  of  the  public  reve- 
nues.   Suitable  to  this  idea,  are  the  appellations  of 
the  King's  Court30,  and  of  the  King's  Great  Coun- 
cil, by  which  parliaments   were   anciently  distin- 
guished ;  and  suitable  to  this,  likewise,  were  the 
constituent  members   of  which  it  was   composed. 
In  all  the  feudal  kingdoms,  such  as  held  of  the 
King  in  chief  were  bound,  by  the  condition  of  their 
tenure,  to  attend  and  to  assist  in  his  courts.     Nor 
was  this  esteemed  a  privilege,  but  a  service31.      It 
was  exacted  likewise  of  bishops,  abbots,  and  the 
greater   ecclesiastics,   who,    holding  vast   posses- 
sions of  the  crown,  were  deemed  subject  to  the 
same  burden.     Parliaments  did  not  continue  long 
in  this  state.     Cities  gradually  acquired  wealth,  a 
considerable  share  of  the  public  taxes  were  levied 
on  them,  the  inhabitants  grew  into  estimation,  and, 
being  enfranchised  by  the  sovereign,  a  place  in  par- 

30  Du  Cange,  voc.  Curia.  • 

31  Du  Cange,  voc.  [Taciturn,  col.  519.    Magna  Charta,  art.  14". 
Aet.  Jac.  I.  1425.  cap.  52. 


OF  SCOTLANF.  73 

Uament  was  the  consequence  of  their  liberty,  and 
of  their  importance.  But  as  it  would  have  been 
absurd  to  confer  such  a  privilege,  or  to  impose  such 
a  burden  on  a  whole  community,  every  borough 
was  permitted  to  choose  one  or  two  of  its  citizens 
to  appear  in  the  name  of  the  corporation ;  and  the 
idea  of  representation  was  first  introduced  in  this 
manner.  An  innovation  still  more  important  na- 
turally followed.  The  vassals  of  the  crown  were 
originally  few  in  number,  and  extremely  powerful ; 
but  as  it  is  impossible  to  render  property  fixed  and 
permanent,  many  of  their  possessions  came,  gra- 
dually, and  by  various  methods  of  alienation,  to 
be  split  and  parceled  out  into  different  hands. 
Hence  arose  the  distinction  between  the  Greater 
and  the  Lesser  Barons.  The  former  were  those 
who  retained  their  original  fiefs  undivided,  the 
latter  were  the  new  and  less  potent  vassals  of  the 
crown.  Both  were  bound,  however,  to  perform 
all  feudal  services,  and,  of  consequence,  to  give 
attendance  in  parliament.  To  the  lesser  barons, 
who  formed  no  inconsiderable  body,  this  was  an 
intolerable  grievance.  Barons  sometimes  denied 
their  tenure,  boroughs  renounced  their  right  of 
electing,  charters  were  obtained  containing  an  ex- 
emption from  attendance;  and  the  anxiety  with 
which  our  ancestors  endeavoured  to  get  free  from 
the  obligation  of  sitting  in  parliament  is  surpassed 
by  that  only  with  which  their  posterity  solicit  to  be 
admitted  there.  In  order  to  accommodate  both 
parties  at  onee,  to  secure  to  the  King  a  sufficient 
number  of  members  in  his  great  council,  and  to 
save  his  vassals  from  an  unnecessary  burden,  an 
easy  expedient  was  found  out.     The  obligation  to 

VOL.  I.  H 


74  THE  HISTORY  B.  I. 

personal  attendance  was  continued  upon  the  greater 
barons,   from   which    the    lesser   barons  were    ex- 
empted,   on    condition    of   their   electing   in    each 
county  a  certain  number  of  representatives,  to  ap- 
pear in   their  name.     Thus  a  parliament  became 
complete,  in  all  its  members,  and  was  composed  of 
lords    spiritual   and    temporal,    of   knights  of  the 
shires,  and  of  burgesses.     As  many  causes  contri- 
buted to  bring  government  earlier  to  perfection  in 
England  than  in  Scotland ;   as  the  rigour  of  the 
feudal  institutions  abated  sooner,  and  its  defects 
were  supplied  with  greater  facility  in  the  one  king- 
dom than  in  the  other  ;   England  led  the  way  in  all 
these  changes,  and  burgesses  and  knights  of  the 
shire  appeared  in  the  parliaments  of  that  nation 
before  they  were  heard  of  in  ours.     [1326]  Bur- 
gesses were  first  admitted  into  the  Scottish  parlia- 
ments by  Robert  Bruce32;  and  in  the  preamble  to 
the  laws  of  Robert  TIL,  they  are  ranked  among 
the  constituent  members  of  that  assembly.     [1427] 
The  lesser  barons  were  indebted  to  James  I.  for  a 
statute  exempting  them  from  personal  attendance, 
and  permitting  them  to  elect  representatives  :  the 
exemption  was  eagerly  laid  hold  on  ;  but  the  privi- 
lege was  so  little  valued  that,  except  one  or  two 
instances,  it  lay  neglected  during  one  hundred  and 
sixty  years  ;  and  James  VI.  first  obliged  them  to 
send  representatives  regularly  to  parliament33. 
A  Scottish  parliament,  then,  consisted  anciently 
*"  great  barons,  of  ecclesiastics,  and  a  few  repre- 
sentatives of  boroughs.     Nor  were  these  divided 

32  Abercromby,  i.  635. 

33  Essays  on  Brit.  Antiq.  Ess.  II.  Dalrymp.  Hist,  of  Fead. 
Prop.  ch.  8. 


OF  SCOTLAND.  7o 

as  in  England  into  two  houses,  but  composed  one 
assembly,  in  which  the  Lord  Chancellor  presided34. 
In  rude  ages,  when  the  science  of  government  was 
extremely  imperfect  among  a  martial  people,  unac- 
quainted with  the  arts  of  peace,  strangers  to  the 
talents  which  make  a  figure   in  debate,    and  de- 
spising them,    parliaments   were    not   held  in   the 
same  estimation  as  at  present;    nor  did  haughty 
barons  love  those  courts  in  which  they  appeared 
with  such  evident  marks  of  inferiority.    Parliaments 
were  often  hastily  assembled,  and  it  was,  probably, 
in  the  King's  power,  by  the  manner  in  which  he 
issued  his  writs  for  that  purpose,  to  exclude  such 
as  were  averse  from  his   measures.      At  a  time 
when  deeds   of  violence  were  common,    and   the 
restraints  of  law  and  decency  were  little  regarded, 
no  man  could  venture  with  safety  to  oppose  the 
King  in  his  own  court.    The  great  barons,  or  lords 
of  parliament,  were  extremely  few  ;  even  so  late  as 
the  beginning  of  the   reign  of  James  VI.35,  they 
amounted   only  to   fifty-three.      The  ecclesiastics 
equaled  them   in   number,  and  being  devoted  im- 
plicitly to  the  crown,  for  reasons  which  have  been 
already  explained,  rendered  all  hopes  of  victory  in 

31  In  England,  the  peers  and  commons  seem  early  to  have 
met  in  separate  houses;  and  James  I.,  who  was  fond  of  imitating 
the  English  in  all  their  customs,  had  probably  an  intention  of  in- 
troducing some  considerable  distinction  between  the  greater  and 
lesser  barons  in  Scotland  ;  at  least  he  determined  lhat  their  con- 
sultations should  not  be  carried  on  under  the  direction  of  the 
same  president ;  for  by  his  law,  A.  D.  1327,  it  is  provided,"  that  out 
of  the  commissioners  of  all  the  shires  shall  be  chosen  a  wise  and 
expert  man,  called  the  common  speaker  of  the  parliament,  who 
shall  propose  all  and  sundry  needs  and  causes  pertaining  to  the 
commons  in  the  parliament  or  general  council."  No  such  speaker, 
it  would  seem,  was  ever  chosen  ;  and  by  a  subsequent  law  the 
Chancellor  was  declared  perpi  tnal  president  of  parliament. 
35  And.  Coll.  vol.i.  pre!.  10. 


7<>  THE  HISTORY  B.  i. 

any  struggle  desperate.  Nor  were  the  nobles  thenir 
selves  so  anxious  as  might  be  imagined,  to  prevent 
acts  of  parliament  favourable  to  the  royal  preroga- 
tive: conscious  of  their  own  strength,  and  of  the 
King's  inability  to  carry  these  acts  into  execution 
without  their  concurrence,  they  trusted  that  they 
might  either  elude  or  venture  to  contemn  them  ; 
and  the  statute  revoking  the  King's  property,  and 
annexing  alienated  jurisdictions  to  the  crown,  re- 
peated in  every  reign,  and  violated  and  despised 
as  often,  is  a  standing  proof  of  the  impotence  of 
laws  when  opposed  to  power.  So  many  concurring 
causes  are  sufficient,  perhaps,  to  account  for  the 
ascendant  which  our  Kings  acquired  in  parliament. 
But,  without  having  recourse  to  any  of  these,  a 
single  circumstance,  peculiar  to  the  constitution  of 
the  Scottish  parliament,  the  mentioning  of  which 
we  have  hitherto  avoided,  will  abundantly  explain 
this  fact,  seemingly  so  repugnant  to  all  our  reason- 
ings concerning  the  weakness  of  the  King,  and  the 
power  of  the  nobles. 

As  far  back  as  our  records  enable  us  to  trace 
the  constitution  of  our  parliaments,  we  find  a  com- 
mittee distinguished  by  the  name  of  Lords  of  Arti- 
cles. It  was  their  business  to  prepare  and  to  digest 
all  matters  which  were  to  be  laid  before  the  parlia- 
ment. There  was  rarely  any  business  introduced 
into  parliament,  but  what  had  passed  through  the 
channel  of  this  committee ;  every  motion  for  a  new 
law  was  first  made  there,  and  approved  of  or  re- 
jected by  the  members  of  it;  what  they  approved 
was  formed  into  a  bill,  and  presented  to  parliament ; 
and  it  seems  probable,  that  what  they  rejected 
could  not  be  introduced  into  the  house.  This  com- 
mittee owed  the  extraordinary  powers  vested  in  it 


OF  SCOTLAND,  77 

to  the  military  genius  of  the  ancient  nobles  :  too 
impatient  to  submit  to  the  drudgery  of  civil  busi- 
ness, too  impetuous  to  observe  the  forms  or  to 
enter  into  the  details  necessary  in  conducting'  it, 
they  were  glad  to  lay  that  burden  upon  a  small 
number,  while  they  themselves  had  no  other  labour 
than  simply  to  give  or  to  refuse  their  assent  to  the 
bills  which  were  presented  to  them.  The  lords  of 
articles,  then,  not  only  directed  all  the  proceedings 
of  parliament,  but  possessed  a  negative  before  de- 
bate. That  committee  was  chosen  and  constituted 
in  such  a  manner  as  to  put  this  valuable  privilege 
entirely  into  the  King's  hands.  It  is  extremely 
probable,  that  our  Kings  once  had  the  sole  right  of 
nominating  the  lords  of  articles36.  They  came  af- 
terwards to  be  elected  by  the  parliament,  and  con- 
sisted of  an  equal  number  out  of  each  estate,  and 

36  It  appears  from  authentic  records,  that  a  parliament  was 
appointed  to  be  held  March  12,  15(i0,  and  that  the  lords  of  arti- 
cles were  chosen  and  met  on  the  7th,  five  days  before  the  assem- 
bling of  parliament.  If  they  could  be  regularly  elected  so  long 
before  the  meeting  of  parliament,  it  is  natural  to  conclude  that 
the  Prince  alone  possessed  the  right  of  electing  them.  There 
are  two  different  accounts  of  the  manner  of  their  election  at  that 
time,  one  by  Mary  herself,  in  a  letter  to  the  Archbishop  of  Glas- 
gow :  "  \\  e,  accompanied  with  our  nobility  for  the  time,  past  to 
the  Tolbooth  of  Edinburgh,  for  holding  of  our  parliament  on  the 
7th  day  of  this  instant,  and  elected  the  lords  articulars."  If  we 
explain  these  words  according  to  the  strict  grammar,  we  must 
conclude  that  the  Queen  herself  elected  tliem.  It  is,  however, 
more  probable  that  Mary  meant  to  say,  that  the  nobles  then  pre- 
sent with  her,  viz.  her  privy  counsellors  and  others,  elected  the 
lords  of  articles.  Keith's  Hist,  of  Scotland,  p.  I»:i!.  The  other 
account  is  Lord  Ruthven's,  who  expressly  allirms  that  the  Queen 
herself  elected  them.  Keith's  Append.  120.  Whether  we  em- 
brace the  one  or  other  of  these  opinions  is  of  no  consequence. 
If  the  privy  counsellors  and  nobles  attending  the  court  had  a 
right  to  elect  the  lords  of  articles,  it  was  equally  advantageous 
for  the  crown,  as  if  the  Prince  had  had  the  sole  nomination  of 
them. 

li  2 


ft*  THE  HISTORY  B.  I. 

most  commonly  of  eight  temporal  and  eight  spiritual 
lords,  of  eight  representatives  of  boroughs,  and  of 
the  eight  great  officers  of  the  crown.  Of  this  body, 
the  eight  ecclesiastics,  together  with  the  officers  of 
the  crown,  were  entirely  at  the  King's  devotion; 
and  it  was  scarce  possible  that  the  choice  could 
fall  on  such  temporal  lords  and  burgesses  as  would 
unite  in  opposition  to  his  measures.  Capable  either 
of  influencing  their  election,  or  of  gaining  them 
when  elected,  the  King  commonly  found  the  lords 
of  articles  no  less  obsequious  to  his  will  than  his 
own  privy  council ;  and,  by  means  of  his  authority 
with  them,  he  could  put  a  negative  upon  his  parlia- 
ment before  debate,  as  well  as  after  it ;  and,  what 
may  seem  altogether  incredible,  the  most  limited 
Prince  in  Europe  actually  possessed,  in  one  in- 
stance, a  prerogative  which  the  most  absolute  could 
never  attain37. 

37  Having  deduced  the  history  of  the  Committee  of  Lords  of 
Articles  as  low  as  the  subject  of  this  preliminary  book  required, 
it  may  be  agreeable,  perhaps,  to  some  of  my  readers,  to  know 
the  subsequent  variations  in  this  singular  institution,  and  the 
political  use  which  our  Kings  made  of  these.  When  parliaments 
became  more  numerous,  and  more  considerable  by  the  admission 
of  the  representatives  of  the  lesser  barons,  the  preserving  their 
influence  over  the  lords  of  articles  became,  likewise,  an  object 
of  greater  importance  to  our  Kings.  James  VI.  on  pretence 
that  the  lords  of  articles  could  not  find  leisure  to  consider  the 
great  multitude  of  affairs  laid  before  them,  obtained  an  act,  ap- 
pointing four  persons  to  be  named  out  of  each  estate,  who  should 
meet  twenty  days  before  the  commencement  of  parliament*,  to 
receive  all  supplications,  &c.  and,  rejecting  what  they  thought 
frivolous,  should  engross  in  a  book  what  they  thought  worthy  the 
attention  of  the  lords  of  articles.  !So  provision  is  made  in  the 
act  for  the  choice  of  this  select  body  ;  and  the  King  would,  of 
course,  have  claimed  that  privilege.  In  1633,  when  Charles  I. 
was  beginning  to  introduce  those  innovations  which  gave  so 
much  offence  to  the  nation,  he  dreaded  the  opposition  of  his  par- 
liament, and,  in  order  to  prevent  that,  an  artifice  was  made  use 

*  Act  I'll.  P.  1594. 


OF  SCOTLAND.  1U 

To  this  account  of  the  internal  constitution  of 
Scotland,  it  will  not  be  improper  to  add  a  view  of 
the  political  state  of  Europe  at  that  period,  where 
the  following-  history  commences.  A  thorough 
knowledge  of  that  general  system,  of  which  every 
kingdom  in  Europe  forms  a  part,  is  not  less  requi- 
site towards  understanding  the  history  of  a  nation 
than  an  acquaintance  with  its  peculiar  government 
and  laws.  The  latter  may  enable  us  to  comprehend 
domestic  occurrences  and  revolutions  ;  but  without 
the  former,  foreign  transactions  must  be  altogether 

of  to  secure  the  lords  of  articles  for  the  crown.  The  temporal 
peers  were  appointed  to  choose  eight  bishops,  and  the  bishops 
eight  peers  ;  these  sixteen  met  together,  and  elected  eight 
knights  of  the  shire,  and  eight  burgesses,  and  to  these  the  crown 
ollicers  were  added  as  usual.  If  we  can  only  suppose  eight 
persons  of  so  numerous  a  body  as  the  peers  of  Scotland  were 
become  by  that  time  attached  to  the  court,  these,  it  is  obvious, 
would  be  the  men  whom  the  bishops  would  choose,  and  of  con- 
sequence the  whole  lords  of  articles  were  the  tools  and  creatures 
of  the  King.  This  practice,  so  inconsistent  with  liberty,  was 
abolished  during  the  civil  war;  and  the  statute  of  James  VI.  was 
repealed.  After  the  restoration,  parliaments  became  more  ser- 
vile than  ever.  What  was  only  a  temporary  device,  in  the  reign 
of  Charles  I.  was  then  converted  into  a  standing  law.  "  For  my 
part,'  says  the  author  from  whom  I  have  borrowed  many  of  these 
particulars,  "  I  should  have  thought  it  less  criminal  in  our  Re- 
storation Parliament,  to  have  openly  bestowed  upon  the  King  a 
negative  before  debate  than,  in  such  an  underhand  artificial 
manner,  to  betray  their  constituents  and  the  nation."  Essays 
on  Brit.  Antiq.  55.  It  is  probable,  however,  from  a  letter  of 
Randolph's  to  Cecil,  10  Aug.  1500,  printed  in  the  Appendix, 
that  this  parliament  had  some  appearance  of  ancient  precedent  to 
justify  their  unworthy  conduct.  Various  questions  concerning 
the  constituent  members  of  the  Scottish  parliament  ;  concerning 
the  era  at  which  the  representatives  of  boroughs  were  introduced 
into  that  assembly  ;  and  concerning  the  origin  and  power  of  the 
committee  of  lords  of  articles,  occur,  and  have  been  agitated 
with  great  warmth.  Since  the  first  publication  of  this  work,  all 
these  disputed  points  have  been  considered  with  calmness  and 
accuracy  in  Mr.  Wight's  Inquiry  into  the  Rise  and  Progress  of 
Parliament,  Sec.  4to.  edit.  p.  17,  &c. 


SO  THE  HISTORY  B.  I. 

mysterious  and  unintelligible.  By  attending  to  this, 
many  dark  passages  in  our  history  may  be  placed 
in  a  clear  light;  and  where  the  bulk  of  historians 
have  seen  only  the  effect,  we  may  be  able  to  dis- 
cover the  cause. 

The  subversion  of  the  feudal  government  in 
France,  and  its  declension  in  the  neighbouring 
kingdoms,  occasioned  a  remarkable  alteration  in 
the  political  state  of  Europe.  Kingdoms,  which 
were  inconsiderable  when  broken,  and  parceled  out 
among  nobles,  acquired  firmness  and  strength  by 
being  united  into  a  regular  monarchy.  Kings  be- 
came conscious  of  their  own  power  and  importance. 
They  meditated  schemes  of  conquest,  and  engaged 
in  wars  at  a  distance.  Numerous  armies  were 
raised,  and  great  taxes  imposed  for  their  subsist- 
ence. Considerable  bodies  of  infantry  were  kept  in 
constant  pay;  that  service  grew  to  be  honourable; 
and  cavalry,  in  which  the  strength  of  European 
armies  had  hitherto  consisted,  though  proper  enough 
for  the  short  and  voluntary  excursions  of  barons 
who  served  at  their  own  expense,  were  found  to  be 
unfit  either  for  making  or  defending  any  important 
conquest. 

It  was  in  Italy  that  the  powerful  monarchs  of 
France  and  Spain  and  Germany  first  appeared  to 
make  a  trial  of  their  new  strength.  The  division 
of  that  country  into  many  small  states,  the  luxury 
of  the  people,  and  their  effeminate  aversion  to  arms 
invited  their  more  martial  neighbours  to  an  easy 
prey.  The  Italians,  who  had  been  accustomed  to 
mock  battles  only,  and  to  decide  their  interior  quar- 
rels by  innocent  and  bloodless  victories,  were  asto- 
nished, wiien  the  French  invaded  their  country,  at 
the  sight  of  real  war  ;  and,  as  they  could  not  resist 


OF  SCOTLAND.  S\ 

file  torrent,  they  suffered  it  to  take  its  course,  and 
to  spend  its  rage.  Intrigue  and  policy  supplied  the 
want  of  strength.  Necessity  and  self-preservation 
led  that  ingenious  people  to  the  great  secret  of  mo- 
dern politics,  by  teaching  them  how  to  balance  the 
power  of  one  Prince,  by  throwing  that  of  another 
into  the  opposite  scale.  By  this  happy  device,  the 
liberty  of  Italy  was  long  preserved.  The  scales 
were  poised  by  very  skilful  hands  ;  the  smallest 
variations  were  attended  to,  and  no  Prince  was 
allowed  to    retain   any   superiority  that  could  be 


dangerous. 


A  system  of  conduct,  pursued  with  so  much  suc- 
cess in  Italy,  was  not  long  confined  to  that  country 
of  political  refinement.  The  maxim  of  preserving 
a  balance  of  power  is  founded  so  much  upon  obvi- 
ous reasoning,  and  the  situation  of  Europe  rendered 
it  so  necessary,  that  it  soon  became  a  matter  of 
chief  attention  to  all  wise  politicians.  Every  step 
any  Prince  took  was  observed  by  all  his  neighbours. 
Ambassadors,  a  kind  of  honourable  spies,  autho- 
rized by  the  mutual  jealousy  of  Kings,  resided  al- 
most constantly  at  every  different  court,  and  had  it 
in  charge  to  watch  all  its  motions.  Dangers  were 
foreseen  at  a  greater  distance,  and  prevented  with 
more  ease.  Confederacies  were  formed  to  humble 
any  power  which  rose  above  its  due  proportion. 
Kf'venge  or  self-defence  were  no  longer  the  only 
causes  of  hostility,  it  became  common  to  take  arms 
out  of  policy ;  and  war,  both  in  its  commencement 
and  in  its  operations,  was  more  an  exercise  of  the 
judgment  than  of  the  passions  of  men.  Almost 
every  war  in  Europe  became  general,  and  the  most 
inconsiderable  states  acquired  importance,  because 
they  could  add  weight  to  either  scale. 


82  THE  HISTORY  B.  I. 

Francis  1.,  who  mounted  the  throne  of  France 
in  the  year  one  thousand  five  hundred  and  fifteen, 
and  Charles  V.,  who  obtained  the  Imperial  crown 
in  the  year  one  thousand  five  hundred  and  nineteen, 
divided  between  them  the  strength  and  affections 
of  all  Europe.      Their  perpetual  enmity  was  not 
owing  solely  either  to  personal  jealousy,  or  to  the 
caprice  of  private  passion,  but  was  founded  so  much 
in  nature  and  true  policy  that  it  subsisted  between 
their  posterity  for  several  ages.    Charles  succeeded 
to  all  the  dominions  of  the  house  of  Austria.     No 
family  had  ever  gained  so  much  by  wise  and  fortu- 
nate marriages.     By  acquisitions  of  this  kind,  the 
Austrian  Princes  rose,  in  a  short  time,  from  obscure 
Counts  of  Hapsbourg,  to  be  Archdukes  of  Austria 
and  Kings  of  Bohemia,  and  were  in  possession  of 
the  Imperial  dignity  by  a  sort  of  hereditary  right. 
Besides  these  territories  in  Germany,  Charles  was 
heir  to  the  crown  of  Spain,  and  to  all  the  dominions 
which  belonged  to  the  house  of  Burgundy.     The 
Burgundian  provinces  engrossed,  at  that  time,  the 
riches  and  commerce  of  one  half  of  Europe;  and 
he  drew  from  them,  on  many  occasions,  those  im- 
mense sums,  which  no  people  without  trade  and 
liberty  are  able  to  contribute.    Spain  furnished  him 
a  gallant  and  hardy  infantry,  to  whose  discipline  he 
was  indebted  for  all  his  conquests.     At  the  same 
time,  by  the  discovery  of  the  new  world,  a  vein  of 
wealth  was  opened  to  him,  which  all  the  extrava- 
gance of  ambition  could  not  exhaust.    These  advan- 
tages rendered  Charles  the  first  Prince  in  Europe  ; 
but  he  wished  to  be  more,  and  openly  aspired  to 
universal  monarchy.      His  genius  was  of  that  kind 
which  ripens  slowly,  and  lies  Long  concealed ;  but 
it  grew  up,  without  observation,  to  an  unexpected 


OF  SCOTLAND.  83 

height  and  vigour.     He  possessed,  in  an  eminent 
degree,  the  characteristic  virtues  of  all  the  different 
races  of  Princes  to  whom  he  was  allied.    In  form- 
ing his  schemes,  he  discovered  all  the  subtlety  and 
penetration  of  Ferdinand  his  grandfather ;  he  pur- 
sued them  with  that  obstinate  and  inflexible  perse- 
verance which  has  ever  been  peculiar  to  the  Austrian 
blood  ;  and  in  executing  them  he  could  employ  the 
magnanimity  and  boldness  of  his  Burgundian  an- 
cestors.    His  abilities  were  equal  to  his  power; 
and  neither  of  them  would  have  been  inferior  to  his 
designs,  had  not  Providence,  in  pity  to  mankind, 
and  in  order  to  preserve  them  from  the  worst  of  all 
evils,  Universal  Monarchy,  raised  up  Francis  I.  to 
defend  the  liberty  of  Europe.     His  dominions  were 
less  extensive,  but  more  united  than  the  Emperor's. 
His  subjects  were  numerous,  active,  and  warlike, 
lovers  of  glory,  and  lovers  of  their  King.  To  Charles, 
power  was  the  only  object  of  desire,  and  he  pursued 
it  with  an  unwearied  and  joyless  industry.    Francis 
could  mingle  pleasure  and  elegance  with  his  ambi- 
tion;  and,  though  he  neglected  some  advantages, 
which  a  more  phlegmatic  or  more  frugal  Prince 
would  have  improved,  an  active  and  intrepid  cou- 
rage supplied  all  his  defects,  and  checked  or  de- 
feated many  of  the  Emperor's  designs. 

The  rest  of  Europe  observed  all  the  motions  of 
these  mighty  rivals  with  a  jealous  attention.  On 
the  one  side,  the  Italians  saw  the  danger  which 
threatened  Christendom,  and,  in  order  to  avert  it, 
had  recourse  to  the  expedient  which  they  had  often 
employed  with  success.  They  endeavoured  to  di- 
vide the  power  of  the  two  contending  monarchs 
into  equal  scales,  and,  by  the  union  of  several  small 


84  THE  HISTORY  B.  i. 

states,  to  counterpoise  him  whose  power  became  too 
great.  But  what  they  concerted  with  much  wisdom, 
they  were  able  to  execute  with  little  vigour;  and 
intrigue  and  refinement  were  feeble  fences  against 
the  encroachments  of  military  power. 

On  the  other  side,  Henry  VIII.  of  England  held 
the  balance  with  less  delicacy,  but  with  a  stronger 
hand.  He  was  the  third  Prince  of  the  age  in  dig- 
nity and  in  power;  and  the  advantageous  situation 
of  his  dominions,  his  domestic  tranquillity,  his  im- 
mense wealth  and  absolute  authority  rendered  him 
the  natural  guardian  of  the  liberty  of  Europe.  Each 
of  the  rivals  courted  him  with  emulation  ;  he  knew 
it  to  be  his  interest  to  keep  the  balance  even,  and 
to  restrain  both  by  not  joining  entirely  with  either 
of  them.  But  he  was  seldom  able  to  reduce  his 
ideas  to  practice ;  he  was  governed  by  caprice 
more  than  by  principle  ;  and  the  passions  of  the 
man  were  an  overmatch  for  the  maxims  of  the  Kino-. 
Vanity  and  resentment  were  the  great  springs  of 
all  his  undertakings,  and  his  neighbours  easily 
found  the  way,  by  touching  these,  to  force  him 
upon  many  rash  and  inconsistent  enterprises.  His 
reign  was  a  perpetual  series  of  blunders  in  politics; 
and  while  he  esteemed  himself  the  wisest  Prince  in 
Europe,  he  was  a  constant  dupe  to  those  who  found 
it  necessary,  and  could  submit  to  flatter  him. 

In  this  situation  of  Europe,  Scotland,  which  had 
hitherto  wasted  her  strength  in  the  quarrels  between 
France  and  England,  emerged  from  her  obscurity 
took  her  station  in  the  system,  and  began  to  have 
some  influence  upon  the  fate  of  distant  nations. 
Her  assistance  was  frequently  of  consequence  to 
the  contending  parties,  and  the  balance  was  oftei* 


OF  SCOTLAND.  85' 

So  nicely  adjusted  that  it  was  in  her  power  to  make 
it  lean  to  either  side.  The  part  assigned  her,  at 
this  juncture,  was  to  divert  Henry  from  carrying 
his  arms  into  the  continent.  That  Prince  having 
routed  the  French  at  Guinegat  and  invested  Te- 
rouenne,  Francis  attempted  to  divide  his  forces,  by 
engaging  James  IV.  in  that  unhappy  expedition 
which  ended  with  his  life.  For  the  same  reason 
Francis  encouraged  and  assisted  the  Duke  of  Al- 
bany to  ruin  the  families  of  Angus  and  Home, 
which  were  in  the  interest  of  England,  and  would 
willingly  have  persuaded  the  Scots  to  revenge  the 
death  of  their  King,  and  to  enter  into  a  new  war 
with  that  kingdom.  Henry  and  Francis  having 
united  not  long  after  against  the  Emperor,  it  was 
the  interest  of  both  Kings  that  the  Scots  should 
continue  inactive ;  and  a  long  tranquillity  was  the 
effect  of  their  union.  Charles  endeavoured  to  break 
this,  and  to  embarrass  Henry  by  another  inroad  of 
the  Scots.  For  this  end  he  made  great  advances 
to  James  V.,  flattering  the  vanity  of  the  young  mo- 
narch by  electing  him  a  Knight  of  the  Golden 
Fleece,  and  by  otfering  him  a  match  in  the  Impe- 
rial family  ;  while,  in  return  for  these  empty  ho- 
nours, he  demanded  for  him  to  renounce  his  alliance 
with  France,  and  to  declare  war  against  England. 
But  James,  who  had  much  to  lose,  and  who  could 
gain  little  by  closing  with  the  Fmperor's  proposals, 
rejected  them  with  decency,  and,  keeping  firm  to  his 
ancient  allies,  left  Henry  at  full  liberty  to  act  upon 
the  continent  with  his  whole  strength. 

Henry  himself  began  his  reign  by  imitating  the 
example  of  his  ancestors  with  regard  to  Scotland. 
He  held  its  power  in  such  extreme  contempt  that 
he  was  at  no  pains  to  gain  its  friendship;  but,  on 

VOL.  J.  J 


8G  THE  HISTORY  B.  I. 

the  contrary,  he  irritated  the  whole  nation,  by  re- 
viving the  antiquated  pretensions  of  the  crown  of 
England  to  the  sovereignty  over  Scotland.      But 
his  own  experience,  and  the  examples  of  his  ene- 
mies, gave  him  a  higher  idea  of  its  importance.    It 
was  impossible  to  defend  an  open  and  extensive 
frontier  against  the  incursions  of  an  active  and  mar- 
tial people.      During  any  war  on  the  continent,  this 
obliged  him  to  divide  the  strength  of  his  kingdom. 
It  was  necessary  to  maintain  a  kind  of  army  of  ob- 
servation in  the  north  of  England ;  and,  after  all 
precautions,  the  Scottish  borderers,   who  were  su- 
perior to  all  mankind  in  the  practice  of  irregular 
war,   often   made  successful   inroads,    and  spread 
terror  and  desolation  over  many  counties.     He  fell, 
at  last,  upon  the  true  secret  of  policy,  with  respect 
to  Scotland,  which  his  predecessors  had  too  little 
penetration  to  discover,  or  too  much  pride  to  em- 
ploy.    The  situation  of  the  country,  and  the  bra- 
very of  the  people,  made  the  conquest  of  Scotland 
impossible ;  but  the  national  poverty,  and  the  vio- 
lence of  faction,   rendered  it  an   easy  matter  to 
divide  and  to  govern  it.    He  abandoned,  therefore, 
the  former  design,  and  resolved  to  employ  his  ut- 
most address  in  executing  the  latter.     It  had  not 
yet  become  honourable  for  one  Prince  to  receive 
pay  from  another,  under  the  more  decent  name  of 
a  subsidy.     But,  in  all  ages,  the  same  arguments 
have  been  good  in  courts,  and  of  weight  with  mi- 
nisters,  factious  leaders,    and   favourites.      AVhat 
were  the  arguments  by  which  Henry  brought  over 
so    many  to    his   interest  during  the    minority   of 
James  V.  we  know  by  the  original  warrant  still 
extant38,  for  remitting  considerable  sums  into  Scot- 

39  Barn.  Hist.  Rcf.  vol.  i.  p.7. 


OF  SCOTLAND.  87 

land.  By  a  proper  distribution  of  these,  many  per- 
sons of  note  were  gained  to  his  party,  and  a  faction, 
which  held  secret  correspondence  with  England, 
and  received  all  its  directions  from  thence,  appears 
henceforward  in  our  domestic  contests.  In  the  se- 
quel of  the  history,  we  shall  find  Henry  labouring 
to  extend  his  influence  in  Scotland.  His  succes- 
sors adopted  the  same  plan,  and  improved  upon  it. 
The  affairs  of  the  two  kingdoms  became  inter- 
woven, and  their  interests  were  often  the  same. 
Elizabeth  divided  her  attention  almost  equally  be- 
tween them ;  and  the  authority  which  she  inherited 
iu  the  one  was  not  greater  than  that  which  she 
acquired  in  the  other. 


THE 

HISTORY  OF  SCOTLAND, 


BOOK  II. 
1542. 


Mary,  Queen  of  Scots,  the  daughter  of  James  V. 
and  Mary  of  Guise,  was  born  [Dec.  8],  a  few  days 
before  the  death  of  her  father.  The  situation  in 
which  he  left  the  kingdom  alarmed  all  ranks  of  men 
with  the  prospect  of  a  turbulent  and  disastrous  reign. 
A  war  against  England  had  been  undertaken  without 
necessity,  and  carried  on  without  success.  Many 
persons  of  the  first  rank  had  fallen  into  the  hands 
of  the  English,  in  the  unfortunate  rout  near  the  frith 
of  Sol  way,  and  were  still  prisoners  at  London. — 
Among  the  rest  of  the  nobles  there  was  little  union 
either  in  their  views  or  in  their  affections ;  and  the 
religious  disputes,  occasioned  by  the  opinions  of  the 
Reformers,  growing  every  day  more  violent,  added 
to  the  rage  of  those  factions  which  are  natural  to  a 
form  of  government  nearly  aristocratical. 

The  government  of  a  Queen  was  unknown  in 
Scotland,  and  did  not  imprint  much  reverence  in 
the  mrnds  of  a  martial  people.  The  government 
of  an  infant  Queen  was  still  more  destitute  of  real 
authority ;  and  the  prospect  of  a  long  and  feeble 
.minority  invited  to  faction  by  the  hope  of  impunity. 


lo42.  HISTORY  OF  SCOTLAND.  80 

James  had  not  even  provided  the  common  remedy 
against  the  disorders  of  a  minority,  by  committing 
to  proper  persons  the  care  of  his  daughter's  educa- 
tion, and  the  administration  of  affairs  in  her  name. 
Though  he  saw  the  clouds  gathering,  and  foretold 
that  they  would  quickly  burst  into  a  storm,  he  was 
so  little  able  to  disperse  them,  or  to  defend  his 
daughter  and  kingdom  against  the  imminent  cala- 
mities, that,  in  mere  despair,  he  abandoned  them 
both  to  the  mercy  of  fortune,  and  left  open  to  every 
pretender  the  office  of  Regent,  which  he  could  not 
fix  to  his  own  satisfaction. 

Cardinal  Beatoun,  who  had  for  many  years  been 
considered  as  prime  minister,  was  the  first  that 
claimed  that  high  dignity  ;  and,  in  support  of  his 
pretensions,  he  produced  a  testament1,  which  he 
himself  had  forged  in  the  name  of  the  late  King ; 
and,  without  any  other  right,  instantly  assumed  the 
title  of  Regent.  He  hoped  by  the  assistance  of  the 
clergy,  the  countenance  of  France,  the  connivance 
of  the  Queen  Dowager,  and  the  support  of  the 
whole  Popish  faction,  to  hold  by  force  what  he  had 
seized  on  by  fraud.  But  Beatoun  had  enjoyed 
power  too  long  to  be  a  favourite  of  the  nation. — 
Those  among  the  nobles  who  wished  for  a  refor- 
mation in  religion  dreaded  his  severity,  and  others 
considered  the  elevation  of  a  churchman  to  the 
highest  office  in  the  kingdom  as  a  depression  of 
themselves.  At  their  instigation,  James  Hamilton 
Earl  of  Arran,  and  next  heir  to  the  Queen,  roused 
himself  from  his  inactivity,  and  was  prevailed  on  to 
aspire  to  that  station  to  which  proximity  of  blood 
gave  him  a  natural  title.  The  nobles,  who  were 
assembled  for  that  purpose,  unanimously  conferred 

1  Saddler's  Lett.  101.     Haines,  State  Papers,  48G. 

1  '2 


DO  THE  HISTORY  B.  II. 

on  him  the  office  of  Regent;  and  the  public  voice 
applauded  their  choice2. 

No  two  men  ever  differed  more  widely  in  dispo- 
sition and  character  than  the  Earl  of  Arran  and 
Cardinal  Beatoun.  The  Cardinal  was  by  nature  of 
immoderate  ambition :  by  long  experience  he  had 
acquired  address  and  refinement ;  and  insolence 
grew  upon  him  from  continual  success.  His  high 
station  in  the  church  placed  him  in  the  way  of  great 
civil  employments ;  his  abilities  were  equal  to  the 
greatest  of  these  :  nor  did  he  reckon  any  of  them 
to  be  above  his  merit.  As  his  own  eminence  was 
founded  upon  the  power  of  the  church  of  Rome,  he 
was  a  zealous  defender  of  that  superstition,  and  for 
the  same  reason  an  avowed  enemy  to  the  doctrine 
of  the  Reformers.  Political  motives  alone  deter- 
mined him  to  support  the  one  or  to  oppose  the 
other.  His  early  application  to  public  business 
kept  him  unacquainted  with  the  learning  and  con- 
troversies of  the  age;  he  gave  judgment,  however, 
upon  all  points  in  dispute,  with  a  precipitancy,  vio- 
lence, and  rigour,  which  contemporary  historians 
mention  with  indignation. 

The  character  of  the  Earl  of  Arran  was,  in  al- 
most every  thing,  the  reverse  of  Beatoun's.  He 
was  neither  infected  with  ambition  nor  inclined  to 
cruelty :  the  love  of  ease  extinguished  the  former, 
the  gentleness  of  his  temper  preserved  him  from  the 
latter.  Timidity  and  irresolution  were  his  predomi- 
nant failings ;  the  one  occasioned  by  his  natural 
constitution,  and  the  other  arising  from  a  consci- 
ousness that  his  abilities  were  not  equal  to  his  sta- 
tion. With  these  dispositions  he  might  have  en- 
joyed and  adorned  private  life  :  but  his  public  con- 
-  Epist.  Reg.  Scot.  vol.  ii.  p.  308. 


1542.  OF  SCOTLAND.  01 

duct  was  without  courage,  or  dignity,  or  consist- 
ence ;  the  perpetual  slave  of  his  own  fears,  and,  by 
consequence,  the  perpetual  tool  of  those  who  found 
their  advantage  in  practising  upon  them.  But,  as 
no  other  person  could  be  set  in  opposition  to  the 
Cardinal,  with  any  probability  of  success,  the  na- 
tion declared  in  his  favour  with  such  general  con- 
sent that  the  artifices  of  his  rival  could  not  with- 
stand its  united  strength. 

The  Earl  of  Arran  had  scarce  taken  possession 
of  his  new  dignity,  when  a  negotiation  was  opened 
with  England,  which  gave  birth  to  events  of  the 
most  fatal  consequence  to  himself  and  to  the  king- 
dom. After  the  death  of  James,  Henry  VIII.  was 
no  longer  afraid  of  any  interruption  from  Scotland 
to  his  designs  against  France ;  and  immediately 
conceived  hopes  of  rendering  this  security  perpe- 
tual; by  the  marriage  of  Edward  his  only  son  with 
the  young  Queen  of  Scots.  He  communicated  his 
intentions  to  the  prisoners  taken  at  Solway,  and 
prevailed  on  them  to  favour  it,  by  the  promise  of 
liberty,  as  the  reward  of  their  success.  In  the 
mean  time  he  permitted  them  to  return  into  Scot- 
land, that,  by  their  presence  in  the  parliament 
which  the  Regent  had  called,  they  might  be  the 
better  able  to  persuade  their  countrymen  to  fall  in 
with  his  proposals.  A  cause  intrusted  to  such  able 
and  zealous  advocates,  could  not  well  miss  of  com- 
ing to  a  happy  issue.  All  those  who  feared  the 
Cardinal,  or  who  desired  a  change  in  religion,  were 
fond  of  an  alliance,  which  afforded  protection  to 
the  doctrine  which  they  had  embraced,  as  well  as 
to  their  own  persons,  against  the  rage  of  that  power- 
ful and  haughty  prelate. 

But  Henry's  rough  and  impatient  temper  was 


J)2  THE  HISTORY  B.  IT. 

incapable  of  improving  this  favourable  conjuncture. 
Address  and  delicacy  in  managing  the  fears,  and 
follies,  and  interests  of  men  were  arts  with  which 
he  was  utterly  unacquainted.  The  designs  he  had 
formed  upon  Scotland  were  obvious  from  the  mar- 
riage which  he  had  proposed,  and  he  had  not  dex- 
terity enough  to  disguise  or  to  conceal  them.  In- 
stead of  yielding  to  the  fear  or  jealousy  of  the  Scots, 
what  time  and  accident  would  soon  have  enabled 
him  to  recover,  he  at  once  alarmed  and  irritated  the 
whole  nation,  by  demanding  that  the  Queen's  per- 
son should  be  immediately  committed  to  his  cus- 
tody, and  that  the  government  of  the  kingdom 
should  be  put  into  his  hands  during  her  minority. 

Henry  could  not  have  prescribed  more  ignomi- 
nious conditions  to  a  conquered  people,  and  it  is  no 
wonder  they  were  rejected,  with  indignation,  by 
men  who  scorned  to  purchase  an  alliance  with 
England  at  the  price  of  their  own  liberty.  [1543] 
The  parliament  of  Scotland,  however,  influenced 
by  the  nobles  who  returned  from  England ;  desir- 
ous of  peace  with  that  kingdom ;  and  delivered,  by 
the  Regent's  confining  the  Cardinal  as  a  prisoner, 
from  an  opposition  to  which  he  might  have  given 
rise ;  consented  to  a  treaty  of  marriage  and  of  union, 
but  upon  terms  somewhat  more  equal  [March  12]. 
After  some  dark  and  unsuccessful  intrigues,  by 
which  his  ambassador  endeavoured  to  carry  off  the 
young  Queen  and  Cardinal  Beatoun  into  England, 
Henry  was  obliged  to  give  up  his  own  proposals, 
and  to  accept  of  theirs.  On  his  side  he  consented 
that  the  Queen  should  continue  to  reside  in  Scot- 
land, and  himself  remain  excluded  from  any  share 
in  the  government  of  the  kingdom.  On  the  other 
hand,  the  Scots  agreed  to  send  their  Sovereign  into 


1543.  OF  SCOTLAND.  1)3 

England  as  soon  as  she  attained  the  full  age  of  ten 
years,  and  instantly  to  deliver  six  persons  of  the 
first  rank  to  be  kept  as  hostages  by  Henry  till  the 
Queen's  arrival  at  his  court. 

The  treaty  was  still  so  manifestly  of  advantage 
to  England  that  the  Regent  lost  much  of  the  pub- 
lic confidence  by  consenting  to  it.  The  Cardinal, 
who  had  now  recovered  liberty,  watched  for  such 
an  opportunity  of  regaining  credit,  and  he  did  not 
fail  to  cultivate  and  improve  this  to  the  utmost, 
He  complained  loudly  that  the  Regent  had  be- 
trayed the  kingdom  to  its  most  inveterate  enemies, 
and  sacrificed  its  honour  to  his  own  ambition.  He 
foretold  the  extinction  of  the  true  Catholic  religion, 
under  the  tyranny  of  an  excommunicated  heretic ; 
but,  above  all,  he  lamented  to  see  an  ancient  king- 
dom consenting  to  its  own  servitude,  descending 
into  the  ignominious  station  of  a  dependent  pro- 
vince ;  and,  in  one  hour,  the  weakness  or  treachery 
of  a  single  man  surrendering  every  thing  for  which 
the  Scottish  nation  had  struggled  and  fought  during 
so  many  ages.  These  remonstrances  of  the  Cardi- 
nal were  not  without  effect.  They  were  addressed 
to  prejudices  and  passions  which  are  deeply  rooted 
in  the  human  heart.  The  same  hatred  to  the  an- 
cient enemies  of  their  country,  the  same  jealousy 
of  national  honour,  and  pride  of  independence, 
which,  at  the  beginning  of  the  present  century,  went, 
near  to  prevent  the  Scots  from  consenting  to  a  union 
with  England,  upon  terms  of  great  advantage,  did, 
at  that  time,  induce  the  whole  nation  to  declare 
against  the  alliance  which  had  been  concluded.  In 
the  one  period,  a  hundred  and  fifty  years  of  peace 
between  the  two  nations,  the  habit  of  being  sub- 
jected to  the  same.  King,  and  governed  by  the  sunn; 


94  THE  HISTORY    .  B.  II. 

maxims,  had  considerably  abated  old  animosities, 
and  prepared  both  people  for  incorporating.  In 
the  other,  injuries  were  still  fresh,  the  wounds  on 
both  sides  were  open,  and,  in  the  warmth  of  resent- 
ment, it  was  natural  to  seek  revenge,  and  to  be 
averse  from  reconcilement.  At  the  Union  in  one 
thousand  seven  hundred  and  seven,  the  wisdom  of 
Parliament  despised  the  groundless  murmurs  occa- 
sioned by  antiquated  prejudices;  but  in  one  thou- 
sand five  hundred  and  forty-three,  the  complaints 
of  the  nation  were  better  founded,  and  urged  with 
a  zeal  and  unanimity,  which  it  is  neither  just  nor 
safe  to  disregard.  A  rash  measure  of  the  English 
Monarch  added  greatly  to  the  violence  of  this  na- 
tional animosity.  The  Scots,  relying  on  the  treaty 
of  marriage  and  union,  fitted  out  several  ships  for 
France,  with  which  their  trade  had  been  interrupted 
for  some  time.  These  were  driven  by  stress  of 
weather  to  take  refuge  in  different  ports  of  Eng- 
land ;  and  Henry,  under  pretext  that  they  were 
carrying  provisions  to  a  kingdom  with  which  he  was 
at  war,  ordered  them  to  be  seized  and  condemned 
as  lawful  prizes3.  The  Scots,  astonished  at  this 
proceeding  of  a  Prince  whose  interest  it  was  mani- 
festly at  that  juncture  to  court  and  to  sooth  them, 
felt  it  not  only  as  an  injury  but  as  an  insult,  and 
expressed  all  the  resentment  natural  to  a  high- 
spirited   people4.      Their   rage   rose    to    such   an 

3  Keith,  32.  31.  Epist.  Reg.  Scot.  ii.  App.  311.  Hamilton 
MSS.  vol.i.  p.  389. 

*  In  the  MS.  Collection  of  Papers  belonging  to  the  Duke  of 
Hamilton,  Sir  Ralph  Sadler  describes  the  spirit  of  the  Scots  as 
extremely  outrageous.  In  his  letter  from  Edinburgh,  Septem- 
ber 1,  1513,  he  says  :  "  The  stay  of  the  ships  has  brought  the 
people  of  this  town,  both  men  and  women,  and  especially  the 
merchants,  into  such  a  rage  and  fury  that  the  whole  towu  is  com- 


1543.  OF  SCOTLAND.  0"» 

height,  that  the  English  ambassador  could  hardlv 
be  protected  from  it.  One  spirit  seemed  now  to 
animate  all  orders  of  men.  The  clergy  offered  to 
contribute  a  great  sum  towards  preserving  the 
church  from  the  dominion  of  a  Prince,  whose  sys- 
tem of  reformation  was  so  fatal  to  their  power. 
The  nobles,  after  having-  mortified  the  Cardinal  so 
lately  in  such  a  cruel  manner,  were  now  ready  to 
applaud  and  to  second  him,  as  the  defender  of  the 
honour  and  liberty  of  his  country. 

Argyll,  Huntly,  Bothwell,  and  other  powerful 
barons  declared  openly  against  the  alliance  with 
England.  By  their  assistance,  the  Cardinal  seized 
on  the  persons  of  the  young  Queen  and  her  mother, 
and  added  to  his  party  the  splendour  and  authority 
of  the  royal  name5.  He  received,  at  the  same 
time,  a  more  real  accession  to  his  strength,  by  the 
arrival  of  Matthew  Stewart  Earl  of  Lennox,  whose 

mover!  against  me,  and  swear  great  oaths,  if  their  ships  are  not 
restored,  that  they  would  have  their  amends  of  me  and  mine,  and 
that  they  would  set  my  house  here  on  lire  over  mv  head,  so  that 
one  of  us  should  not  escape  alive  ;  and  also  it  hath  much  incensed 
and  provoked  the  people  against  the  governor,  saying,  that  he 
hath  coloured  a  peace  with  Your  Majesty  onlv  to  undo  them. — 
This  is  the  unreasonableness  of  the  people  which  live  here  in 
such  a  beastly  liberty  that  they  neither  regard  God  nor  governor  ; 
nor  yet  justice,  or  any  good  policy,  doth  take  place  among  them  ; 
assuring  Your  Highness  that,  unless  the  ships  be  delivered,  there 
will  be  none  abiding  here  for  me  without  danger."  Vol.  i.  451,. 
In  his  letter  of  September  5,  he  writes  that  the  rage  of  the  peo- 
ple still  continued  so  violent,  "  that  neither  I  nor  any  of  my  folks 
dare  go  out  of  my  doors;  and  the  provost  of  the  town,  who  hath 
much  ado  to  stay  them  from  assaulting  me  in  my  house,  and  keep- 
eth  watch  therefore  nightly,  hath  sent  to  me  sundry  times,  and 
prayed  me  to  keep  myself  and  my  folks  within,  for  it  is  scant  in 
his  power  to  repress  or  resist  the  fury  of  the  people.  They  say 
plainly,  I  shall  never  pass  out  of  the  town  alive,  except  they  have 
their  ships  restored.  This  is  the  rage  and  beastliness  of  this  na- 
tion, which  God  keep  all  honest  men  from."     lb.  471. 

i  Keith's  Hist,  of  Scotl.  30. 


DO  THE  HiSTORY  B.  If. 

return  from  France  he  had  earnestly  solicited. — - 
This  young  nobleman  was  the  hereditary  enemy  of 
the  house  of  Hamilton.  He  had  many  claims 
upon  the  Regent,  and  pretended  a  right  to  exclude 
him,  not  only  from  succeeding  to  the  crown,  but  to 
deprive  him  of  the  possession  of  his  private  fortune. 
The  Cardinal  flattered  his  vanity  with  the  prospect 
of  marrying  the  Queen  Dowager,  and  affected  to 
treat  him  with  so  much  respect  that  the  Regent 
became  jealous  of  him  as  a  rival  in  power. 

This  suspicion  was  artfully  heightened  by  the 
Abbot  of  Paisley,  who  returned  into  Scotland  some 
time  before  the  Earl  of  Lennox,  and  acted  in  con- 
cert with  the  Cardinal.  He  was  a  natural  brother 
of  the  Regent,  with  whom  he  had  great  credit;  a 
warm  partisan  of  France,  and  a  zealous  defender 
of  the  established  religion.  He  took  hold  of  the 
Regent  by  the  proper  handle,  and  endeavoured  to 
bring  about  a  change  in  his  sentiments  by  working 
upon  his  fears.  The  desertion  of  the  nobility,  the 
disaffection  of  the  clergy,  and  the  rage  of  the  peo- 
ple ;  the  resentment  of  France,  the  power  of  the 
Cardinal,  and  the  pretensions  of  Lennox,  were  all 
represented  with  aggravation,  and  with  their  most 
threatening  aspect. 

Meanwhile,  the  day  appointed  for  the  ratifica- 
tion of  the  treaty  with  England,  and  the  delivery 
of  the  hostages  approached,  and  the  Regent  was 
still  undetermined  in  his  own  mind.  He  acted  to 
the  last  with  that  irresolution  and  inconsistence 
which  is  peculiar  to  wreak  men  when  they  are  so 
unfortunate  as  to  have  the  chief  part  in  the  conduct 
of  difficult  affairs.  On  the  25th  of  August  he  ra- 
tified a  treaty  with  Henry6,  and  proclaimed  the 
Cardinal,  who  still  continued  to  oppose  it,  an  enemy 

6  Rymer,  Ford,  xv.  p.  4- 


1543.  OF  SCOTLAND.  9? 

to  his  country.  On  the  third  of  September  he  se- 
cretly withdrew  from  Edinburgh,  met  with  the  Car- 
dinal at  Callendar,  renounced  the  friendship  of  Eng- 
land, and  declared  for  the  interests  of  France". 

Henry,  in  order  to  gain  the  Regent,  had  not 
spared  the  most  magnificent  promises.  He  had 
offered  to  give  the  Princess  Elizabeth  in  marriage 
to  his  eldest  son,  and  to  constitute  him  King  of 
that  part  of  Scotland  which  lies  beyond  the  river 
Forth.  But  upon  finding  his  interest  in  the  king- 
dom to  be  less  considerable  than  he  had  imagined, 
the  English  Monarch  began  to  treat  him  with  little 
respect.  The  young  Queen  was  now  in  the  cus- 
tody of  his  enemies,  who  grew  every  day  more 
numerous  and  more  popular.  They  formed  a  se- 
parate court  at  Stirling,  and  threatened  to  elect 
another  Regent.  The  French  King  was  ready  to 
afford  them  his  protection,  and  the  nation,  out  of 
hatred  to  the  English,  would  have  united  in  their 
defence.  In  this  situation  the  Regent  could  not 
retain  his  authority  without  a  sudden  change  of  his 
measures;  and  though  he  endeavoured,  by  ratify- 
ing the  treaty,  to  preserve  the  appearances  of  good 
faith  with  England,  he  was  obliged  to  throw  him- 
self into  the  arms  of  the  party  which  adhered  to 
France. 

Soon  after  this  sudden  revolution  in  his  political 
principles,  the  Regent  changed  his  sentiments  con- 
cerning religion.  The  spirit  of  controversy  was 
then  new  and  warm  ;  books  of  that  kind  were 
eagerly  read  by  men  of  every  rank  ;  the  love  of 
novelty,  or  the  conviction  of  truth,  had  led  the 
Regent  to  express  great  esteem  for  the  writings  of 
the  Reformers;   and  having  been  powerfully  sup 

1  Sadler,  339.  356.     Hamilton  MSS.  i.  470,  &c. 
VOL.  I.  K 


98  THE  HISTORY  B.  II. 

ported  by  those  who  had  embraced  their  opinions, 
he,  in  order  to  gratify  them,  entertained,  in  his  own 
family,  two  of  the  most  noted  preachers  of  the  Pro- 
testant doctrine,   and,  in  his  first  parliament,  con- 
sented to  an  act,  by  which  the  laity  were  permitted 
to  read  the  scriptures  in  a  language  which  they  un- 
derstood8.   Truth  needed  only  a  fair  hearing  to  be 
an  overmatch  for  error.     Absurdities,  which  had 
long  imposed  on   the  ignorance   and   credulity   of 
mankind,  were  detected  and  exposed  to  public  ridi- 
cule ;  and,  under  the  countenance  of  the  Regent,  the 
Reformation  made  great  advances.     The  Cardinal 
observed  its  progress  with  concern,  and  was  at  the 
utmost  pains  to  obstruct  it.     He  represented  to  the 
Regent  his  great  imprudence  in  giving  encourage- 
ment to  opinions  so  favourable  to  Lennox's  preten- 
sions ;  that  his  own  legitimacy  depended  upon  the 
validity  of  a  sentence  of  divorce,  founded  on  the 
Pope's  authority ;  and  that  by  suffering  it  to  be 
called  in  question,  he  weakened  his  own  title  to  the 
succession,  and  furnished  his  rival  with  the  only 
argument  by  which  it  could  be  rendered  doubtful9. 
These  insinuations  made  a  deep  impression  on  the 
Regent's  timorous  spirit,  who,  at  the  prospect  of 

8  Keith,  p.  36,  37. 

9  The  pretensions  of  the  Earl  of  Lennox  to  the  succession  were 
thus  founded.  Mary,  the  daughter  of  James  II.  was  married  \o 
James  Lord  Hamilton,  whom  James  III.  created  Earl  of  Arran 
on  that  account.  Elizabeth,  a  daughter  of  that  marriage,  was  the 
wife  of  Matthew  Earl  of  Lennox,  and  the  present  Earl  was  her 
grandson.  The  Regent  was  likewise  the  grandson  of  the  Princess 
Mary.  But  his  father  having  married  Janet  Beatoun  the  Regent's 
mother,  after  he  had  obtained  a  divorce  from  Elizabeth  Home  his 
former  wife,  Lennox  pretended  that  the  sentence  of  divorce  was 
unjust,  and  that  the  Regent,  being  born  while  Elizabeth  Home 
was  still  alive,  ought  to  be  considered  as  illegitimate.  Crawf. 
Peer.  192. 


1543.  OF  SCOTLAND.  99 

such  imaginary  danger,  was  as  much  startled  as  the 
Cardinal  could  have  wished;  and  his  zeal  for  the 
Protestant  religion  was  not  long  proof  against  his 
fear.  He  publicly  abjured  the  doctrine  of  the  Re- 
formers in  the  Franciscan  church  at  Stirling,  and 
declared  not  only  for  the  political  but  the  religious 
opinions  of  his  new  confidents. 

The  Protestant  doctrine  did  not  suffer  much  by 
his  apostasy.  It  had  already  taken  so  deep  root 
in  the  kingdom  that  no  discouragement  or  severity 
could  extirpate  it.  The  Regent  indeed  consented 
to  every  thing  that  the  zeal  of  the  Cardinal  thought 
necessary  for  the  preservation  of  the  established 
religion.  The  Reformers  were  persecuted  with  all 
the  cruelty  which  superstition  inspires  into  a  bar- 
barous people.  Many  were  condemned  to  that 
dreadful  death  which  the  church  has  appointed  for 
the  punishment  of  its  enemies;  but  they  suffered 
with  a  spirit  so  nearly  resembling  the  patience  and 
fortitude  of  the  primitive  martyrs  that  more  were 
converted  than  terrified  by  such  spectacles. 

The  Cardinal,  however,  was  now  in  possession 
of  every  thing  his  ambition  could  desire  ;  and  ex- 
ercised all  the  authority  of  a  Regent,  without  the 
envy  of  the  name.  He  had  nothing  to  fear  from 
the  Earl  of  Arran,  who,  having  by  his  inconsistency 
forfeited  the  public  esteem,  was  contemned  by  one 
half  the  nation,  and  little  trusted  by  the  other. — 
The  pretensions  of  the  Earl  of  Lennox  were  the 
only  thing  which  remained  to  embarrass  him.  He 
had  very  successfully  made  use  of  that  nobleman 
to  work  upon  the  Regent's  jealousy  and  fear;  but 
as  he  no  longer  stood  in  need  of  such  an  instru- 
ment, he  was  willing  to  get  rid  of  him  with  decency. 
Lennox  soon  began  to  suspect  his  intention  ;  pro- 


*i.00  THE  HISTORY  B.  II. 

mises,  flattery,  and  respect  were  the  only  returns 
he  had  hitherto  received  for  substantial  services : 
but  at  last  the  Cardinal's  artifices  could  no  longer 
be  concealed,  and  Lennox,  instead  of  attaining 
power  and  dignity  himself,  saw  that  he  had  been 
employed  only  to  procure  these  for  another.  Re- 
sentment and  disappointed  ambition  urged  him  to 
seek  revenge  on  that  cunning  prelate,  who,  by  sa- 
crificing his  interest,  had  so  ungenerously  purchased 
the  Earl  of  Arran's  friendship.  He  withdrew,  for 
that  reason,  from  court,  and  declared  for  the  party 
at  enmity  with  the  Cardinal,  which,  with  open  arms, 
received  a  convert  who  added  so  much  lustre  to 
their  cause. 

The  two  factions  which  divided  the  kingdom  were 
still  the  same,  without  any  alterations  in  their  views 
or  principles;  but,  by  one  of  those  strange  revolu- 
tions which  were  frequent  in  that  age,  they  had  in 
the  course  of  a  few  weeks  changed  their  leaders. 
The  Regent  was  at  the  head  of  the  partisans  of 
France  and  the  defenders  of  popery,  and  Lennox 
in  the  same  station  with  the  advocates  for  the  Eng- 
lish alliance  and  a  reformation  in  religion.  The  one 
laboured  to  pull  down  his  own  work,  which  the 
other  upheld  with  the  same  hand  that  had  hitherto 
endeavoured  to  destroy  it. 

Lennox's  impatience  for  revenge  got  the  start  of 
the  Cardinal's  activity.  He  surprised  both  him 
and  the  Regent  by  a  sudden  march  to  Edinburgh 
with  a  numerous  army  ;  and  might  easily  have 
crushed  them  before  they  could  prepare  for  their 
defence.  But  he  was  weak  enough  to  listen  to  pro- 
posals for  an  accommodation  ;  and  the  Cardinal 
nimised  him  so  artfully,  and  spun  out  the  treaty  to 
BUcb  a  length,  that  the  greater  part  of  the  Earl's 


1-543.  OF  SCOTLAND.  101 

troops,  who  served,  as  is  usual  wherever  the  feudal 
institutions  prevailed,  at  their  own  expense,  de- 
serted him ;  and  in  concluding  a  peace,  instead  of 
giving  the  law,  he  was  obliged  to  receive  it.  A 
second  attempt  to  retrieve  his  affairs  ended  yet 
more  unfortunately.  One  body  of  his  troops  was 
cut  to  pieces,  and  the  rest  dispersed ;  and  with  the 
poor  remains  of  a  ruined  party,  he  must  either  have 
submitted  to  the  conqueror,  or  have  fled  out  of  the 
kingdom,  if  the  approach  of  an  English  army  had 
not  brought  him  a  short  relief. 

Henry  was  not  of  a  temper  to  bear  tamely  the 
indignity  with  which  he  had  been  treated,  both  by 
the  Regent  and  Parliament  of  Scotland,  who,  at 
the  time  when  they  renounced  their  alliance  with 
him,  had  entered  into  a  new  and  stricter  confede- 
racy with  France.  The  rigour  of  the  season  re- 
tarded for  some  time  the  execution  of  his  ven- 
geance. But,  in  the  spring  [l->44],  a  considerable 
body  of  infantry,  which  was  destined  for  France, 
received  orders  to  sail  for  Scotland,  and  a  proper 
number  of  cavalry  was  appointed  to  join  it  by  land. 
The  Regent  and  Cardinal  little  expected  xsuch  a 
visit.     Thev  had  trusted  that  the  French  war  would 

•I 

find  employment  for  all  Henry's  forces,  and,  from 
an  unaccountable  security,  were  wholly  unprovided 
for  the  defence  of  the  kingdom.  The  Earl  of  Hert- 
ford, a  leader  fatal  to  the  Scots  in  that  age,  com- 
manded his  army,  and  landed  it,  without  opposi- 
tion, a  few  miles  from  Leith.  He  was  quickly 
master  of  that  place  [May  3] ;  and,  marching  di- 
rectly to  I'Minburgh,  entered  it  with  the  same  ease. 
After  plundering  the  adjacent  country,  the  richest 
and  most  open  in  Scotland,  he  set  on  fire  both  these 
towns,  and,  upon  the  approach  of  some  troops  ga- 

k  2 


11*2  THE  HISTORY  B.  II. 

thered  together  by  the  Regent,  put  his  booty  on 
board  the  fleet,  and  with  his  land  forces  retired 
safely  to  the  English  borders ;  delivering  the  king- 
dom in  a  few  days  from  the  terror  of  an  invasion, 
concerted  with  little  policy,  carried  on  at  great  ex- 
pense, and  attended  with  no  advantage.  If  Henry 
aimed  at  the  conquest  of  Scotland,  he  gained  no- 
thing by  this  expedition  ;  if  the  marriage  he  had 
proposed  was  still  in  his  view,  he  lost  a  great  deal. 
Such  a  rough  courtship,  as  the  Earl  of  Huntly  hu- 
morously called  it,  disgusted  the  whole  nation  ; 
their  aversion  for  the  match  grew  into  abhorrence ; 
and,  exasperated  by  so  many  indignities,  the  Scots 
were  never  at  any  period  more  attached  to  France, 
or  more  alienated  from  England10. 

10  The  violence  of  national  hatred  between  the  English  and  Scots 
in  the  sixteenth  century  was  such  as  can  hardly  be  conceived  by 
their  posterity.  A  proof  of  the  fierce  resentment  of  the  Scots  is 
contained  in  the  note  on  pages  94  and  95.  The  instructions 
of  the  Privy  Council  of  England  to  the  Earl  of  Hertford,  who 
commanded  the  fleet  and  army  which  invaded  Scotland,  A.  D. 
1544,  are  dictated  by  national  animosity  no  less  excessive.  I 
found  them  in  the  collection  of  papers  belonging  to  the  Duke  of 
Hamilton,  and  they  merit  publication,  as  they  exhibit  a  striking 
picture  of  the  spirit  of  that  period. 

The  Lords  of  the  Council  to  the  Earl  of  Hertford,  Lieutenant  in 
Scotland,  April  10,  1544. 

The  instruction  begins  with  observing,  that  the  King  had  origi- 
nally intended  to  fortify  Leith  and  keep  possession  of  it ;  but,  after 
mature  deliberation,  he  had  finally  determined  not  to  make  any 
settlement  in  Scotland  at  present,  and  therefore  he  is  directed 
not  to  make  any  fortification  at  Leith,  or  any  other  place  : 

"  But  only  for  that  journey  to  put  all  to  fire  and  sword,  burn 
Edinburgh  town,  so  used  and  defaced,  that  when  you  have  gotten 
what  you  can  of  it,  it  may  remain  for  ever  a  perpetual  memory  of 
the  vengeance  of  God  lightened  upon  it,  for  their  falsehood  and 
disloyalty.  Do  what  you  can  out  of  hand,  and  without  long  tar- 
l  \ing  to  beat  down  or  overthrow  the  castle  ;  sack  all  the  houses 
and  as  many  towns  and  villages  about  Edinburgh  as  ye  may  con- 
veniently.    Sack  Leith,  and  subvert  it,  and  all  the  rest,  putting 


1,'>44.  OF  SCOTLAND.  108 

The  Earl  of  Lennbx  alone,  in  spite  of  the  Re- 
gent and  French  King,  continued  a  correspondence 
with  England,  which  ruined  his  own  interest,  with- 
out  promoting  Henry's  .  Many  of  his  own  vas- 
sals, preferring  their  duty  to  their  country  before 
their  affection  to  him,  refused  to  concur  in  any 
design  to  favour  the  public  enemy.  After  a  few 
feeble  and  unsuccessful  attempts  to  disturb  the 
Regent's  administration,  he  was  obliged  to  fly  for 
safety  to  the  court  of  England,  where  Henry  re- 
warded services  which  he  had  the  inclination  but 
not  the  power  to  perform,  by  giving  him  in  marri- 
age his  niece  the  Lady  Margaret  Douglas.  This 
unhappy  exile,  however,  was  destined  to  be  the 

man,  woman,  and  cliild  to  fire  and  sword,  without  exception, 
when  any  resistance  shall  be  made  against  you  ;  and  this  done, 
pass  over  to  the  Fifeland,  and  extend  like  extremities  and  de- 
struction to  all  towns  and  villages  whereuuto  you  may  reach  con- 
veniently ;  not  forgetting,  amongst  all  the  rest,  so  to  spoil  and 
turn  upside  down  the  Cardinal's  town  of  St.  Andrew's  as  the  up- 
per sort  may  be  the  nether,  and  not  one  stoke  stand  upon  another, 
sparing  no  creature  alive  within  the  same,  specially  such  as  either 
in  friendship  or  blood  be  allied  unto  the  Cardinal ;  and  if  ye  see 
any  likelihood  to  win  the  castle,  give  some  stout  essay  to  the 
same,  if  it  be  your  fortune  to  get  it,  raze  and  destroy  it  piece- 
meal ;  and  after  this  sort,  .spending  one  month  there,  spoiling  and 
destroying  as  aforesaid,  with  the  wise  foresight  that  His  Majesty 
doubteth  not  ye  will  use  that  your  enemies  take  no  advantage  of 
you,  and  that  you  enterprise  nothing  but  what  you  shall  see  may 
be  easily  achieved,  His  Majesty  thinkelh  verily,  and  so  all  we, 
ye  shall  lind  this  journey  succeedeth  this  way  most  to  His  Ma- 
jesty's honour,"  &c. 

These  barbarous  orders  seem  to  have  been  executed  with  a 
rigorous  and  unfeeling  exactness,  as  appears  from  a  series  of  let- 
ters from  Lord  Hertford,  in  the  same  collection,  giving  a  full 
account  of  all  his  operations  in  Scotland.  They  contain  several 
curious  particulars,  not  mentioned  by  the  writers  of  that  age,  and 
with  which  both  the  historians  of  the  city  of  Edinburgh  were  un- 
acquainted :   but  they  are  of  too  great  length  to  be  inserted  here. 

11  Kyincr,  xv.  p.  22. 


104  THE  HISTORY  B.  II. 

father  of  a  race  of  Kings.  He  saw  his  son  Lord 
Darnly  mount  the  throne  of  Scotland,  to  the  per- 
petual exclusion  of  that  rival  who  now  triumphed 
in  his  ruin.  From  that  time  his  posterity  have  held 
the  sceptre  in  two  kingdoms,  by  one  of  which  he 
was  cast  out  as  a  criminal,  and  by  the  other  received 
as  a  fugitive. 

Meanwhile  hostilities  were  continued  by  both 
nations,  but  with  little  vigour  on  either  side.  The 
historians  of  that  age  relate  minutely  the  circum- 
stances of  several  skirmishes  and  inroads,  which, 
as  they  did  not  produce  any  considerable  effect,  at 
this  distance  of  time  deserve  no  remembrance 12. 

12  Though  this  war  was  distinguished  by  no  important  or  de- 
cisive action,  it  was,  however,  extremely  ruinous  to  individuals. 
There  still  remain  two  original  papers,  which  give  us  some  idea 
of  the  miseries  to  which  some  of  the  most  fertile  counties  in  the 
kingdom  were  exposed  by  the  sudden  and  destructive  incur- 
sions of  the  borderers.  The  first  seems  to  be  the  report  made  to 
Henry  bj  the  English  wardens  of  the  marches  for  the  year  1544, 
and  contains  their  exploits  from  the  2d  of  July  to  the  17th  of 
November.  The  account  it  gives  of  the  different  inroads,  or 
forrays  as  they  are  called,  is  very  minute  ;  and  in  conclusion, 
the  sum  total  of  mischief  they  did  is  thus  computed  : 
Towns,  towers,  stedes,   barnekyns,  parish  churches, 

bastel-houses,  cast  down  or  burnt 192 

Scots  slain 403 

Prisoners  taken 816 

Nolt,  i.  e.  horned  cattle,  taken 10,386 

Sheep 12,492 

Nags  and  geldiugs 1,296 

Goats 200 

Bolls  of  corn 850 

Insight  gear,  i.  e.  household  furniture,  not  reckoned. 

Haynes's  State  Papers,  43. 
The  other  contains  an  account  of  an  inroad  by  the  Earl  of  Hert- 
ford, between  the  8th  and  23d  of  September,  1545  :  the  narra- 
tive is  more  general,  but  it  appears  that  he  had  burnt,  rased,  and 
destroyed,  in  the  counties  of  Berwick  and  Roxburgh  only, 

Monasteries  and  friar-houses 7 

Castles,  towers,  and  piles 16 


1544.  OF  SCOTLAND.  105 

At  last  an  end  was  put  to  this  languid  and  inactive 
war,  by  a  peace,  in  which  England,  France,  and 
Scotland  were  comprehended.  Henry  laboured  to 
exclude  the  Scots  from  the  benefit  of  this  treaty, 
and  to  reserve  them  for  that  vengeance  which  his 
attention  to  the  affairs  of  the  continent  had  hitherto 
delayed.  But  although  a  peace  with  England  was 
of  the  last  consequence  to  Francis  I.,  whom  the 
Emperor  was  preparing  to  attack  with  all  his  forces, 
he  was  too  generous  to  abandon  allies  who  had 
served  him  with  fidelity,  and  he  chose  rather  to 
purchase  Henry's  friendship  with  disadvantage  to 
himself  than  to  leave  them  exposed  to  danger.  By 
yielding  some  things  to  the  interest,  and  more  to  the 
vanity  of  that  haughty  Prince  ;  by  submission,  bat- 
tery, and  address,  he  at  length  prevailed  to  have 
the  Scots  included  in  the  peace  agreed  upon. 

An  event  which  happened  a  short  time  before 
the  conclusion  of  this  peace  rendered  it  more  ac- 
ceptable to  the  whole  nation.  Cardinal  Beatoun 
had  not  used  his  power  with  moderation  equal  to 
the  prudence  by  which  he  attained  it.  Notwith- 
standing his  great  abilities,  he  had  too  many  of  the 
passions  and  prejudices  of  an  angry  leader  of  a  fac- 
tion to  govern  a  divided  people  with  temper.  His 
resentment  against  one  party  of  the  nobility,  his 
insolence  towards  the  rest,  his  severity  to  the  Re*- 

Market  towns 5 

Villages 243 

Milns 13 

Hospitals 3 

All  these  were  cast  clown  or  burnt.  Haynes,  52.  As  the 
Scots  were  no  less  skilful  in  the  practice  of  irregular  war,  we 
may  conclude  that  the  damage  which  they  did  in  England  wan 
not  inconsiderable  ;  and  that  their  raids  were  no  less  wasteful 
mi.iu  ihe  f arrays  of  the  English. 


106  THE  HISTORY  B.  II. 

formers,  and,  above  all,  the  barbarous  and  illegal 
execution  of  the  famous  George  Wishart,  a  man  of 
honourable  birth  and  of  primitive  sanctity,  wore  out 
the  patience  of  a  tierce  age ;   and  nothing  but  a  bold 
hand  was  wanting  to  gratify  the  public  wish  by  his 
destruction.     Private  revenge,  inflamed  and  sanc- 
tified by  a  false  zeal  for  religion,  quickly  supplied 
this  want.     Norman  Lesly,  the  eldest  son  of  the 
Earl  of  Rothes,  had  been  treated  by  the  Cardinal 
with  injustice  and  contempt.     It  was  not  the  tem- 
per of  the  man,  or  the  spirit  of  the  times,  quietly  to 
digest  an  affront.     As  the  profession  of  his  adver- 
sary screened  him  from  the  effects  of  what  is  called 
an  honourable  resentment,  he  resolved  to  take  that 
satisfaction  which  he  could  not  demand.     This  re- 
solution deserves  as  much  censure  as  the  singular 
courage  and  conduct  with  which  he  put  it  in  exe- 
cution excite  wonder.     The  Cardinal  at  that  time 
resided  in  the  castle  of  St.  Andrew's,  which  he  had 
fortified  at  great  expense,  and,  in  the  opinion  of  the 
age,  had  rendered  it  impregnable.    His  retinue  was 
numerous,  the  town  at  his  devotion,  and  the  neigh- 
bouring country  full  of  his  dependents.     In  this 
situation,  sixteen  persons  undertook  to  surprise  his 
castle,  and  to  assassinate  himself;  and  their  suc- 
cess was  equal  to  the  boldness  of  the    attempt. 
[May  20,  1546.]    Early  in  the  morning  they  seized 
on  the  gate  of  the  castle,  which  was  set  open  to  the 
workmen  who  were  employed  in  finishing  the  forti- 
fications ;  and  having  placed  sentries  at  the  door  of 
the  Cardinal's  apartment,  they  awakened  his  nume- 
rous domestics  one  by  one ;  and  turning  them  out 
of  the  castle,  they  without  noise  or  tumult,  or  vio- 
lence to  any  other  person,  delivered  their  country, 
though  by  a  most  unjustifiable  action,  from  an  am- 


lo4G.  OF  SCOTLAND.  107 

bitious  man,  whose  pride  was  insupportable  to  the 
nobles,  as  his  cruelty  and  cunning  were  great  checks 
to  the  Reformation. 

His  death  was  fatal  to  the  Catholic  religion,  and 
to  the  French  interest  in  Scotland.    The  same  zeal 
for  both  continued  among  a  great  party  in  the  na- 
tion, but,  when  deprived  of  the  genius  and  authority 
of  so  skilful  a  leader,   operated  with  less  effect. 
Nothing  can  equal  the  consternation  which  a  blow 
so  unexpected  occasioned  among  such  as  were  at- 
tached to  him;  while  the  Regent  secretly  enjoyed 
an  event  which  removed  out  of  his  way  a  rival, 
who  had  not  only  eclipsed  his  greatness  but  almost 
extinguished  his  power.      Decency,  however,  the 
honour  of  the  church,  the  importunity  of  the  Queen 
Dowager  and  her  adherents,  his  engagements  with 
Trance,  and,  above  all  these,  the  desire  of  recover- 
ing his  eldest  son,  whom  the  Cardinal  had  detained 
for  some  time  at  St.  Andrew's  in  pledge  of  his  fide- 
lity, and  who,  together  with  the  castle,  had  fallen 
into  the  hands  of  the  conspirators,  induced  him  to 
take  arms  in  order  to  revenge  the  death  of  a  man 
whom  he  hated. 

He  threatened  vengeance,  but  was  unable  to 
execute  it.  One  part  of  military  science,  the  art  of 
attacking  fortified  places,  was  then  imperfectly  un- 
derstood in  Scotland.  The  weapons,  the  discipline, 
and  impetuosity  of  the  Scots,  rendered  their  armies 
as  unfit  for  sieges  as  they  were  active  in  the  field. 
A  hundred  and  fifty  men,  which  was  the  greatest 
number  the  conspirators  ever  assembled,  resisted 
all  the  efforts  of  the  Regent  for  five  months  ,;5,  in  a 
place  which  a  single  battalion,  with  a  few  battering 
cannon,  would  now  reduce  in  a  few  hours.  This 
13  Epist.  Reg.  Scot.  2.  370. 


108  THE  HISTORY  B.  II. 

tedious  siege  was  concluded  by  a  truce.  The  Re- 
gent undertook  to  procure  for  the  conspirators  an 
absolution  from  the  Pope,  and  a  pardon  in  parlia- 
ment; and  upon  obtaining  these,  they  engaged  to 
surrender  the  castle,  and  to  set  his  son  at  liberty. 

It  is  probable,  that  neither  of  them  was  sincere 
in  this  treaty.  On  both  sides  they  sought  only  to 
amuse,  and  to  gain  time.  The  Regent  had  applied 
to  France  for  assistance,  and  expected  soon  to 
have  the  conspirators  at  mercy.  On  the  other 
hand,  if  Lesly  and  his  associates  were  not  at  first 
incited  by  Henry  to  murder  the  Cardinal,  they  were 
in  the  sequel  powerfully  supported  by  him.  Not- 
withstanding the  silence  of  contemporary  historians, 
there  are  violent  presumptions  of  the  former  ;  of  the 
latter  there  is  undoubted  certainty14.  During  the 
siege,  the  conspirators  had  received  from  England 
supplies  both  of  money  and  provisions ;  and  as 
Henry  was  preparing  to  renew  his  proposals  con- 
cerningthe  marriage  and  the  union  he  had  projected, 
and  to  second  his  negotiations  with  a  numerous 
army,  they  hoped,  by  concurring  with  him,  to  be  in 
a  situation  in  which  they  would  no  longer  need  a 
pardon,  but  might  claim  a  reward15. 

14  Keith,  60. 

15  In  the  first  edition  of  this  work,  I  expressed  my  suspicion" 
of  a  correspondence  between  the  murderers  of  Cardinal  Beatoun 
and  Henry  VIII.,  prior  to  their  committing  that  crime.  In  the 
papers  of  Duke  Hamilton  is  contaiued  the  clearest  evidence  of 
this,  which  I  publish  not  only  to  establish  that  fact,  but  as  an 
additional  coniirmation  of  the  remarks  which  I  made  upon  the 
frequency  of  assassination  in  that  age,  and  the  slight  opinion 
which  men  entertained  concerning  it. 

The  Earl  of  Hertford  to  the  King's  Majesty,  Newcastle, 
April  17,  1544. 
Pleaseth  Your  Highness  to  understand,  that  this  day  arrived 
with  me  the  Earl  of  Hertford,  a  Scottishman  called  Wishart,  and 


|547.  OF  SCOTLAND.  100 

Jan.  28,  1547.]   Tin-  death  of  Henry  blasted  al! 

these  hopes.  It  happened  in  the  beginning  of  next 
year,  after  a  reign  of  greater  splendour  than  true 
glory;  bustling,  rather  than  active;  oppressive  in 
domestic  government,  and  in  foreign  politics  wild 
and  irregular.  But  the  vices  of  this  Prince  were 
more  beneficial  to  mankind  than  the  virtues  of 
others.  His  rapaciousness,  his  profusion,  and  even 
his  tyranny,  by  depressing  the  ancient  nobility,  and 
by  adding  new  property-  and  power  to  the  Com- 
mons, laid  or  strengthened  the  foundations  of  the 
English  liberty.  His  other  passions  contributed  no 
less  towards  the  downfal  of  popery,  and  the  esta- 
blishment of  religious  freedom  in  the  nation.  His 
resentment  led  him  to  abolish  the  power,  and  his 
covetousness  to  seize  the  wealth,  of  the  church ; 

broaght  me  a  letter  from  the  Lord  of  Brinstone  [id  e.  Crichton 
Laird  of  Brunstan]  which  I  send  Your  Highness  herewith,  and, 
according  to  his  request,  have  taken  order  for  the  repair  of  the 
said  Wishart  to  Your  Majesty  by  post,  both  for  the  delivery  of 
such  letters  as  he  hath  to  Your  Majesty  from  the  said  Brinstone, 
and  also  for  the  declaration  of  his  credence,  which  as  I  perceive 
by  him  consisteth  in  two  points,  one  that  the  Lord  of  Grange, 
late  Treasurer  of  Scotland,  the  Master  of  Rothes,  the  Earl  of 
Rothes'  eldest  son,  and  John  Charteris,  would  attempt  either  to 
apprehend  or  slay  the  Cardinal,  at  some  time  when  he  shall  pass 
through  the  Fifeland,  as  he  doth  sundry  times  in  his  way  to 
St.  Andrew's,  and  in  case  they  can  so  apprehend  him  will  deli- 
ver him  unto  Your  Majesty,  which  attemplate,  he  saith,  they 
would  enterprise,  it'  they  knew  Your  Majesty's  pleasure  therein, 
and  what  supportation  and  maintenance  Your  Miijesty  would 
minister  unto  them,  after  the  execution  of  the  same,  in  case  they 
should  be  pursued  by  any  of  their  enemies  ;  the  other  is,  that  in 
case  Your  Majesty  would  grant  unto  them  a  convenient  enter- 
tainment to  keep  1000  or  1500  men  in  wages  for  a  month  or 
two,  they  journeying  with  the  power  of  the  Earl  Marshal,  the 
said  Mr  of  Rothes,  the  Laird  of  Calder,  and  the  other  the  Lord 
friends,  will  take  upon  them,  at  such  time  as  your  Ma- 
jesty's army  shall  be  in  Scotland,  to  destroy  the  abhey  and  town 
of  Arbroath,  being  the  Cardinal's,  and  all  the  other  Bishops 
VOL.   T.  L 


110  THE  HISTORY  B.  II. 

and  by  withdrawing-  these  supports,  made  it  easy, 
in  the  following  reign,  to  overturn  the  whole  fabric 
of  superstition. 

Francis  I.  did  not  long  survive  a  Prince  who 
had  been  alternately  his  rival  and  his  friend;  but 
his  successor  Henry  II.  was  not  neglectful  of  the 
French  interest  in  Scotland.  He  sent  a  consider- 
able body  of  men,  under  the  command  of  Leon 
Strozzi,  to  the  Regent's  assistance.  By  their  long 
experience  in  the  Italian  and  German  wars,  the 
French  had  become  as  dexterous  in  the  conduct 
of  sieges  as  the  Scots  were  ignorant ;  and  as  the 
boldness  and  despair  of  the  conspirators  could  not 
defend  them  against  the  superior  art  of  these  new 
assailants,  they,  after  a  short  resistance,  surren- 
dered to  Strozzi,  who  engaged,  in  the  name  of  the 
King  his  master,   for  the  security  of  their  lives ; 

houses  and  countries  on  that  side  of  the  water  thereabout,  and 
to  apprehend  all  (hose  which  they  say  be  the  principal  impugna- 
tors  of  amity  between  England  and  Scotland  ;  for  which  they 
should  have  a  good  opportunity,  as  they  say,  when  the  power  of 
the  said  Bishops  and  Ahbots  shall  resort  towards  Edinburgh  to 
resist  Your  Majesty's  army.  And  for  the  execution  of  these 
tilings,  the  said  Wishart  saith,  that  the  Earl  Marshal  aforenamed 
and  others  will  capitulate  with  Your  Majesty  in  writing  under 
their  hands  and  seals,  afore  they  shall  desire  any  supply  or  aid  of 
money  at  Your  Majesty's  hands.  This  is  the  effect  of  his  cre- 
dence, with  sundry  other  advertisements  of  the  great  division 
that  is  at  this  present  within  the  realm  of  Scotland,  which  we 
doubt  not  he  will  declare  unto  Your  Majesty  at  good  length. 
Hamilton  MSS.  vol.  iii.  p.  38. 

-Y.  li.  This  is  the  letter  of  which  Dr.  Mackenzie,  vol.  iii.  p.  18. 
and  Bishop  Keith,  Hist.  p.  44,  published  a  fragment.  It  doea 
not  authorize  us  to  conclude  that  Mr.  George  Wishart,  known 
by  the  name  of  the  Martyr,  was  the  person  who  resorted  to  the 
Earl  of  Hertford.  It  was  more  probably  John  Wishart  of  Pit- 
arrow,  the  chief  of  that  name,  a  man  of  abilities,  zealously  at- 
tached to  the  reformed  doctrine,  and  deeplv  engaged  in  all  the 
intrigues  and  operations  of  that  busy  period.  Keith,  96,  117, 
119,  315. 


Lo47.  OF  SCOTLAND.  Ill 

and,  as  his  prisoners,  transported  them  into  France. 
The  castle  itself,  the  monument  of  Beatoun's  power 
and  vanity,  was  demolished,  in  obedience  to  the 
canon  law,  which,  with  admirable  policy,  denounces 
its  anathemas  even  against  the  houses  in  which  the 
sacred  blood  of  a  Cardinal  happens  to  be  shed,  and 
ordains  them  to  be  laid  in  ruins l6. 

The  archbishopric  of  St.  Andrew's  was  bestowed 
by  the  Regent  upon  his  natural  brother  John  Ha- 
milton, Abbot  of  Paisley. 

The  delay  of  a  few  weeks  would  have  saved  the 
conspirators.  Those  ministers  of  Henry  VIII.  who 
had  the  chief  direction  of  affairs  during  the  minority 
of  his  son  Edward  VI.  conducted  themselves,  with 
regard  to  Scotland,  by  the  maxims  of  their  late 
master,  and  resolved  to  frighten  the  Scots  into  a 
treaty  which  they  had  not  abilities  or  address  to 
bring  about  by  any  other  method. 

But  before  we  proceed  to  relate  the  events  which 
their  invasion  of  Scotland  occasioned,  we  shall  stop 
to  take  notice  of  a  circumstance  unobserved  by  con- 
temporary historians,  but  extremely  remarkable  for 
the  discovery  it  makes  of  the  sentiments  and  spirit 
which  then  prevailed  among  the  Scots.  The  con- 
spirators against  Cardinal  Beatoun  found  the  Re- 
gent's eldest  son  in  the  castle  of  St.  Andrew's ;  and 
as  they  needed  the  protection  of  the  English,  it  was 
to  be  feared  that  they  might  endeavour  to  purchase 
it,  by  delivering  to  them  this  important  prize.  The 
presumptive  heir  to  the  crown  in  the  hands  of  the 
avowed  enemies  of  the  kingdom  was  a  dreadful 
prospect.  In  order  to  avoid  it,  the  Parliament  fell 
upon  a  very  extraordinary  expedient.  By  an  act 
made  on  purpose,  they  excluded  "  the  Regent's 
,6  Burn.  Hist.  Ref.  J.  S38. 


fit  THE  HISTORY  B.  II. 

eldest  son  from  all  right  of  succession,  public  or 
private,  so  long  as  he  should  be  detained  a  prisoner, 
and  substituted  in  his  place  his  other  brothers,  ac- 
cording to  their  seniority,  and  in  failure  of  them, 
those  who  were  next  heirs  to  the  Regent17."  Suc- 
cession by  hereditary  right  is  an  idea  so  obvious 
and  so  popular  that  a  nation  seldom  ventures  to 
make  a  breach  in  it,  but  in  cases  of  extreme  neces- 
sity. Such  a  necessity  did  the  Parliament  disco- 
ver in  the  present  situation.  Hatred  to  England, 
founded  on  the  memory  of  past  hostilities,  and 
heightened  by  the  smart  of  recent  injuries,  was  the 
national  passion.  This  dictated  that  uncommon 
statute,  by  which  the  order  of  lineal  succession 
was  so  remarkably  broken.  The  modern  theories, 
which  represent  this  right  as  divine  and  unalien- 
able, and  that  ought  not  to  be  violated  upon  any 
consideration  whatsoever,  seem  to  have  been  then 
altogether  unknown. 

In  the  beginning  of  September,  the  Earl  of  Hert- 
ford, now  Duke  of  Somerset,  and  Protector  of 
England,  entered  Scotland  at  the  head  of  eighteen 
thousand  men ;  and,  at  the  same  time,  a  fleet  of 
sixty  ships  appeared  on  the  coast  to  second  his 
land  forces.  The  Scots  had  for  some  time  observ- 
ed this  storm  gathering,  and  were  prepared  for  it. 
Their  army  was  almost  double  to  that  of  the  enemy, 
and  posted  to  the  greatest  advantage  on  a  rising 
ground  above  Musselburgh,  not  far  from  the  banks 
of  the  river  Eske.  Both  these  circumstances  alarm- 
ed the  Duke  of  Somerset,  who  saw  his  danger,  and 
would  willingly  have  extricated  himself  out  of  it,  by 
a  new  overture  of  peace,  on  conditions  extremely 
reasonable.  But  this  moderation  being  imputed  to 
17  Ej>ist.  Reg.  Scot.  2.  359. 


1547.  OF  SCOTLAND.  113 

fear,  his  proposals  were  rejected  with  the  scorn 
which  the  confidence  of  success  inspires ;  and  if 
the  conduct  of  the  Regent,  who  commanded  the 
Scottish  army,  had  been,  in  any  degree,  equal  to 
his  confidence,  the  destruction  of  the  English  must 
have  been  inevitable.  They  were  in  a  situation 
precisely  similar  to  that  of  their  countrymen  under 
Oliver  Cromwell  in  the  following  century.  The 
Scots  had  chosen  their  ground  so  well  that  it  was 
impossible  to  force  them  to  give  battle  ;  a  few  days 
had  exhausted  the  forage  and  provision  of  a  narrow 
country ;  the  fleet  could  only  furnish  a  scanty  and 
precarious  subsistence :  a  retreat,  therefore,  was 
necessary :  but  disgrace,  and  perhaps  ruin,  were  the 
consequences  of  retreating. 

On  both  these  occasions,  the  national  heat  and 
impetuosity  of  the  Scots  saved  the  English,  and 
precipitated  their  own  country  into  the  utmost  dan- 
ger. The  undisciplined  courage  of  the  private  men 
became  impatient  at  the  sight  of  an  enemy.  The 
General  was  afraid  of  nothing,  but  that  the  English 
might  escape  from  him  by  flight;  and,  [Sept.  10.] 
leaving  his  strong  camp,  he  attacked  the  Duke  of 
Somerset  near  Pinkey,  with  no  better  success  than 
his  rashness  deserved.  The  Protector  had  drawn 
up  his  troops  on  a  gentle  eminence,  and  had  now 
the  advantage  of  ground  on  his  side.  The  Scottish 
army  consisted  almost  entirely  of  infantry,  whose 
chief  weapon  was  a  long  spear,  and  for  that  reason 
their  files  were  very  deep,  and  their  ranks  close. 
They  advanced  towards  the  enemy  in  three  great 
bodies,  and,  as  they  passed  the  river,  were  consi- 
derably exposed  to  the  fire  of  the  English  fleet, 
which  lay  in  the  bay  of  Musselburgh,  and  had 
drawn  near  the  shore.    The  English  cavalry,  flush* 

L2 


114  THE  HISTORY  B.  II. 

ed  with  an  advantage  which  they  had  gained  in  a 
skirmish  some  days  before,  began  the  attack  with 
more  impetuosity  than  good  conduct.  A  body  so 
firm  and  compact  as  the  Scots  easily  resisted  the 
impression  of  cavalry,  broke  them,  and  drove  them 
oft'  the  field.  The  English  infantry,  however,  ad- 
vanced ;  and  the  Scots  were  at  once  exposed  to  a 
fli°ht  of  arrows,  to  a  fire  in  flank  from  four  hundred 
foreign  fusileers,  who  served  the  enemy,  and  to  their 
cannon,  which  were  planted  behind  the  infantry  on 
the  highest  part  of  the  eminence.  The  depth  and 
closeness  of  their  order  making  it  impossible  for 
the  Scots  to  stand  long  in  this  situation,  the  Earl 
of  Angus,  who  commanded  the  vanguard,  endea- 
voured to  change  his  ground,  and  to  retire  towards 
the  main  body.  But  his  friends,  unhappily,  mistook 
his  motion  for  a  flight,  and  fell  into  confusion,  At 
that  very  instant  the  broken  cavalry,  having  rallied, 
returned  to  the  charge  ;  the  foot  pursued  the  ad- 
vantage they  had  gained  ;  the  prospect  of  victory 
redoubled  the  ardour  of  both :  and,  in  a  moment, 
the  rout  of  the  Scottish  army  became  universal  and 
irretrievable.  The  encounter  in  the  field  was  not 
long  or  bloody  ;  but,  in  the  pursuit,  the  English  dis- 
covered all  the  rage  and  fierceness  which  national 
antipathy,  kindled  by  long  emulation  and  inflamed 
by  reciprocal  injuries,  is  apt  to  inspire.  The  pur- 
suit was  contiuued  for  five  hours,  and  to  a  great 
distance.  All  the  three  roads  by  which  the  Scots 
fled  were  strewed  with  spears,  and  swords,  and 
targets,  and  covered  with  the  bodies  of  the  slain. 
Above  ten  thousand  men  fell  on  this  day,  one  of 
the  most  fatal  Scotland  had  ever  seen.  A  few  were 
taken  prisoners,  and  among  these  some  persons  of 
distinction.    The  Protector  had  it  now  in  his  power 


1547.  OF  SCOTLAND.  115 

to  become  master  of  a  kingdom,  out  of  which,  not 
many  hours  before,  he  was  almost  obliged  to  retire 
with  infamy  18. 

But  this  victory,  however  great,  was  of  no  real 
utility,  for  want  of  skill  or  of  leisure  to  improve  it. 
Every  new  injury  rendered  the  Scots  more  averse 
from  a  union  with  England ;  and  the  Protector 
neglected  the  only  measure  which  would  have  made 

18  Tbe  following  passage  in  a  carious  and  rare  journal  of  the 
Protector's  expedition  into  Scotland,  written  by  W.  Patten, 
who  was  joined  in  commission  with  Cecil,  as  judge  martial  of 
the  army,  and  printed  in  1548,  deserves  our  notice  ;  as  it  gives 
a  just  idea  of  the  military  discipline  of  the  Scots  at  that  time. 
"  But  what  after  I  learned,  specially  touching  their  order,  their 
armour,  and  their  manner  as  well  of  going  to  offend,  as  of 
standing  to  defend,  I  have  thought  necessary  here  to  utter. 
Hackbutters  have  they  few  or  none,  and  appoint  their  fight  most 
commonly  always  a  foot.  They  come  to  the  field  well  furnished 
all  with  jack  and  skull,  dagger  and  buckler,  and  swords  all  broad 
and  thin,  of  exceeding  good  temper,  and  universally  so  made  to 
slice,  that  as  I  never  saw  none  so  good,  so  I  think  it  hard  to 
devise  the  better.  Hereto  every  man  his  pike,  and  a  great 
kercher  wrapped  twice  or  thrice  about  his  neck,  not  for  cold, 
but  for  cutting.  In  their  array  towards  joining  with  the  enemy, 
they  cling  and  thrust  so  near  in  the  fore  rank,  shoulder  and 
shoulder  together,  with  their  pikes  in  both  their  hands  straight 
afore  them,  and  their  followers  in  that  order  so  hard  at  their 
backs,  laying  their  pikes  over  their  foregoers'  shoulders,  that,  if 
they  do  assail  undiscovered,  no  force  can  well  withstand  them. 
Standing  at  defence  they  thrust  shoulders  likewise  so  nigh  toge- 
ther, the  fore  ranks  well  nigh  to  kneeling,  stoop  low  before,  their 
fellows  behind  holding  their  pikes  with  both  hands,  and  there- 
with in  their  left  their  bucklers,  the  one  end  of  their  pike  against 
their  right  foot,  and  the  other  against  the  enemy  breast-high  ; 
their  followers  crossing  their  pike  points  with  them  forward  ;  and 
thus  each  with  other  so  nigh  as  space  and  place  will  suffer, 
through  the  whole  ward,  so  thick,  that  as  easily  shall  a  bare  lin- 
ger pierce  through  the  skin  of  an  angry  hedgehog,  as  any  en- 
counter the  front  of  their  pikes."  Other  curious  particulars  are 
found  in  this  journal,  from  which  Sir  John  Hayward  has  borrowed 
his  account  of  this  expedition.     Life  of  Edward  VI.  279,  c\c. 

The  length  of  the  Scotch  pike  or  spear  was  appoiuted  by  Act 
41.  p.  1471,  to  be  six  ells  ;  i.  e.  eighteen  feet  six  inches. 


116  THE  HISTORY  B.  II. 

it  necessary  for  them  to  have  given  their  consent 
to  it.  He  amused  himself  in  wasting  the  open 
country,  and  in  taking  or  building  several  petty 
castles ;  whereas,  by  fortifying  a  few  places  which 
were  accessible  by  sea,  he  would  have  laid  the 
kingdom  open  to  the  English,  and  in  a  short  time 
the  Scots  must  either  have  accepted  of  his  terms, 
or  have  submitted  to  his  power.  By  such  an  im- 
provement of  it,  the  victory  at  Dunbar  gave  Crom- 
well the  command  of  Scotland.  The  battle  of  Pinkey 
had  no  other  effect  but  to  precipitate  the  Scots  into 
new  engagements  with  France.  The  situation  of 
the  English  court  may,  indeed,  be  pleaded  in  ex- 
cuse for  the  Duke  of  Somerset's  conduct.  That 
cabal  of  his  enemies,  which  occasioned  his  tragical 
end,  was  already  formed;  and  while  he  triumphed 
in  Scotland,  they  secretly  undermined  his  power 
and  credit  at  home.  Self-preservation,  therefore, 
obliged  him  to  prefer  his  safety  before  his  fame, 
and  to  return  without  reaping  the  fruits  of  his  vic- 
tory. At  this  time,  however,  the  cloud  blew  over; 
the  conspiracy  by  which  he  fell  was  not  yet  ripe 
for  execution ;  and  his  presence  suspended  its  ef- 
fects for  some  time.  The  supreme  power  still  re- 
maining in  his  hands,  he  employed  it  to  recover 
the  opportunity  which  he  had  lost.  [April,  1548]. 
A  body  of  troops,  by  his  command,  seized  and  for- 
tified Haddingtoun,  a  place  which,  on  account  of  its 
distance  from  the  sea,  and  from  any  English  garri- 
son, could  not  be  defended  without  great  expense 
and  danger. 

Meanwhile  the  French  gained  more  by  the  defeat 
of  their  allies  than  the  English  by  their  victory. 
After  the  death  of  Cardinal  Beatoun,  Mary  of 
Guise,  the  Queen  Dowager,  took  a  considerable 


3  048.  OF  SCOTLAND.  117 

share  in  the  direction  of  affairs.  She  was  warmly 
attached,  by  blood  and  by  inclination,  to  the  French 
interest;  and,  in  order  to  promote  it,  improved  with 
great  dexterity  every  event  which  occurred.  The 
spirit  and  strength  of  the  Scots  were  broken  at 
Pinkey;  and  in  an  assembly  of  nobles  which  met 
at  Stirling;  to  consult  upon  the  situation  of  the  king- 
dom, all  eyes  were  turned  towards  France,  no  pros- 
pect of  safety  appearing  but  in  assistance  from  that 
quarter.  But  Henry  II.  being  then  at  peace  with 
England,  the  Queen  represented  that  they  could  not 
expect  him  to  take  part  in  their  quarrel,  but  upon 
views  of  personal  advantage ;  and  that  without  ex- 
traordinary concessions  in  his  favour,  no  assistance, 
in  proportion  to  their  present  exigencies,  could  be 
obtained.  The  prejudices  of  the  nation  powerfully 
seconded  these  representations  of  the  Queen.  What 
often  happens  to  individuals  took  place  among  the 
nobles  in  this  convention ;  they  were  swayed  en- 
tirely by  their  passions  ;  and  in  order  to  gratify 
them,  they  deserted  their  former  principles,  and 
disregarded  their  true  interest.  In  the  violence  of 
resentment,  they  forgot  that  zeal  for  the  indepen- 
dence of' Scotland,  which  had  prompted  them  to 
reject  the  proposals  of  Henry  VIII. ;  and,  by  offer- 
ing, voluntarily,  their  young  Queen  in  marriage  to 
the  Dauphin,  eldest  son  of  Henry  II. ;  and,  which 
was  still  more,  by  proposing  to  send  her  immedi- 
ately into  France  to  be  educated  at  his  court,  they 
granted,  from  a  thirst  of  vengeance,  what  formerly 
they  would  not  yield  upon  any  consideration  of  their 
own  safety.  To  gain  at  once  such  a  kingdom  as 
Scotland  was  a  matter  of  no  small  consequence  to 
France.  Henry,  without  hesitation,  accepted  tho 
offers  of  the  Scottish  ambassadors,  and  prepared 


118  THE  HISTORY  B.  II. 

for  the  vigorous  defence  of  his  new  acquisition. 
Six  thousand  veteran  soldiers,  under  the  command 
of  Monsieur  Desse,  assisted  by  some  of  the  best 
officers  who  were  formed  in  the  long  wars  of  Fran- 
cis I.,  arrived  at  Leith.  They  served  two  cam- 
paigns in  Scotland,  with  a  spirit  equal  to  their  for- 
mer fame.  But  their  exploits  were  not  considerable. 
The  Scots,  soon  becoming  jealous  of  their  designs, 
neglected  to  support  them  with  proper  vigour.  The 
caution  of  the  English,  in  acting  wholly  upon  the 
defensive,  prevented  the  French  from  attempting 
any  enterprise  of  consequence ;  and  obliged  them 
to  exhaust  their  strength  in  tedious  sieges,  under- 
taken under  many  disadvantages.  Their  efforts, 
however,  were  not  without  some  benefit  to  the 
Scots,  by  compelling  the  English  to  evacuate  Had- 
dingtoun,  and  to  surrender  several  small  forts  which 
they  possessed  in  different  parts  of  the  kingdom. 

But  the  effects  of  these  operations  of  his  troops 
were  still  of  greater  importance  to  the  French  King. 
The  diversion  which  they  occasioned  enabled  him 
to  wrest  Boulogne  out  of  the  hands  of  the  English ; 
and  the  influence  of  his  army  in  Scotland  obtained 
the  concurrence  of  parliament  with  the  overtures 
which  had  been  made  to  him,  by  the  assembly  of 
nobles  at  Stirling,  concerning  the  Queen's  marriage 
with  the  Dauphin,  and  her  education  in  the  court 
of  France.  In  vain  did  a  few  patriots  remonstrate 
against  such  extravagant  concessions,  by  which 
Scotland  was  reduced  to  be  a  province  of  France  ; 
and  Henry,  from  an  ally,  raised  to  be  master  of  the 
kingdom;  by  which  the  friendship  of  France  be- 
came more  fatal  than  the  enmity  of  England  ;  and 
every  thing  was  fondly  given  up  to  the  one,  that 
had  been  bravely  defended  against  the  other.     A 


1548.  OF  SCOTLAND.  119 

point  of  so  much  consequence  was  hastily  decided 
in  a  parliament  assembled  [June  5]  in  the  camp 
before  Haddingtoun :  the  intrigues  of  the  Queen 
Dowager,  the  zeal  of  the  clergy,  and  resentment 
against  England,  had  prepared  a  great  party  in  the 
nation  for  such  a  step  ;  the  French  general  and  am- 
bassador, by  their  liberality  and  promises,  gained 
over  many  more.  The  Regent  himself  was  weak 
enough  to  stoop  to  the  offer  of  a  pension  from  France, 
together  with  the  title  of  Duke  of  Chatelherault  in 
that  kingdom.  A  considerable  majority  declared 
for  the  treaty,  and  the  interest  of  a  faction  was  pre- 
ferred before  the  honour  of  the  nation. 

Having  hurried  the  Scots  into  this  rash  and  fatal 
resolution,  the  source  of  many  calamities  to  them- 
selves and  to  their  sovereign,  the  French  allowed 
them  no  time  for  reflection  or  repentance.  The  fleet 
which  had  brought  over  their  forces  was  still  in  Scot- 
land, and  without  delay  convoyed  the  Queen  into 
France.  Mary  was  then  six  years  old,  and  by  her 
education  in  that  court,  one  of  the  politest  but  most 
corrupted  in  Europe,  she  acquired  every  accom- 
plishment that  could  add  to  her  charms  as  a  woman, 
and  contracted  many  of  those  prejudices  which  oc- 
casioned her  misfortunes  as  a  Queen. 

From  the  time  that  Mary  was  put  into  their 
hands,  it  was  the  interest  of  the  French  to  suffer 
war  in  Scotland  to  languish.  The  recovery  of  the 
Boulonnois  was  the  object  which  the  French  King 
had  most  at  heart ;  but  a  slight  diversion  in  Britain 
was  suflicient  to  divide  the  attention  and  strength  of 
the  English,  whose  domestic  factions  deprived  both 
their  arms  and  councils  of  their  accustomed  vigour. 
The  government  of  England  had  undergone  a  great 
revolution.     The   Duke  of  Somerset's  power  had 


120  THE  HISTORY  B.  II. 

been  acquired  with  too  much  violence,  and  was  ex- 
ercised with  too  little  moderation  to  be  of  long  con- 
tinuance. Many  good  qualities,  added  to  great 
love  of  his  country,  could  not  atone  for  his  ambition 
in  usurping  the  sole  direction  of  affairs.  Some  of 
the  most  eminent  courtiers  combined  against  him ; 
and  the  Earl  of  Warwick  their  leader,  no  less  am- 
bitious but  more  artful  than  Somerset,  conducted 
his  measures  with  so  much  dexterity  as  to  raise  him- 
self upon  the  ruins  of  his  rival.  Without  the  invi- 
dious name  of  Protector,  he  succeeded  to  all  the 
power  and  influence  of  which  Somerset  was  depriv- 
ed, and  he  quickly  found  peace  to  be  necessary  for 
the  establishment  of  his  new  authority,  and  the  exe- 
cution of  the  vast  designs  he  had  conceived. 

Henry  was  no  stranger  to  Warwick's  situation, 
and  improved  his  knowledge  of  it  to  good  purpose, 
in  conducting  the  negotiations  for  a  general  peace. 
He  prescribed  what  terms  he  pleased  to  the  Eng- 
lish minister,  who  scrupled  at  nothing,  however 
advantageous  to  that  monarch  and  his  allies. — 
[March  24,  1550].  England  consented  to  restore 
Boulogne  and  its  dependencies  to  France,  and  gave 
up  all  pretensions  to  a  treaty  of  marriage  with  the 
Queen  of  Scots,  or  to  the  conquest  of  her  country. 
A  few  small  forts,  of  which  the  English  troops  had 
hitherto  kept  possession,  were  rased;  and  peace 
between  the  two  kingdoms  was  established  on  its 
ancient  foundation. 

Both  the  British  nations  lost  power,  as  well  as 
reputation,  by  this  unhappy  quarrel.  It  was  on 
both  sides  a  war  of  emulation  and  resentment,  ra- 
ther than  of  interest;  and  was  carried  on  under 
the  influence  of  national  animosities,  which  were 
blind  to  all  advantages.     The  French,  who  entered 


1550.  OF  SCOTLAND.  121 

into  it  with  greater  coolness,  conducted  it  with 
more  skill ;  and  by  dexterously  availing  themselves 
of  every  circumstance  which  occurred,  recovered 
possession  of  an  important  territory  which  they  had 
lost,  and  added  to  their  monarchy  a  new  kingdom. 
The  ambition  of  the  English  minister  betrayed  to 
them  the  former ;  the  inconsiderate  rage  of  the 
Scots  against  their  ancient  enemies  bestowed  on 
them  the  latter ;  their  own  address  and  good  policy 
merited  both. 

Immediately  after  the  conclusion  of  the  peace 
the  French  forces  left  Scotland,  as  much  to  their 
own  satisfaction  as  to  that  of  the  nation.  The 
Scots  soon  found  that  the  calling  to  their  assistance 
a  people  more  powerful  than  themselves  was  a  dan- 
gerous expedient.  They  beheld,  with  the  utmost 
impatience,  those  who  had  come  over  to  protect 
the  kingdom  taking  upon  them  to  command  in  it; 
and  on  many  occasions  they  repented  the  rash  in- 
vitation which  they  had  given.  The  peculiar  ge- 
nius of  the  French  nation  heightened  this  disgust, 
and  prepared  the  Scots  to  throw  off  the  yoke,  be- 
fore they  had  well  begun  to  feel  it.  The  French 
were  in  that  age,  what  they  are  in  the  present,  one 
of  the  most  polished  nations  in  Europe.  But  it  is 
to  be  observed,  in  all  their  expeditions  into  foreign 
countries,  whether  towards  the  south  or  north,  that 
their  manners  have  been  remarkably  incompatible 
with  the  manners  of  every  other  people.  Barba- 
rians are  tenacious  of  their  own  customs,  because 
they  want  knowledge  and  taste  to  discover  the  rea- 
sonableness and  propriety  of  customs  which  differ 
from  them.  Nations  which  hold  the  first  rank  in 
politeness  are  frequently  no  less  tenacious  out  of 
pride.     The  G  reeks  were  so  in  the  ancient  world  ; 

vol.  I.  M 


122  THE  HISTORY  B.  II. 

and  the  French  are  the  same  in  the  modern.     Full 
of  themselves ;   flattered  by  the  imitation  of  their 
neighbours  ;   and  accustomed  to  consider  their  own 
modes  as  the  standards  of  elegance  ;  they  scorn  to 
disguise,  or  to  lay  aside,  the  distinguishing  man- 
ners of  their  own  nation,  or  to  make  any  allowance 
for  what  may  differ  from  them  among  others.     For 
this  reason  the  behaviour  of  their  armies  has,  on 
every  occasion,  been  insupportable  to   strangers, 
and  has  always  exposed  them  to  hatred,  and  often 
to  destruction.    In  that  age  they  overran  Italy  four 
several  times  by  their  valour,  and  lost  it  as  often  by 
their  insolence.     The  Scots,  naturally  an  irascible 
and  high-spirited  people,  and  who,  of  all  nations, 
can  least  bear  the  most  distant  insinuation  of  con- 
tempt, were  not  of  a  temper  to  admit  all  the  pre- 
tensions of  such  assuming  guests.     The  symptoms 
of  alienation  were  soon  visible  ;  they  seconded  the 
military  operations  of  the  French  troops  with  the 
utmost  coldness  ;  their  disgust  grew  insensibly  to  a 
degree  of  indignation   that   could    hardly  be   re- 
strained ;  and,  on  occasion  of  a  very  slight  acci- 
dent,   broke   out  with  fatal  violence.      A  private 
French  soldier  engaging  in  an  idle  quarrel  with  a 
citizen  of  Edinburgh,  both  nations  took  arms  with 
equal  rage,  in  defence  of  their  countrymen.     The 
Provost  of  Edinburgh,  his  son,  and  several  citizens 
of  distinction  were    killed  in  the    fray ;    and   the 
French  were  obliged  to  avoid  the  fury  of  the  inhabi- 
tants by  retiring  out  of  the  city.     Notwithstanding- 
the  ancient  alliance  of  France  and  Scotland,  and 
the  long  intercourse  of  good  offices  between  the 
two  nations,  an  aversion  for  the  French  took  its  rise 
at  this  time  among  the  Scots,  the  effects  whereof 
were  deeply  felt,  and  operated  powerfully  through 
the  subsequent  peroid. 


1  o.')0.  OF  SCOTLAND.  l'2o 

From  the  death   of  Cardinal  Beatoun,  nothing 
has  been  said  of  the  state  of  religion.      While  the 
war  with  England  continued,  the  clergy  had  no 
leisure  to  molest  the  Protestants;  and  they  were 
not  yet  considerable  enough  to  expect  any  thing- 
more  than  connivance   and   impunity.      The    new 
doctrines  were  still  in  their   infancy ;    but  during 
this    short   interval   of  tranquillity   they   acquired 
strength,  and  advanced  by  large  and  firm  steps  to- 
wards a  full  establishment  in  the  kingdom.     The 
first  preachers  against  Popery  in  Scotland,  of  whom 
several  had  appeared  during  the  reign  of  James  V. 
were  more  eminent  for  zeal  and  piety  than  for  learn- 
ing.    Their  acquaintance  with  the  principles  of  the 
Reformation  was  partial,  and  at  second  hand ;  some 
of  them  had  been  educated  in  England  ;  all  of  them 
had  borrowed  their  notions  from  the  books  pub- 
lished there  ;  and  in  the  first  dawn  of  the  new  light, 
they  did  not  venture  far  before  their  leaders.     But 
in  a  short  time  the  doctrines  and  writing's  of  the 
foreign  reformers  became  generally  known  ;  the  in- 
quisitive genius  of  the  age  pressed  forward  in  quest 
of  truth ;   the  discovery  of  one  error  opened  the 
way  to  others ;   the  downfal  of  one  impostor  drew 
many  after  it ;  the  whole  fabric,  which  ignorance 
and  superstition  had  erected  in  times  of  darkness, 
began  to  totter ;   and  nothing  was  wanting  to  com- 
plete its  ruin,  but  a  daring  and  active  leader  to  di- 
rect the  attack.     Such  was  the  famous  John  Knox, 
who,  with    better  qualifications   of  learning,    and 
more  extensive  views  than  any  of  his  predecessors 
in  Scotland,  possessed  a  natural  intrepidity  of  mind, 
which  set  him  above  fear.     He  began  his  public 
ministry  at  St.  Andrew's,  in  the  year  one  thousand 
five  hundred   and    forty-seven,    with  that  success 


124  THE  HISTORY  B.  II. 

which  always  accompanies  a  bold  and  popular  elo- 
quence. Instead  of  amusing  himself  with  lopping 
the  branches,  he  struck  directly  at  the  root  of  Po- 
pery, and  attacked  both  the  doctrine  and  discipline 
of  the  established  church  with  a  vehemence  pecu- 
liar to  himself,  but  admirably  suited  to  the  temper 
and  wishes  of  the  age. 

An  adversary  so  formidable  as  Knox  would  not 
have  easily  escaped  the  rage  of  the  clergy,  who  ob- 
served the  tendency  and  progress  of  his  opinions 
with  the  utmost  concern.  But,  at  first,  he  retired 
for  safety  into  the  castle  of  St.  Andrew's,  and, 
while  the  conspirators  kept  possession  of  it,  preach- 
ed publicly  under  their  protection.  The  great  re- 
volution in  England,  which  followed  upon  the  death 
of  Henry  VIII.  contributed  no  less  than  the  zeal 
of  Knox  towards  demolishing  the  Popish  church 
in  Scotland.  Henry  had  loosened  the  chains,  and 
lightened  the  yoke  of  Popery.  The  ministers  of 
his  son  Edward  VI.  cast  them  off  altogether,  and 
established  the  Protestant  religion  upon  almost  the 
same  footing  whereon  it  now  stands  in  that  king- 
dom. The  influence  of  this  example  reached  Scot- 
land, and  the  happy  effects  of  ecclesiastical  liberty 
in  one  nation  inspired  the  other  with  an  equal  de- 
sire of  recovering  it.  The  reformers  had,  hitherto, 
been  obliged  to  conduct  themselves  with  the  ut- 
most  caution,  and  seldom  ventured  to  preach,  but 
in  private  houses,  and  at  a  distance  from  court ; 
they  gained  credit,  as  happens  on  the  first  publica- 
tion of  every  new  religion,  chiefly  among  persons 
in  the  lower  and  middle  rank  of  life.  But  several 
noblemen,  of  the  greatest  distinction,  having,  about 
this  time,  openly  espoused  their  principles,  they 
were  no  longer  under  the  necessity  of  acting  with 


1000.  OF  SCOTLAND.  125 

the  same  reserve ;  and,  with  more  security  and  en- 
couragement, they  had  likewise  greater  success. — 
The  means  of  acquiring  and  spreading  knowledge 
became  more  common,  and  the  spirit  of  innovation, 
peculiar  to  that  period,  grew  every  day  bolder  and 
more  universal. 

Happily  for  the  Ileformation  this  spirit  was  still 
under  some  restraint.  It  had  not  yet  attained 
firmness  and  vigour  sufficient  to  overturn  a  system 
founded  on  the  deepest  policy,  and  supported  by 
the  most  formidable  power.  Under  the  present 
circumstances,  any  attempt  towards  action  must 
have  been  fatal  to  the  Protestant  doctrines ;  and 
it  is  no  small  proof  of  the  authority  as  well  as  pene- 
tration of  the  heads  of  the  party,  that  they  were  able 
to  restrain  the  zeal  of  a  fiery  and  impetuous  people, 
until  that  critical  and  mature  juncture  when  every 
step  they  took  was  decisive  and  successful. 

Meanwhile  their  cause  received  reinforcement 
from  two  different  quarters  whence  they  never 
could  have  expected  it.  The  ambition  of  the 
house  of  Guise,  and  the  bigotry  of  Mary  of  Eng- 
land, hastened  the  subversion  of  the  Papal  throne 
in  Scotland  ;  and,  by  a  singular  disposition  of  Pro- 
vidence, the  persons  who  opposed  the  Reformation 
in  every  other  part  of  Europe  with  the  fiercest  zeal 
were  made  instruments  for  advancing  it  in  that 
kingdom. 

Mary  of  (iuise  possessed  the  same  bold  and  as- 
pirins spirit  which  distinguished  her  family.  But 
in  her  it  was  softened  by  the  female  character,  and 
accompanied  with  great  temper  and  address.  Her 
brothers,  in  order  to  attain  the  high  objects  at 
which  they  aimed,  ventured  upon  sucli  daring  mea- 
sures as  suited  their  great  courage.      Her  designs 

M  *2 


12G  THE  HISTORY  B.  II. 

upon  the  supreme  power  were  concealed  with  the 
utmost  care,  and  advanced  by  address  and  refine- 
ments more  natural  to  her  sex.  By  a  dexterous 
application  of  those  talents,  she  had  acquired  a 
considerable  influence  on  the  councils  of  a  nation 
hitherto  unacquainted  with  the  government  of  wo- 
men ;  and,  without  the  smallest  right  to  any  share 
in  the  administration  of  affairs,  had  engrossed  the 
chief  direction  of  them  into  her  own  hands.  But 
she  did  not  long  rest  satisfied  with  the  enjoyment 
of  this  precarious  power,  which  the  fickleness  of 
the  Regent,  or  the  ambition  of  those  who  governed 
him,  might  so  easily  disturb;  and  she  began  to  set 
on  foot  new  intrigues,  with  a  design  of  undermining 
him,  and  of  opening  to  herself  a  way  to  succeed 
him  in  that  high  dignity.  Her  brothers  entered 
warmly  into  this  scheme,  and  supported  it  with  all 
their  credit  at  the  court  of  France.  The  French 
King  willingly  concurred  in  a  measure,  by  which 
he  hoped  to  bring  Scotland  entirely  under  manage- 
ment, and,  in  any  future  broil  with  England,  to 
turn  its  whole  force  against  that  kingdom. 

In  order  to  arrive  at  the  desired  elevation,  the 
Queen  Dowager  had  only  one  of  two  ways  to 
choose;  either  violently  to  wrest  the  power  out  of 
the  hands  of  the  Regent,  or  to  obtain  it  by  his  con- 
sent. Under  a  minority,  and  among  a  warlike  and 
factious  people,  the  former  was  a  very  uncertain 
and  dangerous  experiment.  The  latter  appeared  to 
be  no  less  impracticable.  To  persuade  a  man  vo- 
luntarily to  abdicate  the  supreme  power ;  to  de- 
scend to  a  level  with  those  above  whom  he  was 
raised ;  and  to  be  content  with  the  second  place 
where  he  hath  held  a  first,  may  well  pass  for  a 
wild  and  chimerical  project.     This,  however,  the 


1550.  OF  SCOTLAND.  127 

Queen  attempted;  and  the  prudence  of  the  attempt 
was  sufficiently  justified  by  its  success. 

The  Regent's  inconstancy  and  irresolution,  to- 
gether with  the  calamities  which  had  befallen  the 
kingdom  under  his  administration,  raised  the  preju- 
dices both  of  the  nobles  and  of  the  people  against 
him  to  a  great  height ;  and  the  Queen  secretly  fo- 
mented these  with  much  industry.  All  who  wished 
for  a  change  met  with  a  gracious  reception  in  her 
court,  and  their  spirit  of  disaffection  was  nourished 
by  such  hopes  and  promises  as  in  every  age  im- 
pose on  the  credulity  of  the  factious.  The  favour- 
ers of  the  Reformation  being  the  most  numerous 
and  spreading  body  of  the  Regent's  enemies,  she 
applied  to  them  with  a  particular  attention  ;  and 
the  gentleness  of  her  disposition,  and  seeming  in- 
difference to  the  religious  points  in  dispute,  made 
all  her  promises  of  protection  and  indulgence  pass 
upon  them  for  sincere.  Finding  so  great  a  part  of 
the  nation  willing  to  fall  in  with  her  measures 
[Oct.],  the  Queen  set  out  for  France,  under  pre- 
tence of  visiting  her  daughter,  and  took  along  with 
her  those  noblemen  who  possessed  the  greatest 
power  and  credit  among  their  countrymen.  Sof- 
tened by  the  pleasures  of  an  elegant  court,  flat- 
tered by  the  civilities  of  the  French  King  and  the 
caresses  of  the  house  of  Guise,  and  influenced  by 
the  seasonable  distribution  of  a  few  favours,  and  the 
liberal  promise  of  many  more,  they  were  brought  to 
approve  of  all  the  Queen's  pretensions. 

While  she  advanced  by  these  slow  but  sure  steps, 
the  Regent  either  did  not  foresee  the  danger  which 
threatened  him,  or  neglected  to  provide  against  it. 
The  first  discovery  of  the  train  which  was  laid  came 
from  two  of  his  own  confidents,  Carnegie  of  Kin- 


128  THE  HISTORY  B.  II. 

naird,  and  Panter  Bishop  of  Ross,  whom  the  Queen 
had  gained  over  to  her  interest,  and  then  employed 
as  the  most  proper  instruments  for  obtaining  his  con- 
sent. The  overture  was  made  to  him  in  the  name 
of  the  French  King,  enforced  by  proper  threaten- 
iugs,  in  order  to  work  upon  his  natural  timidity, 
and  sweetened  by  every  promise  that  could  recon- 
cile him  to  a  proposal  so  disagreeable.  On  the 
one  hand,  the  confirmation  of  his  French  title,  to- 
gether with  a  considerable  pension,  the  parliamen- 
tary acknowledgment  of  his  right  of  succession  to 
the  crown,  and  a  public  ratification  of  his  conduct 
during  his  regency,  were  offered  him.  On  the  other 
hand,  the  displeasure  of  the  French  King,  the  power 
and  popularity  of  the  Queen  Dowager,  the  disaffec- 
tion of  the  nobles,  with  the  danger  of  an  after  reck- 
oning, were  represented  in  the  strongest  colours. 

It  was  not  possible  to  agree  to  a  proposal  so  ex- 
traordinary and  unexpected,  without  some  previous 
struggle  ;  and,  had  the  Archbishop  of  St.  Andrew's 
been  present  to  fortify  the  irresolute  and  passive 
spirit  of  the  Regent,  he,  in  all  probability,  would 
have  rejected  it  with  disdain.  Happily  for  the 
Queen,  the  sagacity  and  ambition  of  that  prelate 
could,  at  this  time,  be  no  obstruction  to  her  views. 
He  was  lying  at  the  point  of  death,  and  in  his  ab- 
sence the  influence  of  the  Queen's  agents  on  a  flex- 
ible temper  counterbalanced  several  of  the  strongest 
passions  of  the  human  mind,  and  obtained  his  con- 
sent to  a  voluntary  surrender  of  the  supreme  power. 

Dec.  1551.]  After  gaining  a  point  of  such  dif- 
ficulty with  so  much  ease,  the  Queen  returned  into 
Scotland,  in  full  expectation  of  taking  immediate 
possession  of  her  new  dignity.  But  by  this  time 
the  Archbishop  of  St.  Andrew's  had  recovered  of 


1551.  OF  SCOTLAND.  129 

that  distemper  which  the  ignorance  of  the  Scottish 
physicians  had  pronounced  to  be  incurable.  This 
he  owed  to  the  assistance  of  the  famous  Cardan, 
one  of  those  irregular  adventurers  in  philosophy,  of 
whom  Italy  produced  so  many  about  this  period. 
A  bold  genius  led  him  to  some  useful  discoveries, 
which  merit  the  esteem  of  a  more  discerning  age  ; 
a  wild  imagination  engaged  him  in  those  chimerical 
sciences  which  drew  the  admiration  of  his  contem- 
poraries. As  a  pretender  to  astrology  and  magic, 
he  was  revered  and  consulted  by  all  Europe ;  as  a 
proficient  in  natural  philosophy,  he  was  but  little 
known.  The  Archbishop,  it  is  probable,  consider- 
ed him  as  a  powerful  magician,  when  he  applied  to 
him  for  relief;  but  it  was  his  knowledge  as  a  philo- 
sopher, which  enabled  him  to  cure  his  disease19. 

Together  with  his  health,  the  Archbishop  reco- 
vered the  entire  government  of  the  Regent,  and 
quickly  persuaded  him  to  recall  that  dishonourable 
promise  which  he  had  been  seduced  by  the  arti- 
fices of  the  Queen  to  grant.  However  great  her 
surprise  and  indignation  were,  at  this  fresh  instance 
of  his  inconstancy,  she  was  obliged  to  dissemble, 
that  she  might  have  leisure  to  renew  her  intrigues 
with  all  parties ;  with  the  Protestants,  whom  she 
favoured  and  courted  more  than  ever ;  with  the 
nobles,  to  whom  she  rendered  herself  agreeable  by 
various  arts ;  and  with  the  Regent  himself,  in  order 
to  gain  whom  she  employed  every  argument.  But, 
whatever  impressions  her   emissaries   might   have 

19  Cardan  himself  was  more  desirous  of  being  considered  as 
an  astrologer  than  a  philosopher  ;  in  his  hook  Ve  Genifuris,  we 
find  a  calculation  of  the  Archhishop's  nativity,  from  which  he  pre- 
tends hoth  to  have  predicted  his  disease,  and  to  have  effected 
his  cure.  He  received  from  Ihe  Archbishop  a  reward  of  1800 
crowns  !  a  great  sum  in  that  age.     De  Vila  sua,  p.  32. 


130  THE  HISTORY  B.  II. 

made  on  the  Regent,  it  was  no  easy  matter  to  over- 
reach or  to  intimidate  the  Archbishop.  Under  his 
management  the  negotiations  were  spun  out  to  a 
great  length,  and  his  brother  maintained  his  station 
with  that  address  and  firmness  which  its  impor- 
tance so  well  merited.  The  universal  defection  of 
the  nobility,  the  growing  power  of  the  Protestants, 
who  all  adhered  to  the  Queen  Dowager,  the  reite- 
rated solicitations  of  the  French  King,  and,  above 
all,  the  interposition  of  the  young  Queen,  who  was 
now  entering  the  twelfth  year  of  her  age,  and  claim- 
ed a  right  of  nominating  whom  she  pleased  to  be 
Regent20,  obliged  him  at  last  to  resign  that  high 
office,  which  he  had  held  many  years.  He  ob- 
tained, however,  the  same  advantageous  terms  for 
himself,  which  had  been  formerly  stipulated. 

It  was  in  the  parliament  which  met  on  the  tenth 
of  April,  one  thousand  five  hundred  and  fifty-four, 
that  the  Earl  of  Arran  executed  this  extraordinary 
resignation;  and  at  the  same  time  Mary  of  Guise 
was  raised  to  that  dignity,  which  had  been  so  long 
the  object  of  her  wishes.  Thus,  with  their  own  ap- 
probation, a  woman  and  a  stranger  was  advanced 
to  the  supreme  authority  over  a  fierce  and  turbulent 
people,  who  seldom  submitted,  without  reluctance, 
to  the  legal  and  ancient  government  of  their  native 
monarchs. 

1553.]  While  the  Queen  Dowager  of  Scotland 
contributed  so  much  towards  the  progress  of  the 
Reformation  by  the  protection  which  she  afforded 
it,  from  motives  of  ambition,  the  English  Queen, 
by  her  indiscreet  zeal,  filled  the  kingdom  with  per- 
sons active  in  promoting  the  same  cause.  Mary 
ascended  the  throne  of  England  on  the  death  of  her 
20  Lesley,  de  Ileb.  Gest.  Scot.  ap.  Jebb.  1.  187. 


1553.  OF  SCOTLAND.  131 

brother  Fid  ward  [.July  6],  and  soon  after  married 
Philip  II.  of  Spain.  To  the  persecuting-  spirit  of 
the  Romish  superstition,  and  the  fierceness  of  that 
age,  she  added  the  private  resentment  of  her  own 
and  of  her  mothers  sufferings,  with  which  she 
loaded  the  reformed  religion  ;  and  the  peevishness 
and  severity  of  her  natural  temper  carried  the  acri- 
mony of  all  these  passions  to  the  utmost  extreme. 
The  cruelty  of  her  persecution  equaled  the  deeds 
of  those  tyrants  who  have  been  the  greatest  re- 
proach to  human  nature.  The  bigotry  of  her  clergy 
could  scarce  keep  pace  with  the  impetuosity  of  her 
zeal.  Even  the  unrelenting  Philip  was  obliged,  on 
some  occasions,  to  mitigate  the  rigour  of  her  pro- 
ceedings. Many  among  the  most  eminent  Refor- 
mers suffered  for  the  doctrines  which  they  had 
taught;  others  fled  from  the  storm.  To  the  greater 
part  of  these  Switzerland  and  Germany  opened  a 
secure  asylum ;  and  not  a  few,  out  of  choice  or  ne- 
cessity, fled  into  Scotland.  What  they  had  seen 
and  felt  in  England  did  not  abate  the  warmth  and 
zeal  of  their  indignation  against  Popery.  Their 
attacks  were  bolder  and  more  successful  than  ever; 
and  their  doctrines  made  a  rapid  progress  among  all 
ranks  of  men. 

These  doctrines,  calculated  to  rectify  the  opinions 
and  to  reform  the  manners  of  mankind,  had  hither- 
to produced  no  other  effects  ;  but  they  soon  began 
to  operate  with  greater  violence,  and  proved  the 
occasion,  not  only  of  subverting  the  established  re- 
ligion, but  of  shaking  the  throne  and  endangering 
the  kingdom.  The  causes  which  facilitated  the  in- 
troduction of  these  new  opinions  into  Scotland,  and 
which  disseminated  them  so  fast  through  the  na- 
tion, merit,  on  that  account,  a  particular  and  care- 
ful inquiry.    The  Reformation  is  one  of  the  greatest 


132  THE  HISTORY  B.  II. 

events  in  the  history  of  mankind,  and,  in  whatever 
point  of  light  we  view  it,  is  instructive  and  in- 
teresting. 

The  revival  of  learning  in  the  fifteenth  and  six- 
teenth centuries  roused  the  world  from  that  lethargy 
in  which  it  had  been  sunk  for  many  ages.  The 
human  mind  felt  its  own  strength,  broke  the  fetters 
of  authority  by  which  it  had  been  so  long  restrained, 
and,  venturing  to  move  in  a  larger  sphere,  pushed 
its  inquiries  into  every  subject  with  great  boldness 
and  surprising  success. 

No  sooner  did  mankind  recover  the  capacity  of 
exercising  their  reason  than  religion  was  one  of  the 
first  objects  which  drew  their  attention.  Long  be- 
fore Luther  published  his  famous  Theses,  which 
shook  the  Papal  throne,  science  and  philosophy 
had  laid  open  to  many  of  the  Italians  the  impos- 
ture and  absurdity  of  the  established  superstition. 
That  subtle  and  refined  people,  satisfied  with  en- 
joying those  discoveries  in  secret,  were  little  dis- 
posed to  assume  the  dangerous  character  of  Refor- 
mers, and  concluded  the  knowledge  of  truth  to  be 
the  prerogative  of  the  wise,  while  vulgar  minds 
must  be  overawed  and  governed  by  popular  errors. 
But,  animated  with  a  more  noble  and  disinterested 
zeal,  the  German  theologian  boldly  erected  the 
standard  of  truth,  and  upheld  it  with  an  uncon- 
querable intrepidity,  which  merits  the  admiration 
and  gratitude  of  all  succeeding  ages. 

The  occasion  of  Luther's  being  first  disgusted 
with  the  tenets  of  the  Romish  church,  and  how, 
from  a  small  rupture,  the  quarrel  widened  into  an 
irreparable  breach,  is  known  to  every  one  who  has 
been  the  least  conversant  in  history.  From  the 
heart  of  Germany  his  opinions  spread,  with  asto- 
nishing rapidity,  all  over  Europe:  and,  wherever. 


1553.  OF  SCOTLAND.  V3S 

they  came,  endangered  or  overturned  the  ancient 
but  ill  founded  system.  The  vigilance  and  address 
of  the  court  of  Home,  cooperating  with  the  power 
and  bigotry  of  the  Austrian  family,  suppressed 
these  notions  on  their  first  appearance  in  the  south- 
ern kingdoms  of  Europe.  But  the  fierce  spirit  of 
the  north,  irritated  by  multiplied  impositions,  could 
neither  be  mollified  by  the  same  arts  nor  subdued 
by  the  same  force ;  and,  encouraged  by  some  Princes 
from  piety,  and  by  others  out  of  avarice,  it  easily 
bore  down  the  feeble  opposition  of  an  illiterate  and 
immoral  clergy. 

The  superstition  of  Popery  seems  to  have  grown 
to  the  most  extravagant  height  in  those  countries 
which  are  situated  towards  the  different  extremities 
of  Europe.  The  vigour  of  imagination,  and  sen- 
sibility of  frame,  peculiar  to  the  inhabitants  of 
southern  climates,  rendered  them  susceptible  of  the 
deepest  impressions  of  superstitious  terror  and  cre- 
dulity. Ignorance  and  barbarity  were  no  less  fa- 
vourable to  the  progress  of  the  same  spirit  among 
the  northern  nations.  They  knew  little,  and  were 
disposed  to  believe  every  thing.  The  most  glaring 
absurdities  did  not  shock  their  gross  understand- 
ings, and  the  most  improbable  fictions  were  received 
with  implicit  assent  and  admiration. 

Accordingly,  that  form  of  Popery  which  pre- 
vailed in  Scotland  was  of  the  most  bigoted  and  illi- 
beral kind.  Those  doctrines  which  are  most  apt  to 
shock  the  human  understanding,  and  those  legends 
which  furthest  exceed  belief,  were  proposed  to  the 
people  without  any  attempt  to  palliate  or  disguise 
them ;  nor  did  they  ever  call  in  question  the  reason- 
ableness of  the  one,  or  the  truth  of  the  other. 

The  power  and  wealth  of  the  church  kept  pace 
vol.  I.  N 


134  THE  HISTORY  B.  II. 

with  the  progress  of  superstition ;  for  it  is  the  na- 
ture of  that  spirit  to  observe  no  bounds  in  its  re- 
spect and  liberality  towards  those  whose  character 
it  esteems  sacred.  The  Scottish  Kings  early  de- 
monstrated how  much  they  were  under  its  influ- 
ence, by  their  vast  additions  to  the  immunities  and 
riches  of  the  clergy.  The  profuse  piety  of  David  I. 
who  acquired  on  that  account  the  name  of  Saint, 
transferred  almost  the  whole  crown  lands,  which 
were  at  that  time  of  great  extent,  into  the  hands  of 
ecclesiastics.  The  example  of  that  virtuous  Prince 
was  imitated  by  his  successors.  The  spirit  spread 
among  all  orders  of  men,  who  daily  loaded  the 
priesthood  with  new  possessions.  The  riches  of 
the  church  all  over  Europe  were  exorbitant;  but 
Scotland  was  one  of  those  countries  wherein  they 
had  furthest  exceeded  the  just  proportion.  The 
Scottish  clergy  paid  one-half  of  every  tax  imposed 
on  land ;  and  as  there  is  no  reason  to  think  that  in 
that  age  they  would  be  loaded  with  an  unequal 
share  of  the  burden,  we  may  conclude  that,  by  the 
time  of  the  Reformation,  little  less  than  one-half  of 
the  national  property  had  fallen  into  the  hauds  of  a 
society,  which  is  always  acquiring,  and  can  never 
lose. 

The  nature,  too,  of  a  considerable  part  of  their 
property  extended  the  influence  of  the  clergy. — 
Many  estates  throughout  the  kingdom,  held  of  the 
church ;  church  lands  were  let  in  lease  at  an  easy 
rent,  and  were  possessed  by  the  younger  sons  and 
descendants  of  the  best  families21.  The  connexion 
between  superior  and  vassal,  between  landlord  and 
tenant,  created  dependencies,  and  gave  rise  to  a 
union  of  great  advantage  to  the  church;  and,  in 
21   Keith,  521.  Note  (b). 


lo">3.  OF  SCOTLAND.  135 

estimating  the  influence  of  the  Popish  ecclesiastics 
over  the  nation,  these,  as  well  as  the  real  amount 
of  their  revenues,  must  be  attended  to,  and  taken 
into  the  account. 

This  extraordinary  share  in  the  national  property 
was  accompanied  with  proportionable  weight  in  the 
supreme  council  of  the  kingdom.  At  a  time  when 
the  number  of  the  temporal  peers  was  extremely 
small,  and  when  the  lesser  barons  and  representa- 
tives of  boroughs  seldom  attended  parliaments,  the 
ecclesiastics  formed  a  considerable  body  there.  It 
appears  from  the  ancient  rolls  of  parliament,  and 
from  the  manner  of  choosing  the  lords  of  articles, 
that  the  proceedings  of  that  high  court  must  have 
been,  in  a  great  measure,  under  their  direction22. 

The  reverence  due  to  their  sacred  character, 
which  was  often  carried  incredibly  far,  contributed 
not  a  little  towards  the  growth  of  their  power.  The 
dignity,  the  titles,  and  precedence  of  the  Popish 
clergy  are  remarkable,  both  as  causes  and  effects 
of  that  dominion  which  they  had  acquired  over  the 
rest  of  mankind.  They  were  regarded  by  the  cre- 
dulous laity  as  beings  of  a  superior  species;  they 
were  neither  subject  to  the  same  laws,  nor  tried  by 
the  same  judges2'.  Every  guard  that  religion  could 

22  Spots.  Hist,  of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  449. 

2i  How  far  this  claim  of  the  clergy  to  exemption  from  lay  juris- 
diction extended  appears  from  a  remarkable  transaction  in  the 
Parliament  held  in  1.110.  When  that  court  was  proceeding  to 
the  forfeiture  of  Ihe  murderers  of  Cardinal  Beatoan,  and  were 
about  to  include  a  priest,  who  was  one  of  the  assassins,  in  the 
general  sentence  of  condemnation,  odious  as  tlie  crime  was  to 
ecclesiastics,  a  delegate  appeared  in  name  of  the  clerical  courts, 
and  repledged  or  claimed  exemption  of  him  from  the  judgment 
of  parliament,  as  a  spiritual  mini.  This  claim  was  sustained 
and  his  name  is  not  inserted  in  the  act  of  forfeiture.  Episl. 
Keg-  Scot.  ii.  350.  361. 


13G  THE  HISTORY  B.  II. 

supply,  was  placed  around  their  power,  their  pos- 
sessions, and  their  persons;  and  endeavours  were 
used,  not  without  success,  to  represent  them  all  as 
equally  sacred. 

The  reputation  for  learning,  which,  however  in- 
considerable, was  wholly  engrossed  by  the  clergy, 
added  to  the  reverence  which  they  derived  from 
religion.  The  principles  of  sound  philosophy  and 
of  a  just  taste  were  altogether  unknown;  in  place 
of  these  were  substituted  studies  barbarous  and  un- 
instructive :  but  as  the  ecclesiastics  alone  were  con- 
versant in  them,  this  procured  them  esteem;  and  a 
very  slender  portion  of  knowledge  drew  the  admi- 
ration of  rude  ages,  which  knew  little.  War  was 
the  sole  profession  of  the  nobles,  and  hunting  their 
chief  amusement;  they  divided  their  time  between 
these  :  unacquainted  with  the  arts,  and  unimproved 
by  science,  they  disdained  any  employment  foreign 
from  military  affairs,  or  which  required  rather  pene- 
tration and  address  than  bodily  vigour.  Wherever 
the  former  were  necessary  the  clergy  were  entrust- 
ed ;  because  they  alone  were  properly  qualified  for 
the  trust.  Almost  all  the  high  offices  in  civil  go- 
vernment devolved,  on  this  account,  into  their 
hands.  The  Lord  Chancellor  was  the  first  subject 
in  the  kingdom,  both  in  dignity  and  in  power. — 
From  the  earliest  ages  of  the  monarchy  to  the 
death  of  Cardinal  Beatoun,  fifty-four  persons  had 
held  that  high  office ;  and  of  these  forty-three  had 
been  ecclesiastics24.  The  lords  of  session  were 
.supreme  judges  in  all  matters  of  civil  right;  and, 
by  its  original  constitution,  the  president  and  one 
fialf  of  the  senators  in  this  court  were  churchmen. 

To  all  this  we  may  add,  that  the  clergy  being 

24  Crawf.  Oflice  of  State. 


1-333.  OF  SCOTLAND.  137 

separated  from  the  rest  of  mankind  by  the  law  of 
celibacy,  and  undistracted  by  those  cares,  and  un- 
incumbered with  those  burdens  which  occupy  and 
oppress  other  men,  the  interest  of  their  order  be- 
came their  only  object,  and  they  were  at  full  leisure 
to  pursue  it. 

The  nature  of  their  functions  gave  them  access 
to  all  persons,  and  at  all  seasons.  They  could  em- 
ploy all  the  motives  of  fear  and  of  hope,  of  terror 
and  of  consolation,  which  operate  most  powerfully 
on  the  human  mind.  They  haunted  the  weak  and 
the  credulous;  they  besieged  the  beds  of  the  sick 
and  of  the  dying;  they  suffered  few  to  go  out  of  the 
world  without  leaving  marks  of  their  liberality  to 
the  church,  and  taught  them  to  compound  with  the 
Almighty  for  their  sins,  by  bestowiug  riches  upon 
those  who  called  themselves  his  servants. 

When  their  own  industry,  or  the  superstition  of 
mankind  failed  of  producing  this  effect,  the  ecclesi- 
astics had  influence  enough  to  call  in  the  aid  of  law. 
When  a  person  died  intestate,  the  disposal  of  his 
effects  was  vested  in  the  bishop  of  the  diocess,  after 
paying  his  funeral  charges  and  debts,  and  distri- 
buting among  his  kindred  the  sums  to  which  they 
were  respectively  entitled ;  it  being  presumed  that 
no  Christian  would  have  chosen  to  leave  the  world 
without  destining  some  part  of  his  substance  to 
pious  uses25.  As  men  are  apt  to  trust  to  the  con- 
tinuance of  life  with  a  fond  confidence,  and  child- 
ishly shun  every  thing  that  forces  them  to  think  of 
their  mortality,  many  die  without  settling  their  af- 
fairs by  will ;  and  the  right  of  administration  in  that 
event,  acquired  by  the  clergy,  must  have  proved  a 

M  Essays  on   Brit.  Antiq.  174.      Annals  of  Scotland,  by  Sir 
David  Dalryiuple,  vol.  i.  Append.  No.  ii. 

N  2 


138  THE  HISTORY  B.  II. 

considerable  source  both  of  wealth  and  of  power  to 
the  church. 

At  the  same  time,  no  matrimonial  or  testamen- 
tary cause  could  be  tried  but  in  the  spiritual  courts, 
and  by  laws  which  the  clergy  themselves  had 
framed.  The  penalty,  too,  by  which  the  decisions 
of  these  courts  were  enforced,  added  to  their  autho- 
rity. A  sentence  of  excommunication  was  no  less 
formidable  than  a  sentence  of  outlawry.  It  was 
pronounced  on  many  occasions,  and  against  various 
crimes:  and,  besides  excluding  those  upon  whom 
it  fell  from  Christian  privileges,  it  deprived  them  of 
all  their  rights  as  men  or  as  citizens ;  and  the  aid 
of  the  secular  power  concurred  with  the  superstition 
of  mankind,  in  rendering  the  thunders  of  the  church 
no  less  destructive  than  terrible. 

To  these  general  causes  may  be  attributed  the 
immense  growth  both  of  the  wealth  and  power  of 
the  Popish  church;  and,  without  entering  into  any 
more  minute  detail,  this  may  serve  to  discover  the 
foundations  on  which  a  structure  so  stupendous 
was  erected. 

But  though  the  laity  had  contributed,  by  their 
own  superstition  and  profuseness,  to  raise  the  clergy 
from  poverty  and  obscurity  to  riches  and  eminence, 
they  began,  by  degrees,  to  feel  and  to  murmur  at 
their  encroachments.  No  wonder  haughty  and 
martial  barons  should  view  the  power  and  posses- 
sions of  the  church  with  envy;  and  regard  the  lazy 
and  inactive  character  of  churchmen  with  the  ut- 
most contempt;  while,  at  the  same  time,  the  inde- 
cent and  licentious  lives  of  the  clergy  gave  great 
and  just  offence  to  the  people,  and  considerably 
abated  the  veneration  which  they  were  accustomed 
to  yield  to  that  order  of  men. 


1553.  OF  SCOTLAND.  139 

Immense  wealth,  extreme  indolence,  gross  igno- 
rance, and,  above  all,  the  severe  injunctions  of  celi- 
bacy, had  concurred  to  introduce  this  corruption  of 
morals  among  many  of  the  clergy,  who,  presuming 
too  much  upon  the  submission  of  the  people,  were 
at  no  pains  either  to  conceal  or  to  disguise  their 
own  vices.  According  to  the  accounts  of  the  Re- 
formers, confirmed  by  several  Popish  writers,  the 
most  open  and  scandalous  dissoluteness  of  manners 
prevailed  among  the  Scottish  clergy 2fr.  Cardinal 
Beatoun,  with  the  same  public  pomp  which  is  due 
to  a  legitimate  child,  celebrated  the  marriage  of  his 
natural  daughter  with  the  Earl  of  Crawford's  son27; 
and,  if  we  may  believe  Knox,  he  publicly  continued 
to  the  end  of  his  days  a  criminal  correspondence  with 
her  mother,  who  was  a  woman  of  rank.  The  other 
prelates  seem  not  to  have  been  more  regular  and 
exemplary  than  their  primate28. 

Men  of  such  characters  ought,  in  reason,  to  have 
been  alarmed  at  the  first  clamours  raised  against 
their  own  morals,  and  the  doctrines  of  the  church, 
by  the  Protestant  preachers  ;  but  the  Popish  eccle- 
siastics, either  out  of  pride  or  ignorance,  neglected 

26  Winzet.  ap.  Keith,  Append.  202.  20>.     Lesley  de  Reb. 
Gest.  Scot.  2?,2. 

27  The  marriage  articles,  subscribed  with  his  own  hand,  in  which 
be  calls  her  my  daughter,  are  still  extant.      Keith,  p.  42. 

28  A  remarkable  proof  of  the  dissolute  manners  of  the  clergy 
is  found  in  the  public  records.  A  greater  number  of  letters  of 
legitimation  was  granted  during  the  lirst  thirty  years  after  the  Re- 
formation than  during  the  whole  period  that  has  elapsed  since 
that  time.  These  were  obtained  by  the  sons  of  the  Popish  clergy. 
The  ecclesiastics,  who  were  allowed  to  retain  their  benefices  alie- 
nated them  to  their  children-,  who,  when  they  acquired  wealth, 
were  desirous  that  the  stain  of  illegitimacy  might  no  longer  re- 
main upon  their  families.  In  Keith's  Catalogue  of  Scottish  Bishop* 
we  find  several  instances  of  such  alienations  of  church  lands,  by 
the  Popish  incumbents  to  their  natural  Children. 


140  THE  HISTORY  B.  II. 

the  proper  methods  for  silencing  them.  Instead  of 
reforming*  their  lives,  or  disguising  their  vices,  they 
affected  to  despise  the  censures  of  the  people. — 
While  the  Reformers,  by  their  mortifications  and 
austerities,  endeavoured  to  resemble  the  first  pro- 
pagators of  Christianity,  the  Popish  clergy  were 
compared  to  all  those  persons  who  are  most  infa- 
mous in  history  for  the  enormity  and  scandal  of 
their  crimes. 

On  the  other  hand,  instead  of  mitigating  the 
rigour,  or  colouring  over  the  absurdity,  of  the  es- 
tablished doctrines  ;  instead  of  attempting  to  found 
them  upon  Scripture,  or  to  reconcile  them  to  rea- 
son ;  they  left  them  without  any  other  support  or 
recommendation  than  the  authority  of  the  church, 
and  the  decrees  of  councils.  The  fables  concerning 
purgatory,  the  virtues  of  pilgrimage,  and  the  merits 
of  the  saints  were  the  topics  on  which  they  insisted 
in  their  discourses  to  the  people  ;  and  the  duty  of 
preaching  being  left  wholly  to  monks  of  the  lowest 
and  most  illiterate  orders,  their  compositions  were 
still  more  wretched  and  contemptible  than  the  sub- 
jects on  which  they  insisted.  While  the  Reformers 
were  attended  by  crowded  and  admiring  audiences, 
the  Popish  preachers  were  either  universally  de- 
serted, or  listened  to  with  scorn. 

The  only  device  which  they  employed,  in  order  to 
recover  their  declining  reputation  or  to  confirm  the 
wavering  faith  of  the  people,  was  equally  imprudent 
and  unsuccessful.  As  many  doctrines  of  their 
church  had  derived  their  credit  at  first  from  the 
authority  of  false  miracles,  they  now  endeavoured 
to  call  in  these  to  their  aid29.  But  such  lvinyjwon- 
ders,  as  were  beheld  with  unsuspicious  admiration, 

-0  Spot&wood,  G9. 


1053.  OF  SCOTLAND.  141 

or  heard  with  implicit  faith,  in  times  of  darkness 
and  of  ignorance,  met  with  a  very  different  recep- 
tion in  a  more  enlightened  period.  The  vigilance 
of  the  Reformers  detected  these  impostures,  and 
exposed  not  only  them,  but  the  cause  which  needed 
the  aid  of  such  artifices,  to  ridicule. 

As  the  Popish  ecclesiastics  became  more  and 
more  the  objects  of  hatred  and  of  contempt,  the 
discourses  of  the  Reformers  were  listened  to  as  so 
many  calls  to  liberty;  and,  besides  the  pious  in- 
dignation which  they  excited  against  those  corrupt 
doctrines  which  had  perverted  the  nature  of  true 
Christianity ;  besides  the  zeal  which  they  inspired 
for  the  knowledge  of  truth  and  the  purity  of  reli- 
gion ;  they  gave  rise  also,  among  the  Scottish  no- 
bles, to  other  views  and  passions.  They  hoped  to 
shake  off  the  yoke  of  ecclesiastical  dominion,  which 
they  had  long  felt  to  be  oppressive,  and  which  they 
now  discovered  to  be  unchristian.  They  expected 
to  recover  possession  of  the  church  revenues,  which 
they  were  now  taught  to  consider  as  alienations 
made  by  their  ancestors  with  a  profusion  no  less 
undiscerning  than  unbounded.  They  flattered  them- 
selves, that  a  check  would  be  given  to  the  pride 
and  luxury  of  the  clergy,  who  would  be  obliged, 
henceforward,  to  confine  themselves  within  the 
sphere  peculiar  to  their  sacred  character.  An  aver- 
sion from  the  established  church,  which  flowed  from 
so  many  concurring  causes,  which  was  raised  by 
considerations  of  religion,  heightened  by  motives  of 
policy,  and  instigated  by  prospects  of  private  ad- 
vantage, spread  fast  through  the  nation,  and  ex- 
cited a  spirit  that  burst  out,  at  last,  with  irresistible 
violence. 

Religious  considerations  alone  were  sufficient  to 
have  roused  this  spirit.     The  points  in  controversy 


142  THE  HISTORY  B.  II. 

with  the  church  of  Rome  were  of  so  much  impor- 
tance to  the  happiness  of  mankind,  and  so  essentia! 
to  Christianity,  that  they  merited  all  the  zeal  with 
which  the  Reformers  contended  in  order  to  esta- 
blish them.  But  the  Reformation  having  been 
represented  as  the  effect  of  some  wild  and  enthu- 
siastic frenzy  in  the  human  mind,  this  attempt  to 
account  for  the  eagerness  and  zeal  with  which  our 
ancestors  embraced  and  propagated  the  Protestant 
doctrines,  by  taking  a  view  of  the  political  motives 
alone  which  influenced  them,  and  by  showing  how 
naturally  these  prompted  them  to  act  with  so  much 
ardour,  will  not,  perhaps,  be  deemed  an  unneces- 
sary digression.  We  now  return  to  the  course  of 
the  history. 

1554].  The  Queen's  elevation  to  the  office  of 
Regent  seems  to  have  transported  her,  at  first,  be- 
yond the  known  prudence  and  moderation  of  her 
character.  She  began  her  administration  by  con- 
ferring upon  foreigners  several  offices  of  trust  and 
of  dignity ;  a  step  which,  both  from  the  inability  of 
strangers  to  discharge  these  offices  with  propriety, 
and  from  the  envy  which  their  preferment  excites 
among  the  natives,  is  never  attended  with  good 
consequences.  Vilmort  was  made  comptroller,  and 
intrusted  with  the  management  of  the  public  reve- 
nues; Bonot  was  appointed  Governor  of  Orkney; 
and  Rubay  honoured  with  the  custody  of  the  great 
seal,  and  the  title  of  Vice-chancellor30.  It  was 
with  the  highest  indignation  that  the  Scots  beheld 
offices  of  the  greatest  eminence  and  authority  dealt 
out  among  strangers31.     By  these  promotions  they 

30  Lesley  de  Reb.  Gest.  Scot.  189. 

31  The  resentment  of  the  nation  against  the  French  rose  to  such 
a  height,  that  an  act  of  parliament  was  passed  on  purpose  to  re- 
strain or  moderate  it.     Pari.  6.  Q.  Mary,  c.  GO. 


1  »>4.  OF  SCOTLAND.  143 

conceived  the  Queen  to  have  ottered  an  insult  botli 
to  their  understandings  and  to  their  courage;  to  the 
former,  by  supposing  them  unfit  for  those  stations 
which  their  ancestors  had  filled  with  so  much  dig- 
nity ;  to  the  latter,  by  imagining  that  they  were 
fume  enough  not  to  complain  of  an  affront,  which, 
in  no  former  age,  would  have  been  tolerated  with 
impunity. 

While  their  minds  were  in  this  disposition,  an 
incident  happened  which  inflamed  their  aversion 
from  French  councils  to  the  highest  degree.  Ever 
since  the  famous  contest  between  the  houses  of 
Valois  and  Plantagenet,  the  French  had  been  ac- 
customed to  embarrass  the  English,  and  to  divide 
their  strength  by  the  sudden  and  formidable  incur- 
sions of  their  allies,  the  Scots.  But,  as  these  in- 
roads were  seldom  attended  with  any  real  advan- 
tage to  Scotland,  and  exposed  it  to  the  dangerous 
resentment  of  a  powerful  neighbour,  the  Scots  be- 
gan to  grow  less  tractable  than  formerly,  and  scru- 
pled any  longer  to  serve  an  ambitious  ally  at  the 
price  of  their  own  quiet  and  security.  The  change, 
too,  which  was  daily  introducing  in  the  art  of  war 
rendered  the  assistance  of  the  Scottish  forces  of 
less  importance  to  the  French  Monarch.  For  these 
reasons,  Henry  having  resolved  upon  a  war  with 
Philip  II.,  and  foreseeing  that  the  Queen  of  Eng- 
land would  take  part  in  her  husband's  quarrel,  was 
extremely  solicitous  to  secure  in  Scotland  the  as- 
sistance of  some  troops,  which  would  be  more  at 
his  command  than  an  undisciplined  army  led  by 
chieftains  who  were  almost  independent.  In  pro- 
secution of  this  design,  but  under  pretence  of  re- 
lieving the  nobles  from  the  expense  and  danger  of 
defending  the  borders,  the  Queen  Regent  proposed 


144  THE  HISTORY  B.  II. 

in  parliament  [1555],  to  register  the  value  of  lands 
throughout  the  kingdom,  to  impose  on  them  a  small 
tax,  and  to  apply  that  revenue  towards  maintaining 
a  body  of  regular  troops  in  constant  pay.  A  fixed 
tax  upon  land,  which  the  growing  expense  of  go- 
vernment had  introduced  into  almost  every  part  of 
Europe,  was  unknown  at  that  time,  and  seemed 
altogether  inconsistent  with  the  genius  of  feudal 
policy.  Nothing  could  be  more  shocking  to  a  ge- 
nerous and  brave  nobility  than  the  intrusting  to 
mercenary  hands  the  defence  of  those  territories 
which  had  been  acquired  or  preserved  by  the  blood 
of  their  ancestors.  They  received  this  proposal 
with  the  utmost  dissatisfaction.  About  three  hun- 
dred of  the  lesser  barons  repaired  in  a  body  to  the 
Queen  "Regent,  and  represented  their  sense  of  the 
intended  innovation  with  that  manly  and  deter- 
mined boldness  which  is  natural  to  a  free  people  in 
a  martial  age.  Alarmed  at  a  remonstrance  deliver- 
ed in  so  firm  a  tone,  and  supported  by  such  for- 
midable numbers,  the  Queen  prudently  abandoned 
a  scheme  which  she  found  to  be  universally  odious. 
As  the  Queen  herself  was  known  perfectly  to  un- 
derstand the  circumstances  and  temper  of  the  na- 
tion, this  measure  was  imputed  wholly  to  the  sug- 
gestions of  her  foreign  counsellors;  and  the  Scots 
were  ready  to  proceed  to  the  most  violent  extremi- 
ties against  them. 

The  French,  instead  of  extinguishing,  added  fuel 
to  the  flame.  They  had  now  commenced  hostilities 
against  Spain,  and  Philip  had  prevailed  on  the 
Queen  of  England  to  reinforce  his  army  with  a  con- 
siderable body  of  her  troops.  In  order  to  deprive 
him  of  this  aid,  Henry  had  recourse,  as  he  project- 
ed, to  the  Scots ;  and  attempted  to  excite  them  to 


i&dS.  OF  SCOTLAND.  145 

invade  England.     But  as  Scotland  had  nothing  to 
dread  from  a  Princess  of  Mary's  character,  who, 
far  from  any  ambitious  scheme  of  disturbing  her 
neighbours,  was  wholly  occupied  in  endeavouring 
to  reclaim  her  heretical  subjects ;   the  nobles,  who 
were  assembled  by  the  Queen  Regent  at  Newbattle, 
listened  to  the  solicitations  of  the  French  monarch 
with  extreme  coldness,  and  prudently  declined  en- 
gaging the  kingdom  in  an  enterprise  so  dangerous 
and  unnecessary.     What  she  could  not  obtain  by 
persuasion,  the  Queen  Regent  brought  about  by  a 
stratagem.     Notwithstanding  the  peace  which  sub- 
sisted between  the  two  kingdoms,  she  commanded 
her   French   soldiers  to  rebuild  a  small  fort  near 
Berwick,  which  was  appointed,  by  the  last  treaty, 
to  be  rased.     The  garrison  of  Berwick  sallied  out, 
interrupted   the   work,   and    ravaged   the   adjacent 
country.     This  insult  roused  the  fiery  spirit  of  the 
Scots,  and   their  promptness  to  revenge  the  least 
appearance  of  national  injury  dissipated,  in  a  mo- 
ment, the  wise  and  pacific  resolutions  which  they 
had  so  lately  formed.     War  was  determined,  and 
orders  instantly  given  for  raising  a  numerous  army. 
But  before  their  forces  could  assemble,  the  ardour 
of  their  indignation  had  time  to  cool;  and  the  Eng- 
lish having  discovered  no  intention  to  push  the  war 
with  vigour,  the  nobles  resumed  their  pacific  sys- 
tem, and  resolved  to  stand  altogether  upon  the  de- 
fensive.  [1556.]  They  marched  to  the  banks  of  the 
Tweed,  they  prevented  the  incursions  of  the  enemy  ; 
and  having  done  what  they  thought  sufficient  for 
the  safety  and  honour  of  their  country,  the  Queen 
could  not  induce  them,  either  by  her  entreaties  or 
her  artifices,  to  advance  another  step. 

While  the   Scots  persisted   in    their    inactivity, 

yoi..  i.  o 


140  THE  HTSTORY  B.  II. 

D'Oysel,  the  commander  of  the  French  troops,  who 
possessed  entirely  the  confidence  of  the  Queen  Re- 
gent, endeavoured,  with  her  connivance,  to  engage 
the  two  nations  in  hostilities.  Contrarv  to  the  orders 
of  the  Scottish  general,  he  marched  over  the  Tweed 
with  his  own  soldiers,  and  invested  Werk  Castle,  a 
garrison  of  the  English.  The  Scots,  instead  of  se- 
conding his  attempt,  were  enraged  at  his  presump- 
tion. The  Queen's  partiality  towards  France  had 
long  been  suspected ;  but  it  was  now  visible  that 
she  wantonly  sacrificed  the  peace  and  safety  of 
Scotland  to  the  interest  of  that  ambitious  and  as- 
suming ally.  Under  the  feudal  governments,  it  was 
in  camps  that  subjects  were  accustomed  to  address 
the  boldest  remonstrances  to  their  sovereigns. — 
While  arms  were  in  their  hands  they  felt  their  own 
strength;  and  at  that  time  all  their  representations 
of  grievances  carried  the  authority  of  commands. 
On  this  occasion  the  resentment  of  the  nobles 
broke  out  with  such  violence,  that  the  Queen,  per- 
ceiving all  attempts  to  engage  them  in  action  to  be 
vain,  abruptly  dismissed  her  army,  and  retired  with 
the  utmost  shame  and  disgust;  having  discovered 
the  impotence  of  her  own  authority,  without  ef- 
fecting any  thing  which  could  be  of  advantage  to 
France  32. 

It  is  observable  that  this  first  instance  of  con- 
tempt for  the  Regent's  authority  can,  in  no  degree, 
be  imputed  to  the  influence  of  the  new  opinions  in 
religion.  As  the  Queen's  pretensions  to  the  Re- 
gency had  been  principally  supported  by  those  who 
favoured  the  Reformation,  and  as  she  still  needed 
them  for  a  counterpoise  to  the  Archbishop  of  St. 
Andrew's,  and  the  partisans  of  the  house  of  Ha- 

32  Strype's  Memor.  iii.  Append.  274.     Lesly,  196. 


1566.  OF  SCOTLAND.  147 

inilton  ;  she  continued  to  treat  them  with  great  re- 
spect, and  admitted  them  to  no  inconsiderable  share 
in  her  favour  and  confidence.  Kirkaldy  of  Grange, 
and  the  other  surviving  conspirators  against  Car- 
dinal Beatoun  were  about  this  time  recalled  by  her 
from  banishment;  and,  through  her  connivance,  the 
Protestant  preachers  enjoyed  an  interval  of  tran- 
quillity, which  was  of  great  advantage  to  their  cause. 
Soothed  by  these  instances  of  the  Queen's  modera- 
tion and  humanity,  the  Protestants  left  to  others 
the  office  of  remonstrating;  and  the  leaders  of  tne 
opposite  factions  set  them  the  first  example  of  dis- 
puting the  will  of  their  sovereign. 

As  the  Queen  Regent  felt  how  limited  and  pre- 
carious her  authority  was,  while  it  depended  on  the 
poise  of  these  contrary  factions,  she  endeavoured  to 
establish  it  on  a  broader  and  more  secure  founda- 
tion, by  hastening  the  conclusion  of  her  daughter's 
marriage  with  the  Dauphin.  Amiable  as  the  Queen 
of  Scots  then  was,  in  the  bloom  of  youth,  and  con- 
siderable as  the  territories  were,  which  she  would 
have  added  to  the  French  monarchy ;  reasons  were 
not  wanting  to  dissuade  Henry  from  completing  his 
first  plan  of  marrying  her  to  his  son.  The  Con- 
stable Montmorency  had  employed  all  his  interest 
to  defeat  an  alliance  which  reflected  so  much  lustre 
on  the  Princes  of  Lorrain.  He  had  represented 
the  impossibility  of  maintaining  order  and  tran- 
quillity among  a  turbulent  people,  during  the  ab- 
sence of  their  sovereign ;  and  for  that  reason  had 
advised  Henry  to  bestow  the  young  Queen  upon 
one  of  the  Princes  of  the  blood,  who,  by  residing 
in  Scotland,  might  preserve  that  kingdom  a  useful 
ally  to  France,  which,  by  a  nearer  union  to  the 
crown,  would  become  a  mutinous  and  ungovernable 


148  THE  HISTORY  B.  II, 

province33.  But  at  this  time  the  Constable  was  a 
prisoner  in  the  hands  of  the  Spaniards  ;  the  Princes 
of  Lorrain  were  at  the  height  of  their  power ;  and 
their  influence,  seconded  by  the  charms  of  the  young 
Queen,  triumphed  over  the  prudent  but  envious  re- 
monstrances of  their  rival. 

Dec.  14,  1557.]  The  French  King  accordingly 
applied  to  the  Parliament  of  Scotland,  which  ap- 
pointed eight  of  its  members34  to  represent  the 
whole  body  of  the  nation,  at  the  marriage  of  the 
Queen.  Among  the  persons  on  whom  the  public 
choice  conferred  this  honourable  character  were 
some  of  the  most  avowed  and  zealous  advocates 
for  the  Reformation ;  by  which  may  be  estimated 
the  degree  of  respect  and  popularity  which  that 
party  had  now  attained  in  the  kingdom.  The  in- 
structions of  the  parliament  to  those  commissioners 
still  remain  35,  and  do  honour  to  the  wisdom  and 
integrity  of  that  assembly.  At  the  same  time  that 
they  manifested,  with  respect  to  the  articles  of 
marriage,  a  laudable  concern  for  the  dignity  and 
interest  of  their  sovereign,  they  employed  every 
precaution  which  prudence  could  dictate,  for  pre- 
serving the  liberty  and  independence  of  the  nation, 
and  for  securing  the  succession  of  the  crown  in  the 
house  of  Hamilton. 

With  regard  to  each  of  these,  the  Scots  obtained 
whatever  satisfaction  their  fear  or  jealousy  could 
demand.  The  young  Queen,  the  Dauphin,  and  the 
King  of  France  ratified  every  article  with  the  most 

33  Melv.  Mem.  15. 

31  Viz.  The  Archbishop  of  Glasgow,  the  Bishop  of  Ross,  the 
Bishop  of  Orkney,  the  Earls  of  Rothes  and  Cassils,  Lord  Flem- 
ing, Lord  Seton,  the  Prior  of  St.  Andrew's,  and  John  Erskine  of 
Dun. 

:'"'  Keith,  Append.  13. 


1557.  OF  SCOTFJAND.  149 

solemn  oaths,  and  continued  them  by  deeds  in  form 
under  their  hands  and  seals.     But  on  the  part  of 
France,  all  this  was  one  continued  scene  of  studied 
and  elaborate  deceit.      Previous  to  these   public 
transactions  with  the  Scottish  deputies,  Mary  had 
been  persuaded  to  subscribe  privately  three  deeds, 
equally  unjust  and  invalid ;  by  which,  failing  the 
heirs  of  her  own  body,  she  conferred  the  kingdom 
of  Scotland,  with  whatever  inheritance  or  succes- 
sion might  accrue  to  it,  in  free  gift  upon  the  crown 
of  France,  declaring  all  promises  to  the  contrary, 
which  the  necessity  of  her  affairs,  and  the  solicita- 
tions of  her  subjects,  had  extorted,  or  might  extort 
from  her,  to  be  void  and  of  no  obligation 36.     As  it 
gives  us  a  proper  idea  of  the  character  of  the  French 
court  under  Henry  II.  we  may  observe  that  the 
King  himself,  the  keeper  of  the  great  seals,  the 
Duke  of  Guise,  and  the  Cardinal  of  Lorrain  were 
the  persons  engaged  in  conducting  this  perfidious 
and  dishonourable  project.     The  Queen  of  Scots 
was  the  only  innocent  actor  in  that  scene  of  iniquity. 
Her  youth,  her  inexperience,  her  education  in  a 
foreign  country,  and  her  deference  to  the  will  of  her 
uncles,  must  go  far  towards  vindicating  her,  in  the 
judgment  of  every  impartial  person,  from  any  im- 
putation of  blame  on  that  account. 

This  grant,  by  which  Mary  bestowed  the  inherit- 
ance of  her  kingdom  upon  strangers,  was  concealed 
with  the  utmost  care  from  her  subjects.  They 
seem,  however,  not  to  have  been  unacquainted  with 
the  intention  of  the  French  to  overturn  the  settle- 
ment of  the  succession  in  favour  of  the  Duke  of 
Chatelherault.  The  zeal  with  which  the  arch- 
bishop of  St.  Andrew's  opposed  all  the  measures 
'M  Corps  Diplomat,  torn.  v.  21.     Keith,  73. 

o  2 


150  THE  HISTORY  B.  II, 

of  the  Queen  Regent,  evidently  proceeded  from  the 
tears  and  suspicions  of  that  prudent  prelate  on  this 
head  w. 

xApril  14,  1558.]    The  marriage,   however,  was 
celebrated  with  great  pomp ;  and  the  French,  who 
had   hitherto  affected  to   draw    a  veil   over  their 
designs  upon  Scotland,  began  now  to  unfold  their 
intentions  without  any  disguise.      In  the  treaty  of 
marriage,  the  deputies  had  agreed  that  the  Dauphin 
should  assume  the  name  of  King  of  Scotland.    This 
they  considered  only  as  an  honorary  title;  but  the 
French  laboured  to  annex  to  it  some  solid  privileges 
and  power.     They  insisted  that  the  Dauphin's  title 
should  be   publicly   recognised;    that  the    Crown 
Matrimonial  should  be  conferred  upon  him ;   and 
that  all  the  rights  pertaining  to  the  husband  of  a 
Queen   should  be  vested  in  his  person.      By  the 
laws  of  Scotland,  a  person  who  married  an  heiress, 
kept  possession  of  her  estate  during  his  own  life,  if 
he  happened  to  survive  her  and  the  children  born  of 
the  marriage  33.     This  was  called  the  courtesy  of 
Scotland.    The  French  aimed  at  applying  this  rule, 
which  takes  place  in   private   inheritances,  to  the 
succession  of  the  kingdom  ;  and  that  seems  to  be 
implied  in  their  demand  of  the  Crown  Matrimonial, 
a  phrase  peculiar  to  the  Scottish   historians,  and 
which  they  have  neglected  to  explain39.      As  the 

37  About  this  time  the  French  seem  to  have  had  some  design 
of  reviving  the  Earl  of  Lennox's  pretensions  to  the  succession, 
in  order  to  intimidate  and  alarm  the  Duke  of  Chatelherault. — 
Havnes,  215,  219.     Porbes's  Collect,  vol.  i.  189. 

M  Reg.  Mag.  lib.  ii.  58. 

1)9  As  far  as  I  can  judge,  the  husband  of  the  Queen,  by  the  grant 
of  the  Crown  Matrimonial,  acquired  a  right  to  assume  the  title  of 
King,  to  have  his  name  stamped  upon  the  current  coin,  and  to 
i  all  public  instruments  together  with  the  Queen.  In  conse- 
quence of  this,  the  subjects  took,  au  oath  of  fidelity  to  him,    Keith, 


15oH.  OF  SCOTLAND.  151 

French  had  reason  to  expect  difficulties  in  carrying 
through  this  measure,  they  began  with  sounding  the 
deputies  who  were  then  at  Paris.  The  English,  in 
the  marriage  articles  between  their  Queen  and  Phi- 
lip of  Spain,  had  set  an  example  to  the  age,  of  that 
prudent  jealousy  and  reserve  with  which  a  foreigner 
should  be  admitted  so  near  the  throne.  Full  of  the 
same  ideas,  the  Scottish  deputies  had,  in  their  oath 
of  allegiance  to  the  Dauphin,  expressed  themselves 
with  remarkable  caution40.  Their  answer  was  in 
the  same  spirit,  respectful  but  firm  ;  and  discovered 
a  fixed  resolution  of  consenting  to  nothing  that 
tended  to  introduce  any  alteration  in  the  order  of 
succession  to  the  crown. 

Four  of  the  deputies  n  happening  to  die  before 
they  returned  into  Scotland,  this  accident  was  uni- 
versally imputed  to  the  effects  of  poison,  which  was 
supposed  to  have  been  given  them  by  the  emissaries 
of  the  House  of  Guise.  The  historians  of  all  na- 
tions discover  an  amazing  credulity  with  respect  to 
rumours  of  this  kind,  which  are  so  well  calculated 
to  please  the  malignity  of  some  men,  and  to  gratify 
the  love  of  the  marvellous  which  is  natural  to  all, 
that  in  every  age  they  have  been  swallowed  with- 

Append.  20.  His  authority  became,  in  some  measure,  coordinate 
with  that  of  the  Queen;  and  without  his  concurrence,  manifested 
by  signing  his  name,  no  public  deed  seems  to  have  been  consi- 
dered as  valid.  By  the  oath  of  fidelity  of  the  Scottish  commis- 
sioners to  the  Dauphin,  it  is  evident  that,  in  their  opinion,  the 
rights  belonging  to  the  Crown  Matrimonial  subsisted  only  during 
the  continuance  of  the  marriage.  Keith,  Append.  20.  But  the 
conspirators  against  Rizio  hound  themselves  to  procure  a  giant 
of  the  Crown  Matrimonial  to  Darnly,  during  aii  the  days  of  his 
life.     Keith,  Append.  120.     Good   i.  227. 

*°  Keith,  Append.  20. 

11  The  Bishop  of  Orkney,  the  Earl  of  Rothes,  the  Earl  of  Cas- 
si].s,  and  Lord  Fleming. 


152  THE  HISTORY  B.  II. 

out  examination,  and  believed  contrary  to  reason. 
No  wonder  the  Scots  should  easily  give  credit  to  a 
suspicion  which  received  such  strong  colours  of  pro- 
bability, both  from  their  own  resentment  and  from 
the  known  character  of  the  Princes  of  Lorrain,  so 
little  scrupulous  about  the  justice  of  the  ends  which 
they  pursued,  or  of  the  means  which  they  employed. 
For  the  honour  of  human  nature,  however,  it  must 
be  observed,  that  as  we  can  discover  no  motive 
which  could  induce  any  man  to  perpetrate  such  a 
crime,  so  there  appears  no  evidence  to  prove  that 
it  was  committed.  But  the  Scots  of  that  age,  in- 
fluenced by  national  animosities  and  prejudices, 
were  incapable  of  examining  the  circumstances  of 
the  case  with  calmness,  or  of  judging  concerning 
them  with  candour.  All  parties  agreed  in  believing 
the  French  to  have  been  guilty  of  this  detestable 
action ;  and  it  is  obvious  how  much  this  tended  to 
increase  the  aversion  for  them,  which  was  growing 
among  all  ranks  of  men. 

Notwithstanding  the  cold  reception  which  their 
proposal  concerning  the  Crown  Matrimonial  met 
with  from  the  Scottish  deputies,  the  French  ven- 
tured to  move  it  in  parliament.  The  partisans  of 
the  house  of  Hamilton,  suspicious  of  their  designs 
upon  the  succession,  opposed  it  with  great  zeal. 
But  a  party,  which  the  feeble  and  unsteady  conduct 
of  their  leader  had  brought  under  much  disreputation, 
was  little  able  to  withstand  the  influence  of  France, 
and  the  address  of  the  Queen  Regent,  seconded, 
on  this  occasion,  by  all  the  numerous  adherents  of 
the  Reformation.  Besides,  that  artful  Princess 
dressed  out  the  French  demands  in  a  less  offensive 
garb,  and  threw  in  so  many  limitations  as  seemed 
to  render  them  of  small  consequence. — These  either 


1559.  OI-   SCOTLAND.  153 

deceived  the  Scots,  or  removed  their  scruples;  and 
in  compliance  to  the  Queen  they  passed  an  act,  con- 
ferring the  Crown  Matrimonial  on  the  Dauphin ;  and 
with  the  fondest  credulity  trusted  to  the  frail  se- 
curity of  words  and  statutes,  against  the  dangerous 
encroachments  of  power42. 

The  concurrence  of  the  Protestants  with  the 
Queen  Regent,  in  promoting  a  measure  so  accept- 
able to  France,  while  the  Popish  clergy,  under  the 
Influence  of  the  Archbishop  of  St.  Andrew's,  op- 
posed it  with  so  much  violence45,  is  one  of  those 
singular  circumstances  in  the  conduct  of  parties, 
for  which  this  period  is  so  remarkable.  It  may  be 
ascribed,  in  some  degree,  to  the  dexterous  manage- 
ment of  the  Queen,  but  chiefly  to  the  moderation 
of  those  who  favoured  the  Reformation.  The  Pro- 
testants were  by  this  time  almost  equal  to  the 
Catholics,  both  in  power  and  in  number;  and,  con- 
scious of  their  own  strength,  they  submitted  with 
impatience  to  that  tyrannical  authority  with  which 
the  ancient  laws  armed  the  ecclesiastics  against 
them.  They  longed  to  be  exempted  from  this  op- 
pressive jurisdiction,  and  publicly  to  enjoy  the  liberty 
of  professing  those  opinions,  and  of  exercising  that 
worship,  which  so  great  a  part  of  the  nation  deemed 
to  be  founded  in  truth  and  to  be  acceptable  to  the 
Deity.  This  indulgence,  to  which  the  whole  weight 
of  priestly  authority  was  opposed,  there  were  only 

42  The  act  of  parliament  is  worded  with  the  utmost  care,  with 
a  view  to  guard  against  any  hreach  of  the  order  of  succession. 
Hut  the  Duke,  not  reiving  on  this  alone,  entered  a  solemn  pro- 
testation to  secure  his  own  right.  Keith,  70.  It  is  plain  that 
he  suspected  the  French  of  having  some  intention  to  set  aside 
bis  right  of  succession;  and,  indeed,  if  lhe_y  had  no  design  of 
Miat  kind,  the  eagerness  with  which  they  urged  their  demand 
was  childish.  "  Mel?.  17. 


154  THE  HISTORY  B.  II. 

two  ways  of  obtaining.  Either  violence  must  ex- 
tort it  from  the  reluctant  hand  of  their  sovereign,  or 
by  prudent  compliances  they  might  expect  it  from 
her  favour  or  her  gratitude.  The  former  is  an  ex- 
pedient for  the  redress  of  grievances,  to  which  no 
nation  has  recourse  suddenly ;  and  subjects  seldom 
venture  upon  resistance,  which  is  their  last  remedy, 
but  in  cases  of  extreme  necessity.  On  this  occa- 
sion the  Reformers  wisely  held  the  opposite  course, 
and  by  their  zeal  in  forwarding  the  Queen's  designs 
they  hoped  to  merit  her  protection.  This  dispo- 
sition the  Queen  encouraged  to  the  utmost,  and 
amused  them  so  artfully  with  many  promises,  and 
some  concessions,  that,  by  their  assistance,  she  sur- 
mounted in  parliament  the  force  of  a  national  and 
laudable  jealousy,  which  would  otherwise  have 
swayed  with  the  greater  number. 

Another  circumstance  contributed  somewhat  to 
acquire  the  Regent  such  considerable  influence  in 
this  parliament.  In  Scotland,  all  the  bishoprics, 
and  those  abbeys  which  conferred  a  title  to  a  seat  in 
parliament,  were  in  the  gift  of  the  crown44.  From 
the  time  of  her  accession  to  the  regency,  the  Queen 
had  kept  in  her  own  hands  almost  all  those  which 
became  vacant,  except  such  as  were,  to  the  great 
disgust  of  the  nation,  bestowed  upon  foreigners. 
Among  these,  her  brother  the  Cardinal  of  Lorrain 
had  obtained  the  abbeys  of  Kelso  and  Melross,  two 
of  the  most  wealthy  foundations  in  the  kingdom  4,\ 
By  this  conduct  she  thinned  the  ecclesiastical 
bench 4(3,  which  was  entirely  under  the  influence  of 

«  See  Book  I.  >5  Lesl.v,  202. 

46  It  appears  from  the  rolls  of  this  parliament,  which  Lesly 
calls  a  vcrv  full  one,  that  only  seven  bishops  and  sixteen  abbots 
were  present. 


1558.  OF  SCOTLAND.  155 

the  Archbishop  of  St.  Andrew's,  and  which,  by  its 
numbers  and  authority,  usually  had  great  weight  in 
the  house,  so  as  to  render  any  opposition  it  could 
give  at  that  time  of  little  consequence. 

The  Earl  of  Argyll,  and  James  Stewart,  Prior  of 
St.  Andrew's,  one  the  most  powerful,  and  the  other 
the  most  popular  leader  of  the  Protestants,  were 
appointed  to  carry  the  crown  and  other  ensigns  of 
royalty  to  the  Dauphin.  But  from  this  they  were 
diverted  by  the  part  they  were  called  to  act  in  a  more 
interesting  scene,  which  now  begins  to  open. 

Before  we  turn  towards  this,  it  is  necessary  to 
observe,  that  on  the  seventeenth  of  November,  one 
thousand  five  hundred  and  fifty-eight,  Mary  of 
England  finished  her  short  and  inglorious  reign. 
Her  sister  Elizabeth  took  possession  of  the  throne 
without  opposition ;  and  the  Protestant  religion 
was  once  more  established  by  law  in  England. 
The  accession  of  a  Queen,  who,  under  very  dif- 
ficult circumstances,  had  given  strong  indications 
of  those  eminent  qualities  which,  in  the  sequel, 
rendered  her  reign  so  illustrious,  attracted  the  eyes 
of  all  Europe.  Among  the  Scots,  both  parties 
observed  her  first  motions  with  the  utmost  solici- 
tude, as  they  easily  foresaw  that  she  would  not 
remain  long  an  indifferent  spectator  of  their  trans- 
actions. 

Under  many  discouragements  and  much  oppres- 
sion, the  Reformation  advanced  towards  a  full  es- 
tablishment in  Scotland.  All  the  low  country,  the 
most  populous,  and  at  that  time  the  most  warlike 
part  of  the  kingdom,  was  deeply  tinctured  with  the 
Protestant  opinions :  and  if  the  same  impressions 
were  not  made  in  the  more  distant  counties,  it  was 
owing  to  no  want  of  the  same  dispositions  among 


156  THE  HISTORY  B.  II, 

the  people,  but  to  the  scarcity  of  preachers,  whose 
most  indefatigable  zeal  could  not  satisfy  the  avidity 
of  those  who  desired  their  instructions.  Among  a 
people  bred  to  arms,  and  as  prompt  as  the  Scots 
to  act  with  violence;  and  in  an  age  when  religious 
passions  had  taken  such  strong  possession  of  the 
human  mind,  and  moved  and  agitated  it  with  so 
much  violence,  the  peaceable  and  regular  demean- 
our of  so  numerous  a  party  is  astonishing.  From 
the  death  of  Mr.  Patrick  Hamilton,  the  first  who 
suffered  in  Scotland  for  the  Protestant  religion, 
thirty  years  had  elapsed,  and  during  so  long  a  pe- 
riod no  violation  of  public  order  or  tranquillity  had 
proceeded  from  that  sect47;  and  though  roused  and 
irritated  by  the  most  cruel  excesses  of  ecclesiastical 
tyranny,  they  did  in  no  instance  transgress  those 
bounds  of  duty  which  the  law  prescribes  to  sub- 
jects. Besides  the  prudence  of  their  own  leaders, 
and  the  protection  which  the  Queen  Regent,  from 
political  motives,  afforded  them,  the  moderation  of 
the  Archbishop  of  St.  Andrew's  encouraged  this 
pacific  disposition.  That  prelate,  whose  private 
life  cotemporary  writers  tax  with  great  irregulari- 
ties48, governed  the  church,  for  some  years,  with  a 
temper  and  prudence  of  which  there  are  few  ex- 
amples in  that  age.  But  some  time  before  the 
meeting  of  the  last  parliament,  the  Archbishop  de- 
parted from  those  humane  maxims  by  which  he  had 
hitherto  regulated  his  conduct;  and,  whether  in 
spite  to  the  Queen,  who  had  entered  into  so  close 

47  The  murder  of  Cardinal  Beafoiin  was  occasioned  bv  private 
revenge;  and  being  contrived  and  executed  bv  sixteen  person* 
onlv,  cannot  with  justice  be  imputed  to  the  whole  Protestant 
party. 

**  Knos,  Buchanan,  Keith,  20*. 


1558.  OF  SCOTLAND.  157 

a  union  with  the  Protestants,  or  in  compliance  with 
the  importunities  of  his  clergy,  he  let  loose  all  the 
rage  of  persecution  against  the  reformed;  sentenced 
to  the  flames  an  aged  priest,  who  had  been  convicted 
of  embracing  the  Protestant  opinions;  and  sum- 
moned several  others,  suspected  of  the  same  crime, 
to  appear  before  a  synod  of  the  clergy,  which  was 
soon  to  convene  at  Edinburgh. 

Nothing  could  equal  the  horror  of  the  Protes- 
tants at  this  unexpected  and  barbarous  execution, 
but  the  zeal  with  which  they  espoused  the  defence 
of  a  cause  that  now  seemed  devoted  to  destruction. 
They  had  immediate  recourse  to  the  Queen  Regent; 
and  as  her  success  in  the  parliament,  which  was 
then  about  to  meet,  depended  on  their  concurrence, 
she  not  only  sheltered  them  from  the  impending 
storm,  but  permitted  them  the  exercise  of  their  re- 
ligion with  more  freedom  than  they  had  hitherto 
enjoyed.  Unsatisfied  with  this  precarious  tenure 
by  which  they  held  their  religious  liberty,  the  Pro- 
testants laboured  to  render  their  possession  of  it 
more  secure  and  independent.  With  this  view  they 
determined  to  petition  the  Parliament  for  some  legal 
protection  against  the  exorbitant  and  oppressive 
jurisdiction  of  the  ecclesiastical  courts,  which,  by 
their  arbitrary  method  of  proceeding,  founded  in  the 
canon  law,  were  led  to  sentences  the  most  shock- 
ing to  humanity,  by  maxims  the  most  repugnant  to 
justice.  But  the  Queen,  who  dreaded  the  effect 
of  a  debate  on  this  delicate  subject,  which  could 
not  fail  of  exciting  high  and  dangerous  passions, 
prevailed  on  the  leaders  of  the  party,  by  new  and 
more  solemn  promises  of  her  protection,  to  desist 
from  any  application  to  parliament,  where  their  mini  • 
bers  and  influence  would,  in  all  probability,  haw 

vol.  I.  p 


158  THE  HISTORY  B.  II. 

procured  them,  if  not  entire  redress,  at  least  some 
mitigation  of  their  grievances. 

They  applied  to  another  assembly,  to  a  convo- 
cation of  the  Popish  clergy,  but  with  the  same  ill 
success  which  hath  always  attended  every  proposal 
for  reformation  addressed  to  that  order  of  men. 
To  abandon  usurped  power,  to  renounce  lucrative 
error,  are  sacrifices  which  the  virtue  of  individuals 
has,  on  some  occasions,  offered  to  truth;  but  from 
any  society  of  men  no  such  effort  can  be  expected. 
The  corruptions  of  a  society  recommended  by  com- 
mon utility,  and  justified  by  universal  practice,  are 
viewed  by  its  members  without  shame  or  horror; 
and  reformation  never  proceeds  from  themselves, 
but  is  always  forced  upon  them  by  some  foreign 
hand.  Suitable  to  this  unfeeling  and  inflexible 
spirit  was  the  behaviour  of  the  convocation  in  the 
present  conjuncture.  All  the  demands  of  the  Pro- 
testants were  rejected  with  contempt;  and  the 
Popish  clergy,  far  from  endeavouring,  by  any  pru- 
dent concessions,  to  sooth  and  to  reconcile  such 
a  numerous  body,  asserted  the  doctrines  of  their 
church,  concerning  some  of  the  most  exceptionable 
articles,  with  an  ill  timed  rigour,  which  gave  new 
offence49. 

1559.]  During  the  sitting  of  the  convocation,  the 
Protestants  first  began  to  suspect  some  change  in 
the  Regent's  disposition  towards  them.  Though 
joined  with  them  for  many  years  by  interest,  and 
united,  as  they  conceived,  by  the  strongest  ties  of 
affection  and  of  gratitude,  she  discovered,  on  this 
occasion,  evident  symptoms,  not  only  of  coldness, 
but  of  a  growing  disgust  and  aversion.  In  order  to 
account  for  this,  our  historians  do  little  more  than 

49  Keitb,  81. 


1559.  OF  SCOTLAND.  159 

produce  the  trite  observations  concerning  the  in- 
fluence of  prosperity  to  alter  the  character  and  to 
corrupt  the  heart.  The  Queen,  say  they,  having 
reached  the  utmost  point  to  which  her  ambition 
aspired,  no  longer  preserved  her  accustomed  mo- 
deration, but,  with  an  insolence  usual  to  the  for- 
tunate, looked  down  upon  those  by  whose  assist- 
ance she  had  been  enabled  to  rise  so  high.  But  it  is 
neither  in  the  depravity  of  the  human  heart  nor  in 
the  ingratitude  of  the  Queen's  disposition  that  we 
must  search  for  the  motives  of  her  present  conduct. 
These  were  derived  from  another  and  a  more  re- 
mote source,  which,  in  order  to  clear  the  subse- 
quent transactions,  we  shall  endeavour  to  open  with 
some  care. 

The  ambition  of  the  Princes  of  Lorrain  had  been 
no  less  successful  than  daring;  but  all  their  schemes 
were  distinguished  by  being  vast  and  unbounded. 
Though  strangers  at  the  court  of  France,  their  emi- 
nent qualities  had  raised  them,  in  a  short  time,  to 
a  height  of  power  superior  to  that  of  all  other  sub- 
jects, and  had  placed  them  on  a  level  even  with  the 
Princes  of  the  blood  themselves.  The  church,  the 
army,  the  revenue,  were  under  their  direction.  No- 
thing but  the  royal  dignity  remained  unattained,  and 
they  were  elevated  to  a  near  alliance  with  it,  by  the 
marriage  of  the  Queen  of  Scots  to  the  Dauphin.  In 
order  to  gratify  their  own  vanity,  and  to  render  their 
niece  more  worthy  the  heir  of  France,  they  set  on 
foot  her  claim  to  the  crown  of  England,  which  was 
founded  on  pretences  not  unplausible. 

The  tragical  amours  and  marriages  of  Henry 
VIII.  are  known  to  all  the  world.  Moved  by  the 
caprices  of  his  love  or  of  his  resentment,  that  im- 
patient and  arbitrary  monarch  had  divorced  or  be- 


100  THE  HISTORY.  B.  II, 

headed  four  of  the  six  Queens  whom  he  married. 
Ill  order  to  gratify  him,  both  his  daughters  had  been 
declared  illegitimate  by  act  of  parliament;  and  yet, 
with  that  fantastic  inconsistence  which  distinguishes 
his  character,  he,  in  his  last  will,  whereby  he  was 
empowered  to  settle  the  order  of  succession,  called 
both  of  them  to  the  throne  upon  the  death  of  their 
brother  Edward;  and,  at  the  same  time,  passing 
by  the  posterity  of  his  eldest  sister  Margaret  Queen 
of  Scotland,  he  appointed  the  line  of  succession  to 
continue  in  the  descendants  of  his  younger  sister, 
the  Duchess  of  Suffolk. 

In  consequence  of  this  destination,  the  validity 
whereof  was  admitted  by  the  English,  but  never 
recognised  by  foreigners,  Mary  had  reigned  in  Eng- 
land without  the  least  complaint  of  neighbouring 
Princes.  But  the  same  causes  which  facilitated 
her  accession  to  the  throne  were  obstacles  to  the 
elevation  of  her  sister  Elizabeth,  and  rendered  her 
possession  of  it  precarious  and  insecure.  Rome 
trembled  for  the  Catholic  faith  under  a  Protestant 
Queen  of  such  eminent  abilities.  The  same  super- 
stitious fears  alarmed  the  court  of  Spain.  France 
beheld  with  concern  a  throne,  to  which  the  Queen 
of  Scots  could  form  so  many  pretensions,  occupied 
by  a  rival,  whose  birth,  in  the  opinion  of  all  good 
Catholics,  excluded  her  from  any  legal  right  of 
succession.  The  impotent  hatred  of  the  Roman 
Pontiff,  or  the  slow  councils  of  Philip  II.  would 
have  produced  no  sudden  or  formidable  effect.  The 
ardent  and  impetuous  ambition  of  the  Princes  of 
Lorrain,  who  at  that  time  governed  the  court  of 
France,  was  more  decisive,  and  more  to  be  dreaded. 
Instigated  by  them,  Henry,  soon  after  the  death  of 
i  uy,  persuaded  his  daughter-in-law  and  her  bus- 


1559.  OF  SCOTLAND.  161 

band  to  assume  the  title  of  King  and  Queen  of  Eng- 
land.    They  affected  to  publish  this  to  all  Europe. 
They  used  that   style    and    appellation    in  public 
papers,  some  of  which  still  remain50.    The  arms  of 
England  were  engraved  on  their  coin  and  plate, 
and  borne  by  them  on  all  occasions.     No  prepara- 
tions, however,  were  made  to  support  this  impoli- 
tic and  premature  claim.     Elizabeth  was  already 
seated  on  her  throne ;  she  possessed  all  the  intre- 
pidity of  spirit,  and  all  the  arts  of  policy,  which 
were  necessary  for  maintaining  that  station.     Eng- 
land was  growing  into  reputation  for  naval  power. 
The  marine  of  France  had  been  utterly  neglected; 
and  Scotland  remained  the  only  avenue  by  which 
the  territories  of  Elizabeth  could  be  approached. 
It  was  on  that  side,  therefore,  that  the  Princes  of 
Lorrain  determined  to  make  their  attack51;   and, 
by  using  the  name  and  pretensions  of  the  Scottish 
Queen,  they  hoped  to  rouse  the  English  Catholics, 
formidable  at  that  time  by  their  zeal  and  numbers, 
and  exasperated  to  the  utmost  against  Elizabeth  on 
account  of  the  change  which  she  had  made  in  the 
national  religion. 

It  was  in  vain  to  expect  the  assistance  of  the 
Scottish  Protestants  to  dethrone  a  Queen  whom 
all  Europe  began  to  consider  the  most  powerfid 
guardian  and  defender  of  the  reformed  faith.  To 
break  the  power  and  reputation  of  that  party  in 
Scotland  became,  for  this  reason,  a  necessary  step 
towards  the  invasion  of  England.  With  this  the 
Princes  of  Lorrain  resolved  to  open  their  scheme. 
And  as  persecution  was  the  only  method  for  sup- 
pressing religious  opinions  known  in  that  age,  or 

r'°  Anders.  Diplom.  Scot.  Nos.  08  and  104. 
'•'  Forbes's  Collect,  i.  253.  209.  271).  401. 

p  2 


102  THE  HISTORY  B.  II. 

xlictated  by  the  despotic  and  sanguinary  spirit  of 
the  Romish  superstition,  this,  in  its  utmost  vio- 
lence, they  determined  to  employ.  The  Earl  of 
Argyll,  the  Prior  of  St.  Andrew's,  and  other  leaders 
of  the  party,  were  marked  out  by  them  for  imme- 
diate destruction52;  and  they  hoped,  by  punishing 
them,  to  intimidate  their  followers.  Instructions 
for  this  purpose  were  sent  from  France  to  the 
Queen  llegent.  That  humane  and  sagacious  Prin- 
cess condemned  a  measure  which  was  equally 
violent  and  impolitic.  By  long  residence  in  Scot- 
land, she  had  become  acquainted  with  the  eager 
and  impatient  temper  of  the  nation  ;  she  well  knew 
the  power,  the  number,  and  popularity  of  the  Pro- 
testant leaders;  and  had  been  a  witness  to  the  in- 
trepid and  unconquerable  resolution  which  religious 
fervour  could  inspire.  What  then  could  be  gained 
by  rousing  this  dangerous  spirit,  which  hitherto  all 
the  arts  of  policy  had  scarcely  been  able  to  restrain? 
If  it  once  broke  loose,  the  authority  of  a  Regent 
would  be  little  capable  to  subdue,  or  even  to  mo- 
derate its  rage.  If,  in  order  to  quell  it,  foreign 
forces  were  called  in,  this  would  give  the  alarm  to 
the  whole  nation,  irritated  already  at  the  excessive 
power  which  the  French  possessed  in  the  kingdom, 
and  suspicious  of  all  their  designs.  Amidst  the 
shock  which  this  might  occasion,  far  from  hoping 
to  exterminate  the  Protestant  doctrine,  it  would  be 
well  if  the  whole  fabric  of  the  established  church 
were  not  shaken,  and  perhaps  overturned  from  the 
foundation.  These  prudent  remonstrances  made  no 
impression  on  her  brothers;  precipitant,  but  inflex- 
ible in  all  their  resolutions,  they  insisted  on  the 
full  and  rigorous  execution  of  their  plan.  Mary, 
52  Forbes's  Collect,  i.  152. 


1551).  OF  SCOTLAND.  103 

passionately  devoted  to  the  interest  of  France,  and 
ready,  on  all  occasions,  to  sacrifice  her  own  opi- 
nions to  the  inclinations  of  her  brothers,  prepared 
to  execute  their  commands  with  implicit  submis- 
sion55; and,  contrary  to  her  own  judgment  and  to 
all  the  rules  of  sound  policy,  she  became  the  in- 
strument of  exciting  civil  commotions  in  Scotland, 
the  fatal  termination  of  which  she  foresaw  and 
dreaded. 

From  the  time  of  the  Queen's  competition  for 
the  regency  with  the  Duke  of  Chatelherault,  the 
Popish  clergy,   under  the  direction  of  the  Arch- 
bishop of  St.  Andrews,  had  set  themselves  in  op- 
position to  all  her  measures.      Her  first  step  to- 
wards the  execution   of  her  new  scheme  was  to 
regain  their  favour.      Nor  was  this  reconcilement 
a  matter  of  difficulty.     The  Popish  ecclesiastics, 
separated  from  the  rest  of  mankind  by  the  law  of 
celibacy,  one  of  the  boldest  and  most  successful 
efforts   of   human   policy;    and    combined    among 
themselves  in  the  closest  and  most  sacred  union, 
have  been  accustomed,  in  every  age,  to  sacrifice  all 
private  and  particular  passions  to  the  dignity  and 
interest  of  their  order.     Delighted  on  this  occasion 
with  the  prospect  of  triumphing  over  a  faction,  the 
encroachments   of  which  they  had  long  dreaded, 
and  animated  with  the  hopes  of  reestablishing  their 
declining  grandeur  on  a  firmer  basis,  they  at  once 
canceled  the  memory  of  past  injuries,  and  engaged 
to  second  the  Queen  in  all  her  attempts  to  check 
the  progress  of  the  Reformation.     The  Queen,  be- 
ing secure  of  their  assistance,  openly  approved  of 
the  decrees  of  the  convocation,  by  which  the  prin- 
ciples of  the   Reformers  were  condemned  ;   and  at 
53  Melv.  18.     Mem.  dc  Custelnau,  ap.  Jcbb,  vol.  ii.  4-10. 


164  THE  HISTORY  B.  II. 

the  same  time  she  issued  a  proclamation,  enjoining 
all  persons  to  observe  the  approaching  festival  of 
Easter  according  to  the  Romish  ritual. 

As  it  was  no  longer  possible  to  mistake  the 
Queen's  intentions,  the  Protestants,  who  saw  the 
danger  approach,  in  order  to  avert  it,  employed 
the  Earl  of  Glencairn,  and  Sir  Hugh  Campbell  of 
London,  to  expostulate  with  her  concerning  this 
change  towards  severity,  which  their  former  ser- 
vices had  so  little  merited,  and  which  her  reiterated 
promises  gave  them  no  reason  to  expect.  She, 
without  disguise  or  apology,  avowed  to  them  her 
resolution  of  extirpating  the  reformed  religion  out 
of  the  kingdom.  And,  upon  their  urging  her  for- 
mer engagements  with  an  uncourtly  but  honest 
boldness,  she  so  far  forgot  her  usual  moderation,  as 
to  utter  a  sentiment,  which,  however  apt  those  of 
royal  condition  may  be  to  entertain  it,  prudence 
should  teach  them  to  conceal  as  much  as  possible. 
"  The  promises  of  Priuces,"  says  she,  "  ought  not 
to  be  too  carefully  remembered,  nor  the  perfor- 
mance of  them  exacted,  unless  it  suits  their  own 
conveniency." 

The  indignation  which  betrayed  the  Queen  into 
this  rash  expression  was  nothing  in  comparison  of 
that  with  which  she  was  animated  upon  hearing 
that  the  public  exercise  of  the  reformed  religion  had 
been  introduced  into  the  town  of  Perth.  At  once 
she  threw  off  the  mask,  and  issued  a  mandate, 
summoning  all  the  Protestant  preachers  in  the 
kingdom  to  a  court  of  justice,  which  was  to  be 
held  at  Stirling  on  the  tenth  of  May.  The  Protes- 
tants, who,  from  their  union,  began  about  this  time 
to  be  distinguished  by  the  name  of  the  CONGRE- 
GATION, were  alarmed,  but  not  intimidated  by  this 


1559,  OF  SCOTLAND.  1(k> 

danger ;  and  instantly  resolved  not  to  abandon  the 
men  to  whom  they  were  indebted  for  the  most  valu- 
able of  all  blessings,  the  knowledge  of  truth.  At 
that  time  there  prevailed  in  Scotland,  with  respect 
to  criminal  trials,  a  custom,  introduced  at  first  by 
the  institutions  of  vassalage  and  clanship,  and  tole- 
rated afterwards  under  a  feeble  government:  per- 
sons accused  of  any  crime  were  accompanied  to  the 
place  of  trial  by  a  retinue  of  their  friends  and  ad- 
herents, assembled  for  that  purpose  from  every 
quarter  of  the  kingdom.  Authorized  by  this  an- 
cient practice,  the  reformed  convened  in  great  num- 
bers to  attend  their  pastors  to  Stirling.  The  Queen 
dreaded  their  approach  with  a  train  so  numerous, 
though  unarmed ;  and  in  order  to  prevent  them 
from  advancing,  she  empowered  John  Erskine  of 
Dun,  a  person  of  eminent  authority  with  the  party, 
to  promise  in  her  name  that  she  would  put  a  stop 
to  the  intended  trial,  on  condition  the  preachers 
and  their  retinue  advanced  no  nearer  to  Stirling. 
Erskine,  being  convinced  himself  of  the  Queen's 
sincerity,  served  her  with  the  utmost  zeal;  and  the 
Protestants,  averse  from  proceeding  to  any  act  of 
violence,  listened  with  pleasure  to  so  pacific  a  pro- 
position. The  preachers,  with  a  few  leaders  of  the 
party,  remained  at  Perth;  the  multitude  which  had 
gathered  from  different  parts  of  the  kingdom  dis- 
persed, and  retired  to  their  own  habitations. 

But,  notwithstanding  this  solemn  promise,  the 
Queen,  on  the  tenth  of  May,  proceeded  to  call  to 
trial  the  persons  who  had  been  summoned,  and, 
upon  their  nonappearance,  the  rigour  of  justice 
took  place,  and  they  were  pronounced  outlaws. 
By  this  ignoble  artifice,  so  incompatible  with  regal 
dignity,   and    so    inconsistent    with    that    integrity 


166  THE  HISTORY  B.  II. 

which  should  prevail  in  all  transactions  between 
sovereigns  and  their  subjects,  the  Queen  forfeited 
the  esteem  and  confidence  of  the  whole  nation. 
The  Protestants,  shocked  no  less  at  the  indecency 
with  which  she  violated  the  public  faith  than  at 
the  danger  which  threatened  themselves,  prepared 
boldly  for  their  own  defence.  Erskine,  enraged  at 
having  been  made  the  instrument  for  deceiving  his 
party,  instantly  abandoned  Stirling,  and  repairing 
to  Perth,  added  to  the  zeal  of  his  associates,  by 
his  representations  of  the  Queen's  inflexible  reso- 
lution to  suppress  religion51. 

The  popular  rhetoric  of  Knox  powerfully  se- 
conded his  representations ;  he  having  been  carried 
a  prisoner  into  France,  together  with  the  other  per- 
sons taken  in  the  castle  of  St.  Andrew's,  soon  made 
his  escape  out  of  that  country;  and  residing  some- 
times in  England,  sometimes  in  Scotland,  had  at 
last  been  driven  out  of  both  kingdoms  by  the  rage 
of  the  Popish  clergy,  and  was  obliged  to  retire  to 
Geneva.  Thence  he  was  called  by  the  leaders  of 
the  Protestants  in  Scotland;  and,  in  compliance 
with  their  solicitations,  he  set  out  for  his  native 
country,  where  he  arrived  a  few  days  before  the 
trial  appointed  at  Stirling.  He  hurried  instantly 
to  Perth,  to  share  with  his  brethren  in  the  common 
danger,  or  to  assist  them  in  the  common  cause. — 
While  their  minds  were  in  that  ferment  which  the 
Queen's  perfidiousness  and  their  own  danger  occa- 
sioned, he  mounted  the  pulpit,  and  by  a  vehement 
harangue  against  idolatry  inflamed  the  multitude 
with  the  utmost  rage.  The  indiscretion  of  a  priest, 
who,  immediately  after  Knox's  sermon,  was  prepar- 
ing to  celebrate  mass,  and  began  to  decorate  the 

54  Keith,  p.  84. 


1559.  OF  SCOTLAND.  167 

altar  for  that  purpose,  precipitated  them  into  im- 
mediate action.  With  tumultuary  but  irresistible 
violence  they  fell  upon  the  churches  in  that  city, 
overturned  the  altars,  defaced  the  pictures,  broke 
in  pieces  the  images;  and  proceeding  next  to  the 
monasteries,  they  in  a  few  hours  laid  those  sump- 
tuous fabrics  almost  level  with  the  ground.  This 
riotous  insurrection  was  not  the  effect  of  any  con- 
cert or  previous  deliberation  ;  censured  by  the  re- 
formed preachers,  and  publicly  condemned  by  per- 
sons of  most  power  and  credit  with  the  party,  it 
must  be  regarded  merely  as  an  accidental  eruption 
of  popular  rage55. 

But  to  the  Queen  Dowager  these  proceedings 
appeared  in  a  very  different  light.  Besides  their 
manifest  contempt  for  her  authority,  the  Protes- 
tants had  violated  every  thing  in  religion  which  she 
deemed  venerable  or  holy ;  and  on  both  these  ac- 
counts she  determined  to  inflict  the  severest  ven- 
geance on  the  whole  party.  She  had  already 
drawn  the  troops  in  French  pay  to  Stirling;  with 
these,  and  what  Scottish  forces  she  could  levy  of  a 
sudden,  she  marched  directly  to  Perth,  in  hopes  of 
surprising  the  Protestant  leaders  before  they  could 
assemble  their  followers,  whom,  out  of  confidence 
in  her  disingenuous  promises,  they  had  been  rashly 
induced  to  dismiss.  Intelligence  of  these  prepara- 
tions and  menaces  was  soon  conveyed  to  Perth. 
The  Protestants  would  gladly  have  soothed  the 
Queen,  by  addresses  both  to  herself  and  to  the 
persons  of  greatest  credit  in  her  court;  but,  finding 
her  inexorable,  they  with  great  vigour  took  mea- 
sures for  their  own  defence.  Their  adherents,  ani- 
mated with  zeal  for  religion,  and  eager  to  expose 
M  Knox.  Hist.  127,  128. 


108  THE  HISTORY  6.  II. 

themselves  in  so  good  a  cause,  flocked  in  such  num-> 
bers  to  Perth  that  they  not  only  secured  the  town 
from  danger,  but  within  a  few  days  were  in  a  con- 
dition to  take  the  field,  and  to  face  the  Queen,  who 
advanced  with  an  army  seven  thousand  strong. 

Neither  party,  however,  was  impatient  to  en- 
gage. The  Queen  dreaded  the  event  of  a  battle 
with  men  whom  the  fervour  of  religion  raised  above 
the  sense  of  fear  or  danger.  The  Protestants  be- 
held with  regret  the  Earl  of  Argyll,  the  Prior  of 
St.  Andrew's,  and  some  other  eminent  persons  of 
their  party,  still  adhering  to  the  Queen ;  and,  des- 
titute of  their  aid  and  counsel,  declined  hazarding 
an  action,  the  ill  success  of  which  might  have  proved 
the  ruin  of  their  cause.  The  prospect  of  an  accom- 
modation was  for  these  reasons  highly  acceptable 
to  both  sides :  Argyll  and  the  Prior,  who  were  the 
Queen's  commissioners  for  conducting  the  nego- 
tiation, seem  to  have  been  sincerely  desirous  of 
reconciling  the  contending  factions;  and  the  Earl 
of  Glencairn,  arriving  unexpectedly  with  a  powerful 
reinforcement  to  the  Congregation,  augmented  the 
Queen's  eagerness  for  peace.  A  treaty  w7as  ac- 
cordingly concluded,  in  which  it  was  stipulated  that 
both  armies  should  be  disbanded,  and  the  gates  of 
Perth  set  open  to  the  Queen ;  that  indemnity  should 
be  granted  to  the  inhabitants  of  that  city,  and  to 
all  others  concerned  in  the  late  insurrection ;  that 
no  French  garrison  should  be  left  in  Perth,  and  no 
French  soldier  should  approach  within  three  miles 
of  that  place ;  and  that  a  parliament  should  imme- 
diately be  held,  in  order  to  compose  whatever  dif- 
ference might  still  remain56. 

May  29.]  The  leaders  of  the  Congregation,  dis- 

56  Keitb,  SO. 


1559.  OF  SCOTLAND.  lfi.'f 

trustful  of  the  Queen's  sincerity,  and  sensible  that 
concessions,  flowing  not  from  inclination,  but  ex- 
torted by  the  necessity  of  her  affairs,  could  not 
long  remain  in  force,  entered  into  a  new  associa- 
tion, by  which  they  bound  themselves,  on  the  first 
infringement  of  the  present  treaty,  or  on  the  least 
appearance  of  danger  to  their  religion,  to  reassem- 
ble their  followers,  and  to  take  arms  in  defence  of 
what  they  deemed  the  cause  of  God  and  of  their 
country07. 

The  Queen,  by  her  conduct,  demonstrated  these 
precautions  to  be  the  result  of  no  groundless  or  un- 
necessary fear.  No  sooner  were  the  Protestant 
forces  dismissed  than  she  broke  every  article  in  the 
treaty.  She  introduced  French  troops  into  Perth, 
fined  some  of  the  inhabitants,  banished  others,  re- 
moved the  magistrates  out  of  office ;  and  on  her 
retiring  to  Stirling,  she  left  behind  her  a  garrison  of 
six  hundred  men,  with  orders  to  allow  the  exercise 
of  no  other  religion  than  the  Roman  Catholic. — 
The  situation  of  Perth,  a  place  at  that  time  of 
some  strength,  and  a  town  among  the  most  proper 
of  any  in  the  kingdom  for  the  station  of  a  garrison, 
seems  to  have  allured  the  Queen  to  this  unjustifi- 
able and  ill  judged  breach  of  public  faith;  which 
she  endeavoured  to  colour  by  alleging  that  the 
body  of  men  left  at  Perth  was  entirely  composed, 
of  native  Scots,  though  kept  in  pay  by  the  King  of 
France. 

The  Queen's  scheme  began  gradually  to  unfold; 
it  was  now  apparent  that  not  only  the  religion  but 
the  liberties  of  the  kingdom  were  threatened;  and 
that  the  French  troops  were  to  be  employed  as  in- 
struments for  subduing  the   Scots,  and  wreathing 

i7   Knox,  2:iS. 
VOL.    I.  Q 


170  THE  HISTORY  B.  II. 

the  yoke  about  their  necks.  Martial  as  the  genius 
of  the  Scots  then  was,  the  poverty  of  their  country 
made  it  impossible  to  keep  their  armies  long  assem- 
bled ;  and  even  a  very  small  body  of  regular  troops 
might  have  proved  formidable  to  the  nation,  though 
consisting  wholly  of  soldiers.  But  what  number  of 
French  forces  were  then  in  Scotland,  at  what  times 
and  under  what  pretext  they  returned,  after  having 
left  the  kingdom  in  one  thousand  rive  hundred  and 
fifty,  we  cannot  with  any  certainty  determine.  Con- 
temporary historians  often  select  with  little  judg- 
ment the  circumstances  which  they  transmit  to  pos- 
terity ;  and  with  respect  to  matters  of  the  greatest 
curiosity  and  importance,  leave  succeeding  ages 
altogether  in  the  dark.  We  may  conjecture,  how- 
ever, from  some  passages  in  Buchanan,  that  the 
French  and  Scots  in  French  pay  amounted  at  least 
to  three  thousand  men,  under  the  command  of  Mon- 
sieur D'Oysel,  a  creature  of  the  house  of  Guise; 
and  they  were  soon  augmented  to  a  much  more 
formidable  number. 

The  Queen,  encouraged  by  having  so  consider- 
able a  body  of  well  disciplined  troops  at  her  com- 
mand, and  instigated  by  the  violent  counsels  of 
D'Oysel,  had  ventured,  as  we  have  observed,  to 
violate  the  treaty  of  Perth,  and  by  that  rash  action 
once  more  threw  the  nation  into  the  most  dangerous 
convulsions.  The  Earl  of  Argyll  and  the  Prior 
of  St.  Andrew's  instantly  deserted  a  court  where 
faith  and  honour  seemed  to  them  to  be  no  longer 
regarded ;  and  joined  the  leaders  of  the  Congre- 
gation, who  had  retreated  to  the  eastern  part  of 
Fife.  The  barons  from  the  neighbouring  counties 
repaired  to  them,  the  preachers  roused  the  people 
to  arms,  and  wherever  they  came,  the  same  violent 


1559.  OF  SCOTLAND.  171 

operations,  which  accident  had  occasioned  at  Perth, 
were  now  encouraged  out  of  policy.  The  enraged 
multitude  was  let  loose,  and  churches  and  monas- 
teries, the  monuments  of  ecclesiastic  pride  and 
luxury,  were  sacrificed  to  their  zeal. 

In  order  to  check  their  career,  the  Queen,  with- 
out losing  a  moment,  put  her  troops  in  motion ; 
but  the  zeal  of  the  Congregation  got  the  start  once 
more  of  her  vigilance  and  activity.  In  that  war- 
like age,  when  all  men  were  accustomed  to  arms, 
and  on  the  least  prospect  of  danger  were  ready  to 
run  to  them,  the  leaders  of  the  Protestants  found 
no  difficulty  to  raise  an  army.  Though  they  set 
out  from  St.  Andrew's  with  a  slender  train  of  a 
hundred  horse,  crowds  flocked  to  their  standards 
from  every  corner  of  the  country  through  which 
they  marched;  and  before  they  reached  Falkland, 
a  village  only  ten  miles  distant,  they  were  able  to 
meet  the  Queen  with  superior  force58. 

The  Queen,  surprised  at  the  approach  of  so  for- 
midable a  body,  which  was  drawn  up  by  its  leaders 
in  such  a  manner  as  added  greatly  in  appearance 
to  its  numbers,  had  again  recourse  to  negotiation. 
She  found,  however,  that  the  preservation  of  the 
Protestant  religion,  their  zeal  for  which  had  at  first 
roused  the  leaders  of  the  Congregation  to  take 
arms,  was  not  the  only  object  they  had  now  in 
view.  They  were  animated  with  the  warmest  love 
of  civil  liberty,  which  they  conceived  to  be  in  im- 
minent danger  from  the  attempts  of  the  French 
forces ;  and  these  two  passions  mingling,  added 
reciprocally  to  each  other's  strength.  Together 
With  more  enlarged  notions  in  religion,  the  Refor- 
mation tilled  the  human  mind  with  more  liberal  and 

58  Knox,  111. 


Xl'l  THE  HISTORY  B.  II, 

generous  sentiments  concerning  civil  government. 
The  genius  of  Popery  is  extremely  favourable  to 
the  power  of  Princes.  The  implicit  submission  to 
all  her  decrees,  which  is  exacted  by  the  Romish 
church,  prepares  and  breaks  the  mind  for  political 
servitude ;  and  the  doctrines  of  the  Reformers,  by 
overturning  the  established  system  of  superstition, 
weakened  the  firmest  foundations  of  civil  tyranny. 
That  bold  spirit  of  inquiry,  which  led  men  to  re- 
ject theological  errors,  accompanied  them  in  other 
sciences,  and  discovered  every  where  the  same 
manly  zeal  for  truth.  A  new  study,  introduced  at 
the  same  time,  added  greater  force  to  the  spirit  of 
liberty.  Men  became  more  acquainted  with  the 
Greek  and  Roman  authors,  who  described  exqui- 
site models  of  free  government,  far  superior  to  the 
inaccurate  and  oppressive  system  established  by 
the  feudal  law ;  and  produced  such  illustrious  ex- 
amples of  public  virtue  as  wonderfully  suited  both 
the  circumstances  and  spirit  of  that  age.  Many 
among  the  most  eminent  Reformers  were  them* 
selves  considerable  masters  in  ancient  learning ; 
and  all  of  them  eagerly  adopted  the  maxims  and 
spirit  of  the  ancients  with  regard  to  government -31'. 
The  most  ardent  love  of  liberty  accompanied  the 
Protestant  religion  throughout  all  its  progress  ;  and 
wherever  it  was  embraced,  it  roused  an  independent 

59  The  excessive  admiration  of  ancient  policy  was  the  occasion 
of  Knox's  famous  hook  concerning  the  Government  of  Women, 
wherein,  conformable  to  the  maxims  of  the  ancient  legislators, 
which  modern  experience  has  proved  to  be  ill  founded,  he  pro- 
nounces the  elevation  of  women  to  the  supreme  authority  to  be 
utterly  destructive  of  good  government.  His  principles,  autho- 
rities, and  examples  were  all  drawn  from  ancient  writers.  The 
same  observation  may  be  made  with  regard  to  Buchanan's  Dia- 
logue, J)e  Jure  Regni  apud  Scoios,  It  is  founded,  not  on  the 
maxims  of  feudal,  but  of  ancient  republican  government. 


loot).  OF  SCOTLAND.  173 

spirit,  which  rendered  men  attentive  to  their  privi- 
leges as  subjects,  and  jealous  of  the  encroachments 
of  their  sovereigns.  Knox  and  the  other  preachers 
of  the  Reformation  infused  generous  sentiments 
concerning  government  into  the  minds  of  their 
hearers  ;  and  the  Scottish  barons,  naturally  free 
and  bold,  were  prompted  to  assert  their  rights  with 
more  freedom  and  boldness  than  ever.  Instead  of 
obeying  the  Queen  Regent,  who  had  enjoined  them 
to  lay  down  their  arms,  they  demanded  not  only 
the  redress  of  their  religious  grievances,  but,  as  a 
preliminary  toward  settling  the  nation,  and  secur- 
ing its  liberties,  required  the  immediate  expulsion 
of  the  French  troops  out  of  Scotland.  It  was  not 
in  the  Queen's  power  to  make  so  important  a  con- 
cession without  the  concurrence  of  the  French  Mo- 
narch ;  and  as  some  time  was  requisite  in  order  to 
obtain  that,  she  hoped  during  this  interval  to  re- 
ceive such  reinforcements  from  France,  as  would 
insure  the  accomplishment  of  that  design  which 
she  had  twice  attempted  with  unequal  strength. 
[June  13.]  Meanwhile,  she  agreed  to  a  cessation  of 
arms  for  eight  days,  and  before  the  expiration  of 
these,  engaged  to  transport  the  French  troops  to 
the  south  side  of  the  Forth  ;  and  to  send  commis- 
sioners to  St.  Andrew's,  who  should  labour  to 
brine;  all  differences  to  an  accommodation.  As  she 
hoped,  by  means  of  the  French  troops,  to  overawe 
the  Protestants  in  the  southern  counties,  the  former 
article  in  the  treaty  was  punctually  executed;  the 
latter,  having  been  inserted  merely  to  amuse  the 
Congregation,  was  no  longer  remembered. 

By  these  reiterated  and  wanton  instances  of  per- 
fidy, the  Queen  lost  all  credit  with  her  adversaries  ; 
and  no  safety  appearing  in  any  other  cause,  they 

Q2 


174  THE  HISTORY  B.  II. 

again  took  arras  with  more  inflamed  resentment,  and 
with  bolder  and  more  extensive  views.  The  re- 
moving- of  the  French  forces  had  laid  open  to  them 
all  the  country  situated  between  Forth  and  Tay. 
The  inhabitants  of  Perth  alone  remaining  subjected 
to  the  insolence  and  actions  of  the  garrison  which 
the  Queen  had  left  there,  implored  the  assistance 
of  the  Congregation  for  their  relief.'  Thither  they 
marched,  and  having  without  effect  required  the 
Queen  to  evacuate  the  town  iu  terms  of  the  former 
treaty,  they  prepared  to  besiege  it  in  form.  The 
Queen  employed  the  Earl  of  Huntly  and  Lord 
Erskine  to  divert  them  from  this  enterprise.  But 
her  wonted  artifices  were  now  of  no  avail ;  repeated 
so  often,  they  could  deceive  no  longer;  and,  with- 
out listening  to  her  offers,  the  Protestants  con- 
tinued the  siege,  and  soon  obliged  the  garrison  to 
capitulate. 

After  the  loss  of  Perth,  the  Queen  endeavoured 
to  seize  Stirling,  a  place  of  some  strength,  and, 
from  its  command  of  the  only  bridge  over  the  Forth, 
of  great  importance.  But  the  leaders  of  the  Con- 
gregation, having  intelligence  of  her  design,  pre- 
vented the  execution  of  it  by  a  hasty  march  thither 
with  part  of  their  forces.  The  inhabitants,  heartily 
attached  to  the  cause,  set  open  to  them  the  gates  of 
their  town.  Thence  they  advanced,  with  the  same 
rapidity,  towards  Edinburgh,  which  the  Queen,  on 
their  approach,  abandoned  with  precipitation,  and 
retired  to  Dunbar. 

The  Protestant  army,  wherever  it  came,  kindled 
or  spread  the  ardour  of  Reformation,  and  the  ut- 
most excesses  of  violence  were  committed  upon 
churches  and  monasteries.  The  former  were  spoil- 
zed  of  every  decoration,  which  was  then  esteemed 


i.>V.>.  OF  SCOTLAND.  175 

sacred  ;  the  latter  were  laid  in  ruins.     We  are  apt, 
at  this  distance  of  time,  to  condemn  the  furious  zeal 
of  the  Reformers,  and  to  regret  the  overthrow  of  so 
many  stately  fabrics,  the  monuments  of  our  ances- 
tors' magnificence,  and  among  the  noblest  orna- 
ments of  the  kingdom.    But  amidst  the  violence  of 
a  Reformation,  carried  on  in  opposition  to   legal 
authority,   some   irregularities   were    unavoidable ; 
and   perhaps  no   one   could  have  been   permitted 
more  proper  to  allure  and  interest  the  multitude,  or 
more  fatal  to  the  grandeur  of  the  established  church. 
How  absurd  soever  and  ill  founded  the  speculative 
errors  of  Popery  may  be,  some  inquiry  and  atten- 
tion are  requisite  towards  discovering  them.     The 
abuses  and  corruptions  which  had   crept  into  the 
public  worship  of  that  church  lay  more  open  to  ob- 
servation, and  by  striking  the  senses  excited  more 
universal  disgust.     Under  the  long  reign  of  hea- 
thenism, superstition  seemed  to  have  exhausted  its 
talent  of  invention,  so  that  when  a  superstitious 
spirit  seized  Christians,  they  were  obliged  to  imi- 
tate the  heathens  in  the  pomp  and  magnificence  of 
their  ceremonies,  and  to  borrow  from  them  the  or- 
naments and  decorations  of  their  temples.     To  the 
pure  and  simple  worship  of  the  primitive  Christians 
there    succeeded   a  species   of   splendid   idolatry, 
nearly  resembling  those   Pagan  originals  whence 
it  had  been  copied.     The  contrariety  of  such  ob- 
servances to  the  spirit  of  Christianity  was  almost 
the  first  thing,  in  the  Romish  system,  which  awa- 
kened the  indignation  of  the  Reformers,  who,  ap- 
plying to  these  the  denunciations  in  the  Old  Testa- 
ment against  idolatry,  imagined  that  they  could  net 
endeavour  at  suppressing  them  with  too  much  zeal. 
No  task  could  be  more  acceptable  to  the  multitude 


I7<>  THE  HISTORY  B.  II. 

than  to  overturn  those  seats  of  superstition ;  they 
ran  with  emulation  to  perform  it,  and  happy  was 
the  man  whose  hand  was  most  adventurous  and 
successful  in  executing  a  work  deemed  so  pious. 
Nor  did  their  leaders  labour  to  restrain  this  impe- 
tuous spirit  of  Reformation.  Irregular  and  violent 
as  its  sallies  were,  they  tended  directly  to  that  end 
which  they  had  in  view :  for,  by  demolishing  the 
monasteries  throughout  the  kingdom,  and  setting 
at  liberty  their  wretched  inhabitants,  they  hoped  to 
render  it  impossible  ever  to  rebuild  the  one,  or  to 
reassemble  the  other. 

But  amidst  these  irregular  proceedings,  a  cir- 
cumstance which  does  honour  to  the  conduct  and 
humanity  of  the  leaders  of  the  Congregation  de- 
serves notice.  They  so  far  restrained  the  rage  of 
their  followers,  and  were  able  so  to  temper  their 
heat  and  zeal  that  few  of  the  Roman  Catholics 
were  exposed  to  any  personal  insult,  and  not  a 
single  man  suffered  death60. 

At  the  same  time  we  discover,  by  the  facility 
with  which  these  great  revolutions  were  effected, 
how  violently  the  current  of  national  favour  ran  to- 
wards the  Reformation.  No  more  than  three  hun- 
dred men  marched  out  of  Perth,  under  the  Earl  of 
Argyll  and  Prior  of  St.  Andrew's61;  with  this  in- 
considerable force  they  advanced.  'But  wherever 
they  came  the  people  joined  them  in  a  body  ;  their 
army  was  seldom  less  numerous  than  five  thousand 
men  ;  the  gates  of  every  town  were  thrown  open 
to  receive  them  ;  [June  29]  and,  without  striking  a 
single  blow,  they  took  possession  of  the  capital  of 
the  kingdom. 

This  rapid  and  astonishing   success    seems  to 

<*>  Lesley,  ap.  Jebb,  vol.  i.  231.  61  Keitb,  94. 


1559.  OF  SCOTLAND.  177 

-have  encouraged  the  Reformers  to  extend  their 
views,  and  to  rise  in  their  demands.  Not  satisfied 
with  their  first  claim  of  toleration  for  their  religion, 
they  now  openly  aimed  at  establishing  the  Protes- 
tant doctrine  on  the  ruins  of  Popery.  For  this 
reason  they  determined  to  fix  their  residence  at 
Edinburgh  ;  and,  by  their  appointment,  Knox,  and 
some  other  preachers,  taking  possession  of  the  pul- 
pits, which  had  been  abandoned  by  the  affrightened 
clergy,  declaimed  against  the  errors  of  Popery  with 
such  fervent  zeal  as  could  not  fail  of  gaining  many 
proselytes. 

In  the  mean  time  the  Queen,  who  had  prudently 
given  way  to  a  torrent  which  she  could  not  resist, 
observed  with  pleasure  that  it  now  began  to  sub- 
side. The  leaders  of  the  Congregation  had  been 
above  two  months  in  arms,  and  by  the  expenses  of 
a  campaign,  protracted  so  long  beyond  the  usual 
time  of  service  in  that  age,  had  exhausted  all  the 
money  which  a  country,  where  riches  did  not 
abound,  had  been  able  to  supply.  The  multitude, 
dazzled  with  their  success,  and  concluding  the 
work  to  be  already  done,  retired  to  their  own  habi- 
tations. A  few  only  of  the  more  zealous  or  wealthy 
barons  remained  with  their  preachers  at  Edinburgh. 
As  intelligence  is  procured  in  civil  wars  with  little 
difficulty,  whatever  was  transacted  at  Edinburgh 
was  soon  known  at  Dunbar.  The  Queen,  regulat- 
ing her  own  conduct  by  the  situation  of  her  adver- 

lies,  artfully  amused  them  with  the  prospect  of 
an  immediate  accommodation;  while,  at  the  same 
time,  she  by  studied  delays  spun  out  the  negotia- 
tions for  that  purpose  to  such  a  length  that,  in  the 
•end,  the  party  dwindled  to  an  inconsiderable  num- 
-!"  !  ;    and,    as  if   peace   had  been   already   reesta- 


178  THE  HISTORY  B.  II. 

blished,  became  careless  of  military  discipline. — 
The  Queen,  who  watched  for  such  an  opportunity, 
advanced  unexpectedly,  by  a  sudden  march  in  the 
night,  with  all  her  forces,  and,  appearing  before 
Edinburgh,  filled  that  city  with  the  utmost  con- 
sternation. The  Protestants,  weakened  by  the  im- 
prudent dispersion  of  their  followers,  durst  not  en- 
counter the  French  troops  in  the  open  field  ;  and 
were  even  unable  to  defend  an  ill  fortified  town 
against  their  assaults.  Unwilling,  however,  to 
abandon  the  citizens  to  the  Queen's  mercy,  they 
endeavoured,  by  facing  the  enemy's  army,  to  gain 
time  for  collecting  their  own  associates.  But  the 
Queen,  in  spite  of  all  their  resistance,  would  have 
easily  forced  her  way  into  the  town,  if  the  season- 
able conclusion  of  a  truce  had  not  procured  her 
admission  without  the  effusion  of  blood. 

Their  dangerous  situation  easily  induced  the 
leaders  of  the  Congregation  to  listen  to  any  over- 
tures of  peace  ;  and  as  the  Queen  was  looking 
daily  for  the  arrival  of  a  strong  reinforcement  from 
France,  and  expected  great  advantages  from  a 
cessation  of  arms,  she  also  agreed  to  it  upon  no 
unequal  conditions.  Together  with  a  suspension 
of  hostilities,  from  the  twenty-fourth  of  July  to  the 
tenth  of  January,  it  was  stipulated  in  this  treaty 
that  on  the  one  hand  the  Protestants  should  open 
the  gates  of  Edinburgh  next  morning  to  the  Queen 
Regent ;  remain  in  dutiful  subjection  to  her  govern- 
ment; abstain  from  all  future  violation  of  religious 
houses ;  and  give  no  interruption  to  the  established 
clergy,  either  in  the  discharge  of  their  functions,  or 
in  the  enjoyment  of  their  benefices.  On  the  other 
hand,  the  Queen  agreed  to  give  no  molestation  to 
the  preachers  or  professors  of  the  Protestant  reli- 


1559.  OF  SCOTLAND.  170 

gion  ;  to  allow  the  citizens  of  Edinburgh,  during 
the  cessation  of  hostilities,  to  enjoy  the  exercise  of 
religious  worship  according  to  the  form  most  agree- 
able to  the  conscience  of  each  individual ;  and  to 
permit  the  free  and  public  profession  of  the  Pro- 
testant faith  in  every  part  of  the  kingdom  fie.  The 
Queen,  by  these  liberal  concessions  in  behalf  of 
their  religion,  hoped  to  sooth  the  Protestants,  and 
expected,  from  indulging  their  favourite  passion,  to 
render  them  more  compliant  with  respect  to  other 
articles,  particularly  the  expulsion  of  the  French 
troops  out  of  Scotland.  The  anxiety  which  the 
Queen  expressed  for  retaining  this  body  of  men 
rendered  them  more  and  more  the  objects  of  na- 
tional jealousy  and  aversion.  The  immediate  ex- 
pulsion of  them  was  therefore  demanded  anew,  and 
with  greater  warmth;  but  the  Queen,  taking  ad- 
vantage of  the  distress  of  the  adverse  party,  eluded 
the  request,  and  would  consent  to  nothing  more 
than  that  a  French  garrison  should  not  be  intro- 
duced into  Edinburgh. 

The  desperate  state  of  their  affairs  imposed  on 
the  Congregation  the  necessity  of  agreeing  to  this 
article,  which,  however,  was  very  far  fro<m  giving 
them  satisfaction.  Whatever  apprehensions  the 
Scots  had  conceived,  from  retaining  the  French 
forces  in  the  kingdom,  were  abundantly  justified 
during  the  late  commotions.  A  small  body  of 
those  troops,  maintained  in  constant  pay,  and  ren- 
dered.formidable  by  regular  discipline,  had  checked 
the  progress  of  a  martial  people,  though  animated 
with  zeal  both  for  religion  and  liberty.  The  smallest 
addition  to  their  number,  and  a  considerable  one 
62  Keith,  98.     Maitland,  Hist,  of  Edin.  16,  17. 


180  THE  HISTORY  B.  II. 

was  daily  expected,  might  prove  fatal  to  the  public 
liberty,  and  Scotland  might  be  exposed  to  the  dan- 
ger of  being  reduced  from  an  independent  kingdom, 
to  the  mean  condition  of  a  province  annexed  to  the 
dominions  of  its  powerful  ally. 

In  order  to  provide  against  this  imminent  cala- 
mity, the  Duke  of  Chatelherault  and  Earl  of 
Huntly,  immediately  after  concluding  the  truce, 
desired  an  interview  with  the  chiefs  of  the  Con  ore- 
gation.  These  two  noblemen,  the  most  potent  at 
that  time  in  Scotland,  were  the  leaders  of  the  party 
which  adhered  to  the  established  church.  They 
had  followed  the  Queen  during  the  late  commo- 
tions ;  and,  having  access  to  observe  more  narrowly 
the  dangerous  tendency  of  her  counsels,  their  ab- 
horrence  of  the  yoke  which  was  preparing  for  their 
country  surmounted  all  other  considerations,  and 
determined  them  rather  to  endanger  the  religion 
which  they  professed  than  to  give  their  aid  towards 
the  execution  of  her  pernicious  designs.  They  pro- 
ceeded further,  and  promised  to  Argyll,  Glencairn, 
and  the  Prior  of  St.  Andrew's,  who  were  appointed 
to  meet  them,  that  if  the  Queen  should,  with  her 
usual  insincerity,  violate  any  article  in  the  treaty  of 
truce,  or  refuse  to  gratify  the  wishes  of  the  whole 
nation,  by  dismissing  her  French  troops,  they  would 
then  instantly  join  with  their  countrymen  in  com- 
pelling her  to  a  measure,  which  the  public  safety 
and  the  preservation  of  their  liberties  rendered  ne- 
cessary63. 

July  8.]  About  this  time  died  Henry  II.  of 
France  ;  just  when  he  had  adopted  a  system,  with 
rpo-ard  to  the  affairs  of  Scotland,  which  would,  in 


63 


Knox,  154. 


1559.  OF  SCOTLAND.  1HL 

all  probability,  have  restored  union  and  tranquillity 
to  that  kingdom64.  Towards  the  close  of  his  reign, 
the  Princes  of  Lorrain  began  visibly  to  decline  in 
favour,  and  the  Constable  Montmorency,  by  the 
assistance  of  the  Duchess  of  Valentinois,  recovered 
that  ascendant  over  the  spirit  of  his  master,  which 
his  great  experience,  and  his  faithful  though  often 
unfortunate  services  seemed  justly  to  merit. — 
That  prudent  minister  imputed  the  insurrections 
in  Scotland  wholly  to  the  Duke  of  Guise  and  the 
Cardinal  of  Lorrain,  whose  violent  and  precipitant 
counsels  could  not  fail  of  transporting  beyond  all 
bounds  of  moderation  men  whose  minds  were  pos- 
sessed with  that  jealousy  which  is  inseparable  from 
the  love  of  civil  liberty,  or  inflamed  with  that  ardour 
which  accompanies  religious  zeal.  Montmorency, 
in  order  to  convince  Henry  that  he  did  not  load 
his  rivals  with  any  groundless  accusation,  prevailed 
to  have  Melvil05,  a  Scottish  gentleman  of  his  re- 
tinue, dispatched  into  his  native  country,  with  in- 
structions to  observe  the  motions  both  of  the  Re- 
gent and  of  her  adversaries;  and  the  King  agreed 
to  regulate  his  future  proceedings  in  that  kingdom 
by  Melvil's  report. 

Did  history  indulge  herself  in  these  speculations, 
it  would  be  amusing  to  inquire  what  a  different 
direction  might  have  been  given  by  this  resolution 
to  the  national  spirit ;  and  to  what  a  different  issue 
Melvil's  report,  which  would  have  set  the  conduct 
of  the  malccontonts  in  the  most  favourable  light, 
might  have  conducted  the  public  disorders.  Per- 
haps, by  gentle  treatment  and  artful  policy,  the 
progress  of  the  Reformation  might  have  been 
checked,   and  Scotland  brought   to  depend    upon 

64  Mel?;  10.  M  The  Authoi  of  the  Memoirs. 

VOL.   I.  R 


182  THE  HISTORY  B.  II. 

France.     Perhaps,  by  gaining  possession  of  this 
avenue,  the  French  might  have  made  their  way  into 
England  ;  and,  under  colour  of  supporting  Mary's 
title  to  the  crown,  they  might  not  only  have  de- 
feated all  Elizabeth's  measures  in  favour  of  the 
Reformation,  but  have  reestablished  the  Roman 
Catholic  religion,    and  destroyed  the  liberties  of 
that  kingdom.      But  into  this  boundless  field  of 
fancy  and  conjecture  the  historian  must  make  no 
excursions ;  to  relate  real  occurrences,  and  to  ex- 
plain their  real  causes  and  effects,  is  his  peculiar 
and  only  province. 

The  tragical  and  untimely  death  of  the  French 
Monarch  put  an  end  to  all  moderate  and  pacific 
measures  with  regard  to  Scotland.     The  Duke  of 
Guise,  and  the  Cardinal  his  brother,  upon  the  ac- 
cession of  Francis  II.,  a  Prince  void  of  genius  and 
without  experience,  assumed  the  chief  direction  of 
French  affairs.     Allied  so  nearly  to  the  throne,  by 
the  marriage  of  their  niece  the  Queen  of  Scots  with 
the  young  King,   they  now  wanted  but  little  of 
regal  dignity,  and  nothing  of  regal  power.     This 
power  did  not  long  remain  inactive  in  their  hands. 
The  same  vast  schemes  of  ambition,  which  they 
had  planned  out  under  the  former  reign,  were  again 
resumed ;   and  they  were  enabled,  by  possessing 
such  ample  authority,  to  pursue  them  with  more 
vigour  and  greater  probability  of  success.     They 
beheld,  with  infinite  regret,  the  progress  of  the  Pro- 
testant religion  in  Scotland  ;  and,  sensible  what  an 
unsurmountable  obstacle  it  would  prove   to  their 
designs,  they  bent  all  their  strength  to  check  its 
growth  before  it  rose  to  any  greater  height.     For 
this  purpose  they  carried  on  their  preparations  with 
all  possible  expedition,  and  encouraged  the  Queen 


15oJ).  OF  SCOTLAND.  183 

their  sister  to  expect,  in  a  short  time,  the  arrival 
of  an  army  so  powerful  as  the  zeal  of  their  adver- 
saries, however  desperate,  would  not  venture  to 
oppose. 

Nor  were  the  Lords  of  the  Congregation  either 
ignorant  of  those  violent  counsels  which  prevailed 
in  the  court  of  France  since  the  death  of  Henry, 
or  careless  of  providing  against  the  danger  which 
threatened  them  from  that  quarter.  The  success 
of  their  cause,  as  well  as  their  personal  safety,  de- 
pending entirely  on  the  unanimity  and  vigour  of 
their  own  resolutions,  they  endeavoured  to  guard 
against  division,  and  to  cement  together  more 
closely  by  entering  into  a  stricter  bond  of  confede- 
racy and  mutual  defence.  Two  persons  concurred 
in  this  new  association,  who  brought  a  great  acces- 
sion both  of  reputation  and  of  power  to  the  party. 
These  were  the  Duke  of  Chatelherault,  and  his 
eldest  son  the  Earl  of  Arran.  This  young  noble- 
man, having  resided  some  years  in  France,  where 
he  commanded  the  Scottish  guards,  had  imbibed 
the  Protestant  opinions  concerning  religion.  Hur- 
ried along  by  the  heat  of  youth  and  the  zeal  of  a 
proselyte,  he  had  uttered  sentiments  with  respect 
to  the  points  in  controversy  which  did  not  suit  the 
temper  of  a  bigoted  court,  intent  at  that  juncture 
on  the  extinction  of  the  Protestant  religion  ;  in  or- 
der to  accomplish  which  the  greatest  excesses  of 
violence  were  committed.  The  church  was  suf- 
fered to  wreak  its  utmost  fury  upon  all  who  were 
suspected  of  heresy.  Courts  were  erected  in  dif- 
ferent parts  of  France  to  take  cognisance  of  this 
crime  ;  and  by  their  sentences  several  persons  of 
distinction  were  condemned  to  the  flames. 

But,  in  order  to  inspire  more  universal  terror,, 


184  THE  HISTORY  B.  II. 

the  Princes  of  Lorrain  resolved  to  select,  for  a  sa- 
crifice, some  persons  whose  fall  might  convince  all 
ranks  of  men  that  neither  splendour  of  birth  nor 
eminence  in  station  could  exempt  from  punishment 
those  who  should  be  guilty  of  this  unpardonable 
transgression.  The  Earl  of  Arran  was  the  person 
destined  to  be  the  unhappy  victim66.  As  he  was 
allied  to  one  throne,  and  the  presumptive  heir  to 
another ;  as  he  possessed  the  first  rank  in  his  own 
country,  and  enjoyed  an  honourable  station  in 
France ;  his  condemnation  could  not  fail  of  mak- 
ing the  desired  impression  on  the  whole  kingdom. 
But  the  Cardinal  of  Lorrain  having  let  fall  some 
expressions  which  raised  Arran's  suspicions  of  the 
design,  he  escaped  the  intended  blow  by  a  timely 
flight.  Indignation,  zeal,  resentment,  all  prompted 
him  to  seek  revenge  upon  these  persecutors  of  him- 
self and  of  the  religion  which  he  professed  ;  and  as 
he  passed  through  England,  on  his  return  to  his 
native  country,  Elizabeth,  by  hopes  and  promises, 
inflamed  those  passions,  and  sent  him  back  into 
Scotland  animated  with  the  same  implacable  aver- 
sion to  France  which  possessed  a  great  part  of  his 
countrymen.  He  quickly  communicated  these  sen- 
timents to  his  father  the  Duke  of  Chatelherault, 
who  was  already  extremely  disgusted  with  the  mea- 
sures carrying  on  in  Scotland ;  and  as  it  was  the 
fate  of  that  noblemen  to  be  governed  in  every  in- 
stance by  those  about  him,  he  now  suffered  himself 
to  be  drawn  from  the  Queen  Regent;  and,  having 
joined  the  Congregation,  was  considered  from  that 
time  as  the  head  of  the  party. 

But  with  respect  to   him,    this  distinction  was 
merely  nominal.     James  Stewart,  Prior  of  St.  An- 
66  Thaan.  lib.  x\iv.  p.  462.     Edit.  Francof. 


15oi>.  OF  SCOTLAND.  18& 

drevv's,  was  the  person  who  moved  and  actuated 
the  whole  body  of  the  Protestants,  among  whom 
he  possessed  that  unbounded  confidence  which  his 
strenuous  adherence  to  their  interest  and  his  great 
abilities  so  justly  merited.  He  was  the  natural  son 
of  James  V.  by  a  daughter  of  Lord  Erskine;  and 
as  that  amorous  monarch  had  left  several  others  a 
burden  upon  the  crown,  they  were  all  destined  for 
the  church,  where  they  could  be  placed  in  stations 
of  dignity  and  affluence.  In  consequence  of  this 
resolution  the  priory  of  St.  Andrew's  had  been  con- 
ferred upon  James  :  but,  during  so  busy  a  period, 
he  soon  became  disgusted  with  the  indolence  and 
retirement  of  a  monastic  life ;  and  his  enterprising 
genius  called  him  forth  to  act  a  principal  part  on  a 
more  public  and  conspicuous  theatre.  The  scene 
in  which  he  appeared  required  talents  of  different 
kinds :  military  virtue  and  political  discernment 
were  equally  necessary  in  order  to  render  him  illus- 
trious. These  he  possessed  in  an  eminent  degree. 
To  the  most  unquestionable  personal  bravery  he 
added  great  skill  in  the  art  of  war,  and  in  every  en- 
terprise his  arms  was  crowned  with  success.  His 
sagacity  and  penetration  in  civil  affairs  enabled  him, 
amidst  the  reeling  and  turbulence  of  factions,  to 
hold  a  prosperous  course  ;  while  his  boldness  in 
defence  of  the  Reformation,  together  with  the  de- 
cency and  even  severity  of  his  manners,  secured 
him  the  reputation  of  being  sincerely  attached  to 
religion,  without  which  it  was  impossible  in  that 
age  to  gain  an  ascendant  over  mankind. 

It  was  not  without  reason  that  the  Queen  dreaded 
the  enmity  of  a  man  so  capable  to  obstruct  her  de- 
signs. As  she  could  not,  with  all  her  address,  make 
the  least  impression  on  his  fidelity  to  his  associates, 

R2 


186  THE  HISTORY  B.  II. 

she  endeavoured  to  lessen  his  influence,  and  to 
scatter  among  them  the  seeds  of  jealousy  and  dis- 
trust, by  insinuating  that  the  ambition  of  the  Prior 
aspired  beyond  the  condition  of  a  subject,  and  aimed 
at  nothing  less  than  the  crown  itself. 

An  accusation  so  improbable  gained  but  little 
credit.  Whatever  thoughts  of  this  kind  the  pre- 
sumption of  unexpected  success,  and  his  elevation 
to  the  highest  dignity  in  the  kingdom,  may  be  al- 
leged to  have  inspired  at  any  subsequent  period, 
it  is  certain  that  at  this  juncture  he  could  form  no 
such  vast  design.  To  dethrone  a  Queen,  who  was 
lineal  heir  to  an  ancient  race  of  Monarchs ;  who 
had  been  guilty  of  no  action  by  which  she  could 
forfeit  the  esteem  and  affection  of  her  subjects ;  who 
could  employ,  in  defence  of  her  rights,  the  forces 
of  a  kingdom  much  more  powerful  than  her  own ; 
and  to  substitute  in  her  place  a  person  whom  the 
illegitimacy  of  his  birth,  by  the  practice  of  all  civi- 
lized nations,  rendered  incapable  of  any  inheritance 
either  public  or  private ;  was  a  project  so  chimeri- 
cal as  the  most  extravagant  ambition  would  hardly 
entertain,  and  could  never  conceive  to  be  practica- 
ble. The  promise  too,  which  the  Prior  made  to 
Melvil,  of  residing  constantly  in  France,  on  condi- 
tion the  public  grievances  were  redressed67;  the 
confidence  reposed  in  him  by  the  Duke  of  Chatel- 
herault  and  his  son,  the  presumptive  heirs  to  the 
crown  ;  and  the  concurrence  of  almost  all  the  Scot- 
tish nobles  in  promoting  the  measures  by  which  he 
gave  offence  to  the  French  court,  go  far  towards 
his  vindication  from  those  illegal  and  criminal  de- 
signs, with  the  imputation  of  which  the  Queen  en- 
deavoured at  that  time  to  load  him. 

,i7  Melvil,  54. 


155!).  OF  SCOTLAND.  \{\"J 

The  arrival  of  a  thousand  French  soldiers  com- 
pensated,, in  some  degree,  for  the  loss  which  the 
Queen  sustained  by  the  defection  of  the  Duke  of 
Chatelherault.  These  were  immediately  command- 
ed to  fortify  Leith,  in  which  place,  on  account  of 
its  commodious  harbour,  and  its  situation  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  Edinburgh,  and  in  a  plentiful 
country,  the  Queen  resolved  to  fix  the  head-quar- 
ters of  her  foreign  forces.  This  unpopular  measure, 
by  the  manner  of  executing  it,  was  rendered  still 
more  unpopular.  In  order  to  bring  the  town  en- 
tirely under  their  command,  the  French  turned  out 
a  great  part  of  the  ancient  inhabitants,  and,  taking 
possession  of  the  houses  which  they  had  obliged 
them  to  abandon,  presented  to  the  view  of  the  Scots 
two  objects  equally  irritating  and  offensive  ;  on  the 
one  hand,  a  number  of  their  countrymen  expelled 
their  habitations  bv  violence,  and  wandering:  with- 
out  any  certain  abode ;  on  the  other,  a  colony  of 
foreigners  settling  with  their  wives  and  children  in 
the  heart  of  Scotland,  growing  into  strength  by  daily 
reinforcements,  and  openly  preparing  a  yoke,  to 
which,  without  some  timely  exertion  of  national  spi- 
rit, the  whole  kingdom  must  of  necessity  submit. 

It  was  with  deep  concern  that  the  Lords  of  the 
Congregation  beheld  this  bold  and  decisive  step 
taken  by  the  Queen  Regent ;  nor  did  they  hesitate 
a  moment,  whether  they  should  employ  their  whole 
strength  in  one  generous  effort,  to  rescue  their  reli- 
gion and  liberty  from  impending  destruction.  But, 
in  order  to  justify  their  own  conduct,  and  to  throw 
the  blame  entirely  on  their  adversaries,  they  re- 
solved to  preserve  the  appearances  of  decency  and 
respect  towards  their  superiors,  and  to  have  no  re- 
course to  arms  without  the  most  urgent  and  appa- 


188  THE  HISTORY  B.  II. 

rent  necessity.  [Sept.  29.]  They  joined,  with  this 
view,  in  an  address  to  the  Regent,  representing,  in 
the  strongest  terms,  their  dissatisfaction  with  the 
measures  she  was  pursuing,  and  beseeching  her  to 
quiet  the  fears  and  jealousies  of  the  nation  by  de- 
sisting from  fortifying  Leith.  The  Queen,  conscious 
of  her  present  advantageous  situation,  and  elated 
with  the  hopes  of  fresh  succours,  was  in  no  dispo- 
sition for  listening  to  demands  utterly  inconsistent 
with  her  views,  and  urged  with  that  bold  importunity 
which  is  so  little  acceptable  to  Princes68. 

The  sug,oestions  of  her  French  counsellors  con- 
tributed,  without  doubt,  to  alienate  her  still  further 
from  any  scheme  of  accommodation.  As  the  Queen 
was  ready  on  all  occasions  to  discover  an  extraor- 
dinary deference  to  the  opinions  of  her  countrymen, 
her  brothers,  who  knew  her  secret  disapprobation 
of  the  violent  measures  they  were  driving  on,  took 
care  to  place  near  her  such  persons  as  betrayed  her, 
by  their  insinuations,  into  many  actions,  which  her 
own  unbiased  judgment  would  have  highly  con- 
demned. As  their  success  in  the  present  juncture, 
when  all  things  were  hastening  towards  a  crisis, 
depended  entirely  on  the  Queen's  firmness,  the 
Princes  of  Lorrain  did  not  trust  wholly  to  the  in- 
fluence of  their  ordinary  agents;  but,  in  order  to 
add  the  greater  weight  to  their  councils,  they  called 
in  aid  the  ministers  of  religion  ;  and,  by  the  autho- 
rity of  their  sacred  character,  they  hoped  effectually 
to  recommend  to  their  sister  that  system  of  severity 
which  they  had  espoused69.  With  this  view,  but 
under  pretence  of  confounding  the  Protestants  by 
the  skill  of  such  able  masters  in  controversy,  they 

68Haynes,  211. 

69  Lesley,  215.     Castelnau,  ap.  Jcbb,  vol.  ii.  446,  473. 


xj-Ji).  OF  SCOTLAND.  J81) 

appointed  several  French  divines  to  reside  in  Scot- 
land. At  the  head  of  these,  and  with  the  charac- 
ter of  legate  from  the  Pope,  was  Pelleve  Bishop 
of  Amiens,  and  afterwards  Archbishop  and  Cardi- 
nal of  Sens,  a  furious  bigot70,  servilely  devoted  to 
the  house  of  Guise,  and  a  proper  instrument  for 
recommending  or  executing  the  most  outrageous 
measures. 

Amidst  the  noise  and  danger  of  civil  arms,  these 
doctors  had  little  opportunity  to  display  their  ad- 
dress in  the  use  of  their  theological  weapons.  But 
they  gave  no  small  offence  to  the  nation  by  one  of 
their  actions.  They  persuaded  the  Queen  to  seize 
the  church  of  St.  Giles  in  Edinburgh,  which  had 
remained  ever  since  the  late  truce  in  the  hands  of 
the  Protestants  ;  and  having,  by  a  new  and  solemn 
consecration,  purified  the  fabric  from  the  pollution 
with  which  they  supposed  the  profane  ministrations 
of  the  Protestants  to  have  defiled  it,  they,  in  direct 
contradiction  to  one  article  in  the  late  treaty,  re- 
established there  the  rites  of  the  Romish  church. 
This,  added  to  the  indifference,  and  even  contempt, 
with  which  the  Queen  received  their  remonstrances, 
convinced  the  Lords  of  the  Congregation,  that  it 
was  not  only  vain  to  expect  any  redress  of  their 
grievances  at  her  hands,  but  absolutely  necessary 
to  take  arms  in  their  own  defence. 

The  eager  and  impetuous  spirit  of  the  nation,  as 
well  as  every  consideration  of  good  policy,  prompt- 
ed them  to  take  this  bold  step  without  delay.  It 
was  but  a  small  part  of  the  French  auxiliaries 
which  had  as  yet  arrived.  The  fortifications  of 
Leith,  though  advancing  fast,  were  still  far  from 
being  complete.      Under  these  circumstances   of 

70  Davila,  Brantorue. 


100  THE  HISTORY  B.  II. 

disadvantage,  they  conceived  it  possible  to  surprise 
the  Queen's  party,  and,  by  one  sudden  and  deci- 
sive blow,  to  prevent  all  future  bloodshed  and  con- 
tention. [Oct.  6.]  Full  of  these  expectations,  they 
advanced  rapidly  towards  Edinburgh  with  a  nume- 
rous army.  But  it  was  no  easy  matter  to  deceive 
an  adversary  as  vigilant  and  attentive  as  the  Queen 
Regeut.  With  her  usual  sagacity,  she  both  fore- 
saw the  danger,  and  took  the  only  proper  course  to 
avoid  it.  Instead  of  keeping  the  field  against  ene- 
mies superior  in  number,  and  formidable  on  a  day 
of  battle  by  the  ardour  of  their  courage,  she  retired 
into  Leith,  and  determined  patiently  to  wait  the  ar- 
rival of  new  reinforcements.  Slight  and  unfinished 
as  the  fortifications  of  that  town  then  were,  she  did 
not  dread  the  efforts  of  an  army  provided  neither 
with  heavy  cannon  nor  with  military  stores,  and 
little  acquainted  with  the  method  of  attacking  any 
place  fortified  with  more  art  than  those  ancient 
towers  erected  all  over  the  kingdom  in  defence  of 
private  property  against  the  incursions  of  banditti. 
Nor  did  the  Queen  meanwhile  neglect  to  have  re- 
course to  those  arts  which  she  had  often  employed 
to  weaken  or  divide  her  adversaries.  By  private 
solicitations  and  promises  she  shook  the  fidelity  or 
abated  the  ardour  of  some.  By  open  reproach  and 
accusation  she  blasted  the  reputation  and  diminish- 
ed the  authority  of  others.  Her  emissaries  were 
everywhere  at  work,  and,  notwithstanding  the  zeal 
for  religion  and  liberty  which  then  animated  the  na- 
tion, they  seem  to  have  laboured  not  without  suc- 
cess. We  find  Knox,  about  this  period,  abounding 
in  complaints  of  the  lukewarm  and  languid  spirit 
which  had  begun  to  spread  among  his  party71.    But 

71  Knox,  180. 


1559.  OF  SCOTLAND.  191 

if  their  zeal  slackened  a  little,  and  suffered  a  mo- 
mentary intermission,  it  soon  blazed  up  with  fresh 
vigour,  and  rose  to  a  greater  height  than  ever. 

The  Queen  herself  gave  occasion  to  this,  by  the 
reply  which  she  made  to  a  new  remonstrance  from 
the  Lords  of  the  Congregation.  Upon  their  arrival 
at  Edinburgh,  they  once  more  represented  to  her 
the  dangers  arising  from  the  increase  of  the  French 
troops,  the  fortifying  of  Leith,  and  her  other  mea- 
sures, which  they  conceived  to  be  destructive  to  the 
peace  and  liberty  of  the  kingdom  ;  and  in  this  ad- 
dress they  spoke  in  a  firmer  tone,  and  avowed  more 
openly  than  ever  their  resolution  of  proceeding  to 
the  utmost  extremities,  in  order  to  put  a  stop  to 
such  dangerous  encroachments.  To  a  remonstrance 
of  this  nature,  and  urged  with  so  much  boldness, 
the  Queen  replied  in  terms  no  less  vigorous  and 
explicit.  She  pretended  that  she  was  not  account- 
able to  the  confederate  lords  for  any  part  of  her 
conduct ;  and  upon  no  representation  of  theirs  would 
she  either  abandon  measures  which  she  deemed 
necessary,  or  dismiss  forces  which  she  found  use- 
ful, or  demolish  a  fortification  which  might  prove  of 
advantage.  At  the  same  time  she  required  them, 
on  pain  of  treason,  to  disband  the  forces  which  they 
had  assembled. 

This  haughty  and  imperious  style  sounded  harsh- 
ly to  Scottish  nobles,  impatient,  from  their  national 
character,  of  the  slightest  appearance  of  injury; 
accustomed,  even  from  their  own  monarchs,  to  the 
most  respectful  treatment;  and  possessing,  under 
an  aristocratical  form  of  government,  such  a  share 
of  power,  as  equaled  at  all  times,  and  often  con- 
trolled, that  of  the  sovereign.  They  were  sensible 
at  once  of  the  indignity  offered  to  themselves,  and 
alarmed  with  this  plain  declaration  of  the  Queen's 


192  THE  HISTORY  B.  IT. 

intentions  ;  and  as  there  now  remained  but  one  step 
to  take,  they  wanted  neither  public  spirit  nor  reso- 
lution to  take  it. 

But,  that  they  might  not  seem  to  depart  from  the 
established  forms  of  the  constitution,  for  which, 
even  amidst  their  most  violent  operations,  men  al- 
ways retain  the  greatest  reverence,  [Oct.  21]  they 
assembled  all  the  peers,  barons,  and  representatives 
of  boroughs,  who  adhered  to  their  party.  These 
formed  a  convention,  which  exceeded  in  number, 
and  equaled  in  dignity,  the  usual  meetings  of  par- 
liament. The  leaders  of  the  Congregation  laid  be- 
fore them  the  declaration  which  the  Queen  had 
given  in  answer  to  their  remonstrance  ;  represented 
the  unavoidable  ruin  which  the  measures  she  therein 
avowed  and  justified  would  bring  upon  the  king- 
dom ;  and  requiring  their  direction  with  regard  to 
the  obedience  due  to  an  administration  so  unjust 
and  oppressive,  they  submitted  to  their  decision  a 
question,  one  of  the  most  delicate  and  interesting' 
that  can  possibly  fall  under  the  consideration  of 
subjects. 

This  assembly  proceeded  to  decide  with  no  less 
dispatch  than  unanimity.  Strangers  to  those  forms 
which  protract  business,  unacquainted  with  the  arts 
which  make  a  figure  in  debate,  and  much  more 
fitted  for  action  than  discourse,  a  warlike  people 
always  hasten  to  a  conclusion,  and  bring  their  de- 
liberations to  the  shortest  issue.  It  was  the  work 
but  of  one  day  to  examine  and  to  resolve  this  nice 
problem,  concerning  the  behaviour  of  subjects  to- 
wards a  ruler  who  abuses  his  power.  But,  how- 
ever abrupt  their  proceeding  may  appear,  they  were 
not  destitute  of  solemnity.  As  the  determination 
of  the  point  in  doubt  was  conceived  to  be  no  less 
the  office  of  divines  than  of  laymen,  the  former  were 


15oi).  OF  SCOTLAND.  103 

called  to  assist  with  their  opinion.  Knox  and  Wii- 
lox  appeared  for  the  whole  order,  and  pronounced, 
without  hesitation,  both  from  the  precepts  and  ex- 
amples in  Scripture,  that  it  was  lawful  for  subjects 
not  only  to  resist  tyrannical  Princes,  but  to  deprive 
them  of  that  authority  which,  in  their  hands,  be- 
comes an  instrument  for  destroying  those  whom  the 
Almighty  ordained  them  to  protect.  The  decision 
of  persons  revered  so  highly  for  their  sacred  cha- 
racter, but  more  for  their  zeal  and  their  piety,  had 
great  weight  with  the  whole  assembly.  Not  satis- 
fied with  the  common  indiscriminate  manner  of  sis- 
nifying  consent,  every  person  present  was  called  in 
his  turn  to  declare  his  sentiments;  and  rising  up  in 
order,  all  gave  their  suffrages,  without  one  dissent- 
ing voice,  for  depriving  the  Queen  of  the  office  of 
Regent,  which  she  exercised  so  much  to  the  detri- 
ment of  the  kingdom72. 

This  extraordinary  sentence  was  owing  no  less  to 
the  love  of  liberty  than  to  zeal  for  religion.  In  the 
act  of  deprivation,  religious  grievances  are  slightly 
mentioned ;  and  the  dangerous  encroachments  of 
the  Queen  upon  the  civil  constitution  are  produced 
by  the  Lords  of  the  Congregation,  in  order  to  prove 
their  conduct  to  have  been  not  only  just  but  neces- 
sary. The  introducing  foreign  troops  into  a  king- 
dom at  peace  with  all  the  world ;  the  seizing  and 
fortifying  towns  in  different  parts  of  the  country ; 
the  promoting  strangers  to  offices  of  great  power 
and  dignity;  the  debasing  the  current  coin73;   the 

72  Knox,  184. 

73  The  standard  of  money  in  Scotland  was  continually  varying. 
In  lli e  ltith  of  James  V.,  A.  D.  1529,  a  pound  weight  of  gold, 
when  coined,  produced  10X  pounds  of  current  money.  But  un- 
der the  Qneen  Regent's  administration,  A.  D.  1550,  a  pound 
weight  of  gold,  although  the  quantity  of  alloy  was  considerably 

VOL.  I.  S 


194  THE  HISTORY  B.  II. 

subverting  the  ancient  laws;  the  imposing  of  new 
and  burdensome  taxes ;  and  the  attempting  to  sub- 
due the  kingdom,  and  to  oppress  its  liberties,  by 
open  and  repeated  acts  of  violence,  are  enumerated 
at  great  length,  and  placed  in  the  strongest  light. 
On  all  these  accounts,  the  Congregation  main- 
tained, that  the  nobles,  as  counsellors  by  birthright 
to  their  monarchs,  and  the  guardians  and  defenders 
of  the  constitution,  had  a  right  to  interpose;  and 
therefore,  by  virtue  of  this  right,  in  the  name  of  the 
King  and  Queen,  and  with  many  expressions  of 
duty  and  submission  towards  them,  they  deprived 
the  Queen  Regent  of  her  office,  and  ordained  that, 
for  the  future,  no  obedience  should  be  given  to  her 
commands74. 

Violent  as  this  action  may  appear,  there  wanted 
not  principles  in  the  constitution,  nor  precedents  in 
the  history  of  Scotland,,  to  justify  and  to  authorize 
it.  Under  the  aristocratical  form  of  government 
established  among  the  Scots,  the  power  of  the 
sovereign  was  extremely  limited.  The  more  consi- 
derable nobles  were  themselves  petty  Princes,  pos- 
sessing extensive  jurisdictions,  almost  independent 
of  the  crown,  and  followed  by  numerous  vassals, 
who,  in  every  contest,  espoused  their  chieftain's 
quarrel,  in  opposition  to  the   King.      Hence  the 

increased,  produced  144/.  current  money.  In  1529,  a  pound 
weight  of  silver,  when  coined,  produced  9/.  2s.;  but  in  1550,  it 
produced  13/.  current  money.  Ruddiniiin.  Praefat.  ad  Anders. 
Diplomat.  Scotia1,  p.  SO,  SI  ;  from  which  it  appears,  that  this 
complaint,  which  the  malecontents  often  repeated,  was  not  alto- 
gether destitute  of  foundation. 

74  M.  Castelnau,  after  condemning  the  dangerous  counsels  of 
the  Princes  of  Lorrain,  with  regard  to  the  affairs  of  Scotland, 
acknowledges,  with  his  usual  candour,  that  the  Scots  declared 
war  against  the  Queen  Regent,  rather  from  a  desire  of  vindi- 
cating their  civil  liberties  than  from  any  motive  of  religion. 
Mem.  446. 


1559.  OF  SCOTLAND.  195 

many  instances  of  the  impotence  of  regal  authority, 
which  are  to  be  found  in  the  Scottish  history.  In 
every  age,  the  nobles  not  only  claimed,  but  exer- 
cised, the  right  of  controlling  the  King.  Jealous  of 
their  privileges,  and  ever  ready  to  take  the  field  in 
defence  of  them,  every  error  in  administration  was 
observed,  every  encroachment  upon  the  rights  of 
the  aristocracy  excited  indignation,  and  no  Prince 
ever  ventured  to  transgress  the  boundaries  which 
the  law  had  prescribed  to  prerogative,  without 
meeting  resistance,  which  shook  or  overturned  his 
throne.  Encouraged  by  the  spirit  of  the  constitu- 
tion, and  countenanced  by  the  example  of  their 
ancestors,  the  Lords  of  the  Congregation  thought 
it  incumbent  on  them,  at  this  juncture,  to  inquire 
into  the  maladministration  of  the  Queen  Regent, 
and  to  preserve  their  country  from  being  enslaved 
or  conquered,  by  depriving  her  of  the  power  to 
execute  such  a  pernicious  scheme. 

The  act  of  deprivation,  and  a  letter  from  the 
Lords  of  the  Congregation  to  the  Queen  Regent, 
are  still  extant75.  They  discover  not  only  that  mas- 
culine and  undaunted  spirit,  natural  to  men  capable 
of  so  bold  a  resolution ;  but  are  remarkable  for  a 
precision  and  vigour  of  expression,  which  we  are 
surprised  to  meet  with  in  an  age  so  unpolished.  The 
same  observation  may  be  made  with  respect  to  the 
other  public  papers  of  that  period.  The  ignorance 
or  bad  taste  of  an  age  may  render  the  compositions 
of  authors  by  profession  obscure,  or  affected,  or 
absurd :  but  the  language  of  business  is  nearly  the 
same  at  all  times ;  and  wherever  men  think  clearly, 
and  are  thoroughly  interested,  they  express  them- 
selves with  perspicuity  and  force. 

"s  Knox,  184. 


THE 

HISTORY  OF  SCOTLAND 


BOOK  III. 
1559. 


The  Lords  of  the  Congregation  soon  found  that 
their  zeal  had  engaged  them  in  an  undertaking 
which  it  was  beyond  their  utmost  ability  to  accom- 
plish. The  French  garrison,  despising  their  nume- 
rous but  irregular  forces,  refused  to  surrender  Leith, 
and  to  depart  out  of  the  kingdom ;  nor  were  these 
sufficiently  skilful  in  the  art  of  war  to  reduce  the 
place  by  force,  or  possessed  of  the  artillery  or 
magazines  requisite  for  that  purpose ;  and  their 
followers,  though  of  undaunted  courage,  yet,  being 
accustomed  to  decide  every  quarrel  by  a  battle, 
were  strangers  to  the  fatigues  of  a  long  campaign, 
and  soon  became  impatient  of  the  severe  and  con- 
stant duty  which  a  siege  requires.  The  Queen's 
emissaries,  who  found  it  easy  to  mingle  with  their 
countrymen,  were  at  the  utmost  pains  to  heighten 
their  disgust,  which  discovered  itself  at  first  in  mur- 
murs and  complaints,  but,  on  occasion  of  the  want 
of  money  for  paying  the  army,  broke  out  into  open 
mutiny.  The  most  eminent  leaders  were  hardly 
secure  from  the  unbridled  insolence  of  the  soldiers; 


1559.  HISTORY  OF  SCOTLAND.  197 

while  some  of  inferior  rank,  interposing  too  rashly 
in  order  to  quell  them,  fell  victims  to  their  rage. 
Discord,  consternation,  and  perplexity  reigned  in 
the  camp  of  the  reformers.  The  Duke,  their  Gene- 
ral, sunk,  with  his  usual  timidity,  under  the  terror 
of  approaching  danger,  and  discovered  manifest 
symptoms  of  repentance  for  his  rashness  in  espous- 
ing such  a  desperate  cause. 

In  this  situation  of  their  affairs,  the  Congregation 
had  recourse  to  Elizabeth,  from  whose  protection 
they  could  derive  their  only  reasonable  hope  of 
success.  Some  of  their  more  sagacious  leaders, 
having  foreseen  that  the  party  might  probably  be 
involved  in  great  difficulties,  had  early  endeavoured 
to  secure  a  resource  in  any  such  exigency,  by  en- 
tering into  a  secret  correspondence  with  the  court 
of  England1.  Elizabeth,  aware  of  the  dangerous 
designs  which  the  Princes  of  Lorrain  had  formed 
against  her  crown,  was  early  sensible  of  how  much 
importance  it  would  be,  not  only  to  check  the  pro- 
gress of  the  French  in  Scotland,  but  to  extend  her 
own  influence  in  that  kingdom  " ;  and  perceiving  how 
effectually  the  present  insurrections  would  contri- 
bute to  retard  or  defeat  the  schemes  formed  against 
England,  she  listened  with  pleasure  to  these  appli- 
cations of  the  malecontents,  and  gave  them  private 
assurances  of  powerful  support  to  their  cause.  Ran- 
dolph3, an  agent  extremely  proper  for  conducting 
any  dark  intrigue,  was  dispatched  into  Scotland, 
and  residing  secretly  among  the  Lords  of  the  Con- 
gregation, observed  and  quickened  their  motions. 
Money  seemed  to  be  the  only  thing  they  wanted  at 
that  time  ;   and  it  was  owing  to  a  seasonable  remit- 

1   Bom.  Hist.  Ref.  3.     Append.  278.      Keith,  Append.  21. 
1  See  Appeud.  No.  1.  J   Keith,  Append.  2*J. 

s  2 


198  THE  HISTORY  B.  III. 

tance  from  England4,  that  the  Scottish  nobles  had 
been  enabled  to  take  the  field,  and  to  advance 
towards  Leith.  But  as  Elizabeth  was  distrustful 
of  the  Scots,  and  studious  to  preserve  appearances 
with  France,  her  subsidies  were  bestowed  at  first 
with  extreme  frugality.  The  subsistence  of  an  army, 
and  the  expenses  of  a  siege,  soon  exhausted  this 
penurious  supply,  to  which  the  Lords  of  the  Con- 
gregation could  make  little  addition  from  their  own 
funds;  and  the  ruin  and  dispersion  of  the  party 
must  have  instantly  followed. 

In  order  to  prevent  this,  Cockburn  of  Ormiston, 
was  sent,  with  the  utmost  expedition,  to  the  go- 
vernors of  the  town  and  castle  of  Berwick.  As 
Berwick  was  at  that  time  the  town  of  greatest  im- 
portance on  the  Scottish  frontier,  Sir  Ralph  Sadler 
and  Sir  James  Crofts,  persons  of  considerable  figure, 
were  employed  to  command  there,  and  were  en- 
trusted with  a  discretionary  power  of  supplying  the 
Scottish  malecontents,  according  to  the  exigency  of 
their  affairs.  From  them  Cockburn  received  four 
thousand  crowns,  but  little  to  the  advantage  of  his 
associates.  The  Earl  of  Both  well,  by  the  Queen's 
instigation,  lay  in  wait  for  him  on  his  return,  dis- 
persed his  followers,  wounded  him,  and  carried  off 
the  money. 

This  unexpected  disappointment  proved  fatal  to 
the  party.  In  mere  despair,  some  of  the  more  zea- 
lous attempted  to  assault  Leith ;  but  the  French 
beat  them  back  with  disgrace,  seized  their  cannon, 
and,  pursuing  them  to  the  gates  of  Edinburgh,  were 
on  the  point  of  entering  along  with  them.  All  the 
terror  and  confusion  which  the  prospect  of  pillage 
or  of  massacre  can  excite  in  a  place  taken  by  storm, 
4  Knox,  214.     Keith,  Append.  44. 


1559.  OF  SCOTLAND.  WO 

filled  the  city  on  this  occasion.  The  inhabitants 
fled  from  the  enemy  by  the  opposite  gate;  the  forces 
of  the  Congregation  were  irresolute  and  dismayed; 
and  the  Queen's  partisans  in  the  town  openly  insulted 
both.  At  last,  a  few  of  the  nobles  ventured  to  face 
the  enemy,  who,  after  plundering  some  houses  in 
the  suburbs,  retired  with  their  booty,  and  delivered 
the  city  from  this  dreadful  alarm. 

A  second  skirmish,  which  happened  a  few  days 
after,  was  no  less  unfortunate.  The  French  sent 
out  a  detachment  to  intercept  a  convoy  of  provi- 
sions which  was  designed  for  Edinburgh.  The 
Lords  of  the  Congregation,  having  intelligence  of 
this,  marched  in  all  haste  with  a  considerable  body 
of  their  troops,  and  falling  upon  the  enemy  between 
Restalrig  and  Leith,  with  more  gallantry  than  good 
conduct,  were  almost  surrounded  by  a  second  party 
of  French,  who  advanced  in  order  to  support  their 
own  men.  In  this  situation  a  retreat  was  the  only 
thing  which  could  save  the  Scots  ;  but  a  retreat 
over  marshy  ground,  and  in  the  face  of  an  enemy 
superior  in  number,  could  not  long  be  conducted 
with  order.  A  body  of  the  enemy  hung  upon  their 
rear,  horse  and  foot  fell  into  the  utmost  confusion, 
and  it  was  entirely  owing  to  the  overcaution  of  the 
French  that  any  of  the  party  escaped  being  cut  in 
pieces. 

On  this  second  blow,  the  hopes  and  spirits  of 
the  Congregation  sunk  altogether.  They  did  not 
think  themselves  secure  even  within  the  walls  of 
Kdinburgh,  but  instantly  determined  to  retire  to 
some  place  at  a  great  distance  from  the  enemy.  In 
vain  did  the  Prior  of  St.  Andrew's,  and  a  few 
others,  oppose  this  cowardly  and  ignominious  flight. 
This  dread  of  the  present  danger  prevailed  over 


200  THE  HISTORY  B.  III. 

both  the  sense  of  honour  and  zeal  for  the  cause. 
[Nov.  G.]  At  midnight  they  set  out  from  Edinburgh 
in  great  confusion,  and  marched  without  halting  till 
they  arrived  at  Stirling5. 

During  this  last  insurrection,  the  great  body  of 
the  Scottish  nobility  joined  the  Congregation.  The 
Lords  Seton  and  Borthwick  were  the  only  persons 
of  rank  who  took  arms  for  the  Queen,  and  assisted 
her  in  defending  LeithA  Bothwell  openly  favoured 
her  cause,  but  resided  at  his  own  house.  The  Earl 
of  Huntly,  conformable  to  the  crafty  policy  which 
distinguished  his  character,  amused  the  leaders  of 
the  Congregation,  whom  he  had  engaged  to  assist, 
with  many  fair  promises,  but  never  joined  them 
with  a  single  man  7.  The  Earl  of  Morton,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Congregation,  fluctuated  in  a  state  of 
irresolution,  and  did  not  act  heartily  for  the  com- 
mon cause.  Lord  Erskine,  governor  of  Edinburgh 
castle,  though  a  Protestant,  maintained  a  neutrality, 
which  he  deemed  becoming  the  dignity  of  his  office; 
and  having  been  entrusted  by  parliament  with  the 
command  of  the  principal  fortress  in  the  kingdom, 
he  resolved  that  neither  faction  should  get  it  into 
their  hands. 

A  few  days  before  the  retreat  of  the  Congrega- 
tion, the  Queen  suffered  an  irreparable  loss  by  the 
defection  of  her  principal  secretary,  William  Mait- 
land  of  Lethington.  His  zeal  for  the  reformed  reli- 
gion, together  with  his  warm  remonstrances  against 
the  violent  measures  which  the  Queen  was  carrying 
on,  exposed  him  so  much  to  her  resentment,  and  to 
that  of  her  French  counsellors,  that  he,  suspecting 
his  life  to  be  in  danger,  withdrew  secretly  from 

5  Keith,  Append.  21—45.  6  Ibid.  Append.  31. 

7  Ibid.  Append.  33.     Knox,  222. 


1539.  OF  SCOTLAND.  201 

Leith,  and  fled  to  the  Lords  of  the  Congregation15; 
and  they  with  open  arms  received  a  convert,  whose 
abilities  added  both  strength  and  reputation  to  their 
cause.  Maitland  had  early  applied  to  public  busi- 
ness admirable  natural  talents,  improved  by  an  ac- 
quaintance with  the  liberal  arts;  and,  at  a  time  of 
life  when  his  countrymen  of  the  same  quality  were 
following  the  pleasures  of  the  chase,  or  serving  as 
adventurers  in  the  armies  of  France,  he  was  admit- 
ted into  all  the  secrets  of  the  cabinet,  and  put  upon 
a  level  with  persons  of  the  most  consummate  expe- 
rience in  the  management  of  affairs.  He  possessed, 
in  an  eminent  degree,  that  intrepid  spirit  which  de- 
lights in  pursuing  bold  designs,  and  was  no  less 
master  of  that  political  dexterity  which  is  necessary 
for  carrying  them  on  with  success.  But  these  qua- 
lities were  deeply  tinctured  with  the  neighbouring 
vices.  His  address  sometimes  degenerated  into 
cunning;  his  acuteness  bordered  upon  excess;  his 
invention,  overfertile,  suggested  to  him,  on  some 
occasions,  chimerical  systems  of  policy,  too  refined 
for  the  genius  of  his  age  or  country;  and  his  enter- 
prising spirit  engaged  him  in  projects  vast  and  splen- 
did, but  beyond  his  utmost  power  to  execute.  All 
the  cotemporary  writers,  to  whatever  faction  they 
belong,  mention  him  with  an  admiration  which  no- 
thing could  have  excited  but  the  greatest  superiority 
of  penetration  and  abilities. 

The  precipitate  retreat  of  the  Congregation  in- 
creased to  such  a  degree  the  terror  and  confusion 
which  had  seized  the  party  at  Edinburgh,  that 
before  the  army  reached  Stirling  it  dwindled  to  an 
inconsiderable  number.  The  spirit  of  Knox  how- 
ever still  remained  undaunted  and  erect;  and  having 

8  Knox.  192. 


202  THE  HISTORY  B.  III. 

mounted  the  pulpit,  he  addressed  to  his  desponding 
hearers  an  exhortation,  which  wonderfully  animated 
and  revived  them.  The  heads  of  this  discourse  are 
inserted  in  his  History  9,  and  afford  a  striking  ex- 
ample of  the  boldness  and  freedom  of  reproof  as- 
sumed by  the  first  reformers,  as  well  as  a  specimen 
of  his  own  skill  in  choosing  the  topics  most  fitted 
to  influence  and  rouse  his  audience. 

A  meeting  of  the  leaders  being  called,  to  consi- 
der what  course  they  should  hold,  now  that  their 
own  resources  were  all  exhausted,  and  their  destruc- 
tion appeared  to  be  unavoidable  without  foreign  aid, 
they  turned  their  eyes  once  more  to  England,  and 
resolved  to  implore  the  assistance  of  Elizabeth  to- 
wards finishing  an  enterprise,  in  which  they  had 
so  fatally  experienced  their  own  weakness,  and  the 
strength  of  their  adversaries.  Maitland,  as  the  most 
able  negotiator  of  the  party,  was  employed  in  this 
embassy.  In  his  absence,  and  during  the  inactive 
season  of  the  year,  it  was  agreed  to  dismiss  their 
followers,  worn  out  by  the  fatigues  of  a  campaign 
which  had  so  far  exceeded  the  usual  time  of  ser- 
vice. But,  in  order  to  preserve  the  counties  most 
devoted  to  their  interest,  the  Prior  of  St,  Andrew's, 
with  part  of  the  leaders,  retired  into  Fife.  The 
Duke  of  Chatelherault,  with  the  rest,  fixed  his 
residence  at  Hamilton.  There  was  little  need  of 
Maitland's  address  or  eloquence  to  induce  Eliza- 
beth to  take  his  country  under  her  protection.  She 
observed  the  prevalence  of  the  French  counsels, 
and  the  progress  of  their  arms  in  Scotland,  with 
great  concern ;  and  as  she  well  foresaw  the  dan- 
gerous tendency  of  their  schemes  in  that  kingdom, 
she  had  already  come  to  a  resolution  with  regard 

9  Knox,  193. 


1559.  OF  SCOTLAND.  20# 

to  the  part  she  herself  would  act,  if  their  power 
there  should  grow  still  more  formidable. 

Iu  order  to  give  the  Queen  and  her  privy  coun- 
cil a  full  and  distinct  view  of  any  important  matter 
which  might  come  before  them,  it  seems  to  have 
been  the  practice  of  Elizabeth's  ministers  to  pre- 
pare memorials,  in  which  they  clearly  stated  the 
point  under  deliberation,  laid  down  the  grounds  of 
the  conduct  which  they  held  to  be  most  reasonable, 
and  proposed  a  method  for  carrying  their  plan  into 
execution.  Two  papers  of  this  kind,  written  by 
Sir  William  Cecil  with  his  own  hand,  and  submit- 
ted by  the  Queen  to  the  consideration  of  her  privy 
council,  still  remain10;  they  are  entitled,  "  A  short 
discussion  of  the  weighty  matter  of  Scotland,"  and 
do  honour  to  the  industry  and  penetration  of  that 
great  minister.  The  motives  which  determined  the 
Queen  to  espouse  so  warmly  the  defence  of  the 
Congregalion,  are  represented  with  perspicuity  and 
force;  and  the  consequences  of  suffering  the  French 
to  establish  themselves  in  Scotland  are  predicted 
with  great  accuracy  and  discernment. 

He  lays  it  down  as  a  principle,  agreeably  to  the 
laws  both  of  God  and  of  nature,  that  every  society 
hath  a  right  to  defend  itself,  not  only  from  present 
dangers,  but  from  such  as  may  probably  ensue  ;  to 
which  he  adds,  that  nature  and  reason  teach  every 
prince  to  defend  himself  by  the  same  means  which 
his  adversaries  employ  to  distress  him.  Upon  these 
grounds  he  establishes  the  right  of  England  to  in- 
terpose in  the  affairs  of  Scotland,  and  to  prevent 
the  conquest  of  that  kingdom,  at  which  the  French 
openly  aimed.  The  French,  he  observes,  are  the 
ancient  and  implacable  enemies  of  England.     Hos- 

10  Burn   vol.  iii.     Append.  283.     Forbes,  i.  387,  c.   Keith, 
Append.  21. 


204  THE  HISTORY  B.  III. 

tilities  had  subsisted  between  the  two  nations  for 
many  centuries.  No  treaty  of  peace  into  which 
they  entered  had  ever  been  cordial  or  sincere.  No 
good  effect  was  therefore  to  be  expected  from  the 
peace  lately  agreed  upon,  which,  being  extorted 
by  present  necessity,  would  be  negligently  ob- 
served, and  broken  on  the  slightest  pretences.  In 
a  very  short  time  France  would  recover  its  former 
opulence;  and  though  now  drained  of  men  and 
money  by  a  tedious  and  unsuccessful  war,  it  would 
quickly  be  in  a  condition  for  acting,  and  the  rest- 
less and  martial  genius  of  the  people  render  action 
necessary.  The  Princes  of  Lorrain,  who  at  that 
time  had  the  entire  direction  of  French  affairs,  were 
animated  with  the  most  virulent  hatred  against  the 
English  nation.  They  openly  called  in. question 
the  legitimacy  of  the  Queen's  birth,  and,  by  ad- 
vancing the  title  and  pretensions  of  their  niece  the 
Queen  of  Scotland,  studied  to  deprive  Elizabeth  of 
her  crown.  With  this  view  they  had  laboured  to 
exclude  the  English  from  the  treaty  of  Chateau  en 
Cambresis,  and  endeavoured  to  conclude  a  separate 
peace  with  Spaiu.  They  had  persuaded  Henry  II. 
to  permit  his  daughter-in-law  to  assume  the  title 
and  arms  of  Queen  of  England;  and  even  since 
the  conclusion  of  the  peace,  they  had  solicited  at 
Rome,  and  obtained  a  bull,  declaring  Elizabeth's 
birth  to  be  illegitimate.  Though  the  wisdom  and 
moderation  of  the  constable  Montmorency  had  for 
some  time  checked  their  career,  yet  these  restraints 
being  now  removed  by  the  death  of  Henry  II.  and 
the  disgrace  of  his  minister,  the  utmost  excesses 
of  violence  were  to  be  dreaded  from  their  furious 
ambition,  armed  with  sovereign  power.  Scotland 
is  the  quarter  where  they  can  attack  England  with 
most  advantage.     A  war  on  the  borders  of  that 


1559.  OF  SCOTLAND.  205 

country  exposes  France  to  no  danger;  but  one  un- 
successful action  there  may  hazard  the  crown,  and 
overturn  the  government  of  England.  In  political 
conduct,  it  is  childish  to  wait  till  the  designs  of  an 
enemy  be  ripe  for  execution.  The  Scottish  nobles, 
after  their  utmost  efforts,  have  been  obliged  to  quit 
the  field;  and,  far  from  expelling  the  invaders  of 
their  liberties,  they  behold  the  French  power  daily 
increasing,  and  must  at  last  cease  from  struggling 
any  longer  in  a  contest  so  unequal.  The  invading 
of  England  will  immediately  follow  the  reduction 
of  the  Scottish  malecontents,  by  the  abandoning  of 
whom  to  the  mercy  of  the  French,  Elizabeth  will 
open  a  way  for  her  enemies  into  the  heart  of  her 
own  kingdom,  and  expose  it  to  the  calamities  of 
war  and  the  danger  of  conquest.  Nothing  there- 
fore remained  but  to  meet  the  enemy  while  yet  at 
a  distance  from  England,  and,  by  supporting  the 
Congregation  with  a  powerful  army,  to  render  Scot- 
land the  theatre  of  the  war,  to  crush  the  designs  of 
the  Princes  of  Lorrain  in  their  infancy,  and,  by 
such  an  early  and  unexpected  effort,  to  expel  the 
French  out  of  Britain,  before  their  power  had  time 
to  take  root  and  grow  up  to  any  formidable  height. 
But  as  the  matter  was  of  as  much  importance  as 
any  which  could  fall  under  the  consideration  of  an 
English  monarch,  wisdom  and  mature  counsel  were 
necessary  in  the  first  place,  and  afterwards  vigour 
and  expedition  in  conduct;  the  danger  was  urgent, 
and  by  losing  a  single  moment  might  become  un- 
avoidable11. 

These  arguments  produced  their  full  effect  upon 

"  The  arguments  which  the  Scots  employed,  in  order  to  obtaiD 
Elizabeth's  assistance,  are  urged  with  great  force  in  a  paper  of 
Rfaitlaod'a.     See  Appeod.  No.  11. 

VOL.   I.  T 


206  THE  HISTORY  B.  III. 

Elizabeth,  who  was  jealous,  in  an  extreme  degree, 
of  every  pretender  to  her  crown,  and  no  less  anxi- 
ous to  preserve  the  tranquillity  and  happiness  of 
her  subjects.  From  these  motives  she  had  acted 
in  granting  the  Congregation  an  early  supply  of 
money ;  and  from  the  same  principles  she  deter- 
mined, in  their  present  exigency,  to  afford  them 
more  effectual  aid.  One  of  Maitland's  attendants 
was  instantly  dispatched  into  Scotland  with  the 
strongest  assurances  of  her  protection,  and  the 
Lords  of  the  Cono-reg-ation  were  desired  to  send 
Commissioners  into  England  to  conclude  a  treaty, 
and  to  settle  the  operations  of  the  campaign  with  the 
Duke  of  Norfolk12. 

Meanwhile  the  Queen  Regent,  from  whom  no 
motion  of  the  Congregation  could  long  be  con- 
cealed, dreaded  the  success  of  this  negotiation  with 
the  court  of  England,  and  foresaw  how  little  she 
would  be  able  to  resist  the  united  efforts  of  the  two 
kingdoms.  For  this  reason  she  determined,  if  pos- 
sible, to  get  the  start  of  Elizabeth ;  and  by  ventur- 
ing, notwithstanding  the  inclemency  of  the  winter 
season,  to  attack  the  malecontents  in  their  present 
dispersed  and  helpless  situation,  she  hoped  to  put 
an  end  to  the  war  before  the  arrival  of  their  English 
allies. 

A  considerable  body  of  her  French  forces,  who 
were  augmented  about  this  time  by  the  arrival  of 
the  Count  de  Martigues,  with  a  thousand  veteran 
foot,  and  some  cavalry,  were  commanded  to  march 
to  Stirling.  Having  there  crossed  the  Forth,  they 
proceeded  along  the  coast  of  Fife,  destroying  and 
plundering,  with  excessive  outrage,  the  houses  and 
lands  of  those  whom  they  deemed  their  enemies. 
12  Keith,  114.     Rvmer,  xv.  p.  569. 


1559.  OF  SCOTLAND.  207 

Fife  was  the  most  populous  and  powerful  county  in 
the  kingdom,  and  most  devoted  to  the  Congrega- 
tion, who  had  hitherto  drawn  from  thence  their 
most  considerable  supplies,  both  of  men  and  provi- 
sions ;  and  therefore,  besides  punishing  the  disaf- 
fection of  the  inhabitants  by  pillaging  the  country, 
the  French  proposed  to  seize  and  fortify  St.  An- 
drew's, and  to  leave  in  it  a  garrison  sufficient  to 
bridle  the  mutinous  spirit  of  the  province,  and  to 
keep  possession  of  a   port   situated  on  the  main 


3an 13. 


But  on  this  occasion  the  Prior  of  St.  Andrew's, 
Lord  Ruthven,  Kirkaldy  of  Grange,  and  a  few  of 
the  most  active  leaders  of  the  Congregation,  per- 
formed, by  their  bravery  and  good  conduct,  a  ser- 
vice of  the  utmost  importance  to  their  party. — 
Having  assembled  six  hundred  horse  they  infested 
the  French  with  continual  incursions,  beat  up  their 
quarters,  intercepted  their  convoys  of  provisions,  cut 
otT  their  straggling  parties,  and  so  harassed  them 
with  perpetual  alarms  that  they  prevented  them  for 
more  than  three  weeks  from  advancing14. 

1560.]  At  last  the  Prior,  with  his  feeble  party, 
was  constrained  to  retire,  and  the  French  set  out 
from  Kirkaldy,  and  began  to  move  along  the  coast 
towards  St.  Andrew's.  [Jan.  23.]  They  had  ad- 
vanced but  a  few  miles  when,  from  an  eminence, 
they  descried  a  powerful  fleet  steering  its  course 
up  the  Frith  of  Forth.  As  they  knew  that  the 
Marquis  D'Elbeuf  was  at  that  time  preparing  to 
sail  for  Scotland  with  a  numerous  army,  they  has- 
tily concluded  that  these  ships  belonged  to  them, 
and  gave  way  to  the  most  immoderate  transports  of 
joy  on  the  prospect  of  this  long  expected  succour. 

13  Haynes,  221 ,  &c.  u  Knox,  202. 


'208  THE  HISTORY  B.  III. 

Their  great  guns  were  already  fired  to  welcome 
their  friends,  and  to  spread  the  tidings  and  terror 
of  their  arrival  among  their  enemies,  when  a  small 
boat  from  the  opposite  coast  landed,  and  blasted 
their  premature  and  shortlived  triumph,  by  inform- 
ing them  that  it  was  the  fleet  of  England  which  was 
in  sight,  intended  for  the  aid  of  the  Congregation, 
and  was  soon  to  be  followed  by  a  formidable  land 
army I5. 

Throughout  her  whole  reign  Elizabeth  was  cau- 
tious, but  decisive  ;  and,  by  her  promptitude  in 
executing  her  resolutions,  joined  to  the  deliberation 
with  which  she  formed  them,  her  administration 
became  remarkable  no  less  for  its  vigour  than  for 
its  wisdom.  No  sooner  did  she  determine  to  afford 
her  protection  to  the  Lords  of  the  Congregation, 
than  they  experienced  the  activity,  as  well  as  the 
extent  of  her  power.  The  season  of  the  year  would 
not  permit  her  land  army  to  take  the  field;  but  lest 
the  French  should,  in  the  mean  time,  receive  new 
reinforcements,  she  instantly  ordered  a  strong  squa- 
dron to  cruise  in  the  Frith  of  Forth.  She  seems, 
by  her  instructions  to  Winter  her  Admiral,  to  have 
been  desirous  of  preserving  the  appearances  of 
friendship  towards  the  French1'1.  But  these  were 
only  appearances ;  if  any  French  fleet  should  at- 
tempt to  land,  he  was  commanded  to  prevent  it  by 
every  act  of  hostility  and  violence.  It  was  the 
sight  of  this  squadron  which  occasioned  at  first  so 
much  joy  among  the  French,  but  which  soon  in- 
spired them  with  such  terror  as  saved  Fife  from 
the  effects  of  their  vengeance.  Apprehensive  of 
being  cut  off"  from  their  companions  on  the  opposite 
shore,  they  retreated  towards  Stirling  with  the  ut- 

15  Knox,  202.  ,6  Keitb,  Append.  45.     Haynes,  231. 


1560.  OF  SCOTLAND.  201) 

most  precipitation,  and  in  a  dreadful  season,  and 
through  roads  almost  impassable,  arrived  at  Leith, 
harassed  and  exhausted  with  fatigue17. 

The  English  fleet  cast  anchor  in  the  road  of 
Leith,  and  continuing  in  that  station  till  the  conclu- 
sion of  peace,  both  prevented  the  garrison  of  Leith 
from  receiving  succours  of  any  kind,  and  consider- 
ably facilitated  the  operations  of  their  own  forces 
by  land. 

Feb.  27.]  Soon  after  the  arrival  of  the  English 
squadron,  the  Commissioners  of  the  Congregation 
repaired  to  Berwick,  and  concluded  with  the  Duke 
of  Norfolk  a  treaty,  the  bond  of  that  union  with 
Elizabeth  which  was  of  so  great  advantage  to  the 
cause.  To  give  a  check  to  the  dangerous  and  rapid 
progress  of  the  French  arms  in  Scotland  was  the 
professed  design  of  the  contracting  parties.  In 
order  to  this  the  Scots  engaged  never  to  suffer  any 
closer  union  of  their  country  with  France;  and  to 
defend  themselves  to  the  uttermost  against  all  at- 
tempts  of  conquest.  Elizabeth,  on  her  part,  pro- 
mised to  employ  in  Scotland  a  powerful  army  for 
their  assistance,  which  the  Scots  undertook  to  join 
with  all  their  forces ;  no  place  in  Scotland  was  to  re- 
main in  the  hands  of  the  English  ;  whatever  should 
be  taken  from  the  enemy  was  either  to  be  rased  or 
kept  by  the  Scots  at  their  choice ;  if  any  invasion 
should  be  made  upon  England,  the  Scots  were 
obliged  to  assist  Elizabeth  with  part  of  their  forces  ; 
and,  to  ascertain  their  faithful  observance  of  the 
treaty,  they  bound  themselves  to  deliver  hostages 
to  Elizabeth,  before  the  march  of  her  army  into 
Scotland  :  in  conclusion,  the  Scots  made  many  pro- 
testations of  obedience  and  loyalty  towards  their 

17  Knox,  203. 

T  2 


£10  THE  HISTORY  B.  III. 

own  Queen,  in  every  thing  not  inconsistent  with 
their  religion  and  the  liberties  of  their  country 18. 

The  English  army,  consisting  of  six  thousand 
foot  and  two  thousand  horse,  under  the  command 
of  Lord  Gray  of  Wilton,  entered  Scotland  early  in 
the  spring.  The  members  of  the  Congregation  as- 
sembled from  all  parts  of  the  kingdom  to  meet  their 
new  allies;  and  having  joined  them,  with  great  mul- 
titudes of  their  followers,  they  advanced  together 
towards  Leith  [April  2.]  The  French  were  little 
able  to  keep  the  field  against  an  enemy  so  much 
superior  in  number.  A  strong  body  of  troops,  des- 
tined for  their  relief,  had  been  scattered  by  a  vio- 
lent storm,  and  had  either  perished  on  the  coast  of 
France,  or  with  difficulty  had  recovered  the  ports 
of  that  kingdom19.  But  they  hoped  to  be  able  to 
defend  Leith  till  the  Princes  of  Lorrain  should 
make  good  the  magnificent  promises  of  assistance 
with  which  they  daily  encouraged  them ;  or  till 
scarcity  of  provisions  should  constrain  the  English 
to  retire  into  their  own  country.  In  order  to  hasten 
this  latter  event,  they  did  not  neglect  the  usual, 
though  barbarous  precaution  for  distressing  an  in- 
vading enemy,  by  burning  and  laying  waste  all  the 
adjacent  country  ~°.  The  zeal,  however,  of  the  na- 
tion frustrated  their  intentions  :  eager  to  contribute 
towards  removing  their  oppressors,  the  people  pro- 
duced their  hidden  stores  to  support  their  friends  ; 
the  neighbouring  counties  supplied  every  thing  ne- 
cessary ;  and,  far  from  wanting  subsistence,  the 
English  found  in  their  camp  all  sorts  of  provisions 
at  a  cheaper  rate  than  had  for  some  time  been 
known  in  that  part  of  the  kingdom21. 

18  Knox,  217.     Haynes,  253,  &c. 

19  Mem.  de  Castel.  450.  -°  Knox,  225.  «  Id.  ibid. 


1560.  OF  SCOTLAND.  211 

On  the  approach  of  the  English  army  the  Queen 
Regent  retired  into  the  castle  of  Edinburgh.  Her 
health  was  now  in  a  declining  state,  and  her  mind 
broken  and  depressed  by  the  misfortunes  of  her  ad- 
ministration. To  avoid  the  danger  and  fatigue  of 
a  siege,  she  committed  herself  to  the  protection  of 
Lord  Erskine.  This  nobleman  still  preserved  his 
neutrality,  and  by  his  integrity  and  love  of  his 
country  merited  equally  the  esteem  of  both  parties. 
He  received  the  Queen  herself  with  the  utmost 
honour  and  respect,  but  took  care  to  admit  no  such 
retinue  as  might  endanger  his  command  of  the 
castle—. 

April  6.]  A  few  days  after  they  arrived  in  Scot- 
land, the  English  invested  Leith.  The  garrison 
shut  up  within  the  town  was  almost  half  as  numer- 
ous as  the  army  which  sat  down  before  it,  and  by 
an  obstinate  defence  protracted  the  siege  to  a  great 
length.  The  circumstances  of  this  siege,  related 
by  contemporary  historians,  men  without  know- 
ledge or  experience  in  the  art  of  war,  are  often  ob- 
scure and  imperfect,  and  at  this  distance  of  time 
are  not  considerable  enough  to  be  entertaining. 

At  first  the  French  endeavoured  to  keep  posses- 
sion of  the  Hawk  Hill,  a  rising  ground  not  far  dis- 
tant from  the  town,  but  were  beat  from  it  with  great 
slaughter  [April  15],  chiefly  by  the  furious  attack 
of  the  Scottish  cavalry.  AVithin  a  few  days  the 
French  had  their  full  revenge ;  having  sallied  out 
with  a  strong  body,  they  entered  the  English 
trenches,  broke  their  troops,  nailed  part  of  their 
cannon,  and  killed  at  least  double  the  number  they 
had  lost  in  the  former  skirmish.  Nor  were  the 
English  more  fortunate  in  an  attempt  which  they 
M  Forbes'  Collect,  vol.  i.  603.     Keith,  122. 


212  THE  HISTORY  B.  III. 

made  to  take  the  place  by  assault  [May  7] ;  they 
were  met  with  equal  courage,  and  repulsed  with 
considerable  loss.  From  the  detail  of  these  cir- 
cumstances by  the  writers  of  that  age,  it  is  easy  to 
observe  the  different  characters  of  the  French  and 
English  troops.  The  former,  trained  to  war  dur- 
ing the  active  reigns  of  Francis  I.  and  Henry  II., 
defended  themselves  not  only  with  the  bravery  but 
with  the  skill  of  veterans.  The  latter,  who  had 
been  more  accustomed  to  peace,  still  preserved  the 
intrepid  and  desperate  valour  peculiar  to  the  nation, 
but  discovered  few  marks  of  military  genius  or  of 
experience  in  the  practice  of  war.  Every  misfor- 
tune or  disappointment  during  the  siege  must  be 
imputed  to  manifest  errors  in  conduct.  The  success 
of  the  besieged  in  their  sally  was  owing  entirely  to 
the  security  and  negligence  of  the  English;  many 
of  their  officers  were  absent;  their  soldiers  had  left 
their  stations ;  and  their  trenches  were  almost  with- 
out a  guard23.  The  ladders,  which  had  been  pro- 
vided for  the  assault,  wanted  a  great  deal  of  the 
necessary  length  ;  and  the  troops  employed  in  that 
service  were  ill  supported.  The  trenches  were 
opened  at  first  in  an  improper  place ;  and  as  it  was 
found  expedient  to  change  the  ground,  both  time 
and  labour  were  lost.  The  inability  of  their  own 
generals,  no  less  than  the  strength  of  the  French 
garrison,  rendered  the  progress  of  the  English  won- 
derfully slow.  The  long  continuance,  however,  of 
the  siege,  and  the  loss  of  part  of  their  magazines  by 
an  accidental  fire,  reduced  the  French  to  extreme 
distress  for  want  of  provisions,  which  the  prospect 
of  relief  made  them  bear  with  admirable  fortitude. 
While  the  hopes  and  courage  of  the  French  pro- 
23  Haynes,  294.  298.  305,  &c. 


lob'O.  OF  SCOTLAND.  213 

tracted  the  siege  so  far  beyond  expectation,  the 
leaders  of  the  Congregation  were  not  idle.  By 
new  associations  and  confederacies  they  laboured 
to  unite  their  party  more  perfectly.  By  publicly 
ratifying  the  treaty  concluded  at  Berwick,  they  en- 
deavoured to  render  the  alliance  with  England  firm 
and  indissoluble.  Among  the  subscribers  of  these 
papers  we  find  the  Earl  of  Huntly,  and  some  others, 
who  had  not  hitherto  concurred  with  the  Congrega- 
tion in  any  of  their  measures24.  Several  of  these 
Lords,  particularly  the  Earl  of  Huntly,  still  ad- 
hered to  the  Popish  church  ;  but,  on  this  occasion, 
neither  their  religious  sentiments  nor  their  former 
cautious  maxims  were  regarded ;  the  torrent  of 
national  resentment  and  indignation  against  the 
French  hurried  them  on  c5. 

June  10.]  The  Queen  Regent,  the  instrument 
rather  than  the  cause  of  involving  Scotland  in  those 
calamities  under  which  it  groaned  at  that  time, 
died  during  the  heat  of  the  siege.  No  Princess 
ever  possessed  qualities  more  capable  of  rendering 
her  administration  illustrious,  or  the  kingdom  happy. 
Of  much  discernment  and  no  less  address  ;  of  great 
intrepidity  and  equal  prudence;  gentle  and  humane, 

21  Burn.  vol.  iii.  287.     Knox,  221.     Haynes,  2G1.  263. 

M  The  dread  of  the  French  power  did  on  many  occasions  sur- 
mount the  zeal  which  the  Catholic  nobles  had  for  their  religion. 
Besides  the  presumptive  evidence  for  this,  arising  from  the  me- 
morial mentioned  bv  Burnet,  Hist,  cf  the  Reformation,  vol.  iii. 
281,  and  published  by  him,  Append,  p.  278,  the  instructions  of 
Elizabeth  to  Randolph  her  agent  put  it  beyond  all  doubt  that 
many  zealous  Papists  thought  the  alliance  with  England  to  be 
necessary  for  preserving  the  liberty  and  independence  of  the 
kingdom.  Keith,  158.  Huntly  himself  began  a  correspondence 
with  Elizabeth's  ministers,  before  the  march  of  the  English  army 
into  Scotland.  Haynes \s  State  Papers,  261.  263.  See  Append. 
Mo.  III. 


214  THE  HISTORY  B.  III. 

without  weakness  ;  zealous  for  her  religion,  without 
bigotry;  a  lover  of  justice,  without  rigour.  One 
circumstance,  however,  and  that  too  the  excess  of 
a  virtue  rather  than  any  vice,  poisoned  all  these 
great  qualities,  and  rendered  her  government  un- 
fortunate and  her  name  odious.  Devoted  to  the  in- 
terest of  France,  her  native  country,  and  attached 
to  the  Princes  of  Lorrain,  her  brothers,  with  most 
passionate  fondness,  she  departed,  in  order  to  gra- 
tify them,  from  every  maxim  which  her  own  wisdom 
or  humanity  would  have  approved.  She  outlived, 
in  a  great  measure,  that  reputation  and  popularity 
which  had  smoothed  her  way  to  the  highest  station 
in  the  kingdom  ;  and  many  examples  of  falsehood, 
and  some  of  severity,  in  the  latter  part  of  her  admi- 
nistration, alienated  from  her  the  affections  of  a 
people  who  had  once  placed  in  her  an  unbounded 
confidence.  But,  even  by  her  enemies,  these  un- 
justifiable actions  were  imputed  to  the  facility,  not 
to  the  malignity  of  her  nature;  and  while  they 
taxed  her  brothers  and  French  counsellors  with 
rashness  and  cruelty,  they  still  allowed  her  the 
praise  of  prudence  and  of  lenity26.  A  few  days 
before  her  death  she  desired  an  interview  with  the 
Prior  of  St.  Andrew's,  the  Earl  of  Argyll,  and 
other  chiefs  of  the  Congregation.  To  them  she 
lamented  the  fatal  issue  of  those  violent  counsels 
which  she  had  been  obliged  to  follow;  and,  with 
the  candour  natural  to  a  generous  mind,  confessed 
the  errors  of  her  own  administration,  and  begged 
forgiveness  of  those  to  whom  they  had  been  hurt- 
ful ;  but  at  the  same  time  she  warned  them,  amidst 
their  struggles  for  liberty  and  the  shock  of  arms, 
not  to  lose  sight  of  the  loyalty  and  subjection  which 

26  Buchanan,  324. 


1560.  OF  SCOTLAND.  215 

were  due  to  their  sovereign07.  The  remainder  of  her 
time  she  employed  in  religious  meditations  and  ex- 
ercises. She  even  invited  the  attendance  of  Wil- 
lox,  one  of  the  most  eminent  among  the  reformed 
preachers,  listened  to  his  instructions  with  reve- 
rence and  attention C8,  and  prepared  for  the  ap- 
proach of  death  with  a  decent  fortitude. 

Nothing  could  now  save  the  French  troops  shut 
up  in  Leith  but  the  immediate  conclusion  of  a 
peace,  or  the  arrival  of  a  powerful  army  from  the 
continent.  The  Princes  of  Lorrain  amused  their 
party  in  Scotland  with  continual  expectations  of 
the  latter,  and  had  thereby  kept  alive  their  hopes 
and  their  courage ;  but,  at  last,  the  situation  of 
France,  rather  than  the  terror  of  the  English  arms, 
or  the  remonstrances  of  the  Scottish  malecontents, 
constrained  them,  though  with  reluctance,  to  turn 
their  thoughts  towards  pacific  counsels.  The  Pro- 
testants in  France  were  at  that  time  a  party  for- 
midable by  their  number,  and  more  by  the  valour 
and  enterprising  genius  of  their  leaders.  FVancis  II. 
had  treated  them  with  extreme  rigour,  and  disco- 
vered, by  every  step  he  took,  a  settled  resolution 
to  extirpate  their  religion,  and  to  ruin  those  who 
professed  it.  At  the  prospect  of  this  danger  to 
themselves  and  to  their  cause,  the  Protestants 
were  alarmed,  but  not  terrified.  Animated  with 
zeal,  and  inflamed  with  resentment,  they  not  only 
prepared  for  their  own  defence,  but  resolved,  by 
some  bold  action,  to  anticipate  the  schemes  of  their 
enemies;  and  as  the  Princes  of  Lorrain  were  deem- 
ed the  authors  of  all  the  King's  violent  measures, 
they  marked  them  out  to  be  the  first  victims  of  their 
indignation.     [March  15.]     Hence,  and  not  from 

27  Lesley,  de  Rebus  Gest.  Scot.  222.  28  Knox,  228. 


21G  THE  HISTORY  B.  III. 

disloyalty  to  the  King,  proceeded  the  famous  con- 
spiracy of  Amboise  ;  and  though  the  vigilance  and 
good  fortune  of  the1  Princes  of  Lorrain  discovered 
and  disappointed  that  design,  it  was  easy  to  ob- 
serve new  storms  gathering  in  every  province  of  the 
kingdom,  and  ready  to  burst  out  with  all  the  fury 
and  outrage  of  civil  war.  In  this  situation  the  am- 
bition of  the  house  of  Lorrain  was  called  off  from 
the  thoughts  of  foreign  conquests,  to  defend  the 
honour  and  dignity  of  the  French  crown  ;  and,  in- 
stead of  sending  new  reinforcements  into  Scotland, 
it  became  necessary  to  withdraw  the  veteran  troops 
already  employed  in  that  kingdom-9. 

In  order  to  conduct  an  affair  of  so  much  import- 
ance and  delicacy,  the  Princes  of  Lorrain  made 
choice  of  Monluc,  Bishop  of  Valence,  and  of  the 
Sieur  de  Randan.  As  both  these,  especially  the 
former,  were  reckoned  inferior  to  no  persons  of  that 
age  in  address  and  political  refinement,  Elizabeth 
opposed  to  them  ambassadors  of  equal  abilities ; 
Cecil,  her  prime  minister,  a  man  perhaps  of  the 
greatest  capacity  who  had  ever  held  that  office; 
and  Wotton,  Dean  of  Canterbury,  grown  old  in  the 
art  of  negotiating  under  three  successive  monarchs. 
The  interests  of  the  French  and  English  courts 
were  soon  adjusted  by  men  of  so  great  dexterity  in 
business ;  and  as  France  easily  consented  to  with- 
draw those  forces  which  had  been  the  chief  occa- 
sion of  the  war,  the  other  points  in  dispute  between 
that  kingdom  and  England  were  not  matters  of  tedi- 
ous or  of  difficult  discussion. 

The  grievances  of  the  Congregation,  and  their 
demands  upon  their  own  sovereigns  for  redress, 
employed  longer  time,  and  required  to  be  treated 

-9  Lesley,  224. 


1560.  OF  SCOTLAND.  '217 

with  a  more  delicate  hand.  After  so  many  open 
attempts,  carried  on  by  command  of  the  King  and 
Queen,  in  order  to  overturn  the  ancient  constitu- 
tion, and  to  suppress  the  religion  which  they  had 
embraced,  the  Scottish  nobles  could  not  think 
themselves  secure  without  fixing  some  new  barrier 
against  the  future  encroachments  of  regal  power. 
But  the  legal  steps  towards  accomplishing  this  were 
not  so  obvious.  The  French  ambassadors  consi- 
dered the  entering-  into  any  treaty  with  subjects, 
and  with  rebels,  as  a  condescension  unsuitable  to 
the  dignity  of  a  sovereign  ;  and  their  scruples  on 
this  head  might  have  put  an  end  to  the  treaty,  if 
the  impatience  of  both  parties  for  peace  had  not 
suggested  an  expedient,  which  seemed  to  provide 
for  the  security  of  the  subject,  without  derogating 
from  the  honour  of  the  Prince.  The  Scottish  no- 
bles agreed,  on  this  occasion,  to  pass  from  the  point 
of  right  and  privilege,  and  to  accept  the  redress  of 
their  grievances  as  a  matter  of  favour.  Whatever 
additional  security  their  anxiety  for  personal  safety 
or  their  zeal  for  public  liberty  prompted  them  to 
demand  was  granted  in  the  name  of  Francis  and 
Mary,  as  acts  of  their  royal  favour  and  indulgence. 
And,  lest  concessions  of  this  kind  should  seem 
precarious,  and  liable  to  be  retracted  by  the  same 
power  which  had  made  them,  the  French  ambassa- 
dor agreed  to  insert  them  in  the  treaty  with  Eliza- 
beth, and  thereby  to  bind  the  King  and  Queen  in- 
violably to  observe  them30. 

In  relating  this  transaction,  contemporary  histo- 
rians have  confounded  the  concessions  of  Francis 
and  Mary  to  their  Scottish  subjects,  with  the  treaty 
between  France  and  England;  the  latter,  besides 

"■"  Keith,  134,  &c. 
VOL.  I.  V 


21tf  THE  HISTORY  B.  III. 

the  ratification  of  former  treaties  between  the  two 
kingdoms,  and  stipulations  with  regard  to  the  time 
and  manner  of  removing  both  armies  out  of  Scot- 
land, contained  an  article  to  which,  as  the  source  of 
many  important  events,  we  shall  often  have  occa- 
sion to  refer.  The  right  of  Elizabeth  to  her  crown 
is  thereby  acknowledged  in  the  strongest  terms  ; 
and  Francis  and  Mary  solemnly  engaged  neither  to 
assume  the  title  nor  to  bear  the  arms  of  King  and 
Queen  of  England  in  any  time  to  come31. 

July  6.]  Honourable  as  this  article  was  for  Eli- 
zabeth herself,  the  conditions  she  obtained  for  her 
allies  the  Scots  were  no  less  advantageous  to  them. 
Monluc  and  Randan  consented,  in  the  name  of 
Francis  and  Mary,  that  the  French  forces  in  Scot- 
land should  instantly  be  sent  back  into  their  own 
country,  and  no  foreign  troops  be  hereafter  intro- 
duced into  the  kingdom  without  the  knowledge  and 
consent  of  Parliament ;  that  the  fortifications  of 
Leith  and  Dunbar  should  immediately  be  rased, 
and  no  new  fort  be  erected  without  the  permission 
of  Parliament ;  that  a  Parliament  should  be  held 
on  the  first  day  of  August,  and  that  assembly  be 
deemed  as  valid  in  all  respects  as  if  it  had  been 
called  by  the  express  commandment  of  the  King 
and  Queen ;  that,  conformable  to  the  ancient  laws 
and  customs  of  the  country,  the  King  and  Queen 
should  not  declare  war  or  conclude  peace  without 
the  concurrence  of  Parliament ;  that,  during  the 
Queen's  absence,  the  administration  of  government 
should  be  vested  in  a  council  of  twelve  persons,  to 
be  chosen  out  of  twenty-four  named  by  Parliament, 
seven  of  which  council  to  be  elected  by  the  Queen, 

31  Keith,  131.      Rymer,  w.  p.  581.  591,  &c.      Havnes,  32r> 
—364. 


K>(JO.  OF  SCOTLAND.  21!) 

and  five  by  the  Parliament ;  that  hereafter  the 
King  and  Queen  should  not  advance  foreigners  to 
places  of  trust  or  dignity  in  the  kingdom,  nor  con- 
fer the  offices  of  treasurer  or  comptroller  of  the  re- 
venues upon  any  ecclesiastics  ;  that  an  act  of  ob- 
livion, abolishing  the  guilt  and  memory  of  all 
offences  committed  since  the  sixth  of  March,  one 
thousand  rive  hundred  and  fifty-eight,  should  be 
passed  in  the  ensuing  Parliament,  and  be  ratified 
by  the  King  and  Queen  ;  that  the  King  and  Queen 
should  not,  under  the  colour  of  punishing  any  vio- 
lation of  their  authority  during  that  period,  seek  to 
deprive  any  of  their  subjects  of  the  offices,  bene- 
fices, or  estates  which  they  now  hold ;  that  the  re- 
dress due  to  churchmen,  for  the  injuries  which  they 
had  sustained  during  the  late  insurrections,  should 
be  left  entirely  to  the  cognizance  of  Parliament. 
With  regard  to  religious  controversies,  the  ambas- 
sadors declared  that  they  would  not  presume  to 
decide,  but  permitted  the  Parliament,  at  their  first 
meeting,  to  examine  the  points  in  difference,  and 
to  represent  their  sense  of  them  to  the  King  and 
Queen32. 

To  such  a  memorable  period  did  the  Lords  of  the 
Congregation,  by  their  courage  and  perseverance, 
conduct  an  enterprise  which  at  first  promised  a  very 
different  issue.  From  beginnings  extremely  feeble, 
and  even  contemptible,  the  party  grew  by  degrees 
to  great  power  ;  and,  being  favoured  by  many  for- 
tunate incidents,  baffled  all  the  efforts  of  their  own 
Queen,  aided  by  the  forces  of  a  more  considerable 
kingdom.  The  sovereign  authority  was  by  this 
treaty  transferred  wholly  into  the  hands  of  the  Con- 
gregation ;  that  limited  prerogative  which  the  crown 

-  Keith,  137,  \c. 


•221)  THE  HISTORY  B.  111. 

had  hitherto  possessed,  was  almost  entirely  annihi- 
lated ;  and  the  aristocratical  power,  which  always 
predominated  in  the  Scottish  government,  became 
supreme  and  incontrolabie.  By  this  treaty,  too, 
the  influence  of  France,  which  had  long  been  of 
much  weight  in  the  affairs  of  Scotland,  was  greatly 
diminished ;  and  not  only  were  the  present  en- 
croachments of  that  ambitious  ally  restrained,  but, 
by  confederating  with  England,  protection  was 
provided  against  any  future  attempt  from  the  same 
quarter.  At  the  same  time,  the  controversies  in 
religion  being  left  to  the  consideration  of  Parlia- 
ment, the  Protestants  might  reckon  upon  obtaining 
whatever  decision  was  most  favourable  to  the  opi- 
nions which  they  professed. 

A  few  days  after  the  conclusion  of  the  treaty, 
both  the  French  and  English  armies  quitted  Scot- 
land. 

The  eyes  of  every  man  in  that  kingdom  were 
turned  towards  the  approaching  Parliament.  A 
meeting,  summoned  in  a  manner  so  extraordinary, 
at  such  a  critical  juncture,  and  to  deliberate  upon 
matters  of  so  much  consequence,  was  expected 
with  the  utmost  anxiety. 

A  Scottish  Parliament  suitable  to  the  aristocra- 
tical genius  of  the  government,  was  properly  an  as- 
sembly of  the  nobles.  It  was  composed  of  bishops, 
abbots,  barons,  and  a  few  commissioners  of  bo- 
roughs, who  met  all  together  in  one  house.  The 
lesser  barons,  though  possessed  of  a  right  to  be 
present,  either  in  person  or  by  their  representatives, 
seldom  exercised  it.  The  expense  of  attending, 
according  to  the  fashion  of  the  times,  with  a  nu- 
merous train  of  vassals  and  dependants ;  the  inat- 
tention of  a  martial  age  to  the  forms  and  detail  of 


1560.  OF  SCOTLAND.  221 

civil  government;  but,  above  all,  the  exorbitant 
authority  of  the  greater  nobles,  who  had  drawn  the 
whole  power  into  their  own  hands,  made  this  pri- 
vilege of  so  little  value  as  to  be  almost  neglected. 
It  appears  from  the  ancient  rolls  that,  during  times 
of  tranquillity,  few  commissioners  of  boroughs,  and 
almost  none  of  the  lesser  barons,  appeared  in  Par- 
liament. The  ordinary  administration  of  govern- 
ment was  abandoned,  without  scruple  or  jealousy, 
to  the  King  and  to  the  greater  barons.  But  in 
extraordinary  conjunctures,  when  the  struggle  for 
liberty  was  violent,  and  the  spirit  of  opposition  to 
the  crown  rose  to  a  height,  the  burgesses  and 
lesser  barons  were  roused  from  their  inactivity,  and 
stood  forth  to  vindicate  the  rights  of  their  country. 
The  turbulent  reign  of  James  III.  affords  examples 
in  proof  of  this  observation  ' 5.  The  public  indigna- 
tion, against  the  rash  designs  of  that  weak  and  ill- 
advised  Prince,  brought  into  Parliament,  besides 
the  greater  nobles  and  prelates,  a  considerable  num- 
ber of  the  lesser  barons. 

The  same  causes  occasioned  the  unusual  conflu- 
ence of  all  orders  of  men  to  the  Parliament,  which 
met  on  the  first  of  August.  The  universal  passion 
for  liberty,  civil  and  religious,  which  had  seized  the 
nation,  suffered  few  persons  to  remain  unconcerned 
spectators  of  an  assembly,  whose  acts  were  likely 
to  prove  decisive  with  respect  to  both.  From  all 
corners  of  the  kingdom  men  flocked  in,  eager  and 
determined  to  aid,  with  their  voices  in  the  senate, 
the  same  cause  which  they  had  defended  with  their 
swords  in  the  field.  Besides  a  full  convention  of 
peers,  temporal  and  spiritual,  there  appeared  the 
representatives  of  almost  all   the   boroughs,    and 

':  Keith,  147. 

u  2 


%2'2'2  THE  HISTORY  B.  111. 

above  a  hundred  barons,  who,  though  of  the  lesser 
order,  were  gentlemen  of  the  first  rank  and  fortune 
in  the  nation34. 

The  Parliament  was  ready  to  enter  on  business 
with  the  utmost  zeal,  when  a  difficulty  was  started 
concerning'  the  lawfulness  of  the  meeting.  No 
commissioner  appeared  in  the  name  of  the  King 
and  Queen,  and  no  signification  of  their  consent 
and  approbation  was  yet  received.  These  were 
deemed  by  many  essential  to  the  very  being  of  a 
Parliament.  But  in  opposition  to  this  sentiment, 
the  express  words  of  the  treaty  of  Edinburgh  were 
urged,  by  which  this  assembly  was  declared  to  be 
as  valid,  in  all  respects,  as  if  it  had  been  called  and 
appointed  by  the  express  command  of  the  King 
and  Queen.  As  the  adherents  of  the  Congregation 
greatly  outnumbered  their  adversaries,  the  latter 
opinion  prevailed.  Their  boldest  leaders,  and 
those  of  most  approved  zeal,  were  chosen  to  be 
lords  of  the  articles,  who  formed  a  committee  of 
ancient  use  and  of  great  importance  in  the  Scottish 
Parliament35.  The  deliberations  of  the  lords  of  the 
articles  were  carried  on  with  the  most  unanimous  and 
active  zeal.  The  act  of  oblivion,  the  nomination  of 
twenty-four  persons,  out  of  whom  the  council,  in- 
trusted with  supreme  authority,  was  to  be  elected ; 
and  every  other  thing  prescribed  by  the  late  treaty, 
or  which  seemed  necessary  to  render  it  effectual, 
passed  without  dispute  or  delay.  The  article  of 
religion  employed  longer  time,  and  was  attended 

34  Keith,  1  i(i. 

35  From  an  original  letter  of  Hamilton,  Archbishop  of  St.  An- 
drew's, it  appears  that  the  lords  of  articles  were  chosen  in  the 
manner  afterwards  appointed  bv  an  act  of  parliament,  1033. — 
Keith,  p.  487.  Spottiswood  seems  to  consider  this  to  have  been 
the  common  practice.      Hist.  1  »!). 


1500.  OF  SCOTLAND.  223 

with  greater  difficulty.  It  was  brought  into  Parlia- 
ment by  a  petition  from  those  who  adopted  the 
principles  of  the  Reformation.  Many  doctrines  of 
the  Popish  church  were  a  contradiction  to  reason, 
and  a  disgrace  to  religion ;  its  discipline  had  be- 
come corrupt  and  oppressive ;  and  its  revenues 
were  both  exorbitant  and  ill  applied.  Against  all 
these  the  Protestants  remonstrated  with  the  utmost 
asperity  of  style,  which  indignation  at  their  absur- 
dity, or  experience  of  their  pernicious  tendency 
could  inspire  ;  and,  encouraged  by  the  number  as 
well  as  zeal  of  their  friends,  to  improve  such  a 
favourable  juncture,  they  aimed  the  blow  at  the 
whole  fabric  of  popery,  and  besought  the  Parlia- 
ment to  interpose  its  authority  for  rectifying  these 
multiplied  abuses  iC. 

Several  prelates,  zealously  attached  to  the  ancient 
superstition,  were  present  in  this  Parliament.  But, 
during  these  vigorous  proceedings  of  the  Protes- 
tants, they  stood  confounded  and  at  gaze ;  arid  per- 
severed in  a  silence  which  was  fatal  to  their  cause. 
They  deemed  it  impossible  to  resist  or  divert  that 
torrent  of  religious  zeal,  which  was  still  in  its  full 
strength  ;  they  dreaded  that  their  opposition  would 
irritate  their  adversaries  and  excite  them  to  new 
acts  of  violence  ;  they  hoped  that  the  King  and 
Queen  would  soon  be  at  leisure  to  put  a  stop  to  the 
career  of  their  insolent  subjects,  and  that,  after  the 
rage  and  havoc  of  the  present  storm,  the  former 
tranquillity  and  order  would  be  restored  to  the 
church  and  kingdom.  They  were  willing,  per- 
haps, to  sacrifice  the  doctrine,  and  even  the  power 
pf  the  church,  in  order  to  ensure  the  safety  of  their 

30  Knox,  237. 


224  THE  HISTORY  B.  III. 

own  persons,  and  to  preserve  the  possession  of 
those  revenues  which  were  still  in  their  hands. — 
From  whatever  motives  they  acted,  their  silence, 
which  was  imputed  to  the  consciousness  of  a  bad 
cause,  afforded  matter  of  great  triumph  to  the  Pro- 
testants, and  encouraged  them  to  proceed  with 
more  boldness  and  alacrity37. 

The  Parliament  did  not  think  it  enough  to  con- 
demn those  doctrines  mentioned  in  the  petition  of 
the  Protestants ;  they  moreover  gave  the  sanction 
of  their  approbation  to  a  Confession  of  Faith  pre- 
sented to  them  by  the  reformed  teachers38;  and 
composed,  as  might  be  expected  from  such  a  per- 
formance at  that  juncture,  on  purpose  to  expose  the 
absurd  tenets  and  practices  of  the  Romish  church. 
By  another  act  the  jurisdiction  of  the  ecclesiastical 
courts  was  abolished,  and  the  causes  which  for- 
merly came  under  their  cognizance  were  transferred 
to  the  decision  of  civil  judges39.  By  a  third  sta- 
tute, the  exercise  of  religious  worship,  according 
to  the  rites  of  the  Romish  church,  was  prohibited. 
The  manner  in  which  the  Parliament  enforced  the 
observation  of  this  law  discovers  the  zeal  of  that 
assembly ;  the  first  transgression  subjected  the 
offender  to  the  forfeiture  of  his  goods,  and  to  a  cor- 
poral punishment  at  the  discretion  of  the  judge  ; 
banishment  was  the  penalty  of  the  second  violation 
of  the  law  ;  and  a  third  act  of  disobedience  was 
declared  to  be  capital'10.  Such  strangers  were  men 
at  that  time  to  the  spirit  of  toleration,  and  to  the 
laws  of  humanity  ;  and  with  such  indecent  haste 
did  the  very  persons  who   had  just  escaped  the 

»  Knox,  253.  38  Id.  ibid. 

39  Keith,  152.  I0  Knox,  254. 


LoiiO.  OF  SCOTLAND.  '22-3 

rigour  of  ecclesiastical  tyranny,  proceed  to  imitate 
those  examples  of  severity  of  which  they  them- 
selves had  so  justly  complained. 

The  vigorous  zeal  of  the  Parliament  overturned 
in  a  few  days  the  ancient  system  of  religion,  which 
had  been  established  so  many  ages.     In  reforming 
the  doctrine  and  discipline  of  the  church  the  nobles 
kept  pace  with  the  ardour  and  expectations  even  of 
Knox  himself.     But  their  proceedings  with  respect 
to  these  were  not  more  rapid  and  impetuous  than 
they  were   slow   and  dilatory  when   they  entered 
on  the  consideration  of  ecclesiastical  revenues. — 
Among  the  lay  members,  some  were  already  en- 
riched with  the  spoils  of  the  church,   and  others 
devoured    in    expectation    the    wealthy   benefices 
which  still  remained  untouched.     The  alteration  in 
religion  had  afforded  many  of  the  dignified  eccle- 
siastics themselves  an  opportunity  of  gratifying  their 
avarice  or  ambition.    The  demolition  of  the  monas- 
teries having  set  the  monks  at  liberty  from  their 
confinement,  they  instantly  dispersed  all  over  the 
kingdom,  and  commonly  betook  themselves  to  some 
secular  employment.     The  abbot,  if  he  had  been 
so  fortunate  as  to  embrace  the  principles  of  the  Re- 
formation  from  conviction,    or   so   cunning  as   to 
espouse  them  out  of  policy,  seized  the  whole  reve- 
nues of  the  fraternity  ;  and,  except  what  he  allowed 
for  the  subsistence  of  a  few  superannuated  monks41, 
applied  them  entirely  to  his  own  use.     The  propo- 
sal made  by  the  reformed  teachers,  for  applying 
these  revenues  towards  the  maintenance  of  minis- 
ters, the  education  of  youth,  and  the  support  of  the 
poor,  was  erpially  dreaded  by  all  these  orders  of 
"  Keith,  106.  Append.  190,  191. 


'2'2G  THE  HISTORY  B.  III. 

men.  They  opposed  it  with  the  utmost  warmth, 
and  by  their  numbers  and  authority  easily  pre- 
vailed on  the  Parliament  to  give  no  ear  to  such  a 
disagreeable  demand42.  Zealous  as  the  first  re- 
formers were,  and  animated  with  a  spirit  superior 
to  the  low  considerations  of  interest,  they  beheld 
these  early  symptoms  of  selfishness  and  avarice 
among  their  adherents  with  amazement  and  sorrow  ; 
and  we  find  Knox  expressing  the  utmost  sensibility 
of  that  contempt  with  which  they  were  treated  by 
many  from  whom  he  expected  a  more  generous 
concern  for  the  success  of  religion  and  the  honour 
of  its  ministers43. 

A  difficulty  hath  been  started  with  regard  to  the 
acts  of  this  parliament  concerning  religion.  This 
difficulty,  which  at  such  a  distance  of  time  is  of  no 
importance,  was  founded  on  the  words  of  the  treaty 
of  Edinburgh.  By  that  the  parliament  were  per- 
mitted to  take  into  consideration  the  state  of  reli- 
gion, and  to  signify  their  sentiments  of  it  to  the 
King  and  Queen.  But,  instead  of  presenting  their 
desires  to  their  sovereigns  in  the  humble  form  of  a 
supplication  or  address,  the  Parliament  converted 
them  into  so  many  acts  ;  which,  although  they 
never  received  the  royal  assent,  obtained  all  over 
the  kingdom  the  weight  and  authoritv  of  laws.  Tn 
compliance  with  their  injunctions  the  established 
system  of  religion  was  every  where  overthrown, 
and  that  recommended  by  the  reformers  introduced 
in  its  place.  The  partiality  and  zeal  of  the  people 
overlooked  or  supplied  any  defect  in  the  form  of 
these  acts  of  parliament,  and  rendered  the  obser- 
vance of  them  more  universal  than  ever  had  been 

42  See  Append.  No.  IV.  4i  Knox,  2Z9.  256. 


li'AiO.  OF  SCOTLAND.  '1'1~ 

yielded  to  the  statutes  of  the  most  regular  or  con- 
stitutional assembly.  By  those  proceedings  it 
must,  however,  be  confessed  that  the  parliament, 
or  rather  the  nation,  violated  the  last  article  in  tiie 
treaty  of  Edinburgh,  and  even  exceeded  the  powers 
which  belong  to  subjects.  But  when  once  men 
have  been  accustomed  to  break  through  the  com- 
mon boundaries  of  subjection,  and  their  minds  are 
inflamed  with  the  passions  which  civil  war  inspires, 
it  is  mere  pedantry  or  ignorance  to  measure  their 
conduct  by  those  rules  which  can  be  applied  only 
where  government  is  in  a  state  of  order  and  tran- 
quillity. A  nation,  when  obliged  to  employ  such 
extraordinary  efforts  in  defence  of  its  liberties, 
avails  itself  of  every  thing  which  can  promote  this 
great  end ;  and  the  necessity  of  the  case,  as  well  as 
the  importance  of  the  object,  justify  any  departure 
from  the  common  and  established  rules  of  the  con- 
stitution. 

In  consequence  of  the  treaty  of  Edinburgh,  as 
well  as  by  the  ordinary  forms  of  business,  it  became 
necessary  to  lay  the  proceedings  of  parliament  be- 
fore the  King  and  Queen.  For  this  purpose  Sir 
James  Sandilands  of  Calder,  Lord  St.  John,  was 
appointed  to  repair  to  the  court  of  France.  After 
holding  a  course  so  irregular,  the  leaders  of  the 
Congregation  had  no  reason  to  flatter  themselves 
that  Francis  and  Mary  would  ever  approve  their 
conduct,  or  confirm  it  by  their  royal  assent.  The  ' 
reception  of  their  ambassador  was  no  other  than 
they  might  have  expected.  He  was  treated  by  the 
King  and  Queen  with  the  utmost  coldness,  and 
dismissed  without  obtaining  the  ratification  of  the 
Parliament's  proceedings.  From  the  Princes  of 
Lorrain,    and   their    partisans,    he  endured   all  tho 


228  THE  HISTORY  B.  Ill, 

scorn  and  insult  which  it  was  natural  for  them  to 
pour  upon  the  party  he  represented 4i. 

Though  the  Earls  of  Morton,  Glencairn,  and 
Maitland  of  Lethington,  the  ambassadors  of  the 
Parliament  to  Elizabeth  their  protectress,  met  with 
a  very  different  reception,  they  were  not  more  suc- 
cessful in  one  part  of  the  negotiation  entrusted  to 
their  care.  The  Scots,  sensible  of  the  security 
which  they  derived  from  their  union  with  England, 
were  desirous  of  rendering  it  indissoluble.  With 
this  view  they  empowered  these  eminent  leaders  of 
their  party  to  testify  to  Elizabeth  their  gratitude 
for  that  seasonable  and  effectual  aid  which  she  had 
afforded  them  ;  and  at  the  same  time  to  beseech  her 
to  render  the  friendship  between  the  nations  perpe- 
tual, by  condescending  to  marry  the  Earl  of  Arran, 
who,  though  a  subject,  was  nearl}7  allied  to  the 
royal  family  of  Scotland,  and,  after  Mary,  the  un- 
doubted heir  to  the  crown. 

To  the  former  part  of  this  commission  Elizabeth 
listened  with  the  utmost  satisfaction,  and  encou- 
raged the  Scots,  in  any  future  exigency,  to  hope  for 
the  continuance  of  her  good  offices;  with  regard  to 
the  latter,  she  discovered  those  sentiments  to  which 
she  adhered  throughout  her  whole  reign.  Averse 
from  marriage,  as  some  maintain,  through  choice, 
but  more  probably  out  of  policy,  that  ambitious 
Princess  would  never  admit  any  partner  to  the 
throne ;  but,  delighted  with  the  entire  and  uncon- 
trolled exercise  of  power,  she  sacrificed  to  the  en- 
joyment of  that  the  hopes  of  transmitting  her  crown 
to  her  own  posterity.  The  marriage  with  the  Earl 
of  Arran  could  not  be  attended  with  any  such  ex- 

44  Knox,  255.     Bticli.  327.     State  Papers  published  bv  Lord 
Hardwicke,  vol.i.  p.  125,  &c. 


L660.  OF  SCOTLAND.  22.9 

traordinary  advantage  as  to  shake  this  resolution  ; 
she  declined  it  therefore,  but  with  many  expressions 
of  good  will  towards  the  Scottish  nation,  and  of 
respect  for  Arran  himself40. 

Towards  the  conclusion  of  this  year,  distinguished 
by  so  many  remarkable  events,  there  happened  one 
of  great  importance.  On  the  fourth  of  December 
died  Francis  II.  a  Prince  of  a  feeble  constitution, 
and  of  a  mean  understanding.  As  he  did  not  leave 
any  issue  by  the  Queen,  no  incident  could  have  been 
more  fortunate  to  those  who,  during  the  late  com- 
motions in  Scotland,  had  taken  part  with  the  Con- 
gregation. Mary,  by  the  charms  of  her  beauty, 
had  acquired  an  entire  ascendant  over  her  hus- 
band ;  and  as  she  transferred  all  her  influence  to 
her  uncles  the  Princes  of  Lorrain,  Francis  followed 
them  implicitly  in  whatever  track  they  were  pleased 
to  lead  him.  The  power  of  France,  under  such 
direction,  alarmed  the  Scottish  malecontents  with 
apprehensions  of  danger  no  less  formidable  than 
well  founded.  The  intestine  disorders  which  raged 
in  France,  and  the  seasonable  interposition  of  Eng- 
land in  behalf  of  the  Congregation,  had  hitherto 
prevented  the  Princes  of  Lorrain  from  carrying  their 
designs  upon  Scotland  into  execution.  But,  under 
their  vigorous  and  decisive  administrations,  it  was 
impossible  that  the  commotions  in  France  could  be 
of  long  continuance,  and  many  things  might  fall  in 
to  divert  Elizabeth's  attention,  for  the  future,  from 
the  affairs  of  Scotland.  In  either  of  these  events, 
the  Scots  would  stand  exposed  to  all  the  venge- 
ance which  the  resentment  of  the  French  court 
could  inflict.  The  blow,  however  long  suspended, 
was  unavoidable,  and  must  fall  at  last  with  redou- 

'•  Hum.  :i.     Append.  308.     Keith,  154,  &c. 
vol.  I.  \ 


230  THE  HTSTORY  B.   III. 

bled  weight.     From  this  prospect  and  expectation 
of  danger,  the  Scots  were  delivered  by  the  death 
of  Francis;    the   ancient  confederacy   of  the  two 
kingdoms  had  already  been  broken,  and   by  this 
event  the  chief  bond  of  union  which  remained  was 
dissolved.     Catherine  of  Medicis,  who,  during  the 
minority  of  Charles  IX.  her  second  son,  engrossed 
the  entire  direction   of  the   French   councils,  was 
far  from  any  thoughts  of  vindicating  the  Scottish 
Queen's  authority.     Catherine  and  Mary  had  been 
rivals  in  power  during  the  reign  of  Francis  II.  and 
had  contended   for  the  government  of  that  weak 
and  unexperienced  Prince;   but  as  the  charms  of 
the  wife  easily  triumphed  over  the  authority  of  the 
mother,  Catherine  could  never  forgive  such  a  dis- 
appointment in  her  favourite  passion,  and  beheld 
now,  with  secret  pleasure,  the  difficult  and  perplex- 
ing scene  on  which  her  daughter-in-law  was  about 
to  enter.     Mary,  overwhelmed  with  all  the  sorrow 
which  so  sad  a  reverse  of  fortune  could  occasion ; 
slighted  by  the  Queen-mother46;  and  forsaken  by 
the  tribe  of  courtiers,  who  appear  only  in  the  sun- 
shine of  prosperity,  retired  to  Rheims,  and  there  in 
solitude  indulged  her  grief,  or  hid  her  indignation. 
Even  the  Princes  of  Lorrain  were  obliged  to  con- 
tract their  views;    to  turn  them  from  foreign  to 
domestic  objects  ;   and,  instead  of  forming  vast  pro- 
jects with  regard  to  Britain,  they  found  it  necessary 
to  think  of  acquiring  and  establishing  an  interest 
with  the  new  administration. 

It  is  impossible  to  describe  the  emotions  of  joy 
which,  on  all  these  accounts,  the  death  of  the  French 
Monarch  excited  among  the  Scots.  They  regarded 
it  as  the  onlv  event  whch  could  give  firmness  and 

16  Henault,  340,     Castelti.  LS4. 


loGO.  OF  SCOTLAND.  231 

stability  to  that  system  of  religion  and  government 
which  was  now  introduced ;  and  it  is  no  wonder 
contemporary  historians  should  ascribe  it  to  the 
immediate  care  of  Providence,  which,  by  unforeseen 
expedients,  can  secure  the  peace  and  happiness  of 
kingdoms,  in  those  situations  where  human  prudence 
and  invention  would  utterly  despair47. 

About  this  time  the  Protestant  church  of  Scotland 
began  to  assume  a  regular  form.  Its  principles  had 
obtained  the  sanction  of  public  authority,  and  some 
fixed  external  policy  became  necessary  for  the  go- 
vernment and  preservation  of  the  infant  society.  The 
model  introduced  by  the  reformers  differed  extremely 
from  that  which  had  been  long  established.  The 
motives  which  induced  them  to  depart  so  far  from 
the  ancient  system  deserve  to  be  explained. 

The  licentious  lives  of  the  clergy,  as  has  been 
already  observed,  seem  to  have  been  among  the 
first  things  that  excited  any  suspicion  concerning 
the  truth  of  the  doctrines  which  they  taught,  and 
roused  that  spirit  of  inquiry  which  proved  fatal  to 
the  popish  system.  As  this  disgust  at  the  vices  of 
ecclesiastics  was  soon  transferred  to  their  persons, 
and  shifting  from  them,  by  no  violent  transition, 
settled  at  last  upon  the  offices  which  they  enjoyed; 
the  effects  of  the  Reformation  would  naturally  have 
extended  not  only  to  the  doctrine,  but  to  the  form 
of  government  in  the  popish  church ;  and  the  same 
spirit  which  abolished  the  former  would  have  over- 
turned the  latter.  But  in  the  arrangements  which 
took  place  in  the  different  kingdoms  and  states  of 
Europe,  in  consequence  of  the  Reformation,  we  may 
observe  something  similar  to  what  happened  upon 
the  first  establishment  of  Christianity  in  the  Roman 

*»   Knox,*.'*. 


232  THE   HISTORY  B.   III. 

empire.  In  both  periods,  the  form  of  ecclesiastical 
policy  was  modelled,  in  some  measure,  upon  that  of 
the  civil  government.  \\  hen  the  Christian  church 
was  patronised  and  established  by  the  state,  the 
jurisdiction  of  the  various  orders  of  the  ecclesias- 
tics, distinguished  by  the  names  of  Patriarchs, 
Archbishops,  and  Bishops,  was  made  to  corres- 
pond with  the  various  divisions  of  the  empire  :  and 
the  ecclesiastic  of  chief  eminence  in  each  of  these 
possessed  authority,  more  or  less  extensive,  in  pro- 
portion to  that  of  the  civil  magistrate  who  presided 
over  the  same  district.  When  the  Reformation  took 
place,  the  episcopal  form  of  government,  with  its 
various  ranks  and  degrees  of  subordination,  appear- 
ing to  be  most  consistent  with  the  genius  of  mo- 
narchy, it  was  continued,  with  a  few  limitations,  in 
several  provinces  of  Germany,  in  England,  and  in 
the  northern  kingdoms.  But  in  Switzerland  and 
some  parts  of  the  Low  Countries,  where  the  popu- 
lar form  of  government  allowed  more  full  scope  to 
the  innovating  genius  of  the  Reformation,  all  pre- 
eminence of  order  in  the  church  was  destroyed,  and 
an  equality  established  more  suitable  to  the  spirit 
of  republican  policy.  As  the  model  of  episcopal 
government  was  copied  from  that  of  the  Christian 
church  as  established  in  the  Roman  empire,  the  si- 
tuation of  the  primitive  church,  prior  to  its  establish- 
ment by  civil  authority,  seems  to  have  suggested  the 
idea,  and  furnished  the  model  of  the  latter  system, 
which  has  since  been  denominated  Presbyterian. 
The  first  Christians,  oppressed  by  continual  perse- 
cutions, and  obliged  to  hold  their  religious  assem- 
blies by  stealth  and  in  corners,  were  contented  with 
a  form  of  government  extremely  simple.  The  influ- 
ence of  religion  concurred  with  the  sense  of  danger, 


loo'O.  OF  SCOTLAND.  233 

in  extinguishing  among  them  the  spirit  of  ambition, 
and  in  preserving  a  parity  of  rank,  the  effect  of  their 
sufferings,  and  the  cause  of  many  of  their  virtues. 
Calvin,  whose  decisions  were  received  among  many 
Protestants  of  that  age  with  incredible  submission, 
was  the  patron  and  restorer  of  this  scheme  of  ec- 
clesiastical policy.  The  church  of  Geneva,  formed 
under  his  eye  and  by  his  direction,  was  deemed  the 
most  perfect  model  of  this  government;  and  Knox, 
who,  during  his  residence  in  that  city,  had  studied 
and  admired  it,  warmly  recommended  it  to  the  imi- 
tation of  his  countrymen. 

Among  the  Scottish  nobility,  some  hated  the  per- 
sons, and  others  coveted  the  wealth  of  the  dignified 
clergy.  By  abolishing  that  order  of  men,  the  former 
iudulged  their  resentment,  and  the  latter  hoped  to 
gratify  their  avarice.  The  people,  inflamed  with  the 
most  violent  aversion  to  popery,  and  approving  of 
every  scheme  that  departed  farthest  from  the  prac- 
tice of  the  Romish  church,  were  delighted  with  a 
system  so  admirably  suited  to  their  predominant 
passion :  while  the  friends  of  civil  liberty  beheld 
with  pleasure  the  Protestant  clergy  pulling  down 
with  their  own  hands  that  fabric  of  ecclesiastical 
power  which  their  predecessors  had  reared  with  so 
much  art  and  industry;  and  flattered  themselves 
that,  by  lending  their  aid  to  strip  churchmen  of  their 
dignity  and  wealth,  they  might  entirely  deliver  the 
nation  from  their  exorbitant  and  oppressive  jurisdic- 
tion. The  new  mode  of  government  easily  made 
its  way  among  men  thus  prepared,  by  their  various 
interests  and  passions,  for  its  reception. 

Hut,  on  the  first  introduction  of  his  system,  Knox 
did  not  deem  it  expedient  to  depart  altogether  from 

x  '2 


1>34  THE  HISTORY  B.  III. 

the  ancient  form48.  Instead  of  bishops,  he  proposed 
to  establish  ten  or  twelve  superintendents  in  diffe- 
rent parts  of  the  kingdom.  These,  as  the  name 
implies,  were  empowered  to  inspect  the  life  and 
doctrine  of  the  other  clergy.  They  presided  in  the 
inferior  judicatories  of  the  church,  and  performed 
several  other  parts  of  the  episcopal  function.  Their 
jurisdiction,  however,  extended  to  sacred  things 
only ;  they  claimed  no  seat  in  parliament,  and  pre- 
tended no  right  to  the  dignity  or  revenues  of  the 
former  bishops. 

The  number  of  inferior  clergy,  to  whom  the  care 
of  parochial  duty  could  be  committed,  was  still  ex- 
tremely small ;  they  had  embraced  the  principles  of 
the  Reformation  at  different  times,  and  from  various 
motives;  during  the  public  commotions,  they  were 
scattered,  merely  by  chance,  over  the  different  pro- 
vinces of  the  kingdom,  and  in  a  few  places  only  were 
formed  into  regular  classes  or  societies.  [Dec.  20]. 
The  first  general  assembly  of  the  church,  which  was 
held  this  year,  bears  all  the  marks  of  an  infant  and 
unformed  society.  The  members  were  but  few  in 
number,  and  of  no  considerable  rank;  no  uniform 
or  consistent  rule  seems  to  have  been  observed  in 
electing  them.  From  a  great  part  of  the  kingdom 
no  representatives  appeared.  In  the  name  of  some 
entire  counties,  but  one  person  was  present;  while, 
in  other  places,  a  single  town  or  church  sent  seve- 
ral members.  A  convention  so  feeble  and  irregular 
could  not  possess  extensive  authority;  and.  con- 
scious of  their  own  weakness,  the  members  put  an 
end  to  their  debates,  without  venturing  upon  any 
decision  of  much  importance4-'. 

1561.]   In  order  to  give  greater  strength  and  con- 
«8  Spotswood,  158.  i0  kcitli,  l'JS. 


1561-  of  scon- and.  '!:)> 

sistence  to  the  Presbyterian  plan,  Knox,  with  the 
assistance  of  his  brethren,  composed  the  first  book 
of  discipline,  which  contains  the  model  or  platform 
of  the  intended  policy50.  [Jan.  15.]  They  presented 
it  to  a  convention  of  estates,  which  was  held  in  the 
beginning  of  this  year.  "Whatever  regulations  were 
proposed,  with  regard  to  ecclesiastical  discipline  and 
jurisdiction,  would  have  easily  obtained  the  sanc- 
tion of  that  assembly ;  but  a  design  to  recover  the 
patrimony  of  the  church,  which  is  there  insinuated, 
met  with  a  very  different  reception. 

In  vain  did  the  clergy  display  the  advantages 
which  would  accrue  to  the  public  by  a  proper  ap- 
plication of  ecclesiastical  revenues.  In  vain  did 
they  propose,  by  an  impartial  distribution  of  this 
fund,  to  promote  true  religion,  to  encourage  learn- 
ing, and  to  support  the  poor.  In  vain  did  they  even 
intermingle  threatenings  of  the  divine  displeasure 
against  the  unjust  detainers  of  what  was  appropri- 
ated to  a  sacred  use.  The  nobles  held  fast  the  prey 
which  they  had  seized;  and,  bestowing  upon  the 
proposal  the  name  of  a  devout  imagination,  they 
affected  to  consider  it  as  a  project  altogether  vision- 
ary, and  treated  it  with  the  utmost  scorn51. 

This  convention  appointed  the  Prior  of  St.  An- 
drew's to  repair  to  the  Queen,  and  to  invite  her  to 
return  into  her  native  country,  and  to  assume  the 
reins  of  government,  which  had  been  too  long  com- 
mitted to  other  hands.  Though  some  of  her  subjects 
dreaded  her  return,  and  others  foresaw  dangerous 
consequences  with  which  it  might  be  attended5-, 
the  bulk  of  them  desired  it  with  so  much  ardour 
that  the  invitation  was  given  with  the  greatest  ap- 
pearance of  unanimity.    But  the  zeal  of  the  Roman 

"  Spots.  152.        "*'   Knox,25G.         -'  See  Append.  No.  V. 


23G  THE  HISTORY  B.  III. 

Catholics  got  the  start  of  the  Prior  in  paying  court 
to  Mary;  and  Lesly,  afterwards  Bishop  of  Ross, 
who  was  commissioned  by  them,  arrived  before  him 
at  the  place  of  her  residence53.  Lesly  endeavoured 
to  infuse  into  the  Queen's  mind  suspicions  of  her 
Protestant  subjects,  and  to  persuade  her  to  throw 
herself  entirely  into  the  arms  of  those  who  adhered 
to  her  own  religion.  For  this  purpose  he  insisted 
that  she  should  land  at  Aberdeen  ;  and,  as  the  Pro- 
testant doctrines  had  made  no  considerable  progress 
in  that  part  of  the  kingdom,  he  gave  her  assurance 
of  being  joined  in  a  few  days  by  twenty  thousand 
men ;  and  flattered  her  that,  with  such  an  army,  en- 
couraged by  her  presence  and  authority,  she  might 
easily  overturn  the  reformed  church,  before  it  was 
firmly  settled  on  its  foundations. 

But,  at  this  juncture,  the  Princes  of  Lorrain  were 
not  disposed  to  listen  to  this  extravagant  and  dan- 
gerous proposal.  Intent  on  defending  themselves 
against  Catherine  of  Medicis,  whose  insidious  po- 
licy was  employed  in  undermining  their  exorbitant 
powers,  they  had  no  leisure  to  attend  to  the  affairs 
of  Scotland,  and  wished  their  niece  to  take  posses- 
sion of  her  kingdom  with  as  little  disturbance  as 
possible.  The  French  officers  too,  who  had  served 
in  Scotland,  dissuaded  Mary  from  ail  violent  mea- 
sures; and,  by  representing  the  power  and  number 
of  the  Protestants  to  be  irresistible,  determined  her 
to  court  them  by  every  art;  and  rather  to  employ 
the  leading  men  of  that  party  as  ministers  than  to 
provoke  them,  by  a  fruitless  opposition,  to  become 
her  enemies54.  Hence  proceeded  the  confidence 
and  affection  with  which  the  Prior  of  St.  Andrew's 
was  received  by  the  Queen.  His  representation  of 
03  Leslj,  2-27.  31  Mclv.  61. 


1561.  OF  SCOTLAND.  237 

the  state  of  the  kingdom  gained  great  credit;  and 
Lesly  beheld  with  regret  the  new  channel  in  which 
court  favour  was  likely  to  run. 

Another  convention  of  estates  was  held  in  May. 
The  arrival  of  an  ambassador  from  France  seems 
to  have  been  the  occasion  of  this  meeting.  He  was 
instructed  to  solicit  the  Scots  to  renew  their  ancient 
alliance  with  France,  to  break  their  new  confede- 
racy with  England,  and  to  restore  the  popish  eccle- 
siastics to  the  possession  of  their  revenues  and  the 
exercise  of  their  functions.  It  is  no  easy  matter  to 
form  any  conjecture  concerning  the  intentions  of  the 
French  court  in  making  these  extraordinary  and  iil 
timed  propositions.  They  were  rejected  with  that 
scorn  which  might  well  have  been  expected  from 
the  temper  of  the  nation55. 

In  this  convention,  the  Protestant  clergy  did  not 
obtain  a  more  favourable  audience  than  formerly, 
and  their  prospect  of  recovering  the  patrimony  of 
the  church  still  remained  as  distant  and  uncertain 
as  ever.  But  with  regard  to  another  point,  they 
found  the  zeal  of  the  nobles  in  no  degree  abated. 
The  book  of  discipline  seemed  to  require  that  the 
monuments  of  popery,  which  still  remained  in  the 
kingdom,  should  be  demolished56;  and,  though 
neither  the  same  pretence  of  policy,  nor  the  same 
ungovernable  rage  of  the  people,  remained  to  jus- 
tify or  excuse  this  barbarous  havoc,  the  convention, 
considering  every  religious  fabric  as  a  relic  of  ido- 
latry, passed  sentence  upon  them  by  an  act  in  form ; 
and  persons  the  most  remarkable  for  the  activity  of 
their  zeal  were  appointed  to  put  it  in  execution. 
-Abbeys,   cathedrals,  churches,   libraries,  records, 

'•''  Knox,  269, 273.  56  Spotswood,  153. 


'238  THE  HISTORY  B.  III. 

and  even  the  sepulchres  of  the  dead,  perished  in  one 
common  ruin.  The  storm  of  popular  insurrection, 
though  impetuous  and  irresistible,  had  extended  only 
to  a  few  counties,  and  soon  spent  its  rage;  but  now 
a  deliberate  and  universal  rapine  completed  the  de- 
vastation of  every  thing  venerable  and  magnificent 
which  had  escaped  its  violence57. 

In  the  mean  time  Mary  was  in  no  haste  to  return 
into  Scotland.  Accustomed  to  the  elegance,  splen- 
dour, and  gaiety  of  a  polite  court,  she  still  fondly 
lingered  in  France,  the  scene  of  all  these  enjoyments, 
and  contemplated  with  horror  the  barbarism  of  her 
own  country,  and  the  turbulence  of  her  subjects, 
which  presented  her  with  a  very  different  face  of 
things.  The  impatience,  however,  of  her  people, 
the  persuasions  of  her  uncles,  but,  above  all,  the 
studied  and  mortifying  neglect  with  which  she  was 
treated  bv  the  Queen-mother,  forced  her  to  think  of 
beginning  this  disagreeable  voyage58.  But  while 
she  was  preparing  for  it,  there  were  sown  between 
her  and  Elizabeth  the  seeds  of  that  personal  jealousy 
and  discord  which  imbittered  the  life  and  shortened 
the  days  of  the  Scottish  Queen. 

The  ratification  of  the  late  treaty  of  Edinburgh 
was  the  immediate  occasion  of  this  fatal  animosity; 
the  true  cause  of  it  lay  much  deeper.  Almost  every 
article  in  that  treaty  had  been  executed  by  both 
parties  with  a  scrupulous  exactness.  The  fortifi- 
cations of  Leith  were  demolished,  and  the  armies  of 
Trance  and  England  withdrawn  within  the  appointed 
time.  The  grievances  of  the  Scottish  malecontents 
were  redressed,  and  they  had  obtained  whatever 
they  could  demand  for  their  future  security.    With 

57  Spotswood,  174.  58  Brantome,  Jebb,  vol.  ii.  482. 


1181.  OF  SCOTLAND.  239 

regard  to  all  these,  Mary  could  have  little  reason 
to  decline,  or  Elizabeth  to  urge,  the  ratification  of 
the  treaty. 

The  sixth  article  remained  the  only  source  of 
contest  and  difficulty.  No  minister  ever  entered 
more  deeply  into  the  schemes  of  his  sovereign,  or 
pursued  them  with  more  dexterity  and  success, 
than  Cecil.  In  the  conduct  of  the  negotiation  at 
Edinburgh,  the  sound  understanding  of  this  able 
politician  had  proved  greatly  an  overmatch  for 
Monluc's  refinements  in  intrigue,  and  had  artfully 
induced  the  French  ambassadors,  not  only  to  ac- 
knowledge that  the  crowns  of  England  and  Ireland 
did  of  right  belong  to  Elizabeth  alone,  but  also  to 
promise,  that  in  all  times  to  come  Mary  should 
abstain  from  usino-  the  title  or  bearing;  the  arms  of 
those  kingdoms. 

The  ratification  of  this  article  would  have  been 
of  the  most  fatal  consequence  to  Mary.  The  crown 
of  England  was  an  object  worthy  of  her  ambition. 
Her  pretensions  to  it  gave  her  great  dignity  and 
importance  in  the  eyes  of  all  Europe.  By  many, 
her  title  was  esteemed  preferable  to  that  of  Eliza- 
beth. Among  the  English  themselves,  the  Roman 
Catholics,  who  formed  at  that  time  a  numerous  and 
active  party,  openly  espoused  this  opinion  ;  and 
even  the  Protestants,  who  supported  Elizabeth's 
throne,  could  not  deny  the  Queen  of  Scots  to  be 
her  immediate  heir.  A  proper  opportunity  to  avail 
herself  of  all  these  advantages  could  not,  in  the 
course  of  things,  be  far  distant,  and  many  incidents 
might  fall  in,  to  bring  this  opportunity  nearer  than 
was  expected.  In  these  circumstances,  Mary,  bj 
ratifying  the  article  in  dispute,  would  have  lost  the 
rank   she  had    hitherto   held    among   neighbouring 


240  THE  HISTORY  B.  III. 

princes ;  the  zeal  of  her  adherents  must  have  gra- 
dually cooled ;  and  she  might  have  renounced  from 
that  moment,  all  hopes  of  ever  wearing  the  English 
crown59. 

None  of  these  beneficial  consequences  escaped 
the  penetrating  eye  of  Elizabeth,  who,  for  this  rea- 
son, had   recourse   to   every  thing   by  which  she 
could  hope  either  to  sooth  or  frighten  the  Scottish 
Queen  into  a  compliance  with  her  demands  ;  and 
if  that  Princess  had  been  so  unadvised  as  to  ratify 
the  rash  concessions  of  her  ambassadors,  Elizabeth, 
by  that  deed,  would  have  acquired  an  advantage 
which,  under  her  management,  must  have  turned  to 
great  account.      By  such  a  renunciation,  the  ques- 
tion with  regard  to  the  right  of  succession  would 
have  been  left  altogether  open  and  undecided  ;  and, 
by  means  of  that,  Elizabeth  might  either  have  kept 
her  rival  in  perpetual  anxiety  and  dependence,  or, 
by  the  authority  of  her  parliament,  she  might  have 
broken  in  upon  the  order  of  lineal  succession,  and 
transferred  the  crown  to  some  other  descendant  of 
the  royal  blood.    The  former  conduct  she  observed 
towards  James  VI.,   who  during  his  whole  reign 
she  held  in  perpetual  fear  and  subjection.    The  lat- 
ter and  more  rigorous  method  of  proceeding  would, 
in    all    probability,   have    been    employed    against 
Mary,  whom  for  many  reasons  she  both  envied 
and  hated. 

Xor  was  this  step  beyond  her  power,  unprece- 
dented in  the  history,  or  inconsistent  with  the  con- 
stitution of  England.  Though  succession  by  here- 
ditary right  be  an  idea  so  natural  and  so  popular 
that  it  has  been  established  in  almost  every  civi- 
lized nation,  yet  England  affords  many  memorable 

09  Haynes,  :)7?>.  &e. 


15G1.  OF  SCOTLAND.  241 

instances  of  deviation  from  that  rule.  The  crown 
of  that  kingdom  having  once  been  seized  by  the 
hand  of  a  conqueror,  this  invited  the  bold  and  en- 
terprising in  every  age  to  imitate  such  an  illustrious 
example  of  fortunate  ambition.  From  the  time  of 
\\  illiam  the  Norman,  the  regular  course  of  descent 
had  seldom  continued  through  three  successive 
reigns.  Those  princes,  whose  intrigues  or  valour 
opened  to  them  a  way  to  the  throne,  called  in  the 
authority  of  the  great  council  of  the  nation  to  con- 
firm their  dubious  titles.  Hence  parliamentary  and 
hereditary  right  became  in  England  of  equal  con- 
sideration. That  great  assembly  claimed  and  ac- 
tually possessed  a  power  of  altering  the  order  of 
regal  succession;  and  even  so  late  as  Henry  VIJT. 
an  act  of  parliament  had  authorized  that  capricious 
monarch  to  settle  the  order  of  succession  at  his 
pleasure.  The  English,  jealous  of  their  religious 
liberty,  and  averse  from  the  dominion  of  strangers, 
would  have  eagerly  adopted  the  passions  of  their 
sovereign,  and  might  have  been  easily  induced  to 
exclude  the  Scottish  line  from  the  right  of  succeed- 
ing to  the  crown.  These  seem  to  have  been  the 
views  of  both  Queens,  and  these  were  the  diilicul- 
ties  which  retarded  the  ratification  of  the  treaty  of 
Edinburgh. 

But,  if  the  sources  of  their  discord  were  to  be 
traced  no  higher  than  this  treaty,  an  inconsiderable 
alteration  in  the  words  of  it  might  have  brought  the 
present  question  to  an  amicable  issue.  The  inde- 
finite and  ambiguous  expression,  which  Cecil  had 
inserted  into  the  treaty,  might  have  been  changed 
into  one  more  limited  but  more  precise;  and  Mary, 
instead  of  promising  to  abstain  from  bearing  tin 
title  of  Queen   of   England    in   nil    times   to  come, 

VOL.  I.  > 


242  THE  HISTORY  B.  III. 

might  have  engaged  not  to  assume  that  title  during 
the  life  of  Elizabeth,  or  the  lives  of  her  lawful  pos- 
terity60. 

Such  an  amendment,  however,  did  not  suit  the 
views  of  either  Queen.  Though  Mary  had  been 
obliged  to  suspend  for  some  time  the  prosecution  of 
her  title  to  the  English  crown,  she  had  not  how- 
ever relinquished  it.  She  determined  to  revive  her 
claim  on  the  first  prospect  of  success,  and  was  un- 
willing to  bind  herself,  by  a  positive  engagement, 
not  to  take  advantage  of  any  such  fortunate  occur- 
rence. Nor  would  the  alteration  have  been  more 
acceptable  to  Elizabeth,  who,  by  agreeing  to  it, 
would  have  tacitly  recognised  the  right  of  her  rival 
to  ascend  the  throne  after  her  decease.  But  neither 
the  Scottish  nor  English  Queen  durst  avow  these 

60  This  expedient  for  terminating  the  differences  between  Eli- 
zabeth and  Mary  was  so  obvious  that  it  could  not  fail  of  present- 
ing itself  to  the  view  of  the  English  ministers. 

"  There  hath  been  a  matter  secretly  thought  of,  (says  Cecil  in 
a  letter  to  Throkmorton,  July  l-l,  1561,)  which  I  dare  commu- 
nicate to  you,  although  I  mean  never  to  be  an  author  thereof; 
and  that  is,  if  an  accord  might  be  made  betwixt  onr  Mistress 
and  the  Scottish  Queen,  that  this  should  by  parliament  in  Scot- 
land, &c.  surrender  unto  the  Queen's  Majesty  all  matters  of 
claim,  and  unto  the  heirs  of  her  body;  and  in  consideration 
thereof,  the  Scottish  Queen's  interest  should  be  acknowledged  in 
default  of  heirs  of  the  body  of  the  Queen's  Majesty.  Well,  God 
send  our  Mistress  a  husband,  and  by  time  a  son,  that  we  may 
hope  our  posterity  shall  have  a  masculine  succession.  This 
matter  is  too  big  for  weak  folks,  and  too  deep  for  simple.  The 
Queen's  Majesty  knoweth  of  it."  Hardw.  State  Pap.  1.  174. 
But  with  regard  to  every  point  relating  to  the  succession,  Eliza- 
beth was  so  jealous  and  so  apt  to  take  offence  that  her  most 
confidential  ministers  durst  not  ur<je  her  to  advance  one  step 
farther  than  she  herself  chose  to  go.  Cecil,  mentioning  some 
scheme  about  the  succession,  if  the  Queen  should  not  marry  or 
leave  issue,  adds,  with  his  usual  caution  :  "  This  song  hath 
many  parts  ;  but,  for  my  part,  I  have  no  skill  but  in  plain  song." 
Ibid'.  178. 


loGl.  OF  SCOTLAND.  1 13 

secret  sentiments  of  their  hearts.  Any  open  disco- 
very of  an  inclination  to  disturb  the  tranquillity  of 
England,  or  to  wrest  the  sceptre  out  of  Elizabeth's 
hands,  might  have  proved  fatal  to  Mary's  preten- 
sions. Any  suspicion  of  a  design  to  alter  the  order 
of  succession,  and  to  set  aside  the  claim  of  the 
Scottish  Queen,  would  have  exposed  Elizabeth  to 
much  and  deserved  censure,  and  have  raised  up 
against  her  many  and  dangerous  enemies.  These, 
however  carefully  concealed  or  artfully  disguised, 
were,  in  all  probability,  the  real  motives  which  de- 
termined the  one  Queen  to  solicit,  and  the  other  to 
refuse,  the  ratification  of  the  treaty  in  its  original 
form ;  while  neither  had  recourse  to  that  explication 
of  it,  which,  to  a  heart  unwarped  by  political  inte- 
rest, and  sincerely  desirous  of  union  and  concord, 
would  have  appeared  so  obvious  and  natural. 

But,  though  considerations  of  interest  first  oc- 
casioned this  rupture  between  the  British  Queens, 
rivalship  of  another  kind  contributed  to  widen  the 
breach,  and  female  jealousy  increased  the  violence 
of  their  political  hatred.  Elizabeth,  with  all  those 
extraordinary  qualities  by  which  she  equalled  or 
surpassed  such  of  her  sex  as  have  merited  the 
greatest  renown,  discovered  an  admiration  of  her 
own  person,  to  a  degree  which  women  of  ordinary 
understandings  either  do  not  entertain,  or  prudently 
endeavour  to  conceal.  Jler  attention  to  dress,  her 
solicitude  to  display  her  charms,  her  love  of  flat- 
tery, were  all  excessive.  Nor  were  these  weak- 
nesses confined  to  that  period  of  life  when  they  are 
more  pardonable.  Even  in  very  advanced  years, 
the  wisest  woman  of  that,  or  perhaps  of  any  other 
age,  wore  the  garb  and  affected  the  manners  of  a 


244  THE  HISTORY  B.  III. 

girl61.  Though  Elizabeth  was  as  much  inferior  to 
Mary  in  beauty  and  gracefulness  of  person,  as  she 
excelled  her  in  political  abilities  and  in  the  arts  of 
government,  she  was  weak  enough  to  compare  her- 
self with  the  Scottish  Queen62;  and  as  it  was  im- 
possible she  could  be  altogether  ignorant  how  much 
Mary  gained  by  the  comparison,  she  envied  and 
hated  her  as  a  rival  by  whom  she  was  eclipsed. 
\n  judging  of  the  conduct  of  Princes,  we  are  apt 
to  ascribe  too  much  to  political  motives,  and  too 
little  to  the  passions  which  they  feel  in  common 
with  the  rest  of  mankind.  In  order  to  account  for 
Elizabeth's  present  as  well  as  subsequent  conduct 
towards  Mary,  we  must  not  always  consider  her 
as  a  Queen,  we  must  sometimes  regard  her  merely 
as  a  woman. 

Elizabeth,  though  no  stranger  to  Mary's  difficul- 
ties with  respect  to  the  treaty,  continued  to  urge 
her,  by  repeated  applications,  to  ratify  it63.  Mary, 
under  various  pretences,  still  contrived  to  gain  time, 
and  to  elude  the  request.  But  while  the  one  Queen 
solicited  with  persevering  importunity,  and  the  other 
evaded  with  artful  delay,  they  both  studied  an  ex- 
treme politeness  of  behaviour,  and  loaded  each 
other  with  professions  of  sisterly  love,  with  reci- 
procal declarations  of  unchangeable  esteem  and 
amity. 

It  was  not  long  before  Mary  was  convinced,  that 
among  princes  these  expressions  of  friendship  are 
commonly  far  distant  from  the  heart.  In  sailing 
from  France  to  Scotland,  the  course  lies  along  the 

61  Johnston,  Hist.  Rer.  Britan.  3  iG,  347.    Carte,  vol.  iii.699. 
Catalogue  of  Royal  and  Noble  Authors,  article  Essex. 

02  Melvil,  98.  «  Keith,  157.  1G0,  &c, 


L561.  OF  SCO  [LAND.  245 

English  coast.  In  order  to  be  safe  from  the  insults 
of  the  English  fleet,  or  in  case  of  tempestuous  wea- 
ther, to  secure  a  retreat  in  the  harbours  of  that 
kingdom,  Mary  sent  M.  D'Oysel  to  demand  of  Eli- 
zabeth a  safe  conduct  during  her  voyage.  This 
request,  which  decency  alone  obliged  one  prince  to 
grant  to  another,  Elizabeth  rejected,  in  such  a  man- 
ner as  gave  rise  to  no  slight  suspicion  of  a  design, 
either  to  obstruct  the  passage,  or  to  intercept  the 
person  of  the  Scottish  Queen'4. 

Mary,  in  a  long  conference  with  Throkmorton, 
the  English  ambassador  in  France,  explained  her 
sentiments  concerning  this  ungenerous  behaviour  of 
his  mistress,  in  a  strain  of  dignified  expostulation, 
which  conveys  an  idea  of  her  abilities,  address,  and 
spirit,  as  advantageous  as  any  transaction  in  her 
reign.  Mary  was  at  that  time  only  in  her  eigh- 
teenth year ;  and  as  Throkmorton's  account  of 
what  passed  in  his  interview  with  her,  is  addressed 
directly  to  Elizabeth65,  that  dexterous  courtier,  we 
may  be  well  assured,  did  not  embellish  the  dis- 
course of  the  Scottish  Queen  with  any  colouring 
too  favourable. 

Whatever  resentment  Mary  might  feel,  it  did  not 
retard  her  departure  from  France.  She  was  accom- 
panied to  Calais,  the  place  where  she  embarked,  in 
a  manner  suitable  to  her  dignity,  as  the  Queen  of 
two  powerful  kingdoms.  Six  Princes  of  Lorrain, 
her  uncles,  with  many  of  the  most  eminent  among 
the  French  nobles,  were  in  her  retinue.  Catherine, 
who  secretly  rejoiced  at  her  departure,  graced  it 
with  every  circumstance  of  magnificence  and  re- 
spect.    After  bidding  adieu  to  her  mourning  attend- 

64  Keith,  171.     Camden.     See  Appendix,  No.  VI. 
M  Cabbala,  p.  374.     Keith,  170,  &-c. 

y  -2 


216  THE  HISTORY  B.  III. 

ants,  with  a  sad  heart,  and  eyes  bathed  in  tears, 
Mary  left  that  kingdom,  the  short  but  only  scene 
of  her  life  in  which  fortune  smiled  upon  her.  While 
the  French  coast  continued  in  sight,  she  intently 
gazed  upon  it,  and  musing,  in  a  thoughtful  posture, 
on  that  height  of  fortune  whence  she  had  fallen, 
and  presaging,  perhaps,  the  disasters  and  calamities 
which  imbittered  the  remainder  of  her  days,  she 
sighed  often,  and  cried  out  "  Farewell,  France  ! 
Farewell,  beloved  country,  which  I  shall  never 
more  behold !"  Even  when  the  darkness  of  the 
night  had  hid  the  land  from  her  view,  she  would 
neither  retire  to  the  cabin,  nor  taste  food,  but  com- 
manding a  couch  to  be  placed  on  the  deck,  she 
there  waited  the  return  of  day  with  the  utmost  im- 
patience. Fortune  soothed  her  on  this  occasion  ; 
the  galley  made  little  way  during  the  night.  In 
the  morning,  the  coast  of  France  was  still  within 
sight,  and  she  continued  to  feed  her  melancholy 
with  the  prospect;  and,  as  long  as  her  eyes  could 
distinguish  it,  to  utter  the  same  tender  expressions 
of  regrett6.  At  last  a  brisk  gale  arose,  by  the  fa- 
vour of  which  for  some  days,  and  afterwards  under 
the  cover  of  a  thick  fog,  Mary  escaped  the  English 
fleet,  which,  as  she  apprehended,  lay  in  wait  in 
order  to  intercept  her67;  and  on  the  nineteenth  of 

C6  Brantome,  483.  He  himself  was  in  the  same  galley  with 
the  Queen. 

67  Goodal,  vol.  i.  175.  Camden  insinuates,  rather  than  affirms, 
that  it  was  the  object  of  the  English  fleet  to  intercept  Mary. 
This,  however,  seems  to  he  doubtful.  Elizabeth  positively  as- 
serts that ,  at  the  request  of  the  King  of  Spain,  she  had  fitted  out 
a  few  ships  of  slender  force,  in  order  to  clear  the  narrow  seas  of 
pirates,  which  iufested  them  ;  and  she  appeals  for  the  truth  of 
this  to  Mary's  own  ministers.  App.  No.  VT.  Cecil,  in  a  letter 
to  Throkmorton,  Vug. 26,  L561,  informs  him,  that  "  the  Queen's 
phius,  which  were  upon  (he  seas  to  cleanse  them  of  pirates,  saw 


1561.  OF  SCOTLAND.  247 

August,  after  an  absence  of  near  thirteen  years, 
landed  safely  at  Leith  in  her  native  kingdom. 

Mary  was  received  by  her  subjects  with  shouts 
and  acclamations  of  joy,  and  with  every  demonstra- 
tion of  welcome  and  regard.  But  as  her  arrival  was 
unexpected,  and  no  suitable  preparation  had  been 
made  for  it,  they  could  not,  with  all  their  efforts, 
hide  from  her  the  poverty  of  the  country,  and  were 
obliged  to  conduct  her  to  the  palace  of  Holyrood- 
house  with  little  pomp.  The  Queen,  accustomed 
from  her  infancy  to  splendour  and  magnificence,  and 
fond  of  them,  as  was  natural  to  her  age,  could  not 
help  observing  the  change  in  her  situation,  and 
seemed  to  be  deeply  affected  with  it68. 

Never  did  any  Prince  ascend  the  throne  at  a 
juncture  which  called  for  more  wisdom  in  council, 
or  more  courage  and  steadiness  in  action.  The 
rage  of  religious  controversy  was  still  unabated. 
The  memory  of  past  oppression  exasperated  the 
Protestants  ;  the  smart  of  ancient  injuries  rendered 
the  Papists  desperate;  both  were  zealous,  fierce, 
and  irreconcilable.  The  absence  of  their  sovereign 
had  accustomed  the  nobles  to  independence;  and, 
during  the  late  commotions,  they  had  acquired  such 
an  increase  of  wealth,  by  the  spoils  of  the  church, 
as  threw  great  weight  into  the  scale  of  the  aristo- 
cracy, which  stood  not  in  need  of  any  accession  of 
power.  The  kingdom  had  long  been  under  the 
government  of  regents,  who  exercised  a  delegated 

lier  [i.  e.  Mary],  and  saluted  her  galleys,  and  staying  her  ships 
examined  them  of  pirates,  and  dismissed  them  gently.  One 
Scottish  ship  they  detained  as  vehemently  suspected  of  piracy." 
Hard.  State  Papers,  i.  170.  Castelnau,  who  accompanied  Mary 
in  this  voyage,  confirms  the  circumstance  of  her  galleys  hcing  in 
sight  of  the  English  fleet.  Mem.  ap.  Jebb.  .\i.  1 5 .1 . 
Brant.  11. 


248  THE  HISTORY  B.  III. 

jurisdiction,  attended  with  little  authority,  and  which 
inspired  no  reverence.  A  state  of  pure  anarchy 
had  prevailed  for  the  two  last  years,  without  a 
regent,  without  a  supreme  council,  without  the 
power,  or  even  the  form,  of  a  regular  government*''. 
A  licentious  spirit,  unacquainted  with  subordination, 
and  disdaining  the  restraints  of  law  and  justice,  had 
spread  through  all  ranks  of  men.  The  influence  of 
France,  the  ancient  ally  of  the  kingdom,  was  with- 
drawn or  despised.  The  English,  of  enemies  be- 
come confederates,  had  grown  into  confidence  with 
the  nation,  and  had  gained  an  ascendant  over  all  its 
councils.  The  Scottish  monarchs  did  not  derive 
more  splendour  or  power  from  the  friendship  of  the 
former  than  they  had  reason  to  dread  injury  and 
diminution  from  the  interposition  of  the  latter. 
Every  consideration,  whether  of  interest  or  of  self- 
preservation,  obliged  Elizabeth  to  depress  the  royal 
authority  in  Scotland,  and  to  create  the  Prince  per- 
petual difficulties,  by  fomenting  the  spirit  of  dissa- 
tisfaction among  the  people. 

In  this  posture  wTere  the  affairs  of  Scotland  when 
the  administration  fell  into  the  hands  of  a  young- 
Queen,  not  nineteen  years  of  age,  unacquainted  with 
the  manners  and  laws  of  her  country,  a  stranger  to 
her  subjects,  without  experience,  without  allies,  and 
almost  without  a  friend. 

On  the  other  hand,  in  Mary's  situation  we  find 
some  circumstances  which,  though  they  did  not 
balance  these  disadvantages,  contributed  however 
to  alleviate  them;  and,  with  skilful  management, 
might  have  produced  great  effects.  Her  subjects, 
unaccustomed  so  long  to  the  residence  of  their 
Prince,  were  not  only  dazzled  by  the  novelty  and 

69  Keith,  Appendix,  92. 


1501.  OF  SCOTLAND.  240 

splendour  of  the  royal  presence,  but  inspired  with 
awe  and  reverence.  Besides  the  places  of  power 
and  proht  bestowed  by  the  favour  of  a  prince,  his 
protection,  his  familiarity,  and  even  his  smiles, 
confer  honour  and  win  the  hearts  of  men.  From 
all  corners  of  the  kingdom  the  nobles  crowded  to 
testify  their  duty  and  affection  to  their  sovereign, 
and  studied  by  every  art  to  wipe  out  the  memory 
of  past  misconduct,  and  to  lay  in  a  stock  of  future 
merit.  The  amusements  and  gaiety  of  her  court, 
which  was  rilled  with  the  most  accomplished  of  the 
French  nobility,  who  had  attended  her,  began  to 
soften  and  polish  the  rude  manners  of  the  nation. 
Mary  herself  possessed  many  of  those  qualifica- 
tions which  raise  affection  and  procure  esteem. 
The  beauty  and  gracefulness  of  her  person  drew 
universal  admiration,  the  elegance  and  politeness 
of  her  manners  commanded  general  respect.  To 
all  the  charms  of  her  own  sex  she  added  many  of 
the  accomplishments  of  the  other.  The  progress 
she  had  made  in  all  the  arts  and  sciences,  which 
were  then  deemed  necessary  or  ornamental,  was  far 
beyond  what  is  commonly  attained  by  princes ;  and 
all  her  other  qualities  were  rendered  more  agreeable 
by  a  courteous  affability,  which,  without  lessening 
the  dignity  of  a  prince,  steals  on  the  hearts  of  sub- 
jects with  a  bewitching  insinuation. 

PYom  these  circumstances,  notwithstanding  the 
threatening  aspect  of  affairs  at  Mary's  return  into 
Scotland  ;  notwithstanding  the  clouds  which  ga- 
thered on  every  hand,  a  political  observer  would 
have  predicted  a  very  different  issue  of  her  reign ; 
and,  whatever  sudden  gusts  of  faction  he  might  have 
expected,  he  would  never  have  dreaded  the  destruc- 
tive violence  of  that  storm  which  followed. 


•250  THE  HISTORY  B.  III. 

While  all  parties  were  contending  who  should 
discover  the  most  dutiful  attachment  to  the  Queen, 
the  zealous  and  impatient  spirit  of  the  age  broke 
out  in  a  remarkable  instance.  On  the  Sunday  after 
her  arrival  the  Queen  commanded  mass  to  be  cele- 
brated in  the  chapel  of  her  palace.  The  first  ru- 
mour of  this  occasioned  a  secret  murmuring  among 
the  Protestants  who  attended  the  court ;  com- 
plaints and  threatenings  soon  followed ;  the  ser- 
vants belonging  to  the  chapel  were  insulted  and 
abused;  and,  if  the  Prior  of  St.  Andrew's  had  not 
seasonably  interposed,  the  rioters  might  have  pro- 
ceeded to  the  utmost  excesses70. 

It  is  impossible,  at  this  distance  of  time,  and 
under  circumstances  so  very  different,  to  conceive 
the  violence  of  that  zeal  against  Popery  which  then 
possessed  the  nation.  Every  instance  of  conde- 
scension to  the  Papists  was  deemed  an  act  of 
apostacy?  and  the  toleration  of  a  single  mass  pro- 
nounced to  be  more  formidable  to  the  nation  than 
the  invasion  of  ten  thousand  armed  men  \  Under 
the  influence  of  these  opinions  many  Protestants 
would  have  ventured  to  go  dangerous  lengths ; 
and,  without  attempting  to  convince  their  sovereign 
by  argument,  or  to  reclaim  her  by  indulgence, 
would  have  abruptly  denied  her  the  liberty  of 
worshiping  God  in  that  manner  which  alone  she 
thought  acceptable  to  him.  But  the  Prior  of  St. 
Andrew's,  and  other  leaders  of  the  party,  not  only 
restrained  this  impetuous  spirit,  but,  in  spite  of  the 
murmurs  of  the  people  and  the  exclamations  of  the 
preachers,  obtained  for  the  Queen  and  her  domes- 
tics the  undisturbed  exercise  of  the  Catholic  reli- 
gion.   Near  a  hundred  years  after  this  period,  when 

7°  Knox,  284.     Haines,  :572.  71  knox,  287. 


lotil.  OF  SCOTLAND.  251 

the  violence  of  religious  animosities  had  bejrun  to 
subside,  when  time  and  the  progress  of  learning 
had  enlarged  the  views  of  the  human  mind,  an 
English  House  of  Commons  refused  to  indulge  the 
wife  of  their  sovereign  in  the  private  use  of  the 
mass.  The  Protestant  leaders  deserve,  on  this 
occasion,  the  praise  both  of  wisdom  and  of  mode- 
ration for  conduct  so  different.  But,  at  the  same 
time,  whoever  reflects  upon  the  encroaching  and 
sanguinary  spirit  of  popery  in  that  age,  will  be  far 
from  treating  the  fears  and  caution  of  the  more 
zealous  reformers  as  altogether  imaginary,  and  des- 
titute of  any  real  foundation. 

The  leaders  of  the  Protestants,  however,  by  this 
prudent  compliance  with  the  prejudices  of  their 
sovereign,  obtained  from  her  a  proclamation  highly 
favourable  to  their  religion,  which  was  issued  six 
days  after  her  arrival  in  Scotland  [Aug.  25].  The 
reformed  doctrine,  though  established  over  all  the 
kingdom  by  the  parliament,  which  met  in  conse- 
quence of  the  treaty  of  pacification,  had  never  re- 
ceived the  countenance  or  sanction  of  royal  autho- 
rity. In  order  to  quiet  the  minds  of  those  who  had 
embraced  that  doctrine,  and  to  remove  any  dread 
of  molestation  which  they  might  entertain,  Mary 
declared,  "  that  until  she  should  take  final  orders 
concerning  religion,  with  advice  of  Parliament,  any 
attempt  to  alter  or  subvert  the  religion  which  she 
found  universally  practised  in  the  realm,  should  be 
deemed  a  capital  crime72."  Next  year  a  second 
proclamation  to  the  same  effect  was  published73. 

The  Queen,  conformably  to  the  plan  which  had 
been  concerted  in  France,  committed  the  adminis- 
tration of  affairs  entirely  to  Protestants.  Her  coun- 
72  Keith,  504.  73  [bid. 510. 


252  THE  HISTORY  B.  III. 

cil  was  tilled  with  the  most  eminent  persons  of  that 
party;  not  a  single  Papist  was  admitted  into  any 
degree  of  confidence 74.  The  Prior  of  St.  Andrew's 
and  Maitland  of  Lethington  seemed  to  hold  the 
first  place  in  the  Queen's  affection,  and  possessed 
all  the  power  as  well  as  reputation  of  favourite  mi- 
nisters. Her  choice  could  not  have  fallen  upon  per- 
sons more  acceptable  to  her  people;  and,  by  their 
prudent  advice,  Mary  conducted  herself  with  so 
much  moderation,  and  deference  to  the  sentiments 
of  the  nation,  as  could  not  fail  of  gaining  the  affec- 
tion of  her  subjects75,  the  firmest  foundation  of  a 
prince's  power,  and  the  only  genuine  source  of  his 
happiness  and  glory. 

A  cordial  reconcilement  with  Elizabeth  was 
another  object  of  great  importance  to  Mary ;  and 
though  she  seems  to  have  had  it  much  at  heart,  in 
the  beginning  of  her  administration,  to  accomplish 
such  a  desirable  conjunction,  yet  many  events  oc- 
curred to  widen  rather  than  to  close  the  breach. 
The  formal  offices  of  friendship,  however,  are  sel- 
dom neglected  among  princes;  and  Elizabeth,  who 
had  attempted  so  openly  to  obstruct  the  Queen's 
voyage  into  Scotland,  did  not  fail,  a  few  days  after 
her  arrival,  to  command  Randolph  to  congratulate 
her  safe  return.  Mary,  that  she  might  be  on  equal 
terms  with  her,  sent  Maitland  to  the  English  court, 
with  many  ceremonious  expressions  of  regard  for 
Elizabeth76.  Both  the  ambassadors  were  received 
with  the  utmost  civility ;  and  on  each  side  the  pro- 
fessions of  kindness,  as  they  were  made  with  little 
sincerity,  were  listened  to  with  proportional  credit. 

Both  were  intrusted,  however,  with  something- 
more  than  mere  matter  of  ceremony.      Randolph 

<•  Knox, 285,  Lesley,  235.  ;,;  Keith,  lsl,  &c 


1561.  OF  SCOTLAND.  253 

urged  Mary,  with  fresh  importunity,  to  ratify  the 
treaty  of  Edinburgh.  Maitland  endeavoured  to 
amuse  Elizabeth,  by  apologizing  for  the  dilatory 
conduct  of  his  mistress  with  regard  to  that  point. 
The  multiplicity  of  public  affairs  since  her  arrival 
in  Scotland,  the  importance  of  the  question  in  dis- 
pute, and  the  absence  of  many  noblemen,  with 
whom  she  was  obliged  in  decency  to  consult,  were 
the  pretences  offered  in  excuse  for  her  conduct; 
the  real  causes  of  it  were  those  which  have  already 
been  mentioned.  But,  in  order  to  extricate  herself 
out  of  these  difficulties,  into  which  the  treaty  of 
Edinburgh  had  led  her,  Mary  was  brought  to  yield 
a  point,  which  formerly  she  seemed  determined 
never  to  give  up.  She  instructed  Maitland  to  sig- 
nify her  willingness  to  disclaim  any  right  to  the 
crown  of  England,  during  the  life  of  Elizabeth,  and 
the  lives  of  her  posterity;  if,  in  failure  of  these,  she 
were  declared  next  heir  by  an  act  of  parliament '"'. 

Reasonable  as  this  proposal  might  appear  to 
Mary,  who  thereby  precluded  herself  from  disturb- 
ing Elizabeth's  possession  of  the  throne,  nothing 
could  be  more  inconsistent  with  Elizabeth's  inte- 
rest, or  more  contradictory  to  a  passion  which  pre- 
dominated in  the  character  of  that  Princess.  Not- 
withstanding all  the  great  qualities  which  threw 
such  lustre  on  her  reign,  we  may  observe,  that  she 
was  tinctured  with  a  jealousy  of  her  right  to  the 
crown,  which  often  betrayed  her  into  mean  and  un- 
generous actions.  The  peculiarity  of  her  situation 
heightened,  no  doubt,  and  increased,  but  did  not 
infuse,  this  passion.  It  descended  to  her  from 
Henry  VII.  her  grandfather,  whom,  in  several  fea- 
tures of  his  character,  she  nearly  resembled.    Like 

"Camden,  3*7.     Bach.  320. 
VOL.  I.  Z 


254  THE  HISTORY  B.  III. 

him,  she  suffered  the  title  by  which  she  held  the 
crown  to  remain  ambiguous  and  controverted,  ra- 
ther than  submit  it  to  parliamentary  discussion,  or 
derive  any  addition  to  her  right  from  such  authority. 
Like  him,  she  observed  every  pretender  to  the  suc- 
cession, not  only  with  that  attention  which  pru- 
dence prescribes,  but  with  that  aversion  which 
suspicion  inspires.  The  present  uncertainty  with 
regard  to  the  right  of  succession  operated  for  Eli- 
zabeth's advantage,  both  on  her  subjects  and  on 
her  rivals.  Among  the  former,  every  lover  of  his 
country  regarded  her  life  as  the  great  security  of 
the  national  tranquillity;  and  chose  rather  to  ac- 
knowledge a  title  which  was  dubious  than  to  search 
for  one  that  was  unknown.  The  latter,  while  no- 
thing was  decided,  were  held  in  dependence,  and 
obliged  to  court  her.  The  manner  in  which  she  re- 
ceived  this  ill  timed  proposal  of  the  Scottish  Queen 
was  no  other  than  might  have  been  expected.  She 
rejected  it  in  a  peremptory  tone,  with  many  expres- 
sions of  a  resolution  never  to  permit  a  point  of  so 
much  delicacy  to  be  touched. 

Sept.  1.]  About  this  time  the  Queen  made  her 
public  entry  into  Edinburgh  with  great  pomp.  No- 
thing was  neglected  that  could  express  the  duty 
and  affection  of  the  citizens  towards  their  sove- 
reign. But,  amidst  these  demonstrations  of  regard, 
the  genius  and  sentiments  of  the  nation  discovered 
themselves  in  a  circumstance,  which,  though  incon- 
siderable, ought  not  to  be  overlooked.  As  it  was 
the  mode  of  the  times  to  exhibit  many  pageants  at 
every  public  solemnity,  most  of  these,  on  this  oc- 
casion, were  contrived  to  be  representations  of  the 
vengeance  which  the  Almighty  had  inflicted  upon 
idolaters78.     Even  while  they  studied  to  amuse  and 

78  Keith,  189. 


1561.  OF  SCOTLAND.  255 

to  flatter  the  Queen,  her  subjects  could  not  refrain 
from  testifying  their  abhorrence  of  that  religion 
which  she  professed. 

To  restore  the  regular  administration  of  justice, 
and  to  reform  the  internal  policy  of  the  country, 
became  the  next  object  of  the  Queen's  care.     The 
laws  enacted  for  preservation  of  public  order,  and 
the  security  of  private  property,  were  nearly  the 
same  in  Scotland  as  in  every  other  civilized  coun- 
try.     But  the  nature  of  the  Scottish  constitution, 
the  feebleness   of  regal   authority,   the   exorbitant 
power  of  the  nobles,  the  violence  of  faction,  and 
the  fierce  manners  of  the  people,  rendered  the  exe- 
cution of  these  laws  feeble,  irregular,  and  partial. 
In  the  counties  which  border  on  England,  this  de- 
fect was  most  apparent;   and  the  consequences  of 
it  most  sensibly  felt.    The  inhabitants,  strangers  to 
industry,    averse   from   labour,    and  unacquainted 
with  the  arts  of  peace,  subsisted  chiefly  by  spoil 
and  pillage;   and,  being  confederated  in  septs  or 
clans,  committed  these  excesses  not  only  with  im- 
punity, but  even  with  honour.    During  the  unsettled 
state  of  the  kingdom  from  the  death  of  James  V. 
this  dangerous  licence  had  grown  to  an  unusual 
height ;  and  the  inroads  and  rapine  of  those  free- 
booters were  become  no  less  intolerable  to  their 
own  countrymen  than  to  the  English.     To  restrain 
and  punish  these  outrages  was  an  action  equally 
popular  in  both  kingdoms.     The  Prior  of  St.  An- 
drew's was  the  person  chosen  for  this  important 
service,  and  extraordinary  powers,  together  with 
the  title  of  the  Queen's  Lieutenant,  were  vested  in 
him  for  that  purpose. 

Nothing  can  be  more  surprising  to  men  accus- 
tomed to  regular  government,  than  the  preparations 


25G  THE  HISTORY  B.  III. 

made  on  this  occasion.  They  were  such  as  might 
be  expected  in  the  rudest  and  most  imperfect  state 
of  society.  The  freeholders  of  eleven  several  coun- 
ties, with  all  their  followers  completely  armed,  were 
summoned  to  assist  the  Lieutenant  in  the  discharge 
of  his  office.  Every  thing  resembled  a  military  ex- 
pedition, rather  than  the  progress  of  a  court  of  jus- 
tice79. The  Prior  executed  his  commission  with 
such  vigour  and  prudence  as  acquired  him  a  great 
increase  of  reputation  and  popularity  among  his 
countrymen.  Numbers  of  the  banditti  suffered  the 
punishment  due  to  their  crimes  ;  and,  by  the  im- 
partial and  rigorous  administration  of  justice,  order 
and  tranquillity  were  restored  to  that  part  of  the 
kingdom. 

During  the  absence  of  the  Prior  of  St.  Andrew's, 
the  leaders  of  the  popish  faction  seem  to  have 
taken  some  steps  towards  insinuating  themselves 
into  the  Queen's  favour  and  confidence80.  But  the 
Archbishop  of  St.  Andrew's,  the  most  remarkable 
person  in  the  party  for  abilities  and  political  ad- 
dress, was  received  with  little  favour  at  court;  and, 
whatever  secret  partiality  the  Queen  might  have 
towards  those  who  Diofessed  the  same  religion  with 
herself,  she  discovered  no  inclination  at  that  time 
to  take  the  administration  of  affairs  out  of  the  hands 
to  which  she  had  already  committed  it. 

The  cold  reception  of  the  Archbishop  of  St.  An- 
drew's was  owing  to  his  connexion  with  the  house 
of  Hamilton  ;  from  which  the  Queen  was  much 
alienated.  The  Duke  of  Guise  and  the  Cardinal 
could  never  forgive  the  zeal  with  which  the  Duke 
of  Chatelherault  and  his  son  the  Earl  of  Arran  had 
espoused  the  cause  of  the  Congregation.  Princes 
"Keith,  198.  60  Ibid,  203. 


1501.  OF  SCOTLAND.  257 

seldom  view  their  successors  without  jealousy  and 
distrust.  The  Prior  of  St.  Andrew's,  perhaps, 
dreaded  the  Duke  as  a  rival  in  power.  All  these 
causes  concurred  in  infusing  into  the  Queen's  mind 
an  aversion  for  that  family.  The  Duke,  indulging 
his  love  of  retirement,  lived  at  a  distance  from 
court,  without  taking  pains  to  insinuate  himself  into 
favour;  and  though  the  Earl  of  Arran  openly  as- 
pired to  marry  the  Queen,  he,  by  a  most  unpardon- 
able act  of  imprudence,  was  the  only  nobleman  of 
distinction  who  opposed  Mary's  enjoying  the  exer- 
cise of  her  religion  ;  and,  by  rashly  entering  a  pub- 
lic protestation  against  it,  entirely  forfeited  her 
favour81.  At  the  same  time,  the  sordid  parsimony 
of  his  father  obliged  him  either  to  hide  himself  in 
some  retirement,  or  to  appear  in  a  manner  unbe- 
coming his  dignity  as  first  Prince  of  the  blood,  or 
his  high  pretensions  as  suitor  to  the  Queen82.  His 
love  inflamed  by  disappointment,  and  his  impa- 
tience exasperated  by  neglect,  preyed  gradually  on 
his  reason,  and,  after  many  extravagancies,  broke 
out  at  last  in  ungovernable  frenzy. 

Dec.  20.]  Towards  the  end  of  the  year,  a  con- 
vention of  estates  was  held,  chiefly  on  account  of 
ecclesiastical  affairs.  The  assembly  of  the  church, 
which  sat  at  the  same  time,  presented  a  petition, 
containing  many  demands  with  respect  to  the  sup- 
pressing of  Popery,  the  encouraging  the  Protestant 
religion,  and  the  providing  for  the  maintenance  of 
the  clergy83.  The  last  was  a  matter  of  great  im- 
portance, and  the  steps  taken  towards  it  deserve  to 
be  traced. 

Though  the  number  of  Protestant  preachers  was 

81  Keith,  201,  204.     Knox,  280.  M  Keitli,  196. 

"  IbUi.  210. 

Z  2 


258  THE  HISTORY  B.  III. 

now  considerably  increased,  many  more  were  still 
wanted,  in  every  corner  of  the  kingdom.    No  legal 
provision  having  been  made  for  them,  they  had 
hitherto  drawn  a  scanty  and  precarious  subsistence 
from  the  benevolence  of  their  people.      To  suffer 
the  ministers  of  an  established  church  to  continue 
in  this  state  of  indigence  and  dependence  was  an 
indecency  equally  repugnant  to  the  principles  of 
religion  and  to  the  maxims  of  sound  policy;  and 
would  have  justified  all  the  imputations  of  avarice 
with  which  the  Reformation  was  then  loaded  by  its 
enemies.    The  revenues  of  the  Popish  church  were 
the  only  fund  which  could  be  employed  for  their 
relief;  but,  during  the  three  last  years,  the  state  of 
these  was  greatly  altered.      A  great  majority  of 
abbots,  priors,  and  other  heads  of  religious  houses, 
had,  either  from  a  sense  of  duty,  or  from  views  of 
interest,  renounced  the  errors  of  Popery ;  and,  not- 
withstanding this  change  in  their  sentiments,  they 
retained  their  ancient  revenues.     Almost  the  whole 
order  of  bishops,  and  several  of  the  other  dignita- 
ries, still  adhered  to  the  Romish  superstition  ;  and, 
though  debarred  from  every  spiritual  function,  con- 
tinued to  enjoy  the  temporalities  of  their  benefices. 
Some  laymen,  especially  those  who  had  been  ac- 
tive in  promoting  the  Reformation,  had,  under  vari- 
ous pretences,  and  amidst  the  licence  of  civil  wars, 
got  into  their  hands  possessions  which  belonged  to 
the  church.     Thus,  before  any  part  of  the  ancient 
ecclesiastical   revenues  could  be  applied  towards 
the  maintenance  of  the  Protestant  ministers,  many 
different  interests  were  to  be  adjusted;  many  claims 
to  be  examined;   and  the  prejudices  and  passions 
of  the  two  contending  parties  required  the  applica- 
tion of  a  delicate  hand.     After  much  contention, 


1561.  OF  SCOTLAND.  259 

the  following  plan  was  approved  by  a  majority  of 
voices,  and  acquiesced  in  even  by  the  popish  clergy 
themselves.  An  exact  account  of  the  value  of 
ecclesiastical  benefices  throughout  the  kingdom  was 
appointed  to  be  taken.  The  present  incumbents, 
to  whatever  party  they  adhered,  were  allowed  to 
keep  possession  :  two-thirds  of  their  whole  revenue 
were  reserved  for  their  own  use,  the  remainder  was 
annexed  to  the  crown ;  and  out  of  that  the  Queen 
undertook  to  assign  a  sufficient  maintenance  for  the 
Protestant  clergy  s4. 

As  most  of  the  bishops  and  several  of  the  other 
dignitaries  were  stiil  firmly  attached  to  the  Popish 
religion,  the  extirpation  of  the  whole  order,  rather 
than  an  act  of  such  extraordinary  indulgence,  might 
have  been  expected  from  the  zeal  of  the  preachers, 
and  from  that  spirit  which  had  hitherto  animated 
the  nation.  But,  on  this  occasion,  other  principles 
obstructed  the  operations  of  such  as  were  purely 
religious.  Zeal  for  liberty,  and  the  love  of  wealth, 
two  passions  extremely  opposite,  concurred  in  de- 
termining; the  Protestant  leaders  to  fall  in  with  this 
plan,  which  deviated  so  manifestly  from  the  max- 
ims by  which  they  had  hitherto  regulated  their 
conduct. 

If  the  Reformers  had  been  allowed  to  act  with- 
out control,  and  to  level  all  distinctions  in  the 
church,  the  great  revenues  annexed  to  ecclesiasti- 
cal dignities  could  not,  with  any  colour  of  justice, 
have  been  retained  by  those  in  whose  hands  they 
now  were  ;  but  must  either  have  been  distributed 
amongst  the  Protestant  clergy,  who  performed  all 
religious  offices,  or  must  have  fallen  to  the  Queen, 
from  the  bounty  of  whose  ancestors  the  greater 
*  Keith,  Append.  175.     Knox,  194.' 


200  THE  HISTORY  B.  III. 

part  of  them  was  originally  derived.  The  former 
scheme,  however  suitable  to  the  religious  spirit  of 
many  among  the  people,  was  attended  with  mani- 
fold danger.  The  Popish  ecclesiastics  had  ac- 
quired a  share  in  the  national  prosperity,  which  far 
exceeded  the  proportion  that  was  consistent  with 
the  happiness  of  the  kingdom ;  and  the  nobles  were 
determined  to  guard  against  this  evil,  by  prevent- 
ing the  return  of  those  possessions  into  the  hands 
of  the  church.  Nor  was  the  latter,  which  exposed 
the  constitution  to  more  imminent  hazard,  to  be 
avoided  with  less  care.  Even  that  circumscribed 
prerogative,  which  the  Scottish  Kings  possessed, 
was  the  object  of  jealousy  to  the  nobles.  If  they 
had  allowed  the  crown  to  seize  the  spoils  of  the 
church,  such  an  increase  of  power  must  have  fol- 
lowed that  accession  of  property  as  would  have 
raised  the  royal  authority  above  control,  and  have 
rendered  the  most  limited  Prince  in  Europe  the 
most  absolute  and  independent.  The  reign  of 
Henry  VIII.  presented  a  recent  and  alarming  ex- 
ample of  this  nature.  The  wealth  w  hich  flowed  in 
upon  that  Prince,  from  the  suppression  of  the  mo- 
nasteries, not  only  changed  the  maxims  of  his  go- 
vernment, but  the  temper  of  his  mind  ;  and  he  who 
had  formerly  submitted  to  his  Parliaments,  and 
courted  his  people,  dictated  from  that  time  to  the 
former  with  intolerable  insolence,  and  tyrannized 
over  the  latter  with  unprecedented  authority.  And 
if  his  policy  had  not  been  extremely  shortsighted, 
if  he  had  not  squandered  what  he  acquired,  with  a 
profusion  equal  to  his  rapaciousness,  and  which 
defeated  his  ambition,  he  might  have  established 
despotism  in  England  on  a  basis  so  broad  and 
strong  as  all  the  efforts  of  the  subjects  would  never 


1561.  OF  SCOTLAND.  26  L 

have  been  able  to  shake.  In  Scotland,  where  the 
riches  ol*  the  clergy  bore  as  great  a  proportion  to 
the  wealth  of  the  kingdom,  the  acquisition  of  church 
lands  would  have  been  of  no  less  importance  to  the 
crown,  and  no  less  fatal  to  the  aristocracy.  The 
nobles,  for  this  reason,  guarded  against  such  an 
increase  of  the  royal  power,  and  thereby  secured 
their  own  independence. 

Avarice  mingled  itself  with  their  concern  for  the 
interest  of  their  order.     The  reuniting  the  posses- 
sions of  the  church  to  the  crown,  or  the  bestowing 
them  on  the  Protestant  clergy,  would  have  been  a 
fatal  blow,  both  to  those  nobles  who  had,  by  fraud 
or  violence,  seized  part  of  these  revenues,  and  to 
those  abbots  and  priors  who  had  totally  renounced 
their    ecclesiastical    character.      But  as  the  plan 
which  was  proposed  gave  some  sanction  to  their 
usurpation,  they  promoted  it  with  their  utmost  in- 
fluence.   The  Popish  ecclesiastics,  though  the  lop- 
ping off  a  third  of  their  revenues  was  by  no  means 
agreeable  to  them,  consented,  under  their  present 
circumstances,  to  sacrifice  a  part  of  their  posses- 
sions, in  order  to  purchase  the  secure  enjoyment 
of  the  remainder ;   and,  after  deeming  the  whole 
irrecoverably  lost,  they  considered  whatever  they 
could  retrieve  as  so  much  gain.      Many  of  the  an- 
cient dignitaries  were  men  of  noble  birth ;   and,  as 
they  no  longer  entertained  hopes  of  restoring  the 
Popish  religion,  they  wished  their  own  relations, 
rather  than  the  crown  or  the  Protestant  clergy,  to 
be  enriched  with  the  spoils  of  the  church.     They 
connived,  for  this  reason,  at  the  encroachments  of 
the  nobles  ;  they  even  aided  their  avarice  and  vio- 
lence;  they  dealt  out  the  patrimony  of  the  church 
among  their  own  relations,  and,  by  granting  feus 


2(;2  THE  HISTORY  B.  III. 

and  perpetual  leases  of  lands  and  tithes,  gave,  to 
the  utmost  of  their  power,  some  colour  of  legal 
possession  to  what  was  formerly  mere  usurpation. 
Many  vestiges  of  such  alienation  still  remain85. 
The  nobles,  with  the  concurrence  of  the  incum- 
bents,   daily  extended   their  encroachments,   and 
gradually  stripped  the  ecclesiastics  of  their  richest 
and  most  valuable  possessions.     Even  that  third 
part,  which  was  given  up  in  order  to  silence  the 
clamours  of  the  Protestant  clergy,  and  to  be  some 
equivalent  to  the  crown  for  its  claims,  amounted  to 
no  considerable  sum.    The  thirds  due  by  the  more 
powerful  nobles,  especially  by  such  as  had  embraced 
the  Reformation,  were  almost  universally  remitted. 
Others,  by  producing  fraudulent  metals ;  by  esti- 
mating the  corn,  and  other  payments  in  kind,  at  an 
under  value;  and  by  the  connivance  of  collectors, 
greatly  diminished  the  charge  against  themselves86 : 
and  the  nobles  had  much  reason  to  be  satisfied  with 
a  device  which,  at  so  small  expense,  secured  to 
them  such  valuable  possessions. 

Nor  were  the  Protestant  clergy  considerable 
gainers  by  this  new  regulation ;  they  found  it  to 
be  a  more  easy  matter  to  kindle  zeal  than  to  ex- 
tinguish avarice.  Those  very  men,  whom  formerly 
they  had  swayed  with  absolute  authority,  were 
now  deaf  to  all  their  remonstrances.  The  Prior  of 
St.  Andrew's,  the  Earl  of  Argyll,  the  Earl  of  Mor- 
ton, and  Maitland,  all  the  most  zealous  leaders  of 
the  Congregation,  were  appointed  to  assign,  or  as 
it  was  called,  to  modify  their  stipends.  A  hun- 
dred merks  Scottish  was  the  allowance  which  their 
liberality  afforded  to  the  generality  of  ministers. 

85  Keith,  507.     Spotsw.  17.">. 

f6  Ibid.  Append.  188.     Spotsw.  183. 


1561.  OF  SCOTLAND.  'ifr. 

To  a  few  three  hundred  merks  were  granted17. 
About  twenty-four  thousand  pounds  Scottish  ap- 
pears to  have  been  the  whole  sum  allotted  for  the 
maintenance  of  a  national  church  established  by 
law,  and  esteemed  throughout  the  kingdom  the  true 
church  of  God88.  Even  this  sum  was  paid  with 
little  exactness,  and  the  ministers  were  kept  in  the 
same  poverty  and  dependence  as  formerly. 

loG2.]  The  gentleness  of  the  Queen's  adminis- 
tration, and  the  elegance  of  her  court,  had  miti- 
gated, in  some  degree,  the  ferocity  of  the  nobles, 
and  accustomed  them  to  greater  mildness  and  hu- 
manity; while,  at  the  same  time,  her  presence  and 
authority  were  a  check  to  their  factious  and  tumul- 
tuary spirit.  But,  as  the  state  of  order  and  tran- 
quillity was  not  natural  to  the  feudal  aristocracy,  it 
could  not  be  of  long  continuance;  and  this  year 
became  remarkable  for  the  most  violent  eruptions 
of  intestine  discord  and  animosity. 

Among  the  great  and  independent  nobility  of 
Scotland,  a  monarch  could  possess  little  authority, 
and  exercise  no  extensive  or  rigorous  jurisdiction. 
The  interfering  of  interest,  the  unsettled  state  of 
property,  the  frequency  of  public  commotions,  and 
the  fierceness  of  their  own  manners  sowed  among 
the  great  families  the  seeds  of  many  quarrels  and 
contentions.  These,  as  we  have  already  observed, 
were  frequently  decided  not  by  law,  but  by  violence. 
The  offended  baron,  without  having  recourse  to  the 
monarch,  or  acknowledging  his  superior  authority, 
assembled  his  own  followers,  and  invaded  the  lands 
of  his  rival  in  a  hostile  manner.  Together  with 
his  estate  and  honours,  every  nobleman  transmitted 
some  hereditary  feud  to  his  posterity,  who  were 
87  Knox,  301.  88  Keith,  Append.  188. 


'264:  THE  HISTORY  B.  III. 

bound  in  honour  to  adopt  and  to  prosecute  it  with 
unabated  rancour. 

Such  a  dissension  had  subsisted  between  the 
house  of  Hamilton  and  the  Earl  of  Bothwell,  and 
was  heightened  by  mutual  injuries  during  the  late 
commotions89.  The  Earl  of  Arran  and  Bothwell 
happening  to  attend  the  court  at  the  same  time, 
their  followers  quarreled  frequently  in  the  streets 
of  Edinburgh,  [February]  and  excited  dangerous 
tumults  in  that  city.  At  last,  the  mediation  of  their 
friends,  particularly  of  Knox,  brought  about  a  re- 
concilement, but  an  unfortunate  one  to  both  these 
noblemen90. 

A  few  days  after,  Arran  came  to  Knox,  and, 
with  the  utmost  terror  and  confusion,  confessed 
first  to  him,  and  then  to  the  Prior  of  St.  Andrew's, 
that,  in  order  to  obtain  the  sole  direction  of  affairs, 
Bothwell,  and  his  kinsmen  the  Hamiltons,  had 
conspired  to  murder  the  Prior,  Maitland,  and  the 
other  favourites  of  the  Queen.  The  Duke  of  Cha- 
telherault  regarded  the  Prior  as  a  rival,  who  had 
supplanted  him  in  the  Queen's  favour,  and  who 
filled  that  place  at  the  helm,  which  he  imagined  to 
be  due  to  himself,  as  first  Prince  of  the  blood. 
Bothwell,  on  account  of  the  personal  injuries  which 
he  had  received  from  the  Prior  during  the  hostile 
operations  of  the  two  contending  parties,  was  no 
less  exasperated  against  him.  But  whether  he  and 
the  Hamiltons  had  agreed  to  cement  their  new 
alliance  with  the  blood  of  their  common  enemy,  or 
whether  the  conspiracy  existed  only  in  the  frantic 
and  disordered  imagination  of  the  Earl  of  Arran,  it 
is  impossible,  amidst  the  contradiction  of  historians 
and  the  defectiveness  of  records,  positively  to  de- 
89  Keith,  215.  90  Keitb,  305. 


156*2.  OF  SCOTLAND.  2G5 

termine.  Among-  men  inflamed  with  resentment  and 
impatient  for  revenge,  rash  expressions  might  be 
uttered,  and  violent  and  criminal  expedients  pro- 
posed; and  on  that  foundation  Arran's  distempered 
fancy  might  rear  the  whole  superstructure  of  a  con- 
spiracy. All  the  persons  accused  denied  their  guilt 
with  the  utmost  confidence.  But  the  known  cha- 
racters of  the  men,  and  the  violent  spirit  of  the  age, 
added  greatly  to  the  probability  of  the  accusation, 
and  abundantly  justify  the  conduct  of  the  Queen's 
ministers,  who  confined  Bothwell,  Arran,  and  a  few 
of  the  ringleaders  in  separate  prisons,  and  obliged 
the  Duke  to  surrender  the  strong  castle  of  Dumbar- 
ton, which  he  had  held  ever  since  the  time  of  his 
resigning  the  office  of  Regent91. 

The  designs  of  the  Earl  of  Huntly  against  the 
Prior  of  St.  Andrew's  were  deeper  laid,  and  pro- 
duced more  memorable  and  more  tragical  events. 
George  Gordon  Earl  of  Huntly,  having  been  one 
of  the  nobles  who  conspired  against  James  III., 
and  who  raised  his  son  James  IV.  to  the  throne, 
enjoyed  a  great  share  in  the  confidence  of  that  ge- 
nerous Prince92.  By  his  bounty,  great  accessions 
of  wealth  and  power  were  added  to  a  family  already 
opulent  and  powerful.  On  the  death  of  that  mo- 
narch, Alexander  the  next  Earl,  being  appointed 
Lord-lieutenant  of  all  the  counties  beyond  Forth, 
left  the  other  nobles  to  contend  for  offices  at  court; 
and  retiring  to  the  north,  where  his  estate  and  in- 
fluence lay,  resided  there  in  a  kind  of  princely 
independence.  The  chieftains  in  that  part  of  the 
kingdom  dreaded  the  crowing  dominion  of  such  a 
dangerous  neighbour,  but  were  unable  to  prevent 

91   Knox,  307,  308.  92  Crawf.  Officers  of  State,  oG. 

VOL.  I.  A  A 


266  THE  HISTORY  B.  III. 

his  encroachments.  Some  of  his  rivals  he  secretly 
undermined,  others  he  subdued  by  open  force.  His 
estate  far  exceeded  that  of  any  other  subject,  and 
his  superiorities  and  jurisdictions  extended  over 
many  of  the  northern  counties.  With  power  and 
possessions  so  extensive,  under  two  long  and  feeble 
minorities,  and  amidst  the  shock  of  civil  commo- 
tions, the  Earls  of  Huntly  might  have  indulged  the 
most  elevated  hopes.  But,  happily  for  the  crown, 
an  active  and  enterprising  spirit  was  not  the  cha- 
racteristic of  that  family;  and,  whatever  object  their 
ambition  might  have  in  view,  they  chose  rather  to 
acquire  it  by  political  address  than  to  seize  it  openly 
and  by  force  of  arms. 

The  conduct  of  George  the  present  Earl,  during 
the  late  commotions,  had  been  perfectly  suitable  to 
the  character  of  the  family  in  that  age,  dubious, 
variable,  and  crafty.      While  the  success  of  the 
Lords  of  the  Congregation  was  uncertain,  he  as- 
sisted the  Queen  Regent  in  her  attempts  to  crush 
them.     When  their  affairs  put  on  a  better  aspect, 
he   pretended   to   join    them,   but   never   heartily 
favoured  their  cause.     He  was  courted  and  feared 
by  each  of  the  contending  parties;  both  connived 
at  his  encroachments  in  the  north ;  and  by  artifice 
and  force,  which  he  well  knew  how  to  employ 
alternately  and  in  their  proper  places,  he  added 
every  day  to  the  exorbitant  power  and  wealth  which 
he  possessed. 

He  observed  the  growing  reputation  and  autho- 
rity of  the  Prior  of  St.  Andrew's  with  the  greatest 
jealousy  and  concern,  and  considered  him  as  a 
rival  who  had  engrossed  that  share  in  the  Queen's 
confidence,  to  which  his  own  zeal  for  the  Popish 
religion  seemed  to  give  him  a  preferable  title.    Per- 


1562.  OF  SCOTLAND.  2(J7 

soual  injuries  soon  increased  the  misunderstanding- 
occasioned  by  rivalship  in  power.  The  Queen 
having  determined  to  reward  the  services  of  the 
Prior  of  St.  Andrew's,  by  creating  him  an  Earl, 
she  made  choice  of  Mar,  as  the  place  whence  he 
should  take  his  title;  and,  that  he  might  be  better 
able  to  support  his  new  honour,  bestowed  upon  him 
at  the  same  time  the  lands  of  that  name.  These 
were  part  of  the  royal  demesnes  93,  but  the  Earls 
of  Huntly  had  been  permitted,  for  several  years,  to 
keep  possession  of  them94.  [Feb.  1.]  On  this  occa- 
sion the  Earl  not  only  complained,  with  some  reason, 
of  the  loss  which  he  sustained,  but  had  real  cause 
to  be  alarmed  at  the  intrusion  of  a  formidable  neigh- 
bour into  the  heart  of  his  territories,  who  might  be 
able  to  rival  his  power,  and  excite  his  oppressed 
vassals  to  shake  off  his  yoke. 

June  27.]  An  incident,  which  happened  soon 
after,  increased  and  confirmed  Huntly's  suspicions. 
Sir  John  Gordon,  his  third  son,  and  Lord  Ogilvie, 
had  a  dispute  about  the  property  of  an  estate.  This 
dispute  became  a  deadly  quarrel.  They  happened 
unfortunately  to  meet  in  the  streets  of  Edinburgh ; 
and  being  both  attended  with  armed  followers,  a 
scuffle  ensued,  in  which  Lord  Ogilvie  was  danger- 
ously wounded  by  Sir  John.  The  magistrates  seized 
both  the  offenders,  and  the  Queen  commanded  thuni 
to  be  strictly  confined.  Under  any  regular  govern- 
ment, such  a  breach  of  public  peace  and  order  would 
expose  the  person  offending  to  certain  punishment. 
At  this  time  some  severity  was  necessary  in  order 
to  vindicate  the  Queen's  authority  from  an  insult 
the  most  heinous  which  had  been  offered  to  it  since 
her  return  into  Scotland.  But  in  an  ;ig<-  accus- 
9;i  Crawf.  Peer.  297.  w  Bach.  334. 


268  THE  HISTORY  B.  III. 

toined  to  licence  and  anarchy,  even  this  moderate 
exercise  of  her  power,  in  ordering  them  to  be  kept 
in  custody,  was  deemed  an  act  of  intolerable  rigour; 
and  the  friends  of  each  party  began  to  convene  their 
vassals  and  dependants,  in  order  to  overawe  or  to 
frustrate  the  decisions  of  justice  95.  Meanwhile 
Gordon  made  his  escape  out  of  prison,  and  flying 
into  Aberdeenshire,  complained  loudly  of  the  in- 
dignity with  which  he  had  been  treated;  and  as  all 
the  Queen's  actions  were  at  this  juncture  imputed 
to  the  Earl  of  Mar,  this  added  not  a  little  to  the 
resentment  which  Huntly  had  conceived  against 
that  nobleman. 

Aug.]  At  the  very  time  when  these  passions 
fermented,  with  the  utmost  violence,  in  the  minds 
of  the  Earl  of  Huntly  and  his  family,  the  Queen 
happened  to  set  out  on  a  progress  into  the  northern 
parts  of  the  kingdom.  She  was  attended  by  the 
Earls  of  Mar  and  Morton,  Maitland,  and  other 
leaders  of  that  party.  The  presence  of  the  Queen 
in  a  country  where  no  name  greater  than  the  Earl 
of  Huntly's  had  been  heard  of,  and  no  power  su- 
perior to  his  had  been  exercised,  for  many  years, 
was  an  event  of  itself  abundantly  mortifying  to  that 
haughty  nobleman.  But  while  the  Queen  was  en- 
tirely under  the  direction  of  Mar,  all  her  actions 
were  more  apt  to  be  misrepresented,  and  construed 
into  injuries;  and  a  thousand  circumstances  could 
not  but  occur  to  awaken  Huntly 's  jealousy,  to  offend 
his  pride,  and  to  inflame  his  resentment.  Amidst 
the  agitation  of  so  many  violent  passions,  some 
eruption  was  unavoidable. 

On  Mary's  arrival  in  the  north,  Huntly  employed 
his  wife,  a  woman  capable  of  executing  the  com- 

9i  Keith,  223. 


15(»2.  OF  SCOTLAND.  ".>(>*> 

mission  with  abundance  of  dexterity,  to  sooth  the 
Queen,  and  to  intercede  for  pardon  to  their  son. 
But  the  Queen  peremptorily  required  that  he  should 
again  deliver  himself  into  the  hands  of  justice,  and 
rely  on  her  clemency.  Gordon  was  persuaded  to 
do  so;  and  being  enjoined  by  the  Queen  to  enter 
himself  prisoner  in  the  castle  of  Stirling,  he  promised 
likewise  to  obey  that  command.  Lord  Erskine, 
Mar's  uncle,  was  at  that  time  Governor  of  this  fort. 
The  Queen's  severity,  and  the  place  in  which  she 
appointed  Gordon  to  be  confined,  were  interpreted 
to  be  new  marks  of  Mar's  rancour,  and  augmented 
the  hatred  of  the  Gordons  against  him. 

Sept.  1.]  Mean  time,  Sir  John  Gordon  set  out 
towards  Stirling;  but,  instead  of  performing  his 
promise  to  the  Queen,  made  his  escape  from  his 
guards,  and  returned  to  take  the  command  of  his 
followers,  who  were  rising  in  arms  all  over  the 
north.  These  were  destined  to  second  and  improve 
the  blow,  by  which  his  father  proposed,  secretly 
and  at  once,  to  cut  off  Mar,  Morton,  and  Mait- 
land,  his  principal  adversaries.  The  time  and 
place  for  perpetrating  this  horrid  deed  were  fre- 
quently appointed;  but  the  executing  of  it  was 
wonderfully  prevented,  by  some  of  those  unfore- 
seen incidents  which  so  often  occur  to  disconcert 
the  schemes  and  to  intimidate  the  hearts  of  assas- 
sins96. Huntly's  own  house,  at  Strathbogie,  was 
the  last  and  most  convenient  scene  appointed  for 
committing  the  intended  violence.  But  on  her 
journey  thither,  the  Queen  heard  of  young  Gor- 
don's flight  and  rebellion,  and,  refusing  in  the  first 
transports  of  her  indignation  to  enter  under  the 
father's  roof,  by  that  fortunate  expression  of  her 

'■*  Keith,  230. 

A  A  2 


270  THE.  HISTORY  B.  III. 

resentment  saved  her  ministers  from  unavoidable 
destruction97. 

The  ill  success  of  these  efforts  of  private  revenge 
precipitated  Huntly  into  open  rebellion.  As  the 
Queen  was  entirely  under  the  direction  of  his  rivals, 
it  was  impossible  to  compass  their  ruin  without 
violating  the  allegiance  which  he  owed  his  sove- 
reign. On  her  arrival  at  Inverness,  the  command- 
ing officer  in  the  castle,  by  Huntly's  orders,  shut 
the  gates  against  her.  Mary  was  obliged  to  lodge 
in  the  town,  which  was  open  and  defenceless;  but 
this  too  was  quickly  surrounded  by  a  multitude  of 
the  Earl's  followers  98.  The  utmost  consternation 
seized  the  Queen,  who  was  attended  by  a  very 
slender  train.  She  every  moment  expected  the 
approach  of  the  rebels,  and  some  ships  were  already 
ordered  into  the  river  to  secure  her  escape.  The 
loyalty  of  the  Munroes,  Frasers,  Mackintoshes,  and 
some  neighbouring  clans,  who  took  arms  in  her  de- 
fence, saved  her  from  this  danger.  By  their  assist- 
ance, she  even  forced  the  castle  to  surrender,  and 
inflicted  on  the  Governor  the  punishment  which  his 
insolence  deserved. 

This  open  act  of  disobedience  was  the  occasion 
of  a  measure  more  galling  to  Huntly  than  any  the 
Queen  had  hitherto  taken.  Lord  Erskine  having 
pretended  a  right  to  the  Earldom  of  Mar,  Stewart 
resigned  it  in  his  favour ;  and  at  the  same  time 
Mary  conferred  upon  him  the  title  of  Earl  of  Mur- 
ray, with  the  estate  annexed  to  that  dignity,  which 
had  been  in  the  possession  of  the  Earl  of  Huntly 
since  the  year  1548".  From  this  encroachment 
upon  his  domains  he  concluded  that  his  family  was 

97  Knox,  318.  98  Crawf.  Officers  of  State,  87,  88. 

99  Crawf.  Peer.  3o9. 


1562.  OF  SCOTLAND.  27  L 

devoted  to  destruction;  and,  dreading  to  be  strip- 
ped gradually  of  all  those  possessions  which,  in 
reward  of  their  services,  the  gratitude  of  the  crown 
had  bestowed  on  himself,  or  his  ancestors,  he  no 
longer  disguised  his  intentions,  but,  in  defiance  of 
the  Queen's  proclamation,  openly  took  arms.  In- 
stead of  yielding  those  places  of  strength,  which 
Mary  required  him  to  surrender,  his  followers  dis- 
persed or  cut  in  pieces  the  parties  which  she  dis- 
patched to  take  possession  of  them  10° ;  and  he 
himself  advancing  with  a  considerable  bodv  of  men 
towards  Aberdeen,  to  which  place  the  Queen  was 
now  returned,  filled  her  small  court  with  consterna- 
tion. Murray  had  only  a  handful  of  men  in  whom 
he  could  confide1.  In  order  to  form  the  appear- 
ance of  an  army,  he  was  obliged  to  call  in  the 
assistance  of  the  neighbouring  barons ;  but  as  most 
of  these  either  favoured  Huntly's  designs,  or  stood 
in  awe  of  his  power,  from  them  no  cordial  or  effec- 
tual service  could  be  expected. 

Oct.  28.]  With  these  troops,  however,  Murray, 
who  coidd  gain  nothing  by  delay,  marched  briskly 
towards  the  enemy.  He  found  them  at  Corichie, 
posted  to  great  advantage ;  he  commanded  his 
northern  associates  instantly  to  begin  the  attack  ; 
but  on  the  first  motion  of  the  enemy  they  treache- 
rously turned  their  back;  and  Huntly's  followers, 
throwing  aside  their  spears  and  breaking  their  ranks, 
drew  their  swords  and  rushed  forward  to  the  pur- 
suit. It  was  then  that  Murray  gave  proof,  both  of 
steady  courage  and  prudent  conduct.  He  stood 
immoveable  on  a  rising  ground  with  the  small  but 
trusty  body  of  his  adherents,  who,  presenting  their 
spears  to  the  enemy,  received  them  with  a  deter- 
100  Kno,x,  310.  ■   Keitfa,  U30. 


272  THE  HISTORY  B.  III. 

mined  resolution  which  they  little  expected.  The 
Highland  broad  sword  is  not  a  weapon  fit  to  en- 
counter the  Scottish  spear.  In  every  civil  commo- 
tion, the  superiority  of  the  latter  has  been  evident, 
and  has  always  decided  the  contest.  On  this  oc- 
casion the  irregular  attack  of  Huntly's  troops  was 
easily  repulsed  by  Murray's  firm  battalion.  Before 
they  recovered  from  the  confusion  occasioned  by 
this  unforeseen  resistance,  Murray's  northern  troops, 
who  had  fled  so  shamefully  in  the  beginning  of  the 
action,  willing  to  regain  their  credit  with  the  victo- 
rious party,  fell  upon  them,  and  completed  the  rout. 
Huntly  himself,  who  was  extremely  corpulent,  was 
trodden  to  death  in  the  pursuit.  His  sons,  Sir  John 
and  Adam,  were  taken,  and  Murray  returned  in  tri- 
umph to  Aberdeen  with  his  prisoners. 

The  trial  of  men  taken  in  actual  rebellion  against 
their  sovereign  was  extremely  short.  Three  days 
after  the  battle,  Sir  John  Gordon  was  beheaded  at 
Aberdeen.  His  brother  Adam  was  pardoned  on 
account  of  his  youth.  Lord  Gordon,  who  had  been 
privy  to  his  father's  designs,  was  seized  in  the 
south,  and  upon  trial  found  guilty  of  treason;  but, 
through  the  Queen's  clemency,  the  punishment  was 
remitted.  The  first  parliament  proceeded  against 
this  great  family  with  the  utmost  rigour  of  law, 
and  reduced  their  power  and  fortune  to  the  lowest 
ebb  ~. 

2  This  conspiracy  of  the  Earl  of  Huntly  is  one  of  the  most  in- 
tricate and  mysterious  passages  in  the  Scottish  history.  As  it 
was  a  transaction  purely  domestic,  and  in  which  the  English  were 
little  interested,  few  original  papers  concerning  it  have  been 
found  in  Cecil's  Collection,  the  great  storehouse  of  evidence  and 
information  with  regard  to  the  affairs  of  this  period. 

Buchanan  supposes  Mary  to  have  formed  a  design  about  this 
time  of  destroying  Murray,  and  of  employing  the  power  of  the 
Earl  of  Huntly  for  this  purpose.     But  his  account  of  this  whole 


lGb'8.  OF  SCOTLAND.  273 

As  the  tall  of  the  Earl  of  Huntly  is  the  most 
important  event  of  this  year,  it  would  have  been 
improper  to  interrupt  the  narrative  by  taking  notice 
of  lesser  transactions,  which  may  now  be  related 
with  equal  propriety. 

In  the  beginning  of  summer,  Mary,  who  was 
desirous  of  entering  into  a  more  intimate  corres- 
pondence and  familiarity  with  Elizabeth,  employed 
JVIaitland  to  desire  a  personal  interview  with  her, 
somewhere  in  the  north  of  England.  As  this  pro- 
posal could  not  be  rejected  with  decency,  the  time, 
the  place,  and  the  circumstances  of  the  meeting 
were  instantly  agreed  upon.  But  Elizabeth  was 
prudent  enough  not  to  admit  into  her  kingdom  a 
rival  who  outshone  herself   so  far  in  beauty  and 

transaction  appears  to  be  so  void  of  truth,  and  even  of  probabi- 
lity, as  to  deserve  no  serious  examination.  At  that  time  Mary 
wanted  power,  and  seems  to  have  had  no  inclination  to  commit 
any  act  of  violence  upon  her  brother. 

Two  other  hypotheses  have  been  advanced,  in  order  to  ex- 
plain this  matter;  but  they  appear  to  be  equally  removed  from 
truth. 

I.  It  cannot  be  well  conceived,  that  the  Queen's  journey  to 
the  north  was  a  scheme  concerted  by  Murray,  in  order  to  ruin 
the  Earl  of  Huntly.  1.  Huntly  had  resided  at  court  almost  ever 
since  the  Queen's  return.  Keith,  198,  Append.  175,  &c.  This 
was  the  proper  place  in  which  to  have  seized  him.  To  attack 
him  in  Aberdeenshire,  the  seat  of  his  power  and  in  the  midst  of 
his  vassals,  was  a  project  equally  absurd  and  hazardous.  2.  The 
Queen  was  not  accompanied  with  a  body  of  troops  capable  of 
attempting  any  thing  against  Huntly  by  violence  :  her  train  was 
not  more  numerous  than  was  usual  in  times  of  greatest  tranquil- 
lity. Keith,  ;J30.  3.  There  remain  two  original  letters  with 
regard  to  this  conspiracy  ;  one  from  Randolph  the  English  resi- 
dent, and  another  from  Maitland,  both  directed  to  Cecil.  They 
talk  of  Huntly's  measures  as  notoriously  treasonable.  Randolph 
mentions  his  repeated  attempts  to  assassinate  Murray,  <Sco.  No 
hint  is  given  of  any  previous  resolution  formed  by  Mary's  minis- 
ters to  ruin  Huntly  and  his  family.  Usui  any  such  design  evei 
existed,  it   was   Randolph's  duty  to    have   discovered  it  ;    nor 


274  THE  HISTORY  B.  III. 

gracefulness  of  person  ;  and  who  excelled  so  emi- 
nently in  all  the  arts  of  insinuation  and  address. 
Under  pretence  of  being-  confined  to  London,  by 
the  attention  which  she  was  obliged  to  give  to  the 
civil  wars  in  France,  she  put  off  the  interview  for 
that  season 3,  and  prevented  her  subjects  from  see- 
ing the  Scottish  Queen,  the  charms  of  whose  ap- 
pearance and  behaviour  she  envied,  and  had  some 
reason  to  dread. 

During  this  year,  the  assembly  of  the  church 
met  twice.  [June  2,  Dec.  25.]  In  both  these  meet- 
ings were  exhibited  many  complaints  of  the  poverty 
and  dependence  of  the  church  ;  and  many  murmurs 
against  the  negligence  or  avarice  of  those  who  had 
been    appointed   to    collect   and  to  distribute  the 

would  Maitland  have  laboured  to  conceal  it  from  the  English 
secretary.     Keith,  229,  232. 

II.  To  suppose  that  the  Earl  of  Huntly  had  laid  any  plan  for 
seizing  the  Queen  and  her  ministers  seems  to  be  no  less  impro- 
bable. 1.  On  the  Queen's  arrival  in  the  north,  he  laboured, 
in  good  earnest,  to  gain  her  favour,  and  to  obtain  a  pardon  for 
his  son.  Knox,  318.  2.  He  met  the  Queen,  first  at  Aberdeen, 
and  then  at  Rothemay,  whither  he  would  not  have  ventured  to 
come,  had  he  harboured  any  such  treasonable  resolution.  Knox, 
318.  3.  His  conduct  was  irresolute  and  wavering,  like  that  of 
a  man  disconcerted  by  an  unforeseen  danger,  not  like  one  ex- 
ecuting a  concerted  plan.  4.  The  most  considerable  persons 
of  his  clan  submitted  to  the  Queen,  and  found  surety  to  obey 
her  commands.  Keith,  22G.  Had  the  Earl  been  previously 
determined  to  rise  in  arms  against  the  Queen,  or  to  seize  her 
ministers,  it  is  probable  he  would  have  imparted  it  to  his  prin- 
cipal followers,  nor  would  they  have  deserted  him  in  this 
manner. 

For  these  reasons  I  have,  on  the  one  hand,  vindicated  the 
Earl  of  Murray  from  any  deliberate  intention  of  ruining  the 
family  of  Gordon  ;  and  on  the  other  hand,  I  have  imputed  the 
violent  conduct  of  the  Earl  of  Huntly  to  a  sadden  start  of  resent- 
ment, without  charging  him  with  any  premeditated  purpose  of 
rebellion. 

3  Keith,  210. 


1562.  OF  SCOTLAND.  275 

small  fund  appropriated  for  the  maintenance  of 
preachers4.  A  petition,  craving  redress  of  their 
grievances,  was  presented  to  the  Queen;  but  with- 
out any  effect.  There  was  no  reason  to  expect 
that  Mary  would  discover  any  forwardness  to  grant 
the  request  of  such  suppliants.  As  her  ministers, 
though  all  most  zealous  Protestants,  were  them- 
selves growing  rich  on  the  inheritance  of  the  church, 
they  were  equally  regardless  of  the  indigence  and 
demands  of  their  brethren. 

1563.]  Mary  had  now  continued  above  two  years 
in  a  state  of  widowhood.  Her  gentle  administra- 
tion had  secured  the  hearts  of  her  subjects,  who 
were  impatient  for  her  marriage,  and  wished  the 
crown  to  descend  in  the  right  line  from  their  an- 
cient monarchs.  She  herself  was  the  most  amiable 
woman  of  the  age ;  and  the  fame  of  her  accom- 
plishments, together  with  the  favourable  circum- 
stance of  her  having  one  kingdom  already  in  her 
possession,  and  the  prospect  of  mounting  the  throne 
of  another,  prompted  many  different  Princes  to  so- 
licit an  alliance  so  illustrious.  Scotland,  by  its 
situation,  threw  so  much  weight  and  power  into 
whatever  scale  it  fell  that  all  Europe  waited  with 
solicitude  for  Mary's  determination ;  and  no  event 
in  that  age  excited  stronger  political  fears  and  jea- 
lousies ;  none  interested  more  deeply  the  passions 
of  several  Princes,  or  gave  rise  to  more  contradic- 
tory intrigues,  than  the  marriage  of  the  Scottish 
Queen. 

The  Princes  of  the  house  of  Austria  remem- 
bered what  vast  projects  the  French  had  founded 
on  their  former  alliance  with  the  Queen  of  Scots; 
and  though  the  unexpected  death,  first  of  Henry 

*  Kuox,  311,  323. 


276  THE  HISTORY  B.  III. 

ami  then  of  Francis,  had  hindered  these  from  tak- 
ing' effect,  yet  if  Mary  should  again  make  choice 
of  a  husband  among  the  French  Princes,  the  same 
designs  might  be  revived  and  prosecuted  with  better 
success. 

In  order  to  prevent  this,  the  Emperor  entered 
into  a  negotiation  with  the  Cardinal  of  Lorrain,  who 
had  proposed  to  marry  the  Scottish  Queen  to  the 
Archduke  Charles,  Ferdinand's  third  son.  The 
matter  was  communicated  to  Mary ;  and  Melvil, 
who  at  that  time  attended  the  Elector  Palatine, 
was  commanded  to  inquire  into  the  character  and 
situation  of  the  Archduke5. 

Philip  II.,  though  no  less  apprehensive  of  Mary's 
falling  once  more  into  the  hands  of  France,  envied 
his  uncle  Ferdinand  the  acquisition  of  so  important 
a  prize;  and,  as  his  own  insatiable  ambition  grasped 
at  all  the  kingdoms  of  Europe,  he  employed  his  am- 
bassador at  the  French  court  to  solicit  the  Princes 
of  Lorrain  in  behalf  of  his  son  Don  Carlos,  at  that 
time  the  heir  of  all  the  extensive  dominions  which 
belonged  to  the  Spanish  monarchy6. 

Catherine  of  Medicis,  on  the  other  hand,  dreaded 
the  marriage  of  the  Scottish  Queen  with  any  of 
the  Austrian  Princes,  which  would  have  added  so 
much  to  the  power  and  pretensions  of  that  ambiti- 
ous race.  Her  jealousy  of  the  Princes  of  Lorrain 
rendered  her  no  less  averse  from  an  alliance  which, 
by  securing  to  them  the  protection  of  the  Emperor 
or  King  of  Spain,  would  give  new  boldness  to  their 
enterprising  spirit,  and  enable  them  to  set  the  power 
of  the  crown,  which  they  already  rivaled,  at  open 
defiance  :  and  as  she  was  afraid  that  these  splen- 

5  Melv.  63,  65.     Keith,  239.     See  Append.  No.  VII. 

6  Castelnau,  461.     Addit.  a  Labour.  501,  503. 


1563.  OF  SCOTLAND.  277 

did  proposals  of  the  Austrian  family  would  dazzle 
the  young  Queen,  she  instantly  dispatched  Castel- 
nau  into  Scotland,  to  offer  her  in  marriage  the  Duke 
of  Anjou,  the  brother  of  her  former  husband,  who 
soon  after  mounted  the  throne  of  France7. 

Mary  attentively  weighed  the  pretensions  of  so 
many  rivals.  The  Archduke  had  little  to  recom- 
mend hirn  but  his  high  birth.  The  example  of 
Henry  VIII.  was  a  warning  against  contracting  a 
marriage  with  the  brother  of  her  former  husband ; 
and  she  could  not  bear  the  thoughts  of  appearing 
in  France,  in  a  rank  inferior  to  that  which  she  had 
formerly  held  in  that  kingdom.  She  listened,  there- 
fore, with  partiality,  to  the  Spanish  propositions, 
and  the  prospect  of  such  vast  power  and  dominions 
flattered  the  ambition  of  a  young  and  aspiring 
Princess. 

Three  several  circumstances,  however,  concur- 
red to  divert  Mary  from  any  thoughts  of  a  foreign 
alliance. 

The  first  of  these  was  the  murder  of  her  uncle 
the  Duke  of  Guise.  The  violence  and  ambition  of 
that  nobleman  had  involved  his  country  in  a  civil 
war;  which  was  conducted  with  furious  animosity 
and  various  success.  At  last  the  Duke  laid  siege 
to  Orleans,  the  bulwark  of  the  Protestant  cause; 
and  he  had  reduced  that  city  to  the  last  extremity, 
when  he  was  assassinated  by  the  frantic  zeal  of 
Poltrot.  This  blow  pro\<  d  fatal  to  the  Queen  of 
Scon.  The  young  Dnkc  was  a  minor;  and  the 
Cardinal  of  Lorrain,  though  subtle  and  intriguing, 
wanted  that  undaunted  and  enterprising  courage, 
which  rendered  the  ambition  of  his  brother  so  for- 
midable.    Catherine,  instead   of  encouraging   the 

7  Castelnau,  401. 
VOL.  I.  B  B 


•278  THE  HISTORY  B.  III. 

ambition  or  furthering-  the  pretensions  of  her  daugh- 
ter-in-law, took  pleasure  in  mortifying  the  one,  and 
in  disappointing  the  other.  In  this  situation,  and 
without  such  a  protector,  it  became  necessary  for 
Mary  to  contract  her  views,  and  to  proceed  with 
caution ;  and,  whatever  prospect  of  advantage  might 
allure  her,  she  could  venture  upon  no  dangerous  or 
doubtful  measure. 

The  second  circumstance  which  weighed  with 
Mary  was  the  opinion  of  the  Queen  of  England. 
The  marriage  of  the  Scottish  Queen  interested  Eli- 
zabeth  more  deeply  than  any  other  Prince ;   and 
she  observed  all  her  deliberations   concerning  it 
with  the  most  anxious  attention.    She  herself  seems 
early  to  have  formed  a  resolution  of  living  unmar- 
ried, and  she  discovered  no  small  inclination  to 
impose  the  same  law  on  the  Queen  of  Scots.    She 
had  already  experienced  what  use  might  be  made 
of  Mary's  power  and  pretensions  to  invade  her  do- 
minions, and  to  disturb  her  possession  of  the  crown. 
The  death  of  Francis  II.  had  happily  delivered  her 
from  this  danger,  which  she  determined  to  guard 
against  for  the  future  with  the  utmost  care.     As 
the  restless  ambition  of  the  Austrian  Princes,  the 
avowed  and  bigoted  patrons  of  the  Catholic  super- 
stition, made  her,  in  a  particular  manner,  dread 
their  neighbourhood,  she  instructed  Randolph  to 
remonstrate,   in  the  strongest  terms,    against  any 
alliance  with  them  ;   and  to  acquaint  Mary,  that  as 
she  herself  would  consider  such  a  match  to  be  a 
breach  of  the  personal  friendship  in  which  they 
were    so    happily  united  ;    so   the   English   nation 
would  regard  it  as  the  dissolution  of  that  confede- 
racy which  now  subsisted  between  the  two  king- 
doms ;  that,  in  order  to  preserve  their  own  religion 


lob'3.  OF  SCOTLAND.  270 

and  liberties,  they  would,  in  all  probability,  take 
some  step  prejudicial  to  her  right  of  succession, 
which,  as  she  well  knew,  they  neither  wanted 
power  nor  pretences  to  invalidate  and  set  aside. 
This  threatening  was  accompanied  with  a  promise, 
but  expressed  in  very  ambiguous  terms,  that  if 
Mary's  choice  of  a  husband  should  prove  agree- 
able to  the  English  nation,  Elizabeth  would  appoint 
proper  persons  to  examine  her  title  to  the  succes- 
sion, and,  if  well  founded,  command  it  to  be  pub- 
licly recognised.  She  observed,  however,  a  mys- 
terious silence  concerning  the  person  on  whom  she 
wished  the  choice  of  the  Scottish  Queen  to  fall. 
The  revealing  of  the  secret  was  reserved  for  some 
future  negotiation.  Meanwhile  she  threw  out  some 
obscure  hints,  that  a  native  of  Britain,  or  one  not 
of  princely  rank,  would  be  her  safest  and  most  in- 
offensive choice8.  An  advice,  offered  with  such 
an  air  of  superiority  and  command,  mortified,  no 
doubt,  the  pride  of  the  Scottish  Queen.  But,  un- 
der her  present  circumstances,  she  was  obliged  to 
bear  this  indignity.  Destitute  of  all  foreign  assist- 
ance, and  intent  upon  the  English  succession,  the 
great  object  of  her  wishes  and  ambition,  it  became 
necessary  to  court  a  rival,  whom,  without  manifest 
imprudence,  she  could  not  venture  to  offend. 

The  inclination  of  her  own  subjects  was  another, 
and  not  the  least  considerable  circumstance,  which 
called  for  Mary's  attention  at  this  conjuncture. 
They  had  been  taught,  by  the  fatal  experiment  of 
her  former  marriage,  to  dread  a  union  with  any 
great  Prince,  whose  power  might  be  employed  to 
oppress  their  religion  and  liberties.     They  trembled 

"Keith,  212,  2  if.. 


280  THE  HISTORY  B..  III. 

at  the  thoughts  of  a  match  with  a  foreigner ;  and  if 
the  crown  should  be  strengthened  by  new  domi- 
nions and  alliances,  they  foresaw  that  the  royal 
prerogative  would  soon  be  stretched  beyond  its  an- 
cient and  legal  limits.  Their  eagerness  to  prevent 
this  could  hardly  fail  of  throwing  them  once  more 
into  the  arms  of  England.  Elizabeth  would  be 
ready  to  afford  them  her  aid  towards  obstructing  a 
measure  so  disagreeable  to  herself.  It  was  easy 
for  them  to  seize  the  person  of  the  sovereign.  By 
the  assistance  of  the  English  fleet,  they  could  ren- 
der it  difficult  for  any  foreign  Prince  to  land  in 
Scotland.  The  Roman  Catholics,  now  an  inconsi- 
derable party  in  the  kingdom,  and  dispirited  by  the 
loss  of  the  Earl  of  Huntly,  could  give  no  obstruc- 
tion to  their  designs.  To  what  violent  extremes 
the  national  abhorrence  of  a  foreign  yoke  might 
have  been  carried  is  manifest  from  what  she  had 
already  seen  and  experienced. 

For  these  reasons  Mary  laid  aside,  at  that  time, 
all  thoughts  of  foreign  alliance,  and  seemed  willing 
to  sacrifice  her  own  ambition,  in  order  to  remove 
the  jealousies  of  Elizabeth,  and  to  quiet  the  fears 
of  her  own  subjects. 

The  Parliament  met  this  year,  for  the  first  time 
since  the  Queen's  return  into  Scotland.  [May  26] 
Mary's  administration  had  hitherto  been  extremely 
popular.  Her  ministers  possessed  the  confidence 
of  the  nation  ;  and  by  consequence,  the  proceed- 
ings of  that  assembly  were  conducted  with  perfect 
unanimity.  The  grant  of  the  Earldom  of  Murray 
to  the  Prior  of  St.  Andrew's  was  confirmed  ;  the 
JEarl  of  Huntly,  and  several  of  his  vassals  and  de- 
pendants,  were   attainted :    the    attainder   against 


1063.  OF  SCOTLAND.  281 

Kirkaldy  of  Grange,  and  some  of  his  accomplices 
in  the  murder  of  Cardinal  Beatoun,  was  reversed9: 
the  act  of  oblivion,  mentioned  in  the  treatv  of  Edin- 
burgh,  received  the  royal  sanction.  But  Mary, 
who  had  determined  never  to  ratify  that  treaty, 
took  care  that  this  sanction  should  not  be  deemed 
any  acknowledgment  of  its  validity ;  she  granted 
her  consent  merely  in  condescension  to  the  Lords 
in  Parliament,  who  on  their  knees  besought  her  to 
allay  the  jealousies  and  apprehensions  of  her  sub- 
jects by  such  a  gracious  law10. 

No  attempt  was  made  in  this  Parliament,  to 
procure  the  Queen's  assent  to  the  laws  establishing 
the  Protestant  religion.  Her  ministers,  though 
zealous  Protestants  themselves,  were  aware  that 
this  could  not  be  urged  without  manifest  danger 
and  imprudence.  She  had  consented,  through  their 
influence,  to  tolerate  and  protect  the  reformed  doc- 
trine. They  had  even  prevailed  on  her  to  imprison 
and  prosecute  the  Archbishop  of  St.  Andrew's, 
and  Prior  of  Withorn,  for  celebrating  mass  con- 
trary to  her  proclamation11.  Mary,  however,  was 
still  passionately  devoted  to  the  Romish  church  ; 
and  though,  from  political  motives,  she  had  granted 
a  temporary  protection  of  opinions  which  she  dis- 
approved, there  were  no  grounds  to  hope  that  she 
would  agree  to  establish  them  for  perpetuity.  The 
moderation  of  those  who  professed  it  was  the  best 
method  for  reconciling  the  Queen  to  the  Protestant 
religion.  Time  might  abate  her  bigotry.  Her  pre- 
judices might  wear  off  gradually,  and  at  last  she 
might  yield  to  the  wishes  of  her  people,  what  their 

9  Knox,  330.         I0  Pari.  9.  Q.  Mary,  c.  G7.     Spotsw.  188. 
11  Keitb,23i>. 

B  B  2 


282  THE  HISTORY  B.  III. 

importunity  or  their  violence  could  never  have  ex- 
torted. Many  laws  of  importance  were  to  be  pro- 
posed in  Parliament;  and  to  defeat  all  these,  by 
such  a  fruitless  and  ill  timed  application  to  the 
Queen,  would  have  been  equall}7  injurious  to  indi- 
viduals and  detrimental  to  the  public. 

The  zeal  of  the  Protestant  clergy  was  deaf  to  all 
these  considerations  of  prudence  or  policy.  Eager 
and  impatient,  it  brooked  no  delay  :  severe  and 
inflexible,  it  would  condescend  to  no  compliances. 
The  leading  men  of  that  order  insisted,  that  this 
opportunity  of  establishing  religion  by  law  was  not 
to  be  neglected.  They  pronounced  the  moderation 
of  the  courtiers  apostacy;  and  their  endeavours  to 
gain  the  Queen  they  reckoned  criminal  and  ser- 
vile. Knox  solemnly  renounced  the  friendship  of 
the  Earl  of  Murray,  as  a  man  devoted  to  Mary, 
and  so  blindly  zealous  for  her  service  as  to  become 
regardless  of  those  objects  which  he  had  hitherto 
esteemed  most  sacred.  This  rupture,  which  is  a 
strong  proof  of  Murray's  sincere  attachment  to  the 
Queen  at  that  period,  continued  above  a  year  and 
a  half12. 

The  preachers,  being  disappointed  by  the  men  in 
whom  they  placed  the  greatest  confidence,  gave 
vent  to  their  indignation  in  their  pulpits.  These 
echoed  more  loudly  than  ever  with  declamations 
against  idolatry;  with  dismal  presages  concerning 
the  Queen's  marriage  with  a  foreigner ;  and  with 
bitter  reproaches  against  those  who,  from  interested 
motives,  had  deserted  that  cause  which  they  once 
reckoned  it  their  honour  to  support.  The  people, 
inflamed  by  such  vehement  declamations,  which 

12  Knox,  331. 


1563.  OF  SCOTLAND.  283 

were  dictated  by  a  zeal  more  sincere  than  prudent, 
proceeded  to  rash  and  unjustifiable  acts  of  vio- 
lence. [Aug.]  During  the  Queen's  absence,  on  a 
progress  into  the  west,  mass  continued  to  be  cele- 
brated in  her  chapel  at  Holyrood-house.  The  mul- 
titude of  those  who  openly  resorted  thither  gave 
great  offence  to  the  citizens  of  Edinburgh,  who, 
being  free  from  the  restraint  which  the  royal  pre- 
sence imposed,  assembled  in  a  riotous  manner, 
interrupted  the  service,  and  filled  such  as  were 
present  with  the  utmost  consternation.  Two  of 
the  ringleaders  in  this  tumult  were  seized,  and  a 
day  appointed  for  their  trial 13. 

Oct.  8.]  Knox,  who  deemed  the  zeal  of  these 
persons  laudable,  and  their  conduct  meritorious, 
considered  them  as  sufferers  in  a  good  cause ;  and 
in  order  to  screen  them  from  danger,  he  issued  cir- 
cular letters,  requiring  all  who  professed  the  true 
religion,  or  were  concerned  for  the  preservation  of 
it,  to  assemble  at  Edinburgh,  on  the  day  of  trial, 
that  by  their  presence  they  might  comfort  and  as- 
sist their  distressed  brethren  14.  One  of  these  let- 
ters fell  into  the  Queen's  hands.  To  assemble  the 
subjects  without  the  authority  of  the  sovereign 
was  construed  to  be  treason,  and  a  resolution  was 
taken  to  prosecute  Knox  for  that  crime,  before  the 
privy  council.  [Dec.  15.]  Happily  for  him,  his 
judges  were  not  only  zealous  Protestants,  but  the 
very  men  who,  during  the  late  commotions,  had 
openly  resisted  and  set  at  defiance  the  Queen's  au- 
thority. It  was  under  precedents  drawn  from  their 
own  conduct  that  Knox  endeavoured  to  shelter 
himself.  Xor  would  it  have  been  an  easy  matter 
to  these  counsellors  to  have  found  out  a  distincr 
13  Knox,  335.  •*  Ibid.  336. 


284  THE  HISTORY  B.  III. 

tion,  by  which  they  could  censure  him  without  con- 
demning themselves.  After  a  long  hearing,  to  the 
astonishment  of  Lethington  and  the  other  cour- 
tiers l0,  he  was  unanimously  acquitted.  Sinclair, 
Bishop  of  Ross,  and  president  of  the  Court  of  Ses- 
sion, a  zealous  papist,  heartily  concurred  with  the 
other  counsellors  in  this  decision16;  a  remarkable 
fact,  which  shows  the  unsettled  state  of  govern- 
ment in  that  age  ;  the  low  condition  to  which  regal 
authority  was  then  sunk ;  and  the  impunity  with 
which  subjects  might  invade  those  rights  of  the 
crown  which  are  now  held  sacred. 

1564.]  The  marriage  of  the  Scottish  Queen  con- 
tinued still  to  be  the  object  of  attention  and  intrigue. 
Though  Elizabeth,  even  while  she  wished  to  direct 
Mary,  treated  her  with  a  disgustful  reserve ;  though 
she  kept  her,  without  necessity,  in  a  state  of  sus- 
pense ;  and  hinted  often  at  the  person  whom  she 
destined  to  be  her  husband,  without  directly  men- 
tioning his  name;  yet  Mary  framed  all  her  actions 
to  express  such  prudent  respect  for  the  English 
Queen,  that  foreign  Princes  began  to  imagine  she 
had  given  herself  up  implicitly  to  her  direction17. 
The  prospect  of  this  union  alarmed  Catherine  of 
Medicis.  Though  Catherine  had  taken  pleasure 
all  along  in  doing  ill  offices  to  the  Queen  of  Scots; 
though  soon  after  the  Duke  of  Guise's  death,  she 
had  put  upon  her  a  most,  mortifying  indignity,  by 
stopping  the  payment  of  her  dowry,  by  depriving 
her  subject  the  Duke  of  Chatelherault  of  his  pen- 
sion, and  by  bestowing  the  command  of  the  Scottish 
guards  on  a  Frenchman18;  she  resolved,  however, 
to  prevent  this  dangerous  conjunction  of  the  British 

15  Calderw.  MS.  Hist.  i.  832.  ,6  Knox,  343. 

,r  Keitb,  248.  ,8  Keitb,  244. 


1564.  OF  SCOTLAND.  285 

Queens.  For  this  purpose  she  now  employed  all 
her  art  to  appease  Mary19,  to  whom  she  had  given 
so  many  causes  of  offence.  The  arrears  of  her 
dowry  were  instantly  paid  ;  more  punctual  remit- 
tances were  promised  for  the  future ;  and  offers 
made,  not  only  ta  restore  but  to  extend  the  privi- 
leges of  the  Scottish  nation  in  France.  It  was  easy 
for  Mary  to  peneirate  into  the  motives  of  this  sud- 
den change ;  she  well  knew  the  character  of  her 
mother-in-law,  and  laid  little  stress  upon  profes- 
sions of  friendship  which  came  from  a  Princess  of 
such  a  false  and  unfeeling  heart. 

The  negotiation  with  England,  relative  to  the 
marriage,  suffered  no  interruption  from  this  appli- 
cation of  the  French  Queen.  As  Mary,  in  com- 
pliance with  the  wishes  of  her  subjects,  and  pressed 
by  the  strongest  motives  of  interest,  determined 
speedily  to  marry,  Elizabeth  was  obliged  to  break 
that  unaccountable  silence  which  she  had  hitherto 
affected.  The  secret  was  disclosed,  and  her  fa- 
vourite Lord  Robert  Dudley,  afterwards  Earl  of 
Leicester,  was  declared  to  be  the  happy  man 
whom  she  had  chosen  to  be  the  husband  of  a 
Queen  courted  by  many  Princes J0.  Elizabeth's 
wisdom  and  penetration  were  remarkable  in  the 
choice  of  her  ministers ;  in  distinguishing  her  favou- 
rites, those  great  qualities  were  less  conspicuous. 
She  was  influenced  in  two  cases  so  opposite,  by 
merit  of  very  different  kinds.  Their  capacity  for 
business,  their  knowledge,  their  prudence,  were  the 
talents  to  which  alone  she  attended  in  choosing  her 
ministers  ;  whereas  beauty  and  gracefulness  of  per- 
son, polished  manners,  and  courtly  address,  were 
19  See  Append.  No.  VIII.  20  Keilh,  251. 


286  THE  HISTORY  B.  III. 

the  accomplishments  on  which  she  bestowed  her 
favour.  She  acted  in  the  one  case  with  the  wis- 
dom of  a  Queen,  in  the  other  she  discovered  the 
weakness  of  a  woman.  To  this  Leicester  owed 
his  grandeur.  Though  remarkable  neither  for  emi- 
nence in  virtue  nor  superiority  of  abilities,  the 
Queen's  partiality  distinguished  him  on  every  oc- 
casion. She  raised  him  to  the  highest  honours, 
she  bestowed  on  him  the  most  important  employ- 
ments, and  manifested  an  affection  so  dispropor- 
tionate to  his  merit,  that,  in  the  opinion  of  that 
age,  it  could  be  accounted  for  only  by  the  power 
of  planetary  influence21. 

The  high  spirit  of  the  Scottish  Queen  could  not 
well  bear  the  first  overture  of  a  match  with  a  sub- 
ject. Her  own  rank,  the  splendour  of  her  former 
marriage,  and  the  solicitations  at  this  time  of  so 
many  powerful  Princes,  crowded  into  her  thoughts, 
and  made  her  sensibly  feel  how  humbling  and  dis- 
respectful Elizabeth's  proposal  was.  She  dissem- 
bled, however,  with  the  English  resident ;  and 
though  she  declared,  in  strong  terms,  what  a  de- 
gradation she  would  deem  this  alliance,  which 
brought  along  with  it  no  advantage  that  could  jus- 
tify such  neglect  of  her  own  dignity,  she  mentioned 
the  Earl  of  Leicester,  notwithstanding,  in  terms  full 
of  respect22. 

Elizabeth,  we  may  presume,  did  not  wish  that 
the  proposal  should  be  received  in  any  other  man- 
ner. After  the  extraordinary  marks  she  had  given 
of  her  own  attachment  to  Leicester,  and  while  he 
was  still  in  the  very  height  of  favour,  it  is  not  pro- 
bable she  could  think  seriously  of  bestowing  him 

21  Camden,  5  19.  22  Keitb,  252. 


1564.  OF  SCOTLAND.  287 

upon  another.  It  was  not  her  aim  to  persuade, 
but  only  to  amuse  Mary23.  Almost  three  years 
were  elapsed  since  her  return  into  Scotland;  and 
though  solicited  by  her  subjects,  and  courted  by 
the  greatest  Princes  in  Europe,  she  had  hitherto 
been  prevented  from  marrying,  chiefly  by  the  arti- 
fices of  Elizabeth.  If  at  this  time  the  English 
Queen  could  have  engaged  Mary  to  listen  to  her 
proposal  in  favour  of  Leicester,  her  power  over 
this  creature  of  her  own  would  have  enabled  her 
to  protract  the  negotiation  at  pleasure  ;  and,  by 
keeping  her  rival  unmarried,  she  would  have  ren- 
dered the  prospect  of  her  succession  less  acceptable 
to  the  English. 

Leicester's  own  situation  was  extremely  delicate 
and  embarrassing.  To  gain  possession  of  the  most 
amiable  woman  of  the  age,  to  carry  away  this  prize 
from  so  many  contending  Princes,  to  mount  the 
throne  of  an  ancient  kingdom,  might  have  flattered 
the  ambition  of  a  subject  much  more  considerable 
than  him.  He  saw  all  these  advantages  no  doubt; 
and,  in  secret,  they  made  their  full  impression  on 
him.  But,  without  offending  Elizabeth,  he  durst 
not  venture  on  the  most  distant  discovery  of  his 
sentiments,  or  take  any  steps  towards  facilitating- 
his  acquisition  of  objects  so  worthy  of  desire. 

On  the  other  hand,  Elizabeth's  partiality  towards 
him,  which  she  was  at  no  pains  to  conceal24,  might 
inspire  him  with  hopes  of  attaining  the  supreme 
rank  in  a  kingdom  more  illustrious  than  Scotland. 
Elizabeth  had  often  declared  that  nothing;  but  her 
resolution  to  lead  a  single  life,  and  his  being  born 
her  own  subject,  would  have  hindered  her  from 
choosing  the  Earl  of  Leicester  for  a  husband.  Such 
23  Mel  v.  104,  105.  2«  Ibid.  93,  94. 


288  THE  HISTORY  B.  III. 

considerations  of  prudence  are,  however,  often  sur- 
mounted by  love;  and  Leicester  might  flatter  him- 
self, that  the  violence  of  her  affection  would  at 
length  triumph  both  over  the  maxims  of  policy  and 
the  scruples  of  pride.  These  hopes  induced  him, 
now  and  then,  to  conclude  the  proposal  of  his  mar- 
riage with  the  Scottish  Queen  to  be  a  project  for 
his  destruction;  and  he  imputed  it  to  the  malice  of 
Cecil,  who,  under  the  specious  pretence  of  doing 
him  honour,  intended  to  ruin  him  in  the  good  opinion 
both  of  Elizabeth  and  Mary c5. 

A  treaty  of  marriage,  proposed  by  one  Queen, 
who  dreaded  its  success ;  listened  to  by  another, 
who  was  secretly  determined  against  it;  and  scarce- 
ly desired  by  the  mar.  himself,  whose  interest  and 
reputation  it  was  calculated,  in  appearance,  to  pro- 
mote ;  could  not,  under  so  many  unfavourable  cir- 
cumstances, be  brought  to  a  fortunate  issue.  Both 
Elizabeth  and  Mary  continued,  however,  to  act 
with  equal  dissimulation.  The  former,  notwithstand- 
ing her  fears  of  losing  Leicester,  solicited  warmly 
in  his  behalf.  The  latter,  though  she  began  about 
this  time  to  cast  her  eyes  upon  another  subject  of 
Engl  uid,  did  not  at  once  venture  finally  to  reject 
Elizabeth's  favourite. 

The  person  towards  whom  Mary  began  to  turn 
her  thoughts  was  Henry  Stewart  lord  Darnly, 
eldest  son  of  the  Earl  of  Lennox.  That  nobleman, 
having  been  driven  out  of  Scotland,  under  the  re- 
gency of  the  Duke  of  Chatelherault,  had  lived  in 
banishment  for  twenty  years.  His  wife,  Lady 
Margaret  Douglas,  was  Mary's  most  dangerous 
rival  in  her  claim  upon  the  English  succession.  She 
was  the  daughter  of  Margaret,  the  eldest  sister  of 

-5xMelv.  101. 


15(M.  OF  SCOTLAND.  281) 

Henry  VIII.  by  the  Earl  of  Angus,  whom  that 
Queen  married  after  the  death  of  her  husband 
James  IV.  In  that  age,  the  right  and  order  of 
succession  was  not  settled  with  the  same  accuracy 
as  at  present.  Time,  and  the  decision  of  almost 
every  case  that  can  possibly  happen,  have  at  lust 
introduced  certainty  into  a  matter,  which  naturally 
is  subject  to  all  the  variety  arising  from  the  caprice 
of  lawyers,  guided  by  obscure  and  often  imaginary 
analogies.  The  Countess  of  Lennox,  though  born 
of  a  second  marriage,  was  one  degree  nearer  the 
royal  blood  of  England  than  Mary.  She  was  the 
daughter,  Mary  only  the  granddaughter  of  Mar- 
garet. This  was  not  the  only  advantage  over  Mary 
which  the  Countess  of  Lennox  enjoyed.  She  was 
born  in  England,  and,  by  a  maxim  of  law  in  that 
country,  with  regard  to  private  inheritances,  "who- 
ever is  not  born  in  England,  or  at  least  of  parents 
who,  at  the  time  of  his  birth,  were  in  the  obedience 
of  the  King  of  England,  cannot  enjoy  any  inheri- 
tance in  the  kingdom25."  This  maxim,  Hales,  an 
English  lawyer,  produced  in  a  treatise  which  he  pub- 
lished at  this  time,  and  endeavoured  to  apply  it  to 
the  right  of  succession  to  the  crown.  In  a  private 
cause  these  pretexts  might  have  given  rise  to  a 
long  and  doubtful  litigation  ;  where  a  crown  was 
at  stake,  such  nice  disputes  and  subtilties  were  to 
be  avoided  with  the  utmost  care.  If  Darnly  should 
happen  to  contract  an  alliance  with  any  of  the  pow- 
erful families  in  England,  or  should  publicly  profess 
the  Protestant  religion,  these  plausible  and  popular 
topics  might  be  so  urged  as  to  prove  fatal  to  the 
pretensions  of  a  foreigner  and  of  a  Papist. 

Mary  was   aware  of  all  this;   and,  in  order  to 

-''  Carle,  Hist,  of  Eng.  vol.  iii.  122. 
VOL.  I.  C  C 


290  THE  HISTORY  B.  III. 

prevent  any  danger  from  that  quarter,  had  early 
endeavoured  to  cultivate  a  friendly  correspondence 
with  the  family  of  Lennox.  In  the  year  one  thou- 
sand five  hundred  and  sixty-two26,  both  the  Earl 
and  the  Lady  Margaret  were  taken  into  custody  by 
Elizabeth's  orders,  on  account  of  their  holding*  a 
secret  correspondence  with  the  Scottish  Queen. 

From  the  time  that  Mary  became  sensible  of 
the  difficulties  which  would  attend  her  marrying  a 
foreign  Prince,  she  entered  into  a  still  closer  con- 
nexion with  the  Earl  of  Lennox  c?,  and  invited  him 
to  return  into  Scotland.  This  she  endeavoured  to 
conceal  from  Elizabeth  ;  but  a  transaction  of  so 
much  importance  did  not  escape  the  notice  of  that 
discerning  Princess.  She  observed  but  did  not 
interrupt  it.  Nothing  could  fall  in  more  perfectly 
with  her  views  concerning  Scottish  affairs.  She 
was  pleased  to  see  the  pride  of  the  Scottish  Queen 
stoop  at  last  to  the  thoughts  of  taking  a  subject  to 
her  bed.  Darnly  was  in  no  situation  to  excite  her 
jealousy  or  her  fears.  His  father's  estate  lay  in 
England,  and  by  means  of  this  pledge  she  hoped  to 
keep  the  negotiation  entirely  in  her  own  hands,  to 
play  the  same  game  of  artifice  and  delay,  which  she 
had  planned  out,  if  her  recommendation  of  Leicester 
had  been  more  favourably  received. 

As  before  the  union  of  the  two  crowns  no  sub- 
ject of  one  kingdom  could  pass  into  the  other  with- 
out the  permission  of  both  sovereigns ;  no  sooner 
did  Lennox,  under  pretence  of  prosecuting  his  wife's 
claim  upon  the  earldom  of  Angus,  apply  to  Eliza- 
beth for  her  licence  to  go  into  Scotland,  than  he 
obtained  it.  Together  with  it,  she  gave  him  let- 
ters, warmly  recommending  his  person  and  cause 

26  Camden,  389.  w  Ibid.  396. 


1-3G4.  OF  SCOTLAND.  2'Jl 

to  Mary's  friendship  and  protection  J;;.  But  at  the 
same  time,  as  it  was  her  manner  to  involve  all  her 
transactions  with  regard  to  Scotland  in  some  degree 
of  perplexity  and  contradiction,  she  warned  Mary, 
that  this  indulgence  of  Lennox  might  prove  fatal 
to  herself,  as  his  return  could  not  fail  of  reviving 
the  ancieut  animosity  between  him  and  the  house 
of  Hamilton. 

This  admonition  gave  umbrage  to  Mary,  and 
drew  from  her  an  angry  reply,  which  occasioned 
for  some  time  a  total  interruption  of  all  correspond- 
ence between  the  two  Queens29.  Mary  was  not  a 
little  alarmed  at  this ;  she  both  dreaded  the  effects 
of  Elizabeth's  resentment,  and  felt  sensibly  the  dis- 
advantage of  being  excluded  from  a  free  intercourse 
with  England,  where  her  ambassadors  had  all  along 
carried  on,  with  some  success,  secret  negotiations, 
which  increased  the  number  of  her  partisans,  and 
paved  her  way  towards  the  throne.  In  order  to 
remove  the  causes  of  the  present  difficulty,  Melvil 
was  sent  express  to  the  court  of  England.  He 
found  it  no  difficult  matter  to  bring  about  a  recon- 
cilement ;  and  soon  reestablished  the  appearance, 
but  not  the  confidence,  of  friendship,  which  was  all 
that  had  subsisted  for  some  time  between  the  two 
Queens. 

During  this  negotiation,  Elizabeth's  professions 
of  love  to  Mary,  and  Melvil's  replies  in  the  name 
of  his  mistress,  were  made  in  the  language  of  the 
warmest  and  most  cordial  friendship.  But  what 
Melvil  truly  observes  with  respect  to  Elizabeth, 
may  be  extended  without  injustice  to  both  Queens. 
"  There  was  neither  plain  dealing  nor  upright  mean- 
ing, but  great  dissimulation,  envy,  and  fear30." 
28  Keith,  2.>.i.  20*.     -"  Kcitli,  263.     Melv.  s;;.     w  Mel?.  104. 


292  THE  HISTORY  B.  III. 

Lennox,  however,  in  consequence  of  the  licence 
which  he  had  obtained,  set  out  for  Scotland,  and 
was  received  by  the  Queen,  not  only  with  the  re- 
spect due  to  a  nobleman  so  nearly  allied  to  the 
royal  family,  but  treated  with  a  distinguished  fami- 
liarity which  could  not  fail  of  inspiring  him  with 
more  elevated  hopes.  The  rumour  of  his  son's 
marriage  to  the  Queen  began  to  spread  over  the 
kingdom;  and  the  eyes  of  all  Scotland  were  turned 
upon  him  as  the  father  of  their  future  master.  The 
Duke  of  Chatelherault  was  the  first  to  take  the 
alarm.  He  considered  Lennox  as  the  ancient  and 
hereditary  enemy  of  the  house  of  Hamilton;  and, 
in  his  grandeur,  saw  the  ruin  of  himself  and  his 
friends.  But  the  Queen  interposed  her  authority 
to  prevent  any  violent  rupture,  and  employed  all 
her  influence  to  bring  about  an  accommodation  of 
the  differences31. 

The  powerful  family  of  Douglas  no  less  dreaded 
Lennox's  return,  from  an  apprehension  that  he  would 
wrest  the  earldom  of  Angus  out  of  their  hands.  But 
the  Queen,  who  well  knew  how  dangerous  it  would 
be  to  irritate  Morton,  and  other  great  men  of  that 
name,  prevailed  on  Lennox  to  purchase  their  friend- 
ship by  allowing  his  Lady's  claim  upon  the  earldom 
of  Angus  to  drop  3~. 

After  these  preliminary  steps,  Mary  ventured  to 
call  a  meeting  of  parliament  [Dec.].  The  act  of 
forfeiture  passed  against  Lennox  in  the  year  one 
thousand  rive  hundred  and  forty-five  was  repealed, 
and  he  was  publicly  restored  to  the  honours  and 
estate  of  his  ancestors33. 

June  25,  Dec.  25.]    The  ecclesiastical  transac- 

•"   Keith,  259;  3-  Ibid.  208.  Note  (6). 

33  See  Append.  No.  I\. 


15(H.  OF  SCOTLAND.  293 

tions  of  this  year  were  not  considerable.  In  the 
assemblies  of  the  church,  the  same  complaints  of 
the  increase  of  idolatry,  the  same  representations 
concerning  the  poverty  of  the  clergy  were  renewed. 
The  reply  which  the  Queen  made  to  these,  and  her 
promises  of  redress,  were  more  satisfying  to  the 
Protestants  than  any  they  had  hitherto  obtained34. 
But  notwithstanding  her  declarations  in  their  fa- 
vour, they  could  not  help  harbouring  many  sus- 
picions concerning  Mary's  designs  against  their 
religiou.  She  had  never  once  consented  to  hear 
any  preacher  of  the  reformed  doctrine.  She  had 
abated  nothing  of  her  bigoted  attachment  to  the 
Romish  faith.  The  genius  of  that  superstition, 
averse  at  all  times  from  toleration,  was  in  that  age 
fierce  and  unrelenting.  Mary  had  given  her  friends 
on  the  continent  repeated  assurances  of  her  resolu- 
tion to  reestablish  the  Catholic  church"0.  She  had 
industriously  avoided  every  opportunity  of  ratifying 
the  acts  of  parliament  one  thousand  five  hundred 
and  sixty,  in  favour  of  the  Reformation.  Even  the 
protection  which,  ever  since  her  return,  she  had 
afforded  the  Protestant  religion,  was  merely  tem- 
porary, and  declared,  by  her  own  proclamation,  to 
be  of  force  only  "  till  she  should  take  some  final 
order  in  the  matter  of  religion35."  The  vigilant 
zeal  of  the  preachers  was  inattentive  to  none  of 
these  circumstances.  The  coldness  of  their  prin- 
cipal leaders,  who  were  at  this  time  entirely  de- 
voted to  the  court,  added  to  their  jealousies  and 
fears.  These  they  uttered  to  the  people,  in  lan- 
guage which  they  deemed  suitable  to  the  necessity 
of  the  times,  and  which  the  Queen  reckoned  disre- 

34  Keith,  533.539.  Carte,  vol.  iiL  115, 

16  Keitb,  501.  510. 

C  < 


294  THE  HISTORY  *  B.  III. 

spectful  and  insolent.  In  a  meeting  of  the  General 
Assembly,  Maitland  publicly  accused  Knox  of 
teaching  seditious  doctrine,  concerning  the  right  of 
subjects  to  resist  those  sovereigns  who  trespass 
against  the  duty  which  they  owe  to  the  people. 
Knox  was  not  backward  to  justify  what  he  had 
taught ;  and  upon  this  general  doctrine  of  resist- 
ance, so  just  in  its  own  nature,  but  so  delicate  in 
its  application  to  particular  cases,  there  ensued  a 
debate,  which  admirably  displays  the  talents  and 
character  of  both  the  disputants ;  the  acuteness  of 
the  former,  embellished  with  learning,  but  prone  to 
subtilty ;  the  vigorous  understanding  of  the  latter, 
delighting  in  bold  sentiments,  and  superior  to  all 
fearX 

1565.]  Two  years  had  already  been  consumed 
in  fruitless  negotiations  concerning  the  marriage  of 
the  Scottish  Queen.  Mary  had  full  leisure  and 
opportunity  to  discern  the  fallacy  and  deceit  of  all 
Elizabeth's  proceedings  with  respect  to  it.  But, 
in  order  to  set  the  real  intentions  of  the  English 
Queen  in  a  clear  light,  and  to  bring  her  to  some 
explicit  declaration  of  her  sentiments,  Mary  at  last 
intimated  to  Randolph  [Feb.  5],  that,  on  condition 
her  right  of  succession  to  the  crown  of  England 
were  publicly  acknowledged,  she  was  ready  to 
yield  to  the  solicitations  of  his  mistress  in  behalf 
of  Leicester38.  Nothing  could  be  further  than  this 
from  the  mind  and  jntention  of  Elizabeth.  The 
right  of  succession  was  a  mystery,  which,  during 
her  whole  reign,  her  jealousy  preserved  untouched 
and  unexplained.  She  had  promised,  however, 
when  she  first  began  to  interest  herself  in  the  mar- 
riage of  the  Scottish  Queen,  all  that,  was  now 
"   Kuox,  310.  »  Keith,  2G9. 


15G5.  OF  SCOTLAND.  21)5 

demanded.  How  to  retreat  with  decency,  how  to 
elude  her  former  offer,  was  on  that  account  not  a 
little  perplexing. 

The  facility  with  which  Lord  Darnly  obtained  per- 
mission to  visit  the  court  of  Scotland,  was  owing-, 
in  all  probability,  to  that  embarrassment.  From 
the  time  of  JYIelvil's  embassy,  the  Countess  of  Len- 
nox had  warmly  solicited  this  liberty  for  her  son. 
Elizabeth  was  no  stranger  to  the  ambitious  hopes 
with  which  that  young  nobleman  flattered  himself. 
She  had  received  repeated  advices  from  her  minis- 
ters, of  the  sentiments  which  Mary  began  to  enter- 
tain in  his  favour39.  It  was  entirely  in  her  power 
to  prevent  his  stirring  out  of  London.  In  the  pre- 
sent conjuncture,  however,  nothing  could  be  of 
more  advantage  to  her  than  Dandy's  journey  into 
Scotland.  She  had  already  brought  one  actor 
upon  the  stage,  who  under  her  management  had, 
for  a  long  time,  amused  the  Scottish  Queen.  She 
hoped,  no  less  absolutely,  to  direct  the  motions  of 
Darnly,  who  was  likewise  her  subject;  and  again 
to  involve  Mary  in  all  the  tedious  intricacies  of 
negotiation.  These  motives  determined  Elizabeth 
and  her  ministers  to  yield  to  the  solicitations  of  the 
Countess  of  Lennox. 

But  this  deep  laid  scheme  was  in  a  moment  dis- 
concerted. Such  unexpected  events,  as  the  fancy 
of  poets  ascribes  to  love,  are  sometimes  really  pro- 
duced by  that  passion.  An  affair  which  had  been 
the  object  of  so  many  political  intrigues,  and  had 
moved  and  interested  so  many  princes,  was  at  last 
decided  by  the  sudden  liking  of  two  young  per- 
sons. Lord  Darnly  was  at  this  time  in  the  first 
bloom  and  vigour  of  youth.  In  beauty  and  grace- 
39  Keith,  2.39.  2G1.2G0. 


296  THE  HISTORY  B.  III. 

fulness  of  person  he  surpassed  all  his  contempora- 
ries; he  excelled  eminently  in  such  arts  as  add 
ease  and  elegance  to  external  form,  and  which  en- 
abled it  not  only  to  dazzle  but  to  please.  Mary 
was  of  an  age,  and  of  a  temper,  to  feel  the  full 
power  of  these  accomplishments.  The  impression 
which  Lord  Darnly  made  upon  her  was  visible 
from  the  time  of  their  first  interview  [Feb.  13]. 
The  whole  business  of  the  court  was  to  amuse  and 
entertain  this  illustrious  guest40;  and  in  all  those 
scenes  of  gaiety,  Darnly,  whose  qualifications  were 
altogether  superficial  and  showy,  appeared  to  great 
advantage.  His  conquest  of  the  Queen's  heart 
became  complete ;  and  inclination  now  prompted 
her  to  conclude  her  marriage,  the  first  thoughts  of 
which  had  been  suggested  by  considerations  merely 
political. 

Elizabeth  contributed,  and  perhaps  not  without 
design,  to  increase  the  violence  of  this  passion. 
Soon  after  Dandy's  arrival  in  Scotland,  she,  in  re- 
turn to  that  message  whereby  Mary  had  signified 
her  willingness  to  accept  of  Leicester,  gave  an  an- 
swer in  such  terms  as  plainly  unravelled  her  ori- 
ginal intention  in  that  intrigue41.  She  promised,  if 
the  Scottish  Queen's  marriage  with  Leicester  should 
take  place,  to  advance  him  to  great  honours;  but, 
with  regard  to  Mary's  title  to  the  English  succes- 
sion, she  would  neither  suffer  any  legal  inquiry  to 
be  made  concerning  it,  nor  permit  it  to  be  publicly 
recognised,  until  she  herself  should  declare  her  re- 
solution never  to  marry.  Notwithstanding  Eliza- 
beth's former  promises,  Mary  had  reason  to  expect 
every  thing  contained  in  this  reply;  her  high  spirit, 
however,  could  not  bear  with  patience  such  a  cruel 

A0  Knox,  309.  4f  Keith,  Append.  158. 


15G<i.  OF  SCOTLAND.  *207 

discovery  of  the  contempt,  the  artifice,  and  mockery, 
with  which,  under  the  veil  of  friendship,  she  had 
been  so  long  abused.  She  burst  into  tears  of  indig- 
nation, and  expressed,  with  the  utmost  bitterness, 
her  sense  of  that  disingenuous  craft  which  had  been 
employed  to  deceive  her42. 

The  natural  effect  of  this  indignation  was  to  add 
to  the  impetuosity  with  which  she  pursued  her  own 
scheme.  Blinded  by  resentment  as  well  as  by  love, 
she  observed  no  defects  in  the  man  whom  she  had 
chosen ;  and  began  to  take  the  necessary  steps 
towards  accomplishing  her  design,  with  all  the  im- 
patience natural  to  those  passions. 

As  Darnly  was  so  nearly  related  to  the  Queen, 
the  canon  law  made  it  necessary  to  obtain  the 
Pope's  dispensation  before  the  celebration  of  the 
marriage.  For  this  purpose  she  early  set  on  foot  a 
negotiation  with  the  court  of  Home43. 

She  was  busy,  at  the  same  time,  in  procuring 
the  consent  of  the  French  King  and  his  mother. 
Having  communicated  her  design,  and  the  motives 
which  determined  her  choice,  to  Castelnau  the 
French  ambassador,  she  employed  him,  as  the 
most  proper  person,  to  bring  his  court  to  fall  in 
with  her  views.  Among  other  arguments  to  this 
purpose,  Castelnau  mentioned  Mary's  attachment 
to  Dandy,  which  he  represented  to  be  so  violent 
and  deep-rooted,  that  it  was  no  longer  in  her  own 
power  to  break  off*  the  match  ' '.  Nor  were  the 
French  ministers  backward  in  encouraging  Mary's 
passion.  Her  pride  would  never  stoop  to  an  alli- 
ance with  a  subject  of  France.  By  this  choice 
they  were  delivered  from  the  apprehension  of  a 
match  with  any  of  the  Austrian  Princes,  us  well 
42  Keiih,  Ippend.  159.      43  Camd.  396.       "  Caateln.  164. 


•298  THE  HISTORY  B.  III. 

as  the  danger  of  too  close  a  union  with  Elizabeth ; 
and  as  Darnly  professed  the  Roman  Catholic  reli- 
gion, this  suited  the  bigoted  schemes  which  that 
court  adopted. 

While  Mary  was  endeavouring  to  reconcile  fo- 
reign courts  to  a  measure  which  she  had  so  much 
at  heart,  Darnly  and  his  father,  by  their  behaviour, 
were  raising  up  enemies  at  home  to  obstruct  it. 
Lennox  had,  during  the  former  part  of  his  life,  dis- 
covered no  great  compass  of  abilities  or  political 
wisdom;    and  appears  to  have  been  a  man  of  a 
weak  understanding  and  violent  passions.      Darnly 
was  not  superior  to  his  father  in  understanding, 
and  all  his  passions  were  still  more  impetuous 4j. 
To  these  he  added  that  insolence,  which  the  advan- 
tage of  external  form,  when  accompanied  with  no 
quality  more  valuable,  is  apt  to  inspire.    Intoxicated 
with  the  Queen's  favour,  he  begau  already  to  as- 
sume the  haughtiness  of  a  King,  and  to  put  on  that 
imperious   air,  which   majesty  itself  can   scarcely 
render  tolerable. 

It  was  by  the  advice,  or  at  least  with  the  con- 
sent of  Murray  and  his  party,  that  Lennox  had 
been  invited  into  Scotland 4(3 :  and  yet,  no  sooner 
did  he  acquire  a  firm  footing  in  that  kingdom  than 
he  began  to  enter  into  secret  cabals  with  those  no- 
blemen who  were  known  to  be  avowed  enemies  to 
Murray,  and,  with  regard  to  religion,  to  be  either 
neutrals,  or  favourers  of  popery47.  Darnly,  still 
more  imprudent,  allowed  some  rash  expressions 
concerning  those  favours  which  the  Queen's  bounty 
had  conferred  upon  Murray  to  escape  him48. 

But,  above  all  these,  the  familiarity  which  Darnly 

1  •  Keith,  '272,  273.  «  Knox,  3G7.     Keith,  271. 

,7  Keith,  272.  » Ibid.  274. 


1565.  OF  SCOTLAND.  299 

cultivated  with  David  Tlizio,  contributed  to  increase 
the  suspicion  and  disgust  of  the  nobles. 

The  low  birth  and  indigent  condition  of  this 
man  placed  him  in  a  station  in  which  he  ought 
naturally  to  have  remained  unknown  to  posterity. 
But  what  fortune  called  him  to  act  and  to  suffer  in 
Scotland,  obliges  history  to  descend  from  its  dig- 
nity, and  to  record  his  adventures.  He  was  the 
son  of  a  musician  in  Turin,  and  having  accompa- 
nied the  Piedmontese  ambassador  into  Scotland, 
gained  admission  into  the  Queen's  family  by  his 
skill  in  music.  As  his  dependent  condition  had 
taught  him  suppleness  of  spirit  and  insinuating- 
manners,  he  quickly  crept  into  the  Queen's  favour, 
and  (her  French  secretary  happening  to  return  at 
that  time  into  his  own  country)  was  preferred  by 
her  to  that  office.  He  now  began  to  make  a  figure 
in  court,  and  to  appear  as  a  man  of  consequence. 
The  whole  train  of  suitors  and  expectants,  who 
have  an  extreme  sagacity  in  discovering  the  paths 
which  lead  most  directly  to  success,  applied  to 
him.  His  recommendations  were  observed  to  have 
great  influence  over  the  Queen,  and  he  grew  to  be 
considered  not  only  as  a  favourite,  but  as  a  minis- 
ter. Nor  was  Tlizio  careful  to  abate  that  envy 
which  always  attends  such  an  extraordinary  and 
rapid  change  of  fortune.  He  studied,  on  the  con- 
trary, to  display  the  whole  extent  of  his  favour. 
He  affected  to  talk  often  and  familiarly  with  the 
Queen  in  public.  He  equalled  the  greatest  and 
most  opulent  subjects,  in  richness  of  dress,  and  in 
the  number  of  his  attendants.  He  discovered,  in  all 
his  behaviour,  that  assuming  insolence  with  which 
unmerited  prosperity  inspires  an  ig;noble  mind.  It 
was  with   the   utmost   indignation  that   the  nobles 


300  THE  HISTORY  B.  III. 

beheld  the  power,  it  was  with  the  utmost  difficulty 
that  they  tolerated  the  arrogance  of  this  unworthy 
minion.  Even  in  the  Queen's  presence  they  could 
not  forbear  treating-  him  with  marks  of  contempt. 
Nor  was  it  his  exorbitant  power  alone  which  ex- 
asperated the  Scots.  They  considered  him,  and 
not  without  reason,  as  a  dangerous  enemy  to  the 
Protestant  religion,  and  suspected  that  he  held,  for 
this  purpose,  a  secret  correspondence  with  the  court 
f>f  Rome4?. 

It  was  Darnly's  misfortune  to  fall  under  the  ma- 
nagement of  this  man,  who,  by  flattery  and  assi- 
duity easily  gained  on  his  vanity  and  inexperience. 
All  Rizio's  influence  with  the  Queen  was  employ- 
ed in  his  behalf,  and  contributed,  without  doubt, 
towards  establishing  him  more  firmly  in  her  affec- 
tions50. But  whatever  benefit  Darniy  might  reap 
from  his  patronage,  it  did  not  counterbalance  the 
contempt,  and  even  infamy,  to  which  he  was  ex- 
posed on  account  of  his  familiarity  with  such  an 
upstart. 

Though  Darniy  daily  made  progress  in  the 
Queen's  affection,  she  conducted  herself,  however, 
with  such  prudent  reserve,  as  to  impose  on  Ran- 
dolph, the  English  resident,  a  man  otherwise  shrewd 
and  penetrating.  It  appears  from  his  letters  at  this 
period,  that  he  entertained  not  the  least  suspicion 
of  the  intrigue  which  was  carrying  on  ;  and  gave 
his  court  repeated  assurances,  that  the  Scottish 
Queen  had  no  design  of  marrying  Darniy01.  In 
the  midst  of  this  security,  Mary  dispatched  Mait- 
land  to  signify  her  intention  to  Elizabeth,  and  to 
solicit  her  consent  to  the  marriage  with  Darnlv. 

40  Buclian.  340.     Melv.  107.  »  Mel  v.  111. 

51   Keith,  273,  and  Append.  169. 


15G5.  OF  SCOTLAND.  301 

This  embassy  was  the  first  thing  which  opened  the 
eyes  of  Randolph. 

April  18.]  Elizabeth  affected  the  greatest  sur- 
prise at  this  sudden  resolution  of  the  Scottish 
Queen,  but  without  reason.  The  train  was  laid  by 
herself,  and  she  had  no  cause  to  wonder  when  it 
took  effect.  She  expressed  at  the  same  time  her 
disapprobation  of  the  match  in  the  strongest  terms; 
and  pretended  to  foresee  many  dangers  and  incon- 
veniencies  arising  from  it  to  both  kingdoms.  But 
this  too  was  mere  affectation.  Mary  had  often  and 
plainly  declared  her  resolution  to  marry.  It  was 
impossible  she  could  make  any  choice  more  inof- 
fensive. The  danger  of  introducing  a  foreign  inte- 
rest into  Britain,  which  Elizabeth  had  so  justly 
dreaded,  was  entirely  avoided.  Darnlv,  though 
allied  to  both  crowns,  and  possessed  of  lands  in 
both  kingdoms,  could  be  formidable  to  neither.  It 
is  evident  from  all  these  circumstances,  that  Eliza- 
beth's apprehensions  of  danger  could  not  possibly 
be  serious;  and  that  in  all  her  violent  declarations 
against  Darnly,  there  was  much  more  of  grimace 
than  of  reality52.  % 

There  were  not  wanting,  however,  political  mo- 
tives of  much  weight  to  induce  that  artful  Princess 
to  put  on  the  appearance  of  great  displeasure. 
Mary,    intimidated  by  this,    might  perhaps  delay 

52  Even  tlie  historians  of  that  age  acknowledge,  that  the  mar- 
riage of  tlie  Scottish  Queen  with  a  subject  was  far  from  being 
disagreeable  to  Elizabeth,  knox,  369.  373.  Bachan.  'Mi'.}. 
Castelnau,  who  at  that  time  was  well  acquainted  with  the  in- 
trigues of  both  the  British  courts,  asserts,  upon  grounds  of  threat 
probability,  thai  the  match  was  wholly  Elizabeth's  own  work; 
Casteln.  \(V2  :  and  that  she  rejoiced  at  the  accomplishment  of 
it,  appears  from  the  letters  of  her  own  ambassadors.  Keith, 
280.  288. 

VOL.   I.  D  D 


302  THE  HISTORY  B.  III. 

her  marriage ;  which  Elizabeth  desired  to  obstruct 
with  a  weakness  that  little  suited  the  dignity  of  her 
mind  and  the  elevation  of  her  character.  Besides, 
the  tranquillity  of  her  own  kingdom  was  the  great 
object  of  Elizabeth's  policy  ;  and,  by  declaring  her 
dissatisfaction  with  Mary's  conduct,  she  hoped  to 
alarm  that  party  in  Scotland  which  was  attached 
to  the  English  interest,  and  to  encourage  such 
of  the  nobles  as  secretly  disapproved  the  match, 
openly  to  oppose  it.  The  seeds  of  discord  would 
by  this  means  be  scattered  through  that  kingdom. 
Intestine  commotions  might  arise.  Amidst  these, 
Mary  could  form  none  of  those  dangerous  schemes 
to  which  the  union  of  her  people  might  have 
prompted  her.  Elizabeth  would  become  the  um- 
pire between  the  Scottish  Queen  and  her  contend- 
ing subjects;  and  England  might  look  on  with  se- 
curity, while  a  storm  which  she  had  raised,  wasted 
the  only  kingdom  which  could  possibly  disturb  its 
peace. 

May  1.]  In  prosecution  of  this  scheme,  she  laid 
before  her  privy  council  the  message  from  the  Scot- 
tish Queen,  and  consulted  them  with  regard  to  the 
answer  she  should  return.  Their  determination,  it 
is  easy  to  conceive,  was  perfectly  conformable  to 
her  secret  views.  They  drew  up  a  remonstrance 
against  the  intended  match,  full  of  the  imaginary 
tlangers  with  which  that  event  threatened  the  king- 
dom53. Nor  did  she  think  it  enough  to  signify  her 
disapprobation  of  the  measure,  either  by  Maitland, 
Mary's  ambassador,  or  by  Randolph,  her  own  re- 
sident in  Scotland  :  in  order  to  add  more  dignity 
to  the  farce  which  she  chose  to  act,  she  appointed 
Sir  Nicholas  Throgmorton  her  ambassador  extra- 

63  Keith,  274.     See  Append.  No.  X. 


1565.  OF  SCOTLAND.  303 

ordinary.  She  commanded  him  to  declare,  in  the 
strongest  terms,  her  dissatisfaction  with  the  step 
which  Mary  proposed  to  take  ;  and  at  the  same 
time  to  produce  the  determination  of  the  privy 
council  as  an  evidence  that  the  sentiments  of  the 
nation  were  not  different  from  her  own.  Not  long 
after,  she  confined  the  Countess  of  Lennox  as  a 
prisoner,  first  in  her  house,  and  then  sent  her  to 
the  Tower04. 

Intelligence  of  all  this  reached  Scotland  before 
the  arrival  of  the  English  ambassador.  In  the  first 
transports  of  her  indignation,  Mary  resolved  no 
longer  to  keep  any  measures  with  Elizabeth  ;  and 
sent  orders  to  Maitland,  who  accompanied  Throg- 
morton,  to  return  instantly  to  the  English  court, 
and  in  her  name  to  declare  to  Elizabeth  that,  after 
having  been  amused  so  long  to  so  little  purpose ; 
after  having  been  fooled  and  imposed  on  so  grossly 
by  her  artifices  ;  she  was  now  resolved  to  gratify 
her  own  inclination,  and  to  ask  no  other  consent 
but  that  of  her  own  subjects,  in  the  choice  of  a 
husband.  Maitland,  with  his  usual  sagacity,  fore- 
saw all  the  effects  of  such  a  rash  and  angry  mes- 
sage, and  ventured  rather  to  incur  the  displeasure 
of  his  mistress,  by  disobeying  her  commands,  than 
to  be  made  the  instrument  of  tearing  asunder  so 
violently  the  few  remaining  ties  which  still  linked 
together  the  two  Queens55. 

Mary  herself  soon  became  sensible  of  her  error. 
She  received  the  English  ambassador  with  respect; 
justified  her  own  conduct  with  decency;  and  though 
unalterable  in  her  resolution,  she  affected  a  won- 
derful solicitude  to  reconcile  Elizabeth  to  the  tin  a 
■"•'  kutli,  Append.  101.  55  Ibid.  160. 


304  THE  HISTORY  B.  III. 

sure ;  and  even  pretended,  out  of  complaisance 
towards  her,  to  put  off  the  consummation  of  the 
marriage  for  some  months50.  It  is  probable,  how- 
ever, that  the  want  of  the  Pope's  dispensation,  and 
the  prospect  of  gaining  the  consent  of  her  own  sub- 
jects, were  the  real  motives  of  this  delay. 

This  consent  Mary  laboured  with  the  utmost 
industry  to  obtain.  The  Earl  of  Murray  was  the 
person  in  the  kingdom,  whose  concurrence  was  of 
the  greatest  importance  ;  but  she  had  reason  to  fear 
that  it  would  not  be  procured  without  extreme  dif- 
ficulty. From  the  time  of  Lennox's  return  into 
Scotland,  Murray  perceived  that  the  Queen's  affec- 
tions began  gradually  to  be  estranged  from  him. 
Darnly,  Athol,  Rizio,  all  the  court  favourites,  com- 
bined against  him.  His  ambitious  spirit  could  not 
brook  this  diminution  of  his  power,  which  his  for- 
mer services  had  so  little  merited.  He  retired  into 
the  country,  and  gave  way  to  rivals  with  whom  he 
was  unable  to  contend57.  The  return  of  the  Earl 
of  Both  well,  his  avowed  enemy,  who  had  been 
accused  of  a  design  upon  his  life,  and  who  had  re- 
sided for  some  time  in  foreign  countries,  obliged 
him  to  attend  to  his  own  safety.  No  entreaty  of 
the  Queen  could  persuade  him  to  a  reconcilement 
with  that  nobleman.  He  insisted  on  havins;  him 
brought  to  public  trial,  and  prevailed,  by  his  im- 
portunity, to  have  a  day  fixed  for  it.  Bothwell 
durst  not  appear  in  opposition  to  a  man,  who  came 
to  the  place  of  trial  attended  by  five  thousand  of 
his  followers  on  horseback.  He  was  once  more 
constrained  to  leave  the  kingdom  ;  but,  by  the 
Queen's  command,  the  sentence  of  outlawry,  which 
56  Keith,  27,s.  "  Ibid.  272.  274.     Append.  159. 


1565.  OF  SCOTLAND.  305 

is  incurred  by  nonappearance,  was  not  pronounced 
against  him 

Mary,  sensible,  at  the  same  time,  of  how  much 
importance  it  was  to  gain  a  subject  so  powerful 
and  so  popular  as  the  Earl  of  Murray,  invited 
him  back  to  court  [May  8],  and  received  him  with 
many  demonstrations  of  respect  and  confidence. 
At  last  she  desired  him  to  set  an  example  to  her 
other  subjects  by  subscribing  a  paper  containing  a 
formal  approbation  of  her  marriage  with  Darnly. 
Murray  had  many  reasons  to  hesitate,  and  even  to 
withhold  his  assent.  Darnly  had  not  only  under- 
mined his  credit  with  the  Queen,  but  discovered, 
on  every  occasion,  a  rooted  aversion  to  his  person. 
By  consenting  to  his  elevation  to  the  throne,  he 
would  give  him  such  an  accession  of  dignity  and 
power  as  no  man  willingly  bestows  on  an  enemy. 
The  unhappy  consequences  which  might  follow 
upon  a  breach  with  England,  were  likewise  of  con- 
siderable weight  with  Murray.  He  had  always 
openly  preferred  a  confederacy  with  England,  be- 
fore the  ancient  alliance  with  France.  By  his 
means,  chiefly,  this  change  in  the  system  of  na- 
tional polities  had  been  brought  about.  A  league 
with  England  had  been  established  ;  and  he  could 
not  think  of  sacrificing,  to  a  rash  and  youthful  pas- 
sion, an  alliance  of  so  much  utility  to  the  kingdom; 
and  which  he  and  the  other  nobles  were  bound  by 
every  obligation  to  maintain  '.  Nor  was  the  in- 
terest of  religion  forgotten  on  this  occasion.  Mary, 
though  surrounded  by  Protestant  counsellors,  had 
found  means  to  hold  a  dangerous  correspondence 
with  foreign  Catholics.  She  had  even  courted  tin 
Pope's  protection,  who  had  sent  her  a  subsidy  of 

Keith,  Append.  160.  ^  [bid.  l<>(). 

i)  I)  2 


30C  THE  HISTORY  B.  III. 

eight  thousand  crowns 6o.  Though  Mary  had  hi- 
therto endeavoured  to  bridle  the  zeal  of  the  reform- 
ed clergy,  and  to  set  the  Queen's  conduct  in  the 
most  favourable  light,  yet  her  obstinate  adherence 
to  her  own  religion  could  not  fail  of  alarming  him ; 
and  by  her  resolution  to  marry  a  Papist,  the  hope 
of  reclaiming  her,  by  a  union  with  a  Protestant, 
was  for  ever  cut  off*'1.  Each  of  these  considera- 
tions had  its  influence  on  Murray,  and  all  of  them 
determined  him  to  decline  complying  at  that  time 
with  the  Queen's  request. 

The  convention  of  nobles,  which  was  assembled 
a  few  days  after  [May  14],  discovered  a  greater 
disposition  to  gratify  the  Queen.  Many  of  them, 
without  hesitation,  expressed  their  approbation  of 
the  intended  match;  but  as  others  were  startled  at 
the  same  dangers  which  had  alarmed  Murray,  or 
were  influenced  by  his  example  to  refuse  their  con- 
sent, another  convention  was  appointed  at  Perth, 
in  order  to  deliberate  more  fully  concerning  this 
matter  62. 

Meanwhile  Mary  gave  a  public  evidence  of  her 
own  inclination,  by  conferring  upon  Darnly  titles 
of  honour  peculiar  to  the  royal  family.  The  oppo- 
sition she  had  hitherto  met  with,  and  the  many 
contrivances  employed  to  thwart  and  disappoint 
her  inclination,  produced  their  usual  effect  on  her 
heart,  they  continued  her  passion,  and  increased 
its  violence.  The  simplicity  of  that  age  imputed 
an  affection  so  excessive  to  the  influence  of  witch- 
craft03. It  was  owing,  however,  to  no  other  charm 
than  the  irresistible  power  of  youth  and  beauty 
over  a  young  and  tender  heart.    Darnly  grew  giddy 

60  Keith,  295.     Mel  v.  114.  6I  Keith,  Append.  160, 

m  Keith,  283.     Knox,  373.  63  Keitli,  283. 


15G5.  OF  SCOTLAND.  307 

with  his  prosperity.  Flattered  by  the  love  of  a 
Queen,  and  the  applause  of  many  among  her  sub- 
jects, his  natural  haughtiness  and  insolence  became 
insupportable,  and  he  could  no  longer  bear  advice, 
far  less  contradiction.  Lord  Ruthven  happening 
to  be  the  first  person  who  informed  him  that  Mary, 
in  order  to  sooth  Elizabeth,  had  delayed  for  some 
time  creating  him  Duke  of  Albany,  he,  in  a  frenzy, 
of  rage,  drew  his  dagger,  and  attempted  to  stab 
him64.  It  required  all  Mary's  attention  to  prevent 
his  falling  under  that  contempt  to  which  such  beha- 
viour deservedly  exposed  him. 

In  no  scene  of  her  life  was  ever  Mary's  own  ad- 
dress more  remarkably  displayed.  Love  sharpened 
her  invention,  and  made  her  study  every  method 
of  gaining  her  subjects.  Many  of  the  nobles  she 
won  by  her  address,  and  more  by  her  promises. 
On  some  she  bestowed  lands,  to  others  she  gave 
new  titles  of  honour05.  She  even  condescended  to 
court  the  Protestant  clergy  ;  and  having  invited 
three  of  their  sitperintendants  to  Stirling,  she  de- 
clared, in  strong  terms,  her  resolution  to  protect 
their  religion,  expressed  her  willingness  to  be  pre- 
sent at  a  conference  upon  the  points  in  doctrine 
which  were  disputed  between  the  Protestants  and 
Papists,  and  went  so  far  as  to  show  some  desire  to 
hear  such  of  their  preachers  as  were  most  remark- 
able  tor  their  moderation00.  By  these  arts  the 
Queen  gained  wonderfully  upon  the  people,  who, 
unless  their  jealousy  be  raised  by  repeated  injuries, 
are  always  ready  to  view  the  actions  of  their  sove- 
reign with  an  indulgent  eye. 

On  the  other  hand,  Murray  and  his  associates 
were  plainly  the  dupes  of  Elizabeth's  policy.     She 

'  Ivcitb,  Append.  100.  Ibid.  283.         M  Knox,  37:}. 


308  THE  HISTORY  B.  III. 

talked  in  so  high  a  strain  of  her  displeasure  at  the 
intended  match;  she  treated  Lady  Lennox  with  so 
much  rigour;  she  wrote  to  the  Scottish  Queen  in 
such  high  terms ;  she  recalled  the  Earl  of  Lennox 
and  his  son  in  such  a  peremptory  manner,  and  with 
such  severe  denunciations  of  her  vengeance  if  they 
should  presume  to  disobey07 ;  that  all  these  expres- 
sions of  aversion  fully  persuaded  them  of  her  sin- 
cerity. This  belief  fortified  their  scruples  with  re- 
spect to  the  match,  and  encouraged  them  to  oppose 
it.  They  began  with  forming  among  themselves 
bonds  of  confederacy  and  mutual  defence;  they 
entered  into  a  secret  correspondence  with  the  Eng- 
lish resident,  in  order  to  secure  Elizabeth's  assist- 
ance when  it  should  become  needful 6s ;  they  endea- 
voured to  till  the  nation  with  such  apprehensions  of 
danger  as  nnVht  counterbalance  the  influence  of 
those  arts  which  the  Queen  had  employed. 

Besides  these  intrigues,  there  were  secretly  car- 
ried on,  by  both  parties,  dark  designs  of  a  more 
criminal  nature,  and  more  suited  to  the  spirit  of 
the  age.  Darnly,  impatient  of  that  opposition, 
which  he  imputed  wholly  to  Murray,  and  resolving 
at  any  rate  to  get  rid  of  such  a  powerful  enemy, 
formed  a  plot  to  assassinate  him  during  the  meet- 
ing of  the  convention  at  Perth.  Murray,  on  his 
part,  despairing  of  preventing  the  marriage  by  any 
other  means,  had,  together  with  the  Duke  of  Cha- 
telherault  and  the  Earl  of  Argyll,  concerted  mea- 
sures for  seizing  Darnly,  and  carrying  him  a  pri- 
soner into  England. 

If  either  of  these  conspiracies  had  taken  effect, 
this  convention  mi^ht  have  been  attended  with  con- 
sequences  extremely  tragical ;  but  both  were  ren- 
67  Keith,  285,  260.  68  Ibid.  289.  292.  298. 


1SG5.  OF  SCOTLAND.  309 

dered  abortive  by  the  vigilance  or  good  fortune  of 
those  against  whom  they  were  formed.  Murray, 
being  warned  of  his  danger  by  some  retainers  to 
the  court,  who  still  favoured  his  interest,  avoided 
the  blow  by  not  going  to  Perth.  Mary,  receiving 
intelligence  of  Murray's  enterprise,  retired  with  the 
utmost  expedition,  along  with  Darnly,  to  the  other 
side  of  Forth.  Conscious,  on  both  sides,  of  guilt, 
and  inflamed  with  resentment,  it  was  impossible 
they  could  either  forget  the  violence  which  them- 
selves had  meditated,  or  forgive  the  injuries  in- 
tended against  them.  From  that  moment  all  hope 
of  reconcilement  was  at  an  end,  and  their  mutual 
enmity  burst  out  with  every  symptom  of  implacable 
hatred  ^ 

69  The  reality  of  these  two  opposite  conspiracies  has  given 
occasion  to  many  disputes  and  much  contradiction.  Some  deny 
that  any  design  was  formed  against  the  life  of  Murray;  others 
call  in  question  the  truth  of  the  conspiracy  against  Darnly. 
There  seems,  however,  to  be  plausible  reasons  for  believing  that 
there  is  some  foundation  for  what  has  been  asserted  with  regard 
to  both  ;  though  the  zeal  and  credulity  of  party-writers  have 
added  to  each  manv  exaggerated  circumstances.  The  following 
arguments  render  it  probable  that  some  violence  was  intended 
against  Murray  : 

I.  1.  This  is  positively  asserted  by  Buchanan,  341.  2.  The 
English  resident  writes  to  Cecil,  that  Murray  was  assuredly  in- 
formed that  a  design  was  formed  of  murdering  liim  at  Perth,  and 
mentions  various  circumstances  concerning  the  manner  in  which 
the  crime  was  to  be  committed.  II  the  whole  had  been  a  fiction 
of  his  own,  or  of  Murray,  it  is  impossible  that  he  could  have 
written  in  this  strain  to  such  a  discerning  minister.  Keith,  287. 
3.  Murray  himself  constantly  and  publicly  persisted  in  affirming 
that  such  a  design  was  formed  against  his  life.  Keith,  App.  10<S. 
He  was  required  by  the  Queen  to  transmit  in  writing  an  account 
of  the  conspiracy  which  he  pretended  had  been  formed  against 
his  life.  This  he  did  accordingly  :  bat,  "  when  ii  was  brought 
to  Ifer  Majoty  by  her  servants  sent  fur  that  purpose,  it  appears 
be  Her  Highness  and  her  council,  that  his  purgation  in  that  bo- 


310  THE  HISTORY  B.  III. 

On  Mary's  return  to  Edinburgh,  she  summoned 
her  vassals  by  proclamation,  and  solicited  them  by 
her  letters  to  repair  thither  in  arms,  for  the  protec- 
tion of  her  person  against  her  foreign  and  domestic 

lialf  was  not  so  sufficient  as  the  matter  required."  Keith,  App. 
109.  He  was  therefore  summoned  to  appear  within  three  davs 
before  the  Queen  in  Holyrood-house  ;  and,  in  order  to  encou- 
rage him  to  do  so,  a  safe  conduct  was  offered  to  him.  Ibid. 
Though  he  had  once  consented  to  appear,  he  afterwards  declined 
to  do  so.  But  whoever  considers  Murray's  situation,  and  the 
character  of  those  who  directed  Mary's  councils  at  that  time, 
will  hardly  deem  it  a  decisive  proof  of  his  guilt,  that  he  did  not 
choose  to  risk  his  person  on  such  security.  4.  The  furious  pas- 
sions of  Darnly,  the  fierceness  of  his  resentment,  which  scrupled 
at  no  violence,  and  the  manners  of  the  age,  render  the  imputa- 
tions of  such  a  crime  less  improbable. 

II.  That  Murray  and  his  associates  had  resolved  to  seize 
Darnly,  on  his  return  from  Perth,  appears  with  still  greater  cer- 
tainty ;  1.  From  the  express  testimony  of  Melvil,  112  ;  although 
Buchanan,  p.  341,  and  Knox,  p.  377,  affect,  vvithont  reason,  to 
represent  this  as  an  idle  rumour.  2.  The  question  was  put  to 
Randolph,  Whether  the  Governor  of  Berwick  would  receive 
Lennox  and  his  son,  if  they  were  delivered  at  that  place?  His 
answer  was,  "  that  they  would  not  refuse  their  own,  i.  e.  their 
own  subjects,  in  whatsoever  sort  they  came  unto  us,  i.  e.  whether 
they  returned  to  England  voluntarily,  as  they  had  been  required, 
or  were  brought  thither  by  force."  This  plainly  shows,  that 
some  such  design  was  in  hand,  and  Randolph  did  not  discourage 
it  by  the  answer  which  he  gave.  Keith,  290.  3.  The  precipi- 
tation with  which  the  Queen  retired,  and  the  reason  she  gave 
for  this  sudden  flight,  are  mentioned  by  Randolph.  Keith,  291. 
4.  A  great  part  of  the  Scottish  nobles,  and  among  these  the 
Earls  of  Argyll  and  Rothes,  who  were  themselves  privy  to  the 
design,  assert  the  reality  of  the  conspiracy.    Good.  vol.  ii.  358. 

All  these  circumstances  rendered  the  truth  of  both  conspira- 
cies probable.  But  we  may  observe  how  far  this  proof,  though 
drawn  from  public  records,  falls  short,  on  both  sides,  of  legal 
and  formal  evidence.  Buchanan  and  Randolph,  in  their  ac- 
counts of  the  conspiracy  against  Murray,  differ  widely  in  almost 
every  circumstance.  The  accounts  of  the  attempt  upon  Darnly 
are  not  mine  consistent.  Melvil  alleges,  that  the  design  of  the 
conspirators  was  to  carry  Darnly  a  prisoner  into  England  ;   ihv 


15G5.  OF  SCOTLAND.  311 

enemies70.  She  was  obeyed  with  all  the  prompt: 
ness  and  alacrity  with  which  subjects  run  to  defend 
a  mild  and  popular  administration.  This  popu- 
larity, however,  she  owed  in  a  great  measure  to 
Murray,  who  had  directed  her  administration  with 
great  prudence.  But  the  crime  of  opposing  her 
marriage  obliterated  the  memory  of  his  former  ser- 
vices;  and  Mary,  impatient  of  contradiction,  and 
apt  to  consider  those  who  disputed  her  will  as 
enemies  to  her  person,  determined  to  let  him  feel 
the  whole  weight  of  her  vengeance.  For  this  pur- 
pose she  summoned  him  to  appear  before  her  upon 
a  short  warning,  to  answer  to  such  things  as  should 
be  laid  to  his  charge71.  At  this  very  time,  Murray 
and  the  Lords  who  adhered  to  him  were  assembled 
at  Stirling,  to  deliberate  what  course  they  should 

proposal  made  to  Randolph  agrees  with  this.  Randolph  says, 
that  they  intended  to  carry  the  Queen  to  St.  Andrew's,  and 
Darnlv  to  Castle  Campbell.  The  Lords,  in  their  declaration, 
aflirm  the  design  of  tlie  conspirators  to  have  been  to  murder 
Darnly  and  his  father,  to  conline  the  Queen  in  Lochleven  during 
life,  and  to  usurp  the  government.  To  believe  implicitly  what- 
ever they  rind  in  an  ancient  paper  is  a  folly  to  which,  in  every 
age,  antiquaries  are  extremely  prone.  Ancient  papers,  how- 
ever, often  contain  no  more  than  the  slanders  of  a  party,  and  the 
lie  of  the  day.  The  declaration  of  the  nobles  referred  to  is  of 
this  kind;  it  is  plainly  rancorous,  and  written  in  the  very  heat 
of  faction.  Many  things  asserted  in  it  are  evidently  false  or 
exaggerated.  Let  Murray  and  his  confederates  be  as  ambitions 
as  we  can  suppose,  they  must  have  had  some  pretences,  and 
plausible  ones  loo,  before  they  could  venture  to  imprison  their 
Sovereign  for  life,  and  to  seize  the  reins  of  government  ;  but, 
at  that  time,  the  Queen's  conduct  had  afforded  no  colourable 
excuse  for  proceeding  to  Bach  extremities.  It  is  likewise  re- 
markable, that  in  all  the  proclamations  against  M urray,  of  which 
so  many  are  published  in  Keith,  Appendix,  10S,  &c.  neither 
the  violent  attempt  upon  Darnlv,  nor  that  which  he  is  alleged 
to  have  formed  against  the  Queen  herself,  is  ever  once  men- 
tioned. 

70  Keith,  298.  7I  Ibid.  Appendix,  108. 


312  THE  HISTORY  B.  III. 

hold  in  such  a  difficult  conjuncture.  But  the  cur- 
rent of  popular  favour  ran  so  strongly  against 
them,  and,  notwithstanding  some  fears  and  jea- 
lousies, there  prevailed  in  the  nation  such  a  gene- 
ral disposition  to  gratify  the  Queen  in  a  matter 
which  so  nearly  concerned  her,  that,  without  com- 
ing to  any  other  conclusion  than  to  implore  the 
Queen  of  England's  protection,  they  put  an  end  to 
their  ineffectual  consultations,  and  returned  every 
man  to  his  own  house. 

Together  with  this  discovery  of  the  weakness  of 
her  enemies,  the  confluence  of  her  subjects  from  all 
corners  of  the  kingdom  afforded  Mary  an  agree- 
able proof  of  her  own  strength.  While  the  Queen 
was  in  this  prosperous  situation,  she  determined 
to  bring  to  a  period  an  affair  which  had  so  long 
engrossed  her  heart  and  occupied  her  attention. 
On  the  twenty-ninth  of  July  she  married  Lord 
Darnly.  The  ceremony  was  performed  in  the 
Queen's  chapel,  according  to  the  rites  of  the 
Romish  church  ;  the  Pope's  bull  dispensing  with 
their  marriage  having  been  previously  obtained72. 
She  issued  at  the  same  time  proclamations,  confer- 
ring the  title  of  King  of  the  Scots  upon  her  hus- 
band, and  commanding  that  henceforth  all  writs  at 
law  should  run  in  the  joint  names  of  King  and 
Queen73.  Nothing  can  be  a  stronger  proof  of  the 
violence  of  Mary's  love,  or  the  weakness  of  her 
counsels,  than  this  last  step.  Whether  she  had 
anv  right  to  choose  a  husband  without  consent  of 
parliament,  was,  in  that  age,  a  matter  of  some  dis- 
pute 74 ;  that  she  had  no  right  to  confer  upon  him, 
by   her   private  authority,   the  title  and  dignity  of 

72  Keith,  302.         73  Anderson,  i.  33.    See  Append.  No.  XI. 
™  Buohan.341. 


15G5.  OF  SCOTLAND.  313 

King,  or  by  a  simple  proclamation  to  raise  her 
husband  to  be  the  master  of  her  people,  seems  to 
be  beyond  all  doubt.  Francis  II.,  indeed,  bore 
the  same  title.  It  was  not,  however,  the  gift  of 
the  Queen,  but  of  the  nation  ;  and  the  consent  of 
Parliament  was  obtained  before  he  ventured  to 
assume  it.  Darnly's  condition,  as  a  subject,  ren- 
dered it  still  more  necessary  to  have  the  concur- 
rence of  the  supreme  council  in  his  favour.  Such 
a  violent  and  unprecedented  stretch  of  prerogative, 
as  the  substituting  a  proclamation  in  place  of  an 
act  of  parliament,  might  have  justly  alarmed  the 
nation.  But  at  that  time  the  Queen  possessed  so 
entirely  the  confidence  of  her  subjects,  that  not- 
withstanding all  the  clamours  of  the  malecontents, 
no  symptoms  of  general  discontent  appeared  on 
that  account. 

Even  amidst  that  scene  of  joy  which  always  ac- 
companies successful  love,  Mary  did  not  sutler  the 
course  of  her  vengeance  against  the  malecontent 
nobles  to  be  interrupted.  Three  days  after  the 
marriage,  Murray  was  again  summoned  to  court, 
under  the  severest  penalties,  and,  upon  his  non- 
appearance, the  rigour  of  justice  took  place,  and 
he  was  declared  an  outlaw75.  At  the  same  time 
the  Queen  set  at  liberty  Lord  Gordon,  who,  ever 
since  his  father's  insurrection  in  the  year  one  thou- 
sand live  hundred  and  sixty-two,  had  been  detained 
a  prisoner ;  she  recalled  the  Karl  of  Sutherland, 
who,  on  account  of  his  concern  in  that  conspiracy, 
had  fled  into  Flanders  ;  and  she  permitted  Both- 
well  to  return  again  into  Scotland.  The  first  and 
last  of  these  were  among  the  most  powerful  sub- 
jects in  the  kingdom,  and  all  of  them  animated  with 

7i  Keitb,  30<>,  :JI<>. 
VOL.  I.  E  E 


314  THE  HISTORY  B.  III. 

implacable  hatred  to  Murray,  whom  they  deemed 
the  enemy  of  their  families  and  the  author  of  their 
own  sufferings.  This  common  hatred  became  the 
foundation  of  the  strictest  union  with  the  Queen, 
and  gained  them  an  ascendant  over  all  her  coun- 
cils. Murray  himself  considered  this  confederacy 
with  his  avowed  enemies,  as  a  more  certain  indica- 
tion than  any  measure  she  had  yet  taken,  of  her 
inexorable  resentment. 

The  malecontents  had  not  yet  openly  taken  up 
arms"6.  But  the  Queen  having  ordered  her  sub- 
jects to  march  against  them,  they  were  driven  to 
the  last  extremity.  They  found  themselves  unable 
to  make  head  against  the  numerous  forces  which 
Mary  had  assembled ;  and  fled  into  Argyleshire,  in 
expectation  of  aid  from  Elizabeth,  to  whom  they 
had  secretly  dispatched  a  messenger  in  order  to 
implore  her  immediate  assistance77. 

Meanwhile  Elizabeth  endeavoured  to  embarrass 
Mary  by  a  new  declaration  of  disgust  at  her  con- 
duct. She  blamed  both  her  choice  of  Lord  Darnlv, 
and  the  precipitation  with  which  she  had  concluded 
the  marriage.  She  required  Lennox  and  Darnly, 
whom  she  still  called  her  subjects,  to  return  into 
England ;  and  at  the  same  time  she  warmly  inter- 
ceded in  behalf  of  Murray,  whose  behaviour  she 

76  After  their  fruitless  consultation  in  Stirling,  the  Lords  re- 
tired to  their  own  houses.  Keith,  304.  Murray  was  still  at 
St.  Andrew's  on  July  22.  Keith,  300.  By  the  places  of  ren- 
dezvous, appointed  for  the  inhabitants  of  the  different  counties, 
August  4,  it  appears  that  the  Queen's  intention  was  to  march 
into  Fife,  the  county  in  which  Murray,  Rothes,  Kirkaldy,  and 
other  chiefs  of  the  malecontents,  resided.  Keith,  310.  Their 
flight  into  the  west,  Keith,  312,  preveuted  this  expedition,  and 
fhe  former  rendezvous  was  altered.     Keith,  310. 

77  Keith,  312.     Knox,  380. 


OF  SCOTLAND.  315 

represented  to  be  not  only  innocent  but  laudable. 
This  message,  so  mortifying  to  the  pride  of  the 
Queen,  and  so  full  of  contempt  for  her  husband, 
was  rendered  still  more  insupportable  by  the  petu- 
lant and  saucy  demeanour  of  Tamvvorth,  the  person 
who  delivered  it78.  Mary  vindicated  her  own  con- 
duct with  warmth,  but  with  great  strength  of  rea- 
son ;  and  rejected  the  intercession  in  behalf  of 
Murray,  not  without  signs  of  resentment  at  Eliza- 
beth's pretending  to  intermeddle  in  the  internal 
government  of  her  kingdom 7y. 

She  did  not,  on  that  account,  intermit  in  the 
least  the  ardour  with  which  she  pursued  Murray 
and  his  adherents80.  They  now  appeared  openly 
in  arms;  and,  having  received  a  small  supply  in 
money  from  Elizabeth81,  were  endeavouring  to  raise 
their  followers  in  the  western  counties.  But  Mary's 
vigilance  hindered  them  from  assembling  in  any 
considerable  body.  All  her  military  operations  at 
that  time  were  concerted  with  wisdom,  executed 
with  vigour,  and  attended  with  success.  In  order 
to  encourage  her  troops,  she  herself  marched  along 
with  them,  rode  with  loaded  pistols8-',  and  endured 
all  the  fatigues  of  war  with  admirable  fortitude. 
Her  alacrity  inspired  her  forces  with  an  invincible 
resolution,  which,  together  with  their  superiority  in 
number,  deterred  the  malecontents  from  lacing  them 
in  the  field :  but,  having  artfully  passed  the  Queen's 

«  Camd.  :'.*)h.  ~"  Keith,  Append.  99. 

hfl  The  must  considerahle  persona  who  joined  .Mnrrav  were, 
the  Duke  ofCbatelberault,  the  Boris  of  Argyll,  Olencairo,  Rothes, 
Lord  Boyd  and  Ochiltree  ;  the  Lairds  of  Grange,  Cunniogham- 

head,  Balcomie,  Canny  lie,  Lawers,  liar,  Dreghorn,  I'ilarrow, 
Comptroller,  and  the  Tutor  of  I'iotur.      Knox,  382. 

-'  Knox,  380.  '  Keith,  Append.  164. 


316  THE  HISTORY  B.  III. 

army,  they  marched  with  great  rapidity  to  Edin- 
burgh, and  endeavoured  to  rouse  the  inhabitants  of 
that  city  to  arms.  [Aug.  91.]  The  Queen  did  not 
suffer  them  to  remain  long  unmolested  ;  and  on 
her  approach  they  were  forced  to  abandon  that 
place,  and  retire  in  confusion  towards  the  western 
borders  83. 

As  it  was  uncertain,  for  some  time,  what  route 
they  had  taken,   Mary  employed   that  interval  in 
providing  for  the  security  of  the  counties   in  the 
heart  of  the  kingdom.     She  seized  the  places  of 
strength  which  belonged  to  the  rebels  ;  and  obliged 
the  considerable  barons  in  those  shires  which  she 
most  suspected,  to  join  in  associations  for  her  de- 
fence84.     Having  thus  left  all  the  country  behind 
her   in    tranquillity,    she,    with   an   army  eighteen 
thousand  strong,  marched  towards  Dumfries,  where 
the  rebels  then  were.      During  their  retreat,  they 
had  sent  letters  to  the  Queen  from  almost  every 
place  where  they  halted,  full  of  submission,  and 
containing  various  overtures  towards  an  accommo- 
dation.     But  Mary,  who  determined  not  to  let  slip 
such  a  favourable  opportunitv  of  crushing  the  muti- 
nous spirit  of  her  subjects,  rejected  them  with  dis- 
dain.    As  she  advanced,  the  malecontents  retired; 
and  having  received  no  effectual  aid  from  Eliza- 
beth85, they  despaired  of  any  other  means  of  safety, 
fled  into  England  [Oct.  20],   and  put  themselves 
under  the  protection  of  the  Earl  of  Bedford,  warden 
of  the  marches. 

Nothing  which  Bedford's  personal  friendship  for 
Murray  could  supply  was  wanting  to  render  their 

83  Keith,  315.  M  Ibid.  113. 

See  Append.  No.  XII.  XIII. 


1565.  OF  SCOTLAND.  317 

retreat  agreeable.  But  Elizabeth  herself  treated 
them  with  extreme  neglect.  She  had  fully  gained 
her  end,  and,  by  their  means,  had  excited  such 
discord  and  jealousies  among  the  Scots  as  would, 
in  all  probability,  long  distract  and  weaken  Mary's 
councils.  Her  business  now  was  to  save  appear- 
ances, and  to  justify  herself  to  the  ministers  of 
France  and  Spain,  who  accused  her  of  fomenting 
the  troubles  in  Scotland  by  her  intrigues.  The 
expedient  she  contrived  for  her  vindication  strongly 
displays  her  own  character,  and  the  wretched  con- 
dition of  exiles,  who  are  obliged  to  depend  on  a 
foreign  Prince.  Murray,  and  Hamilton,  Abbot  of 
Kilwinning,  being  appointed  by  the  other  fugitives 
to  wait  on  Elizabeth,  instead  of  meeting  with  that 
welcome  reception  which  was  due  to  men  who,  out 
of  confidence  in  her  promises,  and  in  order  to  for- 
ward her  designs,  had  hazarded  their  lives  and 
fortunes,  could  not  even  obtain  the  favour  of  an 
audience,  until  they  had  meanly  consented  to  ac- 
knowledge, in  the  presence  of  the  French  and  Spa- 
nish ambassadors,  that  Elizabeth  had  given  them  no 
encouragement  to  take  arms.  No  sooner  did  they 
make  this  declaration  than  she  astonished  them 
with  this  reply:  "  You  have  declared  the  truth;  J 
am  far  from  setting  an  example  of  rebellion  to  my 
own  subjects,  by  countenancing  those  who  rebel 
against  their  lawful  Prince.  The  treason  of  which 
you  have  been  guilty  is  detestable ;  and  as  traitors 
I  banish  you  from  my  presence86."  Notwithstand- 
ing this  scene  of  farce  and  of  falsehood,  so  disho- 
nourable to  all  the  persons  who  acted  a  part  in  it, 
Elizabeth  permitted  the  malecontents  peaceably  to 
reside  in  her  dominions,  supplied  them  secretly  with 

^Mclv.  112. 
VOL.   I.  F  F 


Gia  THE  HISTORY  B.  III. 

money,  and  renewed  her  intercession  with  the  Scot- 
tish Queen  in  their  favour87. 

The  advantage  she  had  gained  over  them  did 
not  satisfy  Mary;  she  resolved  to  follow  the  blow, 
and  to  prevent  a  party  which  she  dreaded  from 
ever  recovering  any  footing  in  the  nation.  With 
this  view,  she  called  a  meeting  of  parliament; 
and,  in  order  that  a  sentence  of  forfeiture  might  be 
legally  pronounced  against  the  banished  lords,  she 
summoned  them,  by  public  proclamation,  to  appear 
before  it88. 

Dec.  1.]  The  Duke  of  Chatelherault,  on  his  hum- 
ble application,  obtained  a  separate  pardon;  but  not 
without  difficulty,  as  the  King  violently  opposed  it. 
He  was  obliged,  however,  to  leave  the  kingdom, 
and  to  reside  for  some  time  in  France  89. 

The  numerous  forces  which  Mary  brought  into 
the  field,  the  vigour  with  which  she  acted,  and  the 
length  of  time  she  kept  them  in  arms,  resemble  the 
efforts  of  a  Prince  with  revenues  much  more  con- 
siderable than  those  which  she  possessed.  But 
armies  were  then  levied  and  maintained  by  Princes 
at  small  charge.  The  vassal  followed  his  superior, 
and  the  superior  attended  the  monarch,  at  his  own 
expense.  Six  hundred  horsemen,  however,  and 
three  companies  of  foot,  besides  her  guards,  re- 
ceived regular  pay  from  the  Queen.  This  extra- 
ordinary charge,  together  with  the  disbursements 
occasioned  by  her  marriage,  exhausted  a  treasury 
which  was  far  from  being  rich.  In  this  exigency, 
many  devices  were  fallen  upon  for  raising  money. 
Fines  were  levied  on  the  towns  of  St.  Andrew's, 
Perth,  and  Dundee,  which  were  suspected  of  fa- 
vouring the  inalecontents.      An  unusual  tax  was 

^  Knox,  389.  P8  Keith,  320.  h'J  Knox,  389. 


1565.  OF  SCOTLAND.  319 

imposed  on  the  boroughs  throughout  the  kingdom; 
and  a  great  sum  was  demanded  of  the  citizens  of 
Edinburgh,  by  way  of  loan.  This  unprecedented 
exaction  alarmed  the  citizens.  They  had  recourse 
to  delays,  and  started  difficulties,  in  order  to  evade 
it.  These  Mary  construed  to  be  acts  of  avowed 
disobedience,  and  instantly  committed  several  of 
them  to  prison.  But  this  severity  did  not  subdue 
the  undaunted  spirit  of  liberty  which  prevailed 
among  the  inhabitants.  The  Queen  was  obliged 
to  mortgage  to  the  city  the  superiority  of  the  town 
of  Leith,  by  which  she  obtained  a  considerable  sum 
of  money'10.  The  thirds  of  ecclesiastical  benefices 
proved  another  source  whence  the  Queen  derived 
some  supply.  About  this  time  we  find  the  Protes- 
tant clergy  complaining  more  bitterly  than  ever  of 
their  poverty.  The  army,  it  is  probable,  exhausted 
a  great  part  of  that  fund  which  was  appropriated 
for  their  maintenance  91. 

The  assemblies  of  the  church  were  not  uncon- 
cerned spectators  of  the  commotions  of  this  turbu- 
lent year.  In  the  meeting  held  the  twenty-fourth 
of  June,  previous  to  the  Queen's  marriage,  several 
of  the  malecontent  nobles  were  present,  and  seem 
to  have  had  great  influence  on  its  decisions.  The 
high  strain  in  which  the  assembly  addressed  the 
Queen  can  be  imputed  only  to  those  fears  and 
jealousies  with  regard  to  religion,  which  they  en- 
deavoured to  infuse  into  the  nation.  The  assembly 
complained,  with  some  bitterness,  of  the  stop  which 
had  been  put  to  the  progress  of  the  Reformation 
by  the  Queen's  arrival  in  Scotland;  they  rerjuircd 
not  only  the  total  suppression  of  the  popish  worship 
throughout  the  kingdom,  but  even  in  the  Queen's 
00  Knox,  :Jh3.  386.  0I  flfaitl.  Ili^t.  of  Edinburgh,  27. 


320  THE  HISTORY  OF  SCOTLAND.        B.  III. 

own  chapel ;  and,  besides  the  legal  establishment  of 
the  Protestant  religion,  they  demanded  that  Mary 
herself  should  publicly  embrace  it.  The  Queen, 
after  some  deliberation,  replied,  that  neither  her  con- 
science nor  her  interest  would  permit  her  to  take 
such  a  step.  The  former  would  for  ever  reproach 
her  for  a  change  which  proceeded  from  no  inward 
conviction ;  the  latter  would  surfer  by  the  offence 
which  her  apostacy  must  give  to  the  King  of  France, 
and  her  other  allies  on  the  continent92. 

It  is  remarkable,  that  the  prosperous  situation  of 
the  Queen's  affairs  during  this  year,  began  to  work 
some  change  in  favour  of  her  religion.  The  Earls 
of  Lennox,  Athol,  and  Cassils,  openly  attended 
mass;  she  herself  afforded  the  Catholics  a  more 
avowed  protection  than  formerly ;  and,  by  her  per- 
mission, some  of  the  ancient  monks  ventured  to 
preach  publicly  to  the  people93. 

92  Knox,  376.  93  Ibid.  3S9,  390. 


END  OF  VOL.   I 


-?>- 


.      SOCIETY 


C.  and  C»~\VU#fl7u^r.ii!i,  Chiswfi 


COLUMBIA 

This  book  i 
expiration  r 
-ovido 


"Y 


R54 
1 


ftHT-ittl