OF  THE 

U N I VLRS  ITY 
Of  ILLINOIS 

930 

RCo^klS 

\S^>4- 

v.^> 


L I E>  R.AHY 
OF  THE 

UNIVERSITY 
OF  ILLINOIS 

930 

RGSUElfc 

\S"M- 

v.3 


BxCtory 


’Clift 

fiSl! 

THE 


™J'edon  • 


opera  eyoii^" 

V Volt  S|A 

* (cn-nurnf 


wrchoev. 


Cvpfttl 


yjuagrana  SgcftarL 

N"-"  „ "iT ~^g 


■ SiraM 


Sa?>  o' 

~-<^rg<X0i 

-Jfc/cu>3--l 


e.mtv>>a 


AGISYAMj 


Raptu' 


Roman  Mili-W 


e&uar  <?fHv7en)y 


PeeneliLeaj^uefi 


Opliir 


THE 


' ANCIENT  HISTORY 


THE  EGYPTIANS,  CARTHAGINIANS,  ASSYRIANS, 
BABYLONIANS,  MEDES  AND  PERSIANS, 
GRECIANS,  AND  MACEDONIANS. 


BY  M.  ROLLIN', 

LATE  PRINCIPAL  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  PARIS,  PROFESSOR  OF  ELOQUENCE  IN  THE  ROYAL 
COLLEGE,  AND  MEMBER  OF  THE  ROYAL  ACADEMY  OF  INSCRIPTIONS 
AND  BELLES-LETTRES. 


TRANSLATED  FROM  THE  FRENCH. 


THE  EIGHTEENTH  EDITION, 

REVISED,  CORRECTED,  AND  ILLUSTRATED  WITH  MAPS. 


IN  SIX  VOLUMES. 

VOL.  III. 


LONDON : 

PRINTED  FOR  THOMAS  TEGG  AND  SON,  CHEAPSIDE. 


MDCCCXXXIV. 


BUNGAY : 

STEREOTYPED  AND  PRINTED  BY  J.  R.  AND  C.  CHILDS. 


CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  III. 


7 SO 

ft 

I $ 3 (-1 


BOOK  VIII. 

CHAP.  I. 

Page 


Sect.  I.  The  very  short  reigns  of  Xerxes  II.  and  Sogdianus. 

They  are  succeeded  by  Darius  Nothus.  He  puts  a stop  to  the 
insurrection  of  Egypt  and  that  of  Media.  He  bestows  on  Cyrus, 
his  youngest  son,  the  supreme  command  of  all  Asia  Minor  . 1 

Sect.  II.  The  Athenians  make  themselves  masters  of  the  island  of 
Cythera.  Expeditions  of  Brasidas  into  Thrace.  He  takes  Am- 
phipolis.  Thucydides  the  historian  is  banished.  A battle  is 
fought  near  Delium,  where  the  Athenians  are  defeated  . . 6 

Sect.  III.  A twelvemonth’s  truce  is  agreed  upon  between  the  two 
states.  Death  of  Cleon  and  Brasidas.  A treaty  of  peace  for 
fifty  years  concluded  between  the  Athenians  and  Lacedaemonians  9 
Sect.  IV.  Alcibiades  begins  to  appear  in  public.  His  character. 

He  opposes  Nicias  in  every  thing,  and  breaks  the  treaty  he  had 
concluded.  The  banishment  of  Hyperbolus  puts  an  end  to  the 

Ostracism 13 

Sect.  V.  Alcibiades  engages  the  Athenians  in  the  war  of  Sicily  . 20 

Sect.  VI.  Account  of  the  several  people  who  inhabited  Sicily  . 23 

Sect.  VII.  The  people  of  Egesta  implore  aid  of  the  Athenians. 
Nicias  opposes,  but  to  no  purpose,  the  war  of  Sicily.  Alcibiades 
carries  that  point.  They  both  are  appointed  generals  with 
Lamachus  ...........  24 

Sect.  VIII.  The  Athenians  prepare  to  set  sail.  Sinister  omens. 

The  statues  of  Mercury  are  mutilated.  Alcibiades  is  accused, 
and  insists  upon  his  being  tried,  but  his  request  is  not  granted. 

Triumphant  departure  of  the  fleet 29 

Sect.  IX.  Syracuse  is  alarmed.  The  Athenian  fleet  arrives  in  Sicily  32 
Sect.  X.  Alcibiades  is  recalled.  He  flies,  and  is  sentenced  to  die 
for  contumacy.  He  retires  to  Sparta.  Flexibility  of  his  genius 

and  disposition 34 

Sect.  XI.  Description  of  Syracuse  . . . . . .37 

Sect.  XIL  Nicias,  after  some  engagements,  besieges  Syracuse. 
Lamachus  is  killed  in  a battle.  The  city  is  reduced  to  the  great- 
est extremities  39 

Sect.  XIII.  The  Syracusans  resolve  to  capitulate,  but  Gylippus’s 
arrival  changes  the  face  of  affairs.  Nicias  is  forced  by  his  col- 
leagues to  engage  in  a sea-fight,  and  is  overcome.  His  land- 

forces  are  also  defeated 47 

Sect.  XIV.  The  consternation  with  which  the  Athenians  are 
seized.  They  again  hazard  a sea-fight,  and  are  defeated.  They 


resolve  to  retire  by  land.  Being  close  pursued  by  the  Syracu- 
sans, they  surrender.  Nicias  and  Demosthenes  are  sentenced  to 
die,  and  executed.  The  effect  which  the  news  of  the  defeat  of 
the  army  produces  in  Athens 59 

CHAP.  II. 

Sect.  I.  Consequences  of  the  defeat  of  the  Athenians  in  Sicity. 
Revolt  of  the  allies.  Alcibiades  grows  into  great  power  with 
Tissaphernes 7Q 


II  CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  III. 

Page 

Sect.  II.  The  return  of  Alcibiades  to  Athens  negotiated,  upon  con- 
dition of  establishing  the  aristocratical,  in  the  room  of  the  demo- 
» cratical  government.  Tissaphernes  concludes  a new  treaty  with 
the  Lacedsemonians  ....  ....  74 

Sect.  III.  The  whole  authority  of  the  Athenian  government  having 
been  vested  in  four  hundred  persons,  they  make  a tyrannical 
abuse  of  their  power,  and  are  deposed.  Alcibiades  is  recalled. 
After  various  accidents,  and  several  considerable  victories,  he  re- 
turns in  triumph  to  Athens,  and  is  appointed  generalissimo.  He 
causes  the  great  mysteries  to  be  celebrated,  and  departs  with  the 

fleet 77 

Sect.  IV.  The  Lacedaemonians  appoint  Lysander  admiral.  He 
acquires  great  influence  with  the  younger  Cyrus,  who  commanded 
in  Asia.  He  beats  the  Athenian  fleet,  near  Ephesus  in  the  absence 
of  Alcibiades,  who  is  deprived  of  the  command.  Ten  generals 
are  chosen  in  his  stead.  Callicratidas  succeeds  Lysander  . . 86 

Sect.  V.  Callicratidas  is  defeated  by  the  Athenians  near  the  Argi- 
nusae.  The  Athenians  pass  sentence  of  death  upon  several  of 
their  generals  for  not  having  brought  off  the  bodies  of  those  who 
had  been  slain  in  battle.  Socrates  alone  has  the  courage  to  op- 
pose so  unjust  a sentence 92 

Sect.  VI.  Lysander  commands  the  Lacedaemonian  fleet.  Cyrus 
is  recalled  to  court  by  his  father.  Lysander  gains  a celebrated 
victory  over  the  Athenians  at  iEgospotamos  . . . .99 

Sect.  VII.  Athens,  besieged  by  Lysander,  capitulates  and  sur- 
renders. Lysander  changes  the  form  of  government,  and  estab- 
lishes thirty  commanders  in  it.  He  sends  Gylippus  before  him  to 
Sparta,  with  all  the  gold  and  silver  taken  from  the  enemy.  De- 
cree of  Sparta  upon  the  use  to  be  made  of  it.  The  Peloponne- 
sian war  ends  in  this  manner.  Death  of  Darius  Nothus  . . 104 

BOOK  IX. 

CHAP.  I. 

Sect.  I.  Coronation  of  Artaxerxes  Mnemon.  Cyrus  attempts  to 
assassinate  his  brother,  and  is  sent  into  Asia  Minor.  Cruel  re- 
venge of  Statira,  wife  of  Artaxerxes,  upon  the  authors  and  ac- 
complices in  the  murder  of  her  brother.  Death  of  Alcibiades. 

His  character  ..........  108 

Sect.  II.  The  Thirty  exercise  the  most  horrid  cruelties  at  Athens. 
They  put  Theramenes,  one  of  their  colleagues,  to  death.  Socrates 
takes  his  defence  upon  himself.  Thrasybulus  attacks  the  tyrants, 
makes  himself  master  of  Athens,  and  restores  its  liberty  . .114 

Sect.  III.  Lysander  abuses  his  power  in  an  extraordinary  manner. 

He  is  recalled  to  Sparta  upon  the  complaint  of  Pharnabazus  . 120 

CHAP.  II. 

The  younger  Cyrus,  with  the  aid  of  the  Grecian  troops,  endeavours 
to  dethrone  his  brother  Artaxerxes.  He  is  killed  in  battle.  Fa- 
mous retreat  of  the  Ten  Thousand 123 

Sect.  1.  Cyrus  raises  troops  secretly  against  his  brother  Artax- 
erxes. Thirteen  thousand  Greeks  join  him.  He  sets  out  from 
Sardis,  ami  arrives  at  Babylonia,  after  a march  of  more  than  six 

months 124 

Sect.  II.  The  battle  of  Cunaxa : the  Greeks  are  victorious  on  their 

side  : Artaxerxes  on  his  : Cyrus  is  killed 129 

Sect.  III.  Eulogy  of  Cyrus 135 


CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  III. 


iii 

Page 

Sect.  IV.  The  king  wishes  to  compel  the  Greeks  to  deliver  up  their 
arms.  They  resolve  to  die  rather  than  surrender  themselves.  A 
treaty  is  made  with  them.  Tissaphernes  takes  upon  him  to  con- 
duct them  back  to  their  own  country.  He  treacherously  seizes 
Clearchus  and  four  other  generals,  who  are  all  potto  death  . . 137 

Sect.  Y.  Retreat  of  the  Ten  Thousand  Greeks  from  the  province  of 
Babylon  as  far  as  Trebisond  . . . . . . . .144 

Sect.  VI  The  Greeks,  after  having  undergone  excessive  fatigues, 
and  surmounted  many  dangers,  arrive  upon  the  sea-coast  opposite 
to  Byzantium.  They  pass  the  strait,  and  engage  in  the  service  of 
Seuthes,  prince  of  Thrace.  Xenophon  afterwards  repasses  the 
sea  with  his  troops,  advances  to  Pergamus,  and  joins  Thimbron, 
general  of  the  Lacedaemonians,  who  was  marching  against  Tissa- 
phernes and  Pharnabazus  . . . . . . . . 150 

Sect.  VII.  Consequences  of  Cyrus’s  death  in  the  court  of  Artax- 
erxes.  Cruelty  and  jealousy  of  Parysatis.  Statira  poisoned  . 155 

CHAP.  III. 

Sect.  I.  The  Grecian  cities  of  Ionia  implore  aid  of  the  Lacedaemo- 
nians against  Artaxerxes.  Rare  prudence  of  a lady  continued  in 
her  husband’s  government  after  his  death.  Agesilaus  elected 
king  of  Sparta.  His  character  .......  158 

Sect.  II.  Agesilaus  sets  out  for  Asia.  Lysander  falls  out  with  him, 
and  returns  to  Sparta.  His  ambitious  designs  to  alter  the  suc- 
cession to  the  throne  . . . . . . . .166 

Sect.  III.  Expedition  of  Agesilaus  in  Asia.  Disgrace  and  death 
of  Tissaphernes.  Sparta  gives  Agesilaus  the  command  of  its 
armies  by  sea  and  land.  He  deputes  Pisander  to  command  the 
fleet.  Interview  of  Agesilaus  and  Pharnabazus  . . . .171 

Sect.  IV.  League  against  the  Lacedaemonians.  Agesilaus  recalled 
by  the  Ephori  to  defend  his  country,  obeys  directly.  Lysander’s 
death.  Victory  of  the  Lacedaemonians  near  Nemaea.  Their  fleet 
is  beaten  by  Conon  off  Cnidus.  Battle  gained  by  the  Lacedaemo- 
nians at  Coronaea  177 

Sect.  V.  Agesilaus  returns  victorious  to  Sparta.  He  always  retains 
his  simplicity  and  ancient  manners.  Conon  rebuilds  the  walls  ot 
Athens.  A peace,  disgraceful  to  the  Greeks,  concluded  by  Antal- 
cidas  the  Lacedaemonian  . . . . . . . ,185 

Sect.  VI.  War  of  Artaxerxes  against  Evagoras  king  of  Salamis. 
Eulogy  and  character  of  that  prince.  Tiribazus  falsely  accused. 

His  accuser  punished  .........  191 

Sect.  VII.  The  expedition  of  Artaxerxes  against  the  Cadusians. 
History  of  Datames  the  Carian 200 

CHAP.  IV. 

History  of  Socrates  abridged  ........  208 

Sect.  I.  Birth  of  Socrates.  He  applies  at  first  to  sculpture  ; then 
to  the  study  of  the  sciences.  His  wonderful  progress  in  them. 

His  taste  for  moral  philosophy.  His  manner  of  living,  and  suf- 
ferings from  the  ill-humour  of  his  wife 209 

Sect.  II.  Of  the  daemon,  or  familiar  spirit  of  Socrates  . . . 213 

Sect.  III.  Socrates  declared  the  wisest  of  mankind  by  the  oracle 

of  Delphi 216 

Sect.  IV.  Socrates  devotes  himself  entirely  to  the  instruction  of  the 
youth  of  Athens.  Affection  of  his  disciples  for  him.  The  admi- 
rable principles  with  which  he  inspires  them,  both  with  respect  to 
government  and  religion 217 


iv  CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  III. 

Page 

Sect.  V.  Socrates  applies  himself  to  discredit  the  sophists  in  the 
opinion  of  the  young  Athenians.  What  is  to  be  understood  of  the 
ironical  character  ascribed  to  him  ....  . 224 

Sect.  VI.  Socrates  is  accused  of  holding  bad  opinions  in  regard  to 
the  Gods,  and  of  corrupting  the  Athenian  youth.  He  defends 
himself  without  art  or  fear.  He  is  condemned  to  die  . . . *226 

Sect.  VII.  Socrates  refuses  to  escape  out  of  prison.  He  passes  the 
last  day  of  his  life  in  discoursing  with  his  friends  upon  the  im- 
mortality of  the  soul.  He  drinks  the  poison.  Punishment  of  his 


accusers.  Honours  paid  to  his  memory 237 

Sect.  VIII.  Reflections  upon  the  sentence  passed  on  Socrates  by 
the  Athenians,  and  upon  Socrates  himself  .....  247 

BOOK  X. 

The  ancient  history  of  the  Persians  and  Grecians  ....  252 
Manners  and  customs  of  the  Greeks  ......  ib. 

CHAP.  I. 

Of  political  government ib. 

ARTICLE  I. 

Of  the  government  of  Sparta 253 

Sect.  I.  Abridged  idea  of  the  Spartan  government.  Entire  sub- 
mission to  the  laws  was  in  a manner  the  soul  of  it  . . . .254 

Sect.  II.  Love  of  poverty  instituted  at  Sparta  . ....  257 

III.  Laws  established  by  Minos  in  Crete  the  model  of  those  of 
Sparta 260 

ARTICLE  II. 

Of  the  government  of  Athens 267 

Sect.  I.  Foundation  of  the  government  of  Athens  according  to  So- 
lon’s plan 268 

Sect.  II.  Of  the  inhabitants  of  Athens 270 

1.  Of  the  citizens ib. 

2.  Of  the  strangers 271 

3.  Of  the  servants 272 

Sect.  III.  Of  the  council  or  senate  of  Five  Hundred  . . . 273 

IV.  Of  the  Areopagus 275 

V.  Of  the  magistrates  ........  277 

VI.  Of  the  assemblies  of  the  people ib. 

VII.  Of  trials  279 

VIII.  Of  the  Amphictyons 281 

IX.  Of  the  revenues  of  Athens 283 

X.  Of  the  education  of  the  youth 284 

1.  Dancing.  Music ib. 

2.  Of  the  other  exercises  of  the  body  ....  287 

3.  Of  the  exercises  of  the  mind 288 


CHAP.  II. 

OF  WAR. 

Sect.  I.  The  nations  of  Greece  in  all  times  very  warlike,  especially 

the  Lacedaemonians  and  Athenians  289 

Sect.  II.  Origin  and  cause  of  the  valour  and  military  virtue  by  which 
the  Lacedaemonians  and  Athenians  always  distinguished  them- 
selves   290 

Sect.  III.  Different  kind  of  troops  of  which  the  armies  of  the  Lace- 


CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  III. 

daemomans  and  Athenians  were  composed 

Sect.  IV.  Of  maritime  affairs,  fleets,  and  naval  forces  . 

Sect.  Y.  Peculiar  character  of  the  Athenians  . 

Sect.  YI.  Common  character  of  the  Lacedaemonians  and  Athe- 
nians   


BOOK  XI. 

The  history  of  Dionysius  the  Elder  and  Younger,  tyrants  of  Sy- 
racuse   


CHAP.  I. 

Sect.  - I.  Means  made  use  of  by  Dionysius  the  Elder,  to  possess 

himself  of  the  tyranny 

Sect.  II.  Commotions  in  Sicily,  and  at  Syracuse,  against  Diony- 
sius. He  finds  means  to  dispel  them.  To  prevent  revolts  he  pro- 
poses to  attack  the  Carthaginians.  His  wonderful  application 
and  success  in  making  preparations  for  the  war.  Plato  comes  to 
Syracuse.  His  intimacy  and  friendship  with  Dion 
Sect.  III.  Dionysius  declares  war  against  the  Carthaginians.  Va- 
rious success  of  it.  Syracuse  reduced  to  extremities,  and  soon 
after  delivered.  New  commotions  against  Dionysius.  Defeat  of 
Imilco,  and  afterwards  of  Mago.  Unhappy  fate  of  the  city  of 

Rhegium 

Sect.  IY.  Violent  passion  of  Dionysius  for  poesy.  Reflections 
upon  that  taste  of  the  tyrant.  Generous  freedom  of  Philoxenus. 
Death  of  Dionysius.  His  bad  qualities 

CHAP.  II. 

Sect.  I.  Dionysius  the  Younger  succeeds  his  father.  Dion  engages 
him  to  invite  Plato  to  his  court.  Surprising  alteration  occasioned 
by  his  presence.  Conspiracy  of  the  courtiers  to  prevent  the  ef- 
fects of  it 

Sect.  IT.  Banishment  of  Dion.  Plato  quits  the  court  soon  after, 
and  returns  into  Greece.  Dion  admired  there  by  all  the  learned. 

Plato  returns  to  Syracuse 

Sect.  III.  Dion  sets  out  to  deliver  Syracuse.  Sudden  and  fortu- 
nate success  of  his  enterprise.  Horrid  ingratitude  of  the  Syracu- 
sans. Unparalleled  goodness  of  Dion  to  them,  and  his  most  cruel 
enemies.  His  death  . . . . . . 

Sect.  TV.  Character  of  Dion 

Sect.  Y.  Dionysius  the  Younger  reascends  the  throne.  Syracuse 
implores  aid  of  the  Corinthians,  who  send  Timoleon.  That  gene- 
ral enters  Syracuse,  notwithstanding  all  the  endeavours  of  Icetas 
to  prevent  him.  Dionysius  surrenders  himself  to  him,  and  retires 

to  Corinth 

Sect.  VI.  Timoleon,  after  several  victories,  restores  liberty  to  Sy- 
racuse, where  he  institutes  wise  laws.  He  resigns  his  authority, 
and  passes  the  rest  of  his  life  in  retirement.  His  death.  Honours 
paid  to  his  memory 


BOOK  XII. 

The  history  of  the  Persians  and  Grecians 

CHAP.  I. 

Sect.  I.  State  of  Greece  from  the  time  of  the  treaty  of  Antalcidas. 
The  Lacedaemonians  declare  war  against  the  city  of  Olynthus. 


v 

Page 

293 

296 

301 

305 

309 

311 

318 

326 

336 

347 

355 

360 

378 

380 

388 

396 


Vi  CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  III. 

They  seize  by  fraud  and  violence  upon  the  citadel  of  Thebes. 

Olynthus  surrenders 

Sect.  II.  Sparta's  prosperity.  Character  of  two  illustrious  Thebans, 
Epaminondas  and  Pelopidas.  The  latter  forms  the  design  of  re- 
storing the  liberty  of  his  country.  Conspiracy  against  the  tyrants 
wisely  conducted  and  happily  executed.  The  citadel  is  retaken  . 
Sect.  III.  Sphodrias,  the  Lacedaemonian,  forms  a design  against 
the  Piraeeus  without  success.  The  Athenians  declare  for  the  The- 
bans. Skirmishes  between  the  latter  and  the  Lacedaemonians 
Sect.  IV.  New  troubles  in  Greece.  The  Lacedaemonians  declare 
war  against  Thebes.  They  are  defeated  and  put  to  flight  in  the 
battle  of  Leuctra.  Epaminondas  ravages  Laconia,  and  marches 
to  the  gates  of  Sparta  ......... 

Sect.  V.  The  two  Theban  generals,  at  their  return,  are  accused  and 
acquitted.  Sparta  implores  aid  of  the  Athenians.  The  Greeks 
send  ambassadors  to  Artaxerxes.  Influence  of  Pelopidas  at  the 
court  of  Persia  .......... 

Sect.  VI.  Pelopidas  marches  against  Alexander,  tyrant  of  Pherae, 
and  reduces  him  to  reason.  He  goes  to  Macedonia,  to  appease 
the  troubles  of  that  court,  and  brings  Philip  to  Thebes  as  a hos- 
tage. He  returns  into  Thessaly,  is  seized  by  treachery,  and  made 
a prisoner.  Epaminondas  delivers  him.  Pelopidas  gains  a vic- 
tory against  the  tyrant,  and  is  killed  in  the  battle.  Extraordinary 
honours  paid  to  his  memory.  Tragical  end  of  Alexander  . 
Sect.  VII.  Epaminondas  is  chosen  general  of  the  Thebans.  His 
second  attempt  against  Sparta.  His  celebrated  victory  at  Man- 

tinea.  His  death  and  eulogy 

Sect.  VIII.  Heath  of  Evagoras,  king  of  Salamis.  Nicocles  his  son 
succeeds  him.  Admirable  character  of  that  prince 
Sect.  IX.  Artaxerxes  Mnemon  undertakes  the  reduction  of  Egypt. 
Iphicrates  the  Athenian  is  appointed  general  of  the  Athenian 
troops.  The  enterprise  miscarries  by  the  ill  conduct  of  Pharna- 

bazus  the  Persian  general  

Sect.  X.  The  Lacedaemonians  send  Agesilaus  to  the  aid  of  Tachos, 
who  had  revolted  from  the  Persians.  „ The  king  of  Sparta’s  ac- 
tions in  Egypt.  His  death.  The  greatest  part  of  the  provinces 

revolt  against  Artaxerxes 

Sect.  XI.  Troubles  at  the  court  of  Artaxerxes  concerning  his  suc- 
cessor. Death  of  that  prince  ....... 

Sect.  XII.  Causes  of  the  frequent  insurrections  and  revolts  in  the 
Persian  empire 


Page 

ib. 

400 

409 

413 

423 

428 

438 

447 

449 

452 

457 

458 


BOOK  VIII. 


THE 

ANCIENT  HISTORY 

OF  THE 

PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


CHAP.  I. 

This  chapter  contains  the  history  of  thirteen  years  of  the  Pelo- 
ponnesian war,  to  the  nineteenth  inclusively. 


SECT.  I. 


The  very' short  reigns  of  Xerxes  II.  and  Sogdianus.  They  are  succeeded  by 
Darius  Nothus.  He  puts  a stop  to  the  insurrection  of  Egypt,  and  that  of 
Media.  He  bestows  on  Cyrus  his  youngest  son  the  supreme  command  of 
all  Asia  Minor. 

Artaxerxes  died  about  the  beginning  of  the 
Aut  jr”'c^425  forty-ninth  year  of  his  reign. a Xerxes,  who  suc- 
ceeded him,  was  the  only  son  which  the  queen  his 
wife  had  brought  him  : but  he  had  seventeen  others  by  his  con- 
cubines, among  whom  was  Sogdianus,  (who  is  called  Secondia- 
nus  by  Ctesias,)  Ochus,  and  Arsites.  Sogdianus, 
Ant!  J C 424.  concert  with  Pharnacias,  one  of  Xerxes’s 
eunuchs,  came  insidiously,  one  festival  day,  to 
the  new  king,  who,  after  drinking  too  immoderately,  was  re- 
tired to  his  chamber,  in  order  to  give  the  fumes  of  the  wine 
he  had  drunk  time  to  evaporate  ; where  he  killed  him  without 
any  difficulty,  after  he  had  reigned  but  forty-five  days  ; and  was 
declared  king  in  his  stead. 

He  was  scarce  on  the  throne,  when  he  put  to  death  Bagorazus, 
the  most  faithful  of  all  his  father’s  eunuchs.  It  was  he  who  had 
been  appointed  to  superintend  the  funeral  obsequies  of  Artax- 
erxes, and  of  the  queen,  Xerxes’s  mother,  who  died  the  same 
day  as  her  husband.  After  having  deposited  the  two  bodies  in 
the  mausoleum  where  the  kings  of  Persia  were  interred,  he 
found,  at  his  return,  Sogdianus  on  the  throne,  who  did  not  re- 
ceive him  favourably,  upon  account  of  some  difference  with  him 
a Ctes.  c.  xlvii — li.  Diod.  1.  xii.  p.  115. 

B 


VOL.  IIE. 


2 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


during-  the  lifetime  of  his  father.  But  the  new  king  did  not  stop 
here : not  long  after  he  took  the  opportunity  to  quarrel  with 
him,  on  some  trifling  circumstance  relating  to  the  obsequies  of 
his  father,  and  caused  him  to  be  stoned. 

By  these  two  murders,  that  of  his  brother  Xerxes  and  of 
Bagorazus,  he  became  the  horror  of  the  army  and  nobility,  so 
that  he  did  not  think  himself  safe  on  a throne,  to  which  he  had 
forced  his  way  by  such  enormous  crimes.  He  suspected  that  his 
brothers  harboured  the  like  design ; and  Ochus,  to  whom  his  father 
had  left  the  government  of  Hyrcania,  was  the  chief  object  of  his 
suspicion.  Accordingly  he  sent  for  him,  with  the  intention  of 
getting  him  murdered  as  soon  as  he  arrived.  However,  Ochus, 
who  saw  through  his  design,  delayed  coming  upon  various  pre- 
tences ; which  he  continued  till  he  advanced  at  the  head  of  a 
strong  army,  which  he  openly  declared  he  would  employ,  to 
revenge  the  death  of  his  brother  Xerxes.  This  declaration 
brought  over  to  him  the  nobility,  and  several  governors  of  the 
provinces,  who  were  justly  dissatisfied  at  Sogdianus’s  cruelty 
and  ill  conduct.  They  put  the  tiara,  which  was  the  mark  of 
royal  dignity,  on  Ochus’s  head,  and  proclaimed  him  king.  Sog- 
dianus,  seeing  himself  abandoned  in  this  manner,  was  as  mean 
and  cowardly  in  the  slight  defence  he  made  to  maintain  his 
crown,  as  he  had  before  been  unjust  and  barbarous  in  usurping 
it.  Contrary  to  the  advice  of  his  best  friends  and  the  wisest  of 
those  who  still  adhered  to  him,  he  concluded  a treaty  with  his 
brother,  who,  getting  him  into  his  hands,  caused  him  to  be 
thrown  into  ashes,  where  he  died  a cruel  death.  This  was 
a kind  of  punishment  peculiar  to  the  Persians,  and  exercised 
only  on  great  criminals.15  One  of  the  largest  towers  was  filled 
to  a certain  height  with  ashes.  The  criminal  then  was  thrown 
headlong  from  the  top  of  the  tower,  into  them ; after  which,  the 
ashes  were  by  a wheel  turned  perpetually  round  him  till  he  was 
suffocated.  Thus  this  wicked  prince  lost  his  life  and  empire, 
which  he  enjoyed  only  six  months  and  fifteen  days. 

Ochus,  by  the  death  of  Sogdianus,  now  saw 
Arit  ^J*C^423  himself  possessed  of  the  empire.  As  soon,  as  he 
was  well  settled  in  it  he  changed  his  name  from 
Ochus  to  that  of  Darius.  To  distinguish  him,  historians  add 
the  epithet  N o0o?,  signifying  bastard.  He  reigned  nineteen 
years. 

Arsites,  seeing  in  what  manner  Sogdianus  had  supplanted 
Xerxes,  and  had  himself  been  dethroned  by  Ochus,  meditated 
to  serve  the  latter  in  the  same  manner.  Though  he  was  his 
brother  by  the  father’s  as  well  as  the  mother’s  side,  he  openly 
revolted  against  him,  and  was  assisted  in  it  by  Artyphius,  son 
of  Megabyzus.  Ochus,  whom  hereafter  we  shall  always  call 
b Val.  Max.  1.  ix.  c.  2.  2 Maccab.  c.  xiii. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


3 


Darius,  sent  Artasyras,  one  of  liis  generals,  against  Artyphius  ; 
and  himself,  at  the  head  of  another  army,  marched  against  Ar- 
sites.  Artyphius,  with  the  Grecian  troops  inehis  pay,  twice  de- 
feated the  general  sent  against  him.  But  engaging  a third 
time,  the  Greeks  were  corrupted,  and  he  himself  was  beaten, 
and  forced  to  surrender,  upon  his  being  flattered  with  hopes  that 
a pardon  would  be  granted  him.  The  king  would  have  had 
him  put  to  death,  but  was  diverted  from  that  resolution  by  queen 
Parysatis,  Darius’s  sister  and  queen.  She  was  also  the  daugh- 
ter of  Artaxerxes,  but  not  by  the  same  mother  as  Darius. 
She  was  an  intriguing,  artful  woman ; and  the  king  her  hus- 
band was  governed  by  her  on  most  occasions.  The  counsel  she 
now  gave  was  perfidious  to  the  last  degree.  She  advised  him 
to  exercise  his  clemency  towards  Artyphius,  and  show  him  kind 
usage,  in  order  that  his  brother  might  hope,  when  he  heard 
of  his  treating  a rebellious  servant  with  so  much  generosity,  that 
he  himself  should  meet  at  least  with  as  mild  treatment,  and 
thereby  be  prompted  to  lay  down  his  arms.  She  added,  that 
when  once  he  should  have  seized  that  prince,  he  might  dispose 
of  him  and  Artyphius  as  he  pleased.  Darius  followed  her 
counsel,  which  proved  successful.  Arsites  being  informed  of 
the  gentle  usage  which  Artyphius  met  with,  concluded  that,  as 
he  was  the  king’s  brother,  he  should  consequently  meet  with 
still  more  indulgent  treatment ; and  with  this  hope  he  con- 
cluded a treaty,  and  surrendered  himself.  Darius  was  very 
much  inclined  to  save  his  life  : but  Parysatis,  by  inculcating  to 
him,  that  it  was  necessary  to  punish  this  rebel  in  order  to  secure 
himself,  at  last  prevailed  with  him  to  put  his  brother  to  death, 
and  accordingly  he  was  suffocated  in  ashes  with  Artyphius. 
However,  Darius  had  a violent  struggle  with  himself  before  he 
could  consent  to  this  sacrifice,  having  a very  tender  affection 
for  his  brother.  He  afterwards  put  some  other  persons  to 
death,  which  executions  did  not  procure  him  the  tranquillity  he 
had  expected  from  them ; for  his  reign  was  afterwards  dis- 
turbed with  such  violent  commotions,  that  he  enjoyed  but  little 
repose. 

One  of  the  most  dangerous  was  occasioned  by 
Ant.  jl  C4°14.  the  rebellion  of  Pisuthnes, c who,  being  governor 
of  Lydia,  wanted  to  throw  off  his  allegiance  to 
the  Persian  empire,  and  make  himself  king  in  his  province. 
What  flattered  him  with  the  hopes  of  succeeding  in  this  attempt 
was,  his  having  a considerable  body  of  Grecian  troops,  which 
he  had  raised  and  enlisted  in  his  service,  under  the  command  of 
Lycon  the  Athenian.  Darius  sent  Tissaphernes  against  this 
rebel,  and  gave  him,  with  a considerable  army,  the  commission 
of  governor  of  Lydia,  of  which  he  was  to  dispossess  Pisuthnes. 

c Ctes.  c.  li. 


4 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


Tissaphernes,  who  was  an  artful  man,  and  capable  of  acting  in  all 
characters,  found  means  of  tampering  with  the  Greeks  under 
Pisuthnes  ; and  by  dint  of  presents  and  promises,  brought  over 
the  troops  with  their  general  to  his  party.  Pisuthnes,  who  was 
too  much  weakened  by  this  desertion  to  carry  on  his  designs, 
surrendered,  upon  his  being  flattered  with  the  hopes  of  obtain- 
ing his  pardon ; but  the  instant  he  was  brought  before  the 
king,  he  was  sentenced  to  be  suffocated  in  ashes,  and  met  with 
the  same  fate  as  the  rest  of  the  rebels  who  had  preceded  him. 
But  his  death  did  not  entirely  put  an  end  to  all  trouble  ; for 
Amorges  his  son, d with  the  remainder  of  his  army,  still  made 
head  against  Tissaphernes  ; and  for  two  years  laid  waste  the 
maritime  provinces  of  Asia  Minor,  till  he  at  last  was  taken  by 
the  Greeks  of  Peloponnesus,  in  Iasus,  a city  of  Ionia,  and  de- 
livered up  by  them  to  Tissaphernes,  who  put  him  to  death. 

Darius  was  involved  in  fresh  troubles  by  one  of  his  eunuchs.e 
This  kind  of  officers  had,  for  many  years,  acquired  considerable 
power  in  the  court  of  Persia ; and  we  shall  find,  by  the  sequel 
of  this  history,  that  they  always  governed  absolutely  in  it.  W e 
may  form  an  idea  of  their  character/  and  the  danger  to  which 
they  expose  princes,  by  the  picture  which  Dioclesian,  after  he 
had  resigned  the  empire,  and  reduced  himself  to  a private  sta- 
tion of  life,  drew  of  freedmen,  who  had  gained  a like  ascendant 
over  the  Homan  emperors.  Four  or  five  persons,  says  he, 
who  are  closely  united,  and  resolutely  determined  to  impose  on 
a prince , may  do  it  very  easily.  They  never  show  things  to 
him  hut  in  such  a light  as  they  are  sure  will  please.  They 
conceal  whatever  would  contribute  to  enlighten  him : and  as 
they  alone  beset  him  continually,  he  cannot  be  informed  of  any 
thing  but  through  their  channel,  and  knows  nothing  but  what 
they  think  fit  to  suggest  to  him.  Hence  it  is,  that  he  bestows 
employments  on  those  whom  he  ought  to  exclude  from  them  ; 
and,  on  the  other  side,  removes  from  offices  such  persons  as  are 
most  worthy  of  filling  them.  In  a word,  the  best  prince  is  often 
sold  by  these  men,  though  he  be  ever  so  vigilant,  and  in  despite 
of  his  distrust  and  suspicion  of  them.  Quid  multa?  Ut  Dio- 
eletianus  ipse  dicebat,  bonus,  cautus,  optimus,  venditur  impe- 
rator. 

In  this  manner  was  Darius’s  court  governed.  Three  eunuchs 
had  usurped  all  power  in  it  ;g  an  infallible  mark  that  a govern- 
ment is  bad,  and  the  prince  of  little  merit.  But  one  of  those 
three  eunuchs,  whose  name  was  Artoxares,  presided  over  and 
governed  the  rest.  He  had  found  Darius’s  weak  side,  by  which 

d Thucyd.  1.  viii.  p.  554 — 568.  e Ctes.  c.  lii. 

f Vopis.  in  vit.  Aurelian.  Imper. 

s Scis  prsecipuum  esse  indicium  non  magni  principis,  magnos  libertos. 
Plin.  ad  Trajan. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


5 


lie  insinuated  himself  into  his  confidence.  He  had  studied  all 
his  passions,  in  order  to  indulge  them,  and  govern  his  prince 
by  their  means.  He  plunged  him  continually  in  pleasures  and 
amusements,  to  engross  his  whole  authority  to  himself.  In  fine, 
under  the  name  and  protection  of  queen  Parysatis,  to  whose 
will  and  pleasure  he  was  the  most  devoted  of  slaves,  he  disposed 
of  all  the  affairs  of  the  empire,  and  nothing  was  transacted  but 
by  his  orders.  Intoxicated  by  the  supreme  authority  which  the 
favour  of  his  sovereign  gave  him,  he  resolved  to  make  himself 
king,  instead  of  being  prime  minister ; and  accordingly  formed 
a design  to  rid  himself  of  Darius,  and  afterwards  ascend  the 
throne.  However,  his  plot  being  discovered,  he  was  seized 
and  delivered  up  to  Parysatis,  who  put  him  to  a most  igno- 
minious and  cruel  death. 

But  the  greatest  misfortune  which  happened  to  Darius  during 
the  whole  course  of  his  reign,  was  the  revolt  of  the  Egyptians.11 
This  terrible  blow  fell  out  the  same  year  with  Pisutlmes’s  re- 
bellion. But  Darius  could  not  reduce  Egypt  as  he  had  done 
that  rebel.  The  Egyptians,1  weary  of  the  Persian  government, 
flocked  from  all  parts  to  Amyrtaeus  of  Sais,  who  at  last  was 
come  out  of  the  fens,  where  he  had  defended  himself  since  the 
suppression  of  the  revolt  of  Inarus.  The  Persians  were  driven 
out,  and  Amyrtesus  proclaimed  king  of  Egypt,  where  he  reigned 
six  years. 

After  having  established  himself  securely  on  the  throne,  and 
entirely  expelled  the  Persians  out  of  Egypt,  he  prepared  to 
pursue  them  as  far  as  Phoenicia,  and  had  already  concerted 
measures  with  the  Arabians  to  attack  them  in  that  country. 
News  of  this  being  brought  the  king  of  Persia,  he  recalled  the 
fleet  which  he  had  promised  the  Lacedaemonians,  to  employ  it 
in  the  defence  of  his  own  dominions. 

Whilst  Darius  was  carrying  on  the  war  in  Egypt  and  Arabia, 
the  Medes  rebelled ; however,  they  were  defeated,  and  reduced 
to  their  allegiance  by  force  of  arms.  To  punish  them  for  this 
revolt,  their  yoke  (till  then  easy  enough)  was  made  heavier : a 
fate  that  rebellious  subjects  always  experience,  when  the  go- 
vernment which  they  endeavoured  to  throw  off  gains  the  upper 
hand. 

Darius’s  arms  seem  to  have  had  the  like  success  against  the 
Egyptians .k  Amyrtseus  dying  after  he  had  reigned  six  years, 
(he  probably  was  killed  in  a battle,)  Herodotus  observes,  it 
was  by  the  permission  of  the  Persians  that  Pausiris  his  son 
succeeded  him  in  the  throne.  To  effect,  this,  they  must  either 
have  been  masters  of  Egypt,  or  their  party  the  strongest  in 
that  kingdom. 

h Euseb.  in  Chron.  1 Thucyd.  1.  i.  p.  72,  78. 

k Herod.  1.  iii.  c.  15. 


6 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


After  having  crushed  the  rebels  in  Media, 
Ant.^J.  c? 407.  an(^  rest°re(i  the  affairs  of  Egypt  to  their  former 
situation,  Darius  gave  Cyrus,  the  youngest  of  his 
sons,  the  supreme  command  of  all  the  provinces  of  Asia  Minor; 
an  important  commission,  by  which  he  made  all  the  provincial 
governors  in  that  part  of  the  empire  dependent  upon  him. 

I thought  it  necessary  to  anticipate  events,  and  draw  toge- 
ther the  facts  which  related  to  the  kings  of  Persia ; to  prevent 
my  being  often  obliged  to  interrupt  the  history  of  the  Greeks, 
to  which  I now  return. 

SECT.  II. 

The  Athenians  make  themselves  masters  of  the  island  of  Cytkera.  Expedi- 
tions of  Brasidas  into  Thrace.  He  takes  Amphipolis.  Thucydides  the 
historian  is  banished.  A battle  is  fought  near  Delium,  where  the  Athenians 
are  defeated. 

The  eighth  year  of  the  War. 

The  three  or  four  campaigns  which  followed  the  reduction 
of  the  small  island  of  Sphacteria,  were  distinguished  by  very 
few  considerable  events. 

The  Athenians  under  Nicias  took  the  island 
Ant  j^'c5424  Eythera,1  situated  on  the  coast  of  Lacedae- 
monia,  near  cape  Malea,  and  from  thence  they 
infested  the  whole  country. 

Brasidas,  on  the  other  side,  marched  towards  Thrace.™  The 
Laced asmonians  were  induced  by  more  than  one  motive  to 
undertake  this  expedition ; imagining  they  should  oblige  the 
Athenians,  who  had  fallen  upon  them  in  their  country,  to  divide 
their  forces.  The  inhabitants  of  it  invited  them  thither,  and 
offered  to  pay  the  army.  In  fine,  they  were  extremely  glad  to 
embrace  that  opportunity  to  rid  themselves  of  the  Helots, 
whom  they  expected  to  rise  in  rebellion,  since  the  taking  of 
Pylus.  They  had  already  made  away  with  2000  of  them  in  a 
most  horrid  manner.  Upon  the  specious  pretence  of  rewarding 
merit  even  in  slaves,  but  in  reality  to  get  rid  of  a body  of  men 
whose  courage  they  dreaded,  they  caused  proclamation  to  be 
made,  that  such  of  the  Helots  as  had  done  the  greatest  service 
to  the  state  in  the  last  campaign,  should  enter  their  names  in 
the  public  registers,  in  order  to  their  being  made  free.  Ac- 
cordingly 2000  gave  in  their  names.  They  were  carried  in 
procession  through  the  temples,  with  chaplets  of  flowers  on 
their  heads,  as  if  they  were  really  to  be  set  at  liberty.  After 
this  ceremony  they  all  disappeared,  and  were  never  heard  of 
more.  We  have  here  an  instance,  in  what  manner  a suspicious 
policy  and  power,  when  filled  with  jealousy  and  distrust,  excite 
1 Thucyd.  1.  iv.  p 2 86.  m Ibid.  p.  304 — 311.  Diod.  1.  xii.  p.  117,  118* 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


7 


men  to  the  blackest  crimes,  without  scrupling  to  make  even 
religion  itself,  and  the  authority  of  the  gods,  subservient  to 
their  dark  designs. 

They  therefore  sent  700  Helots  with  Brasidas,  whom  they 
had  appointed  to  head  this  enterprize.  This  general  brought 
over  several  cities,  either  by  force  or  secret  understanding,  and 
still  more  by  his  wisdom  and  moderation.  The  chief  of  these 
were  Acanthus  and  Stagyra,  which  were  two  colonies  from 
Andros.  He  also  marched  afterwards  towards  Amphipolis,n 
an  Athenian  colony,  on  the  river  Strymon.  The  inhabitants 
immediately  despatched  a message  to  Thucydides0  the  Athenian 
general,  who  was  then  in  Thasus,  a little  island  of  the  yEgean 
sea,  half  a day’s  journey  from  Amphipolis.  He  instantly  set 
sail  with  seven  ships  that  were  near  him,  to  secure  the  place 
before  Brasidas  could  seize  it ; or,  at  worst,  to  get  into  Eion, 
which  lay  very  near  Amphipolis.  Brasidas,  who  was  afraid  of 
Thucydides,  from  his  great  influence  in  all  that  country,  where 
he  was  possessed  of  some  gold  mines,  made  all  the  despatch 
imaginable,  to  get  thither  before  him ; and  offered  such  advan- 
tageous conditions  to  the  besieged,  who  did  not  expect  succours 
so  soon,  that  they  surrendered.  Thucydides  arrived  the  same 
evening  at  Eion  ; and  had  he  failed  to  come  that  day,  Brasidas 
would  have  taken  possession  of  it  the  next  morning  by  day- 
break. Although  Thucydides  had  made  all  imaginable  despatch, 
the  Athenians  however  charged  him  with  being  the  cause  of 
the  taking  of  Amphipolis,  and  accordingly  banished  him. 

The  Athenians  were  greatly  afflicted  at  the  loss  of  that  city, 
as  well  because  they  drew  great  revenues  from  it,  and  timber 
to  build  their  ships,  as  because  it  was  a door  for  entering  Thrace. 
They  were  afraid  that  all  their  allies  in  that  neighbourhood  would 
revolt ; especially  as  Brasidas  discovered  great  moderation  and 
justice,  and  continually  gave  out  that  he  came  with  no  other 
view  than  to  free  the  country.  He  declared  to  the  several 
nations,  that  at  his  leaving  Sparta,  he  had  taken  an  oath,  in 
presence  of  the  magistrates,  to  leave  to  all  those  the  enjoyment 
of  their  liberties,  who  would  conclude  an  alliance  with  him  ; and 
that  he  ought  to  be  considered  as  the  most  abandoned  of  men, 
should  he  employ  oaths  to  ensnare  their  credulity.  For  in  his 
opinion,  a fraud  cloaked  with  a specious  pretence,  reflects  infi- 
nitely greater  dishonour  on  persons  in  high  stations,  than  open 
violence ; because  the  latter  is  the  ejfect  of  the  power  which  for- 
tune has  put  into  our  hands  ; and  the  former  is  founded  wholly 
on  perfidy,  which  is  the  pest  of  society.  Now  I,  said  he,  shoidd 
do  a great  disservice  to  my  country,  besides  dishonouring  it 
eternally,  if,  by  procuring  it  some  slight  advantages,  I should 

n Thucyd.  1.  iv.  p.  320 — 324. 

0 The  same  who  wrote  the  history  of  the  Peloponnesian  war. 


8 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


ruin  the  reputation  it  enjoys  of  being  just  and  faithful  to  its 
promises ; which  renders  it  much  more  powerful  than  all  its 
forces  united  together,  because  this  acquires  it  the  esteem  and 
confidence  of  other  states.  Upon  such  noble  and  equitable 
principles  as  these  Brasidas  always  regulated  his  conduct ; be- 
lieving, that  the  strongest  bulwark  of  a state  is  justice,  modera- 
tion, integrity,  and  the  firm  persuasion  which  their  neighbours 
and  allies  entertain,  that  they  are  incapable  of  harbouring  a 
design  to  usurp  their  dominions,  or  deprive  them  of  their 
liberty.  By  this  conduct  he  brought  over  a great  number  of 
the  enemy’s  allies. 

The  Athenians, p under  the  command  of  Demosthenes  and 
Hippocrates,  had  entered  Boeotia,  expecting  that  several  cities 
would  join  them  the  moment  they  should  appear.  The  Thebans 
marched  out  to  meet  them  near  Helium.  A considerable  en- 
gagement ensued,  in  which  the  Athenians  were  defeated  and 
put  to  flight.  Socrates  was  in  this  battle  ;q  and  Laches,  who 
accompanied  that  great  man  in  it,  gives  the  following  testimony 
of  him  in  Plato  ; that  had  the  rest  of  the  army  behaved  as  gal- 
lantly as  Socrates,  the  Athenians  would  not  have  sustained  that 
loss  before  Deliurn.  He  was  borne  away  by  the  crowds  who  fled, 
and  was  on  foot ; Alcibiades,  who  was  on  horseback,  when  he 
saw  him,  rode  up  to  him,  and  did  not  stir  from  him,  but  de- 
fended him  with  the  utmost  bravery  from  the  enemy  who  were 
pursuing  him. 

After  the  battle,  the  victors  besieged  the  city.  Among  other 
engines  employed  by  them  to  batter  it,  they  used  one  of  a very 
extraordinary  kind.  This  was  a long  piece  of  timber,  cut  into 
two  parts,  and  afterwards  made  hollow  and  joined  again,  so  that 
its  shape  resembled  very  much  that  of  a flute.  At  one  of  the 
ends  was  fixed  a long  iron  tube,  to  which  a caldron  was  hung ; 
so  that  by  blowing  a large  pair  of  bellows  at  the  other  end  of 
the  piece  of  timber,  the  wind  being  carried  from  thence  into  the 
tube,  lighted  a great  fire,  with  pitch  and  brimstone,  that  lay  in 
the  caldron.  This  engine  being  carried  on  carts  as  far  as  the 
rampart,  to  that  part  where  it  was  lined  with  stakes  and 
fascines,  threw  out  so  great  a flame,  that  the  rampart  being 
immediately  abandoned,  and  the  palisades  burnt,  the  city  was 
easily  taken. 

p Thucyd.  1.  iv.  p.  311 — 319. 

*i  Plut.  in  Lach.  p.  181.  In  Conviv.  p.  221.  Plut.  in  Alcib.  p.  196. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


9 


SECT.  III. 

A twelve  months’  truce  is  agreed  upon  between  the  two  states.  Death  of 
Cleon  and  Brasidas.  A treaty  of  peace  for  fifty  years  concluded  between 
the  Athenians  and  Lacedaemonians. 

Ninth,  tenth,  and  eleventh  years  of  the  War. 

The  losses  and  advantages  on  both  sides  had 
Ant^J  (?8423  hitherto  been  pretty  equal  ;r  and  the  two  nations 
begun  to  grow  weary  of  a war,  which  put  them  to 
great  expense,  and  did  not  procure  them  any  real  advantage. 
A truce,  for  a year,  was  therefore  concluded  between  the  Athe- 
nians and  Laced semonians.  The  former  resolved  on  it,  in 
order  to  check  the  progress  of  Brasidas’s  conquests  ; to  secure 
their  cities  and  fortresses  ; and  afterwards  to  conclude  a general 
peace,  in  case  they  judged  it  would  be  of  advantage  to  them. 
The  latter  were  induced  to  it,  in  order  that,  by  the  sweets  of 
repose,  peace  might  become  desirable  to  their  enemy  ; and  to 
get  out  of  their  hands  such  of  their  citizens  as  the  Athenians 
had  taken  prisoners  in  the  island  of  Sphacteria;  and  which  they 
could  never  expect  to  do,  if  Brasidas  extended  his  conquests 
farther.  The  news  of  this  accommodation  sensibly  afflicted  Bra- 
sidas, as  it  stopped  him  in  the  midst  of  his  career,  and  discon- 
certed all  his  projects.  He  could  not  even  prevail  with  himself 
to  abandon  the  city  of  Scione,  which  he  had  taken  two  days  after 
the  truce,  but  without  knowing  that  it  had  been  concluded.  He 
went  still  farther ; and  did  not  scruple  to  take  Mende,  a little 
city  not  far  from  Scione,  that  surrendered  to  him  as  the  former 
had  done,  which  was  a direct  violation  of  the  treaty  ; but  Brasidas 
pretended  he  had  other  infractions  to  object  to  the  Athenians. 

It  will  naturally  be  supposed  that  the  latter  did  not  patiently 
endure  this  conduct  of  Brasidas.  Cleon,  in  all  public  assem- 
blies, was  for  ever  inflaming  the  minds  of  the  Athenians,  and 
blowing  up  the  fire  of  war.  His  great  success  in  the  expedi- 
tion against  Sphacteria  had  infinitely  raised  his  credit  with  the 
people': s he  now  was  grown  insupportably  proud,  and  his  auda- 
ciousness was  not  to  be  restrained.  He  had  a vehement, 
impetuous,  and  furious  kind  of  eloquence,  which  prevailed 
over  the  minds  of  his  auditors,  not  so  much  by  the  strength 
of  his  arguments,  as  by  the  boldness  and  fire  of  his  style 
and  declamation.  It  was  Cleon  who  first  set  the  example  of 
bawling  in  assemblies,  where  the  greatest  decorum  and  mode- 
ration had  till  then  been  observed ; of  throwing  his  robe  be- 
hind him,  to  give  him  the  more  liberty  to  display  his  arms ; 
of  striking  his  thigh ; and  of  running  up  and  down  the 
hustings  while  he  was  making  his  speech.  In  a word,  he  first 

r Thucyd.  1.  iv.  p.  328 — 333.  Diod.  1.  xii.  p.  120. 

8 Plut.  in  vit.  Niciee,  p.  528. 


10 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


introduced  among  the  orators,  and  all  those  who  interfered 
in  affairs  of  state,  an  ungovernable  licentiousness,  and  a con- 
tempt of  decency  ; a licentiousness  and  contempt,  which  soon 
introduced  terrible  irregularities  and  confusion  in  public  affairs. 

Thus  two  men,1  each  on  his  own  side,  opposed  the  tran- 
quillity of  Greece,  and  raised,  but  in  a very  different  way,  an 
invincible  obstacle  to  its  peace.  These  were  Cleon  and  Bra- 
sidas  ; the  former,  because  the  war  screened  his  vices  and  mal- 
versations ; and  the  latter,  because  it  added  new  lustre  to  his 
virtue.  And,  indeed,  it  gave  Cleon  an  opportunity  of  commit- 
ting enormous  oppressions,  and  Brasidas  of  performing  great 
and  noble  actions.  But  their  death,  which  happened  about  the 
same  time,  made  way  for  a new  accommodation. 

The  Athenians  had  appointed  Cleon  to  com- 
Ant  C?  422  manc^  the  troops  which  were  to  oppose  Brasidas,11 
and  reduce  those  cities  that  had  revolted  from 
their  allegiance.  They  were  solicitous  for  none  of  them  so 
much  as  Amphipolis ; and  Brasidas  threw  himself  into  that 
city,  in  order  to  defend  it.  Cleon  had  written  to  Perdiccas, 
king  of  Macedonia,  and  to  the  king  of  the  Odomantes,  to 
furnish  him  with  as  many  troops  as  possible,  and  with  the 
utmost  expedition.  He  waited  for  them,  and  had  resolv- 
ed not  to  march  immediately  towards  the  enemy  : but  find- 
ing his  soldiers,  who  had  followed  him  involuntarily  and  with 
regret,  grow  weary  of  continuing  so  long  inactive,  and  begin 
to  compare  his  cowardice  and  inexperience  with  the  ability  and 
valour  of  Brasidas,  he  could  no  longer  bear  their  contempt 
and  murmurs  ; and  imagining  himself  a great  captain  by  his 
capture  of  Spliacteria,  he  now  fancied  the  same  good  fortune 
would  attend  him  at  Amphipolis.  He  therefore  approached 
it,  merely,  as  he  said,  to  take  a view  of  the  place,  and  till 
such  time  as  all  his  forces  should  be  come  up  ; not  that  he 
thought  he  wanted  them  for  carrying  that  city,  or  that  he 
entertained  any  doubt  of  his  success,  (for  he  was  persuaded 
that  no  one  would  dare  to  oppose  him,)  but  only  to  enable 
him  to  invest  the  place  on  all  sides,  and  afterwards  to  take  it  by 
storm.  Accordingly  he  encamped  before  Amphipolis  ; viewing 
very  leisurely  its  situation,  and  fondly  supposing  that  it  would 
be  in  his  power  to  retire  whenever  he  pleased,  without  draw- 
ing the  sword  : for  not  a man  came  out  or  appeared  on  the 
walls,  and  all  the  gates  of  the  city  were  kept  shut ; so  that 
Cleon  began  to  repent  his  not  having  brought  the  engines,  ima- 
gining that  he  wanted  only  these  to  make  himself  master  of 
the  city.  Brasidas,  who  was  perfectly  well  acquainted  with 
Cleon’s  disposition  and  character,  studiously  affected  an  air  of 

1 Plut.  in  vit.  Nicifle,  p.  528. 
u Thucyd.  1.  iii.  p.  342 — 351.  Diod.  1.  xii.  p.  121,  122. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


11 


fear  and  reserve,  as  a bait  to  his  temerity,  and  to  increase  the 
good  opinion  he  had  of  himself : besides,  he  knew  that  Cleon 
had  brought  with  him  the  flower  of  the  Athenian  forces,  and  the 
choicest  troops  of  Lemnos  and  of  Imbrus.  Accordingly  Cleon, 
despising  an  enemy  that  did  not  dare  to  appear  before  him,  but 
shut  himself  up  in  a cowardly  manner  in  the  city,  went  boldly 
from  place  to  place,  without  precaution  or  observing  any  disci- 
pline among  his  soldiers.  Brasidas,  whose  intention' was  to  at- 
tack him  on  a sudden  before  all  his  forces  should  be  come  up, 
thought  this  the  critical  juncture.  He  had  concerted  proper 
measures,  and  given  the  orders  necessary.  Accordingly,  he 
made  a sudden  sally  on  the  Athenians,  which  surprised  and  dis- 
concerted them  exceedingly.  Immediately  the  left  wing  drew 
off  from  the  main  body  and  fled.  Brasidas  then  turned  the  whole 
force  of  his  arms  against  the  right  wing,  which  gave  him  a warm 
reception.  Here  he  was  wounded  and  disabled,  upon  which 
his  soldiers  carried  him  off,  unperceived  by  the  Athenians.  As 
for  Cleon,  not  having  resolved  to  fight,  he  fled,  and  was  killed 
by  a soldier  who  happened  to  meet  him.  The  troops  he  com- 
manded defended  themselves  for  some  time,  and  sustained  two 
or  three  attacks  without  giving  ground,  but  at  last  they  were 
universally  broken  and  routed.  Brasidas  was  then  carried  into 
the  city,  where  he  survived  his  victory  but  a few  moments. 

The  whole  army  being  returned  from  the  pursuit,  stripped 
the  dead,  and  afterwards  set  up  a trophy.  After  which  all  the 
allies  under  arms  solemnized  the  funeral  obsequies  of  Brasidas 
in  a public  manner ; and  the  inhabitants  of  Amphipolis  cele- 
brated funeral  honours  every  year  to  his  memory,  as  to  a hero, 
with  games,  combats,  and  sacrifices.  They  considered  him  as 
their  founder  : and  to  secure  this  title  the  better  to  him,  they 
demolished  all  the  monuments  of  him  who  had  really  been  so 
in  order  that  they  might  not  appear  to  owe  their  establishment  to 
an  Athenian,  and  at  the  same  time  make  their  court  to  the 
Lacedaemonians,  on  whom  they  depended  wholly  for  their 
security.  The  Athenians,  after  having  carried  off,  with  the 
consent  of  the  victors,  their  dead,  returned  to  Athens,  during 
which  the  Lacedaemonians  settled  the  affairs  of  Amphipolis. 

A saying  is  ascribed  to  the  mother  of  Brasidas,0  which 
strongly  marks  the  Spartan  character.  As  some  persons  were 
applauding  in  her  presence  the  fine  qualities  and  exalted 
actions  of  her  son,  and  declaring  him  superior  to  all  pther 
generals  : You  are  mistaken,  says  she  : my  son  was  a valiant 

man,  but  Sparta  has  many  citizens  braver  than  he.  A mother’s 
generosity,  in  thus  preferring  the  glory  of  the  state  to  that  of 
her  son,  was  admired,  and  did  not  go  unrewarded ; for  the 
Ephori  paid  her  public  honours. 

* Agnon  the  Athenian. 


u Diod.  1.  xii.  p.  122. 


12 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


After  this  last  engagement/  in  which  the  two  persons  who 
were  the  greatest  obstacles  to  peace  lost  their  lives,  both  nations 
seemed  more  inclined  to  an  accommodation,  and  the  war  was 
suspended  in  a manner  on  both  sides.  The  Athenians,  since 
the  loss  of  the  battles  of  Delium  and  Amphipolis,  which  had 
very  much  brought  down  their  haughtiness,  were  undeceived 
with  regard  to  the  high  opinion  they  had  hitherto  entertained 
of  their  own  strength,  that  had  made  them  refuse  the  advantage- 
ous offers  of  their  enemies.  Besides,  they  were  apprehensive 
of  the  revolt  of  their  allies,  who  being  discouraged  by  their  losses, 
might  thereby  be  induced  to  abandon  them,  as  several  had  al- 
ready done.  These  reflections  made  them  strongly  repent  their 
not  having  concluded  a treaty,  after  the  advantages  they  had 
gained  at  Pylus.  The  Lacedaemonians,  on  the  other  side,  no 
longer  flattered  themselves  with  the  hopes  of  being  able  to  ruin 
the  Athenians  by  laying  waste  their  country ; and  were  besides 
dejected  and  terrified  by  their  loss  in  the  island’,  the  greatest 
they  had  hitherto  ever  sustained.  They  also  considered  that 
their  country  was  ravaged  by  the  garrison  of  Pylus  and  Cythe- 
ra ; that  their  slaves  deserted  ; that  they  had  reason  to  dread  a 
more  considerable  revolt ; and  that  as  the  truce  they  had  con- 
cluded with  the  inhabitants  of  Argos  was  near  expiring,  they  had 
reason  to  be  apprehensive  of  being  abandoned  by  some  of  their 
allies  of  Peloponnesus,  as  in  fact  they  were.  These  several 
motives,  enforced  by  the  desire  they  had  of  recovering  their 
prisoners,  the  greatest  part  of  whom  were  the  most  considerable 
citizens  of  Sparta,  made  them  desire  a peace. 

Those  who  were  most  solicitous  for  having  it  concluded,  and 
whose  interest  it  was  chiefly  to  wish  it,  were  the  chiefs  of  the 
two  states,  viz.  Pistonax,  king  of  Lacedasmonia,  and  Nicias, 
general  of  the  Athenians.  The  former  was  lately  returned  from 
banishment,  to  which  he  had  been  sentenced  on  account  of  his 
being  suspected  to  have  received  a bribe,  in  order  to  draw  off  his 
troops  from  the  Athenian  territories  ; and  to  this  precipitate  re- 
treat were  ascribed  several  misfortunes  which  followed  after  it. 
He  also  was  charged  with  having  corrupted  by  gifts  the  priest- 
ess of  Delphi,  who  had  commanded  the  Spartans,  in  the  name 
of  the  god,  to  recall  him  from  his  exile.  Pistonax  was  there- 
fore desirous  of  peace,  in  order  to  put  an  end  to  these  reproach- 
es, which,  on  account  of  the  perpetual  calamities  of  the  war, 
were  daily  revived.  As  for  Nicias,  the  most  fortunate  general  of 
his  age,  he  was  afraid  lest  some  unhappy  accident  should  sully 
his  glory ; and  he  wished  to  enjoy  the  fruits  of  peace  in  ease 
and  tranquillity,  and  to  ensure  the  same  happiness  to  his  country. 

Both  states  began  by  agreeing  to  a suspension  of  arms  for 
twelve  months,  y during  which,  being  every  day  together,  and 
* Thucyd.  1.  v.  p.  351—354.  y Thucyd.  1.  v.  p.  354.  Tlut.  in  Nic.  p.  528, 529. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


13 


tasting  the  sweets  of  security  and  repose,  and  the  pleasure  of 
corresponding  with  their  friends  and  with  foreigners,  they' grew 
passionately  desirous  of  leading  an  easy,  undisturbed  life,  re- 
mote from  the  alarms  of  war  and  the  horrors  of  blood  and 
slaughter.  They  heard  with  the  utmost  demonstrations  of  joy 
the  choruses  of  their  tragedies  sing,  May  spiders  henceforward 
weave  their  cobwebs  on  our  lances  and  shields;  And  they  re- 
membered with  pleasure  him  who  said,  Those  who  sleep  in  the 
arms  of  peace,  do  not  start  from  them  at  the  sound  of  the  trum- 
pet ; and  nothiny  interrupts  their  slumbers  but  the  peaceful 
crowiny  of  the  cock. 

The  whole  winter  was  spent  in  conferences  and  interviews, 
in  which  each  party  proposed  their  claims  and 

A TIT  Q p QQ  1 «/  JL  A 

Ant  j c 421  Pretensi°ns-Z  At  last,  a peace  was  concluded 
and  ratified  for  fifty  years  ; one  of  the  chief  arti- 
cles of  which  was,  that  they  should  reciprocally  restore  the  pri- 
soners on  each  side.  This  treaty  was  concluded  ten  years  and 
some  days  from  the  first  declaration  of  the  war.  The  Boeotians 
and  Corinthians  were  exceedingly  disgusted  at  it,  and  for  that 
reason  used  their  utmost  endeavours  to  excite  fresh  troubles. 
But  Nicias  persuaded  the  Athenians  and  Lacedaemonians  to 
give  the  last  hand  to  this  piece, a by  concluding  an  alliance  of- 
fensive and  defensive,  which  would  render  them  more  formida- 
ble to  those  who  should  desire  to  break  with  them,  and  more 
assured  with  regard  to  each  other.  The  Athenians,  in  conse- 
quence of  this  treaty,  at  last  restored  the  prisoners  they  had 
taken  in  the  island  of  Sphacteria. 

SECT.  IV. 

Alcibiades  begins  to  appear  in  public.  His  character.  He  opposes  Nicias  in 

every  thing,  and  breaks  the  treaty  he  had  concluded.  The  banishment  of 

Hyperbolus  puts  an  end  to  the  Ostracism. 

Twelfth  year  of  the  War. 

Alcibiades  now  began  to  advance  himself  in  the  state, b and 
appear  in  the  public  assemblies.  Socrates  had  attached  himself 
to  him  for  many  years,  and  adorned  his  mind  with  a great 
variety  of  the  noblest  erudition. 

The  strict  intimacy  between  Alcibiades  and  Socrates  is  one 
of  the  most  remarkable  circumstances  in  his  life.  This  philo- 
sopher observing  excellent  natural  qualities  in  him,  which  were 
greatly  heightened  by  the  beauty  of  his  person,  bestowed  incre- 
dible pains  in  cultivating  so  valuable  a plant,  lest,  being  neg- 
lected, it  should  wither  as  it  grew,  and  absolutely  degenerate. 
And,  indeed,  Alcibiades  was  exposed  to  numberless  dangers  ; 

z Diod.  1.  xii.  p.  122.  a Thucyd.  1.  v.  p.  358,  359. 

b Plut.  in  Alcib.  p.  192.  194. 


14 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


the  nobility  of  his  birth,  his  vast  riches,  the  authority  of  his  fa- 
mily, the  influence  of  his  guardians,  his  personal  talents,  his 
exquisite  beauty,  and,  still  more  than  these,  the  flattery  and 
complaisance  of  all  who  approached  him.  One  would  have 
concluded,  says  Plutarch,  that  fortune  had  surrounded  and  in- 
vested him  with  all  these  pretended  advantages,  as  with  so 
many  ramparts  and  bulwarks,  to  render  him  inaccessible  and 
invulnerable  to  all  the  darts  of  philosophy ; those  salutary  darts 
which  strike  to  the  very  heart,  and  leave  in  it  the  strongest  en- 
ticements to  virtue  and  solid  glory.  But  those  very  obstacles 
redoubled  the  zeal  of  Socrates. 

Notwithstanding  the  endeavours  that  were  used  to  divert  this 
young  Athenian  from  an  intercourse  which  alone  was  capable 
of  securing  him  from  so  many  snares,  he  devoted  himself  en- 
tirely to  it.  As  he  had  abundance  of  wit,  he  was  fully  sensible 
of  Socrates’s  merit,  and  could  not  resist  the  charms  of  his  sweet 
and  insinuating  eloquence,  which  at  that  time  had  a greater  as- 
cendant over  him  than  the  allurements  of  pleasure.  He  was  so 
zealous  a disciple  of  that  great  master,  that  he  followed  him 
wherever  he  went,  took  the  utmost  delight  in  his  conversation, 
was  extremely  well  pleased  with  his  principles,  received  his  in- 
structions and  even  his  reprimands  with  wonderful  docility,  and 
would  be  so  moved  with  his  discourses,  as  even  to  shed  tears  and 
abhor  himself ; so  weighty  was  the  force  of  truth  in  the  mouth 
of  Socrates,  and  in  so  glaring  a light  did  he  expose  the  hideous- 
ness and  deformity  of  the  vices  to  which  Alcibiades  abandoned 
himself. 

Alcibiades,  in  those  moments  when  he  listened  tp  Socrates, 
differed  so  much  from  himself,  that  he  appeared  quite  another 
man.  However,  his  headstrong,  fiery  temper,  and  his  natural 
fondness  for  pleasure,  which  was  heightened  and  inflamed  by  the 
conversation  of  young  people,  soon  plunged  him  into  his  former 
irregularities,  and  tore  him,  as  it  were,  from  his  master  ; who 
was  obliged  to  run  after  him  as  after  a runaway  slave.  This 
vicissitude  of  flights  and  returns,  of  virtuous  resolutions  and  re- 
lapses into  vice,  continued  a long  time  ; but  still  Socrates  was 
not  disheartened  by  his  levity,  and  always  flattered  himself  with 
the  hope  of  bringing  him  back  to  his  duty.  And  hence  certainly 
arose  the  strong  mixture  of  good  and  evil  that  always  appeared 
in  his  conduct ; the  instructions  which  his  master  had  given  him 
sometimes  prevailing  ; and  at  other  times,  the  impetuosity  of  his 
passions  hurrying  him,  in  a manner  against  his  own  will,  into 
actions  of  a quite  opposite  nature. 

This  intimacy,  which  continued  as  long  as  they  lived,  did  not 
pass  uncensured.  But  some  persons c of  great  learning  pretend, 

c Abbd  Fraguier  justifies  Socrates  in  one  of  his  dissertations.  Mem.  of  the 
Academy  of  Belles  Lettres , tom.  iv.  p.  372. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


15 


that  these  censures  and  suspicions,  when  duly  examined,  quite 
disappear ; and  that  they  ought  to  be  considered  as  the 
effect  of  the  malice  of  the  enemies  of  both.  Plato,  in  one  of 
his  dialogues,  gives  us  a conversation  between  Socrates  and  Al- 
cibiades,  well  calculated  to  display  the  genius  and  character  of 
the  latter,  who  henceforward  will  have  a very  great  share  and 
play  a conspicuous  part  in  the  affairs  of  the  republic  of  Athens. 
I shall  make  a very  short  extract  from  it  in  this  place,  which  I 
hope  will  not  displease  my  readers. 

In  this  dialogue  Socrates  is  introduced  conversing  with  Al- 
cibiades,  d who  at  that  time  was  under  the  guardianship  of  Pe- 
ricles. He  was  then  very  young,  and  had  been  educated  like 
the  rest  of  the  Athenians  ; that  is,  he  had  been  taught  polite  lite- 
rature, and  to  play  on  instruments,  and  had  practised  wrestling, 
and  other  bodily  exercises.  It  does  not  appear  that  Pericles 
had  hitherto  taken  much  pains  in  Alcibiades’s  education,  (a  fault 
too  common  in  the  greatest  men,)  since  he  had  put  him  under 
the  tuition  of  Zopyrus,  a Thracian,  a man  far  advanced  in  years, 
and  who,  of  all  Pericles’s  slaves,  both  from  his  turn  of  mind  and 
age,  was  the  least  qualified  to  educate  this  young  Athenian. 
And  indeed  Socrates  told  Alcibiades,  that  should  he  compare 
him  with  the  youths  of  Lacedaemonia,  who  displayed  a spirit  of 
valour,  a greatness  of  soul,  a strong  desire  of  glory,  a love  of 
labour,  attended  with  gentleness,  modesty,  temperance,  and  a 
perfect  obedience  to  the  laws  and  discipline  of  Sparta,  he  would 
seem  a mere  child  to  them.  Nevertheless,  his  high  birth,  his 
riches,  the  great  families  he  was  related  to,  and  the  authority  of 
his  guardian  ; all  these  things  had  conspired  to  make  him  ex- 
ceedingly vain  and  haughty.  He  was  full  of  esteem  for  himself, 
and  of  contempt  for  all  others.  He  was  preparing  to  enter  upon 
the  administration  of  public  affairs,  and,  from  his  conversation, 
it  might  be  presumed,  that  he  promised  himself  no  less  than  to 
eclipse  entirely  the  glory  of  Pericles,  and  to  attack  the  king  of 
Persia  even  upon  his  throne.  Socrates  seeing  him  going  to 
mount  the  tribunal,  in  order  to  give  the  people  some  advice  re- 
lating to  the  public  affairs,  demonstrates  to  him,  by  various 
questions,  and  by  Alcibiades’s  answers,  that  he  is  quite  ignorant 
of  the  affairs  about  which  he  is  going  to  speak,  as  he  had  never 
studied  them  himself,  nor  been  informed  in  them  by  others. 
After  making  Alcibiades  himself  confess  this,  he  paints,  in  the 
strongest  colours,  the  absurdity  of  his  conduct,  and  makes  him 
fully  sensible  of  it.- — What,  says  Socrates,  would  Amestris  (the 
mother  of  Artaxerxes,  who  then  reigned  in  Persia)  say,  were  she 
to  hear,  that  there  is  a man  now  in  Athens  who  is  meditating 
war  against  her  son,  and  even  intends  to  dethrone  him  ? She 
doubtless  would  suppose  him  to  be  some  veteran  general,  a man 
d Plut.  in  Alcib.  I. 


10 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


of  intrepid  courage,  of  great  wisdom,  and  consummate  experi- 
ence ; that  he  is  able  to  raise  a mighty  army,  and  march  it 
wherever  he  pleases  ; and  at  the  same  time,  that  he  has  long 
before  taken  the  proper  measures  for  putting  so  vast  a design 
in  execution.  But  were  she  to  hear  that  this  is  by  no  means 
the  case,  and  that  the  person  in  question  is  not  twenty  years 
old  ; that  he  is  utterly  ignorant  of  public  affairs  ; has  not  the 
least  knowledge  of  war,  nor  any  authority  among  the  citizens,  or 
influence  over  the  allies  ; would  it  be  possible  for  her  to  refrain 
from  laughing  at  the  folly  and  extravagance  of  such  an  enter- 
prise ? This,  nevertheless,  says  Socrates,  (directing  himself  to 
Alcibiades,)  is  your  picture;  and  unhappily  resembles  most  of 
those  who  thrust  themselves  into  the  public  employments.  So- 
crates, however,  excepts  Pericles  on  this  occasion  ; his  solid 
merit  and  exalted  reputation  being  acquired  by  his  close  study, 
during  a long  course  of  years,  of  every  thing  capable  of  forming 
his  mind,  and  of  qualifying  him  for  public  employments.  Al- 
cibiades could  not  deny  that  this  was  his  case ; he  was  ashamed  of 
his  conduct,  and  blushing  to  see  himself  so  void  of  merit,  he  asks 
how  he  must  act  in  order  to  attain  it.  Socrates  being  unwilling  to 
discourage  his  pupil,  tells  him,  that  as  he  is  so  young,  these  evils 
might  be  remedied,  and  afterwards  continually  gave  him  the 
wisest  counsels.  He  had  full  leisure  to  profit  by  them  ; as  up- 
wards of  twenty  years  passed  between  this  conversation  and  his 
engaging  in  public  affairs. 

Alcibiades  was  of  a pliant  and  flexible  disposition,  that 
would  take  any  impression  which  the  difference  of  times  and 
circumstances  might  require,  still  veering  either  to  good  or  evil 
with  the  same  facility  and  ardour ; and  shifting  almost  in  an  in- 
stant from  one  extreme  to  its  opposite ; so  that  the  people  ap- 
plied to  him  what  Homer  observes  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  That  it 
produce s a great  number  of  very  excellent  medicinal  drugs,  and  at 
the  same  time  as  many  poisons.  It  might  be  said  of  Alcibiades/ 
that  he  was  not  one  single  man,  but  (if  so  bold  an  expression 
might  be  used)  a compound  of  several  men ; either  serious  or 
gay ; austere  or  affable ; an  imperious  master,  or  a grovelling 
slave  ; a friend  to  virtue  and  the  virtuous,  or  abandoned  to 
vice  and  vicious  men ; capable  of  supporting  the  most  pain- 
ful fatigues  and  toils,  insatiably  desirous  of  voluptuous  de- 
lights. 

His  irregularities  and  dissolute  conduct  were  become  the  talk 
of  the  whole  city  and  Alcibiades  would  very  willingly  have 
put  a stop  to  these  reports,  but  without  changing  his  course  of 
life,  as  appears  from  a saying  of  his.  He  had  a very  handsome 
dog,  of  an  uncommon  size,  which  had  cost  him  threescore  and 

f Quemvis  hominem  secum  attulit  ad  nos.  Juvenal. 
o Plut.  in  Alcib.  p.  195. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


17 


ten  minfe,h  or  3500  French  livres.  By  this  we  find  that  a fond- 
ness for  dogs  is  of  great  antiquity.  Alcibiades  caused  his  tail, 
which  was  the  greatest  beauty  he  had  about  him,  to  be  cut  off. 
His  friends  censured  him  very  much  on  that  account,  and  said, 
that  the  whole  city  blamed  him  very  much  for  spoiling  the  beauty 
of  so  handsome  a creature.  This  is  the  very  thing  I want,  re- 
plied Alcibiades  with  a smile  : J would  have  the  Athenians  con- 
verse about  what  I have  done  to  my  dog,  that  they  may  not 
entertain  themselves  with  saying  worse  things  of  me. 

Among  the  various  passions  that  were  discovered  in  him,1 
the  strongest  and  most  prevailing  was  a haughty  turn  of  mind, 
which  would  force  all  things  to  submit  to  it,  and  could  not  bear 
a superior  or  even  an  equal.  Although  his  birth  and  uncommon 
talents  smoothed  the  way  to  his  attaining  the  highest  employ- 
ments in  the  republic,  there  was  nothing  however  to  which  he 
was  so  fond  of  owing  the  influence  and  authority  he  wanted  to 
gain  over  the  people,  as  to  the  force  of  his  eloquence,  and  the 
persuasive  grace  of  his  orations.  To  this  his  intimacy  with 
Socrates  might  have  greatly  conduced. 

Alcibiades, k with  the  disposition  we  have  here 
Ant  ’ c?8420  described,  was  not  born  for  repose,  and  had  set 
every  engine  at  work  to  thwart  the  treaty  lately 
concluded  between  the  two  states ; but  not  succeeding  in  his 
attempt,  he  endeavoured  to  prevent  its  taking  effect.  He  was 
disgusted  at  the  Lacedaemonians,  because  they  directed  them- 
selves only  to  Nicias,  of  whom  they  had  a very  high  opinion  ; 
and  on  the  contrary  seemed  to  take  no  manner  of  notice  of  him, 
though  the  rights  of  hospitality  had  subsisted  between  his  ances- 
tors and  them. 

The  first  thing  he  did  to  infringe  the  peace  was  this.  Having 
been  informed  that  the  people  of  Argos  only  wanted  an  oppor- 
tunity to  break  with  the  Spartans,  whom  they  equally  hated 
and  feared,  he  flattered  them  secretly  with  the  hopes  that  the 
Athenians  would  succour  them,  by  suggesting  to  them  that  they 
were  ready  to  break  a peace  which  was  no  way  advantageous 
to  them. 

And  indeed  the  Lacedaemonians  were  not  very  careful  to  ob- 
serve the  several  conditions  of  it  religiously,  having  concluded 
an  alliance  with  the  Boeotians,  in  direct  opposition  to  the  design 
and  tenor  of  the  treaty ; and  having  surrendered  up  the  fort  of 
Panactus  to  the  Athenians,  not  fortified,  and  in  the  condition 
it  was  in  at  the  concluding  of  the  treaty,  as  they  had  stipulated 
to  do,  but  quite  dismantled.  Alcibiades  observing  the  Atheni- 

h About.  160/.  sterling.  The  Attic  mina  was  worth  100  drachmas,  and  the 
drachma  ten -pence,  French  money. 

* To  <pi\6veutov,  k ai  to  0t\o7rpwroiA  Plut.  in  Alcib.  p.  195,  196. 
k Thucyd.  1.  v.  p.  368—376.  Plut.  in  Alcib.  p.  197,  198. 

VOL.  III.  C 


18 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


ans  to  be  extremely  exasperated  at  this  breach  of  faith,  did  his 
utmost  to  increase  their  disgust ; and  taking  this  opportunity  to 
embarrass  Nicias,  he  made  him  odious  to  the  people,  by  causing 
them  to  entertain  a suspicion  of  his  being  too  strongly  attached 
to  the  Lacedaemonians  ; and  by  charging  him  with  crimes  which 
were  not  altogether  improbable,  though  they  were  absolutely  false. 

This  new  attack  quite  disconcerted  Nicias ; but  happily  for 
him,  there  arrived,  at  that  very  instant,  ambassadors  from  Lace- 
daemonia,  who  were  invested  with  full  powers  to  put  an  end  to 
all  the  disputes.  Being  introduced  into  the  council,  or  senate, 
they  set  forth  their  complaints,  and  made  their  demands,  which 
every  one  of  the  members  thought  very  just  and  reasonable. 
The  people  were  to  give  them  audience  the  next  day.  Alci- 
biades,  who  was  afraid  they  would  succeed  with  them,  used  his 
utmost  endeavours  to  engage  the  ambassadors  in  a conference 
with  him.  He  represented  to  them,  that  the  council  always 
behaved  with  the  utmost  moderation  and  humanity  towards  those 
who  addressed  them,  but  that  the  people  were  haughty  and  ex- 
travagant in  their  pretensions  ; that  should  the  ambassadors 
mention  full  powers,  the  people  would  not  fail  to  take  advantage 
of  this  circumstance,  and  oblige  them  to  agree  to  whatever  they 
should  take  it  into  their  heads  to  ask.  He  concluded  with 
assuring  them,  that  he  would  assist  them  with  all  his  credit,  in 
order  to  get  Pylus  restored  to  them ; to  prevent  the  alliance 
with  the  people  of  Argos,  and  to  get  that  with  them  renewed  : 
and  he  confirmed  all  these  promises  with  an  oath.  The  ambas- 
sadors were  extremely  well  pleased  with  this  conference,  and 
greatly  admired  the  profound  policy  and  vast  abilities  of  Alci- 
biades,  whom  they  looked  upon  as  an  extraordinary  man ; and, 
indeed,  they  were  not  mistaken  in  their  conjecture. 

On  the  morrow,  the  people  being  assembled,  the  ambassadors 
were  introduced.  Alcibiades  asked  them,  in  the  mildest 
terms,  the  subject  of  their  embassy,  and  the  purport  of  the 
powers  with  which  they  were  invested.  They  immediately 
answered,  that  they  were  come  to  propose  an  accommodation, 
but  were  not  empowered  to  conclude  any  thing.  These  words 
were  no  sooner  spoken,  than  Alcibiades  exclaims  against  them ; 
declares  them  to  be  treacherous  knaves  ; calls  upon  the  council 
as  witness  to  the  speech  they  had  made  the  night  before ; and 
desires  the  people  not  to  believe  or  hear  men  who  so  impudent- 
ly advanced  falsehoods,  and  spoke  and  prevaricated  so  unac- 
countably, as  to  say  one  thing  one  day,  and  the  very  reverse  on 
the  next. 

Words  could  never  express  the  surprise  and  confusion  with 
which  the  ambassadors  were  seized,  who,  gazing  at  one  another, 
could  not  believe  either  their  eyfes  or  ears.  Nicias,  who  did 
not  know  the  treacherous  stratagem  of  Alcibiades,  could  not 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


19 


conceive  the  motive  of  this  change,  and  tortured  his  brain  to  no 
purpose  to  find  out  the  reason  of  it.  The  people  were  at  that 
moment  going  to  send  for  the  ambassadors  of  Argos,  in  order 
to  conclude  the  league  with  them ; when  a great  earthquake 
came  to  the  assistance  of  Nicias,  and  broke  up  the  assembly. 
It  was  with  the  utmost  difficulty  he  prevailed  so  far  in  that 
which  was  held  next  day,  as  to  have  a stop  put  to  the  proceed- 
ings, till  such  time  as  ambassadors  should  be  sent  to  Lacedae- 
mon. Nicias  was  appointed  to  head  them,  but  returned  with- 
out having  done  the  least  good.  The  Athenians  then  repented 
very  much  their  having  delivered  up,  at  his  persuasion,  the 
prisoners  they  had  taken  in  the  island,  and  who  were  related  to 
the  greatest  families  in  Sparta.  However,  though  the  people 
were  highly  exasperated  at  Nicias,  they  did  not  proceed  to 
any  excess  against  him,  but  only  appointed  Alcibiades  their 
general ; made  a league  with  the  inhabitants  of  Mantinea  and 
Elis,  who  had  quitted  the  party  of  the  Lacedaemonians,  in 
which  the  Argives  were  included,  and  sent  troops  to  Pylus,  to 
lay  waste  Laconia.  In  this  manner  they  again  involved  them- 
selves in  the  war  which  they  were  so  lately  desirous  of  avoiding. 

Plutarch,1  after  relating  the  intrigue  of  Alcibiades,  adds  : 
No  one  can  approve  the  methods  he  employed  to  succeed  in 
his  design  ; however , it  was  a master-stroke  to  disunite  and 
shake  almost  every  part  of  Peloponnesus  in  this  manner , and 
raise  up,  in  one  day,  so  many  enemies  against  the  Lacedce- 
monians.  In  my  opinion,  this  is  too  mild  a censure  of  so  kna- 
vish and  perfidious  an  action,  which,  how  successful  soever  it 
might  have  been,  was  notwithstanding  horrid  in  itself,  and  of 
a nature  never  to  be  sufficiently  detested. 

There  was  in  Athens  a citizen,"1  named  Hyperbolus,  a very 
wicked  man,  whom  the  comic  poets  generally  made  the  object 
of  their  raillery  and  invectives.  He  was  hardened  in  evil,  and 
become  insensible  to  infamy,  by  renouncing  ail  sentiments  of 
honour,  which  could  only  be  the  effect  of  a soul  abandoned 
entirely  to  vice.  Hyperbolus  was  not  agreeable  to  any  one ; 
and  yet  the  people  made  use  of  him  to  humble  those  in  high 
stations,  and  involve  them  in  difficulties.  Two  citizens,  Nicias 
and  Alcibiades,  engrossed  at  that  time  all  the  authority  in 
Athens.  The  dissolute  life  of  the  latter  shocked  the  Athe- 
nians, who  besides  dreaded  his  audacity  and  haughtiness.  On 
the  other  side,  Nicias,  by  always  opposing,  without  the  least 
reserve,  their  unjust  desires,  and  by  obliging  them  to  take  the 
most  useful  measures,  was  become  very  odious  to  them.  It 
might  be  expected,  that  as  the  people  were  thus  alienated  from 
both,  they  could  not  fail  to  put  the  ostracism  in  force  against 

1 In  Alcib.  p.  198. 

m Plut.  in  Alcib.  p.  196,  197.  In  Nic.  p.  530  531. 
c 2 


20 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


one  of  them.  Of  the  two  parties  which  prevailed  at  that  time 
in  the  city,  one,  which  consisted  of  the  young  men  who  were  eager 
for  war,  the  other  of  the  old  men  who  were  desirous  of  peace ; 
the  former  endeavoured  to  procure  the  banishment  of  Nicias, 
and  the  latter  of  Alcibiades.  Hyperbolus,  whose  only  merit 
was  his  impudence,  in  hopes  of  succeeding  whichsoever  of  them 
should  be  removed,  declared  openly  against  them,  and  was 
eternally  exasperating  the  people  against  both.  However, 
the  two  factions  uniting,  he  himself  was  banished,  and  by 
that  put  an  end  to  the  ostracism,  which  seemed  to  have 
been  demeaned,  in  being  employed  against  a man  of  so  base  a 
character  ; for  hitherto  there  was  a kind  of  honour  and  dignity 
annexed  to  this  punishment.  Hyperbolus  was  therefore  the 
last  who  was  sentenced  by  the  ostracism  ; as  Hipparchus,  a 
near  relation  of  Pisistratus  the  tyrant,  had  been  the  first. 

SECT.  V. 

Alcibiades  engages  the  Athenians  in  the  war  of  Sicily. 

Sixteenth  and  seventeenth  years  of  the  War. 

I pass  over  several  inconsiderable  events," 
Ant.  j.’c?4i*6.  to  ^as^en  to  ^ie  relation  of  that  of  the  greatest 
importance,  the  expedition  of  the  Athenians  into 
Sicily,  to  which  they  were  excited  by  Alcibiades  especially. 
This  is  the  sixteenth  year  of  the  Peloponnesian  war. 

Alcibiades0  had  gained  a surprising  ascendant  over  the 
minds  of  the  people,  though  they  were  perfectly  well  acquainted 
with  his  character.  For  his  great  qualities  were  united  with 
still  greater  vices,  which  he  did  not  take  the  least  pains  to  con- 
ceal. He  passed  his  life  in  such  an  excess  of  luxury  and 
voluptuousness,  as  was  a scandal  to  the  city.  Nothing  was 
seen  in  his  house  but  festivals,  rejoicings,  and  parties  of  plea- 
sure and  debauchery.  He  showed  very  little  regard  to  the 
customs  of  his  country,  and  still  less  to  religion  and  the  gods. 
All  persons  of  sense  and  judgment,  besides  the  strong  aver- 
sion they  had  for  his  irregularities,  dreaded  exceedingly  the 
consequences  of  his  audacity,  profusion,  and  utter  contempt  of 
the  laws,  which  they  considered  as  so  many  steps  by  which 
Alcibiades  would  rise  to  tyrannical  power. 

Aristophanes,  in  one  of  his  comedies, p shows  admirably 
well,  in  a single  verse,  the  disposition  of  the  people  towards 
him  : They  hate  Alcibiades,  says  he,  and  yet  cannot  do  without 
him.  And,  indeed,  the  prodigious  sums  he  squandered  on  the 

11  Thucyd.  1.  viii.  p.  350 — 409. 

° Plut.  in  Alcib.  p.  198 — 200.  In  Nic.  p.  531. 
p The  Frogs.  Act  v.  scene  4. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


21 


people ; the  pompous  games  and  shows  he  exhibited  to  please 
them ; the  magnificent  and  almost  incredible  presents  which  he 
made  the  city ; the  grace  and  beauty  of  his  person ; his  elo- 
quence, his  bodily  strength,  joined  to  his  courage  and  his  expe- 
rience ; in  a word,  this  assemblage  of  great  qualities  made  the 
Athenians  wink  at  his  faults,  and  bear  them  patiently,  always 
endeavouring  to  lessen  and  screen  them  under  soft  and  favour- 
able names ; for  they  called  them  frolics  and  polite  pastimes, 
and  indications  of  his  humanity  and  good-nature. 

Timon  the  man-hater,  morose  and  savage  as  he  was,  formed 
a better  judgment  of  this  conduct  of  Alcibiades.  Meeting 
him  one  day  as  he  was  coming  out  of  the  assembly,  vastly 
pleased  at  his  having  been  gratified  in  all  his  demands,  and  at 
seeing  the  greatest  honours  paid  him  by  the  people  in  general, 
who  were  attending  him  in  crowds  to  his  house ; so  far  from 
shunning  him  as  he  did  all  other  men,  on  the  contrary  ran  to 
meet  him,  and  stretching  out  his  hand  to  him  in  a friendly  way ; 
Courage , my  son , says  he,  thou  dost  right  in  pushing  thy  for- 
tune, for  thy  advancement  will  he  the  ruin  of  all  these  people . 
The  war  of  Sicily  will  show  that  Timon  was  not  mistaken. 

The  Athenians,  ever  since  the  time  of  Pericles,  had  meditated 
the  conquest  of  Sicily.  However,  that  wise  guide  had  always 
endeavoured  to  check  this  ambitious  and  wild  project.  He 
used  frequently  to  inculcate  to  them,  that  by  living  in  peace, 
by  directing  their  attention  to  naval  affairs,  by  contenting  them- 
selves with  preserving  the  conquests  they  had  already  gained, 
and  by  not  engaging  in  hazardous  enterprises,  they  would  raise 
their  city  to  a flourishing  condition,  and  be  always  superior  to 
their  enemies.  The  authority  he  had  at  that  time  over  the  peo- 
ple, kept  them  from  invading  Sicily,  though  it  could  not  sur- 
mount the  desire  they  had  to  conquer  it,  and  their  eyes  were 
continually  upon  that  island.  Some  time  after  Pericles’  death,1* 
the  Leontines  being  attacked  by  the  Syracusans,  had  sent  a de- 
putation to  Athens,  to  demand  aid.  They  were  originally  of 
Chalcis,  an  Athenian  colony.  The  chief  of  the  deputies  wras 
Gorgias,  a famous  rhetorician,  who  was  reputed  the  most  elo- 
quent man  of  his  time.  His  elegant  and  florid  diction,  height- 
ened by  shining  figures  which  he  first  employed,  charmed  the 
Athenians,  who  were  prodigiously  affected  with  the  beauties 
and  graces  of  eloquence.  Accordingly  the  alliance  was  con- 
cluded, and  they  sent  ships  to  Rhegium  to  the  aid  of  the  Leon- 
tines. The  year  following  they  sent  a greater  number.  Two 
years  after  they  sent  a new  fleet,  something  stronger  than  the 
former  ; but  the  Sicilians  having  put  an  end  to  all  their  divi- 
sions, by  the  advice  of  Hermocrates,  the  fleet  was  sent  back  ; 
and  the  Athenians,  not  being  able  to  prevail  with  themselves  to 
i Diod.  1.  xii.  p.  99. 


22 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


pardon  tlieir  generals  for  not  conquering  Sicily,  sent  two  of 
them,  Hythodorus  and  Sophocles,  into  banishment ; and  sen- 
tenced the  third,  Eurymedon,  to  pay  a heavy  fine  ; their  pros- 
perity having  blinded  them  to  so  prodigious  a degree,  that  they 
were  persuaded  no  power  was  able  to  resist  them.  They  made 
several  attempts  afterwards,  and  upon  pretence  of  sending  from 
time  to  time  arms  and  soldiers  to  such  cities  as  were  unjustly 
treated  or  oppressed  by  the  Syracusans,  they  by  that  means 
were  preparing  to  invade  them  with  a greater  force. 

But  tlie  person  who  most  inflamed  this  ardour  was  Alcibiades, 
by  feeding  the  people  with  splendid  hopes,  with  which  he  him- 
self was  for  ever  filled,  or  rather  intoxicated.  He  was  every 
night  in  his  dreams  taking  Carthage,  subduing  Africa,  cross- 
ing from  thence  into  Italy,  and  possessing  himself  of  all  Pelo- 
ponnesus ; looking  upon  Sicily  not  as  the  aim  and  the  end  of 
this  war,  but  as  the  beginning  and  the  first  step  of  the  exploits 
which  he  was  revolving  in  his  mind.  All  the  citizens  favoured 
his  views,  and,  without  inquiring  seriously  into  matters,  were 
enchanted  with  the  hopes  he  gave  them.  This  expedition  was 
the  only  topic  of  all  conversations.  The  young  men,  in  the 
places  where  the  public  exercises  were  performed,  and  the  old 
men  in  their  shops  and  elsewhere,  were  employed  in  nothing 
but  in  drawing  the  plan  of  Sicily  ; in  discoursing  on  the  nature 
and  quality  of  the  sea  with  which  it  is  surrounded  ; on  its  good 
harbours,  and  flat  shores  towards  Africa  : for  these  people, 
infatuated  by  the  speeches  of  Alcibiades,  were  (like  him)  per- 
suaded that  they  should  make  Sicily  only  their  place  of  arms 
and  their  arsenal,  from  whence  they  should  set  out  for  the  con- 
quest of  Carthage,  and  make  themselves  masters  of  all  Africa 
and  the  sea  as  far  as  the  Pillars  of  Hercules. 

It  is  related  r that  neither  Socrates  nor  Meton  the  astronomer 
believed  that  this  enterprise  would  be  successful : the  former, 
being  inspired,  as  he  insinuated,  by  his  familiar  spirit,  who 
always  warned  him  of  the  evils  with  which  he  was  threatened  ; 
and  the  other  directed  by  his  reason  and  good  sense,  which, 
pointing  out  what  he  had  to  apprehend  in  respect  to  the  future, 
induced  him  to  act  the  madman  on  this  occasion  ; and  to  de- 
mand, in  consideration  of  the  unhappy  condition  to  which  he 
was  reduced,  that  the  Athenians  w ould  not  force  away  his  son, 
and  would  dispense  with  his  carrying  arms. 

r Plut.  in  Alcib.  p.  199.  In  Nic.  p.  532. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


23 


SECT.  VI. 

Account  of  the  several  people  who  inhabited  Sicily. 

Before  I enter  on  the  relation  of  the  war  of  Sicily,  it  will  not 
be  improper  to  give  a plan  of  the  country,  and  of  the  nations 
who  inhabited  it : Thucydides  begins  in  the  same  manner. 

It  was  first  inhabited  by  the  Lestrygones  and  the  Cyclopes, s 
of  whom  we  know  nothing  but  what  we  are  told  by  the  poets. 
The  most  ancient,  after  these,  were  the  Sicani,  who  called 
themselves  the  original  inhabitants  of  this  country,  though  they 
are  thought  to  have  come  into  it  from  the  neighbourhood  of  a 
river  in  Spain,  called  Sicanus,  whose  name  they  gave  to  the 
island,  which  before  was  called  Trinacria  : these  people  were 
afterwards  confined  to  the  western  part  of  the  island.  Some 
Trojans,  after  the  burning  of  their  city,  came  and  settled  near 
them,  and  built  Eryx  and  Egesta, 1 who  all  assumed  the  name 
of  Elymaei  ; and  were  afterwards  joined  by  some  inhabitants  of 
Phocis,  at  their  return  from  the  siege  of  Troy.  Those  who 
are  properly  called  Sicilians  came  from  Italy  in  very  great 
numbers ; and  having  gained  a considerable  victory  over  the 
Sicani,  confined  them  to  a corner  of  their  island,  about  300 
years  before  the  arrival  of  the  Greeks ; and  in  Thucydides’  time, 
they  still  inhabited  the  middle  part  of  the  island  and  the  northern 
coast.  From  them  the  island  was  called  Sicily.  The  Phoenicians 
also  spread  themselves  along  the  coast,  and  in  the  little  islands 
which  border  upon  it,  for  the  convenience  of  trade  ; but  after  the 
Greeks  began  to  settle  there,  they  retired  into  the  country  of 
Elymrni,  in  order  to  be  nearer  Carthage,  and  abandoned  the 
rest.  It  was  in  this  manner  the  Barbarians  first  settled  in 
Sicily. 

With  regard  to  the  Greeks,  the  first  of  them 
Ant.^J.  C 710.  wk°  crossed  into  Sicily  were  the  Chalcidians  of 
Euboea,  under  Theocles  who  founded  Naxos. 
The  year  after,  which,  according  to  Dionysius  of  Halicarnassus, 
was  the  third  of  the  seventeenth  Olympiad,  Archias  the  Corin- 
thian laid  the  foundations  of  Syracuse.  Seven  years  after,  the 
Chalcidians  founded  Leontium  and  Catana,  after  having  driven 
out  the  inhabitants  of  the  country,  who  were  Sicilians.  Other 
Greeks,  who  came  from  Megara,  a city  of  Achaia,  about  the  same 
time,  founded  Megara,  called  Hyblaea,  or  simply  Hybla,  from 
Hyblon  a Sicilian  king,  by  whose  permission  they  had  settled  in 
his  dominions.  It  is  well  known  that  the  Hyblman  honey  was 
very  famous  among  the  ancients.  A hundred  years  after,  the 
inhabitants  of  that  city  built  Selinus.  Gela,  built  on  a river  of 
the  same  name,  forty-five  years  after  the  founding  of  Syracuse, 

6 Thucyd.  1.  vi.  p.  410 — 413.  1 It  is  called  Segestaby  the  Romans. 


24 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


founded  Agrigentum  about  108  years  after.  Zancle,  called 
afterwards  Messana  or  Messene  by  Anaxilas  tyrant  of  Rhegium, 
who  was  a native  of  Messene  a city  of  Peloponnesus,  had  seve- 
ral founders,  and  at  different  periods.  The  Zanclians  built  the 
city  of  Himera ; the  Syracusans  built  Acra,  Casmene,  and  Ca- 
marina.  These  are  most  of  the  nations,  whether  Greeks  or  Bar- 
barians, who  settled  in  Sicily. 

SECT.  VII. 

The  people  of  Egesta  implore  aid  of  the  Athenians.  Nicias  opposes,  but  to  no 
purpose,  the  war  of  Sicily.  Alcibiades  carries  that  point.  They  are  both 
appointed  generals  with  Lamachus. 

A M ^r88  Alliens  was  in  the  disposition  above  related,” 
Ant.  J.  C.  416.  w^iei1  ambassadors  arrived  from  the  people  of 
Egesta,  who,  in  quality  of  their  allies,  came  to 
implore  their  aid  against  the  inhabitants  of  Selinus,  who  were 
assisted  by  the  Syracusans.  It  was  the  sixteenth  year  of  the  Pelo- 
ponnesian war.  They  represented,  among  other  things,  that 
should  they  be  abandoned,  the  Syracusans,  after  seizing  their 
city  as  they  had  done  that  of  Leontium,  would  possess  themselves 
of  all  Sicily,  and  not  fail  to  aid  the  Peloponnesians,  who  were 
their  founders ; and,  that  they  might  put  them  to  as  little 
charge  as  possible,  they  offered  to  pay  the  troops  that  should 
be  sent  to  succour  them.  The  Athenians,  who  had  long  waited 
for  a favourable  opportunity  to  declare  themselves,  sent  deputies 
to  Egesta  to  inquire  into  the  state  of  affairs,  and  to  see  whether 
there  was  money  enough  in  the  treasury  to  defray  the  expenses 
of  so  great  a war.  The  inhabitants  of  that  city  had  been  so 
artful,  as  to  borrow  from  the  neighbouring  nations  a great  number 
of  gold  and  silver  vases,  worth  an  immense  sum  of  money;  and 
of  these  they  made  a show  when  the  Athenians 
Ant.^J  C°415  arrive<[l‘  The  deputies  returned  with  those  of 
Egesta,  who  carried  threescore  talents  in  ingots, 
as  a month’s  pay  for  the  sixty  galleys  which  they  demanded  ; 
and  a promise  of  larger  sums,  which,  they  said,  were  ready  both 
in  the  public  treasury  and  in  the  temples.  The  people,  struck 
with  these  fair  appearances,  the  truth  of  which  they  did  not  give 
themselves  the  leisure  to  examine  ; and  seduced  by  the  advan- 
tageous reports  which  their  deputies  made,  with  the  view  of 
pleasing  them ; immediately  granted  the  Egestans  their  demand, 
and  appointed  Alcibiades,  Nicias,  and  Lamachus,  to  command 
the  fleet ; with  full  power,  not  only  to  succour  Egesta,  and  re- 
store the  inhabitants  of  Leontium  to  their  city ; but  also  to  regu- 

u Thucyd.  1.  vi.  p.  413 — 415.  Diod.  1.  xii.  p.  129,  130.  Plut.  in  Alcib.  p. 
200.  In  Nic.  p.  531. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS.  25 

late  tlie  affairs  of  Sicily,  in  such  a manner  as  might  best  suit  the 
interests  of  the  republic. 

Nicias  was  appointed  one  of  the  generals  to  his  very  great 
regret ; for,  besides  other  motives  which  made  him  dread  that 
command,  he  shunned  it,  because  Alcibiades  was  to  be  his  col- 
league. But  the  Athenians  promised  themselves  greater  suc- 
cess from  this  war,  should  they  not  resign  the  whole  conduct  of 
it  to  Alcibiades,  but  temper  his  ardour  and  audacity  with  the 
coolness  and  wisdom  of  Nicias. 

Five  days  after, x to  hasten  the  execution  of  the  decree, 
and  make  the  necessary  preparations,  a second  assembly  was 
held.  Nicias,  who  had  time  enough  to  reflect  deliberately  on 
the  affair  proposed,  and  was  more  and  more  convinced  of  the 
difficulties  and  dangers  which  would  ensue  from  it,  thought  him- 
self obliged  to  speak  with  some  vehemence  against  a project, 
the  consequences  of  which  he  foresaw  might  be  very  fatal  to 
the  republic.  He  said,  That  it  was  surprising  so  important 
an  affair  should  have  been  determined  almost  as  soon  as  it 
was  taken  into  deliberation : that  without  once  inquiring  into 
matters,  they  had  given  credit  to  what  was  told  them  by  fo- 
reigners, who  were  very  lavish  of  the  most  splendid  promises  as 
costing  them  nothing  ; and  whose  interest  it  ivas  to  offer  mighty 
things,  in  order  to  extricate  themselves  from  their  imminent 
danger.  After  all,  what  advantage,  says  he,  can  accrue  from 
thence  to  the  republic  ? Have  we  so  few  enemies  at  our  doors, 
that  we  need  go  in  search  of  others  at  a distance  from  us  ? 
Will  you  act  wisely,  to  hazard  your  present  possessions,  on 
the  vain  hopes  of  an  uncertain  advantage  ? to  meditate  new 
conquests  before  you  have  secured  your  ancient  ones  ? to  study 
nothing  but  the  aggrandizing  of  your  state,  and  quite  neglect 
your  own  safety  ? Can  you  place  any  dependance  on  a.  truce , 
which  you  yourselves  know  is  very  precarious ; which  you 
are  sensible  has  been  infringed  more  than  once  ; and  which  the 
least  defeat  on  our  side  may  suddenly  change  into  an  open  war  l 
You  are  not  ignorant  how  the  Lacedcemonians  have  cdways 
been,  and  still  continue,  disposed  towards  us.  They  detest  our 
government  as  different  from  theirs  ; it  is  with  grief  and  dis- 
dain they  see  us  possessed  of  the  empire  of  Greece  ; they  con- 
sider our  glory  as  their  shame  and  confusion  ; and  there  is  no- 
thing they  would  not  attempt,  to  humble  a power  which  excites 
their  jealousy , and  keeps  them  perpetually  in  fear.  These  are 
qur  real  enemies,  and  these  are  they  whom  we  ought  to  guard 
against.  Will  it  be  a proper  time  to  make  these  reflections , 
when  ( after  having  divided  our  troops,  and  while  our  arms 
will  be  employed  elsewhere,  and  we  shall  be  unable  to  resist 
them ) we  shall  be  attacked  at  once  by  all  the  forces  of  Pelo - 
x Thucyd.  1.  vi.  p.  415 — 428. 


26 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


ponnesus  ? We  do  but  just  begin  to  breathe,  after  the  calami- 
ties in  which  war  and  the  plague  had  plunged  us  ; and  we  are 
now  going  without  the  least  necessity  to  plunge  ourselves  into 
greater  danger.  If  we  are  ambitious  of  carrying  our  arms  into 
distant  countries , would  it  not  be  more  expedient  to  march  and 
reduce  the  rebels  of  Thrace,  and  other  nations  who  are  still 
wavering  and  unfixed  in  their  allegiance , than  to  fly  to  the  suc- 
cour of  the  inhabitants  of  Egesta,  about  whose  welfare  we  ought 
to  be  very  indifferent  ? And  will  it  suit  our  interest  to  attempt 
to  revenge  their  injuries,  at  a time  that  we  do  not  discover  the 
least  resentment  for  those  we  ourselves  receive  ? Let  us  leave 
the  Sicilians  to  themselves,  and  not  engage  in  their  quarrels, 
which  it  is  their  business  to  decide.  As  the  inhabitants  of 
Egesta  undertook  the  war  without  us,  let  them  extricate  them- 
selves from  it  without  our  interference.  Should  any  of  our 
generals  advise  you  to  this  enterprise,  from  an  ambitious  or 
self-interested  view  ; merely  to  make  a vain  parade  of  his  splen- 
did equipages,  or  to  raise  money  to  support  his  extravagance  ; 
be  not  guilty  of  so  much  imprudence  as  to  sacrifice  the  interest 
of  the  republic  to  his,  or  permit  him  to  involve  it  in  the  same 
ruin  with  himself.  An  enterprise  of  so  much  importance  ought 
not  to  be  committed  wholly  to  the  conduct  of  a young  man. 
Remember,  it  is  prudence,  not  prejudice  and  passion,  that  gives 
success  to  affairs.  Nicias  concluded  with  declaring-  it  his 
opinion,  that  it  would  be  proper  to  deliberate  again  on  the 
affair,  in  order  to  prevent  the  fatal  consequences  with  which 
their  taking  rash  resolutions  might  be  attended. 

It  was  plain  he  had  Alcibiades  in  view,  and  that  his  enor- 
mous luxury  was  the  object  of  his  censure.  And  indeed  he 
carried  it  to  an  incredible  height ; and  lavished  prodigious  sums 
of  money  on  horses,  equipages,  and  furniture ; not  to  mention 
the  delicacy  and  presumptuousness  of  his  table.  He  disputed 
the  prize  in  the  Olympic  games  with  seven  sets  of  chariot  hor- 
ses, which  no  private  man  had  ever  done  before  him  ; and  he 
was  crowned  more  than  once  on  that  occasion.  Extraordinary 
resources  were  necessary  for  supporting  such  luxury ; and  as 
avarice  often  serves  as  a resource  to  ambition,  there  were  some 
grounds  to  believe,  that  Alcibiades  was  no  less  solicitous  for 
the  conquest  of  Sicily,  and  that  of  Carthage,  (which  he  pretend- 
ed would  immediately  follow,)  to  enrich  his  family,  than  to  ren- 
der it  glorious.  It  is  natural  to  suppose  that  Alcibiades  did 
not  let  this  speech  of  Nicias  go  unanswered. 

This,  says  Alcibiades,  is  not  the  first  time  that  merit  had 
excited  jealousy,  and  glory  been  made  the  object  of  envy.  That 
very  thing  which  is  imputed  to  me  for  a crime , reflects,  1 
will  presume  to  say  it,  honour  on  my  country,  and  ought  to 
gain  me  applause.  The  splendour  in  which  I live  ; the  great 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


27 


sums  I expend,  particularly  in  the  public  assemblies  ; besides 
their  being  just  and  lawful,  at  the  same  time  give  foreigners 
a greater  idea  of  the  glory  of  Athens  ; and  show,  that  it  is 
not  in  such  want  of  money  as  our  enemies  imagine.  But  this 
is  not  our  present  business.  Let  the  world  form  a judgment 
of  me,  not  from  passion  and  prejudice,  but  from  my  actions. 
Was  it  an  inconsiderable  service  I did  the  republic,  in  bring- 
ing over  ( in  one  day ) to  its  alliance,  the  people  of  Elis,  of 
Mantinea,  and  of  Argos,  that  is,  the  chief  strength  of  Pelo- 
ponnesus ? Make  use,  therefore,  to  aggrandize  your  empire , 
of  Alcibiades’s  youth  and  folly,  ( since  his  enemies  give  it  that 
name,)  as  well  as  of  the  wisdom  and  experience  of  Nicias  ; 
and  do  not  repent , from  vain  and  idle  fears,  your  engaging 
in  an  enterprise  publicly  resolved  upon,  which  may  redound 
infinitely  both  to  your  glory  and  advantage.  The  cities  of 
Sicily,  weary  of  the  unjust  and  cruel  government  of  their 
princes,  and  still  more  of  the  tyrannical  authority  which 
Syracuse  exercises  over  them,  wait  only  for  a favourable 
opportunity  to  declare  themselves : and  are  ready  to  open 
their  gates  to  any  one  who  shall  offer  to  break  the  yoke  under 
which  they  have  so  long  groaned.  Though  the  citizens  of 
Egesta,  as  being  your  allies,  should  not  have  a right  to  your 
protection  ; yet  the  glory  of  Athens  ought  to  engage  you  to 
support  them.  States  aggrandize  themselves  by  succouring 
the  oppressed,  and  not  by  continuing  inactive.  In  the  present 
state  of  your  affairs,  the  only  way  to  dispirit  your  enemies, 
and  show  that  you  are  not  afraid  of  them,  will  he,  to  harass 
one  nation,  to  check  the  progress  of  another,  to  keep  them  all 
employed,  and  carry  your  arms  into  distant  countries.  Athens 
was  not  formed  for  ease  ; and  it  was  not  by  inactivity  that 
your  ancestors  raised  it  to  the  height  in  which  we  now  see  it. 
For  the  rest,  what  hazards  will  you  run  by  engaging  in  the 
enterprise  in  question  ? If  it  should  be  crowned  with  success, 
you  will  then  possess  yourselves  of  all  Greece  ; and  should 
it  not  answer  your  expectations,  your  fleet  will  give  you  an 
opportunity  of  retiring  whenever  you  please.  The  Lace- 
daemonians indeed  may  make  an  incursion  into  our  country  ; 
but  besides  that  it  would  not  be  in  our  power  to  prevent  it, 
though  we  shoidd  not  invade  Sicily,  we  still  shall  preserve 
the  empire  of  the  sea,  in  spite  of  them  ; a circumstance  which 
makes  our  enemies  entirely  despair  of  ever  being  able  to  con- 
quer us.  Be  not  therefore  biassed  by  Nidus's  reasons.  The 
only  tendency  of  them  is  to  sow  the  seeds  of  discord  between 
the  old  and  young  men,  who  can  do  nothing  without  one 
another  ; since  it  is  wisdom  and  courage,  counsel  and  execution, 
that  give  success  to  all  enterprises  ; and  this  in  which  we  are 
going  to  embark , cannot  but  turn  to  your  glory  and  advantage. 


28 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


The  Athenians,?  flattered  and  pleased  with  Alcibiades’s 
speech,  persisted  in  their  first  opinion ; Nicias,  on  the  other 
side,  did  not  depart  from  his  ; but  at  the  same  time  did  not 
dare  to  oppose  Alcibiades  any  farther.  Nicias  was  naturally 
of  a mild  and  timid  disposition.  He  was  not,  like  Pericles, 
master  of  that  lively  and  vehement  eloquence,  which,  like  a 
torrent,  bears  down  all  things  in  its  way.  And  indeecl  the 
latter,  on  several  occasions  and  at  several  times,  had  never  failed 
to  check  the  impetuosity  of  the  populace,  who,  even  then,  me- 
ditated the  expedition  into  Sicily ; because  he  wras  always  in- 
flexible, and  never  slackened  the  reins  of  that  authority  and 
kind  of  sovereignty  which  he  had  acquired  over  the  minds  of 
the  people : whereas  Nicias, z both  by  acting  and  speaking  in  an 
easy,  gentle  manner,  so  far  from  winning  over  the  people,  suf- 
fered himself  to  be  forcibly  and  involuntarily  carried  away  : and 
accordingly  he  at  last  yielded  to  the  people,  and  accepted  the 
command  in  a war  which  he  plainly  foresaw  would  be  attended 
with  the  most  fatal  consequences. 

Plutarch  makes  this  reflection  in  his  excellent  treatise,  where, 
speaking  of  the  qualities  requisite  in  a statesman,  he  shows  how 
very  necessary  eloquence  and  inflexible  constancy  and  perse- 
verance are  to  him. 

Nicias,  not  daring  to  oppose  Alcibiades  any  longer  openly, 
endeavoured  to  do  it  indirectly,  by  starting  a great  number  of 
difficulties,  drawn  especially  from  the  great  expense  requisite 
for  this  expedition.  He  declared  that,  since  they  were  resolved 
upon  war,  they  ought  to  carry  it  on  in  such  a manner  as  should 
be  consistent  with  the  exalted  reputation  to  which  Athens  had 
attained:  that  a fleet  was  not  sufficient  to  oppose  so  formidable 
a power  as  that  of  the  Syracusans  and  their  allies  ; that  they 
must  raise  an  army,  composed  of  good  horse  and  foot,  if  they 
desired  to  act  in  a manner  worthy  of  so  grand  a design : that, 
besides  their  fleet,  which  w as  to  make  them  masters  at  sea,  they 
must  have  a great  number  of  transports,  to  carry  provisions  per- 
petually to  the  army,  which  otherwise  could  not  possibly  subsist 
in  an  enemy’s  country  : that  they  must  carry  vast  sums  of  money 
with  them,  without  waiting  for  that  promised  them  by  the 
citizens  of  Egesta,  who  perhaps  were  ready  in  words  only,  and 
very  probably  might  break  their  promise : that  they  ought  to 
weigh  and  examine  the  disparity  there  was  between  themselves 
and  their  enemies  with  regard  to  the  conveniences  and  wants  of 
the  army ; the  Syracusans  being  in  their  own  country,  in  the 
midst  of  powerful  allies,  disposed  by  inclination,  as  well  as  en- 
gaged by  interest,  to  assist  them  with  men,  arms,  horses,  and 

y Plut.  in  prsee.  de  ger.  rep.  p.  802. 

z Kfl0a7rfp  ajujSXtT  xa^lvV  T<9  Xoy 7rstpa>jUfvo£  aTroarpstytiv  to v dijfioV)  ov 
tuiTzcrxtv. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


29 


provisions ; whereas  the  Athenians  would  carry  on  the  war  in  a 
remote  country  possessed  by  their  enemies,  where,  in  the  win- 
ter, news  could  not  be  brought  them  in  less  than  four  months’ 
time ; a country,  where  all  things  would  oppose  the  Athenians, 
and  nothing  be  procured  but  by  force  of  arms  : that  it  would 
reflect  the  greatest  ignominy  on  the  Athenians,  should  they  be 
forced  to  abandon  their  enterprise,  and  thereby  become  the 
scorn  and  contempt  of  their  enemies,  by  having  neglected  to 
take  all  the  precautions  which  so  important  a design  required  : 
that  as  for  himself,  he  was  determined  not  to  go,  unless  he  was 
provided  with  all  things  necessary  for  the  expedition,  because 
the  safety  of  the  whole  army  depended  on  that  circumstance  ; 
and  he  would  not  suffer  it  to  depend  upon  the  caprice,  or  the 
precarious  engagements,  of  the  allies. 

Nicias  had  flattered  himself ,a  that  this  speech  would  cool  the 
ardour  of  the  people,  whereas  it  only  inflamed  it  the  more. 
Immediately  the  generals  had  full  power  given  them  to  raise 
as  many  troops,  and  fit  out  as  many  galleys,  as  they  should 
judge  necessary;  and  the  levies  were  accordingly  carried  on,  in 
Athens  and  other  places,  with  inexpressible  activity. 

SECT.  VIII. 

The  Athenians  prepare  to  set  sail.  Sinister  omens.  The  statues  of  Mercury 
are  mutilated.  Alcibiades  is  accused,  and  insists  upon  his  being  tried,  but 
his  request  is  not  granted.  Triumphant  departure  of  the  fleet. 

When  all  things  were  ready  for  their  de- 
Ant  j^*  415  Parture>b  and  they  were  preparing  to  sail,  there 

happened  several  bad  omens,  which  filled  the 
minds  of  the  people  with  trouble  and  disquietude.  The  women 
were  at  that  time  celebrating  the  festival  of  Adonis,c  during 
which  the  whole  city  was  in  mourning,  and  full  of  images  repre- 
senting dead  persons  and  funeral  processions ; and  every  part 
echoed  with  the  cries  and  groans  of  the  women  who  followed 
those  statues  with  lamentations.  Whence  it  was  feared,  that 
this  gay  and  magnificent  armament  would  soon  lose  all  its 
splendour,  and  wither  away  like  a flower. d 

The  general  anxiety  was  increased  by  another  accident.  The 
statues  of  Mercury,  which  stood  at  the  entrance  of  private 
houses  and  temples,  were  all  mutilated  in  one  night,  and  par- 

a Diod.  1.  xiii.  p.  134. 

b Thucyd.  1.  vi.  p.  428.  Plut.  in  Alcib.  p.  200,  201. 
c This  superstitious  rite  had  extended  even  to  God’s  people,  And  behold  there 
sat  women  weeping  for  Tammuz , Ezek.  viii.  14.  N.  B.  The  Latin  version  of 
the  Bible,  which  M.  Rollin  follows,  says,  weeping  for  Adonis  ; which  is  the 
same  as  Tammuz,  the  Hebrews  calling  Adonis  by  that  name. 

d The  historian  alludes  to  the  plants  and  flowers  that  were  carried  in  that 
ceremony,  and  which  went  by  the  name  of  Adonis’s  gardens. 


30 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


ticularly  in  the  face  : and  although  a great  reward  was  promised 
to  any  person  who  should  discover  the  authors  of  so  audaciojis 
a crime,  no  one  was  detected.  The  citizens  could  not  forbear 
considering  this  uncommon  event,  not  only  as  an  unlucky  omen, 
but  as  a contrivance  of  some  factious  men,  who  harboured  very 
ill  designs.  Some  young  people  had  already  been  accused  of 
committing  a nearly  similar  crime  in  the  midst  of  a drunken 
frolic  ; and  particularly  of  having  wantonly  mimicked  the  mys- 
teries of  Ceres  and  Proserpine,  with  Alcibiades,  who  repre- 
sented the  higli-priest,  at  their  head.  It  highly  concerns  all 
those  in  exalted  stations/  to  be  extremely  careful  of  every  step 
they  take,  and  not  to  give  the  least  opportunity  to  the  most  in- 
veterate malice  to  censure  them.  They  ought  to  call  to  mind, 
says  Plutarch,  that  the  eyes  of  all  men  are  upon  their  conduct, 
and  that  they  are  ever  eagle-eyed  on  these  occasions ; that  not 
only  their  outward  actions  pass  the  most  severe  scrutiny,  but 
that  they  penetrate  to  their  most  private  apartments,  and  there 
take  the  strictest  notice  of  their  conversation,  their  diversions, 
and  their  most  secret  transactions.  It  was  this  dread  of  the 
piercing  eye  of  the  people,  that  kept  Themistocles  and  Pericles 
perpetually  on  their  guard,  and  obliged  them  to  refrain  from 
most  of  those  pleasures  in  which  others  indulged  themselves. 

As  for  Alcibiades,  he  did  not  know  what  it  was  to  lay  himself 
under  any  restraints  ; and  accordingly,  as  his  character  was  so 
notorious,  people  were  easily  persuaded  that  he  very  probably 
had  been  concerned  in  what  had  happened.  His  luxury,  liber- 
tinism, and  irreligion,  gave  an  air  of  probability  to  this  charge  ; 
and  the  accuser  was  not  afraid  of  mentioning  his  name.  This 
attack  staggered  the  constancy  and  resolution  of  Alcibiades  ; 
but  hearing  the  soldiers  and  sailors  declare  that  they  were  in- 
duced to  engage  in  this  distant  expedition  beyond  sea,  by  no 
other  motive  than  their  affection  for  Alcibiades ; and  that,  should 
the  least  injury  be  done  him,  they  would  all  immediately  leave 
the  service  ; he  took  heart,  and  appeared  at  his  trial  on  the  day 
appointed  for  that  purpose.  His  enemies,  upon  pretence  that 
it  was  necessary  for  the  fleet  to  set  sail,  got  the  judgment  post- 
poned. It  was  to  no  purpose  for  Alcibiades  to  insist  upon  being- 
tried,  in  case  he  was  guilty,  without  waiting  for  his  absence  in 
order  to  ruin  him  ; and  to  represent,  that  it  would  be  the  most 
shocking  and  barbarous  injustice  to  oblige  him  to  embark  for 
so  important  an  expedition,  without  first  making  due  inquiry  into 
the  accusations  and  horrid  slanders  which  were  cast  upon  him, 
the  bare  thoughts  of  which  would  keep  him  in  perpetual  fear 
and  anxiety.  However,  none  of  these  remonstrances  proved 
effectual,  and  the  fleet  was  ordered  to  set  out. 

They  accordingly  prepared  to  set  sail, f after  having  appointed 
e Plut.  n.  pnec.  de  rep.  p.  800.  f Tliucyd.  p.  430 — 432.  Diod.  1.  xiii.  p.  135. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


31 


Corcyra  as  the  rendezvous  for  most  of  the  allies,  and  such  ships 
as  were  to  carry  the  provisions  and  baggage.  All  the  citizens 
as  well  as  foreigners  in  Athens,  Hocked  by  day-break  to  the  port 
of  Piraeus.  The  former  attended  their  children,  relations, 
friends,  or  companions,  with  a joy  overcast  with  a little  sorrow, 
upon  their  bidding  adieu  to  persons  that  were  as  dear  to  them  as 
life,  who  were  setting  out  on  a far  distant  and  very  dangerous 
expedition,  from  which  it  was  uncertain  whether  they  ever  would 
return,  though  they  flattered  themselves  with  the  hopes  that  the 
enterprise  would  be  successful.  The  foreigners  came  thither 
to  feed  their  eyes  with  a sight  which  was  highly  worthy  their 
curiosity  ; for  no  single  city  in  the  world  had  ever  fitted  out  so 
gallant  a fleet.  Those  indeed  which  had  been  sent  against  Epi- 
daurus  and  Potidsea,  were  as  considerable  with  regard  to  the 
number  of  the  soldiers  and  ships  ; but  then  they  were  not  equip- 
ped with  so  much  magnificence,  neither  was  their  voyage  so 
long,  nor  their  enterprise  so  important.  Here  were  seen  a land 
and  a naval  army,  equipped  with  the  utmost  care,  and  at  the 
expense  of  private  individuals  as  well  as  of  the  public,  with  all 
things  necessary,  on  account  of  the  length  of  the  voyage,  and 
the  duration  of  the  war.  The  city  furnished  100  empty  galleys, 
that  is,  threescore  light  ones,  and  forty  to  transport  the  soldiers 
heavily  armed.  Every  mariner  received  daily  a drachma,  or 
ten-pence  (French)  for  his  pay.  exclusively  of  what  the  captains 
of  ships  individually  gave  the  rowers  of  the  first  bench,  s Add 
to  this  the  pomp  and  magnificence  of  the  equipment ; every  one 
striving  to  eclipse  the  rest,  and  each  captain  endeavouring  to 
make  his  ship  the  lightest,  and  at  the  same  time  the  gayest,  of 
the  whole  fleet.  I shall  not  take  notice  of  the  choice  in  the 
soldiers  and  seamen,  who  were  the  flower  of  the  Athenians  ; nor 
of  their  emulation  with  regard  to  the  beauty  and  neatness  of 
their  arms  and  equipage  ; any  more  than  that  of  their  officers, 
who  had  laid  out  considerable  sums  purely  to  distinguish  them- 
selves, and  to  give  foreigners  an  advantageous  idea  of  their 
persons  and  circumstances  ; so  that  this  sight  had  the  air  of  a 
tournament,  in  which  the  utmost  magnificence  is  displayed,  ra- 
ther than  of  a warlike  expedition.  But  the  boldness  and  great- 
ness of  the  design  still  exceeded  its  expense  and  splendour. 

When  the  ships  were  loaded,  and  the  troops  got  on  board, 
the  trumpet  sounded,  and  solemn  prayers  were  offered  up  for  the 
success  of  the  expedition  ; gold  and  silver  cups  were  filled 
every  where  with  wine,  and  the  accustomed  libations  were 
poured  out ; the  people  who  lined  the  shore  shouting  at  the 
same  time,  and  lifting  up  their  hands  to  heaven,  to  wish  their 
citizens  a good  voyage  and  success.  And  now  the  hymn  being 

s They  were  called  Spavirai.  They  had  longer  oars  than  the  rest,  and  con- 
sequently more  trouble  in  rowing. 


32 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


sung,  and  the  ceremonies  ended,  the  ships  sailed  one  after  ano- 
ther out  of  the  harbour  ; after  which  they  strove  to  outsail  one 
another  till  the  whole  fleet  met  at  ./Egina.  From  thence  it  made 
for  Corcyra,  where  the  army  of  the  allies  was  assembling  with 
the  rest  of  the  fleet. 

SECT.  IX. 

Syracuse  is  alarmed.  The  Athenian  fleet  arrives  in  Sicily. 

Advice  of  this  expedition  having  been  brought  to  Syracuse 
from  all  quarters,  h it  was  thought  so  improbable,  that  at  first 
nobody  would  believe  it.  But  as  it  was  more  and  more  con- 
firmed every  day,  the  Syracusans  began  to  think  seriously  of 
making  the  necessary  preparations  ; and  sent  deputations  to 
every  part  of  the  island,  to  ask  assistance  of  some,  and  send 
succours  to  others.  They  garrisoned  all  the  castles  and  forts  in 
the  country  ; reviewed  all  the  soldiers  and  horses  ; examined 
the  arms  in  the  magazines  ; and  settled  and  prepared  all  things 
as  if  the  enemy  had  been  in  their  country. 

In  the  meantime  the  fleet  sailed  in  three  squadrons,  each  under 
the  command  of  its  particular  general.  It  consisted  of  136  ships, 
100  whereof  belonged  to  Athens,  and  the  rest  to  the  allies.  On 
board  these  ships  were  5000  heavy- armed  soldiers,  2200  of 
whom  were  Athenian  citizens,  viz.  1500  of  those  who  had  estates, 
and  700'  who  had  none,  but  were  equally  citizens  ; the  rest  con- 
sisted of  allies.  With  regard  to  the  light  infantry,  there  were 
eighty  archers  of  Crete,  and  400  of  other  countries  ; 700  Rho- 
dian slingers,  and  120  exiles  of  Megara.  There  was  but  one 
company  of  horse,  consisting  of  thirty  troopers,  who  had  embarked 
on  board  a vessel  proper  for  transporting  cavalry.  Both  the 
fleet  and  the  land  forces  were  afterwards  increased  consider- 
ably. Thirty  vessels  carried  the  provisions  and  sutlers,  with 
masons/  carpenters,  and  their  several  tools  ; the  whole  followed 
by  100  small  vessels  for  the  service,  exclusive  of  merchant-ships, 
of  which  there  were  great  numbers.  All  this  fleet  had  sailed 
together  from  Corcyra.  Having  met  with  but  an  indifferent 
reception  from  the  people  of  Tarentum  and  Locris,  they  sailed 
with  a favourable  wind  for  Rhegium,  where  they  made  some 
stay.  The  Athenians  were  very  urgent  with  the  inhabitants 
of  Rhegium  to  succour  those  of  Leontium,  who  came  originally 
from  Chalcis  as  well  as  themselves  : but  these  answered,  that 
they  were  determined  to  stand  neuter,  and  to  undertake  no- 
thing but  in  concert  with  the  rest  of  Italy.  Here  they  de- 
bated on  the  manner  in  which  it  was  necessary  to  carry  on 
the  war,  and  waited  for  the  coming  up  of  those  ships  that 

h Thucyd.  1.  vi.  p.  432 — 445.  Diod.  1.  xiii.  p.  135,  136. 

* These  were  called  3 fjreg. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


33 


had  been  sent  out  to  make  discoveries  of  a proper  place  for 
landing,  and  to  inquire  whether  the  citizens  of  Egesta  had  got 
their  money  ready.  Upon  their  return  they  brought  advice 
that  they  had  but  thirty  talents  in  the  treasury.  This  Nicias 
had  foreseen,  but  no  regard  had  been  paid  to  his  salutary 
counsels. 

He  did  not  fail,k  the  instant  this  news  was  brought,  to  expa- 
tiate on  the  counsel  he  had  given  in  Athens  ; to  show  the  wrong- 
step  they  had  taken  in  engaging  in  this  war  ; and  to  exaggerate 
the  fatal  consequences  which  might  be  expected  from  it : in  all 
which  he  acted  very  imprudently.  It  was  extremely  judicious 
in  Nicias  to  oppose  it  in  the  beginning,  and  to  set  every  engine  at 
work  to  crush  if  possible  this  ill-fated  project.  But  as  this  expedi- 
tion was  resolved,  and  he  himself  had  accepted  of  the  command, 
he  ought  not  to  have  been  perpetually  looking  backward,  nor  to 
have  repeated  incessantly,  that  this  war  had  been  undertaken 
in  opposition  to  all  the  maxims  of  prudence ; and  by  that 
means  to  cool  the  ardour  of  his  two  colleagues  in  the  command, 
to  dispirit  the  Soldiers,  and  blunt  that  edge  of  confidence  and 
ardour,  which  assures  the  success  of  great  enterprises.  He 
ought,  on  the  contrary,  to  have  advanced  boldly  towards  the 
enemy ; should  have  attacked  them  with  vigour,  and  have 
spread  a universal  terror,  by  a sudden  and  unexpected  descent. 

But  Nicias  acted  in  a quite  different  manner.  His  opinion, 
in  the  council  of  war,  was,  that  they  should  sail  for  Selinus, 
which  had  been  the  first  occasion  of  this  expedition  ; and  then, 
if  the  citizens  of  Egesta  performed  their  promise,  and  gave  a 
month’s  pay  to  tbe  army,  to  proceed  forward ; or  otherwise,  to 
oblige  them  to  furnish  provisions  for  the  sixty  galleys  they  had 
demanded,  and  continue  in  that  road  till  they  should  have  con- 
cluded a peace  with  the  citizens  of  Selinus,  either  by  force  of 
arms  or  some  other  way.  He  said,  that  they  afterwards  should 
return  to  Athens,  after  having  thus  made  a parade  of  their 
forces,  and  the  assistance  they  gave  their  allies ; unless  they 
should  have  an  opportunity  of  making  some  attempt  in  favour  of 
the  Leontines,  or  of  bringing  over  some  city  into  their  alliance. 

Alcibiades  answered,  that  it  would  be  inglorious,  after  sailing 
out  with  so  noble  a fleet,  to  return  without  doing  any  thing ; 
and  that  they  should  first  endeavour  to  conclude  an  alliance 
with  the  Greeks  and  Barbarians,  in  order  to  detach  them  from 
the  Syracusans,  and  procure  troops  and  provisions  from  them ; 
and  especially  to  send  a deputation  to  Messina,  which  was  as  it 
were  the  key  of  Sicily,  and  its  harbour  capacious  enough  to 
hold  all  the  fleet.  He  declared  farther,  that  after  seeing  who 
were  their  friends  and  enemies,  and  strengthening  themselves  by 
the  addition  of  a new  reinforcement,  they  then  should  attack 
k Plut.  in  Nic.  p.  532. 

D 


VOL.  III. 


34 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


either  Selinus  or  Syracuse ; in  case  the  one  should  refuse  to 
conclude  a peace  with  Egesta,  and  the  other  not  permit  the 
Leontines  to  return  to  their  city. 

Lamachus  offered  & third  opinion,  which  perhaps  was  the 
most  prudent ; that  was,  to  sail  directly  for  Syracuse,  before  its 
citizens  had  time  to  recover  from  their  surprise,  or  prepare  for 
their  defence.  He  observed,  that  the  sudden  arrival  of  an 
armed  force  always  strikes  the  greatest  terror ; and  that  when 
enemies  are  allowed  time  to  reflect  and  make  preparations, 
it  also  revives  their  courage ; whereas,  when  they  were  sud- 
denly attacked,  while  still  in  confusion,  they  are  generally 
overcome : that  as  they  would  be  masters  of  the  open  country, 
they  would  not  be  in  want  of  any  thing,  but,  on  the  contrary, 
would  oblige  the  Sicilians  to  declare  for  them  : that  at  last  they 
should  settle  in  Megara,  which  was  quite  desert,  and  a near 
neighbour  to  Syracuse,  and  there  lay  up  their  fleet  in  safety. 
However,  his  counsel  not  being  followed,  he  agreed  to  that  of 
Alcibiades  : accordingly  they  sailed  for  Sicily,  where  Alcibi- 
ades  took  Catana  by  surprise. 

SECT.  X. 

Alcibiades  is  recalled.  He  flies,  and  is  sentenced  to  die  for  contumacy.  He 
retires  to  Sparta.  Flexibility  of  his  genius  and  disposition. 

This  was  the  first  and  last  exploit  performed  by  Alcibiades 
in  this  expedition,1  he  being  immediately  recalled  by  the 
Athenians,  in  order  to  be  tried  upon  the  accusation  laid  against 
him.  For,  since  the  departure  of  the  fleet,  his  enemies,  who 
had  no  regard  to  the  welfare  of  their  country ; and  who,  under 
the  specious  pretence  of  religion,  which  is  often  made  a cloak  to 
cover  the  darkest  designs,  meditated  nothing  but  satiating  their 
hatred  and  revenge : his  enemies,  I say,  taking  advantage  of 
his  absence,  had  proceeded  in  the  affair  with  greater  rigour 
than  ever.  All  those  against  whom  informations  were  lodged, 
were  thrown  into  prison,  without  so  much  as  being  suffered  to 
be  heard,  and  that  too  on  the  evidence  of  the  most  profligate 
and  abandoned  citizens ; as  if,  says  Thucydides,  it  was  not  as 
great  a crime  to  punish  the  innocent,  as  to  suffer  the  guilty  to 
escape.  One  of  the  informers  was  proved  to  be  perjured  by 
his  own  words ; having  declared  that  he  saw  and  knew  one  of 
the  accused  by  moonlight;  whereas  it  appeared,  that  there  was 
no  moon  at  that  time.  But  notwithstanding  this  manifest  per- 
jury, the  populace  were  as  furious  as  ever.  The  remembrance 
of  the  tyranny  of  the  Pisistratidae  made  them  apprehensive  of  a 
similar  attempt ; and,  strongly  possessed  with  this  fear,  they 
would  not  give  ear  to  any  thing. 

1 Thucyd.  1.  vi.  p.  446 — 450.  Plut.  in  Alcib.  p.  202. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


35 


At  last  they  sent  out  the  Salaminian  galley,"1  ordering  the 
captain  not  to  carry  off  Acibiades  by  force,  for  fear  of  raising 
a tumult  in  the  army ; but  only  to  order  him  to  return  to  Athens 
to  pacify  the  people  by  his  presence.  Alcibiades  obeyed  the 
order,  and  went  immediately  on  board  his  galley ; but  the  instant 
he  was  arrived  at  Thurium,  and  had  got  on  shore,  he  disappeared, 
and  eluded  the  pursuit  of  those  who  sought  after  him.  Being 
asked,  whether  lie  would  not  rely  on  his  country,  with  regard 
to  the  judgment  it  might  pass  on  him;  I would  not , says  he, 
rely  on  my  mother,  for  fear  she  should  inadvertently  mistake 
a black  bean  for  a white  one.a  The  galley  of  Salamis  returned 
back  without  the  commander,  who  was  ashamed  of  his  having 
suffered  his  prey  to  escape  him  in  that  manner.  Alcibiades  was 
sentenced  to  die  for  his  contumacy.  His  whole  estate  was  con- 
fiscated, and  all  the  priests  and  priestesses  were  commanded  to 
curse  him.  Among  the  latter  was  one,  named  Theano,  who 
alone  had  the  courage  to  oppose  this  decree,  saying,  That  she 
had  been  appointed  priestess,0  not  to  curse  but  to  bless.  Some 
time  after,  news  being  brought  him  that  the  Athenians  had  con- 
demned him  to  die,  I shall  make  them  sensible,  said  he,  that  I 
am  alive. 

Much  about  this  time  Diagoras  the  Melian  was  prosecuted 
at  Athens. p He  had  settled  himself  in  that  city,  where  he 
taught  atheism,  and  was  brought  to  a trial  for  his  poisonous 
doctrine.  Diagoras  escaped  the  punishment  which  would  have 
been  inflicted  on  him,1!  by  flying  from  the  city ; but  he  could  not 
wipe  off  the  ignominy  of  the  sentence  which  condemned  him  to 
death.  The  Athenians  had  so  great  an  abhorrence  for  the  im- 
pious principles  inculcated  by  him,  that  they  even  set  a price 
upon  his  head,  and  promised  a reward  of  a talent  to  any  man 
who  should  deliver  him  up  dead  or  alive. 

About  twenty  years  before,  a similar  process  had  been  insti- 
tuted against  Protagoras/  for  having  only  treated  the  same  ques- 
tion by  way  of  problem.  He  had  said  in  the  beginning  of  one 
of  his  books  : Whether  the  gods  do  or  do  not  exist,  is  a question 
which  I know  not  whether  I ouyht  to  affirm  or  deny : for  our 
understandings  are  too  much  clouded,  and  the  life  of  man  is  too 
short,  for  the  solution  of  so  nice  and  difficult  a point.  But  the 
Athenians  could  not  bear  to  have  a subject  of  this  nature  made 
a doubt ; and  for  this  reason  they  ordered  proclamation  to  be 
made  by  the  public  crier,  for  all  persons  who  had  any  copies 
of  this  book,  to  bring  them  to  the  magistrates  : after  which 

m This  was  a sacred  vessel,  appointed  to  fetch  criminals. 
n The  judges  made  use  of  beans  in  giving  their  suffrages,  and  the  black  bean 
denoted  condemnation. 

° fyaoKOvaa  Ewpv  ov  Karapwv  ispeictv  ytyovzvca. 
p Joseph-  contr.  App.  i Diod.  1.  xiii.  p.  137- 

r Diod.  Laert.  in  Protag.  Joseph,  contr.  App.  Cic.  1.  i.  de  nat.  deor.  n.  62. 

D 2 


36 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


they  were  burnt  as  infamous  and  impious  pieces,  and  the 
author  was  banished  for  ever,  from  all  the  territories  of  the 
Athenians. 

Diagoras  and  Protagoras  had  been  the  disciples  of  Democri- 
tus, who  first  invented  the  philosophy  of  atoms. 

Since  the  departure  of  Alcibiades,8  Nicias  had  possessed  the 
whole  authority ; for  Lamachus  his  colleague,  though  a man  of 
bravery  and  experience,  possessed  little  influence,  because  of 
his  extreme  poverty,  for  which  he  was  despised  by  the  soldiers. 
But  the  Athenians  were  not  always  of  this  way  of  thinking  ; for 
we  have  seen  that  Aristides,  poor  as  he  was,  was  not  less  es- 
teemed and  respected  on  that  account ; but  in  this  last  expedi- 
tion, the  people  in  general  had  imbibed  a passion  for  luxury  and 
magnificence ; the  natural  consequence  of  which  is,  a love  of 
riches.  As  Nicias,  therefore,  governed  solely,  all  his  actions 
were  of  the  same  cast  with  his  disposition,  that  is,  timid  and 
dilatory  : he  suffered  every  thing  to  languish,  sometimes  either 
by  lying  still  and  undertaking  nothing,  sometimes  by  only  sail- 
ing along  the  coast,  or  losing  time  in  consulting  or  deliberating  ; 
all  which  soon  suppressed,  on  one  side,  the  ardour  and  confi- 
dence the  troops  expressed  at  first ; and  on  the  other,  the  fear 
and  terror  with  which  the  enemy  had  been  seized,  at  the  sight 
of  so  formidable  an  armament.  He  besieged  Hybla;  and 
though  it  was  but  a small  city,  he  was  however  obliged  to  raise 
the  siege  some  days  after,  which  brought  him  into  the  highest 
contempt.  He  retired  at  last  to  Catana,  after  having  per- 
formed but  one  exploit,  viz.  the  ruining  of  Hyccara,  a small 
town  inhabited  by  Barbarians,  from  which  place  it  is  said  that 
Lais  the  courtesan,  at  that  time  very  young,  was  sold  with  the 
rest  of  the  captives,  and  carried  to  Peloponnesus. 

In  the  mean  time, 4 Alcibiades,  having  left  Thurium,  arrived 
at  Argos  ; and  as  he  quite  despaired  of  ever  being  recalled  home, 
he  sent  a messenger  to  the  Spartans,  desiring  leave  to  reside 
among  them,  under  their  guard  and  protection.  He  promised, 
in  the  most  solemn  manner,  that  if  they  would  consider  him  as 
their  friend,  he  would  render  greater  services  to  their  state, 
than  he  before  had  done  injuries  to  it.  The  Spartans  received 
him  with  open  arms  ; and  soon  after  his  arrival  in  their  city  he 
gained  the  love  and  esteem  of  all  its  inhabitants.  He  charmed, 
and  even  enchanted  them,  by  his  conforming  in  all  respects  to 
their  way  of  living.  Such  people  as  saw  Alcibiades  shave  him- 
self to  the  skin,  bathe  in  cold  water,  eat  of  the  coarse,  heavy 
cakes,  which  were  their  usual  food,  and  be  so  well  satisfied  with 
their  black  broth,  could  not  persuade  themselves,  that  a man, 
who  submitted  so  cheerfully  to  this  kind  of  life,  had  ever  kept 

* Thucyd.  p.  452,  453.  Plut.  in  Nic.  p.  533. 

1 Plut.  in  Alcib.  p.  230. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


37 


cooks  in  his  palace  ; had  used  essences  and  perfumes  ; had  worn 
the  fine  stuffs  of  Miletus;  in  a word,  had  hitherto  lived  in  the 
midst  of  voluptuousness  and  profusion.  But  flexibility  was  the 
characteristic  that  chiefly  distinguished  Alcibiades.  Cameleon- 
like,  he  could  assume  all  shapes  and  colours,  to  win  the  favour 
of  those  among  whom  he  resided.  He  immediately  assumed 
their  manners,  and  adapted  himself  to  their  taste,  as  if  they  had 
been  natural  in  him  ; and  though  he  inwardly  had  an  aversion  to 
them,  he  could  however  cover  his  disgust  with  an  easy,  simple, 
and  unconstrained  air.  With  some  he  had  all  the  graces  and 
vivacity  of  the  gayest  youth,  and  with  others  all  the  gravity  of 
old  age.  In  Sparta,  he  was  laborious,  frugal,  and  austere ; in 
Ionia,  enjoyment,  idleness,  and  pleasure,  made  up  his  whole 
life ; in  Thrace,  he  was  always  on  horseback  or  carousing  ; and 
when  he  resided  with  Tissaphernes,  the  satrap,  he  exceeded  all 
the  magnificence  of  the  Persians  in  luxury  and  profusion. 

But  he  was  not  barely  satisfied  with  gaining  the  esteem  of 
the  Lacedaemonians.  He  insinuated  himself  so  far  into  the 
affection  of  Timaea,  the  wife  of  king  Agis,  that  he  had  a son  by 
her,  who,  in  public,  went  by  the  name  of  Leotychides  ; though 
his  mother,  in  private,  and  among  her  women  and  female  friends, 
did  not  blush  to  call  him  Alcibiades  ; so  violent  was  her  passion 
for  that  Athenian.  Agis  was  informed  of  this  intrigue,  and 
therefore  refused  to  own  Leotychides  for  his  son  ; for  which 
reason  he  was  afterwards  excluded  the  throne. 

SECT.  XI. 

Description  of  Syracuse. 

As  the  siege  of  Syracuse  is  one  of  the  most  considerable  in 
the  Grecian  history,  the  particular  circumstances  of  which  I 
thought  proper  to  relate  for  that  reason,  in  order  to  give  my 
readers  an  idea  of  the  manner  in  which  the  ancients  formed  the 
siege  of  a place,  I judge  it  necessary,  before  I enter  into  that 
detail,  to  give  the  reader  a description  and  plan  of  the  city  of 
Syracuse ; in  which  he  will  also  find  the  different  fortifications, 
both  of  the  Athenians  and  Syracusans,  mentioned  in  this  siege. 

Syracuse  stood  on  the  eastern  coast  of  Sicily.  u Its  vast  ex- 
tent, its  advantageous  situation,  the  conveniency  of  its  double 
harbour,  its  fortifications  built  with  the  utmost  care  and  labour, 
and  the  multitude  and  wealth  of  its  inhabitants,  made  it  one  of 
the  greatest,  the  most  beautiful,  and  most  powerful  among  the 
Grecian  cities.  We  are  told,  x its  air  was  so  pure  and  serene, 

u Cic.Verr.  6.  n.  117— 119. 

x Urbem  Syracusas  elegerat,  cujus  hie  situs  atque  hsec  naturaesse  locicoelique 
dicitur,  ut  nullus  unquam  dies  tam  rnagnS  turbulentaque  tempestate  fuerit, 
quin  aliquo  tempore  solem  ejus  diei  homines  viderent.  Cic.  Verr.  7*  n.  26. 


38 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


that  there  was  no  day  in  the  year,  how  cloudy  soever  it  might  be, 
in  which  the  sun  did  not  display  its  beams. 

It  was  built  by  Archias  the  Corinthian,  y a year 
Ant.  J1  C29709  a^ter  Naxos  and  Megara  had  been  founded  on  the 
same  coast. 

When  the  Athenians  besieged  this  city,  it  was  divided  into 
three  parts,  viz.  the  Island,  Achradina,  and  Tyche.  Thucy- 
dides mentions  only  these  three  divisions.  Two  more,  viz. 
Neapolis  and  Epipolse,  were  afterwards  added. 

The  Island,  situated  to  the  south,  was  called  Ni/o-os,  (Nasos,) 
signifying,  in  Greek,  an  island,  but  pronounced  according  to  the 
Doric  dialect ; and  Ortygia.  It  was  joined  to  the  continent  by 
a bridge.  It  was  in  this  island  that  the  Syracusans  afterwards 
built  the  citadel  and  the  palace  for  their  kings. z This  quarter 
of  the  city  was  of  very  great  importance,  because  it  might  ren- 
der those  who  possessed  it  master  of  the  two  ports  which  sur- 
rounded it.  It  was  for  this  reason  that  the  Romans,  when  they 
took  Syracuse,  would  not  suffer  any  Syracusan  to  inhabit  the 
Island. 

There  was  in  this  Island  a very  famous  fountain,  a called  Are- 
thusa.  The  ancients,  or  rather  the  poets,  from  reasons  which 
have  not  the  least  shadow  of  probability,  supposed  that  the  Al- 
pheus,  a river  of  Elis  in  Peloponnesus,  rolled  its  waters  either 
through  or  under  the  waves  of  the  sea,  without  ever  mixing  with 
them,  as  far  as  the  fountain  of  Arethusa.  It  was  this  fiction 
which  gave  occasion  to  the  following  lines  of  Virgil : 

Extremum  hunc,  Arethusa,  mihi  concede  laborem 

Sic  tibi,  cum  fluctus  subterlabere  Sicanos, 

Loris  amara  suam  non  intermisceat  undam.  Virg.  Eclog.  10. 

Thy  sacred  succour,  Arethusa,  bring, 

To  crown  my  labour:  ’tis  the  last  I sing. 

So  may  thy  silver  streams  beneath  the  tide, 

Unmix’d  with  briny  seas  securely  glide.  Dryden. 

Achradina,  situated  entirely  on  the  sea-side  towards  the 
east,  was  the  most  spacious,  the  most  beautiful,  and  best  fortified 
quarter  of  the  city. 

Tyche,  so  called  from  the  temple  of  Fortune  ( Tvxv ) which 
embellished  that  part  of  the  city,  extended  along  Achradina 
westward  from  the  north  towards  the  south,  and  was  very  well 
inhabited.  It  had  a famous  gate  called  Hexapylum,  which  led 
into  the  country,  and  was  situated  to  the  north  of  the  city. 

Epipolse  was  a hill  without  the  city,  which  it  commanded. 
It  was  situated  between  Hexapylum  and  the  point  of  Euryelus, 
towards  the  north  and  west.  It  was  exceedingly  steep  in  seve- 
ral places,  and  for  that  reason  of  very  difficult  access.  At  the 

y Strab.  1.  vi.  p.  269.  z Cic.  Verr.  7-  n.  97- 

a Strab.  1.  vi.  p.  270.  Senec.  Nat.  Qurest.  1.  iii.  c.  26. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


39 


time  of  the  siege  in  question,  it  was  not  surrounded  with  walls  ; 
and  the  Syracusans  defended  it  with  a body  of  troops,  against  the 
attacks  of  the  enemy.  Euryelus  was  the  pass  or  entrance  which 
led  to  Epipolm.  On  the  same  hill  of  Epipolae  was  a fort  called 
Labdalon,  or  Labdaulum. 

It  was  not  till  long  after  (under  Dionysius  the  tyrant)  that 
Epipolae  was  surrounded  with  walls,  and  enclosed  within  the 
city,  of  which  it  formed  a fifth  part,  but  was  thinly  inhabited. 
A fourth  division  had  been  added  before,  called  N EAPOLIS,  that 
is,  the  New  City,  which  covered  Tyche. 

The  river  Anapus  ran  at  almost  half  a league  distance  from  the 
city.  b The  space  between  them  was  a large  and  beautiful  plain, 
terminated  by  two  fens,  the  one  called  Syraco,  whence  the  city 
was  named,  and  the  other  Lysimelia.  This  river  emptied  itself 
into  the  great  harbour.  Near  its  mouth,  southward,  was  a kind 
of  castle  called  Olympia,  from  the  temple  of  Jupiter  Olympius 
standing  there,  and  in  which  were  great  riches.  It  was  500 
paces  from  the  city. 

Syracuse  had  two  harbours,  very  near  one  another,  and 
separated  only  by  the  Isle,  viz.  the  great  harbour,  and  the 
small  one,  called  otherwise  Lactus.  According  to  the  descrip- 
tion which  the  Roman  orator  gives  of  them,c  both  were  sur- 
rounded with  the  buildings  of  the  city. 

The  great  harbour  was  a little  above  5000  paces, d or  two 
leagues  in  circumference.  It  had  a gulf  called  Dascon.  The 
entrance  of  this  port  was  but  500  paces  wide.  It  was  formed* 
on  one  side,  by  the  point  of  the  island  Ortygia ; and  on  the 
other  by  the  little  island  and  cape  of  Plemmyrium,  which  was 
commanded  by  a castle  of  the  same  name. 

Above  Achradina  was  a third  port,  called  the  harbour  of 
Trogilus. 

SECT.  XII. 

Nicias,  after  some  engagements,  besieges  Syracuse.  Lamachus  is  killed  in  a 
battle.  The  city  is  reduced  to  the  greatest  extremities. 

Eighteenth  year  of  the  War. 

At  the  end  of  the  summer, e news  was  brought  Nicias  that 
the  Syracusans,  having  resumed  courage,  intended  to  march 
against  him.  Already  their  cavalry  advanced  with  an  air  of 
insolence  to  insult  him  even  in  his  camp  ; and  asked  with  a loud 

b Plut.  in  Dionys.  vit.  p.  970. 

c Portus  habet  prope  in  sedificatione  aspectuque  urbis  inclusos.  Cic.  Verr. 

9.  n.  117. 

d According  to  Strabo,  it  is  eighty  stadia  in  circumference,  which  is  twice  its 
real  extent ; a plain  proof  that  this  passage  of  Strabo  is  corrupt.  Cluver.  p.  167. 

e Thucyd.  1.  vi.  p.  453 — 461.  Plut.  in  Nic.  p.533,  534.  Diod.  1.  xiii.  p. 
137,  138. 


40 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


laugh,  whether  he  was  come  into  Sicily  to  settle  in  Catana. 
These  severe  reproaches *roused  him  a little,  so  that  he  resolved 
to  sail  for  Syracuse.  The  enterprise  was  bold  and  dangerous. 
Nicias  could  not,  without  running  the  utmost  hazard,  attempt 
to  land  in  presence  of  an  enemy  who  waited  for  him  with  the 
greatest  resolution ; and  would  not  fail  to  charge  him,  the 
instant  he  should  offer  to  make  a descent.  Nor  was  it  safer 
for  him  to  march  his  troops  by  land,  because,  as  he  had  no 
cavalry,  that  of  the  Syracusans,  which  was  very  numerous, 
upon  the  first  advice  they  should  have  of  his  march,  would 
fall  upon  him,  and  overpower  him  by  the  superiority  of  forces.. 

To  extricate  himself  from  this  perplexity,  and  enable  himself 
to  seize  without  opposition  upon  an  advantageous  post,  which 
a Syracusan  exile  had  discovered  to  him,  Nicias  had  recourse 
to  stratagem.  He  caused  a false  piece  of  information  to  be 
given  to  the  enemy,  viz.  that  by  means  of  a conspiracy,  which 
was  to  take  effect  on  a certain  day,  they  might  seize  on  his  camp, 
and  possess  themselves  of  all  the  arms  and  baggage.  The 
Syracusans,  on  this  assurance,  marched  towards  Catana,  and 
pitched  their  camp  near  Leontium.  The  moment  the  Athe- 
nians had  advice  of  this,  they  embarked  with  all  their  troops 
and  ammunition,  and  in  the  evening  steered  for  Syracuse. 
They  arrived  by  day-break  in  the  great  harbour ; landed  near 
Olympia,  in  the  place  which  had  been  pointed  out  to  them,  and 
there  fortified  themselves.  The  enemy,  finding  themselves 
shamefully  over-reached,  returned  immediately  to  Syracuse; 
and,  in  the  greatest  rage,  drew  up  in  battle  array,  some  days 
after,  before  the  walls  of  the  city.  Nicias  marched  out  of  the 
trenches,  and  a battle  was  fought.  Victory  was  a long  lime 
doubtful ; but  a very  heavy  shower  of  rain,  accompanied  with 
thunder  and  lightning,  coming  unexpectedly,  the  Syracusans, 
who  were  inexperienced,  the  greatest  part  of  them  having 
never  carried  arms  before,  were  frighted  at  the  tempest,  whilst 
their  enemies  laughed  at  it,  as  the  mere  effect  of  the  season ; 
and  regarded  nothing  but  the  enemy,  who  were  much  more  to 
be  dreaded  than  the  storm.  The  Syracusans,  after  making  a 
long  and  vigorous  resistance,  were  forced  to  give  way.  The 
Athenians  could  not  pursue  them  far,  because  their  horse, 
which  was  still  in  a body,  and  had  not  been  defeated,  covered 
their  retreat.  The  Syracusans  retreated  in  good  order  into 
the  city,  after  having  thrown  a body  of  troops  into  the  temple 
of  Olympia,  to  prevent  its  being  plundered. 

This  temple  stood  pretty  near  the  camp  of  the  Athenians, 
who  were  very  desirous  of  taking  it,  because  it  abounded  with 
gold  and  silver  offerings,  which  the  piety  of  kings  and 
nations  had  consecrated.  Nicias,  having  delayed  sending  troops 
to  seize  it,  lost  the  opportunity,  and  gave  the  Syracusans  time 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


41 


to  throw  into  it,  as  was  before  observed,  a detachment  for  its 
defence.  It  was  thought  he  did  this  on  purpose,  and  out  of 
reverence  to  the  gods  ; because,  had  the  soldiers  plundered 
this  temple,  the  public  would  not  have  reaped  any  benefit  by 
it,  and  himself  alone  would  have  been  accused  of  the  sacri- 
lege. 

After  the  battle,  the  Athenians,  who  were  not  yet  in  a con- 
dition to  attack  Syracuse,  retired  with  their  fleet  to  Naxos  and 
Catana,  to  winter  there,  with  design  to  return  in  the  beginning 
of  the  next  spring,  and  lay  siege  to  the  city.  For  this  they 
wanted  money,  provisions,  and  particularly  horse,  of  which  they 
were  absolutely  destitute.  The  Athenians  depended  upon  ob- 
taining part  of  these  succours  from  the  people  of  Sicily,  who 
they  supposed  would  join  them,  the  instant  they  should  hear  of 
their  victory ; and  at  the  same  time  they  sent  an  express  to 
Athens,  to  solicit  the  like  aid.  They  also  addressed  the  Car- 
thaginians for  their  alliance  ; and  sent  deputies  to  some  cities 
of  Italy,  situated  on  the  coast  of  the  Tuscan  sea,  which  had 
promised  to  assist  them. 

The  Syracusans  were  far  from  desponding.  Hermocrates, 
who,  of  all  their  leaders,  was  most  distinguished  for  his  valour, 
his  judgment,  and  experience,  represented  to  them,  in  order  to 
raise  their  hopes,  that  they  had  not  been  wanting  in  courage, 
but  in  conduct;  that  the  enemies,  though  very  brave,  owed 
their  victory  to  their  good  fortune  rather  than  to  their  merit ; 
that  the  having  a multitude  of  leaders,  (they  were  fifteen  in 
number,)  from  which  confusion  and  disobedience  were  insepa- 
rable, had  done  them  prejudice ; that  it  would  be  absolutely 
necessary  for  them  to  choose  experienced  generals,  to  keep  the 
rest  in  their  duty,  and  exercise  their  forces  continually  during 
the  winter  season.  This  advice  being  followed,  Hermocrates 
and  two  more  were  elected  generals ; after  which  they  sent 
deputies  to  Corinth  and  Lacedaemon  to  renew  the  alliance,  and 
at  the  same  time  to  engage  them  to  make  a diversion,  in  order 
to  oblige,  if  possible,  the  Athenians  to  recall  their  troops  out  of 
Sicily,  or  at  least  to  prevent  their  sending  a reinforcement 
thither.  The  fortifying  of  Syracuse  was  the  chief  object  of 
their  care.  Accordingly  they  took  into  the  city,  by  a wall,  all 
the  tract  of  land  towards  Epipolae,  from  the  northern  extremity 
of  Tyche,  descending  westward  towards  the  quarter  of  the  city 
called  afterwards  Neapolis,  in  order  to  remove  the  enemy  to  a 
greater  distance,  and  to  give  them  more  trouble  in  making  their 
contravallation,  by  obliging  them  to  give  a larger  extent  to  it. 
This  part,  in  all  probability,  had  been  neglected,  because  it 
seemed  to  be  sufficiently  defended  by  its  rugged  and  steep  situ- 
ation. They  also  garrisoned  Megara  and  Olympia,  and  drove 
stakes  into  all  those  parts  of  the  sea-shore,  where  the  enemy 


42 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


might  easily  make  a descent.  Hearing  afterwards  that  the 
Athenians  were  at  Naxos,  they  went  and  burnt  the  camp  of 
Catana,  and  retired,  after  laying  waste  the  adjacent  country. 

The  ambassadors  of  Syracuse  being  arrived  among  the  Corin- 
thians/ asked  succour  of  them  as  having  been  their  founders, 
which  was  immediately  granted  ; and  at  the  same  time  they  sent 
an  embassy  to  the  Lacedtemonians,  to  invite  them  to  declare  in 
their  favour.  Alcibiades  enforced  their  demand  with  all  his 
credit  and  eloquence,  to  which  his  resentment  against  Athens 
added  new  vigour.  He  advised  and  exhorted  the  Lacedaemo- 
nians to  appoint  Gylippus  their  general,  and  send  him  into 
Sicily  ; and  at  the  same  time  to  invade  the  Athenians,  in  order 
to  make  a powerful  diversion.  In  the  third  place,  he  induced 
them  to  fortify  Decelia  in  Attica,  which  quite  completed  the 
ruin  of  the  city  of  Athens,  it  not  being  able  ever  to  recover  that 
blow : for  by  this  fort,  the  Lacedaemonians  made  themselves 
masters  of  the  country,  by  which  the  Athenians  were  deprived 
of  their  silver  mines  of  Laurium,  and  of  the  revenues  of  their 
lands  ; nor  could  they  be  succoured  by  theijr  neighbours,  JDe- 
celia  becoming  the  asylum  of  all  the  malcontents  and  partisans 
of  Sparta. 

Nicias  had  received  some  succours  from 
Ant.^J.  C 4°14.  Alhens-  These  consisted  of  250  troopers,  who 
the  Athenians  supposed  would  be  furnished  with 
horses  in  Sicily,  (the  troops  bringing  only  the  furniture,)  and  of 
thirty  horse- archers,  with  300  talents,  that  is,  300,000  French 
crowns  .s  Nicias  now  began  to  prepare  for  action.  He  was 
accused  of  often  letting  slip  opportunities,  by  his  losing  time 
in  deliberating,  arguing,  and  concerting  measures ; however, 
when  once  he  entered  upon  action,  he  was  as  bold  and  vigorous 
in  execution,  as  he  before  had  been  slow  and  timorous  in 
undertaking,  as  he  showed  on  the  present  occasion. 

The  Syracusans  hearing  that  the  Athenians  had  received  a 
reinforcement  of  cavalry,  and  would  soon  march  and  lay  siege  to 
the  city ; and  knowing  they  could  not  possibly  approach  it,  or 
make  a contravallation,  unless  they  should  possess  themselves  of 
the  heights  of  Epipolse,  which  commanded  Syracuse,  they  re- 
solved to  guard  the  avenue  to  it,  which  was  the  only  pass  by 
which  the  enemy  could  get  up  to  it,  every  other  part  being  rug- 
ged and  inaccessible.  Marching  therefore  down  into  the 
meadow,  bordered  by  the  river  Anapus,  and  reviewing  their 
troops  there,  they  appointed  700  foot,  under  the  command  of 
Diomilus,  to  guard  that  important  post ; with  orders  to  repair 
to  it,  at  the  first  signal  which  should  be  given  for  that  purpose. 
But  Nicias  conducted  his  design  with  so  much  prudence,  expe- 

f Thucyd.  1.  vi.  p.  471 — 482.  Plut.  in  Alcib.  p.  203.  In  Nic.  p.  534,  535. 
Diod.  1.  xiii.  p.  138.  e About  67,000J.  sterling. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


43 


dition,  and  secrecy,  that  they  had  not  time  to  do  this.  He  sailed 
from  Catana  with  all  his  fleet,  without  the  enemy’s  having  the 
least  suspicion  of  his  design.  Being  arrived  at  the  port  of  Tro- 
gilus,  near  Leontium,  which  is  but  a quarter  of  a league  (six  or 
seven  furlongs)  from  Epipolse,  he  put  his  land  forces  on  shore, 
after  which  he  retired  with  his  fleet  to  Thapsus,  a small  penin- 
sula near  Syracuse,  the  entrance  to  which  he  shut  up  with  a 
staccado. 

The  land  forces  marched  with  the  utmost  expedition  to  seize 
on  Epipoke,  by  the  pass  of  Euryelus,  before  the  enemy,  who 
were  in  the  plains  of  Anapus,  at  above  a league’s  distance,  had 
the  least  notice  of  their  arrival.  At  the  first  news  of  this,  the 
700  soldiers,  under  the  command  of  Diomilus,  advanced  forward 
in  confusion,  but.  were  easily  defeated,  and  300  of  them,  with 
their  leader,  left  dead  in  the  field.  The  Athenians,  after  setting 
up  a trophy,  built  a fort  in  Labdalon,  on  the  summit  of  Epipolae, 
in  order  to  secure  their  baggage  and  most  valuable  effects  in 
it,  whenever  they  should  be  forced  to  fight,  or  work  at  the  con- 
tra vail  ati  on. 

Soon  after,  the  inhabitants  of  Egesta  sent  the  Athenians  300 
horse,  to  which  some  of  the  Sicilian  allies  added  100  more, 
which,  with  the  250  sent  before  by  the  Athenians,  and  who 
had  furnished  themselves  with  horses  in  Sicily,  made  a body  of 
650  horse. 

The  plan  laid  down  by  Nicias  for  taking  Syracuse,  was,  to 
surround  all  the  city  on  the  land  side  with  a strong  contravallation, 
in  order  to  cut  off  all  communication  with  the  place  from  without, 
in  hopes,  no  doubt,  that  his  fleet  would  afterwards  enable  him 
to  prevent  the  Syracusans  from  receiving  any  succours  or  pro- 
visions by  sea. 

Having  left  a garrison  in  Labdalon,  he  came  down  from  the 
hill,  advanced  towards  the  northern  extremity  of  Tyche,  and 
halting  there,  he  employed  the  whole  army  in  throwing  up  a 
line  of  contravallation,  to  shut  up  the  city  northward  from  Tyche 
as  far  as  Trogilus,  situate  on  the  sea-side.  This  work  was 
carried  on  with  such  a rapidity,  as  terrified  the  Syracusans. 
They  thought  it  absolutely  necessary  to  prevent  the  carrying  on 
of  this  work,  and  accordingly  made  some  sallies  and  attacks, 
but  always  with  disadvantage,  and  even  their  cavalry  was 
routed.  The  day  after  the  action,  the  contravallation  (north- 
ward) was  continued  by  part  of  the  army,  during  which  the  rest 
carried  stones  and  other  materials  towards  Trogilus,  in  order  to 
finish  it. 

The  besieged,  by  the  advice  of  Hermocrates,  thought  it  ad- 
visable not  to  venture  a second  battle  with  the  Athenians  ; and 
only  endeavoured  to  put  a stop  to  their  works,  or  at  least  to  ren- 
der them  useless,  by  raising  a wall  to  cut  the  line  of  that  car- 


44 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


ried  on  by  the  Athenians.  They  imagined  that  in  case  they 
should  be  suffered  to  complete  their  wall,  it  would  be  impossible 
for  the  Athenians  to  make  any  farther  progress  in  their  work  : 
or  that,  should  they  endeavour  to  prevent  it,  it  would  be  suffi- 
cient for  the  Syracusans  to  oppose  them  with  a part  of  their  for- 
ces, after  having  shut  up  such  avenues  as  were  most  accessible 
with  strong  palisades ; and  that  the  Athenians,  on  the  contrary, 
would  be  obliged  to  send  for  all  their  forces,  and  entirely  aban- 
don their  works. 

Accordingly  they  came  out  of  their  city,  and  working  with 
inexpressible  ardour,  they  began  to  raise  a wall ; and,  in  order 
to  carry  it  on  with  less  molestation,  they  covered  it  with  strong 
palisades,  and  flanked  it  with  wooden  towers,  at  proper 
distances,  to  defend  it.  The  Athenians  suffered  the  Syra- 
cusans to  carry  on  their  works  undisturbed,  because,  had  they 
marched  only  part  of  their  troops  against  them,  they  would 
have  been  too  weak ; and  if  they  had  brought  them  all,  they 
then  must  have  been  obliged  to  discontinue  their  works,  which 
they  had  resolved  not  to  do.  The  work  being  completed, 
the  Syracusans  left  a body  of  troops  to  defend  the  palisade 
and  guard  the  wall,  and  then  returned  into  the  city. 

In  the  mean  time  the  Athenians  cut  off  the  canals  by  which 
water  was  conveyed  into  the  city ; and  observing  that  the 
Syracusan  soldiers,  who  had  been  left  to  guard  the  wall,  were 
very  negligent  in  their  duty  ; some  returning  at  noon  either 
into  the  city  or  their  tents,  and  the  rest  not  keeping  a pro- 
per guard  ; they  detached  30D  chosen  soldiers,  and  some  light 
infantry,  to  attack  this  post ; during  which  the  rest  of  the 
army-  marched  towards  the  city,  to  prevent  any  succours  from 
coming  out  of  it.  Accordingly,  the  300  soldiers  having  forced 
the  palisade,  pursued  those  who  guarded  it  as  far  as  that 
part  of  the  city  wall  which  covered  Temenites,  where,  pour- 
ing in  indiscriminately  with  them,  they  were  repulsed  by  the  in- 
habitants with  loss.  The  whole  army  afterwards  demolished 
the  wall,  pulled  up  the  palisades  of  the  intrenchment,  and  car- 
ried them  off. 

After  the  success,  whereby  the  Athenians  were  masters  of 
the  northern  parts,  they  began,  the  very  next  day,  a still  more 
important  work,  and  which  would  quite  finish  their  inclosure  of 
the  city ; viz.  to  carry  a wall  from  the  hills  of  Epipolae,  west- 
ward, through  the  plain  and  the  fens,  as  far  as  the  great  har- 
bour. To  prevent  this,  the  besieged,  beginning  the  same  kind 
of  work  as  they  had  carried  on  on  the  other  side,  ran  a trench, 
lined  with  palisades,  from  the  city  through  the  fens,  to  prevent 
the  Athenians  from  carrying  their  contravallation  as  far  as 
the  sea  : but  the  latter,  after  finishing  the  first  part  of  the  wall  on 
the  hills  of  Epipolse,  resolved  to  attack  this  new  work.  For 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


45 


this  purpose,  they  ordered  their  fleet  to  sail  from  Thapsus  to 
the  great  harbour  of  Syracuse  ; for  it  had  hitherto  continued 
in  that  road ; and  the  besieged  had  always  the  sea  open  to  them, 
by  which  the  besiegers  were  obliged  to  get  their  provisions 
from  Thapsus  by  land.  The  Athenians  came  down  therefore 
from  Epipolse  into  the  plain  before  day-break ; when,  throw- 
ing planks  and  beams  in  that  part  where  the  fens  were  only 
•slimy  and  more  firm  than  in  other  places,  they  immediately 
carried  the  greatest  part  of  the  fosse  lined  with  palisades, 
and  then  the  rest,  after  having  beaten  the  Syracusans,  who 
gave  way  and  retired  : such  as  were  on  the  right  towards  the 
city,  and  the  rest  towards  the  river.  Three  hundred  chosen 
Athenians  having  attempted  to  cut  off  the  passage  of  the 
latter,  flew  towards  the  bridge ; but  the  enemy’s  cavalry,  the 
greatest  part  of  which  were  drawn  up  in  battle,  repulsed  them  ; 
and  afterwards  charged  the  right  wing  of  the  Athenians,  and 
put  the  first  battalions  into  disorder.  Lamaclius,  perceiving 
this  from  the  left  wing,  where  he  commanded,  ran  thither 
with  the  Argives,  and  some  archers,  but  having  passed  a 
trench,  and  being  abandoned  by  his  soldiers,  he  was  killed 
with  five  or  six  who  had  followed  him.  The  enemy  imme- 
diately passed  the  river,  and  seeing  the  rest  of  the  army  come 
up,  they  retired. 

At  the  same  time  their  right  wing,  which  had  returned  to- 
wards the  city,  resumed  courage  from  this  success,  and  drew 
up  in  order  of  battle  before  the  Athenians;  after  having  de- 
tached some  troops  to  attack  the  fort  on  the  hills  of  Epipolae, 
which  served  as  a magazine  to  the  enemy,  and  was  thought 
to  be  unguarded.  They  forced  an  intrenchment  that  covered 
the  fort,  but  Nicias  saved  it.  He  had  remained  in  this 
fort,  in  consequence  of  illness,  and  was  at  that  time  in  his 
bed,  with  only  his  domestics  about  him.  Animated  by  the 
danger  and  the  presence  of  the  enemy,  he  struggles  with  his 
indisposition  ; rises  up,  and  commands  his  servants  to  set  fire 
immediately  to  all  the  timber  lying  between  the  intrenchment 
and  the  fort  for  the  military  engines,  and  to  the  engines  them- 
selves. This  unexpected  conflagration  stopped  the  Syracusans, 
saved  Nicias,  the  fort,  and  all  the  rich  effects  of  the  Athenians, 
who  made  haste  to  the  relief  of  that  general.  At  the  same 
time,  the  fleet  was  seen  sailing  into  the  great  harbour,  accord- 
ing to  the  orders  given  for  that  purpose.  The  Syracusans 
having  perceived  this  from  the  hill,  and  fearing  they  should  be 
attacked  from  behind,  and  overpowered  by  the  troops  which 
were  about  to  land,  retired,  and  returned  to  the  city  with  all 
their  forces  ; now  no  longer  expecting,  after  having  lost  their 
fosse  lined  with  palisades,  that  it  would  be  possible  for  them 


46 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


to  prevent  the  enemy  from  carrying  on  their  contravallation  as 
far  as  the  sea. 

In  the  mean  time,  the  Athenians,  who  had  contented  them- 
selves with  building  a single  wall  on  the  hills  of  Epipolpe,  and 
through  such  places  as  were  craggy  and  of  difficult  access, 
being  come  down  into  the  plain,  began  to  build,  at  the  foot  of 
the  hills,  a double  wall,  intending  to  carry  it  as  far  as  the  sea ; 
viz.  a wall  of  contravallation  against  the  besieged,  and  another* 
of  circumvallation  against  those  Syracusan  trbops  which  were 
out  of  the  city,  and  such  allies  as  might  come  to  its  aid. 

From  thenceforward  Nicias,  who  was  now  sole  general,  con- 
ceived great  hopes  : for  several  cities  of  Sicily,  which  hitherto 
had  not  declared  for  either  side,  came  and  joined  him ; and 
there  arrived  from  all  quarters  vessels  laden  with  provisions  for 
his  army,  all  parties  being  eager  to  go  over  to  him  because 
he  had  acquired  the  superiority,  and  been  exceedingly  success- 
ful in  all  his  undertakings.  The  Syracusans,  seeing  themselves 
blocked  up  both  by  sea  and  land,  and  losing  all  hopes  of  being 
able  to  defend  their  city  any  longer,  already  proposed  an  ac- 
commodation. Gylippus,  who  was  coming  from  Lacedaemon 
to  their  assistance,  having  heard,  on  his  passage,  the  extremity 
to  which  they  were  reduced,  and  looking  upon  the  whole  island 
as  lost,  sailed  forward  nevertheless  ; not  with  the  view  of  de- 
fending Sicily,  but  only  of  preserving  to  the  nations  of  Italy 
such  cities  as  were  subject  to  them  in  that  island,  if  it  were  not 
too  late,  and  if  this  could  be  done.  For  fame  had  declared,  in 
all  places,  that  the  Athenians  had  already  possessed  themselves 
of  the  whole  island  ; and  were  headed  by  the  general,  whose 
wisdom  and  good  fortune  rendered  him  invincible.  Nicias 
himself,  now  (contrary  to  his  natural  disposition)  confiding  in 
his  own  strength,  and  elate  from  his  success,  persuaded  also  by 
the  secret  advices  which  were  brought  him  daily  from  Syra- 
cuse, and  the  messengers  who  were  sent  to  him,  that  the  city 
would  immediately  capitulate,  did  not  regard  Gylippus’s  ap- 
proach, and  in  consequence  took  no  precautions  to  prevent  his 
landing,  especially  when  he  heard  that  he  brought  but  very  few 
vessels  ; terming  him  a trifling  pirate,  not  worthy,  in  any  man- 
ner, of  his  notice.  But  a general  ought  to  be  extremely  careful 
not  to  abate  his  cares  and  vigilance  upon  account  of  success, 
because  the  least  negligence  may  ruin  every  thing.  Had  Nicias 
sent  the  smallest  detachment  to  oppose  Gylippus’s  landing, 
he  would  have  taken  Syracuse,  and  the  whole  affair  had,  been 
ended. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


47 


SECT.  XIII. 

The  Syracusans  resolve  to  capitulate,  but  Gylippus’s  arrival  changes  the  face 
of  affairs.  Nicias  is  forced  by  his  colleagues  to  engage  in  a sea-fight,  and  is 
overcome.  His  land-forces  are  also  defeated. 

Nineteenth  year  of  the  War . 

The  fortifications  of  the  Athenians  were  now  almost  com- 
pleted ;ff  and  they  had  drawn  a double  wall,  near  half  a league 
in  length,  along  the  plain  and  the  fens  towards  the  great  port, 
and  had  almost  reached  it.  There  now  remained,  on  the  side 
towards  Trogilus,  only  a small  part  of  the  wall  to  be  finished. 
The  Syracusans  were  therefore  on  the  brink  of  ruin,  and  had  no 
hopes  left,  as  they  were  no  longer  able  to  defend  themselves, 
and  did  not  expect  any  succours.  For  this  reason  they  re- 
solved to  surrender.  Accordingly,  a council  was  held  to  settle 
articles  of  capitulation,  in  order  to  present  them  to  Nicias  ; and 
several  were  of  opinion,  that  it  would  be  proper  to  capitulate 
soon,  before  the  city  should  be  entirely  invested. 

It  was  at  that  very  instant,  and  in  the  most  critical  juncture, 
that  an  officer,  Gongylus  by  name,  arrived  from  Corinth  on 
board  a ship  with  three  benches  of  oars.  At  his  arrival,  all 
the  citizens  flocked  round  him.  He  informed  them,  that  Gylip- 
pus  would  be  with  them  immediately,  and  was  followed  by  a 
great  many  other  galleys,  which  were  coming  to  their  aid. 
The  Syracusans,  astonished,  or  rather  stupified,  as  it  were, 
with  this  news,  could  scarce  believe  what  they  heard.  Whilst 
they  were  thus  fluctuating  and  in  doubt,  a courier  arrived  from 
Gylippus  to  inform  them  of  his  approach,  and  order  them  to 
march  out  all  their  troops  to  meet  him.  He  himself,  after 
having  taken  a fort  in  his  way,h  marched  in  order  of  battle 
directly  for  Epipolae  : and  ascending  by  Euryelus,  as  the  Athe- 
nians had  done,  he  prepared  to  attack  them  from  without, 
whilst  the  Syracusans  should  charge  them,  on  their  side,  with 
the  forces  of  Syracuse  and  his.  The  Athenians,  exceedingly 
surprised  at  his  arrival,  drew  up  hastily,  and  without  order, 
under  the  walls.  With  regard  to  himself,  laying  down  his  arms 
when  he  approached,  he  sent  word  by  a herald,  that  he  would 
allow  the  Athenians  five  days  to  leave  Sicily.  Nicias  did  not 
condescend  to  make  the  least  answer  to  this  proposal ; and  some 
of  his  soldiers  bursting  out  a laughing,  asked  the  herald.  Whe- 
ther the  presence  of  a Lacedaemonian  cloak,  and  a trifling  wand, 
could  make  any  change  in  the  present  state  of  the  city  ? Both 
sides  therefore  prepared  for  battle. 

Gylippus  stormed  the  fort  of  Lebdalon,  and  cut  to  pieces  all 

B Thucyd.  1.  vii.  p.  485 — 489.  Plut.  in  Nic.  p.  535,  536.  Diod.  1.  xiii.  p. 
138,  139.  »>  Jeges. 


48 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


who  were  found  in  it.  The  same  day  an  Athenian  galley  was 
taken,  as  it  sailed  into  the  harbour.  The  besieged  afterwards 
drew  a wall  from  the  city,  towards  Epipohe,  in  order  to  cut 
(about  the  extremity  of  it)  the  single  wall  of  the  Athenians  ; and 
to  deprive  them  of  all  communication  with  the  troops  that  were 
posted  in  the  intrenchments  which  surrounded  the  city  on  the 
north  side  towards  Tyche  and  Trogilus.  The  Athenians,  after 
having  finished  the  wall  which  extended  as  far  as  the  sea  towards 
the  great  harbour,  were  returned  to  the  hills.  Gylippus  percei  v- 
ing,  in  the  single  wall  which  the  Athenians  had  built  on  the  hills 
of  Epipohe,  one  part  that  was  weaker  and  lower  than  the  rest, 
marched  thither  in  the  night  with  his  troops  ; but  being  disco- 
vered by  the  Athenians,  who  were  encamped  without,  he  was 
forced  to  retire,  upon  seeing  them  advance  directly  towards 
him.  They  raised  the  wall  higher,  and  themselves  undertook 
the  guard  of  it,  after  having  fixed  their  allies  in  the  several  posts 
of  the  remainder  of  the  intrenchment. 

Nicias,  on  the  other  side,  thought  proper  to  fortify  the  cape 
of  Plemmyrium,  which,  by  its  running  into  the  sea,  straitened 
the  mouth  of  the  great  harbour  ; and  his  design  thereby  was,  to 
procure  provisions,  and  all  other  things  he  might  want,  the  more 
easily  ; because  the  Athenians,  by  possessing  themselves  of  that 
post,  drew  near  the  little  port,  wherein  lay  the  chief  naval  forces 
of  the  Syracusans,  and  were  the  better  able  to  observe  their  va- 
rious motions  ; and  that  besides,  by  having  the  sea  open,  they 
would  not  be  forced  to  have  all  their  provisions  from  the  bottom 
of  the  great  harbour  ; as  they  must  have  been,  should  the  enemy, 
by  seizing  on  the  mouth  of  it,  oblige  them  to  keep  close  in  the 
harbour,  in  the  manner  they  then  did.  For  Nicias,  since  the 
arrival  of  Gylippus,  had  no  hopes  left  but  from  the  side 
next  the  sea.  Sending  therefore  his  fleet  and  part  of  his  troops 
thither,  he  built  three  forts,  sheltered  by  which  his  ships  were 
enabled  to  lie  at  anchor  ; he  also  secured  there  a great  part  of 
the  baggage  and  ammunition.  It  was  then  that  the  troops  on 
board  the  fleet  suffered  very  much ; for  as  they  were  obliged  to 
go  a great  way  to  fetch  wood  and  water,  they  were  surrounded 
by  the  enemy’s  horse,  the  third  part  of  which  were  posted  at 
Olympia,  to  prevent  the  garrison  of  Plemmyrium  from  sallying, 
and  were  masters  of  the  open  country.  Advice  being  brought 
to  Nicias,  that  the  Corinthian  fleet  was  advancing,  he  sent 
twenty  galleys  against  it  ; . ordering  them  to  observe  the 
enemy  towards  Locris,  Rhegium,  and  the  rest  of  the  avenues  of 
Sicily. 

In  the  mean  time,  Gylippus  employing  those  very  stones 
which  the  Athenians  had  got  together  for  their  own  use,  went 
on  with  the  wall  which  the  Syracusans  had  began  to  carry 
through  Epipohe  ; and  drew  up  daily  in  battle  array  before  it 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


49 


as  did  the  Athenians.  When  he  saw  it  was  a proper  time  for 
engaging,  he  began  the  battle  in  the  spot  lying  between  the  two 
walls.  The  narrowness  of  it  having  rendered  his  cavalry  and 
archers  useless,  he  came  off  with  loss,  and  the  Athenians  set  up 
a trophy.  Gylippus,  to  reanimate  his  soldiers  by  doing  them 
justice,  had  the  courage  to  reproach  himself  for  the  ill  success 
they  had  met  with : and  to  declare  publicly,  that  he,  not  they, 
had  occasioned  the  late  defeat ; because  he  had  made  them 
fight  in  too  confined  a spot  of  ground.  However,  he  promised 
to  give  them  soon  an  opportunity  of  recovering  both  their  ho- 
nour and  his  ; and  accordingly  the  very  next  day  he  led  them 
against  the  enemy,  after  having  exhorted  them  in  the  strongest 
terms,  to  behave  in  a manner  worthy  of  their  ancient  glory. 
Nicias  perceiving,  that  though  he  should  not  desire  to  come  to 
a battle,  it  would  however  be  absolutely  necessary  for  him  to 
prevent  the  enemy  from  extending  their  wall  beyond  the  wall 
of  contravallation,  to  which  they  were  already  very  near,  (because 
otherwise  this  would  be  granting  them  a certain  victory ;)  he 
therefore  marched  against  the  Syracusans.  Gylippus  brought 
up  his  troops  beyond  the  spot  where  the  walls  terminated  on 
both  sides,  in  order  that  he  might  leave  the  more  room  to  ex- 
tend his  battle  ; when  charging  the  enemy’s  left  wing  with  his 
horse,  he  put  it  to  flight,  and  soon  after  defeated  the  right. 
We  see  here  what  the  experience  and  abilities  of  a great  cap- 
tain are  capable  of  producing;  for  Gylippus,  with  the  same 
men,  the  same  arms,  the  same  horses,  and  the  same  ground,  by 
only  changing  his  order  of  battle,  defeated  the  Athenians,  and 
beat  them  quite  to  their  camp.  The  following  night,  the  vic- 
tors carried  on  their  wall  beyond  the  contravallation  of  the 
Athenians,  and  thereby  deprived  them  of  all  hopes  of  being 
ever  able  to  surround  them. 

After  this  success,11  the  Syracusans,  to  whose  aid  the  Corin- 
thian fleet  was  arrived  unperceived  bj  that  of  the  Athenians, 
resumed  courage,  armed  several  galleys  ; and  marching  into  the 
plains  with  their  cavalry  and  other  forces,  took  a great  number 
of  prisoners.  They  sent  deputies  to  Lacedaemonia  and  Corinth, 
to  desire  a reinforcement ; Gylippus  went  in  person  through 
all  the  cities  of  Sicily,  to  solicit  them  to  join  him  ; and  brought 
over  the  greatest  part  of  them  to  join  him ; who  accordingly 
sent  him  powerful  succours.  Nicias,  finding  his  troops  lessen 
and  those  of  the  enemy  increase  daily,  began  to  be  discou- 
raged ; and  not  only  sent  expresses  to  the  Athenians,  to 
acquaint  them  with  the  situation  of  affairs,  but  likewise  wrote 
to  them  in  the  strongest  terms.  I shall  repeat  his  whole  let- 
ter, both  as  it  gives  a clear  and  exact  account  of  the  state 

k Thucyd.  1.  vii.  p.  490 — 494.  Pint,  in  Nic.  p.  536.  Diod.  1.  xiii.  p.  139. 

VOL.  III.  F- 


50 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


of  things  at  that  time  in  Syracuse,  and  may  serve  as  a model 
for  such  kind  of  relations. 

Athenians : I have  already  informed  you , by  several  expresses,  * 
of  what  was  passing  here:  but  it  is  necessary  you  should  know 
the  present  situation  of  affairs,  that  you  may  resolve  accordingly. 
After  we  had  been  victorious  in  several  engagements,  and  had 
almost  completed  our  contrav dilation,  Gylippus  arrived  in 
Syracuse  with  a body  of  Lacedcemonians  and  Sicilian  troops  ; 
and  having  been  defeated  the  first  time,  he  was  victorious  the 
second,  by  means  of  his  cavalry  and  archers.  We  are  in  con- 
sequence shut  up  in  our  intrenchments,  without  daring  to  make 
any  attempt,  and  unable  to  complete  our  works,  through  the 
superiority  of  the  enemy’s  forces ; for  part  of  our  soldiers  are 
employed  in  guarding  our  forts,  and  consequently  we  have  not 
an  opportunity  of  employing  all  our  forces  in  battle.  Besides, 
as  the  Syracusans  have  cut  our  lines,  by  a wall,  in  that  part 
where  they  were  not  complete,  it  will  no  longer  be  possible  for  us 
to  surround  the  city,  unless  we  should  force  their  intrench- 
ments ; so  that  instead  of  besieging,  we  ourselves  are  besieged, 
and  dare  not  stir  out,  for  fear  of  their  horse. 

Not  contented  with  these  advantages,  they  are  bringing  new 
succours  from  Peloponnesus,  and  have  sent  Gylippus  to  force 
all  the  neutral  cities  of  Sicily  to  declare  for  them  ; and  the  rest 
to  furnish  them  with  7nen  and  ships,  to  attack  us  both  by  sea  and 
land.  I say  by  sea,  which,  though  very  surprising,  is  however 
but  too  true.  For  our  fleet,  which  before  was  considerable,  from 
the  good  condition  of  the  galleys  and  mariners,  is  now  very  defi- 
cient in  those  very  circumstances,  and  prodigiously  weakened. 

Our  galleys  leak  every  where ; because  we  cannot  draw  them 
on  shore  to  careen  them,  for  fear  lest  those  of  the  enemy,  which 
are  more  numerous  and  in  better  condition  than  ours,  should 
attack  us  on  a sudden,  which  they  seem  to  threaten  every  mo- 
ment. Besides,  we  are  under  a necessity  of  sending  many  back- 
wards and  forwards  to  guard  the  convoys  which  we  are  forced 
to  fetch  from  a great  distance,  and  bring  along  in  the  sight  of 
the  enemy  ; so  that  should  we  be  ever  so  little  negligent  in  this 
point,  our  army  would  be  starved. 

With  regard  to  the  ships’  crews,  they  decrease  sensibly  every 
day  ; for  as  great  numbers  of  them  disperse  to  maraud,  or  to 
fetch  wood  and  water,  they  are  often  cut  to  pieces  by  the  ene- 
my’s horse.  Our  slaves,  allured  by  the  neighbourhood  of  the 
enemy’s  camp,  desert  very  fast  to  it.  The  foreigners  whom  we 
forced  into  the  service,  disband  daily ; and  such  as  have  been 
raised  with  money,  ivho  came  for  plunder  rather  than  fighting, 
finding  themselves  baulked,  go  over  to  the  enemy,  who  are 
so  near  us,  or  else  hide  themselves  in  Sicily,  which  they  may 
easily  do  in  so  large  an  island.  A great  number  of  citi- 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


51 


zens , though  long  used  to,  and  well  skilled  in,  working  of  ships, 
'by  bribing  the  captains,  have  put  others  in  their  room,  who  are 
wholly  unexperienced,  and  incapable  of  serving,  and  by  that 
means  have  subverted  all  discipline.  I am  now  writing  to  men 
perfectly  well  versed  in  naval  affairs  ; and  who  are  very  sensi- 
ble, that , when  order  is  neglected,  every  thing  grows  worse  and 
ivorse,  and  a fleet  must  inevitably  be  ruined. 

But  the  most  unhappy  circumstance  is,  that,  though  I am  in- 
vested with  the  authority  of  general,  I cannot  put  a stop  to 
these  disorders.  For  ( Athenians ) you  are  very  sensible,  that 
such  is  your  disposition,  that  you  do  not  easily  brook  re- 
straint ; besides,  I do  not  know  where  to  furnish  myself  with 
seamen,  whilst  the  enemy  get  numbers  from  all  quarters.  It  is 
not  in  the  power  of  our  Sicilian  allies  to  aid  us ; and  should 
the  cities  of  Italy,  from  whence  we  have  our  provisions,  (hear- 
ing the  extremity  to  which  we  are  reduced,  and  that  you  do  not 
take  the  least  care  to  send  us  any  succour,) join  the  Syracu- 
sans, we  are  undone ; and  the  enemy  will  have  no  occasion  to 
fight  us. 

I could  write  of  things  which  would  be  more  agreeable,  but  of 
none  that  could  be  more  proper  to  give  you  a just  idea  of  the 
subjects  on  which  you  are  to  deliberate.  I am  sensible  that  you 
love  to  have  such  advices  only  sent  you  as  are  pleasing  ; but 
then  I know  on  the  other  side,  that  when  affairs  ; turn  out 
otherwise  than  you  expected  and  hoped  for,  you  accuse  those 
who  deceived  you  ; which  has  induced  me  to  give  you  a sincere 
and  genuine  account  of  things,  without  concealing  a single  cir- 
cumstance. By  the  way,  I am  to  inform  you,  that  no  complaints 
can  be  justly  made  either  against  the  officers  or  common  soldiers , 
both  having  done  their  duty  very  well. 

But  now  that  the  Sicilians  are  joining  all  their  forces  against 
us,  and  expect  a new  army  from  Peloponnesus ; you  may  lay 
this  down  as  the  foundation  for  your  deliberations,  that  our 
present  troops  are  not  sufficient  : and,  therefore,  we  either 
must  be  recalled,  or  else  a land  and  naval  force,  equal  to  the 
first,  must  be  sent  us,  with  money  in  proportion.  You  must  also 
think  of  appointing  a person  to  succeed  me ; it  being  impossible 
for  me,  through  my  nephritic  disorder,  to  sustain  any  longer 
the  weight  of  the  command.  I imagine  that  I deserve  this  fa- 
vour at  your  hands,  on  account  of  the  services  I have  done  you, 
in  the  several  commands  conferred  upon  me,  so  long  as  my 
health  would  permit  me  to  act. 

To  conclude : whatever  resolutions  you  may  come  to,  the 
request  I have  to  make,  is,  that  you  would  execute  it  speedily, 
and  in  the  very  beginning  of  the  spring.  The  succours  which 
our  enemies  meet  with  in  Sicily,  are  all  ready  ; but  those  which 
they  expect  from  Peloponnesus  may  be  longer  in  coming.  How- 

e 2 


UM' 


52 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


every  fix  this  in  your  minds , that  if  you  do  not  exert  yourselves,  - 
the  Lacedcemonians  will  not  fail,  as  they  have  already  done,  to 
he  beforehand  with  you. 

The  Athenians  were  strongly  affected  with  this  letter,  which 
made  as  great  an  impression  on  them  as  Nicias  expected.  How- 
ever, they  did  not  think  proper  to  appoint  him  a successor ; 
and  only  nominated  two  officers  who  were  under  him,  viz.  Me- 
nander and  Euthydemus,  to  assist  him  till  other  generals  should 
be  sent.  Eurymedon  and  Demosthenes  were  chosen  to  succeed 
Lamachus  and  Alcibiades.  The  former  set  out  immediately 
with  ten  galleys,  and  some  money,1  about  the  winter  solstice,  to 
assure  Nicias  that  a speedy  succour  should  be  sent  him:  during 
which,  the  latter  was  raising  troops  and  contributions,  in  order 
to  set  sail  early  in  the  spring. 

The  Lacedaemonians,111  on  the  other  side,  being 
Ant.^J  C 413  suPPorte<l  by  the  Corinthians,  were  very  indus- 
trious in  preparing  reinforcements  to  send  into 
Sicily,  and  to  enter  Attica,  in  order  to  keep  the  Athenian  fleet 
from  sailing  to  that  island.  Accordingly  they  entered  Attica 
early,  under  the  command  of  king  Agis  ; and  after  having  laid 
waste  the  country,  they  fortified  Decelia ; having  divided  the 
work  among  all  the  forces,  to  make  the  greater  despatch.  This 
post  is  about  120  furlongs  from  Athens,  that  is,  about  six 
French  leagues,  and  the  same  distance  from  Boeotia.  Alci- 
biades was  perpetually  soliciting  the  Lacedaemonians ; and 
could  not  be  easy,  till  he  had  prevailed  with  them  to  begin  that 
work.  This  annoyed  the  Athenians  most  of  all : for  as  hitherto 
the  enemy  had  been  accustomed  to  retire  after  they  had  laid 
waste  the  Athenian  territories,  the  latter  were  unmolested  all 
the  rest  of  the  year ; but  since  the  fortifying  of  Decelia,  the 
garrison  left  in  it  was  continually  making  incursions,  and 
alarming  the  Athenians,  Athens  being  now  become  a kind  of 
frontier  town ; for  in  the  day-time,  a guard  was  mounted  at  all 
the  gates ; and  in  the  night,  all  the  citizens  were  either  on  the 
walls,  or  under  arms.  Such  vessels  as  brought  provisions  from 
the  island  of  Euboea,  and  which  before  had  a much  shorter 
passage  by  Decelia,  were  forced  to  go  round  about,  in  order  to 
double  the  cape  of  Sunium ; by  which  means  provisions,  as 
well  as  goods  imported,  grew  much  dearer.  To  heighten  the 
calamity,  upwards  of  20,000  slaves,  the  greatest  part  of  whom 
were  artificers,  went  over  to  the  enemy,  to  fly  from  the  extreme 
misery  with  which  the  city  was  afflicted.  The  cattle  of  all 
kinds  died.  Most  of  the  horses  were  lamed,  being  continually 
upon  guard,  or  upon  parties.  Every  thing  being  laid  waste  in 
this  manner,  and  the  Athenians  enjoying  no  longer  the  reve- 

1 One  hundred  and  twenty  talents. 
m Thucyd.  1.  vii.  p.  494 — 496,  and  502 — 504.  Diod.  1.  xiii.  p.  140. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


53 


nues  which  arose  from  the  produce  of  their  lands,  there  was  a 
prodigious  scarcity  of  money ; so  that  they  were  forced  to 
take  the  twentieth  part  of  all  the  imports,  to  supply  their  usual 
subsidies. 

In  the  mean  time n Gylippus,  who  had  made  the  tour  of 
Sicily,  returned  with  as  many  men  as  he  could  raise  in  the 
whole  island  ; and  prevailed  with  the  Syracusans  to  fit  out  the 
strongest  fleet  in  their  power,  and  to  hazard  a battle  at  sea, 
upon  the  presumption  that  the  success  would  answer  the  great- 
ness of  the  enterprise.  This  advice  was  strongly  enforced  by 
Hermocrates,  who  exhorted  the  Syracusans  not  to  abandon  to 
their  enemies  the  empire  of  the  seas.  He  observed,  that  the 
Athenians  themselves  had  not  received  it  from  their  ancestors, 
nor  been  always  possessed  of  it : that  the  Persian  war  had  in 
a manner  forced  them  into  the  knowledge  of  naval  affairs,  not- 
withstanding two  great  obstacles,  their  natural  disposition,  and 
the  situation  of  their  city,  which  stood  at  a considerable  distance 
•from  the  sea:  that  they  had  made  themselves  formidable  to 
other  nations,  not  so  much  by  their  real  strength,  as  by  their 
courage  and  intrepidity  : that  they  ought  to  copy  them;  and 
since  they  had  to  do  with  enemies  who  were  so  enterprising,  it 
was  fit  they  should  be  daring. 

This  advice  was  approved,  and  accordingly  a large  fleet  was 
equipped.  Gylippus  led  out  all  his  land-forces  in  the  night- 
time, to  attack  the  forts  of  Plemmyrium.  Thirty-five  Syra- 
cusan galleys  which  were  in  the  great  harbour,  and  forty-five  in 
the  lesser,  where  was  an  arsenal  for  ships,  were  ordered  to 
advance  towards  Plemmyrium,  to  amaze  the  Athenians,  who 
woftld  see  themselves  attacked  both  by  sea  and  land  at  the 
same  time.  The  Athenians,  at  this  news,  went  on  board  also ; 
and,  with  twenty-five  ships,  sailed  to  fight  the  thirty-five  Syra- 
cusan vessels  which  were  sailing  out  against  them  from  the 
great  harbour ; and  opposed  thirty-five  more  to  the  forty-five 
of  the  enemy,  which  were  come  out  of  the  little  port.  A sharp 
engagement  was  fought  at  the  mouth  of  the  great  harbour ; one 
party  endeavouring  to  force  their  way  into  it,  and  the  other  to 
keep  them  out. 

Those  who  defended  the  forts  of  Plemmyrium,  having  flocked 
to  the  shore  to  view  the  battle,  Gylippus  attacked  the  forts  un- 
expectedly by  day-break  ; and  having  carried  the  greatest  of 
them  by  storm,  the  soldiers  who  defended  the  other  two  were 
so  terrified,  that  they  abandoned  them  in  a moment.  After  this 
advantage  the  Syracusans  sustained  a considerable  loss  : for  such 
of  their  vessels  as  fought  at  the  entrance  of  the  harbour  (after 
having  forced  the  Athenians)  ran  foul  of  one  another  with  much 
violence  as  they  entered  it  in  disorder  ; and  by  this  means  trans- 
n Thucyd.  1.  vii.  p.  497 — 500.  Plut.  in  Nic.  p.  536.  Diod.  p.  140. 


54 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


ferred  the  victory  to  their  enemies,  who  were  not  contented  with 
pursuing,  but  also  gave  chase  to  those  who  were  victorious  in 
the  great  harbour.  Eleven  Syracusan  galleys  were  sunk, 
and  great  numbers  of  the  sailors  in  them  killed.  Three  were 
taken  ; but  the  Athenians  likewise  lost  three,  and  after  towing 
off  those  of  the  enemy,  they  raised  a trophy  in  a little  island  that 
lay  before  Plemmyrium,  and  retired  to  the  shelter  of  their  camp. 

The  Syracusans  also  raised  three  trophies  for  their  taking  of 
the  three  forts  ; and  after  razing  one  of  the  smaller,  they  repair- 
ed the  fortifications  of  the  other  two,  and  put  garrisons  into 
them.  Several  Athenians  had  been  either  killed  or  made  prison- 
ers there  ; and  great  sums  of  money  were  taken,  the  property  of 
the  public,  as  well  as  of  merchants  and  captains  of  galleys,  be- 
sides a large  quantity  of  ammunition  ; this  being  a kind  of  ma- 
gazine for  the  whole  army.  They  likewise  lost  the  stores  and 
rigging  of  forty  galleys*  with  three  ships  that  lay  in  the  dock. 
But  a more  considerable  circumstance  was,  Gylippus  thereby 
prevented  Nicias  from  getting  provisions  and  ammunition  so 
easily  ; for,  whilst  the  latter  was  possessed  of  Plemmyrium,  these 
were  procured  securely  and  expeditiously  ; whereas,  after  that 
place  was  lost,  it  was  equally  difficult  and  hazardous,  because 
they  could  not  bring  in  any  thing  without  fighting  ; the  enemy 
lying  at  anchor  just  off  their  fort.  Thus  the  Athenians  could 
have  no  provisions  but  from  the  point  of  their  swords  ; which 
dispirited  the  soldiers  very  much,  and  threw  the  whole  army  into 
a great  consternation. 

There  afterwards  was  a like  skirmish  in  defending  a staccado 
which  the  inhabitants  had  made  in  the  sea, 0 at  the  entrance  of 
the  old  harbour,  to  secure  the  shipping.  The  Athenians  having 
raised  towers  and  parapets  on  a large  ship,  made  it  advance  as 
near  as  possible  to  the  staccado,  in  order  that  it  might  serve  as 
a bulwark  to  some  ships  which  carried  military  engines,  with 
which  they  drew  up  the  stakes  by  the  help  of  pulleys  and  ropes, 
exclusive  of  those  which  the  divers  sawed  in  two  ; the  besieged 
defending  themselves  from  their  harbour,  and  the  enemies  from 
their  tower.  Such  stakes  as  had  been  driven  in,  level  with  the 
surface  of  the  water,  in  order  to  strand  those  vessels  that  should 
come  near  them,  were  the  hardest  to  force  away.  The  divers, 
however,  being  induced  by  large  sums  of  money,  succeeded  in 
removing  these  also,*  and  most  of  the  stakes  were  torn  up  ; but 
then  others  were  immediately  driven  in  their  places.  The  utmost 
efforts  were  used  on  both  sides,  in  the  attack  as  well  as  the 
defence. 

One  circumstance  which  the  besieged  considered  of  the  great- 
est importance,  p was  to  attempt  a second  engagement  both  by 

0 Thucyd.  1.  vii.  p.  500,  501. 

p Ibid.  p.  509 — 513.  Plut.  in  Nic.  p.  536.  Diod.  p.  140,  141. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


55 


sea  and  land,  before  the  fleet,  and  other  succours  sent  by  the 
Athenians,  should  arrive.  They  had  concerted  fresh  measures 
for  a battle  at  sea,  profiting  by  the  errors  they  had  committed 
in  the  last  engagement.  The  change  made  in  the  galleys  was, 
their  prows  were  now  shorter,  and  at  the  same  time  stronger 
and  more  solid  than  before.  For  this  purpose,  they  fixed  great 
pieces  of  timber,  projecting  forward,  on  each  side  of  the  prows  ; 
and  to  these  pieces  they  joined  beams  by  way  of  props.  These 
beams  extended  to  the  length  of  six  cubits  on  each  side  of  the 
vessel,  both  within  and  without.  By  this  they  hoped  to  gain 
the  advantage  over  the  galleys  of  the  Athenians,  which  did  not 
dare,  because  of  the  weakness  of  their  prows,  to  attack  an  ene- 
my in  front,  but  only  in  flank  ; not  to  mention,  that  should  the 
battle  be  fough’t  in  the  harbour,  they  would  not  have  room  to 
spread  themselves,  nor  to  pass  between  two  galleys,  in  which  lay 
their  greatest  art ; nor  to  tack  about,  after  they  should  have 
been  repulsed,  in  order  to  return  to  the  charge  ; whereas  the 
Syracusans,  by  their  being  masters  of  the  whole  extent  of  the 
harbour,  would  have  all  these  advantages,  and  might  recipro- 
cally assist  one  another.  On  these  circumstances  the  latter 
founded  their  hopes  of  victory. 

Gylippus  therefore  first  drew  all  the  infantry  out  of  the  camp, 
and  advanced  towards  that  part  of  the  contravallation  of  the 
Athenians  which  faced  the  city  ; whilst  the  troops  of  Olympia 
marched  towards  the  other,  and  their  galleys  set  sail. 

Nicias  was  unwilling  to  venture  a second  battle,  saying,  that 
as  he  expected  a fresh  fleet  every  moment,  and  a strong  rein- 
forcement under  Demosthenes,  it  would  betray  the  greatest 
want  of  judgment  should  he,  as  his  troops  were  inferior  in  num- 
ber to  those  of  the  enemy,  and  already  fatigued,  hazard  a battle 
without  being  forced  to  it.  On  the  contrary,  Menander  and 
Euthydemus,  who  had  just  before  been  appointed  to  share  the 
command  with  Nicias  till  the  arrival  of  Demosthenes,  fired  with 
ambition,  and  jealousy  of  those  generals,  were  eager  to  perform 
some  great  exploit,  to  bereave  the  one  of  his  glory,  and,  if  pos- 
sible, eclipse  that  of  the  other.  The  pretence  they  alleged  on 
this  occasion  was,  the  fame  and  reputation  of  Athens  : and  they 
asserted  with  so  much  vehemence,  that  it  would  be  entirely  de- 
stroyed should  they  shun  the  battle,  as  the  Syracusans  offered 
it  them,  that  they  at  last  forced  Nicias  to  a compliance. 
The  Athenians  had  seventy-five  galleys,  and  the  Syracusans 
eighty. 

The  first  day  the  fleets  continued  in  sight  of  each  other,  in 
the  great  harbour,  without  engaging  : and  only  a few  skirmishes 
passed,  after  which  both  parties  retired  ; and  it  was  just  the 
same  with  the  land-forces.  The  Syracusans  did  not  make  the 
least  movement  the  second  day.  Nicias,  taking  advantage  of 


56 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


this  inactivity,  caused  the  transports  to  draw  up  in  a Hne,  at 
some  distance  from  one  another,  in  order  that  his  galleys  might 
retire  behind  them  with  safety,  in  case  of  a defeat.  On  the 
morrow,  the  Syracusans  came  up  sooner  than  usual,  when  a 
great  part  of  the  day  was  spent  in  skirmishing,  after  which  they 
retired.  The  Athenians  did  not  suppose  they  would  return,  but 
imagined  that  fear  had  made  them  fly : but  having  refreshed 
themselves  with  great  diligence,  and  returning  on  board  their 
galleys,  they  attacked  the  Athenians,  who  were  far  from  expect- 
ing them.  The  latter  being  now  forced  to  return  immediately 
on  board  their  ships,  they  entered  them  in  great  disorder,  so 
that  they  had  not  time  to  draw  them  up  in  a line  of  bat- 
tle, and  most  of  the  sailors  were  fasting.  Victory  did  not  long 
continue  in  suspense.  The  Athenians,  after  making  a short 
and  slight  resistance,  retired  behind  their  line  of  transports. 
The  enemy  pursued  them  thither,  and  were  stopped  by  the  sail- 
yards  of  those  ships,  to  which  were  fixed  dolphins  of  lead,  4 
which,  being  very  heavy,  had  they  fallen  on  the  enemy’s  galleys, 
would  have  sunk  them  at  once.  The  Athenians  lost  seven  gal- 
leys in  this  engagement,  and  a great  number  of  soldiers  were 
either  killed  or  taken  prisoners. 

This  loss  threw  Nicias  into  the  utmost  consternation. r All 
the  misfortunes  he  had  met  with,  ever  since  the  time  he  had 
first  enjoyed  the  supreme  command,  came  into  his  mind  ; and 
he  now  is  involved  in  a greater  than  any  of  them,  by  his  com- 
plying with  the  advice  of  his  colleagues.  Whilst  he  was  in- 
volving these  gloomy  ideas,  Demosthenes’s  fleet  was  seen  com- 
ing forward  in  great  pomp,  and  with  such  an  air  as  must  fill 
the  enemy  with  dread;  it  was  now  the  day  after  the  battle. 
This  fleet  consisted  of  seventy-three  galleys,  on  board  of  which 
were  5000  fighting  men,  and  about  3000  archers,  slingers,  and 
bowmen.  All  these  galleys  were  richly  trimmed ; their  prows 
being  adorned  with  shining  streamers,  manned  with  stout  row- 
ers, commanded  by  good  officers,  and  echoing  with  the  sound 
of  clarions  and  trumpets  ; Demosthenes  having  affected  an  air 
of  pomp  and  triumph,  purposely  to  strike  terror  into  the  enemy. 

This  gallant  sight  alarmed  them  indeed  beyond  expression. 
They  did  not  see  any  end,  or  even  the  least  suspension,  of  their 
calamities ; all  they  had  hitherto  done  or  suffered  was  aS 
nothing,  and  their  work  was  to  begin  again.  What  hopes  could 
they  entertain  of  being  able  to  weary  out  the  patience  of  the 
Athenians,  since,  though  a hostile  camp  was  intrenched  in  the 
middle  of  Attica,  they  were  however  able  to  send  a second  army 
into  Sicily,  as  considerable  as  the  former  ; and  their  power,  as 

This  engine,  so  violent  was  its  motion,  broke  through  a galley  from  the 
deck  to  the  hold. 

T Thucyd.  1.  vii.  p.  513 — 518.  Pint,  in  Nic.  p.  537.  Diod.  p.  141,  142. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS.  57 

well  as  their  courage,  seemed,  notwithstanding  all  their  losses, 
instead  of  diminishing,  to  increase  daily  ? 

Demosthenes  having  made  an  exact  inquiry  into  the  state  of 
things,  imagined  that  it  would  not  be  proper  for  him  to  lose 
time  as  Nicias  had  done,  who,  having  spread  a universal  terror 
at  his  first  arrival,  became  afterwards  the  object  of  contempt, 
for  having  wintered  in  Catana,  instead  of  going  directly  to 
Syracuse  ; and  had  afterwards  given  Gylippus  an  opportunity 
of  throwing  troops  into  it.  He  flattered  himself  with  the  hopes, 
that  he  should  be  able  to  carry  the  city  at  the  first  attack,  by 
taking  advantage  of  the  alarm  which  the  news  of  his  arrival 
would  spread  in  every  part  of  it,  and  by  that  means  should  im- 
mediately put  an  end  to  the  war : otherwise  he  intended  to  raise 
the  siege,  and  no  longer  harass  and  lessen  the  troops  by  fighting 
battles  never  decisive ; nor  quite  exhaust  the  city  of  Athens, 
by  employing  its  treasures  in  needless  expenses. 

Nicias,  terrified  by  this  bold  and  precipitate  resolution  of 
Demosthenes,  conjured  him  not  to  be  so  hasty,  but  to  take  time 
to  weigh  things  deliberately,  that  he  might  have  no  cause  to 
repent  of  what  he  should  do.  He  observed  to  him,  that  the 
enemy  would  be  ruined  by  delays  ; that  their  provisions  as  well 
as  money  were  entirely  exhausted ; that  their  allies  were  going 
to  abandon  them ; that  they  must  soon  be  reduced  to  such  ex- 
tremity, for  want  of  provisions,  as  would  force  them  to  surren- 
der, as  they  had  before  resolved ; for  there  were  certain  persons 
in  Syracuse  who  held  a secret  correspondence  with  Nicias,  and 
exhorted  him  not  to  be  impatient,  because  the  Syracusans  were 
tired  with  the  war  and  with  Gylippus ; and  that  should  the 
necessity  to  which  they  were  reduced  be  ever  so  little  increased, 
they  would  surrender  at  discretion. 

As  Nicias  did  not  explain  himself  clearly,  and  would  not 
declare  in  express  terms  that  sure  and  certain  advices  were 
sent  him  of  whatever  was  transacted  in  the  city,  his  remon- 
strances were  considered  as  an  effect  of  the  timidity  and  slow- 
ness with  which  he  had  always  been  reproached.  Such,  said 
they,  are  his  usual  protraction,  delays,  distrusts , and  fearful 
precaution,  whereby  he  has  deadened  all  the  vivacity,  and  ex- 
tinguished all  the  ardour  of  the  troops,  in  not  marching  them 
immediately  against  the  enemy ; but,  on  the  contrary,  by  de- 
ferring to  attach  them,  till  his  own  forces  were  weakened  and 
despised.  This  made  the  rest  of  the  generals  and  all  the  officers 
come  over  to  Demosthenes’s  opinion,  and  Nicias  himself  was 
at  last  forced  to  acquiesce  with  it. 

Demosthenes,  after  having  attacked  to  no  purpose  the  wall 
which  cut  the  contravallation  of  the  besiegers,  confined  himself 
to  the  attack  of  Epipolae,  from  a supposition  that  should  he 
once  be  master  of  it,  the  wall  would  be  quite  undefended.  He 


58 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


therefore  took  provisions  for  five  days,  with  workmen,  imple- 
ments, and  every  thing  necessary  for  him  to  defend  that  post 
after  he  should  possess  himself  of  it.  As  there  was  no  going 
up  to  it  in  the  day-time  undiscovered,  he  marched  thither  in  the 
night  with  all  his  forces,  followed  by  Eurymedon  and  Menan- 
der; Nicias  staying  behind  to  guard  the  camp.  They  went  up 
by  the  way  of  Euryelus,  as  before,  unperceived  by  the  sentinels  ; 
attack  the  first  intrenchment,  and  storm  it,  after  killing  part  of 
those  who  defended  it.  Demosthenes,  not  satisfied  with  this 
advantage,  to  prevent  the  ardour  of  his  soldiers  from  cooling, 
and  not  delay  the  execution  of  his  designs,  marches  forward. 
During  this  interval,  the  forces  of  the  city,  sustained  by  Gylip- 
pus,  march  under  arms  out  of  the  intrenchments.  Being  seized 
with  astonishment,  which  the  darkness  of  the  night  increased, 
they  were  immediately  repulsed  and  put  to  flight.  But  as  the 
Athenians  advanced  in  disorder,  to  force  whatever  might  resist 
their  arms,  lest  the.  enemy  might  rally  again,  should  time  be 
allowed  them  to  breathe  and  recover  from  their  surprise,  they 
are  stopped  on  a sudden  by  the  Boeotians,  who  make  a vigorous 
stand,  and  marching  against  the  Athenians  with  their  pikes 
presented,  repulse  them  with  great  shouts,  and  make  a dreadful 
slaughter.  This  spreads  a universal  terror  through  the  rest  of 
the  army.  Those  who  fled  either  force  along  such  as  were  ad- 
vancing to  their  assistance,  or  else,  mistaking  them  for  enemies, 
turn  their  arms  against  them.  They  now  were  all  mixed  indis- 
criminately, it  being  impossible  to  discriminate  objects  in  the 
horrors  of  a night,  which  was  not  so  gloomy  as  entirely  to  make 
them  imperceptible,  nor  yet  light  enough  to  distinguish  those 
which  were  seen.  The  Athenians  sought  for  one  another  to  no 
purpose ; and  from  their  often  asking  the  word,  by  which  only 
they  were  able  to  know  one  another,  a strange  confusion  of 
sounds  was  heard ; which  occasioned  no  little  disorder ; not  to 
mention  that  they,  by  this  means,  divulged  the  word  to  the 
enemy,  and  could  not  learn  theirs ; because,  by  their  being  to- 
gether and  in  a body,  they  had  no  occasion  to  repeat  it.  In  the 
mean  time,  those  who  were  pursued,  threw  themselves  from  the 
top  of  the  rocks,  and  many  were  dashed  to  pieces  by  the  fall ; 
and  as  most  of  those  who  had  escaped  straggled  from  one 
another  up  and  down  the  fields  and  woods,  they  were  cut  to 
pieces  the  next  day  by  the  enemy’s  horse,  who  pursued  them. 
Two  thousand  Athenians  were  slain  in  this  engagement,  and  a 
great  number  of  arms  were  taken  ; those  who  fled  having  thrown 
them  away,  that  they  might  be  the  better  able  to  escape  over 
the  precipices. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


59 


SECT.  XIV. 

The  consternation  with  which  the  Athenians  are  seized.  They  again  hazard 
a sea-fight,  and  are  defeated.  They  resolve  to  retire  by  land.  Being  close 
pursued  by  the  Syracusans,  they  surrender.  Nicias  and  Demosthenes  are 
sentenced  to  die,  and  executed.  The  effect  which  the  news  of  the  defeat  of 
the  army  produces  in  Athens. 

The  Athenian  generals,8  after  sustaining  so  great  a loss, 
were  greatly  perplexed,  and  did  not  know  how  to  act  in  the 
present  discouragement  and  despair  of  the  troops,  who  died 
daily,  either  by  the  diseases  of  the  autumn,  or  by  the  bad  air  of 
the  fens  near  which  they  were  encamped.  Demosthenes  was 
of  opinion,  that  it  would  be  proper  for  them  to  leave  the  country 
immediately,  since  they  had  been  so  unsuccessftil  in  so  impor- 
tant an  enterprise ; especially  as  the  season  was  not  too  far  ad- 
vanced for  sailing : and  that  they  had  ships  enough  to  force  a 
passage,  in  case  the  enemy  should  dispute  it  with  them.  He 
declared,  that  it  would  be  of  much  greater  advantage  to  oblige 
the  enemy  to  raise  their  blockade  of  Athens,  than  for  them  to 
continue  that  of  Syracuse,  by  which  they  exhausted  themselves 
to  no  purpose  ; that  he  was  certain  they  would  not  be  rein- 
forced by  a new  army ; and  that  they  could  not  hope  to 
overcome  the  enemy  with  the  weak  one  under  their  command. 

Nicias  was  sensible  that  the  arguments  his  colleague  used 
were  very  just,  and  he  himself  was  of  his  opinion : but  at  the 
same  time  he  was  afraid,  lest  so  public  a confession  of  the  weak 
condition  to  which  they  were  reduced,  and  their  resolution  to 
leave  Sicily,  (the  report  of  which  would  certainly  reach  the  enemy,) 
should  complete  the  ruin  of  their  affairs,  and  perhaps  make  them 
unable  to  execute  their  resolution  when  they  should  attempt  it. 
Besides,  they  had  some  little  hopes  left  that  the  besieged,  being 
themselves  reduced  to  great  extremity  by  their  absolute  want  of 
provisions  and  money,  would  at  last  be  inclined  to  surrender 
upon  honourable  terms.  Thus,  although  he  was  in  reality  un- 
certain and  wavering,  he  insinuated,  that  he  would  not  quit 
Sicily,  till  the  Athenians  should  have  first  sent  orders  for  that 
purpose ; as  he  well  knew  that  otherwise  they  would  be  highly 
displeased  : that  as  those  who  were  to  judge  them  had  not  been 
eye-witnesses  of  the  state  of  things,  they  would  be  of  a different 
opinion  ; and  at  the  instigation  of  some  orator,  certainly  con- 
demn them : that  most  of  those  men,  who  now  exclaimed  with 
the  greatest  vehemence  against  the  difficulties  they  laboured 
under,  would  then  change  their  note,  and  accuse  them  of  having 
been  bribed  to  raise  the  siege : that  knowing,  so  well  as  he  did, 
the  disposition  and  character  of  the  Athenians,  he  chose  to  die 
8 Thucyd.  1.  vii.  p.  518 — 520.  Plut.  in  Nic.  p.  538 — 542.  Diod.  n.  142. 


60 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


gloriously  by  the  enemy’s  sword,  rather  than  be  ignominiously 
condemned  by  his  fellow-citizens. 

These  reasons,  though  they  appeared  very  strong,  were  not 
# yet  able  to  convince  Demosthenes  ; and  it  was  still  his  opi- 
nion, that  the  only  good  choice  they  could  make  would  be  to 
retire.  However,  as  he  had  been  unsuccessful  in  his  former 
project,  he  was  afraid  of  insisting  upon  this  ; and  he  was  the 
more  inclined  to  accede  to  that  of  Nicias,  from  imagining, 
with  many  others,  that  this  general  might  have  some  secret  re- 
source, as  he  was  so  firmly  resolved  to  stay. 

Gylippus,1  after  having  made  the  tour  of  Sicily,  had  brought 
a great  body  of  troops  with  him.  This  new  reinforcement 
terrified  the  Athenians  exceedingly,  whose  army  diminished 
daily  by  sickness ; and  they  now  began  to  repent  their  not 
having  raised  the  siege,  especially  as  the  besieged  were  pre- 
paring to  attack  them  both  by  sea  and  land.  Besides,  Nicias 
no  longer  opposed  this  resolution,  and  only  desired  to  have  it 
kept  secret.  Orders  were  therefore  given,  as  privately  as 
possible,  for  the  fleet  to  prepare  for  setting  sail  with  the  utmost 
expedition. 

When  all  things  were  ready,  the  m'oment  they  were  going 
to  set  sail,  (wholly  unsuspected  by  the  enemy,  who  were  far 
from  surmising  they  would  leave  Sicily  so  soon,)  the  moon  was 
suddenly  eclipsed  in  the  middle  of  the  night,  and  lost  all  its 
splendour ; which  terrified  Nicias  and  the  whole  army,  who, 
from  ignorance  and  superstition,  were  astonished  at  so  sud- 
den a change,  the  causes  of  which  they  did  not  know,  and 
therefore  dreaded  the  consequence  of  it.  They  then  con- 
sulted the  soothsayers ; who  being  equally  unacquainted  with 
the  reasons  of  this  phenomenon,  only  augmented  their  con- 
sternation. It  was  the  custom,  after  such  accidents  had  hap- 
pened, to  suspend  their  enterprise  but  for  three  days.  The 
soothsayers  pronounced,  that  he  must  not  set  sail  till  three  times 
nine  days  were  past,  (these  are  Thucydides’s  words,)  which 
doubtless  was  a mysterious  number  in  the  opinion  of  the  people. 
Nicias,  scrupulous  to  a fault,  and  full  of  a mistaken  veneration 
for  these  blind  interpreters  of  the  will  of  the  gods,  declared, 
that  he  would  wait  a whole  revolution  of  the  moon,  and  not 
return  till  the  same  day  of  the  next  month ; as  if  he  had  not 
seen  the  planet  very  clearly  the  instant  it  had  emerged  from 
that  part  which  was  darkened  by  the  interposition  of  the  earth’s 
body. 

But  he  was  not  allowed  time  for  this.  The  news  of  the  in- 
tended departure  of  the  Athenians  being  soon  spread  over 
the  city,  a resolution  was  taken  to  attack  the  besiegers  both 

1 Thucyd.  1.  vii.  p.  521 — 548.  Plut.  in  Nic.  p.  538.  Diod.  1.  xiii.  p. 
142—161. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


Gl 


by  sea  and  land.  The  Syracusans  began  the  first  day  by  at- 
tacking the  intrenchments,  and  gained  a slight  advantage  over 
the  enemy.  On  the  morrow  they  made  a second  attack  ; and 
at  the  same  time  sailed,  with  seventy-six  galleys,  against  eighty- 
six  of  the  Athenians’.  Eurymedon,  who  commanded  the  right 
of  the  Athenian  fleet,  having  spread  along  the  shore  to  surround 
them,  this  movement  proved  fatal  to  him  : for  as  he  was  de- 
tached from  the  body  of  the  fleet,  the  Syracusans,  after  forcing 
the  centre,  attacked  him  ; drove  him  vigorously  into  the  gulf 
called  Dascon,  and  there  defeated  him  entirely.  Eurymedon 
lost  his  life  in  the  engagement.  They  afterwards  gave  chase 
to  the  rest  of  the  galleys,  and  run  them  on  shore.  Gylippus, 
who  commanded  the  land  army,  seeing  the  Athenian  galleys 
were  forced  aground,  and  not  able  to  return  into  their  stae- 
cado,  came  down  with  part  of  his  troops,  in  order  to  charge 
the  soldiers,  in  case  they  should  be  forced  to  run  ashore  ; and 
to  give  his  friends  the  more  room  to  tow  such  galleys  as  they 
should  have  taken.  However,  he  was  repulsed  by  the  Tyrrhe- 
nians, who  were  posted  on  that  side ; and  obliged  by  the  Athe- 
nians, who  flew  to  sustain  them,  to  retire  with  some  loss  as  far 
as  the  marsh  called  Lysimelia,  which  lay  near  it.  The  latter 
saved  most  of  their  ships,  eighteen  excepted,  which  were  taken 
by  the  Syracusans,  and  their  crews  cut  to  pieces  by  them. 
After  this,  resolving  to  burn  the  rest,  they  filled  an  old 
vessel  with  combustible  materials;  and  having  set  fire  to  it, 
they  drove  it  by  the  help  of  the  wind  against  the  Athenians, 
who  nevertheless  extinguished  the  fire,  and  drove  off  the  ship. 

Each  side  erected  trophies  ; the  Syracusans  for  the  defeat 
of  Eurymedon,  and  the  advantage  they  had  gained  the  day 
before  ; and  the  Athenians,  for  their  having  driven  part  of  the 
enemy  into  the  marsh,  and  put  the  other  part  to  flight.  But 
the  minds  of  the  two  nations  were  very  differently  disposed. 
The  Syracusans,  who  had  been  thrown  into  the  utmost  con- 
sternation at  the  arrival  of  Demosthenes  with  his  fleet,  seeing 
themselves  victorious  in  a naval  engagement,  resumed  fresh 
hope,  and  assured  themselves  of  a complete  victory  over  their 
enemies.  The  Athenians,  on  the  contrary,  frustrated  of  their 
only  resource,  and  overcome  by  sea,  so  contrary  to  their  ex- 
pectations, entirely  lost  courage,  and  had  no  thoughts  but  of 
retiring. 

The  enemy,  to  deprive  them  of  all  resource  and  prevent 
their  escaping,  shut  the  mouth  of  their  great  harbour,  which 
was  about  500  paces  wide,  with  galleys  placed  across,  and 
other  vessels  fixed  with  anchors  and  iron  chains,  and  at  the 
same  time  made  the  requisite  preparations  for  the  battle,  in 
case  they  should  have  courage  to  engage  again.  When  the 
Athenians  saw  themselves  thus  hemmed  in,  the  generals  and 


62 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


principal  officers  assembled,  in  order  to  deliberate  on  the  present 
state  of  affairs.  They  were  in  absolute  wrant  of  provisions, 
which  was  owing  to  their  having  forbidden  the  people  of  Catana 
to  bring  any,  from  the  hopes  they  entertained  of  their  being 
able  to  retire ; and  they  could  not  procure  any  from  other 
places,  unless  they  were  masters  of  the  sea.  This  made  them 
resolve  to  venture  a sea-fight.  With  this  view,  they  deter- 
mined to  leave  their  old  camp  and  their  walls,  which  extended 
to  the  temple  of  Hercules ; and  to  intrench  themselves  on  the 
shore,  near  their  ships,  in  the  smallest  compass  possible.  Their 
design  was,  to  leave  some  forces  in  that  place  to  guard  their 
baggage  and  the  sick ; and  to  fight  with  the  rest  on  board  all 
the  ships  they  had  remaining.  They  intended  to  retire  to  Ca- 
tana, in  case  they  should  be  victorious ; otherwise,  to  set  fire 
to  their  ships,  and  to  march  by  land  to  the  nearest  city  belong- 
ing to  their  allies. 

This  resolution  being  taken,  Nicias  immediately  filled  110 
galleys  (the  others  having  lost  their  oars)  with  the  flower  of  his 
infantry ; and  drew  up  the  rest  of  the  forces,  particularly  the 
bowmen,  in  order  of  battle  on  the  shore.  As  the  Athenians 
dreaded  very  much  the  beaks  of  the  Syracusan  galleys,  Nicias 
had  provided  harping-irons  to  grapple  them,  in  order  to  break 
the  force  of  the  blow,  and  to  come  immediately  to  close  fight, 
as  on  shore.  But  the  enemy  perceiving  this,  covered  the  prows 
and  upper  part  of  their  galleys  with  leather,  to  prevent  their 
being  so  easily  laid  hold  of.  The  commanders  on  both  sides 
had  employed  all  their  rhetoric  to  animate  their  men ; and 
none  could  ever  have  been  prompted  from  stronger  motives  ; 
for  the  battle  which  was  going  to  be  fought,  was  to  determine, 
not  only  their  lives  and  liberties,  but  also  the  fate  of  their 
country. 

The  battle  was  very  obstinate  and  bloody.  The  Athenians 
being  arrived  at  the  mouth  of  the  port,  easily  took  those  ships 
which  defended  the  entrance  of  it ; but  when  they  attempted 
to  break  the  chain  of  the  rest  to  widen  the  passage,  the  enemy 
came  up  from  all  quarters.  As  near  200  galleys  came  rushing 
on  each  side,  towards  one  narrow  place,  there  must  necessarily 
be  a very  great  confusion ; and  the  vessels  could  not  easily 
advance  forward,  or  retire,  nor  turn  about  to  renew  the  attack. 
The  beaks  of  the  galleys,  for  this  reason,  did  very  little  execu- 
tion : but  there  were  very  furious  and  frequent  discharges. 
The  Athenians  were  overwhelmed  with  a shower  of  stones, 
which  always  did  execution  from  what  place  soever  they  were 
thrown ; whereas  they  defended  themselves  only  by  shooting 
darts  and  arrows,  which,  by  the  motion  of  the  ships  from  the 
agitation  of  the  sea,  could  not  be  well  aimed,  and  by  that  means 
the  greatest  part  of  them  did  little  execution.  Ariston  the 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


63 


pilot  had  given  the  Syracusans  this  counsel.  These  discharges 
being  over,  the  soldiers,  heavily  armed,  attempted  to  enter  the 
enemy’s  ships  in  order  to  fight  hand  to  hand : and  it  often  hap- 
pened, that  whilst  they  were  climbing  up  one  side,  their  own 
ships  were  entered  on  the  other ; and  two  or  three  ships  would 
be  grappled  to  one,  which  occasioned  a great  perplexity  and 
confusion.  Farther,  the  noise  of  the  ships  that  dashed  one 
against  the  other,  together  with  the  different  cries  of  the  victors 
and  vanquished,  prevented  the  orders  of  the  officers  from  being 
heard.  The  Athenians  wanted  to  force  a passage,  whatever 
might  be  the  consequence,  to  secure  their  return  into  their  own 
country ; and  this  the  enemy  employed  their  utmost  efforts  to 
prevent,  in  order  that  they  might  gain  a more  complete  and 
more  glorious  victory.  The  two  land  armies,  which  were 
drawn  up  on  the  highest  part  of  the  shore,  and  the  inhabitants 
of  the  city  who  were  there,  ran  to  the  walls ; whilst  the  rest,  . 
kneeling  in  the  temples,  were  imploring  Heaven  to  give  success 
to  their  citizens : ail  these  saw  clearly,  because  of  their  little 
distance  from  the  fleets,  every  thing  that  passed  ; and  contem- 
plated the  battle  as  from  an  amphitheatre,  but  not  without 
great  anxiety  and  terror.’  Attentive  to,  and  shuddering  at, 
every  movement,  and  the  several  changes  which  happened,  they 
discovered  the  interest  they  took  in  the  battle,  by  their  fears, 
their  hopes,  their  grief,  their  joy,  by  different  cries  and  differ- 
ent gestures ; stretching  out  their  hands,  sometimes  towards 
the  combatants  to  animate  them,  and  at  other  times  towards 
heaven,  to  implore  the  succour  and  protection  of  the  gods.  At 
last,  the  Athenian  fleet,  after  sustaining  a long  battle  and  a 
vigorous  resistance,  was  put  to  flight  and  driven  against  the 
shore.  The  Syracusans,  who  were  spectators  of  this  victory, 
conveyed  to  the  whole  city,  by  a universal  shout,  the  news  of 
this  victory.  The  victors,  now  masters  of  the  sea,  and  sailing 
with  a favourable  wind  towards  Syracuse,  erected  a trophy; 
whilst  the  Athenians,  who  were  quite  dejected  and  overpowered, 
did  not  so  much  as  request  that  their  dead  soldiers  might  be 
delivered  to  them,  in  order  to  pay  the  last  sad  duty  to  their 
remains. 

There  now  remained  but  two  methods  for  them  to  choose ; 
either  to  attempt  the  passage  a second  time,  for  which  they 
had  ships  and  soldiers  sufficient,  or  to  abandon  their  fleet  to 
the  enemy,  and  retire  by  land.  Demosthenes  proposed  the 
former ; but  the  sailors,  in  the  deepest  affliction,  refused  to 
obey,  fully  persuaded  that  it  would  be  impossible  for  them  to 
sustain  a second  engagement.  The  second  method  was  there- 
fore resolved  upon,  and  accordingly  they  prepared  to  set  out  in 
the  night,  to  conceal  the  march  of  their  army  from  the  enemy. 

But  Hermocrates,  who  suspected  their  design,  was  very 


G4 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


sensible  that  it  was  of  the  utmost  importance  not  to  suffer  so 
great  a body  of  forces  to  escape ; since  they  otherwise  might 
fortify  themselves  in  some  corner  of  the  island,  and  renew  the 
war.  The  Syracusans  were  at  that  time  in  the  midst  of  their 
festivity  and  rejoicings  ; and  thinking  of  nothing  but  how  they 
might  best  divert  themselves,  after  the  toils  they  had  sus- 
tained in  fight.  They  were  then  solemnizing  the  festival  of 
Hercules,  which  happened  on  that  very  day.  To  desire  the 
Syracusans  to  take  up  arms  again,  in  order  to  pursue  the  ene- 
my ; and  to  attempt  to  draw  them  from  their  diversions  either 
by  force  or  persuasion,  would  have  been  to  no  purpose ; for 
which  reason  another  expedient  was  employed.  Hermocrates 
sent  out  a few  horsemen,  who  were  to  pass  for  friends  of  the 
Athenians,  and  ordered  them  to  cry  aloud : Tell  Nicias  not  to 

retire  till  day-light : for  the  Syracusans  lie  in  ambush  for 
him,  and  Have  seized  on  the  passes.  This  false  advice  stopped 
Nicias  at  once ; and  he  did  not  even  set  out  the  next  day,  in 
order  that  the  soldiers  might  have  more  time  to  prepare  for 
their  departure  ; and  carry  off  whatever  might  be  necessary  for 
their  subsistence,  and  abandon  the  rest. 

The  enemy  had  time  enough  for  s’eizing  the  avenues.  The 
next  morning  early  they  possessed  themselves  of  the  most  diffi- 
cult passes,  fortified  those  places  where  the  rivers  were  forda- 
ble, broke  down  the  bridges,  and  spread  detachments  of  horse 
up  and  down  the  plain;  so  that  there  was  not  one  place 
through  which  the  Athenians  could  pass  without  fighting. 
They  set  out  upon  their  march  the  third  day  of  the  battle,  with 
design  to  retire  to  Catana.  The  whole  army  was  in  an  inex- 
pressible consternation,  at  the  sight  of  the  dead  or  dying,  some 
of  whom  were  left  exposed  to  wild  beasts,  and  the  rest  to  the 
cruelty  of  the  enemy.  Those  who  were  sick  and  wounded  con- 
jured them  with  tears  to  take  them  along  with  the  army,  and 
held  by  their  clothes  when  they  were  going  ; or  else,  dragging 
themselves  after  them,  followed  them  as  far  as  strength  would 
permit : and,  when  this  failed,  they  had  recourse  to  tears,  sighs, 
imprecations ; and  sending  up  towards  heaven  plaintive  and 
dying  groans,  they  called  upon  the  gods  as  well  as  men  to  avenge 
their  cruelty,  whilst  every  place  echoed  with  lamentations. 

The  whole  army  was  in  as  deplorable  a condition.  All  men 
were  seized  with  the  deepest  melancholy.  They  were  inwardly 
tortured  with  rage  and  anguish,  when  they  represented  to  them- 
selves the  greatness  from  which  they  were  fallen,  the  extreme 
misery  to  which  they  were  reduced,  and  the  still  greater  evils 
from  which  they  foresaw  it  would  be  impossible  for  them  to  es- 
cape. They  could  not  bear  the  comparison,  for  ever  present  in 
their  thoughts,  of  the  triumphant  state  in  which  they  had  left 
Athens,  in  the  midst  of  the  good  wishes  and  acclamations  of  the 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS.  65 

people  ; with  the  ignominy  of  their  retreat,  aggravated  by  the 
cries  and  imprecations  of  their  relations  and  fellow-citizens. 

Eat  the  most  melancholy  part  of  the  spectacle,  and  that  which 
most  deserved  compassion,  was  Nicias.  Dejected  and  worn 
out  by  a tedious  illness  ; deprived  of  the  most  necessary  things, 
at  a time  when  his  age  and  infirmities  required  them  most ; 
pierced,  not  only  with  his  private  grief,  but  still  more  with  that 
of  others,  all  which  preyed  upon  his  heart ; this  great  man, 
superior  to  all  his  misfortunes,  thought  of  nothing  but  how  he 
might  best  comfort  his  soldiers,  and  revive  their  courage.  He 
ran  up  and  down  in  all'  places,  crying  aloud,  that  matters  were 
not  yet  desperate,  and  that  other  armies  had  escaped  from 
greater  dangers ; that  they  ought  not  to  accuse  themselves,  or 
grieve  immoderately,  for  misfortunes  which  they  had  not  occa- 
sioned ; that  if  they  had  offended  some  god,  his  vengeance  must 
be  satiated  by  this  time ; that  fortune,  after  having  so  long 
favoured  the  enemy,  would  at  last  be  tired  of  persecuting  them  : 
that  tjieir  bravery  and  their  numbers  made  them  still  formidable 
(being  still  near  40,000  strong)  ; that  no  city  in  Sicily  would  be 
able4o  withstand  them,  nor  prevent  their  settling  wherever  they 
might  think  proper ; that  they  had  no  more  to  do  but  to  take 
care  severally  of  themselves,  and  march  in  good  order  ; that  by 
a prudent  and  good  retreat,  which  was  now  become  their  only 
resource,  they  would  not  only  save  themselves,  but  also  their 
country,  and  enable  it  to  recover  its  former  grandeur. 

The  army  marched  in  two  bodies,  both  drawn  up  in  the  form 
of  a phalanx ; the  first  being  commanded  by  Nicias,  and  the 
second  by  Demosthenes,  with  the  baggage  in  the  centre.  Being 
come  to  the  river  Anapis,  they  forced  the  passage,  and  after- 
wards were  attacked  by  all  the  enemy’s  cavalry,  as  well  as 
archers,  who  discharged  perpetually  upon  them.  They  were 
annoyed  in  this  manner  during  several  days’  march  ; every  one 
of  the  passes  being  guarded,  and  the  Athenians  being  obliged 
to  dispute  every  inch  of  their  way.  The  enemy  were  unwilling 
to  hazard  a battle  against  an  army  which  despair  alone  might 
render  invincible  : and  the  instant  the  Athenians  presented  the 
Syracusans  battle,  the  latter  retired  ; but  whenever  the  former 
proceeded  on  their  march,  they  advanced  and  charged  them  in 
their  retreat. 

Demosthenes  and  Nicias,  seeing  the  miserable  condition  to 
which  the  troops  were  reduced,  being  in  extreme  want  of  pro- 
visions, and  great  numbers  of  them  wounded,  judged  it  advis- 
able to  retire  towards  the  sea,  by  a quite  contrary  way  to  that  in 
which  they  then  marched,  and  to  make  directly  for  Camarina 
and  Gela,  instead  of  proceeding  to  Catana,  as  they  first  intend- 
ed. They  set  out  in  the  night,  after  lighting  a great  number 
of  fires.  The  retreat  was  made  in  great  confusion  and  disorder, 

VOL.  in.  F 


66 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


as  generally  happens  to  great  armies  during  the  gloomy  horrors  of 
the  night,  especially  when  the  enemy  is  not  far  off.  However, 
the  van-guard,  commanded  by  Nicias,  went  forward  in  good  or- 
der ; but  above  half  the  rear- guard,  with  Demosthenes  at  their 
head,  quitted  the  main  body,  and  lost  their  way.  On  the  next  day 
the  Syracusans,  who,  on  the  report  of  their  retreat,  had  marched 
with  extraordinary  diligence,  came  up  with  him  about  noon ; 
and  having  surrounded  him  with  their  horse,  they  drove  him  into 
a narrow  place  enclosed  with  a wall,  where  his  soldiers  fought 
like  lions.  Perceiving,  at  the  close  of  the  day,  that  they  were 
oppressed  with  fatigue  and  covered  with  wounds,  they  gave  the 
islanders  leave  to  retire,  which  some  of  them  accepted  ; and 
afterwards  spared  the  lives  of  the  rest,  who  surrendered  at  dis- 
cretion with  Demosthenes,  after  having  stipulated  that  they 
should  not  be  put  to  death,  nor  sentenced  to  perpetual  impri- 
sonment. About  6000  soldiers  surrendered  on  these  conditions. 

Nicias  arrived  on  the  same  evening  at  the  river  Erineus,  and 
passing  it,  encamped  on  a mountain,  where  the  enemy  came 
up  with  him  the  next  day,  and  summoned  him  to  surrender  at 
discretion,  as  Demosthenes  had  done.  Nicias  could  not  per- 
suade himself  at  first,  that  what  they  told  him  concerning  that 
general  was  true,  and  therefore  desired  leave  to  send  some  horse 
for  information.  Upon  their  returning  with  the  news  that  De- 
mosthenes had  really  surrendered  in  that  manner,  Nicias  offered 
to  pay  the  expenses  of  the  war,  upon  condition  that  they  would 
permit  him  to  leave  the  country  with  his  forces,  and  to  give 
as  many  Athenians  for  hostages  as  he  should  be  obliged  to 
pay  talents.  But  the  enemy  rejected  this  proposal  with  dis- 
dain and  insolence,  and  renewed  the  attack.  Nicias,  though 
in  absolute  want  of  all  things,  nevertheless  sustained  the  charge 
the  whole  night,  and  marched  towards  the  river  Asinarus. 
When  they  were  got  to  the  banks  of  it,  the  Syracusans  coming 
up  with  them,  drove  most  of  them  into  the  stream  ; the  rest  al- 
ready plunged  voluntarily  into  it  to  quench  their  thirst.  Here 
the  greatest  and  most  bloody  carnage  was  made,  the  poor 
wretches  being  butchered  without  the  least  pity  as  they  were 
drinking.  Nicias,  finding  all  lost,  and  unable  to  bear  this  dis- 
mal spectacle,  surrendered  at  discretion ; upon  condition  that 
Gylippus  should  discontinue  the  fight,  and  spare  the  rest  of  the 
army.  A great  number  were  killed,  and  more  taken  prisoners, 
so  that  all  Sicily  was  filled  with  them.  The  Athenians  seem 
to  have  been  displeased  with  their  general, u for  surrendering  in 
this  manner  at  discretion ; and  for  this  reason  his  name  was 
omitted  in  a public  monument,  on  which  were  engraved  the 
names  of  those  commanders  who  had  lost  their  lives  in  fighting 
for  their  country. 


Pausan.  1.  l.  p.  56. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


G7 


The  victors  adorned,  with  the  arms  taken  from  the  prisoners, 
the  finest  and  largest  trees  on  the  banks  of  the  river,  and  made 
a kind  of  trophies  of  those  trees  ; and  crowning  themselves  with 
chaplets  of  flowers,  dressing  their  horses  in  the  richest  capa- 
risons, and  cropping  the  manes  of  those  of  their  enemies,  they 
entered  triumphantly  into  Syracuse,  after  having  happily  ter- 
minated the  most  considerable  war  in  which  they  had  ever  been 
engaged  with  the  Greeks  ; and  won,  by  their  strength  and  va- 
lour, a most  signal  and  complete  victory.  The  next  day  a 
council  was  held,  to  deliberate  on  what  was  to  be  done  with 
the  prisoners.  Diodes,  one  of  the  leaders  of  the  greatest  au- 
thority among  the  people,  proposed,  that  all  the  Athenians  who 
were  born  of  free  parents,  and  all  such  Sicilians  as  had  joined 
with  them,  should  be  imprisoned  in  the  quarries,  and  only  two 
measures  of  flour,  and  one  of  water,  given  them  daily  ; that 
the  slaves  and  all  the  allies  should  be  publicly  sold ; and  that 
the  two  Athenian  generals  should  be  first  scourged  with  rods, 
and  afterwards  put  to  death. 

This  last  article  was  exceedingly  disliked  by  all  wise  and 
moderate  Syracusans. x Hermocrates,  who  was  very  famous 
for  his  probity  and  justice,  attempted  to  make  some  remon- 
strances to  the  people,  but  they  would  not  hear  him ; and  the 
shouts  which  echoed  on  all  sides,  prevented  him  from  continu- 
ing his  speech.  At  that  instant,  an  ancient  man,  y venerable 
for  his  age  and  gravity,  who  in  this  war  had  lost  two  sons,  the 
only  heirs  to  his  name  and  estate,  made  his  servants  carry  him 
to  the  tribunal,  and  the  instant  he  appeared  a profound  silence 
ensued.  You  here  behold,  says  he,  an  unfortunate  father,  who 
has  felt  more  than  any  other  Syracusan  the  fatal  effects  of 
this  war,  by  the  death  of  two  sons,  who  formed  all  the  conso- 
lation, and  were  the  only  supports,  of  my  old  age.  I cannot 
indeed  forbear  admiring  their  courage  and  felicity,  in  sacrific- 
ing to  their  country  s ivelfare  a life  which  they  would  one  day 
have  been  deprived  of  by  the  common  course  of  nature : but 
then  I cannot  but  be  strongly  affected  with  the  cruel  wound 
which  their  death  has  made  in  my  heart ; nor  forbear  hating 
and  detesting  the  Athenians,  the  authors  of  this  unhappy  war, 
as  the  murderers  of  my  children.  But,  however,  I cannot 
conceal  one  circumstance , which  is,  that  I am  less  sensible  to  my 
private  affliction,  than  to  the  honour  of  my  country  : and  I 
see  it  ready  to  expose  itself  to  eternal  infamy,  by  the  barba- 
rous advice  which  is  now  given  you.  The  Athenians  indeed 
merit  the  worse  treatment,  and  every  Icind  of  punishment  that 
can  be  inflicted  on  them,  for  so  unjustly  declaring  war  against 
us ; but  have  not  the  gods,  the  avengers  of  crimes,  punished 
them  and  revenged  us  sufficiently  ? When  their  generals  laid 
x Diod.  1.  xiii.  p.  149 — 161.  y Nicolaus. 

F 2 


68 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


down  their  arms  and  surrendered , did  they  not  do  this  in  the 
hopes  of  liaviny  their  lives  spared  ? And  if  we  put  them  to 
death,  will  it  be  possible  for  us  to  avoid  the  just  reproach,  of 
our  having  violated  the  law  of  nations,  and  dishonoured  our 
victory  by  the  most  barbarous  cruelty  ? What  ! will  you  suf- 
fer your  glory  to  be  thus  sullied  in  the  face  of  the  whole 
world ; and  have  it  said,  that  a nation , who  first  dedicated  a 
temple  in  their  city  to  Clemency , found  not  any  in  yours  ? 
Surely  victories  and  triumphs  do  not  give  immortal  glory 
to  a city  ; but  the  exercising  mercy  towards  a vanquished 
enemy,  the  using  moderation  in  the  greatest  prosperity,  and 
fearing  to  offend  the  gods  by  a haughty  and  insolent  pride. 
You  doubtless  have  not  forgotten  that  this  Nicias,  whose  fate 
you  are  going  to  pronounce,  was  the  very  man  who  pleaded 
your  cause  in  the  assembly  of  the  Athenians  ; and  employed  all 
his  credit,  and  the  whole  power  of  his  eloquence,  to  dissuade  liis 
country  from  embarking  in  this  war.  Should  you  therefore 
pronounce  sentence  of  death  on  this  worthy  general,  would  it 
be  a just  reward  for  the  zeal  he  shewed  for  your  interest  ? 
With  regard  to  myself,  death  vwuld  be  less  grievous  to  me  than 
the  sight  of  so  horrid  an  injustice,  committed 
and fellow-ci  tizens . 

The  people  seemed  moved  to  compassion  at  this  speech, 
especially  as,  when  this  venerable  old  man  first  ascended 
the  tribunal,  they  expected  to  hear  him  cry  aloud  for  ven- 
geance on  those  who  had  brought  all  his  calamities  upon  him, 
instead  of  suing  for  their  pardon.  But  the  enemies  of  the 
* Athenians  having  expatiated,  with  vehemence,  on  the  unheard- 
of  cruelties  which  their  republic  had  exercised  on  several  cities 
belonging  to  their  enemies,  and  even  to  their  ancient  allies  ; the 
inveteracy  which  their  commanders  had  shown  against  Syracuse, 
and  the  evils  they  would  have  made  it  suffer,  had  they  b£en 
victorious  ; the  afflictions  and  groans  of  infinite  numbers  of 
Syracusans,  who  bewailed  the  death  of  their  children  and  near 
relations,  whose  manes  could  be  appeased  no  other  way  than 
by  the  blood  of  their  murderers  ; on  these  representations, 
the  people  returned  to  their  sanguinary  resolution,  and  follow- 
ed Diocles’s  advice  in  every  respect.  Gylippus  used  his  ut- 
most endeavours,  but  in  vain,  to  have  Nicias  and  Demosthenes 
given  up  to  him,  (especially  as  he  had  taken  them,)  in  order  to 
carry  them  to  Lacedaemon.  But  his  demand  was  rejected 
with  a haughty  scorn,  and  the  two  generals  were  put  to  death. 

All  wise  and  moderate  men  could  not  forbear  shedding  tears 
at  the  tragical  fate  of  these  two  illustrious  personages ; and  parti- 
cularly for  Nicias,  who,  of  all  men  of  his  time,  seemed  least  to 
merit  so  ignominious  and  untimely  an  end.  When  people 
recollected  the  speeches  and  remonstrances  he  had  made  to 


by  my  countrymen 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


69 


prevent  this  war  ; and,  on  the  other  side,  when  they  considered 
how  high  a regard  he  had  always  retained  for  things  relating 
to  religion  ; the  greatest  part  of  them  were  tempted  to  exclaim 
against  Providence,  when  they  saw  a man,  who  had  ever  shown 
the  highest  reverence  for  the  gods,  and  had  always  exerted 
himself  to  the  utmost  for  their  honour  and  worship,  so  ill  re- 
warded by  them,  and  meeting  with  no  better  fate  than  the  most 
abandoned  wretches.  But  it  is  no  wonder  that  the  calamities 
of  good  men  should  inspire  the  heathens  with  such  thoughts,  and 
make  them  murmur  and  despond  ; since  they  did  not  know  the 
holiness  of  the  Divine  Being,  nor  the  corruption  of  human 
nature. 

The  prisoners  were  shut  up  in  quarries;  ( the  public  prisons 
of  Syracuse ; ) where,  crowded  one  upon  the  other,  they 
suffered  incredible  torments  for  eight  months.  Here  they  were 
for  e ver  exposed  to  the  inclemencies  of  the  weather  ; scorched 
in  the  day-time  by  the  burning  rays  of  the  sun,  or  frozen  in  the 
night  by  the  colds  of  autumn  ; poisoned  by  the  stench  of  their  own 
excrements,  by  the  carcasses  of  those  who  died  of  their  wounds 
and  of  sickness  ; in  fine,  worn  out  by  hunger  and  thirst ; for 
the  daily  allowance  to  each  was  but  a small  measure  of  water, 
and  two  of  meal.  Those  who  were  taken  out  of  this  place  two 
months  after,  in  order  to  be  sold  as  slaves,  (many  of  whom  were 
citizens  who  had  concealed  their  condition,)  found  a less  rigor- 
ous fate.  Their  wisdom,  their  patience,  and  a certain  air  of 
probity  and  modesty,  were  of  great  advantage  to  them ; for 
they  were  either  soon  restored  to  their  liberty,  or  met  with  the 
kindest  and  most  generous  treatment  from  their  masters.  Seve- 
ral of  them  even  owed  the  good  usage  they  met  with  to  Euripi- 
des, the  finest  scenes  of  whose  tragedies  they  repeated  to 
the  Sicilians,  who  were  extremely  fond  of  them  ; so  that  when 
they  returned  to  their  own  country,  they  went  and  saluted  that 
poet  as  their  deliverer ; and  informed  him  of  the  admirable 
effect  wrought  in  their  favour  by  his  verses.. 

The  news  of  the  defeat  being  carried  to  Athens,2  the  citizens 
would  not  believe  it  at  first ; and  were  so  far  from  giving  credit 
to  it,  that  they  sentenced  that  man  to  death  who  first  published 
it.  But  when  it  was  confirmed,  all  the  Athenians  were  seized 
with  the  utmost  consternation ; and,  as  if  themselves  had  not 
decreed  the  war,  they  vented  their  rage  and  resentment  against 
the  orators  who  had  promoted  the  enterprise,  as  well  as  against 
the  soothsayers,  who,  by  their  oracles  of  fictitious  prodigies,  had 
flattered  them  with  the  hopes  of  success.  They  had  never  been 
reduced  to  so  deplorable  a condition  as  at  present,  having  nei- 
ther horse,  foot,  money,  galleys,  nor  mariners in  a word,  they 
were  in  the  deepest  despair,  expecting  every  moment  that  the 
s Thucyd.  1.  viii.  p.  551 — 553.  Plut.  de  Garrulit.  p.  509. 


70 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


enemy,  elate  with  so  great  a victory,  and  strengthened  by  the 
revolt  of  the  allies,  would  come  and  invade  Athens,  both  by  sea 
and  land,  with  all  the  forces  of  Peloponnesus.  Cicero  had 
reason  to  observe, a speaking  of  the  battles  in  the  harbour  of  Sy- 
racuse, that  it  was  there  that  the  troops  of  Athens,  as  well  as 
their  galleys,  were  ruined  and  sunk ; and  that,  in  this  harbour, 
the  power  and  glory  of  the  Athenians  were  miserably  ship- 
wrecked. 

The  Athenians  however  did  not  suffer  themselves  to  be  wholly 
dejected,  and  resumed  courage.  They  now  resolved  to  raise 
money  on  all  sides,  and  to  import  timber  for  building  of  ships, 
in  order  to  awe  the  allies,  and  particularly  the  inhabitants  of  the 
island  of  Euboea.  They  retrenched  all  superfluous  expenses, 
and  established  a new  council  of  ancient  men,  who  were  to  weigh 
and  examine  all  affairs  before  they  should  be  proposed  to  the 
people.  In  fine,  they  omitted  nothing  which  might  be  of  service 
in  the  present  conjuncture  ; the  alarm  in  which  they  were,  and 
their  common  danger,  obliging  every  individual  to  be  attentive 
to  the  necessities  of  the  state,  and  docile  to  all  advice  that  might 
promote  its  interests. 


CHAP.  II. 

Sect.  I.  Consequences  of  the  defeat  of  the  Athenians  in  Sicily.  Revolt  of 
the  allies.  Alcibiades  grows  into  great  power  with  Tissaphernes. 

Nineteenth  and  twentieth  years  of  the  War. 

The  defeat  of  the  Athenians13  before  Syracuse 
Ant.^T,  C?4I3.  was  cause  of  great  movements  throughout  all 
Greece.  The  states,  who  had  not  yet  joined 
either  side,  and  waited  to  be  determined  by  the  event,  resolved 
to  declare  against  them.  The  allies  of  the  Lacedaemonians  be- 
lieved, that  the  time  was  come  to  deliver  them  for  ever  from 
the  expenses  of  a war  which  lay  very  heavy  upon  them,  by  the 
speedy  and  final  ruin  of  Athens.  Those  of  the  Athenians,  who 
followed  them  only  out  of  constraint,  seeing  no  appearance  of 
any  future  resource  for  that  republic,  after  the  dreadful  blow 
it  had  received,  thought  it  best  to  take  advantage  of  so  favour- 
able a conjuncture  for  throwing  off  the  yoke  of  dependence,  and 
resuming  their  liberty.  Dispositions  of  this  kind  inspired  the 
Lacedaemonians  with  great  views,  which  were  supported  by  the 
hopes  they  had  conceived,  that  their  Sicilian  allies  would  join 

a Hie  primum  opes  illius  civitatis  victse,  comminutse,  depressaeque  sunt : 
in  hoc  portu  Atheniensium  nobilitatis,  imperii,  gloriae  naufragium  factum  exis- 
timatur.  Cic.  in  Verr.  7.  n.  97*  • h Thucyd.  L viii.  p.  553. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS.  71 

them  in  the  sprin  g with  a naval  army,  augmented  by  the  ruin  of 
the  Athenian  fleet. 

In  fact,c  the  people  of  Euboea,  Chio,  and  Lesbos,  with  seve- 
ral others,  gave  the  Lacedaemonians  to  understand,  that  they 
were  ready  to  quit  the  party  of  the  Athenians  if  they  would  take 
them  under  their  protection.  At  the  same  time  came  deputies 
from  Tissaphernes  and  Pharnabazus.  The  first  was  governor 
of  Lydia  and  Ionia,  the  other -of  the  Hellespont.  Those  vice- 
roys of  Darius  wanted  neither  application  nor  zeal  for  the  inte- 
rest of  their  master.  Tissaphernes,  promising  to  furnish  the 
Lacedaemonians  with  all  the  necessary  expenses  for  their  troops, 
pressed  them  to  arm  directly,  and  to  join  him  ; because  the 
Athenian  fleet  prevented  him  from  levying  the  usual  contribu- 
tions in  his  province ; and  had  put  it  out  of  his  power  to  remit 
those  of  the  preceding  years  to  the  king.  He  hoped  besides 
with  that  powerful  aid  to  get  into  his  hands  with  more  ease  a 
certain  nobleman  who  had  revolted  in  Caria,  and  whom  he  had 
the  king’s  orders  to  send  to  him  dead  or  alive.  This  was 
Amorges,  a bastard  of  Pissuthnes.  Pharnabazus  at  the  same 
time  demanded  ships  to  draw  off  the  cities  of  the  Hellespont 
from  their  subjection  to  the  Athenians  ; who  prevented  him  also 
from  levying  the  tributes  of  his  government. 

The  Lacedaemonians  thought  it  proper  to  begin  by  satisfying 
Tissaphernes  ; and  the  influence  of  Alcibiades  contributed  very 
much  to  the  taking  that  resolution.  He  embarked  with  Chal- 
cidaeus  for  Chio,  which  took  up  arms  upon  their  arrival,  and 
declared  for  the  Lacedaemonians.  Upon  the  news  of  this  re- 
volt, the  Athenians  resolved  to  take  the  1000  talents  out  of  the 
treasury, d which  had  been  deposited  there  from  the  beginning 
of  the  war,  after  having  repealed  the  decree  which  prohibited 
it.  Miletus  also  revolted  soon  after.  Tissaphernes,  having 
joined  his  troops  with  those  of  Sparta,  attacked  and  took  the 
city  of  Iasus,  in  which  Amorges  had  shut  himself  up,e  who  was 
taken  alive  and  sent  into  Persia.  That  governor  gave  a month’s 
pay  to  the  whole  army,  at  a drachma,  or  tenpence  a day  to 
each  soldier,  observing,  that  he  had  orders  to  give  them  only 
half  that  sum  for  the  future. 

It  was  at  this  time  that  Chalcidaeus  made  a treaty  with  Tis- 
saphernes in  the  name  of  the  Lacedaemonians/  of  which  one  of 
the  principal  articles  was,  that  all  the  country  which  had  been 
subject  to  the  king  or  his  predecessors  should  remain  in  his 
hands.  It  was  renewed  some  time  after  by  Theramenes, 
another  general  of  the  Lacedaemonians,  with  some  small  altera- 
tions. But  when  this  treaty  came  to  be  examined  at  Sparta, 
it  was  found,  that  too  great  concessions  had  been  made  to  the 

c Thucyd.  1.  viii.  p.  555 — 558.  d Three  millions  of  livres. 

e Thucyd.  1.  viii.  p.  568.  f Idem.  p.  561 — 571,  572 — 576. 


72 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


king  of  Persia,  in  giving  up  all  the  places  held  by  himself  or  his 
ancestors,  as  this  was  to  make  him  master  of  the  greatest  part 
of  Greece,  of  Thessaly,  Locris,  and  the  whole  country  as  far  as 
Boeotia,  without  mentioning  the  islands  ; from  whence  the 
Lacedaemonians  would  appear  rather  to  have  enslaved  Greece, 
than  re-established  its  liberty.  It  was  therefore  necessary  to 
make  farther  alterations  in  it,  with  which  Tissapbernes  and  the 
other  governors  made  great  difficulties  to  comply.”  A new 
treaty  was  however  concluded,  as  we  shall  see  in  the  sequel. 

In  the  mean  time,  several  cities  of  Ionia  declared  for  Lace- 
daemon, to  which  Alcibiades  contributed  very  much.  Agis,s 
whb  was  already  his  enemy  in  consequence  of  the  injury  he  had 
received  from  him,  could  not  endure  the  glory  he  had  acquired  ; 
for  nothing  was  done  without  the  advice  of  Alcibiades,  and  it 
was  generally  said,  that  the  success  of  all  enterprises  was  owing 
to  him.  The  most  powerful  and  ambitious  of  the  Spartans, 
from  the  same  sentiments  of  jealousy,  looked  upon  him  with  an 
evil  eye,  and  at  length,  by  their  intrigues,  obliged  the  principal 
magistrates  to  send  orders  into  Ionia  for  putting  him  to  death. 
Alcibiades  being  secretly  apprised  of  this  order,  did  not  discon- 
tinue his  services  to  the  Lacedaemonians,  but  kept  himself  so 
well  upon  his  guard,  that  he  avoided  all  the  snares  which  were 
laid  for  him. 

For  his  better  security  he  threw  himself  into 
Aru  j1  c35943U  the  protection  of  Tissaphernes,  the  great  king’s 
governor  at  Sardis,  and  was  not  long  without 
seeing  himself  in  the  highest  degree  of  credit  and  authority  in 
the  court  of  the  barbarian.  For  this  Persian,  who  was  full  of 
fraud  and  artifice,  a great  friend  to  knaves  and  bad  men,  and  set 
no  value  upon  simplicity  and  integrity,  infinitely  admired  the 
versatility  of  Alcibiades,  the  ease  with  which  he  assumed  all 
kind  of  manners  and  characters,  and  his  great  ability  in  the  .con- 
duct of  affairs.  And  indeed  there  was  no  heart  so  hard,  or 
temper  so  untractable,  as  to  hold  out  against  the  graces  and 
charms  of  his  conversation  and  intimacy.  Even  those,  who 
feared  and  envied  him  most,  enchanted  in  a manner  by  his 
affable  air  and  engaging  behaviour,  could  not  dissemble  the 
infinite  satisfaction  they  felt  in  seeing  and  conversing  with  him. 

Tissaphernes  therefore,  though  otherwise  very  haughty  and 
brutal,  and  the  man  who  of  all  the  Persians  most  hated  the 
Greeks,  was  so. much  taken  with  the  complaisance  and  insinua- 
tions of  Alcibiades,  that  he  gave  himself  wholly  up  to  him,  and 
flattered  him  more  than  he  was  flattered  by  him  : insomuch  that 
he  gave  the  name  of  Alcibiades  to  the  finest  and  most  delightful 
of  his  gardens,  as  well  from  the  abundance  of  its  fountains  and 
canals,  and  the  verdure  of  its  groves,  as  the  surprising  beauty 
$ Idem.  p.  577— 579*  Plut.  in  Alcib.  p.  204.  Diod.  p.  164,  165. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


73 


of  its  retreats  and  solitudes,  which  art  and  nature  seemed  to  vie 
with  each  other  in  embellishing,  and  wherein  a more  than  royal 
magnificence  was  displayed. 

Alcibiades,  who  found  there  was  no  longer  any  safety  for  him 
in  the  party  of  the  Spartans,  and  who  always  apprehended  the 
resentment  of  Agis,  began  to  do  them  ill  offices  with  Tissapher- 
nes,  to  prevent  his  aiding  them  with  all  his  forces,  and  ruining 
the  Athenians  entirely.  He  had  no  difficulty  in  bringing  the 
Persians  into  his  views,  which  were  conformable  to  his  master’s 
interests,  and  to  the  orders  he  had  received  from  him.  For 
ever  since  the  famous  treaty  concluded  under  Cimon,  the  kings 
of  Persia,  not  daring  to  attack  the  Greeks  with  open  force,  took 
other  measures  to  ruin  them.  They  endeavoured  covertly  to  excite 
divisions  amongst  them,  and  to  foment  troubles  by  considerable 
sums  of  money,  which  they  found  means  to  convey  sometimes  to 
Athens,  and  sometimes  to  Sparta.  They  applied  themselves  so 
successfully  to  keep  up  a balance  of  power  between  those  two 
republics,  that  the  one  could  never  entirely  reduce  the  other. 
They  granted  them  only  slight  aids,  that  could  effect  nothing 
decisive,  in  order  to  undermine  them  insensibly,  and  exhaust 
both  parties  gradually,  by  weakening  them  by  the  means  of  one 
another. 

It  is  in  this  kind  of  conduct,  that  policy  makes  the  ability  of 
ministers  consist ; who  from  the  recess  of  their  cabinets,  with- 
out noise  or  commotion,  without  any  great  expenses,  or  setting 
numerous  armies  on  foot,  succeed  in  weakening  the  states  whose 
power  gives  them  umbrage,  either  by  sowing  domestic  divisions 
among  them,  or  by  promoting  the  jealousy  of  their  neighbours, 
in  order  to  set  them  at  variance  with  each  other. 

We  must  confess,  however,  that  this  kind  of  policy  gives  us 
no  very  favourable  idea  of  the  kings  of  Persia.  To  reduce 
themselves,  powerful  as  they  were,  to  such  mean,  obscure,  and 
indirect  measures,  was  to  confess  their  weakness,  and  their  in- 
ability, as  they  believed,  to  attack  their  enemies  with  open  force, 
and  to  reduce  them  by  honourable  means.  Besides,  is  it  con- 
sistent with  justice  to  employ  such  methods  towards  states, 
against  whom  there  is  no  foundation  of  complaint,  who  live  in 
Jr  peace  under  the  faith  of  treaties,  and  whose  sole  crime  is  the 
apprehension  of  their  being  one  day  in  a condition  to  do  hurt  ? 
Is  it  lawful  by  secret  bribes,  to  lay  snares  for  the  fidelity  of 
subjects,  and  to  be  the  accomplice  of  their  treasons,  by  putting 
arms  into  their  hands  against  their  native  country  ? 

What  glory  and  renown  would  not  the  kings  of  Persia  have 
acquired,  if,  content  with  the  vast  and  rich  dominions  which 
Providence  had  given  them,  they  had  employed  their  good  offi- 
ces, power,  and  even  treasures,  to  reconcile  the  neighbouring 
states  with  each  other ; to  remove  their  jealousies,  to  prevent 


74 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


injustice  and  oppression  ; and  if,  feared  and  honoured  by  them 
all,  they  had  made  themselves  the  mediators  of  their  differences, 
the  security  of  their  peace,  and  the  guarantee  of  their  treaties. 
Can  any  conquest,  however  great,  be  compared  with  such 
glory  ? 

Tissaphernes  acted  upon  other  principles,  and  had  no 
thought  but  of  preventing  the  Greeks  from  being  in  a condition 
to  attack  the  Persians,  their  common  enemy.  He  therefore 
entered  freely  into  the  views  of  Alcibiades,  and  at  the  same  time 
that  he  declared  himself  openly  for  the  Lacedaemonians,  did 
not  fail  to  assist  the  Athenians  underhand,  and  by  a thousand 
secret  methods ; deferring  the  payment  of  the  Lacedaemonian 
fleet,  and  retarding  the  arrival  of  the  Phoenician  ships,  of  which 
he  had  long  kept  them  in  hopes.  He  omitted  no  occasion  of  giv- 
ing Alcibiades  new  marks  of  his  friendship  and  esteem,  which 
rendered  that  general  equally  considerable  to  both  parties. 
The  Athenians,  who  had  sadly  experienced  the  effects  of  having 
drawn  his  anger  upon  them,  were  not  now  to  repent  their  pass- 
ing sentence  of  condemnation  upon  him.  Alcibiades  also  on 
his  side,  extremely  sorry  to  see  the  Athenians  in  so  mournful 
a situation,  began  to  fear  that  if  the  city  of  Athens  were  to  be 
entirely  ruined,  he  might  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  Spartans, 
who  mortally  hated  him. 

SECT.  II. 

The  return  of  Alcibiades  to  Athens  negotiated  upon  condition  of  establishing 

the  aristocratical,  in  the  room  of  the  democratical  government.  Tissapher- 
nes concludes  a new  treaty  with  the  Lacedaemonians. 

The  Athenians  were  intent  upon  nothing  so  much  as  Samos,h 
where  they  had  all  their  forces.  From  thence  with  their  fleet 
they  reduced  all  the  cities  that  had  abandoned  them  under  their 
obedience,  kept  the  rest  in  their  duty,  and  found  themselves  still 
in  a condition  to  make  head  against  their  enemies,  over  whom 
they  had  obtained  several  advantages.  But  they  were  afraid 
of  Tissaphernes,  and  the  150  Phoenician  ships  which  he  hourly 
expected  ; and  rightly  perceived  that,  if  so  powerful  a fleet 
should  join  the  enemy,  there  was  no  longer  any  safety  for  their 
city.  Alcibiades,  who  was  well  informed  of  all  that  passed 
among  the  Athenians,  sent  secretly  to  the  principal  of  them  at 
Samos,  to  sound  their  sentiments,  and  to  let  them  know,  that 
he  was  not  averse  to  returning  to  Athens,  provided  the  admin- 
istration of  the  republic  were  put  into  the  hands  of  the  great 
and  powerful,  and  not  left  to  the  populace,  who  had  expelled 
him.  Some  of  the  principal  officers  went  from  Samos, 
with  design  to  concert  with  him  the  proper  measures  for  the 
h Thucyd.  1.  viii.  p.  579 — 597*  Plut.  in  Alcib.  p.  204 — 206. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


75 


success  of  that  undertaking.  He  promised  to  procure  the 
Athenians  not  only  the  favour  of  Tissaphernes,  but  of  the  king 
himself,  upon  condition  they  would  abolish  the  democracy  or 
popular  government ; because  the  king  would  place  more  con- 
fidence in  the  engagements  of  the  nobility,  than  upon  those  of 
the  inconstant  and  capricious  multitude. 

The  deputies  lent  a willing  ear  to  these  proposals,  and  con- 
ceived great  hopes  of  exonerating  themselves  from  part  of  the 
public  impositions,  because  as  they  were  the  richest  of  the  peo- 
ple, the  burden  lay  heaviest  upon  them,  and  of  making  their 
country  triumph  after  having  possessed  themselves  of  the  govern- 
ment. At  their  return,  they  began  by  bringing  over  such  as 
were  most  proper  to  share  in  their  design ; after  which  they 
caused  a report  to  be  spread  amongst  the  troops,  that  the  king 
was  inclined  to  declare  in  favour  of  the  Athenians,  and  to  pay 
the  army,  upon  condition  that  Alcibiades  were  reinstated,  and 
the  popular  government  abolished.  That  proposal  surprised 
the  soldiers,  and  was  generally  rejected  at  first ; but  the  charm 
of  gain,  and  the  hope  of  change  to  their  advantage,  soon  soft- 
ened what  was  harsh  and  offensive  in  it,  and  even  made  them 
ardently  desire  the  recall  of  Alcibiades. 

Phrynicus,  one  of  their  generals,  rightly  judging  that  Alci- 
biades cared  as  little  for  an  oligarchy  as  he 1 did  for  the  demo- 
cracy ^ and  that  in  decrying  the  people’s  conduct,  he  had  no 
other  view  than  to  acquire  the  favour  and  confidence  of  the  no- 
bility for  his  own  re-establishment,  had  the  boldness  to  oppose 
the  resolutions,  which  were  about  to  take  place.  He  repre- 
sented, that  the  change  they  meditated  might  very  probably 
excite  a civil  war  to  the  ruin  of  the  state  ; that  it  was  very  un- 
likely that  the  king  of  Persia  would  prefer  the  alliance  of  the 
Athenians  to  that  of  the  Spartans,  which  was  so  much  more 
advantageous  to  him ; that  this  change  would  not  retain  the 
allies  in  their  duty,  nor  bring  over  those  who  had  renounced  it, 
as  they  would  persist  in  preferring  their  liberty  ; that  the  go- 
vernment of  a small  number  of  rich  and  powerful  persons  would 
not  be  more  favourable  to  either  the  citizens  or  allies  than  that 
of  the  people,  because  ambition  was  the  great  cause  of  all  mis- 
fortunes in  a republic,  and  the  rich  were  the  sole  promoters  of 
all  troubles  for  the  aggrandizing  of  themselves  ; that  a state 
suffered  more  oppressions  and  violences  under  the  rule  of  the 
nobility  than  under  that  of  the  people,  whose  authority  kept  the 
former  within  due  bounds,  and  was  the  asylum  of  such  as 
they  desired  to  oppress  ; that  the  allies  were  too  well  acquainted 
with  these  truths  from  their  own  experience,  to  want  any  les- 
sons upon  the  subject. 

These  remonstrances,  wise  as  they  were,  had  no  effect.  Pi- 
sander  was  sent  to  Athens  with  some  of  the  same  faction,  to  pro- 


76 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


pose  the  return  of  Alcibiades,  an  alliance  with  Tissaphernes,  and 
the  abolition  of  the  democracy.  They  represented,  that,  by 
changing  the  government,  and  recalling  Alcibiades,  Athens 
might  obtain  a powerful  aid  from  the  king  of  Persia,  which  would 
be  a certain  means  to  triumph  over  Sparta.  Upon  this  propo- 
sal great  numbers  exclaimed  against  it,  and  especially  the  ene- 
mies of  Alcibiades.  They  alleged,  amongst  other  reasons,  the 
imprecations  pronounced  by  the  priests,  and  all  the  other 
ministers  of  religion,  against  him,  and  even  against  such  as 
should  propose  to  recall  him.  But  Pisander,  advancing  into 
the  midst  of  the  assembly,  demanded,  whether  they  knew  any 
other  means  to  save  the  republic  in  the  deplorable  condition  to 
which  it  was  reduced  ; and  as  it  was  admitted  there  was  none, 
he  added,  that  the  preservation  of  the  state  was  the  question,, 
and  not  the  authority  of  the  laws,  which  might  be  provided  for 
in  the  sequel : but  at  present  there  was  no  other  method  for  the 
attainment  of  the  king’s  friendship  and  that  of  Tissaphernes. 
Though  this  change  was  very  offensive  to  the  people,  they  gave 
their  consent  to  it  at  length,  with  the  hope  of  re-establishing  the 
democracy  hereafter,  as  Pisander  had  promised ; and  they  decreed 
that  he  should  go  with  ten  more  deputies  to  treat  with  Alcibia- 
des and  Tissaphernes,  and  that  in  the  mean  time  Phrynicus 
should  be  recalled,  and  another  general  appointed  to  command 
the  fleet  in  his  stead. 

The  deputies  did  not  find  Tissaphernes  in  so  good  a disposi- 
tion as  they  had  been  made  to  hope.  He  was  afraid  of  the  La- 
cedaemonians, but  was  unwilling  to  render  the  Athenians  too 
powerful.  It  was  his  policy,  by  the  advice  jof  Alcibiades,  to 
leave  the  two  parties  always  at  war,  in  order  to  weaken  and  con- 
sume them  by  each  other.  He  therefore  made  great  difficulties. 
He  demanded  at  first,  that  the  Athenians  should  abandon  all 
Ionia  to  him,  and  afterwards  insisted  upon  their  adding  the 
neighbouring  islands.  Those  demands  being  complied  with,  he 
farther  required,  in  a third  interview,  permission  to  fit  out  a 
fleet,  and  to  cruise  in  the  Grecian  seas ; which  had  been  expressly 
provided  against  in  the  celebrated  treaty  concluded  with  Ar- 
taxerxes.  The  deputies  thereupon  broke  up  the  conferences 
with  indignation,  and  perceived  that  Alcibiades  had  imposed 
upon  them. 

Tissaphernes,  without  loss  of  time,  concluded  a new  treaty 
with  the  Lacedaemonians  ; in  which,  what  had  displeased  in  the 
two  preceding  treaties  was  retrenched.  The  article,  which 
yielded  to  Persia  the  countries  in  general,  that  had  been  in  the 
actual  possession  of  the  reigning  king  Darius,  or  his  predeces- 
sors, was  limited  to  the  provinces  of  Asia.  The  king  en- 
gaged to  defray  all  expenses  of  the  Lacedaemonian  fleet,  in  the 
condition  it  then  was,  till  the  arrival  of  that  of  Persia ; after 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


77 


which  they  were  to  support  it  themselves  ; unless  they  should 
choose  that  the  king  should  pay  it,  to  be  reimbursed  after  the 
conclusion  of  the  war.  It  was  farther  agreed,  that  they  should 
unite  their  forces,  and  continue  the  war,  or  make  peace,  by 
common  consent.  Tissaphernes,  to  keep  his  promise,  sent 
for  the  fleet  of  Phoenicia.  This  treaty  was  made  in  the  ele- 
venth year  of  Darius,  and  the  twentieth  of  the  Peloponnesian  war. 

SECT.  III. 

The  whole  authority  of  the  Athenian  government  having  been  vested  in  400 
persons,  they  make  a tyrannical  abuse  of  their  power,  and  are  deposed. 
Alcibiades  is  recalled.  After  various  accidents,  and  several  considerable 
victories,  he  returns,  in  triumph,  to  Athens,  and  is  appointed  general- 
issimo. He  causes  the  great  mysteries  to  be  celebrated,  and  departs  with 
the  fleet. 

From  the  twenty-first  to  the  twenty-fifth  year  of  the  War . 

Pisander,'  at  his  return  to  Athens,  found  the  change  he  had 
proposed  at  his  setting  out  much  forwarded,  to  which  he  soon 
after  put  the  last  hand.  To  give  a form  to  this  new  govern- 
ment, he  caused  ten  commissioners  with  absolute  power  to  be 
appointed,  who  were  however  at  a certain  fixed  time  to  give 
the  people  an  account  of  what  they  had  done.  At  the  ex- 
piration of  that  term,  the  general  assembly  was  summoned, 
wherein  their  first  resolution  was,  that  every  one  should  be 
admitted  to  make  such  proposals  as  he  thought  fit,  without  being 
liable  to  any  accusation  of  infringing  the  law,  or  to  any  penalty 
in  consequence.  It  was  afterwards  decreed,  that  a new  coun- 
cil should  be  formed,  with  full  power  to  administer  the  public 
affairs  and  to  elect  new  magistrates.  For  this  purpose  five 
presidents  were  established,  who  nominated  100  persons,  in- 
cluding themselves.  Each  of  these  chose  and  associated  three 
more  at  his  own  pleasure,  which  made  in  all  400,  in  whom  an 
absolute  power  was  lodged.  But  to  amuse  the  people,  and  to 
console  them  with  a shadow  of  popular  government,  whilst  they 
instituted  a real  oligarchy,  it  was  said  that  the  Four  Hun- 
dred should  call  a council  of  5000  citizens  to  assist  them 
when  they  should  judge  it  necessary.  The  council  and  assem- 
blies of  the  people  were  held  as  usual ; nothing  was  done  however 
but  by  the  order  of  the  Four  Hundred.  The  people  of  Athens 
were  deprived  in  this  manner  of  their  liberty,  which  they  had  en- 
joyed almost  a hundred  years,  after  having  abolished  the  tyranny 
of  the  Pisistratidae. 

This  decree  being  passed  without  opposition,  after  the  sepa- 
ration of  the  assembly,  the  Four  Hundred,  armed  with  daggers, 
and  attended  by  120  young  men,  whom  they  made  use  of 
when  any  execution  required  it,  entered  the  senate,  and  com- 
* Thucyd.  1.  viii.  p.  590.  594.  Plut.  in  Alcib.  p.  205. 


78 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


pelled  the  senators  to  retire,  after  having  paid  them  the  arrears 
due  upon  their  salaries.  They  elected  new  magistrates  out 
of  their  own  body,  observing  the  usual  ceremonies  upon  such 
occasions.  They  did  not  think  proper  to  recall  those  who 
were  banished,  lest  they  should  he  obliged  to  authorize  the 
return  of  Alcibiades,  of  whose  uncontrollable  spirit  they  were 
apprehensive,  and  who  would  soon  have  made  himself  master 
of  the  people.  Abusing  their  power  in  a tyrannical  manner, 
some  they  put  to  death,  others  they  banished,  confiscating  their 
estates  with  impunity.  All  who  ventured  to  oppose  this  change, 
or  even  to  complain  of  it,  were  butchered  upon  false  pretexts ; 
and  those  would  have  met  with  a bad  reception  who  demanded 
justice  of  the  murderers.  The  Four  Hundred,  soon  after  their 
establishment,  sent  ten  deputies  to  Samos  to  gain  the  concur- 
rence of  the  army. 

All  that  had  passed  at  Athens  was  already  known  there,k 
and  the  news  had  enraged  the  soldiers  to  the  highest  degree. 
They  deposed  immediately  several  of  their  chiefs,  whom  they 
suspected,  and  put  others  into  their  places,  of  whom  Thrasylus 
and  Thrasybulus  were  the  principal,  and  in  highest  credit. 
Alcibiades  was  recalled,  and  chosen  generalissimo  by  the  whole 
army.  They  were  desirous  to  sail  directly  for  Pirmeus  to 
attack  the  tyrants.  But  he  opposed  it,  representing  that  it 
was  necessary  he  should  first  have  an  interview  with  Tissa- 
phernes,  and  that  as  they  had  chosen  him  general,  they  might 
rely  upon  him  for  the  care  of  the  war.  He  set  out  immediately 
for  Miletus.  His  principal  design  was  to  show  himself  to 
that  governor  with  all  the  power  with  which  he  had  been  in- 
vested, and  to  let  him  see  that  he  was  in  condition  to  do  him 
much  good  or  much  harm.  The  consequence  of  which  was, 
that  as  he  had  kept  the  Athenians  in  awe  by  Tissaphernes,  he 
now  awed  Tissaphernes  no  less  by  the  Athenians  ; and  we 
shall  see  in  the  sequel  that  this  interview  was  not  unnecessary. 

Alcibiades,  upon  his  return  to  Samos,  found  the  army  more 
inflamed  than  at  first.  The  deputies  of  the  Four  Hundred  had 
arrived  there  during  his  absence,  and  had  endeavoured  in  vain 
to  justify  the  alteration  made  at  Athens  to  the  soldiery.  Their 
discourses,  which  were  often  interrupted  by  tumultuous  cries, 
served  only  to  exasperate  them  more,  and  they  earnestly  demandr 
ed  to  be  led  against  the  tyrants  directly.  Alcibiades  did  not 
act,  on  this  occasion,  as  every  body  else  would  have  done,  in 
consequence  of  having  been  raised  to  so  high  a dignity  by  the 
favour  of  the  people : for  he  did  not  think  himself  obliged  to 
an  absolute  and  implicit  compliance  with  their  inclinations  in 
every  thing,  though,  from  an  exile  and  fugitive,  they  had  made 
him  general  of  so  great  a fleet,  and  so  numerous  and  formida- 
k Thucyd.  1.  viii.  p.  595—604.  Plut.  in  Alcib.  p.  205.  Diod.  p.  165. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


70 


ble  an  army : but,  as  a statesman  and  great  politician,  he  be- 
lieved it  his  duty  to  oppose  the  blind  fury  that  hurried  them 
on  into  evident  danger,  and  to  prevent  them  from  committing 
a fault  which  must  have  been  attended  with  their  utter  ruin. 
This  wise  steadiness  preserved  the  city  of  Athens.  For  had 
they  sailed  thither  at  first,  the  enemy  would  have  made  them- 
selves masters  of  Ionia,  the  Hellespont,  and  all  the  islands, 
without  resistance ; whilst  the  Athenians,  by  carrying  the  war 
into  their  own  city,  would  have  exhausted  their  whole  forces 
against  one  another.  He  prevented  the  deputies  from  being 
ill-treated,  and  dismissed  them ; saying,  that  he  did  not  object 
to  the  5000  citizens  having  the  supreme  authority  in  the  re- 
public, but  that  it  was  necessary  to  depose  the  Four  Hundred, 
and  to  re-establish  the  senate. 

During  these  commotions,1  the  Phoenician  fleet,  which  the 
Lacedaemonians  impatiently  expected,  approached,  and  news 
came  that  it  was  arrived  at  Aspendus.ra  Tissaphernes  went  to 
meet  it ; nobody  being  able  to  divine  the  true  cause  of  that 
journey.  He  had  sent  for  that  fleet  at  first  to  flatter  the  Lace- 
daemonians with  the  hopes  of  so  powerful  an  aid,  and  to  put  a 
stop  to  their  progress  by  making  them  wait  its  arrival.  It 
was  believed  that  his  journey  had  the  same  motive ; to  prevent 
their  doing  any  thing  in  his  absence,  and  that  their  soldiers  and 
mariners  might  disband  for  want  of  pay.  However  this  might 
be,  he  did  not  bring  the  fleet  with  him,  from  the  view,  no  doubt, 
of  keeping  the  balance  equal,  which  was  the  king  of  Persia’s 
interest,  and  of  exhausting  both  parties  by  the  length  of  the 
war.  For  it  would  have  been  very  easy  for  him  to  have  put 
an  end  to  it  by  the  assistance  of  this  additional  fleet,  as  the 
Lacedaemonians  alone  were  already  as  strong  at  sea  as  the 
Athenians.  His  frivolous  excuse,  of  its  not  being  complete, 
which  he  alleged  as  the  reason  for  not  bringing  it  with  him, 
sufficiently  shows  that  he  had  other  motives  for  his  conduct. 

The  return  of  the  deputies  without  success,"  who  had  been 
sent  to  Samos,  and  the  answer  of  Alcibiades,  excited  new 
troubles  in  the  city,  and  gave  a mortal  wound  to  the  authority 
of  the  Four  Hundred.  The  tumult  increased  exceedingly 
when  news  was  brought  that  the  enemy,  after  having  beaten 
the  fleet  which  had  been  sent  by  the  Four  Hundred  to  the  aid 
of  Euboea,  had  made  themselves  masters  of  the  island.  Athens 
was  in  the  highest  terror  and  consternation  on  this  account. 
For  neither  the  defeat  in  Sicily,  nor  any  other  preceding  it, 
were  of  such  importance  as  the  loss  of  this  island,  from  whence 
the  city  received  considerable  supplies,  and  almost  all  its  pro- 

1 Thucyd.  1.  viii.  p.  604.  606.  m A city  of  Pamphylia. 

n Thucyd.  1.  viii.  p.  607 — 614.  Plut.  in  Alcib.  p.  206 — 210.  Diod.  p.  171, 
172,  & 175,  177,  & 189—192. 


80 


IlSTORY  OF  THE 


visions.  If  in  the  confusion  in  which  Athens  was  at  that  time 
between  two  factions,  the  victorious  fleet  had  fallen  upon  the 
port,  as  it  might  have  done,  the  army  of  Samos  would  have 
been  indispensably  obliged  to  have  flown  to  the  defence  of  their 
country ; and  then  the  republic  would  have  had  only  the  city 
of  Athens  remaining  of  all  its  dominions.  For  the  Hellespont, 
Ionia,  and  all  the  islands,  seeing  themselves  abandoned,  would 
have  been  reduced  to  choose  a side,  and  go  over  to  the  Pelo- 
ponnesians. But  the  enemy  were  not  capable  of  such  great 
designs ; and  this  was  not  the  first  time  that  the  Lacedaemonians 
had  been  observed  to  have  lost  their  advantages  by  their  natural 
slowness  and  procrastination. 

Athens  without  delay  deposed  the  Four  Hundred,  as  the 
authors  of  all  the  troubles  and  divisions  under  which  they 
groaned.  Alcibiades  was  recalled  by  unanimous  consent,  and 
earnestly  solicited  to  make  all  possible  haste  to  the  assistance 
of  the  city.  But  judging,  that  if  he  returned  immediately  to 
Athens,  he  should  owe  his  recall  to  the,  compassion  and  favour 
of  the  people,  he  resolved  to  render  his  return  glorious  and 
triumphant,  and  to  deserve  it  by  some  considerable  exploit. 

For  this  purpose,  leaving  Samos  with  a small 
Ant  cf 409  number  of  ships,  he  cruised  about  the  islands  of 

Cos  and  Cnidos  ; and  having  learnt  that  Minda- 
rus,  the  Spartan  admiral,  was  sailing  towards  the  Hellespont 
with  his  whole  fleet,  and  that  the  Athenians  were  in  pursuit  of 
him,  he  steered  that  way  with  the  utmost  diligence  to  support 
them,  and  arrived  happily  with  his  eighteen  vessels,  at  the  time 
that  the  fleets  were  engaged  near  Abydos  in  a battle,  which 
lasted  till  night,  without  any  advantage  on  either  side.  His 
arrival  gave  the  Spartans  new  courage  at  first,  who  believed 
him  still  their  friend,  and  dispirited  the  Athenians.  But  Alci- 
biades,  hanging  out  the  Athenian  flag  in  the  admiral’s  galley, 
fell  upon  the  Lacedaemonians,  who  were  strongest,  and  were 
vigorously  pursuing  the  Athenians,  put  them  to  flight,  drove 
them  ashore ; and,  animated  by  his  success,  sunk  their  vessels, 
and  made  a great  slaughter  of  the  soldiers,  who  had  thrown 
themselves  into  the  sea  to  save  themselves  by  swimming ; though 
Pharnabazus  spared  no  pains  to  assist  them,  and  had  advanced 
at  the  head  of  his  troops  to  the  coast,  to  favour  their  flight,  and 
to  save  their  ships.  The  Athenians,  after'*having  taken  thirty 
of  their  galleys,  and  retaken  those  they  had  lost,  erected  a 
trophy* 

Alcibiades,  vain  of  his  success,  had  the  ambi- 
Ant  C^408  ti°n  to  desire  to  appear  before  Tissaphernes,  in 
this  triumphant  equipage,  and  to  make  him  rich 
presents,  as  well  in  his  own,  as  in  the  name  of  the  people  of 
Athens.  He  went  to  him  therefore  with  a magnificent  retinue, 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


81 


worthy  of  the  general  of  the  Athenians.  But  he  did  not  meet 
with  the  favourable  reception  he  expected.  For  Tissaphernes, 
who  knew  he  was  accused  by  the  Lacedaemonians,  and  feared 
that  the  king  would  punish  him  at  length  for  not  having  exe- 
cuted his  orders,  found  Alcibiades  presenting  himself  very  op- 
portunely, and  caused  him  to  be  seized  and  sent  prisoner  to 
Sardis  ; to  shelter  himself  by  that  injustice  from  the  representa- 
tions of  the  Lacedaemonians. 

Thirty  days  after,  Alcibiades,  having  found  means  to  get  a 
horse,  escaped  from  his  guards,  and  fled  to  Clazomenae,  where, 
to  revenge  himself  on  Tissaphernes,  he  gave  out,  that  he  had 
set  him  at  liberty.  From  Clazomenae,  he  repaired  to  the  Athe- 
nian fleet,  where  he  was  joined  by  Theramenes  with  twenty 
ships  from  Macedonia,  and  by  Thrasybulus  with  twenty  more 
from  Thasos.  He  sailed  from  thence  to  Parium  in  the  Pro- 
pontis. All  those  ships,  to  the  number  of  fourscore  and  six, 
being  come  thither,  he  left  that  place  in  the  night,  and  arrived 
the  next  morning  at  Proconnesus,  a small  isle  near  Cyzicum. 
He  heard  there,  that  Mindarus  was  at  Cyzicum  with  Pharna- 
- bazus  and  his  land-army.  He  rested  that  whole  day  at  Procon- 
nesus. On  the  morrow  he  harangued  his  soldiers,  and  repre- 
sented to  them  the  necessity  there  was  for  attacking  the  enemy 
by  sea  and  land,  and  for  making  themselves  masters  of  Cyzi- 
cum ; demonstrating,  at  the  same  time,  that  without  a complete 
and  absolute  victory,  they  could  have  neither  provisions  nor 
money.  He  had  taken  great  care  that  the  enemy  should  not  be 
apprized  of  his  approach.  Fortunately  for  him,  a great  storm 
of  rain  and  thunder,  followed  by  a thick  gloom,  helped  him  to 
conceal  his  enterprise  so  successfully,  that  not  only  the  enemy 
were  prevented  from  perceiving  that  he  advanced,  but  the  Athe- 
nians themselves,  whom  he  had  caused  to  embark  with  precipi- 
tation, did  not  know  that  he  had  weighed  anchor  and  put  to  sea. 

When  the  gloom  was  dispersed,  the  Lacedaemonian  fleet 
appeared  exercising  at  some  distance  before  the  port.  Alci- 
biades, who  was  apprehensive  that  the  enemy,  upon  the  sight 
of  so  great  a number  of  ships,  would  make  for  the  harbour, 
ordered  the  captains  to  keep  back  a little,  and  to  follow  him  at 
a good  distance ; and  taking  only  forty  vessels,  he  advanced 
towards  the  enemy,  to  offer  them  battle.  The  enemy,  deceived 
by  this  stratagem,  and  despising  his  small  number,  advanced 
against  him,  and  began  the  fight.  But  when  they  saw  the  rest 
of  the  Athenian  fleet  come  up,  they  immediately  lost  courage, 
and  fled.  Alcibiades,  with  twenty  of  his  best  ships,  pursued 
them  to  the  shore,  landed,  and  killed  a great  number  of  them 
in  the  flight.  Mindarus  and  Pharnabazus  opposed  his  efforts 
in  vain  ; the  first,  who  fought  with  astonishing  valour,  he  killed, 
and  put  the  other  to  flight. 

VOL.  III. 


G 


82 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


The  Athenians  by  this  victory,  which  made  them  masters  of 
the  slain,  the  arms,  spoils,  and  whole  fleet  of  the  enemy,  and  by 
the  taking  of  Cyzicum,  not  only  possessed  themselves  of  the 
Hellespont,  but  drove  the  Spartans  entirely  out  of  that  sea. 
Letters  were  intercepted , in  which  the  latter,  with  a conciseness 
truly  laconic,  informed  the  Ephori  of  the  blow  they  had  received, 
in  terms  to  this  effect : The  flower  of  your  army  is  cut  off ; Min  ■ 
darus  is  dead ; the  rest  of  the  troops  are  dying  with  hunger  ; 
and  we  neither  know  what  to  do,  nor  what  will  become  of  us. 

The  news  of  this  victory  occasioned  no  less  joy  at  Athens, 
than  consternation  at  Sparta.  They  despatched  ambassadors 
immediately  to  demand,11  that  an  end  should  be  put  to  a war 
equally  destructive  to  both  people,  and  that  a peace  should  be 
concluded  upon  reasonable  conditions,  for  the  re-establishment 
of  their  ancient  concord  and  amity,  of  which  they  had  for  many 
years  experienced  the  salutary  effects.  The  wisest  and  most 
judicious  of  the  citizens  of  Athens  were  unanimously  of  opinion, 
that  it  was  proper  to  take  the  advantage  of  so  favourable  a con- 
juncture for  the  concluding  of  a treaty,  which  might  put  an  end 
to  all  jealousies,  appease  all  animosities,  and  remove  all  dis- 
trusts. But  those  who  found  their  advantage  in  the  troubles  of 
the  state  prevented  so  happy  a disposition  from  taking  effect. 
Cleophon,0  amongst  others,  the  orator  in  greatest  repute  at 
that  time,  animated  the  people  from  the  tribunal,  by  a violent 
and  seditious  discourse,  insinuating,  that  their  interests  were  be- 
trayed by  some  who  kept  up  a secret  intelligence  with  the  Lace- 
daemonians, which  aimed  at  depriving  them  of  all  the  advantages 
of  the  important  victory  which  they  had  lately  gained,  and  at 
making  them  lose  for  ever  the  opportunity  of  being  fully  a- 
venged  for  all  the  wrongs  and  misfortunes  Sparta  had  caused 
them  to  suffer.  This  Cleophon  was  a worthless  fellow,  a musi- 
cal-instrument maker.  It  was  reported  also  that  he  had  been  a 
slave,  and  had  got  himself  fraudulently  enrolled  in  the  register  of 
the  citizens.  He  carried  his  audacity  and  fury  so  far,  as  to 
threaten  to  plunge  his  dagger  into  the  throat  of  any  one  who 
should  talk  of  peace.  The  Athenians,  puffed  up  with  their 
present  prosperity,  forgetting  their  past  misfortunes,  and  pro- 
mising themselves  all  things  from  the  valour  and  good  fortune 
of  Alcibiades,  haughtily  rejected  all  proposals  of  accommodation, 
without  reflecting,  that  there  is  nothing  so  fluctuating  and 
precarious  as  the  success  of  war.  The  ambassadors  retired 
without  being  able  to  effect  any  thing.  Such  infatuation  and 
irrational  pride  are  generally  the  forerunners  of  some  great 
misfortune. 

Alcibiades  knew  well  how  to  take  advantage  of  the  victory 
he  had  gained,  and  presently  after  besieged  Chalcedon,  which 

n Diod.l.  xiii.  p.  177 — 179.  0 .flEsch.  in  Orat.  de  fals.  legat. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


83 


had  revolted  from  the  Athenians  and  received  a Lacedaemonian 
garrison.  During  this  siege,  he  took  another  town,  called 
Selymbria.  Pharnabazus,  terrified  by  the  rapidity  of  his 
conquests,  made  a treaty  with  the  Athenians  to  this  effect  ; 
That  Pharnabazus  should  pay  them  a certain  sum  of  money  ; 
that  the  Chalcedonians  should  return  to  their  obedience  and  de- 
pendence upon  the  Athenians,  and  pay  them  tribute  ; and  that 
the  Athenians  should  commit  no  hostilities  in  the  province  of 
Pharnabazus,  who  engaged  for  the  safe  conduct  of  their  ambas- 
sadors to  the  great  king.  Byzantium  and  several  other  cities 
submitted  to  the  Athenians. 

Alcibiades,  who  desired  with  the  utmost  pas- 
Ant  C?9407  s*on  to  see  country  again,  or  rather  to  be 
seen  by  his  country,  after  so  many  victories  over 
their  enemies,  set  out  for  Athens.  The  sides  of  his  ships  were 
covered  with  bucklers  and  all  sorts  of  spoils,  in  form  of  tro- 
phies ; and  causing  a great  number  of  vessels  to  be  towed  after 
him  by  way  of  triumph,  he  displayed  also  the  ensigns  and  orna- 
ments of  those  he  had  burnt,  which  were  more  in  number  than 
the  others  ; the  whole  amounting  to  about  200  ships.  It  is 
said  that  reflecting  on  what  had  been  done  against  him,  upon 
approaching  the  port  he  was  struck  with  some  terror,  and  was 
afraid  to  quit  his  vessel,  till  he  saw  from  the  deck  a great  num- 
ber of  his  friends  and  relations  who  were  come  to  the  shore  to 
receive  him,  and  earnestly  entreated  him  to  land. 

The  people  came  out  of  the  city  in  crowds  to  meet  him,  and 
at  his  appearance  set  up  incredible  shouts  of  joy.  In  the  midst 
of  an  infinite  number  of  officers  and  soldiers,  all  eyes  were 
fixed  solely  on  him,  whom  they  considered  as  Victory  itself, 
descended  from  the  skies : all  thronging  around  him,  caressed, 
blessed,  and  crowned  him  in  emulation  of  each  other.  Those,  who 
could  not  approach  him,  were  never  tired  with  contemplating 
him  at  a distance,  whilst  the  old  men  showed  him  to  their 
children.  They  repeated  with  the  highest  praises  all  the  great 
actions  he  had  done  for  his  country  ; nor  could  they  refuse  their 
admiration  even  to  those  which  he  had  done  against  it  during 
his  banishment,  of  which  they  imputed  the  fault  to  themselves 
alone.  This  public  joy  was  mingled  with  tears  and  regret, 
from  the  remembrance  of  past  misfortunes,  which  they  could 
not  avoid  comparing  with  their  present  felicity.  We  could  not 
have  failed,  said  they,  of  the  conquest  of  Sicily  ; our  other 
hopes  could  never  have  proved  abortive,  if  we  had  intrusted 
all  our  affairs  and  forces  to  the  disposal  of  Alcibiades  alone. 
In  what  condition  was  Athens  when  he  took  upon  him  our 
protection  and  defence ! We  had  not  only  almost  entirely  lost 
our  power  at  sea,  but  were  scarce  possessed  of  the  suburbs  of 
our  city,  and,  to  add  to  our  misfortunes,  were  torn  to  pieces 

g 2 


84 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


by  a horrid  civil  war.  He  notwithstanding  has  raised  the 
republic  from  its  ruins  ; and  not  content  with  having  reinstated 
it  in  the  possession  of  the  sovereignty  of  the  sea , has  rendered 
it  universally  victorious  by  land ; as  if  the  fate  of  Athens  had 
been  in  his  hands  alone,  either  to  ruin  or  restore  it,  and  vic- 
tory was  annexed  to  his  person,  and  obeyed  his  orders. 

This  favourable  reception  of  Alcibiades  did  not  prevent  his 
demanding  an  assembly  of  the  people,  in  order  to  his  justifica- 
tion before  them  ; well  knowing  how  necessary  it  was  for  his 
safety  to  be  absolved  in  due  form.  He  appeared  therefore ; 
and  having  deplored  his  misfortunes,  which  he  imputed  very 
little  to  the  people,  and  entirely  ascribed  to  his  ill  fortune,  and 
some  demon  envious  of  his  prosperity,  he  represented  to  them 
the  designs  of  the  enemy,  and  exhorted  them  not  to  conceive 
other  than  great  hopes.  The  Athenians,  transported  with 
hearing  him  speak,  decreed  him  crowns  of  gold,  appointed 
him  general  by  sea  and  land  with  unlimited  power,  restored 
him  all  his  fortunes,  and  ordered  the  Eumolpidae  and  Ceryces? 
to  absolve  him  from  the  curses  they  had  pronounced  against 
him  by  the  order  of  the  people  ; doing  their  utmost  to  make 
him  amends  for  the  injury  and  shame  of  his  banishment  by  the 
glory  of  his  recall,  and  to  efface  the  remembrance  of  the  impre- 
cations themselves  had  decreed,  by  the  vows  and  prayers  which 
they  made  in  his  favour.  Whilst  all  the  Eumolpidae  and  Cery- 
ces  were  employed  in  revoking  these  imprecations,  Theodorus, 
the  principal  of  them,  had  the  courage  to  say  : As  for  me,  I 
have  not  cursed  him,  if  he  has  done  no  evil  to  his  country  ; 
insinuating,  by  that  bold  expression,  that  the  malediction, 
being  conditional,  could  not  fall  upon  the  head  of  the  innocent, 
nor  be  averted  from  the  guilty. 

In  the  midst  of  this  glory  and  shining  prosperity  of  Alcibia- 
des, the  majority  of  the  people  could  not  help  being  concerned, 
when  they  considered  the  time  of  his  return.  For  it  happened 
precisely  upon  the  day  when  the  Athenians  celebrated  a festi- 
val in  honour  of  Minerva,  adored  under  the  name  of  Agraulis. 
The  priests  took  off  all  the  ornaments  from  the  goddess’s  statue 
to  wash  it,  from  whence  that  feast  was  called  UXwTrjpia,  and 
afterwards  covered  it ; and  that  day  was  accounted  one  of  the 
most  ominous  and  unfortunate.  It  was  the  25th  of  the  month 
Thargelion,  which  answers  to  2d  of  July.  This  circumstance 
displeased  that  superstitious  people,  because  it  seemed  to  imply, 
that  the  goddess,  patroness  and  protectress  of  Athens,  did  not 
receive  Alcibiades  agreeably  and  with  a benign  aspect,  since 

p The  Eumolpidae  and  Ceryces  were  two  families  at  Athens  who  had  differ, 
ent  functions  in  the  mysteries  of  Ceres.  They  took  their  names  from  Eumol- 
pus  and  Ceryx,  the  first  who  had  exercised  those  offices.  Perhaps  the 
employment  of  the  latter  had  some  relation  to  that  of  heralds,  KrjpvKfQ. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS.  85 

she  covered  and  concealed  herself,  as  if  she  would  keep  him 
off  and  remove  him  from  her. 

All  things  having  however  succeeded  according  to  his  wish, 
and  the  100  ships  he  was  to  command  being  ready,  he  deferred 
his  departure  out  of  a laudable  ambition  to  celebrate  the  great 
mysteries  ; for  from  the  time  the  Lacedaemonians  had  fortified 
Decelia,  and  taken  possession  of  all  the  ways  from  Athens  to 
Eleusis,  the  feast  had  not  been  solemnized  in  all  its  pomp, 
and  the  procession  had  been  obliged  to  go  by  sea.  The 
particular  ceremonies  of  this  solemnity  may  be  seen  in  the  pre- 
face to  the  first  volume,  pagexxviii. 

Alcibiades  believed  it  would  be  a most  glorious  action,  and 
draw  down  upon  him  the  blessings  of  the  gods  and  the  praises 
of  men,  if  he  restored  all  its  lustre  and  solemnity  to  this  feast, 
in  making  the  procession  go  by  land,  escorted  by  his  troops  to 
defend  it  against  the  attacks  of  the  enemy.  For  either  Agis 
would  suffer  it  to  pass  quietly,  notwithstanding  the  numerous 
troops  he  had  at  Decelia,  which  would  considerably  lessen  the 
reputation  of  that  king,  and  sully  his  glory ; or,  if  he  should 
choose  to  attack  it,  and  oppose  the  march,  he  should  then  have 
the  satisfaction  to  fight  a sacred  battle ; a battle  grateful  to  the 
gods,  for  the  greatest  and  most  venerable  of  all  their  mysteries, 
in  the  sight  of  his  country  and  citizens,  who  would  be  witnesses 
of  his  valour  and  regard  for  religion.  It  is  very  likely,  that  by 
this  public  and  ostentatious  act  of  piety,  which  struck  the  peo- 
ple’s view  in  so  sensible  a manner,  and  was  so  extremely  to  their 
taste,  Alcibiades’s  principal  design  was  to  efface  entirely  from 
their  minds  the  suspicions  of  impiety,  to  which  the  mutilation  of 
the  statues,  and  profanation  of  the  mysteries,  had  given  birth. 

Having  taken  that  resolution,  he  gave  notice  to  the  Enmol- 
pidse  and  Ceryces  to  hold  themselves  in  readiness,  posted  sen- 
tinels upon  the  hills,  sent  out  scouts  at  the  break  of  day,  and 
taking  with  him  the  priests,  the  initiated,  and  the  probationers, 
with  those  who  initiated  them,  he  covered  them  with  his  army, 
and  conducted  the  whole  pomp  with  wonderful  order  and  pro- 
found silence.  Never  was  show,  says  Plutarch,  more  august, 
nor  more  worthy  the  majesty  of  the  gods,  than  this  warlike  pro- 
cession, and  religious  expedition  ; in  which  even  those  who 
envied  the  glory  of  Alcibiades,  were  obliged  to  own,  that  he 
was  no  less  happy  in  discharging  the  functions  of  a high  priest, 
than  those  of  a general.  No  enemy  dared  to  appear,  to  disturb 
that  pompous  march,  and  Alcibiades  reconducted  the  sacred 
troop  to  Athens  with  entire  safety.  This  success  gave  him 
new  courage,  and  raised  the  valour  and  boldness  of  his  army  to 
such  a degree,  that  they  looked  upon  themselves  as  invincible, 
whilst  he  commanded  them. 

Q Pint,  in  Alcib.  p.  210. 


86 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


He  acquired  the  affection  of  the  poor,  and  the  lower  sort  of 
people,  so  much,  that  they  most  ardently  desired  to  have  him 
for  their  king.  Many  of  them  openly  declared  themselves  to 
that  effect ; and  there  were  some  who  addressed  themselves 
to  him,  and  exhorted  him  to  set  himself  above  envy,  and  not  to 
trouble  himself  about  laws,  decrees,  or  suffrages  ; to  put  down 
those  wordy  impertinent  orators  that  disturbed  the  state  with 
their  vain  harangues,  to  make  himself  absolute  master  of  af- 
fairs, and  to  govern  with  entire  authority,  without  fearing  accu- 
sers. For  him,  what  his  thoughts  of  the  tyranny  and  his  de- 
signs were,  are  unknown  : but  the  most  powerful  citizens,  ap- 
prehending the  breaking  out  of  a fire,  of  which  they  already 
saw  the  sparks,  pressed  him  to  depart  without  delay  ; granting 
whatever  he  demanded,  and  giving  him  for  colleagues  the  ge- 
nerals most  agreeable  to  him.  He.  set  sail  accordingly  with 
100  ships,  and  steered  for  the  island  of  Andros,  that  had  re- 
volted. His  high  reputation,  and  the  good  fortune  that  had 
attended  him  in  all  his  enterprises,  made  nothing  but  what  was 
great  and  extraordinary  to  be  expected  from  him. 

SECT.  IV. 

The  Lacedaemonians  appoint  Lysander  admiral.  He  acquires  great  influence 
with  the  younger  Cyrus,  who  commanded  in  Asia.  He  beats  the  Athenian 
fleet  near  Ephesus  in  the  absence  of  Alcibiades,  who  is  deprived  of  the  com- 
mand.  Ten  generals  are  chosen  in  his  stead.  Callicratidas  succeeds  Ly- 
sander. 

Twenty-sixth  year  of  the  War. 

The  Lacedaemonians, r justly  alarmed  at  the  return  and  success 
of  Alcibiades,  sufficiently  perceived  that  such  an  enemy  re- 
quired to  be  opposed  by  an  able  general,  capable  of  making 
head  against  him.  For  this  reason  they  made  choice  of  Lysan- 
der, and  gave  him  the  command  of  the  fleet.  When  he  arrived 
at  Ephesus,  he  found  the  city  very  well  disposed  towards  him- 
self, and  well  affected  to  Sparta  ; but  otherwise  in  a very  un- 
happy situation.  For  it  was  in  danger  of  becoming  barbarous, 
by  assuming  the  manners  and  customs  of  the  Persians,  who  had 
great  intercourse  with  it,  as  well  from  the  neighbourhood  of 
Lydia,  as  because  the  king’s  generals  commonly  took  up  their 
winter- quarters  there.  An  idle  and  voluptuous  life,  filled  up 
with  luxury  and  empty  show,  could  not  fail  of  disgusting  infi- 
nitely a man  like  Lysander,  who  had  been  bred  from  his  birth 
in  the  simplicity,  poverty,  and  severe  discipline  of  Sparta. 
Having  brought  his  army  to  Ephesus,  he  gave  orders  for  assem- 
bling ships  of  burden  there  from  all  parts,  erecting  an  arsenal  for 

r Xenoph.  Hellen.  1.  i.  p.  440 — 442.  Plut.  in  Lysand.  p.  434,  435.  I)iod.  1. 
xiii.  p.  192 — 197- 


87 


PERSlAlfe  AND  GRECIANS. 

building  of  galleys,  made  the  ports  free  for  merchants,  gave 
up  the  squares  and  public  places  to  artificers,  put  all  arts  in 
motion,  and  held  them  in  honour  ; and  by  these  means  filled 
the  city  with  riches,  and  laid  the  foundations  of  that  grandeur 
and  magnificence,  to  which  it  afterwards  attained.  So  great  a 
change  can  the  application  and  ability  of  a single  person  occa- 
sion in  a state  ! 

Whilst  he  was  making  these  dispositions,  he  received  advice, 
that  Cyrus,  the  king’s  youngest  son,  was  arrived  at  Sardis. 
That  prince  could  not  be  above  sixteen  years  old  at  that  time, 
being  born  after  his  father’s  accession  to  the  throne,  who  was 
now  in  the  seventeenth  year  of  his  reign.  Parysatis,  his  mo- 
ther, loved  him  to  idolatry,  and  she  had  the  entire  ascendant 
over  her  husband.  It  was  she  that  occasioned  his  having  the 
command  in  chief  of  all  the  provinces  of  Asia  Minor  given  him  ; 
a command  that  subjected  all  the  provincial  governors  of  the 
most  important  part  of  the  empire  to  his  authority.  The  view 
of  Parysatis  was,  without  doubt,  to  put  this  young  prince  into  a 
condition  to  dispute  the  throne  with  his  brother  after  the  king’s 
death  ; as  we  shall  see  he  actually  did.  One  of  the  principal 
instructions  given  him  by  his  father  upon  sending  him  to  his 
government,  was  to  give  effectual  aid  to  the  Lacedaemonians 
against  Athens  ; an  order  very  contrary  to  the  measures  ob- 
served till  then  by  Tissaphernes,  and  the  other  governors  of 
those  provinces.  It  had  always  been  their  maxim,  sometimes 
to  assist  one  party,  sometimes  the  other,  in  order  to  hold  their 
power  in  such  a balance  that  the  one  might  never  be  able  to 
crush  the  other  entirely  : from  whence  it  followed,  that  both 
parties  were  kept  weak  by  the  war,  and  neither  were  in  a con- 
dition to  form  any  enterprises  against  the  Persian  empire. 

Upon  Ly sander’s  being  apprized,  therefore,  of  the  arrival  of 
Cyrus  at  Sardis,  he  set  out  from  Ephesus  to  make  him  a visit, 
and  to  complain  of  the  delays  and  breach  of  faith  of  Tissapher- 
nes, who,  notwithstanding  the  orders  he  had  received  to  sup- 
port the  Lacedaemonians,  and  to  drive  the  Athenians  from  the 
sea,  had  always  covertly  favoured  the  latter,  out  of  regard  for 
Alcibiades,  to  whom  he  was  entirely  devoted,  and  had  been  the 
sole  cause  of  the  loss  of  the  fleet,  by  not  supplying  it  with 
the  necessary  quantity  of  provisions.  This  discourse  pleased 
Cyrus,  who  looked  upon  Tissaphernes  as  a very  bad  man,  and 
his  particular  enemy.  And  he  answered,  that  the  king  had 
given  him  orders  to  support  the  Lacedaemonians  powerfully, 
and  that  he  had  received  500  talents  for  that  purpose. s Ly- 
sander,  contrary  to  the  common  character  of  the  Spartans,  was 
submissive  and  condescending,  full  of  complaisance  to  the  great, 
always  ready  to  pay  his  court  to  them,  and  supporting,  for  the 
* Five  hundred  thousand  crowns,  about  112,500/.  sterling. 


88 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


good  of  the  service,  all  the  weight  of  their  haughtiness  and  va- 
nity with  incredible  patience  ; in  which  behaviour  some  people 
make  the  chief  address  and  principal  merit  of  a courtier  to 
consist. 

He  did  not  forget  himself  on  this  occasion,  and  setting  at 
work  all  that  the  industry  and  art  of  a complete  courtier  could 
suggest  of  flattery  and  insinuation,  he  perfectly  gained  the 
young  prince’s  favour  and  good  opinion.  After  having  praised 
his  generosity,  magnificence,  and  zeal  for  the  Lacedaemonians, 
he  desired  him  to  give  each  soldier  and  mariner  a drachma1 
per  day  ; in  order  to  corrupt  those  of  the  enemy  by  that  means, 
and  thereby  terminate  the  war  the  sooner.  Cyrus  very  much 
approved  the  project ; but  said,  he  could  make  no  change  in 
the  king’s  order,  and  that  the  treaty  with  them  expressly  settled 
only  half  a talent u to  be  paid  monthly  for  each  galley.  The 
prince,  however,  at  the  end  of  the  banquet,  which  he  gave  him 
before  his  departure,  drinking  to  his  health,  and  pressing  him  to 
ask  something  of  him,  Lysander  desired  that  an  obolus  x a day 
might  be  added  to  the  seamen’s  pay.  This  was  granted,  and 
he  gave  them  four  oboli,  instead  of  three,  which  they  received 
before,  and  paid  them  all  the  arrears  due  to  them,  with  a 
month’s  advance;  giving  Lysander  10,000  daricks  y for  that 
purpose  ; that  is,  100,000  livres,  or  about  5000/  sterling. 

This  largess  filled  the  whole  fleet  with  ardour  and  alacrity, 
and  almost  unmanned  the  enemy’s  galleys ; the  greatest  part  of 
the  mariners  deserting  to  that  side  where  the  pay  was  best. 
The  Athenians,  in  despair  upon  receiving  this  news,  endeavoured 
to  conciliate  Cyrus  by  the  interposition  of  Tissaphernes ; but 
he  would  not  hearken  to  them,  notwithstanding  that  satrap 
represented,  that  it  was  not  for  the  king’s  interest  to  aggrandize 
the  Lacedaemonians,  but  to  balance  the  power  of  one  side  with 
that  of  the  other,  in  order  to  perpetuate  the  war,  and  to  ruin 
both  by  their  own  divisions. 

Though  Lysander  had  considerably  weakened  the  enemy  by 
augmenting  the  mariners’  pay,  and  thereby  very  much  hurt  their 
naval  power,  he  dared  not,  however,  hazard  a battle  with  them, 
particularly  dreading  Alcibiades,  who  was  a man  of  execution, 
had  a greater  number  of  ships,  and  had  never  been  overthrown 
in  any  battle  either  by  sea  or  land.  But  after  Alcibiades  had 
left  Samos  to  go  into  Phocaea  and  Ionia,  to  raise  money,  of 
which  he  was  in  want,  for  the  payment  of  his  troops,  and  had 
given  the  command  of  his  fleet  to  Antiochus,  with  express 
order  not  to  fight  or  attack  the  enemy  in  his  absence ; the  new 

1 Ten-pence.  u One  thousand  five  hundred  livres,  about  112/.  sterling. 

x The  drachma  was  six  oboli,  or  ten-pence  French  ; each  obolus  being  some- 
thing above  three-halfpence ; so  that  the  four  oboli  was  six-pence  halfpenny  a 
day,  instead  of  five-pence,  or  three  oboli. 

y A dariek  is  about  a pistole. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


89 


commander,  to  make  a show  of  his  courage,  and  to  brave  Ly- 
sander,  entered  the  port  of  Ephesus  with  two  galleys,  and  after 
having  made  a great  noise,  retired  with  loud  laughter,  and  an 
air  of  contempt  and  insult.  Lysander,  enraged  at  that  affront, 
immediately  detached  some  galleys,  and  went  himself  dn  pursuit 
of  him.  But  as  the  Athenians  advanced  to  support  Antiochus, 
he  ordered  other  galleys  of  his  side  to  come  ; till  the  whole  fleet 
arrived  by  little  and  little,  and  the  engagement  became  general 
on  both  sides.  Lysander  gained  the  victory,  and  having  taken 
fifteen  of  the  Athenian  galleys,  he  erected  a trophy.  Alci- 
biades,  on  his  return  to  Samos,  sailed  even  into  the  port  to 
offer  him  battle ; but  Lysander  was  contented  with  his  victory, 
and  did  not  think  proper  to  accept  it ; so  that  he  retired  with- 
out doing  any  thing. 

Thrasybulus  at  the  same  time,  the  most  dan- 
Ant  J^  C ^OG  gerous  enemy  he  had  in  his  army,  left  the  camp, 
and  went  to  Athens  to  accuse  him.  To  inflame 
his  enemies  in  the  city  the  more,  he  told  the  people  in  a full 
assembly,  that  Alcibiades  had  entirely  ruined  their  affairs,  and 
the  navy,  by  the  licence  he  had  introduced ; that  he  had  given 
himself  up  to  the  most  notorious  debauchees  and  drunkards,2 
who,  from  having  been  common  seamen,  were  now  the  only 
persons  in  credit  about  him ; that  he  abandoned  his  whole 
authority  to  them,  to  be  at  leisure  to  enrich  himself  in  the 
provinces,  and  to  plunge  himself  there  into  intemperance  and 
all  other  infamous  excesses,  to  the  disgrace  of  Athens,  whilst 
his  fleet  was  left  neglected  in  the  face  of  that  of  the  enemy. 

Another  article  of  accusation  against  him  was  taken  from 
the  forts  he  had  built  near  the  city  of  Byzantium,  for  an 
asylum  and  retreat  for  himself ; as  neither  being  able  nor 
willing  to  return  any  more  to  his  country.  The  Athenians, 
a capricious,  inconstant  people,  gave  credit  to  all  these  impu- 
tations. The  loss  of  the  last  battle,  and  his  little  success  since 
his  departure  from  Athens,  instead  of  the  great  and  wonderful 
actions  expected  from  him,  entirely  sunk  him  in  their  opinions ; 
and  his  own  glory  and  reputation  may  be  said  to  have  occa- 
sioned his  ruin.  For  he  was  suspected  of  not  having  been  de- 
sirous to  do  what  was  not  done,  which  they  could  not  believe  out 
of  his  power,  because  they  were  fully  persuaded,  that  nothing 
he  desired  to  do  was  impossible  to  him.  They  made  it  a crime 
in  Alcibiades,  that  the  rapidity  of  his  conquests  did  not  corres- 
pond with  that  of  their  imaginations ; not  considering,  that  he 
made  war  without  money  upon  a people  who  had  the  great  king 
for  their  treasurer,  and  that  he  was  often  obliged  to  quit  his 
camp,  to  go  in  quest  of  what  was  necessary  for  the  payment 

1 Antiochus  is  pointed  at  in  this  place,  a mean,  debauched  man,  who  had  ac- 
quired the  favour  of  Alcibiades  by  catching  a quail  for  him,  which  he  had  let  fly. 


90 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


and  subsistence  of  his  troops.  However,  Alcibiades  was 
deposed,  and  ten  generals  nominated  in  his  stead  ; of  which 
when  he  received  advice,  he  retired  in  his  galley  to  some 
castles  which  he  had  in  the  Thracian  Chersonesus. 

About  this  time  died  Plistonax,a  one  of  the  kings  of  Lace- 
daemonia,  and  was  succeeded  by  Pausanias,  who  reigned  four- 
teen years.  The  latter  made  a fine  answer  to  one  who  asked, 
why  it  was  not  permitted  to  make  any  change  in  the  ancient 
customs  of  Sparta  : Because,  says  he,  at  Sparta  the  laws  com- 
mand men , and  not  men  the  laws.b 

Lysander,c  who  intended  to  establish  the  government  of  the 
nobility  in  all  the  cities  in  the  dependence  of  Sparta,  that  the 
governors  of  his  choosing  might  be  always  at  his  disposal,  from 
his  having  rendered  them  independent  of  their  people,  caused 
such  persons  as  he  knew  to  be  the  boldest,  and  most  enterpris- 
ing and  ambitious  among  the  principal  men  of  the  cities,  to 
come  to  Ephesus.  These  he  placed  at  the  head  of  affairs,  pro- 
moted to  the  greatest  honours,  and  raised  to  the  first  employ- 
ments of  the  army,  thereby  rendering  himself,  says  Plutarch,  the 
accomplice  of  all  the  crimes  and  oppressions  they  committed 
to  advance  and  enrich  themselves.  For  this  reason  they  were 
always  extremely  attached  to  him,  and  regretted  him  infinitely, 
when  Callicratidas  came  to  succeed  him,  and  took  upon  him 
the  command  of  the  fleet.  He  was  not  inferior  to  Lysander 
either  in  valour  or  military  knowledge,  and  was  infinitely  above 
him  in  point  of  moral  virtue.  Alike  severe  to  himself  and 
others,  inaccessible  to  flattery  and  sloth,  the  declared  enemy  of 
luxury,  he  retained  the  modesty,  temperance,  and  austerity  of 
the  ancient  Spartans  ; virtues  that  began  to  distinguish  him 
particularly,  as  they  were  not  too  common  in  his  time.  His 
probity  and  justice  were  proof  against  all  things  ; his  simplicity 
and  integrity  abhorred  all  falsehood  and  fraud,  to  which  were 
joined  a truly  Spartan  nobleness  and  grandeur  of  soul.  The 
great  and  powerful  could  not  refrain  from  admiring  his  virtue  ; 
but  they  were  better  pleased  with  the  affability  and  condescen- 
sion of  his  predecessor,  who  was  blind  to  the  injustice  and  vio- 
lence of  their  actions. 

It  was  not  without  mortification  and  jealousy,  that  Lysander 
saw  him  arrive  at  Ephesus  to  take  upon  him  the  command,  and 
out  of  a criminal  baseness  and  treachery,  not  uncommon  with 
those  who  hearken  more  to  their  private  ambition  than  the  good 
of  the  public,  he  did  him  all  the  ill  offices  in  his  power.  Of  the 
10,000  daricks,  which  Cyrus  had  given  him  for  the  augmenta- 
a Diod.  p.  196. 

b "On  Toiig  v6[xovq  ru>v  avdpw v,  ov  rovg  dvdpag  tCjv  vopuiv  icvpiovg  tivai  Iti.  s 
Plut.  in  Apophth.  p.  230. 

c Xenoph.  TIeilen.  1.  i.  p.  442 — 414.  Plut.  in  Lvsand.  p 435,  436.  Diod. 
p.  197,  198. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


91 


tion  of  the  mariner’s  pay,  he  returned  the  remainder  to  that 
prince  ; telling-  Callicratidas,  that  he  might  apply  to  the  king 
for  the  money,  and  that  it  depended  on  him  to  find  means  for 
the  subsistence  of  the  army.  This  conduct  gave  him  great 
trouble,  and  distressed  him  exceedingly.  For  he  had  brought 
no  money  with  him  from  Sparta,  and  could  not  resolve  to 
extort  any  from  the  cities,  as  he  found  them  sufficiently  rifled 
already. 

In  this  urgent  necessity/  a person  having  offered  him  fifty 
talents  (that  is  to  say,  50,000  crowns)  to  obtain  a favour 
which  he  could  not  grant  with  justice,  he  refused  them. 
Upon  which  Oleander,  one  of  his  officers,  said,  I ivould  accept 
them,  were  1 in  your  place. — And  so  would  I,  replied  the  ge- 
neral, were  1 in  yours. 

He  had  no  other  resource  therefore  than  to  go,  as  Ly sander 
had  done,  to  ask  money  at  the  gates  of  the  king’s  generals  and 
lieutenants,  for  which  he  was  the  least  proper  of  all  mankind. 
Nurtured  and  educated  in  the  love  of  liberty,  full  of  great  and 
noble  sentiments,  and  infinitely  remote  from  all  flattery  and 
baseness,  he  was  convinced  at  heart,  that  it  was  a less  evil  and 
dishonour  for  Greeks  to  be  overcome  by  Greeks,  than  infa- 
mously to  make  their  court,  and  beg  at  the  gates  of  barbarians, 
whose  only  merit  consisted  in  their  gold  and  silver.  The  whole 
nation  were  indeed  disgraced  by  so  mean  a prostitution. 

Cicero,  in  his  Offices,  draws  two  very  different  characters 
of  persons  employed  in  the  administration  of  government,  and 
makes  the  application  of  them  to  the  two  generals  of  whom  we 
speak.  The  one,  says  he,e  zealous  lovers  of  truth,  and  declared 
enemies  of  all  fraud,  pique  themselves  upon  their  simplicity  and 
candour,  and  do  not  believe,  that  it  can  ever  be  consistent  with 
honour  to  lay  snares  or  use  artifice.  The  others,  prepared  to 
do  or  suffer  every  thing,  and  not  ashamed  of  the  meanest 
actions,  provided  from  those  unworthy  methods  they  have  reason 
to  expect  the  success  of  their  designs.  Cicero  places  Callicra- 
tidas amongst  the  former,  and  Lysander  amongst  the  latter,  to 
whom  he  gives  two  epithets,  not  much  to  his  honour,  and  hardly 
consistent  with  the  Spartan  character,  when  he  calls  him  very 
artful,  and  very  patient,  or  rather  very  complaisant. 

Callicratidas,  however,  forced  by  necessity,  went  to  Lydia, 
and  repaired  immediately  to  the  palace  of  Cyrus,  where  he 
desired  that  prince  might  be  told  that  the  admiral  of  the  Gre- 
cian fleet  was  come  to  speak  with  him.  He  was  answered, 

d Plut.  in  Apoph.  p.  222. 

e Sunt  his  alii  multiim  dispares,  simplices  et  aperti ; qui  nihil  ex  occulto, 
nihil  ex  insidiis  agendum  putant ; veritatis  cultores,  fraudis  inimici : itemque 
alii,  qui  quidvis  perpetiantur,  cuivis  deserviant,  dum,  quod  velint,  consequan- 
tur.  Quo  in  genere  versutissimum  et  patientissimum  Lacedsemonium  Lysan- 
drum  accepimus,  contraque  Callicratidam.  Offic.  1.  i.  n.  109. 


92 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


that  Cyrus  was  then  at  table,  engaged  in  a party  of  pleasure  ; 
to  which  he  replied  with  a modest  tone  and  air,  that  lie  was  in 
no  haste,  and  would  wait  till  the  prince  came  forth.  The 
guards  set  up  a laugh,  wondering  at  the  honest  stranger’s  sim- 
plicity, who  seemed  so  little  acquainted  with  the  world ; and  he 
was  obliged  to  retire.  He  came  thither  the  second  time,  and 
was  again  denied  admittance.  Upon  which  he  returned  to 
Ephesus,  loaded  those  with  curses  and  imprecations,  who  had 
first  made  their  court  to  Barbarians,  and  by  their  flattery  and 
submissions  had  taught  them  to  make  their  riches  a title  and 
pretence  for  insulting  the  rest  of  mankind.  Addressing  himself 
at  the  same  time  to  those  about  him,  he  swore  that  as  soon  as 
he  returned  to  Sparta,  he  would  use  his  utmost  endeavours  to 
reconcile  the  Greeks  amongst  themselves,  that  for  the  future 
they  might  become  formidable  to  the  Barbarians,  and  have  no 
farther  occasion  for  their  aid  to  invade  and  ruin  each  other. 
But  that  generous  Spartan,  whose  thoughts  were  so  noble,  and 
so  worthy  the  Lacedaemonian  name,  and  whose  justice,  magna- 
nimity, and  valour,  might  rank  him  with  all  that  Greece  had 
ever  produced  of  the  most  excellent  and  most  consummate,  had 
not  the  good  fortune  to  return  to  his  country,  nor  to  apply  him- 
self to  a work  so  great,  and  so  worthy  of  him. 

SECT.  V. 

Callicratidas  is  defeated  by  the  Athenians  near  the  Arginusae.  The  Athenians 
pass  sentence  of  death  upon  several  of  their  generals  for  not  having  brought 
off  the  bodies  of  those  who  had  been  slain  in  battle.  Socrates  alone  has  the 
courage  to  oppose  so  unjust  a sentence. 

Callicratidas/  after  having  gained  several  victories  over  the 
Athenians,  had  at  last  pursued  Conon,  one  of  their  generals,  into 
the  port  of  Mitylene,  where  he  kept  him  blocked  up.  This 
was  in  the  twenty-sixth  year  of  the  Peloponnesian  war.  Conon 
seeing  himself  besieged  by  sea  and  land,  without  hope  of  aid, 
and  in  want  of  provisions,  found  means  to  apprize  Athens  of 
the  extreme  danger  he  was  in.  Extraordinary  efforts  were 
made  to  relieve  him,  and  in  less  than  a month’s  time  a fleet  of 
110  sail  were  fitted  out,  on  board  of  which  were  embarked  all 
that  were  capable  of  bearing  arms,  as  well  slaves  as  freemen, 
with  some  horse.  At  Samos  they  were  joined  by  the  allies 
with  forty  galleys,  and  the  collected  armament  steered  for  the 
Arginusae,  islands  situate  between  Cumae  and  Mitylene.  Cal- 
licratidas, being  informed  of  their  course,  left  Eteonicus  to  con- 

f The  Greek  says  literally  that  he  was  drinking,  The  Persians  valued 

themselves  upon  drinking  a great  deal,  as  an  instance  of  their  merit,  as  we 
shall  see  in  Cyrus’s  letter  to  the  Lacedaemonians. 

e Xenoph.  Hellen.  1.  i.  p.  444—452.  Diod.  1.  xiii.  p.  198,  & 201.  & 217—222. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


93 


tinue  the  siege  with  fifty  ships,  and  put  to  sea  with  120  sail, 
with  design  to  face  the  enemy,  and  prevent  their  relieving 
Conon.  The  right  wing  of  the  Athenians  was  commanded  by 
Protomachus  and  Thrasylus,  who  had  each  fifteen  galleys. 
They  were  supported  by  a second  line  with  a like  number  of 
ships,  commanded  by  Lysias  and  Aristogenes.  The  left  wing, 
like  the  other,  drawn  up  in  two  lines,  was  under  Aristocrates 
and  Diomedon,  supported  by  Erasinides  and  Pericles. h The 
main  body,  consisting  of  near  thirty  galleys,  amongst  which 
were  the  *three  Athenian  admirals,  was  disposed  in  one  line. 
They  had  strengthened  each  of  their  wings  with  a second  line  ; 
because  their  galleys  were  neither  so  swift,  nor  so  easy  to 
manage,  as  those  of  the  enemy ; so  that  there  was  reason  to 
fear  their  getting  between  two,  and  being  changed  on  both 
sides  at  the  same  time.  The  Lacedaemonians  and  their  allies, 
who  perceived  they  were  inferior  in  number  to  the  enemy,  con- 
tented themselves  with  drawing  up  in  one  line,  in  order  to  equal 
their  front,  and  for  the  greater  facility  of  running  between' the 
Athenian  galleys,  and  turning  nimbly  round  them.  Callicra- 
tidas’s  pilot,  daunted  at  the  inequality,  advised  him  not  to 
hazard  the  battle,  and  to  retire  : but  he  replied,  that  he  could 
not  fly  without  shame,  and  that  his  death  was  of  small  import- 
ance to  the  republic.  Sparta,  said  he,  does  not  depend  upon 
one  man.  He  commanded  the  right  wing,  and  Thrasondas  the 
Theban  the  left. 

It  was  a grand  and  awful  sight  to  behold  the  sea  covered 
with  300  galleys  ready  to  engage.  Never  had  more  numerous 
naval  armies  of  the  Greeks  fought  against  each  other  before. 
The  ability,  experience,  and  valour  of  the  generals  who  com- 
manded, left  nothing  to  desire  ; so  that  there  was  reason  to  be- 
lieve this  battle  would  decide  the  fate  of  both  people,  and  put 
an  end  to  a war  that  had  endured  so  long.  When  the  signals 
were  given,  the  two  armies  raised  great  shouts,  and  began  to 
fight.  Callicratidas,  who  from  the  answer  of  the  augurs  ex- 
pected to  fall  in  the  battle,  did  amazing  actions  of  valour.  He 
attacked  the  enemy  with  incredible  courage  and  boldness,  sunk 
some  of  their  ships,  disabled  others  by  breaking  their  oars  and 
piercing  their  sides  with  the  prow  or  beak  of  his  galley.  At 
length  he  attacked  that  of  Pericles,  and  made  a thousand  holes 
in  it ; but  the  latter  having  hooked  him  fast  with  a grappling 
iron,  he  found  it  impossible  to  disengage  himself,  and  was  sur- 
rounded in  an  instant  by  several  of  the  Athenian  vessels.  His 
own  was  immediately  filled  with  the  enemy,  and  after  a dreadful 
slaughter,  he  fell  dead,  rather  overwhelmed  by  their  numbers 
than  vanquished.  The  right  wing  which  he  commanded,  having 
lost  its  admiral,  was  put  to  flight.  The  left,  composed  of  Boe- 
h He  was  the  son  of  the  great  Pericles. 


94 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


otians  and  Euboeans,  still  made  a long  and  vigorous  resistance, 
from  the  urgent  concern  they  were  in,  lest  they  should  fall  into 
the  hands  of  the  Athenians,  against  whom  they  had  revolted  ; 
but  they  were  at  last  obliged  to  give  way,  and  retire  in  disorder. 
The  Athenians  erected  a trophy  in  the  Arginusae.  They  lost 
twenty-five  galleys  in  this  battle,  and  the  enemy  more  than  se- 
venty, of  which  number  were  nine  of  the  ten  furnished  by  the 
Lacedaemonians. 

Plutarch1  equals  Callicratidas,  the  Lacedaemonian  general, 
for  his  justice,  valour,  and  magnanimity,  with  all  who  had  ever 
rendered  themselves  most  worthy  of  admiration  among  the 
Greeks. 

He  blames  him  however  exceedingly  for  hazarding  the  battle 
at  the  Arginusae, k and  observes,  that  to  avoid  the  reproach  of 
having  retired  out  of  fear,  he  had,  through  a mistaken  sense  of 
honour,  failed  in  the  essential  duty  of  his  function.  For,  says 
Plutarch,  if  (to  use  the  comparison  of  Iphicrates  *)  the  light- 
armed infantry  resemble  the  hands,  the  horse  the  feet,  the  main 
body  the  breast,  and  the  general  the  head ; the  general,  who 
abandons  himself  rashly  to  the  impetuosity  of  his  valour,  does 
not  so  much  neglect  or  expose  his  own  life,  as  the  lives  of  those 
whose  safety  depends  upon  his.  Our  Lacedaemonian  chief  was 
therefore  in  the  wrong,  continues  Plutarch,  to  answer  the  pilot, 
who  advised  him  to  retire,  Sparta  does  not  depend  upon  one 
man.  For  though  it  be  true,  that  Callicratidas,  fighting  under 
the  orders  of  another  by  sea  or  land,  was  no  more  than  one  man, 
yet,  when  commanding  an  army,  all  that  obeyed  his  orders  were 
collected  in  his  person  ; and  he,  in  whom  so  many  thousands 
might  be  lost,  was  no  longer  one  man.  Cicero  m had  passed 
the  same  judgment  upon  him  before  Plutarch.  After  having 
said,  that  there  were  many  persons  to  be  found,  who  were 
ready  to  sacrifice  their  fortunes,  and  even  lives,  for  their  country, 
but  who  out  of  a false  delicacy  in  point  of  glory  would  not 
hazard  their  reputation  for  it  in  the  least ; he  cites  the  example 
of  Callicratidas,  who  answered  those  that  advised  him  to  retreat 
from  the  Arginusae,  That  Sparta  could  fit  out  another  fleet  if 
this  were  lost ; hut  for  himself,  he  could  not  fly  before  the 
enemy  without  shame  and  infamy. 

I return  to  the  sequel  of  the  battle  near  the  Arginusae.  The 

» Plut.  in  Lysand.  p.  436.  k Plut.  in  Pelop.  p.  278. 

1 He  was  a famous  general  of  the  Athenians. 

m Inventi  multi  sunt,  qui  non  modo  pecuniam,  sed  vitam  etiam,  profundere 
pro  patria  parati  essent,  iidem  gloriae  jacturam  ne  minimam  quidem  facere 
vellent,  ne  republic!  quidem  postulante  : ut  Callicratidas,  qui,  cum  Lacedae- 
moniorum  dux  fuisset  Peloponnesiaco  hello,  multaque  fecisset  egregie,  vertit 
ad  extremum  omnia,  cum  consilio  non  paruit  eorum,  qui  classem  ab  Arginusis 
removendam,  nec  cum  Atheniensibus  dimicandum  putabant.  Quibus  ille 
respondit,  Lacedaemonios,  classe  ilia  amissa,  aliam  parare  posse,  se  fugere  sine 
suo  dedecore  non  posse.  Offic.  l.i.  n.  48. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


95 


Athenian  generals  ordered  Theramenes,  Thrasybulus,  and 
some  other  officers,  to  return  with  about  fifty  galleys  to  take 
up  the  wrecks  and  dead  bodies,  in  order  to  their  interment, 
whilst  they  sailed  on  with  the  rest  against  Eteonicus,  who  kept 
Conon  besieged  before  Mitylene.  But  a violent  tempest  came 
on  suddenly,  and  prevented  the  execution  of  this  order.  Eteo- 
nicus having  received  news  of  the  defeat,  and  fearing  it  might 
occasion  alarm  and  terror  amongst  the  troops,  sent  back 
those  who  brought  it,  with  orders  to  return  with  wreaths  of 
flowers  upon  their  heads,  and  to  give  out,  that  Callicratidas 
had  gained  the  victory,  and  destroyed  the  whole  Athenian  fleet. 
Upon  their  return  he  offered  sacrifices  of  thanksgiving,  and 
having  made  his  troops  take  some  refreshment,  he  sent  the 
galleys  away  directly,  the  wind  being  fair,  and  marched  off  the 
land  army  to  Methymna,  after  having  burnt  the  camp.  Conon 
being  delivered  in  this  manner  from  the  blockade,  joined  the 
victorious  fleet,  which  returned  forthwith  to  Samos.  However, 
when  it  was  known  at  Athens,  that  the  dead  bodies  had  been 
left  without  interment,  the  people  were  highly  enraged,  and 
caused  the  whole  weight  of  their  resentment  to  fall  upon  those 
whom  they  deemed  guilty  of  that  crime.  The  ancients  held  it 
a great  one  not  to  provide  sepulture  for  the  dead ; and  we 
may  observe,  that  after  all  their  battles,  the  first  care  of  - the 
conquered,  notwithstanding  the  sense  of  their  misfortune,  and 
their  great  affliction  for  a bloody  defeat,  was  to  demand  a sus- 
pension of  arms  from  the  victor,  in  order  to  pay  the  last  duties 
to  those  who  had  fallen  in  battle  ; upon  which  they  believed 
their  happiness  in  another  life  depended.  They  had  little  or 
no  idea  of  the  resurrection  of  the  body  ; but,  however,  the  Pa- 
gans, by  the  soul’s  concern  for  the  body  after  death,  the  religious 
regard  paid  to  it,  and  the  zeal  with  which  they  rendered  solemn 
honours  to  the  dead,  showed  that  they  had  some  confused  notion 
of  a resurrection,  which  subsisted  amongst  all  nations,  and  de- 
scended from  the  most  ancient  tradition,  though  they  could  not 
clearly  distinguish  it. 

Hence  arose  the  fury  of  the  people  of  Athens.  They  imme- 
diately nominated  new  generals,  retaining  only  Conon  of  the 
old  ones,  to  whom  they  gave  Adimantus  and  Philocles  for 
colleagues.  Of  the  eight  others,  two  had  withdrawn  them- 
selves, and  only  six  returned  to  Athens.  Theramenes,  the 
tenth  general,  who  returned  before  the  rest  of  the  fleet,  accused 
the  other  chiefs  before  the  people,  making  them  responsible 
for  not  bringing  off  the  dead  after  the  battle  ; and  to  clear  him- 
self, read  the  letter  they  had  written  to  the  senate  and  people, 
wherein  they  excused  themselves  from  the  violence  of  the  storm, 
without  charging  any  body.  There  was  something  detestably 
vile  in  this  calumny,  as  it  was  making  an  unjust  use  of  their 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


reserve  in  not  mentioning  him  in  their  letter,  and  in  not  laying 
a fault  to  his  charge,  of  which  he  might  have  appeared  the 
most  guilty.  The  generals,  at  their  return,  not  being  able  to 
prevail  in  obtaining  the  time  necessary  for  making  their  defence, 
contented  themselves  with  representing  in  few  words  the  state 
of  the  affairs,  and  appealed  for  the  truth  of  what  they  said  to 
the  pilots,  and  all  present  when  it  happened.  The  people 
seemed  to  receive  their  excuse  favourably,  and  several  persons 
offered  themselves  for  their  sureties  ; but  it  was  thought  proper 
to  adjourn  the  assembly,  because  of  the  night,  and  it  being  the 
people’s  custom  to  give  their  suffrages  by  lifting  up  of  hands, 
their  resolution  could  not  be  known  ; besides  which  the  council 
were  first  to  give  their  opinion  upon  the  question  to  be  proposed 
to  the  people. 

The  feast  of  Apaturia  coming  on,  in  which  it  was  the  custom 
to  assemble  by  families,  the  relations  of  Theramenes  posted  several 
persons  in  mourning  habits,  with  their  heads  shaved,  in  proper 
places,  who  said  they  were  the  kindred  of  those  who  had  been  slain 
in  battle,  and  obliged  Callixenes  to  accuse  the  generals  in  the 
senate.  It  was  decreed  in  consequence,  that  as  the  accusation 
and  defence  had  been  heard  in  the  last  assembly,  the  people  by 
their  respective  tribes  should  give  their  voices,  and  if  the  ac- 
cused were  found  guilty,  they  should  be  punished  with  death, 
their  estates  confiscated,  and  the  tenth  part  consecrated  to  the 
goddess.11  Some  senators  opposed  this  decree  as  unjust,  and 
contrary  to  the  laws  : but  as  the  people,  at  the  instigation  of 
Callixenes,  threatened  to  include  the  opposers  in  the  same  cause 
and  crime  with  the  generals,  they  were  so  mean  as  to  desist 
from  their  opposition,  and  to  sacrifice  the  innocent  generals 
to  their  own  safety,  by  consenting  to  the  decree.  Socrates 
(the  celebrated  philosopher)  was  the  only  one  of  the  senators 
that  stood  firm,  and  persisted  obstinately  in  opposing  a decree 
So  notoriously  unjust,  and  so  contrary  to  all  laws.  The  orator, 
who  mounted  the  tribunal  in  defence  of  the  generals,  showed. 
That  they  had  failed  in  no  part  of  their  duty , as  they  had  given 
orders  that  the  dead  bodies  should  he  taken  up  ; that  if  any 
one  were  guilty , it  was  he  who,  being  charged  with  these  orders, 
had  neglected  to  put  them  in  execution  ; but  that  he  accused 
nobody : and  that  the  tempest , which  came  on  unexpectedly  at 
the  very  instant,  was  an  unanswerable  apology,  and  entirely 
discharged  the  accused  from  all  guilt.  He  demanded,  that  a 
whole  day  should  be  allowed  them  to  make  their  defence,  a fa- 
vour not  denied  to  the  most  criminal,  and  that  they  should  be 
tried  separately . He  represented,  that  they  were  not  in  the 
least  obliged  to  precipitate  a sentence,  wherein  the  lives  of  the 
most  illustrious  of  the  citizens  were  concerned ; that  it  was  in 

n Minerva. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


97 


some  measure  attaching  the  gods  to  make  men  responsible  for 
the  winds  and  weather  ;°  and  that  they  could  not , without  the 
most  flagrant  ingratitude  and  injustice,  put  the  conquerors  to 
death,  to  whom  they  ought  to  decree  crowns  and  honours,  or 
give  up  the  defenders  of  their  country  to  the  rage  of  those  who 
envied  them  ; and  if  they  did  so,  their  unjust  judgment  would 
be  followed  with  a sudden  but  vain  repentance,  which  would 
leave  in  their  hearts  the  sharpest  remorse,  and  cover  them  ivith 
eternal  shame  and  infamy.  The  people  seemed  at  first  to  be 
moved  with  these  reasons ; but  being  animated  by  the  accusers, 
they  pronounced  sentence  of  death  against  the  eight  generals  ; 
and  six  of  them,  who  were  present,  were  seized  in  order  to 
their  being  carried  to  execution.  One  of  them,  Diomedon,  a 
person  of  great  reputation  for  his  valour  and  probity,  demanded 
to  be  heard.  Athenians,  said  he,  I wish  the  sentence  you  have 
passed  upon  us  may  not  prove  the  misfortune  of  the  republic ; 
but  I have  one  favour  to  ash  of  you  in  behalf  of  my  colleagues 
and  myself,  which  is,  to  acquit  us  before  the  gods  of  the  vows 
we  made  to  them  for  you  and  ourselves,  as  we  are  not  in  a con- 
dition to  discharge  them  ; for  it  is  to  their  protection,  invoked 
before  the  battle,  we  acknowledge  that  we  are  indebted  for  the 
victory  gained  by  us  over  the  enemy.  There  was  not  one  good 
citizen  that  did  not  melt  into  tears  at  this  discourse,  so  full  of 
mildness  and  religion,  and  admire  with  surprise  the  moderation 
of  a person,  who  seeing  himself  unjustly  condemned,  did  not 
however  vent  the  least  harsh  expression,  or  even  complaint, 
against  his  judges,  but  was  solely  intent  (in  favour  of  an  un- 
grateful country,  which  had  doomed  them  to  perish)  upon  what 
it  owed  the  gods  in  common  with  them  for  the  victory  they  had 
lately  obtained. 

The  six  generals  were  hardly  executed  when  the  people 
opened  their  eyes,  and  perceived  all  the  horror  of  that  sentence ; 
but  their  repentance  could  not  restore  the  dead  to  life.  Cal- 
lixenes,  their  accuser,  was  put  in  prison,  and  was  not  allowed 
to  be  heard.  Having  found  means  to  make  his  escape,  he  fled 
to  Decelia  to  the  enemy,  from  whence  he  returned  some  time 
after  to  Athens,  where  he  died  of  hunger,  universally  detested 
and  abhorred  by  all  the  world,  as  all  false  accusers  and  slander- 
ers ought  to  be.  Diodorus  remarks,  that  the  people  themselves 
were  justly  punished  for  their  crime  by  the  gods,  who  abandon- 
ed them  soon  after,  not  to  a single  master,  but  to  thirty  tyrants, 
that  treated  them  with  the  utmost  rigour  and  cruelty. 

The  disposition  of  the  populace  is  recognized  in  this  ac- 
count ;P  and  Plato,  upon  the  same  event,  draws  in  few  words 

0 Quern  adeo  iniquum,  ut  sceleri  assignet,  quod  venti  et  fluctus  deliquerint  ? 
Tacit.  Annal.  1.  xiv.  c.  3. 

p Plat,  in  Axioch.  p.  368,  3G9. 

vol.  nr.  h 


98 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


their  character  with  much  spirit  and  resemblance.  The  popu- 
lace,11 says  he,  is  an  inconstant,  ungrateful,  cruel,  suspicious 
animal,  incapable  of  submitting  to  the  government  of  reason ; 
and  this  is  no  wonder,  adds  he,  as  it  is  commonly  composed  of 
the  dregs  of  a city,  and  is  a monstrous  assemblage,  without 
form  or  order,  of  all  that  is  worst  in  it. 

The  same  relation  shows  what  effect  fear  can  have  upon  the 
minds  of  men,  even  upon  those  who  pass  for  the  wisest,  and 
how  few  there  are,  who  are  capable  of  supporting  inflexibly 
the  view  of  present  danger  and  disgrace.  Though  the  justice 
of  the  accused  generals’  cause  was  perfectly  known  in  the 
senate,  at  least  by  the  greater  part  of  it ; as  soon  as  the  people’s 
rage  was  mentioned,  and  the  terrible  menaces  they  murmured, 
those  grave  senators,  most  of  whom  had  commanded  armies,  and 
who  all  had  frequently  exposed  themselves  to  the  greatest  dan- 
gers of  war,  instantly  changed  sides,  and  came  over  to  the  most 
notorious  calumny,  and  flagrant  injustice,  that  ever  had  being : an 
evident  proof,  that  there  is  a courage,  though  very  rare,  which 
infinitely  transcends  that  valour,  which  induces  so  many  thou- 
sands of  men  every  day  to  confront  the  most  terrible  dangers  in 
battle. 

Amongst  all  the  judges,  one  alone,  truly  worthy  of  his  repu- 
tation, the  great  Socrates,  in  this  general  treason  and  perfidy, 
stood  firm  and  immoveable ; and  though  he  knew  his  suffrage 
and  unaided  voice  would  be  of  little  or  no  consequence  to  the 
accused,  he  thought  these  an  homage  due  to  oppressed  innocence, 
and  that  it  was  unworthy  an  honest  manr  to  suffer  himself, 
through  a base  fear,  to  be  hurried  away  by  the  fury  of  a blind 
and  frantic  people.  We  see  in  this  instance  how  far  the  cause 
of  justice  may  be  abandoned.  We  may  conclude  it  was  not 
better  defended  before  the  people.  Of  more  than  3000  citizens, 
who  composed  the  assembly,  two  only  took  upon  them  the 
defence  of  their  generals,  Euriptolemus  and  Axioclius.  Plato 
has  preserved  their  names,  and  given  that  of  the  latter  to  the 
dialogue,  from  whence  part  of  these  reflections  are  taken. 

The  same  year  that  the  battle  of  the  Arginuste 
Ant.  J.'cf 406  was  fought,  Dionysius  possessed  himself  of  the 
tyranny  in  Sicily.  I shall  defer  speaking  of  him 
till  the  ensuing  volume,  in  which  I shall  relate  the  history  of 
the  tyrants  of  Syracuse  at  large. 


Afjpog  a^apuTTOV,  axf/ticopov,  lopov,  fiaanavov,  cnrctiSsvroV' 
T Ow  yap  ityaiviTO  fiot  (TSfivov  brifiip  / ucuvop.kv(p  a vvt^apyiw. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


99 


SECT.  VI. 

Lysander  commands  the  Lacedaemonian  fleet.  Cyrus  is  recalled  to  court  by 
his  father.  Lysander  gains  a celebrated  victory  over  the  Athenians  at 
iEgospotamos. 

After  the  defeat  at  the  Arginusae,*  the  affairs 
Ant  ^05  the  Pel°Ponnesians  declining,  the  allies,  sup- 
ported by  the  credit  of  Cyrus,  sent  an  embassy 
to  Sparta,  to  demand  that  the  command  of  the  fleet  should 
again  be  given  to  Lysander,  with  the  promise  of  serving  with 
more  affection  and  courage  if  their  request  were  granted.  As 
it  was  contrary  to  the  laws  of  Sparta  that  the  same  person 
should  be  twice  admiral,  the  Lacedaemonians,  to  gratify  the 
allies,  gave  the  title  of  admiral  to  one  Aracus,  and  sent  Ly- 
sander with  him,  whom  in  appearance  they  commissioned  only 
as  vice-admiral,  though  in  effect  they  invested  him  with  all  the 
authority  of  the  supreme  command. 

All  those  who  had  the  greatest  share  in  the  government  of 
the  cities,  and  possessed  the  most  authority  in  them,  saw  him 
arrive  with  extreme  joy  ; promising  themselves,  from  his  in- 
fluence, the  final  subversion  of  the  democratic  power.  His 
character  of  complaisance  towards  his  friends,  and  indulgence 
to  all  their  faults,  suited  much  better  their  ambitious  and  in- 
jurious views,  than  the  austere  equity  of  Callicratidas.  For 
Lysander  was  a man  of  the  most  corrupt  heart,  and  gloried 
in  having  no  principles  on  the  score  of  virtue  or  the  most 
sacred  duties.  He  made  no  scruple  to  employ  artifice  and 
deceit  upon  all  occasions,  and  esteemed  justice  only  as  far  as 
it  served  his  measures.  When  it  did  not  promote  them,  he 
never  failed  to  prefer  the  useful,  which  with  him  was  alone 
the  laudable  and  excellent ; from  a persuasion  that  truth  had 
in  its  own  nature  no  advantage  over  falsehood,  and  that  the 
value  of  both  one  and  the  other  was  to  be  appreciated  by  the 
convenience  resulting  from  them.  And  as  to  those  who  re- 
presented to  him,  that  it  was  unworthy  the  descendants  of 
Hercules  to  make  use  of  fraud  and  treachery,  he  laughed  at 
them  ; For , said  he,  where  the  lion’s  skin  is  not  long  enough , it 
is  necessary  to  tack  the  fox’s  tail  to  it. 

An  expression  ascribed  to  him  sufficiently  denotes  how  small 
an  account  he  made  of  perjury.  He  used  to  say,  Children  are 
amused  icith  baubles , and  men  with  oaths  ;*■  showing,  by  so 

9 Xenoph.  Hellen.  1.  ii.  p.  454.  Plut.  in  Lys.  1.  ix.  p.  436,  437.  Diod.  1. 
xiii.  p.  223. 

1 The  Greek  text  admits  of  another  sense,  which  is  perhaps  equally  good  : 
Children  may  use  art , and  cheat  one  another  in  their  games , and  men  in  their  oaths. 
*£<c£\{Uf  rovg  [xsv  7 raidag  aarpayaXoig,  rovg  S’  avdpag  opicoig  s^arrarav. 

H 2 


100 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


professed  a want  of  religion,  that  he  cared  less  for  the  gods 
than  his  enemies.  For  he  who  deceives  with  a false  oath,  plainly 
declares,  in  so  doing,  that  he  fears  his  enemies,  but  that  he  de- 
spises God. 

Here  ends  the  twenty-sixth  year  of  the  Peloponnesian  war.u 
In  this  year  it  was,  that  the  younger  Cyrus,  dazzled  with  the 
splendour  of  supreme  authority,  to  which  he  had  been  little 
accustomed,  and  jealous  of  the  least  omission  in  point  of 
ceremonial  homage,  discovered  by  a remarkable  action  the  secret 
of  his  heart.  Brought  up  from  his  infancy  among  the  reign- 
ing family,  nurtured  under  the  shade  of  the  throne,  amidst  the 
submissions  and  prostrations  of  the  courtiers,  entertained  long 
by  the  discourses  of  an  ambitious  mother  that  idolized  him, 
in  the  desire  and  hope  of  empire,  he  began  already  to  exert  the 
rights  of  sovereignty,  and  to  exact  the  honours  paid  to  it  with 
surprising  haughtiness  and  rigour.  Two  Persians  of  the  royal 
family,  his  cousin-germans  by  their  mother,  sister  of  his  father 
Darius,  had  omitted  to  cover  their  hands  with  their  sleeves  in 
his  presence,  according  to  a ceremonial  observed  only  towards 
the  kings  of  Persia.  Cyrus,  resenting  that  neglect  as  a capital 
crime,  condemned  them  both  to  die,  and  caused  them  to  be  ex- 
ecuted at  Sardis  without  mercy.  Darius,  at  whose  feet  their 
relations  threw  themselves  to  demand  justice,  was  very  much 
affected  with  the  tragical  end  of  his  two  nephews,  and  looked 
upon  this  action  of  his  son’s  as  an  attempt  upon  himself,  to 
whom  alone  that  honour  was  due.  He  resolved  therefore  to 
take  his  government  from  him,  and  ordered  him  to  court  upon 
the  pretext  of  being  sick,  and  having  a desire  to  see  him. 

Cyrus,  before  his  departure,  sent  for  Lysander  to  Sardis,  and 
put  into  his  hands  great  sums  of  money  for  the  payment  of 
his  fleet,  promising  him  still  more  for  the  future.  And, 
with  the  ostentation  of  a young  man,  to  let  him  see  how  much 
he  desired  to  oblige  him,  he  assured  him,  that  though  the  king 
his  father  should  cease  to  afford  him  any  supplies,  he  would 
furnish  him  the  more  willingly  out  of  his  own  coffers,  and  that 
rather  than  he  should  want  the  necessary  provisions,  he  would 
even  cause  the  throne  of  massy  gold  and  silver,  upon  which  he 
sat  to  administer  justice,  to  be  melted  down.  At  length,  when 
he  was  upon  the  point  of  setting  out,  he  empowered  him  to 
receive  the  tributes  and  revenues  of  the  cities,  confided  the 
government  of  his  provinces  to  him,  and  embracing  him,  con- 
jured him  not  to  give  battle  in  his  absence,  unless  superior  in 
force  ; because  the  king  neither  wanted  the  will  nor  the  power 
to  give  him  that  superiority  over  the  enemy ; promising  at  the 
same  time,  with  the  strongest  assurances  of  affection,  to  bring 
him  a great  number  of  ships  from  Phoenicia  and  Cilicia. 
u Xenophon.  Hellen.  1.  ii.  p.  454. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


101 


After  that  prince’s  departure,*  Lysander  sailed  towards  the 
Hellespont,  and  laid  siege  to  Lampsacus  ; Thorax,  having 
marched  thither  with  his  land-forces  at  the  same  time,  assaulted 
the  city  on  his  side.  The  place  was  carried  by  storm,  y and 
abandoned  by  Lysander  to  the  soldiers.  The  Athenians,  who 
followed  him  close,  came  to  an  anchor  in  the  port  of  Eleontum  in 
the  Chersonesus,  with  180  galleys.  But  upon  the  news  of  the 
taking  of  Lampsacus,  they  immediately  steered  for  Sestos,  and 
after  having  taken  in  provisions,  they  stood  away  from  thence, 
sailing  along  the  coast  to  a place  called  jEgospotamos,2  where 
they  halted  over  against  the  enemy,  who  were  then  at  anchor  be- 
fore Lampsacus.  The  Hellespont  is  not  above  2000  paces 
broad  in  that  place.  The  two  armies,  seeing  themselves  so  near 
each  other,  expected  only  to  rest  that  day,  and  were  in  hopes 
of  coming  to  a battle  on  the  next. 

But  Lysander  had  another  design  in  view.  He  commanded 
the  seamen  and  pilots  to  go  on  board  their  galleys,  as  if  they 
were  in  reality  to  fight  the  next  morning  at  break  of  day,  to 
hold  themselves  in  readiness,  and  to  wait  his  orders  with  pro- 
found silence.  He  ordered  the  land-army  in  like  manner  to  draw 
up  in  battle  upon  the  coast,  and  to  wait  the  day  without  any 
noise.  On  the  morrow,  as  soon  as  the  sun  was  risen,  the  Athe- 
nians began  to  row  towards  them  with  their  whole  fleet  in  one  line, 
and  to  bid  them  defiance.  Lysander,  though  his  ships  were 
ranged  in  order  of  battle,  with  their  heads  towards  the  enemy, 
lay  still  without  making  any  movement.  In  the  evening  when 
the  Athenians  withdrew,  he  did  not  suffer  his  soldiers  to  go 
ashore,  till  two  or  three  galleys,  which  he  had  sent  out  to  observe 
them,  were  returned  with  advice,  that  they  had  seen  the  enemy 
land.  The  next  day  passed  in  the  same  manner,  as  did  the 
third  and  fourth.  Such  a conduct,  which  argued  reserve  and 
apprehension,  extremely  augmented  the  security  and  boldness 
of  the  Athenians,  and  inspired  them  with  a sovereign  contempt 
for  an  army,  which  fear,  in  their  opinion,  prevented  from  show- 
ing themselves,  and  attempting  any  thing. 

Whilst  this  passed,  Alcibiades,  who  was  near  the  fleet,  took 
horse,  and  came  to  the  Athenian  generals  ; to  whom  he  repre- 
sented, that  they  kept  upon  a very  disadvantageous  coast,  where 
there  were  neither  ports  nor  cities  in  the  neighbourhood  ; that 
they  were  obliged  to  bring  their  provisions  from  Sestos,  with 
great  danger  and  difficulty ; and  that  they  were  very  much  in 
the  wrong  to  suffer  the  soldiers  and  mariners  of  the  fleet,  as 
soon  as  they  were  ashore,  to  straggle  and  disperse  themselves 
wherever  they  pleased,  whilst  they  saw  an  enemy’s  fleet  fa- 
cing them,  accustomed  to  execute  the  orders  of  their  general 

* Xenophon.  Hellen.  1.  ii.  p.  455 — 458.  v Plut.  in  Lys.  p.  437  & 440 

Id.  in  Alcib.  p.  212.  Diod.  1.  xiii.  p.  225, 226.  z The  river  of  the  Goat. 


102 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


with  instant  obedience,  and  upon  the  slightest  signal.  He  of- 
fered also  to  attack  the  enemy  by  land  with  a strong  body  of 
Thracian  troops,  and  to  force  them  to  a battle.  The  generals, 
especially  Tydeus  and  Menander,  jealous  of  their  command, 
did  not  content  themselves  with  refusing  his  offers,  from  the 
opinion,  that  if  the  event  proved  unfortunate,  the  whole  blame 
would  fall  on  them,  and  if  favourable,  that  Alcibiades  would 
engross  the  honour  of  it;  but  rejected  also  with  insult  his 
wise  and  salutary  counsel,  as  if  a man  in  disgrace  had  lost  his 
sense  and  abilities  with  the  favour  of  the  commonwealth.  Al- 
cibiades withdrew. 

The  fifth  day  the  Athenians  presented  themselves  again,  and 
offered  him  battle  ; retiring  in  the  evening  according  to  custom 
with  more  insulting  airs  than  the  days  before.  Lysander,  as 
usual,  detached  some  galleys  to  observe  them,  with  orders  to 
return  with  the  utmost  diligence  as  soon  as  they  saw  the  Athe- 
nians landed,  and  to  put  a brazen  buckler  at  each  ship’s  head 
as  soon  as  they  reached  the  middle  of  the  channel.  Himself  in 
the  mean  time  ran  through  the  whole  line  in  his  galley,  exhort- 
ing the  pilots  and  officers  to  hold  the  seamen  and  soldiers  in 
readiness  to  row  and  fight  on  the  first  signal. 

As  soon  as  the  bucklers  were  put  up  in  the  ships’  heads,  and 
the  admiral’s  galley  had  given  the  signal  by  the  sound  of  trumpet, 
the  whole  fleet  set  forwards  in  good  order.  The  land-army  at 
the  same  time  made  all  possible  haste  to  the  top  of  the  promon- 
tory to  see  the  battle.  The  strait  that  separates  the  two  conti- 
nents in  this  place,  is  about  fifteen  stadia, a or  three  quarters  of 
a league  in  breadth,  which  space  was  presently  cleared  through 
the  activity  and  diligence  of  the  rowers.  Conon,  the  Athe- 
nian general,  was  the  first  who  perceived  from  the  shore  the 
enemy’s  fleet  advancing  in  good  order  to  attack  him  ; upon 
which  he  immediately  cried  out  for  the  troops  to  embark. 
In  the  height  of  sorrow  and  perplexity,  some  he  called  to  by 
their  names,  some  he  conjured,  and  others  he  forced  to  go  on 
board  their  galleys  ; but  all  his  endeavours  and  emotion  were 
ineffectual,  the  soldiers  being  dispersed  on  all  sides.  For  they 
were  no  sooner  come  on  shore,  than  some  ran  to  the  sutlers, 
some  to  walk  in  the  country,  some  to  sleep  in  their  tents,  and 
others  had  begun  to  dress  their  suppers.  This  proceeded 
from  the  want  of  vigilance  and  experience  in  their  generals, 
who,  not  suspecting  the  least  danger,  indulged  themselves  in 
taking  their  repose,  and  gave  their  soldiers  the  same  liberty. 

The  enemy  had  already  fallen  on  with  loud  cries  and  a great 
noise  of  their  oars,  when  Conon,  disengaging  himself  with  nine 
galleys,  of  which  number  was  the  sacred  ship  called  the  Parali- 
an,  stood  away  for  Cyprus,  where  he  took  refuge  with  Evagoras. 

a 1875  paces. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


103 


The  Peloponnesians,  falling  upon  the  rest  of  the  fleet,  took  im- 
mediately the  galleys  which  were  empty,  and  disabled  and  de- 
stroyed such  as  began  to  fill  with  men.  The  soldiers,  who  ran 
without  order  or  arms  to  their  relief,  were  either  killed  in  the 
endeavour  to  get  on  board,  or,  flying  on  shore,  were  cut  to  pieces 
by  the  enemy,  who  landed  in  pursuit  of  them.  Lysander  took 
3000  prisoners,  with  all  the  generals  and  the  whole  fleet.  After 
having  plundered  the  camp,  and  fastened  the  enemy’s  galleys  to 
the  sterns  of  his  own,  he  returned  to  Lampsacus  amidst  the 
sounds  of  flutes  and  songs  of  triumph.  He  had  the  glory  of 
achieving  one  of  the  greatest  military  exploits  recorded  in  history, 
with  little  or  no  loss,  and  of  terminating  in  the  small  space  of  an 
hour,  a war  which  had  already  lasted  seven-and-twenty  years, 
and  which  perhaps,  without  him,  would  have  been  of  much 
longer  continuance.  Lysander  immediately  sent  despatches 
with  this  agreeable  news  to  Sparta. 

The  3000  prisoners,  taken  in  this  battle,  having  been  con- 
demned to  die,  Lysander  called  upon  Philocles,  one  of  the 
Athenian  generals,  who  had  caused  all  the  prisoners,  taken  in  two 
galleys,  the  one  of  Andros,  the  other  of  Corinth,  to  be  thrown 
from  the  top  of  a precipice,  and  had  formerly  persuaded  the 
people  of  Athens  to  make  a decree  for  cutting  off  the  thumb  of 
the  right  hand  of  all  the  prisoners  of  war,  in  order  to  disable  them 
for  handling  the  pike,  and  that  they  might  be  fit  only  to  serve 
at  the  oar.  Lysander  therefore  caused  him  to  be  brought  forth, 
and  asked  him,  what  sentence  he  would  pass  upon  himself,  for 
having  induced  his  city  to  pass  that  cruel  decree.  Philocles, 
without  departing  from  his  haughtiness  in  the  least,  notwith- 
standing the  extreme  danger  he  was  in,  made  answer,  Accuse 
not  people  of  crimes  who  have  no  judges  ; but  as  you  are  victor , 
use  your  right , and  do  by  us  as  ice  would  have  done  by  you , if 
we  had  conquered . At  the  same  instant  he  went  into  a bath, 
put  on  afterwards  a magnificent  robe,  and  marched  foremost  to 
the  execution.  All  the  prisoners  were  put  to  the  sword,  except 
Adimantus,  who  had  opposed  the  decree. 

After  this  expedition,  Lysander  went  with  his  fleet  to  all  the 
maritime  cities,  and  gave  orders  for  all  Athenians  in  them  to 
withdraw  as  soon  as  possible  to  Athens,  without  permitting 
them  to  take  any  other  route  ; declaring,  that  after  a certain 
time  fixed,  all  such  should  be  punished  with  death,  as  should  be 
found  out  of  Athens.  This  he  did  as  an  able  politician,  to  re- 
duce the  city  by  famine  the  more  easily,  and  to  render  it  inca- 
pable of  sustaining  a long  siege.  He  afterwards  busied  himself 
in  subjecting  democracy,  and  all  forms  of  government,  through- 
out the  cities ; leaving  in  each  of  them  a Lacedaemonian  governor, 
called  harmostes,  and  ten  archons,  or  magistrates,  whom  he  chose 
out  of  the  societies  he  had  established  in  them.  He  thereby  in 


104 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


some  measure  secured  to  himself  universal  authority,  and  a kind 
of  sovereignty  over  all  Greece  ; putting  none  into  power  but 
such  as  were  entirely  devoted  to  his  service. 

SECT.  VII. 

Athens,  besieged  by  Lysander,  capitulates  and  surrenders.  Lysander  changes 
the  form  of  government,  and  establishes  thirty  commanders  in  it.  He 
sends  Gylippus  before  him  to  Sparta  with  all  the  gold  and  silver  taken  from 
the  enemy.  Decree  of  Sparta  upon  the  use  to  be  made  of  it.  The  Pelo- 
ponnesian war  ends  in  this  manner.  Death  of  Darius  Nothus. 

When  the  news  of  the  entire  defeat  of  the 
Ant  j?*C6404  army  came  to  Athens  by  a ship, b which  arrived 
in  the  night  at  the  Piraeeus,  the  city  was  in  uni- 
versal consternation.  Nothing  was  heard  but  cries  of  sorrow 
and  despair  in  every  part  of  it.  They  imagined  the  enemy 
already  at  their  gates.  They  represented  to  themselves  the  mi- 
series of  a long  siege,  a cruel  famine,  the  ruin  and  burning  of 
their  city,  the  insolence  of  a proud  victor,  and  the  shameful 
slavery  they  were  upon  the  point  of  experiencing,  more  af- 
flicting and  insupportable  to  them  than  the  most  severe  punish- 
ments and  death  itself.  The  next  day  the  assembly  was  sum- 
moned, wherein  it  was  resolved  to  shut  up  all  the  ports,  one 
only  excepted  ; to  repair  the  breaches  in  the  walls  ; and  mount 
guard  to  prepare  against  a siege. 

In  fact,  Agis  and  Pausanias,  the  two  kings  of  Sparta,  ad- 
vanced towards  Athens  with  all  their  troops.  Lysander  soon 
after  arrived  at  Piraeeus  with  150  sail,  and  prevented  all  ships 
from  going  in  or  coming  out.  The  Athenians,  besieged  by 
sea  and  land,  without  provisions,  ships,  hope  of  relief,  or  any 
resource,  reinstated  all  persons  who  had  been  attainted  by  any 
decree,  without  however  speaking  of  a capitulation,  though 
many  already  died  of  the  famine.  But  when  their  corn  was  en- 
tirely consumed,  they  sent  deputies  to  Agis,  to  propose  a treaty 
with  Sparta,  upon  condition  of  abandoning  all  their  possessions, 
the  city  and  port  only  excepted.  He  referred  the  deputies  to 
Lacedaemon,  as  not  being  empowered  to  treat  with  them.  When 
they  arrived  at  Selasia,  upon  the  frontier  of  Sparta,  and  had 
made  known  their  commission  to  the  Ephori,  they  were  order- 
ed to  retire,  and  to  come  with  other  proposals,  if  they  expected 
peace.  The  Ephori  had  demanded,  that  1200  paces  of  the 
wall  on  each  side  of  the  Piraeeus  should  be  demolished : but 
an  Athenian,  for  venturing  to  advise  a compliance,  was  sent  to 
prison,  and  prohibition  made  against  proposing  any  thing  of 
that  kind  for  the  future. 

In  this  deplorable  condition,  Theramenes  declared  in  the 
assembly,  that  if  he  were  sent  to  Lysander,  he  would  know 
b Xenoph.  Hellen.  1.  ii.  p.  458 — 462.  Plut.  in  Lysand.  p.  440,  441. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


105 


whether  the  proposal  made  by  the  Laced yemonians  for  disman- 
tling the  city,  was  intended  to  facilitate  its  ruin,  or  to  prevent 
a revolt.  The  Athenians  having  deputed  him  accordingly,  he 
was  more  than  three  months  absent ; no  doubt  with  the  view  of 
reducing  them  by  famine  to  accept  any  conditions  that  should 
be  offered.  On  his  return  he  told  them,  that  Lysander  had 
detained  him  all  that  time,  and  that  at  last  he  had  given  him  to 
undersand,  that  he  might  apply  to  the  Ephori.  He  was  there- 
fore sent  back  with  nine  others  to  Sparta,  with  full  powers  to 
conclude  a treaty.  When  they  arrived  there,  the  Ephori  gave 
them  audience  in  the  general  assembly,  where  the  Corinthi- 
ans and  several  other  allies,  especially  the  Thebans,  insisted 
that  it  was  absolutely  necessary  to  destroy  the  city  without 
hearkening  any  farther  to  a treaty.  But  the  Lacedaemonians, 
preferring  the  glory  and  safety  of  Greece  to  their  own  gran- 
deur, made  answer,  that  they  never  would  be  reproached  with 
having  destroyed  a city  that  had  rendered  such  great  services 
to  all  Greece ; the  remembrance  of  which  ought  to  have  much 
greater  weight  with  the  allies  than  the  resentment  of  private  in- 
juries received  from  it.  The  peace  was  therefore  concluded  upon 
these  conditions  : That  the  fortifications  of  the  Pirceeus,  with 
the  long  wall  that  joined  that  port  to  the  city,  should  he  demolish- 
ed; that  the  Athenians  should  deliver  up  all  their  galleys,  twelve 
only  excepted ; that  they  should  abandon  all  the  cities  they  had 
seized,  and  content  themselves  with  their  own  lands  and  coun- 
try ; that  they  should  recall  their  exiles,  and  make  a league  of- 
fensive and  defensive  with  the  Lacedcemonians,  under  whom 
they  should  march  wherever  they  thought  fit  to  lead  them. 

The  deputies  on  their  return  were  surrounded  with  an  innu- 
merable throng  of  people,  who  were  apprehensive  that  nothing 
had  been  concluded,  for  they  were  not  able  to  hold  out  any 
longer,  such  multitudes  dying  every  day  of  famine.  The  next 
day  they  reported  the  success  of  their  negotiation ; the  treaty 
was  ratified,  notwithstanding  the  opposition  of  some  persons ; 
and  Lysander,  followed  by  the  exiles,  entered  the  port.  It  was 
upon  the  very  day  that  the  Athenians  had  formerly  gained  the 
famous  naval  battle  of  Salamis.  He  caused  the  walls  to  be 
demolished  to  the  sound  of  flutes  and  trumpets,  and  with  all 
the  exterior  marks  of  triumph  and  rejoicing,  as  if  all  Greece 
had  that  day  regained  its  liberty.  Thus  ended  the  Peloponne- 
sian war,  after  having  continued  during  the  space  of  twenty- 
seven  years. 

Lysander,  without  giving  the  Athenians  time  to  look  about 
them,  changed  the  form  of  their  government  entirely,  establish- 
ed thirty  archons,  or  rather  tyrants,  over  the  city,  put  a strong 
garrison  into  the  citadel,  and  left  the  Spartan  Callibius  har- 
mostes,  or  governor.  Agis  dismissed  his  troops.  Lysander, 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


106 

before  he  disbanded  bis,  advanced  against  Samos,  which  he 
pressed  so  warmly,  that  it  was  at  last  obliged  to  capitulate. 
After  having  established  its  ancient  inhabitants  in  it,  he  pro- 
posed to  return  to  Sparta  with  the  Lacedaemonian  galleys,  those 
of  the  Piraeeus,  and  the  beaks  of  those  he  had  taken. 

He  had  sent  Gylippus,  who  had  commanded  the  army  in 
Sicily,  before  him,  to  carry  the  money  and  spoils,  which  were 
the  fruit  of  his  glorious  campaigns,  to  Lacedaemon.  The 
money,  without  reckoning  the  innumerable  crowns  of  gold  given 
him  by  the  cities,  amounted  to  1500  talents,  that  is  to  say, 
1,500,000  crowns.0  Gylippus,  who  carried  this  considerable 
sum,  could  not  resist  the  temptation  of  converting  some  part  of 
it  to  his  own  use.  The  bags  were  sealed  up  carefully,  and  did 
not  seem  to  leave  any  room  for  theft.  He  unsewed  them  at 
the  bottom ; and  after  having  taken  out  of  each  of  them  what 
money  he  thought  fit,  to  the  amount  of  300  talents,  he  sewed 
them  up  again  very  neatly,  and  thought  himself  perfectly  safe. 
But  when  he  arrived  at  Sparta,  the  accounts,  which  had  been 
put  up  in  each  bag,  discovered  him.  To  avoid  punishment,  he 
banished  himself  from  his  country,  carrying  along  with  him  in 
all  places  the  disgrace  of  having  sullied,  by  so  base  and  sordid 
an  avarice,  the  glory  of  all  his  great  actions. 

From  this  unhappy  example,  the  wisest  and  most  judicious  of 
the  Spartans,  apprehending  the  all-powerful  effects  of  money, 
which  enslaved  not  only  the  vulgar,  but  even  the  greatest  of 
men,  extremely  blamed  Lysander  for  having  acted  so  contra- 
dictorily to  the  fundamental  laws  of  Sparta,  and  warmly  repre- 
sented to  the  Ephori,  how  incumbent  it  was  upon  them  to 
banish  all  that  gold  and  silver  from  the  republic, d and  to  lay  the 
heaviest  of  curses  and  imprecations  upon  it,  as  the  fatal  bane 
of  all  other  states,  introduced  only  to  corrupt  the  wholesome 
constitution  of  the  Spartan  government,  which  had  supported 
itself  for  so  many  ages  with  vigour  and  prosperity.  The 
Ephori  immediately  passed  a decree  to  proscribe  that  money, 
and  ordained  that  none  should  be  current,  except  the  usual  iron 
coin.  But  Lysander’s  friends  opposed  this  decree,  and  sparing- 
no  pains  to  retain  the  gold  and  silver  in  Sparta,  the  affair  was 
referred  to  farther  deliberation.  There  naturally  seemed  only 
two  plans  to  be  proposed ; which  were,  either  to  make  the  gold 
and  silver  coin  current,  or  to  cry  them  down  and  prohibit  them 
absolutely.  The  men  of  address  and  policy  found  out  a third 
expedient,  which,  in  their  opinion,  reconciled  both  the  orders 
with  great  success  : this  was  wisely  to  choose  the  mean  betwixt 
the  vicious  extremes  of  too  much  rigour  and  too  much  remiss- 

c About  337, 00(E.  sterling. 

d ’ A7rodioirofnreladai  n av  to  ayxvpiov  ical  to  \pvaiov,  uxjirtp  KtjpaQ  in ayw- 
yyovg. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS 


107 


ness.  It  was  therefore  resolved,  that  the  new  coin  of  gold  and 
silver  should  be  solely  employed  by  the  public  treasury  ; that  it 
should  only  pass  in  the  occasions  and  uses  of  the  state  ; and 
that  every  private  person,  in  whose  possession  it  should  be 
found,  should  be  immediately  put  to  death. 

A strange  expedient ! says  Plutarch ; as  if  Lycurgus  had 
feared  the  specie  of  gold  and  silver,  and  not  the  avarice  they 
occasion ; an  avarice  less  to  be  extingushed  by  prohibiting  in- 
dividuals fron\  possessing  it,  than  inflamed  by  permitting  the 
state  to  amass  and  make  use  of  it  for  the  service  of  the  public. 
For  it  was  impossible,  whilst  that  money  was  held  in  honour 
and  esteem  with  the  public,  that  it  should  be  despised  in  pri- 
vate as  useless,  and  that  the  people  should  look  upon  that  as  of 
no  value  in  their  domestic  affairs,  which  the  state  prized,  and 
was  so  anxious  to  have  for  its  occasions  ; bad  usages,  authorized 
by  the  practice  and  example  of  the  public,  being  a thousand 
times  more  dangerous  to  individuals  than  the  vices  of  individuals 
to  the  public.  The  Lacedaemonians,  therefore,  continues  Plu- 
tarch, in  punishing  those  with  death  who  should  make  use  of  the 
new  money  in  private,  were  so  blind  and  imprudent  as  to  ima- 
gine, that  the  placing  of  the  law,  and  the  terror  of  punishment, 
as  a guard  at  the  door,  was  sufficient  to  prevent  gold  and  silver 
from  entering  the  house ; whilst  they  left  the  hearts  of  their  citi- 
zens open  to  the  desire  and  admiration  of  riches,  and  introduced 
themselves  a violent  passion  for  amassing  treasure,  in  causing  it 
to  be  deemed  a great  and  honourable  thing  to  become  rich. 

It  was  about  the  end  of  the  Peloponnesian 
war,  that  Darius  Nothus,  king  of  Persia,  died, 
after  a reign  of  nineteen  years.  Cyrus  had  arrived 

at  the  court  before  his  death,  and  Parysatis,  his  mother,  whose 
idol  he  was,  not  contented  with  having  made  his  peace,  not- 
withstanding the  faults  he  had  committed  in  his  government, 
pressed  the  old  king  to  declare  him  successor  also,  after  the  ex- 
ample of  Darius  the  First,  who  gave  Xerxes  the  preference 
before  all  his  brothers,  because  he  had  been  born,  as  Cyrus  was, 
after  his  father’s  succession  to  the  throne.  But  Darius  did  not 
carry  his  complaisance  for  her  so  far.  He  gave  the  crown  to 
Arsaces,  his  eldest  son  by  Parysatis  also,  whom  Plutarch  calls 
Arsicas,  and  bequeathed  to  Cyrus,  only  the  provinces  he  had 
already. 


A.  M.  3600. 
Ant.  J.  C.  404. 


BOOK  IX. 


THE 

HISTORY 

OF  THE 

PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS: 

CONTINUED, 

DURING  THE  FIRST  FIFTEEN  YEARS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 
ARTAXERXES  MNEMON. 


CHAP.  I. 


Sect.  I.  Coronation  of  Artaxerxes  Mnemon.  Cyrus  attempts  to  assassinate 
his  brother,  and  is  sent  into  Asia  Minor.  Cruel  revenge  of  Statira,  wife 
of  Artaxerxes,  upon  the  authors  and  accomplices  in  the  murder  of  her  bro- 
ther. Death  of  Alcibiades.  His  character. 

Arsaces,  upon  ascending  the  throne,  assumed 
Ant  j*  cf°404  name  Artaxerxes : he  it  is  to  whom  the 
Greeks  gave  the  surname  of  Mnemon, a from  his 
prodigious  memory.  Being  near  his  father’s  bed  when  he  was 
dying, b he  asked  him,  a few  moments  before  he  expired,  what 
had  been  the  rule  of  his  conduct  during  so  long  and  happy  a 
reign  as  his,  that  he  might  make  it  his  example.  It  has  been , 
replied  he,  to  do  always  what  justice  and  religion  required  of 
me  ; memorable  words,  and  well  worthy  of  being  set  up  in  let- 
ters of  gold  in  the  palaces  of  kings,  to  keep  them  perpetually  in 
mind  of  what  ought  to  be  the  guide  and  rule  of  all  their  actions. 
It  is  not  uncommon  for  princes  to  give  excellent  instructions  to 
their  children  on  their  death-beds,  which  would  be  more 
efficacious  if  preceded  by  their  own  example  and  practice; 
without  which  they  are  as  weak  and  impotent  as  the  sick  man 
who  gives  them,  and  seldom  survive  him  long. 

Soon  after  Darius’s  death,0  the  new  king  set  out  from  his 

a Which  word  signifies  in  the  Greek,  one  of  a good  memory. 
b Athen.  1.  xii.  p.  548.  c Plut.  in  Artax.  p.  1012. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


109 


capital  for  the  city  of  Pasargada/1  in  order  to  his  coronation, 
according  to  custom,  by  the  priests  of  Persia.  There  was  in 
that  city  a temple  of  the  goddess  who  presided  over  war,  in 
which  the  coronation  of  their  kings  was  solemnized.  It  was 
attended  with  very  singular  ceremonies,  which  no  doubt  had 
some  mysterious  sense ; though  Plutarch  does  not  explain  it. 
The  prince,  at  his  consecration,  took  off  his  robe  in  the  temple, 
and  put  on  that  worn  by  the  ancient  Cyras  before  he  came  to  the 
throne,  which  was  preserved  in  that  place  with  great  veneration. 
After  that  he  ate  a dry  fig,  chewed  some  leaves  of  the  turpen- 
tine tree,  and  drank  a draught  composed  of  milk  and  vinegar. 
Was  this  to  signify,  that  the  sweets  of  sovereign  power  are  min- 
gled with  the  bitterness  of  care  and  disquiet,  and  that,  if  the 
throne  be  surrounded  with  pleasures  and  honours,  it  is  also  at- 
tended with  pains  and  anxieties  ? It  seems  sufficiently  evident, 
that  the  design  in  putting  the  robes  of  Cyrus  upon  the  new 
king  was,  to  make  him  understand,  that  he  should  also  clothe 
his  mind  with  the  great  qualities  and  exalted  virtues  of  that 
prince. 

Young  Cyrus,  corroded  by  ambition,  was  in  despair  upon 
being  for  ever  frustrated  in  his  hopes  of  ascending  a throne  with 
which  his  mother  had  inspired  him,  and  on  seeing  the  sceptre, 
which  he  thought  his  right,  transferred  into  the  hands  of  his 
brother.  The  blackest  crimes  cost  the  ambitious  nothing. 
Cyrus  resolved  to  assassinate  Artaxerxes  in  the  temple  itself, 
and  in  the  presence  of  the  whole  court,  just  when  he  was  about 
to  take  off  his  own  robe,  to  put  on  that  of  Cyrus.  Artaxerxes 
was  apprised  of  this  design  by  the  priest  himself  who  had  edu- 
cated his  brother,  to  whom  he  had  imparted  it.  Cyrus  was 
seized  and  condemned  to  die,  when  his  mother  Parysatis,  almost 
out  of  her  senses,  flew  to  the  place,  clasped  him  in  her  arms, 
tied  herself  to  him  with  the  tresses  of  her  hair,  fastened  her 
neck  to  his,  and  by  her  shrieks,  and  tears,  and  prayers,  prevailed 
so  far  as  to  obtain  his  pardon,  and  that  he  should  be  sent  back 
to  his  government  of  the  maritime  provinces.  He  carried  thi- 
ther with  him  an  ambition  no  less  ardent  than  before,  and  ani- 
mated besides  with  resentment  of  the  disgrace  he  had  received, 
and  the  warm  desire  of  revenge,  and  armed  with  an  absolute, 
unbounded  power.  Artaxerxes  upon  this  occasion  acted  con- 
trary to  the  most  common  rules  of  policy,  which  do  not  admit 
the  nourishing  and  inflaming,6  by  extraordinary  honours,  the 
pride  and  haughtiness  of  a bold  and  enterprising  young  prince 
like  Cyrus,  who  had  carried  his  personal  enmity  to  his  brother 
so  far,  as  to  have  resolved  to  assassinate  him  with  his  own  hand, 

d A city  of  Persia  built  by  Cyrus  the  Great. 
e Ne  quis  mobiles  adolescentium  animos  prsematur's  honoribus  ad  superbiam 
extolleret.  Tacit.  Anrial.  1.  iv.  c.  17- 


110 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


and  whose  ambition  for  empire  was  so  great,  as  to  employ  the 
most  criminal  methods  for  the  attainment  of  its  end. 

Artaxerxes  had  espoused  Statira/ . Scarce  had  her  husband 
ascended  the  throne,  when  she  employed  the  power  her  beauty 
gave  her  over  him,  to  avenge  the  death  of  her  brother  Teriteuch- 
mes.  History  has  not  a more  tragical  scene,  nor  a more  mon- 
strous complication  of  adultery,  incest,  and  murder;  which, 
after  having  occasioned  great  disorders  in  the  royal  family,  ter- 
minated at  length  in  the  most  fatal  manner  to  all  who  had  any 
share  in  it.  But  it  is  necessary  for  the  reader’s  knowledge  of 
the  fact  to  trace  it  from  the  beginning. 

Hidarnes,  Statira’s  father,  a Persian  of  very  high  quality,  was 
governor  of  one  of  the  principal  provinces  of  the  empire.  Sta- 
tira  was  a lady  of  extraordinary  beauty,  which  induced  Artax- 
erxes to  marry  her  : he  was  then  called  Arsaces.  At  the  same 
time  Teriteuchmes,  Statira’s  brother,  married  Hamestris,  Ar- 
saces sister,  one  of  the  daughters  of  Darius  and  Parysatis  ; in 
favour  of  which  marriage,  Teriteuchmes,  upon  his  father’s  death, 
had  his  government  given  him.  There  was  at  the  same  time 
another  sister  in  this  family,  named  Boxana,  no  less  beautiful 
than  Statira,  and  who  besides  excelled  in  the  arts  of  shooting 
with  the  bow,  and  throwing  the  dart.  Teriteuchmes  her  brother 
conceived  a criminal  passion  for  her,  and  to  gratify  it,  resolved 
to  set  himself  at  liberty  by  killing  Hamestris,  whom  he  had  es- 
poused. Darius,  having  been  informed  of  this  project  by  the 
force  of  presents  and  promises,  engaged  (Jdiastes,  Teriteuch- 
mes’s  intimate  friend  and  confidant,  to  prevent  so  black  a de- 
sign, by  assassinating  him.  He  obeyed,  and  had  for  his  re- 
ward the  government  of  him  he  had  put  to  death  with  his  own 
hands. 

Among  Teriteuchmes’s  guards  was  a son  of  Udiastes,  called 
Mithridates,  very  much  attached  to  his  master.  The  young 
gentleman,  upon  hearing  that  his  father  had  committed  this 
murder  in  person,  uttered  all  manner  of  imprecations  against 
him,  and  full  of  horror  for  so  infamous  and  vile  an  action,  seized 
on  the  city  of  Zaris,  and  openly  revolting,  declared  for  the  es- 
tablishment of  Teriteuchmes’s  son.  But  that  young  man  could 
not  hold  out  long  against  Darius.  He  was  blocked  up  in  the 
place  with  the  son  of  Teriteuchmes,  whom  he  had  with  him ; 
and  all  the  rest  of  the  family  of  Hidarnes  were  put  in  prison, 
and  delivered  to  Parysatis,  to  do  with  them  as  that  mother,  ex- 
asperated to  the  last  excess  by  the  treatment  either  done  or  in- 
tended against  her  daughter  Hamestris,  should  think  fit.  That 
cruel  princess  began  by  causing  Roxana,  whose  beauty  had 
been  the  occasion  of  all  this  evil,  to  be  sawed  in  two,  and  order- 
ed all  the  rest  to  be  put  to  death,  except  Statira,  whose  life  she 
f Ctes.  c.  li.  lv. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


Ill 


granted  to  the  tears  and  the  most  tender  and  ardent  solicitations 
of  Arsaces ; whose  love  for  his  wife  made  him  spare  no  pains 
for  her  preservation,  though  Darius,  his  father,  believed  it  ne- 
cessary, even  for  his  own  good,  that  she  should  share  the  same 
fate  with  the  rest  of  her  family  Such  was  the  state  of  the  af- 
fair at  the  death  of  Darius. 

Statira,  as  soon  as  her  husband  was  upon  the  throne,  caused 
Udiastes  to  be  delivered  into  her  hands.  She  ordered  his 
tongue  to  be  torn  out,  and  made  him  die  in  the  most  exquisite 
torments  she  could  invent,  to  punish  the  crime  which  had  oc- 
casioned the  ruin  of  her  family.  She  gave  his  government  to 
Mithridates,  in  recompense  for  his  attachment  to  the  interests 
of  her  family.  Parysatis  on  her  side  took  her  revenge  on  the 
son  of  Teriteuchmes,  whom  she  caused  to  be  poisoned  ; and 
we  shall  see  that  Statira’s  turn  was  not  very  remote. 

We  see  here  the  terrible  effects  of  female  revenge,  and  in 
general  of  what  excesses  they  are  capable,  who  find  themselves 
above  all  laws,  and  have  no  other  rule  for  their  actions  than  their 
will  and  passions. 

Cyrus,  having  resolved  to  dethrone  his  brother, 
Aiit.^J*.  C.^403  employed  Clearchus,  the  Lacedaemonian  general, 
to  raise  a body  of  Grecian  troops,  under  pretence 
of  a war  which  that  Spartan  proposed  to  carry  into  Thrace.  I 
shall  defer  speaking  of  this  famous  expedition,  and  also  of  the 
death  of  Socrates,  which  happened  about  the  same  time  ; as  I 
intend  to  treat  those  two  great  events  in  all  the  extent  they  de- 
serve. It  was  without  doubt  with  the  same  view,s  that  Cyrus 
presented  to  Lysander  a galley  of  two  cubits  of  length  made  of 
ivory  and  gold,  to  congratulate  him  upon  his  naval  victory. 
That  galley  was  consecrated  to  Apollo  in  the  temple  of  Delphi. 
Lysander  went  soon  afterwards  to  Sardis,  charged  with  magni- 
ficent presents  for  Cyrus  from  the  allies. 

It  was  upon  that  occasion  Cyrus  had  the  celebrated  conversa- 
tion with  Lysander  related  by  Xenophon,11  and  which  Cicero 
after  him  has  applied  so  beautifully.  That  young  prince,'  who 

s Plut.  in  Lys.  p.  443.  h Xenophon.  CEcon.  p.  830. 

1 Narrat  Socrates  in  eo  libro  Cyrum  minorem,  regem  Persarum,  prsestantem 
mgenio  atque  imperii  gloria,  cum  Lysander  Lacedaemonius,  vir  summse  vir- 
tutis,  venisset  ad  eum  Sardes,  eique  dona  a sociis  attulisset,  et  cseteris  in  rebus 
comem  erga  Lysandrum  atque  humanum  fuisse,  et  ei  quemdam  conseptum 
agrum  diligenter  consitum  ostendisse.  Cum  autem  admiraretur  Lysander  et 
proceritates  arborum,  et  directos  in  quincuncem  ordines,  et  humum  subactam 
atque  puram,  et  suavitatem  odorum  qui  efflarentur  e floribus ; turn  eum 
dixisse,  mirari  se  non  modd  diligentiam,  sed  etiam  solertiam  ejus,  a quo  essent 
ilia  dnnensa  atque  descripta.  Et  ei  Cyrum  respondisse : Atqui  ego  ista  sum 
dimensus,  mei  sunt  ordines,  mea  descriptio,  multse  etiam  istarum  arborum 
mea  manu  satse.  Turn  Lysandrum,  intuentem  ejus  purpuram  et  nitorem 
corporis,  ornatumque  Persicum  multo  auro  multisque  gemmis,  dixisse  : Recte 
vero  te,  Cyre,  beatum  ferunt,  quoniam  vivtuti  tuae  fortuna  conjuncta  est.  Cic. 
de  Senec.  n.  59. 


112 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


piqued  himself  more  upon  his  affability  and  politeness  than  no- 
bility and  grandeur,  pleased  himself  with  conducting  in  person 
so  illustrious  a guest  through  his  gardens,  and  with  making 
him  observe  the  various  beauties  of  them.  Lysander,  struck 
with  so  fine  a prospect,  admired  the  manner  in  which  the 
several  parts  were  laid  out,  the  height  of  the  trees,  the  neat- 
ness and  disposition  of  the  walks  ; the  abundance  of  fruit 
trees  planted  checker-wise,  with  an  art  which  had  known  how 
to  unite  the  useful  with  the  agreeable ; the  beauty  of  the 
parterres,  and  the  glowing  variety  of  flowers,  exhaling  odours 
universally  throughout  the  delightful  scene.  Every  thing 
charms  and  transports  me  in  this  place,  said  Lysander,  ad- 
dressing himself  to  Cyrus ; hut  what  strikes  me  most,  is  the 
exquisite  taste  and  elegant  industry  of  the  person  who  drew 
the  plan  of  the  several  parts  of  this  garden,  and  gave  it  the 
fine  order,  wonderful  disposition,  and  happiness  of  symmetry , 
which  I cannot  sufficiently  admire.  Cyrus,  infinitely  pleased 
with  this  discourse,  replied.  It  was  I that  drew  the  plan, 
and  entirely  marked  it  out ; and  many  of  the  trees  which 
you  see  were  planted  with  my  oivn  hands.  What ! replied 
Lysander,  considering  him  from  head  to  foot,  is  it  possible 
with  these  purple  robes  and  splendid  vestments,  those  strings  of 
jewels  and  bracelets  of  gold,  those  buskins  so  richly  embroi- 
dered, that  you  could  play  the  gardener,  and  employ  your 
royal  hands  in  planting  trees  ? Does  that  surprise  you  ? said 
Cyrus,  I swear  by  the  god  Mithras, k that  when  my  health 
admits,  I never  sit  down  to  table  without  having  made  myself 
sweat  with  some  fatigue  or  other,  either  in  military  exercise, 
rural  labour,  or  some  other  toilsome  employment,  to  which  1 
apply  with  pleasure,  and  without  sparing  myself.  Lysander 
was  amazed  at  this  discourse,  and  pressing  him  by  the  hand  : 
Cyrus}  said  he,  you  are  truly  happy,  and  deserve  your  high 
fortune  ; because  in  you  it  is  united  with  virtue. 

Alcibiades  without  any  trouble  discovered  the  mystery  of  the 
levies  made  by  Cyrus,  and  went  into  the  province  of  Pharnaba- 
zus,  with  a design  to  proceed  to  the  court  of  Persia,  and  to  ap- 
prize Artaxerxes  of  the  scheme  laid  against  him.  Had  he  ar- 
rived there,  a discovery  of  such  importance  would  have  infallibly 
procured  him  the  favour  of  that  prince,  and  the  assistance  he 
wanted  for  the  re-establishment  of  his  country.  But  the  Lace- 
daemonian partisans  at  Athens,  that  is  to  say,  the  thirty  tyrants, 
apprehended  the  intrigues  of  so  superior  a genius  as  his,  and  re- 
presented to  their  masters,  that  they  were  inevitably  ruined  if 
they  did  not  find  means  to  rid  themselves  of  Alcibiades.  The 

k The  Persians  adored  the  sun  under  that  name,  who  was  their  principal  god. 

1 A iKaiojg,  uj  Kvpe,  evdat/iovtlg'  ayaOdg  yap  Cjv  evdaipovtlg.  Rerte  verb  te, 
Cyre,  beatum  ferunt,  quoniam  virtuti  tua?  fortuna  conjuncta  est. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


113 


Lacedaemonians  thereupon  wrote  to  Pharnabazus,  and  with  an 
abject  meanness  not  to  be  excused,  and  which  showed  how 
much  Sparta  had  degenerated  from  her  ancient  manners,  press- 
ed him  with  great  earnestness  to  deliver  them  at  any  rate  from  so 
formidable  an  enemy.  The  satrap  complied  with  their  wish. 
Alcibiades  was  then  in  a small  town  of  Phrygia,  where  he  lived 
with  his  concubine  Timandra.m  Those  who  were  sent  to  kill 
him,  not  daring  to  enter  his  house,  contented  themselves  with 
surrounding  and  setting  it  on  fire.  Alcibiades,  having  quitted  it 
through  the  flames  sword  in  hand,  the  Barbarians  were  afraid  to 
stay  to  come  to  blows  with  him,  but  flying  and  retreating  as  he 
advanced,  they  poured  their  darts  and  arrows  upon  him,  and  he 
fell  dead  upon  the  spot.  Timandra  took  up  his  body,  and  having 
adorned  and  covered  it  with  the  finest  robes  she  had,  she  made  as 
magnificent  a funeral  for  it  as  her  present  condition  would  admit. 

Such  was  the  end  of  Alcibiades,  whose  great  virtues  were 
stifled  and  suppressed  by  still  greater  vices.  It  is  not  easy  to 
say,”  whether  his  good  or  bad  qualities  were  most  pernicious  to 
his  country ; for  with  the  one  he  deceived,  and  with  the  other  he 
oppressed  it.  In  him  distinguished  valour  was  united  with  no- 
bility of  blood.  His  person  was  beautiful  and  finely  made;  he 
was  eloquent,  of  great  ability  in  business,  insinuating,  and  form- 
ed for  charming  all  mankind.  He  loved  glory,  but  without  pre- 
judice to  his  inclination  for  pleasure,  nor  was  he  so  fond  of  plea- 
sure, as  to  neglect  his  glory  for  it.  He  knew  how  to  give  in  to, 
or  abstract  himself  from  it,  according  to  the  situation  of  his  af- 
fairs. Never  was  there  ductility  of  genius  equal  to  his.  He 
metamorphosed  himself  with  incredible  facility,  like  a Proteus, 
into  the  most  contrary  forms,  and  supported  them  all  with  as 
much  ease  and  grace,  as  if  each  had  been  natural  to  him. 

This  convertibility  of  character,  according  as  circumstances, 
the  customs  of  countries,  and  his  own  interests  required,  disco- 
vers a heart  void  of  principles,  without  either  truth  or  justice. 
He  did  not  confine  himself  either  to  religion,  virtue,  laws,  duties, 
or  his  country.  His  sole  rule  of  action  was  his  private  ambition, 
to  which  he  referred  every  thing.  His  aim  was  to  please,  to 
dazzle,  and  be  beloved;  but  at  the  same  time  to  subject  those  he 
soothed.  He  favoured  them  only  as  they  served  his  purposes  ; 
and  made  his  correspondence  and  society  a means  for  engross- 
ing every  thing  to  himself. 

His  life  was  a perpetual  mixture  of  good  and  evil.  His  sal- 
lies into  virtue  were  ill  sustained,  and  quickly  degenerated  into 
vices  and  crimes,  very  little  to  the  honour  of  the  instructions  of 

m It  was  said  that  Lais  the  famous  courtezan,  called  the  Corinthian,  was 
the  daughter  of  this  Timandra. 

" Cujus  nescio  utriun  bona  an  vitia  patriae  perniciosiora  fuerint  s illis  enira 
cives  suos  decepit,  his  afflixit.  Val.  Max.  1.  iii.  c.  I. 

VOL.  III.  I 


114 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


that  great  philosopher,  who  took  no  small  pains  to  cultivate  him 
into  a man  of  worth.  His  actions  were  glorious  ; but  without 
rule  or  principle.  His  character  was  elevated  and  grand  ; but 
without  connexion  and  consistency.  He  was  successively  the 
support  and  terror  of  the  Lacedaemonians  and  Persians  He 
was  either  the  misfortune  or  refuge  of  his  own  country  according 
as  he  declared  for  or  against  it.  In  fine,  he  was  the  author  of  a 
destructive  war  through  the  whole  of  Greece,  from  the  sole 
motive  of  commanding,  by  inducing  the  Athenians  to  besiege 
Syracuse  ; much  less  from  the  hope  of  conquering  Sicily,  and 
afterwards  Africa,  than  with  the  design  of  keeping  Athens  in 
dependance  upon  himself ; convinced,  that  having  to  deal  with 
an  inconstant,  suspicious,  ungrateful,  jealous  people,  averse  to 
those  that  governed,  it  was  necessary  to  engage  them  contin- 
ually in  some  great  affair,  in  order  to  make  his  services  always 
necessary  to  them,  and  that  they  might  not  be  at  leisure  to  ex- 
amine, censure,  and  condemn  his  conduct. 

He  had  the  fate  generally  experienced  by  persons  of  his  cha- 
racter, and  of  which  they  cannot  reasonably  complain.  He 
never  loved  any  one,  himself  being  his  sole  motive  ; nor  ever 
found  a friend.  He  made  it  his  merit  and  glory  to  cajole  all 
men,  and  consequently  nobody  confided  in,  or  adhered  to,  him. 
His  sole  view  was  to  live  with  splendour,  and  to  domineer  uni- 
versally ; and  he  perished  miserably,  abandoned  by  the  whole 
world,  and  obliged  at  his  death  to  the  feeble  services,  and  im- 
potent zeal,  of  one  only  woman  for  the  last  honours  rendered  to 
his  remains. 

About  this  time  died  Democritus  the  philosopher. 

SECT.  II. 

The  Thirty  exercise  the  most  horrid  cruelties  at  Athens.  They  put  Thera- 
menes,  one  of  their  colleagues,  to  death.  Socrates  takes  his  defence  upon 
himself.  Thrasybulus  attacks  the  tyrants,  makes  himself  master  of  Athens, 
and  restores  its  liberty. 

The  council  of  Thirty,0  established  at  Athens  by  Lysander, 
committed  the  most  execrable  cruelties.  Upon  pretence  of 
restraining  the  multitude  within  their  duty,  and  of  preventing 
seditions,  they  had  caused  guards  to  be  assigned  them,  and 
armed  3000  of  the  citizens  for  that  service,  and  at  the  same 
time  disarmed  all  the  rest.  The  whole  city  was  in  the  utmost 
terror  and  dismay.  Whoever  opposed  their  injustice  and  vio- 
lence became  the  victims  of  them.  Riches  were  a crime  that 
never  failed  of  drawing  a sentence  upon  their  owners,  always 
followed  with  death,  and  the  confiscation  of  estates,  which  the 

° Xenoph.  Hist.  1.  ii.  p.  462 — 479.  Diod.  1.  xiv.  p.  235 — 238.  Justin.  1.  \ 
c.  8.  10. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


115 


thirty  tyrants  divided  amongst  themselves.  They  put  more 
people  to  death,  says  Xenophon,  in  eight  months  of  peace,  than 
the  enemies  had  done  in  a war  of  thirty  years. 

The  two  most  considerable  persons  of  the  Thirty  were  Critias 
and  Theramenes,  who  at  first  lived  in  great  union,  and  always 
acted  in  concert  with  each  other.  The  latter  had  some  honour, 
and  loved  his  country.  When  he  saw  with  what  an  excess  of 
violence  and  cruelty  his  colleagues  behaved,  he  declared  openly 
against  them,  and  thereby  drew  their  resentment  upon  him. 
Critias  became  his  mortal  enemy,  and  acted  as  informer  against 
him  before  the  senate,  accusing  him  of  disturbing  the  tranquilli- 
ty of  the  state,  and  of  designing  to  subvert  the  present  govern- 
ment. As  he  perceived  that  the  defence  of  Theramenes  was 
heard  with  silence  and  approbation,  he  was  afraid  that,  if  the 
affair  was  left  to  the  decision  of  the  senate,  they  would  acquit 
him.  Having  therefore  caused  a band  of  young  men,  whom  he 
had  armed  with  poniards,  to  advance  to  the  bar,  he  said  that  he 
thought  it  the  duty  of  a supreme  magistrate  to  prevent  justice 
from  being  abused,  and  that  he  should  act  conformably  upon 
this  occasion.  But , continued  he,  as  the  law  does  not  permit 
that  any  of  the  3000  should  he  put  to  death  without  the  con- 
sent of  the  senate , I exclude  Theramenes  from  that  number , and 
condemn  him  to  die  in  virtue  of  my  own  and  my  colleagues'  au- 
thority. Theramenes  at  these  words,  leaping  upon  the  altar ; 
I demand,  said  he,  Athenians , that  1 may  he  tried  according 
to  the  laws  ; which  cannot  he  refused  me  without  manifest  in- 
justice. Not  that  I imagine  that  the  goodness  of  my  cause 
will  avail  me  any  thing,  or  the  sanction  of  altars  protect  me ; 
hut  I would  show  at  least,  that  my  enemies  respect  neither  the 
gods  nor  men.  What  most  astonishes  me  is,  that  persons  of 
your  wisdom  do  not  see,  that  your  own  names  may  as  easily 
he  struck  out  of  the  list  of  citizens,  as  that  of  Theramenes. 
Critias  upon  this  ordered  the  officers  of  justice  to  pull  him  down 
from  the  altar.  A universal  silence  and  terror  ensued  upon  the 
sight  of  the  armed  soldiers  that  surrounded  the  senate.  Of  all 
the  senators,  Socrates  alone,  whose  disciple  Theramenes  had 
been,  took  upon  him  his  defence,  and  opposed  the  officers  of 
justice.  But  his  weak  endeavours  could  not  deliver  Thera- 
menes, who  was  led  to  the  place  of  execution  notwithstanding  all 
he  could  do,  through  crowds  of  the  citizens,  who  saw  with  tears, 
in  the  fate  of  a man  equally  considerable  for  his  love  of  liberty 
and  the  great  services  he  had  done  his  country,  what  they  had 
to  fear  for  themselves.  When  they  presented  him  the  hemlock, 
that  is,  the  poison,  (which  was  the  manner  of  putting  the  citizens 
at  Athens  to  death,)  he  took  it  with  an  intrepid  air,  and  after 
having  drunk  it,  he  poured  the  bottom  upon  the  table,  after  the 
usual  manner  observed  in  feasts  or  public  rejoicings,  saying, 

i 2 


116 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


This  for  the  noble  Crilias.  Xenophon  relates  this  circum- 
stance, inconsiderable  in  itself,  to  show,  says  he,  the  tranquillity 
of  Theramenes  in  his  last  moments. 

The  tyrants,  delivered  from  a colleague  whose  presence  alone 
was  a continued  reproach  to  them,  no  longer  observed  any  mea- 
sures. Nothing  passed  throughout  the  city  but  imprisonments 
and  murders.P  Every  body  trembled  for  themselves  or  their 
friends.  The  general  desolation  had  no  remedy,  nor  was  there 
any  hope  of  regaining  their  liberty.  Where  had  they  then  as 
many  Harmodiuses as  they  had  tyrants?  Terror  had  taken 
entire  possession  of  their  minds,  whilst  the  whole  city  deplored 
in  secret  their  loss  of  liberty,  without  having  one  amongst  them 
generous  enough  to  attempt  breaking  its  chains.  The  Athenian 
people  seemed  to  have  lost  that  valour,  which  till  then  had 
made  them  awful  and  terrible  to  their  neighbours  and  enemies. 
They  seemed  to  have  lost  the  very  use  of  speeeh  ; not  daring 
to  vent  the  least  complaint,  lest  it  should  be  made  a capital 
crime  in  them.  Socrates  alone  continued  intrepid.  He  consol- 
ed the  afflicted  senate,  animated  the  desponding  citizens,  and 
set  all  men  an  admirable  example  of  courage  and  resolution  ; 
preserving  his  liberty,  and  sustaining  his  part  in  the  midst  of 
thirty  tyrants,  who  made  all  else  tremble,  but  could  never  shake 
the  constancy  of  Socrates  with  their  menaces.  Critias/  who 
had  been  his  pupil,  was  the  first  to  declare  most  openly  against 
him,  taking  offence  at  the  free  and  bold  discourses  which  he 
held  against  the  government  of  the  Thirty.  He  went  so  far  as 
to  prohibit  his  instructing  the  youth  ; but  Socrates,  who  neither 
acknowledged  his  authority,  nor  feared  the  violent  effects  of  it, 
paid  no  regard  to  so  unjust  an  order. 

All  the  citizens  of  any  consideration  in  Athens,  and  who  still 
retained  a love  of  liberty,  quitted  a place  reduced  to  so  harsh 
and  shameful  a slavery,  and  sought  elsewhere  an  asylum  and 
retreat,  where  they  might  live  in  safety.  At  the  head  of  these? 
was  Thrasybulus,  a person  of  extraordinary  merit,  who  beheld 
with  the  most  lively  affliction  the  miseries  of  his  country.  The 
Lacedaemonians  had  the  inhumanity  to  endeavour  to  deprive 
those  unhappy  fugitives  of  this  last  resource.  They  published  an 
edict,  to  prohibit  the  cities  of  Greece  from  giving  them  refuge, 
decreed  that  they  should  be  delivered  up  to  the  thirty  tyrants, 

p Poteratne  civitas  ilia  conquiescere,  in  qua  tot  tyranni  erant,  quot  satellites 
essent  ? Ne  spes  quidem  ulla  recipiendse  libertatis  animis  poterat  offeri,  nee 
ulli  remedio  locus  apparebat  contra  tantum  vim  malorum.  Unde  enim  miserae 
civitati  tot  Harmodios  ? Socrates  tamen  in  medio  erat,  et  lugentes  patres  con- 
solabatur,  et  desperantes  de  republica  exhortabatur — et  imitari  volentibus 
magnum  circumferebat  exemplar,  cum  inter  triginta  dominos  liber  incederet. 
Senec  de  tranquil,  anim.  c.  iii. 

Harmodius  formed  a conspiracy  for  the  deliverance  of  Athens  from  the 
tyranny  of  the  Pisistratidae. 

r Xenoph.  memorab.  1.  i.  p.  716,  717* 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


117 


and  condemned  all  such  as  should  contravene  the  execution  of 
this  edict,  to  pay  a fine  of  five  talents.  Only  two  cities  rejected 
with  disdain  so  unjust  an  ordinance,  Megara  and  Thebes ; the 
latter  of  which  made  a decree  to  punish  all  persons  whatsoever, 
that  should  see  an  Athenian  attacked  by  his  enemies  without 
doing  his  utmost  to  assist  him.  Lysias,  an  orator  of  Syracuse, 
who  had  been  banished  by  the  Thirty,  raised  500  soldiers  at  his 
own  expense,8  and  sent  them  to  the  aid  of  the  common  country 
of  eloquence. 

Thrasybulus  lost  no  time.  After  having  taken  Phyla,  a small 
fort  in  Attica,  he  marched  to  the  Pineeus,  of  which  he  made 
himself  master.  The  Thirty  flew  thither  with  their  troops,  and  a 
warm  battle  ensued.  But  as  the  soldiers  on  one  side  fought  with 
valour  and  vigour  for  their  liberty,  and  on  the  other  with  indo- 
lence and  indifference  for  the  power  of  others,  the  success  was 
not  doubtful,  but  followed  the  better  cause.  The  tyrants  were 
overthrown.  Critias  was  killed  upon  the  spot.  And  as  the 
rest  of  the  army  were  taking  to  flight,  Thrasybulus  cried  out ; 
Wherefore  do  you  fly  from  me  as  from  a victor , rather  than 
assist  me  as  the  avenger  of  your  liberty  ? We  are  not  enemies , 
but  fellow-citizens  ; nor  have  we  declared  war  against  the  city , 
but  against  the  thirty  tyrants.  He  bade  them  remember,  that 
they  had  the  same  origin,  country,  laws,  and  religion ; he  ex- 
horted them  to  compassionate  their  exiled  brethren,  to  restore 
their  country  to  them,  and  resume  their  liberty  themselves. 
This  discourse  made  a due  impression.  The  army,  upon  their 
return  to  Athens,  expelled  the  Thirty,  and  substituted  ten  per- 
sons to  govern  in  their  room,  whose  conduct  proved  no  better 
than  that  of  the  former. 

It  is  a matter  of  surprise,  that  so  sudden,  so  universal,  so  te- 
nacious, and  so  uniform  a conspiracy  against  the  public  good, 
should  always  actuate  the  several  bodies  of  persons  established 
in  the  administration  of  this  government.  This  we  have  seen 
in  the  Four  Hundred  formerly  chosen  at  Athens ; again  in  the 
Thirty  ; and  now  in  the  Ten.  And  what  augments  our  wonder 
is,  that  this  passion  for  tyranny  should  so  immediately  possess 
republicans,  born  in  the  bosom  of  liberty,  accustomed  to  an 
equality  of  condition  on  which  it  is  founded,  and  nurtured  from 
their  earliest  infancy  in  an  abhorrence  of  all  subjection  and  de- 
pendency, There  must  be,1  on  the  one  side,  in  power  and  au- 
thority some  violent  impulse,  to  actuate  in  this  manner  so  many 
persons,  of  whom  many,  no  doubt,  were  not  without  sentiments 
of  virtue  and  honour  ; and  to  banish  so  suddenly  the  principles 
and  manners  natural  to  them : and  on  the  other  an  excessive 

• Quingentos  milites,  stipendio  suo  instructos,  in  auxilium  patriae  commu- 
n.s  eloquentioe  misit.  Justin.  1.  v.  c.  9. 

1 Yi  domination^  convulsus.  Tacit. 


118 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


propensity  in  the  mind  of  man  to  subject  his  equals,  and  to  rule 
over  them  imperiously,  to  carry  him  on  to  the  last  extremities  of 
oppression  and  cruelty,  and  to  make  him  forget  at  once  all  the 
laws  of  nature  and  religion. 

The  Thirty  being  fallen  from  their  power  and  hopes,  sent  de- 
puties to  Lacedaemon  to  demand  aid.  It  was  not  Lysander’s 
fault,  who  was  sent  to  them  with  troops,  that  the  tyrants  were 
not  re-established.  But  king  Pausanias,  who  likewise  marched 
against  Athens,  moved  with  compassion  for  the  deplorable  con- 
dition to  which  a city,  once  so  flourishing,  was  reduced,  had  the 
generosity  to  favour  the  Athenians  in  secret,  and  at  length  ob- 
tained a peace  for  them.  It  was  sealed  with  the  blood  of  the 
tyrants,  who,  having  taken  arms  to  reinstate  themselves  in" the 
government,  and  being  present  at  a parley  for  that  purpose, 
were  all  put  to  the  sword,  and  left  Athens  in  the  full  possession 
of  its  liberty.  All  the  exiles  were  recalled.  Thrasybulus  at 
that  time  proposed  the  celebrated  amnesty,  by  which  the  citizens 
engaged  upon  oath  that  all  past  transactions  should  be  buried  in 
oblivion.  The  government  was  re-established  upon  its  ancient 
foundation,  the  laws  restored  to  their  pristine  vigour,  and  ma- 
gistrates elected  with  the  usual  forms. 

I cannot  forbear  observing  in  this  place  the  wisdom  and  mo- 
deration of  Thrasybulus,  so  salutary  and  essential  after  so  long 
a continuance  of  domestic  troubles.  This  is  one  of  the  finest 
events  in  ancient  history,  worthy  of  the  Athenian  lenity  and 
benevolence,  and  has  served  as  a model  to  successive  ages  in  good 
governments. 

Never  had  tyranny  been  more  cruel  and  bloody  than  that 
which  the  Athenians  had  just  thrown  off.  Every  house  was  in 
mourning ; every  family  bewailed  the  loss  of  some  relation.  It 
had  been  a series  of  public  robbery  and  rapine,  in  which  licence 
and  impunity  had  authorized  all  manner  of  crimes.  Private  in- 
dividuals seemed  to  have  a right  to  demand  the  blood  of  all 
accomplices  in  such  notorious  malversations,  and  even  the  in- 
terest of  the  state  appeared  to  authorize  such  a claim,  that  by 
exemplary  severities  such  enormous  crimes  might  be  prevented 
for  the  future.  But  Thrasybulus  rising  above  those  sentiments, 
from  the  superiority  of  his  more  extensive  genius,  and  the  views 
of  a more  discerning  and  profound  policy,  foresaw,  that  by  ac- 
quiescing in  the  punishment  of  the  guilty,  eternal  seeds  of  dis- 
cord and  enmity  would  remain,  to  weaken,  by  domestic  divisions, 
the  strength  of  the  republic,  which  it  was  necessary  to  unite 
against  the  common  enemy,  and  occasion  the  loss  to  the  state 
of  a great  number  of  citizens,  who  might  render  it  important 
services  with  the  very  view  of  making  amends  for  past  misbe- 
haviour. 

Such  a conduct  after  great  troubles  in  a state  has  always 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


119 


seemed,  to  the  ablest  politicians,  the  most  certain  and  ready 
means  to  restore  the  public  peace  and  tranquillity.  Cicero, u 
when  Rome  was  divided  into  two  factions  upon  the  occasion  of 
Caesar’s  death,  who  had  been  killed  by  the  conspirators,  calling 
to  mind  this  celebrated  amnesty,  proposed,  after  the  example  of 
the  Athenians,  to  bury  all  that  had  passed  in  eternal  oblivion. 
Cardinal  Mazariny  observed  to  Don  Lewis  de  Haro,  prime  mi- 
nister of  Spain,  that  this  gentle  and  humane  conduct  in  France 
had  prevented  the  troubles  and  revolts  of  that  kingdom  from 
having  any  fatal  consequences,  and  that  the  Icing  had  not  lost 
a foot  of  land  hy  them  to  that  day ; whereas,  the  inflexible  se- 
verity of  the  Spaniards  was  the  occasion,  that  the  subjects  of 
that  monarchy , whenever  they  threw  off  the  mask,  never  re- 
turned to  their  obedience  but  by  the  force  of  arms  ; which  suf- 
ficiently appears,  says  he,  in  .the  example  of  the  Hollanders , 
who  are  in  the  peaceable  possession  of  many  provinces,  that  not 
an  age  ago  were  the  patrimony  of  the  king  of  Spain. 

Diodorus  Siculus  takes  occasion,  from  the  thirty  tyrants  of 
Athens,2  whose  immoderate  ambition  induced  them  to  treat 
their  country  with  the  most  excessive  cruelties,  to  observe  how 
unfortunate  it  is  for  persons  in  power  to  want  a sense  of  honour,31 
and  to  disregard  either  the  present  opinion,  or  the  judgment 
which  posterity  will  form  of  their  conduct : for  from  the  con- 
tempt of  reputation  the  transition  is  too  common  to  that  of  vir- 
tue itself.  They  may  perhaps,  by  the  dread  of  their  power, 
suppress  for  some  time  the  public  voice,  and  impose  a forced 
silence  upon  censure ; but  the  more  constraint  they  lay  upon 
it  during  their  lives,  the  more  liberal  will  it  be  after  their  deaths 
of  complaints  and  reproaches,  and  the  more  infamy  and  imputa- 
tion will  be  affixed  to  their  memories.  The  power  of  the  Thirty, 
says  he,  was  of  a very  short  duration,  but  their  infamy  will  be 
immortal ; their  memory  will  be  held  in  abhorrence  throughout 
all  ages,  whilst  their  names  will  be  recorded  in  history  only  to 
render  them  odious,  and  to  make  their  crimes  detestable.  He 
applies  the  same  reflection  to  the  Lacedaemonians ; who  after 

u In  sedem  Telluris  convocati  sumus ; in  quo  templo,  quantum  in  me  fuit, 
jeci  fundamentum  pads ; Atheniensiumque  renovavi  vetus  exemplum,  Grce- 
cum  etiam*  verbum  usurpavi,  quod  turn  in  sedandis  discordiis  usurpaverat 
dvitas  ilia ; atque  omnem  memoriam  discordiarum  oblivione  sempiterna  de- 
lendam  censui.  Philip,  i.  n.  i. 

y Let.  XV.  of  Card.  Maz.  z Diod.  1.  xiv.  p.  234. 

a Csetera  prinoipibus  statim  adesse  : unum  insatiabiliter  parandum,  prospe- 
ram  sui  memoriam;  nam  contempt^  fama,  contemni  virtutes — Quo  magis 
socordiam  eorum  inridere  libet,  qui  prsesenti  potentia  credunt  extingui  posse 
etiam  sequentis  sevi  memoriam — suum  cuique  decus  posteritas  rependit. 
Tacit.  Annal.  1.  iv.  c.  30.  et  35. 

* Some  believe  that  word  was  apvrioTia  ; but  as  it  is  not  found  in  the  histo- 
rians who  have  treated  this  fact,  it  is  more  likely  that  it  was  pr/  pvrjaiKaicriouv, 
which  has  the  same  sense,  and  is  used  by  them  all. 


120 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


having  made  themselves  masters  of  Greece  by  a wise  and  mode- 
rate conduct,  fell  from  that  glory,  through  the  severity,  haugh- 
tiness, and  injustice,  with  which  they  treated  their  allies.  There 
is  doubtless  no  reader,  whom  their  abject  and  cruel  jealousy  in 
regard  to  Athens  enslaved  and  humbled,  has  not  prejudiced 
against  them  ; nor  do  we  recognize  in  such  behaviour  the  great- 
ness of  mind  and  noble  generosity  of  ancient  Sparta  ; so  much 
power  have  the  lust  of  dominion  and  prosperity  over  even  vir- 
tuous men.  Diodorus  concludes  his  reflection  with  a maxim 
very  true,  though  very  little  known  : The  greatness  and  majesty 
of  princes,  says  he,  (and  the  same  may  be  said  of  all  persons  in 
high  authority,)  can  he  supported  only  by  humanity  and  justice 
with  regard  to  their  subjects ; as,  on  the  contrary,  they 
are  ruined  and  destroyed  by  a cruel  and  oppressive  govern- 
ment K which  never  fails  to  draw  upon  them  the  hatred  of  their 
people . 

SECT.  III. 

Lysander  abuses  his  power  in  an  extraordinary  manner.  He  is  recalled  to 
Sparta  upon  the  complaint  of  Pharnabazus. 

As  Lysander  had  had  the  greatest  share  in  the  celebrated 
exploits,6  which  had  raised  the  glory  of  the  Lacedaemonians  to 
so  high  a pitch  ; so  had  he  acquired  a degree  of  power  and  au- 
thority of  which  there  had  been  no  example  before  in  Sparta  ; 
but  he  suffered  himself  to  be  carried  away  by  a presumption  and 
vanity  still  greater  than  his  power.  He  permitted  the  Grecian 
cities  to  dedicate  altars  to  him  as  to  a god,  and  to  offer  sacrifi- 
ces, and  sing  hymns  and  odes  in  honour  of  him.  The  Samians 
ordained  by  a public  decree,  that  the  feasts  celebrated  in  ho- 
nour of  Juno,  and  which  bore  the  name  of  that  goddess,  should 
be  called  the  feasts  of  Lysander.  He  had  always  a crowd  of 
poets  about  him,  (who  are  often  a tribe  of  venal  flatterers,)  that 
vied  with  each  other  in  singing  his  great  exploits,  for  which  they 
were  magnificently  paid.  Praise  is  undoubtedly  due  to  noble 
deeds  ; but  it  diminishes  their  lustre  when  either  extravagant  or 
purchased. 

This  sort  of  vanity  and  ambition,  had  he  stopped  there,  would 
have  hurt  only  himself,  by  exposing  him  to  envy  and  contempt; 
but  a natural  consequence  of  it  was,  that  through  his  arrogance 
and  pride,  in  conjunction  with  the  incessant  flatteries  of  those 
around  him,  he  carried  the  spirit  of  command  and  authority  to 
an  insupportable  excess,  and  observed  no  longer  any  measures 
either  in  rewarding  or  punishing.  The  absolute  government  of 
cities  with  tyrannic  power  were  the  fruits  of  his  friendship,  or 
of  the  ties  of  hospitality  with  him  ; and  only  the  death  of  those 
he  hated,  could  put  an  end  to  his  resentment  and  displeasure* 
b Plut.  in  Lys.  p.  443 — 445. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


121 


without  its  being  possible  to  escape  his  vengeance.  What 
Sylla  caused  to  be  inscribed  upon  his  tomb,  might  with  equal 
propriety  have  been  engraved  upon  Lysander’s  ; that  no  man 
had  ever  surpassed  him  in  doing  good  to  his  friends,  or  evil  to 
his  enemies. 

Treachery  and  perjury  cost  him  nothing  whenever  they  pro- 
moted his  designs  ; nor  was  he  less  cruel  than  revengeful ; of 
which,  what  he  did  at  Miletus  was  a sufficient  proof.  Appre- 
hending that  the  leaders  of  the  popular  party  would  escape  him, 
he  swore  not  to  do  them  any  hurt.  Those  unfortunate  persons 
gave  credit  to  his  oath,  and  no  sooner  appeared  in  public,  than 
they  were  put  to  the  sword  with  his  consent  by  the  nobility,  who 
killed  them  all,  though  no  less  than  800.  The  number  of  those 
on  the  side  of  the  people,  whom  he  caused  to  be  massacred  in 
the  other  cities,  is  incredible ; for  he  did  not  only  destroy  to 
satiate  his  own  individual  resentments,  but  to  serve  in  all  places 
the  enmity,  malice,  and  avarice  of  his  friends,  whom  he  sup- 
ported in  gratifying  their  passions  by  the  death  of  their  enemies. 

There  was  no  kind  of  injustice  and  violence  which  the  people 
did  not  suffer  under  the  government  of  Lysander ; whilst  the 
Lacedaemonians,  who  were  sufficiently  informed  of  his  con- 
duct, gave  themselves  no  trouble  to  correct  it.  It  is  too  com- 
mon for  those  in  power  to  be  little  affected  with  the  vexations 
and  oppressions  laid  upon  persons  of  low  condition  and  credit, 
and  to  turn  a deaf  ear  to  their  just  complaints  ; though  authority 
is  principally  confided  to  them  for  the  defence  of  the  weak  and 
poor,  who  have  no  other  protectors.  But  if  such  remon- 
strances are  made  by  a great  or  powerful  person,  from  whom 
they  may  have  any  thing  to  hope  or  fear,  the  same  authority  that 
was  slow  and  drowsy,  becomes  immediately  active  and  officious  ; 
a certain  proof  that  it  is  not  the  love  of  justice  that  actuates 
it ; this  appears  here  in  the  conduct  of  the  Lacedaemonian  magis- 
trates. Pharnabazus,  weary  of  Lysander’s  repeated  enormities, 
who  ravaged  and  pillaged  the  provinces  under  his  command, 
having  sent  ambassadors  to  Sparta,  to  complain  of  the  wrongs 
he  had  received  from  that  general,  the  Ephori  recalled  him. 
Lysander  was  at  that  time  in  the  Hellespont.  The  letter  of 
the  Ephori  threw  him  into  great  consternation.  As  he  prin- 
cipally feared  the  complaints  and  accusations  of  Pharnabazus, 
he  made  all  the  haste  he  could  to  come  to  an  explanation  with 
him  from  the  hope  of  softening  him,  and  making  his  peace. 
He  went  for  that  purpose  to  him,  and  desired,  that  he  would 
write  another  letter  to  the  Ephori,  intimating  that  he  was  satis- 
fied with  his  conduct.  But  Lysander,  says  Plutarch,  in  such 
an  application  to  Pharnabazus,  forgot  the  proverb,0  Set  a thief 

c The  Greek  word  is,  Cretan  against  Cretan , as  the  people  of  Crete  passed 
for  the  greatest  cheats  and  liars  in  the  world. 


122 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


to  catch  a thief.  The  satrap  promised  all  he  desired,  and  ac- 
cordingly wrote  such  a letter  in  Lysander’s  presence  as  he  had 
requested,  but  he  had  prepared  another  to  a quite  different 
effect.  When  he  was  to  seal  it,  as  both  letters  were  of  the 
same  size  and  form,  he  dexterously  put  that  he  had  written  in 
secret  into  the  place  of  the  other,  without  being  observed, 
which  he  sealed  and  gave  him. 

Lysander  departed  well  satisfied,  and  being  arrived  at  Sparta, 
alighted  at  the  palace  where  the  senate  was  assembled,  and 
delivered  Pharnabazus’s  letter  to  the  Ephori.  But  he  was 
strangely  surprised  when  he  heard  the  contents,  and  withdrew 
in  extreme  confusion  and  disorder.  Some  days  after  he  re- 
turned to  the  senate,  and  told  the  Ephori,  that  he  was  obliged 
to  go  to  the  temple  of  Ammon  to  acquit  himself  of  the  sa- 
crifices he  had  vowed  to  that  god  before  his  battles.  That  pil- 
grimage was  no  more  than  a pretence  to  conceal  the  pain  it 
gave  him  to  live  as  a private  person  in  Sparta,  and  to  submit 
to  the  yoke  of  obeying ; he,  who  till  then  had  always  governed. 
Accustomed  long  to  commanding  armies,  and  to  the  flattering 
distinctions  of  a kind  of  sovereignty  exercised  by  him  in  Asia, 
he  could  not  endure  that  mortifying  equality  which  put  him  on 
a level  with  the  multitude,  nor  reduce  himself  to  the  simplicity 
of  a private  life.  Having  obtained  permission,  not  without 
great  difficulties,  he  embarked. 

As  soon  as  he  was  gone,  the  kings,  reflecting  that  he  held 
all  the  cities  in  dependance  upon  himself,  by  the  means  of  the 
governors  and  magistrates  who  had  been  established  by  him, 
and  who  were  also  indebted  to  him  for  their  unlimited  authori- 
ty, and  that  he  was  thereby  effectually  lord  and  master  of  all 
Greece,  applied  themselves  vigorously  to  restore  the  govern- 
ment of  the  people,  and  to  depose  all  his  creatures  and  friends 
from  any  share  in  it.  This  alteration  occasioned  great  tumults 
at  first.  About  the  same  time,  Lysander,  being  apprized  of 
the  design  of  Thrasybulus  to  re-establish  the  liberty  of  his  coun- 
try, returned  with  the  utmost  diligence  to  Sparta,  and  endea- 
voured to  engage  the  Lacedaemonians  to  support  the  party  of 
the  nobility  at  Athens.  We  have  before  observed,  that  Pau- 
sanias,  from  a more  noble  spirit  of  equity  and  generosity,  gave 
peace  to  Athens,  and  by  that  means,  says  Plutarch,  clipped 
the  wings  of  Lysander’s  ambition. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


123 


CHAP.  II. 

The  younger  Cyrus,  with  the  aid  of  the  Grecian  troops,  endeavours  to  de- 
throne his  brother  Artaxerxes.  He  is  killed  in  battle.  Famous  retreat  of 
the  Ten  thousand. 

Antiquity  has  few  events  so  memorable  as  those  I am 
about  to  relate  in  this  place.  We  see  on  one  side  a young 
prince,  in  other  respects  abounding  with  excellent  qualities, 
but  abandoned  to  his  violent  ambition,  carrying  war  from  a dis- 
tance against  his  brother  and  sovereign,  and  going  to  attack 
him  almost  in  his  own  palace,  with  the  view  of  depriving  him 
at  once  of  his  crown  and  life  ; we  see  him,  I say,  fall  dead  in 
the  battle  at  the  feet  of  that  brother,  and  terminate,  by  so  un- 
happy a fate,  an  enterprise  equally  glaring  and  criminal.  On 
the  other  hand,  the  Greeks  who  follow  him,d  destitute  of  all 
succour  after  the  loss  of  their  chiefs,  without  allies,  provisions, 
money,  cavalry,  or  archers,  reduced  to  less  than  10,000  men, 
with  no  resource  but  in  their  own  persons  and  valour,  support- 
ed solely  by  the  ardent  desire  of  preserving  their  liberty,  and  of 
returning  to  their  native  countries  ; these  Greeks,  with  bold 
and  intrepid  resolution,  make  their  retreat  before  a victorious 
army  of  1,000,000  of  men,  traverse  five  or  six  hundred  leagues, 
notwithstanding  vast  rivers  and  innumerable  defiles,  and  arrive 
at  last  in  their  own  country  through  a thousand  fierce  and  bar- 
barous nations,  victorious  over  all  obstacles  in  their  way,  and 
over  all  the  dangers  which  either  concealed  fraud  or  open  force 
reduce  them  to  undergo. 

This  retreat,  in  the  opinion  of  the  best  judges  and  most  ex- 
perienced military  men,  is  the  boldest  and  best  conducted  exploit 
to  be  found  in  ancient  history,  and  is  deemed  a perfect  model 
in  its  kind.  Happily  for  us  it  is  described  with  the  utmost 
minuteness  by  an  historian  who  was  not  only  an  eye-witness  of 
the  facts  he  relates,  but  the  first  mover,  the  soul  of  this  great 
enterprise.  I shall  only  abridge  his  history,  ^nd  abstract  its 
most  material  circumstances  ; but  I cannot  omit  advising  young 
persons  who  make  arms  their  profession,  to  consult  the  original, 
of  which  there  is  a good  translation  extant,  though  far  short  of 
the  admirable  beauties  of  the  text.  It  is  very  difficult  to  meet 
with  a more  able  master  than  Xenophon  in  the  art  of  war,  to 
whom  may  be  well  applied  here  what  Homer  says  of  Phoenix 
the  governor  of  Achilles,e  That  he  was  equally  capable  of  form- 
ing his  pupil  for  eloquence  or  arms. 

M vQwv  t f pijTrjp'  efisvca,  7 rprjKrrjpd  rs  ’ipyojv. 
d Post  mortem  Cyri,  neque  armis  a tanto  exercitu  vinci,  neque  dolo  capi, 
potuerunt ; revertentesque  inter  tot  indomitas  nationes  et  barbaras  gentes. 
per  tanta  itineris  spatia,  virtute  se  usque  terminos  patriae  defenderunt.  Jus- 
tin. L.  v.  c.  11.  e Iliad.  1.  i.  v.  443. 


124 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


SECT.  I. 

Cyrus  raises  troops  secretly  against  his  brother  Artaxerxes.  Thirteen  thou- 
sand Greeks  join  him.  He  sets  out  from  Sardis,  and  arrives  at  Babylonia  af- 
ter a march  of  more  than  six  months. 

We  have  already  said, f that  young  Cyrus,  son 
Ant  JL  C.6404.  °f  Earius  Nothus  and  Parysatis,  saw  with  pain 
his  elder  brother  Artaxerxes  upon  the  throne, 
and  that  at  the  very  time  the  latter  was  taking  possession  of  it, 
he  had  attempted  to  deprive  him  of  his  crown  and  life  together. 
Artaxerxes  was  not  insensible  of  what  he  had  to  fear  from  a 
brother  of  his  enterprising  and  ambitious  spirit,  but  could  not 
refuse  pardoning  him  to  the  prayers  and  tears  of  his  mother 
Parysatis,  who  doted  upon  this  youngest  son.  He  sent  him 
therefore  into  Asia  to  his  government;  confiding  to  him,  contrary 
to  all  the  rules  of  policy,  an  absolute  authority  over  the  pro- 
vinces left  him  by  the  will  of  the  king  his  father. 

As  soon  as  he  arrived  there,  his  thoughts  were 

A TVT  QPA1  7 ^ 

Ant  J C 403.  solely  intent  upon  revenging  the  affront  he  sup- 
posed he  had  received  from  his  brother,  and  to 
dethrone  him.  He  received  all  that  came  from  the  court  with 
great  favour  and  affability,  to  induce  them  insensibly  to  quit  the 
king’s  party  and  adhere  to  him.  He  gained  also  the  hearts  of 
the  Barbarians  under  his  government ; familiarizing  himself 
with  them,  and  mingling  with  the  common  soldiery,  though 
without  forgetting  the  dignity  of  the  general ; and  these  he 
formed  by  various  exercises  for  service  in  war.  He  applied 
particularly  to  raise  secretly  in  several  places,  and  upon  differ- 
ent pretexts,  a body  of  Grecian  troops,  upon  whom  he  relied 
much  more  than  upon  those  of  the  Barbarians.  Clearchus  re- 
tired to  his  court  after  having  been  banished  from  Sparta,  and 
was  of  great  service  to  him,  being  an  able,  experienced,  and 
valiant  captain.  At  the  same  time  several  cities 
Aiit^J.  C^402.  Proviuces  under  the  government  of  Tissa- 

phernes  revolted  from  their  obedience,  and 
placed  themselves  under  the  jurisdiction  of  Cyrus.  This  inci- 
dent, which  was  not  an  effect  of  chance,  but  of  the  secret  in- 
trigues of  that  prince,  gave  birth  to  a war  between  them. 
Cyrus,  under  the  pretence  of  arming  against  Tissaphernes, 
assembled  troops  with  less  reserve  ; and  to  amuse  the  court  the 
more  speciously,  sent  grievous  complaints  to  the  king  against 
that  governor,  demanding  his  protection  and  aid  in  the  most  sub- 
missive manner.  Artaxerxes  was  deceived  by  these  appear- 
ances, and  believed  that  all  Cyrus’s  preparations  were  directed 

f Diod.  1.  xiv.  p.  243 — 249,  et  252.  Justin.  1.  v.  c.  11.  Xenoph.  de  Cyri 
Exped.  1.  i.  p.  243 — 248. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


125 


against  Tissaphernes  alone,  and  continued  quiet,  from  the 
assurance  of  having  nothing  to  apprehend  for  himself. 

Cyrus  knew  well  how  to  take  advantage  of  the  imprudent  se- 
curity and  indolence  of  his  brother,^  which  some  people  con- 
ceived the  effect  of  his  goodness  and  humanity.  And  indeed 
in  the  beginning  of  his  reign  he  seemed  to  imitate  the  virtues 
of  the  first  Artaxerxes,  whose  name  he  bore.  For  he  demean- 
ed himself  with  great  mildness  and  affability  to  such  as  ap- 
proached him  ; he  honoured  and  rewarded  magnificently  all 
those  whose  services  had  merited  favour  ; when  he  passed  sen- 
tence of  punishment,  it  was  without  either  outrage  or  insult  ; 
and  when  he  made  presents,  it  was  with  a gracious  air,  and 
such  engaging  manners,  as  infinitely  exalted  their  value,  and 
implied,  that  he  was  never  better  pleased  than  when  he  had  an 
opportunity  of  doing  good  to  his  subjects.  To  all  these  excel- 
lent qualities  he  ought  to  have  added  one  no  less  royal,  and 
which  would  have  put  him  upon  his  guard  against  the  enter- 
prises of  a brother,  whose  character  he  ought  to  have  known  : I 
mean  a wise  foresight,  that  penetrates  the  future,  and  renders 
a prince  attentive  to  prevent  or  frustrate  whatever  may  disturb 
the  tranquillity  of  the  state. 

The  emissaries  of  Cyrus  at  the  court  were  perpetually  dis- 
persing reports  and  opinions  amongst  the  people,  to  prepare 
their  minds  for  the  intended  change  and  revolt.  They  said  that 
the  state  required  a king  of  Cyrus’s  character  ; a king,  magni- 
ficent, liberal,  who  loved  war,  and  showered  his  favours  upon 
those  that  served  him  ; and  that  it  was  necessary  for  the  gran- 
deur of  the  empire  to  have  a prince  upon  the  throne  fired  with  ambi- 
tion, and  valour,  for  the  support  and  augmentation  of  its  glory. 

The  young  prince  lost  no  time  on  his  side,  and 
Ant.  jf'cf 40*1.  hastened  the  execution  of  his  great  design.  He 
was  then  only  twenty-three  years  old  at  most. 
After  the  important  services  he  had  done  the  Lacedaemonians, 
without  which  they  had  never  obtained  the  victories,  that  had 
made  them  masters  of  Greece,  he  thought  he  might  safely  open 
himself  to  them.  He  therefore  imparted  to  them  the  present 
situation  of  his  affairs,  and  the  end  he  had  in  view  ; convinced 
that  such  a confidence  could  not  but  incline  them  the  more  in 
his  favour. 

In  the  letter  he  wrote  them,  he  spoke  of  himself  in  very 
magnificent  terms.  He  told  them  he  had  a greater  and  more 
royal  heart  than  his  brother  ; that  he  was  better  versed  in  the 
philosophy  and  the  knowledge  of  the  Magi,h  and  that  he  could 
drink  more  wine  without  being  disordered  in  his  senses  ; a very 

s Plut.  in  Artax.  p.  1013. 

h By  the  knowledge  of  the  Magi,  amongst  the  Persians,  was  meant  the  sci- 
ence of  religion  and  government. 


126 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


meritorious  quality  amongst  the  Barbarians,  but  not  so  proper 
to  recommend  him  to  the  good  opinion  of  those  to  whom  he  was 
writing.  The  Lacedaemonians  sent  orders  to  their  fleet  to  join 
that  of  the  prince  immediately,  and  to  obey  the  commands  of 
Tamos  his  admiral  in  all  things,  but  without  the  least  mention 
of  Artaxerxes,  or  seeming  in  any  manner  privy  to  his  design. 
They  thought  that  precaution  necessary  for  their  justification 
with  Artaxerxes, 1 in  case  affairs  should  happen  to  terminate  in 
his  favour. 

The  troops  of  Cyrus,  according  to  the  review  afterwards 
made,  consisted  of  13,000  Greeks,  which  were  the  flower  and 
chief  force  of  his  army,  and  of  100,000  regular  troops  of  the 
barbarous  nations.  Clearchus,  the  Lacedaemonian,  command- 
ed all  the  Peloponnesian  troops,  except  the  Achaeans,  who 
had  Socrates  of  Achaia  for  their  leader.  The  Boeotians  were 
under  Proxenus  the  Theban,  and  the  Thessalians  under  Menon. 
The  Barbarians  had  Persian  generals,*1  of  whom  the  chief  was 
Ariaeus.  The  fleet  consisted  of  thirty-five  ships  under  Pytha- 
goras the  Lacedaemonian,  and  twenty- five  commanded  by  Ta- 
mos the  ./Egyptian,  admiral  of  the  whole  fleet.  It  followed  the 
land  army,  coasting  along  near  the  shore. 

Cyrus  had  opened  his  design  to  Clearchus  alone  of  all  the 
Greeks,  foreseeing  aright  that  the  length  and  boldness  of  the 
enterprise  could  not  fail  of  discouraging  and  dismaying  the 
officers,  as  well  as  soldiers.  He  made  it  his  sole  application  to 
gain  their  affections  during  the  march,  by  treating  them  with 
kindness  and  humanity,  conversing  freely  with  them,  and  giving 
effectual  orders  that  they  should  want  for  nothing.  Proxenus, 
between  whose  family  and  Xenophon’s  an  ancient  friendship 
subsisted,  presented  that  young  Athenian  to  Cyrus,  who  re- 
ceived him  very  favourably,1  and  gave  him  an  employment  in 
his  army  amongst  the  Greeks.  He  set  out  from  Sardis  at 
length,  and  marched  towards  the  upper  provinces  of  Asia. 
The  troops  knew  neither  the  occasion  of  the  war,  nor  into  what 
countries  they  were  going.  Cyrus  had  only  caused  it  to  be 
given  out,  that  he  was  carrying  his  arms  against  the  Pisidians, 
who  had  infested  his  province  by  their  incursions. 

Tissaphernes,m  rightly  judging  that  all  these  preparations 
were  too  great  for  so  insignificant  an  enterprise  as  against 
Pisidia,  had  set  out  post  from  Miletus  to  give  the  king  an  ac- 
count of  them.  This  news  occasioned  great  trouble  at  court. 
Parysatis,  the  mother  of  Artaxerxes  and  Cyrus,  wras  looked 
upon  as  the  principal  cause  of  this  war;  and  all  persons  in 

» Quserentes  apud  Cyrum  gratiam ; et  apud  Artaxerxem,  si  vicisset,  Venice 
patrocinia,  ciim  nihil  adversus  eum  aperte  decrevissent.  Justin.  1.  v.  c.  11. 
k Xenoph.  Cyri.  Exped.  1.  i.  p.  252.  1 Xenoph.  1.  iii.  p.  294. 

m Plut.  in  Avtax.  p,  1014. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


127 


her  service  and  interest  were  suspected  of  holding  intelligence 
with  Cyrus.  Statira  especially,  the  reigning  queen,  reproached 
her  incessantly  in  the  most  violent  terms.  Where  is  now , said 
she  to  her,  that  faith  you  have  so  often  enyayed  for  your  son’s 
behaviour  ? Where  those  ardent  prayers  you  employed  to  pre- 
serve from  death  that  conspirator  against  his  king  and  bro- 
ther ? It  is  your  unhappy  fondness  that  has  kindled  this  war , 
and  plunged  us  into  an  abyss  of  misfortunes.  The  antipathy 
and  hatred  of  the  two  queens  for  each  other  were  already  very 
great,  and  were  still  more  inflamed  by  such  warm  reproaches. 
We  shall  see  what  the  consequences  were.  Artaxerxes  assem- 
bled a numerous  army  to  receive  his  brother. 

Cyrus  advanced  continually  by  long  marches.11  What  trou- 
bled him  most  on  the  way  was  the  pass  of  Cilicia,  which  was  a 
narrow  defile  between  very  high  and  steep  mountains,  that 
would  admit  no  more  than  one  carriage  to  pass  at  a time. 
Syennesis,  king  of  the  country,  was  preparing  to  dispute  this 
pass  with  him,  and  would  infallibly  have  succeeded,  but  for  the 
diversion  made  by  Tamos  with  his  fleet,  in  conjunction  with 
that  of  the  Lacedaemonians.  To  defend  the  coasts  against  the 
insults  of  the  fleet,  Syennesis  abandoned  that  important  post, 
which  a small  body  of  troops  might  have  made  good  against  the 
greatest  army. 

When  they  arrived  at  Tarsus,  the  Greeks  refused  to  advance 
any  farther,  rightly  suspecting  that  they  were  marching  against 
the  king,  and  loudly  exclaiming  that  they  had  not  entered  into 
the  service  upon  that  condition.  Clearchus,  who  commanded 
them,  had  occasion  for  all  his  address  and  ability  to  stifle  this 
commotion  in  its  birth.  At  first  he  made  use  of  authority  and 
force,  but  with  very  ill  success,  and  desisted  therefore  from  an 
open  opposition  to  their  sentiments  : he  even  affected  to  enter 
into  their  views,  and  to  support  them  with  his  approbation  and 
influence.  He  declared  publicly,  that  he  would  not  separate 
himself  from  them,  and  advised  them  to  depute  persons  to  the 
prince,  to  know  from  his  own  mouth  against  whom  they  were  to 
be  led,  that  they  might  follow  him  voluntarily  if  they  approved 
his  measures  ; if  not,  that  they  might  demand  his  permission  to 
withdraw.  By  this  artful  evasion  he  appeased  the  tumult,  and 
made  them  easy,  and  they  chose  him  and  some  other  officers 
for  their  deputies.  Cyrus,  whom  he  had  secretly  apprized  of 
every  thing,  made  answer,  that  he  was  going  to  attack  Abroco- 
mas  0 his  enemy,  who  was  encamped  at  twelve  days’  march  from 
thence  upon  the  Euphrates.  When  this  answer  was  repeated 


n Xenoph.  1.  i.  p.  248 — 261. 

° It  is  not  said  where  he  commanded.  It  appears  to  be  upon  the  Euphrates. 
He  marched  with  300,000  men  to  join  the  king’s  army,  but  did  not  arrive  till 
after  the  battle. 


128 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


to  them,  though  they  plainly  saw  against  whom  they  were 
going,  they  resolved  to  proceed,  and  only  demanded  an  aug- 
mentation of  their  pay.  Cyrus,  instead  of  one  darick  p a month 
to  each  soldier,  promised  to  give  them  one  and  a half. 

Some  time  after,  Cyrus  was  informed  that  two  of  the  prin- 
cipal officers,  upon  account  of  a private  quarrel  with  Clearchus, 
had  deserted  with  part  of  their  equipage  on  board  a merchant 
ship.  Many  were  of  opinion,  that  it  was  proper  to  send  some 
galleys  after  them,  which  might  be  done  with  great  ease ; and 
that  when  they  were  brought  back,  they  should  be  made  an  ex- 
ample, by  suffering  death  in  the  sight  of  the  whole  army. 
Cyrus,  convinced  that  favour  was  the  most  certain  means  to 
obtain  affection/  and  that  punishments,  like  violent  remedies, 
ought  never  to  be  used  but  in  extreme  necessity,  declared  pub- 
licly that  he  would  not  suffer  it  to  be  said,  that  he  had  detained 
any  one  in  his  service  by  force,  and  added,  that  he  would  send 
them  their  wives  and  children,  whom  they  had  left  as  hostages 
in  his  hands. 

An  answer  displaying  so  much  wisdom  and  generosity  had  a 
surprising  effect;  and  made  even  those  his  firm  adherents,  who 
were  before  inclined  to  retire.  This  is  an  excellent  lesson  for 
all  who  govern.  There  is  in  the  mind  of  man  a fund  of  na- 
tural generosity,  which  it  is  necessary  to  know  and  to  put  in 
play.  Threats  exasperate  them,  and  chastisement  makes  them 
revolt,  when  endeavours  are  used  to  force  them  to  do  their  duty 
against  their  will.  They  desire  a certain  degree  of  confidence 
in  their  honour/  and  that  the  glory  of  discharging  their  duty 
through  choice  be  left  in  their  power  ; to  show  that  you  believe 
men  faithful,  is  often  the  best  means  to  make  them  so. 

Cyrus  soon  after  declared,  that  he  was  marching  against 
Artaxerxes.  Upon  which  some  murmuring  was  heard  at  first, 
but  it  soon  gave  place  to  the  expressions  of  joy  and  satisfac- 
tion, occasioned  by  that  prince’s  magnificent  promises  to  the 
army. 

As  Cyrus  advanced  by  long  marches/  he  was  informed  from 
all  parts,  that  the  king  did  not  intend  to  come  directly  to  a 
, battle,  but  had  resolved  to  wait  in  the  heart  of  Persia  till  all  his 
forces  were  assembled ; and  that,  to  stop  his  enemies,  he  had 
ordered  to  be  dug  in  the  plains  of  Babylonia,  a ditch  of 
five  fathoms  broad,  and  three  deep,  extending  the  space  of 
twelve  parasangas/  or  leagues,  from  the  Euphrates  to  the  wall 

p The  darick  was  worth  ten  livres. 

q Beneficiis  potius  quam  remediis  ingenio  experiri  placuit.  Plin.  in  Traj. 

r Nescio  an  plus  moribus  conferet  princeps,  qui  bonos  esse  patitur,  qukm 
qui  cogit.  Plin.  ibid. 

Plerumque  habita  tides  ipsam  obligat  fidem.  Liv. 

8 Plut.  in  Artax.  p.  1014.  Xenoph.  1.  i.  p.  261 — 266. 

* The  parasanga  is  a road  measure  peculiar  to  the  Persians.  It  was  com- 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


129 

of  Media.  Between  the  Euphrates  and  the  foss6  a way  had 
been  left  of  twenty  feet  in  breadth,  by  which  Cyrus  passed 
with  his  whole  army,  which  he  had  reviewed  the  day  before. 
The  king  had  neglected  to  dispute  this  pass  with  him,  and 
suffered  him  to  continue  his  march  towards  Babylon.  It 
was  Tiribasus  who  made  him  resolve  not  to  fly  in  such  a 
manner  before  an  enemy,  over  whom  he  had  infinite  advan- 
tages, as  well  from  the  number  of  his  troops  as  the  valour  of 
his  generals.  He  resolved  therefore  to  advance  against  the 
enemy. 

SECT.  II. 

The  battle  of  Cunaxa.  The  Greeks  are  victorious  on  their  side, 
Artaxerxes  on  his.  Cyrus  is  killed. 

The  place  where  the  battle  was  fought, u was  called  Cunaxa, 
about  twenty-five  leagues31  from  Babylon.  The  army  of  Cyrus 
consisted  of  13,000  Greeks,  100,000  Barbarians,  and  twenty 
chariots  armed  with  scythes.  That  of  the  enemy  in  horse  and 
foot  might  amount  to  about  1,200,000,  under  four  generals,  Tis- 
saphernes,  Gobryas,  Arhaces,  and  Abrocomas,  without  in- 
cluding 6000  chosen  horse,  that  fought  where  the  king  was  pre- 
sent, and  never  quitted  his  person.  But  Abrocomas,  who  had 
the  command  of  300,000  men,  did  not  arrive  till  five  days  after 
the  battle.  In  the  king’s  army  were  only  150  chariots  armed 
with  scythes. 

Cyrus  believed,  from  the  enemy’s  not  having  defended  the 
pass  at  the  fosse  that  there  would  be  no  battle ; so  that  the 
next'day  the  army  marched  with  great  negligence.  But  on  the 
third,  Cyrus  being  in  his  chariot,  with  few  soldiers  in  their 
ranks  before  him,  and  the  rest  marching  without  any  order,  or 
having  their  arms  carried  for  them,  a horseman  came  in  full 
speed,  crying  out  as  he  passed,  that  the  enemy  were  approach- 
ing in  order  of  battle.  Upon  this,  great  confusion  ensued, 
from  the  apprehension  that  they  should  not  have  time  to  draw 
up  the  army.  Cyrus,  leaping  from  his  chariot,  put  on  his  arms 
immediately,  and  getting  on  horseback  with  his  javelin  in  his 
hand,  he  gave  orders  universally  to  the  troops  to  stand  to 
their  arms,  and  fall  into  their  ranks  : which  was  executed 
with  so  much  expedition,  that  the  troops  had  not  time  to  re- 
fresh themselves. 

Cyrus  posted  upon  his  right  1000  Paphlagonian  horse,  sup- 

monly  thirty  stadia,  which  make  about  a league  and  a half  French.  Some 
were  from  twenty  to  sixty  stadia.  In  the  march  of  Cyrus’s  army,  I suppose 
the  parasanga  only  twenty  stadia,  or  one  league,  for  reasons  I shall  give  here- 
after. 

" Xenoph.  in  Exped.  Cyr.  1.  i.  p.  263 — 266.  Diod.  1.  xiv.  p.  253,  254. 
Plut.  p.  1014 — 1017-  x Five  hundred  stadia. 

VOL.  III. 


K 


130 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


ported  by  the  Euphrates,  and  the  light-armed  infantry  of  the 
Greeks ; and  next  them*  Clearchus,  Proxenus,  and  the  rest  of 
the  general  officers  to  Menon,  at  the  head  of  their  several  corps. 
The  left  wing,  composed  of  Lydians,  Phrygians,  and  other 
Asiatic  nations,  was  commanded  by  Ariaeus,  who  had  1000 
horse.  Cyrus  placed  himself  in  the  centre,  where  the  chosen 
troops  of  the  Persians  and  other  Barbarians  were  posted.  He 
had  around  him  600  horsemen,  armed  at  all  points,  as  were 
their  horses,  with  frontlets  and  breast- plates.  The  prince’s 
head  was  uncovered,  as  were  those  of  all  the  Persians,  whose 
custom  it  was  to  give  battle  in  that  manner;  the  arms  of  all  his 
people  were  red,  and  those  of  Artaxerxes  were  white. 

A little  before  the  onset,  Clearchus  advised  Cyrus  not  to 
charge  in  person,  but  to  cover  himself  in  the  rear  of  the  Gre- 
cian battalions.  What  is  it  you  say  ? replied  Cyrus,  at  the 
time  I am  endeavouring  to  make  myself  king , would  you 
Jiave  me  show  myself  unworthy  of  being  so  ? That  wise  and 
generous  answer  proves,  that  he  knew  the  duty  of  a general, 
especially  on  a day  of  battle.  Had  he  withdrawn  when  his 
presence  was  most  necessary,  it  would  have  argued  his  want  of 
courage,  and  intimidated  others.  It  is  necessary  always,  how- 
ever, preserving  the  due  distinction  between  the  leader  and  the 
troops,  that  their  danger  should  be  common,  and  no  one  ex- 
empt from  it ; lest  the  latter  should  be  alarmed  by  a different 
conduct.  Courage  in  an  army  depends  upon  example,  upon 
the  desire  of  being  distinguished,  the  fear  of  dishonour,  the  in- 
capacity of  doing  otherwise  than  the  rest,  and  the  equality  of 
danger.  If  Cyrus  had  retired,  it  would  have  either  ruined,  or 
greatly  weakened,  all  these  potent  motives,  by  discouraging 
the  officers  as  well  as  soldiers  of  his  army.  He  thought,  that 
being  their  general,  it  was  incumbent  upon  him  to  discharge  all 
the  functions  of  that  office,  and  to  show  himself  worthy  to  be 
the  leader  and  soul  of  such  a number  of  valiant  men,  ready 
to  shed  their  blood  for  his  service. 

It  was  now  noon,  and  the  enemy  did  not  yet  appear.  But 
about  three  of  the  clock  a great  dust  like  a white  cloud 
arose,  followed  soon  after  with  a blackness  that  overspread 
the  whole  plain  ; after  which  were  seen  the  glittering  of  ar- 
mour, lances,  and  standards.  Tissaphernes  commanded  the 
left,  which  consisted  of  cavalry  armed  with  white  cuirasses,  and 
of  light-armed  infantry  ; in  the  centre  was  the  heavy-armed 
foot,  a great  part  of  which  had  bucklers  made  of  wood  which 
covered  the  soldier  entirely  (these  were  Egyptians.)  The  rest 
of  the  light-armed  infantry  and  of  the  horse  formed  the  right 
wing.  The  foot  were  drawn  up  by  nations,  with  as  much 
depth  as  front,  and  in  that  order  composed  square  battalions. 
The  king  had  posted  himself  in  the  main  body  with  the  flower 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


131 


of  the  whole  army,  and  had  6000  horse  for  his  guard,  com- 
manded by  Artegerses.  Though  he  was  in  the  centre,  he  was 
beyond  the  left  wing  of  Cyrus’s  army,  so  much  did  the  front  of 
his  own  exceed  that  of  the  enemy  in  extent.  A hundred  and 
fifty  chariots  armed  with  scythes  were  placed  in  the  front  of  the 
army,  at  some  distance  from  one  another.  The  scythes  were 
fixed  to  the  axle  downwards  and  aslant,  so  as  to  cut  down,  and 
overthrow  all  before  them. 

As  Cyrus  relied  very  much  upon  the  valour  and  experience 
of  the  Greeks,  he  bade  Clearchus,  as  soon  as  he  had  beaten 
the  enemies  in  his  front,  to  take  care  to  incline  to  his  left,  and 
fall  upon  the  centre,  where  the  king  was  posted ; the  success  of 
the  battle  depending  upon  that  attack.  But  Clearchus,  find- 
ing it  very  difficult  to  make  his  way  through  so  great  a body  of 
troops,  replied,  that  he  need  be  in  no  pain,  and  that  he  would 
take  care  to  do  what  was  necessary. 

The  enemy  in  the  mean  time  advanced  slowly  in  good  order. 
Cyrus  marched  in  the  space  between  the  two  armies,  though 
nearest  to  his  own,  and  considered  both  of  them  with  great  at- 
tention. Xenophon,  perceiving  him,  spurred  directly  up  to 
him,  to  know  whether  he  had  any  farther  orders  to  give.  He 
called  out  to  him,  that  the  sacrifices  were  favourable,  and  that  he 
should  tell  the  troops  so.  He  then  hastened  through  the  ranks 
to  give  his  orders,  and  showed  himself  to  the  soldiers  with  such 
a joy  and  serenity  in  his  countenance,  as  inspired  them  with  new 
courage,  and  at  the  same  time  with  an  air  of  kindness  and  fami- 
liarity, that  excited  their  zeal  and  affection.  It  is  not  easy  to 
comprehend  what  great  effects  are  produced  by  a word,  a kind 
air,  or  a look  of  a general,  upon  a day  of  action ; and  with  what 
ardour  a common  man  will  rush  into  danger,  when  he  believes 
himself  not  unknown  to  his  general,  and  thinks  his  valour  will 
oblige  him. 

Artaxerxes  moved  on  continually,  though  with  a slow  pace, 
and  without  noise  and  confusion.  That  good  order  and  exact 
discipline  extremely  surprised  the  Greeks,  who  expected  to  see 
much  hurry  and  tumult,  in  so  great  a multitude,  and  to  hear 
confused  cries,  as  Cyrus  had  foretold  them. 

The  armies  were  not  distant  above  four  or  five  hundred  paces, 
when  the  Greeks  began  to  sing  the  hymn  of  battle,  and  to  march 
on  slowly  at  first,  and  with  silence.  When  they  came  near  the 
enemy,  they  set  up  great  cries,  striking  their  darts  upon  their 
shields  to  frighten  the  horse,  and  then  moving  altogether,  they 
sprung  forwards  upon  the  Barbarians  with  all  their  force,  who 
did  not  wait  their  charge,  but  took  to  their  heels,  and  fled  uni- 
versally ; except  Tissaphernes,  who  stood  his  ground  with  a 
small  part  of  his  troops. 

Cyrus  saw  with  pleasure  the  enemy  routed  by  the  Greeks,  and 


13*2 


HISTORY  OP  THE 


was  proclaimed  king  by  tho#e  around  him.  But  he  did  not 
give  himself  up  to  a vain  joy,  nor  as  yet  reckon  himself  victor. 
He  perceived,  that  Artaxerxes  was  wheeling  his  right  to  attack 
him  in  tlank,  and  marched  directly  against  him  with  his  600 
horse.  He  killed  Artagerses,  who  commanded  the  king’s  guard 
of  6000  horse,  with  his  own  hand,  and  put  the  whole  body  to 
flight.  Discovering  his  brother,  he  cried  out,  his  eyes  sparkling 
with  rage,  1 see  him,  and  spurred  against  him,  followed  only  by 
his  principal  officers  ; for  his  troops  had  quitted  their  ranks  to 
follow  the  runaways,  which  was  an  essential  fault. 

The  battle  then  became  a single  combat,x  in  some  measure, 
between  Artaxerxes  and  Cyrus,  and  the  two  brothers  were  seen 
transported  with  rage  and  fury,  endeavouring,  like  Eteocles  and 
Polynices,  to  plunge  their  swords  into  each  other’s  hearts,  and 
to  assure  themselves  of  the  throne  by  the  death  of  their  rival. 

Cyrus  having  opened  his  way  through  those  who  were  drawn 
up  in  battle  before  Artaxerxes,  joined  him,  and  killed  his  horse, 
that  fell  with  him  to  the  ground.  He  rose,  and  was  remounted 
upon  another,  when  Cyrus  attacked  him  again,  gave  him  a se- 
cond wound,  and  was  preparing  to  give  him  a third,  in  hopes 
that  it  would  prove  his  last.  The  king,  like  a lion  wounded  by 
the  hunters,  only  the  more  furious  from  the  smart,  sprung  for- 
wards, impetuously  pushing  his  horse  against  Cyrus,  who  running 
headlong,  and  without  regard  to  his  person,  threw  himself  into 
the  midst  of  a flight  of  darts  aimed  at  him  from  all  sides,  and  re- 
ceived a woundfrom  the  king’s  javelin,  at  the  instant  all  the  rest 
discharged  their  weapons  against  him.  Cyrus  fell  dead  : some 
say  that  it  was  from  the  wound  given  him  by  the  king  ; others 
affirm  that  he  was  killed  by  a Carian  soldier.  Mithridates,  a 
young  Persian  nobleman,  asserted,  that  he  had  given  him  the 
mortal  stroke  with  a javelin,  which  entered  his  temple,  and 
pierced  his  head  quite  through.  The  greatest  persons  of  the 
court  resolving  not  to  survive  so  good  a master,  were  all  killed 
around  his  body  ; a certain  proof,  says  Xenophon,  that  he  well 
knew  how  to  choose  his  friends,  and  that  he  was  truly  beloved 
by  them.  Ariaeus,  who  ought  to  have  been  the  firmest  of  all  his 
adherents,  fled  with  the  left  wing,  as  soon  as  he  heard  of  his  death. 

Artaxerxes,  after  having  caused  the  head  and  right  hand  of 
his  brother  to  be  cut  off  by  the  eunuch  Mesabates,  pursued  the 
enemy  into  their  camp.  Ariaeus  had  not  stopped  there,  but 
having  passed  through  it,  continued  his  retreat  to  the  place 
where  the  army  had  encamped  the  day  before,  which  was  about 
four  leagues  distant. 

Tissaphernes,  after  the  defeat  of  the  greatest  part  of  his  left 
wing  b^  the  Greeks,  led  on  the  rest  against  them,  and  by  the 
side  of  the  river  passed  through  the  light-armed  infantry  of  the 
x Diod.  1.  xiv.  p.  254. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECJANS. 


133 


Greeks,  who  opened  to  give  him  passage,  and  made  their  dis- 
charge upon  him  as  he  passed  without  losing  a man.  They 
were  commanded  by  Episthenes  of  Amphipolis,  who  was  es- 
teemed an  able  captain.  Tissaphernes  kept  on  without  return- 
ing to  the  charge,  because  he  perceived  he  was  too  weak,  and 
went  forward  to  Cyrus’s  camp,  where  he  found  the  king,  who 
was  plundering  it ; but  had  not  been  able  to  force  the  quarter 
defended  by  the  Greeks  left  to  guard  it,  who  saved  their  baggage. 

The  Greeks  on  their  side,  and  Artaxerxes  on  his,  who  did 
not  know  what  was  going  on  elsewhere,  believed  each  of  them 
that  they  had  gained  the  victory  ; the  first,  because  they  had 
put  the  enemy  to  flight,  and  pursued  them  ; and  the  king,  be- 
cause he  had  killed  his  brother,  beaten  the  troops  who  had  op- 
posed him,  and  plundered  their  camp.  The  event  was  soon 
cleared  up  on  both  sides.  Tissaphernes,  upon  his  arrival  at 
the  camp,  informed  the  king,  that  the  Greeks  had  defeated  his 
left  wing,  and  pursued  it  with  great  vigour  ; and  the  Greeks^ 
on  their  side,  learned,  that  the  king,  in  pursuing  Cyrus’s  left, 
had  penetrated  into  the  camp.  Upon  this  advice,  the  king 
rallied  his  troops,  and  marched  in  quest  of  the  enemy  ; and 
Clearchus,  being  returned  from  pursuing  the  Persians,  advanc- 
ed to  support  the  camp. 

The  two  armies  were  soon  very  near  each  other,  when,  by  a 
movement  made  by  the  king,  he  seemed  to  intend  to  charge  the 
Greeks,  by  their  left,  who,  fearing  to  be  surrounded  on  all  sides, 
wheeled  about,  and  halted  with  the  river  on  their  backs,  to  pre- 
vent their  being  taken  in  the  rear.  Upon  seeing  that,  the  king 
changed  his  form  of  battle  also,  drew  up  his  army  in  front  of 
them,  and  marched  on  to  the  attack.  As  soon  as  the  Greeks  saw 
him  approach,  they  began  to  sing  the  hymn  of  battle,  and  ad- 
vanced against  the  enemy  even  with  more  ardour  than  in  the 
first  action.  * 

The  Barbarians  again  took  to  their  heels,  as  at  first,  ran  far- 
ther than  before,  and  were  pursued  to  a village  at  the  foot  of  a 
hill,  upon  which  their  horse  halted.  The  king’s  standard  was 
observed  to  be  there,  which  was  a golden  eagle  upon  the  top  of  a 
pike,  having  its  wings  displayed.  The  Greeks  preparing  to 
pursue  them,  they  abandoned  also  the  hill,  fled  precipitately, 
and  all  their  troops  broke,  and  were  in  the  utmost  disorder  and 
confusion.  Clearchus,  having  drawn  up  the  Greeks  at  the 
bottom  of  the  hill,  ordered  Lycias  the  Syracusan  and  another 
to  go  up  it,  and  observe  what  passed  in  the  plain.  They  re- 
turned with  an  account  that  the  enemies  fled  on  all  sides,  and 
that  their  whole  army  was  routed. 

As  it  was  almost  night,  the  Greeks  laid  down  their  arms  to 
rest  themselves,  much  surprised  that  neither  Cyrus,  nor  any 
one  from  him,  appeared  ; and  imagining  that  he  was  either  en- 


134 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


gaged  in  the  pursuit  of  the  enemy,  or  was  making  haste  to  pos- 
sess himself  of  sotne  important  place  ; for  they  were  still  igno- 
rant of  his  death,  and  the  defeat  of  the  rest  of  his  army. 
They  determined  therefore  to  return  to  their  camp,  where  they 
arrived  about  night-fall,  and  found  the  greatest  part  of  the 
baggage  taken,  with  all  the  provisions,  and  400  waggons  laden 
with  corn  and  wine,  which  Cyrus  had  expressly  caused  to  be 
carried  along  with  the  army  for  the  Greeks,  in  case  of  any 
pressing  necessity.  They  passed  the  night  in  the  camp,  the 
greatest  part  of  them  without  any  refreshment,  concluding 
that  Cyrus  was  alive  and  victorious. 

The  success  of  this  battle  shows  the  superiority  of  valour  and 
military  knowledge  over  the  greatest  numbers  without  them. 
The  small  army  of  the  Greeks  did  not  amount  to  more  than 
twelve  or  13,000  men  ; but  they  were  seasoned  and  disciplined 
troops,  inured  to  fatigues,  accustomed  to  confront  dangers,  sen- 
sible to  glory,  and  who,  during  the  long  Peloponnesian  war, 
had  not  wanted  either  time  or  means  to  acquire  and  perfect 
themselves  in  the  art  of  war.  On  Artaxerxes’  side  were  rec- 
koned nearly  1,000,000  of  men  ; but  they  were  soldiers  only  in 
name,  without  force,  courage,  discipline,  experience,  or  any 
sentiment  of  honour.  Hence  it  was,  that  as  soon  as  the  Greeks 
appeared,  terror  and  disorder  ensued  amongst  the  enemy  ; and 
in  the  second  action,  Artaxerxes  himself  did  not  dare  to  wait 
their  attack,  but  shamefully  betook  himself  to  flight. 

Plutarch  here  blames  Clearchus  the  general  of  the  Greeks 
very  much,  and  imputes  to  him  as  an  unpardonable  neglect,  his 
not  having  followed  Cyrus’s  order,  who  recommended  to  him 
above  all  things  to  fall  upon  that  body  where  Artaxerxes  com- 
manded in  person.  This  reproach  seems  groundless.  It  is  not 
easy  to  conceive  how  it  was  possible  for  that  captain,  who  was 
posted  on  the  right  wing,  to  attack  Artaxerxes  immediately, 
who,  in  the  centre  of  his  own  army,  lay  beyond  the  utmost  ex- 
tent of  the  enemy’s  left,  as  has  been  said  before.  It  seems  that 
Cyrus,  depending  as  he  did  with  great  reason  upon  the  valour 
of  the  Greeks,  and  desiring  they  should  charge  Artaxerxes  in 
his  post,  ought  to  have  placed  them  in  the  left  wing,  which 
answered  directly  to  the  part  where  the  king  was  ; that  is,  to 
the  main  body,'  and  not  in  the  right,  which  was  very  remote 
from  it. 

Clearchus  may  indeed  be  reproached  with  having  followed 
the  pursuit  too  warmly  and  too  long.  If,  after  having  put  the 
left  wing  which  opposed  him  into  disorder,  he  had  charged  the 
rest  of  the  enemy  in  flank,  and  had  opened  his  way  to  the  cen- 
tre, where  Artaxerxes  was,  it  is  highly  probable  that  he  would 
have  gained  a complete  victory,  and  placed  Cyrus  upon  the 
throne.  The  600  horse  of  that  prince’s  guard  committed  the 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


135 


same  fault,  and  by  pursuing  the  body  of  troops  they  bad 
put  to  flight  too  eagerly,  left  their  master  almost  alone,  and 
abandoned  to  the  mercy  of  the  enemy  : without  considering, 
that  they  were  chosen  from  the  whole  army  for  the  immediate 
guard  of  his  person,  and  for  no  other  purpose  whatsoever.  Too 
much  ardour  is  often  prejudicial  in  a battle,  and  it  is  the  duty 
of  an  able  general  to  know  how  to  restrain  and  direct  it. 

Cyrus  himself  erred  highly  in  this  respect,  and  abandoned 
himself  too  much  to  his  blind  passion  for  glory  and  revenge. 
In  running  headlong  to  attack  his  brother,  he  forgot  that  there 
is  a wide  difference  between  a general  and  a private  soldier. 
He  ought  not  to  have  exposed  himself,  but  as  became  a prince  : 
as  the  head,  not  as  the  hand  ; as  the  person  who  was  to  give 
orders,  and  not  as  those  who  were  to  execute  them. 

In  these  remarks  I only  adopt  those  which  have  been  made 
by  able  judges  in  the  art  of  war,  and  would  not  choose  to  ad- 
vance my  own  opinion  upon  points  which  I am  not  competent 
to  decide. 

Sect.  III.  Eulogy  of  Cyrus. 

Xenophon  gives  us  a magnificent  character  of  Cyrus,  y and 
that  not  merely  from  the  report  of  others,  but  from  what  he  saw 
and  knew  of  him  in  his  own  person.  He  was,  says  he,  in  the 
opinion  of  all  that  were  acquainted  with  him,  next  to  Cyrus  the 
Great,  a prince  the  most  worthy  of  the  supreme  authority,  and 
one  who  had  the  most  noble,  and  most  truly  royal  soul.  From 
his  infancy  he  surpassed  all  of  his  own  age  in  every  exercise, 
whether  it  were  in  managing  the  horse,  drawing  the  bow,  throw- 
ing the  dart,  or  in  the  chase,  in  which  he  distinguished  himself 
once  by  fighting  and  killing  a bear  that  attacked  him.  Those 
advantages  were  enhanced  in  him  by  the  nobleness  of  his  air, 
an  engaging  aspect,  and  by  all  the  graces  of  nature,  that  con- 
duce to  recommend  merit. 

When  his  father  had  made  him  satrap  of  Lydia,  and  the 
neighbouring  provinces, z his  chief  care  was  to  make  the  people 
sensible  that  he  had  nothing  so  much  at  heart  as  to  keep  his 
word  inviolably,  not  only  with  regard  to  public  treaties,  but  the 
most  minute  of  his  promises  ; a quality  very  rare  amongst 
princes,  which  however  is  the  basis  of  all  good  government,  and 
the  source  of  their  own,  as  well  as  their  people’s  happiness. 
Not  only  the  places  under  his  authority,  but  the  enemy  them- 
selves, reposed  an  entire  confidence  in  him. 

Whether  good  or  ill  were  done  him,  he  always  desired  to  re- 
turn it  twofold,  and  wished  that  he  might  live  no  longer  (as  he 
said  himself)  than  whilst  he  surpassed  his  friends  in  benefits, 

y De  ExpetL  Cyr.  1.  i.  p.  266,  267.  z Great  Phrygia  and  Cappadocia. 


136 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


and  his  enemies  in  vengeantfe.  (It  would  have  been  more 
glorious  for  him  to  have  overcome  the  latter  by  the  force 
of  favour  and  benevolence.)  Nor  was  there  ever  a prince 
whom  people  were  more  afraid  to  offend,  nor  for  whose  sake 
they  were  more  ready  to  hazard  their  possessions,  lives,  and 
fortunes. 

Less  intent  upon  being  feared  than  beloved,  his  study  was  to 
make  his  greatness  appear  only  where  it  was  useful  and 
beneficial,  and  to  extinguish  all  other  sentiments,  but  those 
which  flow  from  gratitude  and  affection.  He  was  careful  to 
seize  every  occasion  of  doing  good,  to  confer  his  favours  with 
judgment  and  in  season,  and  to  show,  that  be  thought  him- 
self rich,  powerful,  and  happy,  only  as  he  made  others  sen- 
sible of  his  being  so  by  his  benevolence  and  liberality.  But  he 
took  care  not  to  exhaust  the  means  by  an  imprudent  profusion. 
He  did  not  lavish,a  but  distribute  his  favours.  He  chose 
rather  to  make  his  liberalities  the  rewards  of  merit,  than 
mere  donations,  and  that  they  should  be  subservient  in  pro- 
moting virtue,  and  not  in  supporting  the  soft  and  abject  sloth 
of  vice. 

He  was  particularly  pleased  with  conferring  his  favours  upon 
valiant  men,  and  governments  and  rewards  were  bestowed  only 
on  those  who  had  distinguished  themselves  by  their  actions. 
He  never  granted  any  honour  or  dignity  to  favour,  intrigue,  or 
faction,  but  to  merit  alone  ; upon  which  depends  not  only  the 
glory  but  the  prosperity  of  governments.  By  that  means  he 
soon  made  virtue  estimable,  and  rendered  vice  contemptible. 
The  provinces,  animated  with  a noble  emulation,  furnished  him 
in  a very  short  time  with  a considerable  number  of  excellent 
subjects  of  every  kind  ; who  under  a different  government  would 
have  remained  unknown,  obscure,  and  useless. 

Never  did  any  one  know  how  to  confer  an  obligation  with  a 
better  grace,  or  to  win  the  hearts  of  those  who  could  serve  him 
with  a more  engaging  behaviour.  As  he  was  fully  sensible  that 
he  stood  in  need  of  the  assistance  of  others  for  the  execution 
of  his  designs,  he  thought  justice  and  gratitude  required  that 
he  should  render  his  adherents  all  the  services  in  his  power. 
All  the  presents  made  him,  whether  of  splendid  arms,  or  rich 
apparel,  he  distributed  among  his  friends,  according  to  their 
several  tastes  or  occasions,  and  used  to  say,  that  the  brightest 
ornament,  and  most  exalted  riches  of  a prince,  consisted  in  adorn- 
ing and  enriching  those  who  served  him  well.  In  fact,  says 
Xenophon,  to  do  good  to  one’s  friends,  and  to  excel  them  in 
liberality,  does  not  seem  so  worthy  of  admiration  in  so  high  a 
fortune ; but  to  transcend  them  in  goodness  of  heart  and  senti- 

a Habebat  sinum  facilem,  non  perforatum  : ex  quo  multa  exeant,  nihil 
excidat.  Senec . de  vit.  beat,  cxxiii. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


137 


ments  of  friendship  and  affection,  and  to  take  more  pleasure  in 
conferring  than  receiving  obligations ; this  is  what  I find  in 
Cyrus  truly  worthy  of  esteem  and  admiration.  The  first  of 
these  advantages  he  derives  from  his  rank  ; the  other  from  him- 
self and  his  intrinsic  merit. 

By  these  extraordinary  qualities,  he  acquired  the  universal 
esteem  and  affection  as  well  of  the  Greeks  as  Barbarians.  A 
great  proof  of  what  Xenophon  here  says,  is,  that  none  ever 
quitted  the  service  of  Cyrus  for  the  king’s  ; whereas  great  num- 
bers went  over  every  day  to  him  from  the  king’s  party  after  the 
war  was  declared,  and  even  of  such  as  had  most  credit  at  the 
court ; because  they  were  all  convinced,  that  Cyrus  knew  best 
how  to  distinguish  and  reward  their  services. 

It  is  most  certain  that  young  Cyrus  was  endowed  with  great 
virtues,  and  a superior  merit ; but  I am  surprised,  that  Xeno- 
phon, in  drawing  his  character,  has  described  only  the  most 
beautiful  features,  and  such  as  are  calculated  to  excite  our 
admiration  of  him,  without  saying  the  least  word  of  his  defects, 
and  especially  of  that  immoderate  ambition,  which  was  the  soul 
of  all  his  actions,  and  which  at  length  put  arms  into  his  hands, 
against  his  elder  brother  and  king.  Is  it  allowable  in  an 
historian,  whose  chief  duty  is  to  paint  virtue  and  vice  in 
their  proper  colours,  to  relate  at  large  an  enterprise  of  such  a 
nature,  without  intimating  the  least  dislike  or  reprobation  of 
it  ? But  with  the  Pagans,  ambition  was  so  far  from  being  con- 
sidered as  a vice,  that  it  often  passed  for  a virtue. 

SECT.  IV. 

The  king  wishes  to  compel  the  Greeks  to  deliver  up  their  arms.  They  resolve 
to  die  rather  than  surrender  themselves.  A treaty  is  made  with  them. 
Tissaphernes  takes  upon  him  to  conduct  them  back  to  their  own  country. 
He  treacherously  seizes  Clearchus  and  four  other  generals,  who  are  all  put 
to  death. 

The  Greeks,b  having  learned,  the  day  after  the  battle,  that 
Cyrus  was  dead,  sent  deputies  to  Ariasus,  the  general  of  the 
Barbarians,  who  had  retired  with  his  troops  to  the  place  from 
whence  they  had  marched  the  day  before  the  action,  to  offer 
him,  as  victors,  the  crown  of  Persia  in  the  room  of  Cyrus.  At 
the  same  time  arrived  Persian  heralds  at  arms  from  the  king, 
to  summon  them  to  deliver  up  their  arms  ; to  whom  they  an- 
swered with  a haughty  air,  that  such  messages  were  not  to  be 
sent  to  conquerors  ; that  if  the  king  would  have  their  arms,  he 
might  come  and  take  them ; but  that  they  would  die  before  they 
would  part  with  them ; that  if  he  would  receive  them  into  the 
number  of  his  allies,  they  would  serve  him  with  fidelity  and 

b Xenoph.  in  Exped.  Cyr.  1.  ii.  p.  272—292.  Diod.  1.  xiv.  p.  255—257. 


138 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


valour  ;c  but  if  he  imagined  to  reduce  them  to  slavery  as  con- 
quered, he  might  know,  they  had  wherewithal  to  defend  them- 
selves, and  were  determined  to  lose  their  lives  and  liberty  toge- 
ther. The  herald  added,  that  they  had  orders  to  tell  them,  that 
if  they  continued  in  the  place  where  they  were,  they  would  be 
allowed  a suspension  of  arms,  but  if  they  advanced  or  retired, 
that  they  would  be  treated  as  enemies.  The  Greeks  agreed, 
but  were  asked  by  the  heralds  what  answer  they  should  take 
back.  Peace  in  continuing  here , or  war  in  marching,  replied 
Clearchus,  without  explaining  himself  farther ; in  order  to  keep 
the  king  always  in  suspense  and  uncertainty. 

The  answer  of  Ariteus  to  the  Grecian  deputies  was,  that 
there  were  many  Persians  more  considerable  than  himself,  who 
would  not  suffer  him  upon  the  throne,  and  that  he  should  set 
out  early  the  next  day  to  return  into  Ionia ; that,  if  they  would 
march  thither  with  him,  they  might  join  him  in  the  night.  Cle- 
archus, with  the  advice  of  the  officers,  prepared  to  depart. 
He  commanded  from  thenceforth,  as  being  the  sole  person  of 
sufficient  capacity  ; for  he  had  not  been  actually  elected  gene- 
ral-in-chief. 

When  the  night  came,  Miltocythes  the  Thracian,  who  com- 
manded forty  horse,  and  about  300  foot  of  his  own  country, 
went  and  surrendered  himself  to  the  king  ; and  the  rest  of  the 
Greeks  began  their  march  under  the  conduct  of  Clearchus,  and 
arrived  about  midnight  at  the  camp  of  Ariaeus.  After  they 
had  drawn  up  in  battle,  the  principal  officers  went  to  wait  on 
him  in  his  tent,  where  they  swore  alliance  with  him  ; and  the 
Barbarian  engaged  to  conduct  the  army  without  fraud.  In 
confirmation  of  the  treaty,  they  sacrificed  a wolf,  a ram,  a boar, 
and  a bull ; the  Greeks  dipped  their  swords,  and  the  Barbarians 
the  points  of  their  javelins,  in  the  blood  of  the  victims. 

Ariaeus  did  not  think  it  proper  to  return  by  the  same  route 
they  had  come,  because,  as  they  had  found  nothing  for  their 
subsistence  during  the  last  seventeen  days  of  their  march,  they 
must  have  suffered  much  more,  had  they  taken  the  same  way 
back  again.  He  therefore  took  another;  exhorting  them  only 
to  make  long  marches  at  first,  in  order  to  evade  the  king’s  pur- 
suit ; but  this,  however,  they  could  not  effect.  Towards  the 
evening,  when  they  were  not  far  from  some  villages  where  they 
proposed  to  halt,  the  scouts  came  in  with  advice,  that  they  had 
seen  several  equipages  and  convoys,  which  made  it  reasonable 
to  judge,  that  the  enemy  were  not  far  off.  Upon  which  they 
stood  their  ground,  and  waited  their  coming  up ; and  the  next 
day,  before  sun-rising,  drew  up  in  the  same  order  as  in  the  pre- 
ceding battle.  So  bold  an  appearance  terrified  the  king,  who 

c Sin  ut  victis  servitum  indiceretur,  esse  sibi  ferrum  et  juventutem,  et 
promptum  libertati  aut  ad  mortem  animum.  Tacit.  Annul.  1.  iv.  c.  46. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


139 


sent  heralds,  not  to  demand,  as  before,  the  surrender  of  their 
arms,  but  to  propose  peace  and  a treaty.  Clearchus,  who  was 
informed  of  their  arrival,  whilst  he  was  busy  in  drawing  up  his 
troops,  gave  orders  to  bid  them  wait,  and  to  tell  them,  that  he 
was  not  yet  at  leisure  to  hear  them.  He  assumed  purposely 
an  air  of  haughtiness  and  grandeur,  to  denote  his  intrepidity, 
and  at  the  same  time  to  show  the  fine  appearance  and  good 
condition  of  his  phalanx.  When  he  advanced  with  the  most 
gallant  of  his  officers,  expressly  chosen  for  the  occasion,  and 
had  heard  what  the  heralds  had  to  propose  ; he  made  answer, 
that  they  must  begin  with  giving  battle,  because  the  army, 
being  in  want  of  provisions,  had  no  time  to  lose.  The  herald 
having  carried  back  this  answer  to  their  master,  returned  shortly 
after;  which  showed,  that  the  king,  or  whoever  spoke  in  his 
name,  was  not  very  distant.  They  said,  they  had  orders  to 
conduct  them  to  villages,  where  they  would  find  provisions  in 
abundance,  and  conducted  them  thither  accordingly. 

The  army  staid  there  three  days,  during  which,  Tissaphernes 
arrived  from  the  king,  with  the  queen’s  brother  and  three  other 
Persian  grandees,  attended  by  a great  number  of  officers  and 
domestics.  After  having  saluted  the  generals,  who  advanced 
to  receive  him,  he  told  them  by  his  interpreter,  that  being  a 
neighbour  of  Greece,  and  seeing  them  engaged  in  dangers  out 
of  which  it  would  be  difficult  to  extricate  themselves,  he  had 
used  his  good  offices  with  the  king,  to  obtain  permission  to  re- 
conduct  them  into  their  own  country;  being  convinced,  that  nei- 
ther themselves,  nor  their  cities,  would  ever  be  unmindful  of  that 
favour  : that  the  king,  without  having  declared  himself  positive- 
ly upon  that  head,  had  commanded  him  to  come  to  them,  to 
know  for  what  cause  they  had  taken  arms  against  him  ; and  he 
advised  them  to  make  the  king  such  an  answer  as  might  not  give 
any  offence,  and  might  enable  him  to  do  them  service.  We  call 
the  gods  to  witness,  replied  Clearchus,  that  we  did  not  enlist 
ourselves  to  make  war  with  the  king,  or  to  march  against  him. 
Cyrus,  concealing  his  true  motives  under  different  pretexts, 
brought  us  almost  hither  without  explaining  himself,  the  better 
to  surprise  you.  And  when  we  saw  him  surrounded  with  dan- 
gers, we  thought  it  infamous  to  abandon  him,  after  the  favours 
we  had  received  from  him.  But  as  he  is  dead,  we  are  released 
from  our  engagement , and  neither  desire  to  contest  the  crown 
with  Artaxerxes,  nor  to  ravage  his  country,  nor  to  give  him 
the  least  disquiet ; provided  he  does  not  oppose  our  return. 
However,  if  we  are  attacked,  we  shall  endeavour,  with  the  as- 
sistance of  the  gods,  to  make  a good  defence  ; and  shall  not  be 
ungrateful  towards  those  who  render  us  any  service.  Tissa- 
phernes replied,  that  he  would  let  the  king  know  what  they 
said,  and  return  with  his  answer.  But  his  not  coming  the  next 


140 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


day  gave  the  Greeks  some  anxiety  : he  however  arrived  on  the 
third,  and  told  them,  that  after  much  controversy,  he  had  at 
length  obtained  the  king’s  pardon  for  them  : for,  that  it  had 
been  represented  to  the  king,  that  he  ought  not  to  suffer  people 
to  return  with  impunity  into  their  country,  who  had  been  so  in- 
solent as  to  come  thither  to  make  war  upon  him.  In  fine,  said 
he,  you  may  now  assure  yourselves  of  not  finding  any  obstacle 
to  your  return,  and  of  being  supplied  with  provisions,  or  suffered 
to  buy  them,  and  you  shall  swear  on  your  part,  that  you  will 
passivithout  committing  any  disorders  in  your  march,  and  that 
you  will  take  only  what  is  necessary  ; provided  you  are  not  fur- 
nished with  it.  These  conditions  were  sworn  to  on  both  sides. 
Tissaphernes  and  the  queen’s  brother  gave  their  hands  to  the 
colonels  and  captains  in  token  of  amity.  After  which  Tissa- 
phernes withdrew  to  arrange  his  affairs,  promising  to  return 
shortly  in  order  to  go  back  with  them  into  his  government. 

The  Greeks  waited  for  him  above  twenty  days,  continuing  en- 
camped near  Ariaeus,  who  received  frequent  visits  from  his  bro- 
thers and  other  relations,  as  did  the  officers  of  his  army  from  the 
Persians  of  the  different  party  ; who  assured  them  from  the  king 
of  an  entire  oblivion  of  the  past : so  that  the  friendship  of  Ariaeus 
for  the  Greeks  appeared  to  cool  every  day  more  and  more.  This 
change  gave  them  some  uneasiness.  Several  of  the  officers  went  to 
Clearchus  and  the  other  generals,  and  said  to  them,  What  do  we 
here  any  longer  ? Are  we  not  sensible,  that  the  king  desires  to 
see  us  all  perish,  that  others  may  be  terrified  by  our  example  l 
Perhaps  he  keeps  us  waiting  here,  till  he  re-assembles  his  dis- 
persed troops,  or  sends  to  seize  the  passes  in  our  way  ; for  he 
will  never  suffer  us  to  return  into  Greece  to  divulge  our  own 
glory  and  his  shame.  Clearchus  made  answer  to  this  discourse, 
that  to  depart  without  consulting  the  king  was  to  break  with 
him,  and  to  declare  war  by  violating  the  treaty  ; that  they  should 
remain  without  a conductor  in  a strange  country,  where  nobody 
would  supply  them  with  provisions  ; that  Ariaeus  would  abandon 
them;  and  that  even  their  friends  would  become  their  enemies ; 
that  he  did  not  know  but  there  might  be  other  rivers  to  pass,  but 
that,  were  the  Euphrates  the  only  one,  they  could  not  get  over 
it,  were  the  passage  ever  so  little  disputed.  That  if  it  were 
necessary  to  come  to  a battle,  they  should  find  themselves  with- 
out cavalry  against  an  enemy  that  had  a very  numerous  and 
excellent  body  of  horse  ; so  that  if  they  gained  the  victory,  they 
could  make  no  great  advantage  of  it,  and  if  they  were  overcome, 
they  were  utterly  and  irretrievably  lost.  Besides,  why  should 
the  king,  who  has  so  many  other  means  to  destroy  us,  engage 
his  word  only  to  violate  it,  and  thereby  render  himself  execra- 
ble in  the  sight  of  gods  and  men  ? 

Tissaphernes,  however,  arrived  with  his  troops,  in  order  to 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


141 


return  into  his  government,  and  they  set  forward  all  together 
under  the  conduct  of  that  satrap,  who  supplied  them  with  pro- 
visions. Ariagus  with  his  troops  encamped  with  the  Barbari- 
ans, and  the  Greeks  separately  at  some  distance,  which  kept 
up  a continual  distrust  amongst  them.  Besides  which,  there 
happened  frequent  quarrels  for  wood  or  forage,  that  augmented 
their  aversion  for  each  other.  After  three  days’  march,  they 
arrived  at  the  wall  of  Media,  which  is  a hundred  feet  high, 
twenty  broad,  and  twenty  leagues d in  extent,  all  built  with 
bricks,  cemented  with  bitumen,  like  the  walls  of  Babylon,  from 
which  it  was  not  very  distant  at  one  of  its  extremities.  When 
they  had  passed  it,  they  marched  eight  leagues  in  two  days, 
and  came  to  the  river  Tigris,  after  having  crossed  two  of  its 
canals,  cut  expressly  for  watering  the  country.  They  then 
passed  the  Tigris, e upon  a bridge  of  twenty-seven  boats  near 
Sitace,  a very  great  and  populous  city.  After  four  days’  march, 
they  arrived  at  another  city,  very  opulent  also,  called  Opis. 
They  found  there  a bastard  brother  of  Artaxerxes  with  a very 
considerable  body  of  troops,  which  he  was  bringing  from  Susa 
and  Ecbatana  to  his  aid.  He  admired  the  fine  order  of  the 
Greeks.  From  thence,  having  passed  the  deserts  of  Media, 
they  came  after  a march  of  six  days  to  a place  called  the  lands 
of  Pary satis  ; the  revenues  of  which  appertained  to  that  prin- 
cess. Tissaphernes,  to  insult  the  memory  of  her  son  Cyrus,  so 
dearly  beloved  by  her,  gave  up  the  villages  to  be  plundered  by 
the  Greeks.  Continuing  their  march  through  the  desert  on 
the  one  side  of  the  Tigris,  which  they  had  on  their  left,  they 
arrived  at  Cmnae,  a very  great  and  rich  city,  and  from  thence 
at  the  river  Zabates. 

The  occasions  of  distrust  increased  every  day  between  the 
Greeks  and  Barbarians.  Clearchus  thought  it  incumbent  on 
him  to  come  to  an  explanation  once  for  all  with  Tissaphernes. 
He  began  with  observing  upon  the  sacred  and  inviolable  nature 
of  the  treaties  subsisting  between  them.  Can  a man,  said  he, 
conscious  of  the  guilt  of  perjury,  he  capable  of  living  at  ease. 
How  would  he  shun  the  wrath  of  the  gods,  who  are  the  wit- 
nesses of  treaties,  and  escape  their  vengeance,  whose  power  is 
universal  ? He  added  afterwards  many  things  to  prove,  that 
the  Greeks  were  obliged  by  their  own  interest  to  continue 
faithful  to  him,  and  that,  by  renouncing  his  alliance,  they  must 
first  inevitably  renounce  not  only  all  religion,  but  reason  and 
common  sense.  Tissaphernes  seemed  to  relish  this  discourse, 

d Twenty  parasangas. 

The  inarch  of  the  Greeks  and  the  rest  of  the  army,  from  the  day  after  the 
battle  till  the  passing  of  the  Tigris,  abounds  in  the  text  of  Xenophon  with 
very  great  obscurities,  to  explain  which  fully,  would  require  a long  disserta- 
tion. My  plan  does  not  admit  me  to  enter  into  such  discussions,  which  I 
must  therefore  refer  to  those  who  are  more  able  than  myself. 


142 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


and  spoke  to  him  with  all  the  appearance  of  the  most  perfect 
sincerity  : insinuating,  at  the  same  time,  that  some  persons 
bad  done  him  bad  offices  with  him.  If  you  will  briny  your 
officers  hither,  said  he,  I will  show  you  those  who  have  wrong - 
eel  you  by  their  representations.  He  kept  him  to  supper, 
and  professed  more  friendship  for  him  than  ever. 

The  next  day  Clearchus  proposed  in  the  assembly,  to  go  with 
the  several  commanders  of  the  troops  to  Tissaphernes.  He 
suspected  Menon  in  particular,  whom  he  knew  to  have  had  a 
secret  conference  with  the  satrap  in  the  presence  of  Arimus  ; 
besides  which,  they  had  already  differed  several  times  with  each 
other.  Some  objected,  that  it  was  not  proper  that  all  the  gene- 
rals should  go  to  Tissaphernes,  and  that  it  was  not  consistent 
with  prudence  to  rely  implicitly  upon  the  professions  of  a Bar- 
barian. But  Clearchus  continued  to  insist  upon  his  proposal, 
till  it  was  agreed  that  the  four  other  commanders,  with  twenty 
captains,  and  about  200  soldiers,  under  the  pretext  of  buying 
provisions  in  the  Persian  camp,  where  there  was  a market, 
should  be  sent  along  with  him.  When  they  came  to  the  tent  of 
Tissaphernes,  the  five  commanders,  Clearchus,  Menon,  Proxe- 
nus,  Agias,  and  Socrates,  were  suffered  to  enter,  but  the  captains 
remained  without  at  the  door.  Immediately,  on  a certain  sig- 
nal before  agreed  on,  those  within  were  seized,  and  the  others 
put  to  the  sword.  Some  Persian  horse  afterwards  scoured  the 
country,  and  killed  all  the  Greeks  they  met,  whether  freemen  or 
slaves.  Clearchus,  with  the  other  generals,  was  sent  to  the 
king,  who  ordered  their  heads  to  be  struck  off.  Xenophon 
describes  with  sufficient  extent  the  characters  of  those  officers. 

Clearchus  was  valiant,  bold,  intrepid,  and  of  a capacity  for 
forming  great  enterprises.  His  courage  was  not  rash,  but  di- 
rected by  prudence ; and  he  retained  all  the  coolness  of  his 
temper  and  presence  of  mind  in  the  midst  of  the  greatest  dan- 
gers. He  loved  the  troops,  and  let  them  want  for  nothing. 
He  knew  how  to  make  them  obey  him  ; but  out  of  fear.  His 
mien  was  awful  and  severe  ; his  language  rough  ; his  punish- 
ments instant  and  rigorous  : he  gave  way  sometimes  to  passion, 
but  presently  came  to  himself,  and  always  chastised  with  justice. 
His  great  maxim  was,  that  nothing  could  be  done  in  an  army 
without  severe  discipline ; and  from  him  came  the  saying,  that 
a soldier  ought  to  fear  his  general  more  than  the  enemy.  The 
troops  esteemed  his  valour, f and  did  justice  to  his  merit ; but 
they  were  afraid  of  his  temper,  and  did  not  love  to  serve  under 
him.  In  a word,  says  Xenophon,  the  soldiers  feared  him  as 
scholars  do  a severe  pedagogue.  We  may  say  of  him  with 
Tacitus,  that  by  an  excess  of  severity  he  made,  what  had  other- 


f Manebat  admiratio  viri  et  fama;  sed  oderant.  Tacit.  Histor.  1.  ii.  c.  68. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS.  143 

wise  been  well  done  by  him,  unamiable  ; Cupidine  severitatis 
in  his  etiam,  quce  rite  facer et,  acerbus.% 

Proxenus  was  of  Boeotia.  From  his  infancy  he  aspired  at 
great  things,  and  was  industrious  to  make  himself  capable  of 
them.  He  spared  no  means  for  the  attainment  of  instruction, 
and  was  the  disciple  of  Gorgias  the  Leontine,  a celebrated  rhe- 
torician, who  sold  his  lectures  at  a very  high  price.  When  he 
found  himself  capable  of  commanding,  and  of  doing  good  to  his 
friends,  as  well  as  of  being  served  by  them,  he  entered  into 
Cyrus’s  service  with  the  view  of  advancing  himself.  He  did 
not  want  ambition,  but  would  take  no  other  path  to  glory  than 
that  of  virtue.  He  would  have  been  a perfect  captain,  had  he 
had  to  do  with  none  but  brave  and  disciplined  men,  and  had  it 
been  only  necessary  to  make  himself  beloved.  He  was  more 
apprehensive  of  being  upon  bad  terms  with  his  soldiers,  than  his 
soldiers  with  him.  He  thought  it  sufficient  for  a commander  to 
praise  good  actions,  without  punishing  bad  ones  ; for  which 
reason  he  was  beloved  by  the  worthy  ; but  those  of  a different 
character  abused  his  easiness.  He  died  at  thirty  years  of  age. 

Could  the  two  great  persons,11  whose  portrait  we  have  here 
drawn  after  Xenophon,  have  moulded  into  one,  something  per- 
fect might  have  been  made  of  them  ; by  retrenching  their  seve- 
ral defects,  and  retaining  only  their  virtues  ; but  it  rarely 
happens,  that  the  same  man,  as  Tacitus  ’ says  of  Agricola,  be- 
haves, according  to  the  exigency  of  times  and  circumstances, 
sometimes  with  gentleness  and  sometimes  with  severity,  without 
lessening  his  authority  by  the  former,  or  the  people’s  affection 
by  the  latter. 

Menon  was  a Thessalian,  avaricious  and  ambitious,  but 
ambitious  only  to  satiate  his  avarice,  pursuing  honour  and 
estimation  for  the  mere  lucre  of  money.  He  courted  the 
friendship  of  the  great,  and  of  persons  in  authority,  that  he 
might  have  it  in  his  power  to  commit  injustice  and  oppression 
with  impunity.  To  obtain  his  ends,  falsehood,  fraud,  perjury, 
cost  him  nothing ; whilst  sincerity,  and  integrity  of  heart,  were 
in  his  opinion  merely  weakness  and  stupidity.  He  loved  no- 
body ; and  if  he  professed  friendship,  it  was  only  to  deceive. 
As  others  make  their  glory  consist  in  religion,  probity,  and 
honour,  he  valued  himself  upon  injustice,  deceit,  and  treachery. 
He  gained  the  favour  of  the  great  by  false  reports,  whispering, 
and  calumny ; and  that  of  the  soldiery  by  licence  and  impunity. 
In  fine,  he  endeavoured  to  render  himself  terrible  by  the  mis- 

s Tacit.  Annal.  c.  lxxv. 

h Egregium  principatus  temperamentum,  si  demptis  utriusque  vitiis  solse 
virtutes  miscerentur.  Tacit.  Histor.  1.  ii.  c.  5. 

* Pro  variis  temporibus  ac  negotiis  severus  et  comis — nec  illi,  quod  est  raris- 
simum,  aut  facilitas  auctoritatem,  aut  severitas  amorem,  deminuit.  Tacit . in 
Agric.  c.  ix. 


144 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


chief  it  was  in  his  power  to  do,  and  imagined  he  favoured 
those  to  whom  he  did  none. 

I had  thoughts  of  retrenching  these  characters,  which  in- 
terrupt the  thread  of  the  history.  But  as  men,  in  all  times, 
are  the  same,  I thought  retaining  them  would  neither  be  useless 
nor  disagreeable  to  the  reader. 

SECT.  V. 

Retreat  of  the  10,000  Greeks  from  the  province  of  Babylon, 
as  far  as  Trebisond. 

The  generals  of  the  Greeks  having  been  seized, k and  the 
officers  who  attended  them  massacred,  the  troops  were  in  the 
highest  consternation.  They  were  five  or  600  leagues  from 
Greece,  surrounded  with  great  rivers  and  hostile  nations,  with- 
out a guide  or  any  supplies  of  provisions.  In  this  state  of 
general  dejection,  they  could  not  think  of  taking  either  nourish- 
ment or  repose.  In  the  middle  of  the  night,  Xenophon,  a 
young  Athenian,  but  of  prudence  and  capacity  superior  to  his 
years,  went  to  some  of  the  officers,  and  represented  to  them, 
that  they  had  no  time  to  lose;  that  it  was  of  the  utmost  im- 
portance to  prevent  the  bad  designs  ol  the  enemy ; that  how- 
ever small  their  number,  they  would  render  themselves  for- 
midable, if  they  behaved  with  boldness  and  resolution ; that 
valour  and  not  multitude  determines  the  success  of  arms ; and 
that  it  was  necessary  above  all  things  to  nominate  generals 
immediately  ; because  an  army  without  commanders  is  like  a 
body  without  a soul.  A council  was  immediately  held,  at 
which  100  officers  were  present  ; and  Xenophon  being  desired 
to  speak,  enforced  the  reasons  at  large,  which  he  had  at  first 
but  lightly  touched  upon ; and  by  his  advice  commanders  were 
appointed.  These  were,  Timasion  in  the  room  of  Clearchus, 
Xanthicles  for  Socrates,  Cleanor  for  Agias,  Philesius  for 
Menon,  and  Xenophon  for  Proxenus. 

Before  the  break  of  day,  they  assembled  the  army.  The 
generals  made  speeches  to  animate  the  troops,  and  Xenophon 
amongst  the  rest.  Fellow- soldiers,  said  he,  the  loss  of  so  many 
brave  men  by  vile  treachery,  and  the  being  abandoned  by  our 
friends , is  very  deplorable : but  we  must  not  sink  under  our 
misfortunes ; and  if  we  cannot  conquer , let  us  choose  rather 
to  perish  gloriously,  than  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  Barbarians, 
who  would  inflict  upon  us  the  greatest  miseries.  Let  us  call 
to  mind  the  glorious  battles  of  Platcece,  Thermopylae,  Salamis, 
and  so  many  others,  wherein  our  ancestors,  though  with  a 
small  number,  have  fought  and  defeated  the  innumerable 
armies  of  the  Persians,  and  thereby  rendered  the  name  alone 
h Xenoph.  in  Expert.  Cyr.  1.  iii.  et  iv. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


145 


of  Greek  for  ever  formidable.  It  is  to  their  invincible  valour 
ive  owe  the  honour  ive  possess,  of  acknowledging  no  masters 
upon  earth  but  the  gods,  nor  any  happiness  but  what  is  con- 
sistent with  liberty.  Those  gods,  the  avengers  of  perjury,  and 
witnesses  of  the  enemy' s perfidy , will  be  favourable  to  us  ; and 
as  they  are  attacked  in  the  violation  of  treaties,  and  take 
pleasure  in  humbling  the  proud  and  exalting  the  low,  they  will 
also  follow  us  to  battle  and  combat  for  us.  For  the  rest, 
fellow-soldiers,  as  we  have  no  refuge  but  in  victory,  which  must 
be  our  sole  resource,  and  will  make  us  ample  amends  for  what- 
ever it  costs  to  attain  it;  I should  believe,  if  it  were  your 
opinion,  that,  in  order  to  make  a more  expeditious  and  less 
difficult  retreat,  it  would  be  very  proper  to  rid  ourselves  of 
all  the  useless  baggage,  and  to  keep  only  what  is  absolutely 
necessary  in  our  march.  All  the  soldiers  that  moment  lifted  up 
their  hands  to  signify  their  approbation  and  consent  to  all  that 
had  been  said,  and  without  loss  of  time  set  fire  to  their  tents 
and  carriages  ; such  of  them  as  had  too  much  equipage  giving  it 
to  others  who  had  too  little,  and  destroying  the  rest. 

It  was  resolved  to  march  the  army  without  tumult  or  violence, 
if  their  return  was  not  opposed  ; but  otherwise  to  open  them- 
selves a passage  sword  in  hand  through  the  enemy.  They 
therefore  began  their  march  in  the  form  of  a great  hollow  square, 
with  the  baggage  in  the  centre.  Chirisophus  the  Lacedaemo- 
nian had  the  vanguard  ; two  of  the  oldest  captains  the  right  and 
left ; and  Timasion  with  Xenophon  were  posted  in  the  rear  as 
the  youngest  officers.  The  first  day  was  distressing  ; because 
having  neither  horse  nor  slingers,  they  were  extremely  harassed 
by  a detachment  sent  against  them  : but  they  provided  against 
that  inconvenience  by  following  Xenophon’s  advice.  They 
chose  200  men  out  of  the  Rhodians  among  the  troops,  whom 
they  armed  with  slings,  and  augmented  their  pay  for  their  en- 
couragement. They  could  throw  as  far  again  as  the  Persians, 
because  they  discharged  balls  of  lead,  and  the  others  made  use 
only  of  large  flints.  They  mounted  also  a squadron  of  fifty  men 
upon  the  horses  intended  for  the  baggage,  and  Supplied  their 
places  with  other  beasts  of  burden.  By  the  means  of  this  sup- 
ply, a second  detachment  of  the  enemy  were  very  severely 
handled. 

After  some  days’  march,  Tissaphernes  appeared  with  all  his 
forces.  He  contented  himself  at  first  with  harassing  the 
Greeks,  who  moved  on  continually.  The  latter  observing  the 
difficulty  of  retreating  in  a hollow  square  in  the  face  of  the 
enemy,  from  the  unevenness  of  ground,  hedges,  and  other  ob- 
stacles, which  might  oblige  them  to  break  it,  changed  their 
order  of  battle,  and  marched  in  two  columns,  with  the  little 
baggage  they  had  in  the  space  between  them.  They  formed  a 

VOL.  in.  l 


146 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


body  of  reserve  of  600  chosen  men,  whom  they  divided  into  six 
companies,  and  subdivided  by  fifties  and  tens,  to  facilitate  their 
motions,  according  as  occasion  might  require.  When  the  co- 
lumns came  close  to  each  other,  they  either  remained  in  the 
rear,  or  filed  off  upon  the  flanks  on  both  sides  to  avoid  dis- 
order ; and  when  they  opened,  they  fell  into  the  void  space  in 
the  rear  between  the  two  columns.  Upon  any  occasion  of 
attack,  they  immediately  ran  where  it  was  necessary.  The 
Greeks  stood  several  charges,  but  they  were  neither  consider- 
able, nor  attended  with  much  loss. 

They  arrived  at  the  river  Tigris.  As  its  depth  would  not 
admit  them  to  repass  it  without  boats,  they  were  obliged  to 
cross  the  Carduchian  mountains,  because  there  was  no  other 
way  ; and  the  prisoners  reported,  that  from  thence  they  would 
enter  Armenia,  where  they  might  pass  the  Tigris,  at  its  source, 
and  afterwards  the  Euphrates,  not  very  distant  from  it.  To 
gain  those  defiles  before  the  enemy  could  seize  them,  it  was 
thought  proper  to  set  forwards  in  the  night,  in  order  to  arrive 
at  the  foot  of  the  mountains  by  the  break  of  day  ; which  was 
done  accordingly.  Chirisophus  continued  at  the  head  of  the 
advanced  guard,  with  the  troops  armed  with  missive  weapons, 
besides  his  ordinary  corps  : and  Xenophon  in  the  rear,  with 
only  the  heavy-armed  soldiers,  because  at  that  time  there  was 
nothing  to  fear  on  that  side.  The  inhabitants  of  the  country 
had  taken  possession  of  several  of  the  heights,  from  whence  it 
was  necessary  to  dislodge  them,  which  could  not  be  done  with- 
out great  danger  and  difficulty. 

The  officers,  having  held  a council  of  war,  were  of  opinion, 
that  it  was  proper  to  leave  behind  them  all  the  beasts  of  burden 
not  absolutely  necessary,  with  all  the  slaves  lately  taken  ; be- 
cause both  the  one  and  the  other  would  retard  their  march  too 
much  in  the  great  defiles  they  had  to  pass ; besides  which,  it 
required  a greater  quantity  of  provisions  to  support  them,  and 
those  who  had  the  care  of  the  beasts  were  useless  in  fight. 
That  regulation  was  executed  without  delay,  and  they  continued 
their  march,  sometimes  fighting,  sometimes  halting.  The  pass- 
ing of  the  mountains,  which  took  up  seven  days,  fatigued  the 
troops  exceedingly,  and  occasioned  some  loss  ; but  at  length 
they  arrived  at  villages,  where  they  found  provisions  in  abun- 
dance, and  rested  some  days,  to  recover  the  severe  fatigues  the 
army  had  undergone,  in  comparison  with  which  all  they  had 
suffered  in  Persia  was  trivial. 

But  they  found  themselves  soon  after  exposed  to  new  danger. 
Almost  at  the  foot  of  the  mountains  they  came  to  a river  200  feet 
in  breadth,  called  Centrites,  which  stopped  their  march.  They 
had  to  defend  themselves  both*  against  the  enemy,  who  pursued 
them  in  the  rear,  and  the  Armenians,  the  soldiers  of  the  coun- 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


147 


try,  who  lined  the  opposite  side  of  the  river.  They  attempted 
in  vain  to  pass  it  in  a place  where  the  water  came  up  to  their 
arm-pits,  and  were  carried  away  by  the  rapidity  of  the  current, 
which  the  weight  of  their  arms  made  them  unable  to  resist.  By 
good  fortune  they  discovered  another  place  not  so  deep,  where 
some  soldiers  had  seen  the  people  of  the  country  pass.  It  re- 
quired abundance  of  address,  diligence,  and  valour,  to  keep  off 
the  enemy  on  both  sides  of  them.  The  army  however  passed 
the  river  at  length  without  much  loss. 

They  marched  afterwards  with  less  interruption : passed  the 
source  of  the  Tigris,  and  arrived  at  the  little  river  Teleboa, 
which  is  very  beautiful,  and  has  many  villages  on  its  banks. 
Here  began  the  western  Armenia ; which  was  governed  by 
Tiribasus,  a satrap  much  beloved  by  the  king,  who  had  the  ho- 
nour to  help  him  to  mount  on  horseback  when  at  the  court he 
offered  to  let  the  army  pass,  and  to  suffer  the  soldiers  to  take  all 
they  wanted,  upon  condition  that  they  should  commit  no  ravages 
in  their  march  ; which  proposal  was  accepted  and  ratified  on 
each  side.  Tiribasus  kept  always  a flying  camp  at  a small  dis- 
tance from  the  army.  There  fell  a great  quantity  of  snow, 
which  gave  the  troops  some  inconvenience  ; and  they  learned 
from  a prisoner,  that  Tiribasus  designed  to  attack  the  Greeks 
in  their  passage  over  the  mountains,  in  a defile,  through  which 
they  must  necessarily  march.  They  prevented  him  by  seizing 
that  post,  after  having  put  the  enemy  to  flight.  After  some 
days’  march  through  deserts,  they  passed  the  Euphrates  near  its 
source,  not  having  the  water  above  their  waist. 

They  suffered  exceedingly  afterwards  from  a north  wind, 
which  blew  in  their  faces,  and  obstructed  respiration  ; so  that 
it  was  thought  necessary  to  sacrifice  to  the  wind,  upon  which  it 
seemed  to  abate.  They  marched  on  in  snow  five  or  six  feet 
deep,  which  killed  several  servants  and  beasts  of  burden,  be- 
sides thirty  soldiers.  They  made  several  fires  during  the  night, 
for  they  found  plenty  of  wood.  All  the  next  day  they  continued 
their  march  through  the  snow,  where  many  of  them,  worn 
down  with  hunger,  which  was  followed  with  languor  or  faint- 
ing, continued  lying  upon  the  ground,  through  weakness  and 
want  of  spirits.  When  something  had  been  given  them  to 
eat,  they  found  themselves  relieved,  and  continued  their  march. 

The  enemy  still  pursued  them.  Many,  overtaken  by  the 
night,  remained  on  the  road  without  fire  or  provisions,  so  that 
several  died  of  their  hardships,  and  the  enemy  who  followed 
them  took  some  baggage.  Some  soldiers  were  also  left  behind, 
that  had  lost  their  sight,  and  others  their  toes,  by  the  snow. 
Against  the  first  evil  the  remedy  was  to  wear  something  black 

1 The  French  translator  of  Xenophon  says,  he  held  the  king's  stirrup  when 
he  got  on  horseback , without  considering  that  the  ancients  used  none. 

L 2 


148 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


before  the  eyes  ; and  against  the  other  to  keep  the  legs  always 
in  motion,  and  to  bare  the  feet  at  night.  Arriving  at  a more 
commodious  place,  they  dispersed  themselves  into  the  neigbour- 
ing  villages,  to  recover  and  repose  after  their  fatigues.  The 
houses  were  built  under-ground,  with  an  opening  at  top,  like 
a well,  through  which  the  descent  was  by  a ladder  ; but  there 
was  another  entrance  for  cattle.  They  found  there  sheep,  cows, 
goats,  poultry ; with  wheat,  barley,  and  pulse;  and  for  drink,  there 
was  beer  which  was  very  strong,  when  not  mingled  with  water, 
but  was  agreeable  to  those  who  were  used  to  it.  They  drank 
this  with  a reed  out  of  the  vessels  that  held  the  beer,  upon  which 
they  saw  the  barley  swim.  The  master  of  the  house  where 
Xenophon  lay,  received  him  very  kindly,  and  even  showed  him 
where  some  wine  was  concealed ; besides  which  he  made  him  a 
present  of  several  horses.  He  taught  him  also  to  fasten  a kind 
of  hurdles  to  their  feet,  and  to  do  the  same  to  the  other  beasts 
of  burden,  to  prevent  their  sinking  in  the  snow ; without  which 
they  would  have  been  up  to  the  girth  in  it  at  every  step.  The 
army,  after  having  rested  seven  days  in  these  villages,  resumed 
their  route. 

After  a march  of  seven  days,  they  arrived  at  the  river  Arax- 
es,  called  also  the  Phasis,  which  is  about  100  feet  in  breadth. 
Two  days  after  they  discovered  the  Phasians,  the  Chalybes, 
and  the  Taocians,  who  kept  the  pass  of  the  mountains,  to 
prevent  their  descending  into  the  plain.  They  saw  it  was  im- 
possible to  avoid  coming  to  a battle  with  them,  and  resolved 
to  engage  the  same  day.  Xenophon,  who  observed  that  the 
enemy  defended  only  the  ordinary  passage,  and  that  the  moun- 
tain was  three  leagues  in  extent,  proposed  the  sending  of  a 
detachment  to  take  possession  of  the  heights  that  commanded 
the  enemy  ; which  would  not  be  difficult,  as  they  might  prevent 
all  suspicion  of  their  design  by  a march  in  the  night,  and  by 
making  a false  attack  by  the  main  road,  to  amuse  the  barbari- 
ans. This  was  accordingly  executed,  the  enemy  put  to  flight, 
and  the  pass  cleared. 

They  crossed  the  country  of  the  Chalybes,  who  are  the  most 
valiant  of  all  the  barbarians  in  those  parts.  When  they  killed 
an  enemy,  they  cut  off  his  head,  and  carried  it  about  in  triumph, 
singing  and  dancing.  They  kept  themselves  close  shut  up  in 
their  cities,  and  when  the  army  marched,  fell  suddenly  upon  the 
rear,  after  having  carried  every  thing  of  value  in  the  country 
into  places  of  safety.  After  twelve  or  fifteen  days’  march, 
they  arrived  at  a very  high  mountain,  called  Teches,  from 
whence  they  described  the  sea.  The  first  who  perceived  it, 
raised  great  shouts  of  joy  for  a considerable  time  ; which  made 
Xenophon  imagine  that  the  vanguard  was  attacked,  and  go 
with  haste  to  support  it.  As  he  approached  nearer,  the  cry  of 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


149 


The  sea  ! the  sea  ! was  heard  distinctly,  and  the  alarm  changed 
into  joy  and  gaiety : but  when  they  came  to  the  top,  nothing 
was  heard  but  a confused  noise  of  the  whole  army  crying 
together,  The  sea ! the  sea ! whilst  they  could  not  refrain 
from  tears,  nor  from  embracing  their  generals  and  officers. 
And  then,  without  waiting  for  orders,  they  heaped  up  a pile 
of  stones,  and  erected  a trophy  with  broken  bucklers  and 
shattered  arms. 

From  thence  they  advanced  to  the  mountains  of  Colchis,  one 
of  which  was  higher  than  the  rest,  and  of  that  the  people  of  the 
country  had  possessed  themselves.  The  Greeks  drew  up  in 
battle  at  the  bottom  of  it  to  ascend,  for  the  access  was  not  im- 
practicable. Xenophon  did  not  judge  it  proper  to  march  in  line 
of  battle,  but  by  files  ; because  the  soldiers  could  not  keep  their 
ranks,  from  the  inequality  of  the  ground,  that  in  some  places 
was  easy,  and  in  others  difficult,  to  climb,  which  might  discour- 
age them.  That  advice  was  approved,  and  the  army  formed 
according  to  it.  The  heavy-armed  troops  amounted  to  four- 
score files,  each  consisting  of  about  100  men,  with  1800  light- 
armed soldiers,  divided  into  three  bodies,  one  of  which  was 
posted  on  the  right,  another  on  the  left,  and  a third  in  the  centre. 
After  having  encouraged  his  troops,  by  representing  to  them 
that  this  was  the  last  obstacle  they  had  to  surmount,  and  implor- 
ed the  assistance  of  the  gods,  the  army  began  to  ascend  the 
hill.  The  enemy  were  not  able  to  support  their  charge,  and 
dispersed.  They  passed  the  mountain,  and  encamped  in  vil- 
lages, where  they  found  provisions  in  abundance. 

A very  strange  accident  happened  there  to  the  army,  which 
put  them  in  great  consternation.  For  the  soldiers,  finding 
abundance  of  bee-hives  in  that  place,  and  eating  the  honey, 
they  were  seized  with  violent  vomiting  and  fluxes,  attended  with 
delirious  fits ; so  that  those  who  were  least  ill,  seemed  like 
drunken  men,  and  the  rest,  either  furiously  mad  or  dying.  The 
earth  was  strewed  with  their  bodies  as  after  a defeat ; however, 
none  of  them  died,  and  the  distemper  ceased  the  next  day 
about  the  same  time  it  had  seized  them.  The  third  or  fourth 
day  the  soldiers  got  up,  but  in  the  condition  in  which  people 
are  after  taking  a violent  medicine. 

Two  days  after,  the  army  arrived  near  Trebisond,  a Greek 
colony  of  Sinopians,  situate  upon  the  Euxine  or  Black  Sea,  in 
the  province  of  Colchis.  Here  they  lay  encamped  for  thirty 
days,  and  acquitted  themselves  of  the  vows  they  had  made  to 
Jupiter,  Hercules,  and  the  other  deities,  to  obtain  a happy 
return  into  their  own  country.  They  also  celebrated  the  games 
of  the  horse  and  foot  races,  wrestling,  boxing,  the  pancratium; 
the  whole  attended  with  the  greatest  joy  and  solemnity. 


150 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


SECT.  VI. 

The  Greeks,  after  having  undergone  excessive  fatigues,  and  surmounted  many 
dangers,  arrive  upon  the  sea-coast  opposite  to  Byzantium.  They  pass  the 
strait,  and  engage  in  the  service  of  Seuthes,  prince  of  Thrace.  Xenophon 
afterwards  repasses  the  sea  with  his  troops,  advances  to  Pergamus,  and  joins 
Thimbron,  general  of  the  Lacedaemonians,  who  was  marching  against  Tissa- 
phernes  and  Pharnabazus. 

After  having  offered  sacrifices  to  the  several  divinities,111  and 
celebrated  the  games,  they  deliberated  upon  the  proper  mea- 
sures for  their  return  into  Greece.  They  concluded  upon  going 
thither  by  sea,  and  for  that  purpose  Chirisophus  offered 
to  go  to  Anaxibius,  the  admiral  of  Sparta,  who  was  his 
friend,  in  hopes  of  being  able  to  obtain  ships  of  him.  He  set 
out  directly,  and  Xenophon  regulated  the  order  it  was  neces- 
sary to  observe,  and  the  precautions  to  be  taken  for  the  secu- 
rity of  the  camp,  provisions,  and  forage.  He  believed  it  also 
proper  to  make  sure  of  some  vessels,  besides  those  that  were 
expected,  and  made  some  expeditions  against  the  neighbouring 
people. 

As  Chirisophus  did  not  return  so  soon  as  was  expected,  and 
provisions  began  to  be  wanting,  it  was  resolved  to  pro- 
ceed by  land  ; because  there  was  not  a sufficient  number  of 
ships  to  transport  the  whole  army ; and  those  which  the  pre- 
caution of  Xenophon  had  procured,  were  allotted  to  carry  the 
women,  the  old  and  sick  men,  with  all  the  unnecessary  baggage. 
The  army  continued  its  march,  and  lay  ten  days  at  Cerasus," 
where  there  was  a general  review  of  the  troops,  who  were 
found  to  amount  to  8,600  men,  out  of  about  10,000 ; the  rest 
having  died  in  the  retreat,  of  their  wounds,  fatigues,  or  dis- 
eases. 

In  the  short  time  that  the  Greeks  continued  in  these  parts, 
several  disputes  arose,  as  well  with  the  inhabitants  of  the  coun- 
try, as  with  some  of  the  officers  who  were  jealous  of  Xeno- 
phon’s authority,  and  endeavoured  to  render  him  odious  to  the 
army.  But  his  prudence  and  moderation  put  a stop  to  those 
disorders  ; having  made  the  soldiers  sensible,  that  their  safety 
depended  upon  preserving  union  and  a good  understanding 
amongst  themselves,  and  obedience  to  their  generals. 

From  Cerasus  they  went  to  Cotyora,  which  is  not  very  re- 
mote from  it.  They  there  deliberated  again  upon  the  proper 
measures  for  their  return.  The  inhabitants  of  the  country  re- 

“ Xenoph.  1.  vi. 

n This  city  of  Cerasus  became  famous  for  the  cherry-trees  which  Lucullus 
first  brought  into  Italy,  and  which  from  thence  have  been  dispersed  all  over 
the  western  world. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


15  L 


presented  the  almost  insuperable  difficulties  of  going  by  land, 
from  the  defiles  and  rivers  they  had  to  pass,  and  offered  to  sup- 
ply the  Greeks  with  ships.  This  seemed  the  best  expedient, 
and  the  army  embarked  accordingly.  They  arrived  the  next 
day  at  Sinope,  a city  of  Paphlagonia,  and  a colony  of  the  Mi- 
lesians. Chirisophus  repaired  thither  with  galleys,  but  without 
money,  though  the  troops  expected  to  receive  some.  He  as- 
sured them  that  the  army  should  be  paid  as  soon  as  they  were 
out  of  the  Euxine  sea ; and  that  their  retreat  was  universally 
celebrated,  and  the  subject  of  the  discourse  and  admiration  of 
all  Greece. 

The  soldiers,  finding  themselves  near  enough  to  Greece,  de- 
sired to  make  some  booty  before  they  arrived  there,  and  with 
that  view  resolved  to  nominate  a general  with  full  authority, 
whereas,  till  then,  all  affairs  were  determined  in  the  council  of 
war  by  the  plurality  of  voices.  They  cast  their  eyes  upon  Xeno- 
phon, and  caused  him  to  be  desired  to  accept  that  office.  He 
was  not  insensible  to  the  honour  of  commanding  in  chief  ,•  but 
he  foresaw  the  consequences,  and  desired  time  to  consider. 
After  having  expressed  his  high  sense  of  gratitude  for  an  office 
so  much  to  his  honour,  he  represented,  that,  to  avoid  jealousy 
and  division,  the  success  of  affairs,  and  the  interest  of  the  army, 
seemed  to  require  that  they  should  choose  a Lacedaemonian  for 
their  general,  as  the  Spartan  state  at  that  time  was  actually  mis- 
tress of  Greece,  and  in  consideration  of  that  choice,  would  be 
better  disposed  to  support  them.  This  reason  was  not  relished, 
and  they  objected,  that  they  were  far  from  intending  to  depend 
servilely  upon  Sparta,  or  to  submit  to  regulate  their  enterprises 
by  the  pleasure  or  dislike  of  that  state  ; and  pressed  him  again 
to  accept  the  command.  He  was  then  obliged  to  explain  him- 
self plainly,  and  without  evasion  ; and  declared,  that  having 
consulted  the  gods  by  sacrifice  upon  the  offer  they  made  him, 
they  had  manifested  their  will  by  evident  signs,  from  whence  it 
appeared  that  they  did  not  approve  their  choice.  It  was  sur- 
prising to  see  the  impression  which  the  sole  mention  of  the  gods 
made  upon  the  soldiers,  otherwise  very  warm  and  tenacious  ; 
and  who  besides  are  commonly  little  affected  with  the  motives 
of  religion.  Their  great  ardour  abated  immediately,  and  with- 
out making  any  reply,  they  proceeded  to  elect  Chirisophus, 
though  a Lacedaemonian,  for  their  general. 

His  authority  was  of  no  long  continuance.  Discord,  as 
Xenophon  had  foreseen,  arose  amongst  the  troops,  who  were 
angry  that  their  general  prevented  their  plundering  the  Gre- 
cian cities  through  which  they  passed.  This  disturbance  was  prin- 
cipally excited  by  the  Peloponnesians,  who  composed  one  half 
of  the  army,  and  could  not  see  Xenophon,  an  Athenian,  in  au- 
thority, without  pain.  Different  measures  were  proposed  ; but 


152 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


nothing  being  concluded,  the  troops  divided  themselves  into 
three  bodies,  of  which  the  Achaians  and  Arcadians,  that  is, 
the  Peloponnesians,  were  the  principal,  amounting  to  4,500 
heavy-armed  foot,  with  Lycon  and  Callimachus  for  their  gene- 
rals. Chirisophus  commanded  another  party  of  about  1400 
men,  besides  700  light-armed  infantry.  Xenophon  had  the 
third,  almost  the  same  in  number,  of  which  300  were  light- 
armed soldiers,  with  about  40  horse,  which  were  all  the  ca- 
valry of  the  army.  The  first  having  obtained  ships  from  the 
people  of  Heraclea,0  to  whom  they  had  sent  to  demand  them, 
set  out  before  the  rest  to  make  some  booty,  and  make  a de- 
scent in  the  port  of  Calpe.  Chirisophus,  who  was  sick, 
marched  by  land  ; but  without  quitting  the  coast.  Xeno- 
phon landed  at  Heraclea,  and  entered  into  the  heart  of  the 
country. 

New  divisions  arose.  The  imprudence  of  the  troops  and 
their  leaders  had  involved  them  in  several  difficulties,  not  with- 
out loss,  from  whence  the  address  of  Xenophon  extricated 
them  more  than  once.  Being  all  reunited  again,  after  various 
success,  they  arrived  by  land  at  Chrysopolis  of  Chalcedon, 
facing  Byzantium,  whither  they  repaired  some  days  after, 
having  passed  the  small  arm  of  the  sea  which  separates  the 
two  continents.  They  were  upon  the  point  of  plundering 
that  rich  and  powerful  city,  to  revenge  a fraud  and  injury 
which  had  been  done  them,  and  from  the  hope  of  enriching 
themselves  once  for  all,  when  Xenophon  made  all  possible 
haste  thither.  He  admitted  the  justice  of  their  revenge,  but 
. he  made  them  sensible  of  the  fatal  consequences  which  would 
attend  it.  After  your  plundering  this  city,  and  destroying 
the  Lacedcemonians  established  in  it,  you  will  be  deemed  the 
mortal  enemies  of  their  republic,  and  of  all  their  allies.  Athens, 
my  country,  that  had  400  galleys  at  sea  and  in  the  arsenals , 
when  it  took  ap  arms  against  them,  great  sums  of  money  in 
its  treasury,  a revenue  q/’1000  talents,  and  was  in  possession 
of  all  the  isles  of  Greece , and  of  many  cities  in  Europe  and 
Asia,  of  which  this  was  one,  has  nevertheless  been  reduced  to 
yield  to  their  power,  and  sumbit  to  their  sway.  And  can  you 
hope,  ivho  are  but  a handful  of  men,  without  generals,  pro- 
visions, allies,  or  any  resource,  either  from  Tissaphernes,  who 
has  betrayed  you,  or  the  king  of  Persia,  whom  you  have  at- 
tempted to  dethrone  ; can  you  hope,  I say,  in  such  a con- 
dition to  make  head  against  the  Lacedcemonians  ? Let  us 
demand  satisfaction  from  the  Byzantines,  and  not  avenge 
their  fault  by  a much  greater  of  our  own , which  must  draw 
upon  us  inevitable  ruin.  He  was  believed,  and  the  affair  accom- 
modated. 


A city  of  Rontus. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


153 


From  thence  he  led  them  to  Salmydessa,P  to  serve  Seuthes, 
prince  of  Thrace,  who  had  before  solicited  him,  by  his  envoys, 
to  bring  troops  to  his  aid,  in  order  to  his  re-establishment  in 
his  father’s  dominions,  of  which  his  enemies  had  deprived  him. 
He  had  made  Xenophon  great  promises  for  himself  and  his 
troops  ; but  when  he  had  done  him  the  service  he  wanted,  he 
was  so  far  from  keeping  his  word,  that  he  did  not  give  him  the 
pay  agreed  upon.  Xenophon  keenly  reproached  him  with  this 
breach  of  faith  ; imputing  his  perfidy  to  his  minister  Heraclides, 
who  thought  to  make  his  court  to  his  master,  by  saving  him  a 
sum  of  money  at  the  expense  of  justice,  faith,  and  honesty  ; 
qualities  which  ought  to  be  dearer  than  all  others  to  a prince, 
as  they  contribute  the  most  to  his  reputation,  as  well  as  to  the 
success  of  affairs,  and  the  security  of  a state.  But  that  trea- 
cherous minister,  who  looked  upon  honour,  probity,  and  jus- 
tice, as  mere  chimeras,  and  that  there  was  nothing  real  but  the 
possession  of  much  money,  thought  only  of  enriching  himself 
by  any  means  whatsoever,  and  robbed  his  master  first  with  im- 
punity, and  all  his  subjects  along  with  him.  However , con- 
tinued Xenophon,  every  wise  man,  especially  if  vested  with  au- 
thority and  command,  ought  to  regard  justice,  probity,  and 
the  faith  of  engagements,  as  the  most  precious  treasure  he  can 
possess  ; and  as  an  assured  resource,  and  an  infallible  support 
in  all  the  events  that  can  happen . Heraclides  was  the  more 
in  the  wrong  for  acting  in  this  manner  towards  the  troops,  as 
he  was  a native  of  Greece,  and  not  a Thracian  ; but  avarice 
had  extinguished  all  sense  of  honour  in  him. 

Whilst  the  dispute  between  Seuthes  and  Xenophon  was 
warmest,  Charminus  and  Polynices  arrived  as  ambassadors  from 
Lacedaemon,  and  brought  advice,  that  the  republic  had  declared 
war  against  Tissaphernes  and  Pharnabazus  ; thatThimbron  had 
already  embarked  with  troops,  and  promised  a darick  a month 
to  every  soldier,  two  to  each  officer,  and  four  to  the  colonels,  who 
should  engage  in  the  service.  Xenophon  accepted  the  offer  ; 
and  having  obtained  from  Seuthes,  by  the  mediation  of  the  am- 
bassadors, part  of  the  pay  due  to  him,  he  went  by  sea  to  Lamp- 
sacus  with  the  army,  which  amounted  at  that  time  to  almost 
6000  men.  From  thence  he  advanced  to  Pergamus,  a city  in 
the  Troad.  Having  met  near  Parthenia,  where  ended  the  ex- 
pedition of  the  Greeks,  a great  nobleman  returning  into  Persia, 
he  took  him,  his  wife  and  children,  with  all  his  equipage,  and 
by  that  means  found  himself  in  a condition  to  bestow^  great  lar- 
gesses upon  the  soldiers,  and  to  make  them  a satisfactory  amends 
for  all  the  losses  they  had  sustained.  Thimbron  at  length  ar- 
rived, who  took  upon  him  the  command  of  the  troops,  and  having 


p Xenoph.  !•  vii. 


154 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


joined  them  with  his  own,  marched  against  Tissaphernes  and 
Pharnabazus. 

Such  was  the  event  of  Cyrus’s  expedition.  Xenophon  rec- 
kons,P  from  the  first  setting  out  of  that  prince’s  army  from  the 
city  of  Ephesus,  to  their  arrival  where  the  battle  was  fought, 
530  parasangas  or  leagues,  and  ninety-three  days’  march  ;r  and 
in  their  return  from  the  place  of  battle  to  Cotyora,  a city  upon 
the  coast  of  the  Euxine  or  Black  sea,  620  parasangas  or 
leagues,  and  122  days’  march.  And  adding  both  together,  he 
says,  the  way,  going  and  coming,  was  1155  parasangas  or 
leagues, s and  215  days’  march  and  that  the  whole  time  the 
army  took  to  perform  that  journey,  including  the  days  of  rest, 
was  fifteen  months. 

It  appears  by  this  calculation,  that  the  army  of  Cyrus  marched 
daily,  one  day  with  another,  almost  six  parasangas  or  leagues, 
in  going, u and  only  five  in  their  return.  It  was  natural,  that 
Cyrus,  who  desired  to  surprise  his  brother,  should  use  all  pos- 
sible diligence  for  that  purpose. 

This  retreat  of  the  10,000  Greeks  has  always  passed  amongst 
judges  in  the  art  of  war,  as  I have  already  observed,  for  a per- 
fect model  in  its  kind,  which  has  never  had  a parallel.  Indeed, 
no  enterprise  could  be  formed  with  more  valour  and  bravery, 
nor  conducted  with  more  prudence,  nor  executed  with  more 
success.  Ten  thousand  men,  five  or  six  hundred  leagues  from 
their  own  country,  who  had  lost  their  generals  and  best  officers, 
and  find  themselves  in  the  heart  of  the  enemy’s  vast  empire, 
undertake,  in  the  sight  of  a victorious  and  numerous  army,  with 
the  king  at  the  head  of  it,  to  retire  through  the  seat  of  his  em- 
pire, and  in  a manner  from  the  gates  of  his  palace,  and  to  tra- 
verse a vast  extent  of  unknown  countries,  almost  all  in  arms 
against  them,  without  being  dismayed  by  the  prospect  of  the 
innumerable  obstacles  and  dangers,  to  which  they  were  every 
moment  exposed : the  passage  of  rivers,  of  mountains,  and 

q Xenoph.  de  Exped.  Cyr.  1.  ii.  p.  276.  r Ibid.  1.  v.  p.  355. 

8 1 add ,five,  which  are  left  out  in  the  text,  to  make  the  total  agree  with  the 
two  parts.  1 Xenoph.  1.  vii.  p.  427- 

" The  parasanga  is  a road-measure  peculiar  to  the  Persians,  and  consists  of 
thirty  stadia.  The  stadium  is  a Grecian  measure,  and  contains,  according  to 
the  most  received  opinion,  125  geometrical  paces  ; twenty  of  which  in  conse- 
quence are  required  to  the  common  French  league,  which  consists  of  2500 
paces.  And  this  has  been  my  rule  hitherto,  according  to  which  the  parasanga 
is  a league  and  a half. 

But  I observe  here  a great  difficulty.  According  to  this  calculation  we 
should  find  the  ordinary  days’  marches  of  Cyrus,  with  an  army  of  more  than 
100,000  men,  would  have  been,  one  day  with  another,  nine  leagues,  during  so 
long  a time,  which,  according  to  the  judges  in  military  affairs,  is  absolutely  im- 
possible. This  is  what  has  determined  me  to  compute  the  parasanga  at  no 
more  than  a league.  Several  authors  have  remarked,  and  indeed  it  is  not  to 
be  doubted,  that  the  stadium,  and  all  the  other  road-measures  of  the  ancients, 
have  differed  widely  according  to  times  and  places,  as  they  still  do  amongst  us. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


155 


defiles ; open  attacks,  or  secret  ambuscades  from  the  people 
upon  their  route ; famine,  almost  inevitable  in  vast  and  desert 
regions ; and  above  all,  the  treachery  they  had  to  fear  from 
the  troops,  who  seemed  to  be  employed  in  escorting  them,  but 
in  reality  had  orders  to  destroy  them.  For  Artaxerxes,  who 
was  sensible  how  much  the  return  of  those  Greeks  into  their 
country  would  cover  him  with  disgrace,  and  discredit  the 
majesty  of  the  empire  in  the  opinion  of  all  nations,  had  left 
nothing  undone  to  prevent  it;  and  he  desired  their  destruc- 
tion, says  Plutarch,  more  passionately  than  to  conquer  Cyrus 
himself,  or  to  preserve  his  dominions.  Those  10,000  men, 
however,  notwithstanding  so  many  obstacles,  carried  their  point, 
and  arrived,  through  a thousand  dangers,  victorious  and  tri- 
umphant into  their  own  country.  Antony  long  after, x when 
pursued  by  the  Parthians  almost  in  the  same  country,  finding 
himself  in  like  danger,  cried  out  in  admiration  of  their  in- 
vincible valour,  Oh  the  retreat  of  the  ten  thousand ! 

And  it  was  the  good  success  of  this  famous  retreat,  which  fill- 
ed the  people  of  Greece  with  contempt  for  Artaxerxes,  by  de- 
monstrating to  them,  that  gold,  silver,  luxury,  voluptuousness, 
and  a numerous  seraglio  of  women,  were  the  sole  merit  of  the 
Great  King ; but  that,  as  to  the  rest,  his  opulence,  and  all  his 
boasted  power,  were  only  pride  and  vain  ostentation.  It  was 
this  prejudice,  more  universal  than  ever  in  Greece  after  this 
celebrated  expedition,  that  gave  birth  to  those  bold  enterprises 
of  the  Greeks,  of  which  we  shall  soon  treat,  that  made  Ar- 
taxerxes tremble  upon  his  throne,  and  brought  the  Persian 
empire  to  the  very  brink  of  destruction. 

SECT.  VII. 

Consequences  of  Cyrus’s  death  in  the  court  of  Artaxerxes.  Cruelty  and 
jealousy  of  Parysatis.  Statira  poisoned. 

I return  to  what  passed  after  the  battle  of  Cunaxa  in  the 
court  of  ArtaxerxesJ  As  he  believed  that  he  had  killed 
Cyrus  with  his  own  hand,  and  looked  upon  that  action  as  the 
most  glorious  of  his  life,  he  desired  that  all  the  world  should 
think  the  same;  as  it  was  wounding  him  in  the  most  tender  part, 
to  dispute  that  honour,  or  endeavour  to  share  it,  with  him.  The 
Carian  soldier,  whom  we  mentioned  before,  not  contented  with 
the  great  presents  the  king  had  made  him  upon  a different 
pretext,  perpetually  declared  to  all  that  would  hear  him,  that 
none  but  himself  had  killed  Cyrus,  and  that  the  king  did  him 
great  injustice  in  depriving  him  of  the  glory  due  to  him.  The 
prince,  upon  being  informed  of  that  insolence,  conceived  a 
jealousy  equally  base  and  cruel,  and  had  the  weakness  to  cause 

x Plut.  in  Anton,  p.  937-  TQ  fivpioi.  * Plut.  in  Artax.  p.  1018—1021. 


15  G 


HISTORY  OF  TIIE 


him  to  be  delivered  to  Parysatis,  who  had  sworn  the  destruction 
of  all  those  that  had  any  share  in  the  death  of  her  son.  Ani- 
mated by  a barbarous  spirit  of  vengeance,  she  commanded  the 
executioners  to  take  that  unfortunate  wretch,  and  to  make  him 
suffer  the  most  exquisite  tortures  during  ten  days ; then  after 
they  had  torn  out  his  eyes,  to  pour  melted  brass  into  his  ears, 
till  he  expired  in  that  cruel  agony ; which  was  accordingly 
executed. 

Mithridates  also,  having  boasted  in  an  entertainment  where 
he  had  heated  his  brain  with  wine,  that  it  was  he  who  gave 
Cyrus  his  mortal  wound,  paid  very  dear  for  that  absurd  and 
imprudent  vanity.  He  was  condemned  to  suffer  the  punishment 
of  the  troughs,2  one  of  the  most  cruel  that  was  ever  invented, 
and  after  having  languished  in  torment  seventeen  days,  died  at 
last  in  exquisite  misery. 

There  only  remained,  for  the  final  execution  of  Parysatis’s 
project,  and  fully  to  satiate  her  vengeance,  the  punishment  of 
the  king’s  eunuch  Mesabates,  who  by  his  master’s  order  had 
cut  off  the  head  and  hand  of  Cyrus.  But  as  there  was  nothing 
to  take  hold  of  in  his  conduct,  Parysatis  laid  this  snare  for 
him.  She  was  a woman  of  great  address,  had  abundance  of 
wit,  and  excelled  in  playing  at  a certain  game  with  dice.  After 
the  war,  she  had  been  reconciled  with  the  king,  played  often 
with  him,  was  of  all  his  parties,  had  an  unbounded  complai- 
sance for  him,  and  far  from  contradicting  him  in  any  thing, 
anticipated  his  desires,  did  not  blush  at  indulging  his  passions, 
and  even  at  supplying  him  with  the  means  of  gratifying  them. 
But  she  took  especial  care  never  to  lose  sight  of  him,  and  to 
leave  Statira  as  little  alone  with  him  as  she  could,  desiring  to 
gain  an  absolute  ascendant  over  her  son. 

One  day  seeing  the  king  entirely  unemployed,  and  with  no 
thoughts  but  of  diverting  himself,  she  proposed  playing  at  dice 
with  him  for  1000  daricks,a  to  which  he  readily  consented.  She 
suffered  him  to  win,  and  paid  down  the  money.  But  affecting 
regret  and  vexation,  she  pressed  him  to  begin  again,  and  to 
play  with  her  for  a eunuch.  The  king,  who  suspected  nothing, 
complied,  and  they  agreed  to  except  five  of  the  favourite  eunuchs 
on  each  side,  that  the  winner  should  take  their  choice  out  of  the 
rest,  and  the  loser  be  bound  to  deliver  him.  Having  made  these 
conditions,  they  sat  down  to  play.  The  queen  was  all  attention 
to  the  game,  and  made  use  of  all  her  skill  and  address  in  it ; 
besides  which  the  dice  favoured  her.  She  won,  and  chose  Me- 
sabates, for  he  was  not  one  of  those  that  had  been  excepted. 
As  soon  as  she  got  him  into  her  hands,  before  the  king  could 
have  the  least  suspicion  of  the  revenge  she  meditated,  she  de- 

z See  the  description  of  this  torture,  as  before  given  in  this  volume.. 
a The  darick  was  worth  ten  livres. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


157 


livered  him  to  the  executioners,  and  commanded  them  to  flay 
him  alive,  to  lay  him  afterwards  upon  three  cross  bars,b  and  to 
stretch  his  skin  before  his  eyes  upon  stakes  prepared  for  that 
purpose  ; which  was  performed  accordingly.  When  the  king 
knew  this,  he  was  very  sorry  for  it,  and  violently  angry  with  his 
mother.  But  without  giving  herself  any  farther  trouble  about  it, 
she  told  him  with  a smile,  and  in  a jesting  way,  Really , you  are 
a yreat  loser,  and  must  be  highly  in  the  right,  to  be  so  much 
out  of  humour  for  a decrepit  wretch  of  a eunuch,  when  I,  who 
lost  1000  good  daricks,  and  paid  them  down  upon  the  spot, 
don't  say  a word,  and  am  satisfied . 

All  these  cruelties  seem  to  have  been  only  the  essays  and  pre- 
parations for  a greater  crime  which  Parysatis  meditated.  She 
had  long  retained  in  her  heart  a violent  hatred  for  queen  Statira, 
marks  of  which  she  had  suffered  to  escape  her  upon  many  occa- 
sions. She  perceived  plainly,  that  her  influence  with  the  king 
her  son,  was  only  the  effect  of  his  respect  and  consideration  for 
her  as  his  mother  ; whereas  that  for  Statira  was  founded  in  love 
and  confidence,  which  rendered  that  influence  much  more  secure. 
Of  what  is  not  the  jealousy  of  an  ambitious  woman  capable  ! 
She  resolved  to  rid  herself,  whatever  it  cost  her,  of  so  formida- 
ble a rival. 

For  the  more  certain  attainment  of  her  ends,  she  feigned  a 
reconciliation  with  her  daughter-in-law,  and  treated  her  with  all 
the  exterior  marks  of  sincere  friendship  and  real  confidence. 
The  two  queens,  appearing  therefore  to  have  forgotten  their 
former  suspicions  and  quarrels,  lived  upon  good  terms  together, 
saw  one  another  as  before,  and  ate  at  each  other’s  apartments. 
But  as  both  of  them  well  knew  what  reliance  was  to  be  placed 
upon  the  friendships  and  caresses  of  the  court,  especially  amongst 
the  women,  they  were  neither  of  them  the  dupe  of  the  other ; 
and  as  the  same  fears  always  subsisted,  they  kept  upon  their 
guard,  and  never  ate  but  of  the  same  dishes  and  pieces.  Could 
one  believe  it  possible  to  deceive  so  attentive  and  cautious  a vi- 
gilance? Parysatis  one  day,  when  her  daughter-in-law  was  at 
table  with  her,  took  an  extremely  exquisite  bird  that  had  been 
served  up,  cut  it  in  two  parts,  gave  one  half  to  Statira,  and  ate 
the  other  herself.  Statira  soon  after  was  seized  with  sharp  pains, 
and  having  quitted  the  table,  died  in  the  most  horrible  convul- 
sions, not  without  inspiring  the  king  with  the  most  violent  sus- 
picions of  his  mother,  of  whose  cruelty,  and  implacable  and  re- 
vengeful spirit,  he  was  sufficiently  sensible  before.  He  made 
the  strictest  inquiry  into  the  crime.  All  his  mother’s  officers 
and  domestics  were  seized  and  put  to  the  torture  ; when  Gygis, 
one  of  Parysatis’s  women,  and  the  confidant  of  all  her  secrets, 
confessed  the  whole.  She  had  caused  one  side  of  a knife  to  be 
b Plutarch  explains  this  circumstance  no  farther. 


158 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


rubbed  with  poison,  so  that  Parysatis,  having  cut  the  bird  in 
two,  put  the  sound  part  into  her  own  mouth  directly,  and  gave 
Statira  the  other  that  was  poisoned.  Gygis  was  put  to  death 
after  the  manner  that  the  Persians  punished  prisoners,  which  is 
thus : They  lay  their  heads  upon  a great  and  very  broad  stone, 
and  beat  upon  it  with  another  until  they  are  entirely  crushed,  and 
have  no  remains  of  their  former  figure.  As  for  Parysatis,  the 
king  contented  himself  with  confining  her  to  Babylon,  whither 
she  demanded  to  retire,  and  told  her,  that  he  would  never  set 
his  foot  within  it  whilst  she  was  there. 


CHAP.  III. 

Sect.  I.  The  Grecian  cities  of  Ionia  implore  aid  of  the  Lacedaemonians 
against  Artaxerxes.  Rare  prudence  of  a lady,  continued  in  her  husband’s 
government  after  his  death.  Agesil-aus  elected  king  of  Sparta.  His 
character. 

The  cities  of  Ionia, c that  had  followed  the  party  of  Cyrus, 
apprehending  the  resentment  of  Tissaphernes,  had  applied  to 
the  Lacedaemonians  as  the  deliverers  of  Greece,  requesting  that 
they  would  support  them  in  the  possession  of  the  liberty  they 
enjoyed,  and  prevent  their  country  from  being  ravaged.  We 
have  already  said  that  Thimbron  was  sent  thither,  to  whose 
troops  Xenophon  had  joined  his,  after  their  re- 
Arrt  C^399  *ura  ^rom  Persia.  Thimbron  was  soon  recalled 
upon  some  discontent,  and  had  for  his  successor 
Dercyllidas,  surnamed  Sisyphus,  from  his  industry  in  finding 
resources,  and  his  ability  in  inventing  machines  of  war.  He 
took  upon  him  the  command  of  the  army  at  Ephesus.  When 
he  arrived  there,  he  was  apprized,  that  there  was  a dispute  be- 
tween the  two  satraps,  who  commanded  in  the  country. 

The  provinces  of  the  Persian  monarchy,  of  which  several, 
situate  at  the  extremity  of  the  empire,  required  too  much  appli- 
cation to  be  governed  immediately  by  the  prince,  were  confided 
to  the  care  of  the  great  lords  commonly  called  satraps.  They 
had  each  of  them  in  their  government  an  almost  sovereign  au- 
thority, and  were,  properly  speaking,  not  unlike  the  viceroys 
we  see  in  our  days  in  some  neighbouring  states.  They  were 
supplied  with  a number  of  troops  sufficient  for  the  defence  of 
the  country.  They  appointed  all  officers,  disposed  of  the  go- 
vernments of  cities,  and  were  charged  with  levying  and  remit- 
ting the  tributes  to  the  prince.  They  had  power  to  raise  troops, 
to  treat  with  neighbouring  states,  and  even  with  the  generals  of 
the  enemy  ; in  a word,  to  do  every  thing  necessary  to  maintain 
c Xenoph.  Hist.  Graec.  1.  iii.  p.  479 — 487* 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


159 


good  order  and  tranquillity  in  their  governments.  They  were 
independent  of  one  another  ,•  and  though  they  served  the  same 
master,  and  it  was  their  duty  to  concur  to  the  same  ends,  ne- 
vertheless, each  being  more  interested  in  the  particular  advan- 
tage of  his  own  province  than  in  the  general  good  of  the  empire, 
they  often  differed  among  themselves,  formed  opposite  designs, 
refused  aid  to  their  colleagues  in  necessity,  and  sometimes  even 
acted  entirely  against  them.  The  remoteness  of  the  court,  and 
the  absence  of  the  prince,  gave  room  for  these  dissensions  ; and 
perhaps  a secret  policy  contributed  to  keep  them  up,  to  elude 
or  prevent  conspiracies,  which  too  good  an  understanding 
amongst  the  governors  might  have  excited. 

Dercyllidas  having  heard,  therefore,  that  Tissaphernes  and 
Pharnabazus  were  at  variance,  made  a truce  with  the  former, 
that  he  might  not  have  them  both  upon  his  hands  at  the  same 
time,  entered  Pharnabazus’s  province,  and  advanced  as  far  as 
iEolia. 

Zenis,  the  Dardanian,  had  governed  that  province  under  that 
satrap’s  authority  ; and  as  after  his  death  it  was  to  have  been 
given  to  another,  Mania,  his  widow,  went  to  Pharnabazus  with 
troops  and  presents,  and  told  him,  that  having  been  the  wife  of 
a man  who  had  rendered  him  great  services,  she  desired  him 
not  to  deprive  her  of  her  husband’s  reward  ; that  she  would  serve 
him  with  the  same  zeal  and  fidelity  ; and  that,  if  she  failed  in 
either,  he  was  always  at  liberty  to  take  her  government  from 
her.  She  was  continued  in  it  by  this  means,  and  acquitted  her- 
self with  all  the  judgment  and  ability  that  could  have  been  ex- 
pected from  the  most  consummate  master  in  the  art  of  ruling. 
To  the  ordinary  tributes  which  her  husband  had  paid,  she  added 
presents  of  extraordinary  magnificence  ; and  when  Pharnabazus 
came  into  her  province,  she  entertained  him  more  splendidly 
than  any  of  the  other  governors.  She  was  not  contented  with 
the  conservation  of  the  cities  committed  to  her  care,  she  made 
new  conquests,  and  took  Larissa, d Amaxita,  and  Colona. 

Hence  we  may  observe,  that  prudence,  good  sense,  and  cou- 
rage, are  of  all  sexes.  She  was  present  in  all  expeditions  in  a 
chariot,  and  in  person  decreed  rewards  and  punishments. 
None  of  the  neighbouring  provinces  had  a finer  army  than 
hers,  in  which  she  had  a great  number  of  Greek  soldiers  in  her 
pay.  She  even  attended  Pharnabazus  in  all  his  enterprises, 
and  was  of  no  common  support  to  him.  So  that  the  satrap, 
who  knew  all  the  value  of  so  extraordinary  a merit,  did  more 
honour  to  this  lady  than  to  all  the  other  governors.  He  even 
admitted  her  into  his  council,  and  treated  her  with  such  a dis- 
tinction as  might  have  excited  jealousy,  if  the  modesty  and 
affability  of  that  lady  had  not  prevented  bad  effects,  by  throwing 
d From  the  Mysians  and  Pisidians. 


160 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


in  a manner  a veil  over  all  her  perfections,  which  softened  their 
lustre,  and  let  them  only  occasionally  appear  as  objects  of  ad- 
miration. 

She  had  no  enemies  but  in  her  own  family.  Midias,  her 
son-in-law,  stung  with  the  reproach  of  suffering  a woman  to 
command  in  his  place,  and  abusing  the  entire  confidence  she 
reposed  in  him,  which  gave  him  access  to  her  at  all  times, 
strangled  her  with  her  son.  After  her  death,  he  seized  two 
fortresses,  wherein  she  had  secured  her  treasures ; the  other 
cities  declared  against  him.  He  did  not  long  enjoy  the  fruits 
of  his  crime.  Dercyllidas  happily  arrived  at  this  juncture. 
All  the  fortresses  of  ./Eolia,  either  voluntarily  or  by  force,  sur- 
rendered to  him,  and  Midias  was  deprived  of  the  possessions 
he  had  so  unjustly  acquired.  The  Lacedaemonian  general 
having  granted  Pharnabazus  a truce,  took  up  his  winter- 
quarters  in  Bithynia,  to  avoid  being  chargeable  to  his  allies. 

The  next  vear,e  being  continued  in  the  com- 

A "i\T  ornp  •/  o 

Ant  J C 398  mancf  he  crossed  over  into  Thrace,  and  arrived 
in  the  Chersonesus.  Pie  knew  that  the  deputies 
of  the  country  had  been  at  Sparta,  to  represent  the  necessity  of 
fortifying  the  isthmus  with  a good  wall,  against  the  frequent 
incursions  of  the  Barbarians,  which  prevented  the  cultivation 
of  the  lands.  Having  measured  the  space,  which  is  more  than 
a league  in  breadth,  he  distributed  the  work  amongst  the  sol- 
diers, and  the  wall  was  finished  in  the  autumn  of  the  same  year. 
Within  this  space  were  enclosed  eleven  cities,  several  ports,  a 
great  number  of  arable  lands,  and  plantations,  with  pastures  of  all 
kinds.  The  work  being  finished,  he  returned  into  Asia,  where 
he  reviewed  the  cities,  and  found  them  all  in  good  condition. 

Conon  the  Athenian/  after  losing  the  battle  of  iEgospotamos, 
having  condemned  himself  to  a voluntary  banishment,  continued 
in  the  isle  of  Cyprus  with  king  Evagoras,  not  only  for  the  safety 
of  his  person,  but  also  in  expectation  of  a change  of  affairs  ; 
like  one,  says  Plutarch,  who  waits  the  return  of  the  tide  before 
he  embarks.  He  had  always  in  view  the  re-establishment  of 
the  Athenian  power,  to  which  his  defeat  had  given  a mortal 
wound  ; and  full  of  fidelity  and  zeal  for  his  country,  though 
little  favourable  to  him,  perpetually  meditated  the  means  of 
raising  it  from  its  ruins,  and  restoring  it  to  its  ancient  splen- 
dour. 

This  Athenian  general,  knowing  that,  in  order  to  succeed  in 
his  views,  he  had  occasion  for  a powerful  support,  wrote  to 
Artaxerxes  to  explain  his  projects  to  him,  and  ordered  the  per- 
son who  carried  his  letter  to  apply  to  Ctesias,  who  would  give 
it  into  the  king’s  own  hands.  It  was  accordingly  delivered  to 
that  physician,  who,  it  is  said,  though  he  did  not  approve  the 
e Xerioph.  p.  487,  488.  f Plut.  in  Artax.  p.  1021. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


161 


contents  of  it,  added  to  what  Conon  had  written,  that  he  desired 
the  king  would  send  Ctesias  to  him,  being  a person  very  capable 
of  doing  him  service , especially  in  maritime  affairs.  Phar- 
nabazus,s  in  concert  with  Conon,  was  gone  to  court  to  complain 
against  the  conduct  of  Tissaphernes,  as  too  avowedly  in  favour 
of  the  Lacedaemonians.  At  the  urgent  solicitations  of  Phar- 
nahazus,  the  king  ordered  500  talents h to  be  paid  to  him  for 
the  equipment  of  a fleet,  with  instructions  to  give  Conon  the 
command  of  it.  He  sent  Ctesias  into  Greece,  who,  after  hav- 
ing visited  Cnidos,  his  native  country,  went  to  Sparta. 

This  Ctesias  had  at  first  been  in  the  service  of  Cyrus,1  whom 
he  had  followed  in  his  expedition.  He  was  taken  prisoner  in 
the  battle  wherein  Cyrus  was  killed,  and  was  made  use  of  to 
dress  the  wounds  Artaxerxes  had  received,  of  which  he  ac- 
quitted himself  so  well,. that  the  king  retained  him  in  his  service, 
and  made  him  his  first  physician.  He  passed  several  years  in 
his  service  in  that  quality.  Whilst  he  was  there,  the  Greeks, 
in  all  their  business  at  the  court,  applied  themselves  to  him ; 
as  Conon  did  on  the  present  occasion.  His  long  residence  in 
Persia,  and  at  the  court,  had  given  him  the  necessary  time  and 
means  for  his  information  in  the  history  of  the  country,  which 
he  wrote  in  three-and-twenty  books.  The  first  six  contained 
the  history  of  the  Assyrians  and  Babylonians,  from  Ninus  and 
Semiramis  down  to  Cyrus.  The  other  seventeen  treated  of  the 
Persian  affairs  from  the  beginning  of  Cyrus’s  reign  to  the  third 
year  of  the  95th  Olympiad,  which  agrees  with  the  398th  year 
before  Jesus  Christ.  He  wrote  also  a history  of  India. 
Photius  has  given  us  several  extracts  of  both  these  histories, 
and  these  extracts  are  all  that  remain  of  the  works  of  Ctesias. 
He  often  contradicts  Herodotus,  and  differs  sometimes  also 
from  Xenophon.  He  was  not  much  esteemed  by  the  ancients, 
who  speak  of  him  as  of  a very  vain  man,  whose  veracity  is  not 
to  be  relied  on,  and  who  has  inserted  fables,  and  sometimes 
even  lies,  in  his  history. 

Tissaphernes  and  Pharnabazus,k  though  se- 
Ant.  J.  C.  397.  cretly  ea°h  other’s  enemies,  had  upon  the  king’s 
orders  united  their  troops,  to  oppose  the  enter- 
prises of  Dercyllidas,  who  had  marched  into  Caria.  They  had 
reduced  him  to  post  himself  so  disadvantageous^,  that  he  must 
inevitably  have  perished,  had  they  charged  him  immediately, 
without  giving  him  time  to  look  about  him.  Pharnabazus  was 
of  this  opinion ; but  Tissaphernes,  dreading  the  valour  of  the 
Greeks  who  had  followed  Cyrus,  which  he  had  experienced, 

s Diod.  1.  xiv.  p.  207-  Justin.  1.  vi.  c.  1 . 
h 500,000  crowns,  or  about  112,000^.  sterling. 

* Strab.  1.  xiv.  p.  656.  Plut.  in  Artax.  p.  1017 — 1020.  Diod.  1.  xiv.  p.  273. 
Arist.  de  Hist.  Anim.  1.  viii.  c.  28.  Phot.  Cod.  LXII. 

k Xenoph.  Hist.  Grsec.  1.  iii.  p.  489,  490,  Diod.  1.  xiv.  p.  267* 

VOL.  III.  M 


162 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


and  whom  he  had  conceived  all  the  others  .resembled,  proposed 
an  interview,  which  was  accepted.  Dercyllidas  having  demand- 
ed that  the  Grecian  cities  should  continue  free,  and  Tissa- 
phernes,  that  the  army  and  generals  of  Lacedaemon  should 
retire ; they  made  a truce,  till  the  answers  of  their  respective 
masters  should  be  known. 

Whilst  these  things  were  passing  in  Asia,1  the  Lacedaemo- 
nians resolved  to  chastise  the  indolence  of  the  people  of  Elis, 
who,  not  content  with  having  entered  into  an  alliance  with  their 
enemies  in  the  Peloponnesian  war,  prevented  their  disputing 
the  prizes  in  the  Olympic  games.  Upon  pretence  of  the  non- 
payment of  a fine  by  Sparta,  they  had  insulted  one  of  their 
citizens  during  the  games,  and  hindered  Agis  from  sacrificing 
in  the  temple  of  Jupiter  Olympius.  That  king  was  charged 
with  this  expedition,  which  did  not  terminate  till  the  third  year 
after.  He  could  have  taken  their  city  Olympia,  which  had  no 
works,  but  contented  himself  with  plundering  the  suburbs,  and 
the  places  for  the  exercises,  which  were  very  fine.  They  de- 
manded peace,  which  was  granted,  and  were  suffered  to  retain 
the  superintendency  of  the  temple  of  Jupiter  Olympius,  to 
which  they  had  not  much  right,  but  were  more  worthy  of  that 
honour  than  those  who  disputed  it  with  them. 

Agis  on  his  return  fell  sick, m and  died  upon  arriving  at 
Sparta.  Almost  divine  honours  were  paid  to  his  memory  ; and 
after  the  expiration  of  some  days,  according  to  custom,  Leoty- 
chides  and  Agesilaus,  one  the  son  and  the  other  the  brother  of 
the  deceased,  disputed  the  crown.  The  latter  maintained,  that 
his  competitor  was  not  the  son  of  Agis,  and  supported  his  as- . 
sertion  by  the  confession  of  the  queen  herself,  who  knew  best, 
and  who  had  often,  as  well  as  her  husband,  acknowledged  as 
much.  In  fact,  there  was  a current  report,  that  she  had  him 
by  Alcibiades,  n as  has  been  related  in  its  place,  and  that  the 
Athenian  general  had  corrupted  her  by  a present  of  1000  da- 
ricks.  0 Agis  protested  the  contrary  at  his  death.  Leotychides 
having  thrown  himself  at  his  feet  all  bathed  in  tears,  he  could 
not  refuse  the  favour  he  implored  of  him,  and  owned  him  for 
his  son  before  all  that  were  present. 

Most  of  the  Spartans,  charmed  with  the  virtue  and  great 
merit  of  Agesilaus,  and  deeming  it  an  extraordinary  advantage 
to  have  a person  for  their  king,  who  had  been  educated  amongst 
them,  and  had  passed  like  them  through  all  the  rigour  of  the 
Spartan  education,  supported  him  with  their  whole  power.  An 
ancient  oracle,  that  advised  Sparta  to  beware  of  a lame  reign , 
was  urged  against  him.  Lysander  only  made  a jest  of  it, 
and  turned  its  sense  against  Leotychides  himself;  endeavouring 

1 Xenoph.  Hist.  Graec.  1.  iii.  p.  492.  m Xenoph.  p.  493.  Pint,  in  Lys. 
p.  445.  In  Agesil.  p.  597.  n A then.  1.  xii.  p.  53-4.  0 1000  pistoles. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


163 


to  prove,  that  as  a bastard,  he  was  the  lame  king  whom  the  ora- 
cle intended  to  caution  them  against.  Agesilaus,  as  well  by 
his  own  great  qualities  as  the  powerful  support  of  Lysander, 
carried  it  against  his  nephew,  and  was  declared  king. 

As  by  the  laws  the  kingdom  had  devolved  to  Agis,  his  brother 
Agesilaus,  who  seemed  to  be  destined  to  pass  his  life  as  a pri- 
vate person,  had  been  educated  like  other  children  in  the  Spar- 
tan discipline,  which  as  to  the  mode  of  life  was  very  rough, 
and  full  of  laborious  exercise,  but  taught  youth  obedience  per- 
fectly well.P  The  law  dispensed  with  this  education  only  to 
such  children  as  were  designed  lor  the  throne.  Agesilaus  there- 
fore had  this  peculiar  advantage,  that  he  did  not  arrive  at 
commanding,  till  he  had  first  learned  perfectly  well  how  to  obey. 
From  thence  it  was,  that  of  all  the  kings  of  Sparta,  he  best 
knew  how  to  make  his  subjects  love  and  esteem  him, 4 because 
that  prince,  to  the  great  qualities  with  which  nature  had  endow- 
ed him  for  command  and  sovereignty,  had  united  by  his  educa- 
tion the  advantage  of  being  humane  and  popular. 

It  is  surprising  that  Sparta,  a city  so  renowned  in  point  of 
education  and  policy,  should  have  conceived  it  proper  to  abate 
any  thing  of  its  severity  and  discipline  in  favour  of  the  princes 
who  were  to  reign  ; they  having  most  need  of  being  early  ha- 
bituated to  the  yoke  of  obedience,  in  order  to  their  being  the 
better  qualified  to  command. 

Plutarch r observes,  that  from  his  infancy  Agesilaus  was  re- 
markable for  uniting  qualities  in  himself,  which  are  generally 
incompatible ; a vivacity  of  temper,  a vehemence,  a resolution 
invincible  in  appearance,  an  ardent  passion  for  being  first,  and 
surpassing  all  others,  with  a gentleness,  submission,  and  docility 
that  complied  at  a single  word,  and  made  him  infinitely  sensible 
of  the  slightest  reprimand,  so  that  every  thing  might  be  obtain- 
ed of  him  from  the  motives  of  honour,  but  nothing  by  fear  or 
violence. 

He  was  lame,  but  that  defect  was  covered  by  the  gracefulness 
of  his  person,  and  still  more  by  the  gaiety  with  which  he 
supported  and  rallied  it  first  himself.  It  may  even  be  said, 
that  this  infirmity  of  his  body  set  his  valour  and  passion  for 
glory  in  a stronger  light ; there  being  no  labour  nor  enterprise, 
however  difficult,  that  he  would  refuse  upon  account  of  that  in- 
convenience. 

Praise, s without  any  air  of  truth  and  sincerity,  was  so  far  from 

p Hence  it  was,  that  the  poet  Simonides  called  Sparta  the  tamer  of  men , 
dana(Ti[i(3poTov,  as  that  of  the  Grecian  cities  which  rendered  its  inhabitants  by 

good  habits  the  most  active  and  vigorous,  and  at  the  same  time  the  most  obe- 
lent  to  the  laws,  of  any : djg  paXiera  did  twv  Wuiv  tovq  7ro\irag  roXg  vopolg 
7rei0o/j,svovg  /cat  xsiporjQeig  Troiovoav. 

1 Tip  <ph( tsi  rjys/xoviKip  /cat  /3ct(n\iK<p  ‘7rpo<JKTr)<rd[A£Vog  cnro  rrjg  ayoiyrjg  to  drjpo- 
tikov  teal  <pi\av6poj7rov.  r In  Agesil.  596.  9 Plut.  in  Moral,  p.  55. 

M 2 


164 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


giving  him  pleasure,  that  it  offended  him,  and  was  never  re- 
ceived by  him  as  such,  but  when  it  came  from  the  mouths  of 
those,  who,  upon  other  occasions,  had  represented  his  failings  to 
him  with  freedom.  He  would  never  suffer  his  picture  to  be 
drawn  during  his  life,  and  even  when  dying  expressly  forbade 
any  image  to  be  made  of  him,  either  in  colours  or  relievo.  His 
reason  was/  that  his  great  actions,  if  he  had  done  any,  would 
supply  the  place  of  monuments  ; without  which,  all  the  statues 
in  the  world  would  do  him  no  manner  of  honour.  We  only 
know,  that  he  was  of  a small  stature,  which  the  Spartans  did  not 
like  in  their  kings  ; and  Theophrastus  affirms,  that  the  Ephori 
laid  a fine  upon  their  king  Archidamus,  the  father  of  him  we 
speak  of,  for  having  espoused  a very  little  woman  : For,  said 
they,  she'll  give  us  puppets  instead  of  kings." 

It  has  been  remarked/  that  Agesilaus,  in  his  way  of  living 
with  the  Spartans,  behaved  better  with  regard  to  his  enemies 
than  his  friends  ; for  he  never  did  the  least  wrong  to  the  former, 
and  often  violated  justice  in  favour  of  the  latter.  He  would 
have  been  ashamed  not  to  have  honoured  and  rewarded  his  ene- 
mies, when  their  actions  deserved  it ; and  was  not  able  to  re- 
prove his  friends  when  they  committed  faults.  He  would  even 
support  them  when  they  were  in  the  wrong/  and  upon  such  oc- 
casions looked  upon  the  zeal  for  justice  as  a vain  pretence  to 
cover  the  refusal  of  serving  them.  And  in  proof  of  this,  a 
short  letter  is  cited,  written  by  him  to  a judge  in  recommenda- 
tion of  a friend  ; the  words  are  : If  Nicias  he  not  guilty,  acquit 
him  for  his  innocence  ; if  he  he,  acquit  him  for  my  sake  ; hut 
however  it  he,  acquit  him . 

It  is  understanding  the  rights  and  privileges  of  friendship 
very  ill,  to  be  capable  of  rendering  it  in  this  manner  the  accom- 
plice of  crimes,  and  the  protectress  of  bad  actions.  The  funda- 
mental law  of  friendship,  says  Cicero,  is  never  to  ask  of,  or 
grant  any  thing  to,  friends  that  is  not  consistent  with  justice 
and  honour.  Hcec  prima  lex  in  amicitia  sanciatur  ; ut  iieque 
rogemus  res  turpes,  nec  faciamus  rogati.z 

Agesilaus  was  not  so  delicate  in  this  point,  at  least  in  the 
beginning,  and  omitted  no  occasion  of  gratifying  his  friends, 
and  even  his  enemies.  By  this  officious  and  obliging  conduct, 
supported  by  his  extraordinary  merit,  he  acquired  great  credit, 
and  almost  absolute  power  in  the  city,  which  ran  so  high  as  to 
render  him  suspected  by  his  country.  The  Ephori,  to  prevent 
its  effects,  and  give  a check  to  his  ambition,  laid  a fine  upon 
him  ; alleging  as  their  sole  reason/  that  he  attached  the  hearts 

‘ Ibid.  p.  191. 

u 0 v yap  j 3affi\eig,  tyctaav,  d/xfiiv,  dWd  flaaiXtidia  ysvvaoti. 
x Plat,  in  Agesil.  p.  598. 

y Pint,  in  Agesil.  p.  603.  z De  amicit.  n.  40. 

a "On  tovq  Koivovg  TtoXiraQ,  idiovg  jcrarai. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


165 


of  the  citizens  to  himself  alone,  which  were  the  right  of 
the  republic,  and  ought  not  to  be  possessed  but  in  com- 
mon. 

When  he  was  declared  king,  he  was  put  in  possession  of 
the  whole  estate  of  his  brother  Agis,  of  which  Leotychides 
was  deprived  as  a bastard.  But  seeing  the  relations  of  that 
prince,  on  the  side  of  his  mother  Lampito,  w'ere  all  very  poor, 
though  persons  of  much  worth,  he  divided  the  whole  inherit- 
ance with  them,  and  by  that  act  of  generosity  acquired  great 
reputation,  and  the  good-will  of  all  the  world,  instead  of  the 
envy  and  hatred  which  he  might  have  drawn  upon  himself  by 
the  inheritance.  These  sorts  of  sacrifice  are  glorious,  though 
rare,  and  can  never  be  sufficiently  esteemed. 

Never  was  king  of  Sparta  so  powerful  as  Agesilaus  ; and  it 
was  only,  as  Xenophon  says,  by  obeying  his  country  in  every 
thing,  that  he  acquired  so  great  an  authority  ; which  seems  a 
kind  of  paradox,  thus  explained  by  Plutarch.  The  greatest 
power  was  vested  at  that  time  in  the  Ephori  and  senate.  The 
office  of  the  Ephori  subsisted  only  one  year  ; they  were  insti- 
tuted to  limit  the  too  great  power  of  the  kings,  and  to  serve  as 
a barrier  against  it,  as  we  have  observed  elsewhere.  For  this 
reason  the  kings  of  Sparta,  from  their  earliest  establishment, 
had  always  retained  a kind  of  hereditary  aversion  for  them, 
and  continually  opposed  their  measures.  Agesilaus  took  a 
quite  contrary  method.  Instead  of  being  perpetually  at  war 
with  them,  and  clashing  upon  all  occasions  with  their  measures, 
he  made  it  his  business  to  cultivate  their  good  opinion,  treated 
them  always  with  the  utmost  deference  and  regard,  never  en- 
tered upon  the  least  enterprise,  without  having  first  communi- 
cated it  to  them,  and  upon  their  summons  quitted  every  thing, 
and  repaired  to  the  senate  with  the  utmost  promptitude  and  re- 
signation. Whenever  he  sat  upon  his  throne  to  administer  jus- 
tice, if  the  Ephori  entered,  he  never  failed  to  rise  up  to  do  them 
honour.  By  all  these  instances  of  respect,  he  seemed  to  add 
new  dignity  to  their  office,  whilst  in  reality  he  augmented  his 
own  power  without  its  being  observed,  and  added  to  the  sove- 
reignty a grandeur  by  so  much  the  more  solid  and  permanent, 
as  it  was  the  effect  of  the  people’s  good-will  and  esteem  for 
him.  The  greatest  of  Roman  emperors,  as  Augustus,  Trajan, 
and  Marcus  Antoninus,  were  convinced,  that  the  utmost  a 
prince  could  do  to  honour  and  exalt  the  dignity  of  the  principal 
magistrates,  was  only  adding  to  his  own  power  and  strengthen- 
ing his  authority,  which  neither  should  nor  can  be  founded  in 
any  thing  but  justice. 

Such  was  Agesilaus,  of  whom  much  will  be  said  hereafter, 
and  whose  character  it  was  therefore  necessary  to  develope. 


166 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


SECT.  II. 

Agesilaus  sets  out  for  Asia.  Lysander  falls  out  with  him,  and  returns  to  Sparta. 

His  ambitious  designs  to  alter  the  succession  to  the  throne. 

Agesilaus  had  scarce  ascended  the  throne,  b 
Ant  C**  396  w^ien  accounts  came  from  Asia,  that  the  king  of 
Persia  was  fitting  out  a great  fleet  in  Phoenicia, 
with  intent  to  deprive  the  Lacedaemonians  of  the  empire  of  the 
sea.  Conon’s  letters,  seconded  by  the  remonstrances  of  Phar- 
nabazus,  who  had  in  concert  represented  to  Artaxerxes  the 
power  of  Sparta  as  formidable,  had  made  a strong  impression 
upon  that  prince.  From  that  time  he  had  it  seriously  in  his 
thoughts  to  humble  that  proud  republic,  by  raising  up  its  rival, 
and  by  that  means  re-establishing  the  ancient  balance  between 
them,  which  could  alone  assure  his  safety,  by  keeping  them  per- 
petually employed  against  each  other,  and  thereby  prevented 
from  uniting  their  forces  against  him. 

Lysander,  who  desired  to  be  sent  into  Asia,  in  order  to  re-es- 
tablish his  creatures  and  friends  in  the  government  of  the  cities, 
from  which  Sparta  had  removed  them,  strongly  inclined  Agesi- 
laus to  take  upon  himself  the  charge  of  the  war,  and  to  antici- 
pate the  Barbarian  king,  by  attacking  him  at  a great  distance 
from  Greece,  before  he  should  have  finished  his  preparations. 
The  republic  having  made  this  proposal  to  him,  he  could  not 
refuse  it,  and  charged  himself  with  the  expedition  against  Ar- 
taxerxes, upon  condition  that  thirty  Spartan  captains  should  be 
granted  him,  to  assist  him  and  compose  his  council,  with  2000 
new  citizens,  to  be  chosen  out  of  the  helots  who  had  lately  been 
made  freemen,  and  6000  troops  of  the  allies,  which  was  imme- 
diately resolved.  Lysander  was  placed  at  the  head  of  the  thirty 
Spartans,  not  only  on  account  of  his  great  reputation,  and  the 
authority  he  had  acquired,  but  for  the  particular  friendship  be- 
tween him  and  Agesilaus,  who'  was  indebted  to  him  for  tha’ 
throne,  “as  well  as  for  the  honour  which  had  been  lately  conferred 
upon  him  of  being  elected  generalissimo. 

The  glorious  .return  of  the  Greeks  who  had  followed  Cyrus, 
whom  the  whole  power  of  Persia  had  not  been  able  to  prevent 
from  retreating  into  their  own  country,  had  inspired  all  Greece 
with  a wonderful  confidence  in  her  own  strength,  and  a supreme 
contempt  for  the  Barbarians.  In  this  disposition  of  the  public 
mind,  the  Lacedaemonians  conceived  it  would  be  a reproach  to 
them  not  to  take  advantage  of  so  favourable  a conjuncture  for 
delivering  the  Greeks  in  Asia  from  their  subjection  to  those 
Barbarians,  and  for  putting  an  end  to  the  outrages  and  violences 

b Xenoph.  Hist.  Grsec.  1.  iii.  p.  495,  496.  Id.  de  Agesil.  p.  652.  Plut.  in 
Agesil.  p.  598,  et  in  Lysand.  p.  446. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


167 


with  which  they  were  continually  oppressing  them.  They  had 
already  attempted  this  by  their  generals,  Thimbron  and  Decylli- 
das  ; but  all  their  endeavours  having  hitherto  proved  ineffectual, 
they  referred  the  conduct  of  this  war  to  the  care  of  Agesilaus. 
He  promised  them  either  to  conclude  a glorious  peace  with  the 
Persians,  or  to  employ  them  so  effectually,  as  should  leave  them 
neither  leisure  nor  inclination  to  carry  the  war  into  Greece. 
The  king  had  great  views,  and  thought  of  no  less  than  attacking 
Artaxerxes  in  Persia  itself. 

When  he  arrived  at  Ephesus, c Tissaphernes  sent  to  demand 
what  reason  had  induced  him  to  come  into  Asia,  and  why  he 
had  taken  up  arms.  He  replied,  that  he  came  to  aid  the 
Greeks  who  inhabited  there,  and  to  re-establish  them  in  their 
ancient  liberty.  The  satrap,  who  was  not  yet  prepared,  made 
use  of  art  in  the  place  of  force,  and  assured  him  that  his  master 
would  give  the  Grecian  cities  of  Asia  their  liberty,  provided  he 
committed  no  acts  of  hostility  till  the  return  of  the  couriers. 
Agesilaus  agreed,  and  the  truce  was  sworn  to  on  both, sides.  Tis- 
saphernes, who  laid  no  great  stress  upon  an  oath,  took  advantage 
of  this  delay  to  assemble  his  troops  on  all  sides.  The  Lacedae- 
monian general  was  apprised  of  it,  but  however  kept  his  word  ; 
being  convinced,  that  in  affairs  of  state  the  breach  of  faith  can 
have  but  a very  short  and  precarious  success  ; whereas  a repu- 
tation established  upon  inviolable  fidelity  in  the  observance  of 
engagements,  which  even  the  perfidy  of  other  contracting  parties 
has  not  power  to  alter,  will  establish  a credit  and  confidence 
equally  useful  and  glorious.  In  fact,  Xenophon  remarks,  that 
this  religious  observation  of  treaties  gained  him  the  universal 
esteem  and  opinion  of  the  cities ; whilst  the  contrary  conduct 
of  Tissaphernes  entirely  lost  him  their  favour. 

Agesilaus  made  use  of  this  interval  in  acquiring 
Ant  J C 395  an  exact  knowledge  of  the  state  of  the  cities,  and 
in  making  suitable  regulations.  He  found  great 
disorder  every  where,  their  government  being  neither  democra- 
tical,  as  under  the  Athenians,  nor  aristocratical,  as  Lysander 
had  established  it.  The  people  of  the  country  had  had  no  com- 
munication with  Agesilaus,6  nor  had  ever  known  him;  for  which 
reason  they  made  no  court  to  him,  conceiving  that  he  had  the  title 
of  general  for  form  sake  only,  and  that  the  whole  power  was 
really  vested  in  Lysander.  As  no  governor  had  ever  done  so 
much  good  to  his  friends  or  hurt  to  his  enemies,  it  is  not  wonder- 
ful that  he  was  so  much  beloved  by  the  one  and  feared  by  the 
other.  All  therefore  were  eager  to  pay  their  homage  to  him, 
were  every  day  in  crowds  at  his  door,  and  made  his  train  very 
numerous  when  he  went  abroad  ; whilst  Agesilaus  remained 

c Xenoph.  p.  496  et  652. 

d Plut.  in  Agesil.  p.  599,  600.  In  Lvsand.  p.  446,  447. 


168 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


almost  alone.  Such  a conduct  could  not  fail  of  offending  a ge- 
neral and  king  extremely  sensible  and  delicate  in  what  regarded 
his  authority,  though  otherwise  not  jealous  of  any  one’s  merit, 
but,  on  the  contrary,  much  inclined  to  distinguish  it  with  his 
favour.  He  did  not  dissemble  his  disgust.  He  no  longer  paid 
regard  to  Lysander’s  recommendations,  and  ceased  to  employ  him 
himself.  Lysander  presently  perceived  this  alteration  towards 
him.  He  discontinued  his  applications  for  his  friends  to  the 
king,  desired  them  not  to  visit  him  any  more,  nor  attach  them- 
selves to  him,  but  to  address  themselves  directly  to  the  king, 
and  to  cultivate  the  favour  of  those  who  in  the  present  times  had 
power  to  serve  and  advance  their  creatures.  The  greatest  part 
of  them  gave  over  importuning  him  with  their  affairs,  but  did 
not  cease  to  pay  their  court  to  him.  On  the  contrary,  they  were 
only  more  assiduous  than  ever  about  his  person,  attended  him 
in  throngs  when  he  took  the  air  abroad,  and  regularly  assisted 
at  all  his  exercises.  Lysander,  naturally  vain,  and  long  accus- 
tomed to  the  homage  and  submission  that  attended  on  absolute 
power,  did  not  take  sufficient  care  to  remove  the  busy  crowd 
from  his  person,  that  continually  made  their  addresses  to  him 
with  more  application  than  ever. 

This  ridiculous  affectation  of  authority  and  grandeur  grew 
still  more  and  more  offensive  to  Agesilaus,  and  seemed  as  if  in- 
tended to  insult  him.  He  resented  it  so  highly,  that  having 
given  the  most  considerable  commands  and  best  governments 
to  private  officers,  he  appointed  Lysander  commissary  of  the 
stores,  and  distributor  of  provisions  ; and  afterwards,  to  insult 
and  deride  the  Ionians,  he  told  them,  that  they  might  now  go 
and  consult  his  mast er -hut cher . 

Lysander  then  thought  it  incumbent  upon  him  to  speak,  and 
to  come  to  an  explanation  with  him.  Their  conversation  was 
brief  and  laconic.  Certainly,  my  lord,  said  Lysander,  you  very 
well  know  how  to  depress  your  friends. — Yes,  when  they  would 
set  themselves  above  me  ; but  when  they  study  to  exalt  my  dig- 
nity, I know  also  how  to  let  them  share  in  it. — But  perhaps,  my 
lord,  replied  Lysander,  I have  been  injured  by  false  reports , 
and  things  I never  did  have  been  imputed  to  me.  I must  beg, 
therefore,  if  it  be  only  upon  account  of  the  strangers,  who  have 
all  of  them  their  eyes  upon  us,  that  you  woidd  give  me  an  em- 
ployment in  your  army,  wherein  you  shall  think  me  least  capa- 
ble of  displeasing,  and  most  of  serving  you  effectually. 

The  result  of  this  conversation  was,  that  Agesilaus  gave  him 
the  lieutenancy  of  the  Hellespont.  In  this  employment  he  re- 
tained all  his  resentment,  without  however  neglecting  any  part 
of  his  duty,  or  omitting  any  step  that  might  conduce  to  the  suc- 
cess of  affairs.  Some  short  time  after  he  returned  to  Sparta, 
without  any  marks  of  honour  or  distinction,  extremely  incensed 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS.  169 

against  Agesilaus,  and  trusting  to  make  him  feel  his  resentment 
very  sensibly. 

It  must  be  allowed  that  Lysander’s  conduct,  as  we  have 
here  represented  it,  denotes  a vanity  and  narrowness  of  mind 
on  his  side,  highly  unworthy  of  his  reputation.  Perhaps  Agesi- 
laus carried  too  far  his  sensibility  and  delicacy  on  the  point  of 
honour,  and  was  a little  too  severe  upon  a friend  and  benefac- 
tor, whom  a secret  reprimand,  attended  with  frankness  and 
expressions  of  kindness,  might  have  reclaimed  to  his  duty. 
But,  brilliant  as  Lysander’s  merit,  and  considerable  as  the  ser- 
vices he  had  rendered  Agesilaus,  might  be,  they  could  not  all 
of  them  give  him  a right,  not  only  to  an  equality  with  his  king 
and  general,  but  to  the  superiority  he  affected,  which  in  some 
measure  tended  to  make  the  other  insignificant.  He  ought  to 
have  remembered,  that  it  is  never  allowable  for  an  inferior  to 
forget  himself,  and  to  exceed  the  bounds  of  a just  subordination. 

Upon  his  return  to  Sparta  d he  had  it  seriously  in  his  thoughts 
to  execute  a project,  which  he  had  many  years  resolved  in  his 
mind.  At  Sparta  there  were  only  two  families,  or  rather 
branches,  of  the  posterity  of  Hercules,  who  had  a right  to  the 
throne.  When  Lysander  had  attained  to  that  high  degree  of 
power  which  his  great  actions  had  acquired  him,  he  began  to 
see  with  pain  a city,  whose  glory  had  been  so  much  augmented 
by  his  exploits,  under  the  government  of  princes  to  whom  he 
was  inferior  neither  in  valour  nor  birth  ; for  he  was  descended, 
as  well  as  themselves,  from  Hercules.  He  therefore  sought 
means  to  deprive  those  two  houses  of  the  sole  succession 
to  the  crown,  and  to  extend  that  right  to  all  the  other  branches 
of  the  Heraclidse,  and  even,  according  to  some,  to  all  the  na- 
tives of  Sparta ; flattering  himself,  that  if  his  design  took  effect, 
no  Spartan  could  be  capable  of  disputing  that  honour  with 
him,  and  that  he  should  have  the  preference  over  all  others. 

This  ambitious  project  of  Lysander  shows,  that  the  greatest 
captains  are  often  those  from  whom  a republic  has  most  to 
apprehend.  Those  haughty,  valiant  spirits,  accustomed  to 
absolute  power  in  armies,  bring  back  with  victory  a daring 
loftiness  of  mind,  always  to  be  dreaded  in  a free  state.  Spar- 
ta, in  giving  Lysander  unlimited  power,  and  leaving  it  for  so 
many  years  in  his  hands,  did  not  sufficiently  consider,  that  no- 
thing is  more  dangerous  than  to  confide  to  persons  of  superior 
merit  and  abilities  employments  which  confer  supreme  authori- 
ty, which  naturally  exposes  them  to  the  temptation  of  render- 
ing themselves  independent,  and  retaining  in  their  own  hands 
absolute  power.  Lysander  was  not  proof  against  it,  and  prac- 
tised secretly  to  open  himself  a way  to  the  throne. 

The  undertaking  was  bold,  and  required  long  preparations. 
d Plut.  in  Lysand.  p.  447,  448.  Diod.  1.  xiv.  p.  244,  245. 


170 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


“e4r£  Vzttg  sni!  w “ 

{£?"*“  '*  ™r,  ■ ti  zxa  zts  “ 
hi.  4ss5ur  s?  atsssr^asrs?  rs?  ?•** 

though  ineffectual^a ffiTtime  atl “d  Amm°n’ 
bassadors  to  Spaf  to  accuse  him  of  impt^ 

address  d h,mse,ffrom  that  diffic<%  by  his  credit  and 

It  was  necessary  to  set  other  engines  at  work.  A woman  in 

ApoUoShad  b P°H ‘rS’  af“miS  tbl>t  Sbe  was  with  chlld  by 
Apollo  had  been  delivered  some  years  before  of  a son  to 

whom  the  name  of  Silenus  was  given!  and  the  greatest  persons 

that  nation  had  contended  with  eagerness  for  the  honour  of 

nursing  and  educating  him.  Lysander,  taking  this  wondrous 

birth  for  the  commencement,  and  in  a manner  the  ground-work 

le  plot  he  was  meditating,  supplied  the  rest  himself  by  em’ 

ploying  a good  number  of  persons,  and  those  of  no  inconsider 

able  station,  to  spread  abroad,  by  way  of  prologue  to  the  piece 

the  miraculous  birth  of  this  infant;  and,  as  they  did  tbis^ith- 

believe  “S  affectalion>  people  were  disposed  to 

from  De  phi  U S 7'S  r T*  ’Cy-  brOUSht  certain  , l'mours 

eveTv  where  d.af  ’ , T!  lndustrious,y  spread  abroad 

whZ  i ’ “at  the  priests  °f  the  temple  had  in  their  cus- 
tody  some  books  of  very  ancient  oracles,  which  they  kept  con 
cealed  from  all  the  world,  and  of  which  it  was  not  permitted 
either  for  them  or  any  other  persons  whatsoever,  to\ave  anv 
knowledge ; and  that  only  a son  of  Apollo  who  was  to  mml 

birtPh  °tCeth  °f  ti7e,1aftfr,havin^^iven  undoubted  proofs  of  his 

Seif[!(!;;:  beinf  wel!  arranSed,  Silenus  was  to  present  him- 

Sollo  anSThSe  ’ ant  t0  1emand  tb0Se  °racles  as  the  son  of 
Apollo  and  the  priests,  who  were  in  the  secret,  as  actors  well 

prepared  and  fully  instructed  in  their  parts,  were  on  their  side 

o make  the  most  exact  and  circumstantial  inquirv  into  every 

thing  not  without  affecting  great  difficulty,  and^sking  endless 

questions  for  the  full  proof  of  his  birth.  At  lengthens  abso 

1 utely  convinced  that  this  Silenus  was  the  real  son  of  Apollo’ 

they  were  to  produce  the  books,  and  deliver  them  to  him  - 

fa  nedlnH’  ""S  °f  AP°II,J  was  to  read  the  prophecies  con-’ 
l-o  tl  t flern,| tile  presence  of  all  the  world;  and  particu- 

The  nnrnnrt  M7  ‘ ^ j.h°!e  contrivance  bad  been  fabricated. 
Ihe  puipoit  of  this  prediction  was,  Thai  it  was  more  e.xpe- 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


171 


client  and  advantageous  for  the  Spartans  to  elect  no  king  for 
the  future  hut  the  most  worthy  of  their  citizens.  Lysander 
in  consequence  was  to  mount  the  tribunal,  to  harangue  the 
citizens,  and  induce  them  to  make  this  alteration.  Cleon  of 
Halicarnassus,  a celebrated  rhetorician,  had  composed  a very 
eloquent  discourse  for  him  upon  the  subject,  which  he  had  got 
by  heart. 

Silenus,  when  grown  up,  having  repaired  to  Greece  in  order 
to  play  his  part,  Lysander  had  the  mortification  to  see  his 
piece  miscarry,  by  the  timidity  and  desertion  of  one  of  his  prin- 
cipal actors,  who  broke  his  word,  and  disappeared  at  the  very 
instant  it  was  to  have  been  performed.  Though  this  intrigue 
had  been  carried  on  a great  while,  it  was  transacted  with  so 
much  secrecy  to  the  very  time  that  it  was  to  have  made  its 
appearance,  that  nothing  of  it  was  known  during  the  life  of 
Lysander.  How  it  came  to  light  after  his  death  we  shall  soon 
relate,  but  must  at  present  return  to  Tissaphernes. 

SECT.  III. 

Expedition  of  Agesilaus  in  Asia.  Disgrace  and  death  of  Tissaphernes. 
Sparta  gives  Agesilaus  the  command  of  its  armies  by  sea  and  land.  He 
deputes  Pisander  to'  command  the  fleet.  Interview  of  Agesilaus  and  Phar- 
nabazus. 

When  Tissaphernes e had  received  the  troops  sent  to  him  by 
the  king,  and  drawn  together  all  his  forces,  he  sent  to  command 
Agesilaus  to  retire  out  of  Asia,  and  declared  war  against  him 
in  case  of  refusal.  His  officers  were  all  alarmed,  not  believing 
him  in  a condition  to  oppose  the  great  army  of  the  Persian 
king.  For  himself,  he  heard  Tissaphernes’s  heralds  with  a 
gay  and  easy  countenance,  and  bade  them  tell  their  master, 
that  he  was  under  a very  great  obligation  to  him  for  having 
made  the  gods,  by  his  perjury,  the  enemies  of  Persia  and  the 
friends  of  Greece.  He  promised  himself  great  things  from  this 
expedition,  and  would  have  thought  it  an  exceeding  disgrace 
for  him,  that  10,000  Greeks  under  the  command  of  Xenophon, 
should  have  passed  through  the  heart  of  Asia  to  the  Grecian 
sea,  and  beaten  the  king  of  Persia  as  often  as  he  appeared 
against  them ; and  that  he  who  commanded  the  Lacedaemonians, 
whose  empire  extended  all  over  Greece  by  sea  and  land,  should 
not  execute  some  brilliant  exploit  worthy  of  remembrance. 

At  first,  therefore,  to  take  vengeance  for  the  perfidy  of  Tis- 
saphernes by  a just  and  allowable  deceit,  he  made  a feint  of 
marching  his  army  into  Caria,  the  residence  of  that  satrap  * 
and  as  soon  as  the  barbarian  had  caused  all  his  troops  to  march 

e Xenoph.  Hist.  Graec.  1.  iii.  p.  497—502.  Idem  de  Agesil.  p.  652 — 656. 
Plut.  in  Agesil.  p.  600. 


172 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


that  way,  he  turned  short,  and  fell  upon  Phrygia,  where  he 
took  many  towns,  and  amassed  immense  treasures,  which  he 
distributed  amongst  the  officers  and  soldiers ; letting  his  friends 
see,  says  Plutarch,  that  to  break  a treaty  and  violate  an  oath 
is  to  despise  the  gods  themselves ; and  that,  on  the  contrary’ 
to  deceive  the  enemy  by  the  stratagems  of  war,  is  not  only  just 
and  glorious,  but  a sensible  delight  attended  with  the  greatest 

The  spring  being  come,  he  assembled  all  his  forces  at  Ephe- 
sus; and  to  exercise  his  soldiers,  he  proposed  prizes  both  for 
the  horse  and  toot.  This  small  inducement  set  every  thing  in 
motion  The  place  for  exercises  was  perpetually  full  of  all 
inds  of  troops,  and  the  city  of  Ephesus  seemed  only  a palm- 
stra,  and  a school  of  war.  The  whole  market-place  was  filled 
wi  h horses  and  arms,  and  the  shops  with  different  kinds  of 
military  equipages.  Agesilaus  was  seen  returning  from  the 
exercises,  followed  by  a crowd  of  officers  and  soldiers,  all  of 
hem  crowned  with  wreaths,  which  they  were  going  to  deposit 
m the  temple  of  Diana,  to  the  great  admiration  and  delight  of 
every  one.  For,  says  Xenophon,  where  piety  and  discipline 
are  seen  to  flourish,  the  best  hopes  must  be  conceived. 

lo  give  his  soldiers  new  valour  by  inspiring  them  with  con- 
tempt for  their  enemies,  he  made  use  of  this  contrivance.  He 
one  day  ordered  the  commissaries,  who  had  charge  of  the  booty, 
to  strip  the  prisoners  and  expose  them  to  sale.  There  were 
abundance  who  were  ready  to  buy  their  habits  ; but  as  to  the 
prisoners,  their  bodies  were  so  soft,  white,  and  delicate,  having 
been  nurtured  and  brought  up  in  the  shade,  that  they  laughed 
at  them,  as  of  neither  service  nor  value.  Agesilaus  took  this 
occasion  to  approach  and  say  to  his  soldiers,  pointing  to  the 
men,  See  there  against  whom  you  fight ; and  showing  them 
their  rich  spoils,  and  therefor  what  you  fight . 

When  the  season  for  taking  the  field  returned,  Agesilaus 
gave  out  that  he  would  march  into  Lydia.  Tissaphernts,  who 
had  not  forgotten  the  first  stratagem  he  had  used  in  regard  to 
him  and  was  not  willing  to  be  deceived  a second  time,  made 
his  troops  march  directly  for  Caria ; not  doubting  but  at  this 
time  Agesilaus  would  turn  his  arms  that  way  ; the  rather  be- 
cause it  was  natural  for  him,  as  he  wanted  cavalry,  to  endeavour 
to  make  a rough  and  difficult  country  the  seat  of  action,  which 
might  render  the  horse  of  an  enemy  useless  and  unserviceable. 
.But  he  deceived  himself:  Agesilaus  entered  Lydia,  and  ap- 
proached Sardis.  Tissaphernes  hastened  thither  with  his  horse 
with  intent  to  relieve  the  place.  Agesilaus,  knowing  that  his 
infantry  could  not  yet  have  had  time  to  arrive,  thought  proper 
to  take  the  advantage  of  so  favourable  an  opportunity  to  give 
him  battle,  before  he  had  re-assembled  all  his  troops.  He  drew 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS, 


173 


up  his  army  in  two  lines  ; the  first  he  formed  of  his  squadrons, 
whose  intervals  he  filled  up  with  platoons  of  the  light-armed 
foot,  and  ordered  them  to  begin  the  charge ; whilst  he  followed 
with  the  second  line,  composed  of  his  heavy-armed  infantry. 
The  Barbarians  did  not  sustain  the  first  shock,  but  took  to  their 
heels  immediately.  The  Greeks  pursued  them,  and  forced 
their  camp,  where  they  made  a great  slaughter,  and  a still 
greater  booty. 

After  this  battle f the  troops  of  Agesilaus  were  at  entire 
liberty  to  plunder  and  ravage  the  whole  country  of  the  Great 
King,  and  at  the  same  time  had  the  satisfaction  to  see  that 
prince  inflict  an  exemplary  punishment  upon  Tissaphernes, 
who  was  a very  wicked  man,  and  the  most  dangerous  enemy  of 
the  Greeks.  The  king  had  already  received  abundance  of 
complaints  against  his  conduct.^  Upon  this  occasion  he  was 
accused  of  treason,  as  not  having  done  his  duty  in  the  battle. 
Queen  Parysatis,  always  actuated  in  her  hatred  and  revenge 
against  those  who  had  any  share  in  the  death  of  her  son  Cyrus, 
did  not  a little  contribute  to  the  death  of  Tissaphernes,  by  ag- 
gravating with  all  her  power  the  charges  against  him  ; for  she 
had  been  entirely  restored  to  favour  by  the  king  her  son. 

As  Tissaphernes  had  great  authority  in  Asia,  the  king  was 
afraid  to  attack  him  openly,  but  thought  it  necessary  to  take 
suitable  precautions,  in  order  to  secure  so  powerful  an  officer, 
who  might  prove  a dangerous  enemy.  He  charged  Tithraustes 
with  that  important  commission,  and  gave  him  two  letters  at 
the  same  time.  The  first  was  for  Tissaphernes,  and  contained 
the  king’s  orders  in  regard  to  the  war  with  the  Greeks,  with 
full  power  to  act  as  was  requisite.  The  second  was  addressed 
to  Ariaeus,  governor  of  Larissa  ; by  which  the  king  commanded 
him  to  assist  Tithraustes  with  his  advice  and  all  his  forces  in 
seizing  Tissaphernes.  He  lost  no  time,  and  sent  to  desire 
Tissaphernes  would  come  to  him,  that  they  might  confer  toge- 
ther upon  the  operations  of  the  ensuing  campaign.  Tissa- 
phernes, who  suspected  nothing,  went  to  him  with  only  a guard 
of  300  men.  Whilst  he  was  in  a bath,  without  sabre  or  other 
arms,  he  was  seized,  and  put  into  the  hands  of  Tithraustes,  who 
caused  his  head  to  be  struck  off,  and  sent  it  immediately  to 
Persia.  The  king  gave  it  to  Parysatis  ; an  agreeable  present 
to  a princess  of  her  violent  and  vindictive  temper.  Though 
this  conduct  of  Artaxerxes  seems  little  worthy  of  a king,  nobody 
lamented  the  death  of  that  satrap,  who  had  no  veneration  for 
the  gods,  nor  any  regard  for  men ; who  looked  upon  probity 
and  honour  as  empty  names;  who  made  a jest  of  the  most 
sacred  oaths,  and  believed  the  whole  ability  and  policy  of  a 

f Xenoph.  p.  501,  et  657-  Plut.  in  Artax.  p.  1022,  et  in  Agesil.  p.  601. 
s Diod.  1.  xiv.  p.  299.  Polysen.  Stratag  1.  vii. 


174 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


statesman  consisted  in  knowing  how  to  deceive  others  by  hy- 
pocrisy, fraud,  perfidy,  and  perjury. 

Tithraustes  had  a third  letter  from  the  king,  whereby  he  was 
appointed  to  command  the  armies  in  the  room  of  Tissaphernes. 
After  having  executed  his  commission,11  he  sent  great  presents 
to  Agesilaus,  to  induce  him  to  enter  more  readily  into  his  views 
and  interests  ; and  ordered  him  to  be  told,  that  as  the  cause  of 
the  war  was  now  removed,  and  the  author  of  all  these  commotions 
put  to  death,  nothing  opposed  an  accommodation  ; that  the  king 
of  Persia  consented  that  the  cities  of  Asia  should  enjoy  their  li- 
berty, paying  him  the  customary  tribute,  provided  he  would  with- 
draw his  troops  and  return  into  Greece.  Agesilaus  replied, 
that  he  could  conclude  nothing  without  the  orders  of  Sparta, 
upon  whom  alone  depended  the  peace  ; that  as  for  him,  he  was 
better  pleased  with  enriching  his  soldiers  than  himself : that 
the  Greeks  besides  thought  it  more  glorioqs  and  honourable  to 
take  spoils  from  their  enemies,  than  to  accept  their  presents. 
However,  as  he  was  not  unwilling  to  give  Tithraustes  the  sa- 
tisfaction.of  removing  out  of  his  province,  and  of  expressing 
his  gratitude  to  him  for  having  punished  the  common  enemy  of 
the  Greeks,  he  marched  into  Phrygia,  which  \vas  the  province 
of  Pharnabazus.  Tithraustes  had  himself  proposed  that  expedi- 
tion to  him,  and  paid  him  thirty  talents  for  the  charges  of  his 
journey. 

Upon  his  march  he  received  a letter  from  the  magistrates  of 
Sparta,  with  orders  to  take  upon  him  the  command  of  the  naval 
army,  and  liberty  to  depute  whom  he  thought  fit  in  his  stead. 
By  these  new  powers  he  saw  himself  absolute  commander  of 
all  the  troops  of  that  state  in  Asia  both  by  sea  and  land.  This 
resolution  was  taken,  in  order  that  all  operations  being  directed 
by  one  and  the  same  head,  and  the  two  armies  acting  in  con- 
cert, the  plans  for  the  service  might  be  executed  with  more 
uniformity,  and  every  thing  conspire  to  the  same  end.  Sparta 
till  then  had  never  conferred  this  honour  upon  any  of  her 
generals,  of  intrusting  to  him  at  the  same  time  the  command 
of  the  armies  by  sea  and  land.  So  that  all  the  world  agreed, 
that  he  was  the  greatest  personage  of  his  time,  and  best 
sustained  the  high  reputation  he  enjoyed.  But  he  wras  a man, 
and  had  his  failings. 

The  first  thing  he  did  was  to  establish  Pisauder  his  lieu- 
tenant in  the  fleet ; in  which  he  seemed  to  ha\  e committed  a 
considerable  fault ; because,  as  he  had  about  him  many  older 
and  more  experienced  captains,  yet  without  regard  to  the 
service  of  the  public,  to  do  honour  to  a relation,  and  to  please 
his  wife,  who  was  Pisander’s  sister,  he  intrusted  him  with  the 

h Xenoph.  Hist.  Grsec.  1.  iii.  p.  501.  Plut.  in  Agesil.  p.  601. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS.  175 

command  of  the  fleet ; an  employment  much  above  his  abilities, 
though  he  was  not  without  his  merit. 

This  is  the  common  temptation  of  persons  in  power,  who 
believe  they  possess  it  only  for  themselves  and  their  families  ; as 
if  the  advantage  of  relation  to  them  was  a sufficient  title  and 
qualification  for  posts  which  require  great  abilities.  They  do 
not  reflect,  that  they  not  only  expose  the  affairs  of  a state  to 
ruin  by  their  private  views,  but  sacrifice  besides  the  interests 
of  their  own  glory,  which  cannot  be  maintained  but  by  suc- 
cesses which  it  were  inconsistent  to  expect  from  instruments  so 
ill  chosen. 

Agesilans  continued  with  his  army  in  Phrygia,1 
Ant  C^394  uPon  ^ie  lands  of  Pharnabazus’s  government, 
where  he  lived  in  abundance  of  all  things,  and 
amassed  great  sums  of  money.  From  thence  advancing  as  far 
as  Paphlagonia,  he  made  an  alliance  with  king  Cotys,  who  ear- 
nestly desired  his  amity,  from  the  sense  he  entertained  of  his 
faith  in  the  observance  of  treaties,  and  his  other  virtues.  The 
same  motive  had  already  induced  Spithridates,  one  of  the  king’s 
principal  officers,  to  quit  the  service  of  Pharnabazus,  and  go 
over  to  Agesilaus,  to  whom,  since  his  revolt,  he  had  rendered 
great  services  ; for  he  had  a great  body  of  troops,  and  was  very 
brave.  This  officer,  having  entered  Phrygia,  had  laid  waste 
the  whole  country  under  Pharnabazus,  who  never  dared  to  ap- 
pear in  the  field  against  him,  nor  even  trust  himself  to  his  for- 
tresses ; but  carrying  away  whatever  was  most  valuable  and 
dear  to  him,  he  kept  flying  continually  before  him,  and  retired 
from  one  place  to  another,  changing  his  camp  every  day.  Spi- 
thridates at  length,  taking  with  him  some  Spartan  troops,  with 
Herippidas,  (the  chief  of  the  new  council  of  thirty  sent  by  the 
republic  to  Agesilaus  the  second  year,)  watched  him  one  day  so 
closely,  and  attacked  him  so  successfully,  that  he  made  himself 
master  of  his  camp,  and  of  all  the  rich  spoils  with  which  it 
abounded.  Herippidas,  injudiciously  setting  himself  up  as  an 
inexorable  comptroller,  was  for  bringing  the  booty  that  had  been 
secreted  to  an  account ; forced  even  the  soldiers  of  Spithri- 
dates to  restore  what  they  had  taken,  and  by  visiting  their  tents, 
and  searching  them  with  an  unseasonable  exactitude  and  seve- 
rity, affronted  Spithridates  to  such  a degree,  that  he  withdrew 
directly  to  Sardis  with  his  Paphlagonians. 

It  is  said,  that  in  this  whole  expedition  nothing  so  sensibly 
affected  Agesilaus  as  the  retreat  of  Spithridates.  For,  besides 
his  being  very  sorry  for  the  loss  of  so  good  an  officer  and  so 
good  troops,  he  apprehended  being  reproached  with  mean  and 
sordid  avarice  ; a vice  equally  dishonourable  to  himself  and  his 
country,  and  the  slightest  suspicion  of  which  he  had  taken  pains 
* Xenoph.  Hist.  Grsec.  1.  iv.  p.  507 — 510. 


176 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


to  avoid  during  his  whole  life.  He  did  not  think  it  consistent 
with  the  duty  of  his  office  to  shut  his  eyes,  through  slothful  ease 
and  indolence,  against  all  the  malversations  that  were  committed 
under  him  ; but  he  knew,  at  the  same  time,  that  there  is  an  ex- 
actitude and  severity,  which,  by  being  carried  too  far,  degene- 
rates into  minuteness  and  petulancy,  and  which,  through  an  ex- 
treme affectation  of  virtue,  becomes  a real  and  dangerous  vice. 

Some  time  after,  Pharnabazus,  k who  saw  his  whole  country 
ravaged,  demanded  an  interview  with  Agesilaus,  which  was  ne- 
gociated  by  a common  friend  of  them  both.  Agesilaus  arrived 
first  with  his  friends  at  the  place  agreed  on  ; and  while  waiting 
for  Pharnabazus,  sat  down  upon  the  turf  under  the  shade  of  a 
tree.  When  Pharnabazus  arrived,  his  people  spread  skins  upon 
the  ground  of  exceeding  softness  from  the  length  of  their  hair, 
with  rich  carpets  of  various  colours,  and  magnificent  cushions. 
But  when  he  saw  Agesilaus  sitting  merely  upon  the  ground, 
without  any  preparation,  he  was  ashamed  of  his  effeminacy,  and 
sat  down  also  upon  the  grass.  On  this  occasion  the  Persian 
pride  was  seen  to  pay  homage  to  the  Spartan  modesty  and 
simplicity. 

After  reciprocal  salutations,  Pharnabazus  spoke  to  this  effect : 
That  he  had  served  the  Lacedaemonians  in  the  Peloponnesian 
war  to  the  utmost  of  his  power,  fought  several  battles  for  them, 
and  supported  their  naval  army,  without  giving  any  room  to  re- 
proach him  with  fraud  or  treachery,  as  Tissaphernes  had  done  : 
that  he  was  surprised  at  their  coming  to  attack  him  in  his  govern- 
ment ; burning  the  towns,  cutting  down  the  trees,  and  laying 
waste  the  whole  country  : that  if  it  was  the  custom  with  the 
Greeks,  who  made  profession  of  honour  and  virtue,  to  treat 
their  friends  and  benefactors  in  such  a manner,  he  did  not  know 
what  they  might  mean  by  just  and  equitable.  These  complaints 
were  not  entirely  without  foundation,  and  were  uttered  with  a 
modest,  hut  pathetic  air  and  tone  of  voice.  The  Spartans,  who 
attended  Agesilaus,  not  seeing  how  they  could  be  answered,  cast 
down  their  eyes,  and  kept  a profound  silence.  Agesilaus,  who 
observed  it,  replied  almost  in  these  terms  : Lord  Pharnabazus, 
you  are  not  ignorant  that  war  often  arms  the  best  friends 
against  each  other  for  the  defence  of  their  country.  Whilst 
we  were  such  to  the  Icing  your  master,  we  treated  him  as  a 
friend : but  as  we  are  now  become  his  enemies,  we  make  open 
war  against  him,  as  it  is  just  we  should,  and  endeavour  to  hurt 
him  by  the  injuries  we  do  you.  However,  from  the  instant  you 
shall  think  fit  to  throw  off  the  ignominious  yoke  of  bondage, 
and  prefer  being  called  the  friend  and  ally  of  the  Greeks,  before 
the  name  of  the  king  of  Persia's  slave,  you  may  reckon  that  all 
the  troops  you  see  before  your  eyes,  our  arms,  our  ships,  our 
k Xenoph.  Hist.  Grsec.  1.  iv.  p.  510,  511.  Plut.  in  Agesil.  p.  602- 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


177 


persons  to  the  last  man  of  us,  are  only  here  to  defend  your 
possessions,  and  secure  your  liberty,  which  of  all  blessings  is  the 
most  precious  and  desirable. 

Pharnabazus  answered,  that  if  the  king  sent  another  general 
in  his  place,  and  subjected  him  to  the  new  comer,  he  should 
very  willingly  accept  his  offer  ; that  otherwise  he  would  not  de- 
part from  the  faith  he  had  sworn  to  him,  nor  quit  his  service. 
Agesilaus  then  taking  him  by  the  hand,  and  rising  with  him, 
replied.  Would  it  were  the  pleasure  of  the  gods , lord  Phar- 
nabazus, that  with  such  noble  sentiments,  you  were  rather  our 
friend  than  our  enemy ! He  promised  to  withdraw  from  his 
government,  and  never  return  into  it,  whilst  he  could  subsist 
elsewhere. 


SECT.  IV. 

League  against  the  Lacedaemonians.  Agesilaus,  recalled  by  the  Ej)hori  to  de- 
fend his  country,  obeys  directly.  Lysander’s  death.  Victory  of  the  Lace- 
daemonians nearNemsea.  Their  fleet  is  beaten  by  Conon  off  Cnidos.  Bat- 
tle gained  by  the  Lacedaemonians  at  Coronaea. 

Agesilaus  1 had  been  two  years  at  the  head  of 
Ant  C6  394  army,  and  had  already  made  the  provinces  of 
Upper  Asia  tremble  at  his  name,  and  resound 
with  the  fame  of  his  great  wisdom,  disinterestedness,  modera- 
tion, intrepid  valour  in  the  greatest  dangers,  and  invincible 
patience  in  supporting  the  rudest  fatigues.  Of  so  many  thou- 
sand soldiers  under  his  command,  not  one  was  worse  provided, 
or  lay  harder  than  himself.  He  was  so  indifferent  as  to  heat  or 
cold,  that  he  alone  seemed  formed  to  support  the  most  rigorous 
seasons,™  and  such  as  it  pleased  God  to  send.  These  are  Plu- 
tarch’s express  words. 

The  most  agreeable  of  all  sights  to  the  Greeks  settled  in  Asia, 
was  to  see  the  lieutenants  of  the  great  king,  his  satraps,  and 
other  great  lords,  who  were  formerly  so  haughty  and  morose, 
soften  their  note  in  the  presence  of  a man,  meanly  clad,  and  at 
his  single  word,  however  short  and  laconic,  change  their  lan- 
guage and  conduct,  and  in  a manner  transform  themselves  into 
different  creatures.  Deputies  from  all  parts  were  sent  by  the 
people  to  form  alliances  with  him,  and  his  army  increased 
every  day  by  the  troops  of  the  barbarians  that  came  to  join  him. 

All  Asia  was  already  in  motion,  and  most  of  the  provinces 
ready  to  revolt.  Agesilaus  had  already  restored  order  and  tran- 
quillity in  all  the  cities,  had  reinstated  them  in  the  possession  of 
their  liberty  under  reasonable  modifications,  not  only  without 
shedding  of  blood,  but  without  even  banishing  a single  person. 

1 Plut.  in  Agesil.  p.  603,  604.  Xenoph.  in  Agesil.  p.  657. 
m "Qcnnp  fxovog  del  %p??<T0a(  raig  virb  Stov  KiKpafiivaig  wpcug  mipvicwg. 

VOL.  III.  N 


178 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


Not  content  with  such  a progress,  he  had  formed  the  design  of 
attacking  the  king  of  Persia  in  the  heart  of  his  dominions,  to 
put  him  in  fear  for  his  own  person  and  the  tranquillity  he  enjoyed 
in  Ecbatana  and  Susa,  and  to  find  him  so  much  business  as 
should  make  it  impracticable  for  him  to  embroil  all  Greece  from 
his  cabinet,  by  corrupting  the  orators  and  persons  of  greatest 
authority  in  its  cities  with  his  presents. 

Tithraustes,m  who  commanded  for  the  king  in  Asia,  seeing 
the  tendency  of  Agesilaus’s  designs,  and  desiring  to  prevent 
their  effects,  had  sent  Timocrates  of  Rhodes  into  Greece,  with 
great  sums  of  money  to  corrupt  the  principal  persons  in  the 
cities,  and  by  their  means  occasion  commotions  against  Sparta. 
He  knew  that  the  haughtiness  of  the  Lacedaemonians,  (for  all  their 
generals  did  not  resemble  Agesilaus,)  and  the  imperious  man- 
ner with  which  they  treated  their  neighbours  and  allies,  especially 
since  they  considered  themselves  as  the  masters  of  Greece,  had 
universally  disgusted  the  people,  and  excited  a jealousy  that 
waited  only  an  occasion  to  break  out  against  them.  This  seve- 
rity of  governing  had  a natural  cause  in  their  education.  Ac- 
customed from  their  infancy  to  obey  without  delay  or  reply, 
first  their  tutors,  and  afterwards  their  magistrates,  they  ex- 
acted a like  submission  from  the  cities  dependant  upon  them, 
were  easily  incensed  by  the  least  opposition,  and  by  this 
punctilious  and  excessive  severity,  rendered  themselves  insup- 
portable. 

Tithraustes  therefore  did  not  find  it  difficult  to  draw  off  the 
allies  from  their  party.  Thebes,  Argos,  Corinth,  entered  into 
his  measures;  the  deputy  did  not  go  to  Athens.  These  three 
cities,  influenced  by  those  that  governed  them,  made  a league 
against  the  Lacedaemonians,  who  on  their  side  prepared  vigor- 
ously for  the  war.  The  Thebans  at  the  same  time  sent  deputies 
to  the  Athenians,  to  implore  their  aid,  and  to  induce  them  to  en- 
ter into  the  alliance.  The  deputies,  after  having  slightly  passed 
over  their  ancient  divisions,  insisted  strongly  upon  the  consider- 
able service  they  had  rendered  Athens  in  refusing  to  join  its  ene- 
mies when  they  endeavoured  its  final  destruction.  They  repre- 
sented to  them  the  favourable  opportunity  that  offered  for  rein- 
stating themselves  in  their  ancient  power,  and  for  depriving  the 
Lacedaemonians  of  the  empire  of  Greece  : that  all  the  allies  of 
Sparta,  either  without  or  within  Greece,  were  weary  of  their 
severe  and  unjust  sway,  and  waited  only  the  signal  to  revolt : 
that  the  moment  the  Athenians  should  declare  themselves,  all 
the  cities  w ould  rouse  up  at  the  sound  of  their  arms  ; and  that 
the  king  of  Persia,  who  had  sworn  the  ruin  of  Sparta,  would 
aid  them  with  all  his  forces  both  by  sea  and  land. 

Thrasybulus,  whom  the  Thebans  had  supplied  with  arms  and 

m Xenoph.  Hist.  Grsec.  1.  iii.  p.' 502— 507-  Plut.  in  Lysand.  p.449 — 451. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


179 


money  when  he  undertook  the  re-establishment  of  the  Athenian 
liberty,  seconded  their  demand  with  great  vigour,  and  the  aid 
was  unanimously  resolved.  The  Lacedaemonians  on  their  side 
took  the  field  without  loss  of  time,  and  entered  Phocis.  Lysan- 
der  wrote  to  Pausanias,  who  commanded  one  of  the  two  armies, 
to  give  him  notice  to  march  early  the  next  day  to  Haliartus, 
which  he  designed  to  besiege,  and  that  he  should  be  there  him- 
self at  sun-rise.  The  letter  was  intercepted.  Lysander,  after 
having  waited  his  coming  up  a great  while,  was  obliged  to  en- 
gage, and  was  killed  in  the  battle.  Pausanias  received  this  bad 
news  on  his  way  : but  however  continued  his  march  to  Haliartus, 
and  called  a council  of  war,  to  consider  upon  a second  battle. 
He  did  not  think  it  consistent  with  prudence  to  hazard  it,  and 
contented  himself  with  making  a truce,  to  remove  the  bodies  of 
those  who  had  fallen  in  the  former  fight.  Upon  his  return  to 
Sparta,  he  was  cited  to  give  an  account  of  his  conduct ; and 
refusing  to  appear,  was  condemned  to  die.  But  he  avoided  the 
execution  of  that  sentence  by  flight,  and  retired  to  Tegsea, 
where  he  passed  the  remainder  of  his  life  under  the  shelter  and 
protection  of  Minerva,  to  whom  he  had  rendered  himself  a sup- 
pliant, and  died  of  disease. 

Lysander’s  poverty  having  been  discovered  after  his  death, 
did  great  honour  to  his  memory;  when  it  was  known,  that  of 
all  the  gold  and  riches  which  had  passed  through  his  hands,  of  a 
power  so  extensive  as  his  had  been,  of  so  many  cities  under  his 
government,  and  which  made  their  court  to  him  ; in  a word,  of 
that  kind  of  dominion  and  sovereignty  always  exercised  by  him, 
he  had  made  no  manner  of  advantage  for  the  advancement  and 
enriching  of  his  house. 

Some  days  before  his  death,  two  of  the  principal  citizens  of 
Sparta  had  contracted  themselves  to  his  two  daughters  ; but 
when  they  knew  in  what  condition  he  had  left  his  affairs,  they 
refused  to  marry  them.  The  republic  did  not  suffer  so  sordid 
a baseness  to  go  unpunished,  nor  permit  Lysander’s  poverty, 
which  was  the  strongest  proof  of  his  justice  and  virtue,  to  be 
treated  as  an  obstacle  to  an  alliance  into  his  family.  They  were 
fined  in  a great  sum,  publicly  disgraced,  and  exposed  to  the 
contempt  of  all  persons  of  honour.  For  at  Sparta  there  were 
penalties  established/not  only  for  such  as  refused  to  marry,  or 
married  too  late,  but  also  for  those  who  married  amiss  : and 
those  especially  were  reckoned  of  this  number,  who,  instead  of 
forming  alliances  with  virtuous  families,  and  with  their  own  re- 
lations, had  no  motive  but  wealth  and  lucre  in  marriage  : — an 
admirable  law,  tending  to  perpetuate  probity  and  honour  in 
families,  which  an  impure  mixture  of  blood  and  manners  sel- 
dom fails  to  alter  and  efface  ! 

It  must  be  owned,  that  a generous  disinterestedness  in  the 

n 2 


180 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


midst  of  all  that  could  inflame  and  gratify  the  lust  of  gain,  is 
very  rare,  and  well  worthy  of  admiration:  but  in  Lysander  it 
was  attended  with  great  defects,  which  sullied  its  lustre. 
Without  speaking  of  his  imprudence  in  introducing  gold  and 
silver  into  Sparta,  which  he  despised  himself,  though  he  ren- 
dered it  an  object  of  esteem  to  his  countrymen,  and  thereby  oc- 
casioned their  ruin  ; what  opinion  can  we  have  of  a man,  brave 
indeed,  capable  of  conciliating  the  affections,  skilful  in  affairs, 
and  of  great  ability  in  the  arts  of  government,  and  what  is  com- 
monly called  politics,  but  who  regards  probity  and  justice  as 
nothing ; to  whom  falsehood,  fraud,  and  perfidy,  appear  legi- 
timate methods  for  the  attainment  of  his  ends  ; who  does  not 
fear,  for  the  advancement  of  his  friends  and  the  augmenting 
the  number  of  his  creatures,  to  commit  the  most  flagrant  injus- 
tice and  oppressions,  and  is  not  ashamed  to  profane  whatever 
is  most  sacred  in  religion,  even  to  the  bribing  of  priests  and 
forging  of  oracles,  to  satiate  the  empty  ambition  of  being  equal 
to  a king,  and  of  ascending  the  throne  ? 

When  Agesilaus  was  upon  the  point  of  leading  his  troops 
into  Persia,  n the  Spartan  Epicididas  arrived  to  let  him  know 
that  Sparta  was  threatened  with  a furious  war  ; that  the  Ephori 
recalled  him,  and  ordered  him  to  return  immediately  for  the  de- 
fence of  his  country.  Agesilaus  did  not  deliberate  a moment, 
but  returned  this  answer  immediately  to  the  Ephori,  which  Plu- 
tarch 0 has  transmitted  to  us  •„  Agesilaus  to  the  Ephori , greet- 
ing. We  have  reduced  part  of  Asia,  put  the  Barbarians  to 
flight,  and  made  great  preparations  for  war  in  Ionia  ; hut  as 
you  order  me  to  return,  I am  not  far  behind  this  letter,  and 
would  anticipate  it  if  possible.  I received  the  command  not 
for  myself,  but  my  country  and  its  allies.  I Icnow  that  a gene- 
ral does  not  deserve , or  really  fulfil  the  duties  of  that  name , 
but  when  he  suffers  himself  to  be  guided  by  the  laws  and  the 
Ephori,  and  obeys  the  magistrates. 

This  ready  obedience  of  Agesilaus  has  been  much  admired 
and  applauded,  and  not  without  reason.  Hannibal,  though 
depressed  with  misfortunes,  and  driven  almost  entirely  out  of 
Italy,  obeyed  his  citizens  with  great  reluctance,  when  they  re- 
called him  to  deliver  Carthage  from  the  dangers  that  threaten- 
ed it.  Here  a victorious  prince,  ready  to  enter  the  enemy’s 
country,  and  to  attack  the  king  of  Persia  even  upon  his  throne, 
almost  assured  of  the  success  of  his  arms,  on  the  first  order  of 
the  Ephori  renounces  these  flattering  hopes  and  most  exalted 
expectations.  He  demonstrates  the  truth  of  what  was  said, 
That  at  Sparta  the  laws  ruled  men,  and  not  men  the  laws. 

On  his  departure  he  said,  that  thirty  thousand  of  the  king's 

n Xenoph.  Hist.  Grsec.  1.  iv.  p.  513.  Idem,  in  Agesil.  p.  667-  Plut.  in 
Agesil.  p.  603,  601.  0 Plut.  in  Apoph.  Laconic,  p.  211. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


181 


archers  drove  him  out  of  Asia  ; alluding  in  those  words  to  a 
species  of  Persian  coin,  which  had  on  one  side  the  fig  ure  of  an 
archer,  30,000  of  which  pieces  of  money  had  been  dispersed  in 
Greece  to  corrupt  the  orators  and  persons  of  greatest  power  in 
the  cities. 

Agesilaus,  p on  quitting  Asia,  where  he  was  regretted  as  the 
common  father  of  the  people,  appointed  Euxenes  his  lieute- 
nant, and  gave  him  4000  men  for  the  defence  of  the  country. 
Xenophon  went  with  him.  He  left  at  Ephesus,  with  Mega- 
byzus,  the  guardian  of  Diana’s  temple,  half  the  gold  he  had 
brought  with  him  from  his  expedition  in  Persia  with  Cyrus, 
to  keep  it  for  him  in  trust,  and  in  case  of  death  to  consecrate 
it  to  the  goddess. 

In  the  mean  time  the  Lacedaemonians  had  raised  an  army,  ^ 
and  given  the  command  of  it  to  x\ristodemus,  guardian  to  king 
Agesipolis,  then  an  infant.  Their  enemies  assembled  to  con- 
cert the  operations  of  the  war.  Timolaus  of  Corinth  said,  that 
the  Lacedaemonians  were  like  a river  that  grew  larger  in  pro- 
portion as  it  was  more  distant  from  its  source  ; or  to  a swarm 
of  bees  which  it  is  easy  to  burn  in  their  hive,  but  which  dis- 
perse themselves  a great  way  when  they  fly  abroad,  and  be- 
come formidable  by  their  stings.  He  was  therefore  of  opinion, 
that  it  was  proper  to  attack  them  in  their  capital ; which  was 
approved  and  resolved.  But  the  Lacedemonians  did  not  give 
them  time.  They  took  the  field,  and  found  the  enemy  near 
Nemaea,  a city  not  very  remote  from  Corinth,  where  an  obsti- 
nate battle  ensued.  The  Lacedaemonians  had  the  advantage, 
which  was  very  considerable.  Agesilaus  having  received  this 
news  at  Amphipolis,  as  he  was  hastening  to  the  relief  of  his 
country,  sent  it  directly  to  the  cities  of  Asia  for  their  encou- 
ragement, and  gave  them  hopes  of  his  speedy  return^  if  the 
success  of  affairs  would  admit  it. 

When  the  approach  of  Agesilaus  was  known  at  Sparta/  the 
Lacedaemonians  that  remained  in  the  city,  to  do  him  honour 
for  the  ready  obedience  he  had  paid  to  their  orders,  caused 
proclamation  to  be  made  by  sound  of  trumpet,  that  all  young 
persons  who  were  willing  to  aid  their  king,  might  come  and  list 
themselves  for  that  purpose.  Not  one  of  them  failed  to  enter 
himself  immediately  with  the  utmost  joy.  But  the  Ephori  chose 
only  fifty  of  the  bravest  and  most  robust,  whom  they  sent  him, 
and  desired  that  he  would  enter  Boeotia  with  the  utmost  expe- 
dition : which  he  did  accordingly. 

About  the  same  time  the  two  fleets  came  up  with  each  other 
near  Cnidos/  a city  of  Caria  : that  of  the  Lacedaemonians  was 

Xenoph.  Hist.  Griec.  1.  iv.  p.  513.  Xenoph.  de  Exped.  Cyr.  1.  v.  p.  350. 
q Xenoph.  p.  514 — 517-  r Plut.  in  Agesil.  p.  605. 

6 Xenoph.  Hist.  Graec.  1.  iv.  p.  518.  Diod.  1.  xiv.  p.  302.  Justin.  1.  vi.  c.  2 et  3. 


182 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


commanded  by  Pisander,  Agesilaus’s  brother-in-law,  and  that 
of  the  Persians  by  Pharnabazus  and  Conon  the  Athenian.  The 
latter,  observing  that  the  king  of  Persia’s  supplies  came  slowly, 
and  occasioned  the  loss  of  many  favourable  opportunities,  had 
resolved  to  go  in  person  to  the  court,  to  solicit  the  king’s  assist- 
ance. As  he  would  not  prostrate  himself  before  him,  accord- 
ing to  the  Persian  custom,  he  could  not  explain  himself  but  by 
the  intervention  of  others.  He  represented  to  him,  with  a force 
and  spirit  seldom  pardoned  in  those  who  treat  with  princes, 
that  it  was  equally  shameful  and  astonishing,  that  his  ministers, 
contrary  to  his  intention,  should  suffer  his  affairs  to  be  discon- 
certed and  ruined  by  a disgraceful  parsimony  ; that  the  richest 
king  in  the  world  should  give  place  to  his  enemies  in  the  very 
point  in  which  he  was  so  infinitely  superior  to  them  ; that  is,  in 
riches : and  that,  for  want  of  remitting  to  his  general  the  sums 
his  service  required,  all  their  designs  were  rendered  abortive. 
These  remonstrances  were  free,  but  just  and  solid.  The  king 
received  them  perfectly  well,  and  showed,  by  his  example,  that 
truth  may  often  be  spoken  to  princes  with  success,  if  courage 
were  not  wanting.  Conon  obtained  all  he  demanded,  and  the 
king  made  him  admiral  of  his  fleet. 

It  was  composed  of  more  than  fourscore  and  ten  galleys  : 
that  of  the  enemy  was  somewhat  inferior  in  number.  They 
came  in  view  of  each  other  near  Cnidos,  a maritime  city  of  Asia 
Minor.  Conon,  who  had  in  some  measure  occasioned  the 
taking  of  Athens  by  the  loss  of  the  sea-fight  near  ^Tigospotamos, 
used  extraordinary  efforts  in  this  to  retrieve  his  misfortune,  and 
to  obliterate  by  a glorious  victory  the  disgrace  of  his  former 
defeat.  He  had  this  advantage,®  that  in  the  battle  he  was  going 
to  fight,  the  Persians  would  be  at  the  whole  expense,  and  bear 
all  the  loss  themselves  ; whereas  the  entire  fruits  of  the  victory 
would  accrue  to  the  Athenians,  without  hazarding  any  thing  of 
their  own.  Pisander  had  also  strong  motives  to  show  his 
valour  upon  this  occasion,  that  he  might  not  degenerate  from 
the  glory  of  his  brother-in-law,  and  justify  the  choice  he  had  made 
in  appointing  him  admiral.  In  fact,  he  behaved  with  extreme 
valour,  and  had  at  first  some  advantage;  but  the  battle  growing 
warm,  and  the  allies  of  Sparta  betaking  themselves  to  flight,  he 
could  not  resolve  to  follow  them,  and  died  sword  in  hand.  Co- 
non took  fifty  galleys,  and  the  rest  escaped  to  Cnidos.  The 
consequence  of  this  victory  was  the  revolt  of  almost  all  the  al- 
lies of  Sparta ; several  of  whom  declared  for  the  Athenians, 
and  the  rest  resumed  their  ancient  liberty.  After  this  battle  the 
affairs  of  the  Lacedaemonians  daily  declined . All  their  actions  in 

* Eo  speciosius,  quod  ne  ipsorum  quidem  Atheniensium,  sed  alieni  im- 
perii viribus  dimicet,  pugnaturus  periculo  regis,  victurus  praemio  patriae. 

Justin. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


183 


Asia  were  no  more  than  the  feeble  efforts  of  an  expiring  power, 
till  the  defeats  of  Leuctra  and  Mantineea  completed  their  downfall. 

Isocrates  makes  a very  just  reflection  upon  the  revolutions 
of  Sparta  and  Athens,1  which  had  always  their  source  and  ori- 
gin in  the  insolent  prosperity  of  both  these  republics.  The 
Lacedaemonians,  who  were  at  first  acknowledged  masters  of 
Greece  without  opposition,  fell  from  their  authority  only  in  con- 
sequence of  their  enormous  abuse  of  it.  The  Athenians  suc- 
ceeded them  in  power,  and  at  the  same  time  in  pride ; and  we 
have  seen  into  what  an  abyss  of  misfortunes  it  precipitated 
them.  Sparta,  having  regained  the  superiority  by  the  defeat 
of  the  Athenians  in  Sicily  and  the  taking  of  their  city,  ought 
to  have  improved  in  her  measures  from  the  double  experience 
of  the  past ; as  well  in  regard  to  what  had  befallen  herself,  as 
from  the  recent  example  of  her  rival : but  the  most  striking 
examples  and  events  seldom  or  ever  occasion  a people  to 
change  their  conduct.  Sparta  became  as  haughty  and  untract- 
able  as  before,  and  so  experienced  the  same  destiny  again. 

To  warn  the  Athenians  against  this  misfortune,  Isocrates 
puts  them  in  mind  of  the  past,  while  he  addresses  them  at  a 
time  wherein  they  were  successful  in  every  thing.  You  ima- 
gine, says  he,  that  as  you  are  provided  with  a numerous  fleet, 
absolute  masters  at  sea,  and  supported  by  powerful  allies 
always  ready  to  give  you  aid,  you  have  nothing  to  fear,  and 
may  enjoy  in  repose  and  tranquillity  the  fruits  of  your  victo- 
ries : — for  my  part,  suffer  me  to  speak  with  truth  and  freedom, 
I think  quite  otherwise . The  cause  of  my  apprehension  is, 
my  having  observed,  that  the  decline  of  the  greatest  republics 
has  always  commenced  at  the  time  they  believed  themselves  most 
powerful ; and  that  their  very  security  has  prepared  the  pre- 
cipice into  which  they  have  fallen.  The  reason  of  this  is  evi- 
dent. Prosperity  and  adversity  never  come  alone,  but  have 
each  their  train  of  very  different  effects.  The  first  is  attended 
with  vain-glory,  pride,  and  insolence,  which  dazzle  the  mind, 
and  inspire  rash  and  extravagant  measures  : on  the  contrary, 
the  companions  of  adversity  are,  modesty,  self  diffidence,  and 
circumspection,  which  naturally  render  men  prudent,  and  apt 
to  derive  advantage  from  their  own  failings.  So  that  it  is 
hard  to  judge  which  of  the  two  conditions  we  ought  to  desire 
for  a city  ; as  that  which  appears  unhappy  is  an  almost  cer- 
tain path  to  prosperity ; and  the  other,  so  flattering  and 
splendid,  generally  leads  on  to  the  greatest  misfortunes.  The 
blow  which  the  Lacedaemonians  received  at  the  battle  of  Cnidos 
is  a mournful  proof  of  what  he  says. 

Agesilaus  was  in  Boeotia,  and  upon  the  point  of  giving  bat- 
tle,11 when  this  bad  news  was  brought  him.  Apprehending  that 
‘ lsocrat.  in  Orat.  Areop.  p.  278 — 280.  u Plut.  in  Agesil.  p.  605. 


184 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


it  might  discourage  and  deter  his  troops,  he  caused  it  to  be  re- 
ported in  the  army  that  the  Lacedaemonians  had  gained  a con- 
siderable victory  at  sea  ; and  appearing  in  public  with  a wreath 
of  flowers  upon  his  head,  he  offered  a sacrifice  of  thanksgiving 
for  the  good  news,  and  sent  part  of  it  in  presents  to  his  officers. 
The  two  armies, x almost  equal  in  strength,  were  in  view  of  each 
other  upon  the  plains  of  Coronaea,  and  they  drew  up  in  battle. 
Agesilaus  gave  the  left  wing  to  the  Orchomenians,  and  took 
the  right  himself.  On  the  other  side,  the  Thebans  were  upon 
the  right,  and  the  Argives  on  the  left.  Xenophon  says,  that 
this  was  the  most  furious  battle  of  any  that  had  been  fought  in 
his  time : and  we  may  believe  him,  as  he  was  present  in  it,  and 
fought  near  the  person  of  Agesilaus,  with  whom  he  had  returned 
from  Asia. 

The  first  charge  was  not  very  obstinate,  nor  of  long  con- 
tinuance. The  Thebans  soon  put  the  Orchomenians  to  flight, 
and  Agesilaus  overthrew  and  routed  the  Argives.  But  both 
parties,  having  learned  that  their  left  wing  had  been  very  se- 
verely handled  and  had  fled,  returned  immediately ; Agesilaus 
to  oppose  the  Thebans,  and  to  wrest  the  victory  out  of  their 
hands,  and  the  Thebans  to  follow  their  left  wing  that  was  re- 
tired to  Helicon.  Agesilaus  at  that  moment  might  have  as- 
sured himself  of  a complete  victory,  if  he  would  have  let  the 
Thebans  pass  on,  and  had  afterwards  charged  them  in  the 
rear ; but  carried  away  by  the  ardour  of  his  courage,  he  re- 
solved to  stop  them  with  an  attack  in  front,  and  to  beat  them 
by  pure  force.  In  which,  says  Xenophon,  he  showed  more 
valour  than  prudence. 

The  Thebans,  seeing  Agesilaus  advance  against  them,  drew 
all  their  foot  immediately  into  one  body,  formed  a hollow  square, 
and  waited  his  coming  up  in  good  order.  The  engagement 
was  sharp  and  bloody  on  all  sides,  but  particularly  where  Age- 
silaus fought  at  the  head  of  the  fifty  young  Spartans,  who  had 
been  sent  him  by  the  city.  The  valour  and  emulation  of  those 
young  men  were  of  great  service  to  Agesilaus,  and  may  be 
said  to  have  saved  his  life ; for  they  fought  around  him  with 
exceeding  ardour,  and  exposed  themselves  foremost  in  all 
dangers  for  the  safety  of  his  person.  They  could  not  however 
prevent  his  receiving  several  wounds  through  his  armour  from 
pikes  and  swords.  Notwithstanding,  with  the  utmost  efforts, 
they  brought  him  off  alive  from  the  enemy ; and  making 
their  bodies  a rampart  for  him,  sacrificed  a great  number 
of  Thebans  in  his  defence  ; and  many  of  those  young  men 
were  left  also  upon  the  field.  At  length  finding  it  too  difficult 
to  break  the  Thebans  in  front,  they  were  forced  to  have  recourse 
to  what  they  had  at  first  rejected.  They  opened  their  phalanx 
15  Plut.  ibid.  Xenoph.  Hist.  Grsec.  p.  518 — 520.  et  in  Agesil.  p.  659,  660. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


185 


to  let  them  pass ; which  when  they  had  done,  as  they  marched 
afterwards  in  more  disorder,  they  charged  them  again  upon 
the  flanks  and  rear.  They  could,  however,  neither  break  them 
nor  put  them  to  flight.  Those  brave  Thebans  made  their  re- 
treat continually  fighting,  and  gained  Helicon,  elated  with  the 
success  of  the  battle,  wherein  on  their  side  they  had  always 
remained  invincible. 

Agesilaus,  though  very  much  weakened  by  the  great  number 
of  his  wounds,  and  the  quantity  of  blood  he  had  lost,  would 
not  retire  to  his  tent  till  he  had  been  carried  to  the  place 
where  his  phalanx  was  drawn  up,  and  had  seen  all  the  dead 
bodies  removed  even  upon  their  own  arms.  He  was  informed 
there,  that  many  of  the  enemy  had  taken  refuge  in  the  temple 
of  the  Itonian  Minerva,  which  was  not  very  distant  from  the 
field  of  battle,  and  asked  what  he  would  have  done  with  them. 
As  he  was  full  of  veneration  for  the  gods,  he  gave  orders  to  let 
them  go,  and  even  sent  them  a guard  to  escort  them  in  safety 
wherever  they  thought  fit. 

The  next  morning,  Agesilaus,  to  try  whether  the  Thebans 
would  have  the  courage  to  renew  the  battle,  commanded  his 
troops  to  crown  themselves  with  flowers,  and  the  music  of  the 
army  to  play,  whilst  a trophy  was  erected  and  adorned  in 
honour  of  his  victory.  At  the  same  instant  the  enemy  sent 
heralds  to  demand  his  permission  to  bury  their  dead  ; which 
he  granted,  with  a truce ; and  having  confirmed  his  victory  by 
that  act  of  a conqueror,  he  caused  himself  to  be  carried  to 
Delphi,  where  the  Pythian  games  were  then  celebrated.  He 
made  there  a solemn  procession,  which  was  followed  by  a sa- 
crifice, and  consecrated  to  the  god  the  tenth  part  of  the  booty 
taken  in  Asia,  which  amounted  to  a hundred  talentsJ  These 
great  men,  no  less  religious  than  brave,  never  failed  to  express 
by  presents  their  gratitude  to  the  gods  for  their  successes  in 
arms ; declaring,  by  that  public  homage,  that  they  believed 
themselves  indebted  to  their  protection  for  their  victories. 

SECT.  V. 

Agesilaus  returns  victorious  to  Sparta.  He  always  retains  his  simplicity  and 
ancient  maners.  Conon  rebuilds  the  walls  of  Athens.  A peace,  disgraceful 
to  the  Greeks,  concluded  by  Antalcidas  the  Lacedjemonian. 

After  the  festival,2  Agesilaus  returned  to  Sparta.  His  ci- 
tizens received  him  with  all  the  marks  of  the  most  real  joy,  and 
beheld  him  with  admiration,  when  they  observed  the  simplicity 
of  his  manners,  and  the  constant  frugality  and  temperance  of 
his  life.  At  his  return  from  foreign  countries,  where  pomp, 
luxury,  sloth,  and  the  love  of  pleasures  prevailed,  he  was  not 

y One  hundred  thousand  crowns,  or  about  22,500/.  sterling. 
z Plut.  in  Agesil.  p.  606. 


186 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


infected  with  the  manners  of  the  barbarians,  as  most  of  the 
other  generals  had  been  : he  made  no  alteration  in  his  diet, 
baths,  equipage  of  his  wife,  ornaments  of  his  arms,  or  furniture 
of  his  house.  In  the  midst  of  so  brilliant  a reputation,  and  the 
universal  applause,  always  the  same,  or  rather  more  modest 
than  before,  he  distinguished  himself  from  the  rest  of  the  ci- 
tizens, only  by  a greater  submission  to  the  laws,  and  a more 
inviolable  attachment  to  the  customs  of  his  country ; con- 
vinced that  he  was  king,  only  to  be  the  brighter  example  of 
those  virtues  to  others. 

He  made  greatness  consist  in  virtue  only.a  Hearing  the 
Great  King  (so  the  kings  of  Persia  used  to  call  themselves) 
spoken  of  in  magnificent  terms,  and  his  power  extremely  ex- 
tolled : 1 cannot  conceive , said  he,  wherein  he  is  greater  than 
I , unless  he  he  more  virtuous .b 

There  were  at  Sparta  some  citizens,  who,  vitiated  by  the 
prevailing  taste  of  Greece,  made  their  merit  and  glory  consist 
in  keeping  a great  number  of  horses  for  the  race.  He  per- 
suaded his  sister  Synisca  to  dispute  the  prize  in  the  Olympic 
games,  in  order  to  show  the  Greeks  that  those  victories,  on 
which  they  set  so  high  a value,  were  not  the  effects  of  valour 
and  bravery,  but  of  riches  and  expense.  She  was  the  first  of 
her  sex  who  shared  in  this  honour.  He  had  not  the  same  opinion 
of  the  exercises  which  contribute  to  render  the  body  more 
robust,  and  inure  it  to  labour  and  fatigue ; and,  to  place  them 
in  greater  estimation,  would  often  honour  them  with  his  pre- 
sence. 

Some  time  after  Lysander’s  death,  he  discovered  the  con- 
spiracy formed  by  that  captain  against  the  two  kings,  which 
till  then  had  not  been  heard  of,  and  came  to  light  by  a kind  of 
accident,  in  the  following  manner:  Upon  some  affairs0 
which  related  to  the  government,  it  was  necessary  to  consult 
Lysander’s  papers,  and  A.gesilaus  went  to  his  house  for  that 
purpose.  In  running  them  over,  he  fell  upon  the  sheets  which 
contained  at  large  the  harangue  of  Cleon,  which  had  been  pre- 
pared to  recommend  the  new  method  of  proceeding  in  the  election 
of  the  kings.  Surprised  at  perusing  it,  he  gave  over  his  search, 
and  went  away  abruptly  to  communicate  that  oration  to  the 
citizens,  and  to  let  them  see  what  manner  of  man  Lysander 
was,  and  how  much  they  had  been  deceived  in  regard  to  him. 
But  Lacratidas,  a wise  and  prudent  person,  who  was  president 
of  the  Ephori,  interposed  by  telling  him,  that  it  was  highly 
improper  to  raise  Lysander  from  the  dead : on  the  contrary, 
that  it  was  necessary  to  bury  his  harangue  in  the  same  grave 

a Plut.  de  sui  laud.  p.  555. 
b Tt  S'  kfiov  kictlvog , si  /i>)  ica'i  SiKcuortpog. 

c Plut.  in  Agesil.  p.  G06. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


187 


with  him,  as  a production  of  dangerous  tendency,  from  the 
great  art  with  which  it  was  composed,  and  the  force  of  persua- 
sion that  universally  prevailed  in  it,  which  it  might  prove  no 
easy  matter  to  resist.  Agesilaus  was  of  the  same  opinion  ; and 
the  piece  was  consigned  to  silence  and  oblivion,  as  the  best  use 
that  could  be  made  of  it. 

As  his  credit  was  very  high  in  the  city,d  he  caused  Teleutias, 
his  brother  by  the  mother’s  side,  to  be  declared  admiral  of  the 
fleet.  It  were  to  be  wished  that  history,  to  justify  this  choice, 
had  mentioned  some  other  qualities  in  that  commander  than  his 
nearness  of  blood  to  the  king.  Agesilaus  soon  after  set  out 
with  his  land  army  to  besiege  Corinth,  and  took  the  long  walls, 
as  they  were  called,  whilst  his  brother  Teleutias  attacked  it  by 
sea.  He  did  several  other  exploits  against  the  people  of 
Greece  at  war  with  Sparta,  which  always  indeed  evince  the 
valour  and  experience  of  the  general,  but  are  neither  very  im- 
portant nor  decisive,  and  which  he  thought,  for  that  reason, 
might  be  omitted. 

At  the  same  lime,e  Pharnabazus  and  Conon, 
Ant^J  ^393  havin&  made  themselves  masters  at  sea,  ravaged 
the  whole  coast  of  Laconia.  That  satrap,  re- 
turning to  his  government  of  Phrygia,  left  Conon  the  command 
of  the  naval  army,  with  very  considerable  sums  for  the  re- 
establishment of  Athens.  Conon,  victorious  and  crowned  with 
glory,  repaired  thither,  where  he  was  received  with  universal 
applause.  The  sad  prospect  of  a city,  formerly  so  flourishing, 
and  at  that  time  reduced  to  so  melancholy  a condition,  gave 
him  more  grief  than  he  felt  joy  in  seeing  his  beloved  country 
again,  after  so  many  years’  absence.  He  lost  no  time,  but  fell 
immediately  to  work,  employing,  besides  masons  and  the  usual 
artizans,  the  soldiers,  mariners,  citizens,  allies,  in  a word,  all 
that  were  well  inclined  to  Athens ; Providence  decreeing,  that 
this  city,  formerly  destroyed  by  the  Persians,  should  be  rebuilt 
by  their  own  hands ; and  that  having  been  dismantled  and 
demolished  by  the  Lacedaemonians,  it  should  be  reinstated  at 
their  own  cost,  and  by  the  spoils  taken  from  them.  What  a 
vicissitude  and  alteration  was  this ! Athens  at  this  time  had 
those  for  its  allies,  who  had  formerly  been  its  most  violent 
enemies ; and  for  enemies,  those  with  whom  it  had  contracted 
the  most  strict  and  closest  union.  Conon,  seconded  by  the 
zeal  of  the  Thebans,  soon  rebuilt  the  walls  of  Athens,  restored 
the  city  to  its  ancient  splendour,  and  rendered  it  more  formi- 
dable than  ever  to  its  enemies.  After  having  offered  to  the 
gods  a whole  hecatomb/  that  is  to  say,  a sacrifice  of  a hundred 

d Plut.  in  Agesil.  p.  607- 

e Xenoph.  Hist.  Grsec.  1.  iv.  p.  534 — 537.  Diod.  1.  xiv.  p.  303.  Justin.  1. 
vi.  c.  5.  f Athen.  1.  i.  p.  3. 


188 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


oxen,  as  a thanksgiving  for  the  happy  re-establishment  of  Athens, 
he  made  a feast,  to  which  all  the  citizens,  without  exception, 
were  invited. 

Sparta  could  not  see  without  extreme  affliction  so  glorious  a 
revolution.^  It  looked  upon  the  grandeur  and  power  of  a city, 
its  ancient  rival  and  almost  continual  enemy,  as  its  own  ruin. 
This  made  the  Lacedaemonians  take  the  mean  resolution  of 
avenging  themselves  at  once  upon  Athens,  and  Conon  its  re- 
storer, by  making  peace  with  the  king  of  Persia.  With  this 
view  they  despatched  Antalcidas  to  Tiribazus.  His  commis- 
sion consisted  of  two  principal  articles.  The  first  was,  to  ac- 
cuse Conon  to  that  satrap  of  having  defrauded  the  king  of  the 
money  which  he  had  employed  in  the  re-establishment  of 
Athens  ; and  of  having  formed  the  design  of  depriving  the 
Persians  of  JEo\ia  and  Ionia,  in  order  to  subject  them  anew  to 
the  republic  of  Athens,  upon  which  they  had  formerly  depend- 
ed. By  the  second,  he  had  orders  to  make  the  most  advanta- 
geous proposals  to  Tiribazus  that  his  master  could  desire. 
Without  giving  himself  any  manner  of  trouble  in  regard  to 
Asia,  he  stipulated  only,  that  all  the  islands,  and  other  cities, 
should  enjoy  their  law,  and  liberty.  The  Lacedaemonians  thus 
gave  up  to  the  king,  with  the  greatest  injustice  and  the  utmost 
baseness,  all  the  Greeks  settled  in  Asia,  for  whose  liberty  Agesi- 
laus  had  so  long  fought.  It  is  true,  he  had  no  share  in  this  most 
infamous  negociation  ; the  whole  reproach  of  which  ought  to 
fall  on  Antalcidas,  who,  being  the  sworn  enemy  of  the  king  of 
Sparta,  hastened  the  peace  by  all  manner  of  means,  because 
the  war  augmented  the  authority,  glory,  and  reputation,  of 
Agesilaus. 

The  most  considerable  cities  of  Greece  had  sent  deputies  at 
the  same  time  to  Tiribazus,  and  Conon  was  at  the  head  of  those 
from  Athens.  All  of  them  were  unanimous  in  rejecting  such 
proposals.  Without  speaking  of  the  interest  of  the  Greeks  of 
Asia,  with  which  they  were  extremely  affected,  they  saw  them- 
selves exposed  by  this  treaty  ; the  Athenians,  to  the  loss  of  the 
isles  of  Lamnos,  Imbros,  and  Scyros  ; the  Thebans,  to  aban- 
don the  cities  of  Boeotia,  of  which  they  were  in  possession,  and 
which  would  thereby  regain  their  independence  ; and  the  Ar- 
gives,  to  renounce  Corinth,  with  the  loss  of  which  that  of  Ar- 
gos itself  would  soon,  in  all  probability,  be  attended.  The  de- 
puties therefore  withdrew  without  concluding  any  thing. 

Tiribazus  seized  Conon,  and  put  him  in  prison.  Not  dar- 
ing to  declare  openly  to  the  Lacedaemonians  without  an  ex- 
press order  to  that  purpose,  he  contented  himself  with  supplying 
them  underhand  with  considerable  sums  of  money  for  fitting 
out  a fleet,  in  order  that  the  other  cities  of  Greece  might  not 
s Xenoph.  Hist.  Gnec.  1.  iv.  p.  537, 538.  Plut.  in  Agesil.  p.  608. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


189 


be  in  a condition  to  oppose  them.  After  having  taken  these  pre- 
cautions, he  set  out  directly  for  the  court,  to  give  the  king  an 
account  of  the  negociation.  That  prince  was  well  satisfied  with 
it,  and  directed  him  in  the  strongest  terms  to  put  the  last  hand 
to  it.  Tiribazus  also  laid  before  him  the  Lacedaemonians’  ac- 
cusation of  Conon.  Some  authors,  according  to  Cornelius  Ne- 
pos,  have  affirmed  that  he  was  carried  to  Susa,  and  there  exe- 
cuted by  the  king’s  order.  The  silence  of  Xenophon,  who  was 
his  contemporary,  in  regard  to  his  death,  makes  it  doubtful 
whether  he  escaped  from  prison,  or  suffered  as  has  been  said. 

Whilst  this  treaty  was  negociating,  several  actions  of  little 
consequence  passed  between  the  Athenians  and  Lacedaemo- 
nians. It  was  also  at  the  same  time  that  Evagoras  extended 
his  conquests  in  the  island  of  Cyprus,  of  which  we  shall  soon 
treat. 

Tiribazus  at  length,11  upon  his  return,  summon- 
Ant  J1  C 6387  ec*  ^ie  deputies  °f  the  Grecian  cities  to  be  pre- 
sent at  the  reading  of  the  treaty.  It  imported, 
that  all  the  Grecian  cities  of  Asia  should  remain  dependant  on 
the  king,  and  that  the  rest,  as  well  small  as  great,  should  have 
full  possession  of  their  liberty.  The  king  farther  reserved  to 
himself  the  isles  of  Cyprus  and  Clazomense,  and  left  those  of 
Scyros,  Lemnos,  and  lmbros,  to  the  Athenians,  to  whom  they 
had  long  appertained.  By  the  same  treaty  he  engaged  to  join 
with  such  states  as  acceded  to  it,  in  order  to  make  war  by  sea 
and  land  against  all  that  should  refuse  to  agree  to  it.  We  have  al- 
ready said  it  was  Sparta  itself  who  had  proposed  these  conditions. 

All  the  other  cities  of  Greece,  or  at  least  the  greatest  part  of 
them,  rejected  so  infamous  a treaty  with  horror.  However,  as 
they  were  weakened  and  exhausted  by  domestic  divisions,  and 
not  in  a condition  to  support  a war  against  so  powerful  a prince, 
who  threatened  to  fall  with  all  his  forces  upon  those  who  should 
refuse  to  accede  to  this  agreement,  they  were  obliged  against 
their  will  to  comply  with  it ; except  the  Thebans,  who  had  the 
courage  to  oppose  it  openly  at  first,  but  were  at  length  reduced 
to  accept  it  with  the  others,  by  whom  they  found  themselves 
universally  abandoned. 

Such  was  the  fruit  of  the  jealousy  and  divisions  which  armed 
the  Grecian  cities  against  each  other,  and  which  was  the  end 
proposed  by  the  policy  of  Artaxerxes,  in  distributing  consider- 
able sums  of  money  amongst  the  several  states  ; invincible  by 
arms  and  by  the  sword,  but  not  by  the  gold  and  presents  of  the 
Persians  ; so  remote  were  they  in  this  respect  from  the  charac- 
ter of  the  ancient  Greeks  their  forefathers. 

To  comprehend  aright  how  much  Sparta  and  Athens  differed 
now  from  what  they  had  been  in  former  times,  we  have  only  to 
h Xenoph.  1.  v.  p.  548 — 551. 


190 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


compare  the  two  treaties  concluded  between  the  Greeks  and 
Persians  ; the  former  by  Cimon  the  Athenian,  under  Artax- 
erxes  Longimanus  above  sixty  years  before,  and  the  latter  by 
Antalcidas  thQ  Lacedaemonian,  under  Artaxerxes  Mnemon. 
In  the  first,1  Greece,  victorious  and  triumphant,  assures  the 
liberty  of  the  Asiatic  Greeks,  gives  the  law  to  the  Persians, 
imposes  what  conditions  she  pleases,  and  prescribes  to  them  their 
bounds  and  limits,  by  prohibiting  them  to  approach  nearer  to 
the  sea  with  their  troops  than  the  distance  of  three  days’  march, 
or  to  appear  with  ships  of  war  in  any  of  the  seas  between  the 
Cyanaean  and  Chelidonian  islands  ; that  is  to  say,  from  the 
Euxine  to  the  coasts  of  Pamphylia.  In  the  second,  on  the 
contrary,  Persia,  grown  haughty  and  imperious,  takes  pleasure 
in  humbling  its  conquerors,  in  depriving  them,  with  the  single 
stroke  of  a pen,  of  their  empire  in  Asia  Minor,  in  compelling 
them  to  abandon  basely  all  the  Greeks  established  in  those  rich 
provinces,  to  subscribe  to  their  own  subjection,  and  to  confine 
themselves  in  their  turn  within  the  narrow  bounds  of  Greece. 

From  whence  can  so  strange  an  alteration  arise  ? Are  there 
not  on  both  sides  the  same  cities,  the  same  people,  the  same 
forces,  and  the  same  interests  ? No  doubt  there  are  : but  they 
are  not  the  same  men  ; or  rather,  they  have  no  longer  the  same 
principles  of  policy.  Let  us  recall  to  mind  those  happy 
times  of  Greece,  so  glorious  for  Athens  and  Sparta,  when  Per- 
sia came  pouring  like  a deluge  upon  this  little  country  with  all 
the  forces  of  the  east.  What  was  it  that  rendered  these  two 
cities  invincible,  and  superior  to  such  numerous  and  formida- 
ble armies  ? Their  union  and  good  understanding.  No  dissen- 
sion between  the  two  states,  no  jealousy  of  command,  no  private 
view  of  interest ; in  fine,  no  other  contest  between  them,  but 
that  of  honour,  glory,  and  the  love  of  their  country. 

To  so  laudable  a union  may  be  added  an  irreconcileable  ha- 
tred for  the  Persians,  which  became,  if  I may  so  say,  natural 
to  the  Greeks,  and  was  the  most  distinguishing  character  of 
that  nation.  It  was  a capital  crime, k and  punished  with  death, 
only  to  mention  peace,  or  propose  any  accommodation  with 
them  : and  an  Athenian  mother  was  seen  to  throw  the  first 
stone  at  her  son,  who  had  dared  to  make  such  a motion,  and 
to  set  others  the  example  of  stoning  him. 

This  strict  union  of  the  two  states,  and  this  declared  abhor- 
rence of  the  common  enemy,  were  for  a long  time  the  potent  bar- 
riers of  their  security,  rendered  them  invincible,  and  may  be  said 
to  have  been  the  source  and  principle  of  the  glorious  successes 
that  raised  the  reputation  of  Greece  to  so  high  a pitch.  But 
by  a misfortune  common  to  the  most  flourishing  states,  those 


* Died.  1.  xii.  p.  74.  75. 


k Isoc.  in  Panegyr.  p.  143. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


191 


very  successes  became  the  cause  of  its  ruin,  and  prepared  the 
way  for  the  disgraces  which  it  experienced  in  the  sequel. 

These  two  states,1  which  might  have  carried  their  victorious 
arms  into  the  heart  of  Persia,  and  have  attacked  in  their  turn 
the  great  king  upon  his  throne  itself ; instead  of  forming  in 
concert  such  an  enterprise,  which  would  at  once  have  crowned 
them  with  glory  and  laden  them  with  riches,  have  the  folly  to 
leave  their  common  enemy  in  repose,  to  embroil  themselves 
with  each  other  upon  trivial  points  of  honour,  and  interests  of 
little  importance,  and  to  exhaust  those  forces  to  no  purpose 
against  themselves,  which  ought  to  have  been  employed  solely 
against  the  barbarians,  that  could  not  have  resisted  them.  For 
it  is  worthy  of  remark,  that  the  Persians  never  gained  any  ad- 
vantage over  the  Athenians  or  Lacedaemonians  whilst  they  were 
united  with  each  other,  and  that  it  was  their  own  divisions  alone 
which  supplied  them  with  the  means  to  conquer  both  alternately, 
and  always  the  one  by  the  other. 

These  divisions  induced  them  to  take  such  measures  as  nei- 
ther Sparta  nor  Athens  would  ever  otherwise  have  been  capable 
of.  We  see  both  the  one  and  the  other  dishonour  themselves 
by  their  mean  and  abject  flatteries,  not  only  of  the  king  of  Per- 
sia, but  even  of  his  satraps  ; pay  their  court  to  them,  earnestly 
solicit  their  favour,  cringe  to  them,  and  even  suffer  their  ill- 
humour  ; and  all  this  to  obtain  some  aid  of  troops  or  money  : 
forgetting  that  the  Persians,  haughty  and  insolent  to  such  as 
seemed  afraid  of  them,  became  timorous  and  little  to  those  who 
had  the  courage  to  despise  them.  But,  in  fine,  what  did  they 
gain  by  all  these  mean  condescensions  ? The  treaty,  which  gave 
occasion  for  these  reflections,  and  will  for  ever  be  the  reproach 
of  Sparta  and  Athens. 

SECT.  VI. 

War  of  Artaxerxes  against  Evagoras,  king  of  Salamis.  Eulogy  and  character 

of  that  prince.  Tiribasus  falsely  accused.  His  accuser  punished. 

What  I have  just  said  upon  the  facility  with  which  the  Greeks 
might  have  rendered  themselves  formidable  to  their  enemies  will 
be  more  evident  if  we  consider  on  one  side,  the  diversity  of  the 
nations,  and  the  extent  of  country,  which  composed  the  vast 
empire  of  the  Persians  ; and  on  the  other,  the  weakness  of  the 
government,  incapable  of  animating  so  great  a mass,  and  of 
supporting  the  weight  of  so  much  business  and  application.  At 
the  court  every  thing  was  determined  by  the  intrigues  of  women 
and  the  cabals  of  favourites,  whose  whole  merit  often  consisted 
in  flattering  their  prince,  and  soothing  his  passions.  It  was 
through  their  influence  that  officers  were  chosen,  and  the  first 
1 Isoc.  in  Panegyr.  p 132 — 137-  In  Panath.  p.  524,525. 


192 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


dignities  disposed  of ; by  their  opinion  the  services  of  the  gene- 
rals of  armies  were  judged,  and  their  rewards  decided.  The 
sequel  will  show,  that  from  the  same  source  arose  the  insurrec- 
tion of  provinces,  the  distrust  of  the  greatest  part  of  the  go- 
vernors, the  discontent  and  consequent  revolt  of  the  best  officers, 
and  the  ill  success  of  almost  all  the  enterprises  that  were  formed. 

Artaxerxes,  freed  from  the  care  and  perplexity  which  the 
war  with  the  Greeks  had  occasioned,  applied  himself  to  the 
terminating  that  of  Cyprus,  which  had  lasted  several  years,  but 
had  been  carried  on  with  little  vigour,  and  turned  the  greatest 
part  of  his  forces  that  way. 

Evagoras  reigned  at  that  time  in  Salamis,1"  the  capital  city 
of  the  Isle  of  Cyprus.  He  was  descended  from  Teucer  of  Sa- 
lamis,n  who  at  his  return  from  Troy  built  this  city,  and  gave  it 
the  name  of  his  country.  His  descendants  had  reigned  there 
from  that  time  ; but  a stranger  from  Phoenicia,  having  dispos- 
sessed the  lawful  king,  had  taken  his  place,  and  to  maintain 
himself  in  the  usurpation,  had  filled  the  city  with  barbarians, 
and  subjected  the  whole  island  to  the  king  of  Persia. 

Under  this  tyrant  Evagoras  was  born,  and  great  care  was 
taken  of  his  education.  He  was  distinguished  amongst  the 
youth  by  the  beauty  of  his  aspect,  the  vigour  of  his  body,  and 
still  more  by  the  modesty  and  innocence  of  his  manners,0  which 
are  the  greatest  ornaments  of  that  age.  As  he  advanced  in 
years,  the  greatest  virtues,  valour,  wisdom,  and  justice,  were 
observed  to  shine  forth  in  him.  He  afterwards  carried  these 
virtues  to  so  conspicuous  a height,  as  to  give  jealousy  to  those 
that  were  at  the  head  of  the  government;  who  conceived  justly 
that  so  brilliant  a merit  could  not  continue  in  the  obscurity  of 
a private  condition : but  his  modesty,  probity,  and  integrity, 
re-assured  them ; and  they  reposed  an  entire  confidence  in  him, 
which  he  always  repaid  by  an  inviolable  fidelity,  without  ever 
meditating  their  expulsion  from  the  throne  by  violence  or 
treachery. 

A more  justifiable  means  conducted  him  to  it.  Divine  Pro- 
vidence, as  Isocrates  says,  preparing  the  way  for  him.  One  of 
the  principal  citizens  murdered  the  person  upon  the  throne,  and 
intended  to  seize  Evagoras,  and  to  rid  himself  of  him,  in  order 
to  secure  the  crown  to  himself ; but  that  prince,  escaping  his 
pursuit,  retired  to  Soli,  a city  of  Cilicia.  His  banishment  was 
so  far  from  abating  his  courage,  that  it  gave  him  new  vigour. 
Attended  only  with  fifty  followers,  determined  like  himself  to 
conquer  or  die,  he  returned  to  Salamis,  and  expelled  the 
usurper,  though  supported  by  the  credit  and  protection  of  the 

m Isocrat.  in  Evag.  p.  380. 

n This  Teucer  was  of  Salamis,  a little  island  near  Athens,  celebrated  for  the 
famous  sea-fight  under  Xerxes.  0 Et,  qui  ornat  setatem,  pudor.  Cic. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


193 


king  of  Persia.  Having  re-established  himself  in  Salamis, 
he  soon  rendered  his  little  kingdom  very  flourishing,  by  his 
great  care  in  relieving  his  subjects,  and  by  protecting  them  in 
every  respect;  by  governing  them  with  justice  and  benevo- 
lence ; by  making  them  active  and  laborious  ; by  inspiring  them 
with  a taste  for  the  cultivation  of  their  lands,  the  breeding  of 
cattle,  commerce,  and  navigation.  He  trained  them  also  for 
war,  and  made  them  excellent  soldiers. 

He  was  already  very  powerful,  and  had  ac- 
Ant  C^405  quired  great  reputation,  when  Conon  the  Athe- 
nian general,  after  his  defeat  at  /Egospotamos, 
took  refuge  with  him ; not  thinking  it  possible  to  find  a safer 
asylum  for  himself, p nor  a more  powerful  support  of  his  country. 
The  resemblance  of  their  manners  and  sentiments  soon  made 
them  contract  a strict  amity  with  each  other,  which  continued 
ever  after,  and  proved  equally  advantageous  to  both.  Conon 
possessed  great  influence  at  the  king  of  Persia’s 

A VT  QPKf'  l o o 

Ant  j c 399  court>  which  he  employed  with  that  prince,  by 
the  means  of  Ctesias  his  physician,  to  accom- 
modate his  differences  with  his  host  Evagoras,  and  happily 
effected  it. 

Evagoras  and  Conon,  engaged  in  the  great  design  of  sub- 
verting, or  at  least  of  reducing,  the  great  power  of  Sparta, 
which  had  rendered  itself  formidable  to  all  Greece,  concerted 
together  the  means  for  the  attainment  of  that  end.  They  were 
both  citizens  of  Athens ; the  latter  by  birth,  and  the  other  by 
right  of  adoption ; a privilege  which  great  services  and  zeal 
for  that  republic  had  merited.  The  satraps  of 
Ant.  J1  c6°398  Asia  saw  with  Pa^n  their  country  ravaged  by  the 
Lacedaemonians,  and  found  themselves  in  great 
difficulties  from  not  being  in  a condition  to  make  head  against 
them.  Evagoras  remonstrated  to  them,  that  it  was  necessary 
to  attack  the  enemy  as  well  by  sea  as  land  ; and  he  contributed 
not  a little,  through  the  influence  he  still  had  with  the  king  of 
Persia,  to  Conon’s  being  appointed  general  of  his  fleet.  The 
celebrated  victory  over  the  Lacedaemonians  at 
Anf  t r qqi  Cnidos  was  the  consequence,  and  gave  the 
mortal  wound  to  that  republic. 

The  Athenians, *1  in  acknowledgment  of  the  important  ser- 
vices which  Evagoras  and  Conon  had  rendered  them  with 
Artaxerxes,  erected  statues  in  honour  of  them. 

Evagoras/  on  his  side,  extending  his  conquests  from  city  to 
city,  endeavoured  to  make  himself  master  of  the  whole  island. 
The  Cypriots  had  recourse  to  the  king  of  Persia.  That  prince, 
alarmed  by  the  rapid  progress  of  Evagoras,  the  effects  of  which 

p Isocrat.  in  F.vag.  p.  393 — 395.  **  Pausan.  1.  i.  p.  5. 

r Diocl.  1.  xiv.  p.  311. 

O 


VOL.  III. 


194 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


he  apprehended,  and  conscious  of  what  importance  it  was  to 
him  to  prevent  an  island’s  falling'  into  the  hands  of  an  enemy, 
which  was  so  favourably  situated  for  holding  Asia  Minor  in 
awe,  promised  them  an  immediate  and  powerful  support,  with- 
out declaring  openly,  however,  against  Evagoras. 

Being  employed  elsewhere  by  more  important 
Am.  ^J.  *ie  cou^  not  keep  his  word  with  them 

so  soon  as  he  expected,  and  had  engaged.  That 
war  of  Cyprus  continued  six  years,  and  the  success  with  which 
Evagoras  supported  it  against  the  Great  King,  ought  to  have 
banished  from  the  minds  of  the  Greeks  all  terror  of  the  Per- 
sian name,  and  united  them  against  the  common  enemy.  It  is 
true,  the  succours  sent  by  Artaxerxes,  till  then,  were  inconsider- 
able, as  they  were  also  the  two  following  years.  During  all 
this  time  it  was  less  a real  war,  than  a prepara- 

A TVT  Qfn  q i i 

Ant  J C 386  tion  ^or  war  : when  he  had  disengaged  him- 

self from  the  Greeks/  he  applied  to  it  vigorously, 
and  attacked  Evagoras  with  all  his  forces. 

The  land-army,  commanded  by  Orontes  his  son-in-law,  con- 
sisted of  300,000  men,  and  the  fleet  of  300  galleys  ; of  which 
Tiribazus,  a Persian  of  the  highest  rank  and  greatest  reputa- 
tion, was  admiral.  Gaos,  his  son-in-law,  commanded  under 
him.  Evagoras,  on  his  side,  assembled  as  many  troops  and 
ships  as  he  could  ; but  they  were  a handful,  in  comparison 
with  the  formidable  preparations  of  the  Persians.  His  fleet 
was  composed  of  only  fourscore  and  ten  galleys,  and  his  army 
scarce  amounted  to  20,000  men.  As  he  had  abundance  of 
light  vessels,  he  laid  snares  for  those  that  carried  the  provi- 
sions of  the  enemy,  sunk  a great  number,  took  many,  and  pre- 
vented the  rest  from  arriving ; which  occasioned  a famine 
amongst  the  Persians,  and  gave  rise  to  violent  seditions, 
which  could  only  be  appeased  by  the  arrival  of  fresh  convoys 
from  Cilicia.  Evagoras  strengthened  his  fleet  with  sixty  galleys 
which  he  caused  to  be  built,  and  fifty  sent  him  by  Achoris 
king  of  Egypt,  with  all  the  money  and  corn  he  could  have 
occasion  for. 

'Evagoras,  with  his  land-forces,  attacked  immediately  a part 
of  the  enemy’s  army  which  was  separate  from  the  rest,  and  en- 
tirely routed  it.  This  first  action  was  soon  followed  by  an- 
other at  sea,  in  which  the  Persians  were  worsted  for  some  time, 
till  animated  by  the  warm  reproaches  and  remonstrances  of  their 
admiral,  they  resumed  courage,  and  obtained  a complete  vic- 
tory. Salamis  was  immediately  besieged  by  sea  and  land. 
Evagoras,  leaving  the  defence  of  the  city  to  his  son  Pytha- 
goras, quitted  it  in  the  night  with  ten  galleys,  and  sailed  for 


8 Isocrat.  in  Paneg.  p.  135,  13G. 


t Diod.  1.  xv.  p.  32a— 333. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


195 


Egypt,  to  engage  the  king  to  support  him  vigorously  against 
the  common  enemy.  He  did  not  obtain  from  him  all  the  aid 
he  expected.  At  his  return  he  found  the  city  in  exceeding 
distress ; and  finding  himself  without  resource  or  hope,  he 
was  obliged  to  capitulate.  The  proposals  made  to  him  were, 
that  he  should  abandon  all  the  cities  of  Cyprus  except  Salamis, 
where  he  should  content  himself  to  reign  ; that  he  should  pay 
an  annual  tribute  to  the  king,  and  remain  in  obedience  to  him 
as  a servant  to  a master.  The  extremity  to  which  he  was  re- 
duced obliged  him  to  accept  the  other  conditions,  hard  as  they 
were  ; but  he  could  nev$r  resolve  to  comply  with  the  last,  and 
persisted  always  in  declaring,  that  he  could  only  treat  as  a king 
with  a king.  Tiribazus,  who  commanded  the  siege,  would  abate 
nothing  of  his  pretensions. 

Orontes,  the  other  general,  jealous  of  his  colleague’s  glory, 
had  written  secretly  to  court  against  him,  accusing  him,  amongst 
other  things,  of  forming  designs  against  the  king,  and  assigned 
in  support  of  his  accusation  his  continuing  to  hold  a secret  in- 
telligence with  the  Lacedaemonians,  and  his  manifest  endeavours 
to  attach  to  himself  the  chiefs  of  the  army,  by  force  of  presents, 
promises,  and  an  obliging  demeanour  not  natural  to  him.  Ar- 
taxerxes.,  upon  these  letters,  believed  he  had  no  time  to  lose  in 
stifling  a conspiracy  which  he  considered  as  ready  to  break  out. 
He  despatched  orders  immediately  to  Orontes,  to  seize  Tiriba- 
zus, and  send  him  to  court  in  chains,  which  was  immediately 
put  in  execution.  Tiribazus,  upon  his  arrival,  demanded  to  be 
brought  to  trial  in  form  ; that  the  heads  of  the  accusation  should 
be  communicated  to  him,  and  the  proofs  and  witnesses  produced. 
The  king,  employed  in  other  cares,  had  no  leisure  at  that  time 
to  take  cognizance  of  the  affair. 

Orontes,  in  the  mean  time,  seeing  that  the  besieged  made  a 
vigorous  defence,  and  that  the  soldiers  of  the  army,  discontent- 
ed with  the  removal  of  Tiribazus,  quitted  the  service,  and  refus- 
ed to  obey  him,  was  afraid  affairs  would  take  a bad  turn  with 
regard  to  himself.  He  therefore  caused  Evagoras  to  be  spoken 
to  underhand  ; the  negociation  was  resumed,  the  offers  made 
at  first  by  the  latter  were  accepted,  and  the  mortifying  article, 
which  had  prevented  the  conclusion  of  the  treaty,  retrenched. 

A M 3619  s*e?e  was  ra^se^  consequence.  Evago- 

Ant.  j.  c.  385.  ras  continued  king  of  Salamis  only,  and  engaged 
to  pay  an  annual  tribute. 

It  appears  that  this  prince  lived  twelve  or  thirteen  years  af- 
ter the  conclusion  of  the  treaty,  for  his  death  is  dated  in  the 
year  of  the  world  3632.  His  old  age  was  attended  with  a hap- 
piness and  tranquillity  never  interrupted  with  sickness  or  disease, 
the  usual  effect  of  a sober  and  temperate  life.  Nicocles, 
his  eldest  son,  succeeded  him,  and  inherited  his  virtues  as  well 


196 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


as  throne.  He  celebrated  his  funeral  with  the  utmost  magni- 
ficence. The  discourse,  entitled  Evagoras,  composed  by  Iso- 
crates to  inspire  the  young  king  with  the  desire  of  treading  in 
the  steps  of  his  father,  and  from  which  I hare  extracted  the 
subsequent  eulogium,  served  for  his  funeral  oration.  He  also 
addressed  another  tract  to  Nicocles,  which  bears  his  name, 
wherein  he  gives  him  admirable  precepts  for  governing  well. 
I shall  perhaps  have  occasion  to  speak  farther  of  them  in  the 
ensuing  volume. 

Eulogy  and  character  of  Evagoras. 

Though  Evagoras  was  only  king  of  a little  state,  u Isocrates, 
who  was  well  able  to  judge  of  virtue  and  merit,  compares  him 
with  the  most  powerful  monarchs,  and  poses  him  as  the  perfect 
model  of  a good  king,  convinced  that  it  is  not  the  extent  of 
territory,  but  extent  of  mind  and  greatness  of  soul,  that  con- 
stitute great  princes.  In  fact,  he  points  out  to  us  many  qua- 
lities truly  royal  in  him,  and  which  ought  to  give  us  a very  high 
idea  of  his  merit. 

Evagoras  was  not  of  the  number  of  those  princes  who  be- 
lieve, that  to  reign,  it  is  sufficient  to  be  of  the  blood-royal ; and 
that  the  birth  which  gives  a right  to  the  crown,  gives  also  the 
merit  and  qualities  necessary  for  wearing  it  with  honour.  He 
did  not  fancy  that  it  could  be  supposed,  since  every  other  con- 
dition and  station  of  life  made  a kind  of  apprenticeship  neces- 
sary to  succeed  therein,  that  the  art  of  reigning,  the  most  diffi- 
cult and  important  of  all,  should  require  no  pains  and  prepa- 
ration for  its  attainment.  He  came  into  the  world  with  the 
most  happy  dispositions  ; a great  fund  of  genius,  a ready  com- 
prehension, a lively  and  quick  penetration  which  nothing  es- 
caped, a solidity  of  judgment  that  immediately  perceived  what 
was  necessary  to  be  done  ; qualities  which  might  seem  to  dis- 
pense with  all  study  and  application  ; and  yet,  as  if  he  had 
been  born  without  talents,  and  found  himself  obliged  to  supply 
by  study  what  he  might  want  by  nature,  he  neglected  no  means 
for  the  embellishment  of  his  mind,  and  devoted  a considerable 
part  of  his  time  in  instructing  himself,  x in  reflecting,  meditat- 
ing, and  consulting  the  judgment  and  experience  of  others. 

When  he  ascended  the  throne,  his  greatest  care  and  applica- 
tion was  to  know  mankind,  in  which  the  ability  of  a prince,  and 
of  those  who  are  at  the  head  of  affairs,  principally  consists. 
He  had,  no  doubt,  prepared  himself  for  that  science  by  the 
study  of  history,  which  gives  prudence  by  anticipation,  sup- 
plies the  place  of  experience,  and  teaches  us  what  the  men 
are  with  whom  we  live,  by  what  they  have  been  in  other  ages. 

11  Isocrat.  in  Evag. 

* ’Ey  rqj  Z, r/TiiVt  <ai  <j)povTi%uv,  ical  (3ov\evso9ai,  top  irXelffrov  \povov  dtsrpififv. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


197 


But  we  study  men  quite  differently  in  themselves  ; by  their 
manners,  characters,  conduct,  and  actions.  The  love  of  the 
commonwealth  rendered  him  attentive  to  all  persons  who  were 
capable  of  serving  or  hurting  it.  He  applied  himself  to  the 
discovery  of  their  most  secret  inclinations  and  principles  of 
action,  and  to  the  knowledge  of  their  different  talents  and 
degrees  of  capacity,  in  order  to  assign  to  each  his  proper  post, 
to  bestow  authority  in  proportion  to  merit,  and  to  make  the 
private  and  public  good  promote  each  other.  He  neither  re- 
warded nor  punished  his  subjects,  says  Isocrates,  from  the  re- 
port of  others,  but  solely  upon  his  own  knowledge  and  ex- 
perience of  them  ; and  neither  the  virtues  of  the  good,  nor 
the  vices  of  the  bad,  escaped  his  inquiry  and  penetration. 

He  had  one  quality  very  seldom  found  in  those  who  possess 
the  first  rank,  especially  when  they  believe  themselves  capable 
of  governing  alone  ; I mean  a wonderful  docility  and  attention 
to  the  opinion  of  others,  which  arose  from  a diffidence  in  his  own 
abilities.  With  his  great  penetration,  it  did  not  seem  necessary 
for  him  to  have  recourse  to  the  counsel  of  others  ; yet  he  never- 
theless made  no  resolution,  and  formed  no  enterprise,  without 
having  first  consulted  the  wise  persons  he  had  placed  about  him 
in  his  court ; instead  of  which,  pride  and  presumption,  the  latent 
poison  of  sovereign  power,  incline  the  greatest  part  of  those  who 
arrive  at  thrones,  either  to  ask  no  counsel  at  all,  or  not  to  follow 
it  when  they  do. 

Intent  upon  discovering  what  was  excellent  in  every  form  of 
government  and  private  condition  of  life,  he  proposed  the  unit- 
ing of  all  their  best  qualities  and  advantages  in  himself ; af- 
fable and  popular  as  in  a republican  state  ; grave  and  serious 
as  in  the  council  of  the  elders  and  senators  ; steady  and  decisive, 
after  mature  deliberation,  as  in  a monarchy  ; a profound  politi- 
cian by  the  extent  and  rectitude  of  his  views  ; an  accomplished 
warrior,  from  intrepid  valour  in  battle,  directed  by  a wise  mode- 
ration ; a good  father,  a good  relation,  a good  friend,  and,  what 
crowns  his  eulogy,  in  every  circumstance  of  his  character,? 
always  great,  and  always  a king. 

He  supported  his  dignity  and  rank,  not  by  an  air  of  pride  and 
haughtiness,  but  by  a serenity  of  aspect,  and  a mild  and  easy 
majesty,  resulting  from  innate  virtue,  and  the  testimony  of  a 
good  conscience.  He  won  the  hearts  of  his  friends  by  his  libe- 
rality, and  conquered  others  by  a greatness  of  soul,  to  which  they 
could  not  refuse  their  esteem  and  admiration. 

But  what  was  most  royal  in  him,  and  attracted  the  entire  con- 
fidence of  his  subjects,  neighbours,  and  even  enemies,  was  his 
sincerity,  faith,  and  regard  to  all  his  engagements  ; and  his 
hatred,  or  rather  detestation,  for  all  disguise,  falsehood,  and 

y T vpavviKOg  Sk  ry  nacn  tovtoiq  dia<peptiv. 


198 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


fraud.  A single  word  from  him  had  as  much  regard  paid  to  it 
as  the  most  sacred  oath  ; and  it  was  universally  known,  that 
nothing  was  capable  of  inducing  him  to  Violate  it  in  the  least 
circumstance  whatever. 

It  was  by  all  these  excellent  qualities  that  he  effectually  re- 
formed the  city  of  Salamis,  and  entirely  changed  its  appearance 
in  a very  short  time.  He  found  it  gross,  savage,  and  barba- 
rous, without  any  taste  either  for  learning,  commerce,  or  arms. 
What  cannot  a prince  do  that  loves  his  people,  and  is  beloved 
by  them ; who  believes  himself  great  and  powerful  only  to  ren- 
der them  happy  ; and  knows  how  to  set  a just  value  upon,  and 
do  honour  to,  their  labours,  industry  and  merit  of  every  kind  ! 
He  had  not  been  many  years  upon  the  throne,  before  arts, 
sciences,  commerce,  navigation,  and  military  discipline,  were 
seen  to  flourish  at  Salamis  ; insomuch  that  that  city  did  not  give 
place  to  the  most  opulent  of  Greece. 

Isocrates  often  repeats,  that  in  the  praises  which  he  gives 
Evagoras,  of  which.  I have  only  extracted  a part,  far  from 
exaggerating  any  thing,  he  always  falls  short  of  truth.  To 
what  can  we  attribute  a reign  so  wise,  so  just,  so  moderate, 
so  constantly  employed  in  rendering  his  subjects  happy,  and  in 
promoting  the  public  good?  The  condition  of  Evagoras 
before  he  came  to  govern,  seems  to  me  to  have  contri- 
buted very  much  to  it.  The  being  born  a prince,  and  the 
never  having  experienced  any  other  condition  than  that  of 
master  and  sovereign,  are,  in  my  opinion,  great  obstacles  to  the 
knowledge  and  practice  of  the  duties  of  that  high  station. 
Evagoras,  who  came  into  the  wrorld  under  a tyrant,  had  long 
obeyed  before  he  commanded.  He  had  borne  in  a private  and 
dependant  life  the  yoke  of  an  absolute  and  despotic  power. 
He  had  seen  himself  exposed  to  envy  and  calumny,  and  had 
been  in  danger  on  account  of  his  merit  and  virtue.  Such  a 
prince  had  only  to  be  told,  upon  his  ascending  the  throne,  what 
was  said  to  a great  emperor  ;z  You  have  not  always  been  what 
you  now  are.  Adversity  has  prepared  you  to  make  a good  use 
of  power.  You  have  lived  long  amongst  us,  and  like  us,  you 
have  been  in  danger  under  bad  princes.  You  have  trembled 
for  yourself  “ and  known  by  experience  how  virtue  and  inno- 
cence have  been  treated .a  What  he  had  personally  suffered, 
what  he  had  feared  for  himself  or  others,  what  he  had  seen 
unjust  and  unreasonable  in  the  conduct  of  his  predecessors,  had 
opened  his  eyes,  and  taught  him  all  his  duty.  It  sufficed  to 
tell  him,  what  the  emperor  Galba  told  Piso,  when  he  adopted 

z Trajan. 

* Qu&m  utile  est  ad  usum  secundorum  per  adversa  venisse ! Vixisti  no- 
biscum, periclitatus  es,  timuisti.  Quae  tunc  erat  innocentium  vita  scis,  et 
expertus  es.  Plin.  et  Panegyr. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


199 


him  his  associate  in  the  empire  : Remember  what  you  condemned 
or  applauded  in  princes , when  you  were  a private  man.  You 
have  only  to  consult  the  judgment  you  then  passed  upon  them , 
and  to  act  conformably  to  it,  in  order  to  acquire  full  instruc- 
tion in  the  art  of  reigning  well .b 

Trial  of  Tiribazus . 

We  have  already  said,  that  Tiribazus,c  having  been  accused 
by  Orontes  of  forming  a conspiracy  against  the  king,  had  been 
sent  to  court  in  chains.  Gaos,  admiral  of  the  fleet,  who  had  mar- 
ried his  daughter,  apprehending  that  Artaxerxes  would  involve 
him  in  the  affair  with  his  father-in-law,  and  cause  him  to  be  put 
to  death  upon  mere  suspicion,  conceived  he  had  no  other  means 
for  his  security  than  open  revolt.  He  was  very  well  beloved  by  the 
soldiers,  and  all  the  officers  of  the  fleet  were  particularly  attached 
to  him.  Without  loss  of  time  he  sent  deputies  to  Achoris  king 
of  Egypt,  and  concluded  a league  with  him  against  the  king  of 
Persia.  On  the  other  side,  he  warmly  solicited  the  Lace- 
daemonians to  come  into  that  league,  with  assurances  of  making 
them  masters  of  all  Greece,  and  of  establishing  universally  their 
form  of  government,  at  which  they  had  long  seemed  to  aspire. 
They  hearkened  favourably  to  these  proposals,  and  embraced 
with  joy  this  occasion  of  taking  arms  against  Artaxerxes;  the 
rather,  because  the  peace  which  they  had  a short  time  before 
concluded  with  him,  by  which  they  had  given  up  the  Greeks  of 
Asia,  had  covered  them  with  shame. 

As  soon  as  Artaxerxes  had  put  an  end  to  the  war  of  Cyprus,4 
he  thought  of  concluding  also  the  affair  of  Tiribazus.  He  had 
the  justice  to  appoint  for  that  purpose,  as  commissioners,  three 
of  the  greatest  noblemen  of  Persia,  of  distinguished  probity, 
and  of  the  highest  reputation  in  his  court.  The  affair  came  to 
an  examination  and  a hearing  on  both  sides.  For  so  consider- 
able a crime  as  that  of  having  conspired  against  the  king’s  per- 
son, no  other  proofs  were  produced  than  the  letter  of  Orontes ; 
that  is  to  say,  of  a declared  enemy,  studious  to  supplant  his  rival. 
Orontes  was  in  hopes,  from  his  credit  at  court,  that  the  affair  would 
not  have  been  discussed  in  the  usual  forms,  and  that  upon  the 
memorial  sent  by  him,  the  accused  would  have  been  condemned 
without  farther  examination.  But  this  was  not  the  custom  with 
the  Persians.  By  an  anciently  established  regulation,  to  which, 
amongst  other  privileges,  they  had  a right  by  birth,  no  person 
was  ever  to  be  condemned,  without  being  first  heard  and  confront- 

b Utilissimus  quidem  ac  brevissimus  bonarum  malarumque  rerum  delectus, 
eogitare  quid  aut  nolueris  sub  alio  principe,  aut  volueris.  Tacit.  Hist.  1.  i.  c.  1C. 

c Diod.  L xv.  p.  334,  335. 

d Diodorus  postpones  the  decision  of  this  affair  till  after  the  war  with  the 
Cadusians,  of  which  we  shall  soon  speak.  This  seems  very  improbable. 


200 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


ed  with  his  accusers.  This  was  granted  to  Tiribazus,  who  answer- 
ed to  all  the  articles  of  the  letter.  As  to  his  connivance  with 
Evagoras,  the  very  treaty  concluded  by  Orontes  was  his  apology  ; 
as  it  was  absolutely  the  same  as  that  prince  had  proposed  to  him, 
except  one  condition,  which  would  have  done  honour  to  his 
master.  As  to  his  intelligence  with  the  Lacedaemonians,  the 
glorious  treaty  he  had  made  them  sign  sufficiently  explained, 
whether  his  own  or  the  king’s  interests  were  his  motives  for  it. 
He  did  not  deny  his  credit  in  the  army  ; but  how  long,  he  in- 
quired, had  it  been  a crime  to  be  beloved  by  the  officers  and  sol- 
diers ? and  he  concluded  his  defence,  by  representing  the  long- 
services  he  had  rendered  the  king  with  inviolable  fidelity  ; and 
especially  his  good  fortune  in  having  formerly  saved  his  life, 
when  he  was  hunting,  and  in  great  danger  of  being  devoured  by 
two  lions.  The  three  commissioners  were  unanimous  in  declar- 
ing Tiribazus  innocent.  The  king  restored  him  to  his  former 
favour,  and,  justly  enraged  at  the  black  design  of  Orontes,  let 
the  whole  weight  of  his  indignation  fall  upon  him.  A single 
example  of  this  kind  against  informers  convicted  of  falsehood, 
would  for  ever  shut  the  door  against  calumny.  How  many  in- 
nocents have  been  destroyed  for  want  of  observing  this  rule, 
which  even  the  Pagans  considered  as  the  basis  of  all  justice, 
and  the  guardian  of  the  public  tranquillity. 

SECT.  VII. 

The  expedition  of  Artaxerxes  against  the  Oadusians.  History  of 
Datames  the  Carian. 

When  Artaxerxes  had  terminated  the  Cyprian  war,e  he  enter- 
ed upon  another  against  the  Cadusians,  who  it  is  probable  had 
revolted,  and  refused  to  pay  the  customary  tribute  ; for  authors 
say  nothing  as  to  the  occasion  of  this  war.  Those  people  in- 
habited part  of  the  mountains  situate  between  the  Euxine  and 
Caspian  seas,  in  the  north  of  Media.  The  soil  is  there  so  un- 
grateful, and  so  little  proper  for  cultivation,  that  no  corn  is 
sowed  upon  it.  The  people  subsisted  almost  entirely  upon 
apples,  pears,  and  other  fruits  of  that  kind.  Inured  from  their 
infancy  to  a hard  and  laborious  life,  they  looked  upon  dangers 
and  fatigues  as  nothing  ; and  for  that  reason  were  well  calcu- 
lated for  soldiers.  The  king  marched  against  them  in  person, 
at  the  head  of  an  army  of  300,000  foot,  and  10,000  horse. 
Tiribazus  attended  him  in  this  expedition. 

Artaxerxes  had  not  advanced  far  into  the  country  when  his 
army  suffered  extremely  by  famine.  The  troops  could  find  no- 
thing to  subsist  upon  ; and  it  was  impossible  to  bring  provisions 
from  other  places,  as  the  roads  were  difficult  and  impracticable. 
c Plut.  in  Artax.  p.  1023,  1024. 


201 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 

The  whole  camp  were  reduced  to  eat  their  beasts  of  burden  ; 
and  these  soon  became  so  scarce,  that  an  ass’s  head  was  valued 
at  sixty  drachmas/  and  was  very  hard  to  be  got  at  that  price. 
The  king’s  table  itself  began  to  fall  short,  and  only  a few  horses 
remained,  the  rest  having  been  entirely  consumed. 

In  this  melancholy  conjuncture,  Tiribazus  contrived  a strata- 
gem which  saved  the  king  and  army.  The  Cadusians  had  two 
kings,  who  were  encamped  separately  with  their  troops.  Tiri- 
bazus, who  took  care  to  be  informed  of  all  that  passed,  had 
been  apprized  that  there  was  some  misunderstanding  between 
them,  and  that  their  jealousy  of  each  other  prevented  their  act- 
ing in  concert,  as  they  ought  to  have  done.  After  having  com- 
municated his  design  to  Artaxerxes,  he  went  himself  to  one 
of  the  kings,  and  despatched  his  son  to  the  other.  They  each 
of  them  informed  the  king  to  whom  they  applied,  that  the  other 
had  sent  ambassadors  to  treat  with  Artaxerxes  privately,  and 
advised  him  to  lose  no  time,  but  to  make  his  peace  directly,  in 
order  that  the  conditions  of  it  might  be  the  more  advantageous  ; 
promising  to  assist  them  with  their  whole  credit.  The  fraud  suc- 
ceeded. The  Pagans  thought  it  might  allowably  be  used  with 
enemies.^  Ambassadors  set  out  from  both  princes  respectively, 
from  the  one  with  Tiribazus,  and  from  the  other  with  his  son. 

As  this  double  negociation  lasted  some  time,  Artaxerxes  be- 
gan to  suspect  Tiribazus  ; and  his  enemies,  taking  that  oppor- 
tunity, forgot  nothing  to  his  prejudice  that  might  ruin  him  in 
the  king’s  opinion.  That  prince  already  repented  the  confi- 
dence he  had  reposed  in  him,  and  thereby  gave  room  for  those 
who  envied  him  to  vent  their  calumnies  and  invectives.  Upon 
what  does  the  fortune  of  the  most  faithful  subjects  depend  with 
a credulous  and  suspicious  prince  ! Whilst  this  passed,  arriv- 
ed Tiribazus  on  his  side,  and  his  son  on  the  other,  each  with  am- 
bassadors from  the  Cadusians.  The  treaty  being  concluded  with 
both  parties,  and  the  peace  made,  Tiribazus  became  more  pow- 
erful than  ever  in  his  master’s  favour,  and  returned  with  him. 

The  king’s  behaviour  in  this  march  was  much  admired. 
Neither  the  gold  with  which  he  was  covered,  nor  his  purple 
robes,  nor  the  jewels  that  glittered  all  over  him,  and  were 
worth  36,000,000  of  livres,'1  prevented  his  taking  an  equal 
share  in  the  whole  fatigue  with  the  meanest  soldier.  He  was 
seen,  with  his  quiver  at  his  back  and  his  shield  on  his  arms,  to 
dismount  from  his  horse,  and  march  foremost  in  those  rugged 
and  difficult  roads.  The  soldiers,  observing  his  patience  and 
fortitude,  and  animated  by  his  example,  became  so  light,  that 
they  seemed  rather  to  fly  than  walk.  At  length  he  arrived  at 
one  of  his  palaces,  where  the  gardens  were  kept  in  admirable 

* Thirty  livres.  s Dolus,  an  virtus,  quis  in  hoste  requirat  ? Virgil . 
h Twelve  thousand  talents. 


202 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


order,  and  there  was  a park  of  great  extent  and  well  planted, 
which  was  the  more  surprising,  as  the  whole  country  about  it 
was  entirely  naked,  and  bore  no  kind  of  trees.  As  it  was  the 
depth  of  winter,  and  the  cold  was  excessive,  he  gave  the  sol- 
diers permission  to  cut  down  the  wood  in  this  park,  without 
sparing  the  finest  trees,  either  pines  or  cypresses.  But  the 
soldiers  not  being  able  to  resolve  to  fell  timber  of  such  exceed- 
ing beauty  and  stateliness,  the  king  took  an  axe,  and  began  by 
cutting  the  finest  and  largest  tree  himself ; after  which  the 
troops  had  no  farther  scruples,  but  cut  down  all  the  wood  they 
wanted,  and  kindled  as  many  fires  as  were  necessary  to  enable 
them  to  pass  the  night  without  any  inconvenience.  When  we 
reflect  how  much  value  noblemen  generally  set  upon  their  gar- 
dens and  houses  of  pleasure,  we  must  feel  pleased  with  Artax- 
erxes’s  generosity  in  making  this  sacrifice,  which  argued  great 
goodness  of  heart,  and  a sensibility  for  the  distresses  and  suf- 
ferings of  his  soldiers.  But  he  did  not  always  support  that 
character. 

The  king  had  lost  in  this  enterprise  a great  number  of  his 
best  troops,  and  almost  all  his  horses  : and  as  he  imagined  that 
he  was  despised  upon  that  account,  and  the  ill  success  of  his 
expedition,  he  became  very  much  out  of  humour  with  the  gran- 
dees of  his  court,  and  put  to  death  a great  number  of  them  in 
the  emotions  of  his  wrath,  and  more  out  of  distrust,  and  the 
fear  of  their  attempting  something  against  him.  For  fear  in  a 
suspicious  prince  is  a very  destructive  and  bloody  passion  ; 
whereas  true  courage  is  gentle,  humane,  and  averse  to  all  jea- 
lousy and  suspicion. 

One  of  the  principal  officers  that  perished  in  this  expedition 
against  the  Cadusians,'  was  Camisares,  by  nation  a Carian,  and 
governor  of  Leuco-Syria,  a province  enclosed  between  Cilicia 
and  Cappadocia.  His  son  Datames  succeeded  him  in  that 
government,  which  was  given  him  in  consideration  of  the  good 
services  he  had  also  rendered  the  king  in  the  same  expedition. 
He  was  the  greatest  captain  of  his  time;  and  Cornelius  Nepos, 
who  has  given  us  his  life,  prefers  Amilcar  and  Hannibal  alone 
to  him  amongst  the  barbarians.  It  appears  from  this  life,  that 
no  one  ever  excelled  him  in  boldness,  valour,  and  ability  in  in- 
venting schemes  and  stratagems,  in  activity  in  the  execution  of 
his  designs,  in  presence  of  mind  to  decide  instantly,  and  to  find 
resources  upon  the  most  desperate  occasions  ; in  a word,  in 
every  thing  that  regards  the  science  of  war.  It  seems  that 
nothing  was  wanting  to  his  having  acquired  a more  illustrious 
name,  than  a more  spacious  theatre,  and  perhaps  an  historian 
who  would  have  given  a more  minute  narrative  of  his  exploits. 


* Corn.  Nep.  in  vit.  Datamis. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS.  203 

For  Cornelius  Nepos,  according-  to  liis  general  plan,  could  not 
relate  them  otherwise  than  in  a very  succinct  manner. 

He  began  to  distinguish  himself  particularly  by  the  execution 
of  a commission  that  was  given  him  to  reduce  Thyus,  a very 
powerful  prince,  and  governor  of  Paphlagonia,  who  had  re- 
volted against  the  king.  As  he  was  his  near  relation,  he 
thought  it  incumbent  upon  him  at  first  to  try  the  methods  of 
lenity  and  conciliation,  which  almost  cost  him  his  life,  through 
the  treachery  of  Thyus,  by  the  ambuscades  he  laid  for  him. 
Having  escaped  so  great  a danger,  he  attacked  him  with  open 
force ; though  he  saw  himself  abandoned  by  Ariobarzanes, 
satrap  of  Lydia,  Ionia,  and  all  Phrygia,  whom  jealousy  pre- 
vented from  giving  him  aid.  He  took  his  enemy  prisoner,  with 
his  wife  and  children ; and  knowing  with  what  joy  the  king 
would  receive  the  news,  he  endeavoured  to  make  it  the  more 
sensibly  felt  by  the  pleasure  of  a surprise.  He  set  out  with 
his  illustrious  prisoner,  without  giving  the  court  any  advice, 
and  made  long  marches,  to  prevent  its  being  known  by  report 
before  his  arrival.  When  he  came  to  Susa,  he  equipped  Thyus 
in  a very  singular  manner.  He  was  a man  of  a very  tall  sta- 
ture, of  a haggard  and  terrible  aspect,  a black  complexion,  with 
the  hair  of  his  head  and  beard  very  long.  He  dressed  him  in 
a magnificent  habit,  put  a collar  and  bracelets  of  gold  about  his 
neck  and  arms,  and  added  to  this  equipage  all  the  ornaments 
of  a king,  as  in  fact  he  was.  For  himself,  in  the  coarse  habit 
of  a peasant,  and  clad  like  a hunter,  armed  with  a club  in  his 
right  hand,  he  led  Thyus  in  his  left  in  a leash,  like  a wild  beast 
that  had  been  taken  in  the  toils.  The  novelty  of  the  sight 
drew  the  whole  city  after  it ; but  nobody  was  so  much  surprised 
and  pleased  as  the  king,  when  he  saw  them  approach  in  that 
pleasant  masquerade.  The  rebellion  of  a prince,  very  powerful 
in  his  country,  had  given  Artaxerxes  great  and  just  alarm,  and 
he  did  not  expect  to  have  seen  him  so  soon  in  his  hands.  So 
sudden  and  successful  an  execution  gave  him  a higher  opinion 
than  ever  of  the  merit  of  Datames. 

To  express  his  sense  of  it,  he  gave  him  an  equal  share  in  the 
command  of  the  army  designed  against  Egypt,  with  Pharna- 
bazus  and  Tithraustes,  the  two  principal  persons  in  the  state, 
and  even  appointed  him  general-in-chief  when  he  recalled  Phar- 
nabazus. 

When  he  was  upon  the  point  of  setting  out  for  that  expedi- 
tion, Artaxerxes  ordered  him  to  march  directly  against  Aspis, 
who  had  made  the  country  where  he  commanded  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood of  Cappadocia  revolt.  The  commission  was  of  little 
importance  for  an  officer  who  had  been  appointed  general,  and 
besides  very  dangerous,  because  it  was  necessary  to  go  in  quest 
of  the  enemy  in  a very  remote  country.  The  king  soon  per- 


204 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


ceived  his  error,  and  countermanded  him  : but  Datames  had  set 
out  directly  with  a handful  of  men,  and  marched  night  and  day ; 
judging  that  diligence  alone,  and  not  a great  number  of  troops, 
was  all  that  was  necessary  to  surprise  and  vanquish  the  enemy. 
It  happened  according  to  his  expectation,  and  the  couriers 
despatched  by  the  king,  met  Aspis  in  chains  upon  the  road  to 
Susa. 

Nothing  was  talked  of  at  the  court  but  Datames.  No  one  knew 
which  to  admire  most,  his  ready  obedience,  his  wise  and  enter- 
prising bravery,  or  his  extraordinary  success.  So  glorious  a re- 
putation gave  offence  to  the  courtiers  in  power.  Enemies  in 
secret  to  each  other,  and  divided  by  a contrariety  of  interests, 
and  a competition  in  their  pretensions,  they  united  together 
against  a superior  merit  which  reproached  their  defects,  and 
was  therefore  a crime  in  their  acceptation.  They  conspired  to 
ruin  him  in  the  king’s  opinion,  and  succeeded  but  too  well.  As 
they  besieged  him  perpetually,  and  he  was  not  upon  his  guard 
against  persons  who  appeared  so  well  affected  to  his  service, 
they  inspired  him  with  jealousy  and  suspicion  against  the  most 
zealous  and  faithful  of  his  officers. 

An  intimate  friend  of  Datames,  who  held  one  of  the  highest 
posts  at  the  court,  apprised  him  of  what  was  passing,  and  of  the 
conspiracy  which  had  been  formed  against  him,  and  had  already 
rendered  the  king  disaffected  towards  him.  He  represented 
to  him,k  that  if  the  Egyptian  expedition,  with  which  he  was 
charged,  should  take  a bad  turn,  he  would  find  himself  exposed 
to  great  dangers  : that  it  was  the  custom  of  kings  to  attribute  good 
successes  to  themselves  and  their  auspicious  fortune  only,  and 
to  impute  the  bad  to  the  faults  of  their  generals,  and  to  make 
them  responsible  for  these  at  the  peril  of  their  heads  : that  he 
ran  the  greater  risk,  as  all  that  were  about  the  king’s  person  and 
had  any  ascendant «over  him,  were  his  declared  enemies,  and 
had  sworn  his  destruction. 

Upon  this  advice,  Datames  resolved  to  quit  the  king’s  ser- 
vice, though  without  doing  any  thing  hitherto  contrary  to  the 
fidelity  which  he  owed  him.  He  left  the  command  of  the  army 
to  Mandrocles  of  Magnesia,  departed  with  his  own  troops  for 
Cappadocia,  seized  Paphlagonia,  which  joined  it,  allied  himself 
secretly  with  Ariobarzanes,  raised  troops,  took  possession 
of  the  fortresses,  aud  put  good  garrisons  in  them.  He  re- 
ceived advice,  that  the  Pisidians  were  arming  against  him. 
He  did  not  wait  their  attack,  but  made  his  army  march  thither 

k Docet  eum  magno  fore  in  periculo,  siquid,  illo  imperante,  in  ^Egypto  ad- 
versi  accidisset.  Namque  earn  esse  consuetudinem  regum,  ut  casus  adversos 
hominibus  tribuant  secundos  fortunze  suae  ; quo  facile  fieri,  ut  impellantur  ad 
eorum  perniciem,  quorum  ductu  res  male  gestae  nuncientur.  Ilium  hoc  tna- 
jore  fore  in  discrimine,  quod,  quibus  rex  maxime  obediat,  eos  habeat  inimieis- 
simos.  Cor.  Nep. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


205 


under  the  command  of  his  youngest  son,  who  had  the  mis- 
fortune to  be  killed  in  a battle.  However  lively  the  father’s 
affliction  might  be  upon  that  occasion,  he  concealed  his  death, 
lest  the  bad  news  should  discourage  his  troops.  When  he  ap- 
proached near  the  enemy,  his  first  care  was  to  take  possession 
of  an  advantageous  post.  Mithrobarzanes,1  his  father-inTlaw, 
who  commanded  the  horse,  believing  his  son  entirely  ruined, 
determined  to  go  over  to  the  enemy.  Datames,  without  con- 
cern or  emotion,  caused  a rumour  to  be  spread  throughout  the 
army,  that  it  was  only  a feint  concerted  between  him  and  his 
father-in-law,  and  followed  him  close,  as  if  he  designed  to  put 
his  troops  into  a disposition  for  charging  the  enemy  in  two  differ- 
ent quarters.  The  stratagem  had  all  the  success  he  expected 
from  it.  When  they  joined  battle,  Mithrobarzanes  was  treated 
as  an  enemy  on  both  sides,  and  cut  to  pieces  with  his  troops. 
The  army  of  the  Pisidians  was  put  to  flight,  and  left  Datames 
master  of  the  field,  and  of  all  the  rich  booty  found  in  the  camp 
of  the  conquered. 

Datames  had  not  till  then  declared  openly  against  the  king, 
the  actions  we  have  related  being  only  against  governors,  with 
whom  he  might  have  particular  differences,  which,  as  we  have 
observed  before,  was  common  enough.  His  own  eldest  son, 
called  Scismas,  made  himself  his  accuser,  and  discovered  his 
whole  designs  to  the  king.  Artaxerxes  was  highly  alarmed. 
He  knew  all  the  merit  of  this  new  enemy,  and  that  he  did  not  en- 
gage in  any  enterprise  without  having  maturely  considered  all  its 
consequences,  and  taken  the  necessary  measures  to  secure  its 
success  ; and  that  hitherto  the  execution  had  always  corres- 
ponded with  the  wisdom  of  his  projects.  He  sent  an  army 
against  him  into  Cappadocia  of  almost  200,000  men,  of  which 
20,000  were  horse,  all  commanded  by  Autophradates.  The 
troops  of  Datames  did  not  amount  to  the  twentieth  part  of  the 
king’s  ; so  that  he  had  no  resource  but  in  himself,  the  valour  of 
his  soldiers,  and  the  happy  situation  of  the  post  he  had  chosen. 
For  in  that  consisted  his  chief  excellence  ; never  captain  having 
better  known  how  to  take  his  advantages,  and.  choose  his 
ground,  when  he  was  to  draw  up  an  army  in  battle. 

His  army,  as  I have  observed,  was  far  inferior  to  that  of  the 
enemy.  He  had  posted  himself  in  a situation  where  they  could 
not  surround  him  ; where,  upon  the  least  movement  they  made, 
he  could  attack  them  with  very  considerable  advantage  ; and 
where,  had  they  resolved  to  fight,  their  odds  in  number  would 
have  been  absolutely  useless  to  them.  Autophradates  well 
knew,  that  according  to  all  the  rules  of  war,  he  ought  not  to 
hazard  a battle  in  such  a conjuncture  ; but  he  observed  at  the 


1 Diod.  1.  xv.  p.  399. 


206 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


same  time,  that  it  would  be  disgraceful  for  him,  with  so  nume- 
rous an  army,  to  retreat,  or  to  continue  any  longer  in  inaction 
before  a handful  of  enemies.  He  therefore  gave  the  signal. 
The  first  attack  was  rude ; but  the  troops  of  Autophradates  soon 
gave  way,  and  were  entirely  routed.  The  victor  pursued  them 
for  some  time  with  great  slaughter.  There  were  only  1000  men 
killed  on  the  side  of  Dataines. 

Several  battles,  or  rather  skirmishes,  were  fought  afterwards, 
in  which  the  latter  was  always  victorious  ; because,  perfectly 
knowing  the  country,  and  succeeding  especially  in  stratagems 
of  war,  he  always  posted  himself  advantageously,  and  engaged 
the  enemy  in  difficult  ground,  from  whence  they  could  not  ex- 
tricate themselves  without  loss.  Autophradates  seeing  all  his 
endeavours  ineffectual,  and  his  supplies  entirely  exhausted,  and 
despairing  of  ever  being  able  to  subject  by  force  so  artful  and 
valiant  an  enemy,  suggested  an  accommodation,  and  proposed 
to  him  the  being  restored  to  the  king’s  favour  upon  honourable 
conditions.  Datames  was  not  ignorant  that  there  was  little  se- 
curity for  him  in  such  a choice,  because  princes  are  seldom 
reconciled  in  earnest  with  a subject  who  has  failed  in  his  obe- 
dience, and  to  whom  they  see  themselves  in  some  sort  obliged 
to  submit.  However,  as  despair  alone  had  hurried  him  into 
the  revolt,  and  he  had  always  retained  at  heart  sentiments  of  zeal 
and  affection  for  his  prince,  he  joyfully  accepted  offers  which 
would  put  an  end  to  the  violent  condition  in  which  his  misfor- 
tune had  engaged  him,  and  afford  him  the  means  of  returning 
to  his  duty,  and  of  employing  his  talents  for  the  service  of  the 
prince  to  whom  they  were  due.  He  promised  to  send  deputies 
to  the  king ; upon  which  ensued  a cessation  of  arms,  and  Au- 
tophradates retired  into  Phrygia,  which  was  his  government. 

Datames  was  not  deceived.  Artaxerxes,  furiously  enraged 
against  him,  had  changed  the  esteem  and  affection  which  he 
formerly  professed  for  him,  into  an  implacable  hatred.  Find- 
ing himself  incapable  of  conquering  him  by  force  of  arms,  he 
was  not  ashamed  to  employ  artifice  and  treachery;  means 
unworthy  every  man  of  honour,  and  how  much  more  so  of  a 
prince ! He  hired  several  murderers  to  assassinate  him  ; but 
Datames  was  so  happy  as  to  escape  their  ambuscades.  At 
length  Mithridates,  the  son  of  Ariobarzanes,  to  whom  the  king 
had  made  magnificent  promises,  if  he  could  deliver  him  from 
so  formidable  an  enemy,  having  insinuated  himself  into  his 
friendship,  and  having  long  treated  him  with  all  the  marks  of 
the  most  entire  fidelity,  in  order  to  acquire  his  confidence,  took 
the  advantage  of  a favourable  opportunity  when  he  was  alone, 
and  stabbed  him  with  his  sword  before  he  was  in  a condition 
to  defend  himself. 

Thus  fell  this  great  captain  in  the  snares  of  a pretended 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


207 


friendship,™  who  had  always  made  it  a point  of  honour  to 
observe  the  most  inviolable  fidelity  towards  those  with  whom  he 
had  any  engagements.  Happy  had  he  always  piqued  himself 
also  upon  being  as  faithful  a subject  as  he  was  a true  friend  ; 
and  if  he  had  not,  in  the  latter  part  of  his  life,  sullied  the  lustre 
of  his  heroic  qualities  by  the  ill  use  he  made  of  them ; which 
neither  the  fear  of  disgrace,  the  injustice  of  those  who  envied 
him,  the  ingratitude  of  his  master  for  the  services  he  had  ren- 
dered him,  nor  any  other  pretext,  could  sufficiently  authorize. 

I am  surprised  that,  worthy  as  he  was,  from  his  uncommon 
virtues,  of  being  compared  to  the  greatest  persons  of  antiquity, 
his  merit  has  remained  in  a manner  buried  in  silence  and  ob- 
livion. His  great  actions  and  exploits  are  however  worthy  of 
being  preserved  in  history.  For  it  is  in  such  small  bodies  of 
troops  as  those  of  Datames,  where  every  energy  is  exerted, 
where  prudence  directs,  and  where  chance  has  no  share,  that 
the  abilities  of  a general  appear  in  their  full  light. 

m Ita  vir,  qui  multos  consilio,  neminem  perfidia  ceperat,  simulata  captus 
est  amicitia.  Cor . Nep. 


THE 


ANCIENT  HISTORY 

OF  THE 

PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


BOOK  IX.  CONTINUED. 


CHAP.  IV. 

HISTORY  OF  SOCRATES  ABRIDGED. 

As  the  death  of  Socrates  is  one  of  the  most  considerable  events 
of  antiquity,  I think  it  incumbent  on  me  to  treat  that  subject 
with  all  the  extent  it  deserves.  With  this  view  I shall  go  some- 
what back  in  order  to  give  the  reader  a just  idea  of  this  Prince 
of  Philosophers. 

Two  authors  will  supply  me  principally  with  what  I have  to 
say  upon  the  subject  :■ — Plato  and  Xenophon,  both  disciples  of 
Socrates.  It  is  to  them  that  posterity  is  indebted  for  many  of 
his  discourses,  (as  that  Philosopher  left  nothing  in  writing,4)  and 
for  an  ample  account  of  all  the  circumstances  of  his  condemna- 
tion and  death.  Plato  w&s  an  eye-witness  of  the  whole,  and 
relates,  in  his  Apology,  the  manner  of  Socrates’  accusation  and 
defence  ; in  his  Crito,  his  refusal  to  make  his  escape  out  of 
prison  : in  his  Phaedon,  his  admirable  discourse  upon  the  im- 
mortality of  the  soul,  which  was  immediately  followed  by  his 
death.  Xenophon  was  absent  at  that  time,  and  upon  his  return 
to  his  native  country,  after  the  expedition  of  the  younger  Cyrus 
against  his  brother  Artaxerxes  : so  that  he  wrote  his  Apology 
of  Socrates  only  from  the  report  of  others  ; but  his  actions  and 
discourses  in  his  four  books  of  memorable  things,  he  repeats 
from  his  own  knowledge.  Diogenes  Laertius  has  given  us  the 
life  of  Socrates,  but  in  a very  dry  and  abridged  manner. 

a Socrates,  cujus  ingenium  variosque  sermones  immortalitati  scriptis  suis 
Plato  tradidit,  literam  nullam  reliquit.  Cic.  de  Orat.  1.  iii.  n.  57. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


209 


SECT.  I. 

sciences  his  wonderful^ progresf^them  ^ ^Ktaste  f*  *°  thei  S‘S  °f  the 
h.s  manner  of  living,  and  sufferings  from  the  ill  humouT S wife  P ^ * 

A.  M.  3533.  Socrates  was  born  at  Athens  in  the  fourth 
Ant.  J.  C.  471.  ycf  °t  the  seventy-seventh  Olympiad.  » His 

from  admiration  onii^fi^^geiSusl'an'^the  od^  ^IS  (a,her  s Sl0P’ f 
that  it  was  inconsistent  for3*!  * opinion  he  entertained 

things,  to  coSe  TJZetuJw**  T’  °f  the  latest 

chisel  in  his  hand.  He  wis  AUp°n  Stone  W1*h  a 

ceived  a great  affection  fn  W 1S 41?  f Archelaus,  who  con- 

SSfe^l^SsSS: 

only  that  part  of  pbiliLpby waTknow°„ Id  l™*’ 
sures  us  that  he  was  vm-l  ^ u nc!wn  , and  Xenophon  as- 

having  found  by  his  o vnV  ?C<lna?nt1ed  with  it.*  But  after 
° J ins  own  experience,*  how  difficult,  abstruse, 

?*££•  -^,aert-  in  Socrat.  p.  100.  . . 

d Plat,  in  Theatet.  p.  149,  &c  e i>  , .Ibl(L  P*  1 10* 

f Diog.  p.  loi.  1 ’ _ T.,  . * Paus.  1.  ix.  p.  596. 

h Socrates  primus  nhilndr,^-  j 5 . b'  1V ' Memorab.  p.  710. 


210 


HISTORY  OP  THE 


and  intricate,  and,  at  the  same  time,  of  how  little  use  that  kind 
of  learning  was  to  the  generality  of  mankind,  he  was  the  first, 
as  Cicero  remarks,  who  conceived  the  thought  of  bringing  down 
philosophy  from  heaven,  to  place  it  in  cities,  and  introduce  it 
into  private  houses  ; humanizing  it,  if  I may  use  that  expres- 
sion, and  rendering  it  more  familiar,  more  useful  in  common  life, 
more  within  the  reach  of  man’s  capacity,  and  applying  it  solely 
to  what  might  make  them  more  rational,  just,  and  virtuous. 
He  thought  it  was  a sort  of  folly  to  devote  the  whole  vivacity  of 
his  mind,1  and  employ  all  his  time,  in  inquiries  merely  curious, 
involved  in  impenetrable  darkness,  and  absolutely  incapable  of 
contributing  to  the  happiness  of  mankind  ; whilst  he  neglected 
to  inform  himself  in  the  ordinary  duties  of  life,  and  to  learn 
what  is  conformable  or  opposite  to  piety,  justice,  and  probity;  in 
what  fortitude,  temperance,  and  wisdom  consist  ; what  is  the 
end  of  all  government,  what  the  rules  of  it,  and  what  qualities 
are  necessary  for  commanding  and  ruling  well.  We  shall  see 
in  the  sequel  the  use  he  made  of  this  study. 

It  was  so  far  from  preventing  his  discharging  the  duties  of  a 
good  citizen,  that  it  was  the  means  of  making  him  the  more 
observant  of  them.  He  bore  arms,  as  did  all  the  people  of 
Athens  ; but  with  more  pure  and  elevated  motives.  He  made 
many  campaigns,  was  present  in  many  actions,  and  always  dis- 
tinguished himself  by  his  valour  and  fortitude.  He  was  seen, 
towards  the  end  of  his  life,  giving  in  the  senate,  of  which  he 
was  a member,  the  most  shining  proofs  of  his  zeal  for  justice, 
without  being  intimidated  by  the  greatest  present  dangers. 

He  had  accustomed  himself  early  to  a sober,  severe,  labori- 
ous life  ; without  which  it  seldom  happens  that  men  are  capa- 
ble of  discharging  the  greatest  part  of  the  duties  of  good  citi- 
zens. It  is  difficult  to  carry  the  contempt  of  riches  and  the 
love  of  poverty  farther  than  he  did.  He  looked  upon  it  as  a 
divine  perfection  to  be  in  want  of  nothing  ;k  and  believed,  that 
the  less  we  are  contented  with,  the  nearer  we  approach  to,  the 
Divinity.  Seeing  the  pomp  and  show  displayed  by  luxury  in 
certain  ceremonies, 1 and  the  infinite  quantity  of  gold  and  silver 
employed  in  them  : How  many  things , said  he,  congratulating 
himself  on  his  condition,  do  I not  want ! — Quantis  non  egeo  ! 

His  father  left  him  fourscore  minae,  m that  is  to  say,  about 
200/.  which  he  lent  to  one  of  his  friends  who  had  occasion  for 

fuerunt,  avocavisse  philosophiam,  et  ad  vitam  communem  adduxisse ; ut  de 
virtutibus  et  vitiis,  omninoque  de  bonis  rebus  et  malis  quaereret ; coelestia 
autem  vel  procul  esse  k nostra  cognitione  censeret,  vel  si  maxime  cognita 
essent,  nihil  tamen  ad  bene  vivendum  conferre.  Cic.  Acad.  Qucest.  1.  i.  n.  15. 

* Xenoph.  Memorab.  1.  i.  p.  710.  k Xenoph.  Memorab.  1.  i.  p.  731. 

1 Socrates  in  pompa,  cum  magna  vis  auri  argentique  ferretur;  Quammulta 
non  desidero,  inquit ! Cic.  Tusc.  Qucest.  1.  v. 

m Liban  in  Apolog.  Socrat.  p.  640. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS.  211 

that  sum.  But  the  affairs  of  that  friend  having  taken  an  ill 

b.4h»7r '» 

wlm  * i j^e  nc  lest  Pers°ns  of  Athens  were  among  his  friends 
health0  Wir  rvail  l,p011  him  t0  ac-P‘  -y  -W  of  the 

Sdto^ llreVlAVr  °f  a‘,y  he  was 

m.  ss  i 

iSSJLmT  b“!J- Pg““"'”’  b“>  “"MW  himself 

ass 

i&xszujz  r dSsr - 

S»Sr*VitU^e’1  WPSe  li^erty tolerate"' 

me^:^^rservituiem  iscu^  uh°rtat™  civi*. is 

and  facetious/  ancTth^  life  an^Toufof”  * W“f  ^ m 

~l7SSSSI^JSiSE15!i^^Sr,Tp’1,-"!“- * ■— ••  '■»•- 

Post  hoc  quisquis  properaverit  sero  dat  • I’n*  o'  quo  accipere t,  ambitus  fuit — 
i-  vii.  c.  24.  P peraverit,  sero  dat ; jam  Socrati  defuit.  Senec.  de  Benef. 

« Xenoph.  in  Conviv.  r JrSenf-  de  Benef:  1-  v.  c.  6. 

g ^han*  L 1V-  c.  11.  et  1.  ix.  c.  35. 


212 


HISTORY  OP  THE 


treatment,  could  ever  alter.  Some  have  believed,  that  he  was 
by  nature  hasty  and  passionate,  and  that  the  moderation,  to 
which  he  had  attained,  was  the  effect  of  his  reflections,  and  of 
the  efforts  he  had  made  to  subdue  and  correct  himself ; which 
would  still  add  to  his  merit.  Seneca  tells  us,s  that  he  had  de- 
sired his  friends  to  apprise  him  whenever  they  saw  him  ready  to 
fall  into  a passion,  and  that  he  had  given  them  that  privilege  over 
him,  which  he  took  himself  with  them.  Indeed,  the  best  time 
to  call  in  aid  against  a passion,  which  has  so  violent  and  sudden 
a power  over  us,  is  when  we  are  yet  ourselves,  and  in  cool 
blood.1  At  the  first  signal,  the  least  hint,  he  either  softened  his 
tone,  or  was  silent.  Finding  himself  exasperated  against  a 
slave,  I would  beat  you,  says  he,  if  I were  not  angry. — Ccede- 
rem  te,  nisi  irascerer.u  Having  received  a box  on  the  ear,  he 
contented  himself  with  only  saying,  with  a smile ; It  is  a mis- 
fortune not  to  know  when  to  put  on  a helmet .x 

Without  going  out  of  his  own  house,  he  found  enough  to  exer- 
cise his  patience  in  all  its  extent.  Xantippe,  his  wife,  put  it 
to  the  severest  proofs  by  her  capricious,  passionate,  violent  dis- 
position. It  seems  that,  before  he  took  her  for  his  companion, 
he  was  not  ignorant  of  her  character  ; and  he  says  himself  in 
Xenophon,  that  he  had  expressly  chosen  her,?  from  the  convic- 
tion, that  if  he  should  be  capable  of  bearing  her  insults, 'there  would 
be  nobody,  though  ever  so  difficult  to  endure,  with  whom  he  could 
not  live.  If  this  was  the  view  with  which  he  married  her,  it  was 
certainly  fully  answered.  Never  was  a woman  of  so  violent  and 
fantastical  a spirit,  and  so  bad  a temper.  There  was  no  kind  of 
abuse,  or  injurious  treatment,  which  he  had  not  to  experience 
from  her.  She  would  sometimes  be  transported  with  such  an 
excess  of  rage,  as  to  tear  off  his  cloak  in  the  open  street  ;z  and 
even  one  day,  after  having  vented  all  the  reproaches  her  fury 
could  suggest,  she  emptied  a pot  of  foul  water  upon  his  head  : 
at  which  he  only  laughed,  and  said,  That  so  much  thunder  must 
needs  produce  a shower. 

Some  ancient  authors  write,  that  Socrates  married  a second 
wife,a  named  Myrto,  who  was  the  grand-daughter  of  Aristides 
the  Just,  and  that  he  suffered  exceedingly  from  them  both,  as 
they  were  continually  quarrelling  with  each  other,  and  never 
agreed,  but  in  loading  him  with  reproaches,  and  offering  him 
the  grossest  insults.  They  pretend  that,  during  the  Pelopon- 
nesian war,  after  the  pestilence  had  swept  off  great  part  of  the 
Athenians,  a decree  was  made,  whereby,  to  retrieve  the  sooner 

8 Senec.  de  Ir&,  1 iii.  c.  15. 

1 Contra  potens  malum  et  apud  nos  gratiosum,  dum  conspicimus,  et  nostri 
sumus,  advocemus.  u Senec.  de  Ira,  1.  i.  c.  15.  x Ibid.  1.  iii.  c.  11. 

y Xenoph.  in  Conviv.  p.  876.  z Diog.  in  Socrat.  p.  112. 

a Plut.  in  Aristid.  p.  335.  Athen.  1.  xiii.  p.  555.  Diog.  I.aert.  in  Socrat. 
p.  105. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


213 


the  ruins  of  the  republic,  each  citizen  was  permitted  to  have  two 
wives  at  the  same  time,  and  that  Socrates  took  the  benefit  of  this 
new  law.  Those  authors  found  this  circumstance  solely  upon  a 
passage  in  a treatise  on  nobility,  ascribed  to  Aristotle.  But,  be- 
sides that,  according  to  Plutarch  himself,  Panaetius,  a very 
grave  author,  has  fully  refuted  this  opinion,  neither  Plato  nor 
Xenophon,  who  were  well  acquainted  with  all  that  related  to 
their  master,  say  any  thing  of  this  second  marriage  of  Socrates  ,• 
and,  on  another  side,  Thucydides,  Xenophon,  and  Diodorus 
Siculus,  who  have  treated  at  large  all  the  particulars  of  the 
Peloponnesian  war,  are  alike  silent  in  regard  to  the  pretended 
decree  of  Athens,  which  permitted  bigamy.  We  may  see,  in 
the  first  volume  of  the  Memoirs  of  the  Academy  of  Belles 
Lettres,  a dissertation  of  Monsieur  Hardion’s  upon  this  sub- 
ject ; wherein  he  demonstrates,  that  the  second  marriage  of 
Socrates,  and  the  decree  respecting  bigamy,  are  supposititious 
facts. 

SECT.  II. 

Of  the  dsemon,  or  familiar  spirit,  of  Socrates. 

Our  knowledge  of  Socrates  would  be  defective  if  we  knew 
nothing  of  the  Genius,  which,  he  pretended,  assisted  him  with 
its  counsel  and  protection  in  the  greatest  part  of  his  actions. 
It  is  not  agreed  amongst  authors  what  this  Genius  was,  com- 
monly called,  The  Dcemon  of  Socrates , from  the  Greek  word 
A cufioviov,  that  signifies  something  of  a divine  nature,  con- 
ceived as  a secret  voice,  a sign,  or  such  an  inspiration  as  di- 
viners are  supposed  to  have  had ; this  Genius  dissuaded  him 
from  the  execution  of  his  designs  when  they  would  have  been 
prejudicial  to  him,  without  ever  inducing  him  to  undertake  any 
action  : Esse  divinum  quoddam , quod  Socrates  dcemonium  ap- 
pellat,  cui  semper  ipse  paruerit,  nunquam  impellenti , scepe  re- 
vocanti.h  Plutarch,0  in  his  treatise,  entitled  Of  the  Genius 
of  Socrates , relates  the  different  sentiments  of  the  ancients 
concerning  the  existence  and  nature  of  this  Genius.  I shall 
confine  myself  to  that  which  seems  the  most  natural  and 
reasonable  of  them  all,  though  he  does  not  lay  much  stress 
upon  it. 

We  know  that  the  Divinity  alone  has  a clear  and  unerring 
knowledge  of  futurity  : that  man  cannot  penetrate  into  its  dark- 
ness but  by  uncertain  and  confused  conjectures  : that  those 
who  succeed  best  in  that  research,  are  such  as  by  a more  exact 
and  studied  comparison  of  the  different  causes  capable  of  in- 


b Cic.  de  Divin.  1.  i.  n.  122. 


c Pag.  580. 


214 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


fluencing  future  events,  discern  with  greater  force  and  per- 
spicuity, what  will  be  the  result  and  issue  of  the  conflict  of 
those  different  causes  in  conducing  to  the  success  or  miscarriage 
of  an  effect  or  enterprise.  This  foresight  and  discernment  has 
something  of  divine  in  it,  exalts  us  above  the  rest  of  man- 
kind, approximates  us  to  the  Divinity,  and  makes  us  parti- 
cipate in  some  measure  in  his  counsels  and  designs,  by  giving 
us  an  insight  and  foreknowledge,  to  a certain  degree,  of  what 
he  has  ordained  concerning  the  future.  Socrates  had  a just 
and  piercing  judgment,  joined  with  the  most  exquisite  prudence. 
He  might  call  this  judgment  and  prudence  A aifioviov,  some- 
thing divine , using  indeed  a kind  of  equivocal  expression, 
without  attributing  to  himself,  however,  the  merit ’due  to 
his  wisdom  in  forming  conjectures  with  regard  to  the  fu- 
ture. The  Abbe  Fraguier  comes  very  near  the  same  opinion 
in  the  dissertation  he  has  left  upon  this  subject  in  the  Memoirs 
of  the  Academy  of  Belies  Lettres.d 

The  effect/  or  rather  function,  of  this  Genius,  was  to  stop 
and  prevent  his  acting,  without  ever  inducing  him  to  act.  He 
received  also  the  same  impulse,  when  his  friends  were  going 
to  engage  in  any  unlucky  affair,  which  they  communicated 
to  him  ; and  several  instances  are  related,  wherein  they  found 
themselves  under  much  inconvenience  from  not  having  believed 
him.  Now  what  other  signification  can  be  given  to  this,  than 
that  it  implies,  under  mysterious  terms,  a mind  which,  by  its 
own  lights,  and  the  knowledge  of  mankind,  has  attained  a sort 
of  insight  into  futurity  ? And  if  Socrates  had  not  intended, 
to  lessen  in  his  own  person  the  merit  of  an  unerring  judgment, 
by  attributing  it  to  a kind  of  instinct ; if  at  bottom  he  had  de- 
sired any  thing  to  be  understood,  besides  the  general  aid  of 
the  divine  wisdom,  which  speaks  in  every  man  by  the  voice  of 
reason  ; would  he  have  escaped,  says  Xenophon,  the  imputa- 
tion of  arrogance  and  falsehood  V 

God  had  always  prevented  me  from  speaking  to  you,?  says 
he  to  Alcibiades,  whilst  the  tenderness  of  your  age  would  have 
rendered  my  discourses  of  no  utility  to  you.  But  I conceive 
I may  now  enter  into  a dispute  with  you,  as  an  ambitious  young 
man,  for  whom  the  laws  open  a way  to  the  dignities  of  the 
republic. — Is  it  not  visible  here,  that  prudence  prevented  So- 
crates from  conversing  seriously  with  Alcibiades  at  a time  when 
grave  and  serious  conversation  would  have  given  him  a disgust, 
of  which  he  might  perhaps  never  have  got  the  better  ? And 
when,  h in  the  dialogue  upon  the  Republic,  Socrates  ascribes 
his  avoiding  public  business  to  inspiration  from  above,  does  he 

d Tom.  iv.  p.  368.  e Plat,  in  Theag.  p.  128. 

f Memorab.  1.  i.  p.  708.  s Plat,  in  Alcib.  p.  150. 

h Lib.  vi.  de  Rep.  p.  496.  Apolog.  Soc.  p.  31,  32. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


215 


mean  any  thing  more  than  what  he  says  in  his  Apology,  that  a 
just  and  good  man,  who  in  a corrupt  state  intermeddles  with 
the  government,  is  not  long  without  perishing  ! If  when  he 
was  going  to  appear  before  the  judges  that  were  to  condemn 
him, ' that  divine  voice  does  not  make  itself  heard  to  prevent 
him,  as  it  was  accustomed  to  do  upon  dangerous  occasions,  the 
reason  is,  that  he  did  not  deem  it  a misfortune  for  him  to  die, 
especially  at  his  age,  and  in  his  circumstances.  Every  body 
knows  what  his  prognostication  had  been  long  before,  with 
respect  to  the  unfortunate  expedition  of  Sicily.  He  attributed 
it  to  his  Daemon,  and  declared  it  to  be  the  inspiration  of  that 
spirit.  A wise  man,  who  sees  an  affair  ill  concerted,  and  con- 
ducted with  precipitation,  may  easily  prophesy  the  event  of 
it,  without  the  aid  of  a daemon’s  inspiration. 

It  must  be  allowed,  however,  that  the  opinion  which  gives 
to  men,  genii  and  angels  to  direct  and  guard  them,  was  not  un- 
known even  to  the  Pagans.  Plutarch  cites  some  verses  of 
Menander,  k in  which  that  poet  expressly  says,  That  every  man 
at  his  birth  has  a good  Genius  given  him , which  attends  him 
during  the  whole  course  of  his  lifet  as  a guide  and  director . 

” A-rravTi  Sai[iix)v  avdpi  (rvfnrapaffraTSi 
'EvQvg  yevofievq),  ju varaywyoQ  tov  (3iov 
’A  yaOog. 

It  may  be  believed  with  probability  enough,  that  the  Daemon 
of  Socrates,  which  has  been  so  differently  spoken  of  as  to  make 
it  a question  whether  it  was  a good  or  bad  angel,  was  no  more 
than  the  force  and  rectitude  of  his  judgment,  which,  acting  ac- 
cording to  the  rules  of  prudence,  and  with  the  aid  of  a long  ex- 
perience, supported  by  wise  reflections,  made  him  foresee  the 
events  of  those  things,  upon  which  he  was  either  consulted,  or 
deliberated  himself. 

I conceive,  at  the  same  time,  that  he  was  not  sorry  the  peo- 
ple should  believe  him  inspired,  or  that  his  acquaintance  with 
futurity  was  the  effect  of  a divinity,  whatsoever  that  might  be. 
That  opinion  might  exalt  him  very  much  in  the  mind  of  the 
Athenians,  and  gave  him  an  authority,  of  which  it  is  well  known 
that  the  greatest  persons  of  the  Pagan  world  were  very  fond,  1 
and  which  they  endeavoured  to  acquire  by  secret  communica- 
tions, and  pretended  conferences,  with  some  divinity  : but  it 
likewise  drew  the  jealousy  of  many  of  the  citizens  upon  him. 

* Apolog.  Soc.  p.  40.  k De  anim.  tranquil,  p.  474. 

1 Lycurgus  and  Solon  had  recourse  to  the  authority  of  oracles  to  advance 
their  credit.  .Zaleucus  pretended,  that  his  laws  had  been  dictated  to  him  by 
Minerva.  Numa  Pompilius  boasted  his  conferences  with  the  goddess  Egeria. 
The  first  Scipio  Africanus  made  the  people  believe  that  the  gods  gave  him 
secret  counsels.  Even  Sertorius’s  hind  had  something  divine  in  it. 


216 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


SECT.  III. 

Socrates  declared  the  wisest  of  mankind  by  the  oracle  of  Delphi. 

This  declaration  of  the  oracle,™  so  advantageous  in  appear- 
ance for  Socrates,  did  not  a little  contribute  to  the  inflaming 
envy,  and  stirring  up  of  enemies  against  him,  as  he  tells  us 
himself  in  his  Apology,  wherein  he  recounts  the  occasion,  and 
true  meaning,  of  that  oracle. 

Chaerephon,  a zealous  disciple  of  Socrates,  happening  to  be 
at  Delphi,  demanded  of  the  oracle,  whether  there  was  a wiser 
man  than  Socrates  in  the  world : the  priestess  replied,  there 
was  none.  This  answer  puzzled  Socrates  extremely,  and  he 
could  scarce  comprehend  the  meaning  of  it.  For,  on  the  one 
side,  he  well  knew,  says  he  of  himself,  that  there  was  no  wis- 
dom in  him,  neither  little  nor  great ; and,  on  the  other,  he  could 
not  suspect  the  oracle  of  falsehood,  the  divinity  being  incapable 
of  telling  a lie.  He  therefore  considered  it  attentively,  and 
took  great  pains  to  penetrate  the  meaning  of  it.  At  first  he  ap- 
plied himself  to  a powerful  citizen,  a statesman,  and  a great 
politician,  who  passed  for  one  of  the  wisest  men  of  the  city,  and 
who  was  himself  still  more  convinced  of  his  own  merit  than 
others.  He  found  by  his  conversation  that  he  knew  nothing, 
and  insinuated  as$much  to  him  in  terms  sufficiently  intelligible  ; 
which  made  him  extremely  odious  to  that  citizen,  and  all  who 
were  present.  He  did  the  same  by  several  others  of  the  same 
profession,  and  all  the  fruit  of  his  inquiry  was,  to  draw  upon  him- 
self a greater  number  of  enemies.  From  the  statesmen  he  ad- 
dressed himself  to  the  poets,  whom  he  found  still  fuller  of  self- 
esteem, but  really  more  void  of  knowledge  and  wisdom.  He 
pursued  his  inquiries  to  the  artisans,  and  could  meet  with  no  one, 
who,  because  he  succeeded  in  his  own  art,  did  not  believe 
himself  very  capable  and  fully  informed  in  all  other  points  of 
the  greatest  consequence  ; which  presumption  was  the  almost 
universal  failing  of  the  Athenians.  As  they  had  naturally  abund- 
ance of  wit,  they  pretended  to  know  every  thing,  and  believed 
themselves  capable  of  pronouncing  upon  all  matters.  His  in- 
quiries amongst  strangers  were  not  more  successful. 

Socrates  afterwards  entering  into  and  comparing  himself  with 
all  those  he  had  questioned,  discovered,"  that  the  difference  be- 

m Plat,  in  Apolog.  p.  21,  22. 

n Socrates  in  omnibus  fere  sermonibus  sic  disputat,  ut  nihil  affirmet  ipse, 
refellat  alios:  nihil  se  scire  dicat,  nisi  id  ipsum,  eoque  prsestare  coeteris,  qubd 
illi,  quae  nesciant,  scire  se  putent ; ipse  se  nihil  scire  id  unum  sciat,  ob  eam- 
que  rem  se  arbitrari  ab  Appolline  omnium  sapientissimum  esse  dictum,  qubd 
hsec  esset  una  omnis  sapientia,  non  arbitrari  se  scire  quod  nesciat.  Cic.  Acad . 
Quest.  1.  i.  n.  15,  16. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


217 


tween  him  and  them  was,  that  they  all  believed  they  knew 
what  they  did  not  know,  and  that,  for  his  part,  he  sincerely 
avowed  his  ignorance.  From  thence  he  concluded,  that  God 
alone  is  truly  wise,  and  that  the  true  meaning  of  his  oracle  was 
to  signify,  that  all  human  wisdom  was  no  great  matter,  or,  to 
speak  more  properly,  was  nothing  at  all.- — And  as  to.  the  oracle’s 
naming  me,  it  no  doubt  did  so,  says  he,  by  way  of  setting  me 
up  for  an  example,  as  if  it  intended  to  declare  to  all  men,  The 
wisest  amongst  you  is  he,  who  knows,  like  Socrates,  that  there 
is  no  real  wisdom  in  him. 

SECT.  IV. 

Socrates  devotes  himself  entirely  to  the  instruction  of  the  youth  of  Athens.  Af- 
fection of  his  disciples  for  him.  The  admirable  principles  with  which  he 
inspires  them,  both  with  respect  to  government  and  religion. 

After  having  related  some  particularities  in  the  life  of  So- 
crates, it  is  time  to  proceed  to  that  in  which  his  character  prin- 
cipally and  peculiarly  consisted  ; I mean,  the  pains  he  took  to 
instruct  mankind,  and  particularly  to  form  the  youth  of  Athens. 

He  seemed,  says  Libanius,  0 the  common  father  of  the  re- 
public, so  attentive  was  he  to  the  happiness  and  advantage  of 
all  his  countrymen.  But  as  it  is  very  difficult  to  correct 
the  aged,  and  to  make  people  change  principles,  who  revere 
the  errors  in  which  they  have  grown  grey,  he  devoted  his  la- 
bours principally  to  the  instruction  of  youth,  in  order  to  sow 
the  seeds  of  virtue  in  a soil  more  fit  to  produce  the  fruits  of  it. 

He  had  no  open  school  like  the  rest  of  the  philosophers,  p 
nor  set  times  for  his  lessons.  He  had  no  benches  prepared, 
nor  ever  mounted  a professor’s  chair.  He  was  the  philosopher 
of  all  times  and  seasons.  He  taught  in  all  places,  and  upon 
all  occasions  ; in  walking,  conversation,  at  meals,  in  the  army, 
and  in  the  midst  of  the  camp,  in  the  public  assemblies  of  the 
senate  or  people,  in  prison  itself,  and  when  he  drank  the  poison, 
he  philosophized,  says  Plutarch,  and  instructed  mankind.  And 
from  thence  the  same  judicious  author  takes  occasion  to  estab- 
lish a great  principle  on  the  subject  of  government,  which  Se- 
neca before  him  had  placed  in  its  full  light.  * To  be  a public 

0 In  Apol.  Socvat.  p.  641.  p Plut.  an  seni  sit  ger.  resp.  p.  796. 

q Habet  ubi  se  etiam  in  private  late  explicet  magnus  animus — Ita  deli- 
tuerit  (vir  ille)  ut  ubicunque  otium  suum  absconderit,  prodesse  velit  et  sin- 
gulis et  universis,  ingenio,  voce,  consilio..  Nec  enim  is  solus  reip.  prodest, 
qui  candidatos  extrahit,  et  tuetur  reos,  et  de  pace  bello'que  censet,  sed  qui 
juventutem  exhortatur,  qui  in  tantat  bonorum  prseceptorum  inopia  virtute 
instruit  animos,  qui  ad  pecuniam  luxuriamque  cursu  ruentes  prensat  ac  retrahit, 
et  si  nihil  aliud,  certe  moratur,  in  privato  publicum  negotium  agit.  An  ille 
plus  praestat,  qui  inter  peregrinos  et  cives,  aut  urbanus  praetor  adeuntibus  as- 
sessoris  verba  pronunciat ; quam  qui  docet,  quid  sit  justitia,  quid  pietas,  quid 
patientia,  quid  fortitudo,  quid  mortis  contemptus,  quid  deorum  intellectus, 
quam  gratuitum  bonum  sit  conscientia  ? Senec.  de  tranquil,  anim.  c.  iii. 


218 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


man,  says  he,  it  is  not  necessary  to  be  actually  in  office,  to  wear 
the  robe  of  judge  or  magistrate,  and  to  sit  in  the  highest  tribu- 
nals for  the  administration  of  justice.  Many  do  this,  who, 
though  honoured  with  the  fine  names  of  orators,  praetors,  and 
senators,  if  they  want  the  merit  of  those  characters,  ought  to 
be  regarded  as  private  persons,  and  often  deserve  to  be  con- 
founded with  the  lowest  and  vilest  of  the  populace.  But  who- 
ever knows  how  to  give  wise  counsel  to  those  who  consult  him, 
to  animate  the  citizens  to  virtue,  and  to  inspire  them  with  senti- 
ments of  probity,  equity,  generosity,  and  love  of  their  country  ; 
such  a man,  says  Plutarch,  is  the  true  magistrate  and  ruler,  in 
whatsoever  condition  or  place  he  be. 

Such  was  Socrates.  The  services  he  did  the  state,  by  the 
instructions  he  gave  their  youth,  and  the  disciples  he  formed, 
are  inexpressibly  great.  Never  had  master  a greater  number, 
nor  more  illustrious.  Had  Plato  been  the  only  one,  he  would 
be  worth  a multitude.  Upon  the  point  of  death  he  blessed 
and  thanked  God  for  three  things  :r  that  he  had  endowed  him 
with  a rational  soul,  that  he  was  born  a Greek,-and  not  a bar- 
barian, and  that  he  had  placed  his  birth  in  the  lifetime  of 
Socrates.  Xenophon  had  the  same  advantage.8  It  is  said, 
that  one  day  Socrates  met  him  in  the  street,  and,  stopping  him 
with  his  staff,  asked  him  whether  he  knew  where  provisions 
were  sold  ? It  was  not  difficult  to  answer  this  question.  But 
Socrates  having  demanded  in  what  place  men  learned  virtue, 
and  seeing  this  second  question  put  him  to  a stand : If  you 
desire  to  know  it,  continued  the  philosopher,  follow  me,  and 
you  shall  he  informed.  Which  he  did  immediately,  and  wras 
afterwards  the  first  who  collected  and  published  his  master’s 
discourses. 

Aristippus/  upon  a conversation  with  Ischomachus,  in  which 
he  had  introduced  some  strokes  of  Socrates’  doctrine,  con- 
ceived so  ardent  a passion  to  become  his  disciple,  that  he  grew 
lean  and  wan  in  consequence  of  it,  till  he  could  go  to  the  foun- 
tain-head, and  imbibe  his  fill  of  a philosophy,  that  taught  the 
knowledge  of  evil,  and  its  cure. 

What  is  reported  of  Euclid  the  Megarian,  explains  still 
better  how  high  the  eagerness  of  Socrates’s  disciples  ran,  to 
receive  the  benefit  of  his  instructions.  There  was  at  that  time 
an  open  war  between  Athens  and  Megara,u  which  was  carried 
on  with  so  much  animosity,  that  the  Athenians  obliged  their 
generals  to  take  an  oath  to  lay  waste  the  territory  of  Megara 
twice  a year,  and  prohibited  the  Megarians  to  set  foot  in  Attica 
upon  pain  of  death.  This  decree  could  not  extinguish  nor 
suspend  the  zeal  of  Euclid.  He  left  his  city  in  the  evening  in 

r Plut.  in  Mario,  p.'433.  8 Diog.  in  Xenoph.  p.  120. 

1 Plut.  de  curios,  p.  516*.  u Plut.  in  Peric.  p.  168. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


219 


the  disguise  of  a woman/  with  a veil  upon  his  head,  and  came 
to  the  house  of  Socrates  in  the  night,  where  he  continued  till 
the  approach  of  day,  when  he  returned  in  the  same  manner  he 
came. 

The  ardour  of  the  young  Athenians  to  follow  him  was  in- 
credible. They  left  father  and  mother,  and  renounced  all 
parties  of  pleasure,  to  attach  themselves  to  him,  and  to  hear 
his  discourses.  We  may  judge  of  this  by  the  example  of  Al- 
cibiades,  the  most  ardent  and  fiery  of  all  the  Athenians.  The 
philosopher,  however,  never  spared  him,  and  was  always  careful 
to  calm  the  sallies  of  his  passions,  and  to  rebuke  his  pride, 
which  was  his  great  disease.  I have  before  related  some  in- 
stances of  this  temper  of  his.  One  day  when  Alcibiades  was 
boasting  of  his  wealth/  and  the  great  estates  in  his  possession, 
(for  that  it  is  which  generally  puffs  up  the  pride  of  young  people 
of  quality,)  he  carried  him  to  a geographical  map,  and  asked 
him  to  find  Attica.  It  was  so  small  it  could  scarcely  be  dis- 
cerned upon  that  draught;  he  found  it,  however,  though  with 
some  difficulty : but  upon  being  desired  to  point  out  his  own 
estate  there,  It  is  too  small , says  he,  to  be  distinguished  in  so 
little  a space. — See  then,  replied  Socrates,  what  consequence 
you  attach  to  an  imperceptible  spot  of  land.  This  reasoning 
might  have  been  urged  much  farther  still.  For  what  was 
Attica  compared  to  all  Greece,  Greece  to  Europe,  Europe  to 
the  whole  world,  and  the  world  itself  to  the  vast  extent  of  the 
infinite  orbs  which  surround  it?  What  an  insect,  what  a no- 
thing, is  the  most  powerful  prince  of  the  earth  in  the  midst  of 
this  abyss  of  bodies  and  immense  spaces,  and  what  a portion  of 
it  does  he  occupy  ! 

The  young  people  of  Athens,  dazzled  with  the  glory  of  The- 
mistocles,  Cimon,  and  Pericles,  and  full  of  a wild  ambition,  af- 
ter having  received  for  some  time  the  lessons  of  the  sophists, 
who  promised  to  make  them  very  great  politicians,  conceived 
themselves  capable  of  every  thing,  and  aspired  at  the  highest 
employments.  One  of  these, 2 named  Glauco,  had  taken  it  so 
strongly  into  his  head  to  enter  upon  the  administration  of  the 
public  affairs,  though  not  yet  twenty  years  old,  that  none  of  his 
family  or  friends  were  able  to  divert  him  from  a design  so  little 
suited  to  his  age  and  capacity.  Socrates,  who  had  an  affection 
for  him  upon  account  of  Plato,  his  brother,  was  the  only  person 
that  could  prevail  upon  him  to  change  his  resolution. 

Meeting  him  one  day,  he  accosted  him  with  so  much  address 
and  dexterity,  that  he  engaged  him  to  give  him  the  hearing, 
which  was  already  a great  point  gained.  You  are  desirous 
then  of  governing  the  republic  ? said  he  to  him.  True,  replied 

x Aul.  Gell.  Noct.  Att.  1.  vi.  c.  10.  y iElian.  1.  iii.  c.  20. 

2 Xenoph.  Memorab.  1.  iii.  p 772 — 774. 


220 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


Glauco.  You  cannot  have  a more  noble  design,  answered  So- 
crates : for  if  you  succeed,  you  will  have  it  in  your  power  to 
serve  your  friends  effectually,  to  aggrandize  your  family,  and 
to  extend  the  confines  of  your  country.  You  will  make  your - 
self  known  not  only  at  Athens,  but  throughout  all  Greece ; 
and  perhaps  your  renown,  like  that  of  Themistocles,  may  spread 
abroad  amongst  the  barbarous  nations.  In  short,  wherever 
you  are,  you  will  attract  the  respect  arid  admiration  of  the 
whole  world. 

So  smooth  and  insinuating  a prelude  was  extremely  pleasing 
to  the  young  man,  who  was  attacked  on  the  blind  side.  He 
stayed  willingly,  without  requiring  to  be  pressed  so  to  do,  and 
the  conversation  continued.  Since  you  desire  to  be  esteemed 
and  honoured , no  doubt  your  view  is  to  be  useful  to  the  public  ? 
— Certainly.  — Tell  me  then,  1 beg  you,  in  the  name  of  the 
gods,  what  is  the  first  service  you  propose  to  render  the  state  ? 
As  Glauco  seemed  at  a loss,  and  meditated  upon  what  he  should 
answer  : I presume,  continues  Socrates,  it  is  to  enrich  it,  that 
is  to  say,  to  augment  its  revenues. — Exactly  so. — You  are 
well  versed  then  undoubtedly  in  the  revenues  of  the  state,  and 
know  perfectly  to  what  they  may  amount  ? You  have  not 
failed  to  make  them  your  particular  study,  in  order  that, 
if  a fund  should  happen  to  fail  on  a sudden  by  any  unforeseen 
accident,  you  might  be  able  to-supply  the  deficiency  by  another  ? 
— I protest,  replied  Glauco,  that  never  entered  into  my 
thoughts. — At  least  you, will  tell  me  to  what  the  expenses  of 
the  republic  amount ; for  you  must  know  the  importance  of 
retrenching  such  as  are  superfluous  ? — I own  I am  as  little 
informed  in  this  point  as  the  other.' — You  must  therefore  defer 
your  design  of  enriching  the  state  till  another  time  ; for  it  is 
impossible  you  should  do  it,  whilst  you  are  unacquainted  with 
its  revenues  and  expenses. 

But,  said  Glauco,  there  is  still  another  means  which  you 
have  not  mentioned.  A state  may  be  enriched  by  the  ruin  of 
its  enemies. — You  are  in  the  right,  replied  Socrates.  But 
that  depends  upon  its  being  the  strongest  ; otherwise  it  incurs 
the  danger  of  losing  what  it  has.  For  which  reason,  he  who 
talks  of  engaging  in  a war,  ought  to  know  the  forces  on  both 
sides;  that  if  he  finds  his  own  party  strongest,  he  may  boldly 
advise  the  war,  and  if  weakest,  dissuade  the  people  from  un- 
dertaking it.  Now,  do  you  know  the  strength  of  our  repub- 
lic, and  that  of  our  enemies,  by  sea  and  land  ? Have  you  a 
state  of  them  in  writing  ? Be  so  kind  to  let  me  see  it. — I 
have  it  not  at  present,  said  Glauco.  I see,  then,  said  Socrates, 
that  we  shall  not  soon  enter  into  a war,  if  you  are  charged  with 
the  government ; for  you  have  abundance  of  inquiries  to  make, 
and  much  pains  to  go  through,  before  you  will  resolve  upon  it. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


221 


He  ran  over  in  this  manner  several  other  articles  of  no  less 
importance,  with  which  Glauco  appeared  equally  unacquainted  ; 
tili  he  brought  him  to  confess  how  ridiculous  those  people  were, 
who  have  the  rashness  to  intrude  themselves  into  the  adminis- 
tration of  affairs,  without  any  other  preparation  for  the  service 
of  the  public  than  that  of  a high  esteem  for  themselves,  and  an 
immoderate  ambition  of  rising  to  the  first  places  and  dignities. 
Have  a care , clear  Glauco,  said  he  to  him,  lest  a too  warm  de- 
sire of  honours  should  deceive  you  into  pursuits  that  may  cover 
you  with  shame,  by  setting  your  incapacity  and  slender  abilities 
in  full  light. 

Glauco  improved  from  the  wise  admonitions  of  Socrates,  and 
took  time  to  inform  himself  in  private  before  he  ventured  to  ap- 
pear in  public.  This  is  a lesson  for  all  ages,  and  may  be  very 
useful  to  persons  in  all  stations  and  conditions  of  life. 

Socrates  did  not  urge  his  friends  to  enter  early  upon  public 
employments  ;a  but  first  to  take  pains  to  improve  their  minds 
by  the  knowledge  necessary  to  their  success  in  them.  A man 
must  be  very  simple, b said  he,  to  believe  that  the  mechanic  arts 
are  to  be  acquired  without  the  help  of  proper  masters,  and  that 
the  knowledge  requisite  in  governing  slates,  which  is  the  highest 
degree  of  human  prudence , demands  no  previous  labour  and 
application.  His  great  care,  in  regard  to  those  who  aspired  at 
public  employments,  was  to  form  their  manners  upon  the  solid 
principles  of  probity  and  justice  ; and  especially  to  inspire  them 
with  a sincere  love  of  their  country,  with  the  most  ardent  passion 
for  the  public  good,  and  a high  idea  of  the  power  and  goodness 
of  the  gods  ; because,  without  these  qualities,  all  other  abilities 
serve  only  to  render  men  more  wicked,  and  more  capable  of 
doing  evil.  Xenophon  has  transmitted  to  us  a conversation  of 
Socrates  with  Euthydemus,  upon  Providence,  which  is  one  of 
the  finest  passages  to  be  found  in  the  writings  of  the  ancients. 

Did  you  never  reflect  within  yourself,  says  Socrates  to  Eu- 
thydemus, how  much  care  the  gods  have  taken  to  bestow  upon 
man  all  that  is  necessary  for  him  ? Never,  I assure  you,  replied 
he. — You  see,  continued  Socrates,  how  necessary  light  is,  and 
how  precious  that  gift  of  the  gods  ought  to  appear  to  us. — 
Without  it,  added  Euthydemus,  we  should  be  like  the  blind,  and 
all  nature  as  if  it  were  dead : but  because  we  have  occasion  for 
intervals  of  relaxation,  they  have  also  given  us  the  night  of  our 
repose. — You  are  in  the  right;  and  for  this  we  ought  to  ren- 
der them  continued  praises  and  thanksgiving.  They  have  or- 
dained that  the  sun,  that  bright  and  luminous  star,  should 
preside  over  the  day  to  distinguish  its  different  parts,  and  that 
its  light  should  serve  not  only  to  discover  the  wonders  of  na- 
ture, but  to  dispense  over  every  part  life  and  heat ; and  at  the 
a Xenoph.  Memorab.  1.  iv.  p.  800.  b Ibid.  p.  792. 


222 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


same  lime  they  have  commanded  the  moon  and  stars  to  illumi- 
nate the  night,  which  of  itself  is  dark  and  obscure.  Is  there 
any  thing  more  worthy  of  admiration  than  this  variety  and 
vicissitude  of  day  and  night,  of  light  and  darkness,  of  labour 
and  rest ; — and  all  this  for  the  convenience  and  good  of  mdn  ? 
Socrates  enumerates  in  like  manner  the  infinite  advantages  we 
receive  from  fire  and  water  for  the  necessaries  of  life  ; and  con- 
tinuing to  observe  upon  the  wonderful  attention  of  Providence 
in  all  that  regards  us  : What  say  you,  pursued  he,  upon  the 
suns  return  after  winter  to  revisit  u$  ; and  that  as  the  fruits 
of  one  season  wither  and  decay,  he  ripens  new  ones  to  succeed 
them  ? that  having  rendered  man  this  service,  he  retires,  lest 
he  should  incommode  him  by  excess  of  heat ; and  then,  after 
having  receded  to  a certain  point,  which  he  could  not  jmss 
without  putting  us  in  danger  of  perishing  with  cold,  that  he 
returns  in  the  same  track  to  resume  his  place  in  those  parts  of 
the  heavens  where  his  presence  is  most  beneficial  to  us  ? And 
because  we  could  neither  support  the  cold  nor  heat,  if  we  were 
to  pass  in  an  instant  from  the  one  to  the  other,  are  you  not 
struck  with  admiration  that  this  luminary  approaches  and  re- 
moves so  slowly,  that  the  two  extremes  arrive  by  almost  insen- 
sible degrees  ? Is  it  possible  not  to  discover,  in  this  disposition 
of  the  seasons  of  the  year, c a providence  and  goodness  atten- 
tive not  only  to  our  necessities,  but  even  to  our  delights  arid 
enjoyments  ? 

All  these  things,  said  Euthydemus,  make  me  doubt  whether 
the  gods  have  any  other  employment  than  to  shower  down  their 
gifts  and  benefits  upon  mankind.  There  is  one  point,  however, 
that  puts  me  to  a stand,  which  is,  that  the  brute  animals  par- 
take of  all  these  blessings  as  well  as  ourselves. — Yes,  replied 
Socrates  : but  do  you  not  observe,  that  all  these  animals  subsist 
only  for  mans  service  ? The  strongest  and  most  vigorous  of 
them  he  subjects  at  his  will ; he  makes  them  tame  and  gentle, 
and  employs  them  with  great  advantage  in  war,  tillage,  and 
the  other  occasions  of  life. 

What  if  we  consider  man  in  himself  ? Here  Socrates  ex- 
amines the  diversity  of  the  senses,  by  the  ministry  of  which 
man  enjoys  all  that  is  best  and  most  excellent  in  nature  ; the 
vivacity  of  his  mind,  and  therefore  of  his  reason,  which  exalt 
him  infinitely  above  all  other  animals ; the  wonderful  gift  of 
speech,  by  the  means  of  which  we  communicate  our  thoughts 
reciprocally,  publish  our  laws,  and  govern  states. 

From  all  this,  says  Socrates,  it  is  easy  to  discern  that  there 
are  gods,  and  that  they  have  man  in  their  particular  care, 
though  he  cannot  discover  them  by  his  senses.  Do  we  perceive 

c "Qpag  appoTTovcrag  7rp og  tovto  7raptxstv>  a"L  vpw  ov  povov  u>v  dtopeOci  tt oWa 
Kal  rcavrola  TrapaGKtva^ovcnv,  aKKa  teal  olg  ev<f>pcuv6pe6a. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS, 


223 


the  thunder  whilst  it  crushes  every  thing  which  opposes  it  ? 
Do  ive  distinguish  the  winds  whilst  they  make  such  dreadful 
havoc  before  our  eyes  ? Our  soul  itself  which  is  so  intimately 
connected  with  us,  which  moves  and  actuates  us,  is  it  visible  ; 
can  we  behold  it ! — It  is  the  same  with  regard  to  the  gods,  of 
whom  none  are  visible  in  the  distribution  of  their  favours. 
This  Great  God  himself,  (these  words  are  remarkable,  and 
demonstrate  that  Socrates  acknowledged  one  supreme  God, 
the  Author  of  all  being,  and  superior  to  all  others,  who  were 
only  the  ministers  of  his  will,)  this  Great  God,  who  has 
formed  the  universe,  and  supports  the  stupendous  work,  whose 
every  part  is  finished  with  the  utmost  goodness  and  harmony  ; 
he  ivlio  preserves  them  perpetually  in  immortal  vigour,  and 
causes  them  to  obey  him  with  a never-failing  punctuality,  and 
a rapidity  not  to  be  followed  by  our  imagination  ; this  God 
makes  himself  sufficiently  visible  by  the  endless  wonders  of 
which  he  is  author  ; but  continues  always  invisible  in  himself 
Let  us  not  then  refuse  to  believe  even  what  we  do  not  see  ; and 
let  us  supply  the  defects  of  our  corporeal  eyes,  by  using  those 
of  the  soul : but  especially  let  us  learn  to  render  the  just 
homage  of  respect  and  veneration  to  the  Divinity,  whose  will 
it  seems  to  be,  that  we  should  have  no  other  perception  of  him 
than  by  his  benefits  vouchsafed  to  us.  Now  this  adoration, 
this  homage,  consists  in  pleasing  him,  and  we  can  only  please 
him  in  doing  his  will. 

In  this  manner  Socrates  instructed  youth  :d  these  are  the 
principles  and  sentiments  with  which  he  inspired  them  : on  the 
one  side,  a perfect  submission  to  the  laws  and  magistrates,  in 
which  he  made  justice  consist;  on  the  other,  a profound  regard 
for  the  Divinity,  which  constitutes  religion.  In  things  surpass- 
ing our  understanding  he  advises  us  to  consult  the  gods  ; and 
as  they  impart  themselves  only  to  those  that  please  them,  he 
recommends  above  all  things  the  making  of  them  propitious  by 
a prudent  and  regular  conduct.  The  gods  are  free,*  says  he, 
and  it  depends  upon  them  either  to  grant  what  we  ask,  or  to 
give  us  the  directly  reverse  of  it.  He  cites  an  excellent  prayer 
from  a poet  whose  name  has  not  come  down  to  us  : Great  God, 
give  us,  we  beseech  thee,  those  good  things  of  which  we  stand 
in  need,  whether  we  crave  them  or  not ; and  remove  from  us 
all  those  which  may  be  hurtful  to  us,  even  though  we  implore 
them  of  thee.  The  vulgar  imagined,  that  there  are  things 
which  the  gods  observe,  and  others  of  which  they  take  no 
notice : but  Socrates  taught,  that  the  gods  observe  all  our  ac- 
tions and  words  ; that  they  penetrate  into  our  most  secret 

d Xenoph.  Memorab.  1.  iv.  p.  803  et  805. 

e 'E7ri  Stdlg  eoTiv,  o Ifiai,  toars  ical  Sidovcu  a rr  av  Tig  tvxofievog  Tvyxavyj.  icai 
ravavria  tov-wv.  Plat,  in  Alcib.  ii.  p.  148. 


224 


HISTORY  OF  THE 

thoughts ; are  present  in  all  our  deliberations  ; and  that  thev 
inspire  us  in  all  our  actions.  J 

SECT.  V. 


Socrates  applies  himself  to  discredit  the 
Athenians.  What  is  to  be  understood 
him. 


sophists  in  the  opinion  of  the  young 
of  the  ironical  character  ascribed  to 


Socrates  found  it  necessary  to  guard  the  young  people  against 
a bad  taste  which  had  prevailed  for  some  time  in  Greece.  A 
sect  of  assuming  men  arose,  who,  ranking  themselves  as  the 
hrst  sages  of  Greece,  were  in  their  conduct  entirely  the  reverse. 
t or  instead  of  being  infinitely  remote  from  all  avarice  and  am- 
1 ion,  Jike  Pittacus,  Bias,  Thales,  and  the  others,  who  made 
the  study  of  wisdom  their  principal  occupation,  these  men  were 
ambitious  and  covetous,  entered  into  the  intrigues  and  affairs  of 
ttie  world,  and  made  a trade  of  their  pretended  knowledge. 
Ihey  called  themselves  sophists.^  They  wandered  from  city  to 
city,  and  caused  themselves  to  be  cried  up  as  oracles,  and  walked 
about  attended  by  crowds  of  their  disciples,  who  through  a kind 
ot  enchantment,  abandoned  the  embraces  of  their  parents,  to 
follow  these  proud  teachers,  whom  they  paid  a great  price  for 
tieir  instruction.  There  was  nothing  these  masters  did  not 
profess  theology,  physics,  ethics,  arithmetic,  astronomy, 
grammar,  music,  poetry,  rhetoric,  and  history.  They  knew 
every  thing  and  could  teach  every  thing.  Their  greatest 
supposed  skill  lay  in  philosophy  and  eloquence.  Most  of  them, 
like  Gorgias,  valued  themselves  upon  giving  immediate  answers 
to  all  questions  that  could  be  proposed  to  them.  Their  youno- 
disciples  acquired  nothing  from  their  precepts,  but  a silly  esteem 
lor  themselves,  and  a universal  contempt  for  every  body  else ; so 
thatnota  scholar  quitted  these  schools  but  was  more  impertinent 
than  when  he  first  entered  them. 

It  was  necessary  to  decry  the  false  eloquence  and  bad  logic 
of  these  proud  teachers  in  the  opinion  of  the  young  Athenians, 
lo  attack  them  openly,  and  dispute  with  them  in  a direct  man- 
ner, by  a connected  discourse,  was  what  Socrates  could  well 
have  done,  for  he  possessed  in  a supreme  degree  the  talents  of 
elocution  and  reasoning;  but  this  was  not  the  way  to  succeed 
against  great  haranguers,  whose  sole  aim  was  to  dazzle  their 
auditors  with  a vain  glitter  and  rapid  flow  of  words.  He  there- 
fore took  another  course, h and  employing  the  artifices  and  ad- 
dress of  irony,  which  he  knew  how  to  apply  with  wonderful  art 


. ' \ Plat,  in  Apolog.  p.  19,  20. 

tur.  S™S’!T  129  qU1  OStentati0niS  aut  ^stfls  causa  philosophan- 
J'epSmt!”  omnibus  lepore  atque  humani. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


225 


and  delicacy,  he  chose  to  conceal,  under  the  appearance  of 
simplicity  and  the  affectation  of  ignorance,  all  the  beauty  and 
great  force  of  his  genius.  Nature,  which  had  given  him  so  fine  a 
soul,  seemed  to  have  formed  his  outside  expressly  for  support- 
ing the  ironic  character ; he  was  very  ugly,  and,  besides  that, 
had  something  very  dull  and  stupid  in  his  physiognomy.  * The 
whole  air  of  his  person,  which  had  nothing  but  what  was  very 
common  and  very  poor  in  it,  perfectly  corresponded  with  that 
of  his  countenance. 

When  he  happened  to  fall  into  the  company  of  some  one  of 
these  sophists, k he  proposed  his  doubts  with  a diffident  and  mo- 
dest air,  asked  simple  questions  in  a plain  manner,  and  as  if  he 
had  been  incapable  of  expressing  himself  otherwise,  made  use 
of  trivial  comparisons  and  allusions  taken  from  the  meanest 
employments.  The  sophist  heard  him  with  a scornful  attention, 
and  instead  of  giving  him  a precise  answer,  had  recourse  to  his 
common-place  phrases,  and  talked  a great  deal  without  saying 
any  thing  to  the  purpose.  Socrates,  after  having  praised  (in 
order  not  to  enrage)  his  adversary,  entreated  him  to  adapt  him- 
self to  his  weakness,  and  to  descend  so  low  as  him,  by  satisfy- 
ing his  questions  in  a few  words  ; because  neither  his  wit  nor 
memory  was  capable  of  comprehending  or  retaining  so  many 
fine  and  exalted  notions,  and  all  his  knowledge  was  confined  to 
question  and  answer. 

This  passed  in  a numerous  assembly,  and  the  teacher  could 
not  recede.  When  Socrates  had  once  got  him  out  of  his  in- 
trenchment,  by  obliging  him  to  answer  his  questions  succinctly, 
he  carried  him  on  from  one  to  another,  to  the  most  absurd  con- 
sequences ; and  after  having  reduced  him  either  to  contradict 
himself,  or  be  silent,  he  complained  that  the  learned  man 
would  not  vouchsafe  to  instruct  him.  The  young  people,  how- 
ever, perceived  the  incapacity  of  their  master,  and  changed 
their  admiration  for  him  into  contempt.  Thus  the  name  of  so- 
phist became  odious  and  ridiculous. 

It  is  easy  to  judge  that  men  of  the  sophist’s  character,  of 
which  1 have  now  spoken,  who  were  in  high  credit  with  the  great, 
who  lorded  it  amongst  the  youth  of  Athens,  and  had  been  long- 
celebrated  for  their  wit  and  learning,  could  not  be  attacked 
with  impunity  ; and  the  rather,  because  they  had  been  assailed 
in  the  two  most  sensible  points,  their  fame  and  their  interest. 

1 Zopyrus  physiognomon — stupidum  esse  Socratem  dixit  et  bardum.  Cic. 
de  Fat.  n.  10. 

k Socrates  de  se  ipse  detrahens  in  disputati'one,  plus  tribuebat  iis,  quos  vole- 
bat  refellere.  Ita  cum  aliud  diceret  atque  sentiret,  libenter  uti  solitus  est 
illS.  dissimulation e quam  Grseci  tipwveiav  vocant.  Cic.  *Jcad.  Quaest.  1.  iv.  n.  15. 

Sed  et  ilium  quern  nominavi  (Gorgiam)  et  cseteros  sophistas,  ut  e Platone 
mtelligi  potest,  lusos  videmus  a Socrate.  Is  enim  percontando  atque  interro- 
gando  elicere  solebat  eorum  opiniones  quibuscum  disserebat,  ut  ad  ea,  quae  ii  v 
respondissent,  si  quid  videretur,  diceret.  Cic.  de  Finib.  1.  ii.  n.  2. 

VOL.  III.  q 


226 


history  of  the 


Socrates,1  for  having  endeavoured  to  unmask  their  vices  and 
discredit  their  false  eloquence,  experienced  from  these  men, 
who  were  equally  corrupt  and  haughty,  all  that  could  be  fear- 
ed or  expected  from  the  most  malignant  envy  and  the  most  en- 
venomed hatred  ; to  which  it  is  now  time  to  proceed. 

SECT.  VI. 

Socrates  is  accused  of  holding  bad  opinions  in  regard  to  the  gods,  and  of  corrupt- 
ing the  Athenian  youth.  He  defends  himself  without  art  or  fear.  He  is 
condemned  to  die. 

Socrates  was  accused  a little  before  the  first 
Ant  X C.^402.  year  ^he  ninety-fifth  Olympiad,  soon  after  the 
expulsion  of  the  thirty  tyrants  out  of  Athens,  in 
the  sixty-ninth  year  of  his  life  ; but  the  prosecution  had  been 
projected  long  before.  The  oracle  of  Delphi,  which  had  de- 
clared him  the  wisest  of  mankind  ; the  contempt  into  which  he 
had  brought  the  doctrine  and  morals  of  the  sophists  of  his  time, 
who  were  then  in  high  reputation  ; the  liberty  with  which  he 
attacked  all  vice  ; the  singular  attachment  of  his  disciples  to 
his  person  and  maxims,  had  all  concurred  in  alienating  people 
against  him,  and  had  drawn  abundance  of  envy  upon  him. 

His  enemies  having  sworn  his  destruction,™  and  perceiving 
the  difficulty  of  the  attempt,  prepared  the  way  for  it  at  a dis- 
tance, and  at  first  attacked  him  in  the  dark,  and  by  obscure  and 
secret  methods.  It  is  said,  that  in  order  to  sound  the  people’s 
disposition  towards  Socrates,  and  to  try  whether  it  would  ever 
be  safe  to  cite  him  before  the  judges,  they  engaged  Aristo- 
phanes to  bring  him  upon  the  stage  in  a comedy,  wherein  the 
first  seeds  of  the  accusation  meditated  against  him  were  sown. 
It  is  not  certain  whether  Aristophanes  was  suborned  by  Any- 
tus  and  the  rest  of  Socrates’s  enemies  to  compose  that  satirical 
piece  against  him.  It  is  very  likely  that  Socrates’s  declared 
contempt  for  all  comedies  in  general,  and  for  those  of  Aristo- 
phanes in  particular,  whilst  he  professed  an  extraordinary  es- 
teem for  the  tragedies  of  Euripides,  might  be  the  poet’s  true 
motive  for  taking  his  revenge  of  the  philosopher.  However  it 
were,  Aristophanes,  to  the  disgrace  of  poetry,  lent  his  pen  to 
the  malice  of  Socrates’s  enemies  or  his  own  resentment,  and 
employed  his  whole  genius  and  capacity  to  depreciate  the  best 
and  most  excellent  man  that  ever  the  pagan  world  produced. 

He  composed  a piece  called  The  Clouds,  wherein  he  intro- 
duces the  philosopher  perched  in  a basket,  and  hoisted  up  amidst 
the  air  and  clouds,  from  whence  he  delivers  maxims,  or  rather 
the  most  ridiculous  subtilties.  A very  aged  debtor,  who  de- 
sires to  escape  the  close  pursuit  of  his  creditors,  comes  to  him 
to  be  taught  the  art  of  tricking  them  at  law  ; to  prove  by  un- 
1 Plat,  in  Apolog.  p.  23.  m jElian.  1.  ii.  c.  13.  Plat,  in  Apolog.  Socrat.  p.  19. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


227 


answerable  reasons  that  he  owes  them  nothing  ; and,  in  a word, 
of  a very  bad,  to  make  a very  good,  cause.  But  finding  him- 
self incapable  of  any  improvement  from  the  sublime  lessons  of 
his  new  master,  he  brings  his  son  to  him  in  his  stead.  This 
young  man  soon  after  quits  this  learned  school  so  well  instruct- 
ed, that  at  their  first  meeting  he  beats  his  father,  and  proves  to 
him  by  subtle  but  invincible  arguments,  that  he  has  reason  for 
treating  him  in  that  manner.  In  every  scene  where  Socrates 
appears,  the  poet  makes  him  utter  a thousand  impertinences, 
and  as  many  impieties  against  the  gods,  and  in  particular  against 
Jupiter.  He  makes  him  talk  like  a man  of  the  greatest  vanity 
and  highest  opinion  of  himself,  with  an  equal  contempt  for  all 
others,  who  out  of  a criminal  curiosity  is  desirous  of  penetrating 
into  what  passes  in  the  heavens,  and  diving  into  the  abysses 
of  the  earth  ; who  boasts  of  having  always  the  means  of  mak- 
ing injustice  triumph  ; and  who  is  not  contented  with  keep- 
ing those  secrets  for  his  own  use,  but  teaches  them  to 
others,  and  thereby  corrupts  youth.  All  this  is  attended  with  a 
refined  raillery  and  wit,  that  could  not  fail  of  highly  pleasing  a 
people  of  so  quick  and  delicate  a taste  as  the  Athenians,  who 
were  besides  naturally  jealous  of  all  transcendant  merit.  They 
were  so  much  charmed  with  it,  that  without  waiting  the  con- 
clusion of  the  representation,  they  ordered  the  name  of  Aristo- 
phanes to  be  set  down  above  all  his  competitors. 

Socrates,  who  had  been  informed  that  he  was  to  be  brought 
upon  the  stage,  went  that  day  to  the  theatre  to  see  the  comedy, 
contrary  to  his  custom  ; for  it  was  not  common  for  him  to  go 
to  those  assemblies,  unless  when  some  new  tragedy  of  Euri- 
pides’ was  to  be  performed,  who  was  his  intimate  friend,  and 
whose  pieces  he  esteemed  upon  account  of  the  solid  princi- 
ples of  morality  he  took  care  to  intersperse  in  them.  It  has, 
however,  been  observed,  that  he  once  had  not  patience  to  wait 
the  conclusion  of  one  of  them,  wherein  the  actor  had  advanced 
a dangerous  maxim,  but  went  out  immediately,  without  consi- 
dering the  injury  which  his  withdrawing  might  do  to  his  friend’s 
reputation.  He  never  went  to  comedies,  unless  that  Alcibi- 
ades  and  Critias  forced  him  thither  against  his  will;  as  he  was 
offended  at  the  unbounded  licentiousness  which  reigned  in  them, 
and  could  not  endure  to  see  the  reputation  of  his  fellow-citi- 
zens publicly  torn  in  pieces.  He  was  present  at  this  without 
the  least  emotion,  and  without  expressing  any  discontent : and 
some  strangers  being  anxious  to  know  who  the  Socrates  in- 
tended by  the  play  was,  he  rose  up  from  his  seat,  and  showed 
himself  during  the  whole  representation.  He  told  those  who 
were  near  him,  n and  were  amazed  at  his  indifference  and  pa- 
tience, that  he  imagined  himself  at  a great  entertainment,  where 
n Flut.  de  educ.  liber,  p.  10. 

Q 2 


228 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


lie  was  agreeably  laughed  at,  and  that  it  was  necessary  to  be 
able  to  bear  a joke. 

There  is  no  probability,  as  I have  already  observed,  that 
Aristophanes,  though  he  was  not  Socrates’s  friend,  had  entered 
into  the  black  conspiracy  of  his  enemies,  and  had  any  thought 
of  occasioning  his  destruction.  It  is  more  probable,  that  a 
poet  who  diverted  the  public  at  the  expense  of  the  principal 
magistrates  and  most  celebrated  generals,  was  also  willing  to 
make  them  laugh  at  the  expense  of  a philosopher.  All  the 
guilt  was  on  the  side  of  those  who  envied  him,  and  his  enemies, 
who  were  in  hopes  of  making  great  use  of  the  representation 
of  this  comedy  against  him.  The  artifice  was  indeed  deep  and 
well  planned.  In  bringing  a man  upon  the  stage,  he  is  only 
represented  by  his  bad,  weak,  or  equivocal  qualities.  That 
view  of  him  is  followed  with  ridicule : ridicule  accustoms  peo- 
ple to  the  contempt  of  his  person,  and  contempt  proceeds  to 
injustice.  For  the  world  are  naturally  emboldened  in  insult- 
ing, abusing,  and  injuring  a man,  when  once  he  becomes  the 
object  of  general  contempt. 

These  were  the  first  blows  struck  at  him,  and  served  as  an 
essay  and  trial  of  the  great  affair  meditated  against  him.  It 
lav  dormant  a long  while,  and  did  not  break  out  until  twenty 
years  afterwards.  The  troubles  of  the  republic  might  well  oc- 
casion that  long  delay.  For  it  was  in  that  interval  that  the  en- 
terprise against  Sicily  happened,  the  event  of  which  was  so 
unfortunate,  that  Athens  was  besieged  and  taken  by  Lysander, 
who  changed  its  form  of  government,  and  established  the  thir- 
ty tyrants,  who  were  not  expelled  till  a very  short  time  before 
the  affair  we  speak  of. 

Melitus  then  appeared  as  accuser,  and  enter- 
Ani  C?40l  ec^  a Process  in  for**1  against  Socrates.  His 
accusation  consisted  of  two  heads.  The  first 
was,  that  he  did  not  admit  the  gods  acknowledged  by  the  re- 
public, and  introduced  new  divinities  : the  second,  that  he 
corrupted  the  youth  of  Athens  : and  concluded  with  inferring 
that  sentence  of  death  ought  to  pass  against  him. 

Never  had  accusation  so  little  foundation,  or  even  probability 
and  pretext,  as  this.  Socrates  for  forty  years  had  made  it  his 
profession  to  instruct  the  xVthenian  youth.  He  had  advanced 
no  opinions  in  secret  and  in  the  dark.  His  lessons  were  given 
publicly,  and  in  the  view  of  great  numbers  of  auditors.  He 
bad  always  observed  the  same  conduct,  and  taught  the  same 
principles-  What  then  could  be  Melitus’s  motive  for  this  ac- 
cusation after  such  a length  of  time  ? How  came  his  zeal  for 
the  public  good,  after  having  been  languid  and  drowsy  for  so 
many  years,  to  awake  on  a sudden,  and  become  so  violent  ? Is 
it  pardonable  in  so  zealous  and  worthy  a citizen  as  Melitus 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


229 


would  wish  to  appear,  to  have  continued  mute  and  inactive, 
whilst  a person  was  corrupting  the  whole  youth  of  that  city,  by 
instilling  seditious  maxims  into  them,  and  inspiring  them  with 
a disgust  and  contempt  for  the  established  government?  For 
he  who  does  not  prevent  an  evil  when  it  is  in  his  power,  is 
equally  criminal  with  him  that  commits  it.  These  are  the  ex- 
pressions of  Libanius  in  a declamation  of  his  called  the  Apo- 
logy of  Socrates.0  But,  continues  he,  allowing  that  Melitus, 
whether  through  forgetfulness,  indifference,  or  real  and  serious 
engagements,  never  thought  for  so  many  years  of  entering  an 
accusation  against  Socrates  ; how  came  it  to  pass,  that  in  a city 
like  Athens,  which  abounded  with  wise  magistrates,  and,  what 
is  more,  with  bold  informers,  so  public  a conspiracy  as  that 
imputed  to  Socrates  should  have  escaped  the  eyes  of  those 
whom  either  the  love  of  their  country  or  invidious  malignity 
rendered  so  vigilant  and  attentive  ? Nothing  was  ever  less  cre- 
dible, or  more  void  of  all  probability. 

As  soon  as  the  conspiracy  broke  out,P  the  friends  of  Socrates 
prepared  for  his  defence.  Lysias,  the  most  able  orator  of  his 
time,  brought  him  an  elaborate  discourse  of  his  composing, 
wherein  he  had  set  forth  the  reasons  and  measures  of  Socrates 
in  their  fullest  light,  and  interspersed  the  whole  with  tender 
and  pathetic  strokes, ^ capable  of  moving  the  most  obdurate 
hearts.  Socrates  read  it  with  pleasure,  and  approved  it  very 
much  ; but  as  it  was  more  conformable  to  the  rules  of  rhetoric 
than  the  sentiments  and  fortitude  of  a philosopher,  he  told  him 
frankly  that  it  did  not  suit  him.  Upon  which  Lysias,  having 
asked  how  it  was  possible  to  be  well  done,  and  at  the  same 
time  not  suit  him  : — In  the  same  manner,  said  he,  using,  ac- 
cording to  his  custom,  a vulgar  comparison,  that  an  excellent 
workman  might  bring  me  magnificent  apparel,  or  shoes  embroi- 
dered with  gold,  to  which  nothing  would  be  wanting  on  his 
part,  but  which,  however,  would  not  fit  me.  He  persisted 
therefore  inflexibly  in  the  resolution  he  had  formed,  not  to  de- 
mean himself  by  begging  suffrages  in  the  low,  abject  manner 
common  at  that  time.  He  employed  neither  artifice  nor  the 
glitter  of  eloquence  : he  had  no  recourse  either  to  solicitation 
or  entreaty  : he  brought  neither  his  wife  nor  children  to  incline 
the  judges  in  his  favour  by  their  sighs  and  tears.  Neverthe- 
less/ though  he  firmly  refused  to  make  use  of  any  voice  but  his 
own  in  his  defence,  and  to  appear  before  his  judges  in  the  sub- 
missive posture  of  a suppliant,  he  did  not  behave  in  that  man- 
ner out  of  pride,  or  contempt  of  the  tribunal : it  was  from  a 

0 Liban.  in  Apolog.  Socrat.  p.  645 — 648. 
p Cicer.  1.  1.  de  Orat.  n.  231 — 233.  Quint.  1.  xi.  c.  1. 

r His  et  talibus  adductus  Socrates,  nec  patronum  qusesivit  ad  judicium  ca- 
pitis, nec  judicibus  supplex  fuit ; adhibuitque  liberam  contumaciam  k magni- 
tudine  animi  ductam,  non  a superbit.  Cic.  Tusc.  Qucest.  1.  i. 


230 


HISTORY  OP  THE 


noble  and  intrepid  assurance,  resulting  from  greatness  of  soul, 
and  the  usual  attendant  upon  consciousness  of  truth  and  inno- 
cence. So  that  his  defence  had  nothing  timorous  or  weak  in 
it.  His  discourse  was  bold,  manly,  generous,  without  passion, 
without  emotion,  full  of  the  noble  liberty  of  a philosopher,  with 
no  other  ornament  than  that  of  truth,  and  displaying  throughout 
the  character  and  language  of  innocence.  Plato,  who  was  pre- 
sent, transcribed  it  afterwards,  and  without  any  additions,  com- 
posed from  it  the  work  which  he  calls  The  apology  of  Socrates: 
one  of  the  most  consummate  masterpieces  of  antiquity.  I shall 
here  make  an  extract  from  it. 

Upon  the  day  assigned,®  the  proceeding  commenced  in  the 
usual  forms  ; the  parties  appeared  before  the  judges,  and  Meli- 
tus  spoke.  ’The  worse  his  cause,  and  the  less  provided  it  was 
with  proofs,  the  more  occasion  he  had  for  address  and  art  to 
cover  its  weakness.  He  omitted  nothing  that  might  render  the 
adverse  party  odious  ; and  instead  of  reasons,  which  could  not 
but  fail  him,  he  substituted  the  delusive  glitter  of  a lively  and 
pompous  eloquence.  Socrates,  in  observing  that  he  could  not 
tell  what  impression  the  discourse  of  his  accusers  might  make 
upon  the  judges,  owns,  that  for  his  part  he  scarce  knew  himself, 
such  an  artful  colouring  and  likelihood  had  they  given  to  their 
arguments,  though  there  was  not  the  least  word  of  truth  in  all 
they  had  advanced. 

I have  already  said  that  their  accusation  consisted  of  two 
heads.1  The  first  regards  religion.  Socrates  inquires  out  of 
an  impious  curiosity  into  what  passes  in  the  heavens  and  in  the 
bowels  of  the  earth.  He  does  not  acknowledge  the  gods 
adored  by  his  country.  He  endeavours  to  introduce  new 
deities  ; and,  if  he  may  be  believed,  an  unknown  god  inspires 
him  in  all  his  actions.  To  make  short,  he  believes  there  are  no 
gods. 

The  second  head  relates  to  the  interest  and  government  of  the 
state.  Socrates  corrupts  the  youth  by  instilling  bad  sentiments 
concerning  the  Divinity  into  them,  by  teaching  them  a contempt 
of  the  laws,  and  the  order  established  in  the  republic  ; by  de- 
claring openly  against  the  choice  of  the  magistrates  by  lot ; u 
by  exclaiming  against  the  public  assemblies,  where  he  is  never 
seen  to  appear  ; by  teaching  the  art  of  making  the  worst  of 
causes  good  ; by  attaching  the  youth  to  himself  out  of  a spirit 

8 Plat,  in  Apolog.  Socrat.  Xenoph.  in  Apolog.  Socrat.  et  in  Memor. 

‘ Plat,  in  Apolog.  p.  24. 

u Socrates  in  reality  did  not  approve  this  manner  of  electing  the  magis- 
trates. He  observed,  that  when  a pilot,  a musician,  or  an  architect  is  wanted, 
nobody  is  willing  to  take  him  at  a venture ; though  the  faults  of  these  people 
are  far  from  being  of  such  great  importance  as  those  errors  which  are  com- 
mitted in  the  administration  of  the  republic.  Xenoph.  Memorab.  1.  fig.  1. 
p.  712. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


231 


of  pride  and  ambition,  under  the  pretence  of  instructing  them  ; 
and  by  proving  to  children  that  they  may  treat  their  parents  ill 
with  impunity.  He  glories  in  a pretended  oracle,  and  believes 
himself  the  wisest  of  mankind.  He  taxes  all  others  with  folly, 
and  condemns  without  reserve  all  their  maxims  and  actions  ; 
constituting  himself  by  his  own  authority  the  general  censor 
and  reformer  of  the  state.  Notwithstanding  which,  the  effects 
of  his  lessons  may  be  seen  in  the  persons  of  Critias  and  Alci- 
biades,  his  most  intimate  friends,  who  have  done  great  mischiefs 
to  their  country,  and  have  been  the  most  wicked  of  citizens  and 
the  most  abandoned  of  men. 

This  concluded  with  recommending  to  the  judges  to  be  very 
much  upon  their  guard  against  the  dazzling  eloquence  of  So- 
crates, and  to  suspect  extremely  the  insinuating  and  artificial 
turns  of  address  which  he  would  employ  to  deceive  them. 

Socrates  began  his  discourse  with  this  point, x and  declared 
that  he  would  speak  to  the  judges  as  it  was  his  custom  to  talk 
in  his  common  conversation,  that  is  to  say,  with  much  simplicity, 
and  no  art. 

He  then  proceeds  to  particulars^  Upon  what  foundation 
can  it  be  alleged,  that  he  does  not  acknowledge  the  gods  of  the 
republic  ; he  who  has  been  often  seen  sacrificing  in  his  own 
house  and  in  the  temples  ? Can  it  be  doubted  whether  he  uses 
divination,  since  it  is  made  a crime  in  him  to  report  that  he  re- 
ceived counsels  from  a certain  divinity  ; and  is  thence  inferred 
that  he  aims  at  introducing  new  deities.  But  in  this  he  inno- 
vates nothing  more  than  others,  who,  putting  their  faith  in  divi- 
nation, observe  the  flight  of  birds,  consult  the  entrails  of  victims, 
and  remark  even  words  and  accidental  encounters  ; different 
means  which  the  gods  employ  to  give  mankind  a foreknowledge 
of  the  future.  Old  or  new,  it  is  still  evident  that  Socrates  ac- 
knowledges divinities,  by  the  confession  of  even  Melitus  him- 
self, who  in  his  information  avers  that  Socrates  believes  dae- 
mons, that  is  to  say,  subaltern  spirits,  the  offspring  of  the  gods. 
Now  every  man  who  believes  the  offspring  of  the  gods,  believes 
the  gods. 

As  to  what  relates  to  the  impious  inquiries  into  natural  things 
imputed  to  him  ;z  without  despising  or  condemning  those  who 
apply  themselves  to  the  study  of  physics,  he  declares  that,  as 
for  himself,  he  had  entirely  devoted  himself  to  what  concerns 
moral  virtue,  the  conduct  of  life,  and  the  rules  of  government, 
as  to  a knowledge  infinitely  more  useful  than  any  other  ; and  he 
calls  upon  all  those  who  have  been  his  hearers,  to  come  forth 
and  convict  him  of  falsehood  if  he  does  not  say  what  is  true. 

I am  accused  of  corrupting  the  youth,  and  of  instilling 
dangerous  maxims  into  them,  as  well  in  regard  to  the  worship 

* Plat.  p.  17.  y Plat.  p.  27.  Xenoph.  p.  703.  2 Xenoph.  p.  710. 


232 


HISTORY  OP  THE 


of  the  gods  as  the  rules  of  government.  You  know , Athe- 
nians, that  I never  made  it  my  profession  to  teach,  nor  can 
envy,  however  violent  against  me,  reproach  me  with  ever  hav- 
ing sold  my  instructions.  I have  an  undeniable  evidence  for 
me  in  this  respect,  which  is  my  poverty.  Always  equally 
ready  to  communicate  my  thoughts  either  to  the  rich  or  poor , 
and  to  give  them  full  leisure  to  question  or  answer  me,  I lend 
myself  to  every  one  who  is  desirous  of  becoming  virtuous : and 
if  amongst  those  who  hear  me,  there  are  any  that  prove  either 
good  or  bad,  neither  the  virtues  of  the  one,  of  which  I am  not 
the  cause,  nor  the  vices  of  the  other,  to  which  I have  not  con- 
tributed, are  to  be  ascribed  to  me.  My  ivhole  employment  is 
to  persuade  the  young  and  old  not  to  entertain  too  much  love 
for  the  body,  for  riches , and  all  other  precarious  things,  of 
whatsoever  nature  they  be;  but  to  let  their  principal  regard  be 
for  the  soul,  which  ought  to  be  the  chief  object  of  their  affec- 
tion : for  I incessantly  urge  to  you,  that  virtue  does  not  pro- 
ceed from  riches,  but,  on  the  contrary,  riches  from  virtue  ; and 
that  all  the  other  goods  of  human  life,  as  well  public  as  pri- 
vate, have  their  source  in  the  same  principle. 

If  to  speak  in  this  manner  be  to  corrupt  youth,  I confess, 
Athenians,  that  I am  guilty,  and  deserve  to  be  punished.  If 
what  I say  be  not  true,  it  is  most  easy  to  convict  me  of  false- 
hood. I see  here  a great  number  of  my  disciples  ; they  have 
only  to  appear.  But  perhaps  reserve  and  consideration  for 
a master  who  has  instructed  them,  will  prevent  them  from 
declaring  against  me:  at  least  their  fathers,  brothers,  and 
uncles  cannot,  as  good  relations  and  good  citizens,  excuse, 
themselves  from  standing  forth  to  demand  vengeance  against 
the  corruptor  of  their  sons,  brothers,  and  nephews.  But  these 
are  the  persons  who  take  upon  them  my  defence,  and  interest 
themselves  in  the  success  of  my  cause. 

Pass  on  me  ivhat  sentence  you  please,*  Athenians ! but  I 
can  neither  repent  nor  change  my  conduct.  I must  not  aban- 
don nor  suspend  a function  which  God  himself  has  imposed 
on  me.  Now  it  is  He  who  has  charged  me  with  the  care  of 
instructing  my  fellow-citizens.  If,  after  having  faithfully 
kept  all  the  posts  wherein  I was  placed  by  our  generals  at 
Potidcea,  Amphipolis,  and  Helium,  the  fear  of  death  should 
at  this  time  make  me  to  abandon  that  in  which  the  Divine 
Providence  has  placed  me,  by  commanding  me  to  pass  my  life 
in  the  study  of  philosophy  for  the  instruction  of  myself  and 
others  ; this  would  be  a most  crimincd  desertion  indeed,  and 
make  me  highly  worthy  of  being  cited  before  this  tribunal,  as  an 
impious  man,  who  does  not  believe  the  gods.  Should  you  resolve 
to  acquit  me,  on  condition  that  I keep  silence  for  the  future , 
a Plat.  p.  28,  29. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


233 


I should  not  hesitate  to  make  answer ; ‘ Athenians , I honour 
and  love  you,  hut  I shall  choose  rather  to  obey  God  than  youf 
and  to  my  latest  breath  shall  never  renounce  philosophy,  nor 
cease  to  exhort  and  reprove  you  according  to  my  custom,  by 
telling  each  of  you  when  you  come  in  my  way,  My  good  friend, c 
and  citizen  of  the  most  famous  city  in  the  world  for  wisdom 
and  valour,  are  you  not  ashamed  of  having  no  other  thoughts 
than  of  amassing  wealth,  and  of  acquiring  glory,  credit,  and 
dignities,  whilst  you  neglect  the  treasures  of  prudence,  truth, 
and  wisdom,  and  take  no  pains  in  rendering  your  soul  as  good 
and  perfect  as  it  is  capable  of  being  V 

I am  reproached  with  abject  fear  and  meanness  of  spirit, A 
for  being  so  busy  in  imparting  my  advice  to  every  one  in  pri- 
vate, and  yet  having  always  avoided  being  present  in  your  as- 
semblies, to  give  my  counsels  to  my  country.  1 thought  I had 
given  sufficient  proofs  of  my  courage  and  fortitude,  both  in  the 
field,  where  I have  borne  arms  with  you,  and  in  the  senate,  when 
I alone  opposed  the  unjust  sentence  you  pronounced  against 
the  ten  captains,  who  had  not  taken  up  and  interred  the  bodies 
of  those  who  were  killed  or  drowned  in  the  sea-fight  near  the 
islands  Arginuscc  ; and  when,  upon  more  than  one  occasion,  I 
opposed  the  violent  and  cruel  orders  of  the  thirty  tyrants. 
What  is  it  then  that  has  prevented  me  from  appearing  in  your 
assemblies ? It  is  that  Daemon,  Athenians,  that  voice  divine, 
which  you  have  so  often  heard  me  mention,  and  which  Melitus 
has  taken  so  much  pains  to  ridicule.  That  Spirit  has  at- 
tached itself  to  me  from  my  infancy  : it  is  a voice  which  I ne- 
ver hear,  but  when  it  would  prevent  me  from  persisting  in 
something  I have  resolved,  for  it  never  exhorts  me  to  under- 
take any  thing.  It  is  that  which  has  always  opposed  me  when 
I would  have  intermeddled  in  the  affairs  of  the  republic  : and 
its  opposition  was  very  seasonable ; for  I should  have  been 
amongst  the  dead  long  ago,  had  I been  concerned  in  the  mea- 
sures of  the  state,  without  effecting  any  thing  to  the  advan- 
tage of  myself  or  our  country.  Do  not  take  it  ill,  I beseech 
you,  if  I speak  my  thoughts  without  disguise,  and  with  truth 
and  freedom.  Every  man  who  would  generously  oppose  a whole 
people,  either  amongst  us  or  elsewhere,  and  who  inflexibly 
applies  himself  to  prevent  the  violation  of  the  laws  and  the 
practice  of  iniquity  in  a city,  will  never  do  so  long  with  impu- 
nity. It  is  absolutely  necessary  for  him  who  would  contend 
for  justice,  if  he  has  the  slightest  wish  to  live,  to  remain  in  a 
private  station,  and  never  to  have  any  share  in  public  affairs. 

For  the  rest,*  Athenians,  if,  in  the  extreme  danger  in  which 

b llsiaopai  rop  Sty  j uaWov  r]  vplv- 

c The  Greek  signifies,  O best  of  men,  fo  dpiare  avdpwv'  which  was  an  obliging 
manner  of  accosting.  d Plat.  p.  31.  « Ibid.  p.  34,  35. 


234 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


I now  am,  I clo  not  imitate  the  behaviour  of  those  who  upon 
less  emergencies  have  implored  and  supplicated  their  judges  with 
tears,  andhave  brought  before  them  their  children,  relations,  and 
friends ; it  is  not  through  pride  and  obstinacy,  or  any  contempt 
for  you,  but  solely  for  your  honour,  and  for  that  of  the  whole 
city.  It  is  fit  that  you  should  know,  that  there  are  amongst 
our  citizens,  those  who  do  not  regard  death  as  an  evil,  and  who 
give  that  name  only  to  injustice  and  infamy.  At  my  age,  and 
with  the  reputation  which  I have,  whether  true  or  false,  would 
it  be  consistent  for  me,  after  all  the  lessons  I have  given  upon  the 
contempt  of  death,  to  be  afraid  of  it  myself,  and  to  belie  by  my 
last  act  all  the  principles  and  sentiments  of  my  past  life  ? 

But  without  speaking  of  my  fame,  which  I should  extremely 
injure  by  such  a conduct,  I do  not  think  it  allowable  to  en- 
treat a judge,  nor  to  procure  an  acquittal  by  supplications  : 
he  ought  to  be  persuaded  and  convinced.  The  judge  does  not 
sit  upon  the  bench  to  show  favour  by  violating  the  laws, 
but  to  do  justice  by  conforming  to  them.  He  did  not  take  an 
oath  to  favour  whom  he  pleases  ; but  to  do  justice  where 
it  is  due.  We  ought  not  therefore  to  accustom  you  to  per- 
jury, nor  you  to  suffer  yourselves  to  be  accustomed  to  it ; for 
in  so  doing,  both  the  one  and  the  other  of  us  equally  injure 
justice  and  religion,  and  both  become  criminal. 

Do  not  therefore  expect  from  me,  Athenians,  that  I should 
have  recourse  amongst  you  to  means  which  I believe  neither 
honest  nor  lawful ; especially  upon  this  occasion,  wherein  I am 
accused  of  impiety  by  Melitus.  For  if  I should  influence 
you  by  my  prayers,  and  thereby  induce  you  to  violate  your 
oaths,  it  would  be  undeniably  evident  that  I should  teach  you 
not  to  believe  in  the  gods  ; and  even  in  defending  and  justify- 
ing myself,  should  furnish  my  adversaries  with  arms  against 
me,  and  prove  that  I believe  no  divinity.  But  I am  very 
far  from  such  thoughts.  I am  more  convinced  of  the  existence 
of  God  than  my  accusers  ; and  so  convinced,  that  I aban- 
don myself  to  God  and  you,  that  you  may  judge  of  me  as 
you  shall  deem  best  for  yourselves  and  me. 

Socrates  pronounced  this  discourse  with  a firm  and  intrepid 
tone.f  His  air,  his  action,  his  visage,  bore  no  resemblance  to 
that  of  a person  accused  : he  seemed  the  master  of  his  judges, 
from  the  assurance  and  greatness  of  soul  with  which  he  spoke, 
without,  however,  losing  any  thing  of  the  modesty  natural  to 
him.  So  noble  and  majestic  a deportment  displeased  and 
gave  offence.  It  is  common  for  judges, s who  look  upon  them- 

f Socrates  ita  in  judicio  capitis  pro  se  ipse  dixit,  ut  non  supplex  aut  reus, 
sed  magister  aut  dominus  videtur  esse  judicum.  Cic.  1.  i.  de  Orat.  n.  231. 

s Odit  judex  fere  litigantis  securitatem  ; cumque  jus  suiun  intelligat,  taci- 
tus  reverentiam  postulat.  Quint.  1.  iv.  c.  1. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


235 


selves  as  the  absolute  dispensers  of  life  or  death  to  such  as  are 
before  them,  to  expect,  out  of  a secret  tendency  of  mind,  that 
they  should  appear  in  their  presence  with  humble  submission  and 
respectful  awe ; a homage  which  they  think  due  to  their  su- 
preme authority. 

This  was  what  happened  now.  Melitus,  however,  had  not 
at  first  the  fifth  part  of  the  voices.  We  have  reason  to  suppose 
that  the  judges  assembled  upon  this  occasion  might  amount  to 
500,  without  reckoning  the  president.  The  law  condemned  the 
accuser  to  pay  a fine  of  1000  drachmas,h  if  he  had  not  the  fifth 
part  of  the  suffrages.  This  law  had  been  wisely  established  to 
check  the  boldness  and  imprudence  of  calumniators.  Melitus 
would  have  been  obliged  to  pay  this  fine,  if  Anytus  and  Lycon 
had  not  joined  him,  and  presented  themselves  also  as  the  ac- 
cusers of  Socrates.  Their  influence  drew  over  a great  number 
of  voices,  and  there  were  281  against  Socrates,  and  consequent- 
ly only  220  for  him.  He  wanted  no  more  than  thirty-one  to 
have  been  acquitted  ; 5 for  he  would  then  have  had  251,  which 
would  have  been  the  majority. 

By  this  first  sentence  the  judges  only  declared  Socrates 
guilty,  without  decreeing  against  him  any  penalty. k For  when 
the  law  did  not  determine  the  punishment,  and  when  a crime 
against  the  state  was  not  in  question,  (in  which  manner  I con- 
ceive Cicero’s  expression,  fraus  capitalis,  may  be  understood,) 
the  person  found  guilty  had  a right  to  choose  the  penalty  he 
thought  he  deserved.  Upon  his  answer  the  judges  deliberated 
a second  time,  and  afterwards  passed  their  final  sentence.  So- 
crates was  informed  that  he  might  demand  an  abatement  of  the 
penalty,  and  change  the  condemnation  of  death  into  banishment, 
imprisonment,  or  a fine.  He  replied  generously,  that  he  would 
choose  neither  of  those  punishments,  because  that  would  be  to 
acknowledge  himself  guilty. — Athenians,  said  he,  to  keep  you 
no  longer  in  suspense,  as  you  oblige  me  to  sentence  myself  ac- 
cording to  what  I deserve,  I condemn  myself  , for  having  passed 
my  life  in  instructing  yourselves  and  your  children  : for  having 
neglected  with  that  view  my  domestic  affairs,  and  all  public 
employments  and  dignities  ; for  having  devoted  myself  entirely 
to  the  service  of  my  country,  in  labouring  incessantly  to  render 
my  fellow- citizens  virtuous ; I condemn  myself,  I say,  to  be 
maintained  in  the  Prytaneum  at  the  expense  of  the  republic 

h About  25 1. 

1 The  text  varies  in  Plato : it  says,  thirty-three,  or  thirty ; whence  it  is 
probably  defective. 

k Prirais  sententiis  statuebant  tantum  judices,  damnarent  an  absolverent. 
Erat  autem  Athenis,  reo  damnato,  si  fraus  capitalis  non  esset,  quasi  poense 
aestimatio.  Ex  sentential,  cum  judicibus  daretur,  interrogabatur  reus,  quarn 
quasi  aestimationem  commeruisse  se  maxime  confiteretur.  Cic.  1.  i.  de  Orat, 
n.  231,232.  ^ 


2m 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


for  the  rest  of  my  life}  This  last  answer  so  much  offended  the 
judges,™  that  they  condemned  him  to  drink  hemlock,  a punish- 
ment very  much  m use  amongst  them. 

i 1?!!S  ®entenc?  dld  “Ot  shake  the  constancy  of  Socrates  in  the 
least  I am  going,  said  he,  addressing  himself  to  his  judges  with 
a noble  tranquillity,  to  suffer  death  by  your  order,  to  which 
nature  had  condemned  mefrom  the  first  moment  of  my  birth  ; 
but  my  accusers  will  suffer  no  less  from  infamy  and  injustice 
by  the  decrees  of  truth.  Did  you  expect  from  me,  that  to  ex- 
tricate myself  out  of  your  hands,  I should  have  employed,  ac- 
cording to  the  custom,  flattery  and  pathetic  expressions,  and 
the  timorous  and  grovelling  behaviour  of  a suppliant  l But  in 
trials,  as  well  as  war,  an  honest  man  ought  not  to  use  dll  sorts 
of  means  for  the  preservation  of  his  life.  It  is  equally  disho- 
nourable both  m the  one  and  in  the  other,  to  ransom  it  only  by 
prayers  and  tears,  and  all  those  other  abject  methods  which 
you  see  every  day  practised  by  people  in  my  present  condition. 

Apollodorus,  who  was  one  of  his  friends  and  disciples,  havine 
advanced  to  him  to  express  his  grief  for  his  dying  innocent 
What,  replied  he  with  a smile,  would  you  have  me  die  guilty  ? 

1 lutarch,”  to  show  that  only  our  weakest  part,  the  body,  is  in 
the  power  of  man,  but  that  there  is  another  infinitely  more  noble 
part  of  ns  entirely  superior  to  their  threats,  and  inaccessible  to 
their  attacks,  cites  these  admirable  words  of  Socrates,  which  are 
more  applicable  to  his  judges  than  his  accusers  : Anytus  and 
Mclitus  may  kill  me,  but  they  cannot  hurt  me.  As  if  he  had 
said,  in  the  language  of  the  Pagans : Fortune  may  deprive  me 
of  my  goods  my  health,  and  my  life ; but  I have  a treasure 
within  me,  of  which  no  external  violence  can  deprive  me-  I 
mean  virtue,  innocence,  fortitude,  and  greatness  of  mind.  ’ 

This  great  man,  r fully  convinced  of  the  principle  he  had  so 
often  inculcated  to  his  disciples, -that  guilt  is  the  only  evil  a 
wise  man  ought  to  fear,— chose  rather  to  be  depnved  of  some 
years  which  he  might  perhaps  have  to  live,  than  to  forfeit  in 

It  appears  in  Plato,  that  after  this  discourse,  Socrates  without  doubt  tn 
remove  from  himself  an  imputation  of  pride  and  contumacy,  modestly  offered 
to  pay  a fine  proportionate  to  his  indigence,  that  is  to  sky,  one  m4  (fifty 
that’  -at?e  Citation  of  Sis  friends,  who  ha/bound Themselves 

ttY’n  hr°Se  in-?-S  ,°ffer  t0  thirt^  min*'  Plat‘  ™ Ayolog.  Socrat  D 38 
But  Xenophon  positively  asserts  the  contrary,  p.  705,  This  difference  mav 

offe~ MsX’S  rPTg  th,at  So“^  refused  at  first  S make  a„^ 
StaSon^tofrS  hlmSeIf  at  length  t0  be  °V™  ^e  earnest 

capitis  homine” — 

r Ml^vir^entissimus  quod  super J&ffa  ShTSrtJ  q^m  quod 
piaetensset : et  quando  ab  homimbus  sui  temporis  parum  intelligebatur  ^nos 
terorum  se  judicns  reservavit,  brevi  detrimerito  jam  ultimo  seneltutL  «vmn 
seculorum  omnium  consecutus.  Quint.  1.  i.  c.  1.  seneccutis  eevum 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


237 


an  instant  the  glory  of  his  whole  past  life,  in  dishonouring 
himself  for  ever  by  the  shameful  behaviour  he  was  advised  to 
observe  towards  his  judges.  Seeing  that  his  contemporaries 
had  but  a slight  knowledge  of  him,  he  referred  himself  to  the 
judgment  of  posterity ; and,  by  the  generous  sacrifice  of  the 
remnant  of  a life  already  far  advanced,  acquired  and  secured 
to  himself  the  esteem  and  admiration  of  all  succeeding  ages. 

SECT.  VII. 

Socrates  refuses  to  escape  out  of  prison.  He  passes  the  last  day  of  his  life 
in  discoursing  with  his  friends  upon  the  immortality  of  the  soul.  He 
drinks  the  poison.  Punishment  of  his  accusers.  Honours  paid  to  his 
memory. 

After  the  sentence  had  passed  upon  him,  Socrates,  * with 
the  same  intrepid  aspect  with  which  he  had  held  the  tyrants  in 
awe,  went  forward  towards  the  prison,  which  lost  that  name, 
says  Seneca,  when  he  entered  it,  and  became  the  residence  of 
virtue  and  probity.  His  friends  followed  him  thither,  and  con- 
tinued to  visit  him  during  thirty  days,  which  passed  between 
his  condemnation  and  death.  The  cause  of  that  long  delay  was, 
the  Athenians  sent  every  year  a ship  to  the  isle  of  Delos,  to  offer 
certain  sacrifices  ; and  it  was  prohibited  to  put  any  person  to 
death  in  the  city,  from  the  time  that  the  priest  of  Apollo 
had  crowned  the  poop  of  this  vessel,  as  a signal  of  its  depart- 
ure, till  the  same  vessel  should  return.  So  that  sentence  hav- 
ing been  passed  upon  Socrates  the  day  after  that  ceremony 
began,  it  was  necessary  to  defer  the  execution  of  it  for  thirty 
days,  during  the  continuance  of  this  voyage. 

In  this  long  interval,  death  had  sufficient  opportunity  to  pre- 
sent itself  before  his  eyes  in  all  its  terrors,  and  to  put  his  con- 
stancy to  the  proof,  not  only  by  the  severe  rigour  of  a dungeon, 
and  the  irons  upon  his  legs,  but  by  the  continual  prospect  and 
cruel  expectation  of  an  event  which  nature  always  abhors.  In 
this  sad  condition  he  did  not  cease  to  enjoy  that  profound  tran- 
quillity of  mind  which  his  friends  had  always  admired  in  him.  r 
He  conversed  with  them  with  the  same  temper  he  had  always 
expressed  ; and  Crito  observes,  that  the  evening  before  his 
death  he  slept  as  peaceably  as  at  any  other  time.  He  even  at 
that  time  composed  a hymn  in  honour  of  Apollo  and  Diana,  and 
turned  one  of  iEsop’s  fables  into  verse. 

The  day  before,  or  the  same  day  that  the  ship  was  to  arrive 

Socrates  eodem  illo  vultu,  quo  aliquando  solus  triginta  tyrannos  in  ordi- 
nem  redegerat,  carcerem  intravit,  ignominiam  ipsi  loco  detracturus.  Neque 
enim  poterat  career  videri,  in  quo  Socrates  erat.  Senec.  in  Consol,  ad  Helvet. 
c.  xiii. 

Socrates  carcerem  intrando  purgavit,  omnique  honeetiorem  curia  reddidit. 
Id.  de  viU  bead.  c.  xxvii.  r Plat,  in  Criton. 


2-38 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


from  Delos,  the  return  of  which  was  to  be  followed  by  the  death 
of  Socrates,  Crito,  his  intimate  friend,  came  to  him  early  in  the 
morning  to  let  him  know  that  mournful  news,  and  at  the  same 
time  to  inform  him  that  it  depended  only  upon  himself  to  quit 
the  prison  ; that  the  jailer  was  gained  ; that  he  would  find  the 
doors  open,  and  offered  him  a safe  retreat  in  Thessaly.  So- 
crates laughed  at  this  proposal,  and  asked  him,  whether  he 
knew  any  place  out  of  Attica  where  people  did  not  die  ? 
Crito  urged  the  thing  very  seriously,  and  pressed  him  to  take 
advantage  of  so  precious  an  opportunity,  adding  arguments 
upon  arguments  to  induce  his  consent,  and  to  engage  him  to 
resolve  upon  his  escape.  Without  mentioning  the  inconsolable 
grief  he  should  suffer  for  the  death  of  such  a friend,  how  should 
he  support  the  reproaches  of  an  infinity  of  people,  who  would 
believe  that  it  was  in  his  power  to  have  saved  him,  but  that  he 
would  not  sacrifice  a small  part  of  his  wealth  for  that  purpose  ? 
Could  the  people  ever  be  persuaded  that  so  wise  a man  as  So- 
crates would  not  quit  his  prison,  when  he  might  do  it  with  all 
possible  security  ? Perhaps  he  might  fear  to  expose  his  friends, 
or  to  occasion  the  loss  of  their  fortunes,  or  even  of  their  lives 
or  liberty.  Ought  there  to  be  any  thing  more  dear  and  pre- 
cious to  them  than  the  preservation  of  Socrates  ? Even  strangers 
themselves  dispute  that  honour  with  them  ; many  of  whom  have 
come  expressly  with  considerable  sums  of  money  to  purchase 
his  escape  ; and  declare,  that  they  should  think  themselves 
highly  honoured  to  receive  him  amongst  them,  and  to  supply 
him  abundantly  with  all  he  should  have  occasion  for.  Ought 
he  then  to  abandon  himself  to  enemies,  who  have  occasioned 
his  being  condemned  unjustly  ; and  can  he  think  it  allowable  to 
betray  his  own  cause  ? Is  it  not  essential  to  his  goodness  and 
justice,  to  spare  his  fellow-citizens  the  guilt  of  innocent  blood  ? 
But  if  all  these  motives  cannot  alter  him,  and  he  is  not  con- 
cerned with  regard  to  himself,  can  he  be  insensible  to  the 
interests  of  his  children  ? In  what  a condition  does  he  leave 
them  ? And  can  he  forget  the  father,  only  to  remember  the 
philosopher? 

Socrates,  after  having  heard  him  with  attention,  praised  his 
zeal,  and  expressed  his  gratitude ; but  before  he  could  accede 
to  his  opinion,  was  for  examining  whether  it  was  just  for  him  to 
depart  out  of  prison  without  the  consent  of  the  Athenians. 
The  question  therefore  here  is  to  know,  whether  a man  con- 
demned to  die,  though  unjustly,  can  without  a crime  escape 
from  justice  and  the  laws  ? I do  not  know,  whether,  amongst 
us,  there  are  many  persons  to  be  found  who  would  believe  that 
this  could  be  made  a question. 

Socrates  begins  with  removing  every  thing  foreign  to  the 
subject,  and  comes  immediately  to  the  bottom  of  the  affair.  I 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


239 


should  certainly  rejoice  extremely,  my  dear  Crito,  if  you  could 
persuade  me  to  quit  this  place , hut  cannot  resolve  to  do  so 
without  being  first  persuaded.  We  ought  not  to  concern  our- 
selves for  what  the  people  may  say , hut  for  what  the  sole  Judge 
of  all  that  is  just  or  unjust  shall  say , and  that  alone  is  truth. 
All  the  considerations  you  have  alleged,  as  money,  reputation, 
family,  prove  nothing  unless  you  show  me  that  what  you  pro- 
pose is  just  and  lawful.  It  is  a received  and  constant  princi- 
ple with  us,  that  all  injustice  is  shameful  and  fatal  to  him  that 
commits  it,  whatever  men  may  say,  or  whatever  good  or  evil 
may  ensue  from  it.  We  have  always  reasoned  from  this  prin- 
ciple even  to  our  latest  days,  and  have  never  departed  in  the 
least  from  it.  Would  it  he  possible,  dear  Crito,  that  at  our 

age  our  most  serious  discourses  should  resemble  those  of  infants, 
who  say  Yes  and  No  almost  in  the  same  breath,  and  have  no 
fixed  and  determinate  notion  ? At  each  proposition  he  waited 
Crito’s  answer  and  assent. 

Let  us  therefore  resume  our  principles,  and  endeavour  to 
make  use  of  them  at  this  time.  It  has  always  been  a maxim 
with  us  that  it  is  never  allowable  upon  any  pretence  whatsoever 
to  commit  injustice,  not  even  in  regard  to  those  who  injure  us, 
nor  to  return  evil  for  evil;  and  that  when  we  have  once  en- 
gaged our  word,  we  are  bound  to  keep  it  inviolably  ; no  inte- 
rest being  capable  to  dispense  with  it.  Now,  if  at  the  time  I 
should  be  ready  to  make  my  escape,  the  laws  and  republic 
should  present  themselves  in  a body  before  me,  what  could  I 
answer  to  the  following  question  which  they  might  put  to  me 't 
‘ What  are  you  going  to  do,  Socrates  ? Is  fiying  from  justice 
in  this  manner  aught  else  than  ruining  entirely  the  laws  and 
the  republic  ? Do  you  believe  that  a state  can  subsist,  after 
justice  is  not  only  no  longer  in  force  in  it,  but  is  even  corrupted , 
subverted,  and  trod  under  foot  by  individuals  V But,  it  may 
be  said  the  republic  has  done  me  injustice,  and  has  sentenced 
me  wrongfully.  * Have  you  forgot,’  the  laws  would  reply , 

‘ that  you  are  under  an  agreement  with  us  to  submit  your  pri- 
vate judgment  to  that  of  the  republic  l You  were  at  liberty, 
if  our  government  and  regulations  did  not  suit  you,  to  retire 
and  settle  yourself  elsewhere  : but  a residence  of  seventy  years 
in  our  city  sufficiently  denotes  that  our  regulations  have  not 
displeased  you,  and  that  you  have  complied  with  them  from  an 
entire  knowledge  and  experience  of  them,  and  out  of  choice. 
In  fact  you  owe  all  you  are,  and  all  you  possess,  to  them  ; 
birth,  nurture,  education,  and  establishment : for  all  these 
proceed  from  the  tui  tion  and  protection  of  the  republic.  Do 
you  believe  yourself free  to  break  through  engagements  with 
her,  which  you  have  confirmed  by  more  than  one  oath ? Though 
she  should  intend  to  destroy  you,  can  you  render  her  evil  for 


240 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


evil,  and  injury  for  injury  ? Have  you  a right  to  act  in  that 
manner  towards  your  father  and  mother  ? and  do  you  not 
know  that  your  country  is  more  considerable,  and  more  worthy 
of  respect  before  God  and  man,  than  either  father  or  mother, 
or  all  the  relations  in  the  world  together  ; that  your  country 
is  to  be  honoured  and  revered,  to  be  complied  with  in  her  ex- 
cesses, and  to  be  treated  with  tenderness  and  kindness  even  in 
her  most  violent  proceedings  ? in  a word,  that  she  is  either  to 
be  reclaimed  by  wise  counsels  and  respectful  remonstrances, 
or  to  be  obeyed  in  her  commands,  and  all  she  shall  decree  suf- 
fered without  murmuring  ? As  for  your  children,  Socrates, 
your  friends  will  render  them  all  the  services  in  their  power  ; 
at  least  the  Divine  Providence  will  not  fail  them.  Resign 
yourself  therefore  to  our  reasons,  and  take  the  counsel  of  those 
who  have  given  you  birth,  nurture,  and  education.  Set  not 
too  high  a value  upon  your  children,  your  life,  or  any  thing 
in  the  world,  as  upon  justice  ; that  when  you  appear  before 
the  tribunal  of  Pluto,  you  may  not  be  at  a loss  to  defend  your- 
self in  the  presence  of  your  judges.  But  if  you  demean  your- 
self otherwise,  we  shall  continue  your  enemies  as  long  as  you 
live,  without  ever  affording  you  relaxation  or  repose  ; and 
when  you  are  dead,  our  sisters , the  laws  in  the  regions  below, 
will  be  as  little  favourable  to  you  ; knowing  that  you  have  been 
guilty  of  using  your  utmost  endeavours  to  destroy  us.’ 

Socrates  observed  to  Crito,  that  he  seemed  actually  to  hear 
all  he  had  said,  and  that  the  sound  of  these  words  echoed  so  con- 
tinually in  his  ears,  that  they  entirely  engrossed  him,  and  left 
him  no  other  thoughts  nor  words.  Crito,  agreeing  in  fact  that 
he  had  nothing  to  reply,  continued  silent,  and  withdrew  from 
his  friend. 

At  length  the  fatal  ship  returned  to  Athens,  which  was  in 
a manner  the  signal  for  the  death  of  Socrates.8  The  next  day 
all  his  friends  except  Plato,  who  was  sick,  repaired  to  the  pri- 
son early  in  the  morning.  The  jailer  desired  them  to  wait  a 
little,  because  the  eleven  magistrates  (who  had  the  direction  of 
the  prisons)  were  at  that  time  signifying  to  the  prisoner  that  he 
was  to  die  the  same  day.  Presently  after  they  entered,  and 
found  Socrates,  whose  chains  had  been  taken  off, 1 sitting  by 
Xantippe  his  wife,  who  held  one  of  his  children  in  her  arms. 
As  soon  as  she  perceived  them,  she  uttered  piercing  cries,  sob- 
bing, and  tearing  her  face  and  hair,  and  made  the  prison  resound 
with  her  complaints.  Oh,  my  dear  Socrates,  your  friends  are- 
come  to  see  you  this  day  for  the  last  time ! He  desired  that 

8 Plat,  in  Phaed.  p.  59,  &c. 

1 At  Athens,  as  soon  as  sentence  was  pronounced  upon  a criminal,  he  was  un- 
bound, and  considered  as  the  victim  of  death,  whom  it  was  no  longer  lawful 
to  keep  in  chains. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS.  241 

she  might  be  taken  away,  and  she  was  immediately  carried 
home. 

Socrates  passed  the  rest  of  the  day  with  his  friends,  and 
conversed  with  them  with  his  usual  cheerfulness  and  tran- 
quillity. The  subject  of  conversation  was  most  important,  and 
well  suited  to  his  present  condition  ; that  is  to  say,  the  immor- 
tality of  the  soul.  What  gave  occasion  to  this  discourse  was  a 
question  introduced  in  a manner  by  chance,  Whether  a true 
philosopher  ought  not  to  desire  and  take  pains  to  die  l This 
proposition  taken  too  literally,  implied  an  opinion  that  a phi- 
losopher might  kill  himself.  Socrates  shows  that  nothing  is 
more  unjust  than  this  notion ; and  that  man,  appertaining  to 
God,  who  formed  and  placed  him  with  his  own  hand  in  the  post 
he  possesses,  cannot  abandon  it  without  his  permission,  nor 
quit  life  without  his  order.  What  is  it  then  that  can  induce 
a philosopher  to  entertain  this  love  for  death  ? It  can  be  only 
the  hope  of  that  happiness  which  he  expects  in  another  life, 
and  that  hope  can  be  founded  only  upon  the  opinion  of  the  soul’s 
immortality. 

Socrates  employed  the  last  day  of  his  life  in  entertaining  his 
friends  upon  this  great  and  important  subject,  from  which  con- 
versation Plato’s  admirable  dialogue,  entitled  Phceclon,  is 
wholly  taken.  He  explains  to  his  friends  all  the  arguments  for 
believing  the  soul  immortal,  and  refutes  all  the  objections  against 
it,  which  are  very  near  the  same  as  are  made  at  this  day.  This 
treatise  is  too  long  for  me  to  attempt  an  abstract  of  it. 

Before  he  answers  any  of  these  objections,"  he  deplores  a 
misfortune  common  enough  amongst  men,  who  in  consequence 
of  hearing  ignorant  persons,  that  contradict  and  doubt  every 
thing,  dispute,  believe  there  is  nothing  certain.  Is  it  not  a 
great  misfortune,  dear  Phcedon,  that  having  reasons  which  are 
true , certain,  and  very  easy  to  he  understood , there  should, 
however,  he  persons  in  the  world  who  are  not  at  cdl  ciffected 
with  them,  from  their  having  heard  those  frivolous  disputes 
wherein  all  things  appear  sometimes  true  and  sometimes  false . 
These  unjust  and  unreasonable  men,  instead  of  blaming  them- 
selves for  these  doubts,  or  imputing  them  to  the  narrowness  of 
their  own  capacities,  by  ascribing  the  defect  to  the  reasons 
themselves , proceed  at  length  to  a detestation  of  them , and  be- 
lieve themselves  more  judicious  and  better  informed  than  all 
others,  because  they  imagine  they  are  the  only  persons  who 
comprehend  that  there  is  nothing  true  or  certain  in  the  na- 
ture of  things. 

Socrates  demonstrates  the  injustice  of  this  proceeding.  He 
observes,  that  of  two  things  equally  uncertain,  wisdom  enjoins 


VOL.  III. 


Plat.  p.  90,  91. 
R 


242 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


us  to  choose  that  which  is  most  advantageous  with  least  hazard. 
If  what  I advance , says  he,  upon  the  immortality  of  the  soul 
proves  true , it  is  good  to  believe  it ; and  if  after  my  death 
it  proves  false,  I shall  still  have  drawn  from  it  in  this  life 
this  advantage , — of  having  been  less  sensible  here  of  the  evils 
which  generally  attend  human  life.  This  reasoning  of  Socra- 
tes x (which  is  real  and  true  in  the  mouth  of  a Christian  alone) 
is  very  remarkable.  If  what  I say  is  true,  I gain  every  thing, 
whilst  1 hazard  very  little  ; and  if  false,  I lose  nothing  ; on 
the  contrary,  I am  still  a great  gainer. 

Socrates  does  not  confine  himself  to  the  mere  speculation  of 
this  great  truth,  that  the  soul  is  immortal ; he  draws  from  it 
useful  and  necessary  conclusions  for  the  conduct  of  life,  in  ex- 
plaining what  the  hope  of  a happy  eternity  demands  from  man, 
that  it  be  not  frustrated,  and  that  instead  of  attaining  the  re- 
wards prepared  for  the  good,  they  do  not  experience  the  pun- 
ishment allotted  for  the  wicked.  The  philosopher  here  sets  forth 
these  great  truths,  which  a constant  tradition,  though  very  much 
obscured  by  fiction  and  fable,  had  always  preserved  amongst 
the  Pagans  : the  last  judgment  of  the  righteous  and  wicked  ; 
the  eternal  punishments  to  which  great  criminals  are  condem- 
ned ; a place  of  peace  and  joy  without  end  for  the  souls  that 
have  retained  their  purity  and  innocence,  or  which  during  this 
life  have  expiated  their  offences  by  repentance  and  satisfaction ; 
and  an  intermediate  state,  in  which  they  purify  themselves,  for 
a certain  time,  from  less  considerable  crimes  that  have  not  been 
atoned  for  during  this  life. 

My  friends  j there  is  still  one  thing,  which  it  is  very  just 
to  believe  ; and  this  is,  that  if  the  soul  be  immortal,  it  requires 
to  be  cultivated  with  attention,  not  only  for  what  we  call  the 
time  of  life,  but  for  that  which  is  to  follow,  I mean  eternity  ; 
and  the  least  neglect  in  this  point  may  be  attended  with  endless 
consequences.  If  death  were  the  final  dissolution  of  being , 
the  wicked  would  be  great  gainers  by  it,  as  being  delivered  at 
once  from  their  bodies,  their  souls,  and  their  vices  ; but  as  the 
soul  is  immortal,  it  has  no  other  means  of  being  freed  from 
its  evils,  nor  any  safety  for  itself,  but  in  becoming  very  good 
and  very  prudent ; for  it  carries  nothing  away  with  it  but  its 
good  or  bad  deeds,  its  virtues  or  vices,  which  are  commonly 
the  consequence  of  the  education  it  has  received,  and  the 
causes  of  eternal  happiness  or  misery. 

When  the  dead  are  arrived  at  the  fatal  rendezvous  of  de- 
parted souls,  whither  their  deemon 7 conducts  them,  they  are 
all  judged.7-  Those  who  have  passed  their  lives  in  a manner 

x Monsieur  Pascal  has  expatiated  upon  this  reasoning  in  his  seventh  arti- 
cle, and  deduced  from  it  a demonstration  of  infinite  force. 

y Plat.  p.  107.  z Ibid.  p.  113,  114. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


243 


neither  entirely  criminal  nor  absolutely  innocent,  are  sent  into 
a place  where  they  suffer  pains  proportioned  to  their  faults, 
till  being  purged  and  cleansed  of  their  guilt,  and  afterwards 
restored  to  liberty,  they  receive  the  reward  of  the  good  actions 
they  have  done  in  the  body.  Those  who  are  judged  to  be  in- 
curable on  account  of  the  greatness  of  their  crimes,  who  deli- 
berately and  wilfully  have  committed  sacrileges  and  murder^, 
and  other  such  great  offences,  the  fatal  destiny  that  passes 
judgment  upon  them  hurls  them  into  Tartarus,  from  whence 
they  never  depart.  But  those  who  are  found  guilty  of  crimes , 
great  indeed,  but  worthy  of  pardon  ; who  have  committed  vio- 
lences in  the  transports  of  rage  against  their  father  or  mother, 
or  have  killed  some  one  in  a like  emotion,  and  afterwards  re- 
pented; these  suffer  the  same  punishment  and  in  the  same 
place  with  the  last,  but  for  a time  only,  till  by  their  prayers 
and  supplications  they  have  obtained  pardon  from  those  they 
have  injured . 

But  for  those  who  have  passed  through  life  with  peculiar 
sanctity  of  manners,  delivered  from  their  base  earthly  abodes 
as  from  a prison,  they  are  received  on  high  in  a pure  region 
which  they  inhabit ; and,  as  philosophy  has  sufficiently  puri- 
fied them,  they  live  without  their  bodies  b through  all  eternity 
in  a series  of  joys  and  delights  which  it  is  not  easy  to  describe , 
and  which  the  shortness  of  my  time  will  not  permit  me  to  explain 
more  at  large. 

What  I have  said  will  suffice,  I conceive,  to  prove  that  we 
ought  to  endeavour  strenuously  throughout  our  whole  lives  to 
acquire  virtue  and  wisdom  ; for  you  see  how  great  a reward 
and  how  high  a hope  are  proposed  to  us.  And  though  the  im- 
mortality of  the  soul  were  dubious,  instead  of  appearing  a cer- 
tainty as  it  does,  every  wise  man  ought  to  assure  himself  that 
it  is  well  worth  his  trouble  to  risk  his  belief  of  it  in  this  man- 
ner. And,  indeed,  can  there  be  a more  glorious  hazard  ? We 
ought  to  enchant  ourselves  with  this  blessed  hope,  for  which 
reason  I have  lengthened  this  discourse  so  much . 

Cicero  expresses  these  noble  sentiments  of  Socrates  with  his 
usual  delicacy.  Almost  at  the  very  moment,0  says  he,  that  he 
held  the  deadly  draught  in  his  hand,  he  talked  in  such  a manner 

a Daemon  is  a Greek  word,  which  signifies  spirit,  genius,  and  with  us, 
angel. 

b The  resurrection  of  the  body  was  unknown  to  the  Pagans. 

c Cum  pene  in  manu  jam  mortiferum  illud  teneret  poculum,  locutus  ita  est, 
ut  non  ad  mortem  trudi,  verum  in  coelum  videretur  ascendere.  Ita  enim 
censebat,  itaque  disseruit : duas  esse  vias  duplicesque  cursus  animorum  e cor- 
pore  excedentium.  Nam,  qui  se  humanis  vitiis  contaminassent,  et  se  totos 
libidinibus  dedissent,  quibus  coarctati  velut  domesticis  vitiis  atque  flagitiis  se 
inquinassenl,  iis  devium  quoddam  iter  esse,  seclusum  k consilio  deorum  : qui 
autem  se  integros  castosque  servavissent,  quibusque  fuisset  minima  cum  cor- 
poribus  contagio,  seseque  ab  his  semper  sevocassent,  essentque  in  corporibus 

R 2 


244 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


as  showed  that  he  looked  upon  death  not  as  a violence  done  to 
him,  but  as  a means  bestowed  upon  him  of  ascending  to  heaven. 
He  declared  that,  upon  departing  out  of  this  life,  two  ways  are 
open  to  us : the  one  leads  to  the  place  of  eternal  misery  such 
souls  as  have  sullied  themselves  here  below  in  shameful  plea- 
sures and  criminal  actions  ; the  other  conducts  those  to  the 
happy  mansions  of  the  gods  who  have  retained  their  purity  upon 
earth,  and  have  led  in  human  bodies  a life  almost  divine. 

When  Socrates  had  done  speaking/  Crito  desired  him  to 
give  him  and  the  rest  of  his  Xriends  his  last  instructions  in  re- 
gard to  his  children,  and  his  other  affairs,  that  by  executing  them 
they  might  have  the  consolation  of  doing  him  some  pleasure. 
I shall  recommend  nothing  to  you  this  day,  replied  Socrates, 
more  than  1 have  always  done,  which  is  to  take  care  of  your- 
selves. You  cannot  do  yourselves  a greater  service,  nor  do  me 
and  my  family  a greater  pleasure.  Crito  having  asked  him  af- 
terwards in  what  manner  he  wished  to  be  buried  : As  you  please, 
said  Socrates,  if  you  can  lay  hold  of  me,  and  I do  not  escape 
out  of  your  hands.  At  the  same  time  looking  upon  his  friends 
with  a smile  : I can  never  persuade  Crito,  says  he,  that  So- 
crates is  he  who  converses  with  you,  and  disposes  the  several 
parts  of  his  discourse  ; for  he  always  imagines  that  I am  what 
he  is  going  to  see  dead  in  a little  while.  He  confounds  me  with 
my  carcass,  and  therefore  asks  me  how  I would  he  interred. 
In  finishing  these  words  he  rose  up  and  went  to  bathe  himself 
in  a chamber  adjoining.  After  he  came  out  of  the  bath,  his 
children  were  brought  to  him,  for  he  had  three,  two  very  little, 
and  the  other  grown  up.  He  spoke  to  them  for  some  time, 
gave  his  orders  to  the  women  who  took  care  of  them,  and  then 
dismissed  them.  Being  returned  into  his  chamber,  he  laid  him- 
self down  upon  his  bed. 

The  servant  of  the  Eleven  entered  at  the  same  instant,  and 
having  informed  him  that  the  time  for  drinking  the  hemlock 
was  come,  (which  was  at  sunset,)  the  servant  was  so  much  af- 
fected with  sorrow,  that  he  turned  his  back  and  fell  a weeping. 
See,  said  Socrates,  the  good  disposition  of  this  man  ! Since  my 
imprisonment  he  has  often  come  to  see  me  and  to  converse  with 
me.  He  is  more  worthy  than  all  his  fellows.  How  heartily 
the  poor  man  weeps  for  me  ! This  is  a remarkable  example,  and 
might  teach  those  who  hold  an  office  of  this  kind  how  they  ought 
to  behave  to  all  prisoners,  but  more  especially  to  persons  of  me- 
rit, if  at  any  time  they  should  happen  to  fall  into  their  hands. 
The  fatal  cup  was  brought.  Socrates  asked  what  it  was  ne- 
cessary for  him  to  do.  Nothing  more,  replied  the  servant,  than 

humanis  vitam  imitati  deorum,  his  ad  illos,  a quibus  essent  profecti,  reditum 
facilem  patere.  Cic.  Tusc.  Qucest.  1.  1.  n.  7b  72. 

d Pag.  115—118. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


245 


as  soon  as  you  have  drunk  off  the  draught  to  walk  about  till 
your  legs  grow  weary,  and  afterwards  lie  down  upon  your  hed. 
He  took  the  cup  without  any  emotion  or  change  in  his  colour  or 
countenance,  and  regarding  the  man  with  a firm  and  steady  look, 
Well,  said  he,  what  say  you  of  this  drink ; may  one  make  a li- 
bation out  of  it  ? Upon  being  told  that  there  was  only  enough 
for  one  dose  : At  least , continued  he,  we  may  say  our  prayers 
to  the  gods,  as  it  is  our  duty,  and  implore  them  to  make  our 
exit  from  this  world  and  our  last  stage  happy,  which  is  what  I 
most  ardently  beg  of  them.  After  having  spoken  these  words, 
he  kept  silence  for  some  time,  and  then  drank  off  the  whole 
draught  with  an  amazing  tranquillity,  and  a serenity  of  aspect 
not  to  be  expressed. 

Till  then  his  friends,  with  great  violence  to  themselves,  had 
refrained  from  tears  ; but  after  he  had  drunk  the  potion,  they 
were  no  longer  their  own  masters,  and  wept  abundantly. 
Apollodorus,  who  had  been  in  tears  during  almost  the  whole 
conversation,  began  then  to  utter  great  cries,  and  to  lament  with 
such  excessive  grief  as  pierced  the  hearts  of  all  that  were 
present.  Socrates  alone  remained  unmoved,  and  even  re- 
proved his  friends,  though  with  his  usual  mildness  and  good- 
nature. What  are  you  doing  ? said  he  to  them ; / am 

amazed  at  you . Ah  ! what  is  become  of  your  virtue  ? Was 
it  not  for  this  I sent  away  the  women , that  they  might  not  fall 
into  these  weaknesses  ? For  I have  always  heard  say  that  v:e 
ought  to  die  peaceably,  and  blessing  the  gods.  Be  at  ease,  I 
beg  you,  and  show  more  constancy  and  resolution.  These  words 
filled  them  with  confusion,  and  obliged  them  to  restrain  their 
tears. 

In  the  mean  time  he  kept  walking  to  and  fro  ; and  when  he 
found  his  legs  grow  weary,  he  lay  down  upon  his  back  as  he  had 
been  directed. 

The  poison  then  operated  more  and  more.  When  Socrates 
found  it  began  to  gain  upon  the  heart,  uncovering  his  face, 
which  had  been  covered  without  doubt  to  prevent  any  thing 
from  disturbing  him  in  his  last  moments,  Crito,  said  he,  and 
these  were  his  last  words,  we  owe  a cock  to  JEsculapius ; dis- 
charge that  vow  for  me,  and  pray  do  not  forget  it  : soon  after 
which  he  breathed  his  last.  Crito  drew  near  and  closed  his 
mouth  and  eyes.  Such  was  the  end  of  Socrates,  in  the  first 
year  of  the  95th  Olympiad,  and  the  seventieth  of  his  age.  Cicero 
says  he  could  never  read  the  description  of  his  death  in  Plato 
without  tears.e 

Plato  and  the  rest  of  Socrates’s  disciples,  apprehending  the 
rage  of  his  accusers  was  not  satiated  by  that  victim,  retired  to 

e Quid  dicam  de  Socrate,  cujus  morti  illacrymari  soleo  Platonem  legens  ? 
Be  nat.  deor.  lib.  iii.  n.  82. 


246 


HISTORY  OF  THE 

Megara  to  the  house  of  Euclid,  where  they  stayed  till  the  storm 
blew  over.  Euripides,  however,  to  reproach  the  Athenians 
with  the  horrible  crime  they  had  committed  in  condemning  the 
best  of  men  to  die  upon  such  slight  grounds,  composed  his 
tragedy  called  Palamedes,  in  which,  under  the  name  of  that 
hero,  who  was  also  destroyed  by  a foul  calumny,  he  deplored 
the  misfortune  of  his  friend.  When  the  actor  came  to  repeat 
this  verse,  r 


You  doom  the  justest  of  the  Greeks  to  perish ; 

the  whole  theatre,  remembering  Socrates  by  so  marked  a cha- 
racteristic, melted  into  tears,  and  a decree  passed  to  prohibit 
speaking  any  more  of  him  in  public.  Some  believe  Euripides 
was  dead  before  Socrates,  and  reject  this  anecdote. 

Be  this  as  it  may,  the  people  of  Athens  did  not  open  their 
eyes  till  some  time  after  the  death  of  Socrates.  Their  hatred 
being  satisfied,  their  prejudices  were  dispelled,  and  time  hav- 
ing given  them  opportunity  for  reflection,  the  notorious  injus- 
tice of  the  sentence  appeared  in  all  its  horrors.  Nothing  was 
heard  throughout  the  city  but  discourses  in  favour  of  Socrates. 
Ihe i Academy,  the  Lyceum,  private  houses,  public  walks,  and 
market-places,  seemed  still  to  re-echo  the  sound  of  his  loved 
voice.  Here,  said  they,  he  formed  our  youth,  and  taught  our 
children  to  love  their  country,  and  to  honour  their  parents  In 
this  place  he  gave  us  his  admirable  lessons,  and  sometimes  made 
us  seasonable  reproaches,  to  engage  us  more  warmly  in  the  pur- 
suit of  virtue.  Alas  ! how  have  we  rewarded  him  for  such  impor- 
tant services  ? Athens  was  in  universal  mourning  and  con- 
sternation. The  schools  were  shut  up,  and  all  exercises  sus- 
pended  The  accusers  were  called  to  account  for  the  innocent 
blood  they  had  caused  to  be  shed.  Melitus  was  condemned  to 
die,  and  the  rest  banished.  Plutarch  observes/  that  all  those 
who  had  any  share  in  this  black  calumny,  were  in  such  abomi- 
nation amongst  the  citizens,  that  no  one  would  give  them  fire 
answer  them  any  question,  nor  go  into  the  same  batfi  with  them; 
and  had  the  place  cleansed  where  they  had  bathed,  as  being 
polluted  by  their  touching  it ; which  drove  them  into  such  de- 
spair, that  many  of  them  killed  themselves. 

The  Athenians/  not  contented  with  having  punished  his 
accusers,  caused  a statue  of  brass  to  be  erected  to  him,  of  the 
workmanship  of  the  celebrated  Lysippus,  and  placed  it  in  one 
ot  the  most  conspicuous  parts  of  the  city.  Their  respect  and 
gratitude  rose  even  to  a religious  veneration  ; they  dedicated 
a chapel  to  him,  as  to  a hero  and  a demigod,  which  they  called 
?u>KPaT6?ov,  that  is  to  say,  the  chapel  of  Socrates. 

Be  invid.  et  odio,  p.  538.  g Diog.  p.  116. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


247 


SECT.  VIII. 

Reflections  upon  the  sentence  passed  on  Socrates  by  the  Athenians,  and 
upon  Socrates  himself. 

We  must  be  very  much  surprised,  when  on  the  one  side  we 
consider  the  extreme  delicacy  of  the  people  of  Athens,  with 
respect  to  what  regards  the  worship  of  the  gods,  which  ran  so 
high  as  to  occasion  their  condemning  the  most  eminent  persons 
upon  the  simple  suspicion  of  their  failing  in  respect  for  them ; 
and  on  the  other,  when  we  see  the  exceeding  toleration,  to  call 
it  no  worse,  with  which  the  same  people  hear  comedies  every 
day,  in  which  all  the  gods  are  turned  into  ridicule  in  a manner 
capable  of  inspiring  the  highest  contempt  for  them.  All  Aris- 
tophanes’s pieces  abound  with  pleasantries,  or  rather  buf- 
fooneries, of  this  kind  ; and  if  it  is  true,  that  this  poet  did 
not  know  what  it  was  to  spare  the  greatest  men  of  the  re- 
public, it  may  be  said  also  as  justly,  he  spared  the  gods 
still  less. 

Such  were  the  daily  entertainments  in  the  theatre,  which  the 
people  of  Athens  heard  not  only  without  pain,  but  with  such 
joy,  pleasure,  and  applause,  that  they  rewarded  the  poet  with 
public  honours  who  diverted  them  so  agreeably.  What  was 
there  in  Socrates  that  came  near  this  excessive  licence  ? Never 
did  any  person  of  the  Pagan  world  speak  of  the  Divinity,  or  of 
the  adoration  due  to  him,  in  so  pure,  so  noble,  and  so  respectful 
a manner.  He  did  not  declare  against  the  gods  publicly  re- 
ceived and  honoured  by  a religion  more  ancient  than  the  city  ; 
he  only  avoided  imputing  to  them  the  crimes  and  infamous  ac- 
tions, which  the  popular  credulity  ascribed  to  them,  and  which 
were  only  calculated  to  depreciate  and  decry  them  in  the  minds 
of  the  people.  He  did  not  blame  the  sacrifices,  festivals,  nor 
the  other  ceremonies  of  religion  ; he  only  taught,  that  all  pomp 
and  outward  show  could  not  be  agreeable  to  the  gods  without 
uprightness  of  intention  and  purity  of  heart. 

This  wise,  this  illumined,  this  religious  man,  however,  with 
all  his  veneration  and  noble  sentiments  in  regard  to  the  Divi- 
nity, is  condemned  as  an  impious  person  by  the  suffrages  of  al- 
most the  whole  people,  without  his  accusers  being  able  to  in- 
stance one  single  avowed  fact,  or  to  produce  any  evidence 
that  has  the  least  appearance  of  probability. 

From  whence  could  so  evident,  so  universal,  and  so  deter- 
minate a contradiction  arise  amongst  the  Athenians  ! A people, 
abounding  in  other  respects  with  wit,  taste,  and  knowledge,  must 
without  doubt  have  had  their  reasons,  at  least  in  appearance, 
for  a conduct  so  different,  and  sentiments  so  opposite,  to  their 
general  character.  May  we  not  say,  that  the  Athenians  con- 


248 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


sidered  their  gods  in  a double  light?  They  confined  their  real 
religion  to  the  public,  solemn,  and  hereditary  worship, as  they  had 
received  it  from  their  ancestors,  as  it  was  established  by  the 
laws  of  the  state,  had  been  practised  from  immemorial  time,  and 
especially  confirmed  by  the  oracles,  auguries,  offerings,  and 
sacrifices.  It  is  by  this  standard  they  regulated  their  piety ; 
against  which  they  could  not  suffer  the  least  attempt  whatso- 
ever : it  was  of  this  worship  alone  that  they  were  jealous  ; it  was 
for  these  ancient  ceremonies  that  they  were  such  ardent  zealots  ; 
and  they  believed,  though  without  foundation,  that  Socrates  was 
an  enemy  to  them.  But  there  was  another  kind  of  religion, 
founded  upon  fable,  poetical  fictions,  popular  opinions,  and  fo- 
reign customs ; for  this  they  were  little  concerned,  and  abandoned 
it  entirely  to  the  poets,  to  the  representations  of  the  theatre, 
and  common  conversation. 

What  grossness  did  they  not  attribute  to  Juno  and  Venus  ?h 
No  citizen  would  have  wished  that  his  wife  or  daughters  should 
resemble  those  goddesses.  Timotheus,  the  famous  musician, 
having  represented  Diana  upon  the  stage  of  Athens,  transport- 
ed with  folly,  fury,  and  rage,  one  of  the  spectators  conceived 
he  could  not  utter  a greater  imprecation  against  him,  than  to 
wish  his  daughter  might  resemble  that  divinity.  It  is  better, 
says  Plutarch,  to  believe  there  are  no  gods,  than  to  imagine 
them  of  this  kind  ; open  and  declared  impiety  being  less  pro- 
fane, if  we  may  be  allowed  to  say  so,  than  so  gross  and  absurd 
a superstition. 

However  it  be,  the  sentence,  of  which  we  have  related  the 
circumstances,  will,  through  all  ages,  cover  Athens  with  infa- 
my and  reproach,  which  all  the  splendour  of  its  glorious  ac- 
tions, for  which  it  is  otherwise  so  justly  renowned;  can  never 
obliterate  : and  it  shows  at  the  same  time  what  is  to  be  expect- 
ed from  a people,  gentle,  humane,  and  beneficent  at  bottom, 
for  such  the  Athenians  really  were,  but  volatile,  proud,  haugh- 
ty, inconstant,  wavering  with  every  wind  and  every  impression. 
It  is  therefore  with  reason  that  public  assemblies  have  been 
compared  to  a tempestuous  sea ; as  that  element,  like  the  peo- 
ple, though  calm  and  peaceable  of  itself,  is  subject  to  be  fre- 
quently agitated  by  a violence  not  its  own.  \ 

As  to  Socrates,  it  must  be  allowed  that  the  Pagan  world 
never  produced  any  thing  so  great  and  perfect.  When  we 
observe  to  what  a height  he  carries  the  sublimity  of  his 
sentiments,  not  only  in  respect  of  the  moral  virtues,  temper- 
ance, sobriety,  patience  in  adversity,  the  love  of  poverty, 
and  the  forgiveness  of  wrongs  ; but,  what  is  far  more  consider- 
able, in  regard  to  the  Divinity,  his  unity,  omnipotence,  creation 
of  the  world,  and  providence  in  the  government  of  it;  the  im- 
h Plut.  de  superstit.  p.  170. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


249 


mortality  of  the  soul,  its  ultimate  end  and  eternal  destiny  ; the 
rewards  of  the  good  and  the  punishment  of  the  wicked  : when 
we  consider  this  train  of  sublime  knowledge,  we  ask  ourselves 
whether  it  is  a Pagan  who  thinks  and  speaks  in  this  manner  ; 
and  are  scarce  persuaded  that  from  so  dark  and  obscure  a 
stock  as  Paganism,  should  shine  forth  such  brilliant  and  glori- 
ous rays  of  light. 

It  is  true,  his  reputation  has  not  been  unimpeached,  and  it 
has  been  affirmed  that  the  purity  of  his  manners  did  not  cor- 
respond with  that  of  his  sentiments.  This  question  has  been 
discussed  by  the  learned, 1 but  my  plan  will  not  admit  me  to 
treat  it  in  its  full  extent.  The  reader  may  see  Abb6  Fragu- 
ier’s  dissertation  in  defence  of  Socrates,  against  the  reproach- 
es made  him  upon  account  of  his  conduct.  The  negative  ar- 
gument he  makes  use  of  in  his  justification  seems  a very  strong 
one.  He  observes,  that  neither  Aristophanes  in  his  comedy  of 
The  Clouds,  which  is  entirely  directed  against  Socrates,  nor 
his  vile  accusers  in  his  trial,  have  advanced  one  word  that  tends 
to  impeach  the  purity  of  his  manners ; and  it  is  not  probable 
that  such  violent  enemies  as  those  would  have  neglected  one 
of  the  most  likely  methods  to  discredit  him  in  the  opinion  of 
his  judges,  if  there  had  been  any  foundation  or  probability  for 
the  use  of  it. 

I confess,  however,  that  certain  principles  of  Plato,  his 
disciple,  held  by  him  in  common  with  his  master,  with  re- 
spect to  the  nudity  of  the  combatants  in  the  public  games, 
from  which  at  the  same  time  he  did  not  exclude  the  fair  sex  ; 
and  the  behaviour  of  Socrates  himself,  who  wrestled  naked, 
man  to  man,  with  Alcibiades,  give  us  no  great  idea  of  that  phi- 
losopher’s delicacy  in  point  of  modesty  and  bashfulness.  What 
shall  we  say  of  his  visit  to  Theodota,  k a woman  of  Athens  of 
indifferent  reputation,  only  to  assure  himself  with  his  own  eyes 
of  her  extraordinary  beauty,  which  was  much  talked  of,  and 
of  the  precepts  he  gave  her,  in  order  to  attract  admirers  and 
to  retain  them  in  her  snares  ? Are  such  lessons  very  suitable 
to  a philosopher  ? I pass  over  many  other  things  in  silence. 

I am  the  less  surprised  after  this,  that  several  of  the  fathers 
have  censured  him  in  regard  to  the  purity  of  his  manners,  and 
that  they  have  thought  fit  to  apply  to  him,  as  well  as  to  his  dis- 
ciple Plato,  what  St.  Paul  says  of  the  philosophers : 1 That 
God  by  a just  judgment  abandoned  them  to  a reprobate  mind, 
and  the  most  shameful  lusts,  as  a punishment ; for  that  having 
clearly  known  there  was  but  one  true  God,  they  had  not  hon- 
oured him  as  they  ought,  by  publicly  avowing  their  belief, 
and  were  not  ashamed  to  associate  with  him  an  innumerable 

' Memoires  de  1’  Academie  des  Inscript,  tom.  iv.  p.  372. 
k Xenoph.  Memorab.  1.  iii.  p.  783 — 786.  1 Rom.  ch.  i.  ver.  17 — 32. 


250  HISTORY  OF  THE 

multitude  of  divinities,  ridiculous  and  infamous  even  in  their 
own  opinions. 

And  in  this,  properly  speaking,  consists  the  crime  of  Socrates, 
which  did  not  make  him  guilty  in  the  eyes  of  the  Athenians,  but 
gave  occasion  for  his  being  justly  condemned  by  eternal  Truth. 
She  had  illuminated  his  soul  with  the  most  pure  and  sublime 
lights  of  which  the  Pagan  world  was  capable ; for  we  are  not 
ignorant,  that  all  knowledgeof  God,  even  natural,  cannot  come 
but  from  himself  alone.  He  held  admirable  principles  on  the 
subject  of  the  Divinity.  He  agreeably  rallied  the  fables  of  the 
poets,  upon  which  the  ridiculous  mysteries  of  his  age  were 
founded.  He  often  spoke,  and  in  the  most  exalted  terms,  of 
the  existence  of  one  only  God,  eternal,  invisible,  creator  of  the 
universe,  supreme  director  and  arbiter  of  all  events,  avenger  of 
crimes  and  rewarder  of  virtues  ; but  he  had  not  the  courage  to 
bear  public  testimony  to  these  great  truths.111  He  perfectly  dis- 
cerned the  falsehood  and  absurdity  of  the  Pagan  system ; and 
nevertheless,  as  Seneca  says  of  the  wise  man,  and  as  he  acted 
himself,  he  observed  exactly  all  the  customs  and  ceremonies,  not 
as  agreeable  to  the  gods,  but  as  enjoined  by  the  laws.  He  ac- 
knowledged at  bottom  one  only  Divinity,11  and  worshipped  with 
the  people  that  multitude  of  infamous  idols  which  ancient  super- 
stition had  heaped  up  during  a long  succession  of  ages.  He 
held  peculiar  opinions  in  the  schools,  but  followed  the  multitude 
in  the  temples.  As  a philosopher,  he  despised  and  detested 
the  idols  in  secret ; as  a citizen  of  Athens  and  a senator,  he  paid 
them  in  public  the  same  adoration  with  others  : by  so  much  the 
more  worthy  of  blame,  says  St.  Augustin,  as  that  worship, 
which  was  only  external  and  dissembled,  seemed  to  the  people 
to  be  the  effect  of  sincerity  and  conviction. 

And  it  cannot  be  said  that  Socrates  altered  his  conduct  at 
the  end  of  his  life,  or  that  he  then  expressed  a greater  zeal  for 
truth.  In  his  defence  before  the  people,  he  declared  that  he 
had  always  received  and  honoured  the  same  gods  as  the  Athe- 
nians : and  the  last  order  he  gave  before  he  expired,  was  to 
sacrifice  in  his  name  a cock  to  7®sculapius.  Behold  then  this 
prince  of  the  philosophers,  declared  by  the  Delphic  oracle  the 
wisest  of  mankind,  who  notwithstanding  his  internal  conviction 
of  one  only  Divinity,  dies  in  the  bosom  of  idolatry,  and  profess- 

m Quae  omnia  (ait  Seneca)  sapiens  servabit  tanquam  legibus  jussa,  non  tan- 
quam  diis  grata — Omnem  istam  ignobilem  deorum  turbam,  quam  longo  oevo 
longa  superstitio  congessit,  sic,  inquit,  adorabimus,  ut  meminerimus  cultum 
ejus  magis  ad  morem,  quam  ad  rem,  pertinere — Sed  iste,  quem  philosophia 
quasi  liberum  fecerat,  tamen,  quia  illustris  senator  erat,  colebat  quod  repre- 
hendebat,  agebat  quod  arguebat,  quod  culpabat  adorabat — eb  damnabilius,  quo 
ilia,  quae  mendaciter  agebat,  sic  ageret,  ut  eum  populus  veraciter  agere  existi- 
maret.  S.  Avgust,  de  civit.  Dei , 1.  vi.  c.  10. 

n Eorum  sapientes,  quos  philosophos  vocant,  scholas  habebant  dissentientes 
et  templa  communia.  Id.  lib.  de  ver.  rel.  c.  1. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


251 


ing  to  adore  all  the  gods  of  the  Pagan  theology.  Socrates  is 
the  more  inexcusable  in  this,  since,  declaring  himself  a man 
expressly  appointed  by  Heaven  to  bear  witness  to  the  truth,  he 
fails  in  the  most  essential  duty  of  the  glorious  commission  he 
ascribes  to  himself.  For  if  there  be  any  truth  in  religion  that 
we  ought  most  particularly  to  avow,  it  is  that  which  regards 
the  unity  of  the  Godhead,  and  the  vanity  of  idol  worship.  In 
this  his  courage  would  have  been  well  placed  ; nor  would  it 
have  been  any  great  difficulty  to  Socrates,  determined  besides 
as  he  was  to  die.  But,  says  St.  Augustin,0  it  was  not  these 
philosophers  who  were  designed  by  God  to  enlighten  the  world, 
nor  to  bring  men  over  from  the  impious  worship  of  false  deities 
to  the  holy  religion  of  the  true  God. 

We  cannot  deny  Socrates  to  have  been  the  hero  of  the  Pagan 
world  in  regard  to  moral  virtues.  But  to  judge  rightly  of  him, 
let  us  draw  a parallel  between  this  supposed  hero  and  the 
martyrs  of  Christianity,  who  often  were  young  children  and 
tender  virgins,  and  yet  were  not  afraid  to  shed  the  last  drop  of 
their  blood,  to  defend  and  confirm  the  same  truths,  which  Soc- 
rates knew,  without  daring  to  assert  them  in  public  : I mean 
the  unity  of  God,  and  the  vanity  of  idols.  Let  us  also  com- 
pare the  so  much  boasted  death  of  this  prince  of  philosophers, 
with  that  of  our  holy  bishops,  who  have  done  the  Christian 
religion  so  much  honour,  by  the  sublimity  of  their  genius,  the 
extent  of  their  knowledge,  and  the  beauty  and  excellence  of 
their  writings  ; a Saint  Cyprian,  a Saint  Augustin,  and  so 
many  others,  who  were  all  seen  to  die  in  the  bosom  of  hu- 
mility, fully  convinced  of  their  unworthiness  and  nothingness, 
penetrated  with  a lively  fear  of  the  judgments  of  God,  and 
expecting  their  salvation  from  his  sole  goodness  and  con- 
descending mercy.  Philosophy  inspires  no  such  sentiments  ; 
they  could  proceed  only  from  the  grace  of  the  Mediator,  which 
Socrates  was  not  thought  worthy  to  know. 

0 Non  sic  isti  nati,  ut  populorum  suorum  opinionem  ad  verum  cultum  veri 
Dei  a simulacrorum  superstitione  atque  ab  hujus  mundi  vanitate  converte- 
rent.  S.  August,  lib.  de  ver.  rel.  c.  ii. 


BOOK  X. 


THE 

ANCIENT  HISTORY 

OF  THE 

PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


MANNERS  AND  CUSTOMS  OF  THE  GREEKS. 

Th  E most  essential  part  of  history,  and  that  which  it  concerns 
the  reader  most  to  know,  is  that  which  explains  the  character 
and  manners,  as  well  of  the  people  in  general,  as  of  the 
great  persons  in  particular,  of  whom  it  treats  ; and  this 
may  be  said  to  be  in  some  sort  the  soul  of  history,  while 
the  facts  are  only  the  body.  I have  endeavoured,  as  occasion 
offered,  to  paint  in  their  true  colours  the  most  illustrious  per- 
sonages of  Greece  ; it  remains  for  me  to  show  the  genius  and 
character  of  the  people  themselves.  I shall  confine  myself  to 
those  of  Lacedaemon  and  Athens,  who  always  held  the  first  rank 
amongst  the  Greeks,  and  shall  reduce  what  I have  to  say  upon 
this  subject  into  three  heads  ; their  political  government,  war, 
and  religion. 

Sigonius,  Meursius,  Potter,  and  several  others,  who  have 
wTritten  upon  Grecian  antiquities,  supply  me  with  great  lights, 
and  are  of  much  use  to  me  in  the  subject  which  it  remains  for 
me  to  treat. 


CHAP.  I. 

OF  POLITICAL  GOVERNMENT. 

There  are  three  principal  forms  of  government : Monarchy, 
in  which  a single  person  reigns ; Aristocracy,  in  which  the 
elders  and  wisest  govern ; and  Democracy,  under  which  the 
supreme  authority  is  lodged  in  the  hands  of  the  people.  The 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


253 


most  celebrated  writers  of  antiquity,  as  Plato,  Aristotle,  Po- 
lybius, and  Plutarch,  give  the  preference  to  the  first  kind,  as 
including  the  most  advantages  with  the  fewest  inconveniences. 
But  all  agree,  and  it  cannot  be  too  often  inculcated,  that  the 
end  of  all  government,  and  the  duty  of  every  one  invested 
with  it,  be  the  form  what  it  may,  is  to  use  his  utmost  endea- 
vours to  render  those  under  his  command  happy  and  just,  by 
obtaining  for  them  on  the  one  side  safety  and  tranquillity,  with 
the  advantages  and  conveniences  of  life;  and  on  the  other,  all 
the  means  and  helps  that  may  contribute  to  making  them  vir- 
tuous. As  the  pilot’s  aim,  says  Cicero,a  is  to  steer  his  vessel 
happily  into  port,  the  physician’s  to  preserve  or  restore  health, 
the  general’s  of  an  army  to  obtain  victory ; so  a prince,  and 
every  man  who  governs  others,  ought  to  make  the  utility  of  the 
governed  his  ultimate  aim ; and  to  remember,  that  the  supreme 
law  of  every  just  government  is  the  good  of  the  public,  Sains 
populi  suprema  lex  esto.h  He  adds,  that  the  greatest  and  most 
noble  function  in  the  world,  is  to  be  the  author  of  the  happiness 
of  a nation. 

Plato  in  a hundred  places  esteems  as  nothing  the  most  shin- 
ing qualities  and  actions  of  those  who  govern,  if  they  do  not 
tend  to  promote  the  two  great  ends  I have  mentioned,  the  vir- 
tue and  happiness  of  the  people  ; and  he  refutes  at  large,  in 
the  first  book  of  his  Republic, c one  Thrasymachus,  who  ad- 
vanced, that  subjects  were  born  for  the  prince,  and  not  the 
prince  for  his  subjects ; and  that  whatever  promoted  the  inter- 
ests of  the  prince  or  commonwealth,  ought  to  be  deemed  just 
and  lawful. 

In  the  distinctions  which  have  been  made  upon  the  several 
forms  of  government,  it  has  been  agreed,  that  that  would  be 
the  most  perfect  which  should  unite  in  itself,  by  a happy  mix- 
ture of  institutions,  all  the  advantages,  and  exclude  all  the  in- 
conveniences, of  the  rest ; and  almost  all  the  ancients  have  be- 
lieved, that  the  Lacedaemonian  government  came  nearest  to 
this  idea  of  perfection.  d 

ARTICLE  I. 

Of  the  government  of  Sparta. 

From  the  time  that  the  Heraclida?  had  re-entered  Pelopon- 
nesus, Sparta  was  governed  by  two  kings,  who  were  always  of 

a Tenes-ne  igitur,  moderatorem  ilium  reip.  quo  referre  velimus  omnia  ? — 
Ut  gubernaton  cursus  secundus,  medico  salus,  imperatori  victoria,  sic  huic 
moderatori  reip.  beata  civium  vita  proposita  est,  ut  opibus  firma,  copiis  locu- 
ples,  glori&  ampla,  virtute  honesta  sit.  Hujus  enim  operis  maximi  inter  ho- 
mines atque  optimi  ilium  esse  perfect orem  volo.  Ad  Attic.  1.  viii.  Epist.  10. 
b Cic.  de  leg.  1.  iii.  n.  8.  c Page  338 — 343.  d Polyb.  1.  vi.  p.  458,  459. 


254 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


the  same  two  families,  descended  from  Hercules  by  two  differ- 
ent branches ; as  I have  observed  elsewhere.  Whether  from 
pride  and  the  abuse  of  despotic  power  on  the  side  of  the  kings, 
or  the  desire  of  independence  and  an  immoderate  love  of  liber- 
ty on  that  of  the  people,  Sparta,  in  its  beginnings,  was  always 
involved  in  commotions  and  revolts  ; which  would  infallibly 
have  occasioned  its  ruin,  as  had  happened  at  Argos  and 
Messene,  two  neighbouring  cities  equally  powerful  with  itself, 
if  the  wise  foresight  of  Lycurgus  had  not  prevented  the  fatal 
consequences  by  the  reformation  which  he  made  in  the  state. 
I have  related  it  at  large  in  the  life  of  that  legislator, e and  shall 
only  touch  here  upon  what  regards  the  government. 

SECT.  I. 

Abridged  idea  of  the  Spartan  government.  Entire  submission  to  the  laws 
was  in  a manner  the  soul  of  it. 

Lycurgus  restored  order  and  peace  in  Sparta  by  the  estab- 
lishment of  the  senate.  It  consisted  of  twenty-eight  senators, 
and  the  two  kings  presided  in  it.  This  august  assembly, 
formed  out  of  the  wisest  and  most  experienced  men  in  the 
nation,  served  as  a counterpoise  to  the  two  other  authorities, 
that  of  the  kings,  and  that  of  the  people;  and  whenever  the 
one  attempted  to  overbear  the  other,  the  senate  interposed,  by 
joining  the  weakest,  and  thereby  held  the  balance  even  between 
both.  At  length,  to  prevent  this  body  itself  from  abusing  its 
power,  which  was  very  great,  a kind  of  curb  was  annexed  to 
it,  by  the  nomination  of  five  Ephori,  who  were  elected  out  of 
the  people,  whose  office  lasted  only  one  year,  but  who  had  au- 
thority, not  only  over  the  senators,  but  the  kings  themselves. 

The  power  of  the  kings  was  extremely  limited,  especially 
in  the  city,  and  in  time  of  peace.  In  war  they  had  the  com- 
mand of  the  fleets  and  armies,  and  at  that  time  greater  autho- 
rity. However, f they  had  even  then  a kind  of  inspectors  and 
commissioners  assigned  them,  who  served  as  a necessary  coun- 
cil, and  were  generally  chosen  for  that  office  from  among  those 
citizens  who  were  out  of  favour  with  them,  in  order  that  there 
should  be  no  connivance  on  their  side,  and  the  republic  be  the 
better  served.  There  was  almost  continually  some  secret  mis- 
understanding between  the  two  kings ; whether  it  proceeded 
from  a natural  jealousy  between  the  two  branches,  or  was  the 
effect  of  the  Spartan  policy,  to  which  their  too  great  union 
might  have  given  umbrage. 

The  Ephori  had  a greater  authority  at  Sparta  than  the  tri- 
bunes of  the  people  at  Rome.  They  presided  in  the  election 
of  the  magistrates,  and  called  them  to  an  account  lor  the  admin- 
e Vol.  ii.  f Arist.  de  rep.  1.  ii.  p.  331. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


255 


istration.  Their  power  extended  even  to  the  persons  of  their 
kings,  and  of  the  princes  of  the  blood  royal,  whom  they  had  a 
right  to  imprison,  which  right  they  actually  used  in  the  case  of 
Pausanias.  When  they  sat  upon  their  seats  in  the  tribunal,  they 
did  not  rise  up  when  the  kings  entered,  which  was  a mark  of 
respect  paid  them  by  all  the  other  magistrates,  and  this  seems 
to  imply  a kind  of  superiority  in  the  Ephori  in  consequence  of 
their  representing  the  people  ; and  it  is  observed  of  Agesilaus, 
that  when  he  was  seated  upon  his  throne  to  dispense  justice,  s 
and  the  Ephori  came  in,  he  never  failed  to  rise  up  to  do  them 
honour.  It  is  very  probable,  that  before  him  it  was  not  usual 
for  the  kings  to  behave  in  that  manner,  since  Plutarch  relates 
this  behaviour  of  Agesilaus  as  peculiar  to  him. 

All  public  business  was  proposed  and  examined  in  the  se- 
nate, and  there  it  was  that  resolutions  were  passed.  But  the 
decrees  of  the  senate  were  not  of  force  unless  ratified  by  the 
people. 

There  must  have  been  exceeding  wisdom  in  the  laws  estab- 
lished by  Lycurgus  for  the  government  of  Sparta,  because,  as 
long  as  they  were  exactly  observed,  no  commotions  or  seditions 
of  the  people  were  ever  known  in  the  city,  no  change  in 
the  form  of  government  ever  proposed,  no  private  person 
usurped  authority  by  violence,  or  made  himself  tyrant ; the 
people  never  thought  of  depriving  the  two  families,  in  which  it 
had  always  been,  of  the  sovereignty,  nor  did  any  of  the  kings 
ever  attempt  to  assume  more  power  than  the  laws  permitted. 
This  reflection,11  which  both  Xenophon  and  Polybius  make, 
shows  the  idea  they  had  of  the  wisdom  of  Lycurgus  in  political 
matters,  and  the  opinion  we  ought  to  have  of  it.  In  fact,  no 
other  city  of  Greece  had  this  advantage,  and  all  of  them  expe- 
rienced many  changes  and  vicissitudes,  for  want  of  similar  laws 
to  perpetuate  their  form  of  government. 

The  reason  of  this  constancy  and  stability  of  the  Lacedaemo- 
nians in  their  government  and  conduct  is,  that  in  Sparta  the 
laws  governed  absolutely,  and  with  sovereign  authority ; whereas 
the  greatest  part  of  the  other  Grecian  cities,  abandoned  to  the 
caprice  of  private  individuals,  to  despotic  power,  to  an  arbitrary 
and  irregular  sway,  experienced  the  truth  of  Plato’s  saying  : 
That  the  city  is  miserable,1  where  the  magistrates  command  the 
laws,  and  not  the  laws  the  magistrates. 

The  example  of  Argos  and  Messene,  which  I have  already 
pointed  out,  would  alone  suffice  to  show  how  just  and  true  that 
reflection  is.  After  their  return  from  the  Trojan  war,k  the 

z Plut.  in  Agesil.  p.  597- 

h Xenophon,  in  Agesil.  p.  651.  Polyb.  1.  vi.  p.  459. 
i Plat.  1.  iv.  de  leg.  p.  715. 

k Plat.  1.  iii.  de  leg.  p.  683 — 685.  Plut.  in  Lycurg.  p.  43. 


256 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


Greeks,  distinguished  by  the  name  of  Dorians,  established 
themselves  in  three  cities  of  Peloponnesus,  Lacedaemon,  Argos* 
and  Messene ; and  swore  mutually  to  assist  each  other.  These 
three  cities,  governed  alike  by  monarchical  power,  had  the  same 
advantages ; except  that  the  two  latter  were  far  superior  to  the 
other  in  the  fertility  of  the  territory  where  they  were  situated. 
Argos  and  Messene,  however,  did  not  long  preserve  their  supe- 
riority. The  haughtiness  of  the  kings,  and  the  disobedience 
of  the  people,  occasioned  their  fall  from  the  flourishing  con- 
dition in  which  they  had  been  at  first;  and  their  example 
proved,  says  Plutarch,  after  Plato,  that  it  was  the  peculiar 
favour  of  the  gods  which  gave  the  Spartans  such  a man  as  Lv- 
curgus,  capable  of  prescribing  so  wise  and  reasonable  a plan 
of  government. 

To  support  it  without  change,  particular  care  was  taken  to 
educate  the  youth  according  to  the  laws  and  manners  of  the 
country ; in  order  that,  by  being  early  engrafted  into  them,  and 
confirmed  by  long  habitude,  they  might  become,  as  it  were,  a 
second  nature.  The  hard  and  sober  manner  in  which  they 
were  brought  up,  inspired  them  during  the  rest  of  their  lives 
with  a natural  taste  for  frugality  and  temperance  that  distin- 
guished them  from  all  other  nations,  and  wonderfully  adapted 
them  to  support  the  fatigues  of  war.  Plato  observes,1 *  that 
this  salutary  custom  had  banished  from  Sparta,  and  all  the 
territory  dependant  upon  it,  drunkenness,  debauchery,  and  all 
the  disorders  that  ensue  from  them ; insomuch  that  it  was  a 
crime  punishable  by  law  to  drink  wine  to  excess  even  in  the  Bac- 
chanalia, which  every  where  else  were  days  of  licence,  and  on 
which  whole  cities  gave  themselves  up  to  the  last  excesses. 

They  also  accustomed  the  children  from  their  earliest  infancy 
to  an  entire  submission  to  the  laws,  magistrates,  and  all  in  au- 
thority; and  their  education,111  properly  speaking,  was  no  more 
than  an  apprenticeship  of  obedience.  It  was  for  this  reason 
that  Agesilaus  advised  Xenophon  to  send  his  children  to  Sparta, 
as  to  an  excellent  school,  where  they  might  learn  the  greatest 
and  most  noble  of  all  sciences,"  to  obey  and  to  command,  for 
the  one  naturally  leads  on  to  the  other.  It  was  not  only  the 
mean,  the  poor,  and  the  ordinary  citizens,  who  were  subjected 
in  this  manner  to  the  laws ; but  the  rich,  the  powerful,  the 
magistrates,  and  even  the  kings ; and  they  distinguished  them- 
selves from  the  others  only  by  a more  exact  obedience ; con- 
vinced that  such  behaviour  was  the  surest  means  to  their  being 
obeyed  and  respected  themselves  by  their  inferiors. 

1 Plat.  1.  i.  de  leg.  p.  637- 

m "Qot£  rrjv  ircutiuav  iivai  fitXerrfv  svttei Quag.  Pint,  in  Lycurg.  p.  58. 

n M aQrjffogevovg  tS)V  [xaQrjfJKXTWv  to  koWkttov,  apxeoOai  kui  dpx^v.  Plut. 
in  Agesil.  p.  606. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


257 


Hence  came  the  so  much  celebrated  answers  of  Demaratus.0 
Xerxes  could  not  comprehend  how  the  Lacedaemonians,  who 
had  no  master  to  control  them,  should  be  capable  of  confront- 
ing’ dangers  and  death.  They  are  free  and  independent  of  all 
men , replied  Demaratus,  hut  the  law  is  above  them  and  com- 
mands them ; and  that  law  ordains  that  they  must  conquer  or 
die.  Upon  another  occasion, p when  somebody  expressed  their 
surprise,  that  being  king  he  should  suffer  himself  to  be  ba- 
nished : It  is,  says  he,  because  at  Sparta  the  laws  are  stronger 
than  the  kings. 

This  appears  evidently  in  the  ready  obedience  of  Agesilaus 
to  the  orders  of  the  Ephori/  when  recalled  by  them  to  the 
support  of  his  country ; a delicate  occasion  for  a king  and  a 
conqueror ; but  to  him  it  seemed  more  glorious  to  obey  his 
country  and  the  laws/  than  to  command  numerous  armies,  or 
even  to  conquer  Asia. 


SECT.  II. 

Love  of  poverty  instituted  at  Sparta. 

To  this  entire  submission  to  the  laws  of  the  state,  Lycurgus 
added  another  principle  of  government  no  less  admirable,  which 
was  to  remove  from  Sparta  all  luxury,  profusion,  and  magnifi- 
cence ; to  bring  riches  absolutely  into  discredit,  to  make  poverty 
honourable,  and  at  the  same  time  necessary,  by  substituting  a 
species  of  iron  money  in  the  place  of  gold  and  silver  coin, 
which  till  then  had  been  current.  I have  explained  elsewhere 
the  measures  that  he  used  to  make  so  difficult  an  undertaking 
succeed,  and  shall  confine  myself  here  to  examining  what 
judgment  should  be  passed  on  it,  as  it  affects  a government. 

Was  the  poverty  to  which  Lycurgus  reduced  Sparta,  and 
which  seemed  to  prohibit  to  that  state  all  conquest,  and  to  de- 
prive it  of  all  means  of  augmenting  its  force  and  grandeur,  well 
adapted  to  render  it  powerful  and  flourishing  ? Does  such  a 
constitution  of  government,  which  till  then  had  no  example, 
nor  has  since  been  imitated  by  any  state,  evince  a great  fund 
of  prudence  and  policy  in  a legislator  ? And  was  not  the  modi- 
fication conceived  afterwards  under  Lysander,  of  continuing 
private  persons  in  their  poverty,  and  restoring  to  the  public  the 
use  of  gold  and  silver  coin,  a wise  amendment  of  what  was  too 
strained  and  excessive  in  that  law  of  Lycurgus  of  which  we 
are  speaking  ? 

° Herod.  \.  vii.  c.  145,  146.  p Plut.  in  Apoph.  j^acon.  p.  220. 

3 Idem,  in  Agesil.  p.  603,  604. 

^ r Multo  gloriosius  duxit,  si  institutis  patriae  paruisset,  quam  si  bello  supe- 
rasset Asiam.  Cor.  Nep.  in  Ages'll,  c.  iv. 

VOL.  III.  S 


258 


HISTORY  OP  THE 


It  seems,  if  we  consult  only  the  common  views  of  human 
prudence,  that  it  is  just  to  reason  in  this  manner;  but  the 
event,  which  is  an  infallible  evidence  and  arbiter  in  this  place, 
obliges  me  to  be  of  a quite  different  opinion.  Whilst  Sparta 
remained  poor,  and  persisted  in  the  contempt  of  gold  and 
silver,  which  continued  for  several  ages,  she  was  still  powerful 
and  glorious ; and  the  commencement  of  her  decline  may  be 
dated  from  the  time  when  she  began  to  break  through  the  severe 
prohibition  of  Lycurgus  against  the  use  of  gold  and  silver 
money. 

The  education  which  he  instituted  for  the  young  Lacedaemo- 
nians, the  hard  and  sober  life  which  he  recommended  with  so 
much  care,  the  laborious  and  violent  exercises  of  the  body  pre- 
scribed by  him,  the  abstraction  from  all  other  application  and 
employment,  in  a word,  all  his  laws  and  institutions  show,  that 
his  view  was  to  form  a nation  of  soldiers,  solely  devoted  to 
arms  and  military  functions.  I do  not  pretend  .absolutely  to 
justify  this  scheme,  which  had  its  great  inconveniences  ; and  I 
have  expressed  my  thoughts  of  it  elsewhere.  But,  admitting 
this  to  be  his  view,  we  must  confess  that  legislator  showed 
great  wisdom  in  the  means  he  took  to  carry  it  into  execution. 

The  almost  inevitable  danger  of  a people  solely  trained  up 
for  war,  who  have  always  their  arms  in  their  hands,  and  that 
which  is  most  to  be  feared,  is  injustice,  violence,  ambition,  the 
desire  of  increasing  their  power,  of  taking  advantage  of  their 
neighbours’  weakness,  of  oppressing  them  by  force,  of  invading 
their  lands  under  false  pretexts,  which  the  lust  of  dominion 
never  fails  to  suggest,  and  of  extending  their  bounds  as  far  as 
possible ; all  vices  and  extremes  which  are  horrid  in  private 
persons,  and  the  ordinary  intercourse  of  life,  but  which  men 
have  thought  fit  to  applaud  as  grandeur  and  glory  in  the  per- 
sons of  princes  and  conquerors. 

The  great  care  of  Lycurgus  was  to  defend  his  people  againsf 
this  dangerous  temptation.  Without  mentioning  the  other 
means  he  made  use  of,  he  employed  two  which  could  not  fail 
of  producing  their  effect.  • The  first  was  to  prohibit  all  naviga- 
tion and  war  at  sea  to  his  citizens.s  The  situation  of  his  city, 
and  the  fear  lest  commerce,  the  usual  source  of  luxury  and  dis- 
order, should  corrupt  the  purity  of  the  Spartan  manners,  might 
have  a share  in  this  prohibition.  But  his  principal  motive 
was  to  put  it  out  of  his  citizens’  power  to  project  conquests, 
which  a people  shut  up  within  the  narrow  bounds  of  a penin- 
sula, could  not  carry  very  far  without  being  masters  at  sea. 

The  second  means,  still  more  efficacious,  was  to  forbid  all 
use  of  gold  or  silver  money,  and  to  introduce  a species  of  iron 

8 1 AnsipysTO  Si  avToig  vavraig  tlvai , ical  vavncf%uv.  Pint,  in  instit.  Lacon. 
p.  239. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


259 


coin  in  its  stead,  which  was  of  great  weight  and  small  value, 
and  could  only  be  current  at  home.  How  with  such  money 
could  foreign  troops  be  raised  and  paid,  fleets  fitted  out,  and 
numerous  armies  kept  up  either  by  land  or  sea  ? 

So  that  the  design  of  Lycurgus,  in  rendering  his  citizens 
warlike,  and  putting  arms  into  their  hands,  was  not,  as  Polybius 
observes,4  and  Plutarch  after  him,  to  make  them  illustrious 
conquerors,  who  might  carry  war  into  remote  regions,  and 
subject  great  numbers  of  people.  His  sole  end  was,  that,  shut 
up  within  the  extent  of  the  lands  and  domain  left  them  by  their 
ancestors,  they  should  have  no  thoughts  but  of  maintaining 
themselves  in  peace,  and  defending  themselves  successfully 
against  such  of  their  neighbours  as  should  have  the  rashness  to 
invade  them  ; and  for  this  they  had  occasion  for  neither  gold 
nor  silver,  as  they  found  in  their  own  country,  and  still  more  in 
their  sober  and  temperate  manner  of  life,  all  that  was  sufficient 
for  the  support  of  their  armies,  when  they  did  not  quit  their 
own  lands,  or  the  neighbouring  territories. 

Now,  says  Polybius,  this  plan  once  admitted,  it  must  be  al- 
lowed that  nothing  could  be  more  wise  nor  more  happily  con- 
ceived than  the  institutions  of  Lycurgus,  for  maintaining  a 
people  in  the  possession  of  their  liberty,  and  securing  to  them 
the  enjoyment  of  peace  and  tranquillity.  In  fact,  let  us  imagine 
a little  republic,  like  that  of  Sparta,  of  which  all  the  citizens  are 
inured  to  labour,  accustomed  to  live  on  little,  warlike,  cou- 
rageous, intrepid  ; and  that  the  fundamental  principle  of  this 
small  republic  is  to  do  no  wrong  to  any  one,  nor  to  disturb  its 
neighbours,  nor  invade  their  lands  or  property ; but,  on  the 
contrary,  to  declare  in  favour  of  the  oppressed  against  the  in- 
justice and  violence  of  oppressors  ; is  it  not  certain,  that  such  a 
republic,  surrounded  by  a great  number  of  states  of  equal  ex- 
tent, would  be  generally  respected  by  all  the  neighbouring 
nations,  would  become  the  supreme  arbiter  of  all  their  quarrels, 
and  exercise  an  empire  over  them,  by  so  much  the  more  glorious 
and  lasting,  as  it  would  be  voluntary,  and  founded  solely  upon 
the  opinion  which  those  neighbours  would  have  of  its  virtue, 
justice,  and  valour? 

This  was  the  end  that  Lycurgus  proposed  to  himself.u  Con- 
vinced that  the  happiness  of  a city,  like  that  of  a private  person, 
depends  upon  virtue,  and  upon  being  well  within  itself,  he  re- 
gulated Sparta  so  as  that  it  might  always  suffice  to  its  own 
happiness,  and  act  upon  principles  of  wisdom  and  equity.  From 
thence  arose  that  universal  esteem  of  the  neighbouring  people, 
and  even  of  strangers,  who  asked  from  the  Lacedaemonians  nei- 
ther money,  ships,  nor  troops,  but  only  that  they  would  lend 
them  a Spartan  to  command  their  armies  ; and  when  they  had 
1 Polyb.  1.  vi.  p.  491.  Plut.  in  Lycurg.  p.  59.  u Plut.  p.  58. 

s 2 


2G0 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


obtained  their  request,  they  paid  him  entire  obedience  with 
every  kind  of  honour  and  respect.  In  this  manner  the  Sicilians 
obeyed  Gylippus,  the  Chalcidians,  Brasidas,  and  all  the  Greeks 
of  Asia,  Lysander,  Callicratidas,  and  Agesilaus ; regarding  the 
city  of  Sparta  as  a model  for  all  others,  in  the  arts  of  living  and 
governing  well.x 

The  epocha  of  the  declension  of  Sparta  begins  with  the  open 
violation  of  Lycurgus’s  laws.  I do  not  pretend  that  they  had 
always  been  exactly  observed  till  that  time,  which  was  far  from 
the  case  ; but  the  spirit  and  genius  of  those  laws  had  almost 
always  prevailed  with  the  majority  of  the  persons  who  governed. 
As  soon  as  the  ambition  of  reigning  over  all  Greece  had  in- 
spired them  with  the  design  of  having  naval  armies  and  foreign 
troops,  and  that  money  was  necessary  for  the  support  of  those 
forces,  Sparta,  forgetting  her  ancient  maxims,  saw  herself  re- 
duced to  have  recourse  to  the  Barbarians,  whom  till  then  she 
had  detested,  and  basely  to  make  her  court  to  the  kings  of  Per- 
sia, whom  she  had  formerly  vanquished  with  so  much  glory  ; 
and  that,  only  to  draw  from  them  some  aids  of  money  and  troops 
against  her  own  brethren,  that  is  to  say,  against  people  born 
and  settled  in  Greece  like  themselves.  Thus  had  they  the  im- 
prudence and  misfortune  to  recall  with  gold  and  silver  into 
Sparta,  all  the  vices  and  crimes  which  the  iron  money  had  ba- 
nished ; and  to  prepare  the  way  for  the  changes  which  ensued, 
and  were  the  cause  of  their  ruin.  And  this  infinitely  exalts  the 
wisdom  of  Lycurgus,  in  having  foreseen,  at  such  a distance, 
what  might  strike  at  the  happiness  of  his  citizens,  and  provided 
salutary  remedies  against  it  in  the  form  of  government  which  he 
established  at  Sparta.  We  must  not,  however,  attribute  the 
whole  honour  of  this  plan  to  him  alone.  Another  legislator, 
who  had  preceded  him  several  ages,  has  a right  to  share  this 
glory  with  him. 

SECT.  Ill 


Laws  established  by  Minos  in  Crete,  the  model  of  those  of  Sparta. 

All  the  world  knows,  that  Lycurgus  had  formed  the  plan  of 
most  of  his  laws  upon  the  model  of  those  observed  in  the  island 
of  Crete,  where  he  passed  a considerable  time  for  the  better 
studying  of  them.  It  is  proper  I should  give  some  idea  of  them 
here,  having  forgotten  to  do  it  in  the  place  where  it  would  have 
been  more  natural,  that  is,  when  I spoke  for  the  first  time  of 
Lycurgus  and  his  institutions. 

x Ilpog  ovfnraoav  tt/v  twv  '27rapriaTU>v  iroXiv,  oioTrep  7raiSayo)yov  rf  Sidacrica - 
Xov  twxrjiiovoc;  (3iov  ical  rtrayfisvr}g  7 roXtrriag  aTrofiXtTTOvrsg. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


261 


Minos,  whom  fabulous  history  calls  the  son  of 
Ant  J^*C^l284  J apiter,  was  the  author  of  these  laws.  He  lived 
about  100  years  before  the  Trojan  war.  He 
was  a powerful,  wise,  and  gentle  prince ; and  still  more  esti- 
mable for  his  moral  virtues  than  his  military  abilities.  After 
having  conquered  the  island  of  Crete,  and  several  others  in  its 
neighbourhood,  he  applied  himself  to  strengthen  by  wise  laws 
the  new  state,  of  which  he  had  possessed  himself  by  the  force 
of  arms.  The  end  which  he  proposed  in  the  establishment  of 
these  laws,  y was  to  render  his  subjects  happy  by  making  them 
virtuous.  He  banished  idleness  and  voluptuousness  from  his 
states,  and  with  them  luxury  and  effeminate  pleasures,  the 
fruitful  sources  of  all  vice.  Well  knowing  that  liberty  is  justly 
regarded  as  the  most  precious  and  greatest  good,  and  that  it 
cannot  subsist  without  a perfect  union  of  the  people,  he  endea- 
voured to  establish  a kind  of  equality  amongst  them  ; which  is 
the  tie  and  basis  of  it,  and  well  calculated  to  remove  all  envy, 
jealousy,  hatred,  and  dissension.  He  did  not  undertake  to 
make  any  new  divisions  of  lands,  nor  to  prohibit  the  use  of 
gold  and  silver.  He  applied  himself  to  the  uniting  of  his  sub- 
jects by  other  ties,  which  seemed  to  him  neither  less  firm  nor 
less  reasonable. 

He  decreed,  that  the  children  should  be  all  brought  up  and 
educated  together,  by  troops  and  bands  ; in  order  that  they 
might  learn  early  the  same  principles  and  maxims.  Their  life 
was  hard  and  sober.  They  were  accustomed  to  be  satisfied 
with  little,  to  suffer  heat  and  cold,  to  walk  over  steep  and  rug- 
ged places,  to  skirmish  with  each  other  in  small  parties,  to 
suffer  courageously  the  blows  they  received,  and  to  exercise 
themselves  in  a kind  of  dance  in  which  they  carried  arms  in 
their  hands,  and  which  was  afterwards  called  the  Pyrrhic  ; in 
order,  says  Strabo,  that,  even  to  their  very  diversions,  every 
thing  might  breathe,  and  form  them  for  war.  They  were  also 
made  to  learn  certain  airs  of  music,  but  of  a manly,  martial 
kind. 

They  were  not  taught  either  to  ride,  or  to  wear  heavy  ar- 
mour;2 but  in  return,  they  were  made  to  excel  in  drawing  the 
bow,  which  was  their  most  usual  exercise.  The  reason  of  this 
was  natural.  Crete  is  not  a flat,  even  country,  nor  fit  for  breed- 
ing horses,  as  is  that  of  the  Thessalians,  who  were  considered 
the  best  cavalry  in  Greece  ; but  a rough,  broken  country,  full 
of  hills  and  high  lands,  where  heavy  armed  troops  could  not 
exercise  themselves  in  the  horse-race.  But  as  archers  and 
light-armed  soldiers,  fit  to  execute  the  devices  and  stratagems 
of  war,  the  Cretans  pretended  to  hold  the  foremost  rank, 

Minos  thought  proper  to  establish  in  Crete  a community  of 
y Strab.  1.  x.  p.  480.  * Plat,  de  leg-  1.  i.  p.  623. 


262 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


tables  and  meals.  Besides  several  other  great  advantages 
which  he  found  in  this  institution,  as  the  introducing  a kind  of 
equality  in  his  dominions,  the  rich  and  poor  having  the  same 
diet,  the  accustoming  his  subjects  to  a frugal  and  sober  life,  the 
cementing  friendship  and  unity  between  them  by  the  usual  gaiety 
and  familiarity  of  the  table,  he  had  also  in  view  the  custom  of 
war,  in  which  the  soldiers  are  obliged  to  eat  together.  It  was 
the  public  that  supplied  the  expenses  of  these  tables. a Out 
of  the  revenues  of  the  state,  a part  was  applied  to  the  uses  of 
religion  and  the  salaries  of  the  magistrates,  and  the  rest  allot- 
ted for  the  public  meals.  So  that  the  women,  children,  and 
men  of  all  ages,  were  fed  at  the  cost,  and  in  the  name,  of  the 
republic.  In  this  respect,  Aristotle  gives  the  preference  to  the 
meals  of  Crete  before  those  of  Sparta,  wherein  private  per- 
sons were  obliged  to  furnish  their  proportion,  and  without  it 
were  not  admitted  into  the  assemblies ; which  was  to  exclude 
the  poor. 

After  eating,  the  old  men  discoursed  upon  the  affairs  of  the 
state. b The  conversation  turned  generally  upon  the  history  of 
the  country,  upon  the  actions  and  virtues  of  its  great  men,  who 
had  distinguished  themselves  either  by  their  valour  in  war,  or 
their  wisdom  in  the  art  of  government  ; and  the  youth,  who  v 
were  present  at  these  entertainments,  were  exhorted  to  propose 
those  great  persons  to  themselves  as  their  models,  for  the  form- 
ing of  their  manners,  and  the  regulation  of  their  conduct. 

Minos,0  as  well  as  Lycurgus,  is  reproached  with  having  no 
other  view  in  his  laws  than  war ; which  is  a very  great  fault  in 
a legislator.  It  is  true,  this  appears  to  have  been  his  principal 
object,  because  he  was  convinced  that  the  repose,  liberty,  and 
riches  of  his  subjects  were  under  the  protection,  and  in  a man- 
ner under  the  guard  of  arms  and  military  knowledge  ; the  con- 
quered being  deprived  of  all  those  advantages  by  the  victor. 
But  he  was  desirous  that  war  should  be  made  only  for  the  sake 
of  peace  ; and  his  laws,  are  far  from  being  confined  to  that  sole 
object. 

Amongst  the  Cretans,  the  cultivation  of  the  mind  was  not 
entirely  neglected,  and  care  was  taken  to  give  the  youth  some 
tincture  of  learning.  The  works  of  Homer, d of  much  later  date 
than  the  laws  of  Minos,  were  not  unknown  amongst  them, 
though  they  set  small  value  upon,  and  made  little  use  of,  foreign 
poets.e  They  were  very  curious  in  such  knowledge  as  is  pro- 
per to  form  the  manners ; and  what  is  no  small  praise/  they 
piqued  themselves  upon  thinking  much  and  speaking  little.  The 
poet  Epimenides/  who  made  a voyage  to  Athens  in  the  time  of 

a Arist.  de  rep.  1.  ii.  c.  10.  D Athen.  1.  iv.  p.  143.  c Plat,  de  leg.  1.  ii.  p.  626. 
d Ibid.  p.  680.  e Plut.  in  Solon,  p.  84. 

f IToXyyotaj'  fxaWov  fj  noXvXoyiav  aaictTv.  g Plat,  de  leg.  1.  ii.  p.  641. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS.  263 

Solon,  and  was  in  great  estimation  there,  was  of  Crete,  and  is 
by  some  placed  in  the  number  of  the  seven  sages. 

One  of  Minos’s  institutions,  which  Plato  h admires  the  most, 
was  to  inspire  early  into  the  youth  a high  respect  for  the  max- 
ims, customs,  and  laws  of  the  state,  and  not  to  suffer  them  to 
dispute  or  call  in  question  the  wisdom  of  their  institutions  ; 
since  they  were  to  consider  them  not  as  prescribed  and  imposed 
by  men,  but  as  emanations  of  the  divinity  himself.  Accordingly, 
he  had  industriously  apprised  the  people,  that  Jupiter  himself 
had  dictated  them  to  him.  He  paid  the  same  attention  in  re- 
gard to  the  magistrates  and  aged  persons,  towards  whom  he  re- 
commended honour  should  be  particularly  shown  ; and  in  order 
that  nothing  might  violate  the  respect  due  to  them,  he  ordained, 
that  if  any  defects  were  observed  in  them,  they  should  never  be 
mentioned  in  the  presence  of  the  youth  : a wise  precaution,  and 
one  which  would  be  of  great  utility  in  the  ordinary  practice  of  life ! 

The  government  of  Crete  was  at  first  monarchical,  of  which 
Minos  has  left  a perfect  model  to  all  ages.  According  to  him, 
as  a great  and  most  excellent  man  observes,1  the  king  has 
supreme  power  over  the  people,  but  the  laws  supreme  power 
over  him.  He  has  an  absolute  power  to  do  good,  and  his 
hands  are  tied  up  from  doing  evil.  The  laws  intrust  the  people 
in  his  hands  as  the  most  sacred  of  deposits,  upon  condition  that 
he  shall  be  the  father  of  his  subjects.  The  same  laws  require, 
that  a single  man  by  his  wisdom  and  moderation  shall  consti- 
tute the  felicity  of  an  infinite  number  of  subjects : not  that  the 
subjects,  by  their  misery  and  abject  slavery,  shall  be  subser- 
vient to  the  gratifications  of  the  pride  and  low  passions  of  a 
single  man.  According  to  him,  the  king  ought  to  be  abroad 
the  defender  of  his  country  at  the  head  of  armies,  and  at  home 
the  judge  of  his  people,  to  render  them  good,  wise,  and  happy. 
It  is  not  for  himself  that  the  gods  have  made  him  king ; he  is 
only  so  for  the  service  of  his  people.  He  owes  to  them  his 
whole  time,  care,  and  affection ; and  is  worthy  of  the  throne, 
only  as  far  as  he  forgets  himself,  and  devotes  himself  to  the 
public  good.  Such  is  the  idea  Minos  had  of  the  sovereignty,1* 
of  which  he  was  a living  image  in  his  own  person,  and  which 
Hesiod  has  perfectly  expressed  in  two  words,  by  calling  that 
prince,  the  most  royal  of  mortal  kings,  BcKnXevTaTov  OvrjTwv 
B aaiXewv  : that  is  to  say,  that  he  possessed  in  a supreme  degree 
all  royal  virtues,  and  was  a king  in  all  things. 

It  appears,1  that  the  authority  of  king  was  of  no  long  dura- 
tion, and  that  it  gave  place  to  a republican  government,  as 
Minos  had  intended.  The  senate,  composed  of  thirty  senators, 
formed  the  public  council.  In  that  assembly  the  public  affairs 

h De  leg.  1.  i.  p.  634.  * Monsieur  de  Fenelon,  archbishop  of  Cambray. 

k Plat,  in  Min.  p.  320.  1 Arist.  de  Rep.  1.  ii.  c.  10. 


264 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


were  examined,  and  resolutions  taken ; but  they  were  of  no 
force  till  the  people  had  given  them  their  approbation,  and  con- 
firmed them  by  their  suffrages.  The  magistrates,  to  the  num- 
ber of  ten,  established  for  maintaining  good  order  in  the  state, 
and  therefore  called  Cos?ni,m  held  the  two  other  bodies  of  the 
state  in  check,  and  preserved  the  balance  between  them.  In 
time  of  war  the  same  persons  commanded  the  army.  They 
were  chosen  by  lot,  but  only  out  of  certain  families.  Their 
office  was  for  life,  and  they  were  not  accountable  to  any  for 
their  administration.  Out  of  this  company  the  senators  were 
elected. 

The  Cretans  made  the  slaves  and  mercenaries  cultivate  their 
lands,  who  were  obliged  to  pay  them  a certain  annual  sum. 
They  were  called  Perioeci,  probably  from  their  being  drawn 
from  neighbouring  nations  whom  Minos  had  subjected.  As 
they  inhabited  an  island,  and  consequently  a country  separate 
from  all  others,  the  Cretans  had  not  so  much  to  fear  from  these 
vassals  as  the  Lacedaemonians  from  the  Helots,  who  often 
joined  the  neighbouring  people  against  them.  A custom  an- 
ciently established  in  Crete,11  from  whence  it  was  adopted  by  the 
Romans,  gives  us  reason  to  believe  that  the  vassals  who  tilled 
the  lands  were  treated  with  great  mildness  and  humanity.  In 
the  feasts  of  Mercury,  the  masters  waited  on  their  slaves  at 
table,  and  did  them  the  same  offices  as  they  received  from  them 
the  rest  of  the  year ; — precious  remains  and  traces  of  the  pri- 
mitive world,  in  which  all  men  were  equal,  that  seemed  to  in- 
form the  masters  that  their  servants  were  of  the  same  condition 
with  themselves,  and  that  to  treat  them  with  cruelty  and  pride 
was  to  renounce  humanity. 

As  a prince  cannot  do  every  thing  alone,0  and  is  obliged  to 
associate  co-operators  with  himself,  for  whose  conduct  he  is 
accountable,  Minos  charged  his  brother  Rhadamanthus  with  a 
share  in  the  administration  of  justice  in  the  capital  city,  which 
is  the  most  essential  and  indispensable  function  of  sovereignty. 
He  knew  his  probity,  disinterestedness,  ability,  and  constancy, 
and  had  taken  pains  to  form  him  for  so  important  an  office. 
Another  minister  had  the  care  of  the  rest  of  the  cities,  through 
which  he  made  a circuit  three  times  a year,  to  examine  whether 
the  laws  established  by  the  prince  were  duly  observed,  and  the 
inferior  magistrates  and  officers  religiously  acquitted  themselves 
of  their  duty. 

Crete,  under  so  wise  a government,  changed  its  aspect  en- 
tirely, and  seemed  to  have  become  the  abode  of  virtue,  probity, 
and  justice,  as  we  may  judge  from  what  fabulous  history  tells 
us  of  the  honour  Jupiter  did  these  two  brothers,  in  making 
them  the  judges  of  the  infernal  regions  ; for  every  body  knows 
m Kotr/uoc,  ordo.  n Athen.  1.  xiv.  p.  639.  ° Plat,  in  Min.  p.  320. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


265 


that  fable  is  founded  upon  real  history,  though  disguised  under 
agreeable  emblems  and  allegories,  adapted  to  recommend  truth 
by  the  ornaments  of  fancy. 

It  was,  according  to  fabulous  tradition,,?  a law  established 
from  the  beginning  of  time,  that  men  on  departing  this  life 
should  be  judged,  in  order  to  their  receiving  the  reward  or 
punishment  due  to  their  good  or  evil  actions.  In  the  reign  of 
Saturn,  and  in  the  first  years  of  that  of  Jupiter,  this  judgment 
was  pronounced  at  the  instant  preceding  death,  which  left  room 
for  very  flagrant  injustice.  Princes,  who  had  been  cruel  and 
tyrannical,  appearing  before  their  judges  in  all  the  pomp  and 
splendour  of  their  power,  and  producing  witnesses  to  depose 
in  their  favour,  because,  as  they  were  still  alive,  they  dreaded 
their  anger;  the  judges,  dazzled  with  this  vain  show,  and  de- 
ceived by  such  false  evidence,  declared  these  princes  innocent, 
and  dismissed  them  with  permission  to  enter  into  the  happy 
abodes  of  the  just.  The  same  may  be  said  in  regard  to  the 
rich ; but  for  the  poor  and  helpless,  calumny  and  malice  pur- 
sued them  even  to  this  last  tribunal,  and  found  means  to  have 
them  doomed  for  ever  as  criminals. 

Fabulous  history  adds,  that,  upon  reiterated  complaints  and 
warm  remonstrances  made  to  Jupiter  upon  this  account,  he 
changed  the  form  of  these  trials.  The  time  for  them  was  fixed 
for  the  very  moment  after  death.  Bhadamanthus  and  iEacus, 
both  sons  of  Jove,  were  appointed  judges ; the  first  for  the 
Asiatics,  the  other  for  the  Europeans  ; and  Minos  over  them 
to  decide  supremely  in  cases  of  doubt  and  obscurity.  Their 
tribunal  is  situated  in  a place  called  Hie  Field  of  Truth , be- 
cause neither  falsehood  nor  calumny  can  approach  it.  The 
greatest  prince  must  appear  there,  as  soon  as  he  has  resigned 
his  last  breath,  deprived  of  all  his  grandeur,  reduced  to  his 
naked  self,  without  defence  or  protection,  silent  and  trembling 
for  his  own  doom,  after  having  made  the  whole  world  tremble 
for  theirs.  If  he  be  found  guilty  of  crimes  which  are  of  a 
nature  to  be  expiated,  he  is  confined  in  Tartarus  for  a certain 
time  only,  and  with  assurances  of  being  released  as  soon  as  he 
shall  be  sufficiently  purified.  But  if  his  crimes  are  unpardon- 
able, such  as  injustice,  perjury,  and  the  oppression  of  his 
people,  he  is  cast  into  the  same  Tartarus,  there  to  suffer  eter- 
nal miseries.  The  just,  on  the  contrary,  of  whatsoever  condi- 
tion they  are,  are  conducted  into  the  blest  abodes  of  peace  and 
joy,  to  partake  of  a felicity  which  shall  have  no  end. 

Who  does  not  see  that  the  poets,  under  the  cover  of  these 
fictions,  ingenious  indeed,  but  little  to  the  honour  of  the  gods, 
intended  to  give  us  the  model  of  an  accomplished  prince,  whose 
first  care  is  to  render  justice  to  his  people,  and  to  depict  the 
p Plat,  in  Gorg.  p.  523 — 526.  In  Axioch.  p.  371. 


266 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


extraordinary  happiness  Crete  enjoyed  under  the  wise  govern- 
ment of  Minos?  This  happiness  did  not  expire  with  him. 
The  laws  he  established  subsisted  in  all  their  vigour  even  in 
Plato’s  time,q  that  is  to  say,  more  than  900  years  after  ;r  and 
they  were  considered  as  the  effect  of  his  long  conversations 
for  many  years  with  Jupiter, s who  had  condescended  to  become 
his  teacher,  to  enter  into  a familiarity  with  him  as  with  a friend,4 
and  to  form  him  in  the  great  art  of  reigning  with  a secret  com- 
placency, as  a favourite  disciple  and  a tenderly-beloved  son. 
It  is  in  this  manner  Plato  explains  these  words  of  Homer, 
Atos  /xe^aXov  oapiairj^  :u  the  most  exalted  praise,  according  to 
him,  that  can  be  given  to  a mortal,  and  which  that  poet  ascribes 
only  to  Minos. 

Notwithstanding  so  shining  and  solid  a merit,  the  theatres 
of  Athens  resounded  with  imprecations  against  the  memory  of 
Minos ; and  Socrates,  in  the  dialogue  of  Plato,  which  I have 
already  often  cited,  observes  upon,  and  gives  the  reason  for 
them : but  first  he  makes  a reflection  well  worthy  of  being 
weighed : When  either  the  praise  or  dispraise  of  great  men 
is  in  question,  it  is  of  the  utmost  importance,  says  he,  to  make 
use  of  circumspection  and  wisdom ; because  upon  that  depends 
the  idea  men  form  to  themselves  of  virtue  and  vice , and  the 
distinction  they  ought  to  make  between  the  good  and  the  bad. 
For,  adds  he,  God  conceives  a just  indignation  when  a prince 
is  blamed  ivho  resembles  himself,  and  on  the  contrary  another 
praised  who  is  directly  the  reverse.  We  must  not  believe  that 
nothing  is  sacred  but  brass  and  marble  (he  speaks  of  the 
statues  that  were  worshipped) ; the  just  man  is  the  most 
sacred,  and  the  wicked  the  most  detestable,  of  all  beings  in 
this  world. 

After  this  reflection,  Socrates  observes,  that  the  source  and 
cause  of  the  Athenians’  hatred  of  Minos  was  the  unjust  and 
cruel  tribute  he  imposed  upon  them,  in  obliging  them  to  send 
him,  every  nine  years,  seven  young  men  and  as  many  maids, 
to  be  devoured  by  the  Minotaur : and  he  cannot  avoid  re- 
proaching that  prince  with  having  drawn  upon  himself  the 
abhorrence  of  a city  like  Athens,  abounding  with  learned  men, 
and  of  having  sharpened  the  tongues  of  the  poets  against 
him,  a dangerous  and  formidable  race  of  men,  from  the  poi- 
soned shafts  which  they  never  fail  to  let  fly  against  their 
enemies. 

It  appears  from  what  T have  repeated,  that  Plato  imputes 
to  this  Minos  of  whom  we  are  treating,  the  imposition  of  that 

Plat,  in  Min.  p.  321.  r Ibid.  p.  319. 

s Et  Jovis  arcanis  Minos  admissus.  Horat. 

1 This  poetical  fiction  is  perhaps  taken  from  the  Holy  Scriptures,  which  say 
of  Moses:  And  the  Lord  spake  unto  Moses  face  to  face,  as  a man  speaketh 
unto  his  friend.  Enod.  xxxiii.  11.  u Odyss.  T.  ver.  179. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


267 


cruel  tribute.  Apollodorus,  Strabo,  and  Plutarch,  seem  to  be 
of  the  same  opinion.  The  Abbe  Banier*  alleges  and  proves 
that  they  are  mistaken,  and  confound  the  first  Minos,  of  whom 
we  speak,  with  a second,  his  grandson,  who  reigned  after  him 
in  Crete,  and  who,  to  avenge  the  death  of  his  son  Androgeus, 
killed  in  Attica,  declared  war  against  the  Athenians,  and 
imposed  that  tribute,  to  which  Theseus  put  an  end  by  killing 
the  Minotaur.  It  would  indeed  be  difficult  to  reconcile  so 
inhuman  and  barbarous  conduct  with, what  all  antiquity  relates 
of  the  goodness,  lenity,  and  equity  of  Minos,  and  with  the 
magnificent  praises  it  bestows  upon  the  polity  and  institutions 
of  Crete. 

It  is  true,  that  in  after-times  the  Cretans  degenerated  very 
much  from  their  ancient  reputation,  which  at  length  they  abso- 
lutely lost  by  an  entire  change  of  their  manners,  becoming  ava- 
ricious, and  so  self-interested  as  to  think  that  no  gain  was  base, 
enemies  of  labour  and  regularity  of  life,  professed  liars  arid 
knaves  ; so  that  to  Cretize  became  a proverb  amongst  the 
Greeks,  implying  to  lie  and  to  deceive.  Every  body  knows 
that  St.  Paul  y cites  against  them  as  truth  the  testimony  of  one 
of  their  ancient  poets,  (it  is  believed  to  be  Epimenides,)  who 
paints  them  in  colours  much  to  their  dishonour.  But  this 
change  of  manners,  at  whatever  time  it  took  place,  does  not 
at  all  affect  the  probity  of  the  ancient  Cretans,  nor  the  glory  of 
Minos  their  king. 

The  most  certain  proof  of  that  legislator’s  wisdom,  as  Plato z 
observes,  is  the  solid  and  lasting  happiness  which  the  sole  imi- 
tation of  his  laws  effected  at  Sparta.  Lycurgus  had  regulated 
the  government  of  that  city  upon  the  plan  and  idea  of  that  of 
Crete ; and  it  subsisted  in  a uniform  manner  for  many  ages, 
without  experiencing  the  vicissitudes  and  revolutions  so  com- 
mon in  all  the  other  states  of  Greece. 

ARTICLE  II. 

Of  the  government  of  Athens. 

The  government  of  Athens  was  neither  so  permanent  nor  so 
uniform  as  that  of  Sparta,  but  suffered  various  alterations,  ac- 
cording to  the  diversity  of  times  and  conjunctures.'  Athens, 
after  having  long  been  governed  by  kings,  and . afterwards  by 
Archons,  assumed  entire  liberty,  which  gave  place,  however, 
for  some  years  to  the  tyrannic  power  of  the  Pisistratidae,  but 
was  soon  after  re-established,  and  subsisted  with  splendour  till 

x Mem.  de  l’Acad.  des  Inscrip,  tom.  in. 

y KprjTeQ  au  %pev<TTcu,  icaica  Srpp'ux,  y aoTspeg  apyai,  The  Cretans  are  always 
liars,  evil  beasts,  slow  bellies.  Titus  i.  12.  z Plat.  p.  320. 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


•208 

the  defeat  in  Sicily,  and  the  taking  of  the  city  by  the  Lacedae- 
monians. The  latter  subjected  them  to  the  thirty  tyrants, 
whose  authority  was  not  of  long  duration,  and  gave  place  again 
to  liberty,  which  continued  amidst  various  events  during  a long 
series  of  years,  till  the  Roman  power  had  subdued  Greece,  and 
reduced  it  into  a province. 

I shall  consider  in  this  place  only  the  popular  government, 
and  shall  examine  in  particular  five  or  six  heads  of  it:  The 
foundation  of  their  government  according  to  Solon’s  establish- 
ment ; the  different  parts  of  which  the  republic  consisted : 
the  council  or  senate  of  Five  Hundred  ; the  assemblies  of  the 
people  ; the  different  tribunals  for  the  administration  of  justice  ; 
the  revenues  or  finances  of  the  republic.  I shall  be  obliged 
to  dwell  more  at  large  upon  what  regards  the  government  of 
Athens,  than  I have  upon  that  of  Sparta,  because  the  latter  is 
almost  sufficiently  known,  from  what  has  been  said  of  it  in  the 
life  of  Lycurgus.a 

SECT.  I. 

Foundation  of  the  government  of  Athens  according  to  Solon’s  plan. 

Solon  was  not  the  first  who  established  the  popular  govern- 
ment at  Athens. b Theseus  long  before  him  had  traced  out 
the  plan,  and  begun  the  execution  of  it.  After  having  united 
the  twelve  towns  into  one  city,  he  divided  the  inhabitants  into 
three  bodies  : that  of  the  nobility,  to  whom  the  superintend- 
ence of  religious  affairs  and  all  offices  were  confided  ; the  la- 
bourers, or  husbandmen  ; and  the  artisans.  He  had  proposed 
the  establishment  of  a kind  of  equality  between  the  three  orders. 
For  if  the  nobles  were  considerable  by  their  honours  and  dig- 
nities, the  husbandmen  had  the  advantage  from  their  utility  to 
the  public,  and  the  necessity  there  was  for  their  labours  ; and 
the  artisans  had  the  superiority  to  both  the  other  bodies  from 
their  number.  Athens,  properly  speaking,  did  not  become  a 
popular  state  till  the  establishment  of  the  nine  Archons,  whose 
authority  continued  only  for  one  year,  whereas  before  it  lasted 
for  ten  ; and  it  was  not  till  many  years  after  that  Solon,  by  the 
wisdom  of  his  laws,  confirmed  and  regulated  this  form  of 
government. 

Solon’s  great  principle  was  to  establish  as  much  as  possible 
a kind  of  equality  amongst  his  citizens,0  which  he  regarded 
with  reason  as  the  foundation  and  essential  point  of  liberty. 
He  resolved  therefore  to  leave  the  public  employments  in  the 
hands  of  the  rich,  as  they  had  been  till  then  ; but  to  give 


a Vol.  ii. 


b Plut.  in  Thes.  p.  10,  11. 


c Plut.  in  Solon,  p.  87- 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


269 


the  poor  also  some  share  in  the  government,  from  which  they 
were  excluded.  For  this  reason  he  made  an  estimation  of 
what  each  individual  was  worth.  Those  who  were  found  to 
have  an  annual  revenue  of  500  measures,  as  well  in  grain  as 
liquids,  were  placed  in  the  first  class,  and  called  the  Penta- 
cosiomedimni,  that  is,  those  who  had  a revenue  of  500  mea- 
sures. The  second  class  was  composed  of  such  as  had  300, 
and  could  maintain  a horse  for  war  ; these  were  called  horse- 
men, or  knights.  Those  who  had  only  200,  were  in  the  third 
class,  and  were  called  Zugitce.d  Out  of  these  three  classes 
alone  the  magistrates  and  commanders  were  chosen.  All  the 
other  citizens  who  were  below  these  three  classes,  and  had 
less  revenues,  were  comprised  under  the  name  of  Thetce, 
i.  e.  hirelings,  or  rather  workmen  labouring  with  their  hands. 
Solon  did  not  permit  them  to  hold  any  office,  and  granted 
them  only  the  right  of  giving  their  suffrages  in  the  assemblies 
and  trials  of  the  people,  which  at  first  seemed  a very  slight 
privilege,  but  at  length  was  found  to  be  a very  great  advantage, 
as  will  appear  in  the  sequel.  I do  not  know  whether  Solon 
foresaw  it,  but  he  used  to  say,  that  the  people  were  never  more 
obedient  and  submissive,  than  when  they  possessed  neither  too 
much,  nor  too  little  liberty  :e  which  comes  very  near  Galba’s 
expression,  when/  in  order  to  induce  Piso  to  treat  the  Roman 
people  with  mildness  and  lenity,  he  desires  him  lo  remember/ 
that  he  was  going  to  command  men  who  were  incapable  of 
bearing  either  entire  liberty  or  absolute  subjection. 

The  people  of  Athens/  being  become  more  haughty  after 
their  victories  over  the  Persians,  pretended  to  have  a right  to 
share  in  all  the  public  offices  and  the  magistracy  : and  Aris- 
tides, to  prevent  the  disorders  which  a too  tenacious  opposi- 
tion might  have  occasioned,  thought  proper  to  give  way  to 
them  in  this  point.  It  appears,  however,  from  a passage  in 
Xenophon,'  that  the  people  contented  themselves  with  those 
offices  from  whence  some  profit  arose,  and  left  those  which  re- 
lated more  particularly  to  the  government  of  the  state  in  the 
hands  of  the  rich. 

The  citizens  of  the  first  three  classes  paid  every  year  a 
certain  sum  of  money/  to  be  laid  up  in  the  public  treasury  : 
the  first  a talent,1  the  Knights  half  a talent,  and  the  Zugitae 
ten  mime.™ 

d It  is  believed  they  were  so  called  from  their  being  ranked  between  the 
Knights  and  the  Thetse ; as  in  the  galleys  those  who  rowed  in  the  middle 
were  termed  Zugitse ; their  place  was  between  the  Thalamitse  and  Thranitse. 
e Plut.  in  Solon,  p.  110.  f Tacit.  Hist.  1.  x.  c.  16. 

s Imperaturus  es  hominibus,  qui  nec  totam  servitutem  pati  possunt  nec 
totam  libertatem.  h Plut.  in  Aristid.  p.  332. 

' Xenoph.  de  rep.  Athen.  p.  691.  k Pollux.  1.  viii.  c.  10. 

1 One  thousand  French  crowns.  m Five  hundred  livres. 


270 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


As  the  proportion  of  revenue  determined  the  order  of  the 
classes,  as  their  revenues  augmented,  the  people  were  allowed 
to  rise  to  a superior  class.  * 

If  Plutarch11  may  be  believed,  Solon  formed  two  councils, 
which  were  the  two  anchors,  as  it  were,  of  the  commonwealth, 
to  secure  it  from  being  shaken  by  the  commotions  of  the 
assemblies  of  the  people.  The  first  was  the  Areopagus : but 
it  was  much  more  ancient  than  his  institutions,  and  he  only 
reformed  it,  and  gave  it  new  lustre,  by  augmenting  its  power. 
The  second  was  the  council  of  the  Four  Hundred,  that  is,  100 
of  each  tribe ; for  Cecrops,  the  first  king  of  the  Athenians, 
had  divided  the  people  into  four  tribes.  Clisthenes  long  after 
him  changed  that  order,  and  established  ten.  It  was  in  this 
council  of  the  Four  Hundred  that  all  affairs  were  considered 
before  they  were  proposed  to  the  assembly  of  the  people,  as 
we  shall  soon  explain. 

I do  not  mention  here  another  division  of  the  people  into 
three  parties  or  factions,  which  till  the  time  of  Pisistratus  were 
a continual  source  of  troubles  and  seditions.  One  of  these 
three  parties  was  formed  out  of  those  who  inhabited  the  high 
lands ; and  these  favoured  popular  government ; the  other,  out 
of  those  who  lived  in  the  plains ; and  they  were  for  oligarchy : 
and  the  third  out  of  the  people  upon  the  coast ; and  these  held 
the  mean  between  both. 

It  is  necessary,  for  the  better  understanding  what  we  have 
now  said,  to  enter  into  a more  particular  account  of  the  Athe- 
nian people. 

SECT.  II. 

Of  the  inhabitants  of  Athens. 

There  were  three  sorts  of  inhabitants  of 
Ant.^.  C63°14.  Athens;0  citizens,  strangers,  and  servants.  In 
the  account  taken  by  Demetrius  Phalereus  in 
the  cxvith  Olympiad,  their  number  amounted  to  21,000  citi- 
zens, 10,000  strangers,  and  40,000  servants.?  The  number  of 
citizens  was  almost  the  same  in  the  time  of  Cecrops,  and  less 
under  Pericles. 

1.  Of  the  Citizens. 

A citizen  could  only  be  such  by  birth  or  adoption.  To  be  a 
natural  denizen  of  Athens,  it  was  necessary  to  be  born  of  a 
father  and  mother  both  free,  and  Athenians.  We  have  seen 
that  Pericles  restored  in  all  its  force  this  law,**  which  had  not 

n In  Solon,  p.  88.  ° Athen.  1.  vi.  p.  272. 

v The  text  says,  fivoiaSctQ  rstjaapaicovra , four  hundred  thousand  ; which  is  a 
manifest  error.  q Vol.  ii. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


271 


been  exactly  observed,  and  which  he  himself  some  short  time 
after  infringed.  The  people  could  confer  the  freedom  of  the 
city  upon  strangers  ; and  those  whom  they  had  so  adopted  enjoy- 
ed almost  the  same  rights  and  privileges  as  the  natural  citizens. 
The  quality  of  citizen  of  Athens  was  sometimes  granted  as  an 
honour  and  mark  of  gratitude  to  those  who  had  rendered  great 
services  to  the  state ; as  to  Hippocrates ; and  even  kings  have 
sometimes  canvassed  that  title  for  themselves  or  their  children. 
Evagoras,  king  of  Cyprus,  thought  it  much  to  his  honour. 

When  the  young  men  had  attained  the  age  of  twenty,  they 
were  enrolled  upon  the  list  of  citizens,  after  having  taken  an 
oath  ; and  it  was  only  in  virtue  of  that  public  and  solemn  act 
that  they  became  members  of  the  state.  The  form  of  this  oath 
is  exceedingly  remarkable,  which  Stobaeus  and  Pollux r have 
preserved  in  the  following  words  : 1 will  never  dishonour  the 
profession  of  arms,  nor  save  my  life  by  a shameful  flight.  I 
will  fight  to  my  last  breath  for  the  religion  and  civil  interests 
of  the  state,  in  concert  with  the  other  citizens,  and  alone  if 
occasion  be.  I will  not  bring  my  country  into  a worse  condi- 
tion than  I found  it,  but  will  use  my  utmost  endeavours  to 
make  it  more  flourishing . I will  always  submit  myself  to  the 
laws  and  magistrates,  and  to  whatsoever  shall  be  ordained  by 
the  common  consent  of  the  people.  If  any  one  shall  violate,  or 
attempt  to  annul,  the  laws,  I will  not  disguise  or  conceal  such 
an  enterprise,  but  will  oppose  it  either  alone,  or  in  conjunction 
with  my  fellow- citizens  ; and  I will  constantly  adhere  to  the 
religion  of  my  forefathers.  To  all  which  I call  to  witness 
Agraulos,  Eny alius,  Mars,  and  Jupiter.  I leave  the  reader 
to  his  own  reflections  upon  this  august  ceremony,  well  adapted 
to  inspire  the  love  of  their  country  in  the  hearts  of  the  young 
citizens. 

The  whole  people  at  first  had  been  divided  into  four  tribes, 
and  afterwards  into  ten.  Each  tribe  was  subdivided  into  seve- 
ral parts,  which  were  called  pagi.  It  was  by  these  two 

titles  that  the  citizens  were  described  in  the  public  acts.  Me- 
litus,  e tribu  Cecropide,  epago  Pitthensi. 

2.  Of  the  Strangers. 

I call  those  by  that  name  who,  being  of  a foreign  country, 
came  to  settle  at  Athens  or  in  Attica,  whether  for  the  sake  of 
commerce  or  the  exercising  any  trade.  They  were  termed 
fieroiKoi,  inquilini.  They  had  no  share  in  the  government,  nor 
votes  in  the  assembly  of  the  people,  and  could  not  be  admitted 
into  any  office.  They  put  themselves  under  the  protection  of 
some  citizens,  as  we  find  from  a passage  of  Terence, s and  upon 

r Pollux.  1.  viii.  c.  9.  8 Thais  patri  se  commendavit  in 

clientelam  et  fidem : Nobis  dedit  sese.  Eunuch.  Act.  5.  seen.  ult. 


272 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


that  account  were  obliged  to  render  him  certain  duties  and  ser- 
vices, as  the  clients  did  at  Rome  to  their  patrons.  They  were 
bound  to  observe  all  the  laws  of  the  republic,  and  to  conform 
entirely  to  all  its  customs.  They  paid  a yearly  tribute  to  the 
state  of  twelve  drachmas  and  in  default  of  payment  were 
made  slaves,  and  exposed  to  sale.  Xenocrates,u  the  celebrated 
but  poor  philosopher,  was  very  near  experiencing  this  misfor- 
tune, and  was  being  carried  to  prison  ; but  Lycurgus,  the  ora- 
tor, having  paid  the  tax,  released  him  from  the  hands  of  the 
farmers  of  the  public  revenues ; a kind  of  men  who  in  all  times 
have  been  very  little  sensible  to  merit,  with  the  exception  of 
an  exceeding  few  of  their  number.  That  philosopher,  meeting 
some  time  after  the  sons  of  his  deliverer,  told  them  : 1 pay 
your  father  the  favour  he  has  done  me  with  usury , for  all  the 
world  praises  him  upon  my  account . 

3.  Of  the  Servants. 

These  were  of  two  kinds.  The  one  who  were  free,  and  not 
able  to  get  their  bread  by  their  work,  were  obliged  by  the  bad 
state  of  their  affairs  to  go  into  service,  and  their  condition  was 
reputable  and  not  laborious.  The  service  of  the  other  was 
forced  and  constrained  : these  were  slaves  who  had  either  been 
taken  prisoners  in  war,  or  bought  of  such  as  trafficked  publicly 
in  them.  They  formed  part  of  the  property  of  their  masters, 
who  disposed  absolutely  of  them,  but  generally  treated  them  with 
great  humanity.  Demosthenes  observes, x in  one  of  his  harangues, 
that  the  condition  of  servants  was  infinitely  more  gentle  at 
Athens  than  any  where  else.  There  was  in  that  city  an  asylum 
and  place  of  refuge  for  slaves,  where  the  bones  of  Theseus  had 
been  interred,  and  that  asylum  still  subsisted  in  Plutarch’s  time. 
How  glorious  was  it  for  Theseus,  that  his  tomb  should  do  that, 
1200  years  after  his  death,  which  he  had  done  himself  during 
his  life,  and  continue  the  protector  of  the  oppressed  as  he  had 
been  ! 

When  the  slaves  were  treated  with  too  much  rigour  and  in- 
humanity, y they  had  their  action  against  their  masters,  who 
were  obliged  to  sell  them  to  others,  if  the  fact  were  sufficiently 
proved.  They  could  ransom  themselves  even  against  their  mas- 
ters’ consent,2  when  they  had  laid  up  money  enough  for  that 
purpose.  For  out  of  what  they  got  by  their  labour,  after  having 
paid  a certain  proportion  to  their  masters,  they  kept  the  re- 
mainder for  themselves,  and  made  a stock  which  was  at  their 
own  disposal.  Private  persons,  when  they  were  satisfied  with 
their  services,  often  gave  these  slaves  their  liberty  ; and  the 
same  favour  was  often  granted  them  by  the  public,  when  the 

‘ Six  livres.  u Plut.  in  Flamin.  p.  375.  x Philip.  3. 

y Plut.  de  superstit.  p.  166.  z Plaut.  in  Casin. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS,  273 

necessity  of  the  times  obliged  the  state  to  put  arms  in  their 
hands,  and  enlist  them  amongst  the  citizens. 

The  humane  and  equitable  manner  in  which  the  Athenians 
treated  their  servants  and  slaves,  was  an  effect  of  the  good  tem- 
per natural  to  that  people,  and  very  remote  from  the  austere 
and  cruel  severity  of  the  Lacedaemonians  towards  their  Helots, 
which  often  brought  their  republic  to  the  very  brink  of  destruc- 
tion. Plutarch, a with  great  reason,  condemns  this  rigour.  He 
thinks  it  proper  to  habituate  one’s  self  always  to  mercy,  even 
with  regard  to  beasts,  were  it  only,  says  he,  to  learn  by  that 
means  to  treat  men  well,  and  to  serve,  as  it  were,  an  apprentice- 
ship to  humanity  and  benevolence.  He  relates,  upon  this  occa- 
sion, a very  singular  fact,  and  one  well  calculated  to  give  an 
idea  of  the  character  of  the  Athenians.  After  having  finished 
the  temple  called  Heccitompedon,  they  set  all  the  beasts  of  bur- 
den at  liberty,  that  had  been  employed  in  the  work,  and  assign- 
ed them  fat  pasturages  as  consecrated  animals.  And  it  was 
said,  that  one  of  these  beasts  having  come  to  offer  itself  at  the 
work,  and  put  itself  at  the  head  of  those  that  drew  the  carts  to  the 
citadel,  walking  foremost,  as  if  to  exhort  and  encourage  them, 
the  Athenians  ordained  by  a decree,  that  the  creature  should  be 
maintained  at  the  public  expense  till  its  death. 

SECT.  III. 

Of  the  council  or  senate  of  Five  Hundred. 

In  consequence  of  Solon’s  institutions,  the  people  of  Athens 
had  a great  share  and  authority  in  the  government.  Appeals 
might  be  brought  to  their  tribunals  in  all  cases  ; they  had  a 
right  to  cancel  the  old  laws,  and  establish  new  ones  ; in  a word, 
all  important  affairs,  whether  relating  to  war  or  peace,  were 
decided  in  their  assemblies.  In  order  that  their  determinations 
should  be  made  with  more  wisdom  and  maturity,  Solon  had  in- 
stituted a council,  composed  of  400  senators,  100  out  of  each 
tribe,  which  were  then  four  in  number  ; and  they  prepared  and 
digested  the  affairs  which  were  to  be  laid  before  the  people,  as 
we  shall  soon  explain  more  at  large.  Clisthenes,  about  100 
years  after  Solon,  having  increased  the  number  of  tribes  to  ten, 
augmented  also  that  of  the  senators  to  500,  each  tribe  supplying 
fifty.  This  was  called  the  council,  or  senate,  of  the  Five  Hun- 
dred. They  received  their  stipend  out  of  the  public  treasury. 

They  were  chosen  by  lot,  in  which  they  made  use  of  black 
and  white  beans,  which  were  mingled  and  shaken  in  an  urn ; 
and  each  tribe  gave  in  the  names  of  those  who  aspired  to  that 
trust,  and  had  the  revenue  assigned  by  the  laws  to  qualify  them 
a Plut.  in  Catone,  p.  338,  339. 

T 


VOL.  III. 


274 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


for  it.  None  could  be  admitted  under  the  age  of  thirty. 
After  inquiry  made  into  the  manners  and  conduct  of  the  can- 
didate, he  was  made  to  take  an  oath,  whereby  he  engaged  to 
give  at  all  times  the  best  counsel  he  could  to  the  people  of 
Athens,  and  never  to  depart  in  the  least  from  the  tenor  of  the 
laws. 

This  senate  assembled  every  day,  except  upon  the  days 
appointed  for  festivals.  Each  tribe  in  its  turn  furnished  those 
who  were  to  preside  in  it,  called  Prytanes,h  and  this  rank  was 
decided  by  lot.  This  presidency  continued  thirty-five  days, 
which  being  reckoned  ten  times,  amounts  to  the  number  of  days, 
except  four,  of  the  lunar  year  followed  at  Athens.  This  time 
of  the  presidency,  or  prytanism,  was  divided  into  five  weeks, 
regard  being  had  to  the  five  tens  of  the  Prytanes,  who  were 
to  preside  in  them,  and  every  week  seven  of  these  ten  Prytanes 
drawn  by  lot  presided,  each  their  day,  and  were  denominated 
IT poedpoi,  that  is  to  say,  presidents.  He  who  was  so  for  the  day,c 
presided  in  the  assembly  of  the  senators  and  in  that  of  the 
people.  He  was  charged  with  the  public  seal,  as  also  with  the 
keys  of  the  citadel  and  treasury. 

The  senators,  before  they  assembled,  offered  a sacrifice  to 
J upiter  and  Minerva,  under  the  additional  appellation  of  givers 
of  good  counsel ,d  to  implore  from  them  the  prudence  and  un- 
derstanding necessary  to  form  wise  deliberations.  The  presi- 
dent proposed  the  business  which  was  to  be  considered  in  the 
assembly.  Every  one  gave  his  opinion  in  his  turn,  and  always 
standing.  After  a question  had  been  settled,  it  was  drawn  up 
in  writing,  and  read  with  a loud  voice.  Each  senator  then  gave 
his  vote  by  scrutiny,  by  putting  a bean  into  the  urn.  If  the 
white  beans  carried  it,  the  question  passed,  otherwise  it  was 
rejected.  This  sort  of  decree  was  called  ^(frur/Aa,  or  Tlpof3ov- 
Xevfia,  as  much  as  to  say,  a preparatory  resolution.  It  was  af- 
terwards laid  before  the  assembly  of  the  people,  where,  if  it 
wras  received  and  approved,  it  had  the  force  of  a law  ; if  not,  its 
authority  subsisted  only  one  year.  This  shows  with  what  wis- 
dom Solon  established  this  council,  to  inform  and  direct  the 
people,  to  fix  their  inconstancy,  to  check  their  temerity,  and  to 
impart  to  their  deliberations  a prudence  and  maturity  not  to  be 
expected  in  a confused  and  tumultuous  assembly  composed  of 
a great  number  of  citizens,  most  of  them  without  education,  capa- 
city, or  much  zeal  for  the  public  good.  The  reciprocal  depen- 
dency and  mutual  concurrence  of  the  two  bodies  of  the  state, 
which  were  obliged  to  lend  each  other  their  authority,  and  re- 
mained equally  without  force  when  without  union  and  a good 
understanding,  were  besides  a method  judiciously  contrived  for 
supporting  a wise  balance  between  the  two  bodies ; the  people 
b Ilpvravtig.  c He  was  called  ’Ettkt tccttiq.  d BovXatog , (3ovXaia . 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


275 


not  being  able  to  enact  any  thing  without  its  being  first  pro- 
posed and  approved  by  the  senate,  nor  the  senate  to  pass  any 
decree  into  a law  till  it  had  been  ratified  by  the  people. 

We  may  judge  of  the  importance  of  this  council  by  the 
matters  which  were  treated  in  it ; the  same,  without  any  ex- 
ception, as  were  laid  before  the  people ; — wars,  taxes,  maritime 
affairs,  treaties  of  peace,  alliances ; in  a word,  whatever  re- 
lated to  government;  without  mentioning  the  account  which 
they  obliged  the  magistrates  to  give  on  quitting  their  offices, 
and  the  frequent  decisions  and  judgments  upon  the  most  serious 
and  important  affairs. 

SECT.  IV. 

Of  the  Areopagus. 

This  council  took  its  name  from  the  place  where  it  held  its 
meetings,  called  the  quarter , e or  hill  of  Mars,  because,  accord- 
ing to  some.  Mars  had  been  cited  thither  to  trial  for  a murder 
committed  by  him.  It  was  believed  to  be  as  ancient  as  the 
nation.  Cicero  and  Plutarch  attribute  the  institution  of  it  to 
Solon  ; but  he  only  re-established  it,  by  giving  it  more  lustre 
and  authority  than  it  had  had  till  then,  and  for  that  reason  was 
looked  upon  as  its  founder.  The  number  of  the  senators  of 
the  Areopagus  was  not  fixed  ; at  certain  times  they  amounted 
to  2 or  300.  Solon  thought  proper  that  only  those  who  had 
borne  the  office  of  Archon  should  be  honoured  with  that  dignity. 

This  senate  had  the  care  of  seeing  the  laws  duly  observed, 
of  inspecting  the  manners  of  the  people,  and  especially  of  judg- 
ing in  criminal  cases.  They  held  their  sittings  in  an  open 
place,  and  during  the  night.  The  former  very  probably  to 
avoid  being  under  the  same  roof  with  the  criminals,  and  not  to 
defile  themselves  by  such  an  intercourse  with  them ; the  latter, 
that  they  might  not  be  softened  by  the  sight  of  the  guilty,  and 
might  judge  solely  according  to  justice  and  the  laws.  It  was 
for  the  same  reason,  that,  in  presence  of  these  judges,  the  ora- 
tors were  not  permitted  to  use  any  exordium  or  peroration, 
nor  allowed  to  excite  the  passions,  but  were  obliged  to  confine 
themselves  solely  to  the  subject-matter  of  their  cause.  The 
severity  of  their  judgments  was  exceedingly  dreaded,  particu- 
larly in  regard  to  murder,  and  they  were  highly  attentive  to  in- 
spire their  citizens  with  horror  for  that  crime.  Theyf  con- 
demned av  child  to  be  put  to  death  for  making  it  his  pastime 

e H Apeiog  Trayog. 

f Nec  mihi  videntur  Areopagitae,  cum  damnaverunt  puerutn  oculos  coturni- 
cum  eruentem,  aliud  judicasse,  quam  id  signum  esse  perniciosissimae  mentis, 
multisque  malo  futurae  si  adolevissit.  Quintil.  1.  v.  c.  9. 


276 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


to  put  out  the  eyes  of  quails;  conceiving  this  sanguinary  incli- 
nation as  the  mark  of  a very  wicked  disposition,  which  might 
one  day  prove  fatal  to  many,  if  it  were  suffered  to  grow  up  with 
impunity. 

The  affairs  of  religion,  as  blasphemies  against  the  gods, 
contempt  of  the  sacred  mysteries,  different  species  of  impiety, 
and  the  introduction  of  new  ceremonies  and  new  divinities, 
were  also  brought  before  the  tribunal.  We  read  in  Justin 
Martyr,  s that  Plato,  who  in  his  travels  in  Egypt  had  acquired 
great  lights  concerning  the  unity  of  God,  when  he  returned 
to  Athens,  took  great  care  to  dissemble  and  conceal  his  senti- 
ments, for  fear  of  being  obliged  to  appear,  and  give  an  account 
of  them  before  the  Areopagitae  ; and  we  know  that  St.  Paul 
was  traduced  before  them,  as  teaching  a new  doctrine,  h and 
endeavouring  to  introduce  new  gods. 

These  judges  were  in  great  reputation  for  their  probity, 
equity,  and  prudence,  and  generally  respected.  Cicero,  in 
writing  to  his  friend  Atticus,  upon  the  fortitude,  constancy, 
and  wise  severity  of  the  Roman  senate,  thinks  he  makes  a great 
encomium  upon  it  in  comparing  it  with  the  Areopagus. 
Senatus ’ "A peio?  7ra<yo<s,  nil  constantius,  nil  severius,  nil  fortius. 
Cicero  must  have  conceived  a very  advantageous  idea  of  it, 
to  speak  of  it  as  he  does  in  the  first  book  of  his  Offices.  He 
compares  the  famous  battle  of  Salamis,  k in  which  Themistocles 
had  so  great  a part,  with  the  establishment  of  the  Areopagus, 
which  he  ascribes  to  Solon  ; and  makes  no  scruple  to  prefer, 
or  at  least  to  equal,  the  legislator’s  service  to  that  for  which 
Athens  was  obliged  to  the  general  of  its  army.  For  in  reality , 
says  he,  that  victory  was  useful  to  the  republic  only  for  once , 
hut  the  Areopagus  will  be  so  throughout  all  ages , as  by  the 
wisdom  of  that  tribunal  the  laws  and  ancient  customs  of  the 
Athenian  state  are  preserved.  Themistocles  did  no  service  to 
the  Areopagus,  but  the  Areopagus  abundantly  contributed  to 
the  victory  of  Themistocles  ; because  the  republic  was  at  that 
time  directed  by  the  wise  counsels  of  that  august  senate. 

It  appears  from  this  passage  of  Cicero,  that  the  Areopagus 
had  a great  share  in  the  government,  and  I do  not  doubt  but  it 
was  consulted  upon  important  affairs.  Cicero  here  perhaps  may 
have  confounded  the  council  of  the  Areopagus  with  that  of  the 

s Cohort,  ad  Graec.  h Acts  xvii.  18 — 20.  * Ad  Attic.  1.  i.  ep.  13. 

k Quamvis  Themistocles  jure  laudetur,  et  sit  ejus  nomen,  quam  Solonis, 
illustrius,  citeturque  Salamis  clarissimae  testis  victoriae,  quae  anteponatur  con- 
silio  Solonis  ei,  quo  primum  constituit  Areopagitas : non  minus  praeclarum 
hoc,  quam  illud,  judicandum  est.  Illud  enim  semel  profuit,  hoc  semper  pro- 
derit  civitati : hoc  consilio  leges  Atheniensium,  hoc  majorum  instituta  ser- 
vantur.  Et  Themistocles  quidem  nihil  dixerit,  in  quo  ipse  Areopagum  juve- 
rit : at  ille  adjuvit  Themistoclem.  Est  enim  helium  gestum  consilio  Senatfis 
ejus,  qui  a Solone  erat  constitutus.  Offic.  1.  i.  n.  75* 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS.  277 

Five  Hundred.  It  is  certain,  however,  that  the  Areopagitas 
were  extremely  active  in  the  public  affairs. 

Pericles,  who  .could  never  enter  the  Areopagus,  because, 
chance  having  always  been  against  him,  he  had  not  passed 
through  any  of  the  employments  necessary  to  his  admission,  at- 
tempted to  weaken  its  authority,  and  attained  his  point:  which 
is  a great  blot  in  his  reputation. 

SECT.  V. 

Of  the  magistrates. 

Of  these  a great  number  were  established  for  different  func- 
tions. I shall  speak  only  of  the  Archons,  who  are  the  most 
known.  I have  observed  elsewhere  that  they  succeeded  the 
kings,  and  that  their  authority  at  first  continued  during  life.  It 
was  afterwards  limited  to  ten  years,  and  reduced  at  last  only  to 
one.  When  Solon  was  commissioned  to  reform  the  government, 
he  found  them  upon  this  foot,  and  to  the  number  of  nine.  He 
did  not  abolish  their  office,  but  he  very  much  diminished  their 
power. 

The  first  of  these  nine  magistrates  was  called  the  Archon, 
by  way  of  eminence,  and  the  year  denominated  from  him  : 
Under  such  an  Archon  such  a battle  was  fought}  The  se- 
cond was  called  the  King,  which  was  a remnant  and  vestige 
of  the  authority  to  which  they  had  succeeded.  The  third  was 
the  Polemarch,  who  at  first  commanded  the  armies,  and  al- 
ways retained  that  name,  though  he  had  not  the  same  au- 
thority, of  which,  however,  he  had  yet  preserved  some  part. 
For  we  have  seen,  in  speaking  of  the  battle  of  Marathon,  that 
the  polemarch  had  a right  to  vote  in  the  council  of  war,  as 
well  as  the  ten  generals  then  in  command.  The  six  other  Ar- 
chons were  called  by  the  common  name,  Thesmothet^e, 
which  implies  that  they  had  a particular  superintendence  over 
the  laws,  in  order  to  their  being  duly  observed.  These  nine 
Archons  had  each  of  them  a peculiar  province,  and  were  judges 
in  certain  affairs  allotted  to  their  cognizance.  I do  not  think 
it  necessary  to  enter  into  the  particulars  of  their  duty,  nor 
into  those  of  many  other  employments  and  offices  established 
for  the  administration  of  justice,  for  the  levying  of  taxes  and 
tributes,  for  the  preservation  of  good  order  in  the  city,  for 
supplying  it  with  provisions  ; in  arword,  for  every  thing  relating 
to  commerce  and  civil  society. 

SECT.  VI. 

Of  the  assemblies  of  the  people. 

These  were  of  two  sorts  : the  one  ordinary  and  fixed  to  cer- 
tain days,  and  for  these  there  was  no  kind  of  summons  ; the 
1 From  thence  he  was  called  ’Ettmwpoq. 


278 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


other  extraordinary,  according  to  the  different  occasions  that 
arose,  and  the  people  were  informed  of  it  by  express  pro- 
clamation. 

The  place  for  the  assembly  was  not  fixed.  Sometimes  it 
was  the  public  market-place,  sometimes  a part  of  the  city  near 
the  citadel,  called  and  sometimes  the  theatre  of  Bacchus. 

The  prytanes  generally  assembled  the  people.  Some  days 
before  the  assembly,  bills  were  fixed  up,  wherein  the  business 
to  be  considered  was  set  down. 

All  the  citizens,  poor  as  well  as  rich,  had  a right  to  give 
their  suffrages.  Those  were  liable  to  a penalty  who  failed  of 
being  present  at  the  assembly,  or  who  came  late  ; and  to  induce 
their  punctual  attendance,  a reward  was  annexed  to  it,  at  first 
of  an  obolus,  which  was  the  sixth  part  of  a drachma,  then  of 
three  obofi,  which  made  about  five-pence  French. 

The  assembly  always  began  with  sacrifices  and  prayers,  in 
order  to  obtain  from  the  gods  the  knowledge  and  understanding 
necessary  to  wise  deliberations  : and  they  never  failed  to  add 
the  most  terrible  imprecations  against  such  as  should  wilfully 
advise  any  thing  contrary  to  the  public  good. 

The  president  proposed  the  affair  upon  which  they  were  to 
deliberate.  If  it  had  been  examined  in  the  senate,  and  decided 
upon  there,  the  resolution  was  read  ; after  which  those  who 
wished  to  speak  were  invited  to  ascend  the  tribunal,  that  they 
might  be  the  better  heard  by  the  people,  and  inform  them  in 
the  matter  proposed.  The  oldest  generally  spoke  first,  and 
then  the  rest  according  to  their  seniority.  When  the  orators 
had  done  speaking,  and  giving  their  opinion,  that  it  was  ne- 
cessary, for  instance,  to  approve  or  reject  the  decree  of  the 
senate,  the  people  proceeded  to  vote ; and  the  most  common 
method  of  doing  it  was  by  holding  up  their  hands,  to  denote 
their  approbation,  which  was  called  xeiP° roveJV.  The  assembly 
was  sometimes  adjourned  till  another  day,  because  it  was  too 
late  to  distinguish  the  number  of  those  that  lifted  up  their 
hands,  and  decide  which  party  had  the  majority.  After  a re- 
solution had  been  formed  in  this  manner,  it  was  reduced  to 
writing,  and  read  by  an  officer  to  the  people  with  a loud  voice, 
who  confirmed  it  again  by  holding  up  their  hands  as  before! 
after  which  the  decree  had  the  force  of  a law.  And  this  was 
called  from  the  Greek  word  ^009,  which  signifies  a 

pebble,  or  small  stone , because  they  were  sometimes  used  in 
giving  suffrages  by  scrutiny. 

All  the  great  affairs  of  the  republic  were  discussed  in  these 
assemblies.  It  was  in  them  that  new  laws  were  proposed  and 
old  ones  amended ; every  thing  that  related  to  religion  and  the 
worship  of  the  gods  examined ; magistrates,  generals,  and  offi- 
cers created;  their  behaviour  and  condact  inquired  into;  peace 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


279 


or  war  concluded ; deputies  and  ambassadors  appointed  ; trea- 
ties and  alliances  ratified ; freedom  of  the  city  granted  ; re- 
wards and  honours  decreed  to  those  who  had  distinguished 
themselves  in  war,  or  rendered  great  services  to  the  republic  ; 
and  punishments  ordained  for  those  who  had  behaved  themselves 
ill,  or  had  violated  the  laws  of  the  state,  and  were  banished  by 
the  ostracism.  In  fine,  justice  was  administered,  and  judgment 
passed  there,  upon  the  most  important  affairs.  We  see  from 
this  account,  which  is,  however,  very  imperfect,  how  far  the 
people’s  power  extended  ; and  with  what  truth  it  may  be  said, 
that  the  government  of  Athens,  though  qualified  by  the  aristo- 
cracy and  the  authority  of  the  elders,  was  by  its  constitution 
democratical  and  popular. 

I shall  have  occasion  to  observe  in  the  sequel,  of  what  weight 
the  talent  of  eloquence  must  have  been  in  such  a republic  ; and 
in  what  great  repute  orators  must  have  been  in  it.  It  is  not 
easy  to  conceive  how  they  could  make  themselves  heard  in  so 
numerous  an  assembly,  and  where  such  a multitude  of  auditors 
were  present.  We  may  judge  how  great  that  was,  from  what 
has  been  said  of  it  in  two  instances.  The  first  relates  to  the 
ostracism,  and  the  other  to  the  adoption  of  a stranger  for  a 
citizen.  On  each  of  these  occasions  it  was  necessary  that  no 
less  than  6000  citizens  should  be  present  in  the  assembly. 

I reserve  for  another  place  the  reflections  which  naturally 
arise  from  what  I have  already  related,  and  what  still  remains 
for  me  to  say  upon  the  government  of  Athens. 

Sect.  VII.  Of  trials. 

There  were  different  tribunals,  according  to  the  different 
nature  of  the  affairs  to  be  adjudged,  but  appeals  might  bo 
brought  to  the  people  from  all  decrees  of  the  other  judges,  and 
this  it  was  that  rendered  their  power  so  great  and  considerable. 
All  the  allies,  when  they  had  any  cause  to  try,  were  obliged  to 
repair  to  Athens,™  where  they  often  remained  a considerable 
time  without  being  able  to  obtain  audience,  from  the  multipli- 
city of  affairs  to  be  adjudged.  This  law  had  been  imposed 
upon  them,  in  order  to  render  them  more  dependent  upon  the 
people,  and  more  submissive  to  their  authority ; instead  of 
which,  had  they  sent  commissioners  upon  the  spot,  they  would 
have  been  the  sole  persons  to  whom  the  allies  would  have  made 
their  court  and  paid  their  homage. 

The  parties  pleaded  their  cause  either  in  person,  or  employed 
advocates  to  do  it  for  them.  The  time  allowed  for  the  hearing 
was  generally  fixed,  and  a water-clock,  called  in  Greek  /cAe- 
yJrvBpa,  regulated  its  duration.  The  decree  was  passed  by  plu- 
rality of  voices;  and  when  the  suffrages  were  equal,  the  judges 
m Xenoph.  de  Rep.  Athen.  p.  664. 


280 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


inclined  to  the  side  of  mercy,  and  acquitted  the  accused.  It  is 
remarkable  that  a friend  was  not  obliged  to  give  evidence 
against  a friend. 

All  the  citizens,  even  the  poorest,  and  such  as  had  no  estates, 
were  admitted  into  the  number  of  the  judges,  provided  they 
had  attained  the  age  of  thirty,  and  were  known  to  be  persons 
of  good  morals.  Whilst  they  sat  in  judgment,  they  held  in 
their  hands  a kind  of  sceptre,  which  was  the  mark  of  their 
dignity,  and  laid  it  down  when  they  withdrew. 

The  judges’  salary  was  different  at  different  times.  They 
had  at  first  only  an  obolus  a day,  and  afterwards  three,  at  which 
their  fee  remained  fixed.  It  was  but  a small  matter  in  itself, 
but  became  in  time  a very  great  charge  to  the  public,  and 
exhausted  the  treasury  without  much  enriching  individuals.  We 
may  judgk  of  this  from  what  is  related  in  Aristophanes’s 
comedy  of  The  Wasps , wherein  that  poet  ridicules  the  fond- 
ness of  the  Athenians  for  trying  causes,  and  their  eager  desire 
for  the  gain  arising  from  it,  which  protracted  and  multiplied 
suits  without  end. 

In  this  comedy,  a young  Athenian  who  was  to  act  the  part  I 
have  mentioned,  of  turning  the  judges  and  trials  of  Athens 
into  ridicule,  from  a computation  which  he  makes  of  the  re- 
venues paid  into  the  public  treasury,  finds  their  amount  to  be 
2000  talents.11  He  then  examines  how  much  of  that  sum  falls 
to  the  share  of  the  6000  judges,  with  whom  Athens  was  over- 
run, at  three  oboli  a head  per  day.  This  appears  to  be  a’nnually, 
including  all  of  them,  only  150  talents.0  The  calculation  is  easy. 
The  judges  were  paid  only  ten  months  in  the  year,  the  other 
two  being  employed  in  festivals,  when  all  proceedings  at  law 
were  prohibited.  Now  three  oboli  a day  paid  to  6000  men, 
makes  fifteen  talents  a month,  and  consequently  150  in  ten 
months.  According  to  this  calculation,  the  most  assiduous 
judge  gained  only  sevenly-five  livres  (about  three  guineas)  a 
year.  What  then  becomes  of  the  remainder  of  the  2000 
talents  ? cries  the  young  Athenian.  What  ? replies  his  father, 

who  was  one  of  the  judges,  it  goes  to  those but  let  us  not 

expose  the  shame  of  Athens;  let  us  always  be  for  the  people. 
The  young  Athenian  goes  on  to  insinuate  that  the  remainder 
went  to  such  as  robbed  the  public  treasury ; to  the  orators,  who 
incessantly  flattered  the  people,  and  to  those  who  were  employ- 
ed in  the  government  and  army.  I have  extracted  this  remark 
from  the  works  of  Father  Brumoi  the  Jesuit,  of  which  I have 
already  made  much  use,  where  I have  spoken  of  the  public 
shows  and  dramatic  representations. 


About  280,000/.  sterling. 


About  7000/.  sterling. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


281 


SECT.  VIII. 

Of  the  Amphictyons. 

The  famous  council  of  the  Amphictyons  is  introduced  here, 
though  it  was  not  peculiar  to  the  Athenians,  but  common  to  all 
Greece,  because  it  is  often  mentioned  in  the  Grecian  history, 
and  I do  not  know  whether  I shall  have  a more  natural  occasion 
to  mention  it. 

The  assembly  of  the  Amphictyons  was  in  a manner  the  hold- 
ing of  a general  assembly  of  the  states  of  Greece.  The  establish- 
ment of  it  is  attributed  to  Amphictyon,  king  of  Athens,  and  son 
of  Deucalion,  who  gave  them  his  name.  His  principal  view  in 
the  institution  of  this  council,  was  to  unite  in  the  sacred  band 
of  amity  the  several  people  of  Greece  admitted  into  it,  and  to 
oblige  them  by  that  union  to  undertake  the  defence  of  each 
other,  and  be  mutually  vigilant  for  the  happiness  and  tranquillity 
of  their  country.  The  Amphictyons  were  also  created  to  be 
protectors  of  the  oracle  of  Delphi,  and  the  guardians  of  the  pro- 
digious riches  of  that  temple,  and  also  to  adjudge  the  differ- 
ences which  might  arise  between  the  Delphians  and  those  who 
came  to  consult  the  oracle.  This  council  was  held  at  Thermo- 
pylae, and  sometimes  at  Delphi  itself.  It  assembled  regularly 
twice  a year  ; in  the  spring  and  autumn,  and  more  frequently 
when  affairs  required. 

The  number  of  people  or  cities  which  had  a right  to  sit;  in 
this  assembly  is  not  precisely  known,  and  varied,  without  doubt, 
at  different  times.  When  the  Lacedaemonians,  in  order  to  se- 
cure to  themselves  alone  an  influence  over  the  decrees  of  this 
council,  were  desirous  of  excluding  the  Thessalians,  Argives, 
and  Thebans  ; Themistocles,?  in  the  speech  he  made  to  the 
Amphictyons  to  prevent  that  design  from  taking  effect,  seems  to 
insinuate  that  there  were  only  one- and- thirty  cities  at  that  time 
which  had  this  right. 

Each  city  sent  two  deputies,  and,  consequently,  had  two  votes 
in  the  council ; and  that  without  distinction,  or  the  more  pow- 
erful having  any  prerogative  of  honour  or  pre-eminence  over 
inferior  states  in  regard  to  the  suffrages  ; the  liberty  upon  which 
these  nations  valued  themselves,  requiring  that  every  thing 
should  be  equal  amongst  them. 

The  Amphictyons  had  full  power  to  discuss  and  determine 
finally  in  all  differences  which  might  arise  between  the  Amphic- 
tyonic  cities,  and  to  fine  the  culpable  in  heavy  penalties.  They 
could  employ  not  only  the  rigour  of  the  laws  in  the  execution  of 
their  decrees,  but  even  raise  troops,  if  it  were  necessary,  to 
P Plut.  in  Themist.  p.  122. 


282 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


compel  such  as  rebelled  to  submit  to  them.  The  three  sacred 
wars  undertaken  by  their  order,  of  which  I have  spoken  else- 
where, are  an  evident  proof  of  this  power. 

Before  they  were  installed  in  this  body,  they  took  a very  re- 
markable oath,  of  which  ^Echines  has  preserved  the  form  ; it 
runs  to  this  effect : I swear  that  I will  never  destroy  any  of 
the  cities  honoured  with  the  right  of  sitting  in  the  Amphic - 
tyonic  council , nor  turn  their  running  waters  out  of  their 
course  either  in  times  of  tear  or  peace.  If  any  people  shall 
make  such  an  attempt , I hereby  engage  to  carry  the  war  into 
their  country , to  demolish  their  cities , towns,  and  villages,  and 
to  treat  them  in  every  respect  as  the  most  cruel  enemies. 
Moreover,  if  at  any  time  any  person  shall  dare  to  he  so  impious 
as  to  steal  and  lake  away  any  of  the  rich  offerings  preserved 
in  the  temple  of  Apollo  at  Delphi , or  abet  any  others  in  com- 
mitting that  crime,  either  by  aiding  or  only  counselling  him 
therein , I will  use  my  feet,  hands,  voice ; in  a word,  all  my 
powers  and  faculties,  to  avenge  such  sacrilege.  That  oath  was 
attended  with  the  most  terrible  imprecations  and  execrations  : 
That  if  any  one  infrmges  any  ' thing  contained  in  the  oath  I 
have  now  taken , whether  private  person , city,  or  people,  may 
that  person,  city,  or  people,  be  deemed  accursed ; and,  as  such , 
experience  the  whole  vengeance  of  Apollo,  Latona,  Diana,  and 
Minerva  the  fore-knower.  May  their  country  produce  none 
of  the  fruits  of  the  earth,  and  their  women,  instead  of  gene- 
rating children  resembling  their  fathers,  bring  forth  nothing 
but  monsters  ; and  may  their  animals  share  in  the  same  curse. 
May  those  sacrilegious  men  lose  all  their  suits  at  law ; may 
they  be  conquered  in  war,  have  their  houses  demolished,  and  be 
themselves  and  their  children  put  to  the  sword.  I am  not  as- 
tonished that  after  such  terrible  engagements,  the  holy  war, 
undertaken  by  the  order  of  the  Amphictyons,  should  be  carried 
on  with  so  much  rancour  and  fury.  The  religion  of  an  oath 
was  of  great  force  with  the  ancients  ; and  how  much  more  re- 
gard ought  to  be  had  to  it  in  the  Christian  world,  which  pro- 
fesses to  believe  that  the  violation  of  it  shall  be  punished  with 
eternal  torments  ; and  yet  how  many  are  there  amongst  us  who 
make  a jest  of  breaking  through  the  most  solemn  oaths  ? 

The  authority  of  the  Amphictyons  had  always  been  of  great 
weight  in  Greece,  but  it  began  to  decline  exceedingly  from  the 
moment  they  condescended  to  admit  Philip  of  Macedon  into 
their  body.  For  that  prince,  enjoying  by  this  means  all  their 
rights  and  privileges,  soon  knew  how  to  set  himself  above  all 
law,  and  to  abuse  his  power  so  far  as  to  preside  by  proxy  both 
in  this  illustrious  assembly  and  in  the  Pythian  games  ; of  which 
games  the  Amphictyons  were  judges  and  agonothetm  in  virtue 
jEschin.  in  Orat.  7repi  napeurptofieiag. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


283 


of  their  office.  With  this  Demosthenes  reproaches  him  in  his 
third  Philippic  : When  he  does  not  deign , says  he,  to  honour 
us  with  his  presence,  he  sends  his  slaves  to  preside  over  us. 
An  odious  but  emphatical  term,  and  highly  characteristic  of 
Grecian  liberty,  by  which  the  Athenian  orator  designates  the 
base  and  abject  subjection  of  the  greatest  lords  in  Philip’s  court. 

If  the  reader  desires  a more  intimate  knowledge  of  what  re- 
lates to  the  Amphictyons,  the  dissertations  of  Monsieur  Valois 
may  be  consulted,  in  the  Memoirs  of  the  Academy  of  Belles 
Lettres,r  wherein  this  subject  is  treated  with  great  extent  and 
erudition. 


SECT.  IX. 

Of  the  revenues  of  Athens. 

The  revenues,  according  to  the  passage  of  Aristophanes, s 
which  I have  cited  above,  and  consequently  as  they  stood  in 
the  time  of  the  Peloponnesian  war,  amounted  to  2000  talents ; 
that  is  to  say,  to  6,000,000  of  livres.  They  are  generally 
classed  under  four  heads. 

1.  The  first  relates  to  the  revenues  arising  from  agriculture, 
the  sale  of  woods,  the  produce  of  the  silver  mines,  and  other 
funds  of  a like  nature,  appertaining  to  the  public.  Amongst 
these  may  be  included  the  duties  upon  the  import  and  export 
of  merchandise,  and  the  taxes  levied  upon  the  inhabitants  of  the 
city,  as  well  natives  as  strangers. 

In  the  history  of  Athens  mention  is  often  made  of  the  silver 
mines  of  Laurium,  which  was  a mountain  situate  between  the 
Piraeeus  and  Cape  Sunium,  and  those  of  Thrace,  from  whence 
many  persons  drew  immense  riches.  Xenophon, 1 in  a treatise 
wherein  he  considers  this  subject  at  large,  demonstrates  how 
much  the  public  might  gain  by  industriously  working  these 
mines,  from  the  example  of  many  individuals  who  had  been 
enriched  by  them.  Hipponicus  u let  his  mines  and  600  slaves 
to  an  undertaker,  who  paid  him  an  obolus x a day  for  each 
slave,  clear  of  all  charges,  which  amounted  to  a mina  per  day, 
about  21.  5s.  Micias,  who  was  killed  in  Sicily,  farmed  out  his 
mines  and  1000  slaves  in  the  same  manner,  and  with  the  same 
profit  in  proportion  to  that  number. 

2.  The  second  species  of  revenue  were  the  contributions 
paid  to  the  Athenians  by  the  allies  for  the  common  expenses  of 
the  war.  At  first,  under  Aristides,  they  amounted  to  only  460 
talents. y Pericles  augmented  them  almost  a third,  and  raised 

r Vol.  iii.  8 TeXrj.  1 De  ration,  redituum.  u Page  925. 

* Six  oboli  made  a drachma,  1000  drachmas  a mina,  and  sixty  minje  a 
talent.  y A talent  was  worth  1000  crowns. 


284 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


them  to  600,  and  some  time  after  they  were  run  up  to  1300. 
Taxes,  which  in  the  beginning  were  moderate  and  necessary, 
became  thus  in  a little  time  excessive  and  exorbitant,  notwith- 
standing all  the  protestations  to  the  contrary  made  to  the  allies, 
and  the  most  solemn  engagements  entered  into  with  them. 

3.  A third  sort  of  revenue  were  the  extraordinary  capita- 
tion taxes,  levied  upon  the  inhabitants  of  the  country,  as  well 
natives  as  strangers,  in  pressing  occasions  and  emergencies  of 
the  state. 

4.  The  fines  laid  upon  persons  by  the  judges  for  different 
misdemeanours,  were  applied  to  the  uses  of  the  public,  and 
laid  up  in  the  treasury,  with  the  exception  of  the  tenth  part  of 
them,  which  was  consecrated  to  Minerva,  and  a fiftieth  to  the 
other  divinities. 

The  most  natural  and  legitimate  application  of  these  different 
revenues  of  the  republic,  was  in  paying  the  troops  both  by  sea 
and  land,  building  and  fitting  out  fleets,  keeping  up  and  repair- 
ing the  public  buildings,  temples,  walls,  ports,  and  citadels. 
But  the  greatest  part  of  them,  especially  after  Pericles’s  time, 
was  misapplied  to  unnecessary  uses,  and  often  consumed  in 
frivolous  expenses  ; games,  feasts,  and  shows,  which  cost  im- 
mense sums,  and  were  of  no  manner  of  utility  to  the  state. 

SECT.  X. 

Of  the  education  of  the  youth. 

I place  this  article  under  the  head  of  government,  because 
all  the  most  celebrated  legislators  have  with  reason  believed 
that  the  education  of  youth  was  an  essential  part  of  it. 

The  exercises  that  served  to  form  either  the  bodies  or  minds 
of  the  young  Athenians,  (and  as  much  may  be  said  of  almost 
all  the  people  of  Greece,)  were  dancing,  music,  hunting,  fen- 
cing, riding,  polite  learning,  and  philosophy.  It  is  clear,  that 
I only  skim  over,  and  treat  very  slightly,  these  several  articles. 

1.  Dancing.  Music. 

Dancing  is  one  of  those  bodily  exercises  which  was  cultivated 
by  the  Greeks  with  great  attention.  It  made  a part  of  what 
the  ancients  called  the  Gymnastic,  divided,  according  to  Plato,2 
into  two  kinds,  the  Orchestic , which  takes  its  name  from  danc- 
ing, and  the  P alecs  trie,  a so  called  from  a Greek  word  which 
signifies  wrestling.  The  exercises  of  the  latter  kind  principal- 
ly conduced  to  form  the  body  for  the  fatigues  of  war,  naviga- 
tion, agriculture,  and  the  other  uses  of  society. 

Dancing  had  another  end,  and  taught  such  rules  of  motion 
* 'OpxtioOcu,  saltare.  a naAq. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


285 


as  were  most  proper  to  render  the  shape  free  and  easy  ; to  give 
the  body  a just  proportion,  and  the  whole  person  an  uncon- 
strained, noble,  and  graceful  air;  in  a word,  an  external  polite- 
ness, if  we  may  be  allowed  to  use  that  expression,  which  never 
fails  to  prepossess  people  in  favour  of  those  who  have  b^n 
formed  to  it  early. 

Music  was  cultivated  with  no  less  application  and  success. 
The  ancients  ascribed  wonderful  effects  to  it.  They  believed 
it  well  calculated  to  calm  the  passions,  soften  the  manners,  and 
even  humanize  nations  naturally  savage  and  barbarous.  Poly- 
bius,b  a grave  and  serious  historian,  who  is  certainly  worthy  of 
belief,  attributes  the  extreme  difference  between  two  nations  of 
Arcadia,  the  one  infinitely  beloved  and  esteemed  for  the  ele- 
gance of  their  manners,  their  benevolent  inclinations,  humanity 
to  strangers,  and  piety  to  the  gods  ; the  other,  on  the  contrary, 
generally  reproached  and  hated  for  their  malignity,  brutality, 
and  irreligion  : Polybius,  I say,  ascribes  this  difference  to  the 
study  of  music,  (I  mean,  says  he,  the  true  and  genuine  music,) 
industriously  cultivated  by  the  one,  and  absolutely  neglected  by 
the  other  nation. 

After  this  it  is  not  surprising  that  the  Greeks  should  have 
considered  music  as  an  essential  partin  the  education  of  youth. 
Socrates  himself, c in  a very  advanced  age,  was  not  ashamed  of 
learning  to  play  upon  musical  instruments.  Themistocles, 
however  otherwise  esteemed,  was  thought  deficient  in  polite 
accomplishments, d because  at  an  entertainment  he  could  not 
touch  the  lyre  like  the  rest  of  the  company.  Ignorance  in  this 
respect  was  deemed  a defect  of  education  ;e  on  the  contrary, 
skill  did  honour  to  the  greatest  men.  Epaminondas  was  praised 
for  dancing  and  playing  well  upon  the  flute/  We  may  ob- 
serve in  this  place  the  different  tastes  and  genius  of  nations. 
The  Romans  were  far  from  having  the  same  opinion  with  the 
Greeks  in  regard  to  music  and  dancing,  and  set  no  value  upon 
them.  It  is  very  likely  that  the  wisest  and  most  sensible 
amongst  the  latter  did  not  apply  to  them  with  any  great  indus- 
try ; and  Philip’s  expression  to  his  son  Alexander,  who  had 
shown  too  much  skill  in  music  at  a feast,  induces  me  to  be  of 
this  opinion  : Are  you  not  ashamed , said  he,  to  sing  so  well  ? 

b Polyb.  1.  iv.  p.  288—291. 

c Socrates,  jam  senex,  institui  lyra  non  erubescebat.  Quintil.  1.  i.  c.  10. 

d Themistocles,  cum  in  epulis  recusasset  lyram,  habitus  est  indoctior.  Cic. 
Tusc.  Qucest.  1.  i.  n.  4. 

e Summam  eruditionem  Grseci  sitam  censebant  in  nervorum  vocumque 
cantibus — discebantque  id  omnes ; nec  qui  nesciebat,  satis  excultus  doctrint 
putabatur.  Cic.  Tusc.  Qucest.  1.  i.  n.  4. 

f In  Epaminondse  virtutibus  commemoratum  est  saltasse  eum  commode, 
scienterque  tibiis  cantasse — Scilicet  non  eadem  omnibus  honesta  sunt  atque 
turpia,  sed  omnia  majorum  institutes  judicantur.  Corn.  Nep.  in  prcefat.  vit. 
Epam. 


286 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


In  other  respects,  there  were  some  grounds  for  this  esteem 
for  dancing  and  music.  Both  the  one  and  the  other  were  em- 
ployed in  the  most  august  feasts  and  ceremonies  of  religion,  to 
express  with  greater  force  and  dignity  their  acknowledgment 
to  the  gods  for  the  favours  they  had  vouchsafed  to  confer  upon 
them.  They  formed  generally  the  greatest  and  most  agreeable 
part  of  their  feasts  and  entertainments,  which  seldom  or  ever 
began  or  ended  without  some  odes  being  sung,  like  those  in 
honour  of  the  victors  in  the  Olympic  games,  and  on  other  simi- 
lar subjects.  They  had  a part  also  in  war;  and  we  know  that 
the  Lacedaemonians  marched  to  battle  dancing,  and  to  the 
sound  of  flutes.  Plato, s the  most  grave  philosopher  of  anti- 
quity, considered  both  these  arts  not  as  simple  amusements, 
but  as  having  a great  share  in  the  ceremonies  of  religion  and 
military  exercises.  Hence  we  see  him  very  intent,  in  his  books 
of  laws,  to  prescribe  judicious  regulations  with  respect  to 
dancing  and  music,  in  order  to  keep  them  within  the  bounds  of 
utility  and  decorum. 

They  did  not  continue  long  within  these  restrictions.  The 
licentiousness  of  the  Grecian  stage,  on  which  dancing  was  in 
the  highest  vogue,  and  in  a manner  prostituted  to  buffoons  and 
the  most  contemptible  people,  who  made  no  other  use  of  it  than 
to  awaken  or  cherish  the  most  vicious  passions ; this  licentious- 
ness, I say,  soon  corrupted  an  art  which  might  have  been  of 
some  advantage,  had  it  been  regulated  by  Plato’s  opinion. 
Music  had  a like  destiny ; and  perhaps  the  corruption  of  this 
did  not  a little  contribute  to  the  depraving  and  perverting  of 
dancing.  Voluptuousness  and  sensual  pleasure  were  the  sole 
arbiters  consulted  as  to  the  use  which  was  to  be  made  of  both, 
and  the  theatre  became  a school  of  every  kind  of  vice. 

Plutarch,  h in  lamenting  that  the  art  of  dancing  was  much 
fallen  from  the  merit  which  rendered  it  so  estimable  to  the  great 
men  of  antiquity,  does  not  omit  to  observe,  that  it  was  corrupt- 
ed by  a vicious  kind  of  poetry,  and  a soft,  effeminate  music, 
with  which  it  had  formed  an  injudicious  union,  and  which  had 
taken  place  of  that  ancient  poetry  and  music,  which  had  some- 
thing noble,  majestic,  and  even  religious  and  heavenly  in  them. 
He  adds,  that  being  made  subservient  to  voluptuousness  and 
sensuality,  it  exercised,  by  their  aid,  a kind  of  tyrannical  power 
in  the  theatres,  which  were  become  the  public  schools  of  crimi- 
nal passions  and  gross  vices,  wherein  no  regard  was  paid  to 
reason. 

The  reader,  without  my  reminding  him,  will  make  the  appli- 
cation of  this  passage  of  Plutarch  to  that  sort  of  music  with 
which  our  theatres  resound  at  this  day,  and  which  by  its  effemi- 
nate and  wanton  airs,  has  given  the  last  wound  to  the  little 
s De  leg.  1.  vii.  h Sympos.  1.  ix.  qu.  15.  p.  748. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


287 


manly  force  and  virtue  that  remained  among  us.  Quintilian 
describes  the  music  of  his  times  in  these  terms : Qucb  nunc  in 
scenis  effeminata,  et  impuclicis  modis  fracta,  non  ex  parte  mini- 
ma, si  quid  si  nobis  virilis  roboris  manebat,  excidit.  1 

2.  Of  the  other  exercises  of  the  body. 

The  young  Athenians,  and  in  general  all  the  Greeks,  were 
very  careful  to  form  themselves  in  all  the  exercises  of  the  body, 
and  to  take  lessons  regularly  from  the  masters  of  the  Palaestras. 
They  called  the  places  allotted  for  these  exercises.  Palaestrae, 
or  Gymnasia;  which  answers  very  near  to  our  academies.  Plato, 
in  his  books  of  laws,  after  having  shown  of  what  importance  it 
was,  with  a view  to  war,  to  cultivate  strength  and  agility  of  the 
hands  and  feet,  adds,k  that,  far  from  banishing  from  a well-regu- 
lated republic  the  profession  of  the  Athletae,  on  the  contrary, 
prizes  ought  to  be  proposed  for  all  exercises  that  conduce  to 
the  improvement  of  the  military  art  : such  are  those  which  ren- 
der the  body  more  active  and  fitter  for  the  race  ; more  hardy, 
robust,  and  supple  ; more  capable  of  supporting  great  fatigues, 
and  effecting  great  enterprises.  We  must  remember,  that 
there  was  no  Athenian  who  ought  not  to  have  been  capable  of 
handling  the  oar  in  the  largest  galleys.  The  citizens  themselves 
performed  this  office,  which  was  not  left  to  slaves  and  criminals, 
as  in  these  days.  They  were  all  destined  to  the  trade  of  war, 
and  often  obliged  to  wear  armour  of  iron  from  head  to  foot  of  a 
great  weight.  For  this  reason,  Plato,  and  all  the  ancients, 
looked  upon  the  exercises  of  the  body  as  highly  useful,  and 
even  absolutely  necessary  to  the  good  of  the  public,  and  there- 
fore this  philosopher  excludes  only  those  which  were  of  no  ser- 
vice in  war. 

There  were  also  masters  who  taught  the  youth  to  ride,1  and 
to  handle  their  arms,  or  fence ; and  others  whose  business  it 
was  to  instruct  them  in  all  that  was  necessary  to  be  known,  in 
order  to  excel  in  the  art  military,  and  to  become  good  com- 
manders.' The  whole  science  of  the  latter  consisted  in  what  the 
ancients  called  Tactics,  that  is  to  say,  the  art  of  drawing  up 
troops  in  battle,  and  of  making  military  evolutions.  That 
science  was  useful,  but  it  was  not  sufficient.  Xenophon  m shows 
its  insufficiency,  by  producing  a young  man  lately  come  from 
such  a school,  in  which  he  imagined  he  had  learnt  every  thing, 
though  in  reality  he  had  only  acquired  a foolish  esteem  for  him- 
self, attended  with  perfect  ignorance.  He  gives  him,  by  the 
mouth  of  Socrates,  admirable  precepts  as  to  the  business  of  a 
soldier,  and  well  calculated  to  form  an  excellent  officer. 

1 Quintil.  1.  i.  c.  10.  k Lib.  viii.  de  leg.  p.  832,  833. 

1 Plat,  in  Lachete,  p.  181.  m Memorab.  I.  iii.  p.  761,  &l\ 


288 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


Hunting  was  also  considered  by  the  ancients  as  an  exercise 
well  calculated  for  forming  youth  to  the  stratagems  and  fatigues 
of  war.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  Xenophon,  who  was  no  less  a 
great  general  than  a great  philosopher,  did  not  think  it  below 
him  to  write  a treatise  expressly  upon  hunting,11  in  which  he  de- 
scends to  the  minutest  particulars  ; and  points  out  the  consider- 
able advantages  that  may  be  derived  from  it,  from  being  inured 
to  suffer  hunger,  thirst,  heat,  cold,  without  being  discouraged 
either  by  the  length  of  the  course,  the  difficulty  of  the  clifts  and 
thickets  through  which  it  is  often  necessary  to  press,  or  the 
small  success  of  the  long  and  painful  fatigues  which  are  often 
undergone  to  no  purpose.  He  adds,  that  this  innocent  plea- 
sure removes  others  equally  shameful  and  criminal ; and  that  a 
wise  and  moderate  man  would  not,  however,  abandon  himself 
so  much  to  it  as  to  neglect  the  care  of  his  domestic  affairs.  The 
same  author,0  in  the  Cyropoedia,  frequently  praises  hunting, 
which  he  looks  upon  as  a real  study  of  the  art  of  war ; and  shows 
in  the  example  of  his  young  hero,  the  good  use  that  may  be 
made  of  it. 

3.  Of  the  exercises  of  the  mind . 

Athens,  properly  speaking,  was  the  school  and  abode  of  polite 
learning,  arts,  and  sciences.  The  study  of  poesy,  eloquence, 
philosophy,  and  mathematics,  was  in  great  vogue  there,  and 
much  cultivated  by  the  youth. 

The  young  people  were  first  sent  to  learn  grammar  under 
masters  who  taught  them  regularly,  and  upon  proper  prin- 
ciples, their  own  language  ; by  which  they  attained  a know- 
ledge  of  its  whole  beauty,  energy,  number,  and  cadence.  Hence 
proceeded  that  fine  taste,  which  universally  pervaded  Athens, p 
where,  as  history  informs  us,  a simple  herb-woman  distinguished 
Theophrastus  to  be  a foreigner,  from  the  affectation  of  a single 
word  in  expressing  himself.  And  from  the  same  cause  the 
orators  were  greatly  apprehensive  of  letting  fall  the  least  injudi- 
cious expression,  for  fear  of  offending  so  refined  and  delicate  an 
audience.  It  was  very  common  for  the  young  people  to  get 
the  tragedies  represented  upon  the  stage  by  heart.  We  have 
seen,  that  after  the  defeat  of  the  Athenians  before  Syracuse, 
many  of  them,  who  had  been  taken  prisoners  and  made  slaves, 
softened  their  slavery  by  reciting  the  works  of  Euripides  to 
their  masters,  who,  extremely  delighted  with  hearing  such  sub- 
lime verses,  treated  them  from  henceforth  with  kindness  and 
humanity.  The  compositions  of  the  other  poets  had  no  doubt 
the  same  effect ; and  Plutarch  tells  us,  that  Alcibiades,  when 
very  young,  having  entered  a school  in  which  there  was  not  a 

" De  venatione.  0 Cyrop.  1.  i.  p.  5,  6.  et  1.  ii.  p.  59,  60. 

p Cic.  in  JBrut.  n.  172.  Quintil.  1.  viii.  c.  1.  Plut.  in  Peric.  p.  156. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS.  289 

Homer,  gave  the  master  a box  in  the  ear  as  an  ignorant  fellow, 
and  one  who  dishonoured  his  professions 

As  for  eloquence,  it  is  no  wonder  that  it  was  particularly 
studied  at  Athens.  It  was  that  which  opened  the  way  to  the 
highest  offices,  reigned  absolute  in  the  assemblies,  decided 
the  most  important  affairs  of  the  state,  and  gave  an  almost  un- 
limited power  to  those  who  had  the  talent  of  oratory  in  an  emi- 
nent degree. 

This  therefore  was  the  great  employment  of  the  young  citi- 
zens of  Athens,  especially  of  those  who  aspired  to  the  highest 
offices.  To  the  study  of  rhetoric,  they  annexed  that  of  philo- 
sophy. I comprise  under  the  latter  all  the  sciences  which  are 
either  parts  of,  or  relate  to,  it.  The  persons  known  to  antiquity 
under  the  name  of  Sophists  had  acquired  a great  reputation  at 
Athens,  especially  in  the  time  of  Socrates.  These  teachers, 
who  were  as  presumptuous  as  avaricious,  set  themselves  up  for 
universal  scholars.  Their  chief  strength  lay  in  philosophy  and 
eloquence,  both  of  which  they  corrupted  by  the  false  taste  and 
wrong  principles  which  they  instilled  into  their  disciples.  I 
have  observed,  in  the  life  of  Socrates,  that  philosopher’s  en- 
deavours and  success  in  discrediting  them. 


CHAP.  II. 

OF  WAR. 

Sect.  I.  The  nations  of  Greece  in  all  times  very  warlike,  especially  the  La- 
cedaemonians and  Athenians. 

No  people  of  antiquity  (I  except  the  Romans)  can  dispute  the 
glory  of  arms  and  military  virtue  with  the  Greeks.  During  the 
Trojan  war  Greece  signalized  her  valour  in  battle,  and  acquired 
immortal  fame  by  the  bravery  of  the  captains  she  sent  thither. 
This  expedition  was,  however,  properly  speaking,  no  more  than 
the  cradle  of  her  infant  glory  ; and  the  great  exploits  by  which 
she  distinguished  herself  there,  were  only  her  first  essays  and 
apprenticeship  in  the  art  of  war. 

There  were  in  Greece  several  small  republics,  neighbours 
to  one  another  by  their  situation,  but  widely  distant  in  their 
customs,  laws,  characters,  and  particularly  in  their  interests. 
This  difference  of  manners  and  interests  was  a continual  source 
and  occasion  of  divisions  amongst  them.  Every  city,  little 
satisfied  with  its  own  territory,  was  studious  to  aggrandize 
itself  at  the  expense  of  its  next  neighbours,  according  as  they 
lay  most  commodious  for  it.  Hence  all  these  little  states, 
In  Alcib.  p.  194. 

U 


VOL.  III. 


290 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


either  out  of  ambition,  and  to  extend  their  conquests,  or  the 
necessity  of  a just  defence,  were  always  under  arms ; and  by 
that  continual  exercise  of  war,  there  was  formed  throughout 
the  whole  of  these  nations  a martial  spirit,  and  an  intrepidity 
of  courage  which  made  them  invincible  in  the  field ; as  ap- 
peared in  the  sequel,  when  the  whole  united  forces  of  the  East 
came  to  invade  Greece,  and  made  her  sensible  of  her  own 
strength,  and  of  what  she  was  capable. 

Two  cities  distinguished  themselves  above  the  rest,  and  held 
indisputably  the  first  rank ; these  were  Sparta  and  Athens  : in 
consequence  of  which  those  cities,  either  successively  or  toge- 
ther, had  the  empire  of  Greece,  and  maintained  themselves 
through  a long  series  of  time  in  a power  which  the  sole  supe- 
riority of  merit,  universally  acknowledged  by  all  the  other  states, 
had  acquired  them.  This  merit  consisted  principally  in  their 
military  knowledge  and  martial  virtue ; of  which  both  of  them 
had  given  the  most  glorious  proofs  in  the  war  against  the  Per- 
sians. Thebes  disputed  this  honour  with  them  for  some  years, 
by  surprising  actions  of  valour,  which  had  something  of  prodigy 
in  them : but  this  was  but  a short-lived  blaze,  which,  after  hav- 
ing shone  out  with  exceeding  splendour,  soon  disappeared,  and 
left  that  city  in  its  original  obscurity.  Sparta  and  Athens  will 
therefore  be  the  only  objects  of  our  reflections,  as  to  what 
relates  to  war;  and  we  shall  join  them  together,  in  order  to  be 
the  better  able  to  form  a notion  of  their  characters,  as  well  in 
what  they  resemble,  as  in  what  they  differ  from  each  other. 

SECT.  II. 

Origin  and  cause  of  the  valour  and  military  virtue  by  which  the  Lacedae- 
monians and  Athenians  always  distinguished  themselves. 

All  the  laws  of  Sparta  and  all  the  institutions  of  Lycurgus 
seem  to  have  had  no  other  object  than  war,  and  tended  solely 
to  the  making  the  subjects  of  that  republic  a body  of  soldiers. 
All  other  employments,  all  other  exercises,  were  prohibited 
amongst  them.  Arts,  polite  learning,  sciences,  trades,  even 
husbandry  itself,  formed  no  part  of  their  employment,  and 
seemed  in  their  eyes  unworthy  of  them.  From  their  earliest 
infancy  no  other  taste  was  instilled  into  them  but  for  arms  ; and 
indeed  the  Spartan  education  was  wonderfully  well  adapted  to 
that  end.  To  go  barefoot,  to  lie  on  the  bare  ground,  to  be 
satisfied  with  little  meat  and  drink,  to  suffer  heat  and  cold,  to 
be  exercised  continually  in  hunting,  wrestling,  running  on  foot 
and  horseback,  to  be  inured  to  blows  and  wounds  so  as  to 
vent  neither  complaint  nor  groan  : these  were  the  rudiments  of 
education  of  the  Spartan  youth  with  regard  to  war,  and 
enabled  them  one  day  to  support  all  its  fatigues,  and  to  con- 
front all  its  dangers. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


291 


The  habit  of  obeying,  contracted,  from  the  most  early  years, 
respect  for  the  magistrates  and  elders,  a perfect  submission 
to  the  laws,  from  which  no  age  nor  condition  was  exempt,  pre- 
pared them  amazingly  for  military  discipline,  which  is  in  a man- 
ner the  soul  of  war,  and  the  principle  of  success  in  all  great  en- 
terprises. 

Now  one  of  these  laws  was  to  conquer  or  die,  and  never  to 
surrender  to  the  enemy.  Leonidas  with  his  300  Spartans  was 
an  illustrious  example  of  this  ; and  his  intrepid  valour,  extolled 
in  all  ages  with  the  highest  applauses,  and  proposed  as  a model 
to  all  posterity,  had  given  the  same  spirit  to  the  nation,  and 
traced  them  out  the  plan  they  were  to  follow.  The  disgrace 
and  infamy  annexed  to  the  violation  of  this  law,  and  to  such  as 
quitted  their  arms  in  battle,  confirmed  the  observance  of  it,  and 
rendered  it  in  a manner  inviolable.  The  mothers  recommended 
to  their  sons,  when  they  set  out  for  the  field,  to  return  either 
with  or  upon  their  bucklers.  They  did  not  weep  for  those  who 
died  with  arms  in  their  hands,  but  for  those  who  preserved  them- 
selves by  flight.  Can  we  be  surprised,  after  this,  that  a small 
body  of  such  soldiers,  with  such  principles,  should  put  to  a 
stand  an  innumerable  army  of  barbariaus  ? 

The  Athenians  were  not  bred  up  so  roughly  as  the  people 
of  Sparta,  but  had  no  less  valour.  The  taste  of  the  two  nations 
was  quite  different  in  regard  to  education  and  employment; 
but  they  attained  the  same  end,  though  by  different  means. 
The  Spartans  knew  only  how  to  use  their  arms,  and  were  sol- 
diers alone  : but  amongst  the  Athenians  (and  we  may  say  as 
much  of  the  other  people  of  Greece)  arts,  trades,  husbandry, 
commerce,  and  navigation,  were  held  in  honour,  and  thought 
no  disgrace  to  any  one.  These  occupations  were  no  obstacles 
to  military  skill  and  valour ; they  disqualified  none  for  rising 
to  the  greatest  commands  and  the  first  dignities  of  the  republic. 
Plutarch  observes,  that  Solon,  seeing  the  territory  of  Attica 
was  barren,  applied  himself  to  direct  the  industry  of  his  citi- 
zens towards  arts,  trades,  and  commerce,  in  order  to  supply 
his  country  thereby  with  what  it  wanted  on  the  side  of  fertility. 
This  taste  became  one  of  the  maxims  of  the  government  and 
fundamental  laws  of  the  state,  and  perpetuated  itself  amongst 
the  people,  but  without  lessening  in  the  least  their  ardour  for 
war. 

The  ancierd,  glory  of  the  nation,  which  had  always  distin- 
guished itself  by  military  bravery,  was  a powerful  motive  for 
not  degenerating  from  the  reputation  of  their  ancestors.  The 
famous  battle  of  Marathon,  wherein  they  had  sustained  alone 
the  shock  of  the  barbarians,  and  gained  a signal  victory  over 
them,  infinitely  heightened  their  courage ; and  the  battle  of 
Salamis,  in  the  success  of  which  they  had  the  greatest  share, 

u 2 


292 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


raised  them  to  the  highest  pitch  of  glory,  and  rendered  them 
capable  of  the  greatest  enterprises. 

A noble  emulation  not  to  give  place  in  merit  to  Sparta,  the 
rival  of  Athens,  and  a keenjealousy  of  their  glory,  which  during 
the  war  with  the  Persians  contained  itself  within  due  bounds, 
were  another  strong  incentive  to  the  Athenians,  who  every  day 
made  new  efforts  to  excel  themselves,  and  sustain  their  repu- 
tation. 

The  rewards  and  honours  granted  to  those  who  had  distin- 
guished themselves  in  battle ; the  monuments  erected  in  memory 
of  the  citizens  who  had  died  in  the  defence  of  their  country  ; 
the  funeral  orations  publicly  pronounced  in  the  midst  of  the 
most  august  religious  ceremonies,  to  render  their  names  im- 
mortal :-r — all  conspired  in  the  highest  degree  to  eternize  the 
valour  of  the  Athenians  particularly,  and  to  make  fortitude  a 
kind  of  law  and  indispensable  necessity  to  them. 

Athens  had  a law  by  which  it  was  ordained, r that  those  who 
had  been  maimed  in  war  should  be  maintained  at  the  expense 
of  the  public.  The  same  favour  was  granted  to  the  fathers  and 
mothers,  as  well  as  to  the  children,  of  such  as  had  fallen  in 
battle,  and  left  their  families  poor  and  not  in  a condition  to 
support  themselves.  The  republic,  like  a good  mother,  gene- 
rously took  them  into  her  care,  and  fulfilled  towards  them  all 
the  duties,  and  procured  them  all  the  relief,  that  they  could 
have  expected  from  those  whose  loss  they  deplored. 

This  exalted  the  courage  of  the  Athenians,  and  rendered 
their  troops  invincible,  though  not  very  numerous.  In  the  bat- 
tle of  Plataeae,  where  the  army  of  the  barbarians,  commanded 
by  Mardonius,  consisted  at  the  least  of  300,000  men,  and  the 
united  forces  of  the  Greeks  of  only  108,200  men,  there  were 
in  the  latter  only  10,000  Lacedaemonians,  of  which  one  half 
were  Spartans,  that  is  to  say,  inhabitants  of  Sparta,  and  8000 
Athenians.  It  is  true,  each  Spartan  brought  with  him  seven 
Helots,  which  made  in  all  35,000  men  ; but  they  were  scarce 
even  reckoned  as  soldiers. 

This  shining  merit,  in  point  of  martial  valour,  generally  ac- 
knowledged by  the  other  states,  did  not  suppress  in  their  minds 
all  sentiments  of  envy  and  jealousy  ; as  appeared  once  in  rela- 
tion to  the  Lacedaemonians.  The  allies,  who  were  very  much 
superior  to  them  in  number,  could  with  difficulty  endure  to  see 
themselves  subjected  to  their  order,  and  murmured  against  it  in 
secret.  Agesilaus,  king  of  Sparta,  without  seeming  to  have  any 
knowledge  of  their  disgust,  assembled  the  whole  army  ; and 
after  having  made  all  the  allies  sit  down  on  one  side,  and  the 
Lacedaemonians  by  themselves  on  the  other,  he  caused  procla- 

r Plut.  in  Solon,  p.  96.  Plat,  in  Menex.  p.  248,  249.  Diog.  Laert.  m 
Solon,  p.  37* 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


293 


mation  to  be  made  by  a herald,  that  all  smiths,  masons,  carpen- 
ters, (and  so  on,  through  the  other  trades,)  should  rise  up.  Al- 
most all  the  allies  did  so,  and  not  one  of  the  Lacedaemonians,  to 
whom  all  trades  were  prohibited.  Agesilaus  then  smiling,  You 
see , said  he,  how  many  more  soldiers  Sparta  alone  furnishes 
than  all  the  rest  of  the  allies  together  ; thereby  intimating,  that 
to  be  a good  soldier,  it  was  necessary  to  be  only  a soldier;  that 
trades  diverted  the  artisan  from  applying  himself  wholly  to  the 
profession  of  arms  and  the  science  of  war,  and  prevented  his 
succeeding  so  well  in  it  as  those  who  made  it  their  sole  business 
and  exercise.  But  Agesilaus  spoke  and  acted  in  that  manner 
from  his  prejudice  in  favour  of  the  Lacedaemonian  education  ; 
for  indeed  those  whom  he  wished  to  consider  only  as  simple 
artisans,  demonstrated  by  the  glorious  victories  they  obtained 
over  the  Persians,  and  even  Sparta  itself,  that  they  were  by  no 
means  inferior  to  the  Lacedemonians,  entirely  soldiers  as  they 
were,  either  in  valour  or  military  knowledge. 

SECT.  III. 

Different  kind  of  troops  of  which  the  armies  of  the  Lacedsemonians  and  Athe- 
nians were  composed. 

The  armies  both  of  Sparta  and  Athens  were  composed  of 
four  sorts  of  troops : citizens,  allies,  mercenaries,  and  slaves. 
The  soldiers  were  sometimes  marked  in  the  hand,  to  distinguish 
them  from  the  slaves,  who  had  that  character  impressed  upon 
their  forehead.  Interpreters  believe,  that  it  is  in  allusion  to 
this  double  manner  of  marking,  that  it  is  said  in  the  Revelation, 
that  all  were  obliged  to  receive  the  mark  of  the  beast  in  the 
right  hand,  or  in  their  foreheads  ;9  and  that  St.  Paul  says  of 
himself ; t I bear  in  my  body  the  marks  of  the  Lord  Jesus. 

The  citizens  of  Lacedaemonia  were  of  two  sorts  ; either  those 
who  inhabited  Sparta  itself,  and  who  for  that  reason  were  called 
Spartans,  or  those  who  lived  in  the  country.  In  Lycurgus’s 
time  the  Spartans  amounted  to  9000,  and  the  others  to  30,000. 
This  number  seems  to  have  been  somewhat  diminished  in  the 
time  of  Xerxes,  as  Demaratus,  speaking  to  him  of  the  Lacedae- 
monian troops,  computes  only  8000  Spartans.  The  latter  were 
the  flower  of  the  nation  ; and  we  may  judge  of  the  value  they 
set  upon  them,  by  the  anxiety  the  republic  expressed  for  the  3 
or  400  besieged  by  the  Athenians  in  the  small  island  of  Sphac- 
teria,  where  they  were  taken  prisoners.  The  Lacedaemonians 
generally  spared  the  troops  of  their  country  very  much,  and 
sent  only  a few  of  them  into  the  armies  ; but  even  these  few 
constituted  their  chief  strength.  When  a Lacedaemonian  gene- 
ral was  asked,  how  many  Spartans  there  were  in  the  army  : he 
9 Rev.  xiii.  16.  t Gal.  vi.  17- 


294 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


answered,  as  many  as  are  necessary  to  repulse  the  enemy.  They 
served  the  state  at  their  own  expense,  and  it  was  not  till  after  a 
length  of  time  that  they  received  pay  from  the  public. 

The  greatest  number  of  the  troops  in  the  two  republics  were 
composed  of  th e Allies,  who  were  paid  by  the  cities  which  sent 
them. 

The  foreign  troops,  who  were  paid  by  the  republic  to  whose 
aid  they  were  called  in,  were  styled  Mercenaries. 

The  Spartans  never  marched  without  Helots,  and  we  have 
seen  that  in  the  battle  of  Plataeae  every  citizen  had  seven.  I 
do  not  believe  that  this  number  was  fixed,  nor  do  I well  com- 
prehend for  what  service  they  were  designed.  It  would  have 
been  very  bad  policy  to  have  put  arms  into  the  hands  of  so  great 
a number  of  slaves,  generally  much  discontented  with  their 
masters’  harsh  treatment  of  them,  and  who  consequently  would 
have  had  every  thing  to  fear  from  them  in  a battle.  Herodotus, 
however,  in  the  passage  I have  cited  from  him,  represents  them 
carrying  arms  in  the  field  as  light-armed  soldiers. 

The  infantry  consisted  of  two  kinds  of  soldiers.  The  one 
were  heavy-armed,  and  carried  great  bucklers,  lances,  half- 
pikes, and  scimitars  ; and  of  these  the  main  strength  of  the  ar- 
my consisted.  The  other  were  light-armed,  that  is  to  say,  with 
bows  and  slings.  They  were  commonly  placed  in  the  front  of 
the  battle,  or  upon  the  wings  as  a first  line,  to  shoot  arrows,  and 
fling  javelins  and  stones  at  the  enemy ; and  when  they  had  dis- 
charged, they  retired  through  the  intervals  behind  the  battalions 
as  a second  line,  and  continued  their  volleys. 

Thucydides, u in  describing  the  battle  of  Mantinaea,  divides 
the  Lacedaemonian  troops  in  this  manner.  There  were  seven 
regiments  of  four  companies  each,  without  including  the  Sciri- 
tae,  to  the  number  of  600 ; these  were  horsemen,  of  whom  I 
shall  soon  speak  farther.  The  company  consisted,  according 
to  the  Greek  interpreter,  of  128  men,  and  was  subdivided  into 
four  squadrons,  each  of  thirty-two  men.  So  that  a regiment 
amounted  to  512  men,  and  the  seven  made  together  3584. 
Each  squadron  had  four  men  in  front  and  eight  in  depth,  for 
that  was  the  usual  depth  of  the  files,  which  the  officers  might 
change  according  as  circumstances  required. 

The  Lacedaemonians  did  not  actually  begin  to  use  cavalry 
till  after  the  war  with  Messene,  where  they  perceived  their 
want  of  it.  They  raised  their  horse  principally  in  a small  city 
not  far  from  Lacedaemon,  called  Sciros , from  whence  these 
troops  were  denominated  Sciritce.  They  were  always  on  the 
extremity  of  the  left  wing,  and  this  was  their  post  by  right. 

Cavalry  was  still  more  rare  amongst  the  Athenians  : the  situ- 
ation of  Attica,  broken  with  abundance  of  mountains,  was  the 
u Thucyd.  1.  v.  p.  390. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


295 


cause  of  this.  It  did  not  amount,  after  the  war  with  the  Per- 
sians, which  was  the  time  when  the  prosperity  of  Greece  was 
at  the  highest,  to  more  than  300  horse  : but  increased  after- 
wards to  1200 ; a very  small  body,  however,  for  so  powerful  a 
republic. 

I have  already  observed,  that  amongst  the  ancients,  as  well 
Greeks  as  Romans,  no  mention  is  made  of  the  stirrup,  which 
is  very  surprising.  They  threw  themselves  nimbly  on  horse- 
back : — - 

Corpora  saltu 

Subjiciunt  in  equos JEn.  1.  xii.  ver.  287* 

And  with  a leap  sit  steady  on  the  horse. 

Sometimes  the  horse,  trained  early  to  that  practice,  would  bend 
his  fore-legs  to  give  his  master  the  opportunity  of  mounting 
with  more  ease  ; 

Inde  inclinatus  collum,  submissus  et  armos 
De  more,  infiexis  prsebebat  scandere  terga 
Cruribus. — Sil.  Ital.  de  equo  Ccelii  Equ.  Rom. 

Those  whom  age  or  weakness  rendered  heavy,  made  use  of  a 
servant  in  mounting  on  horseback  ; in  which  they  imitated  the 
Persians,  with  whom  it  was  the  common  custom.  Gracchus 
caused  handsome  stones  to  be  placed  on  each  side  of  the  great 
roads  of  Italy  at  certain  distances  from  one  another,  to  help 
travellers  to  get  on  horseback  without  the  assistance  of  any 
body.x 

I am  surprised  that  the  Athenians,  expert  as  they  were  in 
the  art  of  war,  did  not  perceive  that  the  cavalry  was  the  most 
essential  part  of  any  army,  especially  in  battles ; and  that  some 
of  their  generals  did  not  turn  their  attention  that  way,  as  The- 
mistocles  did  towards  maritime  affairs.  Xenophon  was  well 
capable  of  rendering  them  a similar  service  m respect  to  the 
cavalry,  of  the  importance  of  which  he  was  perfectly  apprized. 
He  wrote  two  treatises  upon  this  subject ; one  of  which  regards 
the  care  it  is  necessary  to  take  of  horses,  and  how  to  acquire  a 
knowledge  of  them,  and  to  break  them ; which  he  treats  with 
astonishing  minuteness : and  the  other  gives  instructions  for 
training  and  exercising  the  troopers  themselves  ; both  well 
worth  the  reading  of  all  who  profess  arms.  In  the  latter  he 
states  the  means  of  placing  the  cavalry  in  honour,  and  lays 
down  rules  upon  the  art  military  in  general,  which  might  be  of 
very  great  use  to  all  those  who  are  designed  for  the  profession 
of  arms. 

I have  been  surprised,  in  running  over  this  second  treatise, 

x ’ AvafioXewg  pi)  deofisvoig.  Pint,  in  Gracch.  p.  838.  This  word  ava(3oXtvgf 
signifies  a servant  who  helped  his  master  to  mount  on  horseback. 


296 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


to  see  with  what  care  Xenophon,  a soldier  and  a pagan,  re- 
commends the  practice  of  religion,  a veneration  for  the  gods, 
and  the  necessity  of  imploring  their  aid  upon  all  occasions. 
He  repeats  this  maxim  in  thirteen  different  places  of  a tract  in 
other  respects  brief  enough  ; and  rightly  judging  that  these  re- 
ligious insinuations  might  give  some  people  offence,  he  makes 
a kind  of  apology  for  them,  and  concludes  the  piece  with  a re- 
flection which  1 shall  repeat  entire  in  this  place.  If  any  one , 
says  he,  wonders  that  I insist  so  much  here  upon  the  necessity 
of  not  forming  any  enterprise  without  first  endeavouring  to 
render  the  Divinity  favourable  aud  propitious,  let  him  reflect, 
that  there  are  in  war  a thousand  unforeseen  and  hazardous 
conjunctures,  wherein  the  generals,  vigilant  to  take  advan- 
tages and  lay  ambuscades  for  each  other,  from  the  uncertainty 
of  an  enemy’s  motions,  can  take  no  other  counsel  than  that  of 
the  gods.  Nothing  is  doubtful  or  obscure  ivith  them.  They 
unfold  the  future  to  whomsoever  they  please,  by  the  inspection 
of  the  entrails  of  beasts,  by  the  singing  of  birds,  by  visions,  or 
in  dreams.  Now  we  may  presume  that  the  gods  are  more  in- 
clined to  illuminate  the  minds  of  such  as  consult  them  not  only 
in  urgent  necessities,  but  who  at  all  times,  and  when  no  dangers 
threaten  them,  render  them  all  the  homage  and  adoration  of 
which  they  are  capable. 

It  was  worthy  of  this  great  man  to  give  the  most  important 
of  instructions  to  his  son  Gryllus,  to  whom  he  addresses  the 
treatise  we  mention,  and  who,  according  to  the  common  opinion, 
was  appointed  to  discipline  the  Athenian  cavalry. 

SECT.  IV. 

Of  maritime  affairs,  fleets,  and  naval  forces. 

If  the  Athenians  were  inferior  to  the  Lacedaemonians  in  ca- 
valry, they  had  infinitely  the  advantage  over  them  in  naval  af- 
fairs ; and  we  have  seen  their  skill  in  that  department  make 
them  masters  at  sea,  and  give  them  a great  superiority  over  all 
the  other  states  of  Greece.  As  this  subject  is  very  necessary 
to  the  understanding  many  passages  in  history,  I shall  treat  it 
rather  more  extensively  than  I have  other  matters,  and  shall 
make  great  use  of  what  the  learned  Father  Dom  Bernard  de 
Montfaugon  has  said  of  it  in  his  books  upon  antiquity. 

The  principal  parts  of  a ship  were  the  prow  or  head,  the 
poop  or  stern,  and  the  middle,  called  in  Latin  carina,  the  hulk 
or  waist. 

The  Prow  was  the  part  which  projected  beyond  the  waist 
or  belly  of  the  ship  : it  was  generally  adorned  with  paintings 
and  different  sculptures  of  gods,  men,  or  animals.  The  beak, 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS, 


297 


called  rostrum , lay  lower,  and  level  with  the  water  : it  was  a 
piece  of  timber  which  projected  from  the  prow,  armed  with  a 
spike  of  brass,  and  sometimes  of  iron.  The  Greeks  termed  it 

e/ifioXov. 

The  other  end  of  the  ship,  opposite  to  the  prow,  was  called 
the  Poop.  There  the  pilot  sat  and  held  the  helm,  which  was 
an  oar  longer  and  larger  than  the  rest. 

The  Waist  was  the  hollow  of  the  vessel,  or  the  hold. 

The  ships  were  of  two  kinds.  The  one  were  rowed  with  oars, 
which  were  ships  of  war ; the  other  carried  sails,  and  were  ves- 
sels of  burden,  intended  for  commerce  and  transports.  Both  of 
them  sometimes  made  use  of  oars  and  sails  together,  but  that 
very  rarely.  The  ships  of  war  are  also  very  often  called  long 
ships  by  authors,  and  by  that  name  distinguished  from  vessels  of 
burden. 

The  long  ships  were  farther  divided  into  two  species ; those 
which  are  called  actuar ice  naves,  and  were  very  light  vessels,  like 
our  brigantines;  and  those  called  only  long  ships.  The  first 
were  usually  termed  open  ships,  because  they  had  no  decries. 
Of  these  light  vessels  there  were  some  larger  than  ordinary,  of 
which  some  had  20,  some  30,  and  others  40  oars,  half  on  one 
side,  and  half  on  the  other,  all  on  the  same  line. 

The  long  ships,  used  in  war,  were  of  two  sorts.  Some  had 
only  one  rank  of  oars  on  each  side  ? the  others,  2,  3,  4,  5,  or  a 
greater  number,  as  far  as  40  ; but  these  last  were  rather  for  show 
than  use. 

The  long  ships  of  one  rank  of  oars  were  called  aphracti ; 
that  is  to  say,  uncovered,  and  had  no  decks  ; this  distinguished 
them  from  the  cataphracti,  which  had  decks.  They  had  only 
small  platforms  to  stand  on,  at  the  head  and  stern,  in  the  time 
of  action. 

The  ships  most  commonly  used  in  the  battles  of  the  ancients, 
were  those  which  carried  from  three  to  five  ranks  or  benches  of 
oars,  and  were  called  triremes,  and  quinqueremes. 

It  is  a great  question,  and  has  given  occasion  for  abundance 
of  learned  dissertations,  how  these  benches  of  oars  were  dis- 
posed. Some  will  have  it,  that  they  were  placed  at  length, 
like  the  ranks  of  oars  in  the  modern  galleys.  Others  maintain, 
that  the  benches  of  the  biremes,  triremes,  quinqueremes,  and 
so  on  to  the  number  of  40  in  some  vessels,  were  one  above 
another.  To  support  this  last  opinion,  innumerable  passages 
are  cited  from  ancient  authors,  which  seem  to  leave  no  manner 
of  doubt  in  it,  and  are  considerably  corroborated  by  the  evi- 
dence of  Trajan’s  pillar,  which*  represents  these  ranks  one 
above  another.  Father  Montfauqon,  however,  avers,  that  all 
the  persons  of  greatest  skill  in  naval  affairs  whom  he  had  con- 
sulted, declared,  that  the  thing  conceived  in  that  manner  seemed 


298 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


to  them  utterly  impossible.  But  reasoning  is  a weak  proof 
against  the  experience  of  so  many  ages,  confirmed  by  so  many 
authors.  It  is  true,  that  in  admitting  these  ranks  of  oars  to  be 
disposed  perpendicularly  one  above  another,  it  is  not  easy  to 
comprehend  how  they  could  be  worked ; but  in  the  biremes 
and  triremes  of  Trajan’s  pillar,  the  lower  ranks  are  placed 
obliquely,  and  as  it  were  rising  by  degrees. 

In  ancient  times  ships  with  several  ranks  of  oars  were  not 
known : they  made  use  of  long  ships,  in  which  the  rowers, 
however  numerous  they  were,  worked  all  upon  the  same  line. 
Such  was  the  fleet  which  the  Greeks  sent  against  TroyJ  It 
was  composed  of  1200  sail,  among  which  the  galleys  of  Boeotia 
had  each  120  men,  and  those  of  Philoctetes  50 ; and  this,  no 
doubt  denotes  the  greatest  and  smallest  vessels.  Their  galleys 
had  no  decks,  but  were  built  like  common  boats ; which  is  still 
practised,  says  Thucydides,  by  the  pirates,  to  prevent  their 
being  so  soon  discovered  at  a distance. 

The  Corinthians  are  said  to  have  been  the  first  who  changed 
the  form  of  ships  ;z  and  instead  of  simple  galleys  made  vessels 
with  three  ranks,  in  order  to  add,  by  increasing  the  number  of 
oars,  to  the  swiftness  and  impetuosity  of  their  motion.  Their 
city,  advantageously  situated  between  two  seas,  was  well 
adapted  for  commerce,  and  served  as  a staple  for  merchandise. 
After  their  example,  the  inhabitants  of  Corcyra,  and  the 
tyrants  of  Sicily,  equipped  also  many  galleys  of  three  benches, 
a little  before  the  war  against  the  Persians.  It  was  about  the 
same  time  that  the  Athenians,  animated  by  the  forcible  exhor- 
tations of  Themistocles,  who  foresaw  the  war  which  soon 
after  broke  out,  built  ships  of  the  same  form,  though  even  then 
the  deck  did  not  reach  the  whole  length  of  the  vessel ; and  from 
thenceforth  they  applied  themselves  to  naval  affairs  with  incre- 
dible ardour  and  success. 

The  beak  of  the  prow  ( rostrum ) was  that  part  of  the  vessel 
of  which  most  use  was  made  in  sea-fights.  Ariston  of  Corinth a 
persuaded  the  Syracusans,  when  their  city  was  besieged  by 
the  Athenians,  to  make  their  prows  lower  and  shorter ; which 
advice  gained  them  the  victory.  For  the  prows  of  the  Athe- 
nian vessels  being  very  high  and  very  weak,  their  beaks  struck 
only  the  parts  above  water,  and  for  that  reason  did  little  damage 
to  the  enemy’s  ships ; whereas  those  of  the  Syracusans,  whose 
prows  were  strong  and  low,  and  their  beaks  level  with  the  water, 
often  sunk,  at  a single  blow,  the  triremes  of  the  Athenians. 

Two  sorts  of  people  served  on  board  these  galleys.  The 
one  were  employed  in  steering  and  working  the  ship,  who  were 
the  rowers,  remiges,  and  the  mariners,  nciutce.  The  rest  were 
soldiers  intended  for  the  fight,  and  are  denoted  in  Greek  by 
y Thucyd.  1.  i.  p.  8.  z Ibid.  1.  i.  p.  10.  a Diod.  1.  xiii.  p.  141. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


299 


the  word  iirlpattu.  This  distinction  did  not  prevail  in  the  early 
times,  when  the  same  persons  rowed,  fought,  and  did  all  the 
necessary  work  of  the  ship,  and  this  was  also  not  wholly  dis- 
used in  later  days.  For  Thucydides, b in  describing  the  arrival 
of  the  Athenian  fleet  at  the  small  island  of  Spacteria,  observes, 
that  only  the  rowers  of  the  lowest  bench  remained  in  the  ships, 
and  that  the  rest  went  cn  shore  with  their  arms. 

1.  The  condition  of  the  rowers  was  very  hard  and  laborious, 
1 have  already  said  that  the  rowers,  as  well  as  mariners,  were 
all  citizens  and  freemen,  and  not  slaves  or  foreigners,  as  in 
these  days.  The  rowers  were  distinguished  by  their  several 
stages.  The  lower  rank  were  called  thalamitce,  the  middle 
zugitce,  and  the  highest  thranitce.  Thucydides  remarks,  that 
the  latter  had  greater  pay  than  the  rest,  because  they  worked 
with  longer  and  heavier  oars  than  those  of  the  lower  benches. 
It  seems  that  the  crew,c  in  order  to  pull  in  concert,  and  with 
greater  regularity,  were  sometimes  guided  by  the  singing  of  a 
man,  and  sometimes  by  the  sound  of  an  instrument;  and  this 
grateful  harmony  served  not  only  to  regulate  the  motion  of  their 
oars,  but  to  diminish  and  soothe  their  toil. 

It  is  a question  amongst  the  learned,  whether  there  was 
only  one  man  to  every  oar  in  these  great  ships,  or  several,  as 
in  the  galleys  of  these  days.-— What  Thucydides  observes  con- 
cerning the  pay  of  the  thranitm,  seems  to  imply  that  they 
worked  single.  For  if  others  had  shared  the  work  with  them, 
wherefore  had  they  greater  pay  given  them  than  those  who  man- 
aged an  oar  alone,  as  the  latter  had  as  much,  and  perhaps  more 
of  the  labour  than  they  ? Father  Montfauqon  believes  that  in 
the  vessels  of  more  than  five  ranks  there  might  be  several  men 
to  one  oar. 

He  who  took  care  of  the  whole  crew,  and  commanded  the 
vessel,  was  called  nauclerus,  and  was  the  principal  officer. 
The  second  was  the  pilot,  gubernator ; his  place  was  in  the 
poop,  where  he  held  the  helm  in  his  hand,  and  steered  the  vessel. 
His  skill  consisted  in  knowing  the  coasts,  ports,  rocks,  shoals, 
and  especially  the  winds  and  stars ; for  before  the  invention 
of  the  compass,  the  pilot  had  nothing  to  direct  him  during  the 
night  but  the  stars. 

2.  The  soldiers  who  fought  in  the  ships  were  aimed  almost  in 
the  same  maimer  with  the  land  forces.  There  was  no  fixed 
number.  The  Athenians, d at  the  battle  of  Salamis,  had 
180  vessels,  and  in  each  of  them  eighteen  fighting  men,  four 

b Thucjd.  1.  iv.  p.  275. 

c Musicam  natura  ipsa  videtur  ad  tolerandos  facilius  labores  veluti  muneri 
nobis  dedisse.  Siquidem  et  remiges  cantus  hortatur;  nee  solum  in  iis  operi- 
bus,  in  quibus  plurium  conatus  prseeunte  aliqua  jucunda  voce  conspirat,  sed 
etiam  singulorum  fatigatio  quam  libet  serudi  modulatione  solatur.  Quintil. 
1.  i.  c.  10.  d Plut.  in  Themist.  p.  1 19. 


300 


HISTORY  OK  THE 


of  whom  were  archers,  and  the  rest  heavy-armed  troops.  The 
officer  who  commanded  these  soldiers  was  called  vptrjpapxo?, 
and  the  commander  of  the  whole  fleet,  i tavapxo*  or  o^at^o's. 

We  cannot  exactly  ascertain  the  number  of  soldiers,  mariners, 
and  rowers,  that  served  on  board  each  ship  ; but  it  generally 
amounted  to  200,  more  or  less,  as  appears  from  Herodotus’s 
estimate  of  the  Persian  fleet  in  the  time  of  Xerxes,  and  in 
other  places  where  mention  is  made  of  that  of  the  Greeks.  I 
mean  here  the  great  vessels,  the  triremes,  which  were  the  species 
most  in  use. 

The  pay  of  those  who  served  in  these  ships  varied  very  much 
at  different  times.  When  the  younger  Cyrus  arrived  in  Asia,e 
it  was  only  three  oboli,  which  was  half  a drachma,  or  five- 
pence  ; and  the  treaty  between  the  Persians  and  Lacedaemo- 
nians was  concluded  at  that  rate  ;f  which  gives  reason  to  be- 
lieve that  the  usual  pay  was  three  oboli.  Cyrus,  at  Lysander’s 
request,  added  a fourth,  which  made  sixpence-halfpenny  a day. 
It  was  often  raised  to  a whole  drachma, g about  tenpence 
French.  In  the  fleet  fitted  out  against  Sicily,  the  Athenians 
gave  a drachma  a day  to  the  troops.  The  sum  of  sixty  ta- 
lents,11 which  the  people  of  Egesta  advanced  to  the  Athenians 
monthly  for  the  maintaining  of  sixty  ships,1  shows  that  the 
pay  of  each  vessel  for  a month  amounted  to  a talent,  that  is 
to  say,  to  about  140/.  ; which  supposes  that  each  ship’s  com- 
pany consisted  of  200  men,  each  of  whom  received  a drachma, 
or  tenpence,  a day.  As  the  officers’  pay  was  higher,  the  re- 
public perhaps  either  furnished  the  overplus,  or  it  was  de- 
ducted out  of  the  total  of  the  sum  advanced  for  a vessel,  by 
abating  something  in  the  pay  of  the  private  men. 

The  same  may  be  said  of  the  land-troops  as  has  been  said 
of  the  seamen,  except  that  the  cavalry  had  double  their  pay. 
It  appears  that  the  ordinary  pay  of  the  foot  was  three  oboli 
a day,  and  that  it  was  augmented  according  to  times  and 
occasions.  Thimbron  the  Lacedaemonian, k when  he  march- 
ed against  Tissaphernes,  promised  a darick  a month  to  each 
soldier,  two  to  a captain,  and  four  to  the  colonels.  Now  a 
darick  a month  is  four  oboli  a day.  The  younger  Cyrus,  to  ani- 
mate his  troops,  who  were  disheartened  by  the  idea  of  a too 
long  march,  instead  of  one  darick,  promised  one  and  a half 
to  each  soldier,  which  amounted  to  a drachma,  or  tenpence 
French,  a day. 

It  may  be  asked  how  the  Lacedaemonians,  whose  iron  coin, 
e Xenoph.  Hist.  1.  i.  p.  441. 

f This  treaty  stipulated  that  the  Persians  should  pay  thirty  minse  a month 
for  each  ship,  which  was  half  a talent : the  whole  amounted  to  three  oboli  a 
day  for  every  man  that  served  on  board. 

s Thucyd.  1.  vi.  p.  431.  h About  8,400/.  sterling. 

• Thucyd.  1.  vi.  p.  415.  k Xenoph.  Exped.  Cyr.  1.  vii. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


301 


the  only  species  current  amongst  them,  would  pass  no  where 
else,  could  maintain  armies  by  sea  and  land  ; and  where  they 
found  money  for  their  subsistence.  It  is  not  to  be  doubted  but 
they  raised  it,  as  the  Athenians  did,  by  contributions  from  their 
allies,  and  still  more  from  the  cities  to  which  they  gave  liberty 
and  protection,  or  from  those  they  had  conquered  from  their  ene- 
mies. Their  second  fund  for  paying  their  fleet  and  armies  was 
the  aids  which  they  drew  from  the  king  of  Persia,  as  we  have 
seen  on  several  occasions. 


SECT.  V. 

Peculiar  character  of  the  Athenians. 

Plutarch  will  furnish  us  with  almost  all  the  leading  features 
upon  this  head.  Every  body  knows  how  well  he  succeeds  in 
copying  nature  in  his  portraits,  and  how  well  calculated  he  was 
to  trace  the  character  of  a people,  whose  genius  and  manners 
he  had  studied  with  so  profound  an  attention. 

I. 1  The  people  of  Athens, m says  Plutarch,  are  easily  pro- 
voiced  to  anger,  and  as  easily  induced  to  resume  sentiments  of 
benevolence  and  compassion.  History  supplies  us  with  an  in- 
finity of  examples  of  this  kind  : the  sentence  of  death  passed 
against  the  inhabitants  of  Mitylene,  and  revoked  the  next  day  : 
the  condemnation  of  the  ten  generals,  and  that  of  Socrates, — 
both  followed  with  an  immediate  repentance  and  the  most  lively 
grief. 

II.  They  are  better  pleased  with  forming  a prompt  decision, n 
and  almost  guessing  at  the  result  of  an  affair,  than  with  giving 
themselves  leisure  to  be  informed  in  it,  thoroughly  and  in  all  its 
extent. 

Nothing  is  more  surprising  than  this  circumstance  in  their 
character.,  which  it  is  very  hard  to  conceive,  as  it  seems  almost 
incredible.  Artificers,  husbandmen,  soldiers,  mariners,  are 
generally  a heavy  kind  of  people,  and  very  dull  in  their  concep- 
tions ; but  the  people  of  Athens  were  of  a quite  different  turn. 
They  had  naturally  a penetration,  vivacity,  and  even  delicacy  of 
wit,  that  surprise  us.  I have  already  mentioned  what  happened 
to  Theophrastus.  He  was  cheapening  something  of  an  old 
woman  of  Athens  that  sold  herbs :°  No,  Mr.  Stranger,  said  she, 
you  shall  not  have  it  for  less.  He  was  much  surprised  to  see 

1 Plut.  de  prsecept.  reip.  ger.  p.  793. 

m 'O  drjfiog  ’A QrjvaiMV  tvKivrjTog  kon  7r pog  dpyrjv,  ev/xsTaOeTog  7 rpog  eXeov. 
n MaAAov  6£ew£  vnovotiv,  r/  didacriceeOcu  icaO'  riavx'iav  fiovXonsvog. 

0 Cum  Theophrastus  percontaretur  ex  anicula  qu&dam,  quanti  aliquid  ven- 
deret,  et  respondisset  ilia,  atque  addidisset,  Hospes,  non  potes  minoris ; tulit 
moleste,  se  non  effugere  hospitis  speciem,  cum  setatem  ageret  Athenis,  opti- 
mdque  loqueretur.  Cic.  de  Clar.  Orat.  n.  17. 


302 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


himself  treated  as  a stranger,  who  had  passed  almost  his  whole 
life  at  Athens,  and  piqued  himself  upon  excelling  all  others  in 
the  elegance  of  his  language.  It  was,  however,  from  that  she 
knew  he  was  not  of  her  country.  We  have  seen  that  the  Athe- 
nian soldiers  knew  the  fine  passages  of  the  tragedies  of  Euri- 
pides by  heart.  Besides,  these  artificers  and  soldiers,  from 
assisting  at  the  public  deliberations,  were  versed  in  affairs  of 
state,  and  understood  every  thing  at  half  a word.  We  may 
judge  of  this  from  the  orations  of  Demosthenes,  whose  style  we 
know  is  ardent,  nervous,  and  concise. 

III.  As  they  are  naturally  inclined  to  relieve  persons  of  a 
low  condition  and  mean  circumstances,  so  are  they  fond  of  con- 
versations seasoned  with  pleasantry,  and  calculated  to  make 
people  laugh? 

They  assisted  persons  of  a mean  condition,**  because  from 
such  they  had  nothing  to  apprehend  in  regard  to  their  liberty, 
and  saw  in  them  the  characters  of  equality  and  resemblance  with 
themselves.  They  loved  pleasantry,  and  in  that  showed  they 
were  men  ; but  men  abounding  with  good  nature  and  indul- 
gence, who  understood  raillery,  who  were  not  prone  to  take 
offence,  nor  over-delicate  in  point  of  the  respect  due  to  them. 
One  day  when  the  assembly  was  fully  formed,  and  the  people 
had  already  taken  their  places,  Cleon,  after  having  made  them 
wait  his  coming  a great  while,  appeared  at  last  with  a wreath  of 
flowers  upon  his  head,  and  desired  the  people  to  adjourn  their 
deliberations  to  the  next  day  : For  to-day,  said  he,  I have  bu- 
siness. I have  been  sacrificing  to  the  gods,  and  am  to  entertain 
some  strangers,  my  friends,  at  supper.  The  Athenians,  set- 
ting up  a laugh,  rose,  and  broke  up  the  assembly.  At  Car- 
thage, it  would  have  cost  any  man  his  life,  who  had  presumed 
to  vent  such  a pleasantry,  and  to  take  such  a liberty  with  a 
proud, r haughty,  jealous,  morose  people,  little  disposed  by  na- 
ture to  cultivate  the  graces,  and  still  less  inclined  to  humour. 
Upon  another  occasion  the  orator  Stratocles,  having  informed 
the  people  of  a victory,  and  in  consequence  caused  sacrifices 
to  be  offered,  three  days  after  news  came  of  the  defeat  of  the 
army.  As  the  people  expressed  their  discontent  and  resentment 
upon  the  false  information,  he  asked  them  of  what  they  had  to 
complain,  and  what  harm  he  had  done  them,  in  making  them 
pass  three  days  more  agreeably  than  they  would  else  have  done  ? 

IV.  They  are  pleased  with  hearing  themselves  praised,  and 

yet  readily  bear  to  be  ridiculed  or  criticized .s  The  least  ac- 

P '£lcn rtp  t&v  avo pwv  roig  aSoZotg  ical  Tamivoig  [3or)duv  7rpo6v/x6rspog,  ovrwg 
twv’  \6ywv  Tovg  tt aiyvubbtig  ical  ytXoiovg  a(nra£tTai  ical  rrpoTi[i$. 

i Xenoph.  de  Athen.  Rep.  p.  691. 
r niKpov,  OKvQpioirbv , 7rpog  7 Tcabiav  iced  xaPlv  dvrjdvvTOv  ical  cncXypov. 

8 Toig  p.kv  tiraivovmv  avrov  jiaXiara  xaipti,  roig  bk  <7fcto7rroi/<Tiv  r^Kiara  dv<y\e~ 
paivti. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


303 


quaiutance  with  Aristophanes  and  Demosthenes  will  show,  with 
what  address  and  effect  they  employed  praises  and  censure  with 
regard  to  the  people  of  Athens. 

When  the  republic  enjoyed  peace  and  tranquillity,1 11  says  the 
same  Plutarch  in  another  place,  the  Athenian  people  diverted 
themselves  with  the  orators  who  flattered  them;  but  in  import- 
ant affairs  and  emergences  of  the  state,  they  became  serious, 
and  gave  the  preference  to  those  whose  custom  it  had  been  to 
oppose  their  unjust  desires : such  as  Pericles,  Phocion,  and 
Demosthenes. 

V.  They  keep  even  those  who  govern  them  in  awe , and 
show  their  humanity  to  their  enemies .u 

The  people  of  Athens  made  good  use  of  the  talents  of  those 
who  distinguished  themselves  by  their  eloquence  and  prudence; 
but  they  were  full  of  suspicion,  and  kept  themselves  always 
on  their  guard  against  their  superiority  of  genius  and  ability  ; 
they  took  pleasure  in  restraining  their  courage,  and  lessening 
their  glory  and  reputation.  This  may  be  judged  from  the  ostra- 
cism, which  was  instituted  only  as  a curb  on  those  whose  merit 
and  popularity  ran  too  high,  and  which  spared  neither  the 
greatest  nor  the  most  worthy  persons.  The  hatred  of  tyranny 
and  tyrants,  which  was  in  a manner  innate  in  the  Athenians, 
made  them  extremely  jealous  and  apprehensive  for  their  liberty 
with  regard  to  those  who  governed. 

As  to  what  relates  to  their  enemies,  they  did  not  treat  them 
with  rigour  ; they  did  not  make  an  insolent  use  of  victory,  nor 
exercise  any  cruelty  towards  the  vanquished.  The  amnesty 
decreed  after  the  tyranny  of  the  Thirty,  shows  that  they  could 
not  forget  the  injuries  which  they  had  undergone  from  them. 

To  these  different  characteristics,  which  Plutarch  unites  in 
the  same  passage  of  his  works,  some  others  may  be  added,  ex- 
tracted principally  from  the  same  author. 

VI.  It  was  from  this  fund  of  humanity  and  benevolence,51 
of  which  I hav  e now  spoken,  and  which  was  natural  to  the 
Athenians,  that  they  were  so  attentive  to  the  rules  of  politeness, 
and  so  delicate  in  point  of  decorum ; qualities  one  would  not 
expect  to  find  among  the  common  people.  In  the  war  against 
Philip  of  Macedon,  y having  intercepted  one  of  his  couriers, 
they  read  all  the  letters  he  carried,  except  that  from  Olympias 
his  wife,  which  they  returned  sealed  up  and  unopened,  out  of 
regard  to  conjugal  love  and  secrecy,  the  rights  of  which  are 
sacred,  and  ought  to  be  respected  even  amongst  enemies.'  The 
same  Athenians  having  decreed  that  a strict  search  should  be 

1 Plut.  in  Phocion.  p.  746. 

11  &6(3ep6g  horiv  <x%pl  tSjv  apxovrwv,  tira  <pi\ctv0p(O7rog  a%pt  twv  jt o\tp,Lwv. 
x Tlarpiov  avroig  Kai  ovptyvrov  rjv  to  (piXuvOp/uTrov.  In  Pelop.  p.  280. 
y Plut.  in  Demetr.  p.  898. 


304 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


made  after  the  presents  distributed  by  Harpalus  amongst  the 
orators,  would  not  suffer  the  house  of  Callicles,  who  was  lately 
married,  to  be  visited,  out  of  respect  for  his  bride,  not  long 
brought  home.  Such  behaviour  is  not  very  common;  and 
upon  like  occasions  people  do  not  always  stand  upon  forms  and 
politeness. 

VII.  The  taste  of  the  Athenians  for  all  arts  and  sciences  is 
too  well  known  to  require  dwelling  long  upon  it  in  this  place. 
But  we  cannot  see  without  admiration,  a people,  composed 
for  the  most  part,  as  I have  said  before,  of  artisans,  husband- 
men, soldiers,  and  mariners,  carry  delicacy  of  taste  in  every 
kind  to  so  ‘high  a degree  of  perfection,  which  seems  the 
peculiar  attribute  of  a more  exalted  condition  and  a nobler 
education. 

VIII.  It  is  no  less  wonderful,  that  this  people  should  have 
had  such  great  views, z and  risen  so  high  in  their  pretensions. 
In  the  war  which  Alcibiades  made  them  undertake,  filled  with 
vast  projects  and  unbounded  hopes,  they  did  not  confine  them- 
selves to  the  taking  of  Syracuse  or  the  conquest  of  Sicily, 
but  had  already  grasped  Italy,  Peloponnesus,  Libya,  the  Car- 
thaginian states,  and  the  empire  of  the  sea  as  far  as  the  Pil- 
lars of  Hercules.  Their  enterprise  failed,  but  they  had  form- 
ed it ; and  the  taking  of  Syracuse,  which  seemed  no  great  dif- 
ficulty, might  have  enabled  them  to  put  it  in  execution. 

IX.  The  same  people,  so  great,  and,  one  may  say,  so 
haughty  in  their  projects,  had  nothing  of  that  character  in  other 
respects.  In  what  regarded  the  expense  of  the  table,  dress, 
furniture,  private  buildings,  and,  in  a word,  private  life,  they 
were  frugal,  simple,  modest,  and  poor;  but  sumptuous  and 
magnificent  in  every  thing  public,  and  capable  of  doing  honour 
to  the  state.  Their  victories,  conquests,  wealth,  and  continual 
communication  with  the  people  of  Asia  Minor,  introduced  nei- 
ther luxury,  gluttony,  pomp,  nor  vain  profusion  amongst  them. 
Xenophona  observes,  that  a citizen  could  not  be  distinguished 
from  a slave  from  his  dress.  The  richest  inhabitants  and  the 
most  famous  generals  were  not  ashamed  to  go  to  market 
themselves. 

X.  It  was  very  glorious  for  Athens  to  have  produced  and 
formed  so  many  persons  who  excelled  in  the  arts  of  war  and 
government ; in  philosophy,  eloquence,  poesy,  painting,  sculp- 
ture and  architecture  : to  have  furnished  alone  more  great  men  in 
every  department  than  any  other  city  of  the  world  : if,  perhaps, 
we  except  Home,  which  had  imbibed  her  information  from 
Athens,  and  knew  how  to  apply  her  lessons  to  the  best  advan- 

z Msya  <ppovti , fitya\ojv  opsytrai.  Plut. 
a De  Rep.  A then.  p.  693. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


305 


tage: b to  have  been  in  some  sort  the  school,  and  tutor  of  almost 
the  whole  universe  : to  have  served,  and  still  continue  to  serve, 
as  the  model  for  all  nations  which  pique  themselves  most  upon 
their  fine  taste : in  a word,  to  have  set  the  fashion,  and  pre- 
scribed the  laws  of  all  that  regards  the  talents  and  productions 
of  the  mind. 

XI.  I shall  conclude  this  description  of  the  Athenians  with 
one  more  attribute  which  cannot  be  denied  them,  and  appears 
evidently  in  all  their  actions  and  enterprises  ; and  that  is,  their 
ardent  love  of  liberty.  This  was  their  darling  passion,  and  the 
main-spring  of  their  policy.  We  see  them,  from  the  commence- 
ment of  the  war  with  the  Persians,  sacrifice  every  thing  to  the 
liberty  of  Greece.  They  abandon,  without  the  least  hesita- 
tion, their  lands,  estates,  city,  and  houses,  and  remove  to  their 
ships,  in  order  to  fight  the  common  enemy,  whose  view  was  to 
enslave  them.  What  day  could  be  more  glorious  for  Athens, 
than  that  in  which,  when  all  the  allies  were  trembling  at  the 
vast  offers  made  her  by  the  king  of  Persia,  she  answered  his 
ambassador  by  the  mouth  of  Aristides,  c That  all  the  gold  and 
silver  in  the  world  was  not  capable  of  tempting  them  to  sell 
their  own  liberty  or  that  of  Greece.  It  was  from  such  gene- 
rous sentiments  that  the  Athenians  not  only  became  the  bulwark 
of  Greece,  but  preserved  the  rest  of  Europe,  and  all  the  west- 
ern world,  from  the  invasion  of  the  Persians. 

These  great  qualities  were  mingled  with  great  defects,  often 
the  very  reverse  of  them,  such  as  we  may  imagine  in  a fluc- 
tuating, light,  inconstant,  capricious  people,  as  were  the  Athe- 
nians. 


SECT.  VI. 

Common  character  of  the  Lacedaemonians  and  Athenians. 

I cannot  refuse  giving  a place  here  to  what  M.  Bossuet  says 
upon  the  character  of  the  Lacedaemonians  and  Athenians. 
The  passage  is  long,  but  will  not  appear  so  ; and  will  include 
all  that  is  wanting  to  a perfect  knowledge  of  the  genius  of  both 
those  states. 

Amongst  all  the  republics  of  which  Greece  was  composed, 
Athens  and  Lacedaemon  were  undoubtedly  the  principal.  No 
people  could  have  more  wit  than  the  Athenians,  nor  more  solid 
sense  than  the  Lacedaemonians.  Athens  affected  pleasure  ; the 

b Grsecia  capta  ferum  victorem  cepit,  et  artes 
Intulit  agresti  Latio.  Horat.  Epist.  1.  1.  2. 

Greece  taken,  took  her  savage  victors’  hearts, 

And  polished  rustic  Latium  with  her  arts. 

c Plut.  in  Aristid.  p.  342. 

X 


VOL.  III. 


306 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


Lacedaemonian  way  of  life  was  bard  and  laborious.  Both  loved 
glory  and  liberty;  but  liberty  at  Athens  tended  to  licentiousness: 
and,  controlled  by  severe  laws  at  Lacedaemon,  the  more  re- 
strained it  was  at  borne,  the  more  ardent  it.  was  to  extend  itself 
by  ruling  abroad.  Athens  wished  also  to  reign,  but  upon  an- 
other principle,  in  which  interest  had  a share  with  glory.  Her 
citizens  excelled  in  the  art  pf  navigation,  and  her  sovereignty 
at  sea  had  enriched  her.  To  continue  in  the  sole  possession 
of  all  commerce,  there  was  nothing  she  was  not  desirous  of 
subjecting  to  her  power  ; and  her  riches,  which  inspired  this 
desire,  supplied  her  with  the  means  of  gratifying  it.  On  the 
contrary,  at  Lacedaemon  money  was  in  contempt.  As  all  the 
laws  tended  to  make  the  latter  a military  republic,  martial  glory 
was  the  sole  object  that  engrossed  the  minds  of  her  citizens. 
From  thence  she  naturally  affected  dominion  ; and  the  more  she 
was  above  interest,  the  more  she  abandoned  herself  to  ambition. 

Lacedaemon,  from  her  regular  life,  was  steady  and  deter- 
minate in  her  maxims  and  measures.  Athens  was  more  lively 
and  active,  and  the  people  too  much  masters.  Philosophy  and 
the  laws  had  indeed  the  most  happy  effects  upon  such  exqui- 
site natural  parts  as  theirs  ; but  reason  alone  was  not  capa- 
ble of  keeping  them  within  due  bounds.  A wise  Athenian/ 
who  knew  admirably  the  genius  of  his  country,  informs  us,  that 
fear  was  necessary  to  those  too  ardent  and  free  spirits ; and 
that  it  was  impossible  to  govern  them,  after  that  the  victory  at 
Salamis  had  removed  their  fears  of  the  Persians. 

Two  things,  then,  ruined  them;  the  glory  of  their  great 
actions,  and  the  supposed  security  of  their  present  condition. 
The  magistrates  were  no  longer  heard  ; and  as  Persia  was  af- 
flicted with  excessive  slavery,  so  Athens,  says  Plato,  experienced 
all  the  evils  of  excessive  liberty. 

Those  two  great  republics,  so  contrary  in  their  manners 
and  conduct,  interfered  with  each  other  in  the  design  they  had 
each  formed  of  subjecting  all  Greece  ; so  that  they  were  always 
enemies,  still  more  from  the  contrariety  of  their  interests,  than 
from  the  incompatibility  of  their  humours. 

The  Grecian  cities  were  unwilling  to  submit  to  the  dominion 
of  either  the  one  or  the  other ; for,  besides  that  each  was 
desirous  of  preserving  their  liberty,  they  found  the  empire  of 
those  two  republics  too  grievous  to  bear.  That  of  the  Lace- 
demonians was  severe.  That  people  were  observed  to  have 
something  almost  brutal  in  their  character.  A government  too 
rigid/  and  a life  too  laborious,  rendered  their  tempers  too 
haughty,  austere,  and  imperious  in  power : besides  which, 
they  could  never  expect  to  live  in  peace  under  the  influence  of 
a city,  which  being  formed  for  war,  could  not  support  itself  but 
d Plat.  1.  in.  de  leg.  e Aristot.  Polit.  1.  i.  p<  4. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


307 

by  continuing  perpetually  in  arms.  So  that  the  Lacedaemo- 
nians were  desirous  of  attaining  to  command,  and  all  the  world 
were  afraid  they  should  do  so.f 

The  Athenians  were  naturally  more  mild  and  agreeable.^ 
Nothing  was  more  delightful  to  behold  than  their  city,  in  which 
feasts  and  games  were  perpetual ; where  wit,  liberty,  and  the 
various  passions  of  men  daily  exhibited  new  objects  : but  the  in- 
equality of  their  conduct  disgusted  their  allies,  and  was  still  more 
insupportable  to  their  own  subjects.  It  was  impossible  for 
them  not  to  experience  the  extravagance  and  caprice  of  a flat- 
tered people  ; that  is  to  say,  according  to  Plato,  something  more 
dangerous  than  the  same  excesses  in  a prince  vitiated  by  flattery. 

These  two  cities  did  not  permit  Greece  to  continue  in  repose. 
We  have  seen  the  Peloponnesian  and  other  wars,  which  were 
always  occasioned,  or  fomented,  by  the  jealousy  of  Lacedasmon 
and  Athens.  But  the  same  jealousies  which  involved  Greece 
in  troubles,  supported  it  in  some  measure,  and  prevented  its 
falling  into  dependance  upon  either  the  one  or  the  other  of 
those  republics. 

The  Persians  soon  perceived  this  condition  of  Greece  ; and 
accordingly  the  whole  mystery  of  their  politics  consisted  in  keep- 
ing up  those  jealousies,  and  fomenting  those  divisions.  Lace- 
daemon, which  was  the  most  ambitious,  was  the  first  that  gave 
them  occasion  to  take  a part  in  the  quarrels  of  the  Greeks. 
They  engaged  in  them  from  the  sole  view  of  making  themselves 
masters  of  the  whole  nation  ; and,  industrious  to  weaken  the 
Greeks  by  their  own  arms,  they  waited  only  the  opportunity  to 
crush  them  altogether.  The  states  of  Greece,  h in  their  wars, 
already  regarded  only  the  king  of  Persia,  whom  they  called  the 
Great  King,  or  the  King,  by  way  of  eminence,  as  if  they  had 
already  reckoned  themselves  among  the  number  of  his  subjects. 
But  it  was  impossible  that  the  ancient  spirit  of  Greece  should 
not  revive,  when  they  were  upon  the  point  of  falling  into  slavery, 
and  the  hands  of  the  Barbarians. 

The  petty  kings  of  Greece  undertook  to  oppose  this  great 
king,  and  to  ruin  his  empire.  With  a small  army,’  but  bred  in 
the  discipline  we  have  related,  Agesilaus  king  of  Sparta  made 
the  Persians  tremble  in  Asia  Minor,  and  showed  it  was  not  im- 
possible to  subvert  their  power.  The  divisions  of  Greece  alone 
put  a stop  to  his  conquests.  The  famous  retreat  of  the  10,000, 
who,  after  the  death  of  the  younger  Cyrus,  in  spite  of  the  vic- 
torious troops  of  Artaxerxes,  made  their  way  in  a hostile 
manner  through  the  whole  Persian  empire,  and  returned  into 
their  own  country  ; that  action,  I say,  demonstrated  to  Greece 
more  than  ever,  that  their  soldiery  was  invincible,  and  superior 

f Xenoph.  de  Rep.  Lacon.  s Plat,  de  Rep.  1.  viii. 

b Plat.  1.  iii.  de  leg.  Isocrat.  Panegyr.  ' rolyb,  1.  iii* 

x 2 


HISTORY  &C. 


.308 

to  all  opposers ; and  that  only  their  domestic  divisions  could 
subject  them  to  an  enemy  too  weak  to  resist  their  forces  when 
united. 

We  shall  see,  in  the  series  of  this  history,  by  what  methods 
Philip,  king  of  Macedon,  taking  advantage  of  these  divisions, 
succeeded  at  length,  partly  by  address  and  partly  by  force,  in 
making  himself  little  less  than  the  sovereign  of  Greece,  and  by 
what  means  he  obliged  the  whole  nation  to  march  under  his 
colours  against  the  common  enemy.  What  he  only  planned, 
his  son  Alexander  brought  to  perfection  ; and  showed  to  the 
wondering  world  how  much  ability  and  valour  avail  against  the 
most  numerous  armies  and  the  most  formidable  preparations. 


BOOK  XI. 


THE 

HISTORY  OF  DIONYSIUS. 

THE 

ELDER  AND  YOUNGER, 

TYRANTS  OF  SYRACUSE. 


Sixty  years  had  elapsed  since  Syracuse  had  regained  its 
liberty  by  the  expulsion  of  the  family  of  Gelon.  The  events 
which  passed  during  that  interval  in  Sicily,  except  the  invasion 
of  the  Athenians,  are  of  no  great  importance,  and  little  known  ; 
but  those  which  follow  are  highly  interesting,  and  make  amends 
for  the  chasm : I mean  the  reigns  of  Dionysius  the  father  and 
son,  tyrants  of  Syracuse  ; the  first  of  whom  governed  thirty- 
eight  years,  and  the  other  twelve, a in  all  fifty  years.  As  this 
history  is  entirely  unconnected  with  what  passed  in  Greece  at 
the  same  time,  I shall  relate  it  in  this  place  altogether,  and  by 
itself ; observing  only,  that  the  first  twenty  years  of  it,  upon 
which  I am  now  entering,  agree  almost  in  point  of  time  with 
the  last  twenty  of  the  preceding  volume. 

This  history  will  present  to  our  view  a series  of  the  most 
odious  and  horrid  crimes,  though  it  abounds  at  the  same  time 
with  instruction.  When  on  the  one  side  we  behold  a prince,b 
the  declared  enemy  of  liberty,  justice,  and  laws,  treading  under 
his  feet  the  most  sacred  rights  of  nature  and  religion,  inflicting 
the  most  cruel  torments  upon  his  subjects,  beheading  some, 
burning  others  for  a slight  word,  delighting  and  feasting  him- 

a After  having  been  expelled  for  more  than  ten  years,  he  reascended  the 
throne,  and  reigned  two  or  three  years. 

b Erit  Dionysius  illic  tyrannus,  libertatis,  justithe,  legum  exitium — Alios 
uret,  alios  verberabit,  alios  ob  levem  offensam  jubebit  detruncari.  Senec.  de 
Consol,  ad  Marc . c.  xvii. 

Sanguine  humano  non  tantum  gaudet,  sed  pascitur ; sed  et  suppliciis  om- 
nium setatum  crudelitatem  insatiabilem  explet.  Id.  de  Benef.  1.  vii.  c.  19. 


310 


HISTORY  OF 


self  with  human  blood,  and  gratifying  his  inhuman  cruelty  with 
the  sufferings  and  miseries  of  every  age  and  condition  : I say, 
when  we  behold  such  an  object,  can  we  deny  a truth,  which 
the  Pagan  world  itself  hath  confessed,  and  which  Plutarch 
takes  occasion  to  observe  in  speaking  of  the  tyrants  of  Sicily  : 
That  God  in  his  anger  gives  such  princes  to  a people,  and 
makes  use  of  the  impious  and  the  wicked  to  punish  the  guilty 
and  the  criminal.  On  the  other  side,  when  the  same  prince, 
the  dread  and  terror  of  Syracuse,  is  perpetually  anxious  and 
trembling  for  his  own  life,  and  abandoned  by  day  and  night  to 
remorse  and  regret,  can  find  no  person  in  his  whole  state,  not 
even  his  wives  and  children,  in  whom  he  can  confide ; who  will 
not  exclaim  with  Tacitus,0  That  it  is  not  without  reason  the 
oracle  of  wisdom  has  declared,  That  if  the  hearts  of  tyrants 
coidd  he  seen,  we  should  find  them  torn  in  pieces  with  a thou- 
sand evils  ; it  being  certain , that  the  body  does  not  suffer  more 
from  stripes  and  torments,  than  the  minds  of  such  wretches 
from  their  crimes,  cruelties,  and  the  injustice  and  violence  of 
their  proceedings. 

The  condition  of  a good  prince  is  quite  different.  He  loves 
his  people,  and  is  beloved  by  them  ; he  enjoys  a perfect  tran- 
quillity within  himself,  and  lives  amidst  his  subjects  as  a father 
with  his  children.  Though  he  knows  that  the  sword  of  justice 
is  in  his  hands,  he  dreads  to  make  use  of  it.  He  loves  to  turn 
aside  its  edge,  and  can  never  resolve  to  evince  his  power,  but 
with  extreme  reluctance,  in  the  last  extremity,  and  with  all  the 
forms  and  sanction  of  the  laws.d  But  a tyrant  punishes  only 
from  caprice  and  passion  ; and  believes,  says  Plutarch,  speak- 
ing of  Diony.sius,  that  he  is  not  really  master,e  and  does  not 
act  with  supreme  authority,  but  in  proportion  as  he  sets  himself 
above  all  laws,  acknowledges  no  other  than  his  own  will  and 
pleasure,  and  sees  himself  obeyed  implicitly.  Whereas,  con- 
tinues the  same  author,  he  that  can  do  whatever  he  will,  is  in 
great  danger  of  willing  what  he  ought  not. 

Besides  the  characteristics  of  cruelty  and  tyranny,  which 
particularly  distinguish  the  first  Dionysius,  we  shall  see  in  his 

c Neque  frustra  praestantissimus  sapientiae  firmare  solitus  est,  si  recludan- 
tur  tyrannorun  mentes,  posse  aspici  laniatus  et  ictus ; quando,  ut  corpora  ver- 
beribus,  ita  saevitia,  libidine,  malis  consultis,  animus  dilaceraretur.  Tacit. 
Annul.  1.  vi.  c.  6. 

d Haec  est  in  maxima  potestate  verissima  animi  teroperantia,  non  cupiditate 
aliqua  non  teineritate  incendi;  non  priorum  principum  exemplis  corruptum, 
quantum  in  cives  suos  liceat,  experiendo  tentare  ; sed  hebetare  aciem  imperii 
sui.  Quid  interest  inter  tyrannum  et  regem  (species  enim  ipsa  fortunae  ac 
licentia  par  est,)  nisi  quod  tyranni  in  voluptate  saeviunt,  reges  non  nisi  ex 
causa  et  necessitate  ? Senec.  de  Clem.  1.  i.  c.  11. 

e diroikavuv  paXiara  rrjg  apxrjg,  orav  ra^k^g  a fiovXsTai  troiy’  fisyag 

oyv  6 KivSvvog  fiovXioOai  & fir/  del,  rov  (i  fiovXtrai  i roielv  bvvapivov.  Ad  Princ. 
indock.  p.  782. 


DIONYSIUS  THE  ELDER. 


311 


history,  whatever  unbounded  ambition,  sustained  by  great 
valour,  extensive  abilities,  and  talents  qualified  for  acquiring 
the  confidence  of  a people,  is  capable  of  undertaking  for  the 
attainment  of  sovereignty ; the  various  means  which  he  had  the 
address  to  employ  for  maintaining  himself  in  it  against  the 
opposition  of  his  enemies,  and  the  odium  of  the  public ; and, 
lastly,  the  tyrant’s  good  fortune  in  escaping,  during  a reign  of 
thirty-eight  years,  the  many  conspiracies  formed  against  him, 
and  in  transmitting  peaceably  the  tyranny  to  his  son,  as  a legi- 
timate possession,  and  an  hereditary  right. 


Dionysius  was  a native  of  Syracuse/  of  noble  and  illus- 
trious extraction,  according  to  some,  but  others  say  his  birth 
was  base  and  obscure.  Be  this  as  it  may,  he  distinguished 
himself  by  his  valour,  and  acquired  great  reputation  in  the  war 
with  the  Carthaginians.  He  was  one  of  those  who  accompanied 
Hermocrates,  when  he  attempted  to  re-enter  Syracuse  by  force 
of  arms,  after  having  been  banished  through  the  intrigues  of 
his  enemies.  The  event  of  that  enterprise  was  not  fortunate. 
Hermocrates  was  killed.  The  Syracusans  did  not  spare  his 
accomplices,  several  of  whom  were  publicly  executed.  Dio- 
nysius was  left  amongst  the  wounded.  The  report  of  his 
death,  designedly  given  out  by  his  relations,  saved  his  life. 
Providence  would  have  spared  Syracuse  an  infinity  of  misfor- 
tunes, had  he  expired  either  in  the  field  or  by  the  executioner. 

The  Carthaginians  had  made  several  attempts  to  establish 
themselves  in  Sicily,  and  to  possess  themselves  of  the  principal 
cities  there,  as  we  have  observed  elsewhere.^  The  happy  situ- 
ation of  that  island  for  their  maritime  commerce,  the  fertility  of 
its  soil,  and  the  riches  of  its  inhabitants,  were  powerful  induce- 
ments to  such  an  enterprise.  We  may  form  an  idea  of  the 
wealth  of  some  of  its  cities  from  Diodorus  Siculus’s  account  of 
Agrigentum.  The  temples  were  of  extraordinary  magnifi- 
cence/ especially  that  of  Jupiter  Olympias,  which  was  340 
feet  in  length,  00  in  breadth,  and  120  in  height.  The  piazzas, 
or  galleries,  in  extent  and  beauty,  corresponded  with  the  rest 
of  the  building.  On  one  side  was  represented  the  battle  of 
the  giants,  on  the  other  the  taking  of  Troy,  in  figures  as  large 
as  the  life.  Without  the  city  was  an  artificial  lake,  which  was 


CHAP.  I. 


Sect.  I.  Means  made  use  of  by  Dionysius  the  elder,  to  possess 
himself  of  the  tyranny. 


f Diod.  1.  xiii.  p.  197- 


312 


HISTORY  OF 


seven  stadia  (above  a quarter  of  a league)  in  circumference, 
and  thirty  feet  in  depth.  It  was  full  of  all  kinds  of  fish,  cover- 
ed with  swans  and  other  water-fowls,  and  afforded  the  most 
agreeable  prospect  imaginable. 

It  was  about  the  time  of  which  we  speak,  that  Exenetus, 
victor  in  the  Olympic  games,  entered  the  city  in  triumph  in  a 
magnificent  chariot,  attended  by  300  more,  all  drawn  by  white 
horses.  Their  habits  glittered  with  gold  and  silver  ; and 
nothing  was  ever  more  splendid  than  their  appearance.  Gel- 
lias,  the  most  wealthy  of  the  citizens  of  Agrigentum,  had  erect- 
ed several  large  apartments  in  his  house  for  the  reception  and 
entertainment  of  his  guests.  Servants  waited  by  his  order  at 
the  gates  of  the  city,  to  invite  all  strangers  to  lodge  at  their 
master’s  house,  whither  they  conducted  them.  Hospitality 
was  much  practised  and  esteemed  by  the  generality  of  that 
city.  A violent  storm  having  obliged  500  horsemen  to  take 
shelter  there,  Gellias  entertained  them  all  in  his  house,  and 
supplied  them  immediately  with  dry  clothes,  of  which  he  had 
always  a great  quantity  in  his  wardrobe.  This  is  understanding 
how  to  make  a noble  use  of  riches.  His  cellar  is  much  talked 
of  by  historians,  in  which  he  had  300  reservoirs  hewn  out  of 
the  rock,  each  of  which  contained  100  amphorae.1 

This  great  and  opulent  city  was  besieged,  and 
Ant.  X C.5406.  at  taken  by  the  Carthaginians.  Its  fall 

shook  all  Sicily,  and  spread  a universal  terror. 
The  cause  of  its  being  lost  was  imputed  to  the  Syracusans,  who 
had  but  weakly  succoured  it.  Dionysius,  who  even  then  was 
engrossed  solely  by  the  thoughts  of  his  grand  designs,  and  who 
was  engaged,  though  secretly,  in  laying  the  foundation  of  his 
future  power,  took  advantage  of  this  favourable  opportunity, 
and  of  the  general  complaints  of  Sicily  against  the  Syracusans, 
to  render  the  magistrates  odious,  and  to  exclaim  against  their 
administration.  In  a public  assembly,  held  to  consider  of  the 
present  state  of  affairs,  when  nobody  dared  to  open  their  mouths 
for  fear  of  incurring  the  displeasure  of  the  persons  at  the  helm, 
Dionysius  rose  up  and  boldly  accused  the  magistrates  of  treason ; 
adding  that  it  was  his  opinion,  that  they  ought  to  be  deposed 
immediately,  without  waiting  till  the  term  of  their  administra- 
tion should  expire.  They  retorted  this  audacity  by  treating 
him  as  a seditious  person,  and  a disturber  of  the  public  tran- 
quillity, and  as  such  laid  a fine  upon  him  according  to  the 
laws.  This  was  to  be  paid  before  he  could  be  admitted  to  speak 
again,  and  Dionysius  was  not  in  a condition  to  discharge  it. 
Philistus,  one  of  the  richest  citizens,  (who  wrote  the  history 
of  Sicily,  which  is  not  come  down  to  us),  deposited  the  money, 

* An  amphora  contained  about  seven  gallons  ; 100  consequently  consisted  of 
700  gallons,  or  eleven  hogsheads  seven  gallons. 


DIONYSIUS  THE  ELDER. 


313 


and  exhorted  him  at  the  same  time  to  give  his  opinion  upon 
the  state  of  affairs  with  all  the  liberty  which  became  a citizen 
zealous  for  his  country. 

Dionysius  accordingly  resumed  his  discourse  with  more  vigour 
than  before.  He  had  long  cultivated  the  habit  of  eloquence, 
which  he  looked  upon  with  reason  as  a talent  very  necessary  in 
a republican  government;  especially  with  relation  to  his  views  of 
acquiring  the  people’s  favour,  and  of  conciliating  them  to  his 
measures.  He  began  with  describing  in  a lively  and  pathetic 
manner  the  ruin  of  Agrigentum,  a neighbouring  city,  and  one  in 
their  alliance  ; the  deplorable  extremity  to  which  the  inhabit- 
ants had  been  reduced,  of  quitting  the  place  under  cover  of  the 
night ; the  cries  and  lamentations  of  infants,  and  of  aged  and 
sick  persons,  whom  they  had  been  obliged  to  abandon  to  a fero- 
cious and  merciless  enemy  ; and  the  cruel  murder  of  all  who 
had  been  left  in  the  city,  whom  the  barbarous  victor  dragged 
from  the  temples  and  altars  of  the  gods,  a feeble  asylum  against 
the  Carthaginian  fury  and  impiety.  He  imputed  all  these  evils 
to  the  treachery  of  the  commanders  of  the  army,  who,  instead 
of  marching  to  the  relief  of  Agrigentum,  had  retreated  with 
their  troops ; to  the  criminal  remissness  and  delay  of  the  magis- 
trates, who  had  suffered  themselves  to  be  corrupted  by  Cartha- 
ginian bribes  ; and  to  the  pride  of  the  great  and  rich,  who 
thought  only  of  establishing  their  own  power  upon  the  ruins  of 
their  country’s  liberty.  He  represented  Syracuse  as  composed 
of  two  different  bodies  ; the  one,  by  their  power  and  influence, 
usurping  all  the  dignities  and  wealth  of  the  state  ; the  other, 
obscure,  despised,  and  trampled  under  foot,  bearing  the  sad 
yoke  of  a shameful  servitude,  and  rather  slaves  than  citizens. 
He  concluded  with  saying,  that  the  only  remedy  for  so  many 
evils  was  to  elect  persons  from  amongst  the  people,  devoted  to 
their  interests,  and  who,  not  being  capable  of  rendering  them- 
selves formidable  by  their  riches  and  authority,  would  be  solely 
employed  for  the  public  good,  and  apply  in  earnest  to  the  re-es- 
tablishment of  liberty  in  Syracuse. 

This  discourse  was  listened  to  with  infinite  pleasure,  as  all 
speeches  are  which  flatter  the  natural  propensity  of  inferiors  to 
complain  of  the  government,  and  was  followed  with  the  univer- 
sal applause  of  the  people,  who  always  give  themselves  up 
blindly  to  those  who  know  how  to  deceive  them  under  the  spe- 
cious pretext  of  serving  their  interest.  All  the  magistrates  were 
deposed  upon  the  spot,  and  others  substituted  in  their  room, 
with  Dionysius  at  the  head  of  them. 

This  was  only  the  first  step  to  the  tyranny,  and  he  did  not 
stop  here.  The  success  of  his  undertaking  inspired  him  with 
new  courage  and  confidence.  He  had  also  in  view  the  dis- 
placing of  the  generals  of  the  army,  and  having  their  power 


314 


HISTORY  OF 

transferred  to  himself.  The  design  was  bold  and  dangerous, 
and  he  set  about  it  with  address.  Before  he  attacked  them 
openly,  he  planted  his  batteries  against  them  at  a distance;  ca- 
lumniating them  by  his  emissaries  among  the  people,  and  spar- 
ing no  pains  to  render  them  suspected.  He  caused  it  to  be 
whispered  amongst  the  populace,  that  those  commanders  held 
secret  intelligence  with  the  enemy ; that  courtiers  in  disguise 
were  frequently  seen  passing  and  repassing  ; and  that  it  was 
not  to  be  doubted,  but  some  conspiracy  was  on  foot.  He  af- 
fected on  his  side  not  to  see  those  leaders,  nor  to  open  himself 
to  them  at  all  upon  the  affairs  of  the  public.  He  communicated 
none  of  his  designs  to  them,  as  if  he  was  apprehensive  of  ren- 
dering himself  suspected  by  having  any  intercourse  or  corre- 
spondence with  them.  Persons  of  sense  and  discernment  were 
not  at  a loss  to  discover  the  tendency  of  these  undermining 
arts  ; nor  were  they  silent  upon  the  occasion  ; but  the  common 
people,  prejudiced  in  his  favour,  incessantly  applauded  and  ad- 
mired his  zeal,  and  looked  upon  him  as  the  sole  protector  and 
asserter  of  their  rights  and  liberties. 

Another  scheme,  which  he  set  at  work  with  his  usual  address, 
was  of  very  great  service  to  him,  and  exceedingly  promoted 
his  designs.  There  was  a great  number  of  banished  persons 
dispersed  throughout  Sicily,  whom  the  faction  of  the  nobility 
of  Syracuse  had  expelled  the  city  at  different  times,  and  upon 
different  pretences.  He  knew  what  an  addition  of  strength  so 
numerous  a body  of  citizens  would  be  to  him,  whom  gratitude 
to  their  benefactor,  and  resentment  against  those  who  had  oo 
casioned  their  banishment,  the  hope  of  retrieving  their  affairs, 
and  of  enriching  themselves  out  of  the  spoils  of  their  enemies, 
would  render  well  calculated  for  the  execution  of  his  designs, 
and  attach  them  unalterably  to  his  person  and  interest.  He 
applied  therefore  earnestly  to  obtain  their  recall.  It  was  given 
out  that  it  was  necessary  to  raise  a numerous  body  of  troops  to 
oppose  the  progress  of  the  Carthaginians,  and  the  people  fore- 
saw with  anxiety  the  expense  to  which  the  new  levies  would 
amount.  Dionysius  took  advantage  of  this  favourable  conjunc- 
ture and  disposition  of  the  public  mind.  He  represented,  that 
it  was  ridiculous  to  bring  foreign  troops  at  a great  expense 
from  Italy  and  the  Peloponnesus,  whilst  their  own  country 
would  supply  them  with  excellent  soldiers,  without  being  at 
any  charge  at  all : that  there  were  numbers  of  Syracusans  in 
every  part  of  Sicily,  who,  notwithstanding  the  ill  treatment  they 
had  received,  had  always  retained  the  hearts  of  citizens  under 
the  name  and  condition  of  exiles : that  they  preserved  a tender 
affection  and  inviolable  fidelity  for  their  country,  and  had  cho- 
sen rather  to  wander  about  Sicily  without  support  or  settlement, 
than  to  enrol  themselves  in  the  armies  of  the  enemy,  however 


DIONYSIUS  THE  ELDER. 


315 


advantageous  the  offers  to  induce  them  to  it  had  been.  This 
discourse  of  Dionysius  had  all  the  effect  upon  the  people  he 
could  have  wished.  His  colleagues,  who  perceived  plainly 
what  he  had  in  view,  were  afraid  to  contradict  him  ; rightly 
judging,  that  their  opposition  would  not  only  prove  ineffectual, 
but.  incense  the  people  against  them,  and  even  augment  the  re- 
putation of  Dionysius,  to  whom  it  would  leave  the  whole  ho- 
nour of  recalling  the  exiles.  Their  return  was  therefore  decreed, 
and  they  accordingly  came  all  to  Syracuse  without  losing  time. 

A deputation  from  Gela,  a city  dependant  on  Syracuse,  ar- 
rived about  the  same  time,  to  demand  that  the  garrison  should 
be  reinforced.  Dionysius  immediately  marched  thither  with  2000 
foot  and  400  horse.  He  found  the  city  in  a great  commotion, 
and  divided  into  two  factions ; one  of  the  people,  and  the  other 
of  the  rich  and  powerful.  The  latter  having  been  tried  in 
form,  were  condemned  by  the  assembly  to  die,  and  to  have 
their  estates  confiscated  for  the  use  of  the  public.  This  con- 
fiscation was  applied  to  pay  off  the  arrears  which  had  long 
been  due  to  the  former  garrison,  commanded  by  Dexippus 
the  Lacedaemonian ; and  Dionysius  promised  the  troops  he  had 
brought  with  him  from  Syracuse  to  double  the  pay  they  were 
to  receive  from  the  city.  This  was  attaching  so  many  new 
creatures  to  himself.  The  inhabitants  of  Gela  treated  him  with 
the  highest  marks  of  honour,  and  sent  deputies  to  Syracuse,  to 
return  their  thanks  for  the  important  service  that  city  had  done 
them  in  sending  Dionysius  thither.  Having  endeavoured  in 
vain  to  bring  Dexippus  into  his  measures,  he  returned  with 
his  troops  to  Syracuse,  after  having  promised  the  inhabitants 
of  Gela,  who  used  all  means  in  their  power  to  keep  him 
amongst  them,  that  he  would  soon  return  with  more  consider- 
able aid. 

He  arrived  at  Syracuse  just  as  the  people  were  coming  out 
of  the  theatre,  who  ran  in  throngs  about  him,  inquiring  with 
earnestness  what  he  had  heard  of  the  Carthaginians.  He  an- 
swered with  a sad  and  dejected  air,  that  the  city  nourished  far 
more  dangerous  and  formidable  enemies  in  her  own  bosom  ; that 
whilst  Carthage  was  making  extraordinary  preparations  for  the 
invasion  of  Syracuse,  those  who  were  in  command,  instead  of 
rousing  the  zeal  and  attention  of  the  citizens,  and  setting  every- 
thing at  work  against  the  approach  of  so  potent  an  enemy,  lulled 
them  with  trivial  amusements  and  idle  shows,  and  suffered  the 
troops  to  want  necessaries  ; converting  their  pay  to  their  private 
uses  in  a fraudulent  manner,  which  was  destructive  to  the  pub- 
lic affairs  ; that  he  had  always  sufficiently  comprehended  the 
cause  of  such  a conduct ; that  however  it  was  not  now  upon 
mere  conjecture,  but  upon  too  evident  proof,  that  his  complaints 
were  founded : that  Imilco,  the  general  of  the  Carthaginians, 


316 


HISTORY  OF 


had  sent  an  officer  to  him,  under  pretext  of  treating  about  the 
ransom  of  prisoners,  but  in  reality  to  prevail  on  him  not  to  be 
too  strict  in  examining  into  the  conduct  of  his  colleagues  ; and 
that  if  he  would  not  enter  into  the  measures  of  Carthage,  at 
least  that  he  would  not  oppose  them  : that  for  his  part,  he  came 
to  resign  his  command,  and  to  abdicate  his  dignity,  that  he  might 
leave  no  room  for  injurious  suspicions  of  his  acting  in  concert, 
and  holding  intelligence,  with  traitors  who  sold  the  common- 
wealth. 

This  discourse  being  rumoured  amongst  the  troops  and  about 
the  city,  occasioned  great  inquietude  and  alarm.  The  next 
day  the  assembly  was  summoned,  and  Dionysius  renewed  his 
complaints  against  the  generals,  which  were  received  with  uni- 
versal applause.  Some  of  the  assembly  cried  out,  that  it  was 
necessary  immediately  to  appoint  him  generalissimo,  with  un- 
limited power,  and  that  it  would  be  too  late  to  have  recourse  to 
so  salutary  a measure  when  the  enemy  was  at  the  gates  of  Sy- 
racuse : that  the  importance  of  the  war  with  which  they  were 
threatened  required  such  a leader  : that  it  was  in  the  same  man- 
ner formerly,  that  Gelon,  when  elected  generalissimo,  had  de- 
feated the  Carthaginian  army  at  Himera,  which  consisted  of 
300,000  men  : that  as  for  the  accusation  alleged  against  the 
traitors,  it  might  be  referred  to  another  day,  but  that  the  present 
affair  would  admit  no  delay.  Nor  was  it  in  fact  delayed  ; for 
the  people  (who,  when  once  prejudiced,  run  headlong  after  their 
opinion  without  examining  any  thing)  elected  Dionysius  gene- 
ralissimo with  unlimited  power  that  instant.  In  the  same  assem- 
bly he  caused  it  to  be  decreed,  that  the  soldiers’  pay  should  be 
doubled  ; insinuating,  that  the  state  would  be  amply  reimbursed 
by  the  conquests  which  would  be  the  consequence  of  that  ad- 
vance. This  being  done,  and  the  assembly  dismissed,  the  Sy- 
racusans, upon  cool  reflection  on  what  had  passed,  began  to  be 
in  some  consternation  ; as  if  it  had  not  been  the  effect  of  their 
own  choice  : and  comprehended,  though  too  late,  that  from  the 
desire  of  preserving  their  liberty,  they  had  given  themselves  a 
master. 

Dionysius  rightly  judged  the  importance  of  taking  his  mea- 
sures before  the  people  repented  what  they  had  done.  There 
remained  but  one  step  more  to  the  tyranny,  which  was  to  have 
a body  of  guards  assigned  him  ; and  that  he  accomplished  in  the 
most  artful  and  politic  manner.  He  proposed  that  all  the  citi- 
zens under  forty  years  of  age,  and  capable  of  bearing  arms, 
should  march  with  provisions  for  thirty  days  to  the  city  of  Le- 
ontium.  The  Syracusans  were  at  that  time  in  possession  of  the 
place,  and  had  a garrison  in  it.  It  was  full  of  fugitive  and  fo- 
reign soldiers,  who  were  very  fit  persons  for  the  execution  of 
his  designs.  He  justly  suspected,  that  the  greatest  part  of  the 


DIONYSIUS  THE  ELDER. 


317 


Syracusans  would  not  follow  him.  He  set  out,  however,  and 
arriving  in  the  night,  encamped  upon  the  plains  near  the  city. 
It  was  not  long  before  a great  noise  was  heard  throughout  the 
whole  camp.  This  tumult  was  raised  by  persons  planted  for 
that  purpose  by  Dionysius.  He  affected  to  believe  that  am- 
buscades had  been  laid  with  design  to  assassinate  him,  and  in 
great  trouble  and  alarm  retired  for  refuge  into  the  citadel  of 
Leontium,  where  he  passed  the  rest  of  the  night,  after  having 
caused  a great  number  of  fires  to  be  lighted,  and  drawn  around 
him  such  of  the  troops  as  he  most  confided  in.  At  break  of 
day  the  people  assembled  in  a body,  to  whom,  expressing  still 
great  apprehension,  he  explained  the  danger  he  had  been  in, 
and  demanded  permission  to  choose  himself  a guard  of  600  men 
for  the  security  of  his  person.  Pisistratus  had  set  him  the  ex- 
ample long  before,  and  had  used  the  same  stratagem  when  he 
made  himself  tyrant  of  Athens.  His  demand  seemed  very  rea- 
sonable, and  was  accordingly  complied  with.  He  chose  out 
1000  men  for  his  guard  upon  the  spot,  armed  them  completely, 
equipped  them  magnificently,  and  made  them  great  promises 
for  their  encouragement.  He  also  attached  the  foreign  soldiers 
to  his  interest  in  a peculiar  manner,  by  speaking  to  them  with 
great  freedom  and  affability.  He  made  many  removals  and  al- 
terations in  the  troops,  to  secure  the  officers  in  his  interest ; 
and  dismissed  Dexippus  to  Sparta,  as  he  distrusted  him.  At 
the  same  time  he  ordered  a great  part  of  the  garrison,  which  he 
had  sent  to  Gela,  to  join  him,  and  assembled  from  all  parts 
fugitives,  exiles,  debtors,  and  criminals — a train  worthy  of  a 
tyrant. 

With  this  escort  he  returned  to  Syracuse,  that  trembled  at 
his  approach.  The  people  were  no  longer  in  a condition  to 
oppose  his  undertakings,  or  to  dispute  his  authority.  The  city 
was  full  of  foreign  soldiers,  and  saw  itself  upon  the  point  of 
being  attacked  by  the  Carthaginians.  To  strengthen  himself 
the  more  in  the  tyranny,  he  espoused  the  daughter  of  Hermo- 
crates,  the  most  powerful  citizen  in  Syracuse,  and  who  had  contri- 
buted the  most  to  the  defeat  of  the  Athenians.  He  also  gave  his 
sister  in  marriage  to  Polyxenus,  brother-in-law  of  Hermocrates. 
He  afterwards  summoned  an  assembly,  in  which  he  rid  him- 
self of  Daphneus  and  Demarchus,  who  had  been  the  most 
active  in  opposing  his  usurpation.  In  this  manner  Dionysius, 
from  a simple  notary  and  a citizen  of  the  lowest  class,  made 
himself  absolute  lord  and  tyrant  of  the  greatest  and  most  opu- 
lent city  of  Sicily. 


318 


HISTORY  OF 


SECT.  II. 

Commotions  in  Sicily  and  at  Syracuse  against  Dionysius.  He  finds  means 
to  dispel  them.  To  prevent  revolts,  he  proposes  to  attack  the  Cartha- 
ginians. His  wonderful  application  and  success  in  making  preparations 
for  the  war.  Plato  comes  to  Syracuse.  His  intimacy  and  friendship  with 
- Dion. 

Dionysius  had  a rude  shock  to  sustain  in  the  beginning-  of 
his  usurpation.1*  The  Carthaginians  having  besieged  Gela,  he 
marched  to  its  relief,  and  after  some  unsuccessful  endeavours 
against  the  enemy,  threw  himself  into  the  place.  He  behaved 
there  with  little  vigour,  and  all  the  service  he  did  the  inhabit- 
ants was  to  make  them  abandon  their  city  in  the  night,  and 
to  cover  their  flight  in  person.  He  was  suspected  of  acting 
in  concert  with  the  enemy,  and  the  more,  because  they  did  not 
pursue  him,  and  that  he  lost  very  few  of  his  foreign  soldiers. 
All  the  inhabitants  who  remained  at  Gela  were  butchered. 
Those  of  Camarina,  to  avoid  the  same  fate,  followed  their  ex- 
ample, and  withdrew  with  all  the  effects  they  could  carry  away. 
The  moving  sight  of  aged  persons,  matrons,,  young  virgins, 
and  tender  infants,  hurried  on  beyond  their  strength,  struck 
Dionysius’s  troops  with  compassion,  and  incensed  them  against 
the  tyrant.  Those  he  had  raised  in  Italy  withdrew  to  their 
own  country  ; and  the  Syracusan  cavalry,  after  having  made 
a vain  attempt  to  kill  him  upon  the  march,  from  his  being 
surrounded  with  his  foreigners,  pushed  forwards,  and  having 
entered  Syracuse,  went  directly  to  his  palace,  which  they 
plundered,  using  his  wife  at  the  same  time  with  so  much  vio- 
lence and  ill-treatment,  that  she  died  of  it  soon  after.  Diony- 
sius, who  had  foreseen  their  design,  followed  them  close  with 
only  100  horse  and  400  foot ; and  having  made  a forced  march 
of  almost  twenty  leagues,1  he  arrived  at  midnight  at  the  gate  of 
Achradina,  which  he  found  shut  against  him.  He  set  fire  to 
it,  and  thus  opened  himself  a passage.  The  richest  of  the 
citizens  ran  thither  to  dispute  his  entrance,  but  were  sur- 
rounded by  the  soldiers,  and  almost  all  of  them  killed.  Diony- 
sius having  entered  the  city,  put  all  to  the  sword  that  came 
in  his  way,  plundered  the  houses  of  his  enemies,  of  whom  he 
killed  a great  number,  and  forced  the  rest  to  leave  Syracuse. 
The  next  morning  the  whole  body  of  his  troops  arrived.  The 
unhappy  fugitives  of  Gela  and  Camarina,  out  of  horror  for  the 
tyrant,  retired  to  the  Leontines.  Imilco  having  sent  a herald 
to  Syracuse,  the  treaty  was  concluded  which  has  been  men- 
tioned in  the  history  of  the  Carthaginians."1  By  one  of  the 
articles  it  was  stipulated,  that  Syracuse  should  continue  under 
k Diod.  1.  xiii.  p.  227*  231.  1 Four  hundred  stadia.  m Vol.  i. 


DIONYSIUS  THE  ELDER. 


319 


the  government  of  Dionysius  ; which  confirmed  all  the  sus- 
picion that  had  been  conceived  of  him.  This  happened  in  the 
year  Darius  Nothus  died. 

It  was  then  he  sacrificed  to  his  repose  and 
Aivt  ^6°4°04  security  every  thing  that  could  give  him  um- 
brage. He  knew  that  after  having  deprived  the 
Syracusans  of  all  that  was  most  dear  to  them,  he  could  not  fail 
of  incurring  their  utmost  hatred  ; and  the  fear  of  the  miseries 
he  had  to  expect  from  it,  increased  in  the  usurper,  in  propor- 
tion to  their  abhorrence  of  him.  He  looked  upon  all  his  new 
subjects  as  so  many  enemies,  and  believed  that  he  could  guard 
against  the  dangers  which  surrounded  him  on  all  sides,  and 
dogged  him  in  all  places,  only  by  cutting  off  one  part  of  the 
people,  to  intimidate  the  other.  He  did  not  perceive,  that  by 
adding  the  cruelty  of  executions  to  the  oppression  of  the  public, 
he  only  multiplied  his  enemies,  and  induced  them,  after  the  loss 
of  their  liberty,  to  preserve  at  least  their  own  lives  by  attempts 
upon  his. 

Dionysius,11  who  foresaw  that  the  Syracusans  would  not  fail 
to  take  advantage  of  the  repose,  in  which  the  treaty  lately  con- 
cluded with  the  Carthaginians  had  left  them,  to  attempt  the  re- 
establishment of  their  liberty,  neglected  nothing  on  his  side  to 
strengthen  his  power.  He  fortified  the  part  of  the  city  called 
the  Isle,  which  was  already  very  strong  from  the  nature  of  its 
situation,  and  might  be  defended  by  a moderate  garrison.  He 
surrounded  it  with  good  walls,  flanked  at  due  distances  with 
high  towers,  and  separated  it  in  that  manner  from  the  rest  of 
the  city.  To  these  works  he  added  a strong  citadel,  to  serve 
him  for  a retreat  and  refuge  in  case  of  accident ; and  caused 
a great  number  of  shops  and  piazzas  to  be  erected,  capable  of 
containing  a considerable  multitude  of  inhabitants. 

As  to  the  lands,  he  chose  out  the  best  of  them,  which  he  be- 
stowed upon  his  creatures  and  the  officers  of  his  appointing, 
and  distributed  the  rest  in  equal  proportion  amongst  the  citizens 
and  strangers,  including  amongst  the  former  the  slaves  who 
had  been  made  free.  He  divided  the  houses  in  the  same  man- 
ner, reserving  those  in  the  Isle  for  such  of  the  citizens  as  he 
could  most  confide  in,  and  for  his  strangers. 

After  having  taken  these  precautions  for  his  security,  he  be- 
gan to  think  of  subjecting  several  free  states  of  Sicily,  wrhich 
had  aided  the  Carthaginians.  He  began  with  the  siege  of 
Herbessus.  The  Syracusans  in  his  army,  seeing  their  swords 
in  their  hands,  thought  it  their  duty  to  use  them  for  the  re- 
establishment of  their  liberty.  At  a time  when  they  met  in 
throngs  to  concert  their  measures,  one  of  the  officers,  who  took 


« Diod.  p.  238.  241. 


320 


HISTORY  OF 


upon  him  to  reprove  them  in  harsh  terms,  was  killed  upon  the 
spot,  and  his  death  served  as  a signal  for  their  revolt.  They 
sent  immediately  to  iEtna  for  the  horse  who  had  retired  thither 
at  the  beginning  of  the  revolution.  Dionysius,  alarmed  at  this 
motion,  raised  the  siege,  and  marched  directly  to  Syracuse,  to 
keep  it  in  obedience.  The  revolters  followed  him  close,  and 
having  seized  upon  the  suburb  Epipolm,  barred  him  from  all 
communication  with  the  country.  Having  received  aid  from 
their  allies  both  by  sea  and  land,  they  set  a price  upon  the 
tyrant’s  head,  and  promised  the  freedom  of  the  city  to  such  of 
the  strangers  as  should  abandon  him.  A great  number  came 
over  to  them  ; whom  ihey  treated  with  the  utmost  favour  and 
humanity.  They  made  their  machines  advance,  and  battered 
the  walls  of  the  Isle  vigorously,  without  giving  Dionysius  the 
least  respite. 

The  tyrant,  finding  himself  reduced  to  ^extremities,  aban- 
doned by  the  greatest  part  of  the  strangers,  and  shut  up  on  the 
side  of  the  country,  assembled  his  friends  to  consult  with  them, 
rather  by  what  kind  of  death  he  should  put  a glorious  period 
to  his  career,  than  upon  the  means  of  saving  himself.  They 
endeavoured  to  inspire  him  with  new  courage,  and  were  divided 
in  their  opinions ; but  at  last  the  advice  of  Philistus  prevailed, 
which  was,  that  he  should  by  no  means  renounce  the  tyranny. 
Dionysius,  to  gain  time,  sent  deputies  to  the  revolters,  and 
demanded  permission  to  quit  the  place  with  his  adherents ; 
which  was  granted,  and  five  ships  were  allowed  him  to  transport 
his  followers  and  effects.  He  had,  however,  sent  despatches 
secretly  to  the  Campanians,  who  garrisoned  the  places  in  the 
possession  of  the  Carthaginians,  with  offers  of  considerable 
reward,  if  they  would  come  to  his  relief. 

The  Syracusans,  who,  after  the  treaty,  believed  their  busi- 
ness done,  and  the  tyrant  entirely  defeated,  had  disarmed  part 
of  their  troops,  and  the  rest  acted  with  great  indolence  and 
little  discipline.  The  arrival  of  the  Campanians,  to  the  number 
of  1200  horse,  infinitely  surprised  and  alarmed  the  city.  After 
having  beaten  such  as  disputed  their  passage,  they  opened 
themselves  a way  to  Dionysius.  At  the  same  time,  300  sol- 
diers more  arrived  to  his  assistance.  The  face  of  things  was 
then  entirely  altered,  and  terror  and  dejection  now  were  trans- 
ferred to  the  Syracusans.  Dionysius,  in  a sally,  drove  the 
Syracusans  vigorously  as  far  as  that  part  of  the  city  called 
Neapolis.  The  slaughter  was  not  very  considerable,  because 
he  had  given  orders  to  spare  those  that  fled.  He  caused  the 
dead  to  be  interred,  and  gave  those  who  had  retired  to  ./Etna 
to  understand,  that  they  might  return  with  entire  security,  pro- 
mising entirely  to  forget  the  past.  Many  came  to  Syracuse, 
but  others  did  not  think  it  advisable  to  confide  in  the  faith  of  a 


DIONYSIUS  THE  ELDER. 


321 


tyrant.  The  Campanians  were  rewarded  to  their  satisfaction, 
and  dismissed. 

The  Lacedaemonians  at  this  time  took  such  measures  in 
regard  to  Syracuse  as  were  most  unworthy  of  the  Spartan  name. 
They  had  lately  subverted  the  liberty  of  Athens,  and  declared 
publicly,  in  all  the  cities  dependant  upon  them,  against  popular 
government.  They  deputed  one  of  their  citizens  to  Syracuse, 
ostensibly  to  express  the  interest  they  took  in  the  misfortunes 
of  that  city,  and  to  offer  it  their  aid  ; but,  in  reality,  to  confirm 
Dionysius  in  his  resolution  of  supporting  himself  in  the 
tyranny ; expecting,  that  from  the  increase  of  his  power,  he 
would  prove  of  great  advantage  and  support  to  their  own. 

Dionysius  saw,  from  what  had  so  lately  happened  at  Syra- 
cuse, what  he  was  to  expect  from  the  people  for  the  future. 
Whilst  the  inhabitants  were  employed  abroad  in  gathering  in 
their  harvest,  he  entered  their  houses,  and  seized  upon  all  the 
arms  he  could  find.  He  afterwards  enclosed  the  citadel  with 
an  additional  wall,  fitted  out  abundance  of  ships,  armed  great 
numbers  of  strangers,  and  took  all  possible  measures  to  secure 
himself  against  the  disaffection  of  the  Syracusans. 

After  having  made  this  provision  for  his  safety  at  home,  he 
prepared  to  extend  his  conquests  abroad  ; from  whence  he 
proposed  to  himself  not  merely  the  increase  of  his  dominions 
and  revenues,  but  the  additional  advantage  of  diverting  his 
subjects  from  feeling  the  loss  of  their  liberty,  by  turning  their 
attention  towards  their  ancient  and  always  abhorred  enemy, 
and  by  employing  them  in  lofty  projects,  military  expeditions, 
and  glorious  exploits,  to  which  the  hopes  of  riches  and  plunder 
would  be  annexed.  He  relied  also  on  acquiring  by  this  means 
the  affection  of  his  troops,  and  on  securing  the  esteem  of  the 
people  by  the  grandeur  and  success  of  his  enterprises. 

Dionysius  wanted  neither  courage  nor  policy,  and  had  all  the 
qualities  of  a great  general.  He  took,  either  by  force  or  fraud, 
Naxcs,  Catana,  Leontium,  and  some  other  towns  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood of  Syracuse,0  which  for  that  reason  were  very  con- 
venient for  his  purposes.  Some  of  them  he  treated  with 
favour  and  clemency,  to  engage  the  esteem  and  confidence  of 
the  people : others  he  plundered,  to  strike  terror  into  the 
country.  The  inhabitants  of  Leontium  were  transplanted  to 
Syracuse. 

These  conquests  alarmed  the  neighbouring  cities,  which  saw 
themselves  threatened  with  the  same  misfortune.  Rhegium, 
situate  upon  the  opposite  coast  of  the  strait  which  divides  Sicily 
from  Italy,  prepared  to  prev  nt  it,  and  entered  into  an  alliance 
with  the  Syracusan  exiles,  who  were  very  numerous,  and  in- 
duced the  Messenians,  on  the  Sicilian  side  of  the  strait,  to  aid 
0 yEtna.  Enna. 

Y 


VOL.  III. 


322 


HISTORY  OF 


them  with  a powerful  supply.  They  had  levied  a considerable 
army,  and  were  upon  the  point  of  marching  against  the  tyrant, 
when  discord  arose  amongst  the  troops,  and  rendered  the  enter- 
prise abortive.  It  terminated  in  a treaty  of  peace  and  alliance 
between  Dionysius  and  the  two  cities. 

He  had  long  revolved  a great  design  in  his  mind — to  ruin  the 
Carthaginian  power  in  Sicily,  which  was  a great  obstacle  to  his 
own,  as  his  discontented  subjects  never  failed  of  finding  a se- 
cure refuge  in  the  towns  dependant  upon  that  nation.  The 
occurrence  of  a plague,  which  had  lately  ravaged  Carthage,  and 
extremely  diminished  its  strength,  seemed  to  supply  a favour- 
able opportunity  for  the  execution  of  his  design.  But,  as  a man 
of  ability,  he  knew  the  greatness  of  the  preparations  ought  to 
correspond  with  that  of  an  enterprise,  to  assure  the  success  of 
it ; and  he  took  his  measures  in  a manner  which  shows  the  ex- 
tent of  his  views  and  extraordinary  capacity.  He  therefore 
used  uncommon  pains  and  application ; conscious  that  the  war, 
into  which  he  was  going  to  enter  w ith  one  of  the  most  powerful 
nations  then  in  the  world,  might  be  of  long  duration,  and  be  at- 
tended with  consequences  of  the  utmost  importance. 

A M 3605  ^is  ^rst  care  Was  to  to  Syracuse,  as 

Ant.  J.  C.  399.  we^  fr°m  the  conquered  cities  in  Sicily  as  from 
Greece  and  Italy,  a great  number  of  artisans  and 
workmen  of  all  kinds,  whom  he  induced  to  come  thither  by  the 
lure  of  great  gain  and  reward,  the  certain  means  of  engaging 
the  most  skilful  persons  in  every  profession.  He  caused  an  in- 
finite number  of  arms  of  all  kinds  to  be  forged  ; swords,  jave- 
lins, lances,  partisans,  helmets,  cuirasses,  bucklers  ; all  after  the 
manner  of  the  nation  by  whom  they  were  to  be  worn.  He 
built  also  a great  number  of  galleys  that  had  from  three  to  five 
benches  of  rowers,  and  were  an  entirely  new  invention,  with 
abundance  of  barks  arid  other  vessels  for  the  transportation  of 
troops  and  provisions. 

The  whole  city  seemed  but  one  workshop,  and  continually 
resounded  with  the  noise  of  the  several  artisans.  Not  only  the 
porches  of  the  temples,  the  piazzas,  porticoes,  places  of  exercise, 
and  public  squares,  but  even  private  houses  of  any  extent,  were 
full  of  workmen.  Dionysius  had  distributed  them  with  admira- 
ble order.  Each  species  of  artists,  divided  by  streets  and  dis- 
tricts, had  their  overseers  and  inspectors,  who  by  their  presence 
and  direction  promoted  and  completed  the  works.  Dionysius 
himself  was  perpetually  amongst  the  workmen,  stimulating  and 
encouraging  them  by  praise  and  rewards,  in  proportion  to  their 
merit.  He  knew  how  to  confer  different  marks  of  honour  upon 
them,  according  as  they  distinguished  themselves  by  their  inge- 
nuity or  industry.  He  would  even  make  some  of  them  dine 
with  him  at  his  own  table,  where  he  entertained  them  with  the 


DIONYSIUS  THE  ELDER. 


323 


freedom  and  kindness  of  a friend.  It  is  justly  said  that  honour 
nourishes  the  arts  and  sciences,  p and  that  men  of  all  ranks  and 
conditions  are  animated  by  the  love  of  glory.  The  prince  who 
knows  how  to  put  the  two  great  springs  and  strongest  incentives 
of  the  human  soul,  interest  and  glory,  in  motion  under  proper 
regulations,  will  soon  make  all  arts  and  sciences  flourish  in  his 
kingdom,  and  fill  it  at  a small  expense  with  persons  who  excel 
in  every  profession.  And  this  happened  now  at  Syracuse, 
where  a single  person,  of  great  ability  in  the  art  of  governing, 
excited  such  ardour  and  emulation  amongst  the  artificers  as  it 
is  not  easy  to  imagine  or  describe. 

Dionysius  applied  himself  more  particularly  to  naval  affairs. 
He  knew  that  Corinth  had  invented  the  art  of  building  galleys 
with  three  and  five  benches  of  oars,  and  was  ambitious  of  ac- 
quiring for  Syracuse,  a Corinthian  colony,  the  glory  of  bringing 
that  invention  to  perfection  ; which  he  effected.  The  timber 
for  building  his  galleys  was  brought,  part  of  it  from  Italy,  where 
it  was  drawn  on  carriages  to  the  sea-side,  and  from  thence  ship- 
ped to  Syracuse,  and  part  from  mount  iEtna,  which  at  that  time 
produced  abundance  of  pine  and  fir-trees.  In  a short  time,  a 
fleet  of  200  galleys  was  seen  to  rise,  as  it  were,  all  at  once  out 
of  the  earth  ; and  100  others  formerly  built  were  refitted  by  his 
order  : he  caused  also  160  sheds  to  be  erected  within  the  great 
port,  each  capable  of  containing  two  galleys,  and  150  more  to 
be  repaired. 

The  sight  of  such  a fleet,  built  in  so  short  a time,  and  fitted 
out  with  so  much  magnificence,  would  have  given  reason  to  be- 
lieve that  all  Sicily  had  united  its  labours  and  revenues  in  ac- 
complishing so  great  and  expensive  a work.  On  the  other  side, 
the  view  of  such  an  incredible  quantity  of  arms  newly  made, 
would  have  inclined  one  to  think  that  Dionysius  had  solely  em- 
ployed himself  in  providing  them,  and  had  exhausted  his  trea- 
sures in  the  expense.  They  consisted  of  140,000  shields,  and 
as  many  helmets  and  swords  ; and  upwards  of  14,000  cuirasses, 
finished  with  all  the  art  and  elegance  imaginable.  They  were 
intended  for  the  horse,  for  the  tribunes  and  centurions  of  the 
foot,  and  for  the  foreign  troops  who  bad  the  guard  of  his  per- 
son. Darts,  arrows,  and  lances,  were  innumerable and  en- 
gines and  machines  of  war  in  proportion  to  the  rest  of  the 
preparations. 

This  fleet  was  to  be  manned  by  an  equal  number  of  citizens 
and  strangers.  Dionysius  did  not  think  of  raising  troops  till  all 
his  preparations  were  complete.  Syracuse  and  the  cities  in  its 
dependance  supplied  him  with  part  of  his  forces.  Many  came 
from  Greece,  and  especially  from  Sparta.  The  considerable  pay 


p Honos  alit  artes,  omnesque  incenduntur  ad  studia  gloria. 
Quasi.  1.  i.  n.  4. 


Y 2 


Cic.  Tusc. 


324 


HISTORY  OF 


he  offered  brought  soldiers  in  crowds  from  all  parts  to  enlist  in 
his  service. 

He  omitted  none  of  the  precautions  necessary  to  ensure  the 
success  of  his  enterprise  ; the  importance  as  well  as  difficulty  of 
w7hich  was  well  known  to  him.  He  was  not  ignorant  that  every 
thing  depends  upon  the  zeal  and  affection  of  the  troops  for  their 
general,  and  applied  himself  particularly  to  gain  the  hearts,  not 
of  his  own  subjects  only,  but  of  all  the  inhabitants  of  Sicily,  and 
was  wonderfully  successful  in  his  attempts.  He  had  entirely 
changed  his  behaviour  for  some  time. . Kindness,  courtesy,  cle- 
mency, a disposition  to  do  good,  and  an  obliging  and  insinuating 
deportment  to  all,  had  tak£n  place  of  that  haughty  and  impe- 
rious air  and  inhumanity,  which  had  rendered  him  so  odious.  He 
was  so  entirely  altered,  that  he  did  not  seem  to  be  the  same  man. 

Whilst  he  was  hastening  his  preparations  for  war,  and  stu- 
dying to  attain  his  subjects’  affections,  he  meditated  an  alliance 
with  two  powerful  cities,  Rhegium  and  Messina,  which  were 
capable  of  disconcerting  his  great  designs  by  a formidable  di- 
version. The  league  formed  against  him  by  those  cities  some 
time  before,  though  without  any  effect,  gave  him  some  uneasi- 
ness. He  therefore  thought  it  necessary  to  make  syre  of  the 
amity  of  them  both.  He  presented  the  inhabitants  of  Messina 
with  a considerable  quantity  of  land,  which  was  situate  in  their 
neighbourhood,  and  lay  very  commodiously  for  them.  To  give 
the  people  of  Rhegium  an  instance  of  his  esteem  and  regard  for 
them,  he  sent  ambassadors  to  desire  that  they  would  give  him 
one  of  their  citizens  in  marriage.  He  had  lost  his  first  wife  in 
the  popular  commotion,  of  which  mention  has  already  been 
made. 

Dionysius,  sensible  that  nothing  establishes  a throne  more 
effectually  than  the  prospect  of  a successor,  who  may  enter  into 
the  same  designs,  have  the  same  interests,  pursue  the  same 
plan,  and  observe  the  same  maxims  of  government,  took  the  op- 
portunity of  the  present  tranquillity  of  his  affairs  to  contract  a 
double  marriage,  in  order  to  have  a successor,  to  whom  he 
might  transfer  the  sovereignty  which  had  cost  him  so  many  toils 
and  dangers  to  acquire. 

The  people  of  Rhegium,  to  whom  Dionysius  had  first  applied, 
having  called  a council  to  take  his  demand  into  consideration, 
after  a long  debate  came  to  a resolution  not  to  contract  any  al- 
liance with  a tyrant ; and  for  their  final  answer  returned,  that 
they  had  only  the  hangman’s  daughter  to  give  him.  The  rail- 
lery was  keen,  and  cut  deep.  We  shall  see  in  the  sequel  how 
dear  that  city  paid  for  their  jest. 

The  Locrians,  to  whom  Dionysius  sent  the  same  ambassadors, 
did  not  show  themselves  so  difficult  and  delicate,  but  sent  him 
for  a wife  Doris,  the  daughter  of  one  of  their  most  illustrious 


DIONYSIUS  THE  ELDER. 


325 


citizens.  He  caused  her  to  be  brought  from  Locris  in  a galley 
with  five  benches  of  rowers,  of  extraordinary  magnificence, 
and  glittering  in  every  part  with  gold  and  silver.  He  mar- 
ried, at  the  same  time,  Aristomache,  daughter  of  Hipparinus, 
the  most  considerable  and  powerful  of  the  citizens  of  Syra- 
cuse, and  sister  of  Dion,  of  whom  much  will  be  said  here- 
after. She  was  brought  to  his  palace  in  a chariot  drawn  by 
four  white  horses,  which  was  then  a singular  mark  of  distinction. 
The  nuptials  of  both  were  celebrated  the  same  day  with  uni- 
versal rejoicings  throughout  the  whole  city,  and  attended  with 
feasts  and  presents  of  incredible  magnificence. 

It  was  contrary  to  the  manners  and  universal  custom  of  the 
western  nations,  from  the  earliest  times,  that  he  espoused  two 
wives  at  once  : taking  in  this,  as  in  every  thing  else,  the  liberty 
assumed  by  tyrants,  of  setting  themselves  above  all  laws. 

Dionysius  seemed  to  have  an  equal  affection  for  the  two 
wives,  without  giving  the  preference  to  either,  to  remove  all 
cause  of  jealousy  and  discord.  The  people  of  Syracuse  report- 
ed that  he  preferred  his  own  countrywoman  to  the  foreigner ; 
but  the  latter  had  the  good  fortune  first  to  bring  her  husband  a 
son,  which  supported  him  not  a little  against  the  cabals  and  in- 
trigues of  the  Syracusans.  Aristomache  was  a long  time  with- 
out any  symptoms  of  pregnancy ; though  Dionysius  desired  so> 
earnestly  to  have  issue  by  her,  that  he  put  the  mother  of  his 
Locrian  wife  to  death,  accusing  her  of  hindering  Aristomache 
from  conceiving,  by  witchcraft  and  sorcery. 

Aristomache’s  brother  was  the  celebrated  Dion,  who  was 
in  great  estimation  with  Dionysius.  He  was  at  first  obliged 
for  his  credit  to  his  sister’s  favour ; but  having  afterwards 
given  proofs  of  his  great  capacity  in  many  instances,  his  own 
merit  made  him  much  beloved  and  regarded  by  the  tyrant. 
Amongst  the  other  marks  which  Dionysius  gave  him  of  his  con- 
fidence, he  ordered  his  treasurers  to  supply  him,  without  farther 
✓orders,  with  whatever  money  he  should  demand,  provided  they 
informed  him  the  very  same  day  what  they" had  given  him. 

Dion  had  naturally  a great  and  noble  soul.  A happy  acci- 
dent had  conduced  to  inspire  and  confirm  in  him  the  most  ele- 
vated sentiments.  A kind  of  chance,  or  rather,  as  Plutarch 
says,  a peculiar  providence,  which  laid  at  a distance  the  foun- 
dations of  the  liberty  of  Syracuse,  brought  Plato,  the  most 
celebrated  of  philosophers,  to  that  city.  Dion  became  his 
friend  and  disciple,  and  made  great  improvements  from  his 
lessons  ; for,  though  brought  up  in  a luxurious  and  voluptuous 
court,  where  the  supreme  good  was  made  to  consist  in  pleasure 
and  magnificence,  he  had  no  sooner  heard  the  precepts  of  his 
new  master,  and  imbibed  a taste  of  the  philosophy  that  incul- 
cates virtue,  than  his  soul  was  inflamed  with  the  love  of  it. 


326 


HISTORY  OF 


Plato,  in  one  of  his  letters,  gives  this  glorious  testimony  of 
him  ; that  he  had  never  met  with  a young  man  upon  whom  his 
discourses  made  so  great  an  impression,  or  who  had  compre- 
hended his  principles  with  so  much  quickness  and  vivacity. 

As  Dion  was  young  and  inexperienced,  observing  the  facility 
with  which  Plato  had  changed  his  taste  and  inclinations,  he 
imagined,  with  simplicity  enough,  that  the  same  reasons  would 
have  the  same  effects  upon  the  mind  of  Dionysius  ; and  with 
this  view  could  not  rest  till  he  had  prevailed  upon  the  tyrant  to 
hear  and  converse  with  him.  Dionysius  consented  : but  the 
lust  of  tyrannic  power  had  taken  too  deep  a root  in  his  heart  to 
be  ever  eradicated  from  it.  It  was  like  an  indelible  dye,  * that 
had  penetrated  his  inmost  soul,  from  whence  it  was  impossible 
ever  to  efface  it. 

Though  the  stay  of  Plato  at  the  court  made  no  alteration  in 
Dionysius, r the  latter  still  continued  to  give  Dion  the  same 
marks  of  his  esteem  and  confidence,  and  even  to  endure,  with- 
out taking  offence,  the  freedom  with  which  he  spoke  to  him. 
Dionysius,  ridiculing  one  day  the  government  of  Gelon,  for- 
merly king  of  Syracuse,  and  saying,  in  allusion  to  his  name, 
that  he  had  been  the  laughing  stock  of  Sicily, s the  whole  court 
greatly  admired,  and  took  no  small  pains  to  praise  the  quaint- 
ness and  delicacy  of  the  conceit,  insipid  and  flat  as  it  was,  and, 
indeed,  as  puns  and  quibbles  generally  are.  Dion  took  it  in  a 
serious  sense,  and  was  so  bold  as  to  represent  to  him  that  he 
was  in  the  wrong  to  talk  in  that  manner  of  a prince  whose  wise 
and  equitable  conduct  had  been  the  model  of  a perfect  govern- 
ment, and  given  the  Syracusans  a favourable  opinion  of  mon- 
archical power.  You  reign,  added  he,  and  are  trusted,  for 
Gelon' s sake  ; hut  for  your  sake,  no  man  will  ever  he  trusted 
after  you.  It  was  much  that  a tyrant  should  suffer  himself  to 
be  talked  to  in  such  a manner  with  impunity. 

SECT.  III. 

Dionysius  declares  war  against  the  Carthaginians.  Various  success  of  it. 
Syracuse  reduced  to  extremities,  and  soon  after  delivered.  New  commo- 
tions against  Dionysius.^  Defeat  of  Imilco,  and  afterwards  of  Mago.  Un- 
happy fate  of  the  city  of  Rhegium. 

Dionysius,  seeing  his  great  preparations  were  now  complete, 
and  that  he  was  in  a condition  to  take  the  field  publicly, 
opened  his  design  to  the  Syracusans,  in  order  to  interest  them 
the  more  in  the  success  of  the  enterprise,  and  told  them  that 

q Trjv  ficKprjv  ovk  avuvra  rrjg  rvp avvidog,  sv  7roXX<p  xpovqt  Sevcroirotdv  ovaav  Kai 
SvGeK7r\vTov.  Ap opaiovg  fie  ovrag  tri  del  rdv  %p»j<T t&v  avn\ap.(3avt<r0ai  \oyu>v . 
Plut.  in  Moral,  p.  779.  r Plot.  p.  960. 

* TlXwe  signifies  laughing-stock. 


DIONYSIUS  THE  ELDER, 


327 


it  was  his  intention  to  make  war  against  the  Carthaginians. 
He  represented  that  people  as  the  perpetual  and  inveterate 
enemy  of  the  Greeks,  and  especially  of  those  who  inhabited 
Sicily ; that  the  plague  which  had  lately  wasted  Carthage,  af- 
forded a favourable  opportunity,  which  ought  not  to  be  neg- 
lected ; that  the  people  in  subjection  to  such  severe  masters, 
waited  only  the  signal  to  declare  against  them  ; that  it  would 
be  glorious  for  Syracuse  to  reinstate  the  Grecian  cities  in  their 
liberty,  after  having  so  long  groaned  under  the  yoke  of  the 
barbarians ; that,  in  declaring  war  at  present  against  the  Car- 
thaginians, they  only  anticipated  them  by  a short  time;  since, 
as  soon  as  they  had  retrieved  their  losses,  they  would  not  fail 
to  attack  Syracuse  with  all  their  forces. 

The  assembly  were  unanimous  in  opinion.  Their  ancient  and 
natural  hatred  of  the  barbarians  ; their  anger  and  resentment 
against  them  for  having  given  Syracuse  a master  ; and  the  hope 
that  with  arms  in  their  hands  they  might  find  some  occasion 
of  recovering  their  liberty,  united  them  in  their  suffrages.  The 
war  was  resolved  without  any  opposition,  and  it  began  that 
very  instant.  There  were  at  Syracuse,  as  well  in  the  city  as  the 
port,  a great  number  of  Carthaginians,  who,  relying  upon  the 
faith  of  treaties  and  the  peace,  exercised  traffic,  and  thought 
themselves  in  security.  The  populace  by  Dionysius’s  authority, 
upon  the  breaking  up  of  the  assembly,  ran  to  their  houses  and 
ships,  plundered  their  goods,  and  carried  off  their  effects. 
They  met  with  the  same  treatment  throughout  Sicily ; and 
murders  and  massacres  were  added  to  this  pillage  by  way  of 
reprisal  for  the  many  cruelties  committed  by  the  barbarians  upon 
those  they  conquered,  and  to  show  them  what  they  had  to  ex- 
pect if  they  continued  to  make  war  with  the  same  inhumanity. 

After  this  bloody  execution,  Dionysius  sent 
Ant.  ^J.  a°397.a  letter  by  a herald  to  Carthage,  in  which  he 
signified  that  the  Syracusans  declared  war  against 
the  Carthaginians,  if  they  did  not  withdraw  their  garrisons  from 
all  the  Grecian  cities  held  by  them  in  Sicily.  The  reading  of 
this  letter,  which  took  place  first  in  the  senate  and  afterwards 
in  the  assembly  of  the  people,  occasioned  an  uncommon  alarm, 
as  the  pestilence  had  reduced  the  city  to  a deplorable  condition. 
However,  they  were  not  dismayed,  and  prepared  for  a vigorous 
defence.  They  raised  troops  with  the  utmost  diligence,  and 
Imilco  set  out  immediately  to  put  himself  at  the  head  of  the 
Carthaginian  army  in  Sicily. 

Dionysius,  on  his  side,  lost  no  time,  and  took  the  field  with 
his  army,  which  daily  increased  by  the  arrival  of  new  troops, 
who  came  to  join  him  from  all  parts.  It  amounted  to  80,000 
foot  and  3000  horse.  The  fleet  consisted  of  200  galleys,  and 
500  barks  laden  with  provisions  and  machines  of  war.  He 


328 


HISTORY  OF 


opened  the  campaign  with  the  siege  of  Motya,  a fortified  town 
belonging  to  the  Carthaginians  near  mount  Eryx,  in  a little  island 
something  more  than  a quarter  of  a league  from  the  continent,4 
to  which  it  was  joined  by  a small  neck  of  land,  which  the  be- 
sieged immediately  cut  through,  to  prevent  the  approaches  of 
the  enemy  on  that  side. 

Dionysius  having  left  the  care  of  the  siege  to  Leptines,  who 
commanded  the  fleet,  went  with  his  land  forces  to  attack  the 
places  in  alliance  with  the  Carthaginians.  Terrified  by  the  ap- 
proach of  so  numerous  an  army,  they  all  surrendered  except 
live  ; which  were  Ancyra,  Solos,  Palermo,11  Segesta,  and  En- 
tella.  The  last  two  places  he  besieged. 

Imilco,  however,  to  make  a diversion,  detached  ten  galleys 
of  his  fleet,  with  orders  to  attack  and  surprise  in  the  night  all 
the  vessels  which  remained  in  the  port  of  Syracuse.  The  com- 
mander of  this  expedition  entered  the  port  according  to  his 
orders,  without  meeting  with  resistance  ; and  after  having  sunk 
a great  part  of  the  vessels  which  he  found  there,  retired  well 
satisfied  with  the  success  of  his  enterprise. 

Dionysius,  after  having  wasted  the  enemy’s  country,  return- 
ed, and  sat  down  with  his  whole  army  before  Motya : and 
having  employed  a great  number  of  hands  in  making  causeways 
and  moles,  he  restored  the  neck  of  land,  and  brought  forward 
his  engines  on  that  side.  The  place  was  attacked  with  the 
utmost  vigour,  and  equally  well  defended.  After  the  besiegers 
had  passed  the  breach  and  entered  the  city,  the  besieged  per- 
sisted a great  while  in  defending  themselves  with  incredible 
valour ; so  that  it  was  necessary  to  pursue  and  drive  them 
from  house  to  house.  The  soldiers,  enraged  at  so  obstinate  a 
defence,  put  all  before  them  to  the  sword  ; age,  youth,  women, 
children,  nothing  was  spared,  except  those  who  had  taken  re- 
fuge in  the  temples.  The  town  was  abandoned  to  the  soldiers’ 
discretion  ; Dionysius  being  pleased  with  an  occasion  of  attach- 
ing the  troops  to  his  service  by  the  allurement  and  hope  of 
gain. 

The  Carthaginians  made  an  extraordinary  effort  the  next 
year,  and  raised  an  army  of  300,000  foot  and  4000  horse. 
The  fleet  under  Mago’s  command  consisted  of  400  galleys,  and 
upwards  of  600  vessels  laden  with  provisions  and  engines  of 
war.  Imilco  had  given  the  captains  of  the  fleet  his  orders 
sealed  up,  which  were  not  to  be  opened  till  they  were  out  at 
sea.  He  had  taken  this  precaution,  that  his  designs  might  be 
kept  secret,  and  to  prevent  spies  from  sending  information  of 
them  to  Sicily.  The  rendezvous  was  at  Palermo  ; where  the 
fleet  arrived  without  much  loss  in  their  passage.  Imilco  took 
Eryx  by  treachery,  and  soon  after  compelled  Motya  to  sur- 
1 Six  Stadia  or  furlongs.  # u Panormus. 


DIONYSIUS  THE  ELDER. 


329 


render.  Messina  seemed  to  him  a place  of  importance  ; be- 
cause it  might  favour  the  landing  of  troops  from  Italy  in  Sicily, 
and  bar  the  passage  of  those  that  should  come  from  Pelopon- 
nesus. After  a long  and  vigorous  defence  it  fell  into  his  hands, 
and  some  time  after  he  entirely  demolished  it. 

Dionysius,  seeing  his  forces  extremely  inferior  to  the  enemy, 
retired  to  Syracuse.  Almost  all  the  people  of  Sicily,  who  hated 
him  from  the  beginning,  and  were  only  reconciled  to  him  in 
appearance  and  out  of  fear,  took  this  occasion  to  quit  his  party, 
and  to  join  the  Carthaginians.  The  tyrant  levied  new  troops, 
and  gave  the  slaves  their  liberty,  that  they  might  serve  on 
board  the  fleet.  His  army  amounted  to  30,000  foot  and  3000 
horse,  and  his  fleet  to  180  galleys.  With  these  forces  he  took 
the  field,  and  removed  about  eight  leagues  from  Syracuse. 
Imilco  continued  to  advance  with  his  land  army,  followed  by 
his  fleet,  that  kept  near  the  coast.  When  he  arrived  at  Naxos, 
he  could  not  continue  his  march  along  the  sea-side,  and  was 
obliged  to  take  a long  compass  round  mount  iEtna,  which,  by 
a new  eruption,  had  set  the  country  about  it  on  fire,  and  cover- 
ed it  with  ashes.  He  ordered  his  fleet  to  wait  his  coming  up 
at  Catana.  Dionysius,  apprised  of  this,  thought  the  opportu- 
nity favourable  for  attacking  it,  whilst  separated  from  the  land 
forces,  and  whilst  his  own,  drawn  up  in  battle  upon  the  shore, 
might  be  of  service  to  animate  and  support  his  fleet.  The 
scheme  was  wisely  concerted,  but  the  success  not  answerable 
to  it.  Leptines,  his  admiral,  having  advanced  inconsiderately 
with  thirty  galleys,  contrary  to  the  opinion  of  Dionysius,  who 
had  particularly  recommended  to  him  not  to  divide  his  forces, 
at  first  sank  several  of  the  enemy’s  ships,  but,  upon  being  sur- 
rounded by  the  greater  number,  was  forced  to  fly.  His  whole 
fleet  followed  his  example,  and  was  warmly  pursued  by  the 
Carthaginians.  Mago  despatched  boats  full  of  soldiers,  with 
orders  to  kill  all  that  endeavoured  to  save  themselves  by  swim- 
ming to  shore.  The  land  army  drawn  up  there,  saw  them 
perish  miserably,  without  being  able  to  give  them  any  assist- 
ance. The  loss  on  the  side  of  the  Sicilians  was  very  great, 
more  than  100  galleys  being  either  taken  or  sunk,  and  20,000 
men  perishing  either  in  the  battle  or  the  flight. 

The  Sicilians,  who  were  afraid  to  shut  themselves  up  in 
Syracuse,  where  they  could  not  fail  of  being  besieged  very 
soon,  solicited  Dionysius  to  lead  them  against  Imilco,  whom 
so  bold  an  enterprise  might  disconcert ; besides  which,  they 
should  find  his  troops  fatigued  with  their  long  and  forced  march. 
The  proposal  pleased  him  at  first;  but  upon  reflecting  that 
Mago,  with  the  victorious  fleet,  might  in  the  mean  time  advance 
and  take  Syracuse,  he  thought  it  more  advisable  to  return 
thither;  which  was  the  occasion  of  his  losing  abundance  of  his 


330 


HISTORY  OF 


troops,  who  deserted  in  numbers  on  all  sides.  Imilco,  after  a 
march  of  two  days,  arrived  at  Catana,  where  he  halted  some 
days  to  refresh  his  army,  and  refit  his  fleet,  which  had  suffered 
exceedingly  by  a violent  storm. 

He  then  marched  to  Syracuse, x and  made  his  fleet  enter  the 
port  in  triumph.  More  than  200  galleys,  adorned  with  the 
spoils  of  the  enemy,  made  a noble  appearance  as  they  ad- 
vanced ; the  crews  forming  a kind  of  concert  by  the  uniform 
and  regular  order  they  observed  in  the  motion  of  their  oars. 
They  were  followed  by  an  infinite  number  of  smaller  vessels ; 
so  that  the  port,  vast  as  it  was,  was  scarcely  capable  of  con- 
taining them,  the  whole  sea  being  in  a manner  covered  with 
sails.  At  the  same  time  on  the  other  side  appeared  the  land 
army,  composed,  as  has  been  said,  of  300,000  foot  and  4000 
horse.  Imilco  pitched  his  tent  in  the  temple  of  Jupiter,  and 
the  army  encamped  round,  at  somewhat  more  than  half  a 
league’s  distance  from  the  city.?  It  is  easy  to  judge  the  con- 
sternation and  alarm  with  which  such  a prospect  inspired  the 
Syracusans.  The  Carthaginian  general  advanced  with  his 
troops  to  the  walls  to  offer  the  Syracusans  battle,  and  at  the 
same  time  seized  upon  the  two  remaining  ports  by  a detachment 
of  100  galleys/  As  he  saw  that  the  Syracusans  did  not  make 
the  least  movement,  he  retired,  contented  for  the  present  with 
the  enemy’s  avowal  of  their  weakness.  For  thirty  days  toge- 
ther he  laid  waste  the  country,  cutting  down  all  the  trees,  and 
destroying  all  before  him.  He  then  made  himself  master  of 
the  suburb  called  Achradina,  and  plundered  the  temples  of  Ceres 
and  Proserpine.  Foreseeing  that  the  siege  might  probably  be 
of  long  duration,  he  intrenched  his  camp,  and  enclosed  it  with 
strong  walls,  after  having  demolished  for  that  purpose  all  the 
tombs,  and  amongst  others,  that  of  Gelon  and  his  wife  Dema- 
rata,  which  was  a most  magnificent  monument.  He  built  three 
forts  at  some  distance  from  each  other  ; the  first  at  Plemmy- 
rium  ; the  second  towards  the  middle  of  the  port ; the  third 
near  the  temple  of  Jupiter  ; in  order  to  secure  his  magazines 
of  corn  and  wine.  He  sent  also  a great  number  of  small  ves- 
sels to  Sardinia  and  Africa  to  fetch  provisions. 

At  the  same  time  arrived  Polyxenus,  whom  his  brother-in-law 
Dionysius  had  despatched  at  the  beginning  of  the  war  into 
Italy  and  Greece  for  all  the  aid  he  could  obtain,  and  he 
brought  with  him  a fleet  of  thirty  ships,  commanded  by  Phara- 
cides  a Lacedtemonian.  This  reinforcement  came  very  sea- 
sonably, and  gave  the  Syracusans  new  spirit.  Upon  seeing  a 
bark  laden  with  provisions  for  the  enemy,  they  detached  five  gal- 
leys, and  took  it.  The . Carthaginians  gave  them  chase  with 

* Diod.  p.  285.  298.  ? Twelve  stadia. 

z The  little  port  and  that  of  Trogilus. 


tUONYSIUS  THE  ELDER. 


331 


forty  sail ; the  Syracusans  advanced  with  their  whole  fleet,  and 
in  the  battle  made  themselves  masters  of  the  admiral-galley, 
damaged  many  others,  took  twenty-four,  pursued  the  rest  to  the 
place  where  their  whole  fleet  rode,  and  offered  them  battle  a 
second  time,  which  the  Carthaginians,  discouraged  by  the  check 
they  had  received,  were  afraid  to  accept. 

The  Syracusans,  emboldened  by  so  unexpected  a victory,  re- 
turned to  the  city  with  the  galleys  they  had  taken,  and  entered 
it  in  a kind  of  triumph.  Animated  by  this  success,  which  could 
be  only  ascribed  to  their  valour,  (for  Dionysius  was  then  absent 
with  a small  detachment  of  their  fleet  to  procure  provisions,  at- 
tended by  Lep tines,)  they  encouraged  each  other,  and  seeing 
themselves  with  arms  in  their  hands,  they  reproached  one  an- 
other with  cowardice,  ardently  exclaiming,  that  the  time  was 
come  for  throwing  off*  the  shameful  yoke  of  servitude,  and  re- 
suming their  ancient  liberty. 

Whilst  they  were  in  the  midst  of  these  discourses,  dispersed 
in  small  parties,  the  tyrant  arrived  ; and  having  summoned  an 
assembly,  he  congratulated  the  Syracusans  upon  their  late  vic- 
tory, and  promised  in  a short  time  to  put  an  end  to  the  war, 
and  deliver  them  from  the  enemy.  He  was  going  to  dismiss 
the  assembly,  when  Theodorus,  one  of  the  most  illustrious  of 
the  citizens,  a person  of  sense  and  valour,  took  upon  him  to 
speak,  and  to  declare  boldly  for  liberty.  We  are  told,  said  he, 
of  restoring  peace,  terminating  the  war,  and  of  being  delivered 
from  the  enemy.  What  signifies  such  language  from  Dionysius  ? 
Can  ive  consider  as  peace  the  wretched  state  of  slavery  to 
which  he  has  reduced  us  ? Have  we  any  enemy  more  to  be 
dreaded  than  the  tyrant  that  subverts  our  liberty,  or  a war 
more  cruel  than  that  he  has  made  upon  us  for  so  many  years  ? 
Let  Imilco  conquer,  he  ivill  content  himself  with  laying  a tri- 
bute upon  us,  and  leave  us  the  exercise  of  our  laws  ,*  but  the 
tyrant  that  enslaves  us,  knows  no  other  than  his  avarice,  his 
cruelty,  his  ambition  ! The  temples  of  the  gods  robbed  by  his 
sacrilegious  hands,  our  goods  made  a prey,  and  our  lands 
abandoned  to  his  instruments,  our  persons  daily  exposed  to  the 
most  shameful  and  cruel  treatment,  the  blood  of  so  many  citi- 
zens shed  in  the  midst  of  us,  and  before  our  eyes  ; these  Ure  the 
fruits  of  his  reign,  and  thepeq.ce  he  obtains  for  us  ! Was  it  for 
the  support  of  our  liberties  he  built  yon  citadel  ? that  he  has 
enclosed  it  with  such  strong  walls  and  high  towers,  and  has 
called  in  for  his  guard  that  tribe  of  strangers  and  barbarians 
who  insult  us  with  impunity  ? How  long,  O Syracusans , 
shall  we  suffer  such  indignities,  more  insupportable  to  the 
brave  and  generous  than  death  itself  ? Bold  and  intrepid 
against  the  enemy  abroad,  shall  we  always  tremble  like  cowards 
in  the  presence  of  a tyrant  ? Providence,  which  has  again  put 


332 


HISTORY  OF 


arms  into  our  hands,  directs  us  what  use  to  make  of  them ! 
Sparta,  and  the  other  cities  in  our  alliance,  who  glory  in  being 
free  and  independent,  would  deem  us  unworthy  of  the  Grecian 
name  if  we  had  any  other  sentiments.  Let  us  show  that  we  do 
not  degenerate  from  our  ancestors.  If  Dionysius  consents  to 
retire  from  amongst  us,  let  us  open  him  our  gates,  and  let  him 
take  along  with  him  whatever  he  pleases ; but  if  he  persists  in  the 
tyranny , let  him  experience  what  effects  the  love  of  liberty  has 
upon  the  brave  and  resolute. 

After  this  speech,  all  the  Syracusans,  in  suspense  betwixt 
hope  and  fear,  looked  earnestly  upon  their  allies,  and  particularly 
upon  the  Spartans.  Pharacides,  who  commanded  their  fleet, 
rose  up  to  speak.  It  was  expected  that  a citizen  of  Sparta 
would  declare  in  favour  of  liberty  ; but  he  did  quite  the  reverse: 
and  told  them  that  his  republic  had  sent  him  to  aid  the  Syracu- 
sans and  Dionysius  against  the  Carthaginians,  and  not  to  make 
war  upon  Dionysius,  or  to  subvert  his  authority.  This  answer 
confounded  the  Syracusans,  and  the  tyrant’s  guard  arriving  at 
the  same  time,  the  assembly  broke  up.  Dionysius  perceiving 
more  than  ever  what  he  had  to  fear,  used  all  his  endeavours  to 
ingratiate  himself  with  the  people,  and  to  attach  the  citizens  to 
his  interests ; making  presents  to  some,  inviting  others  to  eat 
with  him,  and  affecting  upon  all  occasions  to  treat  them  with 
kindness  and  familiarity. 

It  was  probably'  about  this  time,a  that  Polyxenus,  Dionysius’s 
brother-in-law,  who  had  married  his  sister  Thesta,  having  with- 
out doubt  declared  against  him  in  this  conspiracy,  fled  from 
Sicily  for  the  preservation  of  his  life,  and  to  avoid  falling  into 
the  tyrant’s  hands.  Dionysius  sent  for  his  sister,  and  bitterly 
reproached  her  for  not  apprising  him  of  her  husband’s  intended 
flight,  as  she  could  not  be  ignorant  of  it.  She  replied,  without 
expressing  the  least  surprise  or  fear.  Have  I then  appeared  to 
you  so  bad  a wife,  and  of  so  mean  a soul,  as  to  have  abandoned 
my  husband  in  his  flight,  had  I been  acquainted  with  his  design, 
and  not  to  have  desired  to  share  in  his  dangers  and  misfortunes  ? 
No ! I knew  nothing  of  it,  or  1 should  have  been  much  happier 
in  being  called  in  all  places  the  wife  of  Polyxenus  the  exile,  than, 
in  Syracuse,  the  sister  of  the  tyrant.  Dionysius  could  not  but 
admire  an  answer  so  full  of  spirit  and  generosity  ; and  the  Sy- 
racusans in  general  were  so  charmed  with  her  virtue,  that  after 
the  tyranny  was  suppressed,  the  same  honours,  equipage,  and 
train  of  a queen,  which  she  had  before,  were  continued  to  her 
during  her  life ; and  after  her  death,  the  whole  people  attended 
her  body  to  the  tomb,  and  honoured  her  funeral  with  an  extraor- 
dinary concourse. 

On  the  side  of  the  Carthaginians,  affairs  began  to  take  a new 
a Plut  ill  Dion.  p.  9G6. 


DIONYSIUS  THE  ELDER. 


333 


appearance  on  a sudden.  They  had  committed  an  irretrievable 
error  in  not  attacking  Syracuse  upon  their  arrival,  and  in  not 
taking  advantage  of  the  consternation  which  the  sight  of  their 
fleet  and  army,  equally  formidable,  had  occasioned.  At  present 
the  plague,  which  was  looked  upon  as  a punishment  sent  from 
heaven  for  their  plundering  of  temples  and  demolishing  of 
tombs,  had  destroyed  great  numbers  of  their  army  in  a short 
time.  I have  described  the  extraordinary  symptoms  of  it  in  the 
history  of  the  Carthaginians. b To  add  to  that  misfortune,  the 
Syracusans,  being  informed  of  their  unhappy  condition,  attack- 
ed them  in  the  night  by  sea  and  land.  The  surprise,  and  ter- 
ror, and  even  haste  they  were  in,  to  put  themselves  into  a pos- 
ture of  defence,  threw  them  into  new  difficulty  and  confusion. 
They  knew  not  on  which  side  to  send  relief ; all  being  equally 
in  danger.  Many  of  their  vessels  were  sunk,  and  others  almost 
entirely  disabled,  and  a much  greater  number  destroyed  by  fire. 
The  old  men,  women,  and  children,  ran  in  crowds  to  the  walls, 
to  be  witnesses  of  that  scene  of  horror,  and  lifted  up  their  hands 
towards  heaven,  returning  thanks  to  the  gods  for  so  signal  a 
protection  of  their  city.  The  slaughter  within  and  without  the 
camp,  and  on  board  the  vessels,  was  great  and  dreadful,  and 
ended  only  with  the  day. 

Imilco,  reduced  to  despair,  offered  Dionysius  secretly  300,000 
crowns c for  permission  to  retire  in  the  night  with  the  remains  of 
his  army  and  fleet.  The  tyrant,  who  was  not  displeased  with 
leaving  the  Carthaginians  some  resource,  to  keep  his  subjects  in 
continual  awe,  gave  his  consent ; but  only  for  the  citizens  of 
Carthage.  Upon  which  Imilco,  four  days  after,  set  out  with 
forty  ships,  filled  with  Carthaginians  alone  ; leaving  the  rest  of 
his  troops  behind.  The  Corinthians,  discovering  from  the  noise 
and  motion  of  the  galleys  that  Imilco  was  making  off,  sent  to 
inform  Dionysius  of  his  flight,  who  affected  ignorance  of  it,  and 
gave  immediate  orders  to  pursue  him ; but  as  they  saw  that 
those  orders  were  but  slowly  executed,  they  followed  the  enemy 
themselves,  and  sunk  several  vessels  of  their  rear  guard. 

Dionysius  then  marched  out  with  his  troops  ; but  before  their 
arrival,  the  Sicilians  in  the  Carthaginian  service  had  retired  to 
their  several  countries.  Having  first  posted  troops  in  all  the 
passes,  he  advanced  directly  to  the  enemy’s  camp,  though  it 
was  not  quite  day.  The  barbarians,  who  saw  themselves  cruelly 
abandoned  and  betrayed  by  Imilco  and  the  Sicilians,  lost  cour- 
age and  fled.  Some  of  them  were  taken  by  the  troops  in  'the 
passes  ; others  laid  down  their  arms  and  asked  quarter.  The 
Iberians  alone  drew  up,  and  sent  a herald  to  capitulate  with 
Dionysius,  who  incorporated  them  into  his  guards.  The  rest 
were  all  made  prisoners. 

b Vol.  i.  p.  278. 


c Three  hundred  talents* 


HISTORY  OF 


334 

Such  was  the  fate  of  the  Carthaginians  ; which  shows,  says 
the  historian, d that  humiliation  treads  upon  the  heels  of  pride, 
and  that  those  who  are  too  much  puffed  up  with  their  power 
and  success,  are  soon  forced  to  confess  their  weakness  and  vanity. 
Those  haughty  victors,  masters  of  almost  all  Sicily,  who  looked 
upon  Syracuse  as  already  their  own,  and  had  already  entered 
triumphant  into  the  great  port,  insulting  the  citizens,  are  now 
reduced  to  fly  shamefully  under  the  covert  of  the  night ; drag- 
ging away  with  them  the  sad  ruins  and  miserable  remains  of 
their  fleet  and  army,  and  trembling  for  the  fate  of  their  native 
country.  Imilco,  who  had  neither  regarded  the  sacred  refuge 
of  temples,  nor  the  inviolable  sanctity  of  tombs,  after  having 
left  150,000  men  unburied  in  the  enemy’s  country,  returns  to 
perish  miserably  at  Carthage,  avenging  upon  himself  by  his 
death  the  contempt  he  had  expressed  for  gods  and  men. 

Dionysius,  who  was  suspicious  of  the  strangers  in  his  service, 
removed  10,000  of  them,  and,  under  the  pretence  of  rewarding 
their  merit,  gave  them  the  city  of  Leontium,  which  was  in 
reality  very  commodiously  situated,  and  an  advantageous  settle- 
ment. He  confided  the  guard  of  his  person  to  other  foreigners, 
and  the  slaves  whom  he  had  made  free.  He  made  several  at- 
tempts upon  places  in  Sicily,  and  in  the  neighbouring  country, 
especially  against  Rhegimn.e  The  people  of  Italy,  seeing 
themselves  in  danger,  entered  into  a powerful  alliance  to  put  a 
stop  to  his  conquests.  The  success  was  tolerably  equal  on 
both  sides. 

About  this  time,  the  Gauls,  who  some  months  before  had 
burnt  Rome,  sent  deputies  to  Dionysius  to  make  an  alliance 
with  him.f  He  was  at  that  time  in  Italy.  The  advices  he 
had  received  of  the  great  preparations  making  by  the  Cartha- 
ginians for  war,  obliged  him  to  return  to  Sicily. 

In  fact,  the  Carthaginians  having  set  on  foot  a numerous 
army  under  the  conduct  of  Mago,  made  new  efforts  against 
Syracuse,  but  with  no  better  success  than  the  former.  They 
terminated  in  an  accommodation  with  Dionysius. 

He  attacked  Rhegium  again,  and  at  first  re- 
Ant  ^ C61389.  ce*vec*  n0  inconsiderable  check.  But  having 
gained  a great  victory  against  the  Greeks  of 
Italy,  in  which  he  took  more  than  10,000  prisoners,  he  dis- 
missed them  all  without  ransom,  contrary  to  their  expectation  ; 
with  a view  of  detaching  the  Italians  from  the  interests  of 
Rhegium,  and  of  dissolving  a powerful  league,  which  might 
have  defeated  his  designs  against  that  city.  Having  by  this 
act  of  favour  and  generosity  acquired  the  good  opinion  of  all 
the  inhabitants  of  the  country,  and  from  enemies  made  them 
his  friends  and  allies,  he  returned  against  Rhegium.  He  was 
d Diodorus  Siculus.  e Diod.  1.  xiv.  p.  304.  310.  f Justin.  1.  xx.  c.  5. 


DIONYSIUS  THE  ELDER. 


335 


extremely  incensed  against  that  city,  upon  account  of  their  re- 
fusing to  give  him  one  of  their  citizens  in  marriage,  and  the 
insolent  answer  with  which  that  refusal  was  attended.  The 
besieged,  finding  themselves  incapable  of  resisting  so  numerous 
an  army  as  that  of  Dionysius,  and  expecting  no  quarter  if  the 
city  were  taken  by  assault,  began  to  talk  of  capitulating;  to 
which  he  hearkened  not  unwillingly.  He  made  them  pay 
300,000  crowns,  deliver  up  all  their  vessels  to  the  number  of 
seventy,  and  put  100  hostages  into  his  hands  ; after  which  he 
raised  the  siege.  It  was  not  out  of  favour  or  clemency  that  he 
acted  in  this  manner,  but  to  make  their  destruction  sure,  after 
having  first  reduced  their  power. 

Accordingly  the  next  year,  under  the  false  pretext,  and  with 
the  reproach  of  their  having  violated  the  treaty,  he  besieged 
them  again  with  all  his  forces,  having  first  sent  back  their  hos- 
tages. Both  parties  acted  with  the  utmost  vigour.  The  desire 
of  revenge  on  one  side,  and  the  fear  of  the  most  cruel  torments 
on  the  other,  animated  the  troops.  Those  of  the  city  were 
commanded  by  Phyto,  a brave  and  intrepid  man,  whom  the 
danger  of  his  country  rendered  more  courageous.  He  made 
frequent  and  vigorous  sallies,  in  one  of  which  Dionysius  re- 
ceived a wound,  of  which  he  recovered  with  great  difficulty. 
The  siege  went  on  slowly,  and  had  already  continued  eleven 
months,  when  a cruel  famine  reduced  the  city  to  the  last  ex- 
tremities. A measure  of  wheat  (of  about  six  bushels)  was  sold 
for  about  ten  pounds.^  After  having  consumed  all  their  horses 
and  beasts  of  burden,  they  were  reduced  to  support  themselves 
with  leather  and  hides,  which  they  boiled  ; and  at  last  to  feed 
upon  the  grass  of  the  fields  like  beasts  ; a resource  of  which 
Dionysius  soon  deprived  them,  by  making  his  horse  eat  up  all 
the  herbage  around  the  city.  Necessity  at  length  reduced 
them  to  surrender  at  discretion,  and  Dionysius  entered  the 
place,  which  he  found  covered  with  dead  bodies.  Those  who 
survived  were  rather  skeletons  than  men.  He  took  above 
6000  prisoners,  whom  he  sent  to  Syracuse.  Such  as  could 
pay  about  two  pounds’1  he  dismissed,  and  sold  the  rest  for 
slaves. 

Dionysius  let  fall  the  whole  weight  of  his  resentment  and 
revenge  upon  Phyto.  He  began  with  ordering  his  son  to  be 
thrown  into  the  sea.  The  next  day  he  ordered  the  father  to 
be  fastened  to  the  extremity  of  the  highest  of  his  engines  for  a 
spectacle  to  the  whole  army,  and  in  that  condition  he  sent  to 
tell  him  that  his  son  had  been  thrown  into  the  sea.  Then  he  is 
happier  than  Ihy  a day,  replied  that  unfortunate  parent.  He 
afterwards  caused  him  to  be  led  through  the  whole  city,  to  be 
scourged  with  rods,  and  to  suffer  a thousand  other  indignities* 
e Five  minse.  h One  mina. 


336 


HISTORY  OF 


whilst  a herald  proclaimed,  that  the  perfidious  traitor  was 
treated  in  that  manner,  for  having  inspired  the  people  of  Rhe- 
gium  ivith  rebellion. — Say  rather,  answered  that  generous  de- 
fender of  his  country’s  lioerty,  that  a faithful  citizen  is  so  used, 
for  having  refused  to  sacrifice  his  country  to  a tyrant.  Such 
an  object  and  such  a discourse  drew  tears  from  all  eyes,  and 
even  from  the  soldiers  of  Dionysius.  He  was  afraid  his  pri- 
soner would  be  taken  from  him  before  he  had  satiated  his  re- 
venge, and  ordered  him  to  be  flung  into  the  sea  directly. 

SECT.  IV. 

Violent  passion  of  Dionysius  for  poesy.  Reflections  upon  that  taste  of  the 
tyrant.  Flattery  of  his  courtiers.  Generous  freedom  of  Philoxenus. 
Death  of  Dionysius.  His  had  qualities. 

At  an  interval  of  leisure  which  his  success  against  Rhegium 
had  left  Dionysius, 1 the  tyrant,  who  was  desirous  of  glory  of 
every  kind,  and  piqued  himself  upon  the  excellence  of  his 
genius,  sent  his  brother  Thearides  to  Olympia,  to  dispute  in 
his  name  the  prizes  of  the  chariot-race  and  poetry. 

The  circumstance  which  I am  now  going  to  treat,  and  which 
regards  the  taste  or  rather  passion  of  Dionysius,  for  poetry  and 
polite  learning,  being  one  of  his  peculiar  characteristics,  and 
having  besides  a mixture  of  good  and  bad  in  itself,  makes  it 
requisite,  in  order  to  form  an  equitable  judgment  upon  this 
point,  to  distinguish  wherein  this  taste  of  his  is  either  laudable 
or  worthy  of  blame. 

I say  the  same  of  the  tyrant’s  total  character,  with  whose 
vices  of  ambition  and  tyranny  many  great  qualities  were  united, 
which  ought  not  to  be  disguised  or  misrepresented  ; the  vera- 
city of  history  requiring,  that  justice  should  be  done  to  the 
most  wicked,  as  they  are  not  so  in  every  respect.  We  have 
seen  several  things  in  his  character  that  certainly  deserve 
praise ; I mean  in  regard  to  his  manners  and  behaviour : the 
mildness  with  which  he  suffered  the  freedom  of  young  Dion,  the 
admiration  he  expressed  of  the  bold  and  generous  answer  of 
his  sister  Thesta  upon  the  occasion  of  her  husband’s  flight,  his 
gracious  and  insinuating  deportment  upon  several  other  occa- 
sions to  the  Syracusans,  the  familiarity  with  which  he  conversed 
with  the  meanest  citizens  and  even  workmen,  the  equality  he 
observed  between  his  two  wives,  and  his  kindness  and  respect 
for  them  ; all  which  imply  that  Dionysius  had  more  equity, 
moderation,  affability,  and  generosity,  then  is  commonly  as- 
cribed to  him.  He  is  not  such  a tyrant  as  Phalaris,  Alexander 
of  Pherae,  Caligula,  Nero,  or  Caracalla. 

But  to  return  to  Dionysius’  taste  for  poetry.  In  his  inter- 
1 Diod.  1.  xiv.  p.  318. 


DIONYSIUS  THE  ELDER. 


337 


vals  of  leisure,  he  loved  to  unbend  in  the  conversation  of  per- 
sons of  wit,  and  in  the  study  of  the  arts  and  sciences.  He 
was  particularly  fond  of  versifying,  and  employed  himself  in 
the  composition  of  poems,  especially  of  tragedies.  Thus  far 
this  passion  of  his  may  be  excused,  having  something  undoubt- 
edly laudable  in  it ; I mean  in  his  taste  for  polite  learning,  the 
esteem  he  expressed  for  learned  men,  his  inclination  to  do  them 
good  offices,  and  the  employment  to  which  he  devoted  his  lei- 
sure hours.  Was  it  not  better  to  employ  them  in  exercising  his 
mind  and  the  cultivation  of  science,  than  in  feasting,  dancing, 
theatrical  amusements,  gaming,  frivolous  company,  and  other 
pleasures  still  more  pernicious  ? This  is  the  wise  reflection 
which  Dionysius  the  younger  made  when  at  Corinth.  Philip  of 
Macedon  being  at  table  with  him,  k spoke  of  the  odes  and  trage- 
dies his  father  had  left  behind  him  with  an  air  of  raillery  and 
contempt,  and  seemed  to  be  under  some  difficulty  to  compre- 
hend at  what  time  of  his  life  he  had  leisure  for  such  composi- 
tions. Dionysius  smartly  and  wittily  replied,  The  difficulty  is 
very  great  indeed ! Why,  he  composed  them  at  those  hours 
which  you  and  I,  and  an  infinity  of  others,  who  have  so  high 
an  opinion  of  ourselves,  pass  in  drinking,  and  other  diversions . 

Julius  Caesar  and  the  emperor  Augustus  cultivated  poetry, 
and  composed  tragedies.1  Lucullus  intended  to  have  written 
the  memoirs  of  his  military  actions  in  verse.  The  comedies 
of  Terence  were  attributed  to  Laelius  and  Scipio,  both  great 
captains,  especially  the  latter  ; and  that  report,  which  gene- 
rally prevailed  at  Rome,  was  so  far  from  lessening  their  repu- 
tation, that  it  added  to  the  general  esteem  in  which  they  were 
held. 

These  relaxations,  therefore,  were  not  blamable  in  their  own 
nature ; this  taste  for  poetry  was  rather  laudable,  if  kept  within 
due  bounds  ; but  Dionysius  was  ridiculous  for  pretending  to 
excel  all  others  in  it.  He  could  not  endure  either  a superior 
or  competitor  in  any  thing.  From  being  in  the  sole  possession 
of  supreme  authority,  he  had  accustomed  himself  to  imagine 
that  he  possessed  the  same  paramount  rank  in  the  empire  of 
wit : in  a word,  he  was  in  every  thing  a tyrant.  His  im- 
moderate estimation  of  his  own  merit  flowed,  in  some  measure, 
from  the  overbearing  turn  of  mind  which  empire  and  command 
bad  given  him.  The  continual  applauses  of  a court,  and  the 
flatteries  of  those  who  knew  how  to  recommend  themselves 
by  soothing  his  darling  foible,  were  another  source  of  this 
vain  conceit.  And  of  what  will  not  a great  man,m  a minister, 

k Plut.  in  Timol.  p.  243.  c.  lxxxv. 

1 Suet,  in  Coes.  c.  lvi.  in  August,  c.  lxxxv.  Plut.  in  Lucul.  p.  492. 

m Nihil  est  quod  credere  de  se 

Non  possit,  cum  laudatur  diis  sequa  potestas.  Juvenal. 

VOL.  III.  Z 


338 


HISTORY  OF 


a prince,  think  himself  capable,  who  has  such  incense  and 
adoration  continually  paid  to  him  ? It  is  well  known  that 
Cardinal  Richelieu,  in  the  midst  of  his  important  business,  not 
only  composed  dramatic  pieces,  but  piqued  himself  on  his  excel- 
lence in  that  talent ; and  what  is  more,  his  jealousy  in  that 
point  rose  so  high  as  to  use  his  authority  in  causing  criticisms 
to  be  directed  against  the  compositions  of  those  to  whom  the 
public,  a just  and  incorruptible  judge  in  the  question,  had  given 
the  preference  against  him. 

Dionysius  did  not  reflect,  that  there  are  things,  estimable  in 
themselves,  and  conferring  honour  upon  private  persons,  in 
which  it  does  not  become  a prince  to  desire  to  excel.  I have 
mentioned  elsewhere  Philip  of  Macedon’s  expression  to  his  son 
Alexander,  upon  his  having  shown  too  much  skill  in  music  at 
a public  entertainment : Are  you  not  ashamed , said  he,  to  sing 
so  well?  It  was  acting  inconsistently  with  the  dignity  of  his 
rank.  If  Caesar  and  Augustus,  when  they  wrote  tragedies, 
had  taken  it  into  their  heads  to  equal  or  excel  Sophocles,  it 
had  not  only  been  ridiculous,  but  a reproach  to  them.  And  the 
reason  is,  because  a prince  being  obliged  by  an  essential  and 
indispensable  duty  to  apply  himself  incessantly  to  the  affairs  of 
government,  and  having  an  infinitude  of  various  business  per- 
petually flowing  in  upon  him,  he  can  make  no  other  use  of  the 
sciences,  than  to  divert  him  at  such  short  intervals,  as  will  not 
admit  such  progress  in  them,  as  is  requisite  in  order,  to  excel 
those  who  make  them  their  particular  study.  Hence  when  the 
public  sees  a prince  affect  the  first  rank  in  this  kind  of  merit, 
they  have  aright  to  conclude  that  he  neglects  his  more  important 
duties,  and  what  he  owes  to  his  people’s  happiness,  to  give 
himself  up  to  an  employment  which  wastes  his  time  and  mental 
energy  ineffectually. 

We  must,  however,  do  Dionysius  the  justice  to  own,  that 
he  was  never  reproached  for  letting  poetry  interfere  to  the 
prejudice  of  his  great  affairs,  or  that,  it  made  him  less  active 
and  diligent  on  any  important  occasion. 

I have  already  said,n  that  this  prince,  in  an  interval  of  peace, 
had  sent  his  brother  Thearides  to  Olympia,  to  dispute  the  prizes 
of  poetry  and  the  chariot-race  in  his  name.  When  he  ar- 
rived in  the  assembly,  the  beauty  as  well  as  number  of'  his 
chariots,  and  the  magnificence  of  his  pavilion,  embroidered  with 
gold  and  silver,  attracted  the  eyes  and  admiration  of  all  the 
spectators.  The  ear  was  no  less  charmed  when  the  poems  of 
Dionysius  began  to  be  read.  He  had  chosen  expressly  for 
the  occasion  readers  with  sonorous,0  musical  voices,  who  might 
be  heard  far  and  distinctly,  and  who  knew  how  to  give  a just 
emphasis  and  cadence  to  the  verses  they  repeated.  At  first  this- 
Diod.  1.  xiv.  p.  318.  0 These  readers  were  called  'Paxf/qj^oL 


DIONYSIUS  THE  ELDER. 


339 


had  a very  happy  effect,  and  the  whole  audience  were  deceived 
by  the  art  and  sweetness  of  the  pronounciation.  But  that  charm 
was  soon  at  an  end,  and  the  mind  not  long  seduced  by  the  ears. 
The  verses  then  appeared  in  their  absurdity.  The  audience 
were  ashamed  of  having  applauded  them,  and  their  praise  was 
turned  into  laughter,  scorn,  and  insult.  Their  contempt  and 
indignation  rose  to  such  a pitch,  that  they  tore  Dionysius’s  rich 
pavilion  in  pieces.  Lysias,  the  celebrated  orator,  who  was 
come  to  the  Olympic  games  to  dispute  the  prize  of  eloquence, 
which  he  had  carried  several  times  before,  undertook  to  prove, 
that  it  was  inconsistent  with  the  honour  of  Greece,  the  friend 
and  assertor  of  liberty,  to  admit  an  impious  tyrant  to  share  in 
the  celebration  of  the  sacred  games,  who  had  no  other  thoughts 
than  of  subjecting  all  Greece  to  his  power.  Dionysius  was  not 
affronted  in  that  manner  then  ; but  the  event  proved  as  little  in 
his  favour.  His  chariots  having  entered  the  lists,  were  all  of 
them  either  carried  out  of  the  course  by  a headlong  impe- 
tuosity, or  dashed  in  pieces  against  one  another.  And  to  com- 
plete the  misfortune,  the  galley  which  was  bringing  back  the 
persons  Dionysius  had  sent  to  the  games,  met  with  a violent 
storm,  and  did  not  return  to  Syracuse  without  great  difficulty. 
When  the  pilots  arrived  there,  out  of  hatred  and  contempt  for 
the  tyrant,  they  reported  throughout  the  city,  that  it  was  his  vile 
poems  which  had  occasioned  so  many  misfortunes  to  the  read- 
ers, racers,  and  even  the  ship  itself.  This  bad  success  did  not 
at  all  discourage  Dionysius,  nor  make  him  abate  in  the  least 
the  high  opinion  which  he  entertained  of  his  poetic  vein.  The 
flatterers,  who  abounded  at  court,  did  not  fail  to  insinuate  that 
such  injurious  treatment  of  his  poems  could  proceed  only  from 
envy,  which  always  fastens  upon  what  is  most  excellent ; and 
that  sooner  or  later  the  invidious  themselves  would  be  compelled 
by  demonstration  to  do  justice  to  his  merit,  and  acknowledge 
his  superiority  to  all  other  poets. 

The  infatuation  of  Dionysius  on  this  subject  was  incon- 
ceivable.P  He  was  undoubtedly  a great  warrior,  and  an  excel- 
lent captain  ; but  he  fancied  himself  a much  better  poet,  and 
believed  that  his  verses  were  a far  greater  honour  to  him  than 
all  his  victories.  To  endeavour  to  undeceive  him  in  an  opinion 
so  favourable  to  himself,  to  say  nothing  of  the  absolute  hope- 
lessness of  the  attempt,  would  have  been  an  ill  way  of  making 
court  to  him  ; so  that  all  the  learned  men  and  poets,  who  ate 
at  his  table  in  great  numbers,  seemed  to  be  in  an  ecstasy  of 
admiration  whenever  he  read  them  his  poems.  Never,  accord- 
ing to  them,  was  any  thing  comparable  to  them  : all  was  great, 
all  noble  in  his  poetry ; all  was  majestic,  or,  to  speak  more  pro- 
perly, all  divine. 


340 


HISTORY  OF 


Philoxenus  was  the  only  one  of  all  the  tribe  who  did  not 
suffer  himself  to  be  hurried  away  by  this  torrent  of  excessive 
praise  and  flattery.  He  was  a man  of  great  reputation,  and 
excelled  in  Dithyrambic  poetry.  There  is  a story  told  of  him, 
which  La  Fontaine  has  known  how  to  apply  admirably.  Being 
at  table  with  Dionysius,  and  seeing  a very  small  fish  set  before 
him,  and  a huge  one  before  the  king,  the  whim  took  him,  to  lay 
his  ear  close  to  the  little  fish.  He  was  asked  what  he  meant 
by  that  pleasantry  : I was  inquiring,  said  he,  into  some  affairs 
that  happened  in  the  reign  of  Nereus,  hut  this  young  native  of 
the  floods  can  give  me  no  information  : yours  is  elder,  and  with- 
out douht  knows  something  of  the  matter. 

Dionysius  having  read  one  day  some  of  his  verses  to  Philox- 
enus, and  having  pressed  him  to  give  him  his  opinion  of  them, 
he  answered  with  entire  freedom,  and  told  him  plainly  his  real 
sentiments.  Dionysius,  who  was  not  accustomed  to  such  lan- 
guage, was  extremely  offended,  and  ascribing  his  boldness  to 
envy,  gave  orders  to  carry  him  to  the  quarries  ; the  common 
jail  being  so  called.  The  wrhole  court  was  afflicted  upon  this 
account,  and  solicited  for  the  generous  prisoner,  whose  release 
they  obtained.  He  was  enlarged  the  next  day  and  restored  to 
favour. 

At  the  entertainment  made  that  day  by  Dionysius,  for  the 
same  guests,  which  was  a kind  of  ratification  of  the  pardon,  and 
at  which  they  were  for  that  reason  more  than  usually  gay  and 
cheerful ; after  they  had  plentifully  regaled  a great  while,  the 
prince  did  not  fail  to  introduce  his  poems  into  the  conversation, 
which  were  the  most  frequent  subject  of  it.  He  chose  some 
passages  which  he  had  taken  extraordinary  pains  in  composing, 
and  conceived  to  be  masterpieces,  as  was  very  discernible  from 
the  self-satisfaction  and  complacency  he  expressed  whilst  they 
were  reading.  But  his  delight  could  not  be  perfect  without 
Philoxenus’s  approbation,  upon  which  he  set  the  greater  value, 
as  it  was  not  his  custom  to  be  so  profuse  of  it  as  the  rest. 
What  had  passed  the  evening  before  was  a sufficient  lesson  for 
the  poet.  When  Dionysius  asked  his  opinion  of  the  verses, 
Philoxenus  made  no  answer,  but  turning  towards  the  guards, 
who  stood  round  the  table,  he  said  in  a serious,  though  humorous 
tone,  without  any  emotion,  Carry  me  hack  to  the  quarries. 
The  prince  comprehended  all  the  salt  and  spirit  of  that  inge- 
nious pleasantry,  without  being  offended The  sprightliness  of 
the  conceit  atoned  for  its  freedom,  which  at  another  time  would 
have  touched  him  to  the  quick,  and  made  him  excessively  angry. 
He  only  laughed  at  it  now,  and  was  not  displeased  with  the 
poet. 

q Tore  fjikv  8ia  rrjv  tvTpaireXiav  tCjv  Xoycjv  [Jitidiaaag  6 At ovvaiog,  f/veyict  ri)»> 
irafifamav  rov  yeXwrog  rf/v  fiffixpiv  afiflXvvovrog. 


DIONYSIUS  THE  ELDER. 


341 


He  did  not  act  in  the  same  way  upon  occasion  of  a gross 
jest  of  Antiphon’s,  which  was  indeed  of  a different  kind,  and 
was  the  result  of  a violent  and  brutal  disposition.  The  prince 
in  conversation  asked,  which  was  the  best  kind  of  brass.  After 
the  company  had  given  their  opinions,  Antiphon  said,  that  was 
the  best  of  which  the  statues  of  Harmodius  and  Aristogiton 
were  made.r  This  witty  expression,8  if  it  may  be  called  so, 
cost  him  his  life. 

The  friends  of  Philoxenus,  apprehending  that  his  too  great 
frankness  might  be  also  attended  with  fatal  consequences, 
represented  to  him  in  the  most  serious  manner,  that  those  who 
live  with  princes  must  speak  their  language ; that  they  wish  to 
have  nothing  said  to  them  but  what  is  agreeable ; that  whoever 
does  not  know  how  to  dissemble,  is  not  qualified  for  a court ; 
that  the  favours  and  liberalities  which  Dionysius  continually 
bestowed  upon  them,  well  deserved  the  return  of  some  little 
complaisance;  that,  in  a word,  with  his  blunt  freedom  and 
plain  truth,  he  was  in  danger  of  losing  not  only  his  fortune  but 
his  life.  Philoxenus  told  them,  that  he  would  profit  by  their 
good  advice,  and  for  the  future  give  such  a turn  to  his  answers 
as  should  satisfy  Dionysius  without  injuring  truth. 

Accordingly,  some  time  after,  Dionysius  having  read  a piece 
of  his  composing  upon  a very  mournful  subject,  wherein  he  was 
•to  move  compassion  and  draw  tears  from  the  eyes-  of  the 
audience,  he  addressed  himself  again  to  Philoxenus,  and  asked 
him  what  he  thought  of  his  verses.  Philoxenus  gave  him  for 
answer  one  word,1  which  in  the  Greek  language  has  two  dif- 
ferent significations.  In  one  of  them  it  implies  mournful, 
moving  things,  such  as  inspire  sentiments  of  pity  and  com- 
passion : in  the  other,  it  expresses  something  very  mean,  defec- 
tive, pitiful,  and  miserable.  Dionysius,  who  was  fond  of  his 
verses,  and  believed  that  every  body  must  have  the  same  good 
opinion  of  them,  took  that  word  in  the  favourable  construction, 
and  was  extremely  satisfied  with  Philoxenus.  The  rest  of  the 
company  were  not  mistaken,  but  understood  it  in  the  right  sense, 
though  without  explaining  themselves. 

Nothing  could  cure  his  folly  for  versification.  It  appears 
from  Diodorus  Siculus*"  that  having  sent  some  of  his  poems  a 
second  time  to  Olympia,  they  were  treated  with  the  same 
ridicule  and  contempt  as  before.  That  news,  which  could  not 
be  kept  from  him,  threw  him  into  an  excess  of  melancholy,  which 
he  could  never  get  over,  and  turned  soon  after  into  a kind  of 
madness  and  frenzy.  He  complained  that  envy  and  jealousy, 
the  certain  enemies  of  true  merit,  were  always  making  war 

r They  had  delivered  Athens  from  the  tyranny  of  the  Pisistratidae. 
s Plut.  Moral,  p.  78.  et  833. 

1 OlicTpa.  u Page  332. 


342 


HISTORY  OF 


upon  him,  and  that  all  the  world  conspired  to  ruin  his  reputa- 
tion. He  accused  his  best  friends  of  having  engaged  in  the 
same  design ; some  of  whom  he  put  to  death,  and  others  he 
banished ; amongst  whom  were  Leptines  his  brother,  and  Phi- 
listus,  who  had  done  him  such  great  services,  and  to  whom  he 
was  indebted  for  his  power.  They  retired  to  Thurium  in  Italy, 
from  whence  they  were  recalled  some  time  after,  and  reinstated 
in  all  their  fortunes  and  former  favour : Leptines  even  married 
Dionysius’s  daughter. 

To  remove  his  melancholy  occasioned  by  the  ill  success  of 
his  verses, x it  was  necessary  to  find  some  employment  ; and 
with  this  his  wars  and  buildings  supplied  him.  He  had  formed 
a design  of  establishing  powerful  colonies  in  that  part  of  Italy 
which  is  situate  upon  the  Adriatic  sea,  facing  Epirus ; in  order 
that  his  fleet  might  not  want  a secure  retreat,  when  he  should 
employ  his  forces  on  that  side  ; and  with  this  view  he  made  an 
alliance  with  the  Illyrians,  and  restored  Alcetes,  king  of  the 
Molossians,  to  his  throne.  His  principal  design  was  to  attack 
Epirus,  and  to  make  himself  master  of  the  immense  treasures 
which  had  been  for  many  ages  amassing  in  the  temple  of  Del- 
phi. Before  he  could  set  this  project  on  foot,  which  required 
great  preparations,  he  seemed  to  wish  to  make  an  essay  of  his 
abilities,  by  another  of  the  same  kind,  though  of  much  more 
easy  execution.  Having  made  a sudden  irruption  into  Tus- 
cany, under  the  pretence  of  pursuing  pirates,  he  plundered  a 
very  rich  temple  in  the  suburbs  of  Agylla,  a city  of  that  coun- 
try, and  carried  away  a sum  exceeding  4,500,000  livresJ  He 
had  occasion  for  money  to  support  his  great  expenses  at  Sy- 
racuse, as  well  in  fortifying  the  port,  and  making  it  capable  of 
receiving  200  galleys,  as  in  enclosing  the  whole  city  with  good 
walls,  erecting  magnificent  temples,  and  building  a place  of 
exercise  upon  the  banks  of  the  river  Anapus. 

At  the  same  time  he  formed  the  design  of  driving  the  Car- 
thaginians entirely  out  of  Sicily  .z  A first  victory  which  he 
gained,  put  him  almost  into  a condition  to  accomplish  his  pro- 
ject ; but  the  loss  of  a second  battle,  in  which  his  brother  Lep- 
tines was  killed,  put  an  end  to  his  hopes,  and  obliged  him  to 
enter  into  a treaty,  by  which  he  gave  up  several  towns  to  the 
Carthaginians,  and  paid  them  great  sums  of  money  to  reimburse 
their  expenses  in  the  war.  An  attempt  which  he  made  upon 
them  some  years  after,  taking  advantage  of  the  desolation  oc- 
casioned by  the  plague  at  Carthage,  had  no  better  success. 

Another  victory  of  a very  different  kind,a  though  one  which 
he  had  no  less  at  heart,  made  him  amends,  or  at  least  comforted 

x Diod.  1.  xv.  p.  336,  337- 

y Fifteen  hundred  talents,  or  about  200,000/.  sterling. 
z See  the  history  of  the  Carthaginians.  a Diod.  p.  384,  385. 


DIONYSIUS  THE  ELDER. 


343 


him,  for  the  ill  success  of  his  arms.  He  had  caused  a tragedy 
of  his  to  be  represented  at  Athens,  for  the  prize  in  the  cele- 
brated feast  of  Bacchus,  and  was  declared  victor.  Such  a vic- 
tory among  the  Athenians,  who  were  the  best  judges  of  this 
kind  of  literature,  seems  to  indicate,  that  the  poetry  of  Diony- 
sius was  not  so  mean  and  pitiful ; and  it  is  very  possible  that 
the  aversion  of  the  Greeks  for  every  thing  which  came  from  a 
tyrant,  had  a great  share  in  the  contemptuous  sentence  passed 
upon  his  poems  in  the  Olympic  games.  Be  this  as  it  may, 
Dionysius  received  the  news  with  inexpressible  transports  of 
joy.  Public  thanksgivings  were  made  to  the  gods,  the  temples 
being  scarce  capable  of  containing  the  concourse  of  the  people. 
Nothing  was  seen  throughout  the  city  but  feasting  and  rejoic- 
ing ; and  Dionysius  regaled  all  his  friends  with  the  most  ex- 
traordinary magnificence.  Self-satisfied  to  a degree  that  can- 
not be  described,  he  believed  himself  at  the  summit  of  glory, 
and  did  the  honours  of  his  table  with  a gaiety  and  ease,  and 
at  the  same  time  w7ith  a grace  and  dignity,  that  charmed  all  the 
world.  He  invited  his  guests  to  eat  and  drink  more  by  his 
example  than  expressions,  and  carried  his  civilities  of  that 
kind  to  such  an  excess,  that  at  the  close  of  the  banquet  he  was 
seized  with  violent  pains,  occasioned  by  an  indigestion,  of  which 
it  was  not  difficult  to  foresee,  the  consequences. 

Dionysius  had  three  children  by  his  wife  Doris, b and  four  by 
Aristomache,  of  which  two  were  daughters,  the  one  named 
Sophrosyne,  the  other  Arete.  Sophrosyne  was  married  to  his 
eldest  son,  Dionysius  the  younger,  whom  he  had  by  his  Locrian 
wife ; and  Arete  espoused  her  brother  Theorides.  But  Tlieo- 
rides  dying  soon,  Dion  married  his  widow  Arete,  who  was  his 
own  niece. 

As  Dionysius’s  distemper  left  no  hopes  of  his  life,  Dion 
undertook  to  speak  to  him  concerning  his  children  by  Aristo- 
mache, who  were  at  the  same  time  his  brothers-in-law  and 
nephews,  and  to  insinuate  to  him,  that  it  was  just  to  prefer  the 
issue  of  his  Syracusan  wife  to  that  of  a stranger.  But  the 
physicians,  desirous  of  making  their  court  to  young  Dionysius, 
the  Locrian’s  son,  for  whom  the  throne  was  intended,  did  not 
give  him  an  opportunity  ; for  Dionysius  having  demanded  a 
medicine  to  make  him  sleep,  they  gave  him  so  strong  a dose  as 
quite  stupefied  him,  and  laid  him  in  a sleep  that  lasted  him  for 
the  rest  of  his  life.  He  had  reigned  thirty-eight  years. 

He  was  certainly  a prince  of  very  great  political  and  military 
abilities,  and  had  occasion  for  them  all  to  raise  himself  as  he 
did  from  a mean  condition  to  so  high  a rank.  After  having 
held  the  sovereignty  thirty-eight  years,  he  transmitted  it  peace- 
ably to  a successor  of  his  own  issue  and  election  ; and  had  es- 
b Plut.  in  Dion.  p.  960. 


344 


HISTORY  OF 


tablished  his  power  upon  such  solid  foundations,  that  his  son, 
notwithstanding  his  slender  capacity  for  governing,  retained  it 
twelve  years  ; all  which  could  not  have  been  effected  without  a 
great  fund  of  merit.  But  what  qualities  could  cover  the  vices 
which  rendered  him  the  object  of  his  subjects’  abhorrence  ? 
His  ambition  knew  neither  law  nor  limit ; his  avarice  spared 
nothing,  not  even  the  most  sacred  places  ; his  cruelty  had  no 
regard  to  the  nearest  relations  ; and  his  open  and  professed 
impiety  acknowledged  the  Divinity  only  to  insult  him. 

As  he  was  returning  to  Syracuse  with  a very  favourable  wind, 
after  plundering  the  temple  of  Proserpine  at  Locris,  See , said 
he  to  his  friends  with  a smile  of  contempt,  how  the  immortal 
gods  favour  the  navigation  of  the  sacrilegious.  • 

Having  occasion  for  money  to  carry  on  the  war  against  the 
Carthaginians,0  he  rifled  the  temple  of  Jupiter,  and  took  from 
that  god  a robe  of  solid  gold,  which  ornament  Hiero  the  tyrant 
had  given  him  out  of  the  spoils  of  the  Carthaginians.  He  even 
jested  upon  that  occasion,  saying,  that  a robe  of  gold  was  much 
too  heavy  in  summer,  and  too  cold  in  winter  ; and  at  the  same 
time  ordered  one  of  wool  to  be  thrown  over  the  god’s  shoul- 
ders ; adding,  that  such  a habit  would  be  commodious  in  all 
seasons. 

Another  time  he  ordered  the  golden  beard  of  iEsculapius 
of  Epidaurus  to  be  taken  off ; giving  for  his  reason,  that  it 
was  very  inconsistent  for  the  son  to  have  a beard,  d when  the 
father  had  none. 

He  caused  all  the  tables  of  silver  to  be  taken  out  of  the 
temples  ; and  as  there  was  inscribed  upon  them,  according  to 
the  custom  of  the  Greeks,  to  the  good  gods;  he  would 
(he  said)  take  the  benefit  of  their  GOODNESS. 

As  for  less  prizes,  such  as  cups  and  crowns  of  gold,  which 
the  statues  held  in  their  hands,  those  he  carried  off,  without 
any  ceremony  ; saying,  it  was  not  taking  but  merely  receiving 
them  ; and  that  it  was  idle  and  ridiculous  to  ask  the  gods  per- 
petually for  good  things,  and  to  refuse  thetn  when  they  held 
out  their  hands  themselves  to  present  them  to  you.  These 
spoils  were  carried  by  his  order  to  the  market,  and  sold  by 
public  sale : and  when  he  had  got  the  money  for  them,  he  or- 
dered proclamation  to  be  made,  that  whoever  had  in  their  cus- 
tody any  tilings  taken  out  of  sacred  places,  were  to  restore  them 
entire,  within  a limited  time,  to  the  temples  from  whence  they 
were  brought ; adding  in  this  manner  to  his  impiety  to  the  gods, 
injustice  to  man. 

The  amazing  precautions  that  Dionysius  thought  necessary 
to  secure  his  life,  show  to  what  anxiety  and  apprehension  he 

c Cic.  de  nat.  deor.  1.  xv.  n.  83,  84. 
d Apollo  was  represented  without  a beard. 


DIONYSIUS  THE  ELDER. 


345 


was  abandoned.  He  wore  under  his  robe  a cuirass  of  brass. e 
He  never  harangued  the  people  but  from  the  top  of  a high  tower ; 
and  thought  he  made  himself  invulnerable  by  being  inaccessible. 
Not  daring  to  confide  in  any  of  his  friends  or  relations,  his 
guard  was  composed  of  slaves  and  strangers.  He  went  abroad 
as  little  as  possible  ; fear  obliging  him  to  condemn  himself  to 
a kind  of  imprisonment.  These  extraordinary  precautions  are 
to  be  referred  without  doubt  to  certain  periods  of  his  reign, 
when  frequent  conspiracies  against  him  rendered  him  more  ti- 
mid and  suspicious  than  usual ; for  at  other  times  we  have  seen 
that  he  conversed  freely  enough  with  the  people,  and  was  ac- 
cessible even  to  familiarity.  In  those  dark  days  of  distrust 
and  fear,  he  fancied  he  saw  all  mankind  in  arms  against  him. 
An  expression  which  escaped  his  barber/  who  boasted,  by  way 
of  jest,  that  he  held  a razor  at  the  tyrant’s  throat  every  week, 
cost  him  his  life.  From  thenceforth,  not  to  abandon  his  life 
and  head  to  the  hands  of  a barber,  he  made  his  daughters, 
though  very  young,  do  him  that  despicable  office ; and  when 
they  were  more  advanced  in  years,  he  took  the  scissors  and 
razors  from  them,  and  taught  them  to  singe  off  his  beard  with 
walnut  shells.  He  was  at  last  reduced  to  do  himself  that 
office,  s not  daring,  it  seems,  to  trust  his  own  daughters  any 
longer.  He  never  went  into  the  chamber  of  his  wives  at  night, 
till  they  had  been  first  searched  with  the  utmost  care  and  cir- 
cumspection. His  bed  was  surrounded  with  a very  broad  and 
deep  trench,  with  a small  drawbridge  over  it  for  the  entrance. 
After  having  well  locked  and  bolted  the  doors  of  his  apartment, 
he  drew  up  the  bridge,  that  he  might  sleep  in  security.  Nei- 
ther his  brother, h nor  even  his  sons,  could  be  admitted  into  his 
chamber  without  first  changing  their  clothes,  and  being  visited 
by  the  guards.  Can  he  be  said  to  reign,  can  he  be  said  to  live, 
who  passes  his  days  in  such  continual  distrust  and  terror? 

In  the  midst  of  all  his  greatness,  possessed  of  riches,  and 
surrounded  with  pleasures  of  every  kind,  during  a reign  of 
almost  forty  years,  notwithstanding  all  his  presents  and  profu- 
sion, he  never  was  capable  of  making  a single  friend.  He  passed 
his  life  with  none  but  trembling  slaves  and  sordid  flatterers  ; 
and  never  tasted  the  joy  of  loving  or  of  being  beloved,  nor  the 
charms  of  social  intercourse  and  reciprocal  confidence.  This 
he  ingenuously  owned  himself  upon  an  occasion  not  unworthy 
of  being  related. 

Damon  and  Pythias  had  both  been  educated  in  the  principles 
of  the  Pythagorean  philosophy,’  and  were  united  to  each  other 
in  the  strictest  ties  of  friendship,  which  they  had  mutually  sworn 

e Cic.  Tusc.  Qusest.  1.  v.  n.  57*  63.  f Plut.  de  Garrul.  p.  508. 

g Cic.  de  Offic.  1.  ii.  n.  55.  h Plut.  in  Dion.  p.  961. 

* Cic.  de  Offic.  1.  iii.  n.  43.  Val.  Max,  1.  iv.  c.  7* 


346 


HISTORY  OF 


to  observe  with  inviolable  fidelity.  Their  faith  was  put  to  a 
severe  trial.  One  of  them  being*  condemned  to  die  by  the 
tyrant,  petitioned  for  permission  to  make  a journey  into  his  own 
country,  to  settle  his  affairs,  promising  to  return  at  a fixed  time, 
the  other  generously  offering  to  be  his  security.  The  courtiers, 
and  Dionysius  in  particular,  expected  with  impatience  the  event 
of  so  delicate  and  extraordinary  an  adventure.  The  day  fixed 
for  his  return  drawing  nigh,  and  he  not  appearing,  every  body 
began  to  blame  the  rash  and  imprudent  zeal  of  his  friend,  who 
had  bound  himself  in  such  a manner.  But  he,  far  from  express- 
ing any  fear  or  concern,  replied  with  a tranquil  air,  and  confi- 
dent tone,  that  he  was  sure  his  friend  would  return  ; as  he  ac- 
cordingly did  upon  the  day  and  hour  agreed.  The  tyrant, 
struck  with  admiration  at  so  uncommon  an  instance  of  fidelity, 
and  softened  with  the  view  of  so  amiable  a union,  granted  him 
his  life,  and  desired  to  be  admitted  as  a third  person  into  their 
friendship. 

He  expressed  with  equal  ingenuousness  on  another  occasion 
what  he  himself  thought  of  his  condition.11  One  of  his  courtiers 
named  Damocles  was  perpetually  extolling  with  rapture  his 
treasures,  grandeur,  the  number  of  his  troops,  the  extent  of  his 
dominions,  the  magnificence  of  his  palaces,  and  the  universal 
abundance  of  all  good  things  and  enjoyments  in  his  possession  ; 
always  repeating,  that  never  man  was  happier  than  Dionysius. 
Since  you  are  of  that  opinion , said  the  tyrant  to  him  one  day, 
will  you  taste  and  make  proof  of  my  felicity  in  person  ? The 
offer  was  accepted  with  joy  ; Damocles  was  placed  upon  a 
golden  couch,  covered  with  carpets  richly  embroidered.  The 
side-boards  were  loaded  with  vessels  of  gold  and  silver.  The 
most  beautiful  slaves  in  the  most  splendid  habits  stood  around, 
ready  to  serve  him  at  the  slightest  signal.  The  most  exquisite 
essences  and  perfumes  had  not  been  spared.  The  table  was 
spread  with  proportionate  magnificence.  Damocles  was  all  joy, 
and  looked  upon  himself  as  the  happiest  man  in  the  world : 
when  unfortunately  casting  up  his  eyes,  he  beheld  over  his  head 
the  point  of  a sword,  which  hung  from  the  roof  only  by  a single 
liorse-hair.  He  was  immediately  seized  with  a cold  sweat  ; 
every  thing  disappeared  in  an  instant : he  could  see  nothing  but 
the  sword,  nor  think  of  any  thing  but  his  danger.  In  the  height  of 
his  fear  he  desired  permission  to  retire,  and  declared  he  would 
be  happy  no  longer.  A very  natural  image  of  the  life  of  a 
tyrant.  He  of  whom  we  are  speaking,  reigned,  as  I have  ob- 
served before.,  thirty-eight  years. 


k Cic.  Tusc.  Qusest.  1.  v.  n.  61,  62. 


DIONYSIUS  THE  YOUNGER. 


347 


CHAP.  II. 

Sect.  I.  Dionysius  the  Younger  succeeds  his  father.  Dion  engages  him  to 
invite  Plato  to  his  court.  Surprising  alteration  occasioned  by  his  presence. 
Conspiracy  of  the  courtiers  to  prevent  the  effects  of  it. 

Dionysius  the  elder  was  succeeded  by  one 
Ant  J1  (?6372  Hs  sons  of  his  own  name,1  commonly  called 
Dionysius  the  Younger.  After  his  father’s  fune- 
ral had  been  solemnized  with  the  utmost  magnificence,  he  as- 
sembled the  people,  and  desired  they  would  have  the  same  good 
inclinations  for  him  as  they  had  evinced  for  his  father.  They 
were  very  different  from  each  other  in  their  character.  For  the 
latter  was  as  peaceable  and  calm  in  his  disposition,111  as  the 
former  was  active  and  enterprising  ; which  would  have  been  no 
disadvantage  to  his  people,  had  that  mildness  and  moderation 
been  the  effect  of  a wise  and  judicious  understanding,  and  not 
of  natural  sloth  and  indolence  of  temper. 

It  is  surprising  to  see  Dionysius  the  younger  take  quiet  pos- 
session of  the  tyranny  after  the  death  of  his  father,  as  a patrimo- 
nial inheritance,  notwithstanding  the  natural  fondness  of  the  Sy- 
racusans for  liberty,  which  could  not  but  revive  upon  so  favour- 
able an  occasion,  and  the  weakness  of  a young  prince  undistin- 
guished by  his  merit,  and  void  of  experience.  It  seemed  as  if 
the  last  years  of  the  elder  Dionysius,  who  had  applied  himself 
towards  the  close  of  his  life  in  making  his  subjects  taste  the  ad- 
vantages of  his  government,  had  in  some  measure  reconciled 
them  to  tyranny  ; especially  after  his  exploits  by  sea  and 
land  had  acquired  him  a great  reputation,  and  infinitely  ex- 
alted the  glory  of  the  Syracusan  power,  which  he  had  found 
means  to  render  formidable  to  Carthage  itself,  as  well  as  to  the 
most  potent  states  of  Greece  and  Italy.  Besides  which  it  was 
to  be  feared,  that  should  they  attempt  a change  in  the  govern- 
ment, the  sad  consequences  of  a civil  war  might  deprive  them 
of  all  those  advantages  : whereas  the  gentle  and  humane  dis- 
position of  young  Dionysius  gave  them  reason  to  entertain  the 
most  favourable  hopes  with  regard  to  the  future.  He  therefore 
peaceably  ascended  his  father’s  throne. 

Something  of  this  kind  has  been  seen  in  England.  The 
famous  Cromwell  died  in  his  bed  with  as  much  tranquillity  as 
the  best  of  princes,  and  was  interred  with  the  same  honours 
and  pomp  as  a lawful  sovereign.  Richard  his  son  succeeded 
him  as  protector,  and  for  some  time  possessed  equal  authority 
with  his  father,  though  he  had  not  any  of  his  great  qualities. 


1 Diod.  1.  xv.  p.  385. 


m Id.  1.  xvi.  p.  410. 


348 


HISTORY  OF 


Dion,n  the  bravest,  and  at  the  same  time  the  most  prudent,  of 
the  Syracusans,  who  was  Dionysius’s  brother-in-law,  might  have 
been  of  great  support  to  him,  had  he  known  how  to  profit  by  his 
advice.  In  the  first  assembly  held  by  Dionysius  and  all  his 
friends,  Dion  spoke  in  so  wise  a manner  upon  what  was  neces- 
sary and  expedient  in  the  present  conjuncture,  as  showed  that 
the  rest  were  infants  in  judgment  in  comparison  with  him,  and  in 
regard  to  a just  boldness  and  freedom  of  speech,  were  no  more 
than  despicable  slaves  of  the  tyranny,  solely  employed  in  the 
abject  endeavour  of  pleasing  the  prince.  But  what  surprised 
and  amazed  them  most  was,  that  Dion,  at  a time  when  the  whole 
court  was  struck  with  terror  at  the  prospect  of  the  storm  already 
formed  on  the  side  of  Carthage,  and  just  ready  to  break  upon 
Sicily,  should  insist,  that  if  Dionysius  desired  peace,  he  would 
embark  immediately  for  Africa,  and  dispel  this  tempest  to  his 
satisfaction  ; or  if  he  preferred  making  war,  that  he  would  fur- 
nish and  maintain  at  his  own  expense  fifty  galleys  of  three 
benches  completely  equipped  for  service. 

Dionysius,  admiring  and  extolling  so  generous  a magnani- 
mity to  the  skies,  professed  the  highest  gratitude  to  him  for  his 
zeal  and  affection  ; but  the  courtiers,  who  looked  upon  Dion’s 
magnificence  as  a reproach  to  themselves,  and  his  great  power 
as  a lessening  of  their  own,  took  immediate  occasion  from  thence 
to  calumniate  him,  and  spared  no  expressions  that  might  in- 
fluence the  young  prince  against  him.  They  insinuated,  that 
in  making  himself  strong  at  sea,  he  would  open  his  way  to  the 
tyranny  ; and  that  with  his  vessels  he  designed  to  transfer  the  so- 
vereignty to  his  nephews,  the  sons  of  Aristomache. 

But  what  put  them  most  out  of  humour  with  Dion,  was  his 
manner  of  life,  which  was  a continual  censure  of  their  own. 
For  these  courtiers  having  presently  insinuated  themselves  into 
the  good  graces  of  the  young  tyrant,  who  had  been  wretchedly 
educated,  thought  of  nothing  but  of  supplying  him  perpetually 
with  new  amusements,  keeping  him  always  employed  in  feast- 
ing, abandoned  to  women,  and  devoted  to  all  manner  of  shame- 
ful pleasures.  In  the  beginning  of  his  reign  he  made  a riotous 
entertainment,®  which  continued  for  three  entire  months,  during 
all  which  time  his  palace,  shut  against  all  persons  of  sense  and 
reason,  was  crowded  with  drunkards,  and  resounded  with  no- 
thing but  low  buffoonery,  obscene  jests,  lewd  songs,  dances, 
masquerades,  and  every  kind  of  gross  and  dissolute  extrava- 
gance. It  is  therefore  natural  to  believe,  that  nothing  could  be 
more  offensive  and  disgusting  to  them  than  the  presence  of 
Dion,  who  gave  in  to  none  of  these  pleasures.  For  which  rea- 
son, painting  his  virtues  in  such  of  the  colours  of  vice  as  were 
most  likely  to  disguise  them,  they  found  means  to  calumniate  him 
" Plut.  in  Dion.  p.  960,  961.  0 Athen.  1.  x.  p.  435. 


DIONYSIUS  THE  YOUNGER. 


349 


with  the  prince,  and  to  make  his  gravity  pass  for  arrogance,  and 
his  freedom  of  speech  for  insolence  and  sedition.  If  he  ad- 
vanced any  wise  counsel,  they  treated  him  as  a sour  pedagogue, 
who  took  upon  him  to  obtrude  his  lectures,  and  to  school  his 
prince,  without  being  asked  ; and  if  he  refused  to  share  in  the 
revels  with  the  rest,  they  called  him  a man-hater,  a splenetic, 
melancholy  wretch,  who  from  the  fantastic  height  of  virtue  look- 
ed down  with  contempt  on  the  rest  of  the  world,  and  set  himself 
up  for  the  censor  of  mankind. 

And  indeed  it  must  be  confessed,  that  he  had  naturally  some- 
thing austere  and  rigid  in  his  manners  and  behaviour,  which 
seemed  to  denote  a haughtiness  of  disposition,  very  capable  not 
only  of  disgusting  a young  prince,  nurtured  from  his  infancy 
amidst  flatteries  and  submission,  but  even  his  best  friends,  and 
those  who  were  most  closely  attached  to  him.  Full  of  admira- 
tion for  his  integrity,  fortitude,  and  nobleness  of  sentiments,  they 
represented  to  him,  that  for  a statesman,  who  ought  to  know  how 
to  adapt  himself  to  the  different  tempers  of  men,  in  order  to  ap- 
ply them  to  his  purposes,  his  humour  was  much  too  rough  and 
forbidding. 

Plato  afterwards  took  pains  to  correct  that  defect  in  him/ 
by  making  him  intimate  with  a philosopher  of  a gay  and  polite 
turn  of  mind,  whose  conversation  was  well  calculated  to  inspire 
him  with  more  easy  and  insinuating  manners.  He  reminds  him 
also  of  that  failing  in  a letter,  wherein  he  thus  addresses  him  : 
Consider,  I beg  you , that  you  are  censured  as  being  deficient 
in  good  nature  and  affability  ; and  imprint  it  on  your  mind, 
that  the  most  certain  means  to  ensure  the  success  of  affairs,  is 
to  be  agreeable  to  the  persons  with  whom  we  have  to  transact 
them.  A haughty  carriage  keeps  people  at  a distance A and 
reduces  a man  to  pass  his  life  in  solitude.  Notwithstanding 
this  defect,  he  continued  to  be  highly  considered  at  court ; 
where  his  superior  abilities  and  transcendent  merit  made  him 
absolutely  necessary,  especially  at  a time  when  the  state  was 
threatened  with  great  danger  and  commotions. 

As  he  believed/  that  all  the  vices  of  young  Dionysius  were 
the  effect  of  his  bad  education,  and  entire  ignorance  of  his 
duty/  he  conceived  justly,  that  the  first  step  would  be  to  asso- 
ciate him  if  possible  with  persons  of  wit  and  sense,  whose  solid 
but  agreeable  conversation  might  at  once  instruct  and  divert 
him  : for  the  prince  did  not  naturally  want  parts  and  genius. 

The  sequel  will  show  that  Dionysius  the  younger  had  a natu- 
ral propensity  to  what  was  good  and  virtuous,  and  a taste  and  ca- 
l’ Plat.  Epist.  iv.  p.  327,  328. 

q 'H  8'  avQadtia  sprjuia  Zvvoikoq.  M.  Dacier  renders  these  words,  Pride  is 
always  the  companion  of  solitude.  I have  shown  elsewhere  wherein  this  version 
is  faulty.  Art  of  teaching  the  Belles  Lettres , vol.  iii.  p.  505. 

r Plut.  in  Dion.  p.  962.  Plat.  Epist.  vii.  p.  327,  328. 


350 


HISTORY  OF 


pacity  for  arts  and  sciences.  He  knew  how  to  set  a value  upon 
the  merit  and  talents  by  which  men  are  distinguished.  He  de- 
lighted in  conversing  with  persons  of  ability,  and  from  his  cor- 
respondence with  them,  made  himself  capable  of  the  highest  im- 
provements. He  went  so  far  as  to  familiarize  the  throne  with 
those  sciences  which  have  not  usually  the  privilege  of  approach- 
ing it ; and  by  rendering  them  in  a manner  his  favourites,  he 
gave  them  courage  to  make  their  appearance  in  courts.  His 
protection  was  the  patent  of  nobility,  by  which  he  raised  them 
to  honour  and  distinction.  Nor  was  he  insensible  to  the  joys  of 
friendship.  In  private  he  was  a good  parent,  relation,  and 
master,  and  acquired  the  affection  of  all  that  approached  him. 
He  was  not  naturally  inclined  to  violence  or  cruelty ; and  it 
might  be  said  of  him,  that  he  was  rather  a tyrant  by  succession 
and  inheritance,  than  by  temper  and  inclination. 

All  which  demonstrates,  that  he  might  have  made  a very 
tolerable  prince,  (not  to  say  a good  one,)  had  proper  care  been 
early  taken  to  cultivate  the  happy  disposition  which  he  brought 
into  the  world  with  him.  But  his  father,  to  whom  all  merit, 
even  in  his  own  children,  gave  umbrage,  industriously  sup- 
pressed in  him  all  tendency  to  goodness,  and  every  noble  and 
elevated  sentiment,  by  a base  and  obscure  education,  with  the 
view  of  preventing  his  attempting  any  thing  against  himself. 
It  was  therefore  necessary  to  find  for  him  a person  of  the  cha- 
racter before  mentioned,  or  rather  to  inspire  him  with  the  desire 
of  having  such  a one  found. 

This  was  what  Dion  laboured  with  wonderful  address.  He 
often  talked  to  him  of  Plato,  as  the  most  profound  and  illus- 
trious of  philosophers,  whose  merit  he  himself  had  experienced, 
and  to  whom  he  was  obliged  for  all  he  knew.  He  enlarged 
upon  the  brilliancy  of  his  genius,  the  extent  of  his  knowledge, 
the  amiableness  of  his  character,  and  the  charms  of  his  con- 
versation. He  represented  him  particularly  as  the  man  of  all 
others  most  capable  of  forming  him  in  the  arts  of  governing, 
upon  which  his  own  and  the  people’s  happiness  depended.  He 
told  him,  that  his  subjects,  governed  for  the  future  with  lenity 
and  indulgence,  as  a good  father  governs  his  family,  would 
voluntarily  render  that  obedience  to  his  moderation  and  justice, 
which  force  and  violence  extorted  from  them  against  their  will; 
and  that  by  such  a conduct  he  would,  from  a tyrant,  become 
a just  king,  to  whom  all  submission  would  be  paid  out  of  af- 
fection and  gratitude. 

It  is  incredible  how  much  these  discourses,  introduced  in 
conversation  from  time  to  time,  as  if  by  accident,  without 
affectation,  or  the  appearance  of  any  premeditated  design,  in- 
flamed the  young  prince  with  the  desire  of  knowing  and  con- 
versing with  Plato.  He  wrote  to  him  in  the  most  importunate 


DIONYSIUS  THE  YOUNGER. 


351 


and  obliging  manner : he  despatched  couriers  after  couriers  to 
hasten  his  voyage ; whilst  Plato,  who  apprehended  the  conse- 
quences, and  had  but  small  hopes  of  any  good  effect  from  it, 
protracted  the  affair,  and,  without  absolutely  refusing,  sufficient- 
ly intimated,  that  he  could  not  resolve  upon  it,  without  doing 
violence  to  himself.  The  obstacles  and  difficulties  made  to  the 
young  prince’s  request,  were  so  far  from  disgusting  him,  that 
they  only  served,  as  it  commonly  happens,  to  inflame  his  desire. 
The  Pythagorean  philosophers  of  Grcecia  Magna  in  Italy  joined 
their  entreaties  with  his  and  Dion’s,  who  on  his  part  redoubled 
his  solicitation,  and  used  the  strongest  arguments  to  conquer 
Plato’s  repugnance.  This  is  not,  said  he,  the  concern  of  a 
private  person,  hut  of  a powerful  prince,  whose  change  of 
manners  will  have  the  same  effect  throughout  his  ivhole  do- 
minions, with  the  extent  of  which  you  are  not  unacquainted. 
It  is  he  himself  who  makes  all  the  advances  ; who  importunes 
and  solicits  you  to  come  to  his  assistance,  and  employs  the 
interest  of  all  your  friends  to  that  purpose.  What  more 
favourable  conjuncture  could  we  expect  than  that  which  Divine 
Providence  now  offers  ? Are  you  not  afraid  that  your  delays 
will  give  the  flatterers,  who  surround  the  young  prince , the 
opportunity  of  drawing  him  over  to  themselves,  and  of  seduc- 
ing him  to  change  his  resolution  ? What  reproaches  would  you 
not  make  yourself,  and  what  dishonour  would  it  not  he  to  phi- 
losophy, should  it  ever  he  said,  that  Plato,  who  hy  his  counsels 
to  Dionysius  might  have  established  a wise  and  equitable  go- 
vernment in  Sicily , abandoned  it  to  all  the  evils  of  tyranny , from 
fear  of  undergoing  the  fatigues  of  a voyage,  or  from  1 know 
not  what  other  imaginary  difficulties  ? 

Plato  could  not  resist  such  earnest  solicitations.®  Vanquish- 
ed by  the  consideration  of  what  was  due  to  his  own  character, 
and  to  obviate  the  reproach  of  his  being  a philosopher  in  words 
only,  without  having  ever  shown  himself  such  in  his  actions, 
and  conscious  besides  of  the  great  advantages  which  Sicily 
might  acquire  from  his  voyage,  he  suffered  himself  to  be  per- 
suaded. 

The  flatterers  at  the  court  of  Dionysius,  terrified  with  the 
resolution  which  he  had  taken  contrary  to  their  remonstrances, 
and  fearing  the  presence  of  Plato,  the  consequences  of  which 
they  foresaw,  united  together  against  him  as  their  common 
enemy.  They  rightly  judged,  that  if,  according  to  the  new 
maxims  of  government,  all  things  were  to  be  measured  by  the 
standard  of  true  merit,  and  no  favour  was  to  be  expected  from 
the  prince,  but  for  services  done  to  the  state,  they  had  nothing 
farther  to  expect,  and  might  wait  their  whole  lives  at  court  to 
no  manner  of  purpose.  They  therefore  devised  a plan  to  ren- 
* Plut.  p.  962. 


352 


HISTORY  OF 


der  Plato’s  voyage  ineffectual,  though  they  were  not  able  to 
prevent  it : and  this  was  to  prevail  upon  Dionysius  to  recall 
Philistus  from  banishment,  who  was  not  only  an  able  soldier, 
but  a great  historian,  very  eloquent  and  learned,  and  a zealous 
assertor  of  the  tyranny.  They  hoped  to  find  a counterpoise  in 
him  against  Plato  and  his  philosophy.  Upon  his  being  banish- 
ed by  Dionysius  the  elder,  on  some  personal  discontent,  he  had 
retired  into  the  city  of  Adria,  where  it  is  believed  he  composed 
the  greatest  part  of  his  writings.  He  wrote  the  history  of 
Egypt  in  twelve  books,1  that  of  Sicily  in  eleven,  and  of  Diony- 
sius the  tyrant  in  six  ; all  which  works  are  entirely  lost.  Cicero 
praises  him  highly,11  and  calls  him  a little  Thucydides,  pene 
pusillus  Thucydides,  to  signify  that  he  copied  that  author,  and 
not  without  success.  He  was  therefore  recalled.  The  cour- 
tiers at  the  same  time  made  complaints  against  Dion  to  Diony- 
sius, accusing  him  of  having  held  conferences  with  Theodotus 
and  Heraclides,  the  secret  enemies  of  that  prince,  to  concert 
with  them  measures  for  subverting  the  tyranny. 

This  was  the  state  of  affairs  when  Plato  arrived  in  Sicily .x 
He  was  received  with  infinite  caresses,  and  with  the  highest 
marks  of  honour  and  respect.  Upon  his  landing,  he  found  one 
of  the  prince’s  chariots,  equally  magnificent  in  its  horses  and 
ornaments,  awaiting  him.  The  tyrant  offered  a sacrifice,  as  if 
some  singular  instance  of  good  fortune  had  befallen  him  : nor 
was  he  mistaken ; for  a wise  man  who  is  capable  of  giving  a 
prince  good  counsels,  is  a treasure  of  inestimable  value  to  a 
whole  nation.  But  the  worth  of  such  a person  is  rarely  known, 
and  more  rarely  applied  to  the  uses  which  might  be  made  of  it. 

Plato  found  the  most  happy  dispositions  imaginable  in  young 
Dionysius,  who  devoted  himself  entirely  to  his  lessons  and 
counsels.  But  as  he  had  himself  derived  infinite  improvement 
from  the  precepts  and  examples  of  Socrates  his  master,  the 
most  able  man  of  all  the  Pagan  world  in  forming  the  mind  to 
relish  truth,  he  took  care  to  adapt  himself  with  wonderful  ad- 
dress to  the  young  tyrant’s  humour,  avoiding  all  direct  attacks 
upon  his  passions ; taking  pains  to  acquire  his  confidence  by 
kind  and  insinuating  behaviour ; and  particularly  endeavouring 
to  render  virtue  amiable,  in  order  to  render  it  at  the  same  time 
triumphant  over  vice,  which  keeps  mankind  in  its  chains,  by 
the  sole  force  of  allurements,  pleasures,  and  voluptuousness. 

The  change  was  sudden  and  surprising.  The  young  prince, 

1 Diod.  1.  xiii.  p.  222. 

u Hunc  (Thucydidem)  consecutus  est  Syracusius  Philistus,  qui  cum  Dio- 
nysii  tyranni  familirissimus  esset,  otium  suum  consumpsit  in  historia  scri- 
benda,  maximeque  Thucydidem  est,  sicut  mihi  videtur,  imitatus.  Cic.  de 
Or  at.  1.  ii.  n.  57. 

Siculus  ille,  creber,  acutus,  brevis,  pene  pusillus  Thucydides.  Id.  Epist . 
xiii.  ad  Qu.  frat.  1.  ii.  x Plut.  in  Dion.  p.  963. 


DIONYSIUS  THE  YOUNGER. 


353 


who  till  then  had  abandoned  himself  to  idleness,  pleasure,  and 
luxury,  and  was  ignorant  of  all  the  duties  of  his  station,  the 
inevitable  consequence  of  a dissolute  life,  awaking  as  from  a 
lethargic  sleep,  began  to  open  his  eyes,  to  have  some  idea  of 
the  beauty  of  virtue,  and  to  relish  the  refined  pleasures  of  con- 
versation, equally  solid  and  agreeable.  He  was  now  as  pas- 
sionately fond  of  learning  and  instruction,  as  he  had  once  been 
averse  and  repugnant  to  them.  The  court,  which  always  apes 
the  prince,  and  falls  in  with  his  inclinations  in  every  thing,  en- 
tered into  the  same  way  of  thinking.  The  apartments  of  the 
palace,  like  so  many  schools  of  geometry,  were  full  of  the  dust 
made  use  of  by  the  professors  of  that  science  in  tracing  their 
figures  : and  in  a very  short  time  the  study  of  philosophy  and 
of  every  kind  of  literature  became  the  reigning  and  universal 
taste. 

The  great  benefit  of  these  studies,  in  regard  to  a prince, 
does  not  consist  alone  in  storing  his  mind  with  an  infinity  of  the 
most  curious,  useful,  and  often  necessary  information,  but  has 
the  farther  advantage  of  withdrawing  him  from  idleness,  indo- 
lence, and  the  frivolous  amusements  of  a court ; of  habituating 
him  to  a life  of  application  and  reflection  ; of  inspiring  him 
with  a desire  of  instructing  himself  in  the  duties  of  the  sove- 
reignty, and  of  knowing  the  characters  of  such  as  have  excelled 
in  the  art  of  reigning;  in  a word,  of  making  himself  capable  of 
governing  the  state  in  his  own  person,  and  of  seeing  every 
thing  with  his  own  eyes  ; that  is  to  say,  of  being  a king  indeed. 
And  this  it  was  that  the  courtiers  and  flatterers,  as  usually  hap- 
pens, were  unanimous  in  opposing. 

They  were  considerably  alarmed  by  an  expression  that  es- 
caped Dionysius,  and  showed  how  strong  an  impression  had 
already  been  made  upon  his  mind  by  the  discourses  he  had 
heard  upon  the  happiness  of  a king,  who  is  regarded  with  ten- 
der affection  by  his  people  as  their  common  father,  and  the 
wretched  condition  of  a tyrant,  whom  they  abhor  and  detest. 
Some  days  after  Plato’s  arrival,  was  the  time  appointed  for  a 
solemn  sacrifice,  which  was  annually  offered  in  the  palace  for 
the  prince’s  prosperity.  The  herald  having  prayed  to  this  ef- 
fect, according  to  custom,  That  it  would  please  the  gods  to 
support  the  tyranny , and  preserve  the  tyrant ; Dionysius,  who 
was  not  far  from  him,  and  to  whom  these  terms  began  to 
grow  odious,  called  out  to  him  aloud,  Will  you  not  give  over 
cursing  me  ? Philistus  and  his  party  were  infinitely  alarmed  at 
that  expression,  and  judged  from  it,  that  time  and  habit  must 
give  Plato  an  invincible  ascendant  over  Dionysius,  if  the  inter- 
course of  a few  days  could  so  entirely  alter  his  disposition. 
They  therefore  set  themselves  at  work  upon  new  and  more 
effectual  stratagems  against  him. 
vol.  hi.  ' 2 a 


354 


HISTORY  OF 


They  began  by  turning  the  retired  life  which  Dionysius  was 
induced  to  lead,  and  the  studies  in  which  he  employed  himself, 
into  ridicule,  as  if  it  was  intended  to  make  a philosopher  of 
him.  But  that  was  not  all  ; they  laboured  in  concert  to  render 
the  zeal  of  Dion  and  Plato  suspected,  and  even  odious  to  him. 
They  represented  them  as  impertinent  censors  and  imperious 
pedagogues,  y who  assumed  an  authority  over  him,  which  was 
neither  consistent  with  his  age  nor  rank.  It  is  no  wonder  that 
a young  prince  like  Dionysius,2  who,  with  the  most  excellent 
disposition,  and  amidst  the  best  examples,  would  have  found  it 
difficult  to  have  supported  himself,  should  at  length  give  way 
to  such  artful  insinuations  in  a court  that  had  long  been  infected, 
where  there  was  no  emulation  but  to  excel  in  vice,  and  where 
he  was  continually  besieged  by  a crowd  of  flatterers  incessantly 
praising  aiid  admiring  him  in  every  thing. 

But  the  principal  application  of  the  courtiers  was  to  decry 
the  character  and  conduct  of  Dion  himself;  no  longer  sepa- 
rately, nor  in  secret,  but  all  together,  and  in  public.  They 
talked  openly,  and  to  whoever  would  give  them  the  hearing, 
that,  it  was  visible  that  Dion  made  use  of  Plato’s  eloquence,  to 
fascinate  and  enchant  Dionysius,  with  design  to  draw  him  into 
a voluntary  resignation  of  the  throne,  that  he  might  take  pos- 
session of  it  for  his  nephews,  the  children  of  Aristomache,  and 
establish  them  in  the  sovereignty.  They  publicly  observed, 
that  it  was  very  mortifying  to  see  that  the  Athenians,  who  had 
formerly  invaded  Sicily  with  great  forces  both  by  sea  and  land, 
which  had  all  perished  there  without  being  able  to  take  Syra- 
cuse, should  now  with  a single  sophist  attain  their  point,  and 
subvert  the  tyranny  of  Dionysius,  by  persuading  him  to  dismiss 
the  10,000  strangers  who  composed  his  guard  ; to  lay  aside  his 
fleet  of  400  galleys,  which  he  always  kept  in  readiness  for  ser- 
vice ; and  to  disband  his  10,000  horse,  and  the  greatest  part  of 
his  foot ; for  the  sake  of  going  to  find  in  the  Academy  (the 
place  where  Plato  taught)  a pretended  Supreme  Good  which 
could  not  be  explained,  and  to  make  himself  happy  in  imagina- 
tion by  the  study  of  geometry  ; whilst  he  abandoned  to  Dion 
and  his  nephews  a real  and  substantial  felicity,  consisting  in 
empire,  riches,  luxury,  and  pleasure. 


y Tristes  et  superciliosos  aliense  vitse  censores,  publicos  ptedagogos.  Sen. 
Epist.  cxxiii. 

z Yix  artibus  honestis  pudor  retinetur,  nedum  inter  certamina  vitiorum 

Eudieitia,  aut  modestia,  aut  quidquam  probi  moris  servaretur.  Tacit.  Annal. 
iv.  c.  15. 


DIONYSIUS  THE  YOUNGER. 


355 


SECT.  II. 

Banishment  of  Dion.  Plato  quits  the  court  soon  after,  and  returns  into 
Greece.  Dion  admired  there  by  all  the  learned.  Plato  returns  to  Syracuse. 

The  courtiers,  intent  upon  taking  advantage  of  every  favour- 
able moment,  perpetually  besieged  the  young  prince ; and 
covering  their  secret  motives  under  the  appearance  of  zeal 
for  his  service,  and  an  affected  moderation  in  regard  to  Dion, 
incessantly  advised  him  to  take  proper  measures  for  the  se- 
curity of  his  life  and  throne.  Such  repeated  discourse  at 
first  raised  in  the  mind  of  Dionysius  violent  suspicions  of  Dion, 
which  presently  increased  into  fierce  resentment,  and  broke  out 
into  an  open  rupture.  Letters  were  privately  brought  to 
Dionysius,  written  by  Dion  to  the  Carthaginian  ambassa- 
dors, wherein  he  recommended  to  them,  when  they  should 
treat  of  peace  with  Dionysius , not  to  open  the  conferences  hut 
in  his  presence  ; because  he  would  assist  them  in  making  their 
treaty  more  firm  and  lasting.  Dionysius  read  these  letters  to 
Philistus,  and  having  concerted  with  him  what  measures  to  take,1 
he  amused  and  deceived  Dion  with  the  appearance  of  a recon- 
ciliation, and  led  him  alone  to  the  sea-side  below  the  citadel, 
where  he  showed  him  his  letters,  and  accused  him  of  having  en- 
tered into  a league  against  him,  with  the  Carthaginians.  Dion 
would  have  justified  himself,  but  he  refused  to  hear  him,  and 
made  him  immediately  go  on  board  a brigantine,  which  had 
orders  to  carry  him  to  the  coast  of  Italy,  and  to  leave  him 
there.  Dion  immediately  after  set  sail  for  Peloponnesus. 

So  harsh  and  unjust  a treatment  could  not  fail  of  making 
abundance  of  noise, b and  the  whole  city  declared  against  it : 
especially  as  it  was  reported,  though  without  foundation,  that 
Plato  had  been  put  to  death.  Dionysius, c who  apprehended 
the  consequences,  took  pains  to  appease  the  public  discontent, 
and  to  stifle  the  complaints.  He  gave  Dion’s  relations  two  ves- 
sels to  transport  to  him  in  Peloponnesus  his  riches  and  numerous 
family  ; for  he  had  the  equipage  of  a king. 

As  soon  as  Dion  was  gone,  Dionysius  made  Plato  change  his 
lodging,  and  brought  him  into  the  citadel;  in  appearance  to  do 
him  honour,  but  in  reality  to  assure  himself  of  his  person,  and 
prevent  him  from  going  to  join  Dion.  In  bringing  Plato  near- 
er to  him,  he  might  also  have  in  view  the  opportunity  of  hearing 
him  more  frequently  and  more  commodiously.  For,  charmed 
with  the  allurements  of  his  conversation,  and  studying  to  please 
him  in  every  thing,  and  to  merit  his  affection,  he  had  conceived 
an  esteem,  or  rather  passion  for  him,  which  rose  even  to  jea- 
lousy, but  a jealousy  of  that  violence,  that  could  suffer  neither 
a Diod.  1.  xvi.  p.  410,  411,  b Plut.  p.  964.  c Plat.  Ed.  vii. 

2 a 2 


356 


HISTORY  OF 


companion  nor  rival.  He  wished  to  engross  him  entirely  to 
himself,  to  reign  solely  in  his  thoughts  and  affections,  and  to  be 
the  only  object  of  his  love  and  esteem.  He  seemed  ready  to 
give  him  all  his  treasures  and  all  his  authority,  provided  he 
would  but  love  him  better  than  Dion,  and  not  prefer  the  latter’s 
friendship  to  his.  Plutarch  has  reason  to  call  this  passion  a 
tyrannic  affection .d  Plato  had  much  to  suffer  from  it ; for  it 
had  all  the  symptoms  of  the  most  ardent  jealousy.  Sometimes 
it  was  all  friendship,6  caresses,  and  fond  respect,  with  an  un- 
bounded openness  of  heart,  and  an  endless  swell  of  tender  sen- 
timents : sometimes  it  was  all  reproaches,  menaces,  fierce  pas- 
sion, and  wild  emotion  ; and  soon  after  it  sunk  into  repentance, 
excuses,  tears,  and  humble  entreaties  of  pardon  and  forgiveness. 

About  this  time  a war  broke  out  very  conveniently  for  Plato, 
which  obliged  Dionysius  to  restore  him  his  liberty,  and  send 
him  home.  At  his  departure  he  would  have  overwhelmed  him 
with  presents,  but  Plato  refused  them,  contenting  himself  with 
his  promise  to  recall  Dion  the  following  spring.  He  did  not 
keep  his  word,  and  only  sent  him  his  revenue,  desiring  Plato  in 
his  letters  to  excuse  his  breach  of  promise  at  the  time  prefixed, 
and  to  impute  it  only  to  the  war.  He  assured  him,  as  soon  as 
peace  should  be  concluded,  that  Dion  should  return  ; upon  con- 
dition, however,  that  he  should  continue  quiet,  and  not  inter- 
meddle in  affairs,  nor  endeavour  to  lessen  him  in  the  opinion  of 
the  Greeks. 

Plato,  on  his  return  to  Greece,  went  to  see  the  games  at 
Olympia,  where  he  happened  to  lodge  amongst  strangers  of  dis- 
tinction. He  ate  and  passed  whole  days  with  them,  living  in  a 
plain  and  simple  manner,  without  ever  mentioning  Socrates  or 
the  Academy,  or  making  himself  known  in  any  thing,  except 
that  his  name  was  Plato.  The  strangers  were  overjoyed  at 
having  met  with  so  mild  and  amiable  a companion  ; but  as  he 
never  talked  but  on  common  topics,  they  had  not  the  least  no- 
tion that  he  was  the  philosopher  whose  reputation  was  so  uni- 
versal. When  the  games  were  over,  they  went  with  him  to 
Athens,  where  he  provided  them  with  lodgings.  They  were 
scarce  arrived  there,  when  they  desired  him  to  carry  them  to  see 
the  famous  philosopher  of  his  name,  who  had  been  Socrates’s 
disciple.  Plato  told  them  smiling,  that  he  was  the  man  ; upon 
which  the  strangers,  surprised  at  their  having  possessed  so  in- 
estimable a treasure  without  knowing  it,  were  much  displeased 
with,  and  secretly  reproached  themselves  for,  not  having  dis- 
cerned the  great  merit  of  the  man,  through  the  veil  of  simpli- 

d ’HpaaQr)  rvpavviKOv  epura. 

e In  amore  hsec  omnia  insunt  vitia ; suspiciones,  inimicitiae,  injuriae,  indu- 
oiae,  bellum,  pax  rursum.  Terent.  in  Eunuch.  , 

In  amore  hsec  sunt  mala : bellum, 

Pax  rursum.  Her. 


DIONYSIUS  THE  YOUNGER.  357 

city  and  modesty  which  he  had  thrown  over  it,  whilst  they  ad- 
mired him  the  more  upon  that  account. 

The  time  Dion  passed  at  Athens  was  not  misspent. f He  em- 
ployed it  chiefly  in  the  study  of  philosophy,  for  which  he  had  a 
great  taste,  and  which  was  become  his  delight.  He  knew,  s how- 
ever, which  is  not  very  easy,  how  to  confine  it  within  just  bounds, 
and  never  gave  himself  up  to  it  at  the  expense  of  any  duty.  It 
was  at  the  same  time  that  Plato  made  him  contract  a particular 
friendship  with  his  nephew  Speusippus,  who,  uniting  the  easy 
and  insinuating  manners  of  a courtier  with  the  gravity  of  a phi- 
losopher, knew  how  to  associate  mirth  and  innocent  pleasure 
with  the  most  serious  affairs,  and,  by  that  character,  very  rare- 
ly found  amongst  men  of  learning,  was  the  most  proper  of  all 
men  to  soften  what  was  too  rough  and  austere  in  Dion’s  temper. 

Whilst  Dion  was  at  Athens,  it  fell  to  Plato’s  turn  to  give  the 
public  games,  and  to  have  tragedies  performed  at  the  feast  of 
Bacchus,  which  was  usually  attended  with  great  magnificence 
and  expense,  from  an  extraordinary  emulation  which  had  grown 
into  fashion.  Dion  defrayed  the  whole  charge.  Plato,  who 
sought  every  occasion  of  producing  him  to  the  public,  was  well 
pleased  to  resign  that  honour  to  him,  in  order  that  his  magnifi- 
cence might  make  him  still  better  beloved  and  esteemed  by  the 
Athenians. 

Dion  visited  also  the  other  cities  of  Greece,  was  present  at 
all  their  feasts  and  assemblies,  and  conversed  with  the  most 
excellent  wits  and  the  most  profound  statesmen.  He  was  not 
distinguished  in  company  by  the  haughtiness  and  pride  too 
common  in  persons  of  his  rank,  but,  on  the  contrary,  by  an 
unaffected,  simple,  and  modest  air;  and  still  more  by  the  ele- 
vation of  his  genius,  the  extent  of  his  knowledge,  and  the 
wisdom  of  his  reflections.  All  the  cities  paid  him  the  highest 
honours,  and  even  the  Lacedaemonians  declared  him  a citizen 
of  Sparta,  without  regarding  the  resentment  of  Dionysius, 
though  he  actually  was  assisting  them  at  that  time  with  a 
powerful  supply  in  their  war  against  the  Thebans.  So  many 
marks  of  esteem  and  distinction  alarmed  the  tyrant’s  jealousy. 
He  put  a stop  to  the  remittances  of  Dion’s  revenues,  and  or- 
dered them  to  be  received  by  his  own  officers. 

After  Dionysius  had  put  an  end  to  the  war h in  which  he 
was  engaged  in  Sicily,  of  which  history  relates  no  circumstance, 
he  was  afraid  that  his  treatment  of  Plato  would  prejudice  the 
philosophers  against  him,  and  make  him  pass  for  their  enemy. 
For  this  reason  he  invited  the  most  learned  men  of  Italy  to  his 
court,  where  he  held  frequent  assemblies,  in  which,  out  of  a 

f Plut.  in  Dion.  p.  964. 

s Retinuitque,  quod  est  difficillimuni,  ex  sapiential  modum.  Tacit,  in  vit. 
Agric.  n.  4.  h Plat.  Epist.  vii.  p.  338.  340.  Plut.  in  Dion.  p.  964.  966. 


358 


HISTORY  OF 


foolish  ambition,  he  endeavoured  to  excel  them  all  in  eloquence 
and  depth  of  knowledge  ; venting,  -without  application,  such  of 
Plato’s  discourses  as  he  retained.  But  as  he  had  those 
discourses  by  rote,  and  his  heart  had  never  been  rightly 
affected  with  them,  the  source  of  his  eloquence  was  soon  ex- 
hausted. He  then  perceived  what  he  had  lost  by  not  having 
made  a better  use  of  that  treasure  of  wisdom  which  he  had 
once  in  his  own  possession  and  under  his  own  roof,  and  by  not 
having  heard,  in  all  their  extent,  the  admirable  lectures  of  the 
greatest  philosopher  in  the  world. 

As  in  tyrants  every  thing  is  violent  and  impetuous,  Dionysius 
was  suddenly  seized  with  an  excessive  desire  of  seeing  Plato 
again,  and  used  all  means  for  that  purpose.  He  prevailed  upon 
Architas,  and  the  other  Pythagorean  philosophers,  to  write  to 
him,  that  he  might  return  with  all  manner  of  security  ; and  to 
be  bound  for  the  performance  of  all  the  promises  which  had 
been  made  to  him.  They  deputed  Archidemus  to  Plato,  and 
Dionysius  sent  at  the  same  time  two  galleys  of  three  benches 
of  rowers,  with  several  of  his  friends  on  board,  to  entreat  his 
compliance.  He  also  wrote  letters  to  him  with  his  own  hand, 
in  which  he  frankly  declared,  that  if  he  would  not  be  persuaded 
to  come  to  Sicily,  Dion  had  nothing  to  expect  from  him ; but 
that  if  he  came,  there  was  nothing  that  he  would  not  be  inclined 
to  do  in  his  favour. 

Dion  received  several  letters  at  the  same  time  from  his  wife 
and  sister,  who  pressed  him  to  prevail  upon  Plato  to  make  a 
voyage,  and  to  satisfy  the  impatience  of  Dionysius,  that  he 
might  have  no  new  pretexts  against  him  upon  that  account. 
Whatever  repugnance  Plato  had  to  it,  he  could  not  resist  the 
warm  solicitations  made  to  him,  and  determined  to  go  to  Sicily 
for  the  third  time,  at  seventy  years  of  age. 

His  arrival  gave  the  whole  people  new  hopes,  who  flattered 
themselves  that  his  wisdom  would  at  length  overthrow  the  ty- 
ranny ; and  the  joy  of  Dionysius  was  inexpressible.  He  ap- 
pointed the  apartments  of  his  garden  for  his  lodging,  the  most 
honourable  in  the  palace,  and  had  so  much  confidence  in  him, 
that  he  suffered  him  to  have  access  at  all  hours,  without  being 
searched  ; a favour  not  granted  to  any  of  his  best  friends. 

After  the  first  caresses  were  over,  Plato  was  anxious  to  enter 
upon  Dion’s  affair,  which  he  had  much  at  heart,  and  which  was 
the  principal  motive  of  his  voyage.  But  Dionysius  put  it  off 
at  first ; to  which  ensued  complaints  and  murmuriugs,  though 
not  outwardly  expressed  for  some  time.  The  tyrant  took  great 
care  to  conceal  his  sentiments,  endeavouring  by  all  manner  of 
honours,  and  by  all  possible  regard  and  complaisance,  to  abate 
his  friendship  for  Dion.  Plato  dissembled  on  his  side,  and 


DIONYSIUS  THE  YOUNGER.  350 

though  extremely  shocked  at  so  notorious  a breach  of  faith,  he 
kept  his  opinion  to  himself. 

Whilst  they  were  upon  these  terms,  and  believed  that  nobody 
penetrated  their  secret,  Helicon  of  Cyzicum,  one  of  Plato’s 
particular  friends,  foretold  that  on  a certain  day  there  would  be 
an  eclipse  of  the  sun  ; which  happening  according  to  his  pre- 
diction exactly  at  the  hour  assigned,  Dionysius  was  so  much 
surprised  and  astonished  at  it,  (a  proof  that  he  was  no  great  phi- 
losopher,) that  he  made  him  a present  of  a talent.'  Aristippus, 
jesting  with  the  other  philosophers  upon  that  occasion,  said, 
that  he  had  also  something  very  incredible  and  extraordinary 
to  foretell.  Upon  being  pressed  to  explain  himself,  I pro- 
phesy, said  he,  that  it  will  not  he  long  before  Dionysius  and 
Plato,  who  seem  to  agree  so  well  with  each  other,  will  be 
enemies . 

Dionysius  verified  this  prediction  ; for  being  weary  of  the 
constraint  he  laid  upon  himself,  he  ordered  all  Dion’s  lands 
and  effects  to  be  sold,  and  applied  the  money  to  his  own  use. 
At  the  same  time  he  made  Plato  quit  the  apartments  in  the 
garden,  and  gave  him  another  lodging  without  the  castle  in  the 
midst  of  his  guards,  who  had  long  hated  him,  and  would  have 
been  glad  of  an  opportunity  to  kill  him,  because  he  had  advised 
Dionysius  to  renounce  the  tyranny,  to  disband  them,  and  to  live 
without  any  other  guard  than  the  love  of  his  people.  Plato 
was  sensible  that  he  owed  his  life  to  the  tyrant’s  favour,  who 
restrained  the  fury  of  his  guard. 

Architas,  the  celebrated  Pythagorean  philosopher,  who  was 
the  principal  person  and  supreme  magistrate  of  Tarentum, 
had  no  sooner  heard  of  Plato’s  great  danger,  than  he  sent  aim 
bassadors  with  a galley  of  thirty  oars  to  demand  him  from  Dio- 
nysius, and  to  remind  him,  that  he  had  come  to  Syracuse  only 
upon  his  promise,  and  that  of  all  the  Pythagorean  philosophers, 
who  had  engaged  for  his  safety ; that  therefore  he  could  not 
retain  him  against  his  will,  nor  suffer  any  insult  to  be  done  to 
his  person,  without  a manifest  breach  of  faith,  and  absolutely 
forfeiting  the  opinion  of  all  honest  men.  These  just  remon- 
strances awakened  a remnant  of  shame  in  the  tyrant,  who  at 
last  permitted  Plato  to  return  into  Greece. 

Philosophy  and  wisdom  abandoned  the  palace  with  him.k 
To  the  conversations,  as  agreeable  as  useful,  to  that  taste  and 
passion  for  the  arts  and  sciences,  to  the  grave  and  judicious 
reflections  of  a profoundly  wise  politician,  idle  tattle,1  frivolous 
amusements,  and  a stupid  indolence,,  entirely  averse  to  every 
thing  serious  or  reasonable,  were  seen  to  succeed.  Gluttony, 
drunkenness,  and  debauchery  resumed  their  former  empire  at 

’ A thousand  crowns.  k Plut.  in  Moral,  p.  52. 

1 To  \t]puv,  ctpovma,  \r}Qri,  tvrjbtia. 


360 


HISTORY  OF 


the  court,  and  transformed  it  from  the  school  of  virtue,  which  it 
had  been  under  Plato,  into  the  real  stable  of  Circe. 

SECT.  III. 

Dion  sets  out  to  deliver  Syracuse.  Sudden  and  fortunate  success  of  his  enter- 
prise. Horrid  ingratitude  of  the  Syracusans.  Unparalleled  goodness  of 
Dion  to  them  and  his  most  cruel  enemies.  His  death. 

When  Plato  had  quitted  Sicily,"1  Dionysius 
Ant  C636l  threw  off  all  reserve,  and  married  his  sister 
Arete,  Dion’s  wife,  to  Timocrates,  one  of  his 
friends.  So  unworthy  a treatment  was,  in  a manner,  the  signal 
of  war.  From  that  moment,  Dion  resolved  to  attack  the 
tyrant  with  open  force,  and  to  revenge  himself  for  all  the 
wrongs  he  had  done  him.  Plato  did  all  in  his  power  to  make 
him  change  his  resolution ; but  finding  his  endeavours  ineffec- 
tual, he  foretold  the  misfortunes  he  was  about  to  occasion,  and 
declared  that  he  must  expect  neither  assistance  nor  relief  from 
him ; that  as  he  had  been  the  guest  and  companion  of  Dio- 
nysius, had  lodged  in  his  palace,  and  joined  in  the  same  sacri- 
fices with  him,  he  should  never  forget  the  duties  of  hospitality; 
and  at  the  same  time,  not  to  be  wanting  to  his  friendship  for 
Dion,  that  he  would  continue  neuter,  always  ready  to  discharge 
the  offices  of  a mediator  between  them,  in  order  to  reconcile 
them  ; though  he  should  oppose  their  designs,  when  they  tended 
to  the  destruction  of  each  other. 

Whether  through  prudence  or  gratitude,  or  the  conviction 
that  Dion  could  not  justifiably  undertake  to  dethrone  Dionysius; 
this  was  Plato’s  opinion.  On  the  other  hand,  Speusippus,  and 
all  the  rest  of  Dion’s  friends,  perpetually  exhorted  him  to  go 
and  restore  liberty  to  Sicily,  which  opened  its  arms  to  him,  and 
was  ready  to  receive  him  with  the  utmost  joy.  This  was  in 
deed  the  disposition  of  Syracuse,  which  Speusippus,  during 
his  residence  there  with  Plato,  had  sufficiently  experienced. 
This  was  the  universal  cry ; whilst  they  importuned  and  con- 
jured Dion  to  come  thither,  desiring  him  not  to  be  in  pain  for 
the  want  of  ships  or  troops,  but  only  to  embark  in  the  first 
merchant  vessel  he  met  with,  and  lend  his  person  and  name  to 
the  Syracusans  against  Dionysius. 

Dion  did  not  hesitate  any  longer  to  take  that  resolution, 
which  in  one  respect  cost  him  not  a little.  From  the  time  that 
Dionysius  had  obliged  him  to  quit  Syracuse  and  Sicily,  he  had 
led  in  his  banishment  the  most  agreeable  life  it  was  possible  to 
imagine,  for  a person  who  like  him  had  contracted  a taste  for 
the  delights  of  study.  He  enjoyed  in  peace  the  conversation 
of  the  philosophers,  and  was  present  at  their  disputations ; 
m Plut.  in  Dion.  p.  966.  968. 


DIONYSIUS  THE  YOUNGER. 


361 


shining  in  a manner  entirely  peculiar  to  himself,  by  the  great- 
ness of  his  genius  and  the  solidity  of  his  judgment;  going  to 
all  the  cities  of  the  learned  Greece,  to  see  and  converse  with 
the  most  eminent  for  their  knowledge  and  capacity,  and  to  cor- 
respond with  the  ablest  politicians ; leaving  every  where  the 
marks  of  his  liberality  and  magnificence,  equally  beloved  and 
respected  by  all  that  knew  him;  and  receiving  wherever  he 
came,  the  highest  honours,  which  were  rendered  more  to  his 
merit  than  his  birth.  It  was  from  so  happy  a life  that  he  with- 
drew himself  to  go  to  the  relief  of  his  country,  which  implored 
his  protection,  and  to  deliver  it  from  the  yoke  of  a tyranny 
under  which  it  had  long  groaned. 

No  enterprise  perhaps  was  ever  formed  with  so  much  bold- 
ness, or  conducted  with  so  much  prudence.  Dion  began  to 
raise  foreign  troops  privately  by  proper  agents,  for  the  better 
concealment  of  his  design.  A great  number  of  considerable 
persons,  who  were  at  the  head  of  affairs,  joined  with  him. 
But  what  is  very  surprising,  of  all  those  whom  the  tyrant  had 
banished,  and  who  were  not  less  than  1000,  only  twenty-five 
accompanied  him  in  this  expedition  ; so  much  had  fear  got  pos- 
session of  them.  The  isle  of  Zacynthus  was  the  place  of  ren- 
dezvous, where  the  troops  assembled  to  the  number  of  almost 
800  ; but  all  of  them  of  tried  courage  on  great  occasions,  excel- 
lently disciplined  and  robust,  of  an  audacity  and  experience 
rarely  to  be  found  amongst  the  most  brave  and  warlike ; and, 
in  fine,  highly  capable  of  animating  the  troops  which  Dion  was 
in  hopes  of  finding  in  Sicily,  and  of  setting  them  the  example  of 
fighting  with  all  the  valour  so  noble  an  enterprise  required. 

But  when  they  were  to  set  forwards,  and  it  was  known  that 
this  armament  was  intended  against  Sicily  and  Dionysius,  for 
till  then  it  had  not  been  declared,  they  were  all  in  a consterna- 
tion, and  repented  their  having  engaged  in  an  enterprise  which 
they  could  not  avoid  considering  as  the  effect  of  extreme  rash- 
ness and  folly,  that  in  the  last  despair  was  for  putting  every 
thing  to  the  hazard.  Dion  had  occasion  at  this  time  for  all 
his  resolution  and  eloquence  to  reanimate  the  troops  and  re- 
move their  fears.  But  after  he  had  spoken  to  them,  and,  with 
an  assured,  though  modest  tone,  had  made  them  understand, 
that  he  did  not  lead  them  in  this  expedition  as  soldiers,  but  as 
officers,  to  put  them  at  the  head  of  the  Syracusans  and  all  the 
people  of  Sicily,  who  had  long  been  prepared  for  a revolt,  their 
dread  and  sadness  were  changed  into  shouts  of  joy,  and  they 
desired  nothing  so  much  as  to  proceed  on  their  voyage. 

Dion,  having  prepared  a magnificent  sacrifice  to  be  offered  to 
Apollo,  put  himself  at  the  head  of  his  troops  completely 
armed,  and  in  that  equipage  marched  in  procession  to  the  tem- 
ple. He  afterwards  gave  a great  feast  to  the  whole  company. 


362 


HISTORY  OF 


at  the  end  of  which,  after  the  libations  and  solemn  prayers 
had  been  made,  there  happened  a sadden  eclipse  of  the  moon. 
Dion,  who  was  well  versed  in  the  causes  of  such  appearances, 
reassured  his  soldiers,  who  were  at  first  in  some  terror  upon  that 
account.  The  next  day  they  embarked  on  board  two  trading 
vessels,  which  were  followed  by  a third  not  so  large,  and  by  two 
barks  of  thirty  oars. 

Who  could  have  imagined,  says  an  historian,0  that  a man 
with  two  merchant-vessels  should  ever  dare  to  attack  a prince 
who  had  400  ships  of  war, 0 100,000  foot,  and  10,000  horse, 
with  magazines  of  arms  and  corn  in  proportion,  and  treasures 
sufficient  to  pay  and  maintain  them  ; who,  besides  all  this,  was 
in  possession  of  one  of  the  greatest  and  strongest  cities  then  in 
the  world,  with  ports,  arsenals,  and  impregnable  citadels,  with 
the  additional  strength  and  support  of  a great  number  of  potent 
allies  ? The  event  will  show,  whether  force  and  power  are  ad- 
amantine chains  for  retaining  a state  in  subjection,  as  the  elder 
Dionysius  flattered  himself ; or  whether  the  goodness,  humanity, 
and  justice  of  princes,  and  the  love  of  subjects,  are  not  infi- 
nitely stronger  and  more  indissoluble  ties. 

Dion  having  put  to  sea  with  his  small  body  of  troops,  was 
twelve  days  under  sail  with  little  wind,  p and  the  thirteenth  ar- 
rived at  Pachynus,  a cape  of  Sicily,  about  twelve  or  fifteen 
leagues  from  Syracuse.  When  they  came  to  that  place,  the  pilot 
gave  notice  that  they  must  land  directly,  as  there  was  reason  to 
fear  a hurricane,  and  therefore  it  would  not  be  proper  to  put  to 
sea.  But  Dion,  who  was  apprehensive  of  making  his  descent  so 
near  the  enemy,  and  chose  to  land  farther  off,  doubled  the  cape 
of  Pachynus.  He  had  no  sooner  passed  it,  than  a furious  storm 
arose,  attended  with  rain,  thunder,  and  lightning,  which  drove 
his  ships  to  the  eastern  coast  of  Africa,  where  they  were  in 
great  danger  of  being  dashed  to  pieces  against  the  rocks. 
Happily  for  them  a south  wind  rising  suddenly,  contrary  to 
expectation,  they  unfurled  all  their  sails,  and  after  having  made 
vows  to  the  gods,  they  stood  out  to  sea  for  Sicily.  They  ran 
in  this  manner  four  days,  and  on  the  fifth  entered  the  post  of 
Minoa,  a small  town  of  Sicily  under  the  Carthaginians,  whose 

n Diod.  1.  xvi.  p.  413. 

0 It  is  not  easy  to  comprehend  how  the  t wo  Dionysii  were  capable  of  main- 
taining so  great  a force  by  sea  and  land,  their  dominions  being  only  a part  of 
Sicily,  and  consequently  of  no  great  extent.  It  is  true,  that  the  city  of  Syra- 
cuse had  been  very  much  enriched  by  commerce;  and  undoubtedly  those  two 
princes  received  great  contributions  from  the  cities  dependant  upon  them 
both  in  Sicily  and  Italy  : but  it  is  still  no  easy  matter  to  conceive  how  all  this 
could  be  sufficient  for  the  enormous  expenses  of  Dionysius  the  elder,  in  fitting 
out  great  fleets,  raising  and  maintaining  numerous  armies,  and  erecting  mag- 
nificent buildings.  1 1 were  to  be  wished,  that  historians  had  given  us  some 
better  lights  upon  this  head. 

p Plut.  in  Dion.  p.  968.  972.  Diod.  1.  xvi.  p.  414.  417* 


DIONYSIUS  THE  YOUNGER. 


363 

commander  Synalus  was  Dion’s  particular  friend  and  guest. 
They  were  perfectly  well  received,  and  would  have  stayed 
there  some  time  to  refresh  themselves,  after  the  rude  fatigues 
they  had  suffered  during  the  storm,  if  they  had  not  been  in- 
formed that  Dionysius  was  absent,  having  embarked  some  days 
before  for  the  coast  of  Italy,  attended  by  fourscore  vessels. 
The  soldiers  demanded  earnestly  to  be  led  on  against  the  ene- 
my; and  Dion,  having  desired  Synalus  to  send  his  baggage 
after  him  at  the  proper  time,  marched  directly  to  Syracuse. 

His  troops  increased  considerably  upon  his  rout,  by  the  great 
number  of  those  who  came  to  join  him  from  all  parts.  The 
news  of  his  arrival  being  soon  known  at  Syracuse,  Timocrates, 
who  had  married  Dion’s  wife,  the  sister  of  Dionysius,  and  to 
whom  he  had  left  the  command  of  the  city  in  his  absence,  de- 
spatched a courier  to  him  into  Italy,  with  advice  of  Dion’s 
progress.  But  the  courier,  when  almost  at  his  journey’s  end, 
was  so  fatigued  from  having  run  the  best  part  of  the  night, 
that  he  found  himself  under  the  necessity  of  stopping  to  take 
a little  sleep.  In  the  mean  time,  a wolf,  attracted  by  the  smell 
of  a peace  of  meat  which  he  had  in  his  wallet,  came  to  the 
place,  and  ran  away  with  both  the  flesh  and  the  bag,  in  which 
he  had  also  put  his  despatches.  Dionysius  was  by  this  means 
prevented  for  some  time  from  knowing  that  Dion  was  arrived, 
and  then  received  the  news  from  other  hands. 

When  Dion  was  near  the  Anapus,  which  runs  about  half  a 
league  from  the  city,  he  ordered  his  troops  to  halt,  and  offered 
a sacrifice  upon  the  river-side,  addressing  his  prayers  to  the 
rising  sun.  All  who  were  present,  seeing  him  with  a wreath 
of  flowers  upon  his  head,  which  he  wore  upon  account  of 
the  sacrifice,  crowned  themselves  also  in  the  same  manner,  as 
animated  with  one  and  the  same  spirit.  He  had  been  joined  on 
his  march  by  at  least  5000  men,  and  advanced  with  them  to- 
wards the  city.  The  most  considerable  of  the  inhabitants 
came  out  in  white  habits  to  receive  him  at  the  gates.  At  the 
same  time  the  people  fell  upon  the  tyrant’s  friends,  and  upon 
the  spies  and  informers,  AN  ACCURSED  RACE  OF  wretches, 
THE  ENEMIES  OF  THE  GODS  AND  MEN  ,p  says  Plutarch,  who 
made  it  the  daily  business  of  their  lives  to  disperse  them- 
selves into  all  parts,  to  mingle  with  the  citizens,  to  pry  into 
all  their  affairs,  and  to  report  to  the  tyrant  whatever  they  said 
or  thought,  and  often  what  they  neither  said  nor  thought.  These 
were  the  first  victims  to  the  fury  of  the  people,  and  were 
knocked  on  the  head  with  clubs  immediately.  Timocrates,  not 
able  to  throw  himself  into  the  citadel,  mounted  on  horseback, 
and  escaped  from  the  city. 


f ' AvGph)7rovg  avoowve,  Kctl  &tdig  ixGpovQ. 


364 


HISTORY  OP 


At  that  instant  Dion  appeared  within  sight  of  the  walls. 
He  marched  at  the  head  of  his  troops  magnificently  armed,  with 
his  brother  Megacles  on  one  side,  and  Callippus  the  Athenian 
on  the  other,  both  crowned  with  chaplets  of  flowers.  After 
him  came  100  of  the  foreign  soldiers,  very  fine  troops,  whom 
he  had  chosen  for  his  guard.  The  rest  followed  in  order  of 
battle,  with  their  officers  at  the  head  of  them.  The  Syracu- 
sans beheld  them  with  inexpressible  satisfaction,  and  received 
them  as  a sacred  procession,  whom  the  gods  themselves  regarded 
with  pleasure,  and  who  restored  them  their  liberty  with  the 
democracy,  forty-eight  years  after  they  had  been  banished  from 
their  city. 

After  Dion  had  made  his  entry,  he  ordered  the  trumpets  to 
sound,  to  appease  the  noise  and  tumult ; and  silence  being 
made,  a herald  proclaimed,  that  Dion  and  Megacles  were  come 
to  abolish  the  tyranny,  and  to  free  the  Syracusans  and  all  the 
people  of  Sicily  from  the  yoke  of  a tyrant.  And  being  desirous 
to  harangue  the  people  in  person,  he  went  to  the  upper  part  of 
the  city,  through  the  quarter  called  Achradina.  Wherever  he 
passed,  the  Syracusans  had  set  out,  on  both  sides  of  the  streets, 
tables  and  bowls,  and  had  prepared  victims ; and  as  he  came 
before  their  houses,  they  threw  all  sorts  of  flowers  upon  him, 
addressing  vows  and  prayers  to  him  as  to  a god.  Such  was  the 
origin  of  idolatry,  which  paid  divine  honours  to  those  who  had 
done  the  people  any  great  and  signal  services.  And  can 
there  be  any  service,  any  gift,  so  valuable  as  that  of  liberty  ! 
Not  far  from  the  citadel,  and  below  the  place  called  Pentapylae, 
stood  a sun-dial  upon  a high  pedestal,  erected  by  Dionysius. 
Dion  placed  himself  upon  it,  and  in  a speech  to  the  people,  who 
had  crowded  around,  exhorted  them  to  employ  their  utmost 
efforts  for  the  recovery  and  preservation  of  their  liberty.  The 
Syracusans,  transported  with  what  he  said,  and  anxious  to  ex- 
press their  gratitude  and  affection,  elected  him  and  his  brother 
captains-general  with  supreme  authority  ; and  by  their  consent, 
and  at  their  entreaty,  joined  with  them  twenty  of  the  most  con- 
siderable citizens,  half  of  whom  were  of  the  number  of  those 
who,  having  been  banished  by  Dionysius,  had  returned  with 
Dion. 

Having  afterwards  taken  the  castle  of  Epipolm,  he  set  the 
citizens  who  were  prisoners  in  it  at  liberty,  and  fortified  it  with 
strong  works.  Dionysius  arrived  from  Italy  seven  days  after, 
and  entered  the  citadel  by  sea.  The  same  day  a great  number 
of  carriages  brought  Dion  the  arms  which  he  had  left  with  Sy- 
nalus.  These  he  immediately  distributed  amongst  the  citizens 
who  were  unprovided.  All  the  rest  armed  and  equipped  them- 
selves as  well  as  they  could,  expressing  the  greatest  ardour  and 
zeal. 


DIONYSIUS  THE  YOUNGER. 


365 


Dionysius  began  by  sending  ambassadors  to  Dion  and  the 
Syracusans  with  proposals,  which  seemed  very  advantageous. 
The  answer  was,  that  by  way  of  preliminary  he  must  abdicate 
the  tyranny ; to  which  Dionysius  did  not  seem  averse.  From 
thence  he  came  to  interviews  and  conferences  ; which  were  only 
feints  to  gain  time,  and  abate  the  ardour  of  the  Syracusans  by 
the  hope  of  an  accommodation.  Accordingly,  having  made  the 
deputies,  who  were  sent  to  treat  with  him,  prisoners,  he  sud- 
denly attacked,  with  a great  part  of  his  troops,  the  wall,  with 
which  the  Syracusans  had  surrounded  the  citadel,  and  made 
several  breaches  in  it.  So  warm  and  unexpected  an  assault  put 
Dion’s  soldiers  into  great  confusion,  and  they  immediately  fled. 
Dion  endeavoured  in  vain  to  stop  them  ; and  believing  example 
more  efficacious  than  words,  he  threw  himself  fiercely  into  the 
midst  of  the  enemy,  where  he  stood  the  charge  with  intrepid 
courage,  and  killed  great  numbers  of  them.  He  received  a 
wound  in  the  hand  from  a spear ; his  armour  was  scarce  proof 
against  the  great  number  of  darts  thrown  at  him,  and  his  shield 
being  pierced  through  in  many  places  with  spears  and  javelins, 
he  was  at  length  beaten  down.  His  soldiers  immediately 
brought  him  off  from  the  enemy.  He  left  Timonides  to  com- 
mand them,  and  getting  on  horseback,  rode  through  the  whole 
city,  stopped  the  flight  of  the  Syracusans,  and  taking  the  foreign 
soldiers,  whom  he  had  left  to  guard  the  quarter  called  Achra- 
dina,  he  led  them  on  fresh  against  Dionysius’s  troops,  who  were 
already  fatigued,  and  entirely  discouraged  by  so  vigorous  and 
unexpected  a resistance.  It  was  now  no  longer  a battle,  but  a 
pursuit.  A great  number  of  the  tyrant’s  troops  were  killed  on 
the  spot,  and  the  rest  escaped  with  difficulty  into  the  citadel. 
This  victory  was  brilliant  and'  glorious.  The  Syracusans,  to 
reward  the  valour  of  the  foreign  troops,  gave  each  of  them  a 
considerable  sum  of  money  ; and  those  soldiers,  to  honour  Dion, 
presented  him  with  a crown  of  gold. 

Soon  after  came  heralds  from  Dionysius,  with  several  letters 
for  Dion  from  the  women  of  his  family,  and  with  one  from 
Dionysius  himself.  Dion  ordered  them  all  to  be  read  in  a full 
assembly.  That  of  Dionysius  was  couched  in  the  form  of  a 
request  and  justification,  intermixed  however  with  the  most 
terrible  menaces  against  the  persons  who  were  dearest  to  Dion  ; 
his  sister,  wife,  and  son.  It  was  written  with  an  art  and  ad- 
dress exceedingly  well  calculated  to  render  Dion  suspected. 
Dionysius  put  him  in  mind  of  the  ardour  and  zeal  he  had  for- 
merly expressed  for  the  support  of  the  tyranny.  He  exhorted 
him  in  language,  though  covert  and  somewhat  obscure,  yet 
sufficiently  plain  to  be  understood,  not  to  abolish  it  entirely  ; 
but  to  preserve  it  for  himself : not  to  give  the  people  their  li- 
berty, who  at  heart  had  no  attachment  to  him  ; nor  to  abandon 


366 


HISTORY  OF 


his  own  safety,  and  that  of  his  friends  and  relations,  to  the  ca- 
pricious humour  of  a violent  and  inconstant  multitude. 

The  reading  of  this  letter  had  the  effect  which  Dionysius 
had  proposed  from  it.q  The  Syracusans,  without  regard  to 
Dion’s  goodness  to  them,  and  the  greatness  of  his  soul  in  for- 
getting his  dearest  interests,  and  the  ties  ©f  nature,  to  restore 
them  their  liberty,  took  umbrage  at  his  too  great  authority, 
and  conceived  injurious  suspicions  of  him.  The  arrival  of 
Heraclides  confirmed  them  in  their  sentiments,  and  determined 
them  to  act  accordingly.  He  was  one  of  the  banished  persons, 
a good  soldier,  and  well  known  amongst  the  troops,  from 
having  been  in  considerable  commands  under  the  tyrant,  very 
bold  and  ambitious,  and  a secret  enemy  of  Dion’s,  between 
whom  and  himself  there  had  been  some  difference  in  Pelopon- 
nesus. He  came  to  Syracuse  with  seven  galleys  of  three 
benches  of  oars,  and  three  other  vessels,  not  to  join  Dion,  but 
with  the  resolution  of  marching  with  his  own  forces  against  the 
tyrant,  whom  he  found  reduced  to  shut  himself  up  in  the  citadel. 
His  first  endeavour  was  to  ingratiate  himself  with  the  people, 
for  which  his  open  and  insinuating  behaviour  made  him  very 
fit ; whilst  Dion’s  austere  gravity  was  offensive  to  the  multitude  ; 
especially  as  they  were  become  more  haughty  and  untractable 
from  the  last  victory,  and  expected  to  be  treated  like  a popular 
state/  even  before  they  could  call  themselves  a free  people  ; 
that  is  to  say,  in  the  full  sense  of  the  Greek  terms,  they  wished 
to  be  used  with  complaisance,  flattery,  regard,  and  a deference 
to  all  their  capricious  humours. 

What  gratitude  could  be  expected  from  a people  that  con- 
sulted only  their  passions  and  blind  prejudices  ? The  Syracu- 
sans, of  their  own  accord,  formed  an  assembly  immediately,  and 
chose  Heraclides  admiral.  Dion  came  unexpectedly  thither, 
and  complained  highly  of  such  a proceeding;  as  the  charge 
conferred  upon  Heraclides  was  an  abridgment  of  his  office  ; that 
he  was  no  longer  generalissimo  if  another  commanded  at  sea. 
These  remonstrances  obliged  the  Syracusans,  against  their  will, 
to  deprive  Heraclides  of  the  office  they  had  so  lately  conferred 
upon  him.  When  the  assembly  broke  up,  Dion  sent  for  him, 
and  after  some  gentle  reprimands  for  his  strange  conduct 
towards  him  in  so  delicate  a conjuncture,  wherein  the  least  di- 
vision amongst  them  might  ruin  every  thing,  he  summoned  a 
new  assembly  himself,  and,  in  the  presence  of  the  whole  people, 
appointed  Heraclides  admiral,  and  gave  him  a guard,  as  he  had 
himself.  • 

He  thought  by  dint  of  kind  offices  to  get  the  better  of  his 
rival’s  ill-will.  Heraclides,  in  his  expressions  and  outward  be- 

Plut,  in  Dion.  p.  972.  975-  Diod.  1.  xvi.  p.  419.  422. 

!’  lTpo  tov  drj/xog  elvai , to  SrjfxaywyufrBcu  SeXovrfg. 


DIONYSIUS  THE  YOUNGER. 


367 


haviour,  made  his  court  to  Dion,  confessed  his  obligations  to  him, 
promised  eternal  gratitude,  was  mean  and  submissive  in 'his 
presence,  and  obeyed  his  orders  with  a promptitude  aud  punc- 
tuality which  seemed  to  imply  an  entire  devotion  to  his  service, 
and  a desire  of  occasions  to  do  him  pleasure.  But  underhand, 
by  his  intrigues  and  cabals,  he  influenced  the  people  against  him, 
and  opposed  his  designs  in  every  thing.  If  Dion  gave  his  con- 
sent that  Dionysius  should  quit  the  citadel  by  treaty,  he  was 
accused  of  favouring  and  intending  to  save  him:  if,  to  satisfy 
them,  he  continued  the  siege,  without  hearkening  to  any  pro- 
posals of  accommodation,  they  did  not  fail  to  reproach  him  with 
the  desire  of  protracting  the  war,  for  the  sake  of  continuing  in 
command,  and  of  keeping  the  citizens  in  awe  and  respect. 

Philistus,  who  came  from  Apulia  to  the  tyrant’s  relief  with 
several  galleys,  having  been  defeated  and  put  to  death,  Diony- 
sius sent  to  offer  Dion  the  citadel,  with  the  arms  and  troops  in  it, 
and  money  to  pay  them  for  five  months,  if  he  might  be  permitted 
by  a treaty  to  retire  into  Italy  for  the  rest  of  his  life,  and  be  al- 
lowed the  revenue  of  certain  lands,  which  he  mentioned,  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  Syracuse.  The  Syracusans,  who  were  in 
hopes  of  taking  Dionysius  alive,  rejected  these  proposals  ; and 
Dionysius  despairing  of  reconciling  them  to  his  terms,  left  the 
citadel  in  the  hands  of  his  elder  son  Apollocrates,  and  taking 
the  advantage  of  a favourable  wind,  embarked 
Airt  ^ cf.^360.  f°r  Ids  treasures  and  effects  of  the 

greatest  value,  and  such  of  his  friends  as  were 
dearest  to  him. 

Heraclides,  who  commanded  the  galleys,  was  very  much 
blamed  for  having  suffered  him  to  escape  by  his  negligence. 
To  regain  the  people’s  favour,  he  proposed  a new  distribution 
of  lands,  insinuating,  that  the  foundation  of  liberty  was  equality, 
as  poverty  was  the  principle  of  servitude.  Upon  Dion’s  op- 
posing this  motion,  Heraclides  persuaded  the  people  to  reduce 
the  pay  of  the  foreign  troops,  who  amounted  to  3000  men,  to 
enact  a new  division  of  land,  to  appoint  new  generals,  and  de- 
liver themselves  at  once  from  Dion’s  insupportable  severity. 
The  Syracusans  agreed,  and  nominated  twenty-five  new  officers, 
Heraclides  being  one  of  the  number. 

At  the  same  time  they  sent  privately  to  solicit  the  foreign 
soldiers  to  abandon  Dion,  and  to  join  with  them,  promising  to 
give  them  a share  in  the  government  as  native  citizens.  Those 
generous  troops  received  the  offer  with  disdain;  and  then 
placing  Dion  in  the  centre  of  them,  with  a fidelity  and  affection 
of  which  there  are  few  examples,  they  made  their  bodies  and 
their  arms  a rampart  for  him,  and  carried  him  out  of  the  city 
without  doing  the  least  violence  to  any  body,  but  warmly  re- 
proaching all  they  met  with  their  ingratitude  and  perfidy.  The 


368 


HISTORY  OF 


Syracusans,  who  contemned  their  small  number,  and  attributed 
their  moderation  to  fear  and  want  of  courage,  began  to  attack 
them,  not  doubting  but  they  should  defeat  and  put  them  all  to 
the  sword  before  they  got  out  of  the  city. 

Dion,  reduced  to  the  melancholy  necessity  of  either  fighting 
against  his  fellow- citizens,  or  perishing  with  his  troops,  held 
out  his  hands  to  the  Syracusans,  imploring  them  in  the  most 
tender  and  affectionate  manner  to  desist,  and  pointing  to  the 
citadel  full  of  enemies,  who  saw  all  that  passed  with  the  utmost 
joy.  But  finding  them  deaf  and  insensible  to  all  his  remon- 
strances, he  commanded  his  soldiers  to  march  in  close  order 
without  attacking  ; which  they  obeyed,  contenting  themselves 
with  making  a great  noise  with  their  arms,  and  raising  loud 
cries,  as  if  they  were  going  to  fall  upon  the  Syracusans.  The 
latter  were  so  dismayed  with  those  appearances,  that  they  all 
ran  away  in  every  street  without  being  pursued.  Dion  hastened 
the  march  of  his  troops  towards  the  country  of  the  Leon  tines. 

The  officers  of  the  Syracusans,  laughed  at  and  ridiculed  by 
the  women  of  the  city,  were  desirous  to  retrieve  their  honour  ; 
and  made  their  troops  take  arms  and  return  to  the  pursuit  of 
Dion.  They  came  up  to  him  at  the  pass  of  a river,  and  made 
their  horse  advance  to  skirmish.  But  when  they  saw  that  Dion 
was  resolved  in  earnest  to  repel  their  insults,  and  had  made  his 
troops  face  about  with  great  indignation,  they  were  again 
seized  with  terror,  and  taking  to  their  heels  in  a more  shameful 
manner  than  before,  made  all  the  haste  they  could  to  regain 
the  city. 

The  Leontines  received  Dion  with  great  marks  of  honour 
and  esteem.55  They  also  made  presents  to  his  soldiers,  and 
declared  them  free  citizens.  Some  days  after  which  they  sent 
ambassadors  to  the  Syracusans,  to  demand  justice  for  the  ill 
treatment  of  those  troops  ; and  they  on  their  side  sent  deputies 
to  complain  of  Dion.  Syracuse  was  intoxicated  with  incon- 
siderate joy  and  insolent  prosperity,  which  entirely  banished 
reflection  and  judgment. 

Every  thing  conspired  to  swell  and  inflame  their  pride.  The 
citadel  was  so  much  reduced  by  famine,  that  the  soldiers  of 
Dionysius,  after  having  suffered  very  much,  resolved  at  last  to 
surrender  it.  They  sent  in  the  night  to  make  that  proposal, 
and  were  to  give  it  up  the  next  morning.  But  at  day-break, 
whilst  they  were  preparing  to  execute  the  treaty,  Nypsius,  an 
able  and  valiant  general,  whom  Dionysius  had  sent  from  Italy 
with  corn  and  money  to  the  besieged,  appeared  with  his  galleys, 
and  anchored  near  Arethusa.  Plenty  succeeding  on  a sudden 
to-famine,  Nypsius  landed  his  troops,  and  summoned  an  assem- 
bly, wherein  he  made  a speech  to  the  soldiers  suitable  to  the 
8 Plut.  p.  975.  981.  Diod.  p.  422,  423. 


DIONYSIUS  THE  YOUNGER. 


3C>9 

present  conjuncture,  which  determined  them  to  hazard  all  dan- 
gers. The  citadel,  that  was  upon  the  point  of  surrendering, 
was  relieved  in  this  manner,  contrary  to  all  expectation. 

The  Syracusans  at  the  same  time  hastened  on  board  their 
galleys,  and  attacked  the  enemy’s  fleet.  They  sunk  some  of 
their  ships,  took  others,  and  pursued  the  rest  to  the  shore.  But 
this  very  victory  was  the  occasion  of  their  ruin.  Abandoned 
to  their  own  discretion,  without  either  leader  or  authority  to 
command  or  counsel  them,  the  officers  as  well  as  soldiers  gave 
themselves  up  to  rejoicing,  feasting,  drinking,  debauchery,  and 
every  kind  of  loose  excess.  Nypsius  knew  well  how  to  take 
advantage  of  this  general  infatuation.  He  attacked  the  wall 
that  enclosed  the  citadel,  and  having  made  himself  master  of 
it,  he  demolished  it  in  several  places,  and  permitted  his  soldiers 
to  enter  and  plunder  the  city.  All  things  were  in  the  utmost 
confusion.  Here,  the  citizens,  half  asleep,  had  their  throats 
cut ; there,  houses  were  plundered ; whilst  the  women  and 
children  were  driven  off  into  the  citadel,  without  regard  to  their 
tears,  cries,  and  lamentations. 

There  was  but  one  man  who  could  remedy  this  misfortune 
and  preserve  the  city.  This  was  in  every  body’s  thoughts,  but 
no  one  had  courage  enough  to  propose  it ; so  much  ashamed 
were  they  of  the  ungenerous  manner  in  which  they  had  driven 
him  out.  As  the  danger  increased  every  moment,  and  already 
approached  the  quarter  Achradina,  in  the  height  of  their  ex- 
tremity and  despair,  a voice  was  heard  from  the  cavalry  and 
allies,  which  said,  That  it  was  absolutely  necessary  to  recall 
Dion  ancl  the  Peloponnesian  troops  from  the  country  of  the 
Leoniines.  As  soon  as  any  body  had  courage  enough  to  utter 
those  words,  they  were  the  general  cry  of  the  Syracusans, 
who  with  tears  of  joy  and  grief  offered  up  prayers  to  the  gods, 
that  they  would  bring  him  back  to  them.  The  hope  alone  of 
seeing  him  again,  gave  them  new  courage,  and  enabled  them 
to  make  head  against  the  enemy.  The  deputies  set  out  imme- 
diately with  full  speed,  and  arrived  at  the  city  of  Leontium 
late  in  the  evening. 

As  soon  as  they  alighted,  they  threw  themselves  at  Dion’s 
feet,  bathed  in  their  tears,  and  related  the  deplorable  extremity 
to  which  the  Syracusans  were  reduced.  Some  of  the  Leontines, 
and  several  of  the  Peloponnesian  soldiers,  who  had  seen  them 
arrive,  were  already  got  round  Dion,  and  rightly  conceived, 
from  their  earnestness  and  humiliating  posture,  that  something 
very  extraordinary  had  happened.  Dion  had  no  sooner  heard 
what  they  had  to  say,  than  he  carried  them  with  him  to  the 
assembly,  which  formed  itself  immediately ; for  the  people  ran 
thither  with  abundance  of  eagerness.  The  two  principal 
deputies  explained  in  a few  words  the  greatness  of  their  dis- 

yol.  hi.  2 B 


370 


HISTORY  OF 


tress,  and  implored  the  foreign  troops  to  hasten  to  the  relief  of 
the  Syracusans,  and  to  forget  the  treatment  they  had  received ; 
and  the  rather,  because  that  unfortunate  people  had  already 
paid  a severer  penalty  for  it,  than  the  most  injured  amongst 
them  would  desire  to  impose. 

The  deputies  having  finished  their  discourse,  the  whole 
theatre  where  the  assembly  was  held  continued  in  mournful 
silence.  Dion  rose : but  as  soon  as  he  began  to  speak,  a 
torrent  of  tears  suppressed  his  utterance.  The  loreign  soldiers 
called  out  to  him  to  take  courage,  and  expressed  a generous 
compassion  tor  his  grief.  At  length,  having  recovered  himself 
a little,  he  spoke  to  them  in  these  terms  : Men  of  Peloponnesus, 
arid  you  our  allies,  I have  assembled  you  here,  that  you  might 
deliberate  upon  what  regards  yourselves ; as  for  my  part,  I 
must  not  deliberate  when  Syracuse  is  in  danger.  If  I cannot 
preserve  it,  I go  to  perish  with  it,  and  to  bury  myself  in  its 
ruins.  But  for  you,  if  you  are  resolved  to  assist  us  once 
more ; us,  who  are  the  most  imprudent  and  most  unfortunate 
of  mankind ; come  and  relieve  the  city  of  Syracuse,  from 
henceforth  the  work  of  your  hands.  But  if  the  just  subjects 
of  complaint  which  you  have  against  the  Syracusans  determine 
you  to  abandon  them  in  their  present  condition,  and  to  suffer 
them  to  perish ; may  you  receive  from  the  immortal  gods  the 
reward  you  merit  for  the  affection  and  fidelity  which  you  have 
hitherto  expressed  for  me.  For  the  rest,  I have  only  to  desire 
that  you  will  keep  Dion  in  your  remembrance,  who  did  not 
abandon  you  when  unworthily  treated  by  his  countrymen, 
and  who  did  not  abandon  his  countrymen  when  fallen  into 
misfortunes. 

He  had  no  sooner  ceased  speaking,  than  the  foreign  soldiers 
rose  up  with  loud  cries,  and  entreated  him  to  lead  them  on 
that  moment  to  the  relief  of  Syracuse.  The  deputies,  trans- 
ported with  joy,  saluted  and  embraced  them,  praying  the 
gods  to  bestow  upon  Dion  and  them  all  kind  of  happiness 
and  prosperity.  When  the  tumult  was  appeased,  Dion  ordered 
them  to  prepare  for  the  march,  and  as  soon  as  they  had  supped, 
to  return  with  their  arms  to  the  same  place,  being  deter- 
mined to  set  out  the  same  night,  and  fly  to  the  relief  of  his 
country. 

In  the  mean  time,  at  Syracuse,  the  officers  of  Dionysius, 
after  having  done  all  the  mischief  they  could  to  the  city,  re- 
tired at  night  into  the  citadel  with  the  loss  of  some  of  their 
soldiers.  This  short  respite  gave  the  seditious  new  courage. 
Flattering  themselves  that  the  enemy  would  lie  still  after  what 
they  had  done,  they  exhorted  the  Syracusans  to  think  no  farther 
of  Dion,  nor  to  receive  him  if  he  came  to  their  relief  with  his 
foreign  troops,  nor  to  yield  to  them  in  courage,  but  to  defend 


DIONYSIUS  THE  VoUNGER, 


371 


their  city  and  liberty  with  their  own  arms  and  valour.  New 
deputies  were  instantly  despatched  from  the  general  officers 
to  Dion  to  prevent  his  coming,  and  from  the  principal  citizens 
and  his  friends  to  desire  him  to  hasten  his  march;  which  differ- 
ence of  sentiments  and  contrariety  of  advices  occasioned  his 
advancing  slowly,  and  by  short  marches. 

When  the  night  was  far  spent,  Dion’s  enemies  seized  the 
gates  of  the  city,  to  prevent  his  entrance.  At  the  same  instant, 
Nypsius,  well  apprised  of  all  that  passed  in  Syracuse,  made  a 
sally  from  the  citadel  with  a greater  body  of  troops,  and  more 
determinate  than  before.  They  entirely  demolished  the  wall 
that  enclosed  them,  and  entered  the  city,  which  they  plundered. 
Nothing  but  slaughter  and  blood  was  seen  every  where.  Nor 
did  they  stop  for  the  pillage,  but  seemed  to  have  no  other  view 
than  to  ruin  and  destroy  all  before  them.  One  would  have 
thought,  that  the  son  of  Dionysius,  whom  his  father  had  left 
in  the  citadel,  being  reduced  to  despair,  and  prompted  by  en- 
venomed hatred  for  the  Syracusans,  was  determined  to  bury 
the  tyranny  in  the  ruins  of  the  city.  To  prevent  Dion’s  relief 
of  it,  they  had  recourse  to  fire,  the  swiftest  instrument  of 
destruction,  burning,  with  torches  and  lighted  straw,  all  places 
within  their  power,  and  darting  combustibles  against  the  rest. 
The  Syracusans  who  fled  to  avoid  the  flame  were  butchered  in 
the  streets ; and  those  who  to  shun  the  murderous  sword 
retired  into  the  houses,  were  driven  out  of  them  again  by 
the  encroaching  fire  ; for  there  were  abundance  of  houses 
burning,  and  many  that  fell  upon  the  people  in  the  streets. 

These  very  flames  opened  the  city  for  Dion,  by  obliging  the 
citizens  to  agree  in  not  keeping  the  gates  shut  against  him. 
Couriers  after  couriers  were  despatched  to  hasten  his  march. 
Heraclides  himself,  his  most  declared  and  mortal  enemy,  de- 
puted his  brother,  and  afterwards  his  uncle  Theodotus,  to  con- 
jure, him  to  advance  with  the  utmost  speed  to  their  assistance, 
there  being  no  one  who  was  able  to  make  head  against  the  ene- 
my, he  himself  being  wounded,  and  the  city  almost  entirely 
ruined  and  reduced  to  ashes. 

Dion  received  this  news  when  he  was  about  sixty  stadia1 
from  the  gates.  His  soldiers  upon  that  occasion  marched  with 
the  utmost  diligence,  and  with  so  good  a will,  that  it  was  not 
long  before  he  arrived  at  the  walls  of  the  city.  He  entered  by 
the  quarter  called  Hecatompedon.  He  there  detached  his 
light-armed  troops  against  the  enemy,  to  reanimate  the  Syracu- 
sans by  the  sight  of  them.  He  then  drew  up  his  heavy-armed 
infantry,  and  the  citizens  who  came  running  to  join  him  on  all 
sides.  He  divided  them  into  small  parties,  of  greater  depth 
than  front,  and  put  different  officers  at  the  head  of  them,  that 
1 Two  or  three  leagues. 

2 b 2 


372 


HISTORY  OF 


they  might  be  capable  of  attacking  in  several  places  at  once, 
and  appear  stronger  and  more  formidable  to  the  enemy. 

After  having  made  these  dispositions,  and  offered  up  his 
prayers  to  the  gods,  he  marched  across  the  city  against  the 
enemy.  In  every  street  as  he  passed  he  was  welcomed  with 
acclamations,  cries  of  joy,  and  songs  of  victory,  mingled  with 
the  prayers  and  blessings  of  all  the  Syracusans,  who  called 
Dion  their  preserver  and  their  god,  and  his  soldiers  their  bro- 
thers and  fellow-citizens.  At  that  instant,  there  was  not  a sin- 
gle man  in  the  city  so  fond  of  life,  as  not  to  be  much  more  in 
pain  for  Dion’s  safety  than  his  own,  and  not  to  fear  much  more 
for  him  than  for  all  the  rest  together,  seeing  him  march  fore- 
most to  so  great  a danger,  over  blood,  fire,  and  dead  bodies, 
with  which  the  streets  and  squares  were  universally  covered. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  view  of  the  enemy  was  no  less  ter- 
rible : for  they  were  animated  by  rage  and  despair,  and  were 
posted  in  line  of  battle  behind  the  ruins  of  the  wall  they  had 
thrown  down,  which  made  the  approach  very  difficult  and  dan- 
gerous. They  were  under  the  necessity  of  defending  the  cita- 
del, which  was  their  safety  and  retreat,  and  durst  not  remove 
from  it,  lest  their  communications  should  be  cut  off.  But 
what  was  most  capable  of  disordering  and  discouraging  Dion’s 
soldiers,  and  made  their  march  very  painful  and  difficult,  was 
the  fire.  For,  wherever  they  turned  themselves,  they  marched 
by  the  light  of  the  houses  in  flames,  and  were  obliged  to  go 
over  ruins  in  the  midst  of  fires ; exposing  themselves  to  being 
crushed  in  pieces  by  the  fall  of  walls,  beams,  and  roofs  of 
bouses,  which  tottered  half  consumed  by  the  flames,  and  under 
the  necessity  of  keeping  their  ranks,  whilst  they  opened  their 
way  through  frightful  clouds  of  smolie  mingled  with  dust. 

When  they  had  joined  the  enemy,  only  a very  small  number 
on  each  side  were  capable  of  coming  to  blows,  from  the  want 
of  room,  and  the  unevenness  of  the  ground.  But  at  length 
Dion’s  soldiers,  encouraged  and  supported  by  the  cries  and 
ardour  of  the  Syracusans,  charged  the  enemy  with  such  re- 
doubled vigour,  that  the  troops  of  Nypsius  gave  way.  The 
greatest  part  of  them  escaped  into  the  citadel,  which  was  very 
near  : and  those  who  remained  without,  being  broken,  were 
cut  to  pieces  in  the  pursuit  by  the  foreign  troops. 

The  time  would  not  admit  their  making  immediate  rejoicings 
for  their  victory,  in  the  manner  so  great  an  exploit  deserved ; 
the  Syracusans  being  obliged  to  employ  themselves  in  rescuing 
their  houses,  and  to  pass  the  whole  night  in  extinguishing  the 
fire  ; which,  however,  they  did  not  effect  without  great  dif- 
ficulty. 

At  the  return  of  day,  none  of  the  seditious  orators  durst  stay 
in  the  city,  but  all  fled  self-condemned,  to  avoid  the  punish- 


DIONYSIUS  THE  YOUNGER. 


373 


ment  due  to  their  crimes.  Only  Heraclides  and  Theodotus 
came  to  Dion,  and  put  themselves  into  his  hands,  confessing 
their  injurious  treatment  of  him,  and  conjuring  him  not  to  imitate 
their  ill  conduct:  that  it  became  Dion,  superior  as  he  was  in 
all  other  respects  to  the  rest  of  mankind,  to  show  himself  equally 
so  in  greatness  of  soul,  by  subduing  his  resentment  and 
revenge,  and  forgiving  the  ungrateful,  who  owned  themselves 
unworthy  of  his  pardon. 

Heraclides  and  Theodotus  having  made  these  supplications, 
Dion’s  friends  advised  him  not  to  spare  men  of  their  vile  and 
malignant  disposition ; but  to  abandon  Heraclides  to  the  sol- 
diers, and  in  so  doing,  exterminate  from  the  state  that  spirit  of 
sedition  and  intrigue  ; a distemper  that  has  really  something 
of  madness  in  it,  and  is  no  less  to  be  feared  from  its  perni- 
cious consequences  than  tyranny  itself.  But  Dion,  to  appease 
them,  said,  That  other  captains  generally  made  the  means  of 
conquering  their  enemies  their  sole  study  ; that  for  his  part , 
he  had  passed  much  time  in  the  Academy,  in  learning  to  sub- 
due anger,  envy,  and  all  the  jarring  passions  of  the  mind : that 
the  sign  of  having  conquered  them  is  not  kindness  and  affa- 
bility to  friends  and  persons  of  merit ; but  treating  those  with 
humanity  who  have  injured  us,  and  in  being  always  ready  to 
forgive  them  : that  he  did  not  desire  so  much  to  appear  supe- 
rior to  Heraclides  in  power  and  ability,  as  in  wisdom  and 
justice  ; for  in  that  true  and  essential  superiority  consists : 
that  if  Heraclides  be  wicked,  invidious,  and  perfidious,  must 
Dion  contaminate  and  dishonour  himself  by  base  resentment  ? 
It  is  true,  according  to  human  laws,  there  seems  to  be  less  in- 
justice in  revenging  an  injury,  than  committing  it  ; but  if  we 
consult  nature,  we  should  find  both  the  one  and  the  other  to 
have  their  rise  in  the  same  weakness  of  mind.  Besides,  there 
is  no  disposition  so  obdurate  and  savage,  but  may  be  vanquish- 
ed by  the  force  of  kind  usage  and  obligations.  Dion,  influenced 
by  these  maxims,  pardoned  Heraclides. 

Pie  engaged  next  in  enclosing  the  citadel  with  a new  work, 
and  he  ordered  each  of  the  Syracusans  to  go  and  cut  a large 
stake.  In  the  night,  he  set  his  soldiers  to  work,  whilst  the  Sy- 
racusans took  their  rest.  He  surrounded  the  citadel  in  this 
manner  with  a strong  palisade,  before  it  was  perceived  ; so  that 
in  the  morning,  the  greatness  of  the  work,  and  the  suddenness 
of  the  execution,  were  matter  of  admiration  for  all  the  world, 
as  well  the  enemy  as  the  citizens. 

Having  finished  this  palisade,  he  buried  the  dead  ; and 
dismissing  the  prisoners  taken  from  the  enemy,  he  summoned 
an  assembly.  Heraclides  proposed  in  it,  that  Dion  should  be 
elected  generalissimo,  with  supreme  authority  by  sea  and  land. 
All  the  people  of  worth,  and  the  most  considerable  of  the  citi- 


374 


HISTORY  OF 


zens,  were  pleased  with  the  proposal,  and  desired  that  it  might 
have  the  sanction  of  the  assembly.  But  the  mariners  and  ar- 
tisans, who  were  sorry  that  Heraclides  should  lose  the  office  of 
admiral,  and  convinced  that,  however  little  estimable  he  might 
be  in  all  other  respects,  he  would  at  least  be  more  for  the  people 
than  Dion,  opposed  it  with  all  their  power.  Dion,  to  avoid 
exasperating  them,  did  not  insist  upon  that  point,  and  reinstated 
Heraclides  in  his  command-in-chief  at  sea.  But  his  opposing 
the  distribution  of  lands  and  houses,  which  they  were  anxious 
should  take  place,  and  his  cancelling  and  annulling  whatever 
had  been  decreed  upon  that  head,  embroiled  him  with  them 
irretrievably. 

Heraclides,  taking  advantage  of  a disposition  so  favourable 
to  his  views,  did  not  fail  to  revive  his  cabals  and  intrigues  against 
Dion  ; as  appeared  openly  by  an  attempt  of  his  to  make  himself 
master  of  Syracuse,  and  to  shut  the  gates  upon  his  rival.  But 
it  proved  unsuccessful.  A Spartan,  who  had  been  sent  to  the 
aid  of  Syracuse,  negociated  a new  accommodation  between 
Heraclides  and  Dion,  under  the  strictest  oaths,  and  the  strong- 
est assurances  of  obedience  on  the  side  of  the  former  ; weak  ties 
to  a man  void  of  faith  and  probity. 

The  Syracusans  having  dismissed  their  sea-forces,  who  were 
become  unnecessary,  applied  solely  to  the  siege  of  the  citadel, 
and  rebuilt  the  wall  which  had  been  thrown  down.  As  no  relief 
came  to  the  besieged,  and  bread  began  to  fall  short  with  them, 
the  soldiers  grew  mutinous,  and  would  no  longer  observe  any 
discipline.  The  son  of  Dionysius,  finding  himself  without  hope 
or  resource,  entered  into  a capitulation  with  Dion,  by  which  he 
surrendered  to  him  the  citadel,  with  ail  the  arms  and  other  war- 
like stores.  He  carried  his  mother  and  sisters  away  with  him, 
filled  five  galleys  with  his  followers  and  effects,  and  went  to  his 
father ; for  Dion  gave  him  entire  liberty  to  withdraw  unmo- 
lested. It  is  easy  to  conceive  the  joy  of  the  city  upon  his  de- 
parture. Women,  children,  old  people,  all  hurried  to  the  port 
to  gratify  their  eyes  with  so  agreeable  a spectacle,  and  to  solem- 
nize the  joyful  day,  on  which,  after  so  many  years'  servitude,  the 
sun  arose  for  the  first  time  upon  the  liberty  of  Syracuse. 

Apollocrates  having  set  sail,  and  Dion  beginning  his  march 
to  enter  the  citadel,  the  princesses,  who  were  there,  did  not  stay 
till  he  arrived,  but  came  out  to  meet  him  at  the  gates.  Aristo- 
mache  led  the  son  of  Dion  ; after  whom  came  Arete,  his  wife, 
with  her  eyes  fixed  upon  the  ground  and  full  of  tears.  Dion 
embraced  his  sister  first,  and  afterwards  his  son.  Aristomache 
then  presenting  Arete  to  him,  spoke  thus  : The  tears  you  see 
her  shed,  at  the  time  that  your  presence  restores  us  life  and  joy, 
the  shame  expressed  in  her  looks,  her  silence  itself,  and  her 
confusion , sufficiently  denote  the  grief  with  which  she  is  pene - 


DIONYSIUS  THE  YOUNGER. 


375 


trated,  at  the  sight  of  a husband , to  whom  another  has  been 
substituted  contrary  to  her  will,  but  who  alone  has  always  pos- 
sessed her  heart.  Shall  she  salute  you  as  her  uncle,  shall  she 
embrace  you  as  her  husband  ? Aristomache  having  spoken  in 
this  manner,  Dion,  with  his  face  bathed  in  tears,  tenderly  em- 
braced his  wife  ; gave  his  son  again  into  her  arms,  and  sent 
them  home  to  his  house  ; because  he  thought  proper  to  give 
up  the  citadel  to  the  Syracusans,  as  greater  evidence  of  their 
liberty. 

For  himself,  after  having  rewarded  with  a truly  royal  mag- 
nificence all  those  who  had  contributed  to  his  success,  each 
according  to  their  rank  and  merit  ; at  the  height  of  glory  and 
happiness,  and  the  object  of  admiration,  not  only  of  Sicily,  but 
of  Carthage  and  all  Greece,  who  esteemed  him  the  wisest  and 
most  fortunate  captain  that  ever  lived,  he  still  retained  his 
original  simplicity ; as  modest  and  plain  in  his  garb,  equipage, 
and  table,  as  if  he  had  lived  in  the  academy  with  Plato,  and 
not  with  people  bred  in  armies,  with  officers  and  soldiers,  who 
often  breathe  nothing  but  pleasures  and  magnificence.  Accord- 
ingly, at  the  time  that  Plato  wrote  to  him,  That  the  eyes  of  all 
mankind  were  upon  him  alone  ; little  affected  with  that  general 
admiration,  his  thoughts  were  always  intent  upon  the  academy, 
that  school  of  wisdom  and  virtue,  where  exploits  and  successes 
were  judged  of,  not  from  the  external  splendour  and  noise  with 
which  they  are  attended,  but  from  the  wise  and  moderate  use 
which  is  made  of  them. 

Dion  designed  to  establish  a form  of  government  in  Syracuse, 
composed  of  the  Spartan  and  Cretan,  but  wherein  the  aristo- 
cracy was  always  to  prevail,  and  to  decide  the  most  important 
affairs,  by  the  authority,  which,  according  to  his  plan,  was  to  be 
vested  in  a council  of  elders.  Heraclides  again  opposed  him 
in  this  scheme,  still  turbulent  and  seditious  as  usual,  and  solely 
intent  upon  gaining  the  people  by  flattery,  caresses,  and  other 
popular  arts.  One  day  when  Dion  sent  for  him  to  the  council, 
he  answered  that  he  would  not  come  ; and  that  being  only  a 
private  person,  he  should  be  in  the  assembly  with  the  rest  of  the 
citizens,  whenever  it  was  summoned.  His  view,  in  such  be- 
haviour, was  to  make  his  court  to  the  people,  and  to  render  Dion 
odious  ; who,  weary  of  his  repeated  insults,  permitted  those  to 
kill  him  whom  he  had  formerly  prevented.  They  accordingly 
went  to  his  house  and  despatched  him.  We  shall  see  presently 
Dion’s  own  sense  of  this  action. 

The  Syracusans  were  deeply  affected  with  his  death  ; but  as 
Dion  solemnized  his  funeral  with  great  magnificence,  followed 
his  body  in  person  at  the  head  of  his  whole  army,  and  afterwards 
harangued  the  people  upon,  the  occasion,  they  were  appeased, 
and  forgave  him  the  murder  ; convinced  that  it  was  impossible 


376 


HISTORY  OF 


for  the  city  ever  to  be  free  from  commotions  and  sedition,  whilst 
Heraclides  and  Dion  governed  together. 

After  that  murder  Dion  never  knew  joy  nor  peace  of  mind.  u 
A hideous  spectre,  which  he  saw  in  the  night,  filled  him  with 
trouble,  terror,  and  melancholy.  The  phantom  seemed  a wo- 
man of  enormous  stature,  who,  in  her  attire,  air,  and  haggard 
looks,  resembled  a fury,  and  who  swept  his  house  with  violence. 
His  son’s  death,  who  for  some  unknown  grief  had  thrown  him- 
self from  the  roof  of  a house,  passed  for  the  accomplishment  of 
that  ominous  apparition,  and  was  the  prelude  to  his  misfortunes. 
Calippus  gave  the  finishing  stroke  to  them.  He  was  an  Athe- 
nian, with  whom  Dion  had  contracted  an  intimate  friendship 
whilst  he  lodged  in  his  house  at  Athens,  and  with  whom  he  had 
lived  ever  after  in  an  entire  freedom  and  unbounded  confidence. 
Calippus  having  given  himself  up  to  his  ambitious  views,  and 
entertained  thoughts  of  making  himself  master  of  Syracuse, 
threw  off  all  regard  for  the  sacred  ties  of  friendship  and  hospi- 
tality, and  devised  how  to  get  rid  of  Dion,  who  was  the  sole  ob- 
stacle to  his  designs.  Notwithstanding  his  care  to  conceal  them, 
they  got  air,  and  came  to  the  ears  of  Dion’s  sister  and  wife, 
who  lost  no  time,  and  spared  no  pains,  to  discover  the  truth  by 
a very  strict  inquiry.  To  prevent  its  effects,  he  went  to  them 
with  tears  in  his  eyes,  and  the  appearance  of  being  inconsolable, 
that  any  body  should  suspect  him  of  such  a crime,  or  think  him 
capable  of  so  black  a design.  They  insisted  upon  his  taking 
the  great  oath,  as  it  was  called.  The  person  who  swore  it,  was 
wrapped  in  the  purple  mantle  of  the  goddess  Proserpine,  and 
holding  a lighted  torch  in  his  hand,  pronounced  in  the.  temple 
the  most  dreadful  execrations  against  himself  which  it  is  possi- 
ble to  imagine. 

The  oath  cost  him  nothing,  but  did  not  convince  the  prin- 
cesses. They  daily  received  new  intimations  of  his  guilt  from 
several  hands,  as  did  Dion  himself,  and  all  his  friends  in  general 
persuaded  him  to  prevent  Calippus’s  crime  by  a just  and  sudden 
punishment.  But  he  never  could  resolve  upon  it.  The  death 
of  Heraclides,  which  he  looked  upon  as  a horrible  blot  upon  his 
reputation  and  virtue,  was  perpetually  present  to  his  troubled 
imagination,  and  renewed  by  continual  terrors  his  grief  and  re- 
pentance. Tormented  night  and  day  by  that  cruel  remembrance, 
he  professed  that  he  had  rather  die  a thousand  deaths,  and  pre- 
sent his  throat  himself  to  whoever  would  kill  him,  than  live  un- 
der the  necessity  of  continual  precautions,  not  only  against  his 
enemies  but  the  best  of  his  friends. 

Calippus  ill  deserved  that  name.  He  hastened  to  the  exe- 
cution of  his  crime,  and  caused  Dion  to  be  assassinated  in  his 
own  house  by  some  Zacynthian  soldiers,  who  were  entirely 
u Plut.  p.  981.  683.  Diod.  p.  432. 


DIONYSIUS  THE  YOUNGER.  377 

devoted  to  his  interest.  The  sister  and  wife  of  that  prince 
were  put  into  prison,  where  the  latter  was  delivered  of  a son, 
which  she  resolved  to  nurse  there  herself. 

After  this  murder,  Calippus  was  for  some 
Ant  C64358.  ^me  a splendid  condition,  having  made  himself 
master  of  Syracuse  by  the  means  of  the  troops, 
who  were  entirely  devoted  to  his  service,  and  whom  he  had 
gained  by  the  gifts  he  bestowed  upon  them.  The  Pagans 
believed,  that  the  Divinity  ought  to  punish  great  crimes  in  a 
sudden  and  extraordinary  manner  in  this  life;  and  Plutarch 
observes,  that  the  success  of  Calippus  occasioned  very  great 
complaints  against  the  gods,  as  if  they  suffered  calmly,  and 
without  indignation,  the  vilest  of  men  to  raise  himself  to  so 
exalted  a fortune  by  so  detestable  and  impious  a method.  But 
Providence  was  not  long  without  justifying  itself,  for  Calippus 
soon  suffered  the  punishment  of  his  guilt.  Having  marched 
with  his  troops  to  take  Catana,  Syracuse  revolted  against  him, 
and  threw  off  the  yoke  of  so  shameful  a subjection.  He  after- 
wards attacked  Messina,  where  he  lost  abundance  of  men,  and 
particularly  all  the  Zacynthian  soldiers,  who  had  murdered 
Dion.  No  city  of  Sicily  would  receive  him,  but  all  detesting 
him  as  the  most  execrable  of  wretches,  he  retired  to  Rhegium, 
where,  after  having  led  for  some  time  a miserable  life,  he  was 
killed  by  Leptines  and  Polyperchon,  and,  it  was  said,  with  the 
same,  dagger  with  which  Dion  had  been  assassinated. 

History  has  few  examples  of  so  striking  an  attention  of 
Providence  to  punish  great  crimes,  such  as  murder,  perfidy, 
treason,  either  in  the  authors  of  those  crimes  themselves,  who 
commanded  or  executed  them,  or  in  the  accomplices  who  were 
any  way  concerned  in  them.  The  divine  justice  displays  itself 
from  time  to  time  in  this  manner,  to  prove  that  it  is  not  uncon- 
cerned and  inattentive ; and  to  prevent  the  inundation  of  crimes, 
which  an  entire  impunity  would  occasion ; but  it  does  not 
always  distinguish  itself  by  remarkable  chastisements  in  this 
world,  to  intimate  to  mankind,  that  greater  punishments  are 
reserved  for  guilt  in  the  next. 

As  for  Aristomache  and  Arete,  as  soon  as  they  came  out  of 
prison,  Icetas  of  Syracuse,  one  of  Dion’s  friends,  received  them 
into  his  house,  and  treated  them  at  first  with  an  attention,  fide- 
lity, and  generosity  of  the  most  exemplary  kind,  had  he  per- 
severed : but  complying  at  last  with  Dion’s  enemies,  he  pro- 
vided a bark  for  them,  and  having  put  them  on  board,  under  the 
pretence  of  sending  them  to  Peloponnesus,  he  gave  orders  to 
those  who  were  to  carry  them,  to  kill  them  on  the  voyage,  and 
to  throw  them  into  the  sea.  He  was  not  long  without  receiv- 
ing the  chastisement  due  to  his  black  treachery  ; for  being 
taken  by  Timoleon,  he  was  put  to  death.  The  Syracusans, 


378 


HISTORY  OF 


fully  to  avenge  Dion,  killed  also  the  two  daughters  of  that 
traitor. 

The  relations  and  friends  of  Dion,x  soon  after  his  death, 
had  written  to  Plato,  to  consult  him  upon  the  manner  in  which 
they  should  behave  in  the  present  troubled  and  fluctuating  con- 
dition of  Syracuse,  and  to  know  what  sort  of  government  it 
was  proper  to  establish  there.  Plato,  who  knew  the  Syracusans 
were  equally  incapable  of  entire  liberty  or  absolute  servitude, 
exhorted  them  strenuously  to  pacify  all  things  as  soon  as  pos- 
sible, and  for  that  purpose,  to  change  the  tyranny,  of  which 
the  very  name  was  odious,  into  a lawful  sovereignty,  which 
would  make  subjection  easy  and  agreeable.  He  advised  them 
(and,  according  to  him,  it  had  been  Dion’s  opinion)  to  create 
three  kings,  one  to  be  Hipparinus,  Dion’s  son  ; another  Hip- 
parinus,  Dionysius  the  younger’s  brother,  who  seemed  to  be 
well  inclined  towards  the  people  ; and  Dionysius  himself,  if  lie 
would  comply  with  such  conditions  as  should  be  duly  prescribed 
him  ; and  to  invest  them  with  an  authority  not  much  unlike 
that  of  the  kings  of  Sparta.  By  the  same  scheme,  thirty-five 
magistrates  were  to  be  appointed,  to  take  care  that  the  laws 
should  be  duly  observed  ; these  were  to  have  great  authority 
both  in  times  of  war  and  peace,  and  to  serve  as  a balance 
between  the  power  of  the  kings,  the  senate,  and  the  people. 

It  does  not  appear  that  this  advice  was  ever  followed,  and 
indeedit  had  great  inconveniences.  It  is  only  known, y that 
Hipparinus,  Dionysius’s  brother,  having  landed  at  Syracuse 
with  a fleet  and  considerable  forces,  expelled  Calippus,  and 
exercised  the  sovereign  power  two  years. 

The  history  of  Sicily,  which  I have  related  thus  far,  includes 
about  fifty  years,  beginning  with  Dionysius  the  elder,  who 
reigned  thirty-eight,  to  the  death  of  Dion. 

SECT.  IV. 

Character  of  Dion. 

It  is  not  easy  to  find  so  many  excellent  qualities  in  one  and 
the  same  person  as  were  united  in  Dion.  I do  not  consider,  in 
this  place,  his  wonderful  taste  for  the  sciences,  his  art  of  asso- 
ciating them  with  the  greatest  employments  of  war  and  peace, 
of  extracting  from  them  the  rules  of  conduct  and  maxims  of 
government,  and  of  making  them  an  equally  useful  and  honour- 
able entertainment  of  his  leisure ; I confine  myself  to  the  states- 
man and  patriot;  and  in  this  view,  how  admirable  does  he  ap- 
pear ! Greatness  of  soul,  elevation  of  sentiments,  generosity  in 
bestowing  his  wealth,  heroic  valour  in  battle,  attended  with  a 
coolness  of  temper,  and  a prudence  scarce  to  be  paralleled  ; a 
s Plat.  p.  viii.  y Diod.  1.  xvi.  p.  436. 


DIONYSIUS  THE  YOUNGER. 


379 


mind  vast  and  capable  of  the  highest  views,  a constancy  not  to 
be  shaken  by  the  greatest  dangers  or  the  most  unexpected  re- 
volutions of  fortune,  the  love  of  his  country  and  of  the  public 
good  carried  almost  to  excess  : these  are  part  of  Dion’s  virtues. 
The  design  he  formed  of  delivering  his  country  from  the  yoke 
of  tyranny,  and  his  boldness  and  wisdom  in  the  execution  of  it, 
show  us  of  what  he  is  capable. 

But  what  I conceive  the  greatest  beauty  in  Dion’s  character, 
the  most  worthy  of  admiration,  and,  if  I may  say  so,  the  most 
above  human  nature,  is  the  greatness  of  soul,  and  unexampled 
patience,  with  which  he  suffered  the  ingratitude  of  his  country- 
men. He  had  abandoned  and  sacrificed  every  thing  to  come 
to  their  relief ; he  had  reduced  the  tyranny  to  extremities,  and 
was  upon  the  point  of  re-establishing  them  in  the  full  possession 
of  their  liberty : in  return  for  such  great  services,  they  shame- 
fully expelled  him  the  city,  accompanied  with  a handful  of 
foreign  soldiers,  whose  fidelity  they  had  not  been  able  to  cor- 
rupt; they  load  him  with  injuries,  and  add  to  their  base  perfidy 
the  most  cruel  outrages  and  indignity : to  punish  those  ungrate- 
ful traitors,  he  had  only  a signal  to  give,  and  to  leave  the  rest 
to  the  indignation  of  his  soldiers : master  of  their  temper,  as 
well  as  his  own,  he  curbs  their  impetuosity,  and,  without  dis- 
arming their  hands,  restrains  their  just  rage,  suffering  them,  in 
the  very  height  and  ardour  of  an  attack,  only  to  terrify,  and 
not  kill,  his  enemies,  because  he  could  not  forget  that  they 
were  his  fellow-citizens  and  brethren. 

There  seems  to  be  only  one  defect  that  can  be  objected  to 
Dion,  which  is,  his  having  something  rigid  and  austere  in  his 
temper,  that  made  him  less  accessible  and  sociable  than  he 
should  have  been,  and  kept  even  persons  of  worth  and  his  best 
friends  at  a kind  of  distance.  Plato,  and  those  who  had  his 
glory  sincerely  at  heart,  had  often  warned  him  of  this.  But 
notwithstanding  the  reproaches  which  were  made  him  upon  his 
too  austere  gravity,  and  the  inflexible  severity  with  which  he 
treated  the  people,  he  still  piqued  himself  upon  making  no 
abatement  of  them : whether  his  natural  disposition  was  entirely 
averse  to  the  arts  of  insinuation  and  persuasion  ; or  that  from 
the  view  of  correcting  and  reforming  the  Syracusans,  vitiated 
and  corrupted  by  the  flattering  and  complaisant  discourses  of 
their  orators,  he  thought  fit  to  employ  that  rough  and  manly 
manner  of  behaviour  towards  them. 

Dion  was  mistaken  in  the  most  essential  point  of  governing. 
From  the  throne  to  the  lowest  office  in  the  state,  whoever  is 
charged  with  the  care  of  ruling  and  conducting  others,  ought 
particularly  to  study  the  art  of  managing  men’s  tempers, z and 

z Which  art  an  ancient  poet  called  fiexanitna , atnue  omnium  regina  rerum 

oratio.  Cic.  1.  de  divin.  n.  80. 


380 


HISTORY  OF 


of  giving  them  that  bent  and  turn  of  mind  that  may  best  suit 
his  measures  ; which  cannot  be  done  by  harshly  domineering 
over  them,  by  commanding  haughtily,  and  contenting  oneself 
with  laying  down  the  rule  and  the  duty  with  inflexible  rigour. 
There  is  even  in  worth  itself,  in  virtue,  and  the  exercise  of  all 
functions,  an  exactitude  and  steadiness,  or  rather  a kind  of  stiff- 
ness, which  frequently  degenerates  into  a vice  when  carried  into 
extremes.  I know  it  is  never  allowable  to  break  through  rules, 
but  it  is  always  laudable,  and  often  necessary,  to  soften  and 
make  them  more  pliant  ; which  is  best  effected  by  mildness  of 
demeanour,  and  an  insinuating  behaviour  ; not  always  exacting 
the  discharge  of  a duty  in  its  utmost  rigour ; overlooking  abun- 
dance of  small  faults,  that  do  not  merit  much  notice,  and  ani- 
madverting upon  those  which  are  more  considerable  with  favour 
and  mildness  ; in  a word,  in  endeavouring  by  all  possible  means 
to  acquire  people’s  affection,  and  to  render  virtue  and  duty 
amiable. 

Dion’s  permission  to  kill  Heraclides,  which  was  obtained 
with  difficulty,  or  rather  forced  from  him,  contrary  to  his  natu- 
ral disposition  as  well  as  principles,  cost  him  dear,  and  brought 
that  trouble  and  anguish  upon  him  that  lasted  till  the  day  of  his 
death,  and  of  which  they  were  the  principal  cause. 

SECT.  V. 

Dionysius  the  younger  re-ascends  the  throne.  Syracuse  implores  aid  of  the 
Corinthians,  who  send  Timoleon.  That  general  enters  Syracuse,  notwith- 
standing all  the  endeavours  of  Icetas  to  prevent  him.  Dionysius  surrenders 
himself  to  him,  and  retires  to  Corinth. 

Calippus,  who  had  caused  Dion  to  be  murdered. 
Ant  ’ c6357  anc*  bad  substituted  himself  in  his  place,  did  not 
possess  his  power  long.a  Thirteen  months  after, 
Hipparinus,  Dionysius’s  brother,  arriving  unexpectedly  at  Sy- 
racuse with  a numerous  fleet,  expelled  him  from  the  city,  and 
recovered  his  paternal  sovereignty,  which  he  held  during  two 
years. 

Syracuse  and  all  Sicily,  being  harassed  by  dif- 
Ant  Jj*  C^350.  ferent  factions  and  intestine  war,  were  in  a mi- 
serable condition.  Dionysius,  taking  advantage 
of  those  troubles,  ten  years  after  he  had  been  obliged  to  quit 
the  throne,  had  assembled  some  foreign  troops,  and  having 
overcome  Nypsseus,  who  had  made  himself  master  of  Syracuse, 
he  reinstated  himself  in  the  possession  of  his  dominions. 

It  was  perhaps  to  thank  the  gods  for  his  re-establishment,  b 
and  to  express  his  gratitude  to  them,  that  he  sent  statues  of 
gold  and  ivory  to  Olympia  and  Delphi  of  very  great  value. 
a Diod.  1.  xvi.  p.  432 — 436.  b Diod.  1.  xvi.  p . 453. 


DIONYSIUS  THE  YOUNGER, 


381 


The  galleys  which  carried  them  were  taken  by  Iphicrates,  who 
was  at  that  time  near  Corcyra  with  a fleet. c He  wrote  to 
Athens  to  know  in  what  manner  he  should  dispose  of  this  sacred 
booty,  and  was  answered,  that  he  need  not  examine  scrupulously 
for  what  it  was  designed,  but  make  use  of  it  for  the  subsistence 
of  his  troops.  Dionysius  complained  bitterly  of  such  treat- 
ment to  the  Athenians,  in  a letter  which  he  wrote,  wherein  he 
reproached  them,  with  great  warmth  and  justice,  for  their  ava- 
rice and  sacrilegious  impiety. 

A commander  of  pirates  had  acted  much  more  nobly  and  more 
religiously  towards  the  Romans  about  fifty  years  before. d The 
latter,  after  the  taking  of  Veii,  the  siege  of  which  had  lasted  ten 
years,  sent  a golden  cup  to  Delphi.  The  deputies  who  carried 
that  present  were  taken  by  the  pirates  of  Lipara,  and  carried 
to  that  island.  It  was  the  custom  to  divide  among  the  citizens 
all  the  prizes  they  took  as  a common  stock.e  The  island  at 
that  time  was  under  the  government  of  a magistrate  more  like 
the  Romans  in  his  manners  than  those  he  governed.  He  was 
called  Timasitheus/  and  his  behaviour  agreed  well  with  the  sig- 
nification of  his  name.  Full  of  respect  for  their  character  of 
envoys,  the  sacred  gift  they  carried,  the  motive  of  their  offering, 
and  still  more  for  the  majesty  of  the  god  for  whom  it  was  de- 
signed, he  inspired  the  multitude,  that  generally  follow  the  ex- 
ample of  those  who  rule  them,  with  the  same  sentiments  of  re- 
spect and  religion.  The  envoys  were  received  therefore  with  all 
possible  marks  of  distinction,  and  their  expenses  borne  by  the 
public.  Timasitheus  convoyed  them  with  a strong  squadron  to 
Delphi,  and  brought  them  back  in  the  same  manner  to  Rome. 
It  is  easy  to  judge  how  sensibly  the  Romans  were  affected  with 
so  noble  a proceeding.  By  a decree  of  the  senate  they  rewarded 
Timasitheus  with  great  presents,  and  granted  him  the  right  of 
hospitality.  And  more  than  150  years  after,  when  the  Romans 
took  Lipara  from  the  Carthaginians,  with  the  same  gratitude 
as  if  the  action  had  been  but  lately  done,  they  thought  them- 
selves obliged  to  do  farther  honour  to  the  family  of  their  be- 
nefactor, and  resolved  that  all  his  descendants. should  be  ever 
exempted  from  the  tribute  imposed  upon  the  other  inhabitants  of 
that  island. 

This  was  certainly  great  and  noble  on  both  sides ; but  the 
contrast  does  no  honour  to  the  Athenians. 

c Corfu.  d Liv.  Decad.  1.  v.  c.  28.  Diod.  1.  xiv.  p.  307- 

e Mos  erat  civitatis,  velut  publico  latrocinio,  partam  prsedam  dividere. 
Forte  eo  anno  in  summo  magistratu  erat  Timasitheus  quidam,  Romanis  vir 
similior  quam  suis : qui.  legatorum  nomen,  donumque,  et  deum  cui  mittere- 
tur,  et_  doni  causam  veritus  ipse,  multitudinem  quoque,  quae  semper  ferme 
regenti  est  similis,  religionis  justae  implevit ; adductosque  in  publicum  hos- 
pitium  legates  cum  praesidio  etiam  navium  Delphos  prosecutos,  Romam  inde 
sospites  restituit.  Hospitium  cum  eo  senatusconsulto  est  factum,  donaque 
publice  data.  Tit.  Liv.  f Timasitheus  signifies  one  who  honours  the  gods. 


382 


HISTORY  OF 


To  return  to  Dionysius.  Though  he  expressed  some  regard 
for  the  gods,  his  actions  evinced  no  humanity  for  his,  subjects. 
His  past  misfortunes,  instead  of  correcting  and  softening  his 
disposition,  had  only  served  to  inflame  it,  and  to  render  him 
more  savage  and  brutal  than  before. 

The  most  worthy  and  considerable  of  the  citizens,  g not  being 
able  to  support  so  cruel  a servitude,  had  had  recourse  to  Icetas, 
king  of  the  Leontines,  and  abandoning  themselves  to  his  con- 
duct, had  elected  him  their  general ; not  that  they  believed  he 
differed  in  any  thing  from  the  most  avowed  tyrants,  but  be- 
cause they  had  no  other  resource. 

During  these  transactions,  the  Carthaginians,  who  were  al- 
most always  at  war  with  the  Syracusans,  having  arrived  in 
Sicily  with  a great  fleet,  had  already  made  a great  progress 
there.  The  Sicilians  and  the  people  of  Syracuse  resolved  to 
send  an  embassy  into  Greece,  to  demand  aid  of  the  Corinthians, 
from  whom  the  Syracusans  were  descended,  and  who  had  al- 
ways openly  declared  against  tyrants  in  favour  of  liberty. 
Icetas,  who  proposed  no  other  end  from  his  command  than  to 
make  himself  master  of  Syracuse,  and  had  no  thoughts  of  set- 
ting it  free,  treated  secretly  with  the  Carthaginians,  though  in 
public  he  affected  to  praise  the  wise  measures  of  the  Syracu- 
sans, and  even  sent  his  deputies  along  with  theirs. 

Corinth  received  the  ambassadors  perfectly 
Ant  "j*  C^349  we^>  decreed  that  aid  should  be  sent  to  the  Syra- 
cusans, and  immediately  appointed  Timoleou 
general.  He  had  led  a retired  life  for  twenty  years,  without 
interfering  in  public  affairs,  and  was  far  from  believing  that  at 
his  age,  and  in  the  circumstances  he  then  was,  he  should  be 
thought  on  upon  such  an  occasion. 

He  was  descended  from  one  of  the  noblest  families  of  Co- 
rinth, loved  his  country  passionately,  and  discovered  upon  all 
occasions  a singular  humanity  of  temper,  except  against  tyrants 
and  bad  men.  He  was  an  excellent  captain  ; and  as  in  his 
youth  he  had  possessed  all  the  maturity  of  age,  in  age  he  had 
all  the  fire  and  courage  of  the  most  ardent  youth. 

He  had  an  elder  brother  called  Timophanes,  whom  he  ten- 
derly loved,  as  he  had  demonstrated  in  a battle,  in  which  he  co- 
vered him  with  his  body,  and  saved  his  life  at  the  great 
danger  of  his  own ; but  his  country  was  still  dearer  to  him. 
That  brother  having  made  himself  tyrant  of  it,  so  black  a crime 
gave  him  the  sharpest  affliction.  He  made  use  of  all  possi- 
ble means  to  bring  him  back  to  his  duty;  kindness,  friendship, 
affection,  remonstrances,  and  even  menaces.  But  finding  all 
his  endeavours  ineffectual,  and  that  nothing  could  prevail  upon 
a heart  abandoned  to  ambition,  he  caused  his  brother  to  be  as- 
£ Diod.  L xvi.  p.  459  et  464.  Plut.  in  Timol.  p.  236  et  243. 


DIONYSIUS  THE  YOUNGER. 


383 


sassinated  in  his  presence  by  two  of  his  friends  and  intimates, 
and  thought  that,  upon  such  an  occasion,  the  laws  of  nature 
ought  to  give  place  to  those  of  his  country. 

That  action  was  admired  and  applauded  by  the  principal 
citizens  of  Corinth,  and  by  most  of  the  philosophers,  who 
looked  upon  it  as  the  most  noble  effort  of  human  virtue ; and 
Plutarch  seems  to  pass  the  same  judgment  upon  it.  All  the 
world  were  not  of  that  opinion,  and  some  people  reproached 
him  as  an  abominable  parricide,  who  could  not  fail  of  drawing 
down  the  vengeance  of  the  gods  upon  himself.  His  mother 
especially,  in  the  excess  of  her  grief,  uttered  the  most  dreadful 
curses  and  imprecations  against  him  ; and  when  he  came  to 
console  her,  not  being  able  to  bear  the  sight  of  her  son’s  mur- 
derer, she  thrust  him  away  with  indignation,  and  shut  her  doors 
against  him. 

He  was  then  struck  with  all  the 'horror  of  his  guilt,  and 
giving  himself  up  to  the  most  bitter  remorse,  considered  Ti- 
mophanes  no  longer  as  a tyrant,  but  as  a brother,  and  resolved 
to  put  an  end  to  his  life,  by  abstaining  from  all  nourishment. 
It  was  with  great  difficulty  his  friends  dissuaded  him  from 
that  fatal  resolution.  Overcome  by  their  pravers  and  en- 
treaties, he  was  at  length  prevailed  upon  to  live;  but  he  con- 
demned himself  to  pass  the  rest  of  his  days  in  solitude.  From 
that  moment  he  renounced  all  public  affairs,  and  for  several 
years  never  came  to  the  city,  but  wandered  about  in  the  most 
solitary  and  desert  places,  abandoned  to  excess  of  grief  and 
melancholy.  So  true  it  is,  that  neither  the  praises  of  flatterers, 
nor  the  false  reasonings  of  politicians,  can  suppress  the  cries 
of  conscience,  which  is  at  once  the  witness,  judge,  and  exe- 
cutioner of  those  who  dare  to  violate  the  most  sacred  rights 
and  ties  of  nature ! 

He  passed  twenty  years  in  this  condition.  He  did  indeed 
return  to  Corinth  at  the  latter  part  of  that  time,  but  lived  there 
always  private  and  retired,  without  concerning  himself  with 
the  administration  of  the  government.  It  was  not  without 
great  repugnance  that  he  accepted  the  employment  of  general, 
but  he  did  not  think  it  allowable  to  refuse  the  service  of  his 
country,  and  his  duty  prevailed  against  his  inclination. 

Whilst  Timoleon  assembled  his  troops,  and  was  preparing 
to  sail,  the  Corinthians  received  letters  from  Icetas,  in  which 
he  told  them.  That  it  was  not  necessary  for  them  to  make  any 
farther  levies,  nor  to  exhaust  themselves  in  yreat  expenses  to 
come  to  Sicily,  and  expose  themselves  to  evident  danger ; that 
the  Carthaginians,  apprised  of  their  design,  ivere  waiting  to 
intercept  their  squadron  in  its  passage  with  a great  fleet ; and 
that  their  slowness  in  sending  their  troops,  had  obliged  him  to 
call  in  the  Carthaginians  themselves  to  his  aid,  and  to  make 


384 


HISTORY  OF 


use  of  them  against  the  tyrant.  He  had  made  a secret  treaty 
with  them,  by  which  it  was  stipulated,  that  after  the  expulsion 
of  Dionysius  from  Syracuse,  he  should  take  possession  of  it  in 
his  place. 

The  reading  of  these  letters,  far  from  cooling  the  zeal  of  the 
Corinthians,  only  incensed  them  still  more,  and  hastened  the 
departure  of  Timoleon.  He  embarked  with  ten  galleys,  and 
arrived  safe  upon  the  coast  of  Italy : here  the  news  that  came 
from  Sicily  extremely  perplexed  him,  and  discouraged  his 
troops.  An  account  was  brought,  that  Icetas  had  defeated 
Dionysius ; and  having  made  himself  master  of  the  greatest 
part  of  Syracuse,  had  obliged  the  tyrant  to  shut  himself  up  in 
the  citadel,  and  in  that  quarter  called  the  Isle,  where  he  be- 
sieged him ; and  that  he  had  given  orders  to  the  Carthaginians 
to  prevent  Timoleon’s  approach  and  landing,  that  they  might 
make  a peaceable  partition  of  Sicily  between  them,  when  they 
should  have  compelled  that  general  to  retire. 

And  indeed  the  Carthaginians  had  sent  twenty  galleys  to 
Hhegium.  The  Corinthians,  upon  their  arrival  at  that  port, 
found  ambassadors  from  Icetas,  who  declared  to  Timoleon, 
that  he  might  come  to  Syracuse,  and  would  be  well  received 
there,  provided  he  dismissed  his  troops.  The  proposal  was  an 
absolute  insult,  and  at  the  same  time  more  perplexing.  It 
seemed  impossible  to  beat  the  vessels  which  the  barbarians 
had  caused  to  advance  to  intercept  them  in  their  passage,  being 
twice  their  force ; and  to  retire,  was  to  abandon  to  extreme  dis- 
tress the  whole  of  Sicily,  which  could  not  avoid  being  the 
reward  of  Icetas’s  treachery,  and  of  the  support  which  the 
Carthaginians  should  give  the  tyranny. 

In  this  delicate  conjuncture,  Timoleon  demanded  a conference 
with  the  ambassadors,  and  the  principal  officers  of  the  Cartha- 
ginian squadron,  in  the  presence  of  the  people  of  Hhegium.  It 
was  only,  he  said,  to  exonerate  himself,  and  for  his  own  security, 
that  his  country  might  not  accuse  him  of  having  disobeyed  its 
orders,  and  betrayed  its  interests.  There  was  a secret  under- 
standing between  him  and  the  governor  and  magistrates  of 
Hhegium.  They  desired  nothing  more  than  to  see  the  Corin- 
thians in  possession  of  Sicily,  and  apprehended  nothing  so  much 
as  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Barbarians.  They  summoned 
therefore  an  assembly,  and  shut  the  gates  of  the  city,  upon  pre- 
tence of  preventing  the  citizens  from  going  abroad,  in  order 
that  they  might  devote  their  attention  solely  to  the  present 
affair. 

The  people  being  assembled,  long  speeches  were  made  of 
little  or  no  tendency,  every  body  treating  the  same  subject, 
and  repeating  the  same  reasons,  or  adding  new  ones,  only  to 
protract  the  council,  and  to  gain  time.  Whilst  this  was  doing, 


DIONYSIUS  THE  YOUNGER.  3§5 

nine  of  the  Corinthian  galleys  went  off,  and  were  suffered  by  the 
Carthaginian  vessels  to  pass,  believing  that  their  departure  had 

ffiat  thoseer‘ed  W‘i* 1 ‘helr  °Wn  °fficerS  who  were  in  city,  and 
that  those  nine  galleys  were  to  return  to  Corinth,  the  tenth  re 

Thun?/  carry  Timoleou  to  Icetas’s  army  at  Syracuse.  When 
Timoleon  was  mformed  in  a whisper,  that  his  galleys  were  at 

ffoin^off  Pd  ^ Se‘,it  y thr°?S'h  the  crowd.  cvhiclf!  to  'favour  his 
fo  the  ff’  th.Ij0DRed  exceedingly  around  the  tribunal.  He  o-ot 
to  the  sea-side,  embarked  directly ; and  having  rejoined  his 

whereV^  amVecl  tose.,liei'  at  Tauromenium,  a city  of  Sicily 
where  they  were  received  with  open  arms  by  Andromaehus 

thiir™1^  1<:-  3nd  wt)°  joined  his  citizens  with  the  Corin- 
thian troops  to  reinstate  the  Sicilians  in  their  liberties? 

„ 1 IS  ,to  comprehend  how  much  the  Carthaginians  were 

an,|I|m?,llh?l!leWS  °?  Tlmolcon’s  "rival,  Icetas  was  terrified, 

vance  They  hi JmmsOI ^ m th*  Carthaginian  galleys  ad- 
chariots  K 15°  long  slaps,  50,000  foot,  and  300  armed 
Tm-tli  * • ^ Syracusans  lost  all  hope  when  they  saw  the 

o£r<H  Prri0U  °f the  Port’  Icetas  master  of  theci- 

anV®  rer  o d n°Siecn?Pthn  ^ “d  Timoleo"  without 

y otner  now  in  Sic  ly  than  a nook  of  its  coast,  the  small  citv 

(lj  |P  “r0meni''1>'.>  "'I1  llttle  hope  and  less  force ; for  his  troops 
d not  amount  in  all  to  more  than  1000  soldiers  and  he  had 
S P™T/°r  ‘^.e*r  subsistence.  Besides  w dch?the  ciffes 
fcdhen°er  denCe.,,n  ‘""V  The  ills  tlle.V  had  lately  suffered 

un  which  they  had  oppressed  them.  Thev  were  afraid  of 
penencing  the  same  treatment  from  Timoleon 

aeigiiboiod  o/  jSjS™T^thalrrt  31  thr  Same  time  in  lhe 
and  the  other  with  only  1200  near  5000  men, 

Timoleon  who  to.tl  y ^ • Notwithstanding  this  inequality, 
ginTans  in  ,lT  a y c,onceiv,ed  ‘hat  he  should  find  the  Cartha- 

Td  pDlhi  d'Xtrtemf  m™[Ie  r'  I"  *akin?  “P  th6ir  (luar‘ers 
losing  time  to  rest  them  “to  m °°P^  advance-  at)d  without 
voi,.  ” , ’ S tbo  °ffic0rS  advised  l,im>  he  marched 

£ C 


386 


HISTORY  OF 


directly  to  charge  the  enemy,  who  no  sooner  saw  him  than  they 
took  to  flight.  This  occasioned  their  killing  only  300,  and 
taking  twice  as  many  prisoners  ; but  the  Carthaginians  lost 
their  camp,  and  all  their  baggage.  The  Adranites  opened 
their  gates  at  the  same  time,  and  received  Timoleon.  Other 
cities  sent  their  deputies  to  him  soon  after,  and  made  their 
submission. 

Dionysius  himself,  who  renounced  his  vain  hopes,  and  saw 
himself  at  the  point  of  being  reduced,  as  full  of  contempt  for 
Icetas,  who  had  suffered  himself  to  be  so  shamefully  defeated, 
as  of  admiration  and  esteem  for  Timoleon,  sent  ambassadors 
to  the  latter,  to  treat  of  surrendering  himself  and  the  citadel 
to  the  Corinthians.  Timoleon,  taking  advantage  of  so  unex- 
pected a good  fortune,  made  Euclid  and  Telemachus,  two  Co- 
rinthian officers,  with  400  soldiers,  file  off  into  the  castle  ; not 
all  at  once,  nor  in  the  day-time,  that  being  impossible,  the  Car- 
thaginians being  masters  of  the  harbour,  but  in  small  bodies, 
and  by  stealth.  Those  troops,  having  got  successfully  into 
the  citadel,  took  possession  of  it  with  all  the  tyrant’s  effects, 
and  all  the  stores  he  had  laid  up  there.  For  he  had  a con- 
siderable number  of  horse,  all  sorts  of  warlike  engines  and 
darts,  besides  70,000  suits  of  armour,  which  had  been  laid 
up  there  long  before.  Dionysius  had  also  2000  regular  troops, 
which  with  the  rest  he  surrendered  to  Timoleon.  And  for 
himself,  taking  with  him  his  money  and  some  few  of  his  friends, 
he  embarked  unperceived  by  the  troops  of  Icetas,  and  repaired 
to  the  camp  of  Timoleon. 

It  was  the  first  time  of  his  life  that  he  had  appeared  in  the 
low  and  abject  state  of  a private  person  and  a suppliant;  he  who 
had  been  born  and  nurtured  in  the  arms  of  the  tyranny,  and  had 
seen  himself  master  of  the  most  powerful  kingdom  that  ever 
had  been  usurped  by  tyrants.  He  had  possessed  it  for  ten 
whole  years  before  Dion  took  arms  against  him,  and  for  some 
years  after  that,  though  always  in  the  midst  of  wars  and  battles. 
He  was  sent  to  Corinth  with  only  one  galley,  without  convoy, 
and  with  very  little  money.  He  served  there  for 
Ant  J1  (?6347  a every  body  running  to  gaze  at  him  ; 

some  with  a secret  joy  of  heart  to  feed  their  eyes 
with  the  view  of  the  miseries  of  a man  whom  the  name  of  tyrant 
rendered  odious  ; others  with  a kind  of  compassion,  from  com- 
paring the  splendid  condition  from  which  he  had  fallen,  with 
the  unfathomable  abyss  of  distress  into  which  they  beheld  him 
plunged. 

His  conduct  at  Corinth  no  longer  excited  any  sentiments 
towards  him,  but  those  of  contempt  and  indignation.  He 
passed  whole  days  in  the  perfumers’  shops,  in  taverns,  with 
courtesans,  or  actresses  and  singers,  disputing  with  them 


DIONYSIUS  THE  YOUNGER. 


387 


upon  the  rule  of  music  and  the  harmony  of  airs.  Some 
people  have  thought  that  he  behaved  in  such  a manner 
through  policy,  not  to  give  umbrage  to  the  Corinthians,  nor 
to  suffer  any  thought  or  desire  of  recovering  his  dominions 
to  be  discovered.  But  such  an  opinion  does  him  too  much 
honour ; and  it  seems  more  probable,  that,  nurtured  and  edu- 
cated as  he  was  in  drunkenness  and  debauchery,  he  only  fol- 
lowed his  inclination,  and  that  he  passed  his  life,  in  the 
kind  of  slavery  into  which  he  was  fallen,  as  he  had  done  upon 
the  throne,  having  no  other  resource  or  consolation  in  his 
misfortunes. 

Some  writers  sayh  that  the  extreme  poverty  to  which  he 
was  reduced  at  Corinth  obliged  him  to  open  a school  there, 
and  to  teach  children  to  read  ; perhaps,  says  Cicero, 1 (without 
doubt  jestingly),  to  retain  still  a species  of  empire,  and  not 
absolutely  to  renounce  the  habit  and  pleasure  of  commanding. 
Whether  that  were  his  motive  or  not,k  it  is  certain  that  Dio- 
nysius, who  had  seen  himself  master  of  Syracuse  and  of  almost 
all  Sicily,  who  had  possessed  immense  riches,  and  had  had  nu- 
merous fleets  and  great  armies  of  horse  and  foot  under  his 
command  ; that  the  same  Dionysius, 1 reduced  now  almost  to 
beggary,  and  from  a king  become  a schoolmaster,  was  a good 
lesson  for  persons  of  exalted  stations,  warning  them  not  to  con- 
fide in  their  grandeur,  nor  to  rely  too  much  upon  their  fortune. 
This  was  the  admonition  which  the  Lacedaemonians  some  time 
after  gave  Philip.  That  prince,  having  written  to  them  in  very 
haughty  and  menacing  terms,  m they  made  him  no  other  answer, 
than  Dionysius  at  Corinth. 

An  expression  of  Dionysius,  which  has  been  preserved, 
seems  to  argue,  if  it  be  true,  that  he  knew  how  to  make  a good 
use  of  his  adversity,  and  to  turn  his  misfortunes  to  his  advan- 
tage ; which  would  be  very  much  to  his  praise,  but  contrary 
to  what  has  been  related  of  him  before.  Whilst  he  lived  at 
Corinth,  n a stranger  rallied  him  unseasonably,  and  with  an  in- 
decent rudeness,  upon  the  intercourse  which  he  had  kept  up 
with  the  philosophers  during  his  most  splendid  fortune,  and 
asked  him,  by  way  of  insult,  Of  what  advantage  all  the  wisdom 
of  Plato  had  been  to  him  ? — Canyon  believe  then,  replied  he, 
that  1 have  received  no  benefit  from  Plato , when  you  see  me 
bear  ill  fortune  as  I do? 

h Cic.  Tusc.  Quaest.  1.  iii.  n.  27* 

i Dionysius  Corinthi  pueros  docebat,  usque  adeo  imperio  carere  non  poterat. 
k Val.  Max.  1.  vi. 

1 Tanta  mutatione  majores  natu,  nequis  nimis  fortunae  crederet,  magister 
ludi  factus  ex  tyranno  docuit. 

m Demet.  Phaler.  de  Elocut.  1.  viii.  n Plut.  in  Timol.  p.  243. 


2 c 2 


388  .HISTORY  OP 

l 

SECT.  VI. 

Timoleon,  after  several  victories,  restores  liberty  to  Syracuse,  where  he  in- 
stitutes wise  laws.  He  resigns  his  authority,  and  passes  the  rest  of  his  life 
in  retirement.  His  death.  Honours  paid  to  his  memory. 

After  the  retreat  of  Dionysius,0  Icetas  pressed 
Ant.  J.  cf  346.  siege  of  the  citadel  of  Syracuse  with  the 

utmost  vigour,  and  kept  it  so  closely  blocked 
up,  that  the  convoys  sent  to  the  Corinthians  could  not  enter  it 
without  great  difficulty.  Timoleon,  who  was  at  Catana,  threw 
them  in  thither  frequently.  To  deprive  them  of  this  resource, 
Icetas  and  Mago  set  out  together  with  design  to  besiege  that 
place.  During  their  absence,  Leon  the  Corinthian,  who  com- 
manded in  the  citadel,  having  observed  from  the  ramparts  that 
those  who  had  been  left  to  continue  the  siege  were  very  remiss 
in  their  duty,  made  a sudden  furious  sally  upon  them,  whilst 
they  were  dispersed,  killed  part  of  them,  put  the  rest  to  flight, 
and  seized  the  quarter  of  the  city  called  Achradina,  which  was 
the  strongest  part  of  it,  and  that  which  had  been  least  injured 
by  the  enemy.  Leon  fortified  it  in  the  best  manner  the  time 
would  admit,  and  joined  it  to  the  citadel  by  works  of  communi- 
cation. 

This  bad  news  caused  Mago  and  Icetas  to  return  immedi- 
ately. At  the  same  time  a body  of  troops  from  Corinth  landed 
safe  in  Sicily,  having  deceived  the  vigilance  of  the  Carthaginian 
squadron,  which  was  posted  to  intercept  them.  When  they 
were  landed,  Timoleon  received  them  with  joy,  and  after  hav- 
ing taken  possession  of  Messina,  marched  in  battle  array  against 
Syracuse.  His  army  consisted  of  only  4000  men.  When  he 
approached  the  city,  his  first  care  was  to  send  emissaries 
amongst  the  soldiers  that  bore  arms  for  Icetas.  They  repre- 
sented to  them  that  it  was  highly  shameful  for  Greeks,  as  they 
were,  to  endeavour  to  deliver  up  Syracuse  and  all  Sicily  to  the 
Carthaginians,  the  wickedest  and  most  cruel  of  all  barbarians : 
that  Icetas  had  only  to  join  Timoleon,  and  that  in  concert  with 
him  they  would  soon  overwhelm  the  common  enemy.  Those 
soldiers,  having  spread  these  insinuations  throughout  the  whole 
camp,  gave  Mago  violent  suspicions  of  his  being  betrayed  ; be- 
sides which,  he  had  already  for  some  time  sought  a pretext  to 
retire.  For  these  reasons,  notwithstanding  the  entreaties  and 
warm  remonstrances  of  Icetas,  he  weighed  anchor,  and  set  sail 
for  Africa,  shamefully  abandoning  the  conquest  of  Sicily. 

Timoleon’s  army  the  next  day  appeared  before  the  place  in 
line  of  battle,  and  attacked  it  in  three  different  quarters  with  so 
much  vigour  and  success,  that  Icetas’s  troops  were  universally 
° Ibid.  p.  243 — 248.  Diod.  1.  xvi.  p.  465.  474. 


DIONYSIUS  THE  YOUNGER. 


389 


overthrown  and  put  to  flight.  Thus,  by  a good  fortune  that  has 
few  examples.,  he  carried  Syracuse  by  force  in  an  instant, 
which  was  at  that  time  one  of  the  strongest  cities  in  the  world. 
When  he  had  made  himself  master  of  it,  he  did  not  act  like  Dion, 
in  sparing  the  forts  and  public  edifices  on  account  of  their 
beauty  and  magnificence.  To  avoid  giving  the  same  cause  of 
suspicion,  which  at  first  had  raised  distrust,  though  without 
foundation,  against  that  great  man,  and  at  length  had  ruined  him, 
he  caused  proclamation  to  be  made  by  sound  of  trumpet,  that 
all  Syracusans,  who  would  come  with  their  tools,  might  employ 
themselves  in  demolishing  the  forts  of  the  tyrants.  In  conse- 
quence of  which  the  Syracusans,  considering  that  proclamation 
and  day  as  the  happy  commencement  of  their  liberty,  ran  in  mul- 
titudes, and  not  only  demolished  the  citadel,  but  the  palaces  of 
the  tyrants ; breaking  open  their  tombs  at  thejsame  time,  which 
they  also  threw  down  and  destroyed. 

The  citadel  being  rased,  and  the  ground  made  level,  Timo- 
leon  caused  tribunals  to  be  erected  upon  it  for  the  dispensation 
of  justice  in  the  name  of  the  people  ; that  the  same  place  from 
whence,  under  the  tyrants,  every  day  some  bloody  edict  had 
issued,  might  become  the  asylum  and  bulwark  of  liberty  and 
innocence. 

Timoleon  was  master  of  the  city ; but  it  wanted  people  to  in- 
habit it : for  some  having  perished  in  the  wars  and  seditions, 
and  others  having  fled  to  avoid  the  power  of  the  tyrants,  Syracuse 
was  become  a desert,  and  the  grass  was  grown  so  high  in  the 
streets,  that  horses  grazed  in  them.  Almost  all  the  cities  of 
Sicily  were  in  the  same  condition.  Timoleon  and  the  Syracu- 
sans therefore  found  it  necessary  to  write  to  Corinth,  to  desire 
that  people  might  be  sent  from  Greece  to  inhabit  Syracuse  ; 
that  otherwise  the  country  could  never  recover  itself,  especially 
as  it  was  moreover  threatened  with  a new  war.  For  they  had 
received  advice  that  Mago  having  killed  himself,  the  Cartha- 
ginians, enraged  at  his  having  acquitted  himself  so  ill  of  his  com- 
mission, had  hung  up  his  body  upon  a cross,  and  were  making 
great  levies  to  return  into  Sicily  with  a more  numerous  army 
at  the  beginning  of  the  year. 

Those  letters  being  arrived  with  the  ambassadors  from  Syra- 
cuse, who  conjured  the  Corinthians  to  take  compassion  of  their 
city,  and  to  be  a second  time  the  founders  of  it ; the  Corin- 
thians, did  not  consider  the  calamity  of  that  people  as  an  occa- 
sion of  aggrandizing  themselves,  and  of  making  themselves 
masters  of  the  city,  according  to  the  maxims  of  a base  and  in- 
famous policy ; but  sending  to  all  the  sacred  games  of  Greece, 
and  to  all  public  assemblies,  they  caused  proclamation  to  be 
made  in  them  by  heralds,  that  the  Corinthians  having  abolished 
the  tyranny  in  Syracuse,  and  expelled  the  tyrants,  declared  free 


390 


HISTORY  OF 


and  independent  the  Syracusans,  and  all  the  people  of  Sicily, 
who  should  return  into  their  own  country ; and  exhorted  them 
to  repair  thither,  to  partake  of  an  equal  and  just  distribution  of 
the  lands  amongst  them.  At  the  same  time  they  despatched 
couriers  into  Asia,  and  into  all  the  isles,  whither  great  numbers 
of  fugitives  had  retired,  to  invite  them  to  come  as  soon  as  pos- 
sible to  Corinth,  which  would  provide  them  vessels,  comman- 
ders, and  a safe  convoy,  to  transport  them  into  their  country 
at  its  own  expense. 

Upon  this  proclamation  Corinth  received  universal  praises 
and  blessings,  as  it  justly  deserved.  It  was  every  where  pro- 
claimed, that  Corinth  had  delivered  Syracuse  from  the  tyrants, 
had  preserved  it  from  falling  into  the  hands  of  the  barbarians, 
and  restored  it  to  its  citizens.  It  is  not  necessary  to  insist 
here  upon  the  grandeur  of  so  noble  and  generous  an  action  : the 
mere  relation  of  it  must  make  upon  the  mind  of  every  one 
that  impression  that  always  results  from  what  is  great  or  noble; 
and  every  body  must  own,  that  never  conquest  or  triumph 
equalled  the  glory  which  the  Corinthians  then  acquired  by  so 
perfect  and  magnanimous  a disinterestedness. 

Those  who  came  to  Corinth,  not  being  sufficiently  numerous, 
demanded  an  addition  of  inhabitants  from  that  city  and  from  all 
Greece,  to  augment  this  new  kind  of  colony.  Having  obtained 
their  request,  and  finding  themselves  increased,  to  at  least 
10,000,  they  embarked  for  Syracuse,  where  a multitude  of 
people  from  all  parts  of  Italy  and  Sicily  had  already  joined  Ti- 
moleon.  It  is  said  their  number  amounted  to  60,000  and  up- 
wards. Timoleon  distributed  the  lands  amongst  them  gratis  ; 
but  sold  the  houses,  with  which  he  raised  a very  great  sum  ; 
leaving  to  the  old  inhabitants  the  power  of  redeeming  their  own  : 
and  by  this  means  he  collected  a considerable  fund  for  such  of 
the  people  as  were  poor,  and  unable  to  support  either  their  own 
necessities  or  the  charges  of  the  war. 

The  statues  of  the  tyrants,  and  of  all  the  princes  who  had 
governed  Sicily,  were  put  up  to  sale  ; but  first  they  were  cited 
to  trial,  and  regularly  proceeded  against  in  due  form  of  law. 
One  alone  escaped  the  rigour  of  this  inquiry,  and  was  preserved ; 
which  was  that  of  Gelon,  who  had  gained  a celebrated  victory 
over  the  Carthaginians  near  Himera,  and  had  governed  the 
people  with  lenity  and  justice  ; for  which  his  memory  was  still 
cherished  and  honoured.  If  all  statues  were  made  to  undergo 
the  same  scrutiny,  I do  not  know  whether  many  would  continue 
in  being. 

History  has  preserved  another  sentence  passed  also  in  regard 
to  a statue, p but  of  a very  different  kind.  The  fact  is  curi- 
ous, and  will  excuse  the  digression.  Nicon,  a champion  of 
p Suidas  in  Ntfcwi/.  Pausan.  1.  6.  p.  364. 


DIONYSIUS  THE  YOUNGER. 


391 


ThasoSji  had  been  crowned  1400  times  victor  in  the  solemn 
games  of  Greece.  A man  of  such  merit  could  not  fail  of  being- 
envied.  After  his  death,  one  of  his  competitors  insulted  his 
statue,  and  gave  it  several  blows ; to  revenge,  perhaps,  those 
he  had  formerly  received  from  him  it  represented.  But  the 
statue,  as  if  sensible  of  that  outrage,  fell  from  its  height 
upon  the  person  that  insulted  it,  and  killed  him.  The  son 
of  him  who  had  been  crushed  to  death  proceeded  juridically 
against  the  statue,  as  guilty  of  homicide,  and  punishable 
by  the  law  of  Draco.  That  famous  legislator  of  Athens, 
to  inspire  a greater  horror  for  the  guilt  of  murder,  had 
ordained  that  even  inanimate  things  should  be  destroyed,  whose 
fall  should  occasion  the  death  of  a man.  The  Thasians,  con- 
formably to  this  law,  decreed  that  the  statue  should  be  thrown 
into  the  sea.  But  some  years  after,  being  afflicted  with  a 
great  famine,  and  having  consulted  the  oracle  of  Delphi,  they 
caused  it  to  be  taken  out  of  the  sea,  and  rendered  new 
honours  to  it.  * 

Syracuse  being  thus  raised  in  a manner  from  the  grave,  and 
people  flocking  from  all  parts  to  inhabit  it,  Timoleon,  desir- 
ous of  freeing  the  other  cities  of  Sicily,  and  of  finally  extir- 
pating tyranny  and  tyrants  out  of  it,  began  his  march  with 
his  army.  He,  compelled  Icetas  to  renounce  his  alliance  with 
the  Carthaginians,  obliged  him  to  demolish  his  forts,  and  to 
live  as  a private  person  in  the  city  of  the  Leontines.  Lep- 
tines,  tyrant  of  Apollonia  and  of  several  other  cities  and  for- 
tresses, seeing  himself  in  danger  of  being  taken  by  force, 
surrendered  himself.  Timoleon  spared  his  life,  and  sent  him  to 
Corinth.  For  he  thought  nothing  more  great  and  honourable, 
than  to  let  all  Greece  see  the  tyrants  of  Sicily  in  a state  of  hu- 
miliation, and  living  like  exiles. 

He  returned  afterwards  to  Syracuse,  to  regulate  the  govern- 
ment, and  to  institute  such  laws  as  should  be  most  important 
and  necessary,  in  conjunction  with  Cephalus  and  Dionysius, 
two  legislators  sent  to  him  by  the  Corinthians  ; for  he  had  not 
the  weakness  to  desire  unlimited  power,  and  the  sole  adminis- 
tration. But  on  his  departure,  that  the  troops  in  his  pay 
might  get  something  for  themselves,  and  to  keep  them  in  exer- 
cise at  the  same  time,  he  sent  them,  under  the  command  of 
Dinarchus  and  Demaratus,  into  all  the  places  subject  to  the 
Carthaginians.  Those  troops  brought  over  several  cities  from 
the  barbarians,  lived  always  in  abundance,  made  much  booty, 
and  returned  with  considerable  sums  of  money,  which  was  of 
great  service  in  the  support  of  the  war. 

About  this  time, r the  Carthaginians  arrived  at  Lilybmum, 
under  Asdrubal  and  Amilcar,  with  an  army  of  70,000  men,  200 

q An  island  in  the  iEgean  sea.  r Plut.  in  Timol.  p.  248.  255, 


HISTORY  OF 


392 

ships  of  war,  and  1000  transports,  laden  with  machines,  armed 
chariots,  horses,  ammunition,  and  provisions.  They  proposed 
no  less  than  the  entire  expulsion  of  the  Greeks  out  of  Sicily. 
Timoleon  did  not  think  fit  to  wait  their  advancing  ; and  though 
he  could  raise  only  6 or  7000  men,  so  great  was  the  people’s 
terror,  he  marched  with  that  small  body  of  troops  against  the 
formidable  army  of  the  enemy,  and  obtained  a celebrated  vic- 
tory near  the  river  Crimesus  ; an  account  of  which  may  be  found 
in  the  history  of  the  Carthaginians.8  Timoleon  returned  to  Sy- 
racuse amidst  shouts  of  joy  and  universal  applauses. 

He  had  before  effected  the  conquest  and  reduction  of  the 
Sicilian  tyrants,  but  had  not  changed  them,  nor  taken  from  them 
their  tyrannical  disposition.  They  united  together,  and  formed 
a powerful  league  against  him.  Timoleon  immediately  took  the 
field,  and  soon  put  a final  end  to  their  hopes.  He  jnade  them 
all  suffer  the  just  punishment  their  revolt  deserved.  Icetas, 
amongst  others,  with  his  son,  were  put  to  death  as  tyrants  and 
traitors.  His  wife  and  daughters,  having  been  sent  to  Syracuse, 
and  brought  before  the  assembly  of  the  people,  were  also  sen- 
tenced to  die,  and  executed  accordingly.  The  people,  without 
doubt,  designed  to  avenge  Dion,  their  first  deliverer,  by  that 
decree.  For  it  was  the  same  Icetas  who  had  caused  Dion’s 
wife,  his  sister  Aristomache,  and  his  son  an  infant,  to  be  thrown 
into  the  sea. 

Virtue  is  seldom  or  never  without  those  who  envy  it.  Two 
accusers  summoned  Timoleon  to  answer  for  his  conduct  before 
the  judges  ; and  having  assigned  him  a certain  day  for  his  ap- 
pearance, demanded  sureties  of  him.  The  people  expressed 
great  indignation  against  such  a proceeding,  and  would  have 
dispensed  with  so  great  a man’s  observing  the  usual  formal- 
ities ; this,  however,  he  strongly  opposed,  giving  for  his  rea- 
son, that  all  he  had  undertaken  had  no  other  principle,  than 
that  the  laws  might  have  their  due  course.  He  was  accused 
of  malversation  during  his  command  of  the  army.  Timoleon, 
without  giving  himself  the  trouble  to  refute  those  calumnies, 
only  replied  : That  he  thanked  the  gods,  for  that  they  had 
heard  his  prayers,  and  that  he  at  length  saw  the  Syracusans 
enjoy  an  entire  liberty  of  saying  every  thing ; a liberty  abso- 
lutely unknown  to  them  under  the  tyrants,  but  which  it  was 
just  to  confine  within  due  bounds. 

That  great  man  had  given  Syracuse  wise  laws,  had  purged 
all  Sicily  of  the  tyrants  which  had  so  long  infested  it,  had  re-es- 
tablished peace  and  security  universally,  and  supplied  the  cities 
ruined  by  the  war  with  the  means  of  reinstating  themselves. 
After  such  glorious  actions,  which  had  acquired  him  an  un- 
bounded credit,  he  voluntarily  quitted  his  authority  to  live  in 

• Vol.  i. 


DIONYSIUS  THE  YOUNGER. 


393 


retirement.  The  Syracusans  had  given  him  the  best  house 
in  the  city,  in  gratitude  for  his  great  services,  and  another  very 
fine  and  agreeable  one  in  the  country,  where  he  generally  re- 
sided with  his  wife  and  children,  whom  he  had  sent  for  from 
Corinth  ; for  he  did  not  return  thither,  and  Syracuse  was  be- 
come his  country.  He  had  the  prudence  by  resigning  every 
thing  to  shelter  himself  also  entirely  from  envy,  which  never 
fails  to  attend  exalted  stations,  and  pays  no  respect  to  merit, 
however  great  and  substantial.  He  shunned  the  rock  on  which 
the  greatest  men,  through  an  insatiate  lust  of  honours  and 
power,  are  often  shipwrecked  ; that  is,  by  engaging  to  the  end 
of  their  lives  in  new  cares  and  troubles,  of  which  age  renders 
them  incapable,  and  by  choosing  rather  to  sink  under,  than  to 
lay  down,  the  weight  of  them. t 

Timoleon,  who  knew  all  the  value  of  u a noble  and  glorious 
leisure,  acted  in  a different  manner.  He  passed  the  rest  of  his 
life  as  a private  person,  enjoying  the  grateful  satisfaction  of 
seeing  so  many  cities,  and  such  a numerous  people,  indebted  to 
him  for  their  happiness  and  tranquillity.  But  he  was  always 
respected,  and  consulted  as  the  common  oracle  of  Sicily. 
Neither  treaty  of  peace,  institution  of  law,  division  of  land,  nor 
regulation  of  government,  seemed  well  done,  if  Timoleon  had 
not  been  consulted,  and  put  the  last  hand  to  it. 

His  age  was  tried  with  a very  sensible  affliction,  which  he 
supported  with  astonishing  patience  ; it  was  the  loss  of  sight. 
That  accident,  far  from  lessening  the  consideration  and  regard 
of  the  people  towards  him,  served  only  to  augment  them. 
The  Syracusans  did  not  content  themselves  with  paying  him 
frequent  visits,  they  conducted  all  strangers,  both  in  town  and 
country,  to  see  their  benefactor  and  deliverer.  When  they  had 
any  important  affair  to  deliberate  upon  in  the  assembly  of  the 
people,  they  called  him  in  to  their  assistance  ; he  came  thither  in 
a chariot  drawn  by  two  horses,  went  through  the  public  square 
to  the  theatre  : and  in  that  manner  was  introduced  into  the 
assembly,  amidst  the  shouts  and  acclamations  of  joy  of  the 
whole  people.  After  he  had  given  his  opinion,  which  was  al- 
ways religiously  observed,  his  domestics  reconducted  him  across 
the  theatre,  and  he  was  escorted  by  all  the  citizens  beyond  the 
gates,  with  continual  shouts  of  joy  and  clapping  of  hands. 

He  had  still  greater  honours  paid  to  him  after  his  death. 
Nothing  was  wanting  that  could  add  to  the  magnificence  of  the 
procession  which  followed  his  bier,  of  which  the  noblest  orna- 
ments were  the.  tears  that  were  shed,  and  the  blessings  uttered 
by  every  body  in  honour  of  his  memory.  Those  tears  were  nei- 
ther the  effect  of  custom  and  the  formality  of  mourning,  nor  ex- 

1 Mai unt  deficere,  quam  desinere.  Quintil. 
u Otium  cum  dignitate.  Cic. 


394 


HISTORY  OF 


'acted  by  a public  decree,  but  flowed  from  a native  source,  and 
sprung  from  sincere  affection,  lively  gratitude,  and  inconsolable 
sorrow.  A law  was  also  made,  that  annually,  for  the  future, 
upon  the  day  of  his  death,  musical  and  gymnastic  games  should 
be  celebrated,  and  horse-races  run  in  honour  of  him.  But  what 
was  still  more  honourable  for  the  memory  of  that  great  man, 
was  the  decree  of  the  Syracusan  people  ; that  whenever  Sicily 
should  be  engaged  in  a war  with  foreigners,  they  should  send  to 
Corinth  for  a general. 

I do  not  know  that  we  discover  in  history  any  thing  more 
great  and  accomplished  than  what  we  are  told  of  Timoleon.  I 
speak  not  only  of  his  military  exploits  and  the  happy  success  of 
all  his  undertakings.  Plutarch  observes  a characteristic  in 
them,  which  distinguishes  Timoleon  from  all  the  great  men  of 
his  times  ; and  he  makes  use,  upon  that  occasion,  of  a very  re- 
markable comparison.  There  are,  says  he,  in  painting  and 
poetry,  pieces  which  are  excellent  in  themselves,  and  which  at 
the  first  view  may  be  known  to  be  the  works  of  a master ; but 
some  of  them  denote  their  having  cost  abundance  of  pains  and 
application  ; whereas  in  others,  an  easy  and  native  grace  is 
seen,  which  adds  exceedingly  to  their  value  ; and  amongst  the 
latter  he  places  the  poems  of  Homer.  Something  of  this  sort 
occurs,  he  goes  on,  when  we  compare  the  great  actions  of  Epa- 
minondas  and  Agesilaus  with  those  of  Timoleon.  In  the 
former,  we  find  them  executed  with  force  and  innumerable  dif- 
ficulties ; but  in  the  latter  there  is  an  easiness  and  facility, 
which  distinguishes  them  as  the  work,  not  of  fortune,  but  of 
virtue,  which  fortune  seems  to  have  taken  pleasure  in  second- 
ing. It  is  Plutarch  who  still  speaks. 

But  not  to  mention  the  military  actions  of  Timoleon,  what  I 
admire  most  in  him,  is  his  warm  and  disinterested  passion  for 
the  public  good,  reserving  for  himself  only  the  pleasure  of  see- 
ing others  happy  by  his  services ; his  extreme  remoteness  from 
ambition  and  haughtiness  ; his  honourable  retirement  into  the 
country  ; his  modesty,  moderation,  and  indifference  for  the 
honours  paid  him ; and,  what  is  still  more  uncommon,  his  aver- 
sion for  all  flattery,  and  even  just  praises.  When  somebody 
extolled,  in  his  presence,  his  wisdom,  valour,  and  the  glory  he 
had  acquired  in  having  expelled  the  tyrants,  he  made  no 
answer,  but  that  he  thought  himself  obliged  to  express  his  gra- 
titude to  the  gods,  in  that,  having  decreed  to  restore  peace  and 
liberty  to  Sicily,  they  had  vouchsafed  to  make  choice  of  him  in 
preference  to  all  others  for  so  honourable  an  office  : for  he  was 
fully  persuaded,  that  all  human  events  are  guided  and  disposed 
by  the  secret  decrees  of  Divine  Providence.*  What  a treasure, 
what  a happiness  for  a state,  is  such  a minister  ! 
x Cum  suas  laudes  audiret  prsedicari,  nunquam  aliud  dixit,  quam  se  in  e& 


DIONYSIUS  THE  YOUNGER. 


395 


For  the  better  understanding  his  value,  we  have  only  to 
compare  the  condition  of  Syracuse  under  Timoleon,  with  its 
state  under  the  two  Dionysiuses.  It  is  the  same  city,  the  same 
inhabitants,  and  the  same  people : but  what  a difference  do  we 
perceive  under  the  different  governments  we  speak  of!  The 
two  tyrants  had  no  thoughts  but  of  making  themselves  feared, 
and  of  depressing  their  subjects  to  render  them  more  submissive. 
They  were  in  fact  dreaded,  as  they  desired  to  be,  but  at  the 
same  time  detested  and  abhorred,  and  had  more  to  fear  from 
their  subjects,  than  their  subjects  from  them.  Timoleon,  on 
the  contrary,  who  looked  upon  himself  as  the  father  of  the  Sy- 
racusan people,  and  who  had  no  thoughts  but  of  making  them 
happy,  enjoyed  the  refined  pleasure  of  being  beloved  and  re- 
vered as  a parent  by  his  children  : and  he  was  remembered 
amongst  them  with  blessings,  because  they  could  not  reflect 
upon  the  peace  and  felicity  they  enjoyed,  without  calling  to 
mind,  at  the  same  time,  the  wise  legislator  to  whom  they  were 
indebted  for  those  inestimable  blessings. 

re  maximas  diis  gratias  agere  et  habere,  quod  cum  Siciliam  recreare  consti- 
tuissent,  turn  se  potissimum  ducem  esse  voluissent.  Nihil  enim  rerum  hu- 
manarum  sine  deorum  numine  agi  putabat.  Cor.  Nep.  in  Timol,  c.  iv.  - 


BOOK  XII. 


THE 

HISTORY 

OF  THE 

PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


CHAP.  I. 

Sect.  I.  State  of  Greece  from  the  time  of  the  treaty  of  Antalcidas.  The 
Lacedaemonians  declare  war  against  the  city  of  Olynthus.  They  seize  by 
fraud  and  violence  upon  the  citadel  of  Thebes.  Olynthus  surrenders. 

THE  peace  of  Antalcidas,*  of  which  mention 
Ant  "j  C61387  ^as  been  made  in  the  third  chapter  of  the  ninth 
book,  had  plentifully  scattered  among  the  Gre- 
cian states  the  seeds  of  discontent  and  division.  In  conse- 
quence of  that  treaty,  the  Thebans  had  been  obliged  to  abandon 
the  cities  of  Boeotia,  and  suffer  them  to  enjoy  their  liberty ; 
and  the  Corinthians  to  withdraw  their  garrison  from  Argos, 
which  by  that  means  became  free  and  independant.  The 
Lacedaemonians,  who  were  the  authors  and  executors  of  this 
treaty,  saw  their  power  extremely  augmented  by  it,  and  strove 
to  make  farther  additions  to  it.  They  compelled  the  Manti- 
nseans,  against  whom  they  pretended  to  have  many  causes 
of  complaint  in  the  last  war,  to  demolish  the  walls  of  their 
city,  and  to  inhabit  four  different  places,  as  they  had  done 
before. 

The  two  kings  of  Sparta,b  Agesipolis  and  Agesilaus,  were 
of  quite  different  characters,  and  entertained  equally  different 
opinions  upon  the  present  state  of  affairs.  The  first,  who  was 
naturally  inclined  to  peace,  and  a strict  observer  of  justice,  was 
anxious  that  Sparta,  who  was  already  much  exclaimed  against 
for  the  treaty  of  Antalcidas,  should  suffer  the  Grecian  cities 
to  enjoy  their  liberties,  according  to  the  tenor  of  that  treaty, 
a Xenoph.  Hist.  Graec.  1.  V.  p.  550.  553.  b Diod.  1.  xv.  p.  341. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


397 


and  not  disturb  their  tranquillity  through  an  unjust  desire  of 
extending  her  dominions.  The  other,  on  the  contrary,  restless, 
active,  and  full  of  great  views  of  ambition  and  conquest, 
breathed  nothing  but  war. 

At  the  same  time,  deputies  arrived  at  Sparta 

A Tl/T  A A 

Ant  J C 383  ^rom  Acanthus  and  Apollonia,  two  very  consider- 
able cities  of  Macedonia,  on  the  subject  of  Olyn- 
thus,  a city  of  Thrace,  inhabited  by  Greeks,  originally  from 
Chalcis  in  Euboea.  Athens,0  after  the  victories  of  Salamis 
and  Marathon,  had  conquered  many  places  on  the  side  of 
Thrace,  and  even  in  Thrace  itself.  Those  cities  threw  off  the 
yoke  as  soon  as  Sparta,  at  the  conclusion  of  the  Peloponnesian 
war,  had  ruined  the  power  of  Athens.  Olynthus  was  of  this 
number.  The  deputies  of  Acanthus  and  Apollonia  represented, 
in  the  general  assembly  of  the  allies,  that  Olynthus,  situate  in 
their  neighbourhood,  daily  improved  in  strength  in  an  extra- 
ordinary manner ; that  it  perpetually  extended  its  dominions  by 
new  conquests ; that  it  obliged  all  the  cities  round  about  to 
submit  to  it,  and  to  enter  into  its  measures ; and  was  upon  the 
point  of  concluding  an  alliance  with  the  Athenians  and  the 
Thebans.  The  affair  being  taken  into  consideration,  it  was 
unanimously  resolved  that  it  was  necessary  to  declare  war 
against  the  Olynthians.  It  was  agreed  that  the  allied  cities 
should  furnish  10,000  troops,  with  liberty  to  such  as  desired  it 
to  substitute  money,  at  the  rate  of  three  oboli  a day  for  each 
foot  soldier, d and  four  times  as  much  for  the  horse.  The  La- 
cedaemonians, to  lose  no  time,  made  their  troops  march  directly, 
under  the  command  of  Eudamidas,  who  prevailed  writh  the 
Ephori,  that  Phoebidas,  his  brother,  might  have  the  leading  of 
those  which  were  to  follow,  and  to  join  him  soon  after.  When 
he  arrived  in  that  part  of  Macedonia  which  is  also  called 
Thrace,  he  garrisoned  such  places  as  applied  to  him  for  that 
purpose,  seized  upon  Potida^a,  a city  in  alliance  with  the  Olyn- 
thians, which  surrendered  without  making  any  defence ; and 
began  the  war  against  Olynthus,  though  slowly,  as  was  incum- 
bent upon  a general  whose  troops  were  not  all  assembled. 

Phoebidas  began  his  march  soon  after, e and 

A 71/T  O 7 

Ant.  J.  C.  382.  being  arrived  near  Thebes,  encamped  without 
the  walls,  near  the  Gymnasium  or  public  place  of 
exercise.  Ismenius  and  Leontides,  both  polemarchs,  that  is, 
generals  of  the  army,  and  supreme  magistrates  of  Thebes, 
were  at  the  head  of  two  different  factions.  The  first,  who  had 
engaged  Pelopidas  on  his  side,  was  no  friend  to  the  Lacedaemo- 
nians, nor  they  to  him ; because  he  publicly  declared  for  popular 

c Diod.  1.  xv.  p.  554.  556.  d Five-pence. 

e Xenopli.  p.  556 — 558.  Plut.  in  Agesil.  p.  608,  609.  Id.  in  Pelop.  p.  280. 
Diod.  1.  xv.  p.  341,  342. 


398 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


government  and  liberty.  The  other,  on  the  contrary,  favoured 
an  oligarchy,  and  was  supported  by  the  Lacedaemonians  with 
their  whole  interest.  I am  obliged  to  enter  into  this  detail, 
because  the  event  I am  going  to  relate,  and  which  was  a conse- 
quence of  it,  was  the  occasion  of  the  important  war  between  the 
Thebans  and  the  Lacedaemonians. 

This  being  the  state  of  affairs  at  Thebes,  Leontides  ap- 
plied to  Phoebidas,  and  proposed  to  him  to  seize  the  citadel 
called  Cadmaea,  to  expel  the  adherents  of  Ismenius,  and  to  give 
the  Lacedaemonians  possession  of  it.  He  represented  to  him, 
that  nothing  could  be,  more  glorious  for  him  than  to  make  him- 
self-master  of  Thebes,  whilst  his  brother  was  endeavouring  to 
reduce  Olynthus  : that  he  would  thereby  facilitate  the  success 
of  his  brother’s  enterprise  : and  that  the  Thebans,  who  had 
prohibited  their  citizens  by  decree  to  bear  arms  against  the 
Olynthians,  would  not  fail,  upon  his  making  himself  master  of 
the  citadel,  to  supply  him  with  whatever  number  of  horse 
and  foot  he  should  think  proper  for  the  reinforcement  of 
Eudamidas. 

Phoebidas,  who  had  much  ambition  and  little  prudence,  and 
who  sought  only  for  an  opportunity  of  signalizing  himself  by 
some  extraordinary  action,  without  examining  the  consequences, 
suffered  himself  to  be  easily  persuaded.  Whilst  the  Thebans, 
in  entire  security  and  full  reliance  on  the  treaty  of  peace  lately 
concluded  by  the  Grecian  states,  were  celebrating  the  feasts  of 
Ceres,  and  expected  nothing  less  than  such  an  act  of  hostility, 
Phoebidas,  conducted  by  Leontides,  took  possession  of  the 
citadel.  The  senate  was  then  sitting.  Leontides  went  to  them, 
and  declared,  that  there  was  nothing  to  be  feared  from  the  La- 
cedaemonians who  had  just  entered  the  citadel ; that  they  were 
only  the  enemies  of  those  who  wished  to  disturb  the  public 
tranquillity  ; that  as  for  himself,  by  the  power  his  office  of  pole- 
march  gave  him,  of  confining  whoever  caballed  against  the  state, 
he  should  put  Ismenius  into  a place  of  security,  who  factiously 
endeavoured  to  break  the  peace.  He  was  seized  accordingly, 
and  carried  to  the  citadel.  The  party  of  Ismenius,  seeing  their 
chief  a prisoner,  and  apprehending  the  utmost  violence  for 
themselves,  quitted  the  city  with  precipitation,  and  retired  to 
Athens,  to  the  number  of  400  and  upwards.  They  were  soon 
after  banished  by  a public  decree.  Pelopidas  was  of  the  num- 
ber : but  Epaminondas  remained  at  Thebes  unmolested,  being 
disregarded  as  a man  entirely  devoted  to  the  study  of  philosophy, 
who  did  not  intermeddle  in  affairs  of  state ; and  also  on  account 
of  his  poverty,  which  left  no  room  to  fear  any  thing  from  him. 
A new  polemarch  was  nominated  in  the  room  of  Ismenius,  and 
Leontides  went  to  Lacedtemon. 

The  news  of  Phoebidas’s  enterprise,  who  at  a time  of  general 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


399 


peace  had  taken  possession  of  a citadel  by  force,  upon  which 
he  had  no  claim  nor  right,  had  occasioned  great  murmurings 
and  complaints.  Such  especially  as  opposed  Agesilaus,  who 
was  suspected  of  having  shared  in  the  scheme,  demanded 
by  whose  orders  Phoebidas  bad  committed  so  strange  a breach 
of  public  faith.  Agesilaus,  who  well  knew  that  those  warm 
reproaches  were  aimed  at  him,  made  no  difficulty  of  justi- 
fying Phoebidas,  and  declared  openly,  and  before  all  the  world. 
That  the  action  ought  to  he  considered  in  itself,  in  order  to 
understand  whether  it  were  useful  or  not ; that  whatever 
ivas  expedient  for  Sparta,  he  was  not  only  permitted,  hut  com- 
manded to  act,  upon  his  own  authority , and  without  waiting 
the  orders  of  any  body : strange  principles  to  be  advanced 
by  a person  who  upon  other  occasions  had  maintained,  That 
justice  was  the  first  of  all  virtues  ; and  that  without  it,  valour 
itself,  and  every  other  great  quality,  were  useless  and  unavail- 
ing. It  is  the  same  man  that  made  answer,  when  somebody 
in  his  presence  magnified  the  king  of  Persia’s  grandeur  : He 
whom  you  ccdl  the  great  king,  in  what  is  he  greater  than  I, 
unless  he  he  more  just  ? a truly  noble  and  admirable  maxim. 
That  justice  must  betherule  of  whatever  is  ex- 
cellent AND  great  ! but  a maxim  that  he  had  only  in  his 
mouth,  and  which  all  his  actions  contradicted  ; conformably  to 
the  principle  of  the  generality  of  politicians,  who  imagine  that 
a statesman  ought  always  to  have  justice  in  his  mouth,  but 
should  never  lose  an  occasion  of  violating  it  for  the  advantage 
of  his  country. 

But  let  us  now  hear  the  sentence  which  the  august  assembly 
of  Sparta,  so  renowned  for  the  wisdom  of  its  counsels  and  the 
equity  of  its  decrees,  is  about  to  pronounce.  The  affair  being 
maturely  considered,  the  arguments  discussed  at  large,  and 
set  in  their  full  light,  the  assembly  resolved,  that  Phoebidas 
should  be  deprived  of  his  command,  and  fined  100,000  drach- 
mas^ but  that  they  should  continue  to  hold  the  citadel,  and 
keep  a strong  garrison  in  it.  What  a strange  contradiction 
was  this  ! says  Polybius  what  a disregard  of  all  justice  and 
reason ! to  punish  the  criminal,  and  approve  the  crime  ; and 
not  only  to  approve  the  crime  tacitly,  and  without  having  any 
share  in  it,  but  to  ratify  it  by  public  authority,  and  continue  it  in 
the  name  of  the  state,  in  order  to  reap  the  advantages  arising 
from  it.  But  this  was  not  all : commissioners,  appointed  by  all 
the  cities  in  alliance  with  Sparta,  were  despatched  to  the  citadel 
of  Thebes,  to  try  Ismenius,  upon  whom  they  passed  sentence  of 
death,  which  was  immediately  executed.  Such  flagrant  injustice 
seldom  remains  unpunished.  To  act  in  such  a manner,  says  Po- 
lybius again,  is  neither  for  one’s  country’s  interest,  nor  one’s  own. 
f About  22,000?.  sterling.  s Lib.  iv.  p.  296. 


400 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


Teleutias,h  Agesilaus’s  brother,  had  been  substituted  in  the 
place  of  Phoebidas,  to  command  the  rest  of  the  troops  of  the 
allies  designed  against  Olynthus  ; whither  he  marched  with 
all  expedition.  The  city  was  strong,  and  furnished  with 
every  thing  necessary  for  a good  defence.  Several  sallies 
were  made  with  great  success,  in  one  of  which  Teleutias 
was  killed.  The  next  year  king  Agesipolis  had  the  com- 
mand of  the  army.  The  campaign  passed  in  skirmishing, 
without  any  thing  decisive.  Agesipolis  died  soon  after  of  a 
disease,  and  was  succeeded  by  his  brother  Cleombrotus,  who 
reigned  nine  years.  About  that  time  began  the 

A Tl/T  0^04  o J o 

Ant  J C 380  hundredth  Olympiad.  Sparta  made  fresh  efforts 
to  terminate  the  war  with  the  Olynthians.  Po- 
lybidas  their  general  pressed  the  siege  with  vigour.  The  place 
being  in  want  of  provisions,  was  at  last  obliged  to  surrender, 
and  was  received  by  the  Spartans  into  the  number  of  their 
allies. 


SECT.  II. 

Sparta’s  prosperity.  Character  of  two  illustrious  Thebans,  Epaminondas  and 
Pelopidas.  The  latter  forms  the  design  of  restoring  the  liberty  of  his  coun- 
try. Conspiracy  against  the  tyrants  wisely  conducted,  and  happily  executed. 
The  citadel  is  retaken. 

The  fortune  of  the  Lacedaemonians  never  appeared  with 
greater  splendour,1  nor  their  power  more  strongly  established. 
All  Greece  was  subjected  to  them,  either  by  force  or  alliance. 
They  were  in  possession  of  Thebes,  a most  powerful  city, 
and  with  that  of  all  Boeotia.  They  had  found  means  to  humble 
Argos,  and  to  hold  it  in  dependance.  Corinth  was  entirely  at 
their  devotion,  and  obeyed  their  orders  in  every  thing.  The 
Athenians,  abandoned  by  their  allies,  and  reduced  almost  to 
their  own  strength,  were  in  no  condition  to  make  head  against 
them.  If  any  city  or  people  in  their  alliance  attempted  to 
withdraw  themselves  from  their  power,  an  immediate  punish- 
ment reduced  them  to  their  former  obedience,  and  terrified  all 
others  from  following  their  example.  Thus,  masters  by  sea 
and  land,  all  trembled  before  them ; and  the  most  formidable 
princes,  as  the  king  of  Persia  and  the  tyrant  of  Syracuse, 
seemed  to  emulate  each  other  in  courting  their  friendship  and 
alliance. 

A prosperity  founded  in  injustice  can  be  of  no  long  dura- 
tion. The  blow  that  was  to  shake  the  Spartan  power,  came 
from  the  very  quarter  where  they  exercised  the  most  unjust 
violence,  and  from  whence  they  did  not  seem  to  have  any  thing 

1 Xenoph.  1.  v.  p.  559 — 565.  Diod.  1.  xv.  p.  342,  343. 

' Xenoph.  p.  565.  Diod.  p.  334. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


401 


to  fear;  that  is  to  say,  from  Thebes.  Two  illustrious  citizens 
of  that  state  will  make  a glorious  appearance  upon  the  theatre 
of  Greece,  and  for  that  reason  deserve  our  notice  in  this  place. 

These  are  Pelopidas  and  Epaminondas,k  both  descended  from 
the  noblest  families  of  Thebes.  Pelopidas,  nurtured  in  the 
greatest  affluence,  and  having  become,  whilst  young,  sole  heir 
of  a very  rich  and  flourishing  family,  employed  his  wealth,  from 
the  first  possession  of  it,  in  the  relief  of  such  as  had  occasion 
for  it,  and  merited  his  favour  ; showing  in  that  wise  use  of  his 
riches,  that  he  was  really  their  master,  and  not  their  slave.  For 
according  to  Aristotle’s  remark,  repeated  by  Plutarch,1  most 
men  make  no  use  at  all  of  their  fortunes  out  of  avarice,  or  abuse 
them  in  bad  or  trifling  expenses.  As  for  Epaminondas,  poverty 
was  all  his  inheritance,  in  which  his  honour,  and  one  might  al- 
most say  his  joy  and  delight,  consisted.  He  was  born  of  poor 
parents,  and  consequently  familiarized  from  his  infancy  with 
poverty,  which  he  made  more  grateful  and  easy  to  him  by  his 
taste  for  philosophy.  Pelopidas,  who  supported  a great  number 
of  citizens,  never  having  been  able  to  prevail  on  him  to  accept 
his  offers  and  to  make  use  of  his  fortune,  resolved  to  share  in 
the  poverty  of  his  friend  by  making  him  his  example,  and  be- 
came the  model  as  well  as  admiration  of  the  whole  city,  from 
the  modesty  of  his  dress  and  the  frugality  of  his  table. 

If  Epaminondas  was  poor  with  respect  to  the  goods  of  for- 
tune,111 he  was  amply  recompensed  in  those  of  the  head  and 
heart;  modest,  prudent,  grave,  skilful  in  taking  advantage  of 
favourable  opportunities,  possessing  in  a supreme  degree  the 
science  of  war,  equally  valiant  and  wise,  easy  and  complaisant 
in  his  intercourse  with  the  world,  suffering  with  incredible  pa- 
tience the  ill  treatment  of  the  people,  and  even  of  his  friends, 
uniting  with  his  ardour  for  military  exercises  a wonderful  taste 
for  study  and  the  sciences,  piquing  himself  especially  so  much 
upon  truth  and  sincerity,  that  he  made  a scruple  of  telling  a lie 
even  in  jest  or  for  diversion.  Aded  veritalis  diligens,  ut  nejoco 
quidem  mentiretur. 

They  were  both  equally  inclined  to  virtue.*1  But  Pelopidas 
was  best  pleased  with  the  exercises  of  the  body,  and  Epami- 
nondas with  the  cultivation  of  the  mind.  For  which  reason, 
they  employed  their  leisure,  the  one  in  the  palaestra  and  the 
chase,  and  the  other  in  conversation  and  the  study  of  phi- 
losophy. 

But  what  persons  of  sense  and  judgment  must  principally 
admire  in  them,  and  which  is  rarely  found  amongst  those  of  their 


? Corn.  Nep.  in  Epam.  c.  iii. 
VOL.  III. 


2 D 


n 


Plut.  ill  Pelop.  p.  279. 


402 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


high  rank,  is  the  perfect  union  and  friendship  that  always  sub- 
sisted between  them,  during  the  whole  time  they  were  employed 
together  in  the  administration  of  the  public  affairs,  whether  in 
war  or  peace.  If  we  examine  the  government  of  Aristides 
and  Themistocles,  that  of  Cimon  and  Pericles,  of  Nicias  and 
Alcibiades,  we  shall  find  them  full  of  trouble,  dissension,  and 
debate.  The  two  friends  we  speak  of  held  the  first  offices  in 
the  state  ; all  great  affairs  passed  through  their  hands  ; every 
thing  was  confided  to  their  care  and  authority.  In  such  delicate 
conjunctures,  what  occasions  of  pique  and  jealousy  generally 
arise  ! But  neither  difference  of  sentiment,  diversity  of  interest, 
nor  the  least  emotion  of  envy,  ever  altered  their  union  and  good 
understanding.  The  reason  of  which  was,  their  being  founded 
upon  an  unalterable  principle,  that  is,  upon  virtue  ; which  in  all 
other  actions,  says  Plutarch,  occasioned  their  having  neither 
glory  nor  riches,  those  fatal  sources  of  strife  and  division,  in 
view,  but  solely  the  public  good,  and  made  them  desire,  not  the 
advancement  or  honour  of  their  own  families,  but  to  render  their 
country  more  powerful  and  flourishing.  Such  were  the  two  il- 
lustrious men  who  are  about  to  make  their  appearance,  and  to 
give  a new  face  to  the  affairs  of  Greece,  by  the  great  events  in 
which  they  will  have  a principal  share. 

Leontides  being  apprised  that  the  exiles  had 
Ant.  X C.6 37*8.  re^rec*  f°  Athens,0  where  they  had  been  well  re- 
ceived by  the  people,  and  much  respected  by  all 
people  of  worth  and  honour,  laid  a plot  for  secretly  cutting 
them  off,  by  means  of  certain  unknown  persons,  whom  he  sent 
thither  to  assassinate  the  most  considerable  of  them.  Only 
Androclides  was  killed,  and  Leontides  failed  in  his  designs 
against  all  the  rest. 

At  the  same  time,  the  Athenians  received  letters  from 
Sparta,  to  prohibit  their  receiving  or  assisting  the  exiles,  and 
with  orders  to  expel  them  their  city,  as  persons  declared  to  be 
the  common  enemies  of  Greece  by  all  the  allies.  Humanity,  a 
virtue  peculiar  and  natural  to  the  Athenians,  made  them  reject 
so  infamous  a proposal  with  horror.  They  were  transported 
with  the  opportunity  of  expressing  their  gratitude  to  the  The- 
bans for  a previous  obligation  of  the  same  nature.  For  the 
Thebans  had  contributed  the  most  to  the  re-establishment  of 
the  popular  government  at  Athens,  having  declared  in  their 
favour  by  a. public  decree,  contrary  to  the  prohibition  of  Sparta ; 
and  it  was  from  Thebes  that  Thrasybulus  had  set  out  to  deliver 
Athens  from  the  tyranny  of  the  Thirty. 

Pelopidas,  though  at  that  time  very  young,  went  to  all  the 

0 Xenoph.  Hist.  Gr.  1.  v.  p.  56G — 568.  Plut.  in  Pclop.  p.  280 — 284.  Id. 
de  Socrat.  Gen.  p.  58G — 588.  et  594 — 598.  Diod.  1.  xv.  p.  344 — 346.  Cor. 
Nep;  in  Pelop.  c.J — iv. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


403 


exiles  one  after  another,  of  whom  Melon  was  the  most  con- 
siderable. He  represented  to  them,  That  it  was  neither  be- 
coming nor  just  to  content  themselves  with  having  saved  their 
own  lives , and  to  look  ivith  indifference  upon  their  country, 
enslaved  and  miserable  ; that  whatever  good-will  the  people  of 
Athens  might  express  for  them,  it  was  not  fit  that  they  should 
suffer  their  fate  to  depend  upon  the  decrees  of  a people,  which 
their  natural  inconstancy,  or  the  malignity  of  the  orators  that 
turned  them  any  way  at  will,  might  soon  alter : that  it  was 
necessary  to  hazard  every  thing , after  the  example  of  Thra- 
sybulus,  and  to  set  before  themselves  his  intrepid  valour,  and 
generous  fortitude  as  a model:  that  as  he  set  outfro7n  Thebes 
to  suppress  and  destroy  the  tyrants  of  Athens,  so  they  ought 
to  go  from  Athens  to  restore  to  Thebes  its  ancient  liberty . 

This  discourse  made  all  the  impression  upon  the  exiles  that 
could  be  expected.  They  sent  privately  to  inform  their  friends 
at  Thebes  of  their  resolution,  who  extremely  approved  their 
design.  Charon,  one  of  the  principal  persons  in  the  city,  offer- 
ed to  receive  the  conspirators  into  his  house.  Philidas  found 
means  to  get  himself  made  secretary  to  Archias  and  Philip, 
who  were  then  polemarchs  or  supreme  magistrates  of  the  city. 
As  for  Epaminondas,  he  had  for  some  time  diligently  endea- 
voured to  inspire  the  younger  Thebans  by  his  discourse  with  a 
passionate  desire  to  throw  off  the  Spartan  yoke.  He  was  igno- 
rant of  nothing  that  had  been  projected, p but  he  believed  that 
he  ought  not  to  have  any  share  in  it,  because,  as  he  said,  he 
could  not  resolve  to  imbrue  his  hands  in  the  blood  of  his  coun- 
trymen ; foreseeing  that  his  friends  would  not  keep  within  the 
due  bounds  of  the  enterprise,  however  lawful  in  itself,  and  that 
the  tyrants  would  not  perish  alone  ; and  convinced  besides,  that 
a citizen,  who  should  appear  not  to  have  taken  either  side, 
would  have  it  in  his  power  to  make  a more  powerful  impression 
upon  the  minds  of  the  people. 

The  day  for  the  execution  of  the  project  being  fixed,  the 
exiles  thought  proper  that  Pherenicus,  having  assembled  all 
the  conspirators,  should  stop  at  Thriasium,  a little  town  not 
far  from  Thebes*  and  that  a small  number  of  the  youngest  of 
them  should  venture  into  the  city.  Twelve  persons  of  the  best 
families  of  Thebes,  all  united  by  a strict  and  faithful  friendship 
with  each  other,  though  competitors  for  glory  and  honour, 
offered  themselves  for  this  bold  enterprise.  Pelopidas  was  of 
this  number.  After  having  embraced  their  companions,  and 
despatched  a messenger  to  Charon,  to  give  him  notice  of  their 
coming,  they  set  out  dressed  in  mean  habits,  carrying  hounds 
with  them,  and  poles  in  their  hands  for  pitching  of  nets ; that 
such  as  they  met  on  the  way  might  have  no  suspicion  of  them, 
p Plut.  de  Gen.  Socrat.  p.  594. 

2 D 2 


404 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


and  take  them  only  for  hunters  that  had  wandered  after  their 
game. 

Their  messenger  being  arrived  at  Thebes,  and  having  informed 
Charon  that  they  were  set  out,  the  approach  of  danger  did  not 
alter  his  sentiments ; and  as  he  wanted  neither  courage  nor 
honour,  he  prepared  his  house  for  their  reception. 

One  of  the  conspirators,  who  was  not  a bad  man,  who  even 
loved  his  country,  and  would  have  served  the  exiles  with  all 
his  power,  but  had  neither  the  resolution  nor  constancy  neces- 
sary for  such  an  enterprise,  and  could  think  of  nothing  but  the 
difficulties  and  obstacles  that  presented  themselves  in  crowds 
to  his  imagination,  appalled  with  the  prospect  of  danger,  re- 
tired to  his  house  without  saying  any  thing,  and  despatched  one 
of  his  friends  to  Melon  and  Pelopidas,  to  desire  them  to  defer 
their  enterprise,  and  return  to  Athens,  there  to  await  a more 
favourable  opportunity.  Happily  that  friend,  not  finding  his 
horse’s  bridle,  and  losing  a great  deal  of  time  in  quarrelling 
with  his  wife,  was  prevented  from  going. 

Pelopidas  and  his  companions,  disguised  like  peasants,  hav- 
ing separated  from  each  other,  entered  the  city  at  different 
gates  towards  the  close  of  day.  As  it  was  then  early  in  the 
winter,  the  north  wind  blew,  and  the  snow  fell ; which  served 
the  better  to  conceal  them,  every  body  keeping  within  doors  on 
account  of  the  cold  weather  ; which  gave  them  likewise  a pre- 
text for  covering  their  faces.  Some  who  were  in  the  secret, 
received  and  conducted  them  to  Charon’s  house ; where,  of 
exiles  and  others,  their  whole  number  amounted  to  forty-eight. 

Philidas,  secretary  to  the  Boeotarchs,  q who  was  in  the  plot, 
had  some  time  before  invited  Archias  aud  his  companions  to 
supper  on  that  very  day,  promising  them  an  exquisite  repast, 
and  the  company  of  some  of  the  finest  women  in  the  city.  The 
guests  being  met  at  the  appointed  time,  they  sat  down  to  table. 
They  had  circulated  the  glass,  and  were  almost  drunk,  when  it 
was  whispered  about,  but  not  known  where  the  report  began, 
that  the  exiles  were  in  the  city.  Philidas,  without  showing 
any  concern,  did  his  utmost  to  change  the  discourse.  Archias, 
however,  sent  one  of  his  officers  to  Charon,  with  orders  to 
come  to  him  immediately.  It  was  now  late,  and  Pelopidas 
and  the  conspirators  were  preparing  to  set  out,  and  had  put 
on  their  armour  and  swords,  when,  on  a sudden,  they  heard  a 
knocking  at  the  door.  Somebody  went  to  it,  and  being  told  by 
the  officer,  that  he  was  come  from  the  magistrates  with  orders 
for  Charon  to  attend  them  immediately,  he  ran  to  him  half  out 
of  his  wits,  to  acquaint  him  with  that  terrible  message.  They 

•i  The  magistrates  ana  generals  who  were  charged  with  the  government  of 
Thebes,  were  called  Boeotarchs,  that  is  to  say,  commanders  or  governors  of 
Beeotia, 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


405 


all  concluded  that  the  conspiracy  was  discovered,  and  believed 
themselves  lost,  before  it  would  be  possible  to  execute  any  thing 
worthy  their  cause  and  valour.  However,  they  were  all  of 
opinion  that  Charon  should  obey  the  order,  and  present  himself 
before  the  magistrates  with  an  air  of  assurance,  as  void  of  fear, 
and  unconscious  of  offence. 

Charon  was  a man  of  intrepid  courage  in  dangers  which 
threatened  only  himself : but  at  that  time,  terrified  for  his 
friends,  and  apprehending  also  that  he  should  be  suspected  of 
some  treachery,  if  so  many  brave  citizens,  whom  he  had  re- 
ceived into  his  house,  should  be  destroyed,  he  went  to  his  wife’s 
apartment,  and  fetched  his  only  son  of  fifteen  years  old  at  most, 
who  in  beauty  and  strength  excelled  all  the  youths  of  his  age, 
and  put  him  into  the  hands  of  Pelopidas,  saying  at  the  same 
time,  If  you  discover  that  I have  hetrayecl  you,  and  have  been 
guilty  of  treachery  upon  this  occasion,  revenge  yourselves 
on  me  in  tin 
don  to  you, 
thers  perfidy 

These  expressions  wounded  them  to  the  heart ; but  what 
gave  them  the  most  sensible  pain,  was  his  imagining  there  was 
any  one  amongst  them  so  mean  and  ungrateful  as  to  form  to 
himself  the  least  suspicion  in  regard  to  him.  They  conjured 
him  unanimously  not  to  leave  his  son  with  them,  but  to  put 
him  into  some  place  of  safety  ; that  his  friends  and  country 
might  not  want  an  avenger,  if  he  should  not  be  so  fortunate  as 
to  escape  the  tyrants.  No,  replied  the  father,  he  shall  stay 
with  you,  and  share  your  fate.  If  he  must  perish,  what  nobler 
end  can  he  make,  than  to  perish  with  his  father  and  best 
friends  ? For  you,  my  son, -exert  yourself  beyond  your  years, 
and  show  a courage  worthy  of  you  and  me.  You  see  here  the 
most  excellent  of  the  Thebans.  Make  under  such  masters  a 
noble  essay  of  glory,  and  learn  to  fight  ; or,  if  it  must  be  so, 
to  die,  like  them,  for  liberty.  For  the  rest,  I am  not  with- 
out hopes,  for  I believe  that  the  justice  of  our  cause  will 
draw  down  the  favour  and  protection  of  the  gods  upon  us. 
He  concluded  with  a prayer  for  them,  and  after  embracing  the 
conspirators,  went  out. 

He  took  pains  on  his  way  to  recover  himself,  and  to  compose 
his  looks  and  voice,  that  he  might  not  appear  under  any  con- 
cern. When  he  came  to  the  door  of  the  house  where  the  feast 
was  kept,  Archias  and  Philidas  came  out  to  him,  and  asked 
the  meaning  of  a report,  that  disaffected  people  were  arrived 
in  the  city,  and  were  concealed  in  some  house.  He  seemed 
astonished ; and  finding  by  their  answers  to  his  questions,  that 
they  had  no  precise  information  on  the  subject,  he  assumed  a 
bolder  tone,  and  said,  It  is  very  likely  the  report  you  speak  of 


i my  only  son,  whom,  dear  as  he  is  to  me,  1 aban- 
and  let  him  fall  a victim  without  mercy  to  his  fa- 


406 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


is  only  a false  alarm,  intended  to  interrupt  your  mirth : how~ 
ever,  as  it  ouyht  not  to  he  neglected.  Til  go  immediately , and 
make  the  strictest  inquiry  possible  into  it.  Philidas  praised 
his  prudence  and  zeal ; and  carrying  Archias  back  into  the 
company,  again  engaged  him  in  the  debauch,  and  continued 
the  entertainment,  by  keeping  the  guests  in  perpetual  expecta- 
tion of  the  women  he  had  promised  them, 

Charon,  on  his  return  home,  found  his  friends  all  prepared 
not  to  conquer  nor  to  save  their  lives,  but  to  die  gloriously,, 
and  to  sell  themselves  as  dear  as  they  could.  The  serenity 
and  joy  of  his  looks  explained  beforehand,  that  they  had  no- 
thing to  fear.  He  repeated  all  that  had  passed  ; after  which 
they  had  po  thoughts  but  of  putting  into  instant  execution  a 
design,  to  which  the  least  delay  might  occasion  a thousand 
obstacles. 

In  fact,  at  that  very  instant  happened  a second  storm,  far 
more  violent  and  more  dangerous  than  the  first,  and  which 
seemed  as  if  it  could  not  possibly  fail  of  making  the  enterprise 
miscarry.  A courier  from  Athens  arrived  in  great  haste  with 
a packet,  which  contained  a circumstantial  account  of  the  whole 
conspiracy,  as  was  afterwards  discovered.  The  courier  was 
brought  first  to  Archias,  who  was  already  overcome  with  wine, 
and  thought  of  nothing  but  pleasure.  In  giving  him  his  de- 
spatches, he  said.  My  lord,  the  person  ivho  writes  you  these 
letters,  conjures  you  to  read  them  immediately , being  serious 
affairs . Archias  replied,  laughing/  Serious  affairs  to-morrow ; 
which  words  were  afterwards  used  by  the  Greeks  as  a proverb; 
and  taking  the  letters,  he  put  them  under  his  bolster/  and  con- 
tinued the  conversation  and  banquet. 

The  conspirators  were  at  that  time  in  the  streets,  divided 
into  two  parties  ; the  one,  with  Pelopidas  at  their  head,  march- 
ed against  Leontides,  who  was  not  at  the  feast ; the  other 
against  Archias,  under  the  command  of  Charon.  The  latter 
had  put  on  women’s  habits  over  their  armour,  and  crowned 
themselves  with  pine  and  poplar  wreaths,  which  entirely  covered 
their  faces.  When  they  came  to  the  door  of  the  apartment 
where  the  feast  was  kept,  the  guests  made  a great  noise,  and 
set  up  loud  shouts  of  joy.  But  they  were  told,  that  the  women 
would  not  come  in  till  the  servants  were  all  dismissed,  which 
was  done  immediately.  They  were  sent  to  neighbouring  houses, 
where  there  was  no  want  of  wine  for  their  entertainment.  The 
conspirators,  by  this  stratagem,  having  made  themselves  masters 
of  the  field  of  battle,  entered  swrord  in  hand,  and  showing  them- 
selves in  their  true  colours,  put  all  the  guests  to  the  sword,  and 
with  them  the  magistrates,  who  were  full  of  wine,  and  in  no 

r Ovkovv  eg  avpiov,  i<Py,  ra  cnrovSaia. 

s The  Greeks  ate  lying  on  couches. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS, 


407 


condition  to  defend  themselves.  Pelopidas  met  with  more  re- 
sistance. Leontides,  who  was  asleep  in  bed,  awaked  with  the 
noise  that  was  made,  and  rising  immediately,  armed  himself 
with  his  sword,  and  laid  some  of  the  conspirators  at  his  feet, 
but  was  at  last  killed  himself. 

This  grand  affair  being  executed  in  this  manner  with  so 
much  despatch  and.success,  couriers  were  immediately  despatch- 
ed to  the  exiles  who  had  remained  at  Thriasium.  The  doors 
of  the  prisons  were  broken  open,  and  500  prisoners  let  out. 
The  Thebans  were  called  upon  to  resume  their  liberty,  and 
arms  were  given  to  all  they  met,  the  spoils  affixed  to  the  porti- 
coes being  taken  down,  and  the  armourers’  and  cutlers’  shops 
broken  open  for  that  purpose.  Epaminondas  and  Georgidas 
came  in  arms  to  join  them,  accompanied  with  a numerous  band 
of  young  men,  and  with  some  old  persons  of  great  worth,  whom 
they  had  got  together. 

The  whole  city  was  in  great  terror  and  confusion  ; the  houses 
all  illuminated  with  torches,  and  the  streets  thronged  with  the 
multitude  passing  to  and  fro.  The  people,  in  a consternation 
at  what  had  happened,  and  for  want  of  sufficient  information, 
waited  impatiently  for  the  day  to  know  their  destiny.  The  La- 
cedaemonian captains  were  therefore  thought  guilty  of  a very 
great  error  in  not  having  fallen  upon  them  during  their  disorder ; 
for  the  garrison  consisted  of  1500  men,  besides  3000  who  had 
taken  refuge  in  the  citadel.  Alarmed  by  the  cries  they  heard, 
the  illuminations  they  saw  in  the  houses,  and  the  tumult  of  the 
multitude  running  backwards  and  forwards,  they  lay  still,  and 
contented  themselves  with  guarding  the  citadel,  after  having 
sent  couriers  to  Sparta  with  the  news  of  what  had  happened, 
and  to  demand  an  immediate  reinforcement. 

The  next  day  at  sun-rise  the  exiles  arrived  with  their  arms, 
and  an  assembly  of  the  people  was  convened.  Epaminondas 
and  Georgidas  conducted  Pelopidas  and  his  company  thither, 
surrounded  with  all  their  sacrificers,  carrying  in  their  hands  the 
sacred  fillets,  and  exhorting  the  citizens  to  assist  their  country, 
and  to  join  with  their  gods.  At  this  sight,  the  whole  assembly 
rose  up  with  loud  acclamations  and  clapping  of  hands,  and  re- 
ceived the  conspirators  as  their  benefactors  and  deliverers.  The 
same  day,  Pelopidas,  Melon,  and  Charon,  were  elected  Boeo- 
tarchs. 

The  arrival  of  the  exiles  was  followed  by  that  of  5000  foot 
and  500  horse  sent  by  the  Athenians  to  Pelopidas,  under  the 
command  of  Demophoon.  Those  troops,  with  others  which 
joined  them  shortly  after  from  all  the  cities  of  Boeotia,  com- 
posed an  army  of  12,000  foot  and  2000  horse,  and  without  loss 
of  time  besieged  the  citadel,  that  it  might  be  taken  before  relief 
could  come  from  Sparta. 


408 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


The  besieged  made  a vigorous  defence  in  hopes  of  a speedy 
succour,  and  seemed  resolved  rather  to  die  than  surrender  the 
place  ; at  least  the  Laced semonians  were  of  that  opinion.  But 
they  were  not  the  greatest  number  of  the  garrison.  When  pro- 
visions began  to  fall  short,  and  famine  to  press  them,  the  rest  of 
the  troops  obliged  the  Spartans  to  surrender.  The  garrison 
had  their  lives  granted  them,  and  were  permitted  to  retire  whi- 
ther they  thought  fit.  They  were  scarce  marched  out,  when  the 
aid  arrived.  The  Laced mmonians  found  Cleombrotus  at  Me- 
gara,  at  the  head  of  a powerful  army,  which,  with  a little  more 
expedition,  might  have  saved  the  citadel.  But  this  was  not  the 
first  time  that  the  natural  slowness  of  the  Lacedaemonians  had 
occasioned  the  miscarriage  of  their  most  important  enterprises. 
The  three  commanders  who  had  capitulated  were  tried.  Two 
of  them  were  punished  with  death  ; and  the  third  had  so  great 
a fine  laid  upon  him,  that  not  being  able  to  pay  it,  he  banished 
himself  from  Peloponnesus. 

Pelopidas  had  all  the  honour  of  this  great  exploit,  the  most 
memorable  of  any  that  were  ever  executed  by  surprise  and 
stratagem.  Plutarch,  with  reason,  compares  it  to  that  of 
Thrasybulus.  Both  exiles,  destitute  in  themselves  of  all  re- 
source, and  compelled  to  implore  a foreign  support,  form  the 
bold  design  of  attacking  a formidable  power  with  a handful  of 
men ; and  having  overcome  all  obstacles  to  their  enterprise 
solely  by  their  valour,  had  each  of  them  the  good  fortune  to  de- 
liver their  country,  and  to  change  the  face  of  affairs  entirely. 
For  the  Athenians  were  indebted  to  Thrasybulus  for  that  sud- 
den and  happy  change,  which,  freeing  them  from  the  oppres- 
sion under  which  they  groaned,  not  only  restored  their  liberty, 
but  with  it  their  ancient  splendour,  and  put  them  into  a condition 
to  humble,  and  make  Sparta,  their  ancient  and  constant  rival, 
tremble  in  her  turn.  We  shall  see  in  like  manner  that  the  war 
which  is  to  reduce  the  pride  of  Sparta,  and  deprive  her  of  em- 
pire over  both  sea  and  land,  was  the  work  of  this  single  night, 
in  which  Pelopidas,  without  taking  either  citadel  or  fortress, 
but  entering  only  one  of  twelve  into  a private  house,1  unloosed 
and  broke  the  chains  imposed  by  the  Lacedsemonians  on  all  the 
other  states  of  Greece,  though  they  appeared  to  be  so  firmly 
riveted  as  never  to  be  broken  or  unloosed. 

1 Il£\o7ri^ag,  ft  del  fjLtratpopq.  to  dXrjQkg  tiirtlv,  tXvae  teat  SiSKOxf/e  rovg  dtopovg 
rrjg  Aa/cfSqt/xtmW  riye/xoviag,  aXvTovg  Kai  dppr]KTOvg  tlvai  doKOvvTag. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


409 


SECT.  III. 

Sphodrias  the  Lacedaemonian  forms  a design  against  the  Pirseeus  without  suc- 
cess. The  Athenians  declare  for  the  Thebans.  Skirmishes  between  the 
latter  and  the  Lacedaemonians. 

The  Lacedemonians,"  after  the  injury  they 
Ant.  J.  C 377  Pretended  to  have  received  by  the  enterprise  of 
Pelopidas,  did  not  continue  quiet,  but  applied 
themselves  in  earnest  to  take  their  revenge.  Agesilaus,  rightly 
judging  that  an  expedition  of  that  kind,  the  end  of  which  was 
to  support  tyrants,  would  not  reflect  much  honour  upon  him, 
left  it  to  Cleombrotus,  who  had  lately  succeeded  king  Agesipolis ; 
under  pretence  that  his  great  age  dispensed  with  his  under- 
taking it.  Cleombrotus  entered  Boeotia  with  his  army.  The 
first  campaign  was  not  vigorous,  and  terminated  in  committing 
some  ravages  in  the  country : after  which  the  king  retired  ; 
and  detaching  part  of  his  troops  to  Sphodrias,  who  commanded 
at  Thespire,  returned  to  Sparta. 

The  Athenians,  who  did  not  think  themselves  in  a condition 
to  maKe  head  against  the  Lacedaemonians,  and  were  afraid  of 
the  consequences  of  the  war  in  which  the  league  with  the  The- 
bans was  likely  to  engage  them,  repented  their  having  entered 
into  it,  and  renounced  it.  Of  those  who  persisted  to  adhere 
to  the  Theban  party,  some  were  imprisoned,  some  put  to  death, 
others  banished,  and  the  rich  severely  fined.  The  Theban  af- 
fairs seemed  almost  desperate ; as  no  one  came  forward  to 
support  them.  Pelopidas  and  Georgidas  were  then  in  office, 
and  were  concerting  together  means  to  embroil  the  Athe- 
nians with  the  Lacedaemonians  : and  this  was  the  stratagem 
they  contrived. 

Sphodrias  the  Spartan  had  been  left  at  Thespiae  with  a 
body  of  troops,  to  receive  and  protect  such  of  the  Boeotians 
as  should  revolt  against  Thebes.  He  had  acquired  some  re- 
putation amongst  the  soldiery,  and  wanted  neither  courage 
nor  ambition  ; but  he  was  rash,  superficial,  self-conceited, 
and  consequently  apt  to  entertain  vain  hopes.  Pelopidas  and 
Georgidas  sent  privately  a merchant  of  his  own  acquaintance 
to  him,  with  the  offer,  as  from  himself,  of  a considerable  sum 
of  money,  and  with  insinuations  better  calculated  to  persuade 
him  than  money,  since  they  flattered  his  vanity.  After  having 
represented  to  him  that  a person  of  his  merit  and  reputation 
ought  to  form  some  great  enterprise  which  might  immortalize 
his  name,  he  proposed  to  him  the  seizing  of  the  Pirceeus , by 
attaching  the  Athenians  by  surprise,  and  when  they  could  have 

u Xenoph.  Hist.  Gi\  1.  v.  p.  568—572.  Plut.  in  Ages.  p.  609,  610.  Id-  in 
Pelop.  p.  284,  285. 


410 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


no  expectation  of  such  an  attempt.  He  added,  that  nothing 
could  he  more  grateful  to  the  Lacedcemonians , than  to  see  them- 
selves masters  of  Athens  ; and  that  the  Thebans,  enraged 
at  the  Athenians,  whom  they  considered  as  traitors  and  de- 
serters, would  lend  them  no  assistance. 

Sphodrias,  anxious  to  acquire  a great  name,  and  envying 
the  glory  of  Phoebidas,  who,  in  his  opinion,  had  rendered 
himself  renowned  and  illustrious  by  his  unjust  attempt  upon 
Thebes,  conceived  it  would  be  a much  more  brilliant  and  glori- 
ous exploit  to  seize  the  Pirseeus  of  his  own  accord,  and  deprive 
the  Athenians  of  their  great  power  at  sea,  by  an  unforeseen 
attack  by  land.  He  undertook  therefore  with  great  joy  an 
enterprise,  which  was  neither  less  unjust  nor  less  horrid  than 
that  of  (he  Cadmea,  but  executed  neither  with  the  same 
boldness  nor  with  the  same  success.  For  having  set  out  in 
the  night  from  Thespiae,  with  the  view  of  surprising  the  Pi- 
raeeus  before  light,  the  day-break  overtook  him  in  the  plain  of 
Thriasium  near  Eleusis,  and  finding  himself  discovered,  he 
returned  shamefully  to  Thespiae  with  some  booty  which  he 
had  taken. 

The  Athenians  immediately  sent  ambassadors  with  their  com- 
plaints to  Sparta.  Those  ambassadors  found  that  the  Lacedae- 
monians had  not  waited  their  arrival  to  accuse  Sphodrias,  but 
had  already  cited  him  before  the  council  to  answer  for  his  con- 
duct. He  was  afraid  to  obey  that  summons,  having  just  reason 
to  apprehend  the  issue  of  a trial,  and  the  resentment  of  his 
country.  He  had  a son,  who  had  contracted  a strict  and  tender 
friendship  with  the  son  of  Agesilaus.  The  latter  solicited  his 
father  so  earnestly,  or  rather  tormented  him  with  such  extreme 
importunity  and  perseverance,  that  he  could  not  refuse  Spho- 
drias his  protection,  and  got  him  fully  acquitted.  Agesilaus 
had  little  delicacy,  as  we  have  seen  already;  with  respect  to  the 
duties  of  justice,  when  the  service  of  his  friends  was  in  ques- 
tion. He  was  besides,  of  all  mankind,  the  most  tender  and 
indulgent  father  to  his  children.  It  is  reported  of  him,  lhat 
when  they  were  little  he  would  play  with  them,  and  divert  him- 
self with  riding  upon  a stick  amongst  them,  and  that  having 
been  one  day  surprised  by  a friend  in  that  action,  he  desired 
him  not  to  tell  any  body  of  it  till  himself  was  a father. 

The  unjust  sentence  passed  in  favour  of  Sphodrias  by  the 
Spartans  exceedingly  incensed  the  Athenians, x and  determined 
them  to  renew  their  alliance  with  Thebes  immediately,  and  to 
assist  them  with  all  their  power.  They  fitted  out  a fleet  of  sixty 
sail,  and  gave  the  command  of  it  to  Timotheus,  son  of  the  illus- 
trious Conon,  whose  reputation  he  well  sustained  by  his  own 

x Xenoph.  1.  v.  p.  584 — 589.  Hut.  in  Ages.  p.  610,  611.  Id.  in  Pelop.  p. 
285—288. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


411 


valour  and  exploits.  It  was  he  whom  his  enemies,  through 
envy  of  the  glory  he  had  acquired  by  his  great  success,  painted 
sleeping,  with  the  goddess  Fortune  at  his  feet,  taking  towns  in 
nets  for  him  -J  but  upon  this  occasion  he  proved  that  lie  was  not 
asleep.  After  having  ravaged  the  coast  of  Laconia,  he  attacked 
the  isle  of  Corcyra,2  which  betook.  He  treated  the  inhabitants 
with  great  humanity,  and  made  no  alterations  in  their  liberty 
or  laws,  which  very  much  inclined  the  neighbouring  cities  in 
favour  of  Athens.  The  Spartans  on  their  side  made  powerful 
preparations  for  the  war,  and  were  principally  intent  upon  re- 
taking Corcyra.  Its  happy  situation  between  Sicily  and  Greece 
rendered  that  island  very  important.  They  therefore  engaged 
Dionysius  the  tyrant  in  this  expedition,  and  demanded  aid  of 
him.  In  the  mean  time  they  despatched  their  fleet  under  the 
command  of  Mnasippus.  The  Athenians  sent  sixty  sail  against 
them  to  the  relief  of  Corcyra,  under  the  command  of  Timotheus 
at  first;  but  soon  after,  upon  his  seeming  to  act  too  slowly, 
Iphicrates  was  substituted  in  his  place.  Mnasippus  having 
made  himself  odious  to  his  troops  by  his  haughtiness,  rigour, 
and  avarice,  was  very  ill  obeyed  by  them,  and  lost  his  life  in 
an  engagement.  Iphicrates  did  not  arrive  till  after  his  death, 
when  he  received  advice  that  the  Syracusan  squadron  of  ten  gal- 
leys, was  approaching,  which  he  attacked  so  successfully,  that 
not  one  of  them  escaped.  He  had  demanded  that  the  orator 
Callistratus,  and  Chabrias,  one  of  the  most  renowned  captains 
of  his  time,  should  be  joined  in  commission  with  him.  Xeno- 
phon admires  his  wisdom  and  greatness  of  soul  upon  that  ac- 
count, in  being  not  unwilling  to  appear  to  have  occasion  for  ad- 
vice, and  not  apprehending  that  others  might  share  the  glory 
of  his  victories  with  himself, 

Agesilaus  had  been  prevailed  upon  to  take  the  command  of 
the  troops  against  Thebes.  He  entered  Boeotia,  where  he  did 
abundance  of  damage  to  the  Thebans,  not  without  considerable 
loss  on  his  own  side.  The  two  armies  came  every  day  to  blows, 
ai  d were  perpetually  engaged,  though  not  in  formal  battle,  yet 
in  skirmishes,  which  served  to  instruct  the  Thebans  in  the  art 
of  war,  and  to  inspire  them  with  valour,  boldness,  and  expe- 
rience. It  is  reported  that  the  Spartan  Antalcidas  told  Age- 
silaus very  justly  upon  this  head  one  day,  when  he  was  brought 
back  from  Boeotia  much  wounded,  My  lord  Agesilaus,  you 
have  a fine  reward  for  the  lessons  you  have  given  the  Thebans 
in  the  art  of  war,  which  before  you  taught  it  them,  they  never 
would  nor  could  learn.  It  was  to  prevent  this  inconvenience, 
that  Lycurgus,  in  one  of  three  laws  which  he  calls  Rhetrce , 
forbade  the  Lacedaemonians  to  make  war  often  upon  the  same 


? Plut.  m Syl.  p.  454. 


z Corfu. 


412 


HISTORY  OP  THE 


enemy,  lest  they  should  make  them  good  soldiers,  by  obliging 
them  too  frequently  to  defend  themselves. 

Several  campaigns  passed  in  this  manner  without  any  thing 
decisive  on  either  side.  It  was  prudent  in  the  Theban  generals 
not  to  hazard  a battle  hitherto,  and  to  give  their  soldiers  time 
to  inure  and  embolden  themselves.  When  the  occasion  was 
favourable,  they  let  them  seasonably  loose  like  generous  hounds, 
and  after  having  given  them  a taste  of  victory  by  way  of  re- 
ward, they  called  them  off,  contented  with  their  courage  and 
alacrity.  The  principal  glory  of  their  success  and  this  wise 
conduct  was  due  to  Pelopidas. 

The  engagement  at  Tegyra,  which  was  a kind  of  prelude  to 
the  battle  of  Leuctra,  added  much  to  his  reputation.  Having- 
failed  in  his  enterprise  against  Orchomenos,  which  had  joined 
the  Lacedaemonians,  at  his  return  he  found  the  enemy  posted 
to  intercept  him  near  Tegyra.  As  soon  as  the  Thebans  per- 
ceived them  from  the  defiles,  somebody  ran  in  all  haste  to  Pelo- 
pidas, and  told  him,  We  are  fallen  into  the  enemy’s  hands. 
Why  so,  replied  he ; Why  should  we  not  rather  say,  that  they 
are  fallen  into  ours'l  At  the  same  time  he  ordered  his  cavalry, 
which  were  his  rear  guard,  to  advance  to  the  front,  that  they 
might  begin  the  fight.  He  was  assured  that  his  foot,  which 
were  only  300,  and  were  called  the  sacred  battalion,  wherever 
they  charged,  would  break  through  the  enemy,  though  superior 
in  number,  as  they  were  by  at  least  two  thirds.  The  assault 
began  where  the  generals  of  each  party  were  posted,  and  was 
very  fierce.  The  two  generals  of  the  Lacedaemonians,  who 
had  charged  Pelopidas,  were  presently  killed  ; all  that  were 
with  them  being  either  slain  or  dispersed.  The  rest  of  the 
Lacedaemonian  troops  were  so  daunted,  that  they  opened  a 
passage  for  the  Thebans,  who  might  have  marched  on  and 
saved  themselves  if  they  had  thought  fit : but  Pelopidas,  dis- 
daining to  make  use  of  that  opening  for  his  retreat,  advanced 
against  those  who  were  still  drawn  up  in  battle,  and  made  so 
great  a slaughter  of  them,  that  the  rest  were  all  dismayed,  and 
fled  in  disorder.  The  Thebans  did  not  pursue  them  far,  lest 
they  should  be  surprised.  They  contented  themselves  with 
having  broken  them,  and  with  making  a glorious  retreat,  not 
inferior  to  a victory,  because  it  was  made  through  an  enemy 
dispersed  and  defeated. 

This  little  encounter,  for  it  can  be  called  no  more,  was  in  a 
manner  the  source  of  the  great  actions  and  events  we  shall  soon 
relate.  It  had  never  happened  till  then  in  any  war,  either  against 
the  Barbarians  or  Greeks,  that  the  Lacedaemonians  had  been 
defeated  with  the  superiority  of  number  on  their  side,  nor  even 
with  equal  forces  in  a pitched  battle.  For  which  reason  they 
were  insupportably  proud,  and  their  reputation  alone  kept  their 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


413 


enemies  in  awe,  who  never  durst  show  themselves  in  the  field 
before  them,  unless  superior  in  number.  They  now  lost  that 
glory ; and  the  Thebans  in  their  turn  are  to  become  the  terror 
and  dread  even  of  those  who  had  hitherto  rendered  themselves 
so  universally  formidable. 

A M 3827  The  enterPr*se  °f  Artaxerxes  Mnemon  against 
Ant.  J.  C.  377.  Egypt,  and  the  death  of  Evagoras  king  of  Cy- 

A.  M.  3630.  prus,  should  naturally  come  in  here.  But  I shall 
Ant.  J.  C.  374.  jgfgj.  those  articles,  to  avoid  breaking  in  upon 
the  Theban  affairs. 

SECT.  IV. 

New  troubles  in  Greece.  The  Lacedaemonians  declare  war  against  Thebes. 

They  are  defeated  and  put  to  flight  in  the  battle  of  Leuctra.  Epaminondas 

ravages  Laconia,  and  marches  to  the  gates  of  Sparta. 

Whilst  the  Persians  were  engaged  in  the  Egyptian  war,a 
great  troubles  arose  in  Greece.  In  that  interval  the  Thebans, 
having  taken  Platte8e,b  and  afterwards  Thespite,  entirely  de- 
molished those  two  cities,  and  expelled  the  inhabitants.  The 
Plataeans  retired  to  Athens  with  their  wives  and  children,  where 
they  were  received  with  the  utmost  kindness,  and  adopted  into 
the  number  of  the  citizens. 

Artaxerxes,c  being  informed  of  the  state  of 

A ~!\/T  qpqq  o 

Ant  J C 371  the  Grecian  affairs,  sent  a new  embassy  thither, 
to  persuade  the  several  cities  and  republics  at 
war,  to  lay  down  their  arms,  and  accommodate  their  differences 
upon  the  plan  of  the  treaty  of  Antalcidas.  By  that  peace,  as 
has  been  observed  in  its  place,  it  was  concluded,  that  all  the 
cities  of  Greece  should  enjoy  their  liberty,  and  be  governed  by 
their  own  laws.  In  virtue  of  this  article,  the  Lacedtemonians 
pressed  the  Thebans  to  restore  liberty  to  all  the  cities  of  Boeotia, 
to  rebuild  Platae ae  and  Thespiae,  which  they  had  demolished, 
and  to  restore  them,  with  the  territories  dependant  on  them,  to 
their  ancient  inhabitants.  The  Thebans  on  their  side  insisted 
also,  that  the  Lacedaemonians  should  give  liberty  to  all  those 
of  Laconia,  and  that  the  city  of  Messene  should  be  restored 
to  its  ancient  possessors.  This  was  what  equity  required  ; but 
the  Lacedaemonians,  believing  themselves  much  superior  to  the 
Thebans,  were  for  imposing  a law  upon  them,  to  which  they 
would  not  submit  themselves. 

All  Greece  being  weary  of  a war  which  had  already  lasted 
several  campaigns,  and  had  no  other  origin  than  the  ambition 
and  injustice  of  Sparta,  nor  any  other  end  than  the  aggrandizing 
of  that  state,  was  seriously  intent  upon  effecting  a general  peace, 

a Diod.  1.  ii.  p.  381,  362.  b Plataeae,  a city  of  Boeotia;  Thespise  of  Achaia. 
c Xenoph.  Hist.  Graec.  1.  G.  p.  590 — 593.  Diod.  p.  365,  366. 


414 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


and  with  that  view  had  sent  deputies  to  Lacedaemon  to  concert 
together  the  means  of  attaining  so  desirable  an  event.  Amongst 
those  deputies,*3  Epaminondas  was  of  the  first  rank.  He  was 
at  that  time  celebrated  .for  his  great  erudition  and  profound 
knowledge  in  philosophy  ; but  he  had  not  yet  had  an  opportunity 
of  giving  any  very  distinguished  proofs  of  his  great  capacity  for 
the  command  of  armies  and  the  administration  of  public  affairs. 
Seeing  that  all  the  deputies,  out  of  respect  for  Agesilaus,  who 
declared  openly  for  the  war,  were  afraid  to  contradict  him,  or  to 
differ  from  his  opinion  in  any  thing,  a very  common  effect  of 
too  imperious  a power  on  one  side,  and  too  servile  a submis- 
sion on  the  other  : he  was  the  only  one  that  spoke  with  a wise 
and  noble  boldness,  as  became  a statesman  who  had  no  other 
view  than  the  public  good.  He  made  a speech  not  for  the 
Thebans  alone,  but  for  Greece  in  general ; in  which  he  proved, 
that  the  war  augmented  only  the  power  of  Sparta,  whilst  the 
rest  of  Greece  was  reduced  and  ruined  by  it.  He  insisted  prin- 
cipally upon  the  necessity  of  establishing  the  peace  upon  the  ba- 
sis of  equality  and  justice;  because  no  peace  could  be  solid  and 
of  long  duration,  but  that  wherein  all  parties  should  find  an 
equal  advantage. 

A discourse  like  this,  founded  evidently  upon  reason  and  jus- 
tice, and  pronounced  with  a grave  and  serious  tone,  never  fails 
of  making  an  impression.  Agesilaus  plainly  perceived,  from 
the  attention  and  silence  with  wrhich  it  was  heard,  that  the 
deputies  were  extremely  affected  with  it,  and  would  not  fail  to 
act  conformably  to  his  opinion.  To  prevent  that  effect,  he  de- 
manded of  Epaminondas,  Whether  he  thought  it  just  and  rea- 
sonable that  Bceotia  should  be  free  and  independent  ? that  is 
to  say,  Whether  he  agreed  that  the  cities  of  Boeotia  should  de- 
pend no  longer  upon  Thebes  ? Epaminondas  immediately 
asked  in  his  turn,  with  great  vivacity,  Whether  he  thought  it 
just  and  reasonable  that  Laconia  should  enjoy  the  same  inde- 
pendence and  liberty.  Upon  which  Agesilaus  rising  from  his 
seat  in  great  rage,  insisted  upon  his  declaring  plainly,  Whether 
he  would  consent  that  Bceotia  should  be  free  ? Epaminondas 
retorted  his  question  again,  and  asked,  Whether,  on  his  side,  he 
would  consent  that  Laconia  should  be  free  ? Agesilaus,  who 
wanted  only  a pretext  for  breaking  with  the  Thebans,  struck 
their  name  directly  out  of  the  treaty  of  alliance  which  they  were 
about  to  conclude.  The  rest  of  the  allies  signed  it,  less  out  of 
inclination,  than  not  to  offend  the  Lacedaemonians,  whose  power 
they  dreaded. 

In  consequence  of  this  treaty, e all  the  troops  in  the  field  were 
d Plufc.  in  Agesil.  p.  Oil. 

e Xenoph.  1.  vi.  p.  593 — 597-  Diod.  1.  xv.  p.  365 — 371-  Plut.  in  Agesil.  p. 
611,  612.  Id.  in  Pelop.  p.  266,  269. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


415 

to  be  disbanded.  Cleombrotus,  one  of  the  kings  of  Sparta, 
was  then  in  Fhocis,  at  the  head  of  the  army.  He  wrote  to  the 
Ephori  to  know  the  republic’s  resolutions.  Prothous,  one  of 
the  principal  senators,  represented  that  there  was  no  room  for 
deliberation,  for  that  Sparta,  by  the  late  agreement,  had  made 
the  recall  of  the  troops  indispensable.  Agesilaus  was  of  a dif- 
ferent opinion.  Angry  with  the  Thebans,  and  particularly  with 
Epaminondas,  he  was  absolutely  bent  on  war  for  an  opportu- 
nity of  revenge,  and  the  present  seemed  particularly  favourable, 
when  all  Greece  was  free  and  united,  and  only  the  Thebans  ex- 
cluded from  the  treaty  of  peace.  The  advice  of  Prothous  was 
therefore  rejected  by  the  whole  council,  who  treated  him  as  an 
honest  well-meaning  dotard/  that  knew  nothing  of  the  matter  ; 
the  Divinity,  from  thenceforth,  as  Xenophon  observes,  promot- 
ing their  downfall.  The  Ephori  wrote  immediately  to  Cleom- 
brotus to  march  against  the  Thebans  with  his  troops,  and  sent 
orders  at  the  same  time  to  all  their  allies  to  assemble  their  forces, 
who  were  very  averse  to  this  war,  and  did  not  join  in  it  but  with 
great  reluctance,  and  out  of  fear  of  contradicting  the  Lacedae- 
monians, whom  they  did  not  yet  dare  to  disobey.  Though  no 
happy  consequences  could  be  expected  from  a war,  visibly  un- 
dertaken contrary  to  all  reason  and  justice,  and  from  the  sole 
motive  of  resentment  and  revenge  ; the  Lacedaemonians  how- 
ever, from  the  superiority  of  their  numbers,  assured  themselves 
of  success,  and  imagined  that  the  Thebans  abandoned  by  their 
allies  were  in  no  condition  to  oppose  them. 

The  Thebans  were  much  alarmed  at  first.  They 
Aait  "j  C^37*o  saw  tbemselves  alone,  without  allies  or  support, 
whilst  all  Greece  looked  upon  them  as  utterly 
lost,  not  knowing  that  in  a single  man  they  had  more  than  an 
army.  This  man  was  Epaminondas.  He  was  appointed  gene- 
ral, and  had  several  colleagues  joined  in  commission  with  him. 
He  immediately  raised  all  the-  troops  he  could,  and  began  his 
march.  His  army  did  not  amount  to  6000  men,  and  the  enemy 
had  above  four  times  that  number.  As  several  bad  omens  were 
told  him  to  prevent  his  setting  out,  he  replied  only  by  a verse  of 
Homer’s,  of  which  the  sense  is,  There  is  hut  one  good  omen,* 
tvhich  is,  to  fight  for  one's  country.  However,  to  reassure  the 
soldiers,  by  nature  superstitious,  and  whom  he  observed  to  be 
discouraged,  he  instructed  several  persons  to  come  from  differ- 
ent places,  and  report  auguries  and  omens  in  his  favour,  which 
revived  the  spirit  and  hopes  of  the  troops. 

Pelopidas  was  not  then  in  office,  but  commanded  the  sacred 
battalion.  When  he  left  his  house  to  go  to  the  army,  his  wife, 
in  taking  her  last  adieu,  conjured  him,  with  a flood  of  tears,  to 

f \EfCi7vov  phv  (fkvaptlv  rfyrjffXTO,  ■ijSr]  yap,  wg  jocks,  to  daipoviov  r) yev. 
s Elg  olwvog  apiarog,  apvvsoOai  rrepi  Trarpr/g.  Iliad,  xi.  v.  423. 


416 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


take  care  of  himself : That , said  he,  should  he  recommended 
to  young  people ; hut  for  generals,  they  have  no  occasion  for 
such  advice  ; they  should  only  be  exhorted  to  take  care  of  others. 

Epaminondas  had  had  the  wise  precaution  to  secure  a pass, 
by  which  Cleombrotus  might  have  shortened  his  march  consi- 
derably. The  latter,  after  having  taken  a large  compass,  ar- 
rived at  Leuctra,  a small  town  of  Boeotia,  between  Plataeae  and 
Thespiae.  Both  parties  consulted  whether  they  should  give 
battle  ; which  Cleombrotus  resolved  by  the  advice  of  all  his  of- 
ficers, who  represented  to  him,  that  if,  with  such  a superiority  of 
troops,  he  declined  fighting,  it  would  confirm  the  report  which 
was  secretly  spread,  that  he  covertly  favoured  the  Thebans. 
The  latter  had  an  essential  reason  for  hastening  a battle,  to 
anticipate  the  arrival  of  the  troops  which  the  enemy  daily  ex- 
pected. However,  the  six  generals,  who  formed  the  council  of 
war,  differed  in  their  sentiments.  A seventh,  who  came  up  very 
seasonably,  joined  the  three  that  were  for  fighting ; and  his 
opinion,  which  coincided  also  with  that  of  Epaminondas,  carry- 
ing the  question,  the  battle  was  resolved  upon.  This  was  in 
the  second  year  of  the  102d  Olympiad. 

The  two  armies  were  very  unequal  in  number.  That  of  the 
Lacedaemonians,  as  has  been  said,  consisted  of  24,000  foot 
and  1600  horse.  The  Thebans  had  only  6000  foot  and  400 
horse  ; but  all  of  them  choice  troops,  animated  by  their  success 
in  former  campaigns,  and  determined  to  conquer  or  die.  The 
Lacedaemonian  cavalry,  composed  of  men  picked  up  by  chance, 
without  valour,  and  ill-disciplined,  was  as  much  inferior  to  that 
of  their  enemies  in  courage  as  it  was  superior  in  number.  The 
infantry  could  not  be  depended  on,  except  the  Lacedaemonians  ; 
the  allies,  as  it  has  been  said,  having  engaged  in  the  war  with 
reluctance,  because  they  did  not  approve  the  motive  of  it,  and 
were  besides  dissatisfied  with  the  Lacedaemonians. 

The  ability  of  the  generals  on  either  side  supplied  the  place 
of  numerous  armies,  especially  the  Theban,  who  was  the  most 
accomplished  captain  of  his  time.  He  was  supported  by  Pelo- 
pidas  at  the  head  of  the  sacred  battalion,  composed  of  300  young 
Thebans,  united  in  a strict  friendship  and  affection,  and  engaged 
under  a particular  oath  never  to  fly,  but  to  defend  each  other  to 
the  last  drop  of  their  blood. 

Upon  the  day  of  battle  the  two  armies  drew  up  on  a plain. 
Cleombrotus  was  upon  the  right,  consisting  of  Lacedaemonians, 
on  whom  he  confided  most,  and  whose  files  were  twelve  deep. 
To  take  advantage  of  the*  superiority  of  his  horse  in  an  open 
country,  he  posted  them  in  the  front  of  his  Lacedaemonians. 
Archidamus,  Agesilaus’s  son,  was  at  the  head  of  the  allies,  who 
formed  the  left  wing. 

Epaminondas,  who  resolved  to  charge  with  his  left,  which 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


417 


he  commanded  in  person,  strengthened  it  with  the  choice  of 
his  heavy  armed  troops,  whom  he  drew  up  fifty  deep.  The 
sacred  battalion  was  upon  his  left,  and  closed  the  wing.  The 
rest  of  his  infantry  were  posted  upon  his  right  in  an  oblique 
line,  which,  the  farther  it  extended,  was  the  more  distant  from 
the  enemy.  By  this  uncommon  disposition,  his  design  was  to 
cover  his  right  flank,  to  refuse  his  right  wing,  and  keep  it  as  a 
kind  of  reserve,  that  he  might  not  hazard  the  event  of  the  bat- 
tle upon  the  weakest  part  of  his  army  ; and  to  begin  the  action 
with  his  left  wing,  where  his  best  troops  were  posted,  to  turn 
the  whole  weight  of  the  battle  upon  king  Cleombrotus  and  the 
Spartans.  He  was  assured,  that  if  he  could  penetrate  the 
Lacedaemonian  phalanx,  the  rest  of  the  army  would  soon  be  put 
to  the  rout.  As  for  his  horse,  he  disposed  them  (after  the  ene- 
my’s example)  in  the  front  of  his  left. 

The  action  began  by  the  cavalry.  As  that  of  the  Thebans 
were  better  mounted  and  braver  troops  than  the  Lacedaemonian 
horse,  the  latter  were  not  long  before  they  were  broken,  and 
driven  upon  the  infantry,  which  they  put  into  some  confusion. 
Epaminondas  following  his  horse  close,  marched  swiftly  up  to 
Cleombrotus,  and  fell  upon  his  phalanx  with  all  the  weight  of 
his  heavy  battalion.  The  latter,  to  make  a diversion,  detached 
a body  of  troops  with  orders  to  take  Epaminondas  in  flank, 
and  to  surround  him.  Pelopidas,  upon  the  sight  of  that  move- 
ment, advanced  with  incredible  speed  and  boldness  at  the  head 
of  the  sacred  battalion  to  prevent  the  enemy’s  design,  and 
flanked  Cleombrotus  himself,  who,  by  that  sudden  and  unex- 
pected attack,  was  put  into  disorder.  The  battle  was  very 
fierce  and  obstinate ; and  whilst  Cleombrotus  could  act,  the 
victory  continued  in  suspense,  and  declared  for  neither  party. 
When  he  fell  dead  with  his  wounds,  the  Thebans,  to  complete 
the  victory,  and  the  Lacedaemonions,  to  avoid  the  shame  of 
abandoning  the  body  of  their  king,  redoubled  their  efforts,  and 
a great  slaughter  ensued  on  both  sides.  The  Spartans  fought 
with  so  much  fury  about  the  body,  that  at  length  they  gained 
their  point,  and  carried  it  off.  Animated  by  so  glorious  an  ad- 
vantage, they  prepared  to  return  to  the  charge,  which  would 
perhaps  have  proved  successful,  had  the  allies  seconded  their 
ardour.  But  the  left  wing,  seeing  the  Lacedsemonian  phalanx 
had  been  broken,  and  believing  all  lost,  especially  when  they 
heard  that  the  king  was  dead,  took  to  flight,  and  drew  off  the 
rest  of  the  army  along  with  them.  Epaminondas  followed  them 
vigorously,  and  killed  a great  number  in  the  pursuit.  The  The- 
bans remained  masters  of  the  field  of  battle,  erected  a_  trophy, 
and  permitted  the  enemy  to  bury  their  dead. 

The  Lacedaemonians  had  never  received  such  a blow.  The 
most  bloody  defeats  till  then  had  scarce  ever  cost  them  more 

VOL.  III.  2 E 


418 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


than  4 or  500  of  their  citizens.  They  had  been  seen,  however, 
animated,  or  rather  violently  incensed,  against  Athens,  to  ran- 
som by  a truce  of  thirty  years,  800  of  their  citizens,  who  had 
suffered  themselves  to  be  shut  up  in  the  little  island  of  Sphac- 
teria.  Here  they  lost  4000  men,  of  whom  1000  were  Lacedae- 
monians, and  400  Spartans,  out  of  700  who  were  in  the  battle.  h 
The  Thebans  had  only  300  men  killed,  among  whom  were  but 
few  of  their  citizens. 

The  city  of  Sparta  was  at  that  time  celebrating  the  gymnas- 
tic games,  and  was  full  of  strangers  whom  curiosity  had  brought 
thither,  when  the  couriers  arrived  from  Leuctra  with  the  terri- 
ble news  of  their  defeat.  The  Ephori,  though  perfectly  sensi- 
ble of  all  the  consequences,  and  that  the  Spartan  empire  had 
received  a mortal  wound,  would  not  permit  the  representations 
of  the  theatre  to  be  suspended,  nor  any  change  to  take  place  in 
the  celebration  of  the  festival.  They  sent  to  every  family  the 
names  of  their  relations  who  were  killed,  and  stayed  in  the  thea- 
tre to  see  that  the  dances  and  games  were  continued  without 
interruption  to  the  end. 

The  next  day  in  the  morning,  the  loss  of  each  family  being 
known,  the  fathers  and  relations  of  those  who  had  died  in  the 
battle  met  in  the  public  square,  and  saluted  and  embraced  each 
other  with  great  joy  and  serenity  in  their  looks  ; whilst  the 
others  kept  themselves  close  in  their  houses,  or,  if  necessity 
obliged  them  to  go  abroad,  it  was  with  a sadness  and  dejection 
of  aspect  which  sensibly  expressed  their  profound  anguish  and 
affliction.  That  difference  was  still  more  remarkable  in  the 
women.  Grief,  silence,  tears,  distinguished  those  who  expect- 
ed the  return  of  their  sons  ; but  such  as  had  lost  their  sons 
were  seen  hurrying  to  the  temples  to  thank  the  gods,  and  con- 
gratulating each  other  upon  their  glory  and  good  fortune.  It 
cannot  be  denied  but  such  sentiments  evince  great  courage  and 
resolution:  but  I would  not  have  them  entirely  extinguish  na- 
tural tenderness,  and  should  have  been  better  pleased  had 
there  been  less  of  ferocity  in  them. 

Sparta  was  under  no  small  difficulty  to  know  how  to  act  in 
regard  to  those  who  had  fled  from  the  battle.  As  they  were 
numerous,  and  of  the  most  powerful  families  in  the  city,  it  was 
not  safe  to  inflict  upon  them  the  punishments  assigned  by  the 
laws,  lest  their  despair  should  induce  them  to  take  some  violent 
resolution  that  might  be  fatal  to  the  state.  For  such  as  fled 
were  not  only  excluded  from  all  offices  and  employments,  but 
it  was  a disgrace  to  contract  any  alliance  with  them  by  mar- 
riage. Any  body  that  met  them  in  the  streets  might  buffet 
them,  which  they  were  obliged  to  suffer.  They  were  besides 

11  Those  were  properly  called  Spartans,  who  inhabited  Sparta ; the  Lacedae- 
monians were  those  settled  in  the  country. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


419 


to  wear  dirty  and  ragged  habits,  full  of  patches  of  different 
colours  ; and,  lastly,  they  were  to  shave  half  their  beards,  and 
to  let  the  other  half  grow.  It  would  be  a great  loss  to  the 
Spartans  to  be  deprived  of  so  many  of  their  soldiery  at  a time 
when  they  had  such  pressing  occasion  for  them.  To  remove 
this  difficulty,  they  chose  Agesilaus  legislator,  with  absolute 
power  to  make  such  alterations  in  the  laws  as  he  should  think 
fit.  Agesilaus,  without  adding,  retrenching,  or  changing,  any 
thing,  found  means  to  save  the  fugitives  without  prejudice  to 
the  state.  In  a full  assembly  of  the  Lacedaemonians,  he  de- 
creed, “ That  for  the  present  day,  the  laws  should  be  suspended, 
and  of  no  effect ; but  ever  after  to  remain  in  full  force  and  au- 
thority.” By  those  few  words  he  preserved  the  Spartan  laws 
entire,  and  at'  the  same  time  restored  to  the  state  that  great 
number  of  its  members,  by  preventing  their  being  for  ever  de- 
graded, and  consequently  useless  to  the  republic. 

After  the  battle  of  Leuctra  the  two  parties  were  industriously 
employed,  the  one  in  retrieving  their  loss,  and  the  other  in  im- 
proving their  victory.* 

Agesilaus,  to  revive  the  courage  of  his  troops,  marched  them 
into  Arcadia  ;k  but  with  a full  resolution  carefully  to  avoid  a 
battle.  He  confined  himself  to  attacking  some  small  towns  of 
the  Mantinaeans,  which  he  took,  and  laid  the  country  waste. 
This  gave  Sparta  some  joy,  and  they  began  to  take  courage 
from  believing  their  condition  not  entirely  desperate. 

The  Thebans,  immediately  after  their  victory,  had  sent  an 
account  of  it  to  Athens,  and  to  demand  aid  at  the  same  time 
against  the  common  enemy.  The  senate  was  then  sitting,  and 
received  the  courier  with  great  coldness,  did  not  make  him  the 
usual  presents,  and  dismissed  him  without  taking  any  notice  of 
aid.  The  Athenians,  alarmed  at  the  considerable  advantage 
which  the  Thebans  had  gained  over  the  Lacedaemonians,  could 
not  dissemble  the  umbrage  and  dissatisfaction  which  so  sudden 
and  unexpected  an  increase  of  a neighbouring  power  gave 
them,  which  might  soon  render  itself  formidable  to  all  Greece. 

At  Thebes,  Epaminondas  and  Pelopidas  had  been  elected 
joint  governors  of  Boeotia.  Having  assembled  all  the  troops 
of  the  Boeotians  and  their  allies,  whose  number  daily  increased, 
they  entered  Peloponnesus,  and  made  abundance  of  places  and 
states  revolt  from  the  Lacedaemonians ; Elis,  Argos,  all  Ar- 
cadia, and  the  greatest  part  of  Laconia  itself.  It  was  then 
about  the  winter  solstice,  and  towards  the  end  of  the  last  month 
of  the  year,  so  that  in  a few  days  they  were  to  quit  their  offices  ; 
the  first  day  of  the  next  month  being  assigned  by  law  for  their 
resigning  them  to  the  persons  appointed  to  succeed  them,  upon 

1 Xenoph.  1.  vi.  p.  598.  Diod.  1.  xv.  p.  375 — 373- 
k Plut.  in  Agesil.  p.  Cl 3 — 615.  Id.  in  Pelop.  p.  290. 

2 e 2 


420 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


pain  of  death,  if  they  held  them  beyond  that  term.  Their  col- 
leagues, apprehending  the  badness  of  the  seasons,  and  still 
more,  the  dreadful  consequences  of  infringing  that  law,  were 
lor  marching  back  the  army  immediately  to  Thebes.  Felopi- 
das  was  the  first  who,  entering  into  the  opinion  of  Epaminondas, 
animated  the  citizens,  and  engaged  them  to  take  advantage  of 
the  enemy’s  alarm,  and  to  pursue  their  enterprise  without  re- 
gard to  a formality,  from  the  observance  of  which  they  might 
justly  believe  themselves  dispensed  by  the  State  itself,  as  the 
service  of  the  state,  when  founded  injustice,  is  the  sovereign 
law  and  rule  of  the  people’s  obedience. 

They  entered  Laconia  therefore  at  the  head  of  an  army  of 
?0,000  good  soldiers,  of  which  the  Thebans  did  not  form  a 
twelfth  part.  But  the  great  reputation  of  the  two  generals 
was  the  cause,  that  all  the  allies,  even  without  orders,  or  a 
public  decree,  obeyed  them  with  respectful  silence,  and  marched 
with  entire  confidence  and  courage  under  their  command.  It 
was  600  years  since  the  Dorians  had  established  themselves 
at  Lacedaemon,  and  in  all  that  time  they  had  never  seen,  till 
now,  an  enemy  upon  their  lands  ; none  having  hitherto  dared  to 
set  foot  in  them,  and  much  less  to  attack  their  city,  though  with- 
out walls.  The  Thebans  and  their  allies  finding  a country  hitherto 
untouched  by  an  enemy,  ran  through  it  with  fire  and  sword,  de- 
stroying and  plundering  as  far  as  the  river  Eurotas,  without 
any  opposition  whatsoever. 

Parties  had  been  posted  to  defend  some  important  passes. 
Ischolas  the  Spartan,  who. commanded  one  of  these  detach- 
ments, distinguished  himself  in  a peculiar  manner.  Find- 
ing it  impossible,  with  his  small  body  of  troops,  to  support 
the  enemy’s  attack,  and  thinking  it  disgraceful  for  a Spar- 
tan to  abandon  his  post,  he  sent  back  the  young  men  who 
were  of  an  age  and  condition  to  serve  their  country  effec- 
tually, and  kept  none  with  him  but  such  as  were  advanced  in 
years.  These  unanimously  devoting  themselves,  after  the 
example  of  Leonidas,  to  the  public  good,  sold  their  lives  very 
dear  ; and  after  having  defended  themselves  a long  time,  .and 
made  great  slaughter  of  their  enemies,  they  all  perished  to  a 
man. 

Agesilaus  acted  upon  this  occasion  with  great  address  and 
wisdom.  He  looked  upon  this  irruption  of  the  enemy  as  an 
impetuous  torrent,  which  it  was  not  only  in  vain,  but  dangerous 
to  oppose,  whose  rapid  course  would  be  but  of  short  duration, 
and  after  some  ravages  subside  of  itself.  He  contented  himself 
writh  distributing  his  best  troops  into  the  middle  and  all  the  most 
important  parts  of  the  city,  and  with  strongly  securing  all  the 
posts.  He  was  determined  not  to  quit  the  town,  nor  to  hazard 
a battle, ‘and  persisted  in  that  resolution,  without  regard  to  all 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


421 


the  raillery,  insults,  and  menaces  of  the  Thebans,  who  defied 
him  by  name,  and  called  upon  him  to  come  out  and  defend  his 
country,  him  who  had  alone  been  the  cause  of  all  its  sufferings, 
by  kindling  the  war. 

But  a subject  of  far  greater  affliction  to  Agesilaus  were  the 
commotions  and  disorders  excited  within  the  city,  the  murmurs 
and  complaints  of  the  old  men  in  the  highest  affliction  and 
despair  from  being  witnesses  of  what  they  saw,  as  well  as  of 
the  women,  who  seemed  quite  distracted  with  hearing  the 
threatening  cries  of  the  enemy,  and  seeing  the  neighbouring 
country  all  on  fire,  whilst  the  flames  and  smoke,  which  drove 
almost  upon  them,  seemed  to  denounce  a like  misfortune  to 
themselves.  Whatever  courage  Agesilaus  might  express  in  his 
outward  behaviour,  he  could  not  fail  of  being  sensibly  affected 
with  so  mournful  an  object,  to  which  was  added  the  grief  of 
sullying  his  reputation ; who,  having  found  the  city  in  a most 
flourishing  and  potent  condition  when  he  came  to  the  govern- 
ment, now  saw  it  fallen  to  such  a degree,  and  all  its  ancient 
glory  lost  under  him  [ He  was,  besides,  secretly  mortified  at  so 
mournful  a contradiction  of  a boast  he  had  often  made,  that  no 
woman  of  Sparta  had  ever  seen  the  smoke  of  an  enemy’s  camp. 

Whilst  he  was  giving  different  orders  in  the  city,  he  was  in- 
formed that  a certain  number  of  mutineers  had  seized  an  im- 
portant post,  with  a resolution  to  defend  themselves  in  it.  Age- 
silaus ran  immediately  thither ; and,  as  if  he  had  been  entirely 
unacquainted  with  their  bad  design,  he  said  to  them.  Comrades , 
it  is  not  there  I sent  you.  At  the  same  time  he  pointed  to 
different  posts  to  divide  them ; to  which  they  went,  believing 
their  enterprise  had  not  been  discovered.  This  order,  which 
he  gave  without  emotion,  evinces  a great  presence  of  mind  in 
Agesilaus,  and  shows  that  in  times  of  trouble  it  is  not  proper  to 
see  too  much,  that  the  culpable  may  not  want  time  to  reflect 
and  repent.  He  thought  it  more  advisable  to  suppose  that 
small  troop  innocent,  than  to  urge  them  to  a declared  revolt  by 
a too  rigorous  inquiry. 

The  Eurotas  was  at  that  lime  very  much  swoln  by  the  melt- 
ing of  the  snows,  and  the  Thebans  found  more  difficulty  in 
passing  it  than  they  expected,  as  well  from  the  extreme  cold- 
ness of  the  water  as  its  rapidity.  As  Epaminoildas  passed  at 
the  head  of  his  infantry,  some  of  the  Spartans  pointed  him  out 
to  Agesilaus : who,  after  having  attentively  considered  and 
followed  him  with  his  eyes  a long  time,  said  only,  Wonderful 
man!1  in  admiration  of  the  valour  that  induced  him  to  under- 
take such  great  things.  Epaminondas  would  have  been  glad 
to  have  given  battle  in  Sparta  itself,  and  to  have  erected  a 

1 ’Q  tov  ntyanoTrpay\ovoQ  dvOpwirov.  The  Greek  expression  is  not  easy  to 
be  translated.  It  signifies,  Oh  the  actor  of  great  deeds. 


422 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


trophy  in  the  midst  of  it.  He  did  not  however  dare  to  attempt 
the  forcing  of  the  city ; and  not  being  able  to  induce  Agesilaus 
to  quit  it,  chose  to  retire.  It  would  have  been  difficult  for 
Sparta,  without  aid,  and  unfortified,  to  have  defended  itself 
long  against  a victorious  army.  But  the  prudent  captain  who 
commanded  it  was  apprehensive  of  drawing  upon  his  hands  the 
whole  force  of  Peloponnesus,  and  still  more,  of  exciting  the 
jealousy  of  the  Greeks,  who  would  never  have  pardoned  his 
destroying  so  potent  a republic,  and  pulling  out,  as  Leptius 
says,  one  of  the  eyes  of  Greece,  as  a proof  of  his  skill.m  He 
confined  himself  therefore  to  the  glory  of  having  humbled  the 
proud,  whose  laconic  language  added  new  haughtiness  to  their 
commands,  and  of  having  reduced  them  to  the  necessity,  as  he 
boasted  himself,  of  lengthening  their  monosyllables.11  On  his 
return  he  again  wasted  the  country. 

In  this  expedition  the  Thebans  reinstated  Arcadia  into  one 
body,0  and  took  Messenia  from  the  Spartans,  who  had  been  in 
possession  of  it  very  long,?  after  having  expelled  all  its  in- 
habitants. It  was  a country  equal  in  extent  to  Laconia,  and 
as  fertile  as  the  best  soil  in  Greece.  Its  ancient  inhabitants, 
who  were  dispersed  in  different  regions  of  Greece,  Italy,  and 
Sicily,  on  the  first  notice  given  them,  returned  with  incredible 
joy ; animated  by  the  love  of  their  country,  natural  to  all  men, 
and  almost  as  much  by  their  hatred  of  the  Spartans,  which 
length  of  time  had  only  increased.  They  built  themselves  a 
city,  which,  from  the  name  of  the  old  one,  was  called  Messene. 
Amongst  the  unhappy  events  of  this  war,  none  gave  the  Lace- 
daemonians more  sensible  displeasure,  or  rather  more  lively 
grief,  than  this  ; because  from  time  immemorial  an  irreconcile- 
able  enmity  had  subsisted  between  Sparta  and  Messene,  which 
seemed  incapable  of  being  extinguished  but  by  the  final  ruin 
of  the  one  or  the  other. 

Polybius  points  out  an  ancient  error  in  the  conduct  of  the 
Messenians  with  regard  to  Sparta,^  which  was  the  cause  of  all 
their  misfortunes.  This  was  their  too  great  solicitude  for 
present  tranquillity,  and  through  an  excessive  love  of  peace, 
their  neglecting  the  means  of  making  it  sure  and  lasting.  Two 
of  the  most  powerful  states  of  Greece  were  their  neighbours, 
the  Arcadians  and  Lacedaemonians.  The  latter,  from  the  first 
settlement  in  the  country,  had  declared  open  war  against  them : 
the  others,  on  the  contrary,  always  joined  with  them,  and  en- 

m Arist.  Rhet.  1.  iii.  c.  10 

n The  Lacedaemonians  answered  the  most  important  despatches  by  a single 
monosyllable.  Philip  having  written  to  them,  “ If  I enter  your  country,  I 
will  put  all  to  fire  and  sword,”  they  replied,  “ If to  signify  they  would  take 
all  possible  care  to  put  it  out  of  his  power.  ° Paus.  1.  iv.  p.  267,  268. 

p The  Messenians  had  been  driven  out  of  their  country  287  years. 

9 Polyb.  1.  iv.  p.  299,  300. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


423 


tered  into  all  their  interests.  But  the  Messenians  had  neither 
the  courage  to  oppose  their  violent  and  irreconcileable  enemies 
with  valour  and  constancy,  nor  the  prudence  to  treat  with  due 
regard  their  faithful  and  affectionate  allies.  When  the  two 
states  were  either  at  war  with  each  other,  or  carried  their  arms 
elsewhere,  the  Messenians,  with  little  foresight  for  the  future, 
and  regarding  only  their  present  repose,  made  it  a rule  never 
to  engage  in  the  quarrel  on  either  side,  and  to  observe  an  ex- 
act neutrality.  On  such  conjunctures  they  congratulated  them- 
selves upon  their  wisdom  and  success  in  preserving  their  tran- 
quillity, whilst  their  neighbours  all  around  them  were  involved 
in  trouble  and  confusion.  But  this  tranquillity  was  of  no  long 
duration.  The  Lacedaemonians  having  subdued  their  enemies, 
fell  upon  them  with  all  their  forces  ; and  finding  them  unsup- 
ported by  allies,  and  incapable  of  defending  themselves,  they 
reduced  them  to  submit,  either  to  the  yoke  of  a rigid  slavery, 
or  to  banish  themselves  from  their  country.  And  this  was 
several  times  their  case.  They  ought  to  have  reflected,  says 
Polybius/  that  as  there  is  nothing  more  desirable  or  advanta- 
geous than  peace,  when  founded  on  justice  and  honour;  so 
there  is  nothing  more  shameful,  and  at  the  same  time  more  per- 
nicious, when  attained  by  bad  measures,  and  purchased  at  the 
price  of  liberty. 


SECT.  V. 

The  two  Theban  generals,  at  their  return,  are  accused  and  acquitted.  Sparta 
implores  aid  of  the  Athenians.  The  Greeks  send  ambassadors  to  Artax- 
erxes.  Influence  of  Pelopidas  at  the  court  of  Persia. 

It  might  be  expected,  that  the  two  Theban  captains,  on  their 
return  to  their  country  after  such  memorable  actions,  should 
have  been  received  with  general  applause,  and  all  the  honours 
that  could  be  conferred  upon  them.  Instead  of  which,  they 
were  both  summoned  to  answer  as  criminals  against  the  state, 
in  having,  contrary  to  the  law,  whereby  they  were  obliged  to 
resign  their  command  to  new  officers,  retained  it  four  months 
beyond  the  appointed  term;  during  which  they  had  executed 
in  Messenia,  Arcadia,  and  Laconia,  all  those  great  exploits  we 
have  related. 

Such  conduct  is  surprising,  and  the  relation  of  it  cannot  be 
read  without  a secret  indignation  : but  it  had  a very  plausible 
foundation.  The  zealous  assertors  of  a liberty  lately  regained, 
were  apprehensive  that  the  example  might  prove  very  perni- 
cious, in  authorizing  some  future  magistrate  to  maintain  him- 

r TLiprjvri  YaP>  jU£ ra  fikv  rov  Sacaiov  Kal  irpSTrovrog,  koXXuttov  kan  KTrjfia  Kal 
XvmrtXeararov ‘ jusra  8k  Kcuciag  ?)  SovXeiag  s7rovti8i<jTov,  tt avnov  aiayiarov  Kal 
(5Xa(3tpu)TaTov. 


424 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


self  in  command  beyond  the  established  term,  and  in  conse- 
quence to  turn  his  arms  against  his  country.  It  is  not  to  be 
doubted,  but  the  Romans  would  have  acted  in  the  same  man- 
ner ; and  if  they  were  so  severe  as  to  put  an  officer  to  death, 
though  victorious,  for  having  fought  without  his  general’s  orders, 
bow  would  they  have  behaved  to  a general  who  should  have 
continued  four  months  in  the  supreme  command,  contrary  to 
the  laws  ? 

Pelopidas  was  the  first  cited  before  the  tribunal.8  He  de- 
fended himself  with  less  force  and  greatness  of  mind  than  was 
expected  from  a man  of  his  character,  for  he  was  naturally 
warm  and  fiery.  That  valour,  haughty  and  intrepid  in  fight, 
forsook  him  before  the  judges.  His  air  and  discourse,  which 
had  something  timid  and  grovelling  in  it,  denoted  a man  who 
was  afraid  of  death,  and  did  not  in  the  least  incline  the  judges 
in  his  favour,  and  it  was  not  without  difficulty  that  they  acquit- 
ted him.  Epaminondas  appeared,  and  spoke  with  a quite  dif- 
ferent air  and  tone.  He  seemed,  if  I may  be  allowed  the  ex- 
pression, to  charge  danger  in  front  without  emotion.  Instead 
of  justifying  himself,  he  made  a panegyric  upon  his  actions,  and 
repeated  in  a lofty  style,  in  what  manner  he  had  ravaged  Laco- 
nia, re-established  Messenia,  and  reunited  Arcadia  in  one  body. 
He  concluded  with  saying,  that  he  should  die  with  pleasure,  if 
the  Thebans  would  concede  the  sole  glory  of  those  actions  to 
him,  and  declare  that  he  had  done  them  by  his  own  authority, 
and  without  their  participation.  All  the  voices  were  in  his 
favour  : and  he  returned  from  his  trial,  as  he  used  to  return 
from  battle,  with  glory  and  universal  applause.  Such  dignity 
has  true  valour,  that  it  in  a manner  seizes  the  admiration  of 
mankind  by  force. 

He  was  by  nature  designed  for  great  actions,  and  gave  an  air 
of  grandeur  to  every  thing  he  did.  His  enemies/  jealous  of 
his  glory,  and  with  design  to  affront  him,  got  him  elected  Te- 
learch ; an  office  very  unworthy  of  a person  of  his  merit.  He 
however  thought  it  no  dishonour  to  him,  and  said,  that  he 
would  demonstrate,  that  the  office  did  not  only  show  what  the 
man  was , hut  also  the  man  what  the  office  was*  He  accord- 
ingly raised  that  employment  to  very  great  dignity,  which  be- 
fore consisted  in  only  taking  care  that  the  streets  were  kept 
clean,  the  dirt  carried  away,  and  the  drains  and  common  sewers 
in  good  order. 

The  Lacedaemonians, x having  every  thing  to  fear  from  an 
enemy,  whom  the  late  successes  had  rendered  still  more  haughty 
and  enterprising  than  ever,  and  seeing  themselves  exposed  every 

* Plut.  de  sui  laude,  p.  540.  1 Plut.  de  Praecept.  reip.  ger.  p.  811. 

u Ov  fiovov  dpxV  avdpa  fitiicvvcnv,  aXKa  iccil  dpxvv  dvrjp, 
x Xenoph.  1.  vi.  p.  609— G13. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


425 


moment  to  a new  inroad,  had  recourse  to  the  Athenians,  and  sent 
deputies  to  them  to  implore  their  aid.  The  person  who  spoke, 
began  with  describing  in  the  most  pathetic  terms  the  deplor- 
able condition  and  extreme  danger  to  which  Sparta  was  reduced. 
He  enlarged  upon  the  insolent  haughtiness  of  the  Thebans,  and 
their  ambitious  views,  which  tended  to  nothing  less  than  the 
making  themselves  masters  of  all  Greece.  He  insinuated  what 
Athens  in  particular  had  to  fear  from  them,  if  they  were  suf- 
fered to  extend  their  power  by  the  increase  of  allies,  who  every 
day  went  over  to  their  party,  and  augmented  their  forces.  He 
called  to  mind  the  happy  times  in  which  the  strict  union  betwixt 
Athens  and  Sparta  had  preserved  Greece,  and  contributed  to 
the  equal  glory  of  both  states  ; and  concluded  with  saying,  how 
great  an  addition  it  would  be  to  the  Athenian  name,  to  aid  a 
city,  its  ancient  friend  and  ally,  which  more  than  once  had  ge- 
nerously sacrificed  itself  for  the  common  interest  and  safety. 

The  Athenians  could  not  deny  all  that  the  deputy  advanced 
in  his  discourse,  but  at  the  same  time  they  had  not  forgotten  the 
bad  treatment  which  they  had  suffered  from  the  Spartans  on 
more  than  one  occasion,  and  especially  after  the  defeat  in  Sicily. 
However,  their  compassion  of  the  present  misfortunes  of  Sparta 
prevailed  over  their  resentment  of  former  injuries,  and  deter- 
mined them  to  assist  the  Lacedaemonians  with  all  their  forces. 
A short  time  after, y the  deputies  of  several  states  being  assem- 
bled at  Athens,  a league  and  confederacy  was  concluded  against 
the  Thebans,  conformably  to  the  late  treaty  of  Antalcidas,  and 
the  intention  of  the  king  of  Persia,  who  was  continually  urging 
its  execution. 

A slight  advantage  gained  by  the  Spartans  over  their  ene- 
mies,2 raised  them  from  that  dejection  of  spirits  in  which  they 
had  hitherto  remained  \ as  it  generally  happens,  that  in  a mortal 
distemper  the  least  glimpse  of  a recovery  enlivens  hope  and  re- 
calls joy.  Archidamus,  son  of  Agesilaus,  having  received  a 
considerable  aid  from  Dionysius  the  Younger,  tyrant  of  Sicily, 
put  himself  at  the  head  of  his  troops,  and  defeated  the  Arca- 
dians in  a battle,  called  the  battle  without  tears?  because  he 
did  not  lose  a man,  and  killed  a great  number  of  the  enemy. 
The  Spartans  before  had  been  so  much  accustomed  to  conquer, 
that  they  had  become  almost  insensible  to  the  pleasure  of  victory: 
but  when  the  news  of  this  battle  arrived,  and  they  saw  Archi- 
damus return  victorious,  they  could  not  contain  their  joy,  nor 
keep  within  the  city.  His  father  was  the  first  that  went  out  to 
meet  him,  weeping  with  joy  and  tenderness.  He  was  followed 
by  the  officers  and  magistrates.  The  crowd  of  old  men  and 

y Xenoph.  1.  vii.  p.  (513 — 616. 
z Plut.  in  Agesil.  p.  614,  615.  Xenoph.  1.  vii.  p.  619,  620. 
a Diod.  1.  xv.  p.  383. 


426 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


women  came  down  as  far  as  the  river,  lifting  up  their  hands  to 
heaven,  and  returning  thanks  to  the  gods,  as  if  this  action  had 
obliterated  the  shame  of  Sparta,  and  they  began  to  see  those 
happy  days  again,  in  which  the  Spartan  glory  and  reputation 
had  risen  so  high. 

Philiscus,b  who  had  been  sent  by  the  king  of  Persia  to  re- 
concile the  Grecian  states,  was  arrived  at  Delphi,  whither  he 
summoned  their  deputies  to  repair.  The  god  was  not  at  all 
consulted  in  the  affair  which  was  discussed  in  the  assembly. 
The  Spartans  demanded,  that  Messene  and  its  inhabitants 
should  return  to  their  obedience  to  them.  Upon  the  Thebans’ 
refusal  to  comply  with  that  demand,  the  assembly  broke  up,  and 
Philiscus  retired,  after  having  left  considerable  sums  of  money 
with  the  Uacedtemonians  for  levying  troops  and  carrying  on  the 
war.  Sparta,  reduced  and  humbled  by  its  losses,  was  no  longer 
the  object  of  the  Persians’  fear  or  jealousy  ; but  Thebes,  vic- 
torious and  triumphant,  gave  them  just  cause  of  inquietude. 

To  form  a league  against  Thebes  with  greater  certainty,0  th.e 
allies  had  sent  deputies  to  the  great  king.  The  Thebans  on 
their  side  deputed  Pelopidas  ; an  extremely  wise  choice,  from 
the  great  reputation  of  the  ambassador,  which  is  no  indifferent 
circumstance  in  respect  to  the  success  of  a negociation.  The 
battle  of  Leuctra  had  spread  his  fame  into  the  remotest  pro- 
vinces of  Asia.  When  he  arrived  at  the  court,  and  appeared 
amongst  the  princes  and  nobility^,  they  cried  out  in  admiration 
of  him,  This  is  he  who  deprived  the  Lacedcemonians  of  their 
empire  by  sea  and  land , and  reduced  Sparta  to  confine  itself 
between  the  Eurotus  and  Tayyetus ; Sparta,  that  not  long 
since,  under  its  Icing  Agesilaus,  threatened  no  less  than  to  in - 
vade  us  in  Susa  and  Ecbatana. 

Artaxerxes,  extremely  pleased  with  his  arrival,  paid  him  ex- 
traordinary honours,  and  piqued  himself  upon  extolling  him 
highly  before  the  lords  of  his  court  ; in  esteem  indeed  of  his 
great  merit,  but  much  more  out  of  vanity  and  self-love,  and  to 
insinuate  to  his  subjects,  that  the  greatest  and  most  illustrious 
persons  made  their  court  to  him,  and  paid  homage  to  his  power 
and  good  fortune.  But  after  having  admitted  him  to  audience, 
and  heard  his  discourse,  in  his  opinion  more  nervous  than  that 
of  the  Athenian  ambassadors,  and  more  simple  than  that  of  the 
Lacedemonians,  which  was  saying  a great  deal,  he  esteemed 
him  more  than  ever ; and  as  it  is  common  with  kings, d who  are 
but  little  accustomed  to  constraint,  he  did  not  dissemble  his 
extreme  regard  for  him,  and  his  preference  of  him  to  all  the 
rest  of  the  Grecian  deputies. 

b Xenoph.  p.  619.  Diod.  p.  381. 

* Xenoph.  1.  vii.  p.  620 — 622.  Plut.  in  Pelop.  p.  294. 

TlaQog  flamXiKov  -jraQwv . 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


427 


Pelopidas,  as  an  able  politician,  had  apprized  the  king,  how 
important  it  was  to  the  interest  of  his  crown  to  protect  an  infant 
power,  which  had  never  borne  arms  against  the  Persians,  and 
which,  in  forming  a kind  of  balance  between  Sparta  and  Athens, 
might  be  able  to  make  a useful  diversion  against  those  republics, 
the  perpetual  and  irreconcileable  enemies  of  Persia,  and  which 
had  lately  caused  it  so  many  losses  and  inquietudes.  Tima- 
goras,  the  Athenian,  was  the  best  received  after  him  ; because 
being  passionately  desirous  of  humbling  Sparta,  and  at  the 
same  time  of  pleasing  the  king,  he  did  not  appear  averse  to  the 
views  of  Pelopidas. 

The  king  having  pressed  Pelopidas  to  explain  what  favours 
he  had  to  ask  of  him,  he  demanded,  That  Messene  should  con- 
tinue free  and  exempt  from  the  yoke  of  Sparta ; that  the 
Athenian  galleys,  which  had  sailed  to  infest  the  coast  of 
Bceotia,  should  he  readied , or  that  war  should  he  declared 
against  Athens;  that  those  who  would  not  come  into  the 
league,  or  march  against  such  as  should  oppose  it,  should  he 
attacked  first.  All  which  was  decreed,  and  the  Thebans  de- 
clared friends  and  allies  of  the  king.  When  this  decree  was 
read  to  the  ambassadors,  Leon,  Timagoras’s  colleague,  said, 
loud  enough  to  be  heard  by  Artaxerxes,  Athens  has  nothing 
now  to  do  hut  to  find  some  other  ally  than  the  king. 

Pelopidas,  having  obtained  all  he  desired,  left  the  court, 
without  accepting  any  more  of  the  king’s  many  presents,  than 
what  was  necessary  to  carry  home  as  a token  of  his  favour  and 
good-will  ; and  this  aggravated  the  complaints  which  were 
made  against  the  other  ambassadors,  who  were  not  reserved 
and  delicate  in  point  of  interest.  One  of  them,  the  envoy 
from  the  Arcadians,  said  on  his  return  home,  that  he  had  seen 
many  slaves  at  the  king’s  court,  but  no  men.  He  added,  that 
all  his  magnificence  was  no  more  than  vain  ostentation,  and 
that  the  so-much  boasted  plane-tree  of  gold,e  which  was  valued 
at  so  high  a price,  had  not  shade  enough  under  it  for  a grass- 
hopper. 

Of  all  the  deputies,  Timagoras  had  received  the  most  presents. 
He  did  not  only  accept  of  gold  and  silver,  but  of  a magnificent 
bed,  and  slaves  to  make  it,  the  Greeks  not  seeming  to  him  expert 
enough  in  that  office ; which  shows  that  sloth  and  luxury  were 
little  in  fashion  at  Athens.  He  received  also  twenty-four  cows, 
with  slaves  to  take  care  of  them  ; as  it  was  necessary  for  him  to 
drink  milk  for  some  indisposition.  Lastly,  at  his  departure,  he 
was  carried  in  a chair  to  the  sea-side  at  the  king’s  expense, 
who  gave  four  talents  f for  that  service.  His  colleague,  Leon, 
on  their  arrival  at  Athens,  accused  him  of  not  having  held  any 

e It  was  a tree  of  gold,  of  exquisite  workmanship,  and  great  value,  which 
people  went  to  see  out  of  curiosity.  s Four  thousand  crowns. 


4*28 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


communication  with  him,  and  of  having  joined  with  Pelopidas 
in  every  thing.  He  was  brought  to  trial  in  consequence,  and 
condemned  to  suffer  death. 

It  does  not  appear  that  the  acceptance  of  presents  was  what 
most  incensed  the  Athenians  against  Timagoras.  For  Epicrates, 
a simple  porter,  who  had  been  at  the  Persian  court,  and  had  also 
received  presents,  having  said,  in  a full  assembly,  that  he  was 
of  opinion  a decree  ought  to  pass,  by  which,  instead  of  the 
nine  Archons  annually  elected,  nine  ambassadors  should  be  cho- 
sen out  of  the  poorest  of  the  people,  to  be  sent  to  the  king,  in 
order  to  their  being  enriched  by  the  voyage  ; the  assembly  only 
laughed,  and  made  a jest  of  it.  But  what  offended  them  more, 
was  the  Thebans  having  obtained  all  they  demanded.  In  which, 
says  Plutarch,  they  did  not  duly  consider  the  great  reputation 
of  Pelopidas,  nor  comprehend  how  much  stronger  and  more  ef- 
ficacious that  was  in  persuading,  than  all  the  harangues  and  the 
rhetorical  flourishes  of  the  other  ambassadors  ; especially  with  a 
prince  accustomed  to  caress  and  comply  with  the  strongest,  as 
the  Thebans  undoubtedly  were  at  that  time,  and  who  besides 
was  not  sorry  to  humble  Sparta  and  Athens,  the  ancient  and 
mortal  enemies  of  his  throne. 

The  esteem  and  regard  of  the  Thebans  for  Pelopidas  were 
not  a little  augmented  by  the  good  success  of  this  embassy,  which 
had  procured  the  freedom  of  Greece,  aud  the  re-establishment 
of  Messene ; and  he  was  extremely  applauded  for  his  conduct  at 
his  return. 

But  Thessalia  was  the  theatre  where  the  valour  of  Pelopidas 
made  the  greatest  figure,  in  the  expedition  with  which  he  was 
commissioned  by  the  Thebans  against  Alexander,  tyrant  of 
Pherm.  I shall  relate  it  entire,  and  unite  under  one  point  of 
view  all  which  relates  to  that  great  event,  without  any  other 
interruption  than  the  journey  of  Pelopidas  into  Macedonia,  ta 
appease  the  troubles  of  that  court. 

SECT.  VI. 

Pelopidas  marches  against  Alexander,  tyrant  of  Phene,  and  reduces  him  to 
reason.  He  goes  to  Macedonia,  to  appease  the  troubles  of  that  court,  and 
brings  Philip  to  Thebes  as  a hostage.  He  returns  into  Thessaly,  is  seized 
by  treachery,  and  made  a prisoner.  Epaminondas  delivers  him.  Pelopidas 
gains  a victory  against  the  tyrant,  and  is  killed  in  the  battle.  Extraordi- 
nary honours  paid  to  his  memory.  Tragical  end  of  Alexander. 

The  reduced  condition  of  Sparta  and  Athens, s 
Ant.  J1  C°370.  which  for  many  years  had  domineered  over  all 
Greece,  either  in  conjunction  or  separately,  had 
inspired  some  of  their  neighbours  with  the  desire  of  supplanting 
those  cities,  and  given  birth  to  the  hope  of  succeeding  them  in 
s Xenoph.  1.  vi.  p.  579 — 583,  et  598 — 601.  Diod.  1.  xv.  p.  371 — 373. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


429 


the  pre-eminence.  A power  had  risen  up  in  Thessaly,  which 
began  to  grow  formidable.  Jason,  tyrant  of  Pherse,  had  been 
declared  generalissimo  of  the  Thessalians  by  the  consent  of  all 
the  people  of  that  province  ; and  it  was  to  his  merit,  which  was 
generally  acknowledged,  that  he  owed  that  dignity.  He  was 
at  the  head  of  an  army  of  above  8000  horse  and  20,000  heavy- 
armed foot,  without  reckoning  the  light-armed  soldiers,  and 
might  have  undertaken  any  thing  with  such  a body  of  disci- 
plined and  intrepid  troops,  who  had  an  entire  confidence  in  the 
valour  and  conduct  of  their  general.  But  death  prevented  his 
designs.  He  was  assassinated  by  persons  who  had  conspired  his 
destruction. 

His  two  brothers,  Polydorus  and  Polyphron,  were  substituted 
in  his  place,  the  latter  of  whom  killed  the  other  for  the  sake  of 
reigning  alone,  and  was  soon  after  killed  himself  by  Alex- 
ander of  Phene,  who  seized  the  tyranny  un- 
Ant  C*^369  ^er  ^ie  Pretence  °f  avenging  the  death  of 
' Polydorus  his  father.  Against  him  Pelopidas 

was  sent. 

As  the  tyrant  made  open  war  against  several  states  of  Thes- 
saly, and  was  secretly  intriguing  to  subject  them  all,  the  cities 
sent  ambassadors  to  Thebes  to  demand  troops  and  a general. 
Epaminondas  being  employed  in  Peloponnesus,  Pelopidas  took 
upon  himself  the  conduct  of  this  expedition.  He  set  out  for 
Thessaly  with  an  army,  made  himself  master  of  Larissa,  and 
obliged  Alexander  to  make  his  submission  to  him.  He  there 
endeavoured,  by  mild  usage  and  friendship,  to  change  his  dis- 
position, and  from  a tyrant  to  make  him  become  a just  and  hu- 
mane prince  ; but  finding  him  incorrigible,  and  of  unexampled 
brutality,  and  hearing  new  complaints  every  day  of  his  cruelty, 
debauched  life,  and  insatiable  avarice,  he  began  to  employ 
warm  reproofs  and  severe  menaces.  The  tyrant,  alarmed  at 
such  usage,  withdrew  secretly  with  his  guard ; and  Pelopidas, 
leaving  the  Thessalians  in  security  from  any  attempts  of  the 
tyrant,  and  in  good  understanding  with  each  other,  set  out  for 
Macedonia,  where  his  presence  had  been  desired. 

Amyntas  II.  was  lately  dead,  and  had  left  three  legitimate 
children,  Alexander,  Perdiccas,  and  Philip,  and  one  natural 
son,  called  Ptolemy.  Alexander  reigned  but  one  year,  and 
was  succeeded  by  Perdiccas, h with  whom  his  brother  Pto- 
lemy disputed  the  crown.  The  two  brothers  invited  Pelo- 
pidas either  to  be  the  arbitrator  and  judge  of  their  quarrel, 
or  to  espouse  the  side  on  which  he  should  see  the  most  right. 

h Plutarch  makes  this  quarrel  between  Alexander  and  Ptolemy ; which 
cannot  agree  with  iEschines’s  account  (de  Fals.  Legat.  p.  400.)  of  the  affairs 
of  Perdiccas  after  Alexander’s  death,  which  I shall  relate  in  the  history  of 
Philip.  As  iEschines  was  contemporary  with  them,  I thought  it  proper  to 
substitute  Perdiccas  in  the  place  of  Alexander, 


430 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


Pelopidas  was  no  sooner  arrived,  than  he  put  an  end  to  all 
their  disputes,  and  recalled  those  who  had  been  banished  by 
either  party.  Having  taken  Philip,  the  brother  of  Perdiccas, 
and  thirty  other  children  of  the  noblest  families  of  Macedonia 
for  hostages,  he  carried  them  to  Thebes,  to  show  the  Greeks 
how  far  the  authority  of  the  Thebans  extended  from  the  reputa- 
tion of  their  arms,  and  the  entire  confidence  that  was  placed  in 
their  justice  and  fidelity.  It  was  this  Philip  who  was  father  of 
Alexander  the  Great,  and  afterwards  made  war  against  the 
Greeks,  to  subject  them  to  his  power. 

The  troubles  and  factions  arose  again  in  Macedonia  some  years 
after,  occasioned  by  the  death  of  Perdiccas,  who  was  killed  in 
a battle.  The  friends  of  the  deceased  called  in  Pelopidas. 
Being  desirous  to  arrive  before  Ptolemy,  who  was  making  new 
efforts  to  establish  himself  upon  the  throne,  had  time  to  execute 
his  projects  ; and  not  having  an  army,  he  raised  some  merce- 
nary troops  in  haste,  with  whom  he  marched  against  Ptolemy. 
When  they  were  near  each  other,  Ptolemy  found  means  to  cor- 
rupt those  mercenary  soldiers  by  presents  of  money,  and  to  bring 
them  over  to  his  side.  At  the  same  time,  awed  by  the  reputa- 
tion and  name  of  Pelopidas,  he  went  to  meet  him  as  his  superior 
and  master,  had  recourse  to  caresses  and  entreaties,  and  pro- 
mised in  the  most  solemn  manner  to  hold  the  crown  only  as 
guardian  to  the  son  of  the  deceased,  to  acknowledge  as  friends 
and  enemies  all  those  who  were  so  to  the  Thebans  ; and  as  se- 
curity for  his  engagements,  he  gave  his  son  Philoxenus  and 
fifty  other  children,  who  were  educated  with  him,  as  hostages. 
These  Pelopidas  sent  to  Thebes. 

The  treachery  of  the  mercenary  soldiers  ran  very  much  in 
his  thoughts.  He  was  informed  that  they  had  sent  the  greatest 
part  of  their  effects,  with  their  wives  and  children,  into  the  city 
of  Pharsalus,'  and  conceived  that  to  be  a fair  opportunity  for 
being  revenged  on  them  for  their  perfidy.  He  therefore  drew 
together  some  Thessalian  troops,  and  marched  to  Pharsalus, 
where  he  was  scarce  arrived  before  Alexander  the  tyrant  came 
against  him  with  a powerful  army.  Pelopidas,  who  had  been 
appointed  ambassador  to  him,  believing  that  he  came  to  justify 
himself,  and  to  answer  the  complaints  of  the  Thebans,  went  to 
him  accompanied  only  by  Ismenias,  without  any  precaution. 
He  was  not  ignorant  of  his  being  an  impious  wretch,  as  void  of 
faith  as  of  honour ; but  he  imagined,  that  respect  for  Thebes, 
and  regard  to  his  dignity  and  reputation,  would  prevent  him 
from  attempting  any  thing  against  his  person.  He  was  mis- 
taken ; for  the  tyrant,  seeing  them  alone  and  unarmed,  made 
them  both  prisoners,  and  seized  Pharsalus. 

Polybius  exceedingly  blames  the  imprudence  of  Pelopidas 
* A city  of  Thessaly. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS, 


431 


upon  this  occasion.14  There  are,  says  he,  in  the  intercourse  of 
society,  certain  assurances,  and,  as  it  were,  ties  of  sincerity, 
upon  which  one  may  reasonably  rely  : such  are  the  sanctity  of 
oaths,  the  pledge  of  wives  and  children  delivered  as  hostages, 
and  above  all,  the  consistency  of  the  past  conduct  of  those  with 
whom  one  treats  ; when,  notwithstanding  those  motives  for  our 
confidence,  we  are  deceived,  it  is  a misfortune,  but  not  a fault : 
but  to  trust  one’s  self  to  a notorious  traitor  and  villain,  is  cer- 
tainly an  instance  of  temerity  for  which  there  is  no  excuse. 

This  heinous  perfidy  of  Alexander  filled  the  minds  of  all  his 
subjects  with  terror  and  distrust,1  who  very  much  suspected, 
that,  after  so  flagrant  an  injustice  and  so  daring  a crime,  the 
tyrant  would  spare  nobody,  and  would  behave  upon  all  occa- 
sions, and  towards  all  sorts  of  people,  as  a man  in  despair,  that 
needed  no  farther  regard  to  his  conduct  and  actions.  When 
the  news  was  brought  to  Thebes,  the  Thebans,  incensed  at  so 
base  a deed,  immediately  sent  an  army  into  Thessaly  ; and  as 
they  were  displeased  with  Epaminondas,  whom  they  suspected, 
though  without  any  good  reason,  of  having  been  too  favour- 
able to  the  Lacedaemonians  upon  a certain  occasion,  they  no- 
minated other  generals  ; so  that  he  served  in  this  expedition 
only  as  a private  man.  The  love  of  his  country  and  of  the 
public  good  extinguished  all  resentment  in  the  heart  of  that 
great  man,  and  would  not  permit  him,  as  is  but  too  common, 
to  abandon  its  service  through  any  pique  of  honour  or  personal 
discontent. 

The  tyrant  in  the  mean  time  carried  Pelopidas  to  Pherse,  and 
made  a show  of  him  to  all  the  world  at  first,  imagining  that 
such  a treatment  would  humble  his  pride  and  abate  his  courage. 
But  Pelopidas,  seeing  the  inhabitants  of  Phene  in  great  con- 
sternation, perpetually  consoled  them,  advising  them  not  to 
despair,  and  assuring  them  that  it  would  not  be  long  before  the 
tyrant  would  be  punished.  He  caused  him  to  be  told,  that  it 
was  very  imprudent  and  very  unjust  to  torture  and  put  to 
death  every  day  so  many  innocent  citizens,  that  have  never 
done  him  any  wrong,  and  to  spare  his  life,  who,  he  knew, 
would  no  sooner  be  out  of  his  hands,  than  he  would  punish  him 
as  his  crimes  deserved.  The  tyrant,  astonished  at  his  greatness 
of  soul,  sent  to  ask  him  why  he  took  so  much  pains  to  meet 
death  ? It  is,  returned  the  illustrious  prisoner,  that  thou  may - 
est  perish  the  sooner,  by  becoming  still  more  detestable  to  the 
gods  and  men. 

From  that  time  the  tyrant  gave  orders  that  nobody  should 
see  or  speak  to  him.  But  Theb6,  his  wife,  the  daughter  of 
J ason,  who  had  also  been  tyrant  of  Phene,  having  heard  of 

k Lib.  viii.  p.  512. 

1 Plut.  in  Pelop.  p.  292,  293.  Diod.  1.  xv.  p.  382,  383. 


432 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


the  constancy  and  courage  of  Pelopidas  from  those  who  guard- 
ed him,  had  a curiosity  to  see  and  converse  with  him  ; and 
Alexander  could  not  refuse  her  his  permission."1  He  loved 
her  tenderly  (if  indeed  a tyrant  may  be  said  to  love  any  body)  : 
but  notwithstanding  that  -tenderness,  he  treated  her  very  cru- 
elly, and  was  in  perpetual  distrust  even  of  her.  He  never 
went  to  her  apartment  without  a slave  before  him  with  a naked 
sword  in  his  hand,  and  having  first  sent  some  of  his  guard  to 
search  every  coffer  for  concealed  poniards.  Wretched  prince  ! 
cries  Cicero,  who  could  confide  more  in  a slave  and  a barbarian, 
than  in  his  own  wife  ! 

Thebe  therefore  desiring  to  see  Pelopidas,  found  him  in  a 
melancholy  condition,  dressed  in  a poor  habit,  his  hair  and 
beard  neglected,  and  void  of  every  thing  that  might  console 
him  in  his  distress.  JSTot  being  able  to  refrain  from  tears  at 
such  a sight.  Ah , unfortunate  Pelopidas,  said  she,  how  I pity 
your  poor  wife  ! — No,  Thebe,  replied  he,  it  is  you  who  are  to 
be  pitied , who  can  endure  such  a monster  as  Alexander , with- 
out being  his  prisoner.  Those  words  touched  Thebe  to  the 
quick,  for  it  was  with  extreme  reluctance  she  bore  the  tyrant’s 
cruelty,  violence,  and  infamous  excesses.  Hence,  by  going 
often  to  see  Pelopidas,  and  openly  bewailing  before  him  the 
injuries  she  suffered,  she  daily  conceived  new  abhorrence  for 
her  husband,  whilst  hatred  and  the  desire  of  revenge  grew  con- 
tinually more  strong  in  her  heart. 

The  Theban  generals,  who  had  entered  Thessaly,  did  no- 
thing there  of  any  importance,  and  were  obliged,  by  their  in- 
capacity and  ill  conduct,  to  abandon  the  country.  The  tyrant 
pursued  them  in  their  retreat,  harassed  them  shamefully,  and 
killed  abundance  of  their  troops.  The  whole  army  had  been 
defeated,  if  the  soldiers  had  not  obliged  Epaminondas,  who 
served  as  a private  man  amongst  .them,  to  take  upon  him  the 
command.  Epaminondas,  at  the  head  of  the  cavalry  and  light- 
armed foot,  posted  himself  in  the  rear  ; where,  sometimes  sus 
taming  the  enemy’s  attacks,  and  sometimes  charging  them  in 
his  turn,  he  completed  the  retreat  with  success,  and  preserved 
the  Boeotians.  The  generals  upon  their  return  were  each  of 
them  fined  10,000  drachmas,  n and  Epaminondas  substituted  in 
their  place.  As  the  public  good  was  his  sole  view,  he  over- 
looked the  injurious  treatment  and  kind  of  affront  which  he  had 
received,  and  was  amply  recompensed  by  the  glory  that  at- 
tended so  generous  and  disinterested  a conduct. 

Some  days  after,  he  marched  at  the  head  of  the  army  into 
Thessaly  ; whither  his  reputation  had  preceded  him.  It  had 
spread  already  both  terror  and  joy  through  the  whole  country  ; 
terror  amongst  the  tyrant’s  friends,  whom  the  very  name  of 
m Cic.  de  Offic.  1.  ii.  n.  25.  n About  225/.  sterling. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


433 


Epaminondas  dismayed,  and  joy  amongst  the  people,  from  the 
assurance  they  entertained  of  being  speedily  delivered  from  the 
yoke  of  the  tyranny,  and  the  tyrant  punished  for  all  his  crimes. 
But  Epaminondas,  preferring  the  safety  of  Pelopidas  to  his 
own  glory,  instead  of  carrying  on  the  war  with  vigour,  as  he 
might  have  done,  chose  rather  to  protract  it,  from  the  apprehen- 
sion that  the  tyrant,  if  reduced  to  despair,  like  a wild  beast, 
would  turn  his  whole  rage  upon  his  prisoner.  For  he  knew  the 
violence  and  brutality  of  his  nature,  which  would  hearken 
neither  to  reason  nor  justice  ; and  that  he  took  delight  in  bury- 
ing men  alive ; that  some  he  covered  with  the  skins  of  bears 
and  wild  boars,  and  setting  his  dogs  upon  them,  caused  them 
to  be  torn  in  pieces,  or  shot  them  to  death  with  arrows.  These 
were  his  frequent  sports  and  diversions.  - In  the  cities  of  Me- 
liboea  and  Scotusa,0  which  were  in  alliance  with  him,  he  called 
an  assembly  of  the  citizens,  and  causing  them  to  be  surrounded 
by  his  guards,  he  ordered  the  throats  of  all  their  young  men  to 
be  cut  in  his  presence. 

Hearing  one  day  a famous  actor  perform  a part  in  the 
Troades  of  Euripides,  he  suddenly  went  out  of  the  theatre,  and 
sent  to  the  actor  to  tell  him  not  to  be  under  any  apprehension 
upon  that  account,  for  that  his  leaving  the  place,  was  not  from 
being  displeased  with  him,  but  because  he  was  ashamed  to  let 
the  citizens  see  him  weep  at  the  misfortunes  of  Hecuba  and 
Andromache,  who  had  never  felt  any  compassion  for  those 
whom  he  had  murdered. 

Though  he  was  little  susceptible  of  pity,  he  was  much  so  of 
fear  at  this  time.  Amazed  at  the  sudden  arrival  of  Epaminon- 
das, and  dazzled  with  the  majesty  that  surrounded  him,  he 
made  haste  to  despatch  persons  to  him  with  apologies  for  his 
conduct.  Epaminondas  could  not  endure  that  the  Thebans 
should  make  either  peace  or  alliance  with  so  wicked  a man. 
He  only  granted  him  a truce  for  thirty  days : and  after  having 
got  Pelopidas  and  Ismenias  out  of  his  hands,  he  retired  with 
his  troops. 

Fear  is  not  a master  whose  lessons  make  any  deep  and  lasting 
impression  upon  the  mind.?  The  tyrant  of  Pherae  soon  returned 
to  his  natural  disposition.  He  ruined  several  cities  of  Thessaly, 
and  put  garrisons  into  those  of  Pythia,  Achaea,  and  Magnesia. 
Those  cities  sent  deputies  to  Thebes  to  demand  a succour  of 
troops,  praying  that  the  command  of  them  might  be  given  to 
Pelopidas  ; which  was  granted.  He  was  upon  the  point  of 
setting  out,  when  there  happened  a sudden  eclipse  of  the  sun, 
by  which  the  city  of  Thebes  was  darkened  at  noon-day.  The 
dread  and  consternation  were  general.  Pelopidas  knew  very 

0 Cities  of  Magnesia. 

p Plut.  in  Pelop.  p.  295 — 298.  Xenoph.  1.  vi.  p.  801. 

VOL.  III.  2 F 


434 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


well  what  to  think  of  this  accident,  which  was  no  more  than  was 
natural ; but  he  did  not  think  it  proper  for  him  to  expose  7000 
Thebans  against  their  will,  nor  to  compel  them  to  march  in  the 
terror  and  apprehension  with  which  he  perceived  they  were 
seized.  He  therefore  gave  himself  alone  to  the  Thessalians  ; 
and  taking  with  him  300  horse  of  such  Thebans  and  strangers 
as  would  follow  him,  he  departed,  contrary  to  the  prohibition 
of  the  soothsayers,  and  the  opinion  of  the  most  wise  and  judi- 
cious. 

He  was  personally  incensed  against  Alexander,  through  re- 
sentment of  the  injuries  he  had  received  from  him.  What 
Thebe  his  wife  had  said,  and  he  himself  knew,  of  the  general 
discontent  in  regard  to  the  tyrant,  gave  him  hopes  of  finding 
great  divisions  in  his  court,  and  a universal  disposition  to  re- 
volt. But  his  strongest  motive  was  the  beauty  and  grandeur 
of  the  action  in  itself.  For  his  sole  desire  and  ambition  was  to 
show  all  Greece,  that  at  the  same  time  that  the  Lacedaemonians 
were  sending  generals  and  officers  to  Dionysius  the  tyrant,  and 
the  Athenians  on  their  part  were  in  a manner  in  the  pay  of 
Alexander,  to  whom  they  had  erected  a statue  of  brass,  as  to 
their  benefactor,  the  Thebans  were  the  only  people  that  de- 
clared open  war  against  tyranny,  and  endeavoured  to  exter- 
minate from  amongst  the  Greeks  all  unjust  and  violent  go- 
vernment. 

After  having  assembled  his  army  at  Pharsalus,  he  marched 
against  the  tyrant;  who,  being  apprized  that  Pelopidas  had 
but  few  Thebans,  and  knowing  that  his  own  infantry  was 
twice  as  strong  as  that  of  the  Thessalians,  advanced  to  meet 
him.  Pelopidas  being  told  by  somebody  that  Alexander  was 
approaching  with  a great  army ; So  much  the  better , replied  he, 
we  shall  beat  the  greater  number . 

Near  a place  called  Cynoscephalm,  there  were  very  high  and 
steep  hills,  which  lay  in  the  midst  of  the  plain.  Both  armies 
were  in  motion  to  seize  that  post  with  their  foot,  when  Pelo- 
pidas ordered  his  cavalry  to  charge  that  of  the  enemy.  The 
horse  of  Pelopidas  broke  Alexander’s  ; and  -whilst  they  pursued 
them  upon  the  plain,  Alexander  appeared  suddenly  upon  the 
top  of  the  hills,  having  outstripped  the  Thessalian  infantry  ; 
and  charging  fiercely  such  as  endeavoured  to  force  those 
heights  and  intrenchments,  he  killed  the  foremost,  and  repulsed 
the  others,  obliging  them  to  give  way.  Pelopidas,  seeing  this, 
recalled  his  horse,  and  giving  them  orders  to  attack  the  enemy’s 
foot,  he  took  his  buckler,  and  ran  to  those  who  were  fighting 
upon  the  hills. 

He  presently  made  way  through  his  infantry,  and  passing  in 
a moment  from  the  rear  to  the  front,  revived  his  soldiers’  vigour 
and  courage  in  such  a manner  as  made  the  enemies  believe 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


435 


themselves  attacked  by  fresh  troops.  They  supported  two  or 
three  charges  with  great  resolution ; but  finding  Pelopidas’s 
infantry  continually  gained  ground,  and  that  his  cavalry,  who 
were  now  returned  from  the  pursuit,  came  to  support  them, 
they  began  to  give  way,  and  retired  slowly,  still  making  head 
in  their  retreat.  Pelopidas,  seeing  from  the  top  of  the  hills 
the  whole  army  of  the  enemy,  which,  though  it  was  not  yet 
actually  put  to  flight,  began  to  break,  and  was  in  great  dis- 
order, he  stopped  for  some  time,  looking  about  every  where  for 
Alexander. 

As  soon  as  he  perceived  him  upon  his  right  wing,  rallying 
and  encouraging  his  mercenary  soldiers,  he  could  contain  him- 
self no  longer,  but,  fired  with  the  sight,  and  abandoning  to  his 
sole  resentment  the  care  of  his  life  and  the  conduct  of  the 
battle,  he  got  a great  way  before  his  battalions,  and  ran  for- 
wards with  all  his  force,  calling  upon  and  defying  Alexander. 
The  tyrant  made  no  answer  to  his  defiance,  and  not  daring  to 
wait  his  coming  up,  withdrew  to  hide  himself  amongst  his 
guards.  The  battalion  standing  firm  for  some  time,  Pelopidas 
broke  the  first  ranks,  and  killed  the  greatest  part  of  the  guards 
upon  the  spot.  The  rest,  continuing  the  fight  at  a distance, 
pierced  his  arms  and  breast  at  length  with  their  javelins.  The 
Thessalians,  alarmed  at  the  danger  in  which  they  saw  him, 
made  all  the  haste  they  could  from  the  tops  of  the  hills  to  his 
assistance;  but  he  was  fallen  dead  when  they  arrived.  The 
infantry  and  the  Theban  horse,  returning  to  fight  against  the 
enemy’s  main  body,  put  them  to  flight,  and  pursued  them  a 
great  way.  The  plain  was  covered  with  the  dead  ; for  more 
than  3000  of  the  tyrant’s  troops  were  killed. 

This  action  of  Pelopidas,  though  it  appears  the  effect  of  a 
consummate  valour,  is  inexcusable,  and  has  been  generally  con- 
demned, because  there  is  no  true  valour  without  wisdom  and 
prudence.  The  greatest  courage  is  cool  and  sedate.  It  spares 
itself  where  it  ought,  and  exposes  itself  when  occasion 
makes  it  necessary.  A general  ought  to  see  every  thing,  and 
to  have  every  thing  in  his  thoughts.  To  be  in  a condition  to 
apply  the  proper  remedy  on  all  occasions,  he  must  not  precipi- 
tate himself  where  there  is  the  danger  of  his  being  cut  off,  and 
of  causing  the  loss  of  his  army  by  his  death. 

Euripides,P  after  having  said  in  one  of  his  pieces,  that  it  is 
highly  glorious  for  the  general  of  an  army  to  obtain  the  victory 
while  he  preserves  his  own  life,  adds,  that  if  it  he  necessary  for 
him  to  die , he  ought  to  do  so  hy  resigning  his  life  into  the  hands 
of  virtue  ; as  if  he  wished  to  imply,  that  virtue  alone,  not  pas- 
sion, anger,  or  revenge,  has  a right  over  the  life  of  a general. 


p Plut.  in  Pelop.  317- 
2 f 2 


436 


HISTORY  OP  THE 


and  that  the  first  duty  of  valour  is  to  preserve  him  who  pre- 
serves others. 

It  is  in  this  sense  that  the  saying  of  Timotheus  is  so  just  and 
amiable.1*  When  Chares  was  one  day  showing  to  the  Athenians 
the  wounds  he  had  received  whilst  he  was  their  general,  and  his 
shield  pierced  through  with  a pike  : For  my  part,  said  Timo- 
theus, when  I teas  besieging  Samos,  and  a dart  happened  to  fall 
very  near  me,  I was  much  ashamed,  as  having  exposed  myself 
like  a young  man  without  necessity,  and  more  than  was  con- 
sistent for  a general  of  so  great  an  army.  Hannibal  certainly 
cannot  be  suspected  of  fear,  and  yet  it  has  been  observed, 
that  in  the  great  number  of  battles  which  he  fought,  he  never 
received  gny  wound,  except  only  at  the  siege  of  Saguntum. 

It  is  therefore  not  without  reason,  that  Pelopidas  is  reproach- 
ed with  having  sacrificed  all  his  other  virtues  to  his  valour,  by 
thus  throwing  away  his  life,  and  with  having  died  rather  for 
himself  than  his  country. 

Never  was  a captain  more  lamented  than  he.  llis  death 
changed  the  victory  so  lately  gained  into  mourning.  A pro- 
found silence  and  universal  affliction  reigned  throughout  the 
whole  army,  as  if  it  had  been  entirely  defeated.  When  his  body 
was  carried  to  Thebes,  from  every  city  through  which  it  passed, 
the  people  of  all  ages  and  sexes,  the  magistrates  and  priests, 
came  out  to  meet  the  bier,  and  to  march  in  procession  before  it, 
carrying  crowns,  trophies,  and  armour,  all  of  gold.  The  Thes- 
salians, who  were  at  the  same  time  highly  afflicted  for  his  death, 
and  equally  sensible  of  their  obligations  to  him,  made  it  their 
request,  that  they  might  be  permitted  to  celebrate  at  their  sole 
expense  the  obsequies  of  a general,  who  had  devoted  himself 
for  their  preservation  ; and  that  honourable  privilege  could  not 
be  refused  to  their  grateful  zeal. 

His  funeral  was  magnificent,  especially  in  the  sincere  afflic- 
tion of  the  Thebans  and  Thessalians.  For,  says  Plutarch,  the 
external  pomp  of  mourning,  and  those  marks  of  sorrow,  which 
may  be  imposed  by  the  public  authority  upon  the  people,  are 
not  always  certain  proofs  of  their  real  sentiments.  The  tears 
which  flow  in  private  as  well  as  public,  the  regret  expressed 
equally  by  great  and  small,  the  praises  given  by  the  general  and 
unanimous  voice  to  a person  who  is  no  more,  and  from  whom 
nothing  farther  is  expected,  are  an  evidence  not  to  be  question- 
ed, and  a homage  never  paid  but  to  virtue.  Such  were  the 
obsequies  of  Pelopidas,  and,  in  my  opinion,  nothing  more  great 
and  magnificent  could  be  imagined. 

Thebes  was  not  contented  with  lamenting  Pelopidas,  but  re- 
solved to  avenge  him.  A small  army  of  7000  foot  and  700 
horse  were  immediately  sent  against  Alexander.  The  tyrant, 
i Plut.  in  Pelop.  p.  278. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS.  437 

who  had  not  yet  recovered  the  terror  of  his  defeat,  was  in  no 
condition  to  defend  himself.  He  was  obliged  to  restore  to  the 
Thessalians  the  cities  he  had  taken  from  them,  and  to  give  the 
Magnesians,  Pythiots,  and  Achasans,  their  liberty  ; to  withdraw 
his  garrisons  from  their  country ; and  to  swear  that  he  would 
always  obey  the  Thebans,  and  march  at  their  orders  against  all 
their  enemies. 

Such  a punishment  was  very  gentle.  Nor,  says  Plutarch, 
did  it  appear  sufficient  to  the  gods,  or  proportioned  to  his 
crimes:  they  had  reserved  one  for  him  worthy  of  a tyrant. 
Ihebe,  his  wife,  who  saw  with  horror  and  detestation  the  cru- 
elty and  perfidy  of  her  husband,  and  had  not  forgotten  the 
lessons  and  advice  which  Pelopidas  had  given  her  whilst  in  pri- 
son, entered  into  a conspiracy  with  her  three  brothers  to  kill 
him.  The  tyrant’s  whole  palace  was  full  of  guards,  who  kept 
watch  through  the  whole  night ; but  he  placed  little  confidence 
in  them,  and  as  his  life  was  in  some  sort  in  their  hands,  he  feared 
them  the  most  of  all  men.  He  lay  in  a high  chamber,  to  which 
he  ascended  by  a ladder  that  was  drawn  up  after  his  entrance. 
Near  this  chamber  a great  dog  was  chained  to  guard  it.  He 
was  exceeding  fierce,  and  knew  nobody  but  his  master,  Thebe 
and  the  slave  who  fed  him. 

The  time  pitched  upon  for  the  execution  of  the  plot  being 
arnved.  Thebe  shut  up  her  brothers  during  the  day-time,  in  an 
apartment  near  the  tyrant’s.  When  he  entered  his  own 
chamber  at  night,  as  he  was  overcharged  with  meat  and  wine, 
he  tell  into  a deep  sleep  immediately.  Theb6  went  out  presently 
after,  and  ordered  the  slave  to  take  away  the  dog,  that  he 
might  not  disturb  her  husband’s  repose;  and ‘lest  the  ladder 
should  make  a noise  when  her  brothers  came  up  by  it,  she 
covered  the  steps  of  it  with  wool.  All  things  being  thus  pre- 
pared, she  made  her  brothers  ascend  softly,  armed  with  daggers  : 
when  they  came  to  the  door,  they  were  seized  with  terror  and 
would  go  no  farther.  Theb6,  quite  out  of  her  wits,  threatened  to 
awake  the  tyrant  if  they  did  not  proceed  immediately,  and  discov- 
er the  plot  to  him.  Shame  and  fear  re-animated  them:  she  made 
them  enter  Jed  them  to  the  bed,  and  held  the  lamp  herself, 
whilst  they  killed  him  with  repeated  wounds.  The  news  of  his 
death  was  immediately  spread  through  the  city.  His  dead 
body  was  exposed  to  all  sorts  of  outrages,  trampled  under  foot 
by  the  people,  and  given  for  a prey  to  the  dogs  and  vultures  , 
a just  reward  for  his  violent  oppressions  and  detestable  cruel- 
ties. 


438 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


SECT.  VII. 

Epaminondas  is  chosen  general  of  the  Thebans.  His  second  attempt  against 

Sparta.  His  celebrated  victory  at  Man  tinea.  His  death  and  eulogy. 

A M 3641  The  extraordinary  prosperity  of  Thebes  was 
Ant.  j.  C.  363.  no  sma^  subject  of  alarm  to  the  neighbouring 
states.1.  Every  thing  was  at  that  time  in  motion 
in  Greece.  A new  war  had  sprung  up  between  the  Arcadians 
and  the  Eleans,  which  had  occasioned  another  between  the  Ar- 
cadians themselves.  The  people  of  Tegtea  had  called  in  the 
Thebans  to  their  aid,  and  those  of  Mantinea,  the  Spartans  and 
Athenians.  There  were  besides  several  other  allies  on  each 
side.  The  former  gave  Epaminondas  the  command  of  their 
troops,  who  immediately  entered  Arcadia,  and  encamped  at  Te- 
gaea,  with  design  to  attack  the  Mantineans,  who  had  quitted 
their  alliance  with  Thebes  to  attach  themselves  to  Sparta. 

Being  informed  that  Agesilaus  had  begun  his  march  with  his 
army  and  was  advancing  towards  Mantinsea,  he  formed  an  en- 
terprise, which,  he  believed,  would  immortalize  his  name,  and 
entirely  reduce  the  power  of  the  enemy.  He  left  Tegeea  in  the 
night  with  his  army,  unknown  to  the  Mantineans,  and  marched 
directly  to  Sparta  by  a different  route  from  that  of  Agesilaus. 
He  would  undoubtedly  have  taken  the  city  by  surprise,  as  it  had 
neither  walls,  defence,  nor  troops  : but  happily  for  Sparta,  a 
Cretan  having  made  all  possible  baste  to  apprise  Agesilaus  of 
his  design,  he  immediately  despatched  one  of  his  horse  to  ad- 
vise the  city  of  the  danger  that  threatened  it,  and  arrived 
there  soon  after  in  person. 

He  had  scarce  entered  the  town,  when  the  Thebans  were 
seen  passing  the  Eurotas,  and  coming  on  against  the  city. 
Epaminondas,  who  perceived  that  his  design  was  discovered, 
thought  it  incumbent  on  him  not  to  retire  without  some  attempt. 
He  therefore  made  his  troops  advance,8  and  making  use  of  va- 
lour instead  of  stratagem,  he  attacked  the  city  in  several  quar- 
ters, penetrated  as  far  as  the  public  square,  and  seized  that  part 
of  Sparta  which  lay  upon  the  side  of  the  river.  Agesilaus  made 
bead  every  where,  and  defended  with  much  more  valour  than 
could  be  expected  from  his  years.  He  saw  well,  that  it  was 
not  now  a time,  as  before,  to  spare  himself,  and  to  act  only  upon 
the  defensive;  but  that  he  had  need  of  all  his  courage  and  daring, 
and  to  fight  with  all  the  vigour  of  despair  ; means  which  he  had 
never  yet  used,  nor  placed  his  confidence  in  before,  but  which 
he  employed  with  great  success  in  the  present  dangerous  emer- 
gency. For  by  this  happy  despair  and  prudent  audacity,  he  in 
a manner  snatched  the  city  out  of  the  hands  of  Epaminondas. 

r Xenopli.  1.  vii.  p.  642 — 644.  Plut.  in  Agesil.  p.  615.  Diod.  p.  391, 392. 
s Polyb.  1.  ix.  p.  547. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


439 


His  son  Archidamus,  at  the  head  of  the  Spartan  youth,  behaved 
with  incredible  valour  wherever  the  danger  was  greatest,  and 
with  his  small  troop  stopped  the  enemy,  and  made  head  against 
them  on  all  sides. 

A young  Spartan,  named  Isadas,  distinguished  himself  par- 
ticularly in  this  action.  He  was  very  handsome,  perfectly  well- 
shaped, of  an  advantageous  stature,  and  in  the  flower  of  his 
youth.  He  had  neither  armour  nor  clothes,  his  body  shone  with 
oil,  and  he  held  a spear  in  one  hand,  and  a sword  in  the  other. 
In  this  condition  he  rushed  with  impetuosity  from  his  house, 
and  breaking  through  the  throng  of  the  Spartans  that  were 
fighting,  he  threw  himself  upon  the  enemy,  gave  mortal  wounds 
at  every  blow,  and  laid  all  at  his  feet  who  opposed  him,  without 
receiving  any  hurt  himself ; whether  it  were  that  the  enemy  were 
dismayed  at  so  astonishing  a sight,  or  whether,  says  Plutarch, 
the  gods  took  pleasure  in  preserving  him  upon  account  of  his 
extraordinary  valour.  It  is  said,  the  Ephori  decreed  him  a 
crown  after  the  battle,  in  honour  of  his  exploits,  but  afterwards 
fined  him  1000  drachmas 1 for  having  exposed  himself  to  so 
great  a danger  without  arms. 

Epaminondas,  having  failed  in  his  aim,  and  foreseeing  that  the 
Arcadians  would  certainly  hasten  to  the  relief  of  Sparta,  and 
not  being  willing  to  have  them  with  all  the  Lacedaemonian 
forces  upon  his  hands  at  the  same  time,  returned  with  expedi- 
tion to  Tegaea.  The  Lacedaemonians  and  Athenians,  with 
their  allies,  followed  him  close  in  the  rear. 

That  general,11  considering  his  command  was  upon  the  point 
of  expiring,  and  that  if  he  did  not  fight,  his  reputation  might 
suffer  extremely,  and  that  immediately  after  his  retreat  the 
enemy  would  fall  upon  the  Theban  allies,  and  entirely  ruin  them, 
gave  orders  to  his  troops  to  hold  themselves  in  readiness  for 
battle. 

The  Greeks  had  never  fought  amongst  themselves  with 
more  numerous  armies.  That  of  the  Lacedaemonians  con- 
sisted of  more  than  20,000  foot  and  2000  horse  ; the  Theban 
army  of  30,000  foot  and  near  3000  horse.  Upon  the  right 
wing  of  the  former,  the  Mantineans,  Arcadians,  and  Lacedae- 
monians, were  posted  in  one  line ; the  Eleans  and  Achaeans, 
who  were  the  weakest  of  their  troops,  had  the  centre ; and 
the  Athenians  alone  composed  the  left  wing.  In  the  other 
army,  the  Thebans  and  Arcadians  were  on  the  left,  the  Argives 
on  the  right,  and  the  other  allies  in  the  centre.  The  cavalry 
on  each  side  were  disposed  in  the  wings. 

The  Theban  general  marched  in  the  same  order  of  battle 
in  which  he  intended  to  fight,  that  he  might  not  be  obliged, 
when  he  came  up  with  the  enemy,  to  lose,  in  the  disposition 
1 About  251.  u Xenoph.  1.  vii.  p.  645—647. 


440 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


of  his  array,  a time  which  cannot  be  too  much  saved  in  great 
enterprises. 

He  did  not  march  directly,  and  with  his  front  to  the  enemy, 
but  in  a column  along  the  hills  with  his  left  wing  foremost, 
to  make  them  imagine  that  he  did  not  intend  to  fight  that 
day.  When  he  was  over  against  them  at  a quarter  of  a 
league’s  distance,  he  made  his  troops  halt  and  lay  down  their 
arms,  as  if  he  desigued  to  encamp  there.  The  enemy  in  fact 
were  deceived  by  that  stand,  and  reckoning  no  longer  upon  a 
battle,  they  quitted  their  arms,  dispersed  themselves  about 
the  camp,  and  suffered  that  ardour  to  extinguish  which  the  near 
approach  of  a battle  is  wont  to  kindle  in  the  hearts  of  the  soldiers. 

Epaminondas,  however,  by  suddenly  wheeling  troops  to  the 
right,  having  changed  his  column  into  a line,  and  having  drawn 
out  the  choice  troops,  whom  he  had  expressly  posted  in  front 
upon  his  march,  he  made  them  double  their  files  upon  the 
front  of  his  left  wing,  to  add  to  its  strength,  and  to  put  it 
into  a condition  to  attack  in  a point  the  Lacedaemonian 
phalanx,  which,  by  the  movement  he  had  made,  faced  it  directly. 
He  ordered  the  centre  and  right  wing  of  his  army  to  move  very 
slow,  and  to  halt  before  they  came  up  with  the  enemy,  that  he 
might  not  hazard  the  event  of  the  battle  upon  troops  on  whom 
he  would  not  rely. 

He  expected  to  decide  the  victory  by  that  body  of  chosen 
troops,  which  he  commanded  in  person,  and  which  he  had  formed 
in  a column  to  attack  the  enemy  in  a point  like  a galley,  says 
Xenophon.  He  assured  himself,  that  if  he  could  penetrate 
the  Lacedaemonian  phalanx,  in  whichthe  enemy’s  principal  force 
consisted,  he  should  not  find  it  difficult  to  rout  the  rest  of 
their  army,  by  charging  upon  the  right  and  left  with  his  victo- 
rious troops. 

But  that  he  might  prevent  the  Athenians  in  the  left  wing 
from  coming  to  the  support  of  their  right  against  his  in- 
tended attack,  he  made  a detachment  of  his  horse  and  foot 
advance  out  of  the  line,  and  posted  them  upon  the  rising  ground 
in  readiness  to  flank  the  Athenians,  as  well  to  cover  his  right, 
as  to  alarm  them  ; and  gave  them  reason  to  apprehend  being 
taken  in  flank  and  rear  themselves,  if  they  advanced  to  sustain 
their  right. 

After  having  disposed  his  whole  army  in  this  manner,  he  moved 
on  to  charge  the  enemy  with  the  whole  weight  of  his  column. 
They  were  strangely  surprised  when  they  saw  Epaminondas 
advance  towards  them  in  this  order,  and  resumed  their  arms, 
bridled  their  horses,  and  made  all  the  haste  they  could  to  their 
ranks. 

Whilst  Epaminondas  was  marching  against  the  enemy,  the 
cavalry  that  covered  his  flank  on  the  left,  the  best  at  that  time 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


441 


in  Greece,  entirely  composed  of  Thebans  and  Thessalians,  had 
orders  to  attack  the  enemy’s  horse.  The  Theban  general,  whom 
nothing  escaped,  had  judiciously  planted  bowmen,  slingers,  and 
lancers  in  the  intervals  of  his  horse,  in  order  to  begin  the  dis- 
order of  the  enemy’s  cavalry,  by  a previous  discharge  of  a 
shower  of  arrows,  stones,  and  javelins  upon  them.  The  other 
army  had  neglected  to  take  the  same  precaution,  and  had  com- 
mitted another  fault,  not  less  considerable,  in  giving  as  much 
depth  to  the  squadrons  as  if  they  had  been  a phalanx.  By 
this  means  their  horse  were  incapable  of  supporting  long  the  charge 
of  the  Thebans.  After  having  made  several  ineffectual  attacks 
with  great  loss,  they  were  obliged  to  retire  behind  their  infantry. 

In  the  mean  time  Epaminondas,  with  his  body  of  foot,  had 
attacked  the  Lacedaemonian  phalanx.  The  troops  came  to  the 
charge  on  both  sides  with  incredible  ardour  ; both  the  Thebans 
and  Lacedaemonians  being  resolved  to  perish  rather  than  yield 
the  glory  of  arms  to  their  rivals.  They  began  by  fighting  with 
the  spear  ; and  those  first  arms  being  soon  broken  in  the  fury 
of  the  combat,  they  charged  each  other  sword  in  hand.  The 
resistance  was  equally  obstinate,  and  the  slaughter  very  great 
on  both  sides.  The  troops  despising  danger,  and  desiring  only 
to  distinguish  themselves  by  the  greatness  of  their  actions,  chose 
rather  to  die  in  their  ranks,  than  to  lose  a step  of  their  ground. 

The  furious  slaughter  on  both  sides  having  continued  a great 
while  without  the  victory’s  inclining  to  either,  Epaminondas,  to 
force  it  to  declare  for  him,  thought  it  his  duty  to  make  an  ex- 
traordinary effort  in  person,  without  regard  to  the  danger  of  his 
own  life.  He  formed  therefore  a troop  of  the  bravest  and  most 
determinate  about  him,  and  putting  himself  at  the  head  of  them, 
made  a vigorous  charge  upon  the  enemy,  where  the  battle  was 
most  warm,  and  wounded  the  general  of  the  Lacedaemonians 
with  the  first  javelin  he  threw.  His  troop,  by  his  example, 
having  wounded  or  killed  all  that  stood  in  their  way,  broke 
and  penetrated  the  phalanx.  The  Lacedaemonians,  dismayed 
by  the  presence  of  Epaminondas,  and  overpowered  by  the 
weight  of  that  intrepid  band,  were  compelled  to  give  ground. 
The  main  body  of  the  Theban  troops,  animated  by  their  ge- 
neral’s example  and  success,  drove  back  the  enemy  upon  his 
right  and  left,  and  made  a great  slaughter  of  them.  But  some 
troops  of  the  Spartans,  perceiving  that  Epaminondas  aban- 
doned himself  too  much  to  his  ardour,  suddenly  rallied,  and  re- 
turning to  the  fight,  charged  him  with  a shower  of  javelins. 
Whilst  he  kept  off  part  of  those  darts,  shunned  some  of  them, 
warded  off  others,  and  was  fighting  with  the  most  heroic  valour, 
to  assure  the  victory  to  his  army,  a Spartan,  named  Callicrates, 
gave  him  a mortal  wound  with  a javelin  in  the  breast  through 
his  cuirass.  The  wood  of  the  javelin  being  broken  off,  and  the 


442 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


iron  head  continuing  in  the  wound,  the  torment  was  insupport- 
able, and  he  fell  immediately.  The  battle  began  around  him 
with  new  fury ; the  one  side  using  their  utmost  endeavours  to 
take  him  alive,  and  the  other  to  save  him.  The  Thebans  gained 
their  point  at  last,  and  carried  him  off,  after  having  put  the  ene- 
my to  flight.  They  did  not  pursue  them  far ; and  returning  im- 
mediately, contented  themselves  with  remaining  masters  of  the 
field  and  of  the  dead,  without  making  any  advantage  of  their 
victory,  or  undertaking  any  thing  farther,  as  if  they  staid  for  the 
orders  of  their  general. 

The  cavalry,  dismayed  by  the  accident  of  Epaminondas, 
whom  they  belieyed  to  be  dead,  and  seeming  rather  vanquished 
than  victorious,  neglected  to  pursue  their  success  in  the  same 
manner,  and  returned  to  their  former  post. 

Whilst  this  was  passing  on  the  left  wing  of  the  Thebans, 
the  Athenian  horse  attacked  their  cavalry  on  the  right.  But 
as  the  latter,  besides  the  superiority  of  number,  had  the  advan- 
tage of  being  seconded  by  the  light  infantry  posted  in  their 
intervals,  they  charged  the  Athenians  rudely,  and  having  galled 
them  extremely  with  their  darts,  broke,  and  obliged  them  to 
fly.  After  having  dispersed  and  repulsed  them  in  this  manner, 
instead  of  pursuing  them,  they  thought  proper  to  turn  their 
arms  against  the  Athenian  foot,  which  they  took  in  flank,  put 
into  disorder,  and  pushed  with  great  vigour.  Just  as  they 
were  about  to  take  flight,  the  general  of  the  Elean  cavalry, 
who  commanded  a body  of  reserve,  seeing  the  danger  of  that 
phalanx,  came  upon  the  spur  to  its  relief,  charged  the  Theban 
horse,  who  expected  nothing  less,  forced  them  to  retreat,  and 
regained  from  them  their  advantage.  At  the  same  time,  the 
Athenian  cavalry,  which  had  been  routed  at  first,  finding  they 
were  not  pursued,  rallied  ; and  instead  of  going  to  the  assist- 
ance of  their  foot,  which  was  roughly  handled,  they  attacked 
the  detachment  posted  by  the  Thebans  upon  the  heights  with- 
out the  line,  and  put  it  to  the  sword. 

After  these  different  movements,  and  this  alternation  of 
losses  and  advantages,  the  troops  on  both  sides  stood  still  and 
rested  upon  their  arms ; and  the  trumpets  of  the  two  armies, 
as  if  by  consent,  sounded  the  retreat  at  the  same  time.  Each 
party  pretended  to  the  victory,  and  erected  a trophy : the 
Thebans,  because  they  had  defeated  the  right  wing,  and  re- 
mained masters  of  the  field  of  battle ; the  Athenians,  because 
they  had  cut  the  detachment  in  pieces.  And  from  this  point 
of  honour,  both  sides  refused  at  first  to  ask  leave  to  bury  their 
dead,  which,  with  the  ancients,  was  confessing  their  defeat. 
The  Lacedaemonians,  however,  first  sent  a herald  to  demand 
that  permission ; after  which,  the  rest  had  no  thoughts  but  of 
paying  the  last  duties  to  the  slain  on  their  respective  sides. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


443 


Such  was  the  event  of  the  famous  battle  of  Mantinea.  Xe- 
nophon, in  his  relation  of  it,  which  concludes  his  history,  re- 
commends to  the  reader’s  attention  the  disposition  of  the 
Theban  troops,  and  the  order  of  battle,  which  he  describes  as 
a man  of  knowledge  and  experience  in  the  art  of  war.  And 
the  Chevalier  Folard,  who  justly  looks  upon  Epaminondas  as 
one  of  the  greatest  generals  Greece  ever  produced,  in  his  de- 
scription of  the  same  battle,  ventures  to  call  it  the  masterpiece 
of  that  great  captain. 

Epaminondas  had  been  carried  into  the  camp.  The  surgeons, 
after  having  examined  the  wound,  declared  that  he  would  expire 
as  soon  as  the  head  of  the  dart  was  drawn  out  of  it.  Those 
words  gave  all  that  were  present  the  utmost  sorrow  and  afflic- 
tion : they  were  inconsolable  on  seeing  so  great  a man  about  to 
die,  and  to  die  without  issue.  For  him,  the  only  concern  he 
expressed  was  about  his  arms,  and  the  success  of  the  battle. 
When  they  showed  him  his  shield,  and  assured  him  that  the 
Thebans  had  gained  the  victory ; turning  towards  his  friends 
with  a calm  and  serene  air  : Do  not  regard , said  he,  this  day 
as  the  end  of  my  life , hut  as  the  beginning  of  my  happiness,  arid 
the  completion  of  my  glory.  I leave  Thebes  triumphant,  proud 
Sparta  humbled,  and  Greece  delivered  from  the  yoke  of  servi- 
tude. For  the  rest,  I do  not  reckon  that  I die  without  issue  ; 
Leuctra  and  Mantinea  are  two  illustrious  daughters,  that  will 
not  fail  to  keep  my  name  alive,  and  to  transmit  it  to  posterity. 
Having  spoken  to  this  effect,  he  drew  the  head  of  the  javelin  out 
of  his  wound,  and  expired. 

It  may  be  truly  said,  that  the  Theban  power  expired  with 
this  great  man  ; whom  Cicero  seems  to  rank  above  all  the  illus- 
trious men  Greece  ever  prod  need. x Justin  is  of  the  same 

opinion/  when  he  says,  That  as  a dart  is  no  longer  in  a condi- 
tion to  wound  when  the  point  of  it  is  blunted,  so  Thebes,  after 
having  lost  its  general,  was  no  longer  formidable  to  its  enemies, 
and  its  power  seemed  to  have  lost  its  edge,  and  to  be  annihi- 
lated by  the  death  of  Epaminondas.  Before  him,  that  city  was 
not  distinguished  by  any  memorable  action ; and  after  him,  it 
sunk  into  its  original  obscurity ; so  that  it  saw  its  glory  take 
birth  and  expire  with  this  great  man. 

It  has  been  doubted  whether  he  was  a more  excellent  cap- 
tain or  good  man. z He  sought  not  power  for  himself,  but  for 

x Epaminondas  princeps,  meo  judicio,  Graeciae.  Acad . Qucest.  1.  i.  n.  4. 
y Nam  sicuti  telo,  si  primam  aciem  prsefregeris,  reliquo  ferro  vim  nocendi 
sustuleris ; sic  illo,  velut  mucrone  teli,  ablato  duce  Thebanorum,  rei  quoque 
publicae  vires  hebetatae  sunt : ut  non  tarn  ilium  amisisse,  quam  cum  illo  omnes 
interiisse  viderentur.  Nam  neque  hunc  ante  ducem  ullum  rnemorabile  bellum 
gessero,  nec  postea  virtutibus,  sed  cladibus,  insignes  fuere : ut  manifestum 
sit,  patriae  gloriam  et  natam  et  extinctam  cum  eo  fuisse.  Justin. 

z Fuit  incertum,  vir  melior  an  dux  esset.  Nam  et  imperium  non  sibi 
semper  sed  patriae  quaesivit ; et  pecuniae  adeo  parcus  fuit,  ut  sumptus  luneri 


444 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


his  country ; and  carried  his  disinterestedness  to  such  a pitch, 
that  at  his  death  he  did  not  leave  sufficient  wealth  to  defray  the 
expenses  of  his  funeral.  Truly  a philosopher,  and  poor  by  in- 
clination, he  despised  riches,  without  affecting  any  reputation 
from  that  contempt ; and  if  J ustin  may  be  believed,  he  coveted 
glory  as  little  as  he  did  money.  It  was  always  against  his  will 
that  commands  were  conferred  upon  him  ; and  he  behaved  him- 
self in  them  in  such  a manner,  as  did  more  honour  to  the  dig- 
nities, than  the  dignities  to  him. 

Though  poor  himself,  and  without  any  estate,  his  very  po- 
verty, by  drawing  upon  him  the  esteem  and  confidence  of  the 
rich,  gave  him  the  opportunity  of  doing  good  to  others.  One 
of  his  friends  being  in  great  necessity,  Epaminondas  sent  him 
to  a very  rich  citizen,  with  orders  to  ask  him  for  1000  crowns 
in  his  name. a That  rich  man  coming  to  his  house,  to  know 
his  motives  for  directing  his  friend  to  him  upon  such  an  errand  ; 
Why,h  replied  Epaminondas,  it  is  because  this  honest  man  is  in 
want , and  you  are  rich.0 

He  had  imbibed  those  generous  and  noble  sentiments  from 
the  study  of  polite  learning  and  philosophy/  which  he  had 
made  his  usual  employment  and  sole  delight  from  his  earliest 
infancy  ; so  that  it  was  surprising,  and  a question  frequently 
asked,  how,  and  at  what  time,  it  was  possible  fora  man,  always 
busy  amongst  books,  to  attain,  or  rather  seize,  the  knowledge 
of  the  art  military  in  so  great  a degree  of  perfection.  Fond  of 
leisure,  which  he  devoted  to  the  study  of  philosophy,  his  dar- 
ling passion,  he  shunned  public  employments,  and  intrigued 
only  to  exclude  himself  from  them.  His  moderation  conceal- 
ed him  so  well,  that  he  lived  obscure  and  almost  unknown.  His 
merit,  however,  discovered  him.  He  was  taken  from  his  soli- 
tude by  force,  to  be  placed  at  the  head  of  armies  ; and  he  de- 
monstrated that  philosophy,  though  generally  despised  by  those 
who  aspire  at  the  glory  of  arms,  is  wonderfully  well  calculated 
to  form  heroes.  For  besides  its  being  the  greatest  step  towards 
conquering  the  enemy  to  know  how  to  conquer  one’s  self,  in 
this  school  anciently  were  taught  the  great  maxims  of  true  po- 
licy,e the  rules  of  every  kind  of  duty,  the  motives  for  a due 
discharge  of  them,  what  we  owe  to  our  country,  the  right  use  of 
authority,  wherein  true  courage  consists  ; in  a word,  the  quali- 
ties that  form  the  good  citizen,  statesman,  and  great  captain. 

defuerit.  Gloria  quoque  non  cupidior,  quam  pecuniae ; quippe  recusanti 
omnia  imperia  ingesta  sunt,  honoresque  ita  gessit,  ornamentum  non  accipere, 
sed  dari  ipsi  dignitati  videretur.  Justin. 

a A talent.  b Plut.de  praeeept.  reipub.ger.  809. 

c "On  xpyffT°Q’  direv,  ovrog,  iov,  tt evtjq  tort*  av  tie  7r\ovTtig. 
d Jam  literarum  studium,  jam  philosophiae  doctrina  tanta,  ut  mirabile  vi- 
deretur, unde  tarn  insignis  militiae  scientia  homini  inter  literas  nato.  Justin. 
e The  works  of  Plato,  Xenophon,  and  Aristotle,  are  proofs  of  this. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


445 


He  possessed  all  the  ornaments  of  the  mind  : he  had  the 
talent  of  speaking  in  perfection,  and  was  well  versed  in  the 
most  sublime  sciences.  But  a modest  reserve  threw  a veil 
over  all  those  excellent  qualities,  which  still  augmented  their 
value,  and  he  knew  not  what  it  was  to  be  ostentatious  of  them. 
Spintharus,  in  giving  his  character,  said,  That  he  never  had 
met  a man,  who  knew  more , and  spoke  lessJ 

It  may  be  said  therefore  in  praise  of  Epaminondas,  that  he 
falsified  the  proverb,  which  treated  the  Boeotians  as  boorish  and 
stupid.  This  was  the  notion  commonly  entertained  of  them 
and  it  was  imputed  to  the  gross  air  of  the  country,  as  the  Athe- 
nian delicacy  of  taste  was  attributed  to  the  subtilty  of  the  air 
they  breathed.  Horace  says,  that  to  judge  of  Alexander  from 
his  bad  taste  for  poetry,  one  would  swear  him  a true  Boeotian  : 

Boeotum  in  crasso  jurares  aere  natum.  Epist.  i.  1.  2. 

Tn  thick  Boeotian  air  you’d  swear  him  born. 

When  Alcibiades  was  reproached  with  having  little  inclination 
to  music,  he  thought  fit  to  make  his  excuse  ; It  is  for  Thebans 
to  sing  as  they  do,  h who  know  not  how  to  speak.  Pindar  and 
Plutarch,  who  had  very  little  of  the  soil  in  them,  and  who  are 
proofs  that  genius  is  of  all  nations,  do  themselves  condemn  the 
stupidity  of  their  countrymen.  Epaminondas  did  honour  to 
his  country,  not  only  by  the  greatness  of  his  military  exploits, 
but  by  that  sort  of  merit  which  results  from  elevation  of  genius 
and  the  study  of  the  sciences. 

I shall  conclude  this  portrait  and  character  with  a circum- 
stance that  gives  place  to  nothing  in  all  his  other  excellences, 
and  which  may  even  be  preferred  to  them,  as  it  indicates  a 
good  heart,  and  a tenderness  and  sensible  disposition  ; qualities 
very  rare  amongst  the  great,  but  infinitely  more  estimable  than 
all  those  splendid  attributes  which  the  generality  of  mankind 
commonly  gaze  at  with  admiration,  and  fancy  almost  the  only 
objects  worthy  either  of  being  imitated  or  envied.  The  victory 
at  Leuctra  had  drawn  the  eyes  and  admiration  of  all  the  neigh- 
bouring states  upon  Epaminondas,  and  caused  him  to  be  looked 
upon  as  the  supporter  and  restorer  of  Thebes,  as  the  trium- 
phant conqueror  of  Sparta,  as  the  deliverer  of  all  Greece  ; in  a 
word,  as. the  greatest  man,  and  the  most  excellent  captain,  that 
ever  was  in  the  world.  In  the  midst  of  this  universal  applause, 
so  capable  of  intoxicating,  in  a manner,  the  general  of  an  army, 
Epaminondas,  little  sensible  to  so  affecting  and  so  deserved  a 
glory,  My  joy,'  said  he,  arises  from  my  sense  of  that  which  the 
news  of  my  victory  will  give  my  father  and  mother. 

f Plut.  de  audit,  p.  39. 

? Inter  locorum  naturas  quantum  intersit,  videmus — Athenis  tenue  coelum, 
ex  quo  acutiores  etiam  putantur  Attici ; crassum  Thebis,  itaque  pingues 
Thebani.  Cic,  de  Fato , n.  7* 

h They  were  great  musicians.  * Plut.  in  Coriol.  p.  21 


446 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


Nothing  in  history  seems  to  me  so  valuable  as  such  senti- 
ments, which  do  honour  to  human  nature,  and  proceed  from  a 
heart  which  neither  false  glory  nor  false  greatness  have  corrupt- 
ed. I confess  it  is  with  grief  I see  these  noble  sentiments  daily 
expire  amongst  us,  especially  in  persons  whose  birth  and  rank 
raise  them  above  others,  who,  too  frequently,  are  neither  good 
fathers,  good  sons,  good  husbands,  nor  good  friends  : and  who 
would  think  it  derogatory  to  them  to  express  for  a father  and 
mother  the  tender  regard,  of  which  we  have  here  so  fine  an  ex- 
ample from  a Pagan. 

Until  Epaminondas’s  time,  two  cities  had  exercised  alter- 
nately a kind  of  empire  over  all  Greece.  The  justice  and  mo- 
deration of  Sparta  had  at  first  acquired  it  a distinguished  pre- 
eminence, which  the  pride  and  haughtiness  of  its  generals,  and 
especially  of  Pausanias,  soon  made  it  lose.  The  Athenians, 
until  the  Peloponnesian  war,  held  the  first  rank  ; but  in  a 
manner  scarcely  discernible  in  any  other  respect,  than  in  their 
care  to  acquit  themselves  worthily,  and  in  giving  their  inferiors 
just  reason  to  believe  themselves  their  equals.  They  judged  at 
that  time,  and  very  justly,  that  the  true  method  of  commanding, 
and  of  continuing  their  power,  was  to  evince  their  superiority 
only  by  their  good  offices  and  the  benefits  they  conferred. 
Those  times,  so  glorious  for  Athens,  were  of  about  forty-five 
years’  continuance,  and  they  retained  a part  of  that  pre-emi- 
nence during  the  twenty-seven  years  of  the  Peloponnesian  war, 
which  make  in  all  the  seventy-two,  or  seventy-three  years,  which 
Demosthenes  assigns  to  the  duration  of  their  empire  ;k  but  for 
this  latter  space  of  time,  the  Greeks,  disgusted  by  the  haughti- 
ness of  Athens,  received  no  laws  from  that  city  without  reluct- 
ance. Hence  the  Lacedaemonians  became  again  the  arbiters  of 
Greece,  and  continued  so  from  the  time  Lysander  made  himself 
master  of  Athens,  until  the  first  war  undertaken  by  the  Athe- 
nians, after  their  re-establishment  by  Conon,  to  withdraw  them- 
selves and  the  rest  of  the  Greeks  from  the  tyranny  of  Sparta, 
which  was  now  grown  more  insolent  than  ever.  At  length, 
Thebes  disputed  the  supremacy  ; and  by  the  exalted  merit  of  a 
single  man,  saw  itself  at  the  head  of  all  Greece.  But  that 
glorious  condition  was  of  no  long  continuance,  and  the  death  of 
Epaminondas,  as  we  have  already  observed,  plunged  it  again 
into  the  obscurity  in  which  he  found  it. 

Demosthenes  remarks,  in  the  passage  above  cited,  that  the 
pre-eminence  granted  voluntarily  either  to  Sparta  or  Athens, 
was  a pr.e-eminence  of  honour,  not  of  dominion,  and  that  the 
intent  of  Greece  was  to  preserve  a kind  of  equality  and  inde- 
pendence in  the  other  cities.  Hence,  says  he,  when  the  go- 
verning city  attempted  to  ascribe  to  itself  what  did  not  belong 
k Demost.  Philip,  iii.  p.  89. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


447 


to  it,  and  aimed  at  any  innovations,  contrary  to  the  rules  of 
justice,  in  established  customs,  all  the  Greeks  thought  them- 
selves obliged  to  have  recourse  to  arms,  and  without  any  ground 
of  personal  discontent,  to  espouse  with  ardour  the  cause  of  the 
injured. 

I shall  add  here  another  very  judicious  reflection  from  Poly- 
bius.1 He  attributes  the  wise  conduct  of  the  Athenians,  in  the 
times  I have  spoken  of,  to  the  ability  of  their  generals,  who 
were  then  at  the  head  of  their  affairs ; and  he  makes  use  of 
a comparison,  which  explains,  not  unhappily,  the  character  of 
that  people.  A vessel,  without  a master,  says  he,  is  exposed 
to  great  dangers,  when  every  one  insists  upon  its  being  steered 
according  to  his  opinion,  and  will  not  suffer  others  to  guide 
him.  If  then  a rude  storm  attacks  it,  the  common  danger  con- 
ciliates and  unites  them ; they  abandon  themselves  to  the  pilot’s 
skill,  and  all  the  rowers  doing  their  duty,  the  ship  is  saved,  and 
in  a state  of  security.  But  if,  when  the  tempest  ceases,  and 
the  weather  grows  calm  again,  the  discord  of  the  mariners 
revives ; if  they  will  hearken  no  longer  to  the  pilot,  and  some  are 
for  continuing  their  voyage,  whilst  others  resolve  to  stop  in  the 
midst  of  the  course ; if  on  one  side  they  loose  their  sails,  and 
furl  them  on  the  other;  it  often  happens  that,  after  having 
escaped  the  most  violent  storms,  they  are  shipwrecked  even 
in  port.  This,  says  Polybius,  is  a natural  image  of  the  Athe- 
nian republic.  As  long  as  it  suffered  itself  to  be  guided 
by  the  wise  counsels  of  an  Aristides,  a Themistocles,  a Pe- 
ricles, it  came  off  victorious  from  the  greatest  dangers.  But 
prosperity  blinded  and  ruined  it ; following  no  longer  any  thing 
but  its  own  caprice,  and  being  become  too  insolent  to  be  advised 
or  governed,  it  plunged  itself  into  the  greatest  misfortunes. 

SECT.  VIII. 

Death  of  Evagoras  king  of  Salamis.  Nicocles  his  son  succeeds  him. 

Admirable  character  of  that  prince. 

The  third  year  of  the  101st  Olympiad,”1  and 
Ant.  J.  (?3*74.  soon  a^ter  fhe  Thebans  had  destroyed  Platseae 
and  Thespiae,  as  has  been  observed  before,  Eva- 
goras, king  of  Salamis  in  the  isle  of  Cyprus,  of  whom  much 
has  been  said  in  the  preceding  volume,  was  assassinated  by  ope 
of  his  eunuchs.  His  son  Nicocles  succeeded  him.  He  had  a 
fine  model  before  him  in  the  person  of  his  father;  and  he  seemed 
to  consider  it  as  his  duty  to  make  it  his  study,  and  to  tread  in 
his  steps.”  When  he  took  possession  of  the  throne,  he  found 
the  public  treasury  entirely  exhausted,  by  the  great  expenses 
which  his  father  had  been  obliged  to  incur  in  the  long  war  which 
he  had  to  maintain  with  the  king  of  Persia.  He  knew  that 
1 Polyb.  1.  vii.  p.  488.  m Diod.  1.  xv.  p.  363.  n Isocrat.  in  Nicoc.  p.  64. 


448 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


that  the  generality  of  princes,  upon  like  occasions,  think  every 
means  just  for  the  re-establishment  of  their  affairs  ; but  for  his 
part,  he  acted  upon  different  principles.  In  his  reign  there 
was  no  talk  of  banishment,  taxes,  and  confiscation  of  estates. 
The  public  felicity  was  his  sole  object,  and  justice  his  favourite 
virtue.  He  discharged  the  debts  of  the  state  gradually ; not 
by  crushing  the  people  with  excessive  imposts,  but  by  retrench- 
ing all  unnecessary  expenses,  and  by  using  a wise  economy  in 
the  administration  of  his  revenues.  I am  sure,  said  he,  that 
no  citizen  can  complain  that  J have  done  him  the  least  wrong  : 
and  I have  the  satisfaction  to  know  that  1 have  enriched 
many  with  an  unsparing  hand.0  He  believed  this  kind  of 
vanity,  if  it  be  vanity,  might  be  permitted  in  a prince,  and  that 
it  was  glorious  for  him  to  have  it  in  his  power  to  throw  out 
such  a defiance  to  his  subjects. 

He  piqued  himself  also  in  particular  upon  another  virtue,? 
which  is  the  more  worthy  of  admiration  in  princes,  as  it  is  very 
uncommon  among  them ; I mean  temperance.  It  is  most 
amiable,  but  very  difficult,  in  an  age  and  a rank  of  life  to  which 
every  thing  seems  to  be  lawful,  and  wherein  pleasure,  armed 
with  all  her  arts  and  attractions,  is  continually  lying  in  ambush 
for  a young  prince,  and  anticipating  his  desires,  to  make  a long 
resistance  against  the  violence  and  insinuation  of  her  assaults. 
Nicocles  gloried  in  having  never  known  any  woman  besides  his 
wife  during  his  reign,  and  was  amazed  that  all  other  contracts 
should  be  treated  with  due  regard  in  civil  society,  whilst  that 
of  marriage,  the  most  sacred  and  inviolable  of  obligations,  was 
broken  through  with  impunity  ; and  that  men  should  not  blush 
to  commit  an  infidelity  in  respect  to  their  wives,  of  which,  should 
their  wives  be  guilty,  it  would  throw  them  into  the  utmost 
anguish  and  despair. 

What  I have  said  of  the  justice  and  temperance  of  Nicocles, 
Isocrates,  puts  into  that  prince’s  own  mouth  ; and  it  is  not  pro- 
bable that  he  would  have  made  him  speak  in  such  a manner,  if 
his  conduct  had  not  agreed  with  such  sentiments.  It  is  in  a 
discourse,  supposed  to  be  addressed  by  that  king  to  his  people, 
wherein  he  describes  to  them  the  duties  of  subjects  to  their 
princes  : love,  respect,  obedience,  fidelity,  and  unbounded  de- 
votion to  their  service  ; and  to  engage  them  more  effectually  to 
the  discharge  of  those  duties,  he  does  not  disdain  to  give  them 
an  account  of  his  own  conduct  and  sentiments. 

In  another  discourse11  which  precedes  this,  Isocrates  lays 
before  Nicocles  all  the  duties  of  the  sovereignty,  and  makes 
excellent  reflections  upon  that  subject,  of  which  I can  repeat 
here  only  a very  small  part.  He  begins  by  telling  him  that  the 
virtue  of  private  persons  is  much  better  supported  than  his 

0 Isocrat.  in  Nicoc.  p.  65,  06.  p Ibid.  p.  64.  Isocrat.  ad  Nicoc. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS.  440 

own,  by  the  mediocrity  of  their  condition,  by  the  employment 
and  cares  inseparable  from  it,  by  the  misfortunes  to  which  they 
are  frequently  exposed,  by  their  distance  from  pleasures  and 
luxury,  and  particularly  by  the  liberty  which  their  friends  and 
relations  have  of  giving  them  advice ; whereas,  the  generality 
of  princes  have  none  of  these  advantages.  He  adds,  that  a 
king,  who  would  make  himself  capable  of  governing  well, 
ought  to  avoid  an  idle  and  inactive  life,  should  set  apart  a fixed 
time  for  business  and  the  public  affairs,  should  form  his  council 
of  the  most  able  and  experienced  persons  in  his  kingdom, 
should  endeavour  to  make  himself  as  much  superior  to  others 
by  his  merit  and  wisdom  as  he  is  by  his  dignity,  and  especially 
to  acquire  the  love  of  his  subjects,  and  for  that  purpose  love 
them  sincerely,  and  look  upon  himself  as  their  common  father. 
Persist , said  he,  in  the  religion  you  have  received  from  your 
forefathers,  but  be  assured  that  the  most  grateful  adoration 
and  sacrifice  that  you  can  offer  to  the  Divinity,  is  that  of  the 
heart,  in  rendering  yourself  good  and  just.  Show,  upon  all 
occasions,  so  high  a regard  for  truth,  that  a single  word  from 
you  inay  be  more  confided  in  than  the  oath  of  others.  Be  a 
warrior,  by  your  ability  in  military  affairs,  and  by  such  a 
warlike  provision  as  may  intimidate  your  enemies  ; but  let 
your  inclinations  be  pacific,  and  be  rigidly  exact  in  never  pre- 
tending to,  or  undertaking  any  thing  unjustly.  The  only  cer- 
tain proof  that  you  have  reigned  well,  will  be  the  power  of 
bearing  this  testimony  to  yourself ; that  your  people  are  be- 
come both  more  happy  and  more  wise  under  your  government. 

What  seems  to  me  most  remarkable  in  this  discourse,  is,  that 
the  advice  which  Isocrates  gives  the  king  is  neither  attended 
with  praises,  nor  with  those  studied  reservations  and  artificial 
turns,  without  which  fearful  and  modest  truth  dares  not  venture 
to  approach  the  throne.  This  is  most  worthy  of  applause,  and 
it  is  still  more  to  the  credit  of  the  prince  than  the  writer. 
Nicocles,  far  from  being  offended  at  these  counsels,  received 
them  with  joy ; and  to  express  his  gratitude  to  Isocrates,  made 
him  a present  of  twenty  talents,  that  is  to  say,  20,000  crowns/ 

SECT.  IX. 

Artaxerxes  Mnemon  undertakes  the  reduction  of  Egypt.  Iphicrates  the 
Athenian  is  appointed  general  of  the  Athenian  troops.  The  enterprise  mis- 
carries by  the  ill  conduct  of  Phamabazus  the  Persian  general. 

Artaxerxes, s after  having  given  his  people  an 
Ant.  J.  c.  377.  interval  of  relaxation  for  several  years,  had 
formed  the  design  of  reducing  Egypt,  which  had 
shaken  off  the  Persian  yoke  long  before,  and  made  great  pre- 

r Plut.  in  vit.  Isoc.  p.  836.  * Diod.  1.  xv.  p.  328.  347- 

VOL.  III.  2 G 


450 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


parations  for  war  for  that  purpose.  Achoris,  who  then  reigned 
in  Egypt,  and  had  given  Evagoras  powerful  aid  against  the 
Persians,  foreseeing  the  storm,  raised  abundance  of  troops  of 
his  own  subjects,  and  took  into  his  pay  a great  body  of  Greeks 
and  other  auxiliary  soldiers,  of  whom  Chabrias  the  Athenian 
had  the  command.1  He  had  accepted  that  office  of  himself, 
and  without  the  authority  of  the  republic. 

Pharnabazus,  having  been  charged  with  this  war,  sent  to 
Athens  to  complain  that  Chabrias  had  engaged  himself  to  serve 
against  his  master,  and  threatened  the  republic  with  the  king’s 
resentment,  if  he  was  not  immediately  recalled.  He  demand- 
ed, at  the  same  time,  Iphicrates,  another  Athenian,  who  was 
looked  upon  as  one  of  the  most  excellent  captains  of  his  time, 
to  give  him  the  command  of  the  body  of  Greek  troops  in  the 
service  of  his  master.  The  Athenians,  who  had  a great  in- 
terest in  the  continuance  of  the  king’s  friendship,  recalled  Cha- 
brias, and  ordered  him  upon  pain  of  death  to  repair  to  Athens 
by  a certain  day.  Iphicrates  was  sent  to  the  Persian  army. 

The  preparations  of  the  Persians  went  on  so  slowly,  that  two 
whole  years  elapsed  before  they  entered  upon  action.  Acho- 
ris, u king  of  Egypt,  died  in  that  time,  and  was  succeeded  by 
Psammuthis,  who  reigned  but  a year.  Nepheritus  was  the  next, 
and  four  months  after  Nectanebis,  who  reigned  ten  or  twelve 
years. 

Artaxerxes, x to  draw  some  troops  out  of 
Ant  ’j'* C^37*4  Greece,  sent  ambassadors  thither,  to  declare  to 
the  several  states,  that  the  king’s  intent  was  they 
should  all  live  in  peace  with  each  other,  conformably  to  the 
treaty  of  Antalcidas,  that  all  garrisons  should  be  withdrawn, 
and  all  the  cities  suffered  to  enjoy  their  liberty  under  their 
respective  laws.  All  Greece  received  his  declaration  with 
pleasure,  except  the  Thebans,  who  refused  to  conform  to  it. 

At  length, y every  thing  being  in  readiness  for  the  invasion  of 
Egypt,  a camp  was  formed  at  Aco,  since  called  Ptolemais,  in 
Palestine,  the  place  appointed  for  the  general  rendezvous.  In  a 
review  there,  the  army  was  found  to  consist  of  200,000  Persians, 
under  the  command  of  Pharnabazus,  and  20,000  Greeks  under 
Iphicrates.  The  naval  forces  were  in  proportion  to  those  of 
the  land  ; their  fleet  consisted  of  300  galleys,  besides  200  ves- 
sels of  thirty  oars,  and  a prodigious  number  of  barks  to  trans- 
port the  necessary  provisions  for  the  fleet  and  army. 

The  army  and  fleet  began  to  move  at  the  same  time  ; and 
that  they  might  act  in  concert,  they  separated  from  each  other 
as  little  as  possible.  The  war  was  to  open  with  the  siege  of 
Pelusium  ; but  so  much  time  had  been  given  the  Egyptians, 

1 Cor.  Nep.  in  Chab.  et  in  Iphic.  u Euseb.  in  Chron. 

x Diod.  1.  xv.  p.  355.  >’  Diod.  1.  xv.  p.  358,  359. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


451 


that  Nectanebis  had  rendered  the  approach  to  it  impracticable, 
both  by  sea  and  land.  The  fleet,  therefore,  instead  of  making  a 
descent,  as  had  been  projected,  sailed  forwards,  and  entered  the 
mouth  of  the  Nile  called  the  Mendesian.  The  Nile  at  that 
time  emptied  itself  into  the  sea  by  seven  different  channels,  of 
which  only  two  remain  at  this  day  ;z  and  attach  of  these  mouths 
there  was  a fort  with  a strong  garrison  to  defend  the  entrance. 
The  Mendesian  not  being  so  well  fortified  as  that  of  Pelusium, 
where  the  enemy  was  expected  to  land,  the  descent  was  made 
with  no  great  difficulty.  The  fort  was  carried  sword  in  hand, 
and  no  quarter  given  to  those  who  were  found  in  it. 

After  this  signal!  action,  Iphicrates  thought  it  advisable  to 
sail  up  the  Nile  without  loss  of  time,  and  to  attack  Memphis, 
the  capital  of  Egypt.  If  that  opinion  had  been  followed  before 
the  Egyptians  had  had  time  to  recover  the  panic  into  which 
so  formidable  an  invasion,  and  the  blow  already  received,  had 
thrown  them,  they  would  have  found  the  capital  without  any 
defence,  it  would  inevitably  have  fallen  into  their  hands,  and 
all  Egypt  been  reconquered.  But  the  main  body  of  the  army 
not  being  arrived,  Pharnabazus  believed  it  necessary  to  wait 
its  coming  up,  and  would  undertake  nothing,  till  he  had  reas- 
sembled all  his  troops ; under  pretext,  that  they  would  then  be 
invincible,  and  that  there  would  be  no  obstacle  capable  of 
withstanding  them. 

Iphicrates,  who  knew  that,  in  affairs  of  war  especially,  there 
are  certain  favourable  and  decisive  moments  which  it  is  absolute- 
ly proper  to  seize,  judged  quite  differently;  and  in  despair  to 
see  an  opportunity  suffered  to  escape,  that  might  never  be  re- 
trieved, he  earnestly  demanded  permission  to  go  at  least  with 
the  20,000  men  under  his  command.  Pharnabazus  refused  to 
comply  with  that  demand,  out  of  abject  jealousy ; apprehend- 
ing, that  if  the  enterprise  succeeded,  the  whole  glory  of  the 
war  should  redound  to  Iphicrates.  This  delay  gave  the  Egyp- 
tians time  to  look  about  them.  They  drew  all  their  troops  toge- 
ther into  a body,  put  a good  garrison  into  Memphis,  and  with 
the  rest  of  their  army  kept  the  field,  and  harassed  the  Persians 
in  such  a manner,  that  they  prevented  their  advancing  far- 
ther into  their  country.  After  which  came  on  the  inundation 
of  the  Nile,  which  laying  all  Egypt  under  water,  the  Per- 
sians were  obliged  to  return  into  Phoenicia,  after  having  lost  a 
considerable  part  of  their  troops  to  no  purpose. 

Thus  this  expedition,  which  had  cost  immense  sums,  and  for 
which  the  preparation  alone  had  given  so  much  difficulty  for  up- 
wards of  two  years,  entirely  miscarried,  and  produced  no  other 
effect,  than  an  irreconcileable  enmity  between  the  two  generals 
who  had  the  command  of  it.  Pharnabazus,  to  excuse  himself, 
* Damietta  and  Rosetta. 

2 g 2 


452 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


accused  Ipliicrates  of  having  prevented  its  success  ; and  Iphi- 
crates,  with  much  more  reason,  laid  all  the  fault  upon  Pharna- 
bazus.  But  well-assured  that  that  nobleman  would  be  believed 
at  his  court  in  preference  to  him,  and  remembering  what  had 
happened  to  Conon,  he  determined,  in  order  to  avoid  the  fate  of 
that  illustrious  Athenian,  to  retire  secretly  to  Athens  in  a small 
vessel  which  he  hired.  Pharnabazus  caused  him  to  be  accused 
there,  of  having  rendered  the  expedition  against  Egypt  abortive. 
The  people  of  Athens  made  answer,  that  if  he  could  be  convict- 
ed of  that  crime,  he  should  be  punished  as  he  deserved.  / But 
his  innocence  was  too  well  known  at  Athens  to  give  him  any 
disquiet  upon  that  account.  It  does  not  appear  that  he  was 
ever  called  in  question  about  it ; and  some  time  after,  the  Athe- 
nians declared  him  sole  admiral  of  their  fleet. 

Most  of  the  projects  of  the  Persian  court  generally  miscarried 
by  their  slowness  in  putting  them  in  execution.3  Their  gene- 
rals’ hands  were  tied  up,  and  nothing  was  left  to  their  discretion. 
They  had  a plan  marked  out  for  them  in  their  instructions,  from 
which  they  did  not  dare  to  depart.  If  any  accident  happened 
that  had  not  been  foreseen  and  provided  for,  they  must  wait  for 
new  orders  from  court,  and  before  they  arrived,  the  opportunity 
was  entirely  lost.  Iphicrates,  having  observed  that  Pharnaba- 
zus took  his  resolutions  with  all  the  presence  of  mind  and  pene- 
tration that  could  be  desired  in  an  accomplished  general,15  and 
that  nevertheless  they  were  not  carried  into  execution,  asked 
him  one  day,  how  it  happened  that  he  was  so  quick  in  his  views 
and  so  slow  in  his  actions  ? It  is,  replied  Pharnabazus,  because 
my  views  depend  only  upon  myself,  but  their  execution  upon 
my  master. 


SECT.  X. 

The  Lacedaemonians  send  Agesilaus  to  the  aid  of  Tachos,  who  had  revolted 
from  the  Persians.  The  king  of  Sparta’s  actions  in  Egypt.  His  death. 
The  greatest  part  of  the  provinces  revolt  against  Artaxerxes. 

After  the  battle  of  Mantinea,c  both  parties,  equally  weary  of 
the  war,  had  entered  into  a general  peace  with  all  the  other 
states  of  Greece,  upon  the  king  of  Persia’s  plan,  by  which  the 
enjoyment  of  its  laws  and  liberties  was  secured  to  each  city  ; 
and  the  Messenians  were  included  in  it,  notwithstanding  all  the 
opposition  and  intrigues  of  the  Lacedaemonians  to  prevent  it. 
Their  rage  upon  this  occasion  separated  them  from  the  other 
Greeks.  They  were  the  only  people  who  resolved  to  continue 
the  war,  from  the  hope  of  recovering  the  whole  country  of 
Messenia  in  a short  time.  That  resolution,  of  which  Agesilaus 

a Diod.  1.  xv.  p.  358.  b Diod.  1.  xv.  p.  357- 

c Plut.  in  Agesil.  p.  616 — 618.  Diod.  1.  xv.  p.  397 — 401. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


453 


was  the  author,  occasioned  him  to  be  justly  regarded  as  a vio- 
lent and  obstinate  man,  insatiable  of  glory  and  command,  who 
was  not  afraid  of  involving  the  republic  again  in  inevitable  mis- 
fortunes, from  the  necessity  to  which  the  want  of  money  ex- 
posed them  of  borrowing  great  sums,  and  of  levying  heavy 
imposts,  instead  of  taking  advantage  of  the  favourable  oppor- 
tunity that  now  offered  to  conclude  a peace,  and  put  an  end  to 
all  their  evils. 

Whilst  matters  were  thus  passing  in  Greece/ 
Ant  j!  C.  363.  Tachos,  who  had  ascended  the  throne  of  Egypt, 
drew  together  as  many  troops  as  he  could  to  de- 
fend himself  against  the  king  of  Persia,  who  meditated  a new 
invasion  of  Egypt,  notwithstanding  the  ill  success  of  his  past 
endeavours  to  reduce  that  kingdom. 

For  this  purpose  Tachos  sent  into  Greece,  and' obtained  a 
body  of  troops  from  the  Lacedaemonians,  with  Agesilaus  to 
command  them,  whom  he  promised  to  make  generalissimo  of 
his  army.  The  Lacedaemonians  were  exasperated  against 
Artaxerxes,  from  his  having  forced  them  to  include  the  Mes- 
senians  in  the  late  peace,  and  were  rejoiced  to  have  this  oppor- 
tunity of  expressing  their  resentment.  Chabrias,  the  Athenian, 
went  also  into  the  service  of  Tachos,  but  of  his  own  head,  and 
without  the  republic’s  participation. 

This  commission  did  Agesilaus  no  honour.  It  was  thought 
below  the  dignity  of  a king  of  Sparta  and  a great  captain,  who 
had  made  his  name  glorious  throughout  the  world,  and  was 
then  more  than  eighty  years  old,  to  receive  the  pay  of  an 
Egyptian,  and  to  serve  a Barbarian  who  had  revolted  against 
his  master. 

As  soon  as  he  landed  in  Egypt,  the  king’s  principal  generals 
and  the  great  officers  of  his  house  came  to  his  ship,  to  re- 
ceive and  make  their  court  to  him.  The  rest  of  the  Egyptians 
were  as  solicitous  to  see  him,  from  the  great  expectations  which 
the  name  and  renown  of  Agesilaus  had  excited  in  them,  and 
came  in  multitudes  to  the  shore  for  that  purpose.  But  when, 
instead  of  a great  and  magnificent  prince,  according  to  the 
idea  which  his  exploits  had  led  them  to  entertain  of  him,  they 
saw  nothing  splendid  or  majestic  either  in  his  person  or  equi- 
page, and  saw  only  an  old  man  of  a mean  aspect  and  small  stature, 
without  any  striking  appearance,  and  dressed  in  a sorry  robe  of 
a very  coarse  stuff,  they  were  seized  with  an  immoderate  dis- 
position to  laugh,  and  applied  the  fable  of  the  mountain  in 
labour  to  him. 

When  he  met  king  Tachos,  and  had  joined  his  troops  with 
those  of  Egypt,  he  was  very  much  surprised  at  finding  that 
he  was  not  appointed  general  of  the  whole  army,  as  he  ex- 
d Xenoph.  de  reg.  Agesil.  p.  663.  Cor.  Nep.  in  Agesil.  c.  viii. 


454 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


pected,  but  only  of  the  foreign  troops ; that  Charbrias  was 
made  general  of  the  sea-forces,  and  that  Tachos  retained  the 
command-in-chief  to  himself.  This  was  not  the  only  morti- 
fication he  had  to  experience. 

Tachos  came  to  a resolution  to  march  into  Phoenicia,  think- 
ing it  more  advisable  to  make  that  country  the  seat  of  war, 
than  to  await  the  enemy  in  Egypt.  Agesilaus,  who  knew  better, 
represented  to  him  in  vain,  that  his  affairs  were  not  sufficiently 
established  to  admit  his  removing  out  of  his  dominions ; that 
he  would  do  much  better  to  remain  in  them,  and  content  him- 
self with  acting  by  his  generals  in  the  enemy’s  country.  Ta- 
chos despised  this  wise  counsel,  and  expressed  no  less  disregard 
for  him  on  all  other  occasions.  Agesilaus  was  so  much  in- 
censed at  such  conduct,  that  he  joined  the  Egyptians,  who 
had  taken  arms  against  him  during  his  absence,  and  had  placed 
Nectanebus  his  cousin  upon  the  throne.e  Agesilaus,  abandoning 
the  king,  to  whose  aid  he  had  been  sent,  and  joining  the  rebel 
who  had  dethroned  him,  alleged  in  justification  of  this  that  he  was 
sent  to  the  assistance  of  the  Egyptians ; and  that  they  having- 
taken  up  arms  against  Tachos,  he  was  not  at  liberty  to  serve 
against  them  without  new  orders  from  Sparta.  He  despatched 
expresses  thither  ; and  the  instructions  he  received  were,  to  act 
as  he  should  judge  most  ad  vantageous  for  his  country.  He  im- 
mediately declared  for  Xectanebus.  Tachos,  obliged  to  quit 
Egypt,  retired  to  Sidon,  from  whence  he  went  to  the  court  of 
Persia.  Artaxerxes  not  only  forgave  him  his  fault,  but  even 
gave  him  the  command  of  his  troops  against  the  rebels. 

Agesilaus  covered  so  criminal  a conduct  with  the  veil  of 
the  public  utility.  But,  says  Plutarch,  let  that  delusive  blind 
be  removed,  the  most  just  and  only  true  name  which  can  be 
given  the  action,  is  that  of  perfidy  and  treason.  It  is  true 
that  the  Lacedaemonians,  making  the  glorious  and  the  good 
consist  principally  in  the  service  of  their  country,  which  they  idol- 
ized, knew  no  other  justice  than  what  tended  to  the  augmen- 
tation of  the  grandeur  of  Sparta,  and  the  extending  of  its 
dominions.  I am  surprised  so  judicious  an  author  as  Xeno- 
phon should  endeavour  to  palliate  a conduct  of  this  kind,  by 
saying  only,  that  Agesilaus  attached  himself  to  that  of  the  two 
kings  who  seemed  the  best  affected  to  Greece. 

At  the  same  time,  a third  prince,  of  the  city  of  Mendes,  set 
up  for  himself,  to  dispute  the  crown  with  Nectanebus.  This 
new  competitor  had  an  army  of  100,000  men  to  support  his 
pretensions.  Agesilaus  gave  his  advice  to  attack  them  before 
they  were  exercised  and  disciplined.  Had  that  counsel 
been  followed,  it  would  have  been  easy  to  have  defeated  a 
body  of  people  raised  in  haste,  and  without  any  experience  in 
e Diodorus  calls  him  his  son  ; Plutarch,  his  cousin. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


455 


war.  Bat  Nectanebus  imagined  that  Agesilaus  only  gave  him 
this  advice  to  betray  him  afterwards,  as  he  had  done  Tachos. 
He  therefore  gave  his  enemy  time  to  discipline  his  troops,  who 
soon  after  reduced  him  to  retire  into  a city,  fortified  with  good 
walls  and  of  very  great  extent.  Agesilaus  was  obliged  to  fol- 
low him  thither  ; where  the  Mendesian  prince  besieged  them. 
Nectanebus  would  then  have  attacked  the  enemy  before  his 
works  (which  were  begun  in  order  to  surround  the  city)  were 
advanced,  and  pressed  Agesilaus  to  that  purpose ; but  he  re- 
fused to  comply  at  first,  which  extremely  augmented  the  sus- 
picions conceived  of  him.  At  length,  when  he  saw  the  work 
in  a sufficient  forwardness,  and  that  there  remained  only  as 
much  ground  between  the  two  ends  of  the  line  as  the  troops 
within  the  city  might  occupy,  drawn  up  in  battle,  he  told  Nec- 
tanebus that  it  was  time  to  attack  the  enemy,  that  their  own 
lines  would  prevent  their  surrounding  him,  and  that  the  inter- 
val between  them  was  exactly  the  space  he  wanted,  for  rang- 
ing his  troops  in  such  a manner  as  that  they  might  all  act  toge- 
ther effectually.  The  attack  was  executed  according  to  Agesi- 
laus’s  plan ; the  besiegers  were  beaten,  and  from  thenceforth 
Agesilaus  conducted  all  the  operations  of  the  war  with  so 
much  success,  that  the  prince  their  enemy  was  always  over- 
come, and  at  last  taken  prisoner. 

The  following  winter,  after  having  firmly  es- 
/ntM.3643.  tablished  Nectanebus,  he  embarked  to  return  to 
Lacedaemon,  and  was  driven  by  contrary  winds 
upon  the  coasts  of  Africa,  into  a place  called  the  port  of  Mene- 
laus,  where  he  fell  sick  and  died,  at  the  age  of  fourscore  and 
four  years.  He  had  reigned  forty-one  of  them  at  Sparta;  and 
of  those  forty-one  he  had  passed  thirty  with  the  reputation  of 
the  greatest  and  most  powerful  of  all  the  Greeks,  and  had 
been  looked  upon  as  the  leader  and  king  of  almost  all  Greece, 
till  the  battle  of  Leuctra.  His  latter  years  did  not  entirely 
support  the  reputation  he  had  acquired  ; and  Xenophon,  in 
his  eulogium  of  this  prince,  wherein  he  gives  him  the  preference 
to  all  other  captains,  has  been  found  to  exaggerate  his  virtues, 
and  extenuate  his  faults  too  much. 

The  body  of  Agesilaus  was  carried  to  Sparta.  Those  who 
were  about  him  not  having  honey,  with  which  it  was  the  Spar- 
tan custom  to  cover  the  bodies  they  wished  to  embalm,  made 
use  of  wax  in  its  stead.  His  son  Archidamus  succeeded  to  the 
throne,  which  continued  in  his  house  down  to  Agis,  who  was 
the  fifth  king  of  the  line  of  Agesilaus. 

Towards  the  end  of  the  Egyptian  war,  the  greatest  part  of 
the  provinces  in  subjection  to  Persia  revolted. 

Artaxerxes  Mnemon  had  been  the  involuntary  occasion  of 
this  defection.  That  prince,  of  himself,  was  good,  equitable, 


456 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


and  benevolent.  He  loved  his  people  and  was  beloved  by  them. 
He  bad  abundance  of  mildness  and  sweetness  of  temper  in  his 
character,  but  that  easiness  degenerated  into  sloth  and  luxury, 
and  particularly  in  the  latter  years  of  his  life,  in  which  he  dis- 
covered a dislike  for  all  business  and  application,  from  whence 
the  good  qualities  which  he  otherwise  possessed,  as  well  as  his 
beneficent  intentions,  became  useless  and  without  effect.  The 
satraps  and  governors  of  provinces,  abusing  his  favour  and  the 
infirmities  of  his  great  age,  oppressed  the  people,  treated  them 
with  insolence  and  cruelty,  loaded  them  with  taxes,  and  did 
every  thing  in  their  power  to  render  the  Persian  yoke  insup- 
portable. 

The  discontent  became  general,  and  broke  out,  after  long 
suffering,  almost  at  the  same  time  on  all  sides.  Asia  Minor, 
Syria,  Phoenicia,  and  many  other  provinces,  declared  themselves 
openly,  and  took  up  arms.  The  principal  leaders  of  the  con- 
spiracy were,  Ariobarzanes  satrap  of  Phrygia,  Mausolus  king 
of  Caria,  Orontes  governor  of  Mysia,  and  Autophradates  go- 
vernor of  Lydia.  Datames,  of  whom  mention  has  been  made 
before,  and  who  commanded  in  Cappadocia,  was  also  en- 
gaged in  it.  By  this  means,  half  the  revenues  of  the  crown 
were  on  a sudden  diverted  into  different  channels,  and  the  re- 
mainder would  not  have  been  sufficient  for  the  expenses  of  a 
war  against  the  revolters,  had  they  acted  in  concert.  But 
their  union  was  of  no  long  continuance ; and  those  who  had 
been  the  first  and  most  zealous  in  shaking  off  the  yoke,  were 
also  the  foremost  in  resuming  it,  and  in  betraying  the  inter- 
ests of  the  others,  to  make  their  peace  with  the  king. 

The  provinces  of  Asia  Minor,  on  withdrawing  from  their 
obedience,  had  entered  into  a confederacy  for  their  mutual 
defence,  and  had  chosen  Orontes,  governor  of  Mysia,  for  their 
general.  They  had  also  resolved  to  add  20,000  foreign  troops 
to  those  of  the  country,  and  had  charged  the  same  Orontes 
with  the  care  of  raising  them.  But  when  he  had  got  the  money 
for  that  service  into  his  hands,  w-ith  the  addition  of  a year’s  pay, 
he  kept  it  for  himself,  and  delivered  to  the  king  the  persons 
who  had  brought  it  from  the  revolted  provinces. 

Reomithras,  another  of  the  chiefs  of  Asia  Minor,  being  sent 
into  Egypt f to  draw  succours  from  that  kingdom,  committed  a 
treachery  of  a like  nature.  Having  brought  from  that  country 
500  talents  and  fifty  ships  of  war,  he  assembled  the  principal 
revolters  at  Leucas,  a city  of  Asia  Minor,  under  pretence  of 
giving  them  an  account  of  his  negociation,  seized  them  all, 
delivered  them  to  the  king  to  make  his  peace,  and  kept  the 
money  he  had  received  in  Egypt  for  the  confederacy.  Thus 

f Diodorus  says  he  was  sent  to  Tachos,  but  it  is  more  likely  that  it  was  to 
Nectanebus. 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


457 


this  formidable  revolt,  which  had  brought  the  Persian  empire 
to  the  very  brink  of  ruin,  dissolved  of  itself,  or,  to  speak  more 
properly,  was  suspended  for  some  time. 

SECT.  XI. 

Troubles  at  the  court  of  Artaxerxes  concerning  his  successor. 

Death  of  that  prince. 

The  end  of  Artaxerxes’s  reign  abounded  with  cabals.^  The 
whole  court  were  divided  into  factions  in  favour  of  one  or  other 
of  his  sons,  who  pretended  to  the  succession.  He  had  150  by 
his  concubines,  who  were  in  number  360,  and  three  by  his  law- 
ful wife  Atossa ; Darius,  Ariaspes,  and  Ochus.  To  put  a stop 
to  these  intrigues,  he  declared  Darius,  the  eldest,  his  successor; 
and  to  remove  all  cause  of  disputing  that  prince’s  right  after 
his  death,  he  permitted  him  to  assume  from  thenceforth  the 
title  of  king,  and  to  wear  the  royal  tiara.h  But  the  young 
prince  was  for  having  something  more  real.  Besides  which, 
the  refusal  of  Artaxerxes  to  give  him  one  of  his  concubines, 
whom  he  had  demanded,  had  extremely  incensed  him,  and  he 
formed  a conspiracy  against  his  father’s  life,  wherein  he  engaged 
fifty  of  his  brothers. 

It  was  Tiribazus,  of  whom  mention  has  been  made  several 
times  in  the  preceding  volume,  who  contributed  the  most  to  his 
taking  so  unnatural  a resolution,  from  a like  subject  of  discon- 
tent against  the  king ; who  having  promised  to  give  him  first 
one  of  his  daughters  in  marriage,  and  then  another,  broke  his 
word  both  times,  and  married  them  himself.  Such  abominable 
incest  was  permitted  at  that  time  in  Persia,  the  religion  of  the 
nation  not  prohibiting  it. 

The  number  of  the  conspirators  was  already  very  great,  and 
the  day  fixed  for  the  execution,  when  a eunuch,  well  informed 
of  the  whole  plot,  discovered  it  to  the  king.  Upon  that  infor- 
mation, Artaxerxes  thought  it  would  be  highly  imprudent  to 
despise  so  great  a danger,  by  neglecting  a strict  inquiry  into  it ; 
but  that  it  would  be  much  more  so,  to  give  credit  to  it  without 
certain  and  unquestionable  proof.  He  assured  himself  of  it 
with  his  own  eyes.  The  conspirators  were  suffered  to  enter 
the  king’s  apartment,  and  then  seized.  Darius  and  all  his 
accomplices  were  punished  as  they  deserved. 

After  the  death  of  Darius,  the  cabals  began  again.  Three 
of  his  brothers  were  competitors ; Ariaspes,  Ochus,  and 
Arsames.  The  two  former  pretended  to  the  throne  in  right  of 

s Plut.  in  Artax.  p.  1024 — 1027-  Diod.  1.  xv.  p.  400.  Justin.  1.  x.  c.  1,  2. 
h This  tiara  was  a turban,  or  kind  of  head-dress,  with  the  plume  of  feathers 
standing  upright  upon  it.  The  seven  counsellors  had  also  plumes  of  feathers, 
but  these  they  wore  aslant,  and  before.  All  others  wore  them  aslant,  and 
behind. 


158 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


birth,  being  the  two  sons  of  the  queen.  The  third  had  the 
king’s  favour,  who  tenderly  loved  him,  though  only  the  son  of 
a concubine.  Ochus,  prompted  by  his  restless  ambition, 
studied  perpetually  the  means  to  rid  himself  of  both  his 
rivals.  As  he  was  equally  cunning  and  cruel,  he  employed  his 
craft  and  artifice  against  Ariaspes,  and  his  cruelty  against 
Arsames.  Knowing  the  former  to  be  extremely  simple  and 
credulous,  he  made  the  eunuchs  of  the  palace,  whom  he  had 
found  means  to  corrupt,  threaten  him  so  terribly  in  the  name  of 
the  king  his  father,  that  expecting  every  moment  to  be  treated 
as  Darius  had  been,  he  poisoned  himself  to  avoid  it.  After 
this,  there  remained  only  Arsames  to  give  him  umbrage,  be- 
cause his  father  and  all  the  world  considered  that  prince  as 
most  worthy  of  the  throne,  from  his  ability  and  other  excellent 
qualities.  Him  he  caused  to  be  assassinated  by  Harpates, 
son  of  Tiribazus. 

This  loss,  which  followed  close  upon  the  other,  and  the  ex- 
ceeding wickedness  with  which  both  were  attended,  gave  the 
old  king  a grief  that  proved  mortal ; nor  is  it  surprising,  that  at 
his  age  he  should  not  have  strength  enough  to  support  so  great 
an  affliction.  It  overpowered  him,  and  brought 

A Ilf  in  1 ' v 

Ant  J C.  361  to  ^ie  grave>  a*ter  a reign  of  forty-three 

years,  which  might  have  been  called  happy,  if  it 
had  not  been  interrupted  by  many  revolts.  That  of  his  succes- 
sor will  be  no  less  disturbed  with  them. 

SECT.  XII. 

Causes  of  the  frequent  insurrections  and  revolts  in  the  Persian  empire. 

I have  taken  care  in  relating  the  seditions  that  happened  in 
the  Persian  empire,  to  observe  from  time  to  time  the  abuses 
which  occasioned  them.  But  as  these  revolts  were  more  fre- 
quent than  ever  in  the  latter  years,  and  will  be  more  so,  espe- 
cially in  the  succeeding  reign,  I thought  it  would  be  proper  to 
unite  here,  under  one  point  of  view,  the  different  causes  of  these 
insurrections,  which  foretell  the  approaching  decline  of  the  Per- 
sian empire. 

I.  After  the  reign  of  Artaxerxes  Longimanus,  the  kings  of 
Persia  abandoned  themselves  more  and  more  to  the  charms  of 
voluptuousness  and  luxury,  and  the  delights  of  an  indolent  and 
inactive  life.  Shut  up  generally  in  their  palaces,  amongst  wo- 
men and  a crowd  of  flatterers,  they  contented  themselves  with 
enjoying,  in  soft,  effeminate  ease  and  idleness,  the  pleasure  of 
universal  command,  and  made  their  grandeur  consist  in  the 
splendid  glare  of  riches  and  an  expensive  magnificence. 

II.  They  were,  besides,  princes  of  no  great  talents  for  the 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


459 


conduct  of  affairs,  of  small  capacity  in  the  art  of  governing,  and 
void  of  taste  for  glory.  Not  having  a sufficient  extent  of  mind 
to  animate  all  the  parts  of  so  vast  an  empire,  nor  sufficient 
strength  to  support  the  weight  of  it,  they  transferred  to  their 
officers  the  cares  of  public  business,  the  fatigues  of  commanding- 
armies,  and  the  dangers  which  attend  the  execution  of  great 
enterprises  ; confining  their  ambition  to  bearing  alone  the  lofty 
title  of  the  Great  King,  and  the  King  of  kings. 

III.  The  great  offices  of  the  crown,  the  government  of  the 
provinces,  the  command  of  armies,  were  generally  bestowed 
upon  people  without  either  the  claim  of  service  or  merit.  It 
was  the  influence  of  the  favourites,  the  secret  intrigues  of  the 
court,  the  solicitations  of  the  women  of  the  palace,  which  de- 
termined the  choice  of  the  persons  who  were  to  fill  the  most 
important  posts  of  the  empire,  and  appropriated  the  rewards  due 
to  the  officers  who  had  done  the  state  real  service,  to  their  own 
creatures. 

IV.  These  courtiers  frequently,  through  a base  and  mean 
jealousy  of  the  merit  that  gave  them  umbrage  and  reproached 
their  small  abilities,  removed  their  rivals  from  public  employ- 
ments, and  rendered  their  talents  useless  to  the  state.  Some- 
times they  would  even  cause  their  fidelity  to  be  suspected  by 
false  informations,1  bring  them  to  trial  as  criminals  against  the 
state,k  and  force  the  king’s  most  faithful  servants,  in  order  to 
defend  themselves  against  their  calumniators,  to  seek  their  safety 
in  revolting,  and  in  turning  those  arms  against  their  prince,  which 
they  had  so  often  made  triumph  for  his  glory  and  the  service  of 
the  empire. 

V.  The  ministers,  to  hold  the  generals  in  dependance,  re- 
strained them  under  such  limited  orders  as  obliged  them  to  let 
slip  the  opportunities  of  conquering,  and  prevented  them,  by 
waiting  for  new  orders,  from  pushing  their  advantages.  They 
also  often  made  them  responsible  for  their  bad  success,  after 
having  let  them  want  every  thing  necessary  to  conduce  to  it. 

VI.  The  kings  of  Persia  had  extremely  degenerated  from 
the  frugality  of  Cyrus  and  the  ancient  Persians,  who  contented 
themselves  with  cresses  and  salads  for  their  food,  and  water  for 
their  drink.  The  whole  nobility  had  been  infected  with  the 
contagion  of  this  example.  In  retaining  the  single  meal  of 
their  ancestors,  they  made  it  last  during  the  greatest  part  of 
the  day,  and  prolonged  it  far  into  the  night  by  drinking  to  ex- 
cess ; and  far  from  being  ashamed  of  drunkenness,  they  made 
it  their  glory,  as  we  have  seen  in  the  younger  Cyrus. 

VII.  The  extreme  remoteness  of  the  provinces,  which  ex- 
tended from  the  Caspian  and  Euxine  to  the  Red  Sea  and 
Ethiopia,  and  from  the  rivers  Ganges  and  Indus  to  the  jEgean 

' JPharnabazus,  Tiribazus.  k Dataraes,  &c. 


460 


HISTORY  OF  THE 


Sea,  was  a great  obstacle  to  the  fidelity  and  affection  of  the 
people,  who  never  had  the  satisfaction  to  enjoy  the  presence  of 
their  masters  ; who  knew  them  only  by  the  weight  of  their  tax- 
ations, and  by  the  pride  and  avarice  of  their  satraps  or  gover- 
nors ; and  who,  in  transporting  themselves  to  the  court,  to  make 
their  demands  and  complaints  there,  could  not  hope  to  find 
access  to  princes,  who  believed  it  contributed  to  the  majesty  of 
their  persons  to  make  themselves  inaccessible  and  invisible. 

VIII.  The  multitude  of  the  provinces  in  subjection  to  Persia 
did  not  compose  a uniform  empire,  nor  the  regular  body  of  a 
state  whose  members  were  united  by  the  common  ties  of  inte- 
rest, manners,  language,  and  religion,  and  animated  with  the 
same  spirit  of  government,  under  the  guidance  of  the  same 
laws.  It  was  rather  a confused,  disjointed,  tumultuous,  and 
even  forced  assemblage  of  different  nations,  formerly  free  and 
independent ; of  whom  some,  who  were  torn  from  their  native 
countries  and  the  sepulchres  of  their  forefathers,  saw  themselves 
with  grief  transported  into  unknown  regions,  or  amongst  ene- 
mies, where  they  persevered  in  retaining  their  own  laws  and 
customs,  and  a form  of  government  peculiar  to  themselves. 
These  different  nations,  who  not  only  lived  without  any  common 
tie  or  relation  between  them,  but  with  a diversity  of  manners 
and  worship,  and  often  with  antipathy  of  characters  and  incli- 
nations, desired  nothing  so  ardently  as  their  liberty  and  re- 
establishment in  their  own  countries.  All  these  people  there- 
fore were  unconcerned  for  the  preservation  of  an  empire  which 
was  the  sole  obstacle  to  their  so  warm  and  just  desires,  and 
could  not  feel  any  affection  for  a government  that  treated  them 
always  as  strangers  and  subjected. nations,  and  never  gave  them 
any  share  in  its  authority  or  privileges. 

IX.  The  extent  of  the  empire,  and  its  remoteness  from  the 
court,  made  it  necessary  to  give  the  viceroys  of  the  frontier 
provinces  a very  great  authority  in  every  branch  of  government; 
to  raise  and  pay  armies  ; to  impose  tributes  ; to  adjudge  the 
quarrels  of  cities,  provinces,  and  vassal  kings  ; and  to  make 
treaties  with  the  neighbouring  states.  A power  so  extensive 
and  almost  independent,  in  which  they  continued  many  years 
without  being  changed,  and  without  colleagues  or  council  to 
deliberate  upon  the  affairs  of  their  provinces,  accustomed  them 
to  the  pleasure  of  commanding  absolutely,  and  of  reigning. 
In  consequence  of  which,  it  was  with  great  repugnance  they 
submitted  to  be  removed  from  their  governments,  and  often 
endeavoured  to  support  themselves  in  them  by  force  of  arms. 

X.  The  governors  of  provinces,  the  generals  of  armies,  and 
all  the  other  officers  and  ministers,  gloried  in  imitating,  in  their 
equipages,  tables,  furniture,  and  dress,  the  pomp  and  splendour 
of  the  court  in  which  they  had  been  educated.  To  support  so 


PERSIANS  AND  GRECIANS. 


461 

destructive  a pride,  and  to  supply  expenses  so  much  above  the 
fortunes  of  private  persons,  they  were  reduced  to  oppress  the 
subjects  under  their  jurisdiction  with  exorbitant  taxes,  flagrant 
extortions,  and  the  shameful  traffic  of  a public  venality,  that  set 
those  offices  to  sale  for  money,  which  ought  to  have  been  grant- 
ed only  to  merit.  All  that  vanity  lavished,  or  luxury  exhausted, 
was  made  good  by  mean  arts,  and  the  violent  rapaciousness  of 
an  insatiable  avarice. 

These  gross  irregularities,  and  abundance  of  others,  which 
remained  without  remedy,  and  which  were  daily  augmented  by 
impunity,  tired  the  people’s  patience,  and  occasioned  a general 
discontent  amongst  them,  the  usual  forerunner  of  the  ruin  of 
states.  Their  just  complaints,  long  time  despised,  were  fol- 
lowed by  an  open  rebellion  of  several  nations,  who  endeavoured 
to  do  themselves  that  justice  by  force,  which  was  refused  to 
their  remonstrances.  In  such  a conduct,  they  failed  in  the  sub- 
mission and  fidelity  which  subjects  owe  to  their  sovereigns  ; 
but  Paganism  did  not  carry  its  lights  so  far,  and  was  not  capable 
of  so  sublime  a perfection,  which  was  reserved  for  a religion 
that  teaches,  that  no  pretext,  no  injustice,  no  vexation,  can 
ever  authorize  the  rebellion  of  a people  against  their  prince. 


END  OF  VOL.  III. 


BUNGAY : 

STEREOTYPED  AND  PRINTED  BY  J.  R.  AND  C.  CHILDS.