■    & 

_  • 

r"     5 


I 

\ 

1 


dJ 


1* 


Jr^t^pf' 


r- 


v 


C.B 


;.* 


r 


THE 


HISTORY    OF  ENGLAND; 


FROM  .THE 


REVOLUTION  IN  1685 


TO 


THE  DEATH  OF  GEORGE 


DESIGNED   AS  A   CONTINUATION   OF   HUME. 


BY  T.  SMOLLETT,  M.  D. 


•  .!>»)•<•  t  »  '         °      9*M        J   ""    J       '* 


A  NEW  EDnft»tf,  ttK/FftB  ViGrttfJMES. 


»       n    »  »  »  o        J  k  '  •         *      «   «      • 


'»  '  -  •  •»  »  »  * 

»  ;  i  »  •  ^ 

»     j  • »  ■* 

•      » •  * » •* 


a  . 


;  f*  f  ■ — A — i*«- 


«         *  «  jo    « «         •     •      * .»  '      t  » 


VOL".!. 


LONDON : 

PRINTED  BY  J.  F.  DOVE,  ST.  JOHN'S  SQUARE; 

FOR    BAYNES  AND   SON;    R.  PRIESTLEY;    COWIE  AND  CO.;    J.  DOWD1NG ; 
T.    AND    J.  ALLMAN  ;  J.  HEARNE  ;  PRIESTLEY  AND  WEALE  ;  R.  BAYNES; 
ci  RICE  ;  H.  MOZLEY  ;  M.  KEENE;  T.  INGALTON ;  J.  OFFOR ;  I.  H.  BOHTE  ; 
W.  WRIGHT;  D.  A.  TALBOYS ;  SMITH  AND  ELDER  ;  W.  MASON;  M.  DOYLE;  . 
©J"  MACKIE ;  W.  H.  REID  ;  E.  WHEATLEY;  AND  J.  BRUMBY. 

1822.  -^     ' 


L 


ct 


•  • 

•  • 

•  • 

•  • 

•  • 

•• 

• 
• 

!  •    • 

•  •    • 

•  ••• 

•     • 
•   • 

•• 

• 

• 

*      •      •••••-• 

•  •     •     »        •  •   *• 
•  •••       •••"• 

••  ••          •  • *  • 

•     •       •  •  •  •     • 

•  • 

• 
• 
• 

•  •• •     •  -•• 

•  • •     •;   • 

•  ••  •     •    •• 

• 
•  •  • 

•    •  •     •      • 

•••  • •       • 

•  •••• 

•  *  .  • 

• 

•  • 
•  • 

„   .  •    •  •      • 

\ 


CONTENTS 

OF 

THE  FIRST  VOLUME. 


BOOK  L— CHAP.  I. 

WILLIAM  AND  MARY. 

State  of  the  nation  immediately  after  the  Revolution — Account  of  the  new  ministry 
— The  convention   converted   into  a  parliament — Mutiny  in  the  army — The 
coronation,  and  abolition  of  hearth' money — The  commons  vote  a  sum  of  money 
to  indemnify  the  Dutch — William's  efforts  in  favour  of  the  dissenters — Act  for 
a  toleration — Violent  disputes  about  the  bill  for  a  comprehension — The- commons 
address  the  king  to  summon  a  convocation  of  the  clergy — Settlement  of  the 
revenue — The  king  takes  umbrage  at  the  proceedings  of  the  whig  party — Heats 
and  animosities  about  the  bill  of  indemnity  recommended  by  the  king — Birth  of 
the  duke  of  Gloucester — Affairs  of  the  continent — War  declared  against  France 
— Proceedings  in  the  convention  of  Scotland,  of  which  the  duke  of  Hamilton  is 
chosen  president — Letters  to  the  convention  from  king  William  and  king  James 
— They  recognise  the  authority  of  king  William — They  vote  the  crown  vacant, 
and  pass  an  act  of  settlement  in  favour  of  William  and  Mary — They  appoint 
commissioners  to  make  a  tender  of  the  crown  to  William,  who  receives  it  on  the 
conditions  they  propose — Enumeration  of  their  grievances — The  convention  is 
declared  a  parliament,  and  the  duke  of  Hamilton  king's  commissioner — Prelacy 
abolished  in  that  kingdom — The  Scots  dissatisfied  with  the  king's  conduct — Vio- 
,  lent  disputes  in  the  Scotch  parliament — Which  is  adjourned — A  remonstrance 
presented  to  the  king — The  castle  of  Edinburgh    besieged    and  taken — The 
troops  of  king  William  defeated  at  Killycrankie — King  James  cordially  received 
by  the  French  king — Tyrconnel'  temporizes  with  king  William — James,  arrives  in 
Ireland — Issues  five  proclamations  at  Dublin — Siege  of  Londonderry — The  inha- 
bitants defenu  themaelves^with  Qurjpriain.g^cotHftge  ^and  perseverance — Cruelty  of 
Rosene,  the  Frendfe  jzoneraJ-^Tfie  pVceJis^rol^v^  by  Kirke — The  Inniskilliners 
defeat  and  take  general  Maccavty — Sleeting  of  the  Irish  parliament — They  repeal 
the  act  of  settlement — Pqss  a&  act  of  ^tijinder  against  absentees — James  coins 
base  money — The  PrcteS&naa'a^  Ireland  cruelly  oppressed — Their  churches  are 
seized  by  the  Catholics,  amfr'tneiy  if  e  forbid  to  assemble  on  pain  of  death — Ad- 
miral Herbert  worstecj  byjtfte^^ctf'flC)6**  liCan  engagement  near  Bantry-bay — 
Divers  sentences  and;  att£i$itfsf>jj,e#e1ke^i' jn^arliament — Inquiry  into  the  cause 
of  miscarriages  in  Ire&tfd — Bills  passed  in  this  session  of  parliament   .     Page  2 

CHAP.  II. 

Poke  of  Schomberg  lands  with  an  army  in  Ireland — The  Inniskilliners  obtain  a  vic- 
tory over  the  Irish — Schomberg  censured  for  his  inactivity — The  French  worsted 
at  Walcourt — Success  of  the  confederates  in  Germany — The  Turks  defeated  at 
Pacochin,  Nissa,  and  Widen — Death  of  pope  Innocent  XI. — King  William  be- 
comes unpopular — A  good  number  of  the  clergy  refuse  to  take  the  oaths — The 
king  grants  a  commission  for  reforming  church-discipline — Meeting  of  the  convo- 
cation— Their  session  discontinued  by  repeated  prorogations — Proceedings  in 
parliament — The  whigs  obstruct  the  bill  of  indemnity — The  commons  resume 
the  inquiry  into  the  cause  of  the  miscarriages  in  Ireland — King  William  irritated 
against  the  whigs — Plot  against  the  government  by  sir  James  Montgomery* 
discovered  by  bishop  Burnet — Warm  debates  in  parliament  about  the  corporation 
.  bills — The  king  resolves  to  finish  the  Irish  war  in  person — General  Ludlow  arrives 
in  England,  but  is  obliged  to  withdraw — Efforts  of  the  Jacobites  in  Scotland-- The 
court  interest  triumphs  over  all  opposition  in  that  country — The  tory  interest 


i*  CONTENTS. 

prevails  in  the  Dew  parliament  of  England — Bill  for  recognising  their  majesties-* 
Another  violent  contest  about  the  bill  of  abjuration — King  William  lands  in  Ire- 
land— King  James  marches  to  the  Boyne — William  resolves  to  give  him  battle — 
Battle  of  the  Boyne — Death  and  character  of  Schomberg — James  embarks  for 
France — William  enters  Dublin,  and  publishes  his  declaration — The  French  ob- 
tain a  victory  over  the  English  and  Dutch  fleets  off  Beach v -head — Torrington 
committed  prisoner  to  the  Tower — Progress  of  William  in  Ireland— He  invests 
Limerick ;  but  is  obliged  to  raise  the  siege,  and  returns  to  England — Cork  and 
Kinsale  reduced  by  the  earl  of  Marlborough — Lazun  and  the  French  forces  quit 
Ireland — The  duke  of  Savoy  joins  the  confederacy — Prince  Waldeck  defeated 
at  Fleurus— The  archduke  Joseph  elected  king  of  the  Romans— Peath  of  the 
duke  of  Lorrain— Progress  of  the  war  against  the  Turks — Meeting  of  the  parlia- 
ment— The  commons  comply  with  all  the  king's  demands — Petition  of  the  tories 
in  the  city  of  London— Attempt  against  the  marquis  of  Caermartben — The  king's 
voyage  to  Holland— -He  assists  at  a  congress— Returns  to  England     .    Page  56 

CHAP.  III. 

Conspiracy  against  the  government  by  lord  Preston  and  others— The  king  fills  up 
the  vacant  bishopricks — Affairs  of  Scotland — Campaign  in  Flanders — Election  of 
a  new  pope — The  emperor's  success  against  the  Turks — Affairs  of  Ireland — The 
French  and  Irish  obtain  an  honourable  capitulation — Twelve  thousand  Irish  Catho- 
lics are  transported  to  France — Meeting  of  the  English  parliament — Transactions  in 
parliament — The  English  and  Dutch  fleets  worsted  by  the  French  off  Beachy-head 
— The  king  disobliges  the  Presbyterians  of  Scotland — Massacre  of  Glencoe — 
Preparations  for  a  descent  upon  England — Declaration  of  king  James — Precau- 
tions taken  by  the  queen  for  the  defence  of  the  nation — Admiral  Russel  puts  to 
sea — He  obtains  a  complete  victory  over  the  French  fleet  off  La  Hogue — The 
French  king  takes  Namur  in  sight  of  king  William — The  allies  are  defeated  at 
Steenkirk — Extravagant  rejoicings  in  France  on  account  of  this  victory — Conspi- 
racy against  the  life  of  king  William,  hatched  by  the  French  ministry — The  cam- 
paign is  inactive  on  the  Rhine  and  in  Hungary — The  duke  of  Savoy  invades 
Dauphine — The  duke  -of  Hanover  created  an  elector  of  the  empire   •      .      110 

CHAP.  IV. 

False  information  against  the  earl  of  Marlborough,  the  bishop  of  Rochester,  and 
others — Sources  of  national  discontent — Dissension  between  the  queen  and  the 
princess  Anne  of  Denmark — The  house  of  lords  vindicate  their  privileges  in  be- 
half of  their  imprisoned  members — The  commons  present  addr<«  ses  to  the  king 
and  queen — They  acquit  adiqirtf  fttffsitl^nd  resolve  tVaoW^se  his  majesty — They 
comply  with  all  the  demands  ^•tfce^ntfnistry-^iTVe  lprisr/jpiesent  an  address  of 
advice  to  the  king — Dispute  between  the  lords  and  co'ramons  concerning  admiral 
Russel — The  commons  address  theffLfos — ^h^V  establish  the  land-tax,  and  other 
impositions — Burnet's  Pastoral  Lettej  Jiy£ijetf#$y.  jte'Jangman — Proceedings  of 
the  lower  house  against  the  practice  of  jud^apjpng  jnejn  fyr  the  service — The  two 
houses  address  the  king  on  the  ^eva^c«£of«Jtew£t— 4n  account  of  the  place 
bill,  and  that  for  triennial  parliam&tg^ThV^oJnfrfctrft  ^etftion  his  majesty  that  he 
would  dissolve  the  East  India  company — Trial  of  lord  Mohun  for  murder — Al- 
terations in  the  ministry — The  king  repairs  to  the  continent,  and  assembles  the 
confederate  army  in  Flanders — The  French  reduce  Huy — Luxembourg  resolves  to 
attack  the  allies — Who  are  defeated  at  Landen — Charlerby  is  besieged  and  taken 
by  the  enemy — Campaign  on  the  Rhine — The  duke  of  Savoy  is  defeated  by  Ca-  * 
tinat  in  the  plain  of  Marsaglia — Transactions  in  Hungary  and  Catalonia — Naval 
affairs — A  fleet  of  merchant  ships,  under  convoy  of  sir  George  Rooke,  attacked, 
and  partly  destroyed  by  the  French  squadrons — Wheeler's  expedition  to  the  West 
Indies — feenbow  bombards  St.  Maloes — The  French  king  has  recourse  to  the  me- 
diation of  Denmark — Severity  of  the  government  against  the  Jacobites — Com- 
plaisance of  the  Scottish  parliament — The  king  returns  to  England,  makes  some 
changes  in  the  ministry,  and  opens  the  session  of  parliament — Both  houses  in- 
quire into  the  miscarriages  by  sea — The  commons  grant  a  vast  sum  for  the  services 
of  the  ensuing  year — The  king  rejects  the  bill  against  free  and  impartial  proceed- 
ings in  parliament;  and  the  lower  house  remonstrates  on  this  subject — Establish- 
ment of  the  bank  of  England — The  East  India  company  obtain  a  new  charter — 
Bill  for  a  general  naturalization  dropped— Sir.  Francis  Wheeler  perishes  in  a  storm 


CONTENTS.  ▼ 

—The  English  attempt  to  make  a  descent  in  Camaret-bay,  but  are  repulsed  with 
loss — They  bombard  Dieppe,  Havre-de-Grace ,  Dunkirk,  and  Calais — Admiral 
Rnsael  sails  for  the  Mediterranean,  relieves  Barcelona,  and  winters  at  Cadiz — 
Campaign  in  Flanders — The  allies  reduce  Huy — The  prince  of  Baden  passes  the 
Rhine,  but  is  obliged  to  repass  that  river — Operations  in  Hungary — Progress  of 
the  French  in  Catalonia— -State  of  the  war  in  Piedmont — The  king  returns  to 
England — The  parliament  meets — The  bill  for  triennial  parliaments  receives  the 
royal  assent — Death  of  archbishop  Tillotsen  and  of  queen  Mary — Reconciliation 
between  the  king  and  the  princess  of  Denmark      .......  Page  164 

CHAP.  V. 
WILLIAM. 

Account  of  the  Lancashire  plot — The  commons  inquire  into  the  abases  which  had 
crept  into  the  army — They  expel  and  prosecute  some  of  their  own  members  for  cor- 
ruption in  the  affair  of  the  East  India  company — Examination  of  Cooke,  Acton, 
and  others — The  commons  impeach  the  duke  of  Leeds — The  parliament  is  pro- 
rogued— Session  of  the  Scottish  parliament — They  inquire  into  the  massacre  of 
Glencoe — They  pass  an  act  for  erecting  a  trading  company  to  Africa  and  the 
Indies — Proceedings  in  the  parliament  of  Ireland — Disposition  of  the  armies  in 
Flanders — King  William  undertakes  the  siege  of  Namur — Famous  retreat  of 
prince  Vaudemont — Brussels  is  bombarded  by  Villeroy— Progress  of  the  siege 
of  Namur — Viileroy  attempts  to  relieve  it— -The  besiegers  make  a  desperate 
assault — The  place  capitulates — Boufflers  is  arrested  by  order  of  king  William — 
Campaign  on  the  Rhine,  and  hi  Hungary — The  duke  of  Savoy  takes  Casal — 
Transactions  in  Catalonia — The  English  fleet  bombards  St  Maloes  and  other 
places  on  the  coast  of  France — Wilmot's  expedition  to  the  West  Indies — A  new 
parliament— They  pass  the  bill  for  regulating  trials  in  cases  of  high-treason — 
Resolutions  with  respect  tQ  anew  coinage — The  commons  address  the  king  to 
recall  a  grant  he  had  made  to  the  earl  of  Portland — Another  against  the  new 
Scottish  company — Intrigues  of  the.  Jacobites — Conspiracy  against  the  life  of 
William — Design  of  an  invasion  defeated — The-  two  houses  engage  in  an  asso- 
ciation for  the  defence  of  his  majesty — Establishment  of  a  land-bank — Trial  of 
the  conspirators — The  allies  burn  the  magazine  at  Givet — Lewis  XIV.  makes 
advances  towards  a  peace  with  Holland — He   detaches    the  duke  of  Savoy 
from  the  confederacy — Naval  transactions — Proceedings  in  the  parliaments  of 
Scotland  and  Ireland — Zeal  of  the  English  commons  in  their  affection  to  the 
king — Resolutions  touching  the  coin,  and  the  support  of  the  public  credit — 
Enormous  impositions — Sir  John  Fenwick  is  apprehended — A  bill  of  attainder 
being  brought  into  the  house  against  him,  produces  violent  debates — His  defence 
— The  bill  passes — Sir  John  Fenwick  is  beheaded — The  earl  of  Monmouth  sent 
to  the  Tower — Inquiry  into  miscarriages  by  sea — Negotiations  at  Ryswick — The 
French  take  Barcelona — Fruitless  expedition  of  admiral  Neville  to  the  West 
Indies — The  elector  of  Saxony  is  chosen  king  of  Poland — Peter,  the  czar  of  Mus- 
covy, travels  in  disguise  with  his  own  ambassadors — Proceedings  in  the  congress 
at  Ryswick — The  ambassadors  of  England,  Spain,  and  Holland,  sign  the  treaty — 
A  general  pacification 272 

CHAP.  VI. 

State  of  parties — Characters  of  the  ministers — The  commons  reduce  the  number  of 
standing  forces  to  ten  thousand — They  establish  the  civil  list ;  and  assign  funds 

.  for  paying  the  national  debts — They  take  cognizance  of  fraudulent  endorsements 
of  exchequer  bills — A  new  East  India  company  constituted  by  act  of  parlia- 
ment— Proceedings  against  a  book  written  by  William  Moiineux  of  Dublin— And 
against  certain  smugglers  of  alamodes  and  lustrings  from  France — Society  for 
the  reformation  of  manners — The  earl  of  Portland  resigns  his  employments — The 
king  disowns  the  Scottish  trading  company— He  embarks  for  Holland— First 
treaty  of  partition— Intrigues  of  France  at  the  court  of  Madrid— King  William  is 
thwarted  by  his  new  parliament — He  is  obliged  to  send  away  his  Dutch  guards-*- 
The  commons  address  the  king  against  the  Papists — The  parliament  prorogued — 
The  Scottish  company  make  a  settlement  on  the  isthmus  of  Darien ;  which, 
however,  they  are  compelled  to  abandon — Remonstrances  of  the  Spanish  court 
agamst  the  treaty  of  partition — The  commons  persist  in  their  resolutions  to  mortify 
the  king— Inquiry  into  the  expedition  of  captain  Kidd— A  motion  made  against 
Burnet,  bishop  of  Saruin— Inquiry  into  the  Irish  forfeitures — The  commons  pass 


ri  CONTENTS. 

a  bill  of  resumption — And  a  severe  bill  against  Papists— The  old  East  India 
company  re-established — Dangerous  ferment  in  Scotland — Lord  Soraers  dismiss- 
ed from  his  employments — Second  treaty  of  partition — Death  of  the  duke  of 
Gloucester — The  king  sends  a  fleet  to  the  Baltic,  to  the  assistance  of  the  Swedes — 
The  second  treaty  of  partition  generally  disagreeable  to  the  European  powers — 
The  French  interest  prevails  at  the  court  of  Spain — King  William  finds  means  to 
allay  the  heats  in  Scotland — The  king  of  Spain  dies,  after  having  bequeathed  his 
dominions,  by  wiH,  to  the  duke  of  Anjou — The  French  king's  apology  for  accept- 
ing the  will — The  states-general  own  Philip  as  king  of  Spain — A  new  ministry 
and  a  new  parliament — The  commons  unpropitious  to  the  court — The  lords  are 
more  condescending — An  intercepted  letter  from  the  earl  of  Milfort  to  his  bro- 
ther— Succession  of  the  crown  settled  upon  the  princess  Sophia,  electress  dowager 
of  Hanover,  and  the  Protestant  heirs  of  her  body — The  dutchess  of  Savoy  pro- 
tests against  this  act — Ineffectual  negotiation  with  France — Severe  addresses  from 
both  houses  in  relation  to  the  partition-treaty — William  is  obliged  to  acknowledge 

.  the  king  of  Spain — The  two  nouses  seem  to  enter  into  the  king's  measures — The 
commons  resolve  to  wreak  their  vengeance  on  the  old  ministry — The  earls  of 
Portland  and  Oiford,  the  lords  Somers  and  Halifax,  are  impeached — Disputes 
between  the  two  bouses — The  house  of  commons  acquits  the  impeached  lords — 
Petition  of  Kent — Favourable  end  of  the  session — Progress  of  prince  Eugene  io 
Italy — Sketch  of  the  situation  of  affairs  in  Europe — Treaty  of  alliance  between 
the  emperor  and  the  maritime  powers — Death  of  king  James — The  French  king 
owns  the  pretended  prince  of  Wales  as  king  of  England — Addresses  to  king 
William  on  that  subject — New  parliament — The  king's  last  speech  to  both  houses 
received  with  great  applause — Great  harmony  between  the  king  and  parliament — 
The  two  houses  pass  the  bill  of  abjuration — The  lower  house  justifies  the  pro- 
ceedings of  the  commons  in  the  preceding  parliament — Affairs  of  Ireland — The 
king  recommends  a  union  of  the  two  kingdoms — He  falls  from  his  horse — His 

.   death — and  character Page  319 

CHAP.  VII. 

ANNE. 

Anne  succeeds  to  the  throne — She  resolves  to  fulfil  the  engagements  of  her  pre- 
decessor with  his  allies — A  French  memorial  presented  to  the  states-general — 
The  queen's  inclination  to  the  tories — War  declared  against  France — The  parlia- 
ment prorogued — Warm  opposition  to  the  ministry  in  the  Scottish  parliament — 
They  recognise  her  majesty's  authority — The  queen  appoints  commissioners  to 
treat  of  a  union  between  England  and  Scotland — State  of  affairs  on  the  continent 
— Keiserswaert  and  Landau  taken  by  the  allies — Progress  of  the  earl  of  Marlbo- 
rough in  Flanders — He  narrowly  escapes  being  taken  by  a  French  partisan — The 
imperialists  are  worsted  at  Fridlinguen — Battle  of  Luzzara,  in  Italy — The  king  of 
Sweden  defeats  Augustus  at  Lissau,  in  Poland — Fruitless  expedition  to  Cadiz  by 
the  duke  of  Ormond  and  sir  George  Rooke — They  take  and  destroy  the  Spanish 
galleons  at  Vigo — Admiral  Bcnbow's  engagement  with  Ducasse  in  the  West  In- 
dies— The  queen  assembles  a  new  parliament — Disputes  between  the  two  houses 
— The  lords  inquire  into  the  conduct  of  sir  George  Rooke — The  parliament  make 
a  settlement  on  prince  George  of  Denmark — The  earl  of  Marlborough  created  a 
duke — All  commerce  and  correspondence  prohibited  between  Holland  and  the 
two  crowns  of  France  and  Spain — A  bill  for  preventing  occasional  conformity — 
It  miscarries — Violent  animosity  between  the  two  houses,  produced  by  the  in- 
quiry into  the  public  accounts — Disputes  between  the  two  houses  of  convocation 
— Account  of  the  parties  in  Scotland — Dangerous  heats  in  the  parliament  of  that 
kingdom — The  commissioner  is  abandoned  by  the  cavaliers — He  is  in  danger  of 
his  life,  and  suddenly  prorogues  the  parliament — Proceedings  of  the  Irish  parlia- 
ment— They  pass  a  severe  act  against  Papists — The  elector  of  Bavaria  defeats 
the  imperialists  at  Scardingen,  and  takes  possession  of  Ratisbon — The  allies  re- 
duce Bonne — Battle  of  Eckeren — The  prince  of  Hesse  is  defeated  by  the  French 
at  Spirebach — Treaty  between  the  emperor  and  the  duke  of  Savoy— The  king  of 
Portugal  accedes  to  the  grand  alliance — Sir  Cloudesley  Shovel  sails  with  a  fleet  to 
the  Mediterranean — Admiral  Graydon's  bootless  expedition  to  the  West  Indies — 
Charles  king  of  Spain  arrives  in  England   ...........    427 


THE 


HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 


CHAP.  I. 

WILLIAM  AND  MARY. 

§  I.  State  of  the  nation  immediately  after  the  Revolution — §  II.  Account  . 
of  the  new  ministry— §  III.  The  convention  converted  into  a  parlia* 
ment — §  IV.  Mutiny  in  the  army — §  V.  The  coronation,  and  abolition 
of  hearth-money — §  VI.  The  commons  vote  a  sum  of  money  to  indem- 
nify the  Dutch— $  VII.  William's  efforts  in  favour  of  the  dissenters — 
§  VIII.  Act  for  a  toleration—^  IX.  Violent  disputes  about  the  bill  for 
a  comprehension — §  X.  The  commons  address  the  king  to  summon  a 
convocation  of  the  clergy — §  XI.  Settlement  of  the  revenue — §  XII. 
The  king  takes  umbrage  at  the  proceedings  of  the  whig  party — §  XIII. 
Heats  and  animosities  about  the  bill  of  indemnity  recommended  by 
the  king— §  XIV.  Birth  of  the  duke  of  Gloucester— §  XV.  Affairs  of 
the  continent — §  XVI.  War  declared  against  France — §  XVII.  Pro- 
ceedings in  the  convention  of  Scotland,  of  which  the  duke  of  Hamil* 
ton  is  chosen  president— §  XVIII.  Letters  to  the  convention  from 
king  William  and  king  James — §  XIX.  They  recognise  the  authority 
of  king  William — §  XX.  They  vote  the  crown  vacant,  and  pass  an  act 
of  settlement  in  favour  of  William  and  Mary — §  XXI.  They  appoint 
commissioners  to  make  a  tender  of  the  crown  to  William,  who  receives 
it  on  the  conditions  they  propose — §  XXII.  Enumeration  of  their 
grievances.    The-  convention  is  declared  a  parliament,  and  the  duke 
of  Hamilton  king's  commissioner— §  XXIII.  Prelacy  abolished  in  that 
kingdom.    The  Scots  dissatisfied  with  the  king's  conduct — §  XXIV. 
Violent  disputes  in  the  Scotch  parliament — §  XXV.  Which  is  ad- 
journed. A  remonstrance  presented  to  the  king — §  XXVI.  The  castle ' 
of  Edinburgh  besieged  and  taken— §  XXVII.  The  troops  of  king 
William  defeated  at  Killycrankie — §  XXVIIL  King  James  cordially 
received*  by  the  French  king — §  XXIX.  Tyrconnel  temporizes  with 
king  William— §  XXX.  James  arrives  in  Ireland — §  XXXI.  Issues 
five  proclamations  at  Dublin— §  XXXII.  Siege  of  Londonderry — 
§  XXXIII.  The  inhabitants  defend  themselves  with  surprising  cou- 
rage and  perseverance — §  XXXIV.  Cruelty  of  Rosene,  the  French 
general— |  XXXV.  The  place,  is  relieved  by  Kirke— §  XXXVI. 
The  Inniskilliners  defeat  and  take  general  Maccarty— §  XXXVII. 
Meeting  of  the  Irish  parliament— §  XXXVIII.  They  repeal  the  act 

VOL.  I.  B* 


2  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1689. 

of  settlement— §  XXXIX.  Pass  an  act  of  attainder  against  absentees 
— §  XL.  James  coins  base  money.  The  Protestants  of  Ireland  cruelly 
oppressed — §  XLI.  Their  churches  are  seized  by  the  Catholics,  and 
they  are  forbid  to  assemble  on  pain  of  death— §  XLII.  Admiral  Her- 
bert worsted  by  the  French  fleet,  in  an  engagement  near  Ban  try-bay — 
§  XLIII.  Divers  sentences  and  attainders  reversed  in  parliament — 
§  XLI  V.  Inquiry  into  the  cause  of  miscarriages  in  Ireland — §  XLV . 
Bills  passed  in  this  session  of  parliament. 

§  I.  The  constitution  of  England  had  now  assumed  a 
new  aspect.  The  maxim  of  hereditary,  indefeasible 
right,  was  at  length  renounced  by  a  free  parliament. 
The  power  of  the  crown  was  acknowledged  to  flow 
from  no  other  fountain  than  that  of  a  contract  with  the 
people.  Allegiance  and  protection  were  declared  reci- 
procal ties  depending  upon  each  other.  The  represen- 
tatives of  the  nation  made  a  regular  claim  of  rights  in 
behalf  of  their  constituents  ;  and  William  III.  ascended 
the  throne  in  consequence  of  an  express  capitulation 
with  the  people.  Yet,  on  this  occasion,  the  zeal  of  the 
parliament  towards  their  deliverer  seems  to  have  over- 
shot their  attachment  to  their  own  liberty  and  privi- 
leges :  or  at  least  they  neglected  the  fairest  opportunity 
that  ever  occurred,  to  retrench  those  prerogatives  of 
the  crown  to  which  they  imputed  all  the  late  and  former 
calamities  of  the  kingdom.  Their  new  monarch  re- 
tained the  old  regal  power  over  parliaments  in  its  full 
extent.  He  was  left  at  liberty  to  convoke,  adjourn, 
prorogue,  and  dissolve  them  at  his  pleasure.  He  was 
enabled  to  influence  elections,  and  oppress  corporations. 
He  possessed  the  right  of  choosing  his  own  council ;  of 
nominating  all  the  great  officers  of  the  state,  and  of  the 
household,  of  the  army,  the  navy,  and  the  church.  He 
reserved  the  absolute  command  of  the  militia :  so  that 
he  remained  master  of  all  the  instruments  and  engines 
of  corruption  and  violence,  without  any  other  restraint 
than  his  own  moderation,  and  prudent  regard  to  the 
claim  of  rights,  and  principle  of  resistance  on  which  the 
revolution  was  founded.    In  a  word,  the  settlement  was 


1669.  WILLIAM  AND  MARY.  3 

finished  with  some  precipitation,  before  the  plan  had 
been  properly,  digested  and  matured  ;  and  this  will  be 
the  case  in  every  establishment  formed  upon  a  sudden 
emergency  in  the  face  of  opposition.  It  was  observed, 
that  the  king,  who  was  made  by  the  people,  had  it  in 
his  power  to  rule  without  them ;  to  govern  jure  divino, 
though  he  was  created  jure;  humano :  and  that,  though 
the  change  proceeded  from  a  republican  spirit,  the  set- 
tlement was  built  upon  tory  maxims ;  for  the  execution 
of  his  government  continued  still  independent  of  his 
commission,  while  his  own  person  remained  sacred  and 
inviolable.  The  prince  of  Orange  had  been  invited  to 
England  by  a  coalition  of  parties,  united  by  a  common 
sense  of  danger :  but  this  tie  was  no  sooner,  broken  than 
they  flew  asunder,  and  each  resumed  its  original  bias. 
Their  mutual  jealousy  and  rancour  revived,  and  was 
heated  by  dispute. into  intemperate  zeal  and  enthusiasm. 
Those  who  at  first  acted  from  principles  of  patriotism 
were  insensibly  warmed  into  partisans  ;  and  king  Wil- 
liam soon  found  himself  at  the  head  of  a  faction.  As 
he  had  been  bred  a  Calvinist,  and  always  expressed  an 
abhorrence  of  spiritual  persecution,  the  Presbyterians, 
and  other  Protestant  dissenters,  considered  him  as  their 
peculiar  protector,  and  entered  into  his  interests  with 
the  mo6t  zealous  fervour  and  assiduity.  For  the  same 
reasons,  the  friends  of  the  church  became  jealous  of  his 
proceedings,  and  employed  all  their  influence,  first  in 
opposing  his  elevation  to  the  throne,  and  afterward  in 
thwarting  his  measures.  Their  party  was  espoused  by 
all  the  friends  of  the  lineal  succession  ;  by  the  Roman 
Catholics ;  by  those  who  were  personally  attached  to 
the  late  king;  and  by  such  as  were  disgusted  by  .the 
conduct  and  personal  deportment  of  William  since  his 
arrival  in  England.  They  observed,  that,  contrary  to 
his  declaration,  he  had  plainly  aspired  to  the  crown,  and 
treated  his  father-in-law  with  insolence  and  rigour :  that 
his  army  contained  a  number  of  foreign  Papists,  almost 

b  2 


4  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1689. 

equal  to  that  of  the  English  Roman  Catholics  whom 
James  had  employed :  that  the  reports  so  industriously 
circulated  about  the  birth  of  the  prince  of  Wales,  the 
treaty  with  France  for  enslaving  England,  and  the 
murder  of  the  earl  of  Essex,  reports  countenanced,  by 
the  prince  of  Orange,  now  appeared  to  be  without  foun- 
dation: that  the  Dutch  troops  remained  in  London, 
while  the  English  forces  were  distributed  in  remote 
quarters :  that  the  prince  declared  the  first  should  be 
kept  about  his  person,  and  the  latter  sent  to  Ireland : 
that  the  two  houses,  out  of  complaisance  to  William, 
had  denied  their  late  sovereign  the  justice  of  being  heard 
in  his  own  defence:  and  that  the  Dutch  had  lately  in- 
terfered with  the  trade  of  London,  which  was  already 
sensibly  diminished.  These  were  the  sources  of  discon- 
tent, swelled  up  by  the  resentment  of  some  noblemen, 
and  other  individuals,  disappointed  in  their  hopes  of 
profit  and  preferment. 

§  H.  William  began  his  reign  with  a  proclamation,* 
for  confirming  all  Protestants  in  the  offices  which  they 
enjoyed  on  the  1st  day  of  December :  then  he  chose 
the  members  of  his  council,  who  were  generally  staunch 
to  his  interest,  except  the  archbishop  of  Canterbury  and 
the  earl  of  Nottingham,5  and  these  were  admitted  in 
compliance  to  the  church-party,  which  it  was  not  thought 
advisable  to  provoke.  Nottingham  and  Shrewsbury 
were  appointed  secretaries  of  state :  the  privy-seal  was 
bestowed  upon  the  marquis  of  Halifax.:  the  earl  of 
Danhy  was  created  president  of  the  council.  These 
two  noblemen  enjoyed  a  good  share  of  the  king's  confi- 

a  Somen's  Collection.    Reresby.    Burnet. 

b  The  ccwnoii  consisted  of  the  prince  of  Denmark,  the  archbishop  .of 
Canterbury,  the  duke  of  Norfolk,  the  marqnisses  of  Halifax  and  Win- 
chester, the  earls  of  Danby  and  Lindsey,  Devonshire,  Dorset,  Middlesex, 
Oxford,  Shrewsbury,- Bedford,  Bath,  Macclesfield,  and  Nottingham ;  the 
Viscounts.  Faueon  berg,  Mordaunt,  Newport,  Lumley;  the  Jords  Whar- 
ton, Montague,  Delamere,  Churchill;  Mr.  Bentinck,  Mr.  Sidney,  sir 
Robert  Howard,  sir  Henry  Capel,  Mr.  Powle,  Mr.  Russel,  Mr.  Hambden, 
and  Mr.  Bosenwen. 


I 

i 

MK  WILLIAM  AND  MARY.  * 

dence,  and  Nottingham  was  considerable  as  head  of  the 
church-party :  but  the  chief  favourite  was  Bentinck, 
first  commoner  on  the  list  of  privy-counsellors,  as  well 
as  groom  of  the  stole  and  privy-purse.  D'Auverquerque 
was  made  master  of  the  horse,  Zuylestein  of  the  robes, 
and  Schomberg  of  the  ordnance ;  the  treasury,  admiral- 
ty, and  chancery,  were  put  in  commission ;  twelve  able 
judges  were  chosen  ;c  and  the  diocess  of  Salisbury  being 
:  vacated  by  the  death  of  Dr.  Ward,  the  king,  of  his  own 

free  motion,  filled  it  with  Burnet,  who  had  been  a  zeal- 
ous stickler  for  his  interest ;  and,  in  a  particular  man-* 
ner,  instrumental  in  effecting  the  revolution*  San- 
croft,  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  refused  to  consecrate 
this  ecclesiastic,  though  the  reasons  of  his  refusal  are 
not  specified  ;  but,  being  afraid  of  incurring  the  penal- 
ties of  a  premunire,  he  granted  a  commission  to  the 
bishop  of  London,  and  three  other  suffragans,  to  per- 
form that  ceremony.  Burnet  was  a  prelate  of  some 
parts,  and  great  industry ;  moderate  in  his  notions  of 
church-discipline,  inquisitive,  meddling,  vain,  and  ere* 
dulous.  In  consequence  of  having  incurred  the.  dss* 
pleasure  of  the  late  king,  he  had  retired  to  the  continent, 
and  fixed  his  residence  in  Holland,  where  he  was  nabir 
ralized,  and  attached  himself  to  the  interest  of  the  prince 
of  Orange,  who  consulted  him  about  the  affairs,  of  Eng« 
land.  He  assisted  in  drawing  up  the  prince's  manifesto, 
and  wrote  some  other  papers  and  pamphlets  in  defence 
of  his  design.  He  was  demanded  of  the  States,  by  the 
English  ambassador,  as  a  British  fugitive,  outlawed  •  by 
king  James,  and  excepted  in  the  act  of  indemnity  :  ne* 
vertheless,  he  came  over  with  William,  in  quality  of  his 
chaplain ;  and,  by  his  intrigues,  contributed  in  some 
measure  to  the  Success  of  that  expedition.  The  princi* 
pal  individuals  that  composed  this  ministry  have  been 

c  Sir  John  Holt  was  appointed  lord-chief-juaticc  of  tho  king's  bench, 
and  sir  Henry  Pollexfen  of  the  common  pleas :  the  earl  of  Devonshire 
was  made  lord-steward  of  the  household,  and  the  earl  of  Dorset  lord- 
chamberIain.-^Ralph. 


6  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1689: 

characterized  in  the  history  of  the  preceding  reigns,? 
We  have  had  occasion  to  mention  the  fine  talents,  the 
vivacity,  the  flexibility  of  Halifax ;  the  plausibility*  the 
enterprising  genius,  the  obstinacy  of  Danby ;  the  pomp* 
ous  eloquence,  the  warmth,  and  ostentation  of  Notting- 
ham ;  the  probity  and  popularity  of  Shrewsbury.  Go- 
dolphin,  now  brought  into  the  treasury,  was  modest, 
silent,  sagacious,  and  upright.  Mordaunt,  appointed 
first  commissioner  of  that  board,  and  afterward  created 
earl  of  Monmouth,  was  open,  generous,  and  a  republi- 
can in  his  principles.  Delamere,  chancellor  of  the  ex*, 
chequer,  promoted  in  the  sequel  to  the  rank  of  earl  of 
Warrington,  was  close  and  mercenary.  Obsequiousness, 
fidelity,  and  attachment  to  his  master,  composed  the 
character  of  Bentinck,  whom  the  king  raised  to  the 
dignity  of  earl  of  Portland.  The  English  favourite, 
Sidney,  was  a.  man  of  wit  and  pleasure,  possessed  of  the 
most  engaging  talents  for  conversation  and  private 
friendship,  but  rendered  unfit  for  public  business  by  in- 
dolence and  inattention.  He  was  ennobled,  and  after- 
ward created  earl  of  Romney ;  a  title  which  he  enjoyed 
with  several  successive  posts  of  profit  and  importance. 
The  stream  of  honour  and  preferment  ran  strong  in  fa- 
vour of  the  whigs,  and  this  appearance  of  partiality 
confirmed  the  suspicion  and  resentment  of  the  opposite 
party. 

§  III.  The  first  resolution  taken  in  the  new  council 
was  to  convert  the  convention  into  a  parliament;  that 
the  new  settlement  might  be  strengthened  by  a  legal 
sanction,  which  ivas  now  supposed  to  be  wanting,  as  the 
assembly  had  not  been  convoked  by  the  king's  writ  of 
summons.  The  experiment  of  a  new  election  was 
deemed  too  hazardous :  therefore,  the  council  deter- 
mined that  the  king  should,  by  virtue  of  his  own  au- 
thority, change  the  convention  into  a  parliament,  by 
going' to  the  house  of  peers  with  the  usual  state  of  a 
sovereign,  and  pronouncing  a  speech  from  the  throne  to 


1669.  WILLIAM  AND  MARY.  7 

both  houses.    This  expedient  was  accordingly  practised/ 
He  assured  them  he  should  never  take  any  step  that 

d  This  experiment  was  attended  with  an  insurmountable  absurdity^ 
If  the  majority  of  Hie  convention  could  not  grant  a  legal  sanctiou  to  the 
establishment  they  had  made,  they  could  never  invest  the  prince  of 
Orange  with  a  just  right  to  ascend  the  throne ;  for  they  could  not  give 
what  they  had  no  right  to  bestow :  and  if  he  ascended  the  throne  without 
a  just  title,  be  could  have  no  right  to  sanctify  that  assembly  to  which  he 
owed. his  elevation.  When  the  people  are  obliged,  by  tyranny,  or  other 
accidents,  to  have  recourse  to  the  first  principles  of  society,  namely,  their 
own  preservation,  in  electing  a  new  sovereign,  it  will  deserve  considera- 
tion, whether  that  choice  is  to  be  effected  by  the  majority  of  a  parliament 
which  has  been  dissolved,  indeed  by  any  parliament  whatsoever,  or  by 
the  body  of  the  nation  assembled  in  communities,  corporations,  by  tribes, 
or  centuries,  to  signify  their  assent  or  dissent  with  respect  to  the  person 
proposed  as  their -sovereign.  This  kind  of  election  might  be  attended 
with  great  inconvenience  and  difficulty,  but  these  cannot  possibjy  be 
avoided  when  the  constitution  is  dissolved,  by  setting  aside  the  lineal 
succession  to  the  throne.  The  constitution  of  England  is  founded  on  a 
parliament  consisting  of  king,  lords,  and  commons ;  but  when  there  is  no 
longer  a  king,  the  parliament  is  defective,  and  the  constitution  impaired : 
the  members  of  the  lower  house  are  the  representatives  of  the  people, 
expressly  chosen  to  maintain  the  constitution  in  church  and  state,  and 
sworn  to  support  the  rights  of  the  crown,  as  well  as  the  liberties  of  the  na- 
tion; but  though  they  are  elected  to  maintain,  they  have  no  power  to 
alter  the  constitution.  When  the  king  forfeits  the  allegiance  of  his  sub- 
jects, and  it  becomes  necessary  to  dethrone  him,  the  power  of  so  doing 
cannot  possibly  reside  in  the  representatives,  who  are  chosen,  under  cer- 
tain limitations,  for  the  purposes  of  a  legislature  which  no  longer  exists ; 
their  power  is  of  course  at  an  end,  and  they  are  reduced  to  a  level  with 
other  individuals  that  constitute  the  community.  The  right  of  altering 
the  constitution,  therefore,  or  of  deviating  from  the  established  practice 
of  inheritance  in  regard  to  the  succession  of  the  crown,  is  inherent  in  the 
body  of  the  people,  and  every  individual  has  an  equal  right  to  his  sfaace 
in  the  general  determination,  whether  his  opinion  be  signified  by  viva 
voce,  or  by  a  representative  whom  he  appoints  and  instructs  for  that  pur- 
pose. It  may  be  suggested,  that  the  prince  of  Orange  was  raised  to  the 
throne  without  any  convulsion,  or  any  such  difficulties  and  inconveniences 
as  we  have  affirmed  to  be  the  necessary  consequences  of  a  measure  of  that 
nature.  To  this  remark  we  answer,  that  since  the  revolution,  these  king- 
doms have  been  divided  and  harassed  by  violent  and  implacable  factions, 
that  eagerly  seek  the  destruction  of  each  other :  that  they  have  been  ex- 
posed to  plots,  conspiracies,  insurrections,  civil  wars,  and  successive  re- 
bellions, which  have  not  been  defeated  and  quelled  without  vast  effusion 
of  blood,  infinite  mischief,  calamity,  and  expense  to  the  nation :  that  they 
are  still  subjected  to  all  those  alarms  and  dangers  which  are  engendered 
by  a  disputed  title  to  the  throne,  and  the  efforts  of  an  artful  pretender : 
that  they  are  necessarily  wedded  to  the  affairs  of  the  continent,  and  their 
interest  sacrificed  to  foreign  connexions,  from  which  they  can  never  be 


8  HISTORY  OE  ENGLAND.  16& 

would  diminish  the  good  opinion  they  had  conceived  of 
his  integrity.  He  told  them  that  Hdllarid  was  in  such 
a  situation  as  required  their  immediate  attention  and 
assistance ;  that  the  posture  of  affairs  at  home  likewise 
demanded  their  serious  consideration  :  that  a  good  set- 
tlement was  necessary,  not  only  for  the  establishment 
of  domestic  peace,  but  also  for  the  support  of  the  Pro* 
testant  interest  abroad  :  that  the  affairs  of  Ireland  were 
too  critically  situated  to  admit  the  least  delay  in  the  de- 
liberations :  he  therefore  begged  they  would  be  speedy 
and  effectual,  in  concerting  such  measures  as  should  be 
judged  indispensably  necessary  for  the  welfare  of  the 
nation.  The  commons  returning  to  their  house,  im- 
mediately passed  a  vote  of  thanks  to  his  majesty,  and 
made  an  order  that  his  speech  should  be  taken  into 
consideration.  After  the  throne  had  been  declared  va- 
cant by  a  spiall  majority  of  the  peers,  those  who  opposed 
that  measure  had  gradually  withdrawn  themselves  from 
the  house,  so  that  very  few  remained  but  such  as  were 
devoted  to  the  new  monarch.  These,  therefore,  brought 
in  a  bill  *  for  preventing  all  disputes  cohcerning  the  pre-* 
sent  parliament.  In  the  meantime,  Mr.  Mambden,  in 
the  lower  house,  put  the  question,  Whether  a  king, 
elected  by  the  lords  spiritual  and  temporal,  and  the 
commons  assembled  at  Westminster,  coming  to  and 
consulting  with    the    said    lords   and   commons,   did 

disengaged.  Perhaps  all  these  calamities  might  have  been  prevented, 
by  the  interposition  of  the  prince  of  Orange.  King  James,  without  for- 
feiting the  crdwri,  might  have  been  laid  under  such  restrictions,  that  it 
would  not  have  been  in  his  power  to  tyrannize  over  his  subjects,  either  in 
spirituals  or  temporals.  The  power  of  the  militia  might  have  been  vest- 
ed in  the  two  houses  of  parliament,  as  well  as  the  nomination  of  persons 
to  fill  the  great  offices  of  the  church  and  state,  and  superintend  the  eco- 
nomy of  the  administration,  in  the  application  of  the  public-  money ;  a 
law  might  have  passed  for  annual  parliaments,  and  the  king  might  have 
been  deprived  of  his  power  to  convoke,  adjourn,  prorogue,  and  dissolve 
them  at  his  pleasure.  Had  these  measures  been  taken,  the  king  must 
have  been  absolutely  disabled  from  employing  either  force  or  corruption 
in  the  prosecution  of  arbitrary  designs,  and  the  people  must  have  been 
fairly  represented  in  a  rotation  of  parliaments,  whose  power  and  influence 
would  have  been  but  of  one  year's  duration. 


16S9.  WILLIAM  AND  MARY.  9 

not*  make  as  complete  a  parliament,  and  legislative 
power  and  authority,  as  if  the  said  king  should  cause' 
new  elections   to  be  made  by  writ  ?    Many  mem- 
bers affirmed,  that  the  king's  writ  was  as  necessary  as 
his  presence  to  the  being  of  a  legal  parliament ;  and,  as 
the  convention  was  defective  in  this  particular,  it  could 
not  be  vested  with  a  parliamentary  authority  by  any 
management  whatsoever.     The  whigs  replied,  that  the 
essence  of  a  parliament  consisted  in  the  meeting  and 
co-operation  of  the  king,  lords,  and  commons ;  and  that 
it  was  not  material  whether  they  were  convoked  by 
writ  or  by  letter ;  they  proved  this  assertion  by  examples 
deduced  frem  the  history  of  England :  they  observed, 
that  a  new  election  would  be  attended  with  great  trouble, 
expense,  and  loss  of  time ;  and  that  such  delay  might 
prove  fatal  to  the  Protestant  interest  in  Ireland,  as  well 
as  to  the  allies  on  the  continent.    In  the  midst  of  this 
debate,  the  bill  was  brought  down  from  the  lords,  and 
being  read,  a  committee  was  appointed  to  make  some 
amendments.    These  were  n6  sooner  made  than  the 
commons  sent  it  back  to  the  upper  house,  and  it  imme- 
diately received  the  royal  assent.    By  this  act,  the  lords 
and  commons,  assembled  at  Westminster,  were  declared 
the.  two  houses  of  parliament,  to  all  intents  and  pur* 
poses :  it  likewise  ordained,  that  the  present  act,  and 
all  other  acts  to  which  the  royal  assent  should  be  given 
before  the  next  .prorogation,   should  be  understood 
and  adjudged  in  law  to  begin  on  the  13th  day  of  Fe- 
bruary: that  the  members,  instead  of  the  old  oaths  of 
allegiance  and  supremacy,  should  take  the  new  oath  in- 
corporated in  this  act,  under  the  ancient  penalty  ;  and; 
that  the  present  parliament  should  be  dissolved  in  the 
usual. manner.     Immediately  after  this  transaction,  a 
warm  debate  arose  in  the  house  of  commons  about  the 
revenue,  which  the  courtiers  alleged  had  devolved  with 
the  crown  upon  William,  at  least  during  the  life  of 
James ;  for  which  term  the  greatest  part  of  it  had  been 
granted.    The  members  in  the  opposition  affirmed,  that 


10  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  !««>- 

these  grants  were  vacated  with  the  throne ;  and  at 
length  it  was  voted,  that  the  revenue  had  expired.  Then 
a  motion  was  made,  that  a  revenue  should  be  settled  on 
the  king  and  queen  ;  and  the  house  resolved  it  should 
be  taken  into  consideration.  While  they  deliberated 
on  this  affair  they  received  a  message  from \^is  majesty, 
importing  that  the  late  king  had  set  sail  from  Brest  with 
an  armarient  to  invade  Ireland.  They  forthwith  re- 
solved to  assist  his  majesty  with  their  lives  and  fortunes : 
they  voted  a  temporary  aid  of  420,000/.  to  be  levied  by 
monthly  assessments ;  and  both  houses  waited  on  the 
king,  to  signify  this  resolution.  But  this  unanimity  did 
not  take  place,  till  several  lords,  spiritual  as  well  aa  tem- 
poral, had,  rather  than  take  the  oaths*  absented  them- 
selves from  parliament.  The  nonjuring  prelates  were* 
Sancroft,  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  Turner,  bishop  of 
Ely,  Lake,  of  Chichester,  Ken,  of  Bath  and  Wells, 
White,  of  Peterborough,  Lloyd,  of  Norwich,  Thomas, 
of  Worcester,  and  Frampton,  of  Gloucester..  The  tem- 
poral peers  who  refused  the  oath  were,  the  duke  of 
Newcastle,  the  earls  of  Clarendon,  Lichfield,  Exeter, 
Yarmouth,  and  Stafford ;  the  lords  Griffin  and  Stawel. 
Five  of  the  bishops  withdrew  themselves  from  the  house 
at  one  time ;  but,  before  they  retired,  one  of  the  num- 
ber moved  for  a  bill  of  toleration,  and  another  of  com- 
prehension, by  which  moderate  dissenters  might  be  re- 
conciled to  the  church,  and  admitted  into  ecclesiastical 
benefices.  Such  bills  were  actually  prepared  and  pre- 
sented by  the  earl  of  Nottingham,  who  received  the 
thanks  of  the  house  for  the  pains  he  had  taken.  From 
this  period,  the  party  averse  to  the  government  of  Wil- 
liam were  distinguished  by  the  appellation  of  Nonjurors. 
They  rejected  the  notion  of  a  king  de  facto,  as  well  as 
all  other  distinctions  and  limitations ;  and  declared  for 
the  absolute  power,  and  divine,  hereditary,  indefeasible 
right  of  sovereigns. 

§  IV.    This  faction  had   already  begun   to  practise 
against  the  new  government.    The  king,  having  received 


1669.  WILLIAM  AND  MARY.  1 1 

some  intimation  of  their,  designs,  from  intercepted  let- 
ters, ordered  the  earl  of  Arran,  sir  Robert  Hamilton,  and 
some  other  gentlemen  of  the  Scottish  nation,  to  be  ap- 
prehended and  sent  prisoners  to  the  Tower.    Then  he 
informed  the  two  houses  of  the  step  he  had  taken,  and 
even  craved  their  advice  with  regard  to  his  conduct  in 
such  a  delicate  affair,  which  had  compelled  him  to  tres- 
pass upon  the  law  of  England.    The  lords  thanked  him 
for  the  care  he  took  of  their  liberties,  and  desired  he 
would  secure  all  disturbers  of  the  peace  :  but  the  com- 
mons empowered  him  by  a  bill  to  dispense  with  the 
habeas  corpus  act  till  the  1 7  th  day  of  April  next  ensu- 
ing.    This  was  a  stretch  of  confidence  in  the  crown 
which  had  not  been  made  in  favour  of  the  late  king, 
even  while  Argyle  and  Monmouth  were  in  open  rebel- 
lion.    A  spirit  of  discontent  had  by  this  time  diffused 
itself  through  the  army,  and  become  so  formidable  to 
the  court,  that  the  king  resolved  to  retain  the  Dutch 
troops  in  England,  and  send  over  to  Holland,  in  their 
room,  such  regiments  as  were  most  tinctured  with  dis- 
affection.    Of  these  the  Scottish  regiment  of  Dumbar- 
ton, commanded  by  mareschal  Schomberg,  mutinied  on 
its  march  to  Ipswich,  seized  the  military  chest,  disarmed 
the  officers  who  opposed  their  design,  declared  for  king 
James,  and  with  four  pieces  of  cannon  began  their  march 
for  Scotland.     William,  being  informed  of  this  revolt, 
ordered  general  Ginckel  to  pursue  them  with  three  regi- 
ments of  Dutch  dragoons,  and  the  mutineers  surren- 
dered at  discretion.     As  the  delinquents  were  natives  of 
Scotland,  which  had  not  yet  submitted  in  form  to  the 
new  government,  the  king  did  not  think  proper  to 
punish  them  as  rebels,  but  ordered  them  to  proceed  for 
Holland,  according  to  his  first  intention.    Though  this 
attempt  proved  abortive,  it  made  a  strong  impression 
upon  the  ministry,  who  were  divided  among  themselves, 
and  wavered  in  their  principles.     However,  they  used 
this  opportunity  to  bring  in  a  bill  for  punishing  mutiny 


12  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  WW* 

and  desertion,  which  in  a  little  time  passed  both  houses* 
and  received  the  royal  assent.* 

§V.  The  coronation  oathe  being  altered  and  ex- 
plained, that  ceremony  was  performed  on  the  1 1th 
day  of  April,  the  bishop  of  London  officiating,  at  the 
king's  desire,  in  the  room  of  the  metropolitan,  who  was 
a  malecontent ;  and  next  day  the  commons,  in  a  body* 
waited  on  the  king  and  queen  at  Whitehall,  with  an  ad* 
dress  of  congratulation.  William,  with  a  view  to  con- 
ciliate the  affection  of  his  new  subjects,  and  check  the 
progress  of  clamour  and  discontent,  signified,  in  a  solemn 
message  to  the  house  of  commons,  his  readiness  to  ac- 
quiesce in  any  measure  they  should  think  proper  to  take 
for  a  new  regulation,  or  total  suppression,  of  the  hearth-- 
money, -which  he  understood  was  a  grievous  imposition 
on  the  subjects ;  and  this  tax  was  afterward  abolished. 
He  was  gratified  with  ^n  address  of  thanks,  couched  in 
the  warmest  expressions  of  duty,  gratitude,  and  affection, 
declaring  they  would  take  such  measures,  in  support  of 
his  crown,  as  would  convince  th$  world  that  he  reigned 
in  the  heart6  of  his  people. 

§  VI;  He  had,  in  his  answer  to  their  former  address, 
assured  them  of  his  constant  regard  to  the  rights  and 
prosperity  of  the  nation  :  he  had  explained  the  exhausted 

e  The  new  form  of  the  coronation  oath  consisted  in  the  following  ques- 
tions and  answers ;  "  Will  you  solemnly  promise  and  swear  to  govern 
the  people  of  this  kingdom  of  England,  and  the  dominions  thereto  be- 
longing, according  to  the  statutes  in  parliament  agreed  on,  and  the  laws 
and  customs  of  the  same?" 

'  1  solemnly  promise  so  to  do/ 
*  "  Will  you,  to  your  power,  cause  law  and  justioe,  in  mercy,  to  be  exe- 
cuted in. all  your  judgments?"  '  I  will/ — **  Will  you,  to  the  utmost  of 
your  power,  maintain  the  laws  of  God,  the  true  profession  of  the  Gospel, 
and  the  Protestant  reformed  religion,  as  by  law  established ;  and. will  you 
preserve  unto  the  bishops  and  clergy  of  this  realm,  and  to  the  churches 
committed  to  their  charge,  all  such  rights  and  privileges,  as  by  law  do, 
or  shall  appertain  unto  them  or  any  of  them?" 

*  All  this  I  promise  to  do/ 

Then  thp  king  or  queen,  laying  his  or  her  hand  upon  the  Gospels,  shall 
say,  "  The  things  which  I  have  here  before  promised,  I  will  perform"  and 
keep.    So  help  me  God/' 


1699.  WILLIAM  AND  MARY*  13 

state  of  the  Dutch  ;  expatiated  upon  the  zeal  of  that 
republic  for  the  interests  of  Britain,  as  well  as  the  main- 
tenance of  the  Protestant  religion ;  and  expressed  his 
hope,  that  the  English  parliament  would  not  only  repay 
the  sums  they  had  expended  in  his  expedition,  but  like- 
wise farther  support  them,  to  the  utmost  of  their  ability, 
against  the  common  enemies  of  their  liberties  and  reli- 
gion. He  had  observed  that  a  considerable  army  and 
fleet  would  be  necessary  for  the  reduction  of  Ireland, 
and  the  protection  of  Britain:  and  he  desired  they 
would  settle  the  revenue  in  such  a  manner,  that  it  might 
be  collected  without  difficulty  and  dispute.  The  sum 
total  of  the  money  expended  by  the  states-general  in 
William's  expedition,  amounted  to  seven  millions  of 
guilders,  and  the  commons  granted  600,000/.  for  the 
discharge  of  this  debt,  incurred  for  the  preservation  of 
their  rights  and  religion.  They  voted  funds  for  raising 
and  maintaining  an  army  of  two-and-twenty  thousand 
men,  as  well  as  for  equipping  a  numerous  fleet :  but  they 
provided  for  no  more  than  half  a  year's  subsistence  of 
the  troops,  hoping  the  deduction  of  Ireland  might  be 
finished  in  that  term  ;  and  this  instance  of  frugality  the 
king  considered  as  a  mark  of  their  diffidence  of  his  ad- 
ministration. The  whigs  were  resolved  to  supply  him 
gradually,  that  he  might  be  the  more  dependant  upon 
their  zeal  and  attachment :  but  he  was  not  at  all  pleased 
with  their  precaution. 

§  VII.  William  was  naturally  biassed  to  Calvinism, 
and  averse  to  persecution.  Whatever  promises  he  had 
made,  and  whatever  sentiments  of  respect  he  had  enter- 
tained for  the  church  of  England,  he  seemed  now  in  a 
great  measure  alienated  from  it,  by  the  opposition  he 
had  met  with  from  its  members,  particularly  from  the 
bishops,  who  had  thwarted  his  measures.  By  absenting 
themselves  from  parliament,  and  refusing  the  oath,  they 
had  plainly  disowned  his  title,  and  renounced  his  govern- 
ment     He  therefore  resolved  to  mortify  the  church, 

vol.  i.  *c  ' 


14  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  168*; 

and  gratify  his  own  friends  at  the  samfc  tiifte,  by  remov- 
ing the  obstacles  affixed  to  nonconformity,  that  all  Pro- 
testant dissenters  should' be  rendered  capable  of  enjoying 
and  exercising  dvii  employments.     When  he  gave  his 
assent  to  the  bill  for  suspending  the  habeas  corpus  act, 
he.  recommended  the  establishment  of  a  new  oath  in  lieu 
of  those  of  allegiance  and  supremacy:  he  expressed  his 
hope  that  they  wbiild  leave  room  for  the  admission  of 
all  his  Protestant  subjects  who  should  be  found  qualified 
for  the  service  ;  he  said,  such  a  conjunction  would  unite 
them  the  more  firmly  among  themselves,  and  strength- 
en them  against  their  common  adversaries..   In  conse- 
quence of  this  hint,  a  clause  was  inserted  in  the  bill  for 
abrogating  the  pld  and  appointing  the  new  oatha,  by 
which  the  sacramental  test  was  declared  unnecessary  in 
rendering  any  person  capable  of  enjoying  any  office  or 
employment.     It  was,  however,  rejected  by  a  great  ma- 
jority in  the  house  of  lords.     Another  clause  for  the 
same  purpose,  though  in  different  terms,  was  proposed 
by  the  king's  direction,  and  met  with  the  same  fete, 
though  in  both  cases  several  noblemen  entered  a  protest 
against  the  resolution  of  the  house. .  These  fruitless; 
efforts,  in  favour  of  dissenters,  augmented  the  prejudice 
of  ther  churchmen  against  king  William,,  who  would 
have  willingly  compromised  the  difference,  by  excusing 
the  clergy  from  the  oaths,  provided  the  dissenters  might 
be  exempted  from  the  sacramental  ttest :  but  this  was 
deemed  the  chief  bulwark  of  the  church,  arid  therefore 
the  proposal  was  rejected.     The  church-party  in  the 
house  of  lords  moved,  that,  instead  of  inserting  a  clause* 
obliging  the  clergy  to  take  the. oaths*. the  king  should 
be  empowered  to  tender  them  ;  and  in  case  of  their  rer 
fusal,  they  should  incur  the  penalty,  because  deprivation, 
or  the  apprehensions  of  it,  might  make  them  desperate, 
and  excite  them  to  form  designs  against  the  govern"-* 
ment.     This  argument  had  no  weight  with  the  com- 
mons, who\  thought  it  was  indispensably' necessary  to 


1680.  WILLIAM  AND  MARY;  15 

exact  the  oaths  of  the  clergy,  as  their  example  influenced 
the  kingdom  in  general,  and  the  youth  of  the  nation 
were  formed  under  their  instructions.  After  a  long  and 
warm  debate,  aft  the  mitigation  that  could  be  obtained, 
was  a  clause*  empowering  the  king  to  indulge  any  twelve 
clergymen,  deprived  by  virtue  of  this  act,  with  a  third 
part  of  their  benefices  during  pleasure.  Thus  the  an- 
cient oaths  of  allegiance  arid  supremacy  were  abrogated : 
the  declaration  of  non-resistance  in  the  act  of  uniformity 
was  repealed :  the  new  oath  of  allegiance  was  redubed 
to  ife  primitive  simplicity,  and  the  coronation  oath  ren* 
dered  mpre  explicit.  The  clergy  wefe  enjoined  to  take 
the  new  oaths  before  the  1st  day  of  August,  on  pain  of 
being  suspended  from  their  office  for  six  months,  and  of 
entire  deprivation,  in  case  they  should  not  take  them 
before  the  expiration  bf  this  term;  They  generally 
complied,  though  with  such  reservations  and  distinctions 
as  were  not  much  for  the  honour  of  their  sincerity . 

§  VIII.  The  king,  though  baffled  iil  his  design  against 
the  sacramental  test,  resolved  to  indulge  the  dissenters 
with  a  toleration  ;  and  a  bill  for  this  purpose  being  pre-' 
pared  by  the  earl  of  Nottingham,  was*  after  some  debate* 
passed' into  a  law,  under  the  titl6  of  an  act  for  6xempfc? 
ing  their  majesties*  Proteistant  subjects,  diisSentirig  from 
the  church  of  England/  from  the  penalties  of  certain 
laws.  It  enacted^  That  none  of  the  penal  laws  should 
be  construed  to  extehd  to  those  dissenters  who  should 
take  the'  oaths  to  the  present  government^  and  subscribe 
the  declaration  of"  the  thirtieth  year  of  the  reign  of 
Charles  II.  provided  that  they  should  hold  no  private 
assemblies  or  conventicles  *  with  the  doors  shut ;  that 
nothing  should  be  construed  i.o  exempt  them  from  the 
payment  of  tithes,  or  other  parochial  duties :  that  in 
case  of  being  chosen  into  the  office  of  constable,  church- 
warden, overseer,  &c.  and  of  scrupling  to  take  the  oaths 
annexed  to  such  offices,  they  should  be  allowed  to  exe- 
cute the  employment  by  deputy :  that  the  preachers  and  ' 

C2  ? 


16  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  I68d- 

teachers  in  congregations  of  dissenting  Protestants,  who 
should  take  the  oaths,  subscribe  the  declaration,  together 
with  all  the  articles  of  religion,  except  the,  thirty- fourth 
and  the  two  succeeding  articles,  and  part  of  the  twen- 
tieth, should  be  exempted  from  the  penalties  decreed 
against  nonconformists,  as  well  as  from  serving  upon 
juries,  or  acting  in  parish  offices  :  yet  all  justices  of  the 
peace  were  empowered  to  require  such  dissenters  to  sub-> 
scribe  the  declaration,  and  take  the  oaths  ;  and,  in  case 
of  refusal,  to  commit  them  to  prison,  without  bail  or 
mainprise.  The ,  same  indulgence  was  extended  to  Ana- 
baptists, and  even  to  Quakers,  on  their  solemn  promise, 
before  God,  to  be  faithful  to  the  king  and  queen,  and 
their  assenting  by  profession  and  asseveration  to  those  ar- 
ticles which  the  others  ratified  upon  oath :  they  were 
likewise  required  to  profess  their  belief  in  the  Trinity 
and  the  Holy  Scriptures.  Even  the  Papists  felt  the  be- 
nign influence  of  William's  moderation  in  spiritual  mat-, 
ters :  he  rejected  the  proposal  of  some  zealots,  who  ex-r 
horted  him  to  enact  severe  laws  against  popish  recusants* 
Such  a  measure,  he  observed,  would  alienate  all  the  Pa- 
pists in  Europe  from  the  interests  of  England,  and  might 
produce  a  new  Catholic  league,  which  would  render  the 
war  a  religious  quarrel  :*  besides,  he  could  not  /pretend 
to  screen  the  Protestants  of  Germany  and  Hungary, 
while  he  himself  should  persecute  the  Catholics  of  Eng- 
land. He  therefore  resolved  to  treat  them  with  lenity  ; 
and  though  they  were  not  comprehended  in  the  act, 
they  enjoyed  the  benefit  of  the  toleration. 

§  IX.  We  have  observed,  that,  in  consequence  of  the. 
motion  made  by  the  bishops  when  they  withdrew  from 
parliament,  a  bill  was  brought  into  the  house  of  lords , 
for  uniting  their  majesties'  Protestant  subjects.  This 
was  extremely  agreeable  to  the  king,  who  had  the. 
scheme  of  comprehension  very  much  at  heart.  In  the 
progress  of  the  bill  a  warm  debate  arose  about  the  .pos- 
ture of  kneeling  at  the  sacrament,  which  \vas  given  up 


.1*89.  WILLIAM  AND  MARY.  17 

in  favour  of  the  dissenters.    Another,  no  less  violent, 
ensued  upon  the  subsequent  question,  «  Whether  there 
Should  be  an  addition  of  laity  in  the  commission  to  be 
given  by  the  king  to  the  bishops  and  others  of  the  cler- 
gy, for  preparing  such  a  reformation  of  ecclesiastical  af- 
fairs as  might  be  the  means  of  healing  divisions,  andcor- 
recting  whatever  might  be  erroneous  or  defective  in  the 
constitution/*    A  great  number  of  the  temporal  lords 
insisted  warmly  on  this  addition,  and  when  it  was  re- 
jected, four  peers  entered  a  formal  protest.  Bishop  Bur- 
net was  a  warm  stickler  for  the  exclusion  of  the  laity ; 
and  in  all  probability,  manifested  this  warmth  in  hopes 
of  ingratiating  himself  with  his  brethren,  among  whom 
his  character  was  very  far  from  being  popular.    But  the 
merit  of  this  sacrifice  was  destroyed  by  the  arguments 
he  had  used  for  dispensing  with  the  posture  of  kneeling 
at  the  sacrament :  and  by  his  proposing,  in  another 
proviso  of  the  bill,  that  the  subscribers,  instead  of  ex-  * 
pressing  assent  or  consent,  should  only  submit,  with  a 
promise  of  conformity. 

§  X.  The  bill  was  with  difficulty  passed  in  the  house 
of  lords ;  but  the  commons  treated  it  with  neglect.     By 
this  time,  a  great  number  of  malecontent  members,  who 
had  retired  from  parliament,  were  returned,  with  a  view 
to  thwart  the  administration,   though  they  could  not 
prevent  the  settlement.     Instead  of  proceeding  with  the 
bill,  they  presented  an  address  to  the  king,  thanking  him 
for  his  gracious  declaration,  and  repeated  assurances, 
that  he  would  maintain  the  church  of  England  as  by 
law  established ;  a  church  whose  doctrine  and  practice 
had  evinced  its  loyalty  beyond  all  contradiction.     They 
likewise  humbly  besought  his  majesty  to  issue  writs  for 
calling  a  convocation  of  the  clergy,  to  be  consulted  in 
ecclesiastical  matters,  according  to  the  ancient  usage  of 
.parliaments ;  ar\d  they  declared  they  would  forthwith 
take  into  consideration  proper  methods  for  giving  ease  to 
Protestant  dissenters.   Though  the  king  was  displeased 


18  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1680. 

at  this,  address*  iji  which  the  lords  also  had  concurred, 
he  returned  a  civil  answer  by  the  mouth  of  the  earl  of 
Nottiqgham,  profi^nghis  regard  for  the. church  of 
England/  which  should  always  he  his  peculiar  care,  re- 
commending the  dissenters  to  their  protection,  ?nd  pro- 
mising to  summon  a  convocation  as  soon  as  such  a  mea- 
sure should  be  convenient.  This  message  produced  no 
effect  in  favour  of  the  bill,  which  lay  neglected  on  the 
table.  Those  who  moved  firf  it,  had  no  other  view  than 
that  of  displaying  their  moderation ;  and  now  they  ex- 
cited their  friends. to  oppose  it.  with  all  their  interest. 
Others  were  afraid  of  espousing  it,  lest  they  should  be 
stigmatized  as  enemies  to  the  church  ;  and  a  great  num- 
ber of  the  most,  eminent  Presbyterians  were  averse  to 
a  scheme  of  comprehension,  which  diminished  their 
strength,  and  weakened  the  importance  of  the  party. 
Being,  therefore,  violently  opposed  on  one  hand,  and 
but  faintly  supported  on  the  other,  no  wonder  it  miscar- 
ried. The  king,  however,  \yas  so  bent  upon  the  execu- 
tion of  his  design,  that  it  was  next  session:  revived  in 
another  form,  though  with  no  better  success.    . 

§  XI.  The  next  object  that  engrossed  the  attention  of 
the  parliament,  was  the  settlement  of  a  revenue  for  the 
support  of  .the  government  Hitherto  there  had  been 
no  distinction  of  what  was  allotted  for  the  king's  use, 
and  What  was  assigned  for  the  service  of  the  public ;  so 
that  the  sovereign  was  entirely  master  of  the  whole  sup- 
ply. As  the  revenue  in  the  late  reigns  had  been  often 
embezzled  and  misapplied,  it  was  how  resolved  that  a 
certain  sum  should  be  set  apart  for  the  inaintainance  of 
the  king's  household,  and  the  support  of  his  dignity ; 
and  that  the  rest  of  the  public  money  should  be  em- 
ployed under  the  inspection  of  parliament.  According*- 
ly,  since  this  period,  the  commons  have  appropriated  the 
yearly  supplies  to  certain  specified  services  :  and  an  ac- 
count of  the  application  has  been  constantly  submitted 
to  both  houses,  at  the  next  session.     At  this  juncture, 


IW  WILLIAM  AND  MARY.  19 

the  prevailing  party,  or  the  whigs,  determined  that  the 
revenue,  should  be  granted  from  year  to  year,  or  at  least 
for  a  small  term  of  years ;  that  the  king  might  find  him- 
self  dependant  upon  ithe  parliament,  and  merit  the  re- 
newal of  the  grant  by  a  just  and  popular  administration. 
In  pursuance  of  this  maxim,  when  the  revenue  fell  under 
consideration,  they,  on  pretence  of  charges  and  anticipa- 
tions which  they  .had  not  time  to  examine,  granted  it  by 
a  provisional  act  for  one  year  only.  *  The  civil  list  was 
settled  at  <5oo,Q0O/.,  chargeable  with  the  appointments 
of  the  queen-dowager,  the  prince  and  princess  of  Den* 
mark,  the  judges,  and  mareschal  Schomberg,  to  whom 
the  parliament  had  already  granted  100,000/.  inconsider- 
ation  of  his  important  services  to  the  nation.  The  com- 
mons also  voted,  that  a  constant  revenue  of  1 ,200,000/. 
should  be  established  for  the  support  of  the  crown  in 
time  of  peace. 

4  XII.  The  king  took  umbrage  at  these  restraints  laid 
upon  the  application  of  the  public  money,  which  were 
the  most  salutary  fruits  of  the  revolution*  He  consider- 
ed them  as  marks  of  diffidence,  by  which  he  was  distin- 
guished from  his  predecessors ;  and  thought  them  an 
ungrateful  return  for  the  services  he  had  done  the  na- 
tion. The  tones  perceived  his  disgust,  and  did  not  fail 
to  foment  his  jealousy  against  their  adversaries,  which 
was  confirmed  by  a  fresh  effort  of  the  whigs,  in  relation 
to  a  militia.  A  bill  was  brought  into  the  house,  for  regu* 
lating  it  in  such  a  manner  as  would  have  rendered  it  in 
«l  great  measure  independent  both  of  the  king,  and  the 
^lords-lieutenants  of  counties  ;  these  being  generally 
-peers.  The  bill  was  suffered  to  lie  neglected  on  the  table; 
but  the  attempt  confirmed  the  suspicion  of  the  king,  who 
iegan  to  think  himself  in  danger  of  being  enslaved  by  a 
Republican  party.  The  tories  had,  by  .  the  channel  of 
Nottingham,  made  proffers  of  service  to  his  majesty : 
but  complained  at  the  same  time,  that  as  they  were  in 
^danger  of  being  prosecuted  for  their  lives  and  fortunes, 


SO  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND,  W6fr. 

they  could  not,  without  aa  act  of  indemnity,  exert 
themselves  in  favour  erf  the  crown,  lest  they  should  in- 
cur a  persecution  from  their  implacable  enemies. 

4  XIII.  These  remonstrances  made  such  impression 
on  the  king,  that  he  sent  a  message  to  the  house  by  Mr. 
Hambden,  recommending  a  bill  of  indemnity  as  the  most 
effectual  means  for  putting  an  end  to  all  controversies, 
distinctions,  and  occasions  of  discord.  He  desired  it 
might  be  prepared  with  all  convenient  expedition,  and 
with  such  exceptions  only  as  should  seem  necessary  for 
the  vindication  of  public  justice,  the  safety  of  him  and 
his  consort,  and  the  settlement  and  welfare  of  the  nation. 
An  address  of  thanks  to  his  majesty  was  unanimously 
voted.  Nevertheless,  his  design  was  frustrated  by  the 
backwardness  of  the  whigs,  who  proceeded  so  slowly  in 
the  bill,  that  it  could  not  be  brought  to  maturity  before 
the  end  of  the  session.  They  wanted  to  keep  the 
scourge  over  the  heads  of  their  enemies,  until  they 
should  find  a  proper  opportunity  for  revenge ;  and,  in 
the  meantime,  restrain  them  from  opposition,  by  the 
terror  of  impending  vengeance*  They  affected  to  insi- 
nuate that  the  king's  design  was  to  raise  the  prerogative 
as  high  as  it  had  been  in  the  preceding  reigns ;  and  that 
he  for  that  purpose  pressed  an  act  of  indemnity,  by  vir- 
tue of  which  he  might  legally  use  the  instruments  of  the 
late  tyranny.  The  earls  of  Monmouth  and  Warrington 
industriously  infused  these  jealousies  into  the  minds  of 
their  party ;  on  the  other  hand,  the  earl  of  Nottingham  in- 
flamed William's  distrust  of  his  old  friends  :  both  sides 
succeeded  in  kindling  an  animosity,  which  had  like  to 
have  produced  confusion,  notwithstanding  the  endea- 
vours used  by  the  earls  of  Shrewsbury  and  Devonshire 
to  allay  those  heats,  and  remove  the  suspicions  that  mu- 
tually prevailed. 

^  XIV.  It  was  now  judged  expedient  to  pass  an  act 
for  settling  the  succession  of  the  crown,  according  to  the 
former  resolution  of  the  convention.     A  bill  for  this 


168*  WILLIAM  AND  MARY.  21 

purpose  was  brought  into  the  lower  house,  with  a  clause 
disabling  Papists  from  succeeding  to  the  throne :  to  this 
the  lords  added,  "  Or  such  as  should  marry  Papists/9  ab- 
solving the  subject  in  that  case  from  allegiance.  The  bi- 
shop of  Salisbury,  by  the  king's  direction,  proposed  that  the 
princess  Sophia,  dutchess  of  Hanover,  and  her  posterity, 
should  be  nominated  in  the  act  of  succession,  as  the  next 
Protestant  heirs,  failing  issue  of  the  king,  and  Anne  prin- 
cess of  Denmark.  These  amendments  gave  rise  to  warm 
debates  in  the  lower  house,  where  they  were  vigorously 
opposed,  hot  only  by  those  who  wished  well  in  secret  to 
the  late  king  and  the  lineal  succession,  but  likewise  by 
the  republican  party,  who  hoped  to  see  monarchy  alto* 
gether  extinguished  in  England,  by  the  death  of  the 
three  persons  already  named  in  the  bill  of  succession. 
The  lords  insisted  upon  their  amendments,  and  several 
fruitless  conferences  were  held  between  the  two  houses. 
At  length  the  bill  was  dropt  for  the  present,  in  conse- 
quence of  an  event  which  in  a  gfeat  measure  dissipated 
the  fears  of  a  popish  successor.  This  was  the  delivery 
of  the  princess  Anne,  who,  on  the  27  th  day  of  July, 
brought  forth  a  son,  christened  by  the  name  of  William, 
and  afterward  created  duke  of  Gloucester. 

§  XV.  In  the  midst  of  these  domestic  disputes,  Wil- 
liam did  not  neglect  the  affairs  of  the  continent.  He 
retained  all  his  former  influence  in  Holland,  as  his  coun- 
trymen had  reason  to  confide  in  his  repeated  assurances 
of  inviolable  affection.  The  great  scheme  which  he  had 
projected  of  a  confederacy  against  France,  began  at  this 
period  to  take  effect.  The  princes  of  the  empire,  as- 
sembled in  the  diet,  solemnly  exhorted  the  emperor  to 
declare  war  against  the  French  king,  who  had  commit- 
ted numberless  infractions  of  the  treaties  of  Munster, 
Osnabruck,  Nimeguen,  and  the  truce;  invaded  their 
country  without  provocation,  and  evinced  himself  an  in- 
veterate enemy  of  the  holy  Roman  empire.  They 
therefore  besought  his  imperial  majesty  to  conclude  a 


22  HISTORY  OF  KNGIAND.  180K 

treaty  of  peace  with  the  Turks,  who  had  offered  advan- 
tageous terms,  and  proceed  to  an  open  rupture  with 
Lewis :  in  which  case  they  would  consider  it  as  a,  war  of 
the  empire,  and  support  their  head  in  the  most  effectual 
manner.  The  states-general  published  a  declaration 
against  the  common  enemy,  taxing  him  with  manifold 
infractions  of  the  treaty  of  commerce ;  with  having  in* 
volved  the  subjects  of  the  republic  in  the  persecution 
which  he  had  raised  against  the  Protestants  ;  with  hav-~ 
ing  cajoled  and  insulted  them  with  deceitful  promises 
and  insolent  threats ;  with  having  plundered  and  op- 
pressed the  Dutch  i  merchants  and  traders  in  France ; 
and,  filially,  with  having  declared  war  against  the  States, 
without, any  plausible  reason  assigned.  The  elector  of 
Brandenburgh  denounced  war  against  France,  as  a  power 
whose  perfidy,  cruelty,  and  ambition,  it  was  the  duty  of 
every  prince  to  oppose.  The  marquis  de  Castanaga, 
governor  of  the  Spanish  Netherlands,  issued  a  counter- 
declaration  to  that  of  Lewis,  who  had  declared  against  his 
master.  He  accused  the  French  king  of  having  laid  waste 
the  empire,  without  any  regard  to  the  obligations  of  re- 
Jigipn  and  humanity,  or  even  to  the  laws  of  war ;  of 
having  countenanced  the  most  barbarous  acts  of  cruelty 
and  oppression ;  and  of  having  intrigued  with  the  ene- 
mies of  Christ  for  the  destruction  of  the  empire.  The 
emperor  negotiated  an  alliance  offensive  and  defensive 
with  the  states-general,  binding  the  contracting  parties 
to  co-operate  with  their  whole  power  against  France  and 
her  allies.  It  was  stipulated,  that  neither  side  should 
engage  in  a  separate  treaty,  on  any. pretence  whatsoever; 
that  no  peace  should  be  admitted,  until  the  treaties  of 
Westphalia,  Osnabruck,  Munster,  and  the  Pyrenees, 
should  have  been  vindicated :  that,  in  case  of  a  negotia- 
tion for  a  peace  or  truce,  the  transactions  on  both  sides 
should  be  communicated  bmajide :  and  that  Spain  and 
England  should  be  invited  to  accede  to  the  treaty.  In 
ft  separate  article,  the  contracting  powers  agreed,  that, 


r«8&  WILLIAM  AN  I>  MARY.  2$ 

in  case  of  the  Spanish  king's  dying  without  issue,  the 
states-general  should  assist  the  emperor  with  all  their 
forces  to  take  possession  of  that  monarchy :  that  they 
should  use  their  friendly  endeavours  with  the  princes 
electors,  their  allies,  towards  elevating  his  son  Joseph  to 
the  dignity  of  king  of  the  Romans;  and  employ  their 
utmost  force  against  France,  should  she  attempt  to  op-> 
pose  his  elevation. 

$  XVI.  William,  who  was  the  soul  of  this  confede- 
racy, found  no  difficulty  in  persuading  the  English  to 
undertake  a  war  against  their  old  enemies  and  rivals. 
On  the  1 6th  day  of  April,  Mr.  Hambden  made  a  motion 
for  taking  into  consideration  the  state  of  the  kingdom 
with'  respect  to  France,  and  foreign  alliances ;  and  the 
commons  unanimously  resolved,  that,  in  case  his  majes* 
ty  should  think  fit  to  engage  in  a  war  with  France,  they 
would,  in  a  parliamentary  way,  enable  him  to  carry  it  on 
with  vigour.  An  address  was  immediately  drawn  up, 
and  presented  to  the  king,  desiring  hie  -would  seriously 
cdnsider  the  destructive  methods  taken  of  late  years  by 
the  Ftench  king  against  the  trade,  quiet,  and  interest  of 
the  nation,  particularly  his  present  invasion  of  Ireland, 
and  supporting  the  rebels  in  that  kingdom.  They  did 
not  -doubt  but  the  alliances  already  made,  and  those  that 
might  hereafter  be  concluded  by  his  majesty,  would  be 
sufficient  to  reduce  the  French  king  to  such  a  condition, 
that  it  should  not  be  in  his  power  tb  violate  the  peace 
of  Christendom,  nor  prejudice  the  trade  and  prosperity 
of  England  ;  in  the  meantime  they  assured  his  majesty 
he  might  depend  upon  the  assistance  of  his  parliament, 
according  to  (he  vote  which  had  passed  in  the  house  of 
commons.  This  was  a  welcome  address  to  king  Wil- 
Haft.'  He  assured  them,  that  no  part  of  the  supplies 
which: they  might  grant  for  the  prosecution  of  the  war 
should  be  misapplied  ;  and,  on  the  7  th  day  of  May,  he 
declared  war  against  the  French  monarch.  On  this  occa- 
sion, Lewis  was  charged  with  having  ambitiously  invaded 


%4  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  KS* 

the  territories  of  the  emperor,  and  denounced  war  against 
the  allies  of  England,  in  violation  of  the  treaties  con- 
firmed under  the  guarantee  of  the  English  crown  ;  with 
having  encroached  upon  the  fishery  of  Newfoundland, 
invaded  the  Caribbee  islands,  taken  forcible  possession 
of  New  York  and  Hudson's-bay,  made  depredations  on 
the  English  at  sea,  prohibited  the  importation  of  English 
manufactures,  disputed  the  right  of  the  flag,  persecuted 
many  English  subjects  on  account  of  religion,  contrary 
to  express  treaties  and  the  law  of  nations,  and  sent  an 
qrmament  to  Ireland,  in  support  of  the  rebels  of  that 
kingdom. 

§  XVII.  Paving,  thus  described  the  progress  of  the 
revolution  in  England,  we  shall  now  briefly  explain  the 
measures  that  were  prosecuted  in  Scotland,  towards  the 
establishment  of  William  on  the  throne  of  that  king- 
dom. The  meeting  of  the  Scottish  convention  was 
fixed  for  the  14th  day  of  March ;  and  both  parties  em- 
ployed all  their  interest' to  influence  the  election  of 
members.  The  duke  of  Hamilton,  and  all  the  Presby- 
teriatis,  declared  for  William.  The  duke  of  Gordon 
maintained  the  castle  of  Edinburgh  for  his  old  master ; 
but,  as  he  had  neglected  to  lay  in  a  store  of  provisions, 
he  depended  entirely  upon  the  citizens  for  subsistence. 
The  partisans  of  James  were  headed  by  the  earl  of  Bal- 
carras,  and  Graham  viscount  Dundee,  who  employed 
their  endeavours  to  preserve  union  aipong  the  individuals 
of  their  party ;  to  confirm  the  duke  of  Gordon,  who 
began  to  waver  in  his  attachment  to  their  sovereign ; 
and  to  manage  their  intrigues  in  such  a  manner  as  to 
.derive  some  advantage  to  their  cause  from  the  transac- 
tions of  the  ensuing  session.  When  the  lords  and  com- 
mons assembled  at  Edinburgh,  the  bishop  of  that  dio- 
cess,  who  officiated  as  chaplain  to  the  convention,  prayed 
for  the  restoration  of  king  James.  The  first  dispute 
turned  upon  the  choice  of  a'president.  The  friends  of 
the  late  king  set  up  the  marquis  of  Athol  in  opposition 


1*8*  WILLIAM  AND  MARY*  25 

to  the  dole  of  Hamilton ;  but"  this  last  was  elected  by 
a  considerable  majority ;  and  a  good  number  of  the  other 
party,  finding  their  cause  the  weakest,  deserted  it  from 
that  moment.  The  earls  of  Lothian  and  Tweedale  were 
sent  as  deputies,  to  require  the  duke  of  Gordon,  in  the 
name  of  the  estates,  to  quit  the  castte  in  four-and-twenty 
hours,  and  leave  the  charge  of  it  to  the  Protestant  officer 
next  in  command.  The  duke,  though  in  himself  irre- 
solute, was  animated  by  Dundee  to  demand  such  con- 
ditions as  the  convention  would  not  grant.  The  nego- 
tiation proving  ineffectual,  the  states  ordered  the  heralds, 
in  all  their  -formalities,  to  summon  him  to  surrender  the 
castle  immediately,  on  pain  of  incurring  the  penalties  of 
high-treason ;  and  he  refusing  to  obey  their  mandate, 
was  proclaimed  a  traitor.  All  persons  were  forbid,  un- 
der the  same  penalties,  to  aid,  succour,  or  correspond 
with  him,  and  the  castle  was  blocked  up  with  the 
troops  of  the  city. 

§  XVTII.  Next  day  an  express  arrived  from  London, 
with  a  letter  from  kipg  William  to  the  estates  ;  and,  at 
the  same  time,  another  from  James  was  presented  by 
one  Crane,  an  English  domestic  of  the  abdicated  queen. 
William  observed,  that  he  had  called  a  meeting  of  their 
estates  at  the  desire  of  the  nobility  and  gentry  of  Scotland 
assembled  at  London,  who  requested  that  he  would  take 
upon  himself  the  administration  of  their  affairs.  He 
exhorted  them  to  concert  measures  for  settling  the  peace 
of  the  kingdom  upon  a  solid  foundation :  and  to  lay  aside 
animosities  and  factions,  which  served  only  to  impede 
that  salutary  settlement.  He  professed  himself  sensible 
of  the  good  effects  that  would  arise  from  a  union  of 
the  two  kingdoms ;  and  assured  them  he  would  use  his 
best  endeavours  to  promote  such  a  coalition.  A  com- 
mittee being  appointed  to  draw  up  a  respectful  answer  to 
these  assurances,  a  debate  ensued  about  the  letter  from 
the  late  king  James.  This  they  resolved  to  favour  with 
a  reading,  after  the  members  should  have  subscribed  an 


2«  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND/  ifcW. 

act,  declaring,  that  notwithstanding  any  thing  that  might 
be  contained  in  the  letter  for  dissolving  the  convention,, 
or  impeding  their  procedure,  they  were  a  free  and  law- 
ful meeting  of  the  states ;  and  would  continue  undis- 
solved, until  they  should  have  settled  and  secured  the. 
Protestant  religion,  the  government,  laws,/ and  liberties, 
of  the  kingdom*  Having  taken  this  precaution*  they! 
proceeded  to  examine  the  letter  of  the  late  sovereign, 
who  conjured  them  to  support  his  interest  as.  faithful 
subjects,  arid  eternize  their  names  by  a  loyalty  suitable 
to  their  former  professions.  He  said  he  would  not  fail 
to  give  them  such  a  speedy  and  powerful  assistance  as. 
would  enable  them  to  defend  themselves  from  any  foreign 
attempt ;  and  even  to  assert  his  right  against  those  ene- 
mies who  had  depressed  it  by  the  blackest  usurpations 
and  unnatural  attempts,  which  the  Almighty  .God  would 
not  allow  to  pass  unpunished.  He  offered  pardon  to 
all  those  who  should  return  to  their  duty  before  the  last 
day  of  the,  month ;  and  threatened  to  punish  [  rjgorouisly 
such  as  should  stand  out  in  rebellion  against  him  and  his 
authority. 

.  §  XIX.  This  address  produced  very  little  effect  in. 
favour  of  the  unfortunate  exile,  whose,  friends  were? 
greatly  out-numbered  in  this  assembly.,  His  messen- 
ger Ivas  onlered  into  custody,  an4  afterward  dismissed 
with  a.  pass  instead  of  m  answer.  James,  foreseeing 
this  contempt,  had*  by  an  instrument  dated  in  Ireland, 
authorized  the .  archbishop  of  Glasgow,  the  earl  of  Bak 
carras,  and  the  viscount  Duridee,  to  call  a  convention  of; 
the  estates  at  Stirling.  These  three  depended  on  the 
interest  of  the  marquis  !of  Athol  and  the,  e^rl  of  Mar, 
who  professed  the :  warmest  affection ,  for  thp.  late  king ; 
and  th6y  hoped' a^eoea^ion  of  their  friends  would  em-' 
barrass  the  convention  j  so  as  to  retard  the  settlement  of 
king  William.  Their  expectations,  however,  were  dis- 
appointed. Athol  deserted  their  cause ;  arid  Mar  suffer- 
ed himself  to  be  intercepted  in  his  retreat.     The  rest  of 


1689:  WILLIAM  AND . MAUY. :  27 

their  party  were,  by  the  vigilance  of  the  duke  of  Hamil* 
ton,  prevented  from  leaving  the  converi  tion,  except  the 
viscount  Dundee,  who  retreated  to  the  mountains  with 
about  fifty  horse,  and  was  pursued  by  order  of  the-estafces. 
This  design  being  frustrated,  the  convention  approved; 
and  recognised,  by  a  solemn  act^  the  conduct  of  the 
nobility  and  gentlemen  who  had  entreated  the  king  of 
England  to  take  upon  him  the  administration.    They: 
acknowledged  their  obligation  to  the  prince  of  Orangey 
who  had  prevented  the  destruction  of  their  laws,  xeli-: 
gbn,  and  fundamental  constitution;  they  besought  bis 
highness  to  assume  the  reins  of  government  for  that' 
kingdom ,  they  issued  a  proclamation,  requiring  all  per* 
sons  from  sixteen  to  sixty,  to  be  in  readiness  to  take! 
arms  when  called  upon  for  that  purpose :  they  conferred 
the  command  of  their  horse-militia  upon  sir  Patrick 
Hume,  who  was  formerly  attainted  for  having  been  con-* 
cerned in  Argyle's  insurrection:  they  levied  eight  hun-* 
dreri  men  for.  a  guard  to  the  city  of  Edinburgh,  and 
constituted  the  earl  of  Leven  their  commander  :  they 
put  the  militia  all  over  the  kingdom  into  the  hands  of 
those  on  whom  they  could  rely :  they  created  the  earl 
of  Mar  governor  of  Stirling-castle :  they  received  a  rein-* 
forcement  of  five  regiments  from  England,  under  the 
command .  of  Mackay,  whom  they  appointed  .their  ge- 
neral;  and  they  issued  orders  for  securing  all  disaffected: 
persons.    Then  they  dispatched  lofct  Ross,  with  an: 
answer  to  king  William's  letter,  professing  their  gratis 
tude  to  their  deliverer,  and  congratulating  him  upon  his> 
success.    They  thanked  him  for  assuming  the  adminis^ 
tration  of  their  affair^  and  assembling  a  convention  of 
their  estates.    They  declared  they  would  take  effectual 
and  speedy  measure^  for  securing  the  Protestant  religion, 
as  well  as  for  establishing  the  government,  laws,  and 
liberties  of  the  kingdom.    They  as&utfed  him  they  Would, 
as  much  as  lay  in  their  power,  avoid  disputes  and  ann 


28  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1680.' 

mosities ;  and  desired  the  continuance  of  his  majesty's 
care  and  protection. 

$  XX.  After  the  departure  of  lord  Ross,  they  appoint- 
ed a  committee,  consisting  of  eight  lords,  eight  knights, 
and  as  many  burgesses,  to  prepare  the  plan  of  a  new  set- 
tlement ;  btit  this  resolution  was  not  taken  without  a 
vigorous  opposition  from  some  remaining  adherents  of 
the  late  king,  headed  by  the  archbishop  of  Glasgow  ; 
all  the  other  prelates,  except  he  of  Edinburgh,  having 
already  deserted  the  convention.     After  warm  debates, 
the  committee  agrted  in  the  follwing  vote : — "  The 
estates  of  the  kingdom  of  Scotland  find  and  declare, 
That  king  JamesVII.  being  a  professed  Papist,  did  assume 
the  royal  power,  and  act  as  a  king,  without  ever  taking 
the  oath  required  by  law ;  and  had,  by  the  advice  of 
evil  and  wicked  counsellors,  invaded  the  fundamental 
constitution  of  this  kingdom,  and  altered  it  from  a  legal 
and  limited  monarchy  to  an  arbitrary,  despotic  power, 
and  had  governed  the  same  to  the  subversion  of  the 
Protestant  religion,  and  violation  of  the  laws  and  liber* 
ties  of  the  nat  ion,  inverting  all  the  ends  of  government ; 
whereby  he  had  forfaulted  the  right  of  the  crown,  and 
the  throne  was  become  vacant."     When  this  vote  was 
reported,  the  bishop  of  Edinburgh  argued  strenuously 
against  it,  as  containing  a  charge  of  which  the  king  was 
innocent ;  and  he  proposed  that  his  majesty  should  be 
invited  to  return  to  his  Scottish  dominions.     All  his 
arguments  were  defeated  or  over-ruled,  and  the  house 
confirmed  the  vote,  which  was  immediately  enacted  into 
a  law  by  a  great  majority.     The  lord-president  declared 
the  throne  vacant,  and  proposed  that  it  might  be  filled 
with  William  and  Mary,  king  and  queen  of  England. 
The  committee  was  ordered  to  prepare  an  act  for  set- 
tling the  crown  upon  thai*  majesties,  together  with  an 
instrument  qf  government  for  securing  the  subjects  from 
the  grievances  under  which  they  laboured. 


iW&;  WILLIAM  AND  MARY.  29 

§  XXI.  On  the  1  lth  day  of  April,  this  act,  with  the 
conditions  of  inheritance,  and  the  instrument,  were  re- 
ported, considered,  unanimously  approved,  and  solemnly  v 
proclaimed  at  the  market-cross  of  Edinburgh,  in  pre- 
sence of  the  lord-president,  assisted  by  the  lord-provost 
and  magistracy  of  the  city,  the  duke  of  Qneensberry,  the 
marquisses  of  Athol  and  Douglas,  together  with  a  great 
number  of  the  nobility  and  gentry.  At  the  same  time 
they  published  another  proclamation,  forbidding  all  per- 
sons to  acknowledge,  obey,  assist,  or  correspond  with 
the  late  king  James :  or,  by  word,  writing,  or  sermon, 
to  dispute  or  disown  the  royal  authority  of  king  William 
and  queen  Mary  ;  or  to  misconstrue  the  proceedings  of 
the  estates,  or  create  jealousies  or  misapprehensions 
with  regard  to  the  transactions  of  the  government,  on 
pain  of  incurring  the  most  severe  penalties*  Then, 
having  settled  the  coronation  oath,  they  granted  a  com- 
mission to  the  earl  of  Argyle  for  the  lords,  to  sir  James 
Montgomery  for  the  knights,  and  to  sir  John  Dairy  tu- 
ple for  the  boroughs,  empowering  them  to  repair  to 
London,  and  invest  their  majesties  with  the  government: 
This  affair  being  discussed,  the  convention  appointed 
a  committee  to  take  care  of  the  public  peace,  and 
adjourned  to  the  2 1st  day  of  May.  On  the  11th 
day  of  that  month,  the  Scottish  commissioners  being 
introduced  to  their  majesties  at  Whitehall,  presented 
first  a  preparatory  letter  from  the  estates,  then  the  instru- 
ment of  government,  with  a  paper  containing  a  recital 
of  the  grievances  of  the  nation  ;  and  an  address,  desir- 
ing his  majesty  to  convert  the  convention  into  a  parlia- 
ment. The  king  having  graciously  promised  to  concur 
with. them  in  all  just  measures  for  the  interest  of  the 
kingdom,  the  coronation  oath  was  tendered  to  their 
majesties  by  the  earl  of  Argyle.  As  it  contained  a 
clause,  importing  that  they  should  root  out  heresy,  the 
king  declared,  that  he  did  not  mean  by  these  words,  that 
be  should  be  under  an  obligation  to  act  as  a  persecutor: 

vol.  i.  *  D 


30  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1669. 

the  commissioners  replying,  that  such  was  not  the  mean- 
ing or  import  of  the  oath,  he  desired  them,  and  others 
present,  to  bear  witness  to  the  exception  he  had  made. 
-   §  XXII.  In  the  meantime,  lord  Dundee  exerted  him- 
self with  uncommon  activity  in  behalf  of  his  master. 
He  had  been  summoned  by  a  trumpet  to  return  to  the 
Convention,  refused  to  obey  the  citation,  on  pretence 
that  the  whigs  had  made  an  attempt  upon  his  Kfe ;  and 
that  the  deliberations  of  the  estates  were  influenced  by 
the  neighbourhood  of  English  troops,  under  the  com-, 
mand  of  Mackay.     He  was  forthwith  declared  a  fugi- 
tive, outlaw,  and  rebel.     He  was  rancorously  hated  by. 
the  Presbyterians,  on  whom  he  had  exercised  some 
cruelties,  as  an  officer  under  the  former  government : 
and  for  this  reason  the  states  resolved  to  inflict  upon  him 
exemplary  punishment.     Parties  were  detached  in  pur- 
suit of  him  and  Balcarras.     This  last  fell  into  their  hands, 
and  was  committed  to  a  common  prison ;  but  Dundee 
fought  his  way  through  the  troops  that  surrounded  him, 
and  escaped  to  the  Highlands,  where  he  determined  to 
take  arms  in  favour  of  James,  though  that  prince  had 
forbid  him  to  make  any  attempt  of  this  nature,  until  he 
should  receive  a  reinforcement  from  Ireland.     While 
this  officer  was  employed  in  assembling  the  clans  of  his 
party,  king  William  appointed  the  duke  of  Hamilton 
commissioner  to  the  convention-parliament.     The  post 
of  secretary  for  Scotland  was  bestowed  upon  lord  Melvil, 
a  weak  and  servile  nobleman,  who  had  taken  refuge  in 
Holland  from  the  violence  of  the  late  reigns  ;  but  the 
king  depended  chiefly  for  advice  upon  Dalrymple  lord 
Stair,  president  of  the  college  of  justice,  an  old  erafty  fa- 
natic, whd  for  forty  years  had  complied  in  all  things 
with  all, governments.     Though  these  were  rigid  Pres- 
byterians, the  king,  to  humour. the  opposite  party,  ad- 
mitted some  individuals  of  the  episcopal  nobility  to  the 
council-board  ;  and  this  intermixture,  instead  of  allaying 
animosities,  served  onlv  to  sow  the  seeds  of  discord  and 


1689.  WILLIAM  AND  MARY.  31 

• 

confusion.  The  Scottish  convention,  in  their  detail  of 
grievances,  enumerated  the  lords  of  the  articles ;  the  act 
of  parliament  in  the  reign  of  Charles  II.  by  which  the 
king's  supremacy  was  raised  so  high,  that  he  could  pre- 
scribe any  mode  of  religion  according  to  his  pleasure  ; 
a;id  the  superiority  of  any  office  in  the  church  above  that 
of  presbyters.  The  king,  in  his  instructions  to  the  lord- 
commissioner,  consented  to  the  regulation  of  the  lords 
of  the  articles,  though  he  would  tiot  allow  the  institution 
to  £>e  abrogated  ;  he  was  contented  that  the  act  relating 
tp  the  king's  supremacy  should  be  rescinded,  and  that 
the.chUrch-gpvernment  should  be  established  in  such  a 
manqer  as  would  be  most  agreeable  to  the  inclinations  of 
the  people.  -..,".. 

§  XXIII.  On  the  17th  day  of  June,  duke  Hamilton 
opened  the  Scottish  parliament,  after  the  convention  had 
assumed  this  name,  in  consequence  of  an  act  passed  by 
his  majesty's  direction;  but  the  members  in  general 
were  extremely  chagrined  when  they  found  the  commis- 
sioners so:  much  restricted  in  the  affair  of  the  lords  of 
the  articles,  which  they  considered  as  their  chief  griev- 
ance/ The  king  permitted  that  the  estates  should 
choose  the  lords  by  their  own  suffrages ;  and  that  they 
should  be  at  liberty  to  re-consider  any  subject  which  the 
said  lords  might  reject.  He  afterward  indulged  the 
three  estates  with  the  choice  of  eleven  delegates  each,  for 
this  committee,  to  be  elected  monthly,  or  oFtefter,  if 
they  should  think  fit :  but  even  these  concessions  proved 
unsatisfactory,   while   the  institution    itself  remained. 

f  The  lords  of  the  articles,  by  the  gradual  usurpation  of  the  crown,  ac- 
tually constituted  a  grievance  intolerable  in  a  free  nation.    The  king  em- 
.  powered  the  commissioner  to  choose  eight  bishops,  whom  he  authorized 
to  nominate  eight  noblemen  :  these  together  chose  eight  barons  and  eight 
burgesses,  and  this  whole  number,  in  conjunction  with  the  officers  of  state 
as  supermi  roeraries,  constituted  the  l#rds  of  the  articles.    This  committee 
possessed  the  sole  exclusive  right  and  liberty  of  bringing  in  motions, 
making  overtures  for  redressing  wrongs,  and  proposing  means  and  ex- 
pedients for  the  relief,  safety,  and  benefit  of  the  subjects.—  Proceedings  of 
ike  Scots  Parliament  vindicated, 

D  2 


32  HttXQRY  OB  ENGLAND.  ItiK*. 

Their  discontents  were  not  even  appeased  by  the  passing 
of  an  act,  abolishing  prelacy.  Indeed,  their  resentment . 
was  inflamed  by  another  consideration ;  namely,  that  of 
the  king's  having  given  seats  in  the  council  to  some  in- 
dividuals attached  to  the  hierarchy.  They  manifested 
their  sentiments  on  this  subject  by  bringing  in  a  bill, 
^eluding  from  any  public  trust,  place,  or  employment, 
under  their  majesties,  all  such  as  had  been  concerned  in 
the  encroachments  of  the  late  reign,  or  had  discovered 
disaffection  to  the  late  happy  change,  or  in  any  way  re- 
tarded or  obstructed  the  designs  of  the  convention.  This 
measure  was  prosecuted  with  great  warmth ;  and  the  bill : 
passed  through  all  the!  forma  of  the  house,  but  proved 
ineffectual,  for  want  of  the  royal  assent. 

§  XXIV,  Nor  were  they  less  obstinate  in  the  affair 
of  the  jtadges,  whom  the  king  had  ventured  to  appoint : 
by  virtue  of  his  own  prerogative.  The  malecontents 
brought  in  a  bill  declaring  the  bench  vacant,  as  it  was  at 
the  restoration  i  asserting  their  own  right  to  examine  - 
and  approve  those  who  should  be  appointed  to  fill  it ; 
providing,  that  if  in  time  to  cone  any  such  total  vacancy 
should  occur,  the  nomination  should  be  in  the  king  or 
qaetfn,  or  regent  for  the  time  being,  and  the  parliament 
retain  the  right  of  approbation  ;  and  that  all  the  clauses 
in  the  several  acts  relating  to  the  admission  of  the  ordi- 
nary lords  of  session,  and  their  qualification  for  that  of- 
fice* should  be  ratified  and  confirmed  for  perpetual  ob~  • 
servation*  Such  was  the  interest  of  this  party,  that  the: 
bill  was  carried  by  a  great  majority,  notwithstanding  the 
opposition  of  the  ministers,  who  resolved  to  maintain  the 
king's  nomination,  even  in  defiance  of  a  parliamentary 
resolution*  The  majority,  exasperated  at  this  open  vio- 
lation of  their  privileges,  forbade  the  judges  whom  the 
king  had  appointed  to  open  their  commissions,  or  bold 
a  session^  until'  his  majesty's  farther  pleasure  should  be 
knowd  :  on  the  other  hand,  they  were  compelled  to  act 
by  the  menaces  of  the  privy-council.     The  dispute  was 


IW.  WILUAM  JLNB  MARY*  33 

carried  on  with  great  acrimony  on  both  sides,  and  pro- 
duced such  a  ferment,  that  before  the  session  opened, 
the  ministry  thought  proper  to  draw  a  great  number  of 
farces  into  the  neighbourhood  of  Edinburgh,  to  support 
the  judges  in  the  exercise  of  their  functions. 

$  XXV.  The  lord-commissioner,  alarmed  at  this  scene 
of  tumult  and  confusion,  adjourned  the  house  till  the 
Sth  day  of  October ;  a  step  which,  added  to  the  other 
unpopular  measures  of  the  court,  incensed  the  opposi- 
tion to  a  violent  degree.    They  drew  up  a  remonstrance 
to  the  king,  complaining  of  this  adjournment  while  the 
nation  was  yet  unsettled,  recapitulating  the  sereral  in- 
stances in  which  they  had  expressed  theif  zeal  and  af- 
fection for  his  majesty ;  explaining  their  reasons  for  dis- 
senting from  the  ministry  in  some  articles ;  beseeching 
him  to  consider  what  they  had  represented,  to  give  his 
royal  assent  to  the  acts  of  parliament  which  they  had 
prepared,  and  take  measures  for  redressing  all  the  other 
grievances  of  the  nation.    This  address  was  presented  to 
the  king  at  Hampton-court.    William  was  so  touched 
with  the  reproaches  it  implied,  as  if  he  had  not  fulfilled 
the  conditions  on  which  he  accepted  the  erown  of  Scot- 
land, that  he,  in  his  own  vindication,  published  his  in- 
structions to  the  commissioner ;  and  by  these  it  appear- 
ed, that  the  duke  might  have  proceeded  to  greater 
lengths  in  obliging  his  countrymen.    Before  the  ad- 
journment, however,  the  parliament  had  granted  the  re- 
venue for  life ;  and  raised  money  for  maintaining  a  body 
of  forces,  as  well  as  for  supporting  the  incidental  ex* 
pense  of  the  government  for  some  months ;  yet  part  of 
the  troops  in  that  kingdom  were  ©applied  and  subsisted 
by  the  administration  of  England.    In  consequence  of 
these  disputes  in  the  Scottish  parliament,  their  church 
was  left  without  any  settled  form  of  government ;  for, 
though  the  hierarchy  was  abolished,  the  Presbyterian 
discipline  was  not  yet  established,  and  ecclesiastical  af- 
fairs were  occasionally  regulated  by  the  privy-councif, 


34  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1689. 

deriving  its  authority  from  that  very  act  of  supremacy, 
which,  according  to  the  claim  of  rights,  ought  to  have 
been  repealed.  l    * 

§  XXVI.  The  session  was  no  sooner  adjourned,  than 
sir  John  Lanier  converted  the  blockade  of  Edinburgh r 
castle  into  a  regular  siege,  which  was  prosecuted. with 
such  vigour,  that  in  a  little  time  the  fortifications  were 
ruined,  and  the  works  advanced  at  the  foot  of  the  walls, 
in  which  the  besiegers  had  made  several  large  breaches. 
The  duke  of  Gordon,  finding  his  ammunition  expended, 
his  defences  destroyed,  his  intelligence  entirely  cut  ofi^ 
and  despairing  of  relief  from  the  adherents  of  his  mas*- 
ter,  desired  to  capitulate,  and  obtained  very  favourable 
terms  for  his  garrison  ;  but  he  would  not  stipulate  any 
conditions  for  himself,  declaring,  that  he  had  so  much 
respect  for  all  the  princes  descended  from  king  James 
VI.  that  he  would  not  affront  any  of  them  so  far  as  to 
insist  upon  terms  for  his  own  particular :  he  therefore, 
on  the  1 3th  day  of  June,  surrendered  the  castle  and  him- 
self at  discretion.     All.  the  hopes  of  James  and  his  party 
were  now  concentrated  in  the  viscount  Dundee,  who 
had  assembled  a  body  of  Highlanders,  and1  resolved  to 
attack  Mackay,  on  an  assurance  he  had  received  by 
message,  that  the  regiment  of  Scottish  dragoons  would 
desert  that  officer,  and  join.him  in  the  action. .   Mackay^ 
haying  received  intimation  of  this  design,  decamped  im- 
mediately, and  by  long :  marches  retired  before  Dundee., 
until  he  was  reinforced  by  Ramsay's' dragoons,  and  an- 
other regiment  of  English  infantry :  then  he  faced  about, 
and  Dundee  in  his  turn  retreated  into  Lochaber.     Lord 
Murray,  son  of  the  marquis  of  Athbl,  assembled  his  vas- 
sals to  the  number  of  twelve  hundred  men  for  the  ser- 
vice of  the  regency :  but  he, was  betrayed  by  one. of  his 
own .  dependants,  who  seized  the  castle  of  Blair  for 
Dundee*  and  prevailed  upon  the  Athoi*  men. to  dis- 
perse, rather  than  fight  against  James  their  lawful  so- 
vereign. 


1689.  WILLIAM  AND  MARY.  35 

§  XXVII.  The  viscount  was  by  this  time  reduced  to 
great  difficulty  and  distress.  His  men  had  not  for  many 
•weeks  tasted  bread  or  salt,  or  any  drink  but  water :  in- 
stead of  five  hundred  infantry,  three  hundred  horse, 
with  a  supply  of  arms,  ammunition,  and  provision,  which 
James  had  promised  to  send  from  Ireland,  he  received 
a  reinforcement  of  three  hundred  naked  recruits ;  but 
the  transports  with  the  stores  fell  into  the  hands  of  the 
English.  Though  this  was  a  mortifying  disappointment* 
he  bore  it  without  repining ;  and,  far  from  abandoning 
himself  to  despair,  began  his  march  to  the  castle  of  Blair, 
which  was  threatened  with  a  siege-  by  general  Mackay. 
When  he  reached  this  fortress,  he  received  intelligence 
that  the  enemy  had  entered  the  pass  of  Killycrankie,  and 
he  resolved  to  give  them  battle  without  delay.  He  ac- 
cordingly advanced  against  them,  and  a  furious  engage- 
ment ensued,  though  it  was  hot  of  long  duration;  The 
Highlanders  having  received  and  returned  the  fire  of  the 
English,  fell  in  among  them  sword  in  band  with  such 
impetuosity,  that  the  foot  tvere  utterly  broken:  in  seven 
minutes.  The  dragoons  fled  at  the  first  charge  in  the 
utmost  consternation:  Dundee js  horse,  not  exceeding 
one  hundred,  broke  through  Mackay's  own  regiment : 
the  earl  of  Dumbarton,  at  the  head  of  a  few  volunteers^ 
made  himself  master  of  the  artillery :  twelve  hundred  of 
Mackay's  forces  were  killed  on  the  spqt,  five  hundred 
taken  prisoners,  and  the  rest  fled  with  great  precipitation 
for  some  hours,  until  they  were  rallied  by  their  general* 
who  was  an  officer  pf  approved  courage,  conduct,  and 
experience.  Nothing  could  be  more  complete  or  deci- 
sive  than  the  victory  which  the  Highlanders  obtained  ; 
yet  it  was  dearly  purchased  with  the  death  of  their  be-; 
loyed  chieftain,  the  viscount  Dundee,  who  fell  by  a  rah-, 
dom-shot  in  the  engagement,  and  his  fate  produced  such 
confusion  in  his  army  as  prevented  all  pursuit.  He 
possessed  an  enterprising'  spirit,  undaunted  courage,  in- 
violable fidelity,  and  was  peculiarly  qualified  to  command 


36  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  U$p. 

the  people  who  fought  under  his  banner.  He  was  the 
life  and  soul  of  that  cause  which  he  espoused,  and  after 
his  death  it  daily  declined  into  ruin  ami  disgrace.  He 
was  succeeded  in  command  by  colonel  Cannon,  who 
landed  the  reinforcement  from  Ireland  ;  but  all  his  de- 
signs miscarried :  so  that  die  clans,  wearied  with  re- 
peated misfortunes,  laid  down  their  arms  by  degrees,  and 
took  the  benefit  of  a  pardon,  which  king  William  offer- 
ed to  those  who  should  submit  within  the  time  specified 
in  his  proclamation. 

§  XXVIII.  [After  this  sketch  of  Scottish  affairs,  it 
will  be  necessary  to  take  a  retrospective  view  of  James, 
and  relate  the  particulars  of  his  expedition  to  Ireland. 
That  unfortunate  prince  and  his  queen  were  received 
with  the  most  cordial  hospitality  by  the  French  monarch, 
who  assigned  the  castle  of  St.  Germain  for  the  place  of 
their  residence,  supported  their  household  with  great 
magnificence,  enriched  them  with  presents,  and  under- 
took to  re-establish  them  on  the  throne  of  England. 
James,  however,  conducted  himself  in  such  a  manner 
as  conveyed  no  favourable  idea  of  his  spirit  and  under- 
standing. He  seems  to  have  been  emasculated  by  re- 
ligion: he  was  deserted  by  that  courage  and  magna- 
nimity for  which  his  youth  had  been  distinguished.  He 
did  not  discover  great  sensibility  at  the  loss  of  his  king- 
dom. All  his  faculties  were  swallowed  up  in  bigotry. 
Instead  of  contriving  plans  for  retrieving  his  crown,  he 
held  conferences  with  the  Jesuits  on'  topics  of  religion. 
The  pity  which  his  misfortunes  excited  in  Lewis,  was 
mingled  with  contempt.  The  pope  supplied  him  with 
indulgences,  while  the  Romans  laughed  at  him  in  pas- 
quinades :  "  There  is  a  pious  man  (said  the  archbishop 
ofRheims,  ironically),  who  has  sacrificed  three  crowns 
for  a  mass."  In  a  word,  he  subjected  himself  to  the 
ridicule  and  raillery  of  the  French  nation. 

§  XXIX.  All  the  hope  of  re-ascending  the  British 
throne  depended  upon  his  friends  in  Scotland  and  Ire- 


1680.  WILLIAM  AND  MARY.  37 

land.  Tyrcorinel,  who  commanded  in  this  last  kingdom, 
was  confirmed  in  his  attachment  to  James,  by  the  persua- 
sions of  Hamilton,  who  had  undertaken  for  his  submis- 
sion to  the  prince  of  Orange.  Nevertheless,  he  disguised 
his  sentiments,  and  temporized  with  William,  until  James 
.should  be  able  to  supply  him  with  reinforcements  from 
France,  which  he  earnestly  solicited  by  private  mes- 
sages- In  the, meantime,  with  a  view  to  cajole  the  Pro- 
testants of  Ireland,  and  amuse  king  William  with  hope 
of  h  is  submission,  he  persuaded  the  lord  Mountjoy,  in 
whom  the  Protestants  chiefly  confided,  and  baron  Rice, 
to  go  in  person  with  a  commission  to  James,  represent- 
ing the  necessity  of  yielding  to  the  times,  and  of  wait- 
ing a  fitter  opportunity  to  make  use  of  his  Irish  sub- 
jects. Mountjoy,  on  his  arrival  at  Paris,  instead  of 
being  favoured  with  an  audience  by  James,  to  explain 
the  reasons  which  Tyrconnel  had  suggested  touching 
the  inability  of  Ireland  to  restore  his  majesty,  was  com- 
mitted prisoner  to  the  bastile,  on  account  of  the  zeal 
with  which  he  had  espoused  the  Protestant  interest; 
Although  Lewis  was  sincerely  disposed  to  assist  James 
effectually,  his  intentions  were  obstructed  by  the  dis- 
putes of  his  ministry.  Louvois  possessed  the  chief  cre- 
dit in  council ;  but  Seignelai  enjoyed  a  greater  share  of 
personal  favour,  both  with  the  king  and  madame  de 
Maintenon,  the  .favourite  concubine.  To  this  noble* 
man,  as  secretary  for  marine  affairs,  James  made  his 
chief  application  ;  and  he  had  promised  the  command 
of  the  troops  destined  for  his  service  to  Lauzun,  whom 
Louvois  hated.  For  these  reasons  this  minister  thwart- 
ed his  measures,  and  retarded  the  assistance  which  Lewis 
had  promised  towards  his  restoration. 

§  XXX.  Yet,  notwithstanding  all  his  opposition,  the 
Succours  were  prepared,  and  the  fleet  ready  to  put  to 
sea  by  the  latter  end  of  February,  The  French  king  is 
said  to  have  offered  an-  army  of  fifteen  thousand  natives 
of  France  to  serve  in  this  expedition  ;  but  Jajmes  replied, 


38  litSTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1680. 

that  he  would  succeed  by  the  help  of  his  own  subjects, 
or  perish  in  the  attempt.     Accordingly,  he  contented 
himself  with  about  twelve  Hundred  British  subjects,*  and 
a  good  number  of  French  officers,  who  were  embark- 
ed in  the  fleet  at  Brest,  consisting  of  fourteen  ships 
of  the  line,  seven  frigates,  three  fire-ships,  with  a  good 
number  of  transports.     The  French  king  also  supplied 
him  with  a  considerable  quantity  of  arms  for  the  use  of 
his  adherents  in  Ireland;  accommodated  him  with  a  large 
sum  of  money,  superb  equipages,  store  of  plate,  and 
necessaries  of  all  kinds  for  the  camp  and  the  household. 
At  parting,  he  presented  him  with  his  own  cuirass,  and, 
embracing  him  affectionately,  "  The  best  thing  I  can 
wish  you  (said  he)  is,  that  I  may  never  see  you  again." 
On  the  7th  day  of  March,  James  embarked  at  Brest, 
together  with  the  count  d'Avaux,  who  accompanied 
him  in  quality  of  ambassador,  and  his  principal  officers. 
He  was  detained  in  the  harbour  by  contrary  winds  till 
the4  17th  day  of  the  month,  when  he  set  sail,   and 
on  the  22d  landed  at  Kinsale  in   Ireland.     By  this 
time,    king  William,    perceiving  himself  amused  by 
Tyrconnel,   had    published    a    declaration,    requiring 
the  Irish  to  lay  down  their  arms,  and  submit  to  the 
new  government.       On  the  22d  day  of   February, 
thirty  ships  of  war  had  been  put  in  commission,  and 
the  command  of  them  conferred  upon  admiral   Her- 
bert ;  but  the  armament  was  retarded  in  such  a  manner 

*  James  in  this  expedition  was  attended  by  the  duke  of  Berwick,  add 
by  his  brother,  Mr.  Fitzjamos;  grand-prior,  the  duke  of  Powis,  the  earls 
of  Dover,  Melfort,  -Abercorn,  and  Sea  forth  ;  the  lords  Henry  and  Tho- 
mas Howard,  the  lords  Drummond,  Dungan,  Trendraught,  Buchan, 
Hunsdon;  and  Brittas;  the  bishops  of  Chester  and  Gal  way,  the  late  lord 
chief-justice  Herbert ;  the  marquis  d'Estrades,  M.  de  Rosene,  mares- 
dial  de  champ;  Mamoe,  Pusignan,and  Lori,  lieutenant-generals;  Prontee 
engineer-general ;  the  marquis  d' Abbeville,  sir  John  Sparrow,  sir  Roger 
Strickland,  sir  William  Jennings,  sir  Henry  JJond,  sir  Charles  Carney, 
sir  Edward  Vaudrey,  sir  Charles  Murray,  sir  Robert  Parker,  sir  Alphon- 
80  Maiolo,  sir  Samuel  Foxon,  and  sir  William  Wallis  ;  by  the  colonels 
Porter,  Sarsfield,Authony  and  John  Hamilton,  Simon  and  Henry  Luttrel, 
Ramsay,  Dorrington,  Sutherland,  Clifford,  Parker,  Purcel,  Cannon,  and 
Fielding,  with  about  twu-and -twenty  other  officers  of  inferior  rank. 


168&  WILLIAM    AND    MARY.  30 

by  the  disputes  of  the  council,  and  the  king's  attention 
to  the  affairs  of  the  continent,  that  the  admiral  was  not 
in  a  condition  to  sail  till  the  beginning  of  April,  and 
then  with  part  of  his  fleet  only.  James  was  received 
with  open  arms  at  Kinsale,  and  the  whole  country  seem- 
ed to  be  at  his  devotion ;  for,  although  the  Protestants 
in  the  north  had  declared  for  the  new  government,  their 
strength  and  number  was  deemed  inconsiderable,  when 
compared  with  the  power  of  Tyrconnel.  This  minister 
had  disarmed  all  the  other  Protestant  subjects  in  one 
day,  and  assembled  an  army  of  thirty  thousand  foot, 
and  eight  thousand  cavalry,  for  the  service  of  his 
master. 

.    §  XXXI.  In  the  latter  end  of  March,  James  made 
his  public  entry  into  Dublin,  amidst  the  acclamations 
of  the  inhabitants.     He  was  met  at  the  castle-gate  by  a 
procession  of  popish  bishops  and  priests  in  their  pontifi- 
cals, bearing  the  host,  which  he  publicly  adored.      He 
dismissed  from  the  council-board  the  lord  Granard,  judge 
Keating,  and  other  Protestants,  who  had  exhorted  the  lord- 
lieutenant  to  an  accommodation  with  the  new  govern* 
ment.  In  their  room  he  admitted  the  French  ambassador, 
the  bishop  of  Chester,  colonel  Darrington,  and,  by  degrees, 
the  principal  noblemen  who  accompanied  him  in  the  ex- 
pedition.    On  the  second  day  after  his  arrival  in  Dub- 
lin, he  issued  five  proclamations;  the  first  recalled  all 
the  subjects  of  Ireland  who  had  abandoned  the  kingdom, 
by  a  certain' time,  on  pain  of  outlawry  and  confiscation, 
and  requiring  all  persons  to  join  him  against  the  prince 
of  Orange.     The  second  contained  expressions  of  ac- 
knowledgment to  his  Catholic  subjects,  for  their  vigi- 
lance and  fidelity,  and  an ,  inj  unction  to  such  as  were 
not  actually  in  his  service,  to  retain  and  lay  up  their 
arms  until  it  should  be  found  necessary  to  use  them  for 
his  advantage.    By  the  third  he  invited  the  subjects  to 
supply   his  army  with  provisions ;  .and  prohibited  the 
soldiers  to  take  any  thing  without  payment.     By  the 


40  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  IHB. 

fourth  he  nosed  the  value  of  the  current  coin ;  and  io 
the  6ftb  be  summoned  a  parliament  to  meet  on  the 
7th  day  of  May  at  Dublin.  Finally,  he  created  Tyrcon- 
nel  a  duke,  in  consideration  of  his  eminent  services. 

§  XXXII.  The  adherents  of  James  in  England  press- 
ed hin)  to  settle  the  affairs  of  Ireland  immediately,  and 
bring  over  his  army  either  to  the  north  of  England,  or 
the  west  of  Scotland,  where  it  might  be  joined  by  his 
party,  and  act  without  delay  against  the  usurper ;  bat 
his  council  dissuaded  bim  from  complying  with  their 
solicitations,  until  Ireland  should  be  totally  reduced  to 
obedience.  On  the  first  alarm  of  an  intended  massacre, 
the  Protestants  of  Londonderry  had  shut  their  gates 
against  the  regiment  commanded  by  the  earl  of  Antrim, 
?nd  resolved  to  defend  themselves  against  the  lord-lieu- 
tenant They  transmitted  this  resolution  to  the  govern- 
ment of  England,  together  with  an  account  of  the  dan- 
ger they  incurred  by  such  a  vigorous  measure,  and  im- 
plored immediate  assistance.  They  were  accordingly 
supplied  with  some  arms  and  ammunition,  but  did  not 
receive  any  considerable  reinforcement  till  the  middle  of 
April,  when  two  regiments  arrived  in  Loughfoyl,  under 
the  command  of  Cunningham  and  Richards.  By  this 
time,  king  James  had  taken  Coleraine,  invested  Kill- 
more,  and  was  almost  in  sight  of  Londonderry.  George 
Walker,  rector  of  Donaghmore,  who  had  raised  a  re- 
giment for  the  defence  of  the  Protestants,  conveyed  this 
intelligence  to  Lundy,  the  governor.  This  officer  di- 
rected him  to  join  colonel  Crafton,  and  take  post  at 
the  Long-causey,  which  he  maintained  a  whole  night 
against  the  advanced  guard  of  the  enemy  :  until,  being 
overpowered  by  numbers,  he  retreated  to  Londonderry, 
and  exhorted  the  governor  to  take  the  field,  as  the  army 
of  king  James  was  not  yet  completely  formed.  Lundy 
assembling  a  council  of  war,  at  which  Cunningham  and 
Richards  assisted,  they  agreed  that,  as  the  place  was 
not  tenable,  it  would  be  imprudent  to  land  the  two  re- 


!«*,  WIUJAM  AND  MARY.  41 

gimeats:  and  that  the  principal  officers  should  withdraw  i 
themselves  from  Londonderry,  the  inhabitants  of  which 
would  obtain  the  more  favourable  capitulation  in  conse- 
quence of  their  retreat.     An  officer  was  immediately, 
dispatched  to  king  James,  with  proposals  of  a  negotia- 
tion ;  and  lieutenant-general  Hamilton  agreed  that  the, 
army  should  halt  at  the  distance  of  four  miles  from  the' 
town.     Notwithstanding  this  preliminary,  James  ad- 
vanced at  the  head  of  his  troops ;  but  met  with  such  a 
warm  reception  from  the  beseiged,  that  he  was  fain  to* 
retire  to  St.  John's  Town  in  some  disorder.    The  inha- 
bitants and  soldiers  in  garrison  at  Londonderry  were  so 
incensed  at  the  members  of  the  council  of  war,  who  had 
resolved  to  abandon  the  place,  that  they  threatened  im-* 
mediate  vengeance.     Cunningham  and  Richards  retired 
to  their  ships,  and  Lundy  locked  himself  in  his  cham- 
ber.   In  vain  did  Walker  and  major  Baker  exhort  hkn 
to  maintain  his  government.    Such  was  his  cowardice  or 
treachery,  that  he  absolutely  refused  to  be  concerned  in 
the  defence  of  the  place,  and  he  was  suffered  to  escape 
in  disguise,  with  a  load  of  match  upon  his  back  :  but 
he  was  afterward  apprehended  in  Scotland,  from  whence  * 
he  was  sent  to  London  to  answer  for  his  perfidy  or  - 
misconduct. 

§  XXXIII.  After  his  retreat,  the  townsmen  chose 
Mr*  Walker  and  major  Baker  for  their  governors,  with* 
joijof  authority  ;  but  this  office  they  would  not  under-' 
take,  until  it  had  been  offered  to  colonel  Cunningham, 
as  the  officer  next  in  command  to  Luhdy.    He  reject- 
ed the  proposal,  and  with  Richards  returned  to  England, 
wfeere  they  were  immediately  cashiered*    The  two  new 
governors,  thus  abandoned  to  their  fate,  began  to  pre- 
pare for.  a  vigorous  defence  i  indeed  their  courage  seems 
to  have  transcended  the  bounds  of  discretion,  for  the: 
place  wa&  voy  ill  fortified  :  their  cannon,  which  did  not 
exceed  twenty  pieces,  were  wretchedly  mounted;  they 
had  not  one  engineer  to  direct  their  operations :  they- 


42  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1689. 

had  a  vfery  small  number  of  horse  :  the  garrison  consist- 
ed of  people  unacquainted  with  military  discipline  :  they 
were  destitute  of  provisions :  they  were  besieged  by  a 
king  ii  person,  at  the  heid  of  a  formidable  army,  direct- 
ed by  good  officers,  and  supplied  with  all  the  necessary 
implements  for  a  siege  or  battle.    This  town  was  in* 
vested  on  the  20th  day  of  April :  the  batteries  were  soon 
opened,  and  several  attacks  were  made  with  great  impe- 
tuosity :  but  the  besiegers  were  always  repiulsed  with 
considerable  loss.     The  townsmen  gained  divers  ad- 
vantages in  repeated  sallies,  and  would  have  held  their 
enemies  in  the  utmost  contempt,  had  they  not  been  af- 
flicted with  a  contagious  distemper,  as  well  as  reduced  to 
extremity  by  want  of  provision.     They  were  even  tan- 
talized in  their  distress  ;  for  they  had  the  mortification 
to  see  some  ships,  which  had  arrived  with  supplies  from 
England,  prevented  from  sailing  up  the  river  by  the  bat- 
teries the  enemy  had  raised  on  both  sides,  and  a  boom 
with  which  they  had  blocked   up  the  channel.     At 
length  a  reinforcement  arrived  in  the  Lough,  under  the 
command  of  general  Kirke,  who  had  deserted  his  mas- 
ter, and  been  employed  in  the  se'rvice  of  king  William. 
He  found  means  to  convey  intelligence  to  Walker,  that 
he  had,  troops  and  provisions  on  board  for  their  relief, 
but  found  it  impracticable  to  sail  up  the  river  :  he  pro- 
mised, however,  that  he  would  land  a  body  of  forces  at 
the  Inch,  and  endeavour  to  make  a  diversion  in  their 
favour,  when  joined  by  the  troops  at  Inniskilling,  which 
amounted  to  five  thousand  men,  including  two  thousand 
cavalry.     He  said  he  expected  six  thousand  men  from 
England,  where  they,  were  embarked  before  he. set  sail. 
He  exhorted  them  to  persevere  in  their  courage  and 
loyalty,  and  assured  them  he  would  come  to  their  relief  at 
all  hazards.   These  aissurances  enabled  them  to  bear  their 
miseries  a  little  longer,  though  their,  numbers  daily  dimi- 
nished. Major  Bakerdying,  his  place  was  filled  with  colonel 
Michelburri,  who  now  acted  as  colleague  to  Mr.  Walker. 


I6W.  WILLIAM  AND  MARY/  43 

r  §  XXXIV.  King  James  having  returned:  to  Dublin, 
to  be  present  at  the  parliament,  the  command  of  his 
army  devolved  to  the  French  general  Rosene,  who  was 
exasperated  at  such  an  obstinate  opposition  by  a.  handful 
of  half-starved  militia;  He  threatened  to  raze  the  town 
to  its  foundations,  and  destroy  the  inhabitants,  without 
distinction  of  age  or  sex,  unless  they  would  immediately 
submit  themselves  to  their,  lawful  sovereign.  The  go- 
vernors treated  his  menaces  with  contempt,  and  pub- 
lished an  order,  that  no  person,  on  pain  of  death, 
should  talk  of  surrendering.  They  had  now  consumed 
the  last  remains  of  their  provision,  and  supported  life  by 
eating  the  flesh  of  horses,  dogs,  cats,  rats,  mice,  tallow, 
starch,  and  salted  hides,  and  even  this  loathsome  food 
began  to  fail.  Rosene,  finding  them  deaf  to  all  his  pro- 
posals, threatened  to  wrfeak  his  vengeance  on  all  the 
Protestants  of  that  country,  and  drive  them  under  the. 
walls  of  Londonderry,  where  they  should  be  suffered  to 
perish  by  famine.  The  bishop  of  Meath,  being  inform- 
ed  of  this  design,  complained  to  king  James  of  the  bar- 
barous intention,  entreating  his  majesty  to  prevent  its 
being  put  in  execution.  That  prince  assured  him  that 
he  had  already  ordered  Rosene  to  desist  from  such  pro- 
ceedings. Nevertheless,  the  Frenchman  executed  his 
threats  with  the  utmost  rigour.  Parties  of  dragoons 
were  detached  on  this  cruel  service :  after  having  stripped 
all  the  Protestants  for  thirty  miles  round,  they  drove 
tjiese  unhappy  people  before  them  like  cattle,  without 
even  sparing  the  enfeebled  old  men,  nurses  with  infants 
at  their  breasts,  tender  children,  women  just  delivered, 
and  some  even  in  the  pangs  of  labour.  Above  four 
thousand  of  these  miserable  objects  were  driven  under 
the  walls  of  Londonderry.  This  expedient,  far  from 
answering  the  purpose  of  Rosene,  produced  a  quite  con- 
trary effect.  The  besieged  were  so  exasperated  at  this 
act  of  inhumanity,  that  they  resolved  to  perish  rather 
than  submit  to  such  a  barbarian.     They  erected  a  gib- 


44  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1009J 

bet  in  sight  of  the  enemy,  and  sent  a  message  to  the 
French  general,  importing  that  they  would  hang  all  the* 
prisoners  they  had  taken  during  the  stege,  unless  the 
Protestants  whom  they  had  driven  under  the  walls  should* 
be  immediately  dismissed.  This  threat  produced  a  ne-' 
gotiatioti,  in  consequence  of  which  the  Protestants  were* 
released,  after  they  had  been  detained  three  days  with-* 
out  tasting  food.  Some,  hundreds  died  of  famine  or 
fatigue ;  and  those  who  lived  to  return  to  their  own 
habitations  found  them  plundered  and  sacked  by  the 
Papists,  so  that  the  greater  number  perished  for  want,' 
or  were  murdered  by  the  straggling  parties  of  the  ene- 
my ;  yet  these  very  people  had  for  the  most  part  ob- 
tained protections  from  king  James,  to  which  no  respect' 
was  paid  by  his  general. 

§  XXXV.  The  garrison  of  Londonderry  was  now  re-' 
duced  from  seven  to  five  thousand  seven  hundred  men, 
and  these  were  driven  to  such  extremity  of  distress,  that 
they  began  to  talk  of  killing  the  popish  inhabitants,  and* 
feeding  on  their  bodies.  In  this  emergency,  Kirke, 
who  had  hitherto  lain  inactive,  ordered  two  ships  laden 
with  provisions  to  sail  up  the  river,  under  convoy  of 
the  Dartmouth  frigate.  One  of  them,  called  the  Mount- 
joy,  broke  the  enerny*s  boom ;  and  all  the  three,  after 
having  sustained  a  very  hot  fire  from  both  sides  of  the 
river,  arrived  in  safety  at  the  town,  to  the  inexpressible 
joy  of  the  inhabitants.  The  army  of  James  was  so  dis- 
pirited by  the  success  of  this  enterprise,  that  they  aban- 
doned the  siege  in  the  night,  and  retired  with  precipita- 
tion, after  having  lost  about  nine  thousand  men  before 
the  place.  Kirke  no  sooner  took  possession  of  the  town, 
than  Walker  was  prevailed  upon  to  embark  for  Eng- 
land, with  an  address  of  thanks  from  the  inhabitants  to 
their  majesties  for  the  seasonable  relief  they  had  received. 

§  XXXVI.  The  Inniskilliners  were  no  less  remark- 
able than  the  people  of  Londonderry  for  the  valour  and 
perseverance  with    which    they  opposed  the   Papists. 


They  raised  twelve  companies,  which  they  regimented 
under  the  command  of  Gtistavus  Hamilton,  whom  they 
chose  for  their  governor.  They  proclaimed  William 
and  Maiy  on  the  llth  day  of  March *,  *nd  resolved  in 
a  general  council  to  maintain  their  title  against  all  op- 
position. The  lord  Gilmoy  invested  the  castle  of  Crom 
belonging  to  the  Protestants  in  the  neighbourhood  of 
Inniskilling,  the  inhabitants  of  which  threw  succours 

*  into  the  place/  and  compelled  Gilmoy  to  retire  to  Bel- 
turbet.  A  detachment  of  the  garrison,  commanded  by 
lieutenant-colonel  Lloyd,  took  and  demolished  the 
castle  of  Aughor,  and  they  gained  the  advantage  in  se- 

*  veral  skirmishes  with  the  enemy/  On  the  day  that  pre- 
ceded the  relief  of  Londonderry,  they  defeated  six  thou- 
sand Irish  Papists  at  a  place  called  Newton-Butler,  and 
took'  their  commander  Macarty,  commonly  called  Ibrd 

'  Moncashel. 

§  XXXVII.  The  Irish  parliament  being  assembled  at 
Dublin,  according  to  the  proclamation  of  king  James, 
he,  in  a  speech  from  the  throne,  thanked  them  for  the 
•zeal,  courage,  and  loyalty,  they  had  manifested ;  extolled 
the  generosity  of  theFrench  king,  who  had  enabled  hiqii 
to  visit  them  in  person ;  insisted  upon  executing  his  de- 
sign of  establishing  liberty  of  conscience  as  a  step  equally 
agreeable  to  the  dictates  of  humanity  and  discretion,  and 
promised  to  concur  with  them  in  enacting  such  laws' as 
would  contribute  to  the  peace,  affluence,  and  security  of 
:  his  subjects.  Sir  Richard  Neagle;  being  chosen  speaker 
of  the  commons,  mbved  for  an  address  of  thanks  to  his 
majesty;  and  that  the  count  d'Avaux  should  be  de- 
sired to  make  their  acknowledgments  to  the  ihost  Chris- 
tian king,  for  the  generous  assistance  he  had  givetvto 
their  sovereign.  These  addresses  being  drawn  up,  with 
the  Concurrence  of  both  houses,  a  bill  was  brought  in  to 
recognise  the  king's  title,  to  express  their  abhorrence  of 
the  usurpation  by-  the  prince  of  Orange,  as  well  as  of  the 
defection  of  the  English. .  Next  day  James  published  a 

vol.  i.  *  » 


?46  HISTORY  OF  *NGfcAl«>.  .'W?. 

TdedaraiioB,;t3(irnf>laihing  of  the  cftlamnifis  Which 'ffis 
^enemies  had  spread  to.  his  prjejXidic^;  e^patiaiihg  upon 
his  6vfn  impartiality  in  preferring  his  Protectant  stfb- 
jects;  his  bare  in  protecting  thferofrora  their  enertne$, 
in  Redressing  their  grievances,  and  in  granting  liberty  of 
conscience ;  promising  that  he  would  take  no  step  but 
with  the  apprdbatiori  of  parliament;  offering  a  free  par- 
don to  all  persons  who  should  desert  his  enemies,  aqd 
join  with  him  in  fourrand-twenty  days  after  his  landing 
in  Ireland,  and  charging  all  the  Wood  that  might  be 
shed,  upon  those  who  should  continue  in  rebellion, 

$  XXXVIIL  His  conduct,  however,  very  ill  agreed 
with  this  declaration ;.  nor  can  it  be  excused  ori  any 
othek-  supposition,  but  that  of  his  being  governed,  in 
some  cases  against  his  own  inclination,  by  the  count 
te'Av&uk,  and  the  Irish  Catholics,  on  whom  his  whole 
dependance  was  placed.  As  both  houses  were  chiefly 
tfilled  with  membferfc  of  that  persuasion,  we  ought  not 
to  wonder  at  their  bringing  in  a  bill  for  repealing  the  afct 
of  settlement,  by  which  the  Protestants  of  the  kingdom 
'had  been  secured  ih  the  possession  of  their  -estates* 
These  were  hy  thfe  law  divested  of  their  lands,  which 
reverted  to  the  heirs  of  those  Catholics  to  whom  they  be- 
longed before  the  rebellion.  This  iniquitous  bill  was 
framed  in  such  a  manner,  that  no  regard  was  paid  to 
such  Protestant  owners  as  had  purchased  estates  for  va- 
luable considerations  t  no  allowance  was  made  for  im- 
provements, nor  any  provision  .for  Protestant  widowjs: 
the  possessor  and  tenants  were  not  even  allowed  to  re- 
move their  stock  and  corn.  When  the  bill  was  sent  tap 
to  the  lords,  Dr.  Dopping,  bishop  of  Meath,  opposed  it 
\*ith  equal  courage  rand  ability :  and  an  address  in  behalf 
^f  tte  purchafsers  uncter  the  act  of  settlement  was  pre- 
sented to  the  king  by  the  earl  of  Granard :  but,  notwith- 
standing th^ereaionstrances,  it  deceived  the  royal  assent : 
"and  the  Protestants  of  Irieland  were  mostly  ruined,       j 

§ XXXIX.  Y^  in  Order  to  complete  their  destruq- 


$8fc  WILLIAM  AND  ¥AR\\  ^ 

lion,  aaM  bf  attainder  was  passed  against  all  Protest* 
m$09  whether  jraale  or  female,  whether  of  high  or  loir 
<fegr?S>  who  were  absent  from  the  kingdom,  as  well  as 
against  $11  those  who  retired  into  any  part  of  the  three 
kingdoms,  which  did  not  own  the  authority  of  king 
Barnes,  or  corresponded  with  rebels,  or  were  any  ways 
Skiing,  abetting,  or  assisting  to  then*  from  the  1st  day 
<rf  August  in  *he  preceding  year*  .  The  number  of  Pro? 
testants  attainted  by  name  in  this  act  amounted  ta  about 
three  thousand,  including  two  archbishops,  one  duke, 
seventeen  earls,  seven  countesses,  as  many  bishops, 
eighteen  barons,  three-and-thirty  baronets,  one-and- 
fifty  knights,  e^ghty-thre$  clergymen,  ivho  were  declare*} 
traitors,  and  adjudged  to  suffer  the  pains  of  death  and 
forfeiture.  The  individuals  subjected .  U>  this .  dreadful 
proscription  were  even  cut  off  from  all  hope  of  pardon, 
and  all  benefit  o£  appeal :  for,  by  a  clause  in  the  act,  the 
king's  pardon  was  deemed  null,  unless  enrolled  before  the 
Jst  day  of  December.  A  subsequent  law  was  enacted, 
declaring  Ireland  independent  of  the  English  parlia- 
ment. This  assembly  passed  another  act j  granting 
20,000/.  per  annum,  out  of  the  forfeited  estates,  to 
Tyrco^nel,  in  acknowledgment  of  his  signal  services : 
they  imposed  a  tax  of  20,O00/.  per  month  for  the  ser- 
vice of  the  king:  the  royal  assent  was  given  to  an  act 
for  liberty  of  conscience;  they  enacted  that  the  tithes 
payable  by  Papists  should  be  deli vered  to  priests  of  that 
communion:  the  maintenance  of  the  Protestant  clergy 
in  cities  &nd~  corporations  was  taken  away  ;  and  all  dis- 
senters were  exempted  from  ecclesiastical  jurisdictions; 
So  that  the.  established,  church  was  deprived  of  all  power 
and  prerogative ;  notwithstanding  the  express  promise  of 
James,  who  had  declared,  immediately  after  his  landing, 
that  he  would  maintain  the  clergy  in  their  rights  anfi 


tweges, 

$  XL.  Nor  was  the  king  less  arbitrary  in  the  execuT 

£2 


40  HISf  ORY  OF  fcNGfcAND.  1680. 

tive'part  of  his  government,  if  we  suppose  that  he  fcoun- 
tenatieed  the  grievous  acts  of  oppression  that  were  daily 
committed  upon  the  Protestant  subjects  of  Ireland :  but 
the  tyranny  of  his  proceedings  may  be  justly  irtiputed 
to  the  temper  of  his  ministry*  consisting  of  men  aban- 
doned to  all  sense  of  justice  and  humanity,  who  acted 
from  the  dictates  of  rapacity  and  revenge,  inflamed  with 
all  the  acrimony  of  religious  rancour.  Soldiers  wer6 
permitted  to  live  upon  free  quarter:  the  people  were 
robbed  and  plundered:  licences  and  protections  were 
abused,  in  order  to  extort  money  from  the  trading  part 
of  the  nation.  The  king's  old  stores  were  ransacked : 
the  shops  of  tradesmen,  and  the  kitchens  of  burghers* 
were  pillaged  to  supply  the  mint  with  a  quantity  of 
brass,  which  was  converted  into  current  coin  for  his  ma- 
jesty's  occasions  :  an  arbitrary  value  was  set  upon  it,  and 
all  persons  were  required  and  commanded  to  take  it  irt 
payment,  under  the  severest  penalties,  though  the  pro- 
portion between  its  intrinsic  worth  and  currency  was 
nearly  as  one  to  thred  hundred.  A  vast  sum  of  this 
counterfeit  coin  was  issued  in  the  course  of  one  year,  and 
forced  upon  the  Protestants  in  payment  of  merchandise, 
provision,  and  necessaries,  for  the  kingfs  service.  James, 
not  content  with  the  supply  granted  by  parliament,  im- 
posed, by  his  own  authority,  a  tax  of  (20,000/.  per  month 
on  chattels,  as  the  former  was  laid  upon  lands.  This 
seems  to  have  been  a  temporary  expedient-  during  the 
adjournment  of  the  two  houses,  as  the  term  of  the  as- 
sessment Was  limited  to  three  months :  it  vrtas,  however^ 
levied  by  virtue  of  a  commission  under  the  seals ;  and 
seems  to  have  been  a  stretch  of  prerogative,  the  less 
excusable,  as  he  might  have  obtained  the  money  in  a 
parliamentary  way.  Understanding  that  the  Protestants 
had  laid  out  all  their  brass  money  in  purchasing  great 
quantities  of  hides,  tallow,  wool,  and  corn,  he  assumed 
the  despotic  power  of  fixing  the  prices  of  these  comtno- 


1689.  WILLIAM  AND  MARY.:  49 

ditieSj  and  then  bought  them  for  his  own  use.  .One 
may  see  his  ministers  were  bent  upon  the  utter  destruc- 
tion of  those  unhappy  people. 

§  XLI.  All  vacancies  in  public  schools  were  supplied 
with  popish  teachers.  The  pension  allowed  from  the 
exchequer  to  the  university  of  Dublin  was  cut  off:  the 
vice- provost,  fellows,  and  scholars,  were  expelled:  their 
furniture,  plate,  and  public  library,  were  seized,  without 
the  least  shadow  or  pretence,  and  in  direct  violation  of 
a  promise  the  king  had  made  to  preserve  their  privileges 
and  immunities.  His  officers  converted  the  college  into 
a  garrison,  the  chapel  into  a  magazine,  and  the  apart- 
ments into  prisons :  a  popish  priest  was  appointed  pro- 
vost: one  Maccarty,  of  the  same  persuasion,  was  made 
library-keeper ;  and  the  whole  foundation  was  changed 
into  a  Catholic  seminary.  When  bishopricks  and  bene-: 
fices  in  the  gift  of  the  crown  became  vacant,  the  king 
ordered  the  profits  to  be  lodged  in  the  exchequer,  and 
suffered  the  cures  to  be  totally  neglected.  The  reve- 
nues were  chiefly  employed  in  the  maintenance  of  Romish 
bishops  and  priests,  who  grew  so  insolent  under  this  in- 
dulgence, that  in  several  places  they  forcibly  seized  the 
Protestant  churches.  When  complaint  w^s  n)$de  of  this 
outrage,  the  king  promised  to  do  justice  to  the  injured; 
and  in  some  placed  actually  ordered  the  churches  to  be 
restored  :  but  the  popish  clergy  refuged  to  cQmply  with 
this  ordef,  alleging,  that  in  spirituals  they  owed  obe- 
dience to  no  earthly  power  but  the  holy  see ;  and  James 
found  himself  unable  to  protect  his  Protestant  subjects 
against  a  powerful  body  which  he  durst  not  disoblige* 
Some  ships  appearing  in  tjhe  bay  of  Dublin,  ?  proclama- 
tion was  issued,  forbidding  the  Protestants  to  assemble 
in  any  place  of  worship,  or  elsewhere,  on  pain  of  death. 
By  a  second,  )they  \yere  commanded  to  bring  in  their 
arms,  on  pain  of  being  treated  as  rebels  and  traitors. 
Luttrel,  governor  of  Dublin,  published  an  ordinance  by 
beat  of  drum,  requiring  the  farmers  to  bring  in  tfyeir 


3D  tflSTORV  OP  ENGLAND.  MS* 

Com  for  his  majesty's  horses  within  a  certain  <fey, 
otherwise  he  wbutd  order  them  to  be  hanged  before 
their  own  doors.  Brigadier  8arsfie\d  commanded  all 
Protestants  of  a  certain  district  to  retire  to  the  distance 
of  ten  miles  from  their  habitations,  on  pain  of  death  i 
and,  in  order  to  keep  up  the  credit  of  the  brass  money, 
the  same  penalty  was  denounced,  in  a  proclamation/ 
igainst  any  person  who  shoidd  give  more  than  1/.  18$. 
for  a  guinea/ 

§  XLIL  All  the  revenues  <rf  Ireland,  and  all  the 
echefnes  contrived  to  bolster  up  the  credit  of  the  base 
cbix\9  would  have  proved  insufficient  to  support  the  ex- 
penses of  the  war>  had  not  James  received  occasional 
supplies  from  the  French  monarch.    After  the  return 
6f  the  fleet  Which  had  conveyed  him  to  Ireland,  Lewis 
sent  another  strong  squadron,  commanded  by  Chateau 
Renault)  as  a  convoy  to  some  transports  laden  with  arms, 
ammunition,  and  a  large  siim  of  money  for  the  use  of 
king  James.     Before  they  sailed  from  Brest,  king  Wil- 
Ham*  being  informed  of  their  destination*  detached  ad^ 
miral  Herbert  frorti  Spithead  with  twelve  ships  of  the 
line,  diie  fire-ship,  and  four  tenders*  in  order  to  intercept 
the  enemy.     He  was  driven  by  stress  of  weather  into 
Milford-haven,  from  whence  he  steered  his  course  t6 
Kinsale,  oft  the  supposition  that  the  French  fleet  had; 
sailed  from  Brest ;  and  that  in  all  probability  he  should 
fall  in  with  them  on  the  coast  of  Ireland.    Oh  the  1st 
day  of  Miy  he  discovered  them  at  anchor  in  Bantry-* 
.bay,  and  stood  in  to  engage  them,  though  they  werd 
greatly  superior  to  him  irk  taumbeT.     They  no  sooner 
perceived  him  at  day-break,  than  they  weighed,  stood 
dtot  to  windward,  formed  their  line,  bore  down*  and 
began  the  action,  which  Was  maintained  for  two  hours. 
#ith  eqtial  Valour  on  both  «ides>  though  the  English 
fleet  sustained  considerable  damage  from  the  superior 
fire  of  the  enemy.     Herbert  tacked  several  times,  in 
hope1  of  gaining  the  weather- gage ;  but  thef  Frehch ad-- 


IU94  WKX1AM  AND  MARY.   t  &t < 

miral  kept  his  wind  witli  uncommon  §kill  and  p£r«- 
severance.  At  length  the  English  squadrpn  stood  off 
to  sea,  and  maintained  a  runmcg  light  tUl  five  in  the 
afternoon,  when  Chateau  Renault  tacked  .about,  and  re- 
turned into  the  bay,  content  with  the  honour  he  had 
gained.  The  loss  of  mep  was  inconsiderable  on  both: 
sides;  and,  where  the  odds  were  so  great,  the  victor 
could  not  reap  much  glory.  Herbert  retired  to  the  isles; 
of  Scilly,  where  he  expected  a  reinforcement :  but,  being 
disappointed  in  this  expectation,  he  returned  to  Ports- 
mouth in  v^ry-  ill  humour,  with  which  his  officers  and 
njer\  were  infected,  The  common  sailors  still  retained 
some  attachment  to  James,  who  had  formerly  been  a. 
favourite  among  them ;  and  the  officers  complained  that 
they  had  been  sent  upon  this  service  with  a  force  so . 
much  inferior  to  that  of  the  enemy/  King  Williaip, 
in  order  to  appose  their  discontent,  made  an  excursion, 
to  Portsmouth,  where  he  dined  with  the  admiral  on 
board  the  ship  Elizabeth,  declared  his  intention  of  mak- 
ing him  an  earl*  in  consideration  of  his  good  conduct 
and  services,  conferred  the  honour  of  knighthood  oi\ 
the  captains  Ashby  and  Shovel,  and  bestowed  a  donation 
of  ten  shillings  on  every  private  sailor* 

$  XLIIL  The  parliament  of  England  thought  it  in- 
cumbent upon  them,  not  only  to  raise  supplies  for  the 
maintenance  of  (he  war  in  which  the  nation  was  invoW 
ved,  but  also  to  do  justice  with  respect  to  those  who  had, 
been  injured  by  illegal  or  oppressive  sentences  in  the  late 
reigns.  The  attainders  of  lord  Russel,  Algernon  Sidney^ 
alderman  Cornish,  and  lady  Lisle,  were  now  reversed, 
A  committee  of  privileges  was  appointed  by  the  lords,  tot 
examine  the  case  of  the  earl  of  Devonshire,  who  in  the 
late  reign  had  been  fined  30,000/,  for  assaulting  colonel 
Culpepper  in  the  presence-chamber.  They  reported* 
that  the  court  of  kingfs^bench,  in  over-ruling  the  earl's; 
plea  of  privilege  of  parliament*  had  committed:a  manir 

*•* Burnet    Hereiby,    King;    Belcarrcs.    De  1a  Faydtte."  VolUiri?. r* 


5£  HISTORY  4>FE&QLA$m  UWtt 

fest  breach  of  privilege :  that  the  fine  was  excessive  and. 
exorbitant,  against  the  great  charter,  the  common  right 
of  the  subject,  and  the  law  of  the  i;ealm.  The  sentence 
pronounced  upon  Samuel  Johnson,  chaplain  to  lords 
Russel,Jn  consequence  of  which  he  Jiad  been  degraded,, 
fined,  scourged;  and  set  in  the  pillory,  was  now  annulled, 
and  the  commons  recommended  him  to  his  majesty  for. 
spme  ecclesiastical  preferment.  He  received  .1000/.  in* 
money,  with  a  pension  of  300/.  for  his  own  life  and  that 
of  his  son,  who  was  moreover  gratified  with  a  place  of> 
IQOl.  a  year :  but  the  father,  npver  obtained  any  ecde*: 
siastical  benefice*  Titus  Oates  seized  this  opportunity,  of; 
petitioning  the  house  of  lords  for  a  reversal  of  thejudg^ 
inent  given  against  him  on  his  being  convicted  of  per- 
jury. The  opinions  of  all  the  judges  and  counsel  at  the/ 
bar  were  heard  on.  this  subject, .  and  ,a ,  bill  of  reversal: 
passed  the  commons;  but  the  peers  having  inserted  some 
amendments  and  a  proviso,  a  conference  was  demanded* 
and  violent  heats  ensued.  Oates,  however,  was  released 
from  confinement ;  and  the  lords,  with  the  consent  o£ 
the  commons,  recommended  him  to  his  majesty  for  a, 
pardon,  which  he  obtained,  together,  with  a  comfortable; 
pension.  The  committee  appointed  to  inquire  into  the? 
cases  of  the  state-prisoners,  found  sir  Robert  Wright, 
late  lord-chief-justice,  to  have  been  concerned  in  the> 
cruelties  committed  in  the  west,  after  the  insurrection  of 
Monmouth;  as  also  one  of.  the  ecclesiastical  com  mi  s^ 
sioners,  and  guilty  of  manifold  enormities.  Death  had 
by  this  time  delivered  Jefferies  from  the .  resentment  of 
the  nation.  Graham  and  Burton  had  acted  as  solicitors; 
in  the  illegal  prosecutions  carried  on  against  those  whp. 
opposed  the  co\irt  in  the  reign  of  Charles  II. ;  these  were> 
now  reported  guilty  of  having  been  instrumental  in  tak- 
ing away  the  liyes  and  estates  of  those  who  had  suffered 
the  -loss  of  either  under  colour  of  law  for  eight  years 
last  past;  of  having,  by  malicious  indictments,  informa- 
tions, and  prosecutions  of  quo  warranto,  endeavoured 


1*80.  WILLIAM  ANOMALY.  fiA 

the  subversion  of  the  Protestant  religion,  and  the  go* 
vemment  of  the  realm ;  and  of  having  wasted  many 
thousand  pounds  of  the  public  revenue  in  the  course  of 
their  infamous  .practices. 

:  §.  XLIV, .  Nor  did  the  misconduct  of  the  present  mi- 
nistry escape,  the  animadversion  of  the  parliament.  The 
lords  having  addressed  the  king  to  put  the  isle  of  Wight/ 
Jersey,;  Guernsey,  Scilly,  Dover-castle,  and  the  Other 
fortresses  of  the  kingdom,  in  a  posture  of  defence,  and 
to  disarm  the  Papists,  empowered  a  committee  to  inquire 
into  the  miscarriages  in  Ireland,  which  were  generally 
imputed  to  the  neglect  of  the  marquisses  of  Caermarthen 
Halifax.  They. presented  an  address  to  the  king,  de- 
siring the  minute-book  of  the  committee  for  Irish  affairs 
might  be  put  into  their  hands:  but  his  majesty  declined 
gratifying  them  in  this  particular :  then  the  commons 
voted,  that  those  persons  who  had  advised  the  king  to 
delay  this  satisfaction  were  enemies  to  the  kingdom/ 
William,  alarmed  at  this  resolution,  allowed  them  to  in* 
spect  the  book,  in  which  they  found  very  little  for  their, 
purpose.  .  The  house  resolved,  that  an  address  should; 
be  presented  to  his  majesty,  declaring  that  the  succour. 
of  Ireland  had  been  retarded  by  unnecessary  delays ; 
that  the  transports  prepared  were  not  sufficient' to  con- 
vey the  forces  to  that  kingdom  ;  and  that  several  ships 
had  been  taken  by  the  enemy,  for  want  of  proper  con-* 
Yoy.  At  the  same  time  the  question  was  put,  whether 
or  not  they  should  address  the  king  against  the  marquis 
of  Halifax.  But  it  was  carried  in- the  negative  by  av 
small  majority.  Before  this  period,  Howe,  vice-cham-v 
berlain  to  the  queen,  had  moved  for  an  address  against 
such  Counsellors  as  had  been  impeached  in  parliament,! 
and  betrayed  the  liberties  of  the  nation.  This  motion- 
was  levelled  against  Caermarthen  and  Halifax,  the  first 
of  whom  had  been  formerly  impeached  of  hrgh-treason, 
under  the  title  of  earl  of  Danby ;  and  the  other  was 
charged  with  all  the  misconduct  of  the  present  adminis- 


54  HISTORY  Qlf  J&NGLANO.  tf&l 

trstkm.  Warm  debates  ensued,  arid  in  all  probability 
the  motion  would  have  been  carried  in  the  affirmative, 
had  not  those  who  spoke  wariqly  in  behalf  of  it,  sud- 
denly cooled  in  the  course  of  the  dispute.  Some  letters- 
from  king  James  to  his  partisans  being  intercepted,  and 
Containing  some  hints  of  an  intended  invasion,  Mr.' 
Hambden,  chairman  of  the  committee  of  the  whole 
bouse,  enlarged  upon  the  imminent  danger  to  which  the 
kingdom  was  exposed;  and  moved  for  a  farther  supply 
tb  his  majesty.  In  this  unexpected  motion  lie  was  not 
seconded  by  one  jpember.  -  The  house,  however,  hav- 
ing taken  the  letters  into  consideration,  resolved  to  draw 
up  an  address  to  the  king,  desiring  hiip  to  secure  and 
disarm  all  Papists  pf  note ;  and  they  brought  in  a  bill 
for  attainting  several  persons  in  rebellion  against  their 
majesties  ;  but  it  was 'riot  finished  during  this  session.  . 
*  §  XLV.  Another  bill  being  prepared  in  the  house  pf 
lords,  enjoining  the  subject  to  wear  the  woollen  manu- 
facture at  certain  seasons  of  the  year,  a  petition  was  pre- 
sented against  it  by  the  silk  weavers  of  London  and  Can- 
terbury, assembled  in  a  tumultuous  manner  at  West- 
minster. The  lords  refused  their  petition,  bepause 
this  was  an  unusual  manner  of  application.  They  were 
persuaded  to  return  to  their  respective  places  of  abode  ; 
precautions  were  taken  against  a  second  riot;  and  the 
bill  was  unanimously  rejected  in  the  upper  house.  Thte 
parliament  passed  an  act,  vesting  in  the  two  universities 
the  presentations  belonging  to  Papists :  those  of  the* 
southern  counties  being  given  to  Oxford ;  and  those  of 
the  northern  to  Cambridge,  on  certain  specified  condi- 
tions* Courts  of  conscience  were  erected  at  Bristol,- 
Gloucester,  and  Newcastle ;  and  that  of  the  marches  of 
Wales  was  abolished,  as  an  intolerable  oppression.  The 
Protestant  clergymen,  who  had  been  forced  to  leave' 
their  benefices  in  Ireland,  were  rendered  capable  of 
holding  any  living  in  England,  without  forfeiting  theip 
title  to  their  former  preferment ;  with  the- proviso.. that? 


I«0*  WILLIAM  AND  MARY.  g& 

they  should  design  thdr  Ebglish  benefices  when  restored 
to  those  they  had  been  obliged  to  relinquish.  The  sta- 
tute of  Henry  IV.  against  multiplying  gold  and  Silver 
was  now  repealed  i  £he  subjects  were  allowed  to  melt  arid 
refine  metals  and  ores,  and  extract  gold  and  silver  from 
them,  on  condition  that  it  should  be  brought  to  the 
mint,  and  converted  into  money,  the  owners  receiving 
ite  fall  value  in  current  coin.  Theae,  and  several  other 
bills  of  smaller  importance,  being  passed,  the  two  houses 
adjourned  to  the  20th  day  of  September,  and  afferwar^ 
to  the  igth  day  of  October, 


CHAP.  IL 

§  I.  Duke  of  Schombcrg  lands  with  an  army  in  Ireland— >§  II.  The  Iiw 
nisklHiners  obtain  a  victory  OTer  the  Irish — §111.  Schombcrg  cen- 

f  sored  for  his  iuactitity— §  IV.  The  French  worsted  at  Waleeurt— * 

.  §  V*  Success  of  the  confederates  in  Germany.  The  Turks  defeat- 
ed at  Patocbin,  Nissa,  and  Widen— §  VI.  Death  of  pope  Inno- 
cent XI.— $  VII.  King  William  becomes  unpopular— §  VIII.' 
A  #ood;  number  of  the  clergy  refuse  to  take  the  oaths— §  IX.  The 

.  king  grants  a  commission  for  reforming  church-discipline— §  X.  Meet- 
ing of  the  convocation—^  XI.    Their  session   discontinued  by  re- 

*  peated  prorogations— §  XII.  Proceedings  in  •  parliament — §  XIH» 
T  The  whigs  obltruct  the  bill  of  indemnity— §  XIV.  The  commons,  re*, 

sume  the  inquiry  into  the  cause  of  the  miscarriages  in  Ireland.— §  XV* 
1  King  William  irritated  against  the  whigs— §  XVI.  Plot  against  the> 

*  government  by  sir  James  Montgomery,  discovered  by  bishop  Burnet 
>— §  XVII*  Warm  debates  in  parliament  about  the  corporation  bills — -p 
§  XVIII.  The  king  resolves  to  finish  the  Irish  war  in  person — §  XIX* 
General  Ludlow  arrives  in  England,  but  is  obliged  to  withdraw — §  X3L 
Efforts  of  the  Jacobites  in  Scotland— §  XXI.  The  court  interest 
triumphs  oyer  all  opposition  in  that  country*— §  XXII.  The  tory  inte- 
rest prevails  in  the  new  parliament  of  England— §  XXIII.  Bill  for 

'  recognising  their  majesties— §  XXIV.  Another  violent  contest  about 
the  bill  of  *bjjoratfonr-$  XXV.  King  William  lands  in  Ireland— 

.  §  XXVI.  King  James  marches  to  the  Boyne— §  XXVII.  William  re-, 
solves  to  give  him  battle— §  XXVIII. -Battle  of  the  Boyne— §  XXIX* 

'Death  and  fcharader  of  Schomberg-— §  XXX.  James  embarks  for 

:  France-^  XX^&I.  Wittiam  enters  Dublin,  and  publishes  his  declare 
lion— §  XXXil.  The  French  obtain  a  victory  over  the.  English  and  „ 

"-  Dutch'  fleets  olf^Bcacby-head— §  XXXIII.  Torrington  committed**' 


5&  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1<H». 

prisoner  to  the  Tower— §  XXXIV.  Progress  of  William  in  Ireland— 
§  XXXV.  He  invests  Limerick ;  but  is  obliged  to  raise  the  siege,  and 
returns  to  England— §  XXXVI.  Cork  and  Kinsale  reduced  by  the  earl 

•  of  Marlborough— §  XXX VIL  Lauzun  and  the  French  forces  qoft 
Ireland— §  XXXVIII.  The  dake  of  Savoy  joins  the  confederacy— 
§  XXXIX.  Prince  WaMeck  defeated  at  Fleunu— §  XL.  The  arch- 
duke Joseph  elected  king  of  the  Romans.  Death  of  the  duke  of 
Lorraine.  Progress  of  the  war  against  the  Turks— §  XLI.  Meeting  of 
the  parliament—  §  XLU.  The  commons  comply  with  all  the  king's 
demands— §  XLIII.  Petition  of  the  tories  in  the  city  of  London— 
§  XLIV-  Attempt,  against  the  marquis  of  Caermartb«n->-§  XLV. 
The  king's  voyage  to  Hollaud— §  XLVI.  He  assists  at  a  congress; 

.  Returns  to  England. 

§  I.  Though  the  affairs  of  Ireland  were  extremely 
pressing,  and  the  Protestants  of  that  country  had  made 
repeated  applications  for  relief,  the  succours  were  retarded 
either  by  the  disputes  among  the  ministers,  or  the  neg- 
lect of  those  who  had  the  management  of  the  expedi- 
tion, in  such  a  manner,  that  king  James  had  been  six 
months  in  Ireland  before  the  army  was  embarked  for 
that  kingdom.  At  length  eighteen  regiments  of  infan- 
try, and  five  of  dragoons,  being  raised  for  that  service, 
a  train  of  artillery  provided,  and  transports  prepared,  the 
duke  of  Sehomberg,  on  whom  king  William  had  con- 
ferred the  chief  command  of  this  armament,  set  but  for 
Chester,  after  lie  had  in  person  thanked  the  commons 
for  the  uncommon  regard  they .  had  paid  to  his  services, 
and  received  assurances  from  the  house,  that  they  would 
pay  particular  attention  to  him  and  his  army.  On  thel  3 th 
day  of  August  he  landed  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Car- 
ricfergus  with  about  ten  thousand  foot  and  dragoons, 
and  took  possession  of  Belfast,  from  whence  the  enemy 
retired  on  -  his  approach  to  Carricfergus,  where  they 
resolved  to  make  a  stand.  The  duke  having  refreshed 
his  men*  marched  thither,  and  invested  the  place ;  the 
seige  was  carried  on  till  the  26th  day  of  the  month, 
when  the  breaches  being  practicable,  the  beseiged  capi- 
tulated, on  condition  of  marching  out  with  their  arms, 
and  as  much  baggage  as  they  could  carry  oh  their  backs ; 

3nd  of  their  being  conducted  to  the  next  Irish  garrison, 


I689t  WILLIAM  AND  MARY.  5? 

which  was  at  Newry.  During  this  siege  the  duke  was 
joined  by  the  rest  of  his  army  from  England ;  but  he 
had  left  orders  for  conveying  the  greater  part  of  the  ar- 
tillery and  stores  from  Chester  directly  to  Carlingford. 
He  now  began  his  march  through  Lisburne  and  Hills- 
borough, and  encamped  at  Drummore,  where  the  Pro- 
testants of  the  north  had  been  lately  routed  by  Hamil- 
ton ;  thence  he  proceeded  to  Loughbrillane,  where  he 
was  joined  by  the  horse  and  dragoons  of  Inniskilling. 
Then  the  enemy  abandoned  Newry  and  Dundalk,  in 
the  neighbourhood  of  which  Schomberg  encamped  on 
a  low,  damp  ground,  having  the  town  and  river  on  the 
south,  and  surrounded  on  every  part  by  hills,  bogs,  and 
mountains.  " 

§  II.  His  army,  consisting  chiefly  of  new-raised 
men,  little  inured  to  hardship,  began  to  flag  under  the 
fatigue  of  marching,  the  inclemency  of  the  weather, 
and  scarcity,  of  provision.  Here  he  was  reinforced  by 
the  regiments  of  Kirke,  Hanmer,  and  Stuart;  and 
would  have  continued  his  march  to  Drogheda,  where 
he  understood  Rosene  by  with  about  twenty  thousand 
men*  had  he  not  been  obliged  to  wait  for  the  artillery, 
which  was  not  yet  arrived  at  Carlingford.  King  James 
having  assembled  all  his  forces,  advanced  towards 
Schomberg,  and  appeared  before  his  intrenchments  In 
order  of  battle ;  but  the  duke,  knowing  they  were  greatly 
superior  in  number  of  horse,  and  that  his  own  army 
was  undisciplined,  and  weakened  by  death  and  sickness, 
restrained  his  men  within  the  lines,  and  m  a  little  time 
the  enemy  retreated.  Immediately  after  their  departure, 
a  conspiracy  was  discovered  in  the  English  camp,  hatch- 
ed by  some  French  Papists*  who  had  insinuated  them- 
selves  into  the  Protestant  regiments.  One  of  these; 
whose  name  was  Du  Plessis,  had  written  a  letter  to  the 
ambassador,  d'Avaux,  promising  to  desert  with  all  the 
Papists  of  the  three  French  regiment*  in  Schomberg's 
army.     1* his  letter  being  found,  Du  Plessis  and  five 


$$  HifiTOAY  OF  ENGLAND.  MW. 

accomplices  were  tried  by  a  court-martial^  and  exe- 
cuted. About  two  hundred  and  fifty  Papists  being  dis- 
covered in  the  French  regiments,  they  were  sent  over  to 
England,  from  thence  to  Holland.  While  Schomberg 
remained  in  this  situation,  the  Inniskilliners  made  ex- 
cursions in  the  neighbourhood,  under  the  command 
p{  colonel  Lloyd;  and  on  the  i$7th  day"  of  Septem- 
ber^  they  obtained  a  complete  victory  over  five  times 
their  number  of  the  Irish.  They  killed  seven  hundred 
on  the  spotj  and  took  O'Kelly  their  commanded  with 
about  fifty  officers,  and  a  considerable  booty  of  cattle. 
The  duke  wfts  so  pleased  with  their  conduct  on  this  oc- 
casion, that  they  received  a  very  honourable  testimony 
of  his  approbation. 

;  $  III.  Meanwhile,  the  enemy  took  possession  of 
James  Town,  and  reduced  Sligo>  one  of  the  forts  ef 
which  was  gallantly  defended  by  St.  Sauver,  a  French 
captain,  and  his  company  of  grenadiers,  until  he  was 
obliged  to  capitulate  for  want  of  water  and  provision 
A  contagious  distemper  still  continued  to  rage  in  Schon*- 
herg's  camp,  and  swept  off- a  great  number  of  officers 
and  soldiers  ;  $othat,  in  the  beginning  of  next  spring, 
not  above  half  the  number  of  those  who  went  over  with 
the  general  remained  alive.  He  was  censured  for  his 
inactivity,  and  the  king,  in  repeated  letters,  desired  hiqi 
to  hazard  an  engagement,  provided  any  opportunity 
should  occur ;  but  he  djd  not  think  proper  to  run  the 
risk  of  a  battle,  against  an  enemy  that  was  above  thrice 
his  number,  well  disciplined,  healthy,  and  conducted  by 
able  officers.  Nevertheless,  he  was  certainly  biamaMe 
for  having  chosen  stf  ch  an  unwholesome  situation.  Af. 
.the  approach  of  winter  he  re&rfcdiftto  quarters,  in  hop$s 
of  hfcing  reinforced  with  seven  thousand  Danes,  who  had 
already  arrived  in  Britain.  These  auxiliaries  were  sti- 
pulated in  a  treaty  which  Williajfl  had  just  concluded 
with  the  king  of  Denmark.  The  English  were  not 
more  successful  at  sea  than  they  had  proved  in  their 


-WILLIAM  ANQ  MARY.  &Q 

operations  by  lanji. ;  Admiral  Herbert,  now  created  earl 
of  Torripgtony  having  sailed  to  Ireland,  with  the  cog)* 
fcmed, Squadrons  of  England  and  Holland*  made  a  fruit- 
less attempt  uporl  Cork,  and  lost  a  great  number  of  sea* 
men  by  sickness,  which  was  [imputed  to  bad  provision! 
;The  Dartmouth  ship  of  war  fell  into  the  hands  of  the 
enemy,  who  infested  the.channel  with  such  a  number  of 
erbied  ships  and  privateers,  that  the  trade  of  England 
-sustained  incredible  damage* 

$  IV.  The  affairs  of  Erance  wore  but  a  gloomy  as- 
pect on  the  continent,  where  all  the  powers  of  Europe 
seemed  to  have  conspired  her  destruction.  King.Wtt- 
Jiam  had  engaged  in  a  new  league  with  thte  st&tel-geitt1 
xal,  in  which  former  treaties,  of  peace  and  commerce 
were  confirmed.  It  was  stipulated,  that  in  case  the  king 
of  Great  Britain  should  be. attacked,  the  Dutch  should 
assist  him  with  six.,  thousand  infantry,  and  twenty  ships 
of  the  line :  and  that,  provided  hostilities  should  be  com- 
mitted against  the  states-general,  England  should  sup 
ply  them  with  ten  thousand  infantry  and  twenty  ships 
of  war.  This  treaty  was  no  sooner  ratified,  than  king 
William  dispatched  the  lord  Churchill,  whom  he  had 
by  this  time  created  earl  of  Marlborough,  to  Holland, 
in  order  to  command  the  British  auxiliaries  ia  that  ser- 
vice, to  the  number  of  eleven  thousand,  the  greater  part 
of  which  had  beten  in  the  army  of  king  James  whoa  die 
prince  of  Orange  landed  in  England.  The  earl  fortb» 
with  joined  the  Dptph  army,  under  the  command  of 
prince  Waldeck,  who  had  fixed  his.  rendezvous  in  Ihe 
county  of  Liege,  with  %view  to  act  against  the  French 
army,  qopiipanded  by  the  mareschal  Hutnieres;  white 
the  prinoe  of  Vaudemont  headed  a  little  army  of 
observation^  consisting  of  Spaniards,  Dutch,  andOer- 
mans ,  to  watch  the  motions  of  Calvo  in  another  part  of 
the  Low  Countries.  The  city  of  Leige  was  compelled  to 
renounce  the  neutrality,  and  declare  ior  the  allies.  Ma- 
rgscfaal  d'Humieres  attacked  the  foragers  belonging  to 


80  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND  M«fc 

the  army  of  the  states  at  Walcourt,  in  the  month  of 
August;  an  obstinate  engagement  ensued,  and  the 
French  were  obliged  to  retreat  in  confusion,  with  the 
loss  of  two  thousand  men,  and  some  pieces  of  artillery. 
The  army  of  observation  levelled  part  of  the  French 
lines  on  the  side  of  Courtray,  and  raised  contributions 
on  the  territories  of  the  enemy. 

§  V.  The  French  were  almost  entire  masters  of  the 
three  ecclesiastical  electorates  of  Germany.  They  pos- 
sessed Mentz,  Triers,  Bonne,  Keiserswaert,  Philips- 
fcurgh,  and  Landau..  They  had  blown  up  the  castle  of 
Heidelberg,  in  the  palatinate,  and  destroyed  Manheim. 
They  had  reduced  Worms  and  Spiers  to  ashes ;  and  de- 

%  molished  Frankendahl,  together  with  several  other  for-^ 
tresses.  These  conquests,  the  fruits  of  sudden  invasion; 
were  covered  with  a  numerous  army,  commanded  by 
the  mareschal  deDuras;  and  all  his  inferior  generals 
were  officers  of  distinguished  courage  and  ability.  Ne- 
vertheless, he  found  it  difficult  to  maintain  his  ground 
against  the  different  princes  of  the  empire.  The  duke 
of  Lorraine,  who  commanded  the  imperial  troops,  invest-^ 
ed  Mentz,  and  took  it  by  capitulation :  the  elector  of 
Brandenburgh,  having  reduced  Keiserswaert,  undertook 
the  siege  of  Bonne,  which  the  garrison  surrendered, 
after  having  made  a  long  and  vigorous  defence.  Nothing 
contributed  more  to  the  union  of  the  German  princes; 
than  their  resentment  of  the  shocking  barbarity  with 
which  the  French  had  plundered,  wasted,  and  depopu- 
lated their  country.  Lewis  having,  by  his  intrigues  in* 
Poland  and  at  Constantinople,  prevented  a  pacification 
between  the  emperor  and  the  Ottoman  Porte,  the  cam- 
paign was  opened  in  Croatia,  where  five  thousand  Turks' 

,  were  defeated  by  a  body  of  Croats  between  Vihitz  and 
Novi.    The  prince  of  Baden,  who  commanded  the  im- 
perialists oathat  side,  having  thrown  a  bridge  over  the  - 
Morava  at  Passarowitz,  crossed  that  river,  arid  marched 
in  quest  of  the  Turkish  army,  amounting  to  fifty  thou* 


I68a  WILLIAM  AND  MARY;  61 

sand  men,  beaded  by  a  seraskier.  On  the  30th  day  of 
August  he  attacked  the  enemy  in  their  entrenchments 
near  Patochin,  and  forced  their  lines,  routed  them  with 
great  slaughter,  and  took  possession  of  their  camp, 
baggage,  and  artillery.  They  returned  to  Nissa,  where 
the  general,  finding  them  still  more  numerous  than  the 
imperialists,  resolved  to  make  a  stand ;  and  encamped  ill 
a  situation  that  was  inaccessible  in  every  part  except 
the  rear,  which  he  left  open  for  the  convenience  of  4. 
threat.  Through  this  aVemie  he  was,  on  the  24th  day 
of  September,  attacked  by  the  prince  of  Baden*  who, 
after  a  desperate  resistance,  obtained  another  complete 
victory,  enriched  his  troops  with  the  spoils  of  the  enemy, 
and  entered  Nissa  without  opposition.  Itiere  he  found 
above  three  thousand  horses,  and  a  Vast  quantity  of  pro^- 
vfefon.  Having  reposed  his  artny  for  a  few  days  in  this 
place,  he  resumed  his  march  against  the  Turks,  who 
had  chosen  an  advantageous  post  at  Widen,  and  seem- 
ed ambitious  of  retrieving  the  honour  they  had  lost  in 
the  two  former  engagements.  The  Germans  attacked 
their  lines  without  hesitation ;  and  though  the  Mussul* 
men  fought  with  incredible  fary,  they  weire  a  thicd  time 
defeated  with  great  slaughter.  This  defeat  was  attended 
with  the  loss  of  Widen,  which  being  surrendered  to  the 
victor,  he  distributed  his  troops  in  winter-quarters,  and 
returned  to  Vienna,  covered  with  laurels. 

§  VI.  The  French  were  likewise  baffled  in  their  at- 
tempt upon  Catalonia,  where  the  duke  de  Noailles  had 
taken  Campredon,  in  the  month  of  May.  Leaving  a 
garrison  in  this  place,  he  retreated  to  the  frontiers  of 
France,  while  the  duke  de  Villa  Hermosa,  at  the  head 
of  a  Spanish  army,  blocked  up.  the  place>  and  laid  Ron*- 
sillon  under  .contribution.  He  afterward  undertook 
the  siege  in  form,  and  Noailles  marched  to  its  relief; 
but  he  was  so  hard  pressed  by  the  Spaniards,  that  he 
withdrew  the  garrison,  dismantled  the  place,  and  re-* 
treated    with  great  precipitation.     The  French  king 

vol.  i.  *  #.p       ■ 


62  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1609. 

hoped  to  derive  some  considerable  advantage  from  the 
death  of  pope  Innocent  XI.  which  happened  on  the 
12th  day  of  August.  That  pontiff  had  been  an  invete- 
rate enemy  to  Lewis  ever  since  the  affair  of  the  fran- 
chises, and  the  seizure  of  Avignon. k  Cabals  were  im- 
mediately formed  at  Rome  by  the  French  faction  against 
the  Spanish  and  imperial  interest.  The  French  cardi- 
nals de  Bouillon  and  Bonzi,  accompanied  by  Furs- 
temberg,  repaired  to  Rome  with  a  large  sum  of  money. 
Peter  Ottobini,  a  Venetian,  was  elected  pope,  and  as- 
sutned  the  name  of  Alexander  VIII.  The  duke  de 
Chaulnes,  ambassador  from  France,  immediately  signi- 
fied, in  the  name  of  his  master,  that  Avignon  should  be 
restored  to  the  patrimony  of  the  church ;  and  Lewis 
renounced  the  franchises,  in  a  letter  written  by  his  own 
hand  to  the  pontiff.  Alexander  received  these  marks 
of  respect  with  the  warmest  acknowledgments;  but, 
when  the  ambassador  and  Furstemberg  besought  him  to 
re-examine  the  election  of  the  bishop  of  Cologn,  which 
had  been  the  source  of  so  much  calamity  to  the  empire, 
he  lent  a  deaf  ear  to  their  solicitations.  He  even  con- 
firmed   the  dispensations  granted  by  his  predecessor 

k  The  franchises  were  privileges  of  asylum,  annexed  not  only  to  the 
bouses  of  ambassadors  at  Rome,  but  even  to  tbe  whole  district  in  whfoh 
any  ambassador  chanced  to  live.  This  privilege  was  become  a  terrible  nui- 
sance, inasmuch  as  it  afforded  protection  to  the  most  atrocious  criminals, 
who  filled  this  city  with  rapine  and  murder.  Innocent  XI.  resolving  to 
remove  this  evil,  published  a  bull,  abolishing  the  franchises;  and  almost 
all  the  Catholic  powers  of  Europe  acquiesced  in  what  he  had  done,  upon 
being  duly  informed  of  the  grievance.  Lewis  XIV.  however,  from  a 
spirit,  of  pride  and  insolence,  refused  to  part  with  any  thing  that  looked 
like  a  prerogative  of  his  crown.  He  said,  that  the  king  of  France  was 
nottfie  imitator,  but  a  pattern  and  example  for  other  princes.  He  re* 
jected  with  disdain  the  mild  representations  of  the  pope ;  he  sent  the  mar- 
quis de  Laverden  as  bis  ambassador  to  Rome,  with  a  formidable  train, 
to  insult  Innocent  even  in  bis  own  city.  That  nobleman  swaggered 
through  the  streets  of  Rome  like  a  bravo,  taking  all  opportunities  to 
affront  the  pope,  who  excommunicated  him  in  revenge.  On  the  other 
band,  the  parliament  of  Paris  appealed  from  the  pope's  bull  to  a  future 
'council.  Lewis  caused  the  pope's  nuncio  to  be  put  under  arrest,  took 
possession  of  Avignon,  which  belonged  to  the  see  of  Rome,  and  set  the 
Jioly  father  at  defiance. 


16tt.  WILLIAM  AND  MARY.  03 

to  the  prince  of  Bavaria,  who  was  thus  empowered 
to  take  possession  of  the  electorate,  though  he  had 
not  yet  attained  the  age  required  by  the  canons. 
Furstemberg  retired  in  disgust  to  Paris,  where  Lewis 
immediately  gratified  him  with  the  abbey  of  St.  Ger- 
mains. 

§  VIL  King  William  found  it  an  easier  task  to  unite 
the  councils  of  Europe  against  the  common  enemy,  than 
to  conciliate  and  preserve  the  affections  of  his  own  sub- 
jects, among  whom  he  began  visibly  to  decline  in  point 
of  popularity.    Many  were  dissatisfied  with  his  measures ; 
and  a  great  number  even  of  those  who  exerted  themselves 
for  his  elevation,  had  conceived  a  disgust  from  his  per- 
sonal deportment,  which  was  very  unsuitable  to  the  man- 
ners and  disposition  of  the  English  people.     Instead  of 
mingling  with  his  nobility  in  social  amusements  and  fa- 
miliar conversation,he  maintained  a  disagreeable  reserve, 
which  had  all  the  air  of  sullen  pride  ;  he  seldom  or  never 
spoke  to  his  courtiers  or  attendants ;  he  spent  his  time 
chiefly  in  the  closet,  retired  from  all  communication  ;  or 
among  his  troops,  in  a  camp  he  had  formed  at  Hounslow ; 
or  in  the  exercise  of  hunting,  to  which  he  was  immode- 
rately addicted.     This  had  been  prescribed  to  him  by 
physicians,  as  necessary  to  improve  his  coristitution, 
which  was  naturally  weak,  and  by  practice  had  become 
so  habitual,  that  he  could  not  lay  it  aside.      His  ill 
health,  co-operating  with  his  natural  aversion  to  society, 
produced  a  peevishness  which  could  not  fail  of  being 
displeasing  to  those  who  were  near  his  person ;  this  was 
increased  by  the  disputes  in  his  cabinet,  and  the  opposi- 
tion of  those  who  were  professed  enemies  to  his  govern- 
ment, as  well  as  by  the  alienation  of  his  former  friends. 
As  he  could  not  breath  without  difficulty  in  the  air  of 
London,  he  resided  chiefly  at  Hampton-court,  and  ex- 
pended considerable  sums  in  beautifying'  and  enlarging 
that  palace :  he  likewise  purchased  the  house  at  Ken- 
sington of  the  earl  of  Nottingham ;  and  such  profusion, 

p  2 


64  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1689. 

in  the  beginning  of  an  expensive  war,  gave  umbrage  to 
the! nation  in  general.  Whether  he  was  advised  by  hi$ 
counsellors,  or  his  own  sagacity  pointed  out  the  ^expe- 
diency of  conforming  with  the  English  humour,  he  now 
seemed  to  change  his.  disposition,  and  in  some  measure 
adopt  the  manners  of  his  predecessors.  In  imitation  of 
Charles  II.  he  resorted  to  the  races  at  Newmarket :  he 
accepted  an  invitation  to  visit  Cambridge,  where  he  be- 
haved himself  with  remarkable  affability  to  the  members 
Of  the  university :  he  afterward  dined  with  the  lord- 
mayor  of  London,  accepted  the  freedom  of  the  city,  and 
condescended  so  far  as  to  become  sovereign-master  of 
the  company  of  grocers. 

§  VIII.  While  William  thus  endeavoured  to  remove 
the  prejudices  which  had  been  conceived  against  his 
person,  the  period  arrived  which  the  parliament  had 
prescribed  for  taking  the  oaths  to  the  new  government. 
Some  individuals  of  the  clergy  sacrificed  their  beneficed 
to  their  scruples  of  conscience  ;  and  absolutely:  refused 
to  take  oaths  that  were  contrary  to  those  they  had  al- 
ready sworn  in  favour  of  their  late  sovereign.     These  . 
were  distinguished  by  the  epithet  of  nonjurors  :  but  their 
number  bore  a  very  small  proportion  to  that  of  others, 
who  took  theth  with  such  reservations  and  distinctions 
as  redounded  very  little  to  the  honour  of  their  integrity. 
M  tftiy  of  those  who  had  been  the  warmest  advocates  for 
non-resistance  and  passive  obedience,  made  no  scruple  of 
renouncing  thfeir  allegiance  to  king  James*  and  comply- 
ing with  the  present  act,  after  having  declared  that  they 
took  the  oaths  in  no  other  sense  than  that  of  a  peaceable 
submission  to  the  powers  that  were.    They  even  affirm- 
ed that  the  legislature  itself  had  allowed  the  distinction 
between  a  king  de  facto  and  a  king  dejure,  as  they  had 
dropped  the  word  "  rightful,"  when  the  form  was  under 
debate.    They  alleged,  that  as  prudence  obliged  them  to 
conform  to  the  letter  of  the  oath,  so  conscience  required 
them  to .  give  it  their  own  interpretation.     Nothing 


1089.  WILLIAM  AND  MARY.  85 

could  be  more  infamous  and  of  worse  tendency,  than 
this  practice  of ,  equivocating  in  the  most  sacred  of  aH 
obligations.    It  introduced  a  general  disregard  of -oaths, 
which  hath  been  the  source  of  universal  perjury  and  cor- 
ruption.   Though  this  set  of  temporizers  were  bitterly 
upbraided  both  by  the  nonjurors  and  the  Papists,  they 
all  concurred  in  representing  William  as  an  enemy  to 
the  church ;  as  a  prince  educated  in  the  doctrines  of 
Calvin,  which  he  plainly  espoused,  by  limiting  his  fa- 
vour and  preferment  to  such  as  were  latitudinarians  in 
religion,  and  by  his  abolishing  episcopacy  in  Scotland. 
The  Presbyterians  in  that  kingdom  nqw  tyrannised  in 
their  turn.    They  were  headed  by  the  earl  of  Crawford, 
a  nobleman  of  a  violent  temper  and  strong  prejudices. 
He  was  chosen  president  of  the  parliament  by  the  inte- 
rest of  Melvil,  and  oppressed  the  episcopalians  in  such  a 
manner,  that  the  greater  part  of  them,  from  resentment, 
became  well-wishers  to  king  James*   Every  circumstance 
of  the  hardships  they  underwent  was  reported  in  Eng- 
land ;  and  the  earl  of  Clarendon,  a§  well  as  the  suspend- 
ed bishops,  circulated  these  particulars  with  great  assi- 
duity.    The  oathd  being  rejected  by  the  archbishop  of 
Canterbury,  the  bishops  of  Ely,  Chichester,  Bath  and 
Wells,  Peterborough,  and  Gloucester,  they  were  sus- 
pended from  their  functions,  and  threatened  with  de- 
privation.    Lake  of  Chiche6ter  being  seized  with  a  dan- 
gerous distemper,  signed  a  solemn  declaration,  in  winch 
he  professed  his  adherence  to  the  doctrine  of  non-resist- 
ance and  passive  obedience,  which  he  believed  to  be  the 
distinguishing  characteristic  of  die  church  of  England. 
After  his  death  this  paper  was  published,  industriously 
circulated,  and  extolled  by  the  party,  as  an  inspired  ora- 
cle pronounced  by  a  martyr  to  religious  truth  and  sin- 
cerity. 

§  IX.  All  the  clamour  that  was  raised  against  the 
king  could  not  divert  him  from  prosecuting  the  scheme 
-of  comprehension.     He  granted  a  commission  under 


66  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1609. 

the  great  seal  to  ten  bishops,  and  twenty  dignitaries  of 
the  church,  authorizing  them  to  meet  from  time  to  time 
in  the  Jerusalem-chamber,  to  prepare  such  alterations 
of  the  liturgy  and  the  canons,  and  such  proposals  for  the 
reformation  of  ecclesiastical  courts,  as  might  most  con- 
duce to  the  good  order,  edification,  and  uniting  of  the 
church,  and  tend  to  reconcile  all  religious  differences 
among  the  Protestant  subjects  of  the  kingdom.    A  cry 
was  immediately  raised  against  this  commission,  as  an 
ecclesiastical  court  illegal  and  dangerous.     At  their  first 
meeting,  the  authority  of  the  commission  was  questioned 
by  Sprat,  bishop  of  Rochester,  who  retired  in  disgust, 
and  was  followed  by  Mew  of  Winchester,  and  the  doc- 
tors Jane  and  Aldrich.     These  were  averse  to  any  alte- 
ration of  the  forms  and  constitution  of  the  church  in  fa- 
vour  of  an  insolent  and  obstinate  party,  which  ought  to 
have  been  satisfied  with  the  toleration  they  enjoyed; 
They  observed,  that  an  attempt  to  make  such  alteration 
would  divide  the  clergy,  and  bring  the  liturgy  into  dis- 
esteem  with  the  people,  as  it  would  be  a  plain  acknow- 
ledgment that  it  wanted  correction.    They  thought 
they  should  violate  the  dignity  of  the  church,  by  con- 
descending to  make  offers  which  the  dissenters  were  at 
liberty  to  refuse ;  and  they  suspected  some  of  their  col- 
leagues of  a  design  to  give  up  episcopal  ordination — a 
step  inconsistent  with  their  honour,  duty,  opths,  and 
subscriptions. 

§  X.  The  commissioners,  Notwithstanding  this  seces- 
sion, proceeded  to  debate  with  moderation  on  the  abuses 
of  which  the  dissenters  had  complained,  and  corrected 
every  article  that  seemed  liable  to  any  just  objection ; 
but  the  opposite  p^rty  employed  all  their  art  and  indus- 
try to  inflame  the  minds  of  the  people*  The  two  uni- 
versities declared  against  all  alterations,  and  those  who 
promoted  them.  The  king  himself  was  branded  as  an 
enemy  to  the  hierarchy,  and  they  bestirred  themselves 
30  successfully  in  the  electiop  of  members  for  the  cqu^ 


1060.  WILLIAM  AND  MARY.  67 

vocation,  that  they  procured  a  very  considerable  majo- 
rity. At  their  first  meeting,  the  friends  of  the  compre- 
hension-scheme proposed  Dr.  Tillotson,  clerk  of  the  clo- 
set to  his  majesty,  as  prolocutor ;  hut  the  other  party 
carried  it  in  favour  of  Dr.  Jane,  who  was  counted  the 
most  violent  churchman  in  the  whole  assembly.  In  a 
Latin  speech  to  the  bishop  of  London  as  president,  he,  in 
the  name  of  the  lower  house,  asserted  that  the  liturgy  of 
England  needed  no  amendment,  and  concluded  with  the 
old  declaration  of  the  barons,  "  Nolumus  leges  Anglitz 
mutarL  We  will  not  suffer  the  laws  of  England  to  be 
changed/'  The  bishop,  in  his  reply,  exhorted  them  to 
moderation,  charity,  and  indulgence  towards  their  bre- 
thren the  dissenters,  and  to  make  such  abatements  in 
things  indifferent  as  might  serve  to  open  a  door  of  sal- 
vation to  multitudes  of  straying  Christians.  His  injunc- 
tions, however,  produced  no  favourable  effect.  The 
lower  house  seemed  to  be  animated  by  a  spirit  of  oppo- 
sition. Next  day  the  president  prorogued  them,  on 
pretence  that  the  royal  commission,  by  which  they  were 
to  act,  was  defective  for  want  of  being  sealed,  and  that 
a  prorogation  was  necessary  until  that  sanction  should 
be  obtained*  In  this  interval  means  were  used  to  mol- 
lify their  non-compliant  tempers,  but  all  endeavours 
proved  ineffectual.  When  they  met  again,,  the  earl  of 
Nottingham  delivered  the  king's  commission  to  both 
houses,  with  a  speech  of  his  own,  and  a  message  from 
his  majesty,  importing,  that  he  had  summoned  them  out 
of  a  pious  zeal  to  do  every  thing  that  might  tend  to  the 
best  establishment  of  the  church  of  England,  which 
should  always  enjoy  his  favour  and  protection.  He  ex- 
horted them  to  lay  aside  all  prejudice,  and  consider  calm- 
ly ^nd  impartially  whatever  should  be  proposed :  he  as- 
sured them  he  would  offer  nothing  but  what  should  be 
for  the  honour,  peace,  and  advantage,  of  the  Protectant  • 
religion  in  general,  and  particularly  of  the  church  of 
England. 


V 


08  HISTORY  OF  BNGLAND.  1669. 

§  XI.  The  bishops,  adjourning  to  the  Jerusalem- 
chamber,  prepared  a  zealous  address  of  thanks  to  his 
majesty,  which  being  sent  to  the  lower  house  for  their 
concurrence,  met  with  violent  opposition.  Amendments 
were  proposed ;  a  conference  -ensued,  and,  after  warm 
debates,  they  agreed  upon  a  cold  address,  which  was  ac- 
cordingly presented.  The  majority  of  the  lower  house, 
far  from  taking  any  measures  in  favour  of  dissenters, 
converted  all  their  attention  to  the  relief  of  their  non- 
juring  brethren.  Zealous  speeches  were  made  in  behalf 
of  the  suspended  bishops ;  and  Dr.  Jane  proposed  that 
something  might  he  done  to  qualify  them  to  sit  in  the 
convocation.  This,  however,  was  such  a  dangerous 
point  as  they  would  not  venture  to  discuss:  yet,  rather 
than  proceed  upon  the  business  for  which  they  had  been 
assembled,  they  began  to  take  cognizance  of  some 
pamphlets  lately  published,  which  they  conceived  to  be 
of  dangerous  consequence  to  the  Christian  religion.  The 
president  and  his  party,  perceiving  the  disposition  of  the 
house,  did  not  think  proper  to  communicate  any  pro- 
posal touching  the  intended  reformation ;  and  the  king 
suffered  the  session  to  be  discontinued  by  repeated  pro- 
rogations. 

§  XII.  The  parliament  meeting  on  the  19th  day  of 
October,  the  king,  in  a  speech  of  his  own  composing, 
explained  the  necessity  of  a  present  supply  to  carry  on 
the  war.  He  desired  that  they  might  be  speedy  in  their 
determinations  on  this  subject,  for  these  would  in  a 
great  measure  influence  the  deliberations  of  the  princes 
and  states  concerned  in  the  war  against  France,  as  age-* 
neral  meeting  of  them  was  appointed  to  be  held  next 
month  at  the  Hague,  to  settle  the  operations  of  the  en* 
suing  campaign.  He  concluded  with  recommending 
the  dispatch  of  a  bill  of  indemnity,  that  the  minds  of  his 
subjects  might  be  quieted,  and  that  they  might  unani- 
mously concur  in  promoting  the  honour  and  welfare  of 
the  kingdom.     As  several  inflammatory  bills  and  dis- 


1689.  WILLIAM  AND  MARY.  69 

» 

putes,  which  had  produced  heats  and  animosities  in  the 
last  session,  were  still  depending,  the  king,  after  having 
consulted  both  houses,  resolved  to  put  an  end  to  those 
disputes  by  a  prorogation.  He  accordingly  went  to  the 
house  of  lords,  and  prorogued  the  parliament  till  the  2 1st 
day  of  October,  by  the  mouth  of  the  new  speaker,  sir 
Robert  Atkins,  the  marquis  of  Halifax  having  resigned 
that  office.  When  they  rerassembled,  the  king  referred 
them  to  his  former  speech :  then  the  commons  unani- 
mously resolved  to  assist  his  majesty  in  reducing  Ireland, 
and  in  joining  with  his  allies  abroad  for  a  vigorous  pro* 
seeution  of  the  war  against  France :  for  these  purposes 
they  voted  a  supply  of  two  millions. 

§  XIII.  During  this  session  the  whigs  employed  all 
their  influence  and  intrigues  in  obstructing  the  bill  of 
indemnity,  which  they  knew  would  open  a  door  for  fa* 
vour  and  preferment  to  the  opposite  party,  which  began 
to  gain  ground  in  the  king's  good  graces.     With  this 
view  they  revived  the  prosecution  of  the  state  prisoners. 
A  committee  was  appointed  to  prepare  a  charge  against 
Burton  and  Graham.     The  commons  resolved  to  im- 
peach the  earls  of  Peterborough,  Salisbury,  and  Castle- 
main,  sir  Edward  Hales,  and  Obadiah  Walker,  of  high- 
treason,  for  having  been  reconciled  to  the  church  of 
Rome,  contrary  to  the  laws  of  the  realm.    A  bill  was  or- 
dered to  be  brought  in,  to  declare  the  estate  of  the  late 
lord-chancellor  Jefferies  forfeited  to  the  crown,  and  at- 
taint his  blood  ;  but  it  met  with  such  opposition  that  the 
measure  was  dropped  ;  the  house  however  agreed,  that 
the  pecuniary  penalties  incurred  by  those  persons  who 
had  exercised  offices  contrary  to  the  laws  against  popish 
recusants  should  be  speedily  levied,  and  applied  to  the 
public  service.    The  lord  Griffin  being  detected  in  main* 
taming  a  correspondence  with  king  James  and  his  par- 
tisans, was  committed  to  the  Tower ;  but,  as  no  other 
evidence  appeared  against  him  than  written  letters, 
found  in  the  false  bottom  of  a  pewter  bottle,  they  eould 


70  HISTORY  OF  EXGLAN0.  1S8&. 

not  help  consenting  to  his  being  released  upon  bail,  as 
they  had  lately  resolved  that  Algernon  Sidney  was  un- 
justly condemned  in  the  reign  of  Charles  II.  because  no- 
thing but  writings  had  been  produced  against  him  at  his 
trial.  The  two  houses  concurred  in  appointing  a  com- 
mittee to  inquire  who  were  the  advisers  and  prosecutors 
in  taking  away  the  lives-  of  lord  Russel,  colonel  Sidney, 
sir  Thomas  Armstrong,  alderman  Cornishj  and  others  : 
and  who  were  chiefly  concerned  in  the  arbitrary  prac- 
tices touching  the  writs  of  quo  warranto,  and  the  sur- 
render of  charters.  This  inquiry  was  levelled  at  the 
marquis  of  Halifax,  who  had  concurred  with  the  minis- 
try of  Charles  in  all  these  severities.  Though  no  proof 
appeared,  upon  which  votes  or  addresses  could  be  found- 
ed, that  nobleman  saw  it  was  necessary  for  him  to  with- 
draw himself  from  the  administration  :  he  therefore  're-, 
signed  the  privy-seal,  which  was  put  in  commission,  and 
reconciled  himself  to  the  tories,  of  whom  he  became  the 
patron  and  protector. 

§  XIV.  The  commons  likewise  resumed  the  exami- 
nation of  the  miscarriages  in  Ireland,  and  desired  the 
king  would  appoint  commissioners  to  go  over  and  in- 
quire into  the  condition  of  the  army  in  that  kingdom. 
Schomberg,  understanding  that  he  had  been  blamed  in 
the  house  of  commons  for  his  inactivity,  transmitted  to 
the  king  a  satisfactory  vindication  of  his  own  conduct ; 
and  it  appeared  that  the  miscarriages  in  Ireland  were 
'  wholly  owing  to  John  Shales,  purveyor-general  to  the 
army.  The  commons  immediately  presented  an  address 
to  his  majesty,  praying  that  Shales  might  be  taken  into 
custody ;  that  all  his  papers,  accounts,  and  stores,  should 
be  secured ;  and  that  duke  Schomberg  might  be  em- 
powered to  fill  his  place  with  a  more  able  purveyor. 
The  king  gave  them  to  understand,  that  he  had  already 
sent  orders  to  the  general  for  that  purpose.  Meverthe* 
less,  they  in  another  petition  requested  his  majesty  to 
name  those  who  had  recommended  Shales  to  his  service, 


1689.  WILLIAM  AND  MARY/  71 

as  he  had  exercised  the  same  office  under  king  James, 
and  was  suspected  of  treasonable  practices  against  the 
government.    William  declined  gratifying  their  request ; 
but  he  afterward  sent  a  message  to  the  house,  desiring 
them  to  recommend  a  fcertain  number  of  commissioners 
to  superintend  such  provisions  and  preparations  as  might 
be  necessary  for  that  service,  as  well  as  to  nbmiiiate  cer- 
tain persons  to  go  over  and  examine  thie  state  of  the  army 
in  Ireland.     The  commons  were  so  mollified  by  this  in- 
stance of  his  condescension^  that  they  left  the  whole  af- 
fair to  his  own  direction,  and  proceeded  to  examine 
other  branches  of  misconduct.     Instances  of  misma- 
nagement appeared  so  numerous  and  so  flagrant,  that 
they  resolved  upon  a  subsequent  address,  to  explain  the 
ill  conduct  and  success  of  his  arriiy  and  navy ;  to  desire 
he  would  find  out  the  authors  of  these  miscarriages,  and 
for  the  future  intrust  unsuspected  persons  with  the  ma- 
nagement of  affairs.    They  ordered  the  victuallers  of  the 
fleet  to  be  taken  into  custody,  on  suspicion  of  their  hav- 
ing furnished  the  navy  with  unwholesome  provisions, 
and  new  commissioners  were  appointed.     Bitter  re- 
proaches were  thrown  out  against  the  ministry.     Mr. 
Hambden  expressed  his  surprise  that  the  administration 
should  consist  of  those  very  persons  whom  king  "James 
had  employed,  when  his  affairs  were  desperate,  to  treat 
with  the  prince  of  Orange ;  and  moved  that  the  king 
should  be  petitioned  in  an  address  to  remove  such  per- 
sons from  his  presence  and  councils.  "  This  was  a  stroke 
aimed  at  the  earl  of  Nottingham,  whose  office  of  secre- 
tary Hambden  desired  to  possess ;  but  his  motion  was- 
not  seconded,  the  court  members  observing,  that  James 
did  not  depute  those  lords  to  the  prince  of  Orange  be- 
cause, they  were  attached  to  his  own  interest,  but  for  a 
very  different  reason,  namely*  that  they  were  well  known 
to  disapprove  of  his  measures,  and  therefore  would  be 
the  more  agreeable  to  his  highness.    The  house,  how- 
eyqr,  voted  an  address  to  the  king,  desiring  that  the  au- 


73  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  M80. 

thors  of  the  miscarriages  might  bfe  brought  to  condign 
punishment. 

§  XV.  In  the  sequel  the  question  was  proposed, 
Whether  a  placeman  ought  to  have  a  seat  in  the  house  ? 
and  a  very  warm  debate -ensued:  but  it  was  carried  in 
the  affirmative,  on  the  supposition  that  by  such  exclu- 
sion the  commonwealth  would  be  deprived  of  some  of 
the  ablest  senators  of  the  kingdom.  But  what  chiefly 
irritated  William  against  the  whigs,  was  their.backward- 
ness  in  promoting  the  public  service,  and  their  disregard 
of  the  earnest  desire  he  expressed  to  see  his  revenue  set- 
tled for  life.  He  said  his  title  was  no  more  than  a 
pageant,  and  the  worst  of  all  governments  was  that  of 
a  king  without  treasure.  Nevertheless  they  would  not 
grant  the  civil  list  for  a  longer  term  than  one  year. 
They  began  to  think  there  was  something  arbitrary  in 
his  disposition.  His  sullen  behaviour,  in  all  probability, 
first  infused  this  opinion,  which  was  strengthened  and 
confirmed  by  the  insinuations  of  his  enemies.  The 
Scots,  who  had  come  up  to  London  to  give  an  account 
of  the  proceedings  in  their  parliament,  were  infected 
with  the  same  notion.  One  Simpson,  a  Presbyterian 
of  that  country,  whom  the  earl  of  Portland  employed 
as  a  spy,  had  insinuated  himself  into  the  confidence  of 
Nevil  Payne,  an  active  and  intelligent  partisan  and  agent 
of  king  James ;  by  which  means  he  supplied  the  earl 
vyith  such  intelligence  as  raised  him  to  some  degree  of 
credit  with  that  minister.  This  he  used  in  prepos- 
sessing the  eari  against  the  king's  best  friends,  arid  in- 
fusing jealousies  which  were  soon  kindled  into  mutual 
distrust  and  animosity. 

§XVI.  Sir  James  Montgomery,  who  had  been  a 
warm  advocate  for  the  revolution,  received  advice  that 
the  court  suspected  him  and  others  of  disaffection,  and 
was  employed  in  seeking  evidence  by  which  they  might 
be  prosecuted.  They  were  equally  alarmed  and  i ncertsed 
at  this  intimation,  and  Payne  seized  the  opportunity  of 


168a  WILLIAM  AND,  MARY/  73 

seducing  them  into  a  correspondence  with  the  exiled 
king.     They  demanded  the  settlement  of  presbytery  in 
Scotland,  and  actually  engaged  in  a  treaty  for  his  restore 
tion.  They  reconciled  themselves  to  the  duke  of  Queens-; 
berry;  an  d  the  other  noblemen  of  the  episcopal  party : 
they  wrote  to  James  for  a  supply  of  money,  arms,  and 
ammunition,  together  with  a  reinforcement  of  three 
thousand  men  from  Dunkirk.     Montgomery  had  ac- 
quired great  interest  among  the  whigs  of  England,  and 
this  he  employed  in  animating  them  against  the  king 
and  the  ministry.     He  represented  them  as  a  set  of 
wicked  men,  who  employed  infamous  spies  to  ensnare 
and  ruin  the  fast  friends  of  the  government,  and  found 
means  to  alienate  them  so  much  from  William,  that  they 
began  to  think  in  earnest  of  recalling  their  banished 
prince.    The  duke  of  Bolton,  and  the  earl  of  Mon- 
mouth, were  almost  persuaded  into  a  conspiracy  for  this 
purpose;  they  seemed  to  think  James  was  now  so  well 
convinced  of  his  former  errors,  that  they  might  trust 
him  without  scruple.     Montgomery  and  Fayne  were 
the  chief  managers  of  the  scheme,  and  they  admitted 
Ferguson,  into  their  councils,  as  a  veteran  in  the  arts  of 
treason.     In  order  to  blast  William's  credit  in  the  city, 
they  circulated  a  report  that  James  would  grant  a  full 
indemnity,   separate  himself  entirely  from  the  French 
interest,  and  be  contented  with  a  secret  connivance  irt 
favour  of  the  Roman  Catholics.    Montgomery's  brother 
assured*  the  bishop  of  Salisbury,  that  a  treaty  with  king 
James  was  absolutely  concluded,  and  an  invitation  sub- 
scribed by  the  whole  cabal. ,    He  said  this  paper  would  be 
sent  to  Ireland  by  the  way  of  France,  as  the  direct  com- 
munication was  difficult ;  and  he  proposed  a  method  for 
seizing  it  before  it  should  be  conveyed  out  of  the  king- 
dom.    Williamson,  the  supposed  beafer  of  it,  had  ob* 
tained  a  pass  for  Flanders,  and  a  messenger  being  sent 
in  pursuit  of  him,  secured  his  clothes  and  portmanteau  ; 
but>  after  a  very  strict  examination,. nothing  appeared  to 


/ 


74  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  169* 

justify  the  intelligence.  Williamson  had  previously 
delivered  the  papers  to  Simpson,  who  hired  a  boat  at 
Deal,  and!  arrived  in  safety  at  France.  He  returned 
with  large  assurances,  and  12,000/.  were  remitted  to.  the 
Scottish  undertakers.  Montgomery,  the  informer, 
seeing  his  intelligence  falsified/  lost  his  credit  with  the 
bishop,  and,  dreading  the  resentment  of  the  other  party, 
retired  to  the  continent.  .  The  conspirators  loudly  com- 
plained of  the  false  imputations  they  had  incurred.  The 
pretended  discoveries  were  looked  upon  as  fictions  of  the 
ministry,  and  the  king  on  this  occasion  suffered  greatly 
in  the  opinion  of  his  subjects. 

§  XVII.  The  tories  still  continued  to  carry  on  a  secret 
negotiation  with  the  court.  They  took  advantage  of 
the  ill-humour  subsisting  between  the  king  and  the 
whigs ;  and  promised  large  supplies  of  money,  provided 
this  parliament  should  be  dissolved,  and  another  imme- 
diately convoked.  The  opposite  party,  being  apprised 
of  their  intention,  brought  a  bill  into  the  house  of  com- 
mons for  restoring  corporations  to  their  ancient  right* 
and  privileges.  They  knew  their  own  strength  at  elec- 
tions consisted  in  these  corporations ;  and  they  inserted 
two  additional-severe  clauses  against  those  who  were  in 
any  shape  concerned  in  surrendering  charters.  The 
whole  power  of  the  tories  was  exerted  against  this  clause;; 
and  now  the  whigs  vied  with  them  in  making  court  to 
his  majesty,  promising  to  manifest  the  most  submissive 
obedience  should  this  bill  b£  enacted  into  a  law.  The 
strength  of  the  tories  was  now  become  so  formidable  in 
the  house,  that  they  outvoted  the  other  party,  and  the 
clauses  were  rejected  ;  but  the  bill  passed  in  its  original 
form.  The  lords  debated  upon  the  point,  Whether  a 
corporation  could  be  forfeited  or  surrendered?  Lord 
chief-justice  Holt,  and  two  other  judges,  declared  their 
opinion  in  the  affirmative :  the  rest  thought  otherwise, 
as  no  precedents  could  be  produced  farther  back  than 
the  reign  of  Henry  VIII.  when  the  abbeys  were  sup* 


1889.  WILLIAM  AND  MARY.  75 

rendered  ;.  and  this  instance  seemed  too  violent  to.  au- 
thorize such  a  measure  in  a  regular  course  of  administra- 
tion. The  bill,  however,  passed  by  one  voice  only. 
Then  both  parties  quickened  their  applications  to  the 
king,  who  found  himself  so  perplexed  and  distracted  be- 
tween two  factions  which  he  equally  feared,  that  he  re- 
solved, to  leave  the  government  in  the  queen  s  hands,  and 
retire  to  Holland.  He  communicated  this  design  to  the 
marquis  of  Caermarthen,  the  earl  of  Shrewsbury,  and 
some  other  noblemen,  who  pressed  him  to  lay  aside  his 
resolution,  and  even  mingled  tears  with  their  remon- 
strances. 

§  XVIII.  He  at  length  complied  with  their  request, 
and  determined  to  finish  the  Irish  war  in  person.     This 
design  was  far  fripm  being  agreeable  to  the  parliament. 
His  friends  dreaded  the  climate  of  that  country,  which 
might  prove  fatal  to  his  weak  constitution.     The  well- 
wishers  of  James  were  afraid  of  that  prince  s  being  hard 
pressed,  should  William  take  the  field  against  him  in 
person :  both  houses,  therefore,  began  to  prepare  an  ad- 
dress against  this  expedition.     In  order  to  prevent  this 
remonstrance,  the  king  went  to  the  parliament,  and 
formally  signified  his  resolution.     After  his  speech  they 
were  prorogued  to  the  2d  day  of  April.     On  the  6th 
day  of  February  they  were  dissolved  by  proclamation, 
and  a  new  parliament' was  summoned  to  meet  on  the 
20th  day  of  March.     During  this  session,  the  coin- 
mons,  in  an  address  to  the  king,  desired  that  a  revenue 
of  50,000/.  might  be  settled  upon  the  prince  and  princess 
of  Denmark,  out  of  the  civil  list ;  and  his  majesty  grati- 
fied them  in  this  particular :  yet,  the  warmth  and  indus- 
try with  which  the  friends  of  the  princess  exerted  them- 
selves in  promoting  the  settlement,  produced  a  coldness 
and  misunderstanding  between  the  two  sisters :   and  the 
subsequent  disgrace  of  the  earl  of  Marlborough,  was  im- 
puted to  the  part  which  his  wife  acted  on  the  occasion. 
She  was  lady  of  the  bed-chamber,  and  chief  confidant  of 


70  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1689* 

the  princess,  Whom  she  strenuously  advised  to  insist  upon 
the  settlement,  rather  than  depend  upon  the  generosity 
of  the  king  and  queen. 

§  XIX.  About  this  period,  general  Ludlow,  who  at 
the  restoration  had  been  excepted  from  the  act  of  in- 
demnity, as  one  of  those  who  sat  in  judgment  upon 
Charles  I.  arrived  in  England,  and  offered  his  service  in 
reducing  Ireland,  where  he  had  formerly  commanded. 
Though  a  rigid  republican,  he  was  reputed  a  conscien- 
tious man,  and  a  good  officer.  He  had  received  some 
encouragement  to  come  over,  and  probably  would  have 
been  employed,  had  not  the  commons  interposed.  Sir 
Edward  Seymour,  who  enjoyed  by  grant  ah  estate  in 
Wiltshire,  which  had  formerly  belonged  to  Ludlow, 
began  to  be  in  pain  for  his  possession.  He  observed  in 
the  house,  that  the  nation  would  be  disgraced,  shduld 
one  of  the  parricides  be  suffered  to  live  in  the  kingdom. 
An  address  was  immediately  presented  to  the  king,'  de- 
siring a  proclamation  might  be  issued,  promising  a  re- 
ward for  apprehending  general  Ludlow.  This  was  ac-^ 
cordingly  published ;  but  not  before  he  had  landed  in 
Holland,  from  whence  he  returned  to  Vevay  in  Swisser- 
land,  where  he  wrote  the  memoirs  of  his  life,  and  died 
after  ah  exile  of  thirty  years. 

$  XX.  While  king  William  fluctuated  between  two 
parties  in  England,  his  interest  ifl  Scotland  had  well 
nigh  given  way  to  a  coalition  between  the  original  Jaco- 
bites and  Montgomery's  party  of  discontented  Presby- 
terians. Colonel  Cannon,  who  succeeded  the  viscount 
Dundee  in  command,  after  having  made  several  un&uc-^ 
cessful  efforts  in  favour  of  the  late  king's  interest,  re- 
tired into  Ireland :  and  the  Highlanders  chose  sir  Hugh 
Cameron  for  their  leader.  Under  him  they  renewed 
their  incursions  with  the  better  prospect  of  success,  as 
several  regiments  of  the  regular  troops  had  been  sent  td 
reinforce  the  army  of  Schomberg.  James  assisted  them 
with  clothes,   arms,  and  ammunition,    together  with 


1*89.  WILLIAM  AND  MARY.  77 

some  officers,  amongst  whom  was  colonel  Bucan,  ap- 
pointed to  act  as  their  chief  commander.  This  officer, 
at  the  head  of  fifteen  hundred  men,  advanced  into  the 
shire  of  Murray,  in  hope  of  being  joined  by  other 
malecontents  :  but  he  was  surprised  and  routed  by  sir 
Thomas  Livingstone,  while  major  Ferguson  destroyed 
the  places  they  possessed  in  the  isle  of  Mull ;  so  that 
the  Highlanders  were  obliged  to  retire,  and  conceal  them* 
selves  among  their  hills  and  fastnesses.  The  friends  of 
James,  despairing  of  doing  any  thing  effectual  for  his 
service  in  the  field,  converted  all  their  attention  to  the 
proceedings  in  parliament;  where  they  imagined,  their 
interest  was  much  stronger  than  it  appeared  to  be  upon 
trial.  They  took  the  oaths  without  hesitation,  and 
hoped,  by  the  assistance  of  their  new  allies,  to  embroil 
the  government  in  such  a  manner,  that  the  majority  of 
the  people  would  declare  for  a  restoration.  But  the 
views  of  these  new-cemented  parties  were  altogether  in- 
compatible ;  and  their  principles  diametrically  opposite* 
Notwithstanding  their  concurrence  in  parliament,  the 
earl  of  Melvil  procured  a  small  majority.  The  opposi- 
tion was  immediately  discouraged :  some  individuals 
retracted,  rather  than  fall  with  a  sinking  cause;  and 
mutual  jealousies  began  to  prevail.  The  leaders  of  the 
coalition  treated  separately  with  king  James ;  made  in- 
consistent demands ;  reciprocally  concealed  their  nego- 
tiations :  in  a  word,  they  distrusted  and  hated  one  an- 
other with  the  most  implacable  resentment. 

$  XXL  The  earls  of  Argyle,  Anandale,  and  Breadal- 
bane,  withdrew  from  their  councils,  and  repaired  to 
England.  Montgomery,  terrified  at  their  defection, 
went  privately  to  London,  after  he  had  hinted  some- 
thing of  the  plot  to  Melvil,  and  solicited  a  pass  from  the 
queen,  which  was  refused.  Anandale,  having  received 
information  that  Montgomery  had  disclosed  all  the  par- 
ticulars of  the  negotiation,  threw  himself  upon  the 
queen's  mercy,  and  discovered  all  he  knew  of  the  con- 
voy i.  *  G 


78  HISTORY  OP  ENGLAND.  16WL 

epiracy.  As  he  had  not  treated  with  any  of  the  male- 
contents  in  England,  they  remained  secure  from  his 
evidence ;  but  he  informed  against  Nevil  Payne,  who 
had  been  sent  down  as  their  agent  to  Scotland,  where 
he  now  resided.  He  was  immediately  apprehended  by 
the  council  of  that  kingdom,  in  consequence  of  a  letter 
from  the  earl  of  Nottingham ;  and  twice  put  to  the 
torture,  which  he  resolutely  bore,  without  discovering 
his  employers.  Montgomery  still  absconded  in  London, 
soliciting  a  pardon ;  but,  finding  he  could  not  obtain  it, 
except  on  condition  of  making  a  full  discovery,  he  aban- 
doned his  country,  and  chose  to  die  in  exile  rather  than 
betray  his  confederates.  This  disunion  of  the  conspira- 
tors, and  discovery  of  the  plot,  left  the  earl  of  Melvil  in 
possession  of  a  greater  majority ;  though  even  this  he 
was  fain  to  secure  by  overstraining  his  instructions  in 
the  articles  of  patronage,  and  the  supremacy  of  the 
crown,  which  he  yielded  up  to  the  fury  of  the  fanatic 
Presbyterians,  contrary  to  the  intention  of  king  Wil- 
liam. In  lieu  of  these,  however,  they  indulged  him 
with  the  tax  of  chimney  or  hearth-money :  as  well  as 
with  a  test  to  be  imposed  upon  all  persons  in  office  and 
parliament,  declaring  William  and  Mary  their  lawful 
sovereigns,  and  renouncing  the  pretended  title  of  king 
James.  All  the  laws  in  favour  of  episcopacy  were  re- 
pealed, Threescore  of  the  Presbyterian  ministers,  who 
had  been  ejected  at  the  restoration,  were  still  alive ;  and 
these  the  parliament  declared  the  only  sound  part  of  the 
church.  The  government  of  it  was  lodged  in  their 
hands ;  and  they  were  empowered  to  admit  such  as  they 
should  think  proper  to  their  assistance.  A  few  furious 
fanatics  being  thus  associated,  proceeded  with  ungovern- 
able violence  to  persecute  the  episcopal  party;  exercising 
the  very  same  tyranny  against  which  they  themselves 
had  so  loudly  exclaimed. 

§  XXIL  While  the  Presbyterian  interest  thus  tri- 
umphed in  Scotland,  the  two  parties  that  divided  Eng- 


1990.  WILLIAM  AND  MARY.  79 

laud  employed  their  whole  influence  and  attention  in 
managing  die  elections  for  a  new  parliament ;  and  the 
tones  obtained  the  victory.  The  king  seemed  gradually 
falling  into  the  arms  of  this  party*  They  complained  of 
their  having  been  totally  excluded  from  the  lieutenancy 
of  London  at  the  king's  accession  to  the  crown ;  and 
now  a  considerable  number  of  the  most  violent  tories  in 
the  city  were  admitted  into  the  commission,  by  the  inte- 
rest and  address  of  the  bishop  of  London,  the  marquis 
Caermarthen,  and  the  earl  of  Nottingham*  To  gratify 
that  party,  the  earls  of  Monmouth  and  Warrington 
were  dismissed  from  their  employments:  nay,  when 
the  parliament  met  on  the  20th  day  of  March,0  the 
commons  chose  for  their  speaker  sir  John  Trevor,  a 
violent  partisan  of  that  faction,  who  had  been  created 
master  of  the  rolls  by  the  late  king.  He  was  a  bold, 
artful  man,  and  undertook  to  procure  a  majority  to  be 
at  the  devotion  of  the  court,  provided  he  should  be 
supplied  with  the  necessary  sums  for  the  purposes  of 
corruption. '  William,  finding  there  was  ,no  other  way  of 
maintaining  his  administration  in  peace,  thought  proper 
to  countenance  the  practice  of  purchasing  votes,  and 
appointed  Trevor  first  commissioner  of  the  great  seal* 
In  his  speech  to  the  new  parliament,  he  gave  them  to 
understand,  that  he  still  persisted  in  his  resolution  of 
going  in  person  to  Ireland.  He  desired  they  would 
make  a  settlement  of  the  revenue,  or  establish  it  for  the 
present,  as  a  fund  of  credit,  upon  which  the  necessary 
sums  for  the  service  of  the  government  might  be  imme- 
diately advanced :  he  signified  his  intention  of  sending 
to  them  an  act  of  grace,  with  a  few  exceptions,  that  he 
might  manifest  his  readiness  to  extend  his  protection  to 
all  his  subjects,  and  leave  no  colour  of  excuse  for  raising 
disturbances  in  his  Absence,  as  he  knew  how  busy  some 
ill-affected  men  were  in  their  endeavours  to  alter  the 
established  government :   he    recommended  a  union 

•  Burnet.    Bolcurres;    Kennet.    Tindal.    Ralph, 

q2  ' 


&0  HISTORY  OV  ENGLAND]  >&K>. 

trith  Scotland,  the  parliament  of  which  hatj  appointed 
feommtesi'ohers  for  that  purpose  :  he  told  them  he  should 
leave  the  administration  in  the  hands  of  the  queeh,  and 
desired  they  would  prepare  an  act  to  confirm  her  autho- 
rity: he  exhorted  them  to  dispatch  the  business  for 
Which  they  were  assembled,  to  avoid  debates,  and  ex- 
pressed his  hope  that  they  should  soon  meet  again,  to 
finish  what  might  be  now  left  imperfect. 

§  XXIII.  The  commons,  in  compliance  with  his  re- 
quest, voted  a  supply  of  1,200,000/.;  one  million  of  that 
fctim  to  be  raised  by  a  clause  of  credit  in  the  reve- 
nue bills;  but  he  could  not  prevail  upon  them  16  set- 
tle the  revenue  for  life.  They  granted,  however,  the 
hereditary  excise  for  that  term,  but  the  customs  for 
four  years  only.  They  considered  this  short  terni 
as  the  best  security  the  kingdom  could  have  for  fre^ 
quent  parliaments ;  though  this  precaution  was  not 
at  all  agreeable  to  their  sovereign.  A  poll  bill  was 
likewise  passed :  other  supplies  were  granted,  and  both 
parties  seemed  to  court  his  majesty,  by  advancing  money 
on  those  funds  of  credit.  The  whigs,  however,  had 
another  battery  in  reserve.  They  produced,  in  thfc 
upper  house,  a  bill  for  recognising  their  majesties  as 
the  rightful  and  lawful  sovereigns  of  thes6  realms,  and 
for  declaring  all  the  acts  of  the  last  parliament  to  be 
good  and  valid.  The  tories  were  now  reduced  to  a  very 
perplexed  situation.  They  could  not  oppose  the  btfl 
without  hazarding  the  interest  they  had  so  lately  ac- 
quired, nor  assent  to  it  without  solemnly  renouncing 
iheir  former  arguments  and  distinctions.  They  made 
w>  great  objections  to  the  firsft  part,  and  even  proposed 
to  enact,  That  those  should  be  deemed  good  laws  for 
the  time  to  come;  but  they  refused  to  declare  them 
valid  for  that  which  was  past.  After  a  long  debate,  th6 
bill  was  committed ;  yet  the  whigs  lost' their  majority  on 
the  report;  nevertheless,  the  bill  was  recovered,  and 
passed  with  some  alteration  in  the  words,  in  consequence. 


1690.  WILLIAM  AND  MARY.  61 

of  a  neryous,  spirited  protest,  signed  J3oltonf  Macdes*- 
field,  Stanford,  v  Newport,  Bedford,  Herbert,  Suffolk, 
Monmouth,  Delamere,  and  Oxford.  The  whole  inter 
rest  pf  the  court  was  thrown  into  the  scale  with  this 
bill,  before  it  wopld  preponderate  against  the  tories,  the 
chiefs  of  whom,  with  the  earl  of  Nottingham  at  their 
head,  protested  in  their  turn.  The  sapie  party  in  the 
JiQiise  of  commons  were  determined  upon  a  vigorous 
.opposition;  and,  in  the  meantime,  some  trifling  objec- 
tions were  made,  that  it  might  be  committed  for  amend* 
ment ;  but  their  design  was  prematurely  discovered  by 
one  of  their  faction,  who  chanced  to  question  the  legality 
q{  the  invention,  as  it  was  not  summoned  by  the  king's 
writ.  This  insinuation  was  answered  by  'Somers,  the 
solicitor-general,  who  observed,  that  if  it  was  not  a  legal ' 
parliament,  they  who  were  then  met,  and  who  had  taken 
thje  oaths  enacted  by  that  parliament,  were  guilty  of 
fcigh-treaspn;  the  laws  repealed  by  it  were  still  in  force ; 
jt  was  their  duty,  therefore,  tQ  return  to  king  James ; 
and  all  concerned  in  collecting  and  paying  the  money 
levied  by  the. acts  of  that  parliament  were  highly  crimi- 
nal. The  tories  were  so  struck  with  these  arguments^ 
that  the  bill  passed  without  farther  opposition,  and  im* 
mediately  received  the  royal  assent.  Thus  the  settle- 
ment was  confirmed  by  those  very  people  who  had  so 
loudly  exclaimed  against  it  as  illegal :  but  the  whigs, 
*jith  all  their  management,  would  not  have  gained  their 
point,, had  not  the  court  bcien  interested  in  the  dispute. 
§  XXIV..  There  was  another  violent  contest  between 
the  two  parties,  on  .the  import  of  a  bill  requiring  all  sub- 
jects in  office  to  abjure  king  James,  on  pain  of  impri- 
sonment, Though  the  clergy  were  at  first  exempted 
from  this  test,  the  main  body,  of  the  tories  opposed  it 
with  great  vehemence  :  while  the  whigs,  under  counte- 
nance of  the  ministry,  supported  it  with  equal  vigour. 
lit. produced  long  and  violent,  debates  ;  and  the  two  fac- 
tious seemed  pretty  equally  balanced.     At  length  the 


82  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  WO. 

tones  represented  to  the  king,  that  a  great  deal  of  pre- 
cious time  would  be  lost  in  fruitless  altercation ;  that 
those  who  declared  against  the  bill  would  grow  sullen 
and  intractable,  so  as  to  oppose  every  other  motion  that 
might  be  made  for  the  king's  service  ?  that,  in  case  of 
its  being  carried,  his  majesty  must  fall  again  into  the 
hands'  of  the  whigs,  who  would  renew  their  former 
practices  against  the  prerogative ;  and  many  individuals, 
who  were  now  either  well  affected  to  him,  or  at  least 
neutral,  would  become  Jacobites  from  resentment. 
These  suggestions  had  such  weight  with  king  William, 
that  he  sent  an  intimation  to  the  commons,  desiring 
they  would  drop  the  debate,  and  proceed  to  matters  that 
were  more  pressing.  The  whigs  in  general  were  dis*- 
gusted  at  this  interposition :  and  the  earl  of  Shrewsbury, 
who  had  interested  himself  warmly  in  behalf  of  the  bill, 
resented  it  so  deeply,  that  he  insisted  on  resigning  his 
office  of  secretary  of  state.  The  king,  who  revered  hi* 
talents  and  integrity,  employed  Dr.  Tillotson  and  others, 
who  were  supposed  to  have  credit  with  the  earl,  to  dis- 
suade him  from  quitting  his  employment :  but  he  con-  . 
tinued  deaf  to  all  their  remonstrances,  and  would  not 
even  comply  with  the  request  of  his  majesty,  who 
pressed  him  to  keep  the  seals  until  he  should  return 
from  Ireland.  Long  debates  were  likewise  managed  in 
the  house  of  lords  upon  the  bill  of  abjuration,  or  rather 
an  oath  of  special  fidelity  to  William,  in  opposition  to 
James.  The.  tories  professed  themselves  willing  to  en* 
ter  into  a  negative  engagement  against  the  late  king 
and  his  adherents:  but  they  opposed  the  oath  of  abjura- 
tion with  all  their  might ;  and  the  house  was  so  equally 
divided,  that  neither  side  was  willing  to  hazard  a  deci- 
sion :  so  that  all  the  fruit  of  their  debates  was  a  pro- 
longation of  the  session, 

$  XXV.  An  act  was  prepared  for  investing  the  queen 
with  the  administration  during  the  king's  absence;  an- 
other for  reversing  the  judgment  on  a  quo  warrant* 


!*«>•  WILLIAM  AND  MARY.  83 

against  the  city  of  London,  and  restoring  it  to  its  ancient 
rights  and  privileges ;  and  at  length,  the  bill  of  indem- 
nity, so  cordially  recommended  by  tfye  king,  passed 
both  houses/  On  the  21st  day  of  May,  the  king 
closed  the  session  with  a  short  speech,  in  which  he 
thanked  them  ;for  the  supplies  they  had  granted ;  and 
recommended  to  them  a  punctual  discharge  of  their 
duties  in  their  respective  counties,  that  the  peace  of  the 
nation  might  not  be  interrupted  in  his  absence.  The 
houses  were  adjourned  to  the  7  th  day  of  July ;  when 
the  parliament  was  prorogued  and  adjourned  succes- 
sively. As  a  farther  security  for  the  peace  of  the 
kingdom,  the  deputy-lieutenants  were  .authorized  to 
raise  the  militia  in  case  of  necessity.  All  Papists  were 
prohibited  to  stir  above  five  miles  from  their  respective 
places  of  abode:  a  proclamation  was  published  for  appre- 
hending certain  disaffected  persons  ;  sir  John  Cochran 
and  Ferguson  were  actually  arrested,  on  suspicion  of 
treasonable  practices.  On  the  4th  day  of  June  the 
king  set  out  for  Ireland,  attended  by  prince  George  of 
Denmark,  the  duke  of  Ormond,  the  earls  of  Oxford, 
Scarborough,  Manchester,  and  many  other  persons  of 
distinction :  on  the  14th  day  of  the  month,  he  land* 
ed  at  Carrickfergus,  from  whence  he  immediately  pro- 
ceeded to  Belfast,  where  he  was  met  by  the  duke  of 
Schomberg,  the  prince  of  Wirjemberg,  major-general 
Kirke,  and  other  officers.  By  this  time  colonel  Wolsey, 
at  the  head  of  a  thousand  men,  had  defeated  a  strong 

i 

r  The  following  persons  were  excepted  from  the  benefit  of  this  act. 
William,  marquis  of  Powis ;  Theophilus,  earl  of  Huntingdon ;  Robert, 
earl  of  Sunderland ;  John,  earl  of  Melfort ;  Roger,  earl  of  Castlemaio ; 
Nathaniel,  lord  bishop  of  Purham ;  Thomas,  lord  bishop  of  St.  Davids; 
Henry,  lord  Dover ;  lord  Thomas  Howard ;  sir  Edward  Hales,  sir 
Francis  Withers,  sir  Edward  Lutwych,  sir  Thomas  Jenner,  sir  Ni- 
cholas Butler,  sir  William  Herbert,  sir  Richard  Holloway,  sir  Richard 
Heath,  sir  Roger  V  Estrange,  William  Molineux,  Thomas  Tyndesly,  co- 
lonel Townley,  colonel  Lundy,  Robert  Brent,  Edward  Morgan,  Philip 
Barton,  Richard  Graham,  Edward  Petre,  Obadiah  Walker,  Matthew 
Crone,  and  George,  lord  Jeffries,  deceased.  .  ' 


HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1«K>. 

* 

detachment  of  the  enemy  near  Beiturbat :  sir  John 
Lanier  had  taken  Bedloe-castle ;  and  that  of  Charted 
mont,  a  strong  post  of  great  importance.,  together  with 
Balingargy,  near  Cavan,  had  been  reduced.  King  Wil- 
liam, having  reposed,  himself  for  two  or  three  days  at 
Belfast,  visited  the  duke's  head-quarters  at  Lisburne: 
then  advancing  to  Hillsborough,  published  an  order 
against  pressing  horses,  and  committing  violence  on  the 
country  people.  When  some  of  his  general  officers 
proposed  cautious  measures,  he  declared  he  did  not 
come  to  Ireland  to  let  the  grass  grow  under  his  feet- 
He  ordered  the  army  to  encamp  and  be  reviewed  at 
Loughbrilland,  where  he  found  it  amount  to  six-and- 
thirty  thousand  effective  men  well  appointed.  Then  he 
marched  to  Dundalk ;  and  afterward  advanced  to 
Ardee,  which  the  enemy  had  just  abandoned. 

$  XXVI.  King  James  trusted  so  much  to  the  dis- 
putes in  the  English  parliament,  that  he  did  not  believe 
his  son-in-law  would  be  able  to  quit  that  kingdom ;  and 
William  had  been  six  days  in  Ireland  before  he  received 
intimation  of  his  arrival.  This  was  no  sooner  known 
than  he  left  Dublin,  under  the  guard  of  the  militia  com- 
manded by  Luttrel,  and,  with  a  reinforcement  of  six 
thousand  infantry,  which  he  had  lately  received  from 
France,  joined  the  rest  of  his  forces,  which  now  almost 
equalled  William's  army  in  number,  exclusive  of  about 
fifteen  thousand  men  who  remained  in  different  garrisons. 
He  occupied  a  very  advantageous  post  oh  the  bank  of 
the  Boyne,  and,  contrary  to  the  advice  of  his  general 
officers,  resolved  to  stand  battle.  They  proposed  to 
strengthen  their  garrisons,  and  retire  to  the -Shannon, 
to  wait  the  effect  of  the  operations  at  sea.  Lewis  had 
promised  to  equip  a  powerful  armament  against  the 
English  fleet,  and  send  over  a  great  number  of  small 
frigates  to  destroy  William's  transports,  as  soon  as  their 
convoy  should  be  returned  to  England-  The  execution 
of  this  scheme  was  not  at  all,  difficult,  and  must  have 


1000.  WILLIAM  AND  MARY.  85 

proved  fatal  to  the  English  army;  for  their  stores  and 
ammunition  were  still  on  board  ;  the  ships  sailed  along 
the  coast  as  the  troops  advanced  in  their  march ;  and 
there  was  not  one  secure- harbour  into  which  they  could 
retire  on  any  emergency.  James,  however,  was  bent 
upon  hazarding  an  engagement ;  and  expressed  un- 
common confidence  and  alacrity.  Besides  the  river, 
which  was  deep,  his  front  was  secured  by  a  morass  and 
arising  ground :  so  that  the  English  army  could  not  at* 
tack  him  without  manifest  disadvantage. 

§  XXVIL  King  William,  marched  up  to  the  opposite 
bank  of  the  river,  and,  as  he  reconnoitred  their  situation* 
was  exposed  to  the  fire  of  some  'field-pieces,  which  the 
enemy  purposely  planted  against  his  person.      They 
killed  a  man  and  two  horses  close  by  him  ;  and  the  se- 
cond bullet  rebounding  from  the  earth,  grazed  upon  his 
right  shoulder,  so  as  to  carry  off  part  of  his  clothes  and 
skin,  and  produce  a  considerable  contusion.     This  acci^ 
dent,  which  he  bore  without  the  least  emotion,  created 
some  confusion  among  his  attendants,  which  the  enemy 
perceiving,  concluded  he  was  killed,  and  shouted  aloud 
in  token  of  their  joy.     The  whole  camp  resounded  with 
acclamation;  and  several  squadrons  of  their  horse  were 
drawn  down  towards  the  river,  as  if  they  had  intended 
to  pass  it  immediately,  and  attack  the  English  army. 
The  report  was  irtstantly  communicated  from  place  to 
place,  until  it  reached  Dublin ;  from  thence  it  was  con- 
veyed to  Paris,  where,  contrary  to  the  custom  of  the 
French  court,  the  people  were  encouraged  to  celebrate 
the  event  with  bonfires  and  illuminations.     William 
rode  along  the  line  to  shew  himself  to  the  army  after, 
this  giarrow  escape.    At  night  he- -called  a  council  of 
war,  and  declared  his  resolution  to  attack  the  enemy  m 
the  morning.    Schomberg  at  first  opposed  his  design : 
but  finding  the  king  determined,  he  advised  that  a  strong 
detachment  of  horse  and  foot  should  that  night  pass  the 
Boyne  at  Slane-bridge,  and  take  post  between  the 


86  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1690. 

enemy  and  the  pass  of  Duleck,  that  the  action  might  be 
the  more  decisive.  This  counsel  being  rejected,  the 
king  determined,  that,  early  in  the  morning,  lieutenant- 
general  Douglas,  with  the  right  wing  of  the  infantry, 
and  young  Schomberg,  with  the  horse,  should  pass  at 
Slane-bridge,  while  the  main  body  of  foot  should  force 
their:  passage  at  Old-bridge,  and  the  left  .at  certain  fords 
between  the  enemy's  camp  and  Drogheda.  The  duke, 
perceiving  his  advice  was  not  relished  by  the  Dutch  ge- 
nerals, retired  to  his  tent,  where  the  order  of  battle 
being  brought  to  him,  he  received  it  with  an  air  of  dis- 
content, saying,  it  was  the  first  that  had  ever  been  sent 
him  in  that  manner.  The  proper  dispositions  being 
made,  William  rode  quite  through  the  army  by  torch- 
light, and  then  retired  to  his  tent,  after  having  given 
orders  for  the  soldiers  to  distinguish  themselves  from 
the  enemy,  by  .wearing  green  boughs  in  their  hats 
during  the  action. 

§  XXVIIL  At  six  o  clock  in  the  morning,  general 
Douglas,  with  young  Schomberg,  the  earl  of  Portland* 
and  Auverquerque,  marched  towards  Slane-bridge,  and 
passed  the  river  with  very  little  opposition.  When  they 
reached  the  farther  bank,  they  perceived  the  enemy 
drawn  up  in  two  lines,  to  a  considerable  number  of  horse 
and  foot,  with'  a  morass  in  their  front ;  so  that  Doug- 
las was  obliged  to  wait  for  a  reinforcement.  This  being 
arrived,  the  infantry  was  led  on  to  the  charge  through 
the  morass,  while  count  Schomberg  rode  round  it 
with  his  cavalry,  to  attack  the  enemy  in  flank.  The 
Irish,  instead  of  waiting  the  attack,  faced  about  and  re- 
treated towards  Duleck  with  some  precipitation  ;  yet 
not  so  fast,  but  that  Schomberg  fell  in  among  their  rear 
and  did  considerable  execution.  King  James,  however, 
soon  reinforced  his  left  wing  from  the  centre ;  and  the 
count  was  in  his  turn  obliged  to  send  for  assistance.  Ait 
this  juncture  king  William's  main  body,  consisting  of 
the  Dutch  guards,  the  French  regiments,  and  some  bat- 


?W.  WILLIAM  AND  MARY.  ft? 

talions  of  English,  passed  the  river,  which  was  waist 
high,  under  a  general  discharge  of  artillery.  King 
James  had  imprudently  removed  his  cannon  from  the 
other  side ;  but  he  had  posted  a  strong  body  of  muske- 
teers along  the  bank,  behind  hedges,  houses,  and  some 
works  raised  for  the  occasion.  These  poured  in  a  close 
fire  upon  the  English  troops  before  they  reached  the 
shore ;  but  it  produced  very  little  effect :  then  the  Irish 
gave  way,  and  some  battalions  landed  without  farther 
opposition.  Yet,  before  they  could  form,  they  were 
charged  with  great  impetuosity  by  a  squadron  of  the 
enemy's  horse ;  and  a  considerable  body  of  their  cavalry 
and  foot,  commanded  by  general  Hamilton,  advanced 
from  behind  some  little  hillocks  to  attack  those  that 
were  landed,  as  well  as  to  prevent  the  rest  from  reach* 
ing  the  shore.  His  infantry  turned  their  backs  and  fled 
immediately ;  but  the  horse  charged  with  incredible  furyf 
both  upon  the  bank  and  in  the  river,  so  as  to  put  the 
unformed  regiments  in  confusion.  Then  the  duke  of 
Schomberg  passed  the  river  in  person,  put  himself  at 
the  head  of  the  French  Protestants,  and  pointing  to  the 
enemy,  '•  Gentlemen  (said  he),  those  are  your  persecu- 
tors :w  with  these  words  he  advanced  to  the  attack, 
where  hfe  himself  sustained  a  violent  onset  from  a  party 
of  the  Irish  horse,  which  had  broke  through  one  of  the 
regiments,  and  were  now  on  their  return.  They  were 
mistaken  for  English,  and  allowed  to  gallop  up  to  the 
duke,  who  received  two  severe  wounds  in  the  head:  but 
the  French  regiments  being  now  sensible  of  their  mi$- 
take,  rashly  threw  in  their  fire  upon  the  Irish  while  they 
were  engaged  with  the  duke ;  and  instead  of  saving,  shot 
him  dead  upon  the  spot.  The  fate  of  this  general  had 
well  nigh  proved  fatal  to  the  English  army,  which  was 
immediately  involved  in  tumult  and  disorder ;  while  the 
infantry  of  king  James  rallied  and  returned  to  their 
post3  with  a  faee  of  resolution.  They  were  just  ready 
to  fell  upon  the  centre,  when  king^  William,  having 


88  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  |69A. 

passed  with  the  left  wing,  composed  of  the  Danish, 
Dutch,  and  Inniskiiling  horse,  advanced  to  attack  them 
on  the  right.     They  were  struck  with  such  a  panic  at 
his  appearance,  that  they  made  a  sudden  halt,  and  theij 
facing  about,  retreated  to  the  village  of  Dunmore.  There 
they  made  such  a  vigorous  stand,  that  the  Dutch  and 
Danish  horse,  though  headed  by  the  king  in  person, 
recoiled ;   even :  the  Inniskilliners  gave  way;   and  the 
whole  wing  would  have  been  routed,  had  not  a  detachT 
ment  of  dragoons,  belonging  to  the  regiments  of  Cun- 
ningham and  Levison,  dismounted,  and  linjed  the  hedges 
on  each  side  of  the  defile  through  which  the  fugitives 
were  driven.    There  they  did  such  execution  upon  the 
pursuers,  as  soon  checked  their  ardour.     The  horse, 
which  were  broken,  had  now, time  to  rally,  and  return- 
ing to  the  charge,  drove  the  enemy  before  them  in  their 
turn.     In  this  action  general  Hamilton,  who  had  been 
the  life  and  soul  of  the  Irish  during  the  whole  engage- 
ment, was  wounded  and  taken  :  an  incident  which  dis- 
couraged them  to  such  a  degree,  that   they  made  np 
farther  efforts  to  retrieve  the  advantage  they:  had  lost. 
He  was  immediately  brought  to  the  king,  who  asked  him 
if  he  thought  the  Irish  would  jnake  any  farther  resist- 
ance ?  and  he  replied,  "  Upon  my  honour,  I  believe  they 
will;  for  they  have  still  a  good  body  of  hoirse  entire." 
William,  eying  him  >vith  3  look  of  disdain,  repeated, 
"  Your  honour !  your  honour  !"  but  took  no  other  notice 
of  his  having  acted  contrary  to  his  engagement,  when 
he  was  permitted  to  go  to  Ireland,  on  promise  of  per- 
suading Tyrconnel  ;to  submit  to  the  new  government. 
The  Irish  now  abandoned  the  field  with  precipitation  ; 
but  the  French  and  Swiss  troops,  that  acted  as  their 
auxiliaries,  under  Lauzun,  retreated  in  good  order,  after 
having  maintained  the  battle  far  some  time  with  intre- 
pidity and  perseverance. 

$  XXIX.  As  king  William  did,  t\ot  think  proper  to 
pursue  the  enemy,  the  carnage  was  not  great.    The 


1690.  WILLIAM  AND  MARY.  09 

Irish  lost  fifteen  hundred  men,  and  the  English  about 
one-third  of  that  number;    though  the  victory  was 
dearly  purchased,  considering  the  death  of  the  gallant 
duke  of  Schomberg,  who  fell  in  the  eighty-second  year 
of  his  age,  after  having  rivalled  the  best  generals  of  the 
time  in  military  reputation.     He  was  descended  of  a 
noble  family  in  the  palatinate,  and  his  mother  was 
ian  Englishwoman,  daughter  of  lord  Dudley.      Being 
obliged  to  leave  his  country,  on  account  of  the  troubles 
by  which  it  was  agitated,  he  commenced  a  soldier  of 
fortune,  and  served  successively  in  the  armies  of  Hol- 
land, -England*  France,  Portugal,  and  Brandenburgh. 
He  attained  to  the  dignities  of  mareschal!  in  France, 
grandee  in  Portugal,  generalissimo  in  Prussia,  and  duke 
in  England.    He  professed  the  Protestant  religion ;  Was 
courteous  and  humble  in  his  deportment ;  cool,  pene- 
trating, resolute,  and  sagacious ;  nor  was  his  probity 
inferior  to  his  courage.     This  battle  likewise  proved 
fatal  to  the  brave  Caillemote,  who  had  followed  the 
duke's  fortunes,  and  commanded  one  of  the  Protestant 
regiments.     After  having  received  a  mortal  wound,  he 
was  carried  back  through  the  river  by  four  soldiers,  and, 
though  almost  in  the  agonies  of  death',  he,  with  a  cheer- 
ful countenance,  encouraged  those  who  were  crossing 
to  do  their  duty,  exclaiming,  "  A  la  gloire,  mes  enfans  ; 
h  la  glorie  !    To  glory,  my  lads ;  to  glory  P    The  third 
remarkable  person  who  lost  his  life  on  this  occasion  was 
Walker  the  clergyman,  who  had  so  valiantly  defended; 
Londonderry  against  the  whole  army  of  king  James* 
He  had  been  very  graciously  received  by  king  William, 
who  gratified  him  with  a  reward  of  5000/*  and  a  pro- 
mise of  farther  favour :  but,  his  military  genius  still 
predominating,  he  attended  Ins  royal  patron  in  this 
battle,  and,  being  shot  in  the  belly,  died  in  a  few  mi- 
nutes.   The  persons  of  distinction  who  fell  on  the  other 
side  were  the  lords  Dongan  and  Carlingford,  sir  Neile 
Q'Neile*  and  the  marquis  of  Hocquincourt     James 


00  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND,  Ititt. 

himself  stood  aloof  during  the  action,  oil  the  hill  of 
Dunmore,  surrounded  with  some  squadrons  of  horse ; 
and  seeing  victory  declare  against  him,  retired  to  Dub- 
lin, without  having  made  the  least  effort  to  re-assemble 
his  broken  forces*  Had  he  possessed  either  spirit  or 
conduct,  his  army  might  have  been  rallied,  and  rein- 
forced from  his  garrisons,  so  as  to  be  in  a  condition  to 
keep  the  field,  and  even  act  upon  the  offensive ;  for  his 
loss  was  inconsiderable,  and  the  victor  did  not  attempt 
to  molest  his  troops  in  their  retreat — an  omission 
which  has  been  charged  upon  him  as  a  flagrant  instance 
of  misconduct.  Indeed,  through  the  whole  of  this  en- 
gagement, William's  personal  courage  was  much  more 
conspicuous  than  his  military  skill. 
,j§  XXX.  King  James  no  sooner  arrived  at  Dublin, 
than  he  assembled  the  magistrates  and  council  of  the 
city,  and  in  a  short  speech  resigned  them  to  the  fortune 
of  the  victor.  He  complained  of  the  cowardice  of  the 
Iri^h  ;  signified  his  resolution  of  leaving  the  kingdom  im- 
mediately ;  forbade  them,  on  their  allegiance,  to  burn 
or  plunder  the  city  after  his  departure ;  and  assured 
them,  that  though  he  was  obliged  to  yield  to  force,  he 
would  never  cease  to  labour  for  their  deliverance.  Next 
day  he  set  out  for  Waterford,  attended  by  the  duke  of 
Berwick,  Tyrconnel,  and  the  marquis  of  Powis.  He 
ordered  all  the  bridges  to  be  broken  down  behind  him, 
and  embarked  in  a  vessel  which  had  been  prepared  for 
his  reception.  At  sea  he  fell  in  with  the  French  squa- 
dron, commanded  by  the  sieur  de  Foran,  who  persuaded 
him  to  go  on  board  one  of  his  frigates,  which  was  a 
prime  sailer.  In  this  he  was  safely  conveyed  to  France^ 
land  returned  to  the  place  of  his  former  residence  at  St* 
Germains.  He  had  no  sooner  quitted  Dublin,  than  it 
was  also  abandoned  by  all  the  Papists.  The  Protestants 
immediately  took  possession  of  the  arms  belonging  to  the 
militia,  under  the  conduct  of  the  bishops  of  Meath  and 
Limerick.     A  committee  was  formed  tp  take  charge  erf 


169a  WILLIAM  AND  MARY.  91 

the  administration ;  and  an  account  of  these  transactions 
was  transmitted  to  king  William,  together  with  a  petw 
tion  that  he  would  honour  the  city  with  his  presence. 

§  XXXI.  On  the  morning  after  the  battle  of  the 
Boyne,  William  sent  a  detachment  of  horse  and  foot, 
under  the  command  of  M.  Mellionere,  to  Drogheda,  the 
governor  of  which  surrendered  the  place  without  oppo- 
sition. The  king,  at  the  head  of  the  army,  began  his 
march  for  Dublin,  and  halted  the  first  night  at  Bally- 
Breghan,  where,  having  received  advice  of  the  enemy's 
retreat  from  the  capital,  he  sent  the  duke  of  Ormond, 
with  a  body  of  horse,  to  take  possession.  These  were 
immediately  followed  by  the  Dutch  guards,  who  secured 
the  castle.  In  a  few  days  the  king  encamped  at  Finglas, 
in  the  neighbourhood  of  Dublin,  where  he  was  visited 
by  the  bishops  of  Meath  and  Limerick,  at  the  head  of 
the  Protestant  clergy,  whom  he  assured  of  his  favour 
and  protection.  Then  he  published  a  declaration  of 
pardon  to  all  the  common  people  who  had  served  against 
him,  provided  they  should  return  to  their  dwellings,  and 
surrender  their  arms  by  the  1st  day  of  August.  Those 
that  rented  lands  of  popish  proprietors  who  had  been 
concerned  in  the  rebellion,  were  required  to  retain 
their  rents  in  their  own  hands,  until  they  should  have 
notice  from  the  commissioners  of  the  revenue  to  whom 
they  should  be  paid.  The  desperate  leaders  of  the  re- 
bellion, who  had  violated  the  laws  of  the  kingdom,  called 
in  the  French,  authorized  the  depredations  which  had 
been  committed  upon  Protestants,  and  rejected  the  par- 
don offered  to  them  on  the  king's  first  proclamation, 
were  left  to  the  event  of  war,  unless,  by  evident  demon- 
strations of  repentance,  they  should  deserve  mercy, 
which  would  never  be  refused  to  those  who  were  truly 
penitent.  The  next  step  taken  by  king  William,  was  to 
issue  a  proclamation,  reducing  the  brass  money  to  near- 
ly its  intrinsic  value.  In  the  mean  time,  the  principal 
officers  in  the  army  of  James,  after  having  seen  him  em- 


92  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1600. 

bark  at  Waterford,  returned  to  their  troops,  determined 
to  ptosecute  the  war  as  long  as  they  could  be  supplied 
with  means  to  support  their  Operations. 

§  XXXIL   During  these  transactions,  the  queen,  as 
regent,  fouhd  herself  surrounded  with  numberless  cares 
and  perplexities.     Her  council  was  pretty  equally  divided 
into  whigs  and  tories,  who  did  not  always  act  with  una- 
nimity.    She  was  distracted  between  her  apprehensions 
for  her  father's  safety  and  her  husband's  life :  she  was 
threatened  with  an  invasion  by  the  French  from  abroad, 
and  with  an  insurrection  by  the  Jacobites  at  home.    Ne- 
vertheless, she  disguised  her  fears,  and  behaved  with  equal 
prudence  and  fortitude.     Advice  being  received  that  a 
fleet  was  ready  to  sail  from  Brest,  lord  Torrington  hoist- 
ed his  flag  in  the  Downs,  and  sailed  round  to  St.  Helen's, 
in  order  to  assemble  such  a  number  of  ships  as  would 
enable  him  to  give  thetn  battle.     The  enemy  being  dis- 
covered off  Plymouth,  on  the  20th  day  of  June,  the 
English   admiral,   reinforced  with  a  Dutch  squadron, 
stood  out  to  sea,  with  a  view  to  intercept  them  at  the 
back  of  the  isle  of  Wight,  should  they  presume  to  sail 
tip  the  channel:  not  that  he  thought  himself  strong 
enough  to  cope  with  them  in  battle.     Their  fleet  con- 
sisted of  seventy-eight  ships  of  war,  and  two-and-twenty 
fire-ships ;  whereas,  the  combined  Squadrons  of  England 
and  Holland  did  not  exceed  6ix-and-fifty ;  but  he  had 
received  orders  to  hazard  an  engagement,  if  he  thought 
it  might  be  done  with  any  prospect  of  success.     After 
the  hostile  fleets  had  continued  five  days  in  sight  of 
each  other,  lord  Torrington  bore  down  upon  the  enemy 
off  Beachy-head,   on  the  30th  day  of  June,  at  dajr- 
break.     The  Dutch  squadron,  which  composed  the  van, 
began  the  engagement  about  nine  in  the  morning ;  in 
'about  half  an  hour  the  blue  division  of  the  English  were 
close  engaged  with  the  rear  of  the  French  :  but  the 
red,  which  formed  the  centre,  under  the  command  of 
Torrington  in  person,  did  not  fill  the  line  till  ten  o'clock, 


1690.  WILLIAM  AND  MARY.  93 

so  that  the  Dutch  were  almost  surrounded  by  the  ene- 
my, and,  though  they  fought  with  great  valour,  sustain- 
ed considerable  damage.  At  length  the  admiral's  divi- 
sion drove  between  them  and  the  French,  and  in  that 
situation  the  fleet  anchored  about  five  in  the  afternoon, 
when  the  action  was  interrupted  by  a  calm.  The  Dutch 
had  suffered  so  severely,  that  Torrington  thought  it 
would  be  imprudent  to  renew  the  battle ;  he  therefore 
weighed  anchor  in  the  night,  and  with  the  tide  of  flood 
retired  to  the  eastward.  The  next  day  the  disabled  ships 
were  destroyed,  that  they  might  not  be  retarded  in  their 
retreat ;  they  were  pursued  as  far  as  Rye ;  an  English  ship 
of  seventy  guns  being  stranded  near  Winchelsea,  was 
set  on  fire,  and  deserted,  by  the  captain's  command.  A 
Dutch  ship  of  sixty-four  guns  met  with  the  same  accident, 
and  some  French  frigates  attempted  to  burn  her  ;  but  the 
captain  defended  her  so  vigorously,  that  they  were  obliged 
to  desist,  and  he  afterward  found  means  to  carry  her 
safe  to  Holland.  In  this  engagement  the  English  lost 
two  ships,  two  sea-captains,  and  about  four  hundred 
men  ;  but  the  Dutch  were  more  unfortunate :  six  of 
their  great  ships  were  destroyed.  Dick  and  Brackel, 
rear-admirals,  were  slain,  together  with  a  great  number 
of  inferior  officers  and  seamen.  Torrington  retreated 
without  farther  interruption  into  the  mouth  of  the 
Thames  ;  and,  having  taken  precautions  against  any  at- 
tempts of  the  enemy  in  that  quarter,  returned  to  Lon- 
don, the  inhabitants  of  which  were  overwhelmed  with 
consternation. 

^  XXXIII.  The  government  was  infected  with  the 
same  panic.  The  ministry  pretended  to  believe  that 
the  French  acted  in  concert  with  the  malecontents  of 
the  nation ;  that  insurrections  in  the  different  parts  of 
the  kingdom  had  been  projected  by  the  Jacobites ;  and 
that  there  would  be  a  general  revolt  in  Scotland.  These 
insinuations  were  circulated  by  the  court  agents,  in  or- 
der to  justify,  in  the  opinion  of  the  public,  the  measures 

vol.  i.  *  h 


94  HISTOEY  OP  JBNGULND.  WO. 

that  were  deemed  necessary  at  this  juncture ;  and  they 
produced  the  desired  effect.    The  apprehensions  thus 
artfully  raised  among  the  people  inflamed  their  aversion 
to  nonjurors  and  Jacobites.  Addresses  were  presented  to 
the  queen  by  the  Cornish  tinners,  by  the  lieutenancy  of 
Middlesex,  and  by  the  mayor,  aldermen,  and  lieutenancy 
of  London,  filled  with  professions  of  loyalty,  and  pro* 
raises  of  supporting  their  majesties,  as  their  lawful  sove- 
reigns, against  all  opposition.     The  queen,  at  this  crisfe, 
exhibited  remarkable  proofs  of  courage,  activity,  and 
discretion.     She  issued  out  proper  brders  and  directions 
for  putting  the  nation  in  a  posture  of  defence,  as  well  as 
for  refitting  and  augmenting  the  fleet :  she  took  mea- 
sures for  appeasing  the  resentment  of  the  states-general, 
who  exclaimed  against  the  earl  of  Torrington  for  his 
behaviour  in  the  late  action.     He  was  deprived  of  his 
command,  and  sent  prisoner  to  the  Tower ;  and  com- 
missioners were  appointed  to  examine   the  particular 
circumstances  of  his  conduct.     A  camp  was  formed  in 
the  neighbourhood  of  Torbay,  where  the  French  seemed 
to  threaten  a  descent.     Their  fleet,  which  lay  at  anchor 
in  the  bay,  cannonaded  a  small  village  called  Tingmouth. 
About  a  thousand  of  their  men  landed  without  opposi- 
tion, set  fire  to  the  place,  and  burned  a  few  coasting  ves- 
sels ;  then  they  re-embarked,  and  returned  to  Brest,  so 
vain  of  this  achievement,  that  they  printed  a  pompous 
account  of  their  invasion.    Some  of  the  whig  party 
published  pamphlets,  and  diffused  reports,    implying, 
that  the  suspended  bishops  were  concerned  in  the  conspi- 
racy against  the  government :  and  these  arts  proved  so 
inflammatory  among  the  common  people,  that  the  pre- 
lates thought  it  necessary  to  print  a  paper,  in  which  they 
asserted  their  innocence  in  the  most  solemn  protesta- 
tions.    The  court  seems  to  have  harboured  no  suspi- 
cion against  them,  otherwise  they  would  not  have  es- 
caped imprisonment.     The  queen  issued  a  proclamation 
for  apprehending  the  earls  of  Lichfield,  Aylesbury,  and 


1«K  WILLIAM. AND  MART.  9£ 

Gastlemaxn ;  viscount  Preston ;  the  lords  Montgomery 
and  Bellasis;  sir  Edward  Hales,  sir  Robert  Tharold, 
sir  Robert  Hamilton,  sir  Theophilus  Oglethorpe,  colonel 
Edward  Sackville,  and  some  other  officers.  These  were 
accused  of  having  conspired  with  other  disaffected  per- 
sons to  disturb  and  destroy  the  government,  and  of  a 
design  to  concur  with  her  majesty's  enemies  in  the  in- 
tended invasion.  The  earl  of  Torrington  continued  a 
prisoner  in  the  Tower  till  next  session,  when  he  was 
brought  into  the  house  of  commons,  and  made  a  speech 
in  his  own  defence.  His  case  produced  long  debates  in 
the  upper  house,  where  the  form  of  his  commitment 
was  judged  illegal :  at  length  he  was  tried  by  a  court- 
martial,  appointed  by  the  commissioners  of  the  admi- 
ralty, though  not  before  an  act  had  passed,  declaring 
the  power  of  a  lord  high-admiral  vested  in  those  com- 
missioners. The  president  of  the  court  was  sir  Ralph 
Delaval,  who  had  acted  as  vice-admiral  of  the  blue  in 
the  engagement.  The  earl  was  acquitted,  but  the  king 
dismissed  him  from  the  service ;  and  the  Dutch  exclaimed 
against  the  partiality  of  his  judges. 

§  XXXIV.  William  is  said  to  have  intercepted  all 
the  papers  of  his  father-in-law  and  Tyrconnel,  and  to 
have  learned  from  them,  not  only  the  design  projected 
by  the  French  to  burn  the  English  transports,  but  like- 
wise the  undertaking  of  one  Jones,  who  engaged  to  as- 
sassinate king  William.    No  such  attempt,  however,  was 
made,  and,  in  all  probability,  the  whole  report  was  a  fic- 
tion, calculated  to  throw  an  odium  on  James's  character. 
On  the  9th  day  of  July,  William  detached  general 
Douglas  with  a  considerable  body  of  horse  and  foot 
towards  Athlone,  while  he  himself,  having  left  Trelawny 
to  command  at  Dublin,  advanced  with  the  rest  of  his 
army  to  Inchiquin,  in  his  way  to  Kilkenny.     Colonel 
Grace,  the  governor  of  Athlone  for  king  Jame6,  being 
summoned  to  surrender,  fired  a  pistol  at  the  trumpeter, 
saying,  "  These  are  my  terms."    Then  Douglas  re- 

H2 


96  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1<»0. 

solved  to  undertake  the  siege  of  the  place,  which  was 
naturally  very  strong,  and  defended  by  a  resolute  garri- 
son. An  inconsiderable  breach  was  made,  when  Douglas, 
receiving  intelligence  that  Sarsfield  was  on  his  march  to 
the  relief  of  the  besieged,  abandoned  the  enterprise, 
after  having  lost  above  four  hundred  men  in  the  attempt. 
The  king  continued  his  march  to  the  westward ;  and, 
by  dint  of  severe  examples,  established  such  order  and 
discipline  in  his  army,  that  the  peasants  were  secure 
from  the  least  violence.  At  Carlow  he  detached  the 
duke  of  Ormond  to  take  possession  of  Kilkenny,  where 
that  nobleman  regaled  him  in  his  own  castle,  which  the 
enemy  had  left  undamaged.  While  the  army  encamped 
at  Carrick,  major-general  Kirke  was  sent  to  Waterford, 
the  garrison  of  which,  consisting  of  two  regiments,  ca- 
pitulated, upon  condition  of  marching  out  with  their 
arms  and  baggage,  and  being  conducted  to  Mallow. 
The  fort  of  Duncan non  was  surrendered  on  the  same 
terms.  Here  the  lord  Dover  and  the  lord  George 
Howard  were  admitted  to  the  benefit  of  the  king's  mercy 
and  protection. 

§  XXXV.  On  the  1st  day  of  August,  William  being 
at  Chapel-Izard,  published  a  second  declaration  of 
mercy,  confirming  the  former,  and  even  extending  it 
to  persons  of  superior  rank  and  station,  whether  na- 
tives or  foreigners,  provided  they  would,  by  the  25  th 
day  of  the  month,  lay  down  their  arms,  and  submit  to 
certain  conditions.  This  offer  of  indemnity  produced 
very  little  effect;  for  the. Irish  were  generally  governed 
by  their  priests,  and  the  news  of  the  victory  which  the 
French  fleet  had  obtained  over  the  English  and  Dutch 
was  circulated  with  such  exaggerations  as  elevated  their 
spirits,  and  effaced  all  thoughts  of  submission.  The 
king  had  returned  to  Dublin,  with  a  view  to  embark  for 
England;  but  receiving  notice  that  the  designs  of  his 
domestic  enemies  were  discovered  and  frustrated,  that 
the  fleet  was  repaired,  and  the  French  navy  retired  to 


1«X>.  WILLIAM  AND  MAKY.  Q1 

Brest,  he  postponed  his  voyage,  and  resolved  to  reduce 
Limerick;  in  which  monsieur  Boisseleau  commanded 
as  governor,  and  the  duke  of  Berwick  and  colonel  Sars- 
field  acted  as  inferior  officers.  On  the  9th  day  of 
August,  the  king  having  called  in  his  detachment,  and 
advanced  into  the  neighbourhood  of  the  place,  summon- 
ed the  commander  to  deliver  the  town  ;  and 'Boisseleau 
answered,  that  he  imagined  the  best  way  to  gain  the 
good  opinion  of  the  prince  of  Orange  would  be  a  vigo- 
rous defence  of  the  town  which  his  majesty  had  com- 
mitted to  his  charge.  Before  the  place  was  fully  invest- 
ed, colonel  Sarsfield,  with  a  body  of  horse  and  dragoons, 
passed  the  Shannon  in  the  night,  intercepted  the  king's 
train  of  artillery  on  its  way  to  the  camp,  routed  the 
troops  that  guarded  it,  disabled  the  cannon,  destroyed 
the  carriages,  waggons,  and  ammunition,  and  returned 
in  safety  to  Limerick.  Notwithstanding  this  disaster, 
the  trenches  were  opened  on  the  17  th  day  of  the 
month,  and  a  battery  was  raised  with  some  cannon 
brought  from  %  Waterford.  The  siege  was  carried  on 
with  vigour,  and  the  place  defended  with  great  resolu- 
tion. At  length,  the  king  ordered  his  troops  to  make  a 
lodgement  in  the  covered  way  or  counterscarp,  which 
was  accordingly  assaulted  with  great  fury :  but  the  as- 
sailants met  with  such  a  warm  reception  from  the  be- 
sieged, that  they  were  repulsed  with  the  loss  of  twelve 
hundred  men,  either  killed  on  the  spot,  or  mortally 
wounded.  This  disappointment  concurring  with  the 
badness  of  the  weather,  which  became  rainy  and  un- 
wholesome, induced  the  king  to  renounce  his  under- 
taking. The  heavy  baggage  and  cannon  being  sent 
away,  the  army  decamped,  and  marched  towards  Clon- 
mel.  William  having  constituted  the  lord  Sydney  and 
Thomas  Coningsby  lords-justices  of  Ireland,  and  left 
the  command  of  the  army  with  count  Solmes,  embark- 
ed at  Duncannon  with  prince  George  of  Denmark 
on  the  5  th  of  September,    and  next   day  arrived  in 


96  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  KM. 

King-road,  near  Bristol,  from  whence  he  repaired  to 
Windsor, 

§  XXXVI.  About  the  latter  end  of  this  month,  the 
earl  of  Marlborough  arrived  in  Ireland,  with  five  thou- 
sand English  troops,  to  attack  Cork  and  Kinsale,  in 
conjunction  with  a  detachment  from  the  great  army, 
according  to  a  scheme  he  had  proposed  to  king  William* 
Having  landed  his  soldiers  without  much  opposition  in 
the  neighbourhood  of  Cork,  he  was  joined  by  five  thou- 
sand men  under  the  prince  of  Wirtemberg,  between 
whom  and  the  earl  a  dispute  arose  about  the  command ; 
but  this  was  compromised  by  the  interposition  of  La 
Mellionere.  The  place  being  invested,  and  the  bat> 
teries  raised,  the  besiegers  proceeded  with  such  rapidity 
that  a  breach  was  soon  effected.  Colonel  Mackillicut, 
the  governor,  demanded  a  parley,  and  hostages  were 
exchanged ;  but  he  rejected  the  conditions  that  were 
offered,  and  hostilities  re-commenced  with  redoubled 
yigour.  The  duke  of  Grafton,  who  served  on  this  oo* 
casion  as  a  volunteer,  was  mortally  wounded  in  one  of 
the  attacks,  and  died  regretted  as  a  youth  of  promising 
talents.  Preparations  being  made  for  a  general  assault, 
the  besieged  thought  proper  to  capitulate,  and  surren- 
dered themselves  prisoners  of  war.  Besides  the  gover- 
nor and  colonel  Ricaut,  the  victor  found  the  earls  of 
Clancarty  and  Tyrone  among  the  individuals  of  the  gar- 
rison. Marlborough  having  taken  possession  of  Cork, 
detached  brigadier  Villiers  with  a  body  of  horse  and 
dragoons  to  summon  the  town  and  forts  of  Kinsale,  and 
next  day  advanced  with  the  rest  of  the  forces.  The  old 
fort  was  immediately  taken  by  assault ;  but  sir  Edward 
Scott,  who  commanded  the  other,  sustained  a  regular 
seige,  until  the  breach  was  practicable,  and  then  ob- 
tained an  honourable  capitulation.  These  maritime 
places  being  reduced,  all  communication  between 
France  and  the  enemy,  on  this  side  of  the  island,  was 
cut  off,  and  the  Irish  were  ^confined  to  Ulster,  where 


MOO.  WILLIAM  AND  MARY.  99 

they  could  not  subsist  without  great  difficulty.  The 
earl  of  Marlborough  having  finished  this  expedition  in 
thirty  days,  returned  with  his  prisoners  to  England, 
where  the  fame  of  this  exploit  added  greatly  to  his  rer- 
putation. 

§  XXXVII.  During  these  transactions,  count  de 
Lsuzun,  commander  of  the  French  auxiliaries  in  Ire- 
land, lay  inactive  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Galway,  and 
transmitted  audi  a  lamentable  account  of  his  situation  to 
the  court  of  France,  that  transports  were  sent  over  to 
bring  home  the  French  forces,  In  these  he  embarked 
with  his  troops,  and  the  command  of  the  Irish  forces 
devolved  to  the  duke  of  Berwick,  though  it  was  after- 
ward transferred  to  M.  St.  Ruth.  Lauztin  was  dis- 
graced at  Versailles  for  having  deserted  the  cause  before 
it  was  desperate :  Tyrconnel,  who  accompanied  him  in 
his  voyage,  solicited  the  French  court  for  a  farther  sup- 
ply of  officers,  arms,  clothes>  and  ammunition,  for  the 
Irish  army,  which  he  said  would  continue  firm  to  the 
interest  of  king  James,  if  thus  supported*  Meanwhile 
they  formed  themselves  into  separate  bodies  of  freeboot- 
ers, and  plundered  the  country,  under  the  appellation 
of  rapparies ;  while  the  troops  of  king  William  either 
enjoyed  their  ease  in  quarters,  or  imitated  the  rapine  of 
the  enemy;  so  that,  between  both,  the  poor  people 
were  miserably  harassed. 

$  XXXVIII.  The  aflairs  of  the  continent  had  not 
yet  undergone  any  change  of  importance,  except  in  the 
conduct  of  the  duke  of  Savoy,  who  renounced  his  neu- 
trality, engaged  in  an  alliance  with  the  emperor  and  king 
of  Spain ;  and,  in  a  word,  acceded  to  the  grand  confe- 
deracy. He  had  no'  sooner  declared  himself,  than  Cati- 
nat,  the  French  general,  entered  his  territories  at  the 
head  of  eighteen  thousand  men,  and  defeated  him  in  a 
pitched  battle  near  Saluces,  which  immediately  surren- 
dered to  the  conqueror.  Then  he  reduced  Savillana, 
Villa  Franca,  with  several  other  places,    pursued  the 


100  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  l«90r 

duke  to  Carignan,  surprised  Suza,  and  distributed  his 
forces  in  winter-quarters,  partly  in  Provence,  and  partly 
in  the  dutchy  of  Savoy,  which  St.  Ruth  had  lately  re- 
duced under  the  dominion  of  France.  The  duke,  find- 
ing himself  disappointed  in  the  succours  he  expected 
from  the  emperor  and  the  king  of  Spain,  demanded  as- 
sistance of  the  states-general  and  king  William  ;  to  this 
last  he  sent  ah  ambassador,  td  congratulate  him  upon  his 
accession  to  the  throne  of  England.  The  confederates, 
in  their  general  congress  at  the  Hague,  had  agreed  that 
the  army  of  the  States  under  prince  Waldeck  should  op- 
pose the  forces  of  France,  commanded  by  the  duke  of 
Luxembourg,  in  Flanders  ;  while  the  elector  of  Bran- 
denburgh  should  observe  the  marquis  de  Boufflers  on 
the  Moselle  :  but,  before  the  troops  of  Brandenburgh 
could  be  assembled,  Boufflers  encamped  between  the 
Sambre  and  the  Meuse,  and  maintained  a  free  commu- 
nication  with  Luxembourg. 

§  XXXIX.  Prince  Waldeck,  understanding  that  this 
general  intended  to  cross  the  Sambre  between  Namur 
and  Charleroy,  in  order  to  lay  the  Spanish  territories 
under  contribution,  decamped  from  the  river  Pieton, 
and  detached  the  count  of  Berlo,  with  a  great  body  of 
horse,  to  observe  the  motions  of  the  enemy.  He  was 
encountered  by  the  French  army  near  Fleurus,  and 
slain  ;  and  his  troops,  though  supported  by  two  other 
detachments,  were  hardly  able  to  rejoin  the  main  body  ; 
which  continued  all  night  in  order  of  battle.  Next  day 
they  were  attacked  by  the  French,  who  were  greatly  su- 
perior to  them  in  number;  after  a  very  obstinate  engage- 
ment the  allies  gave  way,  leaving  about  five  thousand  men 
dead  upon  the  field  of  battle.  The  enemy  took  about 
four  thousand  prisoners,  and  the  greatest  part  of  their 
artillery :  but  the  victory  was  dearly  bought.  The  Dutch 
infantry  fought  with  surprizing  resolution  and  success. 
The  duke  of  Luxembourg  owned,  with  surprize,  that 
they  had  surpassed  the  Spanish  foot  at  the  battle  of  Roc- 


1090.  WILLIAM  AND  MARY.  101 

roy.  "  Prince  Waldeck  (said  he)  ought  always  to  re- 
member the  French  horse ;  and  I  shall  never  forget  the 
Dutch  infantry."  The  Dutch  general  exerted  himself 
with  such  activity,  that  the  French  derived  very  little 
advantage  from  their  victory.  The  prince  being  rein- 
forced with  th6  five  English  regiments,  nine  thousand 
Hanoverians,  ten  thousand  from  the  bishoprick  of  Liege 
and  Holland,  joined  the  elector  of  Brandenburgh ;  so 
that  the  confederate  army  amounted  to  *five-and-fifty 
thousand  men,  and  they  marched  by  the  way  of  Genap 
to  Bois-Seigneur-Isaac.  They  were  now  superior  to 
Luxembourg,  who  thought  proper  to  fortify  his  camp, 
that  he  might  not  be  obliged,  to  fight,  except  with  con- 
siderable advantage.  Nevertheless,  prince  Waldeck 
would  have  attacked  him  in  his  entrenchments,  had  he 
not  been  prohibited  from  hazarding  another  engage- 
ment, by.  an  express  order  of  the  states-general  ;  and, 
when  this  restriction  was  removed,  the  elector  would  not 
venture  a  battle. 

§  XL.  By  this  time  the  emperor's  son  Joseph  was 
by  the  electoral  college  chosen  king  of  the  Romans ; 
but  his  interest  sustained  a  rude  shock  in  the  death  of 
the  gallant  duke  of  Lorraine,  who  was  suddenly  seized 
with  a  quinsey,  at  a  small  village  near  Lintz,  and  ex- 
pired, not  without  suspicion  of  having  fallen  a  sacrifice 
to  the  fears  of  the  French  king,  against  whom  he  had 
formerly  declared  war,  as  a  sovereign  prince  unjustly  ex- 
pelled from  his  territories.  He  possessed  great  military 
talents,  and  had  threatened  to  enter  Lorraine  at  the 
head  of  forty  thousand  men,  in  the  course  of  the  ensuing 
summer.  The  court  of  France,  alarmed  at  this  declara- 
tion, is  saijd  to  have  had  recourse  to  poison,  for  prevent- 
ing the  execution  of  the  duke's  design.  At  his  death, 
the  command  of  the  imperial  army  was  conferred  upon 
the  elector  of  Bavaria.  This  prince,  having  joined  the 
elector  of  Saxony,  advanced  against  the  dauphin,  who 
had  passed  the  Rhine  at  Fort  Louis  with  a  considerable 


108  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  IW1. 

army,  and  intended  to  penetrate  into  Wirtemberg ;  but 
the  duke  of  Bavaria  checked  his  progress,  and  he  acted 
on  the  defensive  during  the  remaining  part  of  the  cam* 
paign.    The  emperor  was  less  fortunate  in  his  efforts 
against  the  Turks,  who  rejected  the  conditions  of  peace 
he  had  offered,  and  took  the  field  under  a  new  vizir* 
In  the  month  of  August,  count  Tekeli  defeated  a  body 
of  imperialists  near  Cronstadt,  in  Transylvania  ;  then 
convoking  the  states  of  that  province  at.  Albajulia,  he 
compelled  them  to  elect  him  their  sovereign ;  but  his 
reign  was  of  short  duration.     Prince  Lewis  of  Baden, 
having  taken  the  command  of  the  Austrian  army,  de- 
tached four   regiments   into  Belgrade,   and  advanced 
against  Tekeli,  who  retired  into  Valachia  at  his  approach. 
Meanwhile,  the  grand  vizir  invested  Belgrade,  and  car- 
ried on  his  attacks  with   surprizing  resolution.      At 
length,  a  bomb  felling  upon  a  great  tower,  in  which  the 
powder-magazine  of  the  beseiged  was  contained,  the 
place  blew  up  with  a  dreadful  explosion.     Seventeen 
hundred  soldiers  of  the  garrison  were  destroyed  ;  the 
walls  and  ramparts  were  overthrown ;  the  ditch  was 
filled  up,  and  so  large  a  breach  was  opened,  that  the 
Turks  entered  by  squadrons  and  battalions,  cutting  in 
pieces  all  that  fell  in  their  way.     The  fire  spread  from 
magazine  to  magazine,  until  eleven  were  destroyed  ; 
and,  in  the  confusion,  the  remaining  part  of  the  garri- 
son escaped  to  Peterwaradin.,   By  this  time  the  impe- 
rialists were  in  possession  of  Transylvania,  and  cantoned 
at  Cronstadt  and  Clausenburgh.     Tekeli  undertook  to 
attack  the  province  on  one  side,  while  a  body  of  Turks 
should  invade  it  on  the  other ;  these  last  were  totally 
dispersed  by  prince  Lewis  of  Baden  :  but  prince  Augus- 
tus of  Hanover,   whom   he  had  detached  against  the 
count,  was  slain  in  a  narrow  defile,  and  his  troops  were 
obliged  to  retreat  with  precipitation.     Tekeli,  however, 
did  not  improve  this  advantage.     Being  apprized  of 
the  fate  of  his  allies,  and  afraid  of  seeing  his  retreat  cut 


ma  WILLIAM  AND  MAKY.  10$ 

off  by  the  snow,  that  frequently  choaks  up  the  passes  of 
the  mountains,  he  retreated  again  to  Valachia,  and 
prince  Lewis  returned  to  Vienna. 

$  XL  I.  King  William  having  published  a  proclama- 
tion, requiring  the  attendance  of  the  members  on  the  2d 
day  of  October,  both  houses  met  accordingly,  and  he 
opened  the  session  with  a  speech  to  the  usual  purport* 
He  mentioned  what  he  had  done  towards  the  reduction 
of  Ireland ;  commended  the  behaviour  of  the  troops ; 
told  them  the  supplies  were  not  equal  to  the  necessary 
expense;  represented  the  danger  to  which  the  nation 
would  be  exposed,  unless  the  war  should  be  prosecuted  ^ 
with  vigour ;  conjured  them  to  clear  his  revenue,  which 
was  mortgaged  for  the  payment  of  former  debts,  and 
enable  him  to  pay  off  the  arrears  of  the  army ;  assured 
them  that  the  success  of  the  confederacy  abroad  would 
depend  upon  the  vigour  and  dispatch  of  their  proceed- 
ings ;  expressed  his  resentment  against  those  who  had 
been  guilty  of  misconduct  in  the  management  of  the 
fleet  %  recommended  unanimity  and  expedition ;  and  de- 
dared,  that  whoever  should  attempt  to  divert  their  at- 
tention from  those  subjects  of  importance  which  he  had 
proposed,  could  neither  be  a  friend  to  him  nor  a  well- 
wisher  to  his  country.    The  late  attempt  of  the  French 
upon  the  coast  of  England,  the  rumours  of  a  conspiracy 
by  the  Jacobites,  the  personal  valour  which  William  had 
displayed  in  Ireland,  and  the  pusillanimous  behaviour  of 
Jame$,  concurred  in  warming  the  resentment  of  the  na- 
tion against  the  adherents  of  the  late  king,  and  in  raising 
a  tide  of  loyalty-in  favour  of  the  new  government.  Both 
houses  presented  separate  addresses  of  congratulation  to 
the  king  and  queen,  upon  his  courage  and  conduct  in 
the  field,  and  her  fortitude  and  sagacity  at  the  help),  in 
times  of  danger  and  disquiet.     The  commons,  pursuant 
to  an  estimate  laid  before  them  of  the  next  year's  ex- 
penses, voted  a  supply  of  four  millions,  for  the  main- 


104  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1«X>. 

tenance  of  the  army  and  navy,  and  settled  the  funds  for 
that  purpose.. 

§  XLII.  They  proposed  to  raise  one  million  by  the  sale 
of  forfeited  estates  in  Ireland :  they  resolved  that  a  bill 
should  be  brought  in  for  confiscating  those  estates,  with 
a  clause  empowering  the  king  to  bestow  a  third  part  of 
them  on  those  who  had  served  in  the  war,  as  well  as  to 
grant  such  articles  and  capitulations  to  those  who  were 
in  arms,  as  he  should  think  proper.  This  clause  was 
rejected;  and  a  great  number  of  petitions  were  offered 
against  the  bill,  by  creditors  and  heirs,*  who  had  con- 
tinued faithful  to  the  government.  These  were  sup- 
posed to  have  been  suggested  by  the  court,  in  order  to 
retard  the  progress  of  the  bill ;  for  the  estates  had  been 
already  promised  to  the  king's  favourites:  nevertheless, 
the  bill  passed  the  lower  house,  and  was  sent  up  to  the 
lords,  among  whom  it  was  purposely  delayed  by  the  in- 
fluence of  the  ministry.  It  was  at  this  juncture  that 
lord  Torrington  was  tried  and  acquitted,  very  much  to 
the  dissatisfaction  of  the  king,  who  not  only  dismissed 
him  from  the  service,  but  even  forbade  him  to  appear  in 
his  presence.  When  William  came  to  the  house  of 
lords,  to  give  the  royal  assent  to  a  bill  for  doubling  the 
excise,  he  told  the  parliament,  that  the  posture  of  affairs 
required  his  presence  .at  the  Hague ;  that  therefore  they 
ought  to  Jose  no  time  in  perfecting  such  other  supplies 
as  were  still  necessary  for  the  maintenance  of  the  army 
and  navy ;  and  he  reminded  them  of  making  some  provi- 
sion for  the  expense  of  the  civil  government.  Two  bills 
were  accordingly  passed  for  granting  to  their  majesties 
the  duties  on  goods  imported,  for  five  years;  and  these, 
together  with  the  mutiny  bill,  received  the  royal  assent : 
upon  which  occasion  the  king  observed,  that  if  some 
annual  provision  could  be.  made  for  augmenting  the 
navy,  it  would  greatly  conduce  to  the  honour  and  safety 
of  the  nation.     In  consequence  of  this  hint,  they  voted 


HBO.  WILLIAM  AND  MARY.  105 

a  considerable  supply  for  building  additional  ships  of  war/ 
and  proceeded  with  such  alacrity  and  expedition,  as  even 
seemed  to  anticipate  the  king's  desires.  This  liberality 
and  dispatch  were  in  a  great  measure  owing  to  the  ma- 
nagement of  lord  Godolphin,  who  was  now  placed  at  the 
head  of  the  treasury,  and  sir  John  Somers,  the  solicitor- 
general.  The  place  of  secretary  of  state,  which  had  re- 
mained vacant  since  the  resignation  of  the  earl  of  Shrews- 
bury, was  now  filled  with  lord  Sydney ;  and  sir  Charles 
Porter  was  appointed  one  of  the  j  ustices  of  Ireland,  in  the 
room  of  this  nobleman. 

§  XLIIL  Notwithstanding  the  act  for  reversing  the 
proceedings  against  the  city-charter,  the  whigs  had  made 
shift  to  keep  possession  of  the  magistracy :  Pilkington 
continued  mayor,  and  Robinson  retained  the  office  of 
chamberlain.  The  tories  of  the  city,  presuming  upon 
their  late  services,  presented  a  petition  to  -the  house  of 
commons,  complaining,  That  the  intent  of  the  late  act 
of  parliament,  for  reversing  the  judgment  on  the  quo 
warranto,  was  frustrated  by  some  doubtful  expression  ; 
so  that  the  old  aldermen  elected  by  commission  under 
the  late  king's  great  seal,  still  acted  by  virtue  of  that  au- 
thority :  that  sir  Thomas  Pilkington  was  not  duly  returned 
as  mayor  by  the  common-hall :  and  that  he  and  the  alder- 
men had  imposed  Mr.  Leonard  Robinson  upon  them  as 
chamberlain,  though  another  person  was  duly  elected  into 
that  office :  that  divers  members  of  the  commons-council 
were  illegally  excluded>  and  others,  duly  elected,  were 
refused  admittance.  They  specified  other  grievances, 
and  petitioned  for  relief.  Pilkington  and  his  associates 
undertook,  to  prove,  that  those  allegations  were  either 

7  This  supply  was  raised  by  the  additional  duties  upon  beer,  ale,  and 
other  liquors.  They  also  provided  in  the  bill,  that  the  impositions  on 
wines,  vinegar,  and  tobacco,  should  be  made  a  fund  of  credit :  that  the 
surplus  of  the  grants  they  had  made,  after  the  current  service  was  provid- 
ed for,  should  be  applicable  to  the  payment  of  the  debts  contracted  by 
the  war;  and,  that  it  should  be  lawful  for  their  majesties  to  make  use  of 
500,000/.  out  of  the  said  grants,  on  condition  of  that  sum  being  repaid 
from  the  revenue. — Ralph. 


IOtf  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  WO. 

false  or  frivolous ;  and  represented  the  petition  as  a  eon* 
trivanoe  of  the  Jacobites,  to  disturb  the  peace  of  the  city, 
that  the  supply  might  be  retarded,  and  the  government 
distressed.  In  the  late  panic  which  overspread  the  na- 
tion, the  whigs  had  appeared  to  be  the  monied  men,  and 
subscribed  largely  for  the  security  of  the  settlement  they 
had  made,  while  the  tories  kept  aloof  with  a  suspicious 
caution.  For  this  reason  the  court  now  interposed  its 
influence  in  such  a  manner,  that  little  or  no  regard  was 
paid  to  their  remonstrance. 

§  XLIV.  The  marquis  of  Caermarthen,  lord-presi- 
dent, who  was  at  the  head  of  the  tory  interest  in  the 
ministry,  and  had  acquired  great  credit  with  the  king 
and  queen,  now  fell  under  the  displeasure  of  the  op- 
posite faction  :  and  they  resolved,  if  possible,  to  revive 
his  old  impeachment.     The  earl  of  Shrewsbury,  and 
thirteen  other  leading  men,  had  engaged  in  this  design. 
A  committee  of  lords  was  appointed  to  examine  prece- 
dents, and  inquire  whether  impeachments  continued  m 
statu  quo  from  parliament  to  parliament.     Several  such 
precedents  were  reported ;  and  violent  debates  ensued : 
but  the  marquis  eluded  the  vengeance  of  his  enemies,  in 
consequence  of  the  following  question :  "  Whether  the 
earls  of  Salisbury  and  Peterborough,  who  had  been  im- 
peached in  the  former  parliament  for  being  reconciled 
to  the  church  of  Rome,  shall  be  discharged  from  their 
bail }"    The  house  resolved  in  the  affirmative,  and  seve- 
ral lords  entered  a  protest.  The  commons  having  finish- 
ed a  bill  for  appointing  commissioners  to  take  and  state 
the  public  accounts,  and  having  chosen  the  commis- 
sioners from  among  their  own  members,  sent  it  up  to 
the  house  of  lords.    There  the  earl  of  Rochester  moved, 
That  they  should  add  some  of  their  number  to  those  of 
the  commons  :  they  accordingly  chose  an  equal  number 
by  ballot;  but  Rochester  himself  being  elected,  refused 
to  act :  the  others  followed  his  example,  and  the  bill 
passed  without  alteration.     On  the  5th  day  of  January, 


lm.  WILLIAM  AND  MARY.  107 

the  king  put  an  end  to  the  session  with  a  speech,  in 
which  he  thanked  them  for  the  repeated  instances  they 
had  exhibited  of  their  affection  to  his  person  and  govern- 
ment* He  told  them  it  was  high  time  for  him  to  em- 
bark for  Holland ;  recommended  unanimity ;  and  as- 
sured them  of  his  particular  favour  and  protection. 
Then  lord  chief-baron  Atkins  signified  his  tpajesty's 
pleasure,  that  the  two  houses  should  adjourn  themselves 
to  the  3 1st  day  of  March.8 

§  XLV.  William,  having  settled  the  affairs  of  the 
nation,  set  out  for  Margate  on  the  6th  day  of  January ; 
but  the  ship  in  which  he  proposed  to  embark  being  de- 
tained by  an  easterly  wind  and  hard  frost,  he  returned 
to  Kensington.     On  the  l6th,  however,  he  embarked 
at  Gravesend  with  a  numerous  retinue,  and  set  sail  for 
Holland,  under  convoy  of  twelve  ships  of  war,  com- 
manded by  admiral  Rooke.     Next  day,  being  informed 
by  a  fisherman  that  he  was  within  a  league  and  a  half 
of  Goree,  he  quitted  the  yacht,  and  went  into  an  open 
boat,  attended  by  the  duke  of  Ormond,  the  earls  of 
Devonshire,  Dorset,  Portland,  and  Monmouth,  with 
Auverquerque,   and  Zuylestein.      Instead  of  landing 
immediately,  they  lost  sight  of  the  fleet,  and,  night 
coming  on,  were  exposed  in  very  severe  weather  to  the 
danger  of  the  enemy  and  the  sea,  which  ran  very  high, 
for.  eighteen  hours,  during  which  the  king  and  all  his 
attendants  were  drenched  with  sea-water.     When  the 
sailors  expressed  their  apprehensions  of  perishing,  the 
king  asked  if  they  were  afraid  to  die  in  his  company  ? 
At  day-break,  he  landed  on  the  isle  of  Goree,  where  he 
took  some  refreshment  in  a  fisherman's  hut ;  then  he 
committed  himself  to  the  boat  again,  and  was  conveyed 
to  the  shore  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Maeslandsluys. 
A  deputation  of  the  states  received  him  at  Hounslar* 
dyke :  about  six  in  the  evening  he  arrived  at  the  Hague, 

2  In  this  year  the  EnglUh  planters  repossessed  themselves  of  part  of 
the  island  of  St  Christopher's,  from  which  they  had  been  driven  by  iht 
French. 


108  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  NH>1. 

where  he  was  immediately  complimented  by  the  states- 
general,  the  states  of  Holland,  the  council  of  state,  the 
other  colleges,  and  the  foreign  ministers.  He  after- 
ward, at  the  request  of  the  magistrates,  made  his  public 
entry  with  surprising  magnificence  ;  and  the  Dutch  ce- 
lebrated his  arrival  with  bonfires,  illuminations,  and 
other  marks  of  tumultuous  joy.  He  assisted  at  their 
different  assemblies  ;  informed  them  of  his  successes  in 
England  and  Ireland ;  and  assured  them  of  his  constant 
zeal  and  affection  for  his  native  country. 

§  XLVI.  At  a  solemn  congress  of  the  confederate 
princes,  he  represented,  in  a  set  speech,  the  dangers  to 
which  they  were  exposed  from  the  power  and  ambition 
of  France  ;  and  the  necessity  of  acting  with  vigour  and 
dispatch.  He  declared  he  would  spare  neither  his  cre- 
dit, forces,  nor  person,  in  concurring  with  their  mea- 
sures ;  and  that  in  the  spring  he  would  come  at  the 
head  of  his  troops  to  fulfil  his  engagements.  They 
forthwith  resolved  to  employ  two  hundred  and  twenty- 
two  thousand  men  against  France  in  the  ensuing  cam- 
paign. The  proportions  of  the  different  princes  and 
states  were  regulated  ;  and  the  king  of  England  agreed 
to'  furnish  twenty  thousand.  He  supplied  the  duke  of 
Savoy  so  liberally,  that  his  affairs  soon  assumed  a  more 
promising  aspect.  The  plan  of  operations  was  settled, 
and  they  transacted  their  affairs  with  such  harmony, 
that  no  dispute  interrupted  their  deliberations.  In  the 
beginning  of  March,  immediately  after  the  congress 
broke  up,  the  seige  of  Mons  was  undertaken  by  the 
French  king  in  person,  accompanied  by  the  dauphin, 
the  dukes  of  Orleans  and  Chartres.  The  garrison  con- 
sisted of  about  six- thousand  men,  commanded  by  the 
prince  of  Bergue:  but  the  besiegers  carried  on  their 
works  with  such  rapidity  as  they  could  not  withstand. 
King  William  no  sooner  understood  that  the  place  was 
invested,  than  he  ordered  prince  Waldeck  to  assemble 
the  army,  determined  to  march  against  the  enemy  in 


1691.  WILLIAM  AND  MARY.  109 

person.  Fifty  thousand  men  were  soon  collected  at 
Halle,  near  Brussels:  but  when  he  went  thither,  he 
found  the  Spaniards  had  neglected  to  provide  carriages, 
and  other  necessaries  for  the  expedition.  Meanwhile, 
the  burghers  of  Mons,  seeing  their  town  in  danger  of 
being  utterly  destroyed  by  the  bombs  and  cannon  of  the 
enemy,  pressed  the  governor  to  capitulate,  and  even 
threatened  to  introduce  the  besiegers :  so  that  he  was 
forced  to  comply,  and  obtained  very  honourable  condi- 
tions, William,  being  apprised  of  this  event,  returned 
to  the  Hague,,  embarked  for  England,  and  arrived  at 
Whitehall  on  the  13th  day  of  April.* 


CHAP.  III. 

S  I.  Conspiracy  against  the  government  by  lord  Preston  and  others— 
%  II.  The  king  fills  up  the  vacant  bisbopricks—  $  III.  Affaire  of  Scot- 
land—§  IV.  Campaign  in  Flanders— 4  V.  Progress  of  the  French  in 
Piedmont — §  VI.  Election  of  a  new  pope — i  VII.  The  emperor's  sue* 
cess  against  the  Turks— §  VIII.  Affairs  of  Ireland— §  IX.  General 
Ginckel  reduces  Atlilbne— §  X.  Defeats  the  Irish  at  Aghrim— §  XI 
Undertakes  the  siege  of  Limerick— §  XII.  The  French  and  Irish  ob- 
tain an  honourable  capitulation— V  XIII.  Twelve  thousand  Irish  Ca 
tholics  are  transported  to  France— §  XIV.  Meeting  of  the  English 
parliament— §  XV.  Discontent  of  the  nation— §  XVI.  Transactions  in 
parliament— §  XVII.  Disputes  concerning  the  bill  for  regulating  trials 
in  cases  of  high-treason— $'  XVIII.  The  English  and  Dutch  fleets 
worsted  by  the  French  in  an  engagement  off  Beachy-head — §  XIX. 
The  king  disobliges  the  Presbyterians  of  Scotland— §  XX.  The  earl 
of  Brcadalbane  undertakes  for  the  submission  of  the  Highlanders— 
§  XXI.  Massacre  of  Glencoe — §  XXII.  Preparations  for  a  descent 
ripon  England— §  XXIII.  Declaration  of  king  James— §  XXIV. 
Efforts  of  his  friends  in  England— §  XXV.  Precautions  taken  by  the 
queen  for  the  defenoe  of  the  nation— §  XXVI.  Admiral  Russel  puts 
to  sea — $  XXVII.  He  obtains  a  complete  victory  over  the  French 
fleet  off  La  Hogue— §  XXVIII.  Troops  embarked  at  St  Helen's  for 
a  descent  upon  France— §  XXIX.  The  design  laid  aside.  The  troops 
landed  at  Ostend— §  XXX.  The  French  king  takes  Namur  insight  of 
king  William— $  XXXI.  The  allies  are  defeated  at  Steenkirk-~ 
J  XXXII.  Extravagant  rejoicings  in  France  on  account  of  this  victory 
— §  XXXIII.  Conspiracy  against  the  life  of  king  William,  hatched  by 

*  A  few  days  before  his  arrival,  great  part  of  the  palace  of  Whitehall 
was  consumed  by  fire,  through  the  negligence  of  a  female  servant 

VOL.  I.  *  I 


1 10  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1691. 

the  French  miliary— §  XXXIV.  Miscarriage  of  a  design  Often  Dun- 
kirk— §  XXXV.  The  campaign  is  inactive  on  the  Rhine  and  in  Hon- 
gary— $  XXXVI.  The  duke  of  Savoy  invades  Dauphine— $  XXXVII. 
The  duke  of  Hanover  created  an  elector  of  the  empire. 

§  I.  A  conspiracy  against  the  government  had  been 
lately  discovered.  In  the  latter  end  of  December,  the 
master  of  a  vessel  who  lived  at  Barking,  in  Essex,  in- 
formed the  marquis  of  Caermarthen,  that  his  wife  had 
let  out  one  of  his  boats  to  carry  over  some  persons  to 
France ;  and  that  they  would  embark  on  the  13th  day 
of  the  month.  This  intelligence  being  communicated 
to  the  ling  and  council,  an  order  was  sent  to  captain 
Billop,  to  watch  the  motion  of  the  vessel,  and  secure  the 
passehgers.  He  accordingly  boarded  her  at  Gravesend, 
and  found  in  the  hold  lord  Preston,  Mr.  Ashton,  a 
servant  of  the  late  queen,  and  one  Elliot.  He  likewise 
seized  a  bundle  of  papers,  some  of  which  were  scarce 
intelligible ;  among  the  rest,  two  letters,  supposed  to  be 
written  by  Turner,  bishop  of  Ely,  to  king  James  and 
his  queen,  under  fictitious  names.  The  whole  amount- 
ed to  an  invitation  to  the  French  king  to  assist  king 
James  in  re-ascending  the  throne,  upon  certain  condi- 
tions, while  William  should  be  absent  from  the  king- 
dom :  but  the  scheme  was  ill  laid,  and  countenanced 
but  by  a  very  few  persons  of  consideration,  among 
whom  the  chiefs  were  the  earl  of  Clarendon,  the  bishop 
of  Ely,  lord  Preston,  his  brother,  Mr.  Graham,  and 
Penri,  the  famous  Quaker.  Notwithstanding  the  out- 
cries which  had  been  made  against  the  severities  of  the 
late  government,  Preston,  and  his  accomplice  Ashton, 
were  tried  at  the  Old  Bailey  for  compassing  the  death 
of  their  majesties  king  William  and  queen  Mary ;  and 
their  trials  were  hurried  on,  without  any  regard  to  their 
petitions  for  delay.  Lord  Paeston  alleged,  in  his  de- 
fence, that  the  treasons  charged  upon  him  were  not 
committed  in  the  county  of  Middlesex,  as  laid  in  ttie 
indictment ;  that  none  of  the  witnesses  declared  he  had 
any  concern  in  hiring  the  vessel ;  that  the  papers  were 


MM.  WILLIAM  AND  MARY.  HI 

not  found  opon  him  ;  that  there  ought  to  be  two  crer 
dible  witnesses  to  every  fact,  whereas,  the  whole  proof 
against  him  rested  on  similitude  of  hands,  and  mere 
supposition*  He  was,  nevertheless,  found  guilty. 
Ashton  behaved  with  great  intrepidity  and  composure. 
He  owned  his  purpose  of  going  to  France,  in  pursuance 
of  a  promise  he  had  made  to  general  Worden,  who,  on 
his  death-bed,  conjured  him  to  go  thither,  and  finish 
some  affairs  of  consequence  which  he  had  left  there  de>- 
pending ;  as  well  as  with  a  view  to  recover  a  consider- 
able sum  of  money  due  to  himself.  He  denied  that  he 
was  privy  to  the  contents  of  the  papers  found  upon  him i 
he  complained  of  his  having  been  denied  time  to  prer 
pare  for  his  trial ;  and  called  several  persons  to  prove 
him  a  Protestant  of  exemplary  piety  and  irreproachable 
morals.  These  circumstances  had  no  weight  with  the 
court.  He  was  brow-beaten  by  the  bench,  and  found 
guilty  by  the  jury,  as  he  had  the  papers  in  his  custody ; 
yet  there  was  no  privity  proved ;  and  the  whig  party 
themselves  had  often  expressly  declared,  that  of  all  sorts 
of  evidence,  that  of  finding  papers  in  a  person's  posses* 
sion  is  the  weakest,  because  no  man  can  secure  himself 
from  such  danger.  Ashton  suffered  with  equal  courage 
and  decorum.  In  a  paper  which  he  delivered  to  the 
sheriff,  he  owned  his  attachment  to  king  James;  he 
witnessed  to  the  birth  of  the  prince  of  Wales ;  denied 
his  knowledge  of  the  contents  of  the  papers  that  were 
committed  to  his  charge ;  complained  of  the  hard  mea- 
sure he  had  met  with  from  the  judges  and  the  jury,  but 
forgave  them  in  the  sight  of  Heaven.5  This  man  was 
celebrated  by  the  nonjurors  as  a  martyr  to  loyalty  ;  and 
they  boldly  affirmed,  that  his  chief  crime  in  the  eyes  of 
the  government,  was  his  having  among  his  baggage  an 
account  of  such  evidence  as  would  have  been  convincing 
to  all  the  world,  concerning  the  birth  of  the  prince  of 
Wales,  which  by  a  great  number  of  people  was  believed 

b  Burnet.    State  Tract*.    Burchet.    Tindal.    Ralpb. 

12 


1 12  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  ltttt. 

supposititious/  Lord  Preston  obtained  a  pardon :  Elliot 
was  not  tried,  because  no  evidence  appeared  against  him : 
the  earl  of  Clarendon  was  sent  to  the  Tower,  where  he 
remained  some  months,  and  he  was  afterward  confined 
to  his  own  house  in  the  country :  an  indulgence  which 
he  owed  to  his  consanguinity  with  the  queen,  who  was 
his  first  cousin.  The  bishop  of  Ely,  Graham,  and 
Penn,  absconded ;  and  a  proclamation  was  issued  for 
-apprehending  them  as  traitors. 

§  II.  This  prelate's  being  concerned  in  a  conspiracy, 
furnished  the  king  with  a  plausible  pretence  for  filling 
up  the  vacant  bishopricks.  The  deprived  bishops  had 
been  given  to  understand,  that  an  act  of  parliament 
might  be  obtained  to  excuse  them  from  taking  the 
oaths,  provided  they  would  perform  their  episcopal 
functions ;  but,  as  they  declined  this  expedient,  the  king 
resolved  to  fill  up  their  places  at  his  return  from  Hot 
land.  Accordingly,  the  archbishopric  of  Canterbury 
was  conferred  upon  Dr.  Tillotson,d  one  of  the  most 
learned,  moderate,  and  virtuous  ecclesiastics  of  the  age, 
who  did  not  accept  of  this  promotion  without  great  re* 
luctance,  because  he  foresaw  that  he  should  be  exposed 
to  the  slander  and  malevolence  of  that  party  which 
espoused  the  cause  of  his  predecessor.  The  other  va- 
cant sees  were  given  to  divines  of  unblemished  charac- 
ter ;  and  the  public  in  general  seemed  very  well  satisfied 
with  this  exertion  of  the  king's  supremacy.  The  de- 
prived bishops  at  first  affected  all  the  meekness  of  resig- 

*  To  one  of  tbe  pamphlets  published  on  this  occasion,  is  annexed  a  pe- 
tition to  the  present  government,  in  the  name  of  king  James's  adherents, 
importing,  that  some  grave  and  learned  persons  should  be  authorized  to 
compile  a  treatise,  shewing  the  grounds  of  William's  title ;  and  declaring, 
that  in  case  the  performance  shpuld  carry  conviction  along  with  it,  they 
would  submit  to  that  title,  as  they  had  hitherto  opposed  it  from  a  prin- 
ciple of  conscience.  The  best  answer  that  could  be  made  to  this  sum- 
mons was  Locke's  book  upon  government,  which  appeared  at  this  period. 
-*Ra]ph. 

4  Beveridge  was  promoted  to  the  see  of  Bath  and  Wells,  Fowler  to  that 
of  Gloucester,  Cumberland  to  Peterborough,  Moor  to  Norwich,  Grove 
to  Chichester,  and  Patrick  to  Ely. 


109!.  WILLIAM  AND  MARY.  113 

nation.  They  remembered  those  shouts  of  popular  ap- 
probation, by  which  they  had  been  animated  in  the  per- 
secution they- suffered  under  the  late  government;  and 
they  hoped  the  same  cordial  would  support  them  in  their 
present  affliction :  but,  finding  the  nation  cold  in  their 
f  concern,  they  determined  to  warm  it  by  argument  and 
declamation.  The  press  groaned  with  the  efforts  of 
their  learning  and  resentment;  and  every  essay  was  an- 
swered by  their  opponents.  The  nonjurors  affirmed, 
that  Christianity  was  a  doctrine  s>(  the  cross ;  that  no 
pretence  whatever  could  justify  an  insurrection  against 
the  sovereign  ;  that  the  primitive  Christians  thought  it 
their  indispensable  duty  to  be  passive  under  every  inva^ 
sion  of  their  rights;  and  that  non-resistance  was  the 
doctrine  of  the  English  church,  confirmed  by  all  the 
sanctions  that  could  be  derived  from  the  laws  of  God 
and  man.  The  other  party  not  only  supported  the 
natural  rights  of  mankind,  and  explained  the  use  that 
might  be  made  of  the  doctrine  of  non-resistance,  in  ex<- 
citing  fresh  commotions,  but  they  also  argued,  that  if 
passive  obedience  was  right  in  any  instance,  it  was  conr- 
clusively  so  with  regard  to  the  present  government;  for 
the  cbedience  required  by  scripture  was  indiscriminate-— 
"  The  powers  that  be,  are  ordained  of  God — let  every 
soul  be  subject  to  the  higher  powers.**  From  these 
texts  they  inferred,  that  the  new  oaths  ought  to  be  ta- 
ken without  scruple :  and  that  those  who  refused  them, 
concealed  party  under  the  cloak  of  conscience.  On  the 
other  hand,  the  fallacy  and  treachery  of  this  argument 
was  demonstrated.  They  said,  it  levelled  all  distinc- 
tions of  justice  and  duty ;  that  those  who  taught  such 
doctrines,  attached  themselves  solely  to  possession,  how- 
ever unjustly  acquired;  that,  if  twenty  different  usur- 
pers should  succeed  one  another,  they  would  recognise 
the  last,  notwithstanding  the  allegiance  they  had  so  so- 
lemnly sworn  to  his  predecessor,  like,  the  fawning  spaniel 
that  followed  the  thief  who  mounted  his  master's  horse, 


114  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1091. 

after  having  murdered  the  right  owner.  They  also 
denied  the  justice  of  a  lay-deprivation ;  and  with  respect 
to  church-government  started  the  same  distinctions, 
*'  Dejure,  and  de facto"  which  they  had  formerly  made 
in  the  civil  administration.  They  had  even  recourse  to 
all  the  bitterness  of  invective  against  Tillotson  and  the 
new  bishops,  whom  they  reviled  as  intruders  and  usur- 
pers :  their  acrimony  was  chiefly  directed  against  Dr. 
Sherlock,  who  had  been  one  of  the  most  violent  sticklers 
against  the  revolution,  but  thought  proper  to  take  the 
oaths  upon  the  retreat  of  king  James  from  Ireland. 
They  branded  him  as  an  apostate,  who  had  betrayed 
his  cause,  and  published  a  review  of  his  whole  conduct, 
which  proved  a  severe  satire  upon  his  character.  Their 
attacks  upon  individuals  were  mingled  with  their  ven- 
geance against  the  government ;  and  indeed  the  great 
aim  of  their  divines,  as  well  as  of  their  politicians,  was 
to  sap  the  foundation  of  the  new  settlement.  In  order 
to  alienate  the  minds  of  the  people  from  the  interests  of 
the  reigning  prince,  they  ridiculed  his  character ;  in- 
veighed against  his  measures ;  they  accused  him  of  sa- 
crificing the  interests  of  England  to  the  advantage  of  his 
native  country ;  and  drew  invidious  comparisons  between 
the  wealth,  the  trade,  the  taxes,  of  the  last  and  of  the 
present  reign.  To  frustrate  these  efforts  of  the  malecon- 
tents,  the  court  employed  their  engines  to  answer  and 
recriminate ;  all  sorts  of  informers  were  encouraged  and 
caressed:  in  a  proclamation  issued  against  Papists  and 
other  disaffected  persons,  all  magistrates  were  enjoined 
to  make  search,  and  apprehend  those  who  should,  by 
Seditious  discourses  and  libels,  presume  to  defame  the 
government.  Thus  the  revolutioners  commenced  the 
professed  enemies  of  those  very  arts  and  practices  which 
had  enabled  them  to  bring  their  scheme  to  perfection. 

•§  III.  The  Presbyterians  in  Scotland  acted  with  such 
folly,  violence,  and  tyranny,  as  rendered  them  equally 
odious  and  contemptible.     The  transactions  in  their 


imu  WILLIAM  AND  ftfARY.  115 

general  assembly  were  carried  on  with  such  peevishness, 
partiality,  and  injustice,  that  the  king  dissolved  it  by  an 
act  of  state!  and  convoked  another  for  the  month  of 
November  in  the  following  year.  The  episcopal  party 
promised  to  enter  heartily  into  the  interests  of  the  new 
government,  to  keep  the  Highlanders  quiet,  and  induce 
the  clergy  to  acknowledge  and  serve  king  William,  pro- 
vided he  would  balance  the  power  of  Melvill  and  his 
partisans,  in  such  a  manner,  as  would  secure  them  from 
violence  and  oppression :  provided  the  episcopal  minis- 
ters should  be  permitted  to  perform  their  functions 
among  those  people  by  whom  they  were  beloved ;  and 
that  such  of  them  as  were  willing  to.  mix  with  the  Pres- 
byterians in  their  judicatories,  should  be  admitted  with- 
out any  severe  imposition  in  point  of  opinion.  The 
king,  who  was  extremely  disgusted  at  the  Presbyterians, 
relished  the  proposal :  and  young  Dalrymple,  son  of 
lord  Stair,  was  appointed  joint  secretary  of  state  with 
Melvill.  He  undertook  to  bring  over  the  majority  of 
the  Jacobites,  and  a  great  number  of  them  took  the 
oaths :  but  at  the  same  time  they  maintained  a  corres- 
pondence with  the  court  of  St.  Germains,  by  the  conni- 
vance of  which  they  submitted  to  William,  that  they 
might  be  in  a  condition  to  serve  James  the  more  effec- 
tually. The  Scottish  parliament  was  adjourned  by  pro- 
clamation to  the  l6th  day  of  September.  Precautions 
were,  taken  to  prevent  any  dangerous  communication 
with  the  continent :  a  committee  was  appointed  to  put 
the  kingdom  in  a  posture  of  defence;  to  exercise  the 
powers  of  the  regency,  in  securing  the  enemies  o(  the 
government;  and  the.  earl  of  Home,  with  sir  Peter 
Fraser  and  sir  ./Eneas  Macpherson,  were  apprehended 
and  imprisoned. 

.  §  IV.  The  king,  having  settled  the  operations  of  the 
ensuing  campaign  in  Ireland,  where  general  Ginckel 
exercised  the  supreme  command,  manned  his  fleet  by 
dint  of  pressing  sailors,  to  the  incredible  annoyance  of 


116  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  10M . 

commerce :  then,  leaving  the  queen  as  before  at  the 
helm  of  government  in  England,  he  returned  to  Hol- 
land, accompanied  by  lord  Sydney,  secretary  of  state, 
the  earls  of  Marlborough  and  Portland,  and  began  to 
nrake  preparations  for  taking  the  field  in  person.  On 
the  30th  day  of  May,  the  duke  of  Luxembourg  hav- 
ing passed  the  Scheldt  at  the  head  of  a  large  army,  took 
possession  of  Halle,  and  gave  it.up  to  plunder,  in  6ight 
of  the  confederates,  who  were  obliged  to  throw  up  en- 
trenchments for  their  preservation.  At  the  same  time 
the  marquis  de  Boufflers,  with  a  considerable  body  of  - 
forces,  entrenched  himself  before  Liege,  with  a  view  to 
bombard  that  city.  In  the  beginning  of  June,  king 
William  took  upon  himself  the  command  of  the  allied 
army,  by  this  time  reinforced  in  such  a  manner  as  to  be  * 
superior  to  the  enemy.  He  forthwith  detached  the 
count  de  Tilly,  with  ten  thousand  men,  to  the  relief  of 
Liege,  which  was  already  reduced  to  ruins  and  desola* 
tion  by  the  bombs,  bullets,  and  repeated  attacks  of 
Boufflers,  who  now  thought  proper  to  retreat  to  Din  ant. 
Tilly,  having  thus  raised  the  siege,  and  thrown  a  body 
Qf  troops  into  Huy,  rejoined  the  confederate  army, 
which  had  been  augmented  ever  since  his  departure 
with  six  thousand  men  from  Brandenburgh,  and  ten 
thousand  Hessians,  commanded  by  the  landgrave  in 
person.  Such  was  the  vigilance  of  Luxembourg,  that 
William  could  not  avail  himself  of  his. superiority.  In 
vain  he  exhausted  his  invention  in  marches,  counter- 
marches, and  stratagems,  to  bring  on  a  general  engage- 
ment :  the  French  marshal  avoided  it  with  such  dexte- 
rity, as  baffled  all  his  endeavours.  In  the  course  of  this 
campaign,,  the  two  armies  twice  confronted  each  other : 
but  they  were  situated  in  such  a  manner,  that  neither 
could  begin  the.  attack  without  a  manifest  disadvantage. 
While  the  king  lay  encamped  at  Court-sur-heure,  a  sok 
dier,  corrupted  by  the-  enemy,  set  fire  to  the  fusees  of 
several  bombs,  the  explosion  of  which  might  haye  blown 


lew.  WILLIAM  AND  MARY:  '  117 

up  the  whole  magazine,  and  produced  infinite  confusion 
in  the  army,  had  not  the  mischief  been  prevented  by 
the  courage  of  the  men  who  guarded  the  artillery ;  even 
while  the  fusees  were  burning,  they  disengaged  the 
waggons  from  the  line,  and  overturned  them  down  the 
side  of  a  hill ;  so  that  the  communication  of  the  fire  was 
intercepted.  The  person  who  made  this  treacherous 
attempt  being  discovered,  owned  he  had  been  employed 
for  this  purpose  by  the  duke  of  Luxembourg.  He  was 
tried  by  a  court- martial,  and  suffered  the  death  of  a  trai- 
.  tor.  *  Such  perfidious  practices  not  only  fix  an  indelible 
share  of  infamy  on  the-French  general,  but  prove  how 
much  the  capacity  of  William  was  dreaded  by  his  ene- 
mies. King  William,  quitting  Court-sur-heure,  encamp- 
ed upon  the  plain  of  St.  Girard,  where  he  remained  till 
the  4th  day  of  September,  consuming  the  forage,  and 
exhausting  the  country.  Then  he  passed  the  Sambre 
near  Jemeppe,  while  the  French  crossed  it  at  La  Busiere, 
and  both  armies  marched  towards  Enghien.  The 
enemy,  perceiving  the  confederates  were  at  their  heels, 
proceeded  to  Gramont,  passed  the  Dender,  and  toot 
possession  of  a  strong  camp  between  Aeth  and  Oude- 
narde :  William  followed  the  same  route,  and  encamped 
between  Aeth  and  Leuse.  While  he  continued  in  his 
post,  the  Hessian  forces  and  those  of  Liege,  amounting 
to  about  eighteen  thousand  men,,  separated  from  the 
army,  and  passed  the  Meuse  at  Namur :  then  the  king, 
returned  to  the  Hague,  leaving  the  command  to  prince 
Waldeck,  who  forthwith  removed  to  Leuse,  and  on  the 
iOth  day  of  the  month  began  his  march  to  Cambron. 
Luxembourg,  who  watched  his  motions  with  a  curious, 
eye,  found  means  to  attack  him  in  his  retreat  so  sud- 
denly, that  his  rear  was  surprised  and  defeated,  though 
the  French  were  at  last  obliged  to  retire:  the  prince 
continued  his  route  to  .Cambron,  and  in  a  little  time 
both  armies  retired  into  winter-qugrters.     In  the  mean- 


118  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1601. 

time,  the  duke  de  Noailles  besieged  and  took  Urgel  ia 
Catalonia,  while  a  French  squadron,  commanded,  by  the 
count  d'Etr£es,  bombarded  Barcelona  and  Alicant, 

$  V.  The  confederates  had  proposed  to  act  vigorously 
in  Italy  against  the  French :  but  the  season  was  far  ad- 
vanced before  they  were  in  a  condition  to  take  the  field* 
The  emperor  and  Spain  had  undertaken  to  furnish 
troops  to  join  the  duke  of  Savoy ;  and  the  maritime 
powers  contributed  their  proportion  in  money,     Ths 
elector  of  Bavaria  was  nominated  to  the  supreme  com- 
mand of  the  imperial  forces  in  that  country :  the  marquis 
de  Leganez,  governor  of  the  Milanese,  acted  as  trustee 
for  the  Spanish  monarch :  duke  Schomberg,  son  of  that 
great  general  who  lost  his  life  at  the  Boyne,  ldtely  crea- 
ted duke  of  Leinster,  managed  the  interest  of  William, 
as  king  of  England  and  s tad th older,  and  commanded  a 
body  of  the  Vaudois,  paid  by  Great  Britain.     Before  the 
German  auxiliaries  arrived,  the  French  had  made  great 
progress  in  their  conquests.     Catinat  besieged  and  took 
Villa  Franca,  Nice,  and  some  other  fortifications  ;  then 
he  reduced  Villana  and  Carmagnola,  and  detached  the 
marquis  de  Feuquieres  to  invest  Coni,  a  strong  fortress 
garrisoned  by  the  Vaudois  and  French  refugees.     The 
duke  of  Savoy  was  now  reduced  td  the  brink  of  ruin. 
He  saw  almost  all  his  places  of  strength  in  the  possession 
of  the  enemy :  Coni  was  besieged :  and  La  Hoguette, 
another  French  general,  had  forced  the  passes  of  the 
valley  of  Aoste,  so  that  he  had  free  admission  into  the 
Verceillois,  and  the  frontiers  of  the  Milanese.    Turin 
was  threatened  with  a  bombardment ;  the  people  were 
dispirited  and  clamorous,  and  their  sovereign  lay  with 
his  little  army  encamped  on  the  hill  of  MontcalUer, 
from  whence  he  beheld  his  towns  taken,  and  his  palace 
of  Rivoli  destroyed.     Duke  Schomberg  exhorted  him  to 
act  on  the  offensive,  and  give  battle  to  Catinat,  while 
that  officer's  army  was  .weakened  by  detachments,  and 


1001.  WILLIAM  AND  MARY.  ]  19 

prince  Eugene*  supported  his  remonstrance :  but  this 
proposal  was  vehemently  opposed  by  the  marquis  de 
Leganez,  who  foresaw  that,  if  the  duke  should  be  de- 
feated, the  French  would  penetrate  into  the  territories 
of  Milan,  The  relief  of  Coni,  however,  was  undertaken 
by  prince  Eugene,  who  began  his  march  for  that  place 
with  a  convoy,  guarded  by  two-and-twenty  hundred 
horse :  at  Magliano  he  was  reinforced  by  five  thousand 
militia :  Bulonde,  who  commanded  at  the  siege,  no 
sooner  heard  of  his  approach,  than  he  retired  with  the 
utmost  precipitation,  leaving  behind  some  pieces  of  can- 
non, mortars,  bombs,  arms,  ammunition,  tents,  provi- 
sions, utensils,  with  all  his  sick  and  wounded.  When 
he  joined1  Catinat,  he  was  immediately  put  under  arrest, 
and  afterward  cashiered  with  disgrace.  Hoguette  aban- 
doned the  valley  of  Aoste :  Feuquieres  was  sent  with  a 
detachment  to  change  the  garrison  of  Casal :  and  Cati- 
nat  retired  with  his  army  towards  Villa  Nova  d*Aste. 

§  VI.  The  miscarriage  of  the  French  before  Coni 
affected  Louvois,  the  minister  of  Lewis,  so  deeply,  that 
he  could  not  help  shedding  tears  when  he  communicated 
the  event  to  his  master,  who  told  him,  with  great  com- 
posure, that  he  was  spoiled-  by  good  fortune.  But  the 
retreat  of  the  French  from  Piedmont  had  a  still  greater 
influence  over  the  resolutions  of  the  conclave  at  Rome, 
then  sitting  for  the  election  of  a  new  pope,  in  the  room 
of  Alexander  VIII.  who  died  in  the  beginning  of  Fe- 
bruary. Notwithstanding  the  power  and  intrigues  of  the 

*  Prince  Eugene  of  Savoy,  who  in  the  sequel  rivalled  the  fame  of  the 
greatest  warriors  of  antiquity,  was  descended  on  the  father's  side  from  the 
house  of  Savoy,  and  on  the  mother's  from  the  family  of  Soissons,  a  branch 
of  the  house  of  Bourbon.  His  father  was  Eugene  Maurice,,  of  Savoy, 
count  of  Soissons,  colonel  of  the  Switzers,  and  governor  of  Champagne 
and  Brie :  his  mother  was  the  celebrated  Olympia  de  Maucini,  niece  of 
cardinal  Mazarine.  Prince  Eugene,  finding  himself  neglected  at  the 
court  of  France,  engaged  as  a  soldier  of  fortune  in  the  service  of  the  em- 
peror, and  soon  distinguished  himself  by  his  great  military  talents :  he 
was,  moreover,  an  accomplished  gentleman,  learned,  liberal,  mild,  and 
courteous;  an  unshaken  friend;  a  generous  enemy;  an  invincible  cap- 
tain ;  a  consum mate  politician . 


120  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  100U 

French'  faction,  headed  by  cardinal  d'Etrees,  the  affaire 
of  Piedmont  had  no  sooner  taken  this  turn,  than  the 
Italians  joined  the  Spanish  and  imperial  interest,  and 
cardinal  Pignatelli,  a  Neapolitan,  was  elected  pontiff. 
He  assumed  the  name  of  Innocent,  in  honour  of  the  last 
pope  known  by  that  appellation,  and  adopted  all  his 
maxims  against  the  French  monarch.  When  the  Ger- 
man auxiliaries  arrived,  under  the  command  of  the  elec- 
tor of  Bavaria,  the  confederates  resolved  to  give  battle  to 
Catinat ;  but  he  repassed  the  Po,  and  sent  couriers  to 
Versailles,  to  solicit  a  reinforcement.  Then  prince  Eu- 
gene invested  Carmagnola,  and  carried  on  the  siege  with 
such  vigour,  that  in  eleven  days  the  garrison  capitulated. 
Meanwhile,  the  marquis  de  Hoquincourt  undertook  the 
conquest  of  Montmelian,  and  reduced  the  town  without 
much  resistance.  The  castle,  however,  made  such  a 
vigorous  defence,  that  Catinat  marched  thither  in  per- 
son ;  and,  notwithstanding  all  his  efforts,  the  place  held 
out  till  the  2d  day  of  December,  when  it  surrendered  on 
honourable  conditions. 

§  VII.  This  summer  produced  nothing  of  importance 
on  the  Rhine.  The  French  endeavoured  to  surprise 
Mentz,  by  maintaining  a  correspondence  with  one  of 
the  emperor's  commissioners  :  but  this  being  discovered, 
their  design  was  frustrated.  The  imperial  army,  under 
the  elector  of  Saxony,  passed  the  Rhine  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood of  Manheim ;  and  the  French,  crossing  the 
same  river  at  Philipsburgh,  reduced  the  town  of  Portz- 
heim  in  the  marquisate  of  BadenrDourlach.  The  exe- 
cution of  the  scheme,  projected  by  the  emperor  for  this 
campaign,  was  prevented  by  the  death  of  his  general,  the 
elector  of  Saxony,  which  happened  on  the  2d  day  of 
September.  His  affairs  wore  a  more  favourable  aspeqt 
in  Hungary,  where  the  Turks  were  totally. defeated  by 
prince  Lewis  of  Baden  on  the  banks  of  the  Danube. 
The  imperialists  afterward  undertook  the  siege  of  Great 
Waradin  in  Transylvania :  but  this  was  turned  into  a 


MOL  .  WILLIAM  AND  MARY.  J  21 

blockade,  and  the  place  was  not  surrendered  till  the  fol- 
lowing spring.  The  Turks  were  so  dispirited  by  the 
defeat  by  which  they  had  lost  the  grand  visir,  that  the 
emperor  might  have  made  peace  upon  very  advantageous 
terms  ;  but  his  pride  and  ambition  overshot  his  success. 
He  was  weak,  vain,  and  superstitious :  he  imagined  that, 
now  the  war  of  Ireland  was  almost  extinguished,  king 
William,  with  the  rest  of  his  allies,  would  be  able  to 
humble  the  French  power,  though  he  himself  should 
not  co-operate  with  heretics,  whom  he  abhorred ;  and 
that,  in  the  meantime,  he  should  not  only  make  an  en- 
tire conquest  of  Transylvania,  but  also  carry  his  victo- 
rious arms  to  the  gates  of  Constantinople,  according  to 
some  ridiculous  prophecy  by  which  his  vanity  had  been 
flattered.  The  Spanish  government  was  become  so 
feeble,  that  the  ministry,  rather  than  be  at  the  expense 
of  defending  the  Netherlands,  offered  to  deliver  the 
whole  country  to  king  William,  either  as  monarch  of 
England,  or  stadtholder  of  the  United  Provinces.  He 
declined  this  offer,  because  he  knew  the  people  would 
never  be  reconciled  to  a  Protestant  government ;  but  he 
proposed  that  the  Spaniards  should  confer. the  adminis- 
tration of  Flanders  upon  the  elector  of  Bavaria,  who  was 
ambitious  of  signalizing  his  courage,  and  able  to  defend 
the  country  with  his  own  troops  and  treasure.  This 
proposal  was  relished  by  the  court  of  Spain  ;  the  em- 
peror imparted  it  to  the  elector,  who  accepted  the  office 
without  hesitation  ;  and  he  was  immediately  declared 
governor  of  the  Low  Countries,  by  the  council  of  state 
at  Madrid.  King  William,  after  his  return  from  the 
army,  continued  some  time  at  the  Hague,  settling  the 
operations  of  the  ensuing  campaign.  That  affair  being 
discussed,  he  embarked  in  the  Maese,  and  landed  in 
England  on  the  19th  day  of  October.  .      f 

§  VIII.  Before  we  explain  the  proceedings  in  parlia- 
ment, it  will  be  necessary  to  give  a  detail  of  the  late 
transactions  in  Ireland;    In  the  beginning  of  the  season 


122  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1*91. 

the  French  king  had  sent  a  large  supply  of  provisions, 
clothes,  and  ammunition,  for  the  use  of  the  Irish  at  Li- 
merick, under  the  conduct  of  monsieur  St.  Huth,  ac- 
companied by  a  great  number  of  French  officers,  fur- 
nished with  commissions  from  king  James,  though  St. 
Ruth  issued  all  his  orders  in  the  name  of  Lewis,  Tyr- 
connel  had  arrived  in  January,  with  three  frigates  and 
nine  vessels,  laden  with  succours  of  the  same  nature ; 
otherwise  the  Irish  could  not  have  been  so  long  kept  to* 
gether.  Nor,  indeed,  could  these  supplies  prevent  them 
from  forming  separate  and  independent  bands  of  rappa* 
rees,  who  plundered  the  country,  and  committed  the 
most  shocking  barbarities.  The  lords-justices,  in  con- 
junction with  general  Ginckel,  had  taken  every  step 
their  prudence  could  suggest,  to  quiet  the  disturbances 
of  the  country,  and  prevent  such  violence  and  rapine,  of 
which  the  soldiers  in  king  William's  army  were  not  en* 
tirely  innocent.  The  justices  had  issued  proclamations, 
denouncing  severe  penalties  against  those  who  should 
countenance  or  conceal  such  acts  of  cruelty  and  oppres- 
sion :  they  promised  to  protect  all  Papists  who  should 
live  quietly  within  a  certain  frontier  line  .  and  Ginckel 
gave  the  Catholic  rebels  to  understand,  that  he  was  au- 
thorized to  treat  with  them,  if  they  were  inclined  to  re- 
turn to  their  duty.  Before  the  armies  took  the  field, 
several  skirmishes  had  been  fought  between  parties: 
and  these  had  always  turned  out  so  unfortunate  to  the 
enemy,  that  their  spirits  were  quite  depressed,  while  the 
confidence  of  the  English  rose  in  the  same  proportion. 

§  IX.  St.  Ruth  and  Tyrconnel  were  joined  by  the 
rapparees,  and  general  Ginckel  was  reinforced  by  Mac- 
kay,  with  those  troops  which  had  reduced  the  High- 
landers in  Scotland.  Thus  strengthened,  he,  in  the  be- 
ginning of  June,  marched  from  Mullingar  to  Ballymore, 
which  was  garrisoned  by  a  thousand  men  under  colonel 
Bourke,  who,  when  summoned  to  surrender,  returned 
an  evasive  answer.    But,  when  a  breach  was  made  in 


MM.  WILLIAM  AND  MARY.  133 

the  place,  and  the  besiegers  began  to  make  preparations 
for  a  general  assault,  his  men  laid  down  their  arms,  and 
submitted  at  discretion.  The  fortifications  of  this  place 
being  repaired  and  augmented,  the  general  left  a  garrison 
for  its  defence,  and  advanced  to  Athlone,  situated  on  the 
other  side  of  the  Shannon,  and  supported  by  the  Irish 
army,  encamped  almost  under  its  walls.  The  English 
town,  on  the  hither  side  of  the  river,  was  taken  sword 
in  hand,  and  the  enemy  broke  down  an  arch  of  the 
bridge  in  their  retreat.  Batteries  were  raised  against 
the  Irish  town,  and  several  unsuccessful  attempts  were 
made  to  force  the  passage  of  the  bridge,  which  was  de- 
fended with  great  vigour.  At  length  it  was  resolved,  in 
a  council  of  war,  that  a  detachment  should  pass  at  a  ford 
a  little  to  the  left  of  the  bridge,  though  the  river  was 
deep  and  rapid,  the  bottom  foul  and  stony,  and  the 
pass  guarded  by  a  ravelin,  erected  for  that  purpose. 
The  forlorn  hope  consisted  of  sixty  grenadiers  in  armour, 
headed  by  captain  Sandys  and  two  lieutenants.  They 
were  seconded  by  another  detachment,  and  this  was  sup- 
ported by  six  battalions  of  infantry.  Never  was  a  more 
desperate  service,  nor  was  ever  exploit  performed  with 
more  valour  and  intrepidity.  They  passed  twenty  a- 
breast,  in  the  face  of  the  enemy,  through  an  incessant 
shower  of  balls,  bullets,  and  grenades.  Those  who  fol- 
lowed them  took  possession  of  the  bridge,  and  laid  planks 
over  the  broken  arch.  Pontoons  were  fixed  at  the  same 
time,  that  the  troops  might  pass  in  different  places. 
The  Irish  were  amazed,  confounded,  and  abandoned  the 
town  in  the  utmost  consternation ;  so  that,  in  half  an 
hour,  it  was  wholly  secured  by  the  English,  who  did  not 
lose  above  fifty  men  in  the  attack.  Mackay,  Tetteau, 
and  Ptolemache,  exhibited  proofs  of  the  most  undaunt- 
ed courage  in  passing  the  river :  and  general  Ginckel, 
for  his  conduct,  intrepidity,  and  success,  on  this  occa- 
sion, was  created  earl  of  Athlone.  When  St.  Ruth  was 
informed,  by  express,  th&t  the  English  had  entered  the 


124  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1*1. 

.  river,  he  said  it  was  impossible  they  should  pretend  to 
,  take  a  town  which  he  covered  with  his  army,  and  that 
he  would  give  a  thousand  pistoles  they  would  attempt 
to  force  a  passage.  Sarsfield  insisted  upon  the  truth  of 
the  intelligence,  and  pressed  him  to  send  succours  to 
the  town:  he  ridiculed  this  officer's  fears,  and  some 
warm  expostulation  passed  between  .  them.  Being  at 
length  convinced  that  the  English  were  in  possession  of 
the  ,place,  he  ordered  some  detachments  to  drive  them 
„out  again :  but  the  cannon  of  their  own  works  being 
.  turned  against  them,  they  found  the  task  impracticable, 
and  that  very  night  their  army  decamped.  St.  Ruth, 
after  a  march  of  ten  miles,  took  post  at  Aghrim  ;  and 
having,  by  drafts  from  garrisons,  augmented  his  army 
to  twenty-five  thousand  men,  resolved  to  hazard  a  de- 
cisive engagement. 

§  X.  Ginckel  having  put  Athlone  in  a  posture  of  de?- 
fence,  passed  the  Shannon,  and  marched  up  to  the  ene- 
my, determined  to  give  them  battle ;  though  his  forces  did 
not  exceed  eighteen  thousand,  and  the  Irish  were  posted 
in  a  very  advantageous  situation.  St.  Ruth  had  made  an 
admirable  disposition,  and  taken  every  precaution  that 
military  skill  could  suggest.  His  centre  extended  along 
a  rising  ground,  uneven  in  many  places,  intersected  with 
banks  and  ditches,  joined  by  lines  of  communication, 
and  fronted  by  a  large  bog  almost  impassable.  His  right 
was  fortified  with  entrenchments,  and  his  left  secured 
by  the  castle  of  Aghrim.  He  harangued  his  army  in 
the  most  pathetic  strain,  conjuring  them  to  exert  their 
courage  in  defence  of  their  holy  religion,  in  the  extirpar- 
tion  of  heresy,  in  recovering  their  ancient  honours  and 
estates,  and  in  restoring  a  pious  king  to  the  throne, 
from  whence  he  had  been  expelled  by  an  unnatural 
usurper.  He  employed  the  priests  to  enforce  his  ex- 
hortations; to  assure  the  men  that  they  might  de- 
pend upon  the  prayers  of  the  church ;  and  that,  in  case 
they  should  fall  in  battle,  the  saints  and  angels  would 


1601.  WILLIAM  AND  MARY.  125 

convey  their  souls  to  heaven.  They  are  said  to  have 
sworn  upon  the  sacrament,  that  they  would  not  desert 
their  colours,  and  to  have  received  an  order,  that  no 
quarter  should  be  given  to  the  French  heretics  in  the 
army  of  the  prince  of  Orange.  Ginckel  had  encamped 
on  the  Roscommon  side  of  the  river  Sue,  within  three 
miles  of  the  enemy:  after  having  reconnoitred  their 
posture,  he  resolved,  with  the  advice  of  a  council  of  war, 
to  attack  them  on  Sunday  the  12th  day  of  July.  The 
necessary  orders  being  given,  the  army  passed  the  river 
at  two  fords  and  a  stone  bridge,  and,  advancing  to  the 
edge  of  the  great  bog,  began,  about  12  o'clock,  to  force 
the  two  passages,  in  order  to  possess  the  ground  on  the 
other  side.  The  enemy  fought  with  surprising  fury,  and 
the  horse  were  several  times  repulsed ;  but  at  length, 
the  troops  upon  the  right  carried  their  point  by  means 
of  some  field-pieces.  The  day  was  now  so  far  advanced, 
that  the  general  determined  to  postpone  the  battle  till 
next  morning ;  but  perceiving  some  disorder,  among  the 
enemy,  and  fearing  they  would  decamp  in  the  night,  he 
altered  his  resolution,  and  ordered  the  attack  to  be  re- 
newed. At  six  o'clock  in  the  evening,  the  left  wing  of 
the  English  advanced  to  the  right  of  the  Irish,  from 
whom  they  met  with  such  a  warm  and  obstinate  recep- 
tion, that  it  was  not  without  the  most  surprising  efforts 
of  courage  and  perseverance  that  they  at  length  obliged 
them  to  give  ground ;  and  even  then  they  lost  it  by 
inches.  St.  Ruth,  seeing  them  in  danger  of  being  over- 
powered, immediately  detached  succours  to  them  from 
his  centre  and  left  wing.  Mackay  no  sooner  perceived 
them  weakened  by  these  detachments,  than  he  ordered 
three  battalions  to  skirt  the  bog,  and  attack  them  on 
the  left,  while  the  centre  advanced  through  the  middle 
of  the  morass,  the  men  wading  up  to  the  waist  in  mud 
and  water.  After  they  had  reached  the  other  side,  they 
found  themselves  obliged  to  ascend  a  rugged  hill,  fenced 
with  hedges  and  ditches ;  and  these  were  lined  with 

VOL.    I.  *K 


126  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND,  1«H, 

musketeers,  supported  at  proper  intervals  with  squa- 
drons of  cavalry.  They  made  such  a  desperate  resist- 
ance, and  fought  with  such  impetuosity,  that  the  assail* 
ants  were  repulsed  into  the  middle  of  the  bog  with  great 
loss,  and  St.  Ruth  exclaimed — "  Now  will  I  drive  the 
English  to  the  gates  of  Dublin/9  In  this  critical  con- 
juncture, Ptolemache  came  up  with  a  fresh  body  to  sus- 
tain them,  rallied  the  broken  troops,  and  renewed  the 
charge  with  such  vigour,  that  the  Irish  gave  way  in  their 
turn,  and  the  English  recovered  the  ground  they  had 
lost,  though  they  found  it  impossible  to  improve  their 
advantage.  Mackay  brought  a  body  of  horse  and  dra- 
goons to  the  assistance  of  the  left  wing,  and  first  turned 
the  tide  of  battle  in  favour  of  the  English.  Major- 
general  Roiivigny,  who  had  behaved  with  great  gallan- 
try during  the  whole  action,  advanced  with  five  regi- 
ments of  cavalry  to  support  the  centre,  when  St.  Ruth, 
perceiving  his  design,  resolved  to  fall  upon  him  in  a 
dangerous  hollow  way,  which  he  was  obliged  to  pass. 
For  this  purpose,  he  began  to  descend  Kircommodon- 
hill  with  his  whole  reserve  of  horse,  but  in  his  way  was 
killed  by  a  cannon-ball.  His  troops  immediately  halted, 
and  his  guards  retreated  with  his  body.  His  fate  dis- 
pirited the  troops,  and  produced  such  confusion  as  Sars- 
field  could  not  remedy ;  for,  though  he  was  next  in  com- 
mand, he  had  been  at  variance  with  St.  Ruth  since  the 
affair  at  Athlone,  and  was  ignorant  of  the  plan  he  had 
concerted.  Rouvigny,  having  passed  the  hollow  way 
without  opposition,  charged  the  enemy  in  flank,  and 
bore  down  all  before  him  with  surprising  impetuosity : 
the  centre  redoubled  their  efforts,  and  pushed  the  Irish 
to  the  top  of  the  hill,  and  then  the  whole  line,  giving 
way  at  once  from  right  to  left,  threw  down  their  arms. 
The  foot  fled  towards  a  bog  in  their  rear,  and  their  horse 
took  the  route  by  the  highway  to  Loughneagh :  both 
were  pursued  by  the  English  cavalry,  who  for  four  miles 
made  a  terrible  slaughter.     In  the  battle,  which  lasted 


1091.  WILLIAM  AND  MAftY.  127 

two  hours,  and  in  the  pursuit,  above  four  thousand  of 
the  enemy  tfere  slain,  and  six  hundred  taken,  together 
with  all  their  baggage,  tents,  provision,  ammunition, 
and  artillery,  nine-and-twenty  pair  of  colours,  twelve 
standards,  and  almost  all  the  arms  of  the  infantry.     In 
a  word,  the  victory  was  decisive,  and  not  above  eight 
hundred  of  the  English  were  killed  upon  the  field  of 
battle.    The  vanquished  retreated  in  great  confusion  to 
Limerick,  where  they  resolved  to  make  a  final  stand, 
in  hope  of  receiving  such  succours  from  France,  as 
would  either  enable  them  to  retrieve  their  affairs,  or  ob- 
tain  good  terms  from  the  court  of  England.    There 
Tyfconnel  died  of  a  broken  heart,  after  having  survived 
his  authority  and  reputation.     He  had  incurred  the  con-* 
tempt  of  the  French,  as  well  as  the  hatred  of  the  Irish, 
whom  he  had  advised  to  submit  to  the  new  government, 
rather  than  totally  ruin  themselves  and  their  familiesl 
§  XI.  Immediately  after  the  battle,  detachments  were 
sent  to  reduce  Portumny,  Bonnachar,  and  Moor-castle, 
considerable  passes  on  the  Shannon,  which  were  accord- 
ingly  secured.     Then    Ginckel  advanced  to  Galway, 
which  he  summoned  to  surrender;  but  he  received  a 
defiance  from  lord  Dillon  and  general  d'Ussone,  who 
commanded  the  garrison.     The  trenches  were  jmmedl; 
ately  opened ;  a  fort  which  commanded  the  approaches 
to  the  tdwn  was  taken  by  assault ;  six  regiments  of  foot, 
and  four  squadrons  of  horse,  passed  the  river  on  pon- 
toons ;  and  the  place  being  wholly  invested,  the  gover- 
nor thought  proper  to  capitulate.    The  garrison  marched 
out  with  the  honours  of  war,  and  was  allowed  safe  con- 
duct to  Limerick.     Ginckel  directed  his  march  to  the 
same  town,  which  was  the  only  post  of  consequence  that 
now  held  out  for  king  James.     Within  four  miles  of  the 
place  he  halted,  until  the  heavy  cannon  could  be  brought 
from  Athlone.     Hearing  that  Luttrel  had  been  seized 
by  the  French  general  dTJssone,  and  sentenced  to  be 
shot  for  having  proposed  to  surrender,  he  Sent  a  trum- 

k  2   '  , 


128  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  JC91. 

pet,  to  tell  the  commander,  that  if  any  person  should 
be  put  to  death  for  such  a  proposal,  he  would  make 
retaliation  on  the  Irish  prisoners.  On  the  25th  day  of 
August,  the  enemy  were  driven,  from  all  their  advanced 
posts :  captain  Cole,  with  a  squadron  of  ships,  sailed  up 
the  Shannon,  and  his  frigates  anchored  in  sight  of  the 
town.  On  the  26th  day  of  the  month  the  batteries  were 
opened,  and  a  line  of  contravallation  was  formed :  the 
Irish  army  lay  encamped  on  the  other  side  of  the  river, 
on  the  road  to  Killalow,  and  the  fords  were  guarded  with 
four  regiments  of  their  dragoons.  Oh  the  5th  day  of 
September,  after  the  town  had  been  almost  laid  in  ruins 
by  the  bombs,  and  large  breaches  made  in  the  walls  by 
the  battering  cannon,  the  guns  were  dismounted,  the 
oat-forts  evacuated,  and  such  other  motions  made  as  in- 
dicated a  resolution  to  abandon  the  siege.  The  enemy 
expressed  their  joy  in  loud  acclamations ;  but  this  was  of 
short  continuance.  In  the  night  the  besiegers  began  to 
throw  a  bridge  of  pontoons  over  the  river,  about  a  mile 
higher  up  th^n  the  camp ;  and  this  work  was  finished 
before  morning.  A  considerable  body  of  horse  and  foot 
had  passed  when  the  alarm  was  given  to  the  enemy,  who 
were  seized  with  such  consternation,  that  they  threw 
down  their  arms,  aijd  betook  themselves  to  flight,  leav- 
ing behind  them  their  tents,  baggage,  two  pieces  of  can- 
non* and  one  standard.  The  bridge  was  immediately 
removed  nearer  the  town,  and  fortified ;  all  the  fords  and 
passes  were  secured,  and  the  batteries  continued  firing 
incessantly  till  the  22d  day  of  the  month,  when  Ginc- 
kel  passed  over  with  a  division  of  the  army,  and  four- 
teen pieces  of  cannon.  About  four  in  the  afternoon, 
the  grenadiers  attacked  the  forts  that  commanded  Tho- 
mond  bridge,  and  carried  them  sword  in  hand,  after  an 
obstinate  resistance.  The  garrison  had  made  a  sally 
from  the  town  to  support  them ;  and  this  detachment 
was  driven  back  with  such  precipitation,  that  the  French 
officer  on  command  in  that  quarter,  fearing  the  English 


M91.  WILLIAM  AND  MARY.  129 

would  enter  pell-mell  with  the  fugitives,  ordered  the 

bridge  to  be  drawn  up,  leaving  his  own  men  to  the  fury 

of  a  victorious  enemy.    Six  hundred  were  killed,  two 

hundred  taken  prisoners,  including  many  officers*  and  a 

great  number  wqre  drowned  in  the  Shannon.  ; 

§XII.  Then  the  English  made  a  lodgement  within 

ten  paces  of  the  bridge-foot ;  and  the  Irish,  seeing  them* 
selves  Surrounded  on  all  sides,  determined  to  capitulate. 

General  Sarsfield  and  colonel  Wahop  signified  their  re- 
solution to  Scravenmore  and  Rouvigny :  hostages  were 
exchanged ;  a  negotiation  Was  immediately  begun,  and 
hostilities  ceased  on  both  sides  of  the  river.  The  lords- 
justices  arrived  in  the  camp  on  the  1st  day  of  October, 
and  on  the  4th  the  capitulation  was  executed,  extending 
to  all  the  places  in  the  kingdom  that  were  still  in  the 
hands  of  the  Irish.  The  Roman  Catholics  were  restored 
to  the  enjoyment  of  such  liberty  in  the  exercise  of  reli- 
gion as  was  consistent  with  the  laws  of  Ireland,  and 
conformable  with  that  which  they  possessed  in  the  reign 
of  Charles  II.  All  persons  whatever  were  entitled  to 
the  protection  of  these  laws,  and  restored  to  the  posses*  . 
sion  of  their  estates,  privileges,  and  immunities,  upon 
their  submitting  to  the  present  government,  and  taking 
the  oath  of  allegiance  to  their  majesties  king  William 
and  queen  Mary,  excepting,  however,  certain  persons 
who  were  forfeited  or  exiled.  This  article  even  extend- 
ed to  all  merchants  of  Limerick,  or  any  other  garrison  i 
possessed  by  the  Irish,  who  happened  to  be  abroad,  and 
had  not  borne  arms  since  the  declaration  in  the  first  year 
of  the  present  reign,  provided  they  should  return  within 
the  term  of  eight  months.  All  the  persons  comprised 
in  this  and  the  foregoing  article,  were  indulged  with  a 
general  pardon  of  all  attainders,  outlawries,  treasons, 
misprisions  of  treason,  premunires,  felonies,  trespasses, , 
and  other  crimes  and  midemeanours  whatsoever,  com- 
mitted since  the  beginning  of  the  reign  of  James  IL  and 
the  lords-justices  promised  to  use  their  best  endeavours  > 


130  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  10tt. 

# 

towards  the  reversal  of  such  attainders  and  outlawries  as 
had  passed  against  any  of  them  in  parliament.     In  order 
to  allay  the  violence  of  party,  and  extinguish  private 
animosities,  it  was  agreed,  that  no  person  should  be  sued 
or  impleaded  on  either  side  for  any  trespass,  or  made 
accountable  for  the  rents,  tenements,  lands,  or  .houses, 
he  had  received  or  enjoyed  since  the  beginning  of  the 
war.     Every  nobleman  and  gentleman  comprised  in 
these  articles  was  authorized  to  keep  a  sword,  a  case  of 
pistols,  and  a  gun,  for  his  defence  or  amusement.    The 
inhabitants  of  Limerick  and  other  garrisons  were  per- 
mitted to  remove  their  goods  and  chattels,  without 
search,  visitation,  or  payment  of  duty.     The  lords-jus- 
tices promised  to  use  their  best  endeavours,  that  all  per- 
sons comprehended  in  thi6  capitulation  should  for  eight 
months  be  protected  from  all  arrests  and  executions  for 
debt  or  damage :  they  undertook  that  their  majesties 
should  ratify  these  articles  within  the  space  of  eight 
months,  and  use  their  endeavours  that  they  might  be 
ratified  and  confirmed  in  parliament.     The  subsequent 
article  was  calculated  to  indemnify  colonel  John  Brown, 
whose  estate  and  effects  had  been  seized  for  the  use  of 
the  Irish  army  by  Tyrconnel  and  Sarsfield,  which  last 
had  been  created  lord  Lucan^by  king  James,  and  was  now 
mentioned  by   that  title.     All  persons  were  indulged 
with  free  leave  to  remove  with  their  families  and  effects 
to  any  other  country,  except  England  and  Scotland. 
All  officers  and  soldiers  in  the  service  of  king  James, 
comprehending  even  the  rapparees,  willing  to  go  beyond 
sea,  were  at  liberty  to  march  in  bodies  to  the  places  of 
embarkation,  to  be  conveyed  to  the  continent  with  the 
French  officers  and  troops.     They  were  furnished  with 
passports,  convoys,  and  carriages  by  land  and  water;  and 
general  Ginckel  engaged  to  provide  seventy  ships,  if 
necessary,  for  their  transportation,  with  two  men  of  war 
for  the  accommodation  of  their  officers,  and  to  serve  as  a 
convoy  to  the  fleet.    It  was  stipulated,  That  the  provi- 


imu  WILLIAM  AND  MAfcY.  131 

sions  and  forage  for  their  subsistence  should  be  paid  for 
on  their  arrival  in  France :  that  hostages  should  be  given 
for  this  indemnification,  as  well  as  for  the  return  of  the 
ships:  that  all  the  garrisons  should  march  out  of  their 
respective  towns  and  fortresses  with  the  honours  of  war : 
that  the  Irish  should  have  liberty  to  transport  nine  hun- 
dred horses :  that  those  who  should  choose  to  stay  be- 
hind, might  dispose  of  themselves  according  to  their 
own  fancy,  after  having  surrendered  their  arms  to  such 
commissioners  as  the  general  should  appoint :  that  all 
prisoners  of  war  should  be  set  at  liberty  on  both  sides: 
that  the  general  should  provide  two  vessels  to  carry  over 
two  different  persons  to  France,  with  intimation  of  this 
treaty :  and  that  none  pf  those  who  were  willing  to  quit 
the  kingdom  should  be  detained  on  account  of  debt,  or 
any  other  pretence. — This  is  the  substance  of  the  famous 
treaty  of  Limerick,  which  the  Irish  Roman  Catholics 
considered  as  the  great  charter  of  their  civil  and  religious 
liberties.  The  town  of  Limerick  was  surrendered  to 
Ginckel ;  but  both  sides  agreed,  that,  the  two  armies 
should  entrench  themselves  till  the  Irish  could  embark, 
that  no  disorders  might  arise  from  a  communication. 

§  XIII.  The  Protestant  subjects  of  Ireland  were  ex- 
tremely disgusted  at  these  concessions  made  in  favour 
of  vanquished  rebels,  who  had  exercised  such  acts  of 
cruelty  and  rapine.  They  complained,  that  they  them-> 
selves,  who  had  suffered  for  their  loyalty  to  king  Wil- 
liam, were  neglected,  and  obliged  to  sit  down  with  their 
losses,  while  their  enemies,  who  had  shed  so  much  blood 
in  opposing  his  government,  were  indemnified  by  the 
articles  of  the  capitulation,  and  even  favoured  with  par- 
ticular indulgences.  They  were  dismissed  with  the  ho- 
nours of  war ;  they  were  transported  at  the  govern- 
ment's expense,  to  fight  against  the  English  in  foreign 
countries :  an  honourable  provision  was  made  for  the 
rapparees,  who  were  professed  banditti:  the  Roman 
Catholic  interest  in  Ireland  obtained  the  sanction  of  regal 


182  HISTORY  OF  WJGLAND.  1691; 

authority :  attainders  were  overlooked,  forfeitures  an- 
nulled, pardons  extended,  and  laws  set  aside,  in  order  to 
effect  a  pacification.  Ginckel  had  received  orders  to 
put  an  end  to  the  war  at  any  rate,  that  William  might 
convert  his  whole  influence  and  attention  to  the  affairs 
of  the  continent  When  the  articles  of  capitulation 
were  ratified,  and  hostages  exchanged  for  their  being 
duly  executed,  about  two  thousand  Irish  foot,  and  three 
hundred  horse,  began  their  march  for  Cork,  where  they 
proposed  to  take  shipping  for  France,  under  the  conduct 
of  Sarsfield :  but  three  regiments  refusing  to  quit  the 
kingdom,  delivered  up  their  arms,  and  dispersed  to  their 
former  habitations.  Those  who  remained  at  Limerick 
embarked  on  the  7th  day  of  November,  in  French 
transports;  and  sailed  immediately  to  France,  under 
the  convoy  of  a  French  squadron,  which  had  arrived  in 
the  bay  of  Dingle  immediately  after  the  capitulation 
was  signed.  Twelve  thousand  men  chose  to  undergo 
exile  from  their  native  country,  rather  than  submit  to 
the  government  of  king  William.  When  they  arrived 
in  France,  they  were  welcomed  by  a  letter  from  James, 
who  thanked  them  for  their  loyally ;  assured  them  they 
should  still  serve  under  his  commission  and  command ; 
and  that  the  king  of  France  had  already  given  orders 
for  their  being  new  clothed,  and  put  into  quarters  of 
refreshment. 

§  XIV.  The  reduction  of  Ireland  being  thus  com- 
pleted, baron  Ginckel  returned  to  England,  where  he 
was  solemnly  thanked  by  the  house  of  commons  for  his 
great  services,  after  he  had  been  created  earl  of  Athlone 
by  his  majesty.  When  the  parliament  met  on  the  22d 
(fay  of  October,  the  king,  in  his  speech,  insisted  upon 
the  necessity  of  sending  a  strong  fleet  to  sea  early  in  the 
season,  and  of  maintaining  a  considerable  army  to  annoy 
the  enemy  abroad,  as  well  as  to  protect  the  kingdom 
from  insult  and  invasion ;  for  which  purposes,  he  said, 
sixty-five  thousand  men  would  be  barely  sufficient. 


1601*  WILLIAM  AND  MARY.  133 

Each  house  presented  an  address  of  congratulation  on 
his  majesty's  safe  return  to  England,  and  on  the  reduc- 
tion of  Ireland:  they  promised  to  assist  him,  to  the 
utmost  of  their  power,  in  prosecuting  the  war  with 
France ;  and,  at  the  same  time,  drew  up  addresses  to  the 
queen,  acknowledging  her  prudent  administration  dur- 
ing his  majesty's  absence.  Notwithstanding  this  ap- 
pearance of  cordiality  and  complaisance,  a  spirit  of  dis- 
content had  insinuated  itself  into  both  houses  of  parlia- 
ment, and  even  infected  great  part  of  the  nation. 

§  XV.  A  great  number  of  individuals,  who  wished 
well  to  their  country,  could  not,  without  anxiety  and 
resentment,  behold  the  interest  of  the  nation*  sacrificed 
to  foreign  connexions,  and  the  king's  favour  so  partially 
bestowed  upon  Dutchmen,  in  prejudice  to  his  English 
subjects.    They  observed,  that  the  number  of  forces  he 
demanded  was  considerably  greater  than  that  of  any 
army  which  had  ever  been  paid  by  the  public,  even 
when  the  nation  was  in  the  most  imminent  danger : 
that,  instead  of  contributing  as  allies  to  the  maintenance 
of  the  war  upon  the  continent,  they  had  embarked  as* 
principals,  and  bore  the  greatest  part  of  the  burden, 
though  they  had  the  least  share  of  the  profit.    They 
even  insinuated,  that  such  a  standing  army  was  more 
calculated  to  make  the  king  absolute  at  home,  than  to 
render  him  formidable  abroad ;  and  the  secret  friends  of 
the  late  king  did  not  fail  to  enforce  these  insinuations. 
They  renewed  their  animadversion?  upon  the  disagree* 
,  able  part  of  his  character :  they  dwelt  upon  his  proud 
reserve,  his  sullen  silence,  his  imperious  disposition,  and 
his  base  ingratitude,  particularly  to  the  earl  of  Marl* 
borough,  whom  he  had  dismissed  from  all  his  employ* 
ments,  immediately  after  the  signal  exploits  he  had 
performed  in  Ireland.    The  disgrace  of  this  nobleman 
was  partly  ascribed  to  the  freedom  with  which  he  had 
complained  of  the  king's  undervaluing  his  services,  and 
partly  to  the  intrigues  of  his  wife,  who  had  gained  an 


134  HISTORY*  OF  ENGLAND.  Utel. 

ascendancy  over  the  princess  Anne  of  Denmark,  and  is 
said  to  have  employed  her  influence  in  fomenting  a  jea- 
lousy between  the  two  sisters.    The  malecontents  of 
the  whiggish  faction,  enraged  to  find  their  credit  declin- 
ing at  court,  joined  in  the  cry  which  the  Jacobites  had 
raised  against  the  government.     They  scrupled  not  to 
say,  that  the  arts  of  corruption  were  shamefullly  prac- 
tised, to  secure  a  majority  in  parliament :  that  the  king 
was  as  tender  of  the  prerogative  as  any  of  his  predeces- 
sors had  ever  been  ;    and  that  he  even  ventured  to 
admit  Jacobites  into  his  council,  because  they  were  the 
known  tools  of  arbitrary  power.     These  reflections  al- 
luded to  the  earls  of  Rochester  and  Ranelagh,  who,  with 
sir  Edward  Seymour,  had  been  lately  created  privy- 
counsellors.     Rochester  entertained  very  high  notions 
of  regal  authority ;  he  proposed  severity  as  one  of  the 
best  supports  of  government ;  was  clear  in  his  under- 
standing, violent  in  his  temper,  and  incorrupt  in  his 
principles.     Ranelagh  was  a  man  of  parts  and  pleasure, 
who  possessed  the  most  plausible  and  winning  address ; 
and  was  capable  of  transacting  the  most  important  and 
intricate  affairs,  in  the  midst  of  riot  and  debauchery. 
He  had  managed  the  revenue  of  Ireland  in  the  reign  of 
Charles  II.     He  enjoyed  the  office  of  paymaster  in  the 
army  of  king  James ;  and  now  maintained  the  same 
footing  under  the  government  of  William  and  Mary. 
Sir  Edward  Seymour  was  the  proudest  commoner  in 
England,  and  the  boldest  orator  that  ever  filled  the 
speaker's  chair.     He  was  intimately  acquainted  with  the 
business  pf  the  house,  and  knew  every  individual  mem- 
ber so  exactly,  that  with  one  glance  of  his  eye  he  could 
prognosticate  the  fate  of  every  motion.   He  had  opposed 
the  court  with  great  acrimony,  questioned  the  king's 
title,  censured  his  conduct,  and  reflected  upon  his  cha- 
racter.    Nevertheless,  he  now  became  a  proselyte,  and 
was  brought  into  the  treasury. 

§  XVI.  The  commons  voted  3,41 1,675/.  for  the  use 


MM*  WILLIAM  AND  MARY.  135 

of  the  ensuing  year :  bat  the  establishment  of  funds  for 
raising  these  supplies  was  retarded,  partly  by  the  ill- 
humour  of  the  opposition,  and  partly  by  intervening 
affairs,  that  diverted  the  attention  of  the  commons.  Seve- 
ral eminent  merchants  presented  a  petition  to  the  house 
against  the  East  India  company,  charging  them  with  ma- 
nifold abuses ;  at  the  same  time,  a  counter-petition  was 
delivered  by  the  company,  and  the  affair  referred  to  the 
examination  of  a  committee  appointed  for  that  purpose. 
After  a  minute  inquiry  into  the  nature  of  the  complaints, 
the  commons  voted  certain  regulations  with  respect  to 
the  stock  and  the  traffic ;  and  resolved  to  petition  his 
majesty,  that,  according  to  the  said  regulations,  the 
East  India  company  should  be  incorporated  by  charter* 
The  committee  was  ordered  to  bring  in  a  bill  for  this 
establishment :    but  divers  petitions  being  presented 
against  it,  and  the  company's  answers  proving  unsatis- 
factory, the  house  addressed  the  king  to  dissolve  it,  and 
grant  a  charter  to  a  new  company.    He  said  it  was  an 
affair  of  great  importance  to  the  trade  of  the  kingdom  ; 
therefore  he  would  consider  the  subject,  and  in  a  little 
time  return  a  positive  answer.    The  parliament  was 
Kkewise  amused  by  a  pretended  conspiracy  of  the  Papists 
in  Lancashire,  to  raise  a  rebellion,  and  restore  James  to 
the  throne.     Several  persons  were  seized,  and  some 
witnesses  examined :  but  nothing  appeared  to  justify  the 
information.     At  length,  one  Fuller,  a  prisoner  in  the 
king's  bench,  offered  his  evidence,  and  was  brought  to 
the  bar  of  the  house  of  commons,  where  he  produced 
some  papers.     He  obtained  a  blank  pass  from  the  king 
for  two  persons,  who,  he  said,  would  come  from  the 
continent  to  give  evidence.     He  was  afterward  examin- 
ed at  .his  own  lodgings,  where  he  affirmed  that  colonel 
Thomas  Delaval,  and  James  Hayes,  were  the  witnesses 
for  whom  he  had  procured  the  pass  and  the  protection. 
Search  was  made  for  them,  according  to  his  direction, 
but  no  such  persons  were  found.     Then  the  house  de- 


136  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1691. 

clared  Fuller  a  notorious  impostor,  cheat,  and  false  ac- 
cuser. He  was,  at  the  request  of  the  commons,  prose- 
cuted by  the  attorney-general,  and  sentenced  to  stand 
in  the  pillory  ;  a  disgrace  which  he  accordingly  under* 
went. 

§  XVII.  A  bill  for  regulating  trials  in  cases  of  high- 
treason,  having  been  laid  aside  by  the  lords  in  the  pre* 
ceding  session,  was  now  again  brought  upon  the  carpet, 
and  passed  the  lower  house.  The  design  of  this  bill  was 
to  secure  the  subject  from  the  rigours  to  which. he  had 
been  exposed  in  the  late  reigns :  it  provided,  that  the 
prisoner  should  be  furnished  with  a  copy  of  his  indict- 
ment, as  also  of  the  pannel,  ten  days  before  his  trial ; 
and  that  his  witnesses  should  be  examined  upon  oath, 
as  well  as  those  of  the  crown.  The  lords,  in  their  own 
behalf,  added  a  clause,  enacting,  that  upon  the  trial  of 
any  peer  or  peeress,  for  treason  or  misprision  of  treason, 
all  the  peers  who  have  a  right  to  sit  and  vote  in  parlia- 
ment, should  be  duly  summoned  to  assist  at  the  trial : 
that  this  notice  should  be  given  twenty  days  before  the 
trial :  and  that  every  peer  so  summoned,  and  appearing, 
should  vote  upon  the  occasion.  The  commons  rejected 
this  amendment ;  and  a  free  conference  ensued.  The 
point  was  argued  with  great  vivacity  on  both  sides,  which 
served  only  to  inflame  the  dispute,  and  render  each  party 
the  more  tenacious  of  their  own  opinion.  After  three 
conferences,  that  produced  nothing  but  animosity,  the 
bill  was  dropped ;  for  the  commons  resolved  to  bear  the 
hardships  of  which  they  complained,  rather  than  be  re- 
lieved at  the  expense  of  purchasing  a  new  privilege  to 
the  lords  ;  and  without  this  advantage,  the  peers  would 
pot  contribute  to  their  relief. 

§  XVIII.  The  next  object  that  engrossed  the  atten- 
tion of  the  lower  house,  was  the  miscarriage  of  the  fleet 
during  the  summer's  expedition.  Admiral  Russel,  who 
commanded  at  sea,  having  been  joined  by  a  Dutch 
squadron,  sailed  in  quest  of  the  enemy;  but,  as  the 


1691  WILLIAM  AND  MARY  137 

French  king  had  received  undoubted  intelligence,  that 
the  combined  squadrons  were  superior  to  his  navy  in 
number  of  ships  and  weight  of  metal,  he  ordered  Tour- 
ville  to  avoid  an  engagement.     This  officer  acted  with 
such  vigilance,  caution,  and  dexterity,  as  baffled  all  th$ 
endeavours  of  Russel,  who  was,  moreover,  perplexed  with 
obscure  and  contradictory  orders.       Nevertheless,  he 
cruised  3II  summer,  either  in  the  channel  or  in  soundings, 
for  the  protection  of  the  trade,  and,  in  particular,  se- 
cured the  homeward-bound  Smyrna  fleet,  in  which  the 
English  and  Dutch  had  a  joint  concern,  amounting  to 
four  millions  sterling*     Having  scoured  the  channel, 
and  sailed  along  great  part  of  the  French  coast,  he  re- 
turned to  Torbay  in  the  beginning  of  August,  and  re- 
ceived fresh  orders  to  put  to  sea  again,  notwithstanding 
his  repeated  remonstrances  against  exposing  large  ships 
to  the  storms  that  always  blow  about  the  time  of  the 
equinox.     He  therefore  sailed  back  to  soundings,  where 
he  continued  cruising  till  the  2d  day  of  September 
when  he  was  overtaken  by  a  violent  tempest,  which 
drove  him  into  the  channel,  and  obliged  him  to  make 
for  the  port  of  Plymouth.     The  weather  being  hazy,  he 
reached  the  Sound  with  great  difficulty :  the  Coronation, 
a  second-rate,  foundered  at  anchor,  off  the  Ram-head  : 
the  Harwich,  a  third-rate,  bulged  upon  the  rocks,  and 
perished:  two  others  ran  ashore,  but  were  got  off  with 
little  damage:  but  the  whole  fleet  was  scattered  and 
distressed.     The  nation  murmured  at  the  supposed  mis- 
eonduct  of  the  admiral,  and  the  commons  subjected  him 
to  an  inquiry :.  but,  when  they  examined  his  papers, 
•  orders,  and  instructions,  they  perceived  he  had  adhered 
to  them  with  great  punctuality,  and  thought  proper  to 
drop  the  prosecution,  out  of  tenderness  to  the  ministry. 
Then  the  house  took  into  consideration  some  letters 
which  had  been  intercepted  in  a  French  ship  taken  by 
sir  Ralph  Delaval.     Three  of  these  are  said  to  have 
been  written  by  king  James,  and  the  rest  sealed  with  his 


138  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1601  • 

seal.  They  related  to  the  plan  of  an  insurrection  in 
Scotland,  and  in  the  northern  parts  of  England.  Legge, 
lord  Dartmouth,  with  one  Crew,  being  mentioned  in 
them  as  agents  and  abettors  in  the  design,  warrants  were 
immediately  issued  against  them  ;  Crew  absconded,  but 
lord  Dartmouth  was  committed  to  the  Tower.  Lord 
Preston  was  examined  touching  some  ciphers  which 
they  could  not  explain,  and,  pretending  ignorance,  was 
imprisoned  in  Newgate,  from  whence,  however,  he  soon 
obtained  has  release.  The  funds  for  the  supplies  of  the 
ensuing  year  being  established,  and  several  acts6  passed 
relating  to  domestic  regulations,  the  king,  on  the  24th 
day  of  February,  closed  the  session  with  a  short  speech, 
thanking  the  parliament  for  their  demonstrations  of  af- 
fection in  the  liberal  supplies  they  had  granted,  and 
communicating  his  intention  of  repairing  speedily  to 
the  continent.  ;  Then  the  two  houses,  at  his  desire,  ad- 
journed themselves  to  the  12th  day  of  April,  and  the 
parliament  was  afterward  prorogued  to  the  29th  of 
May  by  proclamation/ 

§  XIX.  The  king  had  suffered  so  much  in  his  repu- 

•  The  laws  enacted  in  this  session  wcte  these :  an  act  for  abrogating 
the  oath  of  supremacy  in  Ireland,  and  appointing  other  oaths — an  act  for 
taking  away  clergy  from  some  offenders,  and  bringing  others  to  punish- 
ment— an  act  against  deer-stealing — an  act  for  repairing  the  highways, 
and  settling  the  rates  of  carriage  of  goods — an  act  for  the  relief  of  credi- 
tors against  fraudulent  devices — an  act  for  explaining  and  supplying  the 
defects  of  former  laws  for  the  settlement  of  the  poor-*-an  act  for  the  en- 
couragement of  the  breeding  and  feeding  of  cattle— -and  an  act  for  ascer- 
taining the  tithes  of  hemp  and  flax. 

f  In  the  course  of  this  session,  Dr.  Welwood,  a  Scottish  physician, 
was  taken  into  custody,  and  reprimanded  at  the  bar  of  the  house  of  com- 
mons, for  having  reflected  upon  that  house  in  a  weekly  paper,  entitled 
Mercarius  Reformatus ;  but,  as  it  was  written  in  defence  of  the  govern- 
ment, the  king  appointed  him  one  of  his  physicians  in  ordinary.  At  this 
period,  Charles  Montague,  afterward  earl  of  Halifax,  distinguished  him- 
self in  the  house  of  commons  by  his  fine  talents  and  eloquence.  The  privy- 
seal  was  committed  to  the  earl  of  Pembroke ;  lord  viscount  Sydney  was 
created  lord-lieutenant  of  Ireland  ;  sir  John  Somers  appointed  attorney- 
general  ;  and  the  see  of  Lincoln,  vacant  by  the  death  of  Barlow,  confer- 
red upon  Dr.  Thomas  Tennison,  who  had  been  recommended  to  the  king, 
as  a  divine  remarkable  for  his  piety  and  moderation. 


1691.  WILLIAM  AND  MARY.  139 

tation  by  his  complaisance  to  the  Presbyterians  of  Scot* 
land,  and  was  so  displeased  with  the  conduct  of  that 
stubborn  sect  of  religionists,  that  he  thought  proper  to 
admit  some  prelatists  into  the  administration.  Johnston* 
who  had  been  sent  envoy  to  the  elector  of  Branden- 
burgh,  was  recalled,  and  with  the  master  of  Stair,  made 
joint  secretary  of  Scotland ;  Melvill,  who  had  declined 
iu  his  importance,  was  made  lord  privy-seal  of  that 
kingdom:  Tweedale  was  constituted  lord-chancellor: 
Crawfurd  retained  the  office  of  president  of  the  council ; 
and  Lothian  was  appointed  high-commissioner  to  the 
general  assembly.  The  parliament  was  adjourned  to 
the  15th  day  of  April,  because  it  was  not  yet  compliant 
enough  to  be  assembled  with  safety ;  and  the  episcopal 
clergy  were  admitted  to  a  share  of  the  church-govern- 
ment. These  measures,  instead  of  healing  the  divi- 
sions, served  only  to  inflame  the  animosity  of  the  two 
parties.  The  Episcopalians  triumphed  in  the  king's,  fa- 
vour, and  began  to  treat  their  antagonists  with  insolence 
and  scorn ;  the  Presbyterians  were  incensed  to  see  their 
friends  disgraced,  and  their  enemies  distinguished  by  the 
royal  indulgence.  They  insisted  upon  the  authority  of 
the  law,  which  happened  to  be  upon  their  side:  they 
became  more  than  ever  sour,  surly,  and  implacable : 
they  refused  to  concur  with  the  prelatists,  or  abate  in 
the  least  circumstance  of  discipline ;  and  the  assembly 
was  dissolved,  without  any  place  or  time  assigned  for  the 
next  meeting.  The  Presbyterians  pretended  an  inde* 
pendent  right  of  assembling  annually,  even  without  a 
call  from  his  majesty  ;  they  therefore  adjourned  them- 
selves, after  having  protested  against  the  dissolution. 
The  king  resented  this  measure,  as  an  insolent  invasion 
of  the  prerogative,  and  conceived  an  aversion  to  the 
whole  sect,  who  in  their  turn  began  to  lose  all  respeot  for 
his  person  aud  government. 

§  XX.  As  the  Highlanders  were  not  yet  totally  re- 
duced, the  earl  of  Breadalbane  undertook  to  bring  them 


140  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1601. 

over,  by  distributing  sums  of  money  among  their  chiefs ; 
and  15,000/.  were  remitted  from  England  for  this  pur- 
pose. The  clans  being  informed  of  this  remittance, 
suspected  that  the  earl's  design  was  to  appropriate  to 
himself  the  best  part  of  the  money,  and,  when  he  began 
to  treat  with  them,  made  such  extravagant  demands, 
that  he  found  his  scheme  impracticable.  He  was  there- 
fore obliged  to  refund  the  sum  he  had  received :  and  he 
resolved  to  wreak  his  vengeance  with  th§.  first  opportu- 
nity, on  those  who  had  frustrated  his  intention.  He 
who  chiefly  thwarted  his  negotiation,  was  Macdonald  of 
Glencoe,  whose  opposition  rose  from  a  private  circum- 
stance, which  ought  to  have  had  no  effect  upon  a  treaty 
that  regarded  the  public  weal.  Macdonald  had  plun- 
dered the  lands  of  Breadalbane  during  the  course  of  hos- 
tilities ;  and  this  nobleman  insisted  upon  being  indem- 
nified for  his  losses,  from  the  other's  share  of  the  money 
which  he  was  employed  to  distribute.  The  Highlander 
not  only  refused  to  acquiesce  in  these  terms,  but,  by 
his  influence  among  the  clans,  defeated  the  whole 
scheme,  and  the  earl  in  revenge  devoted  him  to  de- 
struction. King.  William  had  by  proclamation  offered 
an  indemnity  to  all  those  who  had  been  in  arms  against 
him,  provided  they  would  submit  and  take  the  oaths  by 
a  certain  day ;  and  this  was  prolonged  to  the  close  of  the 
present  year,  with,  a  denunciation  of  military  execution 
against  those  who  should  hold  out  after  the  end  of  De* 
cember.  Macdonald,  intimidated  by  this  declaration, 
repaired  on  the  very  last  day  of  the  month  to  Fort- 
William,  and  desired  that  the  oaths  might  be  tendered 
to  him  by  colonel  Hill,  governor  of  that  fortress.  As 
this  officer  was  not  vested  with  the  power  of  a  civil  ma- 
gistrate, he  refused  to  administer  them :  and  Macdonald 
set  out  immediately  for  Inverary,  the  county-town  of 
Argyle.  Though  the  ground  was  covered  with  snow, 
and  the  weather  intensely  cold,  he  travelled  with  such 
diligence,  that  the  term  prescribed  by  the  proclamation 


1*1.  WILLIAM  AND  MARY.  141 

was  but  one  day  elapsed  when  be  reached  the  place,  and 
addressed  himself  to  sir  John  Campbell,  sheriff  of  the 
county,  who,  in  consideration  of  his  disappointment  at 
Fort  William,  was  prpirafled  upon  to  administer  the 
oaths  to  him  and  his  adherents.  Then  they  returned 
to  their  own  habitations  in  the  valley  of  Glencoe,  in  full 
confidence  of  being  protected  by  the  government,  to 
which  they  had  so  solemnly  submitted. 

§  XXI.  Breadalbane  had  represented  Macdonald  at 
court  as  an  incorrigible  rebel,  as  a  ruffian  inured  to 
bloodshed  and  rapine,  who  would  never  be  obedient  to 
the  laws  of  his  country,  nor  live  peaceably  under  any 
sovereign.  He  observed,  that  he  had  paid  no  regard  to 
the  proclamation,  and  proposed  that  the  government 
should  sacrifice  him  to  the  quiet  of  the  kingdom,  in  ex- 
tirpating him,  with  his  family  and  dependants,  by  mili- 
tary execution.  His  advice  was  supported  by  the  sug- 
gestions of  the  other  Scottish  ministers ;  and  the  king, 
whose  chief  virtue  was  not  humanity,  signed  a  warrant 
for  the  destruction  of  those  unhappy  people,  though  it 
does  not  appear  that  he  knew  of  Macdonald's  submis- 
sion. An  order  for  this  barbarous  execution,  signed 
and  counter-signed  by  his  majesty's  own  hand,  being 
transmitted  to  the  master  of  Stair,  secretary  for  Scot- 
land, this  minister  sent  particular  directions  to  Living- 
stone, who  commanded  the  troops  in  that  kingdom,  to 
put  the  inhabitants  of  Glencoe  to  the  sword,  charging 
him  to  take  no  prisoners,  that  the  scene  might  be  more 
terrible.  In  the  month  of  February,  captain  Campbell 
of  Glenlyon,  by  virtue  of  an  order  from  major  Duncan- 
son,  marched  into  the  valley  of  Glencoe  with  a  company 
of  soldiers  belonging  to  Argyle's  regiment,  on  pretence 
of  levying  the  arrears  of  the  land-tax  and  hearth-money. 
When  Macdonald  demanded  whether  they  came  as 
friends  or  enemies,  he  answered  as  friends,  and  pro- 
mised, upon  his  honour,  that  neither  he  nor  his  people 
should  sustain  the  least  injury.     In  consequence  of  this 


vol.  i.  *  L 


L 


148  HISTORY  OF  BNQLAND.  Wl- 

declaration,  lie  and  his  men  were  received  with  the 
most  cordial  hospitality,  and  lived  fifteen  days  with  the 
men  of  the  valley  in  all  the  appearance  of  the  most  un- 
reserved friendship.  At  length  the  fatal  period  ap- 
proached* Maedonald  and  Campbell  having  passed  the 
day  together,  parted  about  seven  in  the  evening,  with 
mutual  professions  of  the  wannest  affection.  The 
younger  Maedonald,  perceiving  the  guards  doubled, 
began  to  suspect  some  treachery,  and  communicated  his 
suspicion  to  his  brother ;  but  neither  he  nor  the  father 
would  harbour  the  least  doubt  of  Campbell's  sincerity : 
nevertheless,  the  two  young  men  went  forth  privately, 
to  make  farther  observations.  They  overheard  the  com- 
mon soldiers  say  they  liked  not  the  work ;  that  though 
they  would  have  willingly  fought  the  Macdonaldsof  the 
Glen  fairly  in  the  field,  they  held  it  base  to  murder 
them  in  cool  blood ;  but  that  their  officers  were  answer- 
able for  the  treachery.  When  the  youths  hasted  back 
to  apprise  their  father  of  the  impending  danger,  they 
saw  the  house  already  surrounded :  they  heard  the  dis- 
charge of  muskets,  the  shrieks  of  women  and  children ; 
and,  being  destitute  of  arms,  secured  their  own  lives  by 
immediate  flight.  The  savage  ministers  of  vengeance 
had  entered  the  old  man's  chamber,  and  shot  him 
through  the  head.  He  fell  down  dead  in  the  arms  of 
his  wife,  who  died  next  day,  distracted  by  the  horror  of 
her  husband  s  fate.  The  laird  of  Auchintrihcken,  Mac- 
donald's  guest,  who  had  three  months  before  tins  period 
submitted  to  the  government,  and  at  this  very  time  had 
a  protection  in  his  pocket,  was  put  to  death  without 
question.  A  boy  of  eight  years*  who  fell  at  Campbell's 
feet,  imploring  mercy,  and  ofiering  to  serve  him  for  life, 
was  stabbed  to  the  heart  bv  one  Drummond,  a  subaltern 
officer*  Eight- and- thirty  persons  suffered  in  this  man- 
ner, the  greater  part  of  whom  were  surprised  in .  their 
beds,  and  hurried  into  eternity  before  they  had  time  to 
implore  the  divine  mercy.    The  design  was  to  butcher 


1(5)1,  WILLIAM  AND  MARY.  143 

all  the  males  under  seventy  that  lived  in  the  valley,  the 
number  of  whom  amounted  to  two  hundred ;  but  some  of 
the  detachments  did  not  arrive  soon  enough  to  secure  the 
passes ;  so  that  one  hundred  and  sixty  escaped.  Camp- 
bell;  having  perpetrated  this  brtital  massacre,  ordered 
all  the  houses  to  be  burned,  made  a  prey  of  all  the  cat- 
tle and  effects  that  were  found  in  the  valley,  and  left  the 
helpless  women  and  children,  whose  fathers  and  hus- 
bands he  had  murdered,  naked  and  forlorn,  without 
covering,  food,  or  shelter,  in  the  midst  of  the  snow  that 
covered  the  whole  face  of  the  country,  at  the  distance  of 
six  long  miles  from  any  inhabited  place.  Distracted  with 
grief  and  horror,  surrounded  with  the  .shades  of  night* 
shivering  with  cold,  and  appalled  with  ,the  apprehension 
of  immediate  death  from  the  swords  of  those  who  had 
sacrificed  their  friends  and  kinsmen,  they  could  not  en- 
dure such  a  complication  of  calamities,  but  generally 
perished  in  the  waste,  before  they  could  receive  the  least 
comfort  or  assistance.  This  barbarous  massacre,  per- 
formed under  the  sanction  of  king  William's  authority, 
answered  the  immediate  purpose  of  the  court,  by  strik- 
ing terror  into  the  hearts  of  the  Jacobite  Highlanders ; 
but  at  the  same  time  excited  the  horror  of  all  those  who 
had  not  renounced  every  sentiment  of  humanity,  and 
produced  such  an  aversion  to  the  government,  as  all  the 
arts  of  a  ministry  could  never  totally  surmount.  A  de- 
tail of  the  particulars  was  published  at  Paris,  with  many 
exaggerations,  and  the  Jacobites  did  not  fail  to  expatiate 
upon  every  circumstance,  in  domestic  libels  and  private 
conversation.*  The  king,  alarmed  at  the  outcry  which 
was  raised  on  this  occasion,  ordered  an  inquiry  to  be  set 
on  foot,  and  dismissed  the  master  of  Stair  from  his  em- 
ployment of  secretary :  he  likewise  pretended  that  he 
had  subscribed  the  order  amidst  a  heap  of  other  papers, 
without  knowing  the  purport  of  it :  but  as  he  did  not 

•Bnnrct.    Story.    Keftnet.    Life  of  king  William.    Naval  History. 

Kalph.    Yolftirc. 

L  a 


144  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1002. 

severely  punish  those  who  made  his  authority  subser- 
vient to  their  own  cruel  revenge,  the  imputation  stuck 
fast  to  his  character ;  and  the  Highlanders,  though  ter- 
rified into  silence  and  submission,  were  inspired  with 
the  most  implacable  resentment  against  his  person  and 
administration. 

§  XXII.  A  great  number  in  both  kingdoms  waited 
impatiently  for  an  opportunity  to  declare  in  behalf  of 
their  exiled  monarch,  who  was  punctually  informed  of 
all  these  transactions,  and  endeavoured  to  make  his  ad- 
vantage of  the  growing  discontent.       King  William 
having  settled  the  domestic  affairs  of  the  nation,  and 
exerted  uncommon  care  and  assiduity  in  equipping  a  for- 
midable fleet,  embarked  for  Holland  on  the  5th  day  of 
March,  and  was  received  by  the  states-general  with  ex-  ' 
pressions  of  the  most  cordial  regard.     While  he  was 
here  employed  in  promoting  the  measures  of  the  grand 
confederacy,  the  French  king  resolved  to  invade  Eng- 
land in  his  absence,  and  seemed  heartily  engaged  in  the 
interest  of  James,  whose  emissaries  in  Britain  began  to 
bestir  themselves  with  uncommon  assiduity,  in  preparing* 
the  nation  for  his  return.     One  Lant,  who  was  impri- 
soned on  suspicion  of  distributing  his  commissions,  had 
the  good  fortune  to  be  released,  and  the  Papists  of  Lan- 
cashire dispatched  him  to  the  court  of  St.  Germains, 
with  an  assurance  that  they  were  in  a  condition  to  re- 
ceive their  old  sovereign.    He  returned  with  advice  that 
king  James  would  certainly  land  in  the  spring;  and 
that  colonel  Parker  and  other  officers  should  be  sent 
over  with  full  instructions,  touching  their  conduct  at 
and  before  the  king's  arrival.     Parker  accordingly  re- 
paired to  England,  and  made  the  Jacobites  acquainted 
with  the  whole  scheme  of  a  descent,  which  Lewis  had 
actually  concerted  with  the  late  king.  He  assured  them 
that  their  lawful  sovereign  would  once  more  visit  his 
British  dominions,  at  the  head  of  thirty  thousand  effec- 
tive men,  to  be  embarked  at  La  Hogue ;  that  the  trans- 


1602.  WILLIAM  AND  MARY,  145 

ports  were  already  prepared,  and  a  strong  squadrdn 
■equipped  for  their  convoy ;  he  therefore  exhorted  them 
to.be  .aj&edy  and  secret  in  their  preparations,  that  they 
might  be  in  readiness  to  take  arms,  and  co-operate  in 
effecting  his  restoration.  This  officer,  and  one  John- 
son, a  priest,  are  said  to  have  undertaken  the  assassina- 
tion of  kingWilliam  ;  but,  before  they  could  execute  their 
design,  his  majesty  set  sail  for  Holland. 

§  XXIII.  Meanwhile,  James  addressed  a  letter  to 
several  lords  who  had  been  formerly  members  of  his 
council,  as  well  as  to  divers  ladies  of  quality  and  distinc- 
tion, intimating  the  pregnancy  of  his  queen,  and  re- 
quiring them  to  attend  as  witnesses  at  the  labour.  He 
took  notice  of  the  injury  his  family  and  honour  had 
sustained,  from  the  cruel  aspersions  of  his  enemies  con- 
cerning the  birth  of  his  son ;  and  as  Providence  had 
now  favoured  him  with  an  opportunity  of  refuting  the 
calumny  of  those  who  affirmed  that  the  queen  was  in- 
capable of  child-bearing,  he  assured  them,  in  the  name 
of  his.  brother,  the  French  king,  as  well  as  upon  his 
own  royal  word,  that  they  should  have  free  leave  to  vi- 
^sit  his  court,  and  return  after  the  labour.5  This  invita- 
tion, however,  no  person  would  venture  to  accept.  He 
afterward  employed  his  emissaries  in  circulating  a  print- 
ed declaration,  importing  that  the  king  of  France  had 
enabled  him  to  make  another  effort  to  retrieve  his 
crown  :  and  that,  although  he  was  furnished  with  a 
number  of  troops  sufficient  to  untie  the  hands  of  his  sub- 
jects, he  did  not  intend  to  deprive  them  of  their  share 
in  the  glory  of  restoring , their  lawful  king  and  their  an- 
cient government.     He  exhorted  the  people  to  join  his 

b  The  letter  was  directed  not  only  to  privy-counsellors,  but  also  to  the 
dutchesses  of  Somerset  and  Beaufort,  the  marchioness  of  Halifax,  the 
countesses  of  Derby,  Mulgrave,  Rutland,  Brooks,  Nottingham,  hum~ 
ley,  and  Danby,  the  ladies  Fitzharding  and  Fretchville,  those  of  sir  John 
Trevor,  speaker  of  the  bouse  of  commons,  sir  Edward  Seymour,  sir  Chris* 
gopher  Musgrave,  the  wives  of  sir  Thomas  Stamford,  lord-mayor  pf  I^om 
don,  air  William  Ashhurst  and  sir  Richard  Levett,  the  sheriffs,  and  last? 
ly,  to  Dr.  Chamberlain,  the  famous  practitioner  in  midwifery. 


146  HISTORY  Of  ENGLAND.  160& 

standard.  He  assured  them  that  the  foreign  auxiliaries 
should  behave  with  the  mdst  regular  discipline,  and  be 
cent  back  immediately  after  his  re-establishment.  He 
observed,  that  when  such  a  number  of  his  subjects  were 
so  infatuated  as  to  concur  with  the  unnatural  design  of 
the  prince  of  Orange,  he  had  chosen  to  rely  upon  the 
fidelity  of  his  English  army,  and  refused  considerable 
succours  that  were  offered  to  him  by  his  most  Christian 
majesty ;  that  when  he  was  ready  {o  oppose  force  with 
force,  he  nevertheless  offered  to  give  all  reasonable  sa- 
tisfaction to  his  subjects  who  had  been  misled,  and  en- 
deavoured to  open  their  eyes,  with  respect  to  the  vain 
pretences  of  his  adversary,  whose  aim  was  not  the  re- 
formation, but  the  subversion  of  the  government ;  that 
when  he  saw  himself  deserted  by  his  army,  betrayed  by 
his  ministers,  abandoned  by  his  favourites,  and  even 
his  own  children,  and  at  last  rudely  driven  from  his  own 
palace  by  a  guard  of  insolent  foreigners,  he  had,  for  his 
personal  safety,  taken  refuge  in  France :  that  his  retreat 
from  the  malice*  and  cruel  designs  of  the  usurper  had 
been  construed  into  an  abdication,  and  the  whole  con- 
stitution bf  the  monarchy  destroyed  by  a  set  of  men  il- 
legally assembled,  who,  in  fact,  had  no  power  to  alter 
the  property  of  the  meanest  subject*  He  expressed  his 
hope  that  by  this  time  the  nation  had  fairly  examined 
the  account,  and,  from  the  losses  and  enormous  ex* 
pense  of  the  three  last  years,  were  convinced  that  the 
remedy  was  worse  than  the  disease ;  that  the  beginning, 
like  the  first  years  of  Nero's  reign,  would,  in  all  proba- 
bility, be  found  the  mildest  part  of  the  usurpation,  and 

,  the  instruments  of  the  new  establishment  live  to  suffer 
severely  by  the  tyranny  they  had  raised ;  that,  even 
though  the  usurpation  should  continue  during  his  life*, 

.  an  indisputable  title  would  survive  in  his  issue,  and  ex* 
pose  the  kingdom  to  all  the  miseries  of  a  civil  war.  He 
not  only  solicited,  but  commanded  his  good  subjects  td 

join  him,  according  to  their  duty,  and  the  oaths  they 


W#2.  WILLIAM    AND    MARY.  \Al 

had  taken.  He  forbade  them  to  pay  taxes,  or  any  part 
of  the  revenue,  to  the  usurper.  He  promised  pardon, 
and  even  rewards,  to  all  those  who  should  return  to  their 
duty,  and  to  procure  in  his  first  parliament  an  act  of  in- 
demnity, with  an  exception  of  certain  persons  whom  h& 
now  enumerated.1  He  declared  that  all  soldiers  who 
should  quit  the  service  of  the  usurper,  and  enlist  under 
his  banners,  might  depend  upon  receiving  their  pardon 
and  arrears ;  and  that  the  foreign  troops,  upon  laying 
down  their  arms,  should  be  paid  and  transported  to  their 
respective  countries.  He  solemnly  protested  that  he 
would  protect  and  maintain  the  church  of  England,  as 
by  law  established,  in  all  her  rights,  privileges,  and  pos* 
sessions :  he  signified  his  resolution  to  use  his  influence 
with  the  parliament  for  allowing  liberty  of  conscience  to 
att  his  subjects,  as  an  indulgence  agreeable  to  the  spirit 
of  the  Christian  religion,  and  conducive  to  the  wealth 
and  prosperity  of  the  nation.  He  said  bis  principal  care 
should  be,  to  heal  the  wounds  of  the  late  distractions ; 
to  restore  trade,  by  observing  the  act  of  navigation, 
which  had  been  lately  so  much  violated  in  favour  of 
Strangers  ;  to  put  the  navy  in  a  flourishing  condition; 
and  to  take  every  step  that  might  contribute  to  the 
greatness  of  the  monarchy,  and  the  happiness  of  the  peo- 
ple. He  concluded  with  professions  of  resignation  to 
the  Divine  Will,  declaring,  that  all  who/should  reject 
his  oilers  of  mercy,  and  appear  in  arms  against  him, 
would  be  answerable  to  Almighty  God  for  all  the  blood 

«  Those  excepted  were  the  fake  of  Ormond,  the  marquis  of  Win- 
chester, the  earls  of  Sunderland,  Bath,  Dauby,  and  Nottingham,  the  lords 
Newport,  DcUuuere,  Wiltshire,  Colchester,  Cornbury,  Dunblain,  and 
Churchill :  the  bishops  of  London  and  St  Asaph,  sir  Robert  Howard,  sir 
John  Worden,  sir  Samuel  brimstone,  air  Stephen  Fox,  sir  George  Tueby, 
sir  Basil  Dixwell,  sir  James  Oxenden,  Dr.  John  TilloUon,  Dr.  Gilbert 
Burnet ;  Francis  Russel,  Richard  Lcvison ;  John  Tren chard,  Charles 
Buncomb,  citizens  of  London ;  Edwards,  Stapleton,  and  Hunt,  fisher- 
men ;  and  *U  others  who  had  offered  personal  indignities  to  him  at  Fever- 
sham.;  or  had  been  concerned  in  the  barbarous  murder  of  John  Ashton 
Cross,  or  any  others  who  had  suffered  death  for  their  loyalty ;  and  all  spies, 
or  such  as  had  betrayed-bis  council  daring  his  late  absence  from  .England. 


148  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1008- 

that  should  be  spilt,  and  all  the  miseries  in  which  these 
kingdoms  might  be  involved  by  their  desperate  and  un- 
reasonable opposition. 

§  XXIV.  While  this  declaration  operated  variously 
on  the  minds  of  the  people,  colonel  Parker,  with  some 
other  officers,  enlisted  men  privately  for  the  service  of 
James,  in  the  counties  of  York,  Lancaster,  and  in  the 
bishoprick  of  Durham  :  at  the  same  time,  Fountaine  and 
Holeman  were  employed  in  raising  two  regiments  of 
horse  at  London,  that  they  might  join  their  master  irah 
mediately  after  his  landing.  His  partisans  sent  captain 
Lloyd  with  an  express  to  lord  Melfort,  containing  a  de- 
tail of  these  particulars,  with  ah  assurance  that  they  had 
brought  over  rear-admiral  Carter  to  the  interest  of  his 
majesty.  They  likewise  transmitted  a  list  of  the  ships 
that  composed  the  English  fleet,  and  exhorted  James  to 
use  his  influence  with  the  French  king,  that  the  count 
de  Tourville  might  be  ordered  to  attack  them  before 
they  should  be  joined  by  the  Dutch  squadron.  It  was 
in  consequence  of  this  advice,  that  Lewis  commanded 
Tourville  to  fall  upon  the  English  fleet,  even  without 
waiting  for  the  Toulon  squadron,  commanded  by  the 
marquis  d'Etrees.  By  this  time  James  had  repaired  to 
La  Hogue,  and  was  ready  to  embark  with  his  army, 
consisting  of  a  body  of  French  troops,  together  with 
some  English  and  Scotch  refugees,  and  the  regiments 
which  had  been  transported  from  Ireland  by  virtue  of 
the  capitulation  of  Limerick. 

§XXV,  The  ministry  of  England  was  informed  of 
all  these  particulars,  partly  by  some  agents  of  James* 
who  betrayed  his  cause,  and  partly  by  admiral  Carter^ 
who  gave  the  queen  to  understand  he  had  been  tamper- 
ed with ;  and  was  instructed  to  amuse  the  Jacobites  with 
a  negotiation.  King  William  no  sooner  arrived  in  Hol- 
land, than  he  hastened  the  naval  preparations  of  the 
Dutch,  so  that  their  fleet  was  ready  for  sea  sooner  than 
was  expected ;  and  when  he  received  the  first  intimation 


MM.  WILLIAM  AND  MARY;  149 

of  the  projected  descent,  he  detached  general  Ptolemache 
with  three  of  the  English  regiments  from  Holland. 
These,  reinforced  with  other  troops  remaining  in  Eng- 
land, were  ordered  to  encamp  in  the  neighbourhood  of 
Portsmouth.     The  queen  issued  a  proclamation,  com- 
manding all  Papists  to  depart  from  London  and  West- 
minster :  the  members  of  both  houses  of  parliament 
were  required  to  meet  on  the  24th  day  of  May,  that  she 
might  avail  herself  of  their  advice  in  such  a  perilous 
<x>njuncture.     Warrants  were  expedited  for  apprehend- 
ing divers  disaffected  persons;  and  they  withdrawing 
themselves  from  their  respective  places  of  abode,  a  pro- 
clamation was  published  for  discovering  and  bringing 
them  to  justice.     The  earls  of  Scarsdale.  Litchfield,  and 
Newburgh  ;  the  lords  Griffin,  Forbes,  sir  John  Fenwick, 
sir  Theophilus  Oglethorpe,  and  others,  found  means  to 
elude  the  search.    The  earls  of  Huntingdon  and  Mark 
borough  were  sent  to  the  Tower :  Edward  Ridley,  Kne« 
vitt,  Hastings,  and  Robert  Ferguson,  were  imprisoned 
in  Newgate.     The  bishop  of  Rochester  was  confined  to 
his  own  house :  the  lords  Brundenel  and  Fanshaw  were 
secured :  the  earls  of  Dunmore,  Middleton,  and  sir  An* 
drew  Forrester,  were  discovered  in  a  Quaker's  house, 
and  committed  to  prison,  with  several  other  persons  of 
distinction.     The  train-bands  of  London  and  Westmin- 
ster were  armed  by  the  queen's  direction,  and  she  review- 
ed them  \n  person :  admiral  Russel  was  ordered  to  put 
to  sea  with  all  possible  expedition ;  and  Carter,  with  a 
squadron  of  eighteen  sail,  continued  to  cruise  along  the 
French  coast,  to  observe  the  motions  of  the  enemy. 

§  3CXVL  On  the  1 1th  day  of  May,  Russel  sailed  from 
Rye  to  St.  Helen's,  where  he  was  joined  by  the  squa- 
drons under  Delaval .  and  Carter.  There  he  received  a 
letter  from  the  earl  of  Nottingham,  intimating,  that  a 
report  having  been  spread  of  the  queen's  suspecting  the 
fidelity  of  the  sea-officers,  her  majesty  had  ordered  him 
to  declare  in  her  name,  that  she  reposed  the  most  entire 


130  mSTOUY  OF£K0LAm>. 

confidence  in  their  attachment ;  and  believed  the  report 
was  raised  by  the  enemies  of  the  government.  The 
flag-offipers  and  captains  forthwith  drew  up  a  very  loyal 
and  dutiful  address,  which  was  graciously  received  by  the 
queen,  and  published  for  the  satisfaction  of  the  nation* 
Ilussel,  being  reinforced  by  the  Dutch  squadrons,  com- 
manded by  Allemonde,  Callemberg,  and  Vandergoes, 
set  sail  for  the  coast  of  France  on  the  J  8th  day  of  May, 
with  a  fleet  of  ninety-nine  ships  of  the  line,  besides  fri- 
gates and  fire-ships*  Next  day,  about  three  o'clock  in 
the  morning,  he  discovered  the  enemy,  under  the  count 
de  Tourville,  and  threw  out  the  signal  for  the  line  of 
battle,  which  by  eight  o'clock  was  formed  in  good  order, 
the  Dutch  in  the  van,  the  blue  division  in  the  rear,  and 
the  red  in  the  centre.  The  French  fleet  did  not  exceed 
sixty-three  ships  of  the  line,  and,  as  they  were  to  wind* 
ward,  Tourville  might  have  avoided  an  engagement: 
but  he  had  received  a  positive  order  to  fight,  on  the  sup- 
position that  the  Dutch  and  English  squadrons  had  not 
joined.  Lewis,  indeed,  was  apprised  of  their  junction 
before  they  were  descried  by  his  admiral,  to  whom  he 
dispatched  a  countermanding  order  by  two  several  ves- 
sels :  but  one  of  them  was  taken  by  the  English,  and 
the  other  did  not  arrive  till  the  day  after  the  engage- 
ment. 

§  XXVII.  Tourville,  therefore,  in  obedience  to  the 
first  mandate,  bore  down  alongside  of  Russel's  own  ship; 
which  he  engaged  at  a  very  small  distance.  He  fought 
with  great  fury  till  one  o'clock,  when  his  rigging  and 
sails  being  considerably  damaged,  his  ship,  the  Rising- 
Sun,  which  carried  one  hundred  and  four  cannon,  *vas 
towed  out  of  the  line  in  great  disorder.  Nevertheless, 
the  engagement  continued  till  three,  when  the  fleets 
were  parted  by  a  thick  fog.  When  this  abated,  the 
enemy  were  descried  flying  to  the  northward ;  and  Rus- 
sel  made  the  signal  for  chasing.  Part  of  the  blue 
squadron  came  up  with  the  eaemy  about  eight  in  the 


1«*.  WILLIAM  AND  MARY.  .  151 

evening,  and  engaged  them  half  an  hour,  during  which 
admiral  Carter  was  mortally  wounded.     Finding  him- 
self in  extremity,  he  exhorted  his  captain  to  fight  as 
long  as  the  ship  could  swim ;  and  expired  with  great 
composure.     At  length,  the  French  bore  away  for  Cor*- 
quet-road,  having  lost  four  ships  in  this  day's  action. 
Next  day,  about  eight  in  the  morning,  they  were  dis- 
covered crowding  away  to  the  westward,  and  the  com- 
bined fleets  chased  with  all  the  sail  they  could  Carry, 
until  Russel's  fore-topmast  came  by  the  board.    Though 
he  was  retarded  by  this  accident,  the  fleet  still  continued 
the  pursuit,  and  anchored  near  Cape  La  Hogue..    Oft 
the  2'2d  of  the  month,  about  seven  in  the  morning, 
part  of  the  French  fleet  was  perceived  near  the  Race  of 
Alderney,  some  at  anchor,  and  some  driving  to  the  east- 
ward with  the  tide  of  flood.     Russel,  and  the  ships 
nearest  him,  immediately  slipped  their  cables,  and  chased. 
The  Rising-Sun,  having  lost  her  masts,  ran  ashore  near 
Cherbourg,  wfrere  she  was  burned  by  sir  Ralph  Delaval, 
together  with  the  Admirable,  another  first-rate,  and  the 
Conquerant  of  eighty  guns.     Eighteen  other  ships  of 
their  fleet  ran  into  La  Hogue,  whei;e  they  were  attacked 
by  sir  George  Rooke,  who  destroyed  them,  and  a  great 
number  of  transports  laden  with  ammunition,  in  the 
midst  of  a  terrible  fire  from  the  enemy,  and  in  sight  bf 
the  Irish  camp.    Sir  John  Ashby,  with  his  own  squadron 
and  some  Dutch  ships,  pursued  the  rest  of  the  French 
fleet,  which  escaped  through  the  Race  of  Alderney,  by 
such  a  dangerous  passage  as  the  English  could  not  at- 
tempt, without  exposing  their  ships  to  the  most  immi- 
nent hazard.    This  was  a  very  mortifying  defeat  to  thfe 
Frerich  king,  who  had  been  so  long  flattered  with  an 
uninterrupted  series  of  victories :  it  reduced  James  to 
the  lowest  ebb  of  despondence,  as  it  frustrated  the  whole 
scheme  of  his  embarkation,  and  overwhelmed  his  friends 
in  England  with  grief  and  despair.    Some  historians 
allege,  that  Russel  did  not  improve  his  victory  with  all 


152  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1692. 

advantages  that  might  have  been  obtained,,  before  the 
enemy  recovered  of  their  consternation.     They  say  his 
affection  to  the  service  was  in  a  good  measure  cooled  by 
the  disgrace  of  his  friend  the  earl  of  Marlborough :  that 
he  hated  the  earl  of  Nottingham,  by  whose  channel  he 
received  his  orders;  and  that  he  adhered  to  the  letter, 
rather  than  to  the  spirit  of  his  instructions.    But  this  is 
a  malicious  imputation ;  and  a  very  ungrateful  return  for 
his  manifold  services  to  the  nation.     He  acted. in  this 
whole  expedition  with  the  genuine  spirit  of  a  British 
admiral.    He  plyed  from  the  Nore  to  the  Downs  with 
a  very  scanty  wind,  through  the  dangerous  sands,  con- 
trary to  the  advice  of  all  his  pilots ;  and  by  this  bold 
passage  effected  a  junction  of  the  different  squadrons, 
which  otherwise  the  French  would  have  attacked  singly, 
jand  perhaps  defeated.    He  behaved  with  great  gallantry 
during  the  engagement ;  and  destroyed  about  fifteen  of 
the  enemy's  capital  ships :  in  a  word,  he  obtained  such 
a  decisive  victory,  that,  during  the  remaining  part  of  the 
war,  the  French  would  not  hazard  another  battle  by  sea 
with  the  English. 

$  XXVIII.  Russel  having  ordered  sir  John  Ashby, 
end  the  Dutch  admiral  Callemberg,  to  steer  towards 
•  Havre  de  Grace,  and  endeavour  to  destroy  the  re- 
mainder of  the  French  fleet,  sailed  back  to  St  Helen's^ 
that  the  damaged  ships  might  be  refitted,  and  the  fleet 
furnished  with  fresh  supplies  of  provision  and  ammuni- 
tion ;  but  his  principal  motive  was,  to  take  on  board  a 
number  of  troops  provided  for  a  descent  upon  France, 
which  had  been  projected  by  England  and  Holland,  with 
a  view  to  alarm  and  distract  the  enemy  in  their  own 
dominions.  The  queen  was  so  pleased  with  the  victory, 
that  she  ordered  30,000/.  to  be  distributed  among  the 
sailors.  She  caused  medals  to  be  struck  in  honour  of 
the  action ;  and  the  bodies  of  admiral  Carter  and  captain 
Hastings;  who  had  been  killed  in  the  battle,  to  be  inter- 
red with  great  funeral  pomp.    In  the  latter  end  of  July, 


161)2.  WILLIAM  AND  MARY.  153 

seven  thousand  men,  commanded  by  the  duke  of  Lein- 
ste*",  embarked  on  lx>ard  transports,  to  be  landed  at  St. 
Maloes,  Brest,  or  Rochefort ;  and  the  nation  conceived 
the  most  sanguine  hopes  of  this  expedition.  A  council 
of  war,  consisting  of  land  and  sea- officers,  being  held  on 
board  the  Breda,  to  deliberate  upon  the  scheme  of  the 
ministry,  the  members  unanimously  agreed,  that  the 
season  was  too  far  advanced  to  put  it  in  execution. 
Nevertheless,  the  admiral  having  detached  sir  John 
Ashby  with  a  squadron,  to  intercept  the  remains  of  the 
French  fleet,  in  their  passage  from  St.  Maloes  to  Brest, 
set  sail  for  La  Hogue  with  the  rest  of  the  fleet  and 
transports:  but,  in  a  few  days,  the  wind  shifting,  he  was 
obliged  to  return  to  St.  Helen's. 

§  XXIX.   The  queen   immediately  dispatched   the 
marquis  of  Caermarthen,  the  earls  of  Devonshire,  Dor- 
set, Nottingham,  and  Rochester,  together  with  the  lords 
Sydney  and  Cornwall  is,  to  consult  with  the  admiral, 
who  demonstrated  the  impracticability  of  making  an 
effectual  descent  upon  the  coast  of  France,  at  that  sea- 
son of  the  year.     The  design  was  therefore  laid  aside ; 
and  ,  the  forces  were  transported  to   Flanders.     The 
higher  the  hopes  of  the  nation  had  been  raised  by  this 
N  armament,  the  deeper  they  felt  the  disappointment.     A 
loud  clamour  was  raised  against  the  ministry,  as  the 
authors  of  this  miscarriage.     The  people  complained, 
that  they  were  plundered  and  abused:  that  immense 
sums  were  extorted  from  them  by  the  most  grievous 
impositions :  that,  by  the  infamous  expedient  of  borrow- 
ing upon  established  funds,  their  taxes  were  perpetuated : 
that  their  burdens  would  daily    increase:    that  their 
treasure  was  either  squandered  away  in  chimerical  pro- 
jects, or  expended  in  foreign  connexions,  of  which  Eng- 
land was  naturally  independent.    They  were  the  more 
excusable  for  exclaiming  in  this  manner,  as  their  trade 
had  suffered  grievously  by  the  French  privateers,  which 
swarmed  in  the  Channel.    In  vain  the  merchants  had 


J  64  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  im% 

recourse  to  the  admiralty ,  which  could  not  spare  parti- 
cular convoys,  while  large  fleets  were  required  for  the 
defence  of  the  nation.  The  French  king,  having  no- 
thing farther  to  apprehend  from  the  English  armament, 
withdrew  his  troops  from  the  coast  of  Normandy ;  .and 
James  returned  in  despair  to  St.  Germain 3,  where  his 
queen  had  been,  in  his  absence,  delivered  of  a  daughter, 
who .  was  born  in  the  presence  of  the  archbishop  of 
Paris,  the  keeper  of  the  seals,  and  other  persons  of  dis- 
tinction. 

§  XXX.  Lewis  had  taken  the  field  in  the  latter  end 
of  May,  On  the  20th  day  of  that  month  he  arrived  at 
his  camp  in  Flanders,  with  all  the  effeminate  pomp  of  an 
Asiatic  emperor,  attended  by  his  women  and  parasites, 
his  band  of  music*  his  dancers,  his  opera,  and,  in  a  word, 
by  all  the  ministers  >of  luxury  and  .sensual  pleasure, 
paving  reviewed  his  army,  which  amounted  to  about 
one  hundred  and  twenty  thousand  men,  he  undertook 
the  siege  of  Namur,  which  he  invested  on  both  sides  of 
the  Sambre,  with  about  one  half  of  his  army,  while  the 
other  covered  the  siege,  under  the  command  of  Luxem- 
bourg. Namur  is  situated  on  the  conflux  of  the  Meuse 
and  the  Sambre.  The  citadel  was  deemed  one  of  the 
strongest  forts  in  Flanders,  strengthened  with  a  new 
work  contrived  by  the  famous  engineer  Coehorn,  who 
now  defended  it  in  person.  The  prince  de  Barbason 
commanded  the  garrison,  consisting  of  nine  thousand 
men.  The  place  was  well  supplied ;  and  the  governor 
knew  that  king  William  would  make  strong  efforts  for 
its  relief:  so  that  the  besieged  were  animated  with  many 
concurring  considerations.  Notwithstanding  these  ad- 
vantages, the  assailants  carried  on  their  attacks  with  such 
vigour,  that  in  seven  days  after  the  trenches  were  open- 
ed the  town  capitulated,  and  the  garrison  retired  into 
the  citadel.  King  William,  being  joined  by  the  troops 
pf  Brandenburgh  and  Liege,  advanced  to  the  Mehaigne* 
$t  .the  .head  of  one  hundred  thpusand  effective  men,  and 


encamped  within  cannon  shot  of  Luxembourg's  army, 
which  lay  on  the  other  side  of  the  river.  That  general, 
however,  had  taken  such  precautions,  that  the  king  of 
England  could  not  interrupt  the  siege,  nor  attack  the 
French  lines  without  great  disadvantage.  The  besiegers, 
encouraged  by  the  presence  of  their  monarch,  and  as- 
sisted by  the  superior  abilities  of  Vauban,  their  engineer, 
repeated  their  attacks  with  such  impetuosity,  that  the 
fort  of  Coehorn  was  surrendered,  after  a  very  obstinate 
defence,  in  which  he  himself  had  been  dangerously 
wounded.  The  citadel  being  thus  left  exposed  to  the 
approaches  of  the  enemy,  could  not  long  withstand  the 
violence  of  their  operations.  The  two  covered  ways 
were  taken  by  assault ;  on  the  20th  of  May  the  governor 
capitulated,  to  the  unspeakable  mortification  of  king 
William,  who  saw  himself  obliged  to  lie  inactive  at  the 
head  of  a  powerful  army,  and  be  an  eye-witness  of  the 
loss  of  the  most  important  fortress  in  the  Nethei  lands. 
Lewis,  having  taken  possession  of  the  place,  returned  in 
triumph  to  Versailles,  where  he  was  flattered  with  all  the 
arts  of  adulation  ;  while  William's  reputation  suffered  a 
little  from  his  miscarriage,  and  the  prince  of  Barbason 
incurred  the  suspicion  of  treachery  or  misconduct. 

$  XXXI.  Luxembourg  having  placed  a  strong  garri- 
son in  Namur,  detached  Boufflers  with  a  body  of  troops 
to  La  Bassiere,  and  with  the  rest  of  his  army  encamped 
at  Soiguies.  The  king  of  England  sent  off  detachments 
towards  Liege  and  Ghent ;  and  on  the  6th  day  of  July 
posted  himself  at  Genap,  resolved  to  seize  the  first  op~ 
portunity  of  retrieving  his  honour,  by  attacking  the 
enemy.  Having  received  intelligence  that  the  French 
general  was  in  motion,  and  intended  to  take  post  between 
Steenkirk  and  Enghien,  he  passed  the  river  Senne,  in 
order  to  anticipate  his  purpose  :  but,  in  spite  of  all  his 
diligence,  Luxembourg  gained  his  point ;  and  William 
encamped  at  Lembeck,  within  six  miles  of  the  French 
army*    Here  he  resolved,  in  a  council  of  war,  to  attack 


166  AlSTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  160*. 

the  enemy ;  and  every  disposition  was  made  for  that 
purpose.  The  heavy  baggage  he  ordered  to  be  conveyed 
to  the  other  side  of  the  Senne ;  and  one  Millevoix,  a 
detected  spy,  was  compelled,  by  menaces,  to  mislead 
Luxembourg  with  false  intelligence,  importing  that  he 
need  not  be  alarmed  at  the  motions  of  the  allies,  who 
intended  the  next  day  to  make  a  general  forage.  On  the 
24th  day  of  July,  the  army  began  to  move  from  the  left, 
in  two  columns,  as  the  ground  would  not  admit  of  their 
inarching  in  an  extended  front.  The  prince  of  Wirtem- 
berg  began  the  attack  on  the  right  of  the  enemy,  at  the 
head  of  ten  battalions  of  English,  Danish,  and  Dutch 
infantry :  he  was  supported  by  a  considerable  body  of 
British  horse  and  foot,  commanded  by  lieutenant-general 
Mackay .  Though  the  ground  was  intersected  by  hedges, 
ditches,  and  narrow  defiles,  the  prince  marched  with 
such  diligence,  that  he  was  in  a  condition  to  begin  the 
battle  about  two  in  the  afternoon,  when  he  charged  the 
French  with  such  impetuosity,  that  they  were  driven 
from  their  posts,  and  their  whole  camp  became  a  scene 
of  tumult  and  confusion.  Luxembourg,  trusting  to  the 
intelligence  he  had  received,  allowed  himself  to  be  sur- 
prised ;  and  it  required  the  full  exertion  of  his  superior 
talents,  to  remedy  the  consequences  of  his  neglect.  He 
forthwith  forgot  a  severe  indisposition  under  which  he 
then  laboured ;  he  rdllied  his  broken  battalions :  he  drew 
up  his  forces  in  order  of  battle,  and  led  them  to  the 
charge  in  person.  The  duke  de  Chartres,  who  was  then 
in  the  fifteenth  year  of  his  age,  the  dukes  of  Bourbon 
and  Vendome,  the  prince  of  Gonti,  and  a  great  number 
of  volunteers  of  the  first  quality,  put  themselves  at  the 
head,  of  the  household  troops,  and  fell  with  great  fury 
upon  the  English,  who  were  very  ill  supported  by  count 
Solmes,  the  officer  who  commanded  the  centre  of  the 
allies.  The  prince  of  Wirtemberg  had  taken  one  of 
the  enemies'  batteries,  and  actually  penetrated  into  their 
lines ;  but  finding  himself  in  danger  of  being  overpowered 


Ittfc  WILLIAM  AND  MARY.  1,57 

by  numbers,  he  sent  an  aide-de-camp  twice,  to  demand 
Succours  from  Sblmes,  who  derided  his  distress,  saying, 
"  Let  us  see  what  sport  these  English  bull-dogs  will 
make."  At  length,  when  the  king  sent  an  express  order, 
commanding  him  to  sustain  the  left  wing,  he  made  a 
motion  with  his  horse,  which  could  not  act  while  his 
infantry  kept  their  ground ;  and  the  British  troops,  with 
a  few  Dutch  and  Danes,  bore  the  whole  brunt  of  the 
engagement.  They  fought  with  surprising  courage  and 
perseverance  against  dreadful  odds ;  and  the  event  of  the 
battle  continued  doubtful,  until  Boufflers  joined  the 
French  army  with  a  great  body  of  dragoons.  The  allies 
could  not  sustain  the  additional  weight  of  this  reinforce* 
ment,  before  which  they  gave  way,  though  the  retreat 
Was  made  in  tolerable  order;  and  the  enemy  did  not 
think  proper  to  prosecute  the  advantage  they  had  gained. 
In  this  action  the  confederates  lost  the  earl  of  Angus, 
general  Mackay,  sir  John  Lanier,  sir  Robert  Douglas, 
and  many  other  gallant  officers,  together  with  about 
three  thousand  men  left  dead  on  the  spot,  the  same 
number  wounded  or  taken,  a  great  many  colours  and 
standards,  and  several  pieces  of  cannon. 
*  §  XXXII.  The  French,  however,  reaped  no  soUd 
advantage  from  this  victory,  which  cost  them  about  three 
thousand  men,  including  the  prince  of  Turenne,  the 
marquis  de  Bellefond,  Tilladet,  and  Fernacoh,  with 
many  officers  of  distinction  :  as  for  Millevoix  the  spy, 
he  was  hanged  on  a  tree,  on  the  right  wing  of  the  allied 
army.  King  William  retired  unmolested  to  his  own 
camp;  and,  notwithstanding  all  his  overthrows,  conti- 
nued a  respectable  enemy,  by  dint  of  invincible  fortitude, 
and  a  genius  fruitful  in  resources.  That  he  was  formid- 
able to  the  French  nation,  even  in  the  midst  of  his  ill 
success,  appears  from  divers  undeniable  testimonies, 
and  from  none  more  than  from  the  extravagance  of  joy 
expressed  by  the  people  of  France,  on  occasion  of  this 
unimportant  victory.    When  the  princes  who  served  in 

VOL.  I.  *m 


168  HiaDORY  OF  ENGLANi),  Iff* 

the  battle  returned  to  Paris,  the  needs  through  which 
they  passed  were  almost  blocked  up  with  multitudes ; 
and  the  whole  air  resounded  with  acclamation.    AJ1  the 
ornaments  of  the  fashion  peculiar  to  both  sexes  adopted 
the  name  of  Steenkirk :  every  individual  who  had  been 
personally  engaged. in  the  action  was  revered  as  a  being 
of  a  superior  species,  and  the  transports  of  the  women 
rose  almost  to  a  degree  of  frenzy* 
.   $  XXXIII.  The  French  ministry  did  not  entirely  de- 
pend upon  the  fortuneof  the  war  for  the  execution  of  their 
revenge  against  king  William.    They  likewise  employed 
assassins  to  deprive  him  of  life,  in  the  most  treacherous 
manner.     When  Louvois  died,  his  son,  the  marquis  de 
Barbesieux,  who  succeeded  him  in  his  office  of  secretary, 
found,  among  his  papers,  the  draft  of  a  scheme  for  this 
purpose,  and  immediately  revived  the  design,  by  means 
of  the  chevalier  de  Grandval,  a  captain  of  dragoons  in 
the  service.    He  and  colonel  Parker  engaged  one  Du- 
mont,  who  undertook  to  assassinate  king  William. 
Madame  de  Maintenon,  and  Paparel,  paymaster  to  the 
French  army,  were  privy  to  the  scheme,  which  they 
encouraged :  the  conspirators  are  said  to  have  obtained 
an  audience  of  king  James,  who  approved  of  their  un- 
dertaking, and  assured  them  of  his  protection ;  but  that 
unfortunate  monarch  was  unjustly  charged  with  the 
guilt  of  countenancing  the  intended  murder,  as  they 
communicated  nothing  to  him  but  an  attempt  to  seize 
the  person  of  the  prince  of  Orange:    Dumont  actually 
enlisted  in  the  confederate  army,  that  he  might  have  the 
better  opportunity  to  shoot  the  king  of  England,  when 
he  should  ride  out  to  visit  the  lines,  while  Grandval  and 
Parker  repaired. to  the  French  camp,  with  orders  to 
Luxembourg,  to  furnish  them  with  a  party  of  horse  for 
Jthe  rescue  of  Dumont,  after  the  blow  should  be.  struck. 
Whether  this  man's  heart  failed  him,  or  he  could  not 
find  the  opportunity  he  desired,  after  having  resided 
some  weeks  in  the  camp  of  the  allies,  he  retired  to  Han- 


1&L  WILLIAM  AND  MARY.  159 

over :  but  still  corresponded  with  Grandval  and  Barbe- 
sieux.  This  last  admitted  one  Leefdale,  a  Dutch  baron, 
into  the  secret,  and  likewise  imparted  it  to  monsieur 
Chanlats,  quarter-master-general  of  the  French  army> 
who  animated  Grandval  and  Leefdale  with  the  promise 
of  a  considerable  reward,  and  promised  to  co-operate  with 
Parker  for  bringing  off  Dumont,  for  this  assassin  still 
persisted  in  his  undertaking.  Leefdale  had  been  sent 
from  Holland,  on  purpose  to  dive  to  the  bottom  of  this 
conspiracy,  in  consequence  of  advice  given  by  the  British 
envoy  at  Hanover,  where  Dumont  had  ^dropped  some 
hints  that  alarmed  his  suspicion.  The  Dutchman  not 
only  insinuated  himself  into  the  confidence  of  the  con- 
spirators, but  likewise  inveigled  Grandval  to  Eyndhoveri, 
where  he  was  apprehended.  Understanding  that  Du- 
mont had  already  discovered  the  design  to  the  duke  of 
#ell,  and  that  he  himself  had  been  betrayed  by  Leefdale, 
he  freely  confessed  all  the  particulars,  without  enduring 
the  torture ;  and,  being  found  guilty  by  a  court-martial, 
was  executed  as  a  traitor. 

§  XXXIV.  About  this  period  the  duke  of  Leinster 
arrived  at  Ostend,  with  the  troops  which  had  been  em* 
barked  at  St  Helen's.  He  was  famished  with  cannon 
sent  down  the  Meuse  from  Maestricht ;  and  reinforced 
by  a  large  detachment  from  the  king's  camp  at  Gramont, 
under  the  command  of  general  Ptolemache.  He  took 
possession  of  Furnes,  was  joined  by  the  earl  of  Portland 
and  M.  d'Auverquerque,  and  a  disposition  wap  made  for 
investing  Dunkirk :  but,  on  farther  deliberation,  the  en- 
terprise was  thought  very  dangerous,  and  therefore  laid 
aside.  Furnes  and  Dixmuyde,  lately  reduced  by  brigadier 
Ramsay,  were  strengthened  with  new  works,  and  secured 
by  strong  garrisons.  The  cannon  were  sent  back,  and  the 
troops  returning  to  Ostend,  re-embarked  for  England^ 
This  fruitless  expedition,  added  to  the  inglorious  issue 
of  the  campaign,  increased  the  ill  humour  of  the  Bri- 
tish nation.    They  taxed  William  with  having  lain  in- 

M  3 


100  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1692 

active  at  Gramont  with  an  army  of  one  hundred  thou- 
sand men,  while  Luxembourg  was  posted  at  Courtray  with 
half  that  number.  They  said,  if  he  had  found  the  French 
lines  too  strong  to  be  forced,  he  might  have  passed  the 
Scheldt  higher  up,and  not  only  laid  the  enemy's  conquests 
under  contribution,  but  even  marched  into  the  bowels"  of 
France ;  arid  they  complained  that  Furnes  and  Dix- 
rnuyde  were  not  worth  the  sums  expended  in  maintain- 
ing their  garrisons.  On  the  26th  day  of  September, 
king  William  left  the  army  under  the  command  of  the 
elector  of  Bavaria,  and  repaired  to  his  house  at  Loo  r  in 
two  days  after  his  departure,  the  camp  at  Gramont  was 
.broke  up;  the  infantry  marched  toMarienkerke,  and  the 
horse  to  Caure.  On  the  16th  day  of  October,  the  kiftg 
receiving  intelligence  that  Boufflers  had  invested  Char- 
leroy^  and  Luxembourg  taken  post  in  the  neighbour- 
hood of  Conde,  ordered  the  troops  to  be  immediately 
re-assembled  between  the  village  of  Ixells  and  Halle, 
with  design  to  raise  the  siege,  and  repaired  to  Brussels, 
where  he  held  a  council  of  war,  in  which  the  proper 
measures  were  concerted.  He  then  returned  to  Hol- 
land, leaving  the  command  with  the  elector  of  Bavaria, 
who  forthwith  began  his  march  for  Charleroy,  At  his 
approach  Boufflers  abandoned  the  seige,  and  moved  tor 
wards  Philipville.  The  elector  having  reinforced  the 
place,  and  thrown  supplies  into  Aeth,  distributed  his 
forces  into  winter-quarters.  Then  Luxembourg,  who 
had  cantoned  his  army  between  Conde,  Leuzet,  and 
Tournay,  returned  to  Paris,  leaving  Boufflers  to  com- 
mand in  his  absence. 

§  XXXV.  The  allies  had  been  unsuccessful  in  Flan- 
ders, and  they  were  not  fortunate  in  Germany.  The 
landgrave  of  Hesse  Cassel  undertook  the  seige  of  Ebe- 
remburgh,  which,  however,  he  was  obliged  to  abandon. 
The  duke  de  Lorges,  who  commanded  the  French 
forces  o«  the  Rhine,  surprised,  defeated*  and  took*  the 
4uke  of  Wirjemberg,  who  had  posted  himself  with  four 


HOT.  WILLIAM  AND  MARY.  161 

thousand  horse  near  Eidelsheim,  to  check  the  progress 
of  the  enemy.      Count  Tallard  having  invested  Rhine- 
field,  the  landgrave  marched  to  its  relief  with  such  ex- 
pedition, that  the  French  were  obliged  to  desist,  and 
retreat  with  considerable  damage.     The  elector  of  Sax- 
ony had  engaged  to  bring  an  army  into  the  field :  but 
he  complained  that  the  emperor  left  the  burden  of  the' 
war  with  France  upon  the  princes,  and  converted  his 
chief  power  and  attention  to  the  campaign  in  Hungary.* 
A  jealousy  and  misunderstanding  ensued :  Schoening 
the  Saxon  general,  in  his  way  to  the  hot-baths  at  Dab-' 
litz  in  Bohemia,  was  seized  by  the  emperor's  order,  on 
suspicion  of  having  maintained  a  private  correspondence 
with  the  enemy,  and  very  warm  expostulations  on  this 
subject  passed  between  the  courts  of  Vienna  and  Dres- 
den.    Schoening  was  detained  two  years  in  custody, 
and  at  length  released,  on  condition  that  he  should 
never  be  employed  again  in  the  empire.    The  war  in 
Hungary  produced  no  event  of  importance.     The  mi- 
nistry of  the  Ottoman  Porte  was  distracted  by  factions, 
and  the  seraglio  threatened  with  tumults.     The  people* 
were  tired  of  maintaining  an  unsuccessful  war ;  the  visir 
was  deposed ;  and  in  the  midst  of  this  confusion,  the  gar- 
rison of  Great  Waradin,  which  had  been  blocked  up  by 
the  imperialists  during -the  whole  winter,  surrendered  on 
capitulation.  Lord  Paget,  the  English  ambassador  at  Vi- 
enna, was  sent  to  Constantinople,  with  powers  to  mediate 
a  peace:  but  the  terms  offered  by  the  emperor  were  reject- 
ed at  the  Porte :  the  Turkish  army  lay  upon  the  defen- 
sive, and  the  season  was  spent  in  a  fruitless  negotiation. 

§  XXXVI.  The  prospect  of  affairs  in  Piedmont  was 
favourable  for  the  allies :  but  the  court  of  France  had 
brought  the  pope  to  an  accommodation,  and  began  to 
tamper  with  the  duke  of  Savoy.  M.  Chanlais  was  sent 
to  Turin,,  with  advantageous  proposals,  which,  however, 
the  duke  would,  not  accept,  because  he  thought  himself 
entitled  to  better  terms," considering  that  the  allied  army 
in  Piedmont  amounted  to  fifty  thousand  effective  men, 


102  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  ttft*. 

while  Catinat's  forces  were  not  sufficient  to  defend  his 
conquests  in  that  country.  In  the  month  of  July  the 
duke  marched  into  Dauphine,  where  he  plundered  a 
number  of  villages,  and  reduced  the  fortress  of  Guilles- 
tre ;  then  passing  the  river  Darance,  he  invested  Am- 
bran,  which,  after  a  siege  of  nine  days,  surrendered  on 
capitulation :  he  afterward  laid  all  the  neighbouring 
towns  under  contribution.  Here  duke  Schomberg,  who 
commanded  the  auxiliaries  in  the  English  pay,  publish- 
ed a  declaration,  in  the  name  of  king  William,  inviting 
the  people  to  join  his  standard,  assuring  them  that  his 
master  had  no  other  design  in  ordering  his  troops  to  in- 
vade France,  but  that  of  restoring  the  noblesse  to  their 
ancient  splendour,  their  parliaments  to  their  former  au- 
thority, and  the  people  to  their  just  privileges.  He  even 
offered  his  protection  to  the  clergy,  and  promised  to  use 
his  endeavours  for  reviving  the  edict  of  Nantes,  which 
had  been  guaranteed  by  the  kings  of  England.  These 
offers,  however,  produced  little  effect ;  and  the  Ger- 
mans ravaged  the  whole  country,  in  revenge  for  the 
cruelties  which  the  French  had  committed  in  the  pala- 
tinate. The  allied  army  advanced  from  Ambrun  to 
Gap,  on  the  frontiers  of  Provence,  and  this  place  sub* 
mitted  without  opposition.  The  inhabitants  of  Greno- 
ble, the  capital  of  Dauphine,  and  even  of  Lyons,  were 
overwhelmed  with  consternation ;  and  a  fairer  opportu- 
nity of  humbling  France  could  never  occur,  as  that 
part  of  the  kingdom  had  been  left  almost  quite  defence- 
less :  but  this  was  fatally  neglected,  either  from  the 
spirit  of  dissension  which  began  to  prevail  in  the  allied 
army,  or  from  the  indisposition  of  the  duke  of  Savoy, 
who  was  seized  with  the  srhall-po*  in  the  midst  of  this 
expedition ;  or,  lastly,  from  his  want  of  sincerity;  which 
was  shrewdly  suspected.  He  is  said  to  have  maintained 
a  constant  correspondence  with  the  court  of  Versailles, 
in  complaisance  to  which  he  retarded  the  operations .  of 
the  confederates.  Certain  it  is,  he  evacuated  all  his 
conquests,  qnd  about  the  middle  of  September  quitted 


1699.  WILLIAM  AND  MARY.  103 

the  French  territories,  after  having,  pillaged  '  fend  laid 
waste  the  country  through  which  he  had  penetrated  * 
In  Catalonia  the  French  attempted  nothing  of  import- 
ance during  this  campaign,  and  the  Spaniards  were 
wholly  inactive  in  that  province. 

§  XXXVIL  The  Protestant  interest  in  Germany  ac- 
quired an  accession  of  strength,  by  the  creation  of  a 
ninth  electorate  in  favour  of  Ernest  Augustus,  duke  of 
Hanover.  He  had,  by  this  time,  renounced  all  his  con* 
nexions  with  France,  and  engaged  to  enter  heartily  into 
the  interest  of  the  allies,  in  consideration  of  his  obtain- 
ing the  electoral  dignity.  King  William  exerted  him* 
self  so  Vigorously  in  his  behalf  lit  the  court  of  Vienna, 
that  the  emperor  agreed  to  the  proposal,  in  case  the 
consent  of  the  other  electors  could  be  procured.  This 
assent,  however,  was  extorted  by  the  importunities  of 
the  king  of  England,  whom  he  durst  uot  disoblige. 
Leopold  was  blindly  bigoted  to  the  religion  of  Rome, 
and  consequently  averse  to  a  new  creation*  that  would 
weaken  the  Catholic  interest  in  the  electoral  college* 
He  therefore  employed  his  emissaries  to  thwart  the 
duke's  measures.  Some  Protestant  princes  opposed  him 
from  motives  of  jealousy,  and  the  French  king  used  all 
his  artifice  and  influence,  to  prevent  the  elevation  of  the 
house  of  Hanover.  When  the  duke  had  surmounted 
all  this  opposition,  so  far  as  to  gain  over  a  majority  of 
the  electors*  new  objections  were  started.  The  empe- 
ror suggested  that  another  popish  electorate  should  be 
created,  to  balance  the  advantage  which  the  Lutherans 
would  reap  from  that  of  Hahover ;  and  he  proposed 
that  Austria  should  be  raised  to  the  same  dignity :  but 
violent  opposition  was  made  to  this  expedient,  which 
would  have  vested  the  emperor  with  a  double  vote  in 
the  electoral  college.    At  length,  after  a  tedious  nego- 

B  At  this  period  queen  Mary,  understanding  that  the  Protestant  Van- 
dois  vrer©  destitute  off  ministers  to  preach  or  teach  the  gospel,  established 
a  fond  from  her  own  privy-parse,  to  maintain  ten  preachers,  and  as  many 
schoolmasters,  in  the  valleys  of  Piedmont 


164  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1002. 

tiation,  the  duke  of  Hanover,  on  the  10th  day  of.De- 
cember,  was  honoured  with  the  investiture,  as  elector 
of  Brunswick ;  created  great-qiarshal  of  the  empire* 
and  did  homage  to  the  emperor  :  nevertheless,  he  wasi 
not  yet  admitted  into  the  college,  because  he  had  not 
been  able  to  procure  the  unanimous  consent  of  all  the 
electors.11 


CHAP.  IV. 

§  I.  False  information  against  the  earl  of  Marlborough,  Che  bishop  of 
Rochester,  and  others — §  II.  Sources  of  national  discontent— §  III. 
Dissension  between  the  queen  and  the  princess  Anne  of  Denmark — 
§  IV.  The  house  of  lords  vindicate  their  privileges  in  behalf  of  their 
imprisoned  members — §  V.  The  commons  present  addresses  to  the 
king  and  queen— §  VI.  They  acquit  admiral  Rnssel,  and  resolve  to 
advise  bis  majesty — §  VII.  They  comply  with  all  the  demands  of  the 
ministry — §  VIII.  The  lords  present  an  address  of  advice  to  the  king 
— -§  IX.  Dispute  between  the  lords  and  commons  concerning  admiral 
Rnssel*- §  X.  The  commons  address  the  king.  They  establish  the 
land-tax  and  other  impositions — §  XI.  Burnet's  pastoral  letter  burned 
by  the  hangman — §  XII.  Proceedings  of  the  lower  house  against  the 
practice  of  kidnapping  men  for  the  service-*-^  X11I.  The  two  houses 
address  the  king  on  the  grievances  of  Ireland — §  XIV.  An  account 
of  the  place  bill,  and  that  for  triennial  parliaments — §  XV.  The  com-' 
Bions  petition  his  majesty  that  he  would  dissolve  the  East  India  com- 
pany— %  XVI.  Trial  of  lord  Mohun  for  murder.  Alterations  in  the 
ministry— §  XVII.  The  king  repairs  to  the  continent,  and  assembles 
the  confederate  army  in  Flanders — §  XVIII.  The  French  reduce 

'  Huy— §  XIX.  Luxembourg  resolves  to  attack  the  allies— §  XX. 
Who  are  defeated  at  Landen — §  XXI.  Charleroy  is  besieged  and  taken 
by  the  enemy — §  XXII.  Campaign  on  the  Rhine.  The  duke  of  Sa- 
voy is  defeated  by  Catinat  in  the  plain  of  Marsaglia — §  XXIII. 
Transactions  in  Hungary  and  Catalonia— §  XXIV.  Naval  anairs—r 
§  XXV.  A  fleet  of  merchant  ships,  under  convoy  of  sir  George  Rooke, 
attacked,  and  partly  destroyed,  by  the  French  squadrons— §  XXVI. 
Wheeler's  expedition  to  the  West  Indies— §  XXVII.  ficnbow  bonk. 

*  lathe  beginning  of  September  the  shock  of  an  earthquake  was  felt 
in  London,  and  many  other  parts  of  England,  as  well  as  in  France,  Ger- 
many, and  the  Netherlands.  Violent  agitations  of  the  same  kind  had 
happened  about  two  months  before  in  Sicily  and  Malta ;  and  the  town 
of  Port-Royal,  in  Jamaica  was  almost  totally  ruined  by  an  earthquake ; 
the  place  was  so  suddenly  overflowed,;  that  about  fifteen  hundred  persona 
perished. 


10ft*.  WILLIAM  AND  MARY.  165 

bards  St.  Maloes— 4  XXVIII.  The  Frenoh  king  has  recourse  to  iho 
mediation  of  Denmark — §  XXIX.  Severity  of  the  government  against 
the  Jacobites— §  XX X.  Complaisance  of  the  Scottish  parliament — 
§  XXXI.  The  king  returns  to  England,  makes  some  changes  hi  the 
ministry,  and  opens  the  session  of  parliament— §  XXXII.   Both 
houses  inquire  into  the  miscarriages  by  sea — §  XXXIII.  The  com- 
mons grant  a  vast  sum  for  the  services  of  the  ensuing  year — §  XXXIV. 
The  king  rejects  the.  bill  against  free  and  impartialproceedings  in  par* 
liament;  and  the  lower  bouse  remonstrates  on  this  subject — §  XXXV. 
Establishment  of  the  bank  of  England—- §  XXXVI.  The  East  India 
company  "obtain  a  new  charter — §  XXXVII.  Bill  for  a  general  natu- 
ralization dropped— §  XXX VI II.  Sir  Francis  Wheeler  perishes  in  a 
storm — §  XXXIX.  The  English  attempt  to  make  a  descent  in  Ca- 
maret-bay,  but  are  repulsed  with  loss — §  XL.  They  bombard  Dieppe, 
Havre-de-tGrace,  Dunkirk,  and  Calais— §  XLI.  Admiral  Russel  sails 
for  the  Mediterranean,  relieves  Barcelona,  and  winters  at  Cadiz — 
§  XLII.  Campaign  in  Flanders— §  XLIII.  The  allies  reduce  Huy — 
§  XLIV.  The  prince  of  Baden  passes  the  Rhine,  but  is  obliged  to  re- 
.  pass  that  river.    Operations  in  Hungary— §  XLV.  Progress  of  the 
French  in  Catalonia.    State,  of  the  war  in  Piedmont— §  XLVI.  The 
king  returns  to  England.  The  parliament  meets.   TJie  bill  for  triennial 
parliaments  receives  the  royal  assent— §  XLVII.  Death  of  archbishop 
Tillotson  and  of  queen  Mary— §  XLVI II.  Reconciliation  between  the 
king  and  the  princess  of  Denmark. 

§  I.  Whilb  king  William  seemed  wholly  engrossed 
by  the  affairs  of  the  continent,  England  was  distracted 
by  domestic  dissension,  and  overspread  with  vice,  cor- 
ruption, and  profeneness.  Over  and  above  the  Jacobites,  . 
there. was  a  set  of  malecon  tents,  whose  number  daily 
increased.    They  not  only  murmured  at  the  grievances 
of, the  nation,  but  composed  and  published  elaborate 
dissertations  upon  the  same  subject.     These  made  such 
impressions,  upon  the  people,  already  irritated  by  heavy 
burdens,  distressed  in  their  trade,  and  disappointed  iri 
their  sanguine  expectations,  that  the  queen  thought  it 
necessary  to  check  the  progress  of  those  writers,  by  is- 
suing out  a  proclamation,  offering  a  reward  to  such  as 
would  discover  seditious  libellers.     The  earl  of  Marl- 
borough had  been  committed  to  the  Tower, -on  the  in- 
formation of  ojne  Robert  Young,  a  prisoner  in  Newgate, 
who  had  forged  that  nobleman's  hand-writing,  and  con- 
trived, the  scheme  of  an  association  in  favour  of  king 
James,  to.  which.  h$  affixed  the  names  of  the  earls  of 


166  HISTORY  OF  EKGLAND.  1*90. 

Marlborough  and  Salisbury,  Sprat,  bishop  of  Rochester, 
the  lord  Cornbury,  and  sir  Basil  Firebrace.  One  of 
his  emissaries  had  found  means  to  conceal  this  paper  in 
a  certain  part  of  the  bishop's  house  at  Bromley  in  Kent, 
where  it  was  .found  by  the  king's  messengers,  who  se- 
cured the  prelate  in  consequence  of  Young's  information. 
But  he  vindicated  himself  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  whole 

« 

council ;  and  the  forgery  of  the  informer  was  detected 
by  the  confession  of  his  accomplice.  Hie  bishop  ob- 
tained his  release  immediately,  and  the  earl  of  Marl- 
borough was  admitted  to  bail  in  the  court  of  kingV 
bench. 

§  II.  So  many  persons  of  character  and  distinction 
had  been  imprisoned  during  this  reign,  upon  the  slight- 
est suspicion,  that  the  discontented  part  of  the  nation 
had  some  reason  to  insinuate,  they  had  only  exchanged 
one  tyrant  for  another.  They  affirmed,  that  the  habeas 
corpus  act  was  either  insufficient  to  protect  the  subject 
from  fake  imprisonment,  or  had  been  shamefully  mis* 
used.  They  expatiated  upon  the  loss  of  ships,  which 
had  lately  fallen  a  prey  to  the  enemy ;  the  consumption 
of  seamen ;  the  neglect  of  the  fisheries ;  the  interruption 
of  commerce,  in  which  the  nation  was  supplanted  by  her 
allies,  as  well  as  invaded  by  her  enemies ;  the  low  ebb  of 
the  kingdom's  treasure,  exhausted  in  hiring  foreign  bot- 
toms, and  paying  foreign  troops  to  fight  foreign  quar- 
rels ;  and  the  slaughter  of  the  best  and  bravest  of  their 
countrymen,  whose  blood  had  been  lavishly  spilt  in  sup- 
port of  connexions  with  which  they  ought  to  have  had 
no  concern.  They  demonstrated  the  mischiefs  that 
necessarily  arose  from  the  unsettled  state  of  the  nation. 
They  observed,  that  the  government  could  not  be  duly 
established,  until  a  solemn  declaration  should  confirm 
the  legality  of  that  tenure  by  which  their  majesties  pos- 
sessed the  throne;  that  the  structure  of  parliaments  was 
deficient  in  point  of  solidity,  as  they  existed  entirely  at 
the  pleasure  of  the  crown,  which  would  use  them  no 


IflTC  WILLIAM  AND  MARY;  107 

longer  than  they  should  be  found  necessary  in  raising 
supplier  for  the  use  of  the  government.  They  exclaimed 
against  the  practice  of  quartering  soldiers  in  private 
houses,  contrary  to  the  ancient  laws  of  the  land,  the  peti- 
tion of  rights,  and  the  subsequent  act  on  that  subject, 
passed  in  the  reign  of  the  second  Charles.  They  enu-* 
merated  among  their  grievances  the  violation  of  property, 
by  pressing  transport  ships  into  the  service,  without,  set-* 
tling  any  fund  of  payment  for  the  owners ;  the  cpndition 
of  the  militia,  which  was  equally  burdensome  and  use- 
less :  the  flagrant  partiality  in  favour  of  allies,  who  car- 
ried on  an  open  commerce  with  France,  and  supplied 
the  jenemy  with  necessaries,  while  the  English  laboured 
under  the  severest  prohibitions,  and  were  in  effect  the 
dupes  of  those  very  powers  whom  they  protected..  They 
dwelt  upon  the  ministry  s  want  of  conduct,  foresight, 
and  intelligence,  and  inveighed  against  their  ignorance, 
insolence,  and  neglect,  which  were  as  pernicious  to 
the  nation  as  if  they  had  formed  a  design  of  reducing  it 
to  the  lowest  ebb  of  disgrace  and  destruction.  By  this 
time,  indeed,  public  virtue  was  become  the  object  of 
ridicule,  and  the  whole  kingdom  was  overspread  with 
immorality  and  corruption;  towards  the  increase  of 
which,  many  concurring  circumstances  happened  to  con- 
tribute- The  people  were  divided  into  three  parties, 
namely,  the  Williamites,  the  Jacobites,  and  the  discon- 
tented revolutioners :  these  factions  took  all  opportuni- 
ties to  thwart,  to  expose,  and  to  ridicule  the  measures 
and  principles  of  each  other;  so  that  patriotism  was 
laughed  out  of  doors,  as  a  hypocritical  pretence.  This 
contention,  established  a  belief  that  every  man  consulted 
his  own  private  interest  at  the  expense  of  the  public;  a 
belief  that  soon  grew  into  a  maxim  almost  universally 
adopted.  The  practice  of  bribing  a  majority  in  parlia- 
ment had  a  pernicious  influence  upon  the  morals  of  all 
ranks  of  people,  from  the  candidate  to  the  lowest  borough- 
elector.    The  expedient  <?f  establishing  funds  of  credit 


108  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1692. 

for  raising  supplies  to  defray  the  expenses  of  government, 
threw  large  premiums  and  sums  of  money  into  the 
hands  of  low,  sordid  usurers,  brokers,  and  jobbers,  who. 
distinguished  themselves  by  the  name  of  the  monied 
interest.  Intoxicated  by  this  flow  of  wealth,  they  affect- 
ed to  rival  the  luxury  and  magnificence  of  their  supe- 
riors ;  but,  being  destitute  of  sentiment  and  taste  to  con- 
duct them  in  their  new  career,  they  ran  into  the  most 
absurd  and  illiberal  extravagances.  They  laid  aside  all 
decoruri ;  became  lewd,  insolent,  intemperate,  and  riot- 
ous. Their  example  was  caught  by  the  vulgar.  All 
principle,  and  even  decency,  was  gradually  banished ; 
talent  lay  uncultivated,  and  the  land  was  deluged  with  a 
tide  of  ignorance  and  profligacy. 

§  III.  King  William,  having  ascertained  the  winter- 
quarters  of  the  army,  and  concerted  the  operations  of 
the  ensuing  campaign  with  the  states-general,  and  the. 
ministers  of  the  allies,  set  sail  for  England  on  the  15  th 
day  of  October:  on  the  18th  landed  at  Yarmouth,  was 
met  by  the  queen  at  Newhall,  and  passed  through  the 
city  of  London  to  Kensingston,  amidst  the  acclamations 
of  the  populace*  He  received  .a  congratulatory  address 
from  the  lord-mayor  and  aldermen,  with  whom  he  dined 
in  public  by  invitation.  A  day  of  thanksgiving  was  ap- 
pointed for  the  victory  obtained  at  sea.  The  lutestring 
company  was  established  by  patent,  and  the  parliament 
met  on  the  4th  day  of  November,  .  The  house  of  lords 
Was  deeply  infected  with  discontent,  which  in  some  mea- 
sure proceeded  from  the  dissension  between  the  queen, 
and  her  sister,  the  princess  of  Denmark,  which  last 
underwent  every  mortification  that  the  court  could  in- 
flict. Her  guards  were  taken  away ;  all  honours  which 
had  been  paid  to  her  rank  by  the  magistrates  of  Bath, 
where  she  sometimes  resided,  and  even  by  the  ministers 
of  the  church  where  she  attended  at  divine  service,  were 
discontinued,  by  the  express  order  of  his  majesty.  Her. 
cause  was  naturally  espoused  by  those  noblemen  who  had, 


1(592.  WILLIAM  AND  MARY.  109 

adhered  to  her  in  her  former  contest  with  the  king, 
about  an  independent  settlement ;  and  these  were  now 
reinforced  by  all  the  friends  of  the  earl  of  Marlborough, 
united  by  a  double  tie  ;   for  they  resented  the  disgrace 
and  confinement  of  that  lord>  and  thought  it  their  duty 
to  support  the  princess  Anne,  under  a  persecution  incur- 
red by  an  attachment  to  his  countess.    The  earl  of 
Shrewsbury  lived  in  friendship  with  Marlborough,  and 
thought  he  had  been  ungratefully  treated  by  the  king: 
the  marquis  of  Halifax  befriended  him,  from  opposition 
to  the  ministry :  the  earl  of  Mulgrave,  for  an  opportu- 
nity to  display  his  talents,  and  acquire  that  consideration 
which  he  thought  due  to  his  merit.     Devonshire,  Mon- 
tague, and  Bradford,  joined  in  the  same  cause  from 
principle:  the  same  pretence  was  used  by  the  earls  of 
Stamford,  Monmouth,  Warrington,  and  other  whigs, 
though  in  effect  they  were  actuated  by  jealousy  and  re- 
sentment against  those  by  whom  they  had  been  sup* 
planted.     As  for  the  Jacobites,  they  gladly  contributed 
their  assistance  to  promote   any  scheme  that  had  a 
tendency  to  embroil  the  administration. 

§  IV.  The  king,  in  his  speech  to  parliament,  thanked 
them  for  their  last  supplies,  congratulated  them  upon 
the  victory  obtained  at  sea,  condoled  them  upon  the  bad 
success  of  the  campaign  by  land,  magnified  the  power 
of  France,  represented  the  necessity  of  maintaining,  a 
great  force  to  oppose  it,  and  demanded  subsidies  equal 
to  the  occasion.  He  expressed  his  reluctance  to  load 
them  with  additional  burdens,  which,  he  said,  could 
not  be  avoided,  without  exposing  his  kingdom  to  in- 
evitable destruction.  He  desired  their  advice  towards 
lessening  the  inconvenience  of  exporting  money  for  the 
payment  of  the  forces.  He  intimated  a  design  of  mak- 
ing a  descent  upon  France  ;  declared  he  had  no  aim  but 
to  make  his  subjects  a  happy  people ;  and  that  he  would 
*  again  cheerfully  expose  his  life  for  the  welfare  of  the 
nation.    The  lords,  after  an  adjournment  of  three  days, 


170  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1002. 

began  with  great  warmth  to  assert  their  privileges,  which 
they  conceived  had  been  violated  in  the  cases  of  the  earl 
of  Marlborough,  and  the  other  noblemen  who  had  been 
apprehended,  committed  to  prison,  and  afterward  ad- 
mitted to  bail  by  the  court  of  king's-bench.  These 
circumstances  being  -fully  discussed  in  a  violent  debate, 
the  house  ordered  lord  Lucas,  constable  of  the  Tower, 
to  produce  the  warrants  of  commitment,  and  the  clerk 
of  the  king's-bench  to  deliver  the  affidavit  of  Aaron 
Smith,  the  court-solicitor,  upon  which  the  lords  had  been 
remanded  to  prison.  At  the  same  time,  the  whole  affair 
was  referred  to  a  committee,  empowered  to  send  for  per- 
sons, papers,  and  records.  The  judges  were  ordered  to 
attend:  Aaron  Smith  was  examined,  touching  the  evi- 
dence against  the  committed  lords.  The  committee 
reported  their  general  resolution,  which  produced  a 
vehement  dispute.  The  opinion  of  the  judges  was  un- 
satisfactory to  both  parties ;  the  debate  was  referred  to 
a  committee  of  the  whole  house,  in  which  it  was  resolv- 
ed, and  declared  as  the  sense  of  that  assembly,  that,  in 
pursuance  of  the  habeas  corpus  act,  it  was  the  duty  of 
the  judges  and  jail-delivery  to  discharge  the  prisoner 
on  bail,  if  committed  for  high-treason,  unless  it  be  made 
appear,  upon  oath,  that  there  are  two  witnesses  against 
the  said  prisoner,  who  cannot  be  produced  in  that  term, 
session,  or  general  jail-delivery.  They  likewise  resolv- 
ed it  was  the  intention  of  the  said  statute,  that  in  case 
there  should  be  more  than  one  prisoner  to  be  bailed  or 
remanded,  there  must  be  oath  made  that  there  'are  two 
witnesses  against  each  prisoner,  otherwise  he  cannot  be 
remanded  to  prison.  These  resolutions  were  entered 
in  the  books,  as  standing  directions  to  all  future  judges, 
yet  not  without  great  opposition  from  the  court  ment- 
bers.  The  next  debate  turned  upon  the  manner  in 
which  the  imprisoned  lords  should  be  set  at  liberty. 
The  contest  became  so  warm,  that  the  courtiers  began 
to  be  afraid.,  and  proposed  an  expedient,  which  was  put 


1092,  WILLIAM  ANJ>  MARY,  171 

in  practice.  The  house  adjourned  to  the  17  th  day  of 
the  month,  and  at  its  next  meeting  was  given  to  under- 
stand, that  the  king  had  discharged  the  imprisoned 
noblemen.  After  another  warm  debate,  a  formal  entry 
W«3  made  in  the  journals,  importing,  That  the  house 
being  informed  of  his  majesty's  having  given  directions 
for  discharging  the  lords  under  bail  in  the  king's-bench, 
the  debate  upon  that  matter  ceased.  The  resentment 
of  the  peers  being  thus  allayed,  they  proceeded  to  take 
his  majesty's  speech  into  consideration. 

$  V,  The  commons  having  voted  an  address  of 
thanks,  and  another,  praying  that  his  majesty's  foreign, 
alliances  should  be  laid  before  them,  determined  on  a 
bill  for  regulating  trials  in  cases  of  high-treason.  They 
passed  a  vote  of  thanks  to  admiral  Russel,  his  officers, 
and  seamen,  for  the  victory  they  had  obtained,  and  then 
proceeded  to  an  inquiry,  why  that  victory  had  not  been 
pursued  ?  why  the  descent  had  not  been  made?  and 
why  the  trade  had  not  been  better  protected  from  the 
enemy's,  cruisers  ?  The  admiral  having  justified  his  own 
conduct,  they  commanded  the  lords  of  the  admiralty  to 
produce  copies  of  all  the  letters  and  orders  which  had 
been  sent  to  the  admiral :  they  ordered  Russel  to  lay 
before  them  his  answers ;  and  the  commissioners  of  the 
transports,  victuallers,  and  office  of  ordnance,  to  deliver 
in  an  account  of  their  proceedings.  They  then  pre- 
sented addresses  to  the  king  and  queen,  acknowledging 
the  favour  of  God  in  restoring  him  to  his  people ;  con- 
gratulating him  upon  his  deliverance  from  the  snares  of 
his  open  and  secret  enemies;  and  assuring  him  they 
would,  .according  to  his  majesty's  desire  in  his  most  gra-* 
cious  speech,  be  always  ready  to  advise  and  assist  him  in 
the  support  of  his  government.  The  queen  was  thank- 
ed for  her  gracious  and  prudent  administration  during 
his  majesty's  absence :  they  congratulated  her  on  their 
signal  deliverance  from  a  bold  and  cruel  design  formed 
for  their  destruction,  as  well  as  on  the  glorious  victory 


J  78  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1&2 

which  her  fleet  had  gained ;  and  they  assured  lief,  that 
the  grateful  sense  they  had  of  their  happiness  under  her 
government,  should  always  be  manifested  in  constant 
returns  of  duty  and  obedience. 

§  VI.  After  this  formal  compliment,  the  house,  in- 
stead of  proceeding  to  the  supplies,  insisted  upon  perus- 
ing the  treaties,  public  accounts,  and  estimates,  that 
they  might  be  in  a  condition  to  advise  as  wrell  as  to  assist 
his  majesty.  Being  indulged  with  those  papers,  they 
passed  a  previous  vote,  that  a  supply  should  be  given  ; 
then  they  began  to  concert  their  articles  of  advice. 
Some  of  the  members  loudly  complained  of  partiality  to 
foreign  generals,  and  particularly  reflected  upon  the  in- 
solence of  count  Solmes,  and  his  misconduct  at  Steen- 
kirk.  After  some  warm  altercation,  the  house  resolved 
one  article  of  their  advice  should  be,  that  his  majesty 
>would  be  pleased  to  fill  up  the  vacancies  that  should 
happen  among  the  general  officers,  with  such  only  a& 
were  natives  of  his  dominions,  and  that  the  commander- 
in-chief  of  the  English  should  be  an  Englishman.  Their 
next  resolution  implied,  that  many  of  the  great  affairs 
of  the  government  having  been  for  some  time  past  uti*- 
successfully  managed,  the  house  should  advise  his  majes- 
ty to  prevent  such  mischiefs  for  the  future,  by  employ- 
ing men  of  knowledge,  ability,  and  integrity.  Individual 
members  inveighed  bitterly  against  cabinet-councils,  as 
a  novelty  in  the  British  system  of  government,  by  which 
the  privy-council  was  jostled  out  of  its  province.  They 
complained  that  all  the  grievances  of  the  nation  proceed- 
ed from  the  vicious  principles  of  the  ministry :  they  ob- 
served, that  he  who  opposed  the  establishment  could 
not  be  expected  to  support  it  with  zeal.  The  earl  of 
Nottingham  was  mentioned  by  name,  and  -  the  house 
resolved,  that  his  majesty  should  be  advised  to  employ 
in  his  councils,  such  persons  otily  whose  *  principles 
obliged  them  to-support  his  rights  against  the  late  king, 
and  all  other  pretenders.     Marlborough's  interest  still 


WILLIAM  AND  MARY.  173 

predominated  among  the  commons.  Hit  friend  Russel 
acquitted  himself  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  house,  and 
shifted  the  blame  of  the  miscarriage  upon  his  enemy  the 
eart  of  Nottingham,  by  declaring  that  twenty  days  elapsed 
between  his  first  letter  to  that  nobleman  and  his  lord- 
ship's answer*  The  earl's  friends,  of  whom  there  was  a 
great  number  in  the  house,  espoused  his  cause  with  great 
vigour,  and  even  recriminated  upon  Russel ;  so  thai  a 
very  violent  debate  ensued.  Both  parties  agreed  that 
there  had  been  mismanagement  in  the  scheme  of  a 
descent.  It  was  moved,  that  one  cause  of  the  miscar- 
riage was  the  want  of  giving  timely  and  necessary  orders, 
by  those  to  whom  the  management  of  the  affair  was 
committed.  The  house  divided,  and  it  was  carried  in 
the  affirmative  by  one  voice  only.  At  the  next  sitting 
of  the  committee,  sir  Richard  Temple  proposed  they 
should  consider  how  to  pay  the  forces  abroad,  by  means 
of  English  manufactures,  without  exporting  money. 
They  resolved  that  the  house  should  be  moved  to  appoint 
a  committee  to  take  this  expedient  into  consideration* 
Sir  Francis  Winnington  was  immediately  called  upon  to 
leave  the  chair,  and  the  speaker  resumed  his  place.  All 
that  had  been  done  was  now  void,  as  no  report  had  been 
made ;  and  the  committee  was  dissolved.  The  house, 
however,  revived  it,  and  appointed  a  day  for  its  sitting ; 
but  before  it  could  resume  its  deliberations,  admiral 
Russel  moved  for  its  being  adjourned,  and  all  its  purposes 
were  defeated* 

§  VII.  The  court  agents  had  by  this  time  interposed, 
and  secured  a  majority  by  the  infamous  arts  of  corrup- 
tion. The  commons  no  longer  insisted  upon  their 
points  of  advice*  Their  whole  attention  was  now  ecu* 
tered  in  the  article  of  assistance.  They  granted  about 
2,000,000/.  for  the  maintenance  of  three-and*thirty 
thousand  seamen,  the  building  of  some  additional  ships 
of  war,  and  the  finishing  of  Plymouth-dock:  and 
750,000/.  to  supply  the  deficiency  of  the  quarterly  polh 

VOL.  I.  *  N 


174  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1092. 

The  *  festimates  of  the  land-service  were  not  discussed 
without  tedious  debates  and  warm  disputes..  The  mi- 
nistry demanded  fifty- four  thousand  men,  twenty  thou- 
sand of  whom  should  be  kept  at  home  for  the  defence 
of  the  nation,  while  the  rest  should  s£rve  abroad  in  the 
allied  army.  Many  members  declared  their  aversion  to 
a  .foreign  war,  in  which  the  nation  had  no  immediate 
concern,  and  so  little  prospect  of  success.  Others  agreed 
that  the  allies  should  be  assisted  on  the  continent  with  a 
proportion  of  British  forces ;  but  that  the  nation  should 
act  as, an  auxiliary,  not  as  a  principal,  and  pay  no  more 
than  .what  the  people  would  cheerfully  contribute  to  the 
general  expense.  These  reflections,  however,  produced 
no  bther  effect  than  that  of  prolonging  the  debate.  Mi- 
nisterial influence  had  surmounted  all  opposition.  The 
house  voted  the  number  of  men  demanded.  Such  was 
their  servile  complaisance,  that  when  they  examined  the 
-treaties'  by  which- the  English  and  Dutch  contracted 
equally  with  the  German  princes,  and  found  that,  not- 
withstanding these  treaties,  Britain  bore  two-thirds  of 
the  expense,  they  overlooked  this  flagrant  instance  of 
partiality,  and  enabled  the  king  to  pay  the  proportion. 
Nay,:  their  maxims  were  so  much  altered,  that,  instead  of 
prosecuting  their  resentment  against  foreign  generals, 
they  assented  to  a  motion  that  the  prince  of  Wirtem- 
berg,  the  major-generals  Tetteau  and  La  Forest,  who 
commanded  the  Danish  troops  in  the  pay  of  the  states- 
general,  should  be  indulged  with  such  an  addition  to 
their  appointments  as  would  make  up  the  difference  be- 
tween the  pay  of  England  and  that  of  Holland.  Finally, 
they  voted  above  2,000,000/.  for  the  subsistence  of  the 
land-forces,  and  for  defraying  extraordinary  expenses  at- 
tending the  war  upon  the  continent,  including  subsidies 
to  the  electors  of  Saxony  and  Hanover. 
j  §  VIII.  The  house  of  lords,  meanwhile,  was  not  free  from 
animosity  and  contention.  The  Marlborough  faction 
exerted  themselves  with  great  vivacity.     They  affirmed, 


1*>2;  WILLIAM  AND  MARY.  »  175 

it  was  the  province  of  their  house  to  advise  the  sovereign : 
like  the  commons,  they  insisted  upon  the  king's  having 
asked  their  advice,  because  he  had  mentioned  that  word 
in  his  speech,  though  he  never  dreamed  that  they  would 
catch  at  it  with  such  eagerness.  They  moved,  that  the 
task  of  digesting  the  articles  of  advice  should  be  under- 
taken by  a  joint  committee  of  both  houses  :  but  all  this 
dependants  of  the  court,  including  the  whole  bench  of 
bishops,  except  Watson  of  St.  David's,  were  marshalled 
to  oppose  this  motion,  which  was  rejected  by  a  majority 
of  twelve  ;  and  this  victory  was  followed  by  a  protest  of 
the  vanquished.  Notwithstanding  this  defeat,  they  pro- 
secuted their  scheme  of  giving  advice ;  and,  after  much 
wrangling  ^nd  declamation,  the  house  agreed  in  an  ad- 
dress or  remonstrance,  advising  and  beseeching  his  ma- 
jesty, that  the  commanding  officer  of  the  British  forfces 
should  be  an  Englishman  :  that  English  officers  might 
take  rank  of  those  in  the  confederate  armies,  who  did 
not  belong  to  crowned  heads :  that  the  twenty  thousand 
men  to  be  left  for  the  defence  of  the  kingdom  should 
be  all  English,  and  commanded  by  an  English  general: 
that  the  practice  of  pressing  men  for  the  fleet  should  be 
remedied  :  that  such  officers  as  were  guilty  of  this  prac- 
tice should  be  cashiered  and  punished  :  and  lastly,  that 
no  foreigners  should  sit  at  the  board  of  ordnance.  This 
address  was  presented  to  the  king,  who  received  it  cold- 
ly, and  said  he  would  take  it  into  consideration. 

§  IX.  Then  the  lords  resolved  to  inquire  into  the 
miscarriage  of  the  purposed  descent,  and  called  for  all 
the  papers  relating  to  that  affair:  but  the  aim  of  the 
majority  was  not  sd  much  to  rectify  the  errors  of  the 
government,  as  to  screen  Nottingham,  and  censure  Rus- 
sel.  That  nobleman  produced  his  own  book  of  entries, 
together  with  the  whole  correspondence  between  him 
and  the  admiral,  whom  he  verbally  charged  with  having 
contributed  to  the  miscarriage  of  the  expedition.  This 
affair  was  referred  to  a  committee.   Sir  John  Ashby  was 

n  2 


17(1    ,  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  H»&. 

examined.  The  house  directed  the  earl  to  draw  up  the 
substance  of  his  charge  ;  and  these  papers  were  after- 
ward delivered  to  a  committee  of  the  commons,  at  a 
conference,  by  the  lord-president,  and  the  rest  of  the 
committee  above.  They  were  offered  for  the  inspection 
of  the  commons,  as  they  concerned  some  members  of 
that  house,  by  whom  they  might  be  informed  more 
fully  of  the  particulars  they  contained.  At  another  con- 
ference, which  the  commons  demanded,  their  committee 
declared,  in  the  name  of  the  house,  that  they  had  read 
and  well  considered  the  papers  which  their  lordships  had 
sent  them,  and  which  they  now  returned :  that,  finding 
Mr.  Russel,  one  of  their  members,  often  mentioned  in 
the  said  papers,  they  had  unanimously  resolved,  that  ad- 
miral Russel,  in  his  command  of  the  fleets  during  the 
last  summer's  expedition,  had  behaved  with  fidelity,  cou- 
rage, and  conduct.  The  lords,  irritated  at  this  declara- 
tion, and  disappointed  in  their  resentment  against  Rus- 
te\,  desired  ^  free  conference  between  the  committees 
of  both  houses.  The  earl  of  Rochester  told  the  com- 
mons, he  was  commanded  by  the  house  of  lords  to  in- 
form them,  that  their  lordships  looked  upon  the  late 
vote  and  proceedings  of  the  lower  house,  in  returning 
their  papers,  to  be  irregular  and  unparliamentary,  as  they 
had  not  communicated  to  their  lordships  the  lights  they 
had  received,  and  the  reasons  upon  which  their  vote  was 
founded.  A  paper  to  the  same  purport  was  delivered  to 
colonel  Granville,  who  promised  to  present  it  to  the 
commons,  and  make  a  faithful  report  of  what  his  lord- 
ship had  said*  Thus  the  conference  ended,  and  the 
inquiry  was  discontinued.  * 

$  X.  The  lower  house  seemed  to  be  as  much  exas- 
perated against  the  earl  of  Nottingham,  as  the  lords 
were  incensed  at  Russel.  Amotion  was  made,  that  his 
m&jesty  should  be  advised  to  appoint  such  commis- 
sioners of  the  board  of  admiralty  as  were  of  known  ex- 
perience in  maritime  afiairs.    Although  this  was  over- 


1693.  x      WILLIAM  AND  MARY.  177 

ruled,  they  voted  an  address  to  the  king,  praying,  that 
for  the  future,  all  orders  for  the  management  of  the  fleet 
might  pass  through  the  hands  of  the  said  commissioners  : 
a  protest  by  implication  against  the  conduct  of  the  se- 
cretary. The  consideration  of  ways  and  means  was  th$  * 
next  object  that  engrossed  the  attention  of  the  lower 
house.  They  resolved  that  a  rate  of  four  shillings  in  the 
pound,  for  one,  year,  should  be  charged  upon  all  lands  ac- 
cording to  their  yearly  value :  as  also  upon  all  persona} 
estates,  and  upon  all  offices  and  employments  of  profit, 
other  than  military  offices  in  the  army  or  navy.  The  act 
founded  on  this  resolution,  empowered  the  king  to  bor- 
row money  on  the  credit  of  it,  at  seven  per  cent.  They 
further  enabled  him  to  raise  1,000,000/.  on  the  ge* 
neral  credit  of  the  exchequer,  by  granting  annuities,. 
They  laid  several  new  duties*  on  a  variety  of  imports* 
They  renewed  the  last  quarterly  poll,  providing,  that  in 
case  it  should  not  produce  300,000/.  the  deficiencies 
might  be  made  up  by  borrowing  on  the  general  credit 
of  the  exchequer.  They  continued  the  impositions  pq 
wine,  vinegar,  tobacco,  and  sugar,  for  five  years ;  and 
those  on  East  India  goods  for  four  years.  They  laid  a 
new  imposition  of  eight  per  cent,  on  the  capital  stock 
of  the  East  India  company,  estimated  at  744,000/. ;  of 
one  per  cent,  on  the  African  ;  of  5/.  on  every  share  of 
the  stock  belonging  to  the  Hudson's-bay  company :  and 
they  empowered  his  majesty  to  borrow  500,000/.  on 
these  funds,  which  were  expressly  established  for  main- 
taining the  war  with  vigour.* 

§  XI.  The  money  bills  were  retarded  in  the  upper 
house  by  the  arts  of  Halifax,  Mulgrave,  and  other 
malecontents.  They  grafted  a  clause  on  the  land-tax 
bill,  importing,  that  the  lords  should  tax  themselves* 
It  was  adopted  by  the  majority,  and  the  bill  sent  with 
this  amendment  to  the  commons,  by  whom  it  was 

*  The  French  king,  hearing  how  liberally  William  was  supplied,  ex- 
claimed with  some  emotion,  "  My  littic  cousin,  the  prince  of  Orange, 
is  fixed  in  the  saddle— but,  no  matter,  the  last  Louis  d'or  most  carry  if 


178  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1»X 

unanimously  rejected  as  a  flagrant  attempt  upon  their 
privileges.  They  demanded  a  conference,  in  which  they 
declared  that  the  clause  in  question  was  a  notorious  en- 
croachment upon  the  right  the  commons  possessed,  of 
regulating  all  matters  relating  to  supplies  granted  by 
parliament.  When  this  report  was  debated  in  the 
house  of  lords,  the  earl  of  Mulgrave  displayed  uncom- 
mon powers  of  eloquence  and  argument,  in  persuading 
the  house,  that,  by  yielding  to  this  claim  of  the  com- 
mons, they  would  divest  themselves  of  their  true  great- 
ness, and  nothing  would  remain  but  the  name  and  sha- 
dow of  a  peer,  which  was  but  a  pageant.  Notwith- 
standing all  hijs  oratory,  the  lords  relinquished  their 
clause,  declaring,  at  the  same  time,  that  they  had  agreed 
to  pass  the  bill  without  alteration,  merely  in  regard  to 
the  present  urgent  state  of  affairs,  as  being  otherwise  of 
opinion,  that  they  had  a  right  to  insist  upon  their  clause. 
A  formal  complaint  being  made  in  the  house  of  com- 
mons against  the  pamphlet,  entitled,  "  King  William 
and  queen  Mary  conquerors,"  as  containing  assertions 
of  dangerous  consequence  to  their  majesties,  to  the  li- 
berty of  the  subject,  and  the  peace  of  the  kingdom,  the 
licenser  and  printer  were  taken  into  custody.  The  book 
being  examined,  they  resolved  that  it  should  be  burned 
by  the  hands  of  the  common  hangman,  and  that  the 
king  should  be  moved  to  dismiss  the  licenser  from  his 
employment.  The  same  sentence  they  pronounced 
upon  a  pastoral  letter  of  bishop  Burnet,  in  which  this 
notion  of  conquest  had  been  at  first  asserted.  The  lords* 
in  order  to  manifest  their  sentiments  on  the  same  sub- 
ject, resolved,  that  such  an  assertion  was  highly  injurious 
to  their  majesties,  inconsistent  with  the  principles  on 
which  the  government  was  founded,  and  tending  to  the 
subversion  of  the  rights  of  the  people.  Bohun,  the  li- 
censer, was  brought  to  the  bar  of  the  house,  and  dis- 
charged upon  his  own  petition,  after  having  been  repri- 
manded on  his  knees  by  the  speaker. 


1»2.  WILLIAM  AND  MARY.  179 

$  XII.  Several  members  having  complained  that  their 
servants  had  been  kidnapped,  and  sent  to  serve  as  sol-: 
diers  in  Flanders,  the  house  appointed  a  committee  to 
'inquire  into  the  abuses  committed  by  press-masters-: 
and  a  suitable  remonstrance  was  presented  to  the -king* 
who  expressed  his  indignation  at  this  practice,  and  as- 
sured the  house  that  the  delinquents  should  be. brought 
to  exemplary  punishment.  Understanding,  however, 
in  the  sequel,  that  the  methods  taken  by  his  majesty  for 
preventing  this  abuse  had  not  proved  effectual,  they  re- 
sumed their  inquiry,  and  proceeded  with  uncommon 
vigour  on  the  information  they  received.  A  great 
number  of  persons  who  had  been  pressed  were  dis- 
charged by  order  of  the  house ;  and  captain  Winter,  the 
chief  undertaker  for  this  method  of  recruiting  the  army, 
was  carried  by  the  Serjeant  before  the  lord-chief-justice, 
that  he  -might  be  prosecuted  according  to  law. 

§  XIII.  Before  the  heats  occasioned  by  this  unpopular 
expedient  were  allayed,  the  discontent  of  the  nation  was 
farther  inflamed  by  c6m plaints  from  Ireland,  where  lord 
Sidney  was  said  to  rule  with  despotic  authority.  These 
complaints  were  exhibited  by  sir  Francis  Brewster,  sir 
William  Gore,  sir  John  Macgill,  lieutenant  Stafford, 
Mr,  Stone,  and  Mr.  Kerne.  They  were  examined  at 
the  bar  of  the  house,  and  delivered  an  account  of  their 
grievances  in  writing.  Both  houses  concurred  in  this 
inquiry;  which  being  finished,  they  severally  presented 
addresses  to  the  king.  The  lords  observed,  that  there  had 
been  great  abuses  in  disponing  of  the  forfeited  estates  : 
that  protections  had  been  granted  to  the  Irish  not  in- 
cluded in  the  articles  of  Limerick  ;  so  that  Protestants 
were  deprived  of  the  benefit  of  the  law  against  them  : 
that  the  quarters  of  the  army  had  not  been  paid  accord- 
ing to  the  provision  made  by  parliament :  that  a  mayor 
had  been  imposed  upon  the  city  tif  Dublin  for  two  years 
successively,  contrary  to  the  ancient  privileges  and  char- 
ter :  that  several  persons  accused  of  murcier  had  been 


|86  HISTORY  OF  &NQLAND.  tOM. 

executed  without  proof:  and  one  Sweetman,  the  most 
guilty,  discharged  without  prosecution.  The  commons 
spoke  more  freely  in  their  address :  they  roundly  ex- 
plained the  abuses  and  mismanagement  of  that  govern- 
inent*  by  exposing  the  Protestant  subjects  to  the  free 
quarter  and  violence  of  a  licentious  army :  by  recruiting 
the  troops  with  Irish  Papists,  who  had  been  in  open  re- 
bellion against  his  majesty ;  by  granting  protections  to 
Irish  Roman  Catholics,  whereby  the  course  of  the  law 
was  stopped ;  by  reversing  outlawries  for  high- treason, 
not  comprehended  Jn  the  articles  of  Limerick  :  by  letting 
the  forfeited  estates  at  under  value,  to  the  prejudice  erf 
his  majesty's  revenue  :  by  embezzling  the  stores  left  in 
the  towns  and  garrisons  by  the  late  king  James,  as  well 
as  the  effects  belonging  to  the  forfeited  estates,  which 
might  have  been  employed  for  the  better  preservation  of 
the  kingdom  ;  and,  finally,  by  making  additions  to  the 
articles  of  Limerick,  after  the  capitulation  was  signed, 
and  the  place  surrendered.  They  most  humbly  besought 
bis  majesty  to  redress  these  abuses,  which  had  greatly 
encouraged  the  Papists,  and  weakened  the  Protestant 
interest  in  Ireland.  The  king  graciously  received  both 
addresses,  and  promised  to  pay  a  particular  regard  to  all 
remonstrances  that  should  come  from  either  house  of 
parliament :  but  no  material  step  was  taken  against  the 
lords  Sidney,  Athlone,  and  Coningsby,  who.  appeared  to 
have  engrossed  great  part  of  the  forfeitures  by  grants 
from  the  crown ;  and  even  commissioner  Culliford,  who 
had  been  guilty  of  the  most  grievous  acts  of  oppression, 
escaped  with  impunity. 

§  XIV.  The  old  whig  principle  was  not  yet  wholly 
expelled  from  the  lower  house.  The  undue  influence 
of  the  court  was  exerted  in  such  an  open,  scandalous 
manner,  as  gave  offence  to  the  majority  of  the  commons. 
In  the  midst  of  all  their  condescension,  sir  Edward 
Hussey,  member  for  Lincoln,  brought  in  a  bill  touching 
free  and  impartial  proceedings  in  parliament.    It  was 


I 


1*3.  WILLIAM  AND  MARY.  181 

intended  to  disable  all  members  of  parliament  from  en- 
joying places  of  trust  and  profit,  and  particularly  levelled 
against  the  officers  of  the  army  and  navy,  who  had  in- 
sinuated themselves  into  the  house  in  such  numbers, 
that  this  was  commonly  called  the  officers'  parliament 
The  bill  passed  the  house  of  commons,  and  was  sent  up 
to  the  lords,  by  whom  it  was  read  a  second  time,  and 
committed;  but  the  ministry  employing  their  whole 
strength  against  it,  on  the  report  it  was  thrown  out  by 
a  majority  of  two  voices.  The  earl  of  Mulgrave  again 
distinguished  himself  by  his  elocution,  in  a  speech  that 
was  held  in  great  veneration  by  the  people :  and  among 
those  who  entered  a  protest  in  the  journals  of  the  house, 
when  the  majority  rejected  the  bill,  was  prince  George 
of  Denmark,  duke  of  Cumberland.  The  court  had  not 
recollected  themselves  from  the  consternation  produced 
by  such  a  vigorous  opposition,  when  the  earl  of  Shrews* 
bury  produced  another  bill  for  triennial  parliaments,  pro* 
viding  that  there  should  be  an  annual  session ;  that  if,  at 
the  expiration  of  three  years,  the  crown  should  not  order 
the  writs  to  be  issued,  the  lord-chancellor,  or  keeper,  or 
commissioner  of  the  great  seal,  should  issue  them  ex 
officio,  and,  by  authority  of  this  act,  under  severe  pe- 
nalties. The  immediate  object  of  this  bill  was  the  dis- 
solution of  the  present  parliament,  which  had  already 
sat.  three  sessions,  and  began  to  be  formidable  to  the 
people  from  its  concessions  to  the  ministry.  The  be- 
nefits that  would  accrue  to  the  constitution  from  the 
establishment  of  triennial  parliaments  were  very  well 
understood,  as  these  points  had  been  frequently  discuss- 
ed in  former  reigns.  The  courtiers  now  objected,  that 
frequent  elections  would  render  the  freeholders  proud 
and  insolent,  encourage  faction  among  the  electors,  and 
entail  a  continual  expense  upon  the  member,  as  he 
would  find  himself  obliged,  during  the  whole  time  of  his 
sitting,  to  behave  like  a  candidate,  conscious  how  soon 
the  time  of  election  would  revolve.    In  spite  of  the 


182  ,  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1003. 

ministerial  interest  in  the  upper  house,  the  bill  passed, 
and  contained  a  proviso,  that  the  present  parliament 
should  not  continue  any  longer  than  the  month  of  Ja- 
nuary next  ensuing.  The  court  renewed  its  efforts 
against  it  in  the  house  of  commons,  where,  nevertheless, 
it  was  carried,  with  some  alterations,  which  the  lords 
approved.  But  all  these  endeavours  were  frustrated  by 
the  prerogative  of  the  king,  who,  by  refusing  his  assent, 
prevented  its  being  enacted  into  a  law. 

§  XV.  It  was  at  the  instigation  of  the  ministry,  that  the 
commons  brought  in  a  bill  for  continuing  and  explain- 
ing certain  temporary  laws  then  expiring  or  expired. 
.Among  these  was  an  act  for  restraining  the  liberty  of 
the  press,  which  owed  its  original  to  the  reign  of  Charles 
II.,  and  had  been  revived  in  the  first  year  of  the  suc- 
ceeding reign.  The  bill  passed  the  lower  house  without 
difficulty,  but  met  with  warm  opposition  in  the  house 
.of  lords;  a  good  number  of  whom  protested  against , it, 
as  a  law. that  subjected  all. learning  and  true  information 
to  the  arbitrary  will  of  a  mercenary,  and  perhaps  igno- 
rant licenser,  destroyed  the  properties  of  authors,  and 
extended  the  evil  of  monopolies.  The  bill  for  regulat- 
ing trials  was  dropped,  and,  in  lieu  of  it,  another  pro- 
duced for  the  preservation  of  their  majesties*  sacred  per- 
sons and  government :  but  this  too  was  rejected  by  the 
majority,  in  consequence  of  the  ministry's  secret  ma- 
nagement. The  East  India  company  narrowly  escaped 
dissolution.  Petitions  and  counter-petitions  were  de- 
livered into  the  house  of  commons  :  the  pretensions  on 
both  sides  were  carefully  examined :  a  committee  of  the 
whole  house,  resolved,  that  there  should  be  anew  sub- 
scription of  a  joint  stock,  not  exceeding  2,500,000/. 
to  continue  for  one-and-twenty  years.  The  report  was 
made  and  received,  and  the  public  expected  to  see  the 
afiair  brought  to  a  speedy  issue :  but  the  company  had 
recourse  to  the  same  expedients,  which  had  lately  proved 
so  successful  in  the  hands  of  the  ministry.     Those  who 


1093.  WILLIAM  AND  MARY.  183 

had  been  the  most  warm  in  detecting  their  abuses,  sud- 
denly cooled ;  and  the  prosecution  of  the  affair  began  to 
languish.  Not  but  that  the  house  presented  an  address 
to  his  majesty,  praying  that  he  would  dissolve  the  comT 
pany  upon  three  years'  warning,  according  to  the  condi- 
tion of  their  charter.  He  told  them  he  would  consider 
their  address ;  and  they  did  not  farther  urge  their  remon- 
strance. The  bill  for  ascertaining  the  commissions  and 
salaries  of  the  judges,  to  which  the  king  had  refused  the 
royal  assent  in  the  last  session,  was  revived,  twice  read, 
and  rejected ;  and  another,  for  preventing  the  exporta- 
tion and  melting  of  the  coin,  they  suffered  to  lie  neglect- 
ed on  the  table.  On  the  14th  day  of  March,  the  king 
put  an  end  to  the  session,  after  having  thanked  the  par- 
liament for  so  great  testimonies  of  their:  affection^  and 
promised  the  supplies  should  not  be  misapplied.  He 
observed,  that  the  posture  of  affairs  called  him  abroad : 
but  that  he  would  leave  a  sufficient  number  of  troops 
for  the  security  of  the  kingdom :  he  assured  them  he 
would  expose  his  person  upoin  all  occasions  for  the  ad- 
vantage of  these  kingdoms ;  and  use  his  utmost  endea- 
vours to  make  them  a  flourishing  nation.1*        .  •/ 

§  XVI.  During  the  course  of  this  session,  lord  Mohun 
was  indicted  and  tried  by  his  peers,  in  Westminster- 
hall,  as  an  accomplice  in  the  murder  of  one  Montford, 

b  The  other  laws  made  in  this  session  were  these  that  follow  : — An  act 
for  preventing  suits  against  such  as  had  acted  for  their  majesties'  service 
in  defence  of  the  kingdom.  An  act  for  raising  the  militia  in  the  year 
1693.  An  act  authorizing  the  judges  to  empower  such  persons,  other 
than  common  attorneys  and  solicitors;  as  they  should  think  lit,  to. take 
special  bail,  except  in  London,  Westminster,  and  ten  miles  round.  An 
act  to  encourage  the  apprehending  of  highwaymen.  An  act  for  prevent- 
ing  clandestine  marriages.  An  act  for  the  regaining,  encouraging,  aritf 
settling  the  Greenland  trade.  An  act  to  prevent  malicious  informations 
in  the  court  of  king's-bench,  and  for  the  more  easy  reversal  of  outlawries 
in  that  court.  An  act  for  the  better  discovery  of  judgments  in  the  courts 
of  law.  An  act  for  delivering  declarations  to  prisoners  for  debt.  An 
act  for  regulating  proceedings  in  the  crown-office.  An  act  for  the  more 
easy  discovery  and  conviction  of  such  as  should  destroy  the  game  of  this 
kingdom :  and  an  act  for  continuing  the  acts  for  prohibiting  all  trade  and 
commerce  with- France,  and  for  the  encouragement  of  privateers. 


184  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1083. 

a  celebrated  comedian,  the  marquis  of  Caermarthen  act- 
ing as  lord-steward  upon  this  occasion.  The  judges 
having  been  consulted,  the  peers  proceeded  to  give  their 
judgments  seriatim,  and  Mohun  -was  acquitted  by  a 
great  majority.  The  king,  who,  from  his  first  acces- 
sion to  the  throne,  had  endeavoured  to  trim  the  balance 
between  the  whigs  and  tories,  by  mingling  them  to- 
gether in  his  ministry,  made  some  alterations  at  this  pe- 
riod, that  savoured  of  the  same  policy.  The  great  seal, 
with  the  title  of  lord-keeper,  was  bestowed  upon  sir  John 
Somers,  who  was  well  skilled  in  the  law,  as  in  many 
other  branches  of  polite  and  useful  literature.  He  pos- 
sessed a  remarkable  talent  for  business,  in  which  he  ex- 
erted great  patience  and  assiduity ;  was  gentle,  candid, 
and  equitable :  a  whig  in  principles,  yet  moderate,  paci- 
fic, and  conciliating.  Of  the  same  temper  was  sir  John 
Trencbard,  now  appointed  secretary  of  state.  He  had 
been  concerned  with  the  duke  of  Monmouth,  and  es- 
caped to  the  continent,  where  he  lived  some  years,  was 
calm,  sedate,  well  acquainted  with  foreign  affairs,  and 
considered  as  a  leading  man  in  his  party.  These  two 
are  said  to  have  been  promoted  at  the  recommendation 
of  the  earl  of  Sunderland,  who  had  by  this  time  insi- 
nuated himself  into  the  king's  favour  and  confidence ; 
though  his  success  confirmed  the  opinion  which  many 
entertained,  of  his  having  betrayed  his  old  master.  The 
leaders  of  the  opposition  were,  sir  Edward  Seymour, 
again  become  a  malecontent,  and  sir  Christopher  Mus- 
grave,  a  gentleman  of  Cumberland,  who,  though  an 
extravagant  tory  from  principle,  had  refused  to  concur 
with  all  the  designs  of  the  late  king.c  He  was  a  person 
of  a  grave  and  regular  deportment,  who  had  rejected 
many  offers  of  the  ministry,  which  he  opposed  with 
violence ;  yet,  on  some  critical  occasions,  his  patriotism 
gave  way  to  his  avarice,  and  he  yielded  up  some  im- 

c  Burnet.    History  of  K.  William.    Burchet.    Lives  of  the  Admirals. 
Stone's  Nar.    Feuqniere*.     Voltaire.    Ralph.    Tindal.    State  Tracts. 


1693.  WILLIAM  AND  MARY.  183 

portant  points,  in  consideration  of  large  sums  which  he 
received  from  the  court  in  secret.  Others  declared  war 
against  the  administration,  because  they  thought  their 
Own  talents  were  not  sufficiently  considered.  Of  these, 
the  chief  were  Paul  Foley  and  Robert  Harley.  The 
first  was  a  lawyer  of  good  capacity,  extensive  learning, 
and  virtuous  principles,  but  peevish,  obstinate,  and  mo- 
rose. He  entertained  a  very  despicable  opinion  of  the 
court ;  and  this  he  propagated  with  equal  assiduity  and 
success.  Harley  possessed  a  good  fund  of  learning ; 
was  capable  of  uncommon  application,  particularly  turn- 
ed to  politics.  He  knew  the  forms  of  parliament,  had  a 
peculiar  dexterity  at  protracting  and  perplexing  debates; 
and  cherished  the  most  aspiring  ambition.  Admiral 
Russel  was  created  treasurer  of  the  household ;  but  the 
command  of  the  fleet  was  vested  in  the  hands  of  Killi- 
grew,  Delaval,  and  Shovel.  Sir  George  Rooke  was  de- 
clared vice-admiral  of  the  red,  and  John  lord  Berkeley, 
of  the  blue  division  ;  their  rear-admirals  were  Matthew 
Aylmer  and  David  Mitchel. 

§  XVII.  The  king  having  visited  the  fleet  and  forti- 
fications at  Portsmouth,  given  instructions  for  annoy- 
ing the  enemy  by  sea,  and  left  the  administration  in  the 
hands  of  the  queen,  embarked  on  the  last  day  of  March, 
near  Gravesend,  and  arrived  in  Holland  on  the  3d  of 
April.  The  troops  of  the  confederates  were  forthwith 
ordered  to  assemble:  but  while  he  was  employed  in 
making  preparations  for  the  campaign,  the  French  king 
actually  took  the  field,  attended  by  madame  de  Main* 
tenon,  and  all  the  court  ladies.  His  design  was  sup- 
posed to  be  upon  some  town  in  Brabant:  his  army 
amounted  to  one  hundred  and  twenty  thousand  men, 
completely  armed,  and  abundantly  supplied  with  all  ne- 
cessaries for  every  sort  of  military  operation.  King 
William  immediately  took  possession  of  the  strong 
camp  at  Parke,  near  Louvain,  a  situation  which  enabled 
him  to  cover  the  places  that  were  most  exposed.     Un- 


t80  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1<595. 

derstanding  that  the  French  emissaries  had  sown  the 
seeds  of  dissension  between  the  bishop  and  chapter  of 
Liege,  he  sent  the  duke  of  Wirtemberg  thither,  to  re- 
concile the  different  parties,  and  concert  measures  for 
the  farther  security  of  the  place.  He  reinforced  the 
garrison  with  nine  battalions ;  and  the  elector  palatine 
lay  with  his  troops  in  readiness  to  march  to  its  relief. 
William  likewise  threw  reinforcements  into  M  aestricht, 
Huy,  and  Charleroy ;  and  he  himself  resolved  to  remain 
on  the  defeusive,  at  the  head  of  sixty  thousand  men, 
with  a  numerous  train  of  artillery. 

§  XVIII.  Lewis  having  reviewed  his  army  at  Gem- 
blours,  and  seen  his  designs  upon  Brabant  defeated  by 
the  diligence  of  his  antagonist,  detached  Boufflers  with 
twenty  thousand  men  to  the  Upper  Rhine,  to  join  the 
dauphin,  who  commanded  in  that  quarter ;  then  leaving 
the  conduct  of  his  forces  in  the  Netherlands  to  the  duke 
<Je  Luxembourg,  he  returned  with  his  court  to  Versailles. 
Immediately  after  his  departure,  Luxembourg  fixed  his 
head-quarters  at  Mildert ;  and  king  William  strength- 
ened his  camp  oil  that  side  with  ten  battalions,  and 
eight-and-twenty  pieces  of  cannon.     The  enemy's  con- 
voys were  frequently  surprised  by  detachments  from  the 
garrison  of  Charleroy  ;  and  a  large  body  of  horse,  foot, 
and  dragoons,  being  drafted  out  of  Hege  and  Maes- 
tjricht,  took  post  at  Huy,  under  the  command  of  the 
qojuot  de  Tilly,  so  as  to  straiten  the  French  in  their 
quarters.     These,  however,  were  dislodged  by  Luxem- 
bourg in  person,  who  obliged  the  count  to  pass  the  Jaar 
with  precipitation,  leaving  behind  three  squadrons  and 
all  his  baggage,  which  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy. 
This,  check,  however,  was  balanced  by  the  success  of 
the, duke  of  Wirtemberg,  who,  at  the  head  of  thirteen 
battalions  of  infantry,  and  twenty  squadrons  of  horse, 
forced  the  French  lines  between  the  Scheldt  and  the 
Lys ;  and  laid  the  whole  country,  as  for  as  Lisle,  under 
contribution.     On  that  very  day,  which  was  the  18th 


W93.  WILLIAM  AND  MARY.  187 

of  July,  Luxembourg  marched  towards  Huy,  which  was 
next  morning  invested  by  M.  de  Villeroy.  The  other 
covered  the  siege,  and  secured  himself  from  the  allies 
by  lines  of  contravallation.  Before  their  batteries  began 
to  play,  the  town  capitulated.  On  the  23d  day  of  the 
month  the  garrison  mutinied ;  the  castles  were  surren-1 
dered ;  the  governor  remained  a  prisoner ;  and  his  men 
were  conducted  to  Liege.  The  confederate  army  ad- 
yanced  in  order  to  relieve  the  town :  but  the  king  being 
apprised  of  its  fate,  detached  ten  battalions  to  reinforce 
the  garrison  of  Liege,  and  next  day  returned  to  Neer- 
Hespen. 

§  XIX.  Luxembourg  made  a  motion  towards  Liege, 
as  if  he  had  intended  to  besiege  the  place ;  and  encamped 
at  Hellecheim,  about  seven  leagues  from  the  confede- 
rates. Knowing  how  much  they  were  weakened  by 
the  different  detachments  which  had  been  made  from 
their  army,  he  resolved  to  attack  them  in  their  camp,  or 
at  least  fall  upon  their  rear,  should  they  retreat  at  his 
approach.  On  the.  28th  day  of  July,  he  began  his 
march  in  four  columns,  and  passed  the  Jaar  near  its 
source,  with  an  army  superior  to  the  allies  by  five-and- 
thirty  thousand  men.  The  king  of  England,  at  first, 
looked  upon  this  motion  as  a  feint  to  cover  his  design 
upon  Liege :  but  receiving  intelligence  that  their  whole 
army  was  in  full  march  to  attack  him  in  his  camp,  he 
resolved  to  keep  his  ground  ;  and  immediately  drew  up 
his  forces  in  order  of  battle.  His  general  officers  ad- 
vised him  to  repass  the  Geete :  but  he  chose  to  risk  a 
battle,  rather  than  expose  the  rear  of  his  army  in  repas- 
sing that  river.  His  right  wing  extended  as  far  as  Neer- 
Winden,  along  the  Geete,  covered  with  hedges,  hol- 
low ways,  and  a  small  rivulet ;  the  left  reached  to  Neer- 
Landen  ;  and  these  two  villages  were  joined  by  a  slight 
entrenchment,  which  the  king  ordered  to  be  thrown  up 
in  the  evening.  Brigadier  Ramsay,  with  the  regiments 
of -OTarrel,  Mackay,  Lauder,  Leven,  and  Monroe, 
were  ordered  to  the  right  of  the  whole  army,  to  line 


188  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  10118. 

some  hedges  and  hollow  ways  on  the  farther  side  of  the 
village  of  Lare.  Six  battalions  of  Brandenburgh  were 
posted  to  the  left  of  this  village ;  and  general  Dumont, 
with  the  Hanoverian  infantry,  possessed  the  village  of 
Neer-Winden,  which  covered  part  of  the  camp,  between 
the  main  body  and  the  right  wing  of  the  cavalry.  Neer- 
Landen,  on  the  left,  was  secured  by  six  battalions  of 
English,  Danes,  and  Dutch.  The  remaining  infantry 
was  drawn  up  in  one  line  behind  the  entrenchment. 
The  dragoons  upon  the  left  guarded  the  village  of  Der- 
mal upon  the  brook  of  Beck ;  and  from  thence  the  left 
wing  of  horse  extended  to  Neer-Landen,  ^rhere  it  wad 
covered  by  this  rivulet. 

§  XX.  The  king  having  visited  all  the  posts  on  horse- 
back, and  given  the  necessary  orders,  reposed  himself 
about  two  hours  in  his  coach ;  and  early  in  the  morn- 
ing sent  for  his  chaplain,  whom  he  joined  in  prayer 
with  great  devotion.  At  sun-rising* the  enemy  appeared 
drawn  up  in  order  of  battle ;  and  the  allies  began  to 
play  their  cannon  with  good  success.  About  eight  in  the 
morning  they  attacked  the  villages  of  Lare  and  Neer- 
Winden  with  great  fury ;  and  twice  made  themselves 
masters  of  these  posts,  from  whence  they  were  as  often 
repulsed.  The  allies  still  kept  their  ground ;  and  the 
duke  of  Berwick  was  taken  by  his  uncle,  brigadier 
Churchill.  Then  the  French  made  an  attack  upon  the 
left  wkig  of  the  confederates  at  Neer-Landen ;  and,  after 
a  very  obstinate  dispute,  were  obliged  to  give  way, 
though  they  still  kept  possession  of  the  avenues.  The 
prince  of  Conti,  however,  renewed  the  charge  with  the 
flower  of  the  French  infantry ;  and  the  confederates 
being  overpowered,  retreated  from  the  village,  leaving 
the  camp  in  that  part  exposed.  Villeroy  marching  this 
way  with  a  body  of  horse,  was  encountered  and  repulsed 
by^  the  count  d'Arco,  general  of  the  Bavarian  cuirassiers : 
and  the  duke  de  Chartres  narrowly  escaped  being  taken. 
Meanwhile,  Luxembourg,  the  prince  of  Conti,  the 
count  de  Marsin,  and  the  marshal  de  Joyeuse,  charged 


r 


16K.  WILLIAM  AND  MARY.  18g 

on  the  right,  and  in  different  parts  of  the  line,  with  such 
impetuosity  as  surmounted  all  resistance.  The  camp  of 
the  confederates  was  immediately  filled  with  French 
troops:  the  villages  of  Lare  aiyi  Neer-Winden  were 
taken,  after  a  long  and  desperate  dispute.  The  Hano- 
verian and  Dutch  horse  being  broken,  the  king  in  per- 
son brought  the  English  cavalry  to  their  assistance. 
They  fought  with  great  gallantry ;  and  for  some  time 
retarded  the  fate  of  the  day.  The  infantry  were  rallied, 
and  stood  firm  until  all  their  ammunition  was  expended. 
In  a  word,  they  were  scarce  able  to  sustain  the  weight 
of  such  a  superiority  in  point  of  number,  when  the  mar- 
quis d'Harcourt  joined  the  enemy  from  Huy,  with  two- 
and-twenty  fresh  squadrons,  which  immediately  turned 
the  scale  in  their  favour.  The  elector  of  Bavaria,  after 
having  made  extraordirtary  efforts,  retreated  with  great 
difficulty  over  the  bridge  to  the  other  side  of  the  river, 
where  he  rallied  the  troops,  in  order  to  favour  the  retreat 
of  those  who  had  not  passed  The  king,  seeing  the 
battle  lost,  and  the  whole  army  in  confusion,  retired 
with  the  infantry  to  Dormul  on  the  brook  of  Beck, 
where  the  dragoons  of  the  left  wing  were  posted,  and 
then  ordered  the  regiments  of  Wyndham,  Lumley,  and 
Galway,  to  cover  his  retreat  over  the  bridge  at  Neer- 
Hespen3  which  he  effected  with  great  difficulty.  Now 
all  was  tumult,  rout,  and  consternation ;  and  a  great 
number  of  the  fugitives  threw  themselves  into  the  river, 
where  they  were  drowned.  This  had  like  to  have  been 
the  fate  of  the  brave  earl  of  Athlone :  the  duke  of  Or- 
mond  was  wounded  in  several  places,  and  taken  prisoner 
by  the  enemy ;  and  the  count  de  Solmes  was  mortally 
wounded.  Ptolemache  brought  off  the  greater  part  of 
the  English  infantry  with  great  gallantry  and  conduct  z 
as  for  the  baggage,  it  had  been  sent  to  Liege  before  the 
engagement :  but  the  confederates  lost  sixty  pieces  of 
cannon,  and  nine  mortars,  a  great  number  of  standards 


vol.  i.  *  o 


19(0  HISTORY  07  ENCU*AW>,  im* 

and  colours,*  with, about  s$ven  thousand  men  killed,  aod> 
wounded  in  the  action.  It  must  be  owned,  that  the 
allies  fought  with  great  valour  and  perseverance ;  and 
that  king  William  made  prodigious  efforts  of  courage 
and  activity  to  retrieve  the  fortune  of  the  day.  He  was 
present  in  all  parts  of  the  battle :  he  charged  in  person 
both  on  horseback  and  on  foot,  where  the  danger  >#a$ 
most  imminent*  His  peruke*  the  sleeve  of  his  coat, 
and  the  knot  of  his  scar£  were  penetrated  by  three  dif- 
ferent musket-bullets ;  and  he  saw  a  great  number  of 
soldiers  fall  on  every  side  of  him.  The  enemy  bore  wit* 
ness  to  his  extraordinary  valour.  The  prince  of  Conti* 
in  a  letter  to  his  princess,  which  was  intercepted*  de^ 
clared  that  he  saw.  the  prince  of  Orange  exposing  him^ 
self  to  the  greatest  dangers.;  and  that  such.yajpur  richly; 
deserved  the  peaceable  possession  of  the  crown  he  wore* 
Yet  here,  as,  in  every  other  battle  he  fought,  his  cor^ 
duct  and  disposition  were  severely  censured..  Luxem*? 
bourg  having  observed  the  nature  of  his  situation  imuie-s 
diately  before  the  engagement,  is  said  to  have  exclaimed, 
"  Now,  I  believe  Waldeck  is  really  dead ;"  alluding  tQ 
that  general's  known  sagacity  in  choosing  ground  for 
an  encampment  Be  that  as  it  will,  he  paid  dear  for  his 
victory.  His  loss  in  officers  and  men  exceeded  th^t,of 
the  allies  :  and  he  reaped,  no  solid  advantage  from  thf 
battle.  He  remained;  fifteen  days  inactive  at,  Warren* 
while*  king  William,  recalling  .the  duke  of  Wirtemberg, 
and  drafting  troops  from.  Liege  and,  other.  garrispps,w^ 
in  a  few  days  able  to  hazard  another  engagement. 

§  XXI.  Nothing  remarkable  happened  during  the, 
remaining,  part  of  the  campaign,  until  Luxembourg, 
being  rejoined  by  Boufilers  with  a  strong  reinforcement 
from  the  Rhine,  invested  Gharleroy.     He  had  taken  his 

a  The  duke  of  Luxembourg  sent  such  a  number  of  standards  and  en- 
signs to  Paris,  during  the  course  of  this  war,  that  the  prince  of  Conti  call- 
ed him  4he  upholsterer  of.  Notre  Dame,  a  church  in  which  those  trophies 
were  displayed. 


\ 

1*0.'  WILLIAM  AND  MAKY.  \  ifcf 

measures  with  siich  caution  and  deiterity,  thaHije  al- 
lies could  not  frustrate  his  operations,  without  attacking 
his  lines  at  a  great  disadvantage.     The  king  detached 
the  elector  of  Bavaria  and  the  dukd  of  Wirterriberg, 
with  thirty  battalions  and  forty  squadrons,  to  make  a 
diversion  in  Flanders;  hut  they  returned  in  a  few  days 
without  having  attempted  any  thing  of  consequence. 
The  garrison  of  Chatleroy  defended  the  place  with  sur- 
prising valour,  from  the  10th  of  September,  to  thd 
1  lth  of  October,  during  which  period  they  had  repulsed 
the  assailants  in  several  attacks ;  but  at  length,  despair- 
ing of  relief,  the  governor  capitulated  on  the  most  ho- 
nourable conditions:  the  reduction  of  the  plate  was 
celebrated  with  a  Te  Deum,  and  other  rejoicings  at 
Paris.     Lewis,  however,  in1  the  midst  of  all  his  glory, 
was- extremely  mortified  when  he  reflected  upon  the 
little  advantage  he  had  reaped  froth  all  his  late  victories. 
The  allies  had  been  defeated  successively  at  Fleurus^ 
Steenkirk,  and  Landen :  yet,  in  a  .fortnight  after  each 
of  those  battles,  William  was  always  iri  a  condition  to 
risk  another  engagement.     Formerly,  Lewis  had  don- 
quered  half  of  Holland,  Flanders;  and  Frdnche-Comt^ 
without  a  battle;  whereas' rioyir  he  could  riot,  with  his 
utmost  efforts,  and  after  the  most  signal  victories,  pass 
the  frontiers  of  the  United  Provinces.    The  conquest  of 
Charieroy  concluded  the  campaign  in  the  Netherlands, 
and  both  armies  went  into  winter-quarters . 

§.  XXIL  The  Frenfch  army  on  the  Rhine,  under  del 
Lorges*  passed  that  river  in  the  month  of  May  at  Phi- 
lipsburgh,  and  invested  >the  city  of  Heidelberg,  which 
they  took,  pluiidered,  and  reduced  to  ashes.  This 
general  committed  nuiriberieiss  barbarities  in  the  palati- 
nate, which'  he  ravaged  without  even  sparing  the  tombs 
of  the  dead.  The  French  soldiers,  on  this  occasion, 
seem  to  have  been  actuated  by  the  most  brutal  inhu- 
manity. They  butchered  the  inhabitants,  violated  the 
women,  plundered  the  houses,  rifled  the  churches,  and 

o2 


1#4  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  *tt8. 

lamented  on  account  of  bis  great  and  amiable  qualities. 
The  earl  of  Warwick  and  Holland,  who  accompanied 
him  .as  a  volunteer,  shared  his  fate  in  being  wounded 
and  taken  .prisoner.:  but  he  soon  recovered  his  health 
and  liberty.  This  victory  was  as  unsubstantial  as  that 
of  Landen,  .and  almost  as  dear  in  the  purchase ;  for  the 
confederates  made  an  obstinate  defence,  and  yielded 
solely  to  superior  number.  The  duke  of  Savoy  retreated 
to  Moncalier,  and  threw  a  reinforcement  into  Com, 
which  Catinat  would  not  venture  to  besiege,  so  severely 
had  he  been  handled  in  the  battle.  He  therefore  con- 
tented himself  with  laying  the  country  under  contribu- 
tion, reinforcing  the  garrisons  of  Casal,  Pignerol,  and 
Susa,  and  making  preparations  for  repassing  the  moun- 
tains. The  news  of  this  victory  no  sooner  reached  Paris, 
than  Lewis  dispatched  M.  de  Chanlais  to  Turin,  with 
proposals  for  detaching  the  duke  of  Savoy  from  the  in- 
terest of  the  allies ;  and  the  pope,  who  was  now  become 
A  partisan  of  France,  supported  the  negotiation  with  his 
whole  influence:  but  the  French  king  had  not  yet 
touched  upon  the  right  string.  The  duke  continued 
deaf  to  all  his  addresses. 

§  XXIII.  France  had  heei>  alike  successful  in  her  in- 
trigues at  the  courts  of  Rome  and  Constantinople. 
The  vizier  at  the  Forte  had  been  converted  into  a  pen- 
sionary and  creature  of  Lewis ;  but  the  war  in  which 
the  Turks  had  been  so  long  and  unsuccessfully  engaged, 
rendered  him  so  odious  to .  the  people,  that  the  grand 
seignior  deposed  him,  in  order  to  appease  their  clamours. 
The  English  and  Dutch  ambassadors  at  Constantinople 
forthwith  renewed  their  mediation  for  a  peace  with  the 
emperor ;  but  the  terms  they  proposed  were  still  rejected 
with  disdain.  In  the  meantime  general  Heusler,  who 
commanded  the  imperialists  in  Transylvania,  reduced 
the  fortresses  of  Jeno  and  Villaguswar.  In  the  begin- 
ning of  July,  the  due  de  Croy  assumed  the  chief  com- 
mand of  the  German  army,  passed  the  Danube  and  the 


1608.  WILLIAM  AND  MARY.  TS5 

Sure,  aftd  kwistted  Belgrade.  The  siege  was  carried 
*>n  fcr  some  time  with  great  vigour;  but  at  length 
abandoned  at  the  approach  of  the  vizier,  who  obliged  the 
Imperialists  to  repass  the  Saave,  and  sent  out  parties 
'Which  made  incursions  into  Uppfer  Hungary.  The 
ftower  of  Frahce  had  never  been  so  conspicuous  as  at 
this  juncture,  when  she  maintained  a  formidable  navy 
at  sea,  atid  four  great  armies  in  different  parts  of  Europe. 
Exclusive  of  the  operations  in  Flanders,  Germany,  arid 
Piedmont,  tfee  couttt  de  Noaillfes  invested  Hoses,  in  Ca- 
'telbnia,  about  the  latter  end  of  May,  while  at  the  same 
^mfe  ft^Was  blocked  up  by  the  French  fleet,  uhder  the 
command  of  the  count  d'Etrges.  In  a  few  days  the 
place  was  surrendered  by  capitulation,  and  the  castle  of 
Ampuras  met  with  the  same  fate.  The  Spanish  pdwer 
•was  reduced  to  such  a  degree,  that  Noailles  might  have 
proceeded  in  his  conquests  without  interruption,  had 
nbt  he  been  obliged  to  detach  part  of  his  army  to  rein- 
force Catinat  in  Piedmont. 

§  XXIV.  Nothing  could  be  more  inglorious  for  the 
English  than  their  operations  by  sea  in  the  course  of 
this  summer.  The  king  had  ordered  the  admirals  to 
use  all  possible  dispatch  in  equipping  the  fleets,  that 
they  might  block  up  the  enemy  in  their  own  ports,  and 
protect  the  commerce,  which  had  suffered  severely  from 
the  French  privateers.  They  were;  however,  so  dilatory 
in  their  proceedings,  that  the  squadrons  of  the  enemy 
toiled  from  their  harbours  before  the  English  fleet  could 
put  to  $ea.  About  the  middle  of  May  it  was  assembled 
at  St.  Helenas,  *and  took  on  board  five  regiments,  in- 
tended for  a  descent  on  Brest ;  but  this  enterprise  was 
never  attempted.  When  the  English  and  £)utch  squa- 
drons joined,  so  as  to  form  &  very  numerous  flfeet,  the 
public  expected  they  would  undertake  some  expedition 
of  importance:  but  the  admirals  were  divided  in  opi- 
nion, nor  did  their  orders  warrant  their  executing  any 
scheme  of  consequence.     Killigtew  arid  Delaval  did  not 


196  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1603. 

escape  the  siApicion  of  being  disaffected  to  the  service  : 
and  France  was  said  to  have  maintained  a  secret  corres- 
pondence with  the  malecontents  in  England.  Lewis 
had  made  surprising  efforts  to  repair  the  damage  which 
his  navy  had  sustained.  He  had  purchased  several  large 
vessels,  and  converted  them  into  ships  of  war:  he  had 
laid  an  embargo  on  all  the  shipping  of  his  kingdom, 
until  his  squadrons  were  manned ;  he  had  made  a  grand 
naval  promotion,  to  encourage  the  officers  and  seamen ; 
and  this  expedient  produced  a  wonderful  spirit  of  activity 
and  emulation.  In  the  month  of  May  his  fleet  sailed 
to  the  Mediterranean,  in  three  squadrons,  consisting  of 
seventy-one  capital  ships,  besides  bomb-ketches,  fire- 
ships,  and  tenders. 

§  XXV.  In  the  beginning  of  June,  the  English  and 
Dutch  fleets  sailed  down  the  channel.  On  the  6th,  sir 
George  Rooke  was  detached  to  the  Straits  with  a  squa- 
dron of  three-and-twenty  ships,  as  convoy  to  the  Medi- 
terranean trade.  The  grand  fleet  returned  to  Torbay, 
while  he  pursued  his  voyage,  having  under  his  protection 
about  four  hundred  merchant  ships  belonging  to  Eng- 
land, Holland,  Denmark,  Sweden,  Hamburgh,  and 
Flanders.  On  the  l6th  his  scouts  discovered  part  of 
the  French  fleet  under  Cape  St.  Vincent :  next  day  their 
whole  navy  appeared,  to  the  amount  of  eighty  sail.  Six- 
teen of  these  plied  .up  to  the  English  squadron,  while 
the  vice-admiral  of  the  white  stood  off  to  sea,  to  inter- 
cept the  ships  under  convoy.  Sir  George  Rooke,  by 
the  advice  of  the  Dutch  vice-admiral  Vandergoes,  re- 
solved, if  possible,  to  avoid  an  engagement,  which  could 
only  tend  to  their  absolute  ruin.  He  forthwith  sent 
orders  to  the  small  ships  that  were  near  the  land,  to  put 
into  the  neighbouring  ports  of  Faro,  St.  Lucar,  and 
Cadiz,  while  he  himself  stood  off  with  an  easy  sail  for  the 
protection  of  the  rest.  About  six  in  the  evening  ten 
sail  of  the  enemy  came  up  with  two  Dutch  ships  of  war, 
commanded  by  the  captains  Schrijver  and  Vander-Poel> 


lfltt.  WILLIAM  AND  MARY.  197 

who,  seeing  no  possibility  of  escaping,  tacked  in  shore ; 
and,  thus  drawing  the  French  after  them,  helped  to"save 
the  rest  of  the  fleet.  When  attacked,  they  made  a 
most  desperate  defence,  but  at  last  were  overpowered 
by  numbers  and  taken.  An  English  ship  of  war  and  a 
rich  pinnance  were  burned  ;  nine-and- twenty  merchant 
vessels  were  taken,  and  about  fifty  destroyed  by  the 
counts  de  Tourville  and  d'Etrees.  Seven  of  the  largest 
Smyrna  ships  fell  into  the  hands  of  M.  de  Coetlegon, 
and  four  he  sunk  in  the  bay  of  Gibraltar.  The  value 
of  the  loss  sustained  on  this  occasion  amounted  to 
one  million  sterling.  Meanwhile  Rooke  stood  off  with 
a  fresh  gale,  and  on  the  19th  sent  home  the  Lark  ship 
of  war  with  the  news  of  his  misfortune ;  then  he  bore 
away  for  the  Madeiras,  where  having  taken  in  wood  and 
water,  he  set  sail  for  Ireland,  and  on  the  3d  day  of  Au- 
gust arrived  at  Cork,  with  fifty  sail,  including  ships  of 
war  and  trading  vessels.  He  detached  captain  Fair- 
borne  to  Kinsale,  with  all  his  squadron,  except  six  ships 
of  the  line,  with  which,  in  pursuance  of  orders,  he  joined 
the  great  fleet  then  cruising  in  the  chops  of  the  channel. 
On  the  25th  day  of  August  they  returned  to  St.  Helen's, 
and  the  four  regiments  were  landed.  On  the  19th  day 
of  September,  fifteen  Dutch  ships  of  the  line,  and  two  fri- 
gates, set  sail  for  Holland ;  and  twenty-six  sail,  with  seven 
fire-ships,  were  assigned  as  ^uard-ships  during  the  winter. 
§  XXVI.  The  French  admirals,  instead  of  pursuing 
Rooke  to  Madeira,  made  an  unsuccessful  attempt  upon 
Cadiz,  and  bombarded  Gibraltar,  where  the  merchants 
sunk  their  ships  that  they  might  not  fall  into  the  hands 
of  the  enemy.  Then  they  sailed  along  the  coast  of 
Spain,  destroyed  some  English  and  Dutch  vessels  at 
Malaga,  Alicant,  and  other  places ;  and  returned  in 
triumph  to  Toulon.  About  this  period  sir  Francis 
Wheeler  returned  to  England  with  his  squadron,  from 
an  unfortunate  expedition  in  the  West  Indies.  In  con- 
junction with  colonel  Codrington,  governor  of  the  Lee- 


198  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  .  fttS. 

ward  islands,  he  madq  unsuccessful  attempts  upon  the 
islands  of  Martinique  and  Dominique.  Then  he  sailed 
"to  Boston  in  New  England,  with  a  view  to  concert  an 
expedition  against  Quebec,  which  was  judged  impracti- 
cable. He  afterward  steered  for  Placentia,  in  New- 
foundland, which  he  would  have  attacked  without  hesi- 
tation ;  but  the  design  was  rejected  by  a  majority  of 
voices  in  the  council  of  war.  Thus  disappointed,  he 
set  sail  for  England ;  and  arrived  at  Portsmouth  in  a 
very  shattered  condition,  the  greater  part  of  his  men 
having  died  in  the  course  of  this  voyage. 

§  XXVII.  In  November  another  effort  Was  made  to 
annoy  the  enemy.     Commodore  Benbow  sailed  with 
a  squadron  of  twelve  capital  ships,  four  bomb-ketches, 
and  ten  brigantines,  to  the  coast  of  St.  Maloes,  and,  an- 
choring within  half  a  mile  of  the  town,  cannonaded 
and  bombarded  it  for  three  days  successively.     Then 
his  men  landed  on  an  island,  where  they  burned  aeon- 
vent.     On  the   lpth   they   took  the  advantage   of  a 
dark  night,  a  fresh  gale,  and  a  strong  tide,  to  send  in 
a  fire-ship  of  a  particular  contrivance,  styled  the  Infer- 
nal, in  order  to  burn  the  town :  but  she  struck  upon 
a  rock  before  she  arrived  at  the  place,  and  the  engi- 
neer was  obliged  to  set  her  on  fire,  and  retreat.      She 
continued  burning  for  some  time,  and  at  last  blew  fcp 
with  such  an  explosion,  as  shook  the  Wholfe  town  like 
an  earthquake,  unrbofed  three  hundred  hotises,  and 
broke  all  the  glass  and  earthen-wane  for  thr^e  leagues 
around.     A  capstan  that  weighed  two  hundred  pounds 
was  transported  into  the  place,  and,  falling  upon   a 
house,  levelled  it  to  the  ground :   the  greatest  part  of 
the  wall  towards  the  sea  tumbled  down  ;  and  the  inha- 
bitants were  overwhelmed  with  consternation :  so  that  a 
small  number  of  troops  might  have  taken  possession 
without  resistance  5  but  there  was  not  a  soldier  on  board. 
Nevertheless,  the  sailors  took  and  demolished  Quince- 
foit,  and  did  considerable  damage  to  the  toWh  of  St. 


1698.  WILLIAM  AND  MA-RY.  199 

M  aloes,  which  had  been  a  nest  of  privateers  that  infested 
the  English  commerce.     Though  this  attempt  was  exe- 
cuted with  great  spirit,  and  some  success,  the  clamours  of 
the  people  became  louder  and  louder.  They  scrupled  not 
to  say,  that  the  councils  of  the  nation  were  betrayed;  and 
their  suspicions  rose  even  to  the  secretary's  office.  They 
observed,  that  the  French  were  previously  acquainted 
with  all  the  motions  of  the  English,  and  took  their  mea- 
sures accordingly  for  their  destruction.    They  collected 
and  compared  a  good  number  of  particulars,  that  seemed 
to  justify  their  suspicion  of  treachery.    But  the  mrafor- 
tunes  of  the  nation,  in  all  probability,  arose  from  a  motley 
ministry,  divided  among  themselves,  who,  instead  of 
acting  in  concert  for  the  public  good,  employed  all  their 
influence  to  thwart  the  views  and  Wacken  the  reputa- 
tions of  each  other.  <  The  people  in  general  exclaimed 
against  the  marquis  of  Caermarthen,  the  earls  of  Not- 
tingham and  Rochester,  who  had  acquired  great  tjredit 
with  the  queen,  and,  from  their  hatred  to  the  whigs, 
betrayed  the  interests  of  the  nation. 

§  XXVIII.  But  if  the  English  were-discontented,  the 
French  were  miserable,  in  spite  of  all  their  victories. 
That  kingdom  laboured  under  a  dreadful  famine,  occa- 
sioned partly  from  unfavourable  seasons,  and  partly  from 
the  war,  which  had  not  left  hands  sufficient  to  cultivate 
die  ground.  Notwithstanding  all  the  diligence  and  pro- 
vidence of  their  ministry,  in  bringing  supplies  of  corn 
from  Sweden  and  Denmark,  their  care  in  regulating  the 
price,  and  furnishing  the  markets,  their  liberal  contribu- 
tions for  the  relief  of  the  indigent ;  multitudes  perished 
of  want,  and  the  whole  kingdom  was  reduced  to  poverty 
and  distress.  Lewis  pined  in  the  midst  of  his  success. 
He  saw  his  subjects  exhausted  by  a  ruinous  war,  in  which 
they  had  been  involved  by  his  ambition.  He  tampered 
with  the  allies  apart,  in  hopes  of  dividing  and  detaching 
them  from  the  grand  confederacy:  he  solicited  the 
northern  crowns  to  engage  as  mediators  for  a  general 


200  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1003. 

peace.  A  memorial  was  actually  presented  by  the 
Danish  minister  to  king  William,  by  which  it  appears, 
that  the  French  king  would  have  been  contented  to  pur- 
chase a  peace  with  some  considerable  concessions  ;  but 
the  terms  were  rejected  by  the  king  of  England,  whose 
ambition  and  revenge  were  not  yet  gratified ;  and  whose 
subjects,  though  heavily  laden,  could  still  bear  additional 
burdens. 

§  XXIX.  The  Jacobites  had  been  very  attentive  to 
the  progress  of  dissatisfaction  in  England,  which  they 
fomented  with  their  usual  assiduity.     The  late  declara- 
tion of  king  James  had  been  couched  in  such  imperious 
terms,  as  gave  offence  even  to  some  of  those  who  favour- 
ed his  interest.     The  earl  of  Middleton,  therefore,  in 
the  beginning  of  the  year,  repaired  to  St.  Germains,  and 
obtained  another,  which  contained  the  promise  of  a  ge-. 
neral  pardon,  without  exception,  and  every  other  con- 
cession that  a  British  subject  could  demand  of  his  sove- 
reign.   About  the  latter  end  of  May,  two  men,  named 
Canning  and  Dormer,  were  apprehended  for  dispersing 
copies  of  this  paper,  tried  at  the  Old  Bailey,  found  guilty 
of  not  only  dispersing,  but  also  of  composing,  a  false  and 
seditious  libel,  sentenced  to  pay  five  hundred  marks  a 
piece,  to  stand  three  times  in  the  pillory,  and  find  sureties 
for  their  good  behaviour.    But  no  circumstance  reflected 
more  disgrace  on  this  reign,  than  the  fate  of  Anderton, 
the  supposed  printer  of  some  tracts  against  the  govern- 
ment.    He  was  brought  to  trial  for  high-treason :    he 
made  a  vigorous  defence,  in  spite  of  the  insults  and  dis- 
couragement he  sustained  from  a  partial  bench.     As 
nothing  but  presumptions  appeared  against  him,  the 
jury  scrupled  to  bring  in  a  verdict  that  would  affect  his 
life,  until  they  were  reviled  and  reprimanded  by  judge 
Treby  :  then  they  found  him  guilty.     In  vain  recourse 
was  had  to  the  queen's  mercy :  he  suffered  death  at 
Tyburn  ;    and  left  a  paper,  protesting  solemnly  against 
the  proceedings  of  the  court,  which  he  affirmed  was  ap- 


MOO.  WILLIAM  AND  MARY.  201 

pointed,  not  to  try,  but  to  convict  him  ;  and  petitioning 
heaven  to  forgive  his  penitent  jury.  The  severity  of  the 
government  was  likewise  exemplified  in  the  case  of  some 
adventurers,  who  having  equipped  privateers  to  cruise 
upon  the  English,  under  joint  commissions  from  the 
late  king  James  and  Lewis  XIV.  happened  to  be  taken 
by  the  English  ships  of  war.  Dr.  Oldys,  the  king's  ad- 
vocate, being  commanded  to  proceed  against  them  as 
guilty  of  treason  and  piracy,  refused  to  commence  the 
prosecution ;  and  gave  his  opinion  in  writing,  that  they 
were  neither  traitors  nor  pirates.  He  supported  this 
opinion  by  arguments  before  the  council :  these  wese 
answered  by  Dr.  Littleton,  who  succeeded  him  in  the 
office  from  which  he  was  dismissed  ;  and  the  prisoners 
were  executed  as  traitors.  The  Jacobites  did  not  fail  to 
retort  those  arts  upon  the  government,  which  their  ad- 
versaries had  so  successfully  practised  in  the  late  reign. 
They  inveighed  against  the  vindictive  spirit  of  the  ad- 
ministration, and  taxed  it  with  encouraging  informers 
and  false  witnesses ;  a  charge  for  which  there  was  too 
much  foundation. 

§  XXX.  The  friends  of  James  in  Scotland  still  con- 
tinued to  concert  designs  in  his  favour :  but  their  cor- 
respondence was  detected,  and  their  aims  defeated,  by 
the  vigilance  of  the  ministry  in  that  kingdom.  Secre- 
tary Johnston  not  only  kept  a  watchful  eye  over  all  their 
transactions,  but,  by  a  dexterous  management  of  court 
liberality  and  favour,  appeased  the  discontents  of  the 
Presbyterians  so  effectually,  that  the  king  ran  no  risk 
in  assembling  the  parliament.  Some  offices  were  be- 
stowed upon  the  leaders  of  the  kirk  party;  and  the  duke 
of  Hamilton,  being  reconciled  to  the  government,  was 
appointed  commissioner.  On  the  18  th  day  of  April,  the 
session  was  opened,  and  the  king's  letter,  replete  with 
the  most  cajoling  expressions,  being  read,  the  parliament 
proceeded  to  exhibit  undeniable  specimens  of  their  good 
humour.     They  drew  up  a  very  affectionate  answer  to 


2ltt  HISTORY  OV  BftSliANV. 

his  majesty  %  letter ;  they  voted  an  addition  of  six?  new 
regiments  to  the  standing  forces  of  the  kingdom ;  they 
granted,  a  supply  of  above  150,000/.  sterling  to  his 
majesty ;,  they  enacted  a  lair  for  levying  men  to  serve 
on  board  the  royal,  navy:;  they  fined  aU  absentees, 
whether  lords  or  commons;  and  vacated  the  seats  of  all 
those  commissioners*  who  refused  to  take  the  oath  of 
assurance,  which  was  equivalent  to  am  abjuration  of  king' 
James :  they  set. on.  foot  an  inquiry  about  atf  intended 
invasion:  they  published  some  intercepted  letters,  sup- 
posed to  be  written  to  king  James  by  Nevil  Payne,  whoiw 
they  committed  to  prison,  and  threatened  with  a  trial 
for  .high-treason;  but  he  eluded  the  danger,  by  threaten- 
ing in  his  turn  to  impeach  those  who  had  made  their 
peace  with  the  government :  they  passed,  an  act  for  the 
comprehension  of  such  of  the  episcopal  clergy  as  should 
condescend  to  take  the  oaths  by  the  10th  day  of  JfAyj 
AIL  thai  the  general  assembly  required  of  them  was;- an' 
offer  to  subscribe  the  confession  of  faith,  and  to  acknow- 
ledge presbytery,  as  the  only  government  of  the  Scottish 
church :  but  they  neither  submitted  to  these  terms,  nor 
took'  the  oaths  within  the.  limited  time,  so.  that  they  for- 
feited all  legal  right  to  their  benefices. .  Nevertheless,? 
they  continued  in.  possession,  and  even  received"  private 
assurances  of  the  king's'  protection..  It  was  one  of 
William's  political  maxims^  to  court  his  domestic  ene- 
mies: but  it  was  never  attended  with  any  good  effect.: 
This  indulgence  gave  offence  to  the  Presbyterians;  and 
fonner  distractions  began  to  revive^ 

$  XXXI.  The  king  having  prevaiJed  upon:  the  states^ 
general  to  augment  their  land-forces  awd  J»vy:  forth© 
service  of  the  ensuing  campaign^  embarked  for  England; 
and  arrived  at  Kensington,  on  the  30th  day  of  October; 
Finding  the  people  clamorous  and  discontented,  the 
trade  of  the  nation  decayed,  the  affairs  of  state  misma- 
naged, and  the  ministers  recriminating  upon  one  another; 
he  perceived  the  necessity  of  changing  hands,  andw 


ltt&  WILLIAM*  AND  MARY.  <M$ 

solved  to  take  his.  measures*  accordingly.  Sunderland** 
his  chief  counsellor,  represented,  that  the  tones  were 
averse  to  the  continuance  of  a  war  which  had  been  pro- 
ductive of  nothing  but  damage  and  disgrace ;  whereas* 
the  whigs  were  much  more  tractable,  and  would  bleed 
freely,  partly  from  the  terrors  of  invasion  and  popery, 
partly  from  the  ambition  of  being  courted  by  the  crown, 
and  partly  from  the  prospect  of  advantage,  in  advancing 
money  to  the  government  on  the,  funds  established,  by 
parliament :  for  that  sort  of  traffic  which  obtained  the 
appellation  of  the  monied  interest  was  altogether  a 
whiggtsh  institution..  The  king  revolved  these  observa* 
tions  in  his  own  mind ;  and,  in  the  meantime,  the  pais 
liament  met  on  the  7  th  day  of  November,  pursuant  to 
the  last  prorogation.  In  his  speech,  he  expressed  his 
resentment  against  those  who  were  the  authors  of  the 
miscarriages  at  sea';  represented  the  necessity  of  increase 
ing.the  land-forces  and  the  navy ;  and  demanded  a  suit- 
able supply  for  these  purposes.  In  order  to  pave  the 
way  to  their  condescension,  he  had  already  dismissed 
from  his  council  the  earl  of  Nottingham,  who,  of  all  hid 
ministers,  was  the  most  odious  to  the  people.  His  place 
would,  have  been  immediately  filled  with  the  earl  of 
Shrewsbury ^  but  that,,  nobleman,  suspecting  this  was  a 
change  of  men  rather  than  of  measures,  stood  aloof  for 
some  time,  until  he  received  such  assurances  from  the 
king  as  quieted  his  scruples,  and  then  he  accepted  the 
office  of  secretary .  The  lieutenancy  for  the  city  of>Lon-> 
don,  and  all  other  commissions  over  England,  ware  al- 
tered with  a  view  to  .favour  the  whig  interest ;  and.  the 
individuals  of  that  party  were  indulged  with  many  places 
of  trust  and  profit ;  but  the  tories  were  too  powerful  in 
the  house  of  commons  to  be  exasperated,  and  therefore 
a  good  number  of  them  were  retained  in  office* 

§  XXXII.  On  the  sixth  day  of  the  session,  the  com-* 
mons  unanimously  resolved  to  support  their  majesties 
and.  their  government;    to   inquire  into  miscarriages; 


206  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  MO* 

of  corruption,  equally  exercised  on  the  individuals  of 
both  parties,  in  occasional  bounties,  grants,  places,  pen* 
sions,  equivalents,  and  additional  salaries.  The  male* 
contents,  therefore,  justly  observed,  the  house  of  com* 
mons  was  so  managed,  that  the  king  could  baffle  any 
bill,  quash  all  grievances,  stifle  accounts,  and  rectify  the  § 
articles  of  Limerick*  When  the  commons  took  into 
consideration  the  estimates  and  supplies  of  the  ensuing 
year,  the  king  demanded  forty  thousand  men  for  the 
navy,  and  above  one  hundred  thousand  for  the  purposes 
of  the  land  service.  Before  the  house  considered  these 
enormous  demands,  they  granted  400,000/.  by  way  of 
advance,  to  quiet  the  clamours  of  the  seamen,  who  were 
become  mutinous  and  desperate  for  want  of  pay,  up- 
wards of  1,000,000/.  being  due  to  them  for  wages. 
Then  the  commons  voted  the  number  of  men  required 
for  the  navy :  but  they  were  so  ashamed  of  that  for  the 
army,  that  they  thought  it  necessary  to  act  in  such  a 
manner  as  should  imply,  that  they  still  retained  some 
regard  for  their  country.  They  called  for  all  the  trea- 
ties subsisting  between  the  king  and  his  allies ;  they 
examined  the  different  proportions  of  the  troops  furnish- 
ed by  the  respective  powers :  they  considered  the  in- 
tended augmentations,  and  fixed  the  establishment  of 
the  year  at  fourscore  and  three  thousand,  one  hundred 
and  twenty-one  men,  including  officers.  For  the  main- 
tenance of  these  they  allotted  the  sum  of  2,530,590/; 
They  granted  2,000,000/.  for  the  navy,,  and  about 
500,000/.  to  make  good  the  deficiencies  of  the  annuity 
and  poll  bills  ;  so  that  the  supplies  for  the  year,  amount- 
ed to  about  five  millions  and  a  half,  raised  by  a  land-tax 
of  four  shillings  in  the  pound,  by  two  more  lives  in  the 
annuities,  a  farther  excise  on  beer,  a  new  duty  on  salt, 
and  a  lottery. 

$  XXXIV.  Though  the  malecontents  in  parliament 
could  not  withstand  this  torrent  of  profusion,  they  en- 
deavoured to  distress  the  court  interest,  by  reviving  the 


1603.  WILLIAM  AND  ."MARY.  207 

popular  bills  of  the  preceding  session  ;  such  as  that  for 
regulating  trials  in  cases  of  high-tfeason,  the  other  for 
the  more  frequent  calling  and  meeting  of  parliaments; 
and  that  concerning  free  arid  impartial  proceedings  in 
parliament.  '  The  first  was  neglected  in  the  house  of 
lords ;  the  second  was  rejected ;  the  third  was  passed 
by  the  commons,  on  the  supposition  that  it  would  be 
defeated  in  the  other  house.  The  lords  returned  it 
with  certain  amendments,  to  which  the  commons  would 
not  agree :  a  conference  ensued  ;  the  peers  receded  from 
their  corrections,  and  passed  the  bill,  to  which  the  king, 
however,  refused  his  assent.  Nothing  could  be  more  um 
popular  and  dangerous  than  such  a  step  at  this  juncture. 
The  commons,  in  order  to  recover  some  credit  with  the 
people,  determined  to.  disapprove  of  his  majesty's  con- 
duct. The  hoiise  formed  itself  into  a  committee,  to 
take  the  state  of  the  kingdom  into  consideration.  They 
resolved,  that  whoever  advised  the  king  to  refuse  the 
royal  assent  to  that  bill,  was  an  enemy  to  their  ma- 
jesties and  the  kingdom.  They  likewise  presented  an 
address,  expressing  their  concern  that  he  had  not  given 
his  consent  to  the  bill;  and  beseeching  his  majesty  to 
hearken  for  the  future  to  the  advice  of  his  parliament; 
rather  than  to  the  counsels  of  particular  persons,  who 
might  have  private  interests  of  their  own,  separate  from 
those  of  his  majesty  and  his  people.  The  king  thanked 
them  for  their  zeal,  professed  a  warm  regard  for  their 
constitution,  and  assured  them  he  would  look  up6n  all 
parties  as  enemies,  who  should  endeavour  to  lessen  the 
confidence  subsisting  between  the  sovereign  arid  people; 
The  members  in  the  opposition  were  not  at  all  satisfied 
with  this  general  reply.  A  day  being  appointed  to  take 
it  into  consideration,  a  warm  debate  was  maintained  with 
equal  eloquence  and  acrimony.  At  length  the  question 
being  put,  that  an  address  should  be  made  for  a  rriore  ex* 
plicit  answer,  it  passed  in  the  negative  by  a  great  majority; 
$  XXXV.  The  city  of  London  petitioned  that  a  par- 

p2 


210  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1603. 

limited  by  the  act,  the  charter  of  the  company  so  falling 
should  be  deemed  void  and  forfeited.  The  East  India 
company  actually  neglected  their  payment,  and  the  pub- 
lic imagined  the  ministry  would  seize  this  opportunity 
of  dissolving  a  monopoly  against  which  so  many  com- 
plaints had  been  made :  but  the  directors  understood 
their  own  strength ;  and?  instead  of  being  broken,  ob- 
tained the  promise  of  a  new  charter.  This  was  no  sooner 
known,  than  the  controversy  between  them  and  their 
adversaries  was  revived  with  such  animosity,  that  the 
council  thought  proper  to  indulge  both  parties  with  a 
hearing.  As  this  produced  no  resolution,  the  merchants 
who  opposed  the  company  petitioned,  that,  in  the  mean 
while,  the  new  charter  might  be  suspended.  Addresses 
of  the  same  kind  were  presented  by  a  great  number  of 
clothiers,  linen-drapers,  and  other  dealers.  To  these  a 
written  answer  was  published  by  the  company :  the- mer- 
chants printed  a  reply,  in  which  they  undertook  to  prove> 
that  the  company  had  been  guilty  of  unjust  and  unwar- 
rantable actions,  tending  to  the  scandal  of  religion,  the 
dishonour  of  the  [nation,  the  reproach  of  our  laws,  the 
oppression  of  the  people,  and  the  ruin  of  trade.  They 
observed,  that  two  private  ships  had  exported  in  one 
year  three  times  as  many  cloths  as  the  company  had  ex- 
ported in  three  years.  They  offered  to  send  more  cloth 
and  English  merchandise  to  the  Indies  in  one  year,  than 
the  company  had  exported  in  five ;  to  furnish  the  go- 
vernment with  five  hundred  tons  of  saltpetre  for  less 
than  one-half  of  the  usual  price ;  and  they  represented, 
that  the  company  could  neither  load  the  ships  they  pe- 
titioned for  in  England,  nor  reload  them  in  the  East 
Indies.  In  spite  of  all  these  remonstrances,  the  new 
charter  passed  the  great  seal ;  though  the  grants  con- 
tained in  it  were  limited  in  such  a  manner,  that  they  did 
not  amount  to  an  exclusive  privilege,  and  subjected  the 
company  to  such  alterations,  restrictions,  and  qualifica- 
tions;, as  the  king  should  direct  before  the  29th  day  of 
September.   This  indulgence,  and  other  favours  granted 


1093.  WILLIAM  AND  MARY.  211 

to  the  company,  were  privately  purchased  of  the  minis- 
try, and  became  productive  of  a  loud  outcry  against  the 
government.  The  merchants  published  a  journal  of  the 
whole  transaction,  and  petitioned  the  house  of  commons 
that  their  liberty  of  trading  to  the  East  Indies  might  be 
confirmed  by  parliament.  Another  petition  was  pre- 
sented by  the  company,  praying  that  their  charter  might 
receive  a  parliamentary  sanction.  Both  parties  employ- 
ed all  their  address  in  making  private  application  to 
the  members.  The  house  having  examined  the  dif- 
ferent charters,  the  book  of  their  new  subscriptions, 
and  every  particular  relating  to  the  company,  resolv- 
ed that  all  the  subjects  of  England  had  an  equal  right 
to  trade  to  the  East.  Indies,  unless  prohibited  by  act  of 
parliament. 

§  XXXVII.  But  nothing  engrossed  the  attention  of 
the  public  more  than  a  bill  which  was  brought  into  the 
house  for  a  general  naturalization  of  all  foreign  Protest- 
ants. The  advocates  for  this  measure  alleged,  that 
great  part  of  the  lands  of  England  lay  uncultivated  r 
that  the  strength  of  a  nation  consisted  in  the  number  of 
inhabitants ;  that  the  people  were  thinned  by  the.  war 
and  foreign  voyages,  and  required  an  extraordinary  sup- 
ply; that  a  great  number  of  Protestants,  persecuted  in 
France  and  other  countries,  would  gladly  remove  to  a 
land  of  freedom,  and  bring  along  with  them  their  wealth 
and  manufactures ;  that  the  community  had  been  large- 
ly repaid  for  the  protection  granted  to  those  refugees 
who  had  already  settled  in  the  kingdom.  They  had  in- 
troduced several  new  branches  of  manufacture,  promoted 
industry,  and  lowered  the  price  of  labour ;  a  circum- 
stance of  the  utmost  importance  to  trade,  oppressed  as 
it  was  with  taxes,  and  exposed  to  uncommon  hazard 
from  the  enemy.  The  opponents  of  the  bill  urged  with 
great  vehemence,  that  it  would  cheapen  the  birth-right 
of  Englishmen :  that  the  want  of  culture  was  owing  to 
the  oppression  of  the  times :  that  foreigners,  being  ad- 


212  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  NS93. 

mitted  into  the  privileges  of  the  British  trade,  would 
grow  wealthy  at  the  expense  of  their  benefactors,  and 
transfer  the  fortunes  they  had  gained  into  their  native 
country  :  that  the  reduction  in  the  price  of  labour  would 
be  a  national  grievance,  while  many  thousands  of  Eng- 
lish manufacturers  were  starving  for  want  of  employ- 
ment, and  the  price  of  provisions  continued  so  high, 
that^even  those  who  were  employed,  could  scarce  sup* 
ply  their  families  with  bread ;  that  the  real  design  of  the 
bill  was,  to  make  such  an  accession  to  the  dissenters,,  as 
would  render  them  an  equal  match  in  the  body-politic  for 
those  of  the  church  of  England ;  to  create  a  greater 
dependaqce  on  the  crown,  and,  in  a  word,  to  supply  a 
foreign  head  with  foreign  members.  Sir  John  Knight, 
a  member  of  the  house,  in  a  speech  upon  this  subject, 
exaggerated  the  bad  consequences  that  would  attend 
sueh  a  bill,  with  all  the  wit  and  virulence  of  satire-:  it 
was  printed  and  dispersed  through  the  kingdom,  and 
raised  such  a  flame  among  the  people,  as  had  not  ap- 
peared since,  the,  revolution.  They  exclaimed,  that  all 
offices  would  be  conferred  upon  Dutchmen,  who  would 
become  lord-danes,  and  prescribe  the  modes  of  religion 
and  government ;  and  they  extolled  sir  John  Knight  as 
the  saviour  of  the  nation/  The  courtiers  incensed  at 
the  progress  of  this  clamour,  complained  in  the  house 
of  the  speech  which  had  been  printed ;  and  sir  John 
was  threatened  with  expulsion  and  imprisonment.  He 
therefore  thought  proper  to  disown  the  paper,  which 
was  burned  by  the  hands  of  the  common  hangman. 
This  sacrifice  served  only  to  increase  the  popular  dis- 
turbance, '  which  rose  to  puch  a  height  of  violence, 
that  the  cqurt  party  began  to  tremble  :  and  the  bill  was 
dropped  for  the  present. 

$  XXXVIII.  Lord  Coningsby  and  Mr.  Porter  had 
committed  the  most  flagrant  acts  of  oppression  in  Ire- 

d  Burnet.  Feuquieres.  Life  of  king  William.    TindaL    State  Tracts. 
$alj>h.    Voltaire, .      .  ; 


1«M.  WILLIAM  AND  MARY.  213 

kind.  These  had  been  explained,  during  the  last  session, 
by  the  gentlemen  who  appealed  against  the  administra- 
tion of  lord  Sidney,  but  they  were  screened  by  the  mi- 
nistry :  and  therefore  the  earl  of  Bellamont  now  im- 
peached them  in  the  house  of  commons,  of  which  he 
and  they  wefe  members.     After  an  examination  of  the 
articles  exhibited  against  them,    the  commons,  who 
wore  by  this  time  at  the  devotion  of  the  court,  declared, 
that,  considering  the  state  of  affairs  in  Ireland,  they  did 
not  think  them  fit  grounds  for  an  impeachment.— In 
the  course  of  this  session,  the  nation  sustained  another 
misfortune  in  ,the  fate  of  sir  Francis  Wheeler,  who  had 
been  appointed  commander-in-chief  of  the  Mediterra- 
nean squadron.     He  received  instructions  to  take  under 
his  convoy  the  merchant  ships  bound  to  Turkey,  Spain, 
and  Italy  ;  to  cruise  thirty  days  in  a  certain  latitude,  for 
the  protection  of  the  Spanish  plate  fleet,  homeward 
bound  ;  to  leave  part  of  his  squadron  at  Cadiz,  as  con- 
voy to  the  trade  for  England ;  to  proceed  with  the  rest 
to  the  Mediterranean  ;  to  join  the  Spanish  fleet  in  his 
return;  and  to  act  in  concert  with  them,    until  he 
should  be  joined  by  the  fleet  from  Turkey  and  the 
Straits,  and  accompany  them  back  to  England.     About 
the  latter  end  of  October  he  set  sail  from  St  Helen's, 
and  in  January  arrived  at  Cadiz  with  the  ships  under  his 
convoy.     There  leaving  rear-admiral  Hopson,  he  pro- 
ceeded for  the  Mediterranean.   In  the  bay  of  Gibraltar, 
he  was  overtaken  by  a  dreadful  tempest,  under  a  lee- 
shore,  which  he  could  not  possibly  weather,  and  where 
the  ground  was  so  foul  that  no  anchor  would  hold.  This 
expedient,   however,  was  tried.     A  great  number  of 
ships  were  driven  ashore,  and  many  perished.     The  ad- 
miral's ship  foundered  at  sea,  and  he  and  all  his  crew 
were  buried  in  the  deep,  except  two  Moors,  who  were 
miraculously  preserved.     Two  other  ships  of  the  line, 
three  ketches,  and  six  merchant  ships,  were  lost.     The 
remains  of  the  fleet  were  so  much  shattered,  that,  in- 


214  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1603. 

stead  of  prosecuting  their  voyage,  they  returned  to 
Cadiz,  in  order  to  be  refitted,  and  sheltered  from  the 
attempts  of  the  French  squadrons,  which  were  still  at 
sea,  under  the  command  of  Chateau-Renaud  and  Gaba- 
ret.  On  the  25  th  day  of  April  the  king  closed  the  ses- 
sion with  a  speech  in  the  usual  style,  and  the  parliament 
was  prorogued  to  the  18th  day  of  September/ 

§  XXXIX.  Lewis  of  Prance,  being  tired  of  the  wfcr> 
which  had  impoverished  his  country,  continued  to  tam- 
per with  the  duke  of  Savoy,  and,  by  the  canal  of  the 
pope,  made  some  offers  to  the  king  of  Spam,  which 
were  rejected.  Meanwhile  he  resolved  to  Stand  upon 
the  defensive  during  the  ensuing  campaign,  in  every 
part  but  Catalonia,  where  his  whole  naval  force  might 
co-operate  with  the  count  de  Noailles,  who  commanded 
the  land  army.  King  William  having  received  intelli- 
gence of  the  design  upon  Barcelona,  endeavoured  to 

.  *  Besides  the  bills  already  mentioned,  the  parliament  in  this  session 
passed  an  act  for  taking  and  stating  the  public  accounts — another  to  en- 
courage ship-building — a  third  for  the  better  disciplining  the  navy — the 
usual  militia  act — and  an  act  enabling  bis  majesty  to  make  grants  and 
leases  in  theduichy  of  Cornwall.    One  was  also  passed  for  renewing  a 
clause  in  ah  old  statute,  limiting  the  number  of  justices  of  the  peace  in  the 
principality  of  Wales.     The  duke  of  Norfolk  brought  an  action  in  the 
court  of  kingVbench  against  Mr.  Germaine,  for  criminal  conversation 
with  his  dutchess.    The  cause  was  tried,  and  the  jury  brought  in  their 
verdict  for  one  hundred  marks,  and  costs  of  suit  in  favour  of  the  plaintiff. 
Before  the  king  embarked,  he  gratified  a  good  number  of  bis  friends 
with  promotions.    Lord  Charles  Butler,  brother  to  the.  duke  of  Ormond, 
was  created  lord  Butler,  of  Weston,  in  England,  and  earl  of  Arran  in 
Ireland.    The  earl  of  Shrewsbury  was  honoured  with  the  title  of  duke. 
The  earl  of  Mulgrave,  being  reconciled  to  the  court  measures*  was  grati- 
fied with  a  pension  of  3000/.  and  the  title  of  marquis  of  Normandy. 
Henry  Herbert  was  ennobled  by  the  title  of  baron  Herbert  of  Oherbury. 
The  earls  of  Bedford,  Devonshire,  and  Clare,  were  promoted  to  the  rank 
of  dukes.    The  marquis  of  Caermarthen  was  made  duke  of  Leeds ;  lord 
viscount  Sidney,  created  earl  of  Romney ;.  and  viscount  Newport,  earl  of 
Bedford.    Russel  was  advanced  to  the  head  of  the  admiralty-board.    Sir 
George  Rooke  and  sir  George  Houblon  were  appointed  joint-commis- 
sioners, in  the  room  of  Killigrew  and  Delaval.    Charles  Montague  was 
made  chancellor  of  the  exchequer ;  and  sir  William  Trumbal  and  John 
Smith,  commissioners  of  the  treasury,  in  the  room  of  sir  Edward  Seymour 
and  Mr.  Hambden.  '      . 


H»3.  WILLIAM  AND  MARY.  2 1  5 

prevent  the  junction  of  the  Brest  and  Toulon  squadrons, 
by  sending  Russel  to  sea  as  early  as  the  fleet  could  be  in 
a  condition  to  sail:  but  before  he  arrived  at  Portsmouth 
the  Brest  squadron  had  quitted  that  harbour*  On  the 
3d  day  of  May,  the  admiral  sailed  from  St.  Helen's  with 
the  combined  squadrons  of  England  and  Holland, 
amounting  to  ninety  ships  of  the  line,  besides  frigates, 
fire-ships  and  tenders.  He  detached  captain  Pritchard 
of  the  Monmouth,  with  two  fire-ships,  to  destroy  a  fleet 
of  French  merchant  ships  near  Conquet-bay ;  and  this 
service  being  performed,  he  returned  to  St.  Helen's, 
where  he  had  left  sir  Cloudesley  Shovel  with  a  squadron, 
to  take  on  board  a  body  of  land-forces,  intended  for  a 
descent  upon  the  coast  of  France.  These  being  em* 
barked,  under  the  command  of  general  Ptolemache,  the 
whole  fleet  sailed  again  on  the  29th  of  May.  The  land 
and  sea  officers,  in  a  council  of  war,  agreed  that  part  of 
the  fleet  designed  for  this  expedition  should  separate 
from  the  rest,  and  proceed  to  Camaret-bay,  where  the 
forces  should  be  landed.  On  the  5th  day  of  June,  lord 
Berkeley,  who  commanded  this  squadron,  parted  with 
the  grand  fleet,  and  on  the  7  th  anchored  between  the 
bays  of  Camaret  and  Bertaume.  Next  day  the  marquis 
of  Caermarthen,  afterward  duke  of  Leeds,  who  served 
under  Berkeley,  as  rear-admiral  of  the  blue,  entered  Ca- 
maret-bay with  two  large  ships  and  'six  frigates,  to 
cover  the'  troops  in  landing.  The  French  had  received 
intelligence  of  the  design,  and  taken  such  precautions, 
under  the  conduct  of  the  celebrated  engineer  Vjaubap, 
that  the  English  were  exposed  to  a  terrible  fire  from  new 
erected  batteries,  as  well  as  from  a  strong  body  oftrfcdps; 
and,  though  the^ships  cannonaded  them  with  great  vir 
gour,  the  soldiers  could  not  maintain  any  regularity  in 
landing.  A  good  number  were  killed  in  the  open  boats 
before  they  reached  the  shore  ;  and  those  who  landed 
were  soon  repulsed,  in  spite  of  all  the  endeavours  of  ge- 
neral Ptolemache/  who  received  a  wound  in  the  thigh, 


216  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  ION. 

which  proved  mortal.  Seven  hundred  soldiers  are  said 
to  have  been  lost  on  this  occasion,  besides  those  who 
were  killed  on  board  of  the  ships.  The  Monk  ship  of 
war  was  towed  off  with  great  difficulty ;  but  a  Dutch  fri- 
gate of  thirty  guns  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy. 

§  XL.  After  this  unfortunate  attempt,  lord  Berkeley, 
with  the  advice  of  a  council  of  war,  sailed  back  for  Eng- 
land, and  at  St.  Helen  s  received  orders  from  the  queen 
to  call  a  council,  and  deliberate  in  what  manner  the  ships 
and  forces  might  be  best  employed.     They  agreed  to 
make  some  attempt  upon  the  coast  of  Normandy .  With 
this  view  they  set  sail  on  the  5th  day  of  July.     They 
bombarded  Dieppe,  and  reduced  the  greatest  part  of  the 
town  to  ashes.    Thence  they  steered  to  Havre-de-Graoe 
which  met  with  the  same  fate.     They  harassed  the 
French  troops,  who  marched  after  them  along-shore. 
They  alarmed  the  whole  coast,  and  filled  every  town 
with  such  consternation,   that  they  would  have  been 
abandoned  by  the  inhabitants,  had  they  not  been  detain* 
ed  by  military  force.     On  the  26th  of  July,  lord  Berke- 
ley returned  to  St.  Helen's,  where  he  quitted  the  fleet, 
and  the  command  devolved  upon  sir  Cloudesley  Shovel. 
This  officer  having  received  instructions  to  make  an  at- 
tempt upon   Dunkirk,    sailed  round  to  the  Downs, 
where  he  was  joined  by  M.  Meesters,  with  six-and-twen- 
ty  Dutch  pilots.  On  the  12th  of  September  he  appeared 
before  Dunkirk ;  and  next  day  sent  in  the  Charles  galley, 
with  two  bomb-ketches,  and  as  many  of  the  machines 
called  infernals.    These  were  set  on  fire  without  effect  * 
and  the  design  miscarried :  then  Shovel  steered  to  Calais, 
which  having  bombarded  with  little  success,  he  returned 
to  the  coast  of  England ;  and  the  bomb-ketches  and 
machines  were  sent  into  the  river  Thames. 

^XLI,  During  these  transactions,  admiral  Russel, 
with  the  grand  fleet,  sailed  for  the  Mediterranean  ;  and 
being  joined  by  rear-admiral  Neville  from  Cadiz,  toge- 
ther with  Callembergh  and  Evertzen,  he  steered  towards 


Kftk  WILLIAM  AND  MARY.  217 

Barcelona,  which  was.  besieged  by  the  French  fleet  and 
army.  At  his  approach,  Tourville  retired  with  precipi- 
tation into  the  harbour  of  Toulon ;  and  Noailles  aban- 
doned his  enterprise.  The  Spanish  affairs  were  in  such 
a  deplorable .  condition,  that  without  this  timely  assis- 
tance, the  kingdom  must  have  been  undone.  While 
he  continued  in  the  Mediterranean,  the  French  admiral 
durst  not  venture  to  appear  at  sea ;  and  all  his  projects 
were  disconcerted.  After  having  asserted  the  honour  of 
the  British  flag  in  those  seas  during  the  whole  summer, 
he  sailed  in  the  beginning  of  November  to  Cadiz,  where, 
by  the  express  order  of  the  king,  he  passed  the  winter, 
during  which  he  took  such  precautions  for  preventing 
Tourville  from  passing  the  Straits,  that  he  did  not  think 
proper  to  risk  the  passage. 

§  XLII.  It  will  now  be  necessary  to  describe  the  opera- 
tions on  the  continent.  In  the  middle  of  May  king 
William  arrived  in  Holland,  where  he  consulted  with 
the  states-general.  On  the  3d  day  of  June  he  repair* 
ed  to  Bethlem-abbey,  near  Louvain,  the  place  appointed 
for  the  rendezvous  of  the  army ;  and  there  he  was  met 
by  the  electors  of  Bavaria  and  Cologn.  In  a  few  days  a 
numerous  army  was  assembled ;  and  every  thing  seemed 
to  promise  an  active  campaign.  On  the  3d  day  of  June, 
the  dauphin  assumed  the  command  of  the  French  forces, 
with  which  Luxembourg  had  taken  post  between  Mons 
and  Maubeuge ;  and  passing  the  Sambre,  encamped  at 
Fleurus  :  but  on  the  18th,  he  removed  from  thence,  and 
took  up  his  quarters  between  St.  Tron  and  Wanheim  : 
while  the  confederates  lay  at  Roosbeck.  On  the  1 1th  of 
July,  the  dauphin  marched  in  four  columns  to  Oerle 
upon  the  Jaar,  where  he  pitched  his  camp.  On  the  22d, 
the  confederates  marched  to  Bomale :  then  the  dauphin 
took  the  route  to  Vignamont,  where  he  secured  his  army 
by  entrenchments,  as  his  forces  were  inferior  in  number 
to  those  of  the  allies ;  and  he  had  been  directed  by  his 
father  to  avoid  aq  engagement.     In  this  situation  both 


218  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1<SH, 

armies  remained  till  the  15th  day  of  August,  when  king 
William  sent  the  heavy  baggage  to  Louvain;  and  on 
the  18th  made  a  motion  to  Sombref.  This  was  no 
sooner,  known  to  the  enemy,  than  they  decamped ;  and 
having  marched  all  night,  posted  themselves  between 
Temploux  and  Masy,  within  a  league  and  a  half  of  the 
confederates.  The  king  of  England  resolved  to  pass 
the  Scheldt ; .  and  with  this  view  marched,  by  the  way 
of  Nivelle  and  Soignies,  to  Chievres:  from  thence  he  de- 
tached the  duke  of  Wirtemberg,  with  a  strong  body  of 
horse  and-  foot,  to  pass  the  river  at  Oudenarde,  while 
the  elector  of  Bavaria  advanced  with  another  detachment 
to  pass  it  at  Pont  de  Espieres.  Notwithstanding  all  the 
expedition  they  could  make,  their  purpose  was  antici- 
pated by  Luxembourg,  who  being  apprised  of  their  route, 
had  detached  four  thousand  horse,  with  each  a  foot  sol- 
dier behind  the  toooper,  to  reinforce  M.  de  Valette,  who 
commanded  that  part  of  the  French  line.  These  were 
sustained  by  a  choice  body  of  men,  who  travelled  with 
great  expedition,  without  observing  the  formalities  of  a 
march.  Marjeschal  de  Villeroy  followed  the  same  route, 
with  all  the  cavalry  of  the  right  wing,  the  household 
troops,  and  twenty  field-pieces ;  and  the  rest  of  the  army 
was  brought  up  by  the  dauphin  in  person^  They 
marched  with  such  incredible  diligence,  that  the  elector 
of  Bavaria  could  scarce  believe  his  own  eyes,  when  he 
arrived  in  sight  of  the  Scheldt,  and  saw  them  entrench-? 
ing  themselves  on  the  other  side  of  the  river.  King 
William,  having  reconnoitred  their  disposition,  thought 
it  impracticable  to  pass  at  that  place:  and  therefore 
marched  down  the  river  to  Oudenarde,  where  a  passage 
had  been  already  effected  by  the  duke  of  Wirtemberg; 
Here  the  confederates  passed  the  Scheldt  on  the  27th 
day  of  the  month ;  and  the  king  fixed  his  head-quarters 
at  Wanneghem.  His  intention  was  to  have  taken  pos^ 
session  of  Cour tray,  and  established  winter-rquarters.  for 
a  considerable  part  of  his  army  in  that  district ;  but  Lux- 


1004.  WILLIAM  AND  MARY.  219 

embourg,  having  posted  himself  between  that  place  and 
Menin,  extended  his  lines  in  such  a  manner,  that  the 
confederates  could  not  attempt  to  force  them,  nor  even 
hinder  him  from  subsisting  his  army  at  the  expense  of 
the  Castellany  of  Courtray,  during  the  remainder  of  the 
campaign.  This  surprising  march  was  of  such  impor- 
tance to  the  French  king,  that  he  wrote  with  his  own 
hand  a  letter  of  thanks  to  his  army ;  and  ordered,  that 
it  should  be  read  to  every  particular  squadron  and  bat- 
talion. 

§  XLIII.  The  king  of  England,  though  disappointed 
in  his  scheme  upon  Courtray,  found  means  to  make 
some  advantage  of  his  superiority  in  number.   He  draft* 
ed  troops  from  the  garrison  of  Liege  and  Maestricht ; 
and  on  the  3d  day  of  September  reinforced  this  body 
with  a  large  detachment  from  his  own  camp,  conferring 
the  command  upon  the  duke  of  Holstein-Ploen,  with 
orders  to  undertake  the  siege  of  Huy.     Next  day  the 
whole  confederate  forces  passed  the  Lys,  and  encamped 
at  Wouterghem.     From  thence  the  king,  with  part  of 
the  army,  marched  to  Roselaer :  this  diversion  obliged' 
the  dauphin  to  make  considerable  detachments,  for  the 
security  of  Ypres  and  Menin  on  one  side,  and  to  cover 
Fumes  and  Dunkirk  on  the  other.     At  this  juncture,  a 
Frenchman,  being  seized  in  the  very  act  of  setting  fire 
to  one  of  the*  ammunition  waggons  in  the  allied  army, 
confessed  he  had  been  employed  for  this  purpose  by 
some  of  the  French  generals,  and  suffered  death  as  a 
traitor.     On  the  J  6th  day  of  the  month,  the  duke  of 
Holstein-Ploen  invested  Huy,  and  carried  on  the  siege 
with  such  .vigour,  that  in  ten  days  the  garrison  capitu- 
lated.   The  king  ordered  Dixmuyde,  Deynse,  Ninove, 
and  Tirlemont,  to  be  secured  for  winter-quarters  to  part 
of  the  army:  the  dauphin  returned  to  Versailles :  Wil- 
liam quitted  the  camp  on  the  last  day  of  September;  and 
both  armies  broke  up  about  the  middle  of  October. 

§  XLIV.  The  operations  on  the  Rhine  were  precon- 


220  HISTORY  <*F  ENGLAND.  MM. 

certed  between  king  William  and  the  prince  of  Baden, 
who  had  visited  London  in  the  winter.  The  dispute 
between  the  emperor  and  the  elector  of  Saxony  was  com- 
promised ;  and  this  young  prince  dying  during  the  ne- 
gotiation, the  treaty  was  perfected  by  his  brother  and 
successor,  who  engaged  to  furnish  twelve  thousand  men 
yearly,  in  consideration  of  a  subsidy  from  the  court  of 
Vienna.  In  the  beginning  of  June,  mareschal  de  Lor- 
ges  passed  the  Rhine  at  Philipsburgh,  in  order  to  give 
battle  to  the  imperialists,  encamped  at  Hailbron.  The 
jprince  of  Baden,  who  was  not  yet  joined  by  the  Saxons, 
Hessians,  nor  by  the  troops  of  Munster  and  Paderborni 
dispatched  couriers  to  quicken  the  march  of  these  auxi- 
liaries, and  advanced  to  Eppirigen,  where  he  proposed 
to  wait  till  they  should  come  up :  but,  on  the  1 5th, 
receiving  undoubted  intelligence  that  the  enemy  were  in 
motion  towards  him,  he  advanced  to  meet  them  in  order 
of  battle.  De  Lorges  concluded  that  this  was  a  despe- 
rate effort,  and  immediately  halted,  to  make  the  neces- 
sary preparations  for  an  engagement.  This  pause  ena- 
bled prince  Lewis  to  take  possession  of  a  strong  pass 
nCar  Sintzheim,  from  which  he  could  not  easily  be  dis- 
lodged. Then  the  mareschal  proceeded  to  Viseloch, 
and  ravaged  the  adjacent'country,  in  hopes  of"  drawing 
the  imperialists  from  their  entrenchments.  The  prince 
being  joined  by  the  Hessians,  resolved  t6  beat  up  the 
quarters  of  the  enemy ;  and  the  French  general  being 
apprised  of  his  design,  retreated  at  midnight  with  the 
utmost  precipitation.  Having  posted  himself  at  Ruth, 
he  sent  his  heavy  baggage  to  Philipsburgh :  then  he 
moved  to  Gonsbergh,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Man- 
heim,  repassed  the  Rhine,  arid  encamped  between  Spiers 
and  Worms.  The  prince  of  Baden  being  joined  by  the 
allies,  passed  the  river  by  a  bridge  of  boats  near  Hagen- 
bach,  in  the  middle  of  September ;  and  laid  the  country 
of  Alsace  under  contribution.  Considering  the  advanced 
season  of  the  year,  this  was  a  rash  undertaking ;  and  the 


U*4.  WILLIAM  AND  MARY.  221 

* 

French  general  resolved  to  profit  by  his  enemy's  teme- 
rity. He  forthwith  advanced  against  the  imperialists^ 
foreseeing  that,  should  they  be  worsted  in  battle,  their 
whole  army  would  l)e  ruined.  Prince  Lewis,  informed 
of  his  intention,  immediately  passed  the  Rhine ;  and  this 
retreat  was  no  sooner  effected,  than  the  river  swelled  to 
such  a  degree,  that  the  island  in  the  middle,'  and  great 
part  of  the  camp  he  had  occupied,  was  overflowed. 
Soon  after  this  incident  both  armies  retired  into  winter- 
quarters.  The  campaign  in  Hungary  produced  no  event 
of  importance.  It  was  opened  by  the  hew  vizier,  who 
arrived  at  Belgrade  in  the  middle  of  August ;  and  about 
the  same  time  Caprara  assembled  the  imperial  army 
in  the  neighbourhood  "of  Peterwaradin.  The  Turks 
passed  the  Saave,  in  order  to  attack  their  camp,  and  car- 
ried on  their  approaches  with  five  hundred  pieces  of  can- 
non :  but  made  very  little  progress.  The  imperialists 
received  reinforcements ;  the  season  wasted  away ;  a 
feud  arose  between  the  vizier  and  the  cham  of  the  Tar- 
tars :  and  the  Danube  being  swelled  by  heavy  rains,  so 
as  to  interrupt  the  operations  of  the  Turks,  their  general 
decamped  in  the  night  of  the  1st  of  October.  They 
afterward  made  an  unsuccessful  attempt  upon  Titul, 
while  the  imperial  general  made  himself  master  of  Giula. 
in  the  course  of  this  summer,'  the  Venetians,  who  were 
also  at  war  with  the  Turks,  reduced  Cyclut,  a  place  of 
importance  on  the  river  Naranta,  and  made  a  conquest 
of  the  island  of  Scio  in  the  Archipelago. 

§  XLV.  We  have  already  observed,  that  the  French 
king  had  determined  to  act  vigorously  in  Catalonia.  In 
the  beginning  of  May,  the  duke  de  Noaiiles  advanced 
at  the  head  of  eight-and-twenty  thousand  men  to  the 
river  Ter,  on  the  opposite  bank  of  which  the  viceroy  of 
Catalonia  was  encamped  with  sixteen  thousand  Spaniards! 
The  French  general  passed  the  river  in  the  face  of  this 
armyi  and  attacked  their  entrenchments  with  such  im- 
petuosity, that  in  less  than  an  hour  they  were  totally 

vol.  I.  *  a 


382.  HKT0BY  OP  BNQLAVO.  1*M. 

defeated  Thmhe«a«5h«dtaPjdanK»,  i^in»dertaolt 
the  fiege  of  that  pkoe,  white,  at  the  same  time,  it  was 
blocked  up  by  the  combined  squadron*  of  Brest  and 
Toulon,  Though  the  besieged  made  an  obstinate  de« 
fence,  the  town  was  taken  by  storm,  the  houses  were 
pillaged,  and  the  people  put  to  the  sword,  without  dis- 
tinction of  age,  sex,  or  condition.  Then  he  invested 
CKfonne,  which  in  a  few  days  capitulated*  Ostalric 
met  with  the  same  fate,  and  Noailles  was  created  viceroy 
of  Catalonia  by  the  French  king.  In  the  beginning  of 
August  he  distributed  his  forces  into  quarters  of  refresh- 
ment, along  the  river  Terdore,  resolving  to  undertake 
the  siege  of  Barcelona,  winch  was  saved  by  the  arrival 
of  admiral  Ruasel.  The  war  languished  in  Piedmont, 
on  account  of  a  secret  negotiation  between  the  king  of 
France  and  the  duke  of  Savoy ;  notwithstanding  the  re* 
moostr&nces  of  Rouvigmy,  earl  of  Galway,  who  had  suc- 
ceeded the  duke  of  Schomberg  in  the  command  of  the 
British  forces  in  that  country.  Casal  was  closely 
blocked  up  by  the  reduction  of  Fort  St.  George,  and 
the  Vaudois  gained  the  advantage  in  some  skirmishes  in 
the  valley  of  Ragehs ;  but  no  design  of  importance  was 
executed* 

$  XLVI.  England  had  continued  very  quiet  under  the 
queen's  administration,  if  we  except  some  little  commo- 
tions occasioned  by  the  practices,  or  pretended  practices, 
of  the  Jacobites.  Prosecutions  were  revived  against 
certain  gentlemen  of  Lancashire  and  Cheshire,  for  hav- 
ing been  concerned  in  the  conspiracy  formed  in  favour 
of.  the  late  king'*  projected  invasion  from  Normandy. 
These  steps  were  owing  to  the  suggestions  of  infamous 
informers,  whom  the  ministry  countenanced!  Colonel 
Parker,  and  one  Crosby,  were  imprisoned,  and  bills  of 

•  *  In  the  course  of  this  year,  M.  da  Casse,  governor  of  St.  Domingo, 
made  an  unsjiefrosftll  attempt  upon  the  isU*nd  of  Jamaica ;.  «nd  M, 
St.  Clair,  with  four  men  of  war,  formed  a  design  agaipat  St.  John's, 
Newfoundland ;  but  he  was  repulsed  with  loss,  by  the  valour  of  the  inha- 
bitants. 


MM*  '    WILLIAM  AND  MARY.  fc£J 

treason  found  against  them :  bat  Parker  mode  tofe  <&* 
cdpe  from  the  Tower,  and  was  never  retaken,  tfttoogh 
ate  ward  of  400/.  was  set  upon  bis  head*  The  king* 
having  settled  the  affairs  rjf  the  confederacy  at  the 
Hague,  embarked  for  England  oa  die  8th  of  Novera-i 
ber*  and  next  day  landed  at  Margate.  On  die  lStfc  fai 
opened  the  session  of  parliament  with  a  speech,  in  which 
he  observed,  tbat  the  posture  of  aflairs  was  improved, 
both  by  sea  tod  land,  since  they  last  parted ;  in  partitas* 
lar,  that  a  stop  was  put  to  the  progress  of  the  Preach 
arms.  He  desired  they  would  continue  the  act  of  too* 
nage  and  poundage,  which  would  expire  at  Christmas  t 
he  reminded  them  of  the  debt  for  the  transport  strips 
employed  in  the  reduction  of  Ireland;  and  esborteA 
them  to  prepare  some  good  bill  for  the  encouragement 
of  seamen.  A  majority  in  both  houses  was  already 
eared ;  and  in  all  probability  he  bargained  for  their 
descension,  by  agreeing  to  the  ball  for  triennial  parfi*» 
ments.  This  Mr.  Hariey  brought  in,  by  order  of  the 
lower  house,  immediately  after  their  first  adjournment^ 
and  it  kept  pace  with  the  consideration  of  the  sap* 
plies.  The  commons,  haying  examined  the  estimates 
and  accounts,  voted  4,764,7 12/.  for  the  servioe  of 
the  army  and  navy.  In  order  to  raise  thii  sum,  they 
continual  the  land-tax;  they  renewed  the  subsidy  xtf 
tonnage  and  poundage  for  five  years,  mid  imposed 
new  duties  oil  different  commodities.0  The  triennial 
bill  eha&ted,  that  a  parliament  should  be  held  once 
in  three  years  at  least:  that  within  three  years  at 
farthest,  after  the  dissolution  of  the  parliament  then 
subsisting,  and  so  from  time  to  time,  for  ever  after, 
legal  writs,  under  the  great  seal,  should  be  issued,  by  the 
direction  of  the  crown,   for  calling,  assembling,  and 

*  They  imposed  certain  rates  add  duties  upon  marriages,  births,- and 
burials,  bachelors,  and  widows.  They  passed  «n  aotfer  laying  axWitiesutl 
duties  qpon  coffee,  tea,  and  chocolate,  towards  paying  the  debt  due 
for  the  transport  ships ;  and  another,  imposing  duties  on  glass-ware, 
stone,  and  earthen  bottles,  coal,  and  euhn 

q  2 


22*  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  «**, 

holditog  another  new  parliament:  that  no  parliament 
should  continue  longer  than  three  years  at  farthest,  to 
be  accounted  from  the  first  day  of  the  first  session: 
and  that  the  parliament  then  subsisting  should  cease 
aad  determine  on  the  1  st  day  of  November  next  fol- 
lowing, unless  their  majesties  should  think  fit  to  dis- 
solve it  sooner.  The  duke  of  Devonshire,  the  marquis 
of  Halifax,  the  earls  of  Weymouth  and  Aylesbury,  pro- 
tested against  this  bill,  because  it  tended  to  the  conti- 
nuance of  the  present  parliament  longer  than,  as  they 
apprehended,  was  agreeable  to  the  constitution  of 
England* 

^XLVII.  While  this  bill  was  depending,  Dr.  John 
Tillotson,  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  was  seized  with  a 
fit  of  the  dead  pally,  in  the  chapel  of  Whitehall,  and 
died  on  the  22d  day  of  November,  deeply  regretted  by 
the  king  and  queen,  who  shed  tears  of  sorrow  at  his  de- 
cease ;  anid  sincerely  lamented  by  the  public,  as  a  pattern 
of  elegance,  ingenuity,  meekness,  charity,  and  modera-* 
tion.  These  qualities  he  must  be  allowed  to  have, 
possessed,  notwithstanding  the  invectives  of  his  enemies, 
who  accused  him  of  puritanism,  flattery,  and  ambition ; 
and  charged  him  with  having  conduced  to  a  dangerous 
schism  in  the  church,  by  accepting  the  archbishopric 
during  the  life  of  the  deprived  Sancroft.  He  was  suc- 
ceeded in  the  metropolitan  see  by  Dr.  Tennison,  bishop 
6f  Lincoln,  recommended  by  the  whig  party,  which  now 
.  predominated,  in  the  cabinet.  The  queen  did  not  long 
survive  her  favourite  prelate.  In  about  a  month  after 
his  decease,  she  was  taken  ill  of  the  small-pox,  and  the 
symptoms  proving  dangerous,  she  prepared  herself  for 
death  with  great  composure.  She  spent  some  time  in 
exercises  of  devotion,  and  private  conversation  with  the 
new  archbishop ;  she  received  the  sacrament  with  all  the 
bishops  who  were  in  attendance;  and  expired  on  the 
28th  day  of  December,  An  the  thirty-third  year  of  her 
age^  and  in  the  sixth  of  her  reign,  to  the  inexpressible 


MM.  WILLIAM  AND  MARY.  fi£5 

grief  of  the  king,  who,  for  some  weeks  after  her  death; 
could  neither  see  company,  nor  attend  to  the  business  of 
state.  Mary  was  in  her  person  tall  and  v/t&  propor- 
tioned, with  an  oval  visage,  lively  eyes,  agreeable  fea*' 
tures,  a  mild  aspect,  and  an- air  of  dignity.  Her  appre- 
hension was  clear,  her  memory  tenacious,  and  her  judg- 
ment solid.  She  was  a  zealous  Protestant,  scrupulously 
exact  in  all  the  duties  of  devotion,  of  an  even  temper, 
and  of  a  calm  and  mild  conversation.  She  was  ruffled 
by  no  passion,  and  seems  to  have  been  a  stranger  to 
the  emotions  of  natural  affection :  for  she  ascended, 
without  compunction,  the  throne  from  which  her  father 
had  been  deposed,  and  treated  her  sister  as  an  alien  to 
her  blood.  In  a  word,  Mary  seems  to  have  imbibed 
the  cold  disposition  and  apathy  of  her  husband ;  and  to 
have  centred  all  her  ambition  in  deserving  the  epithet 
of  a  humble  and  obedient  wife.p 

§  XLVIII.  The  princess  Anne  being  informed  of  the 
queen's  dangerous  indisposition,  sent  a  lady  of  her  bed- 
chamber, to  desire  she  might  be  admitted  to  her  majes- 
ty ;  but  this  request  was  not  granted.  She  Was  thanked 
for  her  expression  of  concern ;  arid  given  to  understand, 
that  the  physicians  had  directed  that  the  queen  should 
be  kept  as  quiet  as  possible.  Before  her  death,  how- 
ever, she  sent  a  forgiving  message  to  her  sister :  and, 
after  her  decease,  the  earl  of  Sunderland  effected  a  re- 
conciliation between  the  king  and  the  princess,  who  vi- 

p  Her  obsequies  were  performed  with  great  magnificence.    The  body 
was  attended  from  Whitehall  to  Westminster-abbey  by  all  the  judges, 
Serjeants  at  law,  the  lord-mayor  and  aldermen  of  the  city  of  London,  and 
both  houses  of  parliament;  and  the  funeral  sermon  was  preached  by  Dr. 
Tennison,  archbishop  of  Canterbury:  Dr.  Kenn,  the  deprived  bishop  of 
Bath  and  Wells,  reproached  him  in  a  letter,  for  not  having  called  upon 
her  majesty,  on  her  death-bed,  to  repent  of  the  share  she  had  in  the  Revo- 
lution.   This  was  answered  by  another  pamphlet.    One  of  the  Jacobite 
clergy  insulted  the  queen's  memory,  by  preaching  on  the  following'  text : 
"Go  now^  see  this  cursed  woman,  and  bury  her,  for  she  is  a  king's  daugh- 
ter."  On  the  other  hand,  the  lord-mayor,  aldermen,  and  common-council 
of  London,  came  to  a  resolution  to  erect  her  statue,  with  that  of  the  king, 
in  the  Royal  Exchange. 


B26  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  WW. 

sited  him  at  Kensington,  where  she  was  reeeired  with 
imcommoaa  civility.  He  appointed  the  palace  of  St. 
JtmesTa  for  her  residence,  and  presented  her  with  the 
greater  part  of  the  queen's  jewels.  But  a  mutual  jea- 
lousy and  disgust  subsisted  under  these  exteriors  of 
friendship  and  esteem.  The  two.  houses  of  parliament 
waited  on  the,  king  at  Kensington,  with  consolatory  ad- 
dresses on  the  death  of  his  consort :  their  example  waa 
fcttowed  by  the  regency  of  Scotland,  the  city  ami  clergy 
of  London,  the  dissenting  ministers,  and  almost  aH  the 
great  corporations  in  England.* 


CHAP.  V. 


WILLIAM. 

§  I.  Account  of  the  t»*ncashlra  plot— §  II.  The  commons  inquire  into 
-  the  abuses  which  had  crept  into  the  army— §  III.  They  expel  and  pro- 
secute  tome  of  their  own.  members  for  corruption  in.  the  affair  of  the 
East  India  company — §  IV.  Examination  of  Cooke,  Acton,  and  others 
— §  V.  The  commons  impeach  the  duke  of  Leeds— §  VL  The  parlia- 
ment is  prorogued— §  VII.  Session  of  the  Scottish  partiaioent— §  VIII* 
They  inquire  into  the  massacre  of  Glencoe — §  IX.  They  pass  an  act 
for  erecting  a  trading  company  to  Africa  and  the  Indies — §  X.  Pro- 
ceedings in  the  parliament  of  Ireland — §  XI.  Disposition  of  tbe-  armies 
in  Flanders— §  XII.  King  Wif&am  undertakes  the  siege  of  Naranr— 
§  XIII.  Famous  retreat  of  prince  Vandemont  Brussels  is  bombarded 
byfVHteroy— §  XIV.  Progress  of  the  siege  of  Namur—  §  XV.  Viileroy 
attempts  to  relieve  it  The  besiegers  make  a  desperate  assault — 
%  XVI*  The  place  capitulates.  Boomers  is  arrested,  by  order  of  king: 
William — $  XVIL  Campaign  on  the  Rhine  and  in  Hungary — 
$  XVIII.  The  duke  of  Savoy  takes  Casal-*-  §  XIX.  Transactions  in 
Catalonia — %  XX*  The  English  fleet  bombards  St.  Maloes,  and  other 
places  on  the  coast  of  France — §  XXI*  Wilmot's  expedition  to  tho 
,  West  Indies— §  XXII.  A  new  parliament— §  XXIII.  They  pass  tho 
,  bill  for  regulating  trials  in  cases  of  high-treason — §  XXIV*  Resolutions 
.  with  respect  to  a  new  coinage — $  XXV.  The  commons  address  the 

*  The  earia  of  Rochester  and  Nottingham  are  said  to  nave  started  a 
doubt*  whether  the  parliament  was  not  dissolved  by  tlio  queen's  death  ; 
but  this  dangerous  motion  met  with  no  countenance. 


MM.  fttLLTAM.  227 

king,  to  retail  *  gra*t  ho  bad  made  to  the  earl  of  Portland-^  &xVt 
Another  against  the  new  Scottish  company— §  XXVIL  Intrigue*  of 
the  Jacobites— §  XXVllJ.  Conspiracy  against  the  life  of  William — 

>  $  XXIX.  Design  of  an  ittVasioti  defeated-^  XXX.  Hw  two  bdufta 
«o«age  in  an  asfooiation  for  the  defence  of  his  nmjttty~4  XXXl. 
Establishment  of  a  land-bank— ^  XXXII.  Trial  of  the  conspirators-- 
§  XXXIII.  tTne  allies  burn  the  magazine  at  Give*— §  XX&IV. 

.  Irtwie  XtVi  toftkes  advances  towards  *  peace  with  HoHaad^- 
§  XXXV.  He  detaches  (he  duke  of  Savoy  from  the  confederacy—- 
£  XXXVI.  Naval  transactions— §  XXXVII.  Proceedings  in  the  par- 

"  Haments  of  Scotland  and  Ireland— §  XXXVlIt.  Zeal  of  the  EngUsn 
cemftum*  itt  thtlr  aftfectioft  td  the  king— §  XXXIX*  Hesitation* 
touching  the  coin,  and  the  support  of  public  credit— §  XL.  Enormous 
impositions — §  XLL  Sir  John  Pen  wick  is  apprehended — §  XLII.  A 
bill  of  attainder  being  brought  into  the  house,  against  him,  produces 
violent  debates-^  XUlL  His  defence— $  XLIV.  The  Mil  <WWW~- 
§  XLV.  Sir  John  Fenwick  is  beheaded— §  XL VI.  The  earl  of  Moo- 
mouth  sent  to  the  Tower— $  XLVlI.  Inquiry  into  miscarriages  by 
**— |  XLVllI.  Negotiations  at  Ryswick  — |  XLIX.  The  French 
tike  Barcelona— ^  lx  Fruitless  expedition  of  admiral  Nnriittf  to  tfato 
West  Indies — §  LI.  The  elector  of  Saxony  is  chosen  king  of  Poland—- 
§  Lt I.  Peter  the  czar  of  Muscovy  travels  in  disguise  with  bis  own 
ambassadors-^  LIU.  Proceedings  in  the  congress  at  ttyswick-*- 
§  LIV*  The  ambhssaddrs  of  England,  Spain,  and  Hollaed,  sign  the 

.  treaty — §  LV.  A  general  pacification. 

§  I.  Th*  kingdom  now  resounded  with  the  complaints 
of  tfafc  Papitts  sod  malecon tents,  who  tafced  the  ministry 
with  subornation  df  perjury,  in  the  case  of  the  Lanca- 
fchire  gentletaen  Who  had  been  persecuted~for  the  con*- 
piracy.  Ond  Lunt,  an  Irishman,  had  informed  sit* 
John  Trenchard*  secretary  of  state,  that  he  had  been 
sent  from  Ireland,  with  commissions  frpm  king  James  to 
divers  gentlemen  in  Lancashire  and  Cheshire  :  that  he 
had  assisted  in  buying  arms,  and  enlisting  men  to  serve 
that  king  in  his  projected  invasion  of  England :  that  he 
had  begn  twice  dispatched  by  those  gentlemen  to  the 
court  of  St*  G^rmains,  assisted  many  Jacobites  in  re- 
pairing to  France,  helped  to  conceal  others  that  came 
from  that  kingdom ;  and  that  all  thdse  persons  told  him 
they  were  furnished  with  money  by  sir  John  Friend,  to 
defray  the  expense  of  their  expeditions.  His  testimony 
tyas  confirmed*  by  other  infamous  emissaries,  who  receiv- 
ed but  too  much  countenance  from  the  government. 


223  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  IflMt 

Blank  warrants  were  issued,  and  filled  up  occasionally 
with  such  names  as  the  informers  suggested.  These 
.were  delivered  to  Aaron  Smith,  solicitor  to  the  treasury, 
who,  with  messengers,  accompanied  Lunt  and  his  asso- 
ciates to  Lancashire,  under  the  protection  of  a  party  of 
Dutch  horse-guards,  commanded  by  one  captain  Baker. 
They  were  empowered  to  break  open  houses,  seize  pa- 
pers, and  apprehend  persons,  according  to  their  plea- 
sure ;  and  they  committed  many  acts  of  violence  and 
oppression.  The  persons,  against  whom  these  measures 
were  taken,  being  apprised  of  the  impending  danger, 
generally  retired  from  their  own  habitations.  Some, 
however,  were  taken  and  imprisoned :  a  few  arms  were 
secured ;  and,  in  the  house  of  Mr.  Standish,  at  Standish- 
hall,  they  found  the  draft  of  a  declaration  to  be  published 
by  king  James  at  his  landing.  As  this  prosecution  seemed 
calculated  to  revive  the  honour  of  a  stale  conspiracy,  and 
the  evidences  were  persons  of  abandoned  characters,  the 
friends  of  those  who  were  persecuted  found  no  great 
difficulty  in  rendering  the  scheme  odious  to  the  nation. 
They  even  employed  the  pen  of  Ferguson,  who  had  been 
concerned  in  every  plot  that  was  hatched  since  the  Rye- 
house  conspiracy.  This  veteran,  though  appointed 
housekeeper  to  the  excise-office,  thought  himself  poorly 
recompensed  for  the  part  he  had  acted  in  the  revolution, 
became  dissatisfied,  and,  upon  this  occasion,  published  a 
letter  to  sir  John  Trenchard  on  the  abuse  of  power.  It 
was  replete  with  the  most  bitter  invectives  against  the 
ministry,  and  contained  a  great  number,  of  flagrant  in- 
stances, in  which  the  court  had  countenanced  the  vilest 
corruption,  perfidy,  and  oppression.  This  production 
was  in  every  body's  hand,  and  had  such  an  effect  upon 
the  people,  that  when  the  prisoners  were  brought  to 
trial  at  Manchester,  the  populace  would  have  put  the 
witnesses  to  death,  had  they  not  been  prevented  by  the 
interposition  of  those  who  Were  friends  to  the  accused 
persons,  and  had  already  taken  effectual  measures  for 


mm.  William.  229 

their  safety.  Lunt's  chief  associate  In  the  mystery  of 
information  was  one  Taaflfe,  a  wretch  of  the  most  pro* 
fligate  principles,  who,  finding  himself  disappointed  in 
his  hope  of  reward  from  the  ministry,  was  privately 
gained  over  by  the  agents  for  the  prisoners.  Lunt, 
when  desired  in  court  to  point  out  the  persons  whom  he 
had  accused,  committed  such  a  mistake  as  greatly  inva- 
lidated his  testimony ;  and  Taaffe  declared  before  the 
bench,  that  the  pretended  plot  was  no  other  than  a  con- 
trivance between  himself  and  Lunt,  in  order  to  procure 
money  from  the  government.  The  prisoners  were  im- 
mediately acquitted,  and  the  ministry  incurred  a  heavy 
load  of  popular  odium,  as  the  authors  or  abettors  of 
knavish  contrivances  to  ensnare  the  innocent.  The  go- 
vernment, with  a  view  to  evince  their  abhorrence  of  such 
practices,  ordered  the  witnesses  to  be  prosecuted  for  a 
conspiracy  against  the  lives  and  estates  of  the  gentlemen 
who  had  been  accused ;  and  at  last  the  affair  was  brought 
into  the  house  of  commons.  The  Jacobites  triumphed 
in  their  victory.  They  even  turned  the  battery  of  cor- 
ruption upon  the  evidence  for  the  crown,  not  without 
making  a  considerable  impression.  But  the  cause  was 
now  debated  before  judges,  who  were  not  at  all  propitious 
to  their  views.  The  commons,  having  set  on  foot  all 
inquiry,  and  examined  all  the  papers  and  circumstances 
relating  to  the  pretended  plot,  resolved,  that  there  was 
sufficient  ground  for  the  prosecution  and  trials  of  the 
gentlemen  at  Manchester ;  and  that  there  was  a  dan- 
gerous conspiracy  against  the  king  and  government. 
They  issued  an  order  for  taking  Mr.  Standish  into  cus- 
tody ;  and  the  messenger  reporting  that,  he  was  not  to  be 
found,  they  presented  an  address  to  the  king,  desiring  a 
proclamation  might  be  published,  offering  a  reward  for 
apprehending  his  person.  The  peers  concurred  with 
the  commons  in  their  sentiments  of  this  affair ;  for  com-, 
plaints  having  been  laid  before  their  house  also,  by  the 


230  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  MM. 

persons  who  thought  themselves  aggrieved,  the  questk)* 
was  put,  whether  the  government  had  cause  to  prosecute 
them ;  and  carried  in  the  affirmative ;  though  a  protest 
was  entered  against  this  vote  by  the  earls  of  Rochester 
and  Nottingham.  Notwithstanding  these  decisions,  the 
accused  gentlemen  prosecuted  Lunt,  and  two  of  his  do 
complices,  for  perjury,  at  the  Lancaster  assises :  and  all 
three  were  found  guilty.  They  were  immediately  in>- 
dicted  by  the  crown,  for  a  conspiracy  against  the  lives 
and  liberties  of  the  persons  they  had  accused.  The  in- 
tention of  the  ministry  in  laying  this  indictment,  was  to 
seize  the  opportunity  of  punishing  some  of  the  witnesses 
for  the  gentlemen,  who  had  prevaricated  in  giving  their 
testimony :  but  the  design  being  discovered*  the  Lanca- 
shire men  refused  to  produce  their  evidence  against  the 
informers  :  the  prosecution  dropped  of  consequence, 
and  the  prisoners  were  discharged. 
.  $11.  When  the  commons  were  employed  in  examin- 
ing the  state  of  the  revenue,  and  taking  measures  for 
raising  the  necessary  supplies*  the  inhabitants  of  Roy- 
ston  presented  a  petition,  complaining,  that  the  officers 
and  soldiers  of  the  regiment  belonging  to  colonel  Hast- 
ings, which  was  quartered  upon  them,  exacted  subsist* 
ence-money,  even  on  pain  of  military  execution.  The 
house  was  immediately  kindled  into  a  flame  by  this  in- 
formation. The  officers,  and  Paundefort,  agent  for  the 
regiment,  were  examined :  then  it  was  unanimously  re- 
solved, that  such  a  practice  was  arbitrary,  illegal,  and  a 
violation  of  the  rights  and  liberties  of  the  subject.  Upon 
farther  inquiry,  Fauncefort  and  some  other  agents  were 
committed  to  the  custody  of  the  serjeant,  for  having 
neglected  to  pay  the  subsistence-money  they  had  re- 
ceived for  the  officers  and  soldiers.  He  was  afterward 
sent  to  the  Tower,  together  with  Henry  Guy,  a  member 
of  the  house,  and  secretary  to  the  treasury,  the  one  for 
giving,  and  the  other  for  receiving,  a  bribe  to  obtain  the 


)6M.  WILLIAM.  231 

fcing'*  bounty*  Pauncefort's  brother  was  Ebewise  com* 
mitted,  for  being  concerned  in  the  same  commerce. 
Gtiy  had  been  employed,  together  with  Trevor  the 
speaker,  as  the  court  agent  for  securing  a  majority  in 
the  house  of  commons :  for  that  reason  ha  was  ob- 
noxious to  the  members  in  the  opposition,  who  took  this 
opportunity  to  brand  him ;  and  the  courtiers  could  not 
With  .any  decency  .screen  him  from  their  vengeance. 
The  house  having  proceeded  in  this  inquiry,  drew  up  an 
Address  to  the  king,  enumerating  the  abuses  which  had 
crept  into  the  army,  add  demanding  immediate  redress* 
He  promised  to  consider  the  remonstrance,  and  redres* 
the. grievances  of  which  they  complained.  Accordingly, 
he  cashiered  colonel  Hastings ;  appointed  a  council  of 
officers  to:  sit  weekly,  and  examine  all  complaints  against 
any  officer  and  soldier ;  and  published  a  declaration  for 
the  maintenance  of  strict  discipline,  and  the  due  pay* 
went  of  quarters.b  Notwithstanding  these  concessions, 
the  commons  prosecuted  their  examinations:  they  com- 
mitted Mr,  James  Craggs,  one  of  the  contractors  for 
dothing  the  army,  because  he  refused  to  answer  upon 
oath  to  such  questions  as  might  be  put  to  him  by  the 
eemmis&iobers  of  accounts. .  They  brought  in  a  bill  for 
obliging  him  and  Mr.  Richard  Harnage,  the  other  con- 
tractor, together  with  the  two  Paunceforts,  to  discover 
how  they  had  disposed  of  the  sums  paid  into  their  hands 
on  account  of  the  army ;  and  for  punishing  them,  in 
eaje  they  should  persist  in  their  refusal.  At  this  period, 
they  received  a  petition  against  the  commissioners  for 
licensing  hackney  coaches.  Three  of  them,  by  means 
of  an  address  to  the  king,  were  removed  with  disgrace, 
for  having  acted  arbitrarily,  corruptly,  and  contrary  to 
the  trust  reposed  in  them  by  act  of  parliament. 

$  III*  Those  who  encouraged  this  spirit  of  reforma- 
tion,, introduced  smother  inquiry  about"  the  orphan's  bill, 

-*  Burnet.    Boyer.    Oldmixon.   State  Tracts.   Tiddal.  Ralph.  Lives 
of  the  Admirals.    Daniel.    Voltaire. 


232  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  140& 

which  was  said  to  have  passed  into  an  act,  by  virtue  of 
undue  influence.  A  committee  being  appointed  to  in- 
spect the  chamberlain's  books,  discovered  that  bribes 
had  been  given  to  sir  John  Trevor,  speaker  of  the  house, 
and  Mr.  Hungerford,  chairman  of  the  grand  commit- 
tee. The  first  being  voted  guilty  of  a  high  crime  and 
misdemeanour,  abdicated  the  chair,  and  Paul  Foley  was 
appointed  speaker  in  his  room.  Then  sir  John  and 
Hungerford  were  expelled  the  house :  one  Nois,  a  soli- 
citor for  the  bill,  was  taken  into  custody,  because  he  had 
scandalized  the  commons,  in  pretending  he  was  engaged 
to  give  great  sums  to  several  members,  and  denying  this 
circumstance  on  his  examination.  The  reformers  in 
the  house  naturally  concluded,  that  the  same  arts  had 
been  practised  in  obtaining  the  new  charter  of  the  East 
India  company,  which  had  been  granted  so  much  against 
the  sense  of  the  nation.  Their  books  were  subjected  to 
the  same  committee  that  carried  on  the  former  inquiry, 
and  a  surprising  scene  of  venality  and  corruption  was 
soon  disclosed.  It  appeared  that  the  company,  in  the 
course  of  the  preceding  year,  had  paid  near  90,000/.  in 
secret  services ;  and  that  sir  Thomas  Cooke,  one  of  the 
directors,  and  a  member  of  the  house,  had  been  the 
chief  manager  of  this  infamous  commerce.  Cooke, 
refusing  to  answer,  was  committed  to  the  Tower,  and  a 
bill  of  pains  and  penalties  brought  in,  obliging  him  to 
discover  how  the  sum  mentioned  in  the  report  of  the 
committee  had  been  distributed.  The  bill  was  violently 
opposed  in  the  upper  house  by  the  duke  of  Leeds,  as 
being  contrary  to  law  and  equity,  and  furnishing  a  pre- 
cedent of  a  dangerous  nature.  Cooke  being,  agreeably 
to  his  own  petition,  brought  to  the  bar  of  the  house  of 
lords,  declared  that  he  was  ready  and  willing  to  make  a 
full  discovery,  in  case  he  might  be  favoured  with  an  in- 
demnifying vote  to  secure  him  against  all  actions  and 
suits,  except  those  of  the  East  India  company,  which  he 
had  never  injured.    The  lords  complied  with  his  re- 


H*&  WILLIAM,  233 

quest,  and  passed,  a  bill  for  this  purpose,  to  which  the 
commons  added  a  penal  clause;  and  the  former  was 
laid  aside. 

§  IV.  When  the  king  went  to  the  house,  to  give  the 
royal  assent  to  the  money-bills,  he  endeavoured  to  dis- 
courage this  inquiry,  by  telling  the  parliament  that  the 
season  of  the  year  was  far  advanced,  and  the  circum- 
stances of  affairs  extremely  pressing :  he  therefore  desired 
they  would  dispatch  such  business  as  they  should  think 
of  most  importance  to  the  public,  as  he  should  put  an 
end  to  the  session  in  a  few  days.     Notwithstanding  this 
shameful  interposition,  both  houses  appointed  a  joint 
committee  to  lay  open  the  complicated  scheme  of  fraud 
and  iniquity.     Cooke,  on  his  first  examination,  confes- 
sed, that  he  had  delivered  tallies  for  10,000/.  to  Francis 
Tyssen,  deputy-governor,  for  the  special  service  of  the 
company  ;  an  equal  sum  to  Richard  Acton,  for  employ- 
ing hie  interest  in  preventing  a  new  settlement,  and  en- 
deavouring to  establish  the  old  company ;  beside  2000/. 
by  way  of  interest,  and  as  a  farther  gratuity ;  a  thousand 
guineas  to  colonel  Fitzpatrick,  five  hundred  to  Charles 
Bates,  and  three  hundred  and  ten  to  Mr.  Molineux,  a 
merchant,  for  the  same  purposes ;  and  he  owned  that  sir 
Basil  Firebrace  had  received  40,000/.  on  various  pre-: 
tences.    He  said,  he  believed  that  the  1 0,000/.  paid  to 
Tyssen  had  been  delivered  to  the  king  by  sir  Josiah  Child* 
as  a  customary  present  which  former  kings  had  received : 
and  that  the  sums  paid  to  Acton  were  distributed  among 
some  members  of  parliament.      Firebrace  being  ex- 
amined, affirmed  that  he  had  received  the  whole  40,000/. 
for  his  own  use  and  benefit ;  but  that  Bates  had  received 
sums  of  money,  which  he  understood  had  been  offered 
to  some  persons  of  the  first  quality.    Acton  declared,  that 
10,000/.  of  the  sum  which  he  had  received,  was  distri* 
buted  among  persons  who  had  interest  with  members  of 
parliament ;  and  that  great  part  of  the  money  passed 
through  the  hands  of  Craggs,  who  was  acquainted  with 


234  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  UN&, 

some  colonels  in  the"  house,  and  northern  joembera- 
Bates  owned  he  had  received  the  money,  in  considera- 
tion of  using  his  interest  with  the  duke  of  Leeds  in.  fa- 
vour of  the  company :  that  this  nobleman  knew,  of  the 
gratuity ;  and  that  the  sum  was  reckoned  by  his  grace'* 
domestic,  one  Robart,  a  foreigner,  who  kept  it  in  his  pos- 
session until  this  inquiry  was  talked  of,  and  then  it  was 
returned.  In  a  word,  it  appeared  by  this  man's  testi- 
mony, as  well  as  by  that  of  Firehrace  on  his  second  ex- 
amination, that  the  duke  of  Leeds  was  not  free  from 
corruption,  and  that  sir  John  Trevor  was  a  hireling 
prostitute. 

§  V.  The  report  of  the  committee  produced  violent 
altercations,  and  the  most  severe  strictures  upon  the 
conduct  of  the  lord-president.     At  length,  the  house 
resolved,  that  there  was  sufficient  matter  to  impeach 
Thomas  duke  of  Leeds  of  high  crimes  and  misdemea- 
nours ;  and  that  he  should  be  impeached  thereupon. 
Then  it  was  ordered,  that  Mr.  Comptroller  Wharton 
should  impeach  him  before  the  lords,  in  the  name  of 
the  house,  and  of  all  the  commons  in  England.    The 
duke  was  actually  in  the  middle  of  a  speech  for  his  own 
justification,  in  which  he  assured  the  house,  upon  his 
honour,  that  he  was  not  guilty  of  the  corruptions  laid  to 
his  charge,  when  one  of  his  friends  gave  him  intimation 
of  the  votes  which  had  passed  in  the  commons.     He 
concluded  his  speech  abruptly,  and,  repairing  to  the 
lower  house,  desired  he  might  be  indulged  with  a  hear- 
ing.   He  was  accordingly  admitted,  with  the  compli- 
ment of  a  chair,  and  leave  to  be  covered.     After  having 
sat  a  few  minutes,  he  took  off  his  hat,  and  addressed 
himself  to  the  commons  in  very  extraordinary  terms. 
Having  thanked  them  for  the  favour  of  indulging  him 
with  a  hearing,  he  said  that  house  would  not  have  been 
then  sitting  but  for  him.     He  protested  his  own  inno- 
cence with  respect  to  the  crime  laid  to  his  charge.    He 
complained  that  this  was  the  effect  of  a  design  which 


1605.  WILLIAM.  f03 

had  been  long  formed  against  him.  He  expressed  a 
deep  sense  of  his  being  under  the  displeasure  of  the  par-, 
liament  and  nation,  and  demanded  speedy  justice.  They 
forthwith  drew  up  the  articles  of  impeachment,  which 
being  exhibited  fit  the  bar  of  the  upper  house,  he  plead- 
ed not  guilty,  and  the  commons  promised  to  make  good 
their  charge :  but,  by  this  time  such  arts  had  been  used, 
as  all  at  once  checked  the  violence  of  the  prosecution. 
Such  a  number  of  considerable  persons  were  involved 
in  this  mystery  of  corruption,  that  a  full  discovery  was 
dreaded  by  both  parties.  The  duke  sent  his  domestic, 
Rohart,  out  of  the  kingdom,  and  his  absence  furnished 
a  pretence  for  postponing  the  trial.  In  a  word,  the  in- 
quiry was  dropped ;  but  the  scandal  stuck  fast  to  the 
duke's  character. 

$  VL  In  the  midst  of  these  deliberations,  the  king 
went  to  the  house  on  the  3d  day  of  May,  when  he 
thanked  the  parliament  for  the  supplies  they  had  grant* 
ed;  signified  his  intention  of  going  abroad;  assured 
them  he  would  place  the  administration  of  affairs  in  per- 
sons of  known  care  and  fidelity ;  and  desired  that  the 
members  of  both  houses  would  be  more  than  ordinarily, 
vigilant  in;  preserving  the  public  peace.  The  parliament 
was  then  prorogued  to  the  1 8th  of  June.k    The  king 

*  In  the  course  of  this  session,  the  lords  had  inquired  into  the  parti- 
culars of  the  Mediterranean  expedition,  and  presented  an  address  to  the 
king,  declaring  that  the  fleet  in  those  seas  had  conduced  to  the  honour 
and  advantage  of  the  nation.  On  the  other  baud,  the  commons,  in  an 
address,  besought  his  majesty  to  take  care  that  the  kingdom  might  be  put 
on  an  equal  footing  and  proportion  with  the  allies,  in  defraying  the  ex- 
pense of  the  war. 

The  coin  of  the  kingdom  being  greatly  diminished  and  adulterated,  the 
earls  of  Rochester  and  Nottingham  expatiated  upon  this  national  evil  in  the 
house  of  lords  >  and  an  act  was  passed,  containing  severe  penalties  against 
clippers ;  but  this  produced  no  good  effect  The  value  of  money  sunk  in 
the  exchange  to  such  a  degree,  that  a  guinea  was  reckoned  adequate  to 
thirty  shillings ;  and  this  public  disgrace  lowered  the  credit  of  the  funds 
and  of  the  government.  The  nation  was  alarmed  by  the  circulation  of 
fictitious  wealth,  instead  of  gold  and  silver,  such  as  bank-bills,  exchequer 


236  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1695, 

immediately  appointed  a  regency  to  govern  the  kingdom 
in  his  absence;  but  neither  the  princess  of  Denmark 
nor  her  husband  were  intrusted  with  any  share  in  the 
administration ;  a  circumstance  that  evinced  the  king's 
jealousy,  and  gave  offence  to  a  great  part  of  the  na- 
tion.1 

§  VII.  A  session  of  parliament  was  deemed  necessary 
in  Scotland,  to  provide  new  subsidies  for  the  mainte- 
nance of  the  troops  of  that  kingdom,  which  had  been 
so  serviceable  in  the  prosecution  of  the  war.  But,  as  a 
great  outcry  had  been  raised  against  the  government, 
on  account  of  the  massacre  of  Glencoe,  and  as  the  Scots 
were  tired  of  contributing  towards  the  expense  of  a  war 
from  which  they  could  derive  no  advantage,  the  minis- 
try thought  proper  to  cajole  them  with  the  promise  of 
some  national  indulgence.  In  the  meantime,  a  com- 
mission passed  the  great  seal,  for  taking  a  precognition 
of  the  massacre,  as  a  previous  step  to  the  trial  of  the 
persons  concerned  in  that  perfidious  transaction.  On 
the  9th  of  May  the  session  was  opened  by  the  marquis 
of  Tweedale,  appointed  commissioner,  who,  after  the 
king's  letter  had  been  read,  expatiated  on  his  majesty's 
care  and  concern  for  their  safetv  and  welfare :  and  his 

tallies,  and  government  securities.  The  malecontents  took  this  opportu- 
nity to  exclaim  against  the  bauk,  and  even  attempted  to  shake  the  credit 
of  it  in  parliament;  bat  their  endeavours  proved  abortive :  themonied- 
interest  preponderated  in  both  houses. 

1  The  regency  was  composed  of  the  archbishop  of  Canterbury;  Somen, 
lord-keeper  of  the  great  seal ;  the  earl  of  Pembroke,  lord-privy-seal ;  the 
duke  of  Devonshire,  lord-steward  of  the  household;  the  duke  of  Shrews- 
bury, secretary  of  state ;  the  earl  of  Dorset,  lopd-chamberlain ;  and  the 
lord  Godolphin,  first  commissioner  of  the  treasury.  Sir  John  Trenchard. 
dying,  his  place  of  secretary  was  filled  with  sir  William  Trumbal,  an 
eminent  civilian,  learned,  diligent,  and  virtuous,  who  had  been  envoy  at 
Paris  and  Constantinople.  William  Nassau  de  Zuylestcin,  son  of  the 
king's  natural  uucle,  was  created  baron  of  Enfield,  viscount  Tunbridge, 
and  earl  of  Rocbford.  Ford,  lord  Gray  of  Werke,  was  made  viscount 
Glendale,  and  earl  of  Tankerville.  The  month  of  April  of  this  year  was- 
distinguished  by  the  death  of  the  famous  George  Saville,  marquis  of  Hali- 
fax, who  had  survived  in  a  good  measure  his  talents  and  reputation; 


1006,  WILLIAM.  237 

firm*  purpose  to  maintain  the  Presbyterian  discipline  in 
the  church  of  Scotland*  Then  he  promised,  in  the  king's 
name,  that  if  they  would  pass  an  act  for  establishing  a 
colony  in  Africa,  America,  or  any  other  part  of  the  world 
where  a  colony  might  Jbe  lawfully  planted,  his  majesty 
would  indulge  them  with  such  rights  and  privileges  as 
he  had  granted  in  like  cases  to  the  subject?  of  his  other 
dominions.  Finally,  he  exhorted  them  to  consider  ways 
and  means  to  raise  the  necessary  supplies  for  main* 
taining  their  land-forces,  and  for  providing  a  competent 
number  of  ships  of  war  to  protect  their  commerce.  The 
parliament  immediately  voted  an  address  of  condolence 
to  his  majesty  on  the  death  of  the  queen ;  and  they 
granted  1 20,000/.  sterling  for  the  services  of  the  ensuing 
year,  to  be  raised  by  a  general  poll-tax,  a  land-tax,  and 
an  additional  excise. 

§  VIII.  Their  next  step  was  to  desire  the  commis- 
sioner would  transmit  their  humble  thanks  to  the  king, 
for  his  care  to  vindicate  the  honour  of  the  government 
and  the  justice  of  the  nation,  in  ordering  a  precognition^ 
to  be  taken  with  respect  to  the  slaughter  of  Glencoe.  A 
motion  was  afterward  made,  that  the  commissioners 
should  exhibit  an  account  of  their  proceedings  in  this 
affair :  accordingly,  a  report,  consisting  of  the  king's  in- 
structions, Dairy mple's  letters,  the  depositions  of  wit- 
nesses, and  the  opinion  of  the  committee,  was  laid  be- 
fore the  parliament.  The  motion  is  said  to  have  been 
privately  influenced  by  secretary  Johnston,  for  the  dis- 
grace of  Dairy mple,  who  was  his  rival  in  power  and  in- 
terest. The  written  opinion  of  the  commissioners,  who 
were  creatures  of  the  court,  imported,  That  Macdonald 
of  Glencoe  had  been  perfidiously  murdered ;  that  the 
king's-  instructions  contained  nothing  to  warrant  the 
massacre;  and  that  secretary  Dalrymple  had  exceeded 
his  orders.  The  parliament  concurred  with  this  report. 
They  resolved,  that  Livingston  was  not  to  blame,  for 

having  given  the  orders  contained  in  his  letters  to  lieu* 
vol.  i.  *  E 


238  HISTORY  OF  .ENGLAND.-  MSB. 

tenant-colonel  Hamilton;  that  this  last  Was  liable  to 
prosecution ;  that  the  king  should  be  addressed  to'  give 
orders,  either  for  examining  major  Duncanson  in  Flan- 
ders, touching  his  concern  in  this  affair ;  of  for  send- 
ing him  home  to  be  tried  in  Scotland :  as  also,  that 
Campbell  of  Glenlyon,  captain  Drummond,  lieutenant 
Lindeey,  ensign  Lundy,  and  Serjeant  Barber,  should  be 
sent  to  Scotland,  and  prosecuted  according  to  law,  for 
the  parts  they  had  acted  in  that  execution.  In  conse- 
quence of  these  resolutions,  the  parliament  drew  up  an 
address  to  the  king,  in  which  they  laid  the  whole  blame 
of  the  massacre  upon  the  excess  in  the  master  of  Stair's 
letters  concerning  that  transaction.  They  begged  that 
his  majesty  would  give  such  orders  about  him,  as  he 
should  think  fit  for  the  vindication  of  his  government ; 
that  the  actors  in  that  barbarous  slaughter  might  be  pro- 
secuted by  the  king's  advocate,  according  to  law ;  and 
that  some  reparation  might  be  made  to  the  men  of 
Glencoe  who  escaped  the  massacre,  for  the  losses  they 
had  sustained  in  their  effects  upon  that  occasion,  as  their 
habitations  had  been  plundered  and  burned,  their  lands 
wasted,  and  their  cattle  driven  away ;  so  that  they  were 
reduced  to  extreme  poverty.  Notwithstanding  this  ad- 
dress of  the  Scottish  parliament,  by  which  the  king  was 
so  solemnly  exculpated,  his  memory  is  still  loaded  with 
the  suspicion  of  having  concerted,  countenanced,  and 
enforced  this  barbarous  execution,  especially  as  the 
master  of  Stair  escaped  with  impunity,  and  the  other 
actors  of  the  tragedy,  far  from  being  punished,  were 
preferred  in  the  service.'  While  the  commissioners  were 
employed  in  the  inquiry,  they  made  such  discoveries 
concerning  the  conduct  of  the  earl  of  Breadalbane,  as 
amounted  to  a  charge  of  high-treasoo;  and  he  was  com- 
mitted prisoner  to  the  castle  of  Edinburgh :  but  it  seems 
he  had  dissembled  with  the  Highlanders  by  the  king's 
permission,  and  now  sheltered  himself  under  the  shadow 
of  a  royal  pardon. 


pma,  William.  239 

.  §  IX.  The  committee  of  trade,  in  pursuance  of  the. 
powers  granted  by  the  king  to  his  commissioner,  pre» 
pared  an  act  far  establishing  a  company  trading  to  Africa 
and  the  Indies,  empowering  them  to  plant  colonies* 
hold  cities,  towns,  or  forts,  in  places  uninhabited,  or  in 
others,  with  the  consent  of  the  natives  ;  vesting  them 
with  an  exclusive  right*  and  an  exemption  for  one-and* 
twenty  years  fronj  all  duties  and  impositions.  This  act 
was  likewise  confirmed  by  letters  patent  under  the  great 
seal,  directed  by  the  parliament,  without  any  farther  war- 
rant from  the  crown.  Paterson,  the  projector,  had 
contrived  the  plan  of  a  settlement  upon  the  isthmus  of 
Darien,  in  such  a  manner  as  to  carry  on  a  trade  in  the 
South  Sea,  as  well  as  in  the  Atlantic;  nay,  even  to. 
extend  it  as  far  as  the .  East  Indies :  a  great  number  of 
London  merchants,  allured  by  the  prospect  of  gain, 
were  eager  to  engage  in  such  a  company,  exempted  from 
all  manner  of  imposition  and  restriction.  The  Scottish 
parliament  likewise  passed  an  act  in  favour  of  the  epis- 
copal clergy,  decreeing,  that  those  who  should  entejr  into 
such  engagements  to  the  king,  as  were  by  law  required, 
might  continue  in  their  benefices  under  his  majesty'* 
protection,  without  being  subject  to  the  power  of  presn 
bytery.  Seventy  of  the  most  noted  ministers  of  that 
persuasion  took  the  benefit  of  this  indulgence.  Another 
law  was  enacted,  for  raising  nine  thousand  men  yearly, 
to  recruit  the  Scottish  regiments  abroad ;  and  an  act  for 
erecting  a  public  bank :  then  the  parliament  was  ad-, 
journed  to  the  7  th  day  of  November. 

§  X.  Ireland  began  to  be  infected  with  the  same  fac- 
tions whichhad  broke  out  in  England  since  the  revolution: 
lord  Capel,  the  lord-deputy,  governed  in  a  very  partial 
manner,  oppressing  the  Irish  Papists,  without  any  re-  v 
gard  to  equity  ;or  decorum.'  He  undertook  to  model  a r 
parliament  in  such  a  manner,  that  they;  should  comply 
with  all  the  demands  of  the  ministry ;  and  he  succeeded 
in  his  endeavours,  by  making  such  arbitrary  changes  in 

B3 


249  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  MB*. 

offices  as  best  suited  his  purpose.  These  precautions 
being  taken,  he  convoked  a  parliament  for  the  27  th  day 
of  Augufct,  when  he  opened  the  session  with  a  speech, 
expatiating  upon  their  obligations  to  king  William,  and 
exhorting  them  to  make  suitable  returns  to  such  a  gra- 
cious sovereign.  He  observed,  that  the.  revenue  had 
fallen  short  of  the  establishment ;  so  that  both  the  civil 
and  military  lists  were  greatly  in  debt ;  that  his  majesty 
had  sent  over  a  bill  for  an  additional  excise,  and  expect- 
ed they  would  find  ways  and  means  to  answer  the  de- 
mands of  the  service.  They  forthwith  voted  an  address 
.  of  thanks,  and  resolved  to  assist  his  majesty  to  the 
utmost  of  their  power,  against  all  his  enemies,  foreign 
and  domestic.  They  passed  the  bill  for  an  additional 
excise,  together  with  an  act  for  taking  away  the  writ, 
"  De  heretico  comburendo  ;n  another  annulling  all  attain- 
ders and  acts  passed  in  the  late  pretended  parliament  of 
king  James ;  a  third  to  prevent  foreign  education  ;  a 
fourth  for  disarming  Papists ;  and  a  fifth  for  settling  the 
estates  of  intestates.  Then  they  resolved,  that  a  sum 
not  exceeding  1 63,325/.  should  be  granted  to  his  majes-* 
ty,  to  be  raised  by  a  poll-bill,  additional  customs,  and  a 
continuation  of  the  additional  excise.  Sir  Charles  Por- 
ter, the  chancellor,  finding  his  importance  diminished, 
if  not  entirely  destroyed,  by  the  assuming  disposition 
and  power  of  the  lord-deputy,  began  to  court  popularity 
by  espousing  the  cause  of  the  Irish,  against  the  severity 
of  the  administration  ;  and  actually  formed  akind  of  tory 
interest,  which  thwarted  lord  Capel  in  all  his  measureSr 
A  motion  was  made  in  parliament  to  impeach  the  chan- 
cellor, for  sowing  discord  and  division  among  his  majes- 
ty'* subjects ;  but,  being  indulged  with  a  hearing  by  the 
house  of  commons,  he  justified  himself  so  much  to  their 
satisfaction,  that  he  was  voted  clear  ofati  imputation  by  a 
gout  majority.  Neverthetees,  they,  at  Hie  end  of  the  sea* 
ston,  sent  over  an  address,  in  which  they  bore  testimony 
to  the  mild  and  just  administration  of  their  lord-deputy. 


WILLIAM.  241 

§  XL  King  William  having  taken  such  steps  as  were 
deemed  necessary  for  preserving  the  peace  of  England 
in  his  absence,  crossed  the  sea  to  Holland  in  the  middle 
pf  May,  fully  determined  to  make  some  great  effort  in 
the  Netherlands,  that  might  aggrandize  his  military 
character,  and  humble  the  power  of  France,  which  was 
already  on  the  decline.  That  kingdom  was  actually 
exhausted  in  such  a  manner,  that  the  haughty  Lewis 
found  himself  obliged  to  stand  upon  the  defensive, 
against  enemies  over  whom  he  had  been  used  to  triumph 
with  uninterrupted  success.  He  heard  the  clamours  of 
his  people,  which  he  could  not  quiet ;  he  saw  his  ad- 
vances to  peace  rejected  j  and,  to  crown  his  misfor- 
tunes, he  sustained  an  irreparable  loss  in  the  death  of 
Francis  de  Montmorency,  duke  of  Luxembourg,  to 
whose  military  talents  he  owed  the  greatest  part  of  his 
glory  and  success.  That  great  officer  died  in  January 
at  Versailles,  in  the  sixty-seventh  year  of  his  age ;  and 
Lewis  lamented  his  death  the  more  deeply,  as  he  had 
v  not  another  general  left,  in  whose  understanding  he  could 
confide.  The  conduct  of  the  army  in  Flanders  was  in- 
trusted to  mareschal  Villeroy :  and  Boufflers  command- 
ed a  separate  army,  though  subject  to  the  other's  orders. 
As  the  French  king  took  it  for  granted,  that  the  confe- 
derates would  have  a  superiority  of  numbers  in  the  field, 
,and  was  well  acquainted  with  the  enterprising  genius  of 
their  chief,  he  ordered  a  new  line  to  be  drawn  between  the 
Lys  and  the  Scheldt :  he  caused  a  disposition  to  be  macte 
for  covering  Dunkirk,  Ypres,  Tournay,  and  Namur.; 
and  laid  injunctions  on  his  general  to  act  solely  on  the 
defensive.  Meanwhile,  the  confederates  formed  two 
armies  in  the  Netherlands.  The  first  consisted  of 
seventy  battalions  of  infantry,  and  eighty-two  squadrons 
of  horse  and  dragoons,  chiefly  English  and  Scots,  en- 
jcatnped  at  Aerseele,  Caneghem,  and  Wouterghem,  be- 
tween Thieldt  and  Deynse,  to  be  commanded  by  the  king 
in  person,  assisted  by  the  old  prince  of  Vaudemont 


242  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  IflM. 

The  other  army,  composed  of  sixteen  battalions  of  foot, 
and  one  hundred  and  thirty  squadrons  of  horse,  encamp- 
ed at  Zellech  and  Hamme,  on  the  road  from  Brussels  to 
Dendermonde,  under  the  command  of  the  elector  of 
Bavaria,  seconded  by  the  duke  of  Hblstein-Ploen.  Ma- 
jor-general Ellemberg  was  posted  near  Dixmuyde,  with 
twenty  battalions  and  ten  squadrons  ;  and  another  body 
of  Brandenburgh  and  Dutch  troops,  with  a  reinforcement 
from  Liege,  lay  encamped  on  the  Mehaigne,  under  the 
conduct  of  the  baron  de  Heyden,  lieutenant-general  of 
Brandenburgh,  and  the  count  de  Berlo,  general  of  the 
Liege  cavalry.  King  William  arrived  in  the  camp  on 
the  5th  day  of  July ;  and  remained  eight  days  at  Aerseele. 
Then  he  marched  to  Bekelar,  while  Villeroy  retired  be- 
hind his  lines  between  Menin  and  Ypres,  after  having 
detached  ten  thousand  men  to  reinforce  Boufflers,  who 
had  advanced  to  Pont  d'Espieres  :  but  he  too  retreating 
within  his  lines,  the  elector  of  Bavaria  passed  the  Scheldt, 
and  took  post  at  Kirkhoven :  at  the  same  time  the  body 
under  Heyden  advanced  towards  Namur. 

§  XII.  The  king  of  England  having,  by  his  motions, 
drawn  the  forces  of  the  enemy  on  the  side  of  Flanders, 
directed  the  baron  de  Heyden  and  the  earl  of  Athlone, 
who  commanded  forty  squadrons  from  the  camp  of  the 
elector  of  Bavaria,  to  invest  Namur;  and  this  service  was 
performed  on  the  3d  day  of  July  :  but  as  the  place  was 
not  entirely  surrounded,  mareschal  Boufflers  threw 
himself  into  it  with  such  a  reinforcement  of  dragoons  as 
augmented  the  garrison  to  the  number  of  fifteen  thou- 
sand chosen  men.  King  William  and  the  elector 
brought  up  the  rest  of  the  forces,  which  encamped  on 
both  sides  of  the  Sambre  and  the  Maese:  and  the  lines 
of  circumvallation  were  begun  on  the  6th  day  of  July, 
under  the  direction  of  the  celebrated  engineer,  general 
Coehorn.  The  place  was  formerly  very  strong,  both  by 
situation  and  art ;  but  the  French,  since  its  last  reduc- 
tion, had  made  such  additional  works,  that  both  the 


i<m.  WILLIAM.  243 

town  arid  citadel  seemed  impregnable.  Considering  the 
number  of  the  garrison,  and  the  quality,  of  the  troops, 
commanded  by  a  mareschal  of  France,  distinguished  by 
his  valour  and  conduct,  the  enterprise  iyas  deemed  an 
undeniable  proof  of  William's  temerity.  On  the  1 1th, 
the  trenches  were  opened,  and  next  day  the  batteries  be- 
gan to  play  with  incredible  fury.  The  king,  receiving  in- 
telligence of  amotion  made  by  a  body  of  French  troops, 
with  a  view  to  intercept  the  convoys,  detached  twenty 
squadrons  of  horse  and  dragoons  to  observe  the  enemy. 
§  XIII.  Prince  Vaudemont,  who  was  left  at  Roselaer 
with  fifty  battalions,  and  the  like  number  of  squadrons, 
understanding  that  Villeroy  had  passed  the  Lys  in  order 
to  attack  him,  took  post  with  his  left  near  Grammen, 
his  right  by  Aerseele  and  Caneghem,  and  began  to  forti- 
fy his  camp,  with  a  view  to  expect  the  enemy.  Their 
vanguard  appearing  on  the  evening  of  the  1 3th  at  Den- 
treghem,  he  changed  the  disposition  of  his  camp,*  and 
entrenched  himself  on  both  sides.  Next  day,  however* 
perceiving  Villeroy 's  design  was  to  surround  him,  by^ 
means  of  another  body  of  troops  commanded  by  M. 
Montal,  who  had  already  passed  the  Thieldt  for  thai 
purpose,  he  resolved  to  avoid  an  engagement,  and  effect- 
ed a  retreat  to  Ghent,  which  is  celebrated  as  one  of  thq 
most  capital  efforts  of  military  conduct.  He  forthwith 
detached  twelve  battalions,  and  twelve  pieces  of  cannon, 
to  secure  Newport,  which  Villeroy  had  intended  to  in- 
vest ;  but  that  general  now  changed  his  resolution,  and 
undertook  the  siege  of  Dixmuyde,  garrisoned  by  eight 
battalions  of  foot,  and  a  regiment  of  dragoons,  com- 
manded by  major-general  Ellemberg,  who,  in  six-and- 
thirty  hours  after  the  trenches  were  opened,  surrendered 
himself  and  his  soldiers  prisoners  of  war.  This  scandal-, 
ous  example  was  followed  by  colonel  Ofarrel,  who  yield- 
ed qp  Deynse  on-  the  same  shameful  conditions,  even 
before  a  battery  was  opened  by  the  besiegers.  In  the- 
sequel,   they  were  both  tried  for  their  misbehaviour; 


344  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  \9». 

Ellemberg  suffered  death,  and  Oferrel  was  broke  with 
infamy.  The  prince  of  Vaudemont  sent  a  message  to 
the  French  general,  demanding  the  garrisons  of  those 
two  places,  according  to  a  cartel  which  had  been  settled 
between  the  powers  at  war,  but  no  regard  was  paid  to 
this  remonstrance.  Villeroy,  after  several  marches  and 
countermarches,  appeared  before  Brussels  on  the  13th 
da  yof  August,  and  sent  a  letter  to  the  prince  of  Berg- 
hem,  governor  of  that  city,  importing,  that  the  king  his 
master  had  ordered  him  to  bombard  the  town,  by  way 
of  making  reprisals  for  the  damage  done  by  the  English 
fleet  to  the  maritiipe  towns  of  France ;  he  likewise  de- 
sired to  know  in  what  part  the  electress  of  Bavaria 
resided,  that  he  might  not  fire  into  that  quarter.  After 
this  declaration,  which  was  no  more  than  an  unmeaning 
compliment,  he  began  to  bombard  and  cannonade  the 
place  with  red-hot  bullets,  which  produced  conflagra- 
tions in  many  different  parts  of  the  city,  and  frightened 
the  electress  into  a  miscarriage.  On  the  15th,  the  French 
discontinued  their  firing,  and  retired  to  Enghein. 
. .  §  XIV.  During  these  transactions,  the  siege  of  Na- 
mur  was  prosecuted  with  great  ardour,  under  the  eye  of 
the  king  of  England ;  while  the  garrison  defended  the 
place  with  equal  spirit  and  perseverance.  On  the  18th 
day  of  July,  major-general  Ramsay,  and  Jord  Cutts,  at 
the  head  of  five  battalions,  English,  Scots,  and  Dutch, 
attacked  the  enemy's  advanced  works  on  the  right  of  the 
counterscarp.  They  were  sustained  by  six  English 
battalions,  commanded  by  brigadier-general  Fitzpatrick ; 
while  eight  foreign  regiments,  with  nine  thousand  pio- 
neers, advanced  on  the  left,  under  major-general  Salisch. 
The  assault  was  desperate  and  bloody,  the  enemy  main- 
taining their  ground  for  two  hours  with  undaunted  cou- 
rage ;  but  at  last  they  were  obliged  to  give  way,  and 
were  pursued  to  the  very  gates  of  the  town,  though  not 
before  they  had  killed  or  wounded  twelve  hundred  men 
of  the  confederate  army.     The  king  wasso-wejl  pleased 


lttfc  WILLIAM.  245 

with  the  behaviour  of  the  British  troops,  that  daring  the 
action  he  laid  his  hand  upon  the  shoulder  of  the  elector 
of  Bavaria,  and  exclaimed,  with  emotion,  "  See  my  brave 
English  P  On  the  27th  the  English  and  Scots,  under 
Ramsay  and  Hamilton,  assaulted  the  counterscarp,  where 
they  met  with  prodigious  opposition  from  the  fire  of  the 
besieged.  Nevertheless,  being  sustained  by  the  Dutch, 
they  made  a  lodgement  on  the  foremost  covered  way 
before  the  gate  of  St  Nicholas,  as  also  upon  part  of  the 
counterscarp.  The  valour  of  the  assailants  on  this  occa- 
sion was  altogether  unprecedented,  and  almost  incredi- 
ble ;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  the  courage  of  the  be- 
sieged was  worthy  of  praise  and  admiration.  Several 
persons  were  killed  in  the  trenches  at  the  side  of  the 
king,  and  among  these  Mr.  Godfrey,  deputy-governor 
of  the  bank  of  England,  who  had  come  to  the  camp,  to 
confer  with  his  majesty  about  remitting  money  for  the 
payment  of  the  army.  On  the  30th  day  of  July  the 
elector  of  Bavaria  attacked  Vauban's  line  that  surrounded 
the  works  of  the  castle.  General  Coehorn  was  present 
in  this  action,  which  was  performed  with  equal  valour  and 
success.  They  not  only  broke  through  the  line,  but  even 
took  possession  of  Coehorn's  fort,  in  which,  however, 
they  found  it  impossible  to  effect  a  lodgement.  On  the 
2d  day  of  August,  lord  Cutts,  with  four  hundred  Eng- 
lish and  Dutch  grenadiers,  attacked  the  saillant-angle  of 
a  demi-bastion,  and  lodged  himself  on  the  second  coun- 
terscarp. The  breaches  being  now  practicable,  and 
preparations  made  for  a  general  assault,  count  Guiscard, 
the  governor,  capitulated  for  the  town  on  the  4th  of 
August ;  and  the  French  retired  into  the  citadel,  against 
which  twelve  batteries  played  upon  the  13th.  The 
trenches,  meanwhile,  were  carried  on  with  great  expedi- 
tion, notwithstanding  all  the  efforts  of  the  besieged,  who 
fired  without  ceasing,  and  exerted  amazing  diligence 
and  intrepidity  in  defending  and  repairing  the  damage 
they  sustained.    At  length,  the  annoyance  became  so 


L 


246!  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1*95. 

dreadful  from ;  the  unintermttting  showers  of  bombs  and 
red-hot  bullets,  that  Boufflers,  after  having  made  divers 
furious  sallies,  formed  a  scheme  for  breaking  through 
the  confederate  camp  with  his  cavalry.  This,  however, 
was  prevented  by  the  extreme  vigilance  of  king  William. 
^  XV.  After  the  bombardment  of  Brussels,  Villeroy, 
being  reinforced  with  all  the  troops  that  could  be  drafted 
from  garrisons,  advanced  towards  Namiir  with  an  army 
of  ninety  thousand  men  ;  and  prince  Vaudemont  being 
joined  by  the  prince  of  Hesse,  with  a  strong  body  of 
forces  from  the  Rhine,  took  possession  of  the  strong 
camp  at  Masy,  within  five  English  miles  of  the  besieging 
army.  The  king,  understanding  that  the  enemy  had 
reached  Eleurus,  where  they  discharged  ninety  pieces  of 
cannon,  as  a  signal  to  inform  the  garrison  of  their  ap- 
proach, left,  the  conduct  of  the  siege  to  the  elector  of 
Bavaria,  and  took  upon  himself  the  command  of  the  co- 
vering army,  in  order  to  oppose  Villeroy,  who,  being 
farther,  reinforced  by  a  detachment  from  Germany,  de- 
clared, that  he  would  hazard  a  battle  for  the  relief  of 
Namur.  .  But,  when  he  viewed  the  posture  of  the  allies 
near  Masy,  he  changed  his  resolution,  and  retired  in 
the  night  without  noise.  On  the  30th  day  of  August, 
the  besieged  were  summoned  to  surrender  by  count 
Home,  who,  in  a  parley  with  the  count  de  Lamont,  ge- 
neral of  the  French  infantry,  gave  him  to  understand, 
that  .inarescbal  Villeroy  had  retired  towards  the  Me- 
haigne  ;  so  that  the  garrison  could  not  expect  to  be  re- 
lieved.. No  immediate  answer  being  returned  to  this 
message^  the  parley  was  broke  off,  and  the  king  resolved 
to  proceed  without  delay  to  a  general  assault,  which  he 
had  already:  planned  with  the  elector  and  his  other  ge- 
nerals. Between  one  and  two  in  the  afternoon,  lord 
Cutts,  who  desired  the  command,  though  it  was  not  his 
turn  of  duty,  rushed  out  of  the  trfenches  of  the  second 
line,  at  the  head  of  throe  hundred  grenadiers,  to  make  a 
lodgement  in  the  breach  of  Terra  nova,  supjjorted  by  the 


1095J  :    .  tVILLIAM.  247; 

regiments  of  Coulthorp,  Buchan,  Hamilton,  and  Mac- 
kay ;  while  colonel  Marselly,  with  a  body  of  Dutch,  the . 
BavaHbns,  and  Brandenburghers,  attacked  at  two  other 
places.  The  assailants  met  with  such  a  warm  reception, 
that  the  English  grenadiers  were  repulsed,  even  after 
they  had  mounted  the  breach,  lord  Cutts  being  for  some 
time  disabled  by  a  shot  in  the  head.  Marselly  was  de- 
feated, taken,  and  afterward  killed  by  a  cannon-ball 
from  the  batteries  of  the  besiegers.  The  Bavarians,  by 
mistaking  their  way,  were  exposed  to  a  terrible  fire,  by 
which  their  general,  count  Rivera,  and  a  great  number 
of  their  officers  were  slain  :  nevertheless,  they  fixed 
themselves  on  the  outward  entrenchment,  on  the  point 
of  the  Coehorn,  next  to  the  Sambre,  and  maintained 
their  ground  with  amazing  fortitude.  Lord  Cutts,  when 
his  wound  was  dressed,  returned  to  the  scene  of  action, 
and  Ordered  two  hundred  chosen  men  of  Mackay's  re- 
giment, commanded  by  lieutenant  Cockle,  to  attack  the 
face  of  the  saillant-angle  next  to  the  breach,  sword  in 
hand,  while  the  ensigns  of  the  same  regiment  should 
advance,  and  plant  their  colours  on  the  pallisadoes. 
Cockle  and  his  detachment  executed  the  command  he 
had  received  with  admirable  intrepidity.  They  broke 
through  the  pallisadoes,  drove  the  French  from  the  co- 
vered way  ;  made  a  lodgement  in  one  of  the  batteries, 
and  turned  the  cannon  against  the  enemy.  The  Bava- 
rians being  thus  sustained,  made  their  post  good.  The 
major-generals  La  Cave  and  Schwerin  lodged  themselves 
at  the  same  time  on  the  covered  way ;  and,  though  the 
general  assault  did  not  succeed  in  its  full  extent,  the  confe- 
derates remained  masters  of  ayery  considerable  lodgement, 
nearly  an  English  mile  in  length.  Yet  this  was  dearly  pur- 
chased with  the  lives  of  two  thousand  men,  including  many 
officers  of  great  rank  and  reputation.  During  the  action 
the  elector  of  Bavaria  signalized  his  courage  in  a  very  re- 
markable manner,  riding  from  place  to  place  through  the 
hottest  of  the  fire,  giving  his  directions  with  notable  pre- 


240  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  MO*. 

sence  of  mind,  according  to  the  emergency  of  circum- 
stances, animating  the  officers  with  praise  and  promise  of 
preferment,  and  distributing  handfuls  of  gold  among  the 
private  soldiers* 

§  XVI.  On  the  1st  day  of  September,  the  besieged 
having  obtained  a  cessation  of  arms,  that  their  dead 
might  be  buried,  the  count  de  Guiscard  appearing  on 
the  breach,  desired  to  speak  with  the  elector  of  Bavaria. 
His  highness  immediately  mounting  the  breach,  the 
French  governor  offered  to  surrender  the  fort  of  Coe- 
horn ;  but  was  given  to  understand,  that  if  he  intended 
to  capitulate,  he  must  treat  for  the  whole-  This  reply 
being  communicated  to  Boufflers,  he  agreed  to  the  pro- 
posal :  the  cessation  was  prolonged,  and  that  very  even- 
ing the  capitulation  was  finished.  Villeroy,  who  lay 
encamped  at  Gemblours,  was  no  sooner  apprised  of  this 
event,  by  a  triple  discharge  of  all  the  artillery,  and  a 
running  fire  along  the  lines  of  the  confederate  army, 
than  he  passed  the  Sambre  near  Charleroy,  with  great 
precipitation;  and  having  reinforced  the  garrison  of 
Dinant,  retreated  towards  the  lines  in  the  neighbour- 
hood of  Mons.  On  the  5th  day  of  September,  the 
French  garrison,  which  was  now  reduced  from  fifteen 
to  five  thousand  five  hundred  men,  evacuated  the  citadel 
of  Natnur.  Boufflers,  in  marching  out,  was  arrested  in 
the  name  of  his  Britannic  majesty,  by  way  of  reprisal 
for  the  garrisons  of  Dixmuyde  and  Deynse,  which  the 
French  king  had  detained,  contrary  to  the  cartel  subr 
sis  ting  between  the  two  nations.  The  mareschal  was 
not  a  little  discomposed  at  this  unexpected  incident,  and 
expostulated  warmly  with  Mr.  Dyckvelt,  who  assured 
him  the  king  of  Great  Britain  entertained  a  profound 
respect  for  his  person  and  character.  William  even 
offered  to  set  him  at  liberty,  provided  he  would  pass  his 
word  that  the  garrisons  of  Dixmuyde  and  Deynse  should 
be  sent  back,  or  that  he  himself  would  return  in  a  fort- 
night.   He  said,  that  he  could  not  enter  into  any  such 


UM&  WILLIAM.  249 

engagement/ as  he  did  not  know  his  master  $  reasons  for 
detaining  the  garrisons  in  question.  He  was  therefore 
reconvened  to  Namur ;  from  thence  removed  to  Maes- 
tricht,  and  treated  with  great  reverence  .and  respect, 
till  the  return  of  an  officer  whom  he  had  dispatched  to 
Versailles  with  an  account  of  his  captivity.  Then  he 
engaged  his  word,  that  the  garrisons  of  Dixmuyde  and 
Deynse  should  be  sent  back  to  the  allied  army.  He 
was  immediately  released,  and  conducted  in  safety  to 
Dinant.  When  he  repaired  to  Versailles,  Lewis  received 
hint  with  very  extraordinary  marks  of  esteem  and  affec- 
tion. He  embraced  him  in  public  with  the  warmest 
expressions  of  regard :  declared  himself  perfectly  well 
satisfied  with  his  conduct ;  created  him  a  duke  and  peer 
of  France ;  and  presented  him  with  a  very  large  sum; 
in  acknowledgment  of  his  signal  services. 

§  XVII.  After  the  reduction  of  Namur  which  greatly 
enhanced  the  military  character  of  king  William,  he 
retired  to  his  house  at  Loo,  which  was  his  favourite 
place  of  residence,  leaving  the  command  to  the  elector 
of  Bavaria :  and  about  the  latter  end  of  September  both 
armies  began  to  separate.  The  French  forces  retired 
within  their  lines.  A  good  number  of  the  allied  troops 
were  distributed  in  different  garrisons :  and  a  strong  de- 
tachment marched  towards  Newport,  under  the  com- 
mand of  the  prince  of  Wirtemberg,  for  the  security  of 
that  place.  Thus  ended  the  campaign  in  the  Nether- 
lands. On  the  Rhine  nothing  of  moment  was  attempted 
by  either  army.  The  mareschal  de  Lorges,  in  the  be- 
ginning of  June,  passed  the  Rhine  at  Philipsburgh ;  and 
posting  himself  at  Brucksal,  sent  out  parties  to  ravage 
the  country.  On  the  1  lth  of  the  same  month,  the 
prinoe  of  Baden  joined  the  German  army  at  Steppach, 
and  on  the  Sth  of  July  was  reinforced  by  the  troops  of 
the  other  German  confederates,  in  the  neighbourhood 
ofWiselack.  On  the  19th,  the  French  retired  without 
noise,  in  the  night,  towards  Mariheim,  where  they  re- 


250  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  169K 

passed  the  river,  without  any  interruption  frbm  the  im- 
perial general :  then  he  sent  off  a  large  detachment  to 
Flanders;    The  same  step  was  taken  by  the  prince  of 
Baden  ;  and  each  army  lay  inactive  in  their  quarters  for 
the  remaining  part  of  the  campaign.     The  command 
of  the  Germans  in  Hungary  was  conferred  upon  the 
elector  of  Saxony  :  but  the  court  of  Vienna  was  so  di- 
latory in  their  preparations,  that  he  was  not  in  a  condi- 
tion to  act  till  the  middle  of  August.     Lord  Paget  had 
been  sent  ambassador  from  England  to  the  Ottoman 
Porte,  with  instructions  relating  to  a  pacification  ?  but 
before  he  could  obtain  an  audience,  the  sultan  died,  and 
was  succeeded  by  his  nephew,  Mustapha,  who  resolved 
to  prosecute  the  war  in  person.     The  warlike  genius  of 
this  new  emperor  afforded  but  an  uncomfortable  pros-* 
pect  to  his  people,  considering  that  Peter,  the  czar  o£ 
Muscovy,  had  taken  the  opportunity  of  the  war  in  Hun- 
gary, to  invade  the  Crimea,  and  besiege  Azoph :  so  that 
the  Tartars  were  too  much  employed  at  home  to  spare 
the  succours  which  the  sultan  demanded.  Nevertheless, 
Mustapha  aiid  his  vizier  took  the  field  before  the  impe- 
rialists could  commence  the  operations  of  the  campaign,, 
passed  the  Danube,  took  Lippa  and  Titul  by  assault, 
stormed  the  camp  of  general  Veterani,  who  was  posted 
at  Lugos  with  seven  thousand  men,  and  who  lost  his: 
life  in  the  action.  The  infantry  were  cut  to  pieces,  after, 
having  made  a  desperate  defence  ;  but  the  horse  retreat- 
ed to  Carousebes,  under  the  conduct  of  general  Trus- 
ches.     The  Turks,  after  this  exploit, '  retired  to  Orsowa. 
Their  navy,  meanwhile,  surprized  the  Venetian  fleet  at 
Scio,  where  several  ships  of  the  republic  were  destroyed,; 
and  they  recovered  that  island,    which  the  Venetians* 
thought  proper  to  abandon ;  but,  in  order  to  balance 
this  misfortune,  these  last  obtained  a  complete  victory 
over  the  bashaw  of  Negropont  in  the  Morea. 

§  XVIII.  The  French  king  still  maintained  a  secret 
negotiation  with  the  duke  of  Savoy,  whose  conduct  had: 


1006.  WILLIAM.  261 

been  for  some  time  mysterious  and  equivocal.  Contrary 
to.  the  opinion  of  his  allies,  he  undertook  the  siege  of 
Casal,  which  was  counted  one  the  strongest  fortifica^ 
tions  in  Europe,  defended  by  a  numerous  garrison, 
abundantly  supplied  with  ammunition  and  provision. 
The  siege  was  begun  about  the  middle  of  May ;  and  the 
place,  was  surrendered  by  capitulation  in.  about  fourteen 
days,  to  the  astonishment  of  the  confederates,  who  did 
not  know  that  this  was  a  sacrifice  by  which  the  French 
court  obtained  the  duke's  forbearance  during  the  remain? 
ing  part  of  the  campaign.  The  capitulation  imported* 
that  the  place  should  be  restored  to  the  duke  of  Mantua, 
who  was  the  rightful  proprietor  :  that  the  fortifications 
should  be  demolished  at  the  expense  of  the  allies ;  that 
the  garrison  should  remain  in  the  fort  till  that  work 
should  be  completed ;  and  hostages  were  exchanged  for 
the  performance  of  these  conditions.  The  duke  under-r 
stood  the  art  of  procrastination  30  well,  that  September 
was  far  advanced  before  the  place  was  wholly  dismantled; 
and  then  he  was  seized  with  an  ague,  which  obliged  him 
to  quit  the  army.  > 

§  XIX.  In  Catalonia  the  French  could  hardly  main-: 
tain  the  footing  they  had  gained.  Admiral  Russel* 
who  wintered  at  Cadiz,  was  created  admiral,  chief  com- 
mander, and  captain-general  of  all  his  majesty's  ships 
employed,  or  to  be  employed,  in  the  narrow  sea's,  and 
in  the  Mediterranean.  He  was  reinforced  by  four  thou-; 
sand  five  hundred  soldiers,  under  the  command  of  bri- 
gadier-general Stewart ;  and  seven  thousand  men* 
imperialists  as  well  as  Spaniards,  were  drafted,  from 
Italy  for  the  defence  of  Catalonia.  These  forces  were; 
transported  to  Barcelona,  under  the  convoy  of  admiral; 
Nevil,  detached  by  Russel  for  that  purpose.  The  affairs. 
of  Catalonia  had  already  changed  their  aspect.  Several; 
French  parties  had  been  defeated.  The  Spaniards  had. 
blocked  up  Ostalric  and  Castel-Follit :  Noailles  had  been* 
recalled,  and  the  command  devolved  to  the  dufce  de; 


852  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1606. 

Vendome,  who  no  sooner  understood  that  the  forces 
from  Italy  were  landed,  than  he  dismantled  Ostalric  and 
Castel-Follit,  and  retired  to  Palamos.  The  viceroy  of 
Catalonia  and  the  English  admiral  having  resolved  to 
give  battle  to  the  enemy,  and  reduce  Palamos,  the 
English  troops  were  landed  on  the  gth  day  of  August, 
end  the  allied  army  advanced  to  Palamos.  The  French 
appeared  in  order  of  battle  ;  but  the  viceroy  declined  an 
engagement.  Far  from  attacking  the  enemy,  he  with- 
drew his  forces,  and  the  town  was  bombarded  by  the 
admiral.  The  miscarriage  of  this  expedition  was  in  a 
great  measure  owing  to  a  misunderstanding  between 
Russel  and  the  court  of  Spain.  The  admiral  complained 
that  his  Catholic  majesty  had  made  no  preparations  for 
the  campaign :  that  he  had  neglected  to  fulfil  his  en- 
gagements with  respect  to  the  Spanish  squadron,  which 
ought  to  have  joined  the  fleets  of  England  and  Holland: 
that  he  had  taken  no  care  to  provide  tents  and  provisions 
for  the  British  forces.  On  the  27  th  day  of  August  he 
sailed  for  the  coast  of  Provence,  where  the  fleet  was  en- 
dangered by  a  terrible  tempest :  then  he  steered  down 
the  Straits,  and  towards  the  latter  end  of  September 
arrived  in  the  bay  of  Cadiz.  There  he  left  a  num- 
ber of  ships  under  the  command  of  sir  David  Mitchel, 
until  he  should  be  joined  by  sir  George  Rooke,  who  was 
expected  from  England,  and  returned  home  with  the 
rest  of  the  combined  squadrons. 

§  XX.  While  admiral  Russel  asserted  the  British  do- 
minion  in  the  Mediterranean,  the  French  coasts  were 
again  insulted  in  the  Channel  by  a  separate  fleet,  under 
the  command  of  lord  Berkeley  of  Stratton,  assisted  by 
the  Dutch  admiral  Allemonde.  On  the  4th  day  of 
July  they  anchored  before  St.  Maloes,  which  they  bom- 
barded from  nine  ketches  covered  by  some  frigates,  which 
sustained  more  damage  than  was  done  to  the  enemy. 
On  the  6th,  Granville  underwent  the  same  fate,  and 
then  the  fleet  returned  to  Portsmouth.    The  bomb* 


ima.  WILLIAM.  253 

vessels  being  refitted,  the  fleet  sailed  round  to  the 
DoWris,  where  four  hundred  soldiers  were  embarked  for 
an  attempt  upon  Dunkirk,  under  the  direction  of  Mees- 
ters,  the  famous  Dutch  engineer,  who  had  prepared  his 
infernals,  and  other  machines  for  the  service.  On  the 
1st  day  of  August  the  experiment  was  tried  without  suc- 
cess. The  bombs  did  some  execution;  but  two  smoke- 
ships  miscarried.  The  French  had  secured  the  Risbank 
and  wooden  forts  with  piles,  bombs,  chains,  and  floating 
batteries,  in  such  a  manner,  that  the  machine-vessels 
could  not  approach  near  enough  to  produce  any  effect. 
Besides,  the  councils  of  the  assailants  were  distracted  by 
violent  animosities.  The  English  officers  hated  Mees- 
ters,  because  he  was  a  Dutchman,  and  had  acquired 
some  credit  with  the  king;  he,  on  the  other  hand, 
treated  them  with  disrespect.  He  retired  with  his  ma- 
chines in  the  night,  and  refused  to  co-operate  with  lord 
Berkeley  in  his  design  upon  Calais,  which  was  now  put 
in  execution.  On  the  l6th  he  brought  his  batteries  to 
bear  upon  this  place,  and  set  fire  to  it  in  different  quar- 
ters ;  but  the  enemy  had  taken  such  precautions  as  ren- 
dered his  scheme  abortive. 

§  XXI.  A  squadron  had  been  sent  to  the  West  Indies 
under  the  joint  command  of  captain  Robert  Wilmot  arid 
colonel  Lilingston,  with  twelve  hundred '  land-forces. 
They  had  instructions  to  co-operate  with  the  Spaniards 
in  Hispanfola,  against  the  French  settlements  on  that 
island,  and  to  destroy  their  fisheries  on  the  banks  of 
Newfoundland,  in  their  return.  They  were  accordingly 
joined  by  seventeen  hundred  Spaniards  raised  by  the 
president  of  St.  Domingo ;  but,  instead  of  proceeding 
against %  Petit-Guavas,  according  to  the  directions  they 
had  received,  Wilmot  took  possession  of  Port  Francois,' 
and  plundered  the  country  for  his  own  private  advan- 
tage, notwithstanding  the  remonstrances  of  Lilingston, 
who  protested  against  his  conduct.  In  a  word,  the  sea 
and  land  officers  lived  in  a  state  of  perpetual  dissension; 

vol.  i.  *  s 


364  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1099, 

and  both  became  extremely  disagreeable  to  the  Spaniards, 
who  soon  renounced  all  connexion  with  them  and  their 
designs.  In  the  beginning  of  September  the  commo- 
dore Set  sail  for  England,  and  lost  one  of  his  ships  in 
the  gulf  of  Florida.  He  himself  died  in  his  passage ; 
and  the  greater  part  of  the  men,  being  swept  off  by  an 
epidemical  distemper,  the  squadron  returned  to  Britain, 
in  a  most  miserable  condition.  Notwithstanding  the 
great  efforts  the  nation  had  made  to  maintain  such  a 
number  of  different  squadrons  for  the  protection  of 
commerce,,  as  well  as  to  annoy  the  enemy,  the  trade 
suffered  severely  from  the  French  privateers,  whieh 
swarmed  in  both  Channels,  and  made  prize  of  many 
rich  vessels.  The  marquis  of  Caermarthen,  being  sta- 
tioned with  a  squadron  off  the  Scilly  islands,  mistook  a 
fleet  of  merchant  ships  for  the  Brest  fleet,  and  retired 
with  precipitation  to  Milford-haven*  In  consequence  of 
this  retreat,  the  privateers  took  a  good  number  of  ships 
from  Barbadoes,  and  five  from  the  East  Indies,  valued 
at  a  million  sterling.  The  merchants  renewed  their 
clamour  against  the  commissioners  of  the  admiralty, 
who  produced  their  orders  and  instructions  in  their  own 
defence.  The  marquis  of  Caermarthen  had  been  guilty 
of  flagrant  misconduct  on  this  occasion ;  but  the  chief 
source  of  those  national  calamities  was  the  circumstan- 
tial intelligence  transmitted  to  France  from  time  to  time 
by  the  malecontents  of  England  ;  for  they  were  actuated 
by  a  scandalous  principle,  which  they  still  retain,  name- 
ly, that  of  rejoicing  in  the  distress  of  their  country. 

§  XXII.  King  William,  after  having  conferred  with 
the  states  of  Holland,  and  the  elector  of  Brandenburgh, 
who  met  him  at  the  Hague,  embarked  for  England  on. 
the  lgth  day  of  October,  and  arrived  in  safety  at  Mar- 
gate, from  whence  he  proceeded  to  London,  where  he 
was  received  as  a  conqueror,  amidst  the  rejoicings  and 
acclamations  of  the  people.  On  the  same  day  he  sum- 
moned a  council  at  Kensington,  in  which  it  was  deter- 


M*.  WILLIAM.  2&3 

mined  to  convoke  a  new  parliament.  Wliile  the  nation 
was  in  good  humour,  it  was  supposed  that  they  would 
return  such  members  only  as  were  well  affected  to  the 
government;  whereas  the  present  parliament  might 
proceed  in  its  inquiries  into  corruption  and  other  griev- 
ances, and  be  the  leas  influenced  by  the  crown,  as  their 
depeodance  was  of  such  short  duration.  The  parlia- 
ment was. therefore  dissolved  by  proclamation,  and  a  new 
one  summoned  to  meet  at  Westminster  on  the  22d  day 
of  November.  While  the  whole  nation  was  occupied 
in  the  elections,  William,  by  the  advice  of  his  chief  con- 
fidents, laid  his  own  disposition  under  restraint,  in  an* 
other  effort  to  acquire  popularity.  He  honoured  the 
diversions  of  Newmarket  with  his  presence,  and  there 
received  a  compliment  of  congratulation  from  the  uni- 
versity of  Cambridge.  Then  he  visited  the  earls  of 
Sunderland,  Northampton,  and  Montague,  at  their  dif- 
ferent houses  in  the  country :  and  proceeded  with  a 
splendid  retinue  to  Lincoln,  from  whence  he  repaired  to 
Welbeck,  a  seat  belonging  to  the  d  uke  of  Newcastle,  in 
Nottinghamshire,  where  he  was  attended  by  Dr.  Sharp, 
archbishop  of  York,  and  his  clergy.  He  lodged  one 
night  with  lord  Brooke,  at  Warwick-castle,  dined  with 
the  duke  of  Shrewsbury  at'Eyefort,  and,  by  the  way  of 
Woodstock,  made  a  solemn  entry  into  Oxford,  having 
bee$  met  at  some  distance  from  the  city  by  the  duke  of 
Ormond,  as  chancellor  of  the  university,  the  vice-chan- 
cellor, the  doctors  in  their  habits,  and  the  magistrates  in 
their  formalities.  He  proceeded  directly  to  the  theatre, 
wiier?  he  was  welcomed  in  an  elegant  Latin  speech :  he  re- 
ceived from  the  chancellor  on  Tus  knees  the  usual  presents 
of  a  large  English  Bible,  and  book  of  common-payer, 
the  cuts  of  the  university,  and*  a  pair  of  gold-fringed 
gloves.  The  conduits  tan  with  wine,  and  a  magnificent 
banquet  was  prepared  ;  but  an  anonymous  letter  being 
found  in  the  street,  importing,  that  there  was  a  design 
to  poison  his  majesty,  William  refused  to  eat  or  drink 

s  7 


256  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  160*. 

in  Oxford,  and  retired  immediately  to  Windsor.  Not- 
withstanding this  abrupt  departure,  which  did  not  savour 
much  of  magnanimity,  the  university  chose  sir  William 
Trumbal,  secretary  of  state,  as  one  of  their  representa- 
tives in  parliament. 

§  XXII.  The  whig  interest  generally  prevailed  in  the 
elections,  though  many  even  of  that  party  were  malecon- 
tents ;  and  when  the  parliament  met,  Foley  was  again 
chosen  speaker  of  the  commons.  The  king,  in  his  first 
speech,  extolled  the  valour  of  the  English  forces;  ex- 
pressed his  concern  at  being  obliged  to  demand  such 
large  supplies  from  his  people ;  observed  that  the  funds 
had  proved  very  deficient,  and  the  civil  list  was  in  a 
precarious  condition ;  recommended  to  their  compassion 
the  miserable  situation  of  the  French  Protestants ;  took 
notice  of  the  bad  state  of  the  coin ;  desired  they  would 
form  a  good  bill  for  the  encouragement  and  increase  of 
seamen ;  and  contrive  laws  for  the  advancement  of  com- 
merce. He  mentioned  the  great  preparations  which  the 
French  were  making  for  taking  the  field  early ;  entreat- 
ed them  to  use  dispatch ;  expressed  his  satisfaction  at  the 
choice  which  his  people  had  made  of  their  representa- 
tives in  the  house  of  commons ;  and  exhorted  them  to 
proceed  with  temper  and  unanimity.  Though  the  two 
houses  presented  addresses  of  congratulation  to  the  king 
upon  his  late  success,  and  promised  to  assist  him  in  pro- 
secuting the  war  with  vigour,  the  nation  loudly  exclaim- 
ed against  the  intolerable  burdens  and  losses  to  which 
they  were  subjected,  by  a  foreign  scheme  of  politics, 
which,  like  an  unfathomable  abyss,  swallowed  up  the 
wealth  and  blood  of  the  kingdom.  All  the  king's  en- 
deavours to  cover  the  disgusting  side  of  his  character 
had  proved  ineffectual ;  he  was  still  dry,  reserved,  and 
forbidding:  and  the  malecon tents  inveighed  bitterly 
against  his  behaviour  to  the  princess  Anne  of  Denmark. 
When  the  news  of  Namur's  being  reduced  arrived  in 
England,  this  lady  congratulated  him  upon  his  success 


1095;  WILLIAM.  257 

in  a  dutiful,  letter,  to  which  he  would  not  deign  to  send 
a  reply,  either  by  writing  or  message ;  nor  had  she  or 
her  husband  been  favoured  with  the  slightest  mark  of 
regard  since  his  return  to  England.  The  members  in 
the  lower  house,  who  had  adopted  opposing  maxims, 
either  from  principle  or  resentment,  resolved  that  the 
crown  should  purchase  the  supplies  with  some  concession 
in  favour  of  the  people.  They  therefore  brought  in  the 
so  long  contested  bill  for  regulating  trials  in  cases  of 
high-treason,  and  misprision  of  treason  ;  and,  consider- 
ing the  critical  juncture  of  affairs,  the  courtiers  were 
afraid  of  obstructing  such  a  popular  measure.  The 
lords  inserted  a  clause,  enacting,  that  a  peer  should  be 
tried  by  the  whole  peerage  ;  and  the  commons  at  once 
assented  to  this  amendment.  The.  bill  provided,  that 
persons  indicted  for  high-treason,  or  misprision  of  trea- 
son, should  be  furnished  with  a  copy  of  the  indictment 
five  days  before  the  trial,  and  indulged  with  counsel  to 
plead  in  their  defence ;  that  no  person  should  be  indicted 
but  upon  the  oaths  of  two  lawful  witnesses  swearing  to 
overt  acts  ;  that  in  two  or  more  distinct  treasons  of  di- 
vers kinds,  alleged  in  one  bill  of  indictment,  one  wit- 
ness to  one,  and  another  witness  to  another,  should  not 
be  deemed  two  witnesses:'  that  no  person  should  be 
prosecuted  for  any  such  crime,  unless  the  indictment  be 
found  within  three  years  after  the  offence  committed, 
except  in  case  of  a  design  or  attempt  to  assassinate  or 
poison  the  king,  where  this  limitation  should  not  take 
place :  that  persons  indicted  for  treason,  or  misprision  of 
treason,  should  be  supplied  with  copies  of  the  pannel  of 
the  jurors,  two  days  at  least  before  the  trial,  and  have 
process  to  compel  their  witnesses  to  appear :  that  no 
evidence  should  be  admitted  of  any  overt  act  not  ex- 
pressly laid  in  the  indictment :  that  this  act  should  not 
extend  to  any  impeachment,  or  other  proceeding  in  par- 
liament; nor  to  any  indictment  for  counterfeiting  his 


$08  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1006* 

majesty's  coin,  his  great  seal,  privy  seal,  sign  manual, 
or  signet. 

§  XXIV.  This  important  affair  being  discussed,  the 
commons  proceeded  to  examine  the  accounts  and  esti- 
mates, and  voted  above  five  millions  for  the  service  of 
the  ensuing  year.  The  state  of  the  coin  was  by  this 
time  become  such  a  national  grievance,  as  could  not 
escape  the  attention  of  parliament  The  lords  prepared 
an  address  to  the  throne!  for  a  proclamation  to  put  a 
stop  to  the  currency  of  diminished  coin ;  and  to  this 
they  desired  the  concurrence  of  the  commons.  The 
lower  house,  however*  determined  to  take  this  affair 
under  their  own  inspection.  They  appointed  a  com- 
mittee of  the  whole  hoqse,  to  deliberate  on  the  state  of 
the  nation  with  respect  to  the  currency.  Great  opposi- 
tion was  made  to  a  re-coinage,  Whitih  was  a  measure 
strenuously  recommended  and  supported  by  Mr.  Mon- 
tague, who  acted  on  this  occasion  by  the  advice  of  the 
great  mathematician  sir  Isaac  Newton.  The  enemies 
of  this  expedient  argued,  that  should  the  silver  coin  be 
called  in,  it  would  be  impossible  to  maintain  the  war 
abroad,  or  prosecute  foreign  trade,  in  as  much  as  the 
merchant  could  not  pay  his  bills  of  exchange*  nor  the 
soldier  receive  hip  subsistence  :  that  a  stop  would  be  put 
to  all  mutual  payment ;  and  this  would  produce  univer- 
sal confusion  and  despair.  Such  a  reformation  could 
not  be  effected  without  some  danger  and  difficulty ;  but 
it  was  become  absolutely  nece$sary9  as  tbe  evil  daily  in- 
creased, and  in  a  little  time  must  have  terminated  in 
national  anarchy.  After  long  aftd  vehement  debates*  the 
majority  resolved  to  proceed  with  all  possible  expedition 
to  a  new  coinage.  Another  question  arose,  whether  the 
new  coin,  it  its  different  denominations*  should  retain 
die  original  weight  and  purity  of  the  old ;  or  the  esta- 
blished standard  be  raised  in  value  ?  The  famous  Locke 
engaged  in  this  dispute  against  Mr.  Lowndes*  who  pro* 


MM.  WILLIAM.  2S9 

posed  that  the  standard  should  be  raised :  the  arguments 
of  Mr.  Locke  were  so  convincing,  that  the  committee 
resolved  the  established  standard  should  be  preserved 
with  respect  to  weight  and  fineness.  They  likewise  re- 
solved, that  the  loss  accruing  to  the  revenue  from  clipped 
money,  should  be  borne  by  the  public.  In  order  to  pre- 
vent a  total  stagnation,  they  farther  resolved,  that  after 
an  appointed  day,  no  clipped  money  should  pass  in  pay- 
ment, except  to  the  collectors  of  the  revenue  and  taxes, 
or  upon  loans  or  payment  into  the  exchequer :  that,  after 
another  day  to  be  appointed,  no  clipped  money  of  any 
sort  should  pass  in  any  payment  whatsoever ;  and  that 
a  third  day  should  be  fixed  for  all  persons  to  bring  in 
their  dipped  money  to  be  re-coined,  after  which  they 
should  have  no  allowance  upon  what  they  might  offer. 
They  addressed  the  king  to  issue  a  proclamation  agree* 
ably  to  these  resolutions;  and,  on  the  19th  day  of  De- 
cember, it  was  published  accordingly.  Such  were  the 
fears  of  the  people,  augmented  and  inflamed,  by  the  ene- 
mies of  the  government,  that  all  payment  immediately 
ceased,  and  a  face  of  distraction  appeared  through  the , 
whole  community.  The  adversaries  of  the  bill  seized 
this  opportunity  to  aggravate  the  apprehensions  of  the 
public.  They  inveighed  against  the  ministry,  as  the  au- 
thor of  this  national  grievance;  they  levelled  their 
satire  particularly  at  Montague ;  and  it  required,  uncom- 
mon fortitude  and  address  to  avert  the  most  dangerous 
consequences  of  popular  discontent  The  house  of 
commons  agreed  to  the  following  resolutions;  that 
!,2GO,OQQ/.  should  he  raised  by  a  duty  on  glass  windows, 
to  make  up  the  loss  on  the  clipped  money :  that  the 
recompense  for  supplying  the  deficiency  of  clipped  money 
should  extend  to  all  silver  coin,  though  of  a  coarser  al- 
loy than  the  standard :  that  the  collectors  and  receivers 
of  his  majesty's  aids  and  revenues  should  be  enjoined  to 
receive  all  such  monies :  that  a  reward  of  five  per  cent, 
ahauld  be  given  to  all  such  persons  as  should  bring  in 


260  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1606* 

either  milled  or  broad  undipped  money,  to  be  applied, 
in  exchange  of  the  clipped  money  throughout  the  king- 
dom :  that  a  reward  of  threepence  per  ounce  should  be 
given  to  all  persons  who  should  bring  in  wrought  plate 
to  the  mint  to  be  coined :  that  persons  might  pay  in  their 
whole  next  year's  land-tax  in  clipped  money,  at  one  con- 
venient time  to  be  appointed  for  that  purpose :  that  com- 
missioners should  be  appointed  in  every  county,  to  pay 
and  distribute  the  milled  and  broad  undipped  money, 
and  the  new  coined  money  in  lieu  of  that  which  was  di- 
minished.    A  bill  being  prepared  agreeably  to  these 
determinations,  was  sent  up  to  the  house  of  lords,  who 
made  some  amendments,  which  the  commons  rejected  : 
but,  in  order  to  avoid  cavils  and  conferences,  they  drop- 
ped the  bill,  and  brought  in  another  without  the  clauses 
which  the  lords  had  inserted.  They  were  again  proposed 
in  the  upper  house,  and  over-ruled  by  the  majority ;  and, 
on  the  21st  day  of  January,  the  bill  received  the  royal 
assent,  as  did  another  bill,  enlarging  the  time  for  pur- 
chasing annuities,  and  continuing  the  duties  on  low 
wines.     At  the  same  time,  the  king  passed  the  bill  of 
trials  for  high-treason,  and  an  act  to  prevent  mercenary 
elections.     Divers  merchants  and  traders  petitioned  the 
house  of  commons,  that  the  losses  in  their  trade  and 
payments,  occasioned  by  the  rise  of  guineas,  might  be 
taken   into    consideration.     A  bill  was    immediately 
brought  in  for  taking  off  the  obligation  and  encourage- 
ment for  coining  guineas,  for  a  certain  time :  and  then 
the  commons  proceeded  to  lower  the  value  of  this  coin : 
a  task  ih  which  they  met  with  great  opposition  from 
some  members,  who  alleged  that  it  would  foment  the 
popular  disturbances.  At  length,  however,  the  majority 
agreed,  that  a  guinea  should  be  lowered  from  thirty  to 
dght-and-twenty  shillings,  and   afterward  to  six-and- 
twenty:  at  length  a  clause  was  inserted  in  the  bill  for 
encouraging  people  to  bring  plate  to  the  mint,  settling 
the  price  of  a  guinea  at  two-and-twenty  shillings,  and  it 


1005,  WILLIAM.  261 

V 

naturally  sunk  to  its  original  value  of  twenty  shillings 
and  sixpence.  Many  persons,  however,  supposing  that 
the  price  of  gold  would  be  raised  the  next  session,  hoard- 
ed up  their  guineas ;  and,  upon  the  same  supposition, 
encouraged  by  the  malecontents,  the  new  coined  silver 
money  was  reserved,  to  the  great  detriment  of  commerce. 
The  king  ordered  mints  to  be  erected  in  York,  Bristol, 
Exeter,  and  Chester,  for  the  purpose  of  the  re-coinage, 
which  was  executed  with  unexpected  success :  so  that 
in  less  than  a  year,  thecurrency  of  England,  which  had 
been  the  worst,  became  the  best  coin  in  Europe. 

§  XXV.  At  this  period  the  attention  of  the  commons 
was  diverted  to  an  object  of  a  more  private  nature.   The 
earl  of  Portland,  who  enjoyed  the  greatest  share  of  the 
king's  favour,  had  obtained  a  grant  of  Some  lordships  in 
Derbyshire.     While  the  warrant  was  depending,  the 
gentlemen  of  that  county  resolved  to  oppose  it  with  all 
their-  power.     In  consequence  of  a  petition,  they  were 
indulged  with  a  hearing  by  the  lords  of  the  treasury. 
Sir  William  Williams,  in  the  name  of  the  rest,  alleged, 
that  the  lordships  in  question  were  the  ancient  demesnes 
of  the  prince  of  Wales,  absolutely  unalienable :  that  the 
revenues  of  these  lordships  supported  the  government  of 
Wales,  in  paying  the  judges  and  other  salaries :  that  the 
grant  was  of  too  large  an  extent  for  any  foreign  subject ; 
and  that  the  people  of  the  county  were  too  great  to .  be 
subject  to  any  foreigner.     Sundry  other  substantial  rea- 
sons were  used  against  the  grant,  which,  notwithstand- 
ing all  their  remonstrances,  would  have  passed  through 
the  offices,  had  not  *  the  Welsh  gentlemen  addressed 
themselves,  by  petition,    to  the  house  of  commons. 
Upon  this  occasion,  Mr.  Price,  a- member  of  the  houses 
harangued  with  great   severity  against  the  Dutch  in 
general,  and  did  not  even  abstain  from  sarcasms  upon 
the  king's  person,  title,  and  government.     The  objec- 
tions started  by  the  petitioners  being  duly  considered, 
were  found  so  reasonable,  that  the  commons  presented 


Wt  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  lift*. 

an  addfess  to  the  king,  representing  that  those  manors 
had  been  usually  annexed  to  the  principality  of  Wal^, 
and  settled  on  the  princes  of  Wales  for  their  support : 
that  many  persons  in  those  parts  held  their  estate^  by 
royal  tenure,  under  great  and  valuable  coiRpositjou^ 
rents,  royal  payments,  and  services  to  the  crown  an4 
princes  of  Wales ;  and  enjoyed  great  privileges  and  ad- 
vantages under  such  tenure.  They  therefore  besought 
his  majesty  to  recall  the  grant,  which  was  in  diminution, 
of  the  honour  and  interest  of  the  crown ;  and  prayed* 
that  the  said  manors  and  lands  might  not  be  alienated 
without  the  consent  of  parliament.  This  address  met 
with  a  cold  reception  from  the  king,  who  promised  to 
recall  the  grant  which  had  given  such  offence  to  the 
commons ;  and  said  he  would  find  some  other  way  of 
shewing  his  favour  to  the  earl  of  Portland. 

§  XXVI.  The  people  in  general  entertained  a  na- 
tional aversion  to  this  nobleman  ;  the  malecontents  in- 
culcated a  notion  that  he  had  made  use  of  his  interest 
and  intelligence  to  injure  the  trade  of  England,  that  the 
commerce  of  his  own  country  might  flourish  without 
competition.  To  his  suggestions  they  imputed  the  act 
and  patent  in  favour  of  the  Scottish  company,  which 
was  supposed  to  have  been  thrown  in  as  a  bone  of  con- 
tention between  the  two  kingdoms.  The  subject  was 
first  started  in  the  house  of  lords,  who  invited  the  com-' 
mons  to  a  conference ;  a  committee  was  appointed  to 
examine  into  the  particulars  of  the  act  for  erecting  the 
Scottish  company  ;  and  the  two  houses  presented  £  joint 
address  against  it,  as  a  scheme  that  would  prejudice  all 
the  subjects  concerned  in  the  wealth  and  trade  of  the 
English  nation.  They  represented,  that,  in  consequence 
of  the  exemption  from  taxes,  and  other  advantages  grant- 
ed to  the  Scottish  company,  that  kingdom  \vould  be- 
come a  free  port  for  all  East  and  West  India  commodi- 
ties:  that  the  Scots  would  he  enabled  to  supply  all  Eu- 
rope at  a  cheaper  r^te  than  the  English  could  afford  tp 


HN*.  WILLIAM.  $0$ 

sell  the  merchandize  for;  therefore,  England  would  km 
the  benefit  of  it)  foreign  trade ;  besides,  they  observed 
that  the  Scots  would  smuggle  their  commodities  into 
England,  to  the  great  detriment  of  his  majesty  and  bis 
customs.  To  this  remonstrance  the  king  replied,  that 
he  had  been  ill  served  in  Scotland  ;  but  that  he  hoped 
some  Remedies  would  be  found  to  prevent  the  inconve- 
niences of  which  they  were  apprehensive.  In  all  pro- 
bability he  had  been  imposed  upon  by  the  ministry  of 
that  kingdom ;  for,  in  a  little  time,  he  discarded  the 
marquis  of  Tweedale,  and  dismissed  both  the  Scottish 
secretaries  of  state,  in  lieu  of  whom  he  appointed  lord 
Murray,  son  to  the  marquis  of  Athol,  Notwithstand- 
ing the  king's  answer,  the  committee  proceeded  oh  the 
inquiry*  and,  in  consequence  of  their  report,  confirm- 
ing a  petition  from,  the  East  India  company,  the  house 
resolved,  that  the  directors  of  the  Scottish  company 
were  guilty  of  a  high  crime  and  misdemeanour,  in  ad- 
ministering and  taking  an  oath  dejiddi  in  this  kingdom ; 
arid  that  they  should  be  impeached  for  the  same.  Mean- 
while, Roderick  Mackenzie,  from  whom  they  had  re- 
ceived their  chief  information*  began  to  retract  his  evi- 
dence, and  was  ordered  into  custody  :  but  he  made  his 
escape,  and  could  not  be  retaken*  although  the  king, 
at  their  request,  issued  a  proclamation  for  that  purpose. 
The  $eots  were  extremely  inceosed  against  the  king* 
when  they  understood  he  had  disowned  their  company, 
from  wbich  they  had  promised  themselves  such  wealth 
and  advantage.  The  settlement  of  Darien  was  already 
planned,  and  Afterward  pot  in  execution,  though  it  mis- 
carried in  the  sequel,  and  had  like  to  have  produced 
abundance  of  mischief. 

§  XXVIL  The  complaints  of  the  English  merchants 
who  had  suffered  by  the  war  were  so  loud  at  this  junc- 
ture, that  the  ^commons  re&olvtd  to  take  their  case  into 
consideration*  Tte  house  resolved  itself  into  arommittee 
to  consider  the  state  of  the  nation  with  regard  to  com- 


264  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  109& 

merce,  and,   havirfg  duly  weighed  all  circumstances, 
agreed  to  the  following  resolutions :  that  a  council  of 
trade  should  be  established  by  act  of  parliament,  with 
powers  to  take  measures  for  the  more  effectual  preser- 
vation of  commerce ;  that  the  commissioners  should 
be  nominated  by  parliament,  but  none  of  them  have 
seats  in  the  house :  that  they  should  take  an  oath,  ac- 
knowledging the  title  of  king  William  as  rightful  and 
lawful;  and  abjuring  the  pretensions  of  James,  or  any 
other  person.     The  king  considered  these  resolutions  as 
an  open  attack  upon  his  prerogative,  and  signified  his 
displeasure  to  the  earl  of  Sunderland,  who  patronised 
this  measure  :  but  it  was  so  popular  in  the  house,  that 
in  all  probability  it  would  have  been  put  in  execution, 
had  not  the  attention  of  the  commons  been  diverted 
from  it  at  this  period  by  the  detection  of  a  new  conspi- 
racy.    The  friends  of  king  James  had,  upon  the  death 
of  queen  Mary,  renewed  their  practices  for  effecting  a 
restoration  of  that  monarch,  on  the  supposition  that 
the  interest  of  William  was  considerably  weakened  by 
the  decease  of  his  consort.     Certain  individuals,  whose 
zeal  for  James  overshot  their  discretion,  formed  a  de- 
sign to  seize  the  person  of  king  William,  and  convey  him 
to  France,  or  put  him  to  death  in  case  of  resistance. 
They  had  sent  emissaries  to  the  court  of  St.  Germains, 
to  demand  a  commission  for  this  purpose,  which  was 
refused.  The  earl  of  Aylesbury,  lord  Montgomery,  son 
to  the  marquis  of  Powis,  sir  John  Fenwick,  sir  John 
Friend,    captain  Charnock,    captain  Porter,    and  one 
Mr.  Goodman,  were  the  first  contrivers  of  this  project. 
Charnock  was  detached  with  a  proposal  to  James,  that 
he  should  procure  a  body  of  horse  and  foot  from  France, 
to  make  a  descent  in  England,  and  they  would  engage 
not  only  to  join  him  at  his  landing,  but  even  to  replace 
him  on  the  throne  of  England.     These  offers  being 
declined  by  James,  on  pretence  that  the  French  king 
could  not  spare  such  a  number  of  troops  at  that  juncture, 


1405.  WILLIAM.  265 

the  earl  of  Aylesbury  went  over  in  person,  and  was  ad- 
mitted to  a  conference  with  Lewis,  in  which  the  scheme 
of  an  invasion  was  actually  concerted.  In  the  beginning 
of  February,  the  duke  of  Berwick  repaired  privately  to 
Epgland,  where  he  conferred  with  the  conspirators,  as- 
sured them  that  king  James  was  ready  to  make  a  de- 
scent with  a  considerable  number  of  French  forces,  dis- 
tributed commissions,  and  gave  directions  for  providing 
men,  arms,  and  horses,  to  join  him  at  his  arrival. 
When  he  returned  to  France,  he  found  every  thing 
prepared  for  the  expedition.  The  troops  were  drawn 
down  to  the  sea-side ;  a  great  number  of  transports 
were  assembled  at  Dunkirk ;  monsieur  Gabaret  had 
advanced  as  far  as  Calais  with  a  squadron  of  ships, 
which,  when  joined  by  that  of  Du  Bart  at  Dunkirk,  was 
judged  a  sufficient  convoy  ;  and  James  had  come  as  far 
as  Calais  in  his  way  to  embark.  Meanwhile,  the  Jaco- 
bites in  England  were  assiduously  employed  in  making 
preparations  for  a  revolt.  Sir  John  Friend  had  very 
near  completed  a  regiment  of  horse.  Considerable  pro- 
gress was  made  in  levying  another  by  sir  William  Per* 
kins.  Sir  John  Fenwick  had  enlisted  four  troops.  Co- 
lonel Tempest  had  undertaken  for  one  regiment  of  dra- 
goons ;  colonel  Parker  was  preferred  to  the  command 
of  another  ;  Mr.  Curzon  was  commissioned  for  a  third ; 
and  the  malecontents  intended  to  raise  a  fourth  in  Suf- 
folk, where  their  interest  chiefly  prevailed. 

§  XXVIII.  While  one  part  of  the  Jacobites  proceed- 
ed ag?ipst  William  in  the  usual  way  of  exciting  an  insur- 
rection, another,  consisting  of  the  most  desperate  con- 
spirators, had  formed  a  scheme  of  assassination.  Sir 
George  Barclay,  a  native  of  Scotland,  who  had  served  as 
an  officer  in  the  army  of  James,  a  man  of  undaunted 
courage,  a  furious  bigot  in  the  religion  of  Rome,  yet 
close,  circumspect,  and  determined,  was  landed,  with 
other  officers,  in  Romney-marsh,  by  one  captain  Gill, 
about  the  beginning  of  January,  and  is  said  to  have 


±86  HISTORY  OF  ENCLAND.  tttt. 

undertaken  the  task  of  seizing  or  assassinating  king 
William.    He  imparted  his  design  to  Harrison,  alias 
Johnston,  a  priest,  Charnock,  Porter,  and  sir  William 
Perkins,  by  whom  it  was  approved ;  and  he  pretended 
to  have  a  particular  commission  for  this  service.     After 
various  consultations,  they  resolved  to  attack  the  kmg 
on  his  return  from  Richmond,  where  he  commonly 
hunted  on  Saturdays ;  and  the  scene  of  their  intended 
ambuscade  was  a  lane  between  Brentford  and  Turnham- 
Green.     As  it  would  be  necessary  to  charge  and  dis- 
perse the  guards  that  attended  the  coaieh,  they  agreed 
that  their  number  should  be  increased  to  forty  horse- 
men,   and  each   conspirator  began   to  engage  proper 
persons  for  the  enterprise.     When  their  compliment 
was  full,  they  determined  to  execute  their  purpose  on  the 
I5th  day  of  February.    They  concerted  the  manner  m 
whifch  they  should  meet  in  smaH  parties  without  suspi- 
cion, arid  waited  with  impatience  for  the  hour  of  action. 
In  this  interval,  some  of  the  underling  actors,  seized 
with'  horror  at  the  reflection  of  what  they  had  under- 
taken, or  captivated  with  the  prospect  of  reward,  resolved 
to  prevent  the  execution  of  the  design  by  a  timely  dis- 
covery.    On  the  1 1  th  day  of  February,  one  Fisher  in- 
formed the  earl  of  Portland  of  the  scheme,  and  named 
some  of  the  conspirators  ;  but  his  account  was  imperfect. 
On  the  13  th,  however,  he  returned  with  a  circumstan- 
tial detail  of  all  the  particulars.     Next  day,  the  earl  was 
accosted  by 'one  Pendergrass,  an  Irteh  officer,  who  told 
his  lordship  he  bad  just  come  from' Hampshire,  at  the 
request  of  a  particular  friend,  and  understood  that  he 
had  been  called  up  to  town  with  a  view  of  engaging  hhjfi 
in  &  design  to  assassinate  king  Wiffiatii.     He  said,  he 
liacl  promised  to  embark  in  the  undertaking,  though  he 
tfetested'it  in  his  own  mind,  and  took  this  first  tfpportu- 
tiity  of  revealing  the  secret,  which  wa&  of  such  conse- 
quence to  his  majesty's  life.     He  owned  Himself  a  Ro- 
man Catholic,  but  declared,  that  he  did  not  think  any 


M*  WILLIAM.  2»7 

religion  could  justify  such  a  treacherous  purpose.    At 
the  same  time  he  observed,  that  as  he  by  under  obliga- 
tions to  some  of  the  conspirators,  his  honour  arid  grati- 
tude would  not  permit  him  to  accuse  them  by  name; 
and  that  he  would  upon  no  consideration  appear  m  an 
evidence.    The  king  had  been  so  muoh  used  to  fictitious 
plots,  and  false  discoveries,  that  he  paid  little  regard  to 
the  informations,  until  they  were  con^tttied<by  the  tes- 
timony of  another  conspirator,  cal  ted)  Lai  Rue,  ^French- 
man, who  communicated  the  same  particulars r  to  briga- 
dier Levison,  without  knowing  the  ka*t  circumstance  of 
the  other  discoveries.    Then  the  king  believed  there  was 
something  real  in  the  conspiracy;  and  Pendergn&ss  and  La 
Roe  wwe  severalty  examined  in  his  presence^  He  thanked 
Pendergrass  in  particular  for  this  instance  of  his  probity ; 
but  observed,  that  it  must  prove  ineffectual,  unless  he 
wo  uid  disco  vert  he  namesof  the  conspirators ;  for,  without 
knowing  who  they  were,  he  should  not  be  able  to  secure 
his  life  against  theirattempts.  At  length  Pendergrass  was 
prevailed  on  to  give  a  list  of  those  he  knew,  yet  not  be- 
fore the  king  had  solefrinly  promised  that  he  should  not 
be  used  as  an  evifdence  against  them,  except  with  his  own 
ctfnrfent.     As  the  king  did  not  go  to  Richmond  on  the 
day  appointed,  the  conspirators  postponed  the  execution 
of  their  design  till  the  Saturday  following.    They  ac- 
cordingly fnfct  at  different  houses  on  the  Friday,  When 
every  ma®  tecdived  his  instructions.  There  they  agreed, 
that  after  the  perpetration  of  the  parricide,  they  should 
ride  in  a  body  as  far  as  Hammersmith,  and  then  dis- 
persing, enter  London  by  .different  avermes.    But,  on 
the  morning,  when  they  understood  that  the  guards 
were  returned  to  their  quarters,  and  the  king's  coaches' 
setitback  to  the  Mews,  they  were  seized  with  a  sadden 
damp,  'on  the  suspicion  that  their  plot  was  discovered 
Sir  George  Barclay  withdrew  himself,  and  every  one 
Began  to  think  of  providing  for  his  own  safety.     Next 
:,  however,  a  great  number  of  them  were  appre<- 


268  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  16Bfc. 

hended,  and  then  the  whole  discovery  was  communicated 
to  the  privy-council.  A  proclamation  was  issued  against 
those  that  absconded ;  and  great  diligence  was  used  to  find 
sir  George  Barclay,  who  was  supposed  to  have  a  particu- 
lar commission  from  James  for  assassinating  the  prince 
of  Orange ;  but  he  made  good  his  retreat,  and  it  was 
never  proved  that  any  such  commission  had  been  granted. 
§  XXIX.  This  design  and  the  projected  invasion 
proved  equally  abortive.  James  had  scarce  reached  Ca- 
lais, when  the  duke  of  Wirtemberg  dispatched  his  aid- 
de-camp  from  Flanders  to  king  William,  with  an  ac- 
count of  the  purposed  descent.  Expresses  with  the 
same  tidings  arrived  from  the  elector  of  Bavaria,  and 
the  prince  de  Vaudemont.  Two  considerable  squadrons 
being  ready  for  sea,  admiral  Russel  embarked  at  Spit- 
head,  and  stood  over  to  the  French  coast  with  about 
fifty  sail  of  the  line.  The  enemy  were  confounded  at 
his  appearance,  and  hauled  in  their  vessels  under  the 
shore,  in  such  shallow  water  that  he  could  not  follow 
and  destroy  them :  but  he  absolutely  ruined  their  de- 
sign, by  cooping  them  up  in  their  harbours.  King 
James,  after  having  tarried  some  weeks  at  Calais,  re- 
turned to  St.  Gtermains.  The  forces  were  sent  back  to 
the  garrisons  from  which  they  had  been  drafted:  the 
people  of  France  exclaimed,  that  the  malignant  star 
which  ruled  the  destiny  of  James,  had  blasted  this  and 
every  other  project  formed  for  his  restoration.  By 
means  of  the  reward  offered  in  the  proclamation,  the 
greater  part  of  the  conspirators  were  betrayed  or  taken. 
George  Harris,  who  had  been  sent  from  France,  with 
orders  to  obey  sir  George  Barclay,  surrendered  himself 
to  sir  William  Trumbal,  and  confessed  the  scheme  of 
assassination  in  which  he  had  been  engaged.  Porter 
and  Pendergrass  were  apprehended  together.  This  last 
insisted  upon  the  king's  promise,  that  he  should  not  be 
compelled  to  give  evidence ;  but,  when  Porter  owned 
himself  guilty,  the  other  observed,  he  was  no  longer 


ltt&  WILLIAM.  209 

bound  to  be  silent,  as  his  friend  had  made  a  confession ; 
and  they  were  both  admitted  as  evidences  for  the  crown. 
§  XXX.  After  their  examination,  the  king,  in  a 
speech  to  both  houses,  communicated  the  nature  of  the 
conspiracy  against  his  life,  as  well  as  the  advices  he  had 
received  touching  the  invasion :  he  explained  the  steps 
he  had  taken  to  defeat  the  double  design,  and  profes- 
sed his  confidence  in  their  readiness  and  zeal  to  concur 
with  him  in  every  thing  that  should  appear  necessary  for 
their  common  safety.  That  same  evening  the  two 
houses  waited  upon  him  at  Kensington,  in  a  body,  with 
an  affectionate  address,  by  which  they  expressed  their 
abhorrence  of  the  villanous  and  barbarous  design  which 
had  been  formed  against  his  sacred  person,  of  which  they 
besought  him  to  take  more  than  ordinary  care.  They 
assured  him  they  would  to  the  utmost  defend  his  life, 
and  support  his  government  against  the  late  king  James, 
and  all  other  enemies ;  and  declared,  that  in  case  his 
majesty  should  come  to  a  violent  death,  they  would 
revenge  it  upon  his  adversaries  and  their  adherents.  He 
was  extremely  well  pleased  with  this  warm  address,  and 
assured  them,  in  his  turn,  he  would  take  all  opportuni- 
ties of  recommending  himself  to  the  continuance  of  their 
loyalty  and  affection.  The  commons  forthwith  em- 
powered him,  by  bill,  to  secure  all  persons  suspected  of 
conspiring  against  his  person  and  government.  They 
brought  in  another,  providing,  that  in  case  of  his  majes- 
ty's death,  the  parliament  then  in  being  should  continue 
until  dissolved  by  the  next  heir  in  succession  to  the 
crown,  established  by  act  of  parliament :  that  if  his  ma- 
jesty should  chance  to  die  between  two  parliaments, 
that  which  had  been  last  dissolved  should  immediately 
reassemble,  and  sit  for  the  dispatch  of  national  affairs. 
They  voted  an  address,  to  desire  that  his  majesty  would 
banish,  by  proclamation,  all  Papists  to  the  distance  of 
ten  miles  from  the  cities  of  London  and  Westmin- 
ster; and  give  instructions  to  the  judges  going  on  the 

VOL.  i.  *  T 


270  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1006. 

circuits,  to  put  the  laws  in  execution  against  Roman 
Catholics  and  nonjurors.  They  drew  up  an  association, 
binding  themselves  to  assist  each  other  in  support  of  the 
king  and  his  government,  and  to  revenge  any  violence 
that  should  be  committed  on  his  person.  This  was 
signed  by  all  the  members  then  present :  but,  as  some 
had  absented  themselves  on  frivolous  pretences,  the 
house  ordered,  that  in  sixteen  days  the  absentees  should 
dither  subscribe  or  declare  their  refusal.  Several  mem- 
bers neglecting  to  comply  with  this  injunction  within 
the  limited  time,  the  speaker  was  ordered  to  write  to 
those  who  were  in  the  country,  and  demand  a  peremp- 
tory answer ;  and  the  clerk  of  the  house  attended  such 
as  pretended  to  be  ill  in  town.  The  absentees,  finding 
themselves  pressed  in  this  manner,  thought  proper  to 
sail  with  the  stream,  and  sign  the  association,  which 
was  presented  to  the  king  by  the  commons  in  a  body, 
with  a  request  that  it  might  be  lodged  among  the  re- 
cords in  the  Tower,  as  a  perpetual  memorial  of  their 
loyalty  and  affection.  The  king  received  them  with 
uncommon  complacency:  declared,  that  he  heartily  en- 
tered into  the  same  association,;  that  he  should  be  al- 
ways ready  to  venture  his  life  with  his  good  subjects, 
against  all  who  should  endeavour  to  subvert  the  religion, 
laws,  and  liberties,  of  England :  and  he  promised  that 
this,  and  all  other  associations,  should  be  lodged  among 
the  records  of  the  Tower  of  London.  Next  day  the 
commons  resolved,  that  whoever  should  affirm  an  asso- 
ciation was  illegal,  should  be  deemed  a  promoter  of  the 
designs  of  the  late  king  James,  and  an  enemy  to  the  laws 
and  liberties  of  the  kingdom.  The  lords  followed  the  ex- 
ample of  the  lower  house  in  drawing  up  an  association ; 
but  the  earl  of  Nottingham,  sir  Edward  Seymour,  and 
Mr.  Finch,  objected  to  the  words  rightful  and  lawful,  as 
applied  to  his  majesty.  They  said,  as  the  crown  and  its 
prerogatives  were  vested  in  him,  they  would  yield  obe- 
dience, though  they  could  not  acknowledge  him  as  their 


1096.  WILLIAM.  271 

rightful  and  lawful  king.  Nothing  could  be  more  ab- 
surd than  this  distinction,  started  by  men  who  had  ac- 
tually constituted  part  of  the  administration ;  unless  they 
supposed  that  the  right  of  king  William  expired  with 
queen  Mary.  The  earl  of  Rochester  proposed  an  ex- 
pedient in  favour  of  such  tender  consciences,  by  altering 
the  words  that  gave  offence ;  and  this  was  adopted  ac- 
cordingly. Fifteen  of  the  peers,  and  ninety- two  com- 
moners, signed  the  association  with  reluctance.  It  was, 
however,  subscribed  by  all  sorts  of  people  in  different 
parts  of  the  kingdom ;  and  the  bishops  drew  up  a  form 
for  the  clergy,  which  was  signed  by  a  great  majority.6 
The  commons  brought  in  a  bill,  declaring  all  men  inca- 
pable of  public  trust,  or  of  sitting  in  parliament,  who 
would  not  engage  in  this  association.  At  the  same 
time,  the  council  issued  an  order  for  renewing  all  the 
commissions  in  England,  that  those  who  had  not  signed 
it  voluntarily,  should  be  dismissed  from  the  service  as 
disaffected  persons. 

§  XXXI.  After  these  warm  demonstrations  of  loyalty, 
the  commons  proceeded  upon  ways  and  means  for  rais- 
ing the  supplies.  A  new  bank  was  constituted  as  a; 
fund,  upon  which  the  sum  of  2,564,000/.  should  be 
raised ;  and  it  was  called  the  land-bank,  because  esta- 
blished on  land  securities.  This  scheme,  said  to  have 
been  projected  by  the  famous  Dr.  Chamberlain,  was 
patronised  by  the  earl  of  Sunderland,  and  managed  by 
Foley  and  Harley  :  so  that  it  seemed  to  be  a  tory  plan, 
which  Sunderland  supported,  in  order  to  reconcile  him- 
self to  that  party/    The  bank  of  England  petitioned 

*  Burnet.  Oldmixon.  Boyer.  Tindal.  Ralph.  Lives  of  the 
Admirals. 

f  The  commons  resolved,  That  a  fund,  redeemable  by  parliament,  be 
settled  in  a  national  land-bank,  to  be  raised  by  new  subscriptions ;  that 
no  persons  be  concerned  in  both  banks  at  the  same  time ;  that  the  dnties 
upon  coals,  culm,  and  tonnage  of  ships,  be  taken  off,  from  the  17th  day 
of  March ;  that  the  sum  of  2,564,0002.  be  raised  on  this  perpetual  fund, 
redeemable  by  parliament ;  that  the  new  bank  should  be  restrained  from 
lending  money  but  upon  land  securities,  or  to  the  government  in  the  ex- 

T  % 


272  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1696. 

against  this*  bill,  and  were  heard  by  their  counsel :  but 
their  representations  produced  no  effect,  and  the  bill 
having  passed  through  both  houses,  received  the  royal 
assent.  On  the  27  th  day  of  April  the  king  closed  the 
session  with  a  short  but  gracious  speech ;  and  the  par-, 
liament  was  prorogued  to  the  16th  day  of  June. 

§  XXXII.  Before  this  period  some  of  the  conspirators 
had  been  brought  to  trial.  The  first  who  suffered  was 
Robert  Charnock,  one  of  the  two  fellows  of  Magdalen- 
college,  who,  in  the  reign  of  James,  had  renounced  the 
Protestant  religion  :  the  next  were  lieutenant  King  and 
Thomas  Keys,  which  last  had  been  formerly  a  trum- 
peter, but  of  late  servant  to  captain  Porter.  They  were 
found  guilty  of  high-treason,  and  executed  at  Tyburn. 
They  delivered  papers  to  the  sheriff  in  which  they  so- 

chequer ;  that  for  making  up  the  fund  of  interest  for  the  capital  stock, 
certain  duties  upon  glass-wares,  stone  and  earthen  bottles,  granted  be- 
fore to  the  king  for  a  term  of,  years,  be  continued  to  his  majesty,  his  heirs, 
and  successors ;  that  a  farther  duty  be  laid  upon  stone  and  earthen-ware, 
and  another  upon  tobaoco  pipes.  This  bank  was  to  lend  out  600,000/.  a 
year  npon  land  securities,  at  three  pounds  ten  shillings  per  cent,  per  an- 
num, and  to  cease  and  determine,  unless  the  subscription  should  be  foil 
by  the  1st  day  of  August  next  ensuing. 

The  most  remarkable  laws  enacted  in  this  session  were  these:  An  act 
for  voiding  all  the  elections  of  parliament-men,  at  which  the  elected  had 
been  at  .any  expense,  in  meat,  drink,  or  money,  to  procure  votes.  An- 
other against  unlawful  and  double  returns.  A  third,  for  the  more  easy 
recovery  of  small  tithes.  A  fourth,  to  prevent  marriages,  without  licence 
or  bands.  A  fifth,  for  enabling  the  inhabitants  of  Wales  to  dispose  of 
all  their  personal  estates  as  they  should  think  fit:  this  law  was  in  bar  of  a 
custom  that  had  prevailed  in  that  country :  the  widows  and  younger  chil- 
dren claimed  a  share  of  the  effects,  called  the  Reasonable  Part,  although 
the  effects  had  been  otherwise  disposed  of  by  will  or  deed.  The  parlia- 
ment likewise  passed  an  act,  for  preventing  the  exportation  of  wool,  and 
eneouragingthe  importation  thereof,  from  Ireland.  An  act  for  encou- 
raging the  linen  manufacturers  of  Ireland.  An  act  for  regulating  jarifes. 
An  act  for  encouraging  the  Greenland  trade.  An  act  of  indulgence  to  the 
Quakers,  that  their  solemn  affirmation  should  be  accepted  instead  of  an 
oatb.  An  act  for  continuing  certain  other  acts  that  were  near  expiring. 
Another  bill  had  passed  for  the  better  regulating  elections  for  members  of 
parliament ;  but  the  royal  assent  was  denied.  The  question  was  put  in 
the  house  of  commons,  That  whosoever  advised  his  majesty  not  to  give  his 
assent  to  that  bill,  was  an  enemy  to  h»  country ;  but  it  was  rejected  by 
a  great  majority. 


1696,  WILLIAM.  273 

lemnly  declared,  that  they  had  never  seen  or  heard  of 
any  commission  from  king  James  for  assassinating  thf 
prince  of  Orange :  Charnock,  in  particular,  observed, 
that  he  had  received  frequent  assurances  of  the  king's 
having  rejected  such  proposals  when  they  had  been  of- 
fered ;  and  that  there  was  no  other  commission  but  that 
for  levying  war  in  the  usual  form.    Sir  John  Friend 
and  sir  William  Perkins  were  tried  in  April.    The  first, 
from  mean  beginnings,  had  acquired  great  wealth  and 
.credit,  and  always  firmly  adhered  to  the  interests  of 
king  James.    The  other  was  likewise  a  man  of  fortune, 
violently  attached  to  the  same  principles,  though  he  had 
taken  the  oaths  to  the  present  government,  as  one  of  the 
six  clerks  in  Chancery.    Porter,  and  Blair,  another  evi- 
dence, deposed,  that  sir  John  Friend  had  been  concern- 
ed in  levying  men  under  a  commission  from  king  James: 
and  that  he  knew  of  the  assassination  plot,  though  not 
engaged  in  it  4s  a  personal  actor.    He  endeavoured  to 
invalidate  the  testimony  of  Blair,  by  proving  him  guilty 
of  the  most  shocking  ingratitude.     He  observed,  that 
both  the  witnesses  were  reputed  Papists.    The  curate  of 
Hackney,  who  officiated  as  chaplain  in  the  prisoner's 
house,  declared  upon  oath,  that  after  the  revolution  he 
used,  to  pray  for  king  William,  and  that  he  had  often 
heard  sir  John  Friend  say,  that  though  he  could  not 
comply  with  the  present  government,  he  would  live 
peaceably  under  it,  and  never  engage  in  any  conspiracy. 
Mr.  Hoadley,  father  of  the  present  bishop  of  Winches- 
ter, added,  that  the  prisoner  was  a  good  Protestant,  and 
frequently  expressed  his  detestation  of  king-killing  prin- 
ciples.    Friend  himself  owned  he  had  been  with  some 
of  the  conspirators  at  a  meeting  in  Leadenhall-street, 
but  heard  nothing  of  raising  men,  or  any  design  against 
the  government.     He  likewise  affirmed,  that  a  consul- 
tation to  levy  war  was  not  treason ;  and  that  his  being 
at  a  treasonable  consult  could  amount  to  no  more  than 
a  misprision  of  treason.      Lord-chief-justice  Holt  de^ 


274  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  i«HJ. 

clared,  that  although  a  bare  conspiracy  or  design  to  levy 
war,  was  not  treason  within  the  statute  of  Edward  III., 
yet,  if  the  design  or  conspiracy  be  to  kill,  or  depose,  or 
imprison  the  king,  by  the  means  of  levying  war,  then 
the  consultation  and  conspiracy  to  levy  war  becomes 
high-treason,  though  no  war  be  actually  levied.     The 
same  inference  might  have  been  drawn  against  the  au- 
thors and  instruments  of  the  revolution.     The  judge's 
explanation* influenced  the  jury,  who,  after  some  deli- 
beration, found  the  prisoner  guilty.     Next  day  sir  Wil- 
liam Perkins  was  brought  to  the  bar,  and  upon  the  testi- 
mony of  Porter,  Ewebank,  his  own  groom,  and  Hay- 
wood, a  notorious  informer,  was  convicted  of  having 
been  concerned,  not  only  in  the  invasion,  but  also  in 
the  design  against  the  king's  life.     The  evidence  was 
scanty,  and  the  prisoner  having  been  bred  to  the  law, 
made  an  artful  and  vigorous  defence:  but  the  judge 
acted  as  counsel  for  the  crown  ;  and  the  jury  decided 
by  the  hints  they  received  from  the  bench.     He  and  sir 
John  Friend  underwent  the  sentence  of  death,  and  suf- 
fered at  Tyburn  on  the  3d  day  of  April.     Friend  pro- 
tested before  God,  that  he  knew  of  no  immediate  descent 
purposed  by  king  James,  and  therefore  had  made  no 
preparations :  that  he  was  utterly  ignorant  of  the  assas- 
sination scheme :  that  he  died  in  the  communion  of  the 
church  of  England,  and  laid  down  his  life  cheerfully  in 
the  cause  for  which  he  suffered.     Perkins  declared,  upon 
the  word  of  a  dying  man,  that  the  tenor  of  the  king's 
commission,  which  he  saw,  was  general,  directed  to  all 
his  loving  subjects,  to  raise  and  levy  war  against  the 
prince  of  Orange  and  his  adherents,  and  to  seize  all 
forts,  castles,  &c.  but  that  he  neither  saw  nor  heard  of 
any  commission  particularly  levelled  against  the  person 
of  the  prince  of  Orange.     He  owned,  however,  that  he 
was  privy  to  the  design :  but  believed  it  was  known  to 
few  or  none  but  the  immediate  undertakers.    These  two 
criminals  were  in  their  last  moments  attended  by  Collier, 


MM.  WILLIAM.  275 

Snatt,  and  Cook,  three  nonjuring  clergymen,  who  ab- 
solved them  in  the  view  of  the  populace,  with  an  impo- 
sition of  hands :  a  public  insult  on  the  government, 
which  did  not  pass  unnoticed.  .  Those  three  clergymen 
were  presented  by  the  grand  jury,  for  having  counte- 
nanced the  treason  by  absolving  the  traitors,  and  there- 
by encouraged  other  persons  to  disturb  the  peace  of  the 
kingdom.  An  indictment  being  preferred  against  them, 
Cook  and  Snatt  were  committed  to  Newgate  ;  but  Col* 
lier  .absconded,  and  published  a  vindication  of  their  con- 
duct, in  which  he  affirmed,  that  the  imposition  of  hands 
was  the  general  practice  of  the  primitive  church.  On 
the  other  hand,  the  two  metropolitans,  and  twelve  other 
bishops,  subscribed  a  declaration,  condemning  the  ad- 
ministration of  absolution  without  a  previous  confession 
made,  and  abhorrence  expressed,  by  the  prisoners,  of  the 
heinous  crimes  for  which  they  suffered. 

In  the  course  of  the  same  month,  Rookwood,  Cran- 
borne,  and  Lowick,  were  tried  as  conspirators,  by  a  spe- 
cial commission,-in  the  king's-bench ;  and  convicted  on 
the  joint  testimony  of  Porter,  Harris,  La  Rue,  Bertram,- 
Fisher,  and  Pendergrass.  Some  favourable  circum- 
stances appeared  in  the  case  of  Lowick.  The  proof  of 
his  having  been  concerned  in  the  design  against  the 
king's  life  was  very  defective ;  many  persons  of  reputa- 
tion declared  he  was  an  honest,  good-natured,  inoffen- 
sive man  :  and  he  himself  concluded  his  defence  with 
the  most  solemn  protestation  of  his  o\vn  innocence* 
Great  intercession  was  made  for  his  pardon  by  some 
noblemen :  but  all  their  interest  proved  ineffectual.* 
Cranborne  died  in  a  transport  of  indignation,  leaving  a 
paper,  which  the  government  thought  proper  to  sup-r 
press.  Lowick  and  Rookwood  likewise  delivered  den 
clarations  to  the  sheriff,  the  contents  of  which,  as  being 
less  inflammatory,  were  allowed  to  be  published.  Both 
solemnly  denied  any  knowledge  of  a  commission  from 
king.  James  to  assassinate  the  prince  of  Orange;  the  one 


270  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  MM. 

affirming,  that  he  was  incapable  of  granting  such  an 
order;  and  the  other  asserting,  that  he,  the  best  of 
kings,  had  often  rejected  proposals  of  that  nature.     Lo- 
wick  owned  that  he  would  have  joined  the  king  at  his 
landing :  but  declared  he  had  never  been  concerned  in 
any  bloody  affair  during  the  whole  course  of  his  life. 
On  the  contrary,  he  said,  he  had  endeavoured  to  prevent 
bloodshed  as  much  as  lay  in  his  power ;  and  that  he 
would  not  kill  the  most  miserable  creature  in  the  world, 
even  though  such  an  act  would  save  his  life,  restore  his 
sovereign,  and  make  him  one  of  the  greatest  men  in 
England.    Rookwood  alleged,  he  was  engaged  by  his 
immediate  commander,  whom  he  thought  it  was  his 
duty  to  obey,  though  the  service  was  much  against  his 
judgment  and  inclination.     He  professed  his  abhorrence 
of  treachery  even  to  an  enemy.     He  forgave  all  man-* 
kind,  even  the  prince  of  Orange,  who,  as  a  soldier,  he 
said,  ought  to  have  considered  his  case  before  he  signed 
his  death-warrant :  he  prayed  God  would  open  his  eyes, 
and  render  him  sensible  of  the  blood  that  was  from  all 
parts  crying  against  him,  so  as  he  might  avert  a  heavier 
execution  than  that  which  he  now  ordered  to'  be  in- 
flicted.   The  next  person  brought  to  trial,  was  Mr. 
Cooke,  son  of  sir  Miles  Cooke,  one  of  the  six  clerks  in 
Chancery.    Porter  and  Goodman  deposed,  that  he  had 
been  present  at  two  meetings  at  the  King's-head  tavern 
in  Leadenhall-street,  with   the    lords  Aylesbury  and 
Montgomery,  sir  William  Perkins,  sir  John  Fenwick, 
sir  John  Friend,  Charnock,  and  Porter.    The  evidence 
of  Goodman  was  invalidated  by  the  testimony  of  the 
landlord  and   two  drawers  belonging   to  the  tavern, 
who  swore  that  Goodman   was  not  there  while  the 
noblemen  were  present.    The  prisoner  himself  solemnly 
protested,  that  he  was  ever  averse  to  the  introduction  of 
foreign  forces :  that  he  did  not  so  much  as  hear  of  the 
intended  invasion,  until  it  became  the  common  topic  of 
conversation :  and  that  he  had  never  seen  Goodman  at 


MM  WJLUAJft  $77 

the  Kings-hjead.  He  declared  his  intention  of  receiving 
the  blessed  sacrament,  and  wished  he  might  perish  in 
the  instant,  if  he  now  spoke  untruth,  No  respeqt  was 
paid  to  these  asseverations.  The  solicitor-general  Hawles, 
and  lord-chief-justice  Treby>  treated  him  with  great  se* 
verity  in  the  prosecution,  and  charge  to  the  jury,  by 
whom  he  was  capitally  convicted.  After  his  condemna- 
tion, the  court  agents  tampered  with  him  to  make  far- 
ther discoveries ;  and  after  his  fate  had  been  protracted 
by  divers  short  reprieves,  he  was  sent  into  banishment. 
From  the  whole  tenor  of  these  discoveries  and  proceed- 
ings, it  appears  that  James  had  actually  meditated  ?n 
invasion :  that  his  partisans  in  England  had  made  pre- 
parations for  joining  him  on  his  arrival:  that  a  few  des- 
peradoes of  that  faction  had  concerted  a  scheme  against 
the  life  of  king  William :  that,  in  prosecuting  the  con- 
spirators, the  court  had  countenanced  informers:  that 
the  judges  had  strained  the  law,  wrested  circumstances, 
and  even  deviated  from  the  function  of  their  office,  to 
donvict  the  prisoners;  in. a  word,  that  the  administra- 
tion had  used  the  same  arbitrary  and  unfair  practices 
against  those  unhappy  people,  which  they  themselves  had 
in  the  late  reigns  numbered  among  the  grievances  of 
the  kingdom. 

$  XXXIII.  The  warmth,  however,  manifested  on 
this  occasion,  may  have  been  owing  to  national  resent- 
ment of  the  purposed  invasion.  Certain  it  is,  the  two 
houses  of  parliament,  and  the  people  in  general,  were 
animated  with  extraordinary  indignation  against  France 
at  this  juncture.  The  lords  besought  his  majesty,  in  a 
solemn  address,  to  appoint  a  day  of  thanksgiving  to 
Almighty  God,  for  having  defeated ;  the  barbarous  pur- 
pose of  his  enemies :  and  this  was  observed  with  uncom- 
mon zeal  and  devotion.  Admiral  Russel,  leaving  a 
squadron  for  observation  on  the  French  coast,  returned 
to  the  Downs :  but  sir  Cloudesley  Shovel,  being  proper- 
ty prepared  for  the  expedition,  subjected  Calais  to  an- 


L 


278*  HISTORY  OF  *tf GLAND.  !<*£ 

other  bombardment,  by  which  the  town  was  set  on  fire 
in  different  parts,  and  the  inhabitants  were  overwhelmed 
with  consternation.  The  generals  of  the  allied  army  in 
Flanders,  resolved  to  make  some  immediate  retaliation 
upon  the  French  for  their  unmanly  design  upon  the 
Kfe  of  king  William,  as  they  took  it  for  granted  that 
Lewis  was  accessary  to  the  scheme  of  assassination. 
That  monarch,  on  the  supposition  that  a  powerful  diver- 
sion would  be  made  by  the  descent  on  England,  had 
established  a  vast  magazine  at  Givet,  designing,  when 
the  allies  should  be  enfeebled  by  the  absence  of  the 
British  troops,  to  strike  some  stroke  of  importance  early 
in  the  campaign.  On  this  the  confederates  now  deter- 
mined to  wreak  their  vengeance*  In  the  beginning  of 
March  the  earl  of  Athlone  and  monsieur  de  Coehorn, 
with  the  concurrence  of  the  duke  of  Holstein-Ploen, 
who  commanded  the  allies,  sent  a  strong  detachment  of 
horse,  drafted  from  Brussels  and  the  neighbouring  garri- 
sons, to  amuse  the  enemy  on  the  side  of  Charleroy ; 
while  they  assembled  forty  squadrons,  thirty  battalions, 
with  fifteen  pieces  of  cannon,  and  six  mortars,  in  the 

•  •  • 

territory  of  Namur.  *  Athlone,  with  part  of  this  body, 
invested  Dinant,  while  Coehorn,  with  the  remainder, 
advanced  to  Givet.  He  forthwith  began  to  batter  and 
bombard  the  place,  which,  in  three  hours,  was  on  fire, 
and  by  four  in  the  afternoon  wholly  destroyed,  with  the 
great  magazine  it  contained.  Then  the  two  generals, 
joining  their  forces,  returned'  to  Namur  without  inter- 
ruption. Hitherto  the  republic  of  Venice  had  deferred 
acknowledging  king  William;  but  now  they  sent  an 
extraordinary  embassy  for  that  purpose,  consisting  of 
signiors  Soranzo  and  Vehier,  who  arrived  in  London, 
and  on  the  1st  day  of  May  had  a  public  audience.  The 
king,  on  this  occasion,  knighted  Sorahzo,  as  the  senior 
ambassador,  and  presented  him  with  the  sword,  accord- 
ing to  custom.  On  that  day,  too,  William  declared  in 
council,  that  he  had  appointed  the  same  regency  which 


1«96.  VVfLLIAM.  420 

*  »  •  » 

had  governed  the  kingdom  during  his  last  absence: 
and,  embarking  on  the  7  th  at  Margate,  arrived  at 
Orange-Polder  in  the  evening,  under  convoy  df  vice^ 
admiral  Aylmer.  This  officer  had  been  ordered  to  aU 
tend  with  a  squadron,  as  the  famous  Du  Bart  still  con- 
tinued at  Dunkirk,  and  some  attempt  of  importance 
was  apprehended  from  his  enterprising  genius.1 

§  XXXIV.  The  French  had  taken  the  field  before 
the  allied  army  could  be  assembled :  but  no  transaction 
of  consequence  distinguished  this  campaign,  either  upon 
the  Rhine  or  in  Flanders.  The  scheme  of  Lewis  was 
still  defensive  on  the  side  of  the  Netherlands,  while  the 
active  plans  of  king  William  were  defeated  for  want  of 
inoney.  All  the  funds  for  this  year  proved  defective : 
the  land-bank  failed,  and  the  national  bank  sustained  a 
rude  shock  in  its  credit.  The  loss  of  the  nation  upon 
jthe  recoinage  amounted  to  2,200,000/. ;  and  though 
the  different  mints  were  employed  without  interruption, 
they  could  not  for  some  months  supply  the  circulation, 
especially  as  great  part  of  the  new  money  was  kept  up 
by  those  who  received  it  in  payment,  or  disposed  of  it 
at  an  unreasonable  advantage.  The  French  king  hav- 
ing exhausted  the  wealth  and  patience  of  his  subjects, 
and  greatly  diminished  their  number  in  the  course  of 
this  war,  began  to  be  diffident  of  his  arms,  arid  employ- 
ed all  the  arts  of  private  negotiation.  While  his  minis- 
ter D'Avaux  pressed  the  king  of  Sweden  to  offer  his 
mediation,  he  sent  Callieres  to  Holland,  with  proposals 
for  settling  the  preliminaries  of  a  treaty.  He  took  it  for 
granted,  that  as  the  Dutch  were  a  trading  people,  whose 
commerce  had  greatly  suffered  in  the  war,  they  could 
not  be  averse  to  a  pacification;  and  he  instructed  his 

*  Some  promotions  were  made  before  the  king  left  England.  George 
Hamilton,  third  son  of  the  duke  of  that  name,  was,  for  hi*  military  ser- 
vices in  Ireland  and  Flanders,  created  earl  of  Orkney.  Sir  John  Lowther 
was  ennobled  by  the  title '  of  baron  Lowther,  and  viscount  Lonsdale; 
sir  John  Thompson  made  baron  of  Haversham,  and  the  celebrated  John 
Locke  appointed  one  of  the  commissioners  of  trade  and  plantation. 


$00  HISTORY  OF  f  POLAND.  1606. 

emissaries  to  tamper  with  the  malecontents  of  the  re- 
public, especially  with  the  remains  of  the  Louvestein 
faction,  which  had  always  opposed  the  schemes  of  the 
stadtholder.  Callieres  met  with  a  favourable  reception 
from  the  States,  which  began  to  treat  with  him  about 
the  preliminaries,  though  not  without  the  consent  and 
concurrence  of  king  William  and  the  rest  of  the  allies. 
Lewis,  with  a  view  to  quicken  the  effect  of  this  nego- 
tiation, pursued  offensive  measures  in  Catalonia,  where 
his  general,  the  duke  de  Vehdome,  attacked  and  worsted 
the  Spaniards  in  their  camp,  near  Ostalrick,  though  the 
action  was  not  decisive ;  for  that  general  was  obliged  to 
retreat  after  having  made  vigorous  efforts  against  their 
entrenchments.  On  the  20th  day  of  June  mareschal 
de  Lorges  passed  the  Rhine  at  Philipsburgh,  and  en- 
camped within  a  league  of  Eppingen,  where  the  impend 
.troops  were  obliged  to  entrench  themselves,  under  the 
.command  of  the  prince  of  Baden,  as  they  were  not  yet 
joined  by  the  auxiliary  forces.  The  French  general, 
after  having  faced  him  about  a  month,  thought  proper 
.  to  repass  the  river.  Then  he  detached  a  body  of  horse 
to  Flanders,  and  cantoned  the  rest  of  his  troops  at  Spires, 
Franckendahl,  Worms,  $nd  Ostofen.  On  the  last  day 
of  August  the  prince  of  Baden  retaliated  the  insult,  by 
passing  the  Rhine  at  Mentz  and  Cocsheim.  On  the 
10th  he  was  joined  by  general  Thungen,  who  command- 
ed a  separate  body,  together  with  the  militia  of  Suabia 
and  fYanconia,  and  advanced  to  the  camp  of  the  enemy, 
who  had  reassembled :  but  they  were  posted  in  such  a 
manner,  that  he  would  not  hazard  an  attack.  Having 
therefore  cannonaded  them  for  some  days,  scoured  the 
adjacent  country  by  detached  parties,  and  taken  the  lit- 
tle castle  of  Wiezengen,  he  repassed  the  river  at  Worms, 
on  the  7  th  day  of  October ;  the  French  likewise  crossed 
at  Philipsburgh,  in  hopes  of  surprising  general  Thun- 
gen, who  had  taken  post  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Stras- 
burg ;  but  he  retired  to  Eppingen  before  their  arrival, 


1696.  WILLIAM.  .261 

and  in  a  little  time  both  armies  were  distributed  in  win- 
ter-quarters. Peter,  the  czar  of  Muscovy,  carried  on 
the  siege  of  Azoph  with  such  vigour,  that  the  garrison 
was  obliged  to  capitulate,  after  the  Russians  had  defeated 
a  great  convoy  sent  to  its  relief.  The  court  of  Vienna 
forthwith  engaged  in  an  alliance  with  the  Muscovite 
emperor :  but  they  did  not  exert  themselves  in  taking 
advantage  of  the  disaster  which  the  Turks  had  under- 
gone. The  imperial  army,  commanded  by  the  elector 
of  Saxony,  continued  inactive  on  the  river  Marosch  till 
the  Jgth  day  of  July  ;  then  they  made  a  feint  of  attack- 
ing Temiswaer :  but  they  marched  towards  Betzkerch, 
in  their  route  to  Belgrade,  on  receiving  advice  that  the 
grand  seignior  intended  to  besiege  Titul.  On  the  21st 
day  of  August  the  two  armies  were  in  sight  of  each 
other  The  Turkish  horse  attacked  the  imperialists  in 
a  plain  near  the  river  Begue,  but  were  repulsed.  The 
Germans  next  day  made  a  show  of  retreating,  in  hopes 
of  drawing  the  enemy  from  their  entrenchments.  The 
stratagem  succeeded.  On  the  26th,  the  Turkish  army 
was  in  motion.  A  detachment  of  the  imperialists  at- 
tacked them  in  flank,  as  they  marched  through  a  wood. 
A  very  desperate  action  ensued,  in  which  the  generals 
Heusler  and  Poland,  with  many  other  gallant  officers, 
lost  their  lives.  At  length,  the  Ottoman  horse  were 
routed:  but  the  Germans  were  so  roughly  handled, 
that  on  the  second  day  after  the  engagement  they  re- 
treated at  midnight,  and  the  Turks  remained  quiet  in 
their  entrenchments. 

§  XXXV.  In  Piedmont  the  face  of  afiairs  underwent 
a  strange  alteration.  The  duke  of  Savoy,  who  had  for 
some  time  been  engaged  in  a  secret  negotiation  with 
France*  at  length  embraced  the  offers  of  that  crown, 
and  privately  signed  a  separate  treaty  of  peace  at  Loretto, 
to  which  place  he  repaired  on  a  pretended  pilgrimage. 
The  French  king  engaged  to  present  him  with  four  mil- 
lions of  livres,  by  way  of  reparation  for  the  damage  he 


282  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1606. 

had  sustained ;  to  assist  him  with  a  certain  number  of 
auxiliaries  against  all  his  enemies  ;  and  to  effect  a  mar- 
riage between  the  duke  of  Burgundy  and'the  princess  of 
Piedmont,  as  soon  as  the  parties  should  be  marriageable. 
The  treaty  was  guaranteed  by  the  pope  and  the  Vene- 
tians, who  were  extremely  desirous  of  seeing  the  Ger- 
mans driven  out  of  Italy.  King  William,  being  apprized 
of  this  negotiation,  communicated  the  intelligence  to 
the  earl  of  Galway,  his  ambassador  at  Turin,  who  ex- 
postulated with  the  duke  on  this  defection :  but  he  per- 
sisted in  denying  any  such  correspondence,  until  the 
advance  of  the  French  army  enabled  him  to  avow  it, 
without  fearing  the  resentment  of  the  allies  whom  he 
had  abandoned.  .  Catinat  marched  into  the  plains  of 
Turin  at  the  head  of  .fifty  thousand  men;  an  army 
greatly  superior  to  that  of  the  confederates.  Then  the 
duke  imparted  to  the  ministers  of  the  allies  the  propo- 
sals which  France  had  made ;  represented  the  superior 
strength  of  her  army  ;  the  danger  to  which  he  was  ex- 
posed ;  and  finally,  his  inclination  to  embrace  her  offers. 
On  the  12  th  of  July  a  truce  was  concluded  for  a  month, 
and  afterward  prolonged  till  the  1 5  th  of  September. 
He  wrote  to  all  the  powers  engaged  in  the  confederacy, 
except  king  William,  expatiating  on  the  same  topics, 
and  soliciting  their  consent.  Though  each  in  particular 
refused  to  concur,  he,  on  the  23d  day  of  August,  sign-, 
ed  the  treaty  in  public,  which  he  had  before  concluded, 
in  private.  The  emperor  was  no  sooner  informed  of  his 
design,  than  he  took  every  step  which  he  thought  could 
divert  him  from  his  purpose,  He  sent  the  count  Mahs- 
feldt  to  Turin,  with  proposals  for  a  match  between  the 
king  of  the  Romans  and  the  princess  of  Savoy,  as  well 
as  with  offers  to  augment  his  forces  and  his  subsidy ; 
but  the  duke  had  already  settled  his  terms  with  France, 
from  which  he  would  not  recede.  Prince  Eugene,  though 
his  kinsman,  expressed  great  indignation  at  his  conduct. 
The  young  prince  de  Co^mercy  was  so  provoked  at  his 


1090.  WILLIAM.  383 

defection,  that  he  challenged  him  to  single  combat,  and 
the  duke  accepted  of  his  challenge :  but  the  quarrel  was 
compromised  by  the  intervention  of  friends,  and  they 
parted  in  an  amicable  manner.     He  had  concealed  the 
treaty  until  he  should  receive  the  remaining  part  of  the 
subsidies  due  to  him  from  the  confederates.     A  consi- 
derable sum  had  been  remitted  from  England  to  Genoa 
for  his  use  :  but  lord  Galway  no  sooner  received  intima- 
tion of.  his  new  engagement,  than  he  put  a  stop  to  the 
payment  of  this  money,  which  he  employed  in  the  Mi- 
lanese for  the  subsistence  of  those  troops  that  were  in 
the  British  service.  "  King  William  was  encamped  at 
Gemblours,  when  the  duke's  envoy  notified  the  separate 
peace  which  his  master  had  concluded  with  the  king  of 
France.     Though  he  was  extremely  chagrined  at  the 
information,  he  dissembled  his  anger,  and  listened  to  the 
minister  without  the  least  emotion.    One  of  the  condi- 
tions of  this  treaty  was,  that  within  a  limited  time  the 
allies  should  evacuate  the  duke's  dominions,  otherwise 
they  shquld.be  expelled  by  the  joint  forces  of  France  and 
Savoy.     A  neutrality  was  offered  to  the  confederates ; 
and  this  being  rejected,  the  contracting  powers  resolved 
jto  attack  the  Milanese.     Accordingly,  when  the  truce 
expired,  the  duke,  as  generalissimo  of  the  French  king, 
entered  that  dutchy,  and  undertook  the  siege  of  Valen- 
cia:   so  that,    in  one  campaign,  he  commanded  two 
contending  armies.     The  garrison  of  Valentia,  consist- 
ing of  seven  thousand  men,  Germans,  Spaniards,  and 
French  Protestants,  made  an  obstinate  defence:  and 
the  duke  of  Savoy  prosecuted. the  siege  with  uncommon, 
impetuosity.     But,  after  the  trenches  had  been  opened 
for  thirteen  days,  a  courier  arrived  from  Madrid,  with 
an  account  of  his  Catholic  majesty's  having  agreed  to 
the  neutrality  for  Italy.     The  agreement  imported,  that 
there  should  be  a  suspension  of  arms  until  a  general 
peace  could  be  effected;   and  that  the  imperial  and 
French  troops  should  return  to  their  respective  countries. 


284  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1090. 

Christendom  had  well  nigh  been  embroiled  anew  by  the 
death  of  John  Sobieski,  king  of  Poland,  who  died  at 
the  age  of  seventy,  in  the  course  of  this  summer,  after 
having  survived  his  faculties  and  reputation.  As  the 
crown  was  elective,  a  competition  arose  for  the  suc- 
cession. The  kingdom  was  divided  by  factions,  and  the: 
different  powers  of  Europe  interested  themselves  warmly 
in  the  contention. 

§  XXXVI.  Nothing  of  consequence  had  been  lately 
achieved  by  the  naval  force  of  England.  When  the 
conspiracy  was  first  discovered,  sir  George  Rooke  had 
received  orders  to  return  from  Cadiz :  and  he  arrived 
in  the  latter  end  of  April.  While  he  took  his  place  at 
the  board  of  admiralty,  lord  Berkeley  succeeded  to  the 
command  of  the  fleet;  and  in  the  month  of  June  set 
sail  towards  Ushant,  in  order  to  insult  the  coast  of 
France.  He  pillaged  and  burned  the  villages  on  the 
islands  Grouais,'  Houat,  and  Heydic ;  made  prize  of 
about  twenty  vessels  ;  bombarded  St.  Martin's  on  the 
isle  of  Rhe,  and  the  town  of  Olonne,  which  was  set  on 
fire  in  fifteen  different  places  with  the  shells  and  car- 
casses. Though  these  appear  to  have  been  enterprises  of 
small  import,  they  certainly  kept  the  whole  coast  of 
France  in  perpetual  alarm.  The  ministry  of  that  king-^ 
dom  were  so  much  afraid  of  invasion,  that  between  Brest 
and  Goulet  they  ordered  above  one  hundred  batteries  to 
be  erected,  and  above  sixty  thousand  men  were  continually 
in  arms,  for  the  defence  of  the  maritime  places.  In  the 
month  of  May,  rear-admiral  Benbow  sailed  with  a  small 
squadron,  in  order  to  block  up  Du  Bart  in  the  harbour 
of  Dunkirk ;  but  that  famous  adventurer  found  means 
,  to  escape  in  a  fog,  and  steering  to  the  eastward,  attacked 
the  Dutch  fleet  in  the  Baltic,  under  a  convoy  of  five  fri- 
gates. These  last  he  took,  together  with  half  the  num- 
ber of  the  trading  ships  ;  but  falling  in  with  the  out* 
ward-bound  fleet,  convoyed  by  thirteen  ships  of  the  line* 
he  was  obliged  to  burn  four  of  the  frigates,  turn  the 


109(5.  WILLIAM.  285 

m 

fifth  adrift,  and  part  with  all  his  prizes,  except  fifteen, 
which  he  carried  into  Dunkirk. 

§  XXXVII.  The  parliament  of  Scotland  met  oh  the 
8th  day  of  September;  and  lord  Murray,  secretary  of 
state,  now  earl  of  Tullibardine,  presided  as  king's  com- 
missioner. Though  that  kingdom  was  exhausted  by  the 
war,  and  two  successive  bad  harvests,  which  had  driven 
a  great  number  of  the  inhabitants  into  Ireland,  there 
was  no  opposition  to  the  court  measures.  The  mem- 
bers of  parliament  signed  an  association  like  that  of 
England.  They  granted  a  supply  of  1 20,000/.  for 
maintaining  their  forces  by  sea  and  land.  They  passed 
an  act  for  securing  their  religion,  lives,  and  properties, 
in  case  his  majesty  should  come  to  an  untimely  death. 
By  another,  they  obliged  all  persons  in  public  trust  to 
sign  the  association;  and  then  the  parliament  was  ad- 
journed to  the  8th  day  of  December.  The  disturbances 
.  of  Ireland  seemed  now  to  be  entirely  appeased.  Lord 
Capel  dying  in  May,  the  council,  by  virtue  of  an  act 
passed  in  the  reign  of  Henry  VIIL,  elected  the  chan- 
cellor, sir  Charles  Porter,  to  be  lord-justice  and  chief 
governor  of  that  kingdom,  until  his  majesty's  pleasure 
should  be  known.  The  parliament  met  in  June  :  the 
commons  expelled  Mr.  Sanderson,  the  only  member  in 
that  house  who  had  refused  to  sign  the  association  ;  and 
adjourned  to  the  4th  day  of  August.  By  that  time  sir 
Charles  Porter,  and  the  earls  of  Montrath  and  Drogheda 
were  appointed  lords-justices,  and  signified  the  king's 
pleasure  that  they  should  adjourn.  In  the  beginning  of 
December  the  chancellor  died  of  an  apoplexy. 

§  XXXVIII.  King  William,  being  tired  of  an  inac- 
tive campaign,  left  the  army  under  the  command  of  the 
elector  of  Bavaria,  and,  about  the  latter  end  of  August, 
repaired  to  his  palace  at  Loo,  where  he  enjoyed  his  fa- 
vourite exercise  of  stag-hunting.  He  visited  the  court 
of  Brandenburgh  at  Cleves  ;  conferred  with  the  states  of 
Holland  at  the  Hague ;  and,  embarking  for  England, 

vol.  i.  *  u 


2M  HISTORY  OF  BNGLAND.  169*. 

landed  at  Margate  on  the  6th  day  of  October.    The 
domestic  economy  of  the  nation  was  extremely  perplexed 
at  this  juncture,  from  the  sinking  of  public  credit,  and 
the  stagnation  that  necessarily  attended  a  recoinage. 
These  grievances  were  with  difficulty  removed  by  the 
clear  apprehension,  the  enterprising  genius,  the  un- 
shaken fortitude,  of  Mr.  Montague,  chancellor  of  the 
exchequer,  operating  upon  a  national  spirit  of  adventure, 
which  the  monied  interest  had  produced.     The  king 
opened  the  session  of  parliament  on  the  20th  day  of 
October,  with  a  spefech,  importing  that  overtures  had 
been  made  for  a  negotiation  ;  but  that  the  best  way  of 
treating  with  France  would  be  sword  in  hand.     He 
therefore  desired  they  would  be  expeditious  in  raising 
the  supplies  for  the  service  of  the  ensuing  year,  as  well 
aft  for  making  good  the  funds  already  granted.    He  de- 
clared, that  the  civil  list  could  not  be  supported  without 
their  assistance.     He  recommended  the  miserable  con- 
dition of  the  French  Protestants  to  their  compassion. 
He  desired  they  would  contrive  the  best  expedients  for 
the  recovery  of  the  national  credit.    He  observed,  that 
Unanimity  and  dispatch  were  now  more  than  ever  neces- 
sary for  the  honour,  safety,  and  advantage  of  England. 
The  commons  having  taken  this  speech  into  consider- 
ation, resolved,  that  they  would  support  his  majesty  and 
his  government,  and  assist  him  in  the  prosecution  of  the 
wart  that  the  standard  of  gold  and  silver  should  not  be 
^altered:  and  that  they  would  make  good  all  parliamen- 
tary funds.    Then  they  presented  an  address,  in  a  very 
spirited  strain,  declaring,  that  notwithstanding  the  blood 
and  treasure  of  which  the  nation  had  been  drained,  the 
commons  of  England  would  not  be  diverted  from  their 
firm  resolutions  of  obtaining  by  war  a  safe  and  honour- 
able peace.    They  therefore  renewed  their  assurances, 
that  they  would  support  his  majesty  against  all  his  ene- 
mies at  home  and  abroad.    The  house  of  lords  delivered 
another  to  the  same  purpose,  declaring,  that  they  would 


.WO*  WILLIAM.  .287 

never  be  wanting  pr  backward,  en  their  parts*  in  wteit 
might  be  necessary  to  his  majesty's  honour,  the  good 
of  his  kingdoms,  and  the  quiet  of  Christendom*  The 
commons,  in  the  first*  transports  of  their  aeal,  ordered 
two  seditious  pamphlets  to  be  burned  by  the  hands  of 
the  common  hangman.  They  deliberated  upon  the 
estimates,  and  granted  above  six  millions  for  the  service 
of  the  ensuing  year.  They  resolved  that  a  supply 
should  be  granted  for  making  good  the  deficiency  of 
parliamentary  funds;  and  appropriated  several  duties 
for  this  purpose. 

.§  XXXIX.  With  respect  to  the  coin,  they  broiight 
in  a  bill,  repealing  an  act  for  taking  off  the  obligation 
and  encouragement  of  coining  guineas  for  a  certain 
time,  and  for  importing  and  coining  guineas  and  half 
guineas,  as  the  extravagant  price  of  those  coins,  which 
occasioned  this  act,  was  now  fallen.  They  passed  a 
second  bill  for  remedying  the  ill  state  of  the  coin ;  arid 
a  third,  explaining  an  act  in  the  preceding  session,  for 
laying  duties  on  low  wines  and  spirits  of  the  first  extmcr 
tion.  In  order  to  raise  the  supplies  of  the  year,  they 
resolved  to  tax  all  persons  according  to  the  true  value  of 
their  real  and  personal  estates,  their  stock  upon  land  and 
in  trade,  their  income  by  offices,  pensions,  and  profes- 
sions. A  duty  of  one  penny  per  week,  for  one  year,  was 
laid  upon  all  persons  not  receiving  alms.  A  farther 
imposition  of  one  farthing  in  the  pound,  per  week,  was 
fixed  upon  all  servants  receiving  4l.  per  annum,  as  wages* 
and  upwards,  to  8/.  a  year  inclusive.  Those  who  re- 
ceived from  8/.  to  l6L  were  taxed  at  one  halfpenny 
per  pound.  An  aid  of  three,  shillings  in  the  pound,  for 
one  year,  was  laid  upon  all  lands,  tenements,  and  here- 
ditaments, according  to  their  true  value.  Without  spe- 
cifying the  particulars  of  those  impositions,  we  shall 
only  observe,  that  in  the  general  charge,  the  commons 
did  not  exempt  one  member  of  the  commonwealth  that 
.could  be  supposed  able  to  bear  any  part  of  the  burden. 

u  2 


286  >  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND,  1696. 

Provision  was  made,  that  hammered  money  should  be 
received  in  payment  of  these  duties,  at  the  rate  of  five 
shillings  and  eight-pence  per  ounce.  All  the  deficiencies 
on  annuities,  and  monies  borrowed  on  the  credit  of  the 
exchequer,  were  transferred  to  this  aid.    The  treasury 
was  enabled  to  borrow  a  million  and  a  half  at  eight  per 
cent,  and  to  circulate  exchequer  bills  to  the  amount  of 
as  much  more.    To  cancel  these  debts,  the  surplus  of 
all  the  supplies,  except  the  three-shilling-aid,  was  ap- 
propriated.   The  commons  voted  125 ,000 J.  for  making 
good  the  deficiency  in  recoining  the  hammered  money, 
and  the  recompense  for  bringing  in  plate  to  the  mint. 
This  sum  was  raised  by  a  tax  or  duty  upon  wrought 
plate,  paper,  pasteboard,  vellum,  and  parchment,  made 
or  imported.     Taking  into  consideration  the  services, 
and  the  present  languishing  state  of  the  bank,  whose 
notes  were  at  twenty  per  cent,  discount,  they  resolved, 
that  it  should  be  enlarged  by  new  subscriptions,  made 
by  four-fifths  in  tallies  struck  on  parliamentary  funds, 
and  one-fifth  in  bank-bills  or  notes :  that  effectual  pro- 
vision should  be  made  by  parliament,  for  paying  the 
principal  of  all  such  tallies  as  should  be  subscribed  into 
the  bank,  out  of  the  funds  agreed  to  be  continued.:  that 
an  interest  of  eight  per  cent,  should  be  allowed  on  all 
such  tallies :  and,  that  the  continuance  of  the  bank  should 
be  prolonged  to  the  1st  day  of  August,  in  the  year  17 10. 
That  all  assignments  of  orders  on  tallies  subscribed  into 
the  bank,  should  be  registered  in  the  exchequer :  that, 
before  the  day  should  be  fixed  for  the  beginning,  of 
the  new   subscriptions,  the  old  should  be  made  one 
hundred  per  cent,  and  what  might  eiceed  that  value 
should  be  divided  among  the  old  members :  that  all  the 
interest  due  on  those  tallies  which  might  be  subscribed 
into  the  bank-stock,  at  that  time  appointed  for  subscrip- 
tions, to  the  end  of  the  last  preceding  quarter  on*  each 
tally,  should  be  allowed  as  principal :  that  liberty  should 
be  given  by  parliament  to  enlarge  the  number  of  bank- 


1006.  WILLIAM.  289 

bills,  to  the  value  of  the  sum  that  should  be  so  subscrib- 
ed, over  and  above  the  1 ,200,000/.  provided  they  should 
be  obliged  to  answer  such  bills  on  demand ;  and  in  de- 
fault thereof,  be  answered  by  the  exchequer,  out  of  the 
first  money  due  to  them :  that  no  other  bank  should  be 
erected  or  allowed  by  act  of  parliament,  during  the  con- 
tinuance of  the  bank  of  England :  that  this  should  be 
exempted  from  all  tax  or  imposition :  that  no  act  of  the 
corporation  should  forfeit  the  particular  interest  of  any 
person  concerned  therein:  that  provision  should  be 
made  to  prevent  the  officers  of  the  exchequer,  and  all 
other  officers  and  receivers  of  the  revenue,  from  divert- 
ing, delaying,  or  obstructing,  the  course  of  payments  to 
the  bank :  that  care  should  be  taken  to  prevent  the  al- 
tering, counterfeiting,  or  forging,  any  bank-bills  or 
notes :  that  the  estate  and  interest  of  each  member  in 
the  stock  of  the  corporation,  should  be  made  a  personal 
estate  :  that  no  contract  made  for  any  bank-stock  to  be 
bought  or  sold,  should  be  valid  in  law  or  equity,  unless 
actually  registered  in  the  bank-books  within  seven  days, 
and  actually  transferred  within  fourteen  days  after  the 
contract  should  be  made.  A  bill  upon  these  resolutions 
was  brought  in,  under  the  direction  of  the  chancellor  of 
the  exchequer :  it  related  to  the  continuation  of  tonnage 
and  poundage  upon  wine,  vinegar,  and  tobacco ;  and 
comprehended  a  clause  for  laying  an  additional  duty 
upon  salt,  for  two  years  and  three  quarters.  All  the  se- 
veral branches  constituted  a  general  fund,  since  known 
by  the  name  of  the  general  mortgage,  without  prejudice 
to  their  former  appropriations.  The  bill  also  provided, 
that  the  tallies  should  bear  eight  per  cent,  interest :  that 
from  the  10th  of  June,  for  five  years,  they  should  bear 
no  more  than  six  per  cent,  interest :  and  that  no  pre- 
mium, or  discount  upon  them,  should  be  taken.  In 
case  of  the  general  funds  proving  insufficient  to  pay  the 
whole  interest,  it  was  provided,  that  every  proprietor 
should  receive  his  proportion  of  the  product,  and  the 


290  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  WW. 

deficiency  be  made  good  from  the  next  aid :  but  should 
the  fund  produce  more  than  the  interest,  the  surplus 
was  destined  to  operate  as  a  sinking  fund,  for  the  dis- 
charge of  the  principal.  In  order  to  make  up  a  defi* 
ciency  of  above  800,000/.  occasioned  by  the  failure  t>f 
the  land-bank,  additional  duties  were  laid  upon  leather : 
the  time  was  enlarged  for  persons  to  come  in  and  pur- 
chase the  annuities  payable  by  several  former  acts,  and 
to  obtain  more  certain  interest  in  such  annuities. 

§  XL.  Never  were  more  vigorous  measures  taken  to 
support  the  credit  of  the  government ;  and  never  was 
the  government  served  by  such  a  set  of  enterprising  un- 
dertakers. The  commons,  having  received  a  message 
from  the  king,  touching  the  condition  of  the  civil  list, 
resolved,  that  a  sum  not  exceeding  515,000/.  should  be 
granted  for  the  support  of  the  civil  list  for  the  ensuing 
year,  to  be  raised  by  a  malt-tax,  and  additional  duties 
upon  mum,  sweets,  cider,  and  perry.  They  likewise 
resolved,  that  an  additional  duty  of  one  shilling  in  the 
pound  should  be  laid  upon  land,  as  an  equivalent  for  the 
duty  of  ten  per  cent,  upon  mixed  goods.  Provision 
was  made  for  raising  1,400,000/.  by  a  lottery.  The 
treasury  was  empowered  to  issue  an  additional  number 
of  exchequer-bills,  to  the  amount  of  1,200,000/.,  every 
10O/.  bearing  interest  at  the  rate  of  five-pence  a  day, 
and  ten  per  cent,  for  circulation :  finally,  in  order  to 
liquidate  the  transport-debt,  which  the  funds  established 
for  that  purpose  had  not  been  sufficient  to  defray,  a 
money-bill  was  brought  in,  to  oblige  pedlars  and  hawk- 
ers to  take  out  licences,  and  pay  for  them  at  certain 
stated  prices.  One  cannot,  without  astonishment,  re- 
flect upon  the  prodigious  efforts  that  were  made  upon 
this  occasion,  or  consider,  without  indignation,  the 
enormous  fortunes  that  were  raised  up  by  usurers  and 
extortioners,  from  the  distresses  of  their  country.  The 
nation  did  not  seem  to  know  ks  own  strength,  until  it 
was  put  to  this  extraordinary  trial;  and  the  experiment 


WILLIAM.  891 

of  mortgaging  funds  succeeded  so  well,  that  later  minis- 
ters have  proceeded  in  the  same  system,  imposing  bur- 
den npon  burden,  as  if  they  thought  the  sinews  vof  the 
nation  could  never  be  overstrained. 

§  3X1.  The  public  credit  being  thus  bolstered  up  by 
the  singular  address  of  Mr.  Montague,  and  the  bills 
passed  for  the  supplies  of  the  ensiling  year,  the  attention 
of  the  commons  was  transferred  to  the  case  of  sir  John 
Fen  wick,  who  had  been  apprehended  in  the  month  of 
June,  at  New  Romney,  in  his  way  to  Prance.    He  had, 
when  taken,  written  a  letter  to  his  lady  by  one  Webber* 
who  accompanied  him  ;  but  this  man  being  seized,  the . 
letter  was  found,  containing  such  a  confession  as  plainly 
evinced  him  guilty.   He  then  entered  into  a  treaty  with 
the  court  for  turning  evidence,  and  delivered  a  long  in- 
formation in  writing,  which  was  sent  abroad  to  his  ma- 
jesty.    He  made  no  discoveries  that  could  injure  any  of 
the  Jacobites,  who,  by  his  account,  and  other  concur- 
ring testimonies,  appeared  to  be  divided  into  two  par- 
ties, known  by  the  names  of  compounders  and  non* 
compounders.    Hie  first,  headed  by  the  earl  of  Mid- 
dle ton,  insisted  upon  receiving  security  from  king  James, 
that  the  religion  and  liberties  of  England  should  be  pre- 
served :  whereas,  the  other  party,  at  the  head  of  which 
was  the  earl  of  Melfort,  resolved  to  bring  him  in  without 
conditions,  relying  upon  his  own  honour  and  genero- 
sity.   King  William  having  sent  over  an  order  for  bring- 
ing Fenwick  to  trial,  unless  he  should  make  more  ma- 
terial discoveries,  the  prisoner,  with  a  view  to  amuse  the 
ministry,  until  he  could  take  other  measures  for  his  own 
safety,  accused  the  earls  of  Shrewsbury,  Marlborough, 
and  Bath,  the  lord  Godolphin,  and  admiral  Russel,  of 
having  made  their  peace  with  king  James,  and  engaged 
to  act  for  his  interest.     Meanwhile  his  lady  and  relations 
tampered  with  the  two  witnesses,  Porter  and  Goodman. 
The  first  of  these  discovered  those  practices  to  the  go- 
vernment; and  one  Clanoey,  who  acted  as  agent  for 


292  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1006. 

lady  Fenwick,  was  tried,  convicted  of  subornation,  fined, 
and  set  in  the  pillory. :  but  they  had  succeeded  better  in 
their  attempts  upon  Goodman,  who  disappeared ;  so  that 
one  witness  only  remained,  and  Fenwick  began  to  think 
his  life  was  out  of  danger.  Admiral  Russel  acquainted 
the  house  of  commons,  that  he  and  several  persons  of 
quality  had  been  reflected  upon  in  some  informations  of 
sir  John  Fenwick :  he  therefore  desired,  that  he  might 
have  an  opportunity  to  justify  his  own  character.  Mr. 
secretary  Trumbal  produced  the  papers,  which  having 
been  read,  the  commons  ordered,  that -sir  John  Fenwick 
should  be  brought  to  the  bar  of  the  house.  There  he 
Was  exhorted  by  the  speaker  to  make  an  ample  discovery: 
which,  however,  he  declined,  except  with  the  proviso, 
that  he  should  first  receive  some  security  that  what  he 
might  say  should  not  prejudice  himself.  He  was  order- 
ed to  withdraw,  until  they  should  have  deliberated  on 
his  request.  Then  he  was  called,  in  again,  and  the 
speaker  told  him,  he  might  deserve  the  favour  of  the 
house,  by  making  a  full  discovery.  He  desired  he  might 
be  indulged  with  a  little  time  to  recollect  himself,  and 
promised  jto  obey  the  command  of  the  house.  This 
favour  being  denied,  he  again  insisted  upon  having  se- 
curity ;  which  they  refusing  to  grant,  he  chose  to  be 
silent,  and  was  dismissed  from  the  bar.  The  house 
voted,  that  his  informations,  reflecting  upon  the  fidelity 
of  several  noblemen,  members  of  the  house,  and  others, 
upon  hearsay,  were  false  and  scandalous,  contrived  to 
undermine  the  government,  and  create  jealousies  be- 
tween the  king  and  his  subjects,  in  order  to  stifle  the 
conspiracy. 

§  XLIL  A  motion  being  made,  for  leave  to  bring  in 
a  bill  to  attaint  him  o£#  high-treason,  a  warm  debate 
ensued,  and  the  question  being  put,  was  carried  in  the 
affirmative  by  a  great  majority.  He  was  furnished  with 
a  copy  of  the  bill,  and  allowed  the  use  of  pen,  ink, 
paper,  and  counsel.     When  he  presented  a  petition, 


me.  William.  393 

.praying  that  his  counsel  might  be  heard  against  passing 
the  bill,  they  made  an  order,  that  his  counsel  should  be 
allowed  to  make  his  defence  at  the  bar  of  the  house :  so 
that  he  was  surprised  into  an  irregular  trial,  instead  of 
being  indulged  with  an  opportunity  of  offering  objec- 
tions to  their  passing  the  bill  of  attainder.    He  was  ac- 
cordingly brought  to  the  bar  of  the  house ;  and  the  bill 
being  read  in  his  hearing,  the  speaker  called  upon  the 
king's  counsel  to  open  the  evidence.    The  prisoner's 
counsel  objected  to  their  proceeding  to  trial,  alleging, 
that  their  client  had  not  received  the  least  notice  of 
their  purpose,  and  therefore  could  not  be  prepared  for 
his  defence ;  but  that  they  came  to  offer  their  reasons 
against  the  bill*    The  house,  after  a  long  debate,  resolv- 
ed, that  he  should  be  allowed  farther  time  to  produce 
witnesses  in  his  defence ;  that  the  counsel  for  the  king 
should  likewise  be  allowed  to  produce  evidence,  to  prove 
the  treasons  of  which  he  stood  indicted ;  and  an  otfder 
was  made  for  his  being  brought  to  the  bar  again  in  three 
days.     In  pursuance  of  this  order  he  appeared,  when 
the  indictment  which  had  been  found  against  him  by 
the  grand  jury  was  produced ;  and  Porter  was  examin- 
ed as  an  evidence.     Then  the  record  of  Clancey's  con- 
viction was  read ;  and  one  Roe  testified,  that  Dighton, 
the  prisoner's  solicitor,  had  offered  him  an  annuity  of 
100/.  to  discredit  the  testimony  of  Goodman.     The 
king's  counsel  moved,  that  Goodman's  examination,  as 
taken  by  Mr.  Vernon,  clerk  of  the  council,  might  be 
read.     Sir  J.  Powis  and  sir  Bartholomew  Shower,  the 
prisoner's  counsel,  .  warmly  opposed  this  proposal :  they 
affirmed,  that  a  deposition  taken  when  the  party  affected 
by  it  was  not  present  to  cross-examine  the  deposer, 
could  not  be  admitted  in  a  case  of  five  shillings  value : 
that  though  the  house  was  not  bound  by  the  rules  of 
inferior  courts,  it  was  nevertheless  bound  by  the  eternal 
and  unalterable  rules  of  justice:  that  no  evidence,  ac- 
cording to  the  rules  of  law,  could  be  admitted  in  such  a 


t$4  HISTORY  OP  ENGLAND. 

casfe,  but  that  of  living  witnesses;  and  that  the  examina- 
tion of  a  person  who  is  absent,  was  never  read  to  supply 
Us  testimony.  The  dispute  between  the  lawyers  on 
this  subject  gave  rise  to  a  very  violent  debate  among  the 
members  of  the  house.  Sir  Edward  Seymour,  sir  Richard 
Temple,  Mr.  Harley,  Mr.  Hartourt,  Mr.  Manly,  air 
Christopher  Musgrave,  and  all  the  leaders  of  the  tory 
party,  argued  against  the  hardship  and  injustice  of  ad- 
mitting this  information  as  an  evidence.  They  demon- 
strated, that  it  would  be  a  step  contrary  to  the  practice 
of  all  courts  of  judicature,  repugnant  to  the  common 
notions  of  justice  and  humanity,  diametrically  opposite 
to  the  last  act  for  regulating  trials  in  cases  of  high-trea- 
son, and  of  dangerous  consequences  to  the  lives  and 
liberties  of  the  people.  On  the  other  hand,  brd  Cutts, 
sir  Thomas  Lyttleton,  Mr.  Montague,  Mr.  Smith  of  the 
treasury,  and  Trevor,  the  attorney-general,  affirmed, 
that  the  house  was  not  bound  by  any  form  of  law  what- 
soever :  that  this  was  an  extraordinary  case,  in  which 
the  safety  of  the  government  was  deeply  concerned  i 
that  though  the  common  law  might  require  two 
evidences  in  cases  of  treason,  the  house  had  a  power 
of  deviating  from  those  rules,  in  extraordinary  cases ; 
that  there  was  no  reason  to  doubt  of  sir  John  Fen- 
wick's  being  concerned  in  the  conspiracy:  that  he, 
or  his  friends,  had  tampered  with  Porter:  and  that 
there  were  strong  presumptions  to  believe  the  same 
practices  had  induced  Goodman  to  abscond.  In  a  word, 
the  terries,  either  from  party  or  patriotism,  strenuously 
asserted  the  causeof  liberty  and  humanity,  by  those  very 
arguments  which  had  been  used  against  them  in  the 
former  reigns ;  while  the  whigs,  with  equal  violence,  and 
mom  sucoess,  espoused  the  dictates  of  arbitrary  power 
and  oppression,  in  the  foce  of  their  former  principles, 
with  which  they  were  now  upbraided.  At  length,  the 
question  was  put,  whether  or  not  the  information  of 
Goodman  should  be  read  ?  and  was  carried  in  the  af- 


1899;  WILLIAM.  %9$ 

finhative  by  a  majority  of  seventy-three  toicjes.  Then 
two  of  the  grand  jury  who  had  found  the  indictment, 
recited  the  evidence  which  had  been  given  to  them  by 
Porter  and  Goodman :  lastly,  the  king's  counsel  insist- 
ed upon  producing  the  record  of  Cooke's  conviction,  as 
he  had  been  tried  for  the  same  conspiracy*  The  pri" 
soner's  counsel  objected,  that,  if  such  evidence  was  adk 
mitted,  the  trial  of  one  person  in  the  same  company 
would  be  the  trial  of  all ;  and  it  could  not  be  expected 
that  they  who  came  to  defend  sir  John  Fenwick  Only> 
should  be  prepared  to  answer  the  charge  against  Cooke, 
This  article  produced  another  vehement  debate  among 
the  members  ;  and  the  whigs  obtained  a  second  victory. 
The  record  was  read,  and  the  king's  counsel  proceeded 
to  call  some  of  the  jury  who  served  on  Cooke's  trial,  to 
affirm  that  he  had  been  convicted  on  Goodman  s  evi- 
dence. Sir  Bartholomew  Shower  said,  he  would  submit 
it  to  the  consideration  of  the  house,  whether  it  was  jo$t 
that  the  evidence  against  one  person  should  conclude 
against  another,  standing  at  a  different  bar,  in  defence 
of  his  life  ?  The  parties  were  again  ordered  to  withdraw : 
and  from  this  point  arose  a  third  debate,  which  ended, 
as  the  two  former,  to  the  disadvantage  of  the  prisoner. 
The  jury  being  examined,  Mr.  Serjeant  Gould  moved* 
that  Mr.  Vernon  might  be  desired  to  produce  the  inter- 
cepted letter  from  sir  John  Fenwick  to  his  tody.  The 
prisoner's  counsel  warmly  opposed  this  motion,  insisting 
upon  their  proving-  it  to  be  his  hand-writing  before  k 
could  be  used  against  him ;  and  no  farther  stress  was 
laid  on  this  evidence.  When  they  were  -called  upon  to 
enter  on  his  defence,  they  pleaded  incapacity  to  deliver 
matters  of  such  importance,  aftqr  they  had  been  fatigued 
with  twelve  hours  attendance. 

4  XLIIL  Tile  house  resolved  to  hear  such  evidence  as 
the  prisoner  had  to  produce  that  night  His  counsel 
declared,  that  they  had  nothing  then  to  produce  but  the 
copy  of  a  record;  and  the  second  resolution  was*  that 


206  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1096. 

he  should  be  brought  up  again  next  day  at  noon.     He 
accordingly  appeared  at  the  bar,  and  sir  J.  Powis  pro- 
ceeded on  his  defence.    He  observed,  that  the  bill  under 
consideration  affected  the  lives  of  the  subjects ;    and 
such  precedents  were  dangerous :  that  sir  John  Fenwick 
was  forthcoming,  in  order  to  be  tried  by  the  ordinary 
methods  of  justice :  that  he  was  actually  under  pro- 
cess, had  pleaded,  and  was  ready  to  stand  trial :  that  if 
there  was  sufficient  clear  evidence  against  him,  as  the 
king's  Serjeant  had  declared,  there  was  no  reason  for  his 
being  deprived  of  the  benefit  of  such  a  trial  as  was  the 
birthright  of  every  British  subject ;  and  if  there  was  a 
deficiency  of  legal  evidence,  he  thought  this  was  a  very 
odd  reason  for  the  bill.     He  took  notice,  that  even  the 
regicides  had  the  benefit  of  such  a  trial :   that  the  last 
act  for  regulating  trials  in  cases  of  treason,  proved  the 
great  tenderness  of  the  laws  which  affected  the  life  of  the 
subject :  and  he  expressed  his  surprise,  that  the  very  par- 
liament which  had  passed  that  law,  should  enact  another 
for  putting  a  person  to  death  without  any  trial  at  all. 
He  admitted  that  there  had  been  many  bills  of  attainder, 
but  they  were  generally  levelled  at  outlaws  arid  fugitives ; 
and  some  of  them  had  been  reversed  in  the  sequel,  as 
arbitrary  and  unjust     He  urged,  that  this  bill  of  attain- 
der did  not  allege,  or  say,  that  sir  John  Fenwick  was 
guilty  of  the  treason  for  which  he  had  been  indicted ;    a 
circumstance  which  prevented  him  from  producing  wit- 
nesses to.  that  and  several  rtiatters  upon  which  the  king's 
counsel  had  expatiated.     He  said,  they  had  introduced 
evidence  to  prove  circumstances  not  alleged  in  the  bill, 
and  defective  evidence  of  those  that  were :   that  Porter 
was  not  examined  upon  oath:  that  nothing  could  be 
more  severe  than  to  pass  sentence  of  death  upon  a  man, 
corrupt  his  blood,  and  confiscate  his  estate,  upon  parole 
evidence ;   especially  of  such  a  wretch,  who,  by  his  own 
confession,  had  been  engaged  in  a  crime  of  the  blackest 
nature,  not  a  convert  to  the  dictates  of  conscience,  but 


im.  WILLIAM.  297 

a  coward,  shrinking  from  the  danger  by  which  he  had 
been  environed,  and  even  now  drudging  for  a  pardon. 
He  invalidated  the  evidence  of  Goodman's  examination. 
He  observed,  that  the  indictment  mentioned  a  conspiracy 
to  call  in  a  foreign  power  ;  but,  as  this  conspiracy  had  not 
been  put  in  practice,  such  an  agreement  was  not  a  suffi- 
cient overt  act  of  treason,  according  to  the  opinion  of 
Hawles,  the  solicitor-general,  concerned  in  this  very 
prosecution.    So  saying,  he  produced  a  book  of  remarks, 
which  that  lawyer  had  published  on  the  cases  of  lord 
Russel,  colonel  Sidney,  and  others,  who  had  suffered  death 
in  the  reign  of  Charles  II.     This  author  (said  he)  takes 
notice,  that  a  conspiracy  or  agreement  to  levy  war,  is 
not  treason,  without  actually  levying  war ;  a  sentiment 
in  which  he  concurred  with  lord  Coke,  and  lord-chief- 
justice  Hales.     He  concluded  with  saying,  u  We  know 
at  present  on  what  ground  we  stand ;  by  the  statute  of 
Edward  III.  we  know  what  treason  is ;  by  the  two  sta- 
tutes of  Edward  VI.  and  the  late  act,  we  know  what  is 
proof;  by  the  Magna  Charta  we  know  we  are  to  be 
tried  per  legem  terrce  et  per  judicium  parium,  by  the 
law  of  the  land  and  the  judgment  of  our  peers ;  but,  if 
bills  of  attainder  come  into  fashion,  we  shall  neither 
know  what  is  treason,  what  is  evidence,  nor  how,  nor 
where,  we  are  to  be  tried."    He  was  seconded  by  sir 
Bartholomew  Shower,  who  spoke  with  equal  energy  and 
elocution ;   and  their  arguments  were  answered  by  the 
king's  counsel.     The  arguments  in  favour  of  the  bill 
imported,  that  the  parliament  would  not  interpose,  ex- 
cept in  extraordinary  cases;   that  here  the  evidence 
necessary  in  inferior  courts  being  defective,  the  parlia- 
ment, which  was  not  tied  down  by  legal  evidence,  had  a 
right  to  exert  their  extraordinary  power  in  punishing  an 
offender,  who  would  otherwise  escape  with  impunity ;  that, 
as  the  law  stood,  he  was  but  a  sorry  politician  that  could 
not  ruin  the  government,  and  yet  elude  the  statute  of 
treason ;  that  if  a  plot,  after  being  discovered,  should  not 


i 
L 


SQ6  HISTORY  0*  ENGLAND.  1090. 

be  thoroughly  prosecuted,  it  would  strengthen  and  grow 
upon  the  administration,  and  probably  at  length  subvert 
the  government ;  that  it  was  notorious  that  patties  were 
forming  for  king  James ;  persons  were  plotting  in  every 
part  of  the  kingdom,  and  an  open  invasion  was  threaten- 
ed :  therefore,  this  was  a  proper  time  for  the  parliament 
to  exert  their  extraordinary  power :  that  the  English 
differed  from  all  other  nations,  in  bringing  the  witnesses 
and  the  prisoner  face  to  face,  and  requiring  two  wit- 
nesses in  cases  of  treason :  nor  did  the  English  law  itself 
require  the  same  proof  in  some  cases  as  in  others ;  for 
one  witness  was  sufficient  in  felony,  as  well  as  for  the 
treason  of  coining :  that  Fenwick  was  notoriously  guilty, 
and  deserved  to  feel  the  resentment  of  the  nation :  that 
he  would  have  been  brought  to  exemplary  punishment 
in  the  ordinary  course  of  justice,  had  he  not  eluded  it, 
by  corrupting  evidence,  and  withdrawing  a  witness.  If 
this  reasoning  be  just,  the  hbuse  of  commons  has  a 
right  to  act  in  diametrical  opposition  to  the  laws  in 
being ;  and  is  vested  with  a  despotic  power  over  the 
lives  and  fortunes  of  their  constituents,  for  whose  pro- 
tection they  are  constituted.  Let  us  therefore  reflect 
upon  the  possibility  of  a  parliament,  debauched  by  the 
arts  of  corruption  into  servile  compliance  with  the  de- 
signs of  an  arbitrary  prince,  and  tremble  for  the  conse- 
quence. The  debate  being  finished,  the  prisoner  was, 
at  the  desire  of  admiral  Russel,  questioned  with  regard 
to  the  imputations  he  had  fixed  upon  that  gentleman 
and  others,  from  hearsay :  but  he  desired  to  be  excused, 
on  account  of  the  risk  he  ran  while  under  a  double  pro- 
secution, if  any  thing  which  should  escape  him  might 
be  turned  to  his  prejudice. 

§  XLIV.  After  he  was  removed  from  the  bar,  Mr. 
Vernon,  at  the  desire  of  the  house,  recapitulated  the 
arts  and  practices  of  sir  John  Fenwick  and  his  friends, 
to  procrastinate  the  trial.  The  bill  was  read  a  second 
time ;  and  the  speaker  asking,  If  the  question  should  be 


MM.  WILLIAM*  S(M^ 

pot  for  its  being  committed )  the  house  was  immediate- 
ly kindled  into  a  new  flame  of  contention*  Hawles, 
the  solicitor-general,  affirmed,  that  the  house  in  the  pre- 
sent case  should  act  both  as  judge  and  jury.  Mr.  Har- 
court  said,  he  knew  no  trial  for  treason  but  what  was 
confirmed  by  Magna  Charta,  by  a  jury,  the  birthright 
and  darling  privilege  of  an  Englishman,  or  per  legem 
term,  which  includes  impeachments  in  parliament :  that 
it  was  a  strange  trial  where  the  person  accused  had  a 
chance  to  be  hanged,  but  none  to  be  saved :  that  he 
never  heard  of  a  juryman  who  was  not  on  his  oath,  nor 
of  a  judge  who  had  not  power  to  examine  witnesses  upon 
oath,  and  who  was  not  empowered  to  save  the  innocent 
as  well  as  to  condemn  the  guilty.  Sir  Thomas  Lyttle- 
ton  was  of  opinion,  that  the  parliament  ought  not  to 
stand  upon  little  niceties  and  forms  of  other  courts, 
When  the  government  was  at  stake.  Mr.  Howe  asserted* 
that  to  do  a  thing  of  this  nature,  because  the  parliament 
had  power  to  do  it,  was  a  strange  way  pf  reasoning :  that 
what  was  justice  and  equity  at  Westminster-hail,  was 
justice  and  equity  every  where :  that  one  bad  precedent 
hi  parliament  was  of  worse  consequence  than  a  hundred 
in  Westminster-hall,  because  personal  or  private  injuries 
did  not  foreclose  the  claims  of  original  right ;  whereas 
the  parliament  could  ruin  the  nation  beyond  redemption, 
because  it  could  establish  tyranny  by  law.  Sir  Richard 
Temple,  in  arguing  against  the  bill,  observed,  that  the 
power  of  parliament  is  to  make  any  law,  but  the  juris- 
diction of  parliament  is  to  govern  itself  by  the  law  :  to 
make  a  law,  therefore,  against  all  the  laws  of  England, 
was  the  ultimum  remedium  et  pessimum>  never  to  be 
used  but  in  case  of  absolute  necessity.  He  affirmed 
that,  by  this  precedent,  the  house  overthrew  all  the  laws 
of  England ;  first,  in  condemning  a  man  upon  one  wit- 
ness; secondly,  in  passing  an  act  without  any  trial. 
The  commons  never  did  nor  can  assume  a  jurisdiction 
of  trying  any  person  :  they  may,  for  their  own  informa- 


300  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1606. 

tion,  hear  what  can  be  offered ;  but  it  is  not  a  trial  tfHere 

r  m 

witnesses  are  not  upon  oath*    All  bills  of  attainder  have 
passed  against  persons  that  were  dead  or  fled,  or  without 
the  compass  of  the  law :  some  have  been  brought  in 
after  trials  in  Westminster-hall ;  but  none  of  those  have 
been  called  trials,  and  they  were  generally  reversed.    He 
denied  that  the  parliament  had  power  to  declare  any 
thing  treason  which  was  not  treason  before.     When  in- 
ferior courts  were  dubious,  the  case  might  be  brought 
before  the  parliament,  to  judge  whether  it  was  treason 
or  felony ;  but  then  they  must  judge  by  the  laws  in 
being ;  and  this  judgment  was  not  in  the  parliament  by 
bill,  but  only  in  the  house  of  lords.    Lord  Digby,  Mr. 
Harley,  and  colonel  Granville,  spoke  to  the  same  pur- 
pose.   But  their  arguments  and  remonstrances  had  no 
effect  upon  the  majority,  by  whom  the  prisoner  was  de- 
voted to  destruction.    The  bill  was  committed,  passed, 
and  sent  up  to  the  house  of  lords,  where  it  produced  the 
longest  and  wannest  debates  which  had  been  known 
since  the  restoration.     Bishop  Burnet  signalized  his  zeal 
for  the  government,  by  a  long  speech  in  favour  of  the 
bill,  contradicting  some  of  the  fundamental  maxims  which 
he  had  formerly  avowed  in  J>ehalf  of  the  liberties  of  the 
people.     At  length  it  was  carried  by  a  majority  of  seven 
voices ;   and-one  and-forty  lords,  including  eight  pre- 
lates, entered  a  protest,  couched  in  the  strongest  terms, 
against  the  decision. 

§XLV.  When  the  bill  received  the  royal  assent, 
another  act  of  the  like  nature  passed  against  Barclay, 
Holmes,  and  nine  other  conspirators  who  had  fled  from 
justice,  in  case  they  should  not  surrender  themselves,  on 
or  before  the  25  th  day  of  March  next  ensuing.  Sir 
John  Fenwick  solicited  the  mediation  of  the  lords  in  his 
behalf,  while  his  friends  implored  the  royal  mercy.  The 
peers  gave  him  to  understand,  that  the  success  of  his 
suit  would  depend  upon  the  fulness  of  his  discoveries. 
He  would  have  previously  stipulated  for  a  pardon  ;  and 


1(190.  WILLIAM-  301 

they  insisted  upon  his  depending  on  their  favour.  He 
hesitated  some  time  between  the  fears  of  infamy  and  the 
terrors  of  death,  which  last  he  at  length  chose  to  under- 
go, rather  than  incur  the  disgraceful  character  of  an  in- 
former. He  was  complimented  with  the  axe,  in  consi- 
deration of  his  rank  and  alliance  with  the  house  of 
Howard,  and  suffered  on  Tower-hill  with  great  compo- 
sure. In  the  paper  which  he  delivered  to  the  sheriff, 
he  took  God  to  witness,  that  he  knew  not  of  the  intend- 
ed invasion,  until  it  was  the  common  subject  of  dis- 
course ;  nor  was  he  engaged  in  any  shape  for  the  service 
of  king  James.  He  thanked  those  noble  and  worthy 
persons  who  had  opposed  his  attainder  in  parliament ; 
protested  before  God,  that  the  information  he  gave  to 
the  ministry  he  had  received  in  letters  and  messages  from 
France;  and  observed,  that  he  might  have  expected 
mercy  from  the  prince  of  Orange,  as  he  had  been  in- 
strumental in  saving  his  life,  by  preventing  the  execu- 
tion of  a  design  which  had  been  formed  against  it;  a 
circumstance  which  in  all  probability  induced  the  late 
conspirators  to  conceal  their  purpose  of  assassination 
from  his  knowledge.  He  professed  his  loyalty  to  king 
James,  and  prayed  Heaven  for  his  speedy  restoration. 

§  XLVL  While  Fenwick's  affair  was  in  agitation,  the 
earl  of  Monmouth  had  set  on  foot  some  practices  against 
the  duke  of  Shrewsbury.  One  Matthew  Smith,  ne- 
phew to  sir  William  Perkins,  had  been  entertained  as 
a  spy  by  this  nobleman,  who,  finding  his  intelligence, of 
very  little  use  or  importance,  dismissed  him  as  a  trou- 
blesome dependant.  Then  he  had  recourse  to  the  earl 
of  Monmouth,  into  whom  he  infused  unfavourable  sen- 
timents of  the  duke;  insinuating,  that  he  had  made 
great  discoveries,  which  from  sinister  motives  were  sup- 
pressed. Monmouth  communicated  those  impressions 
to  the  earl  of  Portland,  who.  enlisted  Smith  as  one  of  his 
intelligencers.  Copes  of  the  letters  he  had  sent  to  the 
duke  of  Shrewsbury  were  delivered  to  secretary  Trum- 

vol.  i.  *  x 


3031  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  MT 

bad,  sealed  up  for  the  perusal  of  his  majesty  at  his  rec- 
tum from  Flanders.  When  Fenwick  mentioned  the 
duke  of  Shrewsbury  in  his  discoveries,  the  earl  of  Morn 
mouth  resolved  to  seize  the  opportunity  of  ruining  that 
nobleman.  He,  by  the  channel  of  the  dutchess  of  Nor- 
folk, exhorted  lady  Fbnwick  to  prevail  upon  her  hus- 
band to  persist  in  his  accusation,  and  even  dictated  a 
paper  of  directions.  Fenwick  rejected  the  proposal  with 
disdain,  as  a  seandalous  contrivance ;  and  Monmouth 
was  so  incensed  at  his  refusal,  that  when  the  bill  of  at- 
tainder appeared  in  the  house  of  lords,  he  spoke  in  fa- 
vour of  it  with  peculiar  vehemence.  Lady  Fenwick; 
provoked  at  this  cruel  outrage,  prevailed  upon  her  ne-J 
phew,  the  earl  of  Carlisle,  to  move  the  house  that  sir 
John  might  be  examined  touching  any  advices  that  had 
been  sent  to  him,  with  relation  to  his  discoveries.  Fen- 
wick being  interrogated  accordingly,  gave  an  account  of 
all  the  particulars  of  Monmouth's  scheme,  which  was 
calculated  to  ruin  the  duke  of  Shrewsbury,  by  bringing1 
Smith's  letters  on  the  carpet.  The  dutchess  of  Norfolk 
and  a  confidant  were  examined,  and  confirmed  the  de- 
tection. The  house  called  for  Smith's  letters,  which 
were  produced  by  sir  William  Trumbal.  The  earl  of 
Monmouth  was  committed  to  the  Tower,  and  dismissed 
from  all  his  employments.  He  was  released,  however, 
at  the  end  of  the  session ;  and  the  court  made  up  all  hid 
losses  in  private,  lest  he  should  be  tempted  to  join  thel 
opposition. 

§  XLVII.  Hie  whigs,  before  they  were  glutted  witfa 
the  sacrifice  of  Fen\Vick,  had  determined  to  let  loose 
their  vengeance  upon  sir  George  Rooke,  who  was  a 
leader  in  the  opposite  interest.  Sir  Cloudesley  Shovel 
had  been  sent  with  a  squadron  to  look  into  Brest,  where,; 
according  to  the  intelligence  which  the  government  had 
received,  the  French  were  employed  in  preparing  for  a 
descent  upon  England;  but  this  information  w&s  false. 
They  were  busy  in  equipping  an  armament  for  the 


iaor:  william.  90S 

West  Indies,  under  the  command  of  M.  Pointis,  who 
actually  sailed  to  the  coast  of  New  Spain,  and  took  the 
city  of  Carthagena.     Rooke  had  been  ordered  to  inter* 
cept  the  Toulon  squadron  in  its  way  to  Brest ;  but  his 
endeavours  miscarried.    The  commons,  in  a  committee 
of  the  whole  house,  resolved  to  inquire  why  this  fleet 
was  not  intercepted  ;  Rooke  underwent  a  long  exami- 
nation, and  was  obliged  to  produce  his  journal,  orders, 
and  letters.     Shovel  and  Mitchel  were  likewise  exa- 
mined ;  but  nothing  appearing  to  the  prejudice  of  the  ad- 
miral, the  house  thought  proper  to  desist  from  their  pro-: 
secution;p    After  they  had  determined  on  the  fate  of 
Fenwick,  they  proceeded  to  enact  several  laws  for  regu- 
lating the  domestic  economy  of  the  nation :   among 
others,  they  passed  an  act  for  the  more  effectual  relief 
of  creditors  in  cases  of  escape,  and  for  preventing  abuses 
in  prisons  and  pretended  privileged  places.    Ever  since 
the  reformation,  certain  [daces  in  and  about  the  city  of 
London,  which  had  been  sanctuaries  during  the  preva- 
lence of  the  popish  religion,  afforded  asylum  to  debtors, 
and  were  become  receptacles  of  desperate  persons,  who 
presumed  to  set  the  law  at  defiance.     One  of  these 
places,  called  White-friars,  was  filled  with  a  crew  of  ruf- 
fians, who  every  day  committed  acts  of  violence  and 
outrage :  but  this  law  was  so  vigorously  put  in  execu- 
tion, that  they  were  obliged  to  abandon  the  district* 
which  was  soon  filled  with  more  creditable  inhabitants; 
On  the  l6th  day  of  April,  the  king  closed  the  session 
with  a  short  speech,  thanking  the  parliament  for  the 
great  supplies  they  had  so  cheerfuBy  granted,  and  ex- 
pressing his  satisfaction  at  the  measures  they  had  taken 
for   retrieving  the  public  credit.    Before  he  quitted 
the  kingdom,  he  ventured  to  produce  upon  the  scene 
the  earl  of  Sunderland,  who  had  hitherto  prompted  his 
councils  behind  the  curtain.     That  politician  was  now 

* Burnet     Kennet.     Qldmixom     State  Trials.     Tindal.     Rat  phi 
Liyes  of  the  Admirals. 

X2 


304  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1007. 

sworn  of  the  privy-council,  and  gratified  with  the  office 
of  lord-chamberlain,  which  had  been  resigned  by  the 
earl  of  Dorset,  a  nobleman  of  elegant  talents  and  invin- 
cible indolence ;  severe  and  poignant  in  his  writings  and 
remarks  upon  mankind  in  general,  but  humane,  good- 
natured,  and  generous  to  excess,  in  his  commerce  with 
individuals. 

§  XLVIII.  William  having  made  some  promotions,*1 
and  appointed  a  regency,  embarked  on  the  26th  day  of 
April  for  Holland,  that  he  might  be  at  hand  to  manage 
the  negotiation  for  a  general  peace.  By  this  time  the 
preliminaries  were  settled  between  Callieres,  the  French 
minister,  and  Mr.  Dykveldt,  in  behalf  of  the  states- 
general,  who  resolved,  in  consequence  of  the  concessions 
made  by  France,  that,  in  concert  with  their  allies,  the 
mediation  of  Sweden  might  be  accepted.  The  emperor 
and  the  court  of  Spain,  however,  were  not  satisfied  with 
those  concessions  :  yet  his  imperial  majesty  declared  he 
would  embrace  the  proffered  mediation,  provided  the 
treaty  of  Westphalia  should  be  re-established  ;  and  pro- 
vided the  king  of  Sweden  would  engage  to  join  his 
troops  with  those  of  the  allies,  in  case  France  should 
break  through  this  stipulation.  This  proposal  being 
delivered,  the  ministers  of  England  and  Holland  at 
Vienna  presented  a  joint  memorial,  pressing  his  imperial 
majesty  to  accept  the  mediation  without  reserve,  and 
name  a  place  at  which  the  congress  might  be  opened. 
The  emperor  complied  with  reluctance.  On  the  14th 
day  of  February,  all  the  ministers  of  the  allies,  except 
the  ambassador  of  Spain,  agreed  to  the  proposal ;  and 
next  day  signified  their  assent  in  form  to  M.  Lillienroot, 
the  Swedish  plenipotentiary.      Spain  demanded,  as  a 

d  Somers  was  created  a  baron,  and  appointed  lord-chancellor  of  Eng- 
land; admiral  Russel  was  dignified  with  the  title  of  earl  of  Orlbrd.^  la 
February  the  earl  of  Aylesbury,  who  had  been  committed  on  account  of 
the  conspiracy,  was  released  upon  bail ;  but  this  privilege  was  denied  to 
lord  Montgomery,  who  had  been  imprisoned  in  Newgate  on  the  same 
account. 


***.  WILLIAM.  305 

preliminary,  that  Prance  should  agree  to  restore  all  the 
places  mentioned  in  a  long  list,  which  the  minister  of 
that  crown  presented  to  the  assembly.  The  emperor 
proposed,  that  the  congress  should  be  held  at  Aix-la- 
chapelle,  or  Franckfort,  or  some  other  town  in  Ger- 
many. The  other  allies  were  more  disposed  to  negotiate 
in  Holland.  At  length  the  French  king  suggested,  that 
no  place  would  be  more  proper  than  a  palace  belonging 
to  king  William,  called  Newbourg-house,  situated  be- 
tween the  Hague  and  Delft,  close  by  the  village  of  Rys- 
wick;  and  to  this  proposition  the  ministers  agreed* 
Those  of  England  were  the  earl  of  Pembroke,  a  vir- 
tuous, learned,  and  popular  nobleman,  the  lord  Villiers, 
and  sir  Joseph  Williamson :  France  sent  Harley  and 
Crecy  to  the  assistance  of  Callieres.  Lewis  was  not  only 
tired  of  the  war,  on  account  of  the  misery  in  which  it 
had  involved  his  kingdom ;  but,  in  desiring  a  peace,  he 
was  actuated  by  another  motive.  The  king  of  Spain 
bad  been  for  some  time  in  a  very  ill  state  of  health,  and 
the  French  monarch  had  an  eye  to  the  succession.  This 
aim  could  not  be  accomplished  while  the  confederacy 
subsisted ;  therefore  he  eagerly  sought  a  peace,  that  he 
might  at  once  turn  his  whole  power  against  Spain,  as 
soon  as  Charles  should  expire.  The  emperor  harbour- 
ed the  same  design  upon  the  Spanish  crown,  and  for 
that  reason  interested  himself  in  the  continuance  of  the 
grand  alliance.  Besides,  he  foresaw  he  should  in  a  little 
time  be  able  to  act  against  France  with  an  augmented 
force.  The  czar  of  Muscovy  had  engaged  to  find  em- 
ployment for  the  Turks  and  Tartars.  He  intended  to 
raise  the  elector  of  Saxony  to  the  throne  of  Poland ;  and 
he  had  made  some  progress  in  a  negotiation  with  the 
circles  of  the  Rhine,  for  a  considerable  body  of  auxiliary 
troops.  The  Dutch  had  no  other  view  but  that  of  se- 
curing a  barrier  in  the  Netherlands.  King  William  in- 
sisted upon  the  French  king's  acknowledging  his.  title ; 
and  the  English  nation  wished  for  nothing  so  much  as 


SOS  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  Vm. 

the  end  of  a  ruinous  war.  On  the  10th  day  of  February, 
Callietes,  in  the  name  of  his  master,  agroed  to  the  fok 
lowing  preliminaries:  That  the  treaties  of  Westphalia 
and  Nimeguen  should  be  the  basis  of  this  negotiation : 
that  Strasbourg  should  be  restored  to  the  empire,  and 
Luxembourg  to  the  Spaniards,  together  with  Mons, 
Gharlerdy,  and  all  places  taken  by  the  French  in.  Cata- 
lonia, since  the  treaty  of  Nimeguen :  that  Dinant  should 
be  ceded  to  the  bishop  of  Liege,  and  ail  reunion  since 
the  treaty  of  Nimeguen  be  made  void :  that  the  French 
king  should  make  restitution  of  Lorraine,  and,  upon 
conclusion  of  the  peace,  acknowledge  the  prince  of 
Orange  as  king  of  Great  Britain*,  without  condition  or 
feserve.  The  conferences  were  interrupted  by  the  death 
of  Charles  XI.  king  of  Sweden,  who  was  succeeded  by  his 
son  Charles,  then  a  minor :  but  the  queen  and  five  se- 
nators, whom  the  late  king  had  by  will  appointed  admi- 
nistrators of  the  government,  resolved  to  pursue  the 
Mediation,  and  sent  a  new  commission  to  Lillienroot  for 
that  purpose.  The  ceremonials  being  regulated,  with 
the  consent  of  all  parties,  the  plenipotentiaries  of  the 
emperor  delivered  their  master's  demands  to  the  media- 
tor on  the  22d  day  of  May,  and  several  German  ministers 
gave  in  the  pretensions  of  the  respective  princes  whom 
they  represented. 

§  XLIX.  Meanwhile,  the  French  king,  in  the  hope 
of  procuring  more  favourable  terms,  resolved  to  make 
his  last  effort  against  the  Spaniards  in  Catalonia  and  in 
the  Netherlands,  and  to  elevate  the  prince  of  Conti  to 
the  throne  of  Poland ;  an  event  which  would  have  greatly 
improved  the  interest  of  France  in  Europe.  Lewis  had 
got  the  start  of  the  confederates  in  Flanders,  and  sent 
thither  a  very  numerous  army,  commanded  by  Catinat, 
Villeroy,  and  Boufflers.  The  campaign  was  opened 
with  the  siege  of  Aeth,  which  was  no  sooner  invested,  « 
than  king  William,  having  recovered  of  an  indisposition, 
took  the  field,  and  had  an  interview  with  the  duke  of 


WILLIAM.     .  ,307 

JBarcaria,  who  commanded  a  separate  body.     He  did  not 
thipk  proper  to  interrupt,  the  enemy  in  their  operations 
before  Aeth,  which  surrendered  in  a  few  days  after  the 
trendies  were  opened,  but  contented  himself  with  taking 
possession  of  an  advantageous  camp,  whare  he  covered 
Brussels,  which  Villeroy  and  Boufflers  had  determined  to 
imiege*    In  Catalonia  the  duke  of  Vendome  invested 
Barcelona,  in  which  there  Was  a  garrison  of  ten  thousand 
Tegular  soldiers,  besides  five  thousand  burghers,  who  had 
voluntarily  taken  arms  on  this  occasion.     The  governor 
«£  the  place  was  the  prince  of  Hesse  d'Armstadt,  who 
Jaad  served  ra  Ireland,  and  been  vested  with  the  com- 
jnand  of  the  imperial  troops  which  were  sent  into  Spun. 
The  French  general  being  reinforced  from  Provence 
and  Languedoc,  earned  on  his  approaches  with  surpris- 
ing impetuosity ;  and  was  repulsed  in  several  attacks  by 
the  valour  of  the  defendants.     At  length  the  enemy 
•surprised  and  routed  the  viceroy  of  Catalonia;  and, 
flashed  with  this  victory,  stormed  the  outworks,  which 
had  been  long  battered  with  their  cannon.     The  dis- 
pute was  very  bloody  and  obstinate ;  hut  the  French,  by 
dint  of  numbers,  made  themselves  masters  of  the  covered 
way  and  two.  bastions.     There  they  erected  batteries  of 
cannon  and  mortars,  and  fired  furiously  on  the  town, 
which,  however,  the  prince  of  Hesse  resolved  to  defend 
to  the  last  extremity.     The  court  of  Madrid,  however, 
unwilling  to  see  the  place  entirely  ruined,  as  in  all  pro- 
bability it  would  be  restored  at  the  peace,  dispatched  an 
order  to  the  prince  to  capitulate;  and  he  obtained  very 
honourable  terms,  after  having  made  a  glorious  defence 
for  nine  weeks ;  in  consideration  of  which  he  was  ap- 
pointed viceroy  of  the  province*     Frapce  was  no  sooner 
in  possession  of  this  important  place,  than,  the  Spaniards 
became  as  eager  for  peace  as  they?  had  been  before  averse 
to  a  negotiation. 

§  L.  Their  impatience  was  not  a  little  inflamed  by  the 
jtuccesp  of  Bointis  in  America,  where  he  took  Cartha- 


308  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  tt*ft 

gena,  in  which  he  found  a  booty  amounting  to  eight 
millions  of  crowns.     Having  ruined  the  fortifications  of 
the  place,  and  received  advice  that  an  English  squadron 
under  admiral  Nevil  had  arrived  in  the  West  Indies, 
with  a  design  to  attack  him  in  his  return,  he  bore  away 
for  the  straits  of  Bahama.    On  the  22d  day  of  May  he 
fell  in  with  the  English  fleet,  and  one  of  his  fly-boats  was 
taken :  but  such  was  his  dexterity,  or  good  fortune,  that 
he  escaped,  after  having  been,  pursued  five  days,  during 
.which  the  English  and  Dutch  rear-admirals  sprang  their 
fore-topmasts,  and  received  other  damage,  so  that  they 
could  not  proceed.     Then  Nevil  steered  to  Carthagena, 
which  he  found  quite  abandoned  by  the  inhabitants, 
who,  after  the  departure  of  Pointis,  had  been  rifled  a 
second  time  by  the  buccaneers,  on  pretence  that  they 
had  been  defrauded  of  their  share  of  the  plunder.    This 
was  really  the  case  ;  they  had  in  a  great  measure  contri- 
buted to  the  success  of  Pointis,  and  were  very  ill  reward- 
ed.    In  a  few  days  the  English  admiral  discovered  eight 
sail  of  their  ships,  two  of  which  were  forced  on  shore  and 
destroyed,  two  taken,  and;  the  rest  escaped.    Then  he 
directed  his  course  to  Jamaica,  and,  by  the  advice  of  the 
governor,  sir  William  Beeston,  detached  rear-admiral 
Meeze  with  some  ships   and  forces  to  attack   Petit- 
Gauvas,  which  he  accordingly  surprised,  burned,  and 
reduced  to  ashes.  After  this  small  expedition,  Nevil  pro- 
ceeded to  the  Ha  van  n  ah  on  purpose  to  take  the  galleons 
under  his  convoy  for  Europe,  according  to  the  instruc- 
tions he  had  received  from  the  king:  but  the  governor 
of  the  place,  and  the  general  of  the  plate-fleet,  suspect- 
ing such  an  offer,  would  neither  suffer  him  to  enter  the 
harbour,  nor  put  the  galleons  under  his  protection.    He 
now  sailed  through  the  gulf  of  Florida  to  Virginia,  where 
he  died  of  chagrin,  and  the  command  of  the  fleet  de- 
volved on  captain  Dilkes,  who  arrived  in  England  on  the 
24th   day  of  October,  with  a  shattered  squadron,  half 
manned,  to  the  unspeakable  mortification  of  the  people, 


1487.  WILLIAM.  300 

who  flattered  themselves  with  the  hopes  of  wealth  and 
glory  from  this  expedition.     Pointis,  steering  to  the 
banks  of  Newfoundland,  entered  the  bay  of  Concep- 
tion, at  a  time  when  a  stout  English  squadron,  com- 
manded by  commodore  Norris,  lay  at  anchor  in  the  bay 
of  St.  John.     This  officer  being  informed  of  the  arrival 
of  a  French,  fleet,  at  first  concluded,  that  it  was  the 
squadron  of  M.  Nesmond  come  to  attack  him,  and  ex- 
erted his  utmost  endeavours  to  put  the  place  in  a  pos- 
ture of  defence ;  but  afterward,  understanding  that  it  was 
Pointis  returning  with  the  spoil  of  Garthagena,  he  called 
a  council  of  war,  and  proposed  to  go  immediately  in 
quest  of  the  enemy.     He  was,  however,  overruled  by  a 
majority,  who  gave  it  as  their  opinion  that  they  should 
remain  where  they  were,  without  running  unnecessary 
hazard.     By  virtue  of  this  scandalous  determination, 
Pointis  was  permitted  to  proceed  on  his  voyage  to  Eu- 
rope :  but  he  had  not  yet  escaped  every  danger.     On 
the  14th  day  of  August  he  fell  in  with  a  squadron  under 
the  command  of  captain  Harlow,  by  whom  he  was  boldly 
engaged  till  night  parted  the  combatants.     He  was  pur- 
sued next  day ;  but  his  ships  sailing  better  than  those  of 
Harlow,  he  accomplished  his  escape,  and  on  the  mor- 
row entered  the  harbour  of  Brest.     That   his  ships, 
which  were  foul,  should  out-sail  the  English  squadron, 
which  bad  just  put  to  sea,  was  a  mystery  which  the 
people  of  England  could  not  explain.  They  complained 
of  having  been  betrayed  through  the  whole  course  of 
the  West  Indian  expedition.     The  king  owned  he  did 
not  understand  marine  affairs,  the  entire  conduct  of 
which  he  abandoned  to  Russel,  who  became  proud,  ar- 
bitrary, and  unpopular,  and  was  supposed  to  be  betrayed 
by  his  dependants*     Certain  it  is,  the  service  was  greatly 
obstructed  by  faction  among  the,  officers,  which,  with 
respect  to  the  nation,  had  all  the  effects  of  treachery  and 
misconduct. 

§  LI.  The  success  of  the  French  in  Catalonia,  Flan- 


310  HISTORY  OF  JEHGLAND.  INK 

dens,  and  the  West  Indies,  was  balanced  by  their  disap- 
pointment in  Poland.    Lewis,  encouraged  by  the  re* 
monstrances  of  the  abb6  de  Polignac,  who  managed  the 
affairs  of  France  in  that  kingdom,  resolved  to  support 
the  prince  of  Conti  as  a  candidate  for  the  crown,  and 
remitted  great  sums  of  money,  which  were  distributed 
among  the  Polish  nobility.     The  emperor  had  at  first 
declared  for  the  son  of  the  late  king :  bat,  finding  the 
French  party  too  strong  for  his  competitor,  be  entered 
into  a  negotiation  with  the  elector  of  Saxony,  who 
agreed  to  change  his  religion,  to  distribute  eight  mil- 
lions of  florins  among  the  Poles,  to  confirm  their  pri- 
vileges, and  advance  with  his  troops  to  the  frontiers  of 
that  kingdom.     Having  performed  these  articles,  he  de- 
clared himself  a  candidate,  and  was  publicly  espoused  by 
the  imperialists.     The  duke  of  Lorraine,  the  prince  of 
Baden,  and  don  Livio  Odeschalchi,  nephew  to  pope  In- 
nocent, were  likewise  competitors :  but,  finding  their 
interest  insufficient,  they  united  their  influence  with  that 
of  the  elector,  who  was  proclaimed  king  of  Poland.  He 
forthwith  took  the  oath  required,   procured  an  attesta- 
tion from  the  imperial  court  of  his  having  changed  his 
religion,  and  marched  with  his  army  to  Cracow,  where 
he  was  crowned  with  the  usual  solemnity.     Lewis  per- 
sisted in  maintaining  the  pretensions  of  the  prince  of 
Conti,  and  equipped  a  fleet  at  Dunkirk  for  his  convoy 
to  Dantzic  in  his  way  to  Poland.    But  the  magistrates 
of  that  city,  who  had  declared  for  the  new  king,  would 
not  suffer  his  men  to  land,  though  they  offered  to  admit 
himself  with  a  small  retinue.     He  therefore  wertt  on 
shore  at  Marienburgh,  where  he  was  met  by  some  chiefs 
of  his  own  party;  but  the  new  king  Augustus  acted 
with  such  vigilance,  that  he  found  it  impracticable  to 
form  an  army  :  besides,  he  suspected  the  fidelity  of  his 
own  Polish  partisans ;  he  therefore  refused  to  part  with 
the  treasure  he  had  brought,  and  in  the  beginning  of 
winter  returned  to  Dunkirk. 


iwr.  WILLIAM,  311 

§  UL  The  establishment  of  Augustus  on  the  throne 
of  Poland  was  in  some  measure  owing  to  the  conduct  of 
Peter,  the  czar  of  Muscovy,  who,  having  formed  great 
designs  against  the  Ottoman  Porte,  was  very  unwilling  to 
see  the  crown  of  Poland  possessed  by  a  partisan  of  France, 
which  was  in  alliance  with  the  grand  seignior.     He 
therefore  interested  himself  warmly  in  the  dispute,  and 
ordered  his  general  to  assemble  ah  army  on  the  frontiers 
of  Lithuania,  which,  by  overawing  the  Poles  that  were 
in  the  interest  'of  the  prince  of  Conti,  considerably  in- 
fluenced the  election.    This  extraordinary  legislator, 
who  was  a  strange  compound  of  heroism  and  barbarity, 
conscious  of  the  defects  in  his  education,  and  of  the  gross 
ignorance  that  overspread  his  dominions,  resolved  to 
extend  his  ideas,  and  improve-  his  judgment,  by  travel- 
ling ;  and  that  he  might  be  the  less  restricted  by  forms, 
or  interrupted  by  officious  curiosity,  he  determined  to 
travel  in  disguise.     He  was  extremely  ambitious  of  be- 
coming a  maritime  power,  and  in  particular  of  main- 
taining a  fleet  in  the  Blade-sea  ;  and  his  immediate  aim 
was  to  learn  the  principles  of  shipbuilding.  He  appoint- 
ed an  embassy  for  Holland,  to  regulate  some  points  of 
commerce  with  the  states-general.    Having  intrusted 
the  care  of  his  dominions  to  persons  in  whom  he  could 
confide,  he  now  disguised  himself,  and  travelled  as  one 
of  their  retinue.    He  first  disclosed  himself  to  the  elec- 
tor of  Brandenburgh,   in  Prussia,   and  afterward  to 
Jung  William,  with  whom  he  conferred  in  private  at 
*Utrecht.    He  engaged  himself  as  a  common  labourer 
-■with  a  ship-carpenter  in  Holland,  whom  he  served  for 
some  months  with  wonderful  patience  and  assiduity. 
He  afterward  visited  England,  where  he  amused  him- 
*self  chiefly  with  the  same  kind  of  occupation.    From 
thpnee  he  set  out  for  Vienna,  where,  receiving  advices 
from  his  dominions,  that  his  sister  was  concerned  in 
managing  intrigues  against  his  government,  he  returned 
suddenly  to  Moscow,  and  found  the  machinations  of 
the  conspirators  were  already  baffled  by  the  vigilance 


312  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.,  1097. 

and  fidelity  of  the  foreigners  to  whom  he  had  left  the 
care  of  the  administration.  His  savage  nature,  however, 
broke  out  upon  this  occasion :  he  ordered  some  hundreds 
to  be  hanged  all  round  his  capital ;  and  a  good  number 
were  beheaded,  he  himself  with  his  own  h^nd  perform- 
ing the  office  of  executioner. 

§  LIII.  The  negotiations  at  Ryswick  proceeded  very 
slowly  for  some  time.  The  imperial  minister  demanded,- 
that  France  should  make  restitution  of  all  the  places  and 
dominions  she  had  wrested  from  theempire  since  the  peace 
of  Munster^  whether  by  force  of  arms  or  pretence  of  right. 
The  Spaniards  claimed  all  they  could  demand  by  virtue  of 
the  peace  of  Nimeguen,  and  the  treaty  of  the  Pyrenees. 
The  French  affirmed,  that,  if  the  preliminaries  offered 
by  Callieres  were  accepted,  these  propositions  could  not 
be  taken  into  consideration.  The  imperialists  persisted 
in  demanding  a  circumstantial  answer,  article  by  article. 
The  Spaniards  insisted  upon  the  same  manner  of  pro- 
ceeding, and  called  upon  the  mediator  and  Dutch  mi- 
nisters to  support  their  pretensions.  The  plenipoten- 
tiaries of  France  declared  they  would  not  admit  any  de- 
mand or  proposition  contrary  to  the  preliminary  articles ; 
but  were  willing  to  deliver  in  a  project  of  peace,  in  order 
to  shorten  the  negotiations,  and  the  Spanish  ambassadors 
consented  to  this  expedient.  During  these  transactions, 
the  earl  of  Portland  held  a  conference  with  mareschal 
Boufflers,  near  Halle,  in  sight  of  the  two  opposite 
armies,  which  was  continued  in  five  successive  meetings. 
On  the  2d  day  of  August  they  retired  together  to  a 
house  in  the  .suburbs  of  Halle,  and  mutually  signed  a 
paper,  in  which  the  principal  articles  of  peace  between 
France  and  England  were  adjusted.  Next  day  king 
William  quitted  the  camp,  and  retired  to  his  house  at 
Loo,  confident  of  having  taken  such  measures  for  a  pa- 
cification as  could  not  be  disappointed.  The  subject  of 
this  field  negotiation  is  said  to  have  turned  upon  the 
interest  of  king  James,  which  the  French  monarch  pro- 
mised to  abandon  :  others,  however,  suppose,  that  the 


1097.  WILLIAM.  313 

first  foundation  of  the  partition-treaty  was  laid  in  this 
conference.     But,  in  all  probability,  William's  sole  aim 
was  to  put  an  end  to  an  expensive  and  unsuccessful  war, 
which  had  rendered  him  very  unpopular  in  his  own  do- 
minions,  and  to  obtain  from  the  court  of  France  an 
acknowledgment  of  his  title,  which  had  since  the  queen's 
death  become  the  subject  of  dispute.     He  perceived  the 
emperor's  backwardness   towards    a   pacification,  and 
foresaw  numberless  difficulties  in  discussing  such  a  com* 
plication  of  interests  by  the  common  method  of  treating: 
he,  therefore,  chose  such  a  step  as  he  thought  would 
alarm  the  jealousy  of  the  allies,  and  quicken  the  nego- 
tiation at  Ryswick.     Before  the  congress  wias  opened, 
king  James  had  published  two  manifestoes,  addressed  to 
the  Catholic  and  Protestant  princes  of  the  confederacy, 
representing  his  wrongs,  and  craving  redress;  but  his 
remonstrances  being  altogether  disregarded,  he  after- 
ward  issued   a  third    declaration,  solemnly  protesting 
against  all  that  might  or  should  be  negotiated,  regulated, 
or  stipulated,  with  the  usurper  of  his  realms,  as  being 
void  of  all  rightful  and  lawful  authority.     On  the  20th 
day  of  July,  the  French  ambassadors  produced  their 
project  of  a  general  peace,  declaring  at  the  same  time, 
that,  should  it  not  be  accepted  before  the  last  day  of 
August,  France  would  not  hold  herself  bound  for  the 
conditions  she  now  offered :  but  Caunitz,  the  emperor's 
plenipotentiary,  protested  he  would  pay  no  regard  to  this 
limitation.     On  the  30th  of  August,  however,  he  deli- 
vered to  the  mediators,  an  ultimatum,  importing,  that 
he  adhered  to  the  treaties  of  Westphalia  and  Nimejguen, 
and  accepted  of  Strasbourg  with  its  appurtenances ;  that 
he  insisted  upon  the  restitution  of  Lorraine  to  the  prince 
of  that  name;   and  demanded,  that  the  church  and 
chapter  of  Liege  should  be  re-established  in  the  posses- 
sion of  their  incontestable  rights.    Next  day  the  French 
plenipotentiaries  declared,  that  the  month  of  August 
being  now  expired,  all  their  offers  were  vacated:  that 


314  HISTORY  OP  ENGLAND.  16W. 

therefore  the  king  of  France  would  reserve  Strasbourg; 
and  unite  it,  with .  its  dependencies,  to  his  crown  for 
ever :  that  in  other  respects  he  would  adhere  to  the  prcK 
ject,  and  restore  Barcelona  to  the  crown  of  Spain  ;  but 
that  these  terms  must  be  accepted  in  twenty  day&> 
otherwise  he  should  think  himself  at  liberty  to  recede; 
The  ministers  of  the  electors,  and  princes  of  the  empire* 
joined  in  a  written  remonstrance  to  the  Spanish  plenU 
potentiaries,  representing  the  inconveniences  and  dan- 
gers that  would   accrue  to  the  Germanic  body  from 
France*s  being  in  possession  of  Luxembourg,  and  e&± 
horting  them  in  the  strongest  terms  to  reject  all  offers 
of  an  equivalent  for  that  province.     They  likewise  pre- 
sented another  to  the  states-general,  requiring  them  to 
continue  the  war,  according  to  their  engagements,  until 
France  should  have  complied  with  the  preliminaries. 
No  regard,  however,  was  paid  to  either  of  these  addresses. 
Then  the  imperial  ambassadors  demanded  the  good 
offices  of  the  mediator,  on  certain  articles :  but  all  that 
he  could  obtain  of  France  was,  that  the  term  for  adjusting 
the  peace  between  her  and  the  emperor  should  be  pro^- 
longed  till  the  1st  day  of  November,  and  in  the  mean- 
time  an  armistice  be  punctually  observed.     Yet  even 
these  concessions  were  made,  on  condition  that  the 
treaty  with  England,  Spain,  and  Holland,  should  bte 
signed  on  that  day,  even  though  the  emperor  and  em- 
pire should  not  concur. 

§  LIV.  Accordingly,  on  the  20th  day  of  September, 
the  articles  were  subscribed  by  the  Dutch,  English, 
Spanish,  and  French  ambassadors,  while  the  imperial 
ministers  protested  against  the  transaction,  observing, 
this  was  the  second  time  that  a  separate  peace  had  been 
concluded  with  France ;  and  that  the  states  of  the  env- 
pire,  who  had  been  imposed  upon  through  their  own 
credulity,  would  not  for  the  future  be  so  easily  persuaded 
to  engage  in  confederacies.  In  certain  preparatory  ar- 
ticles settled  between  England  and  France,  king  William 


I«l  WILLIAM.:  SlS 

promised  to  pay  &  yearly  pension  to  queen  Mary  d*Est£ 
of  60,000/.  or  such  sum  as  should  be  established  for  that 
purpose  by  aet  of  parliament.  The  treaty  itself  consisted 
of  seventeen  articles.  The  French  king  engaged,  that 
he  would  not  disturb  or  disquiet  the  king  of  Great  Bri- 
tain in  the  possession  of  his  realms  or  government,  nor 
assist  his  enemies,  nor  favour  conspiracies  against  hfe 
person.  This  obligation  was  reciprocal.  A  free  com-"- 
merce  waa  restored.  Commissaries  were  appointed  to 
meet  at  London,  and  settle  the  pretensions  of  each  crowrt 
to  Hudson's-bay,  taken  by  the  French  during  the  late 
peace,  and  retaken  by  the  English  in  the  course  of  the 
war  ;  and  to  regulate  the  limits  of  the  places  to  be  re^ 
stored,  as  well  as  the  exchanges  to  be  made.  It  was  like1 
wise  stipulated,  that,  in  case  of  a  rupture,  six  months 
should  be  allowed  to  the  subjects  of  each  power  for  re^ 
moving  their  effects :  that  the  separate  articles  of  the 
treaty  of  Nimeguen,  relating  to  the  principality  of 
Orange,  should  be  entirely  executed ;  and  that  the  ra- 
tifications should  be  exchanged  in  three  weeks  from  the 
day  of  signing.  The  treaty  between  France  and  Hol- 
land imported  a  general  armistice,  a  perpetual  amity,  a 
mutual  restitution,  a  reciprocal  renunciation  of  all  pre- 
tensions upon  each  other,  a  confirmation  of  the  peace 
with  Savoy,  a  re-establishment  of  the  treaty  concluded 
between  France  and  Brandenburgh  in  the  year  l6jg9  a 
comprehension  of  Sweden,  and  all  those  powers ,  that 
should  he  named  before  the  ratification,  or  in  six  months 
after  the  conclusion  of  the  treaty.  Besides,  the  Dutch 
ministers  concluded  a  treaty  of  commerce  with  France,1 
which  was  immediately  put  in  execution.  Spain  had 
great  reason  to  be  satisfied  with  the  pacification,  by 
which  she  recovered  Gironne,  Roses,  Barcelona,  Luxem- 
bourg, Gharleroy,  Mons,  Courtray,  and  all  the  towns, 
fortresses,  and  territories,  taken  by  the  French  in  the 
province  of  Luxembourg,  Namur,  Brabant,  Flanders, 
and  Hainault,  except  eighty-two  towns  and  villages 


316  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  UB7. 

claimed  by  the  French :  this  dispute  was  left  to  the  de- 
cision of  commissaries ;  or,  in  case  they  should  not 
agree,  to  the  determination  of  the  states-general.  A 
remonstrance  in  favour  of  the  French  Protestant  refu- 
gees in  England,  Holland,  and  Germany,  was  delivered 
by  the  earl  of  Pembroke  to  the  mediators,  in  the  name 
of  the  Protestant  allies,  on  the  day  that  preceded  the 
conclusion  of  the  treaty ;  but  the  French  plenipoten- 
tiaries declared,  in  the  name  of  their  master,  that,  as  he 
did  not  pretend  to  prescribe  rules  to  king  William  about 
the  English  subjects,  he  expected  the  same  liberty  with 
respect  to  his  own.  No  other  effort  was  made  in  behalf 
of  those  conscientious  exiles :  the  treaties  were  ratified, 
and  the  peace  proclaimed  at  Paris  and  London. 

§  LV.  The  emperor  still  held  out,  and  perhaps  was 
encouraged  to  persevere  in  his  obstinacy  by  the  success 
of  his  arms  in  Hungary,  where  his  general,  prince  Eu- 
gene of  Savoy,  obtained  a  complete  victory  at  Zenta  over 
the  forces  of  the  grand  seignior,  who  commanded  his 
army  in  person.  In  this  battle,  which  was  fought  on  the 
1  lth  day  of  September,  the  grand  vizier,  the  aga  of  the 
♦janissaries,  seven-and-twenty  bashaws,  and  about  thirty 
thousand  men,  were  killed  or  drowned  in  the  river 
Theysse :  six  thousand  were  wounded  or  taken,  toge- 
ther with  all  their  artillery,  tents,  baggage,  provision, 
and  ammunition,  the  grand  seignior  himself  escaping 
with  difficulty :  a  victory  the  more  glorious  and  accept- 
able, as  the  Turks  had  a  great  superiority  in  point  of 
number*  and  as  the  imperialists  did  not  lose  a  thousand 
men  during  the  whole  action.  The  emperor,  perceiving 
that  the  event  of  this  battle  had  no  effect  in  retarding 
the  treaty,  thought  proper  to  make  use  of  the  armistice^ 
and  continue  the  negotiation  after  the  fore-mentioried 
treaties  had  been  signed.  This  was  likewise  the  case 
with  the  princes  of  the  empire ;  though  those  of  the 
Protestant  persuasion  complained  that  their  interest  was 
neglected.     In  one  of  the  articles  of  the  treaty  it  was 


1607.  WILLIAM.  317 

stipulated,  that,  in  the  places  to  be  restored  by  France, 
the  Roman  Catholic  religion  should  continue  as  it  had 
been  re-established.  The  ambassadors  of  the  Protestant 
princes  joined  in  a  remonstrance,  demanding  that  the 
Lutheran  religion  should  be  restored  in  those  places 
where  it  had  formerly  prevailed  ; .  but  this  demand  was 
rejected,  as  being  equally  disagreeable  to  France  and  the 
emperor.  Then  they  refused  to  sign  the  treaty,  which 
was  now  concluded  betweea  France,  the  emperor,  and 
the  Catholic  princes  of  the  empire.  By  this  pacifica- 
tion, Triers,  the  palatinate,  and  Lorraine,  were  restored 
to  their  respective  owners.  The  countries  of  Spanheim 
and  Veldentz,  together  with  the  dutchy  of  Deux  Ponts, 
were  ceded  to  the  king  of  Sweden,  Francis  Louis  Pa-r 
latine  was  confirmed  in  the  electorate  of  Cologn ;  and 
cardinal  Furstemberg  restored  to  all  his  rights  and  be* 
nefices.  The  claims  of  the  dutchess  of  Orleans. upon 
the  palatinate  were  referred  to  the  arbitration  of  France 
and  the  emperor ;  and  in  the  meantime,  the  elector 
1  palatine  agreed  to  supply  her  highness  with  an  annuity 
of  one  hundred  thousand  florins.  The  ministers  of  the 
Protestant  princes  published  a  formal  declaration  against 
the  clause  relating  to  religion,  and  afterward  solemnly 
protested  against  the  manner  in  which  the  negotiation 
had  been  conducted.  Such  was  the  issue  of  a  long  and 
bloody  war,  which  had  drained  England  of  her  wealth 
and  people,  almost  entirely  ruined  her  commerce,  de- 
bauched her  morals,  by  encouraging  venality  and  corrup- 
tion, and  entailed  upon  her  the  curse  of  foreign  con- 
nexions, as  well  as  a  national  debt,  which  was  gradually 
increased  to  an  intolerable  burden.  After  all  the  blood 
and  treasure  which  had  been  expended,  William's  am- 
bition and  revenge  remained  unsatisfied.  Nevertheless, 
he  reaped  the  solid  advantage  of  seeing  himself  firmly 
established  on  the  English  throne ;  and  the  confederacy, 
though  not  successful  in  every  instance,  accomplished 
their  great  aim  pf  putting  a  stop  to  the  encroachments 
vol.  i.  *  y    . 


318  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1607. 

of  the  French  monarch.  They  mortified  his  vanity, 
they  humbled  his  pride  and  arrogance,  and  compelled 
him  to  disgorge  the  acquisitions  which,  like  a  robber,  he 
had  made,  in  violation  of  public  faith,  justice,  and  huma- 
nity. Had  the  allies  been  true  to  one  another ;  had 
they  acted  from  genuine  zeal  for  the  common  interests 
of  mankind ;  and  prosecuted  with  vigour  the  plan  which 
was  originally  concerted,  Lewis  would  in  a  few  campaigns 
have  been  reduced  to  the  most  abject  state  of  disgrace, 
despondence,  and  submission  ;  for  he  was  destitute  of 
true  courage  and  magnanimity.  King  William,  hav- 
ing finished  this  important  transaction,  returned  to 
England  about  the  middle  of  November,  and  was  re- 
ceived in  London  amidst  the  acclamations  of  the  people, 
who  now  again  hailed  him  as  their  deliverer  from  a  war, 
by  the  continuance  of  which  they  must  have  been  infal- 
libly beggared. 


CHAP.  VI. 

\  I.  State  of  parties— §  II.  Characters  of  the  ministers— §  III.  The 
commons  reduce  tho  number  of  standing  forces  to  ten  thousand — 
§  IV.  They  establish  the  civil  list ;  and  assign  funds  for  paying  the 
national  debts — §  V.  They  take  cognizance  of  fraudulent  endorse- 
ments of  exchequer  bills — §  VI.  A  new  East  India  company  consti- 
tuted by  act  of  parliament— §V|JU  Proceedings  against  a  book  written 
by  William  Molineux  of  Dublin — §  VI II.  And  against  certain  smugglers 
of  alamodes  and  lustrings  from  France — §  IX.  Society  for  the  reforma- 
tion of  manners — §  X.The  earl  of  Portland  resigns  bis  employments — 
§  XI.  The  king  disowns  the  Scottish  trading  company—  §  XII.  He 
embarks  for  Holland— §  XIII.  First  treaty  of  partition— §  XIV. 
Intrigues  of  France  at  the  court  of  Madrid — §  XV.  King  William  is 
thwarted  by  his  new  parliament — §  XVI.  He  is  obliged  to  send  away 
his  Dutch  guards — §  XVII.  The  commons  address  the  king  against 
the  Papists— §  XVIII.  The  parliament  prorogued— §  XIX.  The 
Scottish  company  make  a  settlement  on  the  isthmus  of  Daricri;  — 
§  XX.  Which,  however,  they  are  compelled  to  abandon — §  XXI. 
Remonstrances  of  the  Spanish  court  against  the  treaty  of  partition — 
§  XXII.  The  commons  persist  in  their  resolntions  to  mortify  the 
king.-— §  TfiaSJU'  I|lclmry  mto  tne  expedition  of  captain  Kidd — 
§  XXIV.  A  motion  made  against  Burnet,  bishop  of  Saruai  -§  XXV. 


H»7.  WILLUlMt.  SlJI 

Inquiry  into  the  Irish  forfeitures— 4  XX  Vl.  Tbe  commons  pass  a  bill 
of  resumption— §  XXVII.  And  a  severe  bill  against  Papists-* 
§  XXVIII.  The  old  East  India  company  re-established — §  XXIX. 
'  dangerous  ferment  in  Scotland— $  XXX.  Lord  Somen  dismissed 
from  his  employments — §  XXXI.  Second  treaty  of  partition— 
§  XXXII.  Death  of  the  duke  of  Gloucester— §  XXXUL  The  king 
sends  a  fleet  into  the  Baltic,  to  the  assistance  of  the  Swedes — 
§  XX  XIV.  Tbo  second  treaty  of  partition  generally  disagreeable  to 
the  European  powers— §  XXXV.  The  French  interest  prevails  at  the 
court  of  Spain— §  XXXVI.  King  William  finds  means  to  allay  the 
heats  in  Scotland— §  XXXVII.  The  king  or  Spain  dies,  after  having 
bequeathed  his  dominions,  by  will,  to  tbe  duke  of  Anjou— ^  XXXVIII. 
The  French  king's  apology  for  accepting  the  will— §  XXXIX.  The 
states-general  own  Philip  as'  king  of  Spain — §  XL.  A  new  ministry 
and  a  hew  parliament — §  Xlil.  The  commons  unpropitious  to  the 
court— §  XLII.  The  lords  are  more  condescending— §  XLIII.  Ant 
intercepted  letter  from  the  earl  of  Mitfort  to  his  brother— §  XLIV.  Suc- 
cession of  the  crown  settled  upon  the  princess  Sophia,  electress-dowa- 
ger  of  Hanover,  and  the  Protestant  heirs  of  her  body— §  X.LV.  The 
dutchess  of  Savoy  protests  against  this  act— %  XLYI..  Ineffectual  nego- 
tiation with  France — §  XLVII.  Severe  addresses  from  both  houses  in 
relation  to  the  partition-treaty— $  XLVIII.  William  is  obliged  to 
acknowledge  the  king  of  Spain — §  XL1X.  The  two  houses  seem  to 
enter  into  the  king's  measures — §  L.  Tbe  commons  resolve  to  wreak 
their  vengeance  on  the  old  ministry — §  LI.  The  earls  of  Portland  and 
Orford,  the  lords  Soraers  and  Halifax,  are  impeached—^  LII.  Dis- 
putes between  the  two  houses—  §  LI  II.  The  house  of  peers  acquits' 
the  impeached  lords-*-§UV,  Petition  of  Kent — §  LV.  Favourable 
end  of  the  session — §  EvIT Progress  of  prince  Eugene  in  Italy — 
§LVII;  Sketch  of  the  situation  of  affairs  in  Eur6pe— §  LVIII.  Trea- 
ty ef  alliance  between  tbe  emperor  and  the  maritime  powers — fr  LIX« 
Death*  of  king  James — §  LX,  Tbe  French  king  owns  the  pretended 
prince  of  Wales  as  king  of  England — §^XI.  Addresses  to  king 
William  on  that  subject— §  LXII.  New  parliament— §  LXIII.  The 
king's  last  speech  to  both  houses  received  with  great  applause — 
§  LX1V.  Great  harmony  between  the  king  and  parliament — §  LXV. 
The  two  houses  pass  the  bill  of  abjuration — §-LXVI.  The  lower  house 
justifies  the  proceedings  of  the  commons  in  the  preceding  parliament— 
§  LXVII.^Affairs  of  Ireland— §  LX^m  The  king  recommends  a 
union  oTtoe  two  kingdoms — §  LXTX.  He  falls  from  his  horse — §  LXX. 
His  death— JLXXI.  Andxharacter. 

§  L  When  the  king  opened  the  session  of  parliament 
on  the  3d  day  of  December,  he  told  them  the  war  wU 
brought  to  the  end  they  all  proposed,  namely,  an  ho- 
nourable peace.  He  gave  them  to  understand  there  was 
a  considerable  debt  on  account  of  the  fleet  and  army ; 
that  the  revenues  of  the  crown  had  been  anticipated ;  he 

y  2 


320  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  HOT. 

expressed  his  hope,  that  they  would  provide  for  him 
during  his  life,  in  such  a  manner  as  would  conduce  to 
his  own  honour,  and  that  of  the  government.  He  re- 
commended the  maintenance  of  a  considerable  navy, 
and  gave  it  as  his  opinion,  that  for  the  present,  England 
could  not  be  safe  without  a  standing  army.  He  promised 
to  rectify  such  corruptions  and  abuses  as  might  have 
crept  into  any  part  of  the  administration  during  the  war ; 
and  effectually  to  discourage  profaneness  and  immora- 
lity* Finally,  he  assured  them,  that  as  he  had  rescued 
their  religion,  laws,  and  liberties,  when .  they  were  in 
the  extremest  danger,  so  he  should  place  the  glory  of 
his  reign  in  preserving  and  leaving  them  entire  to  latest 
posterity.  To  this  speech  the  commons  replied  in  an 
address,  by  a  compliment  of  congratulation  upon  the 
peace,  and  an  assurance  that  they  would  be  ever  ready 
to  assist  and  support  his  majesty,  who  had  confirmed 
them  in  the  quiet  possession  of  their  rights  and  liberties, 
and,  by  putting  an  end  to  the  war,  fully  completed  the 
work  of  their  deliverance.  Notwithstanding  these  ap- 
pearances of  good  humour,  the  majority  of  the  house, 
and  indeed  of  the  whole  nation,  were  equally  alarmed 
and  exasperated  at  a  project  for  maintaining  a  standing 
army,  which  was  countenanced  at  court,  and  even 
recommended  by  the  king,  in  his  speech  to  the  parlia- 
ment. William's  genius  was  altogether  military.  He 
could  not  bear  the  thoughts  of  being  a  kihg  without 
power.  He  could  not,  without  reluctance,  dismiss 
those  officers  who  had  given  so  many  proofs  of  their 
courage  and  fidelity.  He  did  not  think  himself  safe 
upon  the  naked  throne,  in  a  kingdom  that  swarmed 
with  malecontents,  who  had  so  often  conspired  against 
his  person  and  government.  He  dreaded  the  ambition 
and  known  perfidy  of  the  French  king,  who  still  retain- 
ed a  powerful  army.  He  foresaw  that  a  reduction  of 
the  forces  would  lessen  his  importance  both  at  home 
and  abroad  ;  diminish  the  dependance  upon  his  govern- 


urn.  William.  321 

roent ;  and  disperse  those  foreigners  in  Whose  attach- 
ment he  chiefly  confided.  He  communicated  his  senti- 
ments on  this  subject  to  his  confidant,  the  earl  of  Sun- 
derland, who  knew  by  experience  the  aversion  of  the 
people  to  a  standing  army  ;  nevertheless,  he  encouraged 
him  with  hope  of  success,  on  the  supposition  that  the 
commons  would  see  the  difference  between  an  army 
raised  by  the  king's  private  authority,  and  a  body  of  ve* 
teran  troops  maintained  by  consent  of  parliament,  for  the 
security  of  the  kingdom.  This  was  a  distinction  to 
which  the  people  paid  no  regard.  All  the  jealousy  of 
former  parliaments  seemed  to  be  roused  by  the  bare  pro- 
posal: arid  this  was  inflamed  by  a  national  prejudice 
against  the  refugees,  in  whose  favour  the  king  had  be- 
trayed repeated  marks  of  partial  indulgence.  They  were 
submissive,  tractable,  and  wholly  dependant  upon  his 
will  and  generosity.  The  Jacobites  failed  not  to  cherish 
the  seeds  of  dissatisfaction,  and  reproach* the  whigs 
who  countenanced  this  measure.  They  branded  that 
party  with  apostacy  from  their  former  principles. 
They  observed,  that  the  very  persons  who,  in  the  late 
reigns,  endeavoured  to  abridge  the  prerogative,  and  de- 
prive the  king  of  that  share  of  porter'  which  was  abso- 
lutely necessary  to  actuate  the  machine  of  government, 
were  now  become  advocates  for  maintaining  a  standing 
army  in  time  of  peace ;  nay,  and  impudently  avowed, 
that  their  complaisance  to  the  court  in  this  particular, 
was  owing  to  their  desire  of  excluding  from  all  share  in 
the  administration,  a  faction  disaffected  to  his  majesty, 
which  might  mislead  him  into  more  pernicious  measures. 
The  majority  of  those  who  really  entertained  revolution- 
principles  opposed  the  court,  from  apprehensions  that  a 
standing  army,  once  established,  would  take  root,  and 
grow  iftto  a  habitual  maxim  of  government ;  that, 
should  the  people  be  disarmed,  and  the  sword  left  in  the 
hands  of  mercenaries,  the  liberties  of  the  nation  must 
be  entirely  at  the  mercy  of  him  by  whom  those  merce- 


322  HISTORY  Of  ENGLAND.  1097. 

naries  should  be  commanded.  .  They  might  overawe; 
elections,  dictate  to  parliaments,  arid  establish  a  tyraa- 
ny,  before  the  people  could  take  any  measures  for  their 
own  protection.    They  could  not  help  thinking  it  was 
possible  to  form,  a  militia,  that,  with  the  concurrence  of 
a?  fleet,  might  effectually  protect  the  kingdom'  from  the 
dangers  of  an  invasion.     They  firmly  believed,  that  a 
militia  might  be  regularly  trained  to  arms,  so  as  t6  ac- 
quire the  dexterity  of  professed  soldiers  :  and  they  did 
not  doilbt  they  would  siirpkss  those  hirelings  in  cou- 
rage, considering  that  they  would  be  animated  by  every 
concurring  rtiotive  'of  interest,  sentiment,  and  affection. 
Nay,  .they  argued  thatBritain,  surrounded  as  it  was  by 
a  boisterous  sea,  secured  by  floating  bulwarks,  abound- 
ing with  stout  and  hardy  inhabitants,  did  not  deserve  to 
be  free,  if  her  sons  could  not  protect  thdr  liberties  with- 
out the  assistance  of  mercenaries,  who  were,  indeed,  the 
only  slaves  in  the  kingdom.    Yet,  among  the  genuine 
friends  of  their  country,  some  individuals  espoused  the 
opposite  maxims.    They  observed,  that  the  military 
system  of  every  government  in  Europe  was  now  altered : 
that  war  was  become  a  trade,  and  discipline  a  science 
not  to  be  learned  but  by  those  who  made  it  their  sole 
profession ;  that,   therefore,  while  France  kept  up  a 
large  standing  army  of  veterans,  ready  to  embark  on  the 
opposite  coast,  it  would  be  absolutely  necessary,  for  the 
safety  of  the  nation,  to  maintain  a  small  standing  force, 
which  should  be  voted  in  parliament  from  year  to  year. 
They  might  have  suggested  another  expedient,  which  in 
a  few  years  would  have  produced  a  militia  of  disciplined 
men.  Had  the  soldiers  of  this  small  standing  army  been 
enlisted  for  a  term  of  years,  at  the  expiration  of  which 
they  might  have  claimed  their  discharge,  volunteers 
would  have  offered  themselves  from  all  parts  of  the 
kingdom,  even  from  the  desire  of  learning  the  use  and 
exercise  of  arms,  the  ambition  of  being  concerned  in 
scenes  of  actual  service,  and  the  chagrin  of  little  disap- 


l<307.  WILLIAM.  323 

pointments,  pr  temporary  disgust*  which  ypt  Qopld  not 
have  impelled  them  to  enlist  as  soldiers  on  the  common 
terms  of  .perpetual  slavery.  In  consequence  of  such  3 
succession,  the  whole  kingdom  would  soon  have  h?$v\ 
Stocked  with  members  of  a  disciplined  militia,  equal,  if 
not  superior,  to  any  army  of  professed  soldiers.  Bu| 
this  scheme  would  have  defeated  the  purpose  of  the  go- 
vernment,, which  was  more  afraid  of  domestic  foes  than 
of  foreign  enemies ;  and  industriously  avoided  every  plan 
of  this,  nature,  which  could  contribute  to  render  the 
malecontents  of  the  nation  more  formidable* 

§  I  J.  Before  we  proceed  to  the  transactions  of  parlia- 
ment in  this  session,  it  may  not  be  amiss  to  sketch  the 
outlines  of  the  ministry,  as  it  stood  at  this  juncture. 
The  king's  affection  for  the  earl  of  Portland  had  begun 
to  abate,  in  proportion  as  his  esteem  for  Sunderland 
increased,  together  with  his  consideration  for  Mrs:  Vil- 
hers,  who  had  been  distinguished  by  some  particular 
marks  of  his  majesty's  favour.  These  two  favourites 
are  said  to  have  supplanted  Portland,  whose  place  in  the 
king's  bosom  was  now  filled  by  Van  Keppel,  a  gentleman 
of  Guelderland,  who  had  first  served  his  majesty  as  a 
page,  and  afterward  acted  as  private  secretary.  The 
earl  of  Portland  growing  troublesome,  from  his  jea- 
lousy of  this  rival,  the  king  resolved  to  send  him  into 
honourable  exile,  in  quality  of  an  ambassador  extraordi- 
nary to  the  court  of  France  ;  and  Trumbal,  his  friend 
and  creature,  was  dismissed  from  the  office  of  secretary, 
which  the  king  conferred  upon  Vernon,  a  plodding  man 
of  business,  who  had  acted  as  under-secretary  to  the 
duke  of  Shrewsbury.  This  nobleman  rivalled  the  earl 
of  Sunderland  in  his  credit  at  the  council-board,  and 
was,  supported  by  Somers,  lord-chancellor  of  England, 
by  Russel,  now  earl  of  Orford,  first  lord  of  the  admiral- 
ty, and  Montague,  chancellor  of  the  exchequer.  Somers 
was  an  upright  judge,  a  plausible  statesman,  a  consum- 
mate courtier,  affable,  mild,  and  insinuating.    Orford 


J*24  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND,  •  1(907. 

appears  to  have  been  rough,  turbulent,  factious,  and 
shallow.  Montague  had  distinguished  himself  early  by 
his  poetical  genius ;  but  he  soon  converted  his  attention 
to  the  cultivation  of  more  solid  talents.  He  rendered 
himself  remarkable  for  his  eloquence,  discernment,  and 
knowledge  of  the  English  constitution.  To  a  delicate 
taste,  he  united  an"eager  appetite  for  political  studies. 
The  first  catered  for  the  enjoyments  of  fancy ;  the  other 
Was  subservient  to  his  ambition.  He,  at  the  same  time, 
was  the  distinguished  encourager  of  the  liberal  arts,  and 
the  professed  patron  of  projectors.  In  his  private  de- 
portment, he  was  liberal,  easy,  and  entertaining ;  as  a 
statesman,  bold,  dogmatical,  and  aspiring. 

§  III.  The  terrors  of  a  standing  army  had  produced 
iuch  a  universal  ferment  in  the  nation,  that  the  depen- 
dants of  the  court  in  the  house  of  commons  durst  not 
openly  oppose  the  reduction  of  the  forces :  but  they 
shifted  the  battery,  and  employed  all  their  address  in 
persuading  the  house  to  agree,  that  a  very  small  number 
should  be  retained.     When  the  commons  voted,  That 
all  the  forces  raised  since  the  year  1680,  should  be  dis- 
banded, the  courtiers  desired  the  vote  might  be  recom- 
mitted, on  pretence  that  it  restrained  the  king  to  the 
old  tory  regiments,  on  whose  fidelity  he  could  not  rely. 
This  motion,  however,  was  overruled  by  a  considerable 
majority.     Then  they  proposed  an  amendment,  which 
was  rejected;  and  afterward  moved,, That  the  sum  of 
500,000/.  per  annum  should  be  granted  for  the  mainte- 
nance of  guards  and  garrisons.    This  provision  would 
have  maintained  a  very  considerable  number ;  but  they 
were  again  disappointed,  and  fain  to  embrace  a  composi- 
tion with  the  other  party,  by  which  350,000/.  were  al- 
lotted for  the  maintenanc    of  ten  thousand  men  ;  and 
they  afterward  obtained  an  addition  of  three  thousand 
marines.    The  king  was  extremely  mortified  at  these 
resolutions  of  the  commons ;  and  even  declared  to  his 
particular  friends,  that  he  would  never  have  in  termed- 


IG97.  WILLIAM.  325 

died  with  the  affairs  of  the  nation,  had  he  foreseen  they 
would  make  such  returns  of  ingratitude  and  distrust 
His  displeasure  was  aggravated  by  the  resentment  ex- 
pressed against  Sunderland,  who  was  supposed  to  have 
advised  the  unpopular  measure  of  retaining  a  standing 
army.  This  nobleman,  dreading  the  vengeance  of  the 
commons,  resolved  to  avert  the  fury  of  the  impending 
storm,  by  resigning  his  office,  and  retiring  from. court, 
contrary  to  the  entreaties  of  his  friends,  and  the  earnest 
desire  of  his  majesty. 

§  IV,  The  house  of  commons,  in  order  to  sweeten 
the  unpalatable  cup  they  had  presented  to  the  king, 
voted  the  sum  of  700,000/.  per  annum  for  the  support 
of  the  civil  list,  distinct  from  all  other  services.  Then 
they  passed  an  act  prohibiting  the  currency  of  silver 
hammered  coin,  including  a  clause  for  making  out  new. 
exchequer  bills,  in  lieu  of  those  which  were  or  might  be* 
filled  up  with  endorsements :  they  framed  another  to 
open  the  correspondence  with  France,  under  a  variety  of 
provisos:  a  third  for  continuing  the  emprisonnpent  of 
certain  persons  who  had  been  concerned  in  the  late  con- 
spiracy:  a  fourth  granting  farther  time  for  adnainteter- 
ing  baths  with  respect  to  tallies  and  orders  in  the  exche- 
quer and  bank  of  England.  These  bills  having  received 
the  royal  assent,  they  resolved  to  grant  a  supply,  which, 
together  with  the  funds  already  settled  for  that  purpose, 
should  be  sufficient  to  answer  and  cancel  all  exchequer 
bilte,  to  the  amount  of  2,700,000/.  Another  supply 
was  voted  for  the  payment  and  reduction  of  the  army,  in- 
cluding half-pay  to  such  commission-officers  as  were  natu- 
ral-born subjects  of  England.  They  granted  1 ,400,000/* 
to  make  good  deficiencies.  They  resolved,  That  the 
sum  of  2,348,102/.  was  necessary  to  pay  off  arrears, 
subsistence,  contingencies,  general  officers,  guards,  and 
garrisons;  of  which  sum  855,502/.  remained  in  the 
hands  of  the  paymaster.  Then  they  took  into  considera- 
tion the  subsidies  due  to  foreign  powers,  and  the  sums 


£3ft  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1607. 

owing  to  contractors. for  bread  and  forage.    Examining 
farther  the  debts  of  the  nation,  they  found  the  general 
debt  of  thenavy  amountedto  1,302,742k    Thatof  the 
ordnance  was  equal  to  204,  J  57/.  The  transport-debt  con- 
tracted for  the  reduction  of  Ireland,  and  other  services, 
did  not  fall  short  of  466,493/. ;  and  they  owed  49^929^ 
for  quartering  and  clothing  the  army,  which  had  been 
raised  by  one  act  of  parliament  in. the  year  1677,  and 
disbanded  by  another  in  the  year  1679.     As  this  enor- 
mous load  of  debt  could  not  be  discharged  at  once,*  the 
commons  passed  *a  number  of  votes  for  raising  sums  of 
money,  by  which  it  was  considerably  lightened;  and  set- 
tled the  funds  for  those  purposes  by  the  continuation  of 
the  land-tax,  and  other  impositions.    With  respect  to 
the  civil  list,  it  was  raised  by  a  new  subsidy  of  tonnage 
and  poundage,  the  hereditary  and  temporary  excise,* a 
weekly  portion  from  the  revenue  of  the  posb-ofpce,  the 
first-fruits  and  tenths  of  the  clergy,  the  fines  in  the  alien- 
ation-office, and  post-fines,  the  revenue  of  the  wine- 
licence,  money  arising  by  sheriffs,  proffers,  and  composi- 
tions in  the  exchequer,  and  seizures,  the  income  of  the 
dutchy  of  Cornwall,  the  rents  of  all  other  crown-lands  in 
England  or  Wales,  and  the  duty  of  four  and  a  half  per 
cent,  upon  specie  from  Barbadoes  and  the  Leeward 
islands.     The  bill  imported,  That  the  overplus  arising 
from  these  funds  should  be  accounted  for  to  parliament. 
Six  hundred  thousand  pounds  of  this  money  was  allotted 
for  the  purposes  of  the  civil  list :  the  rest  was  granted 
for  the  jointure  of  50,000/.  per  annum,  to  be  paid 
to  queen   Mary  d'Este,  according  to  the  stipulation 
at  Ryswick ;  and  to  maintain  a  court  for  the  duke 
of  Gloucester,  son  of  the  princess  Anne  of  Denmark,* 
now  in  the  ninth  year  of  his  age :  but  the  jointure  was 
never  paid ;  nor  would  the  king  allow  above  15,000/.  per 
annum  for  the  use  of  the  duke  of  Gloucester,  to  whom 
Burnet,  bishop  of  Salisbury,  was  appointed  preceptor. 
§  V.  The  commons  having  discussed  the  ways  and 


vmt  WILLIAM.  327 

ipeans  for  raising  the  supplies  of  the  ensuing  year,  which 
rote  almost  to  five  millions,  took  cognizance  of  some 
fraudulent  endorsements  of  exchequer-bills,  a  species  of 
forgery  which  had  been  practised  by  a  confederacy,  con* 
sisting  of  Charles  Duncomb,  receiver-general  of  the 
excise,  Bartholomew  Burton,  who  possessed  a  place  in 
that  branch  of  the  revenue,  John  Knight,  treasurer  of 
the  customs*  and  Reginald  Marriot,  a  deputy-teUer  of 
the  exchequer.  This  last  became  evidence,  and  the 
proof  turning  out  very  strong  and  full,  the  house  resolv- 
ed to  m&ke  examples  of  the  delinquents/  Duncomb 
and  Knight,  both  members  of  parliament,  were  expelled, 
and  committed  to  the  Tower :  Burton  was  sent  to  New- 
gate ;  arid  bills  of  pains  and  penalties  were  ordered  to 
be  brought  in  against  them.  The  first,  levelled  at  Dun- 
comb,  passed  the  lower  house,  though  not  without  great 
opposition ;  but  was  rejected  in  the  house  of  lords  by 
the  majority  of  one  voice.  Duncomb,  who  was  ex- 
tremely rich,  is  said  to  have  paid  dear  for  his  escape. 
The  other  two  bills  met  with  the  same  fate.  The  peers 
discharged  Duncomb  from  his  confinement :  but  he  was 
recommitted  by  the  commons,  and  remained  in  custody 
till  the  end  of  the  session.  While  the  commons  were 
employed  oh  ways  and  means,  some  of  the  members  in 
the  opposition  proposed,  that  one-fourth  part  of  the 
money  arising  from  improper  grants  of  the  crown  should 
be  appropriated  to  the  service  of  the  public ;  but  this 
was  a  very  unpalatable  expedient,  as  it  affected  not  only 
the  whigs  of  king  William's  reign,  but  also  the  tories 
who  had  been  gratified  by  Charles  II.  and  his  brother* 
A  great  number  of  petitions  were  presented  against  this 
measure,  and  so  many  difficulties  raised,  that  both  par^ 
ties  agreed  to  lay  it  aside.  In  the  course  of  this  inquiry, 
they  discovered  that  one  Railton  held  a  grant  in  trust 
for  Mr.  Montague,  chancellor  of  the  exchequer.   A  mo* 

*  Burnet.    Kennet.    State  Tracts.     Burchct.    Lives  of  the  Admirals, 
Tindal.    Ralph.    Voltaire. 


328  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND,  MSB/ 

tion  Was  immediately  made,  that  he  should  withdraw ; 
but  passed  in  the  negative  by  a  great  majority.  Far 
from  prosecuting  this  minister,  the  house  voted  it  was 
their  opinion,  That  Mr.  Montague,  for  his  good  services 
to  the  government,  did  deserve  his  majesty's  favour, 

§  VI.  This  extraordinary  vote  was  a  sure  presage  trf 
success  in  the  execution  of  a  scheme  which  Montague 
had  concerted  against  the  East  India  company.  They" 
had  been  sounded  about  advancing  a  sum  of  money  for 
the  public  service,  by  way  of  loan,  in  consideration  of  a 
parliamentary  settlement ;  and  they  offered  to  raise 
700,000/.  on  that  condition :  but,  before  they  formed 
this  resolution,  another  body  of  merchants,  under  the 
auspices  of  Montague,  offered  to  lend  two  millions  at 
eight  per  cent.,  provided  they  might  be  gratified  with 
an  exclusive  privilege  of  trading  to  die  East  Indies. 
This  proposal  was  very  well  received  by  the  majority  in 
the  house  of  commons.  A  bill  for  this  purpose  was 
brought  in,  with  additional  clauses  of  regulation.  A 
petition  was  presented  by  the  old  company,  representing 
their  rights  and  claims  under  so  many  royal  charters ; 
the  regard  due  to  the  property  of  above  a  thousand 
families  interested  in  the  stock  ;  as  also  to  the  company's 
property  in  India,  amounting  to  44,000/.  of  yearly  re- 
venue. They  alleged  they  had  expended  a  million 
in  fortifications:  that  during  the  war  they  had  lost 
twelve  great  ships,  worth  1,500,000/.:  that  since  the 
last  subscription,  they  had  contributed  295,000/.  to  the 
customs,  with  above  85,000/.  in  taxes:  that  they  had 
furnished  six  thousand  barrels  of  gunpowder  on  a  very 
pressing  occasion :  and  80,000/.  for  the  circulation  of 
exchequer  bills,  at  a  very  critical  juncture,  by  desire  of 
the  lords  of  the  treasury,  who  owned  that  their  compli* 
ance  was  a  very  important  service  to  the  government. 
No  regard  being  paid  to  their  remonstrances,  they  under- 
took to  raise  the  loan  of  two  millions,  and  immediately 
subscribed  200,000/.  as  the  first  payment.    The  two 


1698.  WILLIAM.  329 

proposals  being  compared  and  considered  t>y  the  house, 
the  majority  declared  for  the  bill,  which  was  passed,  and 
sent  up  to  the  house  of  lords.  (  There  the  old  company 
delivered  another  petition,  and  was  heard  by  counsel ; 
nevertheless,  the  bill  made  its  way,  though  not  without 
opposition,  and  a  formal  protestation  by  one-and-twenty. 
lords,  who  thought  it  was  a  hardship  upon  the  present 
company ;  and  doubted  whether  the  separate  trade  -al- 
lowed in  the  bill,  concurrent  with  a  joint  stock,  might 
not  prove  such  an  inconsistency  as  would  discourage  the. 
subscription.  This  act,  by  which  the  old  company:  was 
dissolved,  in  a  great  measure  blasted  the  reputation  of 
the  whigs,  which  had  for.  some  time  been  on  the  decline. 
with  the  people.  They  had  stood  up  as  advocates  for  a 
standing  army :  they  now  unjustly  superseded  the  East 
India  company :  they  were  accused  of  having  robbed 
the  public  by  embezzling  the  national  treasure,  and 
amassing  wealth  by  usurious  contracts,  at  the  expense  of 
their  fellow-subjects,  groaning  under  the  most  oppressive 
burdens.  Certain  it  is,  they  were  at  this  period  the 
most  mercenary  and  corrupt  undertakers  that  ever  had 
been' employed  by  any  king  or  administration,  since  the 
first  establishment  of  the  English  monarchy. 

§  VII,  The  commons  now  transferred  their  attention 
to  certain  objects  in  which  the  people  of  Ireland  were 
interested.  Colonel  Michelborne,  who  had  been  joint 
governor  of  Londonderry  with  Dr.  Walker,  during  thQ 
siege  of  that  place,  petitioned  the  house  in  behalf  of 
himself,  his  officers,  and  soldiers,  to  whom  a  considera- 
ble sum  of  money  was  due  for  subsistence ;  and  the  city 
itself  implored  the  mediation  of  the  commons  with  his 
majesty,  that  its  services  and  sufferings  might  be  taken 
into  consideration*  The  house  having  examined  the 
allegations. contained  in  both  petitions,  presented  an  ad- 
dress to  the  king,  recommending  the  citizens  of  Lon- 
donderry to  his  majesty's  favour;  that  they  might  no 
longer  remain  a  ruinous  spectacle  to  all,  a  scorn  to  their 


330  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND-  1608- 

enemies,  and  a  discouragement  to  well-affected  subjects : 
they  likewise  declared,  that  the  governor  and  garrison 
did  deserve  some  special  marks  of  royal  favour,  for  a 
lasting  monument  to  posterity.  To  this  address  the 
king  replied,  that  he  would  consider  them,  according  to 
the  desire  of  the  commons.  William  Molineux,  a  gen-* 
tleman  of  Dublin,  having  published  a  book  to  prove  that 
the  kingdom  of  Ireland  was  independent  of  the  parlia- 
ment of  England,  the  house  appointed  a  committee  to 
inquire  into  the  cause  and  nature  of  this  performance^ 
An  address  was  voted  to  the  king,  desiring  he  would 
give  directions  for  the  discovery  arid  punishment  of  the 
author.  Upon  the  report  of  the  committee,  the  corn- 
toons,  in  a  body,  presented  an  stddress  to  bis  majesty, 
representing  the  dangerous  attempts  which  had  been 
lately  made  by  some  of  his  subjects  in  Ireland,  to  shako 
off  their  subjection  and  dependance  upon  England ; 
attempts  which  appeared  not  only  from  the  bold  and  per- 
nicious assertions  contained  in  a  book  lately  published, 
but  more  fully  and  authentically  by  some  votes  and  pro- 
ceedings of  the  commons  in  Ireland.  These  had,  during 
their  last  session,  transmitted  an  act  for  the  betted  secu- 
rity of  his  majesty's  person  and  government,  whereby  aft 
English  act  of  parliament  was  pretended  to  be  re-enact- 
ed, with  alterations  obligatory  on  the  courts  of  justice 
arid  the  great  seal  of  England.  The  English  commons, 
therefore,  besought  his  majesty  to  give  effectual  orders 
for  preventing  any  such  encroachments  for  the  future, 
and  the  pernicious  consequences  of  what  was  past,  by 
punishing  those  who  had  been  guilty  thereof:  that  he 
would  take  care  to  see  the  laws  which  direct  and  restrain 
the  parliament  of  Ireland  punctually  observed,  and  dis- 
courage every  thing  which  might  have  a  tendency  to 
lessen  the  dependance  of  Ireland  upon  England.  This 
remonstrance  was  graciously  received,  and  the  king  pro- 
mised to  comply  with  their  request. 
§  VIII.  The  jealousy  which  the  commons  entertained 


iew.  WILLIAM.  331 

of  the  government  in  Ireland,  animated  them  to  take 
other  measures,  that  ascertained  the  subjection  of  that 
kingdom.  Understanding  that  the  Irish  had  established* 
divers  woollen  manufactories,  they,  in  another  address, 
entreated  his  majesty  to  take  measures  for  discouraging 
the  woollen  manufactures  in  Ireland,  as  they  interfered 
with  those  of  England,  and  promote  the  linen  manufac- 
ture, which  would  be  profitable  to  both  nations.  At  the 
same  time,  receiving  information  that  the  French  had 
seduced  some  English  manufacturers,  and  set  up  a  great 
\Vork  for  cloth-making  in  Picardy,  they  brought  in  d 
bill  for  explaining  and  better  executing  former  acts  for 
preventing  the-  exportation  of  wool,  fullers-earth,  and 
Scouring  clay ;  and  this  was  immediately  passed  into  a 
law.  A  petition  being  presented  to  the  house,  by  the' 
lustring  company,  against  certain  merchants  who  had 
smuggled  alamodes  and  lustrings  from  France,  even  dar- 
ing the  war,  the  committee  of  trade  was  directed  to  in- 
quire into  the  allegations ;  and  all  the  secrets  of  this 
traffic  were  detected.  Upon  the  report,  the  house  re- 
solved, that  the  manufactures  of  alamodes  and  lustrings 
set  up  in  England  had  been  beneficial  to  the  kingdom : 
that  there  had  been  a  destructive  arid  illegal  trade  carried } 
on  during  the  war,  for  importing  these  commodities,  by 
which  the  king  had  been  defrauded  of  his  customs,  and 
the  English  manufacturers  greatly  discouraged :  that,  by 
the  smuggling  vessels  employed  in  this  trade,  intelli- 
gence had  been  carried  into  France  during  the  war,  and 
the  enemies  of  the  government  conveyed  from  justice. 
Stephen  Seignoret,  Rhene,  Baudoin,  John  Gbodet, 
Nicholas  Santini,  Peter  de  Hearse,  John  Pierce,  John 
Dumaitre,  and  David  Barreau,  were  impeached  at  the 
bar  of  the  house  of  lords ;  and  pleading  guilty,  the 
lords  imposed  fines  upon  them,  according  to  their  re- 
spective circumstances.  They  were,  in  the  meantime, 
committed  to  Newgate,  until  those  fines  should  be  paid  : 
and  the  commons  addressed  the  king,  that  the  money 


332  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  Iftti. 

might  be  appropriated  to  the  maintenance  of  Greenwich 
hospital.     The  house  having  taken  cognizance  of  this 
affair,  and  made  some  new  regulations  in  the  prosecution 
of  the  African  trade,  presented  a  solemn  address  to  the 
king,  representing  the  general  degeneracy  and  corrup-, 
tion  of  the  age,  and  beseeching  his  majesty  to  command 
all  his  judges,  justices,  and  magistrates,  to  put  the  laws 
in  execution  against  profaneness  and  immorality:     The 
king  professed  himself  extremely  well  pleased  with  this 
remonstrance,  promised  to  give  immediate  directions  for 
a  reformation,  and  expressed  bis  desire  that  some  more 
effectual  provision  might  be  made  for  suppressing  im- 
pious books,  containing  doctrines  against  the  Trinity; 
doctrines  which  abounded  at  this  period,  and  took  their 
origin  from  the  licentiousness  and  profligacy  of  the  times. 
§  IX.  In  the  midst  of  such  immorality,  Dr.  Thomas 
Bray,  an  active  divine,  formed  a  plan  for  propagating  the 
gospel  in  foreign  countries.     Missionaries,  catechisms, 
liturgies,  and  other  books  for  the  instruction  of  ignorant 
people,  were  sent  to  the  English  colonies  in  America. 
This  laudable  design  was  supported  by  voluntary  contri- 
bution ;  and  the  bill  having  been  brought  into  the  house 
of  commons,  for  the  better  discovery  of  estates  given  to 
superstitious  uses,  Dr.  Bray  presented  a  petition,  praying, 
that  some  part  of  these  estates  might  be  set  apart  for  the 
propagation  of  the  reformed  religion  in  Maryland,  Vir- 
ginia, and  the  Leeward  islands.     About  this  period,  a 
society  for  the  reformation  of  manners  was  formed  under 
the  king's  countenance  and  encouragement.  Considera- 
ble collections  were  made  for  maintaining  clergymen  to 
read  prayers  at  certain  hours  in  places  of  public  worship, 
and  administer  the    sacrament  every  Sunday.     The 
members  of  this  society  resolved  to  inform  the  magis- 
trates of  all  vice  and  immorality  that  should  fall  under 
their  cognizance  ;  and  with  that  part  of  the  fines  allow- 
ed by  law  to  the  informer,  constitute  a  fund  of  charity. 
The  business  of  the  session  being  terminated,  the  king, 


urn.  william;    '  333* 

orl  the  3d  day  of  July,  prorogued  the  parliament,  after 
having  thanked  them,  in  a  short  speech,  for  the  many 
testimonies  of  their  affection  he  had  received;  and  in 
two  days  after  the  prorogation  it  was  dissolved^ 

§X.  In  the  month  of  January,  the  earl  of  Portland 
had  set  out.  on  his  embassy  to  France,,  where  he  was 
received  with  very  particular  marks. of  distinction.     He 
made  a  public  entry  into  Paris  with  such  magnificence, 
as  is  said  to  have  astonished  the  French  nation.     He 
interceded  for  the  Protestants  in  that  kingdom,  against 
whom  the  persecution  had  been  renewed  with  redoubled 
violence :  he  proposed  that  king  James  should  be  re- 
moved to  Avignon,  in  which  case  his  master  would  sup- 
ply him  with  an  honourable  pension :  but  his  remon-; 
strances  on  both  subjects  proved  ineffectual.     Lewis, 
however,  in  a  private  conference  with  him  at  Marli,  is 
supposed  to  have  communicated  his  project  of  the  parti* 
tion-treaty.     The  earl  of  Portland,  at  his  return  to  Eng- 
land, finding  himself  totally  eclipsed  in  the  king's  favour 
by  Keppel,  now  created  earl  of  Albemarle,  resigned  his 
employments  in  disgust;  nor  could  the  king's  solicita-> 
tions  prevail  upon  him   to  resume  any  oifice  in  the> 
household;  though  he  promised  to  serve  his  majesty  in 
any  other  shape,  and  was  soon  employed  to  negotiate 
the  treaty  of  partition.     If  this  nobleman  miscarried  in 
•  the:  purposes  of  his  last  embassy  at  the  court  of  Ver- 
sailles, the  agents  of  France  were  equally  unsuccessful  in 
tbe£r  endeavours  to  retrieve  their  commerce  with  Eng 
land,  which  the  war  had  interrupted.     Their  commis- 
sary, sent  over  to  London  with  powers  to  regulate  the; 
trade  between  the  two  nations,  met  with  insuperable 
difficulties.     The  parliament  had.  burdened  the .  French 
commodities  with  heavy  duties,  which  were  already  ap- 

b  On  the  5th  day  of  January,  a  fir©  breaking  oat  at  Whitehall*  through 
the  carelessness  of  a  laundress,  the  whole  body  of  the  palace,  together 
with  the  new  gallery,  council-chamber,  and  sereral  adjoining  apartments, 
was  entirely  consumed ;  but  the  banqueting-bous©  was  not  affected. 

VOL.  I.  .  #  « 


334  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1808. 

propriated  to  different  uses ;  and  the  channel  of  trade 
was  in  many  respects  entirely  altered.  The  English 
merchants  supplied  the  nation  with  wines  from  Italy; 
Spain,  and  Portugal ;  with  linen  from  Holland  and  Silesia; 
and  manufactures  of  paper,  hats,  stuffs,  and  silks,  had 
been  set  up  and  successfully  carried  on  in  England,  by 
the  French  refugees, 

,    §  XL  By  this  time  a  ferment  had  been  raised  in  Scot- 
land, by  the  opposition  and  discouragements  their  new 
company  had  sustained.    They  had  employed  agents  in 
England,  Holland,  and  Hamburgh,  to  receive  subscrip- 
tions.   The  adventurers  in  England  were  intimidated 
by  the  measures  which  had  been  taken  in  parliament 
against  the  Scottish  company.    The  Dutch  East  India 
company  took  the  alarm,  and  exerted  all  their  interest 
to  prevent  their  countrymen  from  subscribing ;  -and  the 
king  permitted  his  resident  at  Hamburgh  to  present  a? 
memorial  against  the  Scottish  company  to  the  senate  of 
that  city.     The  parliament  of  Scotland  being  assembled 
by  the  earl  of  Marchmont,  as  king's  commissioner,  the 
company  presented  it  with  a  remonstrance,  containing  a* 
detail  of  their  grievances,  arising  from  the  conduct  of 
the  English  house  of  commons,  as  well  as  from  the  me- 
morial presented  by  the  king's  minister  *t  Hamburgh/ 
in  which  he  actually  disowned  the  act  of  parliament  and 
letters-patent  which  had  passed  in  their  favour,  and 
threatened  the  inhabitants  of  that  city  with  his  majesty's- 
resentment,  in  case  they  should  join  the  Scots  in  their 
undertaking.     They  represented,  that  such  instances  of 
interposition  had  put  a  stop  to  the  subscriptions  in  Eng-. 
land  and  Hamburgh,  hurt  the  credit  of  the  company, 
discouraged  the  adventurers,  and  threatened  the  entire 
ruin  of  a  design  in  which  all  the  most  considerable- 
families  of  the  nation  were  deeply  engaged.     The  par- 
i  liament  having   taken    their  case  into  consideration, 
sent  an  address  to  his  majesty,  representing  the  hard- 
ships to  whifch  the  company  had  been  exposed,  explain- 


7 


\G9S,  WILLIAM.  336 

ing  boi&r  for  the  nation  in  general  was  concerned  in  the 
ddaign,  and  entreating  that  he  would  take  such,  measures 
as  might  effectually  vindicate  the  undoubted  rights  and 
privileges  of  the  company.  This  address  was  seconded 
by  a  petition  from  the  company  itself,  praying  that  his 
majesty  would  give  some  intimation  to  the  senate  of 
Hamburgh,  permitting  the  inhabitants  of  that  city  to 
renew  the  subscriptions  they  had  withdrawn :  that,  as  a 
gracious  mark  of  his  royal  favour  to  the  company,  he 
would  bestow  upon  them  two  small  frigates,  then  lying 
useless  in  the  harbour  of  Burntisland ;  and  that,  in  con* 
sideration  of  the  obstructions  they  had  encountered,  he 
would  continue  their  privileges  and  immunities  for  such 
longer  time  as  should  seem  reasonable  to  his  majesty. 
Though  the  commissioner  was  wholly  devoted  to  the 
king,  who  had  actually  resolved  to  ruin  this  company, 
he  could  not  appease  the  resentment  of  the  nation  ;  and 
the  heats  in  parliament  became  so  violent,  that  he  was 
obliged  to  adjourn  it  till  the  5  th  day  of  November.  I» 
this  interval  the  directors  of  the  company,  understanding 
from  their  agent  at  Hamburgh,  that  the  address  of  the 
parliament,  and  their  own  petition,  had  produced  no 
effect  in  their  favour ;  they  wrote  a  letter  of  complaint 
to  the  lord  Seafield,  secretary  of  state,  observing,  that, 
they  had  received  repeated  assurances  of  the  king's  hav- 
ing given  orders  to  his  resident  at  Hamburgh  touching 
their  memorial;  and  entreating  the  interposition  of  his: 
lordship,  that  justice  might  be  done  to  the  company. 
The  secretary,  in  his  answer,  promised  to  take  the  first 
convenient  opportunity  of  representing  the  affair  to  his 
'  majesty ;  J>ut  he  said  this  could  hot  be  immediately  ex- 
pected, as  the  king  was  much  engaged  in  the  affairs  of 
the  English  parliament.  This  declaration  the  directors 
considered,  as  it  really  was,  a  mere  evasion,  which  helped 
to  alienate  the  minds  of  that  people  from  the  king's 
person  and  government, 
§  XII.  King  William  at  this  time  revolved  intti&Wa 

X2 


338  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  l&K. 

mind  a  project  of  far  greater  consequence  to  the  interest 
of  Europe ;  namely,  that  of  settling  the  succession  to  the 
throne  of  Spain,  which  in  a  little  time  would  be  vacated 
by  the  death  of  Charles  II.  whose  constitution  was  id- 
ready  exhausted.  He  had  been  lately  reduced  to  ex- 
tremity, and  his  situation  was  no  sooner  known  in 
France,  than  Lewis  detached  a  squadron  towards  Cadiz, 
with  orders  to  intercept  the  plate-fleet,  in  case  the  king 
of  Spain  should  die  before  its  arrival.  William  sent  an- 
other fleet  to  protect  the  galleons ;  but  it  arrived  too 
late  for  that  service,  and  the  nation  loudly  exclaimed 
against  the  tardiness  of  the  equipment.  His  Catholic 
majesty  recovered  from  his  disorder,  contrary  to  the  ex- 
pectation of  his  people ;  but  continued  in  such  an  en- 
feebled and  precarious  state  of  health,  that  a  reflapse  was 
every  moment  apprehended.  In  the  latter  end  of  July, 
king  William  embarked  for  Holland,  on  pretence  of 
enjoying  a  recess  from  business,  which  was  necessary  to 
his  constitution.  He  was  glad  of  an  opportunity' to 
withdraw  himself  for  some  time  from  a  kingdom  in 
which  he  had  been  exposed  to  such  opposition  and  cha- 
grin. But  the  real  motive  of  his  voyage  was  a  design  of 
treating  with  the  French  king,  remote  from  the  observa- 
tion of  those  who  might  have  penetrated  into  the  nature 
of  his  negotiation.  He  had  appointed  a  regency  to  go- 
vern the  kingdom  in  his  absence,  and,  as  one  of  the 
number,  nominated  the  earl  of  Marlborough,  who  had 
regained  his  favour,  and  been  constituted  governor  of 
the  duke  of  Gloucester.  At  his  majesty's  departure, 
sealed  orders  were  left  with  the  ministry,  directing,  that 
sixteen  thousand  men  should  be  retained  in  the  service, 
notwithstanding  the  vote  of  the  commons,  by  which  the 
standing  army  was  limited  to  ten  thousand.  He  alleged, 
that  the  apprehension  of  troubles  which  might  arise  at 
the  death  of  king  Charles,  induced  him  to  transgress 
this  limitation ;  and  he  hoped  that  the  new  parliament 
would  be  more  favourable.    His  enemies,  however, 


l«tt-  WILLIAM.  337 

made  afresh  handle  of  this  step,  to  depreciate  his  cha- 
racter  in  the  eyes  of  the  people. 

§  XIII.  Having  assisted  at  the  assembly  of  the  states- 
general,  and  given  audience  to  divers  ambassadors  at 
the  Hague,  he  repaired  to  his  house  at  Loo,  attended 
hy  the  earfs  of  Essex,  Portland,  and  Selkirk.    There  he 
was  visited  by  count  Tallard,  the  French  minister,  who 
had  instructions  to  negotiate  the  treaty  concerning  the 
Spanish  succession.    The  earl  of  Portland,  by  his  majes- 
ty's order,  had  communicated  to  secretary  Vernon  the 
principal  conditions  which  the  French  king  proposed  ; 
be  himself  wrote  a  letter  to  lord-chancellor  Somers,  de- 
siring his  advice  with  regard  to  the  propositions,  and 
full  powers  under  the  great  seal,  with  blanks  to  be  filled 
up  occasionally,  that  he  might  immediately  begin  the 
treaty  with  count  Tallard.    At  the  same  time,  he  strictly 
enjoined  secrecy.    The  purport  of  Portland's  letter  was 
imparted  to  the  duke  of  Shrewsbury  and  Mr.  Montague, 
who  consulted  with  the  chancellor  and  Vernon  upon  the 
subject;  and  the  chancellor  wrote  an  answer  to  the  king, 
as  the  issue  of  their  joint  deliberation:  but,  before  it 
reached  his  majesty,  the  first  treaty  of  partition  was 
signed  by  the  earl  of  Portland  and  sir  Joseph  William- 
son.   The  contracting  powers  agreed,  that,  in  case  the 
king  of  Spaiij  should  die  without  issue,  the  kingdom  of 
Naples  and  Sicily,  with  the  places  depending  on  the 
Spanish  monarchy,  and  situated  on  the  coast  of  Tuscany, 
or  the  adjacent  islands,  the  marquisate  of  Final,  the' 
province  of  Guipuscoa,  all  places  on  the  French  side  of 
the  Pyrenees,  or  the  other  mountains  of  Navarre,  Alva, 
or  Biscay,  on  the  other  side  of  the  province  of  Guipus- 
coa, with  all  the  ships,  vessels,  and  stores,  should  devolve 
upon  the  dauphin,  in  consideration  of  his  right  to  the 
crown  of  Spain,  which,  with  all.  its  other  dependencies, 
should  descend  to  the  electoral  prince  of  Bavaria,  under 
the  guardianship  of  his  father :  that  the  dutchy  of  Milan 
should  be  settled  on  the  emperor's  second  son,  the  arch* 


SQ&  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND*  M*. 

duke  Charle6 :  that  this  treaty  should  be  communicated 
to  the  emperor  and  the  elector  of  Bavaria  by  the  king  of 
England  and  the  states-general:  that  if  either  should 
refuse  to  agree  to  this  partition,  his  proportion  should 
remain  in  sequestration)  until  die  dispute  could  be  ac- 
commodated :  that  in  case  the  electoral  prince  of  Bava- 
ria should  die  before  his  father,  then  the  elector  and  his 
other  heirs  should  succeed  him  in  those  dominions; 
and,  should  the  archduke  reject  the  dutchy  of  Milan, 
they  agreed  that  it  should  be  sequestered,  and  governed 
by  the  prince  of  Vaudemont.    It  may  be  necessary  to 
observe,  that  Philip  IV.  father  to  the  present  king  of 
Spain,  had  settled  his  crown  by  will  on  the  emperor's 
children :  that  the  dauphin  was  son  to  Maria  Theresa, 
daughter  of  the  same  monarch,  whose  right  to  the  suc- 
cession Lewis  had  renounced  in  the  most  solemn  man- 
ner: as  for  the  electoral  prince  of  Bavaria,  he  was  grand- 
son to  a  daughter  of  Spain.    This  treaty  of  partition 
was  one  of  the  most  impudent  schemes  of  encroachment 
that  tyranny  and  injustice  ever  planned.    Lewis,  who 
had  made  a  practice  of  sacrificing  all  ties  of  honour  and 
good  faith  to  the  interest  of  his  pride,  vanity,  and  ambi- 
tion, foresaw  that  he  should  never  be  able  to  accomplish 
his  designs  upon  the  crown  of  Spain,  while  William  was 
left  at  liberty  to  form  another  confederacy  against  them. 
He  therefore  resolved  to  amuse  him  with  a  treaty,  in 
which  he  should  seem  to  act  as  umpire  in  the  concerns 
of  Europe.    He  knew  that  William  was  too  much  of  a 
politician  to  be  restricted  by  notions  of  private  justice ; 
and  that  he  would  make  no, scruple  to  infringe  the  laws 
of  particular  countries,  or  even  the  rights  of  a  single 
nation,  when  the  balance  of  power  was  at  stake.    He 
judged  right  in  this  particular.     The  king  of  England 
lent  a  willing  ear  to  his  proposals,  and  engaged  in  a  plan 
for  dismembering  a  kingdom,  in  despite  of  the  natives, 
and  in  violation  of  every  law,  human  .or  divine. 

§  XIV,  While  the  French  king  cajoled  William  with 


M0&  WILLIAM.  388 

this  negotiation,  the  marquis  d'Hafcourt,  his  ambassador 
to  Spain,  was  engaged  in  a  game  of  a  different  nature 
at  Madrid.  The  queen  of  Spain,  suspecting  the  designs 
of  Prance,  exerted  all  her  interest  in  behalf  of  the  king 
of  the  Romans,  to  whom  she  was  nearly  related.  She 
new-modelled  the  council*  bestowed  the  government  of 
Milan  on  prince  Vaudemont,  and  established  the  prince 
of  Hesse  d'Armstadt  as  viceroy  of  Catalonia.  Notwith- 
standing all  her  efforts,  she  could  not  prevent  the  Freiich 
minister  from  acquiring  some  influence  in  the  Spanish 
councils.  He  was  instructed  to  procure  the  succession 
of  the  crown  for  one  of  the  dauphin's  sons,  or  at  least  to 
hinder  it  from  devolving  upon  the  emperor's  children. 
With  a  view  to  give  weight  to  his  negotiations*  the 
French  king  ordered  an  army  of  sixty  thousand  men  to 
advance  towards  the  frontiers  of  Catalonia  and  Navarre, 
while  a  great  number  of  ships  and  galleys  cruised  along 
the  coast,  and  entered  the  harbours  of  Spain-  Harcourt 
immediately  began  to  form  his  party;  he  represented 
that  Philip  IV.  had  no  power  to  dispose  of  his  crown 
against  the  laws  of  nature  and  the  constitution  of  the 
realm:  that,  by  the  order  of  succession,  the  crown 
ought  to  descend  to  the  children  of  his  daughter,  in  pre- 
ference to  more  distant  relations :  that,. if  the  Spaniards 
would  declare  in  favour  of  the  dauphin's  second  son,  the 
duke  of  Atijou,  they  might  train  him  up  in  the  mariner* 
and  customs  of  their  country.  When  he  found  them 
averse  to  this  proposal,  he  assured  them  his  master  would 
approve  of  the  electoral  prince  of  Bavaria,  rather  than 
consent  to  the  succession's  devolving  upon  a  son  of  the 
emperor.  Nay,  he  hinted,  that  if  they  would  choose  a 
Sovereign  among  themselves,  they  might  depend  upon 
the  protection  of  his  most  Christian  majesty,  who  had  no 
other  view  than  that  of  preventing  the  house  of  Austria 
from  becoming  too  formidable  to  the  liberties  of  En- 
rope.  The  queen  of  Spain  having  discovered  the  in- 
trigues of  this  minister,  conveyed  the  king  to  Toledo, 


340  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  }69S. 

on  pretence  that  the  air  of  Madrid  was  prejudicial  to  his 
health.    Harcourt  immediately  took  the  alarm.     He 
supposed  her  intention  was  to  prevail  upon  her  husband, 
in  his  solitude,  to  confirm  the  last  will  of  his  father ;  and 
his  doubts  were  all  removed,  when  he  understood  that 
the  count  de  Harrach,  the  imperial  ambassador,  had  pri- 
vately repaired  to  Toledo.    He  forthwith  took  the  same 
road, , pre  tending  to  have  received  a  memorial  from  his 
master,  with  a  positive  order  to  deliver  it  into  the  king's 
own  hand.    He  was  given  to  understand,  that  the  ma- 
nagement of  foreign  affairs  had  been  left  to  the  care  of 
cardinal  Corduba  at  Madrid,  and  that  the  Icings  health 
would  not  permit  him  to  attend  to  business.    The  pur- 
port of  the  memorial  was,  an  offer  of  French  forces  to 
assist  in  raising  the  siege  of  Ceuta  in  Barbary,  which  the 
Moors  had  lately  undertaken :  but  this  offer  was  civilly, 
declined.     Harcourt,  not  yet  discouraged,  .redoubled 
his  efforts  at  Madrid,  and  found  means  to  engage  car- 
dinal Portocarrero  in  the  interests  of  his  master.     In  the 
meantime  Lewis  concluded  an  alliance  with  Sweden, 
under  the  pretext  of  preserving  and  securing  the  com- 
mon peace,  by  such  means  as  should  be  adjudged  most 
proper  and  convenient:    During  these  transactions,  king 
William  was  not  wanting  in  his  endeavours  to  terminate 
the  war  in  Hungary,  which  had  raged  fifteen  years  with- 
out intermission.    About  the  middle  of  August,  lord 
Paget  and  Mr.  Colliers,  ambassadors  from  England  and 
Holland,  arrived  in  the  Turkish  camp  near  Belgrade ; 
and  a  conference  being  opened  under  their  mediation, 
the  peace  of  Carlowitz  was  signed  on  the  26th  day  of 
January.     By  this  treaty,  the  emperor  remained  in  pos- 
session of  all  his  conquests ;  Caminieck  was  restored  to 
the  Poles ;  all  the  Morea,  with  several  fortresses  in  Dal- 
matia,  were  ceded  to  the  Venetians ;  and  the  czar  of 
Muscovy  retained  Azoph  during  a  truce  of  two  years : 
so  that  die  Turks,  by  this  pacification,  lost  great  part  of 
their  European  dominions.    .  The  cardinal  primate  of 


WDS.  WILLIAM.  341 

Poland,  who  had  strenuously  adhered  to  the  prince  of 
Conti,  was  prevailed  upon  to  acknowledge  Augustus : 
and  the  commotions  in  Lithuania  being  appeased,  peace 
was  established  through  all  Christendom. 

§  XV/In  the  beginning  of  December,  the  kingarrivedin 
England,. where  a  new  parliament  had  been  chosen,  and 
prorogued  on  account  of  his  majesty's,  absence,  which 
was  prolonged  by  contrary  winds  and  tempestuous  wea- 
ther. His  ministry  had  been  at  very  little  pains  to  in- 
fluence the  elections,  which  generally  fell  upon  men  of 
revolution-principles,  though  they  do  not  seem  to  have 
been  much  devoted  to  the  person  of  their  sovereign : 
yet  their  choice  of  sir  Thomas  Lyttleton  for  speaker 
seemed  to  presage  a  session  favourable  to  the  ministry. 
The  two  houses  being  convened  on  the  6th  day  of  De- 
cember, the  king,  in  his  speech,  observed,  that  the  safe- 
ty, honour,  and  happiness  of  the  kingdom,  would  in  a 
great  measure  depend  upon  the  strength  which  they 
should  think  proper  to  maintain  by  sea  and  land.  He 
desired  they  would  make  some  farther  progress  in  dis- 
charging the  national  debt;  contrive  effectual  expe- 
dients for  employing  the.  poor ;  pass  good  bills  for  the 
advancement  of  trade,  and  the  discouragement  of  pro- 
faneness;  and  act  with  unanimity  and  dispatch.  The 
commons  of  this  new  parliament  were  so  irritated  at 
the  king's  presuming  to  maintain  a  greater  number  of 
troops  than  their  predecessors  had  voted,  that  they  re* 
solved  he  should  feel  the  weight  of  their  displeasure. 
They  omitted  the  common  compliment  of  an  address : 
they  resolved  that  all  the  forces  of  England,  in  English 
pay,  exceeding  seven  thousand  men,  should  be  forthwith 
disbanded ;  as  also  those  in  Ireland,  exceeding  twelve 
thousand ;  abd  that  those  retained  should  be  his  majes- 
ty's natural-born .  subjects.  A  bill  was  brought  in  on 
these  resolutions,  and  prosecuted  with  peculiar  eagerness, 
to  the  unspeakable  mortification  of  king  William/  who 
was  hot  only  extremely  sensible  of  the  affront,  but  also 


342  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 

particularly  chagrined  to  see  himself  disabled  from  main- 
taining his  Dutch  guards,  and  the  regiments  of  French 
refugees,  to  which  he  was  uncommonly  attached.  Be- 
fore the  meeting  of  the  parliament,  the  ministry  gave 
him  to  understand,  that  they  should  be  able  to  procure  a 
vote. for  ten  or  twelve  thousand;  but  they  would  not 
undertake  for  a  greater  number*  He  professed  himself 
dissatisfied  with  the  proposal,  observing,  that  they  might 
as  well  disband  the  whole,  as  leave  so  few.  The  minis-* 
ters  would  not  run  the  risk  of  losing  all  their  credit* 
by  proposing  a  greater  number :  and,  having  received  no 
directions  on  this  subject,  sat  silent  when  it  was  debated 
in  the  house  of  commons. . . 

§  XVI.  Such  was  the  indignation  of  William^  kindled 
by  this  conduct  of  his  ministry  and  his.  parliament,  that 
he  threatened  to  abandon  the  government;  and  had 
actually  penned  a  speech  to  be  pronounced  to  both 
houses  on  that  occasion:  but  he  was  diverted  from  this 
purpose  by  his  ministry  and  confidants,  and  resolved  to 
pass  the  bilj  by  which  he  had  been  so  much  offended. 
Accordingly,  when  it  was  ready  for  the  royal  assent,  he 
went  to  the  house  of  peers,  where,  having  sent  for  the 
commons,  he  told  them,  that  although  he  might  think* 
himself,  unkindly  used,  in  being  deprived  of  his  guards, 
which  had  constantly  attended  him  in  all  his  actions ; 
yet,,  as  he  believed  nothing  could  be  more  fatal  to  the 
nation  than  any  distrust  or  jealousy  between  him  and 
his  parliament*  he  was  come  to  pass  the  bill*  according 
to  their  desire.  At  the  same  time,  for  his  own  justifica- 
tion, and  in  discharge  of  the  trust  reposed  in  him,  he 
declared,  that,  in  his  own  judgment,  the  nation  was  left 
too  much  exposed:  and  that  it  was  incumbent  upon 
them  to  provide  such  a  strength  as  might  be  necessary 
for  the  safety  of  the  kingdom.  They  thanked  him,  in 
an  address*  for  this  undeniable  proof  of  his  readiness  to 
comply  with  the  desires  of  his  parliament.  They  as- 
sured him*  he  should  never  have  reason  to  think  the 


1096.  WILLIAM.  343 

common*  were  undutiful  or  unkind ;  for  they  would,  on 
all  occasions,  stand  by  and  assist  him  in  the  preservation 
of  his  sacred  person,  and  in  the  support  of  his  govern- 
ment, against  all  his  enemies  whatsoever.    The  lords  . 
presented  an  address  to  the  same  effect  5  and  the  king 
assured  both  houses,  he  entertained  no  doubts  of  their 
loyalty  and  affection-     He  forthwith  issued  orders  for 
reducing  the  army  to  the  number  of  seven  -thousand 
men,  to  be  maintained  in  England,  under  the  name  of 
gnards  and  garrisons :  and,  hoping  the  hearts  of  the 
commons  were  now  mollified,  he  made*  another  effort 
in  favour  of  his  Dutch  guards,  whom  he  could  not  dis- 
miss without  the  most  sensible  regret.     Lord  Ranelagh 
was  sent  with  a  written  message  to  the  commons,  giv- 
ing than  to  understand,  that  the  necessary  preparations 
were  made  for  transporting  the  guards  who  came  with 
him  into  England,  and  that  they  should  embark  imme- 
diately, unless,  out  of  consideration  to  him,  the  house 
should  be  disposed  to  find  a  way  for  continuing  them 
longer  in  the  service ;  a  favour  which  his  majesty  would 
take  very  kindly.    The  commons,  instead  of  complying 
with  his  inclination,  presented  an  address,  in  which  they 
professed  unspeakable  grief,  that  he  should  propose  any 
thing  to  which  they  could  not  consent  with  due  regard* 
to  the  constitution,  which  he  had  come  over  to  restore, 
and  so  often  hazarded  his  royal  •  person  to  preserve. 
Ttiey  reminded  him  of  the  declaration,  in  which  he  had 
promised  that  all  the  foreign  forces  should  be  sent  out 
of  the  kingdom.   They  observed,  that  nothing  conduced 
more  to  the  happiness  and  welfare  of  the  nation,  than  an' 
entire  confidence  between  the  king  and  pedple,  which 
coijjd  no  way  be  so  firmly  established  as  by  intrusting 
his  -sacred  person  •  with  his  own  subjects,  who  had  so 
eminently  signalized  themselves  during  the  late  long 
and  expensive  war.    They  received  a  soothing  answer 
to  this  address,  but  remained  firm  to  their  purpose,  in 
which  die  king  was  fain  to  acquiesce ;  and  the  Dutch 


344  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  lOft 

guards  were  transported  tp  Holland.    At  a  time  when 
they  declared  themselves  so  well  pleased  with  their  de- 
liverer, such  an  opposition,  in  an  affair  of  very  little  cpn-. 
sequence,  sayoured  more  of  clownish  obstinacy  than  of 
patriotism.     In  the  midst  of  all  their  professions  of  re- 
gard, they  entertained  a  national  prejudice  against  him- 
self, and  all  the  foreigners  in  his  service.    Even  in  the 
house  of  commons,  his  person  was  treated  with  great 
disrespect  in  virulent  insinuations.      They  suggested 
that  he  neither  loved  nor  trusted  the  English  nation  : 
that  he  treated  the  natives  with  the  most  disagreeable 
reserve ;  and  chose  his  confidants  from  the  number  of 
strangers  that  surrounded  him :  that,  after  every  session 
of  parliament,  he  retired  from  the  kingdom,  to  enjoy  an 
indolent  and  inglorious  privacy  with  a  few  favourites* 
These  suggestions  were  certainly  true*     He  was  ex- 
tremely disgusted  with  the  English,  whom  he  considered 
as  malicious,  ignorant,  and  ungrateful,  and  he  took  na 
pains  to  disguise  his  sentiments. 

$  XVII.  The  commons  having  effected  a  dissolution 
of  the  army,  voted  fifteen  thousand  seamen,  and  a  pro- 
portionable fleet,  for  the  security  of  the  kingdom ;  they 
granted  1,484,015/.  for  the  services  of  the  year,  tq  be 
raised  by  a  tax  of  three  shillings  in  the  pound  upon  lands, 
personal  estates,  pensions,  and  offices.    A  great  nuijiber 
of  priests  and  Roman  Catholics  who  had  been  frighted 
away  by  the  revolution,  were  now  encouraged  by  the 
treaty  of  Ryswick  to  return,  and  appeared  in  all  public 
places  of  London  and  Westminster,  with  remarkable 
effrontery.    The  enemies  of  the  government  whispered 
about,  that  the  treaty  contained  a  secret  article  in  favour 
of  those  who  professed  that  religion  ;  and  some,  did  not 
even  scruple  to  insinuate,  that  William  was  a  Papist  in. 
his  heart.     The  commons,  alarmed  at  the  number  and. 
insolence  of  those  religionists,  desired  the  king,  in. ap 
address,  to  remove,  by  proclamation,  all  Papists  and 
nonjurors  from  the  city  of  London  and  parts  adjapenf , 


H!»  WILLIAM.  S45 

Arid  put  the  laws  in  execution  against  them,  that  the 
wicked  designs  they  were  always  hatching  might  be  ef- 
fectually disappointed.  The  king  gratified  them  in  their 
request  of  a  proclamation,  which  was  not  much  regard- 
ed:  but  a  remarkable  law  was  enacted  against  Papists  in 
the  course  of  the  ensuing  session.  The  old  East  India 
company,  about  this  period,  petitioned  the  lower  house, 
to  make  some  provision  that  their  corporation  might 
subsist  for  the  residue  of  the  term  of  twenty-one  years, 
granted  by  his  majesty's  charter :  that  the  payment  of 
the  5/.  per  cent,  by  the  late  act  for  settling  the  trade  to 
the  East  Indies,  might  be  settled  and  adjusted  in  such  a 
manner,  as  not  to  remain  a  burden  on  the  petitioners  ; 
and  that  such  farther  considerations  might  be.  had  for 
their  relief,  and  for  the  preservation  of  the  East  India 
trade,  as  should  be  thought  reasonable.  A  bill  was 
brought  in  upon  the  subject  of  this  petition ;  but  re- 
jected at  the  second  reading.8  Discontents  had  risen  to 
such  a  height,  that  some  members  began  to  assert,  they 
were  not  bound  to  maintain  the  votes  and  credit  of  the 
former  parliament ;  and,  upon  this  maxim,  would  have 
contributed  their  interest  towards  a  repeal  of  the  act 
made  in  favour  of  the  new  company :  but  such  a  scheme 
was  of  too  dangerous  consequence  to  the  public  credit  to 
be  carried  into  execution. 

§  XVIII.  That  spirit  of  peevishness  which  could  not 
be  gratified  with  this  sacrifice,  produced  an  inquiry 
into  the  management  of  naval  affairs,  which  was  simed 
at  the  earl  of  Orford,  a  nobleman  whose  power  gave 
umbrage,  and  whose  wealth  excited  envy.  He  officiated 
both  as  treasurer  of  the  navy,  and  lord-commissioner  of 
ther  admiralty,  and  seemed  to  have  forgot  the  sphere 
from  which  he  had  risen  to  title  and  office.  The  com- 
mons drew  up  an  address,  complaining  of  some  unim- 
portant articles  of  mismanagement  in  the  conduct  of  the 
navy ;  and  the  earl  was  wise  enough  to  avoid  farther 

'fiarnet.    Ktnnet,    Lambert j.    State  Tracts.    Tindal.    Ralph. 


340  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  f<*». 

prosecution,  by  resigning  his  employments.  On  the 
4th  day  of  May  the  king  closed  the  session  with  a  short 
speech,  hinting  dissatisfaction  at  their  having  neglected 
to  consider  some  points  which  he  had  recommended  to 
their  attention ;  and  the  parliament  was  prorogued'  to 
1st  of  June.h  In  a  little  time  after  this  prorogation,  his 
majesty  appointed  a  regency  ;*  and  on  the  2d  day  of 
June  embarked  for  Holland. 

§  XIX.  In  Ireland  nothing  of  moment  was  transact- 
ed. The  parliament  of  that  kingdom  passed  an  act  for 
raising  120,000/.  on  lands,  tenements,  and  heredita- 
ments, to  defray  the  expense  of  maintaining  twelve 
thousand  men,  who  had  been  voted  by  the  commons  of 
England:  then  the  assembly  was  prorogued.  A  new 
commission  afterward  arrived  at  Dublin,  constituting 
the  duke  of  Bolton,  the  earls  of  Berkeley  and  Galway, 
lords-justices  of  Ireland.  The  clamour  in  Scotland  in- 
creased against  the  ministry,  who  had  disowned  their . 
company,  and  in  a  great  measure  defeated  the  design 
from' which  they  had  promised  themselves  such  heaps' 
of  treasure.  Notwithstanding  the  discouragements  to' 
which  their  company  had  been  exposed,  they  fitted  but' 
two  of  four  large  ships  which  had  been  built  at  Ham- 
burgh for  their  service.  These  were  laden  with  a  cargo* 
for  traffic,  with  some  artillery  and  military  stores ;  and 

b  About  the  latter  end  of  March,  the  earl  of  Warwick  and  lord  Mohan 
were  tried  by  the  peers  in  Westminster-hall,  for  the  murder  of  captain . 
Richard  Coote,  who  had  been  killed  in  a  midnight  combat  of  three  on 
each  side.    Warwick  was  found  guilty  of  manslaughter,  and  Mohan  a<> 
quitted. 

Villiers,  earl  of  Jersey,  who  had  been  sent  ambassador  to  France,  was 
appointed  secretary  of  state,  in  the  room  of  the  duke  of  Shrewsbury.  This 
nobleman  was  created  lord-chamberlain ;  the  carl  of  Manchester  was 
sent  ambassador  extraordinary  to  France ;  the  earl  of  Pembroke  was  de- 
clared lord-president  of  the  council ;  and  lord  viscount  Lonsdale  keeper 
of  the  privy-seal. 

1  Consisting  of  the  lord-chancellor,  the  lord-president,  the  lord-privy- 
seal,  the  lord-steward  of  the  household,  the  earl  of  Bridge  water,  first  com- . 
missioner  of  the  admiralty,  the  earl  of  Marlborough,  the  earl  of  Jersey,  and 
Mr.  Montague. 


1009.  WILLIAM.  347 

the  adventurers  embarking,  to  the  number  of  twelve 
hundred,  they  sailed  from  the  frith  of  Edinburgh,  with 
some  tenders,  on  the  17  th  day  of  July,  in  the  preceding 
year.    At  Madeira  they  took  in  a  supply  of  wine,  and 
then  steered  to  Crab-  island,  in  the  neighbourhood  of 
St.  Thomas,  lying  between  Santa-Cruz  and  Porto-Rico. 
Their  design  was  to  take  possession  of  this  little  island ; 
but,  when  they  entered  the  road,  they  saw  a  large  tent 
pitched  upon  the  strand,  and  the  Danish  colours  flying. 
Finding  themselves  anticipated  in  this  quarter,  they  di- 
rected their  course  to  the  coast  of  Darien,  where  they 
treated  with  the  natives  for  the  establishment  of  their 
colony,  and  taking  possession  of  the  ground,  to  which 
they  gave  the  name  of  Caledonia,  began  to  execute  their 
plan  of  erecting  a  town,  under  the  appellation  of  New 
Edinburgh,  by  the  direction  of  their  council',  consisting 
of  Patterson^  the  projector,  and  six  other  directors. 
They  had  no  sooner  completed  their  settlement,  than 
they  wrote  a  letter  to  the  king,  containing  a  detail  of 
their  proceedings.     They  pretended  they  had  received 
undoubted  intelligence,  that  the*  French  intended  to 
make  a  settlement  on  that  coast ;  and  that  their  co- 
lony would  be  the  means  of  preventing  the  evil  conse- 
quences which  might  arise  to  his  majesty 'is  kingdom  and 
dominions,  from  the  execution  of  such  a  scheme.    They 
acknowledged  his  goodness  in  granting  those  privileged 
by  which  their  company  was  established :  they  implored 
the  continuance  of  his  royal  favour  and  protection,  as 
they  had  punctually  adhered  to  the  conditions  of  the  act 
of  parliament,  and  the  patent  they  had  obtained. 

§  XX.  By  this  time,  however,  the  king  was  resolved 
to  crush  them  effectually.  He  understood  that  the 
greater  part  of  their  provisions  had  been  consumed  be- 
fore they  set  sail  from  Scotland,  and  foresaw  that  they 
must  be  reduced  to  a  starving  Condition,  if  not  supplied 
from  the  English  colonies.  That  they  might  be  debar- 
red of  all  such  assistance,  he  ^erit  orders  to  the  gover- 


348  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  WHO. 

nors  of  Jamaica,  arid  the  other  English  settlements,  in 
America,  to  issue  proclamations,  prohibiting,  under  the 
severest  penalties,  all  his  majesty's  subjects  from  holding 
any  correspondence  with  the  Scottish  colony,  or  assist- 
ing it  in  any  shape,  with  arms,  ammunition,  or  provi- 
sion ;  on  pretence  that  they  had  not  communicated  their 
design  to  his  majesty,  but  had  peopled  Darien,  in  viola- 
tion of  the  peace  subsisting  between  him  and  his  allies. 
Their  colony  was,  doubtless,  a  very  dangerous  encroach- 
ment upon  the  Spaniards,  as  it  would  have  commanded 
the  passage  between  Porto-Bello  and  Panama,  and  divid-. 
ed  the  Spanish  empire  in  America.     The  French  king 
complained  of  the  invasion,  and  offered  to  supply  the 
court  of  Madrid  with  a  fleet  to  dislodge  the  interlopers* 
Colonna,  marquis  de  Canales,  the  Spanish  ambassador  at 
the  court  of  London,  presented  a  memorial  to  king 
William,  remonstrating  against  the  settlement  qf  this 
colony,  as  a  mark  of  disregard,  and  a  breach  of  the  al- 
liance between  the  two  crowns  ;v  and  declaring,  that  his 
master  would  take  proper  measures  against  such  hostili- 
ties.    The  Scots  affirmed,  that  the  natives  of  Darien 
were  a  free  people,  whom  the  Spaniards  had  in  vain  at- 
tempted to  subdue :  that  therefore  they  had  an  original 
and  incontrovertible  right  to  dispose  of  their  own  lands, 
part  of  which  the  company  had  purchased  for  a  valuable 
consideration.  But  there  was  another  cause  more  power- 
ful than  the  remonstrances  of  the  Spanish  court,  to 
which  this  colony  fell  a  sacrifice ;  and  that  was,  the  jea- 
lousy of  the  English  traders  and  planters.     Darien  was 
said  to  be  a  country  abounding  with  gold;  which  would,* 
in  .a  little  time,  enrich  the  adventurers.     The  Scots 
were  known  to  be  an  enterprising  and  pertinacious  peo- 
ple ;  and  their  harbour,  near  Golden-island,  was  already 
declared  a  free  port.     The  English  apprehended  that 
their  planters  would  be  allured  into  this  new  colony,  by 
the  double  prospect  of  finding  gold,  and  plundering  the 
Spaniards:    that    the  buccaneers  in   particular  would 


1690.  WILLIAM.  349 

choose  it  as  their  chief  residence ;  th^t  the  plantations 
of  England  would  be  deserted ;  that  Darien  would  be* 
come  another  Algiers ;  and  that  the  settlement  would 
produce  a  rupture  with  Spain,  in  consequence  of  which 
the  English  effects  in  that  kingdom  would  be  confiscat- 
ed. The  Dutch,  too,  are  said  to  have  been  jealous  of  a 
company,  which  in  time  might  have  proved  their  com- 
petitors in  the  illicit  commerce  to  the  Spanish  main ; 
and  to  have  hardened  the  king's  heart  against  the  new 
settlers,  whom  he  abandoned  to  their  fate,  notwith- 
standing the  repeated  petitions  and  remonstrances  of 
their  constituents.  Famine  compelled  the  first  adven- 
turers to  quit  the  coast :  a  second  recruit  of  men  and 
provisions  was  sent  thither  from  Scotland :  but  one  of 
their  ships,  laden  with  provision,  being  burnt  by  accident, 
they  likewise  deserted  the  place :  another  reinforcement 
arrived,  and  being  better  provided  than  the  two  former, 
might  have  maintained  their  footing;  but  they  were 
soon  divided  into  factions  that  rendered  all  their  schemes 
abortive.  The  Spaniards  advanced  against  them ;  whenr 
finding  themselves  incapable  of  withstanding  the  enemy, 
they  solicited  a  capitulation,  by  virtue  of  which  they 
were  permitted  to  retire.  Thus  vanished  all  the  golden 
dreams  of  the  Scottish  nation,  which  had  engaged  in  this 
design  with  incredible  eagerness,  and  even  embarked  a 
greater  sum  of  money  than  ever  they  had  advanced 
upon  any  other  occasion.  They  were  now  not  only 
disappointed  in  their  expectations  of  wealth  and  afflu- 
ence, but  a  great  number  of  families  were  absolutely 
ruined  by  the  miscarriage  of  the  design,  which  they  im- 
puted solely  to  the  conduct  of  king  William.  The  whole 
kingdom  of  Scotland  seemed  to  join  in  the  clamour  that 
was  raised  against  their  sovereign^  taxed  him  with  double 
dealing,  inhumanity,  and  base  ingratitude,  to  a  people 
who  had  lavished  their  treasure  and  best  blood  in  sup- 
port of  his  government,  and  in  the  gratification  of  his 
ambition :  and,  had  their  power  been  equal  to  their: 
vol,  i.  *  2  A 


350  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1699 

animosity,  in  all  probability  &  rebellion  would  have  en- 
sued. 

§  XXI.  William,  meanwhile,  enjoyed  himself  at  Loo, 
where,  he  was  visited  by  the  duke  of  Zell,  with  whom  he 
had  long  cultivated  an  intimacy  of  friendship.  During 
his  residence  in  this  place,  the  earl  of  Portland,  and  the, 
grand  pensionary  of  Holland,  frequently  conferred  with 
the  French  ambassador,  count  Tallard,  upon  the  subject 
of  the  Spanish  succession.  The  first  plan  of  the  partition 
being  defeated  by  the  death  of  tbe  young  prince  of  Ba- 
varia, they  found  it  necessary  to  concert  another,  and  be- 
gan a  private  -  negotiation  for  that  purpose.  The  court 
of  Spain,  apprised  of  their  intention,  sent  a  written  re- 
monstrance to  Mr.  Stanhope,  the  English  minister  at 
Madrid,  expressing  their  resentment  at  this  unprece- 
dented method  of  proceeding,  and  desiring  that  a  stop 
might  be  put  to  those  intrigues,  seeing  the  king  of  Spain 
would  of  himself  take  the  necessary  steps  for  preserving 
the  public  tranquillity,  in  case  he  should  die  without 
heirs  of  his  body.  A  representation  of  the  same  kind 
was  made  to  the  ministers  of  France  and  Holland:  the, 
marquis  de  Canales,  the  Spanish  ambassador  at  London, 
delivered  a  memorial  to  the  lords-justices,  couched  in 
the  most  virulent  terms  against  this  transaction,  and 
even  appealing  from  the  king  to  the  parliament.  This 
Spaniard  was  pleased  with  an  opportunity  to  insult  king 
William,  who  hated  his  person,  and  had  forbid  him  the 
court,  on  account  of  his  appearing  covered  in  his  majes- 
ty's presence.  The  regency  had  no  sooner  communi- 
cated this  paper  to  the  king,  than  he  ordered  the  ambas- 
sador to  quit  the  kingdom  in  eighteen  days,  and  to  re- 
main within  his  own  house  till  the  time  of  his  departure. 
He  was  likewise  given  to  understand,  that  no  writing 
would  be  received  from  him,  or  any  of  his  domestics. 
Mr.  Stanhope  was  directed  to  complain,  at  Madrid,  of 
the  affront  offered  to  his  master,  which  he  styled  an  in- 
solent and  saucy  attempt  to  stir  up  sedition  in  the  king- 


1099.  WILLIAM.  351 

dom,  by  appealing  to  the  people  and  parliament  of  Eng- 
land against  his  majesty.  The  court  of  Spain  justified 
what  their  minister  had  done,  and,  in  their  turn,  order- 
ed Mr.  Stanhope  to  leave  their  dominions.  Don  Ber- 
nardo de  Quiros,  the  Spanish  ambassador  in  Holland, 
prepared  a  memorial  oh  the  same  subject  to  the  states- 
general  ;  which,  however,  they  refused  to  accept.  These 
remonstrances  did  not  interrupt  the  negotiation,  in 
which  Lewis  was  so  eager,  that  he  complained  of  Wil- 
liam, as  if  he  had  not  employed;  his  whole  influence  in 
prevailing  upon  the  Dutch  to  signify  their  accession  to 
the  articles  agreed  upon  by  Prance  and  England :  but 
his  Britannic  majesty  found  means  to  remove  this 
jealousy. 

$  XXII.  About  the  middle  of  October,  William  re- 
turned to  England,  and  conferred  upon  the  duke  of 
Shrewsbury  the  office  of  chamberlain,  vacant  since  the 
resignation  of  Sunderland.  Mr.  Montagiie  at  the  same 
period  resigned  his  seat  at  the  treasury-board,  together 
with  the  chancellorship  of  the  exchequer ;  either  fore- 
seeing uncommon  difficulty  in  managing  a  house  of 
commons,  after  they  had  been  dismissed  in  111- humour, 
or  dreading  the  interest  of  his  enemies,  who  might 
procure  a  vote  that  his  two  places  were  inconsistent. 
The  king  opened  the"  session  of  parliament  on  the  1 6tii 
day  of  November,  with  a  long  speech,  advising  a  farther 
provision  for  the  safety  of  the  kingdom  by  sea  and  land, 
as  well  as  the  repairs  of  ships  and  fortifications ;  exhort- 
ing the  commons  to  make  good  the  deficiencies  of  the 
funds,  discharge  the  debts  of  the  nation,  and  provide  the 
necessary  supplies.  He  recommended  sdme  good  bill 
fot  the  more  effectual  preventing  and  punishing  unlaw- 
ful and  clandestine  trading ;  and  expressed  a  desire,  that 
some  method  should  be  taken  for  employing  the  poor, 
which  were  become  a  burden  to  the  kingdom.  He  as- 
sured them,  his  resolutions  were  to  countenance  virtue, 
arid  discourage  vice:  and  that  he  would  decline  no  diffi- 

3A2 


352  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  IC99. 

critics  and  dangers,  where  the  welfare  and  prosperity  of 
the  nation  might  be  concerned.  He  concluded  with 
these  words:  "  Since  then  our  aims  are  only  for  the 
general  good,  let  us  act  with  confidence  in  one  another; 
which  will  not  fail,  with  God's  blessing,  to  make  me  a 
happy  king,  and  you  a  great  and  flourishing  people.5* — 
The  commons  were  now  become  wanton  in  their  disgust. 
Though  they  had  received  no  real  provocation*  they  re- 
solved to  mortify  him  with  their  proceedings.  They 
affected  to  put  odious  interpretations  on  the  very  harm- 
less expression  of  "  Let  us  act  with  confidence  in  one 
another."  Instead  of  an  address  of  thanks,  according 
to  the  usual  custom,  they  presented  a  sullen  remon- 
strance, complaining  that  a  jealousy  and  disgust  had  been 
raised  of  their  duty  and  affection  ;  and  desiring  he  would 
shew  marks  of  his  high  displeasure  towards  a»  persons 
who  had  presumed  to  misrepresent  their  proceedings  to 
his  majesty.  He  declared,  in.  his  answer,  that  no  person 
had  ever  dared  to  misrepresent  their  proceedings,  and 
that,  if  any  should  presume  to  impose  upon  htm  by  such 
calumnies,  he  would  treat  them  as  his  worst  enemies. 

§  XXIIL  The  house  was  not  in  a  humour  to  be  ap- 
peased with  soothing  promises  and  protestations ;  they 
determined  to  distress  him,  by  prosecuting  his  ministers. 
During  the  war,  the  colonies  of  North  America  had 
grown  rich  by  piracy.  One  Kidd,  the  master  of  a  sloop, 
undertook  to  suppress  the  pirates,  provided  the  govern- 
ment would  furnish  him  with  a  ship  of  thirty  guns,  well 
manned.  The  board  of  admiralty  declaring  that  such  a 
number  of  seamen  could  not  be  spared  from  the  public 
service,  Kidd  was  equipped  by  the  private  subscription 
of  the  lord-chancellor,  the  duke  of  Shrewsbury,  the 
earls  of  Romney,  Orford,  and  Beliamont,  sir  Edward 
Harrison,  and  colonel  Livingstone  of  New  York.  The 
king  promised  to  contribute  one  half  of  the  expense,  and 
reserved  to  himself  one- tenth  of  the  profits;  but  he 
never  advanced  the  money.     Kidd,: being  thus  equipped 


WILLIAM.  3^3 

and  provided  with  a  commission  to  act  against  the 
French,  as  well  as  to  make  war  on  certain  pirates  there-" 
in  mentioned  hy  name,  set  sail  from  Plymouth ;  but, 
instead  of  cruising  on  the  coast  of  America,  he  directed 
his  course  to  the  East  Indies,  where  he  himself  turned 
pirate,  and  took  a  rich  ship  belonging  to  the  Mooes. 
Having  divided  his  booty  with  his  crew,  ninety  of  whom 
left  him,  in  order  to  join  other  adventurers,  he  burned 
his  own  ship,  and  sailed  with  his  prize  to  the  West  In- 
dies.   There  he  purchased  a  sloop,  in  which  he  steered 
for  North  America,  leaving  part  of  his  men  in  the  prize, 
to  remain  in  one  of  the  Leeward  islands  until  they  should 
receive  farther  instructions.    Arriving  on  the  coast  of 
New  York,  he  sent  one  Emmet  to  make  his  peace  with 
the  earl  of  Bellamont,  the  governor  of  that  province, 
who  inveigled  him  into  a  negotiation,  in  the  course  of 
which  he  was  apprehended.    Then  his  lordship  sent  an 
account  of  his  proceedings  to  the  secretary  of  state,  de- 
airing  that  he  would  send  for  the  prisoners  to  England, 
as  there  was  no  law  in  that  colony  for  punishing  piracy 
with  death,  and  the  majority  of  the  people  favoured  that 
practice.    The  admiralty,  by  order  of  the  lords-justices, 
dispatched  the  ship  Rochester  to  bring  home  the  pri- 
soners and  their  effects:  but,  after  having  been  tossed 
for  some  time  with  tempestuous  weather,  this  vessel 
was  obliged  to  return  to  Plymouth  in  a  shattered  condi- 
tion.   This  incident  furnished  the  maleconteqts  with  a 
.colour  to  paint  the  ministry  as  the  authors  and  ^bettors 
of  a  piratical  expedition,  which  they  wanted  to  screen 
from  the  cognizance  of  the  public.    The  old  East  In- 
dia company  had  complained  to  the  regency  of  the  cap- 
ture made  by  Kidd  in  the  East  Indies,  apprehending,  as 
the  vessel  belonged  to  the  Moors,  they  should  be  ex- 
posed to  the  resentment  of  the  Mogul.    In  the  begin- 
ning of  December,  this  subject  being  brought  abruptly 
into  the  house  of  commons,  a  motion  was  made,  That 
the  letters  patent  granted  to  the  earl  of  Bellamont  and 


354  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  M»- 

others/ of  pirates'  goods,  were  dishonourable  to  the  king, 
against  the  laws  of  nations,  contrary  to  the  laws  and 
statutes  of  the  land,  invasive  of  property,  and  destructive 
of  trade  and  commerce.  A  warm  debate  ensued,  in  the 
course  of  which  some  members  declaimed  with  great 
bitterness  against  the  chancellor  and  the  duke  of  Shrews- 
bury, as  partners  in  a  piratical  scheme ;  but  these  impu- 
tations were  refuted,  and  the  motion  was  rejected  by  a 
great  majority.  Not  but  they  might  have  justly  stig- 
matized the  expedition  as  a  little  mean  adventure,  in 
which  those  noblemen  had  embarked  with  a  view  to 

their  own  private  advantage.  

§  XXIV.  While  this  affair  was  in  agitation  among 
the  commons,  the  attention  of  the  upper  house  was  em* 
ployed  upon  the  case  of  Dr.  Watson,  bishop  of  St. 
David's.  This  prelate  was  supposed  to  have  paid  a 
valuable  consideration  for  his  bishoprick:  and,  after  his 
elevation,  had  sold  the  preferments  in  his  gift,  with  a 
view  of  being  reimbursed.  He  was  accused  of  simony ; 
and,  after,  a  solemn  hearing  before  the  archbishop  of 
Canterbury  and  six  suffragans,  convicted  and  deprived. 
Then  he  pleaded  his  privilege:  so  that  the  affair  was 
brought  into  the  house  of  lords,  who  refused  to  own 
him  as  a  peer  after  he  had  ceased  to  be  a  bishop.  Thus 
disappointed,  he  had  recourse  to  the  court  of  delegates, 
by  whom  the  archbishop's  sentence  was  confirmed.  The 
next  effort  that  the  commons  made,  with  a  view- of  mor- 
tifying king  William,  was  to  raise  a  clamour  against  Dr. 
Burnet,  bishop  of  Sarum.  He  was  represented  in  the 
house  as  a  very  unfit  preceptor  for  the  duke  of  Glouces- 
ter, both  as.  a  Scottish  man,  and  author  of  that  pastoral 
letter  which  had  been  burned  by  order  of  the  parliament, 
for  asserting  that  William  had  a  right  to  the  crown  from 
conquest.  A  motion  was  made  for  addressing  his  ma- 
jesty, that  this  prelate  might  be  dismissed  from  his  em- 
ployment, but  rejected  by  a  great  majority,  Burnet  had 
acted  with  uncommon  integrity  in  accepting  the  trust* 


WM.  WILLIAM.  365 

He  had  declined  the  office,  which  he  was  in  a  manner 
forced  to  accept.  He  had  offered  to  resign  hia  bishop* 
rick,  thinking  the  employment  of  a  tutor  would  inter- 
fere with  the  duty  of  a  pastor.  He  insisted  upon  the 
duke's  residence  all  the  summer  at  Windsor,  which  is  in 
the  diocess  of  Sarum ;  and  added  to  his  private  chari- 
ties the  whole  income  of  his  new  office. 

§  XXV.  The  circumstance  on  which  the  anti-courtiers 
built  their  chief  hope  of  distressing  or  disgracing  the  go- 
vernment, was  the  inquiry  into  the  Irish  forfeitures,  which 
the  king  had  distributed  among  his  own  dependants. 
The  commissioners  appointed  by  parliament  to  examine 
these  particulars  were,   Annesley,  Trenchard,  Hamil- 
ton, Langford,  the  earl  of  Drogheda,  sir  Francis  Brew- 
ster, and  sir  Richard  Leving.    The  first  four  were  ac- 
tuated by  all  the  virulence  of  faction ;  the  other  three 
were  secretly  guided  by  ministerial  influence.    They 
began  their  inquiry  in  Ireland,  and  proceeded  with  such 
severity,  as  seemed  to  flow  rather  from  resentment  to 
the  court,  than  from  a  love  of  justice  and  abhorrence  of 
corruption.     They  in  particular  scrutinized  a  grant  of 
an  estate  which  the  king  had  made  to  Mrs.  Villiers,  now 
countess  of  Orkney,  so  as  to  expose  his  majesty's  par- 
tiality for  that  favourite,  and  subject  him  to  an  additional 
load  of  popular  odium.     In  the  course  of  their  examina- 
tion, the  earl  of  Drogheda,  Leving,  and  Brewster,  op- 
posed the  rest  of  the  commissioners  in  divers  articles  of 
the  report,  which  they  refused  to  sign,  and  sent  over  a 
memorial  to  the  house  of  commons,  explaining  their 
reasons  for  dissenting  from  their  colleagues.     By  this 
time,  however,  they  were  considered  as  hirelings  of  the 
court,  and  no  regard  was  paid  to  their  representations. 
The  others  delivered  their  report,  declaring  that  a  mil- 
lion and  a  half  of  money  might  be  raised  from  the  sale 
of  the  confiscated  estates ;  and  a  bill  was  brought  in  (of 
applying  them  to  the  use  of  the  public.     A  motion 
being  made  to  reserve  a  third  part  for  the  king's  disposal, 


350  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1009. 

it  was  overruled;  then  the  oommons  passed  an  extra- 
ordinary vote;  importing,  that  they  would  not  receive 
.any  petition  from  any  person  whatsoever  concerning 
the  grants;  and  that  they  would  consider  the  great 
services  performed  by  the  commissioners  appointed  to 
inquire  into  the  forfeited  estates.     They  resolved,  that 
the  four  commissioners  who  had  signed  the  report  had 
.  acquitted  themselves  with  understanding,  courage,  and 
integrity;  and  that  sir  Richard  Leving,  as  author  of 
groundless  and  scandalous  aspersions  cast  upon  his  four 
-  colleagues,  should  be  committed  prisoner  to  the  Tower* 
They  afterward  came  to  the  following  resolution,  which 
was  presented  to  the  king  in  form  of  an  address :  That 
the  procuring  and  passing  those  grants  had  occasioned 
great  debts  upon  the  nation,  and  heavy  taxes  upon  the 
people,  and  highly  reflected  upon  the  king's  honour; 
and  that  the  officers  and  instruments  concerned  in  the 
same  had  highly  failed  in  the  performance  of  their  trust 
and  duty.    The  king  answered,  that  he  was  not  only 
led  by  inclination,  but  thought  himself  obliged  in  jus- 
tice, to  reward  those  who  had  served  well  in  the  reduc- 
tion of  Ireland,  but  of  the  estates  forfeited  to  him  by 
the  rebellion  in  that  kingdom.    He  observed,  that  as 
the  long  war  had  left  the  nation  much  in  debt,  their 
taking  just  and  effectual  ways  for  lessening  that  debt, 
and  supporting  public  credit,  was  what,,  in  his  opinion, 
would  best  contribute  to  the  honour,  interest,  and  safety 
of  the  kingdom.    This  answer  kindled  a  flame  of  in- 
dignation in  the  house.     They  forthwith  resolved,  that 
the  adviser  of  it  had  used  his  utmost  endeavours  tocreate 
a  misunderstanding  and  jealousy  between  the  king  and 
his  people. 

§  XXVI.  They  prepared,  finished,  and  passed  a  bill 
of  resumption.  They  ordered  the  report  of  the  commis- 
sioners, together  with  the  king's  promise  and  speeches, 
and  the  former  resolutions  of  the  house  touching  the 
forfeited  estates  in  Ireland,  to  be  printed  and  published 


lea*  william.  357 

for  their  justification ;  and  tbey  resolved,  that  the  pro- 
curing or  passing  exorbitant  grants,  by  any  member, 
now  of  the  privy-council,  or  by  any  other  that  had  been 
p  privy-counsellor,  in  this  or  any  former  reign,  to  his 
use  or  benefit,  was  a  high  crime  and  misdemeanour. 
That  justice  might  be  done  to  purchasers  and  creditors 
in  the  act  of  resumption,  thirteen  trustees  were  autho- 
rized and  empowered  to  hear  and  determine  all  claims  re- 
lating to  those  estates,  to  sell  them  to  the  best  purchaser, 
and  the  money  arising  from  the  sale  was  appropriated  to 
pay  the  arrears  of  the  army.    It  passed  under  the  title 
of  a  bill  for  granting  an  aid  to  his  majesty,  by  the  sale 
of  forfeited  and  other  estates  and  interests  in  Ireland : 
and  that  it  might  undergo  no  alteration  in  the  house  of 
lords,  it  was  consolidated  with  the  money  bill  for  the 
service  of  the  year.    In  the  house  of  lords  it  produced 
warm  debates ;  and  some  alterations  were  made,  which 
the  commons  unanimously  rejected.    They  seemed  to 
be  now  more  than  ever  exasperated  against  the  minis- 
try, and  ordered  a  list  of  the  privy-council  to  be  laid 
before  the  house.    The  lords  demanded  conferences, 
which  served  only  to  exasperate  the  two  houses  against 
each  other ;  for  the  peers  insisted  upon  their  amend- 
ment, and  the  commons  were  so  provoked  at  their  inter- 
fering in  a  money  bill,  that  they  determined  to  give  a 
loose  to  their  resentment.    They  ordered  all  the  doors 
of  their  house  to  be  shut,  that  no  members  should  go 
forth.     Then  they  took  into  consideration  the  report  of 
the  Irish  forfeitures,  with  the  list  of  the  privy-counsel-; 

'  lors ;  and  a  question  was  moved,  That  an  address  should 
be  made  to  his  majesty,  to  remove  John  lord  Somers, 
chancellor  of  England,  from  his  presence  and  councils 
for  ever.  This,  however,  was  carried  in  the  negative 
by  a  great  majority.  The  king  was  extremely  char 
grined  at  the  bill,  which  he  considered  as  an  invasion  of 

'  his  prerogative,  an  insult  on  his  person,  and  an  injury 
to  his  friends  and  servants ;  and  he  at  first  resolved  to 


358  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1W0. 

hazard  all  the  consequences  of  refusing  to  pass  it  into  a 
law  ;  but  he  was  diverted  from  his  purpose  by  the  re- 
monstrances of  those  in  whom  he  chiefly  confided.*  He 
could  not,  however,  dissemble  his  resentment.  He  be- . 
catme  sullen,  peevish,  and  morose  ;  and  his  enemies  did 
hot  fail  to  make  use  of  this  additional  ill  humour,  as  a 
proof  of  his  aversion  to  the  English  people.  Though  the 
motion  against  the  chancellor  had  miscarried,  the  com- 
mons resolved  to  address  his  majesty,  that  no  person 
who  was  not  a  native  of  his  dominions,  except  his  royal 
highness  prince  George  of  Denmark,  should  be  admitted 
into  his  majesty's  councils  in  England  or  Ireland.  This 
resolution  was  levelled  against  the  earls  of  Portland, 
Albemarle,  and  Gal  way :  but,  before  the  address  could 
be  presented,  the  king  went  to  the  house  of  peers,  and 
having  passed  the  bill  which  had  produced  such  a  fer- 
ment, with  some  others,  commanded  the  earl  of  Bridge- 
water,  speaker  of  the  house,  in  the  absence  of  the  chan- 
cellor, who  was  indisposed,  to  prorogue  the  parliament 
to  the  23d  day  of  May. 

*  §  XXVII;  In  the  course  of  this  session,  the  com- 
mons having  prosecuted  their  inquiry  into  the  conduct 
of  Kidd,  brought  in  a  bill  for  the  more  effectual  sup- 
pressing of  piracy,  which  passed  into  a  law:  under- 
standing afterward  that  Kidd  was  brought  over  to  Eng- 
land, they  presented  an  address  to  the  king,  desiring  that 
he  might  not  be  tried,  discharged,  or  pardoned,  till  the 
next  session  of  parliament ;  and  his  majesty  complied 
with  their  request.  Boiling  still  with  indignation  against 
the  lord-chanoellor,  who  had  turned  many  disaffected 
persons  out  of  the  commission  of  the  peace,  the  house 
ordered  a  bill  to  be  prepared  for  qualifying  justices  of 
the  peace;  and  appointed  a  committee  to  inspect  the 
commissions.    This,  reporting  that  many  dissenters  and 

men  of  small  fortunes,  depending  on  the  court,  were  put 

.  ■        '  ■.     >  ■  ■        * 

a  Burnet.      Oldmixon,     Cole's  Mem-     Slate  Tracts.     Lamberty. 
Tindal.    Ralph. 


1700.  WILLIAM.  359 

into  those  places,  the  commons  declared,  in  an  address, 
that  it  would  much  conduce  to  the  service  of  his  ma- 
jesty, and  the  good  of  this  kingdom,  that  gentlemen  of 
quality  and  good  estates  should  be  restored,  and  put  into 
the  commissions  of  the  peace  and  lieutenancy :  and  that 
men  of  small  estates  be  neither  continued,  nor  put  into 
the  said  commissions.    The  king  assured  them  he  was 
of  the  same  opinion  ;  and  that  he  would  give  directions 
accordingly.     They  were  so  mollified  by  this  instance 
of  his  condescension,   that  they  thanked  him   in  a 
body  for  his .  gracious  answer.     They  passed  a  bill  to 
-exculpate  such  as  had  neglected  to  sign  the  association, 
either  through  mistake  or  want  of  opportunity.  Having 
received  a  petition  from  the  Lancashire  clergy,  complain- 
ing of  the  insolence  and  attempts  of  popish  priests, 
they  appointed  a  committee  to  inquire  how  for  the  laws 
against  popish  refugees  had  been  put  in  execution ;  and, 
upon  the  report,  a  bill  was  brought  in,  complying  with 
the  prayer  of  the  petition.     It  decreed  a  farther  reward 
to  such  persons  as  should  discover  and  convict  popish 
priests  and  Jesuits;  and   perpetual  imprisonment  for 
those  convicted  on  the  oath  of  one  or  more  witnesses. 
It  enacted,  That  no  person  born  after  the  25  th  day  of 
March  next  ensuing,  being  a  Papist,  should  be  capable  of 
inheriting  any  title  of  honour,  or  estate,  within  the  king- 
dom of  England,  dominion  of  Wales,  or  town  of  Ber- 
wick-upon-Tweed :  and  £hat  no  Papist  should  be  capable 
of  purchasing  any  lands,  tenements,  or  hereditaments, 
either  in  his  own  name,  or  in  the  name  of  any  other 
person  in  trust  for  him-    Several  alterations  were  made 
in  this  first  draft,  before  it  was  finished  and  sent  up 
to  the  lords,  some  of  whom  proposed  amendments : 
these,  however,  were  not  adopted;  and  the  bill  ob- 
tained the  royal  assent,  contrary  to  the  expectation  of 
those  who  prosecuted,  the  measure,  on   the  supposi- 
tion that  the  king  was.  a  favourer  of  the  Papists.     After 
all  the  bill  was  deficient  in  necessary  clauses  to  enforce 


360  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1700* 

execution ;  so  that  the  law  was  very  little  regarded  in 
the  sequel.  ' 

§  XXVIII.  The  court  sustained  another  insult  from 
the  old  East  India  company,  who  petitioned  the  house 
that  they  might  be  continued,  by  parliamentary  autho- 
rity, during  the  remaining  part  of  the  time  prescribed 
in  their  charter.  They,  at  the  same  time,  published  a 
state  of  their  case,  in  which  they  expatiated  upon  the 
equity  of  their  claims,  and  magnified  the  injuries  they 
had  undergone.  The  new  company  drew  up  an  answer 
to  this  m  remonstrance,  exposing  the  corrupt  practices  of 
their  adversaries.  But  the  influence  of  their  great  patron, 
Mr.  Montague,  was  now  vanished :  the  supply  was  not 
yet  discussed,  and  the  ministry  would  not  venture  to  pro- 
voke the  commons,  who  seemed  propitious  to  the  old 
company,  and  actually  passed  a  bill  in  their  favour. 
This,  meeting  with  no  opposition  in  the  upper  house, 
was  enacted  into  a  law,  renewing  their  establishment : 
so  that  now  there  were  two  rival  companies  of  merchants 
trading  to  the  East  Indies.  The  commons,  not  yet  satis- 
fied with  the  vexations  to  which  they  had  exposed  their 
sovereign,  passed  a  bill  to  appoint  commissioners  for 
taking  and  examining  the  public  accounts.  Another  law 
was  made,  to  prohibit  the  use  of  India  silks  and  stuffs 
which  interfered  with  the  English  manufactures :  a  third, 
to  take  off  the  duties  on  the  exportation  of  woollen  ma- 
nufactures, corn,  grain,  meal,  bread,  and  biscuit;  and  a 
fourth,  in  which  provision  was  made  for  punishing  go- 
vernors, or  commanders-in-chief,  of  plantations  and  co- 
lonies, in  case  they  should  commit  any  crimes  or  acts  of 
injustice  and  oppression  in  the  exercise  of  their  admi- 
nistration. 

§  XXIX.  The  people  of  Scotland  still  continued  in  a 
voilent  agitation.  They  published  a  pamphlet,  contain- 
ing a  detail  of  their  grievances,  which  they  in  a  great 
measure  ascribed  to  his  majesty.  A  complaint  being 
preferred  to  the  house  of  commons  against  this  per- 


170fc  WILLIAM*  301 

fon&ance,  it  was  voted  a  false,  scandalous,  and  traitorous 
libel*  and  ordered  to  be  burned  by  the  hands  of  the 
common  hangman.    The  commons  addressed  his  ma- 
jesty, to  issue  his  royal  proclamation  for  apprehending 
the  author,  printer,  and  publisher,  of  the  said  libel ;  and 
he  complied  with  their  request.     The  Scottish  company 
had  sent  up  an  address  to  the  king,  in  behalf  of  some 
adventurers  who  were  wrongfully  detained  prisoners 
in  Carthagena :  but  lord  Basil  Hamilton,  who  under- 
took the  charge  of  this  petition}  was  refused  admit- 
tance to  his  majesty,  on  pretence  of  his  being  suspected 
of  disaffection  to  the  government.    The  king,  how- 
ever,  wrote  to  his  council  for  Scotland,  that  he  would 
demand  the  enlargement  of  the  prisoners,  and  counte- 
nance any  laudable  measure  that  could  advance  the  trade 
of  that  kingdom.    The  directors  of  the  company,  not 
content  with  this  declaration,  importuned  their  lord- 
chancellor,  who  was  in  London,  to  procure  access  for 
lord  Basil  Hamilton ;  and  the  ministry  took  shelter  from 
their  solicitations  behind  a  parliamentary  inquiry.    The 
subject  of  the  Scottish  colony  being  introduced  into  the 
house  of  lords,  where  the  ministerial  influence  prepon- 
derated,  a  vehement  debate  arose,  not  frpm  any  regard 
to  the  interest  of  Scotland,  but  from  mere  opposition  to 
the  court,  which,  however,  triumphed  in  the  issue.    A" 
motion  was  made,  that  the  settlement  of  the  Scotch  co- 
lony at  Darien  was  inconsistent  with  the  good  of  the 
plantation  trade  of  England ;  and  passed  in  the  affirma- 
tive by  a  small  majority.    Then  they  presented  an  ad- 
dress, declaring  their  sympathy  with  the  losses  of  their 
fellow-subjects,  and  their  opinion,  that  a  prosecution  of 
the  design  must'  end,  n&  only  in  far  greater  disappoint- 
ments to  themselves,  but  also  prove  very  inconvenient 
to  the  trade  and  quiet  of  the  kingdom.    They  reminded 
him  of  the  address  of  both  houses,  touching  that  settle- 
ment ;  and  they  expressed  their  approbation  of  the  orders 
he  had  sent  to  the  governors  of  the  pkritations  on  this 


362  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1700. 

subject  The  king,  in  his  answer  to  the  address,  in 
which  the  commons  refused  to  toncur,  took  the  oppor- 
tunity of  exhorting  them  to  consider  of  a  union  be- 
tween the  two  kingdoms,  as  a  measure,  than  which  no- 
thing could  more  contribute  to  their  mutual  security 
and  advantage.  The  lords,  in  pursuance  of  this  advice, 
prepared  a  bill,  appointing  certain  commissioners  of  the 
realm  of  England  to  treat  with  commissioners  of?  Scot- 
land for  the  weal  of  both  kingdoms :  but  it  was  obstructed 
in  the  house  of  commons,  who  were  determined  to  thwart 
every  step  that  might  tend  to  lessen  the  disgust,  or  ap- 
pease the  animosity,  of  the  Scottish  nation.  The  male- 
contents  insinuated,  that  the  king's  opposition  to  the 
Scottish  company  flowed  neither  from  his  regard  to  the 
interest  of  England,  nor  from  his  puttfctual  observance 
of  treaties  with  Spain ;  but  solely  from  his  attachment  to 
the  Dutch,  who  maintained  an  advantageous  trade  from 
the  island  of  Cura^oa  to  the  Spanish  plantations  in  Ame- 
rica, and  were  apprehensive  that  the  Scottish  company 
would  deprive  them  of  this  commerce.  This  interpret 
tation  served  as  fuel  to  the  flame  already  kindled  in  Scot- 
land, and  industriously  blown  up  by  the  calumnies  of 
the  Jacobites.  Their  parliament  adopted  the  company 
as  a  national  concern,  by  voting,  That  the  colony  of 
Caledonia  in  Darien  was  a  legal  and  rightful  settle- 
ment, which  the  parliament  would  maintain  and  sup- 
port. On  account  of  this  resolution,  the  session  was 
for  some  time  discontinued :  but,  when  the  Scots  un- 
derstood their  new  settlement  was  totally  abandoned, 
their  capital  lost,  and  all  their  hope  entirely  vanished* 
the  whole  nation  was  seized  with  a  transport  pf  fury. 
They  loudly  exclaimed,  that  they  had  been  sacrificed 
and  basely  betrayed  in  that  quarter,  where  th6y  were 
entitled  to  protection.  They  concerted  an  address  to 
the  king,  couched  in  a  very  high  strain,  representing 
the  necessity  of  an  immediate  parliament.  It  was  cir- 
culated about  the  kingdom  for  subscriptions,  signed  by 


1700.  WILLIAM,  303 

a  great  number  of  those  who  sat  in  parliament,  and  pre- 
sented to  the  king  by  lord  Ross,  who  with  some  others 
was  deputed  for  that  purpose.     The  king  told  them, 
they  should  know  his  intention  in  Scotland ;  and  in  the 
mean  time  adjourned  their  parliament  by  proclamation. 
The  people,  exasperated  at  this  new  provocation,  began 
to  form  the  draft  of  a  second  national  address/  to  be. 
signed  by  the  shires  and  boroughs  of  the  kingdom ;  but, 
before  this  could  be  finished,  the  king  wrote  a  letter  to 
the  duke  of  Queensberry,  and  the  privy-council  of  that 
nation,  which  was  published  for  the  satisfaction  of  the 
people.     He  professed  himself  grieved  at  the  nation's 
loss,  and  willing  to  grant  what  might  be  needful  for  the 
relief  and  ease  of  the  kingdom.     He  assured  them  he 
had  their  interest  at  heart ;  and  that  his  good  subjects 
should  have  convincing  proofs  of  his  sincere  inclination 
to  advance  the  wealth  and  prosperity  of  that  his  ancient 
kingdom.     He  said,  he  hoped  this  declaration  would 
be  satisfactory  to  all  good  men :  that  they  would  not 
suffer  themselves  to  be  misled :  nor  give  advantage  to 
enemies,  and  ill-designing  persons,  ready  to  seize  every 
opportunity  of  embroiling  the  government.     He  gave 
them  to  understand,  that  his  necessary  absence  had  oc- 
casioned the  late  adjournment;   but  as  soon  as  God 
should  bring  him  back,  their  parliament  should  be  as- 
sembled.   Even  this  explanation,  seconded  by  all  the 
credit  and  address  of  his  ministers,  failed  in  allaying 
the  national  ferment,  which  rose  to  the  very  verge  of 
rebellion. 

§  XXX.  The  king,  who,  from  his  first  accession  to 
the  throne,  had  veered  occasionally  from  one  party  to 
another,  according  to  the  circumstances  of  his  affairs,  and 
the  opposition  he  encountered,  was  at  this  period  so  in- 
censed and  embarrassed  by  the  caprice  and  insolence  of  the 
commons,  that  he  willingly  lent  an  ear  to  the  leaders  of 
the  tories,  who  undertook  to  manage  the  parliament  ac- 
cording to  his  pleasure,  provided  he  would  part  with 


364  HISTORY  OP  ENGLAND.  1700. 

some  of  his  ministers,  who  were  peculiarly  odious  to  the  • 
commons.  The  person  against  whom  their  anger  was 
chiefly  directed,  was  the  lord-chancellor  Somers,  the 
most  active  leader  of  the  whig  party.  They  demanded 
his  dismission,  and  the  king  exhorted  him  to  resign  his 
office ;  but  he  refusing  to  take  any  step  that  might  in- 
dicate a  fear  of  his  enemies,  or  a  consciousness  of  guilt, 
the  king  sent  a  peremptory  order  for  the  seals  by  the 
lord  Jersey,  to  whom  Somers  delivered  them  without  he- 
sitation. They  were  successively  offered  to  lord-chief- 
justice  Holt,  and  Trevor,  the  attorney-general,  who  de- 
clined accepting  such  a  precarious  office.  Meanwhile,,, 
the  king  granted  a  temporary  commission  to  three  judges 
to  sit  in  the  court  of  chancery;  and  at  length  bestowed 
the  seals,  with  the  title  of  lord-keeper,  on  Nathan 
Wright,  one  of  the  Serjeants  at  law,  a  man  but  indiffer- 
ently qualified  for  the  office  to  which  he  was  now  pre- 
ferred. Though  William  seemed  altogether  attached  to 
the  tories,  and  inclined  to  a  new  parliament,  no  person 
appeared  to  take  the  lead  in  the  affairs  of  government ; 
and,  indeed,  for  some  time  the  administration  seemed  to 
be  under  no  particular  direction. 

.§  XXXI.  During  the  transactions  of  the  last  session, 
the  negotiation  for  a  second  partition-treaty  had  been 
carried  on  in  London  by  the  French  minister  Tallard, 
in  conjunction  with  the  earls  of  Portland  and  Jersey, 
and  was  soon  brought  to  perfection.  On  the  21st 
day  of  February  the  treaty  was  signed  in  London ; 
and  on  the  25th  of  the  next  month  it  was  subscribed 
at  the  Hague  by  Briord,  the  French  envoy,  and  the 
plenipotentiaries  of  the  states-general.  By  this  con- 
vention the  treaty  of  Ryswickwas  confirmed.  The  con- 
tracting parties  agreed,  that,  in  case  of  his  Catholic  ma- 
jesty's dying  without  issue,  the  dauphin  should  possess, 
for  himself  and  his  heirs,  the  kingdoms  of  Naples  and 
Sicily,  the  islands  of  St.  Stephano,  Porto  Hercole,  Or- 
bitello,  Telamone,  Porto  Longone,  Piombino,  the  city 


170Q.  WILLIAM.  QQfr 

ami  mwrqufefte  of  fina],  the  province  of  Guipuscob,  the 
dijtchies  of  Lorraine  and  Bar ;  in  exchange  for  which 
last,  tye  duke  of  Lorraine  should  enjoy  the  dijtchy  of 
Milan  ;  but  that  the  county  of  Biche  should  remain  in 
sovereignty  to  the  prince  of  Vaudemont:  that  the  arch- 
4pke  Charles  should  inherit  the  kingdom  of  Spain,  and 
all  its  dependencies  in  and  out  of  Europe :  but,  in  case  of 
l)is  dying  without  issue,  it  should  devolve  to  some  other 
child  of  the  emperor,  excepting  him  who  might  succeed 
as  emperor,  or  king  of  the  Romans :  that  this  monarchy 
should  never  descend  to  a  king  of  France,  or  dauphin; 
and  that  three  months  should  be  allowed  to  the  emperor, 
to  consider  whether  or  not  he  would  accede  to  this  treaty, 
Whether  the  French  king  was  really  sincere  in  his  pro- 
fessions at  this  juncture,  or  proposed  this  treaty  with  a 
view  to  make  4  clandestine  use  of  it  at  the  court  of  Spain 
for  more  interested  purposes,  it  is  not  easy  to  determine ; 
at  first,  however,  it  was  concealed  from  the  notice  of 
the  public,  as  if  the  parties  had  resolved  to  take  no  step 
in  consequence  of  it,  during  the  life  of  his  Catholic 
majesty. 

§  XXXII.  In  the  beginning  of  July,  the  king  em- 
barked for  Holland,  after  haying  appointed  a  regency 
fto  govern  the  kingdom  in  his  absence.  On  the  2pth 
flay  of  the  same  month,  the  young  duke  of  Gloucester, 
the  only  remaining  child  of  seventeen  which  the  princess 
Anne  had  born,  died  of  a  malignant  fever,  in  the  ele- 
venth year  of  his  age.  His  death  was  much  lamented 
by  the  greater  part  of  the  English  nation,  not  only  on 
account  of  his  promising  talents  ?nd  gentle  behaviour, 
but  also  as  it  left  the  succession  undetermined,  and  might 
create  disputes  of  fatal  consequence  to  the  nation.  The 
Jacobites  openly  exulted  in  an  event  which  they  ima- 
gined would  remove  the  chief  bar  to  the  interests  of  the 
prince  pf  Wales :  but  the  Protestants  generally  turned 
their  eyes  #pon  the  pfincess  Sophia,  electress-dowager 
of  Hanover,  and  granddaughter  of  James  I.     It  was 

vol.  1.  *  2  B 


366  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1700 

with  a  view  to  concert  the  establishment  of  her  suc- 
cession, that  the  court  of  Brunswick  now  returned  the 
visit  of  king  William.  The  present  state  of  aflat rs  in 
England,  however,  afforded  a  very  uncomfortable  pros- 
pect. The  ptople  were  generally  alienated  from  the 
person  and  government  of  the  reigning  king,  upon 
whom  they  seem  to  have  surfeited.  The  vigour  of  their 
minds  was  destroyed  by  luxury  and  sloth :  the  severity 
of  their  morals  was  relaxed  by  a  long  habit  of  venality 
wid  corruption.  The  king's  health  began  to  decline, 
and  even  his  faculties  decayed  apace.  No  person  was 
appointed  to  ascend  the  throne  when  it  should  become 
vacant.  The  Jacobite  faction  alone  was  eager,  vigilant, 
enterprising,  and  elate.  They  dispatched  Mr.  Graham, 
brother  of  lord  Preston,  to  the  court  of  St.  Germains, 
immediately  after  the  death  of  the  duke  of  Gloucester : 
they  began  to  bestir  themselves  all  over  the  kingdom. 
A  report  was  spread  that  the  princess  Anne  had  privately 
sent  a  message  to  her  father ;  and  Britain  was  once 
more  threatened  with  civil  war,  confusion,  anarchy,  and 
ruin. 

§  XXXIII.  In  the  meantime,  king  William  was  not 
inactive.  The  kings  of  Denmark  and  Poland,  with  the 
elector  of  Brandenburgh,  had  formed  a  league  to  crush 
the  young  king  of  Sweden,  by  invading  his  dominions 
on  different  sides.  The  Poles  actually  entered  Livonia, 
and  undertook  the  siege  of  Riga :  the  king  of  Denmark, 
having  demolished  some  forts  in  Holstein,  the  duke  of 
which  was  connected  with  Sweden,  invested  Tonning- 
hen.  The  Swedish  minister  in  England  demanded  that 
assistance  of  William  which  had  been  stipulated  in  a 
late  renewal  of  the  ancient  treaty  between  England  and 
Sweden.  The  states  of  Holland  were  solicited  to  the  same 
purpose.  Accordingly,  a  fleet  of  thirty  sail,  English  and 
Dutch,  was  sent  to  the  Baltic,  under  the  command  of 
sir  George  Rooke,  who  joined  the  Swedish  squadron, 
and  bombarded  Copenhagen,  to  which  the  Danish  fleet 


1700.  WILLIAM.  367 

had  retired.  At  the  same  time  the  duke  of  Lunenbourg, 
with  the  Swedish  forces  which  happened  to  beat  Bremen, 
passed  the  Elbe/  and  marched  to  the  assistance  of  the 
duke  of  Holstein.  The  Danes  immediately  abandoned 
the  siege  of  Tonninghen ;  and  a  body  of  Saxons,  who 
had  made  an  irruption  into  the  territories  of  the  duke  of 
Brunswick,  were  obliged  to  retreat  in  disorder.  By  the 
mediation  of  William,  a  negotiation  was  begun  for  a 
treaty  between  Sweden  and  Denmark,  which,  in  order 
to  quicken,  Charles,  the  young  king  of  Sweden,  made  a 
descent  upon  the  isle  of  Zealand.  This  was  executed 
with  great  success.  Charles  was  the  first  man  who 
landed ;  and  here  he  exhibited  such  marks  of  courage 
and  conduct,  far  above  his  years,  as  equally  astonished 
and  intimidated  his  adversaries.  Then  he  determined  to 
besiege  Copenhagen ;  a  resolution  that  struck  such  ter- 
ror into  the  Danes,  that  they  proceeded  with  redoubled 
diligence  in  the  treaty,  which  was  brought  to  a  conclu- 
sion, between  Denmark,  Sweden,  and  Holstein,  about 
the  middle  of  August.  Then  the  Swedes  retired  to 
Schonen,  and  the  squadrons  of  the  maritime  powers  re- 
turned from  the  Baltic. 

§  XXXIV.  When  the  new  partition-treaty  was  com* 
municated  by  the  ministers  of  the  contracting  parties  to 
the  other  powers  of  Europe,  it  generally  met  with  a  very 
unfavourable  construction.  Saxony  and  the  northern 
crowns  were  still  embroiled  with  their  own  quarrels,  con- 
sequently could  not  give  much  attention  to  such  a  re- 
mote transaction.  The  pHnces  of  Germany  appeared 
cautious  and  dilatory  in  their  answers,  unwilling  to  be 
concerned  in  any  plan  that  might  excite  the  resentment 
of  the  house  of  Austria.  The  elector  of  Brandenburgh, 
in  particular,  had  set  his  heart  upon  the  regal  dignity, 
which  he  hoped  to  obtain  from  the  favour  and  au- 
thority of  the  emperor.  The  Italian  states  were  averse 
to  the  partition-treaty,  from  their  apprehension  of  seeing 
France  in  possession  of  Naples,  and  other  districts  of 

2  B  2 


368  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1700. 

their  country.  The  duke  of  Savoy  afiected  a  mysterious 
neutrality,  in  hopes  of  being  able  to  barter  his  consent 
for  some  considerable  advantage.  The  Swiss  cantons 
declined  acceding  as  guarantees.  The  emperor  expressed 
his  astonishment  that  any  disposition  should  be  made  of 
the  Spanish  monarchy  without  the  consent  of  the  present 
possessor,  and  the  states  of  the  kingdom.  He  observed 
that  neither  justice  nor  decorum  could  warrant  the  con- 
tracting powers  to  compel  him,  who  was  the  rightful 
heir,  to  accept  a  part  of  his  inheritance  within  three 
months,  under  penalty  of  forfeiting  even  that  share  to  a 
third  person  not  yet  named ;  and  he  declared,  that  he 
could  take  no  final  resolution,  until  he  should  know  the 
sentiments  of  his  Catholic  majesty,  on  an  affair  in  which 
their  mutual  interest  was  so  nearly  concerned.  Leopold 
was  actually  engaged  in  a  negotiation  with  the  king  of 
Spain,  who  signed  a  will  in  favour  of  his  second  son 
Charles :  yet  he  took  no  measures  to  support  the  dispo- 
sition, either  by  sending  the  archduke  with  a  sufficient 
force  to  Spain,  or  by  detaching  troops  into  Italy. 

§  XXXV.  The  people  of  Spain  were  exasperated  at 
the  insolence  of  the  three  foreign  powers  who  pretended 
to  parcel  out  their  dominions.  Their  pride  took  the 
alarm,  at  the  prospect  of  their  monarchy's  being  dis- 
membered :  and  their  grandees  repined  at  the  thought 
of  losing  so  many  lucrative  governments  which  they  now 
enjoyed.  The  king's  life  became  every  day  more  and 
more  precarious,  from  frequent  returns  of  his  disorder. 
The  ministry  was  weak  and  divided,  the  nobility  factious, 
and  the  people  discontented.  The  hearts  of  the  nation 
had  been  alienated  from  the  house  of  Austria,  by  the  in- 
solent carriage  and  rapacious  disposition  of  the  queen 
Mariana.  The  French  had  gained  over  to  their  interests 
the  cardinal  Portocarrero,  the  marquis  de  Monterey, 
with  many  other  noblemen  and  persons  of  distinction., 
These,  perceiving  the  sentiments  of  the  people,  em- 
ployed their  emissaries  to  raise  a  general  cry  that  France 


1700.  WILLIAM.  309 

alone  could  maintain  the  succession  entire:  that  the 
house  of  Austria  was  feeble  and  exhausted,  and  any 
prince  of  that  line  must  owe  his  chief  support  to  detest- 
pble  heretics.  Portocarrero  tampered  with  the  weakness 
of  his  sovereigh.  He  repeated  and  exaggerated  all  these 
suggestions ;  he  advised  him  to  consult  pope  Innocent 
XII.  on  this  momentous  point  of  regulating  the  succes- 
sion* That  pontiff,  who  was  a  creature  of  France, 
having  taken  the  advice  of  a  college  of  cardinals,  deter- 
mined that  the  renunciation  of  Maria  Theresa  was  in- 
valid and  null,  as  being  founded  upon  compulsion,  and 
contrary  to  the  fundamental  laws  of  the  Spanish  monar- 
chy. He  therefore  exhorted  king  Charles  to  contribute 
to  the  propagation  of  the  faith,  and  the  repose  of  Chris- 
tendom, by  making  a  new  will  in  favour  of  a  grandson 
of  the  French  monarch.  This  admonition  was  seconded 
by  the  remonstrances  of  Portocarrero :  and  the  weak 
prince  complied  with  the  proposal.  In  the  meantime, 
the  king  of  France  seemed  to  act  heartily,  as  a  principal 
in  the  treaty  of  partition.  His  ministers  at  foreign  courts 
co-operated  with  those  of  the  maritime  powers,  in  soli- 
citing the  accession  of  the  different  potentates  in  Europe. 
When  count  Zinzendorf,  the  imperial  ambassador  at 
Paris,  presented  a  memorial,  desiring  to  know  what  part 
France  would  act,  should  the  king  of  Spain  voluntarily 
place  a  grandson  of  Lewis  upon  the  throne,  the  marquis 
de  Torcy  answered  in  writing,  that  his  most  Christian 
majesty  would  by  no  means  listen  to  such  a  proposal : 
nay,  when  the  emperor's  minister  gave  thfcm  to  under- 
stand that  his  master  was  ready  to  begin  a  separate  ne- 
gotiation with  the  court  at  Versailles,  touching  the  Spa- 
nish succession,  Lewis  declared  he  could  not  treat  on 
that  subject  without  the  concurrence  of  his  allies. 

§  XXXVI.  The  nature  of  the  partition-treaty  was  no 
sooner  known  in  England,  than  condemned  by  the  most 
intelligent  part  of  the  nation.  They  first  of  all  com- 
plained, that  such  an  important  affair  should  be  con- 


370  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1700. 

eluded  without  the  advice  of  parliament.  They  observed 
that  the  scheme  was  unjust,  and  the  execution  of  it  ha- 
zardous :  that,  in  concerting  the  terms,  the  maritime 
powers  seemed  to  have  acted  as  partisans  of  France :  for 
the  possession  of  Naples  and  the  Tuscan  ports  would 
subject  Italy  to  her  dominion,  and  interfere  with  the 
English  trade  to  the  Levant  and  Mediterranean :  while 
Guipuscoa,  on  any  future  rupture,  would  afford  another 
inlet  into  the  heart  of  the  Spanish  dominions  ;  they,  for 
these  reasons,  pronounced  the  treaty  destructive  of  the 
balance  of  power,  and  prejudicial  to  the  interest  of  Eng- 
land. All  these  arguments  were  trumpeted  by  the  male- 
contents,  so  that  the.  whole  kingdom  echoed  with  the 
clamour  of  disaffection.  Sir  Christopher  Musgrave,  and 
others  of  the  tory  faction,  began  to  think  in  earnest  of 
establishing  the  succession  of  the  English  crown  upon 
the  person  of  the  prince  of  Wales.  They  are  said  to 
have  sent  over  Mr.  Graham  to  St  Germains  with  over- 
tures to  this  purpose,  and  an  assurance  that  a  motion 
would  be  made  in  the  house  of  commons,  to  pass  a  vote 
that  the  crown  should  not  be  supported  in  the  execution 
pf  the  partition-treaty.  King  William  was  not  ignorant 
of  the  censure  he  had  undergone,  and  not  a  little  alarm- 
ed to  find  himself  so  unpopular  among  his  own  subjects. 
That  he  might  be  the  more  able  to  bestow  his  attention 
effectually  upon  the  affairs  of  England,  he  resolved  to 
take  some  .measures  for  the  satisfaction  of  the  Scottish 
nation.  He  permitted  the  parliament  of  that  kingdom 
to  meet  on  the  28th  day  of  October,  and  wrote  a  letter  to 
them  from  his  house  at  Loo,  containing  an  assurance 
,  that  he  would  concur  in  every  thing  that  could  be  rea- 
sonably proposed  for  maintaining  and  advancing  the 
peace  and  welfare  of  their  kingdom.  He  promised  to 
give  his  royal  assent  to  such  acts  at  they  should  frame 
for  the  better  establishment  of  the  Presbyterian  dispH 
pline ;  for  preventing  the  growth  of  popery,  suppressing 
yice  and  immorality,  encouraging  piety  and  virtue,  pre* 


1700.  WILLIAM*  37 1 

serving  and  securing  personal  liberty,  regulating  and  ad- 
vancing trade,  retrieving  the  losses,  and  promoting  the 
interest,  of  their  African  and  Indian  companies.  He 
expressed  his  concern  that  he  could  not  assert  the  com- 
pany's right  of  establishing  a  colony  at  Darien,  without 
disturbing  the  peace  of  Christendom,  and  entailing  a 
ruinous  war  on  that  his  ancient  kingdom.  He  recom- 
mended unanimity  and  dispatch  in  raising  competent 
taxes  for  their  own  defence;  and  told  them  he  had 
thought  fit  to  continue  the  duke  of  Queensberry  in 
the  office  of  high-commissioner.  Notwithstanding  this 
soothing  address,  the  national  resentment  continued  to 
rage,  and  the  parliament  seemed  altogether  intractable. 
By  this  time  the  company  had  received  certain  tidings  of 
the  entire  surrender  of  their  settlement ;  and  on  the  first 
day  of  the  session,  they  represented  to  parliament,  that 
for  want  of  due  protection  abroad,  some  persons  had 
been  encouraged  to  break  in  upon  their  privileges  even 
at  home.  This  remonstrance  was  succeeded  by  another 
national  address  to  the  king,  .who  told  them,  he  could 
not  take  any  farther  notice  of  that  affair,  since  the  par- 
liament was  now  assembled ;  and  he  had  already  made  a 
declaration,  with  which  he  hoped  all  his  faithful  subjects 
would  be  satisfied.  Nevertheless,  he  found  it  absolutely 
necessary  to  practise  other  expedients  for  allaying  the 
ferment  of  that  nation.  His  ministers,  and  their  agents, 
bestirred  themselves  so  successfully,  that  the  heats  in 
parliament  were  entirely  cooled,  and  the  outcry  of  the 
people  subsided  into  unavailing  murmurs.  The  parlia- 
ment resolved,  that,  in  consideration  of  their  great  de- 
liverance by  his  majesty,  and  as,  next  under  God,  their 
safety  and  happiness  wholly  depended  on  his  preserva- 
tion and  that  of  his  government,  they  would  support 
both  to  the  utmost  of  their  power,  and  maintain  such 
forces  as  should  be  requisite  for  those  ends.  They 
passed  an  act  for  keeping  on  foot  three  thousand  men 
for  two  years,  to  be  maintained  by  a  land-tax.    Then  the 


372  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  17*6. 

commissioner  produced  the  king's  letter,  desiring  to 
have  eleven  hundred  men  on  his  own  account,  to  the 

* 

1st  day  of  June  following:  they  forthwith  complied  with 
ihis  request,  and  were  prorogued  to  the  6th  of  May. 
The  supernumerary  troops  were  sent  over  to  the  stated- 
general  ;  and  the  earl  of  Argyle  was  honoured  with  thfe 
title  of  duke,  as  a  recompense  for  having  concurred  with 
the  commissioners  in  managing  this  session  of  parlia- 
ment. 

§  XXXVII.  King  William  had  returned  to  England 
on  the  18th  diy  df  October,  not  a  little  chagrined  at  the 
perplexities  in  which  he  found  himself  involved ;  and,  in 
the  beginning  of  the  next  month,  he  recfeived  advice  that 
the  king  of  Spain  was  actually  dead.  Bte  could  not  be 
surprised  at  this  eVetlt,  which  had  been  so  long  expect- 
ed ;  but  it  was  attended  with  a  circumstance  which  he 
tiad  not  foreseen.  Charles,  by  his  last  will,  had  declared 
the  duke  of  AnjoU,  second  son  of  the  dauphin,  the  sole 
heir  of  the  Spanish  monarchy.  In  cade  this  prince  should 
die  without  issue,  or  inherit  the  croWn  of  France,  he 
willed  that  Spain  should  devolve  to  the  duke  of  Berry ; 
in  default  of  him,  and  childreh,  to  the  archduke  Charles 
and  his  heirs  ;  foiling  of  whom,  to  the  duke  of  Savoy 
and  his  posterity.  He  likewise  recommended  a  match 
between  the  duke  of  Anjou  and  one  of  the  arch- 
duchesses. When  this  testament  was  first  notified  to 
the  French  court,  Lewis  seemed  to  hesitate  between  his 
inclination  and  engagements  to  William  and  the  states- 
general.  ,  Madame  de  Maintenon  te  said  to  have  joined 
her  influence  to  that  of  the  dauphin,  in  persuading  the 
king  to  accept  of  the  will ;  and  Pontchartrain  was  en- 
gaged to  support  the  same  measure.  A  cabinet-council 
was  called  in  her  apartment.  The  rest  of  the  ministry 
declared  for  the  treaty  of  partition ;  the  king  affected  a 
kind  of  neutrality.  The  dauphin  spoke  for  his  son, 
with  an  air  of  resolution  he  had  never  assumed  before ; 
Pontchartrain  seconded    his   argument;    madame  de 


IWd.  WILLIAM.  873 

Mairttendn  asked  what  the  duke  of  Anjou  had  done  to 
pffdVoke  the  king*  that  he  should  be  barred  of  his  right 
td  that  succession  ?  Then  the  rest  of  the  members 
espoused  the  dauphin's  opinion ;  and  the  king  owned 
himsdf  convinced  by  their  reasons.  In  all  probability, 
the  decision  of  this  council  was  previously  settled  in  pri- 
vate. After  the  will  was  accepted,  Lewis  closeted  the 
duke  df  Anjou,  to  whom  he  said,  in  presence  of  the 
iflfifquis  des  Rois,  "  Sir,  the  king  of  Spain  has  made 
you  a  kitig.  The  grandees  deifcand  you ;  the  people 
Vntifo  fbir  y&u,  atid  I  give  my  consent.  Remember  only* 
you  are  a  pririce  of  France.  I  recotnmend  to  you  to 
ioveyoiir  people,  to  gain  their  affection  by  the  lenity  of 
your  government,  and  to  render  yourself  worthy  of  the 
throne  you  are  going  to  ascend/'  The  new  monarch 
was  fongifctulated  oh  his  elevation  by  all  the  princes  of 
the  blood ;  nevertheless,  the  duke  of  Orleans  and  his 
fcon  protested  against  the  will,  because  the  archduke  was 
pladed  next  in  succession  to  the  duke  of  Berry,  in  bar 
of  their  right  as  descendants  of  Anne  of  Austria,  whose 
renunciation  could  be  of  no  more  force  than  that  of 
Maria  Theresa.  On  the  4th  day  of  December,  the 
new  king  set  out  for  Spain,  to  the  frontiers  of  which  he 
was  accompanied  by  his  two  brothers. 

§  XXXVIII.  When  the  will  was  accepted,  the  French 
minister,  de  Torcy,  endeavoured  to  justify  his  master's 
conduct  to  the  earl  of  Manchester,  who  resided  at  Paris 
iii  the  character  of  ambassador  from  the  cotirt  of  Lon- 
don. He  observed,  that  the  treaty  of  partition  was  not 
likely  to  answer  the  end  for  which  it  had  been  concerted : 
that  the  emperor  had  refused  to  accede :  that  it  was  re- 
lished by  none  of  the  princes  to  whom  it  had  been  com- 
municated i  that  the  people  of  England  and  Holland  had 
expressed  their  discontent  at  the  prospect  of  France's 
being  in  possession  of  Naples  and  Sicily :  that  if  Lewis  had 
rejected  the  will^  the  archduke  would  have  had  a  double 
title,  derived  frotn  the  former  will*  and  that  of  the  late 


374  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1700. 

king :  that  the  Spaniards  were  so  averse  to  the  division 
of  their  monarchy,  there  would  be  a  necessity  for  con- 
quering the  whole  kingdom  before  the  treaty  could  be 
executed :  that  the  ships  to  be  furnished  by  Great  Bri- 
tain and  Holland  would  not  be  sufficient  for  the  pur- 
poses of  such  a  war ;  and  it  was  doubtful  whether  Eng- 
land and  the  states-general  would  engage  themselves  in 
a  greater  expense.  He  concluded  with  saying,  That 
the  treaty  would  have  been  more  advantageous' to  France 
than  the  will,  which  the  king  accepted  purely  from  a 
desire  of  preserving  the  peace  of  Europe.  His  master 
hoped,  therefore,  that  a  good  understanding  would  sub- 
sist between  him  and  the  king  of  Great  Britain.  The 
same  reasons  were  communicated  by  Briod,  the  French 
ambassador  at  the  Hague,  to  the  states-general.  Not- 
withstanding this  address,  they  ordered  their  envoy  at 
Paris  to  deliver  a  memorial  to  the  French  king,  expres- 
sing their  surprise  at  his  having  accepted  the  will ;  and 
their  hope,  that,  as  the  time  specified  for  the  emperor's 
acceding  to  the  treaty  was  not  expired,  his  most  Christian 
majesty  would  take  the  affair  again  into  his  consideration, 
and  adhere  to  his  engagements  in  every  article.  Lewis, 
in  his  answer  to  this  memorial,  which  he  dispatched  to 
all  the  courts  of  Europe,  declared,  that  what  he  chiefly 
considered  was  the  principal  design  of  the  contracting 
parties,  namely,  the  maintenance  of  peace  in  Europe ; 
and  that,  true  to  his  principle,  he  only  departed  from  the 
words,  that  he  might  the  better  adhere  to  the  spirit  of 
the  treaty. 

§  XXXIX.  With  this  answer  he  sent  a  letter  to  the 
States,  giving  them  to  understand,  that  the  peace  of 
Europe  was  so  firmly  established  by  the  will  of  the  king 
of  Spain,  in  favour  of  his  grandson,  that  he  did  not 
doubt  their  approbation  of  his  succession  to  the  Spanish 
crown.  The  States  observed,  that  they  could  not  de- 
clare themselves  upon  an  affair  of  such  consequence, 
without  consulting,  their  respective  provinces.     Lewis 


1700.  WILLIAM.  375     , 

admitted  the  excuse,  and  assured  them  of  his  readiness 
to  concur  with  whatever  they  should  desire  for  the  se- 
curity of  the  Spanish  Netherlands.  The  Spanish  am- 
bassador at  the  Hague  presented  them  with  a  letter  from 
his  new  master,  who  likewise  notified  his  accession  to  all 
the  powers  of  Europe,  except  the  king  of  England. 
The  emperor  loudly  exclaimed  against  the  will,  as  being 
more  iniquitous  than  the  treaty  of  partition ;  and  threat- 

"  ened  to  do  himself  justice  by  force  of  arms.  The  Spa- 
niards, apprehending  that  a  league  would  be  formed  be- 
tween his  imperial  majesty  and  the  maritime  powers,  for 
setting  aside  the  succession  of  the  duke  of  Anjou,  and 
conscious  of  their  own  inability  to  defend  their  domi- 
nions,, resigned  themselves  entirely  to  the  protection  of 
the  French  monarch.  The  towns  in  the  Spanish  Ne- 
therlands and  the  dutchy  of  Milan  admitted  French  gar- 
risons :  a  French  squadron  anchored  in  the  port  of  Cadiz ; 
and  another  was  detached  to  the  Spanish  settlements  in 
the  West  Indies.  Part  of  the  Dutch  army  that  was 
quartered  in  Luxembourg,  Mons,  and  Namur,  were 
made  prisoners  of  war,  because  they  would  not  own  the 
king  of  Spain,  whom  their  masters  had  not  yet  acknow- 
ledged. The  States  were  overwhelmed  with  consterna- 
tion by  this  event,  especially  when  they  considered  their 
own  naked  situation,  and  reflected  that  the  Spanish  gar- 
risons might  fall  upon  them  before  they  could  assemble 
a  body  of  troops  for  their  defence.  The  danger  was  so 
imminent,  that  they  resolved  to  acknowledge  the  king 
of  Spain  without  farther  hesitation,  and  wrote  a  letter  to 
the  French  king  for  that  purpose :  this  was  no  sooner 
received,  than  orders  were  issued  for  sending  back  their 
battalions. 

§  XL.  How  warmly  soever  king  William  resented 

.  the  conduct  of  the  French  king,  in  accepting  the  will 
so  diametrically  opposite  to  his  engagements,  he  dissem- 
bled his  chagrin ;  and  behaved  with  such  reserve  and 
apparent  indifference,  that  some  people  naturally  believed 


376  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1700. 

m 

he  had  been  privy  to  the  transaction.  -  Other's  imagined 
that  he  was  discouraged  from  engaging  in  q  new  war 
.by  his  bodily  infirmities,  which  daily  increased,  as  well 
as  by  the  opposition  in  parliament,  to  which  he  should 
be  inevitably  exposed.  But  his  real  aim  was  to  conceal 
his  sentiments,  qntil  he  should  have  sounded  the  opinions 
of  other  powers  in  Europe,  and  seed  how  far  he  could 
depend  upon  his  new  ministry.  He  now  seemed  to  re- 
pose his  chief  confidence  in  the  earl  of  Rochester,  who 
had  undertake*!  for  the  tories,  and  was  declared  lord-lieu- 
tenant of  Ireland.  Lord  Godolphin  was  appointed  first 
commissioner  of  the  treasury*  lord  Tankefville  succeeded 
lord  Lonsdale,  lately  deceased,  as  keeper  of  the  privy- 
seal,  and  sir  Charles  Hedges  w&s  declared  secretary  of 
state,  in  the  room  of  the  earl  of  Jersey :  but  the  manage- 
ment of  the  commons  w&s  intrusted  to  Mr.  Robert  Haf- 
ley,  who  had  hitherto  opposed  the  measures  of  the  court 
with  equal  virulence  and  ability  *  These  new  under- 
takers, well  knowing  they  should  find  it  Very  difficult,  if 
not  impossible,  to  secure  a  majority  in  the  present  par- 
liament, prevailed  on  the  king  to  dissolve  it  by  procla- 
mation: then  the  sheriffs  were  changed  according  to  their 
•nomination,  and  writs  issued  for  a  new  parliament  to 
meet  on  the  6th  day  of  February.  During  this  interval, 
count  Wratislaw  arrived  in  England,  as  ambassador  from 
the  emperor,  to  explain  Leopold's  title  to  the  Spanish 
monarchy,  supported  by  repeated  entails  and  renuncia- 
tions, confirmed  in  the  most  solemn  treaties.  This  mi- 
nister met  with  a  very  cold  reception  from  those  who 
stood  at  the  helm  of  affairs.  They  sought  to  avoid  all 
connexions  that  might  engage  their  country  as  a  prin- 
cipal in  another  war  upon  the  continent ;  smarting  as 
they  were  from  the  losses  and  incumbrances  which  the 
last  had  entailed  upon  them  and  their  posterity.  They 
seemed  to  think  that  Lewis,  rather  than  involve  himself 
in  fresh  troubles,  would  give  all  the  security  that  could 
be  desired  for  maintaining  the  peace  of  Europe :  or  even, 


1700.  WILLIAM.  377 

should  this  be  refused,  they  saw  no  reason  for  Britain's 
exhausting  her  wealth  and  strength  to  support  a  chimeri- 
cal balance,  in  which  her  interest  was  but  remotely  con^ 
cerned.  It  was  their  opinion,  that,  by  keeping  aloof, 
she  might  render  herself  more  respectable.  Her  reserve 
would  overawe  contending  powers  :  they  would  in  their 
turn  sue  for  her  assistance,  and  implore  her  good  offices ; 
and,  instead  of  declaring  herself  a  party,  she  would  have 
the  honour  to  decide  as  arbitress  0(  their  disputes.  Per- 
haps they  extended  this  idea  too  far ;  and,  in  all  proba- 
bility, their  notions  were  inflamed  by  a  spirit  of  faction. 
They  hated  the  whigs  as  their  political  adversaries,  and 
detested  the  war  because  it  had  been  countenanced  and 
supported  by  the  interest  of  that  party.  The  king  be- 
lieved, that  a  conjunction  of  the  two  monarchies  of 
France  and  Spain  would  prove  fatal  to  the  liberties  of 
Europe ;  and  that  this  could  not  be  prevented  by  any 
other  method  than  a  general  union  of  the  other  European 
powers.  He  certainly  was  an  enthusiast  in  his  senti- 
ments of  this  equilibrium,  and  fully  convinced  that  he 
himself,  of  all  the  potentates  in  Christendom,  was  the 
only  prince  capable  of  adjusting  the  balance.  The  im* 
perial  ambassador  could  not,  therefore,  be  long  ignorant 
of  his  real  purpose,  as  he  conversed  with  the  Dutch  fa- 
vourites, who  knew  and  approved  of  their  master's  de- 
sign, though  he  avoided  a  declaration,  until  he  should 
have  rendered  his  ministers  more  propitious  to  his  aitn. 
The  true  secret,  however,  of  that  reserve  with  which 
count  Wratislaw  was  treated  at  his  first  arrival,  was  a 
private  negotiation  which  the  king  had  set  on  foot  with 
the  regency  of  Spain,  touching  a  barrier  in  the  Nether- 
lands. He  proposed,  that  certain  towns  should  be  gar- 
risoned with  English  and  Dutch  troops,  by  way  of  se- 
curity against  the  ambitious  designs  of  France :  but  the 
regency  were  so  devoted  to  the  French  interest,  that  they 
refused  ta  listen  to  any  proposal  of  this  nature.  While 
this  affair  was  in  agitation,  William  resolved  to  maintain 


378  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  170O. 

a  wary  distance  from  the  emperor ;  but  when'  his  effort 
miscarried,  the  ambassador  found  him  much  more  open 
and  accessible.* 

§  XLI.  The  parliament  meeting  on  the  6th,  was  pro- 
rogued to  the  10th  day  of  February,  when  Mr.  Harley 
was  chosen  speaker  by  a  great  majority,  in  opposition  to 
sir  Richard  Onslow.  The  king  had  previously  told  sir 
Thomas  Lyttleton,  it  would  be  for  his  service  that  he 
should  yield  his  pretensions  to  Harley  at  this  juncture, 
and  that  gentlemen  agreed  to  absent  himself  frQm  the 
house  on  the  day  of  election,  The  king  observed,  in 
his  speech,  that  the  nation's  loss  in  the  death  of  the 
duke  of  Gloucester,  had  rendered  it  absolutely  necessary 
for  them  to  make  farther  provision  for  the  succession  of 
the  crown  in  the  Protestant  line :  that  the  death  of  the 
king  of  Spain  had  made  such  an  alteration  in  the  affairs 
of  the  continent,  as  required  their  mature  deliberation. 
The  rest  of  his  harangue  turned  upon  the  usual  topics 
of  demanding  supplies  for  the  ensuing  year,  reminding 
them  of  the  deficiencies  and  public  debts,  recommending 
to  their  inquiry  the  state  of  the  navy  and  fortifications; 
exhorting  them  to  encourage  commerce,  employ  the 
poor,  and  proceed  with  vigour  and  unanimity  in  all  their 
deliberations.  Though  the  elections  had  been  generally 
carried  in  favour  of  the  tory  interest,  the  ministry  had 

*  This  year  was  distinguished  by  a  glorious  victory  which  Uiq  young 
king  of  Sweden  obtained  in  the  nineteenth  year  of  his  age.  Riga  con- 
tinued invested  by  the  king  of  Poland,  while  Peter,  the  czar  of  Muscovy, 
made  his  approaches  to  Narva,  at  the  head  of  a  prodigious  army,  purpos- 
ing, in  violation  of  all  faith  and  justice,  to  share  the  spoils  of  the  youthful 
monarch.  Charles  landed  at  Revel,  compelled  the  Saxons  to  abandon  the 
siege  of  Riga,  and  having  supplied  the  place,  marched  with  a  handful  of 
troops  against  the  Muscovites,  who  had  undertaken  the  siege  of  Narva. 
The  czar  quitted  his  army  with  some  precipitation,  as  if  he  had  been  afraid 
of  hazarding  his  person,  while  Charles  advanced  through  ways  that  were 
thought  impracticable,  and  surprised  the  enemy.  He  broke  into  their 
camp  before  they  had  the  least  intimation  of  his  approach,  and  totally 
routed  them,  after  a  short  resistance.  He  took  a  great  number  of  pri- 
soners, with  all  their  baggage,  tents,  and  artillery,  and  entered  Narva  in 
triumph. 


1700.  *  WILLIAM.  $79 

secured  but  one  part  of  that  faction.    Some  of  the  most 
popular  leaders,  such  as  the  duke  of  Leeds,  the  marquis 
of  Normanby,  the  earls  of  Nottingham,  Seymour,  Mus- 
grave,  Howe,  Finch,  and  Showers,  had  either  been  neg- 
lected, or  found  refractory,  and  resolved  to  oppose  the 
court  measures  with  all  their  influence.     Besides,  the 
French  king,  knowing  that  the  peace  of  Europe  would 
in  a  great  measure  depend  on  the  resolutions  of  the  Eng- 
lish parliament,  is  said  to  have  distributed  great  sums  of 
money  in  England,  by  means  of  his  minister  Tallard,  in 
order  to  strengthen  the  opposition  in  the  house  of  com- 
mons.   Certain  it  is,  the  nation  abounded,  at  this  period, 
with  the  French  coins  called  louis-d'ors  and  pistoles ;  but 
whether  this  redundancy  was  owing  to  a  balance  of  trade  . 
in  favour  of  England,  or  to  the  largesses  of  Lewis,  we 
shall  not  pretend  to  determine.     We  may  likewise  ob- 
serve, that  the  infamous  practice  of  bribing  electors  had 
never  been  so  flagrant  as  in  the  choice  of  representatives 
for  this  parliament.     This  scandalous  traffic  had  been 
chiefly  carried  on  by  the  whig  party,  and  therefore  their 
antagonists  resolved  to  spare  no  pains  in  detecting  their 
corruption.     Sir  Edward  Seymour  distinguished  himself 
by  his  zeal  and  activity :  he  brought  some  of  these  prac- 
tices to  light,  and,  in  particular,  stigmatized  the  new 
East  India  company  for  having  been  deeply  concerned  in 
this  species  of  venality.     An  inquiry  being  set  on  foot 
in  the  house  of  commons,  several  elections  were  declared 
void;  and  divers  persons,  who  had  been  illegally  returned, 
were  first  expelled  the  house,  and  afterward  detained  in 
prison.     Yet  these  prosecutions  were  carried  on  with 
such  partiality,  as  plainly  indicated  that  they  flowed  ra- 
ther from  party  zeal  than  from  patriotism. 

§  XLII.  A  great  body  of  the  commons  had  resolved 
to  present  an  address  to  his  majesty,  desiring  he  would 
acknowledge  the  king  of  Spain  ;  and  the  motion,  hT  all 
probability,  would  have  been  Carried  by  a  considerable 
majority,  had  not  one  bold  and  lucky  expression  given 


380  HISTORY  OJF  ENGLAND.  170Q. 

such  a  turn  to  the  debate,  as  induced  the  anti-ccmrtiers 
to  desist.  One  Mr.  Monckton,  in  the  heat  of  \m  de- 
clamation against  this  measure,  saic},  he  expected  thp  ne^t 
vote  would  be  for  owning  the  pretended  prince  of  Walfss. 
Though  there  was  little  or  no  connexion  betweeji  thjese 
two  subjects,  a  great  many  members  were  startled  at  the 
information,  and  deserted  the  measure,  which  wa§  drop- 
ped accordingly.  The  king's  speech  being  taken  into 
consideration,  the  house  resolved  to  support  his  ipajesty 
gnd  his  government ;  to  take  such  effectual  measures  a$ 
might  best  conduce  to  the  interest  and  safety  of  England, 
and  the  preservation  of  the  Protestant  religion.  Thi? 
resolution  was  presented  in  an  address  to  the  king,  vyfro 
received  it  favourably.  At  the  same  time,  he  teid  before 
them  a  memorial  he  had  received  from  the  states-general, 
and  desired  their  advice  and  assistance  in  the  points  that 
constituted  the  substance  of  this  remonstrance.  The 
States  gave  him  to  understand,  that  they  had  acknow- 
ledged the  duke  of  Anjou  as  king  of  Spain  i  that  France 
had  agreed  to  a  negotiation,  in  which  they  might  stipu- 
late the  necessary  conditions  for  securing  the  peace  of 
Europe ;  and  that  they  were  firmly  resolved  to  do  no- 
thing without  the  concurrence  of  his  majesty  and  their 
other  allies.  They  therefore  begged  he  would  send  a 
minister  to  the  Hague,  with  necessary  powers  and  inr 
structions  to  co-operate  with  them  in  this  negotiation : 
they  told  him,  that,  in  case  it  should  prove  ineffectual, 
or  Holland  be  suddenly  invaded  by  the  troops  which  Lewis 
had  ordered  to  advance  towards  their  frontiers,  they  re- 
lied on  the  assistance  of  England,  and  hoped  his  majesty 
would  prepare  the  succours  stipulated  by  treaty,  to  be 
used  should  occasion  require.  The  memorial  was  like- 
wise communicated  to  the  house  of  lords.,  Meanwhile 
the  commons  desired  that  the  treaties  between  England 
and  the  states-general  should  be  laid  before  their  house. 
These  being  perused,  they  resolved  upon  an  address,  to 
desire  his  majesty  would  enter  into  such  negotiations 


170*  WILLIAM,  381 

with  the  states-general,  and  other  potentates,  as  might 
most  effectually  conduce  to  the  mutual  safety  of  Great 
Britain  and  the  United  Provinces,  as  well  as  to  the  pre- 
servation of  the  peace  of  Europe,  and  to  assure  him  of 
their  support  and  assistance,  in  performance  of  the  treaty 

subsisting  between  England  and  the  states-general.  This 
resolution,  however,  was  not  carried  without  great  opposi- 
tion from  those  who  were  averse  to  the  nation's  involv- 
ing itself  in  another  var  upon  the  continent.  The  king 
professed  himself  extremely  well  pleased  with  this  address, 
and  told  them  he  would  immediately  order  his  ministers 
abroad  to  act  in  concert  with  the  states^general  and  other 
powers,  for  the  attainment  of  those  ends  they  proposed. 

§  XLIII.  He  communicated  to  the  commons  a  letter, 
written  by  the  earl  of  Melfort  to  his  brother  the  earl  of 
Perth,  governor  to  the  pretended  prince,  of  Wales.  It 
had  been  mislaid  by  accident,  and  came  to  London  in  the 
French  mail.  It  contained  a  scheme  for  another  inva- 
sion of  England,  together  with  some  reflections  on  the 
character  of  the  earl  of  Middleton,  who  had  supplanted 
him  at  the  court  of  St.  Germains.  Melfort  was  a  mere 
projector,  and  seems  to  have  had  no  other  view  than  that 
of  recommending  himself  to  king  James,  and  bringing 
his  rival  into  disgrace.  The  house  of  lords,  to  whom 
the  letter  was  also  imparted,  ordered  it  to  be  printed. 
Next  day  they  presented  an  address,  thanking  his  ma- 
jesty for  his  care  of  the  Protestant  religion :  desiring  all 
the  treaties  made  since  the  last  war  might  be  laid  before 
them  ;  requesting  him  to  engage  in  such  alliances  as  he 
should  think  proper  for  preserving  the  balance  of  power 
in  Europe :  assuring  him  of  their  concurrence ;  express- 
ing their  acknowledgment  for  his  having  communicated 
Melfort's  letter  ;  desiring  he  would  give  orders  for  seiz- 
ing the  horses  and  arms  of  disaffected  persons ;  for  re- 
moving Papists  from  London  ;  and  for  searching  after 
those  arms  and  provisions  of  war  mentioned  in  the  letter: 
finally,*  they  requested  him  to  equip  speedily  a  sufficient 

vol.  i.  *  2  c 


39$  HISTORY  QF  BK9L AND.  tfW 

fleet  for  the  defence  of  himself  $nd  fefc  kta&tan*  They 
received  a  gracious  answer  tp  this  address  which  was  a 
farther  encouragement  to  th.e  Jung  to  put  fyi$  own  pri- 
vate designs  in  execution :  towards  the  same  end  the  letter 
contributed  not  a  little,  by  inflaming  the  fears  and  re- 
sentment of  the  nation  against  France,  which  in  vain 
disclaimed  the  earl  of  Melfort  as  a  fantastical  schemer, 
to  whom  no  regard  was  paid  at  the  court  of  Versailles. 
The  French  ministry  complained  of  the  publication  of 
this  letter  as  an  attempt  to  sow  jealousy  between  the  two 
crowns ;  and,  as  a  convincing  proof  of  their  sincerity, 
banished  the  earl  of  Melfort  to  Angers. 

$  XLIV.  The  credit  of  exchequer  bills  was  so  lowers 
ed  by  the  change  of«  the  ministry,  and  the  lapse  of  the 
time  allotted  for  their  circulation,  that  they  fell  near 
twenty  per  cent,  to  the  prejudice  of  the  revenue,  and 
the  discredit  of  the  government  in  foreign  countries* 
The  commons  having  taken  this  affair  into  considera- 
tion, voted,  That  provision  should  be  made  from  time  to 
time  for  making  good  the  principal  and  interest  due  on  all 
parliamentary  funds  ;  and  afterward  passed  a  bill  for  re- 
newing the  bills  of  credit,  commonly  called  exchequer 
bills.  This  was  sent  up  to  the  lords  on  the  6th  day  of 
March,  and  on  the  13  th  received  the  royal  assent.  The 
next  object  that  engrossed  the  attention  of  the  com- 
mons,  was  the  settlement  of  the  succession  to  the 
throne,  which  the  king  had  recommended  to  their  con- 
sideration in  the  beginning  of  the  session.  Having 
deliberated  on  this  subject,  they  resolved,  That  for  the 
preservation  of  the  peace  and  happiness  of  the  kingdom, 
and  the  security  of  the  Protestant  religion,  it  was  abso- 
lutely necessary  that  a  farther  declaration  should  be  made 
of  the  limitation  and  succession  of  the  crown  in  the 
Protestant  line,  after  his  majesty  and  the  princess, 
and  the  heirs  of  their  bodies  respectively :  and  that 
farther  provision  should  be  first  made  for  the  secu- 
rity of  the  rights  and  liberties  of  the  people.     Mr.  Har-* 


ltfK),  WILLUM.  && 

ley  moved,  That  some  conditions  of  goventm  ent  migljfi 
be  settled  as  preliminaries,  before  they  should  ptoceed 
,  to  the  nomination  of  the  person,  that  their  security 
might  be  complete.     Accordingly,  they  deliberated  on* 
this  stibjfect,  and  agreed  to  the  following  resolutions : 
That  whoever  shall  hereafter  come  to  the  possession  of 
this  crown,  shall  jo  n  in  communion  with  the  church  of 
England  as  by  law  established:  that,  in  case  the  crown 
atid  imperial*dignity  of  this  realm  shall  hereafter  come 
to  any  person  not  being  a  native  of  this  kingdom  of 
England,  this  nation  be  not  obliged  to  engage  in  any 
war  for  the  defence  of  any  dominions  or  territories 
which  do  not  belong  to  the  Crown  of  England,  without  ■* 
the  consent  of  parliament  :-  that  no  person  who  shall 
hereafter  come,  to  the  possession  of  the  crown,  shall  go 
out  of  the  dominions  of  England,  Scotland,  or  Ireland, 
without  consent  of  parliament :  that,  from  and  after  the 
time  that  the  farther  limitation  by  this  act  shall  take 
effect,  all  matters  and  things  relating  to  the  well-govern- 
ing of  this  kingdom,  which  are  properly  cognizable  in 
the  privy-council,  by  the  laws  and  customs  of  the  realm, 
shall  be  transacted  there,  and  all  resolutions  taken  there- 
upon shall  be  signed  by  such  of  the  privy-council  as  shall" 
advise  and  consent  to  the  same :  that,  after  the  limitar 
tion  shall  take  effect,  no  person  born  out  of  the  kingdom 
of  England,   Scotland,   or  Ireland,  or  the  dominions 
thereunto  belonging,  although  he  be  naturalized,  and , 
made  a  denizen  (except  such  as  are  born  of  English  pa-r 
rents),  shall  be  capable  to  be  of  the  privy-council,  or  a 
member  of  either  liouse  of  parliament,  or  to  enjoy  any 
office  or  place  of  trust,  either  civil  or  military,  or  to  have 
any  grant  of  lands,  tenements,  or  hereditaments,  from 
the  crown  to  himself,  or  to  any  others  in  trust  for  him  % 
that  no  person  who  has  an  office  or  place  of  profit  under 
the  king,  or  receives  a  pension  from  the  crown,  shall  be 
capable  of  serving  as  member  of  the  house  of  comjrions?  * 

2  c2 


364  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1709. 

that,  after  the  limitation  shall  take  effect,  judges*  com- 
missions be  made  quamdiu  se  bene  gesserint,  and  their 
salaries  ascertained  and  established ;  but  upon  the  ad- 
dress of  both  houses  of  parliament,  it  may  be  lawful  to 
remove  them  :  that  no  pardon  under  the  great  seal  of 
England  be  pleadable  to  an  impeachment  by  the  com- 
mons in  parliament.  Having  settled  these  preliminaries, 
they  resolved,  that  the  princess  Sophia,  dutchess-dowa- 
ger  of  Hanover,  be  declared  the  next  in  succession  to 
the  crown  of  England,  in  the  Protestant  line,  after  his 
majesty  and  the  princess,  and  the  heirs  of  their  bodies 
respectively:  and  that  the  farther  limitation  of  the 
crown  be  to  the  said  princess  Sophia,  and  the  heirs  of 
her  body,  being  Protestants.  A  bill  being  formed -on 
these  resolutions,  was  sent  up  to  the  house  of  lords, 
where  it  met  with  some  opposition  from  the  marquis  of 
Normanby :  a  protest  was  likewise  entered  against  it  by 
the  earls  of  Huntingdon  and  Plymouth,  and  the  lords 
Guilford  and  Jeffries.  Nevertheless,  it  passed  without 
amendments,  and  on  the  1 2th  day  of  June  received  the 
royal  assent :  the  king  was  extremely  mortified  at  the  pre- 
liminary limitations,  which  he  considered  as  an  open  in- 
sult on  his  own  conduct  and  administration;  not  but 
that  they  were  necessary  precautions,  naturally  suggested 
by  the  experience  of  those  evils  to  which  the  nation  had 
been  already  exposed,  in  consequence  of  raising  a  foreign 
prince  to  the  throne  of  England*  As  the  tories  lay  un- 
der the  imputation  of  favouring  the  late  king's  interest, 
they  exerted  themselves  zealously  on  this  occasion,  to 
wipe  off  the  aspersion,  and  insinuate  themselves  into  the 
confidence  of  the  people;  hoping,  that  in  the  sequel 
they  should  be  able  to  restrain  the  nation  from  engaging 
too  deep  in  the  affairs  of  the  continent,  without  incur- 
ring the  charge  of  disaffection  to  the  present  king  and 
government.  The  act  of  settlement  being  passed,  the 
earl  of  Macclesfield  was  sent  to  notify  the  transaction  to 


1700.  WILLIAM.  385 

the  electrons  Sophia,  who  likewise  received  from  his 
hands  the  order  of  the  garter. 

§  XLV.  The  act  of  succession  gave  umbrage  to  all 
the  popish  princes,  who  were  more  nearly  related  to  the 
crown  than  this  lady,  whom  the  parliament  had  preferred 
to  all  others.  The  dutchess  of  Savoy,  grand-daughter  to 
king  Charles  I.  by  her  mother,  ordered  her  ambassador, 
count  Maffei,  to  make  a  protestation  to  the  parliament 
of  England,  in  her  name,  against  all  resolutions  and  de- 
cisions qohtrary  to  her  title,  as  sole  daughter  to  the 
princess  Henrietta,  next  in  succession  to  the  crown  of 
England,  after  king  William  and  the  princess  Anne  of 
Denmark.  Two  copies  of  this  protest  Maffei  sent  in 
letters  to  the  lord-keeper  and  the  speaker  of  the  lower 
house,  by  two  of  his  gentlemen,  and  a  public  notary  to 
attest  the  delivery  ;  but  no  notice  was  taken  of  the  de- 
claration. The  duke  of  Savoy,  while  his  minister  was 
thus  employed  in  England,  engaged  in  an  alliance  with 
the  crowns  of  France  and  Spain,  on  condition  that  his 
Catholic  majesty  should  espouse  his  youngest  daughter 
without  a  dowry  :  that  he  himself  should  command  the 
allied  army  in  Italy,  and  furnish  eight  thousand  infantry, 
with  five-and-twenty  hundred  horse,  in  consideration  of 
a  monthly  subsidy  of  fifty  thousand  crowns. 

§  XLVI.  During  these  transactions,  Mr.  Stanhope, 
envoy  extraordinary  to  the  states-general,  was  empower- 
ed to  treat  with  the  ministers  of  France  and  Spain,  ac- 
cording to  the  addresses  of  both  houses  of  parliament. 
He  represented,  that,  though  his  most  Christian  majesty 
had  thought  fit  to  deviate  from  the  partition-treaty,  it 
was  not  reasonable  that  the  king  of  England  should  lose 
the  effect  of  ^that  convention :  he  therefore  expected 
some  security  for  the  peace  of  Europe;  and  for  that 
purpose  insisted  upon  certain  articles,  importing,  that 
the  French  king  should  immediately  withdraw  his  troops 
from  the  Spanish  Netherlands :  that,  for  the  security  of 


Sa6  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  170p? 

Engbad,  the  cities  of  Ostend  and  Nieuport  should  >e 
delivered  into  the  hands  of  his  Britpnnic  majesty  :  that 
no  kingdom,  provinces,  cities,  lands,  or  places,  belonging 
to  the  Crown  of  Spain,  should  ever  be  yielded  or  trans- 
ferred to  the  crown  of  France,  on  any  pretence  what-? 
ever :  that  the  subjects  of  his  Britannic  majesty  shoukj 
retain  all  the  privileges,  rights^  and  immunities,  with 
regard  tQ  their  navigation  and  commerce  in  the  domir 
niona  of  Spain,  which  they  enjoyed  at  the  death  of  his 
kte  Catholic  majesty;  and  also  all  such  immunities, 
rights,  and  franchises,  as  the  subjects  of  France,  or  any 
other  power,  either  possess  for  the  present,  or  may  en- 
joy for  the  future :  that  all  treaties  of  peace  and  conven- 
tions between  England  and  Spain  should  be  renewed : 
and  that  a  treaty,  formed  on  these  demands,  should  be 
guaranteed  by  such  powers  as  one  or  other  of  the  con* 
tractors  should  solicit  and  prevail  upon  to  accede. 
Such  likewise  were  the  proposals  made  by  the  states* 
general,  with  this  difference,  that  they  demanded,  as 
cautionary  towns,  all  the  strongest  places  in  the  Nether- 
lands. Count  d'Avaux,  the  French  minister,  was  so 
surprised  at  these  exorbitant  demands,  that  he  could  not 
help  saying,  They  could  not  have  been  higher,  if  his 
master  had  lost  four  successive  battles.  He  assured 
them,  that  his  most  Christian  majesty  would  withdraw 
his  troops  from  the  Spanish  Netherlands  as  soon  as.  the 
king  of  Spain  should  have  forces  of  his  own  sufficient  to 
guard  the  country :  with  respect  to  the  other  articles,  he 
could  give  no  other  answer,  but  that  he  would  imme- 
diately transmit  them  to  Versailles.  Lewis  was  filled  with 
indignation  at  the  insolent  strain  of  those  proposals, 
which  he  considered  as  a  sure  mart  of  William's  hostile 
intentions.  He  refused  to  give  any  other  security  fpr 
the  peace  of  Europe,  than  a  renewal  of  the  treaty  of  Rys- 
wick ;  and  he  is  said  to  have  tapered,  by  means. of  his 
agents  and  emissaries,  with  the  members  of  the  English 


im  wiLLtAM.  sm 

parliament,  that  they  might  oppose  all  steps  tending  to 
a  new  war  on  the  continent. 

§  XLVIL  King  William  certainly  had  no  expectation* 
that  France  would  dose  with  such  proposals;  but  be 
was  not  without  hope,  that  her  refusal  would  warm  the 
English  nation  into  a  concurrence  with  his  designs.  He 
communicated  to  the  house  of  commons  the  demands 
Which  had  been  made  by  him  and  the  states-general; 
and  gave  them  to  understand,  that  he  would  from  time: 
to  time  make  them  acquainted  with  the  progress  of  the 
negotiation.    The  commons,  suspecting  that  his  inten- 
tion was  to  make  them  parties  in  a  congress  which  he 
might  conduct  to  a  different  end  from  that  which  they 
proposed,  resolved  to  signify  their  sentiments  in  the  ao- 
tfwer  to  this  message.    They  called  for  the  treaty  of 
partition,  which  being  read,  they  voted  an  address,  of 
thanks  to  his  majesty,  for  his  most  gracious  declaration, 
that  he  would  make  them  acquainted  with  the  progress 
of  the  negotiation :  but  they  signified  their  disapproba- 
tion of  the  partition-treaty ,  signed  with  the  great,  seal  of 
England,  without  the  advice  of  the  parliament  which  was 
then  sitting,  and  productive  of  ill  consequences  to  the 
kingdom,  as  well  as  to  the  peace  of  Europe,  as  it  assigned 
over  to  the  French  kiiig  such  a  large  portion  of  the  Spa- 
nish dominion.     Nothing  could  be  more  mortifying  to* 
the  king  than  this  open  attack  upon  his  own  conduct: 
yet  he  suppressed  his  resentment,  and,  without  taking' 
the  least  notice  of  their  sentiments  with  respect  to  the 
partition- treaty,  assured  them,  that  he  should  be  alwayS 
ready  to  receive  their  advice  on  the  negotiation  which 
he  had  set  on  foot,  according  to  their  desire.    The  de- 
bates in  the  house  of  commons  upon  the  subject  of  the; 
partition-treaty  rose  to  such  violence,  that  divers  mem- 
bers, in  declaiming  against  it,  transgressed  the  bounds  of 
decency.     Sir  Edward  Seymour  compared  the  division 
which  had  been  made  of  the  Spanish  territories  to  a  rob- 
bery on  tbe, highway ;  .arvJ  Mr.Bowe  did  nqt  scruple  to 


388  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1900* 

say  it  was  a  felonious  treaty :  an  expression  which  the 
king  resented  to  such  a  degree,  that  he  declared  he  would 
have  demanded  personal  satisfaction  with  his  sword,  bad 

t  he  not  been  restrained  by  the  disparity  of  condition  be- 
tween himself  and  the  person  who  had  offered  such  an 
outrageous  insult  to  his  honour.  Whether  the  tories 
intended  to  alienate  the  minds  of  the  nation  from  all  fo- 
reign connexions,  or  to  wreak  their  vengeance  on  the  late- 
ministers,  whom  they  hated  as  the  chiefs  of  the  whig 
party,  certain  it  is,  they  now  raised  a  universal  outcry 
against  the  partition-treaty,  which  was  not  only  con- 
demned in  public  pamphlets  and  private  conversation, 
but  even  brought  into  the  house  of  lords  as  an  object  of 
parliamentary  censure.  In  the  month  of  March  a  warm 
debate  on  this  subject  was  begun  by  Sheffield,  marquis 
of  Normanby,  and  carried  on  with  great  vehemence  by 

'  other  noblemen  of  the  same  faction.  They  exclaimed 
against  the  article  by  which  so  many  territories  were 
added  to  the  crown  of  France :  they  complained,  that 
the  emperor  had  been  forsaken :  that  the  treaty  was  not 
communicated  to  the  privy-council  or  ministry,  but  clan- 
destinely transacted  by  the  earls  of  Portland  and  Jersey: 
that  the  sanction  of  the  great  seal  had  been  unjustly  and 
irregularly  applied,  first  to  blank  powers,  and  afterward 
to  the  treaty  itself.  The  courtiers  replied,  that  the  king 
had  engaged  in  a  treaty  of  partition  at  the  desire  of  the 
emperor,  who  had  agreed  to  every  article,  except  that  re- 
lating to  the  dutchy  of  Milan,  and  afterward  desired, 
that  his  majesty  would  procure  for  him  theN  best  terms 
he  could  obtain;  above  all  things  recommending  se- 
crecy, that  he  might  not  forfeit  his  interest  in  Spain,  by 
seeming  to  consent  to  the  treaty :  that  foreign  negotia- 
tions being  intrusted  to  thecare  of  thecrown,  the  king  lay 
under  no  legal  obligation  to  communicate  such  secrets  of 
state  to  his  council;  far  less  was  he  obliged  to  follow 
their  advice :  and  that  the  keeper  of  the  great  seal  had 
no  authority  for  refusing  to  apply  it .  to  any  powers  or 


I*0k  WILLIAM.  389 

treaty  which  the  king  should  grant  or  conclude,  unless 
they  were  contrary  to  law,  which  had  made  no  provision 
for  such  an  emergency.*    The  earl  of  Portland,  appre- 
hending that  this  tempest  would  hurst  upon  his  head, 
declared,  on  the  second  day  of  the  debate,  that  he  had, 
by  the  king's  order,  communicated  the  treaty,  before  it 
was  concluded,  to  the  earls  of  Pembroke  and  Marlbo-  * 
rough,  the  lords  Lonsdale,  Sotners,  Halifax,  and  secre- 
tary Vernon.    These  noblemen  owned,  that  they  had 
been  made  acquainted  with  the  substance  of  it :  that, 
when  they  excepted  to  some  particulars,  they  were  told, 
his  majesty  had  carried  the  matter  as  far  as  it  could  be 
advanced,  and  that  he  could  obtain  no  better  terms ; 
thus  assured  that  every  article  was  already  settled,  they 
said  they  no  longer  insisted  upon  particulars,  but  gave 
their  advice  that  his  majesty- should  not  engage  himself  , 
in  any  measure  that  would  produce  a  new  war,  seeing 
thenation  had  been  so  uneasy  under  the  last.  After  long 
debates,  and  great  variety  as  well  as  virulence  of  alterca- 
tion, the  house  agreed  to  an  address,  in  which  they  dis- 
approved of  the  partition-treaty,  as  a  scheme  inconsistent 
with  the  peace  and  safety  of  Europe,  as  well  as  prejudi- 
•cial  to  the  interest  of  Great  Britain.     They  complained, 
that  neither  the  instructions  given  to  his  plenipoten- 
tiaries, nor  the  draft  of  the  treaty  itself,  had  been  laid  be- 
fore his  majesty's  council.  They  humbly  besought  him, 
that,  for  the  future,  he  would,  in  all  matters  of  impor- 
tance, require  and  admit  the  advice  of  his  natural-born 
subjects  of  known  probity  and  fortune ;  and  thathe  would 
constitute  a  council  of  such  persons,  to  whom  he  might 
impart  all  affairs  which  should  any  way  concern  him  and 

•  In  the  coarse  of  this  debate,  the  earl  of  Rochester  reprehended  some 
lords  for  speaking  disrespectfully  of  the  French  king,  observing,  that  it 
was  peculiarly  incumbent  on  peers  to  treat  monarchs  with  decorum  and 
respect,  as  they  derived  their  dignity  from  the  crown.  Another  affirming 
that  the  French  king  was  not  only  to  be  respected,  but  likewise  to  be 
feared,  a  certain  lord  replied,  "  He  hoped  no  man  in  England  need  to  be 
afraid  of  the  French  king ;  much  less  the  peer  who  spoke  last,  who  was 
loo  much  a  friend  to  that  monarch  to  fear  any  thing  from  his  resentment." 


.390  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  tf«U 

his  dominions.*  They  observed,  that  interest  and  na* 
tural  affection  to  their  country  would  iodine  them  to 
every  measure  that  might  tend  to  its  welfare  and  pros* 
perity;  whereas  strangers  could  not  be  so.  much  in- 
fluenced by  these  considerations :  that  their  knowledge 
of  the  country  would  render  them  more  capable  than  fo- 
reigners could  be  of  advising  his  majesty  touching  the  true 
interests  of  his  kingdom  :  that  they  had  exhibited  such 
repeated  demonstrations  of  their  duty  and  affection,  a$ 
must  convince  his  majesty  of  their  zeal  in  his  service ; 
nor  could  he  want  the  knowledge  of  persons  fit  to  be 
employed  in  all  his  secret  and  arduous  affairs :  finally, 
9s  the  French  king  appeared  to  have  violated  the  treaty 
of .  partition,  they  advised  his  majesty,  in  future  negotia- 
tions with  that  prince,  to  proceed  with  such  caution  as 
might  imply  a  real  security. 

§XLVIJL  The  king  received  this  severe  remonstrance 
with  bis  usual  phlegm ;  saying,  it  contained  matter  of 
very  great  moment ;  and  he  would  take  care  that  all 
treaties  he  made  should  be  for  the  honour  and  safety  of 
England.  Though  he  deeply  felt  this  affront,  he  would 
not  alter  his  conduct  towards  the  new  ministers :  but  he 
plainly  perceived  their  intention  was  to  thwart  him  in  his 
favourite  measure,  and  humble  him  into  a  dependence 
upon  their  interest  in  parliament.  On  the  last  day  of 
March,  he  imparted  to  the  commons  the  French  king's 
declaration,  that  he  would  grant  no  other  security  than 
a  renewal  of  the  treaty  of  Ryswick  :  so  that  the  nego- 
tiation seemed  to  be  at  an  end.  He  likewise  communi- 
cated two  resolutions  of  the  states-general,  with  a  me- 
morial from  their  envoy  in  England,  relating  to  the  ships 
they  had  equipped  with  a  view  to  join  the  English  fleet, 
and  the  succours  stipulated  in  the  treaty  concluded  in 
the  year  l677>  which  they  desired  might  be  sent  over 
with  all  convenient  expedition.   The  house  having  con- 

b  Burnet.    Oldmixon.     Cole.     Lamberty.     State  Tracts.     TiadaL 
Ralph.    Voltaire. 


190L  WILLIAM.  391 

filtered  this  message,  unianimously  resolved  to  desire  hit 
msrjesty  would  carry  on  the  negotiations  in  concert  with 
the  states-general,  and  take  such  measures  therein  as 
might  most  conduce  to  their  safety :  they  assured  him, 
they  would  effectually  enable  him  to  support  the  treaty 
of  167  7 >  by  which  England  was  bound  to  assist  them 
with  ten  thousand  men,  and  twenty  ships  of  war,  in 
ease  they  should  be  attacked.  Though  the  king  was 
nettled  at  that  part  of  this  address,  which,  by  confining 
him  to  one  treaty,  implied  their  disapprobation  of  a  new 
confederacy,  he  discovered  no  signs  of  emotion;  but 
thanked  them  for  the  assurance  they  had  given,  and  told 
them  he  had  sent  orders  to  his  envoy  at  the  Hague,  to 
continue  the  conferences  with  the  courts  of  France  and 
Spam.  On  the  19th  day  of  April,  the  marquis  de  Torcy 
delivered  to  the  earl  of  Manchester  at  Paris,  a  letter  from 
the  new  king  of  Spain  to  his  Britannic  majesty,  notify- 
ing his  accession  to  that  throne,  and  expressing  a  desire 
of  cultivating  a  mutual  friendship  with  the  king  and 
crown  of  England.  How  averse  soever  William  might 
have  been  to  any  correspondence  of  this  sort,  the  earl  of 
Rochester  and  the  new  ministers  importuned  him  in  such 
a  manner  to  acknowledge  Philip,  that  he  at  length  corar 
plied  with  their  entreaties,  and  wrote  a  civil  answer.to  hi? 
most  Catholic  majesty.  This  was  a  very  alarming  inci- 
dent to  the  emperor,  who  was  bent  upon  a  war  with  the 
two  crowns,  and  had  -determined  to  send  prince  Eugene 
with  an  army  into  Italy,  to  take  possession  of  the  dutchy 
of  Milan,  as  a  fief  of  the  empire.  The  new  pope,  Cle- 
ment XL  who  had  succeeded  to  the  papacy  in  the  pre- 
ceding year,  was  attached  to  the  French  interest:  the 
Venetians  favoured  the  emperor;  but  they  refused  to 
declare  themselves  at  this  juncture. 

•§  XLIX.  The  French  king  consented  to  a  renewal 
of  the  negotiations  at  the  Hague;  but,  in  the  meantime* 
tampered  with  the  Dutch  deputies,  to  engage  them  in  a 
separate  treaty.  Finding  them  determined  to  act  in  con- 


392  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1701. 

cert  with  the  king  of  England,  he  protracted  the  con- 
ferences, in  order  to  gain  time,  while  he  erected  fortifica- 
tions, and  drew  lines  on  the  frontiers  of  Holland,  divided 
the  princes  of  the  empire  by  his  intrigues,  and  endea- 
voured to  gain  over  the  states  of  Italy.  The  Dutch,  mean- 
while, exerted  themselves  in  providing  for  their  own  se- 
curity. They  reinforced  their  garrisons,  purchased  sup- 
plies, and  solicited  succours  from  foreign  potentates.  The 
States  wrote  a  letter  to  king  William,  explaining  the  dan- 
ger of  their  situation,  professing  the  most  inviolable  at- 
tachment to  the  interest  of  England,  and  desiring  that 
the  stipulated  number  of  troops  should  be  sent  imme- 
diately to  their  assistance.  The  three  Scottish  regiments 
which  he  had  retained  in  his  own  pay  were  immediately 
transported  from  Scotland.  The  letter  of  the  states-ge- 
neral he  communicated  to  the  house  of  commons,  who, 
having  taken  it  into  consideration,  resolved  to  assist  his 
majesty  to  support  his  allies  in  maintaining  the  liberty 
of  Europe ;  and  to  provide  immediate  succours  for  the 
states-general,  according  to  the  treaty  of  1677.  The 
house  of  peers,  to  whom  the  letter  was  also  communi- 
cated, carried  their  zeal  still  farther.  They  presented  an 
address,  in  which  they  desired  his  majesty  would  not  only 
perform  the  articles  of  any  former  treaty  with  the  states- 
general,  but  also  engage  with  them  in  a  strict  league, 
offensive  and  defensive,  for  their  common  preservation ; 
and  invite  into  it  all  the  princes  and  states  that  were  conr 
cerned  in  the  present  visible  danger,  arising  from  the 
union  of  France  and  Spain.  They  exhorted  him  to  enter 
into  such  alliances  with  the  emperor,  as  his  majesty  should 
think  necessary,  pursuant  to  the  ends  of  the  treaty  con- 
cluded in  the  year  1689.  They  assured  him  of  their 
hearty  and  sincere  assistance,  not  doubting  that  Almighty 
God  would  protect  his  sacred  person  in  so  righteous  a 
cause ;  and  that  the  unanimity,  wealth,  and  courage  of 
his  subjects,  would  carry  him  with  honour  and  success 
through  all  the  difficulties  of  a  just  war.     Lastly,  they 


1701.  WILLIAM.  393 

took  leave  humbly  to  represent,  that  the  dangers  to 
which  his  kingdom  and  allies  had  been  exposed,  were 
chiefly  owing  to  the  fatal  counsels  that  prevented  his 
majesty's  sooner  meeting  his  people  in  parliament. 

§  L.  These  proceedings  of  both  houses  could  not  but 
be  very  agreeable  to  the  king,  who  expressed  his  satis- 
faction in  his  answer  to  each  apart.  They  were  the 
more  remarkable,  as  at  this  very  time  considerable  pro- 
gress was  made  in  a  design  to  impeach  the  old  ministry. 
This  deviation,  therefore,  from  the  tenor  of  their  for- 
mer conduct,  could  be  owing  to  no  other  motive  than  a 
sense  of  their  own  danger,  and  resentment  against 
France,  which,  even  during  the  negotiation,  had  been 
secretly  employed  in  making  preparations  to  surprise  and 
distress  the  states-general.  The  commons. having  ex- 
pressed their  sentiments  on  this  subject,  resumed  the 
consideration  of  the  partition-treaty.  They  had  appointed 
a  committee  to  examine  the  journals  of  the  house  of  lords, 
and  to  report  their  proceedings  in  relation  to  the  treaty  of 
partition.  When  the  report  was  made  by  sir  Edward 
Seymour,  the  house  resolved  itself  into  a  committee,  to 
consider  the  state  of  the  nation :  after  warm  debates, 
they  resolved,  That  William,  earl  of  Portland,  by  ne- 
gotiating and  concluding  the  treaty  of  partition,  was 
guilty  of  a  high  crime  and  misdemeanour.  They  or- 
dered sir  John  Leveson  Gower  to  impeach  him  at 
the  bar  of  the  house  of  lords ;  and  named  a  committee 
to  prepare  the  articles  of  his  impeachment.  Then,  in  a 
conference  with  the  lords,  they  desired  to  know  the  par- 
ticulars of  what  had  passed  between  the  earl  of  Portland 
and  secretary  Vernon,  in  relation  to  the  partition-treaty, 
as  also  what  other  information  they  had  obtained 
concerning  negotiations  or  treaties  of  partition  of  the 
Spanish  monarchy.  The  lords  demurring  to  this  de- 
mand, the  lower  house  resolved  to  address  the  king, 
That  copies  of  both  treaties  of  partition,  together  with 
all  the  powers  and  instructions  for  negotiating  those 


396  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1701* 

§  LII.  The  lords,  incensed  at  this  step  of  the  commons, 
which  they  considered  as  an  insult  upon  their  tribunal y 
and  a  violation  of  common  justice,  drew  up  and  delivered 
a  counter-address,  humbly  beseeching  his  majesty,  that 
he  would  not  pass  any  censure  upon  the  accused  lords, 
until  they  should  be  tried  on  the  impeachments,  and 
judgments  be  given  according  to  the  usage  of  parliament. 
The  king  was  so  perplexed  by  these  opposite  representa-. 
tions,  that  he  knew  not  well  what  course  to  follow.   He. 
made  no  reply  to  the  counter-address  ;  but  allowed  the 
names  of  the  impeached  lords  to  remain  in  the  council- 
books.     The  commons  having  carried  their  point,  which 
was  to  stigmatize  those  noblemen,  and  prevent  their 
being  employed  for  the  future,  suffered  thoimpeachments 
to  be  neglected,  until  they  themselves  moved  for  triaU 
On  the  5th  day  of  May,  the  house  of  lords  sent  a  mes- 
sage to  the  commons,  importing,  That  no  articles  had 
as  yet  been  exhibited  against  the  noblemen  whom  they 
had  impeached.    The  charge  was  immediately  drawn  up 
against  the  earl  of  Orford :  him  they  accused  of  having 
received  exorbitant  grants  from  the  crown ;  of  having 
been  concerned  with  Kidd  the  pirate ;  of  having  com- 
mitted abuses  in  managing  and  victualling  the  fleet,  when 
it  lay  on  the  coast  of  Spain ;  and  lastly,  of  having  advised 
the  partition-treaty.     The  earl  in  his  own  defence  de- 
clared, that  he  had  received  no  grant  from  the  king,  ex- 
cept a  very  distant  reversion,  and  a  present  of  lQ,000/» 
after  he  had  defeated  the  French  at  La  Hogue :  that  in 
Kidd's  affair  he  had  acted  legally,  and  with  a  good  inten- 
tion towards  the  public,  though  to  his  own  loss. :  that 
his  accounts,  with  regard  to  the  fleet  which  he  com- 
manded, had  been  examined  and  passed;  yet  he  was 
ready  to  waive  the  advantage,  and  justify  himself  in  every 
particular ;  and  he  absolutely  denied  that  he  had  given 
any  advice  concerning  the  treaty  of  partition.     Lord 
Somers  was  accused  of  having  set  the  seals  to  the  powers* 
.  and  afterward  to  the  treaties ;  of  having  accepted  some 


1701.  WILLIAM.  397 

grants :  of  having  teen  an  accomplice  with  Kidd ;  and 
of  having  some  guilt  of  partial  and  dilatory  proceedings 
in  chancery.  He  answered  every  article-  in  the  charge ; 
but  no  replication  was  made  by  the  commons,  either  to 
him  or  to  the  earl  of  Orford.  When  the  commons  were 
stimulated  by  another  message  from  the  peers,  relating 
to  the  impeachments >6f  the  earl  of  Portland  and  lord 
Halifax,  they  declined  exhibiting  articles  against  the 
former,  on  pretence  of  respect  for  his  majesty ;  but  on 
the  14th  of  June,  the  charge  against  Halifax  was  sent 
up  to  the  lords.  He  was  taxed  with  possessing  a  grant 
in  Ireland,  without  paying  the  produce  of  it,  according 
to  the  law  lately  enacted  concerning  those  grants :  with 
enjoying  another  grant  out  of  the  forest  of  Deane,  to 
the  waste  of  the  timber,  and  the  prejudice  of  the  navy ; 
with  having  held  places  that  were  incompatible,  by  being 
at  the  same  time  commissioner  of  the  treasury,  and 
chancellor  of  the  exchequer;  and  with  having  advised 
the  two  treaties  of  partition.  He  answered,  that  his 
grant  in  Ireland  was  of  debts  and  slims  of  money,  and 
within  the  act  concerning  confiscated  estates ;  that  all  he 
had  ever  received  from  it  did  not  exceed  400/.  which, 
if  he  was  bound  to  repay,  a  common  action  would  lie 
against  him ;  but  every  man  was  not  to  be  impeached, 
who  did  not  discharge  his  debts  at  the  very  day  of  pay- 
ment. He  observed,  that  as  his.  grant  in  the  forest  of 
Deane  extended  to  weedings  only,  it  could  occasion  no 
waste  of  timber,  nor  prejudice  to  the  navy :  that  the 
auditor's  place  was  held  by  another  person,  until  he  ob- 
tained the  king's  leave  to  withdraw  from  the  treasury : 
that  he  never  saw  the  first  treaty  of  partition,  nor  was 
his  advice  asked  upon  the  subject^ :  that  he  had  never 
heard  of  the  second  but  once  before  it  was  concluded ; 
and  then  he  spoke  his  sentiments  freely  on  the  subject 
This  answer,  like  the  others,  would  have  been  neglected 
by  the  commons,  whose  aim  was  now  to  evade  the  trials, 
had  not  the  lords  pressed  them  by  messages  to  expedite 
vol.  i.  *2p 


396  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  170*. 

the  articles.    They  even  appointed  a  day  for  OrfonTs 
trial,  and  signified  their  resolution  to  the  commons. 
These  desired  that  a  committee  of  both  houses  should  be 
named  for  settling  preliminaries,  one  of  which  was,  Ttoft 
the  lord  to  be  tried  should  not  sit  as  a  peer;  and  the  other 
imported,  That  those  lords  impeached  for  the  same  mat- 
ter should  not  vote  in  the  trial  of  each  other.    They 
likewise  desired,  that  lord  Soiners  should  be  first  tried* 
The  lords  made  no  objection  to  this  last  demand ;  but 
they  rejected  the  proposal  of  a  committee  consisting  of 
both  houses,  alleging,  that  the  commons  were  parties, 
and  had  no  title  to  sit  in  equality  with  the  judges,  or  to 
settle  matters  relating  to  the  trial :  that  this  was  a  de- 
mand contrary  to  the  principles  of  law  and  rules  of  jus- 
tice, and  never  practised  in  any  court  or  nation.    The 
lords,  indeed,  had  yielded  to  this  expedient  in  the  popish 
plot,  because  it  was  a  case  of  treason,  in  which  the  king's 
life,  and  safety  of  the  kingdom,  were  concerned,  while 
the  people  were  jealous  of  the  court,  and  the  whole  na- 
tion was  in  a  ferment ;  but  at  present  the  times  were 
quiet,  and  the  charge  amounted  to  nothing  more  than 
misdemeanours ;  therefore  the  lords  could  not  assent  to 
such  a  proposal  as  was  derogatory  from  their  jurisdiction. 
Neither  would  they  agree  to  the  preliminares ;  but,  on 
the  1 2th  day  of  June,  resolved,  That  no  peer  impeached 
for  high  crimes  and  misdemeanours  should  upon  his 
trial,  be  without  the  bar :  and  that  no  peer  impeached 
could  be  precluded  from  voting  on  any  occasion,  except 
in  his  own  trial.    Divers  messages  passed  between  the 
two  houses ;  the  commons  still  insisting  upon  a  com- 
mittee to  settle  preliminaries :  at  length  the  dispute  was 
brought  to  a  free  conference. 

<  §  LIII.  Meanwhile,  the  king,  going  to  the  house  of 
peers,  gave  the  royal  assent'  to  the  bill  of  succession.  In 
his  speech  he  expressed  his  warm  acknowledgments  for 
their  repeated  assurances  of  supporting  him  in  such  al- 
liances as  should  be  most  proper  for  the  preservation  of 


i76i.  William.  399 

the  iiterfcy  of  Europe,  and  for  the  security  of  England 
4dd  ihfe  ^tes-geheral.  He  bbsterved,  that  the  season  of 
ttofe  year  tos  advanced :  thai  the  posture  of  affair,  db- 
loliitdy  required  his  presence  abfoatf :  and  he  re'cbirt- 
iftended  dispdtch  of  the  public  biteintesfc,  espfecialljf  Uf 
those  matters  which  were  of  the  greatest  imji6rtarici&. 
The  Commons  thanked  him,  in  an  address,  for  havihj 
approved  of  their  ptofceedings :  they  declared  they  woul< 
support  him  in  such  alliances  as  he  should  think  fit  to 
make,  in  Conjunction  with  the  etftperofr  ana  the  states- 
general,  for  the  peace  of  Europ^,  arid  reducing  the  ex- 
orbitant power  of  France.  Theh  they  resiimed  thel* 
dispiite  with  the  Upper  house,  tn  the  free  confereric^ 
lotd  Haversham  happened  to  tdx  the  commons  with 
partiality,  in  impeaching  some  lords,  and  Screening  others 
who  were  equally  guilty  of  the  same  itiisdemeanours. 
Sir  Christopher  MuSgrave  and  the  managers  for  the 
commons  immediately  withdrew :  this  unguarded  sally 
being  reported  to  the  house,  they  immediately  resolved, 
That  John  lord  Haversham  had  tittered  most  scandalous 
ffeproaches  and  false  expressions,  highly  rfcflefcting  upon 
the  hondur  and  justice  of  the  house  of  commons,  tend- 
ing to  a  breach  iri  the  good  corresponderite  between  th6 
two  houses,  and  to  the  interruption  6f  the  public  justice 
of  the  ttation :  that  the  said  lord  Hstvershani  should  bfe 
charged  before  the  lords  for  the  Said  faords :  that  the 
lords  should  be  desired  to  proceed  in  jdgtice  against  him, 
and  to  inflict  tfpon  him  stich  punishment  as  so  frigti  an 
offence  rigainst  the  cbitittibiii  did  deserve*,  fhe  feorri- 
mons  had  now  fotijid  a  pretetide  to  JMify  fhSt  &fey ; 
and  declared  they  would  hot  rtn^  the  conference'  uhtil 
they  should  hatfe?  rfecdv&f  ^isfaotitirf.  ibird  ftaver- 
rfharii  oflffeifed  to  isMit  to  k  tM\  bxA  iri&sted  on  their 
flrtt  ptovirig  the  wbfd*  which  he  #as:  said  to  havS  spbken . 
When  this  declaration  was  imparted  to  the  commons, 
th^y  said,  the  lords  ought  to  have  censured  him  in  a 
#utnmary  way,  and  still  refused  to  renew  t!h6  conference. 

2D  2 


400  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1701. 

The  lords,  on  the  other  hand,  came  to  a  resolution, 
That  there  should  not  be  a,  committee  of  both  houses 
concerning  the  trial  of  the  impeached  lords.  Then  they 
resolved,  That  lord  Somers  should  be  tried  at  West- 
minster-hall on  Tuesday  the  17  th  day  of  June,  and  sig- 
nified this  resolution  to  the  lower  house;  reminding 
them,  at  the  same  time,  of  the  articles  against  the  earl  of 
Portland.  The  commons  refused  to  appear,  alleging 
they  were  the  only  judges,  and  that  the  evidence  was  not 
yet  prepared.  They  sent  up  the  reasons  of  their. non- 
appearance to  the  house  of  lords,  where  they  were  sup- 
ported by  the  new  ministry  and  all  the  malecontents,  and 
produced  very  warm  debates.  The  majority  carried  their 
point  piece-meal,  by  dint  of  different  votes,  against  which 
very  severe  protests  were  entered.  On  the  day  appointed 
for  the  trial,  they  sent  a  message  to  the  commons,  that 
they  were  going  to  Westminster-hall.  The  other  im- 
peached lords  asked  leave,  and  were  permitted  to  with- 
draw. The  articles  of  impeachment  against  lord  Somers, 
and  his  answers  being  read  in  Westminster-hall,  and  the 
commons  not  appearing  to  prosecute,  the  lords  adjourned 
to  their  own  house,  where  they  debated  concerning  the 
question  that  was  to  be  put.  This  being  settled,  they 
returned  to  Westminster-hall ;  and  the  question  being 
put,  "  That  John  lord  Somers  be  acquitted  of  the  arti- 
cles of  impeachment  against  him,  exhibited  by  the  house 
of  commons,  and  all  things  therein  contained ;  and,  that 
the  impeachment  be  dismissed,"  it  was  carried  by  a  ma- 
jority of  thirty-five.  The  commons,  exasperated  at  these 
proceedings,  resolved,  That  the  lords  had  refused  justice 
to  the  commons :  that  they  had  endeavoured  to  over- 
turn the  right  of  impeachment  lodged  in  the  commons 
by  the  ancient  constitution  of  the  kingdom :  that  all  the 
ill  consequences  which  might  attend  the  delay  of  the 
supplies  given  for  the  preservation  of  the  public  , peace, 
and  the  maintenance  of  the  balance  of  Europe,^  would 
be  owing  to  those  who,  to  procure  an  indemnity  for 


1701.  WILLIAM.  401 

their  owh  crimes,  had  used  their  utmost  endeavours  to 
make  a  breach  between  the  two  houses.    The  lords 
sent  a  message  to  the  commons,  giving  them  to  under- 
stand, that  they  had  acquitted  lord  Somers,  and  dismissed 
the  impeachment,  as  nobody  had  appeared  to  support  the 
articles ;  and  that  they  had  appointed  next  Monday  for 
the  trial  of  the  earl  of  Orford.     They  resolved,  That 
unless  the  charge  against  lord  Haversham  should  be  pro- 
secuted by  the  commons  before  the  end  of  the  session, 
the  lords  would  adjudge  him  innocent :  that  the  resolu- 
tions of  the  commons  on  their  late  votes  contained  most 
unjust  reflections  on  the  honour  and  justice  of  the  peers : 
that  they  were  contrived  to  cover  their  affected  and  un- 
reasonable delays  in  prosecuting  the  impeached  lords : 
that  they  manifestly  terided  to  the  destruction  of  the  ju- 
dicature of  the  lords ;  to  the  rendering  trials  on  impeach- 
ments impracticable  for  the  future,  and  to  the  subverting 
the  constitution  of  the  English  government :  that  there- 
fore, whatever  ill  consequence  might  arise  from  the  so 
long  deferring  the  supplies  for  this  year's  service,  were 
to  be  attributed  to  the  fatal  counsel  of  the  putting  off  the 
meeting  of  a  parliament  so  long,  and  to  the  unnecessary 
delays  of  the  house  of  commons.     On  the  23d  day  of 
June,  the  articles  of  impeachment  against  Edward  earl 
of  Orford,  were  read  in  Westminster-hall ;  but  the  house 
of  commons  having  previously  ordered  that  none  of  the 
members  should  appear  at  this  pretended  trial,  those 
articles  were  not  supported :  so  that  his  lordship  was  ac- 
quitted, and  the  impeachment  dismissed.     Next  day* 
the  impeachments  against  the  duke  of  Leeds,  which  had 
lain  seven  years  neglected,  together  with  those  against 
the  earl  of  Portland  and  lord  Halifax,  as  weH  as  the 
charge  against  lord  Haversham,  were  dismissed  for  want 
of  prosecution.     Each  house  ordered  a  narrative  of 
these  proceedings  to  be  published;  and  their  mutual 
anititosity  had  proceeded  to  such  a  degree  of  rancour,  as 
seemed  to  preclude  all  possibility  of  reconciliation.    The 


402  HISTORY  OF  BWLAND.  IWJ. 

commons,  in  the  whole  course  of  this  transaction,  had 
certainly  acted  from  motives  of  faction  and  revenge :  for 
nothing  could  be  more  unjust,  frivojpua,  and  partial, 
than  (he  charge  exhibited  in  the  articles  of  impeachment, 
their  anticipating  address  to  the  king,  and  their  afiepted 
delay  in  the  prosecutiops.  T^eir  conduct  on  this  occa- 
qiop  was  so  flagrant,  as  to  attract  the  ^otice  of  the  com- 
mon people,  and  inspire  the  generality  of  the  nation  with 
disgust  This  tjhe  whigs  did  not  fail  to  augment  by  the 
arts  of  calumny,  and,  in  particular,  l?y  insinuating  tha| 
the  court  of  Versailles  had  found  means  to  engagq  the 
majority  of  the  commons  in  its  interest. 

§  LI  V.  This  faction  had,  since  the  beginning  pf  this 
session,  employed  their  emissaries  in  exciting  a  popular 
aversion  to  the  tory  ministers  and  members,  and  suc- 
ceeded so  well  in  their  endeavours,  that  they  formed;  a 
scheme  of  obtaining  petitions  from  different  counties 
and  corporations,  that  should  induce  the  commons  to 
alter  their  conduct,  on  the  supposition  thpt  it  was  con- 
trary to  the  sense  of  the  nation.     In  execution,  of  this 
scheme,  a  petition  signed  by  the  deputy-lieu  tenants, 
abpve  twenty  justices  of  the  peace^  the  grand  jury  and 
freeholders  of  the  county  of  Kent,  had  been  presented 
to  the  house  of  commons  on  the  18th  day  of  May, 
by  five  g^ntl^men  ofj  fortune  §nd  disjunct ipn.    The  pur- 
gprt  of  this  remonstrapce  was,  to  recommend  union 
aippng  themselves,  and  confidenceJn  his  majesty,  whose 
great  actions  for  the  nation  could;  never  be  forgotteu 
without  the  blackest  ingratitude :  to  beg  they;  wqyid 
have  regard  to  th$  voice  of  the  people ;  that  thqir  ra-. 
ligion  and  safety  might  be  effectually  provided  for;  that 
their  loyal  addresses  might  be  turned  into  bills  of  supply; 
and  that  his  most  sapred  majesty  might  be  enabled 
powerfully  to  assist  his  allies  before  it  should  he  too  late. 
The  house  was  sp  incensed  at  the  petulance  of  the  peti- 
tion, that  they  voted  it  scandalpus,  insolent,  and  seditious; 
and  ordered  the  gentlemen  who  had  presented  it  to  be 


1781.  WILLIAM.  403 

taken  into  custody.  They  were  afterward  committed 
*  to  the  Gatehouse,  where  they  remained  till  the  proroga- 
tion of  parliament :  but  they  had  no  reason  to  repine  at 
their  imprisonment,  which  recommended  them  to  the 
notice  and  esteem  of  the  public*  They  were  visited  and 
caressed  by  the  chiefs  of  the  whig  interest,  and  con* 
sidered  as  martyrs  to  the  liberties  of  the  people.  Their 
confinement  gave  rise  to  a  very  extraordinary  paper,  in- 
titled,  "  A  memorial  from  the  gentlemen  freeholders, 

and  inhabitants,  of  the  counties  of    $  in  behalf  of 

themselves,  and  many  thousands  of  the  good  people  of 
England/9  It  was  signed  Legion,  and  sent  to  the  speaker 
in  a  letter,  commanding  him,  in  the  name  of  two  hun- 
dred thousand  Englishmen,  to  deliver  it.  to  the  house 
of  commons;  In  this  strange  expostulation,  the  house 
was  charged  with  illegal  and  unwarrantable  practices, 
in  fifteen  particulars :  a  new  claim  of  right  was  ranged 
under  seven  heads:  and  the  commons  were  admo- 
nished to  act  according  to  their  duty,  as  specified  in 
this  memorial,  on  pain  of  incurring  the  resentment  of 
an  injured  nation.  It  was  concluded  in  these  words : 
"  For  Englishmen  are  no  more  to  be  slaves  to  par- 
liaments than  to  kings— our  name  is  Legion,  and  we  are 
many."  The  commons  were  equally  provoked  and  in- 
timidated by  this  libel,  which,  was  the  production  of  one 
Daniel  de  Foe,  a  scurrilous  party-writer,  in  very  little 
estimation.  They  would  not,  however,  deign  to  take 
notice  of  it  in  the  house :  but  a  complaint  being  made 
of  endeavour?  to  raise  tumults  and  seditions,  a  committee 
was  appointed  to  draw  up  an  address  to  his  majesty, 
informing  him  of  those  seditious  endeavours,  and  be- 
seeching him  to  provide  for  the  public  peace  and  se- 
curity. 

§,  l*V.  The  house,  however,  perceiving  plainly  that 
they  had  incurred  the  odium  of  the  nation,  which  began 
to.  clamour  for  a  war  with  France,  and  dreading  the 
popular  resentment,  thought  fit  to  change  their  measures 


404  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1701. 

with  respect  to  this  object,  and  present  the  address  we 
have  already  mentioned,  in. which  they  promised  to  sup- 
port him  in  die  alliances  he  should  contract  with  the  em- 
peror and  other  states,  in  order  to  bridle  the  exorbitant 
power  of  France.  They  likewise  proceeded  in  earnest 
upon  the  supply,  and  voted  funds  for  raising  about 
'2,700,000/.  to  defray  the  expense  of  the  ensuing  year. 
They  voted  thirty  thousand  seamen,  and  resolved  that 
ten  thousand  troops  should  be  transported  from  Ireland 
to  Holland,  as  the  auxiliaries  stipulated  in  the  treaty 
of  1677  with  the  states-general.  The  funds  were  con- 
stituted of  a  land-tax,  certain  duties  on  merchandise, 
and  a  weekly  deduction  from  the  excise*  so  as  to  bririg 
down  the  civil  list  to  600,000/. ;  as  the  duke  of  Glou- 
cester was  dead,  and  James's  queen  refused  her  allow- 
ance. They  passed  a  bill  for  taking  away  all  pri- 
vileges of  parliament  in  legal  prosecutions,  during  the 
intermediate  prorogations ;  their  last  struggle  with  the 
lords  was  concerning  a  bill  for  appointing  commissioners 
to  examine  and  state  the  public  accounts.  The  persons 
nominated  for  this  purpose  were  extremely  obnoxious  to 
the  majority  of  the  peers,  as  violent  partisans  of  the  tory 
faction :  when  the  bill,  therefore,  was  sent  up  to  the  lords, 
they  made  some  amendments,  which  the  commons  re- 
jected. The  former  animosity  hetween  the  two  houses 
began  to  revive,  when  the  king  interrupted  their  dis- 
putes, by  putting  an  end  to  the  session,  on  the  24th 
day  of  June,  after  having  thanked  the  parliament  for 
their  zeal  in  the  public  service,  and  exhorted  them  to 
a  discharge  of  their  duties  in  their  several  counties. 
He  was  no  doubt  extremely  pleased  with  such  an  issue 
of  a  session  that  had  begun  with  a  very  inauspicious  as- 
pect. His  health  daily  declined ;  but  he  concealed  the 
decay  of  his  constitution,  that  his  allies  might  not  be 
discouraged  from  engaging  in  a  confederacy,  of  which 
he  was  deemed  the  head  and  chief  support;  He  con- 
ferred the  command  of  the  ten  thousand  troops  destined 


,4701.  WILLIAM.  -  406 

for  Holland  upon  the  earl  of  Marlborough,  and  appoint- 
ed him,  at  the  same  time,  his  plenipotentiary  to  the 
states-general :  a  choice  that  evinced  his  discernment 
and  discretion  ;  for  that  nobleiman  surpassed  ail  his  con- 
temporaries, both  as  a  general  and  a  politician.  He  was 
cool,  penetrating,  intrepid,  and  persevering;  plausible, 
insinuating,  artful,  and  dissembling. 

§  LVI.  A  regency  being  established,  the  king  em- 
barked for  Holland  in  the  beginning  of  July.     On  his 
arrival  at  the  Hague,  he  assisted  at  the  assembly  of  the 
states-rgeneral,  whom  he  harangued  in  very  affectionate 
terms,  and  was  answered  with  great  cordiality :  then  he 
made  a  progress  round  the  frontiers,  to  examine  the 
state  of  the  garrisons ;  and  gave  such  orders  and  direc- 
tions as  he  judged  necessary  for  the  defence  of  the 
country.     Meanwhile,  the  French  minister,  D'Avauxy 
being  recalled  from  the  Hague,  delivered  a  letter  to  the 
States  from  the  French  king,  who  complained  that  they 
had  often  interrupted  the  conferences,  from  which  no 
good  fruits  were  to  be  expected :  but  he  assured  them  it 
wholly  depended  upon  themselves,  whether  they  should 
continue  to  receive  marks  of  his  ancient  friendship  for 
their  republic.    The  letter  was  accompanied  by  an  inso- 
lent memorial,  to  which  the  states-general  returned  a 
very  spirited  answer.     As  they  expected  nothing  now 
but  hostilities  from  France,  they  redoubled  their  dili- 
gence in  making  preparations  for  their  own  defence. 
They  repaired  their  fortifications,  augmented  their  army*  ^ 
and  hired  auxiliaries.  King  William  and  they  had  already 
engaged  in  an  alliance  with  the  king  of  Denmark,  who 
undertook  to  furnish  a  certain  number  of  troops,  in  con- 
sideration of  a  subsidy ;  and  they  endeavoured  to  me- 
diate a  peace  between  Sweden  and  Poland ;  but  this  they 
could  not  effect.     France  had  likewise  offered  her  me- 
diation between  those  powers,  in  hopes  of  bringing  over 
Sweden  to  her  interest ;  and  the  court  of  Vienna  had 
tampered  with  the  king  of  Poland ;  but  he  persisted  in 


406  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1901. 

bis  resolution  to  prosecute  the  war.  The  Spaniards  be- 
gan to  he  very  uneasy  under  the  dominion  of  their  new 
master.  They  were  shocked  at  the  insolence  of  his 
French  ministers  and  attendants,,  and  much  more  at 
die  manners  and  fashions  which  they  introduced.  The 
grandees  found  themselves  very  little  considered  by  their 
sovereign,  and  resented  his  economy;  for  he.  had  en- 
deavoured to  retrench  the  expenses  of  the  court,  which 
had  used  to  support  their  magnificence.  Prince  Eugene, 
at  the  head  of  the  imperial  army,  had  entered  Italy  by 
Vicenga*  and  passed  the  Adige  near  Carpi,' where  he  de- 
feated abody  of  five  thousand  French  forces.  The  enemy 
were  commanded  by  the  duke  of  Savoy,  assisted  by  ma- 
roschal  Catinat  and  the  prince  of  Vaudemont,  who  did 
not  think  proper  to  hazard  an  engagement :  but  mares* 
chai  Villeroy  arriving  in  the  latter  end  of  August,  with 
orders  to  attack  the  imperialists,  Catinat  retired  in  dis- 
gust. The  new  general  marched  immediately  towards 
Chiari,  where  prince  Eugene  was  entrenched,  and  at* 
tacked  his  camp ;  but  met  with  such  a  reception,  that 
he  was  obliged  to  retire  with  the  loss  of  five  thousand 
men.  Towards  the  end  of  the  campaign,  the  prince  took 
possession  of  all  the  Mantuan  territories,  except  Mantua 
itself,  and  Goito,  die  blockade  of  which  he  formed.  He 
reduced  all  the  places  on  die  Oglio,  and  continued  in 
the  field  during  the  whole  winter,  exhibiting  repeated 
masks  of  the  most  invincible  courage,  indefatigable 
vigilance,  and  extensive  capacity  in  the  art  of  war.  In 
January  he  had  well  nigh  surprised  Cremona,  by  intro- 
ducing a  body  of  men  through  an  old  aqueduct.  They 
forced  one  of  the  gates,  by  which  the  prince  and  his 
followers  entered :  Villeroy  being  wakened  by  the  noise, 
ran  out  into  the  street,  where  he  was  taken ;  and  the 
town  must  have  been  infallibly  reduced,  had  prince  Eur 
gene  beep,  joined  by  another  body  of  troops,  which  he 
bad  ordered  to,  march  from  the  Parmesan,  and  secure 
the  bridge    These  not  arriving  at  the  time  appointed, 


HA  lirish  regiment  in  the  French  servke  took  po$9S$e*on 
of  the  bridge,  and  the  prince  was  obliged  to  ijetite  Vfith 
bis  prisor*er. 

§  LVII.  The  French  king*  alanBted  at  the  as&vity 
and  military  genius,  of  the  imperial  general,  sent  a  reiuh 
foroement  to  his  army  in  Italy,  and  the  duke  of  Ven- 
dome  to  command  his  iprces  in  that  country :  he  like* 
wise  importuned  the  duke  of  Savoy  to  assist  him  eflecr 
tually :  but  that  prince  having  obtained  all  he  could  ex- 
pect from  France,  became  cold  and  backward.  His 
WPpnd  daughter  was  by  this  time  married  to  the  new 
k#ag  of  Spain,  who  met  her  at  Barcelona,  where  he 
found  himself  involved  in  disputes  with  the  states  of 
Catalonia,  who  refused  to  pay  a  tax  he  had  imposed, 
until  their  privileges  should  be  confirmed ;  and  he  was 
obliged  to  gratify  them  in  this  particular.  The  war 
continued  to  rage  in  the  north.  The  young  king  of 
Sweden  routed  the  Saxons  upon  the  river  Danube :  thence 
he  marched  into  Courland,  and  took  possession  of  Mit* 
tau  without  opposition ;  while  the  king  of  Poland  retired 
into  Lithuania.  In  Hungary  the  French  emissaries  en- 
deavoured to  sow  the  seeds  of  a  new  revolt.  They  ex- 
erted' themselves  with  indefatigable  industry  in  almost 
every  court  of  Christendom*  They  had  already  gained 
over  the  elector  of  Bavaria,  andhia  brother,  the  elector 
of  Cologn,  together  with  the  dukes  of  Wolfenbuttle  and 
Sft&a-Gotha,  who  professed  neutrality,  while  they  levied 
troops,  and  made  such  preparations  for  war,  as  plainly 
indicated  that  they  had  received  subsidies:  from  France. 
Lewis  had  also  extorted  a  treaty  of  alliance  from  the 
king  of  Portugal,  who  was  personally  attached  to  the 
Austrian  interest :  but  this  weak  prince  was  a  slave  to 
his  ministers,  whom  the  French  king  had  corrupted. 
During  this  summer,  the  French  coasts  were  overawed 
by  the  combined  fleets  of  England  and  Holland,  under 
the  command  of  sir  George  Rooke,  who  sailed  down  the 
Channel  in  the  latter  end  of  August,  and  detached  vice-* 


408  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1701. 

admiral  Benbow  with  a  strong  squadron  to  the  West 
Indies.  In  order  to  deceive  the  French  king  with  re- 
gard to  the  destination  of  this  fleet,  king  William  de- 
manded the  free  use  of  the  Spanish  harbours,  as  if  his 
design  had  been  to  send  a  squadron  to  the  Mediterra- 
•  nean  :  but  he  met  with  a  repulse,  while  the  French  ships 
were  freely  admitted.  About  this  period  the  king  re- 
voked his  letters-patent  to  the  commissioners  of  the 
admiralty,  and  constituted  the  earl  of  Pembroke  lord- 
high-admiral  of  England,  in  order  to  avoid  the  factions, 
the  disputes,  and  divided  counsels  of  a  board.  The  earl 
was  no  sooner  promoted  to  this  office,  than  he  sent 
captain  Loades  with  three  frigates  to  Cadiz,  to  bring 
home  the  sea-stores  and  effects  belonging  to  the  Eng- 
lish in  that  place,  before  the  war  should  commence ;  and 
this  piece  of  service  was  successfully  performed.  The 
French  king,  in  order  to  enjoy  all  the  advantages  that 
could  be  derived  from  his  union  with  Spain,  established 
a  company,  to  open  a  trade  with  Mexico  and  Peru  ;  and 
concluded  a  new  Assiento  treaty  for  supplying  the 
Spanish  plantations  with  negroes.  At  the  same  time, 
he  sent  a  strong  squadron  to  the  port  of  Cadiz.  The 
French  dress  was  introduced  into  the  court  of  Spain ; 
and,  by  a  formal  edict,  the  grandees  of  that  kingdom, 
and  the  peers  of  France,  were  put  on  a  level  in  each  na- 
tion. There  was  no  vigour  left  in  the  councils  of  Spain : 
her  finances  were  exhausted,  and  her  former  spirit  seem- 
ed to  be  quite  extinguished ;  the  nobility  were  beggars, 
and  the  common  people  overwhelmed  with  indigence 
and  distress.  The  condition  of  France  was  not  much 
more  prosperous.  She  had  been  harassed  by  a -long 
war,  and  now  saw  herself  on  the  eve  of  another,  which 
in  all .  probability  .  would  render  her  completely  mi- 
serable. 

§  LVIII.  These  circumstances  were  well  known  to  the 
emperor  and  the  maritime  powers,  and  served  to  ani- 
mate their  negotiations  for  another    grand  alliance. 


1701.  WILLIAM.  409 

Conferences  were  opened  at  the  Hague :  and,  on  the 
7  th  day  of  September,  a  treaty  was  concluded  between 
his  imperial  majesty,  England,  and  the  states-general. 
The  objects  proposed  were,  to  procure  satisfaction  to. 
the  emperor  in  the  Spanish  succession,  and  sufficient 
security  for  the  dominions  and  commerce  of  the  allies. 
They  engaged  to  use  their  endeavours  for  recovering 
the  Spanish  Netherlands,  as  a  barrier  between  Holland 
and  France  :  and  for  putting  the  emperor  in  possession 
of  the  dutchy  of  Milan,  Naples,  and  Sicily,  with  the 
lands  and  islands  upon  the  coast  of  Tuscany,  belonging 
to  the  Spanish  dominions.     They  agreed,  that  the  king 
of  England,  and  the  states-general,  should  keep  and  pos- 
sess whatever  lands  and  cities  they  should  conquer  from 
the  Spaniards  in  the  Indies :  that  the  confederates  should 
faithfully  communicate  their  designs  to  one  another: 
that  no  party  should  treat  of  peace,  or  truce,  but  jointly 
with  the  rest :  that  they  should  concur  in  preventing 
the  union  of  France  and  Spain  under  the  same  govern- 
ment;  and  hinder  the  French   from   possessing  the 
Spanish  Indies :  that,  in  concluding  a  peace,  the  confe- 
derates should  provide  for  the  maintenance  of  the  com- 
merce carried  on  by  the  maritime  powers  to  the  domi- 
nions taken  from  the  Spaniards,  and  secure  the  States  by 
a  barrier :  that  they  should,  at  the  same  time,  settle 
the  exercise  of  religion  in  the  new  conquests :  that  they 
should  assist  one  another  with  all  their  forces,  in  case  of 
being  invaded  by  the  French  king,  or  any  other  poten- 
tate, on  account  of  this  alliance :  that  a  defensive  alliance 
should  remain  between  them,  even  after  the  peace :  that 
all  kings,  princes,  and  states,  should  be  at  liberty  to  en- 
gage in  this  alliance.     They  determined  to  employ  two 
months  to  obtain,  by  amicable  means,  the  satisfaction 
and  security  which  they  demanded ;  and  stipulated,  that 
within  six  weeks  the  treaty  should  be  ratified. 

§  LIX.  On  the  l6th  day  of  September,  king  Jajttes. 
expired  at  St.  Germains,  after  having  laboured  undqr 


410  HISTORY  OF  fiNfeLAND.  1901. 

*  tedious  indisposition.     Hits  unfortunate  monarch, 
since  the  miscarriage  of  his  last  attempt  for  recovering 
hid  throne)  had  bid  wide  all  thoughts  bf  worldly  gfrah- 
deur>  and  devoted  kin  whole  attehtitfi  to  the  cottbeftM 
of  his  ebuL    Though  he  eould  hot  prevent  the  Biify 
genius  of  his  queen  from  planning  new  Schttne*  of  resto- 
ration, he  was  always  best  pleased  when  wholly  detached 
from  Such  chimerical  projects;    Hunting  Was  his  fchief 
diversion ;  but  religion  was  his  constant  care.    Nothing 
could  be  more  harmless  than  the  life  he  led;  and,  in 
the  course  of  it,  he  subjected  himself  to  uncommon 
penance  and  mortification.    He  frequently  visited  the 
poor  monks  of  la  Trappe,  who  were  much  edified  by 
his  humble  and  pious  deportment.    His  pride  and  arbi- 
trary temper  seemed  to  have  vanished  with  his  greatnesg. 
He  became  affable,  kind,  and  easy,  to  all  his  dependants ; 
and  his  religion  certainly  opened  and  improved  the  vir- 
tues of  his  heart,  though  it  seemed  to  impair  the  facul- 
ties of  his  soul.     In  his  last  illness  he  conjured  his  son 
to  prefer  his  religion  to  every  Worldly  advantage,  arid 
even  to  renounce  all  thoughts  of  a  crown,  if  he  could 
not  enjoy  it  without  offering  violence  to  his  faith.     He 
recommended  to  him  the  practice  of  justice  and  Chris- 
tian forgiveness ;  he  himself  declaring,  that  he  heartily 
forgave  the  prince  of  Orange,  the  emperof,  and  all  his 
enemies*    He  died  with  great  marks  of  devotion,  and 
was  interred,  at  his  own  request,  in  the  church  of  the 
English  Benedictines  in  Parte,  without  any  ftnerd  so- 
lemnity. 

§  LX.  Before  his  death  he  w*s  visited  by  the  Fr&tth 
king,  who  seemed  touched  with  his  condition,  and  de- 
clared that,  in  case  of  his  death,  he  would  owfl  his  Soft 
as  king  of  England.  This  promise  J&tie&'d  queen  had 
already  extorted  from  him  by  the  interest  of  tfnddatoe  d& 
Maintenon,  and  the  dauphin.  Accordingly,  when  Jame£ 
died,  the  pretended  prince  of  Wales  was  proclaimed  king 
of  England  at  St.  Germakts,  and  treated  a*  such  at  the* 


1901.  WILLIAM.  411 

court  of  Versailles.  His  title  was  likewise  recognised  by 
the  king  of  Spain,  the  duke  of  Savoy,  and  the  pope* 
William  was  no  sooner  Momedof  thi*tiwisadxm,tl^ 
he  dispatched  a  courier  to  the  king  of  Sweden,  a*  gua- 
rantee of  the  treaty  of  Ryswick,  to  complain  of  this  ma- 
nifest violation.  At  the  same  time,  he  recalled  the  earl 
of  Manchester  from  Paris,  and  ordered  him  to  return 
without  taking  an  audience  of  leave.  That  nobleman 
immediately  withdrew,  after  having  intimated  to  the 
marquis  de  Torcy  the  order  he  had  received.  Lewis,  in 
vindication  of  his  own  conduct,  dispersed  through  all  the 
courts  of  Europe  a  manifesto,  in  which  he  affirmed,  that 
in  owning  the  prmfce  of  Wales  as  king  of  England,  he 
had  not  infringed  any  article  of  the  treaty  of  Ryswick* 
He  confessed,  that  in  the  fourth  article  he  had  promised 
that  he  would  not  disturb  the  king  of  Great  Britain  in 
the  peaceable  possession  of  his  dominions ;  and  he  de* 
dared  his  intention  was  to  observe  that  promise  punc- 
tually. He  observed,  that  his  generosity  would  not 
allow  him  to  abandon  the  prince  of  Wales  or  his  family ; 
that  he  could  not  refuse  him  a  title  which  was  due  to 
him  by  birth ;  that  he  had  more  reason  to  complain  of 
the  king  of  Great  Britain  and  the  states-general,  whose 
declarations  and  preparations  in  favour  of  the  emperor 
might  be  regarded  as  real  contraventions  to  treaties,; 
finally,  he  quoted  some  instances  from  history,  in  which 
the  children  enjoyed  the  titles  of  kingdoms  which  their 
fathers  had  lost.  These  reasons,  however,  would  hardly 
have  induced  the  French  king  to  take  such  a  step,  had 
he  not  perceived  that  a  war  with  England  was  inevitable ; 
and  that  he  should  be  able  to  reap  some  advantages  in 
the  course  of  it,  from  espousing  the  cause  of  the  pre* 
tender. 

§  LXI.  The  substance  of  the  French  manifesto  was 
published  in  London,  by  Ponssin,  the  secretary  of  Tal- 
lard,  who  had  been  left  in  England,  as  agent  for  the  court 


412  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  17#h 

of  Versailles.  He  was  now  ordered  to  leave  the  kingdom, 
which  was  filled  with  indignation  at  Lewis,  for  having 
pretended  to  declare  who  ought  to  be  their  sovereign. 
The  city  of  London  presented  an  address  to  the  lords- 
justices,  expressing  the  deepest  resentment  of  the  French 
king's  presumption ;   assuring  his  majesty  that  they 
would,  at  all  times,  exert  the  utmost  of  their  abilities  for 
the  preservation  of  his  person,  and  the  defence  of  his 
just  rights,  in  opposition  to  all  invaders  of  his  crown  and 
dignity.     Addresses  of  the.  same  nature  were  sent  up 
from  all  parts  of  the  kingdom,  and  could  not  but  be 
agreeable  to  William.    He  had  now  concerted  measures 
for  acting  with  vigour  against  France ;  and  he  resolved 
to  revisit  his  kingdom,  after  having  made  a  considerable 
progress  in  a  treaty  of  perpetual  alliance  between  Eng- 
land and  the  states-general,  which  was  afterward  brought 
to  perfection  by  his  plenipotentiary,  the  earl  of  Marlbo- 
rough. The  king's  return,  however,  was  delayed  a  whole 
month  by  a  severe  indisposition,   during  which,  the 
Spanish  minister  de  Quiros  hired  certain  physicians  to 
consult  together  upon  the  state  and  nature*  of  his  dis- 
temper.    They^  declared,  that  he  could  not  live  many 
weeks;  and  this  opinion  was  transmitted  to  Madrid; 
William,  however,  baffled  the  prognostic,  though  his 
constitution  had  sustained  such  a  rude  shock,  that  he 
himself  perceived  his  end  was  near.    He  told  the  earl  of 
Portland  he  found  himself  so  weak,  that  he  could  not 
expect  to  live  another  summer:  but  charged  him  to 
conceal  this  circumstance  until  he  should  be  dead. 
Notwithstanding  this  near  approach  to  dissolution,  he 
exerted  himself  with  surprising  diligence  and  spirit;  in 
establishing  the  confederacy,  and  settling  the  plan  of 
operations.     A  subsidiary  treaty  was  concluded  with  the 
king  of  Prussia,  who  engaged  to  furnish  a  certain  num- 
ber of  troops.    The  emperor,  agreed  to  maintain  ninety 
thousand  men  in  the  field  against  France :  the  proportion 


mi.  WILLIAM.  413 

of  the  State*  tfas.  limited  to  one  hundred  and  two  thou- 
sand: and  that  of  England  did  not  exceed  forty  thou- 
sand, to  act  in  conjunction  with  the  allies. 

§  I/XII.  Ori  the  4th  day  of  November  the  king  a*-' 
rived  in  England,  which  he  found  in  a  strange  ferment* 
produced  from  the  mutual  animosity  of  the  two  factions^ 
They  reviled  each  other  in  words  arid  writitig  with  alt 
the  falsehood  of  calumny,  and  all  the  bitterness  of  ran- 
cour :  so  that  truth*  candour,  and  temperance,  seemed 
to  be  banished  by  consent  of  both  parties.  The  king 
bad  found  himself  deceived  in  his  new  ministers,  who 
bad  opposed  his  measures  with  all  their  influence.  He 
Was  particularly  disgusted  with  the  deportment  of  the 
earl  pf  Rochester,  who  proved  altogether  imperious  and 
untractable ;  -and,  instead  of  moderating,  inflamed  thd 
violence  of  his  party.  The  king  declared,  the  year  in 
which  that  nobleman  directed  his  councils  was  the  un-> 
easiest  of  his  whole  life.  He  could  not  help  expressing 
his  displeasure  in  such  a  cpldness  of  reserve,  that  RocheS* 
ter  told  him  he  would  serve  his  majesty  no  longer*  since 
he  did  not  enjoy  his  confidence.  William  made  no 
answer  to  this  expostulation,  but  resolved  he  should  see 
him  no  more.  The  earl,  however,  at  the  desire  of  Mr- 
Hurley,  became  more  pliant  and  submissive;  and,  after 
the  king's  departure  for  Holland,  repaired  to  his  govern^ 
ment  of  Ireland,  in  which  he  now  remained,  exerting  all 
his  endeavours  to  acquire  popularity.  William*  fore- 
seeing nothing  but  opposition  from  the  present  spirit  of 
the  house  of  commons,  closeted  some  of  their  leaders, 
with  a  view  to  bespeak  their  compliance  :  but,  finding 
them  determined  to  pursue  their  former  principles,  and 
to  insist  upon  their  impeachments,  he  resolved,  with  the 
advice  of  his  friends*  to  dissolve  the  parliament.  This 
step  he  was  the  more  easily  induced  to  take,  as  the 
commons  were  become  extremely  odious  to  the  nation 
in  general*  which  breathed  nothing  but  war  and  defiance 
against  the  French  monarch.    The  parliament  was  ac- 

VOL.  i.  *  2  E 


414  HISTORY  OF  JBNGLAND.  fcO*. 

eowlingly  dissolved  by  proclamation,  and' another  sum- 
monedto  meet  on  the  30th  day  of  December. 

§  LXHL  Never  did  the  two  parties  proceed  with  such 
heat  and  violence  against  each  other,  at  in  theft*  endea- 
vours to:  influence  the  new  elections.  The  whig*,  bow- 
twerv  obtained  the  victory,  as  they  included  the  Doomed 
Interest,  which  will  always  prevail  among  the  borough 
electors*  Corruption  was  now  reduced  ikrto  an  open 
and  avowed  commerce ;  and,  had  not  the  people  betefc  so 
universally  venal  at)d  profligate,  that  no  sense  of  shame 
remained,  the  victors  must  have  blushed  for  their  suc- 
cess. Though  the  majority  thus  obtained  was  staunch 
to  the  measures  of  the  court,  the  choice  of  speaker  ftSt 
bport  M*\  Hurley,  contrary  to  the  inclination  of  tile 
king,  who  favoured  sir  Thomas  Lyttleton ;  but  his  n«h 
jfesty's  speech  was  received  with  universal  applause*  It 
was  so  much  admired  by  the  well-wishers  to  the  revolt* 
tton>  that  they  printed  it  with  decorations  in  the  English, 
Dutch  5  and  French  languages.  It  appeared  as  a  piece 
of  furniture  in  all  their  houses,  and  as  the  king's  last  le- 
gacy to  his  own  and  all  Protestant  people.  In  this  ce- 
lebrated harangue,  he  expatiated  upon  the  indignity 
offered  to  the  nation  by  the  French  king's  acknowledge 
tog  the  pretended  prince  of  Wales :  he  explained  the 
dangers  to  which  it  was  exposed,  by  his  placing  his 
grandson  on  the  throne  of  Spain :  he  gave  them  to  ui*- 
derstand  he  had  concluded  several  alliances,  according  to 
the  encouragement  given  him  by  both  houses  of  par- 
liament, which  alliances  should  be  laid-  before  them, 
together-  with  other  treaties  still  depending.  Me  ob- 
served, that  the  eyes  of  all  Europe  were*  upon  this  parlia- 
ment, and  all  matters*  at  a  stand,  until  their  resolution 
should  be  known :  therefore,  no  time  ought  to  be  lost. 
Hie  told  them >  they  had  yet  an  opportunity  to-secure' for 
themselves '  and  their  posterity  the  quiet  enjoyment  of 
their  religion  and  liberties,  if  they  were  not  wanting  to 
themselves,  but  wpukL  exert  die  ancient  vigour-of 


-English  Nation ;  btit  he  declared  his  opinion  was,  that, 
shodld  th£y  neglect  this  occasion*  they  hid  no  tetam  to 
Jtope  for  atldther.  He  said  ife  Would  be  nefcessafy  to 
maintain  a  gteat  sttengiih  at  sea,  and  a  force  on  land  pro 
poftioriabie  to  that  of  their  allies,  He  prdssed  the  Ctoxtt* 
mom  to  support  thfc  pabUd  credit,  whibh  could  hot  be 
preserved  Without  keeping  sacred  that  mixing  That 
they  sbaU  navef  be  lasers  who  trust  teethe  parliamentary 
teourity.  He  declared,  that  hfe  ndver  asked  aids  from 
Ws  people  without  regret ;  tint  what  he  desired  was  for 
thAir  6Wn  safety  aAd  honour,  at  sneb  a  critical  time ;  a»jl 
that  the  tfhole  should  be  appropriated  to  the  purposes 
f&f  which  it  was  intended.  He  ertptesaed  his  wittifegri&fe 
that  the  accounts  dhoiild  be  yearly  submitted  to  the  k*- 
speetioft  of  parikitadnt.  He  agam  retiommetaded  di* 
patch,  together  with  good  bills  for  fcmploying  the  poor, 
ettcoHtaging  trade;  ahd  suppressing  vice.  He  exposed 
fete  hope  that  they  wete  dome  together,  determined  t6 
4v®id  dfcputfcs  and  diff^ratioas,  afld  to  act  With  a  hearty 
<toifcuri<(ttcef<#pfot^  He  said, 

lie  shfotld  think  it  as  grfeat  a  blessing  as  could  befal  Bttg- 
find,  if  they  w£re  asmtfeh  inclined  to  ky  aside  those  etf. 
happy  fetal  animosities  which  divided  and  weakened  theft*, 
as  he  Was  disposed  to  make  all  his  subjects  safe  and  eMf, 
fas  to  tfrty,  evfch  the  highest,  offences  committed  against 
ftfe  persoto  He  conjurfcd  thtehi  to  disappoint  the  hop« 
of  their  enemies  by  their  unanimity.  As  he  had  dltfayfe 
she#ii,  and  always  would  shew,  how  desirous  he  was  tt> 
be  the  cotntfion  father  of  all  hfe  people*  he  desired  they 
<Would  ky  aside  parties  and  divisions,  S6*  as*  that  no  dis- 
tinction should  be  healrd  of  ambngst  them,  but  of thoSfc 
who  were  friends  to  the  Protestant  religion  awd  present 
establishment,  and  of  thdsd  wtotf  tfish&f  for  a  popish 
priiice  and  a  Frencft  gdv^rWmeiW.  He  cbAclucted  by 
affirming,  that  if  they,  Hi  good  earnest,  desired  to  aete 
England  hold  the  bal&nce  of  Europe,  attd  be  mdfcfcd  it 
the  htead  of  the  Protestaht  infetett,  it  Wduld  appfcrfr  % 

2  E  2 


416  HISTORY  OP  ENGLAND.  ifOf. 

theft  improving  the  present  opportunity*  The  lords 
immediately  drew  up  a  warm  and  affectionate  address, 
in  which  they  expressed  their  resentment  of  the  proceed- 
ings of  the  French  king,  in  owning  the  pretended  prince 
of  Wales  for  kiqg  of  England-  They  assured  his  ma- 
jesty* they  would  assist  him  to  the  utmost  of  their  power 
against  all  his  enemies :  and  when  it  should  please  God 
to  deprive  them  of  his  majesty's  protection,  they  would 
vigorously  assist  and  defend  against  the  pretended  prince 
of  Wales*  and  all  other  pretenders  whatsoever,  every 
person  and  persons  who  had  right  to  succeed  to  the 
crown  of  England,  by  virtue  of  the  acts  of  parliament 
for.  establishing  and  limiting,  the  succession.  On  the 
5th  day  of  January,  an  address  to  the  same  effect  was 
presented  by  the  commons,  and  both  met  with  a  very 
gracious  reception  from  his  majesty.  The  lords,  as  a 
farther  proof  of  their  zeal,  having  taken  into  considera- 
tion the  dangers  that  threatened  Europe,  from  the  ac- 
cession of  the  duke  of  Anjou  to  the  crown  of  Spain* 
drew  Up  another  address,  explaining  their  sense  of  that 
danger  ;  stigmatizing  the  French  king  as  a  violator  of 
treaties ;  declaring  their  opinion,  that  his  majesty,  his 
subjects,  and  allies,  could  never  be  safe  and  secure  until 
the  house  of  Austria  should  be  restored  to  their  rights, 
and  the  invader  of  the  Spanish  monarchy  brought  to 
reason  ;  and  assuring  his  majesty  that  no  time  should  be 
lost,  nor  any  thing  wanting  on  their  parts,  which  might 
answer  the  reasonable  <  expectations  of  their  friends 
abroad ;  not  doubting  but  to  support  the  reputation  of 
the  English  name,  when  engaged  under  so  great  a 
prince,  in  the  glorious  cause  of  maintaining  the  liberty 
of  Europe. 

*  |  LXIV.  The.  king,  in  order  to  acquire  the  confi- 
dence of  the  commons,  ordered  Mr*  secretary  Vernon, 
to  lay  before  them  copies  of  the  treaties  and  conventions 
he  had  lately  concluded,  which  were  so  well  approved, 
4hat  the  house  unanimously  voted  the  supply.  -  By  an- 


1701.  WILLIAM.;  417 

other  vote,  they  authorized  the  exchequer  to  borrow 
600,000/.  at  six  per  cent,  for  the  service  of  the  fleet,  and 
50,000/.  for  the  subsistence  of  guards  and.  garrisons. 
They  deliberated  upon  the  state  of  the  navy,  with  tha 
debt  due  upon  it,  and  examined  an  estimate  of  what 
would  be  necessary  for  extraordinary  repairs.  They  called 
for  an  account  of  that  part  of  the  national  debt  for  which 
ho  provision  had  been  made.  They  ordered  the  speaker 
to  write  to  the  trustees  for  the  forfeited  estates  in  lie* 
land4  to  attend  the  house  with  a  full  detail  of  tbeir  pn> 
oeedings  in  the.  execution  of  that  act  of  parliament.  On 
the  9th  day  of  January,  they  unanimously  resolved,  That 
leave  be  given  to  bring  in  a  bill  for  securing  his  majesr 
ty's  person,  and'  the  succession  of  the  crown  in  the  Pro^ 
tesftant  line,  for  extinguishing  the  hopes  of  the  pretended 
prince  of  Wales,  and  all  other  pretenders,  and  their  open 
and  secret  abettors.  They  resolved  to  address  his  mat 
jesty,  that  he  would  insert  an  article  in  all  his  treaties  of 
alliance,  importing,  That  no  peace  should  be  made  with 
France,  until  his  majesty  and  the  nation  have  reparation 
for  the  great  indignity  offered  by  the  French  king,  ii| 
owning  and  declaring  the  pretended  prince  of  Wales 
king  of  England,  Scotland,  and  Ireland.  They  agreed 
to  maintain  forty  thousand  men  for  the  sea-service,  and 
a  like  number  by  land,  to  act  in  conjunction  with  the 
forces  of  the  allies,  according  to  the  proportions  settled 
by  the  contracting  powers.  The  supplies  were  raised 
by  an  imposition  of  four  shillings  in  the  pound  upon 
lands,  annuities,  pensions,  and  stipends,  and  on  the  pro- 
fits arising  from  the  different  professions :  by  a  tax  of 
two  and  one-half  per  cent,  on  all  stock  in  trade,  and 
inoney  at  interest ;  of  five  .shillings  in  the  pound  on  all 
salaries,  fees,  and  perquisites ;  a  capitation-tax  of  four  shil- 
lings ;  an  imposition  of  one  per  cent,  on  all  sharfes  in 
the  capital  stock  of  any  corporation  or  company,  which 
should  be  bought,  sold,  or  bargained  for  ;  a  duty  of  sixr 


4 1  fr  HISTORY  <O0  EMGL AND,  IWR 

pence  pert  bushel  oa  mah,  and  a  farther  4Uty  bit  mumj 
cider,  and  perry. 

^  LXV.  The  commons  seemed  to  vie  frith  the  tarda 
in  their  seal  for  the  government.  They  brought  in  a 
bill  for  attainting  the  pretended  prince  of  Wales,  which 
being  sent  up  to  the  other  house,  passed  with  an  addi- 
tional clause  of  attainder  against  the  queen,  who  acted  as 
tegent  for  the  pretender.  This,  however,  was  not  carped 
without  great  opposition  in  the  house  of  lords-  When 
the  bill  was  sent  back  to  the  commons,  they  excepted  to 
tha  amendment  as  irregular.  They  observed,  that  attain* 
dersby  bill  constituted  the  mpst  rigorous  part  of  the  jaw* 
and  that  the  stretching  of  it  ought  to  be  avoided*  They 
proposed,  that  the  queen  should  be  attainted  by  a  separata 
bill.  The  lords  assented  to  the  proposal  $  and  the  biU 
against  the  pretended  prince  of  Wales  passed.  The  lord? 
passed  another  for  attainting  the  queen ;  however,  it  was 
neglected  in  the  house  of  commons.  But  the  longest 
and  warmest  debates  of  this  session  were  produced  by 
a  bill,  which  the  lords  brought  in,  for  abjuring  the 
pretended  prince  of  Wales,  and  swearing  to  the  king 
by  the  title  of  rightful  and  lawful  king,  and  his  heirs,  ac- 
cording to  the  act  of  settlement.  It  was  proposed,  that 
this  oath  should  be  voluntary,  tendered  to  all  persons,  and 
their  subscription  or  refusal  recorded  without  any  other 
penalty.  This  article  was  violently  opposed  by  the  earl 
of  Nottingham,  $nd  other  lords  pf  the  tory  interest. 
They  observed,  that  the  government  was  first  settled  by 
another  oath,  which  was  like  an  original  contract,  so 
that  there  was  no  occasion  for  a  new  imposition ;  that 
oaths  relating  to  men's  opinions  had  been  always  consi- 
dered as  severe  impositions ;  and  that  a  voluntary  oath 
was  in  its  own  nature  unlawful .  During  these  disputes, 
another  bill  of  abjuration  was  brought  into  the  house  of 
commons  by  sir  Charles  Hedges,,  that  should  be  obliga* 
tory  <  on  all  persons  who  enjoyed  employments  in  church 


or  state;  it  likewise  k)d«ided  an  ob%*tiogn  to  pKHOta*? 
the  gov^rHment  ia  king,  lords,  and  commons,  and  tp 
maintain  the  church  of  England,  together  with  the  toler 
ration  for  disSeftters.  Warm  debates  arose  upon  the 
question,  Whether  the  oath  should  be  imposed  or  vo- 
luntary i  and  at  length  it  was  carried  for  imposition,  by 
the  majority  of  one  Voice*  They  agreed  to  insert  an 
additional  clause,  declaring  it  equally  penal  to  compass 
or  imagine  the  death  of  her  royal  highness  the  princess 
A»ne  of  Denmark,  as  it  was  to  compass  or  imagine  the 
{kath  of  the  king's  eldest  son  and  heir.  In  the  house 
of  peers  this  bill  was  strenuously  opposed  by  the  tories ; 
auad,  when,  after  long  debates*  it  passed  on  the  24th  day 
of  February*  ten  lords  entered  a  protest  against  it,  as  an 
unnecessary  and  severe  imposition. 

§  LXVL  The  whole  nation  now  seemed  to  join  in 
the  cry  for  a  War  with  France*  Party  heats  began  tif 
abate ;  the  factions  in  the  city  of  London  were  in  a  great 
measure  moderated  by  the  union  of  the  two  companies 
trading  to  the  East  Indies*  which  found  their  mutual 
interest  required  a  coalition.  The  tories  in  the  house  of 
commons,  having  concurred  so  heartily  with  the  inclina? 
tidns  of  the  people,  resolved,  as  far  as  it  lay.  in  their 
power,  to  justify  the  conduct  of  their  party  in  the  pre-* 
ceding  parliament.  .  They  complained  of  some  petitions 
and  addresses  which  had  reflected  upon  the  proceeding? 
of  the  last  house  of  commons,  and  particularly  of  the 
Kentish  petition.  The  majority,  however,  determined, 
that  it  was  the  undoubted  right  of  the  people  of  Eng- 
land to  petitiQn  or  address  the  king,  for  the  calling,  sit- 
ting, or  dissolving  of  parliaments,  and  for  the  redressing 
of  grievances;  and  that  every  subject  under  any  accusa-. 
tion,  either  by  impeachment  or  otherwise,  had  a  right 
to  be  brought  to  a  speedy  trial.  A  complaint  being  like- 
wise made,  that  the  lords  had  denied  the  commons  jus-, 
tice  in  the  matter  of  the  late  impeachments,  a  furious  de-. 


490  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  )0M, 

bate  ensued ;  and  it  was  carried  by  a  very  small  majority, 
that  justice  had  not  been  denied.  In  sorae  points,  however, 
they  succeeded:  in  the  case  of  a  controverted  election  at 
Maidstone,  between  Thomas  Blisse  and  Thomas  CuIt 
pepper,  the  houte  resolved,  That  the  latter  had  been  not 
only  guilty  of  corrupt,  scandalous,  and  indirect  practices, 
i»  endeavouring  to  procure  himself  to  be  elected  a  bur-? 
gess ;  but  likewise,  being  one  of  the  instruments  in 
promoting  and  presenting  the  scandalous,  insolent,  and 
seditious  petition,  commonly  called  the  Kentish  petition, 
to  the  last  house  of  commons,  wa6  guilty  of  promoting 
a  scandalous,  villanous,  and  groundless  reflection  upon 
that  house,  by  aspersing  the  members  with  receiving 
French  money,  or  being  in  the  interest  of  France ;  for 
which  offence  he  was  ordered  to  be  committed  to  New* 
gate;  and  to  be  prosecuted  by  his  majesty's  attorney-ge- 
neral. They  also  resolved,  That  to  assert  that  thehouseof 
commons  is  not  the  only  representative  of  the  commons 
of  England,  tends  to  the  subversion  of  the  rights  and  pri- 
vileges of  the  house  of  commons,  and  the  fundamental 
constitution  of  the  government  of  this  kingdom :  that 
to  assert,  that  the  house  of  commons  have  po  power 
of  commitment,  but  of  their  own  members,  tends  to  the 
subversion  of  the  constitution  of  the  house  of  commons; 
that  to  print  or  publish  any  hooks,  or  libels,  reflecting 
upon  the  proceedings  of  the  house  of  commons,  or  any 
member  thereof,  for  or  relating  to  his  service  therein,  is 
a  high  violation  of  the  rights  and  privileges  of  the  house 
of  commons.  Notwithstanding  these  transactions*  they 
did  not  neglect  the. vigorous  prosecution  of  the  war. 
They  addressed  his  majesty  to  interpose  with  his  allies, 
that  they  might  increase  their  quotas  of  land-forces,  to.be 
put  on  board  the  fleet  in  proportion  to  the  numbers  his 
majesty  should  embark.  When  they  bad  settled  the 
gums  appropriated  to  the  several  uses  of  the  war,  they 
presented  a  second  address,  desiring  he  would  provide 


1701,  WILLIAM.  421 

for  the  half-pay  officers,  in  the  first  place,  in  the  recruits 
and  levies  to  be  made.  The  king  assured  them;  it  wa* 
always  his  intention  to  provide  for  those  officers.  Jfe 
went  to  the  house  of  peers,  and  gave  the  royal  assent  to 
an  act,  appointing  commissioners  to  take,  examine,  and 
determine  the .  debts  due  to  the  army,  navy,  and  the 
transport  service ;  and  also  to  take  an  account  of  prizes 
taken  during  the  war. 

;  §  LXVI1.  The  affairs  of  Ireland  were  not  a  little  emr 
barrassed,  by  the  conduct  of  the  trustees  appointed  to 
take  cognizance  of  the  forfeited  estates.  Their  office 
Was  extremely  odious  to  the  people,  as  well  as  to  the 
court,  and  their  deportment  was  arbitrary  and  imperious. 
Several  individuals  of  that  kingdom,  provoked  by  the 
insolence  of  the  trustees  on.  the  one  hand,  and  encou*- 
raged  by  the  countenance  of  the  courtiers  on  the  other* 
endeavoured,  by  a  circular  letter,  to  spirit  up  the  grand 
jury,  of  Ireland  against  the  act  of  resumption :  petitions 
were  presented  to  the  king,  pouched  in  very  strong 
terms,  affirming,  that  it  Was  injurious  to  the  Protestant 
interest,  and  had  been  obtained  by  gross  misinformations* 
The  king  having  communicated  these  addresses  to  the 
house,  they  were  immediately  voted  scandalous,  false,  and 
groundless ;  and  the  commons  resolved,  That,  notwith- 
standing the  complaints  and  clamours  against  the  trustees, 
it  did  not  appear  to  the  house  but  those  complaints  were 
groundless:  nevertheless,  they  afterward  received  seve.. 
ual  petitions,  imploring  relief  against  the  said  act ;  and 
they  ordered  that  the  petitioners  should  be  relieved  acr 
cordingly.  Proposals  were  delivered  in  for  incorpora- 
ting such  as  should  purchase  the  said  forfeitures,  on 
certain  terms  therein  specified,  according  to  the  rent- 
roll,  when  verified  and  made  good  to  the  purchasers  i 
but,  whereas,  in  this  rent-roll,  the  value  of  the  estates 
had  been  estimated  at  something  more  than  7  J  6,000/, 
those .  who  undertook  to  make  the  purchase  affirmed 


HISTORY' Or  J*«L  AND.  ItfU 

tbey  ware  not  worth  SdOyOGOl.;  jad  thus  th*  aftait  «* 
makied  in  suspense. 

4  LXVUL  With  respect  to  Sootknd,  the  dknwwM* 
of  that  kingdom  hod  not  yet  sdbstded.  When  the  toft 
of  abjuration  passed  in  the  house  of  peers,  die  earl  of 
Nottingham  had  declared,  that  although  he  differed  ill 
opinion  from  the  majority,  in  many  particulars  relating 
to  that  bill,  yet  he  was  a  friend  to  the  design  of  it;  and* 
in  order  to  secure  a  Protestant  succession,  he  thought  a 
union  of  the  whole  island. was  absolutely  necessary.  He 
therefore  moved  for  an  address  to  the  king,  that  he 
would  dissolve  the  parliament  of  Scotland  now  sitting* 
as  the  legality  of  it  might  be  called  in  question,  on  account 
of  its  having  been  originally  a  convention ;  and  that  £ 
new  parliament  should  be  summoned,  that  they  might 
treat  about  a  union  of  the  two  kingdoms.  The  king 
had  this  affair  so  much  at  heart,  that  even  when  he  was* 
disabled  from  going  to  the  parliament  in  person*  he  seat 
a.  letter  to  the  commons,  expressing  an  eager  desiee  thafc 
a  treaty  for  this  purpose  might  be  set  on  foot,  and  earn 
nestly  recommending  this  affair  to  the  consideration  of 
the  house :  but,  as  a  new  parliament  in  Scotland  could 
flot  be  called  without  a  great  risk,  while  the  nation  waa 
in  such  a  ferment,  the  project  was  postponed  to  a  more 
favourable  opportunity* 

§  LXIX.  Before  the  king's  return  from  Holland,  he 
had  concerted  with  his  allies  the  operations  of  the  ensu- 
ing campaign*  He  had  engaged  in  a  negotiation  with 
the  prince  of  Hesse  d'Armstadt,  who  assured  him,  that 
if  he  would  besiege  and  take  Cadiz,  the  admiral  of  Cas-v 
tile,  and  divers  other  grandees .  of  Spain,  would  declare 
for  the  house  of  Austria.  The  allies  had  also  determined 
upon  the  siege  of  Keiserswaert,  which,  the  elector  of  Co* 
logn  had  delivered  into  the  hands  of  the  French ;  the 
elector  of  Hanover  had  resolved  to  disarm  the  princes  of 
Wolfenbuttle :  the  king  of  the  Romans,  and  prinoe 


imi  WILLIAM.  128 

Lbub  of  Bacte^  undertook,  to  invest  Landau :  and  the 
emperor  promised  to  send  a  powerful  reinforcement  to 
prince  Eugene  in  Italy i  but  William  did  not  live  to  see 
ihdse.  schemes  put  -  in  execution.  His  constitution  was 
by  tbU  time  almost  exhausted,  though  he  endeavoured 
tojconceal  the,  effects  of  his  malady,  and  to  repair  his 
health:  by  exercise-  On  the  3 1st  day  of  February,  in 
riding  to  Hampton«court  from  Kensington,  his  horse 
fell  under  him,  and  he  himself  was  thrown  upon  die 
gnkmd  with  such  violence,  as  produced  a  fracture  in 
his  collar-bone.  His  attendants  conveyed  him  to  the 
palace  of  Hampton-court,  where  the  fracture  was  re+ 
duoed  by  Ronjat,  his  serjeantaurgeori*  In  the  evening 
he  returned  to  Kensington  in  his  coach,  and  the  two 
ends  of  the  fractured  bone  having  been  disunited  by  the 
jolting  of  the  .carriage,  were  replaced  under  the  inspect 
tidn  of  Bidloo,  his  physician.  He  seemed  to  be  in  a  fait 
tray  of  recovering  till  the  1st  day  of  March,  when  his 
knee  appeared  to  be  inflamed,  with  great  pain  and  weak** 
ness.  Next  day  he  granted  a  commission  under,  the 
great  seal  to  several  peers,  for  passing  the  bills  to  which 
both  houses  of  parliament  had  agreed ;  namely,  the  act 
of  attainder  against  the  pretended  prince  of  Wales,  and 
another  in  favour  of  the  Quakers,  enacting,  That  their 
solemn  affirmation  and  declaration  should  be  accepted 
instead  of  an  oath  in  the  usual  form* 

§  LXX.  On  the  4th  day  of  March  the  king  was 
so  well  recovered  of  his  lameness,  that  he  took  several 
turns  in  the  gallery  at  Kensington ;  but,  sitting  down  on 
a  couch  where  he  fell  asleep,  he  was  seized  with  a  shiver- 
ing, which  terminated  in  a  fever  and  diarrhoea.  He  was 
attended  by  sir  Thomas  Milimgton,  sir  Richard  Black** 
more,  sir  Theodore  Colledqn,  Dr.  Bidloo,  and.  other 
eminent  physicians ;  but  their  prescriptions  proved  inef- 
fectual. On  the  6th  he  granted  another  commission 
for  passing  the  bill  for  the  malt-tax,  and  the  act  of  abju- 
ration;  and,  being  so  weak  that  he  could  not  write  his 


424  HISTORY  Of  ENGLAND,  1701, 

name,  he,  in  presence  of  the  lord-keeper,  and  the  clerks 
of  parliament,  applied  a  stamp  prepared  for  the  purpose* 
The  earl  of  Albemarle  arriving  from  Holland,  conferred 
with  him  in  private  on  the  posture  of  affairs  abroad :  but 
he  received  his  informations  with  great  coldness,  and 
said,  '€€  Je  tire  vers  maj!n.—I  approach  the  end  of  my 
life."  In  the  evening  he  thanked  Dr.  Bidloo  for  his 
care  and  tenderness,  saying,  "  I  know  that  you  and  the 
other  learned  physicians  have  done  all  that  your  art  can 
do  for  my  relief;  but,  finding  all  means  ineffectual,  I 
submit."  He  received  spiritual  consolation  from  arah* 
bishop  Tennison,  and  Burnet,  bishop  of  Salisbury:  on 
Sunday  morning  the  sacrament  was  administered  to  him. 
The  lords  of  the  privy-council,  and  divers  noblemen, 
attended  in  the  adjoining  apartments,  and  to  some  of 
them  who  were  admitted  he  spoke  a  little.  He  thanked! 
lord  Auverquerque  for  his  long  and  faithful  services :  he 
delivered  to  lord  Albemarle  the  keys  of  his  closet  and 
scrutoire,  telling  him  he  knew  what  to  do  with  them. 
He  inquired  for  the  earl  of  Portland ;  but,  being  speech- 
less before  that  nobleman  arrived,  he  grasped  his  hand* 
and  laid  it  to  his  heart,  with  marks  of  the  most  tender 
affection.  On  the  8th  day  of  March  he  .expired,  in 
the  fifty-second  year  of  his  age,  after  having  reigned 
thirteen  years.  The  lords  Lexington  and  Scarborough, 
who  were  in  waiting,  no  sooner  perceived  that  the  king 
was  dead,  than  they  ordered  Ronjat  to  untie  from  bis 
left  arm  a  black  ribbon,  to  which  was  affixed  a  ring,  con-, 
taining  some  hair  of  the  late  queen  Mary.  The  body 
being  opened  and  embalmed,  lay  in  state  for  some  time 
at  Kensington  ;  and  on  the  12  th  day  of  April  was  de- 
posited in  a  vault  of  Henry's  chapel  in  Westminster-? 
abbey.  In  the  beginning  of  May,  a  will,  which  he  had 
intrusted  with  monsieur  Schuylemberg,  was  opened  at 
the  Hague.  In  this  he  had  appointed  his  cousin,  prince? 
Frison  of  Nassau,  stadtholder  of  Friesland,  his  sole  and 
universal  heir^  and  appointed  the  states-general,  his  exe- 


17*1.  WILLIAM*  425 

ciitorS.  By  a  codicil  annexed,  he  had  bequeathed  the 
lordship  of  Breevert,  and  a  legacy  of  two  hundred  thou- 
sand guilders,  to  the  earl  of  Albemarle. 
-  §  LXXL  William  III.  was  in  his  person  of  the  middle 
stature,  a  thin  body,  a  delicate  constitution,  subject  to  an 
asthma  and  continual  cough  from  his  infancy.  He  had 
ah  aquiline  nose,  sparkling  eyes,  a  large  forehead,  and  a 
grave,  solemn  aspect.  He  was  very  sparing  of  speech : 
his  conversation  was  dry,  and  his  manner  disgusting, 
except  in  battle,  when  his  deportment  was  free,  spirited, 
and  animating.  In  courage,  fortitude,  and  equanimity, 
he  rivalled  the  most  eminent  warriors  of  antiquity ;  and 
his  natural  sagacity  made  amends  for  the  defects  in  his 
education,  which  had  not  been  properly  superintended. 
He  was  religious,  temperate,  generally  just  and  sincere, 
a  stranger  to  violent  transports  of  passion,  and  might 
have  passed  for  one  of  the  best  princes  of  the  age  in  which 
he  lived,  had  he  never  ascended  the  throne  of  Great 
Britain,  But  the  distinguishing  criterion  of  his  charac- 
ter was  ambition.  To  this  he  sacrificed  the  punctilios 
of  honour  and  decorum,  in  deposing  his  own  father-ip- 
law  and  uncle ;  and  this  he  gratified  at  the  expense  of 
the  nation  that  raised  him  to  sovereign  authority.  He 
aspired  to  the  honour  of  acting  as  umpire  in  all  the  con- 
tests of  Europe ;  and  the  second  object  of  his  attention 
was,  the  prosperity  of  that  country  to  which  he  owed  his 
birth  and  extraction.  Whether  he  really  thought  the 
interests  of  the  continent  arid  Great  Britain  were  in- 
separable* or  sought  only  to  drag  England  into  the  con- 
federacy as  a  convenient  ally,  certain  it  is,  he  involved 
these  kingdoms  in  foreign  connexions,  which,  in  all  pro- 
bability, will  be  productive  of"  their  ruin.  In  order  to 
establish  this  favourite  point,  he  scrupled  not  to  employ 
all  the  engines  of  corruption,  by  Which  the  morals  of  the 
nation  were  totally  debauched.  He  procured  a  parlia- 
mentary sanction  for  a  standing  army,  which  now  seems 
to  be  interwoven  in  the  constitution.    He  introduced 


486     '  HISTORY  <M  BKGLAtfD.  .1*11. 

the  penurious  practice  of  borrowing  upon  remote  funds  t 
an  expedient  that  necessarily  batched  a  brood  of  astir  era, 
brokers,  contractors,  and  stock-jobbers,  to  prey  upon  the 
Vitals  of  their  country.  He  entailed  upon  the  nation  a 
growing  debt,  and  a  system  of  politics  big  with  misery 
despair,  and  destruction.0  To  sum  ap  his  character  in 
A  few  words— William  was  a  fatalist  in  religion,  inde- 
fatigable in  war,  enterprising  in  politics,  dead  to.  ail  the 
i*arm  and  generous  emotions  of  the  human  heart,  a  cold 
retatkJn,  an  indifferent  husband,  a  disagreeable  man,  an 
ungracious  prince,  and  an  imperious  sovereign* 


■j  ■  ■■  <■ 


CHAP.  VII. 

ANNE-    • 

VI.  Aime  succeeds  to  to  throne-^  II,  Sie  resolve*  ta  fulfil  thtesgageV 
,  stent*  of  her  predecessor  with  his  allies;--)  III.  A  French  memoriaf 
presented  to  the  states-general — §  IV.  The  queen's  inclination  to  the 
tones— 4  Y.  War  declared  against  France— $  VI.  The  parliament  pro* 
rogned-4  VII.  Warn  opposition  to  flie  ministry  itr  the"  Soofti sbparlhi- 
mcnt— §  VIII.  They  recognise  her  majesty's  authority — §  IX*.  The 
queen  appoints  commissioners  to  treat  of  a  union  between  England 
and  Scotland— §  X.  State  of  affairs  on  the  continent—^  XI;  Kefeei*- 
:  swaert  and  Landau  taken  by  the  allies— §  XIL  Progra*  of  fie  9$Aff 
Marlborough  in  Flanders — §  XIII.  He  narrowly  escapes  being,  taken 
by  a  French  partisan — ^  XtV.  The  imperialists  are  worsted  at  Frid: 
lingoen— %  XV.  Battle  of  Luzzara,  in  Italy— §  XVI.  The  tfng  of 
Sweden- defeats  Augustus  at  Lissou,  in  Poland— §  XVII.  Fruitier 
.  expedition  to  Cadiz  by  the  duke  of  Ormond  and  sir  George  Rooke— 
§  XVni.  They  take  and  destroy  the  Spanish  galleons  at  Vigo — §  Xf  £'. 
Admiral  Benbow's  engagement  with  Du  Casse  in  the  West  IadtesM- 
§  XX.  The  queen. assembles  a  new  parliament — §  XXL  Disputes  be* 
tween  the  two  houses — §  XXII.  The  lords  inquire  into  the  conduct 
of  sir  George  Rooke— §  XXIII.  The  parliament  make  a  Settlement  on 
prince  George  of  Denmark— §  XXI V.  The  earl  of  Marlborough  created 
a  duke— ^  XXV.  All  commerce  and  correspondence  prohibited  be? 
tween  Holland  and  the  two  crowns  of  France  and  Spain — §  XXVI. 
A  bill  for  preventing  occasional  conformity— §  XXVtI.  ft  miscarries 

e  Burnet.    Oldmixon.    Bbyer.     Lamberty.    State  Tracts.-  'Tijidaf. 
fiarph.    Voltaire. 


;   -^VXXWHv  TMeot  anlnttnitjr  trtrtwew*  thi  tut  boww*  produced  fcy 

tlie  inquiry  into  the  poblicacqounta^-§  XXIX.  Disputes  between  tttff 

"*  two  booses  of  convocation — |  XXX.  Account  of  the  parties  in  Scot- 

•  ted—!  XXXI.  Dangerous  heats  in  tie  parliament  of  that  kingdom 
.  — §,  XXXII*  The  commiasionet  i&  abandoned  *y  the  eaTaliers-r 

^.  XXXIII.,  He  is  in  danger  of  his  life,  and  suddenly  prorogues  the 
'  parliament— §  XXXIV.  Proceedings  of  the   Irish    parliament— 

*  VXXXV.  Tteypatta  tetere act  again*  Papists— §  XXXVI.  The 

*  elector  of  Bavaria  defeats  tto  taineriaiisto  at  Seardingen,  and  taken 
possession  of  rWbbon—§  XXXVII.  The  allies  reduce  Bonne— 

r  $  XXXVni.  Battle  of  Eckeren— §  XXXIX.  The  prince  of  Hesse  & 

;'  4fife«taL  by,  the  French  at  9pn«baatt--r§  XL.  Treaty  between  tile  emu 

,  f^rpr  and  the  duke  of  Samy*    The  king  of  Portugal  accedes  to  tfie 

grand  alliance — §,XLI.  Sir  Cloudesley  Shovel  sails  with  a  fleet  to  the 

•  Mediterranean— §  XL1I.  Admiral  GraydWs  bootless  expedition  tb 
,  the  West  Indies^  XLU1.  Charley  king  of  Spain,  arrites  ia  Engv 

land# 

f  I.  Wili.iam  was  succeeded  as  sovereign  of  England 
by  Anne,  princess  of  Denmark,  who  ascended  the  throne 
in  the  thirty-eighth  year  of  her  age,  to  the  general  *at& 
fsctkm  of  all  parties.  Even  the  Jacobites  seemed  pleased 
with  herelevation*  on  the  supposition,  that,  as  in  all  pro* 
nubility  die  would  learn  no  heirs  of  her  own  body,  th£ 
dictate*  of  natural  affection  would  induce  her  to  alter  the 
succession  in  favour  of  her  own  brother.  She  had  been 
taught  to  cherish  warm  sentiments  of  the  tories,  whom 
she  considered  as  the  friends  of  monarchy,  and  the  true 
sons  of  the  church ;  and  they  had  always  professed  ah 
inviolable  attachment  to  her  person  and  interest ;  but 
her  conduct  was  wholly  influenced  by  the  countess  of 
Marlborough,  a  woman  of  an  imperious  temper  and  in- 
triguing genius,  who  had  been  intimate  with  the  princes^ 
from  her  tender  years,  and  gained  a  surprising  ascend- 
ancy over  her*  Anne  had  undergone  some  strangd 
vicissitudes  of  fortune  in  consequence  of  her  father's  ex- 
pulsion,  and  sustained  a  variety  of  mortifications  in  the 
tote  reign,  during  whidh  she  conducted  herself  with  such 
discration,  as  left  little  or  no  pretence  for  censure  or  re 
dentment.  Such  conduct,  indeed,  was  in  a  great  mea- 
sure owing  to  a  natural  temperance  of  disposition,  not 
easily  ruffled  or*  inflamed.    She  was  zealously  devoted 


438  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1701. 

to  th£  church  of  England,  from  which  her  father  had 
u£ed  some  endeavours  to  detach  her  before  the  revolu- 
tion ;  and  she  lived  in  great  harmony  with  her  husband, 
to  whom  she  bore  six  children,  all  of  whom  she  had  al- 
ready  survived,  William  had  no  sooner  yielded  up  his 
breath,  than  the  privy-council,  in  a  body,  waited  on  the 
tiew  queen,  who,  in  a  short  but  sensible  speech,  assured 
them,  that  no  pains  nor  diligence  should  be  wanting  on 
her  part,  to  preserve  and  support  the  religion,  laws,  and 
liberties  of  her  country,  to  maintain  the  succession  in  the 
Protestant  line,  and  the  gQvernment  in  church  and  state, 
as  by  law  established.  She  declared  her  resolution  to 
carry  on  the  preparations  for  opposing  the  exorbitant 
power  of  France,  and  to  assure  the  allies,  that  she  would 
pursue  the  true  interest  of  England,  together  with  theirs* 
for  the  support  of  the  common  cause.  The  members 
of  the  privy-council  having  taken  the  oaths,  she  ordered 
a  proclamation  to  be  published*  signifying  heir  pleasure; 
that  all  persons  in  office  of  authority  or  government  at: 
the  decease  of  the  late  king,  should  so  continue  till  far- 
ther directions.  By  virtue  of  art  act  passed  in  the  late 
reign,  the  parliament  continued  sitting  even  after  the 
king's  death.  Both  houses  met  immediately,  and  una- 
nimously voted  an  address  of  condolence  and  cohgratii* 
lation ;  and,  in  the  afternoon,  the  queen  waa  proclaim- 
ed. Next  day  the  lords  and  commons  severally  attended 
her  with  an  address*  congratulating  her  majesty's  acces- 
sion to  the' throne;  and  assuring  her  of  their  firm  re- 
solution to  support  her  agairist  all  her  enemies  whatso- 
ever. The  lords  acknowledged,  that  their  great  loss  was 
no  otherwise  to  be  repaired*  but  by  a  vigorous  adherence 
to  her  majesty  and  her  allies*  in  the  prosecution  erf"  those 
measures  already  concerted  to  reduce  thd  exorbitant 
power  of  France*  The  commons  declared*  they  would 
maintain  the  succession  of  the  crown  iti  the  Protestant 
line,  and  effectually  provide  for  the  public  credit  of  the 
nation;    These  addresses  were  graciously  received  by  th<* 


rqoeien, . who;:  on  the  i  lth  day  of ;  March,  went  to  the 
-house  of-  peers  with  the  usual  solemnity,  where,  in  & 
speech  to  both  houses,  she  expressed  her  satisfaction  at 
their  unanimous  concurrence  with  her  opinion,  that  too 
;mkch  oould  not  he  done  for  the  encouragement  of  their 
-allies,  in  humbling  the  power  of  France ;  and  desired 
they  would  consider  of  proper  methods  towards  obtaining 
a  union  between  England  and  Scotland.    She  observed 
to  the  commons,  that  the  revenue  for  defraying  the  ex- 
penses of  the  civil  government  was  expired;  and  that 
she  relied  -entirely  on  their  affection  for  its  being  supplied 
in  eueh  a  manner  as  should  be  most  suitable  to  the 
honour  and  dignity  of  the  crown.    She  declared  it-  should 
.  be  her  constant  endeavour  to  make  them  the  best;  return 
for  their  duty  and  affection,  by  a  careful  and  diligent 
administration  for  the  good  of  all  her  subjects.     "  And, 
*as  I  know,  my  own  heart  to  be  entirely  English  (con- 
'turned  she),  I  can  very  sincerely  assure  you,  there  is  not 
-any  thing  you  can  expect  or  desire  from  me,  whidi  I  shall 
not  be  ready  to  do  for  the  happiness  and  prosperity  of 
England ;  and  you  shall  always. find  me  a  strict  and  re- 
ligious observer  of  my  word."    These  assurances  wfere 
extremely  agreeable,  to  the  parliament ;  and  she  received 
<  the  thanks  of  both  houses.    Addresses  of  congratulation 
were  presented  by  the  bishop  and  clergy  of  London  4 
by  the  dissenters  in  and  about  that  city ;  and  by  all  the 
counties,  cities,  towns, .  and  corporations  •  of  England. 
She  declared  her  attachment  to .  the  church  :  she  •  pro- 
mised her  protection  to  the  dissenters :  and  received  the 
compliments  of  all  her  subjects  with  such  affability  as 
ensured  their  affection. 

'.§  II.  William's  death  was  no -sooner  known  at  the 
Hagjue,  than  all  Holland  was  filled  with  consternation. 
The&tates  immediately  assembled,  and,  for  some  time, 
gazed  at'  each,  other  in  silent .  fear  and  astonishment* 
They  sighed,  wept;  and  interchanged  embrace*- and 
vows,  that  they  would  act  with  unanimity,  and  expend 
vol.  1.  *  2  F 


430  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  t*H. 

their  dearest  blood  in  defence  of  their  country.  Then 
4hey  dispatched  letters  to  the  cities  and  provinces,  in- 
forming them  of  this  unfortunate  event,  and  exhorting 
them  to  union  and  perseverance.  The  express  from 
England  having  brought  the  queen's  speech  to  her 
privy-council,  it  was  translated  and  published,  to  revive 
the  drooping  spirits  of  the  people.  Next  day,  pension- 
ary Fagel  imparted  to  the  states  of  Holland  a  letter  which 
he  had  received  from  the  earl  of  Marlborough,  contain- 
ing assurances,  in  the  queen's  name,  of  union  and  assist- 
ance. In  a  few  days,  the  queen  wrote  a  letter  in  the 
French  language  to  the  States,  confirming  these  assur- 
ances :  it  was  delivered  by  Mr.  Stanhope,  whom  she  had 
furnished  with  fresh  credentials  as  envoy  from  England. 
Thus  animated,  die  States  resolved  to  prosecute  vigorous 
-measures :  their  resolutions  were  still  more  inspirited  by 
the  arrival  of  the  earl  of  Marlborough,  whom  the  queen 
honoured  with  the  order  of  the  garter,  and  invested  with 
the  character  of  ambassador  extraordinary  and  plenipo- 
tentiary to  the  states-rgeneral :  he  was  likewise  declared 
captain-general  of  her  forces  both  at  home  and  abroad. 
He  assured  the  States,  that  her  Britannic  majesty 
would  maintain  the  alliances  which  had  been  co»- 
sduded  by  the  late  king,  and  do  every  thing  that  the 
common  concerns  of  Europe  required.  The  speech  was 
answered  by  Dickvelt,  president  of  die  week,  who,  in 
*the  name  of  the  States,  expressed  their  hearty  thanks  to 
her  majesty,  and  their  resolutions  of  concurring  with  her 
in  a  vigorous  prosecution  of  the  common  interest. 

§  III.  The  importance  of  William's  Ike  was  evinced 
by  the  joy  that  diffused  itself  through  the  kingdom  of 
'France  at  the  news  of  his  decease.  The  person  who 
first  brought  the  tidings  to  Calais  was  imprisoned  by  the 
governor,  until  his  information  was  confirmed.  The 
court  of  Versailles  could  hardly  restrain  their  transports 
so  as  to  preserve  common  decorum  :  the  people  of  Paris 
Openly  rejoiced  at  the  event:  all  decency  was  laid  aside 


IWSL  ANNE.  4$1 

at  Rome,  where  this  incident  produced  such  indecent  rap*, 
tores,  that  cardinal  Grimani,  the  imperial  minister,  com- 
plained of  them  to  the  pope,  as  an  insult  on  his  master 
the  emperor,  who  was  William's  friend,  confederate,  and 
ally.  The  French  king  dispatched  credentials  to  Barre, 
whom  the  count  D'Avaux  had  left  at  the  Hague,  to  ma* 
tiage  the  affairs  of  France,  together  with  instructions  to 
renew  the  negotiation  with  the  States,  in  hoped  of  detach- 
ing them  from  the  alliance.  This  minister  presented  a 
memorial  implying  severe  reflections  on  king  William, 
and  the  past  conduct  of  the  Dutch ;  and  insinuating, 
that  now  they  had  recovered  their  liberty,  the  court  of 
France  hoped  they  would  consult  their  true  interest. 
The  count  de  Goes,  envoy  from  the  emperor,  animad- 
verted on  these  expressions  in  another  memorial,  which 
Waft  likewise  published ;  the  States  produced  in  public  art 
answer  to  the  same  remonstrance,  expressing  their  re* 
sentment  at  the  insolence  of  such  insinuations,  and  their 
veneration  lor  the  memory  of  their  late  stadtholder .  The 
earl  of  Marlborough  succeeded  in  every  part  of  his  lie* 
gotiation.  He  animated  the  Dutch  to  a  full  exertion  of 
their  vigour :  he  concerted  the  operations  of  the  cam* 
paign:  he  agreed  with  the  states-general  arid  the 
imperial  minister,  that  war  should  be  declared  against 
France  on  the  same  day,  at  Vienna,  London,  and  thti 
Hague :  and  on  the  3d  of  April  embarked  for  England, 
after  having  acquired  the  entire  confidence  of  those  who 
governed  the  United  Provinces. 

§  IV.  By  this  time  the  house  of  commons  ki  Eng- 
land had  settled  the  civil  list  ugpti  the  queen  for  he? 
Hfe.  When  the  bill  received  tne  royal  assent,  she  as* 
sured  them,  that  100,000/*  of  this  revenue  should  be  ap- 
plied to  the  public  service  of  the  current  year :  at  the 
same  time  she  passed  another  bill,  for  receiving  and  ex* 
amining  the  public  accounts.  A  commission  for  this 
purpose  was  granted  in  the  preceding  reign,  but  had 
been  for  some  years  discontinued ;  and  indeed  always 

2F2 


]432  HISTORYrOF  ENGLAND.  I7IW. 

proved  ineffectual  todet^ct  and  punish  thos^  individuals 
.who.,  shamefully  piHaged  their  country.  .The  villany 
was  so  complicated,  the  vice  so  gefteral,  and  the  delin- 
quents so  powerfully  screened  by  artifice  and  interest, 
as  to  elude  all  inquiry.  On  the  24th  day  of  March,  the 
x>ath  of  abjuration  wa3  taken  by  the  speaker  and  mem- 
Jbers,  according  to  an  act  for  the  farther  security  of  her 
majesty's  person,  mid:  the  succession  of  the;  crown  in 
the  Protestant  line,  and  for  extinguishing  the  hopes 
?of  the  pretended ,  prince  of  Wales.  The  quje6n*s  kicli- 
nation  to  thetories  plainly  appeared  in  her  choice  of 
ministers.  Doctor  John  Sharp,  archbishop  of  Yock, 
became;  her  ghostly  director  and  counsellor  in  all  eccle- 
siastical affairs.  The  earl  of  Rochester  was.  continued 
lord-lieutenant  of  Ireland,  and  enjoyed  a  great  share  of 
her  majesty's  confidence :  the  privy-seal  was  intrusted  to 
the  marquis. of  Normanby :  the  earl  of  Nottingham  and 
sir  Charles  Hedges  were  appointed  secretaries  of  state ; 
the  earl  of  Abingdon, -viscount  Weymouth,  lord  Dart^ 
mouth,  sir  Christopher  Musgrave,  Grenville,  Howe, 
Gower,  and  Harcourt,  were  admitted  as  members  of  the 
privy-council,  together  with  sir  Edward  Seymour,  now 
declared;  comptroller  of  the  household.  Thelor4  Go- 
dolphin  declined  accepting  the  office  of  lord  high-trea- 
surer, until  he  was  overruled  by  the  persuasions  of  Mar  1- 
l?orough,  to  whose  eldest  daughter  his  son  was  married. 
This  nobleman  refused  to  command  the  forces  abroad, 
unless  the  treasury  should  be  put  into  the  hands  of  Go- 
dolphin,  on  whose  punctuality  in  point  of  remittances  he 
Knew  he  could  depend.  George,  prince  of  Denmark, 
was  inyested  with  the< tide  of  generalissimo  of  all  the. 
queen's  forces  by  sea  arid  land ;  and  afterward  created 
lord  high-admiral,  the  earl  of  Pembroke  having  been, dis- 
missed from  this  office  with  the  offer  of  a  large  pension, 
which  he.  generously  refused.  Prince  George,  as  admi-. 
ral,  was  assisted  by  a  counqil,  consisting  of  sir  George 
Jlooke,  sir  David  Mi  tchel,  George  ChqrchiU,  aqd  Richard 


1702.  ANNE.  433 

Hill.     Though  the  legality  of  this  board  was  doubted, 
the  parliament  had  such  respect  atad  veneration  for  the 
queen,  that  it  was  suffered  to  act  without  question. 
-4  y.'A  rivalship  for  the  queen's  favour  already  ap- 
peared' between  the  earls  of  Rochester  and  Marlborough; 
The  former,  as  first  cousin  to  the  queen,  and  chief  of 
the  tory  faction,  maintained  considerable  influence  in 
the  council :  but .  even  there  the  interest  of  his  rival 
predominated.  -  Marlborough  was  not  only  the  better 
courtier,  but  by  the  canal  of  his  countess,  actually  direct- 
ed the  queen  in  all  her  resolutions.    Rochester  proposed 
in  council,  that  the  English  should  avoid  a  declaration 
of  war  .with  France,  and  act  as  auxiliaries  only.    He  was 
seconded  by  some  other  members  ;  but  the  opinion  of 
Marlborough  preponderated.     He  observed,  that  the 
honour  of  the  nation  was  concerned  to  fulfil  the  late 
king's'  engagements ;  and  affirmed  that  France  could 
never  be  reduced  within  due  bounds,  unless  the  English 
would  enter  as- principals  in  the  quarrel.  This  allegation 
was  supported  by  the  dukes  of  Somerset  and  Devonshire^ 
the  earl  of  Pembroke,  and  the  majority  of  the  council. 
The  queen  being  resolved  to  declare  war,  communicated 
her-intention  to  the  house  of  commons,  by  whom  it  was 
approved;  and  on  the  4th  day  of  May  the  declaration 
was  solemnly  proclaimed.     The  king  of  France  was,  in 
this  proclamation,  taxed  with  having  taken  possession 
of  great  part  of  the  Spanish  dominions ;  with  designing 
to.  invade  the  liberties  of  Europe,  and  obstruct  the  free- 
dom of  navigation  and  commerce ;  with  having  offered 
an.  unpardonable  insult  to  the  queen  and  her  throne,  by 
taking  upon,  him  to  declare  the  pretended  prince,  of 
Wales  king  of  England,  Scotland,  and  Ireland.    The 
three  declarations  of  the .  emperor,  England,  and  the 
states-general,  which  were  published  in  one  day,  did  not 
fail  to  disconcert,  as  well  as  to  provoke,  the  French. mo- 
narch.    When  his  minister  De  Torcy  recited  them  in 
his  hearing,  he  spoke  of  the  queen  with  some  acrimony ; 


434  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  W». 

but  with  respect  to  the  states-general,  he  declared. with 
great  emotion,  that  "  Messieurs  the  Dutch  merchants 
should  one  day  repent  of  their  insolence  and  presump- 
tion, in  declaring  war  against  so  powerful  a  monarch ;" 
he  did  not,  however,  produce  his  declaration  till  the 
3d  day  of  July. 

§  VI.  The  house  of  commons,  in  compliance  with 
the  queen's  desire,  brought  in  a  bill,  empowering  her 
majesty  tP  name  commissioners  to  treat  with  the  Sooty 
for  4  union  of  the  two  kingdoms.  It  met  with  warm 
opposition  from  sir  Edward  Seymour,  and  other  tory 
members,  who  discharged  abundance  of  satire  and  ridi- 
cule upon  the  Scottish  nation :  but  the  measure  seemed 
ao  necessary  at  that  juncture,  to  secure  the  Protestant 
succession  against  the  practices  of  France,  and  the  claims 
of  the  pretender,  that  the  majority  espoused  the  bill, 
which  passed  through  both  houses,  and  on  the  6th  day 
of  May  received  the  royal  assent,  together  with  some 
bills  of  less  importance,  The  enemies  of  the  late  king 
continued  tQ  revile  his  memory,*  They  even  charged 
him  with  having  formed  a  design  of  excluding  the  prim 
cess  Anne  from  the  throne,  and  of  introducing  the  elec- 
tor of  Hanover  as  his  own  immediate  successor.  This 
report  had  been  so  industriously  circulated,  that  it  began 
to  gain  credit  all  over  the  kingdom.  Several  peers  in- 
terested themselves  in  William's  character;  and  a  mo* 
tion  was  made  in  the  upper  house,  that  the  truth  of  this 
report  should  be  inquired  into.  The  house  immediately 
desired,  that  those  lords  who  had  visited  the  late  king's 
papers  would  intimate  whether  or  not  they  had  found 
apy  among  them  relating  to  the  queen's  succession,,  or 

d  In  their  hours  of  debauch,  they  drank  to  the  health  of  Sorrel,  meaning 
the  horse  that  fell  with  the  king  *  and,  under  the  appellation  of  the  little 
gentleman  in  velvet,  toasted  the  mole  that  raised  tie  bill  over  which  the 
horse  had  stumbled.  As  the  beast  had  formerly  belonged  to  sir  Jobs 
Fenwick,  they  insinuated  that  William's  fate  was  a  judgment  upon  him, 
for  his  cruelty  to  that  gentleman ;  and  a  Latin  epigram  was  written  on 
the  occasion. 


r 
1 


1*W.  ANNE.'  4J4 

to  the  succession  of  the  house  of  Hanover.  They  forth-* 
with  declared,  that  nothing  of  that  sort  appeared.  Thet» 
the  house  resolved,  That  the  report  was  groundless, 
false,  viltenous,  tod  scandalous;  to  the  dishonour  of 
the  late  kings  memory,,  and  highly  tending  to  the  dis- 
service of  her  present  majesty,  whom  they  besought  to 
give  order  that  the  authors  or  publishers  of  such  scan- 
dalous reports  should  be  prosecuted  by  the  attorney- 
general.  The  same  censure  was  passed  upon  some  libels 
and  pamphlets,  tending  to  inflame  the  factions  of  the 
kingdom,  and  to  propagate  f*  spirit  of  irreligion/  On 
the  2 1  st  day  of  May,  the  commons,  in  m  address, 
advised  her  majesty  to  engage  the  emperor,  the  states- 
general,  and  her  other  allies,  to  join  with  her  in  >  pro- 
hibiting all  intercourse  with  France  and  Spain :  and  to 
concert  such  methods  with  the  states-general  as  might 
most  effectually  secure  the  trade  of  her  subjects  and  al- 
lies. The  lords  presented  another  address,  desiring  the 
queen  would  encourage  her  subjects  to  equip  privateers*,* 
as  the  preparations  of  the  enemy  seemed  to  be  made  for1 
a  piratical  war,  to  the  interruption  of  commerce :  they 
likewise  exhorted  her  majesty  to  grant  commissions  or 
charters  to  all  persons  who  should  make  such  acquisitions 
in  the  Indies,  as  she  in  her  great  wisdom  should  judge 
most  expedient  for  the  good  of  her  kingdoms.  Oil 
the  25  th  day  of  May,  the  queen  having  passed  seve- 
ral public  and  private  bills/  dismissed  the  parliament  by : 
prorogation,  after  having,  in  a  short  speech,  thanked 

e  Doctor  Binkess  "*  a  semen  preached  before-  the  convocation,  on 
the  30th  day  of  January,  drew  a  parallel  between  the  sufferings  of  Christ 
and  those  of  king  Charles,  to  which  last  he  gave  the  preference,  in  point 
of  right,  character,  and  station. 

f  Daring:  this  short  session,  the  queen  gave  her  assent  to  an  act  for  lay- 
ing a  duty  upon  land ;  to  another  for  encouraging  the  Greenland  trade ;  to 
a  third  for.rnaking  good  the  deficiencies  and  the  public  credit;  to  a  fourth  ' 
for  continuing  the  imprisonment'  of  Counter,  and  other  conspirators 
against  king  William ;  to  a  fifth  for  the  relief  of  Protestant  purchasers  of ' 
the  forfeited  estates  of  Ireland  ;  to  a  sixth  enlarging  the  time  for  taking 
the  oath  of  abjuration ;  to  a  seventh  obliging  the  Jews  to  maintain  and 
pttivide  for  their- ftrotestant  qhil  dren 


436  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1703« 

them  for  their  zeal,  recommended  unanimity,  and  de- 
clared she  would  carefully  preserve  and  maintain  the  act 

of  toleration. 

§  VIL  In  Scotland  a  warm  conte&t  arose  between  the 
revohitioners  and  those  in  the  opi>osition,  concerning  the 
existence  of  the  'present .  parliament.  The  queen  had. 
signified  her  accession  to  the  throne,  in  a  letter  to  her 
privy-council  for  Scotland ;  desiring  they  would  continue, 
to  act  in  that  office,  until  she  should  send  a  new  com- 
mission. Meanwhile,  she  authorized  them  to  publish 
a  proclamation,  ordaining  all  officers  of  state,  counsellors, 
and  magistrates,  to  act  in  all  things  conformably  to  the 
commissions  and  instructions  of  his  late  majesty,  until 
new  commissions  should  be  prepared.  She  likewise 
assured  them  of  her  firm  resolution  to  protect  them  in- 
their  religion,  laws,  and  liberties,  and  in  the  established 
government  of  the  church.  She  had  already,  in  pre-, 
sence  of  twelve  Scottish  counsellors,  taken  the  corojia- 
tion-oath  for  that  kingdom :  but  those  who  wanted  to 
embroil  the  affairs  pf  their,  country  affirmed,  that  this; 
was  an  irregular  way  of  proce^dipg,  and  that  the, oath 
ought  to  have  been  tendered  by  persons  deputed  for  that 
purpose,  either  by  the  parliament,  or  the  privy-cpuncil 
of  the  kingdom*  The  present  ministry,  consisting  of, 
the.  duke  of  Queensbepy,  the  earls  of  Marchmonjt, 
Melvil,  Seafield,  HyndfonJ,  and  Selkirk,  were  devoted 
to  revolution  principles,  and  desirous  that  the  parliament, 
should  continue,  in  pursuance  of  3  late  act  for  continu- 
ing the  parliament  that  should  be  then  in  being,  six 
months  after  the  death  of  the  king ;  and  that  it  should 
assemble  in  twenty  days  after  that  event.  The  queen 
had,  by  several  adjournments,  deferred  the  meeting 
almost  three  months  after  the  king's  decease ;  and  there- 
fore the  anti-revolutioners  affirmed  that  it  was  dissolved. 
The  duke  of  Hamilton  was  at  the  head  of  this  party, 
which  clamoured  loudly  for  a  new  parliament.  This 
nobleman,  together  with  the  marquis  of  Tweedale,  the < 


*70£  ANNE.  43t 

earls  Marshal  and  Rothes,  and  many  other  noble- 
men, repaired  to  London,  in  order  to  make  the  queen 
acquainted  with  their  objections  to  the  continuance  of 
the  present  parliament.  She  admitted  them  to  her  pre- 
sence, and.  calmly  heard  their  allegations :  but  she  was 
determined  by  the  advice  of  her  privy-council  for  that 
kingdom,  who  were,  of  opinion  that  the  nation  was  m 
too  great  a  ferment  to  hazard  the  convocation  of  a  new 
parliament.  .  According  to  the* queen's  last  adjournment, 
the  parliament  met  at  Edinburgh  on  the  9th  day  of  June, 
the  duke  of  Queensberry  having  been  appointed  high- 
commissioner.  Before  the  queen's  commission  was  read, 
the'  duke  of  Hamilton,  for  himself  and  his  adherents, 
declared  their .  satisfaction  at  her  majesty's  accession  to 
the  throne,. not  only  on  account  of  her  undoubted  right 
by  descent,  but  likewise  because  of  her  many  personal 
virtues  and  royal  qualities.  He  said  they  were  resolved 
to  sacrifice  their  lives  and  fortunes  in  defence  of  her  ma- 
jesty's right  against  all  her  enemies  whatever;  but,  at 
the  same  time,  they  thought  themselves  bound  in  duty 
to  give  their  opinion,,  that  they  were  not  warranted  by 
law  to  sit  and  act  as  a  parliament.  He  then  read  a  paper 
to  the,  following  effect :  that  forasmuch  as,  by  the  funda- 
mental laws  and  constitution  of  this  kingdom,  all  par- 
liaments do  dissolve  on  the  death,  of  their  sovereign,* 
exqept  in, so  far  as  innovated  by  an  act  in  the  preceding 
reign,  that  the  parliament  in  being  at .  his  majesty's 
decease  should  meet,  and  act  what  might  be  needful  for 
the  defence  of  the  true  Protestant  religion,  aa  by  law 
established,  and  for  the  maintenance  of  the  succession* 
to  the  crown,  as  settled  by  the  claim  of  right,  and  for 
the  preservation  and  security  of  the  public  peace :  and 
seeing  these  ends  are  fully  answered  by.  her  majesty's 
succession  to.  the  throne;  we  conceive  ourselves  not  now- 
warranted  by  law  to.  meet,  sit,,  or  act ;.  and  therefore  do 
dissent  from,  aay  thing  that  shall  be  done  or  acted.  The 
duke  having  recited  this  paper,  and  formally  protested 


438  HISTORY   OP  ENGLAND.  KRfe 

against  the  proceedings  of  the  parliament,  withdrew  with 
seventy-nine  members,  amidst  the  acclamations  of  the 
people. 

§  VIIL  Notwithstanding  their  secession,  the  commis- 
sioner, who  retained  a  much  greater  number,  produced 
the  queen  s  letter,  signifying  her  resolution  to  maintain 
and  protect  her  subjects  in  the  full  possession  of  their 
religion,  laws,  liberties,  and  the  Presbyterian  discipline. 
She  informed  them  of  heir  having  declared  war  against 
France :  she  exhorted  them  to  provide  competent  sup- 
plies for  maintaining  such  a  number  of  forces  as  might 
be  necessary  for  disappointing  the  enemy's  designs,  and 
preserving  the  present  happy  settlement;  and  she 
earnestly  recommended  to  their  consideration  a  union 
of  the  two  kingdoms.  The  duke  of  Queensberry  and 
the  earl  of  Marchmont  having  enforced  the  different 
articles  of  this  letter,  committees  were  appointed  for  the 
security  of  the  kingdom,  for  controverted  elections,  for 
drawing  up  an  answer  to  her  majesty's  letter,  and  for 
revising  the  minutes.  Meanwhile,  the  duke  of  Hamil- 
ton and  his  adherents  sent  the  lord  Blantyre  to  London, 
with  an  address  to  the  queen,  who  refused  to  receive  it, 
but  wrote  another  letter  to  the  parliament,  expressing 
her  resolution  to  maintain  their  dignity  and  authority 
against  all  opposers.  They,  in  answer  to  the  former, 
had  assured  her,  that  the  groundless  secession  of  some 
members  should  increase  and  strengthen  their  care  and1 
seal  for  her  majesty's  service.  They  expelled  sir  Alex- 
ander Bruce,  for  having  given  vent  to  some  reflections' 
against  presbytery.  The  lord-advocate  prosecuted  the 
faculty  of  advocates  before  the  parliament,  for  having* 
passed  a  vote  among  themselves  in  favour  of  the  pro- 
testation and  address  of  the  dissenting  members.  The 
faculty  was  severely  reprimanded :  but  the  whole  nation 
seemed  to  resent  the  prosecution.  The  parliament 
passed  an  act  for  recognising  her  majesty's  royal  authori- 
ty :  another  for  adjourning  the  court  of  judicature  called 


I70&  ANNE.  43& 

the  session :  a  third  declaring  this  meeting  of  parlia- 
ment legal ;  and  forbidding  any  person  to  disown,  quar- 
rel with,  or  impugn  the  dignity  and  authority  thereof, 
under  the  penalty  of  high-treason :  a  fourth  for  securing 
the  true  Protestant  religion,  and  Presbyterian  church 
government:  a  fifth  for  a  land-tax:  and  a  sixth  en- 
abling her  majesty  to  appoint  commissioners  for  a 
union  between  the  two  kingdoms. 

§  IX.  The  earl  of  Marchmont,  of  his  own  accord,  and 
even  contrary  to  the  advice  of  the  high-commissioner, 
brought  in  a  bill  for  abjuring  the  pretended  prince  of 
Wales :  but  this  was  not  supported  by  the  oourt  party,  as 
the  commissioner  had  no  instructions  how  to  act  on  the 
occasion.  Perhaps  the  queen  and  her  English  ministry 
resolved  to  keep  the  succession  open  in  Scotland,  as  a 
check  upon  the  whigs  and  house  of  Hanover.  On  thd 
30th  day  of  June,  the  commissioner  adjourned  the  par-* 
Hament,  after  having  thanked  them  for  their  cheerful- 
ness and  unanimity  in  their  proceedings ;  and  the  chiefs 
of  the  opposite  parties  hastened  to  London,  to  make  their 
different  representations  to  the  queen  and  her  minis* 
try.  In  the  meantime,  she  appointed  commissioners  for 
treating  about  the  union ;  and  they  met  at  the  Cock- 
pit on  the  22d  day  of  October.  On  the  20th  day  of 
the  next  month,  they  adjusted  preliminaries,  importing, 
that  nothing  agreed  on  among  themselves  should  be 
binding,  except  ratified  by  her  majesty,  and  the  respec- 
tive parliaments  of  both  nations :  pnd  that,  unless  all  the 
heads  proposed  for  the  treaty  were  agreed  to,  no  particu- 
lar thing  agreed  on  should  be  binding.  The  queen 
visited  them  in  December,  in  order  to  quicken  their 
mutual  endeavours.  They  agreed,  that  the  two  king- 
doms should  be  inseparably  united  into  one  monarchy, 
under  her  majesty,  her  heirs,  and  successors,  and  under 
the  same  limitations,  according  to  the  acts  of  settle- 
ment : .  but,  when  the  Scottish  commissioners  proposed, 
that  the  rights  and  privileges  of  their  company  trading  to 


440  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  17ft!. 

Africa  and  the  Indies  should  be  preserved;and  maintain- 
ed,, audi  a  difficulty  arose  as  could  not  be  surmounted, 
and  no  farther  progress  was  made  in  this  commission. 
The  tranquillity  of  Ireland  was  not  interrupted  by  any 
new  commotion.  That  kingdom  was  ruled  by  justices 
whom  the  earl  of : Rochester  had  appointed;  and  the 
trustees  for  the  forfeited  estates  maintained  their  au- 

« 

thority. 

§  X.  While  Britain  was  engaged  in  these  civil  trans- 
actions, her  allies  were  not  idle  on  the  continent.  The 
old  duke  of  Zell,  and  his  pephew,  the  elector  of  Bruns- 
wick, surprised  the  dukes  of  Wolfenbuttle,  and  Saxe- 
Gotha,  whom  they  compelled  to  renounce  their  attach- 
ments to  France,  and  concur  in  the  common  councils  of 
the. empire.  Thus  the  north  of  Germany  was  reunited 
to  the  interests  of  the  confederates ;  and  the  princes 
would  have  been  in  a  condition  to  assist  them  effectually, 
had  not  the  neighbourhood  of  the  war  in  Poland  deterred 
them  from  parting  with  their  forces.  England  and  the 
states-general  endeavoured  in  vain  to  mediate  a  peace 
between  the  kings  of  Sweden  and  Poland.  .  Charles  was 
become  enamoured  of  war,  and  ambitious  of  conquest: 
He  threatened  to  invade  Saxony  through  the  dominions 
of  Prussia.  Augustus  retired  to  Cracow,  while  Charles 
penetrated  to  Warsaw,  and  even  ordered  the  cardinal- 
primate  to  summon  a  diet  for  choosing  a  new  king; 
The  situation  of  affairs,  at.  this  juncture,  was  far  Aom 
being  favourable  to  the  allies.  The  court  of  Vienna  had 
tampered  in  vain  with  the  elector  of  Bavaria,  who  made 
use  of  this  negotiation  to  raise  his  terms  with  Lewis. 
His  brother,  the  elector,  of  Cologn,  admitted  French 
garrisons  into  Liege,  and.  all  his  places  on  the  Rhine; 
The  elector  of  Saxony  was  too  hard  pressed  by  the  king 
of  Sweden,. to  spare  his  full  proportion  of  troops  to  the 
allies:  the  king  of  Prussia  was  overawed  by  the  vicinity 
of  the  Swedish  conqueror :  the  duke  of  Savoy  had  joined 
his  forces  to  those  of  France,  and  overrun  the  whole  state 


1TO*.  ANNE.  Mt 

of  Milan ;  and  the.  pope,  though  he  professed  a  neutra- 
lity, evinced  himself  strongly  biassed  to  the  French  in* 
terests. 

§  XL  The  war  was  begun  in  the  name. of  the  elec- 
tor-palatine, with  the  siege. of  Keiserswaert,  which  was 
invested  in  the  month  of  April  by  the  prince  of  Nassau* 
Saarburgh,  mareschal-du-camp  to  the  emperor:  under 
this. officer  the  Dutch  troops  served  as  auxiliaries,  .be* 
cause  war  had  not  yet  been  declared  by  .the  states-general 
The  French  garrison  made  a  desperate ■  defence.*  ..They 
worsted  the  besiegers  in  divers  sallies,  and  maintained 
the  place  until  it  was  reduced  to.  a  heap  of  ashes. .  At 
length  the  allies  made  a  general  attack  upon  the  coun- 
terscarp and  ravelin,  which  they  carried  after  a  very  ob- 
stinate engagement,  with  the  loss  of  two  thousand  men. 
Then  the  garrison  capitulated  on  honourable  terms, 
and  the  fortifications  were  razed.  During  this  siege, 
which  lasted  from  the  18th  day  of  April  to  the  middle 
of  June,  count  Tallard  posted  himself  on  the  opposite 
side  of  the  Rhipe,  from  whence  he  supplied  the  town  with 
fresh  troops  and  ammunition,  and  annoyed  the  besiegers: 
with  his  artillery;  but,  finding  it  impossible  to  save  the. 
place,  he  joined  the  grand  army,  commanded  by  the 
duke  of  Burgundy  in  the  Netherlands.  The  siege  of 
Keiserswaert  was  .covered  by  a  body  of  Dutch  troops 
under  the  earl  of  Athlone,  who  lay  encamped  in  the 
dutchy  of  Cleve.  Meanwhile,  general  Coehorn,  at  the 
head  of  anpther  detachment,  entered  Flanders,  demo- 
lished the  French  lines  between  the.  forts  of  Donat  and 
Isabella,  and  laid  the  chatellanie  of  Bruges  under  contri- 
bution :  but  a  considerable  body  of  French  troops  ad- 
vancing ,  under  the  marquis  de  Bedmar,  and  the.  count 
de  la  Motte,  he  overflowed  the  country,  and  retired 
under  the  walls  of  Sluys.  The  duke  of  Burgundy,  who 
had  taken  the  command  of  the  French  army  under 
Boufflers,  encamped  at  Zanten,  near  Cleve,  and  laid  a 
scheme  for  surprising  Nimeguen  ;  in  which,  however, 


442  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  \7<&. 

he  ww  baffled  by  the  vigilance  and  activity  of  Athlone, 
who,  guessing  his  design,  marched  thither,  and  encamp- 
ed under  the  cannon  of  the  town.  In  the  beginning  of 
June,  Landau  was  invested  by  prince  Louis  of  Baden : 
in  July,  the  king  of  the  Romans  arrived  in  the  camp  of 
the  besiegers,  with  such  pomp  and  magnificence,  as  ex- 
hausted his  father's  treasury.  On  the  9th  day  of  Sep- 
tember, the  citadel  was  taken  by  assault ;  and  then  the 
town  surrendered. 

§  XII.  When  the  earl  of  Marlborough  arrived  in 
Holland,  the  earl  of  Athlone,  in  quality  of  veldtr-mares- 
chal,  insisted  upon  an  equal  command  with  the  English 
general :  but  the  States  obliged  him  to  yield  this  point 
in  favour  of  Marlborough,  whom  they  declared  general- 
issimo of  all  their  forces.  In  the  beginning  of  July  he 
repaired  to  the  camp  at  Nimeguen,  where  he  soon  assem- 
bled an  army  of  sixty  thousand  men,  well  provided  with 
ail  necessaries ;  then  he  convoked  a  council  of  the  ge- 
neral officers,  to  concert  the  operations  of  the  campaign. 
On  the  1 6th  day  of  the  month  he  passed  the  Maese, 
and  encamped  at  Over-Asselt,  within  two  leagues  and  a 
half  of  the  enemy,  who  had  intrenched  themselves,  be- 
tween Goch  and  Gedap,  He  afterward  repassed  the 
river  below  the  Grave,  and  removed  to  Gravenbroeck, 
where  he  was  joined  by  the  British  train  of  artillery 
from  Holland.  On  the  2d  day  of  August  he  advanced 
to  Petit  Brugel,  and  the  French  retired  before  him, 
leaving  Spanish  Guelderland  to  his  discretion.  He  had 
resolved  to  hazard  an  engagement,  and  issued  orders 
accordingly :  but  he  was  restrained  by  the  Dutch  depu- 
ties, who  were  afraid  of  their  own  interest,  in  case  the 
battle  should  have  proved  unfortunate.  The  duke  of 
Burgundy,  finding  himself  obliged  to  retreat  before  the 
allied  army,  rather  than  expose  himself  longer  to  such  a 
mortifying  indignity,  returned  to  Versailles,  leaving  the 
command  to  Boufflers,  who  lost  the  confidence  of  Lewis 
by  the  ill  success  of  this  campaign.    The  deputies  of 


1703.  ANNE.  449 

the  states-general  having  represented  to  the  earl  of 
Marlborough  th£  advantages  that  would  accrue  io  Holr 
land,  from  his  dispossessing  the  enemy  of  the  plates 
they  maintained  in  the  Spanish  Guelderland,  by  which 
the  navigation  of  the  Maese  was  obstructed,  and  the 
important  town  of  Maestricht  in  a  manner  blocked  up, 
he  resolved  to  deliver  them  from  such  a  troublesome 
neighbourhood*  He  detached  general  Schultz  with  a 
body  of  troops  to  reduce  the  town  and  castle  of  Werfc, 
which  were  surrendered  after  a  slight  resistance.  In 
the  beginning  of  September,  he  undertook  the  siege  of 
Venlo,  which  capitulated  on  the  25  th  day  of  the  month, 
after  Fort  St  Michael  had  been  stormed  and  taken  by 
lord  Cutts  and  the  English  volunteers,  among  whom 
the  young  earl  of  Huntingdon  distinguished  himself  by 
very  extraordinary  acts  of  valour.  Then  the  general 
invested  Ruremonde,  which  he  reduced  after  a  very  ob- 
stinate defence,  together  with  the  fort  of  Stevensuaert, 
situated  on  the  same  river.  BoufHers,  confounded  at 
the  rapidity  of  Marlborough's  success,  retired  towards 
Liege,  in  order  to  cover  that  city :  but,  at  the  approach 
of  the  confederates,  he  retired  with  precipitation  to 
Tongeren,  from  whence  he  directed  his  route  towards 
Brabant,  with  a  view  to  defend  such  places  as  the  allies 
had.no  design  to  attack.  When  the  earl  of  Marlborough 
arrived  at  Liege,  he  found  the  suburbs  of  St.  Walburgh 
had  been  set  on  fire  by  the  French  garrison,  who  had 

retired  into  the  citadel  and  the  Chartreux.    Hie  allies 

• 

took  immediate  possession  of  the  city ;  and  in  a  few 
days  opened  the  trenches  against  the  citadel,  which  was 
taken  by  assault.  On  this  occasion,  the  hereditary 
prince  of  Hesse-Cassel  charged  at  the  head  of  the  gre- 
nadiers, and  was  the  first  person  who  mounted  the 
breach.  Violani,  the  governor,  and  the  duke  of  Charost, 
wete  made  prisoners.  Three  hundred  thousand  florins 
in  gold  and  silver  were  found  in  the  citadel,  besides 
notes  for  above  one  million,  drawn  upon  substantial 


444  history:  of  eng land.  vm. 

merchants  hi  Lie^e,  who  paid  the  money.  Immediately 
after  this  exploit,  the  garrison  of  the  Charjreux  capitu- 
lated on  honourable  terms,  and  were  conducted  to  Ant- 
werp. By  the  success  of  this  campaign,  the  earl  of 
Marlborough  raised  his  military  character  above  •  all 
censure,  and  confirmed  himself  in  the  entire  confidence 
of  the  states-general ;  who,  in  the  beginning  of  the  -sea- 
son, had  trembled  for  Nimeguen,  and  now  saw  the  ene- 
my driven  back  into  their  own  domains/  >  >  ' 
§  XIII.  When  the  army  broke  up  in  November,  the 
general  repaired  to  Maestricht,  from  whence  he  pro- 
.posed  to  return  to  the  Hague  by  water.  Accordingly, 
he  embarked: in  a  large'  boat,  with  five-and-twenty  sel- 
lers, under  the  command  of  a  lieutenant.  Next  mdrnmg 
he  was  joined  at  Ruremonde  by  Coehorn,  in  a  large 
vessel,  with  sixty  men ; .  and  they  were  moreover  escorted 
-by.  fifty  troopers^  who  rode  along  the  bank;  of  the  river; 
.The  large  boat  outsailed  the  other,  and  the,  horsemen 
mistoQk  their  way  in  the  dark.  A  French  partisan,-  with 
five-and-ihirty  men,  from.  Gueldres,  who  lurked  among 
the  rushes  in  wait  for  prey,  seized  the  rope  by  which  .the 
boat  was  drawn,  hauled  it  ashore,  discharged  their  small 
arms  and  hand-grenades,  then  rushing  into  it,  secured  the 
soldiers  before  they  could  put  themselves  in  a  posture  .of 
defence.  The  earl,  of  Marlborough  was  accompanied 
by  general .  Opdam,  and  Mynheer  Gueldermalsen,  one 
of  the  deputies,  who  were  provided  with  passports.  *The 
.earl  had  neglected  this  precaution :  but  recollecting  he 
had  an  old  passport  for  his  brother  general  Churchill,  he 
produced  it  without  any  emotion;  and  the  partisan  was 
in  such  confusion  that  he  never  examined  the  date: 
Nevertheless,  he  rifled  their  baggage,  carried  off  the 
guard  as  prisoners,  and  allowed  the  boat  to  proceed.  The 
governor  of  Venlo  receiving  information  that  the  earl 
was  surprised  by  a  party,  and  conveyed  to: Gueldres, 
immediately  marched  out  with  his  whole  garrison  to 
invest  that  place.    The  same  imperfect  account  being 


1708.  ANNE.  445 

transmitted  to  Holland,  filled  the  whole  province  with 
consternation.  The  states  forthwith  assembling,  re- 
solved, that  all  their  forces  should  march  immediately  to 
Gueldres,  and  threaten  the  garrison  of  the  place, with 
the  utmost  extremities,  unless  they  would  immediately, 
deliver  the  general.  .  But,  before  these  orders  could  be 
dispatched,  the  earl  arrived  at  the  Hague,  to  the  inex- 
pressible joy  of  the  people,  who  already  looked  upon 
him  as  their  saviour,  and  protector.  •.     .  « 

§  XIV.  The  French  arms  were  not  quite  so  nnfor- . 
tunate  on  the  Rhine  as  in  Flanders.  The.  elector  of 
Bavaria  surprised  the  city  of  Ulm,  in  Suabia,  by  a  stra- 
tagem, and  then  declared  for  France,  which. had  by  this 
time  complied  with  all  his  demands.  The  diet  of  the 
empire  assembled  at  Ratisbon,  were  so  incensed  at  his 
conduct  in  seizing  the  city  of  Ulm  by  perfidy,  that  they 
presented  a  memorial  to  his  imperial  majesty,  requesting 
he  would  proceed  against  the  elector,  according  to  the 
constitution  of  the  empire.  They,  resolved,  by  a.  plu- 
rality  of  voices,  to  declare  war  in  the  name  of  the  em- 
pire, against  the  French  king  and  the  duke  of  Anjou,  for 
having  invaded  several  fiefs  of  the  empire  in  Italy,  the 
archbishopric  of  Cologn,  and  the  diocess  of  Liege :  and 
they  forbade  the  ministers  of  Bavaria  and  Cologn  to  ap- 
pear in  the  general  diet.  In  vain  did.  these  powers  pro- 
test against  their  proceedings.  The  empire's  declaration 
of  war  was  published  and  notified,  in  the  name  of  the 
diet,  to  the  cardinal  of  Limberg,  the  emperor's  commits? 
sioner.  Meanwhile,  the  French  made  themselves  mas- 
ters of  Neuburgh,  in  the  circle  of  Suabia,  while  Louis 
prince  of  Baden,  being  weakened  by  sending  off  detach- 
ments, was  obliged  to  lie  inactive  in  his  camp  near  Frid- 
linguen*  The  French  army  was  divided  into  two  bodies* 
commanded  by  the  marquis  de  Villars  and  the  count dc 
Guiscard ;  and  the  prince,  thinking  himself  in  danger  of 
being  enclosed  by  the  enemy,  resolved  to  decamp.  Vil+ 
krs  immediately  passed  the  Rhine,  to  fall  upon  him  in 

VOL.  I.  *  2  G 


446  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1702. 

his  retreat,  and  an  obstinate  engagement  ensuing,  the 
imperialists  were  overpowered  by  numbers*  Hie  prince, 
having  lost  two  thousand  men,  abandoned  the  field  of 
battle  to  the  enemy,  together  with  bis  baggage,  artillery* 
and  ammunition,  and  retired  towards  Stauffen,  without 
being  pursued.  The  French  army,  even  after  they  had 
gained  the  battle,  were  unaccountably  seized  with  such  a 
panic,  that  if  the  imperial  general  had  faced  them  with 
two  regiments,  he  would  have  snatched  the  victory  from 
Villars,  who  was,  upon  this  occasion,  saluted  mareschal 
of  France  by  the  soldiers ;  and  next  day  the  town  of 
Fridlinguen  surrendered.  The  prince  being  joined 
by  some  troops  under  general  Thungen,  and  other 
reinforcements,  resolved  to  give  battle  to  the  enemy : 
but  Villars  declined  an  engagement,  and  repassed  the 
Rhine*  Towards  the  latter  end  of  October,  count  Tal- 
lard,and  the  marquis  de  Lomarie,  with  a  body  of  eighteen 
thousand  men,  reduced  Triers  and  Traerbach :  on  the 
other  hand,  the  prince  of  Hesse-Cassel,  with  a  detach- 
ment from  the  allied  army  at  Liege,  retook  from  the 
French  the  towns  of  Zinch,  Lintz,  Brisac,  and  An* 
dernach. 

§  XV.  In  Italy,  prince  Eugene  laboured  under  a 
total  neglect  of  the  imperial  court,  where  his  enemies, 
on  pretence  of  supporting  the  king  of  the  Romans  in 
his  first  campaign,  weaned  the  emperor's  attention  en- 
tirely from  his  affairs  on  the  other  side  of  the  Alps  ;  so 
that  he  left  his  best  army  to  moulder  away  for  want  of 
recruits  and  reinforcements.  The  prince,  thus  abandon- 
ed, could  not  prevent  the  duke  de  Vendome  from  reliev- 
ing Mantua,  and  was  obliged  to  relinquish  some  other 
places  he  had  taken.  Philip,  king  of  Spain,  beings  in- 
spired with  the  ambition  of  putting  an  end  to  the  war  in 
this  country,  sailed  in  person  for  Naples,  where  he 'was 
visited  by  the  cardinal-legate,  with  a  compliment  from 
the  pope  ;  yet  he  could  not  obtain  the  investiture  of  the 
kingdom  from  his  holiness.    The  emperor,  however^ 


ITO.  ANNE.  447 

was  so  disgusted  at  the  embassy  which  thfe  pope  hart  sertt 
to  Philip,  that  he  ordetied  his  ambassador  at  Bfome  tb 
withdraw.  Philip  proceeded  frbm  Naples  to  Final,  utidet 
convoy  of  the  French  fleet,  which  had  brought  him  td 
Italy:  here  he  had  an  interview  with  the  dnke  of  fe&Voy, 
who  began  to  be  alarmed  at  the  prospect  of  the  Ft&idh 
king's  being  master  of  the  Milanese  $  and,  in  a  tetter  to 
the  doke  de  Vendome^  he  forbade  him  to  engage  prince 
Eugene  until  he  himself  should  arrive  in  the  cMtip. 
Prince  Eugene,  understanding  that  the  French  army  in- 
tended to  attack  Luzzara  and  Guastalla,  parsed  the  Po, 
with  an  army  of  about  half  the  number  of  the  enemy, 
and  posted  himself  behind  the  dyke  of  Zero,  in  stich  a 
manner  that  the  French  were  ignorant  of  his  situation. 
He  concluded,  that  on  their  arrival  at  the  ground  they 
had  chosen,  the  horse  Would  march  out  to  forage,  while 
the  rest  of  the  army  would  be  employed  in  pitching  tefttfr, 
and  providing  for  their  refreshment.  His  design  Was  to 
setae  that  opportunity  of  attacking  them,  not  doubthtg 
that  he  should  obtain  a  complete  victory :  ftttt  he  was 
disappointed  by  mere  accident.  An  adjutant,  with  an 
advanced  guard,  had  the  curiosity  to  ascend  the  dyke, 
ih  drder  to  view  the  country*  when  he  discovered  the 
imperial  infantry  lying  on  their  feces,  tod  their  hotee  itt 
the  rear,  ranged  in  order  of  battle.  The  French  damp 
was  immediately  alarmed;  and,  as  the  intermediate 
ground  wis  covered  with  hedges,  which  obliged  the  as- 
sailants to  defile,  the  enemy  were  in  a  posture  tif  dfe- 
fence  before  the  imperialists  could  advance  tb  action : 
nevertheless,  the  "prince  attacked  them  with  grew  tiva- 
ctty,  in  hopes  of  tftsordering  their  line,  which  gdvfe  Way 
in  several  places  i  but  night  interposing,  he  wfes  obliged 
to  desist ;  and*  in  a  few  days,  the  French  reduced  Luz-. 
aara  and  Guastalla.  The  prince,  however,  maintained 
hte  post,  and  Philip  returned  to  Spain,  Without  having1 
obtained  any  considerable  advantage 
$  XVL  The  French  king  employed  all  his  artifice 

202 


448  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1902. 

and  intrigues,  in  raising  up  new  enemies  against  the  con- 
federates. He  is  said  to  have  bribed  count  Mansfield, 
presidentof  the  council  of  war  at  Vienna,  to  withhold  the 
supplies  from  prince  Eugene  in  Italy.  At  the  Ottoman 
Porte  he  had  actually  gained  over  the  vizier,  who  engaged 
to  renew  the  war  with  the  emperor.  But  the  mufti  and 
all  the  other  great  officers  were  averse  to  this  design,  and 
the  yizeir  fell  a  sacrifice  to  their  resentment.  Lewis 
continued  to  embroil  the  kingdom  of  Poland  by  means 
of  the  cardinal-primate.  The  young  king  of  Sweden  ad- 
vanced to  Lissau,  where  he  defeated  Augustus.  Then 
he  took  possession  of  Cracow,  and  raised  contributions; 
nor  could  he  be  persuaded  to  retreat,  although:  the  Mus- 
covites and  Luthuanians  had  ravaged  Livonia,  and  even 
made  an  irruption  into  Sweden. 

.  §  XVII.  The  operations  of  the  combined' squadrons 
at  sea  did  not  fully  answer  the  expectation  of  the  public. 
On  the  12th  day  of  May,  sir  John  Munden  sailed  with 
twelve  ships,  to  intercept  a  French  squadron,  appointed 
as  a  convoy  to  a  new  viceroy  of  Mexico,  from  Corunna 
to  the  West  Indies.  On  the  28th  day  of  the  month,  he 
chased  fourteen  sail  of  French  ships  into  Corunna.  Then 
he  called  a  council  of  war,  in  which  it  was  agreed,  that 
as  the  .place  was  strongly  fortified,  and  by  the  intelli- 
gence they  had  received/ it  appeared  that  seventeen  of 
the  enemy's  ships  of  war  rode  at  anchor  in  the  harbour, 
it  would  be  expedient  for  them  to  follow  the  latter  part  of 
their  instructions,  by  which  they  were  directed  to  cruise 
in  soundings  for  the  protection  of  the  trade.  They  re- 
turned accordingly,  and  being  distressed  by  want  of  pro- 
visions, came  in  to  port,  to  the  general  discontent  of  the 
nation.  For  the  satisfaction  of  the  people,  sir  John 
Munden  was  tried  by  a  court-martial,  and  acquitted ; 
but  as  this  miscarriage  had  rendered  him  very'unpopular, 
prince  George  dismissed  him  from  the  service.  We 
have  already  hinted,  that  king  William  had  projected  a 
scheme  to  reduce  Cadiz,  with  intention  to  act  afterward 


170S.  ANNE.  m  .  44ff 

against  the  Spanish  settlements  in  the  West  Indies. 
This  design  queen  Anne  resolved  to  put  in  execution. 
Sir  George  Rooke  commanded  the  fleet,  and  the  duke  of 
Ormond  was  appointed  general  of  the  land-forces  destined 
for  this  expedition.  The  combined  squadrons  amounted 
to  fifty  ships  of  the  line,  exclusive  of  frigates,  fire-ships, 
and  smaller  vessels ;  and  the  number  of  soldiers  em* 
barked  was  not  far  short  of  fourteen  thousand.  In  the 
latter  end  of  June,  the  fleet  sailed  from  St.  Helen's :  on- 
the  12th  of  August,  they  anchored  at  the  distance  of 
two  leagues  from  Cadiz.  Next  day  the  duke  of  Or- 
mond summoned  the  duke  de  Brancaccio,  who  was  go- 
vernor, to  submit  to  the  house  of  Austria  ;  but  that  offi- 
cer answered,  he  would  acquit  himself  honourably  of  the 
trust  reposed  in  him  by  the  king.  On  the  1 5th  the  duke 
of  Ormond  landed  with  his  forces  in  the  bay  of  Bulls, 
under  cover  of  a  smart  fire  from  some  frigates,  and  re- 
pulsed a  body  of  Spanish  cavalry :  then  he  summoned 
the  governor  of  Port  St.  Catherine's  to  surrender :  and 
received  an  answer,  importing,  that  the  garrison  was 
prepared  for  his  reception.  A  declaration  was  published 
in  the  Spanish  language,  intimating  that  the  allies  did 
not  come  as  enemies  to  Spain ;  but  only  to  free  them 
from  the  yoke  of  France,  and  assist  them  in  establishing 
themselves  under  the  government  of  the  house  of  Aus- 
tria. These  professions  produced  very  little  effect  among 
the  Spaniards,  who  were  either  cooled  in  their  attach- 
ment to  that  family,  or  provoked  by  the  excesses  of  the 
English  troops.  These  having  taken  possession  of  Fort 
St.  Catherine's,  and  Port  St.  Mary's,  instead  of  protect- 
ing, plundered  the  natives,  notwithstanding  the  strict 
orders  issued  by  the  duke  of  Ormond,  to  prevent  this 
scandalous  practice:  even  some  general  officers  were 
concerned  in  the  pillage.  A  battery  was  raised  against 
Montagorda  fort,  opposite  to  the  Puntal :  but  the  at- 
tempt miscarried,  and  the  troops  were  reimbarked. 


-  \ 


440  HISTORY  OE  ENGLAND.  tfQt. 

%  XYJli  Captain Hardy having  been  tent to  water  h* 
l^ago*  bay,  received  intelligence  that  the  galleons  from 
the  West  Indies  bad  put  into  Vigo,  goffer  convoy  of  ft 
French  squadron*  He  sailed  immed&bely  in  quest  of 
«r  George  Booke*,  who  wag  now  on  his  voyage  hack  tq 
ISngtend*  and  failing  in  with  him  on  the  6th  day  of  Qon 
tober,  cooimujoicated  the  substance  of  what  he  ted 
Wr^.  Rpoke  immediately  called  a  cpwwil  of  war,  um 
which  iit  was  determined  to  alter  thofe  oqto,  and  attask, 
the  eremy  at  Vigo.  He,  forthwith  detected  &>m§  small 
vessels  for  intelligence,  and  received  a  confirmation,  thaft 
the  galleons,  and  the  squadron  commanded,  by  Chateau 
Renault,  were  actually  in  the  harbour.  They  sailed 
thither,  and  appeared  before  the  place  on  the  1  Hh  d^y 
of  October.  The  passage  into,  the  berbour  was  narrow, 
secured  by  batteries,  forts,,  and  breastworks,  on  each 
side ;  by  a  strong  boom,  consisting  of  iron  chains,  top* 
meats*,  and  cables,  moored  at  each  end  to  a  seventy-gun 
ship ; .  and  fortified  within  by  five  ships  of  the  same 
strength,,  lying  athwart  the  channel,  with  their  broad- 
aidea  to  the  offing.  As  the  first  and  second  rates  of  the 
combined  fleets  were  too  large  to  enter,  the  admiral* 
shifted  their  flags;  into  smaller  ships :  and  a  division  of 
five-audrtwenty  English  and  Dutch  ships  of  the  line* 
with  their  frigates^  fire-ships,  and  ketches,  were  destined 
for  the:  service.  In  order  to  facilitate  the  attack,  the 
duke  of  .Qrmond  boded  with  five*and-rtwe»jfcy  hundred 
igttn>  at  the  distance  of  six  miles  from  Vigo,  and  took  by 
assault  a  fort  and  platform  of  forty  pieces  of  canoon,  at 
the  entrance  of  the  harbour.  The  British  ensign  waa 
no  sooner  seen  flying  at  the  top  of  this  fort,  than  the 
ships  advanced  to  the  attack.  Vice-admiral  Hopsoa,  in 
tbeTorbay,  crowding  all  his  sail,. ran  directly  against  the 
boom,  which  was  broken  by  the  first  shock :  thee  the 
whole  squadron  entered  the  harboun,  through  a  prodk 
gious  ffrefrom  the  enemy's  ships,  and,  batteries.    These 


J 


I***.  ANNE.  ,  441 

fast,  however,  wem  won  stormed,  and  token  by  the  gte- 
riddiers  who  had  been  landed.  The  great  ships  lay 
against  the  forts  at  each  side  of  the  harbour,  which  in 
a  little  time  they  silenced;  though  vice-admiral  Hopson 
narrowly  escaped  from  a  fire-ship  by  which  he  was 
boarded.  After  a  very  vigorous  engagement,  the  French, 
finding  themselves  unable  to  cope  with  such  an  adver- 
sary, resolved  to  destroy  their  ships  and  galleons,  that 
they  might  not  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  victors.  They 
accordingly  burned  and  ran  ashore  eight  ships  and  as 
many  advice-boats ;  but  ten  ships  of  war  Were  taken,  toge- 
ther with  eleven  galleons.  Though  they  had  secured  the 
best  part  of  their  plate  and  merchandise  before  the  Eng- 
lish fleet  arrived,  the  value  of  fourteen  millions  of  pieces 
of  eight,  in  plate  and  rich  commodities,  was  destroyed  in 
six  galleons  that  perished ;  and  about  half  that  value  was 
brought  off  by  the  conquerors;  so  that  this  was  a  dread* 
ful  blow  to  the  enemy,  and  a  noble  acquisition  to  the 
allies,  Immediately  after  this  exploit,  sir  George  Rooke 
was  joined  by  sir  Cloudestey  Shovel,  who  had  been  sent 
out  with  a  squadron* to  intercept  the  galleons.  This 
officer  was  left  to  bring  home  the  prizes,  and  dismantle 
the  fortifications,  while  Rooke  returned  in  triumph  to 
Efogland* 

$  XIX.  The  glory  which  the  English  acquired  in 
this  expedition  was  in  some  measure  tarnished  by  the 
conduct  of  some  officers  in  the  West  Indies.  Thither 
admiral  Benbow  had  been  detached  with  a  squadron  of 
ten  sail,  in  the  course  of  the  preceding  year.  At  Jamaica 
he  received  intelligence,  that  monsieur  Du  Casse  was  in 
the  neighbourhood  of  Hispaniola,  and  resolved  to  beat 
up  to  that  island.  At  Leogane  he  fell  in  with  a  French 
ship  of  fifty  guns,  which  her  captain  ran  ashore  and  blew 
up.  He  took  several  other  vessels,  and  having  alarmed 
Petit-Guavas,  bore  away  for  Donna  Maria  bay,  where  he 
understood  that  Du  Casse  had  sailed  for  the  coast  of  Car- 
thagena.    Benbow  resolved  to  follow  the  same  course ; 


458  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  ITO9. 

and,  on  the  19th  of.  August,  discovered  the  enemy's 
squadron  near  St.  Martha,  consisting  of  ten  sail,  steer- 
ing along  shore*  He  formed  the  line,  and  an  engage- 
ment ensued,  in  which  he  was  very  ill  seconded  by 
some  of  his  captains.  Nevertheless,  the  battle  continued 
till  night,  and  he  determined  to  renew  it  next  morning, 
when  he  perceived  all  his  ships  at  the  distance  of  three 
or  four  miles  astern,  except  the  Ruby,  commanded  by 
captain  George  Walton,  who  joined  him  in  plying  the 
enemy  with  chase -guns.  On  the  2 1st,  these  two 
ships  engaged  >  the  French  squadron ;  and  the  Ruby 
was  so  disabled,  that  the  admiral  was  obliged  to  send  her 
back  to  Jamaica.  Next  day  the  Greenwich,  command- 
ed by  Wade,  was  five  leagues  astern ;  and  the  wind 
changing,  the  enemy  had  the  advantage  of  the  weather- 
gage.  On  the  23d  the  admiral  renewed  the  battle 
with  his  single  ship,  unsustained  by  the  nest  of  the 
squadron.     On  the  24  th   his  leg  was  shattered  by 

'  a  chain-shot ;  notwithstanding  which  accident,  he  re- 
mained on  the  quarter-deck  in  a  cradle,  and  continued 
the  engagement.  One  of  the  largest  ships  of  the  enemy 
lying  like  a  wreck  upon  the  water,  four  sail  of  the  Eng- 
lish squadron  poured  their  broadsides  into  her,  and 
then  ran  to  leeward,  without  paying  any  regard  to  the 
signal  for  battle.  Then  the  French  bearing  down  upon 
the  admiral  with  their  whole  force,  shot  away  his  main- 

»  top-sail-yard,  and  damaged  his  rigging  in  such  a  man- 
ner, that  he  was  obliged  to  lay  by  and  refit,  while  they 
took  their  disabled  ship  in  tow.  During  this  interval,  he 
called  a  council  of  his  captains,  and  expostulated  with 
them  on  their  behaviour.  They  observed,  that  the 
French  were  very  strong,  and  advised  him  to  desist.  He 
plainly  perceived  that  he  was  betrayed,  and  with  the  ut- 
most  reluctance  returned  to  Jamaica,  having  not  only 
'  lost  a  leg,  but  also  received  a  large  wound  in  his  face, 
and  another  in  his  arm,  while  he  in  person  attempted  to 
board  the  French  admiral.    Exasperated  at  the  treachery 


m&  ANNE.  455 

of  hts  captains,  be  granted  a  commission  to  rear-admiral 
Whetstone,  and  other  officers,  to  hold  a  court-martial, 
and  try  them  for  cowardice.  Hudson,  of  the  Pendennis, 
died  before  his  trial :  Kirby  and  Wade  were  convicted, 
and  sentenced  to'  be  shot :  Constable,  of  the  Windsor, 
was  cashiered  and  imprisoned :  Vincent,  of  the  Fal- 
mouth, and  Fogg,  the  admiral's  own  captain  of  the  Bre^ ' 
da,  were  convicted  of  having  signed  a  paper,  that  they 
would  not  fight  under  Benbow's  command ;  but,  as  ihey 
behaved  gallantly  in  the  action,  the  court  inflicted  upon 
them  no  other  punishment  than  that  of  a  provisional 
suspension.  Captain  Walton  had  likewise  joined  in  the 
conspiracy,  while  he  was  heated  with  the  fumes  of  in* 
toxication;  but  he  afterward  renounced  the  engage- 
ment, and  fought  with  admirable  courage  until  his  ship 
was  disabled.  The  boisterous  manner  of  Benbow  had 
produced  this  base  confederacy.  He  was  a  rough  sea- 
man ;  but  remarkably  brave,  honest,  and  experienced."* 
He  took  this  miscarriage  so  much  to  heart,  that  he  be* 
came  melancholy,  and  his  grief  co-operating  with  the 
fever  occasioned  by  his  wounds,  put  a  period  to  his  life. 
Wade  and  Kirby  were  sent  home  in  the  Bristol,  and,  on 
their  arrival  at  Plymouth,  shot  on  board  of  the  ship,  by 
virtue  of  a  dead-warrant  for  their  immediate  execution, 
which  had  lain,  there  for  some  time.  The  same  precau- 
tion had  been  taken  in  all  the  western  ports,  in  order  to 
prevent  applications  in  their  favour. 

»       •  *         *  ■ 

m  When  one  of  bit  lieutenants  expressed  his  sorrow  for  the  loss  of  the 
admiral's  leg,  "  I  am  sorry  for  it  too  (replied  the  gallant  Benbow),  but  I 
had  rather  have  lost  them  both  than  have  seen  this  dishonour  brought 
upon  the  English  nation.  But,  do  you  hear?  If  another  shot  should 
take  me  off,  behave  like  brave  men,  and  fight  it  out/'  When  Du  Casse 
arrived  at  Carthagena,  he  wrote  a  letter  to  Benbow  to  this  effect : — 
"  Sir, 

"  1  had  little  hope  on  Monday  last  but  to  have  supped  in  your  cabin; 
but  it  pleased  God  to  order  it  otherwise.  I  am  thankful  for  it.  As  for 
those  cowardly  captains  who  deserted  you,  hang  them  up ;  for,  by  God, 
they  deserve  it. 

u  Yours,  DuC*sse." 


454  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  IW& 

4  XX*  During  these  transactions,  the  queen  seemed 
to  be  happy  in  the  affection  of  her  subjects.  Though 
the  continuance  of  the  parliament  was  limited  to  six 
months  after  the  king's  decease,  she  dissolved  it  by  pro^ 
duration  before  the  term  vras  expired :  and  issued  writs 
for  electing  another,  in  which  the  tory  interest  predomi- 
nated. In  the  summer  the  queen  gave  audience  to  the 
count  de  Platens,  envoy-extraordinary  from  the  elector 
of  Hanover ;  then  she  made  a  progress  with  her  husband 
to  Oxford,  Bath,  and  Bristol,  where  she  was  received 
with  all  the  marks  of  the  most  genuine  aflfeciiow.  The 
new  parliament  meeting  on  the  20th  day  of  October, 
Mr.  Hariey  was  chosen  speaker.  The  queen  in  her 
speech  declared,  she  had  summoned  them  to  assist  her 
in  carrying  on  the  just  and  necessary  war  in  which  the 
nation  was  engaged.  She  desired  the  commons  would 
inspect  the  accounts  of  the  public  receipts  and  payments, 
that*  if  any  abuses  had  crept  into  the  management  of 
the  finances,  they  might  be  detected,  and  the  offenders 
punished.  She  told  them,  that  the  funds  assigned  in 
the  last  parliament  had  not  produced  the  sums  granted ; 
and  that  the  deficiency  was  not  supplied  even  by  the 
100,000/.  which  she  had  paid  from  her  own  revenue  for 
the  public  service.  She  expressed  her  concern  for  the 
disappointment  at  Cadiz,  as  well  as  for  the  abuses  com- 
mitted at  Port  St.  Mary's,  which  had  obliged  her  to  give 
directions  for  the  strictest  examination  of  the  particulars. 
She  hoped  they  would  find  time  to  consider  of  some 
better  and  more  effectual  method  to  prevent  the  expor- 
tation of  wool,  and  improve  that  manufacture,  which  she 
was  determined  to  encourage.  She  professed  a  firm  per- 
suasion, that  the  affection  of  her  subjects  was  the  surest 
pledge  of  their  duty  and  obedience.  She  promised  to 
defend  and  maintain  the  church  as  by  law  established  ; 
and  to  protect  her  subjects  in  the  full  enjoyment  of  all 
their  rights  and  liberties.  She  protested,  that  6he  re- 
lied on  their  care  of  her:  she  said  her  interest  and  theirs 


1702*  ANNE.  456 

were  inseparable ;  mid  that  her  endeavours  shouki  never 
be  wanting  to  mate  them  all  safe  and  happy.  She  was 
presented  with  a  very  affectionate  address  from  either 
house,  congratulating  her  upon  the  glorious  success 
of  her  arms,  and  those  of  her  allies,  under  the  com-* 
i&and  of  the  earl  of  Marlborough :  but  that  of  the  com* 
mon&  was  distinguished  by  an  implicated  reproach  on  the 
late  reign,  importing,,  that  the  wonderful  progress  of  her 
majesty's  ^r^s  under  the  earl  of  Marlborough,  had 
signally  "retrieved"  the  ancient  honour  and  glory 
of  the  English  nation.  This  expression  had  excited  a 
warm  debate  in  the  house,  in  the  course  of  which  many 
severe  reflections  were  made  on  the  memory  of  king 
William.  M  length,  the  question  was  put,  whether  the 
word  "  retrieved"  should  remain  ?  and  carried  in  the 
affirmative,  by  a  majority  of  one  hundred. 

§  XXL  The  strength  of  the  tories  appeared  in  no- 
thing more  conspicuous  than  in  their  inquiry  concerning 
controverted  elections.    The  borough  of  Hindon,  near 
Salisbury,  was  convicted  of  bribery,  and  a  bill  brought 
in  for  disfranchising  the  town :  yet  no  vote  passed  against 
the  person  who  exercised  this  corruption,  because  he  hap- 
pened to-  he  a  tory.  Mr.  Howe  was  declared  duly  elected 
for  Gloucestershire,  though  the  majority  of  the  electors 
had  voted  for  the  other  candidate.  Sir  John  Packington 
exhibited  a  complaint  against  thebishop  of  Worcester  and 
his  son,  for  having  endeavoured  to  prevent  his  election : 
the  commons  having  taken  it  into  consideration,  re- 
solved; that  the  proceedings  of  William,  lord  bishop  of 
Worcester,  and  his  son,  had  been  malicious,  unchristian, 
and  arbitrary,  in  high  violation  of  the  liberties  and  privi- 
leges* of  the  commons  of  England.    They  voted  an  ad- 
dress to  the  queen,  desiring  her  to  remove  the  father 
from  the  office  of  lord-almoner ;  and  they  ordered  the 
attorney-general  ta  prosecute  the  son,  after  his  privilege 
as  member  of  the  convocation  should  be  expired.     A 


496  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1702. 

counter  address  was  immediately  voted  and  presented  by 
the  lords,  beseeching  her  majesty  would  not  remove  the 
bishop  of  Worcester  from  the  place  of  lord-almoner, 
until  he  should  be  found  guilty  of  some  crime  by  due 
course  of  law ;  as  it  was  the  undoubted  right  of  every 
lord  of  parliament,  and  of  every  subject  of  England,  to 
have  an  opportunity  to  make  his  defence  before  he  suffers 
any  sort  of  punishment.  The  queen  said  she  had  not  as 
yet  received  any  complaint  against  the  bishop  of  Wor- 
'  cester :  but  she  looked  upon  it  as  her  undoubted  right 
to  continue  or  displace  any  servant  attending  upon  her 
own  person,  when  she  should  think  proper.  The  peers 
having,  received  this  answer,  unanimously  resolved,  that 
no  lord  of  their  house  ought  to  suffer  any  sort  of  punish- 
ment by  )any  proceedings  of  the  house  of  commons,  other- 
wise than  according  to  the  known  and  ancient  rules  and 
methods  of  parliament.  When  the  commons  attended 
the  queen  with  their  address  against  the  bishop,  she  said 
she  was  sorry  there  was  any  occasion  for  such  a  remon- 
strance, and  that  the  bishop  of  Worcester  should  no 
longer  continue  to  supply  the  place  of  her  almoner. 
This  regard  to  their  address  was  a  flagrant  proof  of  her 
partiality  to  the  tories,  who  seemed  to  justify  her  attach- 
ment by  their  compliance  and  liberality. 

§  XXII.  In  deliberating  on  the  supplies,  they  agreed 
to  all  the  demands  of  the  ministry.  They  voted  forty 
thousand  seamen,  and  the  like  number  of  land-Forces,  to 
act  in  conjunction  with  those  of  the  allies.  For  the 
maintenance  of  these  last,  they  granted  833,826/. ;  be- 
sides 350,000/.  for  guards  and  garrisons ;  70,973/.  for 
ordnance;  and  $1,843/.  for  subsidies  to  the  allies. 
Lord  Shannon  arriving  with  the  news  of  the  success  at 
Vigo,  the  queen  appointed  a  day  of  thanksgiving  for  the 
signal  success  of  her  arms  under  the  earl  of  Marlborough, 
the  duke  of  Ormond,  and  sir  George  Rooke  ;  and,  on 
that  day,  which  was  the  J  2th  of  November,  she  went  in 


1702.  ANNE.  45? 

state  to  St.  Paul's  church,  attended  by  both  houses  of 
parliament.  Next  day  the  peers  voted  the  thanks  of  the 
house  to  the  duke  of  Ormond  for  his  services  at  Vigo; 
and,  at  the  same  time,  drew  up  an, address  to  the  queen, 
desiring  she  would  order  the  duke  of  Ormond  and  sir 
George  Rooke  to  lay  before  them  an  account  of  their 
proceedings :  a  request  with  which  her  majesty  complied. 
Those  two  officers  were  likewise  thanked  by  the  house 
of  commons :  vice-admiral  Hopson  was  knighted,  and 
gratified  with  a  considerable  pension.  The  duke  of  Or- 
mond, at  his  return  from  the  expedition,  complained 
openly  of  Rooke's  conduct,  and  seemed  determined  to, 
subject  him  to  a  public  accusation ;  but  that  officer  was 
such  a  favourite  among  the  commons,  that  the  court 
was  afraid  to  disoblige  them  by  an  impeachment,  and 
took  great  pains  to  mitigate  the  duke's  resentment.  This 
nobleman  was  appointed  lord-lieutenant  of  Ireland,  and 
Rooke  was  admitted  into  the  privy-council. .  A  motion, 
however,  being  made  in  the  house  of  lords,  that  the  ad- 
miral's instructions  and  journals  relating  to  the  last  ex- 
pedition might  be  examined,  a  committee  was  appointed 
for  that  purpose,  and  prepared  an  unfavourable  report : 
but  it  was  rejected  by  a  majority  of  the  house ;  and  they 
voted,  That  sir  George  Rooke  had  done  his  duty,  pur- 
suant to  the  councils  of  war,  like  a  brave  officer,  to  the 
honour  of  the  British  nation. 

§  XXIIL  On  the  2 1  st  day  of  November,  the  queen, 
sent  a  message  to  the  house  of  commons  by  Mr.  secre* 
tary  Hedges,  recommending  farther  provision  for  the 
prince  her  husband,  in  case  he  should  survive  her.  This 
message  being  considered,  Mr.  Howe  moved,  that  the 
yearly  sum  of  100,000/.  should  besettled  on  the  prince, 
in  case  he  should  survive  her  majesty.  No  opposition  yvas 
made  to  the  proposal :  but  warm  debates  were  excited  by 
a  clause  in  the  bill,  exempting  the  prince  from  that  part 
of  the  act  of  succession  by  which  strangers,  though  na- 
turalized, were  rendered  incapable  of  holding  employ- 


4M  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND,  1702. 

marts.  This  clause  related  only  to  those  who  should  be 
naturalised  in  a  future  reign  ;  and  indeed  was  calculated 
as  a  restriction  upon  the  house  of  Hanover.  -Many 
members  argued  against  the  clause  of  exemption,  be- 
cause it  seemed  to  imply,  that  persons  already  natura- 
lized would  be  excluded  from  employments  in  the  next 
reign,  though  already  possessed  of  the  right  of  natural- 
born  subjects,  a  consequence  plainly  contradictory  to  the 
meaning  of  the  act.  Others  opposed  it*  because  the 
lords  had  already  resolved  by  a  vote,  that  they  would 
never  pass  any  bill  sent  up  from  the  commons,  to  which 
a  clause  foreign  to  the  bill  should  be  tacked ;  and  this 
clause  they  affirmed  to  be  a  tack,  as  an  incapacity  to 
hold  employments  was  a  Circumstance  altogether  distinct 
from  a  settlement  in  money.  The  queen  expressed  un- 
common eagerness  in  behalf  of  this  bill;  and  the  court 
influence  was  managed  so  successfully,  that  it  passed 
through  both  houses,  though  not  without  an  obstinate 
opposition,  and  a  formal  protest  by  seven- and-t wen ty 
peers. 

§  XXIV.  The  earl  of  Marlborough  arriving  m  Eng- 
land about  the  latter  end  of  November,  received  the 
thanks  of  the  commons  for  his  great  and  signal  services, 
which  were  so  acceptable  to  the  queen,  that  she  created 
kirn  a  duke,  gratified  him  with  a  pension  of  5000/.  upon 
the  revenue  of  the  post-office  during  his  natural  life ; 
and,  in  a  message  to  the  commons,  expressed  a  desire 
that  they  would  find  some  method  to  settle  it  on  the 
heirs-male  of  his  body.  This  intimation  was  productive 
of  warm  debates,  during  which  sir  Christopher  Musgrave 
observed,  that  he  would  not  derogate  from  the  duke's 
eminent  services ;  but  he  affirmed  his  grace  had  been 
very  well  paid  for  them  by  the  profitable  employments 
which  he  and  his  dutchess  enjoyed.  The  duke,  under- 
standing that  the  commons  were  heated  by  the  subject, 
begged  her  majesty  would  rather  forego  her  gracious 
message  in  his  behalf,  than  create  any  uneasiness  on  his 


1702.  ANNE.  469 

account,  which  might  embarrass  her  aflafct,  and  be  of 

ill  consequence  to  the  public.  Then  she  sent  another 
message  to  the  house,  signifying,  that  the  duke  of  Marl- 
borough had  declined  her  interposition.  Notwkhstand- 
ing  this  declaration,  the  commons  in  a  body  presented 
an  address,  acknowledging  the  eminent  services  of  the 
duke  of  Marlborough,  yet  expressing  their  apprehen- 
sion of  making  a  precedent  to  alienate  the  revenue  of 
the  crown,  which  had  been  so  much  reduced  by  the  ex- 
orbitant  grants  of  the  late  reign,  and  so  lately  settled  and 
secured  by  her  majesty's  unparalleled  grace  and  good- 
ness. The  queen  was  satisfied  with  their  apology ;  but 
their  refusal,  in  all  probability,  helped  to  alienate  the 
duke  from  the  tories,  with  whom  he  had  been  hitherto 
connected. 

§  XXV.  In  the  beginning  of  January,  the  queen 
gave  the  house  of  commons  to  understand,  that  the 
states-general  had  pressed  her  to  augment  her  forces,  as 
the  only  means  to  render  ineffectual  the  great  and  early 
preparations  of  the  enemy.  The  commons  immediately 
resolved,  That  ten  thousand  men  should  be  hired,  as  an 
augmentation  of  the  forces  to  act  in  conjunction  with 
the  allies;  but  on  condition  that  an  immediate  stop 
should  be  put  to  all  commerce  and  correspondence  with 
France  and  Spain  on  the  part  of  the  states-general.  The 
lords  presented  an  address  to  the  queen  on  the  same 
subject,  and  to  the  same  effect ;  and  she  owned  that  the 
condition  was  absolutely  necessary  for  the  good  of  the 
whole  alliance.  The  Dutch,  even  after  the  declaration 
of  war,  had  carried  on  a  traffic  with  the  French :  and, 
at  this  very  juncture,  Lewis  found  it  impossible  to  make 
remittances  of  money  to  the  elector  of  Bavaria  in  Ger- 
many, and  to  his  forces  in  Italy,  except  through  the 
channel  of  English,  Dutch,  and  Geneva  merchants. 
The  states-general,  though  shocked  at  the  imperious 
manner  in  which  the  parliament  of  England  prescribed 
their  conduct,  complied  with  the  demand  without  hesi- 


46Q  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  I7e&. 

tation,  and  published  a  prohibition  of  all  commerce  with 
the  subjects  of  France  and  Spain. 

§XXVL  The  commons  of  this  parliament  had  no- 
thing more  at  heart  than  a  bill  against  occasional  con- 
formity. The  tories  affected  to  distinguish  themselves 
as  the  only  true  friends  to  the  church  and  monarchy : 
and  they  hated  the  dissenters  with  a  mixture  of  spiritual 
and  political  disgust.  They  looked  upon  these  last  as 
an  intruding  sect,  which  constituted  great  part  of  the 
whig  faction  that  extorted  such  immense  sums  of  money 
from  the  nation  in  the  late  reign,  and  involved  it  in  per- 
nicious engagements,  from  whence  it  had  no  prospect  of 
deliverance.  They  considered  them  as  encroaching  - 
schismatics  that  disgraced  and  endangered  the  hierar- 
chy ;  and  those  of  their  own  communion  who  recom- 
mended moderation,  they  branded  with  the  epithets  of 
lukewarm  Christians,  betrayers,  and  apostates.  They 
now  resolved  to  approve  themselves  zealous  sons  of  the 
church,  by  seizing  me  first  opportunity  that  was  in  their 
power  to  distress  the  dissenters.  In  order  to  pave  the 
way  to  this  persecution,  sermons  were  preached,  and 
pamphlets  were  printed,  to  blacken  the  character  of  the 
sect,  and  inflame  the. popular  resentment  against  them. 
On  the  4th  day  of  November,  Mr.  Bromley,  Mr*  St. 
John,  and  Mr.  Annesley,  were  ordered  by  the  house  of 
commons  to  bring  in  a  bill  for  preventing  occasional 
conformity.  In  the  preamble,  all  persecution  for  con* 
science-sake  was  condemned :  nevertheless,  it  enacted, 
that  all  those  who  had  taken  the  sacrament  and  test  for 
offices  of  trust,  or  the  magistracy  of  corporations,  and 
afterward  frequented  any  meeting  of  dissenters,  should 
be  disabled  from  holding  their  employments,  pay  a  fine 
of  100/.,  and  5/.  for  every  day  in  which  they  continued 
to  act  in  their  employments  after  having  been  at  any 
such  meeting:  they  were  also  rendered  incapable  of 
holding  any  other  employment,  till  after  one  whole  year's 
conformity ;  and,  upon  a  relapse,  the  penalties  and  tiafie 


..WOOL.  .-v;      .-ANME.  • 

of  incapacity  were  doubled.    The  promoters  of  the  bill 
alleged,  that  an  established  religion  and  national  church 
were  absolutely  necessary,  when  so  many  impious  men 
pretended  to  inspiration,  and  deluded  such  numbers  of 
-the  people :  that  the  most  effectual  way  to  preserve  this 
-national  church  would  be,  the  maintenance  of  the  civil 
power  in  the  hands  of  those  who  expressed  their  regard 
to  the  church  in  their  principles  and  practice :  that  the 
parliament,  by  the  corporation  and  test  acts,  thought 
they,  had  raised  a  sufficient  barrier  to  the  hierarchy, 
never  imagining  that  a  set  of  men  would  rise  up,  whose 
consciences:  would  be  too  tender  to  obey  the  laws,  but 
hardened  enough  to  break  them  :  that,  as  the  last  reign 
began  with  an  act  in  favour  of  dissenters,  so  the  com- 
mons were  desirous  that,  in  the  beginning  of  her  majes- 
ty's auspicious  government,  an  act  should  pass  in  favour 
of  the  church  of  England :  that  this  bill  did  not  intrench 
on  the  act  of  toleration,  or  deprive  the  dissenters  of  any 
privileges  they  enjoyed  by  law,'  or  add  any  thing  to  the 
legal  rights  of  the  church  of  England  :  that  occasional 
conformity  was  an  evasion  of  the  law>  by  which  the  dis- 
senters might  insinuate  themselves  into  the  management 
of  all  corporations :  that  a  separation  from  the  church, 
to  which  a  man's  conscience  will  allow  him  occasionally 
to  conform,  is  a  mere  schism,  which  in  itself  was  sinful, 
without  the  superaddition  of  a  temporal  law  to  make  it 
an  offence :  that  the  toleration  was  intended  only  for 
the  ease  of  tender  consciences,  and  not  to  give  a  licence 
for  occasional  conformity:  that  conforming  and  non- 
conforming were  contradictions ;  for  nothing  but  a  firm; 
persuasion  that  the'  terms  of  communion  required  aire 
Sinful  and  unlawful  could  justify  the  one ;  and  this  plainly 
condemns  the  other;VThe  members  who  opposed  die  bill 
Argued,  that  the  dissenters  frere  generally  well  affected 
to  the  pretent  institution :  that  to  bring  any  real  hatxU 
ship  upon  them,  or  give  rise  to  jealousies  and  Tears;  at 
such  a  juncture,  might  be  attended  with  dangerous  can* 
vol.  j.  *2  H 


HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  Ifflft 

aoquaices  r  that  the  toleration'  had  greatly  contributed 
to  the  security  and  reputation  of  the  church,  and  plainly 
proved,  that  Kberty  of  conscience,  and  g?fltk  measures, 
were  the  raoet  effectual  means  for  increasing  the  votarie? 
of  the  church,  end  diminishing  the  number  of  difsesir 
ters :  that  the  dissenters  could  not  be  termed  schisms* 
tica,  without  bringing  a  heavy  charge  upon  the  church 
of  England,  which  had  not  only  tolerated  such  sohisio, 
hutevea  allowed  communion  with  the  reformed  church^ 
abroad :  that  the  penalties  of  this  bill  were  more  severe 
than  thoie  which  the  laws  imposed  on  Papists,  lor  assist? 
hog  at  the  most  solemn  act  of  their  religion :  in  a  word, 
that  toleration  and  tenderness  had  been  always  produc- 
tive of  peaee  and  union,  whereas  persecution  had  never 
failed  to  excite  disorder  and  extend  superstition.  Many 
alterations  and  mitigations  were  proposed^  without  effect. 
In  the  course  of  the  debates,  the  disinters  were  mention** 
ed  and  reviled  with  great  acrimony  *  and  the  bill  passed 
the  Iowqt  house  by  virtue  of  a  considerable  majority, 

$  XXVIL  The  lords,  apprehensive  that  the  commons 
would  tack  it  to  SQine  money-bill,  voted,  that  the  an- 
nexing any  clause  to  a  money-bill  was  contrary  to  the 
constitution  of  the  English  government,  and  the  usage 
of  parliament*  The  bill  met  with  a  very  warm  opposi- 
tion in  the  upper  house,  where  a  considerably  portion  of 
the  whig  interest  still  remained.  These  members  be* 
lieved  that  the  intention  of  the  hill  was  to  model  corpo- 
rations, so  as  to  eject  all  those  who  would  not  vote  in 
elections  for  the  tories*  Some  imagined  this  was  a  pre- 
paratory step  towards  a  repeal  of  the  toleration ;  and 
others  concluded  that  the  promoters  of  the  bill  designed 
tp  raise  such  disturbances  at  heme,  as  would  discourage 
the  allies  abroad,  and  render  the  prosecution  of  the  war  " 
impracticable.  The  majority  of  the  bishops,  at)d  among. 
these  Burnet  of  Sanlro,  objected  gainst  it  on  the  priiv 
diples  of  moderation,  and  from  motives  of  conscience* 
Nevertheless,  as  the  court  supported  this  measure  with* 


17*3.  ANNE.  46§ 

its  whole  powef  and  influence,  the  bill  made  ks  way 
through  the  house,  though  not  wfthont  alteration  and 
amendments,  which  were  rejected:  by  the-  common*. 
The  lower  house  pretended,  that  the  tods  hqd  no.  righti 
to  alter  any  fines  and  penalties  that  the  common*  should 
fix  in  bills  sent  up  for  their  concurrence,  on  the  supposi- 
tion, that  those  were  matters  concerning  moneys  the 
peculiar  province  of  the  lower  house :  the  lords  ordered 
a  minute  inquiry  to  be  made  into  all  the  rolls  of  parti**' 
ment  since  the  reign  of  Henry  the  Seventh ;  and  a  great? 
number  of  instances  were  found  in  which  the  beds  had* 
begun  the  clauses  imposing  fines  and  penalties,  altered 
the  penalties  which  had  been  fixed  by  the  commons,  and 
even  changed  die  uses  to  which  they  were  applied 
These  precedents  were  entered  in  the  bods  ;  but  the 
commons  resolved  to  maintain  their  point,  without  en* 
gaging  in  any  dispute  upon  the  subject-  After  warns 
debates,  and  a  free  conference  between  the  two  houses, 
the  lords  adhered  to  their  amendments,  though  this  v& 
solution  was  carried  by  a  majority  of  one  vote  only :  the 
commons  persisted  in  rejecting  them ;  the  bill  miscarried, 
and  both  houses  published  their  proceedings  by  way  df 
appeal  to  the  nation.*  A  bill  was  now  brought  into*  the 
lower  house,  granting  another  year's  consideration  to 
those  who  had  not  taken  the  oath  abjuring  the  pre- 
tended prince  of  Wales.  The  lords  added  three  cfeusesy 
importing,  that  those  persons  who  should  take  the  oath 
within  the  limited  time,  might  return  to  their  benefices 
and  employments,  unless  they  should'  be  already  kgalty 
filled;  that  any  person  endeavouring  to  defeat  the  suc- 
cession to  the  crown,  as  now  limited  by  law,  should  be- 

*  Wbilq  this,  bill  was  depending,  Daniel  de  Foe-  published  a  pamphfet* 
entitled,  "The  shortest  Way  with  the  Dissenters,;  or,  Proposals  for  the. 
Establishment  of  the  Church..''  The  piece  was  a  severe  satire  on  the  vio- 
lence of  the  church  party.  The:  commons  ordered  ft  to.  be  b*roe<i  by*  tj>e> 
hands  of  the  common  hangman,  ap&  the  author  to  be,  prosecuted),  H$ 
was  accordingly  committed  to  Newgate,  tried,  condemned  to  pay  a  fine 

of  500/,  and  stated?  in  the  pillory.  

2  H2 


404  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  -VM 

deemed  guilty  of  high-treason  ;  and  that  the  oath  of  ab- 
juration should  be  imposed  upon  the  subjects  in  Ireland. 
The  commons  made  some  opposition  to  the  first  clause ; 
but  at  length  the  question  being  put,  Whether  they 
should  agree  to  the  amendments  ?  it  was  carried, in  the 
affirmative  by  one  voice. 

'  §  XXVIII.  No  object  engrossed  more  time,  or  pro-, 
duced  more  violent  debates,  than  did  the  inquiry  into 
the  public  accounts.  The  commissioners  appointed  for; 
tilts  purpose*  pretended  to  have  made  great  discoveries* 
They  charged  >  the  earl  of  Ranelagh,  paymaster-general 
of  the  army,  with  flagrant  mismanagement.  He  acr 
quitted  himself  in  such  a  manner  as  screened  him  from 
all  severity  of  punishment :  nevertheless  they  expelkd 
him  from  the  house  for  a  high  crime  and  misdemea- 
nour, in  misapplying  several  sums  of  the  public  money  y 
and  he  thought  proper  to  resign  his  employment  4 
Jong  address  was  prepared  and  presented  to  the  queen* 
attributing  the  national  debt  to  mismanagement  of  the 
funds ;  complaining  that  the  old  methods  of  the  exche-* 
quer  had  been  neglected ;  and  that  iniquitous  frauds  had 
been  committed  by  the  commissioners  of  the  prizes* 
Previous  to  this  remonstrance,  the  house,  in  consequence; 
of  the  report  of  the  committee,  had  passed  several  severe: 
resolutions,  particularly  against  Charles  Lord.  Halifax, 
auditor  of  the  receipt  of  the  exchequer,  as  having  ©e-, 
glected  his  duty,  and  been  guilty  of  a  breach  of  trust*. 
For  these  reasons,  they  actually  besought  the  queen,  in 
an  address,  that  she  would  give  directions  to  the  attor- 
ney-general to  prosecute  him,  for  the  said  offences;  and, 
*he,  promised  to  comply  with  their  request.  ,Qn.  the, 
other  hand,  the  lords  appointed  a  committee  to  examine 
all  the  observations  which  the  commissioners  of  accounts 
bad  offered  to  both  houses.  They  ascribed  the  national 
debt  to  deficiencies  in  the  funds ;  they  acquitted  lord' 
Halifax,  the  lords  of  the  treasury,  and  their  officers, 
whom  the   commons   had  accused;    and  represented 


1IWT  '        ANNE.  465 

these  circumstances  m •  an  address  to'  the  qtieeh,  whieb 
was  afterward  printed,  with  the  Vouchers  to  every  par-f 
ticular.    This  difference  bkw  up  a  fierce  flame  of  dis- 
cord between  the  two  houses,  which  manifested  then? 
mutual  animosity  in  speeches,  votes,  resolutions,  and 
conferences.  <  The  commons  affirmed,  that  no  cogni- 
zance the  lords  could  take  of  the  public  accounts,  would 
enable  them  to  supply  any  deficiency,  or  Appropriate  any 
Surplusage  of  the  public  money :  that  they  could  neither 
acquit  rior  condemn  any  person  whatsoever,  upon  any 
inquiry  arising  originally  in  their  own  house;  and  that 
their  attempt  to  acquit  Charles  lord  Halifax  was  unpar- 
liamentary.   The  lords  insisted  upon  their  right  to  take 
cognizance  originally  of  all  public  accounts:  they  affirmed, ' 
that,  in  their  resolutions  with  respect  to  lord  Halifax, 
they  had  proceeded  according 'to  the  rules  of  justice. 
They  owned,  however,  that  their  resolutions  did  not 
amount  to  any  judgment  or  acquittal ;  but  that,  finding 
a  vote  of  the  commons  reflecting  upon  a  member  of 
their  house,  they  thought  fit  to  give  their  opinion  in 
their  legislative  capacity.    The  queen  interposed  by  a 
message  to  the  lords,  desiring  they  would  dispatch  the 
business  in  which  they  were '  engaged.    The  dispute 
continued  even  after  this  intimation:  one  conference 
was  held  after  another,  till,  at  length,  both  sides  der 
spaired  of  an  accommodation.    The  lords  ordered  their 
proceedings  to  be  printed,  and  the  commons  followed 
their  example.  On  the  27  th  day  of  February,  the  queen, 
having  passed  all  the  bills  that  wfere  ready  for  the  royal 
assent,  ordered  the  lord-keeper  tio  prorogue  the  parlia- 
ment, after  having  pronounced  a  speech  in  the  usual 
fctyle.    She  thanked  them  for  their  zeal,  affection,  and 
dispatch;  declared  she  would  encourage  and  maintain 
the  church  as  by  law  established;  desired  they  would 
consider  some  farther  laws  for  restraining  the  great 
licence  assumed  for  publishing  scandalous  pamphlets  and 
libels ;  and  assured  them,  that  all  her  share  of  thepriaes 


46*  HISTORY  O*  ENGLAND.  ITS*. 

winch  aright  be  taken  in  the  war,  should  be  applied  to 
the  public  service.  By  this  time  the  earl  of  Rochester 
was  entirely  removed  from  the  queen's  councils.  .  Find- 
ing himself  outweighed  by  the  interest  of  the  duke  of 
Marlborough  and  lord  Gocblpbia,  he  had  become  sullen 
and  intractable ;  and  rather  than  repair  to  bis  govern- 
ment of  Ireland,  chose  to  resign  the  office,  which,  as  we 
have  already  observed,  was  conferred  upon  the  duke  of 
Ormond,  an  accomplished  nobleman,  who  had  acquired 
great  popularity  by  the  success  of  the  expedition  to  Vigo. 
The  parties  in  the  house  of  lords  were  so  nearly  matched, 
that  the  queen,  in  order  to  ascertain  an  undoubted  ma- 
jority in  the  next  session,  created  four  new  peers,b  who 
had  signalized  themselves  by  the  violence  of  their 
speeches  in  the  house  of  commons. 

§  XXIX.  The  two  houses  of  convocation,  which 
were  summoned  with  the  parliament,  bore  a  strong 
affinity  with  this  assembly,  by  the  different  interests  that 
prevailed  in  the  upper  and  lower.  The  last,  in  imita- 
tion of  the  commons,  was  desirous  of  branding  the  pre* 
Ceding  reign ;  and  it  was  with  great  difficulty  that  they 
Concurred  with  the  prelates  in  an  address  of  congratu- 
lation to  her  majesty.  Then  their  former  contest  was 
revived.  The  lower  house  desired,  in  an  application  to 
the  archbishop  of  Canterbury  and  his  suffragans,  that 
the  matters  in  dispute  concerning  the  manner  of  synod- 
leal  proceedings,  and  the  right  of  the  lower  house  to 
hold  intermediate  assemblies,  might  be  taken  into  eon* 
sideration,  and  speedily  determined.  The  bishops  pro- 
posed, that  in  the  intervals  of  sessions,  the  lower  house 

b  These  were  John  Granville,  created  baron  Granville  of  Potfaeridge,  in 
the  county  of  Devon;  Heneage  Finch,  baron  of  Guernsey,  in  the  county 
of  Southampton ;  sir  John  Leveson  Gower,  baron  Gower  of  Sittenbam,  in 
Yorkshire;  and  Francis  Seymour  Conway,  youngest  son  of  sir  Edward 
Bejmour,  made  baron  of  Ragley,  in  the  county  of  Warwick.  At  ihe  same 
time,  however.  John  Harvey,  of  the  opposite  faction,  was  created  baron 
oflckworth,  in  the  county  of  Suffolk;- and  the  marquis  of  Normanby 
twas  honoured  with  the  title  pf  duke  of  Buckinghamshire. 


lflfe  ANNE,  4Q7 

might  appoint  committee*  to  prepare  matters;  and, 
when  business  should  be  brought  regularly  before  thtta, 
the  archbishop  would  reguUte  the  prorogations  m  $uch 
*  manner,  that  they  should  have  sufficient  time  to  sk 
and  deliberate  on  the  subject  This  offer  did  not,  satisfy 
the  lower  house,  which  was  emboldened  to  pdrsisjt  in  its 
demand  by  a  Tote  of  the  caramons.  These*  in  conse- 
quence of  ail  address  of  thanks  frotn  the  clergy,  touch* 
ing  Mr-  Ltoyd*  son  to  the  bishop  of  Worcester*  whota 
they  ordered  to  be  prosecuted  after  his  privilege  9s 
member  of  the  convocation  should  be  expired,  had  re- 
solved, that  they  would  on  all  occasions  assert  the  jttst 
rights  and  privileges  of  the  lower  house  of  convocation* 
The  prelates  refused  to  depart  frock  the  archbishof/s 
right  of  proroguing  the  whole  convocation,  with  consent 
of  his  suffragans.  The  lower  house  proposed  to  refer 
the  controversy  to  the  queen's  decision.  The  bishops 
declined  thid  expedient,  as  inconsistent  with  the  episco- 
pal authority,  and  the  presidenoe  of  the  archbishop. 
The  lower  hoUse  haviflg  incurred  the  imputation  of 
favouring  presbytery  by  this  opposition  to  the  bi$hOps> 
entered  in  their  books  a  declaration,  acknowledging  the 
order  of  bishops  lis  superior  to  presbyters,  and  to  be  a 
divine  apostolical  institution*  Then  they  desired  the 
bishops,  in  an  address,  to  concur  in  settling  the  doctrine 
of  the  divine  apostolical  right  of  episcopacy,  that  it 
might  be  a  standing  rule  of  the  church.  They  likewise 
presented  a  petition  to  the  queen,  complaining,  that  in 
the  convocation  called  in  the  year  1 700,  after  aft  inter* 
ruption  often  years,  several  questions  having  arisen  eon* 
cerning  the  rights  and  liberties  of  the  lower  house,  the 
bishops  had  refused  a  verbal  conference ;  and  afterward 
declined  a  proposal  to  submit  the  dispute  to  her  majesty's 
determination ;  they  therefore  fled  for  protection  to  her 
majesty,  begging  she  Would  call  the  question  into  her 
own  royal  audience.  The  queen  promised  to  consider 
their  petition,  which  was  supported  by  the  earl  of  Not* 


468  HISTORY  OV  ENGLAND.  A7GQ. 

tingham  ;  and  ordered  their  council  to  examine  the 
affair,  how  it  consisted  with  law  and  <«^X)tti.  Whether  - 
their  report  was  unfavourable  to  the  lower  house,  or  the 
queen  was  unwilling  to  encourage  the  division,  no  other 
answer  wets  made  to  their  address.  The  archbishop  re- 
plied to  their  request  presented  to  the  upper  house,  con- 
cerning the  divine  right  of  presbytery,  that  the  preface 
to  the  form  of  ordination  contained  a  declaration  of 
three  orders  of  ministers  from  the  times  of  the  apostles; 
namely,  bishops,  priests,  and  deacons,  to  which  they  had 
subscribed ;  but  he  and  his  brethren  conceived  that, 
without  a  royal  licence, -they  had  not  authority  to 
attempt,  enact,  promulge,  or  execute  any  canon;  which 
should  concern  either  doctrine  or  discipline.  The  lower 
house  answered  this*  declaration  in  very  petulant  terms ; 
and  th^  dispute  subsisted  when  the  parliament  was  pro-* 
rogued.  But  these  contests  produced  divisions  through 
the  whole  body  of  the  clergy,  who  ranged  themselves  in 
different  factions,  distinguished  by  the  names  of  high- 
church  and  low^church.  The  first  consisted  of  ecdlesi- 
astical  tories;  the  other  included  those  who  prdfessed 
revolution  principles,  and  recommended  moderation  to- 
wards the  dissenters.  The  high-church  party  reproached 
the  other  as  time-servers,  and  Presbyterians  in  disguise ; 
and  were,  in,  their  turn,  stigmatized  as  the  friends  and 
abettors  of  tyranny  and  persecution.  At  present,  howv 
ever,  the  tories  both  in  church  and  state  triumphed  in 
the  favour  of  their  sovereign.  The  right  of  parliaments, 
the  memory  of  the  late  king,  and  even  the  act  limiting 
the  succession  of  the  house  of  Hanover,  became  the  sub- 
jects of  ridicule.  The  queen  was  flattered  as  possessor 
of  the  prerogatives  of  the  ancient  monarchy :  the  history 
written  by  her  grandfather,  the  earl  of  Clarendon,  was« 
now  for  the  first,  time  published,  to  inculcate  the  prin- 
ciples of  obedience,  and  inspire  the  people  with  an  ab- 
horrence of  opposition  to  apt  anointed  sovereign*  «  Her- 
majesty's  hereditary  right  iy?s  deduced  from  Edward  the* ' 


WW.  ANNE.  «6», 

Conf&ssor,  and,  as  heir  of  his  pretended  sanctity  and 
virtue,  she  was  persuaded  to  touch  persons  'afflicted  with 
the  ting's  evil,  according  to  the  office  inserted  in  the 
liturgy  for  this  occasion. 

>  ^  XXX.  The  change  of  the  ministry  in  Scotland 
seemed  favourable  to  the  episcopalians  and  ariti-revolu-* 
tioners  of  that  kingdom.  The  earls  of  Marchmont, 
Melvil,  Selkirk,  Leveh,  and  Hyndford,  were  laid  aside  j 
the  earl  of  Seafield  was  appointed  chancellor :  the  duke 
of  Queensberry,  and  the  lord  viscount  Tarbat,  were  der 
clared  secretaries  of  state :  the  marquis  of  Annandale 
was  made  president  of  the  council,  and  the  earl  of  Tul- 
libardine  lord*privy-seal.  A  new  parliament  having  been 
summoned,  the  earl  of  Seafield  employed  his  influence 
so  successfully,  that  a  great  number  of  anti-revolutioners 
were  returned  as  members.  The  duke  of  Hamilton  had 
obtained  from  the  queen  a  letter  to  the  privyrcouncil  hr 
Scotland,  in  which  she  expressed  her  desire,  that  the 
Presbyterian  clergy  should  live  in  brotherly  love  and 
eommunion  with  such  dissenting  ministers  of  the  re- 
formed religion  as  were  in  possession  of  benefices,  and 
Kved  with  decency  and  submission  to  the  law.  The 
episcopal  clergy,  encouraged  by  these  expressions  in  their; 
favour,  drew  up  an'  address  to  the  queen,  imploring  her 
protection ;  and  humbly  beseeching  her  to  allow  those 
parishes  in  which '  there  was  a  majority  of  episcopal 
freeholders,  to  bestow  the  benefice  on  ministers  of  their 
principles.  This  petition  was  presented  by  Dr.  Skeen 
and  Dr.' Scot,  who  were  introduced  by  the  duke  of 
Queerisbefiry  to  her  majesty.  She  assured  them  of  her 
protection  and  endeavours  to  supply  their  necessities;, 
and  exhorted  them  to  live  in  peace  and  Christian  love 
with  *  the  clergy,  who  were  by  law  invested  with  the 
church  goverfcrrtent  in  her'ancierit  kingdom  of  Scotland.. 
A  proclamation  of  indemnity  having  been  published  in 
jyjarch,  a  great  number  of  Jacobites  returned  from  France 
?md  other  countries,  pretended  to  have  changed  their 


470  HISTORY  OF  KNGLAND.  WW. 

sentirjientv  and'  to6k  the  daths,  that  they  might  be 
qualified  to  sit  in  parliament.    They  formed  an  accession 
to  the  strength  of  the  anti-revolutkmefs  and  eplsco 
palians,  who  now  hoped  to  outnumber  the  Presbyterians* 
and  outweigh  their  interest.5    But  this  confederacy  was 
composed  of  dissonant  parts,  from  which  no  harmony 
could  be  expected*   The  Presbyterians  fend  revolutioticrs 
were  headed  by  the  duke  of  Argyle*  The  country  party 
of  malecontents,  which  took  its  rise  from  the  disappoint- 
ments of  the  Darien  settlement,  acted  under  the  au- 
spices of  the  duke  of  Hamilton  and  marquis  of  Tweedale  j 
and  the  earl  of  Hume  appeared  as  chief  of  the  anti- 
revolutioners.    The  different  parties  who  now  united, 
pursued  the  most  opposite  ends.    The  majority  of  die 
country  party  were  friends  to  the  revolution,  and  sought 
only  redress  of  the  grievances  which  the  nation  had  sis** 
toined  in  the  late  rfeigiu    The  anti-revolutioners  con- 
sidered the  accession  and  government  of  king  William 
as  an  extraordinary  went,  which  they  were  witting  to 
forget,  believing  that  all  parties  were  safe  under  the 
Shelter  of  her  majesty's  general  indemnity.    The  Jaco- 
bites submitted  to  the  queen,  as  tutrix  or  regent  of  the 
prince  of  Wales,  whom  they  firmly  believed  she  intended 
to  establish  on  the  throne.    The  whigs,  under  Argyle, 
alarmed  at  the  coalition  of  all  their  enemies*  resolved  to 
procure  a  parliamentary  sanction  for  the  revolution* 

§  XXXI.  The  parliament  being  opened  on  the  6th  day 
of  May,  at  Edinburgh,  by  the  duke  of  Queensberiy  as 
commissioner,  the  q&een's  letter  was  read,  in  which  She 
demanded  a  supply  for  the  maintenance  of  the  forces, 
advised  them  to  encourage  trade,  and  exhorted  them  to 
proceed  with  wisdom,  prudence,  and  unanimity.  The 
duke  of  Hamilton  immediately  offered  the  draft  of  a  bill 
for  recognising  her  majesty's  undoubted  right  and  title 

«  Burnet.  Oldmixon.  Torcy's  Mem.  Lamberty's  Mem.  Feuquieres 
Burehet.  Tindal.  Lockhart's  Mem.  Lives  of  the  Admirals.  Hist  of 
the  duke  of  Marlborough,    ttntchessof  Marlboroogrs  Apol. 


»f#*  ANNE.  471 

to  the  imperial  crown  of  Scotland,  according  to  the  de- 
claration of  the  estates  of  the  kingdom,  containing  the 
claim  of  right  It  was  immediately  received:  and  at 
the  second  reading*  the  queen's  advocate  offered  an  ad- 
ditional clause,  denouncing  the  penalties  of  treason 
against  any  person*  who  should  question  her  majesty's 
right  and  title  to  the  crown,  or  her  exercise  of  the  go- 
vernment from  her  actual  entry  to  the  same.  This, 
after  a  Jong  and  warm  debate,  was  carried  by  the  con- 
currence of  the  anti-revolutioners.  Then  the  earl  of 
Hume  produced  the  draft  of  a  bill  for  the  supply :  im- 
mediately after  it  was  read,  the  marquis  of  Tweedale 
made  an  overture,  that,  before  all  other  business;  the 
parliament  would  proceed  to  make  such  conditions  of 
government,  and  regulations  in  the -constitution  of  the 
kingdom,  to  take  place  after  the  decease  of  her  majesty 
and  the  heirs  of  her  body,  as  should  be  necessary  for 
the  preservation  of  their  religion  and  liberty*  This 
overture  and  the  bill  were  ordered  to  lie  upon  the  table; 
and,  in  the  meantime,  the  commissioner  found  himself 
involved  in  great  perplexity.  The  duke  of  Argyle,  the 
marquis  of  Annandale,  and  the  earl  of  Marchmpnt,  gave 
him  to  understand  in  private,  that  they  were  resolved  to 
move  for  an  act,  ratifying  the  revolution  ;  and  for  an- 
other, confirming  the  Presbyterian  government ;  that 
they  would  insist  upon  their  being  discussed  before  the 
bill  of  supply,  and  that  they  were  certain  of  carrying  the 
points  at  which  they  aimed.  The  commissioner  now 
found  himself  reduced  to  a  very  disagreeable  alternative. 
There  was  a  necessity  for  relinquishing  all  hope  of  a 
supply,  or  abandoning  the  anti-revolutioners,  to  whom 
he  was  connected  by  promises  of  concurrence.  The 
whigs  were  determined  to  oppose  all  schemes  of  supply 
that  should  come  from  the  cavaliers ;  and  these  last  re* 
solved  to  exert  their  whole  power  in  preventing  the  con- 
firmation of  the  revolution  and  the  Presbyterian  disci- 
pline.     He  foresaw  that  on  this  occasion  the  whigs 


473-  ,  HISTORY  OOP,  ENGLAND.  Vmi 

would  be  joined  by  the  duke  of  Hamilton  and  his  party,* 
so  as  to  preponderate  against  the  cavaliers. .  He  endear 
voured  to  cajole  both  parties ;  but  found  the  task  imprac-> 
ticable.  He  desired  in  parliament,  that  the  act  for  the* 
supply .  might  be  read,  promising  that  they  should  have 
full  time  afterward  to  deliberate  on  other  subjects.  The 
marquis .  of  Tweedale  insisted  upon  his  overture ;  andy 
after  warm  debates,  the  house  resolved  to  proceed  with' 
such  acts  as  might  be  necessary  for  securing  the  religion,; 
liberty,  and  trade  of  the  nation,  before  any  bill  for  supply 
or  other  business  should  be  discussed. .  The  marquis  of 
Athol  offered  an  act  for  the  security  of,  the  kingdom,  in? 
case  of  her  majesty's  decease ;  but,  before  it  >  was  read, 
the  duke  of  Argyle  presented  his  draft  of  a  bill  for  rati- 
fying the  revolution,  and  all  the  acts  following  there- 
upon. An  act  for  limiting  the  succession  after  .the 
death  of  her.  majesty,  and  the  heirs  of  her  body,  was 
produced  by  Mr*  Fletcher  ,of  Saltoun.  The  earl  of 
Rothes  recommended  another,  importing  that,  after  her 
majesty's  death,  and  failing  heirs  of  her  body,  no  person: 
coming  to  the  crown  of  Scotland,  being  at  the  same  time 
king  or  queen  of  .England,  should,  as  king,  or  queen  of 
Scotland,  have  power  to  make  peace  or  war.  without  the 
consent  of  parliament.  The  earl  of  March mont  recited 
the  draft  of  an  act  for  securing  the  true  Protestant  reli- 
gion and  Presbyterian  government :  one  was  also  sug-' 
gested  by  sir. Patrick  Johnston,  allowing  the  importation 
of  wines,  and  other  foreign  liquors.  All  these  bills  were 
ordered  to  lie  upon  the  table.  k  Then  the  earl  of  Strath* 
more  produced  an  act  for  toleration  to  all  Protestants  in 
the  exercise  of  religious  worship.  But  against  this  the; 
general  assembly  presented  a  most  violent  remonstrance;, 
and  the  promoters  of  the  bill,  foreseeing  that  it  would 
meet  with  great  opposition,  allowed  it  to  drop,  for  the.4 
present.  On  the  3d  day  of  June,  the  parliament. passed: 
the  act  for  preserving  the  true  reformed  Protestant  re-. 
ligionv  and  confirming  Presbyterian  qhurch  government, ; 


I7A&.  ANNE.  478 

as  agreeable  to  the  word  of  God,  and  the  only  govern? 
meat  of  Christ's  church  within  the  kingdom.  The 
same  party  enjoyed  a  farther  triumph  in  the  success  of 
Argyle's-  act,  for  ratifying  and  perpetuating  the  first  act 
of  king  William^  parliament ;  for  declaring  it  high  trea- 
son to  disotvn  the  authority  of  that  parliament,  or  to 
filter  or  renovate  the  claim  of  right,  or  any  article  there- 
of. This  last  clause  was  strenuously  opposed ;  but  at 
last  the  bill  passed,  with  the  concurrence  of  all  the  mi- 
nistry, except  the  Marquis  of  Athol,  and  the  viscount 
Tarhat,  ;\vho  began  at  this  period  to  correspond  with  the 
opposite  party. 

4  XXXII.  The  cavaliers,  thinking  themselves  betrayed 
by  the  duke  of  Queensbeny,  who  had  assented  to  these 
acts,  first  expostulated  with  him  on  his  breach  of  promise, 
and  then  renounced  his  interest,  resolving  to  separate 
themselves  from  the  court,  and  jointly  pursue  such  mea- 
sures as  might  be  for  .the  interest  of  their  party;  But 
pf  all  the  bills  that  were  produced  in  the  course  of  this 
remarkable  session,  that  which  produced  the  most  vio- 
lent altercation,  was  the  act  of  security,  calculated  to 
-abridge  the  prerogative  of  the  crown,  limit  the  successor, 
and  throw  a  vast  additional  power  into  the  hands  of  the 
parliament.  It  was  considered  paragraph  by  paragraph : 
many  additions  and  alterations  were  proposed,  and  some 
adopted:  inflammatory  speeches  were  uttered ;  bitter 
sarcasms  retorted  from  party  to  party  ;sand  different 
votes  passed  on  different  clauses.  At  length,  in  spite  of 
the  most  obstinate  opposition  from  the  ministry  and  the 
cavaliers,  it  was  passed  by  a  majority  of  fifty-nine  voices. 
The  commissioner  was  importuned  to  give  it  the  royal 
assent;  but  declined  answering  their  entreaties  till  the 
10th  day  of  September.  Then  he  made  a  speech  in* 
parliament,  giving  them  to  understand  that  he  had  re- 
ceived the  queens  pleasure,  and  was  empowered  to  give: 
the  royal  assent  to  all  the  acts  voted  in  this  session,  ex- 
cept tp  the  act  for  the  security  of  the  kingdom.  *  A  mo- 


474  HISTORY  OP  ENGLAND.  1709. 

tion  was  made  to  solicit  the  royal  pssent,  in  an  address 
to  her  majesty ;  but  the  question  being  put,  it  was  car- 
ried in  the  negative  by  a  small  majority.  On  the  6th 
day  of  the  same  month,  the  earl  of  Marchmont  had  pro- 
duced a  bill  to  settle  the  succession  on  the  house  of 
Hanover.  At  first  the  import  of  it  was  not  known ;  but, 
when  the  clerk,  in  reading  it,  mentioned  the  princess 
Sophia,  the  whole  house  was  kindled  into  a  flame. 
Some  proposed  that  the  overture  should  be  burned; 
others  moved,  that  the  earl  might  be  sent  prisoner  to  the 
castle;  and  a  general  dissatisfaction  appeared  in  the 
whole  assembly.  Not  that  the  majority  in  parliament 
were  averse  to  the  succession  in  the  house  of  Hanover ; 
but  they  resolved  to  avoid  a  nomination  without  stipulat- 
ing conditions ;  and  they  had  already  provided,  in  the 
act  of  security,  that  it  should  be  high-treason  to  own  any 
person  as  king  or  queen  after  her  majesty*s  decease, 
until  he  or  she  should  take  the  coronation-oath,  and 
accept  the  terms  of  the  claim  of  right,  and  such  condfc 
tions  as  should  be  settled  in  this  or  any  ensuing 
parliament. 

§  XXXIIL  Andrew  Fletcher  of  Saltoun,  a  man  of 
undaunted  courage  and  inflexible  integrity,  who  profess- 
ed republican  principles,  and  seemed  designed  by  nature 
as  a  member  of  some  Grecian  commonwealth,  after 
having  observed  that  the  nation  would  be  enslaved, 
should  it  submit,  either  willingly,  or  by  commission,  to 
the  successor  of  England,  without  such  conditions  of 
government  as  should  secure  them  against  the  influence 
of  an  English  ministry,  offered  the  draft  of  an  act,  im- 
porting, that  after  the  decease  of  her  majesty,  without 
heirs  of  her  body,  no  person  being  successor  to  the  Eng- 
lish throne  should  succeed  to  the  crown  of  Scotland,  but 
under  the  following  limitations,  which,  together  with 
the  coronation-oath  and  claim  of  right,  they  shoukl 
swear  to  observe ;  namely,  that  all  offices  and  places/ 
civil  and  rfiilitary,  as  well  as  pensions,  should>  for  the 


future,  be  conferred  by  a  parliament  to  be  choson  at 
every  Michaelmas  head-court,  to  sit  on  the  1st  day  of 
November,  and  adjourn  themselves  from  time  to  tune* 
till  the  ensuing  Michaelmas ;  that  they  should  phoose 
their  own  president :  that  a  committee  of  six~and*thirty 
members,  chosen  out  of  the  whole  parliament,  without 
distinction  of  estates,  should,  during  the  interval*  of  paw 
liament,  he  invested,  under  the  king,  with  the  admin 
lustration  of  the  government,  act  as  his  council,  he  ac-< 
countable  to  parliament,  and  call  it  together  on  extraon 
dinary  occasions,  He  proposed  that  the  successor  should 
be  nominated  by  the  majority :  declaring,  lor  himself* 
that  he  would  rather  concur  in  nominating  the  moat 
rigid  Papist,  with  those  conditions^  than  the  truest  Fro< 
testant  without  them.  The.  motion  was  seconded  by 
many  members ;  and,  though  postponed  for  the  present,* 
in  favour  of  an  act  of  trade  under  the  consideration  of 
the  house,  it  was  afterward  resumed  with  great  warmth. 
In  vain  the  lord-treasurer  represented,  that  no  funds 
were  as  yet  provided  for  the  army,  and  moved  for  a 
reading  of  the  act  presented  for  that  purpose:  a  oertaiq 
member  observed,  that  this  was  a  very  unseasonable 
juncture  to  propose  a  supply,  when  the  house  had  so 
much  to  do  for  the  security  of  the  nation :  he  said  they 
had  very  little  encouragement  to  grant  supply  when 
they  found  themselves  frustrated  of  all  their  labour  and 
expense  for  these  several  months ;  and  when  the  whole 
kingdom  saw  that  supplies  served  for  no  other  use  but 
to  gratify  the  avarice  of  some  insatiable  ministers.  Mr# 
Fletcher  expatiated  upon  the  good  consequences  that 
would  arise  from  the  act  which  he  had  proposed.  The 
chancellor  answered,  that  such  an  act  was  laying  a 
scheme  for  a  commonwealth,  and  tending  to  innovate 
the  constitution  of  the  monarchy.  The  ministry  pro- 
posed a  state  of  a  vote,  whether  they  should  first  give  a 
reading  to  Fletcher's  act,  or  to  the  act  of  subsidy.  The 
country  party  moved  that  the  question  might  be,  ".Oven* 


476  HISTORY  OP  ENGLAND.  VWL 

tares  for  subsidies,  or  overtures  for  liberty.?  Fletcher 
'withdrew  his  act,  rather  than  people  should  pervert  the 
meaning  of  laudable  designs.  The  house  resounded 
with  the  cry  of  **  Liberty  or  Subsidy  "  .  Bitter  invectives 
were  uttered  against  the  ministry.  One  member  said, 
it  was  now  plain  the  nation  was  to  expect  no  other  return 
for  their  expense  and  toil,  than  that  of  being  loaded  with 
a  subsidy,  and  being  obliged  to  bend  their  necks  under 
the  yoke  of  slavery,  which  was  prepared  for  them  from 
that  throne:  another  observed,  that  as  their  liberties 
were  suppressed,  so  the  privileges  of  parliament  were 
like  to  be  torn  from  them  ;  but,  that  he  would  venture 
his  life  in  defence  of  his  birthright,  and  rather  die  a  free 
man  than  live  a  slave*  When  the  vote  was  demanded, 
and  declined  by  the  commissioner,  the  earl  of  Roxburgh 
declared,  that  if  there  was  no  other  way  of  obtaining  so 
natural  and  undeniable  a  privilege  of  parliament,  they 
would  demand  it  with  their  swords  in  their  hands.  The 
commissioner,  foreseeing  this  spirit  of  freedom  and  con- 
tradiction, ordered  the  foot-guard  to  be  in  readiness,  and 
placed  a  strong  guard  upon  the  eastern,  gate  of  the  city; 
Notwithstanding  these  precautions,  he  ran  the  risk  .  of 
being  torn  in  pieces ;  and,  in  this  apprehension,  ordered, 
the  chancellor  to  inform  the  house,  that  the  parliament 
should  proceed  upon  overtures  for  liberty  at. their  next 
sitting.  This  promise  allayed  the  ferment  which  had 
begun  to  rise.  Next  day  the  members  prepared  an 
overture,  implying,  that  the  elective  members  should  be 
chosen  for  every  seat  at  the  Michaelmas  head-courts: 
that  a  parliament  should  be  held  once  in  two  years  at 
least:  that  the  short  adjournments  de  die  in  diem  should 
be  made  by  the  parliaments  themselves,  as  in  England :. 
and  that  no  officer  in  the  army,  customs,  or  excise,  nor 
any  gratuitous  pensioner,  should  sit  as  an  elective  mem- 
bier.  The  commissioner  being  apprized  of  their  proceed- 
ings, called  for  such  acts  as  he  was  empowered  to  pass; 
and 'having  given  the  royal  assent  to  them,  prorogued 


im  ANNE/  47? 

the  parliament  to  tjie  12th  day.  of  October/  Such  was 
the  issue  of  this  remarkable  session  of  the  Scottish  par- 
liament, in  which  the  duke  of  Queensberry  was  abandon* 
ed  by  the  greatest  part  of  the  ministry ;  and  such  a  spirit 
of  ferocity  and  opposition  prevailed,  as  threatened  the 
whole  kingdom  with  civil  war  and  confusion.  .  The 
queen  conferred  titles  upon  thoscb  who  appeared  to  bave 
influence  in  the  nation,  and  attachment  to  her  govern* 
fttent,  and  revived  the  order  of  the  Thistle,  which  the 
late  king  had  dropped.  . 

$  XXXIV.  Ireland  was  filled  with  discontent  by  the 
behaviour  and  conduct  of  the  trustees  for  the .  forfeited 
estates.  Hie  earl  of  Rochester  had  contributed  to  foment 
the  troubles  of  the  kingdom,  by  encouraging  the  faction* 
which  had  been  imported  from  England.  The  duke  of 
Ormond  was  received  with  open  arms,  as  hear  to  the  yir- 
taes  of  his  ancestors,  who  had  been  the  bulwarks  of  the 
Protestant  interest  in  Ireland.  He  opened  the  parlia- 
ment on  the  a  1st  day  of  September,  with  a  speech,  to 
bod)  bouses,  in  which  he  told  them,  that  his  inclination, 
his  interest,  and  the  examples  of  his  progenitors,  were 

*  Though  the  queen  refused  to  pass  the  act  of  security,  the  royal  assent 
was  granted  to.  an  act  of  limitation  on  the  successor,  in  which  it  was 
declared,  that  no  king  or  queen  of  Scotland  should  have  power  to  make 
war  or  peace  without  consent  of  parliament.  Another  law  was  enacted, 
allowing  French  wines,  and  other  liquors,  to  be  imported  in  neutral  bot- 
toms. Without  this  expedient  U  was  alleged,  that  the  revenue  would 
have  been  insufficient  to  maintain  the  government  An  act  passed  in 
favour  of  the  company  trading  to  Africa  and  the  Indies;  another  for  a 
commission  concerning  the  public  accounts;  a  third  for  panishing  smn* 
details  speeches  and  writings.  The  commission  for  treating  of  a  union 
with  England  was  vacated,  with  a  prohibition  to  grant  any  other  commis- 
sion for  that  purpose  without  consent  of  parliament;  and  no  supply 
baring  been  provided  before  the  adjournment,  the  army  and  expense  of 
government  were  maintained  upon  credit 

b  The  marquis  of  AtboU  and  the  marquis  of  Douglas,  though  this  last 
was  a  minor,  were  created  dukes.  Lord  Tarbat  was  invested  with  the 
title  of  ear!  ef  Cromarty ;  the  visoonntt  Stair  and  Roaeberry  were  pro- 
moted to  the  same  dignity ;  lord  Boyle  was  created  earl  of  'Glasgow; 
James  Stuart  of  Bute,  earl  of  Bute ;  Charles  Hope  of  Hopetoun,  earl  of 
Hopetoun ;  John  Crawford  of  Kilblrnie,  viscount  Garnock ;  and  air  James 
Primrose  efCarrmgton,  viscount  Primrose. 

VOL.  I.  *£  I 


478  HISTORY. OF  ENGLAND.  1703. 

indispensable  obligations  upon  him,  to  improve  every 
opportunity  to  the  advantage  and  prosperity  of  his  native 
country.    The  commons  having  chosen  Allen  Brode- 
rick  to  be  their  speaker,  proceeded  to  draw  up  very 
affectionate  addresses  to  the  queen  and  the  lord-lieute- 
nant.    In  that  to  the  queen  they  complained  that  their 
enemies  had  misrepresented  them,  as  desirous  of  being 
independent  of  the  crowri  of  England :  they  therefore, 
to  vindicate  themselves  from  such  false  aspersions,  de- 
.  clared  and  acknowledged,  that  the  kingdom  of  Ireland 
was  annexed  and  united  to  the  imperial  crown  of  Eng- 
land.    In  order  to  express  their  hatred  of  the  trustees, 
they  resolved,  that  all  the  Protestant  freeholders  of  that 
kingdom  had  been  falsely  and  maliciously  misrepresent- 
ed, traduced,  and  abused,  in  a  book  entitled,  "The  Re- 
port of  the  Commissioners  appointed  to  inquire  into  the 
Irish  Forfeitures ;"  and  it  appearing  that  Francis.  Annes- 
ley,  member  of  the  house,  John  Trenchard,  Henry 
Langford,  and  James  Hamilton,  were  authors  of  that 
book,  they  farther  resolved,  that  these  persons  had  scan- 
dalously and  maliciously  misrepresented  and  traduced 
the  Protestant  freeholders  of  that,  kingdom,  and  endea- 
voured to  create  a  misunderstanding  and  jealousy  be- 
tween the  people  of  England  and  the  Protestants  of 
Ireland.     Annesley  was  expelled  the  house,  Hamilton 
was  dead,  and  Trenchard  had  returned  to  England. 
They  had  finished  the  inquiry  before  the  meeting  of  this 
parliament;  and  sold,  at  an  under  value,  the  best  of  the 
forfeited  estates  to  the  sword-blade  company  of  England. 
This,  in  a  petition  to  the  Irish  parliament,  prayed  that 
heads  of  a  bill  be  brought  in  for  enabling  them  to  take 
conveyance  of  lands  in  Ireland :  but  the  parliament  was 
very  little  disposed  to  confirm  the  bargains  of  the  trustees, 
and  the  petition  lay  neglected  on  the  table.     The  house 
expelled  John  Asgill,  who,  as  agent  to  the  sword-blade 
company,  had  offered  to  lend   money  to   the  public 
in  Ireland,  on  condition    that   the  parliament  would 


s 


1708,  AtfNE.  479 

pass  ah  afct  to  confirm  the  company's  purchase  fcf  the 
forfeited  estates.  His  constituents  disowned  his  pro- 
posal ;  and,  when  he  was  summoned  to  appear  before 
the  house,  and  answer  for  his  prevarication,  he  pleaded 
his  privilege,  as  member  of  the .  English  parliament. 
The  commons,  in  a  representation  of  the  state  and 
grievances  of  the  nation,  gave  her  majesty  to  understand, 
that  the  constitution  of  Ireland  had  been  of  late  greatly 
shaken  \  and  their  lives,  liberties,  and  estates,  called  in 
question,  and  tried  in  a  manner  unknown  to  their  an- 
cestors :  that  the  expense  to  which  they  had  been  un- 
necessarily exposed  by  the  late  trustees  for  the  forfeited 
estates,  in  defending  their  just. rights  and  titles,  had  ex- 
ceeded, in  value,  the  current  cash  of  the  kingdom :  that 
their  trade  was  decayed,  their  money  exhausted ;  and 
that  they  were  hindered  from  maintaining  their  own 
manufactures  ;  that  many  Protestant  families  had  been 
constrained  to  quit  the  kingdom,  in  order  to  earn  a  live- 
lihood in  foreign  countries :  that  the  want  of  frequent 
parliaments  in  Ireland  had  encouraged  evil-minded  men 
to  oppress  the  subjects :  that  many  civil  officers  had  ac- 
quired great  fortunes  in  that  impoverished  country,  by 
the  exercise  of  corruption  and  oppression :  that  others, 
in  considerable  employments,  resided  in  another  king- 
dom,>  neglecting  personal  attendance  on  their  duty, 
while  their  offices  were  ill  executed,  to  the  detriment  of 
the  public,  and  the  failure  of  justice.  They  declared, 
that  it  was  from  her  majesty's  gracious  interposition 
alone,  they  proposed  to  themselves  relief  from  those  their 
manifold  grievances  and  misfortunes.  The  commons 
afterward  voted  the  necessary  supplies,  and  granted 
1 50,000/.  to  make  good  the  deficiencies  of  the  necessary 
branches  of  the  establishment. 

'  §  XXXV.  They  appointed  a  committee  to  inspect  the 
public  accounts,  by  which  they  discovered,. that  above 
100,000/.  had  been  falsely  charged  as  a  debt  upon  the 
nation.     The  committee  was  thanked  by.  the  house  for 

2i2 


400  HISTORY  Q£  ENGLAND.  1709. 

having  saved  this  sum,,  and  ordered  to  examine  what 
persons .  were  concerned  in  such  a  misrepresentation, 
which  was  generally  imputed  to  those  wto>  acted  under 
the  duke  of  Ormond.  He  himself  was  a  nobleman  of 
honour  and  generosity,  addicted  to  pleasure,  and  fond  of 
popular  applause:  but  he  was  surrounded  by  people  of 
more  sordid  principles,  whp  had  ingratiated  themselves 
into  his  confidence  by  the  arts  of  adulation.  The  com? 
mons  voted  a  provision  for  the  half-pay  officers ;  and 
abolished  pensions  to  the  amount  of  17 ,000/.  a  year,  as 
unnecessary  branched  of  the  establishment.  They  pass- 
ed an  act  settling  the  succession  of  the  crown,  after  the 
pattern  set  them  by  England ;  but  the  most  important 
transaction  of  this  session  was  a  severe  bill  to  prevent 
the  growth  of  popery.  It  bore  a  strong  affinity  to  that 
which  had  passed  three  years  before  in  England ;  but 
contained  more  effectual  clauses.  Among  others,  it 
enacted,  that  all  estates  of  Papists  should  be  equally  di- 
vided among  the  children,  notwithstanding  any  settle- 
ment to  the  contrary,  unless  the  persons  to  whom  they 
might  be  settled  should  qualify  themselves  by  taking  the 
oaths,  and  communicating  with  the  church  of  England. 
The  bill  was  not  at  all  agreeable  to  the  ministry  in  Eng- 
land, who  expected  large  presents  from  the  Papists*  by 
whom  a  considerable  sum  had  been  actually  raised  for  this 
purpose.  But,  as  they  did  not  think  proper  to  reject  such 
a  bill  while  the  English  parliament  was  sitting,  they  added 
a  clause,  which  they  hoped  the  parliament  of  Ireland 
would  refuse ;  namely,  that  no  persons  in  that  kingdom 
should  be  capable  of  any  employment,  or  of  being  in  the 
magistracy  of  any  city,  who  did  not  qualify  themselves 
by  receiving  the  sacrament,  according  to  the  test  act 
passed  in  England.  Though  this  was  certainly  a  great 
hardship  on  the  dissenters,  the  parliament  of  Ireland 
sacrificed  this  consideration  to  their  common  security 
against  the  Roman  Catholics,  and  accepted  the  amend- 
ment without  hesitation.    This  affair  being  discussed, 


*m  ANNE.  481 

&e  commons  of  Ireland  passed  a  vote  against  a  book 
«tttitied, w  Memoirs  of  the  late  king  James  II."  as  a  sedi- 
tious libel.  They  ordered  it  to  be  burned  by  the  hands 
of  the  common  hangman :  and  the  bookseller  and  printer 
to  be  prosecuted;  When  this  motion  was  made,  a  mem- 
ber, informed  the  house,  that  in  the  county  of  Limerick, 
the  Irish  Papists  had  begun  to  form  themselves  into 
bodies,  to  plunder  the  Protestants  of  their  arms  arid 
money;  and  to  maintain  a  correspondence  with  the 
disaffected  in  England.  The  house  immediately  resold 
edv  that  the  Papists  of  the  kingdom  still  retained  hopes 
of  the  succession  of  the  person  known  by  the  name  of 
the  prince  of  Wales  in  the  lifetime  of  the  late  king 
James,  and  now  by  the  name  of  James  IIL  In  the 
midst  of  this  zeal  against  popery  and  the  pretender,  they 
were  suddenly  adjourned  by  command  of  the  lord-lieu- 
tenant*  and  broke  up  in  great  animosity  against  that 
nobleman  .* 

'  ^  XXXVI.  The  attention  of  the  English  ministry 
had  been  for  some  time  chiefly  engrossed  by  the  afiairs 
of  the  continent.  The  emperor  agreed  with  the  allies, 
that  his  son,  the  archduke  Charles,  should  assume  the 
title  of  king  of  Spain,  demand  the  infanta  of  Portugal 
in  marriage,  and  undertake  something  of  importance, 
with  the  assistance  of  the  maritime  powers.  Mr.  Me- 
thuen,  the  English  minister  at  Lisbon,  had  already  made 
some  progress  in  a  treaty  with  his  Portuguese  majesty ; 
and  the  court  of  Vienna  promised  to  send  such  an  army 
into  the  field,  as  would  in  a  little  time  drive  the  elector 
of  Bavaria  from  his  dominions.  But  they  were  so  dila- 
tory in  their  preparations,  that  the  French  king  broke 
all  their  measures,  by  sending  powerful  reinforcements 

c  They  had,  besides  tfae  bills  already  mentioned,  passed  an  act  for  an 
additional  excise  on  beer,  ale,  and  other  liquors :  another  encouraging 
the  importation  of  iron  and  stares;  a  third  for  preventing  popish  priests 
from  coming  inte  the  kingdom;  a  fourth  secmring  the  liberty  of  the  sub- 
ject, and  for  prevention  of  imprisonment  beyond  seas ;  and  a  fifth  for 
imtaratfatag  aS  Protestant  strangers. 


482  HISTORY  OF.  ENGLAND.  1708. 

to  the  elector,  in  whose  ability  v  and  attachment  Lewis 
reposed  great  confidence.     Mareschal  Villars,  who  com- 
manded an  army  of  thirty  thousand  men  at  Strasburgh, 
passed  the  Rhine,  and  reduced  fort  Kehl,  the  garrison, 
of  which  was  conducted  to  Philipsburgh.    The  emperor/ 
alarmed  at  this  event,  ordered  count  Schlick  to  enter 
Bavaria  on  the  side  of  Saltsburgh,  with  a  considerable 
body  of  forces;  and  sent  another  under  count  Stirtira, 
to  invade  the  same  electorate  by  the  way  of  Nejvmark, 
which  was  surrendered  to  him,  after  he  had  routed  a 
party  of  Bavarians :  the  city  of  Amberg  met  with  the 
same  fate.     Meanwhile  count  Schlick  defeated  a  body 
of  militia  that  defended  the  lines  of  Saltsburgh,  and.  made 
himself  master  of  Riedt,  and  several  other  places. ,   The, 
elector  assembling  his  forces  near  Breriau,  diffused  a  re- 
port that  he  intended  to  besiege  Passau,  to  cover  which 
place  Schlick  advanced  with  the  greatest  part  of  his  in- 
fantry, leaving  behind  his  cavalry  and  cannon.    The 
elector  having  by  this  feint  divided  the  imperialists,  pass- 
ed the  bridge  of  Scardingen  with  twelve  thousand  men; 
and,  after  an  obstinate  engagement,  compelled  the  impe- 
rialists to  abandon  the  field  of  battle :  then  he  marched 
against  the  Saxon  troops  which  guarded  the  artillery/ 
and  attacked  them  with  such  impetuosity,  that  they  were 
entirely  defeated.     In  a  few  days  after  these  actions,  he 
took  Newburgh  on  the  Inn  by  capitulation.     He  ob- 
tained another  advantage  over  an  advanced  post  of  the 
imperialists  near  Burgenfeldt,  commanded  by  the  young 
prince  of  Brandenburgh  Anspach,   who  was  mortally 
wounded  in  the  engagement.     He  advanced  to  Ratis- 
bon,  where  the  diet  of  the  empire  was  assembled,  and 
demanded  that  he  should  be  immediately  put  in  posses* 
sion  of  the  bridge  and  gate  of  the  city.     The  burghers 
immediately  took  to  their  arms,  and  planted  cannon  on 
the  ramparts:   but,  when  they  saw  a  battery  erected 
against  them,  and  the  elector  determined  to  bombard 
the  place,  they  thought  proper  to  capitulate,  and  comply 


1703.  ANHE.  483 

with  his  demands.  He  took  possession  of  the  town  on 
the  8th  day  of  April,  and  signed  an  instrument,  obliging 
himself  to  withdraw  his  troops,  as  soon  as  the  emperor 
should  ratify  the  diet's  resolution  for  the  neutrality  of 
Ratisbon.  Mareschal  Villars  having  received  orders  to 
join  the  elector  at  all  events,  and  being  reinforced  by  a 
body  of  troops  under  count  Tallard,  resolved  to  break 
through  the  lines  which  the  prince  of  Baden  had  made 
at  Stolhoffen.  This  general  had  been  luckily  joined  by 
eight  Dutch  battalions,  and  received  the  French  army, 
though  double  his  number,,  with  such  obstinate  resolu- 
tion, that  Villars  was  obliged  to  retreat  with  great  loss, 
and  directed  his  route  towards  Offingen.  Nevertheless, 
he  penetrated  through  the  Black- Forest,  and  effected  a 
junction  with  the  elector.  Count  Stirum  endeavoured 
to  join  prince  Louis  of  Baden:  but  being  attacked  near 
Schwdmmingen,  retired  under  the  cannon  of  Norlingen. 
§  XXXVII.  The  confederates  were  more  successful 
on  the  Lower  Rhine  and  in  the  Netherlands.  Theduk? 
of  Marlborough  crossed  the  sea  in  the  beginning  of 
April,  and  assembling  the  allied  army,  resolved  that  the 
campaign  should  be  begun  with  the  siege  of  Bonne,  which 
was  accordingly  invested  on  the  24th  day  of  April*  Threp 
different  attacks  were  carried  on  against  this  place ;  one 
by  the  hereditary  prince  of  Hesse-Cassel ;  another  by  the 
celebrated  Coehorn ;  and  a  third  by  lieutenant-general 
Fagel.  The  garrison  defended  themselves  vigorously 
till  the  14th  day  of  May,  when  the  fort  having*  beep 
taken  by  assault,  and  the  breaches  rendered  practicable, 
the  marquis  d'Alegre,  the  governor,  ordered  a  parley  to^bp 
beat :  hostages  were  immediately  exchanged ;  on  the  1 6th 
the  capitulation  was  signed  ;  and  in  three  days  the  gar- 
rison evacuated  the  place,  in  order  to  be  conducted  to 
Luxembourg.  During  the  siege  of  Bonne,  the  mareschals 
Boufflers  and  Villeroy  advanced  with  an  army  of  forty  thou- 
sand men  towards  Tongeren,  and  the  confederate  ajrmy, 
commanded  by  M.  d'Aqverqijerque,  was  obliged,  at  thpy 


484  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  19M. 

approach,  to  retreat  under  the  cannon  of  Maastricht. 
The  enemy  having  taken  possession  of  Tongeren,  made  a 
motion  against  the  confederate  army,  which  they  found 
already  drawn  up  in  order  of  battle,  and  so  advanta- 
geously posted,  that,  notwithstanding  their  great  supe- 
riority in  point  of  number,  they  would  not  hazard  an  at- 
tack, but  retired  to  the  ground  from  whence1  they,  had 
advanced.  Immediately  after  the  reduction  of  Bonne, 
the  duke,  of  Marlborough,  who  had  been  present  at  thfc 
siege,  returned  to  the  confederate  army  in  the  Nether- 
lands, now  amounting  to  one  hundred  and  thirty  squa- 
drons, and  fifty-nine  battalions.  On  the  25th  day  of 
May,  the  duke  having  passed  the  river  Jecker,  in  order 
to  give  battle  to  the  enemy,  they  marched  with  preci- 
pitation to  Boekwenr,  and  abandoned  Tongeren,  after 
"having  blown  up  the  walk  of  the  place  with  gunpowder. 
The  duke  continued  to  follow  them  to  Thys,  where  lie 
encamped,  while  they  retreated  to  Hannye,  retiring  as 
he  advanced.  Then  he  resolved  to  force  their  lines : 
this  service  was  effectually  performed  by  Coehorn,  at 
the  point  of  Callo,  and  by  baron  Spaar,  in  the  county  of 
Waes,  near  Stoken.  The  duke  had  formed  the  design 
of  reducing  Antwerp,  which  was  garrisoned  by  Spanish 
troops,  under  the  command  of  the  marquis  de  Bedmar. 
He  intended,  with  the  grand  army,  to  attack  the  enemy's 
Knes  on  the  side  of  Louvaine  and  Mechlin :  he  detached 
Coehorn  with  his  flying  camp  to  the  right  of  the  Scheldt, 
towards  Dutch  Flanders,  to  amuse  this  marquis  de  Bed- 
mar  on  that  side ;  and  he  ordered  the  baron  Opdam, 
with  twelve  thousand  men,  to  take  post  between. Eckeren 
and  Capelle,  near  Antwerp,  that  he  might  act  against 
that  part  of  the  lines  which  was  guarded  by  the  Spanish 
forces. 

§  XXXVIII.  The  French  generals,  in  order  to  frus- 
trate the  scheme  of  Marlborough,  resolved  to  cutoflTthe 
retreat  of  Opdam.  Boufflers,  with  a  detachment  of 
twenty  thousand  men  from  Villeroy's  army,  surprised 


1900.  ANNE.  485 

him  at  Eckeren,  where  the  Dutch  were  put  in  disorder ; 
and  Opdftm,  believing  all  was  lost,  fled  to  Breda.  Never- 
theless, the  troops  rallying  uftder  general  Schlangen* 
burg,  maintained  their  ground  with  the  most  obstinate 
valour,  till  night,  when  the  enemy  was. obliged  to  retire, 
and  left  the  communication  free  with  fort  Lilfo,  to  which 
place  the  confederates  marched  without  farther  molesta- 
tion, having  lost  about  fifteen  hundred  men  in  the  en- 
gagement. The  damage  sustained  by  the  French  was 
more  considerable.  They  were  frustrated  in  their  de- 
isign,  and  had  actually  abandoned  the  field  of  battle ;  yet 
Lewis  ordered  Te  Deum  to  be  sung  for  the  victory : 
nevertheless,  Boufflers  was  censured  for  his  conduct  on 
this  occasion,  and  in  a  little  time  totally  disgraced.  Op- 
dam  presented  a  justification  of  his  conduct  to  the  states-  * 
general :  but  by  this  oversight  he  forfeited  the  fruits  of 
k  long  service,  during  which  he  had  exhibited  repeated 
j>roofs  of  courage,  seal,  and  capacity.  The  States  ho- 
noured Schlangenburg  with  a  letter  of  thanks,  for  the 
valour  and  skill  he  had  manifested  in  this  engagement ; 
but  in  a  little  time  they  dismissed  him  from  his  employ- 
ment, on  account  of  his  having  given  umbrage  to  the 
duke  of  Marlborough,  by  censuring  his  grace  for  ex- 
posing  such  a  small  number  of  men  to  this  disaster. 
After  this  action,  Villeroy,  who  lay  encamped,  near  St 
Job,  declared  he  would  wait  for  the  duke  of  Marlborough, 
who  forthwith  advanced  to  Hoogstraat,  with  a  view  to 
givehim  battle :  but,  at  his  approach,  the  Trench  gene- 
ral, setting  fire  to  his  camp,  retired  within,  his  lines  with 
great  precipitation.  Then  the  duke  invested  Huy,  the 
garrison  of  which,  after  a  vigorous  defence,  surrendered 
themselves  prisoners  of  war,  oh  the  27th  day  of  August. 
At  a  council  of  war  held  in  the  camp  of  the  confederates, 
the  duke  proposed  to  attack  the  enemies'  lines  between 
the  Mehaigne  and  Leuwe,  and  was  seconded  by  the 
Danish,  Hanoverian,  and  Hessian  generals :  but  the 
Scheme  was  opposed  by  the  Dutch  officers,  and  the  de- 


488  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1709. 

puties  of  the  States,  who  alleged  that  the  success  was 
dubious,  and  the  consequences  of  forcing  the  lines  would 
be  inconsiderable:  they  therefore  recommended  the 
siege  of  Limburgh,  by  the  reduction  ot  which  they  would 
acquire  a  whole  province,  and  cover  their  own  country, 
as  well  as  Juliers  and  Gueldres,  from  the  designs  of  the 
enemy.  The  siege  of  Limburgh  was  accordingly  under- 
taken. The  trenches  were  opened  on  the  25th  day  of 
September,  and  in  two  days  the  place  was  surrendered ; 
the  garrison  remaining  prisoners  of  war.  By  this  con- 
quest the  allies  secured  the  country  of  Liege,  and  the 
electorate  of  Cologn,  from  the  incursions  of  the  enemy : 
before  the  end  of  the  year,  they  remained  masters  of  the 
whole  Spanish  Guelderland,  by  the  reduction  of  Gueldres, 
which  surrendered  on  the  L7th  day  of  September,  after 
having  been  long  blockaded,  bombarded,  and  reduced  to 
a  heap  of  ashes,  by  the  Prussian  general  Lottum.  Such 
was  the  campaign  in  the  Netherlands,  which,  in  all  pro* 
bability,  would  have  produced  events  of  greater  impor- 
tance,  had  not  the  duke  of  Marlborough  been  restricted 
by  the  deputies  of  the  states-general,  who  began  to  be 
influenced  by  the  intrigues  of  the  Louvestein  faction, 
ever  averse  to  a  single  dictator. 

§  XXXIX.  The  French  king  redoubled  his  efforts  in 
Germany.  The  duke  de  Vendome  was  ordered  to  march 
from  the  Milanese  to  Tyrol,  and  there  join  the  elector  of 
Bavaria,  who  had  already  made  himself  master  of  In- 
spruck.  But  the  boors  rising  in  arms,  drove  him  out 
of  the  country  before  he  could  be  joined  by  the  French 
general,  who  was  therefore  obliged  to  return  to  the  Mir 
lanese.  The  imperialists  in  Italy  were  so  ill  supplied  by 
the  court  of  Vienna,  that  they  could  not  pretend  to  act 
offensively.  The  French  invested  Ostiglia,  which,  how- 
ever, they  could .  not  reduce :  but  the  fortress  of  Bar- 
sillo,  in  the  dutchy  of  Reggio,  capitulating  after  a  long 
blockade,  they  took  possession  of  the  duke  of  Modena's 
country.     The  elector  of  Bavaria  rejoining  Villars,  re^ 


1703.  ANNE.  •«  4S7 

solved  to  attack  count  Stirum,  whom  prince  Louis  of 
Baden  had  detached  from  his  army.  With  this  view, 
they  passed  the  Danube  at  Donawert,  and  discharged  six 
guns,  as  a  signal  for  the  marquis  D'Usson,  whom  they 
had  left  in  the  camp  at  Lavingen,  to  fall  upon  the  rear 
of  the  imperialists,  while  they  should  charge  them  in 
front.  Stirum  no  sooner  perceived  the  signal,  than  he 
guessed  the  intention  of  the  enemy^and  instantly  resolved 
to  attack  D'Usson  before  the  elector  and  the  mareschal 
should  advance.  He  accordingly  charged  him  at  the 
head  of  some  select  squadrons,  with  such  impetuosity, 
that  the  French  cavalry  were  totally  defeated  ;  and  al) 
his  infantry  would  have  been  killed  and  taken,  had  not 
the  elector  and  Villars  come  up  in  time  to  turn  the  fate 
of  the  day.  The  action  continued  from  six  in  the  morn- 
ing till  four  in  the  afternoon,  when  Stirum  being  over- 
powered  by  numbers,  was  obliged,  to  retreat  to  Norlin-* 
gen,  with  the  loss  of  twelve  thousand  men,  and  all  hi$ 
baggage  and  artillery.  In  the  meantime,  the  duke  of 
Burgundy,  assisted  by  Tallard,.  undertook  the  siege  of 
Old  Brisac,  with  a  prodigious  train  of  artillery.  The  place 
was  very  strongly  fortified,  though  the  garrison  wasf 
small,  and  ill  provided  with  necessaries.  In  fourteen 
days  the  governor  surrendered  the  place,  and  was  con- 
demned to  lose  his  head,  for  having  made  such  a  slender 
defence.  The  duke  of  Burgundy  returned  in  triumph 
to  Versailles,  and  Tallard  was  ordered, to  invest  Landau. 
The  prince  of  Hesse-Cassel  being  detached  from  the 
Netherlands,  for  the  relief  of  the  place,  joined  the  count 
of  Nassau- Weilbpurg,  general  of  the  palatine  forces,  near 
Spires,  where  they  resolved  to  attack  the  French  in  their 
lines".  But  by  this  time  Mons.  Pracontal,  with  ten 
thousand  men,. had  joined  Tallard,  and  enabled  him  to 
strike  a  stroke  which  proved  decisive.  He  suddenly 
quitted  his  lines,  and  surprised  the  prince  at  Spirebach, . 
where  the  French  obtained  a  complete  victory,  after  a* 
very  obstinate  and  bloody  engagement,  in  which  the 


4B6  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  Ifte. 

prince  of  Hesse  distinguished  himself  by  uncommon 
marks  of  courage  and  presence  of  mind.  Three  horses 
were  successively  killed  under  him,  and  he  slew  a  French 
officer  with  his  own  hand.  After  incredible  efforts,  he 
was  fhin  to  retreat  with  the  loss  of  some  thousands. 
The  French  paid  dear  for  their  victory,  Pracontal  having 
been  slain  in  the  action.  Nevertheless,  they  resumed 
the  siege,  and  the  place  was  surrendered  by  capitulation* 
The  campaign  in  Germany  was  finished  with  the  reduc*- 
tbn  of  Augsburg  by  the  elector  of  Bavaria,  who  took  it 
in  the  month  of  December,  and  agreed  to  its  beftig  se* 
cured  by  a  French  garrison. 

§  XL.  The  emperor's  affairs  at  this  juncture  wore  a 
very  unpromising  aspect.  The  Hungarians  were  fleeced, 
and  barbarously  oppressed,  by  those  to  whom  he  intrusted 
the  government  of  their  country.  They  derived  courage 
from  despair.  They  seiifcd  this  opportunity,  when  the 
emperor's  forces  were  divided,  and  his  councils  distracted, 
to  exert  themselves  in  defence  of  their  liberties.  They 
ran  to  arms,  under  the  auspiees  of  prince  Ragotzki. 
They  demanded  that  their  grievances  should  be  redress- 
ed, and  their  privileges  restored.  Their  resentment  was 
kept  up  by  the  emissaries  of  France  and  Bavarian  who 
likewise  encouraged  them  to  persevere  in  their  revolt,  by 
repeated  promises  of  protection  and  assistance.  The 
emperdr's  prospect,  however,  was  soon  mended,-  by  two 
incidents  of  very  great  consequence  to  his  interest.  The 
duke  of  Savoy,  foreseeing  how  much  he  should  be  ex- 
posed to  the  mercy  of  the  French  king,  should  that  mo- 
narch become  master  of  the  Milanese,  engaged  in  a  secret 
negotiation  with  the  emperor,  which,  notwithstanding 
all  hrs  caution,  was  discovered  by  the  court  of  Versailles. 
Lewis  immediately  ordered  the  duke  of  Vendome  to  dis* 
arm  the  troops  of.  Savoy  that  were  in  his  army,  to  the 
number  of  two-and-twenty  thousand  men ;  to  insist  upon 
the  duke's  putting  him  in  possession  of  four  considerable 
fortresses ;  and  demand  that  .the  number  of  his  troops 


170&  ANNR.  489 

sbpnlcl  be  Reduced  to  the  establishment  stipulated  in  the 
treaty  of  i6g<5.  The  duke,  exasperated  at  these  insults, 
ordered  the  French  ambassador,  and  several  officers  of 
the  same  nation,  to  be  arrested.  Lewis  endeavoured 
tp.  intimidate  him  by  a  menacing  letter,,  in  which  he 
gave  him  to  understand,  that  since  neither  religion,  ho- 
nour, interest,,  nor  alliances,  had  been  able  to  influence 
his  conduct,  the  duke  de  Vendome  should  make  known 
the  intentions  of  the  French  monarch,  and  allow  him 
four-and-twenty  hours  to  deliberate  on  the  measures  he 
should  pursue.  This  letter  was  answered  by  a  manifesto: 
in  th$  meantime,  the  duke  concluded  a  treaty  with  the 
court  of  Vienna ;  acknowledged  the  archduke  Charles 
as  king  of  Spain  \  and  sent  envoys  to  England  and  Hol7 
land.  Queen  Anne,  knowing  his  importance,  as  well  as 
his  selfish  disposition,  assured  him  of  her  friendship  and 
assistance ;  and  both  she  and  the  States  sent  ambassa- 
dors to  Turin-  He  was  immediately  joined  hy  a  body 
of  imperial  horse  under  Visoouti,  and  afterward  hy  count 
Staremberg,  at  the  head  of  fifteen  thousand  men,  with 
whom  that  general  marched  from  the  Modenese,  in  the 
worst  season  of  the  year,  through  an  enemy's  country,  and 
roads  that  were  deemed  impassable*  In  vain  the  French 
forces  harassed  him  in  hia  march,  and  even  surrounded 
him  in  m^ny  different  places  on  the  route :  be  surmount- 
ed all  these  difficulties  with  incredible  courage  and  perse- 
verance, and  joined  the  doke  of  Savoy  at  Canelli,  so  as 
to  secure  the  country  of  Piedmont  The  other  incident 
which  proved  so  favourable  to  the  imperial  interest,  w«s 
a  treaty  by  which  the  king  of  Portugal  acceded  to  the 
grand  alliance.  His  ministry  perceived,  that,  should 
Spain  be  once  united  to  the  crown  of  France,  their  mas- 
ter would  sit  very  insecure  upon  his  throne.  They  were 
intimidated  by  the  united  fleets  of  the  maritime  powers, 
which  maintained  the  empire  of  the  sea;  and  they  were 
allured  by  the  splendour  of  a  match  between  their  in- 
fanta aqd  the  archduke  Charles,-  to  whqm  the  emperor 


490  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1703. 

and  kirigfof  the  Romans  promised  to  transfer  all  their 
pretensions  to  the  Spanish  crown.  By  this  treaty,  con- 
cluded at  Lisbon,  between  the  emperor,  the  queen  of 
Great  Britain,  the  king  of  Portugal,  and  the  states- 
general,  it  was  stipulated,  that  king  Charles  should  be 
conveyed  to  Portugal  by  a  powerful  fleet,  having  on 
board  twelve  thousand  soldiers,  with  a  great  supply  of 
money,  arms,  and  ammunition :  and  that  he  should  be 
joined  immediately  upon  his  landing  by  an  army  of  eight- 
and-twenty  thousand  Portuguese. 

§  XLI.  The  confederates  reaped  very  little  advantage 
from  the  naval  operations  of  this  summer.  Sir  George 
Rooke  cruised  in  the  channel,  in  order  to  alarm  the 
coast  of  Prance,  and  protect  the  trade  of  England.  On 
the  1st  day  of  July,  sir  Cloudesley  Shovel  sailed  from 
St.  Helen's,  with  the  combined  squadrons  of  England 
and  Holland :  he  directed  his  course  to  the  Mediter- 
ranean, and  being  reduced  to  great  difficulty  by  want  of 
water,  steered  to  Altea,  on  the  coast  of  Valentia,  where 
brigadier  Seymour  landed,  and  encamped  with  five-and- 
twenty '  hundred  marines.  The  admiral  published  a 
short  manifesto,  signifying  that  he  was  not  come  to  dis- 
turb, but  to  protect,  the  .good  subjects  of  Spain,  who 
would  swear  allegiance  to  their  lawful  monarch,  the 
archduke  Charles,  and  endeavour  to  shake  off  the  yoke 
of  France.  This  declaration  produced  little  or  no  effect ; 
and  the  fleet  being  watered,  sir  Cloudesley  sailed  to  Leg- 
horn. One  design  of  this  armament  was  to  assist  the 
Cevennois,  who  had,  in  the  course  of  the  preceding  year, 
been  persecuted  into  a  revolt  on  account  of  religion,  and 
implored  the  assistance  of  England  and  the  states- 
general.  The  admiral  detached  two  ships  into  the  gulf 
of  Narbonne,  with  some  refugees  and  French  pilots,  who 
'had  concerted  signals  with  the  Cevennois  :  but  the 
mareschal  de  Montrevil  having  received  intimation  of 
their  design,  took  such  measures  as  prevented  all  com- 
munication ;   and  the  English  captains  having  repeated 


1709.  ANNE.  491 

their  signals  to  no  purpose,  rejoined  sir  Cloudesley  at 
Leghorn.  This  admiral  having  renewed  the  peace  with 
the  piratical  states  of  Barbary,  returned  to  England, 
without  having  taken  one  effectual  step  for  annoying 
the  enemy,  or  attempted  any  thing  that  looked  tike  the 
result  of  a  concerted  scheme  for  that  purpose.  The 
nation  naturally  murmured  at  the  fruitless  expedition,  by 
which  it  had  incurred  such  a  considerable  expense* 
The  merchants  complained  that  they  were  ill  supplied 
with  convoys.  The  ships  of  war  were  victualled  with 
danpaged  provision ;  and  every  article  of  the  marine 
being  mismanaged,  the  blame  fell  upon  those  who  acted 
as  council  to  the  lord  high-admiral. 

§  XLII.  Nor  were  the  arms  of  England  by  sea  much 
more  successful  in  the  West  Indies.  Sir  George  Rooke, 
in  the  preceding  year,  had  detached  from  the  Mediter- 
ranean captain  Hovenden  Walker,  with  six  ships  of  the 
line  and  transports,  having  on  board  four  regiments  of 
soldiers  for  the  Leeward  islands.  Being  joined  at  Antigua 
by  some  troops  under  colonel  Codrington,  they  made  a 
descent  upon  the  island  of  Guadaloupe,  where  they  razed 
the  fort,  burned  the  town,  ravaged  the  country,  and  re- 
embarked  with  precipitation,  in  consequence  of  a  report 
that  the  French  had  landed  nine  hundred  men  on  the 
back  of  the  island.  They  retired  to  Nevis,  where  they 
must  have  perished  by  famine,  had  they  not  been  provi- 
dentially relieved  by  vice-admiral  Graydon,  in  his  way 
to  Jamaica.  This  officer  had  been  sent  out  with  three 
■ships  to  succeed  Ben  bow,  and  wds  convoyed  about  one 
hundred  and  fifty  leagues  by  two  other  ships  of  the  line. 
He  had  not  sailed  many  days,  when  he  fell  in  with  part 
of  the  French  squadron,  commanded  by  Du  Casse,  on 
their  return  from  the  West  Indies,  very  foul,  and  richly 
laden.  Captain  Cleland,  of  the  Montagu,  engaged  the 
sternmost ;  but  he  was  called  off  by  a  signal  from  the 
admiral,  who  proceeded  on  his  voyage,  without  taking 
.farther  notice  of  the  enemy.     When  he  arrived  at 


402  HISTORY  OF  BNGLAND.  fTOS. 

Jamaica,  he  quarrelled  with,  the  principal  planter*  of  tte 
island;  and  his  ships  beginning  to  be  crazy,  he  resolved 
to  return  to  England.  ^  He  accordingly  sailed  through 
the  gulf  of  Florida,  with  a  view  to  attack  the  French  at 
Placentia,  in  Newfoundland:  but  his  ships  were  dis* 
persed  in  a  fog  that  lasted  thirty  days:  and  afterward 
the  council  of  war,  which  he  convoked,  were  of  opinion 
that  be  could  not  attack  the  settlement  with  any  prospect 
of  success.  At  his  return  to  England,  the  house  of 
lords,  then  sitting,  set  oh  foot  an  inquiry  into  his  con- 
duct* They  presented  an  address  to  the  queen,  desiring 
she  would  remove  him  from  his  employments;  and  he 
was  accordingly  dismissed.  The  only  exploit  that  tend* 
ed  to  distress  the  enemy  was  performed  by  rear-admiral 
Dilkes,  who,  in  the  month  of  July,  sailed  to  the  coast 
of  France  with  a  small  squadron ;  and,  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood of  Granville,  took  or  destroyed  about  forty 
ships  and  their  convoy*  Yet  this  damage  was  incon- 
siderable, when  compared  to  that  which  the  English 
navy  sustained  from  the  dreadful  tempest  that  began  to 
Wow  on  tfae2/th'4*y  of  November,  accompanied  with 
such  flashes  of  lightning,  and  peals  of  thunder,  as  over* 
whelmed  the  whole  kingdom  with  consternation.  The 
houses  in  Londpn  shook  from  their  foundations,  and 
some  of  them  falling,  buried  the  inhabitants  in  their 
ruins.  The  water  overflowed  several  streets,  and  ros£ 
to  a  considerable  height  in  Westmiiister-hall.  London* 
bridge  wa6  almost  choked  up  with  the  wrecks  of  vessels 
that  perished  in  the  river.  The  loss  sustained  by  the 
capital  was  computed  at  a  million  sterling ;  and  the  city 
of  Bristol  suffered  to  a  prodigious  amount ;  but  the 
chief  national  damage  fell  upon  the  navy.  Thirteen 
ships  of  war  were  lost,  together  with  fifteen  hundred 
seamen,  including  rear-admiral  Be&urpont,  who  had  been 
employed  in  observing  the  Dunkirk  squadron*  and  wafr 
then  at  anchor  in  the  Downs,  where  his  ship  foundered* 
1  This  great  loss*  however,  WaS;  repaired  with  incredible 


1703.  ANNE.  49$ 

diligence,'  to  the  astonishment  of  all  Europe^  The  qtieen, 
immediately  issued  orders  for  building  a  greater  number 
of  ships  than  that  which  had  beieri  destroyed  ;  and  she 
exercised  her  'bounty  for  the  relief  of  the  shipwrecfced 
seamen,  and  the  widows  of  those  who  were  drowned, 
in  such  a  manner  as  endeared  her  to  all  her  subjects, 

§  XLIII.  The  emperor  having  declared  his  second 
son  Charles  king  of  Spain,  that  young  prince  set  out 
from  Vienna  to  Holland,  and  at  Dusseldorp  was  visited 
by  the  duke  of  Marlborough,  who,  in  the  name  of  his 
mistress,  congratulated  him  upon  his  accession  to  the 
crown  of  Spain.  Charles  received  him.with  the  most  ob- 
liging courtesy.  In  the  course  of  their  conversation* 
taking  off  his  sword,  he  presented  it  to  the  English 
general,  with  a  very  gracious  aspect,  saying,  in  the  French 
language,  "  I  am  not  ashamed  to  own  myself  a  poor 
prince.  I  possess  nothing  but  my  cloak  and  sword; 
the  latter  may  be  of  use  to  your  grace ;  and  I  hope  you 
will  not  think  it  the  worse  for  my  wearing  it  one  day." 
"  On  the  contrary  (replied  the  duke)  it  will  always  put 
me  in  mind  of  your  majesty's  just  right  and  title,  and  of 
the  obligations  I  lie  under  to  hazard  my  life  in  making 
you  the  greatest  prince  in  Christendom."  This  noble- 
man returned  to  England  in  October ;  and  king  Charles 
embarking  for  the  same  kingdom,  under  convoy  of  an 
English  and  Dutch  squadron,  arrived  at  Spithead  on  the 
26th  day  of  September.  There  he  was  received  by  the 
dukes  of  Somerset  and  Marlborough,  who  conducted 
him  to  Windsor;  and,  on  the  road,  he  was  met  by  prince 
George  of  Denmark.  The  queen's  deportment  towards 
him  was  equally  noble  and  obliging ;  and  he  expressed 
the  most  profound  respect  and  veneration  for  this  illus- 
trious princess.  He  spoke  but  little ;  yet  what  he  said 
was  judicious ;  and  he  behaved  with  such  politeness  and 
affability,  as  conciliated  the  affection  of  the  English 
nobility.  After  having  been  magnificently  entertained 
for  three  days,  he  returned  to  Portsmouth,  from  whence, 

vol.  1.  *  2  K 


ft*- 

494  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.  1703. 

on  the  4th  of  January,  he  sailed  for  Portugal;  with  a 
great  fleet,  commanded  by  sir  George  Rooke,  having 
on  board  a  body  of  land-forces,  under  the  duke  of 
Schomberg.  When  the  admiral  had  almost  reached 
Cape  Finisterre,  he  was  driven  back  by  a  storm  to  Spit- 
head,  where  he  was  obliged  to  remain  till  the  middle  of 
February.  Then,  being  favoured  with  a  fair  wind,  he 
happily  performed  the  voyage  to  Lisbon,  where  king 
Charles  was  received  with  great  splendour,  though  the 
court  of  Portugal  was  overspread  with  sorrow,  excited  by 
the  death  of  the  infanta,  whom  the  king  of  Spain  in- 
tended to  espouse.  In  Poland,  all  hope  of  peace  seem- 
ed to  vanish.  The  cardinal  primate,  by  the  instigation 
of  the  Swedish  king,  whose  army  lay  encamped  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  Dantzick,  assembled  a  diet  at  War- 
saw, which  solemnly  deposed  Augustus,  and  declared 
the  throne  vacant.  Their  intention  was  to  elect  young 
Sobieski,  son  of  their  late  monarch,  who  resided  at 
■  r  Breslau,  in  Silesia :  but  their  scheme  was  anticipated  by 
\)  Augustus,  who  retired  hastily  into  his  Saxon  dominions, 
and  seizing  Sobieski,  with  his  brother,  secured  them  as 
prisoners  at  Dresden. 


r 


END   OF    VOL.    I. 


Printed  by  J.  F.  Dove,  St.  John's  Square. 


3 


THE  NEW  YORK  PUBLIC  LIBRARY 
REFERENCE  DEPARTMENT 


book  is  under  no  circumstances  to    be 
taken  from  the  Building 


^V**is    ">  "*> 


r*r 


i 


•»j»*jt- 


B'DJUL  121*15 


~/ 


%       3