CENTRE 
for 
REFORMATION 
and 
RENAISSANCE 
STUDIES 

VICTORIA 
UNIVERSITY 

T O R O N T O 

/- 

Il 



IORTI.\IT OF STO\V 
[ " il O 1] the []]I&VlI]llS [][çzi]lc fO 11 S37] 



'URVE , " L 

N 

Y OHN ;TO, 

'] 

"' 1" 



A 

SURVEY OF LONDON 

BY JOHN STOW 

REPRINTED FROM THE TEXT OF I6O 3 

WITH INTRODUCTION AND NOTES 
BY 
CHARLES LETHBRIDGE KINGSFORD, M.A. 
T. JOHNS COLLEGIg 
EDITOR OF  CHRONICLES OF LONDON  

VOLUME I 

OXFORD 
AT THE CLARENDON PRESS 
I9o8 



A 
7 
190 
v.I 

IIENRY FROWDE, M.A. 
PUBLISHER TO THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD 
LONDON» EDINBURGH 
NEW YORK AND TORO.NTO 



PREFACE 

Two hundred years ago Thomas Hearne recom- 
mended that Stow's ,..çurvey should be reprinted as 
a venerable original. No words could express better 
the intention of the present edition. The not in- 
frequent misprints and some obvious errors have 
been corrected, and it bas been necessary at times to 
vary the punctuation. But otherwise the text now 
given follows faithfully the edition of 6o3, save that 
the list of Mayors and Sheriffs has been revised, since 
the original was in its earlier part so tangled with 
error that more close reproduction could only bave 
been mischievous. The edition of 6o3 was printed 
for the most part in black letter. In the present 
edition the Roman type represents the black letter 
of the original; the I talic type is used for those 
passages or phrases which, in 6o3, were printed in 
Roman type. Occasionally it has been necessary in 
the interest of uniformity to vary the type. But the 
only changes of importance are the printing in Roman 
type on i.  7 of the paragraph beginning : ' Hauing 
thus in generality'; and the printing in I talics of the 
quotations on ii. 96 and o5. The pages of the I6O3 
edition are marked by a ] in the text, and by the 
number of the page (in I talics) in the margin. 
The text of  6o3 is followed by a collation with the 
first edition of x 598, showing all the variations between 
the two versions. 
Of the making of Notes to such a book as the 
Survey there need be no end. Critics may be dis- 
posed to ask once more: 'Why have ye not noted 
this, or that ?' But some restriction was necessary. 



iv Preface 
The chief aires of the Notes in this edition have 
therefore been: to correct any errors of statement 
or faet which might be found; to trace as far as 
possible the sources of Stov's information ; to supple- 
ment the text vith fresh matter from Stow's own 
collections ;. to illustrate it, vithin a reasonable com- 
pass, by quotations from contemporary vriters. There 
bas been no intention to complete Stow's history. 
Still less have I endeavoured to carry that history 
beyond his own time. I have, however, added notes 
on places and place-names, especially in those cases 
where Stow had himself given some history, suggested 
a derivation, or cited obsolete forms. 
The preparation of the text and its passage through 
the press have been supervised by blr. C. E. Doble. 
How much care and pains his labour has entailed, 
only one who has had some share in it tan realize. 
For myself I have further to thank Mr. Doble both 
for suggesting to me the undertaking of this edition 
and for his constant adviee and assistance in its per- 
formance. Mr. Doble has also supplied the Glossary. 
The map of London ch'ca 16oo has been prepared by 
1Vit. Emery Walker; it is based on a comparison of 
Stow's text with the maps of Hoefnagel in Braun and 
Hogenberg's atlas (circa 156o), of Faithorne (i658), 
and of Morden and Lea (682). The famous map of 
Ralph Agas was probably based on Hoefnagel's map. 
I have to thank Dr. R. R. Sharpe, the Records 
Clerk at the Guildhall, Mr. W. H. Stevenson of 
St. John's College, Oxford, and Mr. J. A. Herbert 
of the British Museum for their assistance in various 
points of difficulty. 
C. L. K. 

.jawv,9o8. 



CONTENTS 

VOLUME I 
INTRODUCTION :-- 
§ I. Lire of Stow 
§ 2. The Survey of London 

APPENDIX TO INTRODUCTION :-- 
I. Notes on the Stow Family . 
II. Documents illustrating Stow's Life. 
x. How Stow began to write History and quarrelled 
with Richard Grafton 
2. Of Stow's quarrel with his brother Thomas, and 
how his mother altered her wiil 
3- Of Willyam Ditcher alias Tefforde 

4. A dispute over a Bill 
5. The Aleconners' Complaint 
6. A Petition for a Pension 
7- Royal Benevolence 
III. Letters to Stow . 
IV. Select Dedications and Epistles 
V. Bibliography 

VI. Some Account of Stow's Collections and MSS. 
CORRIGENDA 
TITLE-PAGE OF I60 3 
TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS 

PAGE 
vii 
xxix 

xliv 

xlviii 

liii 
lx 
lxii 
lxiii 
lxvi 
lxvii 
lxviii 
lxxiv 
• lxxxii 
lxxxvi 
xciv 

xcv 
xcix 

TEXT OF 160 3 I 



vi ConleMs 

VOLUME II 
PAGE 
TEXT O I603 (continue) i 
THE VARIATIONS OF THE FIRST EDITION OF THE SURVEY IN I598 
FROM THE TEXT OF I6O3 • 230 
NOTES '2-69 
SUPPLEMENT TO NOTES . 389 
GLOSSAR' 398 
INDEXES : 
I. Of Persons 419 
II. Of Places . 452 
III. Of Subjects 46î 

ILLUSTRATIONS 

Portrait of Stow, from the Gcnll«man's 171agazine for 1837 
Fronlispiece to VoL 1 

STOW'S To»,B IN S. Ar,'DREW UNDERSHAFT. photographed by per- 
mission from the Original . Fron/ispiece /o Vol. II 

Autograph of Stow, from Laud MS. Misc. 557 (in the Bodleian 
Library) on fronl coz'er 

FROM TANNER lIS. 464 (i),"f. i55 , II THE ]3ODLEIAN LIBRARY. 
*** This represents the first page of a revised draft for the Chapter on 
' Auncient and Present Riuers'. It differs a little from the printed text of 
I598. See ii. 27o" . . tofollowp, xciv in Vol. I 

IIAP OF LONDON, showing the Wards and Liberties as described by 
Stow, circa 16oo. By E?,IERY WALKER. 
Based on a comparison of Stow's text with the maps of Hoefnagel in 
Braun and Hogenberg's atlas (circa x56o), of Faithorne (I658), and of 
Morden and Lea (x682). The information so obtained has been laid down 
on the first edition of the 25inch Ordnance Map of the Survey of 1873. 
The plan of the Tower is taken from a drawing ruade in 1597, and 
engraved in Vetus/a llonumenta. The famous map of Ralph Agas was 
probably based on Hoefnagel's map fo fold out a/end of VoL II 



INTRODUCTION 

§ . LrvF. OF STOW 
JOHN STOW, or STOWE (he spelt his naine indifferently 
in either way), the first painful searcher into the reverend 
antiquities of London, was himself most fittingly a citizen of 
long descent. His grandfather, Thomas Stow, citizen and 
Tallow-Chandler, had died about the end of Match, 15oE 7, 
nearly two years after the birth of his famous grandson, and 
left his body 'tobe buried in the little green churchyard of 
St. Michael, Cornhill, nigh the wall as may be by my father 
and mother '. Old Thomas Stow was a man of some substance, 
and could leave his son and namesake twenty pounds in stuff 
of household and 6 3 s. 4d. in plate, x Thomas Stow, the 
younger, followed his father's trade; he inherited the great 
melting-pan with all the instruments belonging thereto, and 
supplied St. Michael's Church with lamp-oil and candles ; 2 his 
widow at ber death left money to the company of Tallow- 
Chandlers to follow her corpse. By his wife, Elizabeth, 3 he 
had seven children, of whom the eldest was the antiquary; 
the others were three sons, Thomas, William, and John the 
younger, and three daughters, Joan, Margaret, and _/klice. 4 
John the elder was born in the summer of 5oE5; he was 
seventy-eight when he ruade his Mil, on 3 ° _/kugust, 6o3, and 
is said to bave been in his eightieth year at his death.  
John's godparents were Edmund Trindle, Robert Smith, 
and Margaret Dickson, who a11, as he dutifully records, lay 
buried at St. Michael, Cornhill5 The second Thomas Stow, 
who died in 559, 7 dwelt at one rime in Throgmorton Street, 
 Strype, Surve)', i, p. i, and ii. I46, an accurate copy of the will from 
Tunstal, ff. 89-9o ', proved April 4, I527 • 
 Accounts ofthe Churchwardens, ed. W. H. Overall, pp. 62, 67, 6. 
s Not Margaret, as stated by Strype (Survey, i. e), who copied the 
will incorrectly. See p. xliv below. 
 See Notes on Stow family on pp. xliv-xlviii. 
 See p. xxvii. « See i. I97, ii. 306. 7 See p. xlvi below. 



near the modern Drapers' Hall, where John remembered how 
his father's garden had been encroached on for the making of 
Thomas Cromxvell's pleasure-grounds, and could recollect to 
have seen more than two hundred persons served well every 
day at Lord Cromwell's gare vith bread, meat, and drink. 1 
Of John Stow's other reminiscences of his youth, the most 
personal is how he had fetched from the farm in Goodman's 
Fields many a halfpennyworth of milk hot from the kine.  
Of his education he tells us nothing ; it must have been toler- 
able for his time and station ; but his description of how in 
his youth he had yearly seen on the eve of St. Bartholomew 
the scholars of divers grammar-schools repair unto the church- 
yard of St. Bartholomew hardly suggests that he took a part 
in their exercises.  
John Stow left his ancestral calling, and after serving his 
apprenticeship to one John Bulley, was admitted to the free- 
dom of the Merchant Taylors Company on .5 Nov., x.547- 
Though he was for nearly thirty years a working tailor, he 
remained all his rime a member of the subordinate Bachelors 
or Yeoman Company, and xvas never admitted to the Livery. 
Consequently he never held any office in the Company, except 
that he was one of the Whifflers, or escort of ]3achelors, at 
Harper's and Roxve's pageants xvhen they served as mayor in 
.56 and .568. 4 
Stow established himself in his business ata house by the 
well within Aldgate, between Leadenhall and Fenchurch 
Street, where in 1.549, he was witness of an execution ' upon 
the pavement of my door'3 Not much later he must have 
married,  since some twemy years afterwards he speaks of 
himself as having three marriageable daughters in service5 
He began soon to bear his part in civic lire, and mentions 
that in x.5.5 he served on a jury against a sessions of gaol 
delivery, s In his trade he must have prospered fairly, and 

1 i. 89 and 79. Thomas Cromwell's building in Throgmorton Street 
was done in x53-. John Stow was only six years old. But see i. 
292, and ii. 337 for another memory of the saine rime. 
 i. 6. s i. 74. 
* Clode, tïarly I-Iislory oflhe 3Ierchatl Taylors Com#any, il. 299, 267. 
* i. I44 belosv.  On Stow's wife or wives, see p. xlviii. 
 See p. lxii below.  i. 3o below. 



Lire of s/oc, 

ix 

took his brother Thomas to be his apprentice. His patrimony 
can have been but small, yet he grew rich enough to spend 
money freely on the collection of books. Fifteen years would 
hOt have been too many for the self-education of a busy if 
observant man, but from about 56o onwards he round his 
chier interest in learning and in the pursuit of our most famous 
antiquities. His original interest was, he tells us, for divinity, 
sorency (astrology), and poetry, and he never esteemed history, 
were it offered never so fi'eely. 1 So his first publication was 
an edition in I56 of The workes of Geffrcy Chaucer, newly 
printed, witk divers addicions wltichc were never in printe 
belote. Stow never lost his interest in early Eglish poetry, 
but his attention was soon diverted to other studies. In the 
course of his collecting he became possessed of a manuscript 
of a treatise, The Tree of the Cnoton,vea[t]t, written by 
Edmund Dudley. Of this he ruade a copy in his own hand, 
and presented it to the author's grandson Robert, afterwards 
Earl of Leicester. Dudley suggested that Stov should under- 
takesome historical work on his own account. - The suggestion 
thus given chimed in with advice from other friendly quarters. 
In 563 there appeared Richard Grafton's .4bridgement of 
tke Chronicles of England, followed next year by another 
edition, ' which being little better was as much or more of ail 
men misliked.' 'On this,' says Stow, 'many citizens and 
others knowing that I had been a searcher after antiquities 
moved me for the commodity of my country somewhat to 
travail in setting forth some other abridgement, or summary, 
and also to write against and reprove Richard Grafton. To 
the first at length I granted, but to the other utterly refused. 
About the saine rime  it happened that Thomas Marshe, 
printer, required me to correct the old common abridgement, 

 See p. xlix belov. In 1558 he had copied out a collection of Lydgate's 
poems, nov MddiNonal IS. 97 9 in the British Museum. 
 Cf. dedication to 16o4 edition of Summay. Stow varies in his dates 
as to when he began to write on history; in the Sutttmary for I573 he 
says,  It is now eight years since, &c.' ; in that for 1587, 3 years ; in that 
for 1598 , 36 years ; and in that for x6o4, 45 years. Sec p. lxxxi. 
 The subsequent reference to William Baldwin shovs that Marshe's 
proposal must have been ruade in the sunamer of 1563, after the appearance 
of the first edition of Grafton's ,xtbridgemenl, but before the second edition 
of 1564. 



x l»trodctio» 

which was at the first collected of Languet and Cooper's 
Epitome, 1 but then much corrupted with off reprinting, and 
therefore of Richard Grafton so contemned. 2 To this 
request I granted, on condition that some one, which were 
better learned, might be joined with me, for that it was a 
study wherein I had never travailed.' 
The required helper was found in William Baldwyn, 3 parson 
of St. Michael at Paul's Gare. But Baldwyn died before he 
had set hand to the work, and Stow at Marshe's request ,,vent 
on alone until a successor could be obtained. ' After I had 
once begun I could hot rest till the saine was fully ended. 
Then I, of mine own mind, went to Grafton's house, and 
shewed him my book, requiring him not to be offended with 
my doing, for I meant hot to give any such occasion.' Grafton 
professed gratitude for a long catalogue of his own errors, and 
they parted in good friendship. But when Stow's Summarie 
of nglyshe Çhronicles appeared, with the licence of the 
Stationers and authority of the _Archbishop, 4 Grafton began 
to chafe and think how to put his rival out of credit. Leaving 
his own .43ridgement, he drew out of Stow's Summary ' a book 
in sexto decimo, which he entitled, .4 _[mtucll of Ye Çhronicles 

 A Chronick oflhe World, begun by Thomas Languet (d. I545) , was 
completed by Thomas Cooper, afterwards bishop of Winchester, and 
published in 1549. It was often, as Stow says, reprinted, e.g. in 1559 by 
T. Marshe under the editorship of Robert Crowley (see il. 339 below). 
Similar ,vas A brez,iat Cronicle conlaynyne ai1 l/ce kinffes, 6'c., first 
published by John Mitchell or Mychell, of Canterbury, in I55I , of which 
a later edition, published at London by Tottell in 156I, was long regarded 
as the first edition of Stow's Sutmnary. 
 In the Preface to his Abridxement Grafton writes: 'Unto which 
travayle I was the rather provoked for that I saw used and occupied in 
every common person's hands a certayne booke bearyng lyke title, 
wherein was lytle truth and lesse good order.' 
 No doubt William Baldwin, the chier contributor to the l]lirror for 
lIagistrates, and author of teware lhe Cal (see ii. 275 below). His cure 
and the date of his death were otherwise unrecorded. The identification 
is helped by a note in Stow's ltlemoranda (cf. Three FifleenIt Cenlury 
Chronicles, p. 19_6), where he relates that when the Romish bishops were 
taken from the Tower for fear of the plague in Sept. 1563, certain 'prechers 
prechyd, as it was thought of many wysse men, verie sedyssyowsly, as 
Baldwyn at Powll's Cross, wyshyng a galows set up in Smythefyld, and 
ye old byshops and other papestis tobe hangyd thereon. Hymselfe dyed 
of ye plague the next weke aftar.' William Baldwin's writings show him 
to bave been a violent Protestant. Thomas Marshe was printer of 
Baldwin's works from I559 onwards. 
* See pp. Il and lxxxii below. 



Lf of Sto 

xi 

of England from y ° creacion of y ° World tyll anno- I6. '. In 
an address to the Stationers Grafton begged that they 'will 
take such order that there be no briefe abridgementes or 
chronicles hereafter imprinted'. To his readers he expressed 
a hope that'none will show themselves ungentle nor so un- 
friendly as to abuse me or this my little labour and goodwill, 
as of late I was abused by one who counterfeited my volume, 
and hath ruade my travail to pass under his naine'. Stow, 
nothing daunted, made ard dedicated to the Lord Mayor * in 
the beginning of 566 an abridgement of his Summary. At 
this his opponent marvellously stormed, and moved the Com- 
pany of Stationers to threaten Marshe the printer. The 
Stationers asked Stow to attend at theîr Hall and meet 
Grafton. But though he oft came thither, Grafton always 
made excuses, until finally the Master and Wardens told Stow 
that they were sorry they had so troubled him at ail. 
Such is Stow's own account of the inception of his historical 
work.  He and his rival continued to belabour one another 
merrily. Grafton sneered at the 'memories of superstitious 
foundations, fables, and lies foolishly stoxved together'. Stow 
was as good in the dedication of his edition of 567 to the 
Mayor, 'that through the thundering noise of empty tonnes 
and unfruitful grafts of Momus' offspring, it be hot over- 
thrown'. 3 Grafton tried to evade the assault by producing 
a larger work in J568, a Chroniclc at large and mere Iistorye 
of the Affayres of Eufflande. It was but a monstrous com- 
pilation, and Stow accused him roundly of using others' work 
without acknowledgement, and of counterfeiting Stow's own 
list of authorities without having consulted them. Of his 
edition of his Sltltmat 7 in I57o Stow writes thus : ' This my 
latest Summary was by me begun after Whitsuntide, t569, 
and finished in print by Michaelmas next following, but hOt 
commonly published till Christmas, and therefore entitled in 
anno 57 o, being first viewed by wise and learned worshipful 
personages, then dedicate and given to the right honourable 
my lord of Leicester, so to the whole common weal. I have 

 So he states on p. Iii below. But the copy in the British Museum, 
which appears to be perfect, has no dedication. 
* See pp. xlviii to liii below, s See p. lxxvii below. 



xii ]lt['OdllC[iO¢l 

not heard the saine to be misliked of any, but for that I wrote 
against the printers of ]3ede's Chronicle at Louvain (whereof 
I make none account), till now one whole year after by the 
foresaid Richard Graffon, a man that of all others hither- 
towards hath deserved least commendation for his travail in 
many things--as his own conscience (if he had any) can well 
testify. But to speak of that his Abridgement he hath but 
picked feathers from other birds next in his reach.' 1 Editions 
of Grafton's Abridgemeut carrying on the warfare had ap- 
peared in 1.57 ° and 1572. Stow had the last word in his 
Summary of 573, for his opponent was dead, though neither 
then nor afterwards forgotten. 
Some of Stow's criticisms of Grafton appear trifling enough. 
We should find no great cause for censure in the omission of 
all mention of Kings Didantius, Detonus, and Gurguinus,  
nor I suppose would Stow himself have done thirty years later, 
when study had ripened his knowledge and judgement. On 
one point, moreover, he did Grafton positive injustice, when 
he cast doubts on his rival's account of the Chronicle of John 
Hardyng. 3 Grafton had exposed himself to criticism by 
printing in 1543 two editions of Hardyng's Chronicle, which 
differed considerably the one from the other. Stow had seen 
another version which, as he said, 'doth almost altogether 
differ from that which under his name was imprinted by 
Grafton': thus hinting pretty plainly that Grafton had been 
guilty of deliberate falsification. The truth was that Hardyng 
himself had repeatedly rewritten his work to please the taste 
of different patrons. 4 Still the honours of the quarrel rest 
with Stow, whose merits as a chronicler were superior to those 
of Grafton. _At the saine rime his own account reveals him 
as a self-taught man, who was perhaps too jealous of a 
reputation that wanted to be established. The persistence of 
his grievance may perhaps be explained by the fact that the 

 ttarley «]IS. 367, f. I. See p. xlviii below. 
 See p. 1 below. 
-" Epistle to the Reader in Summary for 1573. 
 Hearne relates that a fine copy, which had belonged to Stow, had 
passed through Sir Simonds D'Ewes to the Harleian Library (Collections, 
iii. I). This, which is now tlarley «[S. 661, is one of the mo-t valuable 
of Hardyng'- later versions. 



[_..jc oje Stow xiii 
controversy had helped to aggravate other troubles, which 
during this rime embittered Stoxv's life. 
Stow's literary pursuits may bave put him out of sympathy 
with his commercial kinsfolk. Whatever the reason, his 
associations with his family had been long unhappy. It is 
possible that there may have been some religious difference, 
for John was inclined to favour old beliefs, whilst his mother 
appears to have been Protestant. Strype  says that John 
Stow in 1,544 was in great danger by reason of a false accusa- 
tion brought against him by a priest; 3 the nature of the 
charge is hot known, but it was possibly on a marrer of 
religion. At ail events there was an old family discord, for 
Thomas Stow must have had some sort of excuse for alleging 
that during twenty years John had never asked his mother's 
blessing. 4 Whatever the reason, old Mistress Stow, soon after 
her husband's death in :5.59, went to lire with her son 
Thomas, who had quarrelled with John over money matters 
and by an unwise marriage further strained their relations. 
Elizabeth Stow was a timid and anxious peacemaker between 
her children, fearful of giving offence, and governed by who- 
ever was at hal,d. One day in the summer of 1,568 she came 
on a visit to John, with whom over 'the best ale and bread 
and a cold leg of mutton ', she talked too freely on family 
matters. When the poor soul got home, Thomas and his 
wife would never let her test till she had told them all. When 
it came out that John lamented that Thomas was matched 
with an harlot, they forced her to change her will and leave 
her eldest son out of it altogether. Friends of the family 
intervened, and Thomas, pretending to yield, put John back, 
but only for rive pounds, where all the other children got ten. 
'Thus,' says John with a quaint humour, 'was I condemned 
and paid rive pounds for naming Thomas his wife an harlot, 

 As seems to be shown by the drift of his comments, cautious enough, 
in his Memoranda, cf. p. x above. He had many friends of Catholic 
indinations. But he also seems to have been on good terms with Foxe 
the Martyrologist. 
 ._çurvey, i, p. iii. 
 Perhaps the saine as the man referred to by Wriothesly, Cttron[cIe 
ii. 
 See p. Iv below. 



xiv Ittroduch'on 
privily only to one body, who knew the saine as well as I; 
but if he could so punish ail men that will more openly say 
so much he vould soon be richer than any lord Mayor of 
London.' 1 Thomas himself had often said the like and worse 
in public, and hot long after turned his wife out of doors. 
Not ail the neighbours could get him to relent, and when in 
the evening the poor woman at last stole in, at ten of the clock 
at night, Thomas, ' being bare-legged, searched and found her, 
and fell again a beating of her, so that my mother, being sick 
on a pallet, was fain to creep up, and felt all about the 
chamber for Thomas his hosen and shoes, and crept down 
the stairs with them as well as she could, and prayed him to 
put them on lest he should catch cold. And so my mother 
stood in her smock more than an hour, entreating him for the 
Lord's sake tobe more quiet.' The poor mother fared like 
most interveners in matrimonial broils; for after a while 
Thomas and his wife went off comfortably to bed, lzut the 
old woman caught such a cold that she never rose agaln. 
When the parson z was called in he, 'though but a stranger 
new corne from the country,' exhorted Mistress Stow to 
change her unjust will, but was put off by Thomas. Next 
Master Rolfe, a priest and son-in-law, persuaded with her 
ofttimes, but was told to hold his peace, 'for her son's wife 
was always in one corner or another listening, and she would 
bave a life ten rimes worse than death if Thomas or his wife 
should know.' Then John in despair sent his own wife with 
a pot of cream and strawberries as a peace offering, but only 
got abuse in return. At last, however, with some trouble, 
the affair was patched up over a pint of aie. The will re- 
mained unaltered, so when John got his chance he urged his 
mother to restore him to his share. To have rive pounds 
a However, in October, 157o , the aster and Wardens of the erchant 
Taylors Company inteened to pacify a controversy between Thomas 
Stow and Thomas Holmes, 'both brethren of this myste» as well [or 
and concerning undesent and unseemly words spoken uttered and 
reported by the wife o[ the said Holmes againste the wyfe of the said 
Stowe.' Holmes's wife had to apologize, and he to pay os. to Thomas 
Stow « in satisfaction of ail lawe and other charges incued by him.' 
Clode, emorials of lhe erdtanl Taylors Coany, 183-4, Early 
Histy, i. 
 Richard Mathew, presented 4 July, 1567 (Newcourt, Reertorium, 
i. 483). 



Lfe oZ So, ,. 

put out of the will was, he said, but a small matter as com- 
pared with other things. 'Consider, it must needs offend me 
much to pay rive pounds for one word.' If she would not 
consent for love of her husband or of himself, John bade her 
remember : 'I wax old and decay in my occupation and have 
a great charge of children, and a wife that can neither get nor 
save.' The poor old woman, who had but late been rejoicing 
that her children which were dead were alive, pleaded feebly, 
that if the Lord would surfer her to go abroad again she would 
undo ail: 'so that Thomas and his wife shall not know. 
That wicked woman, woe worth her, will be my death.' 
Other relatives and friends tried their influence in vain. The 
dread of Thomas prevailed. Elizabeth Stow died at Michael- 
mas, leaving her will unaltered, most of her property to 
Thomas, only rive pounds to her eldest son, and larger legacies 
to the other children. The day after the funeral the two 
brothers and Master Rolfe went to the Maiden's Head in 
Leadenhall,  where they had a pint of wine with Henry 
Johnson,  an old fi'iend of the family, who prayed Thomas 
to be good to his brother John. 
At this point John Stow's tale breaks off abruptly. 3 Apart 
from its extraordinary interest as an unstudied, if somewhat 
sordid, record of middle-class lire in the reign of Elizabeth, it 
is of the greatest value, for the light which it throws on other 
incidents in Stow's career, and for its explanation of some 
allusions in his writings. 
It was probably in the following year that Stow had occasion 
to address a petition to the alderman of his ward by reason 
of the annoyance done to him by one William Ditcher and his 
wife. 4 It appears that Ditcher, believing that Stow had re- 
ported him to the Wardmote for setting his frames in the 
street, came railing at Stow's door with the most slanderous 
speech that man or devil could devise. Incited by Thomas 
Stow, Ditcher soon went to worse conduct, throwing stones 

I Elizabeth Stow's will provided ten shillings for her children and 
friends to drink withal after her funeral. See p. xlv below. 
2 He was conductor of the choir at St. Michael's at a stipend of 3 l. 
( Curcwardens' dtccounls, p. 235). 
3 See the full narrative on pp. liii to Ix below. 
 See pp. Ix to lxii below. 



xvi Idrodtctio 

at John's apprentice, abusing his wife, calling him in derision 
of his trade a prick-louse knave, and to crown his offence 
'adding moreover that the said John hathe ruade a cronicle 
of lyes'. Finally, he had told the parson and the deputy of 
the ward that, 'there cometh none but rogues and rascalls, 
the vilest in the land, to the house of the said John, which 
rogues have him from alehouse to alehouse, every day and 
night till two of the clock in the morning.' 
Whether Stow got any remedy against the scurrilous Ditcher 
does hot appear, for the marrer is knovn only by lais draft of 
the petition. But he had soon to meet a more dangerous 
accusation. Early in January, x569, great offence vas given 
to the English Govemment by the circulation in the City of 
a manifesto published by the Spanish ambassador on behalf 
of the Duke of Alva. In this matter Stow was implicated, 
and on 7 February he was called before the Lord Mayor. 
In the record of his examination, where he is described as 
'John Stowe, merchaunt, a collector of cronycles', he ad- 
mitted that he had been lent two copies of the bill in English, 
whereof he ruade a copy for himself, and had read it to some 
neighbours, but never gave copy out of it. The charge was 
also investigated before the Master and Wardens of Stow's 
own company, though without attaching any further blame 
to him. 1 
It vas no doubt in connexion with this business of Alva's 
proclamation that Stov was reported to the Queen's Council 
for having many dangerous books of superstition in his posses- 
sion. In consequence direction was given to 13ishop Grindal 
of London to have Stow's house searched. On 24 February 
Grindal wrote to Cecil enclosing 'a catalogue of Stowe the 
Taylour his unlawfulle bookes', together with a report from 
his chaplains, dated OE February, on which day the search 
was ruade. The chier part of this report was as follows : ' He 
hath a great store of folishe fabulous bokes of olde prynte as 
of Sir Degory Tryamore, &c. He hath also a great sorte of 

 See the depositions at both examinations given in full in Clode's 
Early History of the gIlerchant Taylors Comîbany, ii. 299-302. Itis 
remarkable that Stow never refers to this business of AJva's proclamation 
in any of his printed works. 



Lif of Sow xvii 
old written Eglish Chronicles both in parchement and in 
paper, som long, som shorte. He hath besides, as it were, 
miscellanea of diverse sortes both touching phisicke, surgerye, 
and herbes, with medicines of experience, and also touching 
old phantasticall popishe bokes prynted in the olde tyme, with 
many such also written in olde Englisshe on parchement. 
All which we have pretermytted to take any inventarye of. 
We have only taken a note of such bokes as have been lately 
putt forth in the realme or beyonde the Seas for defence of 
papistrye : With a note of som of his own devises and writinges 
touching such matter as he bath gathered for Chronicles, where- 
aboute he seemeth to have bestowed much travaile. His 
bokes declare him to be a great favourer of papistrye.' 
The list of objectionable books contains thirty-eight items, 
and, besides religious works, includes Thomas Stapleton's 
translation of Bede ; a manuscript of the Flores t-fistoriaru»t ; x 
' much rude matter gathered for a summary of a cronacle' ; 
and ' tk brief collection of matters of Cronicles sins Anno 
Domini I563, entered in an old wryten boke of Cronicles 
bound in borde, wryten as it seemeth with his owne hand '." 
An entry of Fundationes tïccl«siarum, Monast«riorum, &c., 
has been erased. The popish books include Thomas Heskyn's 
Parliament of Christ, Richard Shacklock's Hatchct of Heresy, 3 
Five Homilies ruade by Leonard Pollard, 4 The mancre of the 
List of Saints, together with other works of such writers as 
Roger Edgeworth, Richard Smith, Miles Haggerd, and John 
Rastell. Although these last discoveries of Grindal's chap- 
lains must have lent some colour to the charge of popish in- 
clinations, it does not appear that Cecil or the Council 
thought the business serious enough to require any further 
notice. 5 

 Probably Cotlon ,IIS. Nero D.v. See p. xcii below. 
 These are Stow's llIe»toranda, which are contained in Lambeth giS. 
306» and have been printed by Dr. Gairdner in Three Fifteentlt Centtoy 
Chronicles» pp. x 5-47- See further p. xx.xvi below. 
 I suppose the translation of Hosius, De Ifferesibus, printed at Antwerp 
in It 565, as A most excellent treatise o.[ tke begynnyng of heresyes it out 
ty»te. 
 Dedicated to Bonner and printed at London, I56. 
» Grindal's letter to Cecil and his chaplains' report, with the list of 
suspected books, are printed from Lansdowne 3IS.  in Arber's Tran- 
STOP, Vo l b 



It is likely enough that Thomas Stow was the informant 
against his brother in this matter of Alva's manifesto. From 
the story of their quarrel it is clear that Thomas was an 
ignorant man, believing that John practised magic, but sharp 
enough to see what handle he might find in his brother's 
strange tastes, x At all events it was Thomas Stow who set 
in motion another affair next year. In 57o John Stow was 
brought belote the Ecclesiastical Commissioners on a charge 
in seventeen articles ruade by one that had been his servant 
af ter he had defrauded him of his goods, and supported by 
witnesses of sullied reputation. Stow successfully confounded 
his accusers belote the Archbishop; but when he would 
have prosecuted them he was answered that there was no 
remedy against them. 2 
It is plainly with reference to this incident that Stow in his 
Annales under 556, when describing the punishment of a false 
witness, writes as follows : ' The like Justice I once wished to 
the like accuser of his toaster and elder brother, but it was 
answered that in such case could be no remedy, though the 
accuser himself were in the saine fact found the principal 
offender. Where through it followeth the accuser never 
shewed sign of shame, but terribly curseth, and blasphemously 
sweareth he never committed any such act, though the saine 
be registered belote the honourable the Queen's Majesty's 
High Commissioners. And what horrible slanders, by libel- 
ling and otherwise with threats of murther, he dayly bruiteth 
against me, the knower of all secrets, God I mean, knoweth.' î 
After the lapse of more than twenty years Stow could hot 
forget or forgive the prime authors of his troubles. He never 
lost the chance of exposing a fable of Grafton's 4 or ot 
pointing the moral of his brother's iniquity. Against the 
account of William FitzOsbert he set a note in the first 

$¢rifi.t of he Sationers' t?eislers, i. 181. See also Strype, SurT,ey, i, 
pp. v and xxi, and Lire of Grindal, pp. x84, 5x6. The Register of the 
Privy Council for this year has unfortunately perished. 
t See p. lvi below. 
* Strype, Survey, i, p. iv. 
 See also a similar entry under this year in the x587 edition of the 
Summary Abridg'ed. It was not contained in the 1573 edition, and is 
omitted in that for 6o4. 
*See vol. i. I8, 349. 



Lfe of S[ow xix 
edition of the Survey: ' A false accuser of his elder brother, 
in the end was hanged. God amend or shortly send such an 
end to such false brethren.'l In the original manuscript 
there appears the significant addition : ' Such a brother have 
I, God make him penitent.' How late and long the quarrel 
continued is shown also by a characteristic note preserved 
amongst some private memoranda in Stow's collections." 
'1599. The last of July, at the qwenes armes taverne by 
leden hall, in contempte of me the auctor of this boke called 
the Survey of London, one Smithe, dwellinge at Sopars lane 
ende, in the company of T. Stowe and othar suche lyke, 
sayde he marvayled that mention was not ruade in the saide 
Survay of qwike sylvar roninge out of the grownde at the 
buildinge of his howse. More that the auctor set hot downe 
that the parson of Christes Churche lyeth every night with 
the lord majors wyfe; and suche lyke Knavish talke he 
had to pleasure my bad brother, for he is one of lais 
minstrells.' 
Stow's bitterness may seem excessive. But his obvious 
anxlety when Thomas, triumphing and swearing, got posses- 
sion of his book of alchemy, z shows how real was the danger 
that Stow incurred through the suspicion of popish inclina- 
tions, and occult practices. His experiences no doubt taught 
him that the study of history was likely to prove both safer 
and rnore profitable than divinity, poetry, or astrology. 
.A.part from this the chief result of his troubles had been to 
establish his literary reputation and personal worth. It is 
probable that he owed his triumph over his enemies in some 
degree to the favour of Archbishop Parker, whose notice he 
had attracted some years earlier. Under Parker's direction 
he assisted in the publication of the t;lores tistoriarttm in 
1567, of the Chronicles of Matthew Paris in 57 I, and of 
Walsingham in 1574; 'all of which,' writes Stow in his 

1 See vol. i. 254 , and ii. 249 below. In the second edition the last half 
of this note was omitted. The omission may perhaps be explained by 
the recent death of Thomas Stow in October, 16o2. On the other hand, 
the reference on ii. 76 is an insertion. 
 Ap. 1-Iarley IS. 54 o, f. 82 v°. 
z See p. lvi below. 
bz 



Annales, ' the archbishop réceived of my hands.' 1 His labours 
soon brought him the acquaintance and ffiendship of all the 
leading antiquaries of the day. Such were William Lambarde, 
'his loving friend,' 2 whose Peram3Mation of KeJzt was the 
model for the çnrvey; Henry Savile, who, even in 575, 
addressed him as 'good old friend'; Camden, at this rime 
usher of Vestminster School; John Dee, the celebrated 
astrologer ; Robert Glover, the Somerset herald ; William 
Fleetwood the Recorder, who was, like Stow, a Merchant 
Taylor; together with men of scholarly tastes and good 
position, like William Claxton of Wynyard in Durham, his 
familiar correspondent during nearly twenty years. It is 
noteworthy that Stow's friends included several writers of 
Roman Catholic inclinations as Thomas Martyn, and Henry 
Ferrers. 3 From these and others Stow received counsel in 
his literary labours and rendered help in return. To Hakluyt 
he supplied notes on Cabot's voyages from his manuscript 
(now lost) of Fabyan's Chronicle. 4 To David Powel he 
furnished material for Tle ]-[istoric of Cam3ria.  Thomas 
Speght, the editor of Chaucer, he assisted with notes from 
his own rich collections of ancient poesy. 6 
When the old Society of Antiquaries was formed, about 
i.572 , under Parker's patronage, it was natural that Stow 
should become a member. He certainly belonged to it be- 
fore February, 39 o, and contributed to its discussions a note 
on the origin of sterling money.  Amongst his colleagues 
were Walter Cope, Joseph Holland, William Patten, Francis 
Tate, and Francis Thynne, s ail of whom he counted amongst 

1 p. ii50 ' ed. I6O 5.  See vol. ii, p. 253. 
s See Let/ets to Stow on pp. lxxi, Ixxii. 
• See notes in C]tronides of London, pp. 328-30, 337-8. 
 Powel's treface. See p. Lxxxvii below. 
 Speght in his Preface acknowledges his debt to Stow, ' whose library 
hath helped many writers.' 
 Hearne, Curious Discourses, il. 318; see ii. 278 below. In Asltmole 
MS. 763 f. I95 in the Bodleian Library there is a summons to Stow to 
attend a meeting of the Society at Garter House on 2 lqov. 1599. On the 
back of the summons Stow has written some notes on the subject for 
discussion, ' of the antiquities, etymologie and priviledges of Parishes in 
England.' 
 Cuious Discourses. For the history of the Society see Ardtaeologia, 
vol. i, and for a list of the members in I59O, Stow MS. lO45 in the British 
Museum. See also i. 22, 83, II4, ii. 23, and pp. xxiii, xxxiii below. 



Life of Stow 

xxi 

his friends, and Lord William Howard of Naworth, with 
whom he had at least some acquaintance. 1 
Stow's editorial work for Parker brought him into association 
with Reyne Wolfe, the printer, and when Wolfe died in i573, 
Stow purchased many of his collections. _At the time of his 
death Wolfe had been preparing a Universal History. His 
design vas carried out on a less ambitious scale under the 
direction of Raphael Holinshed, to whom Stow lent ' divers 
rare monuments, ancient writers, and necessary register-books '. 
To the second edition of Holinshed's Ckronides, which ap- 
peared in I587, Stow made other contributions, though at 
a later rime he complained that ils printing and reprinting 
without warrant or well-liking had prevented his own intended 
work. On such a larger history he had long been busy. 2 In 
158o he had produced The Chroniclcs of England front trutc 
unto the lresent year of Christ. This xvork was written in 
civic form, the names of the Mayor and Sheriffs being placed 
at the head of each year. The Chronides were thus only an 
expansion of the Setnttary ; but this form xvas abandoned, 
when the work appeared twelve years later in a more extensive 
shape as the Annales ofEngland. The Annales were but a part 
of what Stow intended, for his laborious collection had by then 
grown into a large volume, which he would have published as 
'The History of this Island ', had he not been compelled to 
condescend to the wishes of his printer, who preferred a less 
ambitious undertaking.  When the Annales appeared for the 
last lime in 16o 5 just before the author's death, the 'farre 
larger volume', though ready for the press, still awaited 
a printer ; it appears to have perished, though some 
part of it may have been embodied in the Successions of tbe 
History of England published under Stow's name in I638. * 
'The History of this Island' was not the only larger work 
on which Stow laboured in vain. Grindal's chaplains found 
in Stow's study a collection of Fnntalioncs Ecclesiarum,  to 
which, during many years, he appears to have made great 
additions. Camden wrote to him for the loan of his Fttnctat[ones 

See p. lxx below. 
Annales, ed. 6o5, p. 438, and Summarie for 6o4, p. 458. 
See p. lxxix below. * See p. Ixxxvi below, s See p. xvii above. 



xxii [ll [l'Off llçtiOll 
for four counties, and William Claxton in his latest letter to 
Stow begged that he might bave a copy with the newest 
augmentations, that so he mifiht preserve il to the collector's 
never-dying faine. 1 Claxton's fears for the fate of his friend's 
labours were in part realized. Whether Stow sent him the 
desired copy or hot, the whole original seems now to bave 
perished. Yet part of one or the other passed into the hands 
of Ralph Starkey, the archivist, who, according to Hearne, 
possessed some of Stow's manuscripts. 'amongst which his 
Monasticon, out of which Mr. Dodsworth collected several 
things'.  Roger Dodsworth's voluminous collections were, 
after his death in x654 , entrusted to Dugdale, whose celebrated 
_Ionasticon Anglicauum was thus in part the outcome of 
Stow's industry. 
In the midst of such labours Stow nevertheless found time 
to produce repeated editions of his Sum»tary and its Abridg- 
rueur, and towards the end of a long and busy life set himself 
to compile his Surv O, of Landau, which first appeared in 
I598 , to be followed after rive years by a second, much 
increased, edition. But of this, his most valuable work, more 
hereafter. 
For the troubles of his middle life Stow may have found 
some compensation in a peaceful and honoured end. His 
character had mellowed with age, and he was, perhaps, a little 
more chary of expressing himself too freely. But for that 
matter, the order which Elizabeth and ber ministers had 
established in Church and State suited his convictions, and 
his open dislike for sectarians could do him no harm. His 
sentiments are shown in his description of Whitgift as a man 
born for the benefit of his country and the good of his Church. 
Literary work had, moreover, brought him at the last, hot 
only the friendship of learned men, but a well-deserved 
reputation with his fellow citizens. 
Though still proud to call himself ' Merchant-Taylor', he 
had left his trade,  and probably at the saine rime changed his 

 See p. lxxiii'below. 
" Hearne, Collections, iii. o8, 43, Oxford Hist. Soc. 
 The only reference to his trade which I have found in Stow's books 
is his note on the prices of cloth in the rnargin of i. 86 below. 



Lire of Sion, xxiii 

residence to a house in St. Andrew's parish in Lime StreetWard, 
near the Leadenhall. 1 This must have been not long after 157o , 
since some years pl-eviously to I579 he had been instrumental at 
a Wardmote inquest in proving the title of his new ward to 
certain tenements afterwards in that year wrongfully with- 
drawn.-" In 1584- 5 John Stow appears to have been employed 
as a surveyor of alehouses, 3 and in the latter year was one of 
the collectors in Lime Street Ward of the charges for a muster 
of four thousand men by the City for the Queen's service. 
These are two of the few occasions on wfiich he took any 
active part in civic affairs. He had, as we have seen, never 
taken up his livery, and, as he tells us, was never a feast- 
follower. 4 But his peculiar knowledge was made use of in the 
service of his Company, who from at least the beginning of 
1579 paid 'John Stowe, a loving brother of this mistery for 
divers good considerations them specially moving' a yearly 
pension or fee of four pounc]s3 This pension was no doubt 
a practical recognition of his literary merit ; but once, in 16o3, 
he appears as in receipt of a fee of ten shillings for 'great 
pains by him taken in searching for such as have been 
mayors, sheriffs, and aldermen of the said company.'  During 
a controversy between the Lieutenant of the Tower and the 
City in I595, Stow is referred to as the ' Fee'd Chronicler' of 
the Corporation, and is stated to bave lately set out the 
boundaries of the Liberty of Cree Church. 7 On e4 Feb., 16Ol, 
Stow was one of the persons appointed by the Court of 
Aldermen to treat with Mr. Tate of the Temple touching the 
procuring of Liber Custumarum and Liber A ntiquorum Rcgum. s 
Stow's labours may perhaps have thus earned him some- 
thing more than a barren reputation ; but, as in the case of 
many others before and since, his zeal for learning was at the 
expense of his own advantage. After Stow's death one, who 
 For letters addressed to him there see pp. lxviii to lxxii below. 
 See i. 161-. He had moved at least as early as 1575 ; perhaps to one 
of Woodroffe's houses to which he refers on i. 151. 
 See p. lxiii.  See vol. ii. 191. 
•  Clode, lV[emorials, 535 ; Early ttislory, ii. 302. 
« id. i. 264. 
v Strype, Survey, i. 67 b. Some memoranda, apparently prepared for 
the use of the corporation, concerning these claires at the Tower and at 
St. Martins are given in ttarley 21IS. 54o, f. I. 
 ]P[unimenta Gildhallae, II, p. xviii. See further p. xxxii below. 



xxiv .ll lrod«cNoz 

had known him, refused to take up his work, and ' thanked 
God that he was hot yet mad to waste his time, spend OEooL 
a year, trouble himself and ail his friends only to gain assur- 
ance of endless reproach.'l It is too much to assume from 
this, as some bave done, that Stow had spent such an amount 
yearly on the purchase of books, or even on the pursuit of his 
studies. Nevertheless itis certain that his substance was 
consumed to the neglect of his ordinary means of maintenance. 
Of his S«tmmary in 1598 he writes : - ' It hath cost me many 
a weary mile's travel, many a hard earned penny and pound, 
and many a cold winter night's study.' So also in two 
petitions, which he made, apparently to the City, about I59 o, 
he relates how ' for thirty years past he bath set forth divers 
somaries and set a good example to posterity. And foras- 
moche as the travayle to many places for serchynge of sondry 
records, whereby the varietie of things may corne to lyght, 
cannot but be chargeable to the sayde John more than his 
habilitie tan afforde, &c.' 3 Edmund Howes, in his edition of 
the Annales, says that Stow ' eould never ride, but travelled on 
foot unto divers chief places of the land to search records' 
These and other like references show that Stow in his latter 
days was in straitened circumstances. But his merits were 
not, as tradition dating from his own rime bas alleged, dis- 
regarded. Robert Dowe, a former toaster of the Merchant 
Taylors Company, established in T59OE pensions for some of 
his poor brethren, and provided specially that one of four 
pounds should be paid to Stow. In 16oo on Dowe's motion 
the Company increased their own pension to six pounds 'soe 
as with the iiijL he receaveth out of this howse (as one of the 
almesmen of the said Mr. Robert Dowe) he is on the whole 
to receave yerely duringe his life a pencion out of and from 
this companye amounting to the sure of tenn pounds per 
annum.' When in 16ooE Dowe revised his charities he pro- 
vided specially that one pension should still be paid to Stow, 
who was hOt then a working tailor, yet' notwithstanding in his 
begynnyng was of the handy craft and now for many yeres 

1 Hoves, Ebistle Dedicalorie to Abridgment (16o7), reprinted at end of 
Annales in I63I. 
 p. 46o in the margin. 3 For these petitions sec p. lxvi below. 



Warner in 
wrote :-- 

Lire of Sto, 

xxv 

hath spent great labour and study in writing of Chronicles 
and other memorable matters for the good of ail posterity.' ' 
In addition to the pension from his Company, Stow is said 
to have had an annuity of 8L from Camden in return for his 
transcripts of Leland. Ralph Brooke, the herald, who is our 
authority for this, alleges that Camden had plagiarized Leland 
in his Britannia, and that Stow lamented the wrong done to 
Leland both by Camden and Harrison. 2 It is probable that 
Brooke had no better justification than Stow's published 
censure of Harrison in the Survey. 3 Camden no doubt had 
free access to any collections of Stow's. But the transcripts 
from Leland were in Stow's possession as late as x598. 4 It 
may be that Camden's annuity was paid in anticipation of 
a promised bequest. 
However, there can be no doubt that, in spite of ail help 
from friends, Stow in his old age found his diminished means 
too small. He was compelled to seek openly for charity, and 
James I granted him Letters Patent, first on 8 May, I6o3, and 
again in February and October, I6o4, giving him licence to ask 
and take benevolence.  It is in reference to this that William 
lines prefixed to his Albion's England in 6o6 

Add Stow's late antiquarian pen, 
That annal'd for ungrateful men. 
Next chronicler omit it hot, 
His licenc't basons little got; 
Lived poorly xvhere he trophies gave, 
Lies poorly there in noteless grave. 

Ben Jonson has left a note: 'John Stow had monstrous 
observations in his Chronicle, and was of his craft a tailor. He 
and I walking alone, he asked two cripples what they would 

a Clode, Early History, ii. 303-4. 
 A Second Discovery of lrrors, p. 47, edited by Anstis in 723. 
Brooke himself published A Discoverie of Errours, attacking the 
tritamtia which appeared in 594. He refers repeatedly to Stow as 
' Camden's familier '. 
s See vol. i. 348, and ii. 353-4. 
 This is shown by the fact that a part of the original MS. of the Survey 
is bound up with the transcripts of Leland. See p. xcii below. 
 CaL State Papers, 16o3-1o, p. 84. See also p. lxvii below ; and Strype. 
Sm,ey, i, pp. xii, xiii. 



xxvi 
have to take him to theiî order'.l Thus could Stow turn 
a merry jest at his poverty ; and yet, as he told Manningham 
the Diarist, on a 7 Dec., 6ooE, he 'ruade no gains by his 
travail'. Certainly he had not the means to meet his great 
charges, and spent for the benefit of posterity what he might 
have kept for his own need. Yet the tradition of his poverty 
has been a little exaggerated, and those of his own rime were 
not, according to their customs, negligent of his merits. 
Warner, in his haste to point a moral, was premature; for 
Stow's widow was rich enough to provide a handsome monu- 
ment, where her husband lay in no noteless grave. Stow 
himself was hot ungrateful for the help given to him, and in 
159OE presented lais Anmlcs to the Merchant Taylors 'as a 
small monument given to this corporation by him in token of 
his thankfulness to this company'. 
Stow continued working to the end. The Anzmles, 'en- 
creased and continued until this present yeare 6o5; were 
reissued within a few days of his death. Two years previously 
he wrote in the .Surz,ey : ' I have been divers rimes minded to 
add certain chapters to this book, but being, by the good 
pleasure of God, visited with sickness, such as my feet (which 
have borne me many a mlle) bave of late refused, once in four 
or rive months to convey me from my bed to my study, and 
therefore could hot do as I would.'  
Howes, in his edition of Stow's Ammlcs, writes of him thus : 
' He was tall of stature, lean of body and face, his eyes small 
and chrystaline, of a pleasant and cheerful countenance; his 
sight and memory very good ; very sober, mild, and courteous 
to any that required lais instructions; and retained the truc 
use of all his senses unto the day of his death, being of an 
excellent memory. He always protested never to have written 
anything either for malice, fear, or favour, nor to seek his own 
particular gain or vainglory ; and that his only pains and care 
vas to write truth .... He was very careless of scoffers, back- 
biters, and detractors. He lived peacefully, and died of the 
stone collicke, being four score years of age, and was buried 
the 8th of April, 6o5, in his parish church of St. Andrew's, 
 Conversatiots e¢,ilz Drzanmout, p..36 ; Shakespeare Society. 
 DiarA, , p. lO 3 ; Camden Society. s Vol. ii. 87-8. 



L[f6 oje StooEv xxvii 
Undershaft; whose mural monument near unto his grave was 
there set up at the charges of his wife Elizabeth.' 
The monument, of Derbyshire xnarble and alabaster, was 
piously restored by the Merchant Taylors Company in I9O5, 
the three hundredth anniversary of Stow's death. It repre- 
sents him sitting in his study writing in a book upon his desk, 
with other books about him. Above it is the motto 'Aul 
scribcnda affgrc, aut Icoeemta scribere' 1. The inscription is as 
follows : 

Memoriae Sacrum. 

Resurrectionem in Christo pie expectat Joannes Stowe, 
ciuis Londiniensis. Qui in antiquis monumentis eruendis, 
accuratissima diligentia usus Angliae Annales, & ciuitatis 
Londini Synopsin bene de sua, bene de postera aetate meritus, 
luculenter scripsit : Vitaeque stadio pie decurso, obiit Aetatis 
anno 8o, die .5 Aprilis t6o.5. 
EIizabetha coniux, ut perpetuuln sui amoris testimonium 
dolens. 

It is pathetic that Stow, after complaining so bitterly of the 
defacers of tombs who thrust out the ancient dead to make 
room for others, should in his turn have suffered the like 
desecration. Maitland " relates that Stow's grave was ' spoiled 
ofhis injured remains by certain men in the year I73. , who 
removed his corpse to make way for another '. 
Besides the effigy on Stow's tomb there is ai1 engraved 
portrait, which is found in some copies of the I6O 3 edition of 
the Survey. Manningham a vrites that in Dec., i6ooE Stow 
told him 'that a modell of his picture was round in the 
Recorder Fleetwood's study, with this inscription, or circum- 
scription, JOHANNES STOWE, ANTIQUARIUS _A_NGLIAE, which 
now is cutt in brasse, and prefixed in print to his Survay of 
London '. He sayth of it as Pilat sayd : ' What I have written, 
I have written' ; and thinkes himself worthie of that title for 

 By a stonemason's error ' STVT' appears instead of AVT. Mr. Philip 
Norman informs me that previous to the last restoration the word 'avt' 
could be read either 'art' or 'stvt', the original and correct lettering 
not having been obliterated. The iron railing now in ff'ont of the 
rnonument was copied from one which appears in prints of the eighteenth 
century. 
" Hislory ofLondon, ii. Io62. s Di«y, p. lO 3. 



XXVIII 

L¥troductiot 

his paynes, for he hath no gaines by his travaile'. The en- 
graved copies are dated ' ./tctatis sua« ïT, 6°3 ,.1 
Of Stow's three daughters two survived him and are men- 
tioned in his will. Julyan, apparently the elder, had married 
a well-to-do neighbour, Mr. Peter Towers, by whom she had 
a large family; three of them died during the great sickness 
of 16o 3, when their grandfather ruade his will; one alone 
seems to have lived beyond early manhood. The second was 
Joan Foster, whose husband lived at Warwick, whence she 
wrote to ask her father's antiquarian help for her very friend 
and neighbour Oliver Brooke. 9' Of his vidow Elizabeth I 
have round no later mention; but she lived long enough to 
set up his tomb after i6o6. The care with which Stov begged 
the overseer of his will to take so much pains that his poor 
wife be not overpressed to take any wrong, suggests that she 
vas one and the saine with the wife who forty years before 
could neither get nor save. s 

§ 2. TIIE SURVEY OF LONDON 
The Survcy of Landau is the book of a life. On it the 
author's peculiar title to faine now rests. Yet probably he 
himself had regarded it as somewhat of a relaxation from his 
more serious labours on general English history. The range 
of his research purs Stow outside the class of 'lay chroni- 
graphers that write of nothing but of Mayors and Sherrifs, 
and the dere yere, and the great frost'. * He has an indis- 
putable right to our regard for the amount of information, 
which he collected and preserved. Yet when this is admitted, 
the ,uualcs entitle him to little other distinction than that 
which belongs to a painstaking seeker after truth, who brought 
the results of lais toil into a chronologically exact narrative, 
without the power to impress them with any greater vitality.  
 This portrait, given as a frontispiece to this volume, was first reproduced 
in the Gentleman's Magazine for 1837. 
u Sec pp. lxx, lxxi below.  Sec pp. xlv and lviii. 
• Nash, in Pierce Pettilesse, ap. bVorks, ii. 6=. This was written in 1592, 
when Stow had published only his Summarie and Cltronicles ol  Enffland, 
to which it applies well enough. Next year, in Slran.¢e -Newes, &c. 
(IVorks, ii. =65), Nash wrote: ' Chroniclers heare my prayers; good 
Maister Stowe be hOt unmindfull of him.' 
 Camden, when sending to Abraham Ortelius, in  580, a copy of Stow's 



The S¢m,ey of Lomto¢ xxix 
Had he done no more, he would be no more remembered than 
are others, who did good work enough in and for their own 
generation. The Sm-vey stands upon quite other ground. 
In it Stow built himself a monument for all time, and bas 
left a record instinct with lire. It is at once the summary of 
sixty observant years, and a vivid picture of London as he 
saw it. 
Stow possessed in a peculiar degree the qualities necessary 
for such a work, and the time at which he wrote was excep- 
tionally favourable. In his da¥ he witnessed the passing of 
mediaevalism and the birth of the modern capital. His youth 
was spent in that declining time of charity and other good old 
customs, when he might behold with his own eyes the lordly 
munificence and pomp of prelates and nobles. 1 He had seen 
the Prior of Trinity ride in civic procession amongst the alder- 
men." He could dimly recollect how the Dean and Chapter 
of St. Paul's in their copes and vestments, with garlands of 
roses on their heads, received a buck at the high altar on the 
feast of the commemoration of their patron saint.  In his 
middle age he lamented the greed and violence of professed 
reformers, and in his last years saw the growth of a new order. 
He had served his apprenticeship whilst the ancient guild-life 
still retained its power, but lived to see its bonds broken and 
a fresh dispensation corne into being. He remembered pleasant 
walks and green fields where in his late days there were only 
streets and houses. He had seen the City spread on every 
side, till the approaches were blocked by unseemly enclosures, 
and even within its ancient bounds remarked how open spaces 
had corne tobe pestered with small tenements. His own 
sympathies were with the old ways. He recalled with regret 
ancient buildings that had perished in the wreck of change or 
through greed of gain. He had loved them for their beauty, 
and, as we may suppose, cherished their memory for the sake 
of what they symbolized. He had grown to manhood before 
the Reformation, and ail that it entailed, was accomplished, 
' Annales' (Tlze Clzronicles) writes : ' Hominem opinor nosti, eius indu- 
striam laudant nostrates, sed iudicium nonnunquam requirunt. Eius modi 
est hoc opus ut inter nostros Chronographos non posteriores ferat.' 
Camden] Iistolae, p. 12, ed. T. Smith I69L 
x i. 89.  i. x4. * i. 334. 



xxx [sllrodztcliosz 
and his studies must have strengthened the associations of his 
youth. Yet he lived to feel in his own old age the warmth of 
the nation's new life. He ,,vas proud ofthe increased prosperity 
of his native city, and of the new state with which the wealth 
ofher citizens adorned her. Whatever lurking sympathy he 
might have felt for the old faith was lost in the deep loyalty 
of a true Elizabethan, who feared lest seditious religion 
might be a betraying unto Spanish invasion and tyranny. If 
thus he wrote down his Survcy ofttimes in the spirit of the 
past, he closed it in confident hope for the long enjoyment of 
the good estate of this city? 
If Stow was fortunate in the rime of his writing he was 
fortunate also in his own qualities. .A_ long life, a retentive 
memol'),, a zeal for accumulating material, and the painstaking 
capacity for giving it shape, enabled him to turn lais oppor- 
tunity to the best advantage. He disclaims any eal'ly interest 
in history, but lais passion for antiquity dated from his 
youth. Towards the end of his life he told George Buck of 
how he had talked with old men who remembered Richard III 
as a comely prince,-" and lais own history of that time is based 
admittedly on what he had heard as well as on what he had 
read. He had a curious faculty for minute observation and 
for graphic description of small detail. This power he 
practised most in his autobiographical fragments, whether 
those which he left in manuscript, or those which are em- 
bedded as the most charming passages in the Survey. But 
indeed the whole book is full with the fruits of the writer's 
observation. 
The main fl'amework of the çtrz,ey was based on a per- 
ambulation of the sevel-al vards of the City, which Stow 
accomplished with scrupulous care and verified from his 
ample collections. The COllapass of Elizabethan London was 
small, not extending very far beyond the walls or bars, 
and with the whole of that small compass a single man 
could easily be familiar. So there is scarcely a ward to the 
history of which Stov could not contribute something from 
his own knowledge or memory. Now itis the recollection of 
 ii. 96. 
= Buck, His/. oj  Richard III, ap. Kennet, Complete Histor3, , i. 548. 



7he Strvey of Lomtoz xxxi 

some old custom of his youth. Here he calls to mind the 
beauty of the perished bell-toxver at Clerkenwell, 1 or describes, 
perhaps not too accurately, the decoration of the old Black- 
well Hall. 2 Here he tells of an inscription which owed its 
preservation to his care, 3 and elsewhere of antiquities and 
remains discovered in the course of excavations, xvhich he 
had witnessed. 4 But his chance memories, though frequent 
and interesting, are of less value than his deliberate record of 
what he sought for. Every church was visited, and ail note- 
worthy monuments carefully described; though, as he told 
Manningham,  he omitted many new monuments, 'because 
those men have been the defacers of the monuments of others, 
and so worthy to be deprived of that memory whereof they 
have injuriously robbed others.' Often in the Survof he 
laments such irreverent defacement, or the greedy spoliation 
of ancient tombs ; and sometimes he had to supply gaps from 
written records, where such were available. He did not scorn 
to question the oldest inhabitant on the history of a for- 
gotten or nameless grave, or to cross-examine the host and 
his ostler for the story of Gerard the giant.  
In the saine spirit of eager inquiry he had thought to obtain 
from the chief City Companies what might sound to their 
worship and commendation, that so he might write of them 
more at large. But xvhen he met with a rather surly rebuff 
from the Vintners, he was somewhat discouraged any further 
to travail. 7 Perhaps also he began to find his material out- 
grow his space, and felt the less inclined to pursue such a wide 
inquiry. To the records of his own Company he no doubt had 
access, and of its early history he gives some account, though 
with less detail than might have been expected3 
Of the City Records Stow ruade far more abundant use, 
and the score of occasions on which he cites them specifically 
do not at all represent the extent of his indebtedness. Some 

t il. 84.  i. 287 ; il. 337. 
 i. 4o. 
 i. 38,138, 168-7o; il. 43. 
 Diary, p. lO 3. Stow's lists confirm the story. 
 i. 348 ; il. 353- 
 ii. 247. 
s i, pp. 18I-2. 



xxxii f il[rO¢[llC[iOil 
of these Records, to wit the Liber Custumarum, and possibly 
others also, were at this rime in private hands, 1 and readily 
accessible to Stow. But Stow as the ' fee 'd Chronicler' of 
the Corporation was no doubt given free permission to consult 
the records which were still at the Guildhall. He had made 
some use of the Liber Iorze, and still more of the Liber 
Duntho'ne, and he refers occasionally by naine, and very often 
in fact, to the Letter-book. °" Once, at all events, he refers to 
the City yourzals. 3 Probably also he owed his extensive 
knowledge of wills in part to the Iïrustistg Rolls, though copies 
of important wills were often preserved elsewhere, as in the 
muniments of interested parishes. 
Stow is said to have received assistance from Robert Bowyer,  
the Keeper ofthe Records ; but Bowyer did not become keeper 
till 604, though he was apparently in oncial service at an 
earlier date. It is clear from his frequent and accurate cita- 
tions, especially from the Patent Rolls and Inquisitions post 
mortem, that Stow obtained abundant extracts from the records 
in the Tower. s This he might have done through Bowyer, or 
through Michael Heneage, who was keeper from x578 to 6o0, 
or Thomas Talbot, who was Heneage's clerk; Heneage and 
a The Liber Custumarum and Liber tnliquoru»t Regum, with some 
others, had been lent to Fleetwood the Recorder about 576, for the 
preparation of the volume which now bears his naine. At Fleetwood's 
death, in I594, they passed by some means into the hands of Stow's friend 
Francis Tare, and ultimately into those of Sir Robert Cotton. In 16oi 
Stow was helping the Corporation in an endeavour to recover their 
property (see p. xxiii above). Through Tate's agency the Liber An[i- 
quorum Regum and part of the Liber Custutttaruttt were restored in 16o8. 
Cotton gave up the Liber Fleetwood in 161o; but even then retained a 
part of the Liber Cu$lttoettartott, now Cottoîl 2IlS. Claudius D. ii. The 
Liber Custumarum and Liber 1-Iorne were probably compiled by Andrew 
Home (d. I328) the City Chamberlain. The Liber tlbus was prepared 
about I419 by John Carpenter. The Liber 1)uttt]torne was compiled from 
Letter-books and other sources (as the Trinity Cartulary) by William 
Dunthorne, the Town Clerk, between 1461 and I49 o. The Liber Con- 
slitutionis which Stow quotes in three places (i. 83, ii. 8, 14) I have not 
been able to identify. For the Liber Albus and Liber Cttslutltartott see 
Riley's AIunimenta Gildhallae in the Rolls Series. 
 See i. I57, 308, and Notes#assim. 
 ii. 94- 
 Hearne, Curious 1)iscourses, ii. 442-3; see also CaL Slate Pa2bers, 
I595-7, pp- IO, 509, and I6O3-o, pp. I78, 568. Bowyer was a member 
of the Society of Antiquaries in November, 1599 : see tshmole 3IS. 763, 
f. x96. 
n See Notes and Supplement 2bassim. 



T/te 3trz,ey of Lomtot xxxiii 
Talbot were both members of the Society of Antiquaries. 
However, the letter from his daughter, and his own statements, 
show that Stow himself ruade searches at the Tower. 1 
Other minor records were hOt neglected. Stow refers once 
to the Church-book of his own parish of St. Andrew Under- 
shaft(" and in another place to that of St. Mildred, Poultry ;  
it is evident aIso that he had consulted the Church-books of 
St. Stephen, Coleman Street, and St. Stephen, WaIbrook. 4 
Probably much of his information as to chantries and charries 
was derived from such sources. 
Stow's work on records was surprisingly good, but was 
necessarily imperfect. In other directions his services to 
posterity were even more precious. With the break-up of 
the Monasteries their muniments were in danger of destruction. 
What was saved from the wreck we owe to the care of Stow 
and others like him. Several of the most important Cartu- 
laries for London history were in his possession. Such were 
the invaluable Register of Holy Trinity, Aldgate ; the Cartu- 
laries of the Nuns' Priory and the Hospital of St. John at 
Clerkenwell; the Liber Papie or Register of St. Augustine 
Papey; and the Liber S. BartholomeL a history of St. 
Bartholomew's Priory ». If he did not himself possess, he had 
access also to, cartularies of St. 1V[ary Overy, ç of the College 
of St. Martin-le-Grand, v and of Colchester Abbey. 8 The 
Dunmow Chronicle of Nicholas de Bromfield is preserved 
only in his transcript, ° He appeal's also to have owned the 
original Liber S. M'ariae Eborttm, which Francis Thynne 
copied as /u tnouinalle Chrouicle ofi38I, our mostvaluable 
account of the Peasants' Revoit in London. " No doubt thc 
large collections of Thynne and othcr friends Iike Glover, 

1 See pp. lxvii, lxxi, and ii. 46. 
 See i. 24I. z See ii. 330.  See i. 227 and ii. 317 . 
 As to these see p. xcii below. * See i. 244, ii. 63, 324-6, 353- 
 See i. 3o7.  See i. -54-  See p. xcii. 
10 Preserved only by Thynne's copy in Slowe «11S. o47. See ii. 366 
below. In the same volume are extracts from a Chronicle of the Kings 
of blan, and the Ledger Book of Osney (now at Christ Church, Oxford), 
which Thynne had borrowed from Stow. For instances of Stow's in- 
debtedness to friends see the account of his own Collections on pp. lx_xoEvii 
to xcii below. The letters of his friends illustrate what community of 
assistance there was between the antiquaries of the day. 



xxxiv 

I¢drod¢tcliot 

Yleetwood, and Camden were at his service. The report of 
Grindal's chaplains on their search of Stow's study in 369 
proves that he had even thus early accumulated a great mass 
of material. The letters of his friends show the repute in 
which ' Stow's Storehouse ', and especially his Fundatioues 
Ecclesiaruu, was held. 1 Not the least of his treasures were his 
transcripts of Leland's Cllections, to which reference has 
already been ruade. 2 
With the works of the great mediaeval historians, as William 
of Malmesbury, Henry of Huntingdon, Roger Hoveden, Mat- 
thew Paris, the Florcs 11isloriarum, Knighton, and Walsingham 
Stow was familiar, and of most if not of all he possessed 
valuable manuscripts. He used also many minor authorities, ï 
and more than one document of interest exists only in his 
transcript. 4 But for his own peculiar purpose in the Sun,ey 
the old Chronicles of London were of greater value, and 
of them he ruade constant use. His own Summary and 
Chronidcs were, so to say, in form, and to a great extent in 
marrer, the direct descendants of the ancient civic histories. 
Stow himself possessed or used at least three of the copies of 
the Chronicles of London which still survive, and made some 
notes in them all. Two of these have been printed, viz. the 
Short Etglish Chrottide from Lambcth [S. 3o6 in Dr. Gaird- 
ner's Thrce Fifteeuth Ccutury Chrotdcles, and the more valuable 
and important copy in Cotton 2[S. Vitellius A. xvi, which is 
included in my own volume of Chrotdcles of Londou. The 
third is contained in Harlcy Rdl C. 8, which is no doubt one 
of the ' old Registers' which Stow searched for information 
on the portreeves and early governors of the City3 But these 

 See pp. lxix to lxxii. - See p. xxv above. 
 As the Chronicon Ingliae, I328-88 (i. 71, ii. I68-9) ; monastic annals 
like those of Bermondsey (ii. 66-7) and Dunstable (il. 49); Walter 
of Coventry (i. 24) ; Peter of lckham (i. 89) ; William de Chambre (i. 9 o, 
ii. 99) ; and the pseudo-lngulph (i. 72, il. I 2, 28). 
 e.g. The .xlrrivall of Edvard Zg, and T/te Chronide of Calais in 
Zffarley IIZSS. 542,543- See p. xc below. 
» See p. xcii and note on il. 382 beloxv. The Chronicle in I-Iarley 
Rdl C. 8, is very similar to the Shorl Enlish Chronide referred to above. 
But even in the earlier portions it contains some additions ; from I4oo 
to I434 it is very meagre; from 1434 to 145I it resembles closely the 
fuller copy in Cotton JIS. Julius B. I (see NICOLAS, Cltronide of London, 



7"le Strvey of Lomtoz xxxv 

were not the only copies with which he was acquainted, as 
appears from various references in his printed works, 1 and from 
fragments and transcripts preserved amongst his Collectiou. " 
It is clear, moreover, that Stow had used the longer original 
of the Vitellius Chronicle, 3 whether at first hand, or through 
the medium of a lost work of Fabyan. Of Fabyan himself 
Stow has left an interesting note : 4 , He wrote a Chronicle of 
London, England and of France, beginning at the creation, and 
endynge in the third of Henry the 8, which both I have in 
writen hand.'  The second edition of Fabyan's Ckronicle, 
which appeared in 53oE, included continuations to 5o 9. But 
for these it is unlikely that Fabyan was in any sense respon- 
sible, and it is certain that his original work ended with x485. 
But both in his Survey and in his Auuales Stow several rimes 
quotes ' Ro. Fabian ', or' Fabian's manuscript ', as his authority 
for incidents between 485 and 52. 6 These citations agree 
with nothing in the printed continuations, and where they 
correspond with passages in the Vitellius Chronicle are some- 
times fuller. A possible solution is that Fabyan had himself 
composed a continuation of his original work, which was 
superior to those supplied in the printed editions. Of this 
manuscript continuation ail trace has now perished, except for 
Stow's record and occasional quotations. The gap between 
the end of Fabyan's manuscript and the beginning of Stow's 
own life was hot long. For the greater part of the reign of 
Henry VIII he was dependent chiefly on Hall's Cttrouicle, 
supplemented by the London Annals in Harley lIS. 540. 
But for the last sixty years of his history he writes from his 
own knowledge, at first of memory, and afterwards of record 

pp. 133-7 , and 171-3) ; it ends with 1463, the notices for the later years 
again resembling the Twrt Ençlisk Chronicle. 
 e.g. The notices on the affair of Laurence Duket in 1284, the play at 
Skinners Well in 14o9, the piracy on the Thames in I44O and the fight 
at Smithfield in 1442. See i. 93, 254; ii. 32, 7I- 
z Ap. t[arley 2V[SS. 367, 530, 54% 54I, and 543. See further pp. lxxxviii 
to xc below. 
s Cf. ii. 31o.  See ii. 305 below. 
 One may possibly be the Colton IS. Nero C. xi. 
 See i. I8I, 209; ii. 55, 116 below. It is probable that some other 
marrer cornes from the saine source, as the notes for I5O4- 5 in i. 67 
and ii. 62. 

C2 



xxxvi 

htrodttctio 

set down systematically year by year for his Su»,mary and 
Attales. 1 ]3etween Feb., I56 and July, 567 at all events he 
kept some sort of Diary. z The greater part of this was ruade 
use of for the Annales, but some matters it would clearly 
have been unwise to print. This Diary ends just belote the 
beginning of his troubles. The search of his library by 
Grindal may have wamed hîm to keep no more any such 
dangerous document. 
Stow himself tells us that the idea of his Survey was 
suggested by Lambarde's Pcra»tbulalio» ofA'ctt, which first 
appeared in .574. He writes modestly that at the desire and 
persuasion of friends he handled the argument after plain 
nlanner rather than leave it unperformed. From the Letters 
Patent of James I it appears that Stow had spent eight years 
on the preparafion of his Survey, and since the first edition 
was published in 598 he must have been long past sixty 
years of age when he began his work. As already pointed 
out, a careful perambulation of the several wards of the City 
furnished the main framework of the book. To this particular 
account there was prefixed a more general narrative dealing 
with the origins, the growth, and social life of the City. For 
that part which deals with Roman Antiquities Stow vas 
probably indebted to the assistance of Camden.  For the 
subsequent chapters on Walls, Rivers, Gates, and Towers, on 
Customs, Sports, and Pastimes, and on the Honour of Citizens 
he found a convenient text in William Fitz-Stephen's 29c- 

 In his Stt»marie for  566 when describing Somerset's execution he 
thinks it 'good to writ myne opinion according to that whiche I there 
save '. Suitable material vas transferred from the Annales to the Survey. 
"- Preserved in Lambelh «ILS. 306 and printed as Stow's .al«llzarand« in 
Dr. Gairdner's Three Fifteenth Century Chronides, pp. I 15-47- I bave 
given some passages which illustrate the Setrz,ey in the notes on ii. -83, 
303, 339, 346, 360 bdmv. Very little of the lemoranda is personal : on 
3 January, I565, he dined with a Iriend at Westminster, and walked back 
on the ice to 13aynard's Castle ' as salffe as ever I went in eny place in all 
my lyffe' ; on z April,  566, ' was sene in yeelyment as thoughe the same 
had openyd yO bredghte of a great shete and shewyd a bryght flame of 
fyre and then closyd agayne, and as it ware at every mynute of an hmvre 
to opyn and close agayne, ge whiche I, beyng at y Barrs without Ail- 
gate, sawe playne easte as it was ovar the churche namyd Whitchappell' 
iPP- 3, 37- 
 Much of it resembles closely Camden's ritannia. 



7"/le Sllr7EE,ey of LollalOll xxxvii 

scri;ption of London, 1 which he printed accordingly as an 
appendix to the Survey."- 
From the state of the original manuscript 3 we may con- 
jecture that Stow first set out in a fait hand the result of hls 
perambulation. This he then proceeded to complete xvith 
additions and interpolations draxvn from his own large store- 
house, and written on the margins, or between the lines, or 
on slips pasted in, at such length as often to double the 
original contents of the page. The draft thus prepared differs 
a good dcal from the printed work as well in matter as in the 
arrangement, which was finally altered for the better. 4 On 
the other hand, Stow seems to have found his copy too exten- 
sive, and therefore cut out various matters which he had 
dealt with elsewhere or thought superfluous. But no sooner 
was the work printed than he began after his accustomed 
manner to enlarge and improve it. In the preface to his 
second edition he declares with justice that he had added 
many rare notes of antiquity.  Amongst the longest of these 
additions may be noted the extract from the Lancaster 
accounts,  the whole section ' Of Charitable Altos ', the ex- 
pansion ofthe Chapter on Honour of Citizens, 7 the account 
of the Devil's appearance at St. Michael, Cornhill, s the notes 
on Jews in England, 9 and on Tournaments at Smithfield ; 1° 
and finally the unperfected notes on City government, a 
subject which he did not touch in his first edition, because 
he had hope that another minded such a labour.  But of 
more real moment than these long insertions, are the number- 
less small corrections and additions, of which it is impossible 
to give any general description. It is curious that the refer- 
ences to foundations of Chantries are nearly ail inserted for 

1 Prefixed by FitzStephen to his Ze of Thomas lccket. 
2 See ii. 22o-9 below. 
 The main part forms ttarley ,IS. 538. A rough draft of the chapter 
on Southwark is in 1-Iar/ey .IIS. 544, ff. 96-9, where also there is another 
fragment on f. o7. A revised draft of the chapter on Rivers is in Tanner 
.I#S. 464 in the Bodleian Library. 
* See notes on ii. 285 and 365 below. 
' The additions amount to oo pages. 
 i. 85-7 and ii. 236. 7 i. 89-9 and ii. œ36. 8 i. 96 and ii. 244. 
 i. 278-82 and ii. 252. 0 ii. -9-33 and 6o. n ii. 87. 



xxxviii 

the first time in the second edition. 1 Several new passages 
are inserted from the Vitellius Chronide of Zondon ; and the 
Cartulary of St. Mary Overy would appear to bave been 
for tbe first rime consulted during tbe interval. 2 Other 
additions relate to events of later date than x598, such as the 
bequests of .A_lice Smith to the Skinners, the foundation of 
Plat's School in 6ox, and the damage done to Cheap Cross 
in 599 and 6oo.  Apart from the addition of new matter 
the text of the Surz,o, was carefully revised. Of this the 
best instance is to be round in the rearrangement of the 
material relating to Cheapside, which in the first edition was 
spread over Cheap, Farringdon Within, and Cordwainer Street 
Wards, but in I6o 3 was more conveniently brought together 
in the account of the first-named. 4 The first edition, more- 
over, seems hot to bave escaped criticism. So a note on the 
Skinners Company was put in 'to stop the tongues of un- 
thankful men, such as use to ask: Why bave ye hot noted 
this, or that? and give no thanks for what is done'.5 A 
contrary reason may explain the disappearance of Stow's 
account of his rebuff by the Vintners. « There is also a char- 
acteristic touch in the note 'that being informed of the 
Writhsleys to be buried there, I bave since round them and 
others to be buried at St. Giles, Cripplegate, where I mind to 
leave them'5 Certainly Stow improved his book in its 
second edition; it was substantially larger, and the changes 
were on the whole for the better. :Nevertheless both the 
original draft and the fil'St edition contain peculiar matter 
which we should have been sorry to lose. 
Thomas Heame called Stow ' an honest and knowing man ', 
but 'an indifferent scholar'.S The criticism is not altogether 
unjust, for Stow suffered ri'oto the limitations which no self- 
taught man can escape entirely. His knowledge of Latin and 
French was imperfect, and he was disposed sometimes to 
evade rather thala solve his difficulties. It is not surprising 
that he should occasionally be at fault in his most positive 
 See for instances, ii. -44-9. 
- See i. 25, 37, 66, 244, 249, 346, il. 63.  See i. I74, 267. 
 See i. 264-7o and ii. 249-54. 
 See il. 247.  See i. 2o 4. 
 Zetters/rare ¢he Bodleian, i. -"88. il. 98. 



771e Strvey of Lomto¢ xxxix 
interpretations. In the first compilation of such a work a 
certain proportion of error was inevitable, whether through 
inaccuracy of transcription for which Stow was personally 
responsible, or in mistakes of the printer over dates. What 
is really remarkable about the Snrvey is that a man with 
little advantages of education, working on new ground from 
sources sfill for the most part in manuscript, was able to 
discover and bring into order so vast a mass of material. 
After all possible deductions the Snrvey justifies Stow's rule 
in the preface to his Su»zmarie for I565 :--' In hystories the 
chief thyng that is to be desired is the truth.' His main 
narrative is substantially accurate, the state of his original 
manuscript, and the variations presented by the printed 
editions bear witness to the pains which he took to verify his 
facts, a The range of his information is indeed remarkable. 
It appears not only in the text of his published works, but 
also in the vast mass of his manuscript Collections, of which 
the surviving remnant, considerable enough, can have formed 
but a small part.  
In the StrzoE Stow's chief task of research was to find 
illustrations for what he had heard or seen, and crificism or 
discrimination was of less importance. The charm and value 
of thework consist in its personal note. We are not so much 
concerned that Stow should have had a fine scorn for fables 
of other folks' telling, especially if that other chanced to be 
R. G., 3 as that he could tell a merry talc on his own account. 
It is well that he should disbelieve in giants, 4 but better that 
he could repeat with simple faith his father's story of how the 
Devil appeared at St. Michael, Cornhill, and add his own 
testimony on the holes where the claws had entered three or 
four inches deep in the stone. 5 But even greater credulity in 
himself, and more harsh censure of it in others, could be for- 
given for the sake of his zeal for truth and just dealing. He 
loved to praise famous men, and rejoiced in the history of 
 A comparison of Stow's account of St. Michael, Cornhill, with the 
Churchwardens' Aceounts, which he does not appear to have seen, 
furnishes a good instance of his accuracy. Sec i. 195- 9 and ii. 3o5-6. 
And sec also ii. 331-- for another contemporary instance. 
"- Sec pp. lxxxvi sqq. below. 
 Sec i. 18, 349. « Sec i. 348- 9.  Sec i. I96, 



×l 1.1#rodz/c/ioee 

their good deeds. The care with xvhich he set down particulars 
of charities seems to have been inspired by a sense of the 
public interest, for he is not less careful to censure the too 
frequent instances of neglect and misappropriation. 1 He 
comments so often on the failure of executors in the discharge 
of their duties,  that one begins to suspect the memory of 
some personal grievance. But his censure never seems 
malicious. He speaks out openly against abuses of civic 
government, and the promotion of unfitting persons,  but 
he glosses over the shortcomings xvhich lost John Cowper 
his term of mayoralty, 4 and does not repeat the scandal caused 
by Sir Thomas Lodge, who was ' braky and professe to be 
banqweroute' during his year of office. 5 In other matters 
his own predilections could hOt be suppressed. He did not 
like change, objected to find his former walks pestered with 
filthy tenements, commended archery, thought no harm of 
bull-baiting, 6 scorned bowling-alleys, and passed theatres by. 
Stow's pronounced opinions on such matters xvere reflected 
inevitably in the Sm'vey. Of the London of contempol'ary 
satirists and dramatists we find little trace. Itis only through 
his repeated complaints of the dicing-houses, and filthy tene- 
ments, which destroyed the pleasant walks of his youth, 
that we get any hint at the cozenage, gambling, and immor- 
ality which defamed the suburbs of Elizabethan London. To 
the lurid picture drawn by Greene and Nash, Dekker and 
Rowlands, Stow's sober narrative may, however, supply a 
needed corrective. More surprising to readers of to-day must 
be the almost complete absence in the Survey of any reference 
to the adventurous and intellectual activities of the age. ' Sir 
Francis Dl'ake, that famous mariner ', is mentioned once. But 
there is hot a word of Shakespeare, nor of any other of the 
great writers of the rime, not even of his own acquaintance 

a i. xx6, I48, x54, x98, 246.  i. xi4-5, 273. 
s See i. I9I.  See i. I2. 
 llemoranda, ap. Three Fifleentk Century Chronicles, p. 127. 
ç It is the desecration of the Sabbath, hOt the cruelty ¢o animais, which 
Stow reprehends, when in referring to the accident at Paris-Garden, on 
Sunday, x3 Jan., 583, he writes : A friendly warning to such as more 
delight themselves in the cruelty of beasts» then in the workes of mercy, 
the fruits of a true professed faith, which ought to be the Sabbath day's 
exercise.' Annales, p. 73, ed. 16o 5. 



xli 

Ben Jonson. It may be replied that Stow was not concerned 
with social lire; but in point of fact he is ready enough to 
digress on any subject that interested him. As a matter of 
topography alone such famous, or notorious, haunts as The 
Bull in Bishopsgate, The Mitre, or The Merrnaid deserved at 
least a passing notice. But theatrical references were struck 
out deliberately in thc edition of I6o3, savc for a gencral 
[mplied censure on stage-plays. Perhaps a like intention 
accounts for the exclusion of other topics to which the writer 
was not attracted. Stow's attitude was not, however, due to 
any recluse-like absorption in books. We get a few glimpses 
of him as a sociable companion, ready to discuss business in 
a friendly way over a quart of ale or pint of wine, interested 
in old sports, in the fun on the frozen Thames, and the time- 
honoured wrestling at Bartholomew Fait. New-fangled 
customs and amusements he did not love, and he either 
censured them openly, or left them unnoticed, like those 
tombs of the lately dead, which thrust out monuments hal- 
lowed by antiquity. 
Such an attitude was perhaps natural to the conservative 
mind of an old rnan, who round himself in 'the most scoffing, 
carping, respectlesse, and unthankeful age that ever was ,.1 
It certainly hurt nobody. Yet once in a way there cornes out 
a touch of spite in his humorous satisfaction at the misfortunes 
which befell the builders of high houses to overlook others, 
and especially a neighbour of lais own in Leadenhall, who 
made him a high tower, but being in short rime tormented 
with gout could not climb and take pleasure thereof.' But 
we rnay accept the protest which has corne down to us through 
Howes, that he never wrote anything either for malice, fear, 
or favour, nor to seek his own particular gain or vain-glory, 
and that his only pains and care was to write Truth. 
The text of the ..ço-z, ey as given in the edition of 16o 3 is 
the only full and authoritatlve version. Strange as it rnay 
appear, it has never been accurately reprinted. The very 
interest of the book encouraged later writers to continue and 

Annales, p. 859 , ed. 1631. It is Howes's observation ; but he may 
have been using Stow's collections. 
See i.  5"2-. 



x l il ]JltrOt{!!(tfOl 

expand it. No long time after Stow's death /knthony 
Munday- took up his friend's work, and in i68 produced an 
edition, 'continued, corrected, and much enlarged with many 
rare and worthie notes.' It is true that in bulk Munday's 
additions were conslderable, but, as Strype remarks, they con- 
sîst very largely of copies of monumental inscriptions from 
churches and extracts from the Su»tmarie and Analcs. How- 
ever, like Stow before him, Munday had no sooner completed 
his labours than he set to xvork once more. In 633, four 
months after Munday's death, there appeared another edition 
' completely finished by the study of A. M., H. D., and others'.l 
Perhaps the most prominent addition on this occasion was the 
insertion of coats of arms of all the Mayors and the City 
Companies. But, besides further notes on churches, there was 
a large if somewhat undigested mass of new matter, copies of 
Acts and Statutes of Parliament and the Common Council, 
notes on the origin of the City Companies, and the like. 
Strype censures Munday for his deviations from the author's 
edition and sense ; unhappily he had not the wisdom to take 
warning from another's error. 
In I694 there was a design to reprint the Survey with large 
additions and improvementsT A little later John Strype began 
to work on the Survey, and after long labour produced in 7o 
a so-called edition in two large folio volumes. Hearne, on 
hearing of the project in 7o7, wrote well : ' Stow should have 
been simply reprinted as a venerable original, and the additions 
given in a different character'. Strype judged otherwise, and 
though he preserved for the most part the original text, he 
embedded it in such a mass of new, if valuable, matter as often 
to conceal its identity and obscure its meaning. A similar 
criticism applies to the version of x734, edited by John Mottley 
under the pseudonym of Robert Seymour, and to the ' Sîxth 
Edition' of i754, printed under Strype's name but with addi- 
tions ' by careful hands ', bringing the survey and history down 
to that date. 

H. D. is Humphry Dyson. See p. 44 of Surz,ey for 633. 
Projected apparently by Awnsham Churchill, and other London 
publlshers: sec a broadsheet in the Bodleian Library. 
Collections, ii. 4. 



7"irle ._Ç?[gpg'.), oal r LoI¢lIol xliii 

The text of I6o 3 was first reprinted by W. J. Thoms in 
184:. Thoms added notes of some antiquarian interest, 
together with the chief variations of the text of I598. But 
he modernized the orthography and omittcd some of the 
marginal notes. His text is moreover hot free from typo- 
graphical errors, which did hot appear in the original. The 
example of Thoms' edition has been followed in subsequent 
reprints. Thus it cornes to pass that the present edition, for 
the first time after three hundred years, makes Stow's true 
work generally accessible in the form in which he wrote it. 



APPENDIX TO INTRODUCTION 

I. NOTES ON THE STOW FAMILY 

STOW no doubt belonged to an old London family. His grand- 
father Thomas (d. 1527) in his will refers to his own parents as 
being buried at St. Michael, Cornhill (see p. vii above). This carries 
the descent one generation further back than John Stow could do. 
The naine occurs occasionally in early records. There is mention 
of a John de Stowe in 1283 (Sharpe, Cal. ll'ills ]-[usling, i. 65). 
Henry de Stowe, draper, had a lease of the Coldharbour in I319 
(see i. 236 below). Another John Stowe occurs in 1351 (Ça/. 
If'dis, i. 641), and William Stowe in 1387 (Anc. Deeds, B. 2o55). 
Thomas Stow was Dean of St. Paul's in 1400. But I cannot connect 
any of these with the chronicler. 
I must pass, therefore, to contemporary documents, and will then 
sure up their evidence. 

The lVill of ,lizabelk S/oz, ve. 
The xxvijth of June 1568. 
' In the name of God Amen. I, Elizabeth Stowe beinge sicke in 
bodye &c.' Her body to be buried ' in the cloyster by my husbande 
in the parisshe of S. Mychell in Cornehill'. Her executor to spend 
' xxxvli, vpon my buryall to burye me decentely withall '. 
'lira. I will myne executor to gyve vnto Iohn my eldeste sonne 
fyve poundes. 1lin. I gyve vnto Iohn my younger sonne the monye 
beinge in the handes of Thomas ffarmer my sonne in lawe, the some 
of xiijli, vjs. viijd., which shalbe due as apperethe by one obligacion. 
And yf it happen that the saide lohn the yonger doe departe this 
worlde within the rime specified in the obligacion, that then it remaine 
vnto William Stowe my sonne, and yf he dye also then it to remaine 
vnto my executor his heires executors or assigns.' 
To William Stowe, ten pounds. To her daughter Iohan, rive 
pounds ' for she hathe had fyve alredy'. To her daughter Margaret 
' the yearely rent of the house which Stephen Rowlandson dwelleth in, 
which is xxxv by year' with remainder to her executor. 



Notes 
Vnto my daughter Alyce my best pettycoate for a remembrance, 
for she hathe had terme poundes of me alredye.' 
' Vnto my brother William Archer his wyfe, my cassocke edged 
with conye, and to his son harye xls. in monye.' 
' Vnto my cosen Cuttler my worste cassocke.' Ten shillings ' for 
my children and fryndes to drincke withall after my buryall '. Five 
shillings for the poor in bread. To the Tallow-chandlers six slfillings 
and eight pente to follow her corpse. 
'My sonne Thomas Stove my full and whoale executor' is named 
residuary legatee, and Harry Johnson is appointed overseer and to 
have six shillings and eight pente for his pains. 
F.lizabeth Stowe makes her mark. Willyam Ere, and Harrye 
Johnson 1 sign. Proved by Thomas Stowe on 3 Oct. I568. 
The lI'T1 of John S/owe. 
' In the naine of God anaen. The xxx day of August 16o 3 I Iohn 
Stowe Citizen and Marchant Tailor of London &c. 
'My bodlre to be buryed where it please God to take me to his 
mercye, fyrst I gyve and bequeath to my daughter Julyan Towers 
the some of x poundes. And to my daughter Jonc foster ten poundes. 
And that they to be satysfyed and contented for any further porcyons 
after my death. And for the rest of my goodes household stuf and 
appareyle I gyve vnto Elizabeth my wyfe, as also I gyve vnto her the 
lease of my bouse with the Residue of the yeares to corne.' 
Elizabeth Stow is appointed executrix, and George Speryng - over- 
seer, 'desyryng hym moste hartely to take so moche paynes to help 
my pore wyfe in ber busynes, that she be not ouerpressed to take any 
wrong.' 
Signed in a very shaky but characteristic hand: ' Iohn stow, Iohn 
stow aged 78 yeres.' 
Proved by F.lizabeth Stow on 6 April 16o. 
Both wills were proved in the Bishop of London's Court, and the 
above abstracts are taken from the originals. 
'ttlri«s in tgarish legislers. 
St. Michael, Cornhill. 
Chrislemngs: 20 Sept. 1547, William Stowe. 
2 Dec. 1574, Thomas; 4 May i578, Elizabeth; 
Judith; 25 Dec. 1581, Emmanuel; 3 June 584, Judith; all 
• children of Thomas Stowe. 
1 Sec pp. liii and Iviii below. 
- Deputy of Limetreet Ward, sec next page. 



xlvi .4lemli.ç lo Dztrodt clio 
t?urials : 6 June I559, Thomas Stowe. 
5 Aug. 7 , Margerye, wife of Thomas Stowe. 6 Dec. fi83, 
Elizabeth, d. of Thomas Swe.  Sept. 94, Judith, wife 
ofThomas Stowe. 8 Oct. x6oz, Thomas Stowe ' dwelling in 
the Churchyard '. 
St. Andrew Undershaft. 
Christenhtgs: 2 7 Jan. i o," s o Jone, d. of John Stowe. 
o Feb. ,s of John Stoe. 
15,, Matie, d. 
29 June ,582, Peter; 9 Feb. ss March 
5z, Francis ; zo 
Elizabeth; z June 1588, Thomas; 8 Nov. t59 o, Susan; 
6 Oct. t594, Peter; 3 Jan. t59-, Robert; t9 Feb. 59, 
Gregorye ; ail children of Peter Towers. 
e][arriages: 3 t Aug. 567, Thomas Stowe and Margefie Kent,widdow. 
z 3 April t581. Peter Towers and Julyan Stoe. 
t5 July 58z, Pawle Walter and Annes Stowe (0r Stone). 
4 Feb. 587, Gylles Dewry and Margaret Stowes. 
urials:  8 Jan. t 58, Anne Stow, the wiffe of Jo. Stow,  8 Feb. 
58, Joyce Stooe, wiffe of Jo. Stooe. 3t Oct. 59 , Eliza- 
beth Towers. z bIarch 159, Peter Towers. 9 Oct. 593, 
Margaret Dewbery, widdow. 
6 Nov. 6oo, Peter ; 5 Sept. 6o3, Thomas; t3 Sept. t6o 3, 
Rort; 2z Sept. 6o 3, Susanna; the last four ing ail 
children of Mr. Peter Towers. 
8 April t6o5, ' Mr. John Stoe was Buryed the viijh day of April, 

t6o5.' 
lO 
4 Feb.  6ï» 
5 July t6, 
Sept.  6  3, 
24 Jan. 62, 

Mrs. Julyan Towers, wiffe of blr. Peter Towers. 
BIr. George Spering, late Alderman's Deputieo 
bIr. Frauncis Towers, son of Mr. Peter Towers. 
Mr. Peter Towers, householder. 
St. Dionis Backchurch. 
M'arriage: 8 Oct. :57, Thomas Stowe of St. Michael, Cornhill, 
to Judith Heath of this parish. 
The Registers of St. Michael, Cornhill, and St. Dionis Backchurch, 
have been pfinted by the Harleian Society. For permission to search 
the Register of St. Andrew Undershaft, I have to thank the ]3ishop of 
Islington, who is Rector of St. Andrew. 
Thomas Stow (d. r559), who married Elizabeth Archer, was the 
father of John Stow, and had other issue: Thomas, William (&. t547), 
and John the younger; Johan, married Blr. Rolfe, alias Frowyke; 
Margaret; and Alice, married Thomas Farmer. From the terres of 



]Voles o» ll«e Slow tTa¢ily xlvii 
Elizabeth Stowe's will, I conjecture that 'John the younger' was 
under age at her death ; I find no other mention either of him or of 
William Stowe. It will be observed that in St. lIiehael's Register 
there is no entry of the death of Elizabeth Stowe ; but in the Churck- 
wardcns' Accounts (p. 62, ed. W. H. Overall) there is a note under 
568 : ' Reeeyved for the buryall of lIystris Stowe iijs. iiijd. '; she 
died in Oct. 568 (see p. lx). The later entries in that Rester 
probably relate to the ehronicler's brother Thomas, his wives and 
children. The first marriage of Thomas Stowe is probably that 
of 1567 in the St. Andrew's Register; from the story on p. lx it 
appears likely that he had married a widow ealled iIargery Kent or 
Kemp shortly before x568; his second marriage is elearly that of the 
St. Dionis Register. But it is eurious that in ttarley 'IIS. 538, 
f. 47 vo, there are two stray notes: ' glastar Bureheley in the towne 
of Hartford is Thomas Stow's eosyn, and Iohan Frowyk's eosen in 
houndsdytehe, glaster Burehely of Hertford is a cosen to Iohan 
Frowicke in houndsdytche, to Thomas Stowe in Cornell, but no kyn 
to Iohn Stowe.' We know, however, that John Stow's sister Johan or 
Joan was sometimes ealled Frowyke (see p. lx), and the tacts whieh 
we know about Thomas Stow fit so well with the entries in the 
Resters, that I ean only conjecture that the truc purport of these 
notes is lost; possibly John Stow, in the bitterness of his quarrel, 
disowned the kinship. Of Thomas Stow of Cornhill we learn some- 
thing from the Churchwardens" Accounts (p. 47) ; he was one of the 
wardens of St. Bliehael's between i58. and fi88; in the latter year 
it was 'agreed that Thomas Stowe after all suche grants now in esse 
or beinge for his sister iIargaret, or for his owne dwelling if nede 
shalbe, shall have one of the houses in the churchyard of o r parishe, 
first empty after the xpiracion of all the saine graunts'. It will be 
remembered that John Stow's sister 13,Iargaret appears to have been 
unmarried. 
From the entries at St. Andrew Undershaft, it seems clear that 
there were at least two parishioners ealled Jo. Stow or Stoe. Itis 
therefore impossible tobe certain that any of the entries relate to the 
chronieler exeept those of his own burial, and of his daughter Julyan's 
marriage ; in both the naine is euriously spelt Stoe. Itis hardly 
possible that the Jone Stowe of ,.s and lIarie Stoe of s should 
be his daughters, since at these dates he probably still lived in 
St. Katherine Cree Church parish ; moreover, Stow's three daughters 
 Unfortunately there are no Registers for St. Katherine Cree Chureh 
earlier than I637. 



563. 

xlviii /ttSjbemtix to btt«odttcIioit 
were ' marriageable and in service x,vith right worshipfull personages' 
by , [;69 or thereabouts (see p. ixii). It bas been commonly assumed 
that the Arme Stow, who died in */58*, was the chronicler's first wife, 
but for this I can fiud no evidence. Joan Foster's mother was clearly 
alive when she wrote the letter to her father which is given on p. Ixx ; 
il she had only dated it fully the point might have been settled. On 
the whole it does hot seem sale to connect either Arme Stow or Joyee 
Stooe with the chronicler. Elizabeth Stow is menfioned by name 
only in her husband's will, on the tomb, and in the copy of the Survey, 
which presumably belonged to her, and is now in the British Museum ; 
but one of her husband's grandchildren was named Elizabeth. Of 
Stow's three daughters two survived him. Julyan, apparently the 
elder, married Peter Towers in *58*, and died in 6,I; the descrip- 
tion of ber husband as ' Mr.' seems to indicate that he was well-to-do. 
The second, Joan Foster, lived at Warwick, whence she wrote the 
letter on p. lxx; her marriage does hOt appear in the St. Andrew's 
Register, but Foster was a common naine in the parish. The 
bIargaret Stowes, who married Gylles Dewbery in I587, and died 
a widow in *593, might possibly be the third. 
Mr. George Spering, the Alderman's Deputy, was no doubt the 
Overseer of John Stow's will. 
Of the other persons named in Elizabeth Stow's will, 'my cosen 
Cuttler' appears also in John Stow's history. The poor uncle, who 
was overcome by Elizabeth's injustice (see p. Iviii), is presumably 
William Archer, whose son 'Harye 'may perhaps be identical with 
the Henry Archer who served in the Netherlands in i587, and 
apparently supplied John Stow with material for his Annales (pp. I 199, 
.:I, ed. 6o5). 

lI. DOCUMENTS ILLUSTRATING STOW'S LIFE 

. ttow Stow began to wrile ttisto9, , and quarrelled with Richard 
Graflon 
[Amongst John Stow's private papers now bound up in ttarleyAIS. 367 
are several disordered fragments (ff. I- 3 and ff. II, IZ) relating to his 
controversy with Richard Grafton. For the most part they deal with 
alleged errors of Grafton's. and such points as the extent of his debt to 
Hall. But L 3, which deals with the beginning of the quarrel, contains 
autobiographical matter of a wider interest, and helps to explain the 
prefaces printed on pp. lxxvi to lxxix ; it is therefore given in full. The 
most interesting portion of f. I is given on pp. xi, xii above.] 
Richard Grafton published his first boke, intituled ' An abridgment 
of ye cronicles of England ', anno 1563 . In ) epistle vherof (dedi- 



Docmlte¢z/« illztstrali¢«g Stow's lire xlix 

eated to y« right honorable lord Robert Dudley gc.), he contemnyth 
ail yo abrydgments before tyme publyshid, saythe yt therin was con- 
tayned lytle trewthe & lesse good order, wt y« vncertaynty ofyeres to yo 
deceyvynge of ail, & vniust dishonoringe of mayny; but in this boke, 
quod he, yow shall fynd these abusys reformyd, & trewthe more 
symply vtteryd gc. This boke thus publyshyd was, hOt wt stondynge 
yo glorios tytle, of moaste men, or rathar of ail (except hym selffe) 
more myslyked then yo former abridgments of othar. 
Richard Grafton reprintyd y« saine his Abridgment Anno 564 wt 
excuse to yo readers that in y« first imprecion partly by miswritynge, 
partly by misentrynge and mystakynge of yeres, but chefly by mys- 
printinge, divars and sondry fautes wer commytted, whiche (nowe) 
aftar he had well parused, he had wt dilygence reformyd and amendyd, 
in suche maner as he trustyd would apeare in y« imprecion to yo 
contentacion of all those yt are des)'rus to vnderstond ye trew notes 
& discorse of tymes gc. This boke beinge little bettar then yo first 
(nay rathar worse) was as myche or more of ail men myslyked, 
thm'ghe occasyon wherof mayny sitisens & othars knovynge yt I had 
bene a serchar of antiquitis, (whiche were devinite, sorencys, & 
poyetrye, but nevar extemyed history wer it offeryd nevar so frely) 
movyd me for ye como'-':;.e of my contry somewhat to travaile in 
settynge forth some oth.. abrydgment or somarye, and also to write 
agaynst & reprove Richard Grafton. To ye first at ye lengthe 
I grauntyd, but to ye othar I vtterly refusyd ; about yo saine tyme 1 it 
haponyd that Thomas Marche printar requiryd me to corecte ye old 
comon abridgment, which at ye first was collectyd of Langwit & 
Copar's epitomy, but then moche coruptyd wt oft reprintynge, and 
therfore of Richard Grafton so contemnyd as is afore sayd. To this 
request I grauntyd on condicion yt some one whiche were bettar 
leamyd mowght be ioyned wt me, for yt it was a stody wherin I had 
nevar travayled; and for my parte I wolde gyve my labores in that 
mattar frely w out takynge for my paynes ).o valew of one pend'. 
Shortly aftar Thomas Marche apoynted to me William Baldwyn, 
mynistar & parson of S. Michels at Powles gate ; but or evar we wrote 
one word of y« mattar it plesyd God to call y« sayd W. Baldwyn to 
his mercy; * wherupon, I thynkynge myselffe dischargyd of my promys 
to Thomas Marshe, he nevartheless required me to begyn a letyl, for 
he wold shortly apoynt one to be io)'nyd wt me, whiche promys as 
yet was nevar performed. But I, aftar I had once begone, I cowld 

a See note on p. ix above. 

 See p. x above. 



! 415ibelldLa" to Id.roditctio, 
hot rest tyll ye saine were fully endyd. And then 1 of myne owne 
mynd wente to Grafton's howse, & shewyd hyme my boke, reqnirynge 
hym not to be offendyd wt my doynges for I ment hot to gyve eny 
suche occasyon. Aftar I had shoyd hym what movyd me to travayle 
in that mattar I also shewyd hym his owne abridgment of ye laste 
imprecion, whiche I had coatyd in ye margen, wherin he had hot only 
mysplacyd ail moaste ail ye yeares of our lord god, but also ye yeres 
ofy begynengs & endyngs of ail ),e kyngs of this realme, and ofmayne 
kynges had lefte ont how longe they severally reygnyd, but in one 
place he left out iii kynges togithar, that is to say, Didantius, Detonus, 
and Gurguinus,  he dothe hot so moche as naine them, fo. 6 There 
also lakynge Sygebert, who reygnyd iii yeres, Io. 25. When he 
comyth to the accompte of ye baylyves, maiors, sheryves of London, 
he eythar myse placethe them or levithe them owt, in some place one, 
some place ij, iii, iiij, ye v. togither, fo. 66, wt also y yeres of out 
lord, & y reynes of ye kyngs, & ail that was done in those yeres. 
For yO folowynge of his awctor one noate shal suffyce. Thomas 
Copar saythe yg xxx garmaynes tawght ye abrogation of y sacra- 
ments of ye awltar, baptisme & wedlocke = fo. =., and Grafton 
saythe they tawght a reformation &c. fo. 4. For ye sterlynge money 
he saythe it was coynyd beinge & s ounce of silvar, & it had ye name 
eythar of ye bird cawlyd a starre havyng perhaps y saine put in, or 
else of a starr in y element, fo. 94. For y well placynge of his 
mattar in fo. 96 he placethe ye conduyte in Grasious strete tobe 
buylded by Thomas Knoles in anno x4xo, whiche conduyt was 
begane tobe buylded by ye executors of Sir Thomas Hyll in anno 
49o & finishyd anno i$o 3. Also in ye saine lefe & ye same yere 
4o he saythe K. Henry ye fourthe endyd his lyfe ye  yere of his 
reigne and was buryed at Canterbery, and then declarethe what was 
done in y  3 and 4 yeres of his reigne, for yt he makythe hym to 
raygne ij yeres aftar he was dede and beryed. In folio 54 he 
placethe y deathe of kynge Edward ye 6 aftar ye lady Iane, ye aftar 
qwene Mary was proclamed, and ye duke of Northombarland apre- 
hendyd. In ye 9. yere of qwen hlary & ye  of kynge Philype he 
saythe ye emperour sent ye Cownty Egmount & othar embassadors 
into england to make a parfet conclusyon of maryage bitwene kynge 
Philype & qwene Marye. And as thes fewe thynges are placyd, sois 
almoste ail his whole boke. ye printar in fo. 97 hathe printyd iiij lynes 
t5"se togethar &c. Aftar I had thus shewyd my owne boke, & also 
* Three mythical monarchs in the first century B.C. 
 The German heretics of t66. W. Newburgh, t32-4 . 
n Rad an, 



])oczzmelz/s illzzstra/)z S/oc;s lift 

Il 

Grafton's late abridgment so coatyd as I bave partl), declaryd, to the 
fyrste Richard Grafton sayd he lykyd ye saine very well, yt I had bothe 
taken great paynes and also desarved great commendacion; for ye 
othar he sayd he had folowyd Fabyan, which was a very nowghty 
crony¢le, and Coper whiche was x. tymes worse, and cursid y« tyme 
y evar he had sene Copar's cronycle, for y had cawsyd hym to comyt 
ail thos errours, & Cop,r was not worthy to be acomptyd learnyd; 
& then he shewyd me wher Copar had written ij negatyves in on 
sentence, which was not y« part of a learnyd man ; he addyd forthar : 
' I do not' (quod he) ' write ij negatives in one sentence ; I can tell 
how to wryt, I trowe &c.' To be short he gave me thankes, and 
professyd his frindshype in eny thynge that lay in hym to do, & so we 
partyd. Then aftar I had got my boke pereusyd & lycensyd by 
ye wardens of ye Stacionars, I requirid foord[er] my lord of Caunter- 
bery his grace to auctoryze ye saine, and then put yO same in print? 
Aftar yo comynge owt wherof, for y yo saine was well vtteryd by 
ye printar, & well lyked of in y« comon weale, Grafton began then 
to chaffe and dyvysyd w hym selffe, & toke counsell of mayny othars, 
whiche way to brynge me out of credyt, and at lengthe toke one of 
my bokes namyd yo Summarie of Englysche chronicles, and drew out 
ther of (all togithar leavyng his owne abridgment) a smale boke 
whiche he printed in desimo sexto, & in ye frontar he entitelythe it, 
A manuell of ye Chronicles of ye world tyll anno 565; to ye redar 
he cawlethe it a brydgyd abridgement, and over ye page of yO leves 
cawlethe it a brefe colation of history. This boke he dedicatyd to his 
lovynge frends yO mastar & wardens of yo company of ye moste 
excelent arte & science of Imprintynge, reqwestynge them to take 
swche ordar wt theyr whole company y ther be no brefe abridgements 
or manuels of Chronicles imprintyd, but only that &c. To yo redar 
he saythe, I hope y none will showe them selves so vngentle, nor so 
vnfrindly as to abuse me in this my little labor & goodwill, as of late 
I was abusyd by one y counterfeacted my volume & ordar of ye 
abridgment of ye chronicles, & hathe made my travayle to passe vnder 
his name,  also by omittynge some thynges of myne & WOl'SSe put in 
place, & by alteracion of some thyngs & by addicion of some other, 
whiche kynd of dealynge is not comendable gc. Aftar y I had 
viewid this preface & ye whole emanuell (st?), I havynge also abridgid 
my summary & cawsed ye saine to be redy prynted, I made a preface 

 See p. lxxxii, below. 
 Stow does hOt quote quite accurately : cf. p. xi above. 
d 



1566. 

ther vnto, wher in I aunsweryd (as reson movyd me) Grafton's vntrew 
reportyng preface, and dedicatyd my boke (named ye summary of 
ye Chronicles of England abridgid) to yo ryght honorable Sir Richard 
Champion lorde maior of ye citye of London, yO worshipfull aldarmen 
gc. in yo biginninge of Anno 566. Aftar ye publishynge of this my 
abrigid sommary Grafton marvelowsly stormyd & cawsyd yO mastar 
& wardens of yO stacionars to threaten Thomas Marche, my pryntar, 
& also to request me to corne before them at theyr comon hawle, 
wher I shulà, they sayd, talke wt Grafton face to face ; but I comynge 
often thythar Grafton allways marie excusys, & drave them of from 
tyme to tyme & nevar came at them; wherupon ye mastar & wardens 
desyryd me hot to be offendyd, for they wer sory they had trobelyd 
me so ofte, but they wold no more trust to Grafton's worde sythe he 
had so ofte disapoynteà them. 
Aftar this in yO same yere 1566 I repryntyd my summary vt 
adytions. And then Grafton seythe that neythar his great abridgment 
nor his small emanuell were of eny extemyd, he alltogether forsoke 
them bothe, & toke my summarv of ).e last edition laynge that for his 
grownd worke, whiche sarvithe hym lbr ye accompte of yeres, for yo 
reygnes of kyngs, for )'o names & yeres of ye bayles, maiors & shrives, 
& also for mayny speciall noates, which by great labour & not wt out 
great costes I had gatheryd. Then, I sa,, he buyldyd ther on wt 
Robart Fabyon, Iohn Frosart, Edward Hall, & Thomas Copar, tyll he 
had finishid a great volome, whiche he intituled, ' A Chronicle at large 
& mere history of ye affayres of England, and kyngs of ye saine, 
deduced from ye creacion of ye wodde vnto ye first habitacion of this 
Islanà gc.' On ye second page he, counterfeitynge my cataloge of 
awctors, namethe to ye nombar of thre score and odd, the moste 
parte wherof were devyns & wrote no matar of history towchynge this 
Realm ; the othar beinge historiographers ; to increase his nombar he 
resitethe twyse : as in ye letter A. he writethe Antoninus, in y letter ]3. 
byshope, which is all one &c.  Also it is easy to vnderstond Grafton 
nevar saw mayny of thos awctors; for profe wherof I saye yt 
T. l'qewton  drewe out of thos devyne awctors in the catalog alledgyd 
almoste all ye matar conteyned in vi partes of his boke, & mastar 
Keyes  of Oxford drew ye seventhe part tyll about ye end of Henry 
i I omit some other instances. 
 No doubt Stow's friend : sec p. lxxi below. 
 Thomas Caius or Keyes (d. 57) who vas Master of University 
College, Oxford, I56-7. Sec Dict. ]VaL Biog., viii. 225. The associa- 
tion of Newton and Caius with Grafton doe hot appear to be elsewhere 
noted. 



Doc¢t¢¢e¢z.[s ill«tstrati¢¢g Stow's l/tic liii 

ye second, when the same (being vnperfecte) was taken away from 
hyln by Rychard Grafton, who at his pleasar patched it vp wt his 
foure awctors afore namyd, Fabian, Frossard, Hall & Coper, ail comon 
bokes, tyll ye end of kynge Edward yo 6, and then Mastar G. F. 1 
pennyd ye story of qwene Mary, wher Grafton endithe his great 
volume. Of this great boke I will make no great descourse, but only 
by ye way a litle &c. 

z. Of Slow's quarrcl zoith hfs rolher Thomas, and hav his molhcr 
allered ber will. 
[From Harley MS. 367, ff. 6, 7. The date is June--October, I568. 
The beginning, middle, and end of the story are ail lnissing.] 
•.. I care not what it be. So I sent for ye best aie and bread, and 
a cold lege of mutton was put before hir, wherof she eate very hungerly, 
and therafter fell both to butter and to cheese. In the end when we 
departyd she promisyd, that as God had placed me to be the principall 
of ail her children, for that I was the eldyst, she would hot conteme 
me but confyrme the same, and when eythar man or woman should 
go about to perswad hir, for the naturall love yt she owght to beare 
vnto me she would cry out vpon them, avoyd dvvel. But aftar hir 
comynge home, Tholnas and lais wyfe would nevar surfer hir to rest 
tyll she had tould them ail the talke that had passed betwixt hir and 
me. And when he had hard that I lalnentyd his beinge matched wt 
an harlot, he would nevar let my mother rest tyll he had foarsyd hir to 
break hir will, wher in she had bequethyd me x. h'. (equall w; ail yO 
yongar children, except Thomas, whiche had ail indede), and to put 
me in nothinge at all ; but even then she could hOt get William Eyre, 
to whom she had gyven Rowlands bouse in Fynkes lane, nor Henry 
Johnson, whom she had made hir ovarseer, to put thevr hands vnto ye 
will except I were at ye least put in x. h'. as I was afore. And thus, 
seinge no remedy, Thomas put in v. h'., and then said he had put in 
as it was afore, for theyr pleasure. And so they set theyr handes to 
it,  and aftar hard it rede, wherin they found but v. h, and wold have 
w drawne theyr hands agayne, but was to laie. And William Eyre 
hathe told me synce y he will take his othe, that he did beleve that I 
had some part in x. h, or elles he wold have nevar set his hand to ri, 
and offeryd them xl. s. out of his purse to have put out his hand 
 George Ferrers, the poet. In his Annales (p. o7o , ed. 6o5) Stow 
writes of the loss of Calais: 'Wherof Mastar George Ferrers hath 
written at large, for he collected the whole history of Queene Mary as the 
same is set downe vnder the name of Richard Gl'affon.' 
 On 27 June. Colnpare the extracts from the will on pp. xliv, xlv above. 



aga)ne. Thus was I condemnyd and payd v. pounds (Thomas 
beinge his owne bayly, whiche is both agaynst law and reasone) for 
namynge Thomas his wyfe an haflot, preve]y only to one body (who 
knew y saine as we]] as I); but 'f he cou]d so ponysshe ail mon y 
wy]] more openly sa so moche, he would sone be rychar then en), 
lord maior of London. ¥ this.., ye hym selle no longe aftar (as he 
had donc ofttymes belote)ca]]ed ber an ow]cl ... whores in ye harynge 
of ail his neyghbours.., suche and suche, and namyd a great nomber 
of ber customers saynge that he had taken hir from ye... and had 
thought to bave ruade her a honest woman, but it was past cure, 
and therefore he thruste hir out of y dores? And aftar yt she being 
convayed agayne into y house through one of y nebours wyndows, 
he bett hir, and threwe hir ageyne into the streat; and ail y neygh- 
bours could hOt get him to take her in agayne ; for he sayd that she 
would robe hym to kepe her bastardis, be his deathe as she was her 
other husbands, for she styll went to wytchis and sorcerars. Yet 
agayne she was conveyed into the house, and at x of ye cloke at nyght 
he, being bare leggyd, serchyd and found her cropte in to ye jakes 
entry, and then fell ageyn a beatynge of hir, so that my mother ]yinge 
syke on a palet was fayne to crepe vp, and felt about )' chambre for 
Thomas his hosyn and shewes; and crept downe y stayres wt them 
as well as she could, and prayd hym to put them on lest he shuld cache 
cold. So my mother stode in hir smoke more than an owre entretynge 
hym for ye lordes sake to be mo quiet. So )' at this tyme my mother 
toke suche a eould yt she nevar rose aftar ; but he and his wyffe went 
fo bed and agreyd well i-nowghe. Afftar this Thomas perswadinge 
hym selfe y my mother drew nere hir end causyd hir on S. Iames 
evenes eve "- to receyve )-e communion, wt whome amongst othar he 
hymselfe receyved. The nùnistar of ).e parishe, althoughe he were 
but a stranger, new corne out of ye contry, desyryd to se hir wyl], and 
fyndynge therin )' she had geven me, her eldyst sonn, but v. li. and 
yOothar children x. li. y peace, excepte Thomas, to whome she had 
geven all hir howsys and goodes, and ruade hym full and sole executor, 
he so moche myslyked therof, y he desyryed to know y cause, whiche 
when by none othar meanes they could excuse, Thomas forcid my 
mothar to say that l was very ryche and nedyd no parte of hir goodes ; 
wherunto y mynistar answeryd that )'f I shuld be nevar so ryche j'et 
she must nedes make me equall  eny othar hir children, or elles 
 The MS. is damaged, and several words marked by blanks above 
cannot be deciphered. 
 23 July. 



shuld show hir selfe bothe vnfryndly and :nnaturall, for so moche that 
by reason I was ye cheffe and ought to have ye distributyng of ai1. 
Then Thomas cawsyd my mothar to answer y she had lyne syke in f. 6"° 
yt case ye space almost of vj yeres, in ail whiche tyme I had nevar 
corne, nor sent to her, allthoughe she had sent to me by ail yO frendes 
I had, more ovar that I had not axed hir blyssynge in xx yeres ; and 
that I shuld say : ' wherefore shuld I care for her, she had done nothynge 
for me' (and of whiche I may not write, but for reverens of nature, 
God forgeve hir 1) ; and I pray God gyve hym grace to repent yt caused 
hir so myche at that tyme and othar to endanger her owne sowle for 
his filthy pleasure; and more over she sayd, yt ail most vj yeres 
Thomas lyke a good naturall child had kept hir to his great charges, 
or yt she mought have starvyd, and she was not able v ail hir goodes 
to make hym amendes, yf it were v. tymes more. This talke beinge 
ail together vntrue (as knoythe God) was allso o his strange ministar 
vncredible for yt he required that I shuld be sent for, which was vterly 
denayed. Then he requeryd to know where I dwelt that he mought 
go and talke to me, which was allso denayed hym. Wherupon he 
refusyd to mynystar the comunion to them, but in ye end they w 
meny glosys perswadyd hym, and so he mynysteryd. The saine day 
Mystar Rolfe, a priest, who had ma[-rried] one of my systars, told me 
that he hd often tymes parswadyd w my mothar to set thynges in 
a bettar ordar, and not to gyve ail to me and nawght to yO othar &c. 
And (as he said) she always bad hym hold his peace, or else speake 
softly, for hir sonnes wyfe was in one cornar or othar harkenynge, and 
she shuld have a lyffe x. tymes worse than deathe yf Thomas or his 
wyfe shuld know of eny suche talke ; ' for' (quod she) I can nor do 
what I would, but as they wyll, excepte ye lorde rayse me that I may 
go abrode, and then I wyll vndo that I have done, and do yt whiche 
shall pleas bothe God and y worlde, but wo worthe that wicked woman 
(meaninge Thomas his wyffe) for she wyll be my deathe '; (the lyke 
awnswer she mad to hir brothar, her systar, her cosyn Cutlar, Henry 
Iohnson, and many othars). Also this Mystar Rolfe told me that my 
mothar that day shuld receyve y communyon, for she had sent for his 
wyfe to receyve w her, and so we partyd. And I consyderyd my selfe 
y it was tyme for me to atempte some way to speake agayne wt my 
mothar, thought it not good that day to do eny thynge. But on y« 
morow, beinge Seint Iames even -, in yO aftemoon I sent my wyffe vt 

1 This is in reference to a foui remark attributed to him, which Stow 
first wrote down but then erased. 
" 24 July. 



1vi libe,dix to Itrodactiou 
a pot of creme and an othar of strawberys ; but y present beinge no 
betar she was kept out wt great threats. Wherupon (as I commaundyd 
hir) she sayd to Thomas ." 'why, brothar, are you ye saine man y y 
wer wont tobe ? I had thought ye had bene changyd, become a new 
man. how dyd yow receyve y communyon yesterday ?' Then he 
swar wt byttar othes, and sayd: how dost thou know yt ? by God 
sowle, thou art a witche, and knowst it by witchcraft.' And she 
answeryd agayne." 'Nay, I know it hot by witchecraft" 'Yes, by 
God's sowle,' quod he, ' thou knowyst it by witchecraft, or else that 
false knave, thy husbond, hathe coniurid for it; but I wyll make the 
vyllayn be handelyed for it, or it shall cost me an hunderyd poundes. 
I will make all y world to know what artes he practysythe ; and get 
ye out of my dores, or by peter, I will lay the at my fete.' Wherupon 
my wyfe returnyd, and tould me. In y morows morninge, beynge 
seynt Iames daye, a I went to my mother's paryshe chirche, and 
inqueryd for ye parson. Wher it was aunsweryd me that he servyd 
hot ther, but had put in a mynystar. So I taryenge in ye chirehe, 
tyll the mynystar came at vij of y cloke, and sayd vnto hym : ' I vnder- 
stond ye mynisteryd to my mothar but ij days passyd.' The whiche he 
confessyd, and told me all that is afore sayd of y« talke betwixt my 
mother and hym, and how that he perseyvyd my mother durst not 
speake one word but as Thomas bad her ; and y agaynst his con- 
science he mynestred to them; moreover he promysyd, when so evar 
I would, to go w me to my mother. 13ut on the morow morninge yn 
saine curat  ................... 
'. , ...... be the furnacis and yœe facis I told you of. And then 
Thomas put y great boke of lese  hen one quyer of papar, bygar 
then y great byble, into the poket of his hose, tryomphinge and 
swarynge as afore. ]3ut mystar Wyntrap  w myche ado gat y boke 
agayne from hym, aftar that he had whisperyd a lyttle. For then 
Thomas his great heat was alayed, and he was bothe could and quiet. 
This boke, beinge compilyd by Thomas Norton,  in short veare, of y 
alteracion of certayn mettaylles, I desyryd bIst' Wyntrap to show to 
some learnyd man for my discharge, as to ve byshope, deane, or arch- 

 z5 July. 
 A leaf, or more, is clearly missing. 
s Possibly it should read 'not less '. 
 Perhaps an uncle of John Winthrop, the first governor of blassa- 
chusetts; the family were clothworkers in London. 
n Thomas Norton (ff. x477), alchemist, and author of an 'Ordinal of 
Alchemy' in English verse, and also De Trattsttttla[iote AIctallorut, 
likewise in verse. See Dicl. NaL Bz'., xli. 2o. 



Docume¢¢ts iihtst«ati,¢g Stoo's lire Mî 

deacon, blystar Foxe, t or Mystar Whithed, 2 which last Thomas vtarly 
denayed to be judge, for, saythe he, he is one that practysethe yo same 
arte. Thomas, havynge his purpos of yO byll, which he rent in pecis 
and burnyd, sent for a pynt of ale, and causyd me to drynke, and 
bothe professyd frindshype and sorowe for his do)'nges passyd. And 
my mothar sayd: 'the lord be praysed, for now my children yt were 
dead af alyve agayne.' After this tyme I repayryd dayly to my 
mothar durynge hir lyfe, whiche was hot longe, and allways awaytynge 
to speake wt hir in secret. One tyme aftar I had longe taryed thar, 
she cried out, as she dyd allwayes (when I was there) ' ye lorde send 
me some drynke. O! that I had some kynd of drynke, what some 
evar it were.' And at ye last she sayd to Thomas his wyfe: 'Dowghter, 
for yo lordes sake gyve me some drynke.' Wherunto after many 
suche callyngs she answeryd : ' I cannot tell what drynke I shuld gyve 
you, for yffe I seche eny of owre owne drynke ye wyll hot lyke it.' 
'¥es, dowghter, yes,' quod she, ,yo lorde knows I would fayne bave 
some drynke.' And then she fetchinge halfe a pynt of small drynke 
(beare as I supose) my mother sayd : ' good dowghter, for ye lordes 
sake loke in my cobard for a lytle g)'ngar, and put into it.' Whiche 
she dyd. Then my mother desyryed hir to warme it a lyde. Whiche 
she dyd, and went into ye kitchin, whiche was iii romes of, for yt ther 
was no fyer in y chamber, thoughe it were at Mychelmas. Then 
I sayd to my mothar in this sort folowynge : ' Mothar, yow know that 
I and my brothar Thomas af now become professars of frindshype, 
and I shall desyre yow for Gods sake so to do towards us yt yo frind- 
shipe professyd may become perfecte and vnfaynyd ; yow know yt for 
one word whiche I spake to yow in secret, whiche ye promysyd not to 
open, he hathe ruade yow put v. ll. out of yowr wyll, whiche yow had 
gyven me... is but a small mattar in comparison of yt he hathe 
deceyvyd me in othar ways.., pray yow to consyder yt it must nedes 
offend me moche to pay v. pound for spekynge a word secretly, & in 
ye way of... fryndshype lamentyng his.., estate, and yf ye wyll hot 
be good to me for yO love ye ought to beare to... pote fathar your 
husbond, nor for yO love you ought to beare to me your naturall sonne 
& yowr fyrst, yet I pray yow to consydar yt I wax old & dekay in myn 
 John Foxe, the martyrologist. 
 The association with Foxe makes it likely that this is David White- 
head (I492-I57I), the Puritan divine ,. In Bemard's Catalogus MSS. 
.4ngliae, i. 332, a translation of Ripley s «lIedulla .41chymiae (ap..4shmole 
MS'. I48o, I I I, B. 6) is attributed to' David Whitehead, doctor of physicke '; 
but in the blS. the ascription is merely to ' D. W.' (Black, (.'al. of 
.4sltmolean 2]'ISS., p. x319). See 19icl. Nat. 1io., lxi. 96-8. 
 The margins of this leaf are much wom. 



lviii .dbbeit«ti.x" [o l/lrodztctiotz 
occupation, 8: yt I have a great charge of children, and a wyfe yt can 
neythar get nor save, & be good to me for theyr sakes. Ye, 
yf ye wyll not be good to me for ail thes cawsys afore shewyd, 
yet be good to me for Thomas his sake, y we maye by that meanes 
contynue, 8: encrease in fryndshype. I crave no more but to 
be put in "ye v. h'. agayne, and so to be made equall wt the test 
of yowr children, y be moste inferiour, and hOt to make me 
an inferior vnto them. And Thomas hym selfe, yf he beare eny 
frindshype at all towards me, or enithinge regard his owne quietnes, 
he would rather of his owne parte spare xx. pound, than to let me 
lake that v. pound; for he knowythe yt I must evar while I lyve 
grudge to pay so deare for so small an errour. I pray you to consydar 
how you shall pleas God to make peace 8: vnity amonge yowr chyl- 
dren.' And then I red vnto her ye I33 psalme, whiche I had writen, 
& would have lefte it w her, but she would hOt take it. Then 
I desyu-d hir to cawse hir sonn Thomas to read it, whiche she sayd 
she daryd hOt do. ye psalme beginithe thus : ' behold how plesaunt 
and how ioyfuil a thynge it is bretherne to dwell togethar 8: to be of 
one mynd &c.' And this is a spesyall note to be markyd ; all the 
tyme yt I was thus talkynge wt hir, to breake me of my talke she lay 
as she had bene more afearyd then of deathe, lest hir sonn Thomas or 
his wyffe shuld here eny of out talke. And styll she cryed to me: 
'Peace, she comyth ; speake softly ; she is on ye stayres harkenynge 
&c.' And at ye last ruade me this answer: ' I trust ye Lord wyll 
rayse me agayne, then I wyll go abrode and vndo all y I have dov, e, 
& they shall hot know of it; but excepte ye lord rayse me I can do 
no thinge for I dare hOt speake for my lyre, this wykyd voman (wo 
worthe hir) wyll be my deathe &c.' Also myn vnkle, & my mothar's 
brother, contynually perswadyd my mothar from mayny thyngs, as 
from yO gyvynge an house to a servynge man (who was hot kyne to 
eny of our kyne) and ye rest of hir howsys & goods to hir sonne 
Thomas from me and ye rest of hir children &c. And she would ail 
f. ï° ways yeld to her brothar & promes to do aftar his counsell; but as 
sone as he as gone she was worse than afore, so y myn vnkell would 
come to me, and w wepynge byttarly parswad me to take ail things 
paciently for y ther was no remandy, he had don what he could, & 
would do as longe as she lyvyd, but it vould hOt helpe for she was 
bywitchid to the sayd Will. Eyre and Thomas Stowe. The greffe 
wherof was suche to my pore vnkle, yt it shortenyd his lyre. lIore- 
ovar Henry Johnson, hearynge moche talke whiche he lykyd hot, for 
y my mothar had ruade hym ovarzeer of hir last vyll, on a tyme... 



Z)ocztme¢zts i//ztstrati¢g StooEa's @ ix 
my mothar alone, he knelynge by ber bed sayd yg he hard many evyll 
words of ber doynges, and all men cried out on hym for y he beinge 
great w hir gave hir hot bettar counsell (whiche fore tyme he dyd, 
but all prevaylyd not): 'Mystris Stow,' quod he, 'ye bave ruade 
Willyam Eyar one of yowr children, for ye bave gyven hym an howse ; 
it had bene more mete to bave gyven it to your sonn Iohn Stowe, to 
vhom, as I bave learnyed, ye nevar gave ye valewe of one pew, and 
now yow had gyven hym but x. pound, and ye bave throwghe your 
sonn Thomas put out v. pound of that, and ye bave ruade your sonne 
Thomas the.., twayne, who hathe bene a deare child to yow, & 
allwayse spent yow moche money. I praye.., to put in ye v. pounds 
agayne & make your sonn Iohn Stowe x. pound as he was afore.' 
Vnto whiche she answeryd yg she cowld hot put in one peny, for she 
had it not. Wherupon Henry Iohnson sayd: ' Mvtris Smwe, every 
man cane tell me yg yow could gyve your sonne Thomas xx. pounds 
to renne away wg an othar mans wyflç, and wyll yow now say ye are 
not able to gyve Iohn Stowe x. pound &c.' AIl this talke my mothar 
told aftarward to Thomas and his wy[e. And he on ye morow, 
being ye Sonday a[tar Bartylmew day, sent for me, and when I cam 
at my mothars, he sat hym doune on the one syd of my mothar, & his 
vy[e on ye othm" ; and I, standynge as a prisonar, he examinyd me as 
y[ he had bene a Iustice, and chargyd me y I should set Henry 
Iohnson to bave that talke a[ore sayd w my mothar; whiche I uttarly 
denayed, as well I mowght, for y was ye first tyme 3 4 evar I had hard 
y Henry Iohnson had bene so playn w her. Amonst many fowl 
words and great threats of Thomas towards me he sayd : ' Iothar, 
every body gmtchid at yg which ye bave ; breake yowr wyll and make 
a new, & gyve them ynowghe ; ye may gyve them Mat yow vyll, but 
yf I pay one peny, I forsake God ; Gods sowlc, have ye eny more thon 
y cowche ye ly on, and who wyll gyve xl.s. for it. How say you, 
bave ye eny? yf ye have eny, speakc.' Whcrunto she answeryd: 
' No, sonne. It is troc I have no more.' ' No, by Gods sowle,' quod 
ho, 'nor ail that notha5for ) kyveringc (whiche was but frise) is 
5Icge Fync (I had lent her moncv on it); every body thynkythc that 
ye have gyven me mychc, whemas ye have gyvcn me nothynge at ail 
to speke of, and it is not worthe "god have mcrcy"  ; and yf my mothar 
had gyvcn me this howse throwly vcll furnyshyd to me and m)'n eyrs 
for cçand an hundrend pound or twaync of redy money, it had 
bene worthe "god have marci "' ; but yf er I y "god have marcy" 
for this, I forsake God & gyve my selfe to ye divell, body and sowle.' 
 Sunday, 9 August. 



lx .4blSet¢ti " /o [ttroctttc/iot 
Then sayd his wyfe: ' I wyll nevar say "god have marcy" for this 
house and ail that is in it, for we have but howse and have loade, & 
I would not wash hir shiten clowts to have it. I forsake God, yf I have 
not washyd x. buks of shitten clowts that she hathe shytten.' Wher- 
unto my mothar answeryd: 'Ye, dowghter, ye lord reward you; I 
have gyven yow ail that I have, and wold it war an hunderyd pound 
bettar for yow.' 1 [Aftar I was departyd from my mothar, remembrynge 
yt Richard Brison, a fyshemonger, who stayed Thomas & Richard 
Kemps "- wyfe when they were rennynge away into Flandars, lay at ye 
marc/of god, & yt ye bell had told for hym, I toke ij of our neygh- 
bours & went to the sayd fyshemongar, & tould hym how I had that 
day bene chargyd and threatenyd by Thomas Stow, for that I shuld 
(as he sayd) set Henry Iohnson to speak the thynges afore sayd to my 
mothar. Wherupon yo sayd fyshemonger.] iIy mothar deceasyed 
a fortnyght aftar nfikellmas Anno x568, and yo morow aftar hir buryall, 
wh/che was sattardaye,  I met Thomas Stowe, my systar Iohn  Rolf, 
allias Froyke,  and Henry Iohnson at leden hall. So we went to ye 
mayden hed, and dranke a pynt of wyne or twayne. At wh/che tyrne 
Henry Iohnson sayd to Thomas : ' I pray you be good to your brothar 
Iohn. Consyder he your eldar...  

3. Of lVl'll',rm D//cher al/as 'tfo«de. 
[This is the draft of a pet/tion, addressed apparently to the Alderman 
of the Ward, perhaps in June, x 569 ; s/nec Stow was still in business it 
cannot have been much later. Sec p. xxiii, tIarle A, [S. 367, f. 5-] 
Pleasethe it your worshipe to vndarstond how your porc orator Iohn 
Stowe, hathe of late bene more then to to mutche abusyd by one 
William Ditcher alAas Tetforde, and his wyfe. The proces whereof is 
to longe to write, but briefly to ruche sorne parte thereof. 
.In primis. At Christmas last past the saine W. being by the warde- 
more inqweste forbiden to set his riame with fetharbends in the strete 
sayd vnto them that the sayde Iohn had complayned on hyln, x'here 
vnto the forman aunsweryd that he was deceyved, for the sayd Iohn 

The passage in brackets was aftelnvards erased by Stow, and left 
incomplete. 
The MS. reads thus; but no doubt it means the ' Margerie Kent, 
widdow' whom Thomas Stow married in x567. See p. xlvi. 
Presumably 60ctober. Elizabeth Stowe's will was proved on 
Oct., probably she died on the .th or th. 
sc. Johan or Joan. 
 See pp..xlvii and Iv. 
Here the story stops abruptly. 



Doczzments illzstralbg Stow's lire lxi 

had spoke no word of it. This notwithstandynge when the sayd 
Iohn went toward his owne house the saine W. and his wyffe rayled 
at hym, first as he passyd by them, and aftar at his owne dote to 
shamefull and slaunderous tobe spoken & hard. 
1tre. When the Wardemote enqwest had gyven vp theyr endenture, 
the saine W. dvd arest the sayd Iohn of ij C. pound action, where 
vnto the sayd Iohn put in surties to aunswer. 
1tre. On the next morninge ye saine W. & his wife belote the 
stawll of the sayd Iohn rayled agaynst hym more then a longe 
howre xv ye moaste slaunderous speches that man or devell cowld 
devyse, but the sayd Iohn to avoyd the breache of peace kepte hym 
selle above in his house xv out eny aunswere makynge. 
It». iii nightes after the saine W. causyd his landlorde, Mastar 
Ritche, to intreat the sayde Iohn to forgyve the saine W., and to 
gyve hym leave to withdraw his action ; where vnto the sayde Iohn 
graunted w conditions to bave his costes and that ye saine W. shuld 
justifie the talke which he at that tyme vsed, that is, that he had bene 
procuryd by Thomas Stowe to do ail what so evar agaynst y« sayd 
John Stowe. 
Il»t. The saine W. contrary to his promis ruade and hand gyven, 
denayethe to ail men that evar he was procuryd by the fore namyd 
Thomas Stowe to do or say eny thinge agaynste the sayde Iohn 
Stowe. And also moaste slaunderowsly saythe that the sayde Iohn 
was fayne to intreat Mastar Ritche to take vp the matar, or eles the 
saine William would have coersed the sayde Iohn, belote he would 
hav xx' drawne his accion. 
Zinc. The saine W. hath not payde one peny to y sayd Iohn 
towards his charges. 
II»t. The saine W. continua]ly thretinithe to do such notable acts 
of displeasure agaynst the sayd Iohn as the lyke hathe nevar bene 
done to eny man, and that all England shall speake of it, and of this 
he hathe assurid his frind Thomas Stowe, where of he greatly 
braggethe. 
Itnt. The saine W. slaunderowsly hathe reportyd to the parson of 
)' parishe, and deputy of the warde, as to all othar he comithe in 
company ,t, that ther comithe none but Roages and Rascalls, the 
vylest in this land to the howse of the sayde Iohn, which Rasca]ls & 
Roages have hym from aie house to ale howse every day and night 
till ij of the c]oke in the morninge. 
ltm. The saine W. comonly and dayly Raylynge on the sayde 
Iohn callyth hym prike lowse knave, beggarly knave, Rascall knave. 



vyilayne and lyenge knave, addinge more ovar that the sayd Iohn 
hathe ruade a cronicle of lyes &c. 
lm. The saine W. often tymes calendginge to fight wt ye sayd 
Iohn, one tyme sodaynly lept in his face, foarcyd to bave dygged out 
his eyes, fowly scrate hym by the face, drew blod on hym, and was 
pullyd of by the neyghbours. 
zrlm. For that the saine W. cannot get his apretises & other servants 
to fight wt the aprentice of the sayde Iohn, he hym selle on the 2 4 of 
Iay la.st past threw tyllshardes and othar stones at the sayd aprentis 
tyll he had driven hym of the stawll from his worke; and then the 
same W. cam to the stawll of the sayde Iohn, and ther thretened that 
yf he cowld catche the sayd aprentice abrode he would coarce hym, he 
wowld provyd for hym, and he wowld accuse hym to have kyllid the 
man on the Miles end in whitson weke &c. 
1tre. The 9 of Iune at x. of ye cloke in the night the same W. 
callid ye sayd Iohn COlnOn promotor, comon barrator, comon dronkard, 
Rascall vyllayne &c. ; and sayde more ovar he wowld make hym to be 
cartyd owt of the towne for such a one &c. 
lira. At that tyme he also sayde, as he hath done dyvars othar 
tymes, that the wyfe of the sayde Iohn had two children by one man 
before she was maried, to the great slaunder of the sayde Iohn, his 
wyfe, and hinderaunce of theyr children, iii dowghters mariageable and 
in sarvyce wt Right worshipfull parsonages. 
I/m. On the x. of Iune the same W. cawsyd William Snelynge at 
that tyme beinge dronken to corne to the stawlle of the sayd Iohn, and 
there to cawle hym by suche a name as hym selfe far bettar deserved. 
1tre. The xi of Iune the same W., Raylynge at the sayde Iohn, 
sayde that he was the falsest man in :England, and thretenyd to coerse 
hym yf he cowlde get hym owt of hys dores, callendgynge hym oft 
tymes to corne owt yf he durst &c. Ail this he dyde in presence of 
Mastar Fostar one of the lord maior's officers. 
4. A Dispule oz,er a B71. 
[This is a rough memorandum preserved in larley zIIS. 247, f. 2o9, 
presurnably dravn up by Stow, vhen Crowche took him into court. 
Crowche may be the Michael Crowche who was churchwarden of 
St. Michael, Cornhill, 574.] 
576. Somewhat before Christmas Mst.' Crowche sent vnto me 
a bill contaynynge parcds to the sume of vs. d., vs. whereof I payde to 
Iohan his mayde on Christmas evene next folowinge, and sayde 
I would be his debtor of the odd peny. Where vnto she aunswered 
and sayde: ' I pray yow to be our debtor of goodwill, and be not 



Doc«tme¢[« i//«ts[ra[i¢g S[oo's lire lxiii 
angry that I sent for so small a some, for other wyse ye are even with 
my toaster, and owe him nothinge.' 
i577. After this more then halfe a yere, to Mte iii or iiij dayes 
before bartylmew tyde, Mst' Crowche sent me to bylls in one, the first 
contaynynge parcells to the some of viis. id. due on the xv of Iune 
I576, the othar vs. id. due (and confessyd to be pa)'de) at Christmas 
next folowynge in the saine yere. 
Aftar the recept ,hereof, to wit on bartilmew da),, I met with Iohan 
his mayd nere to the wrestelyng place, where I demaundyd of hir 
what hir toaster meant to send me suche a bille for money which I had 
payde. She aunswerd: ' Alas! lIst.' Stowe, ),e must make smale 
accompte of my mastar's doinges now, for his heade is intoxicate ; he 
hath maried a wife for Riches, but he had done bettar to ha,ce maried 
a pote wench.' 
Sens this tyme Nst. Crowche, metynge me in the strete bath 
sayd : ' When shall we reoon' ? (sic). Whereunto I bave aunswered : 
' When ye will : ye demaund of me money, which I bave payde longe 
sence.' ' Well,' quod he, • I fynd it in my boke, and I xx'ill warne you 
to the cotte ofeonscience.' 1 Quod I : ' Rathar naine to honest indiferent 
men to here the mattar, and as they shall iudge I will be content.' 
'Say you so,' quod he, ' Well one of thes dayes we wyll drynke a 
qwart of wyne and make an ende of it.' But then have I hard no 
more of it in one whole yere aftar. The last tyme he spake to me 
therof was about Eastar last, when he came home to my howse, where 
we agreyd that Nastar Rickford, his ovartwarte neyghbour, whom he 
named, shold here and ende the mattar on the Twesday next folowinge ; 
but I gyvynge myn attendaunce that Twesday, I hard no more of it tyll 
thursday la.st that I was warned to the [eo]rtes, which I take to be no 
good dealinge towardes me. 

5. The Aleconners' Complainl of a disordered Tippler and Unworlhy 
Constable in Caslle Baynard Ward in I84- . 
[This document (Harley IIS. 367, f. 4) is in Stow's writing, and sinee 
it is written in the first person, is composed in his manner, and round 
amongst his private papers, it is not unreasonable to suppose that he was 
personally concerned. If there is no proof that he was one of the 
surveyors, there is also nothing to show why he should have taken any 
interest in the matter il" he were not.] 
In primis. On Wednesday y i of October anno I584, survayenge 
the ward of Castle Baynard we round in the house of Ioeelyne Turnar, 
I Or Court of Requests, established in London in I   8 to hear disputes 
in cases where the debt or damage did not exceed 4os. See i. 7 below. 



typlar, his gests to be served by vnlavfull measure, x, Vhereupon we 
gave charge to such of the howse as were then present, that the), 
shuld from thens forthe sell no more sortes of ale & bere but twayne, 
to wite doble and single, the best for a peny the qwarte, the smale 
for a peny the potle, by sealed measures and hot othar wyse, which 
charge they promysed to observe in presence of a conystable and the 
bedle of that warde. 
Ilm. On friday the 9 of July 1585, agayne surveyenge the saine 
ward of Castle baynard we found in dyvers places ale to be sold in 
stone pottes and bottles conteyning the pece not a full ale qwarte 
for 3d., but the offendars promysynge reformation, delt the more 
favorably with them, as we can shew by writynge, when tyme shall 
serve ; seven barells of beare we have sent into Christs Hospitall, & 
wold ere this have sent as many more had hOt bene the late interrup- 
tion of Iocelyne Turnar, & and lais vnlawfull supportars, of the saine 
Castle baynard warde. Into this house of this Iocelyne Turnar 
enterid on the day above named, wt one Iohn Topalie constable, 
where callynge for a bottle of ale xve were promysed it ; but the cony- 
stable perswadynge vs that ther was no bottle ale to be solde, we went 
farthere into the house, where Turnar's wyfe was, and there vsed suche 
speeches that she forthwith loked the dote, where hir bottles xvere, and 
sayd to vs she had none, whiche speeche of hers the conystable affermyd 
to be trewe. Then Iastar Symson requerynge herto open the dorewhich 
she had locked, she aunsxvered she xvoulde hot ; and we demaundynge 
to speke with her husbond she sayd he was hot within. Then will- 
inge the conystable to lol:e further into the house for h)-m, he aun- 
sweryd he would do nothing without warrant vnder my lord maiors 
hand, for he knew no authority we had, and therefore willed us to 
loke we ded no more then we mowght well aunsxver, for the goodman 
of the house would put vs to it. At lengthe )-e sayd Iocelyne Turnar, 
beinge amongst vs and vnknown to vs, he sayd : ' I ara he, ye seke 
for. What would you ?' We told hym it was reported he sold bottle 
ale contrary to ordar, xvhich he denyed not, but seyd he ded as othar 
men ded. Whereunto we answered we had reformed some and 
wanted to reforme the rest. We told hym hoxv his wyfe had denyed 
to have eny bottle ale, how she had locked vp the dote, and denyed 
the openynge there of, which was a resystance &c. Quod he : ' I xvill 
not aunswer for my xvyfe, nor eny othar then for my selle ; and I had 
nevar warninge to reforme thos things ye myslyke of.' The cony- 
stable also affirded the saine with many stowte xvords. In the end 
Ioscelyne Turnar opened the dote whiche his wyfe had locked, where 



Doctmets illtstralig Stow's lire lxv 
we found a 6o pottes and bottles filled with aie, where of we measured 
one which the wyfe sayd was thre farthinges, and found it not to con- 
tayne a full pint of sealed measure. Where vpon Mystar Coad sayd: 
' this is inowghe to forfaite all yO ale in yowr house.' We then takyng 
Iocelyn Turnar asyde willed him to reforme, and sell no more suche 
vnlawfull measure, which charge he promysed to observe, but would 
graunt none amends for the fawlt passed. 'Loke, (quod he), what 
yowr authoritie will serve yow to, and spare me not. I will not resiste 
yow.' Where vpon we departed with Browne, an officer to the 
L. major, & Payne, yo bedle, who are witnesses that this was the 
effecte of that days dowynge in that place. 
lira. On Monday the z of July we cam agayne to Iocelyne 
Turnar, and demaundyd of hym, yf he yet would be conformable, and 
vhat beare he would send into Chfiste hospitall for trespase comytted, 
whose aunswere was that he had not offended nor wouid make satis- 
faction, but willed vs agayne to vse our authoritie so far as we would 
aunswere it, demaundinge whethar the sanie were by parlyament or by 
stature. Where vnto we aunswered it was by act of comon counsayle, 
whereat he ruade a pure. ..ftar many words vsed by us to perswade 
hym Topelye, yo conystable, vncalled for cam out of the innar parte of 
the bouse with a brewar, as was sayde ; this conistable with vehement 
words charged vs with offeringe wronge to the sayd brewar, for that we 
had nevar gyven hym warning; addyng that they lyed, that sayd 
they had gyven eny warninge there, and tellynge lIaster S)'lnSOll 
that he lyed thoward hym. Where vpon Mastar Eliot, barynge his 
right hand on Toplye leR showlder, sayd : ' Ye, mystar con)'stable, is 
that well sayd of yow, beinge an officer to gyve a man the lye ? I had 
letle thought to bave hard such a vorde of your moxvthe.' ' What!' 
(quod Toplye), ' dost thou stryke me ?' ' I stryke yow ?' quod Iastar 
Eliot. ' Wherefore should I stryke yow ?' ' Why,' quod Toplye, 
' I fele myn eare smart yet.' William Lathe, officer to my L. major, 
and Payne, the bedle, are witnesses to this. 
Thus and othar wayes beinge there abused, we depated thens, and 
aftar declared to my L. major, and courte of aidarmen, how we had 
bene delt with, cravynge to have his honor and theyr worships ayde in 
this case, or els to be discharged of owr trowblesome offyce. Where 
vpon my L. maior and cowrte by varrant comytted the sayd disordeed 
typlar, and vnworthy constable to ward. But by meanes of such as 
neythar hard or saw, nor inquired aftar the lewde demeanor of them, 
they were forthe with delyvered, and evar sence bave bene stowtly 
suported with great threates agaynst vs, whereof we are. to crave 
remedy in this courte. 
sïow.  e 



lxvi .4iibeudix to I¢¢trod«tctio¢« 

6. A Pelition for a Pension. 
lin ]-[arley AIS. 367, ff. 8, 9, there are t,vo drafts of petitions to the 
Lord Mayor and Aldermen. In the first Stmv says that it was 'almost 
thirty years', in the second 'twenty-five years' since he set forth his 
Summary. But from the first it appears that Stow was sixty-four years 
o[ age, and from the latter that the Atnales were in preparation. This 
seems to fix them to a common date in the earlier part of x 59 o. Perhaps 
the drafts were alternatives. The second draft has been prmted already 
by Strype in his Lzfe o_/" 5"tow, prefixed to the .çurvey, i, p. vii, but with 
his own orthography.] 
Pleasethe it your honor and worships fo vndarstond that where 
your orator Iohn Stowe citizen &c., beinge now of the age of three- 
score yeres fowre, hathe for the space of almost xxx yeres last past 
(besyds his Chronicles dedieated to the Earle of Leeestar)set forth 
divars somaries dedicated to the lord maiors, his brithren thaldarmen, 
and comoners of the Citie. In all whiche he hathe specially noated 
the memorable actes of famows Citizens by them done to the greate 
benefite of the comon wehhe, and honor of the saine Citie. As also 
(in showynge themselves thankefull vnto God for his blessynges) have 
left a godly example fo the posteritie by them to be embrasid and 
Imitatid. And for as moche as the travayle to many places for 
searche of sondry records, whereby the veritie of thinges may corne to 
lyght, cannot but be chargeable to the sayde Iohn more then his 
habilitie can aforde, he now craveth your honor and worships ayde as 
in consideracion of the premises to bestowe on hvm some yere pention 
or othar wyse, xvhereb), he may reape somewhat towards his greate 
charges. And your orator according to his bounden dutie shall here 
aftar, God willinge, employ his diligent labor to the honor of this citie 
and comoditie of the Citizens there of, but also dayly pray for your 
honor and worships prosperitie during lyfe. 

Pleasethe it your honor and worships to vnderstond that where yowr 
orator John Stowe, Citizen of this Citie, hathe heretofore, (to wite for 
the space of these 5 yere last past) besydes his Chronicle, dedicated 
to the fight honorable the earle of Leicestar, set forthe dyvers sure- 
maries dedicate to the lorde maior, his brithren the aldarmen, and 
cornoners of this Citie: In ail which he hathe specially noated the 
memorable actes of famous citizens, by them done to the greate benefite 
of the comon welthe, and honor of the saine Citie, as also in shewinge 
themselves thankefull vnto God, bave lefte a godly example by th6 
posteritie to be imbrasid and ymitated. In consideration where of the 
sayde Iohn Stowe mindithe shortly, yf God so permite, to set forthe 
a fart larger somary or chronicle of this Citie and Citizens there of, 



Docmets i/hstreltig ,S/o,c,s lire Ixvii 

then heretofore hath bene published. And for as moche as the searche 
of records in the Arches and elsewhere, cannot but be chargable to 
the sayd lohn, as heretofore for many yeres it hathe bene altogethar 
of his owne charges, besids his other travayls and studie, he now 
humbly cravithe your honors and worslfips ayde. As in consyderation 
of the premises to bestowe on hym the benefite of two fre men, such 
as yowre honor and worships shall lyke to be admitted into the fre- 
dome of this Citie, whereby he may reape somewhat towards his 
Charges &c. And yowr orator shall dayly pray for yowre honors and 
worships prosperitie during lyfe. 

7. R«,al lenez,ol«u«e. 

[From a printed copy of James I's Declaration of lais royal benevolence, 
in pursuance of his Letters Patent, ap. ltarley AIS. 367, f. o, where there 
is a note of 7s. lori. received from S. Mary Woolnoth parishioners. The 
Declaration has been printed by Strype, and by Thoms in his edition 
of the Survey, p. xi. The Letters Patent are given by Strype, 
i, pp. xii, xiii.] 
Iames, by the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France 
and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, &c. To all our well-beloued 
subiects greeting. 
Whereas our louing subiect Iohn Stowe (a very aged and worthy 
member of our city of London) this fiue and fort)' yeers hath to his 
great charge, and with neglect of lais ordinary meanes of maintenance, 
(for the generall good, as well of posteritie as of the present age), 
compiled and published diuerse necessaLv bookes, and Chronicles; 
and therefore we in recompense of these his painfull laboures, and 
for encouragement to the like, haue in our royall inclination ben 
pleased to graunt our Letters Pattents, vnder our great seale of Eng- 
land, dated the eighth of IIarch  603, thereby authorizing hiln, the 
sayd Iohn Stowe, and his deputies to collect anmngst our louing 
subiects theyr voluntary contribution and kinde gratuities: as by the 
sayd Letters Patents more at large may appeare: Now, seeing that 
our sayd Patents (being but one in themselues), cannot be shewed 
forth in diuerse places or parishes at once (as the occasions of his 
speedy putting them in execution may require), we haue therefore 
thought expedient in this vnusuall manner, to recommend his cause 
vnto you; hauing already, in our owne person, and of our speciall 
grace, begun the largesse for the example of others. Giuen at our 
palace at Westminster. 



lxviii .41bedLv to htrodttctiol 

III. LETTERS TO STOW 
NOTE.--The majorityofthese letters are contained in Itarley ,IS. 374, 
ff. 9-24. No.  is from Harley 3IS. 247. Nos. 3 and 4 are from 
ltarley I]IS. 530, f.  and f. 76*. No. 9 from Tawr ]IS. 464 {iv), f. . 
. From Hemy Savil«. 
[The allusion to Matthew Parker--' my lordes Grace'--shows that the 
date was at the latest  May, x575. Savile's father lived at Halifax. 
Mr. Hare is Robert Hare (d. 61I) the antiquary, who presented two 
volumes of his collections on the Privileges of the University to Oxford. 
See bict. Nat. lio., xxiv. 373-] 
After my most hartie commendacions being verie glad and desirous 
to heare f»om you, trustinge in our lorde that you be in good healthe, 
or els I might be hertelye sorie, for that I have founde at ail tymes 
good favoure of)ou, since our first acquaintance ; and other aequaint- 
ance in London I have none, but that I have by your meanes, as 
good lr. Hare, with whom I pray you commende me and desyre 
him to lett me vnderstande in what towardeness his good workes 
for the privileges of Oxforte is. And forther I beseche you to 
certifye me if Wigornensis  is printed, and vheare I may send to buye 
it, and the price. And gladlye of ail other I vould vnderstande that 
your last booke  weare forthe, that I might sende vnto ),ou for one 
or two for my money. Forther I woulde vnderstonde if my Lordes 
grace be aboute to print Roger Howden, lIaulbesburie,  and Hunting- 
ton, and in what forwardnes they be. Good owlde ffrend let me bave 
your letter in the premisses, and God willinge it shalbe recompensed 
or it be longe. And I must forther desire yowe to have answer by 
riais bearer. At this tyme from Halifaxe, this first of lIaye. 
By your loving ffrende 
HENR,  SAVILL. 
To my most speciall good friend lIr. Iohn Stove deliuer this in 
Cornewall « in London. 
_. t'fore Roberl Glover. 
Thanking him for the loan of a copy of Alarianus Scolus. ' It is 
one of the best bookes I handled a great while. I wishe it were 
 Florence of Woreester. 
u Presumably The Summarie for  5 75. 
 William of Malmesbury. 
* A not uncommon corruption for Cornhill: e.g. «At the end of 
Cornewall by the Stocks,' in Chronicle of Queen Jane and Queen A[ary, 
p. 4o (Camd. Soc.) ; see also lnq. b. m. Lond., iii. 6. Cornhill anciently 
extended to include Leadenhall Street as far as St. Andrew Undershaft : 
see i. 97 and ii. "-gz below. 



Lel/ers /o Slow lxix 

your o wne, for so do I wishe welle vnto myself. Fare )'e hartely 
well. From my house this Wensday the xith of September I5î7. 
Your loyer and freende 
R. GiouEl, Somersett.' 

3. From Thomas Halcher. 
[Dated 15 Jan. 158o (8[ N.S.). A long letter filling the whole of 
f- ]4. Thomas Hatcher [d. 83) was a fellow of King's College, Cam- 
bridge. See lAicl. Nat. Bi«., xxv. ] 5 ].] 
Returning 'John Blakeman's treatise of Henrie the sixt'. As to 
history of King's College. Wishes Stow to publish whatever he has 
of Leland. And also his own Antiquities under the title of Stow's 
Storehouse. Desires him to speak to ' Mr. Cambden, yOr frend, the 
vsher of Westminster School', about publishing the history of Tobit 
in Latin verse. Intends to give an account of the authors cited by 
Stow in his Chronicle: for this purpose he desires Stow's help, and 
also sight of Leland De S«rilorihus. Inquires as to author of Book 
De EtSiscopis Canluariensihus, which Archbishop Parker had printed. 

4. From lVilliam Cla.vlon. 
[As his letters show, Claxton was a northern antiquary, and man of 
position and repute. He ,as the owner of Wynyard in Durham, whence 
he wrote these letters. He died in iXiay, 597 (Durhattt lI'ills, ii. 7, 
Surtees Soc.). The date of this letter is 
Asks for the return of a book by his nephew Thomas Layton the 
bearer. Promises his help in what concerns the bishopric of Durham. 
' To his assured ffrynd lXIr. Iohn Stowe, Chronicler, at his bouse in 
Leaden haull in London.' 

. From the saine. 
[Dated 4 Jan. 584. 'To Mr. Iohn Stowe dwelling by yO Ledon Hall.'] 
Thanks him for his courteous letter. ' I ara glad to heare of your 
good proseading in these two notable workes you haue in hand, and 
I ish my abilitie were of credyt to doe you eny good therein.' Asks 
for the safe return of the book which he had lent. ' I haue also sent 
you an Inglysshe crowne by Robert Layton for a remembraunce, 
wishyng yow to assure your selfe y so long as I lyue yow shall not 
want a friend to the ,ettermost of his power.' Encloses some notes 
on Durham. 



Ix.,, .,4,@cmh'x to lt«odctio¢ 

6. From the saine. 
[Unsigned and undated, but in Claxton's writing.] 
Returns a book, and tells Stow that he has in store for him a 
parchment life of Edward the .Confessor, together with Alured of 
Beverley. ' Where as yg appeareth by yor letter that yow had 
acquaynted the lord ttowel'd I w some of our procedynges, I am 
very sory that I did not sec his lordsh, at his being in ye countrey, to 
whome I would haue donc my dewtye, beynge thereunto reythar 
bound for that I xvas brought vp by suche as were allyed to his Lp. 
|lOtlse.  
7. From jrohn Dce. 
[The celebrated astrologer and antiquary. The only date is 4 Dec. 
Possibly the occasion was the publication of the Cltro¢icles in  580, or of 
the Amtales in 59.] 
'Nr. Stow, )'ou sall vnderstond that my frende Nf. Dyer did 
deliuer your bokes to the two Erls, who toke them very thankfully. 
But (as he noted) there was no return commaunded of them. What 
sali hereafter, God knoweth. So could not I haue done.Hope, 
as well as I.As concerning your burgesses for the Cinq 
ports, &c.' As to Stow's copies of Asscr and Florence of Worcesler. 
8. From his daughler, Joat Fosler. 
[Joan Foster is mentioned in her father's will ; sec p. xlv above. The 
hospital is the Hospital of St. Nichael outside Warwick, as stated in some 
notes written by Stow on the letter. John Fyssher, clerk, was ruade 
keeper, toaster or governor of the house or hospital of St. 'Iichae], 
Warwick, by a grant from Henry VIII, on 4 Nov. 54 (Zetters and 
l)aers, xvi. 39 (4))- Dugdale bas no mention either of Fisher or 
Brooke.] 
After my most hartest commendacions vnto )ou and to my mother, 
trusting that you bothe be in good healthe as I and my husband 
were at my wrytting hereof. Thankes be to God therefor. This is 
to desyer yowe, father, of ail yor fryndly fryndsheppe that you can or 
maye to pleasure a very ffrynd of myn dwellyng here in Warwyck for 
to seche owt for the foundacion of a hospetall or spettell bouse of 
Warw)'ck founded by the earelles"- of Warwyck in this parte. And 
yf yow may healpe llim ther vnto he wold reward you verye well for 
yor paynes, and also you shall do me great pleasure therein, for )4 he 
is my verie ffrynd and neyghbour. It is supposed that you shall f)'nd 
 No doubt Lord William Howard (563-64o), of Naworth. He was 
the...first editor of Florence of Worcester, in 59. Sec 1)ict. 2Vat. Biog., 
XXVIII. 79. 
 I ana x'ea 2 doubtful of the second and third letters of this word ; but 
the sense requires ' Earls'. 



Letters to Stow lxxi 

the foundacion hereof yn the Tower of London, therefore good father, 
now agayne I pray you take some paynes therin. The hospital 
bouse is at the northe syd of Warwyck, the said hospetall was last 
given by kynge henrye the eyght to a Iohn ffisher master of the said 
hospetall for ye terme of hys lyffe, and sence his deathe the sayd 
hospytall was given to my aforsaid neyghbour and frynd Olyver 
]3rooke, who )'et leveffe, and is dryven now for to syke oute the 
foundacion thereof, which and you can helpe him herevnto you shall 
do him greate good, and I praye you so soon as you have found out 
any thing to do him good therin send worde to me w t as much spyd 
as by. And he will Repair vp vnto you wt what spyd he maye. And 
thus in haste I committ yow to God, from Warwyke the 3 daye of 
december by yor loving daughter during lyffe to remaine 
JOAN FFOSTER. 
To my loving ffather Mr. Iohn Stowe bencthe Leadon hall neare 
vnto the Thrye Towenes in London, gyve this. 
9. From Thomas Azvton. 
[Thomas Newton (154z ?-16o7) was a poet of some eminence, a 
physician, and rector of Little Ilford, Essex, whence this letter vas vritten 
on 29 March, 1586. See also p. Iii above and Dict. Net. lioff., xi. 402.] 
Returns the copy of Leland's Epigrams and thanks lfim ' for many 
other your curtesies, frendlie amities many tymes showed vnto me, as 
namely at this tyme for this yor boke of M r. Leland his poetries'. 
Newton, in his Encomh llhtslrium Virorum (ap. Leland, Co[[ectanea, 
v. I77), has an epigram addressed to his friend William Hunnis, the 
musician : 
De Io. Stoëo Chronigrapho. 
Anglica scire cupis solide quis Chronica scribat ? 
Stous id egregia praestat, Hunisse, ride. 
Quottidie e tenebris is multa volumina furvis 
Eruit, is lnandat plurima scripta typis'. 
Ex nitida illius deprompsi ego Bibliotheca 
Plurima, quae nobis nocte dieque patet. 

IO. ti'FO?ll I-Icnry Ferrers. 
[Henry Ferrers (1549-I633), a Warwickshire antiquary and country 
gentleman of Roman Catholic inclinations. I_)icl. Nat. tio., xviii. 385. 
Undated.] 
Mr. Stowe, because I will breake promesse with )'ou no more I have, 
although it be late, first put you these pamphlets, and thervith youre 
other booke, which I borrowed last, and desyre you to lend me youre 



lxxii ]5]SCllat'.,l," t0 /tl«ohdio« 
bede and yor pedigree of kinges, and so till o r next meeting I bid you 
farewell. 
yor loving friend, 
HxR" FERS. 
 . From Thomas B[arO'n. 
[Thomas Marten (d. 597) a Roman Catholic controversialist, and 
fellow of New College, Oxford. Sec DicL Nal. iog., xxxvi. 32o. The 
date must be 592.] 
Likes his Annales and 'the great paynes taken therein'. Offers 
some criticisms. 'gIy founder is bound to you, but that talc of Alice 
Peers is slaunderous, and in my conscience most vntrue.' 
'To my well beloved and very freend BI r. Stowe at his house 
beyonde Leadenhall in London.' 
[There is a fragment of a letter, refering to ' l'urpool' (Portpool) and 
Stow's Chronicle in Harl£v ,liN. g47, f. 2. The address and a post- 
script, apparently of the smne letter, are on f. 2IO as below. There is no 
date. I find nothing as to the writer.] 
' To his assured ffrynd gIr John Stow, chronyclar, dwellinge in the 
Leaden haul at London. d.d.' 
S r. I besech yow of )-or aunswer of this lre. for the within named 
hartely desireth to here rioto yow. 
TItOIAS VICLIFFE. 
 3. From '»0' Savile. 
[As to Mr. Hare sec note on . Lord William Howard's edition of 
Florence of Worcester, and the first edition of Stow's Annales were about 
to appear.] 
bl r Stow. After my hertie commendacions, yor L dated the 
tenthe of maye I receaved at Halifax wt thankes, and synce I ara 
corne to Oxford, where I bave ruade enquirie to knowe where the 
booke showld bec that Ir Hare showlde send hyther, yor L dyd 
ymporte, and as yet I cannot here of the saine. Therefore I desyre 
you to goo vnto the good gentleman Ir Hare in my name, and 
requeste hym to let me vnderstonde by whome and abowte what 
tyme hec sent the booke, and to what place he ruade his direction, 
and whoo showlde bave the custodie therof; for greate pitie yt weare 
that so worthie woorke showlde be embeazled, and I pray ye wr 
speede to certefye me in writynge, and delyver yor LN at the syne of 
the Owle, that yt maye be delyvered vnto the carier, Richard Edwardes, 
whome commythe homeward on Wednys daye next. And further I 
praye ye let me know whoo is the printer of Wygorniensis, and wheare 
hec dwellethe ; and whoo is the printer ofyor booke. I haue heere sente 



Letters to çtoo lxxiii 

yo a mild sixpence to drynke a qwarte of wyne in yor travell. This 
wisshynge yor healthe I byd ye fareweil. Oxon. this sondaye Trinite, 
_'2 lXlay 59"- 
Your lovinge frend, 
HEIR¥ SAVILL. 
Directe yor IFê I praye to Ir Henrie Shirbourne over agaynste 
Ierton Colledge, to be delyvered to me. lIr Blanksome, God 
wyllynge, wyll be at London I ... 
14. From llïl/iam Camd«n. 
[This is without date or address.] 
lI r Stow, yff I might finde so much fauor art your handes as to 
lend me the foundations of the Abbayes in Lincolnshyre, Warwick- 
shire, Darbyshire and Nottinghamshire, you should pleasure me 
greatly. You shall receaue them againe this day before night. 
yr Louing freende, 
'V i LLIAI',I CA|DEN. 

 5. From llTlliam Claxlon. 
[The writer of 4, 5, and 6. Dated Wynyard o April, 594.] 
Thanks Stow for the receipt of a book and his letter. Èncourages 
him to proceed 'to the publishing of such grave histories and 
antiquities' . . . 'I perceiue also by yor letter, that )'ou haue 
ax%nented your booke of foundacions, xvhereof I anae hartelie glad, 
and doe most earnestly request that you xvould let me haue a copie of 
the best sorte wh your newe augmentacions, which trew]ie I would 
make no small accounte of, and keape as a token of )'tur manifeste 
kyndnes vnto me; and y more earnest I ana to haue it, as in yor 
letter you said there is no coppie of it but yor owne, wh :, if owght 
should corne vnto you butt good, might happelie be neuer regarded 
and spoyled, or neuer corne to light, and so all yor paynes frustrate ; 
whereas yf I haue a coppie of it I hope so to vse it and dispose of it, 
as it shall be extant to all posterities, and amongst them a neuer 
dying faine for you, who bestowed suche paynes in collecting the 
certentie thereof together. What charge so euer you be at in gettinge 
it copied fxvrth for me, I will repaie vnto you with thankes'... 
Postscript. ' The greater your augmentacions are, the greater your 
faine and commendacions be'... 'I would also request when )-ou 
publish your great volume  mentioned in your last booke you sent me, 
 The last few words are destroyed. 
"- Presumably 'The History of this Island '. The book on which Stow 
worked so long, to no purpose. See p. xxi. 



l×.v .4bbcudix to irldroct'ttctiot 
you would let me haue one booke of the saine'. Asks for return of 
three books which he left in Stow's study, when last there. They are 
hOt his own. 

IV. SELECT DEDICATIONS AND EPISTLES 
[The Dedications and Epistles prefixed by Stow to his books bave 
a double interest both as giving in their simple way his Canon of 
historical writing and for their incidental allusions to events in his own 
lire. Much of the matter in them was used again and again. Thus the 
Dedication of the Æum»zary lbrided for I573 appeared with slight 
modifications hot only in later editions of that work but as an address 
'To the Reader' in the Su»*m«ry for 1575, in the Chronides, and in 
both editions of the lnnales ; its final appearance in the Sum»,ary 
Mbrided for 16o4 was Stow's last word, and as such it is printed here. 
Of the others now given the Dedication and Epistle from the Summay 
for 156  have a special interest as the first of Stow's writings (the edition 
of Chaucer had no preface of his). The Dedication of 1567, and Epistle 
of 73, deal with the quarrel with Grafton ; they illustrate, and are 
illustrated by, the document on pp. xlviii to liii above. The dedication of 
the lnnales for 592 (repeated with little change in 6oI and 16o5) 
practically completes the series; it explains how Stow's hopes for his 
larger volume were frustrated.] 
Dcdi«aliot and Lpistle prefl.vtd 1o l]w Summary for 1.6y. 
To the Right Honourable and my very good Lord, the Lorde 
Robert Dudley Earle of Leicester, Baron of Dynghly, knyght of the 
honourable order of the Garter, one of the Queenes most honourable 
priuie counsell and Maister of hir maiesties horse. 
Because bothe by the vniuersall reporte of ail men, I heare and allso 
by myne owne experienee I perfeetly know (right honourable and my 
very goode lorde) how honorably and cherefully diuers workes pre- 
sented to your lordship haue ben accepted: I (though of al others 
most simple) was thereby encouraged, to offer to your honour this my 
simple worke, in token of my bounden duty. The exaumple also of 
that famous monarche Artaxerxes, who so wel accepted the simple 
handfull of water, that the poore Persian Sinetas brought him from 
the riuer Cyrus, putteth me in good hope, that youre honour, who geue 
place to no man in humanitie and curtesie, wil hOt mislike this simple 
signifieng of my good wylle. For, like as the mite of that poore 
widowe that is mencioned in the Gospell, whiche she gaue in ail her 
penurie, is accompted a greater gifle then those huge sommes that 
great men layde out of their greate stoare: so ought this my simple 
pamphlet be adiudged to procede, though not from greater, yet from 
as great good will as the best and learnedst writers beare to your 
honour. For, they of their abundant stoare, haue laied oute somewhat : 
But I of my meane knowledge, haue presented these few first frutes to 



your honor: knowing that your wisedome can in this small present 
right well sec my good wyll. Iy gift is a short briefe or summarie of 
the chiefest chances and accidentes, that haue happened in this Realme, 
frome the tyme of Brutus to this our age. Whiche I haue done by the 
conference of many avthors, both old and new, those I meane, that 
commonly are called Chroniclers, ovt of whom I haue gathered many 
notable thinges, moste worthy of remembrance, whiche no man hereto- 
fore hath noted, whiche worke also I was the bolder to dedicate to yovr 
honour, because I know your lordships good inclination to al sortes of 
good knowledges : and especially the great loue that )'ou beare to the 
olde Recordes of dedes doone by famous and noble worthies: whiche 
my boldnes, like as I truste, your honor will not only pardon, but also 
accept in good part: so I besech all the readers hereof that folowyng 
your honourable example, they will iudge the best of this my trauaile, 
whiche I toke in hand, onely for the respecte that I had to their profite. 
Whereby they shall both shew the goodnes of theer owne natures, and 
also encourage me willingly to go forwarde in this my enterprise. 
Which doubting not, but that I shall the rather obtaine of them, 
because of your lordeships fauourable acceptance hereof, I wil now 
cesse any longer to trouble your honor, beseching almightie god long 
to preserue you to the commoditie of this our natiue countrie. 
Your L. most humble 
Ior" STOWE. 

.7O lhe .R«ader. 
Diuers wryters of Hystories write dyuersly. Some penne their 
hystories plentifully at large. Some contrary wyse, briefly and shortly 
doo but (as it were) touche by the way, the remembraunce and accidents 
of those tymes, of which they write. Some do with a large compasse 
discouer as wel the affaires done in foreyn partes, as those that hapned 
in that countrey, of whiche especially they write. And some content 
to let alone other matters, pvt in memory only such thyngs, as they 
them selues haue had experience of, in their own countreis. Amongs 
whom, good Reader, I craue to haue place, and desyre roome in the 
lower part of this table. For I vse thee in this my booke as some 
symple feaster, that beynge hOt able of his owne coste to feast his 
guestes sufficientely, is fayne to bee frended of his neyghboures, and to 
sette before them suche dishes as he hath gotten of others. For I 
acknowledge, that many of the hystories, that thou shalte reade here 
abridged, are taken, partely out of Robert Fabian, sometyme Alderman 
of London, Edwarde Halle gentylman ofGreyes hme, John Hardynge, 



lxxvi .]Semtix ta [ntradttctian 
a great trauailer bothe in foreyne eountreis, and also in all writynges 
of antiquitie: and other, who reaped great abundance of knowledge 
and filled their bookes full therwith, to the great profite and pleasure 
of ail posteritie, and to their own great [ame and glory. $o that of 
their great plenty I might wel take somewhat to hyde my pouertie. 
Howbe it, I haue hOt so doone it, as if they should clayme theyr own, 
I shuld forthwith be left naked. For somwhat I haue noted, which 
I my selle, partly by paynfull searche, and partly by diligent experience, 
haue round out. Wherefore, both the smalnesse of the volume whiche 
comprehendeth gret matters in effect, also the noueltie of soin matters 
vttred therin, ought to cause y it shold hOt be altogither vnwelcome to 
thee. For though it be written homely, yet it is hOt (as I trust) writen 
vntruly. And in hystories the chiefe thyng that is to be desyred is 
truthe. Wheffore, if thou fynde that in it, I beseche thee, wynke at 
small faultes, or at the least, let the consyderacion ofmy well'meanynge, 
drowne them. 8o shalt thou both encourage me to farther diligence, 
and also vtter thyne owne fi'endlynesse, in that thou doest rather 
further, then eondemne a weak wryter. 
Of smoothe and flatterynge speache remember to take hede: 
For Trouthe in playn wordes may be tolde, of craft a iye bath nede. 

In the second 
edition of the 
a bridgement. 

Epislle D«dicalo O' (1o the Lord 3Iayor and Aldermen) preflxed to 
lhe Summary abridged, for zy6 7. 
Although, ryght honorable and worshipful, I was my selfe verye redy 
to dedicate this my small trauayle of Englysh Chronicles vnto you to 
thentent that through your protection it might passe the snarlynges of 
the malicyous, which are alwayes redy to hinder the good meanyngs 
of laborious men and studious : yet consyderynge the occasyons neces- 
saryly vnto me offered, and dutyfiflly to be considered, I thought good 
to begyn with the ryghte honorable Thede of Leicester. For speakyng 
nothyng of my own duetie, the commoditie of my owne countreyemen 
moued mee hereunto, seynge they were deceyued through hys autho- 
rytye by the furnyshyng of a fi'iuolous abridgement in the fronture 
with his noble naine, I thought good, and that after amendement 
promised and not performed, at vacante rimes, to take to my olde 
delectable studies, and after a defence of that wherin another had both 
abused hys Lordshype, and deceaued the expectacion of the common 
people. But nowe at the requeste of the P6nter and other of my 
louing ri'ends, hauyng brought the saine into a newe forme, such as 
may both ease the purse and the caryage, and yet nothing omitted 



Select Dedicalions and tz'15is/les lxxvii 
conuenyent to be knowne; and besydes all thys hauyng example 
before my face to chaunge my Patron (reseruynge styll my Printer, as 
carefull of his aduantage rather thenne myne owne) I ara bold to 
submyt it vnto your honoure and worshyppes protectyons together, that 
thorough the thundryng noyse of empty tonnes and vnfluitful graftes 
of 'Iomus' offsprynge it be not (as it is pretended) defaced and ouer- 
throwne. Truthes quarrell it is, I laye belote you, the whyche bath 
bene (if hot hitherto wholly pretermitted) truelye myserable handled, 
mangled I should saye, and such an hotchepotte ruade of truthe and 
lyes together, that of thignorante in hystoryes thone coulde hOt be 
discernde flore thother. A strange case it is and neglygence shall 
I call it, or ignorance tlaat hec that was moued to wryte euen for 
pytyes sake to restore the truthe to ber ilategritye shoulde commytte 
so great errors, and so many, that he himself had nede of a correcter, 
and truth of a newe laborer. For me a heape of old monumentes, 
wytnesses of tymes, and bright beames of the truth tan testyfye that 
I haue hOt swarued ffom the truthe: the whyche as I ara redy at all 
tymes to shew for naine owne safe conducte aynst tlmduersaryes, so 
ana I most certaine that he that pretendeth most bath had very smale 
store of aucthors for hym selfe before tyme, and now hath fraughte hys 
manerly Ianuell wyth such merchandyse (as to you it shall be most 
manyfest at your conference) that by the byinge of my summarye he 
scoured ne-lye, or cleanly altered his old Abridgment. What pre- 
occupation or what insolence is it then to transfer that vnto me that 
ara fartheste flore such dealing? And yet hauing touche better pre- 
cedents before myne eyes (euen that excellent learned Dr. Coeper, 
that I naine no ancyenter, whose order and deuyse priuatly he con- 
demneth, and yet openly transformeth into his own Abridgement) 
he accuseth of counterfeatyng lais volume and order, whereas it 
might be well sayde vnto hym: What hast thou yt thou hast hOt 
receaued of me ? 
But y I be hOt agaynst my nature angry wythe my vndeserued 
aduersary, 1 wil here surcease to trouble you anye further at this tyme, 
most earnestlye requyrynge your honoure and worshyppes ail ones 
againe to take the tuityon of this little booke vppon you. The whych, 
if I may perceaue to be taken thankfullye and fruitefullye used to the 
amendment of suche grosse erroures, as hytherto haue bene in The 
Great Abridgement, and presentely are in the lIanuell of the Cronycles 
of Englande, in Thabridged Abridgemente, in The briefe Collection of 
Histories commytted, I shall be encouraged to perfecte that labour 
that I haue begun, and such worthy workes of auncyent Aucthours 

In the Epistle 
Dedicatory. 

Too many 
names for a 
trifle. 



lxxviii ./li@euix" [o hd/,odtctio¢t 
that I haue wyth greate peynes gathered together, and partly performed 
in M. Chaucer and other, I shall be much incensed by your gentlenes 
to publyshe to the commoditie of ail the Quenes maiesties louing 
subiectes. 
Your moste humble 
IOHN STOWE. 

Setting (as it 
were) his 
ll'/al-] e on 
another man's 
vessell. 

In the first 
page the I6, 
17, I8, 9 and 
2o lines. 

In the seconde 
page the I &  
lines, 4, 5, 6, 

I leaue his 
simple .and 
plaine dealing 
to the iudg- 
ment of 
others. 
In commend- 
ing mine 
authors 

Episll« Io 1he Rca,la" prefi.red to the Smnmary abridged for U3" 

Calling to memory (gentle Reader) with what dilligence (to my 
great cost and charges) I haue trauayled in my late Summary of ye. 
('hronicles: As also y whonest dealings of somebody towards mee 
(whereof I haue long since sufficientlye written and exhibited to the 
learned and honourable), I persuaded with my selfe to haue surceased 
from this kinde of trauell wherin another hath vsed to repe the fruite 
of my labours. But now for diuers causes thereto mouinge me I haue 
once again briefely run ouer this smal abridgement, placing the yeares 
of our Lord, the yeres of ye Kings, wyth ye Shyriffes and Maiors of 
London, in a farre more perfect and plain order then heretofore hath 
bene published. 
Touching Ri. Grafton his slanderous Epistle, though the saine wyth 
other his abusing of me was aunsweared by the learned & honourable, 
& by theym forbidden to be reprinted, he hath since y rime in his 
second empresion placed his former lying Preface, wherin he hath 
these voords : ' Ge»tle Ieadt'r, lhis mie Ihblge offendelh me so much, /ha/ 
I ara iforccd Io pinte »OE el_/-e lhereof, and showe noE st)uple andplai»e 
deah'»g lho'd». One I,,hn Stmo of ohom I wil sa_y none euil 'c., hath 
published a Booke, and lherbt halh charged mee biltarlye, but chiefdye 
wilh lwo lhinges. The one, IhaI J haue ruade E. Italle's Chronicle 
Chrom'cle, buI noI toilhoule mangeh'nge, amt (as hee sai[h) wt'Ihoute a O, 
i»genious, and film)te declaralion thereof The olher thbge IhaI he 
chatelh me wilhall, is lhal a Chronicle of Itardings which he halh, 
dolh much di_ffC rioto lhe Chronicle, zohich vnder lhe sayd Itardbtges 
naine was prbded by mee, as Ihoughe I had falci,ed ttardings Chronicle 
'c.' For answeare I say the offence by mee committed, requireth no 
such forced purgation. I haue not so bitterlye charged him, as he 
bath plainly accused himselfe. My words be these. Some bodye (wilh- 
ou/any i»genious and plaine declaralion lherof) halh 3ublished, buI no/ 
.ie;t'lholtI ma»gling, e[asler Halles boke for his ozone. I naine not 
Grafton. This is the firste. The second is this :Iohn Hardinge &c. 
exhibited a Chronicle of England, with a Mappe or description of 



Select Dedications and E4Mstles lxxix 

Scotland, to King Henry the sixt, which Chronicle dolh almosl a[lo- I saye hOt 
gelher &'flet" from lhal wht'ch vnder his naine was imprt'nled by Ri. that I haue 
such a chroni- 
Graflon. cle of 
After this in ye saine preface he bl'aggeth to haue a Chronicle of I. l:Iarding, 
&c. 
Iohn Hardings written in the latine tongue, which he assureth himself 
I neuer sawe, and doubteth whether I vnderstand. If he haue any Ri.Grafton 
neuer saw 
such booke, it is like that he vould allege it, as he hath done manye Robert de 
other Authors, whereof I ara better assured he hath neuer seene so Auesberye, 
_ Tho. Wal- 
touche as the outsyde of their books. If ther be no such Chronicle o[ singham, 
Iohn Hardings, as he braggeth on, it is like I haue not seene it, & H. of Leices- 
must needs be hard to vnderstande it. 
Then he saith my latter Summary differeth cleane rioto my first. 
To this I aunswere, I haue not chaunged eyther woork, or title, but 
haue corrected my first booke as I haue founde better Auctours. But 
hee himselfe hath lnade his last abridgemente not onelye cleane con- 
trary to his first, but the two impressions contrarye the one to the 
other, and euery one contrary to his mere History. For his true 
alledging of Aucthors let men iudge by those which are common in 
out vulger tongue, as Policronicon, Ro. Fabian, Ed. Hall, Doctour 
Cooper. Look those Authors iu those yeres and peraduenture ye 
shal finde no such matter. Try, and then trust. 

ter, Register 
of Berye, and 
many other 
which he 
alledgeth for 
that he 
findeth them 
alledged in 
my Summarye. 

29edicalion of Annales in 1.f92. 
To the Right Reuerend Father in God my Lord Archbishop of 
Canterburie, Primate and Metropolitane of England, and one of hir 
Maiesties most honorable priuie Councill, Iohn Stowe wisheth increase 
as well of all heauenly graces as worldly blessings. 
It is now more than thirtie yeeres (Right reuerende father)since 
I first addressed ail my cares and cogitations to the studie of Histories 
and search of Antiquities: the greatest part of which rime I haue 
diligently imploied in collecting such matters of this kingdome, as 
I thought most worthie to be recommended both to the present and 
succeeding age. These laborious collections in so long a rime haue 
now at length grown into a large volume, which I was willing to haue 
committed to the presse had hOt the Printer, for some priuate respects, 
beene more desirous to publish Annales at this present. Wherein 
I haue condescended to him to publish these, which I submit to your 
gratious and graue consideration, and to the censure of the courteous 
reader, & learned Antiquaries: relying wholy vpon this comfort, that 
the truth & credit of my Authors is in no point iniuried, how simple 
and naked soeuer the stile may be iudged. Neither do I doubt but 



they may haue free passage in the world, if they be countenanced 
vnder your honorable naine 8: protection. Vnto whom I offer & with 
al dutiful affection I dedicate both my selle and them : being heerunto 
induced, both for that your worthy predecessor, and m), especiall bene- 
factor Archbishop PARKER, animated me in the course of these 
studies, which otherwise I had long since discontinued ; and also that 
your great loue and entire affection to ail good letters in generall and 
to the Antiquities in particular hath beene so singular, that ail which 
like and loue good studies, do iustl), esteeme you their principall and 
gratious patrone. Thus hoping of your fauorable aceeptance of this, 
as but part of that which I intended in a more large volume, I humbly 
take m), leaue. 
London this -6 of Iay 59- 

JE'pis/le l)edi«alori« (lo /he Lord «lido'or and Aldermen) prefi«.'ed lo lt, e 
Summar), Abridged for 16o4. 
Amongst other bookes, (Honourable & worshipfull) which are in 
this our learned age published in great numbers, there are fewe either 
for the honestie of the matters, or commoditie which they bring to the 
common welth, or for the plesantness of the studie & reading, to be 
preferred before the Chronicles and histories. What examples of men 
deseruing immortalitie, of exploites worthy great renoune, of vertuous 
liuing of the posteritie to be imbraced, of wise handling of weightie 
affaires, diligentl), to be marked, and aptly to bec applied: what 
incouragement of Nobilitie to noble feates, what discouragement of 
vnnaturall subieets from wicked treasons, pernicious rebellions, & 
damnable doctrines, To conclude, what perswasion to honestie, godli- 
nesse' & vertue of all sorts ; what diswasion from the contrarie is not 
plentifully in them to bec found ? So that it is as harde a matter for the 
readers of Chronicles, in my fancie, to passe without some colour oi 
wisdome, inuitements to verrue, and loathing of naughtie factes, as it 
is for a well fauored man to walke vp and down in the hot parching 
Sun, and not to bec therewith Sunburned. They therefore which with 
long studie, earnest good will, & to their great cost & charges haue 
brought hidden Histories from dustie darkenes to the sight of the 
world, and haue beene diligent obseruers of eommon wealths, and 
noted for posteritie the fleeting maners of the people, and accidents of 
the rimes, deserue (at the least) thankes for their paines, and to be 
misreported of none, seeing they haue labored for all. I write hot 
this to complaine of some mens ingratitude towards mec (although 



Select Dedicatiots amt I'lSistles lxxxi 
iustly I might) but to shew the commodities which ensue of the 
reading of histories, that seeing they are so great and many, all men 
would as they ought, imploy their diligence in the honest, fruitfull, 
and delectable perusing of the saine, and so to account of the Authors, 
as of men carefull for their countrie, and to confesse, if neede require, 
by whom they haue taken profite. It is now nigh 45- yeares since 
I seeing the confused order of our late ]ïnglish Chronicles, and the 
ignorant handling of auncient affaires, as also (by occasion) being 
perswaded by the *Eade of Leicester, (leauing naine owne peculiar 
gaines) consecrated my selfc to the search of our famous Antiquities. 
What I haue done in them, the former editions of my Summaries, 
Chronicles, and Annales, with my suruay of the Cities of London, 
Westminster, & Borough of Southwarke, may well testifie: but how 
far (be it spoken without arrogance) I haue labored for the truth more 
then some other, the last editions will euidently declare. Where in 
that I differ from the inordinate & vnskilfull collections of other 
men, it is no maruaile, seeing that I doe hot fully agree with my selfe, 
as some obscure persons haue fondly charged me, but let it be con- 
sidered that there is nothing perfect at the first, & that it is incident to 
mankind to erre & slip sometime, take he neuar so great heede ; but 
only the point of fantasticall fooles to perseuer & continue in their 
errors perceiuing them. Wherfore seeing that the perusing of aunclent 
records & best approued histories of all times (not without great 
difficultie obtained) do not only moue me, but for their authoritie driue 
me to acknowledge both mine & other mens errors, & in acknow- 
ledging, to correct them, I trust to obtaine thus much at your Honor 
& Worships hands: that at the least you will call to remembrance 
a most gentle and wise law of the politike Persians, where in it was 
enacted that a man accused to be in their lawes a trespasser, and 
round guiltie of the crime, should hOt straightway be condemned, but 
a diligent inquirie & search of his whole life and conuersation (no 
slander imputed vnto him as of importance) if the number of his 
laudable facts did counteruaile the contrarie, he was full quit of trespas. 
The same lawe doe I wish the readers of this my abridged Summary 
and other my larger Chronicles, to put in vse, that if the errours be 
not so plentifull, as Histories truely alledged, they will beare with them, 
for (as I haue promised and many wayes performed) I meane (God 
willing) so to trie ail matters worthy of immortalitie by the certaine 
touchstone of the best allowed Historiographers and sound recordes, 
that neither any bodv by me shalbe deceiued nor I forced to craue 
pardon if I do offend. 

Note that 
the vngratfull 
backebiter 
slaieth Three 
at once, him- 
selfe by his 
owne malice, 
him that 
crediteth his 
false tales & 
him that he 
backbiteth. 
* I gaue him 
a booke com- 
piled by his 
Grandfather 
Edmond 
Dudley. 



Ixxxii l/c,,zdi.x" to h#«odactioz 

V. BIBLIOGRAPHY 

. ïrhe Summary and the Summapy A bridged. 
[Stow, in his account of his quarrel with Grafton, distinguishes carefully 
between his Stl,iztary, which first appeared in I565, and the Summary 
Abrid.ged, first published in the next yea*'. The distinction bas hot always 
been noted, but the two works are bibliographically quite different. The 
former is small 8"°, and so long as Leicester was alive was dedicated to 
him ; the additional marrer (other than the Chronicles proper) is hot so 
full as in the abridgement, the amount varies in different editions, but 
generally comprises some notes as to Terres, a List of Authors, and at 
the end a Table or Index; the last edition in I59o was dedicated to the 
Lord blayor. The Summary Abrid$ed is I6 m° (or 24m°); the first 
edition had no dedication [Stow says that it was dedicated to the Lord 
Mayor--p. Iii above--but the apparently complete copy in the British 
Museum has none), all the later editions were dedicated to the Lord 
Mayor ; the additional matter consists of a Calendar, Rules to final Fasts, 
the Terres, &c., at the beginning, and at the end the distances of towns 
from London, and the dates of the principal Faits; there is no List o! 
Authors and no Table. So far as its main substance is concerned the 
Suotmary Abridffcd agrees with Stow's own description of it as brought 
' into a new form, such as may both case the purse and the carriage, yet 
nothing omitted convenient to be known '. Successive editions both of 
the Summaty and the Summary Abridged were from time to time 
curtailed to make room for fresh matter. The entry of the Summary 
appears in the Stationers' Registers under 564-5: 'Thomas marshe 
for printing of a breaffe cronenacle ruade by John Stowe, auctorysshed 
by my lorde of Canterbury.' This is the first time the archbishop's name 
thus appears on the Register. In the margin is the note : 'T. Marshe 
ultimo marcij  573 chaunged with H. Byneman for Terence, per liEem. 
magistri et gardianorum.' This is the earliest note of such an exchange 
(Arber, Transcri;bl, i. i2ob). Like ail Stow's works printed in his life- 
time, the Slgntttary is in black letter. Copies of editions marked * are in 
the British Museum, and of those marked 5" in the Bodleian Library.] 
The Summao,. 
• -t A Summarie ofÈnglyshe Chronicles, Conteyning the truc accompt 
of yeres, wherein euery kyng of this Realme of F.ngland began 
theyr relgne, howe long they reigned: and what notable thynges 
bath beene donc durynge theyr Reygnes. Wyth also the names 
and yeares of ail the Bylyffes, Custos, maiors, and sheriffes of the 
Citie of London, sens the Conqueste, dyligently collected by 
Iohn Stow... in the yere... I565. 
ff. xiv, 48, xii. T. Marshe, i565, 8 o 
i" A Summarie of our F.nglyshe Chronicles... Diligently collected 
by Iohn Stowe... In the yeare...  566. 
ff. xii, 282 a, xii. T. Marshe, ,566, 8,-0 
 However ff: 3o and 137 are» through misprinting, wanting. 



Bibliogr«pb y lxxxiii 
• i" lA Summarie, &c.]. 
ff. x, pp. 43, ff- xi. T. lIarshe, i5î o, 8 TM 
+ A Summarie of the Chronicles of England, from the first comming 
of Brute, into this land, vnto this present yeare of Christ 574- 
ff. viii, pp. 44, fl xi. Henry Binneman, 574, 8,o 
• + A Summarie of the Chronicles of Englande from the first arriuing 
of Brute... unto... 575. Corrected and enlarged. 
ff. viii, pp. 570, ff. xxviii. R. Tottle and H. Binneman, 
[575, 8vo 
• A Summarie of the Chron]cles of England from . .. Brute... vlto 
. .. 59o. First collected, since enlarged, and now continucd by 
Iohn $tow. 
ff. viii, pp. 76o, ff. iv. R. Newbery, 59o, 8 TM 

7"he Summao, A6ridged. 
* The Summarie of Englyshe Chronicles. Lately collected and pub- 
lished, nowe abridged and continued tyl this present moneth of 
lIarche in the yere of our Lord God, 566, by I. S. 
ff. viii, 197, iii. T. Marshe, 1566, 6 tao 
*-I" The Summarie of Eglishe Chronicles... continued til this 
present moneth of Nouember... 1567. By I. S. 
ff. xii, 2oo, ii. T. lIarshe, 567, 16 mo 
* ¢ The Summarie of the Chronicles of Englande... newly cor- 
rected, abridged, and continued vnto 1573. 
unnumbercd. T. lXlarshe, 573, I6m° 
[According to Lowndes there was an edition in 579, but he gives no 
particulars.] 
A Summarie, &c.  
R. Newbery and H. Denham, 1584. 
* -I" A Summarie of the Chronicles of Englande. Diligently collected, 
abridged and continued vnto.., t 587 • • • by Iohn Stow. 
ff. xvi, pp. 446, ff: xvi. R. Newberie and H. Deaham, 
[1587, 6 m° 
* ¢ A Summarie... Diligently collected, &c. 
ff. xvi, pp. 460, ff. xvii. R. Bradocke, i598 , 16mo 
* "i" A Summarie... Diligently collected, &c. 
ff: xv, pp. 458, ff. xvi. Iohn Harison, 16o4, i6 mo 

t The copy in the Bodleian Library is without title. 
 So given by Lowndes. 
fz 



lxxxiv 
The 

The 

The 

«llS15cndLv to In/rodnction 
Abridgement or Summarie of the English Chronicles, first col- 
iected by toaster Iohn Stow... continued vnto... 6o7, by 
E. H.  
Imprinted for the Company of Stationers, 6o7, 8 v° 
Abridgement of the English Chronicles... vnto the end of the 
yeare J6o. By E. H. 
Imprinted for the Company of Stationers, J6 i, 8 vo 
Abridgement... vnto the beginning of the yeare,  6  8. By E. H. 
Imprinted for the Company of Stationers,  618, 8 o 

2. T/e C/rom'de, and Annales. 
[The C]rand«s of 158o furnish as it were a connecting link between 
the 'umma»y and the Ammles, preserving the civic character of the 
former, but approaching the latter in size. Of the Amtales the editions 
of 16ol and 6o are nearly identical; the latter has only one sheet 
{Q q q q) reprinted, with additions clown to =6 March, 16o. Howes in 
his two editions, besides his continuation beyond 6o, interpolated 
matter in other places : qt, otations from his editions are hOt to be relied 
on as representing Stow's own work.] 
The Chronicles of England, flore Brute vnto this present yeare of 
Christ, 58o. Collected by Iohn Stow. 
Ralph Newberie at the assignment of Henrie Bynneman, 
[_ 58o, 4 o 
The Annales of England faithfully collected out of the most autenticall 
Authors, Records, and other monuments of Antiquitie, from the 
first inhabitation wtill this present yeere 59- By Iohn Stow. 
Ralfe Newbery, 592, 4 o 
The Annales of England . . . confinued ... vntill this present yeare 
16or. 
Raire Newbery, i 60 I, 4 
The Annales of England... continued.., vntill this prescrit yeare, 
6o 5. 
George Bishop and Thomas Adams, 16o5, 4 to 
The Annales or Generall Chronicle of England... continued and 
augmented ... vnto the ende of this present yeere, ,6 4. By 
Edmond Howes. 
T. Adams,  6 x 5, folio. 
Annales or a Generall Chronicle of England... continued vnto the 
end of this present yeere 63. By Edmond Howes. 
Richard Meighen, 63 , folio. 
x Thisand the two subsequent editions published by Edmond Howes, 
are re-editions of the original work, not of the S«mma A&-idgtd. 



Biblio gr«h y lxx.,,v 

[The Sur,ey ofLondo# was entered at Stationers' Hall by John Woife 
on 7 July, I598. It was transferred by Woife's widow to John Pyndley 
on 27 Apri], 1612) and by Pyndley's widow to George Pursiowe on 
2 November, 1613 (Arber, Transoffibt, iii. 39, 219, 245). Some copies of 
the first edition have the date 1599; an instance is the presentation copy 
to Elizabeth Stow, now in the British Museum, which has ber name 
printed within in an ornamental border on the back of the title-page, and 
her initiais and the City arms stamped on the covers.] 
A Suruay of London . . . by Iohn Stow Citizen of Londou. Also an 
Apologie, &c. 
Iohn Wolfe,  598, sm. 4 to 
A Suruay, &c. 
Iohn Windet, 6o3, sm. 4 ço 
The Suruay of London . .. continued.., with many rare and worthy 
notes ... by A. M. 
George Purslowe,  6  8, sm. 4 fo 
The Suruey of London...]3egunne first by... Iohn Stow... 
afterwards inlarged by... A. M. in the yeare 68. And now 
completely finished by ... A. M., H. D., and others. 
Elizabeth Purslow, 633, fol. 
A Survey of the Cities of London and Westminster... brought down 
from the Year 633... to the present time by John Strype. 
London, 7o, z vols. folio. 
A Survey, &c. 13y Robert Seymour. The whole being an Improve- 
ment of ]lr. Stow's and other Suve)'s. 
London, 734-5, "z vols. folio. 
A Survey, &c. [Seymour's work with the addition of Dugdale's History 
of S. Paul's.] By a Gentleman of the Inner Temple. 
London,  753,  vols. folio. 
A Survey of the Cities... Corrected, improved and very much 
Enlarged in the Yeare I7-',o by John Strype... brought down 
to the present Time by Careful IIands. The Sixth Edition. 
London, î54-5,  vols. folio. 
A Survey, &c. Edited by W. J. Thoms. 
8vo, 84. Reprinted with illustrations 876. 
A Survey, &c. Edited by H. lIorley. 
8vo, x889. Reprinted 893. 



4. 3liscellaneous. 
The workes of Geffrey Chaucer, newly printed with diners addicions, 
whiche were neuer in printe before. 
56, folio. 
The Successions of the ltistory of England fi'om the beginning of 
Edward vito the end of the reign of Queen Elizabeth : together 
with a list of the Dukes, Marquises, Earls, Viscounts, and Barons 
of England to the present Time. Bv Iohn Stowe. 
London, 638, folio. 
[Lowndes, liblio.r«ibher's ,l«mual, v. 35. There is no copy either 
in the British Museum or the Bodleian Librat3'. The Peerage is stated 
to take 45 PP., the list of Bishops 3 PP. ; the History begins on p. 333, 
and ends on p. 843. ] 
A Recital of Stow's Collection concerning the Rise, Profitableness, 
and Continuance of the Court of Requests, or Court of Con- 
science in the Cit), of London. 
[London, 64o ?] s.sh. folio. 
[There is a copy in the llritish Museum.] 
Three Fifteenth Century Chronicles, with historical memoranda by 
John Stowe, the antiquary, and contemporary notes of occurrences 
written by him in the reign of Queen Elizabeth. Edited by 
James Gairdner. 
Camden Society, 88o. N.S. xxviii. 

VI. SOME ACCOUNT OF STOW'S COLLECTIONS 
AND IISS. 
[This account is intended only as a short summary to show the general 
character of Stow's CNlecNots. The contents of some of the volumes are 
so varied and fragmentar" that a full catalogue would extend to great 
length. 1 have, however, included ail the items of most interest, and 
especially such as bear on the history of London. Further particulars 
of the more important volumes may be found in the Calalo.ffue of 1-[ar- 
leian 3ISS. ; but this summal 3, includes a few notices, which are there 
omitted, together with some fresh identifications. 
Touching the history of Stow's Collections it would appear that part of 
them were purchased at his death by Ralph Starkey, whorn Sir Simonds 
D'Ewes calls 'an ignorant, mercenary, indigent man', whilst allowing 
that he had 'great plenty of new xvritten collections and divers original 
letters of great moment.' Starkey died in 6e8, and D'Ewes eagerl¥ 
purchaseà his library as an inestimable prize (Autobiograibhy , i. 39I-2. 
D'Ewes' library was sold by his grandson to Robert Harley, and thus 
this portion of Stow's Collections round its way to the British Museum. 
Whilst in Starkey's possession Stow's papers were used by Roger Dods- 
worth in preparing his  Monasticon' (Hearne, Colleclanea, iii. o8). In 
Hearne's rime a quantity of Stow's papers, including collections for the 
Annales andonecclesiastical foundations and Leland's llinerao,,were in the 



S[oTo's Coffe6[/ols (llla I ]ISS. lxxxvii 

possession ofa Mr. Davies of Llannerch, and were seen and used by Hearne 
(id. iii. 70, 143). The transcripts of Leland in Tanner ,]I.S'. 464 are no 
doubt those which were purchased by Camden (see p. xxv above). In I657 
they were in the possession of Mr. Robert Vaughan of Hengwrt; they 
came to the Bodleian Library in 1736 (Toulmin Smith, Leland in IVale«, 
p. vi; and ltinerapy, i, pp. xxiii, xxiv). The extant papers can be only 
a small part of Stow's Collections. The fate of the remainder is told by 
a note at the head of those in Collon 315". Cleopatra C. iii: "Bought 
of Edwardes, the Broker and Fripper, ij.s. 27 Octobr. I6137 As regards 
others Anthony Munday states definitely that Stow, while he was alive, 
delivered him some of his best collections, which were made use of in 
subsequent editions of the Survey (Epistle Dedicatorie, ed. I633). In 
like manner it is probable that some lnaterial had passed into the hands 
of Edmund Howes, to be incorporated by him in his editions of the 
Annale« (see vol. ii, pp. 282, 323-4 and 367). 
The great extent of Stow's Library is described by I)avid Powel in 
584 in the Preface to his Hi«torie of Cambria: 'In written hand I had 
Gildas Sapiens alias Nennius, Henrie Huntingdon, William Malmsbury, 
Marianus Scotus, Ralph Cogshall, Io. Eversden, Nicholas Triuet, 
FIorentius Wigornensis, Simon of Durham, Roger Houeden, and other, 
which remaine in the hand of I. Stowe, citizen of London, who deserueth 
commendation for getting together the ancient writers of the histories of 
this land.' Stow hilnself mentions that he possessed copies of Gower's 
Vo.r Clamantis and Cottfessio Amantis and of Fabyan's Chronicles (see 
vol. ii, pp. 57 and 3o 5 below). Camden was indebted to him for a copy 
of Geoffrey le Baker's Ckvnicle lsee Sir E. M. Thompson's Preface, 
p. vii). For a MS. (relating to 5t3) borrowed froln Stow in ,584, sec 
Letters and Pafiers, ttemy VIII, i, p. 63z. Sir Robert Cotton would 
appear to have been a great purchaser of Stow's I[SS., and his collection 
no doubt includes others besides those which 1 bave noted. To lnake 
a complete list of extant .lIS"S. which belonged to Stow would be an 
almost hopeless task. 
Of Stow's printed books one containing a few notes in his writing is 
preserved in the British Museum, riz. a copy of Norden's Itertford«hire.] 

A. COLLECTIO.S 
I. In lhe t?rilish 31useum. 
11arley 247. A volume of miscellaneous and fragmentary papers, 
including many from Stow's Collections. NoTr: ff. zo-37. Part of 
a history of the Kings of Kent with notes by Stow. fi 45. A 
fragment for the Annales. ff. 82-97. Notes out of Hector Boetius 
made by Stow. ff. t43, and I69-7z. Fragments of chronicles in 
English for t376-7 (Printed in Sir E. 1I. Thompson's edition of 
Chronicon A»gh'ae, pp. lxvii-lxxxiii. Sec ii. z83 below), ff. I73-4. 
A fragment of a translation of the Chrom'con Angh'ae (sec Sir E. 
Thompson's edition, p. xi), ff. t74, I76. Copies of deeds relating 
to London. f. zoS. Concerninge the burning of 3Ioskow by the 
Crimme-Tartar, written by Iohn Stow. f. zo9. A note by Stow of 
his dispute with Master Crowche (see p. lxii. above), ff. zlo, zlo*. 
Fragments of a letter to Stow from Thomas Wicliffe (sec p, lxxii. 



above), f. 2i 7. Notes by Stow on the execution of 13arrow and 
Greenwood in 593. 
ttarley 293. A miscellaneous collection containing a few papers 
of Stow's. e.g.f. 32. Historical notes, ff. 44-5- List of sur- 
names from Froissart. 
1-J'arl o, 367 . A volume of miscellaneous papers, the majority of 
which belonged to Stow. For ff. i-o see pp. xlix-lxvii above. NOTE : 
f.  I. Grafton's reply to Stow, with pungent comments by the latter 
in the margin ('This is a lye,' &c. !Much of Grafton's statement is 
too worn to be fully legible ; he claires to bave had a principal share 
in Hall's Chronicle). f. 12. Sto"s further vindication of himself 
against the aspersions of Grafton. ff. 13-18 and 20-45. Various 
historical notes by Stow. f. 19. An extract from a City Chronicle 
for 15o2 (See ii. 34i-2 below), f. 46. The way of coining and 
examining or trying of money, written by Iohn Stow. f. 48. The 
relation of what was found at the digging of a vault at the corner of 
Bread Street, Cheapside. (See ii. 351 below.) f. 86ro. A morall 
Ballad by Henry Scogan (see i. 24I below), f. 129. _A_ poem, dated 
1583 by William Vallans, Salter, addressed to Stow and lamenting 
his lack of reward for writing in praise of citizens.--Vallans was the 
author of a piece of verse printed in Leland's Ih'nerao. , vol. v. ' A 
Tale of Two Swannes'; see .De?/. A'a/. iag., Iviii. 83.--The last 
few lines will illustrate sufficiently the character of this poem: 
Let citizens themselues declare 
What dedes theyre mayors haue done, 
What benefactors they haue had, 
What honor they haue wonn. 
And though your selfe a Cytezen 
Regard there lastyng faine 
Yet reason is they should reward 
Or recompense the same. 
This volume also contains copies of poems by I0"dgate and other 
writers ruade by Stow. 
11arle_y 374. A collection ofautograph letters ruade by Sir Simonds 
I)'Ewes. For letters toStow on ff. 9-24 see pp. lxviii-lxxiiiabove. NorE 
also: f. 12. Christopher Ridley to the right worshipful lXlr. Will. 
Claxton of Wynyard ith an account of the Picts Wall. (Some notes 
written thereon by Stow.) f. 20. A note by Camden of inquiries to 
be ruade of lXlr. Claxton touching the Picts Wall. 
Itarley 53 o. lX|iscellaneous collections of Camden's and Stow's. 
1NToTE ." f. I. .A letter from Henry Savile to Stow (see p. Ixxii above). 



Slov's Collectiots a¢td II.[S5". lxxxîx 

fl: 2-2. Collectanea ex chron, de Dunmowe. ff. 9-3 o. A trans- 
lation of part of the Vda Henrici Qtdnli. f. 38. On the buildings of 
John Churchman (see i. 35). f- 75*. A letter from Camden to 
Stow {see p. lxxiii above), ff. 77-8. Some corrections by Camden 
for the Sttrve).. (They relate fo the western suburbs and Westminster, 
and apparently refer to a iXlS. copy; they are incorporated in the 
printed text.) ff. 81-94. Passages from Greek and Roman writers 
relating to Britain, perhaps collected by Camden for Stow's use. 
ff. 115--18. Fragments of a late copy ofa Chronicle of London for 
127o-88 , and 1344-58. ff. 119, 12o.  London Chronicle for 
1538- 9 (see vol. ii. 284, 31o below). 
ltarlo' 538. Stow's original draft of the main part of the Surv9,. 
See p. xxxvii and Notes passim. 
1-1arley 539. Collections by Stow. No'rE: ff. 1-8, William 
Lambard's 'Perambulation of Kent''writen by Iohn Stowe in 
anno 1579'. ff. 95-6. q'he Foundacion of 13etheleme without 
Byssoppes Gate of London in anno 1247. f. i83vo. Names of the 
Wards in London with some historical notes by Stow. f. 184. 
' 159o. The 4 of Septembre sir John Leveson, Mistar W. Lambarde 
and bIystar Leonard dyd ryde to see the monmnent of Catigern 
corruptly cailed Kytts Cotyhouse, I beinge with them &c.' (A ver)" 
brief note ruade by Stow.) The other collections relate chiefly to 
ecclesiastical foundations in various places. 
ttarley 54o. Historical collections of Stow's. NoE: ff. 3-6. 
E Chronico Regum lXIanniae, ff. 7-21. A London Chronicle 
I485-I55î. (Parti)' in Stow's writing; very brief to 15_'27, fairly full 
to 1541 , and ver), short from r54I to 1549. Prefixed are two brief 
notes of the time of Richard II and Henry IV.--' from a book of 
Mr. Lordynge'. See Notes ii. 295, 352, 370.) ff. 53-6. Notes on 
Annals of London. fl: 68- 9. Notes on history of the Conduit at 
Fleet. ff. 70-7. Account of the expeditions into Scotland in 1547 
and 156o. f" 79" A fragment on Honour of Citizens. I2 81. 
Letters patent re St. Nicholas Coleabbey. f. 82vo. Some private 
memoranda of Stow's; for the only one of interest see p. xix above. 
ff: 83-89. Notes of charitable bequests by London citizens, ff. 
93-11o. John Cooke's Relation of Sir Francis Drake's voiage unto 
the West Indies began 5 November 577. (The only copy extant; 
in Stow's writing. Printed in The II'orMncomp«ss«d, pp. 187--218 , 
Hakluyt Society.) ff. i i i-i 4. ' A Treatise of my Lord of Comber- 
lan's Shippes Voyage (in anno 1592 ) and of theyr takynge of the 
great Carack, lately brought into Dartmouth. Writen by Fraunces 



xc t;bbemti.x" to Ittrodztctiolt 
Seall.' f. 2t. Notes for Annales, 6o4. f. .. Notes by Stow 
as to information to be found in the ,_çurvey, relating to the Tower, 
and the city's claire re St. Martin's, apparently prepared for the use 
of the Corporation in legal business, f. z3. A note on the Standart 
at Leadenhail (see Note, vol. ii, p. 302 below). 
tlarley 54. Collections chiefly by Sir Simonds D'Ewes. But 
NOTE: ff. 25-9. List of Mayors, with a few notes (see Chron. 
Zond., p. 3z). ff. zzo-3. 'Here begynnythe the names of all 
parishe churches xx.tyn the fraunchese of London' (with some notes 
by Stow). f- z-4- The Gates of the Cyttie of London. f. 225. 
List of the Halls of Companies. f. z_ 9. List of trades in London. 
Itarley 54z- Historical collections by Stow chiefly for the Annales. 
NOTE: ri: 15-27. Excerpts from Peter of Ickham. ff. 28-30. 
' Notes gathered by Dr. Talbot out of ye boke of Brute.' ff. 3-3 . 
Richard III, his deathe from a book 'borrowyd of Henry Savill'. 
ff- 34-7. ' History of a moste horrible murder comytted at ffevershame 
in Kent' (Arden of Faversham). ff. 54-6. ' Oute of a small pawmflet 
in parchement wr)-ten in Latyn of the trayterous Seottes' irtc: ' In 
the yeare of Christes birth 3o6. ' ff. 57-65. Richard Turpyn's 
'Chronicleof Calais' (published by Camden Soc.). f. o. Speeches 
at the Pageants for Margaret of Anjou, 446, by Lydgate. f. xo2. 
Lydgate's 'London Licpenny'. ff: o5-8. 'Out of an olde booke 
of Iaster Henry Savill' (on history of Lacy family), ff: o9-6. 
Conquest of Britony (Britain) by Julius Caesar. ff.  5-4o. ' For- 
tescue on Laws of England. Transcribed by Mr. J. Stowe with his 
owne hand.' ff. 4-66. 'Out of a Chronicle of the Angles per- 
taynynge to Mast. Rose Carrike, translatyd into Englysshe for John 
Stowe and by him writen anno x579-' (For years 38-99.) 
tIarley 543- Notes and transcripts by Stow chiefly for the sth 
century. NOTE: ff. 3--49" Art:val of King Edward IV. 'Out of 
Iystar Flyghtwod's Boke.' 'Transcribed by John Stowe the 
Chronieler with his owne hand.' (Published by Camden Society, 
and in Chronicles of lhe Il'bile Rose.) ff. 5o-9 _. History of Loys 
Duke of Orleans. ff. I5o-6o. Extracts from a London Chronicle 
of the type of Çollou J][S. Julius B. i ; events of 43-6 (see Chron. 
Zond., z79-86 ), articles of surrender of French towns 4x7-25. 
ff. xSt-75 . Copies of documents relating to English history during 
Wars of Roses (see Chronicles of the While Rose, pp. lviii, lxxiv, 
229-38). 
ttarlg' 544. Transcripts and historical notes ruade by Stow. 
I'OTE : ff. --I'. From Giraldus Cambrensis ; on f. 3- ' Out of 



an old booke of lX, Iaster Iohn Price's after the description of Wales. 
Writen in Englysshe by Iohn Stow, marchaunt-taylour in anno domini 
I579, and in ye monithe of decembre.' ff: I5-"a. On introduction 
of Ch,istianity to Britain: lists and biographies of archbishops and 
bishops ofLoladon to I594. ff- 3-5. Names of bishops of London, 
and Deans of St. Paul's. f. 26. Dimensions of St. Paul's. ff: 30-`'. 
Bur)'alls in Poles Cherche. fil 33-64. Registrum Fratrum [inonm 
London. (Extracts, xvith list of persons buried at Gïeyfriars, see 
il. 345.) ff. 65-8. Interments at Westminster Abbey, Holy Trinity, 
Charterhouse, Whitefriars, Blackfiiars, Austin Friars (see ii. 3oo, 35o, 
364,376). f. 69. Notes on Cliffords. ff. 7"-9- Notes on hospitals and 
colleges in various towns, ff'. 8o-95. Charters to St. Katherine's 
Hospital. ff. 96- 9. Draft ofthe chapter of the Surve3'on Southwark(see 
notes, vol. il. 365-7 below), f. Ioo. Notes ruade by Stow from a 
Cartulary of St. Iary Overy (see ii. 3"4-6, 352). ff. ioi-',. Visitation 
of Clarencieux in x533, giving lists of persons buried at St. Mary 
Abbey at the Tower Hill (see vol. ii. 87), St. Katherine by the 
Tower, Barking Chapel, Crossed Friars, St. Buttolph's, and St. 
Olave's. f. Io4. Rough notes for the Survey on Westminster. 
f. io 5 . A fiagment of a translation of FizStephen. f. Ioî. A 
fragment of the Surz,o,. 
ltarleA' 545. Chiefly extracts from Chronicles made by Stow in 
I575. Nor: ff. -4-'- Translation of Robert of Avesbury. ff. 
I33-8. An English Chronicle I431-55, with copies of documents 
especially in reference to Cade's rebellion, ff. I39-67. Translation 
of Iurimouth's Chronicle I3o3-37, with a continuation to I38. 
/-arloE 55 I. Historical collections by Stow. Chieflv translations 
from Giraldus Cambrensis written by Stow 576- 9. The Conquest 
of Ireland is said to be translated by Camden. 
ltarley 563. Translations in Stow's writing of the Chronicles of 
Florence of Worcester, Asser, Aelred of Rievaulx, and Trivet. The 
first is said to be by Raphael Holinshed. 
Collon, Cleopatra C. iii. ff. 91-7 . Cronicle of Donmow in 
Estsex. Nicholas de Bromfeld, Canon of Donmowe. ff. -98v,,. 
Latin noteson events in London i318-zo, ff. z97, 300. Boundaries 
of St. Stephen Coleman parish, ff: 3oi-x9 . Extracts from a Llan- 
thony Chronicle and other monastic annals. 
Addilional b, IS. z979. Copies of poems, chiefly by Lydgate, 
made by Stow from the collections of John Shirley and other 
sources. On f. z85 vo is a note: 'This boke perteynythe to Iohn 
Stowe, and was by hym wryten in )' yere of our lord I.d. lviij.' 



. In lhe odlem Zibrao'. 
Tanner 343. On f. 10 some notes by Stow on foundations of 
Churehes. 
Tanner 464. Stow's transeripts from Leland's Collectanea, Itinerary, 
Epigrams, &e. In rive volumes. Bound up with vol. i are the draft of 
a chapter of the Survey (see Note on ii. 269-70 below) and some notes 
for the Annales. ' Writen by Iohn Stow in anno I576.' 
Ashmole 848. Extracts made by Robert Glover rioto Stow's 
Collections. 

NOTE OF SO:*,IE I[SS. WHICH BELONGED TO OR WERE USED BY STOW 
. In lhe Brt'lis/t «lIus«ttm. 
]t,olei«n 31SS. : 
I94. ' An Annale of Queene Marie.' Edited by J. G. Nichols for 
the Camden Soc., t85o, as a Chrom'cle of Otteen Jane and 
(ueen 2]lary. 
604. Transcript of part of' Liber Papie'. See vol. il. 29î. 
66i. Hardyng's Çhronicle. See p. xii above. 
228L A volume of John Shirley's. See vol il. 61. 
3634 . Chronicon Angliae. x328-88. Printed in Rolls Series. 
6217. ff. 3- z. Fragment of Chrom'con A»gh'«e: a note of Stow's 
on f-4- 
Harley Roll, C. 8. A London Chronicle with notes by Stow. See 
p. xxxiv above and vol. il. 38-'2. 
Collon llSS. : 
Nero D.v. The Chroni«a zlajora of lXI. Paris. See Luard's 
Preface, i, p. xii, and Madden's Preface to Hisloria Anglorum, 
i. lxi-iv. It is the copy which Stow lent to Parker, and is 
probably the lelores Hisloriarum, which Grindal's chaplains 
tbund. See pp. xvii, xix above. 
Nero D. viii. A collection of various Historical works including 
Geoffrey of Monmouth, excerpts from Gildas, Giraldus 
Z)escr'It'o Cambriae, Pol3,cronicon. 
Nero E. vi. The Cartulary of the Hospital of St. John at Clerken- 
well. See vol. ii. 27i, ,355, 37x- 
Vitellius A. xvi. A London Chronicle, with notes by Stow 
(Chrom'cles of Zondon, pp. 53-263). 
Vitellius F. xvi. Liber Papie. See vol. il. z97. 



Vespasian B. ix. Liber S. Bartholomei. Somc notes by Stow. 
See vol. il. _'271 , 360. 
Faustina B. il. Cartulary of the Nuns Priory at Clerkenwell. 
Notes by Stow on ff. 6, 9, 27. See vol. il. _'272, 3or. 
A ddilional ./'/SS. :-- 
23147. William of Malmesbury, G«s/« /ï«um. A note by Stow 
on f. 42. 
3436o. A collection of poems chiefly by Lydgate. 
Slowe 2]IS. 952. An imperfect copy of Lydgate's ' Pilgrimage of the 
Life of Man'. Stow has added the conclusion from another 
manuscript. 

2. In lhc Bodician Librao'. 
Ashmole 59. A vohlmc of John Shirley's. See vol. il. 36t. 
Laud. bIisc. 557. Lydgate, 'Siege of Thebes.' On fly-leaf: ' This 
is Iohn Stowe's boke.' 

3. Olher 2muscrt'pls. 
Lambelh 306. A London Chronicle (Shorl '«ghsh Chronide) 
together with notes on sth century history and «lcmoranda, 
156I- 7. Edited by Dr. Gairdner for Camden Soc. in Three 
Fiftetnlh Ccnltoy Chronich's, 88o. 
Chrisl Church, Oxford. Stow's ' LiberOsney '; see below i. 292, and 
il. 337- Given to Christ Church by Sir Robert Cotton in ex- 
change. 
7"rhti Collegc, Cambridge. R. 3- 9. Poems by Chaucer, Lydgate, 
and others. See vol. ii. 377- 
The Carlulaty of r)'htil_)" lrioty. In the Ilunterian Museum at 
Glasgow. There is a modern transcript in GutTdhall e[,S:  
For its history see Dr. Sharpe's Introduction to Leller-tTook 
C, p. xviii. 
1)avies ][S. Afterwards belonged to Speed. From it was edited 
An .English Chronide, I377-I46I , by Rev. J. S. Davies for 
Camden Soc., 1859. 



CORRIGENDA 
i. 43, ]. 6, read: Westninster 
i. o4, l. 20, read flight 
i. Io8, 1. 9. 7c date should e 1391 as )t lhe «dt'lion of I6o 3. 
Comparé ii. 69. 
i. i33 , magin, rcad: Sporiar lane, or Water lane. ]3akers hall. 
Hart lane for t tarpe lane. 
i. I4I, 1. 18,for Cheuë read Chctttë 
i. 163- 4. The puncluation of the firsl scnlcnce itt Ihe accounl « 
'ishopsgate ll'«rd is confusing. Rcad: The next is Bishopsgate 
warde, whereof a parte is without the gate and of the suburbes, from 
the barres by S. ]XIary Spittle to Bishopsgate : and a part of Hounds 
ditch, almost halfe thereof, also without the wall, is of the saine Warde. 
i. 179, 1. î, f,r Manny read 3[ann.v (italic) 
i. 235, 11. I4 and zo. Il should haz'e becn noled thal tkc leal of16o 3 
gives lhe da#s as I447 and 145 I. See Wote on il. 32I beloz,. 
i. 45, 1. 3fromfoot, rcad a great builder thereof. 
i. e49, 1. , r«ad I-Aamsteed. ll)7/iam Stoksbie and Gilbert March had 
Chantries 
i. 9, !. 7. rcad Then lower. 
i. e96, 11. i8, 9, rcad Raph, Thomas, Raph, and Richard. See 
note on ii. 338 below. 
i. 3 I î, 1. 2 I, read studies 
i. 318, 1. 4. The dale I4z9 t's a misprinl (in thc text of 6o3) for 
1421. Compare i. Io9. 
i. 319, 1. 7fromfool, read Powles, the children 
i. 3eo,footnoh ", read  Couc),] 
i. 337, footnote , de&te "- Zhzacre] 
i. 34I, I1. 8-I. Stow's texl is cou./'uscd, and should be correctcd 
fiy omitling and Dame Eizabeth his wife, daughter to the Duke of 
Lancaster. Flizabeth of Laucas#r married (I) John Holland, Farl 
of HuMhtgdon and Dube of F.'etcr ; (z) Sir J'ohn Cornzt'alL See ii. 
350 below. She dt'ed it I4Z6, and is fiuried al t?uo¢'ord lu Shropsht)'e 
(Wylie, Henry 1V. i. 105). 
ii. 57, marg. n. 3, rcad Roses, 
ii. 67, marght. Iohn Bauow is probab[r a mi«pri»tfor John Bever : 
see Flores tlistort'arum, ii. 45, and Luarats Preface, vol. i, pp. xl audxlii. 
ii. 76, 11.3 o, 3 I. Punctuate ' Deepe ditch by Bethelem, into' 
ii. 87, foolnole, read  Curars 
ii. 1 I5, marg. n. 3, 1. 4, read presented 
ii. 149, marg. n. i, I.  _, read Domesmen or Judges 
il. 416, col. I. utder 8rai;e, delcte the Pope was a ' state '... hOt a ' Pope.' 



A 

S VRV A Y 0 F 

LONDON. 

Conteyning the Orieinall, Antioukv, 
Increaçe, Moderne effare, and defcription or that 
City»written in theyeare  ç .08. by lohn Sto¢' 
Citizcn of London. 
Since by the faine Author increaf¢d, 
with diucrs rare notes of Antiquity, and 
publed i» the yeare . 
I6O 3. 
opinion of foret men,concetning that Citic 
the greatnelfc thcreof 
VVith an/ppcndix, contayning in Latine 
Labe//um defu C nobdtate [_wndni: Writtcn by 
William Fitzflephen,in thc raigne of 
H¢nry(hc fecond. 
Imprinted by Iohn Windetœefintec o the hono. 
abl¢ Citie of London. 



Fage iii 

TO THE RIGHT 
Honorable, ROBERT LEE, Lord Mayor 
of the City of London, to the Comminalty, 
and Citizens of the saine : falot Sttrw Citizen, 
wishetlt lonhealtA and fdicitie. 
Ince the first publishing of the 
perambula- 
tion of Kent, by that learned Gentleman 
l¥illiam Lambert Esquier, I haue heard 
of sundry other able persons to haue 
(aceording to the desire of that author) 
assayed to do somewhat for the particular 
Shires and Counties where they were 
borne, or dwelt, of which none that I know (sauing lohn 
:Vorden, for the Counties of Middlesex, and Hertford) haue 
vouehsafed their labor to the I eommon good in that behalfe. 
And therefore eoncurring with the first, in the same desire to 
haue drawn together such speciall descriptions of each place, 
as might hot onely make vp an whole body of the English 
Chorographie amongst out selues: but also might giue occa- 
sion, and courage to M. Camden to increase and beautify his 
singular work of the whole, to the vîew of the learned that 
be abroad. I haue attempted the discouery of Louton, my 
natiue soyle and Countrey, at the desire and perswasion of 
some my good friends, as welI because I haue seene sundry 
antiquities my selle touching that place, as also for that through 
search of Records to other purposes, diuers written helpes are 
corne to my hands, whieh few others haue fortuned to meet 
withall, it is a seruice that most agreeth with my professed 
• ow. , g trauels. 



xcviii 7he Eis[[e Dedica[or, 
['age z, traluels. It is a dutie, that I willingly owe to my natiue 
mother and Countrey. And an office that of right I holde 
selfe bound in loue to bestow vpon the politike body & members 
of the same: what London hath beene of auncient time, men 
may here see, as what it is now euery man doth beholde: 
I knowe that the argu ment, beeing of the chiefe and principall 
citie of the land, required the pen of some excellent rtisen, 
but fearing that none would attempt & finish it, as few haue 
assaied any, I chose rather (amongst other my Labours) to 
handle it açter my playne manner, then to leave it vnper- 
formed. Touching the Dedication I am hot doubtfull where 
to seeke my Patrone, since you be a politiqte estate of the 
Citty, as the walles and buildinges be the materiall pattes 
««t i the same. To you thereçore, I doe I addresse this my whole 
labour, as wel that by your authority I may bee protected. 
as warranted b" your owne skill and vnderstanding of that 
which I haue written. I conçesse that I lacked my desire to 
the accomplishment of some special parts, which some other 
of better abilitie promised to performe, but as I then pro- 
fessed, haue since out of mine olde Store-house added 
to this worke many rare notes of antiquitie, as 
may appeare to the reader, which I do afl'ord 
in all dutie, and recommend to your 
view, my labours to your considera- 
tion, and my selfe to ),out 
seruice, during lire, in 
this or any 
other. 



A Table of the Chapters 
in this Booke 

conteyned 

Page vii 

(VOLUME I) 

PAGE 
The antiquitie of London. 
The wall about the Citie of London. 5 
Of the ancient and present riuers, Brookes, Boornes, Pooles, 
Wels, and Conduits of fresh water seruing the Citie. t t 
The ditch sometime compassing the wall of the saine, t 9 
Bridges of this Citie. z t 
Gates in the wall of this Cittie. 27 
Of Towers and Castels. 44 
Of Schooles and other houses of learning. 7 t 
Houses of students of the Common law. 76 
Of orders and customes of the Citizens.' 79 
Sports and pastimes of old time vsed in this Citie. 9 t 
Watches in London. 99 
Honour of Citizens and worthines of men in the saine, to4 
The Citie of London diuided into parts, t 17 
Portsoken ward.  -o 
Towerstreet ward. t 2,» 
Ealdgate warde. 3  
Limestreete warde, t 5 ° 
Bishopsgate warde, t63 
Broadstreete warde.  75 
Cornehill warde.  87 
Langborne ward and Fenny about. 200 
Billinsgate warde. 2o5 
Bridgewarde within, z  r 
Candlewike streete warde. 2 t 6 
Walbrooke warde. 23 
Downegate warde.   9 
Vintrie warde. .3 8 
Cordwainer streete warde. 
Cheape warde. 2 5 8 



c 1 7àble of the Chab/ers 

Colemanstreete warde. 
Bassings hall warde. 
Cripplegate warde. 
l'age viii Aldersgate warde. 
Faringdon ward infra, or within. 
Bredstreete warde. 

27 
29o 
3o3 
344 

(VOLU,IE II ) 
Queene Hith warde. 
Castle Baynard warde.   
The warde of Faringdon extra, or without. 2o 
Bridge warde without, (the 26. in number,) consisting of the 
Borough of Southwarke in the county of Surrey. 52 
The Suburbs without the wals of the Cittie, briefly touched, as 
also without the liberties more at large described. 69 
Liberties of the Dutchie of Lancaster without Temple Barre. 9  
The Citie of Westminster, with the Antiquities, lIonuments, 
bounds and liberties thereof. 97 
Spirituall, or ecclesiasti(c)all gouernement.  24 
Parish Churches in the Cittie of London, the borough of South- 
warke, the suburbs and Citie of Westminster. 138 
Hospitals in this Citie and suburbs. J 43 
Of Leprose people and Lazar houses.  45 
Temporall gouernement of this Cittie.  47 
Aldermen and Shiriffes of London. 88 
Officers belonging to the Lord blaiors house. 88 
Shiriffes of London their officers. 189 
laior and Shiriffes Liuerie.  89 
Companies of London placed at the Maiors feast. 9  
Liueries worne by Citizens at triumphs. J 94 
An Apologie or defence of the Cittie of London.  97 
Singularities in the same expressed. 200 
An Appendix, containing an Aundent Authour, who wrote in 
the raigne of ltenrie the second: his Booke entituled, Li- 
bellum de silu . nobililale Zondini, neuer before imprinted. 2  5 
(Variations ofthe first edition of the Survey in 598 from the Text 
of 6o3. ) 



The Suruey of London, containing the ,,,g«, 
originall, antiquitie, encrease, moderne estate, 
and &scription of that Citie. 
As the Romane writers to glorifie the citie of Rome drew 
the originall thereof flore Gods and demie Gods, by the 
Troian progenie : so Giffrey of 3[onmoutk the Welsh Historian, 
deduceth the foundation of this famous Citie of Loudon, for the 
greater glorie therof, and emulation of Rome, from the very 
saine originall. For he reporteth that Brute, lineally descended 
flore the demy goal En¢as, the sonne of Venus, daughter of 
hpiler, about the yeare of the world 2855. and o8. before 
the natiuitie of Christ, builded this city neare vnto the riuer 
now called Thames, and named it Troynouant or Trenouant. 
But herein as Liuie the most famous Hystoriographer of the 
Romans writeth, A,tiquiti¢ is ])ardonable, and hall an esp¢- 
cial pridledge, hy intcrlacing diuine nattcrs willz ltunate, 
to make the rirst foundation of Cilles Inore honourable, nore 
sacred, and as it were of greater staiesti¢. 
King Zud (as the foresaid Giffrey of 3[onmoul/z notcth) 
afterward, hot oncly repaired this Cittie, but also increased 
the saine with faire buildinffs, Towers and walles, and after 
his owne naine called it Caire-Zud, as Zuds towne, and the 
strong gare which he builded in the west part of the Cittie, he 
likewise for his owne honour named Ludgatc. 
This Zud had issue two sons, Androgeus, and Theonantius, 
who being not of age to gouerne at the death of their father, 
their vncle Cassibelan took upon him the crowne : about the 
eight yeare of whose raigne, Iulius Ccesar arriued in this land, 
with a great power of Romans to conquer it, the manner of 
which conquest I will summarily set down out of lais owne 
Commentaries, which are of farre better credit, then the re- 
lations of Giffry 3[eeonmouth. 

Trinouantum 
hath the 
written copie. 
Liuie. 

Caire Lud, the 
Citie of Lod, 
but Luds 
towne is a 
Saxon word. 



Coesar's Com- 
raentaries. 
li. 5- 

Trinobants 
Citizens of 
London. 

Mandubrace 
and the Tri- 
nobants yeeld 
to Cœesar, and 
he defended 
them. 

Cassibilins 
towne west 
from London, 
for Cœesar saith 
8o. mlles from 
the sea. 
Cities of the 
13ritaines were 
combersome 
woods forti- 
fied. 

2 Aln/i¢//itie of Lomlon 
OEbe chiefe oernment of the rilonx, and orderin of the [ 
warres, was then by common aduice committed to 
whose Siniorie was separated from the Çities toards the 
sea coast, by the riuer ca|led Tm«x, about fourescore toiles 
from the sea: this Cxxiiliz in times past, bad ruade con- 
tinua]l warre pon tbe Çities adionin, but the ri/onx bein 
mooued with the Romans inuasion, had resolued in that ne- 
cessitie to make him their oueraine and Genera|] of the warres, 
(which continued bote betweene the Romans and them) but in 
the meane while, the OErynobants wbich was then the strongest 
Çitie we]] neare of ail those countries (and out of wbich Çitie 
a yong gentleman called A[andtbrace, vpon confidence of 
Ccesars help, came vnto him into the maine land of Gallia, now 
called Fratlcc, and thereby escaped death, which he should 
haue suffered at Cassibilb«s bande,) sent their Ambassadors to 
Cccsar, promising to yeeId vnto him, and to doe what he 
should command theln, instantly desiring him, to protect 
[amhtbrace from the furious tyrrany of (assibilin, and to 
send him into their Cittie, with authoritie to take the gouern- 
ment thereof vpon him. Cxar accepted the offer, and ap- 
poynted them to giue vnto him 40. Hostages, and withall 
to finde him graine for his armie, and so sent he 'anchzbrace 
vnto them. 
When others saw that C«ar had hot onely defended the 
Trinobants against Ca«siilh6 but had also saued them harme- 
fesse from the pillage of his owne sou]diers, then did the 
Cmtimagztcs, Sego«/im«s, A«ca/its, 13ibrokes, and Cassimls, 
likewise submit themselues vnto him, and by them hee learned 
that not farre from thence was Cassibilins towne, fortified 
with woods, and marish ground, into the which he had 
gathered a great number both of men and cattell. 
For the ]JFittOl$ cal that a towne (saith Cesar) when they 
haue fortified a combersome wood with a ditch and rampire, 
and thether they resort to abide the approach of their 
enemies, to this place therefore marched Ccesar with his 
Legions, hee found it excellentlie fortified, both of nature, 
and by mans aduice : neuerthelesse he resolued to assault it in 
two seuerall places at once, whereupon the 13ri/oT«s, beeing not 
able to endure the force of the lottas, fledde out at another 



.I./iqtitie of Loc{o. 3 
part, and left the towne vnto hlm : a great number of cattell 
he found there, and many of the ]3rirons I he slue, and others 
he tooke in the chase. 
Whilest these things were a doing in these quarte(r)s, Cassi- 
bili sent messengers into Kent, which lieth upon the sea, in 
which there raigned then 4- particular kings, named Ciitgetorex, 
Cardll, Ta.rimagtdl, and Scgomrx, whom he commanded to 
raise all their forces, and suddenl¥ to set vppon, and assault the 
Romanes in their trenches, by the sea side: the which when 
the Romanes perceyued, they salied out vpon them, slue a 
great sort of them, and taking Citgetorix their noble Captaine 
prisoner, retired themselues to their campe in good safetie. 
When Cassibiliu heard of this, and had formerly taken 
many other losses, and found lais Countrey sore wasted, and 
himselfe left almost alone by the defection of the other cities, 
he sent Ambassadors by Çomhts of Arras to Ca'sar, to en- 
treate with him concerning his owne submission, the which 
Ccesar did accept, and taking Hostages, assessed the realme 
of 'Tytaht« to a yearely tribute, to be paied to the people 
of Rome, giuing straight charge to Cassibiliu, that he should 
not seeke any reuenge vpon l'auchtbrace, or the Trinobantes, 
and so withdrew lais army to the sea againe. 
Thus farre out of Cesars Commentaries concerning this 
Historie, which happened in the yeare before Christes natiuitie 
54- In all which processe there is for this purpose to bee noted, 
that Cesar nameth the Cittie of Trinobantes, which hath a 
resemblance vith Troy oua, or Trhtobantum, hauing no 
greater difference in the Orthographie, then chaunging b. into 
v. and yet maketh an error whereof I will not argue, onely this 
I will note that diuerse learned men do not thinke chdtas 
Tritoba]ttt]]t, to be well and truely translated, the Citie of 
the Trinobantes : but it should rather be the state, comunalty, 
or Signiory of the Trinobantes : for that Cesar in his Com- 
mentaries vseth the word chdtas, onely for a people liuing 
vnder one, and t'he selfe same Prince and law: but certaine 
it is that the Citties of the lrytahtes, were in those dayes 
neither artificially builded with bouses, nor strongly walled 
wlth stone, but vere onely thicke and combersome woods 
plashed within, and trenched about : and the like in effect doe 
B2 

Page 3 

Brytaine 
sessed to par a 
yearly tribue 
to the 
Romanes. 

Trinobant 
now London. 

Cities of the 
]3ritaines hot 
artificially 
bnilded with 
honses, nor 
walled with 
stolle. 



Page 4 
Strabo, Pom- 
ponius Mela, 
Tacitus, Dion. 

London most 
famous for 
Marchants & 
intercourse. 

The ]3ritons 
had no houses 
but cottages. 

The ]3ritons 
went naked, 
their bodies 
painted. 

Richborow in 
Kent. 

Verulamium. 
Cilcester, 
W rox«ester. 
Kenchester. 

4 ./Intiq¢ti/ie of Lo¢Mon 
other the Romane and Greeke Authours directly affirme, as 
Strabo, Poonins 3[ela, and 1)ion a Senator of Rme, which 
flouri[shed in the seuerall raignes of the Romaine Emperours, 
Tiberins, Claudins, 1)omitian, & Æeu¢rtts, to wit, that before 
the ariuall of the Romans, the t3rytons had no towns, but 
called that a town xvhich had a thicke intangled wood, de- 
fended as I saide with a ditch and banke, the like whereof the 
Irishmen our next neigbors doe at this day call Fastncs. 
But after that these hither partes of Brytaine were reduced 
into the forme of a Prouince, by the Romanes, who sowed 
the seedes of ciuilitie ouer all Europe : this Citie whatsoeuer it 
was before, began to be renowned, and of fame. For Tacitus, 
who first of all Authours nameth it Londininm, saith that in 
the 6. yeare after Christ, it xvas, albeit no Colonie of the 
Romanes, yet most famous for the great multitude of Mar- 
chants, prouision, and intercourse. At which rime in that 
notable reuolt of the Brytons from Nero, in which 7oo 
Romanes and their confederates were slaine, this Citie with 
l'erul«m neare Saint tlbozs, and y[aldon in Essex, then ail 
famous: were ransacked and spoyled. For Suetonius tgaulimts, 
then Lieutenant for the Romanes in this Isle, abandoned it, as 
hot then fortefied, and left it to the spoyle. 
Shortly after, Iulius Aricol« the Romane Lieutenant, in 
the rime of 1)omitiau, xvas the first that by adhorting the 
Brytaines publikely, and helping them priuately, won them to 
build bouses for themselues, Temples for the Gods, and Courts 
for Iustice, to bring up the noble mens children in good letters 
and humanitie, and to appareil themselues Romane like, where 
as before (for the most part) they went naked, painting their 
bodies, &c. as al the Romane writers haue obserued. 
True it is I confesse, that afterward many Cities and Towns 
in Bwtaine vnder the gouernment of the Romanes, were 
walled with stone, and baked brickes, or tyles, as Rick borrow, 
Ryptacester, in the Isle of Thauet, till the chanell altered his 
course, besides Sandwitch in Kcnt, Vernlamhtm besides S. 
Albows, in Hartfordshire, Cilcester in Hampshire, Wroxcester 
in Shropsldre, Içencestcr in Herefordshire, three myles from 
tlereford towne, Ribcestcr, 7- toiles aboue Prcston, on the 
water of Rible, .dldebmge a toile from Borrowbridge, or 



.dn@tilie of Loszdon5 
Watkelingstreet, on Vre Riuer, and others: and no doubt 
but this Citie of Lonldott was also walled with stone, in the 
rime of the Romane gouernement here, but yet verie lately, 
for it seemeth not to haue beene walled in the yeare of our 
Lord 96. because in that yeare when Alectts the Tyrant was 
slaine in the field, the Frauks easily etatered Lo«do«, and had 
sacked the same, had not God of his great fauour at the very 
instant brought along the riuer of Thames, certaine bandcs of 
Romaine Souldiers, who slewe those Fra¢tkcs in euerie streete 
of the Cittie. 
Wall about the Cittie " Lodo». 
IN few yeares after, as Simcou of Dttrham, an auncient 
Writer reporteth, Hcllct the mother of Coustautiue the Great, 
was the first that inwalled this Citie, about the yeare of Christ, 
36. but howsoeuer those walles of stone might bee builded 
by Hele», yet the Britons, (I know) had no skill of building 
with stone, as it may appeare by that which followeth, aboute 
the yeare of Christ, 399, when Arcaditts and Hoorius the 
sonnes of Thcodosi¢ts ][ag¢«¢ts, gouerned the Empire, the one 
in the East, the other in the West, for Ho¢wrius hauing 
receyued Brilaiue, the Citie of Rome was inuaded and de- 
stroyed by the Gothcs, after which rime the Romaines left to 
rule in Brilai¢w, as being imployed in defence of their Terri- 
tories nearer home, whereupon the Britaines not able to 
defende themselues against the inuasions of their enemies, 
were manie yeares together vnder the oppression of two most 
cruell nations, the Scots and Pictes, and at the length were 
forced to sende their Ambassadors with letters and lamentable 
supplicatîons to Romc, requiring aide and succour from thence, 
upon promise of their continuall fealtie, so that the Romaines 
woulde rescue them out of the bandes of their enemies. 
Hereupon the Romaines sent vnto them a Legion of armed 
Souldiers, which comming into this Illand , and encountering 
with the enemies, ouerthrew a great number of them, and 
draue the rest out of the frontiers of the Countrie, and so 
setting the Britaines at libertie, counselled them to make a 
wall, extending ail along betweene the two seas, which might 
be of force to kcepe out their cuill neighbours, and then 

Leyland. 
t'age 5 
Of the wall 
about London, 

Simeon of 
Durham. 

The Romains 
leR to gouern 
Britaine. 

The Scots & 
pictes inuade 
this land. 

t'age 6 



Britaines vn= 
skilfidl of 
building with 
stone. 

Witchendus. 
Wall of stone 
builded by 
the Romains, 
betwixt the 
Britaines and 
S¢ots. 

l'age 7 

6 ll/'all abmtl llw Cillie of Lonclo« 
returned home with great triumph : The Britaines wanting 
Masons, builded that Wall not of stone as they were aduised, 
but made it of turfe, and that so slender, that it serued little 
or nothing at all for their defence, and the enemie perceyu- 
ing that the Romaine Legion was returned home, forthwith 
arriued out of their boates, inuaded the borders, ouercame 
the country, and as it were bare down all that was before 
them. 
Whereupon Ambassadors were eftsoones dispatched to Rome 
lamentably beseeching that they would not surfer their 
miserable countrey to bee vtterly destroyed: then againe, 
an other Legion was sent, which comming vpon a sodaine, made 
a greate slaughter of the enemie, and chased him home, even 
to his owne Country. These Romaines at their departure, 
tolde the lritaines playnely, that it was hot for their ease or 
leasure to take vpon them any more such long and laborious 
iourneys for their defence, and therefore bad them practice 
the vse of armour and weapons, and learne to withstand their 
enemies, whome nothing else did make so strong as their 
faînt heart and cowardise, and for so much as they thought 
that it would bee no small helpe and encouragement vnto 
their Tributary friendes, whome they were now forced to 
forsake, they builded for them a Wall of harde stone from 
the west sea to the east sea, right bctweene those two Citties, 
which were there made to keepe out the enemies, in the selfe 
saine place where A'cuerts before had cast his Trench. The 
13ritaines also putting to their helping hands as laborers. 
This Wall they builded 8. foote thicke in breadth, and i. 
foot in height, right as it were by a line from east to West, as 
the ruines thereof remayning in many places til this day, do 
make to appeare. Which worke thus perfected, they gaue the 
people straight charge to looke well to themselues, they teach 
them to handle their weapons, and they instruct them in war- 
like feates. And least by the sea side southwardes, where 
their ships laye at harbor, the enemie shoulde corne on 
land, they ruade vp sundrie Bulwarkes each somewhat distant 
from the other, and so bid them farewel as minding no more 
to returne. This happened in the dayes of the Emperour 
Thcodosi«s the yonger, almost 5oo. yeares after the first 



kd! «hou! /!w Ci!tic of LoltdoJ 7 
arruall of the Romanes here: aboute the yeare af!er Chrsts 
ncarnaton, 44. 
The rtanes af!er ths contnun a lnerng and doubtful 
war wth the Scots and Pctes, made choce of VotlEe to bee 
!heUr n and leader, whch man las sayeth llmes¢,) was 
nether valourous of courage, nor wse of counsell, but wholy 
uen ouer to the vnlawfill lusts of hs flesh : the people lke- 
wse n short tme ben rowne to some quetnes aue them- 
selues to glutony, and drunkennes, prude, contention, enue 
and such other vces, castn from !hem the yoke of Christ. 
In he meane season a btter plague fell among !hem, con- 
sumn n short tme such a multitude, that the qucke were 
no sucent to bury the dea, and yet the remnant remayned Th 
plgued or 
sO hardened n snne, tht neyther deah of theyr friendes, nor 
feare of !heUr own auner, could cure the mortafity of !heUr lift. 
soules, wherevpon a reater stroe of vengeance nsued vpon 
the whole snfull nation. For ben now aane nfesed wffh 
!heUr old nehbors the «ots and Pctes, fley consul! wth 
their Idn K Uort«er, and send for the Saxons, who shortly Bede. 
The Saxons 
after arriued here in Britaine, where saith Bcd« they were sent fo to 
defend 
receyued as frends : but as it proued they minded to destroy Briines, b,t 
the countrie as enemies, for after that they had driuen out the they daue 
them into the 
Scots and Pictes, they also draue the Britains some ouer the mountaines. 
seas, some into the waste mountaines of Wales and Cornewall, 
and deuided the Countrey into diuers kingdomes anaongst 
themselues. 
These Saxons were likewise ignorant of building vith stone, 
vntill the yeare 680. for then it is affirmed that Benet Abbot 
of Wirrall, maister to the reuerend Bed«, first brought 
artificers of stone houses, and glasse Windowes into this Iland 
amongst the Saxons: Arts before that time vnto them vn- 
known, and therefore vsed they but vodden buildings. And 
to this accordeth Policronicon, vho sayeth that then had yee Woden 
churches and 
wodden Churches, nay wodden Chalaces and golden Priestes, golden 
but since golden Chalaces and vodden Priestes : And to knit priestes. 
vp this argument, king ] Edgar in his Charter to the Abbey of Page 8 
Malmesbury, dated the yeare of Christ 974- hath wordes to 
this effect : Ail the Monasteries in my Realme, to the out-Monteries 
of otten 
ward sight, are nothing but worme eaten and rotten tymber, tituber. 

Mahnsbery : 
Bede. 
The Britaines 
giuen to glut- 
tony, drunken- 
nes, pride alld 
contention. 

Saxons vnskil- 
ful of building 
vitk stone. 
Benet a Monk 
brought in 
blasons. 



Camden. 

The Citie of 
London de- 
stroyed by the 
Danes, and 
again repaired. 
The Citie of 
London lay 
wast, and not 
inhabited for 
the space of 
almost 5o. 
yêres. 
W: Malmes- 
bery. 
Asser. 
Marianus. 
Florentius. 

W. Fitz- 
stephen. 
tag e 9 
The Citie of 
London walled 
round about 
by the Riuer 
of Thames. 

8 III'al/aboztl t/te Ci/tie of Lomtolt 
and boordes, and that worse is, within they are almost emptie, 
and void of diuine seruice, 
Thus much be said for walling, not only in respect of this 
Citie, but generally also of the first within the Realme. Now 
to returne to our 7"rizobant, (as Ccesar hath it) the same is 
since by Tacitus, _Ptolomcns, & Aulouizts called Londinhtm, 
Longidinium, of A*ll[allllS, Lmzdinum, and Angtsta who 
calleth it an auncient Citie, of our Brytaines Lundayu«, of the 
old Saxons, Lnndeuceaslcr, Lnndotb#'ig, Londc,mir, of stran- 
gers Loudra, and Londrcs, of the inhabitants, London, whereof 
you may read a more large and learned discourse, and how it 
tookc the naine, in that worke of my louing friend M. Camdcn 
lmW Clarcnccanl.v, which is called 17rilania. 
This Citie of Lo,tdou hauing beene destroyed and burnt by 
the.Danes and other Pagan encmies, about theyeare of Christ, 
839. was by Alfred king of the west Saxons, in the yeare 886. 
repaired, honourably restored, and ruade againe habitable. 
Who also committed the custodie thereof vnto his son in law, 
Ethclrcd Earle of Jk[crcca, vnto wlmme before he hath giuen 
his daughter Ethelflcd. 
_And that this Citie vas thcn strongly walled, may appeare 
by diuerse accidents, whereof l l'illiam of _a'[almcsberie hath 
that about the yeare of Christ 994. the Londoners shut vp 
their gates, and dcfcnded their king t:'lhch-cd, vithin their 
walles against the Danes. 
In the yeare o6. dmond Iro,tside raigning ouer the west 
Saxons, Caunte the Dane bringing his nauie into the west 
part of the bridge, cast a trench about the Citie of Lotdon, and 
then attempted to haue won it by assault, but the Citizcns 
repulsed him, and draue them ri'oto their walles. 
Also in the yeare xoSoE. Earle Goodwbz with his nauie 
sayled vp by the South ende of the Bridge, and so assailed 
the walles of this Citie. 
l'Villiam Fitzstcfihcu in the raigne of tt«m'ie the second, [ 
writing of the wals of this Citie, hath these wordes. The 
wall is high a,M great, wcl lowrcd on tac Norlhside, wit/z 
distances bet,«cote lhe tozvres. Ot the Soulhsidc also t/te Cilie 
was walled and towrcd, but thc fishfnll riewr of Thamcs witlz 
his cbbitg aud flowhtg, bath lo,zg sitwc subucrlcd thcm. 



By the Northside, he meaneth fi'om the riuer of Thames in 
the east to the riuer of Thames in the west, for so stretched 
the wall in his time, and the Citie being farre more in length 
from East, to West, then in breadth from South, to North, 
and also narrower at both endes then in the middest, is there- 
fore compassed with the wall on the land side, in forme of 
a bow, except denting in betwixt CpAat«, and Aldersgat« : 
but the wall on thc southside, along by the riuer of Thames, 
w straight as the string of a bow, and all furnished with 
Towres or Bulworkes, (as we now terme them) in due distance 
euery one from other, as witnesseth our Authour, and out 
selues may behold for the land side. This may suffice for 
proofe of a wall, and forme thereof about this Citie, and the 
saine to haue beene of great antiquitie as any other within 
this Realme. 
And now touching the maintenance, and repairing the saide Walles of 
" o -  London re- 
wall, I reade that in the year « 5. the 6. of kln ]o/e, the w.ired : Roger 
Barons entring the City by aldKat¢, first tooke assurance of of Wendouer: 
Mathew Paris: 
the Citizens, thon brake into the Jewes houses, searched their Rulph Cog- 
coffers to fill their owne purses, and after with great diligence shall. 
repaired the walles and gates of the Citie, with stones taken 
from the Jcwes broken houses. In the yeare I57. H«ri« tath. 
the third caused the walles of this Citie, which was sore 
decaied and destitute of towers, to be repaired in more 
seemely wise then before, at the common charges of the Citie. 
Also in the yeare aSz. king Edzeard the first, hauing graunted 
to obcrt Aïlwarby Archbishop of Çaeterbe«rie, licence for 
the enlarging of the blacke Friers Church, to breakc and take 
downe a part of the wall of the Citie, from Ludgate to the 
riuer of Thames: he also glaunted to Hezry l[l¢is Major, 
and the Citizens of Loetloz, the fauour to take toward the 
making of the wall, and inclosure of the Citie, certaine 
customes, or toll, as appeareth by his graunt: this wall was 
then to bec made from Lz«dgate west to Fle¢tebri«tge along 
behinde [ the houses and along by the water of the Flcet, vnto Pge «o 
the riuer of Thames. oreouer, in the yeare 3IO. dz«ard . 
commaunded the Citizens to make vp the wall alreadie 
begunne, and the tower at the ende of the saine wall, within 
the water of Thamcs lmare vnto the blacke Fl-iars, &c. 3z8. 



l»atent. 

Circuit of the 
wall from the 
cast to the 
west. 

IO 

IUal! aboli//he CiANe of Lodo.z 

the second of sEdward the 3. the walles of this citie was 
repaired. It was also graunted by king Richard the second 
in the xo. of his raigne, that atoll should bee taken of the 
wares, solde by lande or by water for ten yeares, towardes the 
repairing of the walles, and clensing of the ditch about London. 
In the  7. of Edzvard the 4- ]alfe Iosclite, Maior, caused part 
of the wall about the citie of London to bee repayred, to wit, 
betwixt Aldgate, and Aldersoeat«. He also caused the Moore- 
field to bee searched for clay, and ]3ricke thereof to be made, 
and burnt: he likewise caused chalke to be brought out of 
Kent, and to be burnt into lime in the same Moorefield, for 
more furtherance of the worke. Then ye Skinners to begin 
in the East ruade that part of the wall betwixt Aldoeate and 
iRztrics markes, towardes iRishosgate, as may appeare by their 
armes in three places fixed there : the 1Haior with his companie 
of the Drapers, made all that part, betwixt iRishopsgate and 
Alhallowcs church in thc same wall, and from Alhallowcs 
towardes the Poslcrlc called loorcffatc. A great part of the 
same wall was repayred by the Executors of sir lohu Crosby, 
late Alderman, as may appeare by his armes, in two places 
there fixed: and other companies repayred the rest of the 
wall to the Posterue of Crcplegatc. The Goldsmiths repayred 
from Creplegatc towards Aldcrsgate, and there the worke 
ceased. The circuit of the wall of Londou on the landes side, 
to wit from the tower of Londou in the East, vnto Aldgatc, 
is 8z. perches: from Ahlgate to t3ishopsgate, 86. perches: from 
t3ishopsatc in the North, to the Postcrnc at Creplegate, 62. 
perches : from Crcplcgatc to tïaldersgate, 75. perches : from 
taldcrsgatc to Nezatc, 66. perches : from Newgate in the 
west, to Lztdgat«, 4- perches, in ail 53- perches of assise. 
From Lztdgatc to the Fleetc dike west, about 60. perches: 
from Flcetc bridge south to the riuer Thamcs, about 7 o. perches: 
and so the totall of these perches amounteth to 643. euery 
perch consisting of 5. yeards and a halfe, which do yeeld ] 3536. 
yardes and a halfe, containing o6c8. foote, which make vp 
two English toiles and more by 6c8. foote. 



lizters amt other wale.rs I  

Of Auncient and present Riuers, 
Brookes, Boorns, Pooles, Wels, and Conduits 
of fresh water, seruing the Citie, as also of 
the ditch compassing the wall of the 
saine for defence thereof. 
A uN c I ETL¥, vntill the Conquerors time, and 200. yeres 
after, the Citie of £ondon was watered besides the famous 
Riuer of Thamcs, on the South part, with the riuer of the 
wds, as it was then called: on the west, with a water called 
walbrooke running through the midst of the citie into the river 
Thamcs, seruing the heart thereof. nd with a fourth water 
or Boorne, which ran within the Citie through Laugboornc 
ward, watering that part in the East. In the west suburbs 
was also an other great water, called Oldbomc, which had his 
fall into the riuer of IVels : then was there 3- principall Foun- 
taines, or wels in the other Suburbs, to wit ttoly well, Cio- 
ments well, and Clarkes well. Neare vnto this last named 
fountaine were diuers other wels, to wit, Skmwrs well, Fags 
well, Todc well, Loders well, and Àadwell. lll which sayde 
Wels hauing the fMI of their ouerflowing in the foresayde 
Riuer, much encreased the streame, and in that place gaue it 
the name of fVel. In west Smithfidd, there was a l'oole in 
Recordes called ttorselole, and one other Poole neare vnto 
the parish Church of Saint Gil«s xvithout Cri])])lcgate. Besides 
all which they had in euerie streete and Lane of the citie 
diuerse fayre Welles, and fresh Springs : and after this manner 
was this citie then serued, with sweete and fiesh waters, which 
being since decaid, other meanes haue beene sought to supplie 
the want, as shall be shewed: but first of the aforenamed 
Riuers and other waters, is to be said, as following. 
Tkames the most famous riuer of this Iland, beginneth a 
little ] aboue a village called IVinchcombe in Ofordshire, and 
still increasing passeth first by the university of Oxford, and 
so with a maruelous quiet course to London, and thence break- 
eth into the French Ocean by maine tides, which twice in 4. 
howers space doth eh and flow, more then 60. toiles in length, 
to the great commoditie of Trauellers, b)" which all kind of 

.P«ffe 12 
Riuer of 
Thames. 



Whirries on 
the Thames. 

Riuer of wcls. 

Decay of the 
Riuer of the 
Wels. 
Iarliamcnl 
record. 

Riuer of Wels 
bare ships. 

_Page z./ 
tgatenl record: 
Mils by Bay- 
nards castell. 
made in the 
first of King 
Iohn. 

12 ldizters «zd other waters sernizg [his Cille 
Marchandise bee easily conueyed to London, the principall 
store house, and Staple of ail commodities within this Realme, 
so that omitting to speake of great ships, and other vessels of 
burden, there pertayneth to the Citties of LoJldoJ, bVest- 
miust«r, and Burrough of Southwarbe, aboue the number as 
is supposed of 2eee. Wherryes and other small boates, whereby 
3eeo. poore men at the least bee set on worke and main- 
tained. 
That the riuer of IVels, in the west parte of the Citty, »vas 
of olde so called of the Wels, it may be proued thus, IVilliam 
the Conqueror in his Charter, to the Colledge of S. 3[arteu 
le Grand in Loudon, hath these wordes : I doe giue and graunt 
to the saine Church ail the land and the Moore, without the 
)osteruc, which is called Criflleate , on eyther part of the 
_Postcrn, that is to say, from the North corner of the Wall, 
as the river of the IVcls, there neare running, departeth the 
saine More from the Wall, vnto the running water which 
cntereth the Cittie: this water hath beene long since called 
the riuer of the Wels, which naine of riuer continued, and it 
was so called in the raigne of Edward the first: as shall bee 
shewed, with also the decay of the saide ritter. In a fayre 
Booke of Parliament recordes, now lately restored to the 
Tower, it appeareth that a Parliament being holden at Carlile 
in the yeare 3e7, the 35. of Edward the . I-[emy Lacy 
Earlc of Lincobtc colayncd that whereas i rimes past the 
coin.se of 7vater, ruunbtg at London vnder Oldeborne bridge, 
aud Flecte bridge itto the Thames, had beene of stclz bredllz 
and depth, that IO. or I2. ships, Nauies al otce r«ith marchat- 
dises, were wont to conte to thc foresaid bridge of Flcclc, aud 
some of them to Ohtborue bridge: now t/w saine coin'se by 
flltk of the Tauncrs & stch othcrs, was sore dccaied, also by 
raisiug of whafes, bttt sccially by a dinersion of the watcr 
ruade by t/wm of the new Temple, for thcir milles standing I 
without Baynardes Castle, iz lhe flrst year« of ]çiug Iohn, and 
diuers othcr imfledimeuts, so as the said ships coMd hot curer 
as they wcre ¢«ont, & as they otght, whcrcforc he dcsh'ed that 
the _[aior of Lotdon with the shb'iffs, aztd other discrete Aider- 
ment, migkt bc aflpoizted to view tle course of thc saide waler, 
aJtd that b.t' t/w or]tes of good mou, all thc «oEorcsahh" himtcraaa's 



liete,s aec? o/be" oate's se'zthzg /his Ce'/ie 13 
miffht bee remoued, and il to bcÆ izadc as it as wolzt of ohl: 
$,herv;oz Roger le ]3rabason, thc Cotstable of lhÆ Toc,cr, 
thc [aior azd Shb'iff cs c, ere assizect fo tabc ,ilh thc»z houest 
atcl discrcte tclt, aml lo zalee dili.ffett scarch & ctqzthie, kow 
the said rieter ,as it old tizÆ, atd /bat lb O, h'auc nothht t/rat 
uay hurt or stop it, bett kCCle it it thc sa»te cstatc lhat il ,vas 
,vottt to be: so far the record. Whervpon it folowed that the 
said riuer was at that rime cleansed, these mils remoued, and 
other things done for the preseruation of the course thereof, 
notwithstanding neuer brought to the olde depth and breadth, 
xvherevpon the naine of riuer ceased, and it was since called a 
Brooke, namely, Turntill, or Tretill Brooke, for that diuers 
Mils wcre erected vpon it, as appeareth by a fayre Register 
booke, conteyning the foundation of the Priorie at Clarbclt- 
t,ell, and donation of the landes thereunto belonging, as also 
by diuers other records. 
This brooke bath beene diuers rimes since clensed, namely, 
and last of ail to any effect, in the yeare I5OoE. the 17 . of 
Henrie the 7- the whole course of Flectc dike, then so called, 
was scowred (I say) downe to the Tltazcs, so that boats with 
fish and fewel were rowed to Fleete bridge, and to Oldbztrze 
bridge, as they of olde rime had beene accustomed, which 
was a great commoditie to all the inhabitants in that part of 
the citie. 
In the yeare 589 . was graunted a fifteene, by a common 
Councell of the citie, for the cleansing of this Brooke or dike : 
the money amounting to a thousand marks was collected, and 
it was vndertaken, that by drawing diuerse springes about 
Ha»zpsted hcatlz, into one head and course, both the citie 
should bee serued of fresh water in ail places of want, and 
also that by such a follower as men call it, the chanell of this 
brooke should bee scowred into the riuer of Thatcs, but much 
mony being therein spent, yÇ effect [ fayled, so that the ]3rooke 
by meanes of continuall incrochments vpon the banks getting 
ouer the water, and casting of soylage into the streame, is now 
become woorse cloyed and (choken) theu euer it was before. 
The running water so called by lVilliaz Colqzterour in 
his saide Charter, which entereth the citie, &c. (before there 
was any ditch) betweene .;sboîsgale and the late ruade 

Riuer so 
called in the 
yeare 13o 7. 

Turnemill 
]3rooke. 

Fleete dike 
promised to 
be clensed ; 
the money 
collected, and 
the Citizens 
deeeiued: 

_Page 



hber customs. 

Walbrook 
vaulted and 
paued ouer. 

Langbome. 

Shareborne 
lane. 
Langboume 
ward. 

Oldbourne. 

 4 li«wrs md o//wr wntem serniff/bis Cille 
losteruc called 3Iooregate, entrcd the xvall, and was trucly of 
the wall called l.Valbroot«e, hOt of Çnalo, as some haue farre 
fetched : it ranne through the citie with diuers windings from 
the North towards the South into the riuer of Thames, and had 
ouer the saine diuerse bridges along the Streetes and Lanes, 
through which it passed. I haue read in a Booke intituled 
the customes of Loudou, that the Prior of the holie Triuitie 
within tldgat« ought to make ouer IVal3rooke in the ward of 
grodstrectc, agaynst the stone wall of the citie, vz. the saine 
Bridge that is next the Church of All Saints, at the wall. 
Also that the Prior of the new Hospitall, S. _[arie S2Mttle 
without Bis]w2#sg«tc, ought to make the middle part of one 
other Bridge next to the said Bridge towardes the North: 
And that in thc 8. yeare of dwarde the first, it was by 
inquisition fOulld bcfore the Major of London, that the parish 
of S. Stcpcn vppon Hral3rookc, ought of right to scowre the 
course of the saide Brooke, and therefore the shiriffes were 
commaunded to distraine the sayde Yarishioners so to doe: in 
the yeare I3OO. the keepers of those Bridges at that rime were 
lVilliam [ordau and [ohu de cucr. This water course hauing 
diuerse Bridges, was afterwards vaulted ouer with bricke, and 
paued leuell with the Streetes and Lanes where through it 
passed, and since that also houses have beene builded thereon, 
so that the course of IValbroke is noxv hidden vnder ground, 
and therby hardly knowne. 
Zangboruc water, so called of the length thereof, was a great 
streame breaking out of the ground, in Fcu Church street, 
which ran downe with a swift course, west, through that 
streete, thwart Grastrcctc, and downe Lumbard streete, to the 
west ende of S. 3laric IVohwthes Church, and then turning 
the course South dovn Sharcborne lane, so termed of sharing 
or diuiding, it brake I into diuerse rilles or rillets to the Riuer 
of Thames: of this bourne that warde took the naine, and is 
till this day called £angborne warde. This Bourne also is 
long since stopped vp at the head, and the rest of the course 
filled vp and paued ouer, so that no signe thereof remayneth 
more then the names aforesaid. 
Oldborne, or Hilborne, was the like water, breaking out 
about the place where now the bars do stand, and it ran 



downe the whole streete till Oldborze bridge, and into the 
Riuer of the l/Vels, or Ttre»till brooke: this Bourne was 
likewise long since stopped vp at the heade, and in other 
places xvhere the same bath broken out, but yet till this day, 
the said street is there called high Oldbornc bill, and both the 
sides thereof togither with ail the grounds adioyning, that lie 
betwixt it and the riuer of Tl«amcs, remaine full of springs, so 
that water is there found at hand, and hard to be stopped in 
euerie house. 
T]terc are (sait]t Fitzstephen), ueare Londou, on tire Nortlt 
side, secial ,els iz t/te Stbttrbs, sveetc, e,l,'olsome and clearc, 
a»wugst wltick Holywell, Clarkes wel,  Clements well, arc 
«uost famotts and frcqttctlcd b 2, Scholcrs and youthes of t/te 
Citic Dt sottlter atetthtgs, e,hct []lcy ,alZ'e fi'tlz to tabe the 
ah'e. 
The first, to wit, Hol3 z«cll, is much decayed and marred 
with filthinesse purposely laide there, for the heighthening of 
the ground for garden plots. 
The fountaine called S. Clcmcnts vell, North from the 
Parish Church of S. Clc»tents, and neare vnto an Inne of 
Clzancerie, called Clenetts Inne, is faire curbed square vith 
hard stone, kept cleane for common vse, and is alwayes full. 
The third is called Clarbes wcll, or Clarkt well, and is 
curbed about square with hard stone, hot farre from the west 
ende of Clarkeu well Church, but close without the wall that 
incloseth it : the sayd Church tooke the naine of the Well, and 
the Well tooke name of the Parish Clarkes in London, who 
of old rime were accustomed there yearely to assemble, and 
fo play some large hystorie of holy Scripture. And for 
example of later time, to vit, in the yeare, a39 . the 4. of 
Ricltard the second, I read the Parish Clarks of London, on 
the 8. of July, playd Enterludes at Sbinuers well, neare vnto 
Clarkes wcll, which play continued three I dayes togither, the 
King, Queene, and Nobles being present. Also the year 
t4 9. the x. of Ietrie the 4. they played a play at the 
Skiers well, which lasted eight dayes, and was of marrer 
from the creation of the worlde. There were to see the same, 
the most part of the Nobles and Gentiles in England, &c. 
Other smaller welles were many neare vnto Clarkes well, 

Fitzstephen. 
Holy well. 

Clements 
'ell. 

Clarks well. 

Playes by the 
parish Clarks 
at Clarks well. 
lag,e 6 

Playes at the 
Skinners well. 

Skinners well. 



Wrestling 
place. 

Fagges well. 

Poole without 
Creplegate. 

l'age 2 7 
Patent.  236. 

V(ater con- 
nayed from 
Teyborn. 

6 iW«ters altd o/ber c,aters serltb(g this Citie 
namely Skinnirs wH1, so called for that the Skinners of 
London held there certaine playes yearely playd of holy 
Scripture, &c. In place whereof the wrestlings haue of later 
yeares beene kept, and is in part continued at t7arlholomew 
Zide. 
Then xvas there Fagcs wcll, neare vnto Smithfeld by the 
Chartcrhouse, now lately dammed up, Todwcll, Loders wel, 
and ladwell, ail decayed, and so fillcd vp, that there places 
are hardly noxv discerned. 
Somewhat North from HolyweI1, is one other well curbed 
square xvith stone, and is called Dame Annis the cleare, and 
hot farre from it but somewhat west, is also one other cleare 
vater called _Pcrillous po«d, because diucrse youthes swim- 
ming therein haue beene droxvned, and thus much bee said for 
Fountaines and Wels. 
llorsepool« in lVcstsmithfield, was sometime a great water, 
and because the inhabitants in that part of the Citie did there 
water their Horses, the saine xvas in olde Records called 
HorsîOoole : itis now much decayed, the springs being stopped 
vp, and the land water falling into the small bottome, 
relnayning inclosed with Bricke, is called Smitkfleldîootd. 
13y S. Giles Churchyard vas a large water called a _Poole, 
I read in the yeare 1244, that Ame of Lodburie was drowned 
therein, this poole is nov for the most part stopped vp, but 
the swing is preserued, and was cooped about with stone by 
the Executors of Richard IVittington. 
The said riuer of the lVels, the running water of IValbrooke, 
the Bournes aforenamed, and other the fresh waters that were 
in and about this Citie, being in processe of time by in- 
crochmentfor buildings and heighthnings of grounds vtterly 
decayed, and the number of Citizens mightily increased, they 
were forced to seeke sweete waters abroad, wherof some at 
the request of king Henry ] the third, in the 2. yeare of his 
raigne, were for the profite of the Citty, and good of the 
whole realme, thether repayring, to vit, for the poore to 
drinke, and the rich to dresse their meate, granted to the 
Cittizens, and their successors by one Gilbert SaoEorde, with 
liberty to conuay water from the Towne of Teyborne, by 
pipes of leade into their Citty. 



i.uers aud other atees z7 
The first Cesterne of leade castellated vith stone in the 
Citty of Zondon, was called the great Conduit in west C/wape, 
which was begunne to bee builded in the yeare 1285. Icnry 
IVales being then Mayor, the water course from Padi1gtou to 
lames/wd hath 51o. rods, from lames /ted on the hil to the 
[ezc,sgate, IO rods, from the 3[ezz,segate to the Crosse in C/tca.pe 
484. rods. 
The Tonne vpon Cortthill was Cisterned in the yeare 14Ol. 
Iohu Sltadworttt then being Mayor. 
Bosses of water at Bdinsgate, by Powlcs wharfe, and by 
S. Giles Church without Cripplcgate made about the yeare 
I43. 
Water conueyed to the Gaoles of iVewgate and Ludgatc, 
43. 
Water was first procured to the Standard in West Chae 
about the yeare 1285. which Standard was againe new builded, 
by the Executors of [ohu Wdlcs, as shall bee shewed in an 
other place. King tl«ttry the sixt in the yeare 1442. graunted 
to Iohu Hat/wrlcy Mayor, licence to take vp co. fodar of 
Leade, for the building of Conduits of a common Garnery 
and of a new Crosse in West Cheapc for the honor of the 
Citty. 
The Conduit in West Cheape by Powles gare, was builded 
about the yeare 1442. one thousand markes was graunted by 
Common Counsell for the building thereof, and repayring of 
the other Conduits. 
The Conduit in .dld«rmaubury and the Standard in Flect- 
streetc, were ruade and finished by the Executors of Sir 
IVilliam tastficld in the yeare 1471. a Sestern was added to 
the Standerd in Flcctestrcetc, and a Sestern was ruade at 
Fleetbridge, and one other without Crilegat« in the yeare, 
478. 
Conduit in Grastreetc, in the yeare, I49X. 
Conduit at Oldbourne Crosse about 1498, againe new made 
by kVilliam Zambe 1577. [ 
Little Conduit by the Stockes market about ISOO. 
Conduit at Bishopsgate, about 1513. 
Conduit at Zondon wall, about 1528. 
Conduit at Aldate without, about x535. 

Andrew Horn. 
Great Conduit 
in west 
Cheape. 
XVater con- 
ueyed from 
Teyborn to 
London. 

Tonne vpon 
Comhill. 

Bosse of 
Belinsgate and 
other Bosses. 

.Page «8 



I8 liters cm/ ol/er watcrs 

Thames water 
conueyed into 
mens houses 
in the east 
parte of the 
Citty. 
Conduits in 
old fishstreet. 

Thames water 
conueyed into 
the xvest part 
of the city. 

]3enefactors 
towaÆdes the 
water con- 
duites. 

Page 

Conduit in Zolhbury, and in Colemauslre«t, 1546. 
Conduit of Thames water at Dowgatc, 1568. 
Thames water conueyed into mens houses by pipes of leade, 
from a rnost al-tificial forcier standing neare vnto London 
bridgc and ruade by Pelcr .a[oris Dutchman in the yeare 
158 , for seruice of che Citty, on Che East part thereof. 
Conduits of Thames water by Che parish Churches of 
S..aIary _Magdalcu, and S. Nicholas Colde Abbcy neare vnto 
olde Fishstreet, in Che yeare 1583. 
One other new Forcier was rnade neare to Broken wharf¢, 
to conuey Tharnes xvater into mens houses of West Chcapc, 
aboute Powles, Flcctcslrc¢t, &c., by an English Gentleman, 
named l?cuis uhm'r, in the yeare 1594. Thus rnuch for 
waters, seruing this Cittie : first by Riuers, 13rookes, Boornes, 
Fountaines, Pooles, &c. _And since by Conduits partly ruade 
by good and charitable Citizens, and otherxvise by charges of 
Che Communaltie, as shalbe shewed in description of Wardes, 
wherein they be placed. _And now sorne 13enefactors to these 
Conduits shalbe remembred. 
In the yeare 136. certaine Marchant Strangers of Cities 
beyond che Seas, to wit, Amicns, Corby, and Nele, for 
priuiledges xvhich they enioyed in this Cittie, gaue lOO. 1. 
towardes the charges of conueying water frorn Che towne of 
Teyborue. Robert Lac Mayor, I439. gaue to Che new water 
Conduits then in hand forty markes, and towardes Che vaulting 
ouer of lValbrooke neare to che parish Church of S. Iaarcl 
in Lolhbery oo. Markes. 
Sir lVillia» Eastfield mayor 1438. conueyed water frorn 
Tcyborue to Flcctstrcclc, to Mldcruaubtry, and frorn Highbcry, 
to Criflplcgale. 
lVilliam Combes Sheriffe I441. gaue to Che worke of che 
Conduits x. li. 
Richard Rawson one of Che Sheriffes 1476. gaue xx. ll. 
Robert Rcuell one of che shiriffes 149 o. gaue x. ll. 
Iohu [alhew Major, 149o. gaue xx. li. 
IVilliam l?ucke Tailor, in che yeare, 1494. towards repairing 
of Conduits, gaue C. Markes. 
Dame Tho**asou widow, lace wife to Ioha Pcrciuall Taylor, 
Maior in Che yeare 1498. gaue toward Che Conduit in Old- 
bournc xx. llarkes. 



IW¢ters and ot[ter 7aters 19 
Rickartt Sirote one of the Shiriffes xSo 5. gaue to the Con- 
duit in Olclbourne x. li. 
The Ladie Ascue, widow to sir Christopher .4 ue, x543. 
gaue towards the Conduits C. li. 
Dauid IVodrooffe shiriffe 554. gaue towardes the Conduit 
at Bishopsgatc xx. li. 
Edward Iackman one of the shiriffes, I564. gaue towarde 
the Conduits C. ll. 
• Barnard Randztlph, common Sergeant of the Citie, 1583 . 
gaue to the water Conduits 9oo ll. 
Thus much for the Conduits of fresh water to this Citie. 

The towne Ditch without the Wall of the citie. 
THEDitch which partly now remaineth, and compassed 
the wall of the Citie, was begun to be ruade by the Lon- 
doners, in the yere oEx. & vas finished in the yeare 
the  5. of king Iohu, this Ditch being then ruade of e.c)o, foot 
broad, caused no small hinderance to the Caaou of the 
holy Triuitie, whose Church stood neare vnto .41dgate, for that 
the saide ditch passed through their ground, from the Tower 
of London, vnto Bishops gare. This Ditch being originally 
ruade for the defence of the Citie, was also long togither, 
carefully clensed and maintained as neede required, but now of 
late neglected and forced either to a verie narrow, and the saine 
a filthie chanell, or altogither stopped vp for Gardens planted, 
and houses builded thereon, euen to the verie wall, and 
many places vpon both ditch & wall houses to be builded, to 
what danger of the Citie, I leaue to wiser consideration: and 
can but wish that reformation might be had. 
In the yeare of Christ, I354. the 8. of dward the third, 
the ditch of this Citie flowing ouer the banke into the Tower 
ditch, the king commaunded the said ditch of the Citie to be 
clensed, and so ordered, that the ouerflowing thereof should 
not force any filth into the Tower ditch. 
Anuo x379. Iohu t)hilot Maior of London, caused this 
ditch to be cleansed, and euerie houshold to pay v,d. which 
was for a dayes worke towards the charges thereof. Richard 
thc . in the tenth of his raigne, granted a Toll to bec taken 
C2 

Lib. Dun- 
stable• 
Ditch about 
London 200. 
foote broade. 
Lib. Trinitate. 

t)age zo 

Ditch ofthe 
Citie ouer- 
floved the 
banke, into 
the Tover 
ditch. 



o The towe Ditch wilhon! lice lall 

Plentie of 
good fish in 
the Towne 
ditch. 

of wares solde by water, or by lande for ten yeares, towardes 
repayring of the wall, and clensing of the ditch. 
T]wm« Fawcucr Maior J414. caused the ditch tobe 
clensed. 
Ralflocdinc Major I477. caused the whole ditch to be cast 
and clensed, and so from rime to time it was clensed, and 
otherwise reformed, namely, in 519, the tenth of tt«nrie 8. for 
clensing and scowring the common ditch betweene ldoeatc 
and the Pos¢crne next the Tower ditch. The chief ditcher 
had by the day vij.d, the second ditcher vi.d. the other ditchers 
v.d. .A_nd euery vagabonde (for so were they termed) one 
pennie the day meate and drinke, at charges of the Citie. 
XCV.li. iij.s, iiij.d. 
In my remembrance also the saine was clensed, namely the 
Mooreditch, when sir 1Villiam Hollies was Major, in the ycre 
54o. & hot long before, fi'om the Tower of London to 
Aldgate. 
It was againe clensed in the yeare 1549. Henrie mcotes 
being Major, at the charges of the Companics. And againe 
569. the i. of Queene I'liza3etk, for clensing the saine ditch 
betweene aldgatc and the Posternc, and making a new 
sewere, and wharf of tymber fl'om the head of the Posterne 
into the towne ditch, viii.C.xiiij.pound, xv.s. viii. d. Belote 
the which time the saide ditch lay open, without wall or 
pale, hauing therein great store of verie good fish, of diuerse 
sorts, as many men yet liuing, who haue taken and tasted them 
can well witnes: but now no such matter, the charge of 
clensing is spared, and great profite ruade by letting out the 
banks, with the spoyle of the whole ditch. I 
I am not ignorant of two fifteenes graunted by a common 
Councell in the yeare 1595. for the reformation of this ditch, 
and that a small portion thereof, to wit, betwixt Bishofisgat«, 
and the Postcrue called 3[ooregate, was clensed and ruade 
somewhat broder: but filling againe very fast, by reason of 
ouerraysing the ground neare adioyning, therefore neuer the 
better : and I will so leaue it, for I cannot helpe it. 



Bridges of this Citie. 
THE originall foundation of London bridge, by report of 
BarHwlomezv Zinsted, alias Fowle, last Prior of S. 3[arie 
Oueries Church in Southwarbe was this : a Ferrie being kept 
in place where now the Bridge is builded, at length the Ferri- 
man & his wife deceasing, left the same Ferrie to their onely 
daughter, a maiden named 3[ari6 which xvith the goodes left 
by ber Parents, as also with the profites rising of the said 
Ferrie, builded a house of Sist«rs, in place where now standeth 
the east part of S. 3[arie Oueries Church aboue the Queere, 
where she was bhried, vnto the which bouse she gaue the ouer- 
sight & profites of the Ferrie, but aRerwards the said bouse 
of sisters being conuerted into a colledge of priests, the priests 
builded the Bridge (of Tituber) as all other the great Bridges 
of this land were, and flore time to time kept the saine in 
good reparations, till at length considering the great charges 
of repayring the saine, there xvas by ayd of the Citizens of 
London, and others, a Bridge builded with Arches of stone, as 
shall be shewed. 
But first of the Tituber Bridge, the antiquitie thereof being 
great, but vncertaine, I remember to haue read, that in the 
yeare of Christ, 994- Sweyn king of Denarbe besieging the 
Citie of London, both by water and by land, the Citizens 
manfully defended themselues, and their king Ethch'cd, so as 
part of their enemies were slaine in battaile, and part of them 
were drowned in the Riuer of Thamcs, because in their hastic 
rage they tooke no heede of the Bridge. 1 
Moreouer in the yeare o6. Cahute the Dane, with a great 
nauie came vp to London, and on the South of the T/tantes, 
caused a Trench to be cast, through the xvhich his ships were 
towed into the west side of the Bridge, and then xvith a deepc 
Trench and straight siege he compassed the CRie round 
about. 
Also in the yeare oSoE. Earle Goodwht with the like nauie, 
taking his course vp the riuer of Thames, and finding none 
that offered to resist on the Bridge, he sayled vp by the south- 
side of the said riuer. Furthermore about the yere o67. 
IVilliam the Cnqucrour in his Charter to the Church of S. t)cter 

London 
bridge first of 
tituber. 

A Ferrie on'er 
the Thames 
between Lon- 
don 8: South- 
warke. 
First arched 
bridge.% Strat- 
ford bow, 
ruade by 
Matild, wife to 
Hen. the first. 

William of 
Malmesbury. 



Men went dry- 
shod vnder 
Londonbridg. 
Lib. lqermond- 
sey. 

Ilenrie the I: 

Lib. Bermond- 
se),. 
Lib. Trinitate. 
lage 23 

London 
bridge brent. 

London bridge 
of tituber new 
builded. 

22 t4dge.ç of t/i.ç Cille 
at Westminster, confirmed to the Monks seruing God there, 
a gare in London, then called 17uttol]ahs Care, with a wharfe 
which was at the head of Lo«don 
We read likewise, that in the yeare 1114. the 14. of Henrie 
the first, t|le riuer of Tllamcs was so dried vp, and such want 
of water there, that betweene the Tower of London, and the 
bridge, and vndcr the bridge, hot onely with horse, but also 
a great number of men, women and children, did wade ouer 
on foote. 
In the yeare IIoEoE. the OEoE. of cm'ie the first, Tlwmas Ardcn 
gaue to the Monkes of Bcrmondsey, the Church of S. Gco,ge 
in Southwarke : and fiue shillings rent by the yeare, out of the 
land peayning to London bridffe. 
I also haue seene a Çharlcr vnder seale to the effect follow- 
ing. Hem'ie kinff of England, lo RaoEe B. of Chichcster, and 
ail lhe [i,dslcrs of S,tsscx scndctl ffrccli,ff, know yG &c. Icom- 
mavmd by *U' ]'inffly aulborilic that lhe amor called Alces- 
toue, ct,hich my fathcr gang ¢vilh otlwr lands, to tlw Abbey of 
Batllc, be frcc and quiet from shiercs and hundredes, and all 
otbcr Çnstomcs of earthly scruitnde, as my fatlwr lwldc tac 
saw, most fi,cly and qMetly, a,d ,mmely from the vorkc 
of L ondon bridge, a,d the worke of lhe Çastle at l»cuensey: 
a,d this I command eon «0' #*fe3'm*, wil, wsse IVilliam 
de l»onllcarcbe at Byru,, the which Charter with the Seale 
very faire, remaineth in the custodie of loseh olland 
Gentleman. 
In the yeare 1136. the first of king Stcltcn, a tire began in 
the bouse of one Ailewardc, neare vnto London stone, which  
consumed east to Aldgale, and west to S. r]'enzvalds shriw, 
in oa,les Çhnrca: the bridge of tituber ouer the riuer of 
Thames was also burnt, &c. but afferwardes again repayred. 
For il»slchcn writeth that in the ralgne of king Stclwn, 
and of Hen, 3, the second, when ptimes were shewed on the 
riuer of Thames, men stoode in greate number on the bridge, 
wharfes, and houses, to behold. 
Now in the yeare 1163 . the saine bridge was hot onely 
repayred, but new made of Tituber as afore, by l»eWr of Çole- 
Church. Priest and Chaplaine. 
Thus much for the olde tituber bridge, maintainde partly 



by the proper lands thereof, partly by the liberality of diuers 
persons, and partly by taxations in diuers Shires, haue I 
proued for the space of 215. yeares belote the Bridge of stone 
was builded. 
Now touching the foundation of the Stone Bridge, it 
followeth : About the yeare  I76. the Stone Bridge ouer the 
riuer of Thames at London, was begunne to be founded by the 
foresaide Peter of Cole Churcl, neare vnto the Bridge of timber, 
but some what more towardes thc west, for I read that t?uttolfe 
wharfe was in the Conquerors rime, at the head of Londoz 
bridge. The king assisted this worke : /k Cardinall then being Lib. Wauer- 
Legate here, and Richard Archbishop of Canterbury, gaue ley- 
one thousand markes towardes the foundation, the course of 
the riuer for the time was turned an other way about by 
a Trench cast for that purpose beginning as is supposed East 
about Radriffe, and ending in the West about Patrickcy, 
now tearmed l?atersey, this worke to wit, the Arches, Chaple & 
stone bridge ouer the riuer ofThames at Zomlon, hauing beene 
33. yeares in building was in the yeare i oEo 9. finished b¥ the 
worthy Marchants of Zondon, Ser& Mercer, IVilliam Almaine, 
and l?encdict l?olezvrite, principall Maisters of that worke, for 
Peler of Colechm-ctz deceased foure years before, and was 
buried in the Chappell on the Bridge, in the yeare IoEo 5. 
King Zottt gaue certaine voide places in Londoz to build 
vppon, the profites thereof to remaine towardes the charges of 
building and repayring of the same bridge: a Mason being 
Maister Workeman of the Bridge, builded from the foundation 
the I large Chapple on that Bridge, of his owne charges, which 
Chapple was then endowed for two Priestes, foure Clearks, &c. 
besides Chanteries since founded for Zo]m Hat.field and other. 
After the finishing of this Chapple, which was the first building 
vppon those/krches, sundr¥ bouses at times were erected, and 
many charitable men gaue lands, tenements, or summes of 
mone¥ towards maintenance thereof, all which was sometimes Gifts t, en to 
maintenance 
note& and in a table fayre written for posterity, remayning in of London 
the Chapple, til the saine Chapple was turned to a dwelling Bridge in a 
table noted 
bouse, and then remoued to the Bridge bouse: the effect off or posterity. 
which Table I was willing to haue published in this booke, if 
I could haue obtained the sight thereof: but making the 

London bridge 
of stone 
founded. 

London bridge 
3 yeares in 
building. 

Chapple on 
London bridg. 
tage 2 4 
Chappel on 
the Bridge on 
the East side. 



Actions on 
London bridge 
to bee 

Lib. Dunmow. 
Walter of 
Couentry. 
William 
l'ackenton. 
London bridge 
perished with 
tire. 

Fine arches of 
London bridge 
borne downe. 

Pattent the 14. 
of Edward the 
second. 

2 4 gridges of []lis Ci/le 
shorter worke, I find by the accompt of lVilliam A[ariner 
and Christopker Eliot Wardens of London Bridge from 
Michaelmas in the OEOE. of ]-r. the 7- vnto Michaelmas next 
ensuing by one whole yeare, that all the paymentes and 
allowances came to viii.C.xv.li, xvii.s, ii.d. ob. as there is 
shewed by particulars, by which accompt then ruade, may be 
partly gessed the great charges and discharges of that Bridge 
at this day, whcn thinges be stretched to so great a prise. 
_And now to actions on this Bridge. 
The first action tobe noted was lamentable, for within foure 
yeares after the finishing thereof, to witte in the yeare, OEI.. 
on the tenth of July at night, the Borough of Southwarke 
vpon the South side the riuer of Thames, as also the Church 
of our Lady of the Canons there beeing on tire, and an 
exceeding great multitude of people passing the Bridge, 
eyther to extinguish and quench it, or else to gaze at and 
behold it, suddenly the north part, by blowing of the South- 
wind was also set on tire, and the people which were euen 
now passing the Bridge, perceyuing the same, would haue 
returned, but were stopped by tire, and it came to passe, that 
as they stayed or protracted time, the other end of the Bridge 
also, namely the South end was fired, so that the people 
thronging themselues betweene the two rires, did nothing else 
but expect present death : then came there to aide them many 
ships and vessels, into the which the multitude so vnaduisedly 
rushed, that the ships being drowned, they all perished: it 
was saide that through the tire and shipwracke there were 
destroyed a]bout three thousand persons whose bodies were 
found in part, or halfe burned, besides those that were wholy 
burnt to ashes, and could not be found. 
About the yeare toE82, through a great frost and deepe 
snow, fiue .A_rches of London bridge were borne downe and 
carryed away. 
In the yeare  OE89. the Bridge was so sore decayed for want 
of reparations, that men were afraid to passe thereon, and 
a subsidie was graunted towards the amendment thereof, Sir 
Ioh Britaine being Custos of London. 38. a great collec- 
tion or gathering was made, of all _Archbishops, Bishops, and 
other Ecclesiasticall persons, for the reparations of London 



tries q/ tMs CiEe 25 
bridge. 38. ll"a! Tiler, and other rebcls of Kent, by 
this bridge entered the Citie, as ye may reade in my Snm- 
narie and lznalcs. 
In the yeare 395-on S. Gcocs day, was a great iusting 
on London bridge, betwixt Danid Earle of Craford of Scot- 
land, and the Lord lVds of Enland. In the which the 
Lord lVds was at the third course borne out of the saddle, 
which hystorie proueth,that at that rime the Bridge being 
coaped on either side was not replenished with houses 
builded thereupon, as since it hath beene, and now is. The Ninepersons 
crowded to 
next yeare on the 3- of Nouember, the young Queene death on Lon- 
Isabell, commonly called the little, for she was but eight don bridge. 
yeares olde, was conueyed from Kcuington besides Zamhith, 
through Southwark to the Tower of London, and such a 
multitude of people went out to see ber, that on London 
bridge nine persons were crowded to death, of whom the 
prior of TiîOtre a place in Esse.r, was one, & a Matron on 
Cornehil, was an other. 
The Tower on London Bridge at the north end of the 
drawbridge, (for that bridge was then readily to be drawn 
up, aswell to giue passage for ships to Queenehith, as for the 
resistance of any forraigne force) was begun to be builded in 
the yeare x426. Iohn Rahtwell being Maior. 
An other tower there is on the sayd bridge ouer the gate 
at the South end towards Southwarke, whereof in an other 
place shall be spoken. 
In the yeare 45o. Iackc Cade, and other Rebels of Kent, Iacke Cade 
entered the 
by this bridge entered the Citie, he strake his sword on Citiebytbe 
London stone, [ and said himselfe then to be Lord of the bridge. 
Iage 6 
Citie, but they were by the Citizens ouercome on the saine 
Bridge, and put to flight, as in my Annalcs. 
In the yeare x47x. Thomas the bastard Fawconbridge be-Bastard Faw- 
eonbridge be- 
sieged this Bridge, burned the gate, and all the houses to the sieged the 
draw bridge, that rime 13. in number, bridge. 
In the year 48. an bouse called the common siege on An house of 
the bridge fell 
London bridge fell downe into the Thames : through the fall downe. 
whereof fiue men were drowned. 
In the year 553. the third of February, sir Thomas lViat 
and the Kentish men marched froln Depeford towards London, 

Tower on 
London bridge 
builded. 



Sir Tho. Wiat 
lay in South- 
warke at the 
bridge foote. 
The drawe- 
bridge cut 
downe. 

The bridge 
descfibed. 

Fleet bridge. 

l'age a7 

Oldborne 
bridge. 

26 trh]es of lhis Ci/ic 
after knowledge whereof, forthwith the drawe bridge was cut 
downe, and the Bridge gares shut, Viat and his people 
entered Southwarke, xvhere they lay till the sixt of Februarie, 
but coulde get no entrie of the Citie by the bridge, the saine 
was then so wcll defended by the Citizens, the Lord lVilliam 
Howard assisting, wherefore he remoued towards Ki»gslo»e, 
&c. as in my tmtales. 
To conclude of this bridge ouer thc said riucr of Thamcs, 
I affirme, as in other my descriptions, that if is a worke verie 
rare, hauing with the draw bridge OEo. _Arches ruade of 
squared stone, of height 60. fcote, and in bredth 30. foote 
distant one from another OEo. foote, compact and ioyned 
togithcr with vaults and cellers, vpon both sides be houses 
buildcd, so that if seemeth rather a continuall streete then 
a Bridge: for the fortifying xvhereof against the incessant 
assaults of the riuer, it hath ouerseers and officers, ve. war- 
dens, as aforesaid, and others. 
Flecte bridge in the vest without Lndgate, a Bridge of 
stone faire coaped, on either side with iron pikes, on the 
vhich towards the south be also certaine Lanthornes of stone, 
for lights to be placed in the winter euenings, for commoditie 
of trauellers. Under this bridge runneth a water, sometimes 
called (as I haue said) the river of the lVels, since Tm'nemill 
b ookc, now Z;lcet diS'e, because if runneth by the Fleete, and 
sometime about the Fleete, so under Flccte bridge into the 
riuer of Thames. This bridge hath beene farre greater in 
rimes past, but lessened, as the water course hath beene 
narrowed. If seemeth this last bridge to be ruade, or re- 
payred at the charges of Iohn lCds Maior, in the yeare 431. [ 
for on the coping is engrauen Wels imbraced by _A_ngels, like 
as on the Standard in Cheape, which he also builded : thus 
much of the Bridge : for of the water course and decay thereof 
I haue spoken in another place. 
Oldbonrw bridge ouer the said riuer of the lVels more to- 
wards the North was so called, of a Bourne that sometimes 
ranne downe Oldborw hill into the sayd Riuer, this Bridge 
of stone like as Fleet bridge from Ludgate west, serueth for 
passengers vith carriage or othervise from Newgate toward 
the west and by North. 



Bridges of tbis Cilie 27 
Çowbrid, ç¢ more North ouer the saine water by Cwbridg¢ Cowbridge. 
streete or Cowlane : this bridge being lately decayed, an other 
of tituber is ruade somewhat more north, by Chidelane, 
]Bridges ouer the Towne ditch, there are diuerse : to witte, 
without Aldate, without gis]wps, çate, the Posterne called 
lre, çate, the Posterne of Crcpl¢gatc xvithout Aldcrsgate, the 
Posterne of Christes Hospitall, Neatc, and Eudgate, all 
these bee ouer paued likewise with stone leuell with the 
streetes. ]But one other there is of Tymber ouer the riuer of 
wds, or :leet dike, betweene he precinct of the glacée :riers, 
and the house of gridewdl. 
There haue beene of olde rime also, diuerse Bridges in lridges ouer 
the course of 
sundrie places ouer the course of Walbrooke, as before I haue Walbrooke. 
partly noted besicles Horshew bridge, by the Church of saint IIorshewe 
[hn gaptist, now called $. [dns vpon Walbrooke. I reade bridge. 
that of olde rime euery person hauing lands on either side of 
the sayd brooke, shonld clense the saine, and repayre the 
Bridges so farre as their landes extended. More, in the I I. 
of dward the third, the inhabitants vpon the course of this 
brooke, were forced to pile and wal the sides thereof. Also 
that in the third of I-[enri¢ the tiR, this water course had many Walbrooke 
vaulted ouer 
Bridges, since vaulted oer with Bricke, and the streetes a,d paued 
where through it passed, so paued, that the saine watercourse with stone. 
is now hardly discerned. For order was taken in the second 
of dward the fourth, that such as had ground on either side 
of Walbrooke, should vault and paue it ouer, so farre as his 
ground extended. And thus much for ]Bridges in this CRie, 
may suffice. I 

Bridge ouer 
the toxwa ditch 

Gates in the wall of this Citie. 
GATE in the wall of this Citie of olde time, were foure : to 
wit, Aeldgate for the east, Aldersgate for the North, Ludga¢e 
for the West, and the tridgegate ouer the riuer of Thames for 
the South, but of later rimes for the ease of Citizens and 
Passengers, diuers other gares and posterns haue beene ruade, 
as shall be shewed. 
In the raigne of Hem'ie the second (saith Fitcstephcn) there 
were seu¢n double gatcs Dt the wall of this Cilie, but he nameth 

Gates of Lon- 
don 4. north, 
south, east, and 
west, & other 
as shall be 
shewed. 

Seuen double 
gates in the 
wall of this 
Citie. 



Posterne by 
the Tower. 

t'age 0 
Wall imbat- 
telled about 
the Tower of 
London. 
Ditch about 
the tower. 

Posterne fell 
downe. 

e8 Ga/es ie //ce wal! of t/ff« 
thcm hot. It may therefore be supposed,hee meant for the first, 
the gare next the Tower of London, now commonly called 
the Posterne: the next to be Aeldgate, the third Bishpsgate, 
the fourth Falclcrsate, the fift Nez,gale, the sixt Zzzclgate, the 
seuenth t?ridgegate. Since the which rime hath beene builded, 
the Posterne called A1ooregate, a Posterne from Christs Hos- 
pitall, towards S. Bartholomewcs Hospitall in Snit]yfelcl, &c. 
Now of euerie of these gates, and posterns in the wall, and also 
of certaine water gares on the riuer of Thames, seuerally, some- 
what may, and shall be noted, as I find authoritie, or reasonable 
conjecture to warrant me. 
For the first now called the posterne by the Tower of 
London, it sheweth by that part which yet remaineth, to 
haue beene a faire & strong arched gare, partly builded of hard 
stone of Keu, and partly of stone brought from Cau in 
A'or«audie, since the Conquest, and foundation of the high 
tower, and serued for passengers on foote out of the Fast, 
from thence through the Citie to Ludgate in the West. The 
ruine and ouerthrow of this gate and posterne, began in the 
yeare xt9o. the second of Richard the first, when llïlliam 
Longshanpc Bishop of Ely, Chancellor of England, caused a 
part of the Citie wall, to wit, from the said gate towards the 
riuer of Thames, to the white tower, to bee broken downe, for the 
enlarging of the said Tower, which he then compassed farre 
wide about with a wall embattelled, and is now the ] outer 
wal. He also caused a broad and deepe ditch to be ruade 
without thc saine wall, intending to haue deriued the riuer of 
Thames with ber tydcs, to haue flowed about it, which would 
not be. But the Southside of this gate being then by under- 
mining at the foundation loosed, and greatly weakned, at 
length, to wit, af ter 2oo. yeares and odde the saine fell downc 
in the yeare x44o. the xviij, of tfcm'ie the sixt, and was neuer 
since by the Citizens reedified. Such was their negligence 
then, and hath bred some trouble to their successors, since 
they suffered a weake and wooden building to be there ruade, 
inhabited by persons of lewde life, off rimes by inquest of 
Portesoken ward presented, but not reformed: whereas of 
former rimes, the said Posterne was accompted of as other 
gares of the Citie, and was appointed to men of good credite. 



Gates of tis Citie 2 9 
/kmongst other, I haue read, that in the 49. of Edzeard thc 
third, lohJt Cobbe was admitted Custos of the said Posterne, and 
all the habitation thereof, for tearme of his lire, by Villiam 
Wahvorth, then Maior of London, &c. More, that lohit Cred.l, 
Esquire, in the si. of Richard the second, was admitted 
Custos of the said Posterne & appurtenances by Richard 
WhittDzgton Major, the Aldermen and Communaltie, &c. 
Aeldgate. 
THE next gare in the East is called .d«ldgate, of the anti-Aldgate. 
quitie or age thereof. This is one and the first of the foure 
principall gates, and also one of the seuen double gates, men- 
tioned by Fit»stthot. It hath had two paire of gates, though 
now but one, the hookes remaincth yet. Also there hath 
becne two Portcloses, the one of them remaineth, the other 
vanteth, but the place of lctting downe is manifest. For anti- 
quitie of the gate, it appeareth by a Charter of ldng Edgar to 
the knights of A'nightoz Guild, that in his dayes the said port 
was called .deldgatc, as ye may reade in the warde of tgort - 
sokot. Also «l[atild the Queene wife to Hezrie the first, 
hauing founded the Priorie of the holie Trinitie within .d«ld- 
gatc, gaue vnto the saine Church, to AornaJt the first Prior, 
and the Chanons that devoutly serued God therein, the Port 
of .deldgate, and the soke or franches thereunto belonging, 
with ail customes as free as shee held the same : in the [ vhich 
Charter, she nameth the house Christs Chtt1"ck, and reporteth 
zteldgate to be of his demaine. 
llore, I reade in the yeare IŒx 5. that in the ciuill warres 
betweene king John and his Barons, the Londoners assisting 
the Barons faction, who then besieged Northampton, and after 
came to Bedford Castell, vhere they were well receyued by 
IVilliam l?eaucha»@e, and captaine of the same : hauing then 
also secrete intelligence that they might enter the Citie of 
London if they would, they remoued their campe to Ware, 
from whence in the night comming to London, they entred 
leldgate, and placing gardians or keepers of the gates, they 
disposed of ail thinges in the Citie at their pleasure. They Ranulph 
spoyled the Friers houses, and searched their Coffers, which Cogshall. 
being done, Robert Fitzwaler, Gij}).cy .[agtauile Erlc of 

Lib. Trinitateo 

Soke or court. 

Mathcw Paris. 



.\ldgatc new 
builded. 

William 
Dunthorne. 

Thomas lord 
Fawconbridge 
set vpon 
.\ldgate. 

Sui mrbs 
burnt. 
t'age 
Rebels wan 
the bulwarkes 
of Aldgate. 

Lieutenant of 
the Toxver 
assisted the 
Citizens 
against the 
Rebels. 

30 Gares af r]zis Ciœeie 
Esex, and the Earle of Glocester, chiefe leaders of the armie, 
applied all diligence to repaire the Gates and walles of this 
Citie, with the stones taken from the Jewes broken houses, 
namely, _deldgate being then most ruinous, (which had giuen 
them an easie entrie) they repayred, or rather newly builded 
after the manner of the Normans, strongly arched, with bul- 
warks of stone brought from Cane in Normandie, and small 
/3ricke called Flanders Tile was brought from thence, such as 
bath beene here vsed since the Conquest, and not before. 
In the yeare 147x. the xi. of Edward the 4. Thomas the 
bastard FawconbrioE«e, hauing assembled a riotous companie of 
shipmen and other, in Essex, and Kent, came to London with 
a great nauie of ships, neare to the Tower, whereupon the 
Maior and Aldermen, by consent of a common Councell, forti- 
fied all along the Thames side, from I3aynards castell to the 
Tower with armed men, & Gunnes, other instruments of war, 
to resist the inuasion of the Mariners, whereby the Thames 
side was safely preserued and kept, by the _A_ldermen and 
other Citizcns, that assemblcd thither in great numbers. 
Whereupon the Rebels being denied passage through the 
Citie that way, set vpon cldKat« , t?is]zo2sgate, Cre2plegatc, 
tddcrsgatc, Londoubriarge, and along the Riuer of Thames, 
shooting arrowes and Gunnes into the Citie, fiered the suburbs, 
and burnt more than threescore houses. And further, on 
sunday the eleuenth of May, fiue thousand of them I assault- 
ing teldgate, wan the /3ulwarkes, and entered the Citie, but 
the Porteclose being letten downe, such as had entered were 
slaine, and Robert tTassct Alderman of tddgate ward, with 
the Recorder, commaunded in the name of God to drawe vp 
the Porteclose, which being done, they issued out, and with 
sharpe shot and tierce tight, put their enemies backe so farre 
as S. t?ottol2ks Church, by which time the Earle Riners, and 
the Lieutenant of the Tower was come, with a fresh companie, 
which ioyning together discomtited the Rebels, and put them 
to flight, whom the sarde Robcrt tTassett, with the other Citi- 
zens, chased to the Miles ende, and fl'om thence, some to 
Poplar , some to Stratford, slue many, and tooke many of 
them prisoners. In which space the /3astard hauing assayed 
a Poplar] Popular 16o3, 1633. 



Ga[es of [his Cille 3  
other places vpon the water side, and little preuailed, fled 
toward his ships: thus much for AeloE«ate. 
Bishopsgate. 
THE third and next toward the North, is called tishopsgate, 
for that (as it may be supposed) the same was first builded by 
some Bishop of London, though now vnknowne, when, or by 
whom: but true it is, that this gate was first builded for ease 
of passengers towarde the East, and by North, as into Nor- 
ffolke, Suffolke, Cambridgeshire, &c. The trauellers into 
which pattes before the building of this gare, were forced, 
passing out at Aeldgate, to goe East till they came to the 
Miles ende, and then turning on the left hand to Blethenhall 
greene, to Cambridge heath, and so North, or East, and by 
North, as their iourney" lay. If they" tooke not this way, 
by the East out at Acldgate, they lllust take their way by the 
North out at Addersgate, through Aeldersgate streete, and 
Goswelstreete towardes Iseldon, and by a crosse of stonc on 
their right hand, set vp for a marke by the North ende of 
Golding lane, to tume Eastward through a long streete, vntill 
this day called/klderstreet, to another crosse, standing, where 
now a Smiths forge is placed by Sewers ditch Church, and 
then to turne againe North towardes Totenham, Endfield, 
Waltham, Ware, &c. The eldest note that I reade of this 
Bish@sgate, is that lVilliam t?hmd, one of the Shiriffes of 
London, in the yere oEIo, [solde to Scrlc2[crcer, and IVilliam 
Almahe, procurators, or Wardens, of London bridge, all his 
land with the Garden in the Parish of Saint Et«ttolpl without 
Eishopsgatc, betweene the land of Richard Casiarin, towardes 
the North, and the land of Robcr Crispic towards the South, 
and the high way called Berewards lane on the East, &c. 
Next I reade in a Charter dated the yeare x35. that 
IValter Brme, Citizen of London, and Rosia his wife, hauing 
founded the Priorie or new Hospitall of out blessed Lady, 
since called Saint 2[arie Spittle without t?islw2sgate, confirmed 
the same to the honour of God and our blessed Ladie, for 
Chanons regular. 
/klso in the yeare I OE47. Simot Fit»tarie one of the shiriffes 
of London, the 9- of Ieurie the third, founded the Hospitall 

Bishops gare. 

Lib. Trinitate. 
tag e 3-" 

Bishopsgate 
street without. 
Charter. 

Record. 



Lib. Custom$. 
London. 

Bishopsgate 
repayred by 
the Marchants 
of the IIaunce. 
Bihopsgate 
was builded. 

Bishopsgate 
prouided to 
haue beene 
new builded. 

l'ostem called 
llooregate. 

32 Ga/es of this Ci/le 
of Saint Iari«, called Ucthlem without Bishosgate. Thus 
much for antiquitie of this gare. 
_And now for repayring the same, I find, that Heur& the 
third confirmed to the Marchants of the Haunce, that had an 
house in the Citie called Guildhalla Theutonicorum, certaine 
Liberties and Priuiledges. Edward the first also confirmed 
the same. In the tenth yere of whose raigne, it was found 
that the said Marchants ought of right to repaire the said gare 
called Uishosgate. Whereupon Gerard 2[arbod, Alderman 
of the Haunce and other, then remaining in the Citie of 
London : for themselues, and all others Marchants of the said 
Haunce, graunted xo. Markes sterling to the Major and 
Citizens. _And couenanted that they and their successors 
should from time to time repaire the saine gare. This gare 
was againe beautifully builded in the yeare 479- in the 
raigne of Edwarde the fourth, by the saide Haunce Mar- 
chaunts. 
Moreouer, about the yeare 55 . these Haunce Marchants 
hauing prepared stone for that purpose, caused a new gate to 
bee framed,there to haue bcene set vp, but then their liberties 
through sute of our Eglish liarchantes, were seazed into the 
Kings hande, and so that worke was stayed, and the olde Gate 
yet remaineth. ] 
Posterne of Moregate. 
TOUCHING the next Posterne, called 2][ore,ate, I finde that 
Thozas Falconcr lIaior about the yeare I45. the thirde of 
H«my the fift, caused the wall of the Cittie to bee broken 
neare vnto Colc;zanstrcctc, and there builded a Posterne, now 
called [ortate, vpon the lIoore side where was neuer gare 
before. This gare he made for ease of the Cittizens, that way 
to pass vpon causeys into the fielde for their recreation: For 
the same field was at that rime a Marrish. This Posterne was 
reedified by bVilliau _l-[ampton Fishmonger, Mayor, in the 
yeare x47. In the yeare also xSxx. the third of Hnry the 
eight, Roger Achdy 1V[ayor caused Dikes and Bridges to bee 
ruade, and the ground to bee leuiled, and made more com- 
modious for passage, since which rime the same hath beene 
heighthened. So much that the Ditches and Bridges are 



Ga[es of [his Cille 33 

couered, and seemeth to me that if it be ruade leuell with the 
]3attlements of the Cittie Wall, yet will it bee little the dryer, 
such is the Moorish nature of that ground. 

Posterne of Cripplegate. 
THE next is the Posterne of Cripplegate, so called long before 
the Conquest. For I reade in the historie of Edmond king of 
the East Angles, written by Abbo Floriacensis, and by But- censis. 
eharde. 
chard somtime Secretarie to Offa king of 3£arcia, but since 
by Iohn Lidgatc Monke of Eery, that in the yeare oç. the 
Danes spoiling the kingdome of the East Angles, Ahvyne 
Bishoppe of I-lelmeham, caused the body of king Edmond the 
Martyre to bee brought from Ecdriswortk, (now called Bury 
Saint Edmondcs,) through the kingdome of the East Saxons, 
and so to Lomton in at Cripplcate, a place sayeth mine Author 
so called of Criples begging there : at xvhich gate, (it was said) 
the body entering, miracles were wrought, as some of the 
Lame to goe vpright, praysing God. The Body of King 
dmond rested for the space of three yeares in the Parrish 
Church of Saint Gregoric, [ neare vnto the Cathedrall Church age34 
of S. Paul«. Moreouer the Charter of II illiam the Conqueror, 
confirming the foundation of the Colledge in London, called 
S. M'artbz the greate, hath these wordes. Z doe giue mtdLib. S. Bar- 
graunt fo the saine Churclz and Canons, seruing God tbercin, tholomew. 
All the land and tlte J£oore, without the Posterne, which is 
called Cripplegate, on eyther part of the Posterne. More, 
I reade that Alfime builded the parish Church of S. Giles, 
nigh a gate of the Citie, called Porta contractorum, or Criffes- 
gare, about the yeare I O90. 
This Posterne was sometime a prison, whereunto such Citi- 
zens and others, as were arrested for debt, or common tres- 
passes, were committed, as they be now to the Compters, 
which thing appeareth by a writte of Edward the first in 
these wordes: Rex vic. London, salutem : ew graui querda t. Record. 
capt. & detent, in risona nostra de Çriples gate ro x.1. quas 
coram Radulho de S'andwico tunc cnstod. Çiuitatis nostrw 
Londo,. & L de tlackwdl ciuis recognit, debit. &c. This gate 
was new builded by the Brewers of London, in the yeare,  OE44. 
sow.  D 

Postern of 
Cripplegate. 
Abbo Floria- 
Bar- 

Cripplegate a 
prison for 
respassors. 

Criplesgate 
new builded. 



34 Ga/es of/bi« CiAle 

,,'Eldersgate. 

In a booke 
called/eware 
th6 cat. 

Page 

as sayth Fabians .(amtso'ipt. Edmond Shaw Goldsmith, 
Major, in the year 483. at his decease appoynted by his 
testament his executors, with the cost of 400. Markes, and the 
stuffe of the old gare, called Cripplcsgate, to build the saine 
gare of new, which was performed and done, in the yeare 
I49. 
Aldersgate. 
THE next is ./ldrcsgatc, or tldersgate, so called not of 
.A_ldrich, or of Elders, that is to say, auncient men, builders 
thereof, nor of Eldarne trees., growing there more aboundantly 
then in other places, as some haue fabuled, but for the ver 3" 
antiquity of the gare it self, as beeing one of the first 4 gares 
of the city, & seruing for the Northerne parts, as .A_ldegate for 
the East, which two gates being both old gares, are for differ- 
cnce sake called, the one Ealdegate, and the other .A_ldersgate. 
This is the 4. principall gare, and bath at sundry rimes beene 
increased with buildinges, namely on the south or innerside, 
a great frame of tituber hath beene added and set vp, con- 
tayning diuers large roomes, and lod'gings: also on the East 
side, is the addition of one great building of Tituber, with one 
large floore paued with stone, or tile, and a Well therein 
curbed with stone, of a great depth, and rising into the said 
roome, two stories high ri'oto the ground: which Well is the 
onely peculiar note belonging to that gare, for I haue not 
seene the like in all this Citie, to be raysed so high. Iohn 
Day Stationer, a late famous Printer of many good books, in 
our rime dwelled in this gare, and builded much vpon the 
wall of the Citie towards the Parish Church of S. nne. 

A poterne out 
of Christes 
Hospitall. 

Posterne out of Christs hospitall. 
THEN is there also a Posterne gare, made out of the wall 
on the North side of the late dissolued cloyster of Friers 
minors, commonly of their habit called Gray friers, now 
Christs Church, and Hospitall. This Posterne was made in 
the first yeare of dward the sixt, to passe from the said 
Hospitall of Christs Church, vnto the Hospitall of S. Bartlemew 
in Smithfield. 



Gates of this Cille 35 

Newgate. 
THE next gate on the West, and by North, is tcrmed New- Newgate. 
gare, as latelier builded then the test, and is the fift principall 
gate. This gate was first erected about the raigne of ttenrie 
the first, or of king Stephen, vpon this occasion. The Cathe- 
drall Church of saint ff'aMe, being burnt about the yeare 
lO86, in the raigne of IVilliam the Conquerour, 3l'a(u)ritins 
then Bishop of London, repayred not the olde Church, as 
some haue supposed, but began the foundation of a new worke, 
such as men then iudged would neuer haue beene performed, 
it was to them so wonderfull for height, length, and breadth, 
as also in respect it was raysed vpon Arches or vaults, a kind 
of workmanship brought in by the Normans, and neuer knowne 
to the Artificers of this land before that time, &c. After 
2][mtritius, Richard B«amore did wonderfully aduaunce the 
worke of the said Church, purchasing the large streetes, and 
lanes round about, wherein vere vont to dvell many lay 
people, vhich grounds he began to compasse about with a, 
strong wall of stone, and gares. By meanes of this increase Page3 6 
of the Church territorie, but more by inclosing of ground for 
so large a cemitorie, or churchyard : the high and large street 
stretching from Aldegate in the East, vntill Ludgate in the 
West, was in this place so crossed and stopped vp, that the 
cariage through the citie vestward, was forced to passe vithout 
the said churchyard wall on the North side, through Pater 
noster row : and then South downe Aue Alrary lane, and againe 
West through 13owyer rov to Ludgate : or else out of Cheepe, 
or Watheling streete to turne south, through the old Exchange, 
then west through Carter lane: againe north vp Creede lane, 
and then xvest to Ludgate. Which passage, by reason of so 
often turning, vas very combersome, and daungerous both for 
horse and man. For remedie whereof a new gare was ruade, Newgatefirst 
OiC builded, and 
and so callcd, by which mcn and cattcll, vith all manncr "the cause why. 
carriagcs might passc more dircctly (as aforc) from Aldcgatc, 
through wcst Chccpc by Paules, on thc North side, through 
saint Nicholas shamblcs, and Ncvgatc markct to Ncwgatc, & 
from thcncc fo any part wcstward oucr Oldbornc bridgc, or 
turning without thc gatc into Smithficldc, and through 
D2 

Powles church 
in London 
new builded. 



Close role. 
lIevgate a 
iayle or prison 
bouse. 
The king re- 
payred it. 

PaKe 37 

The Shiriffes 
of London 
prisoners in 
the Tower 
for escape of 
a prisoner out 
of Newate. 

The Kinges 
Chancellor 
prisoner in 
Newgate. 

36 Ga/es of/his Ci/ic 
lseldon to any part North and by West. This gare hath of 
long time beene a Gaile, or prison for fellons and trespassers, 
as appeareth by Records in the raigne of king Iokn, and of 
other kings, amongest the which I find one testifying that in 
the yeare 12I 8. the third of king Icnrie the third, the king 
writeth vnto the shiriffes of London, commaunding them to 
repayre the Gai]e of Newgate, for the safe keeping of lais 
prisoners, promising that the charges layd out should be 
allowed vnto them vpon their accompt in the Exchequer. 
Moreouer in the yeare I241. the Jeves of Norwich were 
hanged for circumcising a Christian child, their house called 
the Thor was pulled downe and destroyed. Aron the sonne 
of Abraham a Jew, at London, and the other Jewes, were 
constrayned to pay twentie thousand markes at two termes 
in the yeare, or else to be kept perpetuall prisoners in New- 
gate of London, and in other prisons.  53. King lenric the 
third lodging in the Tower of London, vpon displeasure con- 
ceyued towards the citie of London, for the escape of Iokn 
Qffrem a prisoner beeing a Clearke 1 conuict, out of Newgate, 
which had killed a Prior that vas of alliance to the king, as 
coosen to the Queene : he sent for the Major and shiriffes to 
corne before him, to answere the matter : the 1V/aior layd the 
fault from him to the shiriffes, forsomuch as to them belonged 
the keeping of all prisoners within the citie, and so the Maior 
returned home, but the shiriffes remayned there prisoners, by 
the space of a Moneth and more, and yet they excused them- 
selues in that the fault chiefly rested in the Bishops officers : 
for whereas the prisoner was vnder custodie, they at his re- 
quest had graunted licence to imprison the offender within the 
Gaile of Newgate, but so as the Bishops Officers were charged 
to see him safely kept. The king notwithstanding all this, 
demaunded of the citie 3ooo. Markes for a fine. 
In the yeare 1326. Robert taldoke the kings Chancellorwas 
put in Newgate, the third of tdward the 3- In the yeare, 
 337. sir Iokn toultney gaue foure Markes by the yeare, to the 
reliefe of prisoners in Newgate. In the yeare 1385. William 
ll/'alwortk gaue somevhat to relieue the prisoners in Newgate, 
so haue many others since. In the yeare I44. the Gaylers 
of Newgate & Ludgate died, and prisoners in Newgate to the 



Ga/es of tbis Citie 37 
number of 64. In the yere 1418. the person of Wrotham in 
Kent was imprisoned in Newgate. The yeare I422. the first 
of Ie,rie 6. licence was granted to lolzz Ctte,trc, lclez Car- 
flatter, and l.Filliaz Grotte, executors to Richard 
to reedifie the Galle of Newgate, which they did with his 
goods. 
T/}amz« /ïawle« Grocer, sometime Major of London, by 
licence of Reynold Prior of saint lart/zolomcws in Smithfield, 
and also of Iohz walëerizg, maister of the Hospitall of saint 
Bartholo»zew, and his brethren, conueyed the waste of water 
at the Cesterne nere to the common fountaine, and Chappell 
of saint Wicholas (situate by the saide Hospitall) to the Gailes 
of Newgate, and Ludgate, for the reliefe of the prisoners. 
Tuesday next after Palme sunday, I43 I. ail the prisoners of 
Ludgate were remooued into Newgate by lValter Chartcsc, Prisones of 
 r Ludgate re- 
and Robcrt Lare, shiriffes of London. And on me 13. Omotledto 
Aprill, the same shiriffes (through the false suggestion of 
Içitoeesdl Gailer of Newgate) set from thence eighteene per- 
sons free men, and these I were led to the Compters pinioned 
as if they had been relions, but on the xvi. of .lune, Ludgate 
was againe appoynted for fi'ee men prisoners for debt, and the 
same day the sayd free men entered by ordinance of the 
Major, AIdermen and Commons, and by them I-le,trie 
tayler was ruade keeper of Ludgate prison. In the yeare 
457. a great fray was in the North country, betweene sir 
Thomas _Percie Lord lffremomt, and the Earle of Salisb«tries 
sonnes, whereby many were maymed and slaine; but in the 
end the Lord EgrcmoM being taken, was by the kings coun- 
sell found in great default, and therefore condemned in great 
summes of money, to be payed to the Earl of Salisburie, and 
in the lnean time committed to Ncwgate. Not long after sir 
T]zomas _Percie Lord ffrcmoml, and sir Richard _Pcrcie his 
brother beeing in Newgate, brake out of prison by night, and 
went to the king, the other prisoners tooke the Leades of the 
gare, and defended it a long while against the shiriffes, and ail 
their Officers, insomuch that they were forced to call more 
aide of the Citizens, whereby they lastly subdued them, and 
laid them in irons : and this may sufficc for Newgate. 

Prisoners in 
Newgate and 
Ludgate dyed. 

Newgate new 
builded. 

\Vater COll- 
ueyed to New 
gate and 
Ludgate. 

L. Egremonde 
& other brokc 
prison otlt of 
Newgate. 



38 Gates o" lais Citie 

Ludgate. 

Roger of 
Wendouer. 
Mathew Paris. 

lag é 39 

Ludgate new 
builded. 

Jewes houses 
spoyled. 

Patent. 

Ludgate 
IN the West is the next, and sixt principal gate, and is called 
Ludgate, as first builded (saith Geffrey 3onmouth) by king 
Lud a Briton, about the yeare belote Christs natiuitie 66. Of 
which building, and also of the name, as Ludsgat¢, or Fludsçate, 
bath beene of late some question among the learned, where- 
fore I ouerpasse it, as hot to my purpose, onely referring the 
reader to that I haue before written out of Cwsars Commen- 
taries, and other Romaine writers, concerning a towne or 
Citie amongst the Britaines. This gare I suppose to be one 
of the most auncient : and as Aldgate was builded for the 
East, so was this Zuds gare for the West. I reade, as I roide 
you, that in the yeare 1215. the 17. of king Io]m, the Barons of 
the Realme, being in armes against the king, entred this Citie, 
and spoyled the Jewes bouses, which being done, iobert Fit- 
water, and Geffrey dc _lVfaffna villa, Earle of Essex, and the 
Earle of Gloucester, chiefe leaders [ of the/krmie, applied all 
diligence to repayre the gares and wals of this Citie, with the 
stones of the Jewes broken bouses, especially (as it seemeth) 
they then repayred or rather new builded Ludgate. For in 
the yeare 1586, when the saine gate was taken downe, to bee 
newe buylded, there was founde couched within the wall 
thereof, a stone taken from one of the Jewes bouses, wherein 
was grauen in Hebrewe caracters, these wordes following. 
nnq 77n 7 nt:' "In  "In. Hcec «st statio rabbi 3[osis filii 
insiffnis -abbi !saac: which is to say, this is the Station or 
ward of Rabbi 2][oysis, the sonne of the honourable Rabbi 
IsaaG and had beene fixed vpon the front of one ofthe Jewes 
bouses as a note, or signe that such a one dwelled there. In 
the yeare --6o. this Ludgate was repayred and beautified with 
Images of Lud, and other Kings, as appeareth by letters 
pattents, of licence giuen to the Citizens of London, to take 
vp stone for that purpose, dated the 45. of Icnrie the third. 
These Images of Kings in the raigne of tdward the sixt had 
their heades smitten off, and were otherwise defaced by such 
as iudged euery Image to be an Idoll, and in the raigne of 
Queene 3/faric were repayred, as by setting new heades on 



Gates of this Ci/le 39 
their olde bodies, &c. Ail which so remayned vntill the yeare 
586. The 8. of Queene liabct]z, [when] the saine gate 
being sore decayed, was cleane taken downe, the prisoners in 
the meane tilne relnaining in the large Southeast quadrant to 
the saine gate adioyning, and the saine yere the whole gate 
was newly and beautifidly builded, with the Images of Zud, 
and others, as afore, on the East side, and the picture of her 
Maiestie, Queene liabeth on the West side. Ail which was 
done at the common charges of the Citizens, amounting to 
5oo. poundes or more. 
This gate was ruade a free prisone in the yeare I3î8. the 
first of Richard the second, .Vicholas trembar being Maior. 
The same was confirmed in the yeare 38z. [ohu Northampton 
being Maior, b¥ a common Councell in the Guild hall: b¥ 
which it was ordained, that ail freemen of this citie, should for 
debt, trespasses, accounts, & contempts, be imprisoned in 
Zudgatc, and for treasons, fellonies, & other criminall 
offences committed to Nczvgal«, &c. In the yeare 439, the 
tenth of king Hcnric the sixt, [Iohu IVcls being Major, a court 
of common Councell established ordinances, (as lVilliam 
Standon, and Robert Chicheley, late Majors before had done) 
touching the guard and gouernment of Zud, çatc, and other 
prisons. 
Also in the yeare x463, the third of Edward the fourth, 
2][athcw Pltili], being Maior, in a common Councell, at the 
request of the well disposed, blessed, and deuout woman 
Dame Agn«s Forster, widov, late wife to Stepheu Forster Fish- 
monger, sometime Major, for the comfort and reliefe of ail the 
poore prisoners, certain Articles were established. I»rimis, 
that the new workes then late edified by the saine Dame 
Agnes, for the enlarging of the prison of Ludgate, from thence- 
forth should be had and taken, as a part and parcell of the 
said prison ofLudate, so that both the old and new worke of 
Lud, çatc aforesaid, be one prison, gailekeeping, and charge 
for euermore. 
The said quadrant strongly builded of stone, by the belote 
named Stcphen Forster, and Ancs his wife, containeth a large 
walking place by ground of 3 8. foot, & halle in length, besides 
the thicknesse of the walles, which are at the least sixe footc, 

Ludgate again 
nev builded. 

Ludgate in- 
larged in the 
raigne of lt. 
the sixt. 

Ludgate a free 
prison. 
Record, 
Guilde hall. 

Page 4 ° 



Ludgate. 

t'age 4 • 

40 Gates of lhis Cille 
makes ail togither 44 foote and a halfe, the bredth within the 
valles is 0- 9. foote and a halfe, so that the thicknesse of the 
walles maketh it 35. foote and a halfe in bredth. The like 
roome it hath ouer it for lodgings, and ouer it againe faire 
Leades to walke vpon well imbattailed, ail for fresh ayre, and 
ease of prisoners, tothe ende they should haue lodging, and 
water free without charge, as by certaine verses grauven in 
Copper, and fixed on the saide quadrant, I haue read in 
forme following. 
1)cuout soulcs t/cal passe this way, 
for Stephen Forsler lace ll[aior, hcartiIj, pray, 
Accd Dame Agaces his spo«tsc, to God consecralc, 
tkat of pitic this housc cmdc for Loudocters Dt Lud- 
gaie, 
So Chat for lodghcg aud walcr prisoners here uougk! 
pay, 
as theh" kecpers shal all answere a! drcadful doomes 
da),. 
This place, and one other of his Armes, three broad Arrow 
heades, taken downe with Che old gare, I caused to be fixed 
ouer ] che entrie of che said Quadrant, but che verses being 
vnhappily turned inward to Che xvall, procured che like in 
effect to be grauen outward in prose, declaring him tobe 
a Fishmonger, because some vpon a light occasion (as a 
maidens heade in a glasse window) had fabled him to bee 
a Mercer, and to haue begged there at Ludgage, &c. Thus 
much for £udgafc. 
A breaehin Next this, is there a breach in che wall of che CRie, and 
the wal again. 
Bridewell. a bridge of timber ouer Che Tcet dike, betwixt Fleetebridge 
and Thames directly ouer against Che house of Bridewel. 
Thus much for gares in Che wall. 
watergates. Water gares on Che bankes of Che iuer Thalnes haue beene 
many, which beeing purchased by priuate men, are also put 
to priuate vse, and che olde names of them forgotten, but of 
such as remaine, from che West, towards che East, may be 
sayde as followeth. 
Blacke Fryers The Blacke Friers stayres, a free landing place. 
stayers. 
Puddle wharf. Then a water gare at l'uddle wharfe, of one Puddle chat 



Gales of tis Cilie 4  

kept a wharfe on the XVest side thereof, and now of Puddle 
water, by meanes of many horses watred there. 
Then Powles wharfe, also a free landing place with staires, Povleswharf. 
&C. 
Then broken wharfe, and other such like. Broken vharf. 
But Ripa Reginoe, the Queenes Banke, or Queene Hithe, QtleenHith. 
may well be accounted the verie chiefe and principall water- 
gate of this citie, being a common strand or landing place, 
yet equall with, and of olde time farre exceeding t?dins g«te, 
as shall be shewed in the warde of Queene Hithe. 
The next is Downe gare, so called of the sodaine descending, 
or downe going of that way from Saint Zohns Church vpon 
Walbrooke vnto the riucr of Thames, wherby the water in 
the chanell therc hath such a swift course, that in the yere 
574- on the fourth of September, after a strong shower of 
faine, a lad of the age of xviii, yeares, minding to haue leapt A laa of S 
yeares olde 
ouer the channell, was taken by the feete, and borne downe drowned in a 
with the violence of that narrowe streame, and caried toward Channell at 
l)owngate. 
the Thames with such a violent swiftnesse, as no man could 
rescue or stay him, till hee came against a Cart wheele, that 
stoode in the watergate, belote which rime hee was drowned 
and starke dead. [ 
This was sometime a large water gate, frequented of ships, lVage4  
and other vessels, like as the Queene Hith, and was a part 
thereof, as doth appeare by an inquisition nade in the OES. 
yeare of t-lcnry the third, wherein was round, that aswell 
corne as fish and all other thinges comming to the Port of 
Downegate, were to bee ordered after the customs of the 
Queenes Hith, for the kings vse, as also that the corne 
arriuing between the gare of the Guild hall of the marchants Marchantes of 
of Cttllct: the (Styleyeard)which is East from Downegate, the Haunce, 
landed their 
and the bouse then pertayning to the _A_rchbishoppe of conae betwLxte 
their house & 
Çanterbm2,, west froln Baynaldes Castle, was to be measured the black- 
by the measure, and measurer of the Queenes soke, or fyer». 
Queene Hith. I reade also in the x9- of Edward the thirde, 
that customs were then to be paid for ships & other vessels 
resting at Downegate, as if they roade at Queene Hith, and 
as they now doe at Belingsgate. _And thus much for Downe- 
gate may suffice. 



Wolfes gate in 
the Ropary. 
Lib. Home. 
Lib. S. Albani. 

Ebdgate. 
Lib. trinitate. 
Lib. S. Albani. 
Record E. 3. 

Oystergate, 

Bridge Gate. 

l'age 4.1 

W. Dunthorn. 
gare at the 
bridge foote 
burned. 
Buttolphs 
gare. 

42 Gales of llzis Ci/le 
The next was called Wolfes gare in the roparie in the 
Parrish of Alhallowes the lesse, of later time called Wolfes 
fane, but now out of vse : for the lower part was builded on 
by the Earle of Shrewsburie, and the other part was stopped 
vp and builded on by the Chamberlaine of L ondon. 
The next is Ebdgate, a Watergate, so called of old rime, as 
appeareth by diuers records of tenements neare vnto the same 
adioyning. It standeth neare vnto the church of S. Laurence 
Pountney, but is within the parish of S. Marten Ordegare. 
In place of this gare, is now a narrow passage to the Thames, 
and is called Ebgate lane, but more commonly the Old 
Swal]l]e. 
Then is there a water gate at the Bridge foote, called 
Oyster gate, of Oysters that were there of old rime, commonly 
to bc sold, and was the chiefest market for them, and for 
other shell fishes. There standeth now an engne or forcier, 
for the winding vppe of water to serue the cittie, whereof 
I haue already spoken. 
Bridge Gate. 
THE next is the Bridge gate, so called of Landau Bridge, 
whereon it standeth: This was one of the foure first and 
principall gates of the cittie, long before the conquest, when 
there ] stoode a Bridge of tituber, and is the seuenth and last 
principall gate mentioned by IV. Fitzste2heu , which Gate 
being newe made, when the Bridge was builded of stone, hath 
beene often times since repayred. This gare with the Tower 
vpon it, in the yeare I436. fell down, and two of the farthest 
Arches Southwardes also fell therewith, and no man perished 
or was hurte therewith. To the repayring whereof, diuers 
wealthy Citizens gaue large summes of money, namely Robert 
Large sometime Major oo. Markes. Stephc,t Forster o I. Sir 
Iohu Crosbyc Alderman oo I. &c. But in the yeare 47 I. the 
Kentish Marriners vnder the conduct of Bastard Fauconbriarge 
burned the said Gare, and xiii. houses on the Bridge, besides 
the Beere houses at Saint Katherines, and many other in the 
Suburbes. 
The next is Buttolphes gare, so called of the parrish 
Church of S. Buttolph neare adioyning. This gare was 



Gares o_f [hfs Cit.ie 43 
sometime giuen or confirmed by IVilliam Conqueror to the 
Monkes of IVeslmb¢sler in these wordes : " IV. rex.dngliae, 
}Villiam King of England, sendeth greeting to the Shiriffes 
and all his Ministers, as also to al his louing subiectes, French 
and English of Londou : Know ye that I haue granted to God 
and S. _Peler of Wistminster & to the Abbot b7lalis, the 
gift which Ahnundus of the port of S. tultolk gave them, 
when he was there made Monke: that is to say, his Lords 
Court with the houses, & one Wharfe, which is at the head of 
London bridge, and all other his lands which hee had in the 
same Cittie, in such sort as King tdward more beneficially, 
and amply granted the same: and I will and command that 
they shall enioy the saine well and quietly and honourabiy 
with sake and soke." &c. 
The next is Bellinsgate, vsed as an especiall Porte, or 
Harborow, for small shippes and boates comming thereto, 
and is now most frequented, the Queenes Hith being almost 
forsaken. How this Gate tooke that name, or of what 
antiquity the same is, I must leaue vncertaine, as not hauing 
read any ancient recorde thereof, lnore than that Geffry 
A[onmoutlz vriteth, that 17din a king of the Britans, about 
4oo. yeares belote Christes natiuity builded this Gate, and 
named it ]3elins gate, affer his ownel calling : and that when 
he was dead, his bodie being burned, the ashes in a vessell of 
Brasse, were set vpon a high pinacle of stone ouer the same 
Gate. But Ccesar and other Romane writers affirme of 
Citties, walles, and gates, as yee haue before heard, and 
therefore it seemeth to me not to be so auncient, but rather 
to haue taken that name of some later owner of the place, 
happily named Beling, or Biling, as Somars key, Smarts key, 
Frosh wharfe, and others thereby tooke there names of their 
owners: of this gate more shall be said when we come to 
Bdins gate ward. 
Then haue you a water gare, on the west side of Wooll 
wharf, or Customers key, which is commonly called the 
Water gate, at the south end of Water lane. 
One other water gate there is by the bulwarke of the 
Tower, and this is the last and farthest water gate East- 
warde, on the Riuer of Thames, so farre as the Citie of 

Belinsgate. 

Geffrey of 
Monmouth. 

t)ag  44 

watergate by 
the eustome 
house. 

watergate by 
the Tower. 



wharfes and 
keyes. 

Mathew Paris. 
Gates of 
London to be 
kept and 
watcht. 

44 Gales of this Cille 
London extendeth within the walles: both which last named 
water gares bee within the Tower ward. 
13esides these common Water gares, were diuerse priuate 
wharfes and Keyes, all along from the East to the West of 
this Citie, on the banke of the Riuer of Thames : Marchants 
of all nations had landing places, Warehouses, Cellers, and 
stowage of their goods and Marchandises, as partly shall 
bee touched in the wardes adioyning to the said Riuer : now 
for the ordering and keeping these gares of this Citie in the 
night rime, it was appoynted in the yere of Christ, I258. by 
H«nrie the 3. the 4OE. of his raigne, that the Ports of Eng- 
land should be strongly kept, and that the gares of London 
should bee new repayred, and diligently kept in the night, 
for feare of French deceytes, whereof one writeth these verses. 
Per noctem ])ortac clauduntnr Loudoniarum, 
./T[ocnia nc forte ff'ans frangat Francigeuarnm. [ 

Page 45 

The Tower of 
London. 

In my annales. 

Of Towers and Castels. 

UH Citi« of £on&,u (saith t;itast¢]hcn) bath in thc East 
a verie grcat and a mosl strong 1)alalhw Towcr, whos¢ ltrrets 
and walles doe fisc from a docile fonndation, tire morter therof 
bcing te¢red a4th t]w blond of bcasts. Iz t/te wcst ])art arc 
two most strong Castels, &c. To begin therefore with the 
most famous Tower of London, situate in the East, neare 
vnto the riuer of Thames, it hath bcene the common opinion : 
and some haue written (but of none assurcd ground) that 
IMius Ccesm-, the first conquerour of the 13rytains, was the 
originall .Authour and founder aswell thereof, as also of many 
other Towers, Castels, and great buildings within this Realme : 
but (as I haue alreadie before noted) Cwsar remained not here 
so long, nor had hee in his head any such marrer, but onely to 
dlspatch a conquest of this barbarous Countrey, and to pro- 
ceede to greater matters. Neither do the Romane writers 
make mention of any such buildings erected by him here. 
And therefore leauing this, and proceeding to more grounded 



Towers and C«s/els 45 
authoritie, I find in a fayre Register booke containing the acts 
of the Bishops of Rochester, set downe by Edmoud de 
ha»t, that William the first, surnamed Conquerour, builded 
the Tower of London, to wit, the great white and square 
Tower there, about the yeare of Christ lO78. appoynting 
Gntdttlph, then Bishop of Rochester, to bee principall surueyer 
and ouerseer of that worke, who was for that time lodged in 
the house of Edmere a Burgesse of London, the very wordes 
of which mine Authour are these : Gundulphns Episcopns nau- 
dato bVillielmi Regis magni prœeftt# op¢ri maguœe Turris 
London, quo rempote kosp#aIus est apud queudam 
Burgensem L ondou, qui dedit vuum were EcclcsL Rofet. 
Ye haue before heard, that the wall of this Citie was all 
round about furnished with Towers and Bulwarke, in due dis- 
tance eue one from otheu and also that the Riuer Thames, 
with his ebbing and flowing, on the South side, had subueed 
the said wall, ] and towers there. Wherefore king H'illiam, 
for defence of this Citie, in place most daungerous, and open 
to the enemie, hauing taken downe the second Bulwarke 
the east part of the wall, from the Thames builded this Tower, 
which was the great square Tower, now called the white 
tower, and hath beene since at diuerse times enlarged with 
other buildings adioyning, as shalbe shewed. This tower was 
by tempest of winde, sore shaken in the yeare lO9 o. the fourth 
of William Rus, and was againe by the sayd RtŒEEus , and 
Henrie the first repayred. They also caused a Castell tobe 
builded vnder the said tower, namely, on the South side 
towards the Thames, and also incastelated the saine round 
about. 
Henrie Hmtitgton libro scxto, hath these words. William 
R«s ckalletgcd the itnestnre of Prelates, he pilled and shatted 
the peop# w#k tribute, especially to spend about t/te Tower of 
London, aud the great hall at lVestmits#r. 
Othot,erus, Acoliuillus, Otto, and Geffrcy 3[agnattille Earle 
of Essex, were foure the first Constables of this tower of 
London, by succession : all which helde by force a portion of 
lande (that pertained to the Priory of the holy Trht#ie within 
Aldgate) that is to say, Eastsmithfield, neare vnto the tower, 
making thereof a Vineyard, and would not depart flore it, till 

Tower of Lon- 
don builded 
by William 
Conqueror, 
namely the 
white Tower 

l'age 4 6 

tI. Hunting- 
ton. 
XV. Malmes. 
Mathew Paris. 
Iohn London. 
Castle by the 
Tower 
builded. 

First Consta- 
bles of the 
Tower. 

Eastsmithfield 
a vineyearde. 



Ex charta. 

Geffrey 
M gnauille 
Earle of 
Essex Consta- 
ble of the 
Tower and 
Shiriffe of 
London. 
Richard de 
l.ucia Custos 
of the Tower. 

Roger of 
Wendover. 
John Beuer. 
lag e 47 

The Tower of 
London com- 
passed about 
with a wall & 
a ditch. 

S. Katherines 
mill stoode 
where now is 
the Iron gare 
of the Tower. 

46 Towers mtd Castels 
the seconde yeare of king Stepheu, when the saine xvas adiudged 
and restored to the church. This said Geffrey Tag»aMlle 
was earle of Essex, Constable of the tower, Shiriffe of London, 
Middlcsex, Essex, and Hertfordshires, as appeareth by a 
Charter of trawde the Empresse, dated II4I. He also forti- 
fied the tower of London agaynst king Stephen, but the king 
tooke him in his Court at Saint 4lbotes, and would not deliuer 
him till hee had rendered the tower of London, xvith the Castles 
of Waldcn, and Plashey in Essex. In the yeare 1153 , the 
tower of London, and the Castell of Windsore, were by the 
king deliuered to Richard de Ltcie, to be safely kept. In the 
yeare 55, Thomas 17cckct being Chancelor to Hem'le the 
second, caused the Flemings to bee banished out of England, 
their Castels lately builded to be pulled downe, and the toxver 
of London to be repayred. 
About the yeare 119% the second of ichard the first, 
lVilliam Lotgsbampe Bishop of Elle, Chancellor of England, 
for I cause of dissention betwixt him and Earle [ohu the kings 
brother that was rebell, inclosed the tower and Castell of 
London, with an outward wall of stone imbattailed, and also 
caused a deepe ditch to be cast about the same, thinking (as 
I haue said before) to haue enuironed it with the Riuer of 
Thames. By the making of this inclosure, and ditch in East 
smithfield: the Church of the holie Trhfftie in London, lost 
halfe a marke rent by the yeare, and the Mill was remoued 
that belonged to the poore brethren of the Hospitall of Saint 
Kathcrite, and to the Church of the holy Trititie aforesaid, 
which was no small losse and disconmoditie to either part, 
and the garden xvhich the king had hyred of the brethren for 
six Marks the yeare, for the most part was wasted and marred 
by the ditch. Recompence was often promised, but neuer 
performed, vntill king l?dward comming after, gaue to the 
brethren fiue Markes and a halfe for that part which the ditch 
had deuoured : and the other part thereof without, hee yeelded 
to them againe, which they hold: and of the saide rent of fiue 
Markes and a halfe, they haue a deede, by vertue whereof, 
they are well payed to this day. 
It is also to be noted, and cannot bee denied, but that the 
said incl0sure and ditch, tooke the like or greater quantifie of 



7bwers and Castels 47 

ground from the Citie within the xvall, namely one of that part 
called the tower hill, besides breaking downe of the Citie wal, 
from the white tower to the first gate of the Citie, called the 
Posterne, yet haue I not read of any quarell ruade by the 
Citizens, or recompence demaunded by them for that matter, 
because ail was done for good of the Cities defence thereof, 
and to their good likings. But atltczv Paris writeth, that in Mathew Paris. 
r Bulwarkes of 
the yeare 1239. King lfcnrie the third fortified the tower OIth e Tower 
London to an other end, wherefore the Citizens fearing, least builded. 
that were done to their detriment, complayned, and the king 
answered, that hee had not done it to their hurt, but saith he, 
I will from henceforth doe as my brother doth, in building 
and fortifying castels, who beareth the naine to bee wiser than 
I ara. It followed in the next yeere, sayth mine _&uthour, 
the sayd noble buildings of the stonc gare and bulwarke, which west gare and 
bnlwarkes of 
the king had caused to be ruade by the tower of London, on the Tower fel 
the west side thereof, was shaken as it had beene with an downe. 
earthquake, and I fell downe, which the king againe com- 
maunded to bee builded in better sort than before, which was 
done, and yet againe in the yere  247. the said wall and bul- 
warks that were newly builded, wherin the king had bestowed 
more then twelve thousand Marks, were vnrecouerably throwne 
downe, as afore : for the which chance the Citizens of London 
were nothing sorie, for they were threatned that the said wall 
and bulwarkes were builded, to the end that if any of them 
would contend for the liberties of the Citie, they might be 
imprisoned, & that many might be laid in diuerse prisons, 
many lodgings were ruade that no one should speake with 
another: thus much 3lathew Paris for this building. More 
ofIenrie the third his dealings against the citizens of London, 
we may read in the said Authour, in 124.5. I248. I249. 12.53. 
IOE55. IOE56. &c. But concerning the saide xvall and bulwarke, 
the saine was finished though hot in his time: for I read that 
Edward the first, in the second of his raigne, commaunded 
the Treasurer and Chamberlain of the Exchequer, to deliuer 
out of his Treasurie, vnto ]kIiles of Andwarfl, 'zoo. Markes, of 
the fines taken of diuerse Marchants or Usurers of London, 
for so be the words of the Record, towards the worke of the 
ditch then new ruade, about the said Bulwarke, now called 

Page 4 S 
Wall and bul- 
warks againe 
fall down and 
new builded. 



Ditch made 
about the bnl- 
warke without 
the west gate 
of the Tower. 
H. 3 his 
orchard by 
the Tower. 

First parke in 
England. 

'ag'e q9 
Lions in Wod- 
stocke parke. 
Lions sent to 
Henrie the 3- 
anti kept in 
the Tower. 

Edward the 4- 
builded Bul- 
warks without 
the Tower. 

set vpon the sayd hill both scaffold, and gallowes, 

48 7"ozoers mzd Cas/c/s 
the Lion tower. I find also recorded, that ttelzrie the third 
in the 46. of his raîgne, wrote to ]ïdward of 
commaunding him that he should buy certaine perie plants, 
and set the saine in the place without the tower of London, 
within the wall of the said Citie, which of laie he had caused 
tobe inclosed with a mud wall, as may appeare by this that 
followeth : the Maior and Communaltie of London were fined 
for throwing downe the said earthen wall against the tower of 
London, the 9- of dward the second. Edward the fourth in 
place thereof builded a wall of Bricke. But now for the Lion 
Tower, and Lions in Englande the originall, as I haue read, 
was thus. 
tVcm'ie the first builded his Mannor of Wodstocke, with 
a Parke, which he walled about with stone, seuen toiles in 
compas, destroying for the saine diuerse villages, churches & 
chappels, and this was the first Parke in England :hee placed 
therein, besicles great store of Deere, diuers straunge beastes 
to be kept and nourished, such as were brought to him from 
farre countries, as Liions, Leopards, Linces, Porpentines, and 
such other. More I reade that in the yeare  235. Frederidec 
the Emperour sent to /-Feric the third three Leopards, in 
token of his regal shield of armes, wherein three Leopards were 
pictured, since the which rime, those Lions and others haue 
beene kept in a part of this buhvarke, noxv called the Lion 
tower, and their keepers there lodged. King .Edward the 
second in the twelft of his raigne, commaunded the shiriffes of 
London to pay to the keepers of the kings Leopard in the 
tower of London vi. d. the day, for the sustenance of the 
Leopard, and three halle pence a day for diet of the said 
keeper, out of the fee larme of the sayd Citie. 
More, the 6. of .Ed'z«ard the third, one Lion, one Lionesse, 
one Leopard, and two Cattes Lions, in the said toxver, were 
committed to the custodie of lobcrt, the sonne of Ioht 
dïeard thc fourth fortificd thc towcr of London, and 
incloscd with brickc, as is aforcsald, a certaine pcccc of ground, 
takcn out of thc Towcr hill, xvcst Oom thc Lion towcr, now 
callcd thc bulwarkc. His officcrs also in thc 5- of his raignc, 
for thc 



7b,ver« atd Cas/els 49 
execution of offenders, whereupon the Maior, and his brethren 
complained to the king, and were answered, that the saine was 
hot done in derogation of the Cities liberties, & therefore caused 
proclamation tobe ruade, &c.as shall be sh ewed in Towerstreete. 
Riclmrd the third repayred and builded in this Tower Richard the3" 
repayred the 
somewhat, tower. 
tfenrie the 8. in I53oE. repayred the white tower, and other White tower 
parts thereof. In the yeare 1.548. the second of Edwm.d the 6. repayred by 
Henrie the 8. 
on the 2:2. of Nouember in the night, a French man lodged in 
the round bulwarke, betwixt the west gare and the Posterne, 
or drawbridge, called the warders gate, by setting tire on 
a barrel of Gunpowder, blew up the said t3ulwarke, burnt 
himselfe, and no mo persons. This t3ulwarke was forthwith 
againe new builded. 
And here because I haue by occasion spoken of the wcst 
gare of this tower, the saine, as the most principal, is vsed for 
the receipt, and deliuerie of all kindes of carriages, without Gate- and 
the which gare be diuerse bulwarl<s and gates, turning towards Posternes of 
the tower. 
the north, &c. Then neare within this west gare opening 
to the South, is a strong polsterne, for passengers, by the rag«jo 
ward bouse, ouer a draw bridge, let downe for that purpose. 
Next on the saine South side towarde the East, is a large 
watergate, for l-eceipt of Boats, and small vessels, partly 
vnder a stone bridge, from the riuer of Thames. t3eyond it 
is a small Postel'ne, with a draw bridge, seldome letten downe, 
but for the receipt of some great persons, prisoners. Then 
towards the East is a great and strong gare, commonly 
called the Iron gare, but hot vsually opened. And thus 
much for the foundation, building, and repayring of this 
tower, with the Gares and Posternes may suffice. .And now 
somewhat of accidents in the saine, shall be shewed. 
In the yeare 1196. I.Villiam t;itosbcrt, a Citisen of London Actions of 
the tower. 
seditiously mouing the common people to seeke libertie, and 
hot tobe subiect to the rich, and more mightie, at length 
was taken and brought before the .Archbishop of Canterburie, Iustices sate in 
.... . the tower. 
in the tower, where he was by the Judges conclemned, ana 
by the heeles drawn thence to the Elmes in Smithfield, and 
there hanged. 
1:214. King Iol, t wrote to Geffrey #fagnauille to deliuer 
STOWo 1 E 

A buhvarke of 
the Tower 
blowne vp. 



Patent the 15. 
of king Iohn. 

llat, paris. 

plees of the 
crown pleaded 
in the tower. 

Mat. paris. 

Constantine 
Fitz Aehdfe 
hanged. 

1)ag e 5 t 
Griffith of 
Wales fell 
from the 
Tower. 

Sheriffes of 
London pri- 
soners in the 
Tower. 
1,2. Henry 
lodged in the 
Tower. and 
helde his 
parliament 
there. 
Citizens of 
London de- 
spised the 
Queen, wife to 
H. the 3- 

50 7"owers and Caslels 
the tower of London, with the prisoners, armour and all 
other things round therein, belonging to the king, to William 
Archdeacon of Huntingdon. The yeare ioEI6, the first of 
1-[enric the third, the sayd Tower was deliuered to Lewes of 
France, and the Barons of England. 
In the yeare I2o6. Plees of the Crowne were pleaded in the 
Tower : Likewise in the yeare I2zo. and likewise in the yeare 
124. and again in the yere 243. before William of Yorke, 
lichard Passclew, H«m'y I3«thc, [cromc of Saxton Iusticers. 
In the yeare 22. the Citizens of London hauing made 
a tumult against the -/\bbot of Westminster, Hubcrt of 
chiefe Iustice of England, came to the Tower of London, 
called bcfore him the Maior and .A_ldcrmen, of whom he 
inquired for the principall authors of that sedition : amongest 
whome one named Constaniinc Fit.7 Ackdfe auowed, that he 
was the man, and had done much lesse then he ought to 
hauc done: Whereupon the Iustice sent him with two other 
to Falbs dc treattti  who vith armed men, brought them to the 
gallowes, where they wel'e hanged. 
In the yeare I244. Griflith the eldest sonne of Lcolinc, 
prince ] of IValcs, being kept prisoner in the Tower, deuised 
meanes of escape, and hauing in the night ruade of the hang- 
ings, sheetes, &c. a long line, he put himselfe downe from the 
toppe of the Tower, but in the sliding, the weight of his body, 
being a very bigge and a fatte man, brake the rope, and he 
fell and brake lais necke withall. 
In the yeare OE53. King /-/cm;y the third imprisoned the 
Sheriffes of London in the Tower more than a Moneth, for 
the escape of a Prisoner, out of Newgate, as ye may reade in 
the Chapter of Gates. 
In the yeare IoE6o. Khag I4"cnry with his Queene, (for feare 
of the Barons)were lodged in the Tower. The next yeare 
he sent for his Lords, and held lais Parliament there. 
In the yeare  263. when the Queene would haue remooued 
from the Tower by water, towardes Windsore, sundrie Lon- 
diners got them together to the Bridge, vnder the which 
she was to passe, and hot onely cryed out vpon her with 
reprochfull words, but also threw myre and stones at her, by 
 t3reauté] Brent r6o 3 



70wers and Castels 51 
which she was constrained to returne for the time, but in the 
yeare, --65. the saide Cittizens were faine to submit thcm- 
selues to the king for it, and the Mayor, Aldermen, and Sheriffes 
were sent to diuers prisons, and a Custos also was set ouer 
the Cittie, to witte Olaon Constable of the Tower, &c. 
In the yeare ŒES.. Lcolinc Prince of \Vales being taken at Leolinepfince 
of Wales his 
Blewth  Castle, Roge'r L«slraugc cut off his head, which Sir headsetonthe 
Rog«r l[ortimer caused to bee crowned with Iuie, and set it Tower. 
vppon the Tower of London. 
In the yeare x--9 o. diuers Iustices aswell of the Bench, as of Justices of the 
Bench sent to 
the assises, were sent prisoners to the Tower, which with the Tower. 
greate sommes of money redeemed their Libertie. E. :. the 4. 
of his raigne, appointed for Prisoners in the Tower, a Knight 
ij.d. the day, an Esquier, i.d. the day, to serue for their dyet. 
In the yearc 32. the Kinges Justices satc in thc Tower, 
for tryall of matters, whereupon [o]zn Gisors late Mayor of 
London and many other fled the Citty for feare to bee charged 
of thinges they had presumptuously done. 
In the yeare 3t. the rtimcrs yeelding themselues to [ 
the King, he sent them Prisoners to the Tower, where they age  
remayned long, and were adiudged to be drawne and hanged. 
But at length lgger z][rtimer of Wigmore, by giuing to his Mortimer 
Keepers a sleepie drinke, escaped out of the Towcr, and his m.de ai 
escape o6t of 
unckle ogcr being still kept there, dyed about fiue yeares after, the ïower. 
Citizens o! 
In the yeare 36. the Cittizens of London wanne the London 
Tower, wresting the keyes out of the Constables bandes, wrested the 
keyes of the 
deliuered ail the Prisoners, and kept both Cittie and Tower, to Tower froin 
the Constable. 
the vse of Isabel the Queene, and Edward her sonlle. 
In the yeare 33 o. Roger 2]Iortimer Erle of March was Mortimer 
drawne from 
taken and brought to theTower, from whence hee was drawne the Tower to 
to the Elmes, and there hanged, the Elmes, and 
hanged. 
In the yeare 344. King Ec&eard the 3- in the 8. yeare ofA mint in the 
his raigne, commaunded Florences of gold to be ruade and Tower, 
Florences of 
coyned in the Tower, that is to say, a penie peece of the goldcoined 
there. 
value of sixe shillings and eight pence, the halle peny peece 
of the value of three shillinges and foure pence, and a farthing 
peece worth o. pence, t)crceuall de t)ort of Luke being then 
Maister of the coyne. And this is the first coyning of Gold 
 Blewth] Builth 
E2 

Justices sate in 
the Tower. 



The kinges 
Exchange in 
Bucles Bety. 

Round plates 
called ]31anks, 
deliuered by 
weight. 
Argent & pc- 
cunia, after 
called Ester- 
ling. 

Roger 
Il oueden. 

5 2 To«,ers and Castels 
in the Tower, whereof I haue read, and also the first coynage 
of Gold in England : I finde also recorded that the saide King 
in the saine yeare, ordayned his Echange of mony tobe kept 
in Sernes Tower, a part of the Kinges house in I3uckles bury. 
And here to digresse a little (by occasion offered,) I finde 
that in rimes before passed, all great sommes were paid by 
weight of golde or siluer, as so many pounds, or markes of 
siluer, or so many poundes or markes of gold, cut into 
Blankes, and hot stamped, as I could proue by many 
good authorities which I ouerpasse. The smaller sommes 
also were paid in starlings, which were pence so called, for 
other coynes they had none. The antiquity of this starling 
peny vsuall in this realme, is from the raigne of Henry the 
second : notwithstanding the Saxon coynes before the con- 
quest were pence of fine siluer the full weight, and somewhat 
better then the latter sterlinges, as I haue tryed by conference 
of the pence of I3mhrede king of 2tIcrcia, Aelfred, ]'dward, 
and L'deh-cd, kings of the West Saxons, l»legmod Arch- 
bishoppe of Canterbury, and others. IVilliam the Con- 
querors penie also was fine siluer of the weight of the Easter- 
ling, and had on the I one side stamped an armed heade, with 
a beardles face: for the Normans ware no beardes, with a 
scepter in his hand: the inscription in the circumference was 
this, Le Roi IVilam on the other side a Crosse double to the 
ring, betweene fower rowals of sixe poyntes. 
King Hcnry the first his penny was of the like weight, 
finenes, forme of face, crosse. &c. 
This Hcmy in the eight yeare of his raigne, ordayned the 
peny which was round, so to bee quartered, by the crosse, 
that they might easily bee broken, into halfe pence and 
farthinges. In the first, second, thirde, fourth, and fift of 
king Richard the first, his raigne, and afterwards I find com- 
monly Esterling money mentioned, and yet off rimes the 
saine is called argent, as afore, & hot otherwise. 
The first great summe that I read of to be paid in Eter- 
linges, was in the fift of Richard the first, when Robert Earle 
of Leycester being prisoner in France, proffered for his ran- 
some a thousand marks Easterlings, notwithstanding the 
Esterling pence were long before. The weight of the Ester- 



ow r« mec? Cas/els  

ling penie may appeare by diuers statutes, namely of weights 
and measures, ruade in the 5 . of Henry the third in these 
words, Thirty two graines of Wheat, drie and round, taken in 
the middest of the eare shoulde be the weight of a starling 
penie, 2o. of those pence shoulde waye one ounce, 2. ounces 
a pound Troy. It followeth in the statute eight pound to 
make a gallon of Wine, and eight gallons a bushel of Londoa 
measure, &c. Notwithstanding which statute, I finde in the 
eight of Ldzvard the first, Gregorie 2okslcy Mayor of 
London, being chiefe Maister or minister of the Kinges 
Exchaunge, or mintes, a new coyne being then appointed, 
the pound of Easterling money should contain as afore 1,2. 
ownces, to witte fine siluer, such as was then ruade into foyle, 
and was commonlie called siluer of Guthurons lane, 
ounces, two Easterlings, and one ferling or farthing, and the 
other 7. pence ob. q. to bee laye . _Also the pound of money 
ought to weigh xx.s. iij.d, by accounte, so that no pound 
ought to be ouer xx.s. iiij.d, nor lesse then xx.s. ij.d. by 
account, the ounce to weigh twenty pence, the penny weighte, 
24. graynes, (which 24. by welght then appointed, were 
much as the former 3 OE graines of Wheate) a penny force, 
graines and a halfe, the pennic deble or feeble, OEOE. graines, and 
a halfe, &c. 
Nov for the penny Easterling, hov it took that naine, 
I think good briefly to touch. It bath beene saide that 
Vuma tgompilius the second king of the Romaines, com- 
maunded money first to bee made, of whose name they were 
called Numi, and when Copper pence, siluer pence, and gold 
pence were made, because euery siluer peny was worth ten 
Copper pence, and euery golde pennie worth ten siluer pence, 
the pence therefore were called in Latine Denarii, and often- 
rimes the pence are named of the matter and stuffe of Gold 
or siluer. But the money of England was called of the 
workers and makers thereof : as the Floren of Gold is called of 
the Florent ines,that were the workers thereof, and so the Easter- 
ling pence took their name of the Easteflinges which did first 
make this money in England, in the raign of t-cmy the second. 
Thus haue I set dovne according to my reading in _Anti- 
x laye]=alay, alloy, N. E. D. 

Weight of 
starling pence 
3 - granes of 
wheat. 

l'age 4 

The pennie 
Easterling how 
it tooke the 
name. 

H.  ruade a 
new coyne in 
the 3- of his 
raigne. 



Starling mony, 
when it tooke 
beginning in 
this land. 

Of halfpence 
and farthinges. 

The Kinges 
Exchange at 
London. 

Page 

Mints in Eng- 
land. 
patent 9 Iohn. 

Diminishing 
of coyne. 

Stal'ling mony 
forbidden to 
be transported. 

Th. Walsing. 
First groates 
and halfe 
co.naed. 

54 Toçe,ers a¢¢d Castels 
quitie of money matters, omitting the imaginations of late 
writers, of whome some haue said Easterling money to take 
that naine of a Starre, stamped in the border or ring of 
the penie: other some of a Bird called a Stare or starling 
stamped in the circumference: and other (more vnlikely)of 
being coyned at Stritelin or Starlillg, a towne in Scotland, &c. 
Now concerning half pence and farthings, the accounte of 
which is more subtiller then the pence, I neede hot speake 
of them more then that they xvere onely ruade in the Ex- 
chaunge at London, and no where else: first poynted to bee 
ruade by Edward the . in the 8. of his raigne, & also at 
the saine rime, the saide Kinges coynes some few groates of 
silver, but they were not vsuall. The kinges Exchaunge at 
London, was neare vnto the Cathedrall Church of Sainte 
lmtlc, and is to this daye commonlie called the olde Chaunge, 
but in Euidences the olde Exchaunge. 
The Kinges Exchaunger in this place, xvas to deliuer out 
to euery other Exchaunger throughout England, or other the 
kings Dominions, their Coyning irons, that is to say, one 
Standerde I or Staple, and two Trussels, or Punchons: and 
when the saine were spent and xvorne, to receyue them with 
an account, what summe had been coyned, and also their 
l'ix, or Boxe of assay and to deliuer other Irons new grauen, 
&c. I find that in the ninth of king [ohl, there was besides 
the Mint at London, other Mints at lVincllcs/er, Fxccstcr, 
Chichcstcr, Çan/crbtrie, Rochcste; [pswich, Norwich, Li»ne, 
Lbwoluc, Yorke, Çarleil, Northham.pton, O:rford, S. Ldmonds - 
bru3, , and Detrhant. The Exchanger, Examiner, and Trier, 
buyeth the siluer for Coynage: answering for euery hundred 
pound of siluer, bought in Bolion, or otherwise, 98.1. 5.s. for 
he taketh OE5 s. for coynage. 
King Ldward the first, in the 7- of his raigne, held a 
Parliament at S/cbenhcth, in the bouse of Hcnry ll"aleis 
Major of London, wherein amongst other things there handled, 
the transporting of starling money was forbidden. 
In the yeare 35 . lVilliait Editgton Bishop of Winchester, 
and Treasurer of England, a wise man, but louing the kings 
commoditie, more then the wealth of the whole Realme, and 
common people (sayth mine Authour), caused a new coyne 



Towers ame. Castels 55 

called a groate, and a halfe groate to bee coyned and stamped, 
the groate to be taken for iiii.d, and the halfe groate for 
ii.d. not conteyning in weight according to the pence called 
Easterlings, but much lesse, to wit, by v.s. in the pound: 
by reason whereof, victuals, and marchandizes became the 
dearer through the whole realme. About the saine time 
also, the old coine of gold was chaunged into a new, but the 
old Floren or noble, then so called, was worth much aboue 
the taxed rate of the new, and therefore the Marchants in- 
gl'ossed vp the olde, and conueyed them out of the Realme, 
to the great losse of the kingdome. Wherefore a remedie 
was prouided by chaunging of the stampe. 
In the yeare 1411. king Hcm-ic the fourth caused a new 
coyne of Nobles tobe ruade, of lesse value then the old by 
iiii.d, in the Noble, so that fiftie Nobles should be a pound 
Troy weight. 
In the yeare T4OEI. was granted to Iem'ie the fift, a fifteen 
tobe payd at Candlemasse, and at 'Iartinmasse, of such 
money as was then currant gold, or siluer, not ouermuch 
clipped or washed, to wit, that if the noble were worth fiue 
shillings eight pence, then [ the king should take it for a fui 
Noble of sixe shillings eight pence, and if it were lesse of 
value then fiue shillings eight pence, then the person paying 
that golde, to make it good to the value of fiue shillings eight 
pence, the king alway receyuing it for an whole noble of sixe 
shillings eight pence. And if the Noble so payed be better 
then fiue shillings eight pence, the king to pay againe the 
surplusage that it was better then fiue shillings eight pence. 
Also this yere was such scarcitie of xvhite money, yt though 
a Noble were so good of Gold and weight as sixe shillings 
eight pence, men might get no white money for them. 
In the yeare 1465. king Edward the fourth caused a newe 
coyne both of gold and siluer tobe made, whereby he gained 
much, for he made of an olde Noble, a Royall: which he 
commaunded to go for x.s. Neuerthelesse to the saine royall 
was put viii.d, of alay, and so weyed the more, being smitten 
with a new stampe, to wit, a Rose. He likewise ruade halfe 
Angels of v.s. and farthings of v.s. vi.d. Angelets of vi.s. viii.d. 
and halfe Angels, iii.s, iiii.d. Hee ruade siluer money of three 

Coines of gold 
enhaunced. 

Page  6 

More plentie 
of coyne in 
gold then in 
siluer. 

Coynes of 
gold allayed, 
and also raised 
in value. 

Rose nobles. 



Halfe faced 
grotes. 

Page 7. 

Gold and sil- 
uer inhaneed. 

Base monies, 
coyned and 
currant in 
England. 

5 6 Tooers a¢d Cas[Hs 
pence, a groate, and so of other coynes after that rate, to the 
great harme of the Commons. l.V. Lord HasHngs the kinges 
Chamberlaine, being maister of the kinges l'Iints, saith the 
Record, vndertooke to make the monyes vnder forme fol- 
lowing, to wit, of golde a peece of viii.s, iiii.d, starlîng, which 
should be called a noble of golde, of the which there shoulde 
be fiftie such pieces in the pound weight of the tower: an 
other peece of golde, iiij.s, ii.d. of sterlings, and to be of them 
an hundred such peeces in the pound: and a third peece of 
gold, ii.s.i.d, starlîng, two hundreth such peeces in the pound, 
euery pound weight of the Tower to be worth xx. pound, 
xvi.s, viii.& of starlings, the which should be 23. Carits, 
3. graines, and halle fine, &c. and for siluer, 37.s. 6.d. of star- 
lings, the peece of foure pence, to be Cxii. groates, and two 
pence in the pound weight. 
In the yeare I5o 4. king Hem'le the seuenth appoynted 
a new coyne, to wit, a groat, and halfe groat, which bare but 
halle faces ; the same time also was coyned a groat, which was 
in value xii.& but of those but a few, after the rate of fortie 
pence the ounce. 
In the yeare 1526. the xviii, of Hozrie the 8. the Angell 
noble being then the sixt part of an ounce Troy, so that six 
Angels was ]iust an ounce, which was fortie shillinges starling, 
and the Angell was also worth two ounces of siluer, so that 
sixe Angels were worth xii. ounces of siluer, which was fortie 
shillings. A Proclamation was ruade on the sixt of September, 
that the Angell shoulde goe for vil.s, iiii.d, the Royall for 
a xi.s. and the Crowne for iiii.s, iiii.d. And on the fift of 
Nouember following, againe by Proclamation, the Angell was 
enhaunced to vii.s, vi.d. and so euerie ounce of golde to be 
xlv.s, and the ounce of siluer at iii.s, ix.d. in value. 
In the yeare I544. the 35- of Hcurie the 8. on the xvi. of 
1V/ay, proclamation was ruade for the inhauncing of gold to 
xlvîii, shillings, and siluer to iiii. s. the ounce. Also the king 
caused to bee coyned base monyes, to wit, peeces of xii.& 
vi.d. iiii.d, ii.d. and penny, in weight as the late starling, in shew 
good siluer, but inwardly Copper. These peeces had whole, 
or broad faces, and continued currant after that rate, till the 
5. of Edward the sixt, when they were on the ninth of Julie 



called downe, the shilling to nine pence, the grote to three 
pence, &c. and on the xvii. of August, from nine pence to sixe 
pence, &c. And on the xxx. of October was published new 
coynes of siluer and gold to be ruade, a peece of siluer v.s. 
starling, a peece il.s. vi.d. of xii.d, of vi.d. a penny with 
a double Rose, halfe penny a single Rose, and a farthing with 
a Porteclose. Coynes of fine Golde, a whole Soueraigne of 
xxx.s, an Angell of x.s. an Angelet of v.s. Of crowne gold. 
a Soueraigne xx.s. halfe Soueraigne x.s.v.s, il.s. vi.d. and 
base monyes to passe as afore, which continued till the second 
of Queene .Elizabeth, then called to a lower rate, taken to the 
mint, and refined, the siluer whereof being coyned with a new 
stampe of her Maiestie, the drosse was carried to foule high 
wayes, to highten them. This base monyes, for the time, 
caused the olde starling monyes to be hourded vp, so that 
I haue seene xxi. shillings currant giuen for one old Angell 
to guild withall. Also rents of lands and tenements, with 
prises of victuals, were raised farre beyond the former 
rates, hardly since to bec brought downe. Thus much for 
base monyes coyned and currant in England haue I knowne: 
But for Leather monyes as many people haue fondly talked, 
I find no such matter. I reade that king Iohn of France being 
taken prisoner by Edward the black prince, [ at the battaile Pa.e58 
of 19o.ytcrs, paied a raunsome of three Millions of Florences, 
whereby he brought the realme into such pouertie, that manie 
yeares after they vsed Leather money, with a little stud or 
naile of siluer in the middest thereof. Thus much for mint, 
and coynage, by occasion of this tower (vnder correction of 
other more skilfull) may suffice, and now to other accidents 
there. 
In the yeare 136o. the peace betweene England and France 
being confirmed, King Edward came ouer into England, and 
straight to the Tower, to sec the French king then prisoner 
there, whose ransome he assessed at three Millions of Florences, 
and so deliuered him from prison, and brought him with honour 
to the Sea. 
In the yeare 1381. the Rebels of Kent drewout of the tower 
(where the king was then lodged) Si»ton Sztdberie, Archbishop 
of Canterburie, Lord Chancellor: Robert Hales, Prior of 

Crownes and 
halfe crownes 
of silner 
coined. 

French king 
prisoner in the 
Tower. 

Rebels of 
lient elter 
the Tower. 

Leather mony 
in France. 

Starling 
monies 
hoorded vp. 
xxi. s. cnrrant 
giuen for an 
Angell of 
golde. 
Philip Coin- 
mines. 



Richard the 2 
prisoner in 
the tower. 

Porter of the 
Tower 
beheaded. 

Counterfeit 
phisitian, his 
head set on 
the tower of 
London. 

-Page 59 
Iusting in the 
tower. 

Henrie the 6. 
murdered in 
the tower. 

Duke of Clar- 
ence drowned 
in the tower. 
Edward the 5- 
murdred in 
the tower. 

58 Towers a.d Cas[e[s 
S. ]ohn«, and Treasurer of England : l.Vi[diam 4pp[etoz Frier, 
the kings confessor, and ]oh Zegg« a Sargeant of the kings, 
and beheaded them on the Tower hill, &c. 
In the yeare J387 . king Richard held his feast of Christmas 
in the Tower. And in the yeare x399. the same king was 
sent prisoner to the Tower. 
In the yeare 44. Sir ]ohi Oldca«te[! brake out of the 
tower. And the saine yeare a Parliament being holden at 
Leycester, a Porter of the Tower was drawne, hanged and 
headed, whose head was sent vp, and set ouer the Tower 
gate, for consenting to one I4Æhit[ooke, that brake out of the 
tower. 
In the yeare 49. Frier .««cdl]l was sent to the tower, 
and was there slaine by the Parson of S. _Pt'r« in the tower. 
In the yeare 14oE6. there came to London a lewde fellow, 
feyning himselfe to be sent from the Emperor to the yong 
king !-em-ir the sixt, calling himselfe Baron of Blakamoore, 
and that hee should be the principall Phisition in this king- 
dome, but his subtiltle being knowne, he was apprehended, 
condemned, drawne, hanged, headed and quartered, his head 
set on the tower of London, and his quarters on route gares 
of the Citie. 
In the yeare 458. in Whitson weeke, the Duke of Som- 
merset, with Ant]wnie Ritcrs, and other foure, kept Iustes 
be]fore the Queene in the Tower of London, against three 
Esquiers of the Queenes, and others. 
In the yeare 465. king/-r«m-i« the sixt was brought prisoner 
to the tower, where he remained long. 
In the yeare 47 o. the tower was yeelded to sir lichar,4 
Lee Maior of London, and his brethren the Aldermen, who 
forthwith entered the saine, deliuered king ]rcm'i« of his 
imprisonment, and lodged him in the kings lodging there, but 
the next yeare he was againe sent thither prisoner, and there 
murdered. 
In the yeare I478. Gcorgc Duke of Claretlce, vas drowned 
with Malmesey in the tower : and within fiue yeares after king 
dward the tift, with his brother, were said to be murthered 
there. 
In the yeare 1485. Iohn Earle of Oxford was ruade Con- 



stable of the tower, and had custodie of the Lions graunted patent L of 
him. Henrie the 7. 
In the yeare 5o. in the Moneth of May, was royall Tur- Iustes and 
turneying in 
ney of Lordes and knights in the tower of London before the the tower. 
king. 
In the yeare ISOoE. Queene tlizabeth, wife to I-[enric the 7- 
died of childbirth in the tower. 
In the yeare xsoE, thc Chappell in the high white tower 
was burned. In the yeare I536. Queene Annc Bullein was 
beheaded in the tower. I54. Ladie lçathcrb«e Haward, wife 
to king I-[cnrie the 8. was also beheaded there. 
In the yeare I546. the OE7 of Aprill, being Tuesday in Easter Vqilliam Fox- 
weeke, lVilliam Foxlo', Potmaker for the Mint in the tower of ley sleptinthe 
tower 4 
London, fell asleepe, and so continued sleeping, and could not days & more 
without 
be wakened, with pricking, cramping, or otherwise burning waking. 
whatsoeuer, till the first day of the tearme, which vas full 
xiiii, dayes, and xv. nights, or more, for that Easter tearme 
beginneth not afore xvii. dayes after Easter. The cause of his 
thus sleeping could not be knowne, though the same were 
diligently searched after by the kings Phisitians, and other 
learned men: yea the king himselfe examining the said 
William Foxl«y, who was in all poynts found at his wakening 
to be as if hee had slept but one night. _And he lived more 
then fortie yeares after in the sayde Tower, to wit, vntil the 
yeare of Christ, 587, and then deceased on Wednesday in 
Easterweeke. [ 
Thus much for these accidents : and now to conclude thereof 'age 6o 
in summarie. This tower is a Citadell, to defend or commaund Vse ofthe 
the Citie : a royall place for assemblies, and treaties. A Prison Tower to de- 
fend the Citie. 
of estate, for the most daungerous offenders: the onely place 
of coynage for all England at this time : the armorie for war- 
like prouision : the Treasurie of the ornaments and Jewels of 
the crowne, and generall conseruer of the most Recordes of the 
kings Courts of Justice at Westminster. 

Tower on London Bridge. 
THE next tower on the riuer of Tbamcs, is on London bridge Tower at the 
north end of 
at the north end of the draw bridge. This tower was newe the draw 
bridge. 



Tower at the 
south end of 
the bridge. 

tage 61 

William I)un- 
thorne. 
The south- 
gate of 
London 
bridge burned. 

Baynards 
Castell. 
Fitzstephen. 
Geruase of 
Tilbury. 

60 Tower« mtd Castel« 

begun to be builded in the yeare I4OE6. Ihon Reynwell Maior 
of London, layd one of the first corner stones, in the founda- 
tion of this worke, the other three were laid by the Shiriffes, 
and ]3ridgemaisters, vpon euerie of these route stones was 
engrauen in fayre Romane letters, the naine of Ihesus. And 
these stones, I haue seene layde in the Bridge store house, 
since they were taken vp, when that tower was of late newly 
ruade of timber. This gate and tower was at the first strongly 
builded vp of stone, and so continued vntill the yeare 1577. in 
the Moneth of Aprill, when the same stone arched gate, and 
tower being decayed, was begun to be taken downe, and then 
were the heades of the traytours remoued thence, and set on 
the tower ouer the gare at the bridge foote, towards South- 
warke. This said tower being taken downe a newe foundation 
was drawne: and sir Iohn Zangley Lord Major laid the first 
stone, in the preience of the Shiriffes, and ]3ridgemaisters, on 
the OES. of August, and in the Moneth of September, the yere 
'579. the saine tower was finished, a beautifull & chargeable 
peece of worke, all aboue the bridge being of tituber. 

Tower on the South of London Bridge. 
AN other tower there is on London bridge, to wit, ouer the 
gate at the South ende of the saine bridge towards South- 
warke. This gate with the tower thereupon, and two Arches 
of[ the bridge fell downe, and no man perished by the fall 
thereof, in the yeare I436. Towards the new building whereof, 
diuerse charitable Citizens gaue large summes of monies: 
which gate being then againe new builded, was with xiij. 
houses more on the bridge in the yere I47 I. burned by the 
Marriners and Saylers of Kent, Bastard Fancoubridffe being 
their Captaine. 
Baynards Castle. 
IN the west part of this Citie (saith Fitzsteiohen ) are two 
most strong Castels, &c. Also Ger«tasùts Tilbe,7, in the raigne 
of Hem'ic the second, writing of these castels, hath to this 
effect. Two Castels, saith hee, are bnilt with wallcs atd rare- 
pires, ehereof one is in rigltt of possession, I3aynardes : the 



To'tr,e,s a.¢«t Castels 61 

other the Barons of '[ouuoEtchet: the first of these Castels 
banking on the Riuer Thames, was called Bayzards Castell, 
of layarde a noble man that came in with the Conquerour, 
and then builded it, and deceased in the raigne of Williaz 
Rztfus: after vhose decease Geffrey Bayzard succeeded, and 
then William Baynard, in the yeare x x . xvho by forfeyture 
for fellonie, lost his Baronrie of little Dtumow, and ldng 
H«nrie gaue it wholy fo Robert the sonne of Richard thc 
sonne of Gilbard of Clare, and to lais heyres, togither with the 
honour of Bayuard« CastelL This Robert married A[mtdc &" 
Sezt Licio, Ladie of Bradham, and deceased x34. was buried 
at Saint Vc«des by Gilbert of Care his father, IValter his 
sonne succeeded him, he tooke to wife A[atilde dc Bocbam, 
and after her decease, 2[atilde the daughter and coheyre of 
Richard de Lttc3, , on whom he begate Ro, bcrt and other : he 
deceased in the yeare x98. and was buried at Dttumow, after 
whom succeeded Robert Fitcwater, a valiant knight. 
About the yeare xoEx3, there arose a great discord betwixt 
king Iohu and his Barons, because of [atildl, surnamed thc 
fayre, daughter to the said Robert Fitkwat«r, whome the king 
vnlawfully loued, but could hot obtaine her, nor ber fathcr 
would consent thereunto, wherevpon, and for other like causes, 
ensued xvarre through the whole Realme. The Barons xvere 
receyued into London, where they greatly endamaged the 
king, but in I the end the king did hot onely, therefore, banish 
the said Fit:water amongest other, out of the Realme, but 
also caused lais Castell called Bayuard, and other his bouses 
to be spoyled : which thing being done, a messenger being 
sent vnto .latildc the fayre, about the kings sute, vhereunto 
shee would not consent, she vas poysoned. Robcrt 1.)'twater, 
and other being then passed into France, and some into 
Scotland, &c. 
It hapned in the yere  214. king Iohu being then in France 
with a great armie, that a truce was taken betwixt the two 
kings of England and France, for the tearme of fiue yeares. 
And a riuer or arme of the sea being then betwixt eyther 
Host, there was a knight in the English host, that cried to 
them of the other side, willing some one of their knightes to 
come and iust a course or tvaine with him: vherevpon 

Lib. Dunmow. 

i°agc 6e 
Robert Fitz- 
water 
banished. 
Banards castle 
destroyed. 
Virginitie de- 
fended with 
the losse of 
worldly goods, 
and life of the 
bodie, for life 
of the soule. 



62 7bwers a¢«d C«st«ls 

without stay, Robcr! Fitaw«lcr being on the French part, 
made himselfe readie, ferried ouer, and got on horsebacke, 
without any man to helpe him, and shewed himselfe readie 
to the face of his chalenger, whome at the first course, he 
stroake so hard with his greate Speare, that horse and man 
fell to the ground: and when his Speare was broken, hee went 
backe againe to the king of France, which when the King had 
King Iohns seene, by Gods tooth, quoth hee (after his vsuall oath) he 
oath. 
were a king indeed, that had such a knight : the friends of 
lobcrt hearing these wordes, kneeled downe, and saide: O 
ldng, he is your knight : it is Robert Fitzwat«r, and thereupon 
the next day hee was sent for, and restored to the kinges 
fauour: by which meanes peace was concluded, and he re- 
ceiued his liuings, and had license to repaire his Castell of 
taj,nard and other Castels. 
The yeare z6. the first of ttcm'ic the third, the Castell of 
Hartford being deliuered to Lewcs the French (Prince), and 
the Barons of England, Robert Fitzwatcr requiring to haue 
the saine, because the keeping thereof did by ancient right 
and title pertaine to him, was aunswered by Lewes, that 
Eglish men were hot worthie to haue such holdes in keep- 
ing, because they did betray their owne Lord, &c. This 
Idobert deceased in the yeare 234. and was buried at 1)lot- 
mow, and IValtcr lais son that succeeded him, oE5 8. lais 
]3aronie of Baynard was in the ward of king Hcury in the 
tage 63 nonage of RoberlFit.'watcr. This loberttooke to his I second 
wife, telianor daughter and heire to the Earle of Ferrars, in 
the yeare x.89, and in the yeare 33 . on the xij. of March, 
before Iohu tTlondou Maior of London, he acknowledged his 
seruice to the saine Citie, and sware vpon the Euangelists, 
that he would be true to the liberties thereof, and maintaine the 
same to his power, and the counsell of the saine to keepe, &c. 
The right(s) that belonged to Robert Fitzwalter 
Chastalian of London, Lord of Wodeham, 
were these. 
Robert Iqtz- THE sayd Robert and his heyres, ought to be, and are chiefe 
walter Casti- 
lian andBan- Banerers of London, in fee for the Chastilarie, which hee and 
ner bearer of lais auncestors had by Castcll3a3mard , in the said Citie. In 
London. 

Kobcrt Iqtz- 
walter re- 
stored to thc 
kings fauour. 
]3aynards 
castell againc 
builded. 

The keeping 
of Hertford 
castel be- 
longed to 
Robert Fitz- 
walter. 



Towers and Castels 63 
time of warre, the said Robert and his heyres ought to serue 
the Citie in maner as followeth: that is, the said Robert 
ought to corne, he beeing the twentieth man of armes on 
horsebacke, couered with cloath, or armour vnto the great 
West doore of Saint Paule, with h[s Banner displayed belote 
him, of h[s armes: and when he is corne to the said doore, 
mounted and apparelled, as belote is said, the lXIaior with his 
Aldernen, and Shiriffes armed in their armes shall corne out 
of the saide Church of Saint Paule, vnto the saide doore, with 
a Banner in his hande, all on foote, which t3anner shall be 
Guiles, the hnage of Saint Paulc golde: the face, hands, 
feete, and sword of siluer: and assoone as thc said Ioba-t 
shall see the Maior, Aldermen, and Shiriffs cone on foot out 
of the church, armed with such a t3anner, he shall alight fl'otn 
his horse, and salute the Maior, and say to him : Sir ]2raior, 
I atu corne fo do uy scrtticc, wkic]t I owe fo tire Citie. And 
the Maior and Aldermen shall answere. IU«egiue to 3vu as to 
out lauucrcr of fec iu this Citic, rais launer off this Citic to 
beare, atd .ffoltcrltc fO the houo«tr aud profltc of thc Citic to oztr  
powcr. And the said Robert and his heyres shall rccciue thc 
t3anner in his hands, and shall go on foote out of the gate 
with the t3anner in his handes, and the Major, Aldermen, 
and Shiriffes shall follow to the doore, and shall bring a horse 
to the said Robert worth x:«l. which horse shall be sadled 
with a saddle of the _A_rmcs of the said Robcrt,  and I shall be 
sadled with a Saddle of the _A_rmes of the said Robert,"' and 
shall be couered with sindals of the said Armes. Also they 
shall present to him twentie poundes starling money, and 
deliuer to the Chamberlaine of the sayd Robcrt for his 
expences that day: then the saide. Robert shall mount 
vppon the horse which the Major presented to him, with the 
13armer in his hand, and as soone as he is vp, he shall say to 
the Major, that he cause a Marshall to be chosen for the 
hoste, one of the Citie, which Marshall being chosen, the sayd 
Robert shall commaund the Maior and Burgesses of the Citie, 
to warne the Commoners to assemble togither, and they shall 
ail go vnder the Banner of Saint Paul, and the said Robert 
shall beare it himselfe vnto Aldgate, and there the said 
 our] your z633 -z Sic z6o3 ; on. z633 

Banner ol r 
S. paule. 

19a$e 6 4 



Rights be- 
longing to 
Robert 
Fitzwater. 

IaEe 6 

64 Towees and Castels 

Robcrt, and Major shall deliuer the said Banner of Saint 
1)aule, from thence, to whome they shall assent or thinke good. 
And if they must make any issue foorth of the Citie, then 
the sayde Robert ought to choose two foorth of euery warde, 
the most sage personages, to foresee to the safe keeping of the 
Citie, after they be gone foorth. And this counsell shall bee 
taken in the Priorie of the Trinitie neare vnto Aldgate. 
And before euery towne or Castell which the hoast of 
London besiege, if the siege continue a xvhole yeare, the saide 
tobert shall haue for euerie siege of the Communaltie of 
London an hundreth shilling's for his trauaile, and no morc. 
These be the rights that the sayd tobcrt hath in the rime of 
warrc. Rights belongi.ng to tobert Fitzwaltcr, and to his 
heyres in the Citie of London, in the time of peace, are these, 
that is to say, the sayd Rbert hath a soken or warde in the 
Citie, that is, a wall of the Chanonrie of Saint Paule, as a 
man goeth downc the streete before the 13rewhouse of Saint 
19attlc, vnto the Thames, and so to the side of the Mill, which 
is in the water that commeth downe from the Fleete bridge, 
and goeth so by London walles, betwixt the Friers preachers 
and Ludgate, and so returneth backe by the house of the 
said Friers, vnto the said wall of the said Chanonrie of Saint 
Pa«de, that is all the parish of Saint .41zdrew, which is in thc 
gift of his auncesters, by the said signioritie : and so the said 
Iobert hath appendant vnto the saide soken ail these thinges 
vnder written, that he ought to haue a soke man, and to 
place what sokeman he will, so he be of the sokemanrie, or ] 
the saine warde, and if any of the sokemanrie bee impleaded 
in the Guild hall, of any thing" that toucheth not the bodie 
of the Major that for the rime is, or that toucheth the bodie 
of no shiriffe, it is hot lawfull for the soke man of the soke- 
manrie of the sayde _obert Fitcwalter to demaund a Court of 
the sayd -obert, and the Major, and his Citizens of London 
ought to graunt him to haue a Court, and in his Court he ought 
to bring his iudgements as it is assented and agreed vpon in 
this Guild hall, that shall bee giuen them. If any therefore 
be taken in his sokemanry, he ought to haue his Stockes and 
imprisonment in his soken, and he shall be brought from 
thence to the Guild hall before the Maior, and there they 



Towers ald Cas/«ls 6 5 
shall prouide him his iudgement that ought to bee giuen of 
him: but his iudgement shall not bee published till hee 
corne into the Court of the saide Roberts, and in his libertie. 
And the iudgement shall bee such, that if he haue deserued 
death by treason, he to be tied to a post in the Thames at 
a good wharfe where boates are fastened, two ebbings and 
two flowings of the water. And if he be condemned for a 
common theefe, he ought to be ledde to the Elmes, and there 
surfer his iudgement as other theeues : and so the said Robert 
and his he),res hath honour that he holdeth a great Franches 
within the Citie, that the Maior of the Citie, and Citizens 
are bound to doe him of right, that is to say, that when the 
Maior will holde a great counsaile, hee ought to call the saide 
Robert, and his heyres to bee with him in counsaile of the 
Citie, and the saide Robert ought to be sworne to bee of 
counsaile with the Citie against all people, sauing the king 
and his heyres. And when the saide Robert commeth to the 
Hoystings in the Guildhall of the Citie, the Maior or his 
Lieutenant ought to rise against him, and set him downe 
neare vnto him and so long as he is in the Guildhall, ail the 
iudgement ought to be giuen by his mouth, according to the 
Record of the recorders of the sayde Guildhall, and so many 
waifes as corne so long as he is there, hee ought to giue them 
to the Ba),liffes of the Towne, or to whom he will, by the 
counsaile of the Maior of the CRie. These bee the Francheses 
that belonged to Robert Fitzwater, in London, in time of 
peace, which for the antiquitie thereof I haue noted out of an 
olde Recorde. ] 
This Robert deceased in the yeare 12305 . leauing issue Waltcr 
Fitarobert, who had issue Robert Fitzwalter, vnto whom in 
the yeare 132o. the Citizens of London acknowledged the 
right which they ought to him and his heires for the Castell 
Baj,nard: he deceased a3oE 5. vnto whom succeeded Robert 
ït»robert, Fitwaltar, &c. More of the Lord titwaltar 
may ye reade in my Annales in 5 . of Edward the third. But 
how this honour of gaynards Castell with the appurtennances 
fell from the possession of the Fitawaters, I haue hot read: 
onely I find that in the yeare 48, the seuenth of ]-[enrie the 
sixt, a great tire was at ff, aj'itard$ Castell, and that same 

t'age 66 

Baynards Cas- 
tell perished 
by tire, 



llumfrey 
duke of Glo- 
cester new 
builded it. 
Richard D. of 
¥orke, honor 
of Baynards 
castell 

Edward the 4" 
elected king 
in S. Johns 
field. 

Edward the 4. 
tooke on him 
the crowne in 
Baynards 
castell. 

.Page 67 
Richard the 
third tooke 
on him the 
crowne in Bay- 
nards çastle. 

66 Tovers mtd Cas/ris 
ttunrcy Duke of Glocestcr, builded it of new: by lais death 
and attaindor, in the yere 1446. it came to the banals of 
l-[cnrie the sixt, and flore him to Richard Duke of ¥orke, of 
whom we reade, that in the yeare 457- he lodged there as in 
his own bouse. In the yeare 146o. the 8. of Februarie, the 
Earles of March, and of Warwike, with a great power of men, 
(but few of naine) entered the CRie of London, where they 
were of the citizens joyously receyued, and vpon the third of 
March, being Sunday, the said Earle caused to be mustred 
his people in Saint Iohns field: where, vnto that hoast was 
shewed and proclaylned certaine articles and poynts wherin 
K. Henry, as they sayd, had offended, and thereupon it was 
demaunded of the said people, whether the said H. was worthie 
to reigne as king any longer or not: whereunto y people 
cried, nay. Then it was asked of them whether they would 
haue the E. of March for their king: & they cried, yea, yea. 
Wherupon certain captains were appoynted to beare report 
thereof vnto the sayd E. of March, then being lodged at lais 
castell of Baynard. Whereof when the Earle was by them 
aduertized, he thanked God, & them for their election, not- 
withstanding he shewed some countenance of insufficiencie in 
him to occupie so great a charge, till by exhortation of the 
Archbishop of Ca,aterbury, the 13ishop of Excester, & certaine 
Noble men, he granted to their petition: and on the next 
morrow at t)aules he went on Procession, offred, & had Te 
Deum sung. Then was he with great royaltie conueyed to 
Westminster, and there in the great Hall,  sate in the kinges 
set,  with Saint Edzvards scepter in his hand. 
Edward the fourth being dead, leauing lais eldest sonne Ed- I 
ward, and his second sonne Richard both infantes, Richard 
D. of Glocester, being elected by the Nobles and Commons in 
the Guildhall of London, tooke on him the tytle of the Realme 
and kingdome, as imposed vpon him in this Baynardes Castle, 
as yee may reade penned by Sir Thomas ]Ploore, and set downe 
in my Annales. 
Henry the seauenth about the yeare tSo. the 16. of his 
raigne, repayred or rather new buildcd this house, not imbat- 
toled, or so strongly fortified Castle like, but farre more 
-1 ,. L in 6o 3 set in thê kinge. sêat. 



Tazc,ers and CasA'/s 6 7 
beautifull and commodious for the entertainement of any 
Prince or greate Estate: In the seauenteenth of his raigne, 
hec with his Qucene, were lodged there, and came from thence 
to Powles Church, where they ruade their offering, dined in 
the Bishops pallace, and so returned. The 18. of his raigne hec 
was lodged there, and the Ambassadors from the King of the 
Romaines, were thether brought to his presence, and from 
thence the King came to Powles, and was there sworn to the 
King of Romans, as the said king had sworne to him. 
The OEc).'of the saide King, hec with his Knightes of the 
Order, all in their habites of the Garter, rode from the Tower 
of London through the Cittie, vnto the Cathedral Church of 
Saint Pawles, and there heard Euensong, and from thence 
they rode to Baynardes Castle, where the king lodged, and 
on the nexte morrow, in the same habite they rode from 
thence againe to the said Church of Saint Pawles, went on 
Procession, hard the diuine seruice, offered and returned. 
The same yeare the king of Castle was lodged there. 
In the yeare 1553. the 19. of July, the Counsell partlie 
moued with the right of the Lady 3[ari¢s cause, partly con- 
sidering that the most of the Realme was wholy bent on ber 
side, changing their mind flore Lady lane lately proclaimed 
Queene, assembled themselues at this Baynardes Castle, where 
they communed with the Earle of Pembrooke and the Earle 
of Shrewesbury and Sir lahn 3[asan Clearke of the Counsell, 
sent for the Lord Mayor, and then riding into Cheape to the 
Crosse, where Garlar King at Armes, Trumpet being sounded, 
proclaimed the Lady 3lady Daughter to king I«m-y the eight, 
and Queene I Kathercn Queene of Êngland, &c. 
This Castle now belongeth to the Êarle of Pembrooke. 

Next adioyning to this Castle was sometime a Tower, the 
naine thereof I have hOt read, but that the same was builded 
by dwarde the second, is manifest by this that followeth. 
King dward the third in the second yeare of his Raigne, 
gaue vnto William de Ros, of Hamelake in ¥orkeshire, a 
Towre vppon the water of Tha,nes, by the Castle Baynarde 
in the Cittie of London, which Tower his Father had builded : 
he gaue the saide Tower and appurtenances to the said l'illiam 
F2 

Ici. the 7. 
Iodged m 
Baynards 
Castle. 

King I-[etry 
the 7- and 
knights of the 
Garter rode in 
their habites 
from the 
Tower to 
powles 
church. 

The Counsell 
assembled at 
Baynards 
eastle and 
proclaimed 
Queene Marie. 

A towcr by 
Baynards 
eastle builded 
by E. the 2. 



Tower of 
Mountfi,luit. 

Barons of 
London. 

l'ae 6 9 

Tower in the 
Thames. 

68 Towers a.d Cas/e/s 

Hamclake, and his heyres, for a Rose yearely to bec paid for ail 
seruice due, &c. This Tower as seemcth to mee, was since 
called Legats Inne, the 7- of E. the fourth. 

Tower of Mountfiquit. 
THE ncxt Towcr or Castlc, banckiting also on the riucr of 
Thames, was as is afore shcwed cailcd .Moun¢Jïquits Castle of 
a Noble man, Baron of s]Zountflqui¢, the first builder thcrof, 
who came in with lVTliam the Conqueror, and was since named 
Le Sir .Iounflquit: This Castle he buildcd in a place, not 
far distant from Baynardcs, tovardcs thc West. The saine 
lVilliam .IouoEquit liued in thc raignc of ttenry thc first, and 
was witnes to a Chartcr, then grantcd to the Cittic for the 
Shcriffes of London. ichard .[oun¢Jïqui¢ liucd in King 
lons time, and in the yeare, .». was by thc same King 
banished the realm into France, when pcraduenture King Iohn 
caused his Castlc of .[ontJïquit, amongst other Castics of the 
Barons to bec ouerthrown : the which after his rcturne, might 
bce by him againe recdified, for the totali destruction thcrcof 
was aboute the yeare, toE76, when Robert Kiliwarble  Arch- 
bishoppe of Canterbury beganne the foundation of the Fryers 
Preachers Church there, commonly called the Black Fryers, as 
appeareth by a Charter the fourth of Edward the L wherein 
is declared that Gregorie de Rocksley Mayor of London, and 
the Barons of the saine Citie granted, and gaue vnto the saide 
Archbishoppe Roberte, I two fanes or wayes next the streete 
of Baynardes Castle, and the Tower of 2V[ontfiquit, to be 
applyed for the enlargement of the said Church and place. 

One other Tower there was also situate on the riuer of 
Thames neare vnto the said Blacke Fryers Church, on the 
west parte thereof builded at the Citizens charges, but by 
licence and commaundement of Edward the L and of Edward 
the OE. as appeareth by their grantes: which Tower was then 
finished, and so stood for the space of 3oo. yeares, and was at 
the last taken down by the commaundement of Ioh» Sha 
Mayor of London, in the yeare 15o2. 

 Kiiwardby 



7"oe«rs amt Gstc/s 6 9 
An other Tower or Castle, also was there in the West parte Tower or 
Oi r the Cittie, pertayning to the King : For I reade that in the Castle on the 
west of Lon- 
yere o8 7. the ŒEo oi r l'Villiam the first, the Cittie oi r London don by Sainte 
with the Church oi r S. Paule being burned, J]'[aurilius then Brides ehurch. 
Bishop oi r London afterwarde began the foundation oi r a new 
Church, whereunto king William, sayeth mine Author, gaue 
the choyce stones oi r this Castle standing neare to the banke 
of the riuer of Thames, at the west end oi r the Citie. After vita Arken- 
wald. 
this Iauritius, tickard his successor, purchased the streetes 
about Paules Church, compassing the saine with a wall of 
stone and gates. King HeuO, the first gaue to this Richard 
so much oi r the Moate or wall of the Castle, on the Thames 
side to the South, as should be needful to make the saide wall 
of the Churchyearde, and so much more as should suf-fice to 
make a way without the wall on the North side, &c. 
This Tower or Castle thus destroyed stood, as it may seeme, 
in place where now standeth the bouse called Bridewell. For 
notwithstanding the destruction of the said Castle or Tower, 
the house remayned large, so that the Kings of this Realm The Kinges 
house by Saint 
long af'ter were lodged there, and kept the[r Curtes: for Brides in 
vntill the 9. yeare of Icnry the third, thc Courts of law and Fleetstreet. 
Justice were kept in the kinges house, wheresoeuer hee was 
lodged, and hot else where. And that the kinges haue beene 
lodged and kept their Law courts in this place, I could shew 
you many authors of Recorde, but [ for plaine proofe this one iae 70 
may suffice. Hœec est finalis concordia, facta in Curia Domini 
regis apud Sanct. Bridgid. Lomton, a dic Saucti 3Iichaclis in Lib. Burton, 
15. dits, Anno regni rcgis Iohamtis 7. cor«m G. Fil. PetrL sup. Trent. 
Eustacio de Fauconbcrg, Iohanne «te GestlDtge, Osbart filio 
Hruey, I.Valtcr de Crisping Iusticiar. & aliis BaroMbus Domini 
Re, ff&. More (as 3[athew Paris hath) about the yeare oExo. MathewParis, 
manu scripta. 
King Iohn in the t 2. of lais raigne, summoned a Parliament at Parliament at 
S. Brides in London, where hee exacted of the Clergie and s. Brides. 
religious persons the summe of IOCOOO. poundes, & besides 
ail this, the white Monkes were compelled to cancell their 
Priuiledges, and to pay4oooo, poundes to the King &c. This 
house of S. Brides of latter rime being left, and hot vsed by 
the kinges: fell to ruine, insomuch that the verie platforme 
thereof remayned for great part wast, and as it were, but a 



tridewel 
builded by 
Henry the 
eight. 

70 7bwcrs ara? C}rstc'Is 

layestall of filth and rubbish: onely a fayre Well remayned 
there, a great part of this bouse, namely, on the xvest, as hath 
been said, was giuen to the Bishop of Salisbury, the other 
part towardes the East, remayning waste, vntil king Ilem'y 
the 8. builded a stately and beautifull house thereupon, giuing 
it to naine Bridewell, of the parish and well there : this house 
he purposely builded for the entertainemcnt of the Emperour 
Charles the 5. who in the yeare JSOEŒ. came into this Citie, as 
I haue shewed in my summarie, Annales, and large Chronicles. 

Barbican or 
]3urhkcnning. 

ON thc northwcst side of this Citie, neare vnto Rcdcrosse 
streete, there was a Tower commonlie called Barbican, or 
Burhkenning, for that the same being placed on a high ground, 
and also builded of some good height, was in olde rime vscd 
as a Watch Tower for the Cittie, from whence a man might 
behold and view the whole Citie towards the South, as also 
into Kent, Sussex and Surrcy, and likewise cucry other way, 
cast, north, or vest. 
Some other Burhkennings or Watch Towers there vere of 
olde rime, in and about the Cittie, all which were rcpayrcd, 
yca and others new builded, by Gilbart dc Clare Earle of 
Gloccster, in the raigne of King Henry the third, when the 
Barons were in Armes, and held the Citie against the King, 
but the Barons being reconciled to his fauour in the yeare 
x267. hce caused ail their I Burhkenningcs, vatchtowers, and 
Bulwarkes made and repayred by the sayd Earle, to be plucked 
downe, and the ditches to be filled vp, so that nought of them 
might be seene to remaine: and tben was this Burhkenning 
anaongest the rest oucrthrowne and destroycd : and although 
the ditch neare thereunto, called Hounds ditch was stopped 
vp, )-et thc strcete of long timc after was called Houndes 
ditch, and of late rime more commonly called Barbican. 
The plot or seate of this Burhkenning or vatch tower, 
king lz'dward the third in the yeare x336. and the ,c. of 
his raigne, gauc vnto Robert Ufford Earle of Suffolke, by 
the name of his Mannor of Base court, in the parish of 
S. Gilcs without Cripptegate of London, commonly called 
the Barbican. 



7"oToers ami Cas/cls 7 I 
Towo" R«oEall was of old rime the kings bouse, king Stepbeu Tower Royal. 
was there Iodged, but sithence called the Queenes Wardrobe : 
the Princesse, mother to king Richard the OE. in the 4. of his 
raigne was lodged there, being forced to flic from the tower of 
London. when the Rebels possessed it: But on the 15. of 
June (saith Frosard) lVat Tlar being slaine, the king went Iohn Frosard. 
to this Ladie Princesse his mother, then lodged in the Tower 
Royall, called the Queenes Wardrobe, where she had tarried Lib. S. 
2. daies and OE. nights : which Tower (saith the Record of eb°rum" 
Edward the 3" the 36. yeare) was in the Parish of S. 3[ichael 
«le Pater noster, &c. In the yere 1386 , king Rickard with 
Queene Au,te his wife, kept their Christmasse at Eltham, 
whither came to him Lion king of Ermoto', vnder pretence to The king of 
Emony came 
reforme peace, betwixt the kinges of England and France, but into Èngland. 
what his comming profited he only vnderstood : for beside.-. 
innumerable giftes that he receyued of the King, and of the 
Nobles, the king lying then in this (Tower) Royall at the Richard the . 
lodged in the 
Queenes Wardrobe in London, graunted to him a Char,er of a Tower Royal. 
thousand poundes by yeare during his lift. He was, as hec 
affirmed, chased out of his kingdome by the Tartarians. More 
concerning this Tmver shall you read vhen you corne to 
Vintrie ward, in which it standeth. 
Sert,es Tozt,cr in Bucklesberie, was sometilnes the kinges SernesTower 
in Buckles- 
house. Edward the third in the eighteenth yeare of his burie. 
reigne, appoynted lais Exchaunge of monyes therein to be 
kept, and in [ the 3 OE. hec gaue the same Tower to his free l'age 7 2 
Chappell of Saint Stcplto af Westminster. 

Of Schooles and other houses of learning. 

IN tlze ,'aigue of Æh,g Stephcu, and of Hcu, 7 lhc second, saith 
Fitstcphctt, tltcre a,erc it Londott, lhrec prbtcipall Churckcs : 
a,kiclt had famous Schoolcs, cilhcr by îOriuiledge and auncient 
digMlie, or by fauour of some pcrticular îOcrsons, as of Doclors 
whick were accounled ,tolable & rotoa,med for knowledgc in 
Philosopkie. And therc were olhcr i, oEcrior sckooles also. Upon 
Feslittall daj,es lhe 3[aislcrs ruade soient,te nectings in 
Churchcs, wherc lhcb- Scholo's disptttcd Logically a,¢d 

Famous 
8chooles of 
philosophie by 
priuiledge in 
l,ondon. 



Solemne 
meetings 
disputi,,g of 
schollers 
Logically and 
Demonstra- 
tiuely. 

Grammar 
schooles 
scholers : their 
excrcises. 

la, ge 73 
Mathcw Paris. 
Euery Cathe- 
dral Church 
had his school 
for poore 
schollers. 
Ingulphus. 

Free schoole 
t Westmin- 
ster, in the 
raigne of 
Edward the 
Confessor. 

7 2 Of Scbooles ami ot/wr bouses of lcarnbg 
stralinely : some bringing Enlimems, oler pcfcct Sillogismcs : 
some disu¢cd for shew, others to trace out tc truth : cunning 
Sh&ters were thought braue Scholers, whcu thO, flowcd with 
wordes: Others vscd fallac(i)cs : Rcthoritians spake apt O, to 
perswade, obscruing the precepts of Art, and omittinff nothinff 
that mht cerne theh" purposc : the boycs of diuerse Schoolcs did 
cap or pot verses, and contendcd of the principles of Grammar : 
tbcre werc somc which on thc other sidc with Epifframs and 
7,mcs. nipping & quippinff thcir fellowes, and the faults of 
others, though supressing thdr names, moued thereby ranch 
lauffhter amottff lcir Auditors: hitherto Filstehen : for 
Schooles and Schollers, and for their excrcises in the Citie, 
in his dayes, sithence the which rime, as to me it seemeth, by 
the incrcase of Collcdges and Students in the Uniuersities of 
Oxford and Cambridge, the frequenting of schooles and exer- 
cises of schollcrs in the Citie as had beene accustomed hath 
much decreased. 
The three principall Churches, which had these famous 
Schooles by priuiledges, must ncedes be the Cathedrall 
Church of Saint Pau& for one, seeing that by a generall 
Councell holden in ] the yeare of Christ I 17 6. at Rome, in the 
Patriarchie of Laterane, it was decreed, that euerie Cathedrall 
Church should haue his Schoolemaster to teach poore Schollers, 
and others as had beene accustomed, and that no man should 
take any reward for licence to teach. The second as most 
auncient may seeme to haue beene the Monasterie of S. Pels 
at Westminster, wherof Ingulhus, Abbot of Crowland in the 
raigne of IVilliam the Conquerour, writeth thus : 1 [nguhus 
au humb& scruant of God, bornc of Enfflish parents, ht thc 
tost beautoEuH Citie of London, for to attaine to &arnhtg, was 
first put to lZestminstcr, and af ter to stndie at Oxfimd, &'c. 
And writing in praise of Queene Edgitha, wife to Edwarde 
the Confessor : I banc scout, saith hee, oftcn wh«n bchtg but a 
boy, I camc lo see my falher dwellinff in the Kbtges Court, and 
oftcu comming fmm Schoo&, when I met ber, she wouM oppose 
nc, toucMnff my &arning, and &sson, and fallin K from Grain- 
mat fo Logickc, wherin she had some knowledge, she would 
subtilly concludc an Argument with mec, and by hcr handmaiden 
giue mec three or fourc peeccs of monO,, and sonde mee vnto tbc 



Of Schoolcs a¢¢ct othcr holtscs of lc«r¢th¢g 73 
Palace where I shoulde recej,ue some ,iclttals, ami theu bec 
dismissed. 
The third Schoole, seemeth to haue beene in the Monasterie 
of S. Sattiour at Bermondsey in Southwarke : for other Prio- 
ries, as of Saint Iohn by Smithfield, Saint tTartholomcw in 
Smithfield, S. lV[arie Oucrie in Southwarke, and that of the 
Itolie Trinitie by Aldgate.. were all of later foundation, and 
the Friaries, Colledges, and Hospitals in this Citie, were raysed 
since them in the raignes of Henp 3, the 3. t«lvaard the x. . 
and 3- &c. All which houses had their schooles, though hOt 
so famous as these first named. 
But touching Schooles more lately aduanced in this Citie, I 
reade that king Hcnrie the fift hauing suppressed the Priories 
aliens whereof some were about London, namely one ttos- 
pitall, called Out" Ladie of Roun«iuall by Charing Crosse : one 
other Hospitall in Oldborne: one other without Cripplegate : 
and the fourth without Aldersgate, besides other that are now 
worne out of memorie, and whereof there is no monument 
remaining more ] then Rouncittall conuerted to a brother- 
hoode, which continued till the raigne of Henrie the 8. or 
tch,ard the 6. this I say, and other their schools being broken 
vp and ceased : king Henrie the sixt in the =4. of his raigne, 
by patent appointed, that there should bee in London, Grain- 
mat schooles, besides S. Pauh's, at S. d][arlius Le Grand, S. 
3Iarie Le Bow in Cheap, S. 1)unstons in the west and S. 
Anthonies. And in the next yeare, to wit, 394, x the said 
king ordained by Parliament that foure other Grammer 
schooles should be erected, to wit, in the parishes of Saint 
Andrew in Oldborne, Alhallowes the great in Thames streete, 
S. leters vpon Cornehili, and in the Hospitall of S. Thomas 
of Acons in west Cheape, since the which rime as diuers 
schooles by supressing of religious houses, whereof they were 
members, in the raigne of H«nrie the 8. haue beene decayed, 
so againe haue some others beene newly erected, and founded 
for them: as namcly Pauh's schoole, in place of an old 
ruined house, was builded in most ample maner, and largely 
indowed in the yeare I512. by Iohn Collet Doctor of Diuinitie 

priories aliens 
snppressed. 

Page 74 

Henry the sixt 
appoynted 
Grammar 
schooles. 

Grammar 
schools ap- 
poinled by 
parliament. 

Pauls schoole 
new builded. 

For 1394 (.s'l,,w), ,'ead 1447 



74 Of School«s «ml o/ber bourses «f lc«rhzg 
Deane of taulcs, for 53-poore mens children: for which 
there was ordayned a Maister, Surmaister, or Usher, and a 
Free schools Chaplaine. Againe in the yeare 553. after the erection of 
in Christs 
tlospital. Christs Hospitall in the late dissolued house of the Gray 
Fl'iers, a great number of poore children being taken in, a 
Schoole was also ordayned there, at the Citizens charges. 
Freeschoole -,lso in the yere 56 the Marchant Taylors of London 
founded by founded one notable free Grammar Schoole, in the Parish of 
lhe Marchant 
Taylors. S. Lattrence _Poultttcy by Candleweeke street, Richard Hils 
late maister of that companie, hauing giuen 5oo. . towarde 
the purchase of an bouse, called the Mannor of the Rose, 
somctime the Duke of Buckinghams, wherein the Schoole is 
kept. As for the meeting of the Schoolemaisters, on festiuali 
dayes, at festiuall Churches, and the disputing of their 
Schollel's Logically, &c., whereof I have before spoken, the 
Schollers dis- same was long since discontinued : But the arguing of the 
puted in 
S. Bartilmews Schoole boyes about the principlcs of Grammer, hath beene 
chtrchyard, continued cuen till our rime : for I my sclfe in my youth haue 
yearely seene on the Eve of S. tTarthol»tcw the Apostlc, the 
schollers of diuers Grammer schoolcs repayre vnto thc Church- 
yard of S. 17artholomew, the Priorie in Smithfield, vhere vpon 
/'ax 7 a banke boorded [ about vnder a tree, some one Scholler hath 
stepped vp, and there hath apposed and answered, tiil he were 
by some better scholler ouercome and put downe : and then 
the ouercommer taking the place, did like as the first : and in 
the end the best apposers and answerers had rewards, which I 
obserued hot but it made both good Schoolemaisters, and also 
good Schollers, diligently against such times to prepare them- 
selues for the obtayning of this Garland. I remember there re- 
payred to these exercises amongst others the Maisters and 
Schollers of the free Schooles of S. Paul«s in London: of 
Saint Peters at Westminster: of Saint Thomas tcots Hos- 
pitall: and of Saint .tttthonics Hospitall : whereof the last 
named commonly presented the best schollers, and had the 
prize in those dayes. 
Disputation of This Priorie of S. artholomcw, being surrendred to H«trie 
Schollers in 
Christs the 8. those disputations of schollers in that place surceased. 
Ho»pitall. And was againe, onely for a year or twaine, in the raigne of 
ldward thc 6. rcuiued in the Cloyster of Christs Hospitall, 



Of S«hool«s «ml olbcr housses of Icari 75 
where the best Schollcrs, then still of Saint .41tlkonics schoole, 
were rcwarded with bowes and arrowes of siluer, giucn to 
them by sir [arlbt t3ocs, Goldsmith. Neuerthclcssc, how- 
soeuer the encouragement fayled, the schollers of Paulcs, 
meeting with them of S..4tlhonics, would call them AnthoMe 
pigs, and they againc would call the other pigeons of Paulcs, 
because many pigions were bred in 19anlcs Church, and 
Saint .4tthonic was alwayes figured with a pigge following 
him : and mindfull of the former vsage, did for a long season 
disorderly in the open strcete prouoke one anothcr with Sahtc 
tu quoque, 1lacct tibi ttecttm disputarc, placet ? and so pro- 
ceeding from this to questions in Grammar, thcy vsually fall 
from wordcs, to blowes, with their Satchels full of bookcs, 
many rimes in grcat hcaps that they troublcd the strcets, and 
passengers: so that finally they were restrained with the 
decay of Saint tttt]tonigs schoolc. Out of this schoolc haue 
sprong diuerse famous pcrsons, whercof although time bath 
buricd the namcs of many, yct in mine ownc rcmcmbrancc 
may be numbred these following. Sir T/tomas ll[«orc knight 
Lord Chancclor of England, Doctor Nicholas t¢calh somc- 
rime ]3ishop of Rochester, after of Worccster, and lastly, 
Archbishop of ¥orkc, and Lord [ Chancelor of England. l"a:çe 76 
Doctor loht IVltitffift, Bishop of Worcester, and after Arch- 
bishop of Canterburie, &c. 
Of later time, in the yeare of Christ 58oE. thcre was foundcd 
a publike lecture in Chirurgerie to be read in the Colledge of 
Phisitions in Knightriders strecte, to bcgin in the yeare 
584 . on the sixt of May: and so to be continued for eucr 
twice euery wecke, on Wednesday, and Fryday. by the 
honourable Baron, Ioht lord Lomblcy, and the learned l¢ic/tard 
CaMzell, Doctor in Phisicke: the Reader whcreof to be 
Richard Forstcr Doctor of Phisickc, during his life. 
Furthcrmore about the same rime there was also begunne 
a Mathematicall Lecture, to bce read in a faire olde Chappell, 
buildcd by Si»tot t?ayre, within thc Leaden Hall: whereof 
a learned Citizen borne, named Thomas Hood was the first 
Reader. But this Chappcll and other partes of that Hall 
bcing imployed for stowagc f goodes taken out of a great 
Spanish Caracke, tbe said Lecture ccascd any more to be 

Pigeons of 
paules. 

Anthonie 
pigges. 

Mathematical 
lecture read. 

Lectnre in 
Chirurgerie. 



Sir Thomas 
Gresham. 
lectures to bee 
read in Lon- 
don. 

Names of the 
7- first lec- 
turers. 
Pa£'e 77 

76 Of +'chooles crut olher hottses of le«mbtg 
read, and was then in the yeare I588. read in the house of 
Maister Thomas Smith in Grasse streete, &c. 
Last of al, sir Thomas Grcsham knight, Agent to the 
Queens Highnesse, by his last will and testament ruade in the 
yeare 1579. gaue the Royall Exchaunge, and all the buildings 
thereunto appertayning, that is to say, the one moytie fo the 
Maior and communaltie of London and their successors, vpon 
trust that they performe as shall be declared : and the other 
moitie to the Mercers in like confidence. The Maior and 
Communaltie are to find foure to reade Lectures, of Diuinitie, 
Astronomie, Musicke, and Geometrie, within his dwelling 
bouse in Bishopsgate streete, and to bestow the summe of 
zoo. pound, to wit, 5 o. pound the peece, &c. The Mercers 
likewise are to find three Readers, that is in Ciuill law, 
Phisicke, and Rethorick, within the saine dwelling house, the 
summe of I5o.I. to euerie Reader 5o.L &c. Which gift 
hath beene since that time confirmed by Parliament, to take 
effect, and begin after the decease of the Ladie ,Xlnnc Grcsltam, 
which happened in the yeare I596. and so to continue for 
euer. Whereupon the Lecturers were accordingly chosen 
and appointed to haue begun their readings in the Moneth 
of June, 1,597. whose names were AnI, thonie IVootton for 
Diuinite, Doctor 3[athew Gttitt for Phisicke, Doctor ttenric 
3Zottntlocv for the Ciuill law, Doctor Iohn tTull for Musicke, 
I3rercwood 1 for Astronomie, ttenrie tTrigges for Geometrie, 
and Calcb lVillis for Rethoricke. These Lectures are read 
dayly, Sundayes excepted, in the terme times, by euery 
one vpon his day, in the morning betwixt nine and ten, in 
Latine : in the after noone betwixt two and three, in English, 
saue that D. tTull is dispensed with to reade the Musicke lec- 
ture in English onely vpon two seuerall dayes, Thursday and 
Saterday in the after noones, betwixt 3. and 4. of the clocke. 

Houses of students in the Common Lawe. 
An vniuersity BUT besides ail this, there is in and about this Citie, a whole 
of students in 
nd about this Uniuersitie, as it were, of students, practisers or pleaders and 
citie. Iudges of the lawes of this realme, not liuing of common 
 Brerewood] Beerewood, 16o 3 



stipends, as in other Uniuersities it is for ye most part done, 
but of thcir owne priuate maintenance, as being altogither 
fed either by their places, or practise, or otherwise by their 
proper reuenue, or exhibition of parents & friends : for that 
the yonger sort are either gentlemen, or the sons of gcntle- tlousof 
men, or of othcr most welthie persons. Of thcse houscs there sludents of the 
be at this day 4. in all, whereof 9. do stand within thc common 
lawes and 
liberties of this Citie, and 5. in the suburbs thereof, to wit : 
Scrgeants Inne in Fleetstrcctc ff or Iudgcs & Of euery these 
Sergeants Inne in Chancer, lane  Sereants onlv Inns, ye may 
Th Illllcr  " . .  -. rea« more in 
e Iemple [n Fleetstreetc, houses Oltheir seuerall 
The Middle Temple Court. places, where 
Within the Cliffords Inne in Fleetstreete they stand. 
liberties. Thauies Inne in Oldborne  }houses 
of 
Furniuals Inne in Oldborne [-Chanceric. 
Barnards lnne in Oldborne 
Staple Inne in Oldborne 
 Grayes Inne in Oldb°rne }houses of 
Lincolns Inne in Chancerie Court. 
Without the lane by the old Temple. 
liberties. ]Clements Inne 'bouses of Chancerie, without 
New Inne Temple barre, in the liber- 
, .Lions Inne. tie of Westminster. 
There was sometime an Inne of Sargeants, in Oldborne, as ASergeants 
Inne in Old- 
yee may reade of Scrops Inne ouer against Saint Attdrg,es borne. 
Church. 
There was also one other Inne of Chancerie, called Chesters Chesterslnne, 
Inne, for the nearenesse to the Bishop of Chesters house, but orStrandlnne. 
more commonly tearmed Strand Inne, for that it stoode in 
Strand streete, and neare vnto Strand bridge without Temple 
barre, in the libertie of the Duchie of Lancaster. This Inne 
of Chancerie with other houses neare adioyning, were pulled 
downe in the raigne of dward the 6. by dward Duke of 
Sommerset, who in place thereof raised that large and beauti- 
full house, but yet vnfinished, called Sommerset house. 
There was moreouer in the raigne of king etrie the sixt, 
a tenth house of Chancerie, mentioned by Iustice t'tesctte, 
in his boeke of the lawes of England, but where it stoed, 
or when it was abandoned, I cannot finde, and therefore I will 
leaue it, and returne to the rest. 



I Iouse of 
court what 
they be. 

lag e 79 

78 .ç/mte./s of the Co.s.o. Laz,e 
The houses of Court bec replcnishcd partly with young 
studentes, and partly with graduates and practisers of the 
law: but the Innes of Chancerie being as it xvere, prouinces, 
seuerally subiected to the Innes of Court, be chiefly furnished 
with Officers, .A_tturneyes, Soliciters and Clarkes, that follow 
the Courtes of the Kings I3ench, or Common pleas 1 : and yet 
there want not some other, being young students that corne 
thither sometimes from one of the Uniuersities, and some- 
times inmediately from Grammar schooles, and these hauing 
spent sometime in studying vpon the first elements and 
grounds of the lawe, and hauing pcrformed the exercises of 
their own houses (called l?oltas 31-ooles, and putting of cases) 
they proceed to be admitted, and become students in some 
of these route houses or Innes of Court, where continuing by 
the I space of seuen yeares, or thereaboutes, they frequent 
readinges, meetings, boltinges, and other learned exercises, 
whereby growing ripe in the knowledge of the lawes, and 
approued withall to be of honest conuersation, they are either 
by the generall consent of the Benchcrs, or Readers, being of 
the most auncient, graue, and iudiciall men of euerie Inne of 
the Court, or by the speciall priuiledge of the present reader 
there, selectcd and called to the degree of Vtter l?arrestcrs, 
and so enabled to be common counsellers, and to practise the 
law, both in their chambers, and at the Barres, 
Of these after that they be called to a further steppe of 
preferment, called the Bench, there are twaine euerie yeare 
chosen among the I3cnchcrs of cuery Inne of Court, to bce 
readers there, who do make their readings at two times in the 
yeare also : that is, one in Lent, and the other at the beginning 
of August. 
And for the helpe of young students in euerie of the Innes 
of Chauncerie, they do likewise choose out of euery one hme 
of court a Reader, being no Bencher, but an vtter tarrester 
there, of 1o. or . yeares continuance, and of good profite in 
studie. Nowe from these of the sayd degree of Counsellors, or 
Vttcr l?arrcsters, hauing continued therein the space of four- 
teene or fifteene yeares at the leaste, the chiefest and best 
learned are by the Benchers elected to increase the number, as 
1 pleas] place 59 S, 6o 3 



S/deez/« of/be Comewz La¢,c 79 

I sayd, of the lench amongst them, and so in their timc doe 
bccomc first single, and then double readers, to the students 
of those houses of Court: after which last reading they bee 
named -A_pprentices at the lawe, and in default of a sufficicnt 
number of Sergeants at law, these are, at the pleasure of thc 
Prince, to be aduaunced to the places of Sergeants: out of 
which number of Sergeants also the void places of Judges arc 
likcwisc ordinarily fillcd,albcit now and thcn some be aduaunccd 
by the speciall fauour of the t'rince, to the estate, dignitie, and 
place, both of Scrgeant and Judge, as it were in one instant. 
But ri'oto thenceforth thcy hold hot any roome in those 
Innes of Court, being translated to one of the sayde two 
Innes, called Sergeantes Innes, where none but the Sergcants 
and Iudges do conuerse. 

Apprentices 
at the law. 

Of Orders and Customes. 

l'age So 

OF Orders and Customs in this Citie of old time Fitesteph¢t Mn of an 
- trades in dis- 
saith as followcth : llet of all trad«s, sellers of all sorts oj tinctplaces" 
¢varcs, labotrcrs it ctte 7, vorke, ctcr), tornhtg arc lu t]tcir Wine in ships 
and wine in 
distinct aud sertes-ail places: ftrtherntore, fit Loittlon ,poit the tauern». 
rbter «idc, bctwecue the whte bt ships, and the wbe to be soht in Coo« ow i 
Thames street. 
Tau¢rns, is a coumou cookerie or cookes roux, : t]tcre dayly for 
the seasou of the yere, tet tight haue teate, rost, sod, or fi'ied: 
fis]t,flesh, fowles, fit for rick and poore. If auy comc suddenl 3, 
to auy Citieu frot afarre, wcari¢ and hot williug to tarrie till 
the n¢ate bee bought, and drcssed, ¢vhile the scruant brhtgct]t 
vater fdr his uaisters hands, aud fetchet]t bread, ]te shall ]taue 
i»tmediatcly fi-on the Riucrs side, all viands whatsoeuer hc 
d¢siret]t,what itltltitltdg soeuer, eitherof Souldicrs, or strauugers, 
do¢ cone to the Citie, ¢ehatsoeuer houre, day or night, accorditff 
to t]t«ir Dleastr¢s uay refr¢sk t]temsehtes, and they w]tick dclight 
lu dilicatcttesse ntay bec satisfied wit]t as delicate dis]tes therc, 
as tay be round else ¢vher¢. And this Cookes ro¢a is ver3' 
nccessarie to the Çitie : and, accorditg to )9lato in Gorgia« , 
next to l]tisicke, is the offïce af Cookcs, as part if a Citic. 

t Gorgias] Gorgius 6o 3 



Smithfield for 
a plain smooth 
ground, is 
called smeth 
and smothie. 
Market for 
horses and 
other cattell 

l'age 8 

Marchants of 
al nations 
traded at this 
City, & had 
their seuerall 
Keyes and 
wharfes. 

The Authors 
opinion of 
this Citie, the 
antiquitie 
thereof. 
This Citie 
diuided into 
wllld  I o/e 
than 4oo. 
years since. 
and also had 
then both 
Aldermen and 
Shiriffes. 

Customes of 
London. 

Casuahies of 
rires when 
houses wee 
coueed with 
thatch. 

80 Of Orders end Cts/omes 
lVilhout one of the Gates is a plaine fldd, botl in ha»te and 
'tt, wcre cuery fr3,day, vnlesse if be a so/¢ne bidden oly 
day, fs a no/able show of horses /o bec solde, Earles, Barons, 
knigh/s, and Citizens repaire thither to see, or to buy : there 
may you of pl«asure see amb&rs pachtg it dilicatcly : there may 
3,ozt see trotters fit for meu of armes, si/ring more hard : ihere 
may you haue no/ab& yong horse uot yet bwken : thcre may yon 
hatte s/rong s/eedes, wcl limmed gddings, whom /he bttiers do 
espechdly rtard for ace, and swoEtnes : ihe boyes which ride 
/hese horscs, some/ime /wo, some/bne /hrce, doe ruunc faces 
wagers, with a desh-e of praisc, or I hc f ¢,i«torie. Iu an 
oih«r part of that fieht are to be soht ail irai&ments of kus- 
baudty, as also fat swte, mil«]z kitc, sheepe and oxen : /here 
stand also mares and korses, ri/te for ploughcs and/tantes witk 
Ikeir 3,onug coltcs by them. At this Citie farchaut straungers 
of all nations had iheir keyes and whmfes : the Arabians 
sent goMe : the Sabiaus sice ad fi'ankcnsetce : the Scithiau 
armonr, abylon oyle, lndia pmTle garmeuts, Eg3/ precious 
s/ones, .Çorwa3t attd ussia Amberecce and sables, and the 
Prett«k me« wine. ccording 1o the /rutk  Chroticles, this 
Citœe is auncicnler then Route, built of thc ancient Tî'o),atts and 
of rnte, bcfore that was bMlt by Ranmlns, and Rhemus : and 
therefore vseth the attciettl cets/omes  otte. This Citie ctten 
as Romc, is diuided ittto wardes : it bath yearely Shh-iffes in 
stecde of Çottsulles : il bath the dçnitie of Seuators in Aider- 
meu. It bath vuder Offcers, Çottttott Sewers, a/d Conductes 
bi streetcs, according to /he quali/œee of cattses, it bath g«nerall 
Courtes : mtd assemblies vpon appoin/ed dayes. I doe hot thittke 
that lhere is any Citie, wkerebt are bel/er fus/oms, it freqttent- 
itg the Churches, bi serubtg God, in keeping holy dayes, 
gi»ing aimes, in enttaytting slranngers, in so&muisitg ar- 
riagcs, bz furnishbtg banquets, ce&b«ating funerals, aud buryhtg 
dead bodœees. 
The onely plagues of London, (are) immoderate quaffing 
among the fodish sort, and of ten casualties by fire.--Most part 
of the ishops, Abbois, and great Lord«s of tloe land haue bouses 
/here, wkerewt/o they resort, and bes/ow mt]t when they are 
called to Parliament by the king, or to Counsell by their Metro- 
politane, or otherwise by the& priuate businesse. 



Of Ord«rs «ml Custom«s 8I 
Thus farre Fit«stcphcn, of the estate of thinges in his time, 
whereunto may be added the present, by conference whereof, 
the alteration will easily appeare. 
Men of trades and sellers of wares in this City haue 
often times since chaunged their places, as they haue found 
their best aduantage. For where as Mercers, and Haber- 
dashers vsed to keepe their shoppes in West Cheape, of later 
time they helde them on London Bridge, where partly they 
yet remaine. The Goldlsmithes of Gutherons lane, and old 
Exchange, are now for the most part remooued into the 
Southside of west Cheape, the Peperers and Grocers of Sopers 
lane, are now in Bucklesberrie, and other places dispersed. 
The Drapers of Lombardstreete, and of Cornehill, are seated 
in Candlewickstreete, and Watheling streete: the Skinners 
from Saint 3[aric tcllipers, or at the Axe, into Budge row, 
and Walbrooke: The Stockefishmongers in Thames streete: 
wet Fishmongers in Knightriders streete, and Bridge streete : 
The Ironmongers of Ironmongers lane, and olde Iurie, into 
Thames streete : the Vinteners from the Vinetree into diuers 
places. But the Brewers for the more part remaine neare to 
the friendly water of Thames: the Butchers in Eastcheape, 
Saint Nicholas Shambles, and the Stockes Market: the 
Hosiers of olde time in Hosier lane, neare vnto Smithfield, 
are since remooued into Cordwayner streete, the vpper part 
thereof by Bow Church, and last of ail into Birchouerislane 
by Cornehil: the Shoomakers and Curriors of Cordwayner 
streete, remoued the one to Saint [artilts Le Çraud, the other 
to London wall neare vnto Mooregate, the Founders remaine by 
themselues in Lothberie: Cookes, or Pastelars for the more 
part in Thames streete, the other dispersed into diuerse 
pattes. Poulters of late remooued out of the PouRrie betwixt 
the Stockes and the great Conduit in Cheape into Grasse 
streete, and Saint Nicholas Shambles: Bowyers, from Bow- 
yers row by Ludgate into diuers places, and almost worne out 
with the Fletchers: Pater noster makers of olde rime, or 
Beade makers, and Text Writers, are gone out of latcr 
nosler Rowe, and are called Stationers of laules Church 
yarde: Pattenmakers of Saint [arffaret Pattens lane, cleane 
worne out: Labourers euerie worke day are to bec founde in 
STOW. | G 

Page 

Stockfish- 
lalOIlger row' 
old fishstreete, 
and new fish- 
street. 



Marchants of 
all nations. 

Page 8 3 

Thomas Clif- 
lord. 

William of 
Malmesbury. 

82 Of Ord«rs cm? Cus,'amcs 
Cheape, about Sopers lane ende : horse coursers and sellers of 
Oxen, Sheepe, Swine, and such like, remaine in their olde 
Market of Smithfield, &c. 
That Marchants of ail nations had theyr Keyes and wharfes 
at this Citty whereunto they brought their Marchandiscs 
before, and in the raigne of IJt';z;'y the second, naine author 
wrote of his owne knowledge to be true, though for the 
antiquity of the Citty, ] he tooke the common opinion. .Also 
that this Citie was in his rime and afore diuided into wards, 
had yearcly Sherifs, Aldermen, generall courts, and assemblies, 
and such like notes by him set down, in commendation of 
the Cittizens, whereof there is no question, he wrote likewise 
of lais owne experience, as being borne and brought vp 
amongst them. And to confirme lais opinion, concerning 
Marchandises then hither transported, whereof happily may 
bee somc argument, Thomas Clifford (before Fitzstephcns 
time) writing of Edward the Confessor, sayeth to this effect : 
King Edward intending to make his Sepulchre at West- 
minster, for that it was neare to the famous Cittie of London, 
and the Riuer of Thames, that brought in ail kinde of Mar- 
chandises from ail parts of the world, &c. .And lVilliam of 
Mahnsberie, that liued in the raigne of IVilliam the first 
and seconde, Henry the first, and king Stepken, calleth this a 
noble Cittie, full of wealthy citizens, frequented with the trade 
of Marchandises from ail pattes of the world. .Also I reade in 
diuers records that of olde rime no woade was stowed or 
harbored in this Citty, but ail was presently solde in the ships, 
except by licence purchased of the Sheriffes, till of more latter 
time, to witte in the yeare 3 6. Andrew Bokerell being 
Mayor, by assent of the principall cittizens, the Marchants of 
Amiens, Nele and Corby, purchased letters insealed with the 
common seale of the Cittie, that they when they corne, might 
harborow their woades, and therefore should giue the Mayor 
euery yeare 5c. marks starling : and the saine yeare they gave 
cc. 1. towardes the conueying of water from Tyborn to this cittie. 
Alsothe Marchantes of Normandie ruade fine for licencetoharbor 
their Woades till it was otherwise prouided, in the yeare I6 3. 
Thomas Fitz 7"ho»tas being Mayor, &c. which proueth that then, 
'as afore, they were here amongst other nations priuiledged. 



Of Orders «ml Otstomcs 83 
It folloxveth in Fitzstcphcu, that the plagues of £omlou itt plagues of 
that tiJte ,cre hnmoderate quaffiug amoug foolcs, aml oftct London 
imoderat 
casualties byfirc. For the first, to wit of quaffing, it continueth quaffingand 
casualties by 
as afore, or rather is mightily encreased, though greatlie tire. 
qualified among the poorer sort, not of any holy abstinencie, 
but of meere necessitie, Aie and Beere being small, and 
Wines in pricc I aboue thcir reach. As for preuention of,g«s4 
casualties by tire the houses in this citty" being then builded ail 
of tituber and couered with thatch of straw or reed, it was Lib. Constitu- 
long sincc thought good policie in our Forefathers, wisely to tionis. 
Lib. Horne. 
prouide, namcly in the yeare of Christ, I8 9. the first of Lib. Carken- 
Richard the first, tfcury Fitralwhte being then Mayor, that ail well. 
men in this Citty should builde their houses of stone up to 
a certaine height, and to couer thcm with slate or baked tyle : 
since which rime, thanks be giuen to God, there bath not 
happened the like often consuming rires in this cittle as afore. 
But now in our time, instead of these enormities, others are 
corne in place no lessc meete to bee reformed : namely, Pur- 
presturcs, or enchrochmentes on thc H ighvaycs, lanes, and 
common groundes, in and aboute this cittie, whereof a learned 
Gentleman, and graue cittizen hath not many yeares since 
written and exhibited a Booke to the Mayor and communaltie, 
which Booke whether the saine haue beene by them rcad, and 
diligently considered vpon I know not. but sure I ana nothing 
is reformed since concerning this marrer. 
Then the number of carres, drayes, carts and coatches, 
more then hath beene accustomed, the streetes and lanes 
being strcightned, must necdes be daungerous, as dayly ex- 
perience proueth. 
The Coach man rides behinde the horse tayles, lasheth Carts and 
them, and looketh not behind him :. The Draye man sitteth Drayes not 
wel gouerned 
and sleepeth on his Drea, and letteth his horse leade him in this Citty 
home : I know that by the good lawes and customes of this dangerous. 
Citty', shodde carts are forbidden to enter the saine, except 
vpon reasonable causes as seruice of the Prince, or such like, 
they be tollerated. 2klso that the fore horse of euery carriage 
should bee lead by hand: but these good orders are not 
obserued. Of olde rime Coatches were not knowne in this 
Island, but chariots or Whirlicotes, then so called, and they 
G2 

Purpresture in 
and about this 
Citty. 
W. l'atten. 



Lib. S. Mary 
Eborum. 
Riding in 
Wheflicotes. 

Page 

Riding in side 
sadles, that 
vere WOllt to 
ride a stride. 
Riding in 
Çoaches. 

W. Fitz- 
stephen. 

84 Of Or,/ces end Ot«/omcs 
onely vscd of l'rinces or great Estates, such as had their foot- 
men about them: and for example to note, I read that 
Richard the second, being threatned by the rebels of Kent, 
rode from the Tower of London to the Myles end, and with 
him his mother, because she was sicke and weake in a Wherli- 
cote, the Earles of Buckingham, Kent, Warwicke and Oxford, 
Sir Thomas l'crcie, Sir Robert lçnowlcs, the Mayor of London, ] 
Sir Aubc 7 de Hcre that barc the kinges sword, with other 
Knights and Equiers attending on horsebacke. 1 He followed 
in the next year the said king Richard, who took to wife 1 
Ame daughter to thc king of Boheme, that first brought 
hethcr the riding vpon side saddles, and so was the riding in 
Wherlicoates and chariots forsaken, except at Coronations 
and such like spectacles: but now of late yeares the ose of 
coatches brought out of Gcrmanie is takcn op, and ruade so 
common, as there is neither distinction of rime, nor difference 
of persons obserucd: for the world runs on wheeles vith 
many, whose parents were glad to goe on foote. 
Last of all mine Author in this chapter hath these words : 
3last tbart er the lb'ishos, Abbots, and grcat Lardes of the land, 
as if thcy were Citizens and frce men of London, had many 
fayre bouses to resort vnto, and many rick and wcalthy Gentle- 
mcn sge»t thcir money thcre. And in an other place hee hath 
these words : Enery sonday in Lent a fresk companie of you 
mon contes into tkc fichls on horsebacke, and the best horseman 
conductctk thc test, thcn match forth thc Citti»ens sonncs, and 
othcr young men with disarmed lannccs and shiddcs, and 
practise feates of warre : many Courticrs likewise and at- 
tcndants of noble mon repaire to rais excrcise, & whilst tke hopc 
of victorie dot]t eoEame their mindes, th O, doe shew good proofe 
how seruiccablc thcy would be in martial affaD'es, &'c. Againe 
he saith : This Cittie Dt the troublesome tbnc of Khtg Stepheu 
s]lewed al a musIer 20000. arnwd horsemen, and 40000. foot- 
men, seruiceable .for tke warres, &'c. Ail vhich sayings of the 
said Author well considered, doe plainely proue that in those 
dayes, the inhabitants & repayrers to this Citie of what estate 
socuer, spirituall or temporal, hauing houses here, liued 
- But in the yeare next following, the said King Richard tooke to 
wife, &c. 1,598 



Of Orders ami Ctslomes 85 
together in good amity with the citizens, euery man obseruing 
the customes & orders of the Citty: & chose to be contribu- 
tary to charges here, rather than in any part of the land 
wheresoeuer. This citty being the hart of the Realme, the 
Kinges chamber, and princes seate whereunto they ruade 
repayre, and shewed their forces, both of horses and of men, 
which caused in troublesome time, as of king Stcphen, the 
Mustcrs of this Cittic to be so grcat in numbcr. I 
Great families of old time kept. 
AND herc to touch somc what of grcater familics and 
houscholdcs kcpt in former timcs by noble mcn, and grcat 
cstates of this Rcalm% according to thcir honours or dignitics. 
I haue seene an account ruade by /-/. Leicest«r, coffercr to 
Thomas Earle of Lancastcr, for ont whole yeares expences in 
the Earles bouse, from the day ncxt al'ter Michaelmasse in the 
seuenth yere of dward the second, vntill Michaelmasse in 
the eight yeare of the saine king amounting to the sum of 
scuen thousand nine hundred, fiftie seuen pound thirtccne 
shillings route pence halle pcnny, as followeth 
To wit, in the Pantrie, Buttric, and Kitchcn, 345.1. &c. 
for 184. tunnes one pipe of red or claret wine, and one tunne 
of whitc winc bought for the housc, I 4. pound, xvij.s, vi.d. 
For Groceric ware, i8.1i. 17.s. 
For sixe Barrels of sturgeon, t 9.1i. 
For 68. stockfishes, so called, for dricd fishcs of ail sorts, 
as Lings, Habardines, and other, 4I.li. 6.s. 7.d. 
For 174. pound of waxe, with Vermclion and Turpcntine 
to make red waxe, 314.1i. 7.s. 4.d. ob. 
For OE39. li. of Tallow candles for thc houshold, and 87<. 
of lights for Paris candles, callcd Pcrchers, 3I.li. 14.s. 3.d. 
Expences on the Earlcs grcat horscs, and thc kcepers wagcs, 
486.1i. 4s. 3.d. ob. 
Linncn cloth for thc L. and his Chaplcins, and for the 
Pantric, 43.1i.  7.d. 
For  29. dosen of Parchment with Inkc, 4.1i. 8 s. 3.d. ob. 
Summc, 5z3.1i. t7.s. 7.d. ob. 
Item for two clothcs of Skarlet for thc Earlc against 
Christmasse, onc cloth of Russet, for thc Bishop of Angcw, 

The causes of 
greater shewes 
and musters 
in this Citie 
of olde rime, 
more then of 
late. 

l'age $6 
Great familles 
of old time 
kept. 
Tho. Earle of 
Laneaster, his 
housekeeping, 
and charge 
thereof for one 
yeare. 
Record of 
Pont fraet, as 
I could 
obtaine of 
M. Cudnor. 



86 

Of Orders azd Os[omes 

59- clothes in 
liueries 
against 
Christmasse, 

l'age 87 
o 4. cloathes 
in liueries in 
Sommer. 

7o. clothes of Blew for the knights, (as they were then 
termed) 15. clothes of Medley for the Lords clearkes, 28. 
clothes for the Equiers, 15. clothes for Officers, 9. clothes 
for Groomes, 5. clothes for Archers, 4. clothes for Minstrels 
and Carpenters, with the sharing and carriage for the Earles 
Liueries at Christmasse, 46o.li. 5.d. 
Item for 7. Furres of variable Miniuer (or powdred Ermin) 
7. whoodes of Purple, 395- Furres of Budge for the Liueryes 
of Barons Knights, and Clarkes, g3. Furres of Lambe for 
Es]quiers bought at Christmasse, i47.1i. I7.s. 8.d. 
Item 65 . clothes saffron colour, for the Barons and 
Knights: in sommer, Ig. red clothes mixt for Clearkes, 26. 
clothes ray for Esquiers, one cloth ray for Officers coates 
in sommer, and 4. clothes ray for carpets in the hall, for 
345.1i. I3.s. 8.d. 
Item Ioo. peeces of greene silke for the knights, 14. Budge 
Furres for surcotes, 3. whoodes of Budge for Clearks, and 
75. furres of Lambs for the Lordes liueryes in sommer, with 
Canuas and cords to trusse them, 7g.li. I9.s. 
Item Sadles for the Lords liueries in sommer 5 l.li. 6.s. 8.d. 
Item one Sadle for the Earlc of the Princes armes, 4o.s. 
Summe, o79.1i. t S.s. 3.d. 

Item for things bought, whereof cannot be read in my 
note, g4.li. I4.s.I.d. ob. 
For horses lost in seruice of the Earle, 8.1.6.s. 8.d. 
Fees payde to Earles, Barons, knights, and Esquiers, 
693.1i. I5.s. 5.d. 
In gifts to knights of France, the Queene of Englands 
nurces, to the Countesse of Warren, Esquiers, Minstrels, 
Messengers and riders, 9g.li. 4.s. 
Northren Item i68. yeards of russct cloth, and 24. coates for poore 
lusset 
halle yarde men with money giuen to the poore on Maundie Thursday, 
&haifquarter 8.1i. i6.s. 7.d. 
brode, I haue 

seene sold for 
fonte pence 
the yard, and 
was good 
cloath of a 
mingled 
colour. 

Item OE4. silucr dishes, so many sawcers, and so many 
cuppes for thc Buttrie, one paire of Patcrnosters, and one 
siluer coffen bought this ycare, Io3.1i. 5.s. 6.d. 
To di,crsc Messcngers about thc Erles businesse, 34.1i. 
9.s. 8.pencc. 



Of Orders a¢zd Cts/ones 87 
In the Erles chamber, 5.1i. 
To diuersc men for the Erlcs olde debts, 88.1i. 6.s. ob. q. 
Summe,  ZoT.li. 7.s. 11.d. ob. q. 
The expences of the Countesse at Pickering for thc timc 
of this account, as in the Pantrie, Buttrie, Kitchen, and other 
places, concerning thcse Offices, two hundrcd fourcscorc and 
fiue pounds, thirtcene shillings, halfepennie. 
In Wine, Waxe, Spices, cloathes, Furres, and othcr things 
for the Countesses Wardrobe, an hundred fiftie foure poundes ] 
seuen shillings, foure pence, halfepennie. 
Sulnme, 439.1i. 8.s. 6.d.q. 
Summa totalis of the whole expences, 7957.1i. 3.s. 4.d. ob. 
Thus much for this Earle of Lancaster. 

More, I read that in the 14. of the saine Edward the 
second, /ffn, ff Spencer the elder (condemned by the com- 
munaltie) was banished the Realme, at which time, it was 
found by inquisition, that the said Spencer had in sundrie 
shires 59- Mannors: he had 28oo. sheepe, lOOO. Oxcn and 
Steeres, 2oo. Kine, with their Calues, 4o. Mates with thcir 
Coltes, 16o. drawing horse, OEoo. Hogges, 3co. Bullockes, 4 o. 
Tunnes of wine, 6o0. Bacons, 8o. carkases of Martilmasse 
beefe, 6o. Muttons in larder, lO. Tuns of Sidar. His 
armour, plate, iewels, and ready money, better then IOoo.li. 
36. sackes of wooll, and a librarie of bookes. Thus much 
the Record: which prouision for houshold, sheweth a grcat 
familie there to be kept. 
Nearer to our time, I reade in the 36. of 11eurie the sixt, 
that the greater estates of the Realme being called vp to 
London, 
The Earle of Salisburie came with 500. men on horsebacke, 
and was lodged in the Herber. 
Richard Duke of Yorke with 400. men lodged at laymo-ds 
Castell. 
The Dukes of Excester and Sommersct, with 8eo. men. 
The Earle of Northumberland, the Lord Egremont, and 
the Lord Clifford, with 15oo. men. 
Richard Net«ell Earle of Warwicke, with 600. men, ail in 

tag¢ 88 

Record tower. 
Hugh spencer 
the elder, his 
prouision for 
housekeeping, 
which sheweth 
a great 
family to be 
kept in 
houshold. 

Rob. Fabian's 
manuscript. 



Ncuell earle of 
warwicke his 
housekeeping. 

Ric. Redman 
Bishop of Ely. 

lage 89 

Tho. Wolsey 
Arch. of York. 

Lib. Ely. 
West bishop 
of Ely. 

Edward Earl 
of Darby. 

Thomas I ord 
Audley. 

Euerv liuerie 
eoat "had three 
yards of broad 
cloath. 

88 Of Orders aed Ctsloenes 
red Jackets, imbrodered with ragged staues before and behind, 
and was lodged in Warwicke Lane : in whose house there was 
oftentiriaes six Oxen eaten at a breakfast, and euery Tauerne 
was full of his meate, for he that had any acquaintaunce in 
that house, nfight have there so much of sodden and rost 
meate, as hee could pricke and carrie vpon a long Dagger. 
Richard Redman Bishop of Eie, 5oo, the 6. of Hcm'ic 
the seuenth, besides his great familie, house keeping, almesse 
dish, and reliefe to the poore, wheresoeuer he was ldged. 
In his trauailing, when at his comming, or going to or from 
any towne, the I belles being rung, ail the poore would corne 
togither, to whom he gaue euery one 6.d. at the least. 
And now to note of our owne time somewhat. Omitting 
in this place Thomas ll'olsey Archbishop of Yorke, and Car- 
dinall, I referre the Reader to my Dlnal«s, where I haue 
sct downe the order of lais house, and houshold, passing ail 
other subiectes of his time. His seruants dayly attending 
in his house wcre neare about 4ço. omitting his scruants 
seruants, which were many. 
Nicholas ll'cst Bishop of Ely, in the ycare 153. kcpt con- 
tinuaily in his house an hundred seruants, giuing to thc one 
halle of them 53.s. 4.d. thc peccc yearely: to thc othcr halle 
each 4o.s. the pcece, to euery one, for his winter Gowne, 
route yeards of broad cloath, and for his Sommer coate thre 
yards and a halle : he dayly gaue at his Gates bcsides brcad 
and drinke, warme meate to two hundred poore people. 
The housekeeping of dward late Earle of Darbie, is hot 
to be forgotten, who had 2EEzo. men in checke roll: his 
feeding aged persons, twice euery day, sixtie and odde besides 
all commets, thrise a weeke appoynted for his dealing dayes, 
and euery good Fryday 27oo. with nleate drinke and money. 
Thomas Audley Lord Chauncellor, his famille of Gentlemen 
belote him in coates garded with vcluet, and Chaines of 
gold : his yeoman 1 after him in the same liuerie hot garded. 
ll'illiam _Pvlet Lord great maister, Marques of Win- 
chester, kept the like number of Gentlemen and yeoman  in 
a liuery of Reding tawny, and great reliefe at lais gate. 
T]totas Lord Cromwel, Erle of Essex kept the like, or 
1 yeoman] 16o3; yeomen 1633 



O/Ortier« a.d C«zs/omes 8 9 
greater number in a liuery of gray Marble, the Gentlemen "rhomasLord 
Cromwell. 
garded with Veluet, the yeoman  with the saine cloth, yet 
their skirtes large inough for their fi'iends to sit vpon them. 
dward Duke of Sommerset was not inferiour in keeping Duke of 
a number of tall and comely Gentlemen, and yeoman 
his house was then in building, and most of his men were 
lodged abroade. 
The late Earle of Oxford, father to him that now liueth, 
hath beene noted within these fortie yeares, to haue ridden Ofora. 
into ths Citie, & so to his house by London stone, with 8o. 
Gentlemen in a ] liuery of Reading Tawny, nd chaines of gold 
aut their necks before him, nd . tall yeomen in the 
like liuery to follow him wlthout chaines, but all hauing 
his cognisance of the blew Bore, embrodered on their left 
shoulder. 
Of charitable aimes it old rimes giueu. 
These as ail other of their times gauc great relief to the 
poore: I my selfe, in that declining rime of charity, haue oft 
seene at the Lord Crotwels gare in London, more then two Aimes giuen 
at the Lorde 
hundcred persons serued twise euery day with bread, mcate Cromds 
and drinke sufficient, for hee obserued that auncient and gate. 
charitable custome as ail prelates, noble men, or men of 
honour and worship his predecessors had done before him: 
whereof somewhat to note for example, Vcncrable Bcdc Bede. 
writeth that Prelates of bis rime hauing peraduenture but 
wodden Churches, had notwithstanding on their borde at 
theyr meales one Ahnes dish, into the which was carued some Aimes dish t 
on Tables. 
goed portion of meate out of euery oth6r dish broght to 
their Table, ail which was giuen to the poore, besides the 
fragments left, in so much as in a hard rime, a poore Pre-Almei dish 
giuen to the 
late wanting victuals, bath caused his aimes dish, being siluer, poore. 
to be diuided amongst the poore, therewith to shift as they 
could, fil God should send them better store. 
Such a Prelate was lheA,ald Bishop of Winchester in Bishoppe of 
Winchester 
the raigne of King dgar, about the yeare of Christ, 963 . hi saying 
hee, in a greate famine, solde away ail the sacred vessels of t°uching the 
reliefe ofthe 
his Church, for to relieue the almost starued people, saying poore. 
that there was no reason that the senseles Temples of God 
t yeoman] v. ri. 88 



Bishoppe of 
Notwich solde 
his plate. 

Archbishoppe 
of Canterbm y 
his charity. 

lage 9 t 

l'eter de 
lckham. 
Ten thousand 
poore people 
dayly fed and 
sustained by 
Itenrie the 2. 

Record of the 
Tower. 
Henrie the 3- 
fed 6000. 
.poore people 
n one day. 

9 ° Of Ora'ers ad Ots[omes 
should abound in riches, and liucly Temples of the holy 
Ghost to lacke it. 
IValtcr de Sufflde Bishoppe of Norwich was of the like 
minde: about the y.eare 45 in a rime of great dearth, he 
Solde ail lais plate, and distributed it to the poore euery 
pennyworth. 
Robert ll'inchdscy Archbishoppe of Canterbury, about the 
ycare OE93. bcsides the dayly fragments of lais house, gaue 
euery fryday and sunday vnto euery beggar that came to his 
gare, a lofe of bread sufficicnt for that day, and there more 
vsually, euerie such Ælmcs day in time of dearth, to the 
number of 5. and otherwise 4. at the lcast : more, hee 
vsed cucry great Festiuall day to giue 5c. pence to so 
many poore people, to sende daylie I meate, bread and drinke, 
to such as by age, or sickenesse were not able to fetch his 
aimes, and to send meate, money and apparell to such as 
he thought needed 
I reade in 17, that ttcnric the second after lais returne 
into Egland, did pennance for the slaughter of ThOlas 
Bccbet, of vhom (a sore dearth incrcasing) ten thousand 
persons, from thc first of Aprill, till new corne was inned, were 
dayly fed & sustained. 
More, I find recorded that in the yeare 1z36, the OEo. of 
lcnrie the third, IVilliam de laucrhull the kinges Treasurer 
was commaunded, that vppon the da), of the Circumcision of 
our Lord, 6cc. poore people should be fed at Westminster, 
for the state of the king, Queene, and their children. The like 
commaundement, the said king Ieurie gaue to Huglt Gifford, 
and IVilliam t¢rowlC, that vpon Fryday next after the 
Epiphanie, they should cause to be fed in the great Hall at 
Windsore, at a good tire, ail the poore and needie children 
that could be found, and the kings children being weighed and 
measured, their weight and measure to be distributed for 
their good estates. These fewe examples for charitie of kings 
may suffice. 
I reade in the raigne of dward the third, that Richard de 
l?erie Bishop of Durham, did weekely bestow for the reliefe 
of the poore eight quarters of wheate ruade into bread, besides 
his ahnes dish, fragments of his house, and great summes of 



Of Orders and Ostomes 9 T 
mony giuen to the poore when he iourneyed. _And that 
these Mmes dishes were as well vsed at the Tables of Noble 
men, as of the Prelates, one note may suffice in this place. 
I reade in the yeare 45, that i«ard Duke of Yorke Dukeof 
then clayming the Crowne, the Lord Riuers should haue Glocesters 
aimes dish, 
passed the Sea about the kings business, but staying at contained a 
great qmntitie 
Plimmoth till his money was spent, and then sending for more, ri«. 
the Duke of Sommerset sent him the Image of Saint Ç¢¢ in 
siluer and golde, to be solde, with the almes dish of the Duke 
of Glocester, which was also of great price, for coyne had 
they none. 
To ende of Orders and Customes in this Citie: also of great 
families kept by honoutable persons thither repayring. And 
of charitable aimes of olde rime giuen, I say for conclusion, 
that ail noble persons» and other of honour and worship, in 
former times lodging in this Citie, or liberties thereof, did ,,« ç 
without grudging, beare their parts in charges with the Citizens, 
according to their estimated estates, as I haue before said, and 
could proue by examples, but let men call to minde sir omas 
Çramw¢l then Lord priuie Seale, and Vicker generall, lyinff T. Cromwell 
in the Citie of London, hee bare his charges to the great tmuster.the great 
muster there» in dnna 539- he sent his men in great number 
to the Miles ende, and after them their armour in Carres, with 
their coates of white cloth, the armes of this Citie, to wit, a red 
crosse, and a sword on the breast, and backe, which armour 
and coates they ware amongst the Citizens, without any 
difference, and marched through the Citie to Westminster. 
Sports and pastimes of old time vsed in this Citie. 
LET vs now (sait]t Fitzstcp]ten) corne to the sportes attdofspotsand 
pastimes, sechtg it is fit that a citic shouM hot only be pasmesin 
this Citie, 
commodious and serious, but also inertie and sorul : where- euerie thing 
hath his time, 
eon lu the seales of the Popes, vntil the time of Pope Lco, on the  time to 
one side vas S. Peter fishing a,ith a key ouer him, rea«hed as it vee, a rime 
to laugh, 
were O' the hand of God out of heaueu, and about it this verse,  time 
Tu pro me nauem liquisti, suscipe clauem, to mourn, d 
a time to 
And on the other side a,as a Citie, aud this inscription on it. daunce. 
Aurea Roma. Likcvisc to the praisc of Augustus Coesar, and Eele». 3. 
the Citie in respect of th¢ shc.wes and sorts was writen : 



Stage playes. 

Cock fighting. 

Ball play. 

Exercises of 
warlike feates 
on horsebacke 
with disarmed 
I.aunces. 

Battailes on 
the water. 

Leaping, 
dancing, 
shooting, 
wrestling. 

9 2 SiboHs aezal Pas/iezzes 
Nocte pluit tota, rcdcunt spcctacula mane, &c. 
«lll Itight il rahtcs, ami shcws at morvobk rctttr]tc 
And Cœesar wilh almg«hly Ioue bath malcht an eqttal ,.a«,t. 
Bnt Zotdon for lhe shcws ,on Theaa'rs, and Comicall 
pastiucs, bath holy play«s, rcprcsculatious f ,O,racles whick 
holy Co,essours hatte wrotoEht, or rcprescttalions of lormeuts 
whercin the constaucœe of 3[arO,rs appearcd. Euc, W 3,eare also 
at Shronctuesday, that wc ,nay bcgin with childreus sorts, 
scehtg we al bang becne childreu, the schoo# boycs do 
Cockes of the gaine to theh" toaster, and a# the forenoone they 
dclight thcmschtcs it Cockfighthtg : aftcr dhmcr aH 1Ire yonthcs 
go brio the fidds lo phz 3, at lhe bal The schollers of 
schoo& ha,te the& ball, or baston, lu the& hauds : the auucœeenl 
and wcalthy mou of the Citie co,ue foortk ou horscbacke lo sec 
the sport of thc yo»g mon, and lo t«ke part of tbe p&asure 
bcholdi»ff lheh" agilitie. Ettcry Fyday iu Lcut a frcsh compauy 
of 3,oung" ,tet coq,tes itto tke ficM oit hors«back, attd t/te 
horsc,uau con«htcteth the resL Thcu ,narch forth the Citizcts 
sons, attd other 3,ong te,t with disar,»ed latt,tces and shh'lds, 
aud there lhey practise fcates of zvarre. 3Ia,ty Coin-tiers like- 
wise whcn the khtff licth note, and atlcudants of ,toblc **teu doe 
repa&e to thcsc cxcrcises, and while lhe hope of ,,iclorœee doth 
hoEame thcir mbtds, «to shew ffood proofe how seruh'cab& they 
wouM bec ht ,«artiall arcs. Iu Eas[cr holy dayes they fighl 
baltail«s on lbc «alcr, a shœehl is hatg«d zou a po&, fl.red 
the midst er the strcam, a boat is preparcd without oares lo bce 
caried by ,,io&nc« of the ŒEoah',ç and lu thc fore part thcrcof 
staudctk a youug nau, rea«tie to ghtc charge ,on lac shicld 
with his lanncc : {f so be hee breaketh his launcc agabtst thc 
shœeeld, aud doth uot fall, he is lhonght Io haz,e perfi,rmed 
a worthy deed. If so & without breakiuff his launce, he 
nota slwnffly agaiusl the shicld, dowtte he fall«th iuto thc watcr, 
for the boat is vio&utly forced with thc tidc, bnt ou each side of 
the shiel«& ridc two boates, truishcd witk yottg men, whicA 
rccottcr him t/rat fallcth  as soo,te as thcy uay. lou 
bridge, oha,fes, amt houscs, b3' l/te rittcrs sh&, staud great 
numbcrs to sec, & laugh theraL I,t the ho O, dayes aH 
Sommer the youths are excrciscd ht &aping, dauciug, shoolittg, 
* baston] bastion z59 & 16o 3 e falleth] faheth 16o 3 



.,ho«I« aml laslim«s 93 
wrastling, casling lhe stou«, and practi,;ing th«h" shichts : 
[aidcns O'ip ht thcir Timbrcls, and damtce as long as lhcy eau 
wcll sec. bt l Vinlcr cttelç, hO O, dt beforc dinucr, thc Boarcs 
preparcd for brawue arc set to fight, or elsc Buls and 
are ba3'lcd. 
lVhcn lhc ffrcal fcune or [oore, which watcr«#t the wals I of 
thc Cilic ou the North side, is froscn, tatty 3,onff 
ou ghe ycc, some striding as wid« as th 7 may, doe slidc 
swoElly: othcrs ntak thcmsehtes s«al«s of yce, as grcal as 
lilstoucs : otte sils douane, ntatty hand in haud doe draw hi»t, 
and ouc sli??iug on a su&&u, aHfart t«ithcr : sonte lic bones 
1o l]teb" fcclc, and vu&v- thcb- hedes, and s]touing thcmsclucs 
by a lil#c pickd Staff,3 doe slide as swoElO, as a bh'd fliclh 
l]tc ayre, or au arrow out of a Crosscbow. Samclhuc 
rttune toffithcr with Po&s, aud hitlhtff otte thc o#tcr, O,thcr ottc 
or both &e fall, hot without hurt: somc brcak thcir armes, 
somc lheh" fiffg«s, but youth desh'ous of fflorœe in #ris sort 
crcrciselh il seoEc agaynsl l]tc lime of warrc. [any of 
Cilisens doe ddig]tt lhcmselttcs bt Hawb, and hauudes, 
lb O, hatte libcrlic of huuting ht 3[iddlcs, Harlfordshh'c, 
Chiltron, and in A'«ut to lhe water o Cray. Thus farre 
Filastcphcu of sportes. 
These or the like exercises haue beene continued till out 
rime, namely in stage playes, whereof ye may read in 
39 x. a play by the parish Clearkes of London at the Skinners 
well besides Smlthfield : which continued three dayes togither, 
the king Queene and Nobles of the Realme being present. 
And of another, in the yeare x4 9. which lasted eight dayes, 
and was of matter from the creation of the world, whereat was 
present most part of the Nobilitie, and Gentrie of Egland. Of 
late time in place of those Stage playes, hath beene vsed 
Comedies, Tragedies, Enterludes, and Histories, both true and 
fayned : For the acting whereof certaine publike places haue 
beene erected. Also Cockes of the game are yet cherished 
by diuerse men for their pleasures, much money being laide 
on their heades, when they fight in pits whereof some be 
costly ruade fi»r that purpose. The Ball is vsed by noble men 
and gentlemen in Tennis courts, and by people of meaner sort 
in thc open fi¢lds, and streetes. 

I auncing, 
Fighting of 
Boars, bayting 
of Beares and 
Bulles. 

t'agi 94 
The Moorê- 
field when 
thee was no 
ditch by the 
wall of the 
Citie. 
sliding on the 
yce. 

Itauking and 
hunting. 

A stage play 
continued 
3- dayes. 

A stage play 
that lasted 
eight dayes. 
Theater and 
Curten for 
Comedies & 
other shewes. 

Cocke fight. 

The Ball at 
Tennis play. 



Pae 9 
Running at 
the Qninten 
for prises. 
Math. Paris. 

The kings 
sertlan|s 
deriding the 
Citizens were 
sore beaten, 
but the 
Citizens were 
fined by the 
king. 

Quinten vpon 
Cornehill. 

Running with 
staues on the 
Thames. 

Leaping, 
dancing, 
shooting, 
wrestling. 
Matthew 
Paris. 

94 .b]Sorts end t'«s/imes 

The marching forth of Citizens sonnes, and other yong 
men on horsebacke, with disarmed Launces and Shieldes, 
there to practise feates of warre, man agaynst man, hath long 
since been left of, but in their Citie, they haue vsed on horse- 

pared as a prise: 

backe, to runne at a dead marke, called 
a Quinten: for note whereof I reade, 
that in I the yeare of Christ 253, the 
38. of 1]cm-le the third, the youthfull 
Citizens, for an exercise of their acti- 
uitie, set forth a gaine to runne at the 
Quinten, and whosoeuer did best, should 
haue a Peacocke, which they had pre- 
certaine of the kings seruants, because 

the Court lay then at Westminster, came as it were in 
spite of the Citizens, to that gaine, and giuing reprochfull 
names to thc Londoners, which for the dignitie of the Citie, 
and auncient priuilcdge vhich they ought to haue enioyed, 
were called Barons: the said Londoners, hot able to bear so 
to be misused, fell vpon thc kings seruants, and bet them 
shrewdly, so that vpon complaint (to) the king, he fincd the 
Citizens to pay a thousand Markes. This exercise of running 
at the Quinten, was practised by the youthfull Citizens, as well 
in Sommer as in Winter, namely, in the feast of Christmasse, 
I haue seene a Quinten set vpon Cornehill, by the Leaden 
Hall, where the attendantes on the Lords of merrie Disports 
haue runne, and ruade great pastime, for he that hit hOt the 
brode end of the Quinten, was of ail men laughed to scorne, 
and he that hit it full, if he rid hot the faster, had a sound 
blowe in his necke, with a bagge full of sand hanged on the 
otherend. I haue also in the Sommer season seene some vpon 
the riuer of Thames rowed in whirries, with staues in their 
hands, fiat at the fore end, running one against another, and for 
the most part, one, or both ouerthrowne, and well dowked. 
On the Holy dayes in Sommer, the youthes of this Citie, 
haue in the field exercised themselues, in leaping, dauncing, 
shooting, wrestling, casting of the stone or ball, &c. 
And for defence and vse of the weapon, there is a speciall 
profession of men that teach it. Ye may reade in mine 
Z1nuales, hov that in the yeare 2oE. the Citizens kept gaines 



.5orts cm/ ltsti/m's 95 
of defence, and wrestlings neare vnto the I lospitall of Saint 
Giles in the field where they chalenged, and had the mastrie 
of the men in the Suburbs, and other commoners, &c. Also 
in the yeare .1453. of a tumult ruade agaynst the Maior, at 
the wrestling besides Clearkes well, &c. Which is sufficient 
to proue that of olde time the exerlcising of wrestling, and such 
like hath beene much more vsed then of later yeares. The 
youthes of this Citie also haue vsed on holy dayes after Een- 
ing prayer, at their lIaisters doores, to exercise their Wasters 
and Bucklers: and the lVIaidens, one of them playing on a 
Timbrell, in sight of their Maisters and Dames, to daunce 
for garlandes hanged thwart the streetes, which open pastimes 
in my youth, being now suppressed, worser practises within 
doores are to be feared: as for the bayting of Bulles and 
Bears, they are till this day much frequented, namely in 
Bearegardens on the Banks side, wherein be prepared Scaf- 
folds for beholders to stand vpon. Sliding vpon the Ice is 
now but childrens play: but in hawking & hunting many 
graue Citizens at this present haue great delight, and doe 
rather want leysure then good will to follow it. 
Of triumphant shewes ruade by the Citizens of London, yee 
may read in the yere 1236. the 2e. of Hcnrie the third, 
Aud1"goEu lokt'l'gll, 1 then being Maior, how Helimzor daughter 
to Reymond Earle of Prouance, riding through the Citie 
towardes Westminster, there to be crowned Queene of Eng- 
land, the Citie was adorned with silkes, and in the night with 
Lamps, Cressets, and other lights, without number, besides 
many Pageants, and straunge deuises there presented, the 
Citizens also rode to meet the King and Queene, clothed in 
long garments embrodered about with gold, and silks of di- 
uerse colours, their horses gallantly trapped to the number of 
360. euery man bearing a cup of gold or siluer in his hand, 
and the kings trumpetters sounding before them : These Citi- 
zens did minister wine, as Bottelers, which is their seruice at 
the coronation. More, in the yeare 1298. for victorie obtained 
by Edward the first agaynst the Scots, euery Citizen accord- 
ing to their seuerall trade, ruade their seuerall shew, but speci- 
ally the Fishmongers, which in a solemne Procession passed 
 Bokerell] Bockwell 1598, 16o 3 

Gaines of 
defence. 

tage 96 

Playing at the 
Buckles. 

Dauncing for 
garlands in 
the streets. 

Matthew 
Paris. 
Shewes for 
triumphes. 

The Citizens 
roade. 

Imbrodered 
garments. 



Fishmongers 
procession, for 
triumph of 
victory against 
the Seottes, 
more then 
looo. hors- 
meII. 

l'ae 97 
A shew by 
torch light, 
being a Mom- 
mery of more 
then Ioo. 
horses. 

The Prince did 
winne three 
Iewels of the 
Maskers. 

9 6 .orts «n,t/'«s/imcs 
through the Citie, hauing amongest other Pageants and shews, 
foure Sturgeons guilt, caried on four horses: then foure 
Salmons of silver on foure horses, and after them six & fortie 
armed knights riding on horses, ruade like Luces of the sea, 
and then one representing Saint M'aoenes, because it was vpon 
$. ][anes day, with a thousand horsemen, &c. 
One other shew in the yeare 1377, ruade by the Citizens for ] 
disport of the yong prince Richard, son to the blacke prince, 
in the feast of Christmas in this manner. On the $onday 
before Candlemas in the night, one hundred and thirty Citti- 
zens disguised, and well horsed in a mummerie with sound of 
Trumpets, Shackbuts, Cornets, Shalmes, and other Minstrels, 
and innumerable torch lights of Waxe, rode from Newgate 
through Cheape ouer the bridge, through $outhwarke, and so 
to Kennington besides Lambhith, where the young Prince 
remayned with his mother and the Duke of Lancaster his 
vncle, the Earles of Cambridge, Hertford, Warwicke and 
Suffolke, with diuers other Lordes. In the first ranke did 
ride 48. in the likenes and habite of Esquires, two and two 
together, cloathed in redde coates and gownes of Say or 
Sindall 1, with comely visors on their faces: after them came 
riding 48. knightes in the saine liuery, of colour and stuffe: 
Then followed one richly arrayed like an Emperour, and after 
him some distance, one stately tyred like a Pope, whom fol- 
lowed 4. Cardinals, and after them eight or renne with black 
visors not amiable, as if they had beene Legates from some 
lorrain Princes. These maskers after they had enteîed the 
Mannor of Kennington, alighted from their horses, and entred 
the hall on foot, which donc, the Prince, his mother, and the 
Lordes came out of the Chamber into the hall, whome the 
saide mummers did salute: shewing by a paire of dice vpon 
the table their desire to play with the Prince, which they so 
handled, that the Prince did alwayes winne when hec cast 
them. Then the mummers set to the Prince three .jewels, one 
after another, which were a boule of gold, a cup of gold, and 
a ring of gold, which the Prince wanne at three casts. Then 
they set to the Princes mother, the Duke, the Earles, and 
other Lordes, to euery one a ring of gold, which they did also 
 Sindall] Sandall 6o3 



@orls and Iastimes 97 
win : Af ter which they were feasted, and the musicke sounded, 
the prince and Lords daunced on the one part with the mure- 
mers, which did also daunce : which iolitie being ended, they 
were againe ruade to drinke, and then departed in order as 
they came. 
The like was to Itenry the fourth in the OE. of his raigne, hee 
then keeping lais Christmas at Eltham, xv Aldermen of London 
and their sonnes rode in a mumming, and had great thanks. 
Thus much for sportfull shewes in Triumphes may suffice : I 
now for sportes and pastimes yearely vsed, first in the feaste 
of Christmas, there was in the kinges house, wheresoeuer hee 
was lodged, a Lord of Misrule, or Maister of merry disports, 
and the like had yee in the house of euery noble man, of 
honor, or good worshippe, were he spirituall or temporall. 
Amongst the which the Mayor of London, and eyther of the 
shiriffes had their seuerall Lordes of Misrule, euer contending 
without quarrell or offence, who should make the rarest 
pastimes to delight the Beholders. These Lordes beginning 
their rule on Alhollon Eue, continued the same till the morrow 
after the Feast of the Purification, commonlie called Candle- 
mas day: In ail which space there were fine and subtle dis- 
guisinges, Maskes and Mummeries, with playing at Cardes 
for Counters, Nayles and pointes in euery house, more for 
pastimes then for gaine. 
Against the feast of Christrnas, euery mans house, as also 
their parish churches were decked with holme, Iuie, Bayes, 
and what soeuer the season of the yeare aforded to be greene : 
The Conduits and Standardes in the streetes were likewise 
garnished, amongst the xvhich I reade in the yeare x444. that 
by tempest of thunder and lightning, on the first of Februarie 
at night, Powles steeple was fiered, but with great labour 
quenched, and towarde the morning of Candlemas day, at the 
Leaden Hall in Cornhill, a Standarde of tree being set vp in 
midst of the pauement fast in the ground, nayled fui of Holme 
and Iuie, for disport of Christmas to the people, was torne vp, 
and cast downe by the malignant spirit (as was thought) and 
the stones of the pauement all aboute were cast in the streetes, 
and into diuers houses, so that the people were sore agast of 
the great tempests. 
srow. I tl 

t'age 9 8 
L. of Misrule 
at Christmas. 

Tempestes of 
lightning and 
thunder fiered 
Powles 
steeple, 
ouerthrew the 
standard at 
Leaden hall, & 
threw stones 
of the paue- 
ment into 
mens houses. 



Twisted trees 
let from the 
woods. 

May gaines. 

]'age 99 
Edward IIall. 

Robin hoode 
and his men 
shot belote 
the king. 

9 8 

Sïborls am t t«slilltes 

In the weeke before Easter, had ye great shewes made for 
the fetching in of a twisted tree, or With, as they termed it, 
out of the Woodes into the Kinges house, and the like into 
euery mans house of Honor or Worship. 
In the moneth of May, namely on May day in the morn.. 
ing, euery man, except impediment, would valke into the 
sweete meadowes and greene woods, there to reioyce their 
spirites with the beauty and sauour of sweete flovers, and with 
the harmony of birds, praysing God in their kind, and for 
example hereof Edward [ Hall hath noted, that K. Henry the 
eight, as in the 3" of his raigne and diuers other yeares, so 
namely in the seauenth of his raigne on May day in the morn- 
ing with Queene A'athcrcn his wife, accompanied with many 
Lords and Ladies, rode a Maying from Green witch to the 
high ground of Shooters hill, where as they passed by the way, 
they espied a companie of tall yeomen cloathed all in Greene, 
with greene whoodes, and with bowes and arrowes to the 
number of . One beng their Chieftaine was called Robin 
Hoodc, who required the king and lais companie to stay and 
see his men shoote, whereunto the king graunting, Robin 
hoocte whistled, and all the e. Archers shot off, loosing all at 
once, and when he whistled againe, they likewise shot againe, 
their arrowes vhistled by craft of the head, so that the noyse 
was straunge and loude, which greatly delighted the King, 
Queene, and their Companie. Moreouer, this Robiz Hoode 
desired the King & Queene with their retinue to enter the 
greene wood, where, in harbours ruade of boughes, and decked 
with flowers, they were set and serued plentifully with venison 
and wine, by Robin Hoodc and his meynie, to their great con- 
tentment, and had other Pageants and pastimes as ye may 
reade in my saide Authour. I find also that in the moneth of 
May, the Citzens of London of all estates, lightly in euery 
Parish, or sometimes two or three parishes ioyning togither, 
had their seuerall mayings, and did fetch in Maypoles, with 
diuerse warlike shewes, with good Archers, Morice dauncers, 
and other deuices for pastime all the day long, and towards 
the Euening they had stage playes, and Bonefiers in the 
streetes: of these Mayings, we reade in the raigne of Henry 
the sixt, that the Aldermen and Shiriffes of London being on 



@orts altdPastimes 99 
1V[ay day at the Bishop of Londons wood in the parish of Bishopswood 
Bishops hall 
Stcbunheath, and hauing there a worshipfull dinner for them- by Blethenhall 
selues and other commers, Lydoeatc the Poet that was a Monke greene. 
of Bery, sent to them by a Pursiuant a ioyfull commendation 
of that season containing 6. staues in meter Royall, beginning 
thus. 
2][igktie Flora, Goddcssc of frcsh flowcrs, "rhe pleasant 
month of May 
which clolhcd bath lhe soyle hz htstic ffrecnc, commended. 
A[ade buds sprinff, wit]z hcr swccl« sbowcrs, [ 
by iuj¢ucuce of the Sttte shhtc. Fage ,oo 
To doe flcasance of iutcnt fdl clcauc, 
vnto the Statcs which now sit hcrc. 
Iath Ver  downc sent hcr owue dazt$htcr dcarc. 
l]¢akbtff thc verttc, that durcd" it thc root«, 
Callcd of Clarkcs, thc vcrtuc vcgitable, 
for fo transccud, most holsomc atd most sootc 
Into thc crop, this season so affrceablc, 
thc bawmy liquor, is so commeudablc, 
That it reioyccth, witIt his fresh mo3,sttre , 
nat, beast, and fowlc, and eucry creattre, gc. 
These great Mayings and Maygames made by the gouernors 
and Maisters of this Citie, with the triumphant setting vp of 
the great shaft (a principall May-pole in Cornehill, before 
the Parish Church of $. Andrcw) therefore called Undershaft, 
by meane of an insurrection of youthes against /kliens on 
may day, r517, the ninth of tfcnry the 8. haue hot beene 
so freely vsed as afore, and therefore I leaue them, and wil 
somewhat touch of watches as also of shewes in the night. 
Ofwatches in this Citie, and other (Matters)  
cornmanded, and the cause why. 
[4/r[LLIA2][ Cotqtcror commaunded, that in euerie towne Curfew Bell 
and village, a Bell should be nightly rung at eight of atS" ofthe 
clocke com- 
the clocke, and that all people should then put out their mandedfire 
and candle 
tire, and candle, and take their test: which order was ob-tobe 
serued through this Realme during his raigne, and the raigne quenched. 
1 Vel I633 ; I6o3 Vere  dured] dared 16o3 
 (Matters) add. I633 
Il 2 



t'age 
Rog. IIoueden 
mannscript. 

Nightwalkers 
murdered ail 
they met. 

Rich theeues 
most worthie 
to be hanged. 
The iudge- 
ment of tire 
& water called 
ordalii, was 
condemned 
by Pope 
Innocent the 
3-  o5. 
Decretal. 
lib. 5. 
Cause why 
watches in the 
night were 
commmded 
and when. 

Ioo Of c,«7/ches iz Lomto« 
of IVilliat ttoE«ts: but ttenrie the first, restoring to his 
subiects the vse of tire and lights, as afore: it followeth by 
reason of warres within the realme, that many men also gaue 
themselues to robberie and murders in the night, for example 
whereof in this Citie, Roger Huedeu writeth thus: In] the 
yeare x75-a Councell was kept at Notingham: In rime of 
which Councell, a brother of the Earle Ferrers being in the 
night priuily slaine at London, and throwne out of his Inne, 
into the durtie street, when y king vnderstood therof, he 
sware that he would be auenged on the Citizens. For it was 
then (saith mine Authour) a common practise in the Citie, that 
an hundred or more in a company, yong and old, would make 
nightly inuasions vpon bouses of the wealthie, to the intent to 
rob them, and if they found any man stirdng in the Citie 
within the night, that were hot of their crew, they would 
presently murder him : insolnuch, that when night was corne, 
no man durst aduenture to walke in the streetes. When this 
had continued long, it fortuned that, as a crew of yong and 
wealthie Citizens, assembling togither in the night, assaulted 
a stone house of a certaine rich man, & breaking through the 
wall, the good man of that bouse, hauing prepared himselfe 
with other in a corner, when hee perceyued one of the theeues 
named Andrcw ttcqttbtt to leade the way, with a burning 
brand in the one hand, and a pot of coales in the other, which 
hee assaied to kindle with the brand, he flew vpon him, and 
smote off his right hand, and then with a loude voyce cried 
theeues: at the hearing whereof the theeues tooke their 
flight, all sauing hee that had lost his hande, whom the 
good man in the next morning deliuered to Richard de Lucie 
the kings Iustice. This theefe, vpon warrant of his lire, 
appeached his confederates, of whom many were taken, and 
many were fled. Among the rest that were apprehended, 
a certaine Citizen of great countenance, credit, and wealth, 
named Iohn Scnex, who for as much as hee could not acquit 
himselfe by the waterdome, (as that lav was then,) he offed 
to the king fiue hundred pounds of siluer for his life: but 
forasmuch as he was condemned by iudgement of the water, 
the king would hot take the offer, but commaunded him to 
bee hanged on the Gallowes, which was done, and then the 



Of w«tches i¢l Lo¢¢do¢¢ IOI 
Citie became more quiet for a long time after. But for a full 
remedie of enormities in the night, I reade that in the yeare 
of Christ xe53. I-[enrie the third commaunded watches in 
Cities and Boroughe Townes to bee kept, for the better 
obseruing of peace and quietnesse amongst his people. 
And farther by the aduise of them of Sauoy, hec ordaylned Page ,o2 
that if any man chaunced to bee robbed, or by any meancs 
damnified, by any theefe or robber, he to whom the charge 
of keeping that Countre, Citie or Borough chiefly apper- 
tained, where the robberie was done, should competently 
restore the losse: And this was after the vse of Sau0y, but 
yet thought more hard to bee obserued here, then in those 
parts: and therefore leauing those laborious watches, I will 
speake of out pleasures and pastimes in watching by night. 
In the Moneths of Iune, and Iuly, on the Vigiles Of Bonefiersand 
bqueting in 
festiuall dayes, and on the same festiuall dayes in thethestreetes. 
Euenings after the Sunne setting, there were vsually ruade 
Bonefiers in the streetes, euery man bestowing wood or 
labour towards them: the wealthier sort also before their 
doores neare to the said Bonefiers, would set out Tables on 
the Vigiles, furnished with sweete breade, and good drinke, 
and on the Festiuall dayes with meates and drinks plentifully, 
whereunto they would inuite their neighbours and passengers 
also to sit, and bee merrie with them in great familiaritie, 
praysing God for his benefites bestowed on them. These 
were called Bonefiers aswell of good amitie amongest neigh- 
urs that, being befol'e at controuersie, were there by te 
labour of others, reconciled, and made of bitter enemies, 
louing friendes, as also for the verrue that a great tire bath to 
purge the infection of the ayre. On the Vigil of Saint Ioht larching 
Baptist, and on Saint Peter and at[e the Apostles, euery wateh at raid- 
sommer. 
mans doore beng shadowed wth groene Birch, long Fennel, 
SMnt Iohns wort, Orpin, whte Lllies, and such like, garnished GarnisMng of 
vpon wth Garlands of beautfull flowers, had also Lampes -f oeme"Sfumishlngd°°res 
glae, Mth oyle burnng n them all the nght, some hung them out. 
out braunches of yron curously wrought, contaynng hun- 
dreds of Lampes fight at once, which made a goodly shew, 
namely n new Fshstreet, Thames streete, &c. Then had ye 
besdes the standin watches, all n brght harnes 1] euery 



Almost Iooo. 
Cressets light, 
for the ,vatch 
at Mid- 
sommet. 

More than 
24o. Consta- 
bits in Lon- 
don the one 
halle of them 
ech night 
went in the 
marching 
watch, the 
other halle 
kept their 
standingwatch 
in euery streete 
& lane. 

I02 Of watches b Lo¢¢do¢ 

ward and streete of this Citie and Suburbs, a marching 
watch, that passed through the principal streets thereof, to 
wit, from the litle Conduit by Paules gare, through west 
Cheape, by yO Stocks, through Cornhill, by Leaden hall to 
_Aldgate, then backe downe Fenchurch streete, by Grasse 
church, aboute Grasse church Conduite, and vp Grasse church 
streete into Cornhill, and through ! it into west Cheape 
againe, and so broke vp: the whole way ordered for this 
marching watch, extendeth to 3oEoo. Taylors yards of assize, 
for the furniture whereof with lights, there were appointed 700. 
Cressetes, 5oo. of them being round by the Companies, the 
other 2oo. by the Chamber of London : besides the which 
lightes euery Constable in London, in number more then 24. 
had his Cresset, the charge of euery Cresset was in light two 
shillinges foure pence, and euery Cresset had two men, one to 
beare or hold it, an other to beare a bag vith light, and to 
serue it, so that the poore men pertayning to the Cressets, 
taking wages, besides that euery one had a strawne hat, with 
a badge painted, and his breakfast in the morning, amounted 
in number to almost 2oco. The marching watch contained 
in number about .oco. men, parte of them being olde 
Souldiers, of skill to be Captains, Lieutenants, Sergeants, Cor- 
porals, &c. Wiflers, Drommers, and Fifes, Standard and Ensigne 
bearers, Sword players, Trumpeters on horsebacke, Demi- 
launces on great horses, Gunners with hand Guns, or halfe 
hakes, _Archers in coates of white fustian signed on the breast 
and backe with the armes of the Cittie, their bowes bent in 
their handes, with sheafes of arrowes by thcir sides, Pike men 
in bright Corslets, Burganets, &c. Holbards, the like Bill men 
in _Almaine Riuets, and _Apernes of Mayle in great number, 
there were also diuers Pageants, Morris dancers, Constables, 
the one halfe which was oEo. on S. lohns Eue, the other halfe 
on S. Peters Eue in bright harnesse, some ouergilte, and euery 
one a lornet of Scarlet thereupon, and a chaine of golde, his 
Hcnch man following him, his Minstrels before him, and his 
Cresset light passing by him, the Waytes of the City', the 
Mayors Officers, for his guard before him, ail in a Liuery" of 
wolsted or Say Iacquets party coloured, the Mayor himselfe 
well mounted on horseback, the sword bearer before him in 



Of walches i¢ Lo¢zdoz to3 
fayre Armour well mounted also, the Mayors footmen, & the 
like Torch bearers about him, Hench men twaine, vpon great 
stirring horses following him. The Sheriffes watches came 
one after the other in like order, but hot so large in number as 
the Mayors, for where the Mayor had besides his Giant, three 
Pageants, each of the Sheriffes had besides their Giantes but 
two Pageants, ech their Morris Dance, and one Hench man 
their I Officers in Iacquets of Wolsted, or say party coloured, 
differing from the Mayors, and each from other, but hauing 
harnised men a great man)z, &c. 
This Midsommer Watch was thus accustomed yearely, time 
out of mind, vntill the yeare 1539. the 3 . of Hcn 7 the 8. in 
which yeare on the eight of May, a great muster was made by 
the Cittizens, at the Miles end all in bright harnesse with 
coates of white silke, or cloath and chaines of gold, in three 
greate battailes, to the number of 15ooo. which passed through 
London to Westminster, and so through the Sanctuary, and 
round about the Parke of S. Iames, andreturned home through 
Oldbourne. King Henry then considering the great charges 
of the Cittizens for the furniture of this vnusuall Muster, forbad 
the marching watch prouided for, at Midsommer for that 
yeare, which beeing once laide downe, was hot raysed againe 
till the yeare 1548. the second of Edward the sixt, Sir Iohn 
Gresham then being Mayor, who caused the marching watch 
both on the Eue of Sainte Iohu Baptist, and of S. Peler the 
Apostle, to be reuiued and set foorth, in as comely order as it 
had beene accustomed, which watch was also beautified by the 
number of more then 3oo. Demilances and light horsemen, 
prepared by the Cittizens to bee sent into Scotland, for the 
rescue of the towne of Hadington, and others kept by the 
Englishmen. Since this Mayors rime, the like marching watch 
in this Citty bath hot been vsed, though some attemptes haue 
beene ruade thereunto, as in the yeare I585. a book was 
drawn by a graue citizen, & by him dedicated to Sir Tkomas 
Pullison, then Lord Mayor and his Brethren the Aldermen, 
conteyning the manner and order of a marching watch in the 
Cittie vpon the Euens accustomed, in commendation whereof, 
namely in rimes of peace to be vsed, he hath words to this 
effect. The Artificers of sondry sortes were thereby well set 

Page 

A great 
muster at 
London. 

John Mount- 
gomery. 

Comrnoditie 
of the watch 
at llid- 
sommer, in 
the time of 
peaceo 



Wrestling at 
Skinners well 
neare vnto 
Clarks well 
belote the 
major. 

Shooting the 
standard, 
broad arrow» 
& flight, 
before the 
Maior. 

Shooting in 
the long bow 
suppressed, 
bowling allies 
erected and 
frequented. 

o 4 Of vatc/zes iz Lozdoz 

a worke, none but rich men charged, poore men helped, old 
Souldiers, Trompiters, Drommers, Fifes, and ensigne bearers 
with such Iike men, meet for Princes seruice kept in vre, 
wherein the safety and defence of euery common weale con- 
sisteth. Armour and Weapon beeing yearely occupied in this 
wise the Cittizcns had of their owne redily prepared for any 
neede, whereas by intermission hereof, Armo]rers are out of 
worke, Souldiers out of vre, weapons ouergrown with foulness, 
few or none good being prouided, &c. 
In the Moneth of August about the feast of S. t?artholomcw 
the Apostle, belote the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Shiriffes 
of London placed in a large Tent neare vnto Clarken well, of 
olde rime were diuerse dayes spent in the pastime of wrestling, 
where the Officers of the Citie : namely the Shiriffes, Sergeants 
and Yeoman, the Porters of the ldngs beame, or weigh house, 
now no such men, and other of the Citie, were chaIlengers of 
all men in the suburbs, to wrestle for gaines appointed : and 
on other dayes, belote the sayd Maior, Aldermen and Shiriffes, 
in Fensburie field, to shoote the Standard, broad .A_rrow, and 
flght, for gaines : but now of late yeares the wrestling is onely 
practised on t?arZholomcw day in the after noone, and the 
shooting some three or foure dayes after, in one after noone 
and no more. What should I speake of the auncient dayly 
exercises in the long bow by Citizens of this Citie, now almost 
cleane Ieft off and forsaken ? I ouerpass it : for by the meane 
of closing in the common grounds, out Archers for want of 
roome to shoote abroade, creepe into bowling Allies, and 
ordinarie dicing houses, nearer home, where they have roome 
enough to hazard their money at vnlawfull gaines : and there 
I leaue them to take their pleasures. 

Honor of Citizens, and worthinesse of men 
in the saine. 
THIS Citie (saith Fitzstcpheu) is glorious in manhoodc: 
furnished with munitions: îOopulous with inhabitauts, insomuch 
that in the troublcsome lime of King StG#]lelt , il bath shewed at 
a mustcr twenty thousand armcd horsemeu, & threescore thoetsand 
fooZmen, scrviceable for lhe warres. Mreoucr saith hee, the 



Citizens of Zondon, vhcresocucr lhc becolne, arc tolable bŒEore 
all oihcr Citigens bt chlililie of nancrs, aitire, iab&, and talke. 
The I Aqatrotes of this Citœee are the ,erie nol&st Sabhtc Zadies gage 
oJ Italie. The Zon&ners sometime called Trinobaltics, rccllcd The modest 
Coesar, vhœeeh a&,aœees nade his gassaffe b 3, sheddiug bloud, matrons that 
haue beene 
t,her«uon Ztcau Sltltff . and ought 
tobe. 
Territa quœesitis ostcndit terga Britannis. Worthines of 
Thc Clle of Zondon bath brcd sone, ,hich hauc sub&ted men Citizens 
of London. 
tany kingdomes, atd also the Ronanc Enh'e. It bath also 
bwuffht forth nany othcrs, vhome ,crttte at«d 'alour bath 
hiffhly a&tautced, accordinff to ?pollo Dt his Orac& lo rztle, 
sub occasu solis, &c. In the Iine of Ç]tristiatilæ, il brouffht 
foorlh Ihal nob& mcrout" Constantiue, which ffaucthe Çiti¢ Constantine 
, the Emperour 
of Rote and all lhe eriall siffnes to God, Sahtt elcr ana borne in 
Po?« Silucster : choosbtff rathcr a &c callcd a fe«dcr of the London. 
Ch«rch, then an Eneror: and &ast pcace niffht bc ,iolated, 
aud theh. o'es trottb&d b 3, his rcsence, hc reth'cd ri'on Roue, 
aud built rite Citœee of ConstanIhto&. Zondou also in laie 
tine bath brouffht forth fallotts bbtffs : 3Iaudc the Eressc, 
kitg Henrie, sonne fo Hcnrie t]te second, and Thonas the 
A rchbishop, 
This Thonas, surnamcd ccket, borne in London, brought A Shiriffes 
vp in the Priorie of arton, student at Paris, became the clarke of Lon- 
don became 
Shiriffes Clarke of London for a time, then person of Saint Chancellor of 
England, and 
3[arie bill, had a Prebend at London, an other at Lincolne, Archbishopof 
studied the law at Bononie, &c., was me Chancellor of Canterburie" 
Honourable 
England, and Al'chbishop of Canterburie, &c. Unto this actions done 
might bee added innumerable persons of honour, wisedome, bY the worthie 
Citioens 
and verrue, borne in London : but of actions done by worthie Ldon. 
Citizens, I will onely note a few, and so to other matters. 
The Citizens of London, rime out of mind, founded an Hospltall of 
S. lames in 
Hospitall of Saint Iancs in the fieldes for leprous women the field. 
of their Citie. 
In the yeare  97. I.'alter rttu¢ a Citizen of London, and Walter 
Rosia his wife, founded the Hospital of our Ladie called 
Dottts Dci, or Saint 3taric Spittle without Bishops gare of 
London, a house of such reliefe to the needie, that there 
was found standing at the surrender thereof, nine score beds 
well furnished for receipt of poore people. [ 



Page o 7 
Citizens spoile 
the sea rouers. 

Simon Fitz- 
marie. 

Henry Wal- 
lice nmior. 

Wil. Elsing. 

Sir Iohn 
Poultney. 

Iohn Stodie. 

Henry Picard. 

Iohn Lofken. 

lO6 Horreur of Ci/i:elcs, mcd wor/hi¢wsse of mez 
In the yeare 1oE6. the Londoners sending out a Nauie, 
tooke 95- ships of Pirats and sea robbers : besides innumerable 
others that they drowned, which had robbed on the riuer of 
Thames. 
In the yeare t247. Simon FitzmmoE, one of the Shiriffes of 
London, founded the Hospitall of S. 3[ao' called ]3ethlem, 
and without ]3ishops gare. 
In the yeare  83. Henry lVallice then Maior, builded the 
Tun vpon Cornhill, to be a prison for night walkers, and 
a Markct house called the Stocks, both for fish and flesh 
standing in the midst of the Citie. He also builded diuerse 
houses on the West and North side of Paules Churchyard : 
the profits of all which buildings are to the maintenance of 
London bridge. 
In the yeare 332, IVilliam Elsitg Mercer of London, 
founded Esing Spittle within Cripplegate, for sustentation of 
an hundred poore blind men, and becamc himselfe the first 
Prior of that Hospitall. 
Sir Iohn Poultncy Draper, foure times Maior, 1337. builded 
a fayre Chappell in Paules Church, wherein he was buried. 
He founded a Colledge in the parrish Church of Saint Laurencc 
called Poultney. He builded the parish Church called little 
Alhallowes in Thames streete and the Carmelite Friers Church 
in Couentree : he gaue reliefe to prisoners in Newgate, and in 
the Fleet, and ten shillings the yeare to S. Giles Hospitall by 
Oldborne for euer, and other legacies long to rehearse. 
Iohn Stodie Vintener, Major 358. gave to the Vinteners 
all the quadrant wherein the Vinteners hall now standeth, with 
all the tenements round about, from Stodies lane, where is 
founded thirteene Almes houses, for so many poore people, &c. 
Henrie Picard Vintener, Maior 357. in the yeare 1363, 
did in one day sumptuously feast dward the third king of 
England, Ioht king of France, 1)auid king of Scots, the king 
of Cipres, then ail in England, dward prince of Wales, with 
many other noble men, and after kept his hall for all commers 
that were willing to play at dice, and hazard: the Ladie 
.iV[argaret his wife, kept her chamber to the saine effect, &c. 
Iohn Lofken Fishmonger, foure times Maior, 1367. builded 
an H0spitall called Magdalens in Kingstone vpon Thames, 



D/onour of C/li«es, «ud orl/ffesse of men o 
gaue I therevnto nine tenements, ten shops, one Mill, 3. 'a«,o8 
acres of land, ten acres of medow, 1oEo. acres of pasture, &c. 
More, in London, hee builded the faire parish Church of Saint 
Michadl in crooked lane, and was there buried. 
Iohu Barzes Maior, 1371. gave a Chest with three locks, Iohn Barnes. 
and lCOO. Markes therein, to bee lent to yong men vpon 
sufficient pawne, and for the vse thereof, to say Deprofzmdis, 
or Pater noster, and no more : he also was a great builder of 
S. Thomas Apostles parish church, as appeareth by his armes 
there, both in stone and glasse. 
In the yeare 1378. [ohu Filpot sometime Major, hired with Iohn Fllpot. 
his owne money ,ooo. souldiers, and defended the Realme 
from incursions of the enemie, so that in small time lais hired 
men tooke Iohn Zercer a sea Rouer, with ail lais Ships, which 
hee before had taken from Scarborrow, and fiftecnc Spanish 
shippes ladcn xvith great riches. 
In the yeare 1380. Thomas of Woodstocke, 7"honas Pcrde, 
HzoEk Cahterlo, , Robert Kuowles, and others, being sent with 
a great power to ayde the Duke of I3rytaine, the said Iohn 
Filpot hyred ships for them of his owne charges, and released 
the Armour, which the souldiers had pawned for their vittailes, 
more then a thousand in number. This most noble Citizen 
(saieth Thonas lValsilzgham) that had trauelled for the coin- Tho. Wais. 
moditie ef the whole Realme, more then ail other of his time, 
had often relieued the king, by lending him great summes of 
mony, and othel'wise, deceased in Anno 1384. after that hee 
had assured landes to the Citie for the reliefe of 13. poore 
people for euer. 
In the yeare t38I. l'Villia»t l.Valwortk then 1Haior, a most Will. w- 
t- worths 
prouident, valiant, and learned Citizen, did by his arrest Ot valianeie. 
bVat Tyler (a presumptuous Rebell, vppon whom no man 
durst lay hands) deliuer the king and kingdome from the 
daunger of most wicked Traytors, and was for his seruice 
knighted in the field. 
Nicholas Brcmbar, Iohn Filpot, Robert Laund, Nickolas William 
Walworth 
Twiford, and Adam Fraucis, Aldermen xvere then for their and others 
seruice likewise knighted, and sir Robert Knoles, for assisting night,e,d in 
me Ileifl. 
of the Major, was ruade free of this Citie. Rob. Knoles. 
This sir Robert Knoles thus worthily infranchised a Ci[tizen, tae o 9 



Iohn Church- 
mail. 

Adam 
Bamme. 

Tho. Knoles. 

Iohn Hinde. 

Th. Falconar. 

W. Seuenock. 

Richard 
Yhittington. 

lO8 Hoaour o/ Ci/izens, amt vor/lzhzesse of men 
founded a Colledge with an Hospitall at Pontfract: hee also 
builded the great stone bridge at Rochester, ouer the Riuer of 
Medway, &c. 
Iohn Churchman Grocer, one of the Shiriffes 386. for the 
quiet of Marchants, builded a certaine bouse vpon Wooll 
wharfe, in tower warde, to serve for Tronage a, or vaying of 
vooles, and for the Customer, Comptrollers, Clarkes, and other 
Officers to sit, &c. 
Adam Bamme Goldsmith, Maior, 38I. in a great dearth, 
procured corne froln partes beyond the seas, to be brought 
hither on such abundance, as sufficed to serue the Citie, and 
the Countries neare adioyning: to the furtherance of which 
good worke, he tooke out of the Orphants Chest in the Guild- 
hall, OEooo. Markes to buy the said corne, and each Alderman 
layd out OEo. L to the like purpose. 
Thomas Knol«s Grocer, Major 14oo. with his brethren the 
Aldermen, began to new build the Guild hall in London, and 
in stecd of an olde little Cottage in Aldermanberiestreet, 
made a faire and goodly house, more neare vnto Saint 
Laurence church in the Iurie: he reedified Saint Anlhonies 
Church, and gave to the Grocers his house neare vnto the 
same, for reliefe of the poore for euer. More, he caused sweet 
water to be conuayed to the gates of Newgate, and Ludgate, 
for reliefe of the prisoners there. 
Iohn Iq'inde Draper, Maior, 14o 5. newly builded his parish 
Church of Saint Scithen by London stone : his monument is 
defaced, saue onely his armes in the glasse windowes. 
Thomas Falconar Mercer, Maior, 1414. lent to King Henrie 
the sixt towards maintenance of his warres in France, 10000 
Markes vpon iewels. More he ruade the posterne called 
Mooregate, caused the ditches of the citie to be clensed, and 
did many other things for good of the same Citie. 
VzTltam Seucnoke Grocer, Major, 4I 9. founded in the 
towne of Seuenocke in Kent a free schoole for poore mens 
children, and 13. almes houses: his Testament saieth OEo. 
poore men and women. 
Richard Whittington Mercer, three times Maior, in the 
yeare I42I. began the librarie of the gray Friers in London, 
I Tronage] Thoms; Trenage, 6o 3 



tto¢o«tr of Ci/ies, amt worlhbesse of ment o 9 
fo I the charge of foure hundred pound : lais executors with lais Page 
goods founded and builded Whittington Colledge, with almes 
houses for 13. poore men, and diuinitie lectures to bee there 
read for euer. They repaired Saint Bartholomcws Hospitall in 
Smithfield, they bare some charges to the glasing and pauing 
of the Guildhall : they bare halfe the charges of building the 
Librarie there, and they builded the West gare of London, of 
olde rime called Newgate, &c. 
Iohlz Çarctl¢r Towne Clarke of London, in the raigne of Io. Carpenter. 
Itenrie the fift, caused with great expences to bee curiously 
painted vpon boord, about the North Cloyster of Paules, 
a monument of death, leading all estates, with the speeches of 
death, and answere of euerie state. This Cloyster was pulled Daunce of 
downe 549. He also gaue tenements to the Citie, for the death called 
the daunce 
finding and bringing vp of foure poore mens children, with of Paules. 
meate, drinke, appareil, learning at the schooles in the Univer- 
sities, &c. vntil they be preferred, and then other in their 
places for euer. 
Robert Chichley Grocer, Maior, I4OEOE. appointed by his Robert 
Testament, that on lais minde day, a competent dinner should Chichley. 
be ordained for OE4co. poore men housholders of this Citie, 
and euerie man to haue two pence in money. More, he gaue 
one large plot of ground therevpon to build the new parish 
Church of S. Stepheu neare vnto Walbrooke. &c. 
Iohn Rainze,ell Fishmonger, Maior, 14OE7. gaue Tenements 
to discharge certaine xvardes of London of fifteenes, and other 
payments. 
Iohlt lVelles Grocer, Major, 43OE. l a great builder of the IonnWds. 
chappell or Colledge of the Guild hall, and was there buried : 
he caused fresh vater tobe conueyed from Tyborne to the 
standard in west Cheape for seruice of the Citie. 
William Eastficlcl Mercer, 1438. appoynted his executors of William 
his goods to conuey sweete water from Teyborne, and to Eastfield. 
build a faire Conduit by /klderman berie church, which they 
performed, as also ruade a Standard in Fleetstreete by 
Shewlane end : they also conueyed water to Cripples gate, &c. 
tepken lrozwte Grocer, Major, 439- sent into Prussia, 
causing corne tobe brought from thence, whereby hee brought [ Step. Browne. 
a 432] sic z598 ; 433 I6o3 

Iohn Rainwel. 



Philip 
Malpas. 

Robert Large. 

Richard Rich. 

Simon Eyre. 

Godf. Bullein. 

Rich. Rawson. 

Thomas Ilam. 

Edmond 
Shaw. 

Thomas Hill. 

Hugh 
Clopton. 

I IO ttoltotr of Cilizets, altd worthitesse of met 
downe the price of wheate from three shillings the bushell, to 
less then halfe that money. 
thilip JTlal_pas one of the Shiriffes, I44o. gaue by his Testa- 
ment, I2.5. L to reliefe of poore prisoners, & euery yeare for 
fiue yeares 4oo. shirts, and smockes, 4 o. paire of sheetes, and 
15o. gownes of Fl-eese to the poore, to 5oo. poore people in 
London, euery one 6s. 8.d., to poore maides marriages Ioo. 
Markes, to high wayes IOO. Markes, tventie Markes the yeare 
to a graduate to preach, 2o. pound to Preachers at the Spittle 
the three Easter Holidays, &c. 
tobcrl Large Mercer, Major 144 o, gaue to his Parish church 
of S. Oliuc in Surry 2oo. L, to Saint 3argarcls in Lothberie 
25, to the poore OEo. li, to London bridge IOO. markes, towardes 
tbe vaulting ouer the watcr course of Walbrooke 200. marks, 
to poore maids marriages oo. marks, to poore householders 
Ioo. li, &c. 
Richard ticlz mercer, one of the Shiriffes, 1442. founded 
Aimes bouses at Hodsdon in Hertfordshire. 
Simon E3're Draper, Major I446. builded the Leaden hall 
for a common Garner of corne to the vse of this Citie, and left 
fiue thousand markes to charitable vses. 
God.ey 17011cin Major of London, 1458. by lais Testament 
gaue liberally to the prisons, hospitals, and laser houses, 
besides a thousand pound to poore housholders in London, 
and two hundred pound to poore housholders in Norffolke. 
Richard tawson one of the Shiriffes, I477, gaue by Testa- 
ment large legacies to the prisoners, hospitals, laser houses to 
other poore, to high wayes, to the water Conduits, besides to 
poore Maides marriages 34o. pound, and his executors to 
build a large bouse in the Churchyard of Saint [ari« Spittle, 
wherein the major and his brethren do vse to sit and heare the 
Serinons in the Easter holydayes. 
Thomas llam one of the Shiriffes I48O. newly builded the 
great Conduit in Cheape, of his owne charges. 
Edmond Shaw Goldsmith, Major, I483. caused Cripplegate 
of London to be new builded of his goods, &c. 
Thomas Hill Grocer, major, 1485, caused of his goods, the 
Conduit of Grasse streete to be builded. 
tth Clo[ton Mercer, during his life a batchler, major, 1492. I 



Hozoztr of Cilizezs, azd worlhbesse of me I I I 
builded the great stone arched bridge at Stratford x;pon Auon 1 
in Warwickshire, and did many other things of great charitie, 
as in my Summarie. 
Robert Fabiai one of the Shiriffes, 1494. gathered out of 
diuerse good Authours, as well Latin as French, a large 
Chronicle of England, and of France which he published in 
English, to his great charges, for the honour of this Citie, and 
common vtilitie of the whole Realme. 
Sir Iohn Perciuall marchant Tayler, major, 1498. founded 
a Grammar-schoole at Macklefield in Cheshire where hee was 
borne: he indoved the same schoole with sufficient landes, 
for the finding of a Priest maister there, to teach freely ail 
children thither sent, without exception. 
The Ladie Tomash«e lais wife founded the like free schoole, 
togither with faire lodgings for the Schoolemasters, schollers, 
and other, & added 20. li. of yearely reuenexv for supporting 
the charges, at S. 3[my Wike in Cormvall-, where she was 
borne. 
Stc2hc Genubgs Marchant tayler, Major, 15o 9. founded 
a faire Grammar Schoole at Vlfrimhampton in Staffordshire, 
left good landes, and also builded a great part of his parish 
Church called S..zDMrewes Vndershaft in London. 
Heurie Keble Grocer, Major, 1511. in his life a great 
benefactor to the new building of old 3[ary Church, and 
by his Testament gaue a thousand pounds toward the finish- 
ing thereof: he gaue to high wayes OEoo. pound, to poore 
maides marriages, lOO. Markes, to poore husband men in 
Oxford and Warwickeshires, 14o. Ploughshares, and 14o. 
Cultars of iron, and in London to seuen almes men, sixpence 
the week for euer. 
Iolm Collet a Cittizen of London by birth, and dignitie, 
Deane of Paules, Doctor of Diuinitie, erected and builded one 
free schoole in Paules Churchyard, 15IOE. for 1537 poore mens 
children, to be taught free in the saine schoole, appointing 
a maister, a surmaister, and a chaplaine, with sufficient stipends 
to endure for euer, and committed the ouersight thereof to the 
mercers in London, because himselfe was sonne to ttenrie 
 Auon] Auen z6o3  Cornwall] Deuonshire 16o3 
  53] 353 z6o3, z633 

Page 

Rob. Fabian. 

Iohn Perciual. 

Rich. Carew. 

Stephen 
Gennings. 

Henry Keble. 

Iohn Collet. 



l'age t t 3 
Iohn Tate. 

Geor. Monox. 

Io. Milborn. 

Robert Thorn. 

Sir Ioh. Allen. 

Sir William 
I_axton. 

I2 Houottr of Cilizeus, aml worlhiesse of mett 
Collet Mercer, maior of London, and indowed the Mercers with 
lands to the yearly value of x OEo pound, or better. ] 
Iohu Tare Brewer, then a Mercer, Major, 54-caused his 
Brewhouse called the Swan, neare adioyning to the Hospitall 
of S. Inthonie in London, to be taken downe, for the en- 
larging of the said Church, then new builded, a great part of 
his charge : this was a goodly foundation, with aimes bouses, 
freeschoole, &c. 
George .[ono.v Draper, Maior, 55 . reedified the decaycd 
Parish Church of Valtomstow or Valthamstow, in Essex: 
hee founded there a free schoole, and aimes houses for 3. 
almes people, ruade a Cawsey of tituber ouer the Marshes 
from Walthamstow to Locke bridge, &c. 
Sir l"oh [ilborne Draper, Major, SoEoE. builded aimes 
houses fourteene in number by the crossed Friers Church in 
London, there to be placed fourteene poore people, and left 
to the Drapers certaine Messuages, Tenements, and Garden 
plots, in the parish of Saint Olaue in Hartstreete, for the per- 
formance of stipends to the sayd Almes people, and other 
vses. Looke more in Ealdgate ward. 
Robert Thorne Marchant tayler, deceased a Batchler, in the 
yeare x53 . gaue by his Testament to charitable actions, more 
then 444o.li. and legacies to his poore kindred more 5x4.Ii. 
besides his debts forgiuen, &c. 
Sir Ioht gtllet Mercer, Major of London, and of counsaile 
to king Ienrie the 8. deceased I544. buried Saint Thomas of 
Acres in a faire Chappell by him builded. He gaue to the 
Cittie of London, a rich coller of golde, to bee worne by the 
maior, which was first worne by sir IV. Laxton. He gaue 
5oo. markes to bee a stocke for Sea coale, his lands purchased 
of the king, the rent therof to be destributed to the poore in 
the wardes of London for euer. He gaue besides to the 
prisons, hospitals, laser houses, and ail other poore in the 
CRie, or two miles without, very liberally, and long to be 
recited. 
Sir IVilliam La.a:tot Grocer, maior, 1545. founded a faire 
free schoole at Owndale in Northamptonshire, with sixe aimes 
houses for the poore. 



/-/ouor of C[Nzens, aïd OE«o'lhbwsse of 
ir /'en Gre«ham mrcer» ir, 548. founded a reeola. 
schoole at lo.t, a m.arket tovne i Norfolke. Gresham. 
Sir Row[apzc[ltill m:ercer, major, 55 o. caused to be ruade 
dittuerse cawseys both for horse and man, he ruade foure 
bridges, two of stone contaynïn'ff- 18. Arches in them both: 
he builded one notable free schoole af Drayton in Shropshire : 
he gaue to Christs Hospitall in London 5oo.li. &c 
Sir Andrcw Ittd skinner, major, 155I. erected one nofab|e Sir Audrew 
l'ree schoole at Tunbridge in Kent, and almes houses nigh 
::Saint ttelens church in London, and left to the Skinners 
.lundes to the value of 6o.Ii. 3.s. 8.d. the yeare, for the which 
-they bee bound to pay twentie pound to the schoolemayster, 
,eight pound to the Usher, yearely for euer, and route shil- 
• linges the weeke to the sixe aimes people, and OES- shillings 
ffoure pence the yeare in coales for euer. 
Sir T]wmas IVhite Marchant tayler, major, 1554. founded 
saint Iohns Colledge in Oxford, and gaue great summes of 
money to diuerse townes in England for reliefe of the poore, 
as in my Summarie. 
Edward Hall Gentleman of Grayes Inne, a Citizen by birth 
and office, as common Sergeant of London, and one of the 
Iudges in the shiriffes Court, he wrote and published a famous 
and eloquent Chronicle, intituled The vnitinff of the lwo noble 
families Lancaster and Yorkc. 
Richard Hils Marchant tayler, 156o. gaue 5oo.li. towardes 
the purchase of an house called the marmot of the Rose, 
wherein the marchant taylers founded their free schoole in 
London : hee also gaue to the said marchant taylers one plot 
of ground, with certaine small cottages on the Tover hill, 
where he builded faire aimes houses for I4. sole xvomen. 
About the saine rime, lV«Tliam Lambert Esquire, borne in 
London, a Iustice of the peace in gent, founded a Colledge 
for the poore, xvhich he named of Queene Elicabeth, in east 
Greemvitch. 
William Harper marchant tayler, Maior, I56. founded a Sir William 
free schoole in the towne of Bedford where he was borne, and Harper. 
also buried. 
Sir Thomas Gresham mercer, 1566. builded the Royall Sir Thomas 
exchange in London, and by his Testament left his dwelling Gresham. 

Sir Rowland 
Hill. 
Page 114 

S. Tho. White. 

Edward Hall. 

Richard Hils. 

Wil. Lambert. 



Sir T. Roe. 

Ambrose 
Nieholas. 

W. Lambe. 

Sir T. Oftley 
bequeathed 
much to the 
poore. 

Iohn IIaydon. 

£arnard Ran- 
dolph. 

SirWolston 
Dixie. 

I I4 Igonr of Citize,es, an wortldtesse of ,Jeez 
house in Bishops gare streete, to be a place for readings, 
allowing large stipends to the readers, and certaine aimes 
bouses for the poore. I 
}Villiam t'alten Gentleman, a Citizen by birth, and cus- 
tomer of London outward, Iustice of Peace in Middlesex the 
parrish Church of Stokenewenton being ruinous he repayred, 
or rather new builded. 
Sir Thoas Roc Marchant Taylor, Mayor, 1568. gaue to 
the Marchant Taylors lands or Tenements, out of them to 
bce giuen to ten poore men Clothworkers, Carpentars, Tilars, 
Plasterers, and Armorers, 4o.li. yearely, vz. 4.1i. to each, also 
oo.li. to bee lent to 8. poore men : besides hee inclosed with 
a wall of bricke nigh one acre of ground, pertayning to the 
Hospital of Bethlem, tobe a buliall for the dead. 
Ambrosc Nicholas Saltar, Mayor, 1576. founded xii. Aimes 
houscs in Monkeswell strecte, neare vnto Creples gare, wherein 
he placed xii. poore people, hauing each of them vil. d. the 
weeke, and once euery yeare v. sacks of coales, and one 
quarter of a hundred Faggots, all of his gift for euer. 
lV7liam Zambe Gentleman and Clothworker in the yeare 
1577. builded a water Conduit at Oldborne Crosse, to his 
charges of I5oo.li. and did many other charitable actes, as in 
my summary. 
Sir T. O.ff?O' Marchant Taylor, Mayor, deceased 158o. 
appointcd by lais testament, the one halfe of al his goods, and 
zoo.ll, deducted out of the other halfe, giuen to his sonne 
Iffen,y, to bee giuen and bestowed in deedes of charity, by his 
Executors, according to lais confidence and trust in them. 
Iohn Haydon Shiriffe, 1583. gaue large Legacies, more then 
3oo.li. for reliefe of the poore, as in my Summarie. 
Eartard Randol.ph, common Sargeant of London, 1583. 
gaue and deliuered with lais owne hand, 9oo.li. towards the 
building of Water Conduits, which was performed : more, by 
Testament he gaue ]ooo.li. to bee employed in charitable 
actions, but that money being in holde fasts hands, I haue 
hot heard how it was bestowed, more then of other good 
mens Testaments, to bee performed. 
Sir lVolstou 1)ixie Skinner, Mayor, 1586. founded a free 



Schoole at Bosworth, and indoved it vith tventie pound land 
by yeare. 
Ricard A[ay Marchant Taylor, gaue 3oo.li. toward the Richaraiaye. 
new building of Blackwell hall in London, a market place for Pae 
Wollen cloathes. 
lohu Fuller Esquier, one of the Iudges in the Shiriffes Iohn Fuller, 
court of London, by his Testament dated 592. appointed hisalmes 
bouses ap- 
his wife, her heires and assignes, after his decease, to erect pointed, and 
charity tobe 
one Almes house in the parish of Stikonheth l, for xii. poore performed. 
single men aged 50. yeres or vpwardes, and one other Almes 
house in Shoreditch, for xii. poore aged widdow ,vomen of 
like age, shee to endow them, with one hundred pound the 
yeare, to witte, fiffie pound to each for eucr, out of his landes 
in Lincolne shîre, assured tuer vnto certaine Fecs in trust, 
by a Deede of Feffement. Iteln, more he gauchis Mes- 
suages, lands and tenements lying in the parishes of S. Benet, 
and S. Peter by Powles wharfe in London, to Fees in trust, 
yearely for tuer to disburse all the Issues and profites of the 
said landes and tenementes, to the relieuing and discharge 
of poore Prisoners in the Hole, or two penny wardes, in the 
two Comptars in London, in equall portions to each Comptar, 
so that the Prisoners exceede not the somme of xxvi.s, viij.d. 
for euery one Prisoner, at any one rime. 
Thus much for famous Cittizens, haue I noted their charitable 
actions, for the most part done by them in theyr lire rime. 
The residue left in trust to their Executors: I haue knowne 
some of them hardly (or neuer) performed, wherefore I wish 
men to make their owne hands their Executors, and thcir 
eyes their Ouerseers, not forgetting the olde Prouerbe : 
lVomen be foeull, Childre be ,ukiud, 
'ectttors be cottetous, and take what t]tç, find. 
If at, bod, asbe wbere the des ffoods bcca»te, 
They answere, So God ne bel  hoO,domc, he dicd a 
One worthy citizen marchant taylor hauing many years 
considered this prouerb afore going, hath therfore established 
to I. poor aged men archant Taylors 6.1i. .s. to each 
 (Stokenheath) 



Agnes Foster. 
l'age • • 7 

Auice Gibson, 
founded a 
chapell, a free 
schoole, and 
aimes houses 
at l.{edclyfe. 

Cursed is bec 
that remoueth 
his neighbors 
marke, haue I 
rado 

Margaret Dan. 

Mary Ramsey. 

I I6 Hoewr of Ci/izezs, amt worlhhwsse of men 
yearely for euer: hee hath also giuen them Gownes of good 
broade cloath, lined thorough with Bayes, and are to receîue 
euery 3. yeares end, the like new gownes for euer. 
And now of some women: Citizens wiues, deseruing 
memory, for example to posterity shall bee noted: Dame 
Agnes Faster widdow, sometime wife to Strhen Faster Fish- 
monger, Mayor, I 1455. hauing inlarged the Prison of Lud- 
gare, in I463. procured in a common Counsell of this Citie, 
certayne Articles to be established, for the ease, comfort and 
reliefe of poore Prisoners there, as in the Chapter of gares 
I hauc set downe. 
Auice Gibson, wife vnto Nicholas Gibson Grocer, one of the 
Sheriffes, 1539. by licence of ber husband, founded a Free 
schoole at Radclyfe neare vnto London, appointing to the saine 
for the instruction of6o. poore mens Children, la Schoole- 
maister, and Vsher with 5 o. poundes : shee also builded Almes 
bouses for xiiii, poore aged parsons, each of them to receiue 
quarterly ri.s. viii.d, the peece for euer 1. The gouernment of 
xvhich Free schoole and Ahnes houses, shee left in confidence 
to the Coopers in London. This vertuous Gentlewoman was 
after ioyned in marriage with Sir Anthony Kneuet Knight, 
and so called the Lady lnettel: a fayrc paynted Table of hir 
picture was placed in the Chapple which shc had builded there, 
but of late remooued thence by the like reason, as the Grocers 
Armes fixcd on the outer Wall of the $choolehouse are pulled 
downe, and the Coopcrs set in place. 
3[argaret Danne, widdow to William Danne Ironmonger, 
one of the Sheriffes of London, I57O. gaue by his Testament 
to the Ironmongers -ooo. pound, to bee lent to young men of 
that Company, paying after the rate of v. ll. the yeare for 
euerie hundred, which C. li. so rising yearely, to bee imployed 
on charitable actions, as she then appointed, but hOt performed 
in more then 3o. yeares after. 
Dame Tary Ramsey, wife to Sir Tlwmas Ramscy Mayor, 
about the yeare 1577. beeing seased of landes in Fee simple 
of hir inheritance, to the yearely value of 43- poundes, by 
his consent gaue the same to Christes Hospitall in London, 
a- xii. the M. and vi. li. vis. viii. d. the Vsher (Stow in 'Faults 
esc,&ed' 1603). 



Honor of Citizens, «ncl wortbbwsse of men I 17 
towardes the reliefe ofpoore children there, and other waies as 
in my summarie and abridgement I haue long since expressed, 
which gift shee in hir widdowhood confirmed and augmented, 
as is shewed by monumentes in Christes Hospitall erected. 
Thus much for the worthines of Cittizens in this citty, touch- 
ing whome lolm Lidoeate a Monke of Bury, in the raigne of 
Icnry the sixt made (amongst other) these verses following. I 
Of scaacn tbinffcs I praysc this Çitty. 
Of true mcanbzff and faithfull obscruance, 
Of ri«hteousnes, trutlz and cqnity. 
Of stablencs ayc bcpt Dz Lcffiance. 
ind for of verrue t/zou hast suffisance, 
In this land hcrc, and othcr lond(c)s al/, 
Tbc bbzgcs Cbambcr of Çustomc, ilgll 11l££ cal1. 
Hauing thus in gcncrality handled the originall, the vallcs, 
gares, ditches, and fresh waters, the bridges, towers and castles, 
the schooles of learning, and houses of law, the orders and 
customes, sportes and pastimcs, watchinges, and martiall 
exercises, and lastly the honor and worthincs of the Cittizens: 
I ara now to set downe the distribution of this Citty into 
parts: and more especially to declare the antiquities note 
worthy in euery of the saine: and how both the whole and 
partes haue beene from rime to rime, ruled and gouerned. 

THE /kuncient diuision of this Cittie, was into Wardes or 
/kldermanries: and therefore I will beginne at the East, and 
so proceede thorough the high and most principall streete ofthe 
cittie to the west after this manner. First through/kldgate 
streete, to the west corner of S. /kndrewes church called 
Vndershaft, on thc right hand and Lymestreete corner on the 
left, all which is of /kldgate Warde: from thence through 
Cornhill streete, to the west corner of Leaden hall, all which 
is of Lymestreete Wardê: from thence leauing the streete, 
that leadeth to ]3ishopsgate on the right hande, and the waye 
that leadeth into Grasse streete on the lefte, still through 
Cornhill streete, by the conduite to the West corner against 
the Stockes, ail which is in Cornhill Warde, then by the said 
Stockes (a market place both of fish and flesh standing in the 

Iohn Lidgate 
in prayse of 
Londoners of 
his time. 

The Citty of 
London 
diuided from 
east to west, 
into a south 
halfe, and a 
north halle. 

The stockes 
Market the 
midst of the 
Cittie. 



Page • t 9 

The Citty 
deuided from 
north to south 
into a east 
half and a 
west hal fe. 

The course of 
\Valbrooke. 

I8 7he Ci/le dittMed i«to arles 
midst of the cittie) through the PouRrie (a streete so called) to 
the great conduite in west Cheape, and so through Cheape to 
the Standarde, which is of Cheape Warde, except on the 
south [ side from Iowlane, to the said Standard, which is of 
Cordwayner streete ward. Then by the Standard to the 
great crosse, which is in Cripplegate ward on the North side, 
and in Bredstreet ward on the South side. And to the little 
Conduit by Paules gare, from whence of olde rime the saide 
high streete stretched straight to Ludgate, all in the ward of 
Faringdon within, then diuided truly from East to West, but 
since by meanes of the burning of Paules Church, which was 
in the raigne of lVilliam the first, [auricius then Bishop of 
London layd the foundation of a new Church, so farre in 
largenesse exceeding the olde, that the way towards Ludgate 
was thereby greatly streightned, as before I have discoursed. 
Now from the North to the South, this Citie was of olde 
rime diuided hot by a large high way or streete, as from East 
to West, but by a faire Brooke of sweete water, which came 
from out the North fields through the wall, and midst of the 
Citie, into the riuer of Thames, which diuision is till this day 
constantly and without change maintained. This water was 
called (as I haue said) Walbrooke, not Gahts brooke of a 
Romane captaine, slaine by Asclciodatus, and throwne therein, 
as some haue fabuled, but of running through, and from the 
wall of this Citie. The course whereof, to prosecute it perticu- 
larly, was and is from the said wall, to Saint [argarets 
Church in Lothberrie : from thence beneath the lower part of 
the Grocers hall, about the East part of their Kitchen, vnder 
Saint «Iildrcds Church, somewhat west from the said Stockes 
market: from thence through Buckelsberry, by one great 
house builded of stone and tituber, called the old Bardge, 
because Barges out of the riuer of Thames were rowed vp so 
far into this Brooke on the backside of the houses in Walbrooke 
streete (which streete taketh naine of the said Brooke) by the 
west end of Saint Iohns Church vpon Walbrooke, vnder 
Horshew Bridge by the west side of Tallow Chandlers hall, 
and of the Skinners hall, and so behinde the other houses, to 
Elbov lane, and by a part thereof downe Greenewitch lane, 
into the riuer of Thames. 



The Cille diuided inlo iarles I I 9 
This is the course of Walbrooke, which was of old rime 
bridged ouer in diuerse places, for passage of horses, and men, 
as neede [ required : but since by meanes of encrochment on 
the banks thereof, the channel being greatly streightned, and 
other noyances done thereunto, at length the saine by common 
consent was arched ouer with Bricke, and paued with stone, 
equall with the ground where through it passed, and is now 
in most places builded vpon, that no man may by the eye 
discerne it, and therefore the trace thereof is hardly knowne 
to the common people. 
This Citie was diuided from East to Wcst, and from North 
to South : I ara further to shew how the saine was of olde 
time broken into diuerse partes called wardes, whereof Fit»- 
stephcn more then foure hundred yeares since writeth thus. 
This Cittie (saith he) eucn as Rmc, is diuMcd into wardes, it 
bath ycarly Shiriffes iu st«adc of Consuls. It bath thc dignitic 
of Scnators Dz Aldcrmcn, &'c. The n«mber of these wardes 
in London were both before, and in the raigne of Ienrie the 
third 24. in all : whereof 13. lay on the East side of the sayd 
Walbrooke, and ii. on the West: notwithstanding these Ii. 
grew much more larger then those on the East : and therefore 
in the yeare of Christ, 1393. the 17. of Richard the second, 
Faringdon wardc, which was then one entire warde, but 
mightily increased of buildings without the gates: was by 
Parliament appointed to be diuided into twain, and to haue 
two Aldermen, to wit, Faringdon within, and Faringdon 
without, which made vp the number of t OE. wards on the west 
side of Walbrooke, and so the whole number of OES. on both 
sides: moreouer in the yeare 155o. the Maior, Communalty, 
and Citizens of London, purchasing the liberties of the 13orough 
of Southwarke, appointed the same to be a warde of London, 
and so became the number of 13. wardes on the East, "-. on 
the West, and one south the riuer Thames in the said 13orough 
of Southwarke, the Countie of Surrey, which in ail arise to 
the number of OE6. wards, and OE6. Aldermcn of London. 
Wardes on the East part of Walbrooke are these. 
r Portsoken ward without I OE Towerstreete warde. 
the walles. I 3 Ealdegate warde. 

The course of 
Walbrooke 
arched ouer. 
t'age o 

ThisCitie 
diuided into 
wardes. 

Wardes in 
London z 4. 
Patent Record. 

Wardesin 
London. 5. 

Wardes in 
London and 
Borough of 
Southwark 6. 

Names of 
wardes in 
London. 



_Page 

2o 77w Cille diedded Do bartes 

4 Limestreete warde. 
5 Bishopsgate warde within 
the walles, and without. 
6 Brodestreete warde. I 
7 Cornehil warde. 
8 Langbourne warde. 
Wardcs on the west side 
I4 Vintry warde. 
15 Cordwainer streete warde. 
I6 Cheape warde. 
I7 Colmanstreete warde. 
i8 Bassings hall warde. 
19 Cripplegate warde within 
and without. 

One ward south the river 
Southwarke, by the name of 
Bridge ward without. 

9 Billingsgate warde. 
Io Bridge warde within:. 
I I Candlewicke streete 
warde. 
12 Walbrooke wardoE 
13 Downgate warde. 
of Walbrooke are thesez- 
OEo Aldersgate warde -ithir 
and without. 
OEI Faringdon ward within.. 
2OE Bredstrcete warde. 
OE3 Queenehith warde. 
OE4 Castle Baynarde ward. 
25 Faringdon ward without 
the walles. 

Thames, in the Borough of 

Portsoken 
warde. 

Lib. Trinitate. 
Knighten 
G»ild. 

['ag« 122 

Of Portesoken warde, the first in the East part. 
SEEING that of euery these Wardes, I haue to say some- 
what, I will begin with Portsol«cu warde, without Ealdgate. 
This Portsoken, which soundeth, the Franchise at the gare, 
was sometime a Guild, and had beginning in the dayes of 
king Edffar, more then 6oo. yeares since. There were thirteene 
Knights, or Soldiers welbeloued to the king and realme, for 
seruice by them done, which requested to haue a certaine 
portion of land on the East part of the Citie, left desolate 
and forsaken by the Inhabitants, by reason of too much 
seruit.ude. The.y besought the king to haue this land, with 
the libertie of a Guilde for euer: the king granted to their 
request with conditions following : that is, ] that each of them 
should victoriously accomplish three combates, one aboue the 
ground, one vnder ground, and the third in the water, and 
after this at a certaine day in East Smithfield, they should 
rtm with Speares against ail commers, ail which was gloriously 



Po'leso/ëez OEdtrde 121 

performed: and the same day the king named it knighten Boundes of 
Guild, & so bounded it, from Ealdgate to the place where Knighten 
Guild or 
the bars now are toward the east, on both the sides of the Portsoken 
streete, and extended it towards Bishopsgate in the North, warde. 
vnto the house then of lVilliam Prcsbiter, after of Giffrcy 
Tazner, and then of the heyres of Colucr, after that of Iohn 
Easeby, but since of the Lord 1?ou»chier, &c. And agalne 
towardes the South vnto the riuer of Thames, and so farre 
into the water, as a horseman entering the saine, may ride at 
a low water, and throw his speare: so that ail East Smith- 
field, with the right part of the streete that gocth to Dodding 
Pond into the Thames, and also the Hospitall of Saint 
Katherins, vith the Mils, that were founded in king Stephets 
dayes, and the outward stone wall, and the new ditch of the 
Tower are of the said Fee and Libertie: for the saide wall 
and ditch of the Tower were ruade in the rime of king 
Richard, when he ,,vas in the holy land, by IVilliam Lotff- 
sha»qOe, I3ishop of Ely, as before I have noted vnto you. 
These knightes had as then none other Charter by all the 
dayes of Edgar, Ethelred, and Cuutzts, vntill the time of 
tSdward the Confessor, whom the heires of those knights 
humblie besought to confirme their liberties, whereunto he 
graciously graunting, gaue them a deede thereof, as appeareth 
in the booke of the late bouse of the holy Trinitie. The said Lib.Trinitate. 
Charter is faire written in the Saxon letter and tongue. After 
this king Willia»z the sonne of IVilliam the Conqueror, ruade 
a confirmation of the saine liberties, vnto the heyres of 
those knights, in these wordes, l Villiam kbt K of England to 
3Iaurice Bishop, and Godffrcy dc .Iagttm, a«d Richard de 
Parte, aml fo kis faithfull pcople of London, grcetitg : knozo 
yee tee fo haire granted to llw mon of Kniffhtcu Guilde, the 
G«dlde that belonged fo thcm, and thc land that beloltgcd there- 
uuto, with all ÇetsloTttes, as thcy had thc saine in thc rime of 
kitg Eclvard, atd my father. Witesse Httgk &" Bttche : al 
Retking. After him, king Henry the first confirmed the 
same by his Charter, to I the like effect, the recitall whereof, Page te 3 
I pretermit for breuitie. After which rime, the Church of Priorie of the 
the holy Trinitie within Ealdgate of London, being founded Trinity within 
Ealdgate. 
by Queene )lfatilde, wife to the saide t]cnric, the multitude 



22 Portesoke¢t warde 

Knighten- 
Guild geuen 
the Canons of 
the holy 
Trinity. 

of brethren praysing God day and night therein, in short 
time so increased, that all the Citie was delighted in the 
beholding of them: insomuch that in the yeare I5. cer- 
taine Burgesses of London, of the progenie of those Noble 
English knights to wit Radul]hus Fitzalgod, IVilmarde le 
Deuereshe, Orgare le Prude, Edward Itupcortehill, Black- 
stanus, and Alwine his kinsman, and Robert his brother, Che 
sonnes of Lcafstanus the Goldsmith, lViso his sonne, Ituglt 
Fitzvulffar, Algare Secusmc, comming togither into the 
Chapter house of the said Church of the holy Trinitie, gaue 
to the same Church and Canons seruing God therein, all the 
lands and soke caIled in English Knighten Guilde, which 
lieth to the wall of the Citie, without the saine gate, and 
stretcheth to the riuer of Thames, they gaue it, I say', taking 
vpon them the Brotherhoode and participation of the bene- 
rites of that house, by the handes of Prior Normalt. And 
Che bercer to confirme this their graunt, they" offered vpon the 
Altar there, che Charter of lïdward, togither with the other 
Charters, which they" had thereof: and afterward they did 
put the forcsayd Prior in seisine thereof, by the Church of 
Saint 17uttolphcs which is builded thereon, and is Che head of 
Chat land: These things were thus doue, before JBernard 
Prior of Dunstable, Iohn Prior of Derland, Geffrey Clinton 
Chamberlaine, and many other Clarkes and Laymen, French 
and English. Orar le Prude (one of their Companie) was 
sent to king Ieurie, beseeching him to confirme their gift, 
which Che king gladly granted by his deede. 1tourie ki» of 
England fo R. B. of Londo», to tire Shiriffcs, and Prouost, 
attd to all Iris Barons, and faithfull people, Frenclt and Eng- 
lish, of London, and «[iddlesex, grecting. IÇttoTv.,e ncee to 
hattc graunted, attd coufirmed to t/te Church and Crtons of t/te 
holy Trinitic of Loudon, Che Soke of che Enfflisk knighten 
Guildc, and Che land which pcrtahtcth thcreunto, and Che 
Çhttrch of S. Buttolth , as thc mcn of Che saine Gttilde hane 
giuen, and granted vulo them : and [ wil! and straigktly com- 
maund, that they may hold che saine I wcll and honourably and 
freely, with sacke aud soke, loll, and Thcam, hoEangthefe, and 
all euslottcS bclottgbtg to it, as Che men of che saine Guild in 
best sort had che saine bt che timc of Iç. tïdwarcl, and as kbcg 



Portesobe¢ warde i2 3 
14Zillia»t ny fatker, aud brother did grmtt it to thet by their 
writs. IVit«esse A. tke Queene, Geffrey Cliutou tke Ckauu- 
cellor, and lVilliam of Clinton at lVoodstocke. AI1 these pre- 
scribed writings (saieth my booke) which sometime belonged 
to the Priorie of the holy Trinitie, are registred in the end 
of the booke of Remembrances, in the Guildhall of London, 
marked with the letter C. folio 134. The king sent also his 
Shiriffes to wit, Aubo7 de I/Cc, and Roger nephew to Itubert, 
which vpon his behalfe should inuest this church with the 
possessions hereof, which the said Shiriffes accomplished 
comming vpon the ground, Andrew tTuchcuite, and the fore- 
named witnesses, and other standing by: notwithstanding, 
Otltowertts, tcoliuillus, Otto, and Geffr¢y Earle of Essex, 
Constables of the Tower by succession, withheld by force 
a portion of the said land, as I haue before deliuered. The 
Prior and Chanons of the holy Trinitie, being thus seised of 
the said land and Soke of knighten Guilde, a part of the 
Suburbe without the wall, (but within the liberties of the 
Citie) the saine Prior was for him, and his successors, admitted 
as one of the AIdermen of London, to gouerne the same land 
and Soke : according to the customes of the Citie, he did sit in 
Court and rode 1 with the Major, and his Brethren the Alder- 
men, as one of them, in Scarlet, or other leuery, as they vsed, 
vntill the yeare 1531. at the which time, the said Priory by 
the last Prior there was surrendred to king Henry the eight, 
in the 23. of his raigne, who gaue this Priorie to sir Thomas 
Audley, knight, Lord Chauncellor of England, and he pulled 
downe the Church. Sithens the which dissolution of that 
house, the sayde Ward of Portsoken hath beene gouerned 
by a temporall man, one of the Aldermen of London, elected 
by the Citizens, as by the Aldermen of other wardes. Thus 
much for the out boundes of C«ittcn Guilde, or Portsoken 
Warde, and for the antiquitie and gouernment thereof. 
Now of the parts therein, this is specially to be noted. 
First the East part of the Tower standeth there, then an 
Hospitall of [ Saint Katltcrins founded by [atild« the Queene, 
wife to king StcI)hen, by licence of the prior and Couent of 
the holy Trinitie in London on whose ground she founded it. 
1 rode] road 16o 3 

Constables of 
the Tower. 

Part of 
Cnitten Guild 
withheld 
by the 
Constables of 
the Tower. 

Prior of the 
Trinitie an 
Alderman of 
London. 

Page 



Hospitall of 
S. Katherins. 
A second 
foundresse. 

New Abbey 
on Eastsmith- 
field. 

Buriall for the 
ded prepared 
in time of 
pestilence. 

t'affe 126 

12 4 Por[esokee. warde 
Hdianor the Queene wife to king Edward the first, a second 
foundresse, appointed there to be a Maister, three brethren 
Chaplaines, and three Sisters, ten poore women, and sixe 
poore Clarkes, she gaue to them the Marmot of Carlton in 
Wiltshire, and Vpchurch in Kent, &c. Queene Philip wife 
to king .Edward the third I35X. founded a Chauntrie there, 
and gaue to that Hospitall ten pound land by yeare : it was 
of late time called a free chappell, a colledge, and an Hos- 
pital for poore sisters. The Quire, which of late yeares was 
not much inferior to that of Paules, was dissolued by Doctor 
IVilsan a late malster there, the brethren and sisters remain- 
ing : this house was valued at 31.5. pound, foureteene shillings, 
two pence, being now of late yeres inclosed about, or pestered 
with small tenements, and homely cottages, hauing inhabitants, 
English and strangers, more in number then in some citie(s) 
in England. Therc lie buried in this church, the countesse 
of Huntington, countesse of the Match in her rime, I4oE9. 
Ioltlt ttolland Duke of Excestcr and Earle of Huntington 
1447. and his two viues, in a fayre Tombe on the North side 
the Quire, Thomas lI'alsingham Esquire, and Thomas t?allard« 
Esquire by him, 1465. Thomas Flcmmbç knight. I466. &c. 
On the East and by North of the Tower, lieth Eastsmith- 
field, and Tower hill, two plots of ground so called, vithout 
the wall of the citie, and East from them both was sometime 
a Monasterie called nev Abbey, founded by king Edward the 
third, in the yeare 1359. vpon occasion as followeth. 
In the yeare 1348. the OE3 of Edward the third, the first 
great pestilence in his time began, and increased so sore, that 
for want of roome in churchyardes to burie the dead of the 
citie, and of the suburbes, one Iohn Corcy clearke, procured of 
Nicholas prior of the holy Trinitie within Ealdgate, one Toft 
of ground neare vnto Eastsmithfield, for the burial of them 
that died, vith condition that it might be called the Church 
yard of the holy Trinitie, which ground he caused by the aide 
of diuerse deuout citizens to be inclosed with a wall of stone. 
Robert Elsing sonne of IVilliam Elsbtg, I gaue fiue pound 
thereunto: and the saine was dedicated by Rall;lz Stratford 
I3ishop of London, where innumerable bodies of the dead 
were afterwardes buried, and a chappell built in the same 



Porlesobeu warde 25 
place, to the honour of God: to the vhich king Edward 
setting his eie (hauing before in a tempest on the sea, and 
perill of drowning, ruade a vow to build a Monasterie to the 
honour of God, and our Ladie of grace, if God would grant 
him grace to corne safe to land) builded there a Monasterie, 
placing an /kbbot, and Monkes of the Cistercian, or white 
order. The bounds of this plot of ground togither with a 
decree for Tithes thereof, are expressed in the Charter, the 
effect whereof I haue set downe in another place, and haue to 
shew. This house, at the late general suppression was valued 
at 546. L IO. d. yearely, it was surrendered in the yeare 1539. 
the 3o. of Henrie the 8. since the which time, the said Monas- 
terie being cleane pulled downe by sir Arthttr Darcie knight, 
and other, of late time in place thereof is builded a large 
Storehouse for victuale, and conuenient Ouens are builded 
there, for baking of ]3isket to serue her Maiesties Shippes. 
The groundes adioyning belonging to the said /kbbey, are 
employed in building of small tenements. 
For Tower hiIl, as the same is greatly diminished by 
building of tenements and garden plots, &c., so it is of late, 
to wit in the yeare of Christ I593. on the North side thereof, 
and at the West ende of Hogstreete, beautified by certaine 
faire Aimes houses, strongly builded of ]3ricke and tituber, 
and couered with slate for the poore, by the Marchant 
Taylers of London, in place of some small cottages, giuen to 
them by Richard I-]ils sometime a master of that companie, 
IOO. loades of tituber for that vse being also giuen by 
Anthonie Radcliffe of the saine societie, Alderman. In these 
Almes houses I4. charitable brethren of the said Marchant 
taylers yet liulng, haue placed 14. poore sole women, which 
receyue each of them of their founder sixteene pence, or 
better, weekely, besides 8. L 15. s. yearely, paide out of the 
common Treasurie of the saine corporation for fewell. 
From the west part of this Tower hill, towards Ealdgate, 
being a long continuall streete, amongst other smaller build- 
ings in that row, there was sometimes an/kbbey of Nunnes of 
the order [ of Saint Clare, called the Minories, founded by 
]dmnd Earle of Lancaster, Leycester and Darbie, brother to 
king Edward the first, in the yeare 10.93. the length of which 

Tower hill. 

Marchant 
Tailers aimes 
houses at the 
Tower hill. 

tage I2 7 



I26 Portesoken warde 

Abbey of 
Saint Clare 
lXTuunes 
called the 
Minotier, 

Store house 
for armour. 

Parish church 
of S. Trinitie. 

by the 
Minories 
wherein hath 
beene sold 
3. pints of 
milke for one 
halfe pennie 
iii memorie of 
men liuing. 

Ditch of the 
eitie lay open 
and was 
clelised, but 
now filled vp. 

Page 

_Abbey conteyned 15. perches, and seuen foote, neare vnto the 
kings streete, or high way, &c. as appeareth by a deede dated 
13o 3. a plague of pestilence being in this Citie, in the yeare 
I515. there died in this house, of Nunnes professed, to the 
number of OE7- besides other lay people, seruants in their 
house. This house was valued to dispend 418. pounds, 8. s. 
5. d. yearely, and was surrendered by Dame Elizabetk Sahtage, 
the last Abbeyes there, vnto king Henry the 8. in the 3 o. of 
his raigne, the yeare of Christ I539. 
In place of this house of Nunnes, is now builded diuerse 
faire and large storehouses, for armour, and habiliments of 
warre, with diuerse worke houses seruing to the same purpose : 
there is a small parrish Church for inhabitants of the close, 
called S. Trinitics. 
Neare adioyning to this Abbey on the South side thereof, 
was sometime a Farme belonging to the said Nunrie, at the 
which Farme I m v" selle in my youth haue fetched many a 
halle pennie worth of Milke, and neuer had lesse then three 
/kle pints for a half-pennie in the Sommer, nor lesse then one 
/kle quart for a halle pennie in the Winter, alwayes hote from 
the Kine, as the same was milked and strained. One Trolop, 
and afterwardes Goodman, were the Farmers there, and had 
thirtie or fortie Kine to the paile. Goodmans sonne being 
heyre to his fathers purchase, let out the ground first for 
grazing of horse, and then for garden plots, and liued like a 
Gentleman thereby. 
On the other side of that streete, lieth the ditch without the 
walles of the Citie, which of olde time was vsed to lie open, 
alwayes from time to time cleansed from filth and mud, as 
neede required, of great breadth, and so deepe, that diuers 
watring horses where they thought it shallowest, were drowned 
both horse and man. But now of later rime, the same ditch is 
inclosed, and the banks thereof let out for Garden plots, Carpen- 
ters yal'des, Bowling Allies, and diuerse houses thereon builded, 
whereby the Citie wall is hidden, the ditch filled vp, a small 
channell left, and that verie shallow. 
From Ealdgate East, lyeth a large streete, and high way, I 
sometime replenished with few, but faire and comely buildings 
on the North side, whereof the first was the parrish Church of 



torlesokez warde IZ 7 
Saint Btttolph, in a large Cemitarie, or Churchyard. This 
Church hath beene lately new builded at the speciall charges 
of the Priors of the holy Trinitie, patrones thereof, as it 
appeareth by the Armes of that house engrauen on the stone 
worke. The Parishioners of this parish being of late yeares 
mightily increased, the Church is pestered with loftes and 
seates for them. Monumentes in this Church are few: Hem-ie 
Iordeu founded a Chaunterie there, 1 Iohn Ro»teO, , Ollarhts, 
and Agnes his wife 1 were buried there about x4o8. Richard 
Chcster Alderman, one of the Shiriffes x484. Thonas Lord 
Darcie of the North, knlght of the Garter, beheaded 1537. 
Sir Nicholas Carew of Bedington in Surrey, knight of the 
Garter, beheaded I538. sir Arthur Darcy youngest sonne to 
Thomas Lorde Darcie, deceased at the new Abbey on the 
Tower hill, was buried there. East from this l'arrish Church 
there were certaine faire Innes for receipt of trauellers re- 
payring to the Citie, vp towards Hog-lane end, somewhat 
within the Barres, a marke shewing how farre the liberties of 
the Citie do extend. 
This Hogge lane stretcheth North toward Saint [arie 
Spitlc without Bishopsgate, and within these fortie yeares, 
had on both sides fayre hedgerowes of Elme trees, with Bridges 
and easie stiles to passe ouer into the pleasant fieldes, very com- 
modious for Citizens therein to walke, shoote, and otherwise 
to recreate and refresh their dulled spirites in the sweete and 
wholesome ayre, which is nowe within few yeares made a con- 
tinuall building throughout, of Garden houses, and small 
Cottages : and the fields on either side be turned into Garden 
plottes, teynter yardes, Bowling Allyes, and such like, from 
Houndes ditch in the West, so farre as white Chappell, and 
further towards the East. 
On the Southside of the high way from Ealdgate, were 
some few tenements thinly scattered, here & there, with many 
voyd spaces between them, vp to the Bars, but now that street 
is not only fully replenished with buildings outward, & also 
pestered with diuerse Allyes, on eyther side to the Barres, 
but to white Chappell I and beyond. Amongst the which late 
-x Iohn Romeny Olarie and Agnes his wit-e ,v6o3; John Romany, 
Olarie and Agnes his wives 163.3 

Parish ehureh 
of S. Bottolph. 

Hoggelane. 

tag e 9 



28 Portesolel¢ ,arde 

Water conduit 
at Aldgate. 

H ounds ditch. 

Bedred people 
in Hounds 
ditch. 

Brasse ordi- 
nance cast in 
Hounds ditch. 

tagt 

buildings one memorable for the commoditîe of that East 
part of this Cittie, is a fayre water Conduite, harde without the 
Gate, (at) the building whereof, in the yeare 535. Sir Ioltn 
.dllot being Major, two fifteenes wcre granted by the Citizens 
for the making, and laying of Pypes to conuey water from 
Hackney to that place, and so that worke was finished. 
From Aldgate Northwest to Bishopsgate, licth the ditch of 
the Cittie, called Houndes ditch, for that in olde time when 
the same lay open, much filth (conueyed forth of the Citie) 
especially dead Dogges were there layd or cast : whei, efore of 
latter time a mudde wall was made inclosing the ditch, to 
keepe out the laying of such filth as had beene accustomed. 
Ouer against this mudde wall on the other side of the streete, 
was a fayre fieldc, sometime belonging to the Priorie of the 
Trinitie, and sincc by Sir Tho»zas Atdley giuen to 3"[agdalo 
Collcdge in Cambridge: this fielde (as all other about the 
citie) was inclosed, reseruing open passage there into, for such 
as were dispose& Towards the street were some small 
cottages, of two stories high, and little garden plottes backe- 
warde, for poorc bedred people, for in that streete dwelt none 
other, builded by some Prior of thc holy Trinitie, to whom 
that ground belonged. 
In my youth, I remcmber, dcuout pcople as well men as 
women of this Citie,.were accustomed oftentimes, especially on 
Frydayes weekely to walke that way purposely there to bestow 
their charitable almes, euerie poore man or woman lying in 
their bcd within their window, which was towards the streete 
open so low that euery man might see them, a clean linnen 
cloth lying in their window, and a payre of Beades to shew 
that there lay a bedred body, vnable but to pray onely. This 
strecte was first paued in the yeare 1.5o 3. 
About the latter raigne of Iotî-ie the eight, three brethren 
that were Gunfounders surnamed Owens, gate ground there to 
build vpon, and to inclose for casting of Brasse Ordinance. 
These occupied a good part of the streete on the field side, 
and in short time diuerse other also builded there, so that the 
poore bedred people ] were worne out, and in place of their 
homely Cottages, such houses builded, as doe rather want 
roome then rent, which houses be for the most part possessed 



Porlesoken OEcarde 12 9 
by Brokers, sellers of olde apparell, and such like. The residue 
of the fielde was for the most part made into a Garden, by 
a Gardener named Cawsway, one that serued the Markets 
with Hearbes and Rootes: and in the last yeare of King 
Edwarde the sixt, the same was parceled into Gardens, 
wherein are now many fayre houses of pleasure builded. 
On the ditch side of this streete, the mudde wall is also by 
little and little ail taken downe, the Banke of the ditch beeing 
raysed made leuell ground, and turned into Garden plottes, 
and Carpenters yardes, and many large houses are there 
builded, the filth of which bouses, as also the earth cast out 
of their Vaultes, is turned into the ditch, by which meanes the 
ditch is filled vp, and both the ditch and wall so hidden, that 
they cannot bee seene of the passers by. This lortsobcn 
warde hath an Alderman and his deputic, common Councellers 
sixe, Constables foure, Scauengers foure, for the Wardemote 
inquest eighteene, and a Beedle. To the fifteene it is cessed 
at foure pound ten shillings. I 
Tower streete »varde. 
THE first Warde in the East parte of this cittie within the 
wall, is called Towerstreete ward, and extendeth along the 
riuer of Thames from the said Tower in the East, almost to 
Bclinsgate in the West : One halfe of the Tower, the ditch on 
the West side, and bulwarkes adioyning do stand within that 
parte, where the wall of the cittie of old rime xvent straight 
from the Posterne gare south to the riuer of Thames, before 
that the Tower was builded. From and without the Tower 
ditch West and by North, is the saide Tower hill, sometime 
a large plot of ground, now greatly streightned by incroch- 
mentes, (vnlaxvfully made and suffered) for Gardens and 
Houses, some on the Banke of the Tower ditch, whereby thc 
Tower ditch is marred, but more neare vnto the Wall of the 
cittie from the Posterne North till ouer against the principall 
fore gate of the Lord Lzt¢Jtleycs house, &c. but the Tower 
Warde goeth no further that way. 
Vpon this Hill is alwayes readily prepared at the charges 
of the cittie a large Scaffolde and Gallowes of Timber, for the 
execution of such Traytors or Transgressors, as are deliuered 
lOW. 1 K 

Tower streete 
warde. 

Tower hill. 

Scaffold on 
Tower hill. 



I.ib. L. 
folio 4 ° . 

Proclamation. 
W. Dun- 
thorne. 

Page U2 

Chicke lane. 

Tower strecte. 
AIhallowcs 
F, addng, a 
parish church. 
Barking 
chappell of 
out Ladie. 

I3O 7bJer st/,ee/e cv«rde 
out of the Tower, or otherwise to the Shiriffes of London by 
writ there to be executed. I rend that in the fift of King 
Edwarde the fourth a scaffold and gallowes xvas there set vp 
by other the Kinges C)fficers, and no/ of the Citties charges, 
whereupon the Mayor and his Brethren complayned, but were 
aunswered by the King that the Tower hill was of the libertie 
of the cittie : And whatsoeuer was done in that point, was no/ 
in derogation of the cities Liber/les, and therefore commaunded 
Proclamation to bee ruade, aswell within the Ci/le as in the 
Suburbes, as followeth : For as much as the seauenth day of 
this present Moneth of Nouember, Gallowes were erect and 
set vppe besides out Tower of London, within the liber/les 
and franchises of out ci/rie of London, in derogation and 
preiudice of the liberties and fi'anchises of this ci/rie. I The 
king out soueraigne Lord would it bee certainely vnderstood 
that the erection and setting" vp of the said gallowes was not 
done by his commaundcment, wherefore the King out soueraign 
Lord willeth that the erection and se/ring vp the said Gallowes 
bee hot any president or example thereby hereafter to be taken, 
in hurte, preiudicc or dcrogation of the franchises, liberties, & 
priuiledges of the said ci/rie, which hee at ail rimes hath had 
& hath in his beneuolence, tender fauour and good grace, &c. 
..ttml IVes/mil«st. 9" di« Noucmb. Aaito regni nos/ri quin[o. 
On the North side of this hill, is the saide Lord Lllmlcycs 
house, and on the west side diuers houses lately builded, and 
other incrochmentes along south to Chicke lane on the east of 
13arking church, at the end whereof you haue Tower street 
stretching from the Tower hill, west to S. 3Iaoearet Pat/cas 
church Parsonage. 
Now therefore to beginne at the East end of the streete, on 
the North side thereof is the fayre parish Church called 
Alhallowes 13arking, which standeth in a large, but sometime 
farre largcr, cemitory or Churchyearde. On the north side 
whereof was sometime builded a fayre Chappell, founded by 
king Richard the first, some haue written that his heart was 
buried there vnder the high Al/af : this chappell was confirmed 
and augmented by King Edward the I. Edward the fourth 
gaue licence to his coscn ohn Enfle of "VVorcester, to round 
thcre a Brotherhoode for a Maistcr and Brethren, and he gaue 



Tower sLree[e warde  3 
to the Custos of that ffaternity, which was Sir Iohn ç«o 
Knight, TItomas Coite, IoIm Tare, and Iohn Croke, the Priorie 
of Totingbecke, and auotion of the parrish Church of Stretham 
in the county of Surrey, with all the members and appurte- 
nances, and a parte of the Priory of Okeborn in Wiltshire, 
both priors _&liens, and appoynted it to be called the kinges 
chappell or chantrie, In capclla 3eatae Mariae de tarkng. 
King Richard the third new builded and founded therein 
a colledge of Priestes, &c. t-[amoud de Lega was buried in that 
chapple, I¢obcrt Tare Mayor of London, 488. and other were 
there buried. This colledge was suppressed & pulled downe 
in the yeare 1548. the second of king tdward the sixt, the 
grounde was imployed as a Garden plot, during the raigns of 
King Edward, Queene Mary, and parte of Queene tIi:a&th, 
till at length ] a large strong frame of Timber and bricke was 
set thereon, and imployed as a store house of Marchantes 
goodes brought from the sea, by Sir lVilliam IVinter, &c. 
Monumentes in the parrish church of _Alhallowes Barking, 
not defaced, are these: Sir Thomas .tttdin]tam of Norwich 
Dioces, Knight, 1469. Ttwmas GiIbart Draper and Marchant 
of the Staple, 1483. Iohu tolt Marchant of the Staple, 1459. 
Sir Io]m Stilc Knight, Draper, ISoo. IVilliam Thiune Esquier, 
one of the Clearkes of the Greene cloath, and Maister of the 
Houshold to K. Henry the eight, 1546. Hmttfrey _g[omwnth 
Draper, oneof th Sheriffes, 1535. buried in the churchyearde. 
lViIIiam Denham, one of the Sheriffes, I534. ttcm-y ttozvard 
Earle of Surrey beheaded 1546. Sir _Richarde Dct«crenx sonne 
and Heyre to the Lord Ferrers of Chartley, Rickard trowne 
Esquier, 1546. Phillip Deznis Esquier, 1556. Andrew Euetgcr 
Salter, IViIliam I¢obittsou Mercer, _Alderman 1552. lV«7liam 
'h'morcr Clothworker, Esquier, Gouernour of the Pages of 
honor, or M. of the Heance men, seruant to ttenry the eight, 
dzvard the sixt and Queene A[ary, buried 156o. Besides 
which there be diuers Tombes without inscription. Iohn 
Crolys and Tlwmas Pike, Cittizens of London, founded a 
Chantery there 1388. By the West ende of this Parrish 
church and chappell, lyeth Sydon fane, now corruptly called 
Sything lane, from Towerstreete vp North to Hart streete. 
In this Sidon fane diuers fayre and large houses are builded, 
K2 

The Kings 
chappell of 
13arking. 

I, Rowse. 

Page U3 

Sidon lane 



l'arish church 
of S. Olatte in 
Ilartstreet. 

lage 134 

lIart lane of 
a mart kept 
,about Blanch 
chappel. 

/Iincheon 
lane. 

Galley men 
dwelled there. 

I32 Tower slreete warcte 
namely one by Sir Iohn Illcn, sometime Mayor of London, 
and of counsell vnto ldng Hemy the eight: Sir Frauccs 
lI'alshtgam Knight, Principal Secretary to the Queenes 
Maiestie that now is, -,vas lodged there, and so -,vas the Earle 
of Essex, &c. At the North West corner of this lane, stand- 
eth a proper parrish Church of Saint Olaue, which Church 
together with some houses adioyning, and also others ouer 
against it in Hartstreete, are of the saide Tower streete 
Warde. Monumentes in this parrish Church of Saint Olaue 
bee these: 14ichard Ccly, and Robert Ccly Felmongers, prin- 
cipall buildcrs and benefactors of this Church: Dame Iohan, 
wife to Sir Iohlz Zouch, 1439. Iohlz ClarcutiauLr King of 
Armes, 1427. Thomas Sawlc, [ Sir Iqichard Haddou Mercer, 
Mayor, 15oE. Thomas 112trncll Mercer, 1548. Thomas ]Iorley 
Gentleman, 1566. Sir Iohn Iqadcliffe Knight, 568. And Dame 
ttttte his wife, 1585. Chapotte a Florentine Gentleman, I58Z. 
Sir lramoud Va2ghau Knight, Gcor, çe Stoddard Marchant, &c. 
Then haue yee out of Towerstreete, also on the North side, 
one other lane, called Marre lane, which runneth vp towardes 
the North, and is for the most parte of this Toverstreet 
varde, which lane is about the thirde quarter thereof deuided, 
froln .A_ldgate ward, by a chaine to bee drawn thwart the 
saide lane aboue the west ende of Harte streete. Cokedon 
hall, sometime at the South west end of Marre lane I reade of. 
.A_ third lane out of Towerstreete on the North side is 
called Mincheon lane, so called of tenements there sometime 
pertayning to the Minchuns or Nunnes of Saint Helens in 
Bishopsgate streete: this lane is all of the saide Warde, 
except the corner bouse towardes Fenchurch streete. In this 
fane of olde rime dwelled diuers strangers borne of Genoa and 
those parts, these were commonly called Galley men, as men 
that came vppe in the Gallies, brought vp wines and other 
raerchandises which they landed in Thames street, at a place 
called Galley key : they had a certain coin of siluer amongst 
themselues which were halfe pence of Genoa, & were called 
Galley halfe pence: these halfe pence were forbidden in the 
thirteenth of Henry the fourth, and againe by l'arliament in 
the fourth of Hcm'y the fift, it was that if any person bring 
into this realme Galley halfe pence, suskinges or dodkins, hee 



Toever s[reete eparde 133 
should be punished as a Theefe, and he that taketh or payeth 
such money, shall leese a hundred shillings, whereof the king 
shall haue the one halle, and hee that will sue, the other halle : 
notwithstanding in my youth I haue seene them passe currant, 
but with some difficulty, for that the english halfepence were 
then, though 1 hOt so broade, somewhat thicker and stronger. 
The Clothworkers hall is in this lane. Then at the west Clothworkers 
ende of Towerstreet haue ye a little turning towardes the hall. 
1XIorth to a fayre house sometime belonging to one named 
Gistc, for he dwelled there in the yeare 1449. _And [ace Gristes house. 
Cade captaine of the rebels in Kent, being by him in this his 
bouse feasted, when he had I dined, like an vnkinde guest, tage 235 
robbed him of all that was there to be round worth the 
carriage. Next to this is one other fayre bouse, sometime 
builded by .dnell ])mw Grocer, _Alderman of London, since 
possessed by sir Iohu Chamncis _Alderman and Major of 
London. I-le builded in this house an high Tower of Bricke, 
the first that euer I heard of in any private mans house to 
ouerlooke his neighbours in this Citie. But this delight oflohnChamp- 
neisAlderman, 
his eye was punished with blindnesse some yeares before his blind. 
death : since that rime sir Iercenall t-art a iolly Courtier and 
knight, harbenger to the Queene, was lodged there, &c. From 
this house somewhat West is the Parish Church, and parson- 
age house of Saint _/J[a2garets Pattens, to the which Church 
and house on the North side, and as farre ouer against on the 
South, stretcheth the farthest west part of this varde. 
_And therefore to begin againe at the East ende of Tower- Beare lane. 
streete, on the South side haue ye Beare lane, wherein are 
many faire bouses, and runneth downe to Thames street. 
The next is Sporiar lane, of old time so called, but since, and Sporiar lane, 
or Water 
of later rime named }Vater lane, because it runneth downe to lane, or Itart 
the \Vater gate by the Custome house in Thames streete: lane- 
then is there Hart lane for Harpe lane, which likewise runneth 
downe into Thames streete. In this Hart lane is the ]3akers tlakers hall. 
Hall, sometîme the dwelling house of [o/m Chichl« 7 Chamber- Harpe lane. 
lain of London, who was sonne to lVilliam Chiddey, _Alderman 
of London, brother to IVilliam Chiddey, _Archdeacon of Can- 
terburie, nephew to Ro3ert Chidd«'y Major of London, and to 
 though] z633 : thought z6o 3 



Galley row. 
Church fane 
by East. 
Church fane 
in the west. 

Fowle lane. 

Parish church 
of S. Dun- 
stone in the 
East. 

Heurie Chich[ey Archbishop of Canterburie. This ]ohn 
Chfch[«y, saith [ohn ZOo[and, had OE4. children. Sir Thomas 
IçirrioH of Kent, af ter he had beene long prisoner in France, 
married El:ab«/h, one of the daughters of this Chich[«y, by 
whom he had this Chichleys bouse. This Eiizabe/h was 
secondly married to sir a[fe Ashton, Knight Marshall : and 
thirdly, to sir ]ohn Btrchicr, vncle to the late Btrchicr Earle 
of Essex, but she neuer had childe. ]_='dwmd Poyniugs made 
part with Btrchicr and Elizabeth to haue Ostcnhanger in 
Kent, after their death, and entred into it, they liuing. 
In Tower streete, betwcene Hart lane, and Church lane, I 
was a quadrant called Galley row, because Galley men dwelled 
there. Then haue ye two lanes out of Tower streete, both 
called Churchlanes, because one runncth downe by the East 
ende of Saint 1)¢[nsta«s Church, and the othcr by the vest 
ende of the saine : out of the west lane, tumeth another lane, 
west toward S. [aric Hill, and is called Fowle lane, which is 
for the most part of Tower streete warde. 
This Church of Saint 1)«ustonc is called in the East, for 
difference from one other of the saine naine in the west : it is 
a fayre and large Church of an auncient building, and within 
a large Churchyarde: it bath a great parish of many rich 
Marchants, and other occupiers of diuerse trades, namely 
Saltars and Ironmongers. 
The monuments in that Church bee these. In the Quire Iohn 
A'euiugton person, there buried, 1374. IVillianz Isli, person, 
1382. [ohn A(i)ryoll Esquire, brother to T]tomas K(i)ryoll, 
14. iVicholas Bond, Thomas Barry Marchant, 144,5. Robcrt 
S]wlley Esquier, I42C. Robcrt 19e;iOcr Grocer, 1445, ]oAci 
Nor,¢,icA Grocer, I39C. Alice Brome, wife to Iohn Coueuty 
sometime Maior of London, 1433. lI'illia»z Isaack Draper, 
Alderman, I5C8. Edward Skales Marchant, I5i. Iohn Ricroft 
Esquire, Sargeant of the Larder to teurie the seuenth, and 
tcm'ic the eight, I53z. Edwatcrs Esquire, Sargeant at Armes, 
1.558. Sir Bartholomczv I«mcs Draper, Major, I4ï9, buried 
vnder a fayre Monument, with lais Ladie. alfe Greenway 
Grocer, Alderman, put vnder the stone of obert 19el2Oer 1559. 
Thomas Bledlow, one of the Shiriffes, I47 . Iames Bacou 
Fishmonger, Shiriffe, 1573. Sir Richard Chavion Draper, 



Maior, 568. I-Zclry I-Zerdsa» Skinner, Alderman, 555. Sir 
lames Garnada knight, lVilliam I-Zario! Draper, Major, 48. 
buried in a fayre Chappell by him builded, 517 . la]tri Yate 
sonne to sir Ia] Ya'«, in the saine Chappell, in the North 
wall. Sir C]risa]er Dracr Ironmonger, Maior, 566. buried 
58o. and many other worshipfull personages besides, whose 
monuments are altogither defaced. Now for the two Church 
hnes, they meeting on the Southside of this Church and 
Churchyarde doe ioyne in one: and runnin downe to the 
Thames streete : the ] saine is called Saint Dunstans hill, at the tae .¢ 
lower ende whereof the sayd Thames streete towards the west 
on both sides almost to lelins gate, but towardes the East vp 
to the water gare, by the lulwarke of the tower, is all of 
tower streete warde. In this streete on the Thames side are 
diuers large landing places called wharffes or keyes, for 
Cranage vp of wares and Marchandise, as also for shipping of 
wares from thence to be transported. These wharffes and 
keyes commonly beare the names of their owners, and are 
therefore changeable. I reade in the 6. of t-denrii the sixt 
that in the Parish of Saint Dunstone in the East a tenement 
called ]asscl'es wharffe, & another called t-dorn«rs key in Pas-ekes 
Thames streete, were granted to lFillfam t-daritdau Esquire. wharr«, an,1 
Horners kry. 
I reade also that in the sixt of ic]ard the second, Ia] 
C]nrdmau Grocer, for the quiet of Marchants, did newly 
build a certaine house vpon the key, called woole wharfe, in 
the Tower streete warde, in the Parish of Alhallowes larking, 
betwixt the tenement of ]adc 5ali«errfe, on the East part, 
and the lane called the water gate on the west, to serue for 
Tronage, or weighing of woolles in the Port of London:Woolwhaffe 
Whereupon the kin graunted that during the lire of the said 
Io, the aforesayd Tronae should be held and kept in the 
said house, with easements there for the balances and weightes, 
and a counting place for the Customer, Controwlers, Clarkes 
and other Officers of the said Tronage, togither with ingresse 
and egresse to and from the saine, euen as was had in other 
places, where the sayd Tronage was woont to be kept, and 
that the king should pay yearely to the said lo during his Custom 
lire fortie shillings at the termes of S. $lic]ad & Easter, by ouse. 
euen portions, by the handes of his Cutomer, without an}- 

by Ctastomers 
key. 
Water gare 
by Wooll key 
Custome 
hotse. 
Tronage of 
wols. 



Porters key, 
orPorterslane. 
Galley key. 

Pettywales. 

tage 238 

Princes of 
Wales their 
lodging. 

The Mar- 
chants of 
Italie their 
lodging by 
their Gallies 

136 Tower s/ree/e wavde 
other payment to the said Iah/t, as in the Indenture thereof 
more at large appeareth. 
Neare vnto this Customers key towardes the East, is the 
sayd watergate, and west from it Porters key, then Galley key, 
where the Gallies were vsed to vnlade, and land their mar- 
chandizes, and wares: and that part of Thames streete was 
therefore of some called Galley Row, but more commonly 
petty Wales. 
On the North side, as well as on the South of this Thames 
streete, is many fayre houses large for stowage, builded for 
lV[arlchants, but towardes the East end thereof, namely ouer 
agaynst Galley key, Wooll key, and the Custome house, there 
haue beene of olde time some large buildings of stone, the 
ruines wheréof doe yet remaine, but the first builders and 
owncrs of thcm are worne out of memorie, wherfore the 
common peoplc affirm Iu[ius Ceesar to be the builder thereof, 
as also of the Tower it selfe. But thereof I haue spoken 
alreadic. Some are of another opinion and that a more likely, 
that this grcat stone building was sometime thc lodging 
appointcd for the Princes of Wales, when they repayred to 
this Citie, and that therefore the street in that part is called 
pctty Wales, which name remaineth there most commonly 
vntill this day : euen as where the kinges of Scotland were 
vsed to be lodged betwixt Charing crosse, and white hall, it is 
likewise called Scotland: and where the Earles of Briton 
were lodged without A_ldcrsgate, the streete is called Britaine 
streete, &c. 
The said building might of olde rime pertaine to the 
Princes of Wales, as is aforesayd, but is since tumed to 
other vse. 
It is before noted of Galley key, that the Gallyes of Italie, 
& other partes did there discharge their wines and marchan- 
dizes brought to this CRie. It is like therefore that the 
1V[archants and Owners procured the place to builde vpon for 
their lodgings and storehouses, as the 1V[archants of the 
Haunce of A_lmaine were licenced to haue an house called 
Gilda Tcntonicornm, the Guild hall of the Germanes. Also 
the Marchants of 13urdeaux were licenced to build at the 
Vintry, strongly with stone, as may be yet seene and seemeth 



7"owee s[reete arde I37 
olde, though often repayred: much more cause hath these 
buildings in pettie Wales, though as lately builded, and partly 
of the like stone brought ri'oto Carie in Normandie, to seeme 
olde, which for many yeares, to wit, since the Gallies left their 
course of landing there, bath fallen to ruine, and beene letten 
out for stabling of horses, to Tipplers of Beere, and such like : 
amongst others, one mother A[ampudding (as they termed her) 
for many yeares kept this bouse, or a great part thereof, for 
victualing, and it seemeth that the builders of the hall of this 
bouse were shipwrights, and hot house Carpenters : for the 
frame thereof (being but low) is raysed of certaine principall 
postes of maine timber, fixed deepe in the ground, without 
any groundsell, boorded close I round about on the inside, 
hauing none other wal from the ground to the roofe: those 
Boordes not exceeding the length of a Clapboord, about an 
inch thicke, euery Boorde ledging ouer other, as in a Ship or 
Gallie, nayled with Ship nayles called rugh, and clenche, 
to wit, rugh nayles with broad round heades, and clenched on 
the other side with square plates of iron : the roofe of this 
hall is also wrought of the like boord, and nayled with rugh 
and clench, and seemeth as it were a Gallie, the Keele turned 
vpwards, and I obserued that no worme or rottennesse is seene 
to haue entred either boord or tymber of that hall, and there- 
fore, in mine opinion, of no great antiquitie. 
I reade in 44. of Edward the third, that an Hospitall in the 
Parish of Barking Church was founded by Robert Denton 
Chaplen, for the sustentation of poore Priests, and other both 
men and women, that were sicke of the Phrenzie, there to 
remaine till they were perfectly whole, and restored to good 
memorie. Also I reade that in the 6. of Henrie the fift, there 
was in the Tower ward, a Messuage or great house, called 
Cobhams Inne, and in the 37. of tenrie the sixt, a Messuage 
in Thames streete, perteyning to Richard LongMle, &c. Some 
of the ruines before spoken of, may seeme to be of the 
foresayd Hospitall, belonging peraduenture to some Prior 
Alien, and so suppressed amongst the rest, in the raigne of 
Edward the third, or ]ïrcnri« the fift, who suppressed them 
ail. Thus much for the boundes and antiquities of this warde, 
wherein is noted the Tower of London, three Parish Churches, 

No Gallies 
landed here in 
memorie of 
men lining. 

A strange 
kind of buiid- 
ing by ship- 
wrights and 
Galley men. 

t'age 39 

An hospitall 
for Lunatike 
or phrensie 
people. 

Cobhams 
Inne. 



38 Tower strede w«rde 

the Custome house, and two Hais of Companies, to wit, the 
Clothworkers, and the ]3akers. This ward hath an/klderman, 
his Deputie, common Counscllors eight, Constables thirteene, 
Scauengers twelue, Wardmote men thirteene, and a 13eedle: 
it is taxed to the fifteene at sixe and twentie pounds. I - 

.Page 4 o 

Aldgate ward. 

] I arthorne 
Alley. 
l;ricklayers 
hall. 
Sprinckle 
allie. 

Belzetters 
lane. 

Wall, Gate, 
and windows 
of stone, 
found wder 
ground. 

Aldgate warde. 
THE second ward within the wall on the east part is called 
Aldgate ward, as taking naine of the saine Gare : the principall 
street of this warde beginneth at Aldgate, stretching west to 
sometime a fayre Well, where now a pumpe is placed : from 
thence the way being diuidcd into twain, the first & principall 
street, caled Aldgate street, runneth on the south side to Lime- 
street corner, and halfe that strcete, downe on the left hand, 
is also of that warde. In the raid way on that South side, 
betwixt/kldgate and Limestreet, is Hart horne/klley, a way 
that goeth through into Fenchurch streete ouer against North- 
umbedand house. Then haue ye the ]3ricklayers hall and an 
other Alley called Sprinckle Alley, now named Sugar-loafe 
Alley, of the like signe. Then is there a faire house, with 
diuerse tenements neare adioyning, sometime belonging to 
a late dissolued Priorie since possessed by Mistresse Çorpe- 
wallies, widow, and her heyres, by the gift of King/-fcm?y the 
eight, in reward of fine puddings (as it was commonly sayd) 
by hir made, wherewith she had presented him. Such was 
the princely liberalyty of those rimes. Of later rime, Sir 
Nichdas Throgmorton knight, was lodged there. Then some- 
what more West is Belzettars lane, so called of the first builder 
and owner thereof, now corruptly called Billitar lane, betwixt 
this Belzettars lane and Limestreete, was of later rime a frame 
of three fayre houses, set vp in the yeare 59 o. in place where 
before was a large Garden plot inclosed from the high streete 
with a Bricke wall, which wall being taken downe, and the 
ground digged deepe for Cellerage, there was found right 
wader the sayd Bricke wall an other wall of stone, with a g.ate 
arched of stone, and Gatcs of Tituber, to be closed in the 
midst towards the streete, thc tymber of the Gares was con- 
sumed, but the ttinges of yron still remayned on their staples 



.4/dga[e warde 139 
on both the sides. Moreouer in that wall were square 
windowes with bars of yron on dther side the gare, this wall 
was vnder ground about two fathomes deepe, as I then 
esteemed it, and seemeth to bee the ruines of some house 
burned in the raigne of kin S/«ph«u, when the fire began in 
the house of one .dd«warde neare London stone, and consumed 
Est to Aldate, whereby it appeareth how greatly the ground 
of this Citie hath beene in that place raysed. 
On the North side, this principall street stretcheth to the 
west corner of Saint .dndr«we« Church, and then the ward 
turneth towards the orth by S. dJ[arfe streete, on the East 
side to Saint /çu«'hw« Church in the wall, and so by Buries 
markes agMn, or about by the vall to Aldate. 
The second way @oto Aldate more towards the South 
from the pumpe aforesaid is called Fenchurch streete, and is 
of Aldgate warde till ye corne to Culuer Alley, on the west 
side of Ironmoners hall, where sonetime was a lane which 
vent out of Fenchurch streete to the middest of Limestreete, 
but this lane was stopped vp, for suspition of theeues that 
lurked there by night. Aaine to Aldate out of the prin- 
cipall streete, euen by the ate and wall of the Citie, runneth 
a lane South to Crowched Friers, and then Woodroffe lane 
to the Tower hill, and out of this lane west, a streete called 
Hartstreete, which of that warde stretcheth to Sydon lane by 
Saint Odmw« Church. One other lane more west from Ald- 
ate oeth by 1Xorthumberland house toward the Crossed 
Friers : then haue ye on the saine side the 1Xorth end of Mart 
lane, and Blanch Apleton,  where that ward endeth. 
Thus much for the bounds: now for monulnents, or places 
most ancient and notable: I ara first to begin with the late 
dissolued Priorie of the holie Trinitie, called Christs Church, 
on the riht hand within Aldgate. This Priorie was founded 
by 2][atild Queene, wife to ttcm-ie the first, in the same place 
where Sh'edus sometime began to erect a Church in honour 
of the Crosse, and of Saint 3[arie e][adale6 of which the 
Deane and Chapter of Waltham were woont to receiue thirtie 
shiilinges. The Queene was to acquite her Church thereof, 

1 Apleton] Chappleton, 59S : Arleton, z6o 3 

I 

S. Mary street. 

Culuer Aile)'. 

IIart streete. 

Priorie of the 
Trinitie of 
COEIIOIlS 
regular. 



t'ae zqe 

Prior of Christ 
Church an 
Alderman of 
London. 

 4 o A/dgate wa rde 
and in exchange gaue vnto them a Mill. King Hcnric ber 
husband confirmed ber gift. This Church was giuen to 
_]Vorman, the first Canon regular in ail England. The said 
Queene also gaue vnto the same Church, and those that 
"serued God therein, the plot of Aldgate, and the Soke ] there- 
unto belonging, with ail customes so ffee as she had helde the 
same, and 25.1. ]31ankes, which shee had of the Cittie of 
Excester : as appeareth by ber deed, wherein she nameth the 
house Cbris[cs Churck, and reporteth Aldgate to be of her 
Demaines, which she granteth, with two parts of the rent of 
the City of Excester. Norman tooke vpon him to be Prior 
of Christs Church, in the year of Christ x to8. in the parishes 
of Saint 3[m'ic 3Iagdalen, S. A[ichael, S. Kathcrinc, and the 
blessed Triniti«, which now was ruade but one Parish of the 
holy Trhfftic, and was in old rime of the holy Crosse, or holy 
Roode Parish. The Priorie was build'ed on a piece of ground 
in the Parish of Saint Kathcrhw, towardes Aldgate, which 
lieth in length betwixt the kinges streete, by the which men 
go towards Aldgate, neare to the Chappell of Saint 31ïchacl 
towards thc North, and containeth in length 83. Elles, halfc, 
quarter, and halfe quartern of the kings Iron Eln, and lieth 
in bredth, &c. Thc Soke and ward of Aldgate was then 
bounded as I haue bcforc shcwed, the Queene was a meane 
also that the land and English Knighten Guild was giuen 
vnto the Prior lror/la/t. The honorable man Geffrcy de 
Clinton 1 was a great helper thcrein, and obtained that the 
Chanons might inclose the way betwixt their Church and 
the wall of the citie, &c. This Priorie in processe of rime 
became a very fayre and large church, rich in lands and. 
ornaments, and passed ail the Priories in the citie of London, 
or sbire of Middlesex, the Prior whercof was an Alderman of 
London, to wit, of Portsoken ward. 
I reade that Eustacius the 8. Prior, about the yeare x64. 
because hee would hot deale with temporall matters, instituted 
Theobald Fit: luouis Alderman of Portsoken xvarde vnder 
him, and that IVilliam "Risinff Prior of Christs C]mrch was 
sworn Alderman of the said Portsoken warde, in the first of 

a Clinton] Glinton z598 » z6o 3 



li«hm'd the second. These Priors haue sittcn and fidden 
amongst thc Aldermen of London, n liuery like nto them, 
sauing that his habite was n shape of a spirituall person, a» 
I my selle haue seene in my ehildhoode: at whieh rime the 
Pfior kept a most bountifull bouse of meate and drinke, both 
for rieh and poore, aswell withn the bouse, as at the gates, 
to al commets aeeording to their estates. These were the 
monuments in this Church, sir Robert Tm'X'c, l and Dame 
Alice his wife, IohuTirel Equire, Simolz Içe»tpc Equire, 
lames A[anthorpc Èquire, Iohu Ascue Esquire, Thomas Fausct 
of Scalset Èquire, Iohn Içcmpc gentleman, Robert Chirwide 
Equire, Sir Iohu Hcti¢çham, and Dame Isabcll lais wife, 
Dame Agucs, wife first to Sir lVillia»z 17ardolth , and then 
to Sir Thomas Arorti»tcr, hhu Ashficht Esquire, Sir Iohu 
Dcdkam knight, Sir Ambrosc Charcam, Zoan wife to Thomas 
Nttck Gentleman, Iohu Husse Equire, Iohu 
Esquire, Thomas Goodwiue Equire, Ralpk lVallcs Equire, 
Dame A[ar, garct daughter to Sir Ral_ph Chcuie, wife to Sir 
Iohu tarkelcy, to Sir Thomas tarncs, and to Sir IV. tttrsire, 
lI'illia»z Roosc, Simou Fraucis, Ioku lTrcton esquire, Hclh?tg 
Èquire, Ioha A[alw«n and his wife, Authouie IVcls son fo 
Iohn ll/'cls, Nicholas dt Aucscy and ll[moecrii his wife, Auhouic 
son to Iokn AIill«s, taldwine son to king Sleplwn, & A[«thildc 
daughter to king Stcphcu, wife to the Earle of lffculau , Hcnric 
Fit:'alwinc Maior of London, OE3" Gcffrcy -Iaudcuilc, 
and many other. But to conclude of this priorie, king Hcnric 
the eight minding fo reward Sir Thomas Audley, speaker of 
the Parliament against Cardinall lVolscy, as ye may reade in 
Hall, sent for the Prior, commending him for his hospitalitie, 
promised him preferment, as a man worthy of a far greater 
dignitie, which promise surely he performed, and compounded 
with him, though in what sort I neuer heard, so that the 
l'riorie with the appurtenances was (surrendered) fo the king, 
in the moneth of Iuly, in the yeare 53 I. the 3. of the said 
kings raigne. The Chanons were sent to other houses of 
the same order, and the priorie with the appurtenances king 
I«m'ic gaue to sir Thomas Audl7 newly knighted, and after 
made Lord Chauncellor. 

x ilteulau] 21Iitleu, z6o 3 

Priorie of the 
holy Trinitie 
surrendered 
& suppressed. 



144 

The Dukes 
place. 

Parish church 
of S. Katherin 
Christs 
church. 

 4  lldate varde 
Sir Thomas ludley offered the great Church of this priorie, 
with a ring of nine 13els well tuned, whereof route the greatest 
were since solde to the parish of Stcbunhith, and the fiue 
lesser to the parish of Saint Stcphen in Colemans streete, to 
the parishioners of Saint Kalhcrine Christ Church, in ex- 
chaunge for their small parish church, minding to haue pulled 
it downe, and to haue builded there towards the street: But 
the parishioners hauing doubts in their heades of afterclappes, 
refused thc offer. Then was the I priorie church and steeple 
proffered to whomsoeuer would take it down, and carrie it 
from the ground, but no man would vndertake the offer, 
whereupon Sir ïnhomas Audlcy was faine to bee at more 
charges, then could be ruade of the stones, tituber, leade, 
yron, &c. For the workemen with great labour beginning at 
thc toppe, loosed stone from stone, and threw them downe, 
whereby the most part of them were broken, and few re- 
mained whole, and thosc were solde verie cheape, for ail thc 
buildings then ruade about the Citie were of Bricke and 
Timber. .A_t that rime any man in the Cittie, might haue 
a Cart loade of hard stone for pauing brought to his doore 
for 6.d. or 7.d. with the carriage. The said ïnhomas Lord 
Audlcy builded and dwelt on this Priorie during his life, and 
died there in the ycare 544. since the which rime the said 
priorie came by marriage of the Lord Audlej,cs daughter and 
heyre, unto Thomas late Duke of Norfolke, and was then 
called the Dukes place. 
The parish Church of S. Kaœherine standeth in the Cemi- 
tory of the latc dissotued priorie of the holy Trinitie, and is 
therefore called S. Kathcrine Christ Church. This Church 
seemeth to be verie olde, since the building whcreof the high 
streete hath beene so often raised by pauements, that now 
men are faine to descend into the said church by diuerse 
steps seuen in number. But the steeple, or ]3ell tower thereof 
hath beene lately builded, to wit, about the yere 5o4. For 
sir Iohn P¢rcbtall Marchant taylor then deceasing, gaue 
money towards the building thereof. There bee the Monu- 
ments of Thomas Flc»¢hz, knight of Rowlcs, in Essex, and 
3[argaret his wife, 464. Rob, er 3/[arshall Esquire, Ianc 
Home, wife to Rob, er 3[arshall, IVillia»z 3[ulton, alias lhtr- 



Ahtg«te warde I43 
de«u.r Heralde, lrohn Goad Esquire, and [oan his wife, 13eatri.r 
daughter to IVilliam 13rownc, Thomas 3[ultou Esquire, sonne 
to tTm'deaux Herald, lrohn Chitcroft Esquire, Iohzt l.Vakc- 
fichte Esquire, IVilliam Criswicke, Aune, and Sewck, daughters 
to Ralph Shirlcy Esquire, sir Iohn Raiusford knight of 
tsscw, Sir Nichohs Throkmorton chiefe Butler of England, 
one of the Chamberlaines of the Exchequer, Ambassadour, 
&c. I57o. and other. At the North west corner of this warde 
in the said high streete, standeth the faire and beautifull 
parish Church I of S. Andrcw the Apostle, with an addition, 
tobe knowne from other Churches of that naine, of the 
Kn«pe or Vndershaft, and so called S. Auch'ew Vnderskafl, 
because that of old timc, euerie yeare on May day in the 
morning it was vsed, that an high or long shaft, or May-pole, 
was set vp there, in the midst of the streete, before the south 
doore of the sayd Church, which shaft when it was set on 
ende, and fixed in the ground, was higher then the Church 
steeple. Gcffrcy Chawccr, writing of a vaine boaster, hath 
these wordes meaning of the said shaft. 
l¢igh! wcll aAfl, and high yc bcarc your hcadc, 
Thc weathcr cocke, wilh flj,izg, as yc woulcl kill, 
IVhcn yc bc slttffcd, bc! of winc lhcn bredc, 
Thczz lookc j'e, whcn your volllbc dolk fill, 
As ye would bcm.e thc grcal shaft of Cornchill, 
Lord so mo-rily crowdcth thcn your crokc, 
Tha! all lhc slrecle may hcare your body cloke. 
This shaft was hot raysed at any rime since euill May day 
(so called of an insurrection made by Prentises, and other 
),oung persons against _Aliens in the yeare I57.) but the said 
shaft was laid along ouer the doores, and vnder the Pentises 
of one rowe of houses, and Aile), gate, called of the shaft, 
shaft _Alley, (being of the possessions of Rochester bridge) in 
the warde of Limestreete. It was there I say hanged on Iron 
hookes many yeares, till the third of king tchvard the sixt, 
that one Sir SlclOhot, curat of S. Kalhcrhw Christs Churck, 
preaching at _Paules Crosse, said there, that this shaft was 
made an Idoll, by naming the Church of Saint Audrew, with 
the addition of vnder that shaft : hee perswaded therefore that 

l'age t4  

Parish church 
of S. Andrew 
Vndershaft. 

A shaft or 
May pole 
higher then 
the church- 
steeple. 

Chaucer. 
chance of dice. 

Shaft or May 
pole preached 
against at 
Paules crosse. 



The said Elm 
tree his 
preaching 
place is 
lately taken 
downe. 

Page 24 6 

.qhaft or May 
pole sawed in 
peeces and 
burnt. 

13ayliefe of 
Romford exe- 
cuted within 
Aldgate for 
words spoken 
to the priest 
ofthe parish. 

I44 .4ldgate warde 
the names of Churches might bec altered : also that the names 
of dayes in the weeke might be changed, the fish dayes tobe 
kept any dayes, except Friday and Saturday, and the Lent 
any time, saue only betwixt Shrouetide and Easter: I haue 
oft rimes seene this man, forsaking the Pulpet of his said 
l'arish Church, preach out of an high Elme tree in the middest 
of the Church yarde, and then entering the Church, forsaking 
the Alter, to haue sung his high Masse in English vpon 
a Tombe of[the deade towardes the North. I heard his 
Sermon at ])aulcs Crosse, and I saw the effect that followed : 
for in the af ter noone of that present Sunday, the neighbours, 
and Tenants to the sayde Bridge, ouer whose doores the saide 
Shaft had laine, after they had dined to make themselues 
strong, gathered more helpe, and with great labour raysing 
the Shaft from the hooks, whereon it had rested two and thirtie 
yeares, they sawed it in peeces, euerie man taking for his share 
so much as had laine ouer his doore and stall, the length of 
his house, and they of the .Alley diuided amongest them so 
much as had layne ouer their .Alley gate. Thus was this Idoll 
(as he tearmed it) mangled, and af'ter burned. 
Soone after was there a Commotion of the Commons in 
Norfolke, Suffolke, Essex, and other shires, by meanes whereof 
streight orders being taken for the suppression of rumors, 
diuerse persons were apprehended and executed by Marshall 
Law, amongst the which the 13aylife of Romfort in Essex 
was one, a man verie well beloued : he was early in the Morn- 
ing of 3[aric 3[agdalcns day, then kept holy day, brought by 
the shiriffes of London, and the knight Marshall, to the Well 
within Aldgate, there to be executed vpon a Jebit set vp that 
Morning, where being on the Ladder, he had words to this 
cffect : Good people I am corne hither to die, but know not for 
what offence except for words by me spoken yester night to 
Sir Stephen, Curate and Preacher of this parish, which were 
these: He asked me what newes in the Countrey, I answered 
heauie newes : why quoth he ? it is sayde, quoth I, that many 
men be vp in Essex, but thanks be to God al is in good quiet 
about vs : and this was all as God be my Iudge, &c. Vppon 
these wordes of the prisoner, sir Stcibhcu to auoyde reproach 
of the people, left the Cittie, and was neuer heard of sinc 



,4M, ffa[e 'zvarde 
amongst thern to rny knowled¢e. I heard the wordes of the 
prisoner, for he was executed vpon the pauernent of rny doore, 
where I then kept house: Thus rnuch by digression: nov 
again to the parish church of S. Indrczv Vmlcrshaft, for it Prlsh church 
of S. Andrew 
still retaineth ye narne, which hath beene new builded by the V,«ershft 
parishioners there, since the yeare 15oEo. euery man putting to new builded. 
his helping hande, sorne xvith their purses, other with their 
bodies : St«tcn Gcnnigs rnar]chant Taylor, sometime Mayor Page 
of London, caused at his charges to bec builded the whole 
North side of the greate Middle Ile, both of the body and 
qtfier, as appeareth by his armes ouer euery pillar grauen, and 
also the North Ile, vhich hee roofed with tituber and seeled, also 
the whole South side of the Church was glased, and the Pewes 
in the south Chappell rnade of his costes, as appeareth in euery 
Window, and vpon the said pewes. He deceased in the yeare 
I5oE 4. and was buried in the Gray Fryers Church. Ioltz, 
l(erkbie Marchant Taylor sometime one of the Shiriffes, Iohn 
Garlaude Marchant Taylor and Nicholas Leuisou rnercer, 
Executor to Garlaud, were greate benefactors to this worke : 
which was finished to the glasing in the yeare I5oE 9. and fully 
finished I532. Buried in this Church, 19hillip A'alpas one of 
the Shiriffes I439. Sir Robert Deuuie Knight, and after him 
Thomas Deunie his sonne in the yeare I4oEI. Thomas Stokcs 
Gentleman, Grocer, I496. In the new Church [ohn $[iclwll x 
Marchant Tayloq I537. IVTliam 19raper Esquier, I537. 
Isabell and 2/[argaret his wiues, Nicholas Leuison Mercer one 
of the Shiriffes, I534. Iohn Gerrarde Woolman, Merchant of 
the Staple 546. Item7 _Z[azz Doctor of Diuinity, Bishoppe 
of Man, I556. Steplmz Kyrton marchant Taylor, Alderman 
i553. Dauid IVoodroffe Haberdasher, one of the Shiriffes, 
i554. Stephen lVoodroffe his sonne gave aoo. ll. in rnoney, for Stephenwood- 
roffe the best 
the which the poore ofthat parish receiue 2.s. in bread weekely benefactor to 
for euer. Sir Thomas OJfley marchant taylor, Mayor I556. he the poore in 
that parrish, 
bequeathed the one halfe of all his goodes to charitable 
actions, but the parrish receyued little benefite thereby. 
Thomas Starkcy Skinner one of the Shiriffes 578. 
Offley Lethersellar one of the Shiriffes, i588. lVilliam 
Hanbury, Baker. 
t Michell 1.598; Nichell 6o 3 
TOW. l 



S. Mary street. 

Pickering 
house. 

Fletchcrs 
Hall. 

f'ag x48 

Papey a 
brotherhood 
or Hospitall 
for poore 
priestes. 

The Abbot of 
l;ery his Inne. 

Beuis markes. 

Ferme church 
streete. 
Ironmongers 
hall. 

146 4ldga[e warde 
Now downe S. 2V[ary streete by the west end of the church 
towardes the North, stand diuers fayre houses for Marchantes, 
and other: namely one faire greate house, builded by Sir 
IVilliam lickering the father, possessed by Sir ICilliam his 
sonne and since by Sir Edward IVootton of Kent. North 
from this place is the Fletchers Hall, and so downe to the 
corner of that streete, ouer against London wall, and again 
eastwardes to a faire house [ lately new builded, partly by 
M. Robert Bcalc one of the Clearks of the Counsell. 
Then corne you to the Papey, a proper house, wherein 
sometime was kept a fraternity or brotherhood of S. Charity, 
and S. Io/zn Eumz.çdist, called the Papey, for poore impotent 
Priestes, (for in some language Priestes are called Papes) 
founded in the yeare I43 o. by IVilliam Oliuer, lVilliat 
Barnabic and Iohn Stafford Chaplens, or Chauntrie Priestes, 
conducts, and other brethren and sisters, that should bee 
admittcd into thc Church of S. Augustine Papey in the Wall, 
the Brethren of this house becomming lame, or otherwise into 
greate pouerty, were here relieued, as to haue chambers, with 
certaine allowance of bread, drinke, and cole, and one olde 
man and his wife to see them serued, and to keepe the bouse 
cleane. This brotherhoode amongst others was suppressed 
in the raigne of Edward the sixt, since the which time in this 
house hath beene lodged M. [oris of Essex, Sir Francis 
IValsh«fflmm principall secretarie to ber Maiestie, Maister 
Barrel of Essex, &c. 
Then next is one great house large of roomes, fayre courts 
and garden plottes, sometimes pertayning to the Bassets, since 
that to the -Abbots of Bury in Suffolke, and therefore called 
Buries Markes, corruptly Beuis markes, and since the dissolution 
of the Abbey of Bury to T/zomas t-fenage the father, and to Sir 
Thomas his son. Then next vnto it is the before spoken Priorie 
of the holy Trinity, to wit, the west and north part thereof, 
which stretcheth vp to Ealdgate, where we first begun. 
Now in the second way from Ealdgate more towarde the 
south from the Well or Pumpe aforesaide, lyeth Fenne Church 
streete, on the right hand whereof somewhat west from the 
south end of Belzetters lane, is the Ironmongers Hall : which 
Company was incorporated in the thirde of Edward the 



4h?gate w«rde 47 
fourth: Richard Flemi»g was their first Maister, Nicholas 
3[arshall & Richard Co.ce vere Custos or Wardens. _And on 
the lefte hand or South side, euen by the gare and Wall of 
the Citty runneth downe a lane to the Tower Hill, the south 
parte whereof is called Woodroffe lane, and out of this lane 
toward the West, a Istreete called Hart streete. In this 
streete at the South east corner thereof sometime stoode one 
bouse of Crouched or (crossed) Fryers, founded by Raph 
Hosiar, and lI;illiam Sabernes, about the yeare io98. S/ehcn the IO. Prior of the Holy Trinity in London, granted three 
tenementes for xiii.s, viii.& by the yeare, vnto the saide RalNt 
Hosiar, and William Sabcrncs, who afterwardes became Fryers 
of S. Crosse, Acheta was the first Prior of that house. These 
Fryers founded their bouse in place of certaine Tenementes 
purchased of Richarde IVimbusl the 1% Prior of the Holy 
Trinity, in the yeare 1319. which was confirmed by Edward 
the thirde, the seauenteenth of his raigne, valued at 52. ll. 
I3.S. 4d. surrendred the twelfth of Nouember, the 3 o. of 
Henry the eight. In this house was buried Maister Iohn 
Titres, Nicholas the sonne of IVilliam I(yricll Esquier, Sir 
Thomas 3Iollinton x Baron of Wemtne, and Dame Elizabctk 
his wife, daughter and heyre of lVilliam Botclar Baron of 
Wemme, Robert 3[ollington  Esquier, and Eliabctlt lais wife, 
daughter to Ferrers ofOuersley, Ienry Louell, sonne to lVilliam 
Lord LouNl, Dame Isael wife to lVilliam Edwarde Mayor of 
London, 1471. IVilliam Narorough, & Dame EHzabeth his 
wife, lVilliam Narrough, and Dame tTeatri;c his wife, 
IVilliam tTrosk¢d Esquier, IVilliam tTowes, Lionel 3[ollington 
Esquier, son of Robert 3[ollington, Nicholas Couderow, and 
Eliabetk his wife, Sir Iohz Slratford Knight, Sir Thomas 
Asseldey, Knight, Clearke of the Crowne, Submarshal of 
England, and Iustice of the shire of Middlesex, John Rest 
Grocer, Mayor of London, 516. Sir Iohn Skeuington Knight, 
merchant taylor, Sheriffe 152o. Sir Iohn 3Iilborne Draper, 
Mayor in the yeare I5OI. was buried there, but remoued since 
to Sabir Edmondes in Lombard streete, Sir Rice Gri.fit.k 
beheaded on the Tower hill, I531. 
1 Mellitgton and Mollitglon are #rinled indiscriminalely in zff98 , 
z6o3, z633 

Woodroffe 
lane by the 
wall of the 
Tower hill. 

t'age 49 

Crossed Friers 
Church. 



The Glasse 
house burned. 

15o 

Almes houses 
by Crossed 
Fryers. 
Testament of 
S. I. Milborn. 

These poyntes 
hot performed : 
the Drapers 
haue vnlaw- 
fully solde 
these tene- 
ments, and 
garden plots, 
and the poore 
be wronged. 

Lorcl Lumleies 
house. 

48 ./lldEate c,arde 
In place of this church is now a carpenters yeard, a Tennis 
court and such like : the Fryers hall was ruade a glasse bouse, 
or house wherein was ruade glasse of diuers sortes to drinke 
in, which house in the yeare i575. on the 4. of September 
brast out into a terrible tire, where being practised all meanes 
possible to quench, notwithstanding as y" saine house in a 
smal rime before, had consumed a great ] quantite of wood 
by making of glasses, now it selfe hauing within it about 
4o. Billets of woode was all consumed to the stone wals, 
which neuerthelesse greatly hindered the tire from spreading 
any firther. 
Adioyning vnto this Fryers Church, by the East ende 
thereof in Wodrofe lane towardes the Tower hill, are certaine 
proper aimes houses, 14. in number, builded of Bricke and 
timber, founded by Sir Ioh $[ilborw Draper, sometime 
Mayor, 52I. wherein be placed xiii. poore men and their 
wiues, if they haue wiues: these haue their dwellinges rent 
free, and ii.s. iiii.d, the peece : the first day of euery moneth 
for euer. One also is to haue his house ouer the gare, and 
iiii.s, euery moneth: more he appoynted euery sunday for 
euer 13. peny loaues of white bread to bee giuen in the parrish 
Church of Saint Edmonde in Lombarde-streete to 3- poor 
people of that parish, and the like 3. loaues to be giuen in 
the parrish Church of S. $[ichaell vpon Cornhill, and in 
eyther parrish euery yeare one loade of Chare coale, of thiy 
sackes in the loade, and this gifte to be continued for euer: 
for performance whereof, by the Maister and Wardens of the 
Drapers in London, he assured vnto them and their suc- 
cessors 23. messuages and tenementes, and 18. garden plottes 
in the parish of Saint Olaue in Hart street, with prouiso 
that if they performe hOt those poyntes aboue mentioned the 
saide Tenementes and Gardens to remayne to the Mayor and 
Commonaltie of the Cittie of London. 
Next to these Aimes houses is the Lord Lztmleyes house, 
builded in the rime of king cmy the eight, by Sir Thomas 
IViat the father, vpon one plotte of ground of late pertayning 
to the foresaid Crossed Fryers, where part of their bouse 
stoode: And this is the farthest parte of Ealdgate Warde 
towardes the south, and ioyneth to the Tower hill. The 



.4 /dgcr[e vcr rdc r49 
other side of that lane, ouer against the Lord Lt.dO'es house, 
on the wall side of the Citty is now for the most parte 
(or altogether) builded euen to Ealdgate. 
Then haue yee on the south side of Fenchurch streete, ouer 
against the Well or Pumpe amongst other fayre and large 
builded houses, one that sometime belonged to the Prior of 
d[onte Ioucs ] or !tonasterie Cornute, a Cell to #Joute loues 
beyonde the seas, in Essex : it was the Priors Inne, when he 
repayred to this Cittie. Then a lane that leadeth downe by 
Northumberland bouse, towards the crossed Friers, as is afore 
shewed. 
This Northumberland house in the parish of saint Katherite 
Col»tan belonged to ]cnrie Pcrcie Earle of Northumberland, 
in the three & thirtie of ]ettric the sixt, but of late being left 
by the Earles, the Gardcns thereof were made into bowling 
Alleys, and other parts into Dicing houses, common to all 
commers for their money, there to bowle and hazard, but 
now of late so many bowling Allies, and other bouses for 
vnlawful gaming, hath beene raised in other parts of the Citie 
and suburbs, that this their ancient, and onel¥ patron of 
misrule, is left and forsaken of her Gamesters, and therefore 
turned into a number of great rents, small cottages, foî 
strangers and others. 
At the eastl end of this lane, in the way from Aldgate 
toward the Crossed Friers, of old time were certaine tene- 
ments called the poore Iurie, of Iewes dwelling there. 
Next vnto this Northumberland bouse, is the parish Church 
of saint Içatherhe called ColemaG which addition of Colematt 
was taken of a great Haw yard, or Garden, of olde rime called 
Colc«au haz«, in the parish of the Trinitie, now called Christs 
Church, and in the parish of saint 'athcrhte, and all Saints 
called Çolc.taz Chztrch. 
Then haue ye Blanch apleton, whereof I reade in the 
thirteenth of dward the first, that a fane behinde the saine 
Blanch-apleton, was graunted b¥ the king to be inclosed and 
shut vp. This Blanch apleton was a mannor belonging to Sir 
Thomas loos of Ilamelab knight, the seuenth of Richard the 
second, standing at the Northeast corner of Mart lane, so 
 east] west &9 S 

tage ;• 
Prior of horne 
church in 
Essex. 

Northumbcr- 
land house. 

The poore 
Iurie. 

Parish church 
of S. Katherine 
Coleman. 

Mannor of 
Blanch 
appleton. 

Mart lane. 



Basket makers 
at Blanch 
appleton. 

5o 

lh?ate warde 

called of a Priuiledge sometime enioyed to kecpc a mart 
thcre, long since discontinued, and thcrefore forgottcn, so as 
nothing remaineth for memorie, but the name of Mart lane, 
and that corruptly tearmcd Marke lane. I read that in the 
tlfird of tdward the fourth, all Basket makers, Wiar drawers, 
and other forreyners, were permittcd to hauc shops in this 
mannor of Blanch apleton, and hot clse where witlfin this 
Citie or suburbs thereof, and this also being the farthest [ 
west part of this ward, on that southside I leaue it, with thrce 
parish Clmrches, saint Kathcrhte Christ church, saint tltdrcw 
13tdershaft, and saint Içathcrhc Colemmts, and tiare hawles of 
companies, the I}ricklayers hall, the Fletchcrs hall, and the 
Ironmongers hall. It bath an Alderman, lais Deputie, common 
counsellcrs six, Constables six, Scauengers ninc, Wardmote 
mcn for inqucst eighteene, and a Beedle. It is taxed to the 
fiftcene in London at titre pound. 

Limestreete 
warde. 
Lirnestreete. 

High slreet of 
Cornehill. 

Limestreete warde. 
rite next is Limestreete warde, and taketh the naine of 
Limcstreete, of making or selling of Lime therc (as is sup- 
posed). The East side of this Limestreete, from the North 
corner thereof to the midst, is of Aldgate warde, as is afore- 
said: the west side, for the most part fl'om the said north 
corner, southward, is of this Limestreete ward : the southend 
on both sides is of Langborne ward : the bodie of this Lime- 
strcete ward is of the high streete called Cornchill streete, 
which strctcheth rioto Limestreete on the southside, to the 
west corner of Leaden hall: and on the north side from the 
southwest corner of Saint laric streete, to another corner 
ouer against Leadcnhall. 
Now for saint [ary street, the west side therof is of this 
Limestreete wardc, and also the streete which runneth by the 
north ende of this saint .[aric streete, on both sidcs, from 
thence wcst to an house called the Wrestlers, a signe so 
called, almost to 13ishops gate. _And these are the bounds 
of this small ward. 
Monuments or places notable in th[s ward be these,: In 
Limestreetc are diuerse fayre bouses for marchants and 



Limes[ree[e wardc I51 
othcrs : there was sometime a mansion house of the kings, An house in 
e Limestreete 
called the kings -Artirce whereof I find record in the 14. OIcalled the 
Edward the first, but now growne out of knowledge. I reade kings Artirce. 
also of another great house in the west side of Limestreete, 
hauing a Chappell on the south, and a Garden on the west, 
then belonging to the Lord Neuill, which ] garden is now l'age 153 
caIled the Greene yard of the Leaden hall. This house in the 
ninth of Richard the second, pertained to sir Simon 17m'lcy 
and sir [ohz ,m-lcy his brother, and of late the said house 
was taken downe, and the forefront thereof new builded of 
tituber by Hu«h O2ïtey, -Alderman. At the Northwest corner 
of Limestreet vas of old time one great lessuage callcd 
17cnbrigcs Inne, 2Valph 1-Iolland Draper, about the year 45OE- Benbridges 
gaue it to Iohn Gill, maister, and to the Wardens, and Fra-Inne. 
ternitie of Tailers and Linnen -Armorers of saint Iohn Battist 
in London, and to their successors for euer. They did set 
vp in place thereof a fayre large frame of timbcr, containing 
in the high strcet one great house, and before it to the corner 
of Limestreet, three othcr tenements, the corner house being 
the largest, and then downe Limestreete diuers proper tenc- 
ments. _Ail which the Marchant Taylers in the raigne of 
Edward the sixt sold to Stchcn Kirton Marchant Tayler 
and Alderman, he gaue with his daughter Grisild, to Nicholas 
IVooa'roffe the saide great house, with two tenements before 
it, in liew of a hundred pound, and ruade it vp in money 
366. pound, 13. shillings, 4- pence. This worshipfull man, 
and the Gentlewoman his widow after him, kept thosc houses 
downe Limcstrect in good reparations, neuer put out but one 
tennant, tooke no fines, nor raysed rents of them, vhich was 
ten shillings the peece yerely: But whether that fauour did 
ouer]iue her funerall, thc Tenants now can bcst declare the 
contrarie. 
Next vnto this on the high streete, was the Lord Sowches Messuage of 
Messuage or tenement, and othcr. In place whereof _ichardc the Lord 
Souch. 
IVcthcl/1, Marchant Taylcr, buildcd a fayrc housc, with an 
high Towcr, thc seconde in numbcr, and first of tymbcr, that 
cucr I Icarncd to hauc bccnc buildcd to oucrlookc ncighbours 
in this Citic. 
 V«/hell] Whethill i598 



Messuage 
caled the 
I ;reene gare. 
Philip Malpas 
robbed. 

Mutas house 
robbed. 

Leaden porch. 

5 2 LiJJzeslreele warde 
This lichard then a young man, became in short timc so 
tormented with goutes in his ioynts, of the hands and legges, 
that he could nether feede him selfe, nor goe further then he 
was led, much lesse was he able to climbe, and take the 
pleasure of the height of his Tower. 
Then is there another faire house builded by Slchen Içirlot, 
Alderman: Alderman Lce doth now possesse it, and againe 
new [ buildeth it. 1 
Then is there a fayre house of olde rime called the grcene 
gate, by which name one 21[ichctelpistoy Lttmbard held it, with 
a tenement and nine shops, in the raigne of Richard the 
second, who in the 1 5. of his raigne gaue it to Rogcr Crophull, 
and Thomas tTromestcr, Esquires, by the name of the Greene 
gare, in the parish of S. itudrew vpon Cornehill, in Lime- 
streete warde : since the which rime PMlip l][altas, sometime 
Alderman and one of the Shiriffes, dwelled therein, and was 
there robbed and spoyled of his goods to a great value, by 
Iackc Cadc, and other Rebels in the yeal'e 1449. 
_Aftcrwards in the raigne of Hcnrie the seuenth, it was 
seased into the kings hands, and then granted, first vnto John 
llstou, aftcr that vnto IVilliam de la Rbwrs, and since by 
Hcnrie the 8. to Iohz [uhs (a Picarde)or Frcnchman, who 
dwelled there, and harbored in his bouse many Frencllmen, 
that kalendred wolsteds, and did other things contrarie to the 
Franchises of the Citizens : wherefore on euill May day, which 
was in the yeare I57, the Prentizes and other spoyled his 
house: and if they could haue found [ehs, they would haue 
stricken off his heade. Sir 19clef [«tlas, sonne to the said 
Ioht Jltttas, solde this house to Daedd IVoodroffe A_Iderman, 
vhose sonne Sir Nicholas IVoodroffc Alderman, sold it ouer 
to Iohn il[oore A_lderman, that now possesseth it. 
Next is a house called the Leaden portch, lately diulded 
into two tenements, vhereof one is a Tauerne, and then one 
other bouse for a Marchant, likewise called the Leaden 
portch: but now turned to a Cookes house. Next is a faire 
bouse and a large, wherein diuelse Maioralities haue beene 
kept, whereof twaine in my remembrance : to wit, Sir IVillia»t 
Tvzc,j'«r, and Sir Hcury Httbcrlhornc. 
 builded it I633 



The next is Leaden Hall, of which I reade, that in the yearc Mannor of 
309. it belonged to Sir H¢glz Ar«uill knight, and that the Leadenhall 
Ladie Alice his widow made a feofment thereof, by the name 
of Leaden hall, with the aduowsions of the Church of S. Peto" 
vpon Cornhill, and other churches to Richard Earle of Arun- 
dell and Surrey, r36oE. More, in the yeare 138o. Alice Aratill, 
widow I to Sir [oh NeMll, knight of Essex, confirmed to Page II 
Thomas Cgshall and others the said Mannor of Leaden hall, 
the aduowsions, &c. In the yeare r384. H¢mfro, d« tTohu, 
Earle of Hereford, had the said Mannor. _And in the yeare 
I4O8. Robo'l Ril'ccl«1z of Essex, and A[aaret his wife, con- 
firmed to Richarde IV]tillbgtolt and other Citizens of London, 
the said Mannor of Leaden hall, with the _Appurtenances, the 
Aduousions of S. Pctcrs Church, Saint ]gargarcts Patlcls, 
&c. _And in the yere 4 the said IVhitthJgtou and other 
confirmed the saine to the 1V[aior and Comminaltie of London, 
whereby it came to the possession of the Citie. Then in the 
yeare r443. the  r. of Hctric the sixt, [ohu Hatherley Maior, 
purchased licence of the said King, to take vp. -e. fodder of Licence to 
Leade, for the building of water Conduits, a common Granarie, take vp Lead 
to the building 
and the crosse in west Cheape more richly for honour of the vp of common 
Granarie. 
Citie. In the yeare ncxt following, the Parson and parish of 
Saint 1)unsfot in the east of London, seeing the famous and 
mightie man (for the wordes bee in the graunt : cu» nobilis & 
poteus vit.) Simon tyre, Citizen of London, among other lais 
workes of pietie, effectually determined to erect and build a 
certaine Granarie vpon the soile of the same Citie at Leaden 
hall of his owne charges, for the common vtilitie of the saide 
Citie, to the amplifying and inlarging of the sayde Granarie, 
graunted to l-]etrie Froz«icke then Major, the Aldermen, and 
Comminaltie and their successors for euer, all their Tenements, 
with the appurtenaunces, sometime called the Horsemill in Horse mill in 
Grasse streete, for the annuall rent of route pound &c. Also Grassestleete. 
certaine Euidences of an Alley and Tenements pertayning to 
the Horsemill, adioyning to the sayd Leaden hall in Grasse Symon Eyre 
streete, giuen by lVtTlia», Kbtgstouc Fishmonger, vnto the sometime an 
Vpholster, 
parish church of S. Pcter vpon Cornehill, doe specifie the sayd then by 
changing of 
Granarie to be builded by the sayde honourable and famous his copie a 
l\Iarchant S3'»«oz tj,rc, sometime an Upholster, and then a Draper. 



Leaden hall 
nexv builded to 
be a comrnon 
Garner, 
A Chappell 
builded in 
Leaden hall 

l"age 156 

Legacies giuen 
by ,imon 
Eyre. 

Dayly seruiee 
by noate, &c., 
and three free 
schooles in thc 
Leadcn hall. 

I54 Limestreete ,arde 
Draper, in the yeare 1419. He builded it of squared stone, in 
forme as now it sheweth, with a fayre and large chappell in 
the East side of the Quadrant, ouer the porch of which hee 
caused to be written, Dc.rtra Domini e:callauit me, The 
Lords right hand exaltcd me. Within the sayde Church on 
the North wall was written ]onorandus famoss marcator 
Shnon Eyre l huins op«ris, &c. In English thus. Thc 
honourable and famous Marchant, Simon Eyre founder of 
this worke, once Major of this Citie, Citizen and Draper ofthe 
same, departed out of this life, the 18. day of September, the 
yeare from the incarnation of Christ 1459- and the 38. yeare 
of the raigne of king /-L the sixt. He was buried in the 
parish Church of Saint [ay lVohzoth in Lombard streete: 
he gauc by his Testament, which I haue read, to be distributed 
to all prisons in London, or within a mile of that Citie, some- 
what to reliefe them. More, hee gaue 2ooo. Markes vpon a 
condition, which not performed, was then to bee distributed 
to Maides marriages, and other deeds of charitie: he also 
gaue 3000. markes to the Drapers, vpon condition they should 
within one yeare after his decease, establish perpetually a 
maister or warden, fiue secular priests, sixe clarkes, and two 
querlsters, to sing dayly diuine seruice by note for euer, in his 
chappell of the Leaden hall : also one Maister with an Usher 
for Grammar, one master for writing, and the third for song, 
with housing there newly builded for them for euer, the 
Master to haue for lais Salarie ten pound : and euerie other 
priest eight pound, eucry other Clarke fiue pound six shillings 
eight pence, and euery other chorister, fiue marks : and if the 
Drapers refused this to do, within one yeare after his decease, 
then the three thousand Markes to remaine to the Prior and 
coucnt of Christs Churck in London, with condition to estab- 
lish as is aforesayd, within two ycares after his decease : and if 
thcy refused, thcn the three thousand Markes to be disposed 
by his Exccutors as they best could deuise in works of 
charitie: thus much for his Testament, not performed by 
establishing of diuine seruice in his chappell, or free schooles 
for schollers, neither how the stocke of 3ooo. Marks, or rather 
fiue thousand Marks was employed by his Executors, could I 
euer learne : he left issue Thomas, who had issue, Thomas, &c. 



Lhlzesh,eete c,arde 55 
Truc it is that in one yearc I464. the third of Edwarcl the Liber albus. 
fourth, it was agreed by the Mayor, Aldcrmen and Coin-Beame for 
tronage of 
rninaltie of Loltarott, that notwithstanding the I(ings letters wools at 
Patentes, lately before graunted vnto thern touching the Leadenhall" 
Tronage or Weighing of Wares to bee holden at the Leaden 
Hall, yet sure should be ruade to the king for new Ictters 
pattentes to be granted to the Mayor of the Sta[ple for thc l"agc s7 
Tronage of wols to be holden there, & order to be taken by 
the discretion of Tho»tas Coobe then Major, the counsaile of 
the Citie, Gcffrcy Fildi¢ff then Major of thc Staple at West- 
minster, and of the kings Councell, what should bee payd to 
the Major and Aldermen of the Citie, for the laying and 
housing of the Woolles there, that so they might bee brought 
foorth and weighed, &c. 
Touchlng the Chappell there, I filld that in the yeare I466. A brotherhood 
by licence obtained of kîng ldz,ard the fourth, in the sîxt oi in°f the6° priestSchappell 
his raigne, a Fraternitie of the Trinitie of 60. priests (besides of Leaden 
hal. 
other brethren, and sisters) in the same Chappell was founded 
by lVillia»t ousc, lroht Risbie, & Thotas Ashby priests, 
some of the which 6o. priests, euery rnarket day in the fore 
noone, did celebrate diuine seruice there, to such Market people 
as repayred to prayer, and once euerie yeare they met ail 
togither, and had solernn seruice, with Procession of all the 
Brethren and Sisters. This foundation xvas in the yerc I5I". 
by a common councell confirmed to the 6o. Trinitie priests, and 
to their successors, at the will of the Major and Cominaltie. 
In the yeare 1484. a great tire happened vpon this Leaden Leaden hall 
Hall, by xvhat casualtie I know not, but rnuch howsing was burned. 
there destroyed, with ail the stockes for Guns, and other 
prouision belonging to the Citie, which was a great fosse, and 
no lesse charge to be repayred by thern. 
In the yeare i5o 3. the eightenth of tf«zrie the seuenth, Rich. Arnold. 
a request was rnade by the Cornrnons of the Citie, concerning A request of 
the vsage of the said Leaden hall, in forme as followeth, the Citizens to 
the lIaior and 
' Please it the Lord Major, Alderrnen, & cornrnon councel, to Aldermen. 
enact that al Frenchrnen, bringing Canuas, Linnen cloth, and Leaden hall 
market for 
other wares to be sold, and all Forreins bringing Wolsteds, Cauas and 
Sayes, Stairnus,  Kiuerings, Nailes, Iron worke, or any other Linnen cloth. 
 Stamins] z633; Staimus z598 , I6o3 



Common 
Beame to be 
kept in Leaden 
hall. 

Leaden hall 
pertaining to 
the Corn- 
rninaltie. 
Wols, Fels, 
and other 
rnarcandizes 
to be sold in 
Leadcn hall. 

Leaden hall 
vsed as a 
garnar. 

Roger Achley 
Maior, ruade 
good prouision 
for the city. 

Bread Carts 
of Stratford 
the Bow. 

I56 Limes/racle wardc 
wares, and also ail maner Forreins bringing Lead to thc Citie 
to be sold, shall bring all such their wares aforesaid to the 
open Market of the Leaden hall, there and no where else to 
be shewed, solde and vttered, like as ofolde time it bath beene 
vsed, vpon paine of forfeyture of all the sayd wares, shewed or 
sold in any other place then aforcsayd, the show of the said 
wares to be ruade three dayes in the weeke, that is to I say 
Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday : it is also thought reason- 
able that the common P, eam be kept from hencefoorth in the 
Leaden Hall, and the Fariner to pay therefore reasonable 
rent to the Chamber: for better it is that the Chamber haue 
aduauntage thereby, then a forreine person : and also the said 
Leaden hall, which is more chargeable now by halle then 
profitable, shall better beare out the charges thereof: also the 
common ]3eame for wooll at Leaden hall may pay yearly a 
rcnt to the Chamber of London, toward supportation and 
charges of the saine place: for reason it is, that a common 
office occupied vpon a common ground, beare a charge to the 
vse of the Comminaltie: also that Forreins bringing wools, 
fcls, or any other Marchandizes or wares to Leaden hall, to be 
kept there for the sale and Mari<et, may pay more largely for 
the keeping of their goods, then free men.' Thus much for 
the request of the Commons at this rime. 
Now to set downe some proofe that the saîd hall hath beene 
imployed and vsed as a Granarie for corne and graine (as the 
saine was first appoynted) leauing all former examples, this 
one may suffice : Roger ztchley Major of London, in the yeare 
1.512. the third of ttcm.ie the eight, when the said Maior 
entered the Maioralitie, there was hot found one hundred 
quartcrs of wheate in all the Garners of the Citie, either within 
the libcrties, or neare adioynîng : through the which scarcitie, 
whcn the Carts of Stratford came laden with bread to the 
Citie (as they had beene accustomed) there was such presse 
about them, that one man was readie to destroy an other, in 
striuing to bee serued for their money: but this scarcitie 
lasted not long: for the Major in short rime ruade such 
prouision of Wheate, that the Bakers both of London, and of 
Stratford were wearie of taking it vp, and were forced to take 
much more then they" would, and for thc test the Major laid 



Lhzes/reete cardc I57 
out the money, and stored it vp in Leaden hall, and other 
garners of the Citic. This Major also kcpt thc Market so well, 
that hee would be at the Leaden hall by foure a clocke in the 
Sommers mornings, and from thence he went to other markets, 
to the great comfort of the Citizens. 
I reade also that in the yeare I5oE8. the OEo. of Hcm-ic the 
eight, Surueyers were appoynted to view the Garners of the I 
Citie, namely the l-ridgehouse, and the Leaden hall, how they 
were stored of Graine for the scruice of thc Citie. And 
because I haue hcrebefore spoken of the bread Carts comming 
from Stratford at the /3ow, ye shall vndcrstand that of oldc 
time the Bakers of breade at Stratford, were allowed to bring 
dayly (except the Sabbaoth and principall Feast(s)) diuersc 
long Cartes laden with bread, the saine bcing two ounces in 
the pennie wheate loafe heauier then thc penny wheate loafe 
bakcd in the Citie, the same to be solde in Cheape, three or 
foure Cartes standing there, betweene Gutherans fane, and 
Fausters lane onde, one carte on Cornehill, by the conduit, 
and one other in Grasse streete. And I haue reade that in the 
fourth yere of Edward the second, I¢ichard cff«ham being 
Major, a Baker named Iokn of Stratforde, for making Bread 
lesser then the Assise, was with a fooles whoode on his head, 
and loaues of bread about his necke, drawne on a Hurdlc 
through the streets of this Citie: Moreouer in the 44- of 
Edz,ard the third lohu Chichester being blaior of London, I 
read in the visions of licrce f'[ow»«an, a booke so called, as 
followeth. ' Thcrc was a carcf«tl commutc, vhen Jto Cart 
came fo towne ,vit/z bakcd brcad f»otu Stratford : t/to gan 
beggers wee])e, and c, orkcmcu vere agast, a [itt[e this will be 
thotght [oJtg iu thc date of our lgh-te, Dt a drie tucrell 
a thoztsand and three htttd.'ed, lzvise thirtie and test, &'c.' I 
reade also in the -_o. of Hetrie the eight, Sir 1astres Senccr 
being Major, six/3akers of Stratford were merced in the Guild 
hall of London, for baking vnder the size appoynted. These 
Bakers of Stratford left seruing of this citie, I knowe not 
vppon what occasion, about 3. yeares since. 
In the yeare 5t9 . a petition was exhibited by the com- 
ruons to the common councell, and was by them allowed, 
conccming the Leaden hall, howe they would haue it vsed, 

Liber. D. 
A Baker of 
Stratford 
punished in 
London for 
baking bread 
vnder the 
Assise. 

Iohn Maluern. 
13read carts 
from Stratford 
missed in this 
city in time of 
scarsitie. 

A petition of 
the commons 
concerning the 
vse of the 
Leaden hall, 



'age 26o 

Leaden Hall a 
free Market 
place_ for 

Limest'eete va«tc 

riz. 'Meekely beseeching sheweth vnto your good Lordship, 
and Maisterships, diuerse Citizens of this Cittie, which vnder 
correction thinke, that the great place called the Leaden hall, 
should nor ought hot to be lettcn to larme, to any person or 
persons, and in especiall to any fellowship or companie incor- 
porate, to haue and hold the same hall for tearme of yeares, 
for such inconueniences as thereby may ensue, and come to 
the hurt of the common weale of the said Citie, [ in time to 
corne, as somc what more largely may appeare in the Articles 
following. 
' First, if any assembly, or hastie gathcring of thc commons 
of the said Citie for suppressing or subduing of misruled 
people vithin the saide Citie, hereafter shall happen to be 
called or commandcd by the Maior, _Aldermen, and other 
gouernors and counscllors of the said Citie for the rime being, 
there is none so conuenient meete and necessarie a place to 
assemble them in, within the saide citie, as the saide Leaden 
hall, both for largenes of roome, and for their sure defence in 
rime of their counselling togither about the prcmises. _Also 
in that place hath been vsed the Artillerie, Guns, and other 
armors of the said citie, to be safely kept in a rcadines for the 
safegard, wealth, and defencc of the said citie, to bee had and 
occupied at rimes vhen neede required. _As also the store of 
tymbcr for the necessarie reparations of the tencments belong- 
ing to the chambcr of the said citie, there commonly hath 
been kept. Item if any triumph or noblenesse were to be 
done, or shewed by the communaltie of the citie for thc honour 
of our soueraigne Lord the King, and reahne, and for the 
worship of the said Citie, the saide Leaden hall is most meete 
and conuenient place to prepare and order the said triumph 
therein, and from thence to issue foorth to the places therefore 
appoynted. Item, at any largesse or dole ofany money made 
vnto the poore people of this Citie, it hath beene vsed to bee 
done and giuen in the said Leaden hall, for that the saide 
place is most meete therefore. Item, the honourable father, 
that was maker of the said hall, had a speciall will, intent and 
minde, that (as it is commonly said) the Market men and 
women that came to the Citie with victuals and other things, 
should haue their free standing within the said Leaden Hall 



Lblzes/ree/e wardc 59 
in wet weather, to keepe themselues and their wares drie, and 
thereby to encourage them, and ail other to haue the better 
will and desire the more plenteously to resooE to the said 
Cittie, to victuall the saine. And if the saide Hall should be 
letten to farine, the will of the said honourable father should 
neuer be fulfillcd nor take effect. Item, if the said place, which 
is the chiefe fortresse and most necessarie place within ail the 
Citie, for the tuition and safegard of the saine, should bce 
letten to farine out of the handes of the chicfe heades of the 
saine Citie, and especially I to an other bodie politique, it 
might at length by likelihood be occasion of discord and 
debate betweene the saide bodies politique, which God 
defend. 
'For these and many other great and reasonable causes, 
which hereafter shall be shcwed to this honorable Court, 
your said beseechers thinke it much necessarie, that the said 
hal be stil in thc hands of this Citie, and to be surely kept 
by sad and discreet officcrs, in such wise, that it may 
alway be readie to be vsed and occupied for the common 
weale of the said Citie when need shall require, and in no 
wise to bee letten to any bodie politique.' Thus much for the 
petition. 
About the yeare I534. great meanes vas made about the 
Leaden Hall to haue the same made a Bursse for the assemblie 
of marchants, as they had been aecustomed in Lombard- 
street, many common counselles were called to that ende: 
but in the yeare 1535. lohlc ChamDncis being Major, it was 
fully concluded that the Bursse should remaine in Lombard 
streete, as afore, and Leaden hall no more to be spoken of 
concerning that marrer. 
The vse of Leaden hall in tny youth was thus: In a part 
of the North quadrant on the East side of the North gare, 
was the common beames for weighing of wooll, and other 
wares, as had beene accustomed : on the west side the gare 
was the scales to way meale: the other three sides were 
eserued for the most part to the making and resting of the 
pageants shewed at Midsommer in the watch: the remnant 
of the sides and quadrants were imployed for the stowage 
of wooll sackcs, b.ut. not closed vp: the lofts aboue were 

victulers and 
the people to 
stand drie. 

Page 6, 

Leaden Hall 
ment to haue 
beene ruade a 
Burse for 
Marchants. 



I6O Lhnestreete warde 

A pumpe in 
the high street 
of Limestreete 
varde. 
Comhill street 
in some place 
raysed two 
fadome higher 
then of aide 
time, as 
appeared by 
buildings 
round so deepe. 

S. lkIary street, 
Parish church 
of Mary, 
S. Vrsula, & 
x looo virgines 
called at the 
Axe, letten out 
for a ware- 
bouse. 

partly vsed by the painters in working for the decking of 
pagcants and other deuises, for beautifying of the watch and 
watchmen, the residue of the lofts were letten out to 
Marchants, the wooll winders and packers therein to wind 
and packe their wools. And thus much for Leaden hall may 
suffice. 
Now on the North of Limestreet warde in the high street 
are diuerse faire houses for Marchants, and proper tenements 
for artificers, with an Alley also called Shaft alley, of the 
shaft or Maypole sometime resting ouer the gate thereof, as 
I haue declared in Aldgate warde. In the yeare .576. partly 
at the charges of the parish of saint Andrew, and partly at 
the charges of the chamber I of London, a water pompe was 
raised in the high street of Limestreete warde, neare vnto 
Limestreet corner: for the placing of the which pumpe, 
hauing broken vp the ground they were forced to digge more 
then two fadome deepe before they came to any maine 
ground, where they found a harth made of Britain, or rather 
Roman Tile, euery Tile halle yarde square, and about two 
inches thick : they round Coale lying there also (for that lying 
whole will neuer consume) then digging one fadome into the 
maine, they found water sufficient, made their prall, and set 
vp the pumpe, which pumpe with off repayring and great 
charges to the Parish, continued hot foure and twenty yeares, 
but being rotted, was taken vp, and a new set in place, in the 
yeare 1600. Thus much for the high streete. 
In S. e[arie street had ye of olde rime a Parish Church of 
S. }[ar[e the virgine, Saint b'stla, and the I lOOO. virgins, 
which Church was commonly called S. s[arie at the .Axe, of 
the signe of an .Axe, ouer against the East end thereof, or 
S. e[aric ]gellipar, of a plot of ground lying on the North 
side thereof, pertayning to the Skinners in London. This 
parish about the yeare 1565. was vnited to the Parish Church 
of S. Audrew Vndershafl, and so vas S. 2]'[ary at the Axe 
suppressed, and letten out to bee a warehouse for a Marchant. 
Against the east end of this Church, was some time a faire 
wall, now turned to a pumpe. Also against the north end of 
this S. M'ary street, was sometime one other parish church 
of S. Altgltstine, called S. Augnstine in the wall, for that it 



Limeslreele r¥rde 

stood adioyning to the wall of the Citie, and otherwise called Pa»ish church 
of S. Austine 
S. ,4ttgnstins PaçO, , or the poore, as I haue read in the in thewall 
raigne of Ed. the 3- About the yeare 43o in the raigne of ruade a 
chappell to 
Hezrie the sixt, the saine church was allowed to the brethren the Papey, and 
of the Papey, the bouse of poore priests, whereof I haue since pulled 
downe (and) 
spoken in Aldgate warde. The Parishioners of this Church maea stb|e. 
were appointed to the Parish church of Alhallowes in the 
wall, which is in lroadstreete xvarde, this brotherhood, called 
Papey, being suppressed, the church of S..dugustin was 
pulled downe, and in place thereof one Grey a Pothecarie 
builded a stable, a hayloft, &c. It is now a dwelling house. 
Those two parish churches both lying in the ward of Lime- 
street, being thus suppressed, there is not any" one parish 
church or place for ] diuine seruice in that warde, but the Page 163 
inhabitantes thereof repaire to S. Peter in Cornhill warde, 
S..dndrew in Aldegate xvard, Alhallowes in the wall in 
Broadstreet ward, and some to S. Denis in Langborne 
warde. 
Now because of late there bath beene some question, to 
what Warde this Church of S..dugusti»e PajOey should of 
right belong, for the saine hath beene challenged by" them of 
AIdegate Warde, and without reason taken into Bishopsgate 
Warde from Limestreete Warde, I ara somewhat to touch it. 
About 3 o. yeares since the Chamber of London granted a 
lease of ground (in these wordes) lying neare London wall in 
the ward of Limestreet, from the west of the said church or 
chappell of S. Zlugustine PajOey towardes Bishopsgate, &c. 
On the which plat of grounde the lease  builded three faire Houscs by 
London wall, 
tenementes, and placed tennantes e there: these were charged in the ward of 
to beare scot and lot, and some of them to beare office in I.imestreete. 
Limestreete varde: all which they did willingly" without 
grudging. And when any suspected or disordered persons 
were by the Landlord placed there, the officers of Limestreete 
warde fetched them out of their houses, committed them to 
Warde, procured their due punishments, and banished them 
from thence: whereby in short time that place was reformed, 
& brought into good order, which thing being noted by 

t leasee 633 
Ow.  

 tennantes] 15o: tenementes 16o;? 



A part of 
Limestreete 
ward vniustly 
withhelde by 
Bishopsgate 
warde. 

Pae 64 
A churchyeard 
bv Loadou 
\:(ail pertayn- 
ing to Saint 
Martins 
Otoswch in 
Bishopsgate. 
Liber Frater. 

Liber lapie. 

them of _Aldegate Warde, they moued their _Alderman Sir 
Thomas Offley to call in those houses to be of his Ward, but 
I my selle shewing a faire ledgier booke sometime pertayning 
to the late dissolued Priorie of the holy Trinity within Alde- 
gate, wherein were set down the iust boundes of Aldgate 
warde, before Sir Thomas Of Jtcy, Sir Rowlatd Heyward, the 
common Counsell and Wardemote inquest of the saide Lime- 
streete ward, Sir Tho»tas Of2¢y gaue ouer his challenge : and 
so that marrer rested in good quiet, vntill the yeare I579. that 
Sir Richaî'd Z'ypc being Mayor, and Alderman of Bishopsgate 
warde challenged those houses to bec of his Warde, whereunto 
(without reason shewed) Sir Rowla»d Heyward yeelded : and 
thus is that side of the streete from the North corner of 
S. [ary streete almost to Bishopsgate (wherein is one plot 
of grounde letten by the Chamberlaine of London to the 
parrish of S. hrtits Otcs«ick, to be a churchyeard, or 
burying place for the dead of that I parish, &c. vniustly 
drawne and withholden from the warde of Limestreet. Diuers 
other proofes I could set down, but this one following may 
suffice. The layor and Aldermen of London made a graunt 
to the fratemity of Papie, in these words : Be it remembred, 
that where now of late the toaster and wardens of the frater- 
nity of the Papie, haue ruade a bricke wall, closing in the 
chappell of Saint 41tgusthte called Papie chappell, scituate 
in the parrish of Ail-Saintes in the wall, in the warde of 
Limestreete of the Cittie of London: from the southeast 
corner of the which bricke wall, is a skuncheon of xxi. foote 
of assise from the said corner Estward. And from the 
saine skuncheon there to a messuage of 55- foote & a halfe 
westward, the said skuncheon breaketh out of line righte 
southward betwixt the measures aforesaid, iii. foot, and fiue 
inches of assise, vpon the common ground of the city afore- 
said, ]?afik Verney Mayor, and the Aldermen of the saine 
crie, the xxii. day of October, the sixt yeare of Edward the 
fourth, graunted to ]ohn Hod Priest, toaster ]okn tlolte, and 
Thomas flachet priests, wardens of the fraternity of Papie 
aforesaid, and to their successors for euer, &c. yeelding iiii.d. 
sterling yearly at Michaelmas, and this is, sayeth my booke, 
inrol|e.d in the Guildhall of London: which is a suffi, cient 



proofe the saine plot of ground to be of Lmesreet warde 
and neuer oterwe accouted or callened. 
On he south sde of ths treete stretcng west çrom 
. I«y streete owarde opate streete, here was of 
olde rime one large messuage builded of stone and tituber, 
in the parish of S. Attgtslite in the wall, now in the 
parrish of Alhallowes in the saine wall, belonging to the 
Efle of Oxeford, for Richard de bére Eafle of Oxeford Patent. 
possessed it in the 4- of Httry the fift, but in processe of °xt°t« place. 
rime the landes of the Earle fell to femals, amongest the 
which one being married to lVizgficlde of Suffolke, this house 
with the appurtenances fell to his lot, and was by his heire 
Sir Robert ViugficM sold to M. Edward Cooke, at this time 
the Queenes Atturney Generall. This house being greatly 
runated of late rime, for the most part hath beene letten out 
to Powlters, for stabling of horses and stowage of PouRrie, 
but now lately new builded into a number of small tenements, 
letten out to strangers, and other meane people. [ 
One note more of this Warde, and so an end. I finde of Page 
Recorde, that in the yeare 37 . the 45. of dwar the 
thirde, a great subsdie of . pounde was graunted Sbsidieo[ 
towardes the Kinges warres in France, whereof the Cleargie Limestroete 
warde in the 
paid 5o. pounde, and the laitie ooo. pound, to be leuied 
to 39. shires of England, containing parishes 8600. of euery 
parrish . pounde xvi.s, the greater to helpe the lesser: this 
Cittie (as one of the shires) then containing 4. Wardes, and 
in them  o. parishes, was therefore assessed to 63.1i. z.s. 
whereof Limestteet ward did beare 34- shillinges and no 
more, so small a Warde it was and so accounted,  hauing 
no one whole parrish therein, but small portions onely of two 
parrishes in that warde. This warde hath an Alderman, his 
Deputie, common counsailors 4. Constables 4- Scauengers 
2. Wardemote inquest 6. and a Beadle, and is taxed to the 
fifteene at .li. 9.s. ii.d. ob.q. 

Bishopsgate Warde 
THE next îs Bishopsgate warde, whereof a parte is without Bislaopsgate 
the gate and of the suburbes from the barres, by S. Iar 



Parrish church 
of S. Buttolph 
without 
Bishopsgate. 

.Page 66 
Petty France, 
neare to the 
towne ditch. 

Hospitall of 
Bethelem. 

t6 4 Bis/mi«ga[e wa rde 
Spittle, to Bishopsgate, and a part of Hounds ditch, almost 
halle thereof, also without the wall is of the saine Warde. 
Then within the gate is Bishopsgate streete, so called of the gate, 
to a Pumpe, where sometime was a fayre wel with two buckets 
by the East ende of the parrish Church of S. [artin Otoswick, 
and then winding by the West corner of Leaden hall down 
Grasse street to the cornet" ouer against Grasse Church, and 
this is the boundes of that "Varde. 
Monumentes most to bee noted, are these: the Parrish 
church of S. lhtttolph without Bishopsgate in a fayre Church- 
yeard, adioyning to the Town Ditch vpon the very banke 
thereof, but of olde time inclosed with a comely wall of 
bricke, lately repayred by Sir IVilliam Allen Mayor, in the 
yeare I571. because he was borne in that parrish, where also 
he was buried: an Ancris by Bishopsgate receyued 4o.s. the 
yeare of the Shiriffes of I London. 
Now without this Churchyearde wall is a causeye leading to 
a quadrant, called Petty Fraunce, of Frenchmen dwelling 
there, and to other dwelling bouses, lately builded on the 
banke of the saide ditch b¥ some Cittizens of London, that 
more regarded their owne priuate gaine, then the common good 
of the Cittie: for by meanes of this causeye raysed on the 
banke, and soylage of bouses, with other filthines cast into the 
ditch, the saine is now forced to a narrow channetl, and almost 
filled vp with vnsauorie thinges, to the daunger of impoysoning 
the whole Cittie. 
Next vnto the parrish church of S. luttolh, is a fayre 
Inne for receipt of Trauellers : then an Hospitall of S. 3fa O, 
of Bethelem, founded by Si»ton Fitz 3Iary one of the 
Sheriffes of London in the yeare xoE46. He founded it to haue 
beene a Priorie of Cannons with brethren and sisters, and king 
tdward the thirde granted a protection, which I haue seenc, 
for the brethren 3[iliciae beatae 2Iariae de Bcthlem, within the 
Citty of Londou, the 4. yeare of his raigne. It was an 
Hospitall for distracted people, Steplwn Geninges Marchant 
Taylor gaue 40. ll. toward purchase of the patronage b¥ his 
Testament lSoE 3. the Mayor and Communal W purchased the 
patronage thereof with all the landes and tenementes there- 
unto belonging, in the yeare 546. the saine yeare King Henry 



gisholsg«te warde 65 
the eight gaue this Hospitall wato the Cittie: the Church and 
Chappell whereof were taken downe in the raigne of Queene 
Elfsabetlt, and houses builded there, by the Gouernours of 
Christes Hospitall in London. In this place people that bee 
distraight in wits, are by the suite of their friendes receyued 
and kept as afore, but hot without charges to their bringers 
in. In the yeare 7569. Sir Thomas Rc Marchant Taylor, 
Mayor, caused to bee enclosed with a Wall of bricke, about 
one acre of ground, being part of the said Hospitall of 
Bethelem, to wit on the banke of deepe ditch so called, Buriall for the 
dead prepared. 
parting the saide Hospitall of Bethelem ff'oto the More field : Deepe ditch 
this he did for buriall, and easc of such parrishes in London, by Bethelem. 
as wanted ground conuenient within their parrishes. The 
Lady his wife was there buried (by whose perswasion he in- 
closed it) but himselfe borne in London was buried in the 
parrish church of Hackney. I 
From this hospitall Northwarde vpon the streetes side many laKe 
houses haue beene builded with Alleys backeward of late time 
too much pesterd with people (a great cause of infection) vp to 
the barres. 
The other side of this high streete from Bishopsgate & 
t[ounds ditch, the first building, a large Inne for receipt Of Dolphinwith 
traueIlers, and is called the Dolphin of such a signe. In the out Bishops- 
gare. 
yeare 53- Magarct Ricroft widow, gaue this house, with 
the Gardons, and appurtenaunces, vnto lVilliam Gara, R. Clj'c, 
their wiues, her daughters, and to their heyres, with condition, 
they yearly to giue to the warden or gouernour of the gray 
Friers Church within Newgate fortie shillings, to find a student 
of Diuinitie in the Uniuersitie for euer. Then is there a faire 
bouse of late builded by Iohn Powlct. Next to that, a farre Fishers Folly. 
more large and beautifull house with Gardens of pleasure, 
bowling Alleys, and such like, builded by Iastcr F. ishcr, free 
of the Goldsmiths, late one of the six Clarks of the Chauncerie, 
and a Iustice of peace. It hath since for a time beene the 
Earle of Oxfords place. The Queenes Maiestie lz'lizabctlz 
hath lodged there. It now belongeth to Sir Roer 2],Ianars. 
This house being so large and sumptuously builded by a man 
of no greater calling, possessions or wealth, (for he was in- 



Berxvards lane. 

Tasell close. 

Artillary 
yeard. 
'age  68 

Walter Brune, 
Mercer, one of 
the Shiriffes of 
London, t 2o3. 

Berwards lane. 
Soreditch so 
called more 
then 400 
yeares since. 

I66 Bish#.%,«t« wrde 
debted to many) was mockingly called t;ishers folly, and a 
Rithme was ruade of it, and other the like, in this manner. 
tVirlec3yes Çaslell, and F.. isloers _Follic, 
Sinilas Dlcasurc, and [egses gloric. 
And so of other like buildings about the Cittie, by Citizens, 
men haue hOt letted to speake their pleasure. 
From Fishers Follie vp to the west end of Berwards lane, 
of olde rime so called, but now Hogge lane, because it meeteth 
with ttogge lane, which commeth from the Barres without 
Aldgate, as is afore shewed, is a continuall building of tene- 
ments, with Allcys of Cottages, pestered, &c. Then is there 
a large close called Tasell close sometime, for that there were 
Tasels planted for the vse of Clothworkers: since letten to 
the Crosse-bow-makers, wherein they vsed to shootc for gaines 
at the Popingey: now the saine being inclosed with a bricke 
wall, serueth to be an Artillerieyard, wherevnto the Gunners 
of the Tower doe weekely I repaire, namely euerie Thursday, 
and there leuelling certaine Brasse peeces of great Artillerie 
against a But of earth, ruade for that purpose, they dis- 
charge them for their exercise. Then haue ye the late 
dissolued Priorie and Hospitall, commonly" called Saint )[arie 
Spittle, founded by IVa#rr 17rmw, and Rosia his wife, for 
Canons regular, 1Va#er Archdeacon of London laid the first 
stone, in the yeare IX97. lVilliam of Saint ][arie Church then 
Bishop of London, dedicated to the honour of Iesus Christ. 
and his Mother the perpetuall virgin _]V[arie, by the naine of 
Domus Dei, and Beatoe ¢][aria,, c.,'tra Bishopsgate, in the 
Parish of S. Buttolph, the bounds whereof, as appeareth by 
composition betwixt the person, and Prior of the said Hos- 
pitall concerning tithes, beginneth at Berwards lane toward 
the South, and extendeth in breadth to the parish of Saint 
Lconard of Soresditch towardes the North, and in length, 
from the Kings streete on the west to the Bishops of Londons 
field, called Lollesworth on the East. The Prior of this Saint 
3[arie Spittle, for the emortising and propriation of the Priorie 
of Bikenacar in Essex to his said house of Saint [arie 
Spittle, gaue to Ifcnrie the seuenth 4co. pounds in the 22. of 
his raigne. This Hospitall, surrendered to 1renfle the eight, 



was valued to dispend 478. pounds, wherein xvas found, besides 
ornaments of the Church, and other goods pertaining to the 
Hospitall, a So. beds well furnished, for receipt of the poore. 
For it was an Hospitall of great reliefe. Sir Itenri« Plesilzgto 
knight was buried there, I452. 
In place of this Hospitall, and neare adioyning, are now 
many faire houses builded, for receipt and lodging of worship- 
full persons. A part of the large Church yeard pcrtaining to 
this Hospitall, and seuered from the rest with a Bricke wall, 
yet remaineth as of olde rime, with a Pulpit Crosse therein, 
somewhat like to that in Paules Church yard. And against 
the said Pulpet on the Southside, before the chernell and 
Chappell of Saint Edmoud the Bishop, and A[arie 2[agdalcn, 
which chappell was founded about the yeare I39I. by IVilliam 
Em'sham Citizen and Peperer of London, who was there 
buried, remaineth also one faire builded house in two stories in 
height for the Maior, and other honourable persons, with the 
Aldermen and Shiriffes to sit in, thcre ] to heare the Serinons 
preached in the Easter holydayes. In the loft ouer them 
stood the Bishop of London, and other Prelates, now the 
ladies, and Aldermens wiues doe there stand at a fayre 
window, or sit at their pleasure. .And here is to be noted, 
that time out of minde, it hath beene a laudable custome, that 
on good Friday in the after noone, some especiall learned 
man, by appoyntment of the Preiats, hath preached a Sermon 
at Paules crosse, treating of Christs passion: and vpon the 
three next Easter Holydayes, Monday, Tuesday, and Wednes- 
day, the like learned men, by the like appoyntment, haue vsed 
to preach on the forenoones at the sayde Spittle, to perswade 
the Article of Christs resurrection : and then on low Sunday, 
one other learned man at Paulcs Crosse, to make rehearsall 
of those foure former Sermons, either commending or reprouing 
them, as to him by iudgement of the learned Diuines was 
thought conuenient. And that done, he was to make a 
sermon of his owne studie, which in all were fiue sermons in 
one. _At these serinons so seuerally preached, the Major, 
with his brethren the Aldermen were accustomed to bee 
present in their Violets at _Paulcs on good Fryday, and in 
their Scarlets at the Spittle in the Holidayes, except Wednes- 

Pulpit Crosse 
at the Spittle. 

Chernell and 
Chappell of 
• . Edmond 
and of Mary 
Magdalen. 

Sermons in 
the Easter 
holy dayes at 
the Spittle. 
Paffe 169 



House in S. 
Mary Spittle 
Çhurchyeard 
builded for lhe 
Mayor and 
Aldermen. 

,Page 17o 
Pulpit Crosse 
in Spittle 
churchyeard 
new builded. 
A house in 
Spittle church 
yeard builded 
for the gouer- 
nets and chil- 
dren of Christs 
Hospitall. 
Lolesworth 
fielde. 
Buriall of the 
Romaines in 
Spittle field. 
Old monu- 
ments of the 
Romaines 
round. 

I68 Bisholbsgale warde 
day in violet, and the Major with his brethren, on low sonday 
in scarlet, at PaMes Crosse, continued vntill this day. 
Touching the antiquîtie of this custome, I finde that in the 
yeare 398. king Richard hauing procured from Rome, con- 
firmation of such statutes, and ordinances, as were ruade in 
the Parliament, begun at Westminster, and ended at Shrews- 
burie, hee caused the saine confirlnation to be read and 
pronounced at _Pauls Crosse, and at saint ][aric spittle in the 
serinons before all the people. Philip _Malpas one of the 
shiriffes in the yeare I439. gaue 2o. shillinges by the yeare to 
the three preachers at the Spittle: Stcphen Forster Maior, in 
the yeare I454- gaue fortie pounds to the preachers at IaMes 
crosse & Spittle. I find also that the afore said house, wherein 
the Major and Aldermen do sit at the Spittle, was builded for 
that purpose of the goods, & by the Executors of A'ichard 
I¢awson Alderman, & [sabcll his wife, in the yeare 488. In 
the year 594- this Pulpit being old, was taken down, and 
a new set vp, the Freachers face turned towardes the south, 
which I was before toward the west, also a large house on the 
east side of the said Pulpit, was then builded for the gouernors 
and children of Christs Hospitall to sit in : and this was done 
of the goods of lI'illiam Flkcus Alderman, late deceased, but 
within the first yeare, the saine house decaying, and like to 
haue fallen, was againe with great cost repayred at the Cities 
charge. On the East side of this Churchyard lieth a large 
field, of olde rime called Lolesworth, now Spittle field, which 
about the yeare I576. was broken vp for Clay to make Bricke, 
in the digging whereof many earthen pots called Vrnae, were 
found full of Ashes, and burnt bones of men, to wit, of the 
Romanes that inhabited here : for it was the custome of the 
Romanes to burne their dead, to put their _Ashes in an /-'ma, 
and then burie the saine with certaine ceremonies, in some 
field appoynted for that purpose, neare vnto their Citie : euerie 
of these pots had in thcm with the Ashes of the dead, one 
peece of Copper mony, with the inscription of the Emperour 
then l'aigning: some of them were of Claudius, some of 
Vespasian, some of Nero, of Anthonhts 29lus, of Traiauus, and 
others : besides those Friras, many other pots were there found, 
ruade of a white earth with long necks, and handels, like to our 



lish@sgat« wa ¢«e I6 9 
stone Iugges : these were emptie, but seemed to be buried ful 
ofsome liquid matter long since consumed and soaked through: 
for there were round diuerse vials and other fashioned Glasses, 
some most cunningly wrought, such as I haue not seene the 
like, and some of Christall, all which had water in them, noth- 
ing differing in clearnes, taste, or sauour from common spring 
water, what so euer it was at the first : some of these Glasses 
had Oyle in them verie thicke, and earthie in sauour, some 
were supposed to haue balme in them, but had lost the vertue : 
many of those pots and glasses were broken in cutting of the 
clay, so that few were taken vp whole. There were also 
round diuerse dishes and cups of a fine red coloured earth, 
which shewed outwardly such a shining smoothnesse, as if 
they had beene of Currall , those had in the bottomes Romane 
letters printed, there were also lampes of white earth and red, 
artificially wrought with diuerse antiques about them, some 
three or route Images ruade of white earth, about a span long 
each of them: one I remember was of-Pallas, the rest I haue 
forgotten. I my selle haue reserued almongst diuerse of those 
antiquities there, one lrua, with the Ashes and bones, and 
one pot of white earth very small, not exceeding the quantitie 
of a quarter of a wine pint, made in shape of a Hare, squatted 
vpon her legs, and betweene her eares is the mouth of the pot. 
There hath also beene round in the saine field diuers coffins 
of stone, containing the bones of men : these I suppose to bee 
the burials of some especiall persons, in time of the Brytons, 
or Saxons, after that the Romanes had left to gouerne here. 
lX, loreouer there were also round the seuls and bones of men 
without coffins, or rather whose coffins (being of great tituber) 
were consumed. Diuerse great nailes of Iron were there 
round, such as are vsed in the wheeles of shod Carts, being 
each of them as bigge as a mans finger, and a quarter ofa yard 
long, the heades two inches ouer, those nayles were more 
wondred at then the test of thinges there round, and many 
opinions of men were there vttred of them, namely that the 
men there buried were murdered by driuing those nayles into 
their heads, a thing vnlikely, for a smaller naile would more 

Page 

Troughes of 
stone found in 
the Spittle 
field. 

Great nayles 
of iron fonnd 
in the field, & 
fond opinions 
of men. 

a Currall] Ly9S; currell r6o3 



Clearks Hall 
and lheir alms 
bouses in 
Bishopsgate 
street. 

 70 Bs/w]Ssg«tc 
aptly serue to so bad a purpose, and a more secret place would 
lightly be imployed for their buriall. But to set downe what 
I haue obserued concerning this matter, I there behelde the 
bones of a man lying (as I noted) the heade North, the feete 
South, and round about him, as thwart his head, along both 
his sides, and thwart his feete, such halles were round, where- 
fore I coniectured them to be the nailes of his coffin, which had 
beene a trough cut out of some great tree, and the saine 
couered with a planke, of a great thicknesse, fastned with such 
nayles, and therefore I caused some of the nayles to bee 
reached vp to mee, and found vnder the broad heades ofthem, 
the olde wood, skant turned into earth, but still retaining both 
the graine, and proper colour: of these nayles with the wood 
vnder the head thereof, I reserued one, as also the nether iaw 
bone of the man, the teeth being great, sound, and fixed , which 
amongst other many monuments there round, I haue yet to 
shew, but the nayle lying drie, is by scaling greatly wasted. 
And thus much for this part of Bishopsgate warde, without 
the gare : for I haue in another place spoken of the gare, and 
therefore I ara to speake of that other parte of this warde, 
which lieth within the gare. [ 
And first to begin on the left hand of Bishopsgate street, 
from the gare ye haue certaine Tenements of olde time per- 
tayning to a brotherhood of S. Nickol«s, granted to the Parish 
Clarkes of London, for two Chaplens to be kept in the Chapple 
of S. 2][arie 2][agdalcu neare vnto the Guild hall of London, 
in the 7. of Hcurie the sixt. The first of these houses 
towardes the North, and against the wall of the Citie, was 
sometime a large Inne or Court called the Wrastlers, of such 
a signe, and the last it the high streete towardes the South. 
was sometime also a fayre Inne called the Angell, of such 
a signe. Amongest these said Tenements was on the saine 
strecte side a fayre Entrie or Court to the common hall of the 
saide Parish Clarkes, with proper Ahneshouses seauen in 
nmnber adioyning, for poore Parish Clarkes, and their wiues, 
their widowes, such as were in great yeares hot able to labour. 
One of these by the sayd Brotherhoode of Parish Clarkes was 

1 fast fixed] I50S ; fixe 6o 3 



allowed sixteene pence the weeke, the other sixe had each 
of them nine pence the weeke, according to the pattent thereof 
graunted. This Brotherhoode amongest other being sup- 
pressed : In the raigne of Fdzt,ard the sixt, the said Hall with 
the other buildings there, was giuen to sir Robert Chcslcr, 
a knight of Cambridge shire, against whome the Parish Clarkes 
commencing sure, in the raigne of Queene l][arie, and being 
like to haue preuayled, the saide Sir Robcrt Chcslcr pulled 
downe the Hall, sold thc tituber, stone, and lcad, and there- 
vpon the sute was ended. Thc Almeshouses remaine in the 
Queenes handes, and people are their placed, such as can make 
best friendes: some of them taking the pension appoynted, 
hauc let foorth their houses for great lent, giuing occasion to 
the Parson of the Parish to chalenge tythes of the poore, &c. 
Next vnto this is the small Parish Church of Saint 'thel- 
bur.çe virgin, and from thence some small distance is a large 
court called little S. H«lnts, because it pertained to the Nuns 
of Saint 1-felcns, and was their house : there are seuen Aimes 
roomes or houses for the poore, belonging to the companie of 
Leathersellers. Then some what more West is another Court 
with a winding lane, which commeth out agaynst the west ende 
of Saint Andrew V«dcrshaft Church. In this court standeth 
the church [ of S. 1-f«h'n, sometime a Priorie of blacke Nuns, 
and in the saine a parish Church of Saint Hclclt. 
This Priorie was founded before the raigne of Hem'le the 
third, ll'illiam Basbzg Deane ofpauh's was the first founder, 
and was there buried, and ll;illiam 17asb«g one of the Shiriffes 
of London, in the second yeare of Fdward the second, was 
holden also to be a founder, or rather an helper there: this 
Priorie being valued at 314. pound two shillings sixe pence, 
was surrendred the 25. of Nouember, the thirtie of 1-fcm-ic 
the eight, the whole Church, the partition betwixt the Nuns 
Church, and Parlsh Church being taken downe, remaineth 
now to the Parish, and is a faire Parish Church, but wanteth 
such a steeple as Sir T]tomas Grcs]tam promised to haue 
builded, in recompence of ground in their Church filled vp 
with his monument. The Nuns hall and other housing 
thereunto appertaining, was since purchased by the Companie Leathersellers 
of the Lethersellers, and is their common Hall: whichhall. 

Parish church 
of S. Ethel- 
burge 
priory of Saint 
Hellens and 
Ahnesehouses. 

Page t73 
Parrish church 
of S. Hellen. 



Of Crosbies 
place, and of 
sir Iohn 
Crosbie. 

companie was incorporate in the 21. yeare of Richard the 
second. 
In the Church of saint I--:clcn, haue ye these monuments of 
the dead: Thomas LangIon Chaplain, buried in the Quire 
135o. ./idal/t Fralwcs Major 354- EliabeIh I:enttar, wife 
to IVilliam l'cuuar Alderman, one of the Shiriffes of London, 
14oJ. ]Ot'lll daughtcr to tfcnrie Statuer, wife to Richard, 
sonne and heyre to l¢obert Lord PoyMngs, died a virgin I42o. 
[oh# SwhoEat 42o. Nicholas _/]Iarshall Ironmonger, Aider- 
man, 1474. Sir Iohn Crosby _Alderman, 1475. and Aune his 
wife, Thomas lVilliams Gentleman, 495- Ioan Cocken wife 
to Iahn Cocbcn Esquire, I5o9 . Jl'/arœee Orrcll, wife to sir Lewes 
Orrcll knight, Hcm.ic Sommcr, and A'athcrhw his wife, lValtcr 
lIuntigtou Esquire, [olttt LmzgIhorp Equire, 151o. [oht 
Gowcr steward of Saint ltclc»s, I5I. Robert ochcstcr 
Esquire, Sergeant of the Pantrie to 11cnric the 8, sir IVilliam 
Sanctlo, and sir lVilliam SatcIlo, father and sonne. Elca#o», 
daughter to sir Thomas Butlcr Lord Sudlcy, [ohn Southworth, 
Nicho/as tfarpsfield Esquire, Thomas Sattdcford, or Sommcr- 
ford _Aldcrman, llcxandcr Chcytey, lValtcr Dawbency, Georgc 
FasIolh, sonne to tfuglt FasIolb, RobcrI Liade, Thomas 
17c[nolt alias Clarenciaulx, king at arms, 1.534. lVilliam tfollis 
Major 154o , Iohlt Fa«tconbridge Esquire, 1.545. tfacleet Gentle- 
man of the Kinges Chapple, sir lnd»cc, Ittd Maior, 15.51. sir 
ll'illiam )gickcring, and sir IVilliam 19icbcring, father and 
sonne, ll'il/iam Botd _Alderman, 567, sir 7"homas Gresham 
Mercer 579. ll'il/iam Skcggcs Sargeant Poultar, Richard 
Gresham, sonne to sir Thomas Grcsham 1.564. 
Then haue ye one great housc called Crosbie place, bccause 
the saine was builded by sir [abat Crosby Grocer, and Woolman, 
in place of certaine  Tenements, with their appurtenances letten 
to him by A/icc Ashfed Prioresse of saint tfclcus, and the 
Couent for ninetie nine -"yeares, ri'oto the yeare 466. vnto the 
yeare 1565. for the annuall rent of eleuen pound sixe shillings 
8. pence. This bouse he builded of stone and timber, verie 
large and beautifull, and the highest at that time in London : 
he was one of the Shiriffes, and an Alderman in the yeare 

1 certaine] 1598 ; certaines 16o 3  nine] neene 16o 3 



47o. knighted by ldvard the fourth, in the yere x47. and 
deceased in the yeare 475 so short a rime enioyed hec that 
his large and sumptuous building. He was buried in sain 
elens, the Parish Church, a fayre monument of him and his 
Ladie is raysed there: he gaue towardes the reforming of that 
Church fiue hundred Markes, which was bestowed with the 
better, as appeareth by his Armes, both in the stone worke, 
roofe of tituber, and glasing. I holde it a fable saide of him, 
to bec named ÇrosMe, of being round by a crosse, for I haue 
read of other to haue that naine of çrosie before him, namely, 
in the yeare 14o6. the seuenth of enrie the fourth, the sayde 
King gaue to his seruant on çrosMe, the wardship of oan 
daughter and »ole heyre to ohn orahe Fishmonger, &c. 
This Çrosie might bec the Father, or Grandfather to sir ohn 
Crosbie. 
Richard Duke of Glocester, and Lord Protector, afterward 
king by the name of Richard the third, was lodged in this 
house: since the which time among other, tl]totie oiltil-e 
a rich Marchant of [talle dwelled there, after him Gertaht 
Coll: then ll'illiam oud Alderman increased this house in 
height with building of a Turret on the top thereof: hee 
deceased in the yeare 576, and was buried in saint e&ns 
Church : ders Ambassa[dors haue beene lodged there, namely 
in the yeare 586. eztri« amelius Chauncellor of Denmarke, 
Ambassadour vnto the Queenes Maiestie of England from 
Predericbe the seconde, the King of Denmarke: an Ambassa- 
dor of France, &c. sir [ohn Sencer Alderman lately purchased 
this house, made great reparations, kept his Maioralitie there, 
and since builded a most large warehouse neare therevnto. 
From this Cî'osbie place vp to Leaden hall corner, and so 
downe Grassestreete, anaongst other tenements, are diuerse 
faire and large builded houses for Marchants, and such like. 
Now for the other side of this warde, namely the right 
hande, hard by within the gate is one faire water Conduite, 
which Thomas Knsivorth Major, in the yere I5 5, founded, 
he gaue 6.I. the rest was furnished at the common charges of 
the Citie. This Conduit bath since beene taken downe, and 
new builded. Dauid IVoodrooffe Alderman gaue twentie 
poundes towardes the conuayance of more water therevnto. 

Pae 75 

Water conduit 
at Bishopsgate. 



Sir Thomas 
Greshams 
house builded. 

Sir Andrew 
lud his Mmes 
houses. 

t'age 176 

tî4 isha/)ŒEE(a/e c,a rde 
From this Conduit haue ye amongst many faire Tenements, 
diuerse fayre lnnes, large for receipt of trauellers, and some 
houses for men of worship, namely one most spatious of all 
other thereabout, builded of Bricke and Tituber, by sir Tkamas 
Gresham, knight, who deceased in the yeare 579. and was 
buried in saint Hcl«ns church, vnder a faire Monument by him 
prepared in his life. He appoynted by his Testament, this house 
to be made a Colledge of Readers as before is said in the 
Chapter of schooles and houses of learning. 
Somewhat west from this house is one other very faire 
house, wherein sir lVilliam Hollies kept his Maioraltie, and 
was buried in the Parish church of saint Helen. Sir Amtrew 
lud also kept his Maioraltie there, and was buried at saint 
l-tN, ws : hee builded _Almeshouses for six poore _Almes people 
neare to the saide Parish Church, and gaue lands to the 
Skinners, out of the which they are to giue 4. shillings euery 
weeke, to the six poore Almes people, eight pence the peece, 
and fiue and twentie shillings route pence the yere in coales 
amongst them for euer. 
Alice Smith of London widdow, late wife of Thomas Smit/ 
of the same Citty Esquier, and Customer of the Porte of 
London, in her last Will and Testament bequeathed landes to 
the valew of fifteen poundes by the yeare for euer, to the 
Company of Skinners, for the augmenting of the pensions of 
certaine poor, inhabiting in 8. _Almes houses, erected by Sir 
Andrew lnd knight her father, in the parrish of great S. Helens 
in Bishopsgate streete in London, shee hath also giuen in her 
saide last will and Testament in other charitable vses, as to 
the Hospitals and to the poore of other Parrishes and good 
preachers, the some of 3oo.li. _As also to the poore schollers 
in the 2. Uniuersities of Oxford and Cambridge, the sum of 
200 li. of which her last Will and Testament shee made her 
sons Thomas Smith late Shiriffe of London, and Richard and 
Robert Smith her Executors, who haue performed the sarne 
according to her godly and charitable mind. 
Then in the very west corner ouer against the East ende of 
saint £V[artins Oteswiclt church (from whence the street windeth 
towards the south) you had of olde rime a faire well with two 
buclkets so fastned, that the drawing vp of the one, let 



downe the other, but now of late that well is turned into 
a pumpe. 
From this to the corner ouer against the Leaden hall, and 
so downe Grasse streete, are many faire houses for Marchants, 
and artificers, and many fayre Innes for trauellers, euen to the 
corner where that ward endeth, ouer against Grasse church : 
and thus much for this ]3ishops gate warde shall suffice : which 
bath an Alderman, two Deputies, one without the gare, 
another within, common counsellers six, Constables seuen, 
Scauengers seuen, for Wardmote inquest thirteene, ànd 
a Beedle: it is taxed to the fifteene at thirteene pound. 

Brodestreete warde 

THE next is Brodestreete warde, which beginneth within 
Bishopsgate, from the water conduit westward on both the 
sides of the streete, by Alhallowes church to an Iron grate on 
the channell which runneth into the water course of Walbrooke 
before ye come to the Posterne called Mooregate : and this is 
the farthest west part ofthat ward. Then haue ye Brodestreete, 
whereof the ward taketh naine, which stretcheth out of the 
former street, from the East corner of Alhallowes churchyard, 
somewhat South to the parish Church of saint Pctcr the 
Poore on both sides, and then by the southgate of the lttgtts- 
tine Friers west, downe Throkmorton streete by the Drapers 
hall into Lothburie, to another grate of Iron ouer the channell 
there, whereby the water runneth into the course of Wal- 
brooke, vnder the East end of saint Jl[argarets Church, 
certaine posts of tituber are there set vp : and this is also the 
farthest west part of this ward, in the said street. Out of the 
which streete runneth vp Bartholomew lane south to the north 
side of the Exchange, then more East out of the former street 
from ouer against the Friers Augustiues church south gate, 
runneth vp another part of Brodestreete, south to a Pumpe 
ouer against Saint Bennets church. Then haue ye one other 
streete ] called Three needle streete, beginning at the Well with 
two buckets, by saint 2IIartius Otoswick Church wall. This 
streete runneth downe on both sides to Finkes lane, and halfe 
way vp that lane, to a gate of a Marchants bouse on the West 

Brodestreete 
warde. 

Page  7 7 
Three Needle 
streete. 



l'arish church 
of Alhallowes 
in the wall. 

Carpen ters 
hall. 

Çurryers rov;e. 

Lane stopped 

Footeway 
stopped s'p. 

Sir William 
Powlet, 
L. Treasurer, 
his bouse. 
Brodestreet. 

laKt «7 8 

T76 

side, but hot so farre on the East, then the foresaid streete, 
from thls Finkes lane runneth downe by the Royall Exchange 
to the Stockes, and to a place formerly called Scalding house, 
or Scalding wicke, but now Scalding Alley, by" the west side 
whereof vnder the parish Church of saint [iMred runneth the 
course of Walbrooke: and these bee the bounds of this warde. 
Speciall monuments therein are these. First the parish church 
of Alhallowes in the wall, so called of standing close to the 
wal of the Citie, in which haue beene buried Tkomas Durrcm 
Esquire, and [argarct his wife, Robert leele Esquire 6ot. 
On the other side of that streete, amongest many proper 
bouses possessed for the most part by Curriers ls the Car- 
penters hall, which companle was incorporated in the 7. 
yeare of king Edwarcl the fourth. 
Then Est from the Curriers row, is a long and high wall of 
stone, inclosing the north side of a large Garden adioyning to 
as large an house, builded in the ralgne of king Itenrie the 
eight, and of Edwardthe sixt, by" sir lVTliam Powlet, Lord 
Treasurer of England: through this Garden, which of olde 
rime consisted of diuerse parts, now vnîted, was sometimes a 
faire foote way, leading by the west end of the Augustine 
Friers church straight North, and opened somewhat West 
from Alhallowes Church against London wall towardcs More- 
gate, which footeway" had gates at either end locked vp euery 
night, but now the saine way" being taken ir:to those Gardens, 
the gates are closed vp with stone, whereby" the people are 
forced to go about by" saint Peters church, and the East end 
of the said Friers Church, and ail the saide great place and 
Garden of sir l'Villiam PoTe,let to London wall, and so to 
Moregate. 
This great house adioyning to the Garden aforesaid, stretch- 
eth to the North corner of Brodestreete, and then turneth vp 
Brodestreete all that side to and beyond the East end of 
the saide Friers church. It was builded by" the said Lord 
Treasurer in place of Augustine Friers house, cloyster, and 
gardens, &c. The Friers I Church he pulled not downe, but 
the West end thereof inclosed from the steeple, and Quier, 
was in the yeare x55o. graunted to the Dutch Nation in 
London, to be their preaching place: the other part, namely 



I77 

the steeple, Quier and side Isles to the t2uier adioyning, he 
reserued to housholde vses, as for stowage of corne, coale, and 
other things, his sonne and heyre Marques of Winchester sold 
the Monuments of noble men there buried in great number, 
the pauing stone, and whatsoeuer (which cost many thousands) 
for one hundred pound, and in place thereof ruade fayre 
stabling for horses. He caused the Leade to be taken from 
the roofes, and laid tile in place, which exchange prooued 
hot so profitable as he looked for, but rather to his dis- 
aduauntage. 
On the East side of this Brodestreete amongst other build- Sir Thoma» 
Greshams 
ings, on the backe part of Gresham house, which is in Bishops aimes houses. 
gate streete, be placed eight proper aimes houses, builded of 
Bricke and timber by sir Thomas Gresham knight, for eight 
Aimes men, which be now there placed rent free, and receiue 
each of them by his gift sixe pounde, thirteene shillinges foure 
pence yearely for euer. 
Next vnto 1)awlet house, is the Parish Church of saint 
P«t«r the Poore, so called for a difference from other of that 
naine, sometime peraduenture a poore Parish, but at this 
present there be many fayrc houses, possessed by rich 
marchants and other. 13uried in this Church, Richard Fitz- 
williams Marchant Tayler, xSzo. sir lVilliam Roclz Major, 
154o. M'ariDe Calthroe Major, 1588. 
Then next haue ye the Augustin Friers Church, and Church Frier Augus- 
tines Church 
yard, thc entring there vnto, by a southgate, to the west Porch, part whereof 
a large Church, hauing a most fine spired steeple, small, high, is the Dutch 
church. 
and streight, I haue hot seene the like : founded by 1-[u»oErey 
Bohmt Earlc of Hereford and Essex, in the yeare I53. 
lcgbtald Çobham gaue his messuage in London to the 
enlarging thereof, in the yeare 1344. 1-[umfrcy Bohnn Earle 
of Hereford and Esex, reedified this Church in the yeare 
1354. whose bodie was there buried in the Quier. The small 
spired steeple of this Church was ouerthrowne by tempest of 
wind, iii the yeare I36. but was raised of new as now it 
standeth to the beautifying of the Citie. This ] bouse was 'age9 
valued at 57. pound, and was surrendl'ed the 2. of Nouember 
the thirtieth of Itenry the eight. 
There lye buried in this Fryers church, amox',gst others, 

Parish church 
of S. Peters the 
poore. 



Fa£e t,5o 

178 Ab'odesh'eete warde 
Edmoud first sonne to loan, mother to king Ridlard the 
seconde, Gy de 3[ericke Earle of S. Paule, Lucie Countes of 
Kent, and one of the Heyres of aruabie Lorde of Millaine, 
with an Epitaph, Dame la¥ wife to Sir Thomas IVest, Dame 
]kIargaret lVcst, Stcphen Lindericlc Esquier, Sir t-[ttoErcy 
ohun Earle of Hereford and Esex, Lord of Brekenake, 
Richard the great Erle of _A_rundell, Surrey and Warren, 
beheaded, I397. Sir lz'dward Arundcll, and Dame Elizabellt 
his vife, Sir Frauucis zttcottrt, Erle of Pembrooke, which 
married Alicc sister to the Earle of Oxeford: Dame Lucic 
A'nowlcs of Kent, Sir 1)ctcr Gariusers of France, the Lord 
Iohn IlCe Erle of Oxeford, beheaded on the Tower Hill, 
1463 . ./lubry dc I "crc sonne and heire to the Earle of Oxeford, 
Sir Thomas Tuduam Knight, I Villiam Bourscr, Lord Fit, 
IVa»ro6 Sir Thomas de la Laude Knight, Dame loan Noris 
the Ladie of Bedforde, Aune daughter to Iohtz l'icount IVcll«s, 
IUalter Arettcl[ Equier, Sir Iolm Iauncrs Knight, the wife of 
Sir l)at«id Cradocke Knight, the mother to the Lord Seuccrs 
wife, Sir 17arllemew Rodlcgalc, ]oht sonne to Sir Iohn IVing- 
ficM, Sir ll'a#cr Alewes, Robert Acwculon Esquier, IPhilip 
Spencer sonne to Sir tgrttgh S])euccr, Dame Isabell daughter to 
Sir//ugh. The Lorde Barons slaine at Barnet field, buried 
there, x47. In the body of the church, Dame Iulian wife to 
Sir tichard Lacie, Sir Thomas Courtu O, sonne to the Erle of 
Deuonshire, and b¥ him his sister, wedded to Clteuerstone, the 
Daughter of the Lorde Eea»tonl, two sonnes of Sir Thomas 
forlcy to wit IVilliam and Raph, Sir lVilliam Talmagw 
Knight, Ni«Itolas Blondcll Esquier, Sir tWchard Chamberlaiuc, 
Iohu ttallon Gentleman, Sir Iolt» Gifford Knight, Tltomas 
AIauuingkam Esquier, Sir ll'illiam ti'gltltde Knight, Sir 
IVtTliant sonne to Sir Thomas Tcrill, lohn Sttrdl Gentleman. 
In the Est Wing lIargaret tTareutiu Gentlewoman, Iohu 
Sicer Equier, and Lctis his wife, lohn lc Percers Esquier, 
Rogcr Chiba 7 Esquier, IPcter AIorcns l Equier, Thomas 
sonne to Sir William eckland, Iames Cuthbtg Esquier, Iohn 
Chornet Esquier, ll'illiam Kcnley Equier, AIar.çery wife to 
Tltomas Batd and daughter to Iohn Hucit, the Lorde IVilliam 
Marques of Barkele¥ and Earle of Nottingham, and Dame 
lrcaite his wife. In the West Wing Sir Iohn Tirrill, and 



t¢rodes/reete warde 179 

Dame Kathcriue his wife, Sir IValter of Powle Knight, Sir 
Iohtt Blaickwell and his wife, Dame Iane Sayue, daughter to 
Sir Iohn Zee, Sir Iohn Dawbeny, sonne and heyre to Sir Giles 
Dawbeny, William sonne to Sir Roger Scroopc, Dame Ioat 
Dawbeny wife to Sir William Dawbeny, Thomas Charles 
Esquier, sir Iohit Dawbeny knight, and his sonne Robert, sir 
Iames Bell Knight, sir Oliuer Manny Knight, Hettrie Deskic 
Esquier, sir Dioncs ll[ordaske, sir Bernard Rolitgcort, sir Petcr 
lSayor, sir IVilliam Tirell, sir IVilliam his brother knightes, 
IVilliam Collingborne Esquier beheaded, 484. sir Roger 
Clifford knight, sir Thomas Coke Mayor in the yeare 1462. 
IVilliam Edward Ma¥or 47I. sir Iamcs Tircll, sir Iokn 
IViudauy knights, beheaded 15o2. sir Iohn 19awtrie knight, 
59. Dame #[argaret Redc, x5IO. t:'dward Duke of 
Buckingham, beheaded 5" t- Gwiskard Earle of Huntington. 
On the south side and at the West end of this Church, many 
fayre houses are builded, namely in Throgmorton streete, one 
very large and spacious, builded in the place of olde and small 
Tenementes by Tkomas Cromwell lIaister of the kinges 
Iewell house, after that Maister of the Rols, then Lord 
Cromwell knight, Lord priuie seale, Vicker Generall, Earle of 
Essex, high Chamberlaine of England, &c. This house being 
finished, and hauing some reasonable plot of ground left for 
a Garden, hee caused the pales of the Gardens adioyning to 
the nooEhe parte thereof on a sodaine to bee taken downe, ŒEŒE. 
foot to bee measured forth right into the north of euery mans 
ground, a line there to bee drawne, a trench to be cast, 
a foundation laid, and a high bricke Wall to bee builded. My 
Father had a Garden there, and an house standing close to his 
south pale, this house they lowsed from the ground, & bare 
vpon Rowlers into my Fathers Garden OEoE. foot, ere my Father 
heard thereof, no warning was giuen him, nor other an[swere, 
when hee spake to the surueyers of that worke, but that their 
Mayster sir Thomas commaunded them so to doe, no man 
durst go to argue the matter, but each man lost his land, and 
my Father payde his whole rent, which was vi.s. viii.d, the 
yeare, for that halfe which was left. Thus much of mine owne 
knowle.dge haue I thought good to note, that the suddaine 
rising of some men, causeth them to forget themselues. 
N2 

Throgmorton 
streete. 

T. Cromwell 
his bouse. 

['age 18t 



180 trodes/ree/e 7«arcte 

The Drapers 
Hall. 

The Drapers 
armes. 

Lethbury, or 
Lothbury. 
]3artholomew 
lane. 

Abbot of S. 
Albons his 
lnnes. 
S. Anthonies 
schoole. 

Three needle 
streete. 

S. Martins 
Oteswich a 
parish church. 
lage zSz 

The Company of the Drapers in London bought this house, 
and now the same is their common Hall, this Company 
obtayned of king Hem 7 the sixt, in the seauenteenth of his 
raigne to bee incorporate, loht« Gidney was chosen to bee their 
first Maister, and the foure Wardens were, Z lVotton, L 
Darbie, Robert Brctou, and T. Cooke. The Armes graunted 
to the said Company b), sir ll'illiam Bridges Knight. first 
Gartier king at Armes in Blason are thus: Three sunne 
Beames issuing out of three clowdes of flame, crowned with 
three Crownes imperials of gold, vpon a shield azure. From 
this hall on the saine side down to the grates and course of 
Walbrook haue ye diuers faire houses for marchantes and 
other, from the which grates backe againe on the other side is 
Lethbury 1, so called in Record of lz'dward the third, the 38. 
yeare, and now corruptly called Lothbury, are candlesticke 
founders placed, till yee corne to Bartholomew lane, so called 
of S. Bartholomewes church, at the southeast corner thereof. 
In this lane also are diuers faire builded houses on both sides, 
and so likewise haue ye in the other street, which stretcheth 
from the Fryers Augustins south gate, to the corner ouer 
against S. Bennets Church. In this street amongst other 
fayre buildings the most ancient was of old time an house 
pertayning to the Abbot of S. Albons, lohn Catchcr 
_Alderman now dwelleth there: then is the free schoole per- 
tayning to the late dissolued Hospitall of saint Anthony, 
whereof more shall bee shewed in an other place, and so vppe 
to Three Needle streete. On the south parte of which streete, 
beginning at the East, by the Well with two Buckets, now 
turned to a Pumpe, is the Parrish Church of saint Martin called 
Oteswich, of [artin de Otcswich, Nicltolas dc Oteswich, 
lVilliam Oteswich, & Iohn Oteswich founders thereof. There 
bee monumentes in this Church, of IVilliam Cotsta«ltitte 
Alderman, and Emme his wife, Katherine wife to 17eucdick 
Auustine, Sir IVilliam Drifield knight, Iohn Oteswick and his 
wife vnder a fayre monument on the south side, Iokn Church- 
man one of the Shiriffes, in the yeare x385. RichardeNaj,lor 
Ta'lor, Alderman, 483 . Iamcs Falleron, Iohu 2]Iclchbornc, 

» Lethbury] z508; Lothbury z6o 3 



B'rodes/ree/e w« rde  8  

Tko»tas Hey and Ellen his wife, Willia»t Clitkerow & 3Iargaret 
his wife, Oliuer and lVillia»t sons to [okn l.Voodroffe esquier, 
-tc]?tgk -Pembertot Taylor, Alderman, 5oo. & Katherbte his 
wife, ll/[athew _Pe»tbcrton Marchant Taylor about xSx4. he 
gaue 5 o. pound to the repayring of S. Lawreuce Chappel. 
The aforesaid John Ckurchmau for lV¢Tliam and h»hn Oteswiclz 
by licence of I-]'enly the fourth, the 6. of his raigne gaue the 
aduowson or Patronage of this church, foure messuages, & 7- 
shops with the appurtenances in the parrish of S. Martins 
Oteswich, &c. to the Maister and Wardens of Taylors and 
linnen armorers, keepers of the Guild and fraternity of S. John 
taptist in London, and to their successors in perpetuall aimes, 
to bec employed on the poore Brethren and sisters, whereupon 
adioyning vnto the West end of this parish church, the said 
maister & wardens builded about a proper quadrant or squared 
court, seauen almeshouses, wherein they placed seauen almes 
men of that company, and their wiues (if they had wiues) each 
of these 7. of old time had xiiii.d, the weeke, but now of later 
time their stipend by the said maister and Wardens bath 
beene augmented to the summe of xxvi.s, the quarter, which 
is v. pound iiii.s, the yeare to each of them, besides coales: 
more, to each of them xx.s. the yeare by gift of |Ve/ter Fislt 
sometime mayster of that Company and Taylor to her 
Maiestie. 
Some small distance from thence is the Merchant Taylors 
hal pertayning to the Guilde and fl-aternity of S. [ohu Baptist, 
time out of mind called of Taylors and linnen armourers of 
London, for I find that King Edward the first in the 8 of 
his raigne confirmed this Guild by the naine of Taylors and 
linnen armourers, and also gaue to the brethren thereof 
authority euery yeare at midsommer to hold a feast, and to 
choose vnto them a gouernour, or Mayster with wardens: 
whereupon the saine yeare a3oo. on the feast day of the 
natiuitie of Saint Iokn Baptist, they chose Henry de Ryall to 
be their pilgrim, for the maister of this miste]rie (as one that 
trauelled for the whole companie) was then so called vntil the 
, x. of Richard the second : and the foure wardens were then 
called Purueyors of aimes, (now called quarterage) of the said 
fraternitie. This Marchant Taylers hall sometime pertaining 

Taylers and 
linnen armo- 
rers their alms 
bouses in 
Brodestreete 
warde : looke 
more in Port- 
soken ward. 

Taylers and 
linnen armor- 
ers hall. 
Antiquitie of 
the Taylers 
feast by au- 
thoritie. 
A pilgrim to 
trauaile for the 
Taylers now 
called toaster 
purueyers of 
alms now 
called War- 
dens. 

l'age lj 



8 Zrodestreete e,a.rde 

Taylers pur- 
chasetheirhal. 

Taylers hall. 

The marchant 
taylers armes. 

Taylers & lin- 
nen armorer 
incorporate 
marchant 
Taylers. 

tage ,8 4 

Finke lane. 

to a worshipful gentleman named d**wnd ŒErepiu, 1)omims 
Crehlg after some Record, he in the yere of Christ I33I the 
sixt of arward the third, for a certaine summe of money to 
him paid, ruade his grant thereof by the naine ofhis principall 
messuage in the wardes of Cornehill and Brodestreete, which 
sir Oliuer ],t, ffba,t knight did then hold, to Ioht of I/'akley 
the kinges Pauilion maker. This was called the new bal, or 
Taylers Inne, for a difference from their olde hall, which was 
aboute the backe side of the red Lion in Basing lane, and in 
the ward of Cordwayner streete. 
The al. of Edward the fourth, Thomas Igolme, alias Caren- 
ciatl.r king of Armes for the south part of England, granted 
by his pattents to the said fraternitie and guild of Saint 2rohu 
baplisl, of Taylers and linnen Armourers, to beare in a field 
siluer, a Pauilion betweene two mantels imperial, purple, 
garnished with gold, in a chiefe Azure an holy Lambe, set 
within a sunne, the creast vpon the helme, a pauilion purple 
garnished with gold, &c. After this king He,trie the seuenth, 
being himselfe a brother of this fraternitie, or Guild of Saint 
Ioht lgaîMist, of Taylers or linnen Armourers (as diuerse other 
his predecessors kinges before him had beene, to wit, Richm-d 
the thirde, Eda,ard the fourth, Heurie the sixt, Hcnrie the 
fift, He,zrie the fourth, and Richard the second). And for that 
diuerse of that fraternitie had time out of minde beene great 
marchants, and had frequented ail sortes of marchandises into 
most partes of the worlde, to the honour of the kinges realme, 
and to the great profite of his subiects, & of his progenitors, 
and the men of the said misterie during the rime aforesaid, 
had exercised the buying and selling of all wares and mar- 
chandises, especially of woollen cloth, as well in grosse, as by 
retaile, throughout all this realme of England, and chiefly 
within the said Citie, therefore he of his especiall grace did 
change, transferre, and translate the Guilde aforesaide, and 
did incorporate them into the naine of the toaster and Wardens 
of the lXarchant Taylers of the fraternitie ] of Saint Iohn 
latOlist , in the Citie of London. 
Some distance West from this the IVIarchant Taylers hall is 
Finkes lane, so called of Robert t:itke, and Robert Fiuke his 
sonne, la,nes Fiuke, and Rosamotd Fitke. Robert Fi,ke the 



t7ro«!«s/me/c ,m'dc 183 
elder new builded the parish Church of Saint 17cnnet commonly 
called Finie of the founder, his tenements were both of 
17ennels parish, and saint 2].'l'artins Otesvaiclt parish : the one 
halfe of this Finke lane is of Brodestreete warde, to wit, on 
the West side vp to the great and principall house wherei/a 
the saide Finb dwelled : but on the other side, namely the 
East, not so much towards Cornhill. Then without this lane 
in the foresaid Three needle streete, is the said parish Church 
of S. 17enuct, a proper Church, in which are these monuments Parish ehurch 
r, er of S. Bennet 
of the dead. Robert Simson, and Elicabct]t his wife, .«o" Finke. 
Straptçe Esquire, Treresse, llZilliam Colby, Iohn Fro', Thomas 
lCriar Plummar, r4IO , &c. 
Some distance west is the Royall Exchaunge, whereof more 
shall be spoken in the warde of Cornhill, and so downe to the 
little Conduit, called the pissing Conduit, by the Stockes 
Market, and this is the southside of Three needle streete. 
On the northside of this street from ouer against the East 
corner of S. 3[artins Otescviclt Church haue yee diuerse faire 
and large houses til )'ou corne to the hospital of S. AnthoMc, llospitall of 
S. Anthonie 
sometime a Cell to saint Anthonies of Viemta. For I reade sometime a 
that King 1-fenrie the third granted to the brotherhood of Synagogue of 
the lewes. 
saint zlnt]toitie of Vienna, a place amongst the Iewes, which Patent record. 
was sometime their Sinagogue, and had beene builded by 
them about the yeare IoE3I , but the Christians obtained of the 
king, that it should be dedicated to our blessed Ladie, and 
since, an hospitall being there builded, was called saint 
thonies in London: it was founded in the parish of saint 
17ennet Finke, for a Master, two Priests, one schoolemaster 
and 12. poore men: after which foundation, amongst other 
things was giuen to this Hospitall one messuage and Garden, 
whereon was builded the faire large free schoole, and one other 
parcell of ground containing 37. foote in length, and 18. foote Free Schoole 
in breadth, whereon was builded the .Aimes houses of hard of s. Antho- 
nies builded. 
stone and tituber, in the raigne of l-f enfle the 6. which said Almeshouses 
1-fenrie the 6. in the 20. of his raigne, gaue vnto Ioltn Carpentar of S.Anthonies 
builded. 
doctor of Diuinitie malster of saint Anthonies Hospitall, and PagelSr 
to his brethren, and their successors for euer, his Mannor Of Gift of Henry 
Poinington, with the appurtenances, with certaine pencions the6 to saint 
Anthonies. 
and portions of Milburne, Burnworth, Charlton, and vp Wim- 



S. Anthonies 
pigs fed on 
the dungue 
hilles. 

I84 tTrodes/ree/e ;cw rde 
bol-ne, in thc Countie of Southampton, towards the main- 
tenance of fiue schollers in the Universitie of Oxford, to be 
brought vp in the facultie of .Artes. after the rate of ten pence 
the weeke for euerie scholler: so that the sayde schollers be 
first instructed in the rudiments of Grammar at the Colledge 
of Eaton, founded by the said king. 
In the yeare I474. E«[zvard the fourth granted to lVilliam 
Sa3, , Batchler of Diuinitie, maister of the said Hospitall, to 
haue Priests, Clarkes, schollers, poore men, and brethren of 
the same, Clarks, or lay men, Queresters, Procters, messengers, 
seruants in houshold, and other things whatsoeuer, like as the 
Prior, and Couent of saint Authou&'s of l'icuna, &c. Hee 
also annexed, vnited, and appropriated the said I-lospital, vnto 
the Collegiate Church of saint George in Windsore. 
The Procters of this bouse wcre to collect the beneuolence 
of charitable persons, towards the building and supporting 
thereof. .And amongst other things obscrued in my youth, I 
remember that the Officers charged with ouersight of the Markets 
in this Citie, did diuers titnes take from thc blarket people pigs 
sterued,or otherwise vnholsome for man's sustenance, these they 
slit in the eare: one of the Proctors for saint Aztthonies tyed 
a Bell about the necke, and let it feede on the Dunguehils, no 
man would hurt, or take them vp, but if any gaue to them 
bread, or other feeding, such would they know, watch for, and 
dayly follow, whining till they had some what giuen them: 
whereupon was raysed a prouerbe, such a one will follow such 
a one, and whine as it were an Attthouic pig : but if such a pig 
grew to be fat, & came to good liking (as oft times they did) 
then the Proctor would take him vp to the vse of the 
Hospitall. 
In the yeare I499, sir Iohu Tare, sometime Alebrewer, then 
a Mercer, caused his t3rewhouse called the swan neere adioyn- 
ing to the sayd free Chappell, Colledge, or Hospitall of saint 
Att]touie, to be taken downe for the enlarging of the Church, 
which was then newly builded, toward the building whereof 
the said Tab" gaue [ great summes of money, and finished it 
in the yeare 5o. Sir Iibzz Tare deceased 54. and was 
there buried vnder a fayre monument by him prepared, 
Doctor ToErlcr m«ister of the Rois, and other. 



lf'alt«r Chamtk» Draper, one of the Shiriffes of I.ondon 
x5.9 . was buried there, and gaue to the Beadmen twentie 
pound. The landes by yeare of this Hospitall were valued in 
the 37- yeare of Henrie the eight to bee fiftie fiue pound, sixe 
shillings eight pence. 
One Iohnson (a Schoolemaster of the famous ffeescoole Schoole mas- 
there) became a Prebend of Windsor, and then by little and ter of S. An- 
thonies ruade 
little followed the spoyle of this Hospitall : he first dissolued Prebend of 
Windsore, 
the Quire, conueyed the plate and ornaments, then the bels, spoyled the 
and lastly put out the Aimes men from their houses, appoint- schoole and 
hospitall. 
ing them portions of twelue pence thc weeke to each (but now 
I heare of no such matter performed) their houses with other 
be letten out for rent, and the Church is a preaching place for 
the French nation. 
This Schoole was commaunded in the raigne of I-[cm 7 the 
sixt, and sithence also 1 aboue other, but now decayed, and 
corne to nothing, by taking that from it what thereunto 
belonged. 
Next is the parish Church of Saint IL'artholomczv, at the end Parish church 
of Bartlemew lane. Thomas Pibe Alderman, with the assist- of saint Bar- 
tholomew. 
ance of ATicholas lo, one of the Shiriffes of London, about 
the yeare x438. new builded this Church, Sir Iohn Fray knight 
was buried there, 3[argerie his daughter and heyre, wife to 
sir Iohn Lclington knight, founded there a Chauntery the -. 
of dzvard the fourth. tlderban a Gascoyne was buried 
thcre: sir Il'il. Caell Major, 5o9 . added vnto this Church 
a proper chappell on the South side thereof, and was buried 
there : sir Giles Cappell was also buried there : Iamcs llïlford 
Tayler, one of the shiriffes r499. appoynted by his Testament 
a Doctor of Diuinitie euerie good Fryday for euer, to preach 
there a Sermon of Christes passion, from 6. of the clocke, till 
8. before noone, in the said church. Io. ll'ilford marchant 
taller, Alderman, 544- sir Ianes ll'ilford, 155o. sir Gcorgc 
arne Maior,  55 ŒEE. Iohn i)ent, 3files merdale Bi. of Excester. 
Thomas 1)ancer & Annc his wife.[ 
Then lower downe towards the Stocks Market, is the parish Page 87 
Phrish chureh 
Church of Saint Christolh«r, but reedified of new: for Idichard of s. Christo- 
pher. 
 also] z59S 



An Alderman 
of London put 
to penance by 
the Clargie 
for wedding of 
a widow pro- 
fessed to 
chastitie. 

Scalding house 
or Sca!di:g 
wicke. 

Skor« one of the shiriffes x5o6. gaue money towards the 
building of the steeple. There lie buried Richard Skering/on, 
139. who gaue landes to that Church, the Ladie )fargaret 
Nford 4o6.2rokt Çlaterbg 4OEJ, who gaue lands therevnto, 
loku Gid»ry 1 Draper, Maior, 427. This Gidey a in the yeare 
J444- wedded the widdow of Robert Z.arge late Major, which 
widdow had taken the Mantell and ring, and the vow to liue 
chast to God tearme of her life, for the breach whereof, the 
marriage done they were troubled by the Church, and put to 
penance, both he and she. lVilliam Ifampto« Maior, 472. 
was a great benefactor, and glased some of the church win- 
dowes, sir IVilliam ifartb« Major, J492. Roger Ackley Major, 
5. hee dwelt in Cornehill warde, in a bouse belonging to 
Cobham Colledge, rented by the yeare 26. shillings, 8. pence, 
I¢obert Thorne Marchant Tayler, a Batchler, x532. he gaue by 
his Testament in charitie, more then 4445. pounds: lokn 
Norryholmc, Raflk Bat/e, Alice Perciua/1, Iane Drezo, lVilliam 
Borrcsbie, Iohn Broke, Rickard Stt/tot, lVillfant a/te, Ia»tes 
Il/e/l, tfctrie eachcr Alderman, x57o. 
West from this Church haue ye Skalding Alley, of old time 
called Scalding house, or Scalding wike, because that ground 
for the most part was then imployed by Poulterers that 
dwelled in the high streete, from the Stocks market to the 
great Conduit. Their poultrie which they sold at their stalles 
were scalded there, the street doth yet beare the naine 
of the Poultrie, and the Poulterers are but lately departed 
from thence into other streets, as into Grasse street, and the 
ends of saint Nicholas flesh shambles. This Skalding Wike 
is the farthest west part of Brodestreete warde, and is by the 
water called Walbrooke parted from Cheap ward : this Brode- 
streete warde bath an Alderman, with his Deputie, common 
Counsellors ten, Constables ten, Scauengers eight, Wardmote 
inquest thirteene, and a Beedle. It is taxed to the fifteene, in 
London at seuen and twentie pound, and accounted in the 
Exchequer after twentie fiue pound. I 

 Gidney] 1598; Godnay I6o 3 



Cor.eh/l! cw«t'e T87 

Cornehill warde Page ,8« THE next warde towards the south, is Cornehill warde, so Cornhill ward. 
called of a corne lffarket, rime out of minde there holden, and 
is a part of the principall high streete, beginning at the west 
end of Leaden hall, stretching downe west on both the sides 
by the south end of Finks lane, on the right hand, and by the 
North ende of ]3irchouers lane, on the left part, of which lanes, 
to wit, to the middle of them, is of this warde, and so downe 
to the Stockes market, and this is the bounds. The vpper 
or East part of this warde, and also a part of Limestreete 
warde, hath beene (as I saide) a market place, especially for 
Corne, and since for ail kinds of victuals, as is partly shewed 
in Limestreete warde. It appeareth of record, that in the yeare 
15oEoE. the Rippers of Rye and other places solde their fresh fish 
in Leaden hall lffarket, vpon Cornehill, but forraine Butchers 
were not admitted there to sell flesh, till the yeare 533. and 
it was enacted that Butchers should sell their bcefe not aboue 
a halfe pennie the pound, and mutton halfepennie halfe 
farthing: xvhich act being deuised for the great commoditie of 
the Realme (as it was then thought,) hath since proued farre 
other wayes, for before that rime a fat Oxe was solde at 
London, for sixe and twentie shillings eight pence, at the 
most, a fat Weather for three shillings foure pence, a fat Calfe 
the like price, a fat Lambe for twelue pencc, peeces of beefe 
weighed two pounds and a halfe, at the least, yea three pounds 
or betteq for a pennie on euerie Butchers stall in this Citie: 
and of those peeces of beefe thirteene or fourteene for twelue 
pence, fat Mutton for eight pence the quarter, and one hundred 
weight of beefe for foure shillings eight pence, at the dearest. 
What the price is now, I need hot to set downe, many men 
thought the same act to rise in price, by meane that Grasiers 
knewe or supposed what weight euery their beastes contained, 
and so raising their price thereafter, the ]3utcher could be no 
gayner, but by likewise raysing his price. The number of 
Butchers then in the Citie and suburbs, was accounted I slxe t'age r89 
score, of which euerie one killed 6. Oxen a peece weekely, 
which is in fortie sixe weekes. 3To. Oxen. or 72o. Oxen 

Fleshmarket 
at Leaden hall 
and alteration 
of prices in a 
short rime. 



88 Cr eh ill 'u.,a rde 

Standarde of 
Thames water 
by Leaden 
hall. 

The highest 
ground of the 
City of Lon- 
don. 

The Tunne 
vpon Cornhill 
a prison home 
for night 
walkers. 

Temporall 
men punish 
spirituall per- 
sons for 
incontinency. 
tage 19o 

weekly. The forrein Butchers fol" a long time stoode in the 
high street of Limestreete warde on the north side, twise euery 
weeke, vz. Wednesday, and Saturday, and were some gaine to 
the tenants before whose doores they stood, and into whose 
houses they set t:heir blockes and stalles, but that aduantage 
being espicd, they were taken into Leden hall, there to pay 
for their standing to the Chamber of London. This much 
for the Market vpon Cornehill. 
The chiefe ornaments in Cornehill warde are these. First 
at the East ende thereof, in the middle of the high streete, 
and at the parting of foure wayes, haue ye a water standard, 
placed in the yeare x582. in maner following. A certaine 
German named Peler 3Iorris, hauing made an artificial Forcier 
for that purpose, conueyed Thames water in Pipes of Leade, 
ouer the steeple of Saint 3[agm«s Church, at the north end 
of London bridge, and from thence into diuerse mens bouses 
in Thames street, new fish streete, and Grasse streete, vp to 
the northwest corner of Leaden hall, the highest ground of 
all the Citie, where the waste of the maine pipe rising into 
this standarde, (prouided at the charges of the Citie) with 
foure spoutes did at euery tyde runne (according to couenant) 
foure wayes, plentifully seruing to the commoditie of the 
inhabitants neare adioyning in their houses, and also cleansed 
the Chanels of the Stl'eete towarde Bishopsgate, Aldgate, the 
bridge, and the Stocks Market, but now no such matter, 
through whose default I know not. 
Then haue ye a faire Conduit, of sweete water, castellated 
in the middest of that warde and street. This Conduit was 
first builded of stone, in the yeare 1282. by Hen O, Il'ailes, 
Major of London, to be a prison for night walkers, and other 
suspicious persons, and was called the Tunne vpon Cornehill, 
because the same was builded somewhat in fashion of a Tunne 
standing on the one ende. 
To this prison the night watches of this Citie committed 
not onely night valkers, but also other persons, as well 
spirituall as temporall, whom they suspected of incontinencie, 
and punished I them according to the customs of this Citie, 
but complaint thereof being ruade, about the yeare of Christ 
'-'97. king Edward the first writeth to his Citizens thus. 



Comchil! w«rde 89 
lZdward by the grace of God, &c. \Vhereas lidard Graucs- 
ctd Bishop of London, bath shewed vnto vs, that by the 
great Charter of England, the Church hath a priuiledge, that 
no Clarke should be imprisoned by a lay man without out 
commandement, and breach of peace, which notwithstanding 
some Citizens of London vpon meere spite doe enter in their 
watches into Clarkes chambers, and like fellons carrie them 
to the Tunne, which H«urie le lValleys sometime Major built for 
night walkers, wherefore we will that this our commaundement 
be proclaymed in a full hoystings, and that no watch hereaher 
enter into any Clarkes Chamber, vnder the forfeyt of 2o. pound. 
Dated at Carlile the xS. of March, the OES. of our raigne. 
More, I reade that about the yeare of Christ x99. the 7. 
of Edward the first, certaine principall Citizens of London, 
to wit, T. Olattc, ichard Gloucestcr, Nichohs Faringdon, 
Adam Helhtffburic, T. SaO', Iohn Dmlstablc, Richard Ashy, 
loku lVadc and II'illiam Storord, brake vp this prison 
called the Tunne, and tooke out certaine prisoners, for the 
which they were sharpely punished by long imprisonment, and 
great fines. It cost the Citizens (as some haue written) more 
then oz. markes, which they were amerced in, before 
IVilliam dc Iarck Treasurer of the kings Echequer, to 
purchase the kings fauour, and confirmation of their liberties. 
Also that in the yeare x383. the seuenth of R#hard the . 
the Citizens of London, taking vpon them the rights that 
belonged to their Bishops, first imprisoned such women as 
were taken in fornication or aduouterie, in the saide Tunne, 
and after bringing them forth to the sight of the vorlde, they 
caused their heads to be shauen, after the maner of theeves, 
whom they named appellators, and so to be led about the 
Citie in sight of ail the inhabitants, with Trumpets and pipes 
unding before them, that their persons might be the more 
largely knowne, neither did they spare such kinde of men 
a whit the more, but vsed them as hardly, saying, they 
abhorred not onely the negligence of their Prelates, I but also 
detested their auarice, that studying for mony, omitted the 
punishment limitted by law, and permitted those that were 
found iltie, to liue fauourably in their sinne . Wherefore 
' by their fines 633 

The Bishop 
complaineth. 
The King for- 
biddeth the 
laytieto punish 
the Clargie 
laleIl. 

Citizens of 
London break 
vp the Tunne 
vpon Cornehil, 
take prisoners 
from thence, 
but are pun- 
ished for their 
fact. 

Th. Walsing. 

Citizens of 
London 
punished forni- 
cation & adul- 
terie in Priests 
and other 
without par. 
cialitie. 

Page z9t 



Priests ptm- 
ished in the 
Tunne vpon 
Comehill 
foreed fo for- 
sweare this 
Citie. 

A Priest pun- 
ished for 
lecherie. 

Pae 192 

19o Corlw/dl! warde 
they would themselues, they sayd, purge their Citie from such 
filthinesse, least through God's vengeance, either the pestilence 
or sworde should happen to them, or that 1 the earth should 
swallow them. Last of all to be noted, I reade in the charge 
of the Wardmote inquest in euerie warde of this Citie, these 
wordes. If there be any priest in seruice within the warde, 
which before time hath beene set in the Tunne in Cornehill 
for his dishonestie, and hath forsworne the Citie, all such shall 
be presented. Thus much for the Tunne in Cornehill haue 
I read. Now for the punishment of Priests in my youth, one 
note and no more. on Alzvod Draper, dwelling in the 
parish of Saint zl/[ic]mcll vpon Cornehill, directly against the 
Church, hauing a proper woman to his wife, such a one as 
seemed the holyest amongst a thousand, had also a lustie 
Chauntrie priest, of the sayd parish Church, repayring to his 
house, with the which Priest, the said Awod would sometimes 
affer supper play a game at Tables for a pint of Ale: it 
chanced on a time, hauing baste of worke, and his game 
prouing long, hee left his wife to play it out, and went downe 
to his shop, but returning to fetch a Pressing iron he round 
such play to his misliking, that he forced the Priest to leape 
out at a xvindow, ouer the Penthouse into the streete, and so 
to run to his lodging in the Churchyard. .4tzvod and his wife 
xvere soone reconciled, so that he would hot surfer ber to be 
called in question, but the Priest being apprehended, and 
committed, I saxv his punishment to be thus: he was on three 
Market dayes conueyed through the high streete and Markets 
of the Citie with a Paper on his head, wherein was written his 
trespasse : The first day hee rode in a Carry, the second on a 
horse, his face to the horse taile, the third, led betwixt twaine, 
and euery day rung with Basons, and proclamations ruade of 
his fact at euery turning of the streets, and also before [olzl 
AIwods stall, and the Church doore of his Seruice, where he 
lost his Chauntrie of 2o. nobles the yeare, and was banished 
the Citie for euer. 
By the west side of the foresayd prison then called the 
Tunne, was a faire Well of spring water, curbed round with 
hard stone: [ but in the yeare I4ol. the said prison house 
 that] that that z6o d 



called the Tunne, was ruade a Cesterne for sweet water, con- 
ueyed by pipes of lead from Tiborne, and was ri'oto thence- 
forth called the Conduit vpon Cornhill. Then was the well 
planked ouer, and a strong prison ruade of Tituber called 
a Cage, with a paire of stockes therein set vpon it, and this 
was for night walkers. On the top of which Cage was placed 
a Pillorie, for the punishment of Bakers offending in the 

A faire well in 
Cornhil. 
The tun vpon 
Cornhil ruade 
a Conduit of 
sweet water. 
Cage, stocks 
& pillorie in 
Comhill. 
I3akers, mil- 
lers, bawds, 

assise of bread, for Millers stealing of corne at the Mill, for scolds, and 
common iurors 
bawdes, scoulds, and other offenders. As in the yeare J468, for rewards, 
the 7- of Ed. the 4. diuerse tel'sons being common Iurors, p.unish..ed .on 
r _ the pitlorm. 
such as at assises were forsworne for rewards, or fauour of 
parties, were iudged to ride from Newgate to the pillorie in 
Cornehill, with Miters of paper on their heads, there to stand, 
and from thence again to Nevgate, and this iudgement was 
giuen by the Major of London. In the yeare I5c 9. the first 
of H«m'ie the 8. Darby, Smitk, and Simson, ringleaders of 
false inquests in London, rode about the Citie with their 
faces to the horse tailes, and papers on their heads, & were 
set on the pillorie in Cornhill, and after brought againe to 
Newgate, where they died for very shame, saith Robert 
Fabiatt. A ring leader of inquests, as I take it, is he that Ringleaders of 
making a gainefull occupation thereof, will appeare on Nisi inquests, will 
proffer their 
Prius's 1 or he be warned, or procure himselfe to be wamed, seruice, and 
. bend ettery 
to corne on by a talles. He wil also procure himselfe to oe way for gain. 
foreman, when he can, and take vpon him to ouerrule the Careful choice 
of Iurors is to 
re.st to his opinion, such a one shall be laboured by plaintiues be had, a man 

and defendants, not without promise of rewards, and therefore 
to be suspected of a bad conscience. I would wish a more 
carefull choyse of Iurors to be had, for I haue knowne a man 
carted, rung with basons, and banished out of Bishopsgate 
ward, and afterward in Aldgate ward admitted to be Constable, 
a grand Iuryman, and foreman of their Wardmote inquest, 
what I know of the like, or worse men, preferred " to the like 
offices, I forbeare to write, but wish to be reformed. 
The foresaid Conduit vpon Cornhill was in the yeare 147.5. 
inlarged by Robert 19tope, Draper, Major, that then dwelt in 
that warde, he increased the Cesterne of this conduit with an 
East end of stone, and castellated it in comely maner. 
t Nisi Prius's 1633 ; Iseprises 16o3  prefeled : proffered 16o3 

detected, and 
that had sworn 
foolishly 
against his 
brother, is hot 
to be admitted 
Il Coin IllOD_ 
Inror, neither 
butcher, nor 
surgeon, is to 
be admitted. 

Conduit vpon 
Comhil 
inlarged. 



The weyhouse 
or kings beam 
vpon Cornhill. 

Sir Thomas 
Loucl his gift 
fo the Grocers. 

The Bursc vp- 
on Cornehill, 
or the Royall 
Exchange. 
S,van Alley. 
New Alley. 
S.Christophers 
Alley. 
Householdes 
displaced for 
building ofthe 
Bursse. 
The Citie 
charged with 
buildings of 
the Bursse. 

In the yeare I546. sir :Iartiu Bowts lIaior, dwelling in 
Lomlbarde streete, and hauing his backe gate opening into 
Cornehill against the said conduit, minded to haue enlarged 
the cesterne therof with a west end, like as Robert Drope 
before had done toward the Est: view and measure of thc 
plot was taken for this worke, but the pillorie & cage being 
remoued, they" found the ground planked, and the well afore- 
said worne out of memorie, which well they reuiued and 
restored to vse, it is since ruade a pumpe, they set the Pillorie 
somewhat West from the Well, and so this worke ceased. 
On the North side of this strcete, fiom the Est vnto the 
West haue ye diucrse faire houses for marchants and other, 
amongst the which one large house is called the Wey house, 
where marchandizes brought from beyond the Seas, are to be 
weighed at the kings beame. This bouse hath a maister, and 
vnder him foure maister Porters, with Porters vnder them: 
they haue a strong cart, and foure great horses, to draw and 
carrie the wares from thc Marchants houses to the Beame, 
and backe againe: Sir Thomas Louell knight builded this 
house, with a faire front of Tenements towards the streete, 
all which hee gaue to the Grocers of London, himselfe being 
free of the Citie, and a brother of that companie. 
Then haue ye the said Finkes lane, the south end of which 
lane on both sides is in Cornehill warde. 
Then next is the Royall Echange, erected in the yeare 
566. after this order, vz. certaine houses vpon Cornehill, and 
the like vpon the backe thereof, in the warde of Brodestreete, 
with three Allies, the first called Swan Allie, opening into 
Cornehill, and second new Alley, passing throughout of 
Cornehill into Brodestreete warde, ouer against Saint B'ar- 
tholomcw lane, the third Saint Cbristo#wrs Alley, opening into 
Brodestreete warde, and into Saint Cltristo:hcrs parish, con- 
taining in ail fourscore housholds : were first purchased by the 
Citizens of London, for more then 353 . pound, and were solde 
for 478. pound, to such persons as should take them downe and 
carrie them thence, also the ground or plot vas ruade plaine 
at the charges of the Citie, and then possession thereof was 
by certaine Aldermen, in name of the whole Citizens, giuen to 
sir Thomas Grcsha»t knight, Agent to the [ Queenes High- 



Corte]till ward'e I93 
nesse, therevpon to build a ]3ursse, or place for marchants to 
assemble in, at his owne proper charges: and hee on the 
seuenth of Iune laying the first stone of the foundation, being 
t3ricke, accompanied with some Aldermen, euery of them laid 
a piece of Golde, which the workemen tooke vp, and forthwith 
followed vpon the saine with such diligence, that by the 
moneth of Nouember, in the yeare t567, the saine was couered 
with slate, and shortly after fully finished. 
In the yeare 157o. on the 23 . of Ianuarie, the Queenes 
Maiestie, attended with her Nobilitie, came from her house at 
the Strand called Sommerset house, and entered the citic by 
Temple Barre, through Fleetstreete, Cheape, and so by the 
North side of the I3urss through threeneedle streete, to sir 
T/wmas Grcs/ams in Bishopsgate streetc, where she dined. 
Af'ter dinner, her Maiestie returning through Crnehill, entered 
the Bursse on the southside, and after that she had viewed 
euery part therofaboue the ground, especially the Pawne, which 
was richly furnished with all sorts of the finest wares in the 
Citie: shee caused the same Bursse by an Herauld and a 
Trumpet, to be proclamed the R«9'al 7.r«/auge, and so to be 
called from thenceforth, and hot otherwise. 
Next adioyning to this Royall Exchange remaineth one The Bnrse 
called the 
part of a large stone house, and is now called the Castell Royall 
of such a signe, at a Tauerne doore there is a passage Exchauge. 
through out of Cornehill into Three needle streete, the other 
part of the said stone house was taken downe for enlarging 
the Royall exchange: this stone house was said ofsome to 
haue beene a Church, whereof it had no proportion, of others, 
a Iewes bouse, as though none but Iewes had dwelt in stone 
houses, but that opinion is without warrant : for besides the 
strong building of stone houses against the inuasion of Theeues 
in the night when no watches were kept, in the first yeare of 
Ricltard the first, to preuent the casualties of tire, which often The cause of 
 stone honses 
had happened in the Citie, when the houses were builded OIbuilde d iu 
Timber, and couered with Reed, or Straw, Iem7 Fit'llewi«e London. 
being Major, it was decreed that from hencefoorth no man 
should build within the Citie but of stone, vntill a certaine 
height, and to couer the saine building with slate, or burnt 
tile, and this was the verie cause of such stone buildings, 
I'OW. I O 

Queene Eliza- 
beth came to 
the Bursse. 



Yarish church 
of S. Yeter 
vpon Comhil. 

.'rchbihops 
of London 
hard to bee 
proued, and 
therefore hot 
tobe alïirmed. 

Libmry of S. 
Peters upon 
Cornhill, now 
a Grammar 
Schoole. 

Iohn Leyland. 

G rammar 
schooles com- 
maunded by 
parliamcnt. 

194 CoriLehil! warete 
whereof many haue remained I till out time, that for winning 
of ground they haue bin taken down and in place of some one 
of them being low, as but two stories aboue the ground, many 
houses of route or fiue stories high are placed. 
From this stone bouse down to the Stockes, are diuers large 
bouses especially for height, for marchants and Artificers. 
On the south side of this high streete is the Parish church 
of S. Peter vpon Cornehill, which seemeth to be of an ancient 
building, but hOt so ancient as faine reporteth, for it bath 
been lately repayred, if hot ail new builded, except the 
steeple, which is ancient: the roofe of this Church, and 
glasing was finishcd in the raigne of E. the fourth, as appear- 
eth by armes of Noble mon, and Aldermen of London then 
liuing: there remayneth in this Church a table wherein it is 
written, I know hot by what authority, but of a late hand, 
that king Lt«ci««s founded the saine church to be an Arch- 
bishops sea l'Ietropolitane, & chief church of his kingdom, 
& that it so endured the space of 4oo. years, vnto the coming 
of ttgttstill the Monk. 
loccliw of fftrm'is writeth that Thcau the first Archbishoppe 
of London in the raigne of Ltwitts, builded the said Church 
by the aide of Cirau chiefe Butler to king Ltwitts, and also 
that htantts the second Archbishop builded a Library to the 
saine adioyning, and conuerted many of the Druides, learned 
men in the Pagan law, to Christianity. True it is that a 
Library there was pertaining to this Parrish Church, of olde 
rime builded of stone, and of late repayred with bricke by the 
executors of Sir Ioha Crosby Alderman, as his Armes on the 
south end doth witnes. 
This Library bath beene of late rime, to wit, within these 
fifty yeares well furnished of bookes: Iohu Lç,laud viewed 
and commended them, but now those bookes be gone, and 
the place is occupied by a Schoolemaister, and his Usher, ouer 
a number of schollers learning their Grammar rules, &c. 
Notwithstanding before that time, a Grammer schoole had 
beene kept in this Parrish as appeareth in the yeare 425. 
I read that IvkuIVh#by was rector & Ioht Stcward school- 
maister there: and in the 25. of . the 6. it was enacted by 
Parliament, that foure Grammar schooles in London, should 



bee maintained, vz. In the parrishes of Allhallowes in Thames 
streete. Saint Andrcw in Oldbourne. S. leters vpon Cornehill. 
and Saint Thomas of Acars. I 
Monumentes of the dead in this Church defaced. I reade 
that ltoElt IVallkam, Nicholas lricol, Mercer, Alderman, 
Richard 2Ianltall, 150.3. |Villiam A'inffston, Fishmonger, gaue 
his tenements called the Horse mill in Grasse street to this 
church, and was there buried about the yeare 1298. Iokn 
VnisbTtit, Poultar, 4IO, Iohlt Lawe. Also Peter 271ason 
Taylor, gaue to this Church seauen pound starling yearely for 
euer, out of his Tenementes in Colechurch parrish, and de- 
ceased about the yeare 46. Iohn Fo.,:ton founded a Chauntrie 
there. A Brotherhoode of Saint fl'ctcr was in this Church 
established by Hem 7 the fourth, the fourth of his raigne. 
IVilliam tTraml)tou and IVilliam .4sbhaln, Fishmongers and 
.Aldermen, were chiefe procurers thereof for the Fishmongers. 
Of late buried there Sir lVilliam tTowier Mayor 1543. Sir 
tfcm 3' uberthrn Mayor, 546. Sir Cristopker _loricc 
Maister Gunner of England to king tfeÆ 7 the eight, 'dward 
Elriulon Esquier, chief Butler to E. the 6. Tkomas Gardener 
Grocer, & Iustice çmilk and other. Then haue ye the parish 
Church of S. JV[ichacll Tharchangel, for the antiquity wherof 
I find that .4hwthus the Priest gaue it to the _A_bbot and 
Couent of Eouesham,  c3,noM _A_bbot, & the Couent there 
did grant the same to çparling the Priest in all measureæ as 
he and his Predecessors belote had held it, to the which 
çerling also they graunted all their landes which they there 
had, except certaine landes which Orgar l« .Prowdc held of 
them, and payde two shillinges yearely, for the which graunt, 
the sayde çpcrIiug should yearely pay one Marke of rent to 
the sayde _A_bbot of Eouesham, and finde him and his lodging 
salt, water, and fier, when hee came to London, this was 
graunted 1133. about the 34. of lenry the first. Thus much 
for antiquity, of later time I find that Elizabetk .Peake, widdow, 
gaue the patronage or gift of this benefice to the Drapers in 
London, shee lycth buried in the ]3elfrey, I58. her monu- 
ment yet remayneth. This hath beenc a fayre and bewtifull 

Page 196 

 Eoucsham] L e. Evcsham: Covcsham edd 



Paï 97 

This was 
accounted thc 
best ring of 6. 
Belles to bec 
rung by 6 mon 
t bat was in 
England, for 
harmonye, 
sweetnes of 
sound & tune. 

i ,ightningsaud 
thunder with 
vgly shapes 
seen in Saint 
Michaels 
steeple. 
The pfiut of 
clawes to bee 
scene in hard 
tone. 

Pulpit Crosse 
in Povles 
church yearde 
ouer turned. 

I96 Cor,¢ehil! 7ewrde 
Church, but of late yeares since the surrender of their landes 
to Edward the sixt, greatly blemished by the building of 
fower Tenementes on the North side thereof towardes the 
highstreete, in place of a greene Churchyeard, whereby the 
Church [ is darkened and other wayes annoyed. The fayre 
new steeple or Bell Tower of this Church was begunne to bee 
builded in the yeare 14oEx. which being finished, and a fayre ring 
of fiue Belles therein placed, a sixt Bell was added and giuen 
by Io]u I l:lilwcll, Isabell his wife, and I I:illiam Rzts Alderman 
and Goldsmith, about thc yeare 43 
nightly at eight of the Clocke, and otherwise for Knelles, 
and in Peales, rung by one man, for the space of 6o. yeares, 
of late ouerhaylcd by foure or fiue at once, hath beene thrice 
broken, and new cast within the spacc of ten yeares, to the 
charges of that Parrish, more then oo. Markes. And here a 
Note of this Steeple, as I haue oft heard my-Father report, 
vpon S. Iatcs night, certaine men in the lofte next vnder the 
Belles, ringing of a Peale, a Tempest of lightning and Thunder 
did arise, an vglie shapen sight appeared to them, comming in 
at the south window, and lighted on the North, for fearc 
whereof, they all fell downe, and lay as dead for the rime, 
letting the Belles ring and cease of their owne accord: when 
the ringers came to themselues, they founde certaine stones of 
the North Window to bee raysed and scrat, as if they had been 
so much butter, printed with a Lyons clawe, the same stones 
were fastened there againe, and so remayne till this day. I 
haue seene them oft, and haue put a feather or small sticke 
into the holes, where the Clawes had entered three or foure 
inches deepe. At the saine time certaine maine timber postes 
at Queene Hith were scrat and cleft from the toppe to the 
bottome, and the Pulpit Crosse in Powles Churchyearde was 
likewise scrat, cleft, and ouer turned, one of the Ringers liued 
in my youth, whom I haue oft heard to verifie the same to 
bee true: but to returne, IVilliacz tzts ,,vas a speciall Bene- 
factor to this Church, his Armes yet remayne in the Windowes. 
IVilliam Coea'tot, Symot Snith, IValter lcletffltam were 
buried there, and founded Chaunteries there, [o]tu Grace 439. 
Robert 1)ro:e Mayor, buried on the North side the Quier 
vnder a fayre Tombe of Grey Iarble, 485. hee gaue to poore 



Cowehil! warde  97 
maidcs marriages of that parr[sh twenty pound, to poore ofthat 
Warde ten pound, shirtes and smockes 3oo. and gownes of 
broade cloath oo. &c. [ Iane his wife, matching with Edwm-d 
Gray, Vicecount Lisle, was buried by her first husband 5oo. 
she gane ninetie pound in money to the beautifying of that 
Church, and her great messuage with the appurtenance, which 
was by her Executors IV. Çaple and othcr 57 . the ninth of 
Hcnr, the eight, assured to lohu lVardroper, Parson, T. 
Clearke, IV. Dixsm«, and lohn _/lira.don \Vardens of the saide 
Church, and theyr successors for euer, they to keepe yearely 
for her an obite, or aniuersary, to bee spent on the poore, and 
otherwise, in all tbree pound, the rest of the profites to bee 
employed in reparation of the church. In the 34- yeare of 
Henry the eight Edward Stephan Parson, T. Spencer, P. 
Guntar and G. Cronch, 1 Churchwardens, graunted to 7". Lodge, 
a lease for 60 yeares of the saide great messuage, with the 
appurtenance, which were called the Ladie Lisles landes, for 
the rent of eight pound, thirteene shillinges, foure pence the 
yeare, the Parishioners since gaue it vppe as Chauntery land, 
and wronged themselues, also the saide Robert Drope and 
Lady Lisle (notwithstanding their liberality to that Church 
and Parrish) their Tombe is pulled downe, no monument 
remayneth of them. Peter Hawton late Alderman is laid in 
their vaulte, 59 6. Robert Fabian Alderman that wrote and 
published a Cronicle of England, & of France, was buried 
there, 5  . with this Epitaph. 
Like as t/te dal, his course dotlt consume, 
And thc new morrow springeth againe as fast, 
So man and eotatz by natures c¢tstoe, 
This lire to passe, at last in eartlt are cast, 
In ioy, and sorrow which ho'e tbeir rime do wast, 
Nener lu oue state, but in course Transito3,, 
So fnll of change, is of this world the Io7,. 
His monument is gone: Richard Garnam, 5z7. buried 
there, Edmond Triudlc, & Robert SmitA, ll'illiam Dicksou 
and .largaret his wife, buryed in the Cloyster vnder a fayre 
Tombe now defaced, Thomas Stow my Grandfather, about 

 G. Croudt] z6o3; E. Grou,k z633 

Page r9S 



.Pag'« «99 
John Tolu hi 
ft to the 
Chrch hot 
performed but 
eoncealed. 

Pulplt crosse 
in S. blichael 
churchyard. 

Math. c. S- 

Birchover 
lane. 

I98 Co«:e/:H! warate 
the yeare 5OE6. and Thomas Stow my father, L559. Iohn 
Tohts Alderman x548. he gaue to Iohu I.Villowby Parlson 
of that Church, to Thomas Lodge, G. ttiud, P. Bolcte, church- 
wardens, and to their successors towardes the reparation of 
that Church, and reliefe of the poore for euer, his tenement 
with the appurtenances in the parish of Saint [ichael, which 
hec had lately purchased of Ahter), landalp/z of lad[esncere 
in Kent : but the Parish neuer had the gift, nor heard thereof 
by the space of 4o. yeares af ter, such was the conscience of 
G. 17arue, and other the executors to conceale it to them- 
selues, and such s the negligence of the Parishioners that 
(being informed thereo 0 make no claime thereunto. ]ghilip 
Gouter that was Alderman for a rime, and gaue foure hundred 
pound to be discharged thereof, was buried in the cloyster, 
about the yeare 58z. and Aune his wife, &c. Tkomas 
I-IougMon father to the said Petcr I-Ioughton, Frmtcis Beueso#, 
and lVillia»t Towersou. 
This parish church hath on the southside thereof a proper 
cloister, and a fayre Church yard, with a Pulpit crosse, not 
much vnlike to that in ]gaules churchyard. Sir Iokt Rud- 
stone, Major, caused the saine Pulpit crosse, in his life rime 
to bee builded, the Church yarde to bee inlarged by ground 
purchased of the next parish, and also proper houses to be 
raysed, for lodging of Quire men, such as at that rime were 
assistants to diuine seruice, then dayly sung by noate, in that 
church. The said Iohz Rudstote deceased, I53. and was 
buried in a vault vnder the Pulpit crosse: hee appoynted 
Serinons to be preached there, not now performed: his 
Tombe before the pulpit crosse is taken thence, with the 
Tombe of Richard l'axley Doctor of Phisicke to king Henri« 
the eight, and other. The Quire of that Church dissolued, 
the lodgings of Quire-men were by the graue fathers of that 
rime charitably appoynted for receipt of auncient decayed 
parishioners, namely widowes, such as were hOt able to beaie 
the charge of greater renti abroade, which blessed worke of 
harbouring the harbourlesse, is promised to be rewarded in 
the kingdome of heauen. 
Then haue ye Burcheouer lane, so called of Eirchouer, the 
first builder and owner thereof, now corruptl¥ called Birchin 



Cor¢lehill warcte I99 
lane, the North halfe whereof is of the said Cornehill warde, 
the other part is of Langborne warde. [ 
This fane, and the high streete neare adioyning, hath beene l'age 
inhabited for the most part with wealthie Drapers, from Vpholders 
sellers of olde 
Birchouers fane on that side the streete downe to the Stockes : st,re in 
in the raigne of tfettrie the sixt, had yee for the most part Comehill. 
dwelling Fripperers or Vpholders, that solde olde apparell 
and housholde stuffe. 
I haue read of a Countrey man, that then hauing lost his 
hood in Westminster hall, found the same in Cornehill hanged 
out tobe solde, which he chalenged, but was forced to bu),, 
or goe without it, for their stall (they said) was their Market. 
At that time also the Wine drawer of the Popes head Tauerne 
(standing without the doore in the high streete) tooke the 
same man by the sleeue, and said, sir will you drinke a pinte 
of wine, whereunto hee aunswered, a pennie spend I ma),, and 
so drunke his pinte, for bread nothing did he pay, for that was 
allowed free. 
This Popes head Tauerne, with other houses adioyning, 
strongly builded of stone, bath of olde rime beene all in one, 
pertaining to some great estate, or rather to the king of this 
Realme, as ma), be supposed both by the largenesse thereof, The kings 
and by the armes, to wit, three Leopards passant, gardant, ho,se in 
Comehill, 
which was the whole armes of England before the raigne of 
Earward the thirde, that quartered them with the Armes of 
Fraunce, three Flower de £ uces. 
These Armes of England supported betweene two Angels, Arms of Eng- 
are faire and largely grauen in stone on the fore front towardes land supported 
by Angels. 
the high street, ouer the doore or stall of one great house, 
lately for man}, years possessed by M. Philip Gratter. The 
Popes heade Tauerne is on the backe part thereof towards 
the south, as also one other house called the stone house in 
Lombard streete. Some sa}, this was king Iohus house, 
which might be so, for I finde in a written copie of M'athcw 
Paris his historie, that in the yere I232. Iem-ie the third 
sent Iubert de Burgho Earle of Kent, to Cornehill in London, Hubert ae 
there to answere all matters obiected against him, where he Burgho Earle 
of Kent sent to 
wisely acquited himselfe. The Popes head Tauern hath a Corehin. 
foote way through, from Cornehill into Lombard streete. 

Popes heade 
Tauerne in 
Comehill. 
Wine one pint 
for a pennie, & 
bread giuen 
free. 



eoo C vw// /// "wa rdc 

The CrdiMs 
Ht Tueme. 

Langbome 
warde and 
Fennie about. 

Sharebome or 
southborne 
lane. 

Culuer Alley. 
Lane stopped 
Vpo 

Fen church 
streete. 

l'age 2oz 

Parish church 
of S. Mary, & 
S. Gabriel. 

And downe lower on the high streete of Cornehill, is there 
one olther way through by the Cardinals Hat Tauerne, into 
Lombard street. And so let this suffice for Cornehill warde. 
In which be Gouernors, an Alderman, his Deputie, common 
Counsellors foure, or sixe, Constables foure, Scauengers foure, 
Wardmote inquest sixteene, and a Beedle: it is charged to 
the fifteene at sixteene pound. 
Langborne warde, and Fennie about. 
LANGBORNE warde, so called of a long borne of 
sweete water, which of olde time breaking out into 
Fenclmrch streete, tanne downe the saine streete, and 
Lombard street, to the West end of S. 3la U, Woolnothes 
Church, where turning south, and brcaking into smal shares, 
rils or strcams, it left the naine of Share borne lane, or 
South borne lane (as I haue read) because it ran south to 
the Riuer of Thames. This Warde beginneth at the West 
ende of Aldgate warde, in Fennc church streete, by the Iron- 
mongers hall, which is on the North side of that streete, at 
a place called Culuer alley, where sometime was a lane, 
through the which mon went into Limestreete, but that being 
long since stopped vp for suspition of theeues, that lurked 
there by night, as is shewed in Limestreete warde, there is 
now this said alley, a tennis court, &c. 
Fenne-church streete tooke that naine of a Fennie or 
Moorish ground, so ruade by means of this borne which 
passed through it, and therfore vntill this day in the Guildhall 
of this citie, that ward [ is called by the name of Langbome, 
and fennie about and hot otherwise : yet others be of opinion 
that it tooke that naine of Faeuum, that is hey solde there, 
as Grasse street tooke the naine of Grasse or hearbes there 
solde. 
In the midst of this streete standeth a small parish Church 
called S. Gabricl Fenchurch, corruptly Fan church. 
t]elmitg Legget Esquire, by license of Edzvaî-d the third, in 
the 49. of lais raigne, gaue one tenement, with a curtelarge  
thereto belonging, and a Garden with an entrie thereto leading 
vnto sir Iobn Hariot parson of Fenchurch, and to his suc- 

' sfc L9 8, z6o3, z633 



Lagbore warde 2o[ 
cessors for euer, the house to be a Parsonage house, the garden 
tobe a churchyard, or burying place for the parish. 
Then haue ye Lombardstreete, so called of the Lon, çobards, 
and other Marchants, strangers of diuerse nations assembling 
there twise euery day, of what originall, or continuance, I haue 
not read of record, more then that dward the second, in 
the x oE. of his raigne, confirmed a messuage, sometime belong- 
ing to Robert Turke, abutting on Lombard streete toward the 
South, and toward Cornehill on the North, for the Marchants 
of Florence, vhich proueth that street to haue had the naine 
of Lombard street before the raigne ofclward the second. 
The meeting of vhich Marchants and others, there continued 
until the 22 of December, in the yeare, 1568. on the which 
day, the said Marchants began to make their meetings at the 
Bursse, a place then new builded for that purpose in the 
warde of Cornehill, and was since by her Maiestie, Queene 
liabeth, named the Royall Exchange. 
On the North side of this Warde, is Limestreete, one halfe 
whereof on both the sides is of this Langborne Warde, and 
therein on the West side, is the Pewterers Hall, which coin- Pewterers 
panie were admitted to bec a brotherhoode, in the 3- °fhall" 
Edward the fourth. 
At the Southvest corner of Limestreete, standeth a fayre 
Parish Church of Saint i)ionys called Backe church, lately 
new builded in the raigne of Henrie the sixt, Ioku tTugge 
Esquire was a great benefactor to that vorke, as appeareth 
by his armes three water Budgets, and his crest a Morians 
head, grauen in the stone work of the Quire, the vpper end on 
the north side, where he was ] buried. Also Iohn i)arloE e o 
Alderman, added thereunto a fayre Isle or Chapple on the 
Southside, and vas there buried, about the yeare 466. He 
gaue (besides sundrie ornaments) his dwelling house and 
others vnto the said church. The Ladie IVich widow to 
Huglt lVich, sometimes Major of London, was there buried, 
and gaue lands for Sermons, &c. Iohu [ascr Gentleman, 
was by his children buried there, I444, Thomas lritaine, 
Hcm'ic Trauers of Maidstone in Kent Marchant, 1501. Iohn 
17ond about 15o4. Robert Pagct marchant Tayler, one of the 
Shiriffes 536. Sir T]lotas Curtcis Pewterer, then Fish- 

I .ombard 
street so called 
before E. . 

Limestreet. 

Parish ehtrch 
of S. Dionis. 



The foure cor- 
nets, a place so 
called of foure 
wayes meet- 
ing. 
Parish church 
of Alhallowes 
in Lombard 
streete. 
Lib. Trinitate. 

Lombard 
street so called 
Page 204 

Parish church 
of S. Edmond 
in Lombard 
streete. 

202 Lm¢gbor¢¢e wartte 
monger, Maior, I557, Sir lames Iaruie Ironmonger, Maior, 
I58I. William tetersolt Esquire, William Skeriltgtm¢, Sir 
Edward Osboree Clothworker, Major, &c. 
Then by the foure corners (so called of Fen church streete 
in the East, Bridgestreete on the South, Grasse streete on the 
North and Lombard streete on the West.) In Lombard streete 
is one faire Parish church, called AlhaIlowes Grasse church in 
Lombard streete, I do so reade it in Euidences of Record, for 
that the Grasse lIarket went downe that way, when that 
streete was farre broder then now it îs, being streightened by 
incrochments. 
This Church waslately new buildcd. Iohu lI'arucr armorer, 
and then Grocer, Shiriffe, I494. builded the south Ile, his sonne 
iobert lVarer Esquire finished it, in the yere 516. The 
Pewterers were benefactors towards the north Isle, &c. The 
Steeple or Bell tower thereof was finished in the yeare 544. 
about the thirtie and sixt of Henrie the eight. The faire 
stone porch of this church was brought rioto the late dissolued 
Priorie of S. lokn of lertsalcm by Smithfield, so was the frame 
for their belles, but the belles being bought, were neuer brought 
thither, by reason that ine old lVm'»«r Draper, of that Parish 
deceasing, his sonne 3iarke IVartcr would not performe what 
lais father had begunne, and appoynted, so that faire steeple 
hath but one Bell, as Friers were wont to use. The monu- 
ments of this church be these. The said IVarners, and [ohn 
Wahhvt Draper. Next is a common Osterie for trauellers, 
called the George, of such a signe. This is said to haue per- 
teyned to the Earle Ferrers, and was his London lodging in 
Lombard street, and that in the yeare, i 175- a I brother of the 
said Earle, being there priuily slaine in the night, was there 
throwne downe into the dirtie streete, as I haue afore shewed 
in the Chapter of night watches. 
Next to this is the parish church of S. Edmotd the king 
and Martyr in Lombard street, by the south corner of Birch- 
ouer lane. 
This Church is also called S. Edmond Grasse church, because 
the said Grasse Market came downe so low. The monuments 
in this Church are these: Sir Ioht Milborte, Draper, Maior, 
deceased I535. buried there by Dame loat and Dame ]Plat- 



LanEborne OEe'arde 203 
garer hls wiues, vnder a tombe of Touch, ]tmfrcy ]eyford, 
Goldsmith, Malor, I477, Sir William Chestcr, Draper, Maior, 
I56o , with his wiues, amongst his predecessors, Sir Gcoe 
Barne, Major, 1536 , Al"atilde at Vine * founded a Chaunterie 
there, &c. 
From this Church downe Lombard streete, by Birchouers 
lane (the one halfe ofwhich lane is of this warde) and so downe, 
be diuerse faire houses, namely one with a verie faire forefront 
towards the streete, builded by sir 3[artin lowes Goldsmith 
since Maior of London, and then one other, sometime belong- Noble men of 
ing to lVillîam de la Pole Knight banaret, and yet the Kings this realme, of 
olde time, as 
marchant in the 4. of Edward the third, and after him to also oflate 
R/ h __ yearcs, haue 
./[ichacl de la Pole Earle of Suffolke, in the I4. of c m-a delt in mar- 
the second, and was his Marchants house, and so downe chandises- 
toward the Stocks Market, lacking but some three houses 
thereof. 
The Southside of this Ward beginncth in the East, at the 
chaine to be drawne thwart Mart lane, vp into Fen church 
street, and so West, by the North end of Minchen lane to 
S. _]hraarets Pattens street, or Roode lane, and down that 
street to the midway towards S. 2[ararets Church : then by 
Philpot lane, (so called of sir John Philpol that dwelled there, Philpot lane. 
and was owner thereof) and downe that lane some sixe or eight 
houses on each side, is ail of this warde. 
Then by Grasse Church corner into Lombard streete, to 
S. Clements lane, and downe the same to S. Clements church : s. Clements 
then downe S. Nicholas lane, and downe the saine to Saint lane. 
Nickolas church, and the same Church is of this ward. Then 
to Abchurch lane, and downe some small portion thereof: 
then down Sherborne lane, a part thereof, and a part of 
Bearebinder lane bee of this I warde : and then downe Loto- Page 
bardstreete to the signe of the Angell almost to the corner 
ouer against the Stockes market. 
On the Southside of this ward, somewhat within Mart lane, Pafish Chureh 
haue yee the Parish Church of Alhallowes, commonly called of Alhallowes 
Stane church. 
Stane Church (as may bee supposed) for a difference from 
other Churches of that name in this Citie which of old time 

t at Vine, oto. 633 



Crdoek 

Parish church 
of S. Nicholas 
1 lacon. 

.Page 206 

2o 4 La ybos'ne varde 
were builded of timber, and since were builded of stone. In 
this church haue beene diuerse fayre monuments of the dead, 
namely ofla]n Çastin, Girdler, a great benefactor : he deceased, 
oE44. His naine remaineth painted in the church roofe : if it 
had beene set in Brasse, it would haue beene fetched downe. 
He gaue out of certaine tenements to the poore of that parish, 
an hundred quarters of Charcoales yearely for euer. Sir Rabert 
Test knight of the holy Sepulchre, and Dame Ioan his wife, 
about 1486. Robert Sto«e, sir lohlt Stiward, and Dame Alice 
his wife, Iohn l¢ostockc Esquire, Christopber ttolt, sir Richard 
Tare knight, Ambassador to king ttenrie the eight, buried 
there, 1554. His monument remaineth yet, the rest being ail 
pulled downe, and svept out of the Church, the Church war- 
dens xvere forced to make a large account, l oE. shillings that 
yeare for Broomes, besides the carriage away of stone, and 
brasse of thcir owne charge. And here I ara to note, that 
being informed of the lVrithslcys to be buried there, I haue 
since found them and other tobe buried at S. Giles without 
Cripplegate, where I minde to lcaue them. 
By this Church sometime passed a lanc, called Cradocks 
lane, from Mart lane, winding by the North side of the said 
Church into Fen church streete, the which lane being 
streightned by incrochments, is now called Church alley. 
Then is the Parish church of Saint 1Vicholas Acon, or Hacon, 
(for so haue I read it in Recordes) in Lombardstreete. Sir 
lohn tTrhtges Draper, Major I520. newly repayred this church 
and imbatailed it, and was there buried : Francis 17oyer Grocer, 
one of the Shiriffes, was buried there 58o. with other of the 
17oycrs. So was Iuliat, wife to [okft Lantbart Alderman. 
Then is there in the high streete a proper parish Church of 
Saint l"V[arie Woolnoth, of the Natiuitie, the reason of which 
name I haue hot yet learned. This Church is lately new 
builded, Sir ttugh Brice [ Goldsmith, Major in the first yeare 
of ttcnric the seuenth, keeper of the kings Exchange at 
London, and one of the gouernors of the kings Mint in thc 
Tower of London, vnder bV7liam L. Hasthtgs, the fifth of 
Edward the fourth, deceased 496. He builded in this church 
a Chappell, called the charnell, as also part of the bodie of the 
Church and of the Steeple, and gaue money towarde the 



finishing thereof, besides the stone which he had prepared : 
hee was buried in the bodie of the Church, Guy tTricc or tToys 
was buried there, Dame loan vife to sir lVillia»z Peach, 
Thomas .ç«Z'et Draper, 396. he founded a Chanterie there, 
Simon Eyre 1459. he gaue the Tauerne called the Cardinals 
Hat in Lombardstreete, with a tenement annexed on the 
East part of the Tauerne, and a mansion behind the East 
tenement, togither vith an Alley from Lombard streete to 
Cornhill, with the appurtenances, all which were by him new 
builded, toward a brotherhoode of our Ladie in S. 
Woolnoths church. [obit [oagvr Pewterer, and Eutme his 
wife in saint [ohns Chappell: Sir [oku Pcrcittall Marchant 
tayler, laior. about 504, Thomas Roc, and .-lmh-czo .][ichacl 
Vinteners, and [oatz their wifc: l Villia»« Hilton Iarchant 
tayler, and tayler to king Hcur&" the cight, was buried there, 
I59 . Vnder the Chappell of S. G,wc, which Chappell was 
builded by Gcoc LtoEken, sometimc tayler to the Prince. 
Eobcrt Amades Goldsmith, toaster of the Kings iewels, Sir 
Martiu Bowcs Major, buried about 569. he gaue lands for the 
discharge of that Langborn ward, of all fifteenes to be granted 
to the king by l'arliament: Geae Haskcu, sir T]totas 
Ramscy late blaior, &c. Thus haue ye seuen Parish Churches 
in this ward, one Hall of a companie, diuerse faire houses for 
marchants, and other monuments none. It bath an Alderman, 
his Deputie, common Counsellors 8. Constables xS. Scauengers 
9. men of the Wardmote inquest t7- and a Beedle. It is 
taxed to thc fifteene in the Exchequer at 2.I. 9.s. 8.d. [ 

Langborne 
ward dis- 
charged of 
fifteens. 

Billinsgate warde 
]ILLINGSGATE WARD, beginnetb, at the west ende of 
Toverstreete varde in Thames streete about Smarts Key, 
and runneth downe along that streete on the southside to 
saint ,}[agmts Church at the Bridge foote, and on the North 
side of the said Thames street, from ouer against Smarts Key, 
till ouer against the north west corner of saint Iaguzts Church 
aforesayd : on this north side of Thames streete is saint 3Iari« 
Hill fane, vp to saînt 2[argarets Church, and then part of 

]3illinsgate 
warde. 



Smarts key. 
Billinsgate. 

Customes of 
]3illinsgate. 

Sommcrs kcy. 
Lion key. 

Buttolphs 
wharfe. 

206 Billinsga/e warde 
saint Marffarets Pattens streete, at the ende of saint Marie hill 
lane: Next out of Thames streete is Lucas lane, and then 
Buttolph lane, and at the North end thereof Philpot lane, then 
is Rother lane, of olde time so called, and thwart the saine lane 
is little Eastcheape, and these be the bounds of Billinsgate 
warde. Touching the principall ornaments within this ward. 
On the south side of Thames streete, beginning at the East 
ende thereof, there is first the saide Smarts Key, so called of 
one 3"mart sometime owner thereof, the next is Belinsgate 
whereof the whole warde taketh naine, the which (leauing out 
of the fable thereof, faigning it to be builded by King Teliue 
a Briton, long belote the incarnation of Christ) is at this 
present a large Watergate, Port or Harbrough for shippes 
and boats, commonly arriuing there with fish, both fresh and 
salt, shell fishes, salt, Orenges, Onions, and other fruits and 
rootes, wheate, Rie, and graine of diuers sorts for seruice of 
the Çitie, and the parts of this Realme adioyning. This gate 
is now more frequented then of olde time, when the Queenes 
tIith was vsed, as being appointed by the Kings of this Realme, 
to be the speciall or onely port for taking vp of all such kind 
of marchandises brought to this CRie by strangers and 
Forrenners, and the draw bridge of tituber at London bridge 
was then to be raised or drawne vp for passage of ships with 
tops thither. [ 
Touching the auncient customes of Belinsgate in the raigne 
of Edward the third, euerie great ship landing there, payd for 
standage two pence, euery little ship with Orelockes a penny, 
the lesser boate called a Battle a halfepenny : of two quarters 
of corne measured, the king was to haue one farthing, of a 
Combe of corne a pennie, of euery weight going out of the 
Citie a halfepennie, of two quarters of sea coale measured a 
farthing, and of euery Tunne of/kle going out of England 
beyond the seas, by Marchant strangers foure pence, of euery 
thousand Herring a farthing, except the franchises, &c. 
Next to this is Sommers key, which likewise tooke that 
naine of one .Sommer dwelling there, as did Lion key of one 
Lion owner thereof, and since of the signe of a Lion. 
Then is there a faire Wharfe or Key, called Buttolphes gate, 
by that naine so called in the times of Villiam the Conqueror, 



Billiltsga/e rvarctc 207 
and of Edward the Confessor, as I haue shewed alreadie in 
the description of the Gares. 
Next is the parish Church of Saint Buttolphs, a proper 
church, and hath had many fayre monuments therein, now 
defaced and gone: notwithstanding I find by Testimonies 
abroad, that these were buried there, to wit, Roger Coffgar, 
1384. Audrew Pikcman, and Ioan his wife, I39I. Nicholas 
Iantes Ironmonger, one of the Shiriffes, I4OE3. IVilliam Rain- 
wcll, Fishmonger, and Iohn Rainwdl his sonne, Fishmonger, 
Major, 14OE6. and deceasing 144.5. buried there with this 
Epitaph. 
Citizcns of L ondon, call fo yom- rcmcmbrancc, 
The ramons Iohn tïaiwell, somctime your 3Iaivr, 
Of thc StaOlc of Callis, so was his ckancc. 
Hcrc lictk uow his Corps, his soule brighl and fah-c, 
[s takcn lo lwaucns blisse, tkcreof is uo dispairc. 
His acts bcarc wilncs, by maltcrs of rccordc, 
Hozc, charitablc he was, and of what accordc, 
No man bath bccne so beucficiall as hec, 
Vnto tke Citie in gittittg libcralli«, &c. 
He gaue a stone house to bee a Reuestrie to that Church for I 
euer: more, he gaue landes and Tenements to the vse of the 
Comminaltie, that the Major and Chamberlaine should satisfie 
vnto the discharge of all persons, inhabiting the wards of 
Belinsgate, Downegate, and Aldgate, as oft as it shall happen 
any fifteene, by Parliament of the king to be graunted, also 
to the Exchequer in discharge of the Shirîffes, ten pound 
yearely, which the shiriffes vsed to pay for the Farme of 
Southwarke, so that all men of the Realme, comming or 
passing with carriage, should be free quitted and discharged 
of all Toll and other payments, afore time claimed by the 
shiriffes. Further, that the Major and Chamberlaine shall 
pay yearely to the shiriffes eight pound, so that the said 
shiriffes take no maner Toll or money of any person of this 
Realme, for their goodes, Marchandizes, victuals, and carriages 
for their passages at the great gate of the Bridge of the Citie, 
nor at the gate called the draw Bridge, &c. The ouerplus of 
money comming of the said lands and Tenements, deuided 

Parish church 
of $. Buttolph. 

lohn Rainwel 
his opinion. 

t'age 209 
Billinsgat¢ 
ward, I)own- 
gate ward, and 
Aldgate ward, 
discharged of 
all fifteenes. 



Thé number 
of strangcrs 
lately in- 
creaed in thi 
Citie. 

Bosse Alley 
and the Bo»se 
of Billinsgatc. 

. Mary hi]l 
lane. 

Parish church 
of S. Mary 
bill. 

2o8 tillinsgate wa rde 
into euen portions, the one part to bee imployed to instore 
the Grayners of the Citie with Wheate for the releefe of the 
poore Comminaltie, and the other moytie to cleare and clense 
the shelues, and other stoppages of the riuer of Thames, &c. 
Stcph¢n Farstar Fishmonger, Maior in the yeare 454- and 
Dame Agites his wife, lie buried there. IVilliam 
Haberdasher, one of the Shiriffes, 48o. was there buried, 
besides many other persons of good worship, whose monu- 
ments are al destroyed by bad and greedy men of spoyle. 
This parish of saint Buttolp/z is no great thing, notwith- 
standing diuerse strangers are there harboured, as ma¥ appeare 
by a presentment, hot many yeres since ruade, of strangers 
inhabitants in the warde of Billinsgate in these wordes. In 
Billinsgate warde were one and fiftie housholds of strangers, 
whereof thirtie of these housholdes inhabited in the parish of 
saint 17uttolpk in the chiefc and principall houses, where they 
giue twentie pounde the yeare for a bouse lately letten for 
foure markes: the nearer they dwell to the watcr side, the 
more they giue for bouses, and within thirtie yeares before 
there was hOt in the whole wardc aboue three Netherlanders, 
at which rime there was within the said parish leuied for the 
helpe of the poore, seauen and twentie pound by the yeare, 
but since they came so plentifully thither, there cannot bee 
gathered aboue eleuen pound, for the stranger will not con- 
tribute to such charges as other Citizens doe. Thus much for 
that south side of this warde. 
On the North side is Bosse Alley, so called of a Bosse of 
spring water continually running, which standeth by Billins- 
gare, against this Alley, and was sometimes ruade by the 
Executors of Richard IVhittiugton. 
Then is saint 3[arie hill lane, which runneth vp North from 
Billinsgate, to the end of S. 3[argaret _Patlcns, commonly 
called Roodc lane, and the greatest halfe of that lane is also 
of Belinsgate warde. In this saint 3[arie hill lane is the faire 
parish church of saint 3Iary called on the hill, because of the 
ascent from Billinsgate. 
This Church hath beene lately builded, as may appeare by 
this that followeth. Richard 1-)'ackney one of the shiriffes in 
thc yeare I3,. and tlice his wife were there buried, as Robcrt 



l?illi, s g [e "zoa rde 9.0 9 
Fabfalt writeth, saying thus. In the yeare 1497. in the 
moneth of Aprill, as Labourers digged for the foundation of a 
wall, within the Church of saint l"arfe hill neare vnto 13elins- 
gate, they round a coffin of rotten tituber, and therein the 
Corps of a woman whole of sknne, and of bones vndeseuered, 
and the ioyntes of her armes plyable, without breaking of the 
skinne, vpon whose sepulchre this was engrauen, [[ere lieth 
the bodies of Richard Hackze 3, t;ïshtotger, and Alice his 
The which Richard was shiriffe in the fifteenth of Ede,ard the 
second, ber bodie was kept aboue grounde three or foure 
dayes without noysance, but then it waxed vnsauorie, and so 
was againe buried. Iohlz dVdordatt stockefishmonger was 
buryed there, 1387. Nicholas Extot Fishmonger, Major, 
1387, lVilliam Cambridge Major, I42O. Richard Gosliz 
shiriffe, x4oE. IVilliam Phillip Sergeant at Armes, 473, 
Robert Reuell one of the shiriffes, x49 o. gaue liberally towarde 
the new building of this Church, and steeple, and was there 
buried, lVilliam Rc»titgton Major, I5oo. sir Tho»tas Blanke, 
Major, I58, IVillia»t I-dolstocke Esquire, Controller of the 
Queenes * shippes, sir Cutbcrt Buckle Major, x594. [ 
This lane on both sides is furnished with many fayre bouses t'age et, 
for Marchantes, and bath at the North end thereof, one other 
lane called S. d[argaret Pattens, because of olde rime Pattens $. Margaret 
were there vsually ruade and sold : but of latter time this is PattensU lane 
called Roode lane, of a Roode there placed, in the Church- 
yeard of Saint dIargaret, whilest the olde Church was taken 
downe, and againe newly builded, during which rime the 
oblations ruade to this Roode, were imployed towardes 
building of the Church, but in the yeare 538. about the 3. 
of May in the morning the sayde Roode was found to haue 
beene in the night preceding z (by people vnknown) broken 
ail to peeces, together with the Tabernacle, wherein it had 
beene placed. Also on the 7. of the saine moneth, in the 
saine parish amongst the Basketmakers, a great and sudden Fire in Rode 
tire happened in the night season, which within the space oflane" 
three howres consumed more then a dozen houses, & nine 
t Queenes] kings z598, z6o3 
• Pattens] Patents r59o°; patentes r6o 3 
s preceding] proceeding I59 v, z6o3 
STOW. I P 

Alice Hack- 
ney found vn- 
corrupted more 
then IOO yeres 
af ter she was 
buried. 

Parish church 
of S. Margaret 
Pattens." 



Rope |ane or 
I.ucas lane. 

Parish church 
of S. Andrew 
Hubbert. 

Parish chtarch 
of S. George, 
Btattolph lane. 

Rother lane or 
Red rose lane. 

2IO 17illiezs.«a/e w«i«te 
persons were brcnt to death there, and thus ceased that worke 
ofthis Church, being at that time nigh finished to the steeple. 
The fane on both sides beyond the saine church to the mid- 
way towardes Fenchurch streete is of ]3ellinsgate warde. 
Then againe out of Thames streete, by the west end of 
Saint ]Vl"ary hill Church, runneth vp one other Lane, of old 
rime called Roape Lane, since called Lucas lane, of one Lucas 
owner of some part thereof, and now corruptly called Loue 
Lane, it runneth vp by the east end of a parish church of 
saint tndrew l-ubbert, or Saint tndrew in East Cheape: 
This Church and all the whole Lane called Lucas lane is of 
this Belinsegate Warde. 
Then haue yee one other lane out of Thames streete, called 
Buttolph Lane, because it riseth ouer against the Parrish 
Church of S. Buttolph, and runneth vp North by the east end 
of S. Georges Church, to the West end of S. ,4ndrowes church, 
and to the south end of Philpot lane. 
This Parrish Church of S. George in Buttolph fane is small, 
but the Monuments for two hundred yeares past are well pre- 
serued from spoyle, whereof one is of _/Idam amme Mayor 
x397. Richard amme Esquier, his sonne of Gillingkam in 
Kent, I45OE. Ioh IValton Gentleman I4Ot. l'arpor a Gentle- 
man, 4oo. ]ohn Saint ]ohn Marchant of Leauaunt, and ] 
,4gnes his wife, 14oo./rugh Spencer Esquier, 44. IVilliam 
Combes Stockfishmonger, one of the Shiriffes, a45- who gaue 
forty pound towardes the workes of that Church. ]okn Stokar 
Draper one of the Shiriffes, 477. lickard 1)îT,laud Esquier. 
and ]7atherine lais wife, Daugbter to 2lçorrice t?rtme Knight of 
South Ockendon in Essex , Steward of Itousholde to t-]'umfrey 
Duke of Glocester, 1487, Nicholas Partrich one of the 
Shiriffes, 519 . in the Churchyeard, IVilliam [;ormau Mayor, 
538. Iamcs ][moEordc Esquier, Surgeon to King He-try the 
eight, buried 1544, Thomas Gaffe Haberdasher, i34o. Nicholas 
l l'ilford Marchant Taylor and Eliabeth his wife, about the 
yeare 1551. Edward Ifeyward 1573, &c. Roger Delakcre, 
founded a Chauntrie there. 
Then haue yee one other fane called Rother Lane, or Red 
Rose Lane, of such a signe there, now commonly called 
t South Ockendon] : Southuckenton z6o 3 



Pudding Lane, because the Butchers of Eastcheapc haue their 
skalding House for Hogges there, and their puddinges with 
other filth of Beastes, are voided downe that way to theyr dung 
boates on the Thames. 
This Lane stretcheth from Thames streete to little Easte 
Cheape chiefly inhabited by Baskelmakers, Turners and 
Butchers, and is ail of Billinsgate Warde. The Garland in 
little East Cheape, sometime a Brewhouse, with a Garden on 
the backside, adioyning to the Garden of Sir [ohu Philpot, 
was the chiefe bouse in this Est Cheape, it is now diuided 
into sundry small tenements, &c. 
This Warde hath an Alderman and his Deputie, common 
Counsellors (seuen) 1, Constables eleuen. Scauengers sixe, for 
the Wardmote inquest foureteene and a Beadle, it is taxed to 
the fifteen in London at 3-'- pound, and in the Exchequer at 
one and thirty pound, ten shillings. ] 

Bridge warde within 
]RIDGEWARD vithin, so called of London Bridge, which 
Bridge is a principall part of that Ward, and beginneth at the 
stulpes on the South end by Southwarke, runneth along the 
Bridge, and North vp Bridgestreete, commonly called (of 
the Fishmarket) New Fishstreete, from Fishstreete hil, vp 
Grasse streete, to the North corner of Grasse church, all the 
Bridge is replenished on both the sides with large, fayre 
and beautifull buildinges, inhabitants for the most part rich 
marchantes, and other wealthy Cittizens, lIercers and Haber- 
dashers. 
In new Fishstreete bee Fishmongers and fayre Tauernes 
on Fishstreete bill and Grassestreete, men of diuerse trades, 
Grocers and Haberdashers. 
In Grassestreete haue yee one fayre Conduit of sweete 
water castellated with crest and vent, ruade by the appoynt- 
ment of Thomas IJill Blayor, 484. who gaue by his testament 
one hundred markes, towardes the conuayance of water to 
this place. It was begun by his Executors in the yeare 49. 
and finished of his goods whatsoeuer it cost. 
1 blank in z59S, z6o3 

13ridgewarde 
within. 

Bridge streete 
or new Fish- 
street. 

Water Con- 
duit in Grasse- 
streete. 



Parish church 
of S. Magnus. 

Page az 4 

Parish church 
of S. Margaret 
vpon fish street 
MIL 

Parish church 
of S. Leonarde 
Milke church. 

j * • 
On the East side of this Bridge warde, haue yee the tayre 
Parrish Church of S. dfaffmts, in the which church haue beene 
buried many men of good Worship, whose monumentes are 
now for the most part vtterly dehced. I find Iohn htud 
Mayor,  307 . cmy ]reude Flemason to . 3 Richard the 2. 
& Hcu7, the 4. who deceased I4O. his Monument yet re- 
mayneth. IVilliam Bramtou, Iohn A[ichdl Mayor, I436. 
Iohn French, Baker, rman of the Crowne to Henry the 7- 
5IO. Roberlc Clarke Fishmonger ISoEi. Richard T«trke one of 
the Shiriffs  549. JVilliam Sccdc Alderman, Richard A[orffan 
Knight, chiefe Iustice of the common pleas , 556. AIauritius 
Greth Bishoppe of Rochester, I559. Robcrt lanch Girdler 
x567. Robcrt elffrate Girdler, IVilliam ramG Iohn Cocher 
Fishmonger, Alderman, who was put by his turn of Mao-[ 
raltie, 584. Sir IVilliam Garrard Haberdasher, Mayor x555. 
a graue, sober, wise and discreete Cittizen, equall vith the best, 
and inferior to none of our rime, deceased I57X. in the parrish 
of S. Christoher, but was buried in this Church of Saint 
Magnus as in the parrish where he was borne, a fayre monument 
is there raysed on him: Robert Harditff Salter, one of the 
Shiriffs x568. Simon Low Marchant Taylor, Esquier, &c. 
Then is the parrish Church of S. 31argarct on Fishstreete 
hill, a proper Church, but monumentes it bath none: a foot 
way passeth by the south side of this Church, from Fishstreet 
bill into Rother lane. 
Vp higher on this bill, is the parrish Church of Saint 
Leonard Milke Churche, so termed of one IVilliam A[elker, 
an especiall builder thereof, but commonly called Saint 
Leonardes in East Cheape, because it standeth at East Cheape 
corner. Monumentes there bee of the Dogets, namely, 
Haler Doggct Vintner, one of the Shiriffes, 38o. Iohn 
Dogget Vintner and dllice his wife, about 456. this Iohu 
Dogget gaue lands to that Church, IVilliam Doggc?, &c. 
This Church, and from thence into little East Cheape to 
the east end of the saide Church, is of the Bridge Warde. 
Then higher in Grasse streete is the parrish Church of 

Bridge warde within] : /5/. z14- 7 in error Billinsgate warde x6o 3 
pleas] place 1598 , 16o 3 



tridge warde wilhbz zI 3 
Saint Eennet, called Grasse Church, of the Herbe market 
there kept : this Church also is of the Bridge Warde, and the 
farthest North end thereof: some Monumentes remayne there 
vndefaced, as of IohuHarding Saltar, 1576. [ohn Slnrgeon 
Haberdasher, Chamberlaine of London, Philip Cushcn Floren- 
tine, a famous marchant, i6oo. 
The Customes of Grasse church market, in the raigne of customesof 
dward the third, as I haue reade in a Booke of Customes, C,rse bteet 
market. 
were these: Euery Forren Cart laden with corne, or Maulte, 
comming thether to bee sold, was to pay one halle peny, euery 
Forren cart bringing cheese two pence, euery cart of corne 
& cheese together, (if the cheese be more worth then the 
corne) two pence, and if the corne bee more worth then the 
cheese, it was to paye a halle peny, of two horses laden with 
corne or malte, the Bayliffe had one Farthing, the cart of the 
Franchise of the temple and ] of Saint 2[artins lc grand, payed I-'ag« , 
a Farthing: the cart of the Hospitall of Saint Iohu of [crlt- 
salera paid nothing for their proper goods, and if the corne 
were brought by Marchants to sel againe, the load paid a 
halfepennie, &c. 
On the west side of this ward, at the north end of London 
bridge is a part of Thames stl'eete, which is also of this warde, 
to wit, so much as of old rime was called Stockefishmonger 
Row, of the stockefishmongers dwelling there, downe west to 
a water gare, of old rime called Ebgate, since Ebgate lane, 
and now the olde swan, which is a common stayre on the 
Thames, but the passage is very narrow by meanes of en- 
crochments. On the South side of Thames streete, about the 
midway betwixt the bridge foote, and Ebgate lane, standeth 
the Fishmongers hall, and diuerse other fait houses for 
marchants. 
These Fishmongers were sometimes of two seuerall compa- 
nies, to wit, Stockefishmongers, and Saltfishmongers, of whose 
antiquitie I reade, that by the naine of Fishmongers of 
London, they were for forestalling, &c. contrarie to the lawes 
and constitutions of the Citie, fined to the king at 5co. 
markes, the 8. of king Fdward the first. More, that the 
said Fishmongers, hearing of the great victorie obtained by 
the same king against the Scots, in the 26. of his raigne, made 

Grasse church 
of S. Benet. 
Grasse church. 

Fishmongers 
hall, 

Antiquities of 
the fishmon- 
gers, 1290. 

Thames 
streete. 
Stockfish- 
monger row. 
Ebgate lane. 



A triumphant 
shew ruade by 
the fishmon- 
gers for victo- 
rie of the king. 

l"ishmongers 
had six hais in 
London. 
Fishmongers 
sixe of them 
Maiors in -4. 
yeares. 

Fishnongers 
for their grete- 
tings enuicd of 
the other 
companics. 

l'agc z16 

Nicholas 
Exton tor the 
l'ïshmongers 
craued the 
kings protec- 
tion. 

lohn Cauen- 
dish craued 
the peace 
against the 
Chancellor, 
chalengeth 
him for taking 
of a bribe. 
Fishrnongers 
by Parliament 
restored to 
their liberties. 

a triumphant and solemne shew through the Citie. with 
diuerse Pageants, and more then oo. horsemen, &c. as in the 
Chapter of sports and pastimes. These two companies of 
Stockcfishmongers and Saltfishmongers, of old rime had their 
seuerall Hals, to wit, in Thames streete twaine, in newe Fish- 
streete twaine, and in olde Fishstreete twaine : in each place 
one for either companie, in ail sixe seuerall halles, the com- 
partie was so gl'eat, as I haue read, and can proue by Recordes. 
These Fishmongers hauing beene iolly Citizens, and sixe 
Maiors of their companie in the space of 4- yeares, to wit, 
Il'alto- Turkc, 135o. Iob L@in, 359. Iolat lVroth, 36. 
gobez Pcchic, 362. Sizou Alord¢z, 369 • and ll'iffiam ll'al- 
worlh, 374- It followed that in the veare 38oE. through the 
counsell of John Arortbamtou Draper thon being Maior, 
1Villiam 'ssca', fihz ,'1lofe Mcrcer, and l?icbard 2Vorl]zbltric, 
the sayde Fislunongers were greatly troubled, hindered of 
their libertics, [ and ahnost destroyed by congregations ruade 
against thcm, so that in a Parliamcnt at London the con- 
trouersie depending betweene the Maior and Alderxnen of 
London, and the Fishxnongers there, A%holas E.rton speaker 
for the Fishmongers, prayeth the ldng to receiue him and his 
companie into his protection, for feare of corporall hurt. 
Wherevpon it was commanded, either part to keepe the peace, 
on painc of loosing ail they had. Iterevpon a Fishmonger 
starting vp, replyed that thc complaint brought against thcm 
by the moouers, &c. was but marrer of malice, for that the 
Fishmongers in the raigne of Edward thc third, being chiefe 
oNccrs of the Citic. had for their misdemeaners then done, 
committed the chiefc exhibitors of those petitions to prison. 
In this parliament, the Fishmongers by the kings Chartar 
patents were restored to thcir liberties : notwithstanding in the 
ycare next following, to wit,  383. lohz Caucudisk Fishmonger, 
craueth the peace against the Chauncellor of England, which 
was granted, and he put in sureties, the Earles of Stafford and 
Salisburie, Cauczdish chalengeth the Chauncellor for taking 
of a bribe of ten pound for fauour of his case, which the 
Chauncellor by oath vpon the Sacrament auoydeth. In further 
triall it vas found that the Chauncellors man without Iris 
maisters priuitic had taken it. Whereupon Caueudish was 



adiudged to prison, and to pay the Chauncellor ieee. Markes 
for slandering him. 
After this many of the Nobles assembled at Reding, to 
suppresse the seditious sturs of the said Iohn Nor/hampton or 
Combarton, late Major, that had attempted great and heynous 
interprises, of the whîch he was conuict, and when he stoode 
mute, nor would vtter one worde, it was decreed, that hee 
should be committed to perpetuall prison, his goods confiscate 
to the kings vse, and that he should not corne within one 
hundred mlles of London during his life. He was therefore 
sent to the Castell of Tintegall in the confines of Cornewall, 
and in the meane space the kinges seruants spoyled his 
goodes. John A[ore, Richard Northbery, and other, were 
likewise there conuict, and condemned to perpetuall prison, 
and their goods confiscate, for certaine congregations by them 
made against thc Fishlnongers in the Citie of London, as is 
aforesayd, but they obtained and had the kings pardon, in the 
4. [ of his raigne as appeareth of Record, and thus was ail 
these troubles quieted. Those Stockfishmongers, & Saltfish- 
mongers, were vnited in the year I536, the .8. of ]-tcnric the 
cight, their bal to be but one, in the house giuen vnto them by 
sir John Coruwall, Lord Fanhope, and of Ampthull, in the 
parish of saint A[i«hael Dt Crooked lane, in the raigne of 
llenric the sixt. Thus much haue I thought good to note of 
the Fishmongers, men ignorant of their Antiquitics, not able 
to shew a reason why, or when they were ioyned in amitie 
with thc Goldsmiths, do giue part of their armes, &c. Neither 
to say ought of sir IVilliam IVaheorth, the glorie of their 
companie, more then that he slue [ackc Straw, which is a 
meere fable, for the said Straw was after ouerthrown of the 
Rebels, taken, and by iudgement of the Maior beheaded, 
whose confession at the Gallowes is extant in my Annales, 
where also is set down the most valiant, and praise-worthie 
act of IVilliam IValworlh, against the principall rebell Waltar 
TiffMar. _As in reproofe of IValworths monument in Saint 
Jffichads Church I haue declared, and wished to be reformed 
there, as in other places. 
On that south side of Thames streete, haue ye Drinkwater 
warfe, and Fish Wharfe in the parish of saint A[agmt«. On 

Principall 
aduersaries to 
the Fishmon- 
gers con- 
denmed to 
perpetuall 
prison. 

Patent. 

gage ..'z 7 

Stock fishnloll- 
gers and Salt- 
fishmongers 
vnited. 
Sir Iohn Corn- 
wall created 
baron lm - 
hope the 6. of 
II. the 6. 
.Fishrnongers 
oyned in 
arnitiewith the 
Goldsmiths. 
V. walworth 
slndered bv a 
fable of Iac 
Straw. 
T.Walsing- 
haro. 
H. Kniton. 
Lib. Ebor. 



I rinkwaler 
wharfe, and 
I-lh wharfe. 

Crooked lane. 

Edward the 
blacke prince. 

216 Bridge warde withiz 
the North side of Thames streete is Saint lartb«s lane, a part 
of which lane is also of this vard, to wit, on the one side to a 
vell of water, and on the other side as farre vp as against the 
said well. Then is Saint [ichaels lane, part whereof is also of 
this varde vp to a Well there, &c. Then at the vpper end of 
new fishstreete, is a lane turning towards S. _Iichads lane, 
and is called Crooked lane, of the croked windings thereof. 
.A_boue this lanes end, vpon Fishstreet hill is one great house, 
for the most part builded of stone, which pertained sometime 
to 'd. the black prince, son to 'd. the 3. who was in his lire 
time lodged there. It is now altered to a common hosterie, 
hauing the blacke bell for a signe: .A_boue this house at the 
top of Fishstreet hil is a turning into great Eastcheape, and 
so to the corner of Lombardstreet, ouer against the northwest 
corner of Grasse church, & these be the whole bounds of this 
lridgeward within: the which hath an .A_lderman, and his 
deputie, for the common counsell 16. Constables 15. Scauengers 
6. for the wardmote inquest I6. & a I]eedle. It is taxed to 
the 15. in Lon. at 47-l. 

Candlewicke 
street, or Çall- 
dlewright 
street ward. 

;reatEast- 
cheape. 

]stcheape a 
Cookcs row. 

Candlewicke street warde 

CANDLEWICKE STREETE, or Candlewright streete 
warde, beginneth at the East end of great Eastcheape, it 
passeth west through Eastcheape to Candlewright streete, and 
through the saine downe to the north ende of Suffolke lane, 
on the south side, and downe that lane by the west ende of 
saint Laureuce Churchyard, which is the farthest west part of 
that ward. The streete of great Eastcheape is so called of 
the Market there kept, in the East part of the Citie, as West 
Cheape is a Market so called of being in the West. 
This Eastcheape is now a flesh Market of t3utchers there 
dwelling, on both sides of the streete, it had sometime also 
Cookes mixed amongst the 13utchers, and such other as solde 
victuals readie dressed of all sorts. For of olde time when 
friends did meet, and were disposed to be inertie, they went 
hot to dine and suppe in Tauerns, but to the Cookes, where 
they called for meate what them liked, which they alwayes 



Cattdlezvicke street warde 217 
found ready dressed at a reasonable rate, as I haue before 
shewed. 
In the yeare 141o. the il. of Icnrie the fouvth, vpon the 
euen of saint Iohn taptist, the kings sonnes, Tlwmas and Iohu, 
being in Estcheape at supper, (or rather at breakefast, for it 
was after the watch was broken vp, betwixt two and three of 
the dock after midnight) a great debate happened betweene 
their men, and other of the Court, which lasted one houre, till 
the Major and Shiriffes with other Citizens appeased the saine : 
for the which afterwards the said Maior, Aldermen and 
shiriffes, were called to answere before the King, his sonnes, and 
diuerse Lordes, being highly mooued against the Citie. At 
which time IVilliam Gascoyue chiefe Iustice required the 
Major and Aldermen, for the Citizens, to put them in the 
kings grace : whereunto they aunswered, that they had not 
offended, but (according to the law) had done I their best in Page 219 
stinting debate, and maintaining of the peace: vpon which 
aunswere the king remitted all his ire, and dismissed them. 
And to prooue this Estcheape to bee a place replenished with 
Cookes, it may appeare by a song called London lickeflcnnic, 
made by Lidgatc a Monke of Berrie, in the raigne of Icnric 
the fift, in the person of a Countrie man comming to London, 
and trauelling through the same. In West Cheape (saith the 
song) hee was called on to buy fine lawne, Paris threed, cotton In west cheap 
Vmble  and other linnin clothes, and such like (he speaketh _c linnen cloth 
ol sold but no 
no silks) in Cornhill to bu¥ old apparell, and houshold stuffe, silkes spoken 
where he was forced to buy his owne hoode, which hee had of. 
lost in Westminster hall: in Candlewright streete Drapers 
profered him cheape cloath, in Est cheape the Cookes cried 
hot ribbes of beefe rosted, pies well baked, and other victuals : 
there was clattering of Pewter pots, harpe, pipe, and sawtrie, 
yea by cocke, nay by cocke, for greater othes were spared : 
some sang of Ienken, and IMiau, &c. ail which melodie liked 
well the passenger, but he wanted money to abide by it, and 
therefore gat him into Grauesend barge, & home into Kent. 
Candlewright (so called in olde Records of the Guildhall, of 
saint _Iarie Oneries, and other) or Candlewicke streete tooke 

The kings sons 
beaten in 
Eastcheape, 
there was no 
tauerne then in 
Eastcheape. 

Fripparia. 
Vpholders 
vpon Cornhill, 
sellers of olde 
appareil and 
houshold stuff, 
Eastcheape. 

 Umble] 1603 ; umple 1598 



Candlewright 
or Candlewike 
streete : wike 
is a working 
place. 

Weauers in 
Candlewike 
streete. 
Weauers 
brought out 
of Flanders 
and Brabant. 

Abchurch lane. 
Parish church 
of S. Marie 
Abchurch. 

218 Candlewicke st«ee! warde 

that naine (as may bee supposed) either of Chandlers, or makers 
of Candles, both of waxe and tallow: for Candlewright is a 
maker of Candles, or of Weeke which is the cotton or yarne 
thereof: or otherwise Wike, which is the place where they 
wed to worke them, as Scalding wike by the stockes Market 
was called of the Poulters scalding and dressing their poultrie 
there : and in diuerse Countries, Dayrie houses, or Cottages, 
wherein they make butter and cheese, are vsually called 
Wickes. There dwelled also of old time diuers Veauers of 
woollen clothes, brought in by Edward the third. For I 
reade that in the 44. of his raigne the Weauers brought out 
of Flaunders were appointed their meetings to be in the Church- 
yard of saint Lam'cuce Poultncy, and the Weauers of Brabant 
in the churchyard of saint ]IIary Sommersct. There were 
then in this citie weauers of diuerse sorts, to wit, of Drapery 
or Taperie, and Naperie. These Weauers of Candlewright 
»treet being in short time worne out, their place is now 
possessed by rich Drapers, sellers of woollen cloth, &c. On 
thc north side of this [ warde, at the west end of East cheape, 
haue yee saint Çlemculs lane, a part whereof on both sides is 
of Candlewike streete ward, to wit, somewhat North beyond 
the parish Church of saint Clcmeut in Eastcheape. This is a 
smal Church, void of monuments, other then of k)-ancis Barnam 
Alderman. who deceased 575, and of B«ncdi«kc Baruam his 
sonne, alderman also, 598. IVilliam Chartnc3', and lViIliam 
Oucrfi', founded a Chaunterie there. Next is saint A'icholas 
lane for the most part on both sides of this ward, almost to 
saint A%holas church. Then is Abchurch fane, which is on 
both the sides, almost wholy of this ward, the parish Church 
there (called of saint A[aric Abchurch, Apechurch, or Vp- 
church as I haue read it) standeth somewhat neere vnto the 
south ende thereof, on a rising ground: it is a faire Church, 
Simon de IVinchcomb founded a Chaunterie there, the 9. of 
Richard the second. Iohn Littleton founded an other, and 
T/wmas Io/«don an other, & hath the monuments of I. Long 
Esquire of ]3edfordshire, 442. IVilliam IVikenson Alderman, 
5  9. I Villiam ]m«drcll Tayler, , 44. sir lames ]-fawes Maior, 
J574- sir Iohn ]3/'anck Maior, I58. Ioh/ 3[iaers, IVilliam 
Kcttle, &c. 



Cam//ec, icb s/ree/ w«rde _919 
On the south side of this warde, beginning againe at the s. llichaels 
East, is saint 3Ii«hacls lane, which lane is almost wholy of e" 
this warde, on both sides dovnc towardes Thames streete, to 
a Well or Pumpe there. On the East side of this lane is 
Crooked lane aforesaid by saint [ichaels Church, towards Crooked lane. 
Leaden Porch 
new Fish streete. One the most ancient house in this lane is in Crooked 
called the leaden porch, and belonged sometime to sir Iohu lane. 
Parish church 
el[erston l«aight: the first of 'dward thc fourth : It is now of s. Michaell 
called the swan in Crooked lane, possessed of strangers, and in Coed 
lane. 
selling of Rhenish xvine. The parish cburch of this S. 3[icha«ls 
was sometime but a small and homely thing, standing upon 
part of that ground, wherein now standeth the parsonage 
house: and the ground there about was a filthie plot, 
reason of the Butchers in Eastcheape, who ruade the saine 
their Laystall. ll'illiam dc Burffo gaue two messuages to that 
Church in Candlewicke streete, I3 7. ohu Lou«bcu stockfish- 
monger, foure times Major, builded in the saine ground this faire 
Church of saint e][ichaeL and was there buried in the Quier, 
vnder a faire [ tombe with the Images of him and his wife in l'age 
Alabaster: the said Church bath becne since increased with 
a new Quier and side chappels by sir lVilliam IVah,orth 
Stockfishmonger, Maior, sometime seruant to the saide 
Lottckctz : also the tombe of Lottckct was remoued, and a fiat 
stone of gray Iarble garnished with plates of Copper laid on 
him, as it yet remaineth in thc bodie of tbe Church : this 
IVilliam ll)&,ortlt is reported to haue slaine [abe Straz«, 
but acke Straw being afterward taken, was first adiudged by 
the said Iaior, and then executed by the losse of his head in 
Smithfield. True it is that this ll'illia»t lIh«orth being 
a man wise, learned, and of an incomparable manhood, 
arrested IVat T3,&r a presumptuous rebell, vpon whom no 
man durst lay hand. whereby hee deliuered the king and 
kingdome fl'om most wicked tyrannie of traytors.- The aior 
arrcsted him on the head with a sounde blow, wherevpon lVat 
Tj'&r furiously stroke the aior with his Dagger, but hurt 
him not, by reason he was well armed ; the Maior hauing 
receiued lais stroke, drew his basiliard, and grieuously wounded 
l'Var in the necke, and vithall gaue him a great blow on the 
head: in the which conflict, an Esquire of the kings house, 

Fable of 
William Val- 
worth, and 
Iacke Straw 
reproued. 
Praise of W. 
Walxvorth for 
his manhood 
in arresting of 
wat Tylar. 
The Maior was 
well armed, 
and had on 
his head a 
Basonet. 
T. Walsing. 
H. Knighton. 
Lib. S. Marioe 
Ehorum. 



220 

Candlewicke Mreel warde 

Maior ruade 
knight, and 
otherwise 
rewarded. 
Order of mak- 
ing a knight 
for seruice in 
the field. 

222 
Aldermen 
knighted. 

Colledge 
founded. 
S. Michaels 
Crooked lane. 
Monument of 
ir W. Wal- 
worth defaced 
and since 
falsified, and 
so remayncth. 

called Iohn Caucndish, drew his sword, and wounded Wat 
twise or thrise euen fo the death: and IVat spurring his 
horse, cried to the commons to reuenge him : the horse bare 
him about 80. foote from the place, and there hee fell downe 
halfe dead, and by and by they which attended on the king 
enuironed him about, so as he was not seene of his companie : 
many of them thrust him in diuerse places of his bodie, and 
drew him into the Hospitall of S. tTartholomew, from whence 
againe the Major caused him to be drawne into Smithfield 
and there to be beheaded. In reward of this seruice, (the 
people being dispersed) the king commaunded the Major to 
put a Basenet on his heade, and the Major requesting wh), 
he should so do, the king answered, he being much bound 
vnto him, would make him knight : the Maior answered, that 
hee was neither worthie nor able to take such estate vpon 
him, for he was but a Marchant, and had to liue by his 
Marchandise onely: notwithstanding, the king made him put 
on his Basenet, and then with a sworde in both his hands he 
strongly stroke him on the necke, as the manne, was then, 
and the saine I da), he ruade three other Citizens knights for 
his sake in the saine place, to wit, Iohu Philpot, Nicholas 
Brcmbcr, and Robert Lattndc Aldermen. The king gaue 
to the Maior ICm. pound land by yeare, and to each of the 
other 40. pound land yearely, to them and their heyres for 
euer. 
.&fier this in the same yeare, the said sir IVilliam IValwortk 
founded in the said parish church of S. 3[ichacl, a Colledge 
of a master and nine priests or Chaplens, and deceased I385. 
was there buried in the north Chappell by the Quier : but his 
monument being amongst other by bad people defaced in the 
raigne of Edward the sixt and againe since renued by the 
Fishmongers for lacke of knowledge, what before had beene 
written in his Epitaph, they followed a fabulous booke, and 
wrote Iackc Straw, insteade of }Var TilaG a great error meete 
to be reformed thcre, and else whcre, and therefore haue I the 
more at large discoursed of this marrer. 
It hath also beene, and is now growne to a common opinion, 
that in reward of this seruice done, by the said l/Villiam 
bValworth against the rebell, King Richard added to the 



Camtlewick street ,arde 

armes of this Citie, (which was argent, a plaine Crosse Gules) 
a sword or dagger, (for so they terme it) whereof I haue read 
no such recorde, but to the contrarie. I find that in the 
fourth yeare of Richard the second in a full assembly ruade 
in the vpper Chamber of the Guildhall, summoned by this 
IVilliam lValworth, then Major, as well of Aldermen as of 
the common Counsell in euery warde, for certaine affaires 
concerning the king, it was there by common consent agreed 
and ordained, that the olde Seale of the office of the Maioralty 
of the citie being very smal, old, vnapt, & vncomely for the 

Dunthorne. 
Old seale of 
the Mayoralty 
broken and a 
new seale 
made. 
The Armes of 
this Citty were 
hOt altered, 
but remayne 
as afore, to 
witte, argent 
a playne crosse 
Gules, a sword 
of S. Paule, in 

honor of the citie, should be broken, and one other new the firstquar- 
• ter, and no 
should be had, which the said maior commaunded to be made dagger of V'. 
artificiaIly, and honourable for the exercise of the said office Walworth as 
is fabuled. 
thereafter in place of the other : in which llew Seale, besides 
the Images of tcter, & taul, which of old were rudely 
engrauen, there should be vnder the feet of the said Images, 
a shield of the armes of the saide Citie perfectly graued, with 
two Lions supporting the saine with two sergeants of armes, 1an 
other part, 1 one, and two tabernacles, in which aboue should 
stand two Angels, between whom aboue the said I[mages of Page 223 
Peter and 2Paul¢, shall bee set the glorious virgine : this being 
done, the old Seale of the Office was deliuered to Richard 
Odiham Chamberlaine, who brake it, and in place thereof, 
was deliuered the new seale to the said Major to vse in his 
office of Maioraltie, as occasion should require. This new 
seale seemeth to bee made before IVilliam IValwortk was 
knighted, for he is hot here intituled Sir, as afterwards he 
wai: and certain it is that the saine new seale then ruade, is 
now in vse and none other in that office of the Maioraltie: 
which may suffice to aunswere the former fable, without 
shewing of any euidence sealed with the olde seale, which was 
the Crosse, and sworde of Saint Paule, and hot the dagger of 
lVilliam lValworth. 
Now of other monuments in that Church, Simon M'ordog 
Major, 1368. was buried there, Iohu Ohwy Maior 1446. Robcrt 
Match Stockfishmonger gaue two peeces of ground to be a 
Churchyard : Iohu Radwell Stockfishmonger, buried 45. 
George Gowre Esquire, son to Edward Gowre Stockfish- 
- an other part «6o3 ; in the other part «633 



Colledge 
bouse in 
crooked lane. 

Page 224 

Houses in 
Crooked lane 
blowne vp 
with mnpot- 
der. 

S. Martins 
Orgar lane, 
and parish 
church. 

Parish church 
of S. Martin 
Orgar. 

monger, Esquire, 147 o. Alexandcr Pnroynt Stockefishmonger, 
1373. Andrew Burd Gentleman, of Grayes Inne 1487. [oh. 
Skmw Stockfishmonger 1487. with this Epitaph. 
Farcwell my fi'i«nds thc ride abide# no man, 
[ ara dcarted hcncc, and so shall ye. 
But iz tkis passage tbe bcst song that I crut, 
[s Requicm tcrnam, nozv [csu grant if me, 
IVlten [ kauc cndcd al/ mhw aduersitic, 
Grant nc Dt Paradise to hane a mansion. 
That shcdst thy blood for 0' redcmpNon. 
John Finbdl one of the Shiriffes, I487. was knighted, and 
gaue 4.Ii. to this church, the one halfe for his monument. 
loht Pattcsley Major, 144. Thomas Ewen Grocer, bare halfe 
the charges in building of the steeple, and was buried 15. 
l l'illiam Combes Gent. of Stokc by Gilford in Surrey, I5o2. 
Sir Ioh, B»me Maior, I53.  gaue 5 . li. for a house called 
the Colledgc in Crooked lane, he lieth buried in S. ATch»las 
Hacon. ll'altar FairefiwL Robert Barre, Alcxander HcybaG 
h,hu 37ottc, I lohu Gramstone, fikn Brampton, John lod, 
Stockfishmonger, 53 I. Sir Hem3, Amcots Major, I548. &c. 
Hard by this Saint Iichaels Church, on the south side 
thereof, in the yeare 56. on the fift of Julie through the 
shooting of a Gun, which brake in the house of one Adriau 
Art«n a Dutchman, and set tire on a Firkin and Barrell of 
Gunpowder, foure houses were blowen vp, and diuerse other 
sore shattered,  . men and women were slaine, and 16. so 
hurt and brused, that they hardly escaped with life. 
West from this Saint 3[ich«wls lane. is Saint 3[artins Oar 
lane, by Candlewicke street, which lane is on both sides 
down to a Well, replenished with faire and large houses for 
marchants, and it is of this ward : one of which houses was 
sometime called Beachamps Inne, as pertaining vnto them of 
that familie. Thomas Arundel, Archbishop of Canterbury, 
commonly for his time was loged there. 
The parish Church of saint [artin Oar is a small thing. 
II'tTliam Çrowmcr Major, builded a proper Chappell on the 
south side thereof, and was buried there, I433. hhu 3[athew 
x- «52o ' deceased 153o , Sto,o's MS. 



nd dhter, wfe fo »h" wm' O«burn« , a 
dicke Reding, Thomas Harding, Iames Smith, Richard Gain- 
lord Esquire, Iohu Bold. &c. Then is there one other fane 
called saint £a¢trettce, of the parish Church there. This lane, 
down to the south side of the churchyard, is of Candlewicke 
street ward. The parish church of saint £a¢trcnce was in- 
creased with a Chappell of Iesus by Thomas Cole, for a maister 
and Chapleine, the which Chappell and parish Church was 
ruade a Colledge of Iesus, and of Corpus Christi, for a maister 
and seuen Chapleins, by Iohn Poultney maior, and was con- 
firmed by Edward the third, the eo. of his raigne: of him 
was this Church called S. Laurcnce Poullncy in Candle- 
wicke street, which Colledge was valued at 79.1i. x7.s. xi.d. 
and was surrendred in the raigne of Edward the sixt. 
Ro&rl Ratcle earle o[ Sussex, and Hen 7 Ratclc earle of 
Sussex, were buried there, Alderman cswicke was buried 
there, Iohn OIoEe Alderman, Robert rowne and others. 
Thus ] much for this ward, and the antiquities thereoE It 
hath now an Alderman, his Deputie, common Counsellors 8. 
Constables 8. Scauengers 6. Wardmote inquest men x, and 
a Beedle. It is taxed to the fifteene at xvi. pound. 

Parish church 
of S. Laurence 
Poultney 
rnade a Col- 
ledge. 

Walbrooke warde 
WALBROOKE warde beginneth at the West end of Candle- 
wicke streete ward. It runneth downe Candlewicke street west 
towards Budge row. It hath on the northside thereof S. 
Swithens fane, so called of S. Switltens a parish Church by 
London stone: This lane is replenished on both the sides 
with faire builded houses, and is wholy of Walbrooke warde. 
The said parish Church of S. Swithen standeth at the south- 
west corner of this lane. Licence xvas procured to new build 
and encrease the said Church and steeple, in the yeare 
Sir Iohn ttend Draper, Major, was an especiall benefactor 
thereunto, as appeareth by his armes in the Glasse windowes 

 Osburne] Osborne «59,.? 

Walbrooke 
warde. 

Parish church 
of S. Swithen. 



rior of Tor- 
tington his 
Inne. 
Oxford place 
by London 
stone. 
Empson and 
Dudley. 

Page 226 

London stone. 

Antiquitie of 
London stone. 

Lib. Trinitate. 

22 4 [Ualbroohe oarde 
euen in the toppes of them, which is in a field siluer, a chiefc 
/kzure, a Lion passant siluer, a Cheueron azure, three Escalops 
siluer : he lieth buried in the bodie of this Church, with a faire 
stone laid on him, but the plates and inscriptions are defaced. 
Roffcr Depham Alderman, Thomas Aylcsbourgh, IVilliam 
Ncue, and l[atilde Ca.vton, founded Chaunteries, and were 
buried there, Iohn tlutler Draper, one of the Shiriffes, 4oEo. 
Raph Iocclbte, Major, a benefactor, buried in a fayre Tombe, 
IVillia»z lVhite Draper, one of the Shiriffes, I48. and other. 
On the north side of this Church and Churchyard, is one 
faire and large builded house, sometime pertayning to the 
prior of Torliugtou in Sussex, since to the Earles of Oxford, 
and now to sir Ioht Hart Alderman: which house hath 
a faire Garden belonging thereunto, lying on the west side 
thereof. On the backeside of two other faire houses in Wal- 
brooke, in the raigne of Hcnrie the seuenth, sir Richard 
Empson knight, Chanceler of the Duchie of Lancaster, dwelled 
in the one of them, and Edmond Dudlcy ] Esquire in the other : 
either of them had a doore of entercourse into this Garden, 
wherein they met and consulted of matters at their pleasures. 
In this O.rford place sir Ambrose Nichdas kept his lIaioraltie, 
and since him the said sir Iohn Iart. 
On the south side of this high streete, neare vnto the chan- 
nell is pitched vpright a great stone called London stone, 
fixed in the ground verie deepe, fastned with bars of iron, 
and otherwise so strongly set, that if Cartes do run against it 
through negligence, the wheeles be broken, and the stone 
it selfe vnshaken. 
The cause why this stone was there set, the time when, or 
other memorie hereof, is none, but that the saine hath long 
continued there is manifest, namely since (or rather before) 
the conquest : for in the ende of a faire written Gospell booke 
giuen to Christes Church in Canterburie, by Ethelslane king 
of the west Saxons, I find noted of landes or rents in London 
belonging to the sayd Church, whereof one parcell is described 
to lie neare unto London stone. Of later rime we read that 
in the yeare of Christ  x35. the first of king Stephen, a tire 
which began in the house of one Ailward, neare vnto 
London stone consumed all East to/kldgate, in the which tire 



llç/3roo/,,e e,«rde 225 
the Priorie of the holy Trinitie was burnt, and West to S. 
Er]'euwalds shrine in Paules Church : and these be the eldest 
notes that I reade thereof. 
Some haue said this stone tobe set, as a marke in the 
middle of the Citie vithin the valles : but in truth it standeth 
farre nearer vnto the riuer of Thames, then fo the wall of the 
Citie: some others haue said the saine to be set for the tender- 
ing and mak[ng of payment by debtors to their creditors, at 
their appoynted dayes and rimes, till of later time, payments 
were more vsually ruade at the Font in Poules 1 Church, and 
now most commonly at the Royall Exchange : some againe 
haue imagined the saine to bec set vp by one [ohu or Thomas 
Zoudottstou« dwelling there agaynst, but more likely it is, that 
such men haue taken naine of the stone, then the stone of 
them, as did [ohuat Noke, Tomas at Stile, IVilliam at Wall, 
or at Well. &c. 
Downe west from this parish church, and from London 
stone, haue ye Walbrooke corner: from whence runneth vp 
a streete, North to the Stockes, called Walbrooke, because it 
standeth on I the east side of the saine brooke by the banke 
thereof,nd the whole warde taketh naine of that streete. On 
the east side of this streete and at the north corner thereof is 
the Stockes market, which had this beginning. Aboute the 
yeare of Christ I282. -[-]'gUI' lVales Mayor caused diuers 
houses in this Citty to bee builded towards the maintenance 
of London bridge: namely one void place neare vnto the 
parish Church called Woole Church, on the north side thereof, 
wfiere sometime (the vay being very large and broade) had 
stoode a payre of Stocks, for punishment of offenders, this 
building tooke naine of these Stockes, and was appoynted by 
him to bee a market place for fish and flesh in the midst ofthe 
city, other hou.ses hee builded in other places, as by the patent 
of.Edward the first it doth appeare, dated the tenth of his 
raigne. After this in the yeare 1322. the 17. of _Edz«ard the 
second a decree was ruade by Iamomt Chickwcll Mayor, that 
none should sell fish or flesh out of the markets appoynted, to 
witte Bridge street, East Cheape, Olde Fishstreete, S. Nicholas 
shambles, and the saide Stockes vpon pain to forfeite such 
t Pontes I598; Ponts 6o3, I673 
STOP« I Q 

lag "e  7 

Walbrooke 
streete. 

Stocks mari/et. 

The middest 
of the City. 



Ro. Fabian, 

Parish church 
of S. lIary 
Wool chtucla. 

Page 028 
Tronage or 
xveighing of 
xvool, caused 
the church to 
bee named 
Wooll church 
Haw. 

2_'26 ll 5/broo/,'e ¢e,ardc 

fish or flesh as were sold, for the first time, and the second 
time to loose theyr freedom, which act was ruade by com- 
mandement of the king vnder his letters patents dated at the 
Tower the I7. of his raign, and then was this stocks let to 
farmefor 46. pound, 13. shillinges, foure pence by yeare. This 
Stockes market was againe begunne to bee builded in the 
yeare I4IO. in the 1i. of ]eury the fourth, and was finished in 
the yeare next following. In the yeare I5o7. the saine was 
rented 56. pound, 9. shillinges ten pence. .And in the 
yeare I543. Iohn Cotes being Mayor, there was in this Stockes 
Market for Fishmongers OES- boordes or stalles, rented yearely 
to thirty foure pound thirteene shillinges foure pence, there 
was for Butchers I8. boordes or stalles, rented at one and 
forty pound, sixeteen shillinges foure pence, and there were 
also chambers aboue, sixeteene rented at fiue pound, thirteene 
shillinges foure pence, in all 8oE.li. 3.s. 
Next vnto this Stocks is the parrish church of S../lary IVool 
church, so called of a Beam placed in the church yeard, which 
was thereof called Wooll Church Haw, of the Tronage, or weigh- 
ing of Wooll there vsed, and to verifie this, I find amongst 
the [ customes of London, written in French, in the raigne of 
Edward the second, a Chapter intituled Les Customes de 
lVolchurck ]aw, wherein is set downe what was there to bee 
paide for euery parcell of Wooll weighed. This Tronage or 
Weighing of Woole till the sixt of Richarde the second was 
there continued, Iohn Churchman then builded the Custome 
bouse vppon Wooll keye, to serue for the saide Tronage, as is 
before shewed in Towerstreete Warde : This church is reason- 
able fayre and large, and was lately new builded, by licence 
graunted in the OEo. of t[cury the sixt, with condition to bee 
builded 15. foote ri'oto the Stockes market for sparing of light 
to the saine Stockes. The Parson of this church is to haue 
foure markes the yeare for tith of the said Stockes, payde him 
by the Maisters of the Bridge bouse, by a speciall decree ruade 
the seconde of ]enr), the seuenth. Iohn IVingar Groceq 
Mayor I5o 4. was a great helper to the building of this church, 
and was there buried ,5o5 . he gaue vnto it b t, his testament 
two large Basons of siluer and twenty pound in money, also 
lticha;-d Shore Draper one of the Shiriffes a 505 . was a great 



Hçl&'ool,,c ,m«t« 227 
Ylcnefactor in his liçe, and by hs test3ment ffaue 2. paund to 
make a porch at fle West end thercof, and was therc buried, 
i«rff «lff of Steplemorden n Cambridgeshire lyeth 
intombed there, 467. Edward Dcoly Esquier x467. ]ohn 
Naudford Grocer, ruade the Font of that church, very curiously 
wrought, painted and guilded, and was there buried: [ohu 
Archer Fishmonger, 487. Anue Cawode founded a Chauntrie 
there, &c. From the Stockes market, and this parrish Church 
East vp into Lombarde streete, some foure or fiue houses on 
a side, and also on the south side of Wooll Church, haue yee 
Bearebinder lane, a parte whereof is of this Walbroke Warde, 
then downe lower in the streete called kValbrooke, is one other 
fayre Church of Saint Stephen latelie builded on the east side 
thereof, for the olde Church stoode on the xvest side, in placc 
where now standeth the Parsonage bouse, & therefore so much 
nearer the Brooke, euen on the Banke. Robert Chœeehlcy Mayor 
in the yeare 48. the sixt of Henry the sixt, gaue to this 
parrish of Saint Scphen one plot of grounde, containing 
foote and a halfe in length and sixtie sixe foote in [ bredth, 
thereupon to builde their nev church, and for their church yeard : 
and in the seuenth of Nenry the sixt, the saide Robert one of 
the founders laide the first stone for himselfe, the second for 
IVilliam Stondou Mayor, vith vhoose goodes the grounde 
that the Church standeth on, and the housing with the grounde 
of the churchyearde was bought by the said Chœeehley for two 
hundred markes from the Grocers, vhich had beene letten be- 
fore for sixe and twenty markes the yeare : Robert I#thgham 
Draper laide the thirde stone, f[«m 3, 'arton then Mayor, &c. 
The sayde Chichley gaue more one hundred pound to the saydc 
vorke, and bare the charges of ail the tituber worke on the pro- 
cession way, and layde the leade vpon it of his ovne cost, he 
also gaue ail the timber for the rooffing of the two side lies, and 
paid for the carriage thereof. This church was finished in the 
yeare x439. the bredth thereof is sixtie seauen foote, and length 
x25-foote, the church yearde ninetie foote in length, and 
thirty seauen in bredth, and more. Robert IVhitthgham 
(made knight of the Bath) in the yeare 43e. purchascd the 
patronage of this church from John Duke of Bedford, wckle 
to em, the sixte, and Edeard the fourth, in the second of 
Q 2 

Bercbinder 
I ane. 

Parish church 
of S. Stephen 
by walbrooke. 
tdff£ 22q 



_"28 llçT[brooke 7oarde 

2age u3o 

Buckles bery. 

Horshew 
bridge in Hor- 
shew streete. 

his raigne, gaue if to Richard Lee then Mayor : There bee 
monumentes in this church of Thomas Southwcll first Parson 
of this new church, who lyeth in the Quier, IohJt Duustable 
Maister of Astronomie and Musicke, in the yeare 1453. Sit" 
Rickard Lee Mayor, who gaue the saîde Patronage 1 to the 
Grocers. Rowlaud t]ill Mayor, t549. Sir Tkomas tope first 
Treasurer of the augmentations, with his xvife Dame ¢l[argaret, 
Sir Iohu Cootes Mayor, 1542. Sir Iohn Yorke Knight, Mar- 
chaunt Taylor, 1549. Edzvard[a«kman Shiriffe, 564, Rcharde 
A«hley, Grocer, Doctor Owyu Phisition to king Hcm-ie the 
eight, [ohuKh-kbie Grocer, 578. and others. 
Lower downe from this parrish church bee diuers fayre 
houses namely one, wherin of late Sir I¢ichard tak«r a knight 
of Kent was lodged, and one wherein dwelled maister Thomas 
Gorc a marchant famous for Hospitality. On the West side 
of this Walbrooke streete, ouer against the Stockes Market, 
is [ a parte of the high streete, called the Poultrie, on the 
south side west, till ouer against S. Mildredes Church, and 
the Skalding Wike is of this Ward. Then downe againe 
Walbrooke streete some small distance, is Buckles Bury, a 
street so called of 13u«kle that sometime was owner thereof, 
part of which streete, on both sides 3- or 4. houses to the 
course of the ]3rooke is of this Warde, and so downe Wal- 
brooke streete, to the South corner : from whence west downe 
Budge Row, some small distance to an Alley and through 
that Alley south by the west end of S. [abris Church vpon 
Walbrooke, by the south side and east end of the samc, 
againe to Walbrooke corner. This parrish church is called 
S. tohn vpon Walbrooke, because the west end thereof is 
on the verie banke of Walbrooke, by ttorshew ]3ridge, in 
Horshew bridge streete. This Church was also lately new 
builded : for aboute the yeare I4oE. licence was graunted by 
the Mayor and comminalty, to the Parson and Par, ish, for 
the enlarging thereof, with a peece of ground on the North 
parte of the Quier, . foot in length, 17. foot in bredth, & 
3. inches, and on the south side of the Quier one foote of 
the common soyle. There be no monuments in this Church of 
any accounte, onely I haue lerned IVilliam Combarton Skinner, 
 Patronage] Parsonage z6o 3 



IUa[brooke w«rde 229 

who gaue landes to that church, was there buried, ,41o. and 
John Stauc Taylor, one of the Shiriffes, 1464, was likewise 
buried theîe. On the south side of Walbrooke warde from 
Candlewickc streete, in the raid way betwixte London stone, 
and Walbrooke corner, is a little lane with a turnepike in the 
middest therof, and in the saine a proper parish church called 
S. l[aly Bothaw, or Boatehaw, by the Erber: this church 
being neare vnto Downegate on the riuer of Thames, hath 
the addition of Boathaw, or Boat haw, of neare adioyning to 
an hav or yeard, wherein of old time boates were ruade, and 
landed from Downegate to bee mended, as may be supposed, 
for otheî reason I find none why it should bee so called. 
Within this Church, and the small Cloystrie adioyning, diuers 
Noblemen and persons of worshippe haue beene buried, as 
appeareth by Armes in the Windowes, the defaced Tombes, 
and printe of plates torn vp and carried away: there remayne 
onely of John Il'est Es]quire, buried in the yeare I4o8. 'age231 
Thomas lZ1tyllcy Equire 1539. but his monument is defaced 
sincc, £atcclat ]?alhm-st, &c. Thc Erbar is an ancient place The Erbar. 
so called, but hot of Walbrooke warde, and thereforc out of 
that lane, to \Valbrooke corner, and thcn downe till ouer against 
the south corner of Saint Iohns Church vpon Walbrooke. 
_And this is all that I can say of Walbrooke warde. It bath 
an Alderman, and his Deputie, common Counsellers eleuen, 
Constables ninc, Scauengers sixe, for the Wardmote inquest 
thirteene, and a Bcedle. It is taxed to the fiftcene in London, 
to 33- pound, fiue shillings. 

Parish church 
of S. Mary 
Bothaw. 

Downegate warde 
DO\VNEGATE warde boginneth at thc south end of Wal- 
brooke warde, ouer against the East corner of Saint [ol;;;s 
church vpon Walbrooke, and descendeth on both the sides 
to Downegate, on the Thames, and is so called of that downe 
going or descending thereunto: and of this Downgate the 
vard taketh namç. This ward turneth into Thames streete 
westwarde, some ton houses on a side to the course of Wal- 
brooke, but East in Thames streete on both sides to Ebgate 
lane, or old Swan, the lande side whereof bath many lanes 

DOwllgatc 
warde. 



I "onduit vpon 
1 )ownegate. 

A lad of 8. 
yeares oldc 
drowned in 
the chanell. 

Tallow 
chandlers hall. 

('oppcd hall 
nov Skinners 
hall. 

Six kings 
brethren xvith 
the Skinners 
companie in 
London, their 
pompous 
procession. 

230 Dow¢wgate wa,«tc 
turning vp, as shall bee shewed when I corne to them. But 
first to begin with the high street called l)owgate, at the 
vppcr ende thereof is a fail'e Conduit of Thames water, castel- 
lated, and ruade in the year 568. at charges of the Citizens, 
and s called the Conduit vpon Downgate. OEhe descent of 
this streete is such that in the yeare I574. on the fourth of 
September in the after noon there fel a storme of raine, where- 
through the channels suddenly arose, and tan with such a swiff 
course towardes the common shores, that a lad of  8. yearcs 
old, minding to haue leapt ouer the channell near vnto the 
said Conduit, was taken with the streame, and carried from 
thence towards the Thames with such a violence, that no man 
with staues, or otherwise could ] stay him, till he came against 
a cart whcele, that stood in the said watergate, before which 
time he was drowncd, and starke dcade. 
On the west sidc of this streetc is the OEallow Chandlers hall, 
a proper bouse, which companie was incorporated in thc 
sccond yeare of Edward thc fourth. 
Solnewhat lower standeth the Skinncrs hall, a faire bouse, 
which was sometime called Copped hall by Downgate, in the 
parish of Saint John vpon XValbrooke. In the 9-yeare of 
Edwm'd thc second, R«gh Cob«m possesscd it with fiue 
shops, &c. 
This companie of Skinnel-s in Loudoll werc iucorporatc 
13, ]d. the 3. in the first of his raignc : they had two brothcr- 
hoodes of Ço,us Chrisli, 'iz:. one at saint A[aric Spilllc, thc 
,,thcr at saint A[m'ic ]Icthlcm without Bishops gate. Richard 
thc second in the 8. of his raigne, graunted them to make 
thcir two Brotherhoodes one, by the naine of the fraternitie 
of Cous Chr#tL of Skinuers, diuerse royall persons were 
named to be founders and brethren of this fraternitie, to wit, 
Kings 6. Dukes 9- Earles OE. Lordes . Kings, Eda,ard the 
third, Richard the second, Hmy the fourth, Heuric the fift, 
HenO, the sixt, and Edward the fourth. This fraternitie had 
also once euery yere on Cozts çhristi day after noone a Pro- 
cession, passed through the principall streetes of the Citie, 
wherein was borne more then one hundred Torches of Waxe 
(costly garnished) burning light, and aboue two hundred 
Clearkes aud Priests in Surplesses and Coapes, singing. After 



Dowa/e eoarde 23i 
the which were the shiriffes seruants, the Clarkes of thc Coun- 
rets, Chaplains for the Shiriffes, the Maiors Sargeants, the 
counsell of the Citie, the Maiol" and Aldermen in scarlet, and 
then the Skinners in their best Liueryes. Thus much to stoppe 
the tongues of vnthankfull men, such as vse to aske, why haue 
yee hot noted this, or that ? and giue no thankes for what fs 
done. Then lower downe was a Colledge of Priestes, called 
[csus Commons, a house well fumished with Brasse, Pewter, 
Naparie, Plate, &c. besides a faire Librarie well stored with 
bookes, all which of old rime was giuen to a number of 
Priestes, that should kcepe commons there, and as one leff 
his place by doEth or otherwfse, an other should be admitted 
into his roome, but this order within this thirtie years being 
discontinued, the sayde [ house was dissolued, and turned to 
Tenements. 
Downe lower haue ye Elbow lane, and at the corner thereof 
was one great stone house, called Oldc hall, it is now taken 
downe, and diuerse %ire houses of Timber placed there. This 
was sometime partaining to ll'illiam de pont le m'ch, and by 
him giuen to the Priorie of S. A[arie Oue 7 in Southwarke, in 
the raigne of Hnrie the first. In this Elbow lane is the 
Inholders hall, and other faire houses : this lane runneth west, 
and suddenly turneth south into Thames street, and therefore 
of that bending is called Elbow lane. On the Est side of 
this Downgate streete, is the great olde house before spoken 
of, caIled the Eber, neare to the Church of saint A[ari« 
çothaw, Ge' 3, Scra&c heldc it by the gift of Edward the 
third, in the t4. of his raigne : it belonged since to Io .Vcucll 
Lord of Rabie, then to Richard Neud earle of Warwicke, 
• Vc«dl Earle of Salisburie was lodged there, a457. then it 
came to Georgc Duke of Clarence, and his heires males, by 
the gift of Edward the fourth, in the 4. of his raigne. It 
w lately new builded by sir Thomas Pullisou Maior, and 
was afterward inhabited by sir Franc& Drakc that famous 
Mariner. Next to this great house, is a lane turning to Bush 
lane, (of olde time called Carter lane, of carts, and Carmen 
hauing stables there) and now called Chequer lane, or Chequer 
Alley, of an Inne called the Chequer. 
In Thames street on the Thamcs side west from Downc- 

I'«ge 
Elbow lane. 

William de 
polit arch his 
house. 

Inholders hall. 

The Erber, S. 
Mary Both- 
haw. 



Greemvich 
lane, or Fricr 
lane. 
Ioyncrs hall. 

Granthams 
lne. 

Cosin lane. 

.age 234 

A gin to con- 
uay Thames 
water to Dow- 
gate Conduit. 
• qteleyeard for 
marchantes of 
Almaine. 

Gilhala 
Theuto:fico- 
IU ,'I. 

232 Dow/wgate arde 
gare is Greenewitch lane of olde rime so called, and now 
Frier lane, of such a signe there set vp. In this lane is the 
Ioyners hall, and other faire houses. 
Then is Granthams lane so called of lohu Gra«tham some 
rime Maior and owner thereof, whose house was very large 
and strong, builded of stone, as appeareth by gares arched yet 
remayning, )a:k 1)odmcr, first a Brewer, then a Mercer, 
lXIaior 1529 . dwelled there, and kept lais Maioraltie in that 
bouse, itis now a Brewhouse as it was afore. 
Then is Dowgate whereof is spoken in another place. East 
from this Dow[n]gate is Cosin lane, named of one lVilliam 
Çosbt that dwelled there, in the fourth of )ichard the second, 
as diuers his predecessors, Father, Gran(d)father, &c. had done 
before him. ] IVilliam Cosin vas "one of the Shiriffes, in the 
yeare 3o6. That bouse standeth at the south ende of the 
lane, hauing an olde and artificiall conueyance of Thames 
water into it, and is now a Diehouse called Lambards messuage. 
Adioyning to that bouse, there was lately erected an engine, 
to conuey Thames water vnto Dovngate Conduit aforesaid. 
Next to this lane on the East, is the Steleyard (as they 
terme it) a place for marchants of Almaine, that vsed to bring 
hither, as well Wheat, Rie, and other graine, as Cables, Ropes, 
Masts, Pitch, Tar, Flaxe, Hempe, linnin cloth, Wainscots, 
Waxe, Steele, and other profitable Marchandizes : vnto these 
Marchants in the yeare i OE59- Henry the third, at the request 
of his brother Richard earle of Cornewell, king of _Almaine, 
granted that all and singular the marchants, hauing a house 
in the Citie of London, commonly called Guilda gtula 
Thetttonia,rmu, should be maintaincd and vpholden through 
the vhole Realme, by all such freedomes, and free vsages or 
liberties, as by the king and his noble progenitors time the)" 
had, and inioyed, &c. tzYheard the first renued and confirmed 
that charter of Liberties gmnted by his Father. And in the 
tenth yeare of the same Edward, Hem'ic lVale« being Maior, 
a great controuersie did arise betweene the said Maior, and 
the marchants of the Haunce of Almaine, about the repara- 
tions of Bishopsgate, then likely to fall, for that the said 
marchants inioyed diuerse priuiledges, in respect of maintain- 
ing the saide gare, which they now denied to repaire : for the 



Dowze,ate wardc 233 
appeasing of which controuersie the king scnt his writ to the 
Treasurer and Barons of his Exchequer, comlnaunding that 
they should make inquisition thereof, belote whom the Mar- 
chants being called, when they were hot able to discharge 
themselues, sith they inioyed the liberties to theln granted 
for the saine, a precept was sent to the Major, and shiriffes, to 
distraine the said marchants to make reparations, namely 
Gcrard lI[arbod Alderman of the Hauncc, Ralpk dc Cssardc 
a Citizen of Colen, Ludero dc Dcneuar, a Burges of Triuar, 
lohu of Aras, a Burges of Triuon, tartram of Hamburdge, 
Godestalke of Hundondale, a Burges of Triuon, lohn de Dele 
a Burges of Munstar, then remaining in the said Citie of 
London: for themselues, and all other marchants of the 
Haunce, and so they granted ] OElo. markes sterling, to the 
Maior and Citizens, and vndertooke that they and their suc- 
cessors should from time to tine repayre the said gate, and 
beare the third part of the charges in money, and men to 
defend it when neede were. And for this agreement, the 
said Major and Citizens granted to the said Marchants their 
liberties which till of late they haue inioyed, as namely 
amongst other, that they might lay vp their graine which they 
brought into this realme, in Innes, and sell it in their Garners, 
by the space of fortie dayes after they had laid it vp: except 
by the-Major and Citizens they were expresly forbidden, 
because of dearth or other reasonable occasions. Also they 
might haue their Aldermen as they had beene accustomed, 
foreseene alwayes that he were of the Citie, and presented to 
the Major and Aldermen of the Citie, so off as any should 
be chosen, and should take an oath before them to maintaine 
Justice in their Courts, and to behaue themselues in their 
office according to law, and as it stoode with the customes of 
the Citie. Thus much for their priuiledges: whereby it 
appeareth, that they were great Marchants of corne brought 
out of the East parts hither, in so much that the occupiers of 
husbandry in this land were inforced to complaine of them for 
brînging in such abundance, when the corne of this realme was 
at an easie price : wherupon it was ordained by Parliament, 
that no person should bring into any part of this Realme by 
way of Marchandise, Wheate, Rie or Barly, growing out of 

Marchantes of 
the Haunce of 
Almaine licen- 
sed to lay vp 
their corne in 
garners, but to 
sell it within 
4 o. dayes after. 



'ct of l'arlia- 
ment forbid- 
ding corne to 
be brought 
from beyond 
se,q So 

236 

V(indgoosc 
lane. 

l'atent. 

Stilliard put 
downe. 

234 Dowwate wardc 
the said Realme, when the quarter of wheate exceeded not 
the price of 6. shiIlings 8. pence, Rie 4- s. the quarter, and 
Barley 3. s. the quarter, vpon forfeyture the one halle to the 
king, the other halfe to the seasor thereof. These marchants 
of Haunce had their Guild hall in Thames street in place 
açoresaid, by the said Cosin lane. Their hall is large, builded 
oç stone, with three arched gares towards the street, the 
middlemost whereof is farre bigger then the other, and is 
seldome opened, the other two be mured vp, the saine is now 
called the old hall. 
Of !ater rime, to wit, in the sixt of lic]zard the second, they 
hyred one house next adioyning to their old hall, which some- 
time belonged to Richard Lions a famous Lapidarie, one of 
the Shiriffes of London, in the 49. of Fdward the third, and 
in the 4. of Rh'hard the second, by the rebels of Kent, 
drawne out of that bouse l and beheaded in west Cheape : this 
also was a great house with a large wharfe on the Thamcs, and 
the way thereunto was called Windgoosc, or Wildgoose fane, 
vhich is now called Windgoose Alley, for that the saine .A_lley 
is for the most part builded on by the Stilyard Marchants. 
The Abbot of S. tlbots had a messuage here with a Key 
giuen to him in the 34- of t-[«m-ic the 6. Then is one other 
great house which somtime pertained to John R«iuwcll 
Stockfishmonger, Maior, and it xvas by, him giuen to the Maior, 
and communaltie to the ende that thc profites thereof should 
bc disposcd in decdes of pictie: which house in the 5.°f 
Ew«rd the fourth, was confirmed vnto the sayd Marchants 
in manner following, vz. ' It is ordayned by our soueraigne 
Lord and his Parliament, that the sayd Marchants of Almainc, 
being of the companie called the Guildhall Tctton[cornm (or 
the Flemish Geld) that now bee or hereafter shall be, shall 
haue, hold and enioy to thcm and their successors for euer, 
the said place called the stele house, yeelding to thc Maior 
and communaltie an annuall rent of 7 o. pound, 3. shillings 
foure pence, &c.' 
In the yeare I55I. and the fift of ]?dward the sixt, through 
complaint of the English marchants, the libertie of the 
Stilliard Marchants was seised into the ldngs hands, and so 
it resteth. 



Dowzzega/e eoarde 
Then is Church fane, at the west end oç Alhallowcs church 
called Alhallowes the more h Thames streete, çor a diercnce 
from Alhallowes the lesse n the saine street : t s also called 
Alhallowes ad v«m h the Ropery, because hay (was) sold 
neare thereunto at hay wharfe, and ropes of old tme madc 
and solde h the hgh street. Ths s a faire Church wth a 
large cloyster on the south sde thereof about ther Church- 
yard, but foulely defaced and ruinated. 
The church also hath had many çah'e monumcnts, but now 
defaced : there remaneth în the Quiet some Plates on graue 
stones, namely of ll'illia»t Lichficld, Doctor of Diuînitie, who 
deceaoed the yeare 448, hce was a great student, and com- 
pilcd many bookes both moral and diuine, in prose and in 
verse, namely one intitulcd the complaint of God vnto sinfull 
man. He madc in his timc 383 . Scrmons, as appeared by 
Iris owne hand writing ] and were found when hee was dead. 
One other plate there is of Iohn ricblcs Draper, who deceased 
in the yeare 437- he was a great benefactor to that Church, 
and gaue by his testament certaine tenements, to the reliefc 
of the poore, &c. Ari«hohso«tcn and ll'illi«m Pcshm founded 
Chaunteries there. 
At the East end of this Church gocth downe a lane called 
l lay wharfe fane, now lately a great Brewhouse, builded there 
by one Pot : Hcœe;-& Cavtiot Esquire, a Beerebrewer vsed it. 
and Abraha»t his sonne now possesseth it. Thcn was thcrc 
one other fane, sometime called Wolses gare , now out of vse, 
for the lower part therof vpon the bank of Thames is builded 
(vpon) 2 by the late Earle of Shrewsburie, and the other end 
is builded on and stopped vp by the Chamberlaine of London. 
Iohn Bttler Draper, one of the Shiriffes, in the yeare 4oEo. 
dwelled there: he appoynted his bouse to be sold. & the 
price therof to be giuen to the poor: it was of Alhallowes 
parish the lesse. Then is therc the said parish church of 
Alhallowes callcd the lesse, and by some Alhallowes on the 
cellers, for it standeth on vaults, it is said to be builded by sir 
Ioltu Poultney, sometimes Maior. The Steeple and Quire of 
this Church standeth on an arched gate, being the entrie to a 

Church 1, ne. 
Parish church 
of Alhalloves 
the more. 

l'ac 

Hay wharlc 
! RII2. 

\\ol»cy lanc. 

Parish church 
of Alhalloves 
the lesse. 

 \ oolseys Lane 103] "-' vpon a<M. 159 8 



Cold Har- 
brough. 

236 Dowwgate warcte 
great house called Cold Harbrough : the Quire of late being 
fallen downe, is now againc at lcngth in the yeare .594. by the 
parishioners new builded. Touching this Cold Harbrough, 
I find that in the 13. of ]z'dward the OE. sir lroh1 ,4bcl knight, 
demised or let vnto 25rcnric Stow Draper, ail that his capitall 
messuage called the Cold Harbrough, in the Parish of ,411 
Saizts adfivtetm, and ail the purtenances within the gate, with 
the key which Robo-t 25rartford Citizen, sonne to IVilliam 
Hartford, had, and ought, and the foresaid Robert paid for 
it the rent of 33. shillings the yeare. This t?obert I-[artford 
being owner thereof, as also of other lands in Surrey, deceasing 
without issue maie, left two daughters his co-heyres, to wit, 
hlotHa, maricd to sir l¢aph t3i«ot, and 21[aude maried to sir 
Slcph«n Coscnlon knights, betweene whom the sayd house and 
lands were parted. After the which Iohn tigot sonne to the 
said sir l¢aph, and sir Iohn Cosctttou, did sell their moities of 
Cold Harbrough vnto h/)t/ I)oulDle3 ', sonne of Adam Ponll¢cy 
the 8. of ]{d7ard the third. This sir lohz ]-'oultuo dwelling 
in ] this house, and being foure rimes Maior, the said house 
tooke the naine of Ionlttte3,s Inne. Notwithstanding this sir 
_ohn Pottltttcy the 21. of l£dw«rd the 3- by his Charter gaue 
and confirmed to 25rmuphr O, de Bohune Earle of Hereford and 
Essex, his whole tenement called Cold Harbrough, with all 
the tenements and key adioyning, and appurtenances some- 
time pertaining to l¢obcrt dc Hcrford, on the way called Hay 
wharfe lane, &c. for one Rose at Midsommer, to him and to 
his heyres for all seruices, if the saine were demaunded. This 
sir Zohn Ponllttey deceascd  349. and left issue by 2][argarel 
his wife, lIlliam 1)oMtt¢e3 ,, who died without issue, and 
Jlararct his mother was married to sir lVicholas Louell 
I«fight, &c. Philip S. Cleare gaue two messuages pertaining 
to this Cold Harbrough in the Roperie, towardes the inlarging 
of the Parish church, and churchyard of .AI1 Saints, called the 
lesse, in the e. of Richard the second. 
In the yeare 397- the OE. of l¢ichard the second, Iohu 
I-[olland Earle of Huntington was lodged there, and l¢ichard 
the OE. his brother dined with him, it was then counted a right 
fayre and stately house, but in the next yeare following, I find 
that l£dmond Earle of Cambridge was there lodged, notwith- 



Dow.ega[e m'de 237 
standing the saide house still retained the naine of PoMtaç,« 
Inne, in the raigne of enrfe the sixt, the OE6. of his raine. 
It beloned since to . dlamd duke of Excest¢r, and he was 
lod¢d there in the yeare 47oE. In the yeare 483. kard 
the third by his l¢tters Patents ranted and aue to dor 
lrft, alias Çartr» principall kin of Armes of Enlsh men, 
and to the rest of the kins Heraulds and Purseuants of Armes, 
ail that messuae with the appurt¢nances, called Cold Harber 
in the parish of 11 saints the little in London» and their 
succeors for euer. Dated at Westminster y OE. of March 
muo r«nfrf»w without fine or fee : how the said Heraulds 
depaed therewith I haue not read, but in the raine of«nrf« 
the eiht, the Bishop of Durhams house neare Charin crosse, 
being taken into the kings hand, Cuth&rl Tmtslal Bishop 
of Durham was lodged in this Cold Harber, since the which 
time it hath belonged to the Earles of Shrewsburie by com- 
position (as is supposed) from the said Cuthbert Tuustall. The 
last deceased Earle tooke it downe, and in place thereof 
builded a great number of smal I tenements now letten out for 
great rents, to people of ail sortes. 
Then is the Diers Hall, which companie was ruade a brother- 
hood or Guild, in the fourth of Hcurie the sixt, and appoynted 
to consist of a gardian or Warden, and a communaltie the x. 
Edward the 4. Then bee there diuerse large Brewhouses, 
and others, till you corne to Ebgate lane, where that ward 
endeth in the East. On the North side of Thames street be 
diuers lanes also, the first is at the south end of Elbow lane 
before spoken of, west from Downegate, ouer against Green- 
wich lane: then be diuerse fayre houses for Marchants and 
others ail along that side. The next lane East from Downe- 
gate, is called Bush fane, which turneth vp to Candlewicke 
streete, and is of Downegate warde. Next is Suffolke lane, 
likewise turning vp to Candlewicke streete, in this lane is one 
notable Grammar schoole, founded in the yeare 56L by the 
toaster, wardens, and assistants of the Marchant taylers in the 
parish of Saint Laurcnce Poultney. Richard Hilles sometime 
master of that companie, hauing before giuen 5oe. pound 
towards the purchase of an house, called the Mannor of the 
Rose, sometime belonging to the Duke of Buckingham, wherein 

Page e39 

The Dyers 
hall. 

Bush lane. 
Suffolke lane. 

.Iarehant 
Tailers 
schoole. 

The Mauner 
of the Rose. 



,q. Lurence 
lane, 
Poultney lane, 

13" wardes on 
the east side 
of walbrooke, 
hot hauing 
one bouse on 
the west of the 
.ai«l brook. 

2_t0 

Wards on the 
west of Wal- 
i,rooke, and 
first of Vintrie 
warde. 

Euerie man 
liued by his 
seuerall pro- 
fessed trade. 

"-38 

Dow.Goa/« 

the said schoole is kept. Then is there one other lane which 
turncth vp to saint Laurcitce bill, and to the southwest corner 
of S. Laurence churchyard : then one other lane called Ponltney 
lane, that goeth vp of this ward to the southeast corner of 
Saint Laurence churchyard, and so downe againe, and to thc 
west corner of S. 21[artbt Or, gar fane, and ouer against Ebgate 
fane: and this is ail of Downgate ward, the 3" in number 
lying East from the water course of Walbrook, and bath not 
any one bouse on the west side of the said brooke. It bath an 
Alderman, his Deputie, common Counsellors nine, Constables 
cight, Scauengers fiue, for the Wardmote inquest fourteene, and 
a Beedle, it is taxed to the fifteene eight and twentie pound. I 

Wards on the west side of Walbrooke, and 
first of Vintry »vard 
NOW I am to speake of the other wardes,  OE. in number, ail 
lying on the west side of the course ofWalbrooke : and first of 
the Vintry ward, so called of Vintners, and of the Vintrie, a parte 
of the banke of the Riuer of Thames, where the marchants of 
Burdeaux craned their wines out of Lighters, and other 
vessels, & there landed and ruade sale of them within forty 
daies after, vntil the OES. of Edze, ard the first, at which rime the 
said marchants complained that they could not sell their wines, 
paying poundage, neither hire houses or sellers to lay them in, 
and it was redressed by virtue of the kings writ, directed to 
the Maior and shiriffes of London, dated at C«rl«ucroke (or 
Carlile) since the which rime many faire and large houses with 
vaults and cellers for stowage of wines and lodging of the 
Burdeaux marchants haue been builded in place, where before 
rime were Cookes bouses: for Fit.vstephen in the raigne of 
tteJtrie the OE. writeth that vpon the riuers side betweene the 
wine in ships, and the wine to be sold in tauerns, was a coin- 
mon cookerie or Cookes row, &c. as in another place I haue 
set downe : whereby it appeareth that in those dayes (and till 
of late rime) euery man liued by his professed trade, not any 
one interrupting an other. The cookes dressed meate, and 
sold no wine, and the Tauerner sold wine. but dressed no 
meatc for salc, &c. 



This varde beginneth in the East, at the west end of 
Downegate ward, as the water course of Walbrooke parteth 
them, to wit at Granthams lane on the Thames side, and at 
Elbow lane on the land side: it runneth along in Thames 
streete west, some three houses beyond the olde Swanne 
a Brewhouse, and on the lande side some three houses west, 
beyond Saint/ames at Garlicke Hith. In bredth this ward 
stretcheth from the Vintry north to the wall of the West Gare 
of the Tower Royall : the other I North part is of Cordwayner 
streete warde. Out of this Royall streete by the South gate 
of Tower Royall runneth a small streete, East to S. Iohns vpon 
Walbrooke, which streete is called Horshew bridge, of such 
a bridge sometime ouer the brooke there, which is now vaulted 
ouer. Then from the sayd south gate west. runneth one other 
streete, called Knight riders streete, by S. Thomas Apost/cs 
church, on the north side, and Wringwren fane, by the said 
Church, at the west end thereof, and to the East end of the 
Trinitie Church in the said Knightriders streete, where this 
ward endeth on that south side the street: but on the north 
side it runneth no farther then the corner against the new 
builded Tauerne, and other houses, in a plot of ground, where 
sometime stood Ormond place, yet haue yee one other lane 
lower downe in Royall streete, stretching from ouer against 
S. 3tichaels church, to, and by the North side of S. Iames 
church by Garlicke Hith, this is called Kerion lane, and thus 
much for the bounds of Vintrie ward. Now on the Thames 
side west from Granthams lane, haue ye Herber lane, or Brikels 
lane, so called of Iohn t?rikels, sometime owner thereof. 
Then is Simpsons lane, of one Simpson or Emperors head 
lane of such a signe : then the three Cranes lane, so called 
hOt onely of a signe of three Cranes at a Tauerne doore, but 
rather of three strong Cranes of Timber placed on the Vintrie 
wharfe by the Thames side, to crane vp wines there, as is 
afore shewed: this lane was of old rime, to wit, the 9. of 
Richard the . called the painted Tauerne lane, of the Tauerne 
being painted. 
Then next ouer against S. AIartins Church, is a large house 
builded of stone and tituber, with vaults for the stowage 
of wines, and is called the Vintrie. There dwelled Iohn 

_Page 24I 

tlorshew 
bridge streete, 
Knightriders 
streete. 

Kerion lane. 

IIarber lane, 
or Brikels lane. 

Simpsons lane. 
Painted Ta- 
uerne or three 
Cranes lane 

The Vintrie 
Record. 



or chureh lane 

lhode lane. 

.Page 242 
l'arish eicarks 
hall. 
S;pittle lane or 
Stodies lane. 

The Vintnars 
hall. 

Almeshouses 
of the Vint- 
Fiel'S. 
Marchant 
Vintoners. 

24o lit/O, wardc 
Gisers Vintner, Major of London, and Constable of the 
Tower, and then was Itcnry Picard, Vintner, Maior. In this 
house Item-le Picard feasted some foure kings in one day 
(as in my Summarie I haue shewed). Then next is Vanners 
lane, so called of one ['annar that was owner therof, it is 
now called church lanc. of the comming vp from the xvharfe 
to S. $[artins church. Next is Brode lane, for that the saine 
is broder for the passage of Carts from the Vintrie warfe, 
then be the other lanes. At the northwest corner of this lane 
is the [ parish Clcarks hall, lately by them purchased, since 
they lost their old hall in Bishopsgate street. Next is Spittle 
lane of old time so called, since Stodies lane of the owner 
thercof, named Stodie. Sir Iohn Stodie, Vintner, Maior in 
the yeare x 357, gaue it with all the Quadrant wherein Vintners 
hall now standeth, with the tenements round about vnto the 
Vintners: the Vintners builded for themselues a faire hall, 
and also .3- Almes houses there for '3. poore people, which 
are kept of charitie, rent free. 
The Vintners in London were of old rime called marchants 
Vintners of Gascoyne, and so I read them in the Records 
of Edward the ,z. the  i. yeare, and Edward the third the 
ninth yeare, they were as well English men, as straungers 
borne beyond the Seas, but then subiects to the kings of 
England, great Burdeous Marchants of Gascoyne, and French 
wines, diuers of them were Maiors of this Citie, namely Iohn 
Adriau Vintner, Reignoht at Conduit, Iohn OxeoEord, _tien. 
Picard, that feasted the kings of England, France, Scotland 
& Cypres, Iohu Stodie that gaue Stodies lane to the Vintners, 
which 4- last named were Majors in the raigne of Edward the 
third, and yet Gascoyne wines were then to be sold at London, 
hot aboue 4.d. nor Rhenish wine aboue 6.d. the Gallon. I reade 
of sweet wines, that in the 5 o. of Edward the 3- Iohn Pcachie 
Fishmonger was accused, for that he procured a licence for 
the onely sale of them in London, which notwithstanding he 
iustified by laxv : he was imprisoned and fined. More I reade 
that in the sixt of I-tcnrie the sixt, the Lombards corrupting 
their sweete wines, when knowledge thereof came to 
RainwÆll Major of London, he in diuerse places of the Citie 
commanded the heades of the buts and other vessels in the 



open streetes tobe broken, to the number of I5 o, so that the 
liquour rulming for/h, passed through the Ci/tic like a streame 
of raine water, in the sight of ail the people, from whence 
there issued a most loathsome sauour. 
I reade in the raigne of tt«nrie the seuenth, that no sweete 
wines were brought into this realm but Malmesies by the 
longabards, paying to y" ldng for his licence 6.s. 8.d. of euery 
but, besides I2.d. for bot/ci large. I remember within this 
54. yeres, blalmsey no/ to be solde more then i.d. ob. the 
pint. For proofe whereof, it[ appeareth in the Church booke t2ge 243 
of S. Andrezv Vnd«rshafte, that in the yearc I547. /. G. and 
S. A'. then Churchwardens, for Lxxx. pintes ofbIaluesey 1 spent 
in the Church, af/er i.d. ob. the pinte, payde ai the yeares end 
for the saine/en shillinges : more I remember that no Sackes 
were solde, but Ruinney, and that for medicine more then 
for drinke, but now many kinds of sackes are knowne and 
vsed, and so much for Wines. For the Vintrey, to end there- 
with, I reade that in the raigne of tteury the four/h, the yong 
Prince ]aremT,, T. Duke of Clarence, LDuke of Bedford, and 
ttumfrcy Duke of Glocester the Kinges sonnes, being at 
supper amongst the Marchantes of London in the Vintrey, 
in the house of Lezi,cs Iohu, ][cn*3' Scogan sent to theln 
a Ballad beginning thus, 
,l[y ttoblc soit/tes a/tel ebe my Lords a'«arc, 
[ lvttr Fathcr, called vnworlkily, 
Scnd vnto you, this ballacl following ho'e, 
IVri/teu with minc own hand fnll rtatcly, 
:tlthonglt i! be tha! I no! re/retenti.j, 
tfauc writtcu to 3vnr es/ores, [ 3'ait tr«O " 
3line z, nctmuizg tahcth beuucO', 
tror Gods sabe, end kcar]«en «ha! [ sa.l'. 
Then follow in like race/er OE3- staues, contayning a per- 
swasion from loosing of rime, follilic in lust and vice, but to 
spcndc thc saine in verrue and godlines, as yee may rcadc in 
Gcffr O' Cha.wccr his workcs latcly printcd. Thc succcs5ors Chaucer, fol. 
of those Viutners and winc drawers that retayled by thc 334, & 335. 
Gallon, pot/cil, quart and pinte, were all incorporated by the 
 Maluesey] z6o3: Malmsey Thams 
;IOW. I 

The kings son 
supped in 
Vintrie. 
Il. Scogan. 



,in« tunners naine of wine tunners, in the raigne of l?dward the third, 
incorporated 
the IS. ofH.6, confirmed the 15. of/-fem'y the 6. 

Palmers lane 
or anchor lane. 
Plummers 
hall. 
worster h«wse. 
Frewterers 
hall. 
 qde Swanne. 

[,a'.ernoster 
lane. 
Page 44 
Lib. S. Maty 
Ouery. 

l'arrish "church 
of S. Michaels 
pater noster a 
Colledge one 
Almcshouse or 
11 ospitall. 

R. Wnitington 
son to Sir W. 
"Vhitington 
k night. 

and 

Next is Palmers lane, now called Anchor lane: thc plum- 
mers haue their Hall there, but are tenantes to the Vintners. 
Then is Worcester bouse, sometimes belonging to the Earles 
ofWorcester, now diuided into many Tenementes. The Fru- 
tcrers haue their Hall there. Then is the Old Swan, a great 
Brew bouse. And this is all on the Thames side, that I can 
note in this Ward. 
On the land side is the royall streete and Pater uoster 
Lane, I I thinke of olde time called A_rches, for I reade that 
lobert de Sztffolle, e gaue to lI'alter dc Forda  his tenement with 
the purtenance in the lane, called Les Arc/tes in the parish ot" 
S. A[ich«cl de ip«tcr nostcr church, betweene the Wal of the 
e Selde called Winchester Seld  on the Est, and the same 
on thc West, &c. More, I reade of a Stone house callcd 
S«hta a dt" IVbttot, b.rta Steml«z bridge, which in that Lane 
was ouer Walbrooke water. Then is the fayre parish church 
of S. AIichael called Patcr ztostcr church in the Royal, this 
church was new builded and ruade a colledge of S. Spirit, 
and S. ]Im3,, founded by lichard IVhitbtgton Mercer, 
4. times Mayor, for a maister, 4. fellowes maisters of art, 
clearks, conducts, chorists, &c. and an almcs house called 
Gods bouse, or hospitall for thirteene poore men, one of 
them to bc tutor, and to have xvi.d, the wecke, the other 
twelue each of them to havc xiiii.d, thc weeke for euer, 
with other necessal T prouisions, an hutch with three lockes, 
a common seale, &c. These were bounde to pray for the 
good estate of Richard ll'hitb«fftou and Alicc his wife their 
founders, and for Sir ll'illiam lVhitingtoa Knight, and Dame 
[oa« his wife, and for Httgh Fitswarcn, and Dame 3Iohte his 
wife, the fathers and mothers ofthe saide Richarde I Vhitingtou 
and Alice his wife, for king Rich«rd the second, and Thom«s 
f IVoodstockc. Duke of Glocester, speciall Lordcs and Pro- 
moters of the saide A'icbar&" lFbitbtgton, &c. The licence 
for this foundation xvas graunted by king t[«m 3, the fourth. 
the eleuenth of his raigne, and in the twelfth of the saine 
 de Farda] Z)afard 6o 3 - fielde called Winchester field 6o 3 
 S«hta] Stotht 1633 



Ii;«try ee,a rc?c 243 
kinges raign the Mayor and Commonalty of London graunted 
to Richard« I¢Zldlipglo;t a vacant peece of grounde, thereon 
to build his Colledge in the Royall, all which was confirmed 
by tfe;tr), the sixt, the third of his raigne, to Iv/rit Çoucntrie, 
lcubbt Crpenter and lVilliam Grotte Executors to Richard 
lVhithzgtolz. This foundation was againe confirmed by Par- 
liament, the tenth of/-/-enTy the sixt, and was suppressed by 
the stature of Edwarcl the sixt. 
The Aimes bouses with the poore men do remayne, and Richard 
are paide by the Mercers: this Richard« IVhititfftou was in whitington 
thrise buried. 
this Church three rimes buried, first by his Executors vnder 
a fayre monument, then in the raigne of tSclwarcl the 6. the 
Parson of that Church, thinking some great riches (as he 
said) to bee buried I with him, caused his monument to bee 
broken, his body to be spoyled of his Leaden sheet, and 
againe the second rime to bee buried : and in the raigne of 
Queene A[ar3,, the parishioners xvere forced to take him vp, 
to lap him in lead, as afore, to bury him the thirde time, and 
to place his monument, or the like, oucr him again, which 
rcmayneth and so hee resteth. Thomas lludforc?, Alderman, 
was buried in this church, a448. Arudd Alacbzam Vintner, 
a Marchant of Burdious, a 457. Sir ltecrc Taub, or t-la»tau- 
c&ltx Knight of the Garter, borne in Almayne, a Noble 
Warriour in ltcz»y the fift, and /-/-«3' the sixt dayes. Sir 
L¢clmottdAhtlshezv Knight, neare to Tltotas Cokham Recorder 
of London, the Lady 1Ç3,te , Sir II'illia»t Ohthall knight, a46o. 
ll'illiam arttockc, Sir loht Youff Grocer. Mayor x466, 
daughter to Sir I«»ku Yot, ff, first married to _obcrl 
after to Robert ./][ttllelettx, then to IVilliam Chyt-'3' Equier, 
[ohu latth Gentleman, lVilliam iVos«dl Equier, 
['ostar Clearke of the Crowne, xSoEo. Sir IVillia»t Ba3'O', 
Draper, Mayor 533. with Dame l(athercu his vife, leauing 
xvi. children, h,hu la3'doJt mcrccr, Shiriffe x58oE, who gaue 
Legacies to thc 3- Almes men, and othcrvise for a Lecture. 
At the vppcr cnd of this. streete, is the Tower Royall, To,verRoyall 
whcreof that strectc taketh naine : this Tower and great placc buildcd about 
llcnry the 
was so called, of pertavning to the kinges of this Realme, as maybesup- 
• " . .... - - . . posed: king 
but by whome the saine was first Dmtae, or ot wlaat antqmty Stephen was 
continued, I haue hOt read, more then that in the raigne ofl°dg ed there. 
R2 



l'age -46 
The I.ady 
princes lodged 
in the Tower 
Royall. 

King Richard 
lodged in the 
"l%wer Royall. 

Cutlars hall. 

244 1 7ntry çvarde 
dward the first, the second, fourth and seuenth yeares, it 
was the tenement of »wn eawmes, also that in the 36 of 
dward the 3" the saine xvas called the Royall, in the prrish 
of E. 3[i«a«ldeater noster,  that in the 43. ofhis raigne, hee 
gaue it by thc nmne of his Inne, called the Royall in the 
cittie of London, in alue xx.l. by yeare, nto his Colledffe of 
. St¢e» at Westminster : notwithstanding in the raigne of 
Richard the second it was called the Queenes Wardrope, as 
apl)eal'eth by this that followeth, king Rchard« hauing in 
Smithfield ouercome and dispersed his Rebels, hec, his Lordes 
and all his Company, cntered the Citty of London. with great 
ioy, and xvent to the Lady Princes his nother, who was [ thon 
lodged in the Tower Royall, called the ueenes Wardrope, 
where shee had remayned three dayes and two nightes, right 
sore abashed, but when shee saxv the king her sonne, she was 
greatelie reioyced and saide. Ah SOlme, what great sorrow 
haue I suffered for you this day. The king aunswered and 
saide, certaincly Madam I know it xvell, but now reioyce, and 
th«mke God, for I hauc this day recouered lllillC heritage, and 
the Reahnc of ]çngland, which I had nearc hand lost. 
This Twcr secmcth fo haue beenc at that tilne of good 
defencc, lbr when the Rebels had beset the Tower of London, 
and got possession thereof, taking from thence whome they 
listed, as in naine Annales I haue shewed, the princesse being 
forced to flye came to this Tower Royall, where shee was 
lodged and renayned fe as yee haue heard, and it may bee 
also supposcd that the king himselfe was at that rime lodged 
there. I read that in the yeare 386. Lyon king of Armonie, 
being chased out of his Realme by the Tartarians, receyued 
innumerable giftes of the King and of his Nobles, the king 
then lying in thc Royall, where hee also granted to the saide 
king of Allnonie, a Chartcr of a thousand poundes by yeare 
during his life. This for proofe may suffice, that Idnges of 
England haue beene lodged in this Tower, though the saine 
of later time haue been neglected and turned into stabling for 
the kinges horses, and now letten out to diuers men, and 
diuided into Tenements. 
In Horsebridge streete is the Cutlars Hall. Richard de 
IVildmle x95. confirmed to aule utdar this house and 



edifices in the parrish of S. Michaell pater noster church, and 
S. Johns vpon Walbrooke, which sometime Lawrens Gisors, 
and his sonne Peler Gisors did possesse, and afterward 
ttztgo de tZingham, and lyeth betweene the Tenement of 
the saide Richard towardes the south, and the lane called 
Horshew bridge towards the north, and betweene the waye 
called pater noster Church on the We.t, and the course of 
Walbrooke on the East, paying yearely one cloue of Gcreflowers 
at Easter, and to the Prior and Couent of Saint Mary 
Ouery, 6.s. This house sometime belonged to S/mon .l)olesly 
Grocer, Mayor J359. They of this Company were of olde 
time three Artes, or sortes of \Vorkemen, to wit, the first I were page e-t7 
Smithes, Forgers of Blades, and therefore called :Bladers, and 
diuerse of them prooued wealthie men, as namely IVal¢er 
Nelc, Blader, one of the Shiriffes, the oE. of E,lward the 3- 
deceased .35. and buried in Saint lames Garlickc I-lit/z: 
hee left lands to the mending of high wayes about London. 
betwixt Newgate and Wicombe, Aldgate and Chelmesford, 
Bishopsgate and Ware, Southwarke and Rochester, &c. The 
second were makers of Haftes, and otherwise garnishers of 
Blades : the third sort were Sheathmakers for swords, daggers, 
and kniues. In the o. of I-[euric the 4. certaine ordinances 
were ruade betwixt the Bladers, and the other Cutlers, and in 
the 4. of t[eurie the 6, they were all three Companies drawne 
into one fraternitie, or brotherhood, by the naine of Cutlers. 
Then is Knight riders streete, so called (as is supposed) of Knightriders 
Knights well armed and mounted at the Tower Royall, teete" 
ryding from thence through that street, west to Creede lane, 
and so out at Ludgate towards Smithfield, when they were 
there to turney, iust. or otherwise to shew actiuities before the 
king and states of the Reallne. In this streete is the parish 
Church of saint Thvmas .4ostlcs, by Wringwren lane, a 
proper Church, but monuments of antiquitie be there none, 
except some Armes in the windowes, as also in the stone 
worke, which some suppose to be of Iohn 17arns Mercer, Maior 
of London in the yere 37 r. a great builder thereof,/-/. Caus- 
ton, Marchant, was a benefactor, and had a Chantrie there 
about 396, T. l.oman Maior 3o. had also a Chantrie there 
3t9 . Fit.'_.williams also a benefactor, had a Chantry there. 

P, laders or 
iflade smithes. 

t Iaftemakers. 
Shethmakers. 

Vringwren 
iane. 
l'arish church 
of S. Thomas 
thê AI-'ostle. 



Page 24S 
George in 
Bredstreete 
giuen to the 
Naltars vpoll 
conditions hot 
performed. 

Ipris Inne. 

King Stephen 
lodged in the 
Tower Royal. 

246 I'it/ry warde 
More, sir lf'illiam Littles3ery, alias tIorne, (for king Ed. the 4- 
so named him) because he vas a most excellent blower in 
a borne, he was a Salter, and Marchant of the staple, Major 
of London in the yeare 1487. and was buried in this Church, 
hauing appointed by his testament the Bels to bee chaunged 
for foure new Bels of good tune and sound, but that was hOt 
performed : he gaue 500. marks to the repayring of high waies 
betwixt London and Cambridge, his dwelling house, with a 
Garden, and appurtenances in the said parish to be sold, and 
bestowed in charitable actions, as his executors would answer 
before God: lais house called the Georffe in lqredstreete he 
gaue to the Saltars, they to find a Priest in the I said Church, 
to haue six pound thirteene shillings foure pence the yeare, 
to euery preacher at Paules Crosse, and at the Spittle 4. pence 
for euer. to the Prisoners of Newgate, Ludgate, Marshalsey, 
and Kings bench, in victuals ten shillings at Christmas, and 
ten shillings at Easter for euer, which legacies are hot per- 
formed, lIilliam Shipton, l'illiam Champncis and John 
de Bmford, had Chauntries there, Iohn «[artDt Butcher, one 
of the Shiriffs, was buried there 1533 &c. Then west from 
the said Church on the saine side, was one great messuage, 
sometime called Ipris Inne, of lVilliam of Ipris  a Fleming, 
the first builder thereof. This lI'illiam was called out of 
Flanders, with a number of Flemings to the aide of king 
Stcphen, agaynst dJ[attde the Empresse, in the yeare I38. 
and grew in fauour with the said king for his seruice, so farre 
that he builded this his house neare vnto Tower royall, in the 
which Tower it seemeth the king was then lodged, as in the 
heart of the Citie, for his more safetie. 
Robert Erle of Glocester, brother to the Empresse, being 
taken, was committed to the custodie of this IVilliam to be 
kept in the Castell of Rochester, till king St,hen was also 
taken, and then the one was deliuered in exchange for the 
other, and both set free : this lb'illiam of Ipres gaue Edredes 
Hith, now called the Queenes Hith, to the Prior and Chanons 
of the holy Trinitie in London: he founded the Abbay of 
Boxley in Kent, &c. In the first of Ifenrie the second, the 
saide ll,lliam with ail the other Flemmings, fearin. the 
 Ipris Inne, so called of Willialn of Ipres 1598. 



indignation of the new king departed the land, but it seemeth 
that the saide IVil[ia», was shortly called backe againe, and 
restored both to the ings fauour, and to his olde possessions 
here, so that the naine and famille continued long after in this 
realme, as may" appeare by" this which followeth. In the 
yeare I377. the 5. of dwara t the third, the Citizens of 
London mindin to haue destroyed Iohn of Gaunt, Duke of 
Lancaster and I-teri P«r«[e Marsha]l, (for causes shewed in 
my ,zbmles) sought vp and downe, and could not find them, 
for they wcre that day" to dine with Ioh of [pres at his lnne, 
which the Londoners wist hot of', but thouht the Duke and 
Marshall had beene at the Sauoy, and therefore poasted 
thither: but one of the Dukes nights seeing these things, 
came in great hast to the place where ] the Duke was, and '«« 49 
after that he had kno¢ed and could not bee let in, he said to 
Itaudana t the Porter, if' thou loue my Lord and thy lire, open 
the gate: with which wordes he gat entry, and with great 
feare he tels the Duke, that without the gare were infinite 
numbers of armed men, and vnlesse he tooke great heede, 
that day" would be his last: with which wordes the Due 
leapt so hastily" from his Oisters, that hee hurt both his legges 
against the forme: wine was offered, but he could not drinke 
for haste, and so fled with his fellow tter[e t:¥r«ie out at 
a backe gate, and entering the Thames, neuer stayed rowin., 
vntill they came to a house heure the Marmot of Kenington, Kenington 
besid¢ Lamb- 
where at that rime the Princesse lay with 
Prince, belote whom hee ruade his complaint, &c. On tbe 
other side, I reade of (a) Messuage called Ringed hall, king 
//eri« the eight the 3. of his raigne, gaue the saine with 
foure tenements adioyning vnto A[orga Phi/ip, a/ias lVolfe, 
in the Parish of Saint Tkomas Apostles in London, &c. 
Ouer against Ipres Inne in Knight riders streete at the corner 
towards S. lames at Garlicke Hith, was sometime a great 
house builded of stone, and called Ormond place, for that it ,mc«.a place. 
sometimes belonged to the Earles of OrmoM. King Edward 
the 4- in the fifth of his raigne, gaue to Eliabetl, his wife the 
Mannor of Greenwitch with the Tower and Parke in the 
Countie of Kent. He also gaue this tenement called Ormond 
place with all the appurtenances to the same, scituate in the 



Kerion fane. 

Glasiars hall. 
Parish church 
of S. Martin in 
the ¥intrie. 

Lib. Trinitate 
London. 

Iage aio 

Gisors hall 
corruptlycal¢d 
Gerards hall. 

Epitaph. 

248 l )?/3' c,a.rde 
parish of saint I)'iuitie in Knightriders streete in London. 
This bouse is now lately taken downe, and diuerse faire 
Tenements are builded there, the corner bouse whereof is 
a Tauerne. Then lower downe in Royall streete, is Kerion 
lane, of one Kerion sometime dwelling there. In this lane be 
diuers faire houses for Marchants, and amongest others is the 
Glasiers hall. At the south corner of Royall streete, is the faire 
parish Church of saint [artin called in the Vintrie, sometime 
called saint l]tartin de l'eremand church. This church was 
new builded about the yeare 1399. by the executorsofJ][athew 
Columbars a stranger borne, a Burdeaux Marchant of Gascoyne 
and French wines, his armes remaine yet in the East Window, 
and is bctweene a Chcue»on, 3. Cohmtbins: there lie ] buried 
in this Church, Sir John Gisors Maior, I31 I. Heurie Gisors 
his sonne, 1343. and ohu Gisors his brother, 135o. he gaue to 
his sonne T. his great mansion house, called Gisors hall in the 
parish of S. Hldred in Bredstreet. This Thomas had issue 
Ioht and Thomas, Iohn made a feofment, and sold Gisors 
hall, and other his lands in London, about the yeare I386. 
Thomas deceased 1395. Henrie Veunar, l?arlholomew de la 
'attdl, Thomas Cornzvallcs, one of the Shiriffes, 1384. Iohn 
Cornwalh's Esqui,'e, 436, Iohn 3[ustrcll, Vintner, 144. 
II,'illiam ]odson, lVilliam Castleton, Zohu Çray, Robert Dalusse 
Barbar, in the raigne of Edward the 4. with this Epitaph. 
As flowers lu flcld thus asseth l', 
Nabed thon clothcd, f«eble in the cud. 
It shcweth by Robert Dalusse, and Alison his wife, 
Ç/tris! thcm sauc from the power of the fleud. 
Sir Raph Anstric. Fishmonger, Maior, new roofed this church 
with timber, couered it with lead, and beautifully glased it : 
he deceased 1494. and was there buried with his two wiues, 
Rah Austrie his sonne, gentleman, II:illia»t Austrie,and other 
of that name, t?artrand wife to Grimond Descure Esquire, 
a Gascoyne and Marchant of wines, 1494. Thomas latsou, 
Alice Fowler, daughter and heire to Iohn lowton, wife to Ioh, 
Hulton, lames Bartlet, and Alice his wife, IVilliam Fennor, 
Roger Cotton, Robcrt Slocker, Iohn Pembcrton, P/tilil «te 
Plasse, Iohn StaiOh'h,n , hhn 3[ortimcr, II"illiam Lee, ll'illiam 



ttamst««d, lVilliam Sioksb&, and Gilbo'! 2[ard, had Chantries 
there. 
ŒEhen is the Parish Church of S. Inm«s, called at Garlick hith 
or Garlicke hiue, for that of old rime on the banke of the 
riuer of ŒEhames, neare to this Church, Garlicke was vsally 
solde : this is a proper Chnrch, whereof Ridmrd Roildn, E one 
of the shiries, 3OE6. is said to be the new builder : and leth 
buried in the saine, so was lFalt«r N«I«, Blader, one of the 
Shiriffes, 1337. Iohn of O.rooEordVilatner, Major 341. I read 
in the first of Ldward the third, that this lohn of O.re@rd 
gaue to the Priorie of the holy Trinitie in London, two tofts 
of land, one Mill, I fiftie acres of land, two actes of wood, 
with the _Appurtenances, in Kentish towne, in valour OEo.s. 
and 3.d. by yeare. Richard Goodcbeapc, Iohn «le Cressbtgham, 
and Iohu ll'hitthorne, and before them Çalfrid2[ouch'y, I28, 
founded a Chantrie there. 
Monuments remaining there, I¢o3crt Ga3ctcr, Esquier, Major 
of Newcastle vpon Tine, 3IO. [o/m Gisors, )Villiam Tilinoe- 
haro, Iohn Stanley, L. Stra»g«, eldest sonne to the Earle of 
Darby, 15o 3. Nicholas Slaham, Robert de LMon, I361. 
Richard £ions, a famous marchant of wines, and a Lapidarie, 
sometime one of the Shiriffes, beheaded in Cheape by l'at 
Tiler, and other Rebels, in the yearc x38. his picture on his 
graue stone verie faire and large, is with his haire rounded by 
his eares, and curled, a little beard forked, a gowne girt to hinl 
downe to his feete, of branched Damaske vrought with the 
likenes of flowers, a large pursse on his right side, hanging in 
a belt from his left shoulder, a plaine whoode about his necke, 
couering his shoulders, and hanging backe behinde him. Sir 
lhon lVroth Fishmonger, Maior 1361. deceased 14o 7. Thomas 
Stonarde of Oxfordshire. lohn Bromer Fishmonger, Alderman, 
x474- the Ladie Stanlo, , mother to the Lord Straug,; the 
Countesse of Huntington, the Ladie I-farb«rt. Sir Geoc 
Stanley, Gilbert 17onct, 1398 , a Countcsse of Worcester and 
one of her children, lVilliam 2fore Vintner, Maior 1395. 
lVilliam l'enor, Grocer, Maior 1389. Robert Chichley blaior 
x4oEI, lames Sî«ncer Vintner, Major xSoE 7. Iichard Plat 
Brewer, founded a free schoole there, 16Ol. And thus an cnd 
of Vintrie warde, which bath an Alderman, with a Deputie, 

Parish church 
of .q. Iames. 
Garlicke hith. 



250 l«h/ry warde 

common Counsellors nine, Constables nlne, Scauengers foure, 
Wardmote inquest foureteene, and a Beedle. It is ta.xed to 
the fifteene, six pound, 1.3. shillings 4. pence. [ 

PaEe 212 
Cordwainer 
stfeete warde. 

Budge Row. 

Wathling 
streete. 

Turnbase lane. 

Corwainer 
streete. 

Ilosiar lane in 
Cordwainer 
streete. 

Page 253 

Cordwainer street ward 
THE next is Cordwainer street warde, taking that naine of 
Cordwainers, or Shoemakers, Curriars, and workers of Leather 
dwelling there: for it appeareth in the records of /-L the 6. 
the ninth of his raigne, that an order was taken then for Cord- 
wainers and Curriars in Corney streete, and Sopars lane. 
This warde beginneth in the East on the west side of Wal- 
brooke, and runneth west through Budge Row (a street so 
called of Budge Furre, and of SHnners dwelling there), then 
vp by S. A»ffwnics Church through Ac/lcling (or Noble street) 
as Le'ylamttermeth it, commonly called Wathlng streete, to the 
red Lion, a place so called of a great Lion of Timber placed 
there at a Gate, entring a large Court, wherein are diuerse 
fayre and large shoppes well furnished with broade cloathes, 
and other draperies of all sorts to be solde, and this is the 
farthest West part of this ward. 
On the South side of this streete from Budge Row, lieth 
a lane turning downe by the west gate of the Tower Royall, 
and to the south ende of the stone Wa!l beyond the said gate, 
is of this ward, and is accounted a part of the Royall streete : 
agaynst this west gate of the Tower Royall, is one other fane, 
that runneth west to Cordwainer streete, and this is called 
Turnebase lane: on the south side wherof is a peece of 
Wringwren lane, to the Northwest corner of Saint Tlamas 
Church the Apostle. Then againe out of the high streete 
called Wathling, is one other streete which runneth thwart the 
same, and this is Cordwainer streete, whereof the whole warde 
taketh name: this streete beginneth by West Cheape, and 
Saint [arie t3ow church is the head thereof on the west side, 
and it runneth downe south through that part which of later 
time was called Hosier lane, now Bow lane, and then by the 
west end of Aldmary Church, to the new builded houses, in 
place of Ormond bouse, and so to Garlicke bill, or hith, to 
Saint Iames [ Church. The vpper part of this street towards 
Cheape was called Hosiar lane of hosiars dwellinff there in 



place of Shoomakers : but now those hosiers being worne out 
by men of other trades (as the Hosiars had worne out the 
Shoomakers) the saine is called Bow lane of Bow Church. 
On the west side of Cordewainers street is 13asing fane, right 
ouer against Turne basse lane. This Basin lane west to the 
backe cate of the red Lion, in Wathlin streete» is of this 
Cordwainers street varde. 
Now aaine on the north side of the hih street in Budge 
row, by the Eat end of S. Anthouies church, haue ye 
S. Sith«s lane, so called of S. Sithes Church, (which standeth 
against the North end of that lane) and this is wholy of 
Cordwainers streete ward: also the south side of Needlers 
lane, which reacheth from the north end of Saint Sithes lane, 
west to Sopers fane, thon west from saint Anthonics Church 
is the south ende of Sopars lane, which lane tooke that naine, 
not of Sope-making, as some haue supposed, but of Al«u l« 
Sopar, in the ninth of dward the second. I haue hOt read 
or heard of Sope making in this Cittie till within this foure- 
score yeares, that [ohn £ame dwelling in Grassestreete set 
vp a boyling bouse : for this Citie, of former rime, was serued 
of white Sope in hard Cakes (called Castell sope, and other) 
from beyond the seas, and of gray sope, speckeled with white, 
verie sweete and good, from Bristow, solde here for a pennie 
the pound, and neuer aboue pennie farthing, and blacke 
sope for a halfe pennie the pounde. Then in Bowe Lane 
(as they now call it) is Goose lane, by Bow Church, ll'illiam 
sse.r Mercer had Tenements there in the 6. of Edward the 
thirde. 
Then ri'oto the south end of Bow lane, vp Wathling streete, 
till ouer against the red Lion : And these bee the bounds of 
Cordwainer streete warde. 
Touching Monuments therein, first you haue the fayre 
parish Church of saint Anthonies in Budge row, on the north 
side thereof. This Church was lately reedified by Thomas 
Knowles Grocer, Maior, and by Thomas Knowles his sonne, 
both buried there, with Epitaphes : of the father thus, [ 

Here liet]t grauen vnder this stone, 
Thomas Knowlcs, botlt flcslt and botte, 

Bassing lane. 

S. Sythes lane. 

Needlars lane. 

.qopars lane. 

Gray sope 
inade in Lon- 
don dearer 
then bought 
from lqristow. 

Goose lane. 

Parish church 
of.q. Anthonie. 

Page 2 ,e 4 



Epitaph of 
Th. Knowles. 

Symon Streete 
lais Epitaph. 

Cordc«hwr s/me/ 

Groccr and Alderman yeares fortie, 
Shh-iffe, and twice 3[aior trMy. 
A zzd for hc shouM hot lie aloue, 
Here lielt ¢«#h him his ood woEc [oan. 
Thcy vere togither sixtie ycare, 
And niucleezte chihh-en they had in feerc, 'c. 
Thomas t[olland Mcrcer was there buried 456. Thomas 
ll'imhmt Mcrcer, Alderman, and A'ahcrin« his wifc. Thomas 
Ilimt Merccr, 5oE8. Ho was a bencfactor to this church, to 
Aldemarie Church, and to Bow. I[ugh «Icou Marchant taylcr 
buricd SoE. Ho gaue 36. pound to the repayring of the 
steeple of this Church: Simon So'ect Groccr lyeth in the 
Church wall toward the south, his armes be thrce CoRs, and 
Iris Epitaph thus. 
Sztch as I ara, swh shall 9,oz be, 
(çrocer « London samctime eas I, 
Thc kiztgs wayer more thcn ycares twen/h', 
Simou Slree# call«d in my place, 
M rot good fcllesh@ fabtc z«otzht trace, 
Thcrcfwe Dz hcaueu, cuerlasliug loEc 
h'su scmt me, and Agnes »0' woEe : 
Kcrlic «lIcrlie, my «ordes «cre tho, 
M ud Deo gratias [ cozled thcto, 
I passcd fo God Dz the ycare of gracc. 
A thousatd foure hundred it was, 6"c. 
ll'illiam Da«ntscy Mercer, one of the Shiriffes, buried 1542. 
I[«m'h" Collet Mercer, Major, a great benefactor to this Church, 
the pictures of him, his wife, ten sonnes, and ten daughters 
remaine in the glasse window on the North side of the 
Church : but the sayde Hcurœee Collet was buryed at Stebunhith. 
l[«urh" Haltou Grocer, one of the Shiriffes, deceased I45. 
Thomas 5«bt Marchant Tayler 1533. and Roger 3[artiu, 
Mercer, Major, deceased 1573. Iohn Grmtlbam and I Nicbolas 
Bull had Chanteries there. 
Next on the south side of Budge row by the west corner 
thereof, and on the East side of Cordwainer streete, is one 
other fayre Church called Aldemarie Church, because the 
saine was very old, and elder then any Church of saint 3[arie 



Cordïoafer stree! ward -"53 
in the Citie, till of late yeares the foundation of a verie faire 
new Church was laid there by /-ricin-i« A'cM« Orocer, MMor, 
who deceased 5 8. and vas there buried in a vault by 
prepared, with a faire monument raioed ouer hm on the 
North sde the Quer, now destroyed and one: he aue 
by hs testmnent ooo. pound towards the buildin vp of that 
Church» and yet hOt permtted a resfin place for his bones 
there. Thomas oman, Major 3o. had a Chauntrie the. 
Richard Chawccr Vintner gaue to that Church his tenement 
and tauverne, xvith the appurtenance, in thc Royatt streete, 
the corner of Kirion lane, and xvas there buried, Ia48. [ohn 
Britou, R«h Hdlatd Draper, one of the Shirifls, deceased 
45 OE. lVilliam TayloG Grocer, Maior deceased, 483. He 
discharged that xvard of fifteenes to bee paide by the poore. 
Thomas Jlitd«' Mercer, buried in saint nthoth's, gaue ten 
fodder of lead to thc couering of the middlc Iste of this 
Aldemarie Church. Charlcs l¢htut Lord Montioy was buried 
there, about the yeare 545. he ruade or glased the East 
window, as appeareth by his Armes: his Epitaph madc by 
him in his life time, thus : 
lVillit&.l d, haro' I sat@hl, ami wi//i,gO' haro' T 
Sir lVilliam Laxtou Groccr. Maior. deceased 556. and 
Thomas Zo«Ç«e Grocer, Major, 563. vere buried in the Vautt 
of Hem'ic K'eble, vhose bones were vnkindty cast out, and 
his monument pulled downe, in place whereof monuments are 
set vp of the later buried, II'illiam lihm/I.. Mountioy, buricd 
there, 594. &c. 
At the vpper ende of Hosier Lane, towarde West Cheape, 
is the fayre Parish Church of Saint dh«rh Bow. This Church ' 
in the teigne of ll'Tliam Co¢qtwro¢tr, being the first in this 
Cittie builded on Arches of stone, was therefore catled ncwe 
l[arie Church, of Saint [arie de drcubus, or le Bow in West 
Cheaping: As Stratford Bridge being the first, buitded (by 

Richard Chau- 
cer Father fo 
Geffrey Chan- 
cer the poet, as 
may be sup- 
posed. 

iXev Mary 
church or 
Mary Bow in 
vest Cheping. 
Li. Colchester. 



Roofe of Bow 
chnrch ouer- 
turned by 
tempest. 

Bow steeple 
fortified. 
A false accuser 
of his elder 
brother in thc 
end was 
hanged. 

t'age .7 
Bow ste e I,! c 
lell downe. 

254 CordoEvainer slreel ward 
MatiMe the Queene, wife to It«uric the first) with .Arches of 
stone, was called Stratford le tk,w, which nalnes to the said 
Church and Bridge remayneth till this day. The Court of 
the/krches is kept in this Church, and taketh naine of the 
place, hot the place of the Court, but of what antiquitie 
or continuation that Court hath there continued I cannot 
learne. 
This Church is of Cordwayner streete Warde, and for diuerse 
accidents happening there, hath beene made more famous 
then an), other Parish Church of the whole Cittie, or suburbs. 
Fit'st we reade that in the yeare lO9O. and the thirde of 
IVilliam RzoEus, by tempest of winde, the roofe of the Church 
of saint 3[ari« low in Cheape was ouerturned, wherewith 
some persons were slaine, and foure of the Rafters of 26. foote 
in length, with such violence were pitched in the ground of 
the high streete, that scantly foure foote of them remayned 
aboue ground, which were faine to be cut euen with the ground, 
because they could not bec plucked out, (for the Citie of 
I.ondon was not then paued, and a marish ground.) 
In the yeare  96. IVilliam Fitz Osbert, a seditious traitor, 
tooke the Steeple of Bow, and fortified it with munitions and 
victualles but it was assaulted, and IVilliam with his com- 
plices were taken, though hot without bloodshed, for hec was 
forced by tire and smoke to forsake the Church, and then by 
the Iudges condemned, he was by the heeles drawne to the 
Ehnes in Smithfield, and there hanged with nine of his 
fellowes, where because his fauourers came hOt to deliuer him, 
hec forsooke 3[ari«s sonne (as hec tearmed Christ out Sauiour) 
and called vpon the Diuell to helpe and deliuer him. Such 
was the ende of thîs deceyuer, a man of an euill life, a secrete 
murtherer, a filthy fornicator, a polluter of concubines, and 
(amongest other his detestable facts) a false accuser of his 
elder brother, who had in his youth brought him vp in learning, 
and donc many things for his preferment. [ 
In the yeare l-,7a, a great part of the steeple of Bow fcll 
downe, and slue lnany people men and women. In the yeare 
 z84. the thirteenth of 'dward the first, L atrctce Duckct Gold- 
smith, hauing grieuously wounded one Raph Crepin in west 
Cheape, fled into Bowe Church, into the which in the night 



Contwai¢«e" st'ee! OEoard 255 
time entered certaine euill persons, friendes vnto the sayd 
Raph, and slue the sayd Lanrcuc« lying in the steeple, and 
then hanged him vp, placing him so by the window, as if he 
had hanged himselfe, and so was it round by inquisition : for 
the which fact Lanrocc 19ucleet being drawne by the feete, 
was buried in a ditch without the Citie: but shortly after by 
rclation of a boy, who lay with the said Laurence at the rime 
of his death, and had hid him there for feare, the truth of 
the matter was disclosed, for the which cause, Iot'dalt Çood- 
cheape, tah Crebz, Gilber! Clark«, and Geffrcy C/arkc, 
were attainted, a certaine woman named Alice, that was 
chiefe causer of the sayd lnischiefe was burned, and to the 
number of sixteene men were drawne and hanged besides 
others, that being richer, after long imprisonment were hanged 
by the pursc. 
The Church was interdicted, the doores and windowes were 
stopped vp with thornes, but Laurence was taken vp, and 
honestly buried in the Churchyard. 
The Parish church of S. Jl[ary Bow by mcane of incroch- 
ment and building of houses, wanting roome in their Church- 
yard for buriall of the dead, hhn Rolhau or Rodham Citizen 
and Tayler, by his Testament dated the yeare 465. gaue to 
the Parson and Churchwardens a certaine Garden in Hosier 
lane, to bee a Churchyarde which so continued near a hundred 
yeares. But now is builded on, and is a priuate mans bouse. 
The olde steeple of this Church was by little and little reedified, 
and newe builded vp, at the least so much as was fallen 
downe, many men giuing summes of money to the furtherance 
thereof, so that at lcngth, to wit, in the yeare 46 9. it was 
ordayned by a common counsaile, that the Bow bell should 
bec nightly rung at nine of the clocke. Shortly after, Iohn 
Donte Mercer, by his testament dated 47"-. according to the 
trust of Rcgbtaht Loztgcl«n, gaue to the Parson and church- 
wardcns of saint 21[aTy Bow. two tenellnents with the appurten- 
ances, since ruade into ont, in Hosiar lane, then so callcd, to 
the maintenancc of Bowe bcll, the samc to bce rung as 
aforesaid, and other things to bec obserued, as by the will 
appeareth. 
This 13ell being vsually rung somewhat late, as seemed 

Lanrence 
Ducket 
hanged in 
Bow steel,le. 

Bow church 
interdicted. 

Bow Bell tu 
be rung 
nightly at 
nine of the 
clocke. 

Z'«g' 



-'56 Cordw«b¢er s/rcc! ward 
to the yong llel Prentises and other in Cheape, they ruade 
and set vp a ryme against the Clarke, as followeth. 
Clarbe of lhc Bow bru wil lhe yellort, lockcs. 
For thy laie ri«gizg lb 5, head shall ha«ze kockes. 

Bow or 
Arches on 
Bow steeple. 

f;rammar 
sehoole in 
Bow Church- 
yard. 

Vaults vnder 
Bow church. 

lag e 9 

Whereunto the Clarke replying, wrotc. 
Chihh'cn of Cheatc, hoM you ail still. 
Fo" yo¢t shall halte lhe Bov bell r««ç al yo«tr will. 
Robert Hardi«g Goldsmith, one of the Shiriffes 1478. gaue 
to the new worke of that steeple fortie pound. [ohu Haw 
Mercer ten pound, Doctor llcz foure pound, Thom«s Bahh7 
foure pound, and other gaue other summes, so that the said 
worke of the steeple was finished in the yeare I5OE. The 
Arches or Bowes thereupon, with the Lanthornes fiue in hum- 
ber, to wit, one at each corne; and one on the top in the 
middle vpon the Arclles, were also afterward finished of stone, 
brought from Canc in Normandie, deliuered at the Customers 
Key for 4.s. 8.d. thc tun, IVilliam Cophmt Tayler, the King 
Merchant, and .lmh'cw l:«zller Mercer, being Churchvardens 
55- and 56. It is said that this C«g, la«d gaue the great 
Bell, which ruade the fift in the ring, to be rung nightly at 
nine of the clocke. This Bell was first rung as a knell at the 
buriall of the same Coplaud. It appeareth that the Lanthornes 
on the toppe of this Steeple, were meant to haue beene gled, 
and lightes in them placed nightly in the Winter, whereby 
trauellers to the Cittie might haue the better sight thereof, and 
hot to mie of their wayes. 
In this parish also was a Grammar schoole by com- 
nmundement of king enrie the sixt, which schoole was of 
olde time kept in an bouse for that purpose prepared in the 
Churchyard, but that schoolc being decayed as others about 
this Citie : the schoole house was let out for rcnt, in the raign 
of Heuric the eight, for 4. shillings the yeare, a Celler for two 
shillings the ycare, and two vaults vnder the Church for fifteenc 
shillings both. [ 
The monumentes in this church be these, vz. of Sir Iahu 
Coucntrie, Mercer, Mayor 45. Richard Lambcrt Alderman, 
Nicholas A[wize Mercer, Mayor 499. Robcrte ardiug 



Goldsmith one ofthe Shiriffes, 478. Iohzz Lobe onc of the 
Shiriffes, 46. dwarde Bankcs Alderman, Haberdasher, 
566. Ioht IVarde, lVilliam œeersot Scriuener, and Atturney 
in the common place. In a proper Chappell on the South 
side the Church standeth a Tombe, eleuate and arched, Adc 
de tke Hatter glased the Chappell and most parte of the 
Church, and was there buried: ail other monumentes bec 
defaced, Hawlcy and Sowtham had chauntries there. 
Without the North side of this church of Sahtt Mary Bow A sea or 
standing for 
towardes west Chepe standeth one fayre building of Stone, the king 
called in record Seldam, a shed, which greatly darkeneth the cUea crown 
silde. 
said church, for by meanes thereof ail the windowes and dores 
on that side are stopped vp. King dzvard the third vpon 
occasion as shal be shewed in the Warde of Cheape, caused 
this sild or shed to be ruade and strongly to bec builded of 
stone, for himselfe, the Queene, and other Etates to stand in, 
there to beholde the Iustinges and other shewes at their 
pleasures. And this house for a long rime after serued to that 
vse, namely, in the raigne of dward the third and Richard 
the second, but in the yeare 4xo. Hc»7 the fourth in the 
twelfth of his raigne confirmed the saide shedde or building 
to Stephez Spilma, IVilliam A[archfol, and Iohu lVhatele 
Mercers, by the name of one new Seldam, shed or building, 
with shoppes, sellers, and edifices whatsoeuer appertayning, 
called Crounsilde, or Tamarsilde, situate in the Iercery in Crounsilde. 
West Cheape, and in the parrish of Saint ][a 3, dc Mrcztbzts in 
London, &c. Notwithstanding which graunte, the Kinges of 
England, and other great Etates, as well of forreine Countries 
repayring to this realme, as inhabitantes of the same, haue 
vsually repayred to this place, therein to beholde the shewes 
of this Citty, passing through West Cheape, namely, the great 
watches accustomed in the night, on the eucn of S. Ioht 
Baptisl, and Saint Petcr at Midsommer, the examples whereof 
were ouer long to recite, wherefore let it suffice [ brieflie to ageaSo 
touch one. In the yeare ]Sx. on Saint Iohns euen at night, K. Henrythe 
eight came in 
king Henry the eight came to this place then called the thelikenesof 

Kinges head in Cheape, in the liuerie of a Yeoman of the 
Garde, with an halberde on his shoulder (and there beholding 
the watch) departed priuily, when the watch was done, and 
STOW. i S 

a yeoman of 
his guard, to 
the ldngs head 
in Cheape. 



9.58 

was not known to any but to whome it pleased him, but on 
S. tgelers night next following, hec and the Queene came 
royally riding to the said place, and there with their Nobles 
beheld the watch of the cittie, and returned in the morning. 
This church of S../7/[ary with the saide shedde of stone, al 
the housing in or aboute Bov Church yearde, and without on 
that side the high streete of Cheape to the Standarde bec 
of Cordewainer streete warde. These houses were of olde time 
but sheddes : for I read of no bousing otherwise on that side 
the street, but of diuers sheddes from Sopars lane to the 
Standarde, &c. Amongst other I read of three shops or 
sheddes by Sopars lane, pertayning to the priorie of the holy 
Trinity within Aldgate: the one was let out for OESs. one 
other for OEo s. and the third for xii.s, by the yeare : Moreouer 
that Richard Goodchc_pe Mercer, and .a[aery his wife, sonne 
to lordailte GoodchcDe , did let to Iohz 1)alilzgcs the yonger, 
mercer, their shed and chamber in west Cheape, in the parrish 
of S. $t'a 7 dc Archcs, for iii.s, iiii.d, by the yeare. Also the 
men ofBredstreete ward contended with the men of Cordwayner 
street ward, for a selde or shede, opposite to the standard on 
the south side, and it was found to be of Cordwainer streete 
ward, W. I Valdorne being then Mayor, the i. of Ienrie the 6. 
Thus much for Cordwainer streete ward: which hath an 
Alderman, his Deputie, common Counsellors 8. Constables, 8. 
Scauengers 8. Wardmote inquest men I4. and a Beadle. It 
standeth taxed to the fifteene in London at 5oE.li. I6.S. in the 
Exchequer at 5OE. pound, 6.s. ] 

.Page 6« 
Cheape warde. 

Cheape warde 
NEXT adioyning is Cheape Warde, and taketh name of 
the 1V[arket there kept, called West Cheping, this warde also 
beginneth in the East, on the course of Walbrooke, in Buckles 
13ury, and runneth vp on both the sides to the great Conduit 
in Cheape. Also on the south side of Buckles Berie, a lane 
turning vp by S. Sithes Church, and by S. Pancrates church 
through Needlers lane, on the north side thereof, and then 
through a peece of Sopars lane, on both sides vppe to Chepe, 



Cbeo/e ward« 259 
be all of Chepe ward. Then to begin again in the east vpon 
the said course of Walbrook, fs S. Mildreds church in the 
Poultrie, on the north side, and ouer against the said church 
gare, on the south to passe vp al that hie street called the 
Poultrie, to the great conduit in Chepe, and then Chepe it 
self, which beginneth by the east end of the saide Conduit, 
and stretcheth vp to the north east corner of Bowlane, on the 
south side, and to the Standard on the north side, and thus 
far to the west is of Cheape ward. On the south side of this 
high street is no lane turning south out of this ward, more 
then some small portion of Sopars lane, whereof I haue belote 
written. But on the north side of this high streete is Cony- 
hope lane, about one quarter of Olde Iury lane on the west 
side, and on the East side, almost as much to the signe of the 
Angell. Then is Ironmongers lane, all wholy on both sides, 
and from the North end thereof through Catton streete, West 
to the North ende of S. Lawrence lane, & some 4. houses west 
beyond the saine on that side, and ouer against Ironmongers 
lane end on the North side of Catton streete vp by the Guild- 
hal, and S. Lawrence church in the Iurie is altogether of 
Chepe ward. Then againe in Chepe more toward the west is 
S. Laurence lane belote aamed, which is ail wholie of this 
warde, and last of all is Hony lane, and vppe to the standarde 
on that North side of Chepe, and so stand the bounds of 
Chepe ward. I 
Now for antiquities there, first is Buckles berie, so called of 
a Marmot, and tenementes pertayning to one Buckle, who 
there dwelled and kept his Courts. This Marmot is supposed 
to be the great stone building, yet in part remayning on the 
south side the streete, which of late time hath beene called 
the olde Barge, of such a signe hanged out, neare the gare 
thereof. This Marmot or great house hath of long rime 
beene diuided and letten out into many tenementes: and it 
hath beene a common speech that when Walbrooke did lie 
open, barges were rowed out of the Thames, or towed vp so 
farre, and therefore the place hath euer since been called the 
Olde barge. 
Also on the north side of this streete directly ouer against 
the said Buckles bery, was one ancient and strong tower of 
$2 

]3uekles bury 
of one Buckle. 

Barges towed 
vp Walbrook, 
vnto Buckles- 
bery. 



Cernets towre 
in Buckles- 
bery the 
kinges Ex- 
change. 
Exchequer. 

Penerith 
streete. 
Parish church 
of S. Syth, or 
Benit shrog 
Needlars lane. 

PaKe 263 

260 Cbea15e c,arde 
stone, the which Tower king E. the third, in the 8. of his 
raigne by the naine of the kinges house, called Cernettes 
towre in London, did appoint to bee his Exchange of money 
therc to bee kept. In the OEg- he graunted it to Fydus 
Gnynysan, and Landns lardoilc, Marchantes of Luke, for 
twenty pound the yeare. And in the 32. he gaue the same 
Tower to his Colledge, or free Chappell of Saint Stcphenat 
Westminster, by the naine of Cornettes toute at Buckles bery 
in London. This Tower of late yeares was taken downe by 
one lncl,'le a Grocer, meaning in place thereof, to haue set 
vppe and buildcd a goodly frame of tituber, but the sayde 
/'ttcb/e greedily labouring to pull downe the olde tower, a 
parte thereof fell vpon him, which so sore brused him that his 
lire was thcreby shortened: and an othcr that married his 
widdow, set vppe the newe prcpared frame of tituber, and 
finished the worke. 
This whole streete called /3uckles bury on both the sides 
throughout is possessed of Grocers and Apothecaries. Toward 
the west end thercof, on the south side, breaketh out one 
other shorte lane, called in Recordes Peneritch street.it reacheth 
but to Saint Sythes lane, and S. Sythes Church is the farthest 
part thereof, for by the west end of the saide Church begin- 
neth Needlars lane, which reacheth to Sopars lane as is afore- 
saide: this small parrish Church of S. Sith hath also an addition 
of Bennet shorne, (or Shrog, or Shorehog) for by ail these 
names haue I read it, but I the auncientest is Shorne, where- 
fore it seemeth to take that name of one lcnedict Shorne, 
sometime a Cittizen and Stockefishmonger of London, a new 
builder, repayrer or Benefactor thereof in the raigne of E. the 
second, so that Shorne is but corruptlie called Shrog, and 
more corruptly Shorehog. 
There lie buried in this church Iohn FroysIz 1V[ercer, Mayor 
394. Iohn Roc/oEord and Robert Roc/oEordc, Io/m Hold 
Alderman, ]enTy Froocb Mercer, Mayor 435- dward 
lVarrington, Iohn AIorrice, Iohn ]runtley, Richard Lincohz 
Felmonger, 1548. Sir Raph l'Varen 1V[ercer, Mayor, 1553. 
Sir Iohn Lion Grocer, Mayor 554- these two last haue 
monuments, the test are all defaced, td¢vard Hall, Gentle- 
man, of Greyes Inne, common sergiant of this Cittie, and then 



Cheaïe warde 261 
Vnder Shiriffe of the saine, hee wrote the large chronicles 
from Richard the second, till the end of Hem 7 the eight, was 
buried ha this church. 
Then in Needelars lane haue yee the parrish church of SaD! 
Pancrate, a proper small church, but diuers rich Parishioners 
therein, and bath had of olde rime many liberall benefactors, 
but of late such as (hot regarding the order taken by ber 
Maiesty) the least bell in their church being broken, haue 
rather solde the saine for halle the value, then put the parish 
to charge with new casting: late experience hath proued this 
to bee true, besides the spoyle of monumentes there. In this 
Church are buried Sir .xl[ecr, Io]m .xl.cr, Iohn Barws, lercer, 
Mayor 37o. Ioht Bcslou and his wife, Robcr Raylatd, Iohz 
Hambcr, Iohn Gagc, Iohzz Rowlcy, Iohn Lambe, Iohn Hadlcy, 
Grocer, Mayor 1379. l¢icharde Gardcncr Mercer, Mayor 478. 
[obit Stockton Mercer, Mayor 147 o. Iohu Dane, Mercer, John 
Parker, Robcrt 3[arshall Alderman, 439. Rober! Corcbc- 
fordc, I¢obcrt HaoEcldc, and Robert HaoEeld, lVi«hohs lVil- 
fildc and Thomas his sonne, the monumentes of all which bee 
defaced and gone. Thcre doe remaine of Robert tTurlcy, 36o. 
Richard lVilsou, I5"_ 5. Robert tgackc«tou, Mercer, slayne with 
a Gunne shot at him in a naorning, as hee was going to 
morrow masse from his house in Chepe to S. Thomas of Acars 
in the yeare 1536. the murderer was neuer discouered, but 
by ] his owne confession inade when he canae to the gallowes 
at Baubury, to be hanged for fcllony: T. IUa.rdbm 7 Haber- 
dasher, 1545. Iames Huislz Grocer, I59O../tmbrose Smith, &c. 
Then is a part of Sopers lane turning vp to Cheape. 
By the assent of Stephen Abuuden, Major, the Pepperers in 
Sopers fane vere admitted to sell all such spices and other 
wares as Grocers now vse to sell, retayning the old naine of 
Pepperers in Sopers lane, till at length in the raigne of Henri« 
the sixt, the saine Sopers lane was inhabited by Cordwainers 
and Curriars, after that the l'epperers or Grocers had seated 
themselves in a more open street, to wit, in Buckles bury, 
where they yet remain. Thus nauch for the south wing of 
Cheapewarde. 
Now to begin againe on the banke of the said "Valbrooke, 
at thc East end of the high streete., callcd the Poultrie. on the 

Parish church 
of S. Pancrate. 
Justices 
charged to 
punish such 
as sel bels 
from their 
churches, 
Elizabeth, 14- 

afft 264 

Pepperers in 
Sopers lane. 

The Poultrie. 



Parish church 
of S. Mildred. 

262 ChealSe warde 
north side thereof, is the proper Parish Church of S. Mildred, 
which Church was new builded vpon Walbrooke in the yeare 
14.57. Iohn Saa'ton then parson gaue 32. pounds towards the 
building of the new Quire, which now standeth vpon the 
course of Walbrooke. Loucll and 19uery, and Iichard 1,Seston, 
haue their arms in the East windowes as benefactors. The 
footing of that church is garnished with the armes of Thomas 
trchchull, one of the Churchwardens, in the yeare 455. who 
was there buried. Thomas [orsted Esquire and Chirurgion to 
king t-czrie the fourth, fift, and sixt, one of the shiriffes of 
London, in the yeare I436. gaue vnto this Church a parcell of 
ground, contayning in length fi'om the course of Walbrooke, 
toward the West, 45- foot, and in bredth from the Church 
toward the north, 3,3. foot, beeing within the gate of Scalding 
wike in the said Parish, to make a Churchyard, wherein to 
burie their dead, IVichard Shorc Draper one of the shiriffes, 
I5o5. gaue 5- pound for making a porch to this Church. 
Salomon Zanuarc had a Chauntrie there in the 4. of Fdward 
the second, uff]t Gaine had one other. Buried here as 
appeareth by monuments, Zohn tildye Poulter, 1416. Iohn 
Kcndall, 1468. Iohn Garland, I476. Iobcrt Bois, I485. and 
Simon Zee Poulters, 1487. Thomas Lee of Essex Gentleman, 
lVilliam talliridffc, Christohc» Fcliocke, 1494. lobert 
Draiton Skinner, I484. Iohn Christol)herson Doctor of Phi-] 
sicke, 1524. ll'illiam Tre'no" Skinner, I536. Blase ll'hite 
Grocer, 1558. Thomas Iobson Haberdasher, 1559. lVilliam 
Iobson Haberdasher, 158i. Tho. Tttsscr, 158o. with this 
Epitaph. 
Iere Thomas Tuss«r «lad in earth doth lie, 
That sometime ruade t/w ]o3'tls of husbandric, 
t32, him thcz lcarnc t/wu maist, hcrc lcarue wc must, 
lVh¢n all is donc 2vc slcel)c and tre'ne to &tst, 
tnd 2'et throç«h Christ ¢o hcauen we hoje ¢o go: 
lVha rcadcs his bookes shall find his faith a,as so. 
On the north side of the Churchyard remaine two Tombes 
of Marble, but not knowne of whom, or otherwise then by 
tradition, itis saide they were of Thomas 3[otshamflc , and 
I Villiam 13rothe»s, about 1547. &c. 
 xlIonshamte 1598, 16o3 ; 3ruschambc 1633 



Che@e warde 263 
Some foure houses west from this Parish Church of saint 
2[ildred, is a prison bouse pert-aining to one of the shiriffes 
of London, and is called the Counter in the Poultrie. This 
hath beene there kept and continued rime out of minde, for 
I haue not read of the originall thereof. West from this 
Counter was a proper Chappell, called of Crpus Christi, and 
saint 2I[aric at Çonie hope lane ende, in the Parish of saint 
21[ildrcd, founded by one named Ionirunm's 1, a Citizen of 
London, in the raigne of dward the third, in which Chappel 
was a Guild or fraternitie, that might dispend in lands, better 
then twentie pound by yeare: it was suppressed by tcnric 
the eight, and purchased by one Tkomas tfo3son, Haber- 
dasher, he turned this Chappell into a faire Warehouse and 
shoppes, towardes the streete, with lodgings ouer them. 
Then is Conyhope lane, of old time so called of such a Conihope 
signe of three Conies hanging ouer a Poulters stall at the lane. 
lanes end. With in this Lane standeth the Grocers hall, 
which companie being of old time called Pcpperers, werc first 
incorporated by the naine of Grocers, in the yeare I345. at 
which time they elected for Custos or Gardian of their frater- 
nitie, Rickard Oswin, and Laurence Halizvell and twentie 
brethren were then taken in, to be of their societie. In the 
yere 4I. the Custos or Gardian, & the brethren of this 
companie, purchased of the Lord ]o. Fitwaters, one plot [ of Page 
ground with the building therevpon in the said Conyhope 
fane, for 32o. markes, and then layd the foundation of their 
new common hall. 
_About the yere I429. the Grocers had licence to purchase 
500. Markes land, sillce the which rime, neare adioyning vnto 
the Grocers hall the said companie hath builded seuen proper 
houses for seuen aged poore _Almes people. Thomas Knowlcs, 
Grocer, Major, gaue his tenement in saint Anthonics Curch- 
yard to the Grocers, towardes the reliefe of the poore brethren 
in that companie. Also H. ]x2ce3l«, Grocer, Major, gaue to 
the seuen almes people, six pence the peece weekely for euer, 
which pension is now encrcased by the 1V[aisters. to some of 
them two shillings the peece weekely, and to some of them 

Counter in the 
Poultrie. 

Chappell of 
corpus Christi. 

Grocers hall 
purchased ard 
builded. 

Almes bouses 
by the Groces 
hall. 

 Ion. Irunnes Tlwms ; Ionyrunnes 598, r633 



Parish church 
of S. Mary 
Colechurch. 

West Checpe a 
]arge market 
place. 

tagc 267 
Great conduit 
in west Chcap. 

264 Che@e varde 
fesse, &c. Ircnric Ady Grocer, a563. gauc aooo. markes to 
the Grocers to purchasc lands. .A_nd sir Iohn _PccMc knight 
banaret, free of that company, gaue them fiue hundred pound 
to certaine vses: he builded almes houses at Ludingstone in 
Kent, and was there buried. 
West from this Conyhope lane is the old Iurie, whereof 
some portion is of Cheape ward, as afore is shewed. /kt the 
south end of this lane, is the Parish church of saint 
Colechurch, named of one Cole that builded it : this church is 
builded vpon a vault aboue ground, so that men are forced 
to goe to ascend vp therevnto by certain steppes. I find no 
monuments of this church more then that H«nrie the fourth 
granted licence to IVilliam A[arshal and others, to found 
a brothcrhood of saint ]Cal]wren therein, because T]wmas 
Becket, and saint ædmond the .A_rchbishop, were baptized 
there. More I reade of ]ordhangly lane, to be in that 
l'arish: and thus llmch for the north side of the Poultrie. 
The south side of the sayd Poultrie, beginning on the banke 
of the said brooke oucr against the Parish church of Saint 
A[ihh'cd passing vp to the great Conduite hath diuerse fayre 
houses, which were sometimes inhabited by Poulters, but now 
by Grocers, Haberdashers, and Vpholsters. 
At the west end of this Poultrie, and also of Buckles berie, 
beginneth the large streete of West Cheaping, a Market place 
so called, xvhich streete stretcheth west, till ye corne to the 
little Conduit by Paules gare, but not all of Cheape warde. 
In the East[ part of this streete standeth the great Conduit, 
of sweete water, conueyed by pipes of Lead vnder ground 
from Paddington, for seruice of this citie, castellated with 
stone, and cesterned in leade, about the yeare 285, and 
againe new builded and enlarged, by Thomas Ilam one of the 
shiriffes, 1479. 
About the middest of this streete is the standard in Cheape, 
of what antiquitie the first foundation I haue not read. But 
ll. the sixt by his Patent dated at Windsore the i. of his 
raigne, which patent was confirmed by Parliament 1442, 
graunted licence to Thomas Knollcs, Iohn Chichle, and other, 
executors to John l l'cls Grocer, somtime lV[aior of London, 
with his goods to make ncw the high way, whicb leadeth 



Clze«@e warde 265 
ri'oto the city of London towards the palace of Wcstminster, 
before and nigh the mannor of Sauoy, percell of the Dutchie 
of Lancaster a way then very ruinous and the pauement 
broken, to the hurt & mischiefe of the sub{ects, which old 
pauemenL then remaining in that vay within the lenth of 
300. fooL and ail the breadth of the saine before and nih 
the site of the mannor aforesaid, they to breake vp and with 
stone» grauel and other stuffe, one other good and suffident 
way there to make for the commoditie of the subiects. 
And further that the Standard in Cheape» where diuerse 
executions of the lav before time had beene performed, which 
standard et that present was verie ruinous with age in vhich 
there was a ConduiL should be taken down and an other com- 
petent tandard of stone togither wth a Conduit in the same 
of new strongly to be builded for the commoditie and honor 
of the citie, with the goeds of their said testator without 
interruption &c. 
Of executions et the Standard in Cheape ve read that in 
the yeare 93. three men had theh- right hands smitten off 
there, for rescuin of a prisoner arrested by an officer of the 
citie. In the yere 3a6. the Buresses of London caused 
limiter St«l«to« bishop of Excester, treasurcr to 
thê OE, and other, to be beheaded et thê Standard in Cheape 
(but this was by £auls gatê). In the yerê 3.5. the 6. of Ed. 
the 3- two Fishmongers were bcheadêd et the standard in 
Chêape, but I rêad not of thêir offence. 38. llt Tilcr 
beheadêd Richard Lions, and other thêrê. In thê yere 399- 
 thê 4. caused the blanch Chartêrs madê by Ri. the . to 
bê burnt [ therê. In thê yeare 4.5o. lackc Cade captaine of 
thê Kêntish Rebels, beheaded thc Lord Say thêre. In the 
yere 46. lo/zu Daz O, had his hand stricken off there, bêcausc 
he had strickên a man befol-e the Iudges at Westminster, &c. 
Thên nêxt is the great Crossê in wêst Chêape, which crosse 
was there erêctêd in the yêare 29 o. by d. the first, vpon 
occasion thus: Quêênê Elianor his wife died at Hardêby 
(a towne ncarc vnto the citie of Lincolnc), her bodie was 
brought from thence to Westminster, & the king in memorie 
of her, caused in euery place where her body rested in the 
way, a stately crosse of stone to bc crected with the Quecnes 

The old 
standard in 
Cheap with 
a Conduit 
therein, takcn 
downe and 
new builded. 

Executions at 
the slandard 
in Chcape. 

.Page z68 

Great Crosse 
in xvest Cheap 
first builded. 



Crosse in 
Cheape new 
builded. 

Crosse in 
Cheape 
indighted, the 
images 
brokcn. 

t'aôe 269 

266 Chect;bc warde 
Image and armes vpon it, as at Grantham, Woborne, North- 
ampton, stony Stratford, Dunstable, S. Albones, Waltham, 
west Cheape, and at Charing, from whence she was conueyed 
to Westminster, and there buried. 
This crosse in west Cheape being like to those other which 
remaine till this day, and being by length of rime decayed, 
Ioht f[al]lerlcy Maior of London procured in the yeare 1441. 
licence of king H. the 6. to reedifie the same in more 
beautifull manner for the honor of the citie : and had licence 
also to take vp -oo. fodder of lead for the building thereof 
of certaine Conduits, and a common Garnarie. This crosse 
was then curiously wrought at the charges of diuers citizens, 
Iohn Fishcr lercer gaue 600. marks toward it, the same was 
begun tobe set vp, I484. and finished I486. the OE. of H. 
the 7. It was nmv gilt ouer in the year x5OEOE, against the 
comming of Charles the 5. Emperor, in the yere I5337 against 
the coronation of Queen Anuc, new burnished against the 
coronation of Ed. the 6. and againe new gilt *554 against 
the comming in of king I°/dlip: since the which time, the 
said crosse hauing beene presented by diuers Iuries (or quests 
of Wardmote) to stand in the high way to the let of cariages 
(as they alledged) but could not haue it remoued, it followed 
that in the yeare 58I. the OEI. of lune, in the night, the lowest 
Images round about the said crosse (being of Christ his resur- 
rection, of the virgin e][a3', king Ed. the confessor, and such 
like) were broken, and defaced, proclamation was made, that 
who so would bewray the doers, should haue 4o. crownes, but 
nothing came to light : the image of the blessed virgin, at 
that time robbed of ber son, and her armes broken, by which 
she staid him on ] her knees: her whole body also was haled 
with ropes, and left likely to fall: but in the yeare *595- was 
againe fastned and repaired, and in the yeare next following, 
a new misshapen son, as borne out of rime, all naked was 
laid in ber armes, the other images remayning broke as afore. 
13ut on the east side of y saine crosse, the steps taken thence, 
vnder the image of Christs resurrection defaced, was then set 
vp a curious wrought tabernacle of gray Marble, and in the 
same an Alabaster Image of Di«ua, and water conuayed 
t 1533 cor»; T,'tollts; 1553 e,t«L Tlte refe, ë,tce is la Q. Ait,te toley,t 



Clwcr;c ,cr.rde 267 
from the Thames, prilling from ber naked breast for a time, 
but now decaied. In the yeare 1599. the timber of the crosse at 
the top being rotted within the lead, the armes thereofbending, 
were feared to haue fallen to the harming of some people, 
and therefore the whole body of the crosse was scaffolded 
about, and the top thereof taken down, meaning in place 
thereof to haue set vp a Piratais, but some of ber Maiesties 
honorable counsellers directed their letters to sir Nicolas 
[osley then Maior, by ber highnes expresse commandement 
concerning the crosse, forthwith to be repaired, and placed 
againe as it formerly  stood, &c. Notwithstanding the said 
crosse stoode headles more then a yeare after: wherevpon 
the said counsellors in greater number, meaning hot any 
longer to permit the continuance of such a contempt, wrote 
to lVilliam Rider then Maior, requiring him by vertue of her 
highnesse said former direction and COlnmandement, [that] 
without any further delay to accolnplish the saine her 
Maiesties most princely care therein, respecting especially the 
antiquitie and continuance of that monument, an ancient 
ensigne of Christianitie, &c. dated the 4. of December, I6oo. 
ffer this a crosse of Tituber was framed, set vp, couered 
with lead and gilded, the body of the crosse downeward 
clensed of dust, the scaffold caried thence. About i2. nights 
following, the Image of.out Lady was again defaced, by 
plucking off ber crowne, and almost ber head, taking from 
her her naked child, & stabbing her in the breast, &c. Thus 
much for the crosse in west Cheape. Then at the west ende 
of west Çheape street, was sometime a crosse of stone, called 
the old crosse. Ra Hgd«n in his PolicroMcon, saith, that 
IValtar taleton Bishop of Excester treasurer to Ed. the . 
was by the Bulgesses of London beheaded at this crosse 
called the standart without the north doore of S. Pauls 
church, & so is it noted in other writers that [then liued. 
This old crosse stood and remained at the East ende of the 
parish Church called S. 3licl in the corne by Paules gare, 
nere to the north end of the old Exchange till the yere 39 o. 
the xiii of Richard the , in place of which old crosse then 

Image of 
Diana set 
vpon the 
crosse in 
Chepe. 
Socrat. li. 
cap. 
Toppe of the 
crosse being 
feared to rail, 
was taken 
downe ; 
Crosse in 
Chepe com- 
maunded to 
be repayred. 

Paffe 270 

 formcrly] formally e,t, 



lustings and 
turnament in 
west Cheape. 

Edward the 3- 
held a turna- 
ment or iustes 
in west Cheap 
three dayes 
togither. 
Queenc Philip 
and ber ladies 
fell from a 
scaffold in 
Cheape. 

A shcd o," 
standing ruade 
lbr the king 
to behold the 
shews in 
Cheape. 

South side of 
Cheapc street, 
so far as Chepe 
ward reacheth. 

ta e -"7* 

268 Cheajbe warde 
taken downe, the said church of S. A[ichael was enlarged, 
and also a faire water Conduit builded about the ninth of 
H«uric the sixt. 
In the raigne of Edward the 3. diuers Iustings were made 
in this streete, betwixt Sopars lane and the great Crosse, 
namely one in the yeare 133 about the xxi. of Septembeq 
as I find noted by diuerse writers of that rime. In the middle 
of the city of London (say they) in a street called Cheape, the 
stone pauement being couered with sand. that the horse might 
not slide, when they strongly set their feete to the ground, 
the king held a tornamcnt 3- dayes togither with the Nobilitie, 
valiant men of the realme, and other, some strange knights. 
_And to the end, the beholders might with the better ease see 
the same, there was a woodden scaffold erected crosse the 
streete, like vnto a Tower, wherein Queene Philifl, and many 
other Ladies, richly attyred, and assembled from all parts of 
the realme, did stand to behold the Iustes: but the higher 
frame in which the Ladies xvere placed, brake in sunder, 
wherby they werc with somc shame forced to fall downe, by 
reason wherof y" knights and such as were vnderncath were 
grieuously hurt, wherefore the Qucene tooke great care to 
saue the Carpenters from punishlnc.nt, and through her prayers 
(which she ruade vpon ber knees) pacified the king and coun- 
soli, and thercby purchased great loue of the people. _After 
which time, the king caused a shed to be strongly ruade of 
stone for hilnselfe, the Queenc, and other states to stand on, 
& there to beholde the Iustings, and other shewes at their 
pleasure, by the church of S. A[ary [;ow, as is shewed in 
Cordwainer strcct varde. Thus much for the high streete of 
Cheape: now let vs retulnc to the south side of Cheape 
warde. From the grcat Conduit west be many faire and large 
houses, for the most part possessed of Mercers vp to thc 
corncr of Cordwainer street, corruptly called Bow lane, which 
houses ill former timcs were but sheds or slmps, with solers 
ouer them, as of late one of them remained at sopars lane 
end, wherein a-woman sold seedes, rootes and herbes, but 
those sheds or shops, by incrochments on y" high street, are 
now largely builded on both I sides outward, and also vpward, 
some 3. 4, or 5. stories high. 



C/wape ¢varde 269 
Now of the north side of Cheape street 8: ward, beginning 
at the great Conduit, & by saint lary Çole church where we 
left. Next therevnto westward is the Mcrcers chappel, some- 
time an hospital intituled of S. Thomas of Acon or Acars, for 
a master and brethren, M'ilitia hospitalis, &c. saith the record 
of Ed. the 3- the xiiii, yere, it was founded by Thomas Fit:- 
thebaM de belli, & Agncs his wife, sister to T. B«cket, in the raigne 
of tf. the OE. They gaue to the master and brethren the lands 
with the appurtenances that sometimes were Gilbart tTeckets, 
father to the said Thomas, in the which he was borne, there 
to make a church. There was a Charnell, and a Chappel ouer 
it, ot S. Nicholas, and S. Stephcn. This hospitall was valued 
fo dispend 77. l. 3 s. 4.d. surrendered the 3 o. of If. the 8. the 
xxi. of October, and was since purchased by the Mercers, by 
meanes of sir Richard Gresham, and was agMn set open on 
the Eue of S. _l'ichacl, x54. the 33. of _/4. the 8. it is now 
called the Mercers Chappel, therein is kept a fi'ee Grammar 
schoole, as of old rime had beene accustomed, commanded by 
Parliament. Here bee many monuments remaining, but more 
haue beene defaced: Iames l?ntler Earle of Ormond, and 
Dame Ioan hi Countesse 48. Iohu Nortou Esquire, StephcJ 
Cancudish Draper, Major, 36e. Thomas Cancndisk, lVilliam 
Canendish, Thomas Ganon called t'ike, one of the shiriffes, 
4m. Ifmtgate of Yorkshlre, Ambrose Cresacre, IohJ Chester 
Draper, Zoht Trusb¢tt 1V[ercer, x437. Tho. Norhmd, shiriffe 
483. sir Edmoml Sha Goldsmith, 1V[aior, 48. sir Tho. Ifill 
Major, 485. Thomas Ilam shiriffe, 479- Lmwdot Laken 
Esquire, Rapk Tilney Shiriffe, 488. Gartlz Esquire, Iokn Rich, 
Thomas lntler Earle of Ormond, 5x5. sir IV. lntlcr Grocer, 
Major 515 . IV. rowue mercer, Maior x5 3. Iohu Zoke x5 9. 
sit" 7". laldry mercer, Maior xSoE3, sit" Il: Locke mercer, shiriffe 
548. sit" Ioh¢ Alleu mercer, Maior 5oE5. deceased 1544. sit" 
T. Leigh mercer, Maior 558. sir IL-[alory mercer, 1V[aior 
x564. If tarif. BaskerMle mercer, shiriffe 56. sir G lond 
Maior, 587. &c. 
]3efore this Hospital towards the street, was builded a faire 
and beautifull chappell, arched ouer with stone, and therevpon 
the Mercers hall, a most curious peece of worke: sir Iohn 
Allen Mercer [ being founder of that Chappell, was there l'age 272 

North side of 
Chepe warde. 

Hospitall of 
S. Tho. of 
Acars. 

Mercers 
Chappell. 

.A free schoole 
m the Hos- 
pitall of 
S. Thomas 
of Acars. 

Locke his 
armes in the 
windowes. 



Crowne silde 
vnder Bow 
chureh. 

Ironmonger 
lane. 

Parish church 
of S. Martins 
pomary. 

S. Lawrence 
fane, 

270 Cbea]e w«rde 
buried, but since his Tombe is remoued thence into the 
Chappell t of the hospitall church, and his bodie  diuided nto 
shops is letten out for rent. These Mercers were enabled to 
be a companie, and to purchase landes to the value of OEo. 1. the 
yeare, the 17. of Richard the OE. They had three messuages 
and shops in the parish of S. J[artin Otcswitch in the ward of 
Bishopsgate, for the sustentation of the poore, and a chantrie 
the =OE. of RL the OE. /fcm7 the 4. in the xii. of his raigne, 
confirmed to Slephen Silman, IV. l[archford, and Ioh. 
IVhatile mcrcers, by the naine of one new seldam, shed, or 
building, with shops, Cellers and edifices whatsoeuer apper- 
taining called Crownsild situate in the Mercërie in west Cheape, 
in the parish of S. A[aric dc Arcubzzs in London, &c. to be 
holden in burgage, as ail the Citie of London is, and which 
were worth by yere in ail issues, according to the true value 
of them, 7-I. 13. s. 4. d. as found by inquisition before Th. 
Knolles Maîor, and Eschetor in the said Citie. /-/. the 6. in 
the 3- of his raigne, at the request of Iohzz Couenlrie, John 
Carpenter, and William Groue, granted to the Mercers to 
haue a Chaplaine, and a brotherhoode for reliefe of such of 
their companie as came to decay by misfortune on the sea. 
In the yeare 536. on S. _Pelcrs night, king//-, the 8. and Queene 
Iane his wife, stoode in this Mercers hall then new builded, and 
beheld the marching watch of the Citie, most brauely set out, 
sir Iohn Allen mercer, one of the kings counsell, being Major. 
Next beyond the Mercers Chappell, and their hall, is Iron- 
monger lane, so called of Ironmongers dwelling there, whereof 
I reade in the raigne of '. the first, &c. In this lane is the 
smal parish church of S. _a[artin called -Pomary, vppon what 
occasion I certainely know hot. It is supposed to be of 
.&pples growing, where now houses are lately builded: for 
my selfe haue seene large void places. Monuments in that 
Church none to be accounted of. 
Farther west is S. Laurence lane, so called of S. Laurencc 
church, which standeth directly ouer against the north end 
thereof: antiquities in this fane, I find none other, then that 
among many fayre houses, there is one large Inne for receipt 
t Chappell] «598 ; bodie «6o 3 
= bodie 6o3 ; body-roome z633 ; chapel Tltoms 



Ceae ,arde 
of trauelers, called tlossoms Inne, but corruptly tosoms Inne 
and hath to signe Saint d.«re« the Deacon, in a Border of lnne. 
blossoms or flowers. I 
Then neare to the Standarde in Chepe is Honey lane so 
clled not of sweetenes thereof, being very narrow and some- 
what darke, but rather of often washing and sweeping, to 
keepe it cleane. In this lane is the small parrish church 
called Alhallows in Honey lane, there be no monumentes in 
this church worth the noting. I find that Ioh1 Vort«u 
Draper, 1V[ayor I453. was buried there: he gaue to the 
Drapers his tenements on the north side the saide church, 
they to allow for the 13eame light and lamp, xiii.s, iiii.d. 
yearely, from this lane to the Standard, and thus much for 
Chepe warde in the high streete of Chepe, for it strctcheth no 
farther. 
Nov for the North Wing of Chepe warde haue yee Catte- 
street, corruptly called Catteten streete, which beginneth at 
the North end of Ironmonger lane, and runneth to the West 
end of S. [.a;vreuce church as is afore shewed. 
On the North side of this streete is the Guild Hall, wherein 
the courts for the citty be kept, namely, . the court ofcommon 
counsaile, OE. The court of the Lord 1V[ayor and his 13rethren Liber 
the Aldermen, 3. The court of Hustinges, 4. The court of Fletw°d" 
Orphanes, 5- The two courtes of the Shiriffes, 6. The court 
of the Wardmote, 7. The court of Hallmote, 8. The court of 
requestes, commonly called the court of conscience, 9. The 
chamberlaines court for Prentises, and making them free. 
This Guilde Hall, sayeth obert t;abiaG was begunne to bee 
builded new in the yeare, 4I. the twelfth of //«mv the 
fourth, by Thomas A'uoles then 1V[ayor, and his Brethren the 
Aldermen, the saine was made of a little cottage, a large and 
great house as now it standeth : towards the charges whereof 
the companies gaue large beneuolences, also offences of men 
were pardoncd for summes of money towards this worke, 
extraordinary fees were raysed, Fines, Amercements, and 
other thinges imployed during seauen yeares, with a con- 
tinuation thereof three yeares more, ail tobe imployed to 
this building. 
The first yeare of Henry the sixt, Ioht Çottettrie and Ioht 

Page 73 
Hony lane. 

Parish chureh 
of Alhallowes, 
lion), lane. 

Catstreete. 

The Guild 
hall and 
courts kept. 



Verses made 
on the images, 
ouer the Guild 
hall gate. 

Names of 
I mages. 

Kitchins by 
the Guildhall. 

272 Chae wm'de 

Carl«t:tar Executors to Richard lVhitin, ffton, gaue towardes 
the pauing of this great Hall hventie pound, and the next 
yeare fifteene pound mor.e, to the saide pauement, with hard 
stone of I Purbecke, they also glased some \Vindowes thereof 
and of the Mayors court, on euery which vVindowe the armes 
of lichard lVhitbgton are placed. The foundation of the 
Mayors court xvas laid in the thirde yeare of the raigne of 
tfcmy thc sixt, and of the Porch on the South side of thc 
Mayors courte, in the fourth of the saide King. Then vas 
builded the Mayors chamber, and the counsell chamber with 
other roomes aboue the staires: last of all a stately porch 
entering the great Hall was erected, the front thereof towards 
the South being beautified with ilnages of stone, such as is 
shewed by thesc verses following, made about some 3 o. yeares 
since by IVilliam Eldertou, at that time an Atturney in the 
Shiriffes courts there. 

Though mosl lhe images bc îpulled clown, 
And noue & t/zoughl rcma),ne in Towue, 
I ara sure thcre bc in Loudon ycl, 
Seuen images snch, and ht snch a 
As few or noue I t/dnke will hit : 
]t euc7 day th 3, shcw tbcir face, 
And lhousands sec them euey y«arc, 
Bu/few I tkinkc can tcll me where, 
wherc Iesu Christ aloft doth stand, 
Law and lcarnbtff ot eythcr hand, 
Discipline in the DcMls nccke, 
And hard by hcr are tbrcc direct, 
Tbcre Justice, Fortitndc and Tcmerancc stand, 
«bere find yc tc likc in ail this land P 

Diuers Aldermen glased the great Hall, and other courtes, 
as appeareth by their Arms in each window, lVilliam 
]-fariol Draper, Mayor 1481. gaue 4 o. pound to the making 
of two loouers in the said Guildhal, and toward the glasing 
therof. The kitchens and other houses of office adioyning 
to this Guildhall were builded of latter rime, to vit, about 
the yeare 1501. by procurement of Sir Iohn Sha Goldsmith, 
Mayor (who was the first that kepte his Feast there)towaràes 



Cbeaibe wardc 273 
the charges of which worke the Mayor had of the Fellow- 
shippes of the cittie, by their owne agrcement certaine surnmes 
of mone),, as of the Mercers forty pound, the I Groccrs 
twenty pound, the Drapers thirty pound, and so of the other 
Fellowships through the citty, as they were of power. Also 
Widdowes and other well disposed persons gaue certain 
summes of rnoney, as the Lady I-/iii ten pound, the Lady 
ztttslric ten pound, and so of rnany other till the worke was 
finished, since thc which rime the Mayors Feastes haue beenc 
yearely keptc there, which beforc time had beene kept in the 
Taylers Hall, and in the Grocers hall: Nicholas tlw3,n 
Mercer, Mayor I499. deceased I5C 5. gaue by his Testarncnt 
for a hanging of Tapcstric to seruc for principall daycs in thc 
Guild hall 73.1i. 6.s. 8.d. How this gift was performcd I hauc 
hot heard, for Exccutors of our timc hauing no conscience, 
(I spcake of my own knowledge) proue more tcstarncnts then 
they performe. 
Nov for the chappell or colledgc of our Lady 
l[agdalcn, and of Ail-Saintes by the Guild hall called London 
colledge, I reade that the sarne was builded about the yeare 
z99- and that I>eter Fatch»rc, A«[am P)'attcis and H«nC1, 
Frowib« cittizens gaue one Messuage with the appurtenances 
in the parrish of Saint Fawstar to lI'illiam Bramptou Custos 
of the Chauntrie, by thern founded 1 in the said chappell with 
foure Chaplens, and one other house in the parrish of S. Giles 
without Criplegate, in the OE7. of t:-dward the third, was 
giuen to thern. Moreouer I find that Richard the 2. in the 
2o. of his raigne, graunted to Stephcu Spilman Mercer, licence 
to giue one rnessuage, 3" shops, and one garden, with the 
appurtenances, being in the parish of Saint Andrcw t-[ubbard, 
to the Custos and Chaplens of the said chappell and to their 
successors for their better reliefe and maintenance for euer. 
King leu 7 the 6. in the eight of lais raigne gaue licence to 
hdtn tTarmrd Custos, and the Chaplens to build of new the 
said chappell or colledge of Guild hall, and the sarne lcm 
the 6. in the "7. of his raigne, graunted to the parish Clearkes 
in London, a Guild of S. Nicholas, for two Chaplens by them 

1 founded] round 598, 6o3 
T 

Chappel or 
Colledge at 
G uildhall. 

l'atellt. 

Chappell or 
Colledge at 
Guildhall new 
builded. 



tage 276 

Iohn XVels 
a principall 
benefactor to 
(;uild hall 
Colledge. 

274 Chealge warde 
to be kepte in thc said Chappell of S. A[ary 3[agdalcn, neare 
vnto the Guild hall, and to keepe ï. Almes people. ][enry 
arlotz Skinner, Mayor, founded a chaplen there, )offer 
De, haro Mercer, and Sir William L anffford knight had also 
chaplens there. This Chap]pell or colledge had a Custos, 
7. chaplens, 3. clearkes, and foure Quiristers. 
Monumentes there haue been sundrie, as appeareth by the 
tombs of marble yet remayning, seuen in number, but al 
defaced. The vppermost in the quire on the South side 
thereof aboue the Reuestrie dore, was the tombe of Iohn 
IVdlcs Grocer, Mayor I431. The likenes of welles are grauen 
on the tombe, on the Reuestrie dote, and other places on 
that side the Quire. Also in the Glasse vindov ouer this 
tombe, and in the East Window is the likenes of Welles, with 
hands eleuatcd out of the same Welles, holding scrowles, 
wherein is written 2[,rcy, the writing in the East window 
being broken yet remayneth lb'dlcs: I round his armes also 
in the South glasse window, all which doe shew that the East 
end and South side the Quire of this Chappell, and the 
teuest'iè were by him both builded and glased: on the 
North side the Quire the tombe of Thomas Içncswortk Fish- 
monger, lIayor 15 5. who dcceased 1515 . was defaced, and 
within these 44. yeares againe renewed by the Fishmongers : 
two other Tombs lower there are, the one of a Draper, the 
other of a Haberdasher, their names hot knowne: Rickard 
Stominc is written in the window by the Haberdasher, vnder 
fiat stones do lye diuers Custos of the chappell, chaplens and 
officers to the chamber. Amongst others Iottu Clistone 
priest, sometime Custos of the Librarie of the Guildhall, I457. 
An other of Ldmond tlisou priest, one of the Custos of the 
Library, 151. &c. Sir Iohu Æatgly Goldsmith, Mayor, 
I576. lyeth buried in the vault, vnder the tombe of Ioltn 
wcllcs before named. This chappell or colledge, valued to 
dispend twelue pound, eight shillinges nine pence by the 
yeare, was surrendered amongst other, the chappell remayneth 
to the Mayor and Comminalty, wherein they haue seruice 
weekely, as also at the election of the Mayor, and at the 
Mayors fest, &c. 
Adioyning to this chappell on the south side was sometime 



Chea_pc warde 275 
a fayre and large library, furnished with books, pertayning to Library at 
the Guildhall and colledge : These books as it is said were Gt, ilde hall. 
in the raign of tïdward the 6. sent for by P_.'dward Duke 
of Somerset, Lorde Protector, with promise to be restored 
shortly: men laded from thence three Carries with them, but 
they were neuer retur[ned. This Library was builded by the Page 
Executors of _R. lVhitiltgtot, and by lVilliam turie: the 
armes of [Vhitiugto are placed on the one side in the stone 
worke, and two letters to wit, IV. and E. for lVillia» Bttr],, 
on the other side: it is now loted through, and ruade a store 
house for clothes. 
Southwest from this Guildhall is the fayre parrish church of parish church 
of S. Laurence 
Saint Laurence called in the Iury, because of olde rime many in the Iury. 
Iewes inhabited there about. This church is fayre and large, 
and hath some monumentes, as shall bee shewed. I my selfe 
more then 7 o. yeares since haue seene in this church the 
shanke bone of a man (as it is taken) and also a tooth of a The tooth of 
very greate bignes hanged vp for shew in chaines of iron, somemon- 
strous fish as 
vppon a pillar of stone, the tooth (being aboute the bignes of  take it. 
A shanke bone 
a mans fist) is Ing since conueyed from thence : the thigh or of,s inches 
shanke bone of 5- inches in length by the fuie, remayneth long, of a 
man as is said, 
yet fastened to a post of tituber, and is hot so nmch to be but might be 
noted for the length, as for the thicknes, hardnes and strength ofanOliphant. 
thereof, for when it was hanged on the stone pillar, it fretted 
with mouing the said pillar, and was not itselfe fretted, nor as 
seemcth, is hOt yet lightned by remayning drie : but where or 
when this bone was first found or discouered I haue not 
heard, and therefore reiecting the fables of some late writers 
I ouerpasse them. IValter thtndell had a Chaunterie there, 
the foureteenth of tïdward the second. There lie buried in 
this church Fliabctk wife to Iotm Fortcsc«e, Kathcriue Stok- 
ton, Iohtt Strattou, Phillip Albcrt, Iohn Flc,nbtg, Phillip Ig- 
moud«skam, IVilliam Skywitk, [ohz Norloug, Iotm Bakcr, 
Thomas Allyte, IVillia, t7artoz Mercer, I4. IVillia»z 
[clrith, Mercer, one of the Shiriffes, 4 5. Si»ton Bartlct 
Mercer, x4oE8. Waltcr Ckartsey, Draper, one of the Shiriffes, 
i43.RichardRicl Esquier of London the Father, & Richard 
Rich his sonne, Mercer, one of the Shiriffes, 442. deceased 
469 with this Eitaph 
T ,« 



Page »79 

276 ChealSe wa rc?e 
Respicc quod opus est praesentis tcmporis oeuum. 
Omne qtod est, tihil cst.practer amare 1)eum. 
This Richard was Father to [ohtt buried in S. Thomas 
./tcars, which Ioht was Father to Thomas, father to Richard] 
Lord Ritch, &c. lohtt )gickcrht, G honorable for seruice of his 
prince and of the English marchantes beyond the seas, who 
deceased 1448. Godfi'ey Bolleu Mercer, Mayor, 457- Thomas 
Eollen his sonne Esquier of Norfolke, I471. Iohn Atkcusott, 
Gentleman, Dame 3[at7 S. Iaure, Iohn lValtham, Rogcr 
tonifant, Iohu Chayhce, Iohu tbbott, Geffrey Filding Mayor, 
145OE. and tngell his wife, Simo,t 17cttbtgtot Draper, and troau 
his wife, Iohn Jlarshal Mercer,  4931. William _Purchasc Mayor, 
2498. Thomas ]ttl',O.qtt" Gentleman, Mercer, 1517. The Wife 
of a Maister of defence, seruant to the Princes of Wales, 
Dutches of Corncwell, and Countesse of Chester, Sh" Richard 
Grcsham Mayor 2.537. Sir l][ichell Dormer Mayor, 54. 
Robert Charscy one of the Shiriffes, 2548. Sir lVilliatu Roc« 
Ironmonger, mayor 593. Samttell Thornhill I597. Thus 
much for Chepe ward, which hath an Alderman, his Deputie, 
Common counsellors xi. Constables xi. Scauengers ix. for the 
Wardmote inqucst xii. and a Bcadle. It is taxed to the 
fifteene at 5-. pound, sixtcene shillinges, and in the Ex- 
chequer at seuenty two pound, eleuen shillinges. 
Coleman street warde. 
NEXT to Chepe Warde on the North side thereof is Co!e- 
manstreete Ward, and beginneth also in the East, on the 
course of Walbrooke in Lothbury, and runneth west on the 
South side to the end of Ironmongers lane, and on the North 
side to the West corner of Bassinges hall streete. On the 
South side of Lothbury is the streete called the old Iury, the 
one half and better on both sides towardes Cheape is of this 
Warde. On the north side lyeth Colemanstreete, whereof the 
Ward taketh naine, wholy on both sides North to London 
wall, and from that north ende along by the Wall, and More- 
gare East to the course of Walbrook. And again from 
Coleman streete west to the Iron grates: and these bee [ the 
boundes of this Warde. 
 John Marshal, Mercer, Mayor z6o3 



Colemalz stree! waro;« 277 
Ant[quit[es to be noted therein are these: First the streete 
of Lothberie, Lathberie, or Loadberie (for by all these names 
haue I read it) tooke the naine (as it seemeth) of Berie, or 
Court of olde time there kept, but by whom is growne out of 
memorie. This streete is possessed for the most part by 
Founders, that cast Candlestickes, Chafingdishes, Spice mor- 
rats, and such like Copper or Laton workes, and do afterwarde 
turne them xvith the foot & hOt with the wheele, to make 
them smooth and bright with turning and scrating (as some 
do tearme if) making a loathsome noice to the by-passers, 
that haue hot been vsed to the like, and therefore by them 
disdainedly 1 called Lothberie. On the south side ofthis street, 
amongst the Founders, be some faire houses and large for 
marchantes, namely, one that of old time was the Iews Sina- 
gogue, which was defaced by the Cittizens of London, after 
that they had slaine 7oo. Iewes, and spoyled the residue of 
their goods in the yeare i62. the 47. of Henry the third. 
And hot long after in the yeare i29I. King Edward the i. 
banished the remnant of the Iewes out of England, as is afore 
shewed. The said slnagogue being so suppressed certaine 
Fryers got possession thereof: For in the yeare 257. (sayth 
.4[ath«w Paris) there were seene in London a new order of 
Fryers, called de floenitcntia [est, or Fratres de sacca, because 
they were apparrelled in sackecloth, who had their house in 
London, neare vnto Aldersgate without the gate, and had 
licence of Henry the third, in the 54- of his raigne, to remoue 
from thence fo any other place : and in the 56. hee gaue vnto 
them this Iewes Sinagogue: after which rime Eliawr the 
Queene, wife to Edward the first, tooke into her protection 
and warranted vnto the Prior, & brethren dt Pedtentia resu 
Christi of London, the said land and building in Colechurch 
street in the parish of S. Olaue in the Iury, and S. Margaret 
in Lothbery by her graunted, with consent of St«phttt de 
Fulborne, vnder-Warden of the Bridge house, & other breth- 
ren of that house, for lx. marks of siluer, which they had 
receiued of the said prior and brethren of repentance to the 
building of the said bridge. This order of friers gathered 
man), good schollers, & multiplied in number exceedingly 
 disdainedly] 633; disdainely r6o3 

Lothbery. 

The Iewes 
Sinagogue. 

Fratres de 
sacca o1 de 
penitentia. 

Cole chureh 
street, or Olde 
Iury. 



a£'e a8o 

Robert Fitz- 
walter his 
house. 

The windmill 
Tauerne in the 
old Iurie. 

The olde 
Iury. 

The Iewes 
brought from 
Rone by W. 
I)uke of Nor- 
mandy. 

W. Rufus fa- 
aored lhem. 

H. the 2. puni- 
shed then. 
Richard the L 
forbad them to 
corne fo his 
coronation. 

278 Co/emm s/me/ 
vntill the counsell at Lyons, by the which it was decreede, 
that [ from that thnc forth thcre should be no more orders 
begging friers be permitted, but onely the 4-orders, to wit, 
the Dominicke or preachers, the Minorites or Gray Fryers, the 
Carmelites or white Fryel's, and the .Augustines : and so fi-om 
that time the bcgging Fryers decreased, and fell to nothing. 
Now it followcd that in the yeare I3O 5. RoV«r! Fiwalt«r 
requested and obtayned of the said king Edzvard the first, 
that the saine Fryers of the Sacke might assigne to the said 
_h'o3crl their chappell or church, of olde time called the Syna- 
gogue of the Iewes, neare adioyning to the then mansion 
place of the saine ]3ert, which was in place where now 
standeth the Grocers hall: and the saide Sinagogue was at 
the north Corner of the old Iury. A'Vert Zac Mercer, 
Mayor in the yeare 1439. kept his Mayoralty in this house, 
and dwelled there vntill his dying day. This bouse standeth 
and is of two parrishes, as opening into Lothberie, of S. 2[ar- 
garc¢s parrish, and opening into the Old Iury of S. Olaues 
parrish. The said Ro3erl Zac gaue liberally to both these 
parrishes, but was buried at S. Olaues. ]ïruffh Clo];lon Mercer, 
Mayor 149. dwe]led in this house, and kept his Mayoralty 
there: it is now a Tauernc, and hath to signe a Windmill. 
.And thus much for this house, sometime the Iewes Syna- 
gogue, since a house of Fryers, then a Noble mans house, 
after that a Marchauntes house, wherein Mayoralties haue 
beene kept, and now a \Vine Tauerne. 
Then is the olde Iurie, a streete so called of Iewes sometime 
dwelling there, and neare adioyning, in the parrishes of S. 
Olaue, S. Michaell Bassings Hall, S. Martin Ironmonger lane, 
S. Lawrence called the Iury, and so \Vest to Wodstreete. 
lVilliam Duke of Normandy first brought them from Rone, 
to inhabite here. 
ll'illiam ]zoEus fauoured them so farre, that hee sware by 
Luks face his common oath, if they could ouercome the 
Christians he would be one of their sect. 
]e»ry the second grieuously punished them for corrupting 
his coyne. 
Ric]tard the first forbad Iewes and women to bee present 
at his coronation for feare of inchantments, for breaking of 



vhich ! commaundement many Ieves vere slayne, who being 
assembled to present the king with some gifte, one of them 
was stricken by a Christian, which some vnruly people per- 
ceyuing, fell vpon them, bet them to their houses, and brent 
them therein, or slewe them at their comming out : Also the 
Iewes at Norwich, Saint Edmondsbury, Lincolne, Stanford, 
and Lynne, were robbed and spoyled, and at Yorke to the 
numbcr of 5co. besides womcn and Children, entered a Tower 
of the Castle, proffered money to be in suretie of their liues, 
but the christians would hot take it, xvhervpon they cut the 
throtes of their wiues & children, and cast them ouer the wals 
on the christians heads, and then entering the kings lodging, 
they brent both the house and themselues. 
King Iohn in the eleuenth of his raigne, commaunded ail 
the Iewes both men and vomen to be imprisoned and 
grieuously punished, because he would haue all their money, 
some of them gaue ail they had, and promised more to escape 
so many kindes of tormentes, for euery one of them had one 
of their eyes at the least plucked out, amongest whome there 
was one which being tormented many wayes would hot ran- 
some himselfe, till the king had caused euery day one of his 
great teeth to bee plucked out by the space of seuen dayes, 
and then gaue the king Io. markes of siluer, to the end 
they should pull out no more: the sayde king at that time 
spoyled the Iexves of 66o. markes. 
The 17. of this king, the Barons broke into the Iews 
houses, rifeled their coffers, and with the stone of their houses 
repaired the gates and walles of London. 
King t]em'y the third in the eleuenth of his raign graunted 
to Semayne or Balaster the house of/?enomye [ithm the Iew 
in the parrish of S. 2Hchaell Bassinghaughe in which the 
saide Benomy dwelt, with the fourth part of all his land in 
that parrish which IFilliam Elie held of the Fee of 
Neuell, and all the land in Coleman streete, belonging to the 
said Benomye, and the fourth parte of the land in the parrish 
of S. Lawrence, which was the fee of T. Buckerell, and were 
excheted to the king for the murder which the saide t?e»omye 
committed in the Cittie of London, to hold to the sayde 
Semaine, and his heyres of the king, paying at Easter a payre 

t:'«ge28z 

King Iohn 
tormented the 
Iewes. 

The Barons 
rifled the Iews. 

Charta Ii. Of" 
H. 3. 
H. 3- exeheted 
tk, e lands and 
goods 
of the Iewes. 



The Iewes 
builded them 
a Synagogue 
in London. 
H. the third 
founded an 
house for con- 
uerted Iewes. 

Ieves stale a 
child and cir- 
cumcised him, 
and minded to 
haue crucified 
him. 
H. the third 
exacteth mo- 
ney of the 
Iewes. 

Iewes hange] 
for crucifying 
of a child. 

7oo. Iewes 
slayn at lxn- 
don. 

of gilt spurres, and to doe thc seruice thereof due [vnto the 
Lords Court. In like manner and for like seruices the king 
graunted to Çnso for his homage, the other parte of the lands 
of the said Bcnomye in S. Michaels parrish, which Lawes the 
Paynter held, and was the ldnges Exchete, and the lands of 
the saide I¢elwmye in the sayde parrish, which lValar Tm'nar 
held, and xv. foote of land which H¢tgh Harman held, with xv. 
yron elles of land and halfe in the front of Ironmongar fane, 
in the parrish of S. Martin, which were the said Benomies of 
the fee of the Hospitall of S. Giles, and which .ddam the 
smith held, with two stone houses, which were l'oscs the Iewe 
of Canterbury, in the parrish of S. Olaue, and which are the fee 
of trnoM le Re2s, and are the kinges exchetes as before said. 
The 16. of the saide Hcm.ie the Iewes in London builded a 
Synagogue, but the king commaunded it should bee dedicated 
to out blessed Lady, and after gaue it to the Brethren of 
S. t»thonie of Vienna, and so was it called S. tnlhonies 
Hospitall : this ]ïremi, founded a Church and bouse for con- 
uerted Iewes, in new streete by the Temple, whereby it came 
to passe that in shorte rime there was gathered a great number 
of Conuertes : the OEo. of this Hem'y seuen Iewes were brought 
ri'oto Norwich, which had stolne a Chrlstened child, had cir- 
cumcised, and minded to haue crucified him at Easter, where- 
fore their bodies and goodes were at the kinges pleasure : the 
OE6. the Iewes were constrayned to pay to the king 2oooo. 
markes at two termes in the yeare, or else to bee kept in 
perpetuall prison : the 35. hee taketh inestimable sumnes of 
money of ail rich mon, namely of taron a Iewe, borne at 
Yorke, I4COO. markes for himselfe, and ton thousande markes 
for the Queene, and before hee had taken of the same Iewe as 
much as in all amounted to 3oooo. markes of siluer, and 2oo. 
markes of gold to the Queene. In the 4o. were brought vp to 
Westminster 2o. Iexves from Lincolne, for crucifying of a 
child named H2gh, eightteene of them were hanged : the 43- a 
Iewe at Tewkesbery fell into a Priuie on the Saturday and 
would not that day bee taken out for reuerence of his sabboth, 
wherefore Ridmrd Care Earle of Glocester kepte him there 
till munday that ho was dead: the 47. the Barons slew the 
Iews at London 7oo, the test were spoyled and their Syna- 



Coleman slree! varde 8 

gogue defa]ced, because one Iew would haue forced a Christian Pag e83 
to haue paide more then OE. d. for the lone of xx. s. a weeke. 
The third of ldzvard the first, in a Parliament at London, 
vsury was forbidden to the Iewes, and that ail Vsurers might 
be knowne, the king commaunded that euery Vsurer should 
weare a Table on their breast, the bredth of a paueline, or 
else to auoyde the Realme : the 6. of the said king ldzvard a 
reformation was ruade for clipping of the kings coyne, for 
which offence 67. Iews werc drawne and hanged, three were 
English Christians, and other were English Iewes: the saine 
yeare the Iewes crucified a child at Northampton, for the 
which fact many Iewes at London were drawn at Horse tayles 
and hanged: the 1 I. of Edr«ard the first, Iohn Peckham 
Archbishoppe of Canterbury commanded the Bishop of Lon- 
don to destroy all the Iewes Sinagogues in his Dioces. The 
16. of the said Edzvard ail the Iewes in England were in one 
day apprehended by precept from the king, but they re- 
deemed themselues for xaooo, poundes of siluer: notwith- 
standing in the 19. of his raigne, he banished them ail out of 
England, giuing them onely to beare their charge, till they 
were out of his Realm, the number of Iews then expulsed 
were 15o6c. persons : the king ruade a mighty masse of money 
of their houses, which he sold, and yet the Commons of 
England had graunted & gauc him a fifteenth of all their 
goods to banish them : and thus much for the Iewes. 
In this sayde streete, called the olde Iury, is a proper 
parrish Church of S. Olaue Vpwell, so called in Record, x3oEo. 
Iohn Eriat Parson of Saint Olaue Vpwell, in the Iury, 
founded there a Chauntrie, and gaue two messuages to that 
Parrish the 6. of lclward the second, and was by the said 
King confirmed : In this Church, to the commendation of the 
Parsons and Parishioners, the monumentes of the deade re- 
mayne lesse defaced then in many other: first of IVilliam 
Dilenaz Fereno or Ironmonger, one of the Shiriffes of London, 
1367. Rob¢rte Iauelobe Ironmonger, 39 o. [ohn Organ Mercer 
one of the Shiriffes, 385. [ohn Forcst Vicker of Saint Olaues, 
and of S. Stephen, at that rime as a Chappell annexed to 
S. Olaue, 399. /-/- Friole Taylor, 4o. T. 3[orsted Esquire, 
Chirurgion [ to Hemy the fourth, fift and sixt, one of the 'ag« es4 

Vsury for- 
biden. 

English Iewe 
hanged. 

Iewes hanged 
at Lotdot for 
crucifying a 
child at Nor- 
thampton. 
Ail the lewe 
in England ap- 
prehended and 
redeemed for 
money. 
Ail the Iewe 
batished thi 
Realme. 

Parish church 
of S. Olaue 
Vpwell in the 
Iewry. 
A well was vn- 
der the east 
end of this 
Chttrch, late 
turned to a 
pumpe but de- 
cayed. 



9.89. Colemm¢ s/met vm'c?c 

Kings pallace 
in the old 
Iewry. 

Parish church 
of S. Margaret 
in Lothberv. 

sh[riffes, i436. hee builded a faire nev Ile to the enlargement 
of this church, on the North side thereof, wherein he lyeth 
buried, 145o. Adam 17reabsicarc, Chaplen, 1411. lVilliam 
]çerbbie Mercer, 1465. Aobert Large Mercer, Mayor I44O. 
He gaue to that Church 200 pound. Zo/m tT, chvbze Founder, 
1467. GabrielIRazw Fuller, 15t. ll'cnlvort, Esquier, I5O. 
Tlwmas [ichell Ironmonger, 1527. Gil«s Z)cwcs, seruant to 
/-]cm 7 the seuenth, and to /r«z1:j, the eight, Cleark of their 
Libraries, and schoolemaister for the French tongue to l'rince 
Arlhm', and to thc I.ady Ma3',  535. Richard Ç]tambcrlaine 
Ironmonger, one of the shiriffes, 56-. Edmond Bru'la U, Mer- 
cer, I583. Zohn rian, &c. 
From this parrish church of S. O[aue, to the north 
ende of the Old Iurie, and from thence west to the north 
end of Ironmongers lane, and ri'oto the said corner into 
Ironmongers lane, almost to the parrish Church of saint 
Martin, was of olde rime one large building of stone, 
very ancient, nade in place of Iewes houses, but of what 
antiquitie, or by whom the saine was builded, or for what 
vse I haue not lerned, more then that king t-emy the 6. 
in the 6. of his raign, gaue the office of being Porter or 
keeper thereof, vnto Iohn Stent for terme of his lire, by the 
name of his principall palace in the o/de Iurie : this was in my 
youth called the old \Vardrope : but of later rime the outward 
stone vall bath been by little and little taken downe, and 
diuers fayre houses builded therevpon, euen round about. 
Now for the North side of this Lothburie, beginning again 
at the East end thereof, vppon the water course of Walbrooke 
haue yee a proper Parrish Church, called saint 3[a;ffarct, 
vhich seemeth to bec newly reedificd and builded aboute the 
yeare 1440. For Robert Large gaue to the Quire of that Church 
one hundred shillinges, and twentie pounde for ornamentes, 
more, to the vaulting ouer the Watercourse of Walbrooke 
by the saide church, for the inlarging thereof, two hundred 
markes. 
There be monuments in this church, of Reginald Colcman 
sonne to Ro3ert Çoleman buried there, 138.3. This said 
Zfobert Çolemaz nmy bec supposed the first builder or owner 11 
 owner] 633 ; Honor Li9 8, 6o 3 



of Coleman streete, and that saint Scrphens church then builded Page »2» 
in Coleman streete was but a chappell belonging to the parrish 
Church of saint Olaue in the Iul-y: for we reade (as afore) 
that Zohn For«st Vicker of saint Olaues, and of the chappell 
annexed of saint Stcîhcn. deceased in the yeare 1399. 
CloîOton Mercer, Mayor, deceased 1496. lohn Dimock, Au- 
sclme Bcckt, Iohn ]Mian and ll'illiam Ilford (had) Chaunteries 
there. Sir triat Tcwke knight, Treasnrer of the Chamber to 
King Item'ie the eight, and Daine Grisildc his wife, that 
deceased after him, were there buried, 1536. ]ohn Feillac« , 
Draper, Equier, *464, and Ioan lais. wife, sir Ittgk 
Mercer, Mayor, sonne to Richard ll7tch, intombed there, I466. 
He gaue to his third wife three thousand pound, and to maides 
marriages fiue hundred marks : Sir John Leigh 1564. with this 
Epitaph. 
No wealth, no proEvsc, no bright renowue, no ski[l, 
Aro force, no faine, no princes loue, no toyle, 
Thotgb forraigne la,d by lrancll search ye çvill, 
Aro faithfull scrnice of tbc comtt;'y soylc, 
Can life iprolo¢zg one mbmtc of an honte, 
gli/ death at length will ca'ccute his power. 
For Sir Iohu Leiffh to sundry conntrfi's knowne, 
A worthy Kuight c,ell of his prince csleemdG 
P,,y secing ranch fo grcat c.rpcriencc growuc, 
Tbough sale on scas, llto¢tgk surc on land hc scem«h" 
l'et here ho lycs loo sooue by &'alh opprest, 
His famc yet lhtcs, his so2tlc i¢z heazten dotlz test. 
By the West end of this parrish church haue ye a fayre 
water Conduit, builded at the charges of the cittie in the 
yeare I546. Sir 3[artin lozc,es being Mayor: two fifteenes 
were leuied of the Cittizens toward the charges thereof: this 
water is conueyed in great aboundance from diuers springes 
lying betwixt Hoxton and Iseldon. 
Next is the Founders Hall, a proper House, and so to 
the Southwest Corner of Bassinges Hall streete, haue yee 
fayre and large houses for Marchauntes: namely the Corner 
house, at the ende of Bassings hall streete, an olde peece of t'age 286 
worke builded of stone, sometime belonging to a certaine Icw 

Conduit in 
Lothbey. 

The Founders 
hall. 



Bay IIall. 

Coleman 
street. 

Armorers I lal. 

Kings alley. 
Loue lane. 
Parish Church 
of S. Steuen 
sometime a 
Sinagogue of 
the Iewe 

Cocke of wa- 
ter by S. Ste- 
phens church. 
]age 287 

284 Colemmz . t ee! vas'de 
named _/Jranscre, the sonne of ,qron, the sonne of Çoke the 
Iew, the 7- of Edward the first: since to Rahere de Soars 
lane, then to Simon Francis. Thom«s Bradery mercer kept 
his Maioraltie there, deceased 15o 9. Part of this bouse bath 
beene Iately imployed as a Market bouse for the sale of wool- 
len bayes, Watmols , Flanels, and such like : Alderman cnnet 
now possesseth it. On this North side aainst the old Iurie, 
is Coleman streete, so called of Çoleman the first builder and 
owner thereoÇ as also of Colechurch, or Coleman church 
agaynst the great Conduit in Cheape. This is a faire and 
lare street, on both sides builded with diuerse faire bouses, 
besides Allies, with small tenements in great number. On 
the East side of this streete, almost at the North end thereof, 
is the Arlnourers Hall, which companie of Armourers were 
ruade a fraternitie or Guild of Saint Geoe, with a Chantrie 
in the Chapple of saint Thomas in Paules Church, in the first 
of em-ie the sixt. Also on the saine side, is kings Alley, 
and Loue lane, both containing many tenements. And on 
the west side towards the south end, is the parish church of 
Saint Stehen, wherein the Monuments are defaced : notwith- 
standing, I find that IFillàzm Crayha founded a Chantrie 
there, in the raigne of Edward the second, and was buried 
there. Also [ohn Esse.ç the 35. of Edzvard the third, Adam 
Godman the 37- of Edward the third, llS"lliam Kbtff Draper, 
sometime owner of Kings Alley, the 18. of Richard the 
second, ]o/m Sokelin K the IO. of Hem'i« the sixt, ]ohn ArnoM 
Leatherseller, the 17. of enrie the sixt. Thomas Erad3crie 
mercer, Major, the first of enric the eight, his tombe remaln- 
eth on the north side the Quire. Richard Hmwy 1418. 
Kh'nigham 1468. Sir Io/m Garme, Richard Colsel, dmond 
Harbeb Currier, ail these vere benefactors, and buried there. 
This Church was sometime a Synagogue of the Iewes, then a 
Parish church, then a chappell to saint O[aues in the Iurie, 
vntill the seuenth of Ed, vard the fourth, and was then incor- 
porated a parish church. 
By the East ende of this Church is placed a cocke of sweete 
water, taken of the maine pipe that goeth into Lothberie. 
Also in I London wall directly against the north end of 
 Watmols] Wodmels 598 



Coleman s/ree/ varde e85 

Colman street, is a Conduit of water, ruade at the charges of 
Tttomas xJtcw goldsmith, Major 57. And let here be the 
ende of this warde, which hath an _Alderman, his Deputie, 
common Counsellers foure, Constables foure, Scauengers foure, 
of the Wardmote inquest a3. and a Beedlc. It is taxed to 
the fifteene xv. 1. xvi. s. ix. d. 

Bassings Hall warde 
THE next adioyning to Colemanstreetc ward on the west 
side thercof is ]3assings hall warde, a small thing, and consist- 
eth of one streete called Bassings hall streete, of Bassings hall, 
the most principall house, wherof the ward taketh name. It 
beginneth in the South by the latc spoken Market house 
called the Bay hall, which is the last of Colemanstrecte warde. 
This streete runneth from thence north downe to London 
vall, and some little distance both East and West, against the 
said hall, and this is the bounds of Bassings hall warde. 
Monuments on the East sidc thercof, amongst diuerse fayre 
houses for Marchants, haue ye three halles of Companies, 
nalnely, the Masons hall for the first, but of what antiquitie 
that company is I haue not read. The next is the weauers 
hal, which companie hath beene of great antiquitie in this 
Citie, as appeareth by a Charter of tIcnrie the second, in 
these wordes. .cx omnibus ad quos, &c. tobe Englished thus. 
tIenrie king of England, Duke of Normandie, and of Guian, 
Erle of Aniow, to the Bishop, Iustices, Shiriffes, Barons, 
Ministers, and all his true Lieges a of London, scndeth greet- 
ing: Know ye that we haue granted to the Weauers in 
London, their Guild, with ail the freedomes and custolnes 
that they had in the rime of king lenrie my Grandfather, so 
that none but they intermit within the Citie of their craft but 
he be of their Guild, neither in Southwarke, or other places 
pertaining to London, otherwise then it was done in the rime 
ofking Henrie my Grandfather : wherefore I will and straightly 
comImaund that ouer ail lawfully, they may treate, and haue 
ail aforesaid, as well in peace, free, worshipfull, and wholy, as 
they had it, freer, better, worshipfullier, and wholier, then in 
 Lieges] 1633; Leagues z6o 3 

Conduit at 
London wall. 

Bassings hall 
warde. 

Masons l tali. 
Weuars Ilall. 

Patent of It :. 

ltenry the . 

Page 288 



Patent. 

Mathew Paris. 

Girdlers hall. 

Bakewell hall. 

tage 8 9 

Bassings hall. 

286 tkrssings Hall warde 
the rime of king t[enric my Grandfather, so that they yeeld 
yearely to mee two mari(es of gold at the feast of S. [i«hacll, 
and I forbid that any man to them do any vnright, or disease, 
vpon paine of ten pound, witnes Thomas of Çanterburic, 
IVarinofilio Gerardi, Camerario. Also I read that the saine 
l-[curie the second in the 3 I. of his raigne, ruade a confirmation 
to the Weauers that had a Guild of fraternitie in London, 
wherein it appeareth that the said Weauers ruade wollen cloth, 
and that they had the correction thereof: but amongst other 
.Articles in that patent, it was decreed, that if any man ruade 
cloth of Spanish wooll mixed with English wooll, the Portgraue, 
or principall Magistrate of London ought to burne it, &c. 
Moreouer in the yeare 197. king Richard the first at the 
instance of Hub«r! Archbishop of Canterburie and Iusticier 
of England, ordained that the woollen clothes in euery part of 
this realme should be in bredth two yards within the listes 
and as good in the middest as in the sides, &c. King l-[enrie 
the third granted to the Citizens of London that they should 
hOt be vexed for the burels, or clothlisted, according to the 
constitution ruade for bredth of cloth the ninth of his raigne, 
&c. ii«hard thc second, in the third of his raigne, granted 
an order of agreement betweene the Weauers of London, 
English men and Aliens or straungers borne, brought in by 
tz-dzc,ard the third. 
Lower downe is the Girdlers hall, and this is all touching 
the East side of this ward. 
On the west side almost at the south end thereof is Bake- 
well hall, corruptly called Blackewell hall: concerning the 
originall whereof I haue heard diuerse opinions, which I ouer- 
passe as fables, without colour of truth, for though the saine 
seemed a building of great antiquitie, yet in mine opinion the 
foundation thereof was first laide since the Conquest of 
IVilliam Duke of Normandie : for the same was builded vpon 
vaultes of stone, which stone was brought from Cane in Nor- 
mandie, the like of that of Paules Church, builded by 3[auri- 
tius and his successors Bi[shops of London: but that this 
house hath beene a Temple or Iewish Sinagogue (as some 
haue fantasied) I allow hot, seeing that it had no such forme 
of roundnes, or other likenesse, neither had it the forme of a 



B«ssiugs Ho/l. warde 287 
Church for thc assembly of Christians, which are builded East 
and WesL bu conrariwîse the saine was buHded norh and 
south, and in forme of a noble mans house, and therefore the 
best opinion in my iudgement is that it was of olde rime 
belonging to the family of the asshgs, which was in this 
realme a naine of great antiquifie and renownc, and that it 
bare also the naine of that familie,  xvas called therefore 
Bassings Haugh, or Hall : xvhereunto I ara the rather induced, 
for that the rmes of that family xvere of olde rime so 
abundantly placed in sundry parts of that house, euen in the 
stone worke, but more especially on the wals of the hall, 
which cried a continuall painting of them on euerie side so 
close togither, as one escutcheon could be placed by another, 
which I my selle haue often secne and noted before the olde 
building was taken downe: these armes were a Gerond of 
twelue poynts, Gold, and zure. Of the Bassb«oes therefore, 
builders of riais house, and owncrs of the round neare adioyn- 
ing, tiret warde taketh the naine, as Coleman streete xvarde 
of Coleman, and Faringden xvaïd of IVllhm and i«hohs 
riugden, men that were principall owners of those places. 
nd of olde rime thc most noble persons that inhabited 
this Citie, wcre appointed to be principall magistrates there, 
as was Godfn 7 dc Aluu (or lagnauilc), Portgraue or Shiriffe 
in the raign of Villiam Conqueror, and of William 
Huglz de Buch, in the raigne of «ury the first. Au&ri« de 
Vere Earle of Oxford : after him Gilbert Bccket, in the raign of 
king Stephen, after that Godfrey de A[agnauilc the sonne of 
Villiam the sonne of Godfrey de AIaguauile Earles of Essex, 
were Portgraues or Shiriffes of London and Middlesex. In 
the raigne of Heurie the second, Petcr Fitzwallcr: after him 
John Fitn«cl, &c. so kewise in the raigne of king [ohu, the 
16. of his raigne, a rime of great troubles, in the yeare 
Salonou Bassing, and ugh Basst)«g, Barons of this realme 
as may bee supposed, were Shiriffes: and the said Salomou 
Bassiug was Maior in the yere 26. which was the first of 
em'ie the thirde. Also dam as]siu sonne to Salomon 
(as it seemeth) was one of the Shiriffes, in the yeare 1243, the 
28. of Heurie the third. 
Vnto this Adam dc Bassing, king Hearie thc third in the 

Armes of the 
Bassings. 

llow Bassings 
hall warde 
tooke that 
name. 

Salomon 
Bassing and 
other of that 
name. 
tag 290 



Bassing bornc. 

Bakevell hall 
.iuen to the 
City. 

Bakewell hall 
a market placc 
for wollen 
clothes. 

_Page 29 

288 ;ass#«Es Hall warde 
3. of his raigne, gaue and confirmed certaine messuages in 
Aldermanbury, and in Milke streete (places hot far from 
Bassings Hall) and the aduouson of the Church at Bassinges 
hall, with sundrie liberties and priuiledges. 
This man was afferwards Major in the yeare I.5I. the 36. 
of Hcnric the thirde. Moreouer Thomas Bassing ,,vas one of 
the Shiriffes, IOE69. Robert Bassing Shiriffe, IOE79. and IVilliam 
F, assing was Shiriffe 13o8 , &c. for more of the Bassings in this 
Ctie I need hot note, onely I read of this family of Bassinges 
in Cambridgeshire, called Bassing at the bourne, and more 
shortly ]3assing bourll, and gaue Armes as is afore shewed, 
and was painted about this old hall. But this familie is worne 
out, and hath left the naine to the place where they dwelt. 
Thus much for this Bassings hall. 
Now how Bakewell hall tooke that naine is another question : 
for which I read that Thomas takewell dwelled in this house 
in the six and thirtieth of Fdwardc the third, and that in the 
2o. of Rcharde the second, the saide king for the summe of 
fiftie poundes which the Major and Comminaltie had paide 
into the Itanapar graunted licence, so much as was in him, to 
lohn Frosh, IVilliam larkcr, and Stcphen Silman (Citizens 
and Mercers) that they, the said Messuage called Bakewell 
hall, and one Garden with the appurtenances in the parish of 
Saint 3[ichad of Bassings Haugh, and of Saint Laurcnce in 
the Iurie of London, and one messuage, two shops, and one 
Garden, in the sayde parish of Saint 3[ichadl, which they 
held of the king in burgage, might giue and assigne to the 
Major and Comminaltie for euer. This Bakewell hall thus 
established, hath beene long since imployed as a weekely 
market place for all sorts of \Vollen clothes broade and 
narrow, brought from all partes of this Realme, there to be 
solde. In the 2I. of Richard the second, _. bVkittington 
maior, & in the 2. Dreugh a Barrhtine being major, it was 
decreed that no forrein or stranger should sell any wollen 
cloth but in the Bakewell hall, vpon paine of forfeyture 
thereof. [ 
This house of late yeares groving ruinous and in daunger 

 Dreugh] Drengh r6o 3 ; Drew æ633 



Zassi¢g« 7/! 7va«tc 289 
of falling, Ric]«rd [ay marchant Tayler at his discease gaue 
towards the new building of the outward part thereof 3eo. 
pounds, vpon condition that the same should bee performed 
within three yeares after his discease, whervpon the old 
Bakewel Ball was taken downe, and in the moneth of Feb- 
ruarie next Following, the foundation of a new strong and 
autiful storehouse being laid, the worke therof was so 
diligently applied, that within the space of ten moneths after 
to the charges of aSoo. poundes, the same was finished in the 
yeare 588. 
Next beyond this house be placed diuerse faire houses for 
marchants and others, till yee came to the backe Gate of Guild 
hNl, which gare and part of the building within the same, is 
of this warde. Some small distance beyond this gate, the 
Coopers haue their common hall. Then is the Parish Church 
of S. l[icacll, called S. l[ichacll at Bassings hall, a proper 
Church lately reedifyed, or new builded, whereto Zo¢ E«r¢o 
mercer, and gws  his wife were great benefactors, as appear- 
eth by his marke placed throughout the whole roofe of the 
Quier and middle Ile of the Church, he deceased in the yeare 
46e. and was buried in thc Quire with this Epitaph. 
Iohz artoz O'cl vmlcr hcrc, 
Somclimcs of Lo¢dou Cilicct mtd elfcrccr, 
ud &tcl t his zc,ifi', t,itk lhcb" rogctic, 
cac D«w«d fo carllt as yc taj, scc, 
Fricmts fi'cc whal sa yc bec, 
raj, fi,r 's wc yv¢t pray, 
As j'o¢ scc vs i this dcgrce, 
So shaH j,olt bc am,thcr dŒEr. 
l¢rauces Cookc, fiku [artbz, dward ErooEil Esquier, of 
Wanvickeshire, x46o. R&kard Baracs, Sir Rvgcr Roe, Rogcr 
Vdd«n, x479- Sir Iames 15fvrd mercer, Maior, deceased 
a57- buried vnder a fayre Tombe with his Ladie in a speciall 
Chappell by him builded, on the North side of the Quire. 
Sir Iou Greska,z mercer, Major, deceased 554- Sir lokz I 
AiIoEc Chirurgion, then a Grocer, one of the Shiriffes, 548. 
Nic]tolas Eak]tursl one of the Shiriffes 577. lI'vlstvu Dixi, 
1 sic 

Bakewell hall 
new builded. 

Coopers hall. 
Parish church 
of S. Michaell. 



-'9 ° J?«,sshgs H«li OEc2ardc 
Skinner, Major 585. &c. Thus haue you noted one Parish 
Church of S..Mi«ha«ll, Bakewell hall, a Market place for 
wollen clothes, the Masons hall, Weauers hall, Girdlers 1 hall, 
and Coopers hall. And thus I ende this Ward, which bath 
an A_Iderman, his Deputie, for common Counsaile route, 
Constables two, Scauengers two, for the Wardmot inquest 
seuenteene, and a Beedle, itis taxed to the fifteene in London 
seuen pound, and likewisc in the Exchequer at seuen pound. 

Creplegate 
warde. 

From the 
standard fo 
the Crosse in 
Cheape on the 
north side, is 
of Cripplegate 
warde. 

l'agc2 

Creplesgate warde 
THEnext Warde is called of Cripplesgate, and consisteth 
of diuerse streetes and lanes, lying as well without the Gate 
and Wall of the Cittie, as within : first within the Wall on the 
Est part thereof, towards the north, it runneth to the West 
side of Bassings hall Warde: and towardes the South it 
ioyneth to the Warde of Cheape, it beginneth at the West 
ende of saint Laurencc Church in the Iurie, on the North side, 
and runneth West to a Pumpe, where sometime was a Well 
with two Buckets, at the South corner of Alderman burie 
streete, which street runneth downe North to Gay spurre 
lane, and so to London Wall. which streete and lane are wholy 
on both sides of this Warde, and so bee some few bouses on 
both the sides from Gay spurre lane, by and agaynst the Wall 
of the Citie, Èast to the Grates ruade for the Watercourse of 
the Channels, and west to Cripplesgate. Now on the south- 
side from ouer against the west end of saint Laurcncc church 
to the Pumpe, and then vp Milke streete south vnto Cheape, 
which Milkestreete is wholy on both the sides of Cripplegate 
warde, as also without the South ende of Milkestreete, a part 
of west Cheape, to wit from the standarde to the Crosse is all 
of Cripplegate warde. Then downe great Woodstreete, which 
is wholy of this warde on both the ] sides thereof, so is little 
Woodstreete which runneth downe to Cripplegate. 
Out of this Woodstreete be diuerse lanes, namely on the 
Est side is Lad lane, which runneth east to Milkestreete 
corner : down lower in Woodstreete is Louelane, which lyeth 
by the south side of S. Albons church in Woodstreete, and 
 Girdlers] 1633 ; Cordellers 1598 , 16o 3 



runneth downe to the Conduite in Aldermanburie streete. 
Lower downe in Woodstreet is Addlestreete, out of the which 
runneth Phillip lane downe to London wall. These be the 
lanes on the East sidc. 
On the west side of Woodstreete is Huggen lane by the 
south side of S. Mi«la«l« church, and goeth through to 
Guthuruns lane. The lower is Maiden lane, which runneth 
west to the north end of Gutherons lane and vp the said lane 
on the East side thereof, till against Kery lane and backe 
againe: then the sayd Maiden lane, on the north side goeth 
vp to staining lane, and vp a part thereof on the East side, to 
the farthest North part of Haberdashers Hall, and backe 
againe to Woodstreete, and there lower downe is Siluer- 
streete» which is of this warde, till ye corne to the East ende of 
S. Olit«« church» on the south side, and to Munkes well streete 
on the north side, then downe the saide Munkes well streete 
on the East side thereof, and so to Cipplesgate, do make the 
boundes of this ward withh the walles. 
Without Cripplegate Forestreete runneth thwart bcfore the 
gare, from against the north side of saint Uile« church, along 
to lore lane end and to  Posterne lane ende that runneth 
betwixt the Towne ditch on the south, nd certaine Gardens 
on the north almost to Moregate at the East of which lane 
is a Pot-makers house, which house with ail other the Gar- 
dens, houses and Allies on that side the Morefieldes» till ye 
corne to a Bridge and Cowhouse neare vnto Fensburie Curt 
is all of Criplegate ward : then to turne back again through the 
said Posterne lane to More lane» which More lane with 11 the 
Allies and buildings there» is of this warde, after that is Grub- 
streete, more then halle thereof to the streightning of the 
streete next is Whitecrosse streete, vp to the end of Bech 
lane, and then Redcrosse streete wholy, with a part of Golding 
lane» euen to the Postes there placed, as a bounder. I 
Then is ZBechlane belote spoken of, on the East side of the 
Red crosse, and the Barbican streete, more then halle thereof 
towarde Aldersgate streete, and so haue you all the boundes 
of Cripplegate ward without the walles. 
Now for Antiquities and Ornaments in this warde, to be 
noted: I find first at the meeting of the corners of the old 

Phillip lane. 

tVav  .94 



A pttmpe at 
the corner of 
Aldermanbury 
street. 

l.iber Osney. 
Aldermanbery 
court or Guild 
hal by Alder- 
manbury 
church. 

Page 295 
Parish church 
of S. Mary 
Aldermanbnry. 
bhanke bone 
of a man 28. 
inches and a 
halle long. 

292 Cret3le«_gate wa rde 
Iurie, Milkestreet, Ladlane, and Aldermanburie, therc was of 
old time a fayre Well with two Buckets, of late yeares con- 
uerted to a Pumpe. How _A_ldermanbury streete tooke that 
naine, many fables haue beene bruted, alI which I ouerpasse 
as not worthy the counting: but to be short, I say, this street 
tooke the naine of _A_ldermans burie (which is to say a Court) 
there kept in their Bery, or Court hall now called the Guild 
hall, which hall of old rime stoode on the East side of the 
saine streete not farre from the west ende of Guildhall now 
vsed. Touching the antiquitie of this old Aldermans burie 
or court, I haue hot read other then that Richard teuery one 
of the Shiriffes of London, in the first of ]ichard the first, 
xvhich was in the yeare of Christ  8 9. gaue to the Church of 
S. [ary at Osncy by Oxford, certaine ground and rents in 
_Alderman bery of London, as appeareth by the Register of 
that Church, as is also entred in the tIoistinges of the Guild 
hall in London : this olde Bery Court or hall continued, and 
thc Courts of the Major and _A_ldermen were continually 
holden there, vntill thc new Bery Court or Guildhall that now 
is was builded and finishcd, which hall was first begun to be 
founded in the yearc 1411 , and vas not fully finished in 20. 
yeares after. I my selle haue seene the ruines of the old Court 
hall in Aldermanbery streete, which oflate hath beene imployed 
as a Carpenters yard, &c. 
In this Alderman bury streete be diuersc faire houses on 
both the sides, meete for marchants or men of Worship, and 
in the middest thereof is a fayre Conduit, ruade at the charges 
of IVilliam k'as(/ïeld, sometime major, who tooke order as 
well for water to bee conueyed from Teyborne, and for the 
building of this Conduit hOt farre distant from his dwelling 
house, as also for a Standarde of sweete water, to bee erected 
in Fleetestreete, all which was done by his executors, as in 
another place I haue shewed. I 
Then is the parrish church of S. 2tlary Aldermanbury a 
fayre Church with a churchyeard, and cloyster adioyning, in 
the which cloyster is hanged and fastned a shanke bone of a 
man (as is said) very great and larger by three inches and 
a halfe then that which hangeth in S. Lmvrcncc church in the 
Iury, for it is in length 28. inches and a halle of assisse, but 



hot so hard and steely, 1 like as the other, for the saine is light 
and somewhat Porie and spongie. This bone is saîd to bee 
round amongst the bones of men remoued fi'om the charnel 
house of Powles, or rather from the cloyster of Powls church, 
of both which reportes I doubt, for that the late _eyne 
Statîoner (who paid for the carriage of those bones from the 
charnell to the Morefieldes) tolde mee of some thousandes of 
Carrie loades and more to be conueighed, whereof hec wondred, 
but neuer told of any such bone in eyther place to bee round, 
neyther would the saine haue becne easily gotten from him, if 
hee had heard thereof, except he had reserued the like for 
himselfe, being the greatest preseruer of antiquities in those 
pattes for his time. True it is, that this bone, (from whence 
soeuer it came) beeing of a man, as the forme sheweth, must 
needes be monstrous, and more then affer the proportion of 
fiue shanke bones of any lnan now liuing alnongst vs. There 
lie buried in this Church Shnon lVinchcombe Esquier, 39 I. 
Robert Combarto 4oo. Ioht lVheatley Mercer, 48. Sir 
IVilliam Estfild, knight of the Bath, Mayor, I438. a great 
benefactor to that church, vnder a fayre monument, hee also 
builded their steeple, changed their old Bels into 5-tunable 
bels, and gaue one hundred poundes to other workes of that 
church. Moreouer hee caused the Conduit in Aldermanbury 
which he had begun, to be performed at his charges, and 
water to be conuayed by pypes of leade from Tyborne to 
Fleetstreete, as I haue said. And also from high Berie to the 
parrish of S. Giles without Cripplegate, where the inhabitants 
of those partes incastellated the saine in sufficient cesterns, Iohz 
2[idleton, Mercer, Mayor I47. Ioh Tomcs Draper, 486. 
William Bucke, Taylor,  5 I. Sir 1Villiam Browne Mayor, 157 . 
Dame 3[arffaret [enhtffes, wife to Steihen Icnitges, Mayor 1515. 
A widdow named Starkcy sometime wife to #[odie. Rafle Wood- 
cock Grocer, one of the shiriffes 1586. Dame I «l[ary Gresham 
wife to Sir Iohu Gresham, 1538. Thomas Godfrey Remem- 
brancer of the office of the first fruites, I577. Beneath this 
church haue yee Gay spur lane, which runneth downe to 
London Wall as is afore shewed. In this lane at the North 
end thereof was of olde time a house of Nunnes, which house 
: stcely] 263 ; Steele like 26o 3 

Reyne Wolfe 
graue anti- 
quary, collect- 
ed the great 
Chronicles in- 
creased and 
published by 
his executors 
vnder the 
name of Raph 
tIolonshead. 

Conduit in 
Alderman- 
bury. 

Pae 9 6 

Gay spur lane. 



Priory or Hos- 
pitall called 
Elsing Spittle. 

Charterhouse 
Churchyard 
vithout 
Aldersgate, & 
one other the 
like withont 
Aldgate. 

Parish chureh 
of S. Alphage. 

l',tge z97 

Elslng Spittle 
burned. 

-94 Cr@h'sga/e arde 
being in grcat decay, IVilliam llsi»g Nercer in the yeare of 
Christ, 3oE9 . the 3- of a',ard the 3. began in place thereof 
the foundation of an Hospitall, for sustentation of oo. blind 
men, towardes the erection whereof, he gaue his two houses in 
the parishes of S. 12baKe, and out blessed Lady in Alder- 
manbury neare Crîpplegate. This house was after called a 
Priorie or Hospital of S. [a3, the Virgin, founded in the 
yeare 33 . by IV. El«itg for CalOllS regular : the which 
became thc first Prior thcrc. Robert lsbzg son to the said 
gaue to the said Hospitall IoE li. by the yeare, for the finding 
of 3. priestes, hee also gaue o. s. towards the inclosing ofthe 
new churchyeard withoutAldegate and . s. to the inclosing 
of the new Churchyeard without Aldersgate, to Thomas Elsitg 
his sonue 8o. pound, the rest of his goods to bee sold, and 
giuen to the poore. This house valued x93 ll. IS.S. 5. d. was 
surrendercd the xi. of May, the xxii. of Hm7 the eight. 
The monmncntes that were in this church defaced. Thomas 
Cheto, , sonne to IVilliam Chcno,, Thomas, Iohu, and ll'illiam 
Chenu, , loht Vor#tattou Draper, Mayor 1381. Edmond 
'tger«t, Hc« 7 Fro, c,ikc, Ioatt, daughter to sir lVillian 
Chcucy, wife to IVillia» Stokes, Robcrt Eldarbrokc Esquier, 
46o. dame [oatt Ratcl', ll'illia2t F«lcî', IVilliau 
stoze, Thomas S,h«eley, and Hc&u his wife, &c. The princi- 
pall Isle of this church towardes the north was pulled dowu 
and a riame of foure houses set vp in place: the other parte 
from the steeple vpward, vas conuerted into a parrish Church 
of S. hage, and the parrish Church which stoode neare 
vnto the Wall of the Cittie by Cripplesgate vas pulled downe, 
the plot thereof ruade a Carpenters yearde, with sav pittes. 
The hospitall it selfe, the Prior, and Canons house with oLher 
lodgings, were made a dwelling house, the church yeard is 
a garden plot, and a fayre gallery on the cloyster: the 
lodgings for the poore are [ translated into stabling for 
horses. 
In the yeare I54. sir [ohu llïlliams maister of the kinges 
Iewels, dwelling in this house on Christmas euen at night, 
about seuen of the clocke, a great tire began in the gallery 
thereof, which burned so sore, that the flame fiering the whole 
house, and cousunaing it, was seeue all the Cittie ouer, and 



Cre]Slesg«te war«/e 295 
was hardly quenched, whereby manie of the kings Iewels 
were burned, and more imbeseled (as was said). Sir Ro'wlamt 
Heyward, Mayor, dwelled in this Spittle, and was buried there, 
t593. Richard Lec, alias, Clarenciaul.ç king of Armes, 597- 
Now to returne to Milkstreete, so called of blilke sold 
there, there bee many fayre houses for wealthy Marchantes 
and other: amongst the which I read that Grego7 Rokesley 
gIayor of London in the yeare 1275. dwelled in this Milke 
streete, in an house belonging to the Priorie of Lcwes in 
Sussex, whereof hee was tenant at will, paying twentie shil- 
linges by the yeare without other charge: such were the 
rentes of those rimes. 
In this Milke streete is a smal parrish church of Saint 
l]Iarie 3[agda&», which hath of late yeares beene repayred, 
ll'illiam Brownc Mayor x53. gaue to this church forty 
pound, & was buried there, Tho»ms Exmcw Mayor, x58. gaue 
forty ll. and was buried there : so was Iohu 3[ilford one of the 
shiriffes 375(?)- Iohz Olu¢y Mayor, 475- Richard Rawsou 
one of the shiriffes, x476. Heurœe A'clscy, Sir Iohu Browne 
Mayor, x497. Tho»tas 3D«schame one of the Shiriffes, x463. 
Sir IVilliam Cautilo Knight, Mercer, 46. Heu7 Cattlozt,, 
Mercer, marchant of the Staple, who builded a Chappell and 
was buried there, 495. Iohu llçst Alderman, x57. Iohn 
2Iachcll Alderman, x558. Thomas Sbiuuer Clothworker, Mayor 
596. 
Then next is Woodstreete, by what reason so called, I 
know not, true it is that ofolde rime, according to a decree ruade 
in the raigne of Richard the first, the houses in London were 
builded of stone for defence of tire, which kind of building 
was vsed for two hundred yeares or more, but of later time 
for the winning of ground taken downe, and houses of timber 
set vp in place. It seemeth therfore that this street hath 
beene of the latter building [ ail of timber, (for not one house 
of stone hath been known there,) and therfore called Wood- 
street, otherwise it might take the naine of some builder or 
owner thereof. 
Thomas lI.od one of the shiriffes in the yeare x49- 
dxvelled there: he was an especiall benefactor towardes the 
building of S. Peters church at Woodstreet ende: he also 

Gregory 
Rocksley 
Mayor of Lon- 
don, his house 
rent xx shil- 
lings the yeare. 

Parish church 
of S. Mary 
Magdalen. 

Woodstreet. 

Page ,c, 8 



Compter in 
Woodstreet. 

Ladle lane 
corruptly 
called Lad 
lane. 
Loue lane. 
Parish church 
of S. Albon. 

]'a'e 299 

296 Cr@/esgatc wardc 
builded the beautifull front of houses in Cheape, ouer against 
Woodstreete end, which is called Goldsmithes row. garnished 
with the likenes of llodmen: his predecessors might bec 
the first builders, owners and namers of this streete after their 
OWlle naine. 
On the East side of this street is one of the Prison houses, 
pertayning to the Shiri?s of London, and is called the 
Compter in Woodstreet, which was prepared to be a prison 
house in the yere 1555. and on the Ee of S. A[icadl the 
Archangell, the prisoners that lay in the Compter iii Bred- 
streete were remoued to this Compter in Woodstreete. 
Beneath this Colnpter is Lad lane, or Ladle hall . for so 
I find it of Record, in thc parrish of S. A[ichaell Woodstreete, 
and bcneath that is Loue lane, so called of wantons. By 
this lane is the parrish church of S. Albon, which hath the 
tnonuments of Sir RichardIlligworth Baron of the Echequer, 
Thomas Calzvorl Grocer, Mayor, 1443. Iohn lVoodcocbe, 
Mayor, 14o 5. Iohu Cdh't and Alicc his wife: Raph Thomas, 
Rah and Rœeehard sonnes of Raph Illingworth, which was 
sonne to Sir Rœehard Illi»gz«orth Baron of the Echequer, 
Thomas sonne of Sir Thomas Fitïa,illiams, Thomas Chalton, 
Merccr, Mayor, 449- Thomas Os-ich Haberdasher 483. 
Richarde Swctcnham Equier, and lVilliam Dunthorne Towne 
Clearke of London, with this Epitaph : 
Fa'li.r prima dits postquam mortalibns 
Cesserit, hœee morbas subit, arque repente setectus. 
Tutu mors qua nosD'nm DuMhoTt cecidisse l lïlclmum, 
Hand cniquam latMsse reor, dignissimus (i»quam,) 
Artibus hic doclor, ncc mn cclebcrri»ms hMus 
Clericus vrbis oral primus, uMliquc sccumhts, 
A[oribus, itgenio, studio, uil dia'eris illi, 
Qnin dcderit natura bonL plus ipse, modestus, 
Longanimus, 2solcrs, paticns z, ster 0111llia ff1"alus, I 
Qnique sub immensas curas ¢,ariosque labores, 
A.Hus atteritur, rira" dura transcrit auras, 
Hoc tctro i tumulo, compostus ace quiescit. 
Si»ton Morsted, Tkomas Pichurst  Esquier, Richarde 
 lane &98 : hall z6o 3 - sokrs, aliens Thoms ; solis z633 
 Pikehurst z598 , z6o 3 ; Pikdtmzçt Harl. 538 



Cre/Sh s. /c ee,ardc 297 
Talee, Ro&rt Ashco**de, Taomas Lozet, Esquier, Shiriffe of 
Northamptonshire, 49. ha,z Spoo,, Kataerc,a daughter to 
Sir Tomas Alirley Knight, Villia**a LiwMa& Mercer,  39. 
lo/m Peuie Mercer, 1450. [o*a Thomas Mercer, 1485. 
topat- azc,se, Mercer, one of the shiriffes 15o 3, Williaaz 
Skarboroztgk Vintner, Simo, de Berchi, zg, Sir Iohn Chekc 
Knight, Schoolemaister to king Ed«,a,l the sixt, deceased 
1557. do lie here. 
Then is Adle streete, the reason of which naine I know Adle street. 
hot, for at this present it is replenished with fayre buildinges 
on both sides: amongst the which there was sometime the 
Pinners Hall, but that Company being decayed, it is now the 
Plaisterers Hall. 
Not far from thence is the Brewers I tall, a fayre house, 
which companie of Brewers was incorporated by King tl. 
the 6. in the 16. of his raign, confirmed by the name or 
S. 3[a, 3, and S. Thomas the Martyr, the 19. of E. the 4. 
From the West end of this Addle streete, little Woode- 
streete runneth downe to Cripplesgate, and somewhat East 
fl'om the Sunne Tauerne against the wall of the Citty is the Curriers hall. 
Curriers Hall. 
Now on the West side of Woodstreete haue yee Huggen Iluggen lane. 
lane, so called of one Hztga,«, that of olde time dwelled there : 
hee was called ugau in the lane, as I haue read in the 
34. of E. the first, this lane runneth downe by the south side 
of S. 3Iichaels church in Woodstreet, and so, growing very 
narrow by meane of late encrochmentes, to Guthurons lane. 
The parrish church of saint Michaell in Woodstreete is a Parish ehurch 
 of S, Michael 
proper thing, and lately well repayred, Iohz Izte Parson OlinWoodstreet" 
this church, Zobn Forstcr Goldsmith, and Peler Fikldc 
Taylor, gaue two messuages and two shoppes, with solars, 
sellars, and other edifices in the saine parrish and streete, 
and in Ladle lane, I to the reparations of the church, page3oo 
chauncell, and other workes of charitie, the 6. of Richard 
the second. 
The monumentes here be of lVillia» Bambrough the sonne 
of Henry Bambroztgh of Skardborough, 1392. lVilliam 7)trner 
Waxechandler, 4oo. loh** Pekc Goldsmith, 44I. lVilliam 
Tmter2ter Girdler, 4.ç4-. Hïlliam AIawer Ironmonger, 1465. 

Pinners hall, 
now the Plais- 
terers hall. 
Brewers hall. 



Iames the 
four|h King of 
Scots, his head 
buried in S. 
31ichaels 
church in 
Woodstreet. 

Black hall in 
Woodstreet in 
.'q. Michaels 
parish. 
Ingenelane or 
Mayden lane. 
Wax dmndlers 
hall. 
tage 3oz 
Haberdashers 
hall. 
Record in the 
Rowles. 

298 C r clD [c oE¢a t(" .z o cr r « ?c 
Iohn Nask 466. with an Epitaph, Ioht Allcz Timbermonger, 
44- Robert Draler 5 oe. Iokn Lamberde Draper, Aider- 
man, one of the Shiriffes of London, who deceased 554. and 
was father to lVilliam Lambarde Esquire, well knowne by 
sundry learned bookes that he hath published, [ohu fcdlcy 
Chambcrlaine of London, [ohu ill«rsh, Esquire, Mercer and 
common Seargeant of Loir&m, &c. There is also (but without 
any outvard monument)thc head of [amcs, the fourth king 
of Scots of that naine, slayne at Flodden field, and buried 
hcre by this occasion. After the battell the body of the 
saide king being founde, was closed in lead. and conueyed 
from thence to.London, and so to the Monastery of Sheyne 
in Surrey, where it remayned for a rime, in what order I am 
hot certainc: but since the dissolution of that bouse, in the 
raigne of F.dward the sixt, ]-[cuy Gray Duke of Suffolke, 
beeing lodged and keeping bouse there, I haue beene shewed 
the saine body so lapped in lead, close to the head and body, 
throwne into a wast roome amongst the olde tituber, leade, 
and other rubble. Since the which rime Workemen there 
for their foolish pleasure hewed off lais head : aîad La«a«cclot 
t'ot«g Maister Glasier to her Maiestie, feeling a sweet savour 
to corne from thence, and seeing the saine dryed from ail 
moisture, and yet the forme remayning, with the hayre of the 
heade and bearde redde, brought it to London to his house 
in Woodstreet, where for a rime hee kept it for the sweete- 
nesse, but in the ende caused the Sexton of that Church to 
bury it anaongst other bones, taken out of their Charnell, &c. 
I reade in diuers Recordes of a house in Woodstreete then 
called Blacke Hall, but no man at this day can tell thereof. 
On the North side of this S. 3[ichaels church is Mayden 
lane, now so called, but of old rime Ingenelane, or Inglane. 
In this lane the Waxechandlers haue their common Hal on 
the south side I thcreof: and the Haberdashers haue their like 
hall on the North side at Stayning lane end. This Company 
of the Haberdashers or Hurrers of olde time so called, were 
incorporated a t3rotherhood of sabot Içatheritc, the OE6. of 
]-Zeny the sixt, and so confirmed by ]-Ze«rie the seauenth, the 
7. of his raigne, the Cappers and Hat Marchantes or Hurrers 
being one Company of IIaberdashers. 



Cre2Nesa/c ¢,ardc 99 
Downe loxver in Woodstreete is Siluer streete, (I thinkesiherstreet. 
of siluer smithcs dwelling there) in which bce diuers fayre 
bouses. 
And on the North side thereof is blonkes well streete, so ,or, ks well 
called of a xvell at the North end thereof, where the Abbot street. 
of Garendon had an house or Cell callcd saint Iames in the 
Wall by Criplesgate, and certaine Monkes of their house 
were the Chaplens there, wherefore the \Vell (belonging to 
that Cell or Hermitage) was called Monks Wel, and the street 
of the Wel Monkswel street. 
The East side of this streete downe against London wall, 
and the south side thereof to Criplesgate, bee of Criplesgate 
ward, as is afore shewed. In this street by the corner ofMonks 
well street is the Bowyers hall. On the said east side of Monks Boyers hall. 
well streete be proper Almesehouses, xoE. in numlber founded 
by sir Imbrosc Nicholas, Salter, Mayor 575. wherein beAlmeslaouses 
placed twelue poore and aged people rent free, hauing each in Monks -ell 
street. 
of them seuen pence the weeke, and once the yeare each of 
them fiue sackes of Charcoales, and one quarter of an hundreth 
of Faggots of his gift for euer. 
Then in little Woodestreet be seauen proper Chambers in .Aimes cham- 
bers in little 
an Alley on the west side, founded for seuen poore people, woodstreet. 
therein to dwell rent free, by Hem'y lartou Skinner, Mayor 
46. Thus much for the Monuments of this \Vard within 
the walles. 
Now without the Posterne of Criplesgate, first is the parish Parrish church 
Church of saint Giles a very fayre and large church lately of s. Giles 
without 
repaired after that the saine was burned, in the yeare 545- Criplegate. 
the 37. of/-eny the eight, by which mischance the monu- 
ments of the dead in this church are very fewe: notwith- 
standing I haue read of these following: llice, lI'illiam & 
Iohz wife and sonnes to T. ] Clarell, _/Tgetes daughter to P«ge3oe 
Thomas Niter Gentleman, llZilliam Itwel, t;cli.v daughter to 
sir Thotas Gisors, and wife to Thomas Tra,tctrs, Thomas 
Iasot Esquier, armotd lVartar, Esquier, Ioau wife to Iohu 
Chatberlabtc Esquier, daughter to 2o.çer Lcwkter Esquier, 
IVilliam Fryer, Ioht lamberger Esquier, l«tgh Iorcsbye, 
Gilbcrt tgrhce, Alderman, Olietcr Cherley Gentleman, sir Iohzt 
ll"right or lI'rithcsley, alias Garter King at Armcs, loctt 



Brotherhoode 
in S. Giles 
Church. 

WaterConduit 
without 
Criplesgate. 
lage 303 

Bosse in the 
wal of S. Giles 
Churchyeard. 

300 CmlS/esga/e voa l«te 
wife to Thomas ll'rithesley, sonne to sir lohn IVrithesley, 
Garter, daughter and heyre to lœilliam al Esquier, Io, 
Writhesley the yonger, sonne to sir [ahz Writheslcy & 
Aliauor, Aliouor second wife to lahn lKrithesley daughter 
and heyre to Thomas Arndde, sister and heyre to Richard 
AruoM Esquier, [obn her sonne and heyre, [argaret Irith  
her daughter, [ahn Brigct, Thom«s Rus[a,t Gentleman, Iolm 
Talbol, Esquier, and Kalhcren his wife, Thomas IVarfle, and 
Isabel his wife, Thomas Lztcie Gentlcman, 447- Rata Roch- 
ord knight, 4o 9. Edmond lKatar Esquier, Eli, abeth wife 
to Richard arnes, sister and heyre to Richard lalgraue, 
Esquier, of Essex, Richard Gouere, & [dm Gvucre Esquiers, 
e[o/m aronie of Millain, 1546 a, Sir cmy Grey knight, sonne 
and heyre to Geo,e Grey Earle of Kent, 56z, Regiualde 
Gro, Earle of lient, Rich«rd Choppht a, Tallowe Chandler, one 
of the shiriffes, 53 o. [ohz Hamber Esquier, 573, Thomas 
t[aul W alias Clarenciaux King at Armes, Thomas Busbœee, 
Cooper, who gaue the Queenes head Tauerne to the l'eliefe 
of the poore in the parrish, 575. lohu IVhdar Goldsmith 
575. Rœeehard Bv&e, 563 . lVilliam go&ne 575. 1 Bo&ur 
Phisition, 587 . Robert Crowley Vicker there, all these foure 
vnder one olde stone in the Quire, the learned Iohn Foxe writer 
of the Actes and Monumentes of the English church 587 . 
The skilfull Robert Glouer alias Sommerset Herralde 588. 
There was in this church of old rime a fraternitie or 
Brotherhoode of our blessed Ladie, or Corpus Christi, and 
saint Giles, founded by John elmtcer in the raigne of Edwarde 
the thirde, the 35. yeare of his raigne. 
Some small distance from the east end of this church is 
a water [ Conduit brought in pypes of leade from Highbery, 
by Iohu liddleton one of the Executorsto Sir lVilliam ast- 
field, and of his goodes, the inhabitantes adioyning castelated 
it of their owne costes and charges, about the yeare 483 , 
There was also a Bosse of cleare water, in the wall of the 
Churchyeard, made at the charges of Richard lI'hitizgto, som- 
times Mayor, and was like to that of Belins gate: of late the 
same was turned into an euill pumpe, and sois cleane decayed. 
1 3htsgarel bVrilh &9S; ,l[agarel with z6o 3 
-e oto. z633 ; bttl cf z633. . 3i3 b a Champion i633 



C'e;Nesg«[e a'dc 3o 
There was also a fayre poole of cleare water neare vnto the 
Parsonae» on the west side thereof, which was filled vp n 
the raiGne of «m, the sxt, the sprin vas coaped in, and 
arched ouer vith hard stonG and staires of stone to oe down 
to the sprint, on the banke of the Towne dtch: and this 
was also done of the oodes and by the executors of fdmrd 
In xvhite crosse streete king Hcu 7 the fift builded one 
fayre house, and founded there a brotherhoode of saint Giles, 
to bee kept, vhich house had sometime beene an Hospitall 
of the French order, by the naine of saint Gil«s without 
Criplesgate, in the raigne of E. the first, the king hauing 
the iurisdiction and poynting a Custos thereof, for the pre- 
cinct of the parlish of saint Giles, &c. patent R. OE. the 15. yearc, 
which Hospitall being suppressed, the landes were giuen to 
the Brotherhood for reliefe of the poore. 
One Alley of diuers tenementes ouer against the north wall 
of S. Giles Churchyeard, vas appoynted to bee almes houses 
for the poore, wherein they dwelled rent free, and otherwise 
were relieued : but the said Brotherhoode was suppressed by 
Hem3' the 8. since which tilne Sir Ioh Grcsham Mayor pur- 
chaud the landes and gaue parte therof to the maintenance 
of a free schoole, which he had founded at Holt, a Market 
town in Norfolke. 
In Red crosse street on the west side from saint Gilcs 
Churchyard, vp to the said Crosse, be many fayre houses 
builded outward, with diuers Alleyes, turning into a large 
plot of grounde, of olde time called the Iewes Garden, as 
being the onely place appoynted them in England, wherein 
to bury their deade, till the yeare I77. the 4. of rictus' the 
second, that it was permitted to them (after long sure to the 
king and Parliament at Oxford) to haue a speciall place 
assigned them in euery quarter where they dwelled. I 
This plot of ground remayned to the said Iewes, till the 
time of their final banishment out of England, and is now 
turned into faire garden plots and summer houses for pleasure. 
On the east side of this Red crosse streete, bee also diuers 
faire houses, vp to the Crosse. And there is Beech lane, 
peraduenture so called of Nicholas de la Beech, Lieutenant of 

Poole of spring 
water. 

white Crosse 
street. 

Hospitall ot 
the Frcnch 
order. 

Red Crosse 
streete. 
l.iber S. 
Buttolph. 
The Iewes 
Garden or 
place to bury 
their dead. 

tgage .to4 

Beech lane. 



The Abbot of 
Ramsey his 
hme. 

Almes houses 
in Beech ]ane. 

Golding lane. 
Aimes people 
there. 

Burghkening 
or Barbican. 

t'age 3os 
3arterhouse. 

302 Crelesgale warde 
the Towcr of London, put out of that office in the 13. of 
Edward thc third. This Lane stretcheth ri'oto the Red 
Crosse streete, to white crosse street, replenished hot with 
Beech trees, but vitb beautifull houses of stone, bricke & 
tituber. _Amongst the which ,,vas of old rime a great house, 
pertayning to the Abbot of Ramsey, for his lodging when he 
repayred to the Cittie: It is now called Drewry house, of 
sir Drcwc Dr«wrie, a worshipfull owner thereof. 
On the north side of this Beech lane, towardes white Crosse 
streete, the Drapers of London haue lately builded 8. _Almes 
houses of bricke and timber, for 8. poore widdowes of their 
own Company, xvhom they haue placed there rent free, 
according to the gift of the Lady Asbcw, widdow to sir 
Christoher Askcw somtime Draper and Mayor, 533. 
Then in Golding lane Richard Gallard of Islington Esquier, 
Cittizen and paynter stayner of London, founded thirteen 
aimes bouses for so many poore people placed in them rent 
free, hee gaue to the poore of the saine _Almesehouses two 
pence the peece weekly, and a loade of Charcoale amongst 
them yearely for euer, hee lefte fayre landes about Islington 
to maintaine his foundation : Tkomas tfayes sometime Cham- 
berlaine of London, in the latter time of tfenrie the eight 
married Eli»abctk his daughter and heyre, which Itaycs & 
tli:abctk had a daughter named Elizabcth married to Ioht 
[rotttottger of London, mercer, who now bath the order of 
the Almes people. 
On the west side of the Red crosse, is a streete called the 
Barbican, because sometime there stoode on the North side 
thereof, a Burgh-Kening or Watch Tower of the Cittie called 
in some language a Barbican, as a bikening is called a Beacon : 
this Brugh-kening by the naine of the Manner of Base court, 
xvas giuen by Edward the third to Robert Vfford earle of 
Suffolke, and was lately pertayning to Percgrine Bartie Lord 
IVilh,ugkby [ of Ersby. 
Next adioyning to this, is one other great house, called 
Garterhouse, sometime builded by Sir Tkomas Writke, or 
Writhesley knight, alias Gaffer principall king of Armes, 
second son of Sir [ok¢« Writhe knight, alias Gaffer, and was 
vnckle to the first Thomas Earle of Southampton knight of 



Cc/lesg«/c wadc 

3o3 

the Gartar, and Chancelor of England. He built this house 
and in the top thereof, a chapell, which he dedicated by the 
name of S. Trinitatis in Alto. Thus much for that part of 
Criplegate \Varde without the wall, wherof more shall be 
spoken in the suburbe of that part. This ward hath an 
Alderman & his Deputie within the gate. Common Coun- 
salle eight, Constables nine, Scauengers twelue, For Wardmote 
Inqueast fifteene and a 13eadle. 
Without the gate, it hath also a Deputie, Common Coun- 
salle two, Constables foure, Scauengers foure, Wardmote In- 
quest 7. and a Beadle. It is taxed in London to the fifteene, 
at forty pound. 

Aldersgate warde 
THE next is Aldersgate Ward, taking naine of that north 
gare of the citie, this ward also consisteth of diuers streetes 
and lanes, lying aswell within the gate and wall, as without, 
and first to spcak of that part within the gate thus it is. The 
east part thereof ioyneth vnto the west part of Criplegate 
xvarde in Engain lanc or Maiden lane. It beginneth on the 
north side of that lane, at Stayning Lane end, and runneth 
vppe from the Haberdashcrs Hall, to S. /llaij, Staining 
Church : and by thc church east winding almost to Wood- 
streete: and west through Oatelane, & then by the south side 
of Bacon house in Noble streete, backe againe by Lilipot 
lane, which is also of that ward, to Maiden lane, and so on 
that north .side west to S. Iolzu Sacharies church, and to 
Faster fane. Now on the south side of Ingaine or Mayden 
lane is the west side of Guthuruns lane, to Kery lane, and 
Kery Lane I itself (which is of this ward) and backe again 
into Engainlane, by the north side of the Goldsmithes hall, to 
Faster lane : and this is the East wing of this ward. Then is 
Foster lane almost wholy of this Warde, beginneth in the 
south toward Cheape, on the East side by the north side of 
S. Fosters church and runneth down North west by the west 
ende of Engaine lane, by Lilipot lane, and Oate lane, to 
Noble streete, and through that by Shelly house (of old time Noble 
so called, as belonging to the Shcllcycs) Sir Tbomas Shcllcy, streete. 

Aldersgate 
warde. 

Oate Ianê. 
Noble 
streete. 

tgage 306 



Shelleyes 
bouse ilOlV 
Bacon' 
house. 

S. Martins 
lane. 

Aldersgate 
streete. 

Goswel 
streete. 

Briton streete. 

]age 307 
Stayning 
lane. 

_Almeshouscs 
there. 

304 4lde«gate warde 
knight, xvas owner thereof in the I. of H. the 4- It is now 
called Bacon house, because the saine xvas new builded by sir 
1Vickolas tacon Lord Keeper of the great Seale. Dovn on 
that side by Sergeant Flcct«oods house, Recorder of London, 
who also new builded it, to S. Olaues Church in Siluer streete 
which is by the North west end of this Noble streete. 
Then again in Foster lane this ward beginneth on the West 
side thereoff ouer against the South xvest corner of S. Fosters 
church, and runneth downe by S. Leonards church by Pope 
lane end, and by S. Anns lane end, which lane is also of this 
xvard, north to the stone wall by the wall of the Citty, ouer 
against Bacon house: vhich stone wall, and so down north to 
Criplegate on that side, is of Faringdon xvard. 
Then haue yee the maine streete of this warde, xvhich is 
callcd S. Martins lane, including Saint Martin on the East 
side thereoL and so downe on both the sides to Aldersgate. 
&nd these be the boundes of this ward xvithin the vall and 
gate. 
XVithout the gatc, thc maine street called Aldersgate stroete 
runneth vp North on the cast side, to the west ende of Howndes 
ditch or Barbican streete : A part of vhich streete is also of 
this warde. And on the west side to Long lane, a part 
whereof is likewise of this ward. Beyond the which Alders- 
gate street, is Gosewell streete vp to the Barres. 
And on this xvest side of Aldersgate streete, by S. But- 
tolphes church is Briton street, which runneth west to a 
pumpe, and then north to the gate, which entreth the church- 
yeard somtime pertaining to the Priory of S. Bartholomew, 
on the east side: and on the west side towards S. Bar- 
tholomewes spittle, to a paire of postes there fixed. And these 
be the boundes of this Aldersgate vard without. , 
The antiquities be these, first in Stayning lane, of old rime 
so called, as may be supposed, of Painter stainers dwelling 
there. 
On the east side thereof, adioyning to the Haberdashers 
Hall, bee ten almes houses, pertaining to the Haberdashers 
xvherin be placed ten Almes people of that company, euery 
of them hauing eight pence the peece euery Fryday for euer, 
by the gifte of 7"homas uu¢lozv Haberdasher. one of the 



.4her««[e «rde 305 
Shiriffes in the yeare, 1539. More, Sir Çcor amu aue 
them ten ponndes by the yeare for euer. 
Then is the small parrish Church of S. dary called Stain- 
ng, because it standeth at the orth ende of Stayning lane. 
In the which church being bnt newly builded, there remayne(s) 
no monument worth the notin. 
Then is Enaine lane, or Mayden lane, and at the North- 
west corner thereof, the parrish Church of S. Iohu Sachary : -A 
fayre church, with the monuments wel preserued, of Thomas 
Lichfidd, who founded a chauntrie there in the 14. of E. the 
OE. of sir IVichdas Twiford, Goldsmith, mayor I388. and Dame 
Iacry his wife: of whose goods the church was made & 
new builded, with a Tomb for them, and others of their race, 
I39O. 1)rugo t?arentine, Mayor, 1398. He gaue fayre landes 
to the Goldsmithes : hee dwelled right against the Goldsmithes 
Hall. Between the which hall and his dwelling house, hee 
builded a Galory thwarting the streete, whereby hee might 
go fi'om the one to the other: he was buried in this church, 
and Christian his wife, I4oE7. Iohn Adis Goldsmith 14oo. and 
2Iar.garet his wife. Iohn Francis, Goldsmith, Mayor 4oo. 
And Eliaabcth his wife, 145o. [. Sltllol, Goldsmith, one of 
the Shiriffes, 143. tTartholomcw Seman, Gold-beater, Maister 
of the kinges Mintes, within the Tower of London and the 
town of Calice, 143 o. John Hewc! Esquier, 5co. ll'illiam 
Breakcs2ere, Goldsmith, 46t. Christophcr Eliot, Goldsmith, 
5o5. artholomcw Rcadc, Goldsmith, Mayor 15o, was buried 
in the Charterhouse, and gaue to this his parrish Church one 
hundred pound. His wife was buried here with a fayre 
Monument, her picture in habite of a widdow, Thomas 
tou, Lorimar, 1522. lVilliam Potkct Esquier, 1537. Iohn 
Cornisk with an Epitaph, I47O. Robot! I«cnrmhcr, Goldsmith, 
one of[ the shiriffes in the yeare 15IOE. 
On the east side of this Faster lane, at Egayne lane ende, 
is the Goldsmithes hall, a proper house, but hot large. .And 
therefore to say that artholomcw Rcad, Goldsmith, Mayor 
in the yeare I5OoE. kept such a feast in this hall as some haue 
fabuled, is far incredible, & altogether vnpossible, considering 
the smalnes of the bal & number of the guests, vhich as they 
say, were more then an hundreth persons of great estate. 
STOW. I X 

Parish Church 
of saint Mary 
Stayning. 

Parish church 
of q. Iohn 
Sachary. 

lage 3oS 
The Gold- 
smithes hall. 

R. Grafton. 



The first 
Mayor of 
London was 
a Goldsmith. 
Principal men 
of the Citty 
Goldsmithes. 

Parrish church 
of S. Olaue in 
Siluer streete. 

Parrish church 
of S. Leonarde 
in Faster lane. 

306 
For the messes and dishes of meates to them serued, the 
palcd Parke in the saine hall, furnished with frutefull trees, 
beastes of venery, and other circumstances of that pretended 
feast well weighed, Westminster hall would hardly haue 
sused, and therefore I will ouerpasse it, and note somewhat 
of principall Goldsmithes. 
First I read, that Lcefsta«, Goldsmith, was Prouost of this 
Cittie, in the raigne of e«e 7, the . Also that Wc 7, Fitz 
lezvbt Fits Leaçtanc, Goldsmith, was Mayor of London in 
the . of Richard the first, & continued Mayor e4- years. 
Also that Greosy Rocksly chiefe say-maister of ail the Kings 
Mints within England, (and therefore by my coniecture) a 
Goldsmith, was Maior in the 3 of «heard the first, and con- 
tinued Major 7. years together. Then ll'ilhm Farhgdon, 
Goldsmith, Alderman of Faringdon ward, one of the shiriffes, 
OES. the 9- of E. the . who was a Goldsmith as appeareth 
in record. & shall be shewed in Faringdon warde. Then 
Wicholas Faringdon his son, Goldsmith, Alderman of Faring- 
don Warde, foure times Mayor in the raign of Edward the 
second, &c. For the rest of latter time are more manifestlie 
knowne, and therefore I leaue them. The men of this mistery 
were incorporated or confirmed in the sixeteenth of Richard 
the second. 
Then at the North end of Noble streete, is the parfish 
church of S. Olaue in Siluer streete, a small thing, and without 
any noteworthy monuments. 
On the west side of Fauster lane, is the smal parrish Church 
of S. Leonardes, for them of S. Martins le graund. A number 
of Tenements beeing lately builded in place of the great 
Collegiate Church of S. Martin, that parish is mightily in- 
creased. In this Church remayne these Monumentes. First 
without the Church is I grauen in stone on the east ende, 
John rokeitwell. an cspeciall reedifier or new builder thero£ 
In the Quire, grauen in brasse, Robert Pufct, Grocer, 57 . 
Robert Trapis, Goldsmith, 56. with this Epitaph. 

lVhen the bcls be ,lzcrily roong, 
.nd the lmsse dcltolttl 3, Sllllff, 
Atd tbe mcat «izcrilj, eatclz, 



.41dersE«te w« rdc 

Then shall Robcrt Traps  his wines 
And children be forgotten. 

307 

Then in Pope lane, so called of one Po_pe that was owner Popelane, 
thereof, on the north side is the parrish church of saint Arme Palish church 
of S. Arme in 
in the willowes, so called I know hot vpon what occasion : but the willowes. 
some say, of willowes gl'owing thereabouts : but nmv there is 
no such voyde place for willowes to grow, more then the 
Churchyeard,wherin do grow some high Ashe trees. 
This church by casualty of tire, in the yeare 1548. was 
burnt, so far as it was combustible, but since being newly 
repayred, there remain a few monuments of antiquity, of 
Thomas Bcckheuton z, Clarke of the pipe, who was buried there, 
1499. Rapl G,hIwcll, Gentleman of Greyes Inne, 15 7. 
Iohn Lord Shcffelde, Iohn I-[ercnden, Mercer, Fsquire, 57OE. 
these verses on an old stone. 

lVilliam Gregory Skinner, Mayor of London in the year 45I, 
was there buried, and founded a chauntrie, but no monument 
of him remayneth. 
Then in S. Martins lane was of old time a fayre & large 
colledge of a deane and secular canons or priests, and was 
called S. Martins le graund, founded by [»gelricns and 
Edwardns his brother in the yeare of Christ 1056. &. con- 
firmed by IV. the Conqueror, as appeareth by his charter dated 
lO68. This colledge claymed great priuiledges of sanctuary 
and otherwise, as appeareth in a booke, written by a notary 
of that house about the yeare 144o. the 19 of H. the 6. 
wherin amongst other things is set down & declared, that I on 
the . of september in the yeare aforesaid, a souldier prisoner 

Colledge or 
S. Martin le 
graund, 
claimed priui- 
ledge of 
sanctuary. 
Lib. S. Martin. 

t'age 3 z o 

 Trabs] tta,l. 538 ; TritSs 16o3 
" teckhenlou] I003 ; Lekttimtlot 1633 
X2 



Argument 
against priui- 
ledge 
chalenged by 
the Deane 
of saint 
Martins. 

Page 

308 .41de r«a te v a rde 
in Newgate, as he was led by an officer towards the Guild 
hall of London, there came out of Panyer Alley 5. of his fellow- 
ship, & took him from the C)fficer, brought him into sanctuary 
at the west dote of S. Martins church, and tooke grithe of 
that place, but the saine day Z'hilifl 2£ralpas and ob. -'[arshall 
then shiriffes of London, with many other entered the said 
Church. and forcibly tooke out with them the said 5. men, 
thether fled: ledde them fettered to the Compter, and from 
thence chaincd by the neckes to Newgate, of which violent 
taking the Deane and Chapter in large manner complayned 
to the king, and required him as thcir patron to defend their 
priuiledges, like as his predecessors had done, &c. All which 
complaint and sure the Cfftizens by their counsell, [arkam 
sergeant at the law, Iohn Capentar late common Clearke of 
the Citty, and other, learnedly aunsvered, offering to proue that 
the said place of saint Martin had no such immunity or 
Liberty, as was pretended : namely Cacntcr offered to loose 
his liuclode, if that Church had more immunitie then the least 
church in London: notwithstanding, after long debating of 
this controuersie, by the kinges commaundement, and assent 
of his Councell in the stered Chamber, the Chauncelor and 
Treasurer sent a vrit vnto the shiriffes of London, charging 
them to bring the saide fiue persons, with the cause of their 
taking, and vithholding, afore the king in hls Chauncerie, on 
the Vigill of All-hallowes. C)n which daye the saide shiriffes 
with the Recorder and Counsell of the Cittie, brought and 
deliuered them accordingly, afore the saide Lordes, whereas the 
Chauncelor, after hee had declared the Kinges commaundement, 
sent them to saint Martins, there to abide freely, as in a place 
hauing franchises, whiles them liked, &c. 
Thus much out of that Booke haue I noted, concerning the 
priuiledge of that place challenged in these daies,since the which 
time, to wit in the yeare 457, the 36. of the said Hem 3, the 6, 
an ordinance was ruade by the king and his counsel, concerning 
the said sanctuary men in saint Martins le graund, whereof the 
Articles are set down in the booke of K within the Chamber 
of the Guild hall, in the leafe 299.] 
This Colledge was surrendered to king tïdward the sixt, the 
2. of his raigne, in the yeare of Christ, 548. and the saine 



yeare the Colledge church being pulled downe» in the east part 
thereof a large Wine tauerne was builded» and withall downe 
to the west and throughout the whole prednct of that Colledge 
many other houses were builded, and highly prised letten to 
stîauners borne, and other such, as there claymed benefite 
of priuiledges» graunted to the Canons.. seruin Ood day and 
night (for so be the wordes in the Charter of 1//'. Conqueror) 
which may hardly be wrested to artificers» buyers and sellars» 
otherwise then is mentoned in the OEI. of saint d/[atewe« 
Gospel. 
Lower dowll ola thc xvest side of S. Martins lane, in the 
parish of S. Aue almost by Aldersgate, is one great house, 
commonlie called Northumberland bouse: it belonged to 
I. Percy. K./-/. the 4. ill thc 7- of his raign, gaue this house 
with the tenements thcrevnto appertayning to Queene [aue 
his wife, and then it was called hcr Wardrope, it s now 
a Printing house. 
Without Aldersgate, on the east side of Aldersgate strcet, 
is the Cookes hall : which Cooks (or Pastelars) were admitted 
to be a Company, and to haue a Maister & Wardens in the 
OE'z. of '. the 4. From thcnce along vnto Hounsditch or 
13arbican streete, bee many faire houses. On the west side 
also be the like faire buildings till ye corne to Long lane, 
and so to Gosxvel streete. 
In ]3riten street, which tooke that name of the Dukes of 
Briton lodging there, is olle proper parish church of S. Buttolph, 
in which church xvas sometime a Brotherhood of S. Faiaz 
& Scaslimz, founded in the yeare 377, the 5 . of '. the 3. 
and confirmed by tf. the 4. in the 6. of his raign. Then 
/-/. the 6. in the 4. of his raign, to thc honour of the Trinitie, 
gaue licence to Dame ]a«z AsI«j,, somtime his Nurse, to 
. C«wod and T. S,zit to founde the saine a fraternity, 
perpetually to haue a M. and OE. Custos with brethren & 
sisters, &c. This brotherhood vas indowed with landes, more 
then 3 o. pound by the yeare, and was suppressed by '. the 6. 
There lie buried, ld« de ]?at/z, Weuar, 139o. Philit al l'ilte, 
Capper, 396. l?euet Gerard, Brewer, 4o 3. Tlozas l?ilsbtgtoz 
founded a Chauntrie there, and gaue to that Church a bouse, 
called the Helmet vpon Cornhill. [oht Bra«hzorc Chirurgion, [ 

Mathew z . 

Cookes Ilall. 

Briton streete. 
Parish church 
of S. 13uttolph. 



Aargarc! & Katercn lfis wues, q. Iou [icacll serant 
at Armes, 45. Allen rel, Carpenter, 
4e6. [ou çrilio, rewer, 1417. [o 
o. Cawd, Clarke of the Ppe n the Mngs Exchequer, 466. 
i. Emmcsscy, [ohu lVaole, I. artshorne Esquier, seruant 
to the king, a4. And other of that family great benefactors 
to that church. W. 3[arrow, Grocer, Mayor (455.) & 
Içathcro« his wife, vere buried there, about 468. The Lady 
Au,te Pacbiutot widow, late wife to Iv. Pacbbthm knight, 
Chirographer of the court of the common pleas : shee found 
Almes houses neare vnto the white Fryers church in Fleet- 
street, the Clothworkers in London haue ouersight thereof. 
And thus an end of this ward, which hath an Alderman, 
his Deputie, common Counsellers fiue, Constables eight, 
Scauengers nine, for the Wardmote inquest 4. and a eedle. 
It is taxed to the fiftcen in London, seuen pound, and in the 
Exchequer, 6.1. 9- s. 

l"aringdon 
ward within. 

Faringdon 
extra, and 
Faringdon 
infra, ail one 
vard, and 
then diuided 
into twain, by 
parliament. 
Faringdon 
ward took 
that naine of 
W. Farindon. 

l'agc 313 

Faringdon Ward 
Infra or within 
ON the south side of Aldersgate warde lyeth Faringdon 
ward, called iufi'a or within, for a difference ri'oin an other 
ward of that naine, which lyeth without the wals of the citie, 
and is therfore called tTariudoz extra. These two wardes 
of old time were but one. and had also but one .&lderman, 
til the 7. of Richard the z, at which rime the said ward for 
the greatnes therof, was diuided in to twain, & by Parlia- 
ment ordered to haue z..&ldermen, & so it continueth til 
this day. The whole great ward of Farindon, both ioEra and 
extra, tooke name of IV. Fareudoz, Goldsmith, Alderman of 
that ward, and one of the shiriffes of London : in the yeare 
18. the 9. of Ed. the first, he purchased the A_ldermanry of 
this ward, as by the abstract of deedes which I haue read 
thereof may appeare. 
Thomas dc Ardc(r),te, sonne and heyre to Sir Ralph Ardcrnc 
knight, granted to Ralçh le t«cure Cittizen of London, one of 
the [ shiriffes in the yeare 77. all the Aldermanry with the 



appurtenances within the Cittie of London, and the suburbs Sir Raph 
Of the saine between Ludate and Newate, and also without Araerne 
knight, Aider- 
the saine ates : wh[ch Aldermanry, dllttflls & dt«re man ofthat 
vard now 
held duHug hs Hfe,by the graunt oç the sad Toms ««r;m, called Fafin- 
to haue and to hold to the sad «/#h and to IHs heyres, çreely don, in the 
ragn of H. 
without all chalenge, yeeldng therefore yearly to the sad the thrd. 
Thomas and hs heyrcs, one cloue or slip oç GIHflowers, at «nefinus de 
Auerne, 
the feast of Easter, for all secular seruice and customes, xvith Alderman. 
Ralph le 
warranty vnto the said Ral le Feere, and his heyres, against Feure, Altier- 
all people Christians and Jewes, in consideration of twenty n. 
marks, which the said alp le c«rc did giue belote hand, 
in naine of a Gersum or fine, to the said Thoms, &c. dated 
the fifi of Edward the first, witnes G. de RoesAy maior, 
R. Mrras one of the shiriffes, . ll'al«s, P. le Ta3,lor, T. dt 
Basieoe, . ore¢, . Blact]tor«, Aldermen of London. After 
this [ohn le eer¢, son and heire to the saide R]e le Y«r«, 
granted to lVilliam Faredo, Cittizen and Goldsmith of 
London, & to his heires the said Aldermanry, with the 
appurtenances for the seruice thervnto belonging, in the 
seuenth of Edward the first, in the yeare of Christ, 79. 
This Aldermanry descended to A«idwlas bbrcdon son to the Nicholas 
Farendon, 
said lVilliam and to his heyres, which AV«holas Far¢MvG also a Alderman & 
Goldsmith, was foure rimes Mayor, & liued many yeares after: mayor. 
for I haue read diuers deedes wherevnto he was a witnes dated 
the yearc 36. He ruade his Testament, 36. which was Nicholas 
53. yeares after his first being Mayor. and was buried in Farendon 
liued 53 )ears 
S. Peters church in Cheape. So this ward continued vnder after hehad 
,. . . beenonce 
the gouernment of I[T[diam Far£tgdot the father, and zvtc/wlas Mayor. 
his son, by the space of 8z. yeares, and retaineth their naine 
vntil this prescnt day. 
This ward of Faringdon within the xvalles, is bounded thus: 
Beginning in the East, at the great Croie in xvest Cheape, 
flore whence it runneth West. On the north side flore the 
parish church of S. Peter, which is at the Southwest corner 
of XVood street, vnto Guthuruns lane, and down that lane, to 
Hugon lane on the Est side, and to Kery lane on the west. 
Then again into Cheape, and to Foster fane, and down that 
Lane on the east side, to the north side of saint Fausters 
church, l and on the XVest, till ouer against the Southwest corner ç,,ge 

Iohn le Feure, 
Alderman. 
"V. Faring- 
don,Alderman 
and one of 
the shiriffes 
of London. 



312 FarbzEclo tVa«! withhz 
of the saide Church, from xvhence downe Fauster lane, and 
Noble street, is ail of Aldersgate streete ward, till yee corne 
to the stone wall, in the West side of Noble streete, as is afore 
shewed. Which sayde Wall downe to Neuils Inne, or Windsor 
house, and downe Monkes well streete, on that west side, then 
by London wall to Criplegate, and the west side of that same 
gate, is all of Faringdon Ward. 
Then backe againe into Cheape, and ri'oto Fauster Lane 
end, to S. Martins fane end, and from thence through saint 
Nicholas shambles, by Penticost Lane, and Butchers alley, and 
by stinking lane through Newgate market to Nexvgate. AI1 
which is the North side of Faringdon warde. 
On the south fl'om against the saide great Crosse in Cheape 
West to Fridayes streete, and downe that streete on the East 
side, till ouer against the North East corner of saint Mathewes 
Church : and on the west side, till the south corner of the. 
saide Church. 
Then againe along Cheape to the old Exchange, and downe 
that lane (on the East side) to the parrish church of Saint 
/kugustine, which church and one house next adioyning in 
Watheling streete bee of this warde, and on the west side of 
this lane, to the east arch or gare by saint Augustines church, 
which entereth the south churchyeard of saint Paules, whch 
arch or gate was builded by Nicholas Farilzgdon about the 
yere I36X. & xvithin that gare on the said north side, to the 
gate that entereth the North churchyeard, and all the North 
Churchyearde, is of this Faringdon Warde. 
Then againe into Cheape, and from the North end of the 
olde Exchaunge, West by the North gare of Powles church- 
yearde, vp Pater Noster Roxv, by the two lanes out of Powles 
church, and to a signe of the Goldyng Lyon, which is some 
txvelue houses short of .Aue lIal'y lane : the west side of which 
Lane is of this Warde. 
Then at the south end of/kue IXlary lane, is Creede Lane, 
the xvest side whereof is also of this ward. 
Nov betwixt the south ende of/kue lXIary Lane, and the[ 
north end of Creede lane, is the comming out of Paules church- 
yard on the East, and the high streete called 13owier roxv to 
Ludgate, on the west, which xvay to Ludgate is of this vard. 



On the orth side wheeo[ is sMt ]hrtin Church. And on 
the South side a turning into the Blacke Friers. 
Now to turne vp againe to the North ende of Auc 3[ary 
lane, there is a short lane which runneth West some small 
distaunce, and is there closed vp with a gate into a great 
house : and this is called Amen lane. 
Then on the north side of Pater noster Row, beginning at 
the Conduit ouer against the olde Exchaunge Lane ende, and 
going west by saint 3[ichacls Church. At the west end of 
which Church is a small passage tgrough towardes the North. 
And beyond this Church some small distance, is another 
passage, which is called Paniar Alley, and commeth out 
against Saint artins lane ende. 
Then further vest in Patcr Noster Rw, is Iuie lane, which 
runneth North to the West end of Saint Nicholas Shambles. 
And then west Pater nostcr Rowe, till ouer against the golden 
Lion, where the ward endeth for that streete. 
Then about some dozen houses (which is of Bainards Castell 
çVarde) to Warwicke lane end : which Warwicke Lane stretch- 
eth north to the high street of Newgate Market. And the 
west side of Warwicke lane is of this Faringdon ward. For 
the East side of Warwicke lane, of Nue 3[arie lane, and of 
Creede lane, with the West end of Pater Nosler Row, are ail 
of Baynardes Castell warde. 
Yet to begin againe at the saide Conduit by the old 
Èxchange, on the North side thereof is a large street that 
runneth vp to Newgate, as is aforesaid. The first part or 
south side whereof, from the Conduit to the Shambles, is 
called Bladder street. Then on the backeside of the shambles 
be diuers slaughter houses and such like, pertaining to the 
shambles, & this is called Mount Godard street. Then is 
the Shambles it selfe. And then Newgate Market. And so 
the whole street on both sides vp to Newgate, is of this warde, 
and thus it is wholly bounded. 
Monuments in this warde be these. First the great Crosse 
in  West Cheape streete, but in the warde of Faringdon, the 
which Crosse was first erected in that place by Edward the 
first, as before is shewed in west Cheape streate. 
At the Southwest corner of Woodstreet, is the parish church 

Amen lane. 

Panier Alley. 

Iuie lane. 

Bladder Street. 

Mountgodard 
streete. 

tage 3x6 



I'rish church 
of S. Peter in 
Chepe. 

Long sllop or 
shead by the 
Crosse in 
Cheape. 

(;ttthurons 
lfllle, 

Imblotherers 
hall. 

I htgon lane. 
Kery lane. 

Sadlers hall. 
Fauster lane. 
]arisll church 
of S. Fauster. 

Page 317 

3  4 Farizg«o [Fard uilhit 
of S. Pctcr the Apostle, by the said Crosse, a proper Church 
lately new builded. [ohpt Sha, Goldsmith, Major, deceased 
5o 3. appointed by his Testament, the said church and steeple 
to be newly builded of his goods, with a fiat roof e. Notwith- 
standing Tho. Vood, Goldsmith, one of the Shiriffes, x49. is 
accounted principall benefactor: because the roofe of the 
midle Ile is supported by Images of Woodmen. I find to 
haue beene buried in this Church, Nicholas Fareudo6 Maior, 
Richard Hadley, Grocer, t592. [ohn Palmer, fishmonger, xSOO. 
IViiam Rus, Goldsmith, Shiriffe 4 9. T. Atkins, Esquire, 
4oo. [obit Butler, Shiriffe, 142o. HIlrœe lVarlo,, Alderman, 
54. Sir Iohn 2[otd,,, Goldsmith. Major, deceased 1537. 
A¢usIineHinde Clothworker, one of the Shiriffes in the yeare 
155 o (whose monument doth yet remaine, the others be gone) 
sir Aie.ramier Aucnon, Major,  57o. 
The long shoppe or shed incroching on the high street 
before this Church wall, was licenced to be ruade in the yeare 
14o, yeelding to the Chamber of London 3o. shillings foure 
pence yearely for the rime, but since 3 shillings foure pence. 
Also the saine shop was letten by the Parish for three pound 
at the most many yeres since. 
Then is Guthuruns lane, so called of Guthuruu somtime 
owner thereof: the inhabitants of this lane of old rime were 
Goldbeaters, as doth appeare by records in the Exchequer. 
For the Easterling money was appoynted to be ruade of fine 
siluer, such as men ruade into foyle, and was commonly called 
siluer of Gulhuwus lane, &c. The Imbroderers hall is in this 
lane. Iohn Throwstone Embroderer, then Goldsmith, shiriffe, 
deceased 59 . gaue 40. pound towards the purchase of this 
hall. Hugon fane on the Est side, and Kery lane (called of 
one Kc3,) on the West. 
Then in the high streete on the saine north side is the 
Sadlers hall. nd then Fauster lane (so called of Saint 
Fausters, a fayre Church, lately new builded). Henrie Coote, 
Goldsmith, one of the Shiriffes, deceased 5o9 . builded saint 
Dunstons chappell there, [John T]«rowstonc one of the shiriffes, 
gaue to the building thereof one hundred pound by his Testa- 
ment. [oku ])rowa Sergeant Fainter, Iderman, deceased 
] 53 OE. was a great benefactor, and was there buried, lVilliam 



Faringdon !lm! withh 3 5 
Trist, Selerar to the king, 4OE5. John StanarÆlfÆ Goldsmiths, 
lie buried there. Iichard GaMcr, I544. Agnes wife to Willian 
3lilorne Chamberlane of London, 15. &c. 
Then downe Fauster lane, and Noble streete both of 
Ealdersgate street ward, till ye corne to the stone wall which 
incloseth a Garden plot before the wal of the City, on the west 
side of Noble streete, and is of this Faringdon ward. This 
Garden plot contayning 95. Elles in length, 9. Elles and a halle 
in bredth, was by Adam de tTurie, Maior, the Aldermen, and 
Citizens of London letten to Iohn de Ncuell, Lord of Raby, 
Rad«libh and Thomas his sonnes for 60. yeares, paying 6. s. 8. d. 
the yeare: Dated the 48. of -dward the third, hauing in a 
seale pendant, on the one side, the figure of a walled Cittie, 
and of S. Paul, a sword in his right hand, and in the left 
a banner, 3. Leopards, about that Seale, on the same side 
written, Sigilhtm Barouum Londoniarum. On the other side 
the like figure of a Citie, a Bishop sitting on an Arch, the 
inscription, 3[c : que : te : pcjbcri : ne : Cesses : Thoma : tueri : 
Thus much for the Barons of London, their common seale at 
that rime. At the north end of this garden plot, is one great 
house builded of stone and timber, now callcd the Lord 
Windsors bouse, of old time belonging to the Ntvtels, as in 
the  9. of Richard the z. it was found by inquisition of a Iuric, 
that Elizabcth Ncucl died, seased of a great Messuage in the 
Parish of saint Olaue in lIonks well street in London, holden 
of the king in fiee burgage, which she held of the gift of [ohn 
Neucll of Raby, her husband, and that Iohn I. alimer was next 
sonne and heyre to the said t7li»abeth. In this west side is 
the Barbars Chirurgions hall. This companie was incorporated 
by meanes of Thomas A[orestede Esquire, one of the shiriffes 
of London, I436. Chirurgion to the Kinges of England, Hem@ 
the 4. 5- and 6. He deceased I45 o. Then faqttcS Fl"ies 
Phisition to tdward the 4. and lVilliam Hobbs Phisition and 
Chirurgion for the saine kings bodie, continuing the sure the 
full rime of o yeares. N'al. the 4. in the OE. of his raigne, and 
-i[chard duke of Glocester became founders of the same 
corporation in the naine 1 of S. Cosmc and Damiane. The 

Barons of Lon- 
don, their 
seale. 

Seale. 

Monkeswell 
streete. 

]3arbar Chi- 
rurgians hall. 

l"age 38 

 name] z633 : parish z6o 3 



Hermitage of 
S. Iames in the 
Wall. 

l'entecost lane. 

Parish church 
of S. iNicholas. 

Stinking lane 
or Chick lane. 
Gray Friers 
Church. 
Page 3 z 9 

36 Farhtgdo¢¢ lUard within 
first Assemb(ly) of that craft, was Roger Slripe, lV. Hobbs, 
T. Goddard, & Richard Keut, since the which time they 
builded their hall in that street, &c. 
At the north corner of this streete, on the saine side was 
some time an Hermitage, or Chappell of saint dames, called 
in the wal, neare Crepplegate: it belonged to the Abbey and 
Couent of Garadon. as appeareth by a Recorde, the 7- of 
dward the first: And also the 6. of dward the third, 
IVilliam de Lio¢s was Hermet there, and the Abbot and 
Couen(t) of Geredon found two Chaplaines, Cestercian Monks 
of their bouse : in this Hermitage one of them, for Aymor de 
Va&tce Earlc of Pembrooke, and A[a 7 dc Saiut Pau&, his 
Countesse. 
Of these Monkes, and of a Well pel'taining to them, the 
street tooke that naine, and is called Monks-well streete. 
This Hermitage with the appurtenances, was in the rai of 
Edward the sixt purchased from the id king, by IVilliam 
Lambc one of the Gentlemen of the kinges Chappell, Citizen 
and clothworker of London: he deceased in the yeare 1577. 
and then gaue it to the Cloathxvorkers of London, with other 
tenements, to the value of fiftie pound the yeare, to the intent 
they shall hire a Minister to say diuine seruice there, &c. 
Againe to the high streete of Cheape, ri'oto Fauster lane 
cnde to S. lIarthzs, and by that lane to the shambles or flesh 
market, on the North side whereof is Penticost lane, containing 
diuerse slaughter bouses for the Butchers. 
Then was there of old time a proper parish church of saint 
Nicholas, wherof the said flesh market tooke the naine, & 
vas called S. Nicholas shambles. This Church with the tene- 
ments and ornamcnts, was by Hnric the eight giuen to the 
Major and communaltie of the Citie, towards the maintenance 
of the new parish Church,then to be erected in the late dissolued 
church of the Gray Friers: so was this church dissolucd and 
pulled downe. In place wherof, & of the churchyard, many 
fayre houses are now builded in a Court with a Wel, in the 
middest whereof the church stoode. 
Then is stinking lane, so called, or Chicke lane at the East 
end of the Gray Friers church, and there is the Butchers hall. [ 
In the third of Richard the second, motion was ruade that 



11o ]3utcher should kil no flesh vithin London, but at Knights- 
bridge, or such like distance of place from the wals of the citie. 
Then the late dissolued Church of the Gray Friers: the 
originall whereof was this. 
The first of this order of Friers in England, nine in number, 
arriued at Douer: fiue of them remained at Canterburie, the 
other 4. came to London, were lodged at the preaching Friers 
in Oldborne, for the space of x5 dayes, and then they hyred 
an house in Cornhill of [oh ratars, one of the shh'iffes of 
London. They builded there litle cels wherein they inhabited, 
but shortly after the deuotion of citizens towardes them, and 
the number of the Fryers so increased, that they were by the 
Citizens remoued to a place in S. Nicholas shambles : which 
Iohn ,c,i2 Mercer appropriated vnto the Comminaltie, to the 
vse of the said Friers, and himselfe became a lay brother 
anongst them: about the yeare 1225. II'illia» [ojqcr 
builded their Quire, Hc¢t IValles the body of the church, 
Walter Potier Alderman the Chapter house, Gregorie okcsley 
their Dorter, Bartholomew of the Castle made the refectorie, 
Peter de Hliland made the infirmitorie, Bcnis Bo«d king of 
Heraulds ruade the studie, &c. 
Iaaret Queene, second wife to Edward the first, began 
the quire of their new church, in the yere 13o6. to the building 
whereof, in her lire rime she gaue 2,000. markes, and IOO. 
marks by her testament. Ioht Britaine, Earle of Richmond, 
builded the bodie of the church to the charges of three hundred 
pound, and gaue many rich Iewels and Ornaments to be vsed 
in the same. Iarie Countesse of Pembroke, seuentie pound. 
Gilbert de Clare, Earle of Glocester, bestowed 20. great beams 
out of his forrest of Tunbridge, and 2o. pound starlings, Lady 
Helianor le Specer, Lady Eliabctl de Burgh, sister to Gilbert 
de Clare, gaue sums of money, and so did diuers Citizens, as 
Arnald de ToKnea, IOO. pounde, obert Baron Lislc, who 
became a fryer there, 300. pound, Bartholomew de Al»taDte 
fiftie pound. Also Philippe Queene, wife to Edward the 
third, gave 62. pound, lsabell Quoene, mother to Edwardc the 
thirde, gaue threescore and ten pound. And so the worke 
was done within the space of 2I. [yeares, 1337. This Church 
thus furnished with windowes madeat the charges of diuerse 

New church 
of the Gray 
Friers. 

'age 320 



Library of the 
Gray Friers. 

Length and 
bredth of 
Gray Friers 
Church. 

Gray Friers 
Church made 
a parrish 
Church. 

l'age 3e 

3 8 Farhgdol [Um«! wi/bh 
persons, the Ladie 3.[argarct Segrmte, Countesse of Norffolke 
bare the charges of making the stalles in the Quire, to the 
value of three hundred and fiftie markes, about the yeare  38o. 
Richard lVhittillg[on in the yeare I49. founded the Librarie, 
which was in length, one hundred twentie nine foote, and in 
breadth thirtie one: all seeled with Wainscot, hauing twentie 
eight desks, and eight double setles of Wainscot. Which in the 
next yeare following was altogither finished in building, and 
within three yeares aftcr, furnished with ]3ookes, to the charges 
of fiue hundred fiftie sixe pound, ten shillings, whereof Richard 
lVhittitgton bare foure hundred pound, the rest was borne by 
Doctor Thomas IVilzchelscy, a Frier there : and for the writing 
out of/9. Nicholas de Zh'a his works in two volumes, to be 
chained there, one hundred markes, &c. The seeling of the 
Quire at diuers mens charges, two hundred marks, and the 
painting at fiftie markes : their Conduit head and water course 
giuen them by William Tailer, Tayler to Hetrie the third, &c. 
This whole church containeth in length three hundred foote, 
of the feete of S. Paule: in breadth, eightie nine foot, and 
in height from the ground to the roofe, 64. foote, and two 
inches, &c. It was consecrated r3z 5. and at the generall 
suppression, was valued at thirtie two pound, ninteene shillings, 
surrendred the twelfth of Nouember, x538. the 3 o. of I4"enrie 
the eight, the ornaments and goods being taken to the kings 
vse: the church was shut vp for a rime, and vsed as a Store 
house of goods, taken prises from the French: but in the 
yeare 546. on the third of Januarie, was againe set open. 
On the which day preached at Pauls crosse the 13ishop of 
Rochester, where he declared the kings gift thereof to the 
citie, for the releeuing of the poore. 
Which gift was by Pattents  (of) S. 13artholomewcs Spittle in 
Smithfield, lately valued at three hundred fiue pound sixe 
shillings seuen pence, and surrendred to the king: of the 
sayd church of the Gray Friers, and of two parish churches, 
the one of Saint Nicholas in the Shambles, and the other of 
S. W_wies in Newgate market, which were to be made one 
Parrish church in the sayd I Fryers church, & in lands he 

 Pattents] z6o 3 ; Pattents. z633 



Fctringdoz tl/'ard wi[hh« 3T 9 
gaue for maintenance for the sald church, with diuine seruice, 
reparations, &c. 500. markes by yere for euer. 
The thirteenth of January, the 38. of Henry the eight, an 
agreement was made betwixt the King and the Mayor and 
communalty of Zondon: dated the 27. of December: by 
which the said gft of the gray Fryers church, with al the 
Edifices & ground, the Fratrie, the Library, the Dortar, & 
Chapter-house, the great Cloystry and the lesser : tenements, 
gardens, and vacant grounds, Lead, Stone, Iron, &c., the 
Hospitall of S. t'artholomcw in west smithfield, the church of 
the same, the lead, belles, & ornaments of the same Hospital, 
with al the Messuages, tenements, & appurtenances, the 
parishes of S. Nicholas, and of S. Ewin, and so much of S. 
Pulchers parish as is within Newgate, were ruade one Parish 
church in the Gray Fryers church, and called Christes church 
founded by Henry the 8. 
The Vickar of Christs church was to haue 26. pound, 3. s. 
4. d. the yeare. The Vicar of S. tartholomew '3. pound 6. s. 
8. d. The Visiter of Newgate (being a Priest) ten pound. 
And other 5. Priests in Christs church, ail to be helping in 
diuine seruice, ministring the Sacraments, and Sacramentals, the 
5. Priests to haue 8 pound the peece. Txvo Clarkes, 6. pound 
each. .A_ Sexton 4- pound. Moreouer, he gaue them the 
Hospitall of tethele»t : with the lauer of Brasse in the cloyster, 
by esteemation rB. foote in lenh, and two foote and a halfe 
in depth, and the water course of lead to the sayd Fryer house 
belonging, contayning by esteemation in length x8..A_cres. 
In the yeare r55. began the reparing of the Gray Fryers 
house, for the poore fatherlesse children. And in the month of 
Nouember, the children were taken into the same to the num- 
ber of almost foure hundreth. On Christmas day in the 
afternoone, while the Lord Mayor and Aldermen rode to 
Powles, and children of Christs Hospitall stood, from saint 
Lawrence lane end in Cheape, towards Powles, all in one liuery 
of russet cotten, 34« in number. And at Easter next, they 
were in blew at the spittle, and so haue continued euer since. 
The defaced Monuments in this church were these. First 
- Kln, 
in the Ouire, of the Lady 3[aaret, daughter to Pkillip "" « 
of I Frauce, and wife to Edzc,ard the first, foundresse ofthis nexv 

The Major & 
comunalty of 
London 
Parsons of 
Christ Church ; 
the Vicar to be 
at their ap- 
pointment. 

Christs Hospi- 
tall. 

Monuments 
in Christs 
Church. 



Folre Qleens 
buried in this 
chrcb. 

tage 33 

320 Farhzdol« lUard OEe, il/+iz 
church, 317 . Of lsabcl Oueene,_ wife to Fdzvard the second, 
daughter to Phillip King of France, x358. ]ohan of the Tower, 
Queene of Scots, wife to Dauid rztse, daughter to dvard 
the second, dyed in HaroEord Castle, and was buried by Isabd 
her mother, x36oE, lVilliam Fitzwaren, Baron, and Isabel his 
wife, sometime queene of Man. Isabcl daughter to dward 
the third, wedded to the Lord Coucy 1 of France, after created 
Earle f cdford. Eliauor wife to ohn Duke of Britaine. 
catri.r Dutchesse of ritaine, daughter to Henry the third. 
Sir Robert Lis# Baron, the Lady Lisle, and A]argaret de 
Rhwrs, Countesse of Deuon, all vnder one stone. Roger 
A[ortimer Earle of March, beheaded 39 . Patar Bishop of 
Carbon in Hungary, x33 l. Grcgo3' Rocksl, 7 Mayor, xz8z. 
Sir lohu cneru." knight. 385 . lohn Hastings, Earle of 
Pembrooke, 1389. 3[aar«t daughter to Thomas Brotharton, 
Earle bIarshall, she was Dutchesse of Norfolke. and Countesse 
Marshall and Lady Segrane,  389 . Richard Hauering knight, 
388. Robert Trisilian knight, (Chief) Iustice, 1388. Ge-ey 
Lucy, sonne to Gc-c 3, Lwj,. Ioku Mnby, sonne to Iokn Mayor 
of Norwich, 368. Ioht Nhilpot knight, Mayor of London, and 
the Lady Iane San«ord his wife, 384. Iohu Duke of Burbon 
and Angue, Earle of Claremond, Mounpouncier, and Baron 
Beaugeu, who was taken prisoner at Agencourt, kept prisoner 
8 yeares, & deceased 4.33- Robert Chalons knight, 439. 
Ioht Chalons. 3Iaaret daughter to sir Iokt Philpot, first 
maried to T. Santlor Esquire, and after to Iohu Ncybaml 
Esquier. Sir Nicholas Brcmbar Mayor of London, buried 
x386. Eli,vabcth Ncud wife to Iohn, sonne and heyre to Raph 
Earle of Westmerland, and mother to Raph Earle of Westmer- 
land, and daughter to Thomas Hollamt Earle of Kent, I4oE3. 
Edz«ard urneN sonne to the Lord EurncL In Alhallowes 
chappell, lames Fincs Lord Say. 145 o. and Hclcnor his wife 
I452. Iohn Smith Bishop of Landafe, 478. lohn Baron 
Hilton : lohn Baron Clinton. Richard Hastings knight, Lord 
of Willowb, and Welles, Thomas Enrdct Esquier behead, 
477. Robert Lile sonne and heyre to the Lord Lisle. In 
out Lady chappel, lohn Giso of London knight. [ HunoErcy 

Coucy] Courcy Thoms ; Couse z598 , z6o 3 



St.ord Esquer, of Worstershre . Roeri 
Baron of otheIl. R Ions, nght. Vill 
nght. RO'uold« Cnmro, nigh. Thomes B«wmo, sonne 
and heyre to He 5, Lord B«»wu. Ion Butle nght. 
Adam dc Howtoz knight, 4 7. Bartkolo»z«w Caste" knight, 
of London. Reiride Arund«lc knight, I46O. Thomas Couil 
Esquier, 4oE- In the Postles chappell, lValter htnt knight 
of the Garter, and Lord A[ountioy, Treasurer of England, sonne 
& heyre to T. [lt]tl knight, Treasurer of Normandy, 474- 
E. Eltmt Lord A[outtioj,, 1475. tli«« Ehmt, (Lady) 3[ountio', 
sometime vife to IVil. vwu ayor of London and daughter 
to H. Ifebcl Major 5I. Aune ltttt daughter to L Eluut 
knight, L. A[ountioy, 48. Sir All«t Ch«htic knight, and sir 
T. Grccue knight. IVillia»t Elunt Esquier, sonne and heyre 
to Ibltcr Blttnl Captayne of Gz5'ucs 49 . 'liabctk 
wife to Robert Cttrson knight, 494. tCartholomezv 
and Iohu urwashc his sonne, lohn lttt Lord 
Captayne of Gwins and Haros 485 . loht Dhtha»z Baron, 
sometime Treasurer of England, knight of the Garter 5. 
Elianor Dutchesse of Buckingham 53. lohu Eluut knight 
55. Rozc,L ltmt Esquier, 59. Ro&rt Bradb«t O, ,489 . 
Ni«holas CIoEtott knight. Fratc# Ch«c. Tvo sonnes of Allay«c 
Lord Cheiuey, and Iohn sonne and heyre to the saine. Lord 
Al[ahtc Cheitey knight. Iohu Robsart knight of the Garter 
45 o. AlloEnc ChNuœe knight. Thomas ]Ialoo' knight, 47 o. 
Thomas ltg a Iustice of the Bench, ,476. Ioh aldwiz 
fellowe ofGrayes Inne, and common Sergeant ofLondon, ,469. 
Walter IVrotslt 7 knight, of Warwickshire, 473. S#ueu letius, 
Major 53. Thomas a Patç and Iohn lViltwa#ç slaine at 
Barnet, x47'- Nicholas Poyncs Esquier, 5  OE. Robertlkeutou 
night, 46. [ohn a#r (alias lrk«) Herault xSoEo. Iohu 
zl[ore (alias VoO') King ofArmes 49x- Geogc Hoflton knight, 
,489. Between the quire and the Altar, Raflh Spatel knight, 
lohn A[oyle Gent. of Grayes Inne, 495- IVilliam Huddy knight, 
5. Io. Cobham a Baron of Kent, h. A[ortaiu, Knight, Io. 
Dç,ncort knight, Io. Norbe T Esquier, high Treasurer of 
England, He«. Norbe O' his sonne Esquier, h. Southlce [ Knight, 
Tho. Sakuile, Tko. Ltto, knight, 5oE5 . Ro&rt de la Rœetar, 
sonne to fattr#itts " In Ritmr Lord of Tormerton, 457- 

t'agi J4 



Parish church 
of S. Matthew 
in Friday 
street. 

l'agc 3z$ 

Zo. llralmayas Esquier, and Tho. f«lmaynas knight, 
Aco Taylor,  53 o. Niclolas ahnMns, ug Parsal knight 
49 o. Nlex'andcr Kh'e¢on knight, &c. In the body of the 
church, WilliamP«ulet Esquier of Summersetshire 48oE. Io 
Ioj,lc Gent. 53 o. eter Chaion Esquier 5. Zo. Hart 
gentleman, 449- lice La. tttffefo'd, hanged at Tiborne 
for murdering ber husband, 5OE3. dward Hll gent. of 
Grayes Inne, x47 o. Ri. Chuzhyard gent. fellow of Grayes 
Inne, 498. Iohn Bramre gent. of Grayes Inne 498. [o. 
3[ortimar knight, beheaded 4OE 3. Hnry Frowike Alderman, 
RcnauM Frowikc, hilip ats, 58. IVil. çorter Sergeant 
at armes 55. Tho. Granlbam Gentleman, 5. dmond 
Rothelcy gentleman, 47 o. Hn T Rostou gentleman, of Grayes 
Znne, x485. Nichol 3Iongomey gentleman, sonne to Zo. 
AIongomo of Northhamptonshire, 485. Sir Bartho. 
knight, sir Baruard S. ete» knight, sir Raph Saudwicl knight, 
Custos of London : sir Andrew Sakeuilc knight, Iohn Tresza- 
wall gentleman and Taylor of London, SoEo. Ail these and 
fiue times so many more haue bin buried there, whose 
Monuments are wholly defaced : for there were 9. Tombes of 
Alablaster and Marble, inuironed with strikes of Iron in the 
Quire, and one Tombe in the body of the Church, also coped 
with iron, all pulled downe, besides seuen-score graue stones 
of Narble, ail sold for 50. pounds, or thereaboutes, by sir 
Iartiz Bowes, Goldsmith and Alderman of London. Of late 
time buried there, lValter Hadden, Doctor, &c. From this 
Church West to Newgate, is of this Warde. 
Now for the South side of this warde, beginning againe at 
the crosse in Cheape, from thence to Fryday streete, and downe 
that streete, on the West side, till ouer against the Northwest 
corner of saint Iatthewes Church. And on the West side, to 
the South corner of the sayd Church, which is wholly in the 
Warde of Faringdon. This church bath these few Monuments. 
Thomas Pole Goldsmith, x395- Robert Iolz«sot Goldsmith, 
Alderman. Iohz Twiscltou Goldsmith, Alderman, 
Rap Allen Grocer, one of the Shiriffes, deceased xM6. 
Anthouy Gamage Ironmonger, one of the Shiriffes, deceased 
x579. Anthouy Cage. Iohu Iabbe Chamberlaine of London, 
&c. Alleu at Condit and Thomas IVarlingworth founded 



Faringdo» I4/'arcl withh 323 
a chauntrie there. Sir Nicholas Twiford Goldsmith, Mayor, 
gaue to that church an house with the appurtenances, called 
the Griffon on the hope, in the same streete. 
From this Fryday street, west to the old Exchange, 
a streete so called of the Kings Exchange there kept, which 
was for the receit of tTnllion, to be coyned. For Henry the 3. 
in the 6. yeare of his raigne, wrote to the Scabines and men 
of Ipre, that he and his counsell had giuen prohibition, that 
none, Englishmen or other, should make chaunge of plate or 
other masse of siluer, but onely in his exchaunge at London, 
or at Canterbury. Andrew Bttkcrell then had to Farme the 
Exchaunge of England, and was Mayor of London in the 
raigne of Henry the third. Iohn Somcrcotc had thc keeping 
of the Kings Exchaunge ouer ail England. In the eight of 
Edward the first, Gregory Rockesly was keeper of the sayd 
Exchaunge for the King. In the fift of Ed. the second 
IVilliant Hausted was keeper thereof. _And in the i8. Roger 
dc Frowicbe, &c. 
Thcse receiued the old stamps, or coyning irons, from time 
to time, as the saine xvere worne, and deliucred new to all 
the Mints in England, as more at large in another place 
I haue noted. 
This street beginneth by west Cheape in the North, and 
runneth downe South to Knight-Riderstreet, that part there- 
of which is called Old Fishstreet: but the very housing and 
Office of the Exchaunge and Coynage, was about the midst 
thereof, South from the East gate that entreth Powles church- 
yard, and on the west side in Baynards Castle Warde. 
On the East side of this lane, betwixt West cheape, and 
the church of S. Augtsthte, Henry IVallcs, Mayor (by license 
of Ed. the first) builded one row of houses, the profits rising 
of them to bee imployed on London Bridge.. 
The parish church of S. Augustine, and one house next 
adioyning in Watheling street, is of this Warde called Faring- 
don. This is a fayre church, and lately well repaired, wherein 
be monuments remaining of H. Reade Armorer, one of y 
Sheriffes, a45, ] Robert 17cllcsdon haberdasher, Mayor, 49 L 
Sir- Townley, IVillianz Dere one of the Shiriffes, 45 o. 
Robert Ratteu haberdasher 5oo. Tlzomas Al;leyard Gentle- 

Old change. 

parish church 
of S. Augu- 
stine. 



Cathedral| 
Church of S. 
Paule. 

Page 

man, 51.5. IVillia»t Iaucasta" Merchant Taylor, 5oE4. 
l[71lia»z alt« Merchant Taylor, 544 &c. 
Then is the North churchyard of Powles, in the which 
standeth the Cathedrall church, first founded by tdart 
King of Kent, about the yeare of Christ, 6. He gaue 
thereto lands as appeareth. 
edelbcrl«a Rc.r, «'o bzsh'aue, p admce s«tœee remcdio, 
dcdil iscop uclito #rratt q.ac aellat«tr Tillittgekant ad 
tttouaslcrff stti solatitnu scilicet , S. Pauli : et cffo Re.r ethd- 
berAus itfl flrmitcr conce& tibi prcsdi tclito polcslalett dus 
habatdi  possid«udi ,t bi pctct«tn»t ht monasterH vtilitatc 
t«r,ttattcat, c. thclstan, Edgarc, 'd. the Co(cssor, and 
others also gaue lands therevnto, l Vil. ÇottÇttcror gaue to 
the church of S. l'a«t&, aad to J][aetricbts then Bishop, and 
his successors, the Castle of Stortford, with the appurtenances, 
&c. I Ie also confirmed the gifts of his predecessors, in thcse 
words: Rc.r. tffl. Clauo quh'tas bz erp'tuu& 4. l[idas 
The Charter of King. lVil. the Couqucror, exemplified in the 
Tower, englished thus. 
lVillia.z by lhc ffracc of God, Kit« of £tglishzcz, la 
hb wdbelotted Fretch and Etglish peop&, greetit b Know 
yc, lhal I do ffhte vnlo God " thc chtrch of S. attlc of 
Z outil.t,  lo thc rcctors  seruitors ( thc sa»tc, i a# their 
knds ,hkh thc church bath, or sha# hattc, a,ithbt 
«ithott, sa,'b and sod', Tho& & 7"he(»z), hoEazgtlzc & Grith- 
br&hc, œee a#frecships by s«a, & by land, ou tidc, and off ride, 
and aH the r«hts that ittlo the»t christctdo»zc byrad 
Bishp'icks i. ,dtc lan«l : azd ou ek othcr ,zans land. For 
I «t,ill that the churck itz aH thhtgs bc as fi'ee as 
sott& fo bc bt tbc day of htdgatteut: c,ittcsses Osmottnd ont 
Chancdloç £a»[rauk th« rclzbislwp  Catterbu7, & T. 
Nrchbishop of l bff, Rogcr adc of Shreeesbuo, , lane 
co«tnO,, Geff U' dc [agtta villa, and Raph 
In the yeare xe8 7. this church of S. Pau& was brcnt with 
tire, & therewith the most part of the citie: which tire began 

1 scilioz] 1603 ; sdlicel tort. 1633 



at the entry of the west gate, and consumed the east gate. 
J][a«tricius then Bishop, began therefore the foundation of a 
new church of saint t»anle, a work that men of that rime 
iudged, would neuer haue bin finished, it was to them so 
wonderfull for length & breadth, & also the saine was builded 
vpon arches (or vaults) of stone, for defence of fier, which was 
a maner of worke before that rime vnknowne to the people of 
this nation, and then brought in by the French • & the stone stone brought 
was fetcht from Cne in Nortnandy. from Cane in 
Normandy. 
This -/J[am'icits deceased in the yeare 11o 7. tichard 
lBeamor  succeeded him in the Bishopricke, who did wonder- 
fully increase the said clmrch, purchasing of his owne cost 
the large streetes and lanes about it, vherin vere wont to 
dwel many lay people, which ground he began to compasse Wal about 
Paules church 
about, with a strong vall of stone, & gares. King H. the yard. 
first gaue to the said Richard, so much of the Mote (or wall) 
of the castle, on the Thames side to the South, as should be 
ueedfull to make the said wall of the church, & so much as 
should suffise to make a wal without the way on the north 
side, &c. 
It should seeme that this lickard inclosed but two sides of 
the said church or Cemitory of S. P«Me, to wit, the South 
and North side: for King Ldward the second, in the tenth 
of his raigne, granted that the said churchyard should be 
inclosed with a wall where it wanted, for the murthers and 
robberies that were there committed. But the cittizens then 
claimed the East part of the church yarde to be the place of 
assembly to their folkemotes, and that the great steeple there 
scituate was to that vse, their common bell, which being there 
rung, al the inhabitants of the citie might heare and corne 
together. They also claimed the west side, that they 
might there assemble themselues together, with the Lord of 
Baynards Castle, for view of their armour in defence of 
the cittie. This marrer was in the Tower of London re- 
ferred to ttarnins d« .çt«nton, and his fellow Iustices Itener- 
anles, but I finde not the decision or iudgement of that 
controuersie. 

.qaint Paules 
chureh brent. 
Foundation of 
the new 
Church of S. 
Paule builded. 

The common 
bell in Paules 
chutchyatd 
rung, for the 
calling togither 
of the Cifizens 
to theit folke- 
m otes. 

x 17eamor 6o3, 16.].] ; 13eames : Stubbs' Regisirum 



l'age 3a8 

Paules steeple. 

The new work 
of powles in 
the East. 

Pauls steeple 
fiered by light- 
ning. 

Pauls steeple 
repaired. 

Wethercocke 
on Pauls 
steeple. 

326 

True it is, that Edward the third, in the seucnteene of lais 
raigne, gaue commandement for the finishing of that wall, 
which was then performed, and to this day it continueth ; 
although now on both the [ sides (to wit, within and without) 
it be hidden with dwelling houses. Richard Beamer deceased 
in the yeare 1127. and his successors in processe of time 
performed the worke begun. 
The steeple of this church was bnilded and finished in the 
yeare 22OE: the Crosse on the said steeple fell downe, and 
a new was set vp in the yeare i314. The new worke of 
Powls (so called) at the Est end aboue the Quire, was begun 
in the yeare 1OE5I. 
tt'cnry Lacy Earle of Lincolne, Constable of Chester, and 
Custos of England, iii his rime was a great benefactor to this 
work and was there buried, in the yeare I3ao. Also I¢apk 
Baldockc Bishop of London, in lais life rime gaue 2. markes 
to the building of the sayd new worke: and left much by his 
Testament towards the finishing thereof, he deceased in the 
yeare I313. and was buried in the Lady Chappell. Also the 
new worke of Powls, to wit, the crosse IIes, were begun to be 
new builded in the yeare a256. 
The first of February, in the yere 1444. about two of the 
clock in the afternoone, the steeple of Powles was fiered by 
lightning, in the midst of the shaft or spire, both on the West 
side, and on the South, but by labour of many well disposed 
people the saine to appearance quenched with Vinegar, so 
that all men withdrew themselues to their houses praysing 
God : but betweene eight and nine of the clocke in the same 
night, the tire burst out againe, more feruently then before, 
and did much hurt to the Lead and Tituber, till by the great 
labour of the Mayor and people that came thither, it was 
throughly quenched. 
This steeple was repayred in the yeare I462. and the 
Weather-Cocke agayne erected: Robert Godwin winding it 
vp, the tope bl'ake, and hee was destroyed on the Pinacles, 
and the Cocke was sore brused. Bnt tm-cltwood (the Kinges 
Plomer) set it vp againe: since the which rime, needing 
reparation, it was both taken downe and set vp, in the yeare 
1553. At which rime it was round to be of copper, gilt ouer, 



Farigdot llTrd witbi 327 
& the length from the bill to the tail being 4. foot, & the 
breadth ouer the wings 3. foot and a halle, it weighed 4o. li. 
the crosse from the bole, to the Eagle (or cock) was fifteene 
foot, & 6. inches of asise : the length thereof ouerthwart, was 
.5. foote & xo. înches: and the compasse of the bole was 
9. foot and . inch. [ 
The inner bodie of this Crosse was Oake, the next couer 
was Lead, and the vttermost was of Copper, red vernished. 
The boale and Eagle or Cocke, were of Copper and gilt also. 
The height of the steeple was 520. foot, whereof the stone- 
worke is 26o. foot, & the spire was likewise 26o. foote: the 
length of the whole church is o-4o. taylers yardes, which make 
720. foote : the breadth thereof, is 3 o. foote : and the height 
of the bodie of that Church, is 5o. foote. This Church hath 
a Bishop, a Deane, a Precentor, Chancellor, Treasurer, and 
fiue Archdeacons: to wit, of London, Midlesex, Essex, Col- 
chester, and S. Albns : it hath Prebendaries thirtie, Canons 
twelue, Vickars Corail six, Ac. 
The Colledge of Pettie Canons there was founded by king 
Richard the second, in honor of Queene Aune his wife, and of 
her progenitors, in the ,7. of his raign. Their hall and lands 
was then giuen vnto them, as appeareth by the Pattent, 
maister Robert Dokeswort] then being maister thereof. In 
the yeare 14o8, the petty Canons then building their Colledge, 
the Maior and Comminaltie graunted them their water courses, 
and other easements. 
There was also one great Cloyster on the north side of this 
church inuironing a plot of ground, of old rime called Pardon 
church yard, wherof T]wmas A1ore, deane of Pauls, was either 
the first builder, or a most especiall benefactor, and was buried 
there. About this Cloyster, was artificially and richly painted 
the dance of Z].Iachabray, or dance of death, commonly called 
the dance of Pauls: the like whereof was painted about 
S. Innocents cloyster at Paris in France: the meters or poesie 
of this dance were translated out of French into English by 
Iohn Lidate, Monke of Bury, the picture of death leading all 
estates, at the dispence of Ienkcn Capituler, in the raigne of 
]enry the sixt. In this Cloyster were buryed many persons, 
some of worship, and others of honour : The Monuments of 

.ag'e 3a9 

lleight of the 
steeple. 

Length of 
Pauls church. 

Gouernors of 
this church. 

Petty canons of 
Pauls. 

Great Cloyster 
of Pauls. 

Daunce of 
Paules. 



Library of 
paules. 

.Page 330 
Chapel in par- 
don Church- 
yard. 

Chappell at 
the North 
dore of pauls. 

Holmes Col- 
ledge. 

Iesus Chapple. 

.328 I:m'itgdo llqzrd withi 
whome, in number and curious Wol'kcmanship, passed all other 
that were in that Church. 
Ouer the East Quadrant of this Cloyster, was a fayre 
Librarie, builded at the costes and charges of lIltar 
Shcrhzglon, Chancellor of the Duchie of Lancaster, in the 
raigne of em'ie the 6. which hath beene well furnished with 
faire written bookes in Vellem: but few of them now do 
rcmaine thcre. In the midst I of this pardon churchyard, was 
also a faire Chappell, first founded bg Gilberl Beckel, Port- 
graue and principall magistrate of this Citie, in the raigne of 
king Stephen, who was there buried. 
Thomas [oorc Deane of Pauls before named, reedified or 
new builded this Chappell, and founded three Chaplains there, 
in the raigne of Hm7 the fift. 
In the yeare I49. on the tenth of Aprill, the sayd Chappell, 
by commaundement of the Duke of Sommerset, was begun to 
boe pulled downe, with the whole Cloystrie, the daunce of 
Death, the Tombes and Monuments : so that nothing thereof 
was left but the bare plot of ground, which is since conuerted 
into a Garden, for the pettie Canons. There was also a 
Chappell at the Noh doore of atdes, founded by the saine 
llllar Sherrington, by licence of Hcm'ic the sixt, for two, 
three, or foure chaplaines, indowed with fortie pound by the 
yeare. This Chappell also was pulled downe in the raigne of 
Eda,ard the sixt, and in place thereof a fayre house builded. 
There was furthermore, a fayre Chapple of the holy Ghost 
in Paztls church, on the north side: founded in the yeare 
4o. by Rogcr ohncs, Chancellor and Prebendary of Paules, 
for Adam cric Alderman, Major of London i364, Iohn 
l Kingbam and others, for seuen Chaplains, and called Holmcs 
colledge. Their common hall was in Pauls churchyard on 
the south side, neare vnto a Carpenters yard. This colledge 
was with others suppressed in the raigne of Ed. the sixt. 
Then vnder the Quire of Paules is a large chappel, first 
dedicated to the naine of Iesu, founded, or rather confirmed 
the 37- of . the 6. as appeareth by his patent thereof, dated 
at Crodoa,w to this effect. «]Ia, 0, liege me]t, and Çkrislia,l 
peop& /za¢tbff begmt a 'aler,tilœee, and guild, to the ho,tonr of 
most fflorio¢ts ,rame of lesu Ckrist ottr sa¢tiom-, D¢ a lace callcd 



the Croc,dt's & thc ca/ha?rall clmrch & ads i L oMot, 
kath cottitued la,rg lime pcaceabl 3, fil/tow & laie: whercvpoz 
they kaue tade request, and we haue taket zon 's the naine & 
charge of lhe foundalion, la lhe laztd of Almhtie GoC 
Father, tbe Sotnc and tbe ho Ghost, and especially to the 
honore" of lest, it whose honottr the fratertitic was begzm, 
The king ordained IVilliam Say, then Deane of Paules, to 
bel the Rector, and Richard Fard (a remembrancer in the 
Exchequer) and Heuric Eetuis (clearke of his priuie Seale) thc 
Gardians of these brothers and sisters: they and their suc- 
cessors to haue a common seale: licence to purchase lands 
or tenements to the value of fortie pound by the yeare, &c. 
This foundation was confirmed by Htrie the seuenth, thc 
two and twentie of lais reigne, to Doctor Collet, then Deane of 
Powles, Rcctor there, &c. And by H«nrœee the eight, the seuen 
and twentieth of his raigne, to Richard Pace, then Deane of 
Paules, &c. 
At the West ende of this Iesus Chappell, vnder the Quire 
of Paules, also was a parrish Church of Saint Faith, commonly 
called S. Faith vnder Pauls, which serucd for the Stacioners 
and others dwelling in Paules Churchyard, Pater noster row, 
and the places nearc adioyning. The said Chappell of Iesus 
being suppressed in the raigne of E&vard the sixt: the 
Parishioners of saint Faiths church were remooued into the 
samc, as to a place more sufficient for largenesse and light- 
somnesse, in the yeare 55. and sa it remaineth. 
Then was there on the north side of this churchyard, a large 
charnell bouse for the bones of the dead, and ouer it a chappell 
of an olde foundation, such as followeth. In thc yeare 
the tenth of Edward the first, it was agreed, that Heurœee llllcs 
Major, and the Citizens, for the cause of shops by them builded, 
without the wall of the churchyard, should assigne to God, and 
to the church of Saint Paule, ten markes of rent by the yeare 
for euer, tovardes the new building of a chappell of the blessed 
virgin i][my, and also to assigne fiuc marks of yearly rent to 
a chaplaine to celebrate there. 
Moreouer in the yeare 43 o. the eight of Henroe the sixt, 
licence was granted to [auket Çaenter (executor to Richard 
II'bitliZfflot) to establish vpon the said chamell, a chaplaine, 

_Page 33 z 

parish Church 
of S. Faith. 

Charnel house 
with a chappel. 



Reign Wolfe. 

Powles school. 

Clochiard in 
Poules church 
yard. 

330 Farh,ffdo ll'm'd 
to haue eight marks by the yeare: Then was also in this 
chappell two brotherhoods. /'ober! Barton, Henrie Barlon 
Maior, and Thomas Hrfin Maior, all Skinners, were intombed 
with their Images of Alablaster ouer them, grated or coped 
about with Iron before the said Chappell, all which was pulled 
downe, I in the yeare 549- The bones of the dead couched vp 
in a Charnill vnder the chappell, were conueyed from thence 
into Finsbery field (by report of him who paid for the carriage) 
amounting to more then one thousand cart loades, and there 
laid on a 1V[orish ground in short space after raised, by soylage 
of the citie vpon them, to beare three milles. The Chappell 
and charnill were conuerted into dwelling houses, ware houses 
and sheades before them for Stacioners, in place of the 
Tombes. 
In the east parte of this Churchyeard, standeth Powles 
schoole, lately new builded and endowed in the yeare 
by Io/tn Collet Doctor of Diuinity, and Deane of Powles, for 
53. poore mens children to bee taught free in the same 
schoole, for which hee appointed a Maister, a Surmaister, or 
Vsher, and a Chaplain with large stipends for euer, committing 
the ouersight thereof to the Maisters, Wardens and Assistantes 
of the Mercers in London, because hee was sonne to Hcnry Collet 
Mercer, sometime Maior. Hee lefte to these Mercers, landes to 
the yearely value of one hundred and twenty pound or better. 
Neare vnto this schoole, on the north side therof, was of 
old rime a great and high Clochier, or bell house, foure square, 
builded of stone, and in the same a most strong frame of 
timber, with foure Belles, the greatest that I haue heard, these 
were called Iesus Belles, and belonged to Iesus Chappell, but 
I know hOt by whose gift: the saine had a great spire of 
Timber couered with lead, with the Image of saint Paule on 
the toppe, but was pulled downe by Sir 3Hles Partridge 
knight, in the raigne of ttenry the eight. The common speech 
then was, that hee did set an hundred pound vpon a cast at dice 
against it, and so wonne the said Clochiard and belles of the 
king: and then causing the bels to bee broken as they hung, 
the rest was pulled downe. This man was afterward executed 
on the Tower hill, for matters concerning the Duke of Som- 
merset, the fift of Edward the sixt. 



In place of tbis Clocbiarde, of olde times tbe common Common bell 
Be]l of tbe Cittie was vsed to be rung for tbe assembIy of tbecitr- 
of tbe citizens to tbeir Folke motes, as I baue before 
shewed. Pulpit Crosse 
in Powles 
About the middest ofthis Churchyeard is a Pulpit Crosse of I Churchyard. 
tilnber, mounted vpon steppes of stone, and couered with leade, z',,ge  
in which are serinons preached by learned Diuines euery 
Sundaye in the forenoone. The very antiquity of which 
Crosse is to mee vnknowne : I reade, that in the yeare OE59. 
King t[ory the third commaunded a generall assembly to bee 
made at this crosse, xvhere hee in proper person commaunded 
the Mayor, that on the next day following, hee should cause 
to bee sworne before the Alderman, euery stripling of twelue 
yeares of age, or vpwarde, to bee true to the king and his 
heyres, ldnges of England. Also in the yeare IOE6OE. the saine 
king caused to bee read at Pauls Crosse, a Bull obtayned from 
Pope Vrban the fourth, as an absolution for him, and for all 
that were sworne to maintaine the Articles made in Parliament 
at Oxford. Also in the yere 1OE99. the Deane of Powles 
accursed at Powles Crosse ail those which had searched in 
the Church of Saint Martin in the fielde, for an hoorde of 
gold, &c. This Pulpit crosse was by tempest of lightning and 
thunder defaced. Thomas Ketpe Bishop of London new 
builded it, in forme as it nov standeth. 
In the yeare I561. the fourth of hme, bctwixt the houre of Paules steeple 
three and foure of the clocke in the afternoone, the greate spire and church 
brent. 
of the steeple of Saint Paules church was fiered by lightning, 
which brake foorth (as it seemed) two or three yeardes beneath 
the foote of the Crosse, and from thence it brent downeward 
the spire to the battlements, stone worke and Belles, so 
furiously, that within the space of foure houres, the same 
steeple with ail the roofes of the church were consumed, to 
the great sorrow and perpetuall remembrance of the beholders. 
After this mischaunce, the Queenes Maiestie directed her 
letters to the Mayor, willing him to take order for speedy Speedy repair- 
repayring of the same. And shee of her Gratious disposition, Church.ing of Paules 
for the furtherance thereof, did presently giue and deliuer in The Queen's 
golde IOOO. markes, vith a warrant for a thousand loades of gift" 
Timber, to bee taken out of her woods, or elsewhere. 



lieneuolence, 

]-'a ff e .3 4 

Monumentes 
in Powles 
church. 

The Cttizens also gaue first a great beneuolence, and after 
that three fifteenes tobe speedily paid. The Cleargie of 
Englande likewise within the Prouince of Canterburie graunted 
the fortieth part of the value of their benefices, charged with 
first fruites, I the thirtieth part of such as were hot so charged, 
but the Ceargie of London Dioces graunted the thirtieth parte 
of all that paide first fruites, and the twentieth parte of such 
as had paide theyr fruites. 
Sixe Cittizens of London, and two Petie Canons of Powls 
church, had charge to fi, rther and ouersee the worke, wherein 
such expedition was vsed, that within one Moneth next follow- 
ing the burning thereof, the church was couered with boords 
& lead, in manner of a false roofe against the weather, and 
before the ende of the said yeare, ail the saide Iles of the church 
were fl'amed out of new timber, couered with lead, and fully 
finished. The same yeare also the great roofes of the west 
and east endes were framed out of great timber in Yorkshire, 
brought thence to London by sea, and set vp, and couered 
with lead, the north and south endes were framed of timber, 
and couered with leade before .A_prill, 566. Concerning the 
steeple, diuers models were deuised and made, but little else 
was done, through whose default God knoweth: it was said 
that the money, appointed for new building of the steeple, was 
collected. 
Monumentes in this church be these, First as I reade, of 
Trkcuwalde 13ishoppe of London buried in the olde Church, 
aboute the yeare of Christ, seuen hundred, whose body was 
translated into the new worke, in the yeare 1 I4o. being richly 
shrined aboue the Quire behind the high Alter. 
5«bba or Seba king of the East Saxons, first buried in the 
olde Church, since remoued into the new, and laide in a coffin 
of stone , on the north side without the Quire, Etlwldred king 
of the West Saxons was likewise buried and remoued. 
lI'illiam Vorman, 13ishop of London in the raignes of Edward 
the Confessor and of IFilliam the conqueror, deceased ioïo. 
and is new buried in the body of the church with an Epitaph, 
as in my summary I haue shewed, Enstac]dtts de Faucon- 

 stone] or gray marble add. z633 



8rid« Bishoppe of London, 8. buried in the south Ile 
aboue the Quire. 3[artin Pa«sull Deane of Powles, 39- 
W. auarul Canon, the kings Treasurer, u atcsull 
 4o. er «ar Bishoppe of London, 4. buried in the 
North side the quier. Eukv assc Bishop of London, 
and his Brother ilip Basset knight  IOE6 
Bishop of London buried in the south Ile aboue the Quire, 
 262. Gcffr O, de Acra Chaplen, in the Chapple of saint Iames 
vnder the roode at North dote, 1264. Ale.vander de 
]273. lan Grantham, 1273. Iohn BroEvoEord, & Rchard 
V2(ramuilc, I OE75. Rogcr de Laie &rchdeacon of Essex,  280. 
Ralh Donion Canon 1382. God'cy S. Donstan, 74. #)dkc 
Loucll, 298. lVilliam Harworth, Clearkc, I3O2. Ieginaht 
Brandon in the new Lady Chappell, 13o 5. Ii«]zard 
2rchdeacon of Middlesex, 13o 9. ]fera 3, Lacie, Earle of Lin- 
colne, in the new worke of l'owles, betwixt thc Lady Chappell 
and Saint Dunstons chappell, where a fayre monument was 
raysed for him, with his picturc in armour, crosse legged, as ç'use of m- 
one profcssed for deence o the holy land against thc Infidels, numents of 
the dead crose 
131o. his monument is fowly defaced. Ralh BaMokc Bishoppe legged. 
of London, 3t3. in the saide Lady Chappell. whereof he was 
founder. 
Some haue noted that in digging the foundation of this 
new worke, namely of a chappell on the south side of Chapple°n 
the south Ile 
Powles church, there were round more then an hundred of Povle», 
builded. 
scalpes of Oxen or Kine, in the yeare one thousand three Sealps of oxcn 
hundred and sixeteene, which thing (say they) confirmed found indig- 
_ ging the foun- 
greatly the opinion of those which haue reported that Ot dation. 
olde rime there had beene a Temple of hiter, and that 
there was dayly sacrifice of beastes. 
Othersome both wise and learned haue thought the Buckes A Bucks head 
  borne beforc 
head, borne before the procession of Paules on Saint mms the pressiou 
day, to signifie the like. But true it is I haue read an ancient af powles. 
deede to this effect. 
Sir lVilliam Banal knight, the third of dward the first. 
in the yeare ï4, on Candlemas day granted to Har O' de 
ortam, Deane of Powles, and to the chapter there, that in 
consideration of twentie two Acres of ground or 1and, by 
them granted within their Marmot of lVe«tley in Essex, to 



l'agi 336 

334 [«arh«garot IUard withi« 
bee inclosed into his parke of Curingham, he would for euer 
vppon the Feast daye of the conuersion of S. Paule in winter, 
giue vnto them a good Doe, seasonable and sweete, and 
vppon the Feast of the commemoration of S. Paule in 
summer, a good Bucke, and offer the same at the high Altar, 
the same to bee spent anaongst the Ca[nons residentes: 
the Doe to bee brought by one man at the houre of Proces- 
sion, and through the Procession to the High Alter: and the 
bringer to haue nothing : the Bucke to bee brought by all his 
meyney in like manner, and they to haue paid vnto them by 
the chamberlaine of the church xii. pence onely, and no more 
to be required. This grant he ruade, and for performance, 
bound the landes of him and his heyres to bee distrained on : 
and if the landes should bec euicted, that yet hee and his 
Heyres shoulde accomplish the gifle. Witnesses Richard 
Tilbcrœee, IVillia»z d« IVockendot, Richardc dc Harlowe 
knights, Pclcr of SlaoEorde, Tomas of lValdoz, and some 
others. 
Sir IVal/cr Bande, sonne to lVilliam, confirmed this gift, 
in the thirtieth of the said king, and the witnesses therevnto 
were Nicholas dc lVokcndou, Richard «& Rokclo,, Thomas 
de A[amh'uilc, Ioht dc Rochford knights, Richard de BronoEord, 
1Villiam «& Alarkes, lVilliam de Fulham, and other. 
Thus much for the grant. 
Noxv what I haue heard by report, and haue partly seene, 
it followeth. On the feast day of the commemoration of 
saint Pau# the bucke being brought vp to the steps of the 
high Altar in Powls church, at the houre of procession, the 
Deane and chapter being apparrelled in coapes and vest- 
mentes, with garlands of Roses on their heades, they sent 
the body of the ucke to baking, and had the head fixed on 
a powle, borne before the Crosse in their procession, vntill 
they issued out of the West dore, where the keeper that 
brought it blowed the death of the Bucke, and then the 
horners that vere about the cittie, presently aunswered him in 
like manner: for the which paines they had each one of the 
Deane and chapter, foure pence in money, and their dinner, 
and the keeper that brought it was allowed during his abode 
there, for that seruice, meate, drinke and lodging, at the 



Farhgdo« rd wi[it 335 
deanc and chapters charges, and fiue shillinges in money at 
his going away, together with a loafe of bread, hauing the 
picture of saint Pa«le vppon it, &c. 
There was belonging to the church of Saint Paulc for 
both the dayes, two speciall sutes of vestmentes, the one 
embrodered with[ Buckes, the other with Does, both giuen 
by the sayd Bm«c/« (as I haue heard.) Thus much for the 
matter. Now to the residue of the monuments, sir 
Higkam, chiefe Iustice of both Benches successiuely, buried 
in the side of the north walke agaynst the Quire, 3o8. 
GMldford Clarke, at the Altar of the Apostles, 33 . Rickard 
Newport Bishop of London, r3r8. IVilliam Chatclcslztt¢te 
Canon in the new worke, r3oEI, had a chantrie there, sir 
Niclwlas IVobctMez knight, at the Altar of Saint Tlwmas in 
the new worke, a3z3 . Ioht Cl¢esltttll Bishop of London, oE79- 
Rgcr bValtl«mz Canon, 3OE5 . Hamo Cl«ikcwcll sixe times 
Maior of London, 3OE8. Robert [ozdcz, and Iohtt 
his brother, Canons, in the new worke, 33-'- IVoltar Tkorpe 
Canon, in the new worke, r333. Io]zz Fable, 334. Iames 
Frisil, Chaplen, 34. IVilliam _[clford Archdeacon of 
Colchester (d. 336), Riclzard de t)laccto, Archdeacon of Col- 
chester (in) r34oE, before Saint Tlzo¢as chappell. Geffrcy 
Etotz, Canon, 345- Ni«lwlas Httsbmzd canon, 347- sir Iolzt 
Pottlttey Maior, 348. in a faire chappell by him builded on 
the north side of Paules, wherein he founded three Chaplains. 
Willimz tttcrsdct canon, in the Crowds, 349. Almz Hot]za»t 
Canon, în the new Crowdes,  35 . t-fcm'ic ttesworth, vnder 
the Roode at north doore, r353, Iol«z t?cacl¢ampc Con- 
stable of Douer, warden of the Portes, knight of the 
Garter, sonne to G«y Bcauchampe Earle of Warwike, and 
]3rother to Thomas Earle of Warwicke, in the bodie of the 
church on the South side, 358- where a proper chapple, and 
fayre monument remaineth of him : he is by ignorant people 
misnamed, to be HttoErey Duke of Glocester, who lieth 
honourably buried at Saint Albons, twentie myles from 
London, and therefore such as merrily, or simply professe 
themselues to serue Duke HtzoErey in Paules, are to be 
punished here, and sent to Saint Albons, thcre againe to bee 
punished for their absence from their Lord and maister, as 



/ag'e jjS 
Carta fun- 
dationis can- 
terii. 

Margaret 
Countesse of 
Shrewesburic 
ber monulnent 
painted ouer 
the entrie of 
Iesus Chappel. 

336 oeatbzgctou l¢/'at«t wi/hh« 
they call him. ./][ichael IVorboivzo lishop of London, 136. 
lVltar e& Blader, and Auis his wife, 36. Gilbert 
rez«er Deane of Paules, ,/,x Richard lVetdouc 3 366. 
DO01" • 
[ohu iltoft Goldsmith, and Alice his wife, in the new worke, 
S. Duustons chapple, 368. Adam de Bery, aior of 
Lonldon, and ldogcr ohnes for seuen Priestes in a Chappell 
of the holy Ghost behinde the Rode at the North doore of 
Pauls, 39 . çohu of Çauu Duke of Lancaster, 399. buried 
on the north sidc the Quire, beside lauc his first wife, who 
deceased I368. sir icbard 'urlçe knight of the Garter, 
wader a fayre monument in the side of the north walke 
against the Quirc, a chantrie was there founded for him, 4 9. 
eatri.r his wife, after his death lnarried to Tlomas Lord 
Rouse, was buried in the chappell of Saint [ohzt Baptist (or 
ttltu,3,s Chappell) neare the north doore of Paules, 4o 9. 
T/tosnas Euers Dcane of Paules, in Saint T/zouas chappell 
thc new workc, 4x. 1 Thomas 3[,re Deane of Pouls, in the 
chapplc of Saint nne and Saint Tbomas by him new builded 
in Pardon churchyard, 49. Thé,mas Storv Deane of Paules, 
by the Tombe of [ohn eaztchampe, 43.  The Dutchesse 
of Bedford, sister to bilip Duke of Burgoyne, 433. Robert 
l;[t,ht«]t Bishop of London in the quire, 433. lPltcr 
Sheritgton, in a chappell without the North doore by him 
builded, 457. çoht Dra3'toz Goldsmith, in Alhallowes 
chappell, 4.56. llZilliam Say Deane of Paules, in the Crowds, 
or Iesus chappel, 468. l][argaret countessc of Shrewsburie, 
in the Crowdes, or Iesus chappell, as appeareth by an Inscrip- 
tion on a pillar there. ' Here before the Image of Iesu, lieth 
the worshipfull and right noble ladie e]laoearet Countesse of 
Shrewsburie, late wife of the true and victorious knight and 
redoubtable warriour, [ohn Talbot  Earle of Shrewsburie, 
which worship  died in Guien for the right of this land. The 
first daughter, and one of tlae heyres of the right famous 
and renowned knight Richard cauchamçc late Earle of 
Walavicke, which died in Roane, and of Daine Elizabetlz his 
wife, the which li»abetl, was daughter and heyre to Thosnas 
late Lord Berkeley on his side, and of ber mothers side Ladie 

14oo Le 
Talles] ed. : z633 , tort. Talbot 

" ct. t. 14o5 Le zVe,e 
 worshipful man 



Farigdo¢ IU«'# wilhi 337 
Lisle, and Tyes, which countesse passed from this world the 
xiiii, day of Iune, in the yeare of out Lord z468. on whose 
(soule) Iesu haue mercie, Amen.' Iohu IVenlocke by his last 
will, dated z477. appoynted there should bee dispended vpon 
a Monument ouer the Lady of Shrewesburie where she is 
buried afore Iesus, one hundred pounds. He left Sir 
Talbot 1 his Superuisor. This sir I-/u»oErey Talbot knight, 
Lord Marshall of the towne of Calles, ruade his will the yeare t'age339 
149. He was yonger son of [ohtt Earle of Shrewsburie, and 
Margaret his wife: hee appoynted a stone to be put in a 
pillar before the graue of his Ladie mother in Pauls, of his 
portrature, and armes, according to the will of Iohu IVenlocke, 
but for want of roome and lightsomnesse in that place, it 
was concluded, the Image of Iesus to bee curiously painted 
on the wall in Paules Church, ouer the doore that entreth 
into the said Chappell of lesus, and the portrature also of 
the said Ladie A[argarct countesse of Shrewesburie, kneeling 
in her mantle of Armes, with other of her progenie, ail which 
was so performed, and remaineth till this day. In the 
Chapplc of Iesus, Thomas Docwrcy, IVilliam Lambe, 57 8 
and many other haue been enterred, Iohtt of London vnder 
the North rode, I OE66. Iohu Loetdl Clarke, Ioht Rommte, 
of Saint Olaue, lValtar 171oxlcy, Sir Aleu 17oxhztll knight of 
the Garter, Constable of the Tower, Custos of the Forrest 
and parke of Clarendon, the Forrest of Brokholt, Groztell and 
AIelchet, buried beside Saint rkeuwalds shrine ; and of later 
rime Thomas I(cmpe Bishop of London, in a proper Chappell 
of the Trinitie by him founded in the bodie of the Church on 
the North syde, z489. Tkomas Lh«icar , Doctor of Phisicke, 
Iohu Collctt Deane of Paules, on the South side without the 
Quier, a5z 9. Iohn Dow»m« Canon of Paules. 55. Richard 
Fit:-Iamcs Bishop of London, hard beneath the North-west 
pillar of Paules Steeple, vnder a fayre Tombe, and a Chappell 
of Saint ['aule builded of Tymber, with Stayres mounting 
therevnto ouer his Tombe ofgray 1VIarble, zS:Zl. His Chappell 
vas burned by tire falling from the Steeple, his Tombe was 
taken thence. Iohn Stokesley I3ishop of London in our Ladie 
Chappell, 539- Iokn Netdll, Lord Latimer, in a Chappell 
 Talles z6o 3  Linacre] L#ticar z6o 3 
STOW. 1 Z 



.Page 34 ° 

Rowe. 

Pater Noster 
makers. 

Aue Mary 
]aile. 

338 P'm'34¢doe 1I 
by the North doore of Paulcs, about 542. Sir [ohn [ason 
Knight in thc North walke, agaynst the Quier, 1366. II3"lliat 
Hrbert Earle of Pembrooke, knight of the Garter, on the 
North side the Quier, 569 . Sir Nic/zolas Bacou, Lord Keeper 
of the great Seale, on the South side of the Quier, 578. 
Sir hilli Sidney aboue the Quier, on the north side, 586. 
Sir Frances[ lValsingham knight, principall secretarie, and 
Chauncellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, 159o. sir Christopher 
Hatton Lord Chancellor of England, knight of the Garter, 
aboue the Quier, I59. vnder a most sumptuous Monument, 
where a merry poet writ thus. 
]'hilip and ranc& haue no Tombe, 
For great Christ«her ta]'es aH the roomc. 
lohn Ehner Bishop of London before saint T]zom chappel, 
 594. The lady Heneage, and her husband, sir Thomas Heneage 
Chancellor of the Dutchie, 59.5- Richard Fl«tcber Bishop of 
London, 1596 . These as the chiefe haue I noted to bee 
buried there. 
Without the North gare of Paules Church, from the ende 
of the olde Exchaunge, West vp Pater Noster Rowe, by the 
two lanes out of Paules Church, the first out of the crosse lsle 
of Paules, the other out of the bodie of the Church, about the 
midst thereof, and so West t6 the golden Lion, be ail of this 
Warde, as fs aforesaid. The houses in this streete, from the 
first North gate of Paules Churchyard, vnto the next gate, 
were first builded without the Wall of the Churchyard, by 
enrie lllles Major, in the yeare 8OE. The rentes of those 
houses goe to the maintenance of London Bridge. This 
streete is now called ater Arostcr Rowe, because of Stacioners 
or Text writers that dwclled there, who wrote and solde all 
sortes of Bookes then in vse, namely, A. B. C. with the Pater 
œostcG Aue, Creede, Graces, &c. 
There dwelled also turners of Beades, and they were called 
atcr Noster makers, as I read in a record of one Robert 
Nikke, Pater Nostcr maker and Citizen, in the raine of 
the 4- and so of other. At the end of this Pater Noster 
Rowe, is Aue la7, lane, so called vpon the like occasion of 
tcxt writers, and Beade makers then dweIling there: and at 



TarhGdo. /Fard wl/hhz 339 
the ende of that lane is likewise Crced« lane, late so called, Çreede lane. 
but sometime Spztrrier Row«, of Sîurrfers dwellin there, and 
dm«n lane is added therevnto, betwixt the South end Of Amenlane. 
Warvicke lane, and the north end of due 11m'2 lane : at the 
north ende of Aui ._Tm-y lane, is one reat house builded of 
stone and tituber, of old time pertainin to dodu Duke of I 
Britaine, Earle of Richmond, as appeareth by the Records of-g«.« 
E'd. the second: since that it is called tV«mbrooks Inne, nere Duk¢ of IJry- 
taines house, 
vnto Ludgate, as belonging to the Earles of Fembrooke in the since Pem- 
rimes of ]ic. the 2. the x 8. yeare : and of Henry the 6. in the brookes lnne, 
now Burgaue- 
xiiii, yeare. It is now called Burgaueny house, and belongeth ny house. 
to larcin3, late Lord of Burgaueny. Betwixt the south end of 
,que J/Tm;y lane, and the North end of Creed lane, is the 
comming out of Faules Church yard, on the East, and the 
high street on the "VVest, towards Ludgate, and this is called 
Boxvier row, of Bowiers dwelling there in olde time, now worne Bowier row. 
out by Mercers and others. In this street on the north side. 
is the parish church of saint [artiu, a proper church, and Parish church 
of S. Martin 
lately new builded : for in the yeare 437. [oha «l[ic/md Maior by Ludgate. 
and the comminaltie, gîanted to lVilliam Dowue parson of 
S. Iartins at Ludgate, a parcell of ground, conteyning in 
length OE4 foot, and in breadth OE4- foot, to set and build 
theyr steeple vpon, &c. The Monuments here hath beene 
of Willianz Seuenoake Major, 48. Itenry Belwase, and 
Iohn Gest, 458. Villiam Taucrner Gentleman, I466. Iohn 
Barton Esquire, 439- Stephen Peacocke, Maior, 533- Sir 
Roger Chohuley. Iohu IVent, and Idoger Pahw had Chanteries 
there. 
On the south side of this streete, is the turning into the The Blaeke 
blacke Friers, which order sometime had their houses in Olde- Frier. 
borne, where they remayned for the space of fiftie fiue yeares, 
and then in the yeare e,76. Gregoric ldoksley laior, and the Maior and 
Barons of this 
Barons of this citie, granted and gaue to/do. Kilwarby Arch- Citie 
bishop of Canterbury, two lanes or wayes next the streete of 
Baynards castell, and also the Tower of Mountfitchit, to bee 
destroyed : in place of which, the said ldobert builded the late 
new church of the Blacke-Friers, and placed them therein. 
King Edward the first and Elianor his wife were great 
benefactors therevnto. This was a large church, and richly 



Parliament at 
the Blacke 
Fryers called 
the blacke 
Parliament. 

340 Farizoedo lPard wi[hi 
furnished with Ornaments: wherein diuerse parliaments aud 
other great meetings hath beene holden : namely in the yeare 
I45o. the twentie eight of t-]enrie the sixt, a parliament was 
begun at Westminster, and adiourned to the Blacke-Friers in 
London, and from thence to Leycester. In the yeare 1522. 
the Emperour Charles the fiff was lodged there. In the 
yeare I5OE4. the fiffeenth of Aprill, a parliament was begun ] 
at the Blacke Friers, wherein was demaunded a subsidie of 
8o. pound, to bee raysed of goodes and landes, foure 
shillings in euery pound, and in the ende was granted two 
shillinges of the pound, of goodes or landes, that were worth 
twenty pound, or might dispend twentie pound by the yeare, 
and so vpward, to be payed in two yeares. This Parliament 
was adiourned to XVestminster, amongst the blacke Monkes, 
and ended in the kings palace there, the fourteenth of August, 
at nine of the clocke in the night, and was therefore called the 
blacke parliament. In the yere 1529. Cardinall Cameius the 
Legat, with Cardinal lVoolscy sate at the said blacke friers, 
where belote them as Legats & Iudges, w brought in 
question the kings marriage with Queene Ka[erit as to be 
vnlawfull, before whom the king and Queene were cited and 
summoned to appeare, &c. whereof more at large in my 
Annales I haue touched. 
The saine yeare in the Moneth of October began a parlia- 
ment in the Blacke Friers, in the which Cardinall IVoolsey 
was condemned in the premunire: this house valued at 
o4.1i. IS.s. 5.d. was surrendred the xii. of Nouember, the 3 . 
of enrie the eight. There were buried in this Church, 
[aTarct Queene of Scots, Hnbert de Bttr/ Earle of Kent, 
translated from their olde Church, by Old-Boorne : Robert de 
Attabeto Earle of Bellimon: Dame Isabd wife to Sir Roffer 
Bygot, Earle Marshall: IVilliam and Iane Httse, children to 
Dame Ellis, Countes of &rundell, and by them lieth Dame 
Ellis, daughter to the Earle IVarrcn, and after Countesse of 
&rundell: DameIde wife to Sir bValtar  daughter toFerrers 
of Chartley, Richard de Brezves, Richard Stmnge, sonne to 
Rogcr Strangc, Elizabetk daughter to sir Barthol. Badlesmere, 
wife to sir lilliam Bohuu Earle of Northampton. [arsk, 
 premunire] priminerie z98; preminire z6o 3 



Fari«,gdm l/Fard wilhhz 34 I 
the Earles of Match and Hereford, and t?liabeth Countesse of 
_Arnndell. Dame [oau daughter to sir Iohlz Carlw, first wife 
to sir Gz«ide riam H]z Clare l«ight,  z95. The heart of 
Q. Hdianor the foundresse : the heart of AoEotce her son : the 
hearts of Iohz and 3[aaret, children to bV. Va#tce: sir 
IVillia»z Thorpe Iustice, the lord Liotk of Ireland, Maude wife 
to Geffrcy Say, daughter to y Earle of Warwick, Dame 
SiNe, daughter to Wil. Patlchullc, wife to Roger ew[cha»e, 
and by her Sir Richa»d or Roger Bewcha»e, Lorde S. Amaud 
and Dame Eli»abeh his wife, daughter to the Duke of 
Lancaster, sir Stehcz Collitfftoz knight, sir lVilliam Pctcr 
knight. The Countesse of Huntington, Dutches of Excester 
a45- sir Iohu Cornzvall, Lord Fanhope, died at Ampthill in 
Bedfordshire, and was buried here, 1443. sir Ihz Tifltoflc 
Earle of Worcester beheaded, 47 . and by him in his Chapple, 
Iames Tzttchc, Lord Audlcj,, beheaded I497. ll'illiam Pastot 
and Amie daughter to Edmomt Lmtcastcr. The Lord Bea- 
mout sir Edmond Cortewall Baron of Bur%rd, The Lady 
Neudl, wedded to the Lord DozcNlas, daughter to the Duke of 
Excester, Richard Scrofle Esquier, Dame A'athercu Vau.r alias 
Co3ham, sir Thomas Erozvtte and dame hSabch his wife, 
Iate Powcll, Th«mas SzvboEorth, I«hu Alawsh3, , Equier, 1432. 
Ioht de la Bere, 2Vicholas arc, Geffrç, SprDtg, I lïlliam 
Clord Esquiers, Sir Thomas Brmtdot knight of the Garter, 
I5 9. IVilliam Stahvorth larchant Taylor, x518. IVilliam 
CourttŒE Earle of Deuonshire nominate but not created, the 
3. ofHcmy the eight, &c. 
There is a parrish of saint Amzc within the precinct of the 
Black Fryers, which was pulled down with the Friers Church, 
by sir Thomas Cardcu: but in the raigne of Queene AGIO,, 
hee being forced to find a church to the inhabitantes, allowed 
them a lodging chamber aboue a staire, which since that 
time, to witte the yeare, 597. fell downe, and was againe 
by collection therefore ruade, new builded and enlarged 
in the saine yeare, and was dedicated on the eleuenth of 
December. 
Now to turne againe out of the Black Fryers through 
Bowier Rowe, Aue Mary lane, and Pater Noster Row, to the 
church of saint Michaell ad Bladum, or at the corne, (corruptly 

t'age 343 

Parish church 
of S. Arme 
new bnilded 
in the black 
Friers. 

Corne market 
by later nos- 
ter Row. 



Parish church 
of S. liichaell 
ad ]31adum. 

Olde Crosse in 
west Cheape. 

.Page 344 

Roger i'qorth. 

Water conduit 
by Pauls 
gare. 

_rassage throgh 
S. hIichels 
chnrch. 

Panier Alley. 
Iuie lane. 

342 Fariezgaoez lUard wi/]zh¢ 
at the Querne,) so called, because in place thereof, was some- 
time a corne market, stretching vp West to the Shambles : It 
seemeth that this church vas new builded, about the raigne 
of dzc,m'd the 3. Thomas ea,/ot first Parson there, was 
buried in the Quire, thc yeare 36x. At the east end of this 
Church stoode a Crosse, called the old crosse in west Cheape, 
which was taken downe in the yeare x39o. since the which 
rime, the said parrish church was [ also taken down, but new 
huildcd and enlarged, in the yeare 43 . the eight of Hnry 
the sixt. lVilliam EascM Mayor, & the comminaltie 
graunted of the conamon soyle of the citie, three feet and 
a halfe in bredth on the north part, and foure foot in bredth 
toward the East, for the enlarging thereof. This is now a 
proper Church, and hath the monumentes of Thomas AYwton 
first Parson, Rogcr llod«ock«, Hatter, 475. Thomas Rossel 
Brewcr, 473- Iohz ][tltot, Stacioner, 475- L Oxte3, , Roger 
Arlh, Marchant Haberdasher, ] 59 . Ioht Zeilatd the famous 
Antiquary, Hcu7, raucll Vintner, one of the shiriffes 585 . 
lVilliam Ikht one of the shiriffes, 586. Thomas mbcs, 
Barber Chirurgion, ]598. &c. [ohu A[mdham had a Chaun- 
tric there, in the 4. of . the second. 
At the east end of this church, in place of the olde crosse, is 
now a vater conduit placed, II'. lascht Mayor, the 9. of H 
the 6. at thc request of diuers common councels, granted it so 
to be: wherevpon in the  9. of the saine Hem3, , one thousand 
marks was granted by a common counsell towardes the workes 
of this conduit. & the rcparations of othcr : this is called the 
little Conduit in West Cheape by l'ovles gare. At the west 
end of this parrish church is a small passage for people on 
foote thlough the saine church, & west from the said church, 
some distance, is an other passage out ofalcr uoster row, and 
is called of such a signe, Panyar Alley, which commeth out 
into the North ouer against S. Martins lane. Next is Iuie 
lane, so called of Iuie growing on the walles of the Prebend 
houses, but now the lane is replenished on both the sides with 
faire bouses, and diuers offices be there kept, by registers, 
namelie, for the prerogatiue court of the Archbishop of Can- 
terbury, the Probate of Willes, and for the Lord Treasurers 
remcmbrance of the Exchequer, &c. 



This Lane runneth North to the west ende of S. Nicholas 
shambles. Of old time was one great house, sometimes 
belonging to the Earles of Britaine, since that to the Louels, 
and was called Louels Inne : for 3[athiM wife to Iohl, Loucll Louels Inne. 
held it in the first of/-L the 6. Then is Eldenese lane, which Eldenese lane, 
or warwicke 
stretcheth North to the high street of Newgate lnarket, the lane. 
saine is l'OW called \Varwicke lane, of an ancient house there warwickes 
Inne. 
builded by an Earle of War[wicke, and was since called War- P,,ge34s 
wicke hme. It is in record called a messuage in Eldenesc 
lane, in the parrish of S. Sepulchre, the 8. of Item 7 the 6. 
Cicille Dutches of Warwicke possessed it. Now againe from 
the Conduit by Powles gate on the north side, is a large stl'eete, 
running west to Newgate, the first part whereof from the 
Conduit to the shambles, is of selling bladders there, called 
Bladder street. Then behind the butchers shops be now 
diuers slaughter houses inward, and Tippling houses outward. 
This is called Mountgodard strecte of the Tippling houses Mountgodard 
there, and the Goddards mounting from the tappe to the treete. 
Table, ri'oto the table to the mouth, and sometimes ouer the 
head. This streete goeth vp to the North end of Iuie lane. 
Before this Mountgodard streete stall boordes were of olde 
rime set vp by the Butchers, to shew & to sell their flesh 
meate vpon. ouer the which stalboordes, they first builded 
sheades to keepe off the weather, but since that incroching by 
little and little, they haue ruade their stall boordes & sheads, 
faire houses, meete for the principall shambles. Next is 
Newgate market, first of corne and meale, and then of other Newgate mar- 
victuals, xvhich stretcheth almost to Eldenese lane. _A faire ket. 
new and strong frame of tituber couered with lead, was there- 
fore set vp at the chargçs of the crie, neare to the west 
corner of S. Nicholas shambles, for the meale to be weighed, 
in the I. of dward the 6. Sir Ioh Gresham being then 
Mayor. On this side the north corner of Edenese lane stood 
sometime a proper parrish church of S. Ewine, as is before Parish ehurch 
said, giuen by l-Jeta3, the 8. towards the erecting of Christs of s. Ewin. 
church, it was taken down, and in place thereof, a faire strong 
ri'ame of tilnber erected, wherein dwell men of diuers Trades. 
Jk_nd from this fralne to Newgate îs all of this ward, and so 
an end thereof. It hath an -\ldclman, lais Deputie, conlnon 

]31adder street. 



344 

councel, OE. Constables, I7. Scauengers, 8. Wardmote In- 
quest, 18. and a Bedle: And is taxed to the fifteene, 5 ° . 
pound.] 

['age 346 

Bredstreete 
ward. 

Bredstreete. 

Friday streete. 

Bredstreete warde 

BREDSTREETE WARD beginneth in the high streete 
of west Cheape, to wit, on the south side, from the Standard 
to the great Crosse. Then is also a part of Watheling streete 
of this ward, to wit, from ouer against thc Red Lion on the 
North side vp almost to Powles gate, for it lacketh but one 
house of S. Augustines church. And on the south side from 
the red Lion gare to the Old Exchange, and downe the same 
Exchange on the East side, by the west end of Mayden lane, 
or Distar lane, to Knightriders streete, or as they call that 
part thereof, Old Fishstreet. And all the north side of the 
said old Fishstreete, to the South ende of ]3redstreete, and by 
that still in Knightriders streete, till ouer against the Trinitie 
Church, and Trinitie lane. Then is Bredstreet it selle, so 
called of bread in olde time there sold: for it appeareth 
by recordes, that in the yeare I3oŒE. which was the 3 o. of '. 
first, the Bakers of London were bounden to sell no bread 
in their shops or houses, but in the market, and that they 
should haue 4. Hall motes in the yeare, at route seuerall 
terms, to determine of enormities belonging to the said 
Company. 
This streete giuing the naine to the whole warde, beginneth 
in west Chepe, almost by the Standarde, and runneth downe 
south, through or thwart Watheling street, to Knightriders 
street aforesaide, where it endeth. This ]3redstreet is wholy 
on both sides of this warde. Out of the which street on the 
East side is ]3asing lane, a peece whereof, to wit, to and ouer 
against the backe gate of the Red Lion in Watheling streete, 
is of this Bredstreete ward. 
Then is Fryday streete beginning also in west Cheape, and 
runneth downe South through çVatheling street to Knight- 
rider streete, or olde Fishstreet. This Friday streete is of 



t?redslreele wrr rare 345 
Bredstreet ward, on the east side from ouer against the 
northeast corner of S. 3Iathewes church, and on the west 
side from the south corner of the said church, down as 
aforesaid. ] 
In this Fryday streete on the west side thereof is a Lane, 
commonly called Mayden Lane, or Distaffe Lane, corruptly 
for Distar lane, which runneth west into the old Exchange: 
and in this lane is also one other lane, on the south side 
thereof, likewise called Distar lane, which runneth downe to 
Knightriders street, or olde Fishstreete : and so be the boundes 
of this whole ward. 
Monumentes to be noted here, first at Breadstreet corner 
the'north East end, 595- of Thomas 7"omlinsou causing in the 
high streete of Cheape a Vaulte to be digged, and made, there 
was found at fifteene foote deepe, a fayre pauement like vnto 
that aboue ground, and at the further end at the chanell, was 
founde a tree saved into fiue steppes, vhich was to steppe 
ouer some brooke running out ofthe west towardes Walbrooke, 
and vpon the edge of the saide Brooke, as it seemeth, there 
were round lying along the bodies of two great trees, the endes 
whereof were then sawed off, and firme tituber as at the first 
when they fell, parte of the sayde trees remayne yet in the 
ground vndigged. It was ail forced ground, vntill they went 
past the trees afore sayde, which was about seuenteene foote 
deepe or better, thus much hath the grounde of this Cittie in 
that place beene raysed from the mayne. 
Next to be noted, the most beautiful ri'ame of fayre houses 
and shoppes, that bee within the Walles ofLondon,or else where 
in ]']ngland, commonly called Goldsmithes Rowe, betwixt 
Bredstreet end & the Crosse in Cheape, but is within this 
Bredstreete warde, the same was builded by Thomas IVood 
Goldsmith, one of the shiriffes of London, in the yeare x49x- 
It contayneth in number tenne fayre dwelling houses, and 
foureteene shoppes, all in one frame, vniforlnely builded foure 
stories high, bewtified towardes the streete with the Gold- 
smithes armes and the likenes of woodmen, in memory of his 
naine, riding on monstrous beasts, ail which is cast in lead, 
richly painted ouer and gilt, these he gaue to the Goldsmithes 
with stockes of money to be lent to yong men, hauing those 

A fayre paued 
vay round, 
 5 foote deepe 
in Cheape 
strcete. 

Goldsmithes 
row in Chepe. 



Watheling 
streete. 

K,fightriders 
streete. 

Fishmarket 
called old Fish 
streete. 

Bred streete. 

Parish church 
of Alhallowes 
Bredstreete. 

346 Bredslr«ete warde 
shops, &c. This saide Front was againe new painted and 
guilt ouer, in the yeare 594- Sir Richard J'[artiu being then 
Mayor, and keeping his Mayoralty in one of them, seruing out 
the time of Cutbert t?ucklc from the second of July, till the 
zS. of October. J 
Then for Wathelin[ streete, which £ed,land calleth Atheling 
or Noble strecte: but since he sheweth no reason why, 
I rather take it to be so namcd of the great high way of the 
saine calling. True it is, that at this present, the inhabitants 
thercof are wealthy Drapers, retailors of woollen cloathes 
both broad and narrow, of all sorts, more then in any one 
streete of this citie. 
Of the old Exchaunge, I haue noted in Faringdon Warde : 
wherefore I passe downe to Knightrider street, whereof I 
haue also spoken in Cordwainer streete Warde, but in this 
part of the said Knightriders streete îs a fishmarket kept, and 
therefore called old Fishstrect, for a difference from new 
Fishst,eete. 
In this old Fishstreete, is ont roxv of small houscs, placed 
along in the ,niddest of Knightriders streete, which rowe is also 
of Bredstrcete Wardc: these houses now posscsscd by Fish- 
mongers, xvere at the first but moueablc boordes (or stalles) 
set out on market daies, to shew their fish there to be sold : 
but procuring license to set up sheds, they grew to shops, and 
by little and little, to tall bouses, of thrce or foure stories in 
height, and nov are called Fishstrcetc. IV airer Tttrke Fish- 
nonger, Mayor 349- had txvo shops in old Fishstreete, ouer 
against saint Nicholas church, the one rented v.s. the yeere, 
the other iiii. s. 
13redstreete, so called of bread sold there (as I said) is now 
wholy inhabited by rich Marchants, and diuers faire Innes 
bee there, for good receipt of Carriers, and other trauellers to 
the city. 
On the East side of this streete, at the corner of Watheling 
streete, is the proper church of Alhallowes in 13redstreete, 
wherein are the Monuments of Ia.mes Thame Goldsmith, Iohn 
llZalole Goldsmith, 1349. Thomas 13camouut Alderman, one 
of the Shiriffes,  44OE. Robert ]3assct, Salter, lIayor 1476. Sir 
Richard C/«au,3, , Salter, Mayor a5o 9. Sir Tlwmas Pa,;gitar, 



re«reee «de 4  
Salter, Mayor x53o. Heury Siz«Io,, Merchant Taylor, one of 
the Shiriffes i54i. Richard Rcadc Alderman, that serued and 
was taken prisoner in Scotland, 54oE. Robert Hozsc one of 
the Shiriffes, x589. IVilliam Albato , Richard [a3,, and 
Roger  bdy, gerchant Taylors. 
In the OE3" of Heu 3, the eight, the seuenteenth of August, 
two priests of this church fell at variance, that the one drev 
bloud of thc  othcr, wherefore the saine church was suspended. 
and no seruice sung or sayd therein for the space of one 
month after, the priestes were committed to prison, and the 
fifteenth of October being inioyned penance, went bcfore 
a generall procession, bare headed, bare footed, and bare 
legged, before thc children, with beades and bookes in their 
hands, from Pades through Cheape, Cornehill &c. Iore to 
be noted of this church, which had solnetimc a fa)'rc spircd 
steeple of stone. 
In the yeare x559-the fift of September, about raid day, 
fell a great tempest of lightning, with a terrible clap of thunder, 
which strokc the sayd spire about nine or ten foote bcncath 
the top : out of the which placc fcll a stone that slew a dog, 
and ouerthrev a man that was playing with thc dogge. The 
saine spire being but littlc damnified thereby, was shortly after 
taken downc, for sparing the charges of reparation. On 
the saine side is Salters Hall, with sixe aimes houses in 
number, builded for poore decayed brethren of that com- 
pany: This Hall was burned in thc yearc 539. and againe 
reedified. 
Lover downe on thc saine side, is the parih church of Saint 
«Uildred the Virgine. The monuments in this church be of 
the Lord Trezckaeazt, of Saint Albus, knight, who was supposed 
to be either the new builder of this church, or best benefactor to 
the works thereof, about the yeare  3oo. and odde ;  Cortish, 
gentleman, x3x2. lVilliam Palmer, Blader, a great benefactor 
also, 356. Iohn Shadoorthlayor 4o. who gaue the 
parsonage bouse, a reuestry, and Churchyard to that parish, in 
the yeare x428. Notwithstanding, his monument is pulled 
downe. Stepltct Betgge Gent. his Armes be three water bugges, 
49. Hczzry Bzzggc founded a chauntrie therc, a49- N««r 
 odde ;] certaine, 633 

Church sus- 
pended. 

SpircofAlhal- 
lowes steeplc 
srnitten 
by tempest. 

Salters llall. 

l'arih church 
of S. l[ildred 
in ]3redstreet. 



Parson of S. 
Mildred and 
his man 
burned. 

Page 3.1o 

Basing lane 
called the 
bakehouse. 

A pole of 40. 
foote long, & 
15. inches 
about, fabu|ed 
tobe the 
iusting staffe 
of Gerrard a 
Giant. 

348 Breds/ree[e warde 
Fora¥ Vintoner, 144o. Thomas Bm'uwcll Fishmonger, one of 
the shiriffes, 434- Sir l"oku lZawl«t CIarke, Parson of that 
Church, who built the parsonage house newly, after the saine 
had beene burucd to the ground, together with the parson and 
his man also, burned in that tire, I485. Iohu Partell Sto. 
lVillia»z Hurstwaight Pewterer to the King, x56. Christopher 
Tur;tcr Chirurgian to King lZcnry the eight, x53o: Raplt 
Simouds Fishmonger, one of the Shiriffes, in the yeare 5OE7. 
Thomas[Laugham gauc to the poore of that parish foure 
tenements,  575. Thomas Hall Salter, 58OE. Thomas Collins 
Salter, Alderman. Sir .dmbrose Nicholas Salter, Mayor x575, 
was buried in sir Iohu Shadworlhs vault. 
Out of this Bredstrcet on the same side, is Basing lane, a part 
whereof (as is afore shewed) is of this Warde, but how it tooke 
the name of Basing I haue hot red. In the twenteeth yeare of 
Richard the second,the samewas called the Bakehouse: whether 
ment for the Kings bakehouse, or of bakers dwelling there, and 
baking bread to serue the market in Bredstreete, where 
the bread was sold, I know hot: but sure I am, I haue not 
red of ]3asing, or of Gcrrard« the Gyant, to haue any thing 
there to doe. 
On the South side of this Lane, is cne great house, of old 
rime buildcd vpon Arched Vaultes, and with Arched Gates of 
stone, brought from Cane in Normandy. The same is now 
a common C)strey for receipt of trauellers, comnaonly and cor- 
ruptly called Gerrardes hall, of a Gyant sayd to haue dwelled 
there. In the high rooffed Hall of this bouse, sometime stoode 
a largc Firre Pole, which reached to the roofe thereof, and was 
sayd to bee one of the staues that Gcrrardc the Gyant vsed 
in the warres to rumae withall. There stoode also a ladder of 
the saine length, which (as they say) serued to ascend to the 
toppe of the Staffe. Of later yeares this Hall is altered in 
building, & diuers roomes are ruade in it. Notwithstanding 
the Pole is remooued to one corner of the Hall, and the ladder 
hanged broken, vpon a wall in the yarde. The Hostelar of 
that bouse sayde to me, the Pole lacked halfe a foote of fortie 
in length: I measured the compasse thereof and found it 
fifteene inches. Reason of the Pole, could the toaster of the 
Hostrcy giue me none, but bade me reade the great Chronicles, 



for there he heard of it: Which aunswere seemed to me 
insuflîcient, for he meant the description of ]3ritaine, for the 
most part drawne out of Io]m Leyland his Cmentaries, 
(borrowed of myselfe)and placed belote 2eyn IVolfes Chronicle, 
as the |abours of another (who was foced to confesse he neuer 
trauelled further, then from London to the Vniuersity of 
Oxford) he writing a chapter of giants or monstrous men, hath 
set down more I matter then troth, s partIy against my will, [atj.f 
I am enforced here to touch. R. G'. in his briefe collection of 
Histories (as he tearmeth it) bath these words. ' I the writer 
hereof, did see the IO. day of Match, in the yeare of out Lord R. G. saw a 
1.564. & had the saine in my hand, the tooth of a man, which stone & said 
the saine to be 
weighed ten ounces of Troy weight : and the scull of the saine a tooth, but be- 
ing by my self 
man is extant & to be seene, which will hold fiuc pecks of proued a stone 
wheat: and the shin bone of the saine man is 6. foote in there fayled 
both scull and 
length and of a mcruelous greatnes.' Thus farre _. G. The shank bone, & 
errour thereof is thus, he affirmeth a stone to be the tooth otr clusterf°ll°Wedofalies 
a man, which stone (so proued) hauing no shape of a tooth, together yet 
since increased 
had neither scull or shin bone. Notwithstanding, it is added, y another. 
in the sayd description, that by coniecturall simetery of those Gerrards hall 
restored to his 
parts, the body to be OE8. foote long or more. From this he ola naine. 
goeth to another like matter, of a man with a mouth sixteene 
foote wide, and so to Gerrard the Gyant, & his staffe. But to 
leaue these fables, & returne where I left, I will note what my 
selle hath obserued concerning that house. 
I reade, that hn Gisors Mayor of London, in the yeare 
IOE45. was owner thereof, and that Sir ohn Gisors knight, 
Mayor of London, and Constable of the Tower, x3xI. and 
diuers others of that naine and family since that rime owed it. 
lVilliam Gisors was one of the Shiriffes, 13z 9. More, Iohn 
Gisors had issue, [/'em 3, and Ioht: which Iohn had issue, 
Thomas. Which Thomas deceasing in the yeare 35o. left 
vnto his sonne Thomas, his messuage called Gysors Hall, in Gerrards IIall 
ouerthrowne 
the parish of S. [ildred in Bredstl'eet : Iohn Gisors made a with Gerrard 
Feoffment thereof 1386. &c. So it appeareth that this Gisors the Giant, and 
Hall, of late rime by corruption bath bin called Gerrards hall, hisgreatspear. 
for Gisors hall: as Bosomes Inne, for Blossoms Inne, Beuis 
marks, for Buries markes, Marke Lane, for Marte lane : belliter 
lane, for belsetters lane: gutter lane, for guthuruns lane: Cry 



uezy mans 
house of old 
lime was 
decked with 
holly and iuy 
in the xvinter, 
cspecially at 
Christmas. 

Compter in 
Bredstreet. 
Prisoners re- 
moved from the 
Compter in 
Bredstreet to a 
new Compter 
in woodstreet. 

Keeper of the 
compter sent 
to l/ewgate. 

Quest of in- 
quiry indight 
the keepers of 
the gayles for 
dealing hardly 
with their pri- 
sorlers. 
They indight- 
ed the bowl- 
ing alleys, &c. 

350 Ag'ed«/ree/e o«rdc 
church for Christs church : S. [i/lcl ii the quern, for S. ]icl 
at corne, and sundry such others. Out of this Gisors hall, at 
the first building thereof, were ruade diuers arched doors, yet 
to be seene, which seeme not sufficient for any great monster, 
or other then men of common stature to passe through, the 
pole in the hall might be vscd of old rime (as then the 
custome was in euery parish)to be set vp in the Summer as 
May-Pole, belote the principall house in the Parrish or Streete, [ 
and to stand in the hall before the scrine, decked with holme 
& Iuy, all the feast of Christmas. The ladder serued for the 
decking of the may-pole, and roofe of the hall. Thus much 
for Gisors hall, & for that side of Bredstreet, may suffice.- 
Now on thc west side of Bredstreet, amongst diuers faire & 
large howses for Merchants, and fayre Innes for passengers, 
had ye one prison house pertayning to the Shiriffes of London, 
called the compter in Bredstreet : but in the yeare 555. the 
prisoners were remoued ri'oto thence, to one other new compter 
in Woodstreet, prouided by the Cities purchase, and builded 
for that purpose: the cause of which remoue was this. Ri. 
Husand Pastelar, keeper of this Compter in Bredstreet, being 
a wilfull and headstrong man, dealt for his owne aduantage, 
hard xvith the prisoners vnder his charge, hauing also seruants 
such as himselfe liked best for their bad vsage, and would not 
for any complaint be reformed : wherevpon in the yeare 55 o. 
Sir Rowla»d Hill being Mayor, by the assent of a court of 
Aldermen he was sent to the gayle of Newgate, for the cruell 
handling of his prisoners: & it was commaunded to the 
keeper to set those Irons on his legges, which are called the 
widdowes almes: These he ware from thursday, till Sunday 
in the aernoone, and being by a court of Aldermen released, 
on the tuesday, was bound in an hundred markes, to obserue 
from thenceforth an act ruade by the common counsell, for 
the ordering of prisoners in the Compters : all which notwith- 
standing, he continued as afore: whereof my selle ara partly 
a witnesse : for being of a Iury to enquire against a Sessions 
of Galle deliuery, in the yeare I55OE, we round the prisoners 
hardly dealt withall, for their achates and otherwise, as also 
that theeues and strumpets were there lodged for foure pence 
the night, whereby they might be sale from searches that were 



made abroad : fol" the which enormities, and other not needfull 
tobe rccited, he was indighted at that Session, but did tub 
it out, and could hot be reformed, til this remoue of ye 
prisoners, for the house in Bredstreet was his own by lease, 
or otherwise, so that he could not be put from it. Note 
that Gaylors buying their offices will deale hardly with pitifull 
prisoners. 
Now in Fryday streete, so called of fishmongcrs dwelling 
there, and seruing Frydaycs market, on the East side, is a 
small Parish I church, commonly called S. L Euan.gdisl. The 
monuments therein, be of çoh« f)o.ggel, Merchant Taylor, one 
of the Shiriffes in the yeare I5o 9. Sir Cbrislolhcr Askew, 
Draper, Major 533. lk'il, de Auingcr, Farrier, was buried 
therc in the 34- of '«L the 3- Thon lower downe, is one 
other parish church of S..[a,arcl 3[oyscs. so called (as 
seemeth) of one l[oyses, that was founder or new builder 
thel'eof. The monuments there, be of sir Ri. Dobbcs, Skinner, 
Mayor 1.551. ll'il. Da,w Ironmonger, one of the Shiriffes, 
1569 . Sir Iobn Allo! Fishmonger, Mayor, 1591. There was 
of older time buried, Nicholas Stazws. and Aricholas Braye: 
they founded chauntries there. 
On the west side of this Fryday street, is Mayden lane, so 
named of such a signe, or Distaffe lane, for Distar lane. as 
I reade in record of a brewhouse, called the Lamb in Distar 
lane, the sixteenth of/f. the sixt. In this Distar lane, on the 
north side thereof, is the Cordwayners, or Shoomakers hall, 
which company were ruade a brotherhood or fraternity, in the 
eleuenth of lgcnry the fourth. Of these Cordwayners, I readc, 
that since the fift of Richard the 2. (when he tooke to wife 
Azme daughter to l'esalans i King of Bohcm) by her example 
the English people had vsed piked shooes, tied to their knees 
with silken laces, or chaynes of siluer and gilt, wherefol'e in 
the fourth of 'd. the 4. it was ordayned and proclaimed, that 
beakes of shoone" and bootes should hOt passe the length of two 
inches, vpon paine of cursing by the Cleargie, and by Parlia- 
ment to pay xx. s. for euery payrc. And euery Cordwayner 
that shod any man or woman on the Sunday, to pay xxx. s. 
 lésalans] }Fénceslaus z633 ; for daughter read sister 
= thin z6o3, corrected in ' Faultes escaped' ; shin z633 

Friday streete. 

Page 353 
Parish church 
of S. lohn 
Euangelist. 
Sometime of 
Werbridge. 
Parish church 
of . Margaret 
Movses. 

Mayden lane 
or Distar lane. 

Cordwainer 
Hall. 

Longpiked 
shooes tied to 
the knees. 

Piked shooes 
forbidden. 



35 'rcds/reete wm.'de 

On the south side of ths Distar lane, is also one other lane, 
called Distar lane: which runneth downe to Knightriders 
streete, or old Fishstreet, and this is the end of ]3redstreet 
Warde: which hath an Alderman his Deputy, Common 
counsell IO. Constables io. Scauengers 8. Wardmote inquest 
13. and a Bedle. It standeth taxed to the fifteene in London, 
at 37. ll. and in the Exchequer af 36. ll. 8. s. OE. d. 

END OF VOLUME 1 

Oxford : Printed at the Clarendon Press by HORACE l'{ART, M.A.
