S SS SS EE ES EE EE EE EE SE EE EE EE EE EE EE ES EE E383 SEA SEA ES +4 +4 +34 


I ETFETETTE TT 


by 


Kerr, 


tt 
of Chatto. 


ulliam Sco 


— 


* 
= 
ow * : 
- 
* 
* 3 
. 
% * 1 
whe, 
— 
* 
. ” 
a 
- - N * 1 
* 
5 4 TW © r 
* 75 A ” 
_ 5, — . 


TiC U __ RIA MI ITT YT YYSUOPYY YT IR I TI WIR www LL r Gr wr Lew) 


S SS SS EE ES EE EE EE EE SE EE EE EE EE EE EE ES EE E383 SEA SEA ES +4 +4 +34 


I ETFETETTE TT 


by 


Kerr, 


tt 
of Chatto. 


ulliam Sco 


— 


* 
= 
ow * : 
- 
* 
* 3 
. 
% * 1 
whe, 
— 
* 
. ” 
a 
- - N * 1 
* 
5 4 TW © r 
* 75 A ” 
_ 5, — . 


TiC U __ RIA MI ITT YT YYSUOPYY YT IR I TI WIR www LL r Gr wr Lew) 


— DEP Inn -_—_ _— _ - 


1 
* 


7 * 
* 


2 . 
* 
* — = * 
bs — pn—n——_——_ no — — — ith. — aL enn——one— — — TO 1 
— — — — 
= * — — — 
8. SED * - - = 8 * — 5 
> T — * —— . <= 20 — — — — — , 4 * 
2 * 
- * _ 


_——— — — 


AN 


E SS & Y 


UNIVERSAL HISTORY, 


Pt 


AN 


ES SY =. 


ON — 


UNIVERSAL HISTORY, 
THE 
MANNERS, AND SPIRIT 


OF 


N ATI 


From the Reign of CHARLEMAIGN 
To the Age of LEWIS XIV. 


Written in French by M. de VoLTairs. 


Tranſlated into Engliſh, 
IWith additional Notes and Chronological Tables, 


By Mr. NUGENT. 


The SS coNDO EDITION, reviſed, and conſiderably 
improved by the AUTHOR, 


YVAKk 1: 


LOND ON, 


Printed for J. NouksE at the Lamb oppoſite Katherine» 
Street in the Strand, MDCCLIX, 


THE 


| TRANSLATOR) 
IPREFACE. 


HE. reader will eaſily perceive that 

the following work is not a chro- 

nological compilement, or a dry 
ſeries of genealogies and facts; the public 
is overſtocked with pieces of that ſort: it 
is the picture of mankind in different ages; 
or a philoſophical hiſtory of the world, Here 
the ſagacious author may be ſaid to erect 
his ſupreme tribunal, to fit as judge of all 
that has been tranſacted for a number of 
centuries in the various parts of this globe, 
to pronounce the deſtiny of the great, to 
fix their character with poſterity, to give 
leſſons to all nations, and to dire& the con- 
duct of future ages. If on ſome occa- 
ſions he may appear to judge ſeverely, it 
is only in regard to thoſe whoſe memory has 
been ever branded with infamy: for he 
is as ready to do juſtice to merit, and to 
beſtow eternity * upon virtuous actions. 


* Pulchrum imprimis widetur, non pati -octid re, 
quibus æternitas debtatur. Plin. ep. 


A3 In 


PREFACE. 


In ſhort truth is his aim; and whatever 


face ſhe wears, he is ſure to deſcribe her in 
her real colours. £50 


If we conſider his ſtyle and manner, we 
may venture to affirm that he has hardly 


his equal among the numerous liſt of mo- 
dern hiſtorians. His brevity, to which his 


plan confined him, is extremely pleaſing; 
as he takes care to embelliſh it with a thou- 
ſand graces. He has a noble elegance, un- 
known to vulgar writers; and though bold 
in the uſe of his figures, yet he is remark- 
ably perſpicuous. In the midſt of his 
proſe he throws out ſome ſparks of his poetic 
fire; but he has a ſpirit and ſtrength of 
ſentiment, that ſupport his flights. Where 
it is proper, he has ſublimity; and where 
the ſubject will bear it, wit: but in the one 
there is not the leaſt appearance of bombaſt ; 
nor in the other, of force or conſtraint. 
There is a nervouſneſs and yet a fluency in 
his periods, with an exquiſite delicacy in his 
remarks; the juſtnefs of which will con- 
tribute to fix many things in the memory, 
that would have — it under a leſs 
ſprightly narrative. pon the whole, his 
manner is fo intereſting, that it animates 
while it delights the reader. ; 
In regard to the preſent tranſlation, I 
ſhall obſerve that it was made intirely 
from the Geneva edition under the author's 


inſpec- 


PREFACE. 
inſpection, wherein very conſiderable addi- 


tions and corrections were inſerted, which 


are not to be found in the firſt edition print- 
ed in Holland. 

Some errors having been committed by. 
Mr, Voltaire, in the Engliſh hiſtory, par- 
ticularly as to the names of places, families, 
and the like, in which a foreigner may be 
eaſily miſtaken; care has been taken to 
rectify chem in the tranſlation. | 

In the courſe of the work ſeveral terms are 
made uſe of, which may not perhaps be ſo 


obvious to the generality of readers: theſe 


] have been deſired by a friend to explain, 
for the uſe at leaſt of the fair ſex ; and to 
add a few notes towards illuſtrating ſome 
_ of hiſtory and mythology, which 

ave been only glanced at in the original. 
This I have done but very fparingly, for 
fear of ſwelling the work. | 

In the age of Lewis the fourteenth, there 
is a liſt of cotemporary princes z which has 
been looked upon as uſeful. I have fol- 
lowed this example in the preſent tranſla- 
tion, by adding Chronological tables of the 
ſeveral princes, who reigned within the 
period contained in each volume. 

The uſe of Indexes being acknowledged 
on all hands to be very great, a.copious 
one has been therefore added : which, toge- 
ther with correcting and enlarging the mar- 


ginal 


viii 


PREFACE. 


ginal dates, will fully ſhew that no pains. | 


have been ſpared to render this work agree · 
able to the. Engliſh reader. 


If any thing remains further to be added, 


it is to beg indulgence for my own miſtakes, 


1 am ſenſible of the difficulty and almoſt 


impoſſibility of doing juſtice to ſo elegant, 


and indeed ſo ingenious an hiſtorian: but 


they who are the beſt judges of this difficul- 
ty, will be the readieſt to excuſe me. 


- | CONTENTS. 


S* 

] r 
5 (, Omtaining the plan of the work, with a brief 
8. account of what the weſtern nations were ori- 
ſt ginally, and the reaſons why we began this Eſſay 
6: with the Eaſt. Page 1 
] Chap. 

E I. l Of China, its antiquity, force and 


laws. 10 
II. Of the religion of China. — That the 

government is not atheiſtical ; that 

Chriſtianity was not preached there 

in the ſeventh century. Of ſome 


ſects eflabliſhed in the country. 22 
III. 2 India. 30 
IV. Perſia, Arabia, and Mahomet. 36 


V. Of the ſtate of Italy, and the church 


before Charlemaign. »+ - 717740 
VI, Origin of the papal power. oY 
VII. State of the Eaſtern church before © 
Charlemaign. +: . 
VIII. Of Charlemaign. 87 
IX. e emperor Charlemaign. 94 
X, Manners and cuſtoms about the time of 
Charlemaign. 102 
Xl. Laws and cuſtoms at the time of Char- 
lemaign. | 106 


XII. Of religion at the time of Charlemaign, 114 
XIII. A continuation of the cuftoms in the time 
of Charlemaign. Of juſtice, laws, 

5 and ſingular uſages. 5 
' XIV. Lewis the Weak or the Debonnair. 136 
| XV. State Europe after the deathof Lewis 
1 the Debennair, or the Weak. 145 


CONTENTS. 


Page 


XVI. Of the Normans towards the ninth 
century. 153 


XVII. Of England towards the ninth century. 160 
XVIII. Of Spain and the Muſſulmen in the 


eighth and ninth centuries. 164 
XIX. Of the empire of Conſtantinople in the 
eighth and ninth centuries. 173 


. Of Italy and the popes with the druorce 
of Latharius king of Lorain, and 
the reſt of the affairs of the church 
| in the eighth and ninth centuries. 180 
XXI. Of Photius, and the ſchiſm between 
the eaſtern and weſtern churches. 186 
XXII. The fate of the weſtern empire to- 
dur the end f the ninth century. 193 
XXIII. Of feudal tenurts, and the empire. 196 
XXIV. Of Ochothe Great inthe tenth century. 199 
Of the * in the tenth century, 
before Otho the Great made himſelf 
maſter of Rome. 202 
XXVI. The reign of the emperor Otho, and 
7227 the flate of Italy continued. 207 
XXVII. Of the emperors Otho II. and III. 
and of Rome. 212 
XXVIII. Of France towards the time of Hugh 
Capei. oo 2T7 
XXIX. The tate of France in the tenth and 
_* eleventh centuries. \ My 
XXX. The conqueſt of Naples and Sicily by 
. ſome gentlemen of Normandy, 8 7 
ap. 


Chap. | Page 
XXXI. Of Sicih in particular and the © 
Legatine power in that iſland. 238 


XXXII. The conqueſt of England by Wil- 


lam duke of Normandy. 243 
XXXIII. The flate of Europe in the tenth 
and eleventh centuries. 249 


XXXIV. Of Spain and the Mahometans of 
that kingdom, to the beginning of 

the twelfth century. 254 

XXXV. Of religion, and ſuperſtitiam in th _ 
tenth and eleventh centuries. 262 


XXXVI. Of the Empire, Italy, the emperor 
Harp . "and Gregory VII. 


oc Rome and the empire in the 
eleventh century. © 270 
XXXVII. Of the or Henry V. and « | 
1 reign of Frederick 4 288 
XXXVIII. Of Frederick Barbareſſa. 293 
XXXIX. Of the emperor Henry VI. and of 
Rome. 301 


XL. The flate of France. and England, 
till the reigns of St. Lewis, and 

75 ohn Lackland, and Henry 

III. during the twelfth century. 

Great change in 'the public 
adminiſtration in England and 

France, Murder of Thomas 

Becket, archbiſbop of Canter- 

England becomes a pro» _ 


Chap. 


CONTENTS. 
Chap. 
XLII. O Otho IV. and Philip Auguſtus 
En the thirteenth century. 
. Of the battle of Bouvines, of Eng- 


land and France, to the death 
1 of Lewis VIII. father of St. 


Page 


A eWIS. | 320 
XLII. Of Frederick II. and his quarrels 
with the popes; and of the Ger- 

; man empire. | 328 
XLIII. OftheEgftatthetimeofthecruſades. 344 


XLIV. Of 22 cruſade to the taking 


| . eruſalem. | VEL 
- XLV. Cruſades after the taking of Je- 
d ruſalem. 350 


 XLVI. Of St. Lewis and the laſt cruſade, 38 5 


XLVII. Continuation of the taking of Con- 
Aantinople by the cruſaders. 397 


ERRATA. 

Page 1. line g. from the bottom, for he read we. P. 
15. I. 12. from the bottom, dele into. P. 36. J. 7. 
from the bottom, dele when. P. 57. 1. 3. from the 
bottom, for Ng read Yνοe P. 77. l. 4. from 
the bottom, for Pepin's read Pepin. P. go. 1. 16. 
after Ereſburg read in. P. 212. 1. 2. from the bot- 
tem, for VI. read VII. P. 260. I. 4. before Cid 
read the. P. 301. l. 10. from the bottom, for car- 
Anal read cardinals, P. 190. for in read at, P. 
384. 1. 8. from the bottom, after Jews read that 
were left in Feruſalem. ** 


AN 


E 8 8 A Y 


0 N* 


$5 Univerſal Hiſtory, 


T | 'The Manxzns and SPIRIT of. 


[NATION'S 


"INTRODUCTION. 
Containing the plan of the work, with g. brief 
account of what the weſtern nations were 


originally, and the reaſous why he began 
this Eſſay with the Eaſt. 


T 7 þ lengthy you are deſirous to overcome 
the diſlike you had conceived to-modern 
' hiſtory, ſince the decline of the Roman 


empire, and to take a general view of the nations 
vhich inhabit and lay waſte the earth. In this 


immenſe proſpect you ſeek only what is worth 
your notice, namely, the ſpirit, the manners 
Vol. I, B and 


Introduction. 


and cuſtoms of the moſt conſiderable nations, 
ſupported by ſuch facts, as it would be a re- 
proach to you not to know. The end of this 
inquiry is not to learn in what year a prince un- 
worthy of being known, ſucceeded to a barbar- 
ous ſovereign in an uncivilized nation. Could 
you be ſo unfortunate as to get by heart the 
chronological ſucceſſion of all the Dynaſties, the 
whole would be a bare knowledge of words. 
The more you ought to be acquainted with the 
great"exploits of ſovereigns, who have improved 
the manners and contributed to the happineſs of 
their people, the leſs you need defire to know 
of the vulgar race of kings, who'would be on- 
ly a burden to the memory, Of what uſe 
would it be, to be acquainted with the particu- 
lars of ſo many petty intereſts which no longer 
ſubſiſt, and of ſuch a number of extin& families, 
that contended for provinces, that were afterwards 
ſwallowed up in great kingdoms. Almoſt every 
City at preſent has its hiſtory, true or falſe, more 
ample, and more minute than that of Alexan- 
der. 'The bare annals of a monaſtic order, 
contain more volumes than thoſe of the Roman 


hiftory. 


In this immenſe collection, all which it is im- 
poſſibje to embrace, you muſt confine your read- 
ing, and make ſome choice. It is like a great 


magazine, out of which you may take what will 
ſerve your purpoſe. : 


The celebrated Boſſuet, who in his diſcourſe 


on one part of the univerſal hiſtory, has entered 


into the true ſpirit of it, went no lower than 


Charlemaign. Your intent is to begin at this 
'#ra, and thence to form a general idea of the 


SITS, univerle : 


- a MAS Oar Aw. ond. 


Introduction. 


univerſe: but you will be often obliged to go 
back to remoter times. This great writer 
takes but a ſlight notice of the Arabians who 
founded ſo potent an empire and ſo flouriſhing 


a religion ; he makes mention of them as a ſwarm 


of barbarians. He expatiates on the Egyptians 
but he is filent in regard to the Indians and the 
Chineſe, nations as antient at leaſt, and as con- 
ſiderable as the people of Egypt. 

Nouriſhed with the produce of their lands, 
clothed with their ſilks, amuſed by the games 
which they invented, and even inſtructed by 
their moral fables, why ſhould we neglect to be 
acquainted with the ſpirit of thoſe nations, to 
whoſe coaſts our European merchants did not 
fail to ſteer, as ſoon as the way was laid open ? 

When you conſider this globe as a philoſopher, 
you firſt direct your attention to the eaſt, the 
nurſery of all arts, and from whence they have 
been communicated to the weſt, 

The orienta] climates towards the ſouth have 
every thing from nature; and we in the ſouth weſt, 
are indebted for all things to time, to commerce, 
and to tardy induſtry, Foreſts, ſtones, and wild 
fruits, are the whole natural product of the antient 
countries of the Celtes *, the Allobroges +, the 

Picts 


* The Celtz or Celtes were the antient inhabitants of Gaul; 
the name is of uncertain origin, ſome deriving it from Celtes, 
who is. ſaid to have been the ninth king of the antient Gauls, 
and others from the Greek word xtAsTa; or ihren, lignifying 
horſemen in Homer and Pindar, 


+ The Allobroges were the antient inhabitants of Dauphine, 
Savoy and Piedmont, Some derive the name from d) eg other, 
and Broga, a land or country in the antient Callic language, 
fignifying that they were à people who came from ſome other 

B 2 province, 


| 


| 
| 


part of Muſcovy, 


Introduction. 
Picts r, the Germans, the Sarmatians ||, and the 
Scythians. The iſland of Sicily is ſaid to pro- 
duce of itſelf a little oats; but wheat, rice, and 
delicious fruits grow no where naturally except 
towards the Euphrates, in China, and in India. 
Fruitful countries were peopled the firſt, and the 


friſt civilized. The whole Levant from Greece 


to the — of our hemiſphere, was long 
celebrated in hiſtory, before we knew enough to 
convince us that we were barbarians. If we 
want to be informed in regard to our anceſtors 
the Celtes, we miuſt have recourſe to the Greeks 
and the Romans, nations of a much later date 
than the Aſiatics. 

That the Gauls, for inſtance, in the neigh- 
bourhood of the Alps, joined the inhabitants 
of thoſe mountains, and made ſettlements on 
the banks of the Eridanus, that they march- 


ed to Rome 361 years after its foundation, and 


laid ſiege to the capital; all this we learn of the 


Romans. That another body of Gauls, about a 
hundred years after, penetrated into Theſſaly 
and Macedonia, and even advanced to the banks 
of the Euxine ſea, we are informed by the 


Greeks, without mentioning what Gauls theſe 


were, or what road they took. We have no 
monument extant of thoſe emigrations, which 


province. They were ſubdued by the conſul Fabius Maximus, 
who'took the name of Allobrogicus. | 
1 The Pidt were a people, who are ſaid to have come from 
Scythia; and to have ſettled between England and Scotland, Some 
authors ſay they came from Denmark, and that their name is 
derived from painting their bodies. 1 | 
Ihe Sarmatians were the antient inhabitants of that vaſt 
northern country; part of which lieth in Aſia, called Tartary ; 
the other in Europe, containing Poland, Pruſſia, Lithuania, and 


S. 


reſemble 


= \ . ir. r 
n 8 * Py wo” 8 e . 
4 WF, Fg OG *» ns "= a7 

Sap SELF nt s ab 1 


Introduction. 


reſemble thoſe of the Tartars. They prove on- 
ly that the nation was very numerous, but not 
civilized. The colony of Greeks, who found- 
ed Marſeilles ſix — years before our vul- 
gar æra, could not poliſh Gaul; for the Greek 
tongue did not reach beyond the territory 
that city. | | 
We modern Gauls, Germans, Spaniards, 
Britons, and Sarmatians, know nothing of 
our hiſtory, above eighteen centuries ago, ex- 
cept what little we have learnt of our con- 
querors. We have not even fabulous accounts; 
we have not ventured even to feign an original. 
The idle notion that all this weſtern world 
was peopled by Gomer ſon of Japhet, is an 
oriental tale. 


If che antient Tuſcans, who inſtrudtad the. 


old Romans, knew ſomething more than the 
other weſtern nations, it is- becauſe the Greeks 
had planted colonies among them; or rather it is 
becauſe in all ages it was one of the properties 
of that ſoil to produce men of genius, as the 
territory of Athens was more favourable to the 
arts than that of Thebes or Lacedemon. But 
what monuments have we of antient Tuſcany? 
none at all. We loſe qur time in idle conjec- 
tures about ſome unintelligible inſcriptions, which 
have eſcaped the injuries of time. In regard 
to the other European nations, there is not ſo 
much as one inſcription left in their antient lan- 
guage. | 
The maritime part of Spain was diſcovered 
by the Phenicians, juſt as America has been 
ſince diſcovered by the Spaniards. The Syrians, 
the Carthaginians, NY were ſueceſſive- 


3 ly 


Ly 


Introduction. 


ly enriched by the ſubterraneous treaſures which 


they found in that country. The Carthaginians 


worked ſeveral mines as rich as thoſe of Peru 


and Mexico; time has ſince exhauſted them, as 
it will exhauſt thoſe of the new world. Pliny 
relates that the Romans in the ſpace of nine 
years, drew from thence eight thouſand marks 
of gold, and about four and twenty thouſand of 
ſilver. We muſt confeſs that thoſe pretended de- 


ſcendants of Gomer, had made a very indifferent 


uſe of the preſents of all ſorts which the earth 


poured into their hands, ſince they were ſucceſ- 
28 ſubdued by the Carthaginians, the Romans, 


the Vandals, the Goths, and the Arabs. 

What little we know of the Gauls from Juli- 
us Cæſar and other Roman authors, repreſents 
them as a people that ſtood in need of being 


ſubdued by a more civilized nation. The dialects 


of the antient Celtic were frightful. The emperor 
Julian, in whoſe time this language was. ſtill 
| ſpoke, ſays it reſembled the croaking of ravens. 
Their manners in Cæſar's time, were as barba- 
rous as their language. The Druids *, thoſe 


aukward impoſtors, made for the people whom 


they governed, uſed to ſacrifice human victims, 


which they burnt in a huge hollow pile of oſier, 


* The Druids were the prieſts of antient Gaul and Britain, 
who are ſuppoſed to be the ſame as the Eubages of Ammianus 


Marcellinus, or the Saronides of Diodorus Siculus, Their name 


is of uncertain origin, ſome deriving it from the Hebrew word 
Derufim, ſigniſying thoſe wwho ſearch or inquire; and others more 
probably from the Greek word debe, a tree which thoſe prieſts 
held in great veneration. They were choſe out of the beſt fa- 
milies, and were greatly reſpected on account of the honours of 
their birth, as well as of their office, They had the adminiftration 


of all ſacred things, and were the interpreters of religion. They 


preſerved the memory and actions of great men in verſe, 


ſhaped 


F 


Introduction. 


ſhaped like a ſtatue *. The Druideſſes plunged 
a knife into the breaſt of each of their captives, 
and from the flowing of the blood formed their 
predictions f. The great hollow ſtones, that 
have been found on the confines of Germany 
and Gaul, are ſaid to be the altars, on which 
thoſe ſacrifices were offered, Theſe are all the 
monuments of antient Gaul. The inhabit- 
ants of the coaſt of Biſcay and Gaſcony uſed 
ſometimes to feed on human fleſh, We 
ought to turn away our eyes from thoſe ſavage 
times, which are à diſhonour to human na- 
ture. N | 
Among the follies of the human mind, let us 
reckon the notion that has prevailed in our times, 
of deriving the Celtes from the Hebrews. The 
Celtes ſacrificed human victims, it is ſaid, be- 
cauſe Jephtha had offered up his daughter. The 
Druids were cloathed in. white like the Jewiſh 
prieſts; and like theſe alſo they had a high prieſt. 
Their Druideſſes are an imitation of Moſes's 


* Alii immani magnitudine ſimulacra habent, quorum con- 
texta viminibus membra vivis hominibus complent, quibus ſuc- 
cenſis, circumventi flamma exanimantur hoſtes. Cæſ. Com lib. 


de bell. Gal. lib. 6. 


+ This was practiſed among the Cimbri, who indeed were a 
branch of the old Celtes. The Druideſſes, on thoſe occaſions, 
were cloathed with tunics faſtened with hooks, and girt with a braſs 
girdle, and without ſhoes. ' As ſoon as the Cimbrians had taken 
any priſoners, theſe women flew upon them with drawn ſwords . 
in their hands, and threw them down; thence they dragged 
them to a large ciſtern, by the fide of which was a kind of foot- 
ſtool, on which the Druideſs then officiating ſtood, who plunged 
a long knife into the breaſt of each of thoſe wretches. The 
particulars of this bloody ceremony are taken from Strabo Ib. 7. 
Auguſtus Tiberius, and ſucceeding, emperors made ſevere laws 


againſt it, 
WY ” e 


Introduction. 


fiſter and of Debora. The cuſtom + of fatten- 
ing an indigent Maffilian, and leading him to 
his death dreſſed with garlands and loaded with 
the | bittereſt imprecations, owed its original to 
the 2 They go ſo far as to find a re- 
ſembl 

words, which are both pronounced equally bad; 
and thence it is inferred, that the Jews and the 
Celtic nations are of the ſame ſtock. Thus is 
reaſon inſulted in univerſal hiſtories, and what lit- 
tle knowledge we may have of antiquity, is all 


"ſmothered in a maſs of forcgd eonjectures. 


The Germans in their manners reſembled the 
Gauls, for they ſactificed human victims, they 
decided their little - quarrels. by — combat; 
and only were more ſimple and leſs induſtrious. 
Their habitations were huts, where on one ſide 
lay the father, mother, ſiſters, brothers, chil- 
dren, all naked on ſtraw, and on the other were 
their domeſtic animals. And yet theſe are the 
very people, whom we ſhall foon fee ſubdue the 


Omans. 


When Cæſar went over to England, he found 
the inhabitants of this iſland ſtill more ſavage 


than the Germans. Scarce did they cover their 
private parts with the ſkins,of beaſts. The wo- 
men of a particular diftri& were all in common, 


to the men of. the ſame diſtrict. Their dwellings 


were cottages of reeds, and their only ornaments 


were figures which men and women imprinted 


on their bodies by pricking the ſkin, and making 
t This is reported to have been the cuſtom of Marſeilles 


in times of peſtilence, but the poor man muſt have offered 


himſelf voluntarily, and then they fattened him with the dainti- 
eſt fare a whole year, before-he was ſacrificed, See Univ, Hiſt. 
Fo 18. P · 553. | * 


ance between a few Celtic and Hebrew 


«4 4 


Introduction. 


an infuſion of the juice of herbs, as is ſtill prac- 
tiſed by the ſavages of America. 6 8 

That human nature was plunged, for ſuch a 
ſeries of ages, into this condition ſo ſimilar, and 
in many reſpects inferior to that of brutes, is but 
too true The reaſon is, it is not in the nature 
of man to covet what he does not know. The 
human ſpecies requires not only a prodigious 
ſpace of time, but likewiſe a happy concurrence 
of circumſtances, before they can raiſe them- 
ſelves above animal life, | N BE 

You are therefore very much in the right, in 


deſiring to paſs at once to thoſe nations, that 


were firſt civilized, It is poſſible that long be- 
fore the empires of China and the Indies, there 
might have been learned, civilized, and power- 
ful nations, whom a ſwarm of barbarians plunged 
once more into their firſt ſtate of ignorance and 
rudeneſs, which is called a ſtate of pure nature. 
The taking of Conſtantinople alone was ſuf- 
ficient to demoliſh the ſpirit of ancient Greece. 
The genius of the Romans was extinguiſhed by 
the Goths. The coafts of Africa, where here- 
tofore ſtood ſuch flouriſhing cities, are now no 
more than neſts of robbers. Much greater ehan- 
ges muſt have happened in leſs happy elimates. 
atural cauſes muſt have joined the moral ones; 
for though the ocean cannot intirely change its 
bed, yet it is certain that it has alternately do- 
vered, and withdrawn itſelf 'from vaſt tracts of 


number of calamities and” vieitfitttdes:" * 


land. Nature is neceſſarily exposed to a gtest 
6 « . : « ” 14 | re 
mult have been frequeſt rævolutidus; but we 


- 


3 


Wy Beſides, 


know them not; mankind to us are new, W-. 


"SO 


IO Introduction. 


Beſides, you begin your inquiries at the time, 
when our — 2 chaos aſſumes a new form 
after the decline of the Roman empire. Let us 
then ſurvey this globe together. Let us ſee in 
what ſtate it then was, and conſider it in the ſame 
order as it ſeems to have been civilized, that is, 
by proceeding from the eaftern nations to our 
own; and let us give our attention firſt of all 
to a people, who had a connected hiſtory in a 
language already fixed, before we knew how to 
write, - 


Ci AP.'L 
/ China, its antiquity, forces and laws. 


HE empire of China, even in thoſe days, 
was larger than that of Charlemaign, eſpe- 
cially if we include Corea and Tonquin, pro- 
vinces at that time tributary to the Chineſe: it 
extends about 30 degrees in longitude, and 24 in 
latitude. This ſtate has ſubſiſted in ſplendour 
above 4000 years, without having undergone 
any material alteration in its laws, manners, 
ef e or even in the mode and faſhion of 
ar 1 | 22517 
| Its hiſtory, which is inconteſtable, being the 
only . on celeſtial obſervations, is 
"traced by the inoſt accurate chronology, ſo high 
as an eclipſe calculated 2155 years before our 
vulgar æra, and verified by the miſſionaries ſxill- 
ed in mathematical learning, wha * been 
ſent in theſe latter times to preach the goſpel 4 
| | 2 


„ f & 


Of China. 


the people of this unknown nation, have ad- 
mired and inſtructed them. Father Gaubil has 
examined a ſeries of 36 eclipſes of the ſun, re- 
corded in the books of Confucius, and found 
only two of them dubious and two ſpurious. 


rue it is that Alexander had ſent from Ba- 


bylon into Greece, the obſervations of the Chal- 
deans, who aſcended 400 years higher than the 
Chineſe; and doubtleſs this is one of the moſt 
valuable monunients of antiquity. But theſe 
ephemerides of Babylon were not connected with 
hiſtorical facts; whereas the Chineſe have joined 


the celeſtial to the terreſtrial hiſtory, and thus 


proved the one by the other, 

Their chronology, according to teſtimonies that 
- are judged authentic, uninterruptedly aſcends 
two hundred and thirty years beyond the above- 


mentioned eclipſe, ſo high as the emperor Hiao, 


who took ſome pains himſelf to correct their 
aſtronomy, and who during a reign of about 80 
ears, made it his ſtudy to promote the know- 
edge and happineſs of mankind. His name is 
ſtill held in veneration in China, as in Europe 


we venerate the names of the Titus's, the Tra- 


jans, and the Antoninus's. His being an able 
. mathematician for his time, ſhews that his na- 
tion was already much civilized, We do not 
find that the antient chiefs of the German or 
Gallic boroughs, reformed aſtronomy. Clovis 
had no obſervatory, 


We find that ſix kings preceded Hiao, but 


the length of their reigns is uncertain, Where 
chronology is thus ſilent, the beſt way, in my 


opinion, 1s to have recourſe to Sir Iſaac New- 


ton's rule, who * W. one common 
8 . . year 


Ii 


12 


3 D Chana, Ch. i. 
year for the time which the princes of different 
countries reigned, reduces each reign to 22 years 
or thereabouts. Purſuant to this calculation, 
which, as moſt moderate, ſeems moſt reaſon- 
able, thoſe ſix kings muſt have reigned very near 
130 years: and this is far more agreeable to the 
order and courſe of nature, than the 250 years, 
for example, attributed to the ſeven kings of 
Rome; and than ſs many other calculations 
contradicted by the experience of all ages. | 

Fohi then, the firſt of thoſe kings, reigned 25 
centuries at leaſt before our vulgar æra, at the time 
when the Babylonians had already a ſeries of aſtro- 
nomical obſervations : and from that time China 
was ſubject to one ſovereign. The union of its 15 
kingdoms under one head, ſhews, that long before 
that time this country was very populous, civi- 
Tized, and divided into many ſovereignties: for 
a great empire is never formed but out of ſeveral 
petty ſtates ; this being the work of time, policy, 
and courage : there cannot therefore be a ſtronger 
proof of antiquity. 

A tyrant named Hoangti, commanded indeed 
that all books ſhould be burnt ; but this mad and 
barbarous order rather induced people to preſerve 
them with care, and accordingly they appeared 
again after his deceaſe. But what does it ſignify, 
whether thoſe books always include a ſure chro- 
nology or not. Suppoſe we know not exactly 


at what time Charlemaign lived: as it is certain 


that he made vaſt conqueſts with large atmies, 
it appears that he was born in a numerous na- 


tion, formed into a body by a long ſucceſſion of 
ages. Since therefore the emperor Hiao, who 


undeniably lived about two thouſand four * 
| r 


Of China. 

dred years before our æra, ſubdued the whole 
country of Corea, it is certain that his people 
were of the very remoteſt antiquity. By 
Mankind do not multiply fo eaſy as we imagine. 
One third part of the number of infants die at 
the age of ten. The calculators of the propa- 
gation of the human ſpecies have obſerved, that 
there muſt be' favourable circumſtances for a 
nation to increaſe a twentieth part in the ſpace 
of a hundred years: and it often happens that the 
number of inhabitants diminiſhes inſtead of increaſ- 
ing. This is a further proof of the antiquity of 
China. It was in the reign of Chatlemaign, and 
ot before, even more populous than extenſive. 

he laſt regiſter that we know of, made in 
the 15 provigces that compoſe China properly 
ſo called, amounts to near fixty millions of men 
able to bear arms, without including either the 
veteran troops, the old men above ſixty, ot the 


young men under twenty, or the mandarins * 


of the multitude of literati, or the bonzes +, 


* Mandatin is a name given to the magiſtrates and governors 
of provinces in China, who are choſen from among the moſt 
learhed men of the empire, and whoſe government is always at 
a great diſtance from the place of their birth, The Chineſe 
call them Quongfu, that is to ſay, Preſidents ; and the Portugueſe 
not being able to pronounce the word Quongfu according to the 
antient Chineſe, called them Mandarinos, from the Latin word 
Mandare, in which they have been followed by the other European 
nations. The Mandarins are greatly reſpeQed by the common 
people, who always ſpeak to them upon their knees. There 
are military mandarins who have the command of the troops, 
and Mandarins who have the adminiftration of juſtice, 

F+ Bonzes ate Indian and Chineſe priefts, who affect great 
continence and admirable ſobriety, They have divers univer + 
lities, where they teach the myſteries of their ſex, and live in 


necks, 


community, The Indian Bonges wear a chaplet round their 


13 


14 


Of China. Ch. 1. 


and much leſs the women, whoſe number in all 


countries equals. that of the men within a 15th 


or. 16th part, according to the obſervations of 


thoſe who have made the exacteſt calculations 
in regard to the human ſpecies. At this rate 
there cannot be leſs, than 130 millions of inhabi- 
tants in China; Europe has not many more than 


100 millions, reckoning 20 millions in France, 
two and twenty in Germany, four in Hungary, 
ten in all Italy as far as Dalmatia, eight in great 
Britain and Ireland, eight in Spain and Portugal, 
ten in European Ruſſia, fix in Poland, fix. in 


Turky in Europe, Greece and the iſlands, four 


in Sweden, three in Norway and Denmark, 
three in Holland and the Auſtrian Nether- 
lands. | TY | | | 

We. muſt not therefore be ſurprized that the 
cities of China are immenſely large; that Pe- 
quin, the new capital of the empire, is above 
fix great * leagues in circumference, and contains 
about four millions of inhabitants: that Nan- 


Quin, the antient metropolis, had formerly a 


greater number: and that a ſimple borough, 


* + Yealled Quientzeng, where they manufacture 


7 


their porcelain, contains about a million of people. 

The forces of this empire, according to the 
relation of the moſt intelligent perſons that ever 
travelled, conſiſt in a militia of about 800,000 
ſoldiers well maintained; five hundred and ſeventy 
thouſand horſes are fed in the emperor's ſtables 


necks, conſiſting of an hundred beads, and carry a ſtaff at the 
end of which is a wooden bird; they live upon the alms of. the 
people, and yet maintain ſeveral orphans and widows out of 
their own collection. — 

* 4 Miles. 


Or 


Of China. 


or paſture grounds, for mounting the cavalry, 
for the court journeys, and for public couriers, 
Several miſſionaries, whom the emperor Cang- 
hi, from his love of the ſciences, had in theſe 
latter times about his perſon, affirm, that they 
attended him in thoſe magnificent hunting 
matches towards great Tartary, in which 100,000 
horſe and 60,000 foot marched regularly in or- 
der of battle. This has been a cuſtom in thoſe 
countries time immemorial, 

The Chineſe towns had never any other forti- 
fications than ſuch. as good ſenſe pointed out to 
all nations, before the uſe of artillery ; namely a 
ditch, a rampart, a ſtrong wall, and towers: and 
even ſince the Chineſe have made uſe of can- 
non, they have not followed the model of our 
fortreſſes; but whereas other nations fortify their 
towns, theſe people have fortified their empire. 
The great wall which ſeparated and defended 
China againſt the Tartars, and which was built 
a hundred and thirty ſeven years before our zra, 
ſubſiſts to this day; it is 500 leagues in cireum- 
ference, riſing on the tops of mountains, and 
deſcending down into precipices, being almoſt 
every where 20 feet broad, and above 30 feet 


high: a monument ſuperior to the pyramids of 


Egypt, both by its utility and dimenſions. | 
Vet this rampart did not hinder the Tartars 
from making a proper uſe of the diviſions of the 
"Chineſe, and conquering that empire; but this 
revolution made no change in their conſtitution 
of government. The country of the conquerors 
is — part of the conquered ſtate; and the 
Mantchoux Tartars, now maſters of China, 
have only ſubmitted with ſword in hand to ws 
WS 


15 


Of China. Ch. i. 


laws of the country, whoſe throne they in- 
vaded. | | 

The emperor's ordinary revenue, according 
to- the moſt probable calculations, amounts to 
two hundred millions of ounces of filver *, 
Here it is proper to obſerve, that the ounce of 
filver is not worth one hundred French ſous in- 
trinſic value, as the hiſtory of China aſſerts ; 
for there is no ſuch thing as intrinſic numerical 
value: but taking the ſilver mark at 50 livres, 
as reckoned in France, this ſum amounts to 1250 
millions of French money in 1740. I mention 
this date; for this arbitrary _ has but too 
greatly changed, and perhaps will change till 
in this kingdom: this is a point which ſeveral 
writers who are better acquainted 'with books 
than public affairs, do not ſeem ſufficiently to 
attend to; and hence it is, that they are free- 
' quently ſo defective in their valuation of foreign 
Coins. | 


They had gold and ſilver coin, long before 


the darics were ſtruck in Perſia. The emperor 
Cang-hi had collected a ſeries of 3000 of theſe 
pieces, among which were ſeveral ſtruck in 
Indiaz another proof of the antiquity of the arts 


in Aſia. But gold for a long time has ceaſed thy * 


be a common meaſure in Chirfa, having beet 
a merchandiſe as in Holland ; - neither do they 
coin any ſilver, but ſettle the value of this metal 
by the weight and ſtandard ; they coin nothing 
but copper, which alone has an arbitrary value 
in this country. In difficult times the govern- 
ment has made uſe of a paper currency, as fince 
hath been practiſed by ſeveral ſtates in Europe; 
V Above fifty two millions of Guineas, 


-- 


but 


LO 


Of China. 


but they never had any ſuch thing as public banks, 
which by multiplying the credit of a nation in- 
creaſe its riches. 4 : | : KY 

This country, ſo greatly favoure nature, 
produces all the diffelent ſorts of fruits that grow 
in Europe, and a great many others which we 
are ſtrangers to. The is covered with 
wheat, rice, vines, pulſe, and trees of every 
kind ; but the inhabitants never make any wine, 
being ſatisfied with a liquor of ſufficient ſtrength, 
which they extract from rice. - 


That precious inſect which produces filk, is 


originally from China, from whence it was not 
* into Perſia till very late, together with 
the art of weaving the down, in which it is in- 
vel : this manufacture was ſo very ſcarce even 
in Juſtinian's time, that filk was fold in Europe 
for its weight in gold. « +a OH ras 
The Chineſe have had a paper manufacture 


time immemorial ; the paper is exceeding white 


and fine, and made of the ſtrings of boiled bam- 
boo . We cannot tell when firſt their porce- 
lain ' was invented, nor that beautiful varniſh 
which we begin now to imitate and to rival in 


2 


-*Fhey hive bud laß munüfadtures theſe 2000 


years, but their glaſs is not ſo fine nor fo tranſ- 


patent as ours. ue. 2 Sj 
They invented printing at the fame time, It 
is well known that their method of printing is 
by engraving on wooden blocks, in the manner 
as was firſt practiſed by Guttenberg at Mentz 
in the fifteenth century. The art of ſtamping 
characters on wood is more improved in China 

A kind of ſugar- cane in the Indies. 


but 


17 


18 


Of China. Ch. i. 


but ſuch is their attachment to antient cuſ- 
toms, that they have not yet adopted our method 
of uling moveable and fount types, though 
greatly ſuperior to theirs. | 

They have been uſed to bells from the very 
earlieſt times. They have cultivated chemiſtry ; 


- and though w have made no great improve- 


ments in natural philoſophy, they invented gun- 
powder ; but they never uſe it except at feſtivals, 


in the exhibiting of fireworks, in which they 


ſurpaſs other nations, It was the Portugueſe that 
firſt taught them the uſe of artillery, and the 
Jeſuits that learnt them to found cannon. "Tho? 
the Chineſe have not diſtinguiſhed themſelves by 
the invention of theſe defiruQtive inſtruments, 
yet this is not owing to their virtue, ſince they 
have nevertheleſs been uſed to war. 

If they have gone fer in aſtronomy, this is 
becauſe. it is a ſcience depending on ocular ob- 
ſervation,” and the, fruit of patience. .., They 
were aſſiduous obſervers of the heavens, re- 
marked all the phenomena, and tranſmitted 
them to poſterity. They divided after our man- 
ner the annual courſe of the ſun into 365 parts 
and a quarter; and had a confuſed knowledge 
of the preceſſion of the equinoxes and ſolſtices. 
But what is moſt worthy of obſervation is, 


that time immemorial they have divided their 


months into weeks of ſeven days. | 
They {till ſhew the inſtruments which one of 
their celebrated aſtronomers made uſe of a thou- 
ſand; years before our #ra, in a city which is only 
of the hird arder in that empire. | 


Is Nanquin, the antient capital, they” bave 
preſerved a brazen globe, larger than three men 
5 e can 


. | Of China. 19 


* can ſurround in their embrace; it ſtands on a 
th cube of braſs, which opens, and receives a man. 
E who turns the globe round; and on it are drawn 
the meridians and parallels. . | py 
Pekin has an obſervatory full of aſtrolabes and 
„ armillary ſpheres, inferior indeed to our inſtru- 
ments for exactneſs, but yet ſufficient proofs of 
the ſuperiority of the Chineſe over the other na- 
„ FF tions of Aſia. 5 
A They were acquainted with the compaſs, but 
4 did not apply it to its right uſe in navigation. 
; For as they inhabited a land that abounds with 
every thing, they had no need like us to cir- . 
cumnavigate the globe. The compaſs as well as 
. ris was only a matter of curioſity in re- 
pect to them, nor indeed were they much to 
be lamented for the want of ſuch improve- 
ments. | | 
It is ſurprizing that this ingenious nation ne- 
ver went beyond the elements of geometry, that 
they were ignorant of ſemitones in muſic, that 
their aſtronomy and all their ſciences were at the 
ſame time ſo antient and fo limited. It ſeems as 
if nature had given to this ſpecies of men ſo dif- 
ferent from ours, organs formed for diſcovering; 
all at once whatever was neceſſary for them, a 
incapable of going any further. We on the 
contraty have made our diſcoveries very late; 
but we have been quick in bringing things to 
perfection. But what is leſs ſurprizing is, that theſe 
people have always blended their errors in judicial 
_ aſtrology with the truth of their celeſtial obſervati- 
ons. This has been a ſuperſtition adopted ſome time 
or other by all mankind ; nor is it long ſince we 
| have 


O China. Ch. i. | 


have recovered from it ourſelves, ſuch. is the 
proneneſs of human nature to error. 


89 3 . @ + wo — k 
If any one was to. inquire how it comes to 


paſs, that this nation ſhould during an uninter- 
rupted ſucceſſion of ages have cultivated the arts 
and ſciences, and yet. make ſo ſmall a pro- 
reſs in them, perhaps two reaſons. may be aſ- 
gned : one is the great reſpect they have for 
whatever has been tranſmitted to them by their 
anceſtors, and which makes them look upon 


every thing as perfect that bears the ſtamp of an- | 


tiquity z the other is the nature of their language, 
the firſt principle of all human knowledge. 

_ The art of communicating our ideas in writ- 
ing, which ſhould be a plain eaſy method, is 
with them a thing of the greateſt- difficulty, 
Every word has a different character; thus in 
China a learned man is he who knows moſt of 
thoſe characters, inſomuch that a great many 
arrive at old age before they know how to write 


have moſt improved, is morality and the laws. 
The reſpect which children bear to their parents, 
is the foundation of the Chineſe government. 
Paternal authority is ſo ſtrongly ſupported among 
them, that a ſon cannot go to law with his father 
but by the conſent of all his relations, friends, 
and of the magiſtrates. The learned mandarins 
are conſidered as fathers of the towns and pro- 
vinces, and the king as father of the empire: 
this principle ingrafted in their breaſts has formed 
this vaſt empire into a fingle family. _ 
Human nature is addicted there as in other 
countries to vice, but more reſtrained by the 
aWs, 


What they ſeem to underſtand beſt, and to 


Of China. 

laws, which are always uniform. The learned 
author of the lord Anſon's voyage round the 
world, expreſſes great contempt of China, be- 
cauſe the lower ſort of people in Canton im- 
poſed upon the Engliſh as much as ever they 
could, But are we to judge of the government of 
a great pation from the behaviour of the populace 
in a ſea port town ? And what would the Chineſe 
ſay of us, if they had been caſt away upon our 
coaſts, at the time when the laws of European 
nations confiſcated ſhipwrecked effects, and cuſ- 
tom permitted the murder of the proprietors ? 

By means of the continual ceremonies with 
which ſociety is incumbered in this country, and 
which nothing but friendſhip and domeſtic fami- 


liarity can prevail upon them to diſpenſe with, 


they have eſtabliſhed throughout the empire a 
certain modeſty and decorum, which ſoftens and 
tempers their manners. This gentleneſs and 


_ civility reaches even to the loweſt claſs of people: 


for the miſſionaries inform us, that even in the 
public market places, in the midſt of the hurry 


and confuſion of carriages, which excite ſuch 


horrid noiſe and imprecations in our parts of the 
world, they have often ſeen the peaſants fall upon 
their knees, and aſk one another pardon for the 
trouble which they accuſed themſelves of having 
occaſioned, and then aſſiſt each other with ſuch 
coolneſs of temper as indeed greatly helps to 
diſembarraſs them. 3 

In other countries the laws inflict puniſhments 
on criminal actions, in China they do more, they 
reward virtue. If the fame of a generous and 
ſignal action is ſpread in a province, the mandarin 
is obliged to acquaint the emperor, who 83 

1 en 


21 


22 


Of the Religion Ch. i. 
ſends a badge of honour to the perſon who has ſo | 
well deſerved it, This morality, and this ſub- 
miſſion to the laws, joined to the worſhip of a 
ſupreme Being, conſtitute the religion of China, 
as profeſſed by the emperor and the men of litera- 2? 
ture. The emperor has been high pontif time 
immemorial ; it is he who facrifices to Tien, the 


ſupreme ruler of heaven and earth: he is conſi- 
dered alſo as the firſt philoſopher and firſt preach- 
er in the empire; and his edicts are generally 
inſtructions and leſſons of morality. 


ieh Wie- Win- e -f Nie- 
; CHAP. Il 
Of the religion of China. 


That the government is not atheiſtical ; that Chriſ- 


tianity was not preached there in the ſeventh 


century. Of fome ſects eftabliſhed in the country. 


7 ONGFUTSEE, whom we call Con- 


| fucius, and who flouriſhed two thouſand 
three hundred years ago, a little before Pythago- 
ras, was the founder of this religion, which con- 
fiſts in being juſt : he taught 7 practiſed it both 
in a ſtate of grandeur and in obſcurity ; one 
while firſt miniſter to a king who was tributary 
to the emperor ; then an exile, and reduced to 
extreme poverty. In his life-time he had five 
thouſand diſciples, and after his death his doc- 
trine was embraced by the emperors, the * * 

* . 


* 
\ 
« 


* 


R˙̈œ.᷑f :; 


FFC 


| of China. 
that is the mandarins, the men of literature, and 
in fine, by all but the common people. 

His family is ſtill exiſting: and in a count 
where there is no other title of nobility but 
that derived from actual ſervices ; it is diſtin- 
guiſhed from all other families in memo 
of its founder. In regard to himſelf, he has 
no divine honours paid him, theſe being due 
to the Deity alone; but he has ſuch as a 
man deſerves, who has given the pureſt ideas that 
human nature unaſhſted by. revelation can form 
of the ſupreme Being: for which reafon father 
le Comte and the other miſſionaries have re- 
marked that the Chineſe acknowledged the true 
God, when other nations were idolaters, and 
that they ſacrificed to him in the moſt antient 


temple in the univerſe. —__ 


The reproach of atheiſm, which we in this part 
of the world are ſo apt to beſtow upon every body 
that is not of the ſame way of thinking as our- 
ſelves; has been laviſhed on the Chineſe. No- 
thing but the inconſiderateneſs, for which we 
are remarkable in all our diſputes, could have 
made us preſume to treat a government as atheiſ- 


tical, moſt of whoſe edicts ſpeak * of a ſupreme - 


being, father of nations, recompencing, and pun- 
ihhing with juſtice, who has eſtabliſhed betwixt him- 
ſelf and man, a correſpondence of prayers and be- 
nefits, of tranſgreſſions and chaſt1 ſements. 

It js true their religion does not admit of 
eternal rewards and puniſhments ; and this ſhews 
its antiquity. Moſes himſelf makes no mention 
of a future ſtate. The Sadducees did not believe 


* See the edit of the emperor Yontching, 


it; 


23 


o 


- Of the Religion Ch. ii. 
it; this doctrine has been happily eſtabliſhed in 
the weſt only by the mafter of life and death. 
It has been thought that the Chineſe literati 
have not a diſtin& idea of an immaterial God; 
but it is wrong to infer from | thence that they 
are atheiſts. The antient Egyptians, a people 
ſo very religious, did not worſhip Iſis and Ofiris 
as pure ſpirits. All the gods of antiquity were 
adored under a human form; and (which de- 
monſtrates the injuſtice of mankind) among the 
Greeks all were ſtigmatized as atheiſts, who 
would not allow of corporeal deities, and 'who 
worſhipped in the divinity an unknown nature, 
inviſible, inacceſſible to our ſenſes. _ 
The famous archbiſhop Navaretta “ ſays, that 
| N to all interpreters of the ſacred books 
of the Chineſe, the ſoul is an aerial, fiery 
particle, which ſeparating itſelf from the body 
Joins the celeflial ſubſtance. his is the opi- 
nion of the Stoics. This is what Virgil + ad- 
7 mirably 
Ferdinand Navaretta; a learned Dominican friar, was 
born at Pennafiel in old Caftile, and had been an eloquent 
preacher, when he quittted Spain in 1646 to preach the goſpel 
in China, where he did not arrive till rb5y- He learnt the 
Chineſe language, which he wrote, and ſpoke with fluency, 
He was head of the miſſion in the province of Chekiang in 1665, 
when a perſecution aroſe, and he with the reſt of the miſſiona- 
ries was baniſhed, He returned to Spain in 1672, and ſoon af- 
ter went to Rome, to give an account of his miſſion. In 1678 
Charles II. raiſed: him to the archbiſhopric of St, Domingo in 
America, where he reſided till his death in 1689. No man is 
ſaid to d ou better concerning = oy of China 1 yy 
work is intitled Tradados hiftoricos, politicos cos, y relipio 
de la manarchia de China, Ne, te — ; but the-third was 
2 publiſhed, and the ſecond was condemned by the inqui- 
tion. 8 | 3 
+ The pa alluded to is: [1 332.0 
i 22 ac terras, campoſque liquentes, 


Luceatemque globum lunæ, Titaniaque aftra 1 
- 3 Spiritus 


8 


of China. 

mirably explains in his ſixth Eneid. Now ſurely 
neither Epictetus's Manual, nor Virgil's Æneid 
are infected with atheiſm. We have ſlandered 
the Chineſe, merely becauſe their metaphyſics 
differ from ours. We ought rather to admire 
two virtues, by which they are diſtinguiſh- 
ed, and which at the ſame time condemn the 
ſuperſtitions of the pagans, and the manners of 
the Chriſtians. - The religion of the literati was 
never diſgraced by fables, nor ſtained by quar- 
rels and civil wars. | TY LL en 

In charging the government of this vaſt em- 
pire with atheiſm, we have been fo inconfiderate 
as to accuſe them alſo of idolatry, an accuſation 
which contradicts itſelf. The great miſtake in 
regard to the Chineſe rites proceeds from our 
judging of their cuſtoms by ours: for we carry 
our prejudices and litigious diſpoſition to the fur- 
ther extremity of the earth. A genuflexion, 


which with them is only a common civility, ap- 


pears to us an act of adoration ; and a table we 
miſtake for an altar, Thus it is we judge of 
oP thing. We ſhall ſee hereafter, how our 
diviſions and diſputes drove the miſſionaries out 
Some time before Confucius, Laokium * had 
| | intro» 
Spiritus intus alit, totamqve infuſa per artus | 
Mens agitat molem, & magno ſe corpore miſcet. 
Inde hominum pecudumque genus, vitzque volantum, 
Et quæ marmoreo fert monſtra ſub zquore pontus, 
Igneus eſs ollis vigor, et cœleſtis origo 
emmnibus, 

* Laokium, or more properly Lao-Kiun, was the founder of 
one of the two principal ſeas, eftabliſhed in China, "He was born 
in the province of Hou-Quang, in the reign of Ting-Vang the 
21ſt emperor of the third Dynaſty, about 600 years before our 


vulgar æra. His doctrine was that the ſoul died with the body, 
Vor. I. : C that 


* q ” 


8 


2 
1 


26 


Of the Religion Ch. 11. 


introduced a ſect that believed in wicked ſpirits, 
inchantments, and witchcrafts : another ſe& like 
that of Epicurus was received, though with ſome 
oppolition, in China five hundred years before the 
birth of Chriſt, But in the firſt century of our 
æra this country was over-run by the ſuperſtition 
of the Bonzes, who brought from India the idol 
Fo or Foe, which is worſhipped under different 
names by the Tartars and Japaneſe ; a pretended 
divinity deſcended. from heaven' upon the earth, 
to whom they pay a worſhip the. moſt ridiculous, 
and of conſequence the beſt adapted to the ſtupid 


vulgar. This religion, which had its firſt riſe in 


India almoſt a thouſand years before Chriſt, has 


infected all oriental Aſta; this is the God which 


the Bonzes preach in China, the Talapoins in 
Siam, and the Lamas in Tartary. It is in his 
name that they promiſe immortal life, and that 
thouſands of Bonzes conſecrate their days to ſuch 
penitential exerciſes as are ſhocking to human 
nature: ſome ſpend their whole life naked and 

fettered, others wear an iron collar which bends 


their bodies double, and holds their faces down to 


the ground. Their fanaticiſm is ſubdivided in 


infinitum ; they are ſuppoſed to' expel devils and 
to work miracks ; and they ſell their abſolutions 


to the people, The mandarins are ſometimes 
ſeduced by this ſect, and by a fatality which 
ſhews that the ſame ſuperſtition is common to all 


that the ſummum bonum conſiſted in pleaſure ; and confining all 
bappineſs to this life, he pretended to bave found out the ſecret + 
of prolonging it beyond the ordinary courſe : for which reaſon 
this was called the Sect of the Immortals, Yet it is thought, 
that the chief of this ſect acknowledged a Supreme Being, 
whom he called 7A U. See Du Halde and Navaretta. 


Nations, 


of China. 
nations, ſome mandarins have turned Bonzes and 
ſhaved their heads out of devotion: 

It is theſe Bonzes that in Tartary have the Da- 
lailama for their chief, a living idol to whom 
they pay divine worſhip; and this perhaps is the 
- higheſt pitch of human ſuperſtition. 

This Dailama the ſucceſſor and vicegerent of 
the God Fo, is ſuppoſed to be immortal : the 
prieſts always train up a hoes gms who is in- 
tended to be the ſecret ſucceſſor of the Supreme 
Pontiff, and takes his place as ſoon as he, whom 
the people believe immortal, is dead. The Tartar 
princes never ſpeak to him but upon their knees; 
and he ultimately decides the ſeveral points on 
which the Lamas are divided : in fine he has for 
ſome time paſt made himſelf maſter of Tibet that 
lies weft of China: the emperor alſo receives his 
ambaſſadors,” and ſends an embaſſy in return with 
conſiderable preſents, 

Theſe ſects are tolerated in China for the uſe 
of the. vulgar, as a coarſe ſort of food proper for 
their ſtomachs ; while the magiſtrates and the 
learned, who are in every reſpect ſeparated from 
the common people, feed on a purer ſubſtance. 
Yet Confucius was greatly concerned at this de- 
luge of errors; there wete a great many idolaters 
in his time, The ſect of Laokium had already 
introduced ſuperſtitions among the people : hence 
in one of his books he ſays; how comes it that the 
ignorant populace are guilty of mire crimes than the 
learned? It is becauſe the populace are governed by 
the Bonzes, et | 
A great many of the learned are indeed fallen 
into the error of materialiſm, but this has not al- 
tered their moral ad They fay that virtue 

| 2 18 


Of the Religion Ch. ii. 
is ſo neceſſary to mankind, and ſo amiable in it- 
ſelf, that they have no occaſion for the knowledge 


of a God to follow it. Beſides we ought not to 


look upon the Chineſe materialiſts as atheiſts, ſince 
the primitive fathers of the church believed * God 
and angels to be corporeal. 

Some pretend that the Chriſtian religion was 
known in China towards the eighth century, in 
the time of Charlemaign, It is affirmed that our 
miſſionaries have found in the province of Kingt- 
ching, an inſcription in Syriac and Chineſe cha- 
racters: this monument, which the reader may 
ſee at length in, Kircher, mentions that a hol 
man named Olopuen conducted by blue clouds, 
and obſerving the direction of the winds, came 


from Tacin to China in the year 1092 of the 


æra of the Seleucidæ, which anſwers to the year 
636 of Jeſus Chriſt; that as ſoon as he arrived 
in the ſuburbs of the imperial city, the emperor 
ſent a colao to attend him, and built a Chriſtian 
church for his uſe, &c. | 

It is evident by the very inſcription itſelf, that 
this is one of thoſe pious frauds, which have not 
been looked upon in ſo bad a light as they deſerve. 
This the learned Navaretta allows. This coun- 
try of Tacin, this zra of the Seleucidz, this name 
of Olopuen, which, they ſay, is Chineſe, and 
reſembles a Spaniſh name, theſe blue clouds, which 


* I apprehend this is in part a miſtake ; many of the pri- 
mitive "3 any it is true, did believe the angels to be corporeal, 
or to have been formed of a thin rarefied matter; but none of 
them held that opinion of the Deity : for we find in eceleſiaſtic 
hiſtorians, that Audeus a Syrian of Meſopotamia, who lived in 
the beginning of the fourth century, was condemned for this 
opinion, and his followers were called Anthrepomorphites, See 
Du Pin, Epiph. Aug. 


ſerve 


of China. 


ſerve as guides, this Chriſtian church built all of 
a ſudden at Pekin for a prieſt of Paleſtine, who 
could not ſet foot in China without running the 
riſk of his life; all ſhew the ſtory to be ridicu- 
lous. Thoſe who endeavour to defend it, do 
not reflect, that the priefts whoſe names are 
mentioned in this pretended monument, were 
Neſtorians, and conſequently that they are only 
contending for heretics. 

This inſcription we muſt rank with that of Ma- 
labar, where it is ſaid that St, Thomas arrived in 


that country, in the quality of a carpenter, with 


a rule and a ſtake, and that he carried alone a 
large beam of wood, as a proof of his miſſion, 
There are hiſtorical truths enough, without mix- 
ing with them theſe fooliſh lies. 

Tt is therefore very certain that in the time of 
Charlemaign, the Chriſtian religion (as well as 
the people who profeſs it) were abſolutely ſtran- 
gers to China. Indeed there were ſome Jews in 
that country. Several families of that vagrant 
and ſuperſtitious nation, were ſettled there two 
centuries before our vulgar æra; and followed the 
buſineſs of brokers, which the Jews practiſe in 
almoſt every part of the world. EPA 
I ſhall defer my ſurvey of Siam, Japan, and all 
that tract of country ſituate towards the eaſt and 
ſouth, till I come to that time in which the in- 
duſtry of the Europeans opened an eaſy paſlage to 
thoſe parts, the remoteſt of our hemiſphere. 


29 


— 


Of India. Ch. iii. 
CHAP. III. 
Of India. 
OLLOWING the apparent courſe of 


T the ſun, the next country I come to, is 
India, a country almoſt as extenſive as China, 
and more known on account of the precious 
commodities in all ages brought from thence b 
the 4nduſtry of merchants, than from any exaC 
relation of it. . © 4 
A chain of mountains but little interrupted, 
ſeems -to have fixed its limits towards China, 
Tartary and Perſia ; and the reſt is ſur- 
rounded by the ſea, And yet India on this 
ſide the Ganges, was for a long time ſubject to 
the Perſians ; for which reaſon Alexander the re+ 
venger of Greece and the conqueror of Darius, 
puſhed his conqueſts even into that -part of India 
which was tributary to his enemy, Since the 
timg of Alexander, the Indians have lived in a li- 
centiouſneſs and effeminacy inſpired by the good- 

neſs of the climate, and the richneſs of the ſoil. 
The Greeks travelled thither in ſearch of know - 
ledge, before the reign of Alexander, There the 
celebrated Pilpay t, two thouſand three hundred 
th. 14 5c years 


. + Pilpey or Pidpay is the name of an antient Indian Bramin, 


who was governor of part of Indoſtan, and counſellor to a pow- 
erful Indian king, named Dabſchelim, whom he inſtructed in 
morality and politics, according to the method of the Orientals, 
by fables, Theſe inſtructions gave birth to the work which 
was written 2000 years ago in the Indian language, and intitled 
Kelile Wadimne, a name the Orientals give to a certain animal 


yery much reſembling a fox, which is made to ſpeak — 
* 20 out 


| Of Ina. 
= ago, wrote his Moral Fables that have fince 


en tranſlated into almoſt all languages. 

All ſubjects whatever have been treated in the 
way of fable or allegory, by the Orientals, and 
particularly the Indians. Hence it is that Pytha- 


goras, who ſtudied among them, generally ex- 


prefles himſelf in parables. The ſpirit of Pilpay 
prevailed long in India. Pachimerus + in the thir- 
teenth cen ury, tranſlated ſeveral pieces written 
by their ſages: we ſhall give here a very extraor- 
dinary paſſage from one of them. 

I have ſeen all ſes accuſing one another of 
“ impoſture. I have ſeen all the Magi furiouſly 
« diſputing about the firſt principle and the laſt 
« end, I have queſtioned them all; and among 
all thoſe heads of faction, I found nothing but 
« aninflextble obſtinacy, a ſupercilious contempt, 
« and an implacable averſion againſt one ano- 
ce ther. I reſolved therefore to believe none of 
& them. Theſe Doctors, in ſeeking the truth, 
« are like a woman that waats to introduce her 
6 lover by a back door, but cannot find the key. 
% Mankind in their idle reſearches, reſemble a 


« perſon, who climbs up a tree, where there is 


« little honey, and ſcarce has he eaten of it, 


out the work. All the modern tranſlations of this valuable 
compoſition are made either from the Greek or from the Per- 


ſian, and are ſaid to differ greatly from the original. See Fa- 
bric, bibliot, Gr. and Hyde de /udis Orient, 


+ George Pachimerus is an antient Greek writer, who flou- 
riſhed towards the year 1280, under Michael Paleologus and 
Andronicus his ſucceſſor, He was a perſon of rank, and wrote 
the hiſtory of the abovementioned emperors, which is eſteemed, 
not for its ſtile, which is obſcure and iff, but for exactneſs and 
impartiality, He wrote comments on Ariftatle, and ſome 


Greek verſes, N 
| 7 „„ when 


7 


- 22 


oy 
artiſans, 
* 
4 Wy, 


Of India. Ch. iii. 
«© when the dragons that are about the tree, de- 


4 your him.“ | 
Such was the manner of writing among the In- 


dians. Their ſpirit appears ſtill more in the di- 


verſions which they invented. The game, which 


the French by corruption call des echecs (cheſs) is 


of their invention: it is allegorical like their fa- 
bles, and an image of war. he names of Sha# 
(Check) which fignifies King, and of Pon, 
(Pawn) which ſignifies ſoldier, are ſtill retained 
in that part of the eaſt. 

The figures we make uſe of in arithmetic, which 
we received from the Arabs, near the time of 
Charlemaign, came from India : and perhaps the 
antient medals ſo highly valued by the curious 
among the Chineſe, are a proof that the arts were 
cultivated in India, before they were known in 


China. 2 


The Indians have, from time immemorial, 
divided the annual courſe of the ſun into twelve 
parts; and the year of the Brachmans *, and 
moſt antient Gymnoſophiſts, always began when 
the ſun entered the conſtellation, which they call 


*The Brachmans were a ſe& of Indian philoſophers, known 
to the antients alſo by the name of Gymnoſophiſts, They 
lived upon herbs and pulſe, and abſtained from all animal 
food, They ſpent their days in ſolitude, without matrimony, 
or property, and wiſhed ardently for death, conſidering life only 
as a burden, The Greek philoſophers uſed to travel to India 
to conſult the Brachmans, and it is from them that Pythagoras 
is ſuppoſed to have learnt the doctrine of metempſychoſis. The 


modern Bramins are thought to be the ſucceſſors of the antient 


Brachmans, living much in the ſame manner, and following 
the ſame doctrine. The name is ſaid to be derived from Brama, 
the legiſlator of India, who divided the people into four caſts or 
tribes, namely the Brachmans and Bramins, who are the prieſts 
and doctors of law, the Rageputs who are the militia, the Ba- 
nians who are merchants and brokers, and laſt of all the 


. 


Of India. 


moſcham, and we the ram. Their weeks al- 
ways conſiſted of ſeven days: a diviſion never 
known to the | Greeks. Their days bear the 
names of the ſeven planets. Sunday was by them 
called Mithradinam ; but it is uncertain whether 
this word Mithra, which among the Perſians alſo 
ſignifies the ſun, belonged originally to the lan- 
guage of the Magi, or to that of the ſages of India: 
for it is very difficult to diſcover which of the two 
nations taught the other. If it was neceſſary 
to decide this point between the Egyptians and 
Indians, I ſhould imagine that the ſciences were 
much more antient in the Indies; and my con- 
jecture is founded on the country of India being 
more eaſily inhabited than the land adjoining to 
the Nile, whoſe inundations muſt for a long time 
have diſcouraged the firſt colonies, before they 
had brought this river into ſubjection by digging 
canals, Beſides the foil of India, being much 
more various in its fertility, was better adapted 
to excite the curioſity and induſtry of mankind. 
Some have imagined that the human race came 
originally from Indoſtan, alledging that the weak- 
eſt animal muſt have been produced in the mildeſt 
climate: but we are in the dark in regard to all 
originals. Who can ſay that there were neither 
inſects, nor herbs, nor trees in our climate, when 
* were in the eaſt ? 
ndia was known-only by name in the time of 
Charlemaign ; and the Lale were ignorant that 
there was a Charlemaign. The Arabs, ſole ma- 
ſters of the maritime commerce, ſupplied both 
Conſtantinople and the Franks with the commo- 
dities of the Indies. The Venetians bought them 
up at Alexandria. The demand for them in France 


C 5 among 


34 


Of Iudia. Ch. iii. 


among private people was not yet very conſidera- 


ble: they were long unknown in Germany, and 


throughout the north. The Romans had carried 
on this trade themſelves, as ſoon as they were 
maſters of Egypt: Thus the weſtern nations 
have always carried their gold and filver to India, 
—4 enriched that country, which is ſo rich of 
itſelf. Fes of ty 

India having been in all ages a trading induſ- 
trious nation, its civil polity muſt have been ex- 
cellent ; and that country, to which Pythagoras 


had travelled for inſtruction, muſt have been go- 


verned by good laws, without which the arts 
are never cultivated. But mankind with. good 


laws have ever been ſubje to fooliſh cuſtoms : 


# 


Fa 
* 


* 


that which made it a point of honour and reli- 
gion, for women to burn themſelues upon the dead 
bodies of their huſbands, ſubſiſted in India from 
time immemorial, and is not yet aboliſhed. Indian 
philoſophers have flung themſelves upon a funeral 
pile, through exceſs of fanaticiſm and vain glory. 
Calanus *, who burnt himſelf to death in the 


preſence of Alexander, did not ſet the example. 


One -would think that a nation, in which both 
philoſophers and women devoted themſelves vo- 
hintarily to death, muſt have been warlike and in- 
vincible: yet ever fince the antient Szzac +, 


* Calanus was an Indian philoſopher, who followed Alexan- 
der in his expedition into India, He lived to the age of 83 free 
from all pain or ſickneſs, and being then ſeized with a violent 
cholic, he took the reſolution to burn bimſelf, See Curt, lib. 
10, Arrian. lib. 7. Val. Max. Ib. 1. : 

1 Seſac, Seſonc his, or 8eſonchoſis, king of Egypt, the firſt of 
che 12th dynaſty of Africanus, reigned in the little Diſopolis 
towards the year 1510 tefore the birth of Chriſt. * According to 
Herodotus, Diodorvs Siculus, and Euſebius, this is the famous 
bk. Sefoſtris, 


of India. 
known by the name of Bacchus, every invader 
of India hath eaſily conquered that country. 
It would be difficult to reconcile the ſublime 
ideas, which the Bramins preſerve of the Su- 
preme Being, with their ſuperſtitions and fabu- 
lous mythology ; did not hiſtory furniſh us with 
the like contradictions among the Greeks and 
| Romans. In the midſt of thoſe idolatrous na- 
tions, there have been Chriſtians ſettled, theſe 
two hundred years. A merchant of Syria, whoſe 
name was Mark Thomas, having ſettled on the 
Malabar coaſt with his family, and his factors, in 
the ſixth century, left there his religion, which 
was + Neſtorianiſm. *Theſe eaſtern ſectaries 
multiplied, and called themſelves the Chriſtians 
of St. Thomas: they lived peaceably among 
idolaters. Thoſe who make no ſtir, are ſeldom, 
perſecuted. Theſe Chriſtians had no knowledge 
of the Latin church. | 


— 


Seſaſtris, who was one of the greateſt conquerors that ever exift.. 
ed, He reigned 51 years, and undertook his expedition into 
Aſia in the eighteenth. of his reign. See Herodot. lib, 242. 
The doctrine of Neſtorius, a Greek monk, who was 
raiſed to the ſee of Conſtantinople in 428. He maintained that 
there were two perſons in Chriſt, as well as two natures, and 
that the virgin Mary could not be called darts, mother of 
God, but only gerne, mother of Chriſt. St, Cyril of A- 
lexandria was: his great antagoniſt. The general council, of Ephe- 
ſus condemned the doctriſſe of Neſtorius in 437, after which: be 


6 . CHAP, 


36 


That is, the reign of Charlemaign. * 


5 
4 


\ 4 ” 
. @T. 
* * 7 


— 


288 and mo 


Of Perſia, Ch. iv. 


Of Perſia, Arabia, and Mahomet. 


N turning towards Perſia, we find a little be- 
fore the tima / make uſe of as an zra , the 
| udden revolution that was ever 

own upon earth. . | 
A new empire, a religion and manners hither- 
to unknown, changed the face of theſe countries 
and this change had already extended a great way, 

into Aſia, Africa and Europe. 

In order to obtain an idea of Mahometiſm, 
which has given a new form to ſo many empires, 
J ſhall begin with taking a view of the parts of the 


world that firſt ſubmitted to it. 


- Perſia had before Alexander's time, extended 
its dominion from Egypt to Bactria t, beyond 
the country where now ſtands Samarcand, and 
from Thrace to the river Indus. | 

Though it was divided and limited under the 
Seleucidæ , it gained new additions under Ar- 


* 


1 Or Bactriana, now called Choraſſan. 

1 Seleucide is the name of the deſcendants of Seleucus I, 
king of Syria, one of Alexander's generals. The æra of the 
Seleueidæ is of great importance in hiſtoty. Some authors call 
it the æra of the Greeks, The Jews call it the æra of contracts, 
becauſe when upon being ſubdued by the Syro- Macedonian kings, 
they were obliged to make uſe of it in all their civil deeds, 
Moſt nations made it begin at the autumnal equinox of the year 
312 before Chriſt, except the Chaldeans who date it from the 
commencement of the enſuing ſpring, becauſe they did not look 
upon Seleucus as well ſettled at Babylen, before the tetreat of 
Demetrius, which happened at that time, 


"Er my ſaces 


* 


Arabia, and Mahomet. 


ſaces * the Parthian, two hundred and fifty years 
before Chrift : and though the Arſacidæ poſſeſſed 
neither Syria, nor the countries bordering on the 
Euxine ſea, they diſputed with the Romans the 
empire of the Eaſt, and their oppoſition always 
proved unſurmountable. | 

In the time of Alexander Severus, about the 
year of our Lord 226, a Perſian common ſoldier, 
who took the name of Artaxerxes, wreſted this 
Fingdom from the Parthians, and re-eſtabliſhed 
the Perſian empire, whoſe extent was then near- 
ly the ſame as it is at preſent. | | 

You are not diſpoſed to examine who were the 
_ firſt Babylonians ſubdued by the Perſians, nor 
why theſe people ſhould boaſt of aſtronomical ob- 
ſervations for four hundred thouſand years, of 
which no more than a ſeries of nineteen hundred 


years could be found in the time of Alexander 


the Great. Neither are you inclined to depart 
from your ſubject, to revive the ideas of the gran» 
deur of Babylon, and of thoſe monuments, 
which are ſounded much higher than they deſerve, 
and of which the very ruins are deſtroyed. If 
any remains of the Aſiatic arts merit our curio- 
fity, it is the ruins of Perſepolis deſcribed in 
many books, and copied in ſeveral prints. I am 


\ # Arſaces, the firſt king of the Parthians, was elected by 
thoſe people, who revolted againſt the Macedonian Seleucidæ, 
250 years before our æra. He reigned about thirty years, and 
was ſucceſsful in his adminiſtration. His ſucceſſors were called 
Arſacidæ, as the antient kings of Egypt had the name of Pharao, 


and the new ones of Ptolemy, Authors are not agreed in regard 


to the time when this government was ſettled, which lafted to 
the reign of Alexander ſon of Mammea, when Artabanus was 


killed by Artaxerxes in the year 228, See Photius, Euſebius, 
ther, &c, 


not 


37 


«Of De,, Ch. ſv. 


not ignorant of the admiration inſpired by thoſe 
ruins, that eſcaped the torches with which Alex- 
ander and the courteſan Thais, ſet, Perſepolis in 
flames. But could a palace erected at the foot 
of a chain of barren rocks, be a maſter piece of 
art? The columns which are yet ſtanding, can- 
not ſurely be reckoned either of a juſt proportion, 
or of an elegant deſign, The capitals are loaded 
with foohſh — 2 and nearly as high as the 
ſhaft; All the figures are as heavy and hard, as 
thoſe. which unluckily diſgrace our Gothic 
churches. They are monuments of grandeur 
but not of taſte; and the whole confirms me in 
the opinion, that if we confine ourſelves to the 
hiſtory of the polite arts, we ſhall find no more 
than four ages in the annals of the world, name 
Iy thoſe of Alexander, of ner of the Me- 
dicis, and of Lewis XIV. 

Vet the Perſians were always an ingenious 
people. Lokman *, who is the ſame as Eſop, 
was born at Caſbin. This tradition is far more 
en than that which makes him a native of 


C) He is forpamed the Wiſe, ee with reſpect in 
the Koran, which has induced many of the Mahometans to 
write commentaries, upon his fables or apologues. Some make 


him cotemporary with-Moſes, and others with David, which 


is the opinion of Mircond the Perſian biftorian, They pretend 
that he lived three thouſand years, to which purpoſe, Sahdi.a fa- 
maus Perfian poet tells the following Kory, Lokman towards 
the latter end of his days, lived in the neighbourhood of 8 
moraſa full of reeds, where he had built himſelf a but, and 
employed his time in making wicker baſkets. The angel of 
death appeared. to. bim, and ſaid, how comes it Lokman, that. 
thou, who haſt, been three thouſand years in the world, didſt 
not learn to build thy ſelf a houſe ? Lokman anſwered bim, 0 
Eſrail, {54% was the angel of death's name) it would be very 
— or one that knew he had thee at his oy to think of 


| building a houſe, 


Ethiopia, 


4 Arabia, and Mahomet. 


Ethiopia, a country that never produced philoſo- 
phers. "The doctrine of the antient Zerduſt, called 
Zoroaſter by the Greeks, who have changed all 
the oriental names, ſtill ſubſiſted. Its antiquity 
is rated at nine thouſand years; for the Perſians, 
as well as the Egyptians, Indians, and Chineſe, 
throw back the origin of the world as much as 
others bring it forward, This antient religion 
was only improved by a ſecond Zoroaſter, under 
Darius the ſon of Hyſtaſpes. In: this doctrine 
we find the earlieſt notions. of the immortality 
of the ſoul, and a future ſtate of happineſs or 
miſery. There we find an expreſs mention of 
hell. Zoroaſter in the writings preſerved. by Sad- 
der *, pretends that God gave him a. fight of 
this hell, and of the puniſhments reſerved tor the 
wicked : there he ſaw many kings, and amon 
the reſt one who wanted a ſoot. He aſked God 
the reaſon; and God anſwered him: This per- 
verſe king did but one gaod action in his whale life. 
As be was hunting one day, he ſaw a drome 
tied fo far from his trough, that though he wanted 
ta cat, he could not reach it. He kicked the trough 
nearer with his foot; I placed that foot in heaven; all 
the reſt is here. This paſſage, which is but little 
known, ſhews the kind of philoſophy that pre- 
vailed in thoſe diſtant ages, a philoſophy always 


* Sadder, or as others call him Sabdy, or Saadi and Sadi, 
is the moſt celebrated author among the Perfians, He led the 
life of a Dexvis or ſolitary, and ſpent great part of his time in 
travelling, He was made a ſlave by the Franks in the Haly Land 
and ranſomed for ten crowns by a merchant of Aleppo, who 
. gave him. a hundred more in portion with his daughter, But 

this wife made Sadder's life ſo uneaſy, that he could not help 
expreſſing his anxiety in his works, particularly in his Gu/;/las 
or flower garden, See D'Herbelot bibl. orient, F 


allegorical, 


Of Porfa," Ch. iv. 
allegorical, and yet ſometimes extremely pro- 
found. \. 37:9121 1110 2090090 2 ©» 
The Babylonians were the firſt, who admitted 
intermediate beings between the Deity and man. 
The Jews gave no names to angels, till the time 
of the Babyloniſh captivity. he word Satan 
appears for the firſt time in the book of Job; 
it is a Perſian name, ſome pretend that Job was 
of that country. The name of Raphael is uſed 
by Tobias, who was captive at Nineveh, and 
who wrote in Chaldaic. 15752 | 
The doctrine of two principles is from Zoroaſ- 
ter. Oromaſdes* or Oromazes, the antient of days, 
and Arimanes +, the genius of darkneſs, are the 
original of Manicheiſm. This is the Oſiris , and 
+: gs | "DP. 1-55 


* Oromazes is the name, which the Magi and the Chaldeans 
gave to the Supreme Being, and which in the Chaldaic language 
fignifies, burning light, They repreſented God as ſurrounded by 
fire, and uſed to ſay, that his body is like unto light, and bis foul 
unto truth, according to Porphyry in the life of Pythagoras. 
This God was the good principle, but there was another bad 
principle, which they called Arimanes or Arimanus, that is, in 
Chaldaic,' my enemy, or cunning and deceitful, It is oppoſed to Oro- 
mazes, who was to deſtroy it however at laſt, See Plut. de 
Ifide & Ofiride, Diog, Laert. in proœmio, and D' Herbelot 
bibl. orient. 1 x 3 
* + M, le Clerc thinks that Arimanes may be derived from 
EIN). the Hebrew word Harim, cunning, crafty, and he obſerves 
that this is the epithet given to the ſerpent, Gen, e. 3. 

. 4 Ofris, according to fabulous hiſtory, was the ſon of Jupiter 
and Niobe, and king of Argos; he reſigned his kingdom to his 
brother ZEgialus, and went to Egypt, and having civilized that 
kingdom, he attained the ſovereignity of it, Afterwards he 
married Io or Iſis, whom Jupiter had changed into a cow, She 
and her huſband inſtructed the Egyptians in ſeveral arts, ſo that 
after their death they both received divine henours from that 
nation. Typho is ſaid to have been the brother of Ofiris, whom 
he killed with an intent to uſurp the throne ; but he was over- 
come by Iſis, who puniſhed him for his parricide, Oſiris, it is 

| pretended, 


Arabia, and Mabomet. 


the Typhon of the Egyptians; this the Pandora 
of the Greeks; this the vain effort of all the ſages 
to explain the original of good and evil. This 
Theurgy of the Magi was reſpected in the eaſt 
under all governments; and amidſt all revolu- 
tions, the antient religion maintained itſelf in 
Perſia. Neither the Gods of the Greeks, nor 
other Deities ever gained ground in that empire. 

Towards the end of the ſixth century, Nou- 
ſhirvan or Coſroes the great extended his empire 
into a part of Arabia Petræa, and Arabia Felix. 
He drove out the Abyſſinian Chriſtians, by 
whom they had been invaded ; and baniſhed Chri- 
ſtianity, as much as he was able, out of his domi- 
nions, being forced to that ſeverity by the crime 


of his wife's ſon, who turning Chriſtian revolted 


againſt him. 1 

In the laſt year of the reign of this famous 
king, Mahomet was born at Mecca in Arabia 
Petræa, on the fifth of May 570. His country 
at that time defended its liberties againſt the Per- 
ſians, and againſt the princes of Conſtantinople, 
who ſtill retained the title of Roman emperors. 


pretended, was transformed into an ox, under which form the 
Egyptians worſhipped him, and he was called Apis and Serapis. 
There was another Typho, a giant, ſon of Tartarus and Terra, 
according to Heſiod. See Plut. de Ifid. et Ofir. Tibullus looks 
upon Oſiris as inventor of the plow, | - |» J 

Primus aratra manu ſolerti fecit Oſiris, 

Et teneram ferro ſollicitavit bumum. 
I Pandora, a ſurprizing fine woman, according to poetical ac- 
counts, formed by the hands of Vulcan. Each of the Gods had 
given her ſome perfection, Venus beauty, Pallas wiſdom, M er- 
cury eloquence, &c. Jupiter being angry with Prometheus, 
for ſtealing the heavenly fire, ſent Pandora upon earth with a 
fatal box, which when opened by Epimetheus, brother of Pro- 
metheus, diffuſed the ills and diſeaſes which it contained, all 
over the earth. Hope alone remained at the bottom. 


| | The 


41 


42 


Of Perſia, Ch. iv, 

The children of the great Nouſhirvan, whc 
were unworthy of ſuch a father, laid Perſia waſte 
by their parricides and civil wars: The ſucceſſors 
of the wiſe Juſtinian degraded the name of empe- 
ror : Maurice was dethroned by the arms of Phocas, 
and by the intrigues of the patriarch of Syria, in 
conjunction with ſome biſhops, whom Phocas 
afterwards puniſhed for having aſſiſted him. The 
blood of Maurice and his five ſons was ſpilt by 
the hand of the common executioner. Pope 
Gregory the great, the enemy of the patriarchs 
of Conſtantinople, endeavoured to engage the 


_ tyrant Phocas to embrace his intereſt, by laviſh- 


ing praiſes upon him, and condemning the me- 
mory of Maurice, whom he had flattered while 
living. | | 4 | | | TY 
The Roman empire in the Weſt was de- 


ſtroyed, and a deluge of Barbarians, Goths, He- 


ruli, Huns and Vandals had overflowed Europe; 
when Mahomet laid the foundations of the re- 
ligion and power of the Muſſulmen in the deſerts 


of Arabia. 


It is well known that Mahomet was the 


younger ſon of a poor family; that he was for 


a long time in the ſervice of a woman of Mecca 
whoſe. name was Cadigha, who followed the 
employment of a Merchant; that he married 


her, and lived an obſcure life till he was forty 
years old. It was not till this age that he diſ- 


Payed the talents that rendered him ſuperior to 


all his countrymen. He had a lively and forci- 
ble eloquence, void of all art and method, 


fuch as appears adapted to the taſte of the Arabs ; 
an air of authority and inſinuation, animated by 
piercing eyes, and a happy diſpoſition of —_ ; 
51 L | E 


Arabia, and Mabomel. 


he had beſides the intrepidity of Alexander, his li- 
berality, and that ſobriety which Alexander want- 
ed, in order to render his character complete, 

The love of women, which the warmth of his 
conſtitution rendered unavoidable, and which oc- 
caſioned his having ſo many wives and concu- 
bines, did not weaken either his courage, his ap- 
plication, or his health. This the Arabians, his 
contemporaries, obſerve, and the picture is juſti- 
hed by his aclious. 

Having obtained a thorough knowledge of the 
character of his fellow citizens, of their ignorance, 
credulity and diſpoſition to enthuſiaſm, he found 
that it was poſſible for him to. aſſume the cha- 
racter of a prophet. He therefore pretended to 
receive revelations, he uttered them and firſt 
| — credit in his own houſe, which was pro- 

y the moſt difficult taſk; in three years he 
had forty two diſciples. Omar, his perſecutor, 
became his apoſtle ; and at the end of five years, 
he had one hundred and fourteen followers, 

He taught the Arabians who paid their adora- 
tions to the ſtars, that they ought only to adore 
the God who created the ſtars ; that the books 


of the Jews and Chriſtians being corrupted and 


interpolated, ought to be held in abhorrence: 


that they were obliged under pain of eternal pu- 


niſhment, to pray five times a day; to give 
alms; and eſpecially whilſt they acknowledged 
only one God, to believe in Mahomet, the laſt 


of his prophets, and to hazard their lives in de- 


fence of that faith, 

He -prohibited the uſe of wine, becauſe the 
abuſe of it is too dangerous. He preſerved cir- 
cumcilion which was practiſed by the Arabians, 


43 


Of Perſia, Ch. iv. 


as well as by the antient Egyptians,. and was 
probably inſtituted to prevent thoſe early abuſes 
of puberty that often enervate youth. He al- 
lowed the men a plurality of wives, a cuſtom 
that had prevailed from time immemorial, 
throughout all the Eaſt; and he made no alter- 
ation in morality, which in its main branches 
has ever been the ſame amongſt all mankind, and 
which no legiſlator has ever corrupted. His re- 
ligion was in other reſpects more enſlaving than 
any other, by the legal ceremonies, by the num- 
ber and forms of prayers and ablutions; nothing 
being more mortifying to human nature, than 
practices which it does not require, and which 
muſt be repeated every day. 

He promiſed by way of recompence an eternal 
life, in which the ſoul ſhould be inebriated with 
all kinds of ſpiritual pleaſures, and in which 
the body, being raiſed again with all its organs of 
ſenſation, ſhould taſte, by means of thoſe ſenſes, 
all the pleaſures it is capable of enjoying. 

His religion was called [/maniſm, which ſigni- 
fies reſignation to the will of God; and the book 
in which it is contained is named Koran, that is, 
the Book, the Scriptures, or the Lecture, by way of 
Eminence. > © 8 fs 
- All the interpreters of this book allow that its 
morality is contained in theſe words; “Court 
« him who diſcards thee ; give to him who 
« taketh from thee ; forgive thoſe who have of- 
„ fended thee; do g to all; and never diſ- 
% pute with the ignorant.” He ought much 
rather to have recommended to his followers not 
to diſpute with the learned. But in that part of 
the world, it was never imagined that there was 
ſcience or learning elſewhere. Among 


Arabia, and Mahomet. 


Among the incoherent declamations with which 


this book, according to the eaſtern taſte, is fill - 
ed; there are paſſages that appear truly ſublime. 
Mahomet, for example, on ſpeaking of the ceſ- 


ſation of the deluge, expreſſes himſelf thus. 


« God ſaid, Earth abſorb thy waters, Heaven 
« drink up the ſhowers thou haſt poured down: 


« the Heaven and the Earth obeyed.” 


His definition of God is expreſſed in a manner 


ſtill more ſublime: on being aſked who was that 
Allah. whom he preached, he replied : © It 
& js he who holds his being of himſelf, and from 
e whom all other beings are derived; who be- 
ce getteth not, neither is begotten; and who has 
c no likeneſs throughout the whole extent of 
<<. being.“ 

*Tis true that contradictions, abſurdities and 


anachroniſms are plentifully ſcattered throughout 


this book; where we more particularly find a pro- 
found ignorance of the moſt ſimple and obvious 


parts of natural philoſophy. This is the touch- 


ſtone of the books which falſe religions pretend 
to have been written by the Deity; for God can 
utter nothing that is abſurd or falſe; but the vul- 


gar who are incapable of ſeeing theſe faults adore 


them, while their /mans * employ a deluge of words 
to conceal and palliate them. 


* Imans in Turky are the ſame as curates or pariſh prieſts, 


They are obliged to officiate at appointed hours, each in his 


own moſque, Before they enter upon their offices they muft 
appear to be men of regular lives, They are nominated by the 
grand vizir at the preſentation of the pariſhioners, All the li- 
terature requiſite is to know how to read the Koran, They are 
inſtalled without any ceremony, and the Mufti has no authority 
over them, as they have no hierarchy, Each Iman is indepen- 
dent in his pariſh : but in civil and criminal matters they are 
ſubje& to the temporal power, See le Brun, &c, 4 

| Some 


1 


49” 


46 


Of Fi, Ch. iv. 
Some people have imagined from an equivocal 


paſſage in the Koran, that Mahomet could nei- 
ther write nor read ; which would ſtill add to the 


prodigies of his ſucceſs : but it is not probable- 


that a man who had been long a merchant, ſhould 
be ignorant of what is ſo neceſlary to trade: much 
leſs 1s it probable, that a man who was ſo well 
verſed in the hiſtories and fables of his native 
country, ſhould be ignorant of what was known 
to all the children in Arabia. Beſides the Arabian 
authors obſerve, that Mahomet, when dying, 
called for a pen and ink. 

On his being perſecuted at Mecca, his flight, 
which was called Hegira +, became the æra of his 


glory, and of the foundation of his empire: from 


being a fugitive, he roſe to be a conqueror; and 
having taken refuge at Medina, he converted the 
people, made uſe of their aſſiſtance, and with an 
hundred and thirteen men, defeated the inhabi - 
tants of Mecca, who came and attacked him with 


a thouſand. This victory, which his followers 


conſidered as a miracle, made them imagine that 
God fought for them, as they did for him ; and 


from this firſt victory they flattered themſelves 


with the hopes of conquering the world. Ma- 
homet took Mecca, ſaw his perſecutors at his 
feet, conquered within the compaſs of nine years, 
by preaching and the force of arms, all Arabia, 
a country as large as Perſia, and which neither 
the Perfians nor Romans were ever able to ſubdue. 


. + This is the famous epocha of the Arabs; who date their 
years from the flight of Mahomet. to Mecca, which was on a 
Friday July .15th, in the year of Chriſt 622, and under the 
reign. of the emperor Heraclius, See Petav. de doct. temp. Scalig. 


On 


de emend. &c, 


—_—_ Aa mQÞw waa Ao aA 


Sms any PP 8moaw Quads £A A<« tos tos 


„ }=Y bd 


a on oS Hu — = a = Wk oo & o =ww 


E. ©3Þ Wt: p< G = 


Arabia, and Mabomet. | 
On his firſt ſucceſs, he wrote to Coſroes the 
ſecond, king of Perſia, to the emperor Heraclius, 


to the prince of the Copts 1, governor of Egypt, 
to the king of Abyflinia ; and to a prince whoſe 


name was Mandar, who reigned in a province 


near the Perſian gulph. f 

He had the preſumption to make them the pro- 
poſal of embracing his religion; and what ap- 
pears very ſtrange is, that two of theſe princes 
actually became Mahometans; theſe were Man- 
dar, and the king of Abyſſinia. Coſroes tore Ma- 
homet's letter with an air of indignation; Hera- 
clius anſwered him by making him preſents; and 
the prince of the Copts ſent him a girl eſteemed 
the maſterpiece of nature, who was called the 
beautiful Maria. | | 

Mahomet at the end of nine years, thinking 
himſelf ſtrong enough to extend his conqueſts 
and religion into the Grecian and Perfian em- 
pires, began by attacking Syria, then ſubject to 
Heraclius, and took ſome cities, That prince, 
whoſe head was turned with metaphyſical diſputes 


1 Copes is a name given to ſuch of the Chriſtians of Egypt, 


as are of the ſect of Jacobites, ſo called from Jacobus Zanzalus 


their patriarch, who lived in the ſixth century: they are alſo 
called Monophyſites, becauſe they believe there is but one na- 
ture in Chriſt, It is thought that the word Copt comes from 
Egyptos, becauſe the greateſt part of the Chriſtians of Egypt per- 
ſiſted in that error; and when the Arabs made themſelves ma- 
ſters of that country, the orthodox were expelled, and the Jaco- 
dites permitted to ſtay, Theſe ſoon loſt the uſe of the Greek 
tongue, and performed divine ſervice in the Egyptian, though 
mixed with Greek terms and in Greek characters. The antient 
Coptic is now a dead language, to be met with no where but in the 
tranſlations of the ſacred writings and in liturgies, the language 
uſed all over the country being Arabic. The Copts have a pa- 


triarch, who is tiled the patriarch of Alexandria, and has eleven 
or twelve biſhops under him. 


in 


47 


Of Perſia, Ch. iv. 


in religion, and who had eſpouſed the party of 
the Monothelites, received within the compaſs 
of a very ſhort time, two propoſals of a very 
ſingular nature; the one from Coſroes the ſecond, 
who had ſubdued him long before, and the other 
from Mahomet. Coſroes inſiſted on Heraclius's 
embracing the religion of the Magi, and Maho- 
met, on his becoming a Muſſulman *. 

'The new prophet left it to the choice of thoſe 
whom he wanted to ſubdue, either to embrace 
his ſect, or to pay a tribute. This tribute was 
regulated by the Koran at thirteen drachms of ſil- 
ver yearly by every head of a family. So ſmall a 
tax proves that the people he conquered, were 
poor. The tribute has been increaſed ſince. Of 
all the legiſlators, who founded a new religion, 
he is the only one that extended his by conqueſts. 
Other nations have ſpread their worſhip by fire 
and ſword into foreign countries; but no founder 
of a ſect was ever a conqueror. This extraordi- 
nary privilege 1s, in the eye of the Mahometans, 
the ſtrongeſt argument, that God himſelf was 
pleaſed to aſſiſt their prophet. 

At laſt Mahomet, after having made himſelf 
maſter of Arabia, and formidable to all his neigh- 
bours, was ſeized with a mortal diſtemper at the 
age of ſixty three years and a half; when reſolv- 
ing to behave in his laſt moments like a hero and 
a man of integrity, he cried out, Let him to 
* whom I have done violence and injuſtice ap- 
& pear; Iam now ready to make him reparation,” 
On this a man ſtood up, and deſiring the reſtitu- 
tion of ſome money, he ordered it to be given 

* Muſſulman ſignifies a true believer, a name which Maho- 


met gave to thoſe, who embraced his religion, ; 
2 | him, 


Arabia, and Mabomet. 


him, and expired a ſhort time after, with the 
character of a great man even in the opinion of 
thoſe who knew him to be an impoitor, and re- - 
vered as a prophet by all the reſt. 

The Arabs, his cotemporaries, wrote his life 
in a moſt circumſtantial manner. The barbarous 
ſimplicity of thoſe times, which are called heroic, 
appears throughout the whole. His marriage 
contract with his firſt wife Cadigha, is expreſſed 
in theſe words: Whereas Cadigha is in love with 
Mahomet, and Mahomet is alſo in love with her. 
We find what victuals his wives dreſſed for him; 
we are told the names of his ſwords, and of his 
horſes. Eſpecially we may obſerve a remarkable 
conformity between the manners of his people, 
and thoſe of the antient Hebrews (I ſpeak here of 
their manners only) the ſame ardor to ruſh- into 
battle in the name of the Lord, the ſame thirſt for 


plunder, the ſame diviſion of the ſpoils, and eve- 


ry thing referred to this great object. 
But, humanly ſpeaking, and conſidering things 
abſtractedly from the judgments of God, and his 
unſearchable ways, how came it that Mahomet 
and his ſucceſſors, who began their conqueſts ex- 
actly like the Jews, how came it, I ſay, that 
they atchieved ſuch great things, and that the 
Jews did ſo little? Was it not becauſe the Muſ- 
ſulmen took particular care, either by force or 
perſuaſion, to ſubje& the vanquiſhed to their reli- 
2 On the contrary the Jews never admitted 
rangers to partake of their rites? The Arabian 
Muſſulmen incorporated among them other na- 
tions; the Jews always kept themſelves a diſtinct 
people. It appears in ſhort that the courage of 
the Arabians was more enthuſiaſtic, and their 
Vol D : conduct 


50. 


%. 


Of Perfia, Ch. iv. 


conduct more generous and bold. The Jews 
held all other nations in abhorrence, and were 
always afraid of being enſlaved: on the contrary 


the Arabs wanted to bring all nations under them, 


and looked upon themſeves as born to command. 

Mahomet's laſt will was not executed. He 
had nominated Ali his ſon-in-law and: Fatima his 
daughter to ſucceed him in the government of his 
empire: but ambition which triumphs over fanati- 
ciſm itſelf, induced the chiefs of his army to chuſe 
for caliph, or vicar of the prophet, old Abubeker, 
his father-in-law, from the hope that they ſhould 
ſoon divide the ſucceſſion amongſt themſelves. 
Mean while Ali ſtaid in Arabia waiting till time 
ſhould give him an opportunity to ſignalize him- 
ſelf. | | 

Abubeker firſt gathered together the ſcattered 
ſheets of the Koran: and the ſeveral chapters of 
this book being read. in the preſence of all the 
chiefs, its authenticity was eſtabliſned. 

Soon after Abubeker led his Muſſulmen into Pa- 
leſt ine, where he defeated the brother of Heraclius. 
He died a ſhort time after, with the reputation of 


being the moſt gencrous of all mankind, having 


never taken to his own uſe more than about forty 
French ſous “ per day, out of all the ſpoil that 
was divided; thus ſhewing;how. the contempt of 
little mercenary views is compatible with that 
ambition which great intereſts inſpire. 

Abubeker is eſteemed by the Mahometans as a 
great man, and a true Muſſulman. He is one of 
the ſaints of the Koran. The Arabs have given 
us his laſt will couched in theſe terms: In the 
name of the moſt merciful God, this is the will of 


® Twenty-pence Engliſh, | 
k Abubeker 5 


Arabia, and Mahomet. 


Abubeker, made at a time when he was going out 
of this world into the next, at a time when infidets 
elieve, when the impious ceaſe to doubt, and when 
liars tell truth. This introduction ſcems to prove 
that the man was ſincere. And yet he was Ma- 
homet's father-in-law, and had ſeen very far into 
that prophet. Either he was deceived himlſelt by 
Mahomet, or he muſt have been an accomplice 
in a ſignal impoſture, which he conſidered as ne- 
ceſſary; and his place required him to impoſe up- 
on the world, both in his life time, and at the 
hour of his death, | 
Omar who was elected after him, was one of 
the moſt rapid conquerors that ever ſpread deſo- 
lation throughout the earth: He firſt took Da- 
maſcus, celebrated for the fertility of its territory, 
for the fineſt manufactures of ſteel in the univerſe, 
and for thoſe ſilks that ſtill bear its name. He 
drove the Greeks, who went under the appellation 
of Romans, out of Syria and Phœnicia: and after 
a long ſiege, he took by capitulation the city of Je- 


ruſalem; a city that had been poſſeſſed by ſtran- 


gers, who ſucceeded each other, ever ſince David 
wreſted it from its antient inhabitants. 

At the ſame time the lieutenants of Omar ad- 
vanced into Perſia. The laſt of the Perſian kings 
whom we call Hormiſdas the fourth 4, gave bat- 
tle to the Arabians, at ſome leagues diſtance from 
Madain, which was then the capital of that em- 
pire; where he loſt both the battle and his life, 
The Perſians then paſſed under the dominion of 


+ By other writers he is called Iſdigertes, he was the laſt 
Perfian monarch of the line of Artaxerxes, in which the Perſian 
empire had continued upwards of 400 years, This happened in 
632, See Petay, rat. = 


2 Omar, 


Of Perſia, Ch. iv. 


Omar, more eaſily than they had ſubmitted to 
the yoke of Alexander. 

Then fell that antient religion of the Magi, 
which the conqueror of Darius had treated with 
reſpect ; for he never interfered in the worſhip of 
the nations he ſubdued. 

The Magi worſhipped one only God, were 
enemies to idols, and reverenced fire, which ani- 
mates all nature, as an emblem of the Deity. 
They regarded their religion as the pureſt and 
moſt antient; and the knowledge they had ac- 
quired of the mathematics, aſtronomy, and hi- 
ſtory, encreaſed their contempt for their con- 
querors, who were then involved in ignorance : 
they could not therefore forſake a religion that 
had been conſecrated for ſo many ages, for a new 
doctrine profeſſed by their enemies. Moſt of 
them retired to the extremities of Perſia and In- 
dia, where they live at preſent under the name 
of Gaures or Guebres , marrying only amongſt 
themſelves ; keeping up the ſacred fire, and ad- 
hering to what they know of their antient wor- 
ſhip : yet they are ignorant, deſpiſed, and except 
in their poverty reſemble the Jews, who have ſo 
long been diſperſed, without being allied to other 
nations; they have a ſtill greater reſemblance to 
the Banians, who live no where but in India, 
where they are ſcattered in different parts. 


1 They are called Parſis in India, and in Perſia Guebran, a 
name taken from the Arabic Gaur, which ſignifies infidel, or 
idolater: They are in Caramania deſerta, and towards the Per- 
ſian gulf, but in much greater numbers in the provinces of Yezd 
and Kherman ; they are all working people, chiefly employed 
in manufactures of tapeſtry, and fine capets ; they prefer agri- 
culture to every other profeſſion, See D' Herbelot biblioth, 
onent. | 


Many 


n 
r Ta 


*. - 
= / 
WS n 
＋ * 
* 
. 
fb, 
BY 
_y 
+ 
: 
* 
* 


Arabia, and Mahomet. 


Many families of the Guebres or Ignicolæ & re- 
mained at Iſpahan, till the reign of Schah Abbas, 
who expelled them from thence, as Iſabella did 
the Jews from Spain, The Ignicolæ in their 
prayers have long curſed Alexander and Maho- 


met: it is probable that they have joined Schah 


Abbas to them ſince. 

While one of Omar's lieutenants ſubdued Perſia, 
another took all Egypt and a great part of Lybia 
from the Romans, In this conqueſt was burnt 
the famous library of Alexandria, a monument 
of the knowledge and errors of mankind, begun 
by Ptolemy Philadelphus, and augmented by a 
number of ſucceeding kings. The Saracens at 
that time would have no learning but what was 
contained in the Koran; but they afterwards diſ- 
covered a genius cayable of the greateſt under- 
takings, Ihe re-eſtabliſhment of the antient ca- 
nal in Egypt, firſt dug by the kings of that coun- 
try, and afterwards repaired by Trajan, to open 
a communication again between the Nile and the 
Red Sea, is an enterprize worthy of the moſt e 
lightened ages. A governor of Egypt ſets about 
this great work under the caliphate of Omar, and 
completes it. How different the genius of the 
Arabs from that of the Turks? The latter have 
ſuffered a work to go to ruin, the preſervation of 
which was of more value than the acquiſition of 
a large province, 

The ſucceſs of this conquering nation ſeems to 
be owing rather to the enthuſiaſm that inſpired 
them, and to the genius of the people, than to 
their leaders: for Omar was aſſaſſinated by a Per- 
ſian ſlave in 603; and Otman his ſucceſſor was 


* Worſhippers of fire, 
D 3 


ſlain 


154 


Of Perſſa, Ch. iv. 


flain in a tumult in 655. Ali the famous ſon- 
in-law of Mahomet was elected in the midſt of 
commotions, which laſted during his adminiſtra- 
tion. At the end of five years, he was aſſaſſi- 
nated like his predeceſſors, and ſtill the Maho- 
metan arms continued to proſper. . This Ali, 
whom the Perſians revere to this day, and whoſe 
principles they follow in oppoſition to thoſe of 
Omar, at Jaſt obtained the caliphat, and trans- 
terred the ſeat of empire from the city of Medina, 
where Mahomet lies buried, to the city of Couffa, 
on the banks of the Euphrates; the ruins of which 
are now ſcarcely to be be found : this has been 
the fate of Babylon, Seleucia, and all the antient 
cities of Chaldea, that were only built with brick. 

It is evident that the genius of the Arabians, 
being put in motion by Mahomet, did all of itſelf 
near three centuries, and in this reſpect reſembled 
the genius of the antient Romans, In effect it 
was under Valid, the leaſt warlike of all the ca- 
liphs, that the greateſt conqueſts were made. In 
7 one of his generals extends his empire as far 
as Samarcand, At the ſame time another attacks 
the Greck empire towards the Black ſea. Ano- 


ther in 711 tranſports an army from Egypt to 


Spain, which had been ſucceſſively ſubdued with 


eaſe by the Carthaginians, the Romans, the Goths 


and Vandals, and laſt of all by theſe Arabs, who 
were called Moors. There they erected the king- 
dom of Cordova, Indeed the ſultan of Egypt ſhakes 
off the yoke of the grand caliph of Bagdat ; and 
Abderama, governor of the conquered part of 
Spain, no longer acknowledges the ſultan of E- 
gypt: fill the arms of the Muſſulmen are every 


where victorious. N 
| This 


Arabia, and Mahomet. 


This Abderama, grandſon of the caliph Heſh- 
am, makes himſelf maſter of the kingdoms of 
Caſtile, Navarre, Portugal, and Arragon. He 
occupied Languedoc, ſeized on Guienne and 
Poitou; and had it not been for Charles Martel, 
who deprived him of victory and life, France 
would have been a Mahometan province. | 

After the reign of nineteen caliphs of the fa- 
mily of the Ommiades, ſucceeded the dynaſty of 
the Abaſſides, about the year 752 of the Chriſtian 
#ra, Abougiafar Almanzor, who was the ſecond 
caliph of the Abaſſides, fixed the ſeat of that great 
empire at. Bagdat in Chaldea, beyond the Eu- 
phrates. The Turks ſay that he laid the foun- 
dations of Bagdat; but the Perſians affirm that 
it was more antient, and that he only repaired it: 
this is the city, which is ſometimes called Baby- 
lon, and which has been the occaſion of ſo many 
wars between the Turks and Perſians. 

The dominion of the caliphs laſted ſix hundred 
and fifty five years; during which time they were 
as deſpotic in religion as in government. Though 
they were not adored like the great Lama, they 
enjoyed a more ſubſtantial authority; and even 
at the time of their decay, they were reſpected 
by the princes by whom they were perſecuted. 
All the ſultans, whether Turks, Arabians or 
Tartars, received the inveſtiture of their domi- 
nions from the caliphs, with leſs reluctance than 
many Chriſtian princes have received theirs from 
the pope: they did not indeed kiſs the feet of 
the caliph, but they proftrated themſelves at the 
threſhold of his palace. 

If ever any power threatened univerſal mo- 
narchy, it was certainly that of theſe caliphs ; for 
2215 D 4 they 


Of Per/a, Ch. iv. 


they enjoyed the privileges of the throne and the 
altar, the right of wielding the ſword, and of di- 
recting the impulſes of enthuſiaſm : all their or- 
ders were oracles, and all their ſoldiers fanatics. 

In the year 671, they laid ſiege to Conſtanti- 
nople, which was one day to become Mahome- 
tan : the almoſt inevitable diviſions among ſo 
many ferocious chiefs, did not put a ſtop to their 
conqueſts ; for in this particular they reſembled the 
antient Romans, who amidſt their civil wars ſub- 
dued Aſia minor. <> 

In proportion as the Mahometans grew power- 
ful, they became polite. "Theſe. caliphs, who 
were always acknowledged as the ſovereigns of 
religion, and apparently of the empire, by thoſe 
who no longer received their orders at ſuch a 
diſtance, lived in tranquillity in their new Baby- 
Ion, and ſoon revived the arts. Aaron Rachild, 
cotemporary with 8 was more reſpect- 
ed than any of his predeceſſors, and made him- 
ſelf obeyed even in Spain and India; he revived 
the ſciences, taught the agreeable and the uſeful 
arts to flouriſh, drew learned men into his country, 
compoſed verſes, and made politeneſs take place 
of barbariſm throughout his vaſt dominions. Un- 
der him the Arabians, who had already adopted 
the Indian method of computation by nine figures 
and a cypher, brought them to us : the French 
and Germans learnt from theſe Arabians the courſe 
of the ſtars : of this the very word almanack * is 
ſtill a proof. 


* Some derive it from the Arabic particle al, and manah, to 
count; while others, think it comes from almanab, new year's 
gifts, becauſe the aſtronomers of Arabia uſed at the beginning of 
the year, to make preſents of their ephemerides for the next 


year. 
The 


Arabia, and Mahomet. 


The Almageſt * of Ptolemy was then tranſlat- 
ed from the Greek into Arabic, by Benhonain 
the aſtronomer. The caliph Almamon cauſed a 
degree of the meridian to be meaſured by the rules 
of geometry, in order to determine the magni- 
tude of the earth ; an operation that was not per- 
formed in France till above nine hundred years 
after, in the reign of Lewis XIV. This aſtro- 
nomer Benhonain carried his obſervations very far, 
and diſcovered, that either Ptolemy had fixed the 
ſun's greateſt declination too far north, or that 
the obliquity of the ecliptic was changed: he 
even found that the period of thirty ſix thouſand 
years aſſigned for the pretended motion of the fix- 


ed ſtars from the Weſt to the Eaſt, ought to be 


greatly ſhortened. 
The knowledge of chemiſtry and phyſic was 


cultivated by the Arabians ; and we are indebted 
to them tor the diſcovery of the firſt of theſe which: 
we have brought to perfection. We owe to them 
the new remedies called minoratives, more mild 


and ſalutary than thoſe that were before in uſe in 


the ſchools of Hippocrates and Galen. In ſhort, 
the ſecond century after Mahomet, the Chriſtians. 


of the Weſt were obliged to receive inſtructions 
from the Muffulmen. 


An infallible proof of the ſuperior genius of a: 


nation in regard to the polite arts, is the cultiva- 
tion of true poetry, I ſpeak not of high flown 
bombaſt compoſitions, nor. of the heap of infipid 


* The Arabs write and pronounce it Aſmagefthi or Almagiſthi, 
that is, the ſyſtem of the world, compoſed by Ptolemy, intitied 
in Greek ourra{:; wuenice, Syntaxis megifi; whence the Arabs 
have taken their word by corruption, and by another corruption: 
we have formed ours from that of the Arabs, See D' Herbelot. 
bibl. orient, | 


D 5 com- 


: 
Z 
: 
r 
* 
wt 
? 
o 


— > 


— n — 
— — —2 


—— 


— 
— 


ä ̃ r1——é—— — X’ÄÄ————— 


Of Perſia, Ch. iv. 


common places about the ſun, the moon, and 
ſtars, the mountains, and ſeas : but of that bold 
yet elegant taſte which obtained in the reign of 


Auguſtus, and which we have ſeen revived under 


Lewis XIV. This poetry which abounds with 
images and ſentiments, was known in the time 
of Aaron Rachild, Amidit a variety of examples 
J ſhall ſelect one that ſtrikes me, and I give it be- 
cauſe it is conciſe. It reJates to the famous 
downfall of Giafar Barmecides *. | 


* The name cf one of the moſt illuſtrious families in Aſia, 
ſaid to be originally from the city of Balch on the frontiers of 
Perſia, Giafar, one of their anceſtors, having been conſtrained 
by civil commotions to leave his country, fled for ſhelter to the 
court of Solyman, caliph of the line of Ommiades,who refided at 
Damaſcus in the beginning of the eighth century. Giafar ap- 
pearing one day before the caliph, this prince immediately chan- 
ged colour, and commanded him to withdraw, becauſe he car- 
ried poiſon about him : this he perceived by the beating of two 
ſtones tied to his arm, which always had that effect, when poi- 
ſon was near, Giafar confeſſed, that he had ſome in the collet 
of his ring, to take or ſuck in caſe of any ſudden misfortune ; 
and as he expreſſed himſelf in the Perſian language by the word 
Bar, or Bermekum, which ſignifies to ſuck, thence the name 
continued. to him and his poſterity, This Giafar was famous for 
all civil and military virtues, and was choſen by caliph Mabadi 
for governor to his ſon Aaron Rachild. He had four ſons, Fad- 
hel, Giafar, Mohammed, and Muſſa, who all inherited their 
father's virtues, and raiſed their family to the higheſt degree of 
reputation, Giafar was vizir under Aaron Rachild, and that 
prince's intimate favourite. The cauſe of the diſgrace of this 
family is variouſly related by Arabian writers, Some ſay it was 
for Giafar's having not performed a condition, which he pro- 
miſed when he married Abaſſah the caliph's fiſter, which was, that 
they never ſhould ſee each other but in his preſence, and always 
live like brother and ſiſter ; others ſay it was for Giafar's having 
refuſed to obey Aaron's orders for putting Jahia prince of the 
Alides to death: others in fine, that it was owing to the jcalouſy 
dich the caliph conceived of the great power and riches ef this 
family, See D' Rerbelot, lib, orient, 


Weak 


Arabia, and Mabomet. 


Weak mortal, whom proſperity 

Has intoxicated with its dangerous charms, 

Learn how precarious is the favour 

Of kings, from the example of Barmecides; 

And dread being nappy 

This laſt verſe is tranſlated word for word. 

Nothing can be more beautiful in my opinion 
than, dread being happy. The Arabic tongue 
had the advantage of being perfected a great 
while ago; it was aſcertained before the time of 
Mahomet, and has not altered ſince. Of the ſe- 
veral jargons then ſpoken in Europe, there is not 
at preſent the leaſt veſtige. Which way ſoever 
we turn ourſelves, we muſt own we were born 
but yeſterday. We go beyond other nations in 


many reſpeCts ; and perhaps it is becauſe we came 
the laſt. 


NNNNNNNNN NNW N NN NN 


HAF. V. 


Of the flate of Italy and the church, Bùeſors 
Charlemaign. l 


O THIN is more worthy of our curioſi- 

ty, than the manner in which God was 
pleaſed to eftabliſh his church, by making the 
ſecond cauſes concur with his eternal decrees, 
Let us reſpectfully leave whatever is myſterious 
and divine, to thoſe who are the depoſitaries of 
religion, and confine ourſelves to hiſtory. A few 
diſciples of St. John took up their reſidence 
in that part of Arabia neareſt to Jeruſalem ; but 
Chriſt's diſciples fpread themſelves all over the 
; D 6 world, 


Of the fate of Italy, Ch. v. 


world. The Platonic philoſophers of Alexandria, 
where there was ſuch a multitude of Jews, join- 
ed the primitive Chriſtians at Rome in Nero's 
time; but they were confounded with the Jews, 
becauſe they came from the ſame country, ſpoke 
the ſame language, and abſtained from the ali- 
ments prohibited by the Moſaic law: beſides 
- many of them were circumciſed, and obſerved 
the ſabbath. | 
There were till about four thouſand Jews at 
Rome : in Auguſtus's reign they were eight 
thouſand ; but Tiberius ſent one moiety of them 
to Sardinia, in order to people the iſland, and to 
eaſe the city of Rome of a multitude of uſurers, 
Far from being interrupted in their religious wor- 
ſhip, they enjoyed the toleration which the Ro- 
mans liberally extended to all religions. They 
were allowed to have ſynagogues and magiſtrates 
of their nation, as they have ſtill in modern 
Rome, where they are more numerous. Havin 
an implacable hatred to the profeſſors of Chri- 
ſtianity, they accuſed them of being the incen- 
diaries who deſtroyed ſome part of Rome under 
the emperor Nero. It was as unjuſt to impute 
this accident to the Chriſtians, as to Nero. Nei- 
ther he, nor the Chriſtians, nor the Jews, had 
any intereſt in ſetting Rome on fire. But there 
was a neceſlity for appealing the populace, who 
had the ſame deteſtation as the Jews, for thoſe 
ſtrangers. A few poor wretches were ſacrificed 
to the public vengeance. This inſtance of vio- 
lence ought not, I apprehend, to be reckoned 
among the perſecutions, which the Chriſtians 
underwent on account of their faith ; it had no- 
thing at all to do with their religion, which was 
not 


and the church before Charlemaign. 


not ſo much as known, and which the Romans 
confounded with Judaiſm, then under the pro- 
tection of the laws. 

If it be true that in Spain they have found in- 
ſcriptions, in which Nero is thanked for having 
aboliſhed a new ſuperſtition in that province; the 
antiquity of thoſe 1aſcriptions is ſtrongly ſuſpect- 
ed. But even ſuppoſing them authentic, Chri- 
ſtianity is not mentioned: and after all, if thoſe 
contumelious expreſſions were levelled againſt the 
Chriſtians, muſt we not impute them to the Jews 
ſettled at that time in Spain, who were jealous 


of the Chriſtians, and abhorred their religion as 


a domeſtic and inveterate enemy? | 

We ſhall not preſume to ſearch into the im- 

penetrable obſcurity, which involves the church 
in its infant ſtate, and has been ſometimes in- 
creaſed by the elaborate diſquilitions of the li- 
terati. 
This is very certain, that it was not the diſpo- 
ſition of the ſenate to perſecute any man for his 
opinion, that no emperor ever attempted to force 
the Jews to change their religion, neither after 
the revolt in Veſpaſian's reign, nor that which 
broke out under Adrian. It is true their wor- 
ſhip was reviled and derided; and ſtatues were 
erected in their temple before its demolition : but 
never did emperor, proconſul, or Roman ſe- 
nate, dream of hindering the Jews from be- 
lieving the Moſaic law. This ſingle reaſon 
ſhews what liberty the Chriſtians had to extend 
their religion in private. 

The Chriftians were not moleſted by any of 
the emperors, till the reign of Domitian. Dion 
Caſſius ſays that under this emperor there mu 

me 


61 


62 


Of the ſtate of Italy, Ch. v. 


ſome people condemned as Atheiſts, and for imi- 
tating the manners of the Jews. It ſeems that this 
oppreſſion, of which we have but very imperfect 
accounts, was neither long nor general, We can- 
not _ tell why ſome Chriſtians were exiled, 
nor why they were recalled, How is it poſſible to 
believe Tertullian who, upon the credit of Hege- 
ſippus, gravely informs us, that Domitian exa- 
mined the grandſons of the apoſtle St. Jude of 
the race of David, of whoſe pretenſions to the 
throne of Judea he was jealous, and finding 
them to be poor and miſerable, he diſcontinued 
the perſecution. Were it poſſible for a Roman 
emperor to be afraid of the pretended deſcendants 
of David, when Jeruſalem was deſtroyed, his 
malice would have been againſt the Jews and not 
the Chriſtians. But who can imagine that 
the ſovereign of the known world ſhould give 
himſelf any uneaſineſs about the rights of St. 
Jude's grandſons to the kingdom of . Paleſtine, 
or be at the trouble of examining them ? Thus 


it is that hiſtories have been unfortunately writ- 


ten by ſuch a number of men, who had more 
piety than judgment. 5 

Nerva, Veſpaſian, Titus, Trajan, Adrian, 
and the Antoninus's were not perſecutors. Tra- 
jan having prohibited all private aſſemblies, wrote 
notwithſtanding to Pliny: you muſt make no in- 
quiry after the Chriſtians. Theſe words ſuffi- 
ciently prove, that they might conceal them- 
ſelves, and exerciſe their religion with prudence, 
though through the malice of the prieſts, and the 
hatred of the Jews, they were frequently car- 
ried before the magiſtrates, and puniſhed. The 
people, and eſpecially the people of the Po 

ate 


and the church before Charlemaign, 


hated the Chriſtians : They incited the magiſtrates 
againſt them, and were for having them expoſed to 
wild beaſts in the Circus . The emperor Adrian 
not only gave ſtrict charge to Fondanus the procon- 
ſul of Aſia Minor not to perſecute them, but his or- 
ders expreſsly mention, that if the Chriſtians were 
flandered, the flanderer ſhould be ſeverely puniſhed. 
This regard to juſtice in Adrian, made ſome 
people falſely imagine, that this emperor was a 
Chriſtian. But would he who erected a temple 
to Antinous, erect one to Jeſus Chriſt ? 
Marcus Aurelius ordained that the Chriſtians 
ſhould not be perſecuted on the account of re- 
ligion. Caracalla, Heliogabalus, Alexander, 
Philip, Gallien, openly protected them: there- 
fore they had full leiſure to extend their doctrine, 
and to ſtrengthen their infant church. They 
held five councils in the firſt century, ſixteen in 
the ſecond, and thirty-ſix in the third. They 
had magnificent altars ſo early as this third cen- 
tury: the church hiftorians mention ſome that 
were adorned with filver columns, which toge- 
ther weighed three thouſand marks. The chalices 
made after the model of the Roman cups, as alſo 
the pattens or covers, were of pure gold. 
So great was the liberty which the Chriſtians 
enjoyed, notwithſtanding the outcries and per ſe- 
cutions of their enemies, that in ſeveral pro- 
vinces they had publicly erected churches on the 
ruins of Pagan temples, This is acknowledged 
by Origen and St. Cyprian; and the church muſt 
certainly have enjoyed a long repoſe, ſince thoſe 


*The Circus was a place where the people of Rome aſſembled 


to ſee the public FeQacles, ſo called, in all probability, from 
aun, which ſignifies a circle, | 


two 


63 


64 


Of the fate of Traly, Ch. v. 


two great men reproach their cotemporaries 
already with luxury, effeminacy, and avarice, 
the conſequence of happineſs and plenty. St. 
Cyprian particularly complains, that ſome biſhops 
inſtead of imitating the holy examples before 
their eyes, hoarded large ſums of money, grew 
rich with uſury, and defrauded people of their 
eſtates. Theſe are his very words: which are 
an evident proof of the eaſe and happineſs they 
enjoyed under the Roman laws, The abuſe of 
a thing is a demonſtration of its exiſtence. If 
Decius, Maximinus, and Diocleſian perſecuted 
the Chriſtians, it was for reaſons of ſtate: Deci- 
us, becauſe they ſided with Philip, who was 
ſuſpected himſelf, though unjuſtly, of being a 
Chriſtian: Maximinus, becauſe they ſupported 
Gordian. During the ſpace of twenty years they 
enjoyed the greateſt liberty under Diocleſian. 
At length Cæſar Galerius who hated them, pre- 
vailed on Diocleſtan in 303, to give orders for 
demoliſhing the- cathedral church of Nicomedia, 
which had been built oppoſite to the imperial 
palace, A Chriſtian publicly tore the edict, 
and was puniſhed. A few days after, part of 
Galerius's palace was conſumed bs fire; and the 


. Chriſtians were ſuppoſed to be the incendiaries. 


As yet however they were not ſubject to rv 
capital puniſhment. The tenour of the edi 
was that their temples and books ſhould be 
burnt, and their perſons diveſted of all honours. 
So far Diocleſian never intended to lay any 
conſtraint upon them in regard to religion. Af- 
ter his victory over the Perſians he publiſh- 
ed ſome edits againſt the Manicheans, who 
were devoted to the Perſian intereſt, and ſecret 
| Enemies 


and the church before Charlemaign, 


enemies of the Roman empire. Theſe edicts 
were owing intirely to political motives. Had 
they been dictated by religious zeal, which 
-is rarely the caſe in regard to conquerors, the 
Chriſtians would have been included. But as 
they were not; they muſt have enjoyed a repoſe 
of twenty years under Diocleſian, during which 
time their religion gained ground: nor were 
they moleſted in his whole reign, more than 
two years; and even then Lactantius, Euſebius, 
ahd the emperor Conſtantine imputes this ſeveri- 
ty to Galerius only and not to Diocleſian. And 
indeed it is not at all probable that a man who 
had philoſophy enough to abdicate the imperial 
dignity, ſhould have fo little as to be a fanatic 
perſecutor. The ignorant vulgar have formed a 
notion of Diocleſian, as one that waged perpe- 
tual war againſt the Chriſtian faith, and imagine 
his reign to have been a continual maſſacre like 
that of St. Bartholomew : but this is far from 
being true. The æra of martyrs, which begins 
at Diocleſian's acceſſion, ought therefore to be 
dated two years before his abdication, ſince he 
put no one to death for religion the ſpace of 
twenty years, 

That he reſigned the imperial dignity, out of 
vexation for not being able to aboliſh Chriſti- 
anity, is a wretched lie. On the contrary, had 
he been ſo virulent a perſecutor, he would have 
continued to reign, in order to deſtroy that relt- 
gion; and if he was forced to abdicate, as fome 
affirm without proof, his abdication. could not be 
the effect of vexation and ſpite. The vanity of 
dealing in the marvellous, and of ſwelling the 
number of martyrs, has been the caule of _— 

alle 


65 


—— — — — 2 3 A 
- — 7 __— —— — . 
— Rs - — — — 
. n 
- — « - + As - — — 8 1 * "Vu 


—UüU— — 


— — D ¶—ůuöL’ʃ 1 Be — _ 


66 


Of the fiate of Italy, Ch. v. 
falſe and improbable perſecutions to thoſe which 
are but too real. It is ſaid that in Diocleſian's 
reign, Maximianus Hercules Cæſar made a 
whole legion of martyrs in the Alps; this was 
called the Theban legion, conſiſting of ſix thou- 
ſand ſix hundred men, all Chriſtians, who ſuf- 
fered themſeves to be maſlacred without repining. 


This famous ſtory was not committed to writing till 


two hundred years after by the abbot Eucherius *, 


who relates it upon hearſay. And even grant- 


ing there was a Theban legion, which is very 
doubtful, how could Maximianus Hercules ſend 


for this oa, as he is ſaid to have done, out 


of the Eaſt, only to quell a ſedition in Gaul ? 
Why ſhould he deſtroy ſix thouſand fix hundred 


good troops, when he wanted their aſſiſtance to 
-appeaſe this tumulc? How could they be all 
Chriſtians to a man? Why ſhould he murder 
them upon the road? Who were their execution- 
ers? What purpoſe could ſuch a butchery anſwer, 
at a time when there was no perſecution ; at a 
time when the church enjoyed the profoundeſt 
"tranquillity; and when the Chriſtians had built 
a magnificent temple at Nicomedia, juſt 


oppoſite to Diocleſian's palace? The profound 


peace and full liberty which we enjnyed, ſays 
Euſebius, oocaſioaned a relaxation of morals. Is 
this profound peace, and this full liberty, 


reconcileable with the maſſacre of ſix thouſand 


fix hundred ſoldiers? Could this extraordinary 


fact be true, would Euſebius have omitted to 


mention it? Such a multitude of real martyrs 
have ſealed the Chriſtian religion with their 


blood, that we ſhould give no ſhare of their glory 
* He was biſhop of Lyons, See Du Pin, | 
to 


I OW DD 


* 


and the church bee re Cbarlemaign. 


to thoſe who did not partake of their ſufferings. 
It is certain that Diocleſian, during the two laſt 
years of his reign, and Galerius for ſome years 
after, did violently perfecute the Chriſtans of 
Aſia Minor and the neighbouring provinces : 
but in Spain, Gaul, and England, which were 
under the dominion of Conſtantius Chlorus, far 
from being perſecuted, their religion was pre- 
dominant, and Euſebius ſays that Maxentius, 
who was choſen emperor at Rome in 306, raiſed 
no perſecution, 


The Chriſtians were very uſeful to Conſtan- 


tius Chlorius, who took them under his pro- 
tection, and whoſe wife Helena made public 
profeſſion of their religion. They muſt therefore 
at that time have been a ſtrong party in the ſtate. 
Their money and their arms contributed to place 
Conſtantine on the throne. This is what ren- 
dered him odious to the ſenate, to the people of 
Rome and to the Pretorian guards, who had all 
eſpouſed the cauſe of Maxentius his competitor 
to the empire. Our hiſtorians call Maxentius 


a tyrant, becauſe he was unfortunate ; and yet 


it is very certain that he was the lawful emperor, 
ſince he had been proclaimed by the ſenate and 
by the people of Rome. TR | 
Conſtantine's reign is a glorious æra to the 
religion which he eſtabliſhed in the empire, 
There was no neceſſity for adding prodigies to 
this revolution, ſuch as the apparition of the 


Labarum * in the clouds, without letting us 
know 


* The Labarum was the Military ſtandard, which the Ro- 
mans bore ſince the reign of Conſtantine the great, This prince 


on his march againſt Maxentius is ſaid to have ſeen in the hea- 
vens 


67 


68 


— 
Of the ſtate of Italy, Ch. v. 


know in what country this ſtandard appeared. 
There was no occaſion to write that the guards 
who had care of the Labarum, were invulnera- 
ble. The ſhield * which fell from heaven in 
antient Rome, the Oriflamme + which an angel 
brought to St. Denis, and all theſe imitations 
of the Trojan Palladium , have a fabulous air, 
and only tend to diſcredit truth. Learned anti- 
quarians have ſufficiently refuted theſe errors, by 
arguments drawn from philoſophy, and ſound 
criticiſm. Let us therefore content ourſelves 
with ſeeing in what manner Rome ceaſed to be 
miſtreſs of the world, 


vens a luminous croſs, like the Greek letter X inverted 
in the form of a ſquare croſs, with the Greek letter P over 
the x, round which were theſe Greek words EN TOYTQ NIKA, 
conquer by this : the next night it is ſaid that Chriſt appeared to 
him, and ordered him to make a military ſtandard in the form 
of the croſs he had ſeen the preceding day, and he ſhould be 
victorious ; which he did, and he ſucceeded. The form of it 
may be ſeen on Conſtantine's medals, Others write it Laborum, 
and ſay that Conſtantine gave it this name, to ſignify that the 
croſs ſhould put an end to the /abeurs and perſecutions of the 
Chriſtians, See Euſebius in vita Conſtantini. Turneb. Adverſ. 
1. 15. c. 16, Prudentius mentions it in his firſt book againſt 
e ger in theſe terms, ' 
briflus purturcum geminanti textus in auro— ſignabat Labarum, 

* This is — Auel which is ſaid to have Lala from heaven 
at Rome, after a great peſtilence, in the year 48, U. C. and 
the reign of Numa Pompilius. See Livy, Plutarch, &c. 

+ The Oriflamme is the ſtandard of the abby of St, Dennis; 
it was made in the form of an antient banner, and ſaid to have 
been ſo called, becauſe it was made of ſilk of the colour of gold 
and fire, See Du Cange. 

t A ſtatue of the goddeſs Pallas, ſuppoſed to have dropped 
down from heaven, preſerved in Troy, and on which the fate 
of that city is ſaid to have depended : this occaſioned Diomedes 
and Ulyſſes, in the time of the Trojan war, to ſteal it, See 
Liv. I. 26, Roſin. Antiq. Rom, lib, 3, 


Conſtantine 


VF a” yU=_s >” Yy DD Vw, v WF: 5 Www vw 


—_—— WWF WW WW WW Wo WF WW j— Cy _ wary 


ok AM. 4 


and the church before Charlemaign. 


Conſtantine having attained the imperial dignity 
in ſpite of the Romans, could not gain their affec- 
tion. Tt is evident that the hatred they bore him, 
was not at all abated by the many horrid mur- 
ders he committed, ſuch as that of Licinius his 
brother-in-law contrary to the moſt ſolemn en- 
gagement, that of Licinian his nephew a child 


only twelve years old, that of Maximian his 


father-in-law who was ſtrangled by his orders at 
Marſeilles, that of his own ſon Criſpus who was 


put to death after having gained ſeveral victories 
againſt his enemies, and in fine that of his wife 


Fauſta, who was ſmothered in a bath. Proba- 
bly this was what induced him to transfer the 
ſeat of empire to Byzantium. In the Theodo- 
ſtan Code we find an ediét of - Conſtantine, in 
which he declares, that he founded Conſtantinople 
by order of the Deity, Thus he pretended a re- 
velation, to ſilence all complaints. This act 
alone is ſufficient to ſhew his character. Our 
curioſity would feign penetrate into the in- 
moſt receſſes of ſuch a prince as Conſtantine, 
who ſoon made a general revolution through- 
out his dominions; changing the ſeat of em- 
pire, the manners of the court, the cuſtoms, 
language, dreſs, form of government, and re- 
ligion. But how can we come at the real 
character of a perſon, whom one party re- 
preſents as the moſt criminal, and the other 
as the moſt virtuous of men? Were we to 
conclude that he made every thing ſubſervient 
to what he looked upon as his intereſt, we 
ſhould not be miſtaken. : 

To know whether the ruin of the empire was 


owing to him, is a point worthy of your as * 
c 


6g 


Of the ſtate of Italy, Ch. v. 


It ſeems evident that he was the cauſe of the 
downfall of Rome. By transferring the ſeat of 
empire to the Thracian Boſphorus, he raiſed a 
barrier in tne eaſt againſt the inroads of barba- 
rians, who over-run the empire under his fuc- 
ceſſors, and found Italy defenceleſs. He ſeems 
to have ſacrificed. the weſtern empire to the eaſt : 
for Italy fell when Conſtantinople roſe. The 
political hiſtory of thoſe times would be a curious 
and inſtructive ſtudy. But we have hardly any 
thing upon the ſubject, except ſatires and pane- 
gyrics. And yet the truth may ſometimes be 
_ diſcovered by panegyrics. For inſtance, Con- 
ſtantine is extolied to the ſkies, for ordering the 
ſeveral chiefs of-the Franks, with all the priſoners 
he had made in an expedition towards the Rhine, 
for ordering them, I ſay, to be devoured by wild 
beaſts at the Circenſian games. Such was the 
treatment ſhewn to the predeceſſors of Clovis 
and Charlemaign. Writers who have been fo 
mean as to commend ſuch acts of barbarity, do 
however aſcertain thoſe acts, and the reader is 
to judge of them as he thinks prudent. The 
moſt circumſtantial part of the hiſtory of this re- 
volution, as far as it has been tranſmitted down 
to us, is that which relates to the eſtabliſhment 
of the church, and its domeſtic troubles. 

It is melancholy to conſider, that as ſoon as 
Chriſtianity was ſeated on the throne, the ſanQi- 
iy of this religion {ſhould be profaned by Chri- 

ians unworthy of that name, who indulged their 
thirſt for revenge, even when their triumph ſhould 
have inſpired them with the love of peace. They 
maſſacred all the magiſtrates in Syria and Pa- 
leſtine, that had been concerned in perſecuting 
them ; 


# 
at 
f 
5 


. & AR d 9... .AX-.. ©. cad. 


and the church before Charlemaign. 


them; they drowned the wife and daughter of 
Maximinus; they put his ſons and his relations 
to death by the moſt cruel tortures. The diſputes 
about the conſubſtantiality of the ſon of God diſ- 
turbed the world, and embrued it in blood. In ſhort 
Ammianus Marcellinus tells us, that the Chriſtians 
in his time, tore one another to pieces lite wild beaſts. 
There were perſons of eminent virtue among 
thoſe people, though Ammĩanus takes no notice of 


them : but mankind are generally blind to the vir- 


tues of their enemies, and only obſerve their vices. 

The church of Rome was preſerved from thoſe 
unfortunate diſputes: in the beginning it was 
neither powerful, nor corrupt; ſo that it be- 


haved with moderation, and enjoyed a long 


peace in the midſt of a Pagan ſenate and peo- 
ple. In that capital of the known world there 
were ſeven hundred temples, great and ſmall, 
dedicated to the Gods majorum & minorum gen- 
tium x. Theſe ſubſiſted till the reign of Theo- 
doſius; and the country people continued a long 
time in their antient worſhip. Hence the fol- 
lowers of the old religion came to have the name 
of Pagans, Pagani, from the villages called in 
Latin pagi, in which idolatry was tolerated till 
the eighth century. | | $5 
The impoſture , on which the donation of 
Conſtantine was founded, is well known ; but 
the public are not ſo well informed how long 
this impoſture had gained credit. Thoſe who 
would not believe it, were frequently puniſhed in 


* Theſe are different orders of the heathen Gods. 

+ This impofture has been lately refuted even at Rome by 
F. Giuſ, Agoſtino Orfi, m:ſter of the ſacred palace. See his 
difſertation Della origine del dominio e della Souwranita de Romani 
Pontefici ſopra gli ſtati lere tem peralmente ſoggetti. Teal 

I taly 


7l 


72 


© ICT ANC . OED TS» UE WG eB A Son OO 


Of the flate of Traly, Ch. v. 


Italy and in other countries. Who could ima- 
gine that there were people burnt alive at Straſ- 
burg in 1478 for oppoling this error ? | 

Fan indeed gave, not to the biſhop of 
Rome only, but to the cathedral, which was the 
church of St. John Lateran, a thouſand marks of 
gold, and thirty thouſand of ſilver, with a yearly 
income of fourteen thouſand ſous, and ſome lands 
in Calabria. Succeeding emperors encreaſed this 
eſtate, which the biſhops of Rome ſtood greatly 
in need of. The miſſionaries they ſent into the 
Pagan countries in Europe, the ſhelter they af- 
forded to biſhops exiled from their ſees, and the 
maintaining great numbers of poor, laid them 
under the neceſſity of having a good revenue to 
ſupport theſe expences. The dignity being 
ſtill greater than the revenue, the paſtor of 
the Chriſtians at Rome was grown the chief 
perſon in the weſtern world. Pious men had 
often accepted of this office, and the ambi- 
tious courted it. Conteſts aroſe about the 
papal chair; for there were antipopes ſo early 
as the middle of the fourth century : hence the 
Pagan Conſul Pretextatus expreſſed himſelf in 
theſe words in 466; make me biſhop of Rome, 
and I will be a Chriſtian. 

Yet this biſhop had no other power than that 
which is founded either in virtue, perſonal accom- 
pliſhments, or intrigue. Thoſe paſtors of the 
church had no civil juriſdiction, much leſs the 
prerogative of ſovereigns. None of them had 
what we call the jus terrendi, nor à terfitorial 
right, nor the power of pronouncing: * do, di- 

| co, 


*. Theſe were the three words, which the Roman nib 
uſe 


E17 


and the church before Charlemaign. 


co, addico. The emperors continued ſupreme 
judges of every thing, except articles of faith. 
They ſummoned councils: and Conſtantine at 
that of Nice heard and tried the criminal charge, 
which the biſhops brought againſt one another. 
Even the title of ſupreme pontif was ſtill annexed 
to the Imperial dignity. | 

When the Goths made themſelves maſters of 
Rome after the Heruli, when the celebrated The- 
odoric, a prince not inferior in power to Char- 
lemaign, had fixed the ſeat of his empire at Ra- 
venna in the beginning of the ſixth century, 
without aſſuming the title of emperor of the welt, 
which he might have done; he exerciſed exactly 
the ſame authority over the Romans, as the Cæ- 
ſars had been uſed to: he maintained the ſenate 
he allowed liberty of conſcience; he made all 
perſuaſions, whether orthodox, Arians, or Pa- 
gans, ſubmit to the civil magiſtrate ; he tried 
the Goths by Gothic laws, and the Romans by 
theirs; he preſided by his commiſſaries at the 
election of biſhops ; he prohibited ſimony ; and 
put a ſtop to ſchiſms. Two popes diſputed the 
pontifical chair; he nominated Symmachus to 
that dignity, and this man being accuſed of ſome 
crime, he ordered him to be tried by his mY 
dominici +. 

His ſon Athalaric regulated the elections of 
the popes, and of the other metropolitans of his 
dominions, by an edict which was ftrictly obſerv- 


uſed to ſay, when they ſat in judgment on the dies faſt; or court | 


days; the meaning of them is, I ſit here to give laws, declare 
right, adjudge loſſes, 


+ Miſi Dominici ſignifies commiſſaries appointed by the lord or 
fovereign, i 


Vor. Lo E ed; 


73 


Of the fate of Traly, Ch. v. 


ed; an edict drawn up by his miniſter Caſſiodo- 
rus, who retired afterwards to Mount Caſſino, 
and embraced the rule of St. Benedict; an edict 
to which pope John II. made no difficulty to 
ſubmit. 

When Belifarius came into Italy, and reſtored 
the Imperial command in that country, it is well 
known that he baniſhed pope Silverius ; and in ſo 
doing he did not exceed the limits of his authori- 
ty, though he might thoſe of juſtice. Beliſa- 
rius, and Narſes having reſcued Rome from the 
Gothic yoke, another inundation of barbarians, 
Gepids, Franks, and Germans, ſpread themſelves 
over Italy. The whole weftern empire was laid 
waſte by ſavages. Ihe Lombards eſtabliſhed 
their dominion in citerior Italy. Albuinus, the 
founder of that new dynaſty, was no more than 
a ſavage free-booter ; but the conquerors ſoon 
adopted the polite manners, the language and re- 
ligion of the conquered. This was not the caſe 
m regard to the Franks, and Burgundians, who 
carried their barbarous language, and their ſtill 
more barbarous manners into Gaul. The Lombard 
nation was compoſed of Pagans and Arians. Their 
king Rotharis publiſhed an edict towards the year 
640, granting liberty of conſcience to all reli- 
gions ; ſo that almoſt in every town in Italy there 
were two biſhops, a Catholic and an Arian, who 
ſuffered the idolaters that were ſtill diſperſed among 
the villages, to live in peace and quiet, 

The kingdom of Lombardy extended from 
Piedmorit to Brindiſi and the tetra d'Otranto : 
it included Benevento, Tari, Tarento ; but it 
contained neither Apulia, Rome, nor Ravenna, 
Theſe countries continued to be annexed 7 755 


and the church before Charlemaign. 


feeble empire of the eaſt, Thus the church of 
Rome paſſed from the dominion of the Goths to 
that of the Greeks, The city itſelf was govern- 
ed by an exarch * appointed by the emperor ; but 
he did not reſide in that capital, which was al- 
moſt deſerted. His reſidence was at Ravenna, from 
whence he ſent his orders to the duke or prefect 
of Rome, and to the ſenate who were ſtil] called 
conſcript fathers, The outward form of munici- 
pal government ſtill ſubſiſted in that antient and 
decayed capital ; and the republican ſentiments 
were never extinguiſhed, 'T hey were ſupported 
by the example of Venice, a republic founded 
by fear and diſtreſs, but ſoon raiſed by commerce 
and bravery. The Venetians were ſo powerful 
in the eighth century, as to reſtore the exarch 
Scholaſticus, who had been chaced away from 
Ravenna, 

In what condition then was Rome in the ſe- 
venth and eighth centuries? It was a poor un- 
happy city, weakly protected by the exarchs, con- 
tinually menaced by the Lombards, and ſtill ac- 
knowledging the emperor for its maſter. The 
popes had increaſed their influence during the de- 
ſolation of that capital. They were often the com- 
forters, the fathers of the people; but ſtil] they 
were ſubjects, and could not be conſecrated with- 
out the expreſs leave of the exarch. The form 
in which this leave was aſked and granted, is 
ftill RE The clergy of Rome wrote to 
the metropolitan of Ravenna, and deſired his 
beatitude's protection and recommendation to 


* The emperor's viceroy in Italy; it is a Greek word, 
ag xo, from i and dgxopas to command, 
a E 2 the 


15 


Origin of the © Ch. vi. 
the governor ; the pope afterwards ſent his pro- 
feſſion of faith to this metropolitan. 

At length the Lombard king Aſtolphus ſeized 
on the whole exarchate of Ravenna, in 751, and 
put an end to this Imperial viceroyalty, which 
had laſted a hundred and eighty three years. 

As the dutchy of Rome depended on the ex- 
archate of Ravenna, Aſtolphus laid claim to 
Rome by right of conqueſt. Pope Stephen II. 
the only defender of 'the unfortunate Romans, 
applied to the emperor Conſtantine, ſurnamed 
Copronymus, for ſuccour. All the ſuccour this 
eva emperor gave, was to ſend an officer be- 
onging to his court with a letter to the king of 
the Lombards. This weak ſituation of the Greek 
emperors was the origin of the new empire of the 
welt, and of the pontifical grandeur, 


GOP H- NN Hi i a i 8/29 
CHAP, VI. 
Origin of the papal power. 
OME, ſo often plundered by barbarous 


nations, abandoned by the emperors, and 
hard preſſed by the Lombards, was incapable ei- 
ther of reſtoring the antient republic, or of pre- 
tending any longer to grandeur. She ſtood in 


need of repoſe, which ſhe would have —_— 


had ſhe been governed at that time by her biſhop, 
after the manner afterwards eſtabliſhed in ſeveral 
cities of Germany ; and anarchy would at leaſt 
have been productive of this advantage. But it 
| Was 


F 


Papal power. 


was not yet a received opinion among Chriſtians, 
that a biſhop could be a ſovereign, though the 
hiſtory of the world afforded ſo many examples 
of the union between the prieſthood and the em- 
pire in other religions. 

Pope Gregory III. was the firſt who had re- 
courſe to the protection of the Franks againſt the 
Lombards and the emperor. His ſucceſſor Za- 
chary, animated with the fame ſpirit, acknow- 
ledged Pepin, the uſurper of the crown of France, 
as lawful ſovereign. It has been pretended that 
Pepin who was only prime miniſter, firſt ſent to 


aſk the pope, which was the true king, he who 


had only the right and the name, or he who had 


the authority and merit? And that the pope de- 
termined this queſtion by anſwering that the mi- 
niſter ought to be king. It has never been prov- 
ed that this farce was really acted : but it is cer- 
tain that pope Stephen III. called Pepin to his 
aſſiſtance againſt the Lombards ; that he came to 


- France, and that in the church of St. Denis he 


gave the royal unction to Pepin, the firſt anoint- 
ed king in Europe. Not only did this firſt uſurper 


receive the ſacred unction from the pope, after 


having received it from St. Boniface, who was 
called the apoſtle of Germany; but Stephen III. 
forbad the French, under pain of excommunica- 
tion, ever to chuſe a king of another family. 
While this biſhop expelled from Italy, and 
forced to be a ſupplicant in a foreign country, had 
the courage to give laws; his policy made him 
aſſume an authority which ſecured that of Pe- 
pin's: and this prince the better to enjoy what 
was not his due, left the pope privileges which 
he had no right to poſſeſs. 


E 3 Hugh 


73 


Orizin of the Ch. vi. 


Hagh Canet in Fance, amd Comtad in Ger- 
many, hive fle ſhe un that ar) excommuniica- 
Gon of that kind is a functamental law, 

And yet the prejudice of opinion, which di- 
refts the affairs of s world, imprinted ſuch a 
reſpect in the minds of the gecp e for the ccremo 
ny which the pope porformed at St, Denis, that 
Eginhardus, ſecretary to Charlemaign, fays in ex- 
prefs terre, that ting Hilderic 15595 arprjed hy ar dev 


of prpe Errphen, 


One would think it « contradiction, that this. 


ſhould come te F rare, in order to proſtrate 
himſelſ at Pepin's feet, and afterwards difpoſe of 
the erown, But it is far otherwiſe: thoſe pro- 
trations were locked upon in no other light than 
5 our bows or reverences, at preſent, T his was 
the antient cuſtom of the eaſt. I hey ſaluted the 
biſhops on their knees; and the biſhops paid 
the farne compliment to the governors of their 
dioceſes, Charles, the fon of Pepin, embraced 
pope Stephen's feer at St. Mawice in Valais; 
and Stephen embraced thoſe of Pepin, This was 
# matter of no confequence : but the popes inſer- 
ſibly aſlumed to themſelues alone this mark of 
reſpet, Some pretend that pope Adrian I. was 
he who infifted on the ceremony of kiffing his 
feet, Kings and emperors ſubmitted afterwards 
to this kind of homage, which rendered the Ro- 
man religion more venerable in the eyes of the 


people. | 

We ate told that Pepin paſſed the Alps -_ 544 
that the Lombard king A ſtolphus, intimidated 
merely by the preſence of the king of the F ranks, 


immediately relinquiſhed the whole exarchate of 


Ravenma to the pope; that Pepin repaſſed the 
moun- 


Papal proer, 


mounta ns, and that he was bardiy returned, 
hen Aſtoiphus, inſtead of giving Ravenna to 
the pops, laid ſiege to Rome, The conduct of 
the princes of thoſe times is fo very irregular, 
that it is poſhble Pepin might make a preſent t5 
the pope, of the exarchat* of Kavenna, which 
did not belong to bim; and be might have made 
this extraordinary donation, without taking any 
mcaſure to put it into exccution, Tet it is not 
at all probable, that ſuch a man as Pepin, who 
hal dethroned his king, ſhould march with an 
army into Italy merely to make prelents, No- 
thing is more uricertain than this grant, though 
cited by ſuch a number of writes, Anaſtaſhus 
the bibliothecarian, who wrote 149 years after 
FVepin's expedition, is the friſt that mentions 
it, I confels, a thouſand authors take notice 
of it; but the fact is now denied by the beſt 
civilians in Germany; 

At that time there prevailed an odd mix- 
ture of policy and ſimplicity, of aukward- 
nels and cunning, which ftrongly charatterizes 
the general decay of the times, Stephen 
feigned a letter from St. Peter, addreſſed to 
Pepin and his ſons, which deſerves to be inſerted 
here, as follows: „Peter called an apoftle by 
„ Jeſus Chriſt fon of the living God, &c. As 
« through me the whole catholic, apoſtolic, and 
© Roman church, the mother of all other churches, 
4% ig founded on a rock, and to the end that 
« gtephen biſhop of this beloved church of Rome, 
« —and that virtue and power may be granted 
« by our lord to reſcue the church of God out of 
« the hands of its perſecutors: To you moſt 
„ excellent princes, 3 Charles, and Charlo- 

E 4 „% man, 


80 


Origin of the Ch. vi, 


& man, and to all the holy biſhops and abbots, 
« prieſts and monks, as alſo to dukes, counts 
& and people, I Peter the apoſtle, &c. I con- 
« jure you; and the virgin Mary, who will be 
© obliged to you, gives you notice, and com- 
“ mands you, as do alſo the thrones, domina- 
tions. . . If you will not fight for me, I declare 
© to you by the holy Trinity, and by my apoſtle- 
& ſhip, that you ſhall have no ſhare in heaven.” 

This letter had its effect: Pepin paſſed the Alps a 
ſecond time, laid ſiege to Pavia, and concluded 


La 


a peace once more with Aſtolphus. But is it at 


all likely that he ſhould paſs the mountains twice, 
for no other motive than to give away towns to 
pope Stephen ? How comes it that St. Peter in his 
letter makes no mention of ſo important a fat? 
Why does not he complain to Pepin of not being 
in poſſeſſion of the exarchate ? Why does not he 
demand it back again in expreſs terms ? 

As the original title of this donation has never 
yet appeared, we are obliged to doubt; which is 
the only reſource often left to hiſtorians as well as 
to philoſophers. But the holy ſee does not ſtand 
in need of any ſuch equivocal titles; it hath as 
undoubted a right to its dominions, as the other 
princes of Europe have to theirs. It is certain that 
the Roman pontifs had large patrimonies at that 
time in more countries than one; that thoſe pa- 
trimonies were reſpected, and free from taxes. 
They had eſtates in the Alps, in Tuſcany, Spo- 
leto, Gaul, Sicily, and even in Corſica, before 
the Arabs made themſelves maſters of that iſland 


in the eighth century. It is likely that Pepin 


made a great addition to this patrimony in the 
province of Romagna, and that it was called the 
| | patrimony 


Papal power. 


patrimony of the exarchate. Probably this word 

atrimany was thezoriginal cauſe of the miſtake. 
Poſderior authors in times of darkneſs ſuppoſed 
that the popes had the ſovereignty of thoſe coun- 
tries, where they poſſeſſed only ſome lordſhips or 
eſtates. 


If any pope pretended to rank as a ſovereign 
prince towards the end of the eighth century, it 
ſeems to have been Adrian I. The money 
coined in his name-(if this coin was really 
{truck in his time) ſhews that he had the prero- 
gative of ſovereignty; and the cuſtom he intro- 
duced of making people kits his feet, corroborates 
this conjecture. Yet he conſtantly acknowledged 
the Greek emperor for his lord and maſter. He 
might very well pay an empty homage to that 
diſtant ſovereign, and claim a real independence 
ſupported by the authority of his ſacred office. 

Before we ſhew how the tranſlation of the em- 
pire, produced a total revolution in the weſt, it 
will be proper to give a ſhort view of the Eaſtern 
church, whoſe diſputes contributed not a little to 
this great revolution, 


LEES ESES SS $-$:3$3-33-$-$-1 


Ci AP. VIL 
State of the Eaſtern church before Charlemaign. 


HETHER the cuftoms of the Greek 
and Latin churches were as different as 
their language; whether their liturgy, their ſa- 
cerdotal veſtments, the ornaments and ſtructure 
of their churches, and their manner of making 


E 5 the 


82 


State of the Eaſtern church Ch. vii. 


the ſign of the croſs, were the fame or not; whe- 
ther the Greeks prayed ſtanding, and the Latins 
kneeling, is not what I am about to examine. 
Theſe different uſages did not ſet the Eaſt and Weft 
at variance : they only ferved to foment the na- 
tural averſion between nations that were grown 
rivals to each other. The Greeks eſpecially, who 
were always chriſtened by immerſion, or by plung- 
Ing into large baptizing tubs, hated the Latins 
who, in favour of the northern Chriſtians, had 
introduced baptiſm by ſprinkling. But theſe uſages 
were productive of no diſturbance. 

The eaſtern churches were ſtrangers to tem- 
poral dominion, that perpetual ſource of diſcord 
in the Weſt. The biſhops, under the eye of their 
Tovereign, continued to be ſubjects : but other 
broils, of no leſs fatal conſequence, were excited 
by thoſe endleſs diſputes, which ſprang up con- 
tinually in the ſophiſtical brains of the Greeks 
and their diſciples. 

The ſimplicity of the primitive times diſappear- 
ed amidſt the multitude of queſtions, which were 
ſtarted by human curioſity : for the founder of 
the Chriſtian religion having wrote nothing, and 
mankind being impatient to know every thing, 
each myſtery gave riſe to different opinions, and 
each opinion was produttive of bloodſhed, 

It is very extraordinary that out of very near 
fourſcore ſets, which had rent the church ſince 
its firſt eſtabliſhment, not one was founded by a 
Roman, except Novatianus, who can hardly be 
conſidered as an heretic. And of all the biſhops 
of Rome there has been only one, that favoured 


any of thoſe ſyſtems condemned by the church. 


This was pope Honorius I, who is charged » 
| this 


before Charlemaign. 


this day with having been a monotheliſt f. By 
this accuſation they think to ſtigmatize his me- 
mory : but whoever will give himſelf the trouble 
to peruſe his celebrated paſtoral letter, wherein 
he attributes but one will to Jeſus Chriſt, will 
find him a man of great prudence. We acknow- 
ledge, ſays he, but one will in Cbriſt. Te do 
not find that either councils, or ſcripture authorize 
ws to think otherwiſe : but whether, in conſequence 
of the works of the divine and human nature with 
which he is inveſted, we ought to under/land one 
operation or two, I leave to grammarians, ad im- 
ports but little to know. 

There is nothing perhaps more valuable in 
the letters of the popes, than theſe very ex- 
preſſions. They ſhew that all the diſputes of 
the Greeks were merely about words ; and that 
they ought to have filenced thoſe ſophiſtical quar- 
rels, which have been attended with ſuch fatal 
conſequences. Had they left them to gramma- 
rians, as this judicious pontif adviſeth, the church 
would have enjoyed a conſtant peace, But were 
they to decide the queſtion, whether the Son was 
conſubſtantial with the Father? the Chriſtian 
world was divided, and one half perſecuted the 
other. Would they know 'whether the mother 
of Jeſus Chriſt was the mother of God, or of 
Jeſus ? Whether Chriſt had two natures and two 
wills in one and the ſame perſon, or two perſons 
and one will, or one will and one perſon ? All 
theſe diſputes, which aroſe in Conftantinople, 
Antioch, and Alexandria, excited ſeditions: one 


+ A ſe& ſo called from their maintaining that though there 
are two natures, there is but ene woll, in Chriſt, The word is 
of Greek original from ie, one, and gha, will, 

E 6 party 


84 


State of the Eaſtern church Ch. vii. 


party anathematized the other ; and the ruling 
faction condemned to exile, to priſon, to death, 
and to eternal torments the other faction, which 
in its turn took revenge by making uſe of the ſame 
weapons, | . 

Such troubles were never known amongſt the 
Pagans: the reaſon of which is, though they 
were involved in the groſſeſt errors, they had no 
ſettled religious tenets; beſides, the idol prieſts, 
much leſs the laiety, never aſſembled in a judicial 
manner in order to diſpute. | 

In the eighth century it was debated in the 
eaſtern church whether religious worſhip ought 
to be paid to images: this had been expreſsly for- 
bidden by the law of Moſes, a law that had never 
been repealed ; and moreover the primitive Chri- 
ſtians had for two hundred years never ſuffered 
them to be placed in their religious aſſemblies. 

By little and little the cuſtom was every where 
introduced of having crucifixes in private houſes ; 
and at laſt people had pictures, either true, or what 
were pretended to be ſo, of martyrs or confeſſors. 
There were yet no altars erected to the ſaints, and 
no maſſes celebrated in their name ;,pnly at the 
fight of a crucifix, or of the image of a good 
man, the heart, which more particularly in thoſe 
climates ſtands in need of ſenſible objects, was 
excited to virtue. | 

This cuſtom was introduced in churches : but 
ſome biſhops refuſed to adopt it. We find, that 


in the year 393, St. Epiphanius pulled down an 


image, in a church in Syria, before which a per- 
ſon was praying : he declared, that the Chriſtian 
religion did not permit that worſhip, and yet his 
ſeverity did not occaſion the leaſt ſchiſm, 


At 


before Charlemaign. 
At laſt this pious practice, like all other —_ 
h 


merely human, degenerated into an abuſe. e 
common people, who are ever groſs in their 
ideas, made no diſtinction between God and the 
images: they ſoon proceeded ſo far as to attribute 
to them virtues and miracles ; each image cured 
a particular diſeaſe : they even uſed them in ſuper- 
ſtitious divinations, which have always ſeduced the 
credulity of the vulgar; I do not mean the vulgar 
among the common people only, but thoſe among 
princes and learned men. 

In the year 727, the emperor Leo, the Iſau- 
rian, at the deſire of ſome biſhops, rooted out 
this abuſe: but he did it by a ſtill greater abuſe; 
he cauſed all the paintings to be defaced, and all 
the ſtatues and repreſentations of Chriſt and his 
apoſtles to be broke to pieces. Thus in ſud- 
denly removing the objects of their worſhip, 
he exaſperated the people: they diſobeyed his 
orders; on which he perſecuted them, and be- 
cauſe he had been imprudent, became a tyrant. 

His ſon Conſtantine Copronymus cauſed a civil 
and eccleſiaſtical law to be paſſed for the abolition 
of images. He held a council at Conſtantinople 
compoſed of three hundred and thirty-eight biſhops, 
who unanimouſly condemned this worſhip, which 
had obtained in many churches, and more parti- 
cularly at Rome. 

This emperor thought with the ſame eaſe to 
have aboliſhed the monks whom he held in abhor- 
rence, and whom he never called by any other 
name but the Abominables : however, he did not 
here meet with ſucceſs; for theſe monks, who 
were already very rich, defended their wealth 
with more judgment than they had ſhewn in the 
protection of the images of their ſaints, The 


$6 


State of the Eaſtern church Ch. vii. 


The popes Gregory II. and III. and their fuc- 
ceſſors, though ſecret enemies of the empe- 
rors, and avowed adverſaries to their doctrine, 
did not, however, level againſt them thoſe heavy 
excommunications, that have ſince been ſo fre- 
quently employed, even on the ſlighteſt occa- 
ſion: but whether an antient reſpect for the ſuc- 
ceſſors of the Cæſars ſtill reſtrained the Roman 
metropolitans, or whether, as is moſt probable, 
they ſaw how greatly thoſe ex communications, in- 
terdictions and diſpenſations of oaths of allegiance, 
would be deſpiſed at Conſtantinople, where the 
patriarchal church equalled at leaſt that of Rome, 
they contented themſelves with holding two 
councils, one in 728, the other in 732, in which 
it was declared, that all who were enemies to 
images ſhould be excommunicated, without add- 
ing any thing more, or even mentioning the em- 
peror. It ſeems as if the popes thought more of 
buſineſs than diſputing. Gregory II. gained the 
direction of affairs in Rome, while the people 
continued in their revolt againſt the emperor, 
and ceaſed to pay him any tribute. Gregory III. 
conducted himſelf according to the ſame prin- 
ciples. Some Greek writers of a later date, in 


order to render the pontifs odious, have aſſert- 


ed that Gregory II. excommunicated and de- 
pes the emperor, and that the whole city of 
ome acknowledged Gregory II. for their 
prince. Thoſe Greeks did not reflect that the 
popes, whom they would fain repreſent as uſurp- 
ers, would in that caſe have been the moſt right- 
ful ſovereigns. They would have held their 
1 the free choice of the people of Rome. 
hey would have been ſovereigns of that 

| | by 


H 


— 


before Charlemaign. 


by a much juſter title, than a great many empe- 
rors. But it is neither probable, nor true, that 
the Romans, while they were menaced by Leo 
the Iſaurian, and hard preſſed by the Lombards, 
ſhould chuſe a biſhop for their prince, when 
they ſtood in need of a captain. Had the popes 
at that time acquired fo juſt a right to the Impe- 
rial throne, they would never have transferred it 
to Charlemaign, 


00000000,00000000 


HAT. 
Of Charlemaign. 


1 kingdom of Pepin extended from the 
Rhine to the Pyrenean mountains and the 
Alps. Charlemaign, his eldeſt ſon, inherited all 
theſe dominions; for one of his brothers died af- 
ter they were ſhared between them, and the other 
had before embraced a religious life in the mo- 
naſtery of St. Sylveſter. A ſpecies of piety, agree- 
able to the barbariſm of thoſe times, had confined 
more than one prince to the cloiſter: thus Rachis, 
king of the Lombards; Charloman, the brother 
of Pepin; and a duke of Aquitain, had taken 
the habit of the Benedictines, which was then al- 
moſt the only order in the Weſt, Convents were 
honourable aſylums for thoſe who deſired to live 
a peaceful life : but ſoon after theſe aſylums be- 
came the priſons of dethroned princ=s. 


Pepin, 


| xd - 1 ' : b * 
r e ²˙ . ]¾ ÄbA ye meer on 


— 2 8 
— ̃ — — 


88 


Of Cbarlemaign. Ch. viii 

Pepin, however, was very far from having 
the direct property of all thoſe ſtates: Aquitain, 
Bavaria, Provence, and Britany, were countries 
lately conquered, which rendered homage, and 
paid tribute. 

Two neighbours were capable of being formida- 
ble to this vaſt empire, the northern Germans and 
the Saracens. England, which had been con- 
quered by the Anglo-Saxons, and divided into 
ſeven kingdoms, being always at war with Al- 
bania, new called Scotland, and with the Danes, 
had neither civil polity nor power. Italy be- 
ing weak and torn in pieces, expected only a 
new maſter, 

The northern Germans were then called 
Saxons; a name given to all the nations 
who dwelt on the banks of the Weſer and 
the Elbe, from Hamburgh to Moravia, and 
from Mentz to the Baltick ſea. They, as well 
as all the North, were Pagans: their manners 
and laws were the ſame as in the times of the 
antient Romans: each canton was a republic, 
but they elected a chief when they went to war : 
their laws were ſimple as well as their manners: 
their religion was abſurd : in times of imminent 
danger, they, like many other nations, ſacrificed 
human victims to che Deity : it is the character 
of Barbarians, that they repreſent the Deity as 
a ſtern malevolent being; for men make God 
after their own image. The French, though 
Chriſtians, had this horrible ſuperſtition in the 
reign of Theodebert; for Procopius obſerves, 
that they ſacrificed human victims in Italy: and 
even the Jews had ſometimes committed theſe 
* profana- 
0 


Of Charlemaign: 
profanations from a motive of piety, In other 
reſpects theſe people practiſed juſtice, and placed 
their glory and happineſs in liberty, Theſe 
are they, who under the names of the Catti, 
the Cheruſci, and the Bructeri, conquered Varus, 
and were afterwards defeated by Germanicus. 

One part of theſe people were, towards the 
fifth century, called over by the Britons to aſſiſt 
them againſt the Scots; when they ſubdued 
Britain, and gave it the name of England. 
They had been there before in the third century 
for in the time of Conſtantine part of this 
iſland was called the Saxon coaſt, 

Charlemaign, the moſt ambitious, the moſt 
politic, and the greateſt warrior of his age, 
carried on a war of thirty years againſt the 
Saxons, before he entirely brought them into 
ſubjection. Their country had not yet any 
thing capable of tempting the avarice of con- 
querors: The rich mines of Goſlar and 
Friedberg, from which ſuch quantities of ſilver 
have been drawn, were not then diſcovered; 
theſe were unknown till the reign of Henry the 
Fowler. They had no riches accumulated by 
long induſtry; no city worthy the ambition of 
an uſurper: this conqueſt could only be de- 
ſigned to make ſlaves of millions of men, who 
cultivated the earth under a ſevere climate, who 
fed their flocks, and were reſolved to have no 
maſters. 

The war againſt the Saxons began with de- 
manding a tribute of three hundred horſes, and 
of ſome cows which Pepin had required of them; 
and this war laſted thirty years, W hat right ew 

ranks 


90 


Of Charlemaign. Ch. viii. 


Franks over that nation? The ſame as the Saxons 
had heretofore over England. 

They were but ill armed; for we find in the 
capitularies of Charlemaign, a ſtrict prohibition 
againſt ſelling cuiraſſes to the Saxons. This differ- 
ence of arms, added to diſcipline, had made the 
Romans the conquerors of ſo many nations; 
and this at laſt enabled Charlemaign to triumph 
over the Saxons. 

The general of the greateſt part of thoſe people 
was the famous Witikind, from whom the prin- 
cipal families in the empire are made to deſcend: 
he in many reſpects reſembled Arminius, but at 
laſt behaved with greater weakneſs. Charle- 
maign “ firſt took the famous village of Ereſ- 
bourg + 772; for that place did not deſerve: the 
name either of a town or fortrefſs. He cauſed 
the inhabitants to be murdered: he pillaged, 
and at laſt raſed the principal temple in the coun- 
try, originally built for the worſhip of the God 
Tanfana, the univerſal principle, if it could be 
ſaid that thoſe ſavages had. ever any knowledge 
of an univerſal principle. It was then dedicated 
to the God Irminſul ; whether this was the god 
of war, the Ares of the Greeks, the Mars of the 
Romans; or whether it was conſecrated to the 
famous Herman Arminius, vanquither of Varus, 
and avenger of the Germanic liberty. 

The prieſts were maſſacred on the ruins 
of the idol, Charlemaign penetrated to the 

® This war againſt the Saxons, was reſolved upon in the diet 
of Worms, at the inſtigation of Sturmio, abbot of Fulda, His 


reſentment was owing to this, that notwithſtanding the treaty 


concluded with Pepin, the Saxons had murdered ſome of his 
miſhonaries. bo | 


+ In Weſtphalia, | 
Weſer 


- Of Charlemaign. 


Weſer with his victorious army, and all the 
cantons ſubmitted. He reſolved to bind them to 
his yoke by Chriſtianity ; and while he marched 
to the other end of his dominions to obtain new 
conqueſts, he left miſſionaries to perſuade, and 
ſoldiers to force them : thus almoſt all thoſe who 
dwelt near the Weſer found themſelves, within 

the compaſs of a year, Chriſtians and ſlaves, 
Witikind retired amongſt the Danes, who al- 
ready trembled for their liberty and their Gods; 
but returning a few years after, he revived the 
courage of his countrymen, and aſſembled them 
together. He found in Bremen, the capital of the 
country that bears its name, a biſhop, a church, 
and his diſtreſſed Saxons, who were dragged to 
the new altars : he drove away the biſhop, who 
had time to fly and embark; deſtroyed Chriſtia- 
nity, which the people had been forced to em- 
brace; and marched almoſt to the Rhine, follow- 
ed by a multitude of Germans, where he de- 
feated Charlemaign's lieutenants. | 
This prince made haſte and defeated: Witikind 
in his turn; but treated this couragious effort in 
behalf of liberty, as a revolt: he ordered the 
trembling Saxons to deliver up their general, 
and on being informed that they had ſuffered 
him to return into Denmark, he maſſacred four 
thouſand five hundred priſoners on the banks of 
the little river Aller. If theſe priſoners had been 
his rebellious ſubjects, {till ſuch a ehaſtiſement 
would have been an inhuman and horrid ac 
of ſeverity: but his treating thus men, who 
fought for their liberties and laws, was the ac- 
tion of a barbarian and robber; and yet his re- 
markable 


| 
| 


— 


Of Cbarlemaign. Ch. viii. 
markable ſucceſs, and ſome ſhining qualities in 
other reſpects, gained him the character of a 
great man. 

He was obliged to obtain three victories more 
before he could make theſe people ſubmit to his 
yoke; but at laſt blood cemented Chriſtianity 
and ſlavery: Witikind himſelf, wearied out by 
his misfortunes, was obliged to ſubmit to bap- 
tiſm, and to live from thenceforward tributary 
to his conqueror. The king, the better to 
ſecure the poſſeſſion of theſe countries, tranſ- 
planted Saxon colonies even into Italy, and eſta- 
bliſhed colonies of Franks in the lands of the 
conquered; but he added to this wiſe policy the 
cruelty of cauſing thoſe Saxons to be poniard- 
ed, who were found diſpoſed to return to their 
antient worſhip. Conquerors are hardly ever 
cruel except in war; for peace introduces re- 
— of 2 and milder laws: but Char- 
emaign, in the midſt of peace, made laws that 
partook of the inhumanity of his conqueſts. 

Having obſerved how this prince treated the 
idolatrous Germans, let us ſee how he behaved 
with reſpect to the Mahometans in Spain. The 
ſame thing had already happened amongſt them, 
as was ſoon after ſeen in Germany, France, 
and Italy: the governors rendered themſelves in- 
dependent. The emirs * of Barcelona, and thoſe 
of Saragoſa, put themſelves under Pepin's pro- 
tection: and the emir of Saragoſa, in the year 
778, came as far as Paderborn to entreat Char- 


Emir among the Turks and other Mahometans ſignifies a 
commander or prince. The Saracen Caliphs took the title of 
Emir al moumenim, that is commander of the faithful, See D' Her- 
belot, 


lemaign 


— 


Of Charlemaign. 


lemaign to ſupport him againſt his ſovereign 
when the French prince eſpouſed the part of the 
Muſſulman, but never thought of making him 
a Chriſtian. Other intereſts produced other 
cares; he entered into an alliance with Sa- 
racens againſt Saracens ; but after ſome ad- 
vantages obtained on the frontiers of Spain, his 
rear-guard was defeated at Roncevaux near the 
Pyrenean mountains, by the Chriſtians themſelves 
of thoſe mountains, in conjunction with the 
Muſſulmen. In this engagement Rowland his 
nephew periſhed ; a misfortune that was the ori- 
gin of thoſe fables wrote by a monk in the ele- 
venth century, under the name of the archbiſhop 
Turpin *, and which were afterwards embel- 
liſhed by the imagination of Arioſto. It is not 
known at what time Charlemaign ſuffered this 
diſgrace, nor do we find that he revenged it. 
Contented with ſecuring his frontiers againſt 
enemies that were but too well diſciplined, he 
graſped only at what he was capable of keeping, 


and regulated his ambition by ſuch events as were 
favourable to it. 


* This archbiſhop Turpin or Tulpin had been a monk of St. 
Denis, and was made archbiſhop of Rheims towards the year 
760: he died about the year $00 after enjoying the archiepiſ- 
copal ſee above 40 years. The book attributed to him is intitled 
Hiſtoria de vita Caroli Magni & Rolandi : but as Voltaire obſerves, 
this ſtory or romance was wrote by a monk in the 11th century. 


CHAP, 


93 


— 


— * 


— 


5 — ——— 
— 8 —«ß«⏑ 8 — ů—— 5 
1 


94 


T he emperor Charlemaign. Ch. ix. 


CHAP. IX. 
The emperor Charlemaign. 


| HARLES's ambition made him aſpire 


l after Rome and the empire of the Weſt, 
T he power of the kings of Lombardy was the 
only obſtacle : for the church of Rome, aud all 
the churches on which ſhe had an influence ; the 
monks, 'who were already powerful; and the 
people who were now governed by them, 
invited Charlemaign to the empire. Pope 
Adrian, a Roman by birth, and a man of 
art and- abilities, ſmoothed the road to it: he 
at firſt prevailed on him to repudiate the daughter 
of Deſiderius, king of Lombardy. 15 
The cuſtoms and laws of that time were 
not very ſevere, at leaſt in regard to princes. 
Charles had married this daughter of the king 
of Lombardy, when he was ſaid to have another 
wife. And indeed it was not uncommon to have 
many or ſeveral wives at the ſame time. Gre- 

ory of Tours relates that the kings Gontran, 
ebert, Sigebert and Chilperic had more than 
one wife. Charles repudiates the daughter of 
Deſiderius, without giving any reaſon for it, and 
without any formality. 

Deſiderius, who ſaw this fatal union be- 
tween the king and the pope, took a cou- 
ragious refolution : he determined to ſurpriſe 


Rome, and ſeize the pope's perſon z but 


the artful biſhop turned the war into a ne- 
gotiation. Charlemaign ſent ambaſladors in 


order to gain time, and at laſt paſſed the Alps, 
when 


The emperor Charlemaign. 
when a part of Deſiderius's army abandoning 
him, this unhappy king ſhut himſelf up in Pavia, 
his capital, which Charlemaign befieged in the 


midſt of winter. The city being reduced 774. 


to extremity, ſurrendered after a ſiege of 
ſix months; and Deſiderius could obtain no 
other condition than the granting him his life. 
Thus ended the kingdom of the Lombards, who 
had deſtroyed 8 power in Italy, and 
ſubſtituted their own laws in the room of thoſe of 
the emperors. Deſiderius, the laſt of theſe kings, 
was Carried into France, and confined in a mo- 
naſtery in the city of Corbie, where he lived 
and died a captive and a monk; while his ſon 
applied in vain for affiftance to Conſtan- 
tinople, that ſhadow of the Roman empire, 
which had in the Weſt been deſtroyed by his 
anceſtors. It ought to be obſerved, that Deſi- 
derius was not the only prince confined by Char- 
lemaign ; for he treated in the ſame manner the 
duke of Bavaria and his children. 

Charlemaign durſt not yet become ſovereign 
of Rome; and therefore he only aſſumed the title 
of king of Italy, a title that had been borne by 
the Lombards. He was crowned, like them, at 
Pavia with an iron crown, which is ſtill kept in the 
little town of Monza * : juſtice was ſtill admi- 
niſtered at Rome in the name of the Grecian 
emperor: and the popes "themſelves received 
from him the confirmation of their election. 
Charlemaign therefore only took, like Pepin, 
the title of Patrician, which Theodoric and 


* Situate in the dutchy of Milan on the river Lumbro, in a | 
great plain, towards the lake of, Como, and within ten miles of 


Milan, | 
Attila 


| 
; 
| 
| 
| 


4 IS — — — * 2 ron omg — n n - . 
— ũꝗ¶ ꝗÜmm _—_— _— ——  —  — _—_— — I : 


Es 


The emperor Charlemaign. Ch. ix. 


Attila had alſo condeſcended to take: thus the 
name of emperor, which when firſt uſed, only 
meant the general of an army, ſtill ſignified the 
maſter of the Eaſt and Weſt. Vain as this title 
was, they treated it with reſpect, feared to uſurp 
it, and only affected to make uſe of that of Patri- 
cian, which formerly meant a Roman ſenator. 
The popes, though they had already a vaſt 
power in eccleſiaſtical affairs, though they were 
great lords at Rome, and poſſeſſed ſeveral eſ- 
tates, had notwithſtanding only a precarious 
and tottering authority in that capital. The pre- 
fect, the people, and the ſenate, the ſhadow of 
which ſtill ſubſiſted, frequently oppoſed them; 
and the enmity between the families who had pre- 
tenſions to the pontificate, filled the city with 
conſuſion. | 
Acdrian's two nephews conſpired againſt Leo 
III. his ſucceſſor, who had been elected pope 
—— cuſtom, by the people and clergy of 
Rome. They accuſed him of many crimes, they 
exaſperated the Romans againſt him, dragged him 
to priſon, and uſed him moſt cruelly, who every 
where but at Rome was treated with the greateſt re- 
ſpect. However, he made his eſcape, and fled to Pa- 
derborn, to throw himſelf on his knees before the 
patrician Charlemaign. This prince, who had al- 
ready aſſumed an abſolute authority, ſent him back 
with an eſcort and commiſſioners who were to try 
him, and had orders to find him innocent. In ſhort, 
Charlemaign, who was as abſolute maſter of 
Italy as of Germany and France, the judge of the 
pope, and the arbiter of Europe, went to Rome 
at the end of the year 799. At that time the 
Romans began the new year from ns 7 
Leo 


w——_— _ 


SS 


* 


8 


© 


The emperor Charlemaign. 97 


Leo III. proclaimed him emperor of the Weſt 
during the time of maſs on Chriſtmas day 800, 
The people joined the ceremony with the loudeſt 
acclamations. Charles pretends to be ſurprized ; 
yet he aſſerts the rights annexed to his new dig- 
nity. Thoſe rights were well founded, becauſe 
the voice of a whole nation ever confers the beſt [| 
of rights. "i 
It has been aſſerted, and there are who ſtill 1 
continue to aſſert it, that Charles, even before I 
be was made emperor, had confirmed the dona- 1 
tion of the exarchate of Ravenna, and that he Wil 
had increaſed it with the addition of Corſica, bo 
Sardinia, Liguria, Parma, Mantua, the dutchies 
of Spoleto, Benevento, Sicily, and Venice, and that 
he depoſited the act of this donation on the tomb, 
where the aſhes of St. Peter and Paul are pretend- 
ed to lie buried, | X 
This donation might be ranked with that of 
Conſtantine. We cannot find that the popes ever 
poſſęſſed any of thoſe provinces, till the time of 
Innocent III. If they had been maſters of the ex- 
archate, they would have been ſovereigns of Ra- 
venna and — but in Charlemaign's will, 
which we have from Eginhardus, this monarch 
mentions Rome and Ravenna at the head of the 
metropolitan towns ſubject to his dominion, and 
to which he bequeaths ſome legacies. He could 
not give away either Sicily, Corſica, or Sardi- 
nia, which were not in his poſſeſſion; nor the 
dutchy of Benevento, of which he had hardly the 
ſovereign juriſdiction; much leſs Venice, which did 
not acknowledge him as emperor. At that time the 
duke of Venice for form ſake recognized the em- 
peror of the Eaſt, from whom he received the 
Vor. 1. F title 


The emperor Charlemaign. Ch. ix. 


title of Hippatos . Pope Adrian's letters make 
mention of the patrimonies of Spoleto and Bene- 
vento; but theſe patrimonies can mean no more 
than the eſtates or lands which the popes poſſeſſed 
in theſe two dutchies. Gregory VII. hiamfelf 
confeſſes in ſome of his letters, that Charlemaign 
granted a penſion of twelve hundred livres to the 
holy ſee. Now it is not at all probable that he 
ſhould grant ſuch an aid to a perſon who was poſ- 
ſeſſed of fo many fair provinces. The holy fee 
did not acquire Benevento till a long time after, 
by the giſt of Henry the Black towards the year 
1047. This gift was confined to the town, but 
did not extend to the dutchy. There was no talk 
of confirming the donation of Charlemaign. a 
In the midſt of ſo many uncertainties, the moſt 
probable inference we can make, is that in Char- 
lemaign's time, the popes had obtained the full 
property of the marquiſate of Ancona, beſides 
tome - towns, caſtles, and villages diſperſed in 
other countries. The foundation I proceed upon, 
is this. When the weſtern empire was revived 
in the family of the Othos in the tenth century; 
Otho III. particularly aſſigned the marquiſate of 
Ancona to the holy ſee, confirming all the grants 
ever made to that church. It ſeems therefore that 
Charlemaign had given away this marquiſate, and 
the troubles which afterwards broke out in Italy, 
had prevented the popes from enjoying the benefit 
of it. We ſhall ſee how they loſt the poſſeſſion 
of this ſmall country under the emperors of the 
bouſe of Swabia. Sometimes we ſhall find them 
lords of a vaſt tract of land, and at other times 
Bi lh vere a Greek _— ſignifying ſupreme, ww ore to 
ornan ia penes illum rerum erat ſumma poteſias. 
. 1 


The emperor Charlemaign. 


deſpoiled of almoſt every poſſeſſion, like other 
ſovereigns. Let it ſuffice to know that they 
enjoy at preſent the undoubted ſovereignty of 
a country that extends a hundred and fourſcore 
Italian miles in length from the gates of Mantua 
to the borders of Abruzzo along the Adriatic; 
and a hundred miles in breadth from Civita Vec- 
chia to Ancona from ſea to ſea; They have been 
ever obliged to negotiate, and often to fight, in 
order to ſecure the poſſeſſion of theſe dominions. 

While Charlemaign attained the Imperial dig- 
nity in the weſtern world the empreſs Irene reign- 
ed in the Eaſt, a princeſs Who had made herſelf 
famous by her courage and her crimes, and who 
had cauſed her only ſon to be put to death, after 
baying firſt put out his eyes. She would have 
deſtroyed Charlemaign ; but being too weak te 
make war againſt him, ſhe reſolyed to marry him, 
and thus, to reunite the tWo empires. While this 
marriage was in agitation, a revolution drove Irene 
from the throne, to obtain which ſhe had paid ſo 
dearly. - Charlemaign had therefore only the em- 
pire of the Weſt: his poſſeſſions in Spain were 
very ineonſiderable ; for the vain homage of ſome 
Saracens ought not to be reckoned an inheritance : 
be poſſeſſed nothing on the-coaſt. of Africa; but 
all the reſt was under his dominion + 

It he had made Rome his capital, if bis ſucceſ-— 
ſors had fixed their principal refidence in this city, 
and' eſpecially if the Barbarians had not adhered to 
the cuſtom. of dividing dominions among their 
childret it is: probable that the Roman empire 
would have been revived. Every thing has ſince 
concurred, te diſmember this vaſt body, which the 
valour and fortune * 2 Ou had formed 
. 2 bdut 


The emperor Charlemaign. Ch. ix. 


but nothing has contributed ſo much to it as his 
_ deſcendants. ; 

He had no capital; but as he was beſt pleaſed 
with Aix-la-Chapelle, he made it the place of his 
ordinary reſidence : he there gave audiences with 
the greateſt pomp to the ambaſſadors of the ca- 
liphs, and to thoſe of Conſtantinople. Beſides, 
like Charles the fifth, who lived a long time after 
him, he was almoſt always either at war, or upon 
a journey. He divided his dominions like all the 
kings of that time, even before his deceaſe. 

ut at laſt, when of all the ſons whom he had 
appointed to reign, there was none left but Lewis, 
ſo well known afterwards by the name of the De- 
bonnair, to whom he had already given the kingdom 
of Aquitaine, he made him his aſſociate in the em- 
pire at Aix- la- Chapelle; commanding him to 
take the Imperial crown at the altar, to let the 
world ſee that this crown was only due to the va- 
Jour of the father, and the merit of the ſon; and 
as if he had foreſeen that the time would come 
when the miniſters of the altar would diſpoſe of 
that diadem. = | | 

He had ſome reaſon for declaring his ſon empe- 
ror in his life-time ; for this dignity, acquired 
by the fortune of Charlemaign, was not ſecured 
to his ſon by the right of inheritance : but in leav- 
ing the empire to Lewis, and in giving Italy to 
Bernard, his ſon Pepin's heir, did not he himſelf 
rend in pieces that empire, which he was willing 
to preſerve to his poſterity? Was not this the 
natural means of arming his ſucceflors the one 
againſt the other? Was there any room to pre- 
ſume that the new king of Italy would obey his 
uncle the emperor, or that the emperor would not 
deſire to become maſter of Italy? How- 


The emperor Char/emaign. 


However, Charlemaign died in 814, with the 
reputation of having been an emperor as happy 
as Auguſtus, as warlike as Adrian; but not like 
the Trajans and Antoninuſes, to whom no ſo- 
vereign was ever worthy to be compared. 

There was then in the Eaſt a prince that equall- 

ed him in glory as well as in power: this was the 
celebrated caliph Aaron Rachild, who greatly ſur- 
paſled him in juſtice, humanity, and learning. 
I could almoſt venture to place. next to theſe 
two illuſtrious men, pope Adrian, who in a lcfs 
elevated rank, with an almoſt private fortune, and 
with virtues leſs heroic, ſhewed a prudence to 
which his ſucceſlors owed their grandeur, 

'The curioſity of mankind which penetrates in- 
to the private life of princes, has attempted to 
dive into the particulars of the life of Chaile- 
maign, even into his fecret pleaſures; and it hus 
been obſerved, that he carried his love of women 
fo far as to enjoy it with his own daughters : the 
ſame has been ſaid of Auguſtus ; but of what im- 
portance is the divulging of theſe weakneſſes, 
which have not the leaſt influence on public affairs, 
to mankind in general ? 

[ conſider his reign in a manner more worthy 
the attention of a citizen. The countries which 
at preſent compoſe France and Germany as far a+ 
the Rhine, enjoyed a ſtate of tranquillity for near 
fifty years, and Italy during thirteen, from his ac- 
ceſſion to the empire: there happened no revolution 
in France, nor no calamity during this half cen- 
tury; which was a very ſingular circumſtance, 
So long a ſtate of happineſs was not however ſuf- 
ficient to reſtore politeneſs and tha arts: the ruſt 


F 3 of 


Manners and cuſtoms about Ch. x. 


of barbariſm was too great; and the following 
ages added ſtill to its thickneſſs. 


3 71 K S 21 1921. 2 5 

0000000000000000 
e e cis. aide 

Manners and cuftems about the time of Charlemaign, 


STOP at this celebrated #ra, to conſider 

the cuſtoms, laws,» religion, and manners, 
which then prevailed. The Franks bad been al- 
ways barbarians, and were ſo ſtill after the death 
cf Charlemaign. His reign produced only a glim- 
mering of politeneſs, which was probably owing 
to his journey to Rome, or rather was the effect 
. to ol lofi 967 ot ol 

His predeceſſors were famous for their depreda- 
tions only: they deſtroyed towns, but built none: 
The Gauls were fortunate in 2 by 
the Romars. Marſeilles, Arles, Autun, Lyons, 
Triers, were flouriſhing cities, which peaceably 
enjoyed their municipal laws, ſubordinate to the 
ge inſtitutions of the Romans. They were 
animated. by an extenſive trade. We find by a 
letter from a proconſul to Theodoſius, that in 
Autun there were five and twenty thouſand heads 
of families. But as ſoon as the Burgundians, the 
Gothe, the Franke, invaded Gaul, the great 
towns were depopulated. The many circuſes, 
and the amphitheatres built by the Romans even 
as- far as the banks of the Rhine, were demoliſh- 
ed or ſuffered :to run to decay. If the wicked 
and: unfortunate queen Prunchaut kept up m_ 
100 g E 9 


the time of Charlemaign. 


of thoſe Roman high roads, which no nation 
ever imitated, it {till occaſions our ſurprize. 
What could hinder thoſe new comers from 
building regular ſtructures after the Roman mo- 
dels? They had ſtone, marble, and better tim- 
ber than we. The Engliſh and Spaniſh ſheep 
were covered with fine wool then as now; and 
yet good cloth was manufactured no where but in 
Italy. How comes it that the reſt of Europe did 
not traffic in any of the commodities of Afia ? 
How comes it that all thoſe conveniences, which 
ſweeten the bitterneſs of life, were then unknown ? 
It could be for no other reaſon, but becauſe the 
ſavages who paſſed the Rhine, mace the other 
people favage. Of this we may judge by the 
Salic, the Ripuarian, and Burgund:an laus, 
which Charlemaign himſelf confirmed, when he 
found he could not aboliſh them. [Thoſe poor 
and rapacious nations valued the moſt heinous 
crimes, as murder, mutilation, rapes, inceſt, 
and poiſoning, at a fixed price. Whoever had 
four hundred ſous, that is four hundred crowns, 
to give away, might kill a biſhop with impunity. 
It would coſt two hundred ſous for the life of a 
prieſt, as many for a rape, and as many for poi- 
ſoning with herbs, A witch that had eaten of 
human fleſh, could eſcape for two hundred ſous ; 
and this ſhews that witches were not only to be 
found among the dregs of the people, as in theſe 
latter ages, but that thoſe horrid extravagances 
were practiſed alſo by perſons of fortune. The 
right of inheritance, and the validity of a teſtament, 
were decided, as we ſhall ſee hereafter, by com- 
bats, and experiments. Their juriſprudence was 
the reſult of barbarity and ſuperſtition, 1 
F 4 Let 


104 


Manners and cuſtoms about Ch. x, 


Let us judge of the manners of the people by 
thoſe of the princes: we do not find one mag- 
nanimous action in their whole hiſtory. The 
Chriſtian religion, which ſhould humanize man- 
kind, did not hinder king Clovis from cauſing the 
little kings his neighbours to be aſſaſſinated. Clo- 
domir's two ſons were murdered at Paris in 1533 
by their uncles Childebert' and Clotharius, who 
are called kings of France ; and Clodoaldo, the 


brother of thoſe flaughtered innocents, is invoked 


as a ſaint by the name of St. Clou, becauſe he 
was made a monk. - 
Under Chilperic king of Soiſſons in 562, the 
ſubjects were fo enſlaved, that they deſerted that 
pretended kingdom, tired of the tyranny of their 
maſtcr, who took their bread and wine, but 
could not take their money, for they had none. 
Sizebert and another Chilperic were aſſaſſinated. 
Brunehaut after quitting the Arian ſe to embrace 


the catholic religion, was accuſed of a thouſand 


murders; and Clotharius II, one as barbarous 
as herſelf, ordered her to be dragged after a horſe's 
tail to his camp, till ſhe expired under this new 
kind of puniſhment in 616. We have no monu- 
ments of thoſe horried times except the founda- 


tion of a few monaſteries, and a confuſed account 
of miſery and depredations. 


We muſt not imagine that thoſe ſavage chiefs, 


who commanded in Burgundy, at Soiſſons, Paris, 


Mets, and Orleans, were acknowledged as kings 
by any of the emperors. Never did they give 
them the title of Baſileus: they did not even grant 
it to Dagobert II. who reunited all eaſt and weſt 
France, as far as the Weſer, under his dominion. 
Hiſtorians talk greatly of the magnificence of this 

a a Dagobert: 


the time of Charlemaign. 


Dagobert : in proof of which they mention the 
ſtory of the goldſmith Eloy, who appeared at court, 
it is ſaid, with a girdle ſet with diamonds; that is, 
he ſold diamonds, and therefore he carried them 
about him. They tell us of the magnificent 
churches which he built. Where are they? The 
old church of St. Paul is a poor Gothic ſtructure. 
All we know of Dagobert is, that he had three 
wives at once, that he ſummoned councils, and 
that he tyrannized over his country. 

During his reign, a merchant of Sens, whoſe 
name was Samon, went to trade in Germany. 
'Thence he proceeded as far as Sclavonia. The 
ſavages of that country were ſo amazed to ſee a 
man, that had travelled fo far to bring them things 
which they wanted, that they made him theic 
king. This Samon, it is ſaid, waged war with 
Dagobert; and if the king of the Franks had 
three wives, the new king of S. lavonia had 
fifteen. ä 

It was under this Dagobert that the mayors of 
the palace began to eſtabliſh their authority. Af- 
ter him ſucceeded a race of lazy kings, under 
the confuſed, and deſpotic adminiſtration of the 
mayors. At this ſame period, in the begin- 
ning of the eighth century, the Arabs, con- 
querors of Spain, penetrated as far as Tou- 
louſe, made themſelves maſters of Guienne, ra- 
vaged the whole country as far as the Loire, and 
were very near wreſting Gaul intirely from the 
Franks, as theſe had wreſted it from the Romars, 
I leave you then to judge, in what ſtate were the 
people, the church, and the laws at that time. 


F 2 CHAP. 


106 


keeps his king in confinement. 


Ch. xi. 


1 Laws and cuſtoms 


CHAP. xl. 


Laws and cuſtoms at the time of Charlemaign, 


HARLES Martel, the uſurper and ſup- 
port of the ſupreme power in a large mo- 
narchy, conqueror of the warlike Arabs whom 
he drove back as far as Gaſcony, is called never- 
leſs a little deputy king, ſubregulus, by pope Gre- 
gory II. who implores his protection againſt 
the kings of Lombardy, He prepares to 
aſſiſt the church of Rome, but in the mean 
time he robs the churches in France, diſtributes 
the monaſtic revenues among his officers, and 
We have al- 
ready ſeen the feats of his ſon e and his 
randſon Charlemaign. | 
The great conqueſts of Charlemaign were ow- 
ing to his care in maintaining a body of well diſ- 
ciplined troops conſtantly on foot. Theſe were 
raiſed by the dukes who governed the provinces, 


much in the ſame manner as the beglerbegs * 


amongſt the Turks do at preſent. Theſe dukes 
had been inſtituted in Italy by Diocleſian. The 
counts, who, I imagine, were inſtituted in the 
time of Theodoſius, uſed to command under the 
dukes, and aſſemble troops each in his canton. The 
farmers, the market towns, and the villages, fur- 
niſhed a number of ſoldiers proportionahle to their 
ſtrength. Twelve farmers furniſhed- a horſeman 


Beglerbeg or beplerbey,  governor-of one of the principal 
provinces of the Turkiſh empire; the word fignifies lord of 
herds, for beg means a /ord, and begler is the plural, 


com- 


in the time of Charlemaipn. 


completely armed, with a helmet and cuiraſs ; 
the other ſoldiers did not wear them ; but al] had 
a buckler in the form of a long ſquare, a battle- 
ax, a javelin and ſword. 'I hole who made uſe 
of arrows were obliged to have at leaſt twelve in 
their quiver. The province that furniſhed the mili- 
tia, diftributed corn and neceſlary proviſions for ſix 
months; which were ſupplied by the king the reſt 
of the campaign, They were reviewed either on 
the firſt of March or the firſt of May ; for it was 
commonly at thoſe times that the parliaments 
were held. In beſieging a town they made uſe of 
the battering ram *, the baliſta , the teſtudo , and 
moſt of the Roman machines. The lords called 
barons, or free rich men, compoſed with their 
followers, the little cavalry that was then found 
in their armies: but the cavalry of the Mullulmen 
of Africa and Spain was more numerous. 
Charlemaign had naval forces, that is, large 
boats, in the mouths of all the great rivers in his 
empire ; before his time, they were unknown 
amongſt the barbarians, and after him they were 
a long time without them. By this means, and 
by his warlike policy, he put a ſtop to the inun- 
dations of the northern nations, and kept them 
within their frozen climates ; but under his weak 
deſcendants they ſpread all over Europe. 


* A military engine among the Romans, with which they 
uſed to batter and beat down the walls of places befeped, 

+ A military machine uſed by the antients in befic ging cities, 
to throw large ſtones, darts, and javelins: it reſembled our crois- 
bows, though much larger and ſuperior in force, 

t A kind of cover or fcreen, which the ſoldiers made them- 
ſelves of their bucklers, by holding them up over their heads, 
and Ranging cloſy to each other. 


F 6 e 


Laws and cuſtoms Ch. xi, 


General affairs were regulated in affemblies 
compoſed of the repreſentatives of the nation. In 
his reign parliaments had no other will beſides that 
of a maſter, who knows how to command and 
perſuade. 

He made commerce flourifh, becauſe he wag 
maſler of the fea; thus the merchants on the coaſt 
of Tuſcany, and thoſe of Marſeilles, traded at 
Conſtantinople with the Chriſtians, and at the 
port of Alexandria with the Muſſulmen, by whom 
they were received, and from whom they drew 
the riches of Aſa, 

Venice and Genoa, fince rendered ſo powerful 
by their trade, did not then ſwallow up the riches 
ef other nations; but Venice began to increaſe in 
wealth and grandeur. Rome, Ravenna, Lyons, 
Arles and Tours, had many manufactures of 
woollen ſtuffs: they inlaid iron with gold and 
filver after the manner of Aſia: glaſs was alſo 
made; but filk was not wove in any town in the 
weſtern empire. 

The Venetians began to import wrought ſilks 
from Conſtantinople; but it was almoſt four 
hundred years after Charlemaign's time,when the 
Norman princes eſtabliſhed a manufacture of ſilk 
at Palermo. Linen was very uncommon ; St. 
Boniface, in a letter to a German biſhop, deſires 
him to ſend him eloth with a large nap, to make 
uſe of in waſhing his feet, Probably this want 
of linen was the cauſe of all the diſeaſes in the 
ſkin, known by the name of leproſy, and which 
were at that time ſo genera}; for the hoſpitals, 
called Lazarettos, were already very numerous. 

Money had nearly the ſame value as that of the 
Roman empire after the reign of W 

8 e 


in the time of Charlemaign. 


The golden ſou was the /olidus Romanus * this 
golden ſou was equal to forty ſilver denzers + ; and 
theſe deniers, which were ſometimes larger and 
ſometimes leſs, weighed upon an average thirty 
grains. 

The ſou of gold is at preſent, in 1740, worth 
about fifteen livres, and the ſilver denier thirty 
ſous of the current money of France. 

We ought always when we read hiſtory to re- 

member, that beſides this real ſpecie in gold and 
filver, people in calculation made uſe of money of 
another denomination ; expreſſing themſelves fre- 
quently in ideal money, which as with us at pre- 
ſent was only a manner of reckoning, 
The Aſiatics and Greeks counted by minæ f 
and talents $, and the Romans by ſeſterces |, 
without there being any ſuch real money as a 
great ſeſterce or a talent. 

The livre in the time of Charlemaign was ſup- 
poſed to weigh a pound of filver of twelve ounces, 
and this pound was divided as at preſent, into 
twenty parts, They had indeed ſilver ſous like 
our crowns, each of which weighed the twentieth, 
the twenty ſecond, or the twenty fourth part of 
a pound of twelve ounces ; and this ſou, likg ours, 


® The ſolidus Romanus was a piece of gold coin, near the value 
of our old noble. 
+ 1 he Roman denier, or denarius, is in our preſent money 
of the value of eight pence halfpenny farthing. 
The ming in our money is 31, 45s. and 7 d. ſterling. 
\The talent conſiſted of fixty mine, equal to 193 J. 158. 
The ſeſtertius was a coin among the Romans in value two 
aſſes and a half, and nearly equal to 2 d. ſterling; 1000 of 
theſe made the ſeftertium equal to $1, 18. 54 d.; and 1000 of 
the ſeſtertia made the decies A (the adverb centies being 
always underſtood) equal to 86721, 188, 4 4, See Bud. de aſe 
Gronov, de ſeſtertiis. 


Was 


Laws and cuſtoms Ch. xi. 


was divided into twelve deniers: but Charlemaign 
having ordered, that the filver ſou ſhould be exact- 
ly the twentieth part of twelve ounces, they were 
accuſtomed to reckon in accounts twenty ſous to 
a pound or livre. 

For two (centuries money continued on the 
footing on which Charlemaign had put it ; but 
by degrees the kings in their neceflity ſometimes 
mixed it' with an alloy, and ſometimes leflened 
the weight; ſo that by a change, which is a diſ- 
grace to almoſt all the governments in Europe, 
this ſou, which was formerly very near equal to 
a crown piece, is no more than a light piece of 
braſs with about an eleventh part in ſilver; and 
the livre, which is the repreſentative ſign of twelve 
ounces of filver, is no more in France than the 
repreſentative: of twenty of our braſs ſous. The 
denier, which was the hundred and twenty fourth 
part of a pound of filver, is no more than the third 
of that baſe money called a /iard. Suppoſe then, 
that a city in France had been bound in Char- 
lemaign's time to pay yearly 120 livres, that is, 
one thouſand four hundred and forty ounces of 
filver, it would diſcharge the debt in our days by 
payingwhat we call a crown of ſix livres. 

The pound of the Engliſh and Dutch has had 
leſs variation. A pound fterling in England is 
worth about twenty two livres of France, and a 

ound in Holland is worth about twelve livres 

Free: thus the Dutch have deviated leſs than 
the French from the original ſtandard, and the 
Engliſh ſtill leſs. | 

Whenever hiſtory mentions money under the 
name of livres or pounds, we have nothing to do 
but to examine what a livre or pound was worth 

| at 


in tbe. time of Charltmaign. 


at the time and in the country ſpoken: of, and to 
compare it with the value of ours. We ought 
to make uſe of the ſame care in reading the Greek 
and Roman hiſtory. The reader, for example, 
is greatly perplexed in being obliged to correct in 
every page, the accounts he finds in the antient 
hiſtory of a celebrated profeſſor of the univerſity 
of Paris, in Fleury's ecclefiaſtic hiſtory, and in 
many other uſeful authors. When they would ex- 


preſs talents, minœ, and ſeſterces in French mo- 


ney, they always uſe the valuation, which ſome 
learned men made before the death of the great 
Colbert: but the mark of eight ounces, which 
under this miniſter was worth twenty fix livres, 
and ten ſous, has for a long time been worth forty 
nine livres, which makes a difference of nearly 
half. This difference, which has been ſometimes 
more conſiderable, may be increaſed or diminiſh- 
ed. We muſt beware of theſe miſtakes ; other- 
wiſe we ſhall have a wrong idea of the ſtrength of 
the antient governments, of their commerce, 
the pay of their forces, and their civil cxco- 
nomy. 1 | | 
It appears, that there was then eight times leſs 
money in-France, in Italy, and towards the Rhine, 
than there is at preſent. We can only form a 
judgment by the price of proviſions ; and I find 
that this was eight times leſs in the time of Char- 
lemaign, than it is in our days. Four and twen- 
ty loaves of white bread were worth a ſilver de- 
nier, according to the capitularies. This denier 


was the fortieth part of a gold ſou, which was 


worth about ſixteen livres of our money: thus 
the pound of bread came to about a liard, and 


ſomething over, which is in effect the eighth part 
of our uſual price of bread. In 


111 


Lats and tuſloms Ch. xi. 


In the northern countries money was much 
more ſcarce, where, for example, the price of 
an ox was fixed at a ſou of gold, We fhall ſee 
in the ſequel how trade and riches extended them- 
ſelves and followed each other. 

The ſciences and the polite arts could have but 
a very feeble beginning, in thoſe vaſt countries, 
which were yet uncivilized. We are informed by 
Eginhardus, ſecretary to Charlemaign, that this 
conqueror did not know how to fign his name, 
And yet by mere ſtrength of genius, he was con- 
vinced of the utility of polite learning. He ſent 
to Rome for maſters of grammar and rhetoric. 
From that ruined capital the rude nations of the 
Weſt drew all their improvements. The cele- 
brated Engliſhman Alcuinus, and Peter of Piſa 
who taught Charlemaign a little grammar, had 
both ſtudied at Rome. 

There had been choriſters in the churches of 
France; and it is obſervable that they were call- 
ed Gallic choriflers. The conquering race of 
Franks never cultivated any arts. The Gauls 
pretended then, as they do ſtill, to diſpute the 
palm of muſic with the Romans. The Grego- 
rian ſong, attributed to St. Gregory the Great, 
was not without merit, but had ſomething noble 
in the midſt of its ſimplicity. The Gallic cho- 
riſters, not being uſed to the old alphabetic notes, 
had ſpoiled this ſong, which they pretended to 
embelliſh. Charlemaign in one of his expedi- 
tions into Italy, obliged them to conform to 
the muſic of their maſters. Pope Adrian gave 
them books with the notes pricked down ; and 
two Italian muſicians were appointed to teach 
the alphabetic notes, one at Metz, and the other 

| at 


© A wa 8VWtms 


22 4 g ͤ 0 & 


in the time of Charlemaign. 

at Soiſſons. They were likewiſe obliged to fend 
to Rome for an organ. | + 

There were no . nar in the cities throughou 
this empire; nor were they introduced till to- 
wards the thirteenth century. Thence comes the 
antient cuſtom, which is ſtill kept up in Ger- 
many, Flanders, and England, of hiring per- 
ſons to cry the hour of the night. The clock 
which the Caliph Aaron Rachild ſent as a preſent 
to Charlemaign, was conſidered as a prodigy. 

In regard to the ſciences, to Philoſophy, Phyſics, 
Aſtronomy, and the principles of Medicine, 
how could they be known in that age of dark- 
neſs; when they have but juſt begun to dawn 
with us? | 
They computed time by nights, and hence it 
is that the Engliſh ſtill make uſe of the word 
fortnight, to ſignify two weeks. The language 
called Roman * or Romance, began to be formed of 
the mixture of the Latin with the Teutonic. This 
language was the foundation of the French, 
Spaniſh, and Italian. It laſted till about the time 
of Frederick II. and is ſtill ſpoken in ſome vil- 
lages of the Griſons, and towards Swiſſerland. 

The faſhions have been continually changing 
in the Weſt, ever ſince the decline of the k 
man empire: at that time they dreſſed in ſhort 
clothes, except on days of ceremony, when over 
their coat they wore a mantle frequently lined 


lt was called alſo Romana Ruftica : the French and Pro- 
vencals wrote hiſtories in this language; for originally the name 
of Romance was given to true as well as fabulous hiſtories, and 
indeed to every compoſition written in this tongue, which wag 
vulgarly uſed in France before the 8th century; though in pro- 
ceſs of time it was applied only to fabulous hiſtory. See Huet 
origine des Remans, and Fontanini della eloquenza Italiana. h 
wit 


"+ 


113 


114 


religion Ch. xi. 
with futs; theſe they imported, as we do now, 
from the north, and eſpecially from Ruſſia. The 
Roman manner of covering the leg and foot was 
ſtill preſerved. It is mentioned that Charle- 
Maign uſed to cover his legs with fillets twiſted 
in the form of buſkins, after the manner of the 
Scotch Highlanders, the only people, who have 
Preſerved the military dreſs of the Romans. 


UDC DID e 0 


1 C H . | 
Of religion at the time of cb 


eK o oY ew warns res hep 


F we turn our eyes at preſent to the advan- 

tages accruing from religion, to the miſ- 
Chiefs which mankind drew upon themſelves by 
rendering it fubſervient. to their paſſtons, to 
the ſacred cuſtoms or ceremonies, and to the 
abuſe of thoſe cuſtoms; we ſhall find that the 
quarrel about image worſhip is what W de- 
ſerves our attention. 

The empreſs Irene, the tutoreſs of her un- 
happy ſon Conſtantine Porphirogenitus, in order 
to ſmooth the way to the government of the em- 
pire, ingratiated herſelf with the monks: and 
common people, who were ſtill pleaſed with the 
worſhip of images, proſcribed by fo many em- 
perors ſince the time of Leo Iſaurus: and ſhe 
herſelf was attached to them, becauſe her huſ- 
band held them in abhorrence. Irene had been 
perſuaded to believe, that in order to govern her 
huſband, ſhe need only put under his pillow the 
1 of certain female ſaints: thus the moſt 

ridiculous 


FSU Qoomeabncnonmnmr ng map . 


JJ a Se. A OS. 


Da BB ea ld a Re. kk wa vb 


7 Fe 


at the time of Charlemaign: 
ridiculous credulity. is ſometimes indulged by a 
political genius: but the emperor, her huſband, 
puniſhed: the authors. Irene, after the death of 
her: bufband, gave a free courſe to her ambitious 
deſires- For this purpoſe, in the year 786, ſhe 
aſſembled the ſecond council of Nice, and the 
ſeventh œcumenical council, which was held at 
firſt at Conſtantinople: upon which occaſion ſhe 
cauſed a Jaymany named Taraſus, her ſecretary 
of . ftate, to be elected patriarch. There had 
indeed been formerly ſome examples of laymen 
being choſen into a biſhopric, without their paſ- 
fing through the other degrees; but at that time 
this cuſtom did not ſubſiſt. 1 
This patriarch opened the council; and here 
the conduct of pope Adrian was very remark- 
able: he did not anathematize the ſecretary of 
ſtate, who had been made patriarch, but only 
modeſtly proteſted in his letter to Irene againſt 


the title of Univerſal Patriarch, and inſiſted on 


her reſtoring to him his inheritances in Sicily. 
He demanded with authority that trifling patri- 
mony, while he, as well as his predeceſſors, en- 
joyed the important demeſnes of all the fine 
countries which he affirms to have been given by 
Pepin and Charlemaign. In the mean time the 
ecumenioal council of Nice, in which the legates 
of the pope preſided, as well as the patriarch, re- 
eſtabliſned the worſhi p of images. 2 


115 


It is acknowledged by all able critics, that the h 


fathers of this council, who were three hundred 
and fifty in number, quoted the authority of 
many pieces that are evidently falſe; and of 
many miracles, the relation of which would 
have apps el Gand deus in any ther age; and 
1245 0 


£ 


Of religion Ch. xii, 


of many apocryphal books. Yet theſe falſe 
pieces did no injury to thoſe that were true, by 
which they regulated their determinations. 


But in what perplexities was the pope invol- 
ved, when it became neceſſary to engage Charle- 
maign and the French biſhops to agree to the 
deciſions of this council? Charlemaign had pub- 
licly declared againſt images, and books had by 
his order been juſt written, that went by the 
name of Caroline *, in which thoſe who adhered to 
this worſhip were anathematized. He aſſembled 
in the year 794, a council at Francfort, at which 
he preſided according to the cuſtom of other 
emperors; a council compoſed of three hundred 
biſhops or abbots, as well Italians as French, 
who rejected by unanimous conſent the ſervice 
and adoration of images. This equivocal word 
adoration was the ſource of all theſe differences; 
if men would define the terms they make uſe of, 


there would be fewer diſputes. , More than one 
kingdom has been overthrown by the miſinter- 


pretation of a word. 
While pope Adrian ſent to France the acts of 
the ſecond council of Nice, he received the 
Caroline books oppoſite to this council, and was 
preſſed in Charlemaign's name to declare the 
emperor of Conſtantinople and his mother here- 
tics. It is ſufficiently plain by this conduct, that 
Charlemaign was. deſirous of obtaining a new 


® This work is in four books; it was publiſhed in 1549 from 
an antient MS, by M. du Tillet biſhop of Meaux, under the 
fictitious name of Eli Phili, There are fome who doubt of 
the genuineſs of the Caroline books, and who attribute them to 
Anguiltram biſhop of Metz, others to Alcuinus : but whoever 
was their author, there is no doubt of their having been written 
at the time of Charlemaign, See Du Pin. Bibl. 8 cent. h 
| right 


at the time of Charlemaign. 


right from the pretended hereſy of the emperor, 
that he might take Rome from him under the 
colour of juſtice, 

: The pope, divided between the council of 
Nice, whoſe proceedings he adopted, and Char- 
lemaign, whom he was deſirous of pleaſing, 
took, in-my opinion, a politic medium, that 
ought to ſerve for an example in all thoſe un- 
happy diſputes, by which the Chriſtian world 
hath been conſtantly diſtracted, He explained 
the Caroline books in ſuch a manner as was 
favourable to the council of Nice, and by that 
means refuted the king without diſpleaſing him : 
at the ſame time he gave liberty to refuſe the 
worſhip of images, which was very reaſonable 
with reſpect to the Germans, who had been juſt 
converted' from idolatry; and to the ignorant 
French, who had few ſculptors and painters ; 
but he exhorted them likewiſe-not to demoliſh 


theſe images, Thus he ſatisfied every body, and 


left it to time. to confirm or aboliſh a worſhip 
that was ſtill doubtful. As he placed his princi- 
pal attention in keeping fair with mankind, and 
making religion ſubſervient to his intereſt, he 
wrote to Charlemaign in theſe terms: I can- 
„ not, after what the council of Nice has done, 
« declare Irene and her ſon heretics; but I ſhall 
% declare them to be ſuch, if they do not re- 
« ſtore me my patrimony in Sicily.“ 

We fee this pope act with the ſame prudence 
in a diſpute of a ſtill more delicate nature, and 
which alone would in other times have been ſuf- 
ficient to kindle civil wars. It was diſputed, 
whether the Holy Ghoſt proceeded from the 
Father and the Son, or from the Father alone, 


2 In 


117 


118 


D relgian + Ch. xii. 
In che 0 durch there was an 1 addition 
made to the firſt council of Nice, that he pro- 
ceeded from the Father; after that, they added fur- 
ther in Spain, France, and Germany, that he 
proceeded from the Father and the Son, and this 
was the opinion that prevailed almoſt throughout 
the Fes. empire of Charlemaign. Theſe words 
in the creed, qui ex Patre Filroqueprocedit, were 
ſacred with the Flche but the ſame words had 
never been adopted at Rome. The pope being 
preſſed by Charlemaign to decide this Alno, 
ple, That: he does not condemm the king's 
opinion, but vet he made no alteration in the 
Roman creed. Thus he appeaſed the diſpute, 
without coming to a deciſion, by leaving every 
one entirely at liberty. In a word, he treated 
ſpiritual affairs like a prince, while: too many 
— have ary then as if they 217 been 
roy of 1 
Fans: that time the pebſuni policy of the 


popes eftabliſhed their power * es. They 


trumped up a collection of forged acts, known at 
nt by the nume of the fa 22 — and 
which are faid to have been digeſtediby a Spaniard 


* Ifidorus merrator, or piſcaton , or peccu- 

The German biſhops;; 'whote fincerity was 
arpoſed: upon, ſpread then abroad, and gave 
them their weight. It is ſaid mow that there are 
indubitable proofs of their having been com- 
poſed by one Algeram abbot of Senones, and 
biſhop of Metz. They are among the manuſcripts 
of the Vatican library. But what ſigniſies it who is 


their author? In theſe fälſe decretals antient 
canons are 


wich ordain; that à ſingle 
— council chow nov berthcld.. — 
; e 


8 — a F TY D 8 


29 2 ye mw oe 


AS AqgssD 


. SY w —_— MY WW — ͤ * 


d ä A 7 4. 84 q 


— 
2 


FR 


at the time of Charlemaign. 


the permiſſion of the pope; and that all eccle- 
ſiaſtical cauſes ſnall be under his juriſdiction. 
The words of the immediate ſueceiſors of the 
apoſtles are there quoted, and they are ſuppoſed 
to have left writings behind them. It is true, 
that all being wrote in the wretched ſtyle of the 
eighth century, and the whole filled with blun- 
ders contrary to hiſtory and geography, the arti- 
hce was extremely groſs; bur they had none hut 
ignorant men to deceive. Theſe | falſe deeteraly 
impoſed upon mankind for eight centuries,” ari@ 
at laſt, though | the error was- diſcovered;/ the 
cuſtoms they eftabliſhed, ſtill ſubfiſt in a part of 


119 


the church: their antiquity ſupplied the place 


of truth. a 

In boſe times the biſhops of the Weſt 'were 
temporal lords, and poſſeſſed many lands in fee; 
but none were independent ſovereigns. The 
kings of France nominated” to biſhoprics : in 
this inſrance they were more bold, and acted 
more agreeably to the rules of policy, than the 

recian emperors, and the kings the Lom- 
bards, who contented themſelves with interpoſing 
their authority in elections. 

The firſt Chriſtian churches were governed 
as a republic in the manner of ſynagogues 3 thoſe 
who preſided over theſe aff-mblics, imſenfibly 
took the title of biſhop, a name by which the 
Greeks called thoſe who were appointed go- 
vernors of their colonies: and the elders of theſe 
aſſemblies called themſelves pricey” which in 


Greek ſignifies old men. 


Charlemaign in his old age, oranted the dope 
a privilege, of which his on ſon was made the 


victim. They perſuaded chis prince, that in the 
\ 


code 


120 


Of religion Cũh. xi. 
code digeſted in the reign of Theodoſius, a law 
expreſsly mentioned, that if two laymen had a 
ſuit depending, and one of them choſe a biſhop 
for his judge, the other was obliged to ſubmit 
o his deciſion without the power of appeal. 

his law, which had never been executed, is 
by all critics in eccleſiaſtic antiquity eſteemed a 
fiction: it is the laſt in the Theodoſftan code, 
without date, and without a conſular name: it 
inſenſibly excited a civil war between the courts 
of juſtice and the miniſters. of the ſanQuary : 
but as in thoſe times, every body in the Weſt, 
except the clergy, were involved in profound 
ignorance, it is aſtoniſhing, that they did not 
give a ſtil] greater power to thoſe, who. having 
obtained a little inſtruction, ſeemed the only per- 
ſons qualified to decide the differences among 
mankind. 

But as the biſhops diſputed with the laity for 
authority, the monks began to diſpute with the 

i however, were, by the canons, 
their maſters: but theſe monks were already 
too rich to ſhew their obedience. That cele- 
brated formula of Marculfus, I, for the repoſe 
< of my ſoul, and to prevent my being placed 
« after death amongſt the goats, give to ſuch a 
c monaſtery, &c, &c.” was already uſed. In 
the firſt century they generally believed that the 
world was drawing towards an end; and this 
epinion growing ſtronger in after ages, people 
gave their eſtates to monks, as if this would be 
a means to preſerve them from the general con- 
fagration. Several deeds of donation begin with 
theſe words, Aduentante mundi veſpero. 


The 


Li 


at the time of Charlemaign. 
The Benedictine abbots were long before 


Charlemaign ſo powerful as to revolt; and an ab- 
bot of Fontenelle had the preſumption to put him- 
ſelf at the head of a party againſt Charles Martel, 
and to raiſe troops: but the hero deprived the 
monk of his head, a juſt execution, which con- 
tributed not a little to thoſe revelations made to 
ſuch a number of monks, in regard to the dam- 
nation of Charles Martel. 

Before theſe times, we find an abbot of St. 

Remy in Rheims, and the biſhop of that city, 
22 on a civil war in the ſixth century againſt 
Childebert; a crime that could be committed by 
none but men in power. 
The biſhops and abbots had many ſlaves. Al- 
cuin the abbot was reproached with having even 
twenty thouſand: this number is not incredible, 
ſince Alcuin had three abbeys, the lands of which 
might be inhabited by at leaſt twenty thouſand 
men. Theſe ſlaves, known by the name of vil- 
lains, could neither marry nor change their abode 
without the abbot's permiſſion, and were obliged 
to march fifty leagues with their carts whenever 
he was pleaſed to order them : they worked for 
him three days in a week, and he partook of all 
the fruits of the earth. 


Thoſe opulent Benedictines indeed could not 


121 


be charged with violation of poverty; for they 


make no ſuch vow. When they are admitted 
into the order, the only engagement they take 
upon them, is to obey their abbot. They fre- 
quently had donations of waſte lands, which 
they grubbed up with their own hands, and af- 
terwards employed their bondmen to till them, 
They formed villages, and even built little towns 


Vor. I. G around 


Of religion Ch. xii, 
around their monaſteries. They applied them- 
ſelves to ſtudy, and were the only perſons that 
tranſcribed, and conſequently preſerved the anti- 
ent writings ; in ſhort in thoſe barbarous days, 
when the generality of the people were fo miſer- 
able, it was a great conſolation to find a ſecure 
2 in monaſteries, from tyranny and oppreſ- 
on. | 
In France and Germany more than one biſhop 
led their villains to battle. Charlemaign, in a let- 
ter to one of his wives, named Fraſtade, men- 
tions a biſhop who fought valliantly by his fide 
in a battle againſt the Avari, a people deſcended 
from the Scythians, who dwelt near the country 
now called Auſtria, We find in his time: four- 
teen monaſteries which were obliged to furniſh 
ſoldiers; and if an abbot had never fo little of the 
warrior, nothing hindered him from commanding 
them himſelf. A parliament, it is true, com- 
Plained to Charlemaign, in the year 803, of the 
too. great number of prieſts that had been killed 
in the war; the miniſters of the altar were there- 
fore forbid to go to battle, and were not ſuffered 
to call themſelves clerks without being really ſo, 
nor to wear the tonſure without belonging to a 
biſhop. Such clerks were called acephali *, and 
puniſhed as vagabonds. They at that time had 
no idea of an order, ſo common in our days, 
that is neither ſecular nor eccleſiaſtic: for the 
title of abbot, which ſignifies! father, only be- 
longed to the-chiefs of monaſteries... 
The abbots had then the paſtoral ſtaff, the ſame 
as that borne by biſhops, and which formerly was 
the mark of the pontifical dignity in pagan Rome. 
From the Greek word dxi pa * * 
u 


1 


at the time of Charlemaign. 


Such was the power of thoſe abbots over the 
monks, that they ſometimes condemned them to 
the moſt cruel and dreadful torments. They were 
the firſt who took the barbarous cuſtom from the 
Grecian emperors of burning out the eyes; and a 
council was under the neceſſity of putting a ſtop to 


this wicked practice, which they began to conſider: 


as a right, | 
The maſs was then different from what it is at 
preſent, and more ſtill from what it was in the firſt 
ages of Chriſtianity. It was at firſt a ſupper 
but afterwards the dignity of the ceremony in- 
creaſing, together with the number of the faithful, 
by degrees it became the ſame kind of liturgy as 
the preſent high maſs. Till the fifth century there 
was only one common maſs celebrated in each 
church. The name Hnaxis which it has among 
the Greeks, and which ſignifies an aſſembly or 
meeting; the forms alſo of addreſſing this aſſem- 
bly which ſtill ſubſift, all plainly ſhew that it was 
long before private maſſes were introduced. This 
ſacrifice, this meeting, this common prayer, way 
called miſſa in the Latin church, becauſe, accord- 
ing to ſome, the penitents who did not receive the 
communion, were diſmiſſed ; or according to 
others, becauſe the ſacrament was ſent, miſſa erats 
to thoſe who could not come to church. L 
When the clergy grew more numerous, they 
were obliged to ſay private maſſes. The great 
lords had their chaplains ; and Agobart biſhop of 


Lyons N of this as an abuſe in the ninth 
century. It 


in his collection of canons, and by ſeveral others; 

that the whole congregation received the holy 

communion at high maſs. In his time the people 
G 2 brought 


is confirmed by Dionyſius Exiguus 


123 


Of Religion Ch. xii. 
brought the bread and wine, for the prieſt to con- 
ſecrate; and each perſon took the bread in his 
hand, This bread was not yet unleavened ; it 
was given even to children, The communion in 
both kinds was univerſally received at the time of 
Charlemaign ; this cuſtom was always kept up b 
the Greeks, and continued among the Latins tl 
the twelfth century. We find even in the thir- 
teenth that it was praCtiſed ſometimes. The au- 
thor of the relation of the victory obtained by 
Charles of Anjou over Manfred in 1264, takes 
notice that his knights received the ſacrament in 
bread and wine before the battle. The cuſtom 
of dipping the bread into the wine had obtained 
before Charlemaign ; that of ſucking the wine 
through a metal pipe or crane was not introduced 
till about two hundred years after, and was ſoon 
aboliſhed. All theſe rites and cuſtoms received 
divers changes, according to the circumſtances 
of the times, and the prudence of ſpiritual paſtors. 
The Latin church was the only one that per- 
ſormed divine ſervice in a language not underſtood 
by the common people. This had been owing 
to the inundations of barbarians, who introduced 
their reſpective idioms into different parts of Eu- 
rope. The Latins were likewiſe the only people 
that baptized by aſperſion only; an indulgence 
very natural for children born in cold northern 
climates; and a proper decency in the warm cli- 
mate of Italy. The ceremonies obſerved in con- 
ferring baptiſm on adult perſons, and on infants 
were not the ſame. This difference, nature it- 
ſelf pointed out. | 

Auricular confeſſion began to be introduced, as 
it is ſaid, ſo early as the ſixth century: = bi- 
| | ops 


at the time of Cbarlemaign. 


ſhops required that the canons ſhould con- 
feſs to them twice a year, by an order of the 
council of Attigny in 763 and this is the firſt 
time it was expreſsly commanded. The abbots 
obliged their monks to ſubmit to this yoke; and 
the laity put it on by degrees. Public confeſ- 
fion was never in uſe in the Weſt; for when the 
Barbarians embraced Chriſtianity, the abuſe and 
ſcandal with which it was attended, occaſioned 
its being aboliſhed in the Eaſt, under the patri- 
arch Nectarius, at the end of the fourth century: 
but public ſinners frequently did public penance 
in the weſtern churches, eſpecially in Spain, where 
the invaſion of the Saracens redoubled the fervour 
of the humbled Chriſtians. I cannot trace the 
form of confeſſion, nor the confeſſion boxes which 
are fixed in churches, nor the neceſſity of con- 
feſſing before receiving the ſacrament, higher than 
the 12th century. In the eighth and ninth cen- 
turies they had three lents, and they generally 
confeſſed their fins on theſe ſolemnities. The 
commandments of the church, which were not 
aſcertained till after the fourth council of Lateran 
in 1215, laid an injunction of performing once 
a year, what before ſeemed to be a matter of 
choice, | 
In the reign of Charlemaign, they had con- 
feſſors in the armies. Charles had one for him- 
ſelf, by particular office : his name was: Valdo, 
and he was abbot of Augi in the neighbourhood 
of Conſtance, 3 
It was permitted to confeſs to a layman, or 
even to a woman in caſe of neceſſity; and this 
permiſſion Jaſted a long time. Hence Joinville 
ſays he confeſſed an officer in Africa, and gave 
G 3 bim 


125 


Of Religion Ch. xii. 


him abſolution purſuant to the power in him in- 
herent. It is not a downright . ſays St. 
Thomas *, but a kind of ſacrament, © 
Conſeſſion may, be looked upon as the greateſt 
check to ſecret crimes. The ſages of antiqui- 
ty had in ſome meaſure embraced this ſalu- 
tary practice. The Egyptians and the Greeks 
made a confeſſion of fins at their expiations, and 
almoſt at every celebration of their myfteries. 
Marcus Aurelius, aſſiſting at the myſteries of 
Ceres Eleuſina +, confefled to the Hierophantes t. 


He means Thomas Aquinas, ſurnamed the angelica! doctor, 
a famous ſchoolman who wrote in the thirteenth century, He 
was born in the caſtle of Aquino in the kingdom of Naples in 
1224, and died in the monaſtery of Foſſanova near Terracina in 
1274 

1 80 called from Elevufis, an antient city of Attica, which 
had a famous temple dedicated to the myſteries of this goddeſs, 
The origin of this temple and myſteries is ſaid to have been ow- 
ing to the kind reception which Celeus king of Eleuſis gave to 
Ceres, when ſhe was in ſearch of her daughter Proſerpine, and 
which induced this goddeſs to teach him agriculture. Theſe my- 
ſeries were highly revered by the antients, and kept with ſuch 
ſecrecy, that the diſcloſing of them was reckoned moſt im- 

ious action that could be committed. This however did not 
| ra ſeveral writers in the firſt ages of Chriſtianity from prying 
into the. great ſecret, and bringing it to light, Tertullian ſays 
of it, rota in adytis divinitas, &c. fimulacrum membri virilis reve- 
Jatur. Theodoretus ſays it was, nature muliebris imago. See 
Meurſius in a work on this ſubject, intitled Elenfinia, 

t The Hierophantes is a name which the Athenians gave to 
the ſacrificers or guardians of ſacred things, ſo called from the 
Greek word lige, ſacred, and qdou, to few, becauſe they 
ſnewed the ſacred 1 Alexander ab Alexandro, 1. 4. 
c. 19 ſays that they drank hemlock, to mortify the defires of 
the fleſh, in order to devote themſelves intirely to the ſervice 


of the Gods: Legimus. quoque Hierophantas Athenienfium, poſt- 
ram in pontificatum evecti erant, ut cafti anctiſſime r 
2 HP orbitione caftrari, Kg uae perry Je- 


This 


at the time of Charlemaign. 


This practice ſo piouſly eſtabliſhed among 
Chriſtians, was kama the occaſion ſome 
time after of horrid abuſes, eſpecially during the 
quarrels between the emperors and the popes, and 
the ſactions into which ſeveral cities were divided, 
when the prieſts would not grant abſolution to 
thoſe who were not of their party. Of this we 
had an inftance in France, in the reign of Hen 
IV ; when almoſt the whole clergy refuſed to ab- 
ſolve thoſe who paid allegiance to their king. 
Such 1s the deplorable condition of human nature, 
that the moſt ſovereign remedies are frequently 
converted into poiſon. | 
The Chriſtian religion was not extended 
farther in the north than the conqueſts of Charle- 
maign. Scandinavia and Denmark, which were 


then called the country of- the Normans, were' 


un in groſs idolatry. They worſhipped 
— and — — after — the happi- 
neſs of man would conſiſt in drinking beer in the 
hall of this God out of the ſkulls of his enemies. 
We have ſtill ſome of their antient ſongs, which 
are tranſlated, and expreſs this idea. It was a 
E deal for them to believe a future ſtate, Po- 
and was neither leſs barbarous nor leſs idolatrous. 
The Muſcovites, more favage than the reſt of 
Grand Tartary, ſcarcely knew enough to be 
reckoned Pagans: but all theſe nations enjoyed 
their ignorance in peace; happy in being un- 
known to Charlemaign, who ſold at ſo high a 
price the knowledge of Chriſtianity |! 

The Engliſh began to receive the Chriſtian re- 


127 


ligion, which had been carried formerly into that 


* Odin was the God of the antient Danes, who prefided over 
battles, along with another God _— Thor, See Barthol. Ant. Dan, 


4 iſland 


Of Religion Ch. xii. 
iſland by Conſtantius Chlorus, the ſecret protec- 
tor of Chriſtianity then perſecuted : but it did not 
reign there, idolatry had ſtill the aſcendant, and 
continued ſo for a long time. Some miſſionaries 
from Gaul inſtructed in a rude and imperfect man- 
ner a ſmall number of the inhabitants of that 
iſland. The famous Pelagius, too zealous a de- 
fender of human nature, was born in England ; 
but he was not educated there, and ought to be 
reckoned amongſt the Romans. 

Ireland, then called Scotland, and Scotland 
known at that time by the name of Albania, or 
the country of the Pi#s, had alſo received ſome 
ſeeds of Chriſtianity, that were conſtantly ſtifled 
by the idolatry that prevailed. Columbanus the 
monk was born in Ireland in the fixth century ; 
but it appears by his retreat into France, and the 
monaſteries he founded in Burgundy, that thoſe 
had little to do, and much to apprehend, who 
ſought in England and Ireland for ſuch rich and 
peaceful eſtabliſhments, as were found in other 
places under the ſhelter of religion. 

After an almoſt total extinction of Chriſtianity 
in England, Scotland, and Ireland, it was reviv- 
ed by conjugal tenderneſs. Ethelbert, one of the 
Anglo-Saxon kings in the heptarchy, who had his 
little kingdom in the county of Kent, where the 
city of Canterbury is ſituated, propoſed to enter 
into an alliance with a king of France, and mar- 
ried the daughter of Childebert, king of Paris. 
This Chriſtian princeſs, who croſſed the ſea with 
a biſhop of Soiſſons, diſpoſed her huſband to con- 
ſent to be baptized, as Clotilda had prevailed on 
Clovis. Pope Gregory the great ſent Auguſtine 
with other Roman monks, in the year 598: they 


made 


at he time of Charlemaign. 


made but few converts; for it was at leaſt neceſ- 
ſary that they ſhould underſtand the language of 
the country, before they could make any change 
in religion; however, being favoured by the queen, 
ay + built a monaſtery. 

t was ſtrictly ſpeaking the queen who convert- 
ed the little kingdom of Canterbury. Her barba- 
rous ſubjets, who were deſtitute of religious opi- 
nions, eaſily followed the example of their ſoye- 
reigns. This Auguſtine found no difficulty in ob- 
taining the rank of primate from Gregory the 
Great; he was even deſirous of obtaining the ſame 
rank in Gaul; but Gregory wrote him word, that 
he could not give him any other juriſdiction be- 
ſides that over England. He was therefore the 
firſt archbiſhop of Canterbury, and the firſt pri- 
mate of England. He gave to one of his monks 
the title of biſhop of London, and to another that 
of Rocheſter. We cannot compare theſe biſhops 
better than to thoſe of Antioch and Babylon, who 
are called biſhops in partibus infidelium : but the 
Engliſh hierarchy encreaſed with time, Monaſte- 
ries eſpecially were very rich in the eighth and 
ninth centuries z and they put into the catalogue 
of ſaints all the great lords who had given them 
lands; from whence it proceeds, that we find 
among the ſaints of this time, ſeven kings, ſeven 
7 eight princes, and ſixteen princeſſes. 

heir chronicles inform us, that ten kings and 
eleven queens ended their days in cloyſters: 
it is probable, that theſe ten kings and eleven 
queens only ordered themſelves to be cloathed 
at their death in the habits of the religious, and 
perhaps, carried to a convent in their laſt ſickneſs; 
| | G 5 but 


130 Continnation of the cuſtoms Ch. xiii. 
but not that they really in health gave up all pub- 
lic affairs to lead a monaſtic life, 


SESSSUSISSSISSSSS0O0SE00D 


wand... All. & . 
A continuation of the cuftoms in the time Charle- 
maign. Of juſtice, laws, and fingular uſages. 


USTICE was commonly diftributed by the 
- counts nominated by the king, who had their 
diſtricts aſſigned them, and were obliged to be 
verſed in the laws, which were neither ſo diffi- 
cult to be underſtood, nor ſo numerous as ours. 
The proceedings were ſimple, for in France and 
Getmany each pleaded his own cauſe : but Rome 
alone, and its territories, ſtil} retained many of the 
Jaws and formalities of the Roman empire, The 
laws of the Lombards took place in the reſt of 
Every count had under him a lieutenant, call- 
ed a viguier, feven affiſtants called ſeabini, and a 
 Glerk called notarius. The counts publiſhed in 
their juriſdictions the order of the marches in time 
of war, enrolled ſoldiers under the centenarii *, 
conducted them to the rendezvous, and left their 
Jieatenants to perform the office of judge. 
Ide kings ſent commiſſaries with letters pa- 
tent, mii Dominici, who examined the conduct 
of the counts; but neither theſe commiſſarĩes nor 
the counts hardly ever condemned a perſon to ſuf- 
A commander of a hundred ſoldiers, © | 


fer 


under Charlemaign. 


fer death, or corporal — — for if we ex- 
cept Sax where Charlemaign made ſangui- 
nary — almoſt all offences — the reſt of his 
empire were attoned for by money. Rebellion 
alone was puniſhed with death, and the kings in 
this caſe reſerved to themſelves the power of giv- 


* ö 


ing judgment. The Salic or Ripuarian law, and 


that of the Lombards, had, as we have already 
obſeryed, fet a Privo. in money on moſt other 
tranſgreſhons. 

Their civil law which appeared humane, was 
in reality more cruel than ours; for it left the li- 
berty of doing ill to all who were able to pay for 
it. The mildeſt law is that which by putting the 
moſt terrible conſtraint on iniquity prevents the 
multiplication of crimes. 

| The Salic laws were put in force by Charlemaign. 
Among theſe laws we find one that expreisly 
ſhews in what contempt the Romans were held 
amongſt the barbarous nations. The Frank, who 
had killed a Roman citizen, paid only one thous 
ſand and fifty deniers ; while the Roman paid for 
the blood of à Frank two thouſand five hundred 
denters. 

In criminal cauſes that could 0 be decided, 
they purges. e, ger by an oath; and it was 
made neceſſary not only for the party aceuſed to 
ſwear, but all o to produce a certain number of 
witneſſes to ſwear with him, When the two par- 
ties oppoſed oath to oath, they were ſometimes 
permitted to decide it by combat, in which they 
fought to extremity. | 
Theſe combats, it is well denn = were called 
= Judgment of God : and this was alſo the name 

G 6 given 


132 


Continuation of the cuſton Ch. xiii. 


given to one of the ,moſt deplorable follies of this 
barbarous government; by which the accuſed 
were put to the ordeal of hot water, cold water, 
or red hot iron. The celebrated Stephen Baluzius 
has collected all the antient ceremonies belongin 

to theſe ordeals. They began with the — 
when the accuſed received the euchariſt: they 
then bleſſed the cold water, exorciſed it; and at 
laſt the accuſed was thrown, bound with cords, 
into the water: if he ſunk to the bottom he was 
reputed innocent; but if he aroſe to the top he 
was adjudged: to be guilty. Mr. de Fleury, in 
his Eccleſiaſtical Hiſtory, ſays, that this was a 
certain method of finding nobody criminal : but I 
dare believe, that it was a certain method of de- 
ſtroying many innocent perſons. ' There are ſe- 
veral men who have their breaſts and lungs ſo large 
as not to permit them to fink, when a rope tied 
many times about them, forms in conjunction 
with their perſons, a body lighter than an equal 
quantity of water. This unhappy cuſtom though 
fince prohibited in great towns, has ſubſiſted till 
very lately in many provinces, where thoſe ſuſ- 
hed of uſing witchcraft, have often been con- 
demned to it, even by the ſentence of the judges ; 


' for nothing laſts ſo long as ſuperſtition : and this 


has coſt the lives of more than one unhappy 
perſon. + SY F OF « > 31 f * 
The judgment of God by hot water was exe- 


cuted by plunging the naked arm of the accuſed 


perſon into a great tub of boiling water, where 
he was obliged to take from the bottom.a conſe- 
crated ring. The judge, in the preſence of the 
prieſts and people, encloſed the arm of the patient. 
' "» . 3 In 

1 


* 


under Cbarlemaign. 
in a bag, ſealed it with his own: ſeal, and if in 


three days after the arm diſcovered no mark of 


a ſcalding, his innocence was acknowledged. 
All che hiſtorians relate the example of queen 
Teutberga, daughter- in- law to the emperor Lo- 
tharius, grandſon to Charlemaign, accuſed of 
having committed inceſt with her brother, a monk 
and ſubdeacon: this princeſs nominated a cham- 
pion, who in her ſtead ſubmitted to the trial of 
boiling water in the preſence of a numerous 
court, and took out the ring without being ſcald- 
ed. It is certain that there are ſecrets to bear the 
action of fire for a few ſeconds without being 
hurt: I have ſeen ſome inſtances of it myſelf : 
theſe ſecrets mult at that time have been more 
common, as there was a greater neceſſity for them. 
But no ſecret whatever can render a man abſolute- 
ly invulnerable. It is very probable that at thoſe 


133 


range judgments, they made the perſon undergo - 


a more or leſs ſevere trial, according as they were 
inclined to condemn or to acquit him. 

This trial of boiling water was deſigned parti- 
cularly for the conviction of adultery. Theſe 
cuſtoms were more antient and ſpread farther than 
people imagine. The women accuſed of this crime 
among the Jews, were obliged by the law of 
Moſes to undergo the trial of the waters of jealouſy. 


They drank in the preſence of the prieſts a water 


which had been mixed with ſome conſecrated aſhes. 
This proved a falutary potion to the innocent, 
but the guilty were ſeen to ſwell and burſt upon 
tha jdt a ee l eee of, 
The learned know very well that in the temple 
of the Dii Palici ® in Sicily, they uſed to write 

eln pals argted eln 4 their 
® Dii Palici, according to fabulous biſtory, were twins 


Continuation of the cuſtoms Ch. xii. 
their oath in a table book, which they threw 
into a baſon of water, and if it _ upon the 
ſurface, the perſon was acquitted. The temple 
of Trezena F was famous for trials of that ſort. 
We meet alſo. with the like cuſtoms in Japan, 
cuſtoms founded on the ſimplicity of antient times, 
and the common ſuperſtition of all nations. 

The- third-trial was that of a bar of red hot 


iron which the perſon was to carry in his hand 


while he-walked nine ſteps. It was mote difficult 
to deceive the people in this trial than in the 
others; we therefore find nobody in theſe igno- 
rant ages that ever ſubmitted to it. 


of Jupiter and Thalia, Jupiter enjoyed this 3 in Si- 
cily, upon the banks of the river Simethus, now the rr 
near Catana, Thalia finding herſelf pregnant, and dreading the 
reſentment of Juno, prayed the would ſwallow her up. 
Her prayer | was heard z the "received her. into her 


+ boſom, where ſhe was delivered of two boys; and the earth 


4 them to light by opening a ſecond time. From this cir- 
cumſtance they took the name of Palici, formed of the Greek 
word dv ixioffa;, which fignifies to come again: becauſe hav- 
ing been conceived above ground, they were ſwallowed by the 
earth before they were born; and after their birth, they came 
again to light; Theſe brothers were worſhi as Gods in Si- 
city. On the ſpot where they roſe out of the earth, two ſmall 


lakes are ſaid to have been formed, whoſe waters were in great 


veneration, being uſed, as Voltaire relates, for the conviction of 
erjurers. The Palic God is mentioned by Virgil, Ea. I. 9. 
lis ara Palici, And by Ovid Met. 85. | 
© . "Pergue lacus altos, et olentia fulpbure Arey * | 
Stegna Palicorum, rupta ferveitia terra. : 
ruins of the temple of the Palie Gods are ftill extant, no 
far from the ſource of the Jarerta, and the lake is now called 
Naphthia, See Farzellus de feb. Sic. and Macr. ſat. I. 5. 19, 
7 A city of Peloponneſus, known for its fidelity to the Athe- 
jans ; the modern name is Pleda, Plutarch 'mentions it in the 
es of Theſeus, Demoſthenes, and Themiſtocles. It was, fa- 
rhous for a temple dedicated to Minerva the ours ooh nom 
the girls dedicated their girdles, before they married i 
f 2 a In 


under Charlemaign. 


135 


In regard to the civil laws, what follows appears | 


to me to be the moſt remarkable. A man who 
had no children might adopt them. Huſbands 
— repudiate their wives by due courſe of law, 
and after the divorce they were ſuffered to marry 
another woman. Marculfus gives us a collection 
of theſe laws. 8 
But what will, perhaps, appear more aſtoniſn- 
ing, though it is not leſs true, is, that in the ſe- 
cond book of theſe formularies of Marculfus, we 
find that nothing was more readily permitted, 
nor more common than to derogate from that fa- 
mous Salic law, by which the daughters were not 
allowed to inherit. On this occaſton, the perſon 
led his daughter to the count or his commiſfary, 
when he ſaid, My dear daughter, an antient 
“ and impious cuſtom prevents our giving a ſhare 
cc of our paternal eſtates to our daughters; but 
«© having conſidered this impiety, I have found, 
e that as you have all been equally given to me 
by God, I ought to love you all alike ; there- 
« fore, my dear daughter, I deſire that you may 
inherit an equal ſhare with your brothers of all 
© m lands. &c.” TIE g ; 1 
The Franks, who lived according to the Salic 
and Ripuarian laws, were entirely unacquainted 
with the diſtinction of nobles and plebeians, of 
nobles ab avs, or men living nobly. They had 
but two orders of citizens, freemen and villains, 
which nearly reſembled the. preſent ſtate of the 
Mahometan and Chineſe empires. The word 
nobilis is uſed. but once, to fignify the officers, the 
counts, and the centenarii. | N 
The cities of Italy and France were all govern» 
ed according to their municipal laws. The —_— 
whic 


—— — ñ—üͤ— — — MAS ao, ” ww 


136 


ſeen at preſent. 


Lewis the Weak - Ch. xiv. 
which they paid to the ſovereign, conſiſted in fo- 


derum, paratam, manſionaticum, forage, proviſions, 
and moveable goods. Emperors and kings kept 
their court a long time upon their demeſnes, and 


continued theſe duties payable in kind whenever 


they travelled. We have ſtill extant a capitu- 
lar * of Charlemaign concerning his farms, where 
he enters into the minuteſt parts of that oecono- 
my. He orders an exact account of his flocks, 
to be given in to him. We find that one of the 
moſt valuable parts of a country ſtock was their 
bees. In ſhort by the ſmall, as well as the more 
important matters of thoſe days, we are made ac- 
quainted with the laws, manners, and cuſtoms, 
though there are hardly any veſtiges of them to be 


=” 


2 CHAP. XV. 
Lewis the Weak or the Debonnair. 


N E hiſtory of the great events of this world 

| is little elſe beſides a regiſter of crimes, I 
can find no age which the ambition of the laity 
and of the ecclefiaſtics has not filled with ſcenes of 
horror. 131 + How ; 


»A Capitular is in general a book divided into ſeveral chapters 
or capitula ; but in particular it is taken for a collection of civil 
and canon law, and eſpecially for thoſe laws and regulations 
which the kings of France-made at tho public meetings of the 
biſhops and temporal lords, for the government of church and 
ftate, Baluzius publiſhed an edition ef all the capitulars of the 


kings of France in 677. | 


— 


Scarce 


or the Debonnair. 

Scarce was Charlemaign in his tomb when a 
civil war ſpread deſolation both through his family 
and the empire. n | 

The archbiſhops of Milan and Cremona lighted 
the firſt flames, under the pretence that Bernard, 
king of Italy, was the chief of the Carlovingian 
family, being ſon to Pepin the elder brother of 
Lewis- We find plainly enough the true reaſon 
in that mad propenſity to raiſe commotions, and 


in that frenzy of ambition, which avails itſelf even 


of the laws made to repreſs it. A biſhop of Or- 
leans entered into their intrigues : both the un- 
cle and nephew raiſed forces, and were ready to 
come to an engagement at Chalons-ſur-Soan ; but 
the emperor's party gained half the Italian army 


137 


by money and promiſes. They then entered up- 


on a negotiation, that is, they reſolved to deceive 
each other; when the king was ſo imprudent as 
to come to his uncle's camp: on which Lewis, 
who was called the Debonnair, becauſe he was 
weak, and who was cruel merely from that weak- 
neſs, cauſed his neghews eyes to be put out, 
though he begged for mercy on his knees: the 
unhappy king died of the torment he ſuffered in 
his body and mind, three days after that cruel 
execution. He was interred at Milan and on his 
tomb was engraved, Here hes Bernard of prous 
memory. The word pious or faint at that time 
ſeems to have been only an honourable title. 
Lewis then cauſed his three brothers “ to be ſhaven 
and ſhut up in a monaſtery, leſt their being of the 
blood of Charlemaign ſhould entitle them to too 
much reſpect, and occaſion wars in their favour, 
But this was not all'; the emperor ordered all 
| „They were natural ſons of Charlemaign, © | 

Bernard's 


— * _— —— — — 


Lewis the Weak Ch. xiv. 


Bernard's partiſans to be arreſted, whom that king 
had diſcovered, from the hope of obtaining mercy ; 
and they ſuffered the ſame puniſhments as him- 
ſelf : the eccleſiaſtics, however, were excepted ; 
they were ſpared who were the authors of the war, 
and depoſition or exile was their only puniſhment. 
Lewis defired to keep fair with the church ; and 
the church ſoon made it evident, that he ought 
to have behaved with leſs cruelty and more 
firmneſs. 

The year 817, Lewis followed his father's bad 
example in giving kingdoms to his children; and 
having neither the courage nor the judgment of 
his father, nor the authority that courage pro- 
cures, he expoſed himſelf to ſuffer the effects of 
ingratitude, While he was a barbarous uncle, 
and too ſevere a brother, he was too indulgent a 


r. | ; 

_ After he had made his eldeſt ſon Lotharius his 
collegue in the government of the empire, given 
Aquitain to the ſecond named Pepin, and Bavaria to 
Lewis his third ſon, there ſtill remained an infant 
whom he had had by a ſecond wife: this was Charles 
the Bald, who was afterwards emperor: he reſolved 
after the diviſion not to leave this child, the ſon 
of a wife whom he loved, without dominions. 


Oneof the ſources of Lewis the Debonnair's mis- 


| fortunes, and of a number of {till greater diſaſters 


that have fince diſtutbed Europe, was that abuſe 
which began to ariſe, of granting power in the 
world to thoic who had renounced the world. 

This memorable ſcene was begun by a monk, 
named Vala, abbot. of Corby. He was a man 
whom. zeal, or the ſpitit of faction, or both to- 
gether, had rendered furious; one of thoſe party 
et. | | leaders, 


1 aan 1 


5 we UW . 


or the Debonnair. 


teaders, who have been ſo often obſerved to do a 
great deal of miſchief while they preach up virtue, 
and to throw every thing into confuſion for the 
ſake of order and rule. 

In a parliament held at Aix-la-Chapelle in the 
year 829 ; a parliament to which abbots were ad- 
mitted from their being lords of very large manors, 
this Vala publicly reproached the emperor for all 
the diſorders in the ſtate: It is you, faid he, 
« that are guilty of them.” He afterwards ſpoke 
to every member of parliament, even in a more 
ſeditious manner. He preſumed to accuſe the em- 
preſs Judith of adultery. He ſtrove to hinder the 
gifts the emperor was deſirous of beſtowing on the 
ſon he had had by this empreſs: in ſhort, he diſ- 
honoured and diſturbed the royal family, and con- 
ſequently the empire, under the pretence of pro- 
moting the welfare of the ſtate. + 

At length the emperor enraged ſent Vala to his 
monaſtery, where it would have been proper for 
him to have always remained ; and reſolving t6 
ſatisfy his wife, he gave her ſon a ſmall part of 
Germany towards the Rhine, which was Swiſſer⸗ 
land and Franche-Comte. | 

If the laws of Europe had been founded on pa- 
ternal authority, and if every mind had been pe- 
netrated with the neceflity of filial reſpect, as the 
firſt of all duties, which I have obſerved is the caſe 
in China ; the three children of the emperor, who 
had received their crowns from him, would not 
have revolted againſt their father, for giving an 
inheritance to a child by a ſecond marriage. , 

At firſt they vented their complaints ; preſently 
the abbot of Corby united himſelf to the abbot of 
St. Denis, a perſon of a ſtill more factious diſ- 

| poſition, 


140 


Lewis the Weak Ch. xiv, 
poſition, and who having the abbeys of St. Me- 


dard, Soiſſons, and St. Germain=des-prez, was 
capable of raiſing forces, and ſoon after did fo, 
The biſhops of — Lyons, and Amiens, 
Joining theſe monks, drove the princes to a civil 


war, declaring that all who were not of their par- 


ty were rebels to God and the church. In vain 
did Lewis the Debonnair, inſtead of raiſing armies, 
aſſemble four councils, in which were made good 
but unneceſſary laws: his three ſons had recourſe 
to arms, and, I believe, that this is the firſt time 
in which three ſons joined in a rebellion againſt 
their father. The emperor at laſt took up arms, 
and two camps were ſeen filled with biſhops, ab- 
bots, and monks : but on the fide of the princes 
there was pope Gregory IV. whoſe name gave 
great weight to their _ It was already the 
intereſt of the popes to humble the emperors. 
Already had Stephen, Gregory's predeceſſor, been 
inſtalled in the pontifical chair without the con- 
ſent of Lewis; and the raiſing diſputes between 
the father and his children, ſeemed a ready means 
of aggrandizing themſelves on their ruins. Pope 
Gregory therefore came to France and threaten- 
ed the emperor with excommunication, a cere- 
mony that did not yet convey the ſame idea that 
has been fixed to it ſince: for nobody dared to 
pretend that an excommunicated perſon was de- 
prived of his fortune by excommunication alone : 
but they thought of rendering a perſon execrable, 
and of cutting by this ſword all the bands that were 
Capable of attaching mankind to him, 

The biſhops on the emperor's ſide however made 
uſe of their right, and couragiouſly let the pope 
know, that S1 EXCOMMUNICATURUS VENIET, 
EXCOM- 


% ® © wh 


or the Debonnair. 


EXCOMMUNICATUS ABIBIT ; ( if he came to ex- 
% communicate, he himſelf ſhould return excom- 
e municated.” They wrote boldly to him, treat- 
ing him indeed like a pope, but at the ſame time 
like a brother. But Gregory, more haughty 
« than they, ſent to let them know that the term 
&« brother expreſſed too great an equality ;” and 
added, Adhere to that of pope ; acknowledge 
« my ſuperiority, and know that the authority 
© of my chair is above that of Lewis's throne.” 
In ſhort, in this letter he evaded the oath he had 
taken to the emperor. 

In the midſt of this war they entered upon ne- 
gotiations. The pontif ſet up for arbitrator, and 
went to meet the emperor in his camp, where he 
had the ſame advantage that Lewis formerly had 
over Bernard : he ſeduced his troops; and ſcarce 
had he left the camp, when that very night half 
of the Imperial army went over to Lotharius, his 


141 


ſon. This deſertion happened near Baſil, and g;, 


the plain where the pope carried on this negotia- 
tion, is ſtill called the Field of Lies. The un- 
happy monarch then ſurrendered himſelf a pri- 
ſoner to his rebellious. children, with his wife 
Judith, the object of their hatred ; he likewiſe 
delivered up to them his ſon Charles, who was 
only ten years of age, and the innocent pretence 
for this war. In more barbarous times, as in the 
reigns of Clovis and his children, or in countries 
like Conſtantinople, I ſhould not be ſurprized, if 
they had murdered Judith and her ſon, and even 
the emperor : but the conquerors contented them- 
ſelves with cauſing the empreſs to be ſhaved and 
ſent to priſon in Lombardy ; with ſhutting up 


young Charles in the conyent of Prum, in the 
midſt 


| 233. 


Lewis the Weak Ch. xi v. 


midſt of the foreſt of Ardenne; and with de- 
throning their father. In reading this fond pa- 
rent's diſaſter, we muſt receive, I think, a ſecret 
ſatisfaction, when we find that his ſons were not 
leſs ungrateful to the abbot Vala, the firſt author 
of theſe troubles, and to the pope, who had ſo 
well carried them on. With pleaſure we ſee the 
pope return to Rome, deſpiſed by the conquerors; 
and Vala confined in a monaſtery in Italy. 
Lotharius, who was ſo much the more guilty 
as he had been aſſociated to the empire, dragged 
his father as a priſoner to Compiegne. There 
had been at that time a fatal abuſe introduced 
into the church, which forbad the carrying of 
arms and exerciſing civil functions during the 
time of public penance. Theſe penances were 
ſeldom practiſed, and ſcarcely ever fell on any 
beſides ſome unhappy perſons amongſt the dregs 
of the people; yet it was reſolved, that the em- 
peror ſhould ſubmit to this infamous puniſhment, 
under the colour of a voluntary Chriſtian humi- 


liation, and to impoſe upon him a perpetual pen- 


ance that would degrade him for ever, 

Lewis was intimidated, and had the meanneſs 
to condeſcend to this propoſal, which they had 
the boldneſs to make him. An archbiſhop of 
Rheims, named Hebo, who, in ſpight of the 
laws, had by Lewis himſelf been raiſed from a 
ſervile condition to this dignity, depoſed his 
ſovereign and benefactor. he ſovereign was 
obliged to make his appearance, ſurrounded by 
thirty biſhops, canons, and monks, in the church 
of Notre Dame at Soiſſons; and Lotharius was 
preſent to enjoy the ſight of his father's humiha- 


tion. A hair- cloth was ſpread before the altar ; 
| | an 


—_— cc. 7 OO... Eoin on 


— -- fy I ©5 Q © ro rs kw ww, ow mw gy oy _ 


— 


EE . ßß , ea nf 


12 


or the Debonnair. 


and the archbiſhop ordered the emperor to take 
off his belt, ſword and coat, and to proſtrate 
himſelf on the cloth. Lewis with his face to 
the earth, aſked the public penance, which he 
too well deſerved for ſubmitting to it. "The 
archbiſhop forced him to read with a loud voice 
a paper, in which he accuſed himſelf of ſacrilege 
and 'murder ; and the unhappy prince read deli- 
berately a liſt of his crimes, among which it is 
expreſsly mentioned, that he had cauſed his troops 
to march in Lent, and had called a parliament on 
Maundy Thurſday, A verbal proceſs was pre- 
pared of the whole action, which is a monument 
{till ſubſiſting of the extremes of inſolence and 
meanneſs. f 

condeſeend to give Lewis the title of emperor: 
but he is there called Dominus Lupovicus, a 


nobleman, a venerable perſon. 


Mankind are fond of bringing precedents to 


deſend Ar behaviour. The pen- 


ance of Lewis the Debonnair, was authorized 
by the example of a Viſigoth king named Vam- 


ba, who reigned in Spain in 68 : this prince's, 


intellects being impaired, ke ſubmitted to a pub- 
lie penance at the council of Toledo, and ſhut 
himſelf up in a cloyſter. His ſucceſſor Hervicus 
had acknowledged that he held his crown of the 
biſhops. This fact was quoted, as if villain 
could be juſtified by example, The likewiſe 
alledged the penance of the emperor Th 

but it was a very different caſe. This prince had 
cauſed fifteen thouſand citizens of Theſſalonica 


to be maſſacred, not in a ſudden tranſport of paſ- 


hon, as is falfely aſſerted every day, but after 
very mature deliberation, In conſequence of this 
premedi- 


n this verbal proceſs they do not 


eodoſius: 


. 725755 ä — 
* 


144 


Lewis the Weak Ch. xiv. 


premediated crime he might have felt the reſent- 
ment of the people, who did not chuſe him their 
ſovereign, to have their throats cut. St. Ambroſe 


did a noble action in refuſing him admittance into 


the church, and Theodoſius acted very prudently 
in aſſwaging the hatred of the people, by keeping 
away from divine ſervice for about eight months; 
a poor ſatisfaction for the moſt barbarous act that 


ever ſtained the memory of a ſovereign. 


June 


840. 


Lewis was confined for a year in a cell of the 
convent of St. Medard at Soiſſons, cloathed with 
ſackcloth like a penitent, without ſervants, with- 
out conſolation, and dead to the reſt of the world. 
If he had had but one fon, he would have been 
loſt for ever; but his three ſons quarreling about 
his ſpoils, their diſſenſions reſtored the father to 
his liberty and crown. 

| He was removed to St. Denis, when two of 
his ſons, Lewis and Pepin, came to re-eſtabliſh 
him on the throne, and to reſtore to his arms his 
wife and ſon Charles. The aſſembly of Soiſſons 
was anathematizcd by another at T hionville : but 
this coſt the archbiſhop of Rheims only the loſs of 
his ſee; moreover he was only tried and depoſed 
in the veſtry; whereas the emperor, had been de- 
poſed in public at the-foot of the altar. Some 
other biſhops were alſo deprived of their ſees; and 
this was all the puniſhment the emperor dared to 
inflict on them. | | 

Soon after Lewis of Bavaria, one of the ſame 
ſons that had re-eſtabliſhed him on the throne, 
rebelled. againz on which the unhappy father 
died of vexation in a tent near Mentz, ſaying, 
6 forgive Lewis, but let him know that he has 
«© been the cauſe of my death.” 


By 


or the Debonnair. 


By his laſt will he is ſaid to have confirmed, in 
a ſolemn manner, the donation made by Pepin 
and Charlemaign to the church of Rome. 

The ſame doubts ariſe in regard to this confir- 
mation, as to the original donation itſelf. It is 
difficult to believe that Charlemaign and bis ſon 
ſnould make a preſent to the pope, of Venice, 
Sicily, Sardinia, and Corſica, countries to which 
they had at fartheſt only the conteſted ri ht of ſove- 
reign juriſdiction. And when could Lewis have 
given away Sicily, which belonged to the Greek 
emperors, and was infeſted by the continual de- 
ſcents of the Arabs ? 


60000000 20000 0000 


CH AP. XV. 


State of Europe after the death of Lewis the 
Debonnair, or the Neat. 


exander, or as that which we ſhall ſoon ſee 
befel the empire of the caliphs, Having been 
founded with precipitation, it preſently ſhook, 
and was divided by inteſtine wars, 

It is not at all ſurpriſing that princes, who had 
dethroned their father, ſhould reſolve to exter- 
minate one another; each was ſtriving to ſtrip 
his brother. Lotharius, the emperor, would 
have all. Charles the Bald, king of France, and 
Lewis, king of Bavaria, united their forces againſt 
him, A grandſon to Lewis the Debonnair, the 
lon of Pepin, king of Aquitain, who was' king 

Vor, H after 


his empire had the ſame fate as that of 


, FTER the death of Charlemaign's ſon, 
| 


B State of Europe Ch. xv. 
after his father's death, joined Lotharius, Theſe 


laid the empire waſte, and drained it of ſol- 


diers. In ſhort, two kings againſt two kings, 
three of whom were brothers, and the other 
their nephew, gave battle at Fontenay in Auxer- 
rois, the horror of which was worthy of a civil 
war. Many authors aſſure us, that in this en- 
agement there periſhed an, hundred thouſand 
men. It is true, that theſe; authors were not 
cotemporaries; and that we ought at leaſt to have 
the liberty of doubting whether ſo much blood 
was ſpilt. The emperor Lotharius was over- 
come. He then ſet the world an example of po- 
licy directly oppoſite to that of Charlemaign. 
The conqueror of the Saxons had made them 
ſubmit to Chriſtianity as a neceſſary reſtraint : 
their having ſometimes revolted, and fre- 
quently returned to the antient worſhip, was a 
mark of their averſion to a religion, which they 
conſidered as a puniſhment: but Lotharius, in 
order to engage them to embrace his intereſt, 


# 


gave them an entire liberty of conſcience, on 


which half of the country returned to idolatry, 
but continued faithful to the king. This con- 
duct, and that of Charlemaign his grandfather, 


let people ſee by what different methods princes | 


make religion ſubſervient to their own intereſt. 
The diſgraces of Lotharius furniſhed another 
example of it: his two brothers, Charles the 
Bald, and Lewis of Bavaria, aſſembled a council 
| of biſhops and abbots at Aix-la-Chapelle: theſe 
prelates by common conſent declared Lotharius 
deprived of his right to the crown, and his ſub- 
iects releaſed from their oath of fidelity. * Do 
you promiſe to goyern better than he has 
| | | | ONCE + 


— FA a _ a —— thc a. 1 


. ˙ — tt 


after the death of Lewis the Debonnair. 


ce done?“ ſaid they to the two brothers Charles 
and Lewis: We promiſe it,” the two kings 
replied; © And we,“ ſaid the biſhop, who fat 
as preſident, we, by divine authority, permit 
« and command- you to reign in his place.“ 
When we ſee biſhops thus diſpoling of crowns, 
we deceive ourſelves if we imagine that they 
were then, what the electors of the empire are 
now. They were powerful, indeed, but none 
of them were ſovereigns. The authority of their 
character, and the reſpect paid them by the peo- 
ple, were the inſtruments which kings made uſe 
of at pleaſure. There was much more weak- 


147 


neſs than grandeur in theſe eccleſiaſtics thus 


deeiding the right of kings, according to the 
orders they received from thoſe who had the great- 
eſt ſtrength. | 

We ought not to be ſurprized, that ſome 


years after an archbiſhop of Sens, with twenty gg,, 


other biſhops, preſumed in a like conjuncture to 
depoſe Charles the Bald, king of France: an 


action done to pleaſe Lewis of Bavaria. Theſe ' 


monarchs, who were as wicked kings as they were 
unnatural brothers, not being able to effect their 


mutual deſtruction, cauſed each other to be 


anathematized by turns; but it is moſt ſurpriſing, 


that this ſame Charles the Bald ſhould ſay in 


a letter he condeſcended to publiſh againſt the 


archbiſhop of Sens, At leaſt that archbiſhop 
« ought not to have depoſed me, before I had 


made my appearance before the biſhops who 


** conſecrated me king: it was fit that I ſhould 
have firſt ſubmitted to their judgment, having 


« heen always ready to reſign myſelf to their 
« paternal correction and chaſtiſement. When 


4 H 2 the 


148 


844. 


1 
; 
1 
1 


State of Eurepe Ch. xv. 


the race of Charlemaign was reduced to ſpeak 
thus, it was viſibly hurrying to its ruin. 

I return to Lotharius, who had always a large 
arty in Germany, and was quiet poſſeſſor of 
taly. He paſled the Alps, cauſed his ſon Lewis 

to be crowned, who went to try pope Sergius II, 
at Rome, The pontif made his appearance, an- 


ſwered in a formal manner the accuſations of a 


biſhop of Mentz, juſtihed himſelf, and at laſt 


took the oath of fidelity to the fame Lotharius 
that was depoſed by the biſhops. Lotharius alſo 
made that celebrated and uſeleſs decree, that to 


avoid the ſeditions, which too frequently aroſe, 


the pipe ſhould be no longer elected by the people; 
and that an inſormation ſhould be ſent to the em- 
peror whenever the holy ſee was vacant. 

We are ſurprized to ſee the emperor ſometimes 
ſo humble, and at other times ſo haughty: but he 
had an army. in the neighbourhood of Rome, 


when the pope ſwore allegiance to him; and he 
Bad none at Aix-la-Chapelle, when he was de- 


throned. by the biſhops. | 

Their ſentence was but one ſcandal more add- 
ed to the deſolations of Europe; the provinces 
from the Alps to the Rhine no longer knew who 
they were to obey: towns every day changed 
their tyrants: countries were ravaged by different 
parties one after another: nothing was heard of 
hut battles; and in theſe battles there were always 
monks, abbots, and biſhops, who died ſword in 
hand. Hugh, one of Charlemaign's ſons, for- 


| * to turn monk, and ſince abbot of 


St. Quintin, was killed before Toulouſe, with 
the abbot of Ferriere; and two biſhops were there 
made priſoners. 

This 


after the death of Lewis the Debonnair. 149 


This civil combuſtion ſtopped for a moment, 
only to begin again with freſh fury, The three 
brothers, Lotharius, Charles, and Lewis, n- ade a 
new diviſion, which occaſioned only new ſubjects 
of diſcontent and war. 

The emperor Lotharius, after having turned 
Europe upſide down, without cauſe, and without 

obtaining glory, on feeling an-inward 2 be- 
came a monk in the aþbey of Prum: but he did 
not wear the habit above ſix days, and died a fool, 
after having lived a tyrant. 

At the death of this third emperor of the 
Weſt there aroſe new kingdoms in Europe, like 
heaps of earth after the ſhocks of a great earth- 
quake. 

Another Lotharius, ſon of that emperor, gave 
his name to a pretty large country, ſince by con- 
traction called Lorrain, ſituated between the 
Rhine, the Scheld, the Maeſe, and the ſea, 
Brabant was called Lower Lorrain, the reſt was 
Upper Lorrain. At preſent none of this Upper 
Lorrain goes by that name, but a ſmall province 

lately ſwallowed up in the kingdom of France, 

A ſecond ſon of the emperor Lotharius, named 
Charles, had Savoy, Dauphine, and a part of 
-Lyonois, Provence, and Languedoc. This ſtate 
compoſed the kingdom of Arles, fo called from 
the name of its capital, once an opulent city, and 
:embejliſhed- by the Romans, but at that time a 
poor little place, as were all the cities on this ſide 
the Alps. 0 
A bar barian named Solomon, became ſoon af- 
ter king of Britany, a part of which was ſtill pa- 
gan; but all theſe kingdoms fell as quickly as 
Wee raid. e enο Aανh˖ s e 1 


- 


H 3 The 


State of Europe Ch. xv. 


The ſhadow of the Roman empire ſtill ſubſiſted. 
Lewis, ſecond ſon of Lotharius, who had re- 
ceived a part of Italy for his ſhare, was pro- 
claimed emperor by Sergius II. in the year 855. 
He did not reſide at Rome; nor did he poſſeſs a 
ninth part of the empire of Charlemaign : he 
had only in Italy an authority conteſted by the 
popes and the dukes of Benevento, who then 
poſſeſſed a conſiderable territory. 

After his death, which happened in the year 
875, if the Salic law had taken effect with reſpect 
to the family of Charlemaign, the empire would 
have belonged. to the eldeſt of that houſe; and 
Lewis of Germany, Charlemaign's , eldeſt de- 
ſcendant, would have ſucceeded his nephew, who 
died without children; but troops and money 
conſtituted -the right of Charles the Bald: this 
prince ſhut up the paſſages of the Alps againſt his 
brother, and haſtened to Rome with-ſome troops, 
Reginus, and the annals of Metz and Fuld 
aſſure us, that he bought the empire of pope 
John VIII. The pope not only made him pay 
for this honour, but taking advantage of that 
conjuncture, gave him the empire as his ſove- 
reign; and Charles received it as his vaſſal, pro- 
teſting that he held it of the pope, as he had be- 
fore in France, in the year 859, proteſted that he 
ought to ſubmit to the judgment of the biſhops. 
| Thus he always ſuffered his dignity to be degraded 
in order to enjoy it. 122 
Under his reign the Roman empire was com- 
| | poſed only of France and Italy. It is ſaid that 
3 he was poifoned by his phyſician, a JIew, named 


Sedecias; hut nobody has ever ſaid for what rea- 


ſon his phyſician committed this crime. _ 
| cou 


after the death of Lewis the Debonnair, 


could he get by poiſoning his maſter? With 
whom could he enjoy a better fortune? B-lives, 
as no author mentions any puniſhment inflicted 
on the phyſician, we ought to queſtion the truth 
of this prince's being poiſoned, and only reflect 
that the Chriſtians in Europe were fo ignorant, 
that kings were obliged to ſearch for phyſicians 
amongſt the Jews and Arabians. 
This ſhadow of the Roman empire continued 
ſtill the object of ambition; and Lewis the Stam- 


merer, king of France, the ſon of Charles the 


Bald, diſputed it with the other deſcendants of 
Charlemaign. They always aſked it of the pope. 


A duke of Spoleto, and a marquis of "Tuſcany, 
inveſted with theſe ſtates by Charles the Bald, 


ſeized the perſon of pope John VIII. and plun- 


dered a part of Rome, to force him, it is ſaid, 


to give the empire to Carloman, king of Bavaria, 


"the eldeſt of the race of Charlemaign, ' Pope 
John VIII. was not only thus perſecuted in 


ome by the Italians, but was obliged in 877, 


to pay twenty-five thouſand pounds weight of 
Ailver to the Mahometans, the poſſeſſors of Sicily 
and the Neapolitan coaſt, This was the money 

with which Charles the Bald had purchaſed the 
empire. It paſſed ſoon after out of the hands of 
the pope into thoſe of the Saracens, and the pope 
even ſigned an authentic treaty, by which he en- 


gaged to pay them annually the ſame ſum. _ 
| However this pontif, who was tributary to 


the Mahometans, and a priſoner in Rome, eſ- 


caped, embarked and got into France, where he 
crowned Lewis the Stammerer in the city of 


Troyes, after the example of Leo III. of Adrian 


H 4 and 


151 


* — 
o — "ry 
o LET -- i GY 1 3 
. 4 . 


— 
— e * : 
BT). - {tes 
£ — a2 A ES wr” 3, 
ä 8 5 9 ne. Wool 
* © 7 ; —_ 7 oa 3 : 
. Ca 4. - „ R 


5 ox, 700. W _ - x a * r $5 tu, A 1 
wth : — 0 1 * * 3 , "= 
* 33 4 2 22 4 — 7 9 
r IIRER 
4 2 4 — 


«a — 2 82 
Es E L 8 mx 


— 


— 


— 44” * 


— 


— — 


—— ſU— 


$87. 


State of Europe &c, Ch. xv. 


and Stephen III. who were perſecuted at home, 
and beſtowed crowns abroad, 

Under Charles the Fat, emperor and king of 
France, the miſery of Europe was redoubled. 
The farther the blood of Charlemaign ran from 
its ſource, the more it degenerated. This Charles 
the Fat was declarcd incapable of reigning by an 
aſſembly of French and German lords, who 
depoſed him near Mentz, in a diet called by 
himſelf, "Theſe were not biſhops, who taking 
advantage of a prince's paſſions, ſeemed to dil- 
pole of a crown; but the leading perſons of the 
nation, who believed that they had a right to 
nominate him that was to govern them, and to 
command at their head. It is ſaid, that the in- 
tellects of Charles the Fat grew weak; and 
there is no doubt of it, fince he ſuffered him- 
{clf to be dethroned without reſiſtance, and thus 
to loſe Germany, France, and Italy, and to be 
deprived of all other means of ſubſiſtence, beſides 


the charity of the archbiſhop of Mentz, who 


condeſcended to allow him a maintenance. It 
ſeems very plain, that the order of ſucceſſion 
was then entirely. diſregarded, fince Arnolph, 
the baſtard of Carloman, ſon of Lewis the 


Stammerer, was declared emperor, and Eudes, 


or Odo, count of Paris, was king of France. 


There was at that time neither the right of birth, 
nor the acknowledged, right of election: Europe 


was a chaos in which the ſtrongeſt roſe upon the 
ruins of the weakeſt, in order to be at length 
thrown down by others. | | 


— Fe CHAP, 


7 


a WW Vt = 


The foreſts with which theſe countries were over- 


their barks, which were navigated with two fails 
and a number of oars, and would contain about 
an hundred men with their ſtores, beer, ſea- biſ- 


Of the Normans &c: 


CHAP. XVI. 


Of the Ner mans towards the ninth century, 


UROPE being thus divided, every ſtate 
E was weak and unhappy. This confuſion 
opened a paſſage to the people of Scandinavia, and 
the inhabitants on the coaſts of the Baltick. Thoſe 
ſavages becoming too numerous, having only an 
ungrateful ſoil to cultivate, wanting manufactures, 
and being deprived of arts, thought of nothing 
but of ſpreading themſelves far from their native 
country, Robbery and piracy were as neceſſary 
for their ſubſiſtence, as carnage for beaſts of prey. 
In Germany they were called Normans, or MAen 
of the North, without diſtinction, juſt as we ſtill 
ſay in general, the Corſairs of Barbary. So early 
as the fourth century they joined the fleets of the 
other Barbarians, who carried deſolation even as 
far as Rome and Africa; yet under Charlemaign 
we have ſeen that they confined themſelves within 
their own bounds, for fear of ſlavery. In the time 
of Lewis the Debonnair they renewed their cruiſes, 


grown, . furniſhed them with wood for building 


cuit, ſalt meat and cheeſe, They —_ along the 
coaſt, landed where they found no reſiſtance, and 
returned home with their booty, which they at 
length divided according to the laws of piracy, as 
now in uſe at Tunis. In the year 843, they en- 
tered France at the mouth of the river Seine, and 


Hs . pillaged 


- — — . F you E 
he — 2 1 2 * % % k. 4. - Po. 
2 © r * — = — ons — _ 4 
- SAG a Ah od ab = n n r os s * 2 = 
” - Ea * . e 4 * 4 : £ 9 * © 
n T > 44 4 4 — _— —Y ah * A 22 _ 
+——-$ — 8 2 1 = CE 4 _ 
* 4 4 6.4 


n 92 
PLE 


—— *% 


— 
* 5 
— * 


+ 
— —_— - oat 


22 
r 


| 
"Of the Normans Ch. xvi. 


pillaged the city of Rouen, Another fleet ſailed 
up the Loire, and laid the whole country wafte 
as far as Touraine: they carried the men into 
ſlavery, divided the women and girls amongſt 
themſelves, and even took the children to bring 
them up to the trade of piracy : in ſhort, cattle, 
furniture, and every thing were carried off, and 
they ſometimes ſold on one coaſt what they had 
Pillaged on another. Their firſt, ſucceſs excited 
the avarice of their indigent countrymen, and theſe 
were joined by the inhabitants on the coaſts of 
Germany and Gaul, juſt as the renegadoes of 
Provence and Sicily have ſerved on board the 
veſſels of Algiers. | 

In 844 they covered the ſea with veſſels, and 
landed almoſt at one and the fame time in Eng- 
Jand, France, and Spain, It is evident, that the 
governments of France and England were worſe 
adminiftred than that of the Mahometans who 
reigned in Spain; for no meaſures were taken by 


the French and Engliſh to prevent theſe irrup- 


tions ; but the Arabians in Spain guarded their 
coaſts, and at laſt repulſed the pirates. 

In 845 the Normans plundered Hamburgh, and 
penetrated into Germany. They were no longer 
a diſorderly multitude of Corſairs; but a fleet of 
ſix hundred veſſels that had a regular army on 


board, with Erick a king of Denmark at their 


head, who gained two battles before he reimbark- 
ed. This king of the pirates after his return home 
with the ſpoils of the Germans, ſent to France 
one of the admirals of the Corſairs, to whom hi- 
Kory gives the name of Regnier, who went up 
the Seine with an hundred and twenty fail, To 
all appearance theſe hundred and twenty * 
d 


rw or IR. —_— 


towards the ninth century. _ I 


did not carry ten thouſand men; yet with a num- 
ber probably ſtill inferior, he pillaged Rouen a 
ſecond time, and proceeded even to Paris. In 
ſuch invaſions, when the weakneſs of an admi- 
niſtration has provided no remedy, the terror of 
the people encreaſes the danger, and the greateſt 
number flies before the ſmalleſt. The Pariſians, 
who at other times defended themſelves with 
much bravery, abandoned their city, and the 
Normans found nothing there but wooden houſes, 
which they burnt. The unhappy king, Charles 
the Bald, entrenched himſelf at St. Denis with 
a few troops, inſtead of oppoſing theſe Barbarians, 
and purchaſed with fourteen thouſand marks of 
ſilver the retreat they condeſcended to make. One 
is provoked at reading in our authors, that many 
of theſe Barbarians were puniſhed with ſudden 
death for having pillaged the church of St. Ger- 


main-des-prez, Neither the people nor their 


ſaints made any defence; but the conquered al- 
ways had the ſhameful conſolation of ſuppoſing 
miracles performed againſt their enemies. 

Charles the Bald in thus purchaſing the peace, 
only gave theſe pirates new means of making war, 
and took from himſelf that of ſupporting it. The 
Normatis made uſe of this money in carrying on 
the ſiege of Bourdeaux, which they plundered ; 
and what gave the finiſhing ſtroke to the horror 
and humiliation of the French, Pepin, king of 
Aquitain, who was deſcended from Charlemaign 
not being able to reſiſt, joined with them ; and 
then France, about the year 858, was entireh 
ravaged, The Normans ſtrengthened by tell 
allies for a long time, laid waſte Germany, Flan- 
ders, aud England. 8 lately ſeen armies 
| of 


« © 5 by, 
- & — — . — wr — 75 
— 2 a 


f 


1 ' 
* 
f , = 
1 1 
14 
= EY 
a 2 
4 . 3 
- » 
* 
o 2 8 
9 * 
* oP 
bf 4 
4 d 
I 1 
. 
T5 = 
£8 
1 
TH 
$3 T 
* I 
* + 
5 1 Lu 
KW YH 
* 1 
14 
6 
A 
„ " = = 
q 
x N WA 
* # 
1 9 
- „ 3, 
, 7 
9 
1 
" A - 
x 
N. 
N * , 
= 
Wl * 
2 * 
* 40 
» 3 
T 
* 1 
or 4 
1 4 
N L. 1 
e 3TH 
9 
. 
- q 
$3 
os 
2 „ 
52 
* 
1 
4 
WY [4 
» f = 
EG 
, £9 
4 . 
. 
FS 4 | 
wi 
4 - 
W_ 
14 
- 4 * . 
= * BJ 
* 4 
- 0X 
ma 
s 
= > 
Wc 
: a 
* 
* 
ö 
iT 
4 'J 6 N 
* - 4 
2 1 
1 F 
i 
2» . 
#1 
{ 
1 * 
* - 
| T 


4,156 


888, 


Of the Normans Ch, xvi. 


of a hundred thouſand men ſcarce able, after very 
ſignal victories, to take two towns; ſo much has 
the art of fortification, and taking proper precau- 
tions againſt a ſiege, been brought to perfection: 
but at that time Om: 17 hghting againſt other 
Barbarians who were at variance amongſt them- 
ſelves, found, after the firſt ſucceſs, ſcarcely any 
thing to ſtop their career; and when they were 
ſometimes defeated, they ſoon returned with freſh 
A 

Frotho, king of Denmark, to whom Charles the 


Fat at length yielded a part of Holland in the year 


882, penetrated from thence into Flanders, when 
his Normans paſſed from the Somme to the Oiſe 
without reſiſtance, took and burnt Pontoiſe, and 


arrived by land and water at Paris. 


The Pariſians, who then expected an irruption 
of Barbarians, did not, as formerly, abandon the 
capital. The count of Paris, Odo, or Eudes, whoſe 
valour afterwards raiſed him to the throne of 


France, made ſuch regulations in the city, as 


animated their courage, and ſerved them inſtead 
of towers and ramparts. Sigefroy, who com- 


manded the Normans, preſſed the ſiege with an 


obſtinate fury, not deſtitute of art. T hey made 
uſe of battering rams, effected a breach, ana gave 
three aſſaults, which the Pariſians ſuſtained with 
unſhaken courage, They had at their head not 
only count Eudes, but alſo Goſlin their biſhop, 
who every day, after he had beſtowed his bene- 
ditions on the people, repaired to the breach, 
with a helmet on his head, a quiver of arrows on 
his back, and an ax at his girdle, and having 
may the croſs on a rampart, fought with it in 


his fight. This biſhop appears to have had at 


leaſt 


. 
| 


leaſt as much authority in the city as count Eudes; 
ſince Sigefroy firſt addreſſed himſelf to him, to 
obtain permiſſion to enter Paris: however, the 


ble; for though he armed thoſe hands which re- 


pet he armed them for that altar itſelf, and for 


towards the ninth century. 


* * 
— — 5 


: >. £ * ti —— 
27 6 2 
— — 
r -= — £24 by 8 LC Pe 
A ae ho , GE as - l 
18 ” Py” 4 l 


E 2 - $4 
» * 2 * 
3 8 


* 


ood prelate died of fatigue in the midſt of the 
1 leaving a memory equally dear and reſpecta- 


i 
— 


17 
+U 
bo 
25 
| 


3 
8 


ligion reſerved ſolely for the ſervice of the altar, 


is fellow citizens, in the juſteſt cauſe, a neceſ- 
ſary defence, which is ever ſuperior to all laws. 
His brethren had only armed themſelves in civil 
wars, and againſt Chriſtians : but if an apotheo- 
ſis is due to any man, this prelate who fought 
and died for his country, had perhaps a much 
better right to a place in heaven, than ſuch num- 
bers of obſcure perſons, whoſe virtue, if they had 
any, was generally of ro ſervice to the world. 
The Normans blocked up the city a year and 
a half, during which time the Pariftans experien- 
ced all the horrors that attend a long. ſiege, ſuch 
as famine and peſtilence, and yet remained un- 
ſhaken. At length the emperor Charles the Fat, 
king of France, appeared on the Mount of, Mars, 
now called Montmartre; but not daring to at- 
tack the Normans, he only came to purchaſe ano- 
ther ſhameful truce. Theſe Barbarians left Paris 
to go and beſiege Sens, and plunder Burgundy ; 
while Charles went to Mentz, to afſemble the 
patliament that deprived him of a throne he was 
ſo unworthy to poſſeſs. | 
. The Normans continued their devaſtations ; 
but though they were enemies to the Chriſtian 
name, they never attempted to force any one to 
renounce Chriſtianity. They nearly reſembled 
the Franks, the Goths, the Alans, the Hobs, 


* 
—— 


Is 8 p * ws 8 ae " 
wah.” 7 — — 4 
> R "be" * . 5 by 
* 322 — F 7 = * . 
Fr x, 2 * A $i AS ot 8 * 
: ĩðâ2y;v .. 


| we. 8 


Charles the 


912. 


Of "the Normans Ch. xvi. 


and the Heruli, who in the fourth century, ſought 
for new ſettlements, and were fo far from im- 


Poſing a religion on the Romans, that they eaſily 
accommodated themſelves to theirs: thus the 
Turks, in plundering the empire of the caliphs, 
ſubmitted to the Mahometan religion. 
At length Rollo, or Raoul, the moſt illuſtrious 
of thefe northern robbers, after being driven from 
Denmark, aſſembled in Scandinavia all thoſe that 
were willing to attach themſelves to his fortune; 


and ee the hopes of his future grandeur on 


the weakneſs of Europe, he attempted new ad- 
ventures. He landed firſt in England, where his 
countrymen were already eſtabliſhed ; but after 
two uſeleſs victories, he ſteered his courſe towards 
France, which other Normans had ruined, but 
had not been able to enſkave. 

Rollo was the only perſon amongſt thoſe Bar- 
barians who ceaſed to deferve that name, in ſeek- 
ing for a fixed eſtabliſhment. Having without 
difficulty made himſelf maſter of Rouen, inſtead 
of deſtroying that city, he repaired its walls and 
towers. Rouen became his arſenal, from whence 


he went in queſt of plunder, ſometimes to Eng- 


land, and ſometimes in France, making war with 
as much policy as fury. France was then expir- 
ing under the reign of Charles the Simple, a king 
only in name, and whoſe monarchy was even 
more diſmembered by the dukes, counts, and ba- 
rons, his ſubjects, than by the Normans. Charles 
the Fat had given only gold to the Barbarians ; but 
inple offered to Rollo his daughter 
and his provinces. I 
Rollo at firſt demanded Normandy, and Charles 
thought himſelf happy in getting off ſo _ 
8 x 


towards the ninth century. 139 Wl 
He afterwards demanded Britany; this was diſ- ii 
.puted, but Charles was obliged to give up this too 
with certain clauſes, which the ſtrongeſt al- 
ways explains to his own advantage. Thus Bri- 
.tany, which a little before had been a kingdom, 
was made a fief to Neuſtria; and Neuſtria, af- 
terwards called Normandy from the name of the 
conquerors, became a ſeparate ſtate, the dukes of 
which paid a vain and empty homage to the crown 
of France. #27 3's 
The archbiſhop of Rouen prevailed on Rollo to 
turn Chriſtian; and this prince readily embraced 
a religion that confirmed his power. 

True conquerors are thoſe who know how to 
make laws: their power is ſtable; the others are 
torrents that paſs away, Rollo grew peaceable, 
and was the only legiflator of his time on the 
Chriſtian continent. It is well known with what 
inflexibility he adminiſtred juſtice. He aboliſſied 
theft and robbery amongſt his Danes, who had 
hitherto lived only on rapine; and for a long time 
after his deceaſe, the ſole pronouncing of his 
name was an order to the officers of juſtice to run 
to ſuppreſs any act of violence: from thence comes 
the cuſtom of calling Hare, ſo well known in 
Normandy *. The blood of the Danes and 


„This is the clameur de Haro, the cry of Haro, by virtue of - 
which the perſon who meets his adverſe party, obliges him to 
go before the judge, who decides the difference between them at 


) leaſt proviſionally. It is derived from Raoul, the French name 

for Rollo, becauſe this prince having adminiſtered juſtice with ſuch 
exactneſs, thoſe who were injured, uſed even after his death to 
q cry out 1 Raol ! Others ſay that in this prinee's life time 


they uſed to cry A Raoul, as much as to ſay, I ſummon you. to 
8 appear before Raoul, becauſe he adminiſtered juftice himfelf in 
perſon, See Du Carge Gloſſatium Latinitafis,  — © 
a Franks, 


2 


1 bo 


wud Of England Ch. xvii, 


Franks was mingled together, and at laſt produced 
[thoſe heroes, whom we ſhall ſee conquering Eng- 


0000000000000 


land, Naples and Sicily. 


! 


CHAP. XVII. 
Of E neland towards the ninth century. 


HE. Engliſh, a nation grown famous for 
commerce and war, for a. paſſionate at- 
tachment to their laws, and for the love of liberty 
which conſiſts in being governed only by laws, 
were not near ſo powerful then as they are at pre- 


. 


fomt... | 


No ſooner had they got rid of the Roman yoke, 


than they fell a prey to the Saxons, who after 


F 
N 
' 


= 


making the conqueſt of England towards the ſixth 


century, were in the eighth ſubdued, by Charle- 
maign. Theſe uſurpers divided the country into 
ſeven provinces called kingdoms; which were 


at length reunited under king Egbert of the Saxon 


line, when the Normans: came to ravage England 
as well as France. It is pretended, that in the 


Naa 852, they failed up the Thames with three 
hundred veſſels, when the Engliſh did not defend 


themſelves much better than the Franks had done ; 


but like them paid their conquerors. A king 


named Ethelbert followed the unhappy example 


of Charles the Bald: he gave them' money ; an 
the ſame fault had the ſame puniſhment: for the 
pirates made uſe, of this money in providing the 


means to ſubdue the country. They brought one 
half of England under ſubſection. As the En 4 


the Danes; but alone and unaffiſted he reſolved 


towards the ninth century. 


| liſh are naturally brave, and defended by their ſi- 


tuation, there muſt have been very eſſential de- 
fects in their government, ſince they were gene- 
rally ſubdued even by people who ought not to 
have invaded them with impunity. The accounts 
of the dreadful devaſtations committed in this 
iſland, exceed even the horrid ſcenes we have juſt 
now ſeen in France. It ſeems as if there were par- 


ticular periods in which the whole earth is deſtin- 


ed to be a ſcene of ſlaughter, and theſe periods are 
but too frequent. 


I think it an agreeable reſpite, when amidſt 


| ſuch horrors, I ſee a great «man ariſe, who 


reſcues his country from ſlavery, and governs 


it like a good king: 


I queſtion whether there ever was a man upon 


_ earth more deſerving of the regard of poſterity 
than Alfred the Great, who did ſuch ſignal ſer- 


vices to his country; upon a ſuppoſition that all 


which is ſaid of him, be true. 
Ne ſucceeded his brother Ethelred I. who left 87:. 
him only a conteſted right to the crown of Eng- 


land, divided more than ever into petty ſovereign- 
ties, ſeveral of which were in the poſſeſſion of the 
Danes. Almoſt every year there was an inunda- 
tion of new pirates, who diſputed the few remain 
ing ſpoils with the firſt uſurpers. _ ;- | _ 
Alfred having only a fmgle province in the 
Weſt that ſtood firm to his intereſt; was ſoon 
vanquiſhed by thoſe Barbarians in a pitched battle. 
And though he was deſerted by every body, yet 
he did not retire to an Engliſh college at Rome, 
like his uncle Butred, who had been king of a 


ſmall province, from which he was expelled by 


to 


162 


/ England Ch. xvii. 


to periſh or to reverige his country's cauſe. He 


concealed himſelf during the ſpace of ſix months 


in a cottage * {ſurrounded with a moraſs ; and the 
earl of Devon alone +, 'who ſtill defended a weak 
caſtle | againſt the uſurpers, was in the ſecret. 
At length this earl having aſſembled a few troops; 


Alfred diſguiſed in a ſhepherd's tattered dreſs, ven- 
tured to appear in the midſt of the Daniſh -o 


playing upon the harp : here he perceived the 


tuation and defects of their camp. Being inform- 


ed of a feſtival which the Barbarians were ſhort- 
ly to celebrate, he returns with all expedition to 


the earl of Devon, whoſe troops were ready; and 


marching againſt the Danes with this ſmall but 


reſolute body of forces, he furprized the enemy, 


and gained a complete victory. The Danes were 
then torn with inteſtine diviſions ; and as Alfred 
knew how to negottate as well as fight, by a ſur- 


prizing turn both tlie Englith and the "Hazes 
unanimouſly acknowledged him for their king. 


He nd] had''nothing more to do than to make 


"himſelf maſter of London, which he took, and 


- after having Tortihed" this city, he improved it 
with — — Þulldings he then fitted out fleets, 
Engliſh Denies in awe, and hindered the 


_— from — a deſcent; after which he 


employed himſelf, during a peaceable reign of 


twelve years, in civilizing his country. His laws 
were mild, but ſtrictly executed. It was he who 


b eſtabliſhed juries, who divided England into 


n * 2 1 in the iſle of Athelney near Taunton in 


Rapin. 
Fey og See Dugdale's baronage p. 12. 
Nu was Kinwith caſtle, which ſtood on the river Tau be- 
There ate at preſent no remains of it. Camd. 


ſhires 


towards the ninth century. 
ſhires or counties, and: who firſt encouraged his 


. ſubjects to trade. He is ſaid to have lent ſhips THY 
a and money to prudent adventurers, i who went as $8 
K far as Alexandria, and from thence paſſing the 1 
. iſthmus of Suez, extended their commerce to the 9 
; Perſian gulf. He regulated the militia, erected 1 
k ſeveral councils, and diffuſed regularity, and ha : 
„ peace its natural attendant, through every part BY 
Y of his kingdom, j l 
2 It appears to me, that there never was really a 2 
. great man, who was not a friend to learning. by 
0 Alfred founded the univerſity of Oxford, and ſent . 1 
d for books to Rome; for England was ſo barba- * 
it rous a country as tor have ſcarce any at that time. . 
„ He uſed to complain that there was not one Eng- Fl | 
4 liſh prieſt who even underſtood Latin: yet for his 1 
d part he was no ſtranger to this language; he was KB 
* even a tolerable geometrician, | cdh{1dering” the 1 
* time he lived in, and was well verſed in hiftory. iN 
g. It is alſo ſaid that he compoſed verſes in the An- | 


ce glo- Saxon latnguagy p ſor what little time he could 
1d - ſpare fromi the adminiftration of public affairs, he 


it conſecrated to ſtudy. By means of a prudent 
, cconomy he had it in his power to be liberal. 
he We find that he rebuilt ſeveral churehes, but ndt 
he One monaſtery. f Doubtleſs : be was of opinion, | 
of that in a ravaged ſtate, which he was under a ne- 
WS Ceflity' of repeopling, he would have done no ſer- 


ho vice to his country, in giving too much encou- 
to ragement to thoſe immenſe families, [which with- 
out parents or children perpetuate themſelves-at 
in the expence of the nation. Hence he was never 
ranked in the catalogue of ſaints; but hiſtory, 
which accuſes him neither of vice, nor weakneſs, 
41 places him in the firſt rank of n 
res Boat 


164 Of Spain and the Muſſulmen Ch. xviii, 


ful to mankind, who, were it not for ſuch extra- 
ordinary perſonages, would have {till reſembled 
nothing better than ſavage beaſts, 


Co VT VET flir RTE 


; CHAP, XVIII. 
Of Spain and the Muſſulmen in the eighth and ninth 


: Centuries. © «+ 
N Spain I behold. misfortunes and revolutions 
of another kind, which merit our particular 
attention. But we muſt briefly aſcend to the 
ſource, and remember that the Goths, uſurpers 
of this kingdom, after they became Chriſtians, ſtill 
remained | Barbarians, - and were expelled in the 
eighth century by the Muſſulmen of Africa. It is 
my opinion, that the imbecillity of king Bamba, 
Vho was ſhut up in a cloyſter, was the cauſe of the 
decline of this kingdom: and the madneſs of his 
ſucceſſors was owing to his weakneſs. Vititza, 
a prince of ſtill greater ſtupidity than Bamba, 
becauſe he was cruel, diſarmed his ſubjects whom 
che dreaded, and by this ſtep put it out of their 
power do aſſiſt hi.. 
Kaderick, whoſe father be bad aſſaſſinated, 
ſeryed him in the like manner in his turn, and 
ſurpaſſed him in all manner of wickedneſs. Here 
ve find the cauſe of the ſuperiority of the Maho- 
metans in Spain. I am not certain of its being a 
real fact, that Roderick raviſned Florinda, called 
Cava, or: the hau, the: unfortunately celebrated 
daughter of count Julian; and whether it was to 
- 1 1883 revenge 


* 


the eighth und ninth centuries.” 


revenge her honour that this count called in the 


Moors. Perhaps the adventure of Cava is partly 
copied from that of Lucretia, and neither of them 
ſeems to me to be properly ſupported by authentic 
proofs. One would think that to call in the Afri- 
cans there was no occaſion for the pretext of a 
rape, which is generally as difficult to prove as to 
commit. For before that time under king Bamba, 
count Ervigius, afterwards king, had brought 
over an army of Moors. Opas, archbiſhop of 
Seville, the principal inſtrument of this great re- 
volution, had more important intereſts to ſupport 
than thoſe of a lady's chaſtity. This biſhop, the 
ſon of the uſurper Vititza, dethroned and aſ- 
ſaſſinated by the uſurper Roderick, was the per- 
ſon whoſe ambition invited the Moors the ſecond 
time. Count Julian, the ſon-in-law of Vititza, 
derived from this alliance ſufficient reaſons for 
riſing againſt the tyrant. Another biſhop, named 
Torizo, joined in the conſpiracy with Opas and 
the count. Is it likely that two biſhops would 
have confederated in this manner with the ene- 
mies of Chriſtianity, ' upon no other account than 

that of revenging the honour of an injured lady ? 
Be that as it may, the Mahometans were then, 
as they ſtill are, maſters of all that part of Africa 
formerly ſubject to the Romans, and had lately 
founded the city of Morocco in the neighbour- 
hood of mount Atlas. The caliph Valid Alman- 
zor, ſovereign of that fruitful part'of the world, 
reſided at Damaſcus in Syria. His viceroy Muzza, 
who was governor of Africa, made the conqueſt 
of all Spain by the means of one of his lieutenants. 
He ſeat thither at firſt a general officer, named 
Tariff, who in 714 won that memorable battle 
in 


165 


— — —— r , rcQ⁵ —— ] »ͤ.ꝶgʒAm ]⁵ ³ «r. W’ m CCC cc 


166 


Of opain and the-Mufilyey Ch. xviii. 
in which Roderick; loft his life. It is pretended 
that the Saracens. did not keep their word with 
Julian, whom they certainly miſtruſted. But 
the archbiſhop Opas had more reaſon to be ſa- 
tisfied with them; for he ſwore allegiance to the 


- Mahometans, and under their protection he pre- 


ſerved a conſiderable authority over the Chriſtian 
churches, which were tolerated by the conquerors. 

As to king Roderick, he was fo little regretted, 
that his widow, Egilona publicly married young 
Abdalis, ſon of the conqueror Muzza, whoſe 
arms had been the deſtruction of her huſband, and 
had reduced her country and religion to a ſtate of 
ſlavery. | | : 

Spain in fourteen months was brought under 
ſubjeCtion to the empire of the caliphs, excepting 
the, caverns and rocks of Aſturia. A Goth named 
Pelagius Teudomer, who was a relation of the 
laſt king Roderick, concealed himſelf, and pre- 
ſerved. his liberty. I know not how they came 


to give the name of king to this prince, though 


he was really worthy of that dignity ; ſince his 
whole royalty conſiſted in not being a captive. 
The Spaniſh | hiſtorians, and thoſe who have co- 
pied after them, pretend he obtained very ſignal 
victories, imagine . miracles in his favour, eſta- 
bliſh a court for. him, and mention his ſon Fa- 
viia, and his ſon-in-law Alfonſo, as peaceable 
ſucceſſors to this pretended kingdom. But is it 
likely that the Mahometans, who under Abde- 
ramen towards the year 7 34, had fubdued one half 
of France, ſhould permit this kingdom of Aſtu- 
ria to ſubſiſt behind the Pyrenees? It was a great 
point for the Chriſtians to be able to take ſhelter 
in thoſe mountains, and to live there by their in- 


curſions, 


in the eighth ard ninth centuries. 


curſions, paying tribute to the Mahometans. It 
was not till towards 759 that the Chriſtians be- 


| gan to make head againſt, their conquerors, Who 
had been weakened by the victories of Charles 


Martel and their own inteſtine diviſions : but the 
Chriſtians became ſtill more divided among them- 
ſelves than the Mahometans, inſomuch that they 
ſoon relapſed under the former yoke, Mauregat, 
whom the hiſtorians have been pleaſed to honour 
with the title of king, was ſuffered to govern 


167 


Aſturia and ſome other neighbouring territories, 583. 


upon condition of paying homage and tribute. 
He even ſubmitted to furniſh a hundred beautiful 
damſels every year for Abderamen's ſeraglio. 

As ſucceſſor, to this Mauregat they mention a 
deacon,, named Veremond, chief of thoſe high- 
land refugees, who yielded the ſame homage, 
and paid the ſame tribute of beautiful virgins. Is 
this a kingdom, and can ſuch as theſe be called 


kings ? 


After the deceaſe of Abderamen, the emirs 


of the Spaniſh provinces wanted to be indepen- 
dent, We have ſeen in the article of Charlemaign, 
that one' of them, whoſe name was Ibna Larabi, 


aſſiſtance. If at that time there had been really a 


have protected this kingdom by his arms, rather 
than join his forces to the Mahometans ? He took 
this emir under his protection, and made him yield 
homage for the lands ſituate between the Ebro 
and the Pyrenees, which the Mahometans then 
poſſeſſed, We find in the year 794, that the 
Moor Abutar paid homage to Lewis the Debon- 
nar, who governed Aquitain under his father 
With the title of king, Some 


had the imprudence to call in this conqueror to his 


Chriſtian kingdom in Spain, would not Charles. 


——— — K .  — — 


168 


Of Spain and the Muſſulmen Ch. xviii. 

Some time afterwards the diviſions began to in- 
creaſe among the Moors of Spain ; and the coun- 
cil of Lewis the Debonnair made a proper uſe of 
this conjuncture: for his troops laid ſiege two 
whole years to Barcelona, and in 796 Lewis him- 
ſelf entered the city in triumph. From this period 
we. mult date the decline of the Moors. "Thoſe 
conquerors were no longer ſupported by the Afri- 
cans and by the caliphs, whoſe yoke they had 
ſhaken off. The ſucceſſors of Abderamen having 


eſtabliſhed their royal reſidence at Cordova, were 


but indifferently obeyed by the governors of the 
other provinces. 

Under this happy conjuncture, Alfonſo of the 
race of Pelagius, began to render the name of 
thoſe Spaniſh Chriſtians conſiderable, who had 
retired into the mountains of Aſturia. He refuſed 
to pay the uſual tribute to maſters whom he was 
now able to fight ; and after a few victories he ſaw 
himſelf in peaceable poſſeſſion of Aſturia and Leon 
in the beginning of the ninth century. 

It is this prince that properly revived the ſuc- 
ceſſion of Chriſtian kings in Spain. He was art- 
ful and cruel ; they gave him the name of the che, 
for being the firſt that refuſed to pay the tribute 
of the hundred virgins. People do not reflect 
that he did not engage in this war merely becauſe 
he had refuſed the payment of this tribute ; but 
becauſe as he was determined to throw off the 
Mooriſh yoke, and to be no longer tributary, it 
was incumbent upon him to refuſe the hundred 
damſels, as well as every other acknowledgment 
of ſubjection. 

Alfonſo's ſuↄceſs, notwithſtanding the many 
hardſhips he ſtruggled with, encouraged the - ri- 

| ians 


in the eighth and ninth centuries. 


ſtians of Navarre to give themſelves a king. The 
inhabitants of Arragon likewiſe took up arms un- 
der a certain count ; ſo that towards the end of 
Lewis the Debonnair's reign, neither the Moors 
nor the French had a foot of ground left in thoſe 
barren provinces : the reſt of Spain was ſtill ſub- 
ject to Mahometan kings. Then it was that the 
Normans ravaged the coaſt of Spain ; but meet- 
ing with a repulſe, they turned back and plun- 
dered France and England. | 

It is no wonder that the Spaniards of Aſturia, 
Leon, and Arragon, were at that time in a ſtate 
of barbariſm. The military life, which ſucceed- 
ed their ſervitude, was far from poliſhing their 
manners. They lived in ſuch profound ignorance, 
that Alfonſo, ſurnamed the Great, king of Leon 
and Aſturia, was obliged to commit his ſon to the 
care of Mahometan preceptors. | 

I cannot help being ſurpriſed at the profuſion 
with which hiſtorians laviſh away titles on kings. 
This Alfonſo, whom they ſtile the Great, put out 
the eyes of his four brothers ; and his whole life 
was one continued ſeries of cruelty and deceit. 
He cloſed the ſcene with forcing his ſubjects to 
revolt, and he was obliged to reſign his little 
kingdom to his ſon about the year 910. : 

In the mean time the Mahometans who had 
loſt that part of Spain which borders on France, 
were extending their arms in every other pact. 
If I conſider their religion, I find it embraced all 
over India, and upon the eaſtern coaſts of Africa 
to which they traded. If I look upon their con- 
queſts, I find that the caliph Aaron Rachild, at 
firſt impoſes a yearly tribute of ſeventy thouſand 


crowns upon the empreſs Irene. The em- 
Vol, I. I peror 


169 


170 


Of Spain and the Muſſulmen Ch. xviii. 


Peror Nicephorus having refuſed to pay this tri- 


bute, Aaron takes the ifle of Cyprus, and ravages 
Greece. Almamon, his grandſon, a prince in 
other reſpects fo celebrated for his learning, 
makes himſelf maſter of the iſle. of Crete in 826, 
by the means of his generals: here the Maho- 
metans built the city of Candia which they re- 
took in our times. i 
In the year 828, the ſame Africans who had 
ſubdued Spain, made incurſions into the fruitful 
iſland of Sicily, encouraged by a Sicilian, whoſe 
name was Euphemius : this man having followed 
the emperor Michael's example in marrying a nun, 
and being proſecuted by the laws, whoſe authority 
the emperor had evaded, acted very near the ſame 
tragedy in Sicily as count Julian had done before 
in Spain. | 
Neither the Greek, nor weſtern emperors, were 
then able to drive the Mahometans out of Sicily ; 
ſuch was the male adminiſtration that prevailed 
at that time in both empires. Theſe conquerors 
would have made themſelves maſters of Italy, it 
they had been united; but their diſſenſions ſaved 
Rome, as it had been ſaved in former times by 
thoſe of the Carthaginians. They ſet fail from 
Sicily in 846, with a numerous fleet, entered the 
mouth of the Tiber, and finding the country al- 
moſt all depopulated, they went and laid ſiege to 
Rome. They made themſelves maſters of the 
ſuburbs, and after plundering the rich church of 
St. Peter that ſtood without the walls, they raiſed 
the ſiege in order to give battle to a French army, 
which was marching to the relief of Rome, under 
the command of one of the emperor Lotharius's 
generals. The French army was beaten, but the 
| City 


in the eighth and ninth. centuries. 


city being revictualled was ſaved ;. ſo that this ex- 
pedition, which in all probability would have end- 
ed in a conqueſt, by their own miſunderſtandings 
proved no better than an incurſion of Barbarians. 
They returned ſoon after with a formidable army, 
which ſeemed to threaten the deſtruction of Italy, 
and to turn the capital of Chriſtendom into a Ma- 
hometan town. In this critical conjuncture pope 
Leo IV. afluming an authority, which the empe- 
ror Lotharius's generals ſeemed to abandon, ſhew- 
ed himſelf in defending Rome, worthy of being 
its ſovereign, He employed the treaſures of the 
church in repairing the walls, raiſing towers, and 
ſtretching iron chains croſs tbe Tiber. He arm- 
ed the militia at his own expence, engaged the in- 
habitants of Naples and Gaieta to come and de- 
fend the coaſts and port of Oftia, without neglect- 
ing the prudent precaution of taking hoſtages of 
them, knowing perfectly well that thoſe who have 
ſufficient ſtrength to aſſiſt, are frequently power- 
ful enough to hurt. He viſited every poſt himſelf, 
and received the Saracens at their deſcent, not in 
a military equipage, as Goſlin, biſhop of Paris, 
had done on a more preſſing occaſion, but as a 
pontif that exhorted a Chriſtian people, and as a 
king that watched over the ſecurity of his ſubjects. 
He was a Roman by birth ; and the courage of the 
early ages of the republic, ſeemed to be revived in 


I71 


him, ata time of cowardice and corruption; like 849. 


one of the beautiful monuments of antient Rome, 
which are ſometimes found in the ruins of the mo- 


dern city. His courage and care were feconded 


by his people; they gave a warm reception to the 


Saracens upon their landing; and one half of their 


ſhips having been diſperſed by a tempeſt, a part of 
11 thoſe 


Of Spain and the Muſſulmen, Ch. xviii. 
thoſe invaders who had eſcaped ſhipwreck, were 
made ſlaves. The pope rendered his victory the 
more uſeful, -by employing thoſe very barbarians 
that were come to demoliſh the walls of Rome, 
in repairing the fortifications and improving the 
public edifices of the city. Yet the Mahometans 
ſill continued in poſſeſſion of part of the coaſt, 
between Capua and Gaieta, but rather as a neſt 
of independent Corfairs, than in the quality of 
diſciplined conquerors. 

In the ninth century therefore, I behold the 
Mahometans grown formidable at the ſame time 
to Rome and to Conſtantinople, maſters of Perſia, 
Syria, and Arabia, of the whole coaſt of Africa, 
ſo far as mount Atlas, and of three fourths of 
Spain. But theſe conquerors did not conſtitute 
one nation, as the Romans, who in extending 
their arms "almoſt as far, ſtill compoſed only 
one people. | | | 

Under the famous caliph Almamon, about the 
2 815, a little after the death of Charlemaign, 

gypt became independent, and another caliph 
fixed his reſidence at Grand Cairo. The prince 
of Mauritania Tingitana, under the title of 
Miramolin *, was abſolute ſovereign of the 
empire of Morocco. Nubia and Lybia were 
ſubject to another caliph. The Abderamens, who 
had founded the kingdom of Cordova, could not 
hinder the reſt of the Moors from erecting that 
of Toledo. All theſe new dynaſties paid a re- 


* Miramolin is a name given to the kings of Africa, of the 
race of the Almoravides, It was Abu-Techifien, king of Mo- 
rocco, that firſt took the name of Amir-el-Mumenim, that 15, 
commander or prince of the faithful, whence by corruption has 
been formed the name of Miramolin. | 

ſpect 


in the eighth and ninth centuries. 


ſpect to the caliph as the ſucceſſor of their pro- 
phet. Thus as the Chriſtians crowded in pil- 
grimage to Rome, the Mahometans from all 
parts of the world flocked to Mecca, which was 
governed by a cherif *, whom the caliph appoint- 
ed; and it was principally on account of this pil- 
grimage that the caliph, as maſter of Mecca, was 
revered by all the princes of his perſuaſion. But 
theſe princes, by diſtinguiſhing their religion 
from their political intereſts, diveſted the caliph 
of his power at the ſame time that they affected 


to pay him homage. 


MMM MMM MMM MMK Nx 


CHAP. XIX. 
Of the empire of Conſtantinople in the eighth and 


ninth centuries, 


HILE the empire of Charlemaign was 

falling to pieces, and the weſtern world 
was laid waſte by the inundations of the Sara- 
cens and the Normans, the empire of Conſtan- 
tinople ſubſiſted like a large tree, ſtill vigorous, 
though old and {tripped of ſome of its branches, and 
aſſailed on every fide by violent ſtorms. This 
empire had nothing left in Africa, and had loſt 
Syria with part of Aſia Minor, It ſtill defended 
its frontiers againſt the Mahometans towards the 
eaſtern coaſt of the Black Sea; and fighting with 
alternate ſucceſs it might at leaſt have maintained 
its ground, by being always inured to war. But 
it was ravaged by other enemies towards the. 


Danube and on the weſtern coaſt of the Black. 


„An Arabic word, Ggnifying high in birth or dignity, 
| T3 - Sea. 


173 


2— 2 
— 


—— ä—mũͤ— —— 
2 "ES TT 4 8 3 r 7 
BE — — r 


N 
i 
K. 17 
" 
N 4 
F 1 
: a © 
" 
N 
% 
1 » 
4 
+5 
= 
' i 
N 
1 
1 5 1 
PS | 


— 


Of the Greek empire Ch. xix. 


Sea, A Seythian nation, called Abari, or A- 
vari, the Bulgarians likewiſe, another tribe of 
Seythians, from whom Bulgaria has taken its 
name, laid the fruitful province of Romania 
waſte, in which Adrian and Trajan had built 
fo many fine cities, and thoſe high roads of 
which there are only a few cauſeways now re- 
maining. 
The Abari, who were diſperſed in Hungary 
and in Auſtria, at one time made incurſions in- 
to the eaſtern empire, and at other times invaded 
that of Charlemaign. Thus from the borders of 
Perſia to thoſe of France, the earth was expoſed 
to almoſt: continual incurſions. | 
While the frontiers of the Greek empire were 
daily ſtraightened - and ravaged, the capital 
was a theatre of revolutions and all manner of 
crimes. The reigning. character at court con- 
ſiſted of a mixture of Greek cunning and Thra- 
cian ferocity. In a word, what a fad ſpectacle 
does Conſtantinople exhibit to our view? Mau- 
Tice and his five children maſſacred : Phocas af- 
ſaſſinated in puniſhment for his murders and in- 
ceſts: Conſtantine poiſoned by the empreſs 
Martina, whoſe tongue is plucked out while 
they cut off the noſe of her fon Heracleonas : 
Conſtans killed by his domeſtics in a bath: Con- 
ſtantine Pogonatus putting out the eyes of both 
his brothers: his ſon Juſtinian II. who was 
very near acling the ſame ſcene at Conſtan- 
tinople as that of Theodoſius at Theſſalonica, 
ſeized, mutilated, and laid in irons by Leontius, 
at the very moment he was going to maſſacre the 
principal eitizens: Leontius ſoon aſter treated in 
the ſame manner as he had uſed Juſtinian II: this 
$97 Juſtinian 


in the eighth and ninth centuries. 


Juſtinian reinſtated, feaſting his eyes with the 
blood of his enemies in the public forum, and 
dying at length by the hands of an executioner : 
Philip Bardanes dethroned and condemned to loſe 
his ſight : Leo Ifaurus, and Conſtantine Copro- 
nymus dying indeed in. their beds, but after a 
ſanguinary reign, equally diſgraceful to the prince, 
and fatal to the ſubjects: the empreſs Irene, the 
firſt woman that aſcended the throne of the Cæſars, 
and the firſt that murdered her ſon for the am- 
bition of reigning: Nicephorus her ſucceſſor, 
deteſted by his ſubjects, taken priſoner by the 
Bulgarians, beheaded, his body expoſed in prey 
to the wild beaſts, and his ſcull converted into 
a. cup for, his conqueror: in fine, the emperor 
Michael Curopalatus, cotemporary of Chatle- 
maign, conhned in a monaſtery, and dying leſ; 


cruelly indeed, but more ignominiouſſy than 


his predeceſſors. Thus the empire was governed 
during the ſpace of 200 years. Where is there a 
hiſtory or account of banditti publicly executed 
for their crimes, that can be more horrid and 
more diſtaſteful? | | 

Vet we muſt proceed: in the ninth century, 
we ſee Leo the Armenian, a brave warrior, but an 


enemy to images, aſſaſſinated at maſs whilehe was 


ſinging an anthem: his murderers, proud of haw- 
ing deſtroyed an heretic, repair to the public 
jail to releaſe an officer named Michael the Stam- 
merer, who had been condemned to death by the 
ſenate, but inſtead of being executed, was in- 


veſted with the Imperial diadem. This was the 


prince, who falling in love with a nun, cauſed 
the ſenate to intreat him to marry her, which 


was done without * oppoſition of any one 


+ biſhop, 


175 


Of the Greek empire Ch. xix, 


- biſhop. The fact is ſo much the more deſerving 
of our attention, as almoſt at the ſame time we 
have an inſtance of Euphemius in Sicily, ſe- 
verely proſecuted for a re of the ſame ſort; 
and as ſome time after, the legitimate marriage 
of the emperor Leo the philoſopher was con- 
demned at Conſtantinople. Where is the coun- 
try then that could boaſt of laws and manners ? 
None ſurely in our weſtern part of the world. 

The antient diſpute about images ſtill diſturbed 
the empire. The court ſometimes favoured, 
and ſometimes oppoſed the worſhip of them, 
according to the general bent of the people. 
Michael the Stammerer began with the conſe- 
cration of images, and cloſed his reign with their 
demolition, oo | | 

His ſucceſſor Theophilus, who reigned about 
12 years, from 829 to 842 declared againſt this 
worſhip. It has been reported, that he did not 
believe the reſurrection, and that he denied the 
divinity of Chriſt. It is poſſible that an emperor 
might have been of ſuch a way of thinking : but 
are we to take the character, I will not ſay of 
princes, but even of private men, upon the evi- 
dence of their enemies, who without producing 
proof of any one fact, decry the religion and 
' morals of men that happen to differ from them 
in opinion? | 

This Theophilus, ſon of Michael the Stam- 
merer, was almoſt the only emperor who had 
peaceably ſucceeded his father for two centuries. 
Under him the image worſhippers were more 
perſecuted than ever. By theſe long perſecutions 
it is eaſy to conclude, that the ſentiments of the 
people were divided, _ oer | 


It 


in the eighth and ninth centuries. 


It is obſervable, that two women were the re- 
ſtorers of images. One was the empreſs Irene, 
widow of Leo IV. and the other the empreſs 
Theodora, widow of Theophilus. 

Theodora, miſtreſs of the eaflern empire during 
the minority of her ſon Michael, perſecuted the 
enemies of image worſhip in her turn: ſhe even 
carried her zeal or policy to a greater length. 
There were ſtill in Aſia Minor a great number 
of Manicheans who lived quietly, becauſe the 
fury of enthuſiaſm, which rages ſeldom but 
among new ſects, was then ſpent. Theſe peo- 
ple had enriched themſelves by commerce; and 
whether their opinions or their eſtates were aim- 
ed at, this is certain, that the court publiſhed 
ſevere edits againſt them, which were executed 
with the utmoſt cruelty. Their original fana- 
ticiſm returned with the perſecution; ſo that 
many thouſands of them died under torments, 
and the reſt growing deſperate, took up arms 


177 


and revolted. Above 40,000 of them went over 846. 


to the Mahometans. Thus theſe Manicheans, 
who before that time had been ſuch peaceable 
ſubjects, became implacable enemies of the 
empire, and joining with the Saracens ravaged. 
all Aſia Minor up to the very gates of the Im- 
perial city, which had been depopulated by a 
a peſtilence in 842, ſo as to be an object 
of pity. | | 

The plague, ſtrictly ſo called, is, as well as 
the ſmall-pox, of the growth of Africa; and from 
thence it is always communicated by merchant 
ſhips. It would certainly ravage all Europe, 
were it not for the wiſe precautions that are taken 
in our ports; and ** it was through. want 

| 5 of 


178 


Of the Greek empire Ch. xix. 


of attention in the. government, that this con- 
tagion reached the Imperial city. 

This very inattention expoſed the empire to 
another ſcourge. The Roſſi or Ruſſi embarked 


at the port, now called Aſoph, and ravaged all 


the coaſts of the Euxine ſea. On the other 
hand, the Arabs puſhed their conqueſts beyond 
Armenia, and as far as Aſia Minor. At length 
Michael the Young, after a cruel and unfortunate 
reign, was aſſaſſinated by Baſilius, whom he had 
raifed from a very mean ſtation, and made his 
aſſociate in the empire. A 
Baſilius's adminiſtration was not much happier, 
This reign is the æra of the great ſchiſm, which 


ſeparated the Greek from the Latin church. 


The grievances of the empire were not much 
redreſſed under Leo, called the Philoſopher; he 
had this title given him, not that he was an 
Antoninus, a Marcus Aurelius, a Julian, an 


Aaron Rachild, an Alfred, but becauſe of his 


learning. He is faid to have been the firſt that 


opened the way for the Turks, who a long time 
afterwards made themſelves maſters of Conſtan- 
tinople. ä 4 

It is a queſtion, whether the Turks, who af - 
terwards fought againſt the Saracens, but unity 
ing at length with that nation, became their 
chief ſupport, and ſubverted the Greek empire; 
whether the Turks, I ſay, had ſeat colonies al- 
ready into thoſe countries that border upon the 
Danube? We have ſcarce any true hiſtory of 
theſe emigrations of barbarians. 

In all [ikelihood this is the manner of life that 


mankind led for many ſueceſſions of ages. Scarce 


had a country received a little cultivation, but it 
Was 


in tbe eigbib and ninth: centuries. 


was invaded by a hungry people, who were dri- 
ven from thence in their turn by ſome other na- 
tion. Did not the Gauls make a deſcent upon 
Italy? and did not they penetrate as far as Aſia 
Minor? And have not twenty different ſwarms 
come from Great Tartary in ſearch of new 
lands ? 

But notwithſtanding ſo many diſaſters, Con- 
ſtantinople ſtill for a long time continued, of all 
the cities in Chriſtendom, the moſt opulent, the 
moſt populous, and the moſt celebrated for the 
polite arts. Its very fituation by which it has 
the command of two ſeas, neceflarily rendered 
it a place of trade. The plague in 842, though 
ſo greatly deſtructive, was not a laſting ſcourge. 
Cities where; commerce flouriſhes, and a. court 
reſides, are eaſily repeopled from the neighbour- 
ing provinces. Neither the mechanic nor the 
liberal arts are in danger of being Joſt in a great 
metropolis, where the wealth of. the nation gene- 
rally centers. 

Theſe ſudden revolutions of ſtate, and the 
barbarities of ſo many emperors maſſacred by 
one another, are ſtorms which ſeldom fall on 
mer in retirement, who quietly cultivate ſuch 
profeſſions as do not attract the envy of the great. 

The riches of the empire were not exhauſted: 
it is ſaid, that in 857, Theodora,. mother of the 
emperor Michael, on being depoſed againſt her 
will from the regency, and. treated very near in 
the ſame manner by her ſon, as Mary of Medicis 
was in our days by Lewis XIII. gave the emper - 
or to underſtand, that there was in the exche- 
quer a hundred and nine thouſand pounds weight 
of gold, and three hundred thouſand pounds of 
klver, I 6 A 


180 


Of Italy and the Popes Ch. xx. 
_ A prudent adminiſtration might therefore have 
ſtill been able to ſupport the empire. It was con- 
tracted, but not diſmembered, and though fre- 
quently changing emperors, yet always united 
under the perſon inveſted with the purple. In 
ſhort, it was richer, had more internal reſources, 
and preater power than that of Germany ; yet it 
is no more, and the German empire ſtill ſubſiſts. 


TR A AS Rf ALS Rf * 


CIH AP. XX, 


Of Traly and the popes with the divorce of Lotha- 
rius king of Lorrain, and the reft of the affairs 
of the church in the eighth and ninth centuries. 


EST we ſhould loſe the thread of our 
hiſtory in ſuch a multitude of events, let 


us remember, how prudently the popes conducted 


themſelves under Pepin and Charlemaign, how 
dexterouſly they Rifled all religious quarrels, and 
in what manner each of them inſenſibly eſtabliſn- 
ed the foundations of the pontifical grandeur. 
Their power was already grown very conſi- 
derable, ſince Gregory IV. repaired the port of 
Oſtia, and Leo IV. fortified Rome at their own. 
expences. But every pope could not be a great 
man, nor could every conjuncture be favourable 
to their views. Each vacancy of the papal ſee 
produced almoſt as many commotions as the elec- 
tion of a king does in Poland. The pope elect 


was obliged at the ſame time to keep fair with 


the Romen ſenate, with the people, and the em- 
rc or. The Eoman nobility had a great ſhare 
n 


with the divorce of Loth. K. of Lorrain. 


in the government; for they elected two conſuls 


every year, and created a prefect, who was a 


kind of tribune of the people. They had a court 
of twelve ſenators, who named the principal of- 
ficers of the dutchy of Rome. This municipal 
government had ſometimes more, and at other 
times leſs authority. The popes were poſſeſſed 
rather of a high degree of credit, than of a legiſ- 
lative power. 

Though they were not 3 of Rome, 
yet they loſt no opportunity of acting as ſove- 
reigns of the weſtern church. The biſhops pre- 
tended to pronounce judgment on kings, and 
the pope on biſhops. This claſhing of authority, 
this inſufficiency of the laws, this mixture of re- 
ligion, ſuperſtition, weakneſs, and vice, trium- 
phant in all the courts of Europe, cannot be repre- 
ſented in ſtronger colours than by a narrative of 
the marriage and divorce of Lotharius king of 
Lorrain, nephew of Charles the Bald. 

Charlemaign had repudiated one of his wives, 
and married another not only with the approbation, 
but at the earneſt requeſt of pope Stephen. The 
kings Gontram, Caribert,- Sigebert, Chilperic, 
and Dagobert, had had ſeveral wives living at the 
ſame time; and yet no body complained: if it 
was a ſcandal, it was ſuch a one as created no 
uneaſineſs. But time makes great alterations: 
Lotharius, who had married Teutberga, daughter 
of a duke of Burgundia T ransjurana, pretends 
to repudiate her for being guilty of inceſt with 
her brother, and to marry his miſtreſs Valrade. 


This whole tranſaction is attended with moſt ex- 


traordinary ' circumſtances. . Firſt of all, Queen 
Teutberga clears herſelf by the trial of boiling 


Wader. 


181 


180 


Of Italy and the Popes Ch. xx. 


A prudent adminiſtration might therefore have 
ſtill been able to ſupport the empire. It was con- 
tracted, but not diſmembered, and though fre- 
quently changing emperors, yet always united 
under the perſon inveſted with the purple. In 
ſhort, it was richer, had more internal reſources, 
and greater power than that of Germany ; yet it 
is no more, and the German empire ſtill ſubſiſts. 


Rf Nef Rf Rf Ries 


CH AP. XX. 
Of Italy and the popes tuith the divorce of Lotha- 


rius king of Lorrain, and the reft of the affairs 
of the church in the eighth and ninth centuries. 


EST we ſhould loſe the thread of our 


hiſtory in ſuch a multitude of events, let 


us remember, how prudently the popes conducted 


themſelves under Pepin and Charlemaign, how 
dexterouſly they ſtifled all religious quarrels, and 
in what manner each of them inſenſibly eſtabliſh- 
ed the foundations of the pontifical grandeur, 
Their power was already grown very conſi- 
derable, fince Gregory IV. repaired the port of 
Oſtia, and Leo IV. fortified Rome at their own. 
expences. But every pope could not be a great 
man, nor could every conjuncture be favourable 
to their views. Each vacancy of the papal ſee 
produced almoſt as many commotions as the elec- 
tion of a king does in Poland. The pope. elect 


Was obliged at the ſame time to keep fair with 
the Romen ſenate, with the people, and the em- 
rc or. The Roman nobility had a great ſhare 

Al 


with the divorce of Loth. K. of Lorrain. 


in the government; for they elected two conſuls 


every year, and created a prefect, who was a 


kind of tribune of the people. They had a court 
of twelve ſenators, who named the principal of- 
ficers of the dutchy of Rome. This municipal 
government had ſometimes more, and at other 
times leſs authority. The popes were poſſeſſed 
rather of a high degree of credit, than of a legiſ- 
lative power. 

Though they were not * of Rome, 
yet they loſt no opportunity of acting as ſove- 
reigns of the weſtern church. The biſhops pre- 
tended to pronounce judgment on kings, and 
the pope on biſhops. This claſhing of authority, 
this inſufficiency of the laws, this mixture of re- 
ligion, ſuperſtition, weakneſs, and vice, trium- 
phant in all the courts of Europe, cannot be repre- 
ſented in ſtronger colours than by a narrative of 
the marriage and divorce of Lotharius king of 
Lorrain, nephew of Charles the Bald. 

Charlemaign had repudiated one of his wives, 
and married another not only with the approbation, 
but at the earneſt requeſt of pope Stephen. The 
kings Gontram, Caribert,- Sigebert, Chilperic, 
and Dagobert, had had ſeveral wives living at the 
ſame time; and yet no body complained : if it 
was a ſcandal, it was ſuch a one as created no 
uneaſineſs. But time makes great alterations: 
Lotharius, who had married Teutberga, daughter 
of-a duke of Burgundia T ransjurana, pretends 
to repudiate her for being guilty of inceſt with 
her brother, and to marry his miſtreſs Valrade. 


This whole tranſaction is attended with moſt ex- - 


traordinary ' circumſtances. Firſt of all, Queen 
Teutberga clears herſelf by the trial of boiling 
, . Wader. 


181 


182 


Of Haly and the Popes Ch. xx. 


water. Her advocate thruſts his hand into a veſ- 
ſel, and picks up a confecrated ring without be- 
ing hurt. The king complains of foul play on 
this occaſion. It is beyond all doubt that if the 
trial was really performed, the advocate muſt have 
been acquainted with the ſecret of preparing the 
ſkin ; to reſiſt the action of boiling water: the 
whole ſecret is ſaid to conſiſt in rubbing ones ſelf 
a long time with the ſpirit of vitriol, and allum, 
together with the juice of an onion. None of 


the academies of ſciences in our days, have at- 


tempted to verify by experiments a truth well 
known to quacks and mountebanks. 

The ſucceſs of this trial was reckoned a 
miracle, and the judgment of God himſelf; 
yet Teutberga, tho cleared by heaven, ac- 
knowledges to ſeveral biſhops, and in the pre- 
ſence of her father confeffor, that ſhe is guilty of 
the charge. It is not-at all likely, that a king, 
who wanted to part from his wife upon an ac- 
cuſation of adultery, ſhould think of charging 
her with committing inceſt with her brother, un- 
leſs the fact was public. He would hardly go to 
forge a crime, ſo unnatural, ſo extraordinary, 
and fo difficult to prove: beſides in thoſe days 
they muſt have been utterly inſenſible of what 
we call honour, Both the king and queen co- 
vered themſelves with infamy, the former by his 
accuſation, the latter by her confeſſion. Iwo 
national councils were aſſembled, which permit- 
ted the divorce. | | 

Pope Nicholas I. annuls the reſolution of the 
two councils; and depoſes Gontier, archbiſhop 
of Cologne, who had been the moſt active in the 
affair of the divorce. Gontier immediately writes 

tO 


with the divorce of Lotb. K. of Lorrain. 
to all the churches, © Though lord Nicholas, 


« who is called pope, and who looks upon him- 
« ſelf as pope and emperor, hath excommuni- 
« cated us, yet we have withſtood his folly ;” 
and afterwards addreſſing his diſcourſe to the pope 
himſelf, * We do not acquieſce, he ſays, to 
« your curſed ſentence, we deſpiſe it, we even caſt 
« you out of our communion, being ſatisfied 
« with that of our brethren the biſhops whom 
© you contemn, &c.” | 

A brother of the archbiſhop of Cologne carried 
this proteſt himſelf to Rome, and laid it upon St. 
Peter's tomb, ſword in hand. But the political 
ſtate of affairs having changed ſoon afterwards, 
the biſhop changed alſo. He came to mount 
Caſſino to proſtrate himſelf before pope Adrian, 
ſucceſſor to Nicholas. © I declare, ſaid he, be- 
fore God, and before his ſaints, and to you, 
lord Adrian, ſovereign pontif, as well as to 
the biſhops ſubject to your juriſdiction, and to 
«© the whole aſſembly, that I humbly ſubmit to 
the ſentence of depoſition canonically denoun- 
« ced againſt me by pope Nicholas, &c.“ It is 
eaſy to ſee what an acceſſion of ſtrength an exam- 
ple of this kind muſt have given to the pretenſions 
of the church of Rome; eſpecially as the con- 
junctures of the times rendered theſe examples 
frequent. 

The fame Nicholas I. excommunicated the 
ſecond wife of Lotharius, and commands this 
prince to take his firſt wife again to his bed. All 
Europe was involved in the quarrel. And firſt 
of all, the emperor Lewis II. brother of Charles 
the Bald, and uncle to Lotharius, declares vio- 
lently in favour of his nepheyy againſt the pope: 

his 


182 


184 


869. 


Of Ttaly and the popes Ch. xx. 


This emperor reſiding at that time in Italy, threa- 
tens Nicholas I.; ſome blood is ſpilt on the oc- 
caſion, and Italy is alarmed. They negotiate, 
they cabal on both ſides. Teutberga goes to 
plead her cauſe at Rome; her rival Valrade un- 


dertakes the journey, but dares not finiſh it. The 


excommunicated Lotharius ſets out for the ſame 
— and ſubmits to aſk pardon of Adrian II. ſuc- 
ceſſor to Nicholas I. apprehending leſt his uncle 
Charles the Bald, who was in arms againſt him 
in behalf of 'the church, ſhould ſeize on his king- 
dom of Lorrain. Adrian II. upon admitting him 
to the holy communion at Rome, makes him 
ſwear that he has not bedded with Valrade, 


ſince” the orders he had received from pope 


Nicholas to forbear any further concern with her. 
Lotharius makes oath -accordingly, receives the 
ſacrament, and dies a ſhort while after. All hi- 
ſtorians agree in obſerving that his death was a 
puniſhment for his crime; and that his ſervants 
who forſwore themſelves at the ſame time, died 
within the year. | 54 
The right which Nicholas I. and Adrian II. 
exerciſed on this occaſion, was founded on the 
falſe decretals, which were already conſidered as 
an univerſal code. As the civil contract which 
unites the married pair, had been made a ſacra- 
ment, it was conſequently ſubject to the deciſion 
of the church. | 
I his is the firſt ſcandalous affair in regard to 
the marriage of | crowned heads in the Welt. 
Since that time, there were inſtances of excom- 
munications pronounced by the pope againſt Ro- 
bert, Philip I. and Philip Auguſtus, all three 
kings of France, for nearly the ſame cauſe, 
| or 


with the divorce of Loth. K. of Lorrain. 


or for marriages contracted between very diſtant 


relations. Long had the biſhops of the kingdom 


claimed the privilege of deciding theſe cauſes ; 
the ſupreme pontifs always evoked them to 
Rome. 

We do not pretend to examine whether theſe 
new inſtitutes be uſeful or dangerous; we do not 
write either as a civilian, or a controvertiſt ; but 
this we can aver, that every country in Chriſten- 


185 


dom hath been diſturbed with theſe ſcandalous 


diſputes. In this reſpe& the antient Romans, 
and the oriental nations were far more happy. 
Neither the rights of fathers of families, nor the 
ſecrets of marriage beds, were ever expoſed to 


public curioſity. They never heard of any ſuch 


law ſuits about marriage or divorce, 

This deſcendant of Charlemaign was the firft 
that went to plead before a foreign judge, three 
hundred miles from home, to know which woman 
he ought to love. The people had like to have 
been ruined by this diſpute. Lewis the Debon- 
nair was the firſt inſtance of the power of biſhops 
over the emperors, Lotharius of Lorrain was the 
firſt example of the power of popes over biſhops. 
From the hiſtory of thoſe days it follows plainly 
that there were hardly any eſtabliſhed rules of ſo- 
ciety among weſtern nations, that the laity had 
but few laws, and that the church would fain 
have the legiſlative power. 


CHAP. 


186 


Of Photins, and ihe ſchiſm Ch. xxi. 


. 


Of Photius, and the ſchiſm between the eaſtern and 
weſtern churches, 


HE weightieſt affair the church had then 

[ upon her hands, and which is ſtill to this 
very day of the greateſt importance to her, was 
the origin of the total ſeparation of the Greeks 


from the Latins. As the patriarchal ſee of Con- 


ſtantinople was, like the throne, the object of 
ambition, it was ſubject to the ſame revolutions, 
The emperor Michael III. diſſatisfied with Igna- 
tius the patriarch, obliged him to ſign his own 
degradation; and ſubſtituted in his.place Photius, 
eunuch of the palace, a perfon of noble birth, a 


vaſt genius, and a man of univerſal learning. 


He was maſter of the horſe and miniſter of-{tate. 
In order to ordain him patriarch, the biſhops 
made him paſs in ſix days through all the degrees. 
The firſt day he was made monk, — the 
monks were conſidered at that time as conſtitut- 
ing part of the hierarchy ; the ſecond he was made 
lecturer; the third ſubdeacon, afterwards deacon, 
prieſt, and at length patriarch on Chriſtmas-day, 
in the year 858. Je 
Pope Nicholas ſided with Ignatius, and excom- 
municated Photius. He condemned him chiefly 
for having paſſed from a layman's ſtate to that of 
a biſhop with ſuch rapidity : but Photius juſtly 
anſwered, that St. Ambroſe, governor of Milan, 
and ſcarce a, Chriſtian, had with till greater 
rapidity joined the epiſcopal dignity to that of 
governor 3 he likewiſe excommunicated the 
pope in his turn, and declared him depoſcd. 3 
then 


f d d . Ry ET" 5 


wn, mln. 4 WW a £A S#ShKh ds tr. _ te. 


> Oo © OS ww 


between the eaſtern and weſtern churches. 
then aſſumed the title of cecumenical patriarch, 


and loudly: accuſed the weſtern biſhops of hereſy 


for communicating with the pope. The greateſt 


187 


objection he brought againſt them, was their be- 


lieving the proceſſion from the Father and the 
Son. Men, ſays he in one of his letters, whs are 


the offspring of weſtern darkneſs, have ruined every 


thing by their ignorance, To complete their impiety, 
they have added ſome words to the ſacred ſymbel which 
has been authorized by all the councils, by ſaying that 
the Holy Ghoft does not proceed from the Father only, 
but likewiſe from the Son, which is renouncing 
Chriſtianity, 

By this and a great many other paſſages, we 
ſee what ſuperiority the Greeks at that time af- 
fected over the Latins. They pretended: that 
Rome was indebted-for every thing to the Greek 
church, even for the names of cuſtoms, ceremo- 
nies, myſteries, and dignities. Baptiſm, eucha- 


rift, liturgy, diaceſe, pariſh, biſhop, prieſt, dea con, 


monk, eccleſiaſtic, are all of Greek derivation. In 
ſhort, they looked upon the Latins as ignorant 
ſcholars, who had rebelled againſt their maſters. 

The other ſubjects of anathema were, that the 
Latins made uſe of unleavened bread in the eu- 
chariſt, that they eat eggs and cheeſe in Lent; 
and their prieſts did not ſhave their beards. Very 
odd reaſons for creating ſuch a breach between the 
eaſtern and weſtern churches | 

But every impartial judge muſt acknowledge, 
that Photius was not only the moſt learned man 
in the church, but moreover a very great biſhop. 
He behaved juſt as St. Ambroſe had done, when 
Baſil, the murderer of the emperor Michael, ap- 


pearedin the church of St. Sophia: Youareunworthy, 867. 


I ſaid 


188 Of Photius, and the ſchiſm Ch. xxi. 


ſaid he, with a loud voice, % approach the ſacred 
myſteries, you whoſe hands are ſtill imbrued in the 
blood of your benefaftor. Photius did not find ano- 
ther Theodoſius in Baſi]: this tyrant did an act 
of juſtice purely out of revenge; he reſtored Ig- 
natius to the patriarchal ſee, and baniſhed Photius, 
Rome availed herſelf of this conjuncture to call 
the eighth general council at Conſtantinople, 
compoſed of three hundred biſhops. The legates 
preſided there, but did not underſtand a word of 
Greek, and very few of the other biſhops under- 


condemned as an intruder, and obliged to do pub- 
lic penance. The five patriarchs ſigned before 
the popes legates; which is very extraordinary ; 
for ſince the legates had the firſt place, they ought 
to have ſigned the firſt. But during the whole 
ſeſſion, the queſtions which divided the eaſtern 
and weſtern churches were not canvaſled ; all their 
aim was to depoſe Photius. 

Some time after, upon the death of the legiti- 
mate patriarch Ignatius, Photius had the addreſs 
to prevail upon the emperor Baſilius, to reinſtate 
him. Pope John VIII. received him into his 
communion, acknowledged him as patriarch, cor- 
reſponded with him; and notwithſtanding this 
eighth cecumenical council, which had anathema- 
tized the patriarch, the pope ſent his legates to 
another council, at. Conſtantinople, in which 
Photius was declared innocent by four hundred 
' biſhops, three hundred of whom had before ſign- 
ed his condemnation. 'The very legates of this 
ſame ſee of Rome, who had formerly anathema- 
tized him, were inſtrumental in annulling this 
eighth cecumenical council. How changeable 
is 


ſtood Latin. Photius was by the whole aſſembly 


— — +» $55 89 — on 


8 22 


— — — © tay 


Nn 
1 


between the eaſtern and weſtern churches. 


is the mind of man] How often is falſity tranſ- 
formed into truth ! The legates of John VIII. 
loudly declared in full council: J/hoſoever will 
not acknowledge Photius, let his portion be with 
Fudas. The council declares, long live the pa- 
triarchs Photius and Fohn. 

In a word, we find in the acts of this council, 
a letter from the pope to this learned patriarch, 
wherein he tells him; we think as you do; thoſe 
who have added to the Conſtantinopolitan creed, 
that the Holy Ghoſt proceeds from the Father and 
the Son, are by us conſidered as tranſgreſſors of the 
word of God, and we rank them with Fudas; but 
we think at the ſame time that we ought to treat 
them with lenity, and exhort them to renounce this 
blaſphemous doctrine. 

It is therefore evident that the Roman and 
Greek churches thought differently. at that time 
from what they do at preſent. Rome happened 
afterwards to adopt the proceſſion from the Father 
and the Son; and it happened alſo in 1274, that 
the Greek emperor Michael Paleologus, wanting 
the aſſiſtance of a new cruſade againſt the Turks, 
ſent his patriarch and chancellor to the ſecond coun- 
cil of Lyons, where they joined with the council in 
ſinging in Latin, qui ex patre filiogue procedit. But 
the Greek church returned again to her old opj- 
nion, which ſhe ſeemed once more to abandon, on 
occaſion of the reunion with Eugene IV. which 
proved but of very ſhort duration. Let mankind 
learn from hence to bear with one another : here 
they may ſee variations and diſputes on a funda- 
mental point, which raiſed no diſturbances, filled 
no priſons, and lighted no faggots. 

This condeſcenſion of pope John VIII. to the 

patriarch 


189 


190 07 Photius, and the ſchiſm Ch. xxi. 


patriarch Photius has been ſeverely cenſured, but 
without reflecting that the pontif at that time 
ſtood greatly in need of the emperor Baſilius. A 
king of Bulgaria, named Bogoris, yielding to the 
ſollicitations of his wife who was a Chriſtian, 
embraced this religion after the example of Clovis 
and king Egbert. The queſtion was then to Phe 


know on which patriarchate this new Chriſtian piſl 
province ſnould depend; the diſpute was between that 
Conſtantinople and Rome; and the emperor Ba- ed i 
filius was to decide. This is in part the motive the 
of the indulgence and condeſcenſion which the to tl 
biſhop of Rome ſhewed to the biſhop of Con- with 
ſtantinople. time 

We muſt not forget to mention that there were dioc 
cardinals in this as well as in the preceding coun- ' whil 
cil: this was a title then given to prieſts and dea- dom 
cons, who aſſiſted the metropolitans with their ad- thoſe 
vice. There were ſome of them at Rome as well trope 


as in other churches; and though they made a of R 
figure even at that time, yet they ſigned after te Conf 
biſhops and the abbots. | even 
The pope both in his letters and by his legates thoug 
gave the title of holrneſs to the patriarch Photius: than 
the other patriarchs are likewiſe in this council know 
called popes. . This is a Greek appellation, which The 
was common at firſt to all prieſts, but by degrees iity, 
it became the diſtinguiſhing title of the metropoli- WW the ti. 
tan of Rome. : nelius 
John VIII. ſeems to have managed his affairs WRoma 
with great dexterity and prudence : but his ſucceſ- © Luitp: 
ſors having quarrelled with the Greek empire, ¶ Conſt. 
w | adopted the eighth general council of 869, Ide G 
nd rejected the other, which had acquitted Pho- name 
tius; a ſtep that broke the peace 2 of Indeed 
ohn 


; 
* 
: 
: 


between the eaſtern and weſtern churches. 


John VIII. Photius then exclaimed againſt the 
church of Rome, and charged it with hereſy in 
regard to the article filioque procedit, to eating 
eggs in Lent, to uſing unleavened bread in the 
ſacrament, and ſeveral other cuſtoms. But the 
grand point of ſeparation was the ſupremacy. 
Photius and his ſucceſſors wanted to be the firſt 
biſhops in Chriſtendom ; and could not endure 
that the biſhop of Rome, a city which they look- 
ed upon at that time as barbarous, ſeparated from 
the empire by its rebellion, and expoſed as a prey 
to the firſt invader, ſhould diſpute the precedency 
with the biſhop of the Imperial city. At that 
time the patriarch of Conſtantinople had all the 
dioceſes of Sicily and Apulia under his juriſdiction ; 
while the holy ſee having fallen under a foreign 
dominion, had been deſpotled of its patrimony in 
thoſe provinces, and at the ſame time of its me- 
tropolitan rights. The Greek church held that 
of Rome in contempt. Learning flouriſhed at 
Conſtantinople ; but at Rome all literature, and 
even the Latin tongue was fallen to decline : and 
though they knew ſomewhat more in this capital 
than in the other parts of the Weſt, {till that little 
knowledge had a tincture of thoſe calamitous times. 
The Greeks took ample revenge of that ſuperio- 
rity, which the Latins had bad over them, from 
the time of Lucretius and Cicero down to Cor- 
nelius Tacitus. They no longer mentioned the 
Romans but with a ſtrain of irony. The biſhop 
Luitprandits, who was ſent on an embaſly to 
Conſtantinople by the Othos, takes notice that 
the Greeks called Gregory the Great by no other 
name than that of Gregory the Dialogiſt; becauſe 
indeed his dialogues ſhew him to have been a 

: man 


191 


192 


Of Photius, and the ſchiſm Ch. xxi. 


man of too much ſimplicity. But time has pro- 
duced a total change. The pope is now a preat 
ſovereign ; Rome 1s grown the ſeat of the polite 
arts; and the Latin church is famed for learning: 
while the patriarch of Conſtantinople is no more 
than a ſlave, and the paſtor of a ſervile flock. 
Photius, whoſe life was a ſcene of more adver- 
ſity than glory, was depoſed: by court intrigues, 
and died miſerable; yet his ſucceſſors adhered to 
his pretenſions, and maintained them with vigour, 
Pope John VIII. made ftill a more miſerable 
end: the annals of Fulda take notice that he was 
knocked on the head with a hammer. In ſucceed- 
= hag we ſhall often behold the pontifical ſee 
imbrued in blood; while Rome continued the 
object of foreign ambition, and general pity. 
The weſtern church was not yet troubled with 


. dogmatic diſputes 3 there is little more than the 


bare mention made of a trifling theological conteſt 
ſtarted in 814, by one John Godeſcalcus, con- 
cerning predeſtination and grace. I ſhould not 
take notice of an epidemical folly, with which the 
people of Dijon were ſeized in 844, on occaſion 
of the convulſions cauſed by St. Benignus in the 

eople, while they were praying over his tomb: 
i ſhould not, I ſay, take notice of this popular 
ſuperſtition, if it had not been furiouſly revived in 
our times under almoſt the ſame circumſtances. 
It ſeems as if a kind of fate had determined, that 
the ſame follies ſhould from time to time make 
their appearance on this great ſtage of the world: 
but good ſenſe is alſo the ſame in all times; and 
there has been nothing ſo judiciouſly advance! 


concerning the modern miracles of St. Medard at 


Paris, as what a biſhop of Lyons ſaid in 844 in 
| regar 


France. Arnold, in quan of Emperor, looked 


between the eaſtern and weſtern churches. 193 


regard to thoſe of Dijon: * This is a ſtrange ſort 
& of ſaint indeed, that maims thoſe who pay their 
« addrefies to him: I ſhould think that miracles 
e“ ought to be performed rather for the curing, 
ce than for the inflicting of maladies,” 

_ - Theſe trifles did not diſturb the peace of the 
Weſt ; for Rome did not bufy herſelf then about 
theological quarrels, her whole aim was the in- 
creaſe of her temporal dominion. They made 
more noiſe in the Eaſt, becauſe the clergy had no 
temporal power in that part of the world, and there- 
fore endeavoured to make a figure by paper wars. 
There is yet another cauſe to be aſſigned of the 
theological tranquillity of the Welt, namely, the 
great ignorance of that age, which produced 


this good however, among an infinite number of 
evils, 


9000000000000 


CHAP. XXII. 


State of the weſtern empire towards the end of the 
ninth century. 


HE empire of the Weſt ſubſiſted only in 
name. Arnold, or Arnolf, a baſtard ſon 
of Carloman, made himſelf maſter of Germany: 
but Italy was divided between two lords, both of 
the blood of Charlemaign by the females : one ggg, 
was a duke of Spoleto, named Guy; the other — 
. Berenger, duke of Friuli; both inveſted with 
theſe dutchies by Charles the Bald, and both pre- 
tenders to the empire as well as to the kingdom of 


VoL, 1 


upon 


194 


$94. 


State of the weſtern empire Ch. xxii. 


upon France as belonging to him of right, while 
this kingdom, ſevered from the empire, was di- 
vided betwixt Charles the Simple, who was loſing 
it, and king Eudes, great uncle of Hugh Capet, 
who was uſurping it. 

One Bozo, king of Arles, alſo diſputed the 
empire, Formoſus, biſhop of the unfortunate 
city of Rome, had ſo little weight at that time, 
that he was obliged to give the ſacred unction 
to the ſtrongeſt. He crowned this Guy of Spo- 
leto; the following year he crowned Berenger 
who happened to be conqueror; and at length 
he was forced to crown this Arnold, who 
beſieged Rome, and took it by ſtorm. The 
equivocal oath which the Romans took to Ar- 
nold, ſhews that the popes already pretended to 
the ſovereignty of Rome. It was couched in 
theſe words: I ſwear by the holy myſteries, 
« that without prejudice to my honour, the laws 
&« of my country, and my fealty to his lordſhip 
« pope Formoſus, I ſhall be faithful to the empe- 
« ror Arnold.” 

The popes at that time in ſome meaſure reſem- 
bled the caliphs of Bagdat, who were revered by 
all Mahometan ſtates as the heads of their reli- 
gion, and yet had no other privilege than that of 

ranting inveſtitures of kingdoms to thoſe who 
L them with ſword in hand: but there 
was this difference between theſe caliphs and thoſe 
popes, that the caliphs were upon their decline, 
and the popes were riſing. 

In reality the empire no longer ſubſiſted, neither 


in right nor in fact. The Romans, who with a 
8 acclamation had ſubmitted themſelves to 


harlemaign, refuſed to acknowledge the fove- 
| | reignty 


at the end of the ninth century, 


reignty of baſtards, foreigners, and perſons who 
were hardly maſters of a ſmall part of Germany, 
In ſpite of their humiliation, and their inter- 
mixture with ſuch a number of foreigners, they 
ſtill preſerved, as they do to this day, a ſecret 
kind of haughtineſs in conſequence of their 
former grandeur. They could not bear that the 
Bructeri, the Catti, the Marcomanni, ſhould call 
themſelves ſucceſſors of the Cæſars, and that the 
banks of the Mein, and the Hercynian foreſt, 
ſhould be the center of the empire of Titus and 
Trajan, | 

They were ſtruck with indignation, and at the 
ſame time they contemptuouſly ſneered, upon hear- 
ing, that after the death of Arnold, his ſon Hilu- 
dovic, whom the French call Lewis, had been 
created emperor of the Romans at three or four 
years of age in a barbarous village, named For- 
cheim, by ſome German lords and biſhops. This 
infant was never reckoned in the liſt of emperors; 
and yet the Germans looked upon him as one who 
was to ſucceed to Charlemaign and the Cæſars. 
Indeed this was a ſtrange fort of Roman empire, 
a government that neither poſſeſſed the countries 
between the Rhine and the Maeſe, nor France, 
nor Burgundy, nor Spain, nor any part of Italy, 
nor even ſo much as a houſe in Rome that could 
be ſaid to belong to the emperor. 

From the time of this Lewis, the laſt German 
prince of the baſtard blood of Charlemaign, and 
who died in 912, the empire being confined 
to Germany, was in the ſame condition as 
France, a country depopulated by civil and fo- 
reign wars, under a prince tumultuouſly elected 
and ill obeyed, | 

K 2 All 


195 


oo. 


196 


912. 


Of feudal tenures, Ch. xxlil, 


All governments are ſubje ꝙ to revolutions : it 
was an amazing one to ſee part of thoſe ſavage 
Saxons, who were treated by Charlemaign as the 
Helotes by the Lacedzmonians ; to ſee them, I ſay, 
in the ſpace of 112 years, beſtowing and aſſum- 
ing the Imperial dignity, which was no longer in 
the family of their conqueror. Otho, duke of Sax- 
ony, after the death of Lewis, by his credit and 
intereſt put the German crown, as it is ſaid, on 
the head of Conrad, duke of Franconia; and at- 
ter the death. of Conrad, Henry the Fowler, ſon 
of duke Otho of Saxony, was elected emperor, 
Theſe elections were made by thoſe who were 
grown hereditary princes in Germany, in conjunc- 
tion with the biſhops ; and ſometimes the princt- 
pal inhabitants of the ſeveral cities were alſo de- 
fired to give their votes. 


SS SSS Seeds 


CHAP. XXIII. 
Of feudal tenures, and the empire. 


! r 


. Ai. 


world, had rendered the Romans maſters of 

taly and Gaul. Barbarous nations roſe up, and 
uſurped their conqueſts. Charlemaign's father 
uſurped Gaul from the kings of the Franks. Un- 
der Charlemaign's deſcendants, the governors of 
provinces uſurped all they could, The kings of 
the Lombards had already eſtabliſhed the feudal 
tenures in Italy: and this was the plan by which 
the dukes and counts, after the reign of Charles 
the Bald, were directed. By degrees their go- 


vernments 


ÞF wor, which direQs every thing in this 


> dw, , 


and the empire. 


vernments became hereditary. The biſhops of 
ſeveral conſiderable fees, already powerful by 
their dignity, had only one ftep further to take 
in order to become princes ; and this ſtep was ſoon 
taken, From thence ariſes the temporal power 
of the biſhops of Mentz, Cologne, Triers, Wurtz- 
burg, and of ſo many others in Germany and 
France. The archbiſhops of Rheims, Lyons, 
Beauvais, Langres, and Laon, uſurped the royal 
prerogatives. But this power of the dignihed 
clergy did not Jaſt long in France; though in 
Germany it has been for many years confirmed. 
In ſhort, even abbots themſelves became princes, 
ſuch as the abbots of Fulda, St. Gal, Kemp— 
ten, Corbie, &c. They were now petty kings 
in a country, where fourſcore years before they 
and their monks manured ſome lands, which 
had been beſtowed upon them by the charita- 
ble proprietors. All theſe lords, dukes, counts, 
biſhops, abbots, yielded homage to the ſove- 
reign. The origin of this feudal] government 
has been long the ſubject of inquiry : in all pro- 
bability it is derived from no other ſource than the 
antient cuſtom of all nations, of impoſing homage 
and tribute on the weaker fide, It is known that 
the Roman emperors gave away lands in perpe- 
tuity to their veterans on certain conditions; of 
this we have inſtances in the lives of Alexander 
Severus and Probus, The Lombards were the 
firſt who erected dutchies to be held as fiefs of their 


197 


kingdom: Spoleto and Benevento were hereditary 


dukedoms under the kings of Lombardy. 

Beſore the time of Charlemaign, Taſſillo was 
poſſeſſed of the dukedom of Bavaria on condition 
of homage; and this dukedom would have de- 

K 3 ſcended 


198 


920. 


g e WY 


Of feudal tenures, Ch. xxiii. 


ſcended to his poſterity, if Charlemaign, after 
having ſubdued this prince, had not diſpoſſeſſed 
both the father and his children. | 

'There were no free towns at that time in Ger- 
many, conſequently there was no trade nor opu- 
lence, The cities were not even ſurrounded with 
walls. This ſtate, which might have been fo 
formidable, was rendered fo impotent by the num- 
ber and diviſion of its ſeveral petty princes, that 
the emperor Conrad was cbliged to promiſe an 
annual tribute to the Hungarians, Huns, or Pan- 
nonians, a people who had been awed by Char- 
lemaign, and who were afterwards ſo great! 
humbled by the emperors of the houſe of Auſtria, 
But at that period of time they ſeemed to be juſt 
the ſame nation as they had been under Attila. 
They ravaged Germany and the frontiers of 
France; they made incurſions into Italy through 
Tirol, after plundering Bavaria ; and then return- 
ed to their own country, loaded with the ſpoils of 
ſo many nations. 

It was in the reign of Henry the Fowler, that 
Germany became in ſome meaſure a more orderly 
ſtate. Its limits were then the river Oder, Bo- 
hemia, Moravia, Hungary, the banks of the 
Rhine, the Scheld, the Moſelle, the Maeſe ; and 
Pomerania and Holſtein were its barriers towards 
the north. 

Henry the Fowler was very deſerving of the Im- 
perial crown. Under him the lords of Germany, 
who had been ſo divided, were reunited. The firſt 
fruit of this reunion was the abolition of the tribute 
paid to the Hungarians, in conſequence of a ſignal 
victory obtained over this formidable nation. He 
cauſed moſt of the cities of Germany to be e 

l round; 


and the empire. 


round; and eſtabliſhed a militia, He is ſuppoſed 
to be the inventor of ſome military games, which 
gave the firſt idea of tournaments. In ſhort, Ger- 
many began to recover herſelf, but did not ſeem 
to pretend to the Roman empire, Henry the 
Fowler had been conſecrated by the archbiſhop of 
Mentz ; at which ceremony neither the pope's 
legate, nor any deputy from the people of Rome, 
were preſent. It ſeems as if Germany during this 
whole reign had loſt ſight of Italy. 

But the caſe was different under Otho the Great, 
whom the German princes, the biſhops and abbots, 
unanimouſly eleed emperor after the death of his 


199 


father. The undiſputed heir of a potent prince, 5.6. 


who has been the founder or reſtorer of a ſtate, is 
generally more powerful than his father, unleſs he 
is deficient in courage; for he enters upon a carecr 
already opened to him, and he begins where 
his predeceſſors finiſhed. Thus Alexander went 
farther than Philip, Charlemaign farther than 
Pepin, and Otho the Great far excelled Henry 
the Fowler. 


SS DD SSSISSOISSSEOS SS 


CHAP, XXIV. 
Of Otbo the Great in the tenth century. 


THO. having partly reſtored the empire 


of Charlemaign, followed the example of 

that prince in extending the Chriſtian religion in 
Germany by force of arms. He compelled the 
Danes to pay tribute to him, and to ſubmit to 
K 4 baptiſm, 


REY 


Of Otho the Great Ch. xxiv, 


baptiſm, which had been preached to them a cen- 
tury before, but the memory of which was now 
almoſt intirely aboliſhed. 
F 94% Theſe Danes or Normans, after conquering 
| Neuſtria and England, and ravaging France and 
Germany, were obliged to yield to Otho. He 
appointed biſhops in Denmark, who at firſt were 
ſubject to the archbiſhop of Hamburg, metropo- 
litan of the churches of thoſe Barbarians, which 
had been founded lately in Holſtein, Sweden, 
and Denmark: the whole of their Chriſtianity 
conſiſted in making the ſign of the croſs. Af- 
ter an obſtinate war he ſubdued Bohemia: it is 
ſince his time that this laſt kingdom, and even 
Denmark, were conſidered as provinces of the em- 
pire ; but the Danes ſoon ſhook off the yoke. 
Otho was now the moſt powerful ſovereign in 
the Weſt, and the umpire of princes. So great 
was his authority, and ſo deplorable at that time 
was the ſtate of France, that Lewis 4outremer, 
or Lewis from beyond ſea, ſon of Charles the Sim- 
ple, and a deſcendant of Charlemaign, repaired in 
perſon in 948 to a council of biſhops held by 
Otho in the neighbourhood of Mentz, where 
this king of France delivered himſelf in theſe very 
words, as recorded in the acts: „ have been 
„acknowledged as king, and crowned, by the 
votes of all the lords and nobility of France. 
« Yet Hugh has chaced me away, after taking 
« me priſoner in a fraudulent manner, and con- 
& fining me a whole year; nor could I obtain 
„my liberty, without ſurrendering to him the 
„town of Laon, the only place left to queen 
«© Gerberga, to keep her court together with my 
„ ſervants, * If he pretends that J have —_— 
| | 1 6 it 


SY OS» 


e 


2 7 = 


n , Cy p q * pan, - 1 * 
om 7 ? "Sy FRY Ys . 2 "oF $0 1 «+ 3 y 
_— x ©: ts! 4 £3 5 4 OR RA. i Hs 
7 > "I 2 3 TEENS AA er 
I F 5 4 
* * 


in the ninth century. 


© ted any crime to deſerve ſuch treatment, I am 
ce ready to abide by the judgment of a council of 
& biſhops, and according to the orders of king 
& Otho, or to decide the affair by ſingle combat.“ 

This important ſpeech proves ſeveral points ; 
viz. the power of Otho, the weakneſs of France, 
the cuſtom of ſingle combats, and in ſhort the 
practice lately introduced of conferring the crown 
not by right of blood, but by the votes of the no- 
bility, a practice ſoon aboliſhed in France. 

Such was the power of Otho the Great, when 
he was invited to paſs the Alps by the Italians 
themſelves : by the Italians, a people ever factious 
and feeble, who could neither ſubmit to be go- 
verned by their countrymen, nor recover their 
freedom, nor defend themſelves againſt the Sara- 
cens, and Hungarians, who ſtill infeſted Italy by 
their incurſions. 

Yet Italy, even in its ruinous ſtate, was till 
the richeſt and moſt flouriſhing country in the 
Weſt: it was weakened by the diviſions of 
petty tyrants ; but in thoſe diviſions Rome took 
always the lead of the other cities. They who 
are acquainted with the ftate of Paris during 
the minority of Lewis XIV. and much more ſo 
under Charles the Mad, as alſo with the diſtracted 
condition of England under Charles I. may be 
able to form an idea of Rome in the tenth centu- 

The holy ſee was oppreſſed, diſgraced, and 
imbrued in blood; the papal elections being con- 
ducted in ſuch a manner, as is abſolutely unpa- 
ralleled in hiſtory, , 


3 CHAP. 


201 


— 


Of the Popedom Ch. xxv. 


CHAP, XXV. 


Of the Popedom in the tenth century, before Otho 
the Great made bimſelf maſter of Rome. 


uc ſcandal and diviſions, as thoſe with 
which the ſee of Rome was diſgraced in 
the tenth century, and which continued for a 


long time after, neither happened under the 


Greek or Latin emperors, nor under the Gothic 
kings, nor under the kings of the Lombards, 
nor in the reign of Charlemaign. They are the 
plain conſequence of anarchy ; and this very anar- 
chy was owing to the meaſures which the popes 
had taken to prevent it, to their policy in calling 
the Franks into Ttaly. Had the biſhops of Rome 


been really poſſeſſed of all the lands, which Char- 


lemaign is ſaid to have given them, they would 
have been princes of greater power than they are 
even at this day. Order and regularity would 
have prevailed at their elections, and in their go- 
vernment, as it does at preſent. But Italy was 
ever the object of foreign ambition; and the fate 
of Rome was always uncertain, We muſt never 
forget, that the grand deſign of the Romans was 
to reſtore the antient republic; that petty tyrants 
had ſtarted up in Italy and in Rome; that the 
elections were ſcarce ever free; and that every 
thing was governed by factions. 

At the time when pope Formoſus, ſon of Leo 
the prieſt, was biſhop of Porto, he had headed 
a faction againſt John VIII. and was twice ex- 
communicated by this pope; but theſe excommu- 
nication*, which ſoon became ſo terrible to __ 

e 


before Otho the Great. 


ed heads, were ſo little regarded. by Formoſus, 
that he had intereſt ſufficient to procure himſelf 
to be elected to the papal dignity in 890. 

Stephen VI. or VII. alſo fon of a prieſt, ſuc- 
ceſſor of Formoſus, was a man in whom the ſpirit 
of fanaticiſm was joined to that of faction: having 
all his life hated Formoſus, he ordered his body, 
which had been embalmed, to be dug up, and 
dreſſing him in his pontifical habit, ſummoned 
him before a council that had been called to 
paſs ſentence on the memory of the deceaſed. 
The dead pope had counſel allowed him, and his 
trial having been carried on in form, the corpſe 
was found guilty of having changed ſees, and of 
having quitted the biſhopric of Porto for that of 
Rome : in puniſhment of this crime, the head was 
ſeparated from the body by the hands of the pub- 
lic executioner, three of his fingers were cut off, 
and the body was thrown into the Tiber. 

Pope Stephen VI. rendered himſelf ſo odious 
by this horrid and fooliſh farce, that the friends 
of Formoſus having ſtirred up the citizens, load- 
ed him with irons, and afterwards ſtrangled him 
in priſon. 

The faction oppoſite to this Stephen cauſed the 
body of Formoſus to be fiſhed up again, and to 
be interred a ſecond time with all the pontifical 
ceremonies. 

The minds of the people were inflamed with 
theſe diſputes: Sergius III. who had filled all 
Rome with his intrigues to get himſelf elected 
pope, was banithed by his rival John IX. a friend 
of Formoſus; but being acknowledged ſupreme 
pool after the death of John IX. he condemned 

ormoſus a ſecond time. During theſe troubles 
K 6 Theodora, 


203 


Of the Popedom Ch. xxv. 


Theodora, mother of Marozia, whom ſhe after- 
wards married to the marquiſs of Touſcanella, and 
of another Theodora, all three famous for their 
amours, bore the principal ſway at Rome. Ser- 
gius owed his election intirely to the intrigues of 
heodora the mother. While he was pope, he 
had a fon by Marozia, whom he publicly educated 
in his palace: but he does not appear to have 
been hated by the Romans, who being natural] 
a voluptuous people, were more ready to follow 
than to cenſure his example. 

After his deceaſe the two ſiſters Marozia and 
Theodora procured the chair of St. Peter for one 
of their favourites, named Lando; but upon 
Lando's deceaſe, the young Theodora made in- 
tereſt for her lover John X, biſhop of Bologna, 
and afterwards of Ravenna, and cauſed him to be 
elected pope. His having being transferred to 
different ſees, was not alledged as a crime againſt 
him, as it had been. againſt Formoſus, Theſe 
popes, though condemned by poſterity as wicked 
biſhops, were not bad princes. Far from it : 
this John X. who owed his election to an,amour, 
was a man of genius and courage; he did more 
than all his predeceflors were able to compaſs, by 
driving the Saracens from that part of Italy be- 
tween Capua and Gaieta. 

In order to render this expedition ſucceſsful, he 
had the cunning to prevail on the emperor of 
Conſtantinople to lend him troops, though this 
emperor had as much reaſon to complain of the 
rebellious Romans as of the Saracens. He made 
the count of Capua arm his vaſſals, and got the 
militia of Tuſcany to join him; he then put him- 
felf at the head of this army, taking with him a 


young 


before Otho the Great. 


young ſon of Marozia and of the marquiſs Adal- 
bert. After having driven the Mahometans 
from the neighbourhood of Rome, he wanted 
alſo to deliver Italy from the Germans and other 
foreigners. ih 

Italy was invaded almoſt at the ſame time by | 
the Berengers, by a king of Burgundy, and b [ 
a king of Arles: but he hindered them all N 
from having any command in Rome. However, 1 
after ſome years were elapſed, Guy, brother by q. 
the ſame venter of Hugh king of Arles, and ty- 1 
rant of Italy, having married Marozia, who was 1 
all powerful at Rome; this very Marozia con- 
ſpired againſt the pope, who had been for ſo long 1 
a time her ſiſter's gallant : upon which he was = 
ſeized, impriſoned, and ſmothered between two [ 
mattreſſes. 4 

Marozia, now miſtreſs of Rome, cauſed a 
perſon named Leo to be elected pope, whom ſhe 
murdered in priſon at the end of a few months. 929. 
Having afterwards given the ſee of Rome to an 
obſcure fellow, who enjoyed it but two years ; at 
length ſhe conferred the pontifical dignity on 
John XI. her own ſon, the fruit of her adulterous 
commerce with Sergius III. 

John XI. was only 24 years of age when his 931. 
mother made him pope; ſhe inveſted him with 
this dignity merely on condition that he ſhould 
confine himſelf entirely to his epiſcopal- func- 
| tions, and act in the capacity of his mother's 

chaplain. _ 

It is ſaid, that Marozia poiſoned at that time 
her huſband Guy, marquiſs of Toſcanella. This, 
however, is certain, that ſhe married her huſ- 


, band's brother Hugh, king of Lombardy, and 
put 


4 e 


Of the Popedom Ch. xxv. 


put him in poſſeſſion of Rome, flattering herſelf, 
that in conjunction with him ſhe ſhould enjoy 
the Imperial dignity. . But a ſon of Marozia by 
a former marriage ſided with the Romans againſt 
his own mother, and putting himſelf at their 
head, drove Hugh out of Rome, and confined 
Marozia and the pope her ſon in Adrian's mau- 


foleum, now called the caſtle of St. Angelo. It 


is pretended, that John XI. was poiſoned in his 
impriſonment. 

Stephen VIII. by birth a German, was choſen 
in 939; but on the account of his country he 
proved ſo odious to the Romans, that a ſedition 
happening to ariſe, the people ſlaſhed his face in 
ſuch a manner, that he never afterwards could 
appear in public, 

Some time after this, a grandſon of Marozia, 
named Octavianus Sporco, was by the intereſt of 
his family elected pope at the age of eightcen, 
He took the name of John XII. out of regard to 
the memory of his uncle John XI. and is the firſt 
pope that changed his name upon his acceſſion to 
the pontificate. He was not in orders when his 
family made him pope. This John was a Roman 
patrician ; ſo that being inveſted with the ſame 
dignity as Charlemaign, by the pontifical ſee he 
united both powers, which founded the moſt le- 
gitimate right. But he was young, debauched, 
and far from being a potent prince. 

It is a ſubject of amazement to many, that under 
ſuch a number of ſcandalous and inſignificant popes, 
the ſee of Rome did not loſe either its prerogatives 
or pretenſions; but the reaſon is, almoſt every 
other ſee was governed at that time in the ſame 
manner. The clergy of Italy might deſpiſe ſuch 

popes, 


1 
| 
/ 
[ 
t 
2 
a 
Ii 
tt 
vi 
Of 
ye 
ne 
OC 


before Otho the Great. 207 


| popes, but they reſpected the popedom, eſpecial- 

ly as they aſpired to that ſtation themſelves; in 
fine, in the public opinion, the dignity was ſa- 
cred, how execrable ſoever the perſon, 

While Rome and the church were thus rent 
in pieces, Berenger, ſurnamed the Young, diſ- 
puted the government of Italy with Hugh of 
Arles. The Italians, as Luitprandus, a cotem- 
porary writer expreſſes himſelf, always wanted 
two maſters, in order to be really ſubject to none; 
a falſe and unhappy policy, which produced only 
a continual change of tyrants, as well as of pub- 
lic calamities. Such was the deplorable ſtate of 
this fine country, when Otho the Great was in- 
vited thither by the ſollicitations and complaints | 
of almoſt al! the Italian cities, and even by this 11 
young pope John XII. who was reduced to the 
neceſſity of calling in the Germans, a nation ſo 
odious to him. j 


RR ORR NERO eReearatepearare natal SF 


C HAP. XXVI. 


The reign of the emperor Otho, and the ſlate of 
Italy continued, 


ſelf there in the ſame manner as Charle- 
maign. He overcame Berenger, who aimed 962, | 
at the ſovereignty of that country ; he obliged I 
John XII. to conſecrate and crown him em- 
peror of the Romans, and took the name of 

Ceſar and Auguſtus: this pontif was like- 

wiſe compelled to ſwear allegiance to him * 

, tne 


| | 
THO entered Italy, and conducted him- 961. f | 
| 


The reign of O!tho, Ch. xxvi. 


the tomb where St. Peter's body is ſaid to lye in- 
terred. An authentic inſtrument of this ſolemn 
at was drawn up: the clergy and nobility of 
Rome bound themſelves never to chuſe a pope, 
except in the preſence of the emperor's commi- 
ſioners. In this at Otho confirms the dona- 
tions of Pepin, Charlemaign, and Lewis the De- 
bonnair, but does not ſpecify theſe difputed dona- 
tions: „* Without prejadice, he fays, to our 
„ power, nor to that of our fon and his deſcend- 
& ants,” This inſtrument written in golden 
letters, and ſigned by ſeven biſhops of Germany, 
five counts, two abbots, and ſeveral Italian pre- 
lates, is ftill preſerved in the caſtle of St. Angelo; 
the date is the 13th of February 962. 

It is affirmed by ſome, and among the reſt by 
Mezeray, that Lotharius, king of F rance, and 
Hugh Capet, afterwards king, affiſted at this 
coronation. The Kings of France were indeed 
ſo weak at that time, that they might ſerve as 
an ornament to the coronation of an emperor ; 
but neither Lotharius nor Hugh Capet's names 
are to be met with among thoſe who ſigned the 
inſtrument. | 

The pope having thus given himſelf a maſter, 
when he wanted only a protector, was not long 
faithful to his engagement. He entered into a 
confederacy againſt the emperor with that very 
Berenger, who had taken ſhelter among the 
Mahometans lately ſettled on the coaſts of Pro- 


vence, He invited Berenger's fon to Rome, 


while Otho was at Pavia; he ſent likewiſe to 
the Hungarians, ſolliciting them to make an in- 
curſion into Germany; but he was not ſtrong 
+ * | enough 


þ 


and the flate of Ttaly continued. 


enough to ſupport this bold ſtep, and the emperor 
had power ſufficient to puniſh him, 

Otho therefore returned from Pavia to Rome, 
and having ſecured the city, he held a council, in 
which he brought the pope to an account. In- 
ſtead of trying him by a military Jaw, he con- 
vened ſeveral German and Roman lords, forty 
biſhops, and ſeventeen cardinals, in the church 
of St, Peter; and there, in the preſence of the 
whole people, the holy father was accuſed of hav- 
ing lain with ſeveral women, and eſpecially one 
Etiennette, who died in child-bed. The other 
heads of accuſation were, that he had ordained a 
child of ten years biſhop of Todi; that he had 
made a ſale of ordinations and benefices ; that he 
had plucked out his godfather's eyes; that he had 
caſtrated a cardinal, and afterwards put him to 
death ; in fine, that he did not believe in Jeſus 


Chriſt, and had invoked the devil: two things 


which ſeem to contradict each other. Thus, as 
it generally happens, they mixed falſe and true 
accuſations together ; but they did not mention a 
word of the only motive for which this council 
was aſſembled. The emperor doubtleſs was 
afraid of reviving that revolt and conſpiracy, in 
which even the 'pope's accuſers had been con- 
cerned. This young pope, who was then twenty- 
ſeven years of age, ſeemed to have been depoſed 
for his inceſtuous and ſcandalous life ; but the 
real cauſe of his degradation, was the ſtrong de- 
fire he and all the Romans had of aboliſhing the 
German power in Rome. 

Otho could not ſeize on the perſon of this 
pope, or if he could, he committed a great miſ- 
take in permitting him to enjoy his liberty. - For 
| carce 


209 


The reign of Otho, Ch. xxvi, 


ſcarce had he cauſed Leo VIII. to be elected 
biſhop of Rome, who, if we are willing to be- 
lieve Arnold biſhop of Orleans, was neither 
a clergyman nor a Chriſtian; ſcarce had he re- 
ceived homage from this Leo, and quitted Rome, 
where he ought rather to have reſided, when 
John XII. had the courage to ſtir up the Romans 
to revolt, and ſetting up council againſt council, 
they depoſed Leo VIII. It was here ordained, 
that no inferior could ever degrade his ſuperior. 
By this deciſion, the pope not only meant, 
that the biſhops and cardinals ſhould never depoſe 
the ſupreme pontif ; but he aimed alſo at the em- 
peror, whom the biſhops of Rome always looked 
upon as a layman, of whom the church had a 
right to demand that homage and fealty which 
be required of her, The cardinal, named John, 
who wrote and read the accuſations. againſt 
the pope, had his right hand cut off. They 
plucked out the tongue, and cut off the noſe and 
two fingers of the perſon, why acted as regiſter 
to the depoſing council. | 
And yet in all theſe councils, which were ani- 
mated the ſpirit of faction and revenge, they 
conſtantly quoted the goſpels and the fathers, 
they implored the light of the Divine Spirit, 
they pretended to ſpeak in his name, and eſta- 
bliſhes ſome uſeful regulations : and whoever was 
to read theſe acts, without knowing the hiſtory, 
would imagine he was reading the acts of ſaints. 
All theſe tranſactions paſſed almoſt within fight 
of the emperor ; and who can tell how far this 
revolution might have been carried by the courage 
and reſentment of the young pontif, by the revolt 
of the Romans in his favour, and by the averſion 


of 


and the ſtate of Ttaly continued. 


of the other towns in Italy to the Germans ? But 


211 


pope John XII. was murdered within three 964. 


months after, in the arms of a married woman, 
whoſe huſband with his own hands revenged the 
injury done him. He died of his wounds in eight 
days; and it is ſaid, that not believing in the 
religion of which he was ſupreme pontif, he refuſed 
to receive the ſacrament at his death. 

This pope, or rather patrician, had inſpired 
the Romans with ſuch courage, that they ven- 
tured, even after his deceaſe, to maintain a ſiege, 
and not to ſurrender but at the laſt extremity. 
Otho, twice conqueror of Rome, was maſter of 
Italy as well as of Germany. 

Pope Leo, created by Otho, together with the 
ſenate, the heads of the people, and the clergy 
of Rome, aſſembled in a ſolemn manner in the 
church of St. John Lateran, confirmed the em- 
peror's right of chuſing a ſucceſſor to the king- 
dom of Italy, of ratifying the pope's election, 
and of giving the inveſtiture to biſhops, After 
ſo many treaties, and oaths, the effects of fear, the 
emperors ought to have remained at Rome to ſee 
them obſerved. | 

Scarce was the emperor Otho returned to 
Germany, when the Romans reſolved to regain 
their freedom: they ſent their new pope, who 
was one of the emperor's creatures, to priſon ; 
and the prefect of Rome, the tribunes and ſenate, 
took the reſolution to revive the antient laws : but 
what in one time is an heroic enterprize, is con- 
ſidered at another time as a ſeditious revolt. Otho 
flew back to Italy, cauſed a part of the ſenate to 
be hanged, and the prefect of Rome, who had 
reſolved to be another Brutus, to be publicly 

> _ whipped, 


- 


212 


Of the emperors Otho II. Ch. xxvii. 


whipped, led about naked upon an aſs, and thrown 
into a dungeon, where he died of hunger, 


CE RT oF CT RT I Lage 


LH AP. XXVII. 


Of the emperors Otha II. and III. and of Rome. 


| HIS was nearly the ſtate of Rome under 
| Otho-the Great, Otho II. and Otho III. 
The Germans held the Romans in ſubjeCtion, 
and the Romans broke their chains, as often as 
they were able. 

A pope elected by the emperor's order, or of 
his nomination, was ſure to be deteſted by the 
Romans. They had ftill a notion of reſtoring 
the commonwealth ; yet this noble ambition was 
productive of nothing but miſery and horror. 

Otho II. marches to Rome againſt his father. 
What a government! what an empire! what 
a pontificate! a conſul, named Creſcentius, fon 
of pope John X. and of the famous Marozia, re- 
ceiving with this title a hatred to royalty, arm- 


ed Rome againſt Otho II. and cauſed Benedict 


VI. who was devoted to the emperor, to die in 
priſon : but the authority of Othb, though he 
himſelf was at a diſtance, having, amidſt theſe 
troubles, given the Roman chair to the chancellor 
of the empire in Italy, who was made pope un- 
der the name of John XIV; this unhappy prelate 
was a new victim ſacrificed by the Roman party. 


Pope Boniface VI. a creature of the conſul 


Creſcentius, already ftained with the blood of 
(2 Benedict 


, * = HT . AE TIE. 


Sm 
1 


WW ww = _ 


and III. and of Rome. 


Benedict VI. brought John XIV. to his grave. 
The times of Caligula, Nero, and Vitellius, 
did not produce more deplorable diſaſters, nor 
greater inſtances of barbarity : but the horrid 
actions and the calamities of thoſe popes are as 
obſcure as themſelves. Theſe bloody tragedies 
were indeed acted on the Roman ſtage ; but it 
was when Rome was ſmall and in ruins ; thoſe 
of the Cæſars had for their theatre all the known 
world, | 
During theſe tranſactions, Otho II. marches 
to Rome in 981; The popes had heretofore in- 
vited the Franks into Italy, and ſhaken off the 
yoke of the eaſtern emperors. What meaſures 
do they take now? They ſtrive in appearance to 
return to their old maſters, and having impru- 
dently called in the Saxon emperors, they want- 
ed to drive them out again. This very Boniface 
VII. went to Conſtantinople, to ſollicit the em- 
perors Baſil and Conſtantine, that they would 
reſtore the Imperial throne in Italy. Rome was 
ignorant of her ſtate, ignorant whom ſhe belonged 
to. The conſul Creſcentius and the ſenate would 
fain re-eſtabliſh the republic: the pope would 
have neither a republic nor a maſter. Otho II. 
wanted to be ſovereign: he therefore enters Rome, 
and having invited the principal ſenators, and 
the conſul's adherents to dinner, he cauſed them 
all to be murdered, if we can believe Jeffery of 
Viterbo, in the midſt of the entertainment. Thus 
the pope, by means of his very enemy, got rid of 
his republican ſenators; but now he muſt get 
ria alſo of this tyrant. It was not enough for 
him to have called the Greek emperor's troops 


into Apulia; he likewiſe invited the — 


213 


— n — — - 


4 . 
S —————— > 1—2ꝛ . — 
— IRE — 


— 


ͤ—ñ—ñ———ẽ— — 


© OI EEE — ̃— tl cats A CT a 


Of the emperors Otho II. Ch. xxvii, 


If the maſlacre of the ſenators at this bloody en- 
tertainment, as mentioned by Jeffery, be true, 
it was doubtleſs far better to-have the Maho- 
metans for his protectors, than this bloody Saxon 
for his maſter, Otho was defeated by the 
Greeks and Saracens ; the latter took him pri- 
ſoner, but he made his eſcape, and taking advan- 
tage of the diviſions of his enemies, he returned 
to Rome, where he died in 983. | 

After his deceaſe the conſul Creſcentius for 
ſome time maintained the ſhadow of the Roman 
republic. He drove Gregory IV. nephew to the 
emperor Otho III. from the pontifical chair : but 
at laſt Rome was beſieged and taken; Creſcentius 
having been drawn out of the caſtle of St. Angelo 
by the hope of an accommodation, and the promiſes 
and oaths of the emperor, had his head cut off, 
and his body hung up by the feet ; while the new 
pope elected by the Romans, under the name of 
John XV. had his eyes put out, his noſe cut off, 
and in this condition was thrown from the top of 
the caſtle of St. Angelo. 

The Romans then renewed to Otho III. the 
oaths ſworn to Otho I. and Charlemaign : and he 
aſſigned the lands belonging to the marquiſate of 
Ancona to ſupport the pontifical dignity. 

After the three Othos, this ſtruggle for the Ger- 
man ſovereignty, and the liberty of Italy, remained 
for a long time on the ſame terms. Under the 
emperors Henry II. of Bavaria, and Conrad II. 


named the Salic, as ſoon as the emperor was em- 


ployed in Germany, there aroſe a party in Italy. 
Henry II. went thither as the Othos had done, to 
diſperſe factions, to confirm to the popes the dona- 


tions of the emperors, and to receive the ſame ho- 
mage. 


and III. and of Rome. 


mage. In the mean time, the popedom was put 
up to ſale, as well as almoſt all the other biſhoprics. 

Benedict VIII. and John XIX. bought it pub- 
licly one after the other : theſe were brothers of the 
family of the marquiſs of Toſcanella, which had 
been very powerful at Rome ever ſince the time 
of Marozia and Theodora. 

After their death, in order to perpetuate the 1034. 
pontificate in their houſe, it was purchaſed for a 
child of twelve years of age. This was Benedict 
IX, who had the biſhopric of Rome in the ſame 
manner that we ſtill ſee many families purchaſe, 
though privately, benefices for their children. 

This diſorder had no bounds. In the popedom 
of Benedict IX. two other popes, who were elected 
by the force of money, reciprocally excommunicated 
each other; but an happy agreement prevented a 
civil war, ſo that theſe three popes mutually con- 
| ſented to divide the revenues of the church amon 
f them, and to live in peace each with his miſtreſs. 

This pacific and ſingular triumvirate laſted no 
longer than their money; and at laſt, when they 
had none left, each ſold his part of the popedom to 
Gratian, the deacon, a man of quality, who was 
very rich: but as young Benedict had been elected 
of long before the other two, they left him, by a ſolemn 
agreement, the enjoyment of the tribute paid by 
England to Rome, called Peter's pence, which a 


Saxon king of England, whoſe name was Ethel- 
wulph, had ſubmitted to in 852 *. 


215 


* This was in $55, Ethelwulph himſelf being then at Rome. 
It was originally a charity, called Rome-ſcot, or tribute of 
Rome, a penny collected yearly of every family for the mainte- 
nance of an Engliſh college, founded in 727 by Ina king of the 
Weſt Saxons, Some time after Offa king of Mercia impoſed the 
ſame tax on his ſubjects; and Ethelwulph extended it to all 


gland, This 


216 Of the emperors Otho II. Ch. xxvii, 


This Gratian, who took the name of Gregory 
VI. and had the reputation of behaving with great 
wiſdom, enjoyed the pontificate very peaceably 
till the emperor Henry III. the ſon of Conrad the 

1046. Salic, went to Rome. 

Never did any emperor ſhew more authority, 
He depoſed Gregory VI. who was beloved by the 
Romans, and nominated in his room Suiger, his 
chancellor, biſhop of Bamberg, without any one's 
daring to murmur at it. 

1048. After the death of this German, who in the 
rank of popes is called Clement II. the emperor, 
who was in Germany, created Poppo, a Bava- 
rian, his ſucceſſor: this was Damaſus II. he went 
with the emperor's brief to Rome, where he wa 
acknowledged pope in ſpite of the abovemention- 
ed Benedict IX. who was deſirous of getting again 
into the pontifical chair, notwithſtanding his hay- 

| ing ſold it. 

| This Bavarian dying twenty-three days after 

| his taking poſleſſion of his office, the emperor 

gave the popedom to his couſin Bruno, of the 
houſe of Lorrain, whom he tranſlated from the 
biſhopric of Toul to that of Rome, by his abſo- 
lute authority. Had this authority of the empe- 
rors continued, the popes would have been no 
more than their chaplains, and Italy would have 
been enſlaved. 
This pontif took the name of Leo IX, and b 
ranked in the catalogue of ſaints. We ſhall (ce 
him preſently at the head of an army, fighting 
3 the Norman founder of the kingdom of 
aples, who takes him priſoner. 
Could the emperors have fixed their reſidence 


at Rome, it is evident, by the weaknels of the 
| . Romans, 


9 


and III. and of Rome. 


Romans, by the diviſions of Italy, and by the 
power of Germany, that they would have been 
ever ſovereigns of that capital, and of courſe there 
would: have. been really a Roman empire. But 
thoſe elective kings of Germany could not reſide 
at Rome ſo far diſtant from the German princes, 
who were grown too formidable to their maſters. 
The neighbouring nations were ever ready to in- 
vade their frontiers. Sometimes they were obli- 
ged to oppoſe the Danes, at other times the Poles 
and Hungarians. This is what preſerved Italy 
for a while from the German yoke. 


S0S00009000000000000S 


CHAP. XXVIIL 
Of France towards the time of Hugh Capet. 


| HILE Germany thus began to take a 
'V new form of adminiſtration, and Rome 
and Italy had none, France became, like Germa- 
ny, entirely a feudal government. | 

This kingdom extended from the countries on 
the Scheld and the Maeſe, to the Engliſh channel, 
and from the Pyrenean mountains to the Rhone. 
Theſe were at that time its bounds; for though 
ſo. many hiſtorians pretend that this great fief of 
France extended beyond the Pyrenean mountains, 
even to the Ebro, it does not at all appear, that 
the Spaniards in thoſe provinces between the Ebro 
and the Pyrenean mountains, were ſubject to the 


217 


feeble government of F ranee; When they fought | 


againſt the Mahometans. 
83 B53, | Y) -13W. (0444S 


1 L France, 


r F 


8 


- wes 


— —— 
— 
— — 


Of France Ch. xxviii, 


France, in which neither Dauphine nor Pro- 
vence were comprehended, was a kingdom of a 


| tolerable extent; but the king of France was far 


from being a great ſovereign. Lewis, the laſt of 
the deſcendants of Charlemaign, had no other 
demeſnes beſides the city of Laon, Soiſſons, and 
ſome territories that were diſputed with him. The 
homage paid by Normandy, only ſerved to make 
a royal vaſſal, who was able to keep his maſter in 
pay. Every province had either its counts or its 
hereditary dukes: he who could only ſeize two 
or three villages, paid homage to the uſurper of 
a province; and he who had only a caſtle paid 
tribute to him who had taken poſſeſſion of a city. 
All this produced a monſtrous aſſemblage of mem- 
bers, without conſtituting one body, 

Time and neceffity eſtabliſhed it as a cuſtom, 
that the lords of great fiets ſhould march with their 
troops to the aſſiſtance of the king. One lord 
owed him forty days ſervice, another twenty-five, 
and the rear-vaſlals marched at the orders of their 
immediate lords. But while theſe lords ſerved the 
ſtate for ſome days, they made war againſt one 
another almoſt all the year round. In vain did 
the coungils, which in thoſe guilty times often 
enacted good laws, decree that nobody ſhould 
fight from Thurſday till Monday at break of day, 
nor in the time of Lent, nor at other ſolemnities ; 
theſe; regulations not being fupported by any co- 


ercive power, were without effect. Each caſtle 


” 
* * 


was the capital of a {mall diſtri of robbers, 
and each monaſtery was in arms: their advocates, 
who had, been inſtituted in the early ages to pre- 
ſent their petitions to the prince and manage their 
affairs, were the generals of their troops: their 

{ 700m 


1 ms a4 — 


e totyards the time of Hugh Capet. 


corn was either burnt, or cut down before it was 
ripe, or defended ſword in hand: thus the cities 


were almoſt reduced to ſolitude, and the country 
depopulated by long famines. 


i 


219 


One would have imagined, that this kingdom, 


without a head, without government, and with- 
out order, muſt have fallen a prey to a foreign 
power: but an anarchy nearly of the ſame na- 
ture in almoſt all countries, conſtituted its ſafety; 
and when under the Othos Germany was moſt 
to be dreaded, its inteſtine wars employed its 
troops. 

From theſe barbarous times we derive the cuſ- 
tom of paying homage for a houſe and a hamlet 
to a lord of another village. A lawyer, or a 
merchant, who poſſeſſes an antient fief, receives 
fealty and homage from another burgher, or from 
a peer of the realm, who has bought a meſne 
tenure in his manor. The Jaws of fiefs no longer 
ſubſiſt; but theſe old dependences of one fee upon 
another, theſe homages and duties ſtill ſubſiſt: in 
almoſt all our courts of juſtice this maxim is ad- 
mitted, No land without a lord; as if it was not 
enough to belong to our country. wy 

W hen France, Italy, and Germany, were thus 
divided, and under the dominion of a multitude 
of little tyrants, the armies, the principal ſtrength 
of which in. the reign of Charlemaign, as well as 
under the antient Romans, was the infantry, were 
reduced to cavalry, They knew no other troops 
beſides the gens d' armes; and the foot were not 


allowed this name, becauſe in compariſon of the 
horſemen they were not armed. | 


The gens d' armes were ſo called from being completely clad 
\narmour, 


L 2 Th 


220 


Of France Ch. xxviii. 

The poſſeſſors of the ſmalleſt manors did not 
enter the field without bringing as many horſe as 
they could poſſibly raiſe; ns their oftentation 
then conſiſted in being attended by ſquires, who 
were called vaſlets, from the word vaſ/alet, a little 
vaſſal. The point of honour being then to fight 
only on horſeback, the cuſtom obtained of wear- 
ing a complete ſuit of iron armour, which would 
have loaded a man on foot with its weight: and 
the braſſets and. cuiſſes + were a part of the dreſs. 
It is pretended that Charlemaign had them, but it 
was about the year one thouſand when they were 
brought into common uſe. 

Whoever was rich became almoſt invulnerable 
in war: and more particularly at that time they 
made uſe of clubs to knock down thoſe knights, 
whom they could not wound with the points of 
their lances. The principal articles in trade were 
cuiraſſes, bucklers, and helmets, adorned with 
plumes of feathers. 

The peaſants whom they dragged to war, were 
both expoſed and deſpiſed, and ſerved for pioneers 
rather than for combatants. The horſes, who 
were held in greater eſteem than the common 
people, were barbed, and their heads covered 
with armour. + : 

There were then ſcarcely any other laws beſides 
thoſe made by the moſt powerful for the ſervice of 
the fiefs. All other points of diſtributive juſtice 
were left to the caprice of the ſtewards, and of the 
provoſts and bailiffs nominated by the poſſeſſors 
of the lands. 1 a 

The ſenate of thoſe towns, which under Char- 
lemaign and the Romans had enjoyed a municipal 


+ Braſſets were for the arms, and cuiſſes for the thighs, 
govern- 


G 


towards the time of Hugh Capet. 


overnment, wete almoſt every where aboliſhed. 
The title ſenior, ſeigneur, or lord, for along time 
peculiar to the prineipal perſons in the ſenate of 
towns; was no longer given to any but the poſ- 
ſeſſors of fiefs. 
The term peer began to be introduced into the 
Gallo-German language, which was then uſed in 
France. It came from the Latin word par, equa! 


or fellow, and it was only made uſe of in this ſenſe. 


in the firſt and ſecond race of the kings of France. 
The ſons of Lewis the Debonnair called themſelves 
peers in one of their interviews in the year 8513 
and long before Dagobert gave the name of peers 
to monks, Godegrand, biſhop of Metz, in the 
time of Charlemaign, called the biſhops and abbots 
peers, as the learned Du Cange obſerves, The 
vaſſals of the ſame lord then accuſtomed themſelves 
to call each other peers. | 

Alfred the Great had eſtabliſhed juries in Eng- 
land; theſe were peers in each profeſſion, and a 
man on his trial might chuſe twelve men of his 
own profeſſion to be his judges. Some vaſſals in 
France had alſo the fame privilege, but the num- 
ber was not always limited to twelve. There 
were in each fief as many as there were barons, 
who held of the ſame lord, and who were peers 
amongſt themſelves, but not peers with their feu- 
dal lord, n 

The princes who paid immediate homage to 
the crown, ſuch as the dukes of Guienne, Nor- 
mandy, and Burgundy, with the counts of Flan- 
ders and Toulouſe, were therefore in reality peers 
of France. 

Hugh Capet was not the leaſt powerful: he had 
boſleſſed for à long time the dutchy of France, 

| * which 


1 — 95 


221 


r * 


— ²˙ 
n 


n 


222 


Of France Ch. xxviii. 


which extended even to Touraine: he was count 
of Paris; and his vaſt demeſnes in Picardy and 
Champagne gave him alſo great authority in thoſe 
provinces, His brother had what at preſent is the 
dutchy of Burgundy. His grandfather Robert the 
Strong, and his great uncle Eudes, or Odo. both 
wore the crown in the time of Charles the Simple. 
Hugh, his father, ſurnamed the Abbot, on ac- 
count of his poſſeſſing the abbeys of St. Denis, 
St. Martin de Tours, ,St. Germain-des-prez, and 
many others, had ſhaken and governed France : it 
may therefore be ſaid, that from the year 888, in 


| which king Eudes began his reign, his family go- 


verned without interruption ; and if we except 
Hugh the abbot, who would not take the royal 
crown, it Forms a ſeries of ſovereigns that has 
laſted above 850 years, a ſucceſſion which no. 
other kingdom can produce. | 

It is well known how Hugh Capet, duke of 
France, and count of Paris, uſurped the crown 
from duke Charles, uncle to the laſt king, Lewis 
V. If the ſuffrages had been free, the blood of 
Charlemaign reſpeCted, and the right of ſucceſſion 
as ſacred as it is at preſent, Charles would have 
been king of France: it was not a national par- 
liament that deprived him of the rights enjoyed by 
his anceſtors ; but that which makes and unmakes 
kings, force joined to prudence, 

While Lewis, the laſt king of the blood of 
Charlemaign, was drawing near the cloſe of his 
obſcure life by a ſlow decay at the age of twen- 
ty-three, Hugh Capet aſſembled his forces; and 
was ſo far from having recourſe to the autho- 
rity of a parliament, that he-diſperſed one that 


was held at Compeign to ſecure the ſucceſſion 
| | | to 


towards the time of Hugh Capet. 
to Charles. Of this the letter wrote by Gerbert, 
afterwards archbiſhop of Rheims, and pope under 


the name of Sylveſter II. publiſhed by Ducheſne, 
is an authentic teſtimony. \ 42:10 


Charles, duke of Brabant and Hainault, ſtates 
that compoſed - the Lower Lorrain, was obliged 
to yield to a rival more powerful and more for- 
tunate than himſelf : being betrayed by the bi- 

ſhop of Laon, and unexpectedly ſeized and deli- 
vered to Hugh Capet, he died a priſoner in the 
tower of Orleans, leaving behind him two chil- 
dren who were the laſt princes of the male line of 
Charlemaign, and who could not revenge his 
death, though one of them ſucceeded to Lower 
Lorrain. Yet Hugh Capet on his becoming king 


of his peers, did not acquire any increaſe of ter- 
ritory. 


KMM OO CCC 


CIT AY. EE: 
The ate of France in the tenth and eleventh 


centuries, 


RANCE was diſmembered, and continued 
languithing under ſecret diforders from the 
reign of Charles the Fat to Philip the firſt, great 
—— to Hugh Capet, near a hundred and 
ty years; and we ſhall ſee whether the cruſades, 
which ſignalized the reign of Philip I. at the end 
of the eleventh century, rendered it more flou- 
riſhing. In the ſpace of time I am mention- 


ing, there was nothing but confuſi 
barbariſm, : 3 


and poverty. Every lord, Who had 
L 4 a tolerable 


223 


224 


998, 


State of France Ch. xxix. 


a tolerable eſtate, coined money; while it was 
every body's buſineſs to debaſe it. The fine ma- 
nufactures were in Greece and Italy; for the 
French could not imitate them in towns that had 
no privileges, and in a country intirely diſunited, 
Of all the events of theſe times, that which is 
moſt worthy our attention, is the excommuni- 
cation of king Robert. He had married Bertha, 
his couſin in the fourth degree; a marriage in 
itſelf lawful, and moreover neceſſary for the wel- 
fare of the ſtate, We have ſeen in our days, pri- 
vate perſons marry their nieces, and purchaſe at 
the ordinary price, the diſpenſations of Rome, as 
if Rome had any thing to do with the marriages 
ſolemniſed at Paris: but the king of France did 
not meet with the fame indulgence. The Roman 
church, amidſt the contempt and ſcandal into 
which it was ſunk, dared to impoſe on the kin 
a penance of ſeven years, enjoined him to quit his 
wife, and excommunicated him in caſe of refuſal. 
Ihe pope interdicted all the biſhops who had al- 
liſted at this marriage; and ordered them to repair 
to Rome to beg his parden. Such audacity ap- 
pears incredible ; but the ignorant ſuperſtition of 
thoſe times might have ſuffered it; and it might 
have been cauſed by policy. Gregory V. who 
thundered out this excommunication, was a Ger- 
man and governed by Gerbert, formerly archbi- 
ſhop of Rheims, and enemy of the houſe of France. 
The emperor Otho III. who was no friend to Ro- 
bert, affiſted in perſon at the council, where the 
excommunication was pronounced: all theſe par- 
ticulars render it probable, that reaſons of ftate 
had as great a ſhare in this baſe proceeding, as 
fanaticiſm. 8 
Hiſtorians 


r 5bLÄ ooo i Edie ii iy 


in the tenth and eleventh centuries. 


Hiſtorians inform us, that this excommunica- 

tion had ſuch an effect in France, that the king 
was abandoned 'by all his courtiers, and even by 
his own domeſtics ; and that there ſtaid with him 
only two ſervants, who threw into the fire what 
he left at his meals, from the horror they felt at 
what had been touched by an excommunicated per- 
ſon, Degraded as human nature was at that time, 
yet there is no probability that the abſurdity could 
be carried ſo far. The firſt author who mentions 
this ſtupidity of the court of France, is cardinal 
Peter Damian, who did not write his account till 
ſxty-four years aſter: and he relates, that as a pu- 
nifſhment of this pretended inceſt, the queen Was 
brought to bed of a monſter ; but there is nothing 
monſtrous in this whole affair, except the aſſur- 
ance of the pope, and the weakneſs of the king, 
who ſeparated from his wife. 
Ex communications and interdictions are thun- 
der- bolts that never ſet a ſtate on fire, except they 
meet with combuſtible materials. There were none 
at that time, but Robert perhaps might fear that 
ſome would be formed. 

King Robert's condeſcenſion emboldened the 
popes to ſuch a degree, that his grandſon, Philip I. 
was excommunicated as he had been. The famous 
Gregory VII. in the year 1075, threatened to de- 
poſe him, if he did not clear himſelf from the 
crime of ſimony before his nuncios. Another pope 
actually excommunicated him. Philip diſliked his 


queen, and was in love with Bertha, the wife of 


the count of Anjou; he therefore made uſe of the 
laws to annul his marriage, under the pretence of 
kindred: and Bertha his miſtreſs got her union 
with the count of Anjou diſſolved on the ſame 
pretence. | L. 5 Ihe 


223 


226 late of France Ch. xxix. 


The king and his miſtreſs were at laſt ſolemnly 
married by the biſhop of Bayeux. They were 
worthy of cenſure, but they had at leaſt ſhewn 
ſuch reſpect to the laws, as to make uſe of 
them to cover. their faults, However that be, 
one pope had excommunicated Robert, for hav- 
ing married his relation; and another pope ex- 
communicated Philip, Wr repudiated his 
relation, What appears moſt ſingular is, that 
pope Urban II. pronounced this ſentence in the 
king's own dominions, at Clermont in Auvergne, 
where he came to ſeek for ſhelter, -and in the ſame 
council in which he preached the cruſade, _ 

However, it does not appear that Philip on his 
being excommunicated was held in abhorrence by 
his fubjects; and this may give us reaſon to doubt 
of Robert's having been ſo generally abandoned. 

It is pretty remarkable, that king Henry, Phi- 

1044. lip's father, was married to a Muſcovite princeſs. 
The Muſcovites, or Ruſſians, began to profeſs 
the Chriſtian religion, but they had no communi- 
cation with the reſt of Europe; they dwelt beyond 
Poland, which had yet ſcarce embraced Chriſtia- 
nity, and had not the leaſt correſpondence with 
France. However, king Henry ſent into Ruſſia 
to demand the ſovereign's daughter, to whom the 
other Europeans gave the title of duke, as well 
as to the chief of Poland. The Ruſſians called 
him in their language tzaar, of which we have 
ſince formed the word czar. It is pretended, that 
king Henry reſolved on this marriage, from the 
fear of being engaged in ſome eccleſiaſtical quar- 

| rel. Of all the ſuperſtitions of thoſe times, this 
was not the leaſt prejudicial to the welfare of 

4 ſtates; that people were not permitted to marry 

| a COU 


i the 1enth and eleventh centuries. 


a couſin of the ſeventh degree : for almoſt all the 
ſovereigns in Europe were Heary's relations. 
However, Anne, daughter of Jaraſlau, czar of 
Muſcovy, was queen of France; and it is re- 


markable, that after the death of her huſband, 1060. 


ſhe did not enjoy the regency, nor ever made the 
leaſt pretence to it. Laws change according to 
the times: the count of Flanders, one of the 
vaſſals of the kingdom, was regent, and the queen 
married a count of Crepi. Theſe things would 
appear ſingular at preſent, though they were not 
ſo then. | 
Neither Henry, nor Philip I. did any thing re- 
markable ; but in their time their vaſlals, and un- 
der vaſſals conquered kingdoms. 0 
We ſhall ſee preſently in what manner a few 
adventurers of the province of Normandy, with- 
out either eſtates, or lands, -and almoſt without. 
troops, founded nevertheleſs the kingdom of the: 
two Sicilies, which proved afterwards a bone of 
contention, between the emperors of the dynaſty 
of Swabia and the popes, between the families of 


Anjou and Arragon, and between the houſes of 
Auſtria and France. 


S οοο 


CHAP. XXX. 
| The conqueſt of Naples and Sicily by a few gentlemen. 


of Normandy. 


* 


HEN Charlemaign took the title of em- 
peror, it gave him no more than he 
could ſecure by his arms. He pretended to be 


ſuꝑteme 


2 


— — 
EEE ˙¹A oo> 0 


s * — 
* 


— — — — ———— — — — — — — 
— 
2 


——_—_—— 
DL.” * 


228 


The conque/t of Naples Ch. xxx. 


ſupreme lord of the dutchy of Benevento, which 
at that time conſtituted great part of the preſent 
kingdom of Naples. The dukes of Benevento 
more fortunate than the kings of Lombardy, flood 
their ground agamft him, and his ſucceſſors. Apu- 
lia, Calabria, Sicily, were -expoſed to the depre- 
dations of the Saracens, In vain did the Greek 
and Latin emperors difpute the ſovereignty of 
thoſe countries. A great many private lords thar- 
ed the ſpoils with the Arabs. The people did 
not know who they belonged to, nor whether 
they were of the Roman, Greek, or Mahometan 
communion. The emperor Otho I. having the 
longeſt ſword,” exerciſed his authority in thoſe 
parts; and erected Capua into a principality, 
Otho II. had not ſuch good fortune, but was 


| beaten by the combined army of Greeks and A- 


rabs, The emperors of the Eaſt remained then 
in poſieſſion of Apulia and Calabria, which they 
governed by a deputy called Catapan *. Salerno 
was uſurped by private lords. The princes of 
Benevento and Capua, encroached as much as 
poſitble om the Catapan's territories, and the latter 
did them all the miſchief he could in his turn. 
Naples and Cajeta were petty republics, like 
Sienna and Lucca; the Mahometans were quar- 
tered in ſeveral caſtles, from whence they plun- 
dered the Greeks and Latins both alike: the 
churches belonging to the Catapan's juriſdiction, 
were ſubject to the metropolitan of Conftantino- 

* Some dcrive the origin of this word from xa7sT«vw, which 
the Byzantine writers make uſe of, to denote a perſon in potuer : 
and others think it is an abbreviation of x«aTe mavrongaToga, f 


to the emperor, or the emperor's lieutenant, Be that as it may, the 
authors of the Byzantine hiſtory, and the writers of the middle 


age frequently make uſe of it. See Du Cantze Gloll, Lat, ts 
7 


and Sicily by a few gentlemen of Normandy. 229 
ple, and the reſt to Rome. Their manners were 
ſuch as might be expected from a mixture of peo- 
ple, governments, and religion. The inhabitants 
ſhewed not the leaſt mark of their natural wit and 
vivacity. It ſeemed no longer the country that 
had given birth to Horace and Cicero, and that 
was one day to produce a Taſſo. Such was the 
in the tenth and ele- 
ariglianoꝰ 


ſtate of this fruitful country 

venth centuries, from Gaieta and the G 

as far as Otranto. 
Pilgrimages and knight 


money, and the victorious 


errantry, were the pre- 
- vailing paſſion of thoſe days. The times of anar- 
chy are apt to produce the moſt heroic flights, 
which are checked under regular governments. 
About fifty or fixty Frenchmen failed from Nor- 
mandy for Paleſtine in 983; and returning by the 
ſea of Naples, landed at Salerno at the time when 
the Mahometans were beſieging this city, and 
the inhabitants had agreed to ranſom their liberties. 
They found the townſmen buſy in collecting the 
uſſulmen in their 
camp, ſecurely rioting in brutal debauchery. 
This handful of ſtrangers reproached the be- 
ſieged with their puſillanimous behaviour; then 
ſallying out with great intrepidity in the mid- 
dle of the night, and followed by a few of the 
inhabitants who dared to imitate. their exam- 
ple, they fell unawares upon the Saracen camp, 
put the enemy to flight, obliged them to re- 


embark in the greateſt confuſion, and not on! 


ſaved the treaſure of Salerno, but likewiſe en- 


creaſed it with the ſpoils of the enemy. 


Tbe prince of Salerno, greatly ſurprized, would 
tain have rewarded them with magnificent pre- 


The antient Liris, 


ſents, 


— 


— — — — — > — ” — 
2-— VI — — —⅛ RK De — — — — 
— - = 


230 


The conqueſt of Naples Ch. xxx. 


ſents, but was ſtill more ſurprized at their refuſal : 
they were a long time treated at Salerno in ſuch a 
manner as heroes and deliverers of a nation richly 
deſerved : in ſhort they were prevailed upon to pro- 
miſe to return. The honour which followed fo 
{ſtrange an adventure, ſoon induced a great many 
of their countrymen. to viſit Benevento and Salerno; 
ſo that at length the Normans reſumed their antient 
cuſtom of croſſing the ſeas, in ſearch of an enemy, 
Sometimes they ſerved the Greek emperor, ſome- 
times the princes of the country, and at other times 
they enliſted under the pope's banners. Little did 
they mind in what prince's cauſe they ſignalized 
their proweſs, provided they reaped the truit of their 


labour. At Naples there ſtarted up a duke, who 


had inſlaved the infant republic. This duke of 
Naples thought himſelf very happy in concluding 


an alliance with a handful of Normans, who lent 


him their aſſiſtance againſt the duke of Benevento. 
Between the two territories they founded. the city 
of Averſa towards the year 1030, and this was 
the firſt ſovereignty acquired by their valour. 
Not long after, arrived the three ſons of Tan- 
cred of Hauteville, from the territory of Cou- 
tance: their names were William ſurnamed Fier- 
a: bras *, Drogo, and Humphrey. Nothing bears 
a greater reſemblance to the fabulous times. 
Theſe three brothers, with the Normans of Aver- 
fa, attend the Catapan into Sicily ; William Fier- 


 a-bras ſlays the Saracen general, and determines 


the victory in favour of the Greeks, who would 
have been once more in poſſeſſion of Sicily, had 
not they-been ungrateful. But the Catapan was 


* It ſignifies the ſame as arm-ſfrong, and from thence the 
Engliſh name Firebrace ſeems to be derived. : 
| | | afraid 


and Sicily by a few gentlemen of Normandy. 


afraid of his French auxiliaries ; he did them in- 
juſtice, and incurred their diſpleaſure, They 
turned their arms againſt him; and three or 
four hundred Normans made themſelves maſters 


of almoſt all Apulia, The fact ſeems incredi- 


ble: but they were joined by adventurers of the 1047. 


country, who learnt the military art under ſuch 
expert maſters: the Calabreſe who wanted to 
make their fortunes by the ſword, ſeemed to ri- 
val the Normans in courage. William Fier-a- 
bras aſſumed the title of count of Apulia, with- 
out conſulting. either the emperor, the pope, or 
the neighbouring lords: he conſulted none but 
his ſoldiers, after the example of the firſt kings of 
all countries. Each Norman captain had a town 
or a village to his ſhare. _ 


231 


After the deceaſe of Fier-a- bras, his brother 1046, 


Drogo was choſen ſovereign of Apulia. Then it 
was that Robert Guiſcard and his two younger 
brothers ſet out from Coutance in order to par- 
take of ſuch good fortune, Old Tancred was a- 
mazed to ſee himſelf the father of a race of con- 
querors. The Norman name filled all the neigh- 
bourhood of Apulia, and even Rome itſelf with 
terror. , Robert Guiſcard and his brother, toge- 
ther with a great number of their countrymen, 
went in pilgrimage to Rome in ſmall parties. 
They walked incognito with the pilgrim's ſtaff 
in hand, and arrived at length in Apulia. 

Though the emperor >Henry III. had power 
enough at that time to lord it over Rome, yet he 
was not able to oppoſe theſe conquerors. He 


ſolemnly granted them the inveſtiture of what 1047, 
they had invaded. At that time they were poſ- 
ſeſſed of all Apulia, the county of Averſa, and a 


Thus 


moiety of the dutchy of Benevento, 


— — 


— 


— . — . ——ůů—— 
— 
— 


2 we A 

— +4575 50 : 
— T4 mc. 88 * Ry , . 
4 — — — 8 


232 


ro p z. 


1053. 


The congueff of Naples Ch. xxx. 


Thus did this family, which ſoon after roſe to 
the regal dipnity, afid founded the kingdoms of 
Naples and Sicily, become feudatories of the 
empire. But how — it that this por- 
tion of the empire ſhould be lopped off ſo very 
foon, and be made a ſief of the holy ſee, at a time 
when the popes were ſcarce poſſeſſed of any terri- 
tory, when they were not yet maſters -of Rome, 
and not ſo much as acknowledged as ſovereigns in 
the marquiſate of Ancona, which had been be- 
ſtowed upon them by Otho the Great? This 
tranſaction is as ſurprizing as the conqueſts of the 
Normen gentlemen. The ænigma however is 
thus explained. Pope Leo IX. was defirous to 


have the city of Benevento, which had belonged 


to the princes of the Lombard race, who were 
diſpoſſeſſed by Charlemaign. Accordingly the 
emperor Henry III. gave him this city, in ex- 
change for the fief of Bamberg in Germany: and 


the ſupreme pontifs are maſters of Benevento to- 


this day by virtue of that donation. The new 
Norman princes were dangerous neighbours: no 
conqueſts were ever made without committing 
great injuſtice and oppreſſion: the Normans were 
guilty of acts of this kind; and the emperor 


would have been glad to have lefs powerful vaſſals. 


Leo IX. having excommunicated them firſt, pre- 


pared to fight them with an army of Germans, 


which Henry III. fent to his aſſiſtance. Hiſto- 
rians do not inform us what manner the ſpoils 
were to be divided: thev only tell us that the ar- 


my was numerous, that the pope joined them with 


Italian troops, who inliſted with as much eager- 
neſs as if it was a holy war, and that among the 
officers there were a great many biſhops. The 

Normans, 


K „ erred th rs wo 2 


A an S,H4 5 -& 


- ww «A ww A — 82 wy 


and Sicily by a few gentlemen of Normandy. 233 


Normans, who had been always victorious in ſmall 
numbers, were not above a fourth part fo nume- 
rous as the pope's troops; but they were inured 
to war. Robert Guiſcard, with his brother Hum- 
phrey, and Richard count of Averſa, each at the 
head of a well diſciplined corps, cut the German 
army in pieces, and put the Italians to flight. The 

pe retired to Civitade * in the Capitanata f near 
the field of battle; the Normans purſued him, took 
him priſoner, and carried him to that very city of 
Benevento, which had been the firſt cauſe of this 
quarrel, 8 thr 

Rome has made a ſaint of this pope Leo IX. 
probably becauſe he repented his having been 
the cauſe of ſuch effuſion of blood, and havi 
led ſuch a number of eccleſiaſties to battle. It is 
very certain he repented what he had done, eſpe- 
cially when he ſaw with what reſpect his conque- 
rors treated him, and how inflexible they were in 
detaining him priſoner a whole year. They re- 
ſtored Benevento to the Lombard princes, and it 
was not till after the extinction of this famĩly that 
the popes took poſſeſſion of this city. 

We may eaſily imagine that —— were 
more incenſed againſt the emperor, who had:ſent 
a formidable army to cruſh them, than againſt 
the pope who commanded. it. They found their 
only way was to get rid of the pretenſions or 
rights of the two emperors, who preſſed them on 
each fide. They continued their conqueſts, and 
made themſelves maſters of Calabria and Capua 
during the minority of Henry IV. and while the 


* This, I ſuppoſe, is Ci A mare, 
7 A province of the kingdom of Naples. | 


Greeks. 


EO PO TRE Ge > wn -- 2 de 


The conqueſt of Naples Ch. xxx. 


Greeks were under a government ſtill weaker than 
a minority, = 

It was the ſons of Tancred of Hauteville that 
ſubdued Calabriaz and it was the deſcendants of 
the firſt deliverers that conquered Capua. Theſe 
two. victorious. dynaſties had none of thoſe dif. 
putes, by which the arms of conquerors are ſo 
often weakened and divided. The uſe of hi- 
ſorz calls upon me here to obſerve, that Richard 
of Averſa, who conquered Capua, cauſed him- 
ſelf to be crowned with the ſame ceremonies of 
conſecration and the holy oil, as were practiſed 
at the coronation of Clovis. - The dukes of Be- 
nevento were always crowned in that manner; 
and Richard's ſucceſſors took care to have the 
ſame ceremony performed. Nothing can be a 
ſtronger proof that every prince eſtabliſhes cuſ- 
toms according to his own fancy, 

Robert Guiſcard, duke of Apulia and Cala- 
bria, Richard count of Averſa and Capua, both 
poſſeſſed of their ſovereignties by the right of 
conqueſt, would fain be 1ntirely independent of 
the emperors : for this end they had recourſe to a 
meaſure, which private perſons uſed frequently to 
take in thoſe times of confuſion and rapine, in or- 
der to preſerve their eſtates; this was to give 
them to the church by way of an offering, after 
which they enjoyed them in peace, only paying 
a ſmall duty or acknowledgment. Such was the 
reſource of the weak in the tempeſtuous govern- 
ments of Italy. The Normans, though power- 
ful princes, made uſe of this as a ſafeguard againſt 
the emperors, whoſe power might poſſibly increaſe. 
Robert Guiſcard and Richard of Capua, when 
excommunicated by pope Leo IX, detained him 

in 


and Sicily by a few gentlemen of Normandy. 235 


in confinement; and theſe very conquerors, when 
excommunicated. by Nicholas II. thought fit to 
pay him homage. * | 


* 


The two princes therefore reſolved to put under 1059. 


the protection of the church, not only all they had 
hitherto taken or conquered, but whatever they 
might take or conquer hereafter. Duke Robert 
did homage to Nicholas II. for Sicily, which 


was not yet in his poſſeſſion: he declared him- 


ſelf a feudatory of the holy ſee for all his do- 
minions, and promiſed. a duty of twelve deniers 
for each plough, which was a great deal. This 
homage was an act of political devotion, and 
might be looked upon in the ſame light as the St. 
Peter's pence, which England uſed to pay to the 
holy ſee, or as the two pounds of gold paid to 
the ſame ſee by the firſt Kings of Portugal, or in 
ſhort as the voluntary ſubmiſſion of ſo many other 
kingdoms to the church. Slot 975 1 
According to all the feudal” laws eftabliſh- 
ed in Europe, thoſe princes being vaſlals of 
the empire, could not chuſe another lord para- 
mount. This would be rendering them guilty of 
rebellion towards the emperor, and'giving him. a 
juſt cauſe to confiſcate their eftates. But the quar- 
rels which enſued between the church and the em- 
pire, and eſpecially the great power of the Nor- 
man princes, prevented the emperors from exer- 
ciling their prerogatives. Theſe conquerors at 
the ſame time that they made themſelves the 


pope's vaſſals, were become: protectors and of- 


tentimes maſters of their new lord paramount. 
Duke Robert from an enemy of the church being 
grown its defender, received a ſtandard from the 
pope, and croſſed over to Sicily wirh his brother 
. g N Roger: 


236 "The conqueſt of Naples Ch. xxx, 
Roger: they ſoon wreſted this iſtand from the 
Greeks and the Arabs, between whom it had been 
divided ; and both nations made their ſubmiſſion 

1067, to the two brothers, 'on condition of being ſuffered 
to retain their cuſtoms and religion. 

Their aim was now to complete the conqueſt 
of all that country, which now conſtitutes the 
kingdom of Naples. There ſtill remained 
the princes of Salerno, deſcendants of thoſe who 
had fitſt invited the Normans to that coun- 
try. Duke Robert at length diſpoſſeſſed theſe 

alſo; he took Salerno from them; and they 
ſheltered themſelves at Rome under the pro- 
tection of Gregory VII. that ſame pope, who 
uſed to make the emperors tremble. Robert, 
vaſſal, and defender of the church, purſued them 
thither: Oregory VII. excommunicates him: 
the fruit of the excommunication is the con- 
— of the whole dutchy of Benevento, which 
obert ſeixes after the deceaſe of the laſt duke of 

the Lombard race. 

Gregory VII. whom we ſhall ſee behave with 
ſuch haughtineſs and pride to emperors and kings, 
was all complaiſance to the excommunicated Ro- 

1077. bert. He granted him abſolution, and in return 
he received the city of Benevento, which has cver 
ſince continued in poſſeſſion of the holy ſee. 

| _ Svon after broke out the violent quarrels be- 
twixt the emperor Henry IV. and Gregory VII. 
of which we ſhall take more particular notice 

1084. hereafter. Henry had made himſelf maſter of 
Rome, and was beſieging the caſtle, ſince called 
by the name of St. Angelo, to which the pope 
was retired. Robert hurries away from Dalmatia, 
where he was making new conqueſts, raiſes the 


ſiege 


as @ ar a... cc coco a . 


ay a e 


wy os 


<q! QO 2 2 


and Sicily by a few gentlemen of Normandy. 237 
ſiege of the caſtleSt. Angelo in ſpite of the Germans 
and Romans both united, makes himſelf maſter of 
the pope's perſon, and'carries him with him to 
Salerno, where this pope, who had depoſed ſo many 
kings, died the captive of-a Norman gentleman, ; 
who was at the ſame time his protector. | 

We muſt not be at all ſurprized at ſuch anum- 
ber of romances, in which we are told of knight fi 
errants, who roſe to be potent ſovereigns by their N 
exploits, and married into Imperial families. 
This was exactly the caſe of Robert Guiſcard, 
and what happened more than once, as we ſhall 
ſee, at the time of the Cruſades. Robert mar- 
ried his daughter to Conſtantine, ſon of Michael 
Ducas emperor of Conſtantinople. This did not 
prove a happy marriage. Michael being ſoon 
after depoſed, Robert was determined to avenge 
the cauſe of his daughter and ſon-in-law, and to 
dethrone the new emperor of the Eaſt, after he had 
humbled the emperor of the Weſt, 

The court of Conftantinople ſeemed to- be 
agitated by continual ſtorms. Michael Ducas 
was caſt from the throne by Nicephorus ſurnamed 
Botoniates: and Conſtantine, Robert's ſon- in- 
law, was made an eunuch, At length Alexius 
Comnenus, who had. afterwards ſo'much reaſon, 
to complain of the cruſaders, aſcended the throne., 
During theſe revolutions Robert was advancing 
through Dalmatia and Macedonia, and had al- 1023. 
ready filled Conſtantinople with terror: Bohe- 
mond, his fon by his firſt wife, and who was after- 
wards a celebrated cruſader, attended him in this 
expedition, to conquer an empire. By this it appears 
that Alexius Comnenus had good teaſon to be afraid 
of the cruſaders, ſince Bohemond began his exploits 
with attempting to dethrone him. 'The 


Of Sicily in particular Ch. xxxi. 


58 


x35 The death of Robert in the iſle of Corfu, put 


| 
| 
' 
| 
| 
| 
| 
1 
| 
Hf 
: 
z 
Li 


© - 


— . . , . — — 


an end to his ſchemes. Princeſs Anna Comnena, 
daughter of the emperor Alexius, and who wrote 
part of this hiſtory, looks upon Robert in no better 
light than a free booter, and expreſſes great indig- 
nation at his preſuming to marry his daughter to 
an emperor's ſon. She ought to have remembered 
that even the Imperial hiſtory abounded with ex- 
amples of extraofdinary elevations of fortune, and 
that every thing in this world muſt yield to force 
and power. . | 


0000000000000 
5 CHAP. XXXI. 


Of Sicily in particular and the Legatine power in 
ee en eee | 
HE notion of conquering the empire of 
Conſtantinople, vaniſhed together with 
Robert: but his family were more 2 ſettled 
in their poſſeſſions in Italy. His brother, count 
Roger, remained maſter of Sicily; and his ſon, 
duke Roger, continued in poſſeſſion of almoſt all 
that country, which now goes by the name of 
the kingdom of Naples. Bohemond, his other 
ſon, went afterwards to conquer Antioch, after 
he had in vain- endeavoured to divide the domi- 
nions of his brother duke Roger. 
But how comes it that neither count Roger 
ſovereign of Sicily, nor his nephew Roger duke 
of Apulia, took upon them the title of kings? 
Furz muſt be time for every, thing. Robert 
3uiſcard the firſt conqueror had been men . 
| | uke 


in; — n T3 ws 0 8 


ñu:Rl e me (as a A a 


1 


t 


e 


and the Legatine power in that iſland. 
duke by pope Nicholas II. and his brother Roger 


had received the inveſtiture of Robert Guiſcard 


as count of Sicily, Theſe ceremonies confer- 
red no more than a bare title, and made no 
addition of power. But this count of Sicily ac- 
quired a right, which is ſtill preſerved, and which 


no king in Europe ever enjoyed: he was pope 
of that iſland, | | 


* 


The biſhops of Rome had been in poſſeſſion 
of ſending miniſters to- every part of Chriſten- 
dom, who were called Legates a /atere*, and 
exerciſed juriſdiction over all the churches, ex- 
acting tenths, conferring benefices, and extend- 


ing the pontifical power, as far as conjunc- 
tures and the intereſts of kings would permit. 


Temporal concerns, generally intermixt with 


ſpiritualities, were ſubject to their juriſdiction; 


and they even went ſo far as to take cogni- 
zance of civil cauſes. Provided there was but 
the leaſt ſpiritual mixture in any worldly affair, 


as in marriages, wills, and promiſes by oath, 


it was ſure to belong to their court. The 
were proconſuls, whom the eccleſiaſtical emperor 
of Chriſtendom, ſent to every part of the weſ- 


tern world. It was by this policy, that Rome 
though impotent, though rent by perpetual factions, 
enſlaved by the Germans, and expoſed to all the 


ſcourges that afflict mankind, continued neverthe- 


* This word originally fignified a perſon who waited on the 


pope, and whom he ſent to any part upon ſome particular com- 
miſſion: in the ſame ſenſe almoſt as the perſons deputed by 
the kings of France to viſit the provinces, were called Lateralcs 
or de Latere miſſi, becauſe they were fingled out from the officers 


belonging to the houſhold, But now the title of Legate a 


= is given only to cardinals, who are ſent by the pope as am- 


adors extraordinary to crowned heads, 
= leſs 


239 


- - 4 
ESE —— — 
2 1 2 
* 
— N 


240 / Sicily in particular Ch. xxxi. 
leſs the miſtreſs of the world. Hence the hiſtory F 
of Rome is the hiſtory of all nations. 

As ſoon as Roger had wreſted Sicily from the 
Mahometans and Greeks, and eſtabliſhed the Latin 
church, Urban II. ſent a legate to that iſland, 
This of all countries ſeemed to ſtand the moſt 

in need of a legate, who ſhould ſettle the hie- 
rarchy among a people, one half of whom were 
. the other half of the Greek com- 
munion. Vet this proved the only province, 
from whence the legates were proſcribed. Count 
Roger the benefactor of the Latin Church, while 
he reſtored Sicily to her communion, could not 
bear to have a king ſent, under the name of a 
legate, into an iſland ſubdued by his arms. 

Pope Urban II. intent upon the ſcheme of the 
cruſades, and willing to keep fair with a family 
of heroes, whoſe aſſiſtance would be ſerviceable 
in this enterprize, granted a bull in 1098, the laſt 
year of his life, to count Roger, whereby he re- 
called his legate, and-created Roger and his ſuc- 
ceſſors hereditary legates of the holy ſee in vicily, 
inveſting them with all the rights and privileges 
of that dignity, which was at the ſame time both 
ſpiritual and temporal. Such is the famous pre- 
rogative called the Sicilian monarchy, a prero- 
— annexed to that kingdom, and which 
ucceeding popes have attempted to aboliſh, 

| but the kings of Sicily have reſolutely main- 

| tained. If a privilege of this kind is inconſiſtent 
| with the Chriftian hierarchy, it is evident that 

| Urban had no authority to. grant it: if it be a 

| point of diſcipline no way contrary. to religion, 

| it is further evident, that every kingdom has 2 

right to claim it. In the main this privilege is 

. 1 8 nothing 


4 
| 


——— ů —— — ae en 


and the Legaline power in that i/land. 


nothing more than the right which Conſtantine 
and all emperors had to direct the civil admini- 
ſtration of their dominions ; yet of all the Catho- 
lic powers in Europe, there was only one little 
Norman prince, that dared to aſſert this right at 
the gates of Rome. 

The ſon of this count Roger ſucceeded to the 
whole inheritance of the Norman family ; he was 


241 


crowned king of Sicily and Apulia, Naples, 1140, 


which at that time was but a ſmall town, did not 
belong to him, therefore could not give a name 
to the kingdom, It had long maintained itſelf in 
the form of a republic, under a duke who paid 
homage to the emperors of Conſtantinople; and 
hitherto this duke had, by means of preſents, 


_ eſcaped the ambition of the conquering family of 


the Normans. 

This firſt king Roger did homage to the holy 
ſee. At that time there were two popes, one 
the ſon of a Jew named Leon, who took the 
name of Anacletus, and whom St. Bernard calls 
Judaicum ſobolem, a Jewiſh breed; the other 
was called Innocent II. King Roger acknow- 
ledged Anacletus, becauſe the emperor Lotharius 
II. acknowledged Innocent; and it was to this 
Anacletus that he paid his empty homage. 

The emperors conſidered theſe Norman con- 
querors in no other light than as uſurpers. Hence 
St. Bernard, who was concerned in all the public 
affairs of popes and kings, wrote againſt Roger 
as well as againſt this ſon of a Jew, who had ob- 
tained the tiara by bribery ; the one, ſays he, has 
uſurped the chatr of St. Peter, the ather has uſurped 
Sicily, and it is Cæſar's buſineſs to puniſb him. 


. . M King 


242 


x 137. 


1139 


Of Sicily in particular Ch. xxxi. 


King Roger ſupported Anacletus, who was 
ſtill acknowledged at Rome. Lotharius avail- 
ing himſelf of this opportunity to deſpoil the 
Normars of their conqueſts, marches towards 
Apulia along with pope Innocent IT. It ſeems 
that the Normans had good reaſon not to depend 
on the emperors, but to ſettle a barrier between 
them. Roger had ſcarce aſcended the throne, 
when he was in danger of being ſtripped of all 
his dominions. He had laid ſiege to Naples, 
when the emperor advanced towards him : they 
fought different battles; Roger was defeated, and 
loſt almoſt all his poſſeſſions on the continent, 
Innocent II. excommunicated him, and joined 
in the purſuit. St. Bernard, who accompanied 
the emperor and the pope, in vain endeavoured 
to compromiſe matters; Roger was obliged to 
retire into Sicily. In the mean time the emperor 
died, which produced a total change of affairs. 
King Roger and his ſon recovered their dominions, 
Pope Innocent II. having been at length recog- 
nized at Rome, entered into a league with the 
princes, on whom Lotharius had beſtowed thoſe 
dominions; and continuing the implacable ene- 
my of king Roger he put himſelf, like Leo IX. at 
the head of an army, but was defeated and taken 
priſoner like that very ſame Leo. In this ſitua- 
tion how is he to act? Juſt like his predeceſſors ; 
he grants abſolutions and inveſtifures, and after he 
had called the emperor to his aid againſt the 
Norman family, he now engages this very fami- 
ly to deſend him againſt the empire. 

Soon after this tranſaction, the king made 
himſelf maſter of Naples, and of whatever little 
territory was ſtill remaining to render his —4 

om, 


and the Legatine power .in that ifland, 


dom, from Gaieta to Brindiſi, quite compact. 
Thus the monarchy was eſtabliſhed in its preſent 
form; Naples quietly became the capital of the 


kingdom, and the liberal arts began in ſome - 


meaſure to revive once more in thoſe fruitful 
Provinces, 

After having ſhewn in what manner a few 
gentlemen of Coutance founded the kingdom of 
Naples and Sicily, we now come to a peer of 
France, the duke of Normandy, who made the 
conqueſt of England. It is amazing to think of 
this vaſt multitude of invaſions and emigrations, 
which continued from the end of the fourth cen- 
tury to the beginning of the fourteenth, and 
ended with the Cruſades, There has been a 
mixture of nations all over Europe, and there 
is hardly a country that has not had its uſurpers, 


77 OK HK 


CHAP, MAI. 
The conqueſt of England by William duke of Normandy. 


HILE the ſons of Tancred of Haute- 

ville founded kingdoms at ſuch a diſ- 
tance, their lords the dukes of Normandy ac- 
quired one that is become more conſiderable 
than the two Sicilies. The Bri:ons notwith- 
ſtanding their bravery were deſtined to be 
conſtantly governed by foreigners. After the 
death of Alfred, which happened in the year 
goo, England relapſed into confuſion and bar- 
bariſm, The antient Anglo-Saxons, its former 


M 2 conque- 


243 


244 Canqueft of England Ch. xxxii. 


conquerors, and the Danes its new uſurpers, 
conſtantly diſputed the poſſeſſion of the king- 
dom; and freſh Daniſh pirates frequently came 
to partake of the ſpoils. Theſe pirates conti- 
nued ſo formidable, and the Engliſh ſo weak, 
that about the year 1000, the latter had no 
other way of getting rid of the former, but by 
paying them forty-eight thouſand pounds ſter- 
ling: and to raiſe this ſum, a tax was impoſed, 
which laſted for a long time in England; like moſt 
other taxes which continue to be raiſed, after the 
occaſion ceaſes for which they were firſt impoſed, 
This humbling tribute was called Danegelt, or 
Daniſh money. 

Canute king of Denmark, -who was ſurnamed 
the Great, though he only diſtinguiſhed himſelf 
by acts of great cruelty, reduced both Denmark 
and England under his dominion in the year 1017. 
The native Engliſh were then treated like ſlaves; 
and the authors of thoſe times confeſs, that when 
an Engliſhman met a Dane, he was obliged to 
ſtop till the Dane had paſſed by. 

The family of Canute being extinct in the 

ear 1041, the ſtates of the kingdom recovered 
their liberty, and conferred the crown on Ed- 
ward, a deſcendant of the Anglo-Saxons, who 
was called the Saint and Confeflor, One of the 
great faults, or great misfortunes of this king, 
was his having no children by his wife Edi- 
tha, daughter of the moſt powerful lord in the 
kingdom: he hated his wife, as well as his 
own mother, for reaſons of ſtate, and removed 
them both from his court, The barrenneſs of 
this marriage contributed to his cannonization : 


for it was pretended that he had made a vow of 
chaſtity ; 


by William duke of Normandy. 


chaſtity; a vow raſh in a huſband, and abſurd 
in a king who wanted heirs ; and this vow, if 
real, prepared new chains for England. 

You ſtill perceive that the manners and cuſ- 
toms of thoſe times had not the leaſt reſemblance 
to ours. William duke of Normandy, was ſo 
far from having any right to that kingdom, that 
he had not even any to Normandy, if a right is 
conſtituted by birth; for his father, duke Robert, 
who was never married, had him by the daughter 
of a ſkinner of Falaiſe, whom hiſtory calls Arlet, 
or Harlot, a word that ſignified then, and ſtill 
ſignifies in the Engliſh language, corcubine, or 
miſtreſs. This baſtard, who was aeknowledged 
in his father's life-time as the lawful heir, main- 
tained himſelf by his dexterity and valour againſt 
all thoſe who diſputed his dutchy : he reigned 
peaceably in Normandy, and received homage 
from Britany; when Edward the Confeſſor dy- 
ing, he laid claim to the kingdom of England. 
The right of ſucceſſion was not then eſtabliſhed 
in any ſtate in Europe: the crown of Germa- 
ny was elective ; Spain was divided between the 
Chriſtians and Muſſulmen; Lombardy every day 
changed its maſter ; and the race of Charlemaign 
dethroned in France, made it evident what force 
could do againſt the right of blood. Edward the 
Confeſſor had not enjoyed the throne by inheri- 
tance; and Harold his ſucceſſor was not of the 
ſame family; but he had the moſt indiſputable 
of all rights, that of the ſuffrages of the whole na- 
tion. William the Baftard had neither the right 
of election, nor that of inheritance, nor was he 
ſupported by any party in England. He pretend- 
ed, that in a former voyage he had made to this 

M 3 iſland 


2 * > ” o * a * wy 
— N . N RK — 3% ne ts — 
. m a3 „ 9 Lag. 4 * 7 r RISE "at. £ 2 0 2 2 
2 . as = = us "___ * 8 S - hd D N 2 * 1 8 eie 
1 7 33 l p © oy vs * 9 * PRE 7.% 5,» ** = 
— — — 8 . F 2 | ww 2 ESE>. A . e p 25 — 

EE TEST da CS S's — | bh ad > 3 p ( 

. ö $94 at + Alta & 1 r . 
J ˙ !A 2 8 
1 . 2 * Rr <> . 

+ * 3: . N 


— 28 "A OP _ T , 
_ 0 rn. . 8 
— 7 —_ mW = 22 * y 4 3 4. 7 
n 8 a 
r — | 


* 
LA 

a" 
mg 


ry nee — . 4 
4 II * FI. a 2 


. 
* N ITY W 
* LE 


CA * 
"= _ 
23 a 
<> . . 
x . 


246 Conqueſt of England Ch. xxxii. 
iſland, king Edward had deviſed the crown to him 
by a will; which, however, nobody had ſeen, 
He alſo pretended, that he had formerly delivered 
Harold from priſon, and that this prince had 
yielded up to him his right to the crown of Eng- 
land. Theſe weak reaſons were, however, ſup— 
ported by a ſtrong army. 

The barons of Normandy, who aſſembled in 
the form of a diet, refuſed to grant their duke 
money for this expedition; becauſe, if he ſhould + 
not ſucceed, Normandy would be impoveriſhed ; 
and his ſucceſs would render it a province to Eng- 
land: yet many Normans hazarded their fortune 
with the duke. One ſingle nobleman, named 
Fitz-Oſborn, equipped forty veſſels at his own 
expence; the earl of Flanders, William's fa- 
ther-in-law, aſſiſted him with money; even the 
pope engaged in his intereſt, and excommuni— 
cated all who oppoſed his deſigns. In ſhort, he 
ſet out from St. Valery with a numerous fleet; but 
the exact number of the veſlels and ſoldiers is not 

og. known. He landed on the coaſt of Suſſex, and 

14, ſoon after was fought in that county the famous 

20. battle of Haftings, which alone decided the fate 
of England. The Engliſh with king Harold at 
their head, and the Normans under the conduct 
of their duke, engaged for twelve hours together. 
The cavalry who fought in armour, and began 
every where elſe to be looked upon as the ſtrength 
of an army, do not appear to have been employed 
in this battle. The chiefs themſelves were on 
foot; and Harold and his two brothers being ſlain 
in the engagement, the conqueror marched to- 
wards London with a banner, conſecrated by tie 


pope, carried before him. Under this 2 
a 


by William duke of Normandy. 


all the biſhops met, and united in his favour : 
they came to the gates, attended by the magi- 
ſtrates of the city, and offered him the crown, 
which they could not refuſe to the conqueror. 
William knew as well how to govern as to 
conquer: ſeveral rebellions extinguiſhed, Daniſn 
invaſions fruſtrated, and rigorous laws ſeverely 
executed, ſignalized his reign. The antient Pri- 
tons, Danes, and Anglo-Saxons, were all in- 
volved in the fame ſlavery. The Normans, who 
had helped him to obtain the victory, ſhared the 
lands of the conquered ; and from hence came 
all the Norman families, whoſe deſcendants, or 
at leaſt their names, ſtill ſubſiſt in England. He 
cauſed an exact inventory to be taken of all the 
goods belonging to his ſubjects, of what nature 
ſoever they were; and it is pretended, that from 
thence he took advantage to raiſe in England a re- 
venue of four hundred thouſand pounds ſterling 
which at preſent would make about five millions 
ſterling, and is above a hundred millions of French 
livres. It is evident that the hiſtorians mult, in this 
inſtance, be miſtaken; for England, Scotland, and 
Ireland, do not at preſent raiſe ſo large a revenue, 
if we deduct what is levied for the payment of the 
debts of the nation. This is however certain, that 
William aboliſhed all the laws of the country, in 
order to introduce thoſe of Normandy. He or- 
dered that the lawyers ſhould plead in the Nor- 
man tongue; and all the public acts were wrote in 
that language, till the reign of Edward the third. 
He was reſolved, that the language of the con- 
querors ſhould be that of the country, and ſchools 
were eſtabliſhed to teach it in all the cities and 
borough towns in the kingdom, This language 


M 4 Was 


[ 
4 
- 7 
5 
* 
. 
* 
F. 
2 
4 
* 
F 
1 


— — 


p » > "4 L at 

. # - =" = — 1 — = 

eee 

* * - ry o 
rr 


n 
— SP 
8 


** 


* e — 
* — A — — 2 
—— . r 
F 8 27 3 


248 


Conqueſt of England Ch. xxxii, 


was French, mixed with a little Daniſh ; a bar- 
barous dialect, that had not the leaſt advantage 
above that ſpoken in England. It is ſaid, that he 
not only treated the conquered nation with ſeve- 
Tity, but alſo affected a capricious and whimſical 
kind of tyranny: and they mention as an example 
of it, the law called convre feu, or curfeu ; by 
which the people were obliged, at the found of 
a bell, to extinguiſh their fires at eight o'clock 
in the evening. But this law, fo far from being 
tyrannical, was only an antient regulation, eſta- 
bliſhed in almoſt all the towns of the north; and 
which has been long obſerved in monaſteries. The 
houſes were built with wood, and the fear of fire 
was then one of the moſt important objects of the 
concern of the magiſtrates. 

He is alſo reproached with having deſtroyed all 
the villages, within the compaſs of fifteen leagues, 


to make a foreſt, in which he might enjoy the 


pleaſure of hunting. Such an action is too abſurd 
to be probable. Hiſtorians do not conſider, that 


a new plantation would require, at leaſt, twenty 


years to render it a foreſt fit for hunting. It is 
{aid, that this foreſt was planted in the year 1050, 
when he was ſixty years old; what probability is 
there then, that a man of ſenſe ſhould at that aze, 
deſtroy villages, to ſow a tract of land of fiftcen 
leaves in circumference with acorns, in hopes of 
one day hunting there ? 

The conqueror of England was the terror of 
Philip I. king of France; who, when it was too 
late, ſtrove to humble a vaſſal grown ſo powerful, 
and invaded Maine, which at that time depended 
on Normandy ; but William crofled the fea, re- 


took Maine, and obliged the king of why. 
c 


ſuc for a peace, 


by William duke of Normandy. 

The pretenſions of the court of Rome never 
appeared in a more ſingular manner, than in 
its behaviour to this princs. Pope Grego- 
ry VIL. took advantage of the time in which 
he was engaged in a war with France, to de- 


mand his paying him homage for the kingdom of 


England. This homage was founded on the an- 
tient Peter-pence, which a part of England pay- 
ed to the church of Rome, amounting to about 
three French livres, or two ſhillings and nine- 
pence of the preſent Engliſh money,. for each 
houſe : too large an alms for the pope not to con- 
ſider it as a tribute. William the conqueror 
cauſed the pope to be told, that he might poſſi- 
bly continue the alms; but inſtead of paying ho- 
mage, he would forbid his people in England to 
acknowledge any other pope than whom he thould 
approve, Thus Gregory the ſeventh's propoſal 
became ridiculous, by its being too preſump- 
tuous. This is the fame Gregory VII. who 
overturned Europe, to raiſe the ſacerdotal dignity 
above that of the empire: but before we men- 
tion that memorable quarrel, and the cruſades 
which began at the ſame time, it is neceſſary to 
give a ſhort view of the ſtate of the other coun» 
tries of Europe. 


eee Rai Ref Ro Af Res 


CH AP. XXXIII. 
State of Europe in the tenth and eleventh centuries, 


R 


USSTA had embraced Chriſtianity at the 
end of the eighth century. The women 
M were 


8 . Dh td molded en de a” an 
. . > EY". 3 * * FG > - 5 +8 

WE IST OE n Foy * — 

n ; 


* % we 
4 2- 


1 
3 1 
* — 
4 5 . 
p 
, . 
4 - 
. 
#7 


> 7 
* * 
8 8 


8 
"ue * 
4 F< 


To 


- = 
* > 1 . 
. 25 — 2 


” r * = . ” 2 
8 r F ">= 
2 SO TITEL 1 20T I 
Gas he ie n 


Te - 2 66 rat F Ls <8 uy 4 
* > : þ $1 3 
. a - SI REL he 7 — 
2 * * . 8 2 ws 
" PP . ——— _— 
. —— 
44 LORE bs 
—_— — mos _ l 
. — — 


* 


* 8 bu. 0+ © opal mar 
„ 


"A247 


to 


250 


The ſtate of Europe Ch. xxxili. 


were deſtined to convert kingdoms: a ſiſter of 
the emperors Baſilius and Conſtantine married the 
father of the czar Jaraſlau, whom TI have already 
mentioned, and prevailed on her huſband to be 
baptized. The Ruſſians, who were ſlaves to their 
princ2, imitated his example ; but they adopted no- 
thing from the Greek church except its ſuperſtitions, 

About the ſame time, a woman alſo brought 
Poland to embrace Chriſtianity ; Miciſlas, duke 
of Poland, being converted by his wife, who was 
ſiſter to the duke of Bohemia, I have already 
obſerved, that the Bulgarians received the faith 
in the ſame manner. Giſelle, ſiſter to the empe- 
ror Henry, converted her huſband, the king of 
Hungary, in the firſt year of the eleventh century, 
Thus it is a certain truth, that half of Europe owes 
its Chriſtianity to women, 

The Swedes, to whom it was preached in the 
ninth century, were again become idolaters: Bo- 
hemia and all the country on the north of the Elbe 
renounced Chriſtianity in the year 1013: all the 
eaſtern coaſt of the Baltic ſea was inhabited by pa- 
gans: in 1047, Hungary returned to paganiſm: 
but all theſe nations were even much farther from 
being poliſhed and civilized than they were from 
being Chriſtians. 

Sweden, which was probably for a long time 
exhauſted of its inhabitants by its antient emigra- 
tions, with which Europe had been overflowed, 
appeared in the cighth, ninth, tenth, and eleventh 
centuries, in a manner buried in barbariſm; and 
being unengaged in war, and without any com- 
merce with its neighbours, it had no ſhare in any 
great event, and on this account was probably the 
more happy. 


Poland, 


in the tenth and eleventh centuries. 


Poland, which was much more barbarous than 
it was Chriſtian, preſerved till the thirteenth cen- 
tury all the cuſtoms of the antient Sarmatians; for 
they killed the children that were born imperfect, 
and the old men that were paſt their labour. From 
this account we may form a judgment of the reſt 
of the North. 

The empire of Conſtantinople was neither more 
nor leſs extended than we have ſeen it in the ninth 
century. In the Welt it defended itſelf againſt the 
Bulgarians, and on the Eaſt, North, and South 
againſt the Turks and Arabians. 

We have ſeen in general the ſtate of Italy : 

private lords enjoyed all the country from Rome 
to the Calabrian ſea; and the Normans had the 
greateſt part, Florence, Milan, and Pavia, were 
governcd by their magiſtrates, under the counts 
or dukes nominated by the emperors : Bologna 
indeed enjoyed a ſtate of greater freedom, 
The houſe of Maurienne, from which the dukes 
of Savoy, now kings of Sardinia, are deſcended, 
began to make a figure. It poſſeſſed, as a hef of 
the empire, the hereditary county of Savoy and 
Maurienne, ever ſince Humbert with the white 
hands,. the ſtock of this family, had obtained, in 
the year 888, that ſmall part of the kingdom of 
Burgundy, | 

The Swiſs and Griſons, likewiſe detached from 
the ſame kingdom,. were under the government of 
bailiffs nominated by the emperor. 

Two maritime cities of Italy began to ariſe, not 
by thoſe ſudden invaſions, which have formed the 
rights and prerogatives of almoſt all the princes, 
who have paſled in review before us; but by a 
wiſe induſtry, which alſo ſoon degenerated into the 


M. 6 ſpirit 


251 


252 


The ſtate of Europe, Ch. xxxili. 


ſpirit of conqueſt. Theſe two cities were Ge- 
noa and Venice. Genoa, celebrated in the time 
of the Romans, regarded Charlemaign as her 
reſtorer ; for this emperor rebuilt the city ſome 
time after it had been deſtroyed by the Goths : 
it was governed by counts under Charlemaign, 
and his firſt deſcendants ; but in the tenth centu- 
ry it was ſacked by the Mahometans, and almoſt 
all its citizens led into flavery. However, as 
this was a trading port, it was ſoon repeopled, 
and the traffic, which had made it flouriſh, ſerv- 
ed to re-eſtabliſh its grandeur: it then became a 
republic, and took Corſica from the Arabians. 
The popes required a tribute for that iſland, not 
only becauſe they had been heretofore poſſeſſed of 
patrimonies in that country, but moreover be- 
cauſe they pretended to the ſovefeign juriſdiction 
over all kingdoms-conquered from infidels. The 
Genoeſe paid this tribute at the beginning of the 
eleventh century; but ſoon after they freed them. 
felves from it under the pontificate of Lewis II. 
At laſt, their ambition encreaſing with their riches, 
from being merchants, they reſolved to become 
conquerors. $ 

Ihe city of Venice, which w:s far from being 
ſo antient as Genoa, affected the frivolous honour 
of having enjoyed a more antient liberty, while it 
poſſeſſed the ſolid glory of a much ſuperior power. 
This was at firſt the retreat of fiſhermen and a 
few fugitives, who ſettled there in the beginning 
of the fifth century, when the Goths ravaged 
Italy: there was then no city, and only a icw 
huts on the Rialto, The name of Venice was 
not then known; and this Rialto was ſo far from 


being free, that for thirty years it was only a bo- 


rough 


in the eleventh and twelfth centuries, 


rough belonging to Padua, which governed it by 
its conſuls : but the viciſſitude of human affairs af- 
terwards laid Padua under the yoke of Venice. 

There is not the leaſt proof, that Venice en- 
joyed an acknowledged liberty under the kings 
of the Lombards: it is much more probable, that 
the inhabitants then lay forgotten in their marſhes, 

The Rialto, and the little neighbouring iſlands, 
did not begin, till the year 709, to be governed by 
their own magiſtrates. They were then indepen- 
dent of Padua, and were conſidered as a republic. 

In the year 709 they had their firſt doge, who 
was only a tribune of the people, elected by the 
citizens. Several families, who gave their votes 
to this firſt doge, ſtill fubſiſt: theſe are the moſt 
antient nobles in Europe, 'without exception ; and 
ſufficiently prove, that nobility may be acquired 
without poſſeſſing a caſtle, or purchaſing patents 
of ſovereign princes. 

Heraclea was the firſt ſeat of this republic til] 
the death of its third doge, and it was not till the 
end of the ninth century that theſe iſlanders, re- 
tiring farther into their lagunes, gave to this aſ- 
ſemblage of little iſlands, which formed a town, 
the name of Venice, from the name of that coaſt 
which was called Terræ Venetorum. As the inha- 
bitants of theſe marſhes could not ſubſiſt without 
commerce, neceſſity was the origin of their power, 
It is not yet certainly decided, whether this repub- 
lic was even then intirely independent; for we 
find, that Berenger, who had been for ſome time 
acknowledged emperor in Italy, granted the doge, 
in the year 950, the privilege of coining money: 
and even theſe doges were obliged to ſend annu- 
ally to the emperors, by way of rent or ſervice, a 

| mantle 


253 


— "PIPE 
"IM" TS 
** 


2 - 
* * — * 2 - — 
* 9 1 \ 4 G * 1 
n * » . *% 2 En N * * * — * — 
_ ST? > He: r — TP 2 
. c nr Re as 


: 2 — — r 
n 
rr ; 


254 


Of Spain Ch. xxxiv. 


mantle of cloth of gold; but Otho 1II. in the 
year 998, excuſed them from paying this petty 
kind of tribute. Yet theſe ſlight marks of vaſlal- 
lage did not at all leſſen the true power of Venice; 
for while the Venetians paid this mantle to the 
emperors, they acquired, by their money and their 
arms, the province of Iſtria, and almoſt the whole 
coaſt of Dalmatia, Spalatto, Raguſa, and Na- 
renza. Their doge, about the middle of the tenth 
century, aſſumed the title of duke of Dalmatia: 
but Venice was leſs enriched by its conqueſts, than 
by its trade, which even ſurpaſſed that of Genoa 
for while the barons of Germany and France 
were building caſtles, and opprefling the people, 
the Venetians received their money, by furniſh- 
ing them with all the merchandiſes of the Eaſt, 
The ſea was already covered with their veſſels; 
and they enriched themſelves by the ignorance 
and barbariſm of the northern nations of Europe, 


EEEEESSEESE ES $333 34-421 


. . 


Of Spain and the Mahametans of that kingdom, lo 
the beginning of the twelfth century. 


PAIN was fill divided between the Maho- 

metans and Chriſtians : but theſe laſt did not 
poſſeſs a fourth part; and even that was the moſt 
barren corner of all the country. The dominions 
of the Chriſtians were, Aſturia, the princes of 
which took the title of king of Leon; a part of 
old Caſtile, governed by counts; Barcelona, and 
half of Catalonia, alſo ſubject to counts; Navarre, 
which had a king; and a part of Arragon, which 


had been for ſome time united to Navarre. The 
Arabians 


and the Mahometans, Cc. 256 


Arabians poſſeſſed Portugal, Murcia, Andaluſia, 
Valentia, Granada, and Tortoſa; and their do- 
minion extended to the heart of the country, be- 

ond the mountains of Caſtile and Saragoſſa. The 
ans kings conſtantly dwelt at Cordova, 
where they built that large moſque, which has an 
arched roof ſupported by three hundred and ſixty- 
five columns of a very curious marble, and which 
ſtill bears amongſt the Chriſtians the name of 
moſque, notwithſtanding its being uſed as a cathe- 
dral. 

There the arts flouriſhed, while magnificence 
and gallantry reigned at the court of the Mooriſh 
kings, Tournaments, and tiltings, were per 
haps the invention of theſe Arabians; they had 
alſo ſhows and theatres, which, rude as the 
were, proved at leaſt, that other nations had lets 
politeneſs than theſe Mahometans. Cordova 
was the only country in the Weſt where geo- 
metry, aſtronomy, chemeſtry and phyſic were 
cultivated. Sancho the Fat, king of Leon, was 
obliged, in the year 956, to go to Cordova, to 
put himſelf under the care of that famous Arabian 
phyſician, who, on being invited to come to the 
king, reſolved that the king ſhould come to him. 

Cordova is a delightful country, watered by 
the Guadalquivir, where groves of citrons, 
oranges, and pomegranates, perfume the air, 
and every thing invites to effeminacy. Luxury 
and pleaſure at Jaſt corrupted the Mooriſh kings : 
their dominions were, in the tenth century, like 
thoſe of almoſt all the Chriſtian princes, divided 
into little kingdoms; for Toledo, Murcia, Va- 
lencia, and even Hueſca, had their kings. This 
was the proper time for cruſhing this divided 

I power ; 


” 
* 

q 

* 

o 
1* 
* 

: 
— 

5 

| 

* 

7 4 
x 
vp 
1 

it 

2 ; 
\ ' 
1 
— 
Ls, 


* 
| 
5 


— * 
' — ... , 
— —— OO cS:.. T0 — 
"2 1 vo 4 ——— 
— 
no 


Of Spain Ch. xxxiv. 


power: but the Spaniſh Chriſtians were more di- 
vided ſtill; they were continually at war amongſt 
themſelves; they reunited, only to betray each 
other ; and frequently entered into alliances with 
the Muſſulmen. Alfonſo V. king of Leon, in 
the year 1000, even gave his ſiſter Tereſa in 
marriage to ſultan Abdala, king of Toledo. 
Jealouſy produces more crimes among petty 
princes, than among great ſovereigns. War 
alone is capable of deciding the fate of a great 
empire; while ſurpriſals, inſtances of perfidy, 
aſſaſſinations and poiſonings are practiſed by 
neighbouring rivals, who having much ambition, 
and but few means of gratifying it, ſet every en- 
ine to work that can Apply the place of ſtrength. 
Thus at the end of the tenth century, Sancho 
Garcias, count of Caſtile, poiſoned his mother; 
and his ſon Don Garcia was ſtabbed by three 
noblemen of that country, as he was going to 
be married. 
In fine, in the year 1035, Ferdinand, ſon of 
Sancho, king of Navarre and Arragon, reunited 
to his dominions Old Caſtile, which his family 


1036. had inherited by the murder of Don Garcia, to- 


ger with the kingdom of Leon, which he took 
from his brother-in-law whom he ſlew in battle. 

Caſtile then became a kingdom, and Leon was 
only one of its provinces. Ferdinand, how- 
ever, not contented with having deprived his 
brother-in-law of his kingdom and. life,. took 
alſo Navarre from his own brother, whom he 
caufed to be aſſaſſinated in a battle which he 
fought againſt him. This is the Ferdinand on 
whom the Spaniards have beſtowed the name of 
— perhaps to diſhonour a title, too often 

viſhed on uſurpers. ; — 


r 6 3 
FF be Cs a EL Ia 


. 

4 
9 
4 J 
1 
x 
| 
* 
1 
1 
x 
T9 
T! 
3.1 


* thy, way by 
e — i. en * 


and the Mahometans, e. 


His father, Don Sancho, alſo ſurnamed the 
Great, for having ſucceeded to the counts of 
Caſtile, and married one of his ſons to the prin- 
ceſs of the Aſturias, had cauſed himſelf to be 
proclaimed emperor, and Don Ferdinand like- 
wiſe reſolved to aſſume this title. It is certain, 
that there never was, nor can be, a title ſettled 
on ſovereigns, except thoſe which they are will- 
ing to aſſume, and cuſtom has given them. The 
name of emperor every where fiznified the heir 
to the Cxſars, and maſter of the Roman em- 
pire, or at leaſt one who pretended to be fo. It 
is not at all probable then, that this could be 
the diſtinguiſhing title of a prince, whoſe power 
was but il! eſtabliſhed, and who governed only a 
fourth part of Spain. 

The emperor Henry III. and not Henry II. 
as many authors affirm, mortified the pride of 
the Spaniard, by demanding homage of Fer- 
dinand for his little ſtates as fiefs of the empire. 
It is difficult to ſay which was the moſt idle 
pretenſion, that of the German emperor or that 
of Spain: but theſe vain fancies had no effect, 
for the dominions of Ferdinand remained a little 
free kingdom, | 

In the reign of this Ferdinand lived Roderick, 
ſurnamed the Cid, who actually married Chi- 
mene, whoſe father he had murdered. All thoſe 
who know this hiſtory only from the Tragedy, 
ſo celebrated in the laſt age, believe that king 
Ferdinand was in poſſeſſion of Andaluſia. 

The famous exploits of the Cid confiſted at 
firſt in his aſſiſting Don Sancho, Ferdinand's eldeſt 
ſon, to ſtrip his brothers and ſiſters of the inheri- 
tance left them by their father. But Don Sancho 


being 


258 


1073. 


Of Spain Ch. xxxiv. 


being aſſaſſinated in one of theſe unjuſt expeditions, 
his brothers entered again into the poſſeſſion of 
their eſtates. : 

There were then near twenty kings in Spain, 
ſome of whom were Chriſtians and others Ma- 
hometans ; beſides a conſiderable number of in- 
dependent lords, who came on horſeback com- 
pletely armed, and followed by ſeveral *fquires, 
to offer their ſervices to the princes or princeſſes 
at war. This cuſtom, which had already ſpread 
over Europe, was no where in ſuch credit as in 
Spain. The princes, in whoſe cauſe theſe knights 
engaged, girded them with a belt, and preſented 


them with a ſword, with which they lightly 


touched their ſhoulder, The Chriſtian knights 
had other ceremonies at their dubbing, and 
watched their arms before an altar of the virgin 
Mary : but the Muſſulmen were contented with 
girding on a ſcimitar. This was the origin of 
knights errant, and of ſuch numbers of ſingle 
combats ; the moſt celebrated of which was that 
fought after the death of king Sancho, who was 
aſſaſſinated while he was beſieging his ſiſter Ouraca 
in the city of Zamora. Three knights maintained 
the innocence of the Infanta againſt Don Diego 
de Lara, by whom ſhe was accuſed, They 
fought hand to hand, in the preſence of judges 
named by both parties, when Don Diego over- 
threw and killed two of the Infanta's knights ; 
but the horſe of the third having the reins of his 
bridle cut, and carrying his maſter out of the 
liſts, the combat was adjudged to be undecided. 
Of all the knights the Cid diſtinguiſhed him- 
ſelf moſt againſt the Muſſulmen. Many of them 
ranged themſelves under his banner, and all to- 
| gether, 


and the Mahometans, Sc. 259 


gether, with their 'ſquires and horſemen in ar- 
amour,” compoſed an army covered with iron, 
and mounted on the fineſt horſes in the coun- 
try. The Cid conquered more than one petty 
Mooriſh king, and having at laſt fortified him- 
ſelf in the city of Alcaſar,, formed there a little 
ſovereignty. 

. At length he prevailed on his maſter Alfonſo VI. 
king of Old Caſtile, to lay ſiege to the city of Fo- 
ledo, and offered him all his knights for that en- 
terprize. The report of this ſiege, and the Cid's 
reputation, brought many knights and princes 
from France and Italy, particularly Raymond 
count of Toulouſe, and two princes of the blood 
of France, of the branch of Burgundy. 'The 
Mahometan king called Hiaja, was the ſon of one 
of the moſt generous princes, whoſe name has 
been preſerved by hiſtory. Almamon, his father, 

had given an aſylum in Toledo to this very king 
Alfonſo, when perſecuted by his brother Sancho : 
they had lived a long time together in the moſt 
intimate friendſhip; and Almamon was ſo far 
from detaining him, when' after the death of 
Sancho he became a king, and conſequently an 
object of fear, that he gave him part of his trea- 
ſures; and, it is faid, that at their ſeparating 
they both ſhed tears, More than one Mahome- 
tan knight rode forth from the city to reproach 
king Alfonſo for his ingratitude to his benefactor, 

and more than one remarkable combat was fought 
under the walls of Toledo. | 
. The ſiege laſted a year, when Toledo capitu- 1083. 
lated on condition that the Muſſulmen ſhould be 
treated in the ſame manner as they had behaved to 
me Chriſtians, and that they ſhould leave them 
the 


5 
9 
* 
=_ 
: 
U 
_— 
Y 
T 
LY 
* F 
1 
1 
9 
by 
9 
= . 
© 
, ; 
* * 
bo 
2 
WW 
3 
"= 
7 
1 
* 
A 
2 
% vs 
= 
be. | 
* 4 
_—_ 
"> 
= 
"ed 
4 
| " bs. 
A 
_— 
2 *. 
* 
* 
„ 
"Wi 1. 
_— 
3 * 
1 o 
f 
R 
c . 
1 
H 
p 
2 
cn 
=B 
1 
, 
i 
®; 
1 


260 


Of Spain Ch. xxxiv. 


the enjoyment of their religion and laws: a pro- 
miſe which they at firſt kept, but which time 
made them violate. All New Caſtile at laſt ſub- 
mitted to Cid, who took poſſeſſion of it in the 
name of Alfonſo; and Madrid, a ſmall place, 
that was one day to become the capital of Spain, 


was for the firſt time in the power of the 
Chriſtians. 


Many families left France in order to ſettle in 


Toledo, and privileges were granted them that 
are ſtill called franchiſes in Spain. King Alfonſo 
immediately called an aſſembly of biſhops, who, 
without the concurrence of the people, which 
was before thought neceſſary, promoted a prieft 
named Bernard to the biſhopric of Toledo, on 
whom pope Gregory VII. at the king's requeſt, 
conferred the primacy of Spain. This conqueſt 
was almoſt entirely for the advantage of the 
church ; but the firſt care of the primate was to 
make an ill uſe of it, by violating the conditions 
the king had ſworn to the Moors. The great 
moſque was to belong to the Mahometans ; but 
the archbiſhop, during the king's abſence, turned 
it into a church, and raiſed a ſedition againſt him. 
Alfonſo returned to Toledo, enraged at the in- 
diſcretion of the prelate, whom he was going to 
puniſh, if the Mahometans, to whom the king 
reſtored the moſque, had not petitioned to have 
him pardoned. 

The dominions Alfonſo had gained by the 
ſword of the Cid, he enlarged by a marriage, 
either from policy or inclination, with Zaid, 
daughter of Benadat, a new king of the Moors 
in Andaluſia, with whom he received many cities 
as her dowry. He is reproached for having in 

conjunction 


— un. ( G W n 


CͥEñ:ʒ᷑ ã ed. f f a a as as , f oa Do 


and the Mabometans, - 9c. 


conjunction with his father-in-law, called in other 
Moors from Africa into Spain : but it is hard to 
believe that he could act in a manner ſo unpoli- 
tic: however, the conduct of kings frequently 
contradicts all the rules of probability. Be that 
as it may, an army of Moors was tranſported 
from Africa into Spain, and enereaſed the general 
confuſion of the kingdom. The Miramolin, 
who reigned in Morocco, and whoſe deſcendants 
reign there ſtill, ſent his general Abenada to 
the aſſiſtance of the king of Andaluſia, This 
general betrayed not only the king to whom he 
was ſent, but alſo the Miramolin, in whoſe name 
he came. In ſhort, the Miramolin, enraged againſt 
him, went over himſelf in perſon to fight his 
perfidious general, who made war on the other 
Mahometans, while the Chriſtians were as much 
divided amungft themſelves. 

Spain was thus torn in pieces by ſo many 
Chriſtian and Mahometan nations, when the 
Cid, Don Roderigo, at the head of his knights, 
ſubdued the kingdom df Valencia. There were 
few ſovereign princes in Spain more powerful 
than he; but whether he preferred the title of 
Cid, or whether the ſpirit of chivalry rendered 
him faithful to king Alfonſo his maſter, he never 
aſſumed the name of king. However, he govern- 
ed Valencia with the authority of a ſovereign; 
while he received ambaſſadors, and was treated 
with reſpect by all nations. After his death, 
which happened in the year 1096, the kings of 
Caſtile and Arragon conſtantly continued at war 
with the Moors, and Spain was never more 
drenched in blood, or rendered more deſolate: the 
melancholy effects of the antient conſpiracy be- 

tween 


261 


— —— 
- — 4 = _ * gr uf u * * 
— 1 a * r : 
— . ja. * 
: halls -- > hl - : 
4 — HY wo — oy — 
= 2 > 


— — 


* _ a 
— rs a ms N 
. --—" 2 — 
To — . ̃ SE en IT CESS * 


262 Of Religion Ch. xxxv. 


tween the biſhop of Opas and count Julian, 
which had laſted four hundred years, and con- 
tinued long after to involve Spain in the moſt 
dreadful calamities. 


0 C=YU(U⁰⁰⁰/⁰⁰α 0050000 


CHAP. XXXV. 
Of religion, and ſuperſtition in the tenth and eleventh 


centuries, 


ERESTIES ſeem to be the fruit of a little 

learning and leiſure, We have ſeen, that 
the ſtate of the church in the tenth century ſcarce- 
ly permitted either leiſure or ſtudy : the whole 
world was in arms, and all the diſpute was for 
riches. However, in the reign of king Robert 
there were ſome prieſts in France, and, amongſt 
others, one, named Stephen, confeſſor to queen 


Conſtantia, accuſed of hereſy : theſe, that they 


might have an odious name, were called Mani- 
cheans ; for neither they nor their judges could 
be acquainted with the doctrine of the Perſian 
philoſopher Manes. They were probably enthu- 
ſiaſts, who, in order to gain upon the minds of 
the people, affected an extraordinary ſanctity ; 
for this is the character of the chiefs of all ſects, 
Horrible crimes, and unnatural ſentiments, were 
imputed to them ; the ordinary method of treat- 
ing thoſe, whoſe doctrines are not ſufficiently 
known and underſtood. They were juridically 
e023, accuſed of reciting litanies in honour of devils, 
with afterwards extinguiſhing the lights, 2 
ing 


7 
5 
2 


and ſuperſtition, &c. 


ling together indifferently, and of burning the 


firſt born that proceeded from theſe impure mix- 
tures, in order to ſwallow their aſhes. Theſe 
come pretty near to the reproaches caſt upon the 
firſt Chriſtians; and theſe calumnies, I imagine, 
the Pagans raiſed againſt them from no other 
foundation, but that ſometimes when they par- 
took of the Lord's ſupper, they eat bread made 
in the form of little children, in order to repre- 
ſent the body of our Saviour, as is ſtill practiſed 
in ſome of the Grecian churches. The heretics 
I have been mentioning were accuſed particularly, 
of teaching that God did not really come upon 
the earth, that he could not be born of a virgin, 
that he neither died nor roſe again, and if fo, they 
were not Chriſtians. I find that accuſations of 
this ſort always contradict themſelves. 

The only thing certain is, that king Robert, 


and his wife Conſtantia, removed to Orleans, 


where ſome meetings of thoſe called Manicheans 
were held; when the biſhops cauſed thirteen of 


theſe unhappy perſons to be burnt, and the king 


and queen aſſiſted at this ſpeQacle, ſo unworthy of 
their majeſties. Never before this execution was 
any perſon put to death in France, for preaching 
what they did not underſtand. It is true, that 
in the fourth century Priſcillian, with ſeven of 
his followers, was condemned to death at Tiers: 
but this city, which was then in Gaul, was not 
annexed to France ſince the declenſion of the fa- 
mily of Charlemaign, It is worthy of obſerya- 
tion, that St. Martin of Tours would not com- 
municate with the biſhops, who had ſought the 
blood of Priſcillian; and loudly declared that it 
was a horrible action to condemn men to death, be- 


cauſe 


263 


- —_— - 1 4 py T 
— K . CE £ En — 
77 by * be — 
r WI 
— ES . - — + — 
war” Ao tn a I — — 


4 1 = J _ _ — 
eat 


IE 
3 
— — = 7 1 
GA VIED?- 


— 


5 2 
r X 
Land ——_ * 


- * N — 
7 «> 4 
6 e 
1 P 4 


— 


264 


Of religion Ch. xxxv. 


cauſe they were miſtaken. There was no St. 
Martin to be found in the time of king Robert, 
There then gathered ſome flight clouds about 
the euchariſt; but they did not yet burſt into a 
ſtorm. I do not know how this contentious ſub- 


ject, which ſhould have been only adored in ſi- 


lence, eſcaped the warm imaginations of the Greek 
Chriſtians : but it was probably neglected, from its 
giving no ſcope to the metaphyſics cultivated by 
the Greek doctors, ſince they adopted the ideas of 
Plato. They had found the means of making uſe 
of this philoſophy in the explication of the Trini- 
ty, in the conſubſtantiality of the Word, in the 
union of two natures and two wills, and, in fine, 
in the abyſs of predeſtination: but the queſtions, 
Whether the bread and wine were changed into 
the ſecond perſon of the Trinity, and conſequently 
into God? and, Whether we eat and drink this ſe- 
cond perſon in the Trinity by faith alone? were of 
another kind, which do not appear to be ſubject 
to the philoſophy of thoſe times. Thus, in the firſt 
ages of Chriſtianity, people were contented with 
eating the Lord's ſupper in the evening; and in the 
time I am ſpeaking of, with communicating at the 
maſs under both ſpecies, without having any fixed 
and determinate ideas, in relation to this myſtery. 

It appears that in many churches, and parti- 
cularly in England, they believed that they 
only eat and drank the body and blood of Chrilt 
ſpiritually. Woe find in the Bodleian library a 
homily, wrote in the tenth ccentury, in which are 
theſe words. * It is truly, by conſecration, the 
% body and blood of Jeſus Chriſt, not corporally, 
<< bur ſpiritually. The body in which Jeſus Chriſt 
« ſuffered, and the euchariſtical body, are entirely 


« different, 


hs OY — 295 . ef. oc fi. BE 


\ 
- 


| and ſuperſtition Sc. 

cc different. The firſt was compoſed of fleſh and 
& bones, animated by a rational ſoul ; but what 
cc ye call the euchariſt, has neither blood, nor 
& bones, nor ſoul. We ought then to under- 
« ſtand it in a ſpiritual ſenſe.” 

John Scotus, ſurnamed Erigena, becauſe he came 
from Ireland, had for a long time before ſupport- 
ed the ſame opinion, in the reign of Charles the 
Bald, and even as it is ſaid, by that emperor's 
order, 

In the time of John Scotus, Ratramne, a monk 
of Corby, and others, wrote on this myſtery in 
ſuch a manner, as at leaſt to leave room to doubt, 
whether they believed what has fince been called 
the real preſence : for Ratramne, in his works ad- 
drefled to the emperor Charles the Bald, ſays in 
expreſs terms, The body of Jeſus Chriſt is 


& ſeen, received, and eaten, not by the bodily 


&« ſenſes, but by the eyes of the minds of the 
« faithful.” 


People however wrote againſt them, and the 
moſt common opinion doubtleſs was, that they eat 


the true body of Jeſus Chriſt, ſince they diſputed, 


in order to know whether it was digeſted, and 
voided with the excrements. 

At length Berenger, archdeacon of Tours, 
taught about the year 1050, - both by his writ- 
ings and in the pulpit, that the true body of Jeſus 
Chriſt is not, nor cannot be in the bread and wine. 

He affirmed that what would cauſe an indige- 


ſtion, if eaten in too great a quantity, could be no- 


thing but bodily food; that what would cauſe'in- 


toxication, if drunk in too large a quantity, was a 
real liquor; that there was no ſuch thing as white- 
neſs without a white ſubject, no roundneſs with- 


Vol. | N out 


265 


Of religion Ch. xxxv, 


out a ſubje& that was round, &c. Theſe propo- 
ſitions were then ſo much the more offenſive, as 
Berenger, having a very great reputation, had con- 
ſequently many enemies. The perſon who diſtin- 
guiſhed himſelf moſt againſt him, was Lanfranc, 


a native of Lombardy, born at Pavia, who was 


come to France to ſeek his fortune; and his re- 
putation was equal to that of Berenger. This is 
the method he made uſe of to confound him, in 


his treatiſe De corpore Domini. 


„We may ſay with truth, that the body of 
& our Lord in the euchariſt, is the ſame as that 
* which was brought forth by the virgin, and 
« that it is not the ſame: it is the ſame, as to 
& the eſſence and properties of real nature; and 
„it is not the ſame, as to the ſpecies of bread 
„ and wine; ſo that it is the ſame as to the ſub- 
& ſtance, and it is not the ſame as to the form.” 

Lanfranc's opinion ſeems to be that of the whole 
church. Berenger had reaſoned merely as a phi- 
loſopher ; but the point in queſtion was an article 
of faith, a myſtery which the church conſidered 
as incomprehenſible, Berenger as a member of 
this church, ought to have had the ſame belief, 
and to have ſubmitted his reaſon in the ſame man- 
ner as the reſt of the body. He was condemned 
at the council of Paris in 1050, as alſo at Rome 
in 1079; and he was obliged to pronounce his 
recantation; but this being forced, only ſerved 
to impreſs thoſe ſentiments more deeply in his 
heart; he therefore died in the ſame opinion, 
which at that time cauſed neither a ſchiſm, nor a 
civil war. Temporalities alone were the grand 
objects that excited the ambition of mankind. 
T he other ſource, that was to occaſion the _ 

ing 


m — 6 © — e 9 w 


. ac a an  £ Xo -o- =o fo co 


—— 


mw $3 . — Hs 


e w 


and ſuperſtition Sc. 


ding of ſo much human blood, was not yet o- 

ened. . 7 
N We have reaſon to believe, that the ignorance 
of thoſe times ſtrengthened the popular ſuperſti- 
tions. I ſhall relate ſome examples, which have 
long exerciſed human credulity. It is pretended, 
that the emperor Otho III. put Mary of Arragon, 
his wife, to death, on account of adultery ; and 
it is very poſſible, that a cruel and bigotted prince, 
ſuch as Otho III. is painted, might puniſh with 
death a wife leſs debauched than himſelf. But 
twenty authors have written, and Maimbourg has 
repeated after them, and others have repeated af- 
ter Maimbourg, that the empreſs having made 
ſome advances to a young Italian count, who re- 
fuſed her from a principle of virtue, ſhe accuſed 
him. to the emperor, and he was puniſhed with 
death : when the count's widow, ſay they, came 
with her huſband's head in her hand, to demand 
juſtice, and to prove his innocence ; the widow 
inſiſted on being put to the trial of hot iron, and 
held in her hand an iron barred hot, ſo long as was 
deſired, without being burnt : this prodigy ſerving 
as a legal proof, the empreſs was condemned to 
be burnt alive. 

Maimbourg ſhould have conſidered, that this 
fable is related only by authors who wrote lon 
after the reign of Otho III. and that they do not 
give the names of the Italian count, or of the 
widow who handled a bar of red hot iron without 
being hurt, In ſhort, though even cotemporary 
authors ſhould attempt to give authentic accounts 
of ſuch events, they would not deſerve greater 
credit, than the wizards who depoſe before a court 
of juſtice, that they have aſſiſted at the nocturnal 
meetings of witches, N 2 The 


268 


Of religion Ch. xxxv. 


The adventure of the iron bar ought to diſcre- 
dit the puniſhment of the empreſs Mary of Arra- 
gon, related in ſo many dictionaries and hiſtories, 
where, in every page, falſhood and truth are 
mingled together. 

The ſecond event is of the ſame kind. It is 
pretended that Henry II. ſucceſſor to Otho III. 
tried the fidelity of his wife Cunigunda, by mak- 
ing her walk barefooted over nine red hot plow- 
ſhares. This hiſtory, related in ſuch a number of 
martyrologies, deſerves the ſame anſwer as that of 
the wife of Otho. 

Deſiderius, abbot of Mount Caſſino, and many 
other writers, relate a fact nearly of the ſame kind, 
In the year 1063, the monks of Florence, diſ- 
pleaſed at their biſhop, went through the city and 
country, crying: Our biſhop is guilty of ſi- 
c mony, and is a knave.” And they had, it is 
faid, the boldneſs to promiſe, that they would 
prove this accuſation by the trial of hre. The day 
was therefore fixed for the obſervance of this cere- 
mony, and that was on the Wedneſday in the firſt 
week of Lent. Two piles of wood were prepared, 
each ten feet in length and five in breadth, ſepa- 
rated by a path a foot and a half broad, filled with 


dry wood. The two piles being lighted, and the 


wood in this ſpace reduced to coals, a monk, 
called Aldobrandin, paſſed through this path with 


a grave and ſolemn pace, and even returned half 


way back to take from the midſt of the flames his 
maniple, which he had let fall. This has been 
related by many hiſtorians, and cannot be denied 
without overturning the very foundations of hi- 


ſtory; but it is certain, that we cannot give cre- 


dit to it without overturning the very foundation 
of reaſon. | It 


uw... FF RVYFTw =o Yr PS 888 


Os Fa. 


© P 


and ſuperſtition &c, 


It is doubtleſs poſſible, that a man may paſls 
very ſwiftly between two burning piles of wood, 
and even on hot embers, without being intirely 
burnt ; but his paſſing and repaſſing with a grave 
ſtep to take up his maniple, is one of thoſe ad ven- 
tures of the golden legends, which ought no longer 
to be mentioned to men of ſenſe, 

The laſt proof I ſhall relate, is that made uſe 
of in Spain after the taking of Toledo, to prove, 
f whether they ought to repeat the Roman office, or 
f that called Moſarabic. It was at firſt unanimouſly 
greed to terminate the quarrel by a duel: two 
champions armed cap-a-pee fought according to 


DO 


7 all the rules of chivalry ; when Don Ruis de Mar- 
. tanza, knight of the Moſarabic maſs- book, made 
0 his adverſary loſe his ſaddle, and threw him to 
I the ground : but the queen, who had a great in- 


clination for the Roman maſs-book, reſolved that 
14 they ſhould make the trial of fire, All the laws of 

chivalry were againſt it; however, the two maſs- 
books were thrown into the flames, and were pro- 
10 bably burnt; when the king to pleaſe every body, 
0 gave ſuch orders, that ſome churches prayed to 
1 God, according to the Roman ritual, and others 


. 
1 
N 
4 
— 
„ 
1 
, o 
4 
* i 
wn 
” 
1 
Wy. 1 
„ 
* 
a 
2 
” 
WS 
"SY 
b 
by : 5 
. 
4 
1 
"” 
i 
[1 
N EY) 
m4 
.—_— 
2 
1 
* * 
* 
13 
= 
2 
—— 
ts 
= 
* * 
% 
41% 
13 
8 
"x 
4 Y 
=_— 
$31 
* 
| 


7 
"vg 
'v 
1 
14 
Wh 
; 


ar kept the Moſarabic. 
* Every thing ſacred in religion was disfigured in 
* the Weſt by cuſtoms the moſt ridiculous and ex- 


ith travagant. The feſtivals of fools, and aſſes, were 
lf eſtabliſhed in moſt churches. On days of ſo- 
his lemnity they created a biſhop of fools; and an aſs 
was led into the body of the church, dreſſed in a 

cope and a four cornered cap. 
Church dances, feaſtings on the altar, revelry, 
and obſcene farces, were: the ceremonies obſerved 


on thoſe feſtivals; and the extravagance laſted 
N 3 | about 


—ͤ—— — —2— 


_ 
— 


—— — 
Fa. * 


- rH % 
= = _ _ r 


— 
- + = _ 


270 


Henry IV. Ch. xxxvi. 


about ſeven centuries in many dioceſes. If we 
were to conſider only the uſages here related, we 
ſhould imagine we were reading an account of 
Hottentots or negroes; and it muſt be conſeſſed 
that in many things we did not fall much ſhort of 
them, 

Rome ever condemned theſe barbarous cuſtoms, 
as well as duels, and ordeals. In the rites of that 
church, notwithſtanding the ſcandalous lives of 
many popes, and the frequent confuſion of govern- 
ment, there was more decorum and gravity than in 
thoſe of other ſees; and upon the whole it appear- 
ed that Rome, when free and well adminiſtered, 


Was formed to direct the reſt of the Chriſtian world. 


eee 


CHAP. XXXVI. 


Of the Empire, Italy, the emperor Henry IV. and 
Gregory VII. Of Rome and the empire in the 


eleventh century. 


T is now time to return to the ruins of Rome, 
and to the ſhadow of the throne of the Cæſars, 
lately revived in Germany. b 15 
The fate of Rome and Italy was very uncer- 
tain. The German emperors looked upon them- 
ſelves as ſovereigns of the weſtern world. But 
they were hardly ſovereigns in Germany, where 
the grand feudal government of lords and biſhops 
began to take deep.root. The Norman conque- 
rors had erected a new power in Apulia and Ca- 


labria, The great cities in Italy were EY 
| c 


and Gregory VIT. 


the example of the Venetians with the love of li- 
berty. The popes were not ſovereigns as yet, 
but they were aiming at ſovereignty. 

The right reſumed by the emperors of nominat- 
ing the popes, "_ to be eſtabliſhed; but it is eaſy 
to ſee, that the firſt favourable circumſtance muſt 
have given a ſudden turn to affairs. Such a cir- 
cumſtance ſoon fell out under the minority of the 
emperor Henry IV. who in the life-time of his 
father Henry III. was acknowledged his ſucceſſor. 

Even ſo early as the reign of Henry III. the 
Imperial authority began to declinz in Italy. His 
ſiſter, the counteſs or dutcheſs of "Tuſcany, mo- 
ther of the great benefactreſs of the popes, the 
counteſs Matilda of Eſte, was the perſon who 
chiefly contributed to excite all Italy againſt her 
brother. She was poſleſled of the dutchy of 
Mantua, and of a conſiderable part of Tuſcany 
and Lombardy ; but having been fo imprudent 
as to venture her perſon in Germany, ſhe was 
there confined for a long time by the emperor's 
orders, Her daughter, the counteſs Matilda, in- 
herited her ambition, together with her averſion 
to the Imperial family. 

During the minority of Henry IV. ſeveral popes 
owed their election to intrigues, to money, and 
to civil diſſenſions. At length Alexander II. was 
choſen pope in 1061, without conſulting the Im- 
perial court, In vain did the Germans nominate 


another pope; their Intereſt was then upon the 


decline in Italy. Alexander II. carried his point, 
and his competitor was driven out of Rome, 
When Henry IV. came of age, he ſaw him- 
ſelf emperor 4 Italy and Germany, but hardly 
poſſeſſed of any * Part of the ſecular and 


4 c̃.ccleſiaſtic 


271 


1056, 


272 


1073. 


Henry IV. Ch. xxxvi. 


eceleſiaſtic princes of his own country had con- 
ſpired againſt him; and it is plain, that he could 
not be maſter of Italy but at the head of an army, 
which he wanted. His power was inconſiderable, 
but his courage was ſuperior to his fortune. 

Some authors mention, that being accuſed at 
the diet of Wurtſburg of having intended to aſſaſ- 
ſinate the dukes of Swabia and Carinthia, he of- 
fered to fight the accuſer, who was only a private 
gentleman. The day was fixed for the combat, 
but the accuſer not appearing the emperor was 
acquitted. | 

As ſoon as the authority of a prince is conteſted, 
an attack 1s made upon his morals, He was pub- 
licly accuſed of having miſtreſſes, while the cler- 
gy of every rank enjoyed variety of concubines with 
impunity. He wanted to be divorced from his wife, 
a daughter of the marquiſs of Ferrara, with whom 
he ſaid he was incapable of conſummating his mar- 
Triage, Beſides, he had alienated the minds of the 
people by ſome flights of youth, and his conduct 
had — {age his power. 

There reſided at that time at Rome a monk of 
the order of Cluny, lately created cardinal ; a man 
of a reſtleſs, fiery, and enterprizing diſpoſition z 
but chiefly remarkable for his furious zeal for the 
pretenſtons ef the church, which he ſometimes 
made ſubſervient to his private intereſts, Hilde- 
brand was the name of this daring man, after- 
wards the celebrated Gregory VII. He was born 
at Soana in Tuſcany, of obſcure parents, brought 
up at Rome, admitted monk of Cluny under the 
abbot Odilo, deputed afterwards to negotiate the 
affairs of his order at Rome, employed by that 


court in all thoſe political concerns that require 
| dexterity 


and Gregory VII. 


dexterity and reſolution ; and already celebrated 


in all parts of Italy for his zeal and intrepidity. 
The public expected he would ſucceed to Alex- 
ander II. as he had had the adminiſtration of affairs 


under that pontificate. All that the malice or 


flattery of a multitude of writers have ſaid of this 
pope, is concentered in a portrait drawn by a Nea- 
politan artiſt, where Gregory is repreſented hold- 
ing a crook in one hand, and a whip in the other, 
trampling ſceptres under his feet, with St. Peter's 
net, and fiſhes on each fide of him. 

Gregory engaged pope Alexander II. to take a 
bold and very extraordinary ſtep, in ſummoning 
the young emperor Henry tv appear at Rome be- 


273 


fore the tribunal of the holy ſee. This is the firſt 1073 


inſtance of ſuch an enterprize. And at what 
time did it happen? When Rome had been ac- 
cuſtomed by Henry III. father of Henry IV. to 
receive her biſhops, upon a fimple nomination 
from the head of the empire. This was the very 
yoke which Gregory wanted to ſhake off : to pre- 
vent the Germans from giving laws to Rome, he 
fain would have the pope ſuperior to the emperor. 
90 bold a ſtep was attended with no bad conſe- 
quence at that time. Alexander ſeemed to be a 
kind of forlorn hope, ſent by Hildebrand againtt 
the empire, before he gave battle: for he died 
foon after this firſt act of hoſtility, 


Hildebrand had intereſt to procure himſelf to be 


elected and inſtalled by the people of Rome, with- 
out waiting for the emperor's permiſſion : but he 
ſoon obtained this permiſſion, upon promiſing 
fealty and allegiance. Henry accepted of his ex- 


euſes; and his chancellor of Italy repaired- to 


Rome, to confirm the election. Upon this occa- 


N 5 hog! 


274 


1075. 


Henry IV. Ch. xxxvi. 


ſion Henry, whom his courtiers adviſed to beware 
of Gregory, publicly declared, that this pope 
could never be ungrateful to his benefactor. But 
Gregory was ſcarce ſettled on the papal throne, 
when he pronounced excommunication againſt all 
thoſe, who received benefices from the hands of 


laymen, and againſt every layman that conferred 


them. His deſign was to deprive all ſecular pa- 
trons of the right of preſentation to church liv- 
ings ; which indeed was ſetting the church at 
open variance with the ſovereigns of all nations. 
His violent temper broke out at the ſame time 
againſt Philip I. king of France. The diſpute 
was concerning ſome Italian merchants, of whom 
the French had extorted money. The pope wrote 
a circular letter to the biſhops of France, in 
which he has theſe words: Your king is rather 


a tyrant than a king; he ſpends his days in 


2, 


« infamy and vice;” and ta theſe indiſcreet ex- 
preſſions, he annexed the ordinary menace of ex- 
communication. 

Not long after, while Henry was engaged in a 
civil war againſt the Saxons, the pope ſent two 
legates to him, with ſummons to come and an- 
ſwer to the charge of having granted the inveſti- 
ture of benefices, and threatening to excommuni · 
cate him in caſe he refuſed to comply. The two 
meſſengers, who brought this ſtrange ſummons, 
delivered their meſſage to the emperor juſt after he 
had obtained a complete victory over the Saxons, 
when he was crowned with glory, and grown 
more powerful than they expected. It is eaſy to 
conceive with what diſdain a young emperor of 
fve-and-twenty, victorious, and jealous of his 
dignity, muſt have received this meſlage : = 

2 x C 


and Gregory V I. 


he did not inflict any exemplary puniſhment upon 
them, the prejudices of the times not allowing of 
ſuch a ſtep ; all he did, was to treat this audacity 
with contempt, and to abandon theſe indiſcreet le- 
gates to the contumelies of the ſervants attending 
his court, 

About this very time the pope excommunicated 
alſo the Norman princes of Apulia and Calabria, 
(as we have already mentioned in the thirtieth 
chapter.) Such a number of excommunications 
thundered out all at once, would in our days 2p- 
pear to be the effect of madneſs: but we are to 
obſerve, that when Gregory VII. menaced the 
king of France, he addreſſed his bull to the duke 
of Aquitaine, the king's vaſſal, who had as much 
power as the king himſelf ; that when he darted 
his thunderbolts againſt the emperor, he hid a 
part of Italy on his ſide, together with the coun- 
teſs Matilda, Rome and one half of Germany; 
that in regard to the Normans, they were his 
avowed enemies; and then the conduct of Gre— 
gory VII. will appear rather violent and daring, 
than weak and extravagant. He was ſenſible, 
that in raifing his dignity above the emperor, and 
all other princes, he would be ſupported by the 
reſt of the prelates, who muſt be pleaſed to lee 
themſelves the members of a head, to whoſe yoke 
the ſecular powers were obliged to ſubmit. His 
ſcheme was not only to throw off all depende 1cy 
on the emperors, but moreover, to bring Ro ne, 
the emperors, and kings, into ſubje tion to the 
popedom. The attempt might coſt him his if2, 
and it was what he ought to expect; but he 1:r- 


tered himſelf, that at leaſt the peril of the en - 


prize would crown his memory with glory, 
N 6 | Henry 


275 


1076. 


276 


3076, 


2076, 


Henry IT. 


Henry IV. being too buſy in Germany, to be 
able to march into Italy, took a ſtep, by which 
he ſeemed to revenge himſelf rather as an Italian 
lord, than as a German emperor. Inſtead of em- 
ploying a general and an army, he is ſaid to have 
made uſe of a ruffian, named Cencius, who ſeiz- 
ed upon the pope in the church of St. Mary Ma- 
Jor, at the very time he was celebrating divine ſer- 
vice. The deſperate villains that were with him, 
ſtruck the pontif, and gave him ſeveral wounds: 
from thence they hurried him away, and con- 
fined him in a tower, of which Cencius had got 
poſſeſſion. 

The emperor acted a little more in the character 
of a prince, in calling a couycil of biſhops, ab- 
bots, and doctors, at Worms, where he cauſed 
the pope to be depoſed; and the ſentence was. 
agreed to by the votes of the whole aſſembly, two 
only excepted. But this council wanted troops 
to oblige the Romans to pay a proper regard to 
their deciſions. Henry only weakened his au- 
thority, by writing to the pope that he depoſed 


him, and to the people of Rome, that he forbad 


them to acknowledge Gregory as their biſhop. 
No ſooner, had the pope received theſe frivolous 
letters, than he aſſembled a council at Rome, in 
which he expreſſed himſelf in theſe words: In 
„ the name of the Almighty God, and by ow 
„ authority, I prohibit Henry, the ſon of eur 
“ emperor Henry, from governing the Teutonic 
“% kingdom and Italy, I releaſe all Chriſtians 
«© from their oath of allegiance to him; and I 
6 ſtrictly charge every perſon whomſoever never 
6 to ſerve, or attend him as king.“ It is well 
known, that this is the firft inſtance of a pope's 
pretending 


and Gregory VII. Ch. xxxvi. 277 


pretending to deprive a ſovereign of his crown. 
We have already beheld the example of biſhops 
depoſing Lewis the Debonnair, but there was at 
leaſt ſome colour for that ſtep. They condemned 
Lewis, in appearance, only to a public penance; 
but nobody, ſince the foundation of the church, 
had preſumed to ſpeak in the ſame ſtyle as Gre- 
gory, The pope, in his circular letters, breathes 
the ſame ſpirit as in his excommunicatory ſen- 
tence; for he repeats theſe expreſſions ſeveral 
times, “ that biſhops are ſuperior to kings, and 
e made to judge them ;z”” expreſſions equally artful 
and preſumptuous, as they were likely to make 
the prelates in all parts of the world his friends. 
In all probability, when Gregory VII. thus de- 
poſed his ſovereign, only by pronouncing a few 
words, he depended on the diverſion which would 
be made in his favour by the civil wars in Ger- 
many, which began to revive with the utmoſt 
fury. The death of a biſhop of Utrecht, who 
had been moſt inſtrumental in the pope's condem- 
nation, contributed alſo to bring over the Ger- 
mans to Gregory's ſide. It is pretended, that this 
biſhop being ſeized with a ſudden and painful ill- 
neſs, which deprived him of life, had declared his 
repentance for having been concerned in depoſing 
the pope, deeming it a ſacrilegious act. This re- 
morſe of the biſhop, whether true or falſe, pro- 
duced a ſenſe of ſorrow and pity in the people. 
The time was paſt, when Germany was united 
under the Othos; ſo that Henry IV. faw himſelf 
ſurrounded at Spire by the army of the confede- 
rates, who availed themſelves of the pope's bull to 
diſtreſs their ſovereign, The like revolutions were 
a natural conſequence of the feudal nnen, 
| ac 


278 


Henry IT. 


Each' German prince was jealous of the Imperial 
power, as in France the high barons were jealous 
of their king. The fire of civil war ſtill lay con- 
cealed, and the timely thundering of a bull might 
light it up. 

The confederate princes granted Henry his li- 
berty, on condition that he ſhould live as a pri- 
vate perſon, and under ſentence of excommuni- 
cation, at Spire, without performing either any 
regal or Chriſtian function, till the pope came to 
preſide at Augſburg at a diet of princes and biſhops, 
by whom he was to be ſolemnly tried. 

One would think that thoſe princes, who had 
a right of chuſing the emperor, had alſo a right 
to depoſe him; but to make the pope preſide at 
this trial, was in reality acknowledging him to 
be the ſupreme judge both of the emperor and the 
empire. Here Gregory and the popedom exulted 
in their victory; and Henry, reduced to ſuch an 
extremity, took another ſtep, which greatly added 
to the ſolemnity of the triumph. 

In order to prevent this fatal judgment of Augſ- 
burg, he ſuddenly reſolved to paſs the Tyroleſe 
Alps with a few domeſtics, and to afk abſolution 
of the pope. Gregory was then with the countels 
Matilda, in the town of Canoſa, the antient Ca- 
nuſtum, on the Apennine mountains near Reg- 
gio, a fortreſs then conſidered as impregnable. 
The emperor, who had been celebrated for fo 
many victories, preſents himſelf at the gate of the 


fortreſs, without either guards or attendants. They 


ſtopped him as ſoon as he had paſſed the firſt in- 
cloſure, ſtripped him of all his cloaths, and then 
clad him with a hair cloth. He was obliged to 
wait barefooted for ſome time in the court-yard 

though 


and Gregory VII. 


279 


though it was in the month of January: after- 1977, 


wards they made him faſt three days, without 
admitting him to kiſs the pope's feet; who, dur- 
ing this whole time, had ſhut himſelf up with the 
counteſs of Matilda, whoſe ſpiritual director he 
had been for ſome time. It is no wonder that 
the-enemies of this pope ſhould have cenſured his 
conduct in regard to that princeſs: true it is, 
that he was then ſixty years old; bur ſtill he was 
a ſpiritual director, and Matilda was a weak 
young woman, The devout language which 
we find in the pope's letters to this princeſs, 
compared with the extravagance of his ambition, 
might induce ſome to ſuſpect that he made uſe of 
religion as a cloak to all his paſſions. However, 
it muſt be owned, that there is not a ſingle fact, 


or circumſtance, to ground theſe - ſuſpicions. - 


Voluptuous hypocrites have neither ſuch con- 
ſtancy in their enthuſiaſm, nor ſuch intrepidity in 
their zeal. Gregory was auſtere, and this is the 
very thing that made him dangerous. 

At length the emperor was permitted to throw 
himſelf at the pope's feet, who conſented indeed 
to abſolve him, but at the ſame time made him 
{wear that he would wait for the papal ſentence at 
the diet of Augſburg, and in every reſpect ſubmit 
himſelf to it. Some other biſhops and German 
lords of the emperor's party, made the ſame ſub- 


miſſion, Gregory then looking upon himſelf, and 


indeed not without reaſon, as the lord and maſter 
of all the crowned heads of the earth, ſaid in ſe- 
veral of his letters, that it was his duty to pull 
down the pride of kings. 

The people of Lombardy, who ſtill held out 


for the emperor, were ſo provoked at this mean 
ſubmiſſion, 


8 3 3 4 ; 8 — - = ANA A ** * — —„ —- — * 1 — 
. ? 2 3 Pc — £ N 222 6 ws . N 1 . > — 1 — — * 1 - _ - 
4 — = — — — -— oa — 2 — 2 — - * 5 — 
— — _ — 2 —— by . . — — —— " IV — — 1 * — — — * 
r FI: Won _ : — - 8 — . - - N — be DS a. + - - . . — ” 
- n . - 2d; 7 * : - . = es ih he — — ; Wer” . 3 L 
— . pn eee tag — "5 e FA J e 
i 2 2 — — 4 ——_ * : * = — 3 * F 
A 4 —— — by _ 
g 4 — — , 7 — 
K. *> 


— 4 * a. me 
— — — — 
2 > 
on — Ps 
- EY — 
ry 22 A 


— 


— , 2 E 


— — 


N 1 — „— 
yo — — 1 —— 
— — — — — by - 


af 7 
q 
x 


CT ĩͤ — — 
* * * 2 
8 . - — by 


— wma 
_— IE. 
— — — 


— A 


abe 


2078. 


Henn I. Ch. xxxvi. 
ſubmiſſion, that Ray were very near deſerting him. 


Gregory was more hatred in this part of Italy, than 
in Germany; and luckily for Henry, the averſion 
to the pope's extravagant ambition, prevailed over 
the indignation with which they had heard of this 
prince's mean behaviour. He made a proper uſe 
of this diſpoſition of the people, and by a ſtrange 
reverſe of fortune in a German emperor, he found 
himſelf very powerful in Italy, while he was de- 
ſerted in 3 All Lombardy was up in 
arms againſt the pope, and Gregory was raiſing 
all Germany againſt the emperor. N 

On the one ſide, the pope acted under hand to 
prevail on the Germans to elect another emperor, 
and Henry uſed every endeavour to make the Ita- 
lians chuſe another pope. Accordingly, the Ger- 
mans: choſe Rodolph duke of Swabia; and Gre- 
gory wrote word, that he would determine be- 
tween Henry and Rodolph, and beſtow the im- 
perial crown on him who would be moſt ſubmiſ- 
five to the Roman ſee, Henry put more con- 
fidence in his troops, than in the holy father, but 
happened to meet with ſome ill fucceſs ; upon 
which the pope grew more haughty, and ex- 
communicated him the ſecond time in 1080. 
4 deprive him of his crown, ſaid he, and give 
« away the German kingdom to Rodolph.” 
And in order to make people believe that he was 
really the beſtower of empires, he made a preſent 
to this Rodolph of a crown of. gold, on which 
this verſe was ingraved. 


Petra dedit Petro, Petrus diadema Rodolpho“. 


: * The rock has given this crown to Peter, and Peter gives it to 


Rodelph, The pun is ip the Latin word petra, and therefore is 
4 1 Egli. uot * Nn | 4 
R I This. 


and Gregory V1 J. 


This wretched pun ſhews the taſte of thoſe 
times, and likewiſe the pride of the Roman 
pontif. | 
In the mean time, Henry's party began to re- 
cover itſelf in Germany; and this very prince, 
who, clad in haircloth and barefooted, had waited 
three days at the mercy of a perſon, whom he 
conſidered as his ſubject, took two generous re- 
ſolutions upon this occaſion ; one to depoſe the 
pope, and the other to give battle to his com- 


petitor. - Accordingly he aſſembled about twenty 080. 


biſhops at Brixen in the county of Tyrol, who, 
with the concurrence of the — of 31 
excommunicated and depoſed Gregory VII. as an 
encourager of tyrants, and one that was guilty of 
ſimony, ſacrilege, and ſorcery. They then pro- 
ceeded to the election of a new pope, and con- 
ferred this dignity on Guibert archbiſhop of Ra- 
venna. While this new pope hurries away to 
Lombardy, in order to excite the people againſt 
Gregory; Henry puts himſelf at the head of his 
army, and marches againſt Rodolph his rival. 
Was it exceſs of enthuſiaſm; or what we call a 
pious fraud, that induced Gregory to predict 
that Henry would be vanquiſhed and lain in 
the courſe of this war? Let me be no longer popes 
ſays he in a letter to the German biſhops of his 
party, F it will not fall out fo before St. Peter's 
day. Sound reaſon telis us, that whoever pre- 
tends to foretell future events, is either a knave 
or a fool. But let us conſider the reigning pre- 
judices of thoſe days. Judicial aſtrology was 
ever the ſuperſtition of the learned : and Gregory 
is accuſed of having liſtened to Aſtrologers. In 
the act of his depoſition at Brixen, it is a” 

ed, 


281 


. 
: 
: 
<0 
4 
AY 
1 
1 
r 
£264 
4 - 
+ 
i 
2 
* 
* 
* 
W 
1 
= 
7 
1 
59 
17. 
1 
2 5 
- 7 
vB 
2 
1 
4 
. 1 
"2 
x 
< ". 
XK 
9 
: * 
, 1 
A 
** 
7 
| 
5 
4 
a! 
1 
0 þ 4 
1 
4 
1 
TY 
F 
4% 
4 
N 
* 
4 
* 
1 
* 
1 
. 
* 
,” 
ay 
1 
: 


1080. 


Henry IV. Ch. xxxvi. 


ed, that he concerned himſelf in the interpreting 
of dreams; and it was on this foundation that 
they accuſed him of ſorcery. He was treated as 
an impoſtor becauſe of this falſe and ſtrange pre- 
diction; when perhaps his only guilt was tuo 
much credulity, 

His prediction fell out upon his own creature 
Rodolph, who met with a complete overthrow, 
Godfrey of Bouillon, nephew of the counteſs Ma- 
tilda, the ſame who afterwards made the con- 
queſt of Jeruſalem, ſlew this emperor whom the 
pope was ſo proud of having elected. Who 
could believe, that Gregory upon hearing of this 
event, inſtead of courting Henry, ſhould write 
to all the biſhops of Germany, that they muſt 
proceed to the election of another ſovereign, on 
condition of his yielding homage to the holy ſee ? 
Theſe letters ſhew plainly, that there was till in 
Germany a powerful party againſt Henry. 

At this very time it was that the pope ordered 
his legates in France, to demand a yearly tribute 
of a ſilver denier for every houſe, as was the 
practice in England. 

He treated Spain even in a more deſpotic man- 
ner; for he pretended to be the lord paramount 
of the whole kingdom: and in his fixth letter 
he ſays, that it is much better it ſhould belong 
to the Saracens, than not to yield homage to the 
holy ſee. 

He wrote thus to Salomon, king of Hungary, 
a country which at that time had hardly em- 
braced Chriſtianity, 4+ You may learn from the 
&« elders of your nation, that the kingdom of 
Hungary belongs to the church of Rome.” 


Enterprizes 


IF B= £1 ig 


and Gregory VII. 


Enterprizes of this nature, how raſh ſoever 
they may appear to us, are generally a conſe- 
quence of the prejudices of the times. Undoubted- 
ly. the ignorance which prevailed in thoſe days, 
made a multitude of people believe, that the 
church was abſolute miſtreſs of all kingdoms z 
ſince the pope conſtantly wrote in this ſtyle. 
His inflexibility in regard to Henry was not 
without ſome cauſe; for he had gained ſuch 
an aſcendant over the counteſs. Matilda, as to 
perſuade her to make an authentic donation of 
her territories to the holy ſee, reſerving to herſelf 
only the ufufruct during life. It is not known, 
whether there was a public inſtrument of this 
donation. It was the cuſtom for thoſe who gave 
away their lands to the church, to put a lump of 
earth upon the altar. Witneſſes rendered the 
deed authentic : and Matilda is ſaid to have given 
away all her lands twice to the holy ſee.  —» 
The truth of this donation, . afterwards con- 
firmed by her will, was not diſputed in the leaſt 
by Henry IV. This is the moſt authentic title 
that was ever ſet up by the popes: and yet this 
very title proved a ſubject of freſh quarrels, The 
counteis Matilda was in poſſeſſion of Tuſcany, 
Mantua, Parma, Reggio, Placentia, Ferrara, Mo- 
dena, part: of Umbria, and the dutchy of Spoleto, 
with Verona, and almoſt all that is now. called the 
patrimony of St. Peter, from Viterbo to Orvieto, 
and part of the marquiſate of Ancona. EN 

Henry III. had granted this marquiſate to the 
popes ; yet this grant did not hinder the mother of 
the counteſs of Matilda from putting herſelf into 
poſſeſſion of towns, which ſhe conſidered as her 
property. One wou'd think that Matilda wanted 

to 


x0? r. 


Henry IV. Ch. xxxvi, 


to repair after her mother's deceaſe, the injury 
ſhe had done the holy ſee when living, But ſhe 
could not give away fiefs that were unalienable ; 
and the emperors pretended that her whole patri- 
mony was a hef of the empire. She was mak- 
ing a grant of lands that were firſt to be conquer- 
ed; which was intailing war on thoſe who reaped 
her inheritance. Henry IV. as next heir and 


lord paramount looked upon this donation, as an 


infringement of the rights of the empire; yet 
aſter a long ſtruggle the holy ſee kept poſſeſſion of 
part of thoſe dominions. This donation was 
made alittle after the emperor had humbled him- 
ſelf before the pope at Canoſa: and Henry was 
the next heir of Matilda, both as a relation and 
as lord paramount, | 
Henry breathing revenge came at length and 
laid ſiege to Rome, and ſoon made himſelf maſter 
of the part of the town on this fide the Tiber, 
which 1s called the Leonina, While he menaces 
the pope, he enters into a treaty with the 
citizens, and: gains the chief inhabitants by 
money. The people throw themſelves at Gre- 
gory's feet, intreating him to avert the miſeries 
of a ſiege, and to ſubmit to the emperor. The 
mtrepid pontif replies, that the emperor muſt do 
penance once more, if he expects to receive 
abſolution. | 
Henry at firſt carried on the ſiege in perſon, 
but was afterwards obliged to leave the direc- 
tion of it to his generals, in order to go and 
quell a revolt in — : this occaſioned the 
ſiege to be protracted; but at length the city 
was taken by ſtorm. It is ſurprizing, that the 


German emperors ſhould have ſo often made 
we” themſelves 


and Gregory VII. 


themſelves maſters of Rome, and yet never choſe 
to reſide there. But Gregory VII. was not yet 
taken; for he had retired into the caſtle of St. 
Angelo, from whence he ſtill defied and excom- 
municated the emperor, 

Rome was ſeverely puniſhed for her pope's ambi- 
tion. Robert Guiſcard, duke of Apulia, one of 
the famous Normans, of whom I have already 
made mention, took the opportunity of the empe- 
ror's abſence, to come to the pope's aſſiſtance: but 
at the ſame time he plundered Rome, which was 
equally a prey to the Imperialiſts who beſieged the 
pope, and to the Neapolitans who ſet him free. 
Gregory VII. died ſome time after at Salerno the 
24th of May 1085, leaving behind him a memory 
dear and ſacred to the Roman clergy who inherited 
his pride, but deteſtable to the emperors and to eve- 
ry good citizen, who conſiders the effects of his in- 
flexible ambition. The church, whoſe cauſe he 
avenged, and to whom he died a victim, has 
ranked him in the liſt of Saints, as the antients 
uſed to place their defenders among the Gods. 

The counteſs Matilda having loſt pope Gre- 

ory, ſoon after married the young prince 
Guiife, ſon of Guelfe, duke of Bavaria. Then 
was ſeen the imprudence ſhe had been guilty of 
in making the abovementioned donation : for ſhe 
was only two and forty years of age, and ſhe 
might ſtill have had children, who muſt have 
engaged in a civil war to recover their inheri- 
_ tance, | | | 


The death of Gregory VII. did not extinguiſh 


the flames he had kindled. His ſucceſſors would 


not ſubmit to have their elections approved of by 
the emperor; and inſtead of yielding homage to 
| others, 


285 


4 
9 
* 
fk 
"8 
UN 
* 
79 8 
[ + 
+ 
by 24 
: 
4 
* 
7 
V 
1 
4+ 
s + 
. * 
5 
+378 
"41 
1. 
$1, 
133 
x5 
a4 
Al 
"hp 
. , 
7 
1 " 
4 
* 30 
1 
Ro 
1 
2 „ 
a} 
" 
1 
. 
93 1 
= 
ed 
#1 
* b 
v 1 
of 
n 
1 


. 
4 
„ 
1 
1 
1 
nf 
* 
75 
£ 
4 
4 
W 
. 
\ 
8 
i 
i 
1 
q 


- — ca 
— 2 


- —— — 04 — « - 
38" * = 1 2 7 "<> 
* 


1 


2 — 
FP 


mony. 


Benny IV. Ch. xxxvi. 


others, they expected it ſhould be paid to them- 
ſelves: beſides, if an emperor was excommuni- 
cated, he ceaſed to be looked upon as a human 
creature, Hildebrand the monk was ſucceeded 
by an abbot of mount Caſſino, who had the 
ſame ſpirit; but his reign was very ſhort : 
to him ſucceeded Urban II. a Frenchman of 
obſcure birth, who reigned eleven years; and 
both of them proved bitter enemies to the em- 
peror. 

It ſeems evident to me, that the real bottom 
of the quarrel was this: the popes and the Ro- 
mans did not chuſe that the emperors ſhould 
have any power in Rome; and the pretext, to 
which they would fain give the ſanction of reli- 
gion, was that the popes, being depoſitaries of 
the rights of the church, could not permit pro- 
fane princes to inveſt the biſhops with the croſier 
and ring. There could be no doubt but the bi- 
ſhops, as ſubjects of princes, and enriched by 
them, owed them homage for the lands which 
they held by their benevolence. The emperors 
and kings did not pretend to give the holy Ghoſt 
to thoſe biſhops, but they wanted them to ſwear 
fealty for their temporalities, which were ſurely 
their gift. The croſier and ring were acceſſories 
to the main queſtion : but it happened here as in 
almoſt all diſputes ; they neglected the eſſential 
point, and wrangled about an indifferent cere- 
Henry IV. conftantly excommunicated and 
perſecuted under this pretence by every pope in 
his time, experienced all the miſeries that reli- 
gious and civil wars are capable of producing. 
Urban II. ſtirred up his own ſon Conrad ae, 

; Hbim; 


and Gregory VII. 287 


him; and after the death of this unnatural ſon, his 
brother, who was afterwards the emperor Henry 
V, made war againſt his father, This was the 
ſecond time fince Charlemaign that the popes 
perſuaded children to take up arms againſt their 
parent. 1 

Henry IV. deceived by his ſon Henry, as 1106. 
Lewis the Debonnair had been by his, was con- 
fined in Mentz. There he was depoſed by two 
of the popes legates; and two deputies of the 
diet, ſent by his ſon, ſtripped him of his Im- 
perial robes. 

Not long afterwards he made his eſcape out of 
priſon, and wandered about in great diſtreſs and 
poverty, without finding any aſſiſtance. At 
length he died in Liege, in a more miſerable Aug. 7 
condition than Gregory VII. and in ſtill greater 
obſcurity, after having ſo long engaged the at- 
tention of all Europe, by his victories, his gran- 
deur, his misfortunes, his vices, and his virtues. 
With his laſt breath he cried out, 7½% God thou 
wilt revenge this parricide. In all ages mankind 
have imagined that God gave ear to the curſes of 
dying perſons, and eſpecially of parents : an er- 
ror of ſome uſe and value, could it be a bar to 
villainy. Another error obtained more general- 
ly, that perſons dying under excommunication 
were damned : the fon of Henry IV. put the 
finiſning ſtroke to his impiety, by affecting the 
barbarous religion of digging up the body of his 
father, which lay buried in the cathedral of Liege, 
and ordering it to be removed to a vault at Spire. 

Thus did he complete his unnatural hypocriſy. 


— — — 3 wY 2 
1 — . ˙ A | — I T + 
_— " a — - — = > WF ors ” * 722 - by . — - = ” - — af a — 
— — K N © — * 0 n 2 — — Pu ** „ 1 neX 
: STO SIS « -- 1 yo — — — y — . ST AT ——_ 
— > : r — 8 : 22 - 


” * 

A — * be = r 
; - — p ——— — IS - 
GEES IT CNTR Oo 27 8 


R — 
1 


— — — 


1 


— ͤ——— 


ne een ooo — Be 4 
"Xx! * — — — 
—— . et and ara hes 5 
— * % s 
gt >. n 4 
2 2 1 


wp — — 
— — * 


| ian 


| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 


1107, 


Of the emperor Ch. xxxvii, 


CHAP. XXXVII. 


Of the emperor Henry V. and 4 Rome, to the 
reign of Frederick I. 


HIS Henry V. whoin virtue of the pope's 


| bull had dethroned his father, maintained the 


ſame prerogatives as his father againſt the church, 
as ſoon as he was poſleſſed of the ſovereignty, 
The popes had already learnt to ſhelter them- 
ſelves againſt the emperors under the protection of 
the kings of France; it is true, the papal preten- 
ſions ſtruck directly at the authority of all ſove- 
reigns, but they knew how to ſoften by treaties 


' thoſe whom they inſulted by their bulls. The 


kings of France had no pretenſions at Rome; 
they were likewiſe.neighbours to Germany, and 
Jealous of its princes; of courſe they were the 
natural allies of the popes. This encouraged 
Paſchal II. to come into France, to implore the 
aſſiſtance of king Philip; and his ſucceſſors often 
followed his example. The pope, notwithſtand- 
ing ſo many donations made to the church of 
Rome, and even that of the counteſs Matilda, 
was not yet grown a powerful prince. All theſe 
eſtates were either conteſted or poſſeſſed by o- 
thers, The emperor probably maintained, that 
Matilda's lands ought to revert to him as a fief 
of the empire; and thus the popes were engaged 
both in a ſpiritual and temporal quarrel. All 
that Paſchal II. could obtain of Philip II. was 2 
permiſſion to hold a council at Troyes; the go- 
vernment being then too weak, and too much 
divided to aſſiſt him with troops. 

| Henry 


TOW Ts 7 


a 


d 


Henry V. &c. 289 


Henry V. having, after a ſhort war, concluded 
a treaty with the Poles, engaged the princes of 
the empire to ſupport his right: and now thoſe 
very princes, who had helped to dethrone his fa- 
ther in virtue of the pope's bulls, joined with 
the ſon to cauſe thoſe bulls to be annulled at 
Rome. 
The emperor paſſed the Alps with a powerful 1111. 
army, and Rome was once more a ſcene of blood 
for this quarrel about the croſier and ring. Trea- 
ties, perjuries, excommunications and murders, 
ſucceeded each other with the greateſt rapidity. 
Paſchal II. having ſolemnly given up the point of 
inveſtitures by ſwearing upon the goſpels, made 
the cardinals annul his oath; a new way of break - 
ing his word. He ſuffered himſelf to be treated 
in full council as a coward and a prevaricator, in 
order to be obliged to reſume what he had given 
away. The emperor then marches a ſecond time 
to Rome; for thoſe German Czfars hardly ever 
went thither but on the account of ecclefiaſtical 
diſputes, the chief of which was the ceremony of 
the coronation, At length this Henry V. after 
having created, depoſed, baniſhed, and recalled . 
ſeveral popes, and after having been as often ex- 
communicated as his father, and like him diſturbed 
by his great vaſſals in Germany, was obliged to 
terminate the war about the inveſtitures by renoun- 
eing the croſier and the ring. He went further; 
for he ſolemnly reſigned the right which he as 
well as the kings of France had claimed, of no- 
minating to biſhoprics, or of interfering in ſuch 
a manner at elections, as to have the abſolute diſ- 
poſal of them, 


1120. 


Vol. I. O It 


1125. 


Of the emperor Ch. xxxvii. 


Tt was then determined in a council held at 
Rome, that kings ſhould no longer grant inveſti- 
tures, with the ceremony of a crooked ſtaff, but 
with a ring. The emperor confirmed in Germa- 
ny the decrees of this council, and thus this bloody 
and prepoſterous war was ended. But at the ſame 
time that the council decided ſo particularly the 
kind of ſtaff with which the biſhoprics were to 
be granted, they took care not to meddle with 
the queſtion, whether the emperor had a right to 
nominate to the ſee of Rome ? or whether the 
pope was his vaſſal ? or whether the eſtate of the 
counteſs Matilda bclonged to the church, or to 
the empire? It ſeems as if they had reſerved all 
theſe points 2s fuel for a new war, 

After the death of Henry V. without iſſue, the 
empire being ſtil] elective, was by means of an 
archLiſhop of Mentz, conferred on a prince «of 
the houſe of Saxony, named Lotharius II. I here 
was much Icfs intrigue and quarrel about the Im- 
perial throne than the papal chair ; for though it 
had been ordained in a council held in 1059, by 
pope Nicholas III. that the pope ſhould be elect- 
ed by cardinal biſhops, yet there was no ſet form 
or rule as yet eftabliſhed in theſe elections. I his 
t ſſential deſect in the government was owing to 
the aſſemblies of the primitive Chriſtians, who 
being generally obſcure people, and united toge- 
ther by the common dread of the magiſtrates, ſc- 
cretly governed their poor and holy ſociety by a 
plurality of voices. But riches having afterwards 
ſucczeded to indigenee, all that 2 ＋ 5 of the 

imitive church, was this popular Ii now 
— into licentiouſneſs. The cardinals, biſhops, 
prieſts, and clergy, who compoſed the pn 

- cone, 


„* 


r 


Henry V. e. 


council, had a great ſhare in the election; but 
the reſt of the clergy wanted alſo to enjoy their 
antient right ; the people likewiſe looked upon 
their ſuffrage as neceſlary ; and the emperors were 


of opinion, that all theſe votes together ſignified 
nothing. 


Peter of Leon, ſon of a wealthy Jew, was eleCt- 1730. 


ed by one faction: and Innocent II. by another. 
This occaſioned a civil war : the Jew's ſon, be- 
ing the richeſt of the two, remained maſter of 
Rome, and was protected by Roger, king of Si- 
cily (as hath been ſhewn in the 31ſt chapter ;) 
the other being more artful and more fortunate, 
was acknowledged in France and Germany. 
Here comes in an hiſtorical fact worthy of our 
particular notice. This Innocent IL in order to 
gain the emperor's vote, 3 to him and to his 
children the uſuftuct of all the demeſnes belong - 
ing to the counteſs Matilda, by a deed dated 
the 13th of June 1133. At length the He- 
brew pope dying after a reizn of eight years, 
Innocent II. was left peaceable poſſeſſor of the 
ſee of Rome, and a truce followed for ſome years 
between the prieſthood and the empire, The 
enthuſtaſm of the cruſades, which was then at its 
keight, gave to people's minds another turn. 
me, however, was not yet quiet ; the antient 
love of liberty was not intirely rooted out of the 


people's breaſts: ſeveral cities in Italy had taken__ 
the opportunity of theſe troubles, to erect theme 


ſelves into republics, fuch as Florence, Sienna, 
Bologna, Milan, Pavia. Rome had likewiſe the 
great examples before her eyes of Genoa, Venice, 
and Piſa, and ſtill remembered that ſhe had given 
birth to the Scipios. The people re- eſlab A 

O 2 fradow 


291 


292 O the emperor Ch. xxxvii. 


ſhadow of a ſenate, whom the cardinals had abo- 
liſhed ; and created a patrician inſtead of two con- 

1144. ſuls. The new ſenate ſignified to pope Lucius II. 
that the ſovereignty reſided in the people of Rome, 
and that the biſhop ought to have no other care 
than that of conſciences. 

The ſenators entrenched themſelves in the capi- 
tol, which pope Lucius laid ſiege to in perſon ; 
but was wounded in the head with a ſtone, of 

which he died a few days after, 

At the ſame time Arnold of Breſcia, one of 
thoſe enthuſiaſtical men, who are dangerous to 
themſelves and the reſt of mankind, went about 
from town to town, preaching againſt the im- 
menſe riches and luxury of the clergy. He came 
to Rome, where he found the minds of the peo- 
ple diſpoſed to receive his doCtrine; he had a no- 
tion of reforming the popes, and of reſtoring the 
liberty of that capital. Eugenius III. hereto- 
fore a Ciſtercian monk, was then pope. St. Ber- 
nard wrote to him in theſe words: Beware of 
< the Romans; they are odious to heaven and 
* earth, guilty of impiety againſt God, and of 
ce rebellion againſt man; jealous of their neigh- 
* bours, cruel to ſtrangers : they love nobody, 
t and 2 loves them: deſirous of mak- 
ing every body fear them, they are afraid of 
« all the world, &c.” If we compare theſe anti- 
theſes with the lives of ſo many of theſe popes, 
whom we have mentioned, it would be eaſy to 
find an excuſe for a people who bore-the name 
of Romans, and wanted to get rid of their maſters. 
Pope Eugene III. managed things ſo as to bring 
theſe people back to their accuſtomed yoke, The 

2155, ſenate continued ſome years after that: but _— 


A 


Henry V. c. 


of Breſcia reaped no other fruit from his ſermons, 
than being burnt at Rome under Adrian IV; the 
ordinary fate of reformers, who have more indiſ- 
cretion than power. 

I think it is proper here to obſerve, that this 
Adrian IV. an Engliſhman by birth, had arrived 
to this pitch of grandeur from the meaneſt condi- 
tion of human life. He was a beggar's ſon, and 
had been a beggar himſelf, ſtrolling about from 
country to country, before he could obtain to be 
admitted as a fervant among the monks of Valence 
in Dauphine: by degrees he afterwards raiſed 
himſelf, and at length was elected pope. * 2 
Mankind generally meaſure their behaviour by 
their preſent fortune. Adrian IV. was ſo much 
the more haughty, as he had raiſed himſelf to this 
dignity from the moſt abject condition. The 
church of Rome had always this advantage, of 
giving to merit what in other places is the conſe- 
quence of high birth: and it is obſervable that thoſe 
popes who have behaved with the higheſt ſpirit, 
were generally perſons of the loweſt extraction. 
There are monaſteries now in Germany that ad- 
mit of none but perſons of noble families: Rome 
acts with more ſpirit, and leſs vanity. 


RR eee ee ede dt z 


CHAP. XXXVIII. 
Of Frederick Barbaroſſa. 
A that time reigned in Germany Fre- 1152. 


derick I. commonly called Barbaroſſa, a 
prince comparable to the Othos and the Char- 


3 lemaigns: 


294 


Of Frederick Barbaroſſa. Ch. xxxviii. 


lemaigns : he was choſen after the deceaſe of 
his uncle Conrad III. not only by the German 
lords, but likewiſe by the Lombards, . who gave 
their votes on this occaſion, He was obliged 
to go to Rome for this Imperial crown, which 
the popes gave with ſuch pride and ſuch re- 
gret, wanting to crown him as a vaſſal, and 
vexed to ſee him their maſter, This ambiguous 
fituation of the popes, of the emperors, the Ro- 
mans, and the principal cities of Italy, cauſed the 
effuſion of human blood every time an emperor 
was crowned, The cuſtom was, that when the 
emperor drew near to Rome in order for his coro- 


-nation, the pope entrenched himſelf, the people 


ſtood upon their guard, and all Italy was up in 
arms. The emperor promiſed, that he would 
make no attempt either againſt the life, the per- 
ſon, or the honour of the pope, the cardinals, 
and the magiſtrates : a knight armed cap-a-pee 
made this oath upon the croſs in the name of Fre- 
dericx. The pope went to meet the emperor ſome 
miles from Rome. The Roman ceremonial re- 
quired, that his Imperial majeſty ſhould proſtrate 
himſelf before the pope, kiſs his feet, hold his 
ſtirrup, and lead the holy father's white pad by 
the bridle the diſtance of nine Roman paces. 
It was not thus the popes received Charlemaign ; 
Frederick looked upon this ceremony as a piece 
of inſolence, and refuſed to ſubmit to it: upon 
which all the cardinals fled, as if by this ſacrile- 
gious non-compliance he had given the ſignal for a 
civil war. But the Roman chancery, who kept 
a regiſter of acts of this kind, made him ſenſible 
that his predeceſſors had complied with this part 


of their duty. I queſtion, whether any other em- 
| peror, 


— em „ 


Of Frederick Barbaroſſa. 

peror, except Lotharius II. ſon of Henry V. had 
led the pope's horſe by the bridle. However, 
the ceremony of kifling the pope's toe, was not 
ſo ſhocking to Frederick, becauſe cuſtom had 
eſtabliſhed it: it was the leading the horſe by the 
bridle, and the holding the ſtirrup, that filled him 
with indignation becauſe it appeared new. Yet 
his pride ſubmitted at length to thoſe two affronts, 
which he conſidered only as empty marks of Chri- 
ſtian humility, while they were looked upon by 
the Romans as proofs of ſubjection. 

The deputies of the' people of Rome were 
grown ſo infolent, fince almoſt all the other cities 
of Italy, had rung the alarm for liberty, that they 
wanted to ſtipulate on their ſide with the emperor ; 
but upon their opening their harangue with theſe 
words: Great king, we have made you our 
e fellow-citizen, and our prince, you that was 
« a foreigner.” The emperor provoked at fo 
much pride, ſilenced them, and told them in plain 
terms, Rome is no longer what it was former- 
« ly; it is not true, that you invited me into Ita- 
é ly and made me your prince; Charlemaign 
« and Otho conquered you by their proweſs : 
and I am by eſtabliſhed poſſeſſion your lawful 


296 


„ maſter.” With this anſwer he diſmiſſed them; [une 
and he was inaugurated without the walls of the 15. 
city by the pope, who put the ſceptre and ſword ''55” 


into his hands, and the crown on his head, 

At that time they had ſo confuſed an idea of the 
dignity and rights of the empire, and their ſeveral 
pretenſions were ſo contradictory to each other, 


that on the one hand the Romans mutinied, and 


there was à great deal of blood ſpilt, becauſe the 


pope had crowned the emperor without the conſent 
SIS 1 O 4 of 


Of Frederick Barbroſſa. Ch. xxxviii. 


of the ſenate and the people ; and on the other 
hand pope Adrian wrote in all his letters, that he 
had conferred the benefice of the Roman empire 
an Frederick, beneficium Imperii Romani : this 
word beneficium literally ſignified a hef. Moreover 
he exhibited to public view a picture in Rome, in 
which was repreſented Lotharius II. on his knees 
before pope Alexander II. holding both his hands 
Joined between thoſe of the pontif, which was the 
charaCteriſtic of vaſlalage. The inſcription on 
the picture was, | 
Rex venit ante fores, jurans prius urbis honores : 
Poſt homo fit pape, F quo dante coronam. 
That is: The king ſwears at the gate to main- 
« tain the honour of Rome; and he becomes 
<< the pope's vaſſal, who grants him the crown.“ 
Frederick was then at Beſancon, (for what we 
cail Franche Comte, a part of the kingdom of 
Burgundy, had devolved to him by marriage) 
where he heard of theſe encroachments, and com- 
plained of them to his courtiers. A cardinal then 
preſent made anſwer: ** And of whom then does 
«© he hold the empire, but of the pope ? This 
ſpeech irritated Otho count Palatine to ſuch a de- 
gree, that he was very near running him through 
the body with the Imperial ſword, which he held 
in his hand: the cardinal ran away, and the pope 
negotiated. The Germans in thoſe days cut eve- 
ry knot with the ſword; and the court of Rome 
got off by equivocations. 3 
Roger, conqueror of the Muſſulmen in Sicily, 


and of the Chriſtians in the kingdom of Naples, 


had obtained the inveſtiture of thoſe countries, 
by kifling the feet of pope Urban II. his priſoner, 


ho reduced the dut ſervice, to ſix hundred 
* o reduce uty, or ſervice, . xn 


Of. Frederick Barbaroſſa. 


beſants of gold, a coin in value about a piſtole. 
When pope Adrian was beſieged by William in 


1156, he yielded to him all eccleſiaſtical preten- 


ſions. He even conſented, that this iſland ſhould 
never have any legate, nor be ſubject to an appeal 
to the ſee of Rome, except when the king pleaſed. 
Ever fince that time the kings of Sicily, though 
the only princes that are vallals to the pope, are 
a kind of popes themſelves in that iſland. The 
Roman pontifs, thus adored and abuſed, - bore a 
reſemblance, if I may dare uſe the expreſſion, to 
the idols which the Indians uſed to beat, in order 
to obtain favours from them. 


297 


Adrian IV. took full revenge of every other 


prince that ſtood in need of his afliſtance ; for thus 


he wrote to Henry II. king of England. There 
6 is no doubt, and you know it well, that Ire- 


land, and all the other iſlands that have em 


6 braced the faith, belong to the church of Rome: 
«© now you want to take poſſeſſion of that iſland, 
* in order to baniſh vice from.thence, to-enforce 


“% an obſervance of the laws, and with an intent 


“e of paying yearly. St. Peter's penny for every 


« houſe; and with pleaſure-we grant you your 


„ requeſt 


If I may be permitted to make ſome reflections 
in this hiſtorical eſſay, I cannot help obſerving 


that the world is ſtrangely governed. An Eng- 


liſh Deggars who was become a biſhop in Italy, 
reland away, by his own authority, to a 


gives 
man who wants to uſurp it. The popes had more 


than once gone to war about the inveſtiture with 


the croſier and ring; and yet Adrian IV. ſends 
king Henry II. a ring as a mark of the inveſtiture 
of Ireland, If a king bad given a ring upon pre- 


ſenting; 


Of Frederick Barbarcſſa. Ch. xxxviii. 


ſenting to a prebend, he would have been guilty 
of ſacrilege. 

The intrepid activity of Frederick Barbaroſſa 
was ſcarcely able to ſubdue the popes who diſputed 
the empire, the Romans who refuſed to ſubmit 
to the yoke, and all the cities of Italy which 
wanted to aſſert their liberty: he was obliged, at 
the ſame time, to check the Bohemians who mu- 
tinied, and the Poles who were at war with him: 
nevertheleſs, he ſucceeded in every point. Po- 
land was conquered, and erected into a tributary 


kingdom: and he quelled the tumults in Bohe- 


mia, which had been already made a kingdom by 
Henry IV. in 1086. It is ſaid alſo, that the king 
of Denmark received the inveſtiture of him, He 


| ſecured the fidelity of the princes of the empire, 


1160. 


by rendering himſelf formidable to foreign na- 
tions; and flew back to Italy, which was eſta- 
bliſhing its liberty on the troubles and perplexi- 
ties of this prince. Here he found every thing 
in the utmoſt confuſion, not ſo much owing to 
the efforts which the ſeveral cities had been mak- 
ing for-the recovery of their liberty, as to that 
of party rages, by which, as I have already 
mentioned, the elections of the popes were di- 
ſtinguiſhed. 

After the death of Adrian IV. two oppoſite ſac- 
tions tumultuouſly elected the perſons called Vic- 
tor II. and Alexander III. The emperor's allies 
were under a neceſſity of acknowledging the ſame 
pope as he did; and thoſe princes who were jea- 
lous of the emperor, acknowledged the other. 
That which was therefore the ſhame and ſcandal 
of Rome, unavoidably became the ſignal of divi- 
ſion and diſcord over all Europe, Victor II. was 

| Fredg+ 


e A or mW gr nt 5 


Of Frederick Barbaroſſa. 


Frederick Barbarofla's pope ; conſequently Ger- 
many, Bohemia, and the halt of Italy, adhered to 
him: the reſt ſubmitted to Alexander. It was in 
honour of this pope that the inhabitants of Milan,. 
the avowed enemies of Frederick, built the city 
of Alexandria. In vain did the partiſans of Fre- 
derick inſiſt it ſhould be called Cæſarea; the 
e's name prevailed, and it was called-* Aleſſan- 
dria della paglia, a ſurname which ſhews the diffe- 
rence between this little city, and others of that 
name formerly built in honour of the real Alex- 
ander. | 
Happy age, had it produced no other diſputes ! 
But Milan, for attempting to recover its liberty, 
was razed to the very foundations, and the empe- 


299 


ror ordered ſalt to be ſown on its ruins. Breſcia, 1162. 


Placentia, were diſmantled by the conqueror; and 
the other cities,, which had endeavoured to ſhake 
off the yoke,. were deprived of their privileges. 
But pope Alexander, who had ſtirred them all up 


to revolt, came back to Rome upon the death of 


his competitor z. and occaſioned a civil war in that 
eity. Frederick cauſed another to be elected pope, 
and upon the death of him, he nominated an- 
other. Upon this Alexander III. retires to France, 
the natural aſylum of every pope who is at vari- 
ance with the emperor. But ſtill the fire he had 
kindled rages with all its fury; the Italian cities 


enter into a confederacy for the maintenance of 


their liberty; and the people of Milan rebuild: 
their city in ſpite of the emperor. The pope at 
length, by negotiating, grew ſtronger than the 
emperor had done by fighting : Frederick was ob- 


liged to give way; and Venice had the honour 1177: 


* Alexandria built of ſtraw. 
O 6 of 


300 Of Frederick Barbaroſſa. Ch. xxxviii. 


of bringing about the reconciliation. The empe- 
ror, the pope, and a multitude of princes and 
cardinals, repaired to this city, already miſtreſs of 
the ſea, and one of the wonders of the world. 
Here the emperor put an end to the diſpute, by 
acknowledging the pope, kiſſing his feet, and 
holding his ſtirrup on the banks of the ſea, Eve- 
ry thing turned to the advantage of the church: 
Frederick promiſed to reſtore what had belonged 
to the holy ſee; but ſtill the lands of the counteſs 
Matilda were not mentioned. At the ſame time 
he made a truce for ſix years with the cities of 
Italy. Milan, which had been lately rebuilt, as 
alſo Pavia, Breſcia, and a great many others, 
thanked the pope for having reſtored them that 
precious liberty for which they had been fighting: 
and the holy father in a tranſport of joy, cried 
out, God has been pleaſed that an old man, and 
<« a prieſt, ſhould triumph over a potent and for- 
1c midable emperor, without bloodſhed.” | 
It is obſervable, that during this long quarrel, 
though pope Alexander III. had often performed 
the ceremony of excommunicating the emperor, 
yet he never went ſo far as to depoſe him. Is 
not this conduct not only a mark of this pope's 8 
great prudence, but likewiſe a general condemna- 
tion of the extravagance of Gregory VII.? 
After the pacification of Italy, Frederick Bar- 
| baroſſa ſet out for the wars of the cruſades, and 
1190, died by bathing himſelf in the Cydnus, of the 


ſame illneſs as that of which Alexander the Great / 
had formerly with ſuch difficulty recovered, when FP 
he plunged himſelf, all over covered with ſweat, is 
into that river, Probably this illneſs was a pleu- ſo 


riſy. 
'E EY Of 


Of Frederick Barùaroſſa. 


Of all the emperors Frederick had carried his 


pretenſions the higheſt, He made the civilians 
in Bologna paſs a determination in 1158, that the 
whole world belonged to him, and that the con- 
trary opinion was heretical. But what was more 
ſubſtantial, at the ceremony of his coronation the 
ſenate and people of Rome took the oath of alle- 
giance to him; an oath that did him no ſervice, 
when pope Alexander III. triumphed over him at 
the congreſs of Venice. The Greek emperor 
Iſaac Angelus never gave him any other title than 
that of advocate of the church of Rome; and 
Rome did all the miſchief ſhe could to her ad- 
vocate, 

As for pope Alexander, he lived four years 
longer in a glorious tranquillity, beloved by Rome 
and all Italy, He enacted in a numerous council, 
that henceforward for the canonical election of a 
pope, it would be ſufficient to have two thirds of 
only the cardinal votes. And yet this regulation 
could not prevent the ſchiſms, which were after- 
wards cauſed by what they. call in Italy /a rabbia 
papale F, 


' 


FCC I I I AY 


CH AP. XXXIX. 
Of the emperor Henry VI. and of Rome. 


301 


HE quarrel betwixt Rome and the German 1191. 


empire was ſtill carried on with vigour. It 

is mentioned by hiſtorians, that when Henry VI. 
ſoa of the emperor Frederick Barbaroſſa received 
* The papal madneſs, | 

upon 


Of the emperor Ch. xxxix. 
upon his knees the Imperial crown of Celeſtine 
III. the holy father, who was then upwards 
of fourſcore, kicked it off the emperor's head 
with his foot. The fact is not at all probable : 
but its being believed ſhews ſufficiently to what a 
degree the animoſity of parties was carried. Had 
the pope behaved in that indecent manner, it 
would have been only a mark of dotage. 

This coronation of the emperor Henry VI. 
exhibits to our view a far nobler object, and in- 
tereſts of higher importance. He wanted to be 
king of the two Sicilies; and notwithſtanding 
his Imperial dignity, he conſented to receive the 
pope's inveſtiture for dominions, which heretofore 
r homage to the empire, and of which he 

ooked upon himſelf as lord paramount and lawful. 
proprietor, He defires to be the pope's liege 
vaſſal, and his holineſs refufes him. The Ro- 
mans would neither have Henry VI. for their 
On, nor the king of Naples for their 
maſter; yet they were obliged to have him 
whether they would or not. Some nations 
feem doomed to ſervitude, and to ſubmit to the 
firſt invader. Of the legitimate line of the 
Norman conquerors, there was none remaining 
but the princeſs Conſtantia, daughter of king 
William II. and married to Henry VI. Tancred, 
a baſtard of this line, had been recognized as ſo- 
vereign by the people and by the ſee of Rome. 
The queſtion then was, who ſhould be king; 
Tancred, whot had the right by election, or 
Henry who had a right by his wife ? The point 
was to be decided by the ſword. In vain did the 
people of the two Sicilies proclaim the young * 

a R * 


Henry VI. and of Rome. 303 


of Tancred upon the death of his father: it was 
Henry's good fortune to prevail. 1193. 

One of the meaneſt actions a ſovereign can 
be guilty of, contributed to this prince's ſucceſs, 
Richard coeur de lion, the valiant king of Eng- 
land, in his return from a cruſade, having been 
caſt away upon the coaſt of Dalmatia, with 
difficulty eſcaped on ſhore, and travelled through 
the territories of the duke of. Auſtria, This 
duke in defiance of the laws of hoſpitality, made 
the king of England priſoner, and fold him 
to the emperor Henry VI. as the Arabs ſell 
their ſlaves. Henry inſiſts on a large ranſom, 
and with the money undertakes the conqueſt 
of the two Sicilies. Having ſucceeded in his 
expedition : he orders the body of king Tancred 
to be dug up, and beheaded by the public ex- 
ecutioner 3 a ſhocking and uſeleſs act of bar- 
barity. The young king his ſon, after having 
had his eyes plucked out, was caſtrated, and con- 
fined to a priſon in Coire in the country of the 
Griſons. His ſiſters were impriſoned in Alſace 
along with their mother. The adherents of this 
unfortunate family, whether lords, or biſhops, 
died by the hands of the executioner, The 
treaſure was all plundered, and carried into Ger- 


_ 

Thus the crown of Naples and Sicily was 
transferred to Germans, after having been con- 
quered by the French: And ſuch a number of 
fair provinces fell under the dominion of ſove- k 
reigns, whom nature had placed at the diſtance 0M 
of three hundred leagues. This has been a per- Ky 4 
petual ſource of diſcord; and a very ſtrong proof * 
of the prudence of ſuch a regulation as the _—_ 


304 


Of the emperor Ch. xxxiy; 


law; a law ftill more advantageous to a ſmall 
than to an extenſive ſtate. Henry VI. was then 
more powerful than Frederick Barbaroſſa; almoſt 
deſpotic in Germany, ſovereign of Lombardy, 
Naples, and Sicily, and lord paramount of Rome; 
ſo that he began to be formidable to all Europe, 
But his cruelty. ruined him ; his own wife Con- 
ſtantia, whoſe family he had extirpated, is ſaid to 
have conſpired againſt his life, and to have poiſo- 


2198. ned the tyrant. - 


Upon the death of Henry VI. the empire of 
Germany was divided. This was not the caſe of 
France; becauſe the French were prudent, or 
fortunate enough to eſtabliſh the order of ſucceſ- 
ſion. But the Imperial title, affected by Ger- 
many, contributed to render the crown eleQtive : 
every biſhop and every great lord gave his vote. 
This right of electing, and being elected, flat- 
tered the ambition of the ſeveral - princes, and 
was ſometimes the. cauſe of the misfortunes of 
the empire. 


1198. The young Frederick II. ſon of Henry VI. 


was juſt out of his cradle, when he was choſen 
emperor by a faction, who gave the title of 
King of the Romans to his uncle Philip: another 
party choſe Otho of Saxony. From theſe diviſi- 
ons of Germany the popes reaped a very different 
advantage, from what the emperors had received 
from thoſe of Italy. 

At length Innocent III. ſon of a gentleman of 
Anagni, in the neighbourhood of Rome, raiſed 
the ſtructure of that temporal power, the materials 
of which his predeceſſors had been collecting 
during the ſpace of four hundred years. T he ex- 
communicating of Philip, the attempting to de- 


throne. 


os 


> ad A SS ms Jud os. wh O£%  awwnk ts Aw * 


Do a WT. 5 80 


a =X © 


Henry VI. and of Rome, 


throne young Frederick, the pretending to exclude 
forever the houſe of Swabia, ſo odious to the 
popes, from the throne of Germany and Italy, 
in ſhor!, the aſpiring to be maſters of crowned 
heads, was quite agreeable to the ordinary ſtyle 
of the ſee of Rome ſince the time of Gregory 
VII. But Innocent III. did not ſtop at ſuch 
ceremonious trifles: he had now a fair oppor- 
tunity, which he readily embraced, of recovering 
the patrimony of St. Peter, which had been ſo 
long conteſted, and was part of the famous in- 
heritance of the counteſs Matilda. 

Thus Romagna, Umbria, the March of An- 
cona, Orbitello, and Viterbo, acknowledged the 
pope for their fovereign; and his dominion ex- 
tended from ſea to ſea. The Romans did not 
carry their arms further the four firſt ages of their 


republic, nor were theſe countries of ſuch value 


to them as they proved to the popes. Innocent 
III. made even the conqueſt of Rome; ſo that 
the new ſenate paid him obeiſance, and became 
the papal, not the Roman ſenate: the title of 
Conſul was alſo aboliſhed. The Roman pontifs 
began from that time to be kings indeed, and 
the prejudices of religion occaſionally rendered 
them the maſters of crowned heads. But this 
great temporal power in Italy was not of long 
continuance. | 

The diſputes, which in thofe days aroſe be- 
tween the heads of the church, and France, 
Germany, and England, are of a moſt intereſt- 
ing nature. You have ſeen the quarrels between 
the prieſthood and the empire down to pope In- 
nocent III. and to the emperors Philip, Henry, 


and Otho, while Frederick II, was ſtill in his 
| minority. 


305 


Of France and England Ch. xl. 


minority, We muſt now turn our attention to 
France and England, and to the intereſts which 
theſe kingdoms had to manage with the empire 
of Germany. 


eee eee 


CHAP. XL, 


The flate of France and England, till the reigns of 
St. Lewis, and of 91 Lackland, and Henry 
II. during the twelfth Century. Great change 
in the public adminifiration in England and 
France. Murder of Thomas Becket, archbiſhop 
of Canterbury, England becomes a province to 

me, c. 


HE feudal government was eftabliſhed al- 

moſt all over Europe, and the laws of chi- 
valry were in all countries very near the ſame, 
Particularly in France it was regulated, that if 
the lord of a fief ſaid to his vaſſal, Come along 
« with me, for I want to wage war againſt the 
« king my E who refuſes to do me juſ- 
&« tice:” the vaſſal was obliged immediately to 
wait upon the king, and to aſk him whether it 
Was true, that he had denied to do juſtice to that 
lord. In caſe the king refuſed it, the vaſſal was 
forced to join his lord, and to march with him 


againſt the king within a limited number of days, 


under penalty of loſing his fief. Such a regula- 


tion might properly be intitled, Au ordinance to 


wage a ciuil war, 


King 


. 


a * © 


> D JJ, K 1 


in the 12th century. 


King Lewis the Fat was long employed in 
fighting againſt the barons within ſeven or eight 
leagues of Paris. 

Lewis the Young had acquired a vaſt eſtate by 
marriage, but loſt it by a divorce. Eleanor his 
wife, heireſs of Guienne and Poitou, affronted 
him in ſuch a manner as a huſband could not put 
up with. This princeſs was ſo tired of attending 
her huſband in thoſe celebrated and unfortunate 
cruſades, that ſhe reſolved to indemnify herſelf, 
to uſe her own words, for the wretched hours ſhe 
was obliged to ſpend in company with a king, who 
was fitter to be a monk. The king cauſed his 
marriage to be annulled under pretence of being 
too near a-kin: thoſe who have cenſured this 
prince for not keeping the dowry when he re- 
pudiated his wife, do not reflect that in thoſe days 
a king of France had not power ſufficient to com- 
mit ſuch an act of 1 — 

A deſcendant of William the Conqueror, al- 
ready maſter of Normandy, Maine, Anjou, and 
Tourraine, was not ſo nice as Lewis the Young z 
but thought it no diſgrace to marry a wanton 
lady, that brought him Guienne and Poitou for 
her dowry. This was Henry II. afterwards king 
of England, who paid homage to the king of 
France for thoſe territories, which the latter 
would have been glad to pay to the Engliſh king. 

The feudal government was equally diſagree- 
able to the kings of France, England, and Ger- 
many, Thoſe kings undertook, almoſt at the 
ſame time, and by the ſame meaſures, to raiſe 
troops independently of their vaſſals. Lewis the 
Young granted privileges to all the towns in his 
demeſnes, on condition that the inhabitants . 

eac 


307 


308 


Of France and England Ch. xi, 


each pariſh ſhould repair to the army under the 
banner of the ſaint of their parochial church, as 
the kings themſelves marched under the banner 
of St. Denis. Numbers of bondmen were en- 
franchiſed at that time, and became citizens ; 
and the citizens had the privilege of chuſing 
their municipal officers, their ſheriffs, and their 
mayors. 7 

The zra of the re-eſtabliſhment of this 
municipal government of the cities and boroughs, 
may be fixed towards the year 1137 and 1138. 
Henry II. of England granted the ſame privileges 
to ſeveral towns, in order to get money from 
them for the raiſing of troops, 
The emperors practiſed almoſt the ſame arti- 
fices in Germany, The city of Spire, for ex- 
ample, purchaſed in 1166, the privilege of chuſing 
her own burgomaſters, notwithſtanding the op- 
poſition of the biſhop : thus liberty, the natural 
privilege of mankind, aroſe from the indigence 
of princes. But this liberty was only a leſſer ſer- 
vitude in comparifon to what thoſe cities of Italy 
Enjoyed, which had then erected themſelves into 
republics, | 

The inhabitants of Upper Italy had formed a 
plan of government upon that of antient Greece : 
moſt of thoſe large cities having entered into a 
confederacy upon the recovery of their liberty, 
ſeemed to bid fair for becoming a formidable re- 
public ; but this government was ſoon deſtroyed 
by great and petty tyrants. 

The popes had intereſts to manage with each 
of theſe cities, as alſo with the kingdom of 
Naples, Germany, France, England, and Spain, 


all at the ſame time. Every one of theſe had 
ſome 


in the 12th century. 


ſome diſputes with the popes, who always came 
off with the advantage. 

Lewis the Young having in the year 1142 
excluded one of his ſubjects, named Peter la 
Chartre, from being made biſhop of Bourges, 
the biſhop was choſen in ſpight of him, and 
ſupported by Rome; and afterwards he inter- 
dicted the royal demeſnes ſituate in his biſhopric. 
This gave riſe to a civil war, which was ended 
at length by a treaty, by which the king ac- 
knowledged the biſhop, and intreated the pope 
to take off the interdict. 

The kings-of England had ſtill greater broils 
with the church. One of the kings, whoſe me- 
mory is moſt revered by the Engliſh, is Henry]. 
the third king from the conqueſt, and who began 
his reign in 1100. They are indebted to him for 
his having aboliſhed the law of couvre ſeu, which 
was ſo great a reſtraint to them. He ſhewed 
himſelf a wiſe legiſlator, in eſtabliſhing the ſame 
weights and meaſures in every part of his domi- 
nions; a regulation which was eaſily executed in 
England, and has been always unſucceſsfully pro- 
jected in France. He confirmed the laws of Ed- 
ward the Confeſſor, which his father, William 
the Conqueror, had aboliſhed. In fine, in order 
to bring the clergy over to his intereſt, he re- 
nounced the right of regale, which gave him the 
uſufruct of all vacant benefices. 

But he ſignalized his reign chiefly by a charter 
of privileges which he granted to the Engliſh na- 
tion; this was the origin of the liberties of that 
kingdom, which were afterwards fo greatly en- 


kad treated the Engliſh as ſlaves, of whom he 
Was 


309 


larged. His father, William the Conqueror, 


310 OF France and England Ch. xl. 


was not afraid: his ſon ſhewed a greater regard 6. 
for them ; but it was becauſe he ſtood in need of ki 
their aſſiſtance. He had uſurped the crown from 15 
Robert his elder brother; therefore to gain the 
= - people over to his intereſt, he ſhewed them ſo 
| much indulgence. But artful and abſolute as he 
| was, yet he could not hinder his clergy, and the h 
| ſee of Rome, from oppoling thoſe very inveſti- . 
| tures. In ſhort, he was obliged to deſiſt from I . 
| his pretenſions, and to be contented with the ho- 
mage, which the biſhops yielded him for their tem- 
poralities. 
As for France, it had not yet felt theſe trou- 
bles; becauſe the ceremony of the croſier and 5 
the ring had not yet been introduced into that 


kingdom. - 

The Engliſh biſhops at that time were little I aun 
leſs than temporal princes in their reſpective dio- 90 
ceſſes: this at leaſt is certain, that the firſt vaſſals 5 5 
of the crown did not ſurpaſs them either in power I >. 
or riches, In the reign of Stephen, ſucceſſor of ¶ vit 
Henry I. a biſhop of Saliſbury, whoſe name was . 


Roger, and who was married, and lived publicly The 
with a woman whom he acknowledged for bis ou 
wife, waged war againſt the king his ſovereign. ch: 
In the courſe of this war one of his caftles was 
taken, where, it is ſaid, were found forty thouſand 
filver marks; which, reckoning eight ounces to Hat 
the mark, amounts to two millions of livres the * 
preſent money of France. An amazing ſum, at BY: 1% 
a time when ſpecie was fo ſcarce, and commerce fl 
fo greatly limited. - Wis 
After the reign of this Stephen, which was diſ- n 
turbed by civil wars, England aſſumed a new form "ry 
under Henry II. who ſtrengthened this crown 3 


in the twelfth century. 311 


the acceſſion of Normandy, Anjou, Tourraine, 
Saintonge, Poitou, and WT The whole 
kingdom enjoyed a perfect tranquillity, when this 
happineſs was diſturbed by the great quarrel be- 
tween the king and Thomas Becket, commonly 
called St. Thomas of Canterbury. 

This Thomas Becket was a lawyer, who had 
been raiſed by king Henry II. to the dignity of 
chancellor, and at length to that of archbiſhop of 
Canterbury, primate of all England, and legate 
to the holy ſee. No ſooner was he made the 
ſecond perſon in the kingdom, but he became an 
enemy to the firſt, A certain prieſt having been 

ulty of murder, the primate ordained that he 
1d Boule only be deprived of his benefice. The 
king was provoked at this judgment, and told 
'him, that ſince a layman, in the like caſe, was 
puniſhable with death, he was encouraging the 
clergy to commit murder, by thus diſproportion- 
Ing the puniſhment to the crime. The archbiſhop 
* maintained, that no clergyman could be puniſhed 
ih death; and immediately reſigned his office of 
chancellor, in order to be intirely independent. 
h The king propoſed in parliament, that no biſhop 

'" WM ould be permitted to go to Rome; that none 
© * WI" his ſubjects ſhould appeal to the holy ſee; that 
uo vaſſal, or officer of the crown, ſhould be ex- 
communicated, or ſuſpended from his office, with- 
ne at leave of the ſovereign; and in fine, that the 
! gergy, in regard to criminal caſes, ſhould be ſub- 
e to the ordinary courſe of juſtice. Theſe pro- 

jlals were paſſed by all the temporal peers, but 
40 tected at firſt by Thomas Becket. At length he 
rm * prevailed upon to give his aſſent to theſe equi- 
* wle laws ; yet he afterwards accuſed himſelf be- 
the 008 


© > aw roy w=w @© 


1170, king and the prelate; and Becket returned to 


Of France and England. Ch. xl. 


fore the pope of having betrayed the rights of the 
church, and promiſed never to be guilty of the 
like cowardice, | 

Upon his being accuſed before the peers of mil. 
demeanors during the time he had been chancellor, 
he refuſed to acknowledge the juriſdiction of the 
court, becauſe he was an archbiſhop. However, 
he was condemned to impriſonment as a ſeditious 
perſon, both by the lords ſpiritual and temporal; 
upon which ke fled to France, where he waited 
on Lewis the Young, the hereditary enemy of 
Henry II. The king of England uſed all the 
gentleſt methods to engage the archbiſhop to re- 
turn to his duty : in a voyage he made to France, 
he choſe Lewis the Young, his lord paramount, 
for arbitrator 3 upon which occaſion he expreſſed 
himſelf to Lewis in the following words. Let 
& the archbiſhop act towards me, as the holieſt of 
© his predeceſſors have behaved towards the loweſt 
of mine, and I ſhall be ſatisfied.” At length a 
feigned reconciliation was concluded between the 


England ; but it was only to excommunicate all 
the biſhops, canons, and inferior clergy, that had 
declared againſt him, They made their com- 
plaints to the king, who was then in Normandy, 
and his paſſion being raiſed to the higheſt degree, 
he cried out, © Is it poſſible, that not one of my 
& ſervants will rid me of this turbulent prieſt?ꝰ 
This expreſſion, which indeed was very indiſ 
ereet, ſeemed only to encourage = ruffian to in 
dulge the king's revenge, by aſſaſſinating a man 
who deſerved to be puniſhed by the laws of hi 
country. 


Accotd 


reſtrain the arbitrary ſway of ſovereigns, and to 


in the twelfth century. 313 


Accordingly four of his domeſtics went to Can- 110. 
terbury, and murdered the archbithop at the foot 
of the altar. Thus a man, who might have been 
arraigned and condemned as a rebel, became a 
martyr, and the king was loaded with the ſhame 
and horror of this murder. 

There is no mention in hiſtory of any puniſh- 
ment inflicted on thoſe four aſlafſins; it appears 
that juſtice was done only on the king. UE. 

We have ſeen how Adrian IV. gave Henry II. 
leave to uſurp Ireland. Alexander III. ſucceſſor 
to Adrian IV. confirmed this permiſſion, if the 
king would poſitively ſwear that he had never 
commanded this murder, and would go barefoot- 
ed to the tomb of the archbiſhop, to be whipped 
with rods by the canons of the cathedral of Can- 
terbury. It would have been great in the pope to 
give away Ireland, if he had a right to diſpoſe of 
it; but it was much greater to oblige a powerful 
but guilty king to aſk forgiveneſs of his crime. 

The king, whoſe children were in open re— 
bellion againſt him, performed the penance after 1174. 
having ſubdued Ireland. He ſolemnly renounced 
all the prerogatives of the crown, which he had 
maintained againſt Becket. The Engliſn have 
ſince condemned this renunciation, and even this 
penance inflicted on their king. He ought not 
indeed to have reſigned his prerogative, but he 
ſhould have repented the murder: the intereſt of 
mankind requires, that there ſhould be a curb to 


protect the lives of the people. This curb of re- 
ligion might, by univerſal agreement, be intruſt- 
ed into the hands of the pope, as we have already 


obſerved. The ſupreme pontif by interfering 
Vol. I. P no 


| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 


314 Of France and England. Ch. xl. 


no otherwiſe with temporal quarrels than to ap- 
peaſe them, by admoniſhing kings and ſubjects of 
their duty, by rebuking them for their tranſgreſ- 
ſions, and reſerving excommunications for the 
moſt flagitious crimes, would have been always 
revered as God's image upon earth; but mankind 
are reduced to depend upon the laws and cuſtoms 
of each country for their defence; laws often de- 
ſpiſed, cuſtoms as often perverted. 

39. tngland enjoyed a perfect tranquillity under 
Richard Cocur-de- Lion, the ſon and ſucceſſor of 
Henry II. This prince was unſucceſsful in regard 
to the cruſades, but his country was happy. He 
had ſome diſputes with Philip Auguſtus, which 
indeed are things unavoidable between a lord pa- 
ramount and a potent vaſſal. Theſe contentions 
made no alteration in the condition of their reſpec- 
tive ſubjets: we muſt look upon all quarrels of 
this nature, between Chriſtian princes, as the ef- 
fects of a contagion, or peſtilence, which depopu- 
lates provinces, without making any change in 
their limits, cuſtoms, or manners. What is moſt 
remarkable in thoſe wars, is that Richard took 
from Philip Auguſtus his roll, or regiſter of char- 
ters, Which he always carried with him wherever 
he went, containing the ſeveral particulars of the 
revenues of the prince, a liſt of his vaſſals, and 
the ſtate of his ſlaves and ſreedmen. The king 
of France was obliged to make a new regiſter, in 
which his prerogative was rather increaſed than 
diminiſhed, | ; 

1194. Another event worthy of attention is the capti- 
vity of a biſhop of Beauvais, who was taken in his 
military accoutrements by king Richard. Pepe 


Celeſtin III. demanded the biſhop, ſaying 1 — 
Ing; 


Fon Lackland. 


king, Lou muſt reſtore me my ſon.” But the 
king ſent the biſhop's cuirals to the pope, and at 
the ſame time anſwered him in theſe words from 
the hiſtory of Joſeph, „know now whether it be 
thy ſon's coat, or no ?” 

It muſt be obſerved in regard to this warlike 
prelate, that though the feudal laws did not oblige 
the biſhops to fight, yet they enjoined them to lead 
their vaſſals to the place where the troops were to 
rendezvous, 

Philip Auguſtus ſeized on the temporalities of 
the biſhops of Orleans and Auxerre, for not having 
complied with this abuſe, which was now become a 
duty. The biſhops were condemned; upon which 
they ſuſpended divine ſervice throughout the king- 
dom, but were glad at length to come off by 
making a ſubmiſſion. 

We ſhall fee in the hiſtory of the cruſades the 
reſt of the adventures of Richard Coeur-de-Lion. 

John Lackland, his brother and ſucceſſor, was 
certainly the greateſt prince in Europe, in regard 
to extent of territory; for beſides his father's do- 
minions, he was alſo maſter of Britany, which he 
uſurped from prince Arthur his nephew, to whom 
this province had devolved in right of his mother. 
But by invading the right of others, he at length 
was ſtripped of his own, and became a ſtriking ex- 
ample, that ſhould fill all bad princes with terror, 
He began with endeavouring to take poſſeſſion of 
Britany, which belonged to his nephew Arthur, 
whom -he took priſoner in an engagement, and 
confined in the tower of Roan; nor was it ever 
known what afterwards became of this young 

prince, All Europe with juſtice accuſed king 
John of having 2 his nephew: and luckily 
| 2 


for 


— — 
— Re ar ne rr TO II — 4 
- 


316 


Of France and England. Ch. xl, 
for the inſtruction of all kings, it may be faid, 


that this firſt crime was the cauſe of all his mis- 
fortunes. The feudal laws, which in other coun- 
tries had been productive of ſuch miſchiefs and diſ- 
orders, were attended here with a ſignal example 
of juſtice. The counteſs of Britany, mother of 
yn Arthur, preſented to the court of peers in 
*rance, a petition ſigned by the barons of Britany. 
The king of England was ſummoned by the peers 
to make his appearance; and the ſummons was 
ſerved upon him by the ſergeants at arms. The 
king, who was accuſed, ſent a biſhop to Philip 
Auguſtus to demand a ſafe conduct. Let him 
come, ſaid the king, he ſafely may.” The 
biſhop then aſked, whether he would be ſafe alſo 
in returning? „“ Yes, anſwered the king, if the 
judgment of the peers will permit.” In de- 
fault of appearance, the peers of France condemn- 
ed John to death, and declared all the lands he 

oſſeſſed in France to be forfeited to the king. 

hilip immediately took an advantage of the crime 
committed by the king his vaſſal. John Lack- 
land ſeems to have been of the ſame diſpoſition as 
all tyrannical and daſtardly princes: he ſuffered 
himſelf to be tamely ſtripped of Normandy, Gui— 
enne, and Poitou, and withdrew to England, 
where he was hated and deſpiſed. At firſt he 
found ſome relief in the pride of the Engliſh na- 
tion, who were provoked to ſee their king con- 
demned in France; but the Engliſh barons. were 
ſoon tired of granting money to a prince who did 
not know how. to apply it. To complete his 


misfortune, John quarrelled with the court of 
Rome about an archbiſhop of Canterbury, whom 


the pope wanted to nominate in oppoſition to the 
— Innocent 


laws. 


a 8 at nant ocacanc camo. aa 1 8 


John  Lackland. 


Innocent III. that prelate under whom the ſce 212. 


of Rome grew fo formidable, interdicted the king- 
dom of England, and ſtrictly prohibited John's 
ſubſects to obey him. This eccleſiaſtical thun- 
derbolt was really terrible, becauſe the pope put 
it into the hands of Philip Auguſtus, to whom he 
tranferred the kingdom in perpetuity, promiſing 
him the remiſſion of all his fins, if he ſucceeded 


in the redudtion of England. He even granted 


the ſame indulgences on account of this expedi- 
tion, as had been given to thoſe who went to re- 
cover the Holy Land. The king of France did 
not then declare, that it was not the pope's place 
to give away crowns: he himſeif had been ex- 
communicated ſome years before in 1199, and his 


kingdom had been ſubjected to an interdict by 


this very pope Innocent III. for having attempted 
to marry another wife, He had declared thoſe pa- 
pal cenſures inſolent and abuſive ; and had ſeized 
on the temporalities of every biſhop and prieſt in 
France, that had been ſo bad a ſubject as to obey 
the pope. But he thought quite differently when 
he ſaw himſelf commiſſioned with the execution 
of #bull, which was to put England into his poſ- 
ſeſſion, Then he took again to his bed that very 
wife, whoſe divorce had been the cauſe of ſo many 
excommunications ; and bent his mind intirely up- 
on executing the ſentence of the fee of Rome. 
He employed a whole year in building 170 ſhips, 
and in raiſing and diſciplining the finef army ever 
(cen in France, The averſion which the Engliſh 
bore to. king John,. might, in regard to king Phi 
lip, be eſteemed 2 to another army. The 
French king was juſt ready to ſet ſail, and John 
on his ſide was making every preparative neceſſa- 


3 "Y 


1213. 


England a province Ch. xl. 


ry for a defence. But though he was ſo greatly 
hated by a part of the nation, yet by means of the 


8 emulation between the Engliſn and the 


rench, by the horror his ſubjects conceived againſt 
the pope's arbitrary proceedings, and in fine, by 
the help of the prerogatives of the erown, which 
were ſtill very — 6a he was able to raiſe 
and keep together a few weeks, an army of near 
fixty thouſand men, at the head of which he ad- 
vanced towards Dover, to meet the perſon who 
had tried and condemned him in France, and was 
coming to dethrone him in England, 

All Europe was then in expectation of a deci- 
five engagement betwixt the two kings, when the 
pope tricked them both, and artfully uſurped to 
himſelf what he had given away to Philip. This 
extraordinary negotiation was managed and con- 
cluded by a ſubdeacon, named Pandulph, one of 
his domeſtics, and legate in France and England, 
He went over to Dover under pretence of treat- 
ing with the barons in favour of the French king. 
Here he waited on king John, and ſaid to him, 
& You are undone, the French fleet is going to 
& ſet fail; your troops will certainly deſert you; 
&* fo you have only one reſource left, which is to 
« ſubmit yourſelf abſolutely to the protection of 
e the holy ſee.” John conſented, and ſwore to 
it, and ſixteen barons took the ſame oath on John's 
behalf. A ſtrange kind of oath by which they 
bound themſelves to a ſubmiſſion, without fo 
much as knowing the conditions of it. The art- 
ful Ttalian terrified the king to ſuch a degree, and 
ſo dexterouſly managed the minds of the barons, 
that at length John conſented to the following 


act of the 15th of May 1213, in the houſe of the 
| knights 


a a wm Acc 


„% tens © wy wi _ traQat „ oa ww, wg, wack, oo wages — „ Py an oft ”" ry —_ — _ 


—— 


of the Holy See. 


knights templars in the ſuburb of Dover, where 
falling upon his knees, and holding his hands be- 
tween thoſe of the legate, he pronounced theſe 
words : | 

„ , John by the grace of God, king of Eng- 
« land and lord of Ireland, for the expiation of 
« my fins, and out of my pure free will, and with 
« the advice of my barons, give unto the church 
« of Rome, to pops Innocent and to his ſucceſ- 
&« ſors, the kingdoms of England and Ireland, 
« with all their rights; and will hold them as 
« a vaſſal of the pope; I will be faithful to God, 
eto the Roman church, to the pope my lord, and 
« to his ſucceſſors lawfully elected. I bind myſelt 
« to pay him a tribute of a thouſand marks of 
« filver yearly, that is ſeven hundred for the 
« kingdom of England, and three hundred for 
„Ireland.“ | | 

Then a ſum of money was delivered into the 
hands of the legate as the firit payment of che tri- 
bute ; and they likewiſe gave him the crown and 
ſcepter. The Italian deacon ſpurned with his 
foot the money, but he kept the crown and ſcepter 
hve days; after which he reſtored thoſe ornaments 
to the king, as a favour from the pope their com- 
mon maſter. _ 

Philip Auguſtus was all this while waiting at 
Boulogne for the return of the legate, to put to 
lea, The legate at length came back, to let him 
know, that he was no longer permitted to make a 
deſcent upon England, now become a fief of the 
Roman church, and, that king John was under the 
proteCtion of the holy ſee. 1 2 
| The donation which the pope had made to Phi- 
lip of the kingdom of England, might have then 

P 4 proved 


The battle of Botrvines, Ch. xli. 


proved of dangerous conſequence to him : for an- 
other excommunicated prince, king John's ne- 
phew, had entered into an alliance with his uncle 
to oppoſe the deſigns of France, which was then 
becoming too formidable. This excommunicated 
prince was Otho IV. who diſputed the empire 
with young Frederick II. fon of Henry VI, at 
the ſame time that he was diſputing the ſovereignty 
of Italy with the pope. He is the only emperor 
of Germany that ever gave battle in perſon againſt 
a King of France, 


RE · Nocte RR Se A He, os 
CHAP, LL 


/ Otha IV, and Philip Auguſtus in the thirteenth 


century. 
Of the battle of Bouvines, 7 England and France, 
to the death of Lewis VIII. father of St. Lewis, 


HOUGH the ſyſtem of equilibrium among 

the European princes was not eſtabliſhed 

till theſe latter times, yet they ſeem to have ever 
united as far as they were able, againſt the pre- 
ponderating powers. Germany, England, and 
the Netherlands armed againſt Philip Auguſtus, 
a confederacy not unſimilar to that which was af- 
terwards formed againſt Lewis XIV. Ferrand, 
earl of Flanders, joined the emperor Otho IV. 
he was Philip's vaſſal, but it was this very reaſon 
that induced him to declare war againſt the French 
king, as well as againſt the count of Bologne. 
Thus Philip was very near being cruſhed only for 
having accepted of the pope's preſent : — his. 
ortune 


* 


The battle of Bouvines. 


fortune and his courage, he extricated himſelf out 
of this danger with the greateſt glory that a king of 
France ever merited. 

Between Lille and Tournay there is a little vil- 
lage, called Bouvines, in the neighbourhood of 
which Otho IV, appeared at the head of an army, 
which was ſaid to have been an 100,000 ſtrong, 
intending to give battle to Philip, who had not 
half the number. It was about that time they be- 
gan to uſe the croſs-bow, a weapon hrit invented 
under Lewis the Fat. But what decided the fate 
of the day, was the heavy cavalry, armed cap-a- 
pee. "This complete armour was a privilege of 
honour granted to the knights, and which the 
'{quires could not pretend to, for they were not 
permitted to be invulnerable. All that a knight 
had need to be afraid of, was his being wounded 
either in the face, when he lifted up the viſter of 
his helmet; or in the ſide, at the extremity of the 
armour ; or when he was knocked down, and 
they had pulled off his coat of mail; cr, in fine, 
_ the arm-pits, when he lifted up his arm to 

rike, 

There were alſo ſom? troops of cavalry drawn. 
from the body of the commonalty, who were not 
near fo well armed as the knights. As for the in- 
fantry, they wore what defenſive arms they pleaſ- 
ed, and their offenſive weapons were the ſword, 
the arrow, the club, and the ſling, 

It was a biſhop who drew up Philip Auguſtus's 
army in battalia; his name was Guerin, and he 
had been lately nominated to the biſhopric of 
Senlis. The famous biſhop of Beauvais, whom 
Richard king of England had kept priſoner ſo 
long, was alſo preſent at this battle: he always 

Fx nwde 


The batile of Bouvines. Ch. xl. 


made uſe of a club, ſaying, it was againſt the 
canons to ſpill human blood. We know not in 
what manner either the emperor or the king ranged 
their troops. Before the battle began, Philip or- 
dered his men to ſing the plalm, Ex/urgat Deus & 
diſſigentur inimici jus, as if Otho had taken up 
arms againſt the Almighty. Heretofore the 
French uſed on ſuch occaſions to ſing verſes in 
honour of Charlemaign and Rowland. Otho's 
Imperial ſtandard was raiſed upon four wheels; it 
was a long pole to which they had faſtened a paint- 
ed dragon, and over the dragon was raiſed an ea- 
gle of gilt wood. The royal ſtandard of France 
was a gilded ſtaff with white ſilk colours ſowed 
with flower-de-luces ; which indeed had been for 
a long time only the fancy of painters, but was 
now become the arms of France. The old 
crowns of the kings of Lombardy, of which there 
are very exact prints in Muratori, are mounted 
with this ornament, which is nothing more than 
the head of a ſpear, tied with two other pieces of 
crooked iron, 

Beſides the royal ſtandard Philip made them 
carry the oriflamb of St. Denis: whenever the 
king was in danger, they raiſed or lowered one of 
thoſe ſtandards, Every knight had alſo a ſtandard 
of his own, and the great knights had other co- 
lours carried before them, which were called a 
banner. - This word banner, though ſo very 
honourable, was nevertheleſs common to the 
colours of infantry, who were almoſt all bond- 
men. The military ſhout among the French 
was mon joye Saint Denis; that of the Germans 
was Ayrie eleiſon. | / 


The 63th plalm ; Let Cod ariſe, les bis enemies be Junge 
0 


* 


The battle of Bouvines, 


To ſhew that the knights completely armed 
ſeldom ran any other riſk than of being diſmount- 
ed, and were not hurt but by ſome great chance, 
we need only mention that Philip Auguſtus after 
being knocked off his horſe, was a long time ſur- 
rounded by the enemy, and received ſeveral blows 
with all kinds of weapons without being in the 
leaſt wounded. 

It is even related, that when he lay upon the 
ground, a German ſoldier wanted to pierce his 
neck with a dart that had a double hook, but 
could not compaſs his end. Not one knight was 
killed in the battle, except William Longchamp, 
who unluckily died of a blow on the eye levelled 
through the viſter of his helmet, 

Among the Germans were reckoned five and 
twenty knights bannerets, and ſeven counts of the 
empire, priſoners, but not one wounded. _ 

The emperor Otho loſt the battle, in which 
30,000 Germans were ſaid to have been lain; 
but probably the number is exaggerated. We do 
not find, however, that the French king made 
any conqueſt on the ſide of Germany after the 
victory obtained at Bouvines ; but he grew more 
powerful over his vaſſals. | 1 

'The perſon who loſt moſt by this battle was 
John, king of England, whoſe laſt hopes were 
centered in the emperor Otho. This emperor 
ſoon after, that is in 1218, made a very peniten- 
tial death: it is ſaid, that he uſed to order his 
ſcullions to trample upon him, and to ſuffer him- 
ſelf to be ſcourged by the monks, according to 
the opinion of the princes of that time, who be- 
lieved that by a little whipping they could atone 
for the blood of ſo many thouſands, 


P 6 It 


| 
| 
|; 


— 


3 


2 4 


The battle of Bouv' nes. Ch. xi. 


It is not true, though we find it mentioned by 
ſeveral hiſtorians, that Philip on the very day he 
gained the battle of Bouvines, received alſo the 
news of another victory obtained by his ſon Lewis 
VIII. over king John. On the contrary, John 
had ſome ſucceſs in Poitou; but being abandoned 
by his allies, he concluded a truce wi h Philip. 
This happened at a very lucky conjuncture, for 
his Engliſh ſubjects were grown his greateſt ene- 
mies, and treated him with the utmoſt contempt, 
becauſe he had made himſelf the vaſſal of Rome. 
The barons compelled him to ſign that famous 
charter, called Aagna Charta or the charter of the 
liberties of England. 

King John thought himſelf more injured by 
letting his ſubjects enjoy their birthrights in 
virtue of this charter; than when he degraded 
himſelf to be a ſubject of Rome. He complained 
of this grant as the greateſt affront that could 
be done to his dignity : yet what is there after all 
in it, that can be ſaid to be injurious to the royal 
authority? For inſtance, that at the death of an 
earl, his eldeſt ſon to enter into poſſeffion of the 


fief, ſhould pay to the king one hundred marks 


of ſilver, and a baron one hundred ſhillings : that 
none of the king's bailiffs ſhould take the horſes 
belonging to peaſants, without paying five pence 
a day for each horſe? Whoever reads the whole 
charter through, will only find, that the rights of 
mankind have not been ſufficiently ſecured : he 
will fee, that the commons, who bore the great- 
eſt burden, and rendered the greateſt ſervices to 
the ſtate, had no ſhare in this government, which 


without them could never flouriſh, And yet 


John 


The battle of Bouvines. 325 
John complained of this as a hardſhip, and applied 


to the pope his new ſovereign for redreſs, 

Pope Innocent III. who had excommunicated 
the king, now denounces the ſame eccleſiaſtical 
cenſure againſt the peers of England : upon which 
the peers were ſo provoked, that they did the 
very ſame thing as the pontif before had done ; 
they offered, in ſhort, the crown of England to 
France. Philip Auguſtus, who had lately triumphed 
over Germany, and was now poſſeſſed cf all 
John's demeſnes in France, upon ſeeing himſelf 
invited to the crown of England, aCted like an 
able politician: he prevailed on the Engliſh to 
demand his ſon for their king. In vain did the 
legates of Rome repreſent to Philip, that John 
was a feudatory of the holy ſee; Lewis having 
concerted matters privately with his father, thus. 
addreſſed himſelf to him in the preſence of the le- 
gate. “ Sir, I am your vaſlal for the fiefs I hold 
of you in France; but it does not belong to 
« you to determine what concerns the kingdom 
« of England; and if you interfere, I ſhall ap- 
e peal to my peers.” 

After having made this ſpeech, he ſet out for 
England, notwithſtanding the public prohibitions 
of his father, who privately ſupplied him with 
men and money. Innocent III. excommuni- 1216. 
cated both the father and the ſon, but to no pur- 
poſe, for the French biſhops declared the excom- 
munication againſt the father void. It is obſerv- 5 
able however, that they did not dare to invalidate 5 
that of Lewis; which was acknowledging, that F 
the pope had a right to excommunicate princes. 
They could not diſpute this power of the pope, / 
becauſe they aſſumed it themſelves ; but they * 

| wiſe 


326 


The battle of Bouvines, Ch. xli, 


wiſe reſerved to themſelves the right of deciding, 
whether the pope's excommunication was jult 
or not. Princes in thoſe days were extremely 
unhappy, being for ever expoſed to excommuni- 
cations both at home and at Rome. But the 
people were ſtill more wretched : the anathema 
fell always upon their heads, and by the hard fate 
of war they were ſtripped of their property, 
The ſon of Philip Auguſtus was proclaimed 


king in London: yet he did not omit ſending 


1216, 


1223, 


ambaſſadors to plead his cauſe before the pope. 
This pontif had the honour, which the Roman 
ſenate formerly enjoyed, of being the judge of 
kings : but he died before he paſled his definitive 
ſentence. | 

John Lackland, wandering in his own country 
from town to town, and deſerted by all the world, 
died at the ſame time in a village of the county of 
Norfolk. A peer of France had farmerly con- 


quered England, and kept poſſeſſion of it; yet a 


king of France could not keep it. | 
Lewis VIII. was obliged, even while Philip 
Auguſtus was living, to quit this ſame country 
which had invited him to be their king; and in- 
ſtead of maintaining himſelf upon the throne, he 
engaged in the cruſade then carrying on againſt 
the Albigenſes, who at that time were ſlaughtered 
like ſheep, in purſuance of the orders iſſued out 
by the ſee of Rome. 
Philip Auguſtus died, and left his territories 
increaſed by the acceſſion of Normandy, Maine, 
and Poitou; but the reſt of the lands belonging 


ern were ſtill defended by a number of 


In 


The battle of Bouvines, 


In the reign of Lewis VIII. one part of Guien- 
ne belonged to the French, and the other to the 
Engliſh. There happened nothing in that reign, 
that might be ſaid to be very remarkable, or of 
importance. 

But the will of Lewis VIII. in 1125 merits 
ſome attention: he bequeaths one hundred ſous 
to each of the two thouſand Lazarettos in his 
kingdom. Thus the whole fruit, the Chriſtians 
reaped from their cruſades, was this leprous in- 
fection; which we may ſuppoſe to have been 
greatly increaſed by the little uſe of linen, and by 
the naſtineſs of the people. "This name of Laza- 
retto was not indifferently given to other hoſpi- 
tals; for we find by the ſame will, that the king 
bequeaths a hundred livres current money to two 
hundred hoſpitals. The legacy which this ſame 
king left, of 3ooco livres, to his wife, the fa- 
mous queen of Caſtile, amounted to hve hundred 
and forty thouſand livres preſent money. I often 
touch upon this ſubject of the valuation of money; 
becauſe I look upon it as the pulſe of the ſtate, 
and the ſureſt way of knowing its ſtrength. For 
example, it is evident that Philip Auguſtus was 
the, moſt powerful prince in his time, it indepen- 
dently of the jewels he left behind him, the ſums 
becified in his will amount to near 900,000 
marks of eight ounces, which is equivalent to 
torty five millions preſent money, reckoning the 


mark at fifty livres. But there muſt be ſome miſ- 
take in that will: it is not at all probable that a 


king of France, who had no other revenue than 


from his private demeſnes, could leave ſo vaſt a 


lum behind him. At that time the power of the 


eral kings in Europe conſiſted in leading a 


great 


328 


Of Frederick IT. Ch. xlii 


great number of vaſſals into the field, not in poſ. 
ſeſſing treaſures ſufficient to enſlave them, 


OOOOOGOOOOOOOOO) 


CH AP... XLII. 
Of Frederick II. and his quarrels with the popes; 


and of the German empire. 


OWARDS the beginning of the thir. 

teenth century, while Philip Auguſtus was 
ftill upon the throne; while Lewis VIII. was 
ſtripping John Lackland of his dominions; and 
when, after the death of John and Philip Au— 
guſtus, Lewis VIII. was driven out of England, 
which he left to Henry III. and reigned peace- 
ably himſelf in France; all this time, I fay, the 
cruſades, and the perſecution of the Albigenſes 
were exhauſting Europe. The emperor Fre- 
derick II. employed himſelf in healing the 


wounds of Germany and Italy, which were not 


well cloſed. The quarrel about the Imperial 
crown and the Roman mitre, the factions of the 
Guelfs and Gibelins, and the averſion between 
the Germans and Italians, diſturbed the tranquil- 
lity of Europe more than ever. "This Frederick 
II. fon of Henry VI, and nephew of Philip, had 
been elected in his inf&hcy, in 1211, and enjoyed 
the empire which his competitor Otho IV. had 
reſigned before his death. 


The emperors at that time were much more 


powerful than the kings of France; for beſides 
Swabia, and the other extenſive lands which Fre- 


derick had in Germany, he was alſo poſſeſſed of 
Naples 


b 
0 
0 
t 
{ 


and his quarrels with the Popes. 


Naples and Sicily by inheritance. Lombardy 
belonged to him, in virtue of the poſſeſſion long 
enjoyed by the former emperors; but this right of 
the German Cæſars was very little regarded by 
the Italian cities, which were then intoxicated 
with the love of liberty. Germany was in a ſtate 
of anarchy and confuſion, which laſted a con- 
ſiderable time. To ſuch a degree was this con- 
fuſion increaſed, that the nobility reckoned it one 
of their privileges ta rob upon the high way in 
their own territories, and to coin falſe money. 
Frederick II. obliged them at the Diet of Egra 
in 1219, to ſwear they would ceaſe to exerciſe 
thoſe privileges : and to ſet them an example, he 
relinquiſhed the rights, which his predeceſſors 
had claimed, of ſeizing on the effects of biſhops 
upon their deceaſe. | 
The moſt ridiculous, the moſt extravagant 
cuſtoms obtained at that time, The great lords 
had taken it into their heads to eſtabliſh a right 
of prelibation , which was that of lying the firſt 
night with the new married wives of their plebeian 
vaſſals. Biſhops, and abbots had alſo this righ t 
in the quality of free barons, and ſome of them 
made their ſubjeQs in the laſt century purchaſe 
the renunciation of this extraordinary privilege, 
which in Scotland and France was ſpread through- 
out the provinces. Such were the prevailing 
manners at the time of the cruſades. 
Italy was leſs barbarous, but not leſs unhappy. 
the quarrels between the church and the empire 
had been productive of the factions of Guelphs 4 


and 


* A taſte before hand. 
+ The Origin of theſe names, like thoſe of Whig and Tory, is 
very uncertain, Maimbourg in his decadence de L'empire, on 
U ey 


329 


— — 4 — — — — 
— - Ä ˙w¹w- ù . ] ⁰1¹ r ˙ömü ³—n̈nᷓ ð f ̃ꝗ-¾: A Ee IE —— —— 
— 


Of Frederick II. Ch. xli. 


and Gibellines, into which the ſeveral towns and 
families were divided. 

Milan, Breſcia, Mantua, Vicenza, Padua, 
Trevigi, Ferrara, and almoſt all the cities of 


they were owing to two illuſtrious families, on the confines 
of Germany and Italy, one of the Henries of Guibeling, the 
other the Guelfs of Adorf, whoſe continual jealouſy and emula- 
tion occaſioned great diſturbances in the empire, The emperors 
Conrad the Salic, and his ſucceſſors the three Henries, were of 
the former family; and of the ſecond were the dukes of Bava- 
ria, known by the name of Guelfs or Welt. Italy being divided 
into two great factions in the 1:th century, thofe who fided 
with the emperor, were called Gibellines, from the houſe 
whence the emperors, dukes of Swabia, were deſcended; and 
thoſe who followed the pope, were called Guelfs, the name of 
the avowed enemies of rhat houſe, | 

The judicious author of the Abrege de L'biſtoire d Allemagne 
gives the following maſt probable atcount of the derivation of 
theſe names. The emperor Conrad III. having put Henry Gue!f 
or Welf, duke of Saxeny and Bavaria, under the ban of the em- 
pire for rebellion in 1138, Saxony was given to Albert the Bear, 
marquiſs of Brandenburg, and Bavaria to Leopold margrave of 
Auftria, The above Henry, who was ſurnamed the Proud, died 
of grief, and left an only ſon then an infant, who was afterwards 
called Henry the Lion. The margrave of Auſtria found great 
difficulty in taking poſſeſſion of Bavaria, becauſe of the brave re- 
fiſtance made by elf, uncle of the young Henry, and brother 
of the deceaſed, This prince drove the new duke into Auſtria: 
animated then with ſucceſs, he went and attacked Frederick, 
duke of Swabia, who at that time was beſieging the caſtle of 
Winſberg, ſituate on the frontiers of Swabia, Franconia and Ba- 
varia; but he was defeated by the Imperial troops. This is the 
battle of Winſberg, ſo famous in the hiſtory of the middle ages 
for giving riſe to the names of Guelfs and Gibellines, The mi- 
litary cry of the Bavarians, was Welf, from the name of their 
general; that of the Imperialiſts was Weiblingen, the name of a 
little village in Swabia, where their general, Frederick, duke of 
Swabia, was educated, By degrees theſe appellations ſerved to 
diſtinguiſh the two parties; ſo that the Imperialiſts were ever after 
called Weiblingians, and thoſe who oppoſed the emperors, had 
the name of Welfs The Italians not being uſed to the original 
pronunciation of theſe two words, fitted them to their own lan- 


guage, and thence formed the Guelf and Gibellini. 
Romania 


* Rm w-— ww aww 


and his quarrels with the popes. 331 


Romania under the protection of the pope, had 
entered into a confederacy againſt the emperor. 

Cremona, Bergamo, Modena, Parma, Reggio, 
Trent, were of the Imperial party; and a great 
many other towns. were divided between the fac- 
tions of the Guelfs and Gibelins. Thus Italy was 
become the theatre not of one war only, but of a 
hundred civil wars, which inflamed the minds and 
paſſions of the inhabitants, and greatly contri- 
buted to the ſpreading of thoſe horrid” crimes of 
poiſoning and murder among the new raiſed pow- 
ers of Italy. | 

Frederick II. was born in Italy: he was fond 
of that agreeable country, and could bear neither 
the climate, nor cuſtoms of Germany, from 
whence he had been abſent fifteen years. It is 
evident that his grand deſign was to reſtore the 
throne of the Cæſars in Italy. This alone might 
have changed the face of Europe: this is the ſe- 
cret ſource of all the quarrels between him and the 
popes. He alternately had recourſe to artifice and 
violence, and the holy ſee fought him with the 
lame arms. | | 

Honorius III. and Gregory IX. had no other 
way to withſtand him. at firſt, than by fending 
him to wage war in the Holy Land. Such was 


the prejudice of the times, that the emperor was 1228. 


obliged to make a vow of performing this expe- 
dition, left the people ſhould think he was not a 
Chriſtian. His vow was the effect of policy, and 
the ſame motive made him defer his journey. 
Gregory IX. excommunicates him according 
to cuſtom. Frederick fets out; and while he is 
making a crufade at Jeruſalem, the pope preaches 


another againſt him at Rome. The emperor af- 
| ter 


332 


1230. 


1235. 


the empire and the prieſthood, and conſequently 


Of Frederick II. Ch. xlii. 
ter concluding a peace with the ſultan, returns to 


Europe, to fight againſt the holy ſee. In the ci- 
ſtrict of Capua he finds his own father-in-liw 


John of Brienne, titular king of Jeruſalem, at 


the head of the pope's troops, who wore the 
badge of St. Peter's keys on their ſhoulder. 'I he 
emperor's Gibellines wore the ſign of the croſs; 
and the croſſes ſoon put the keys to flight. 
Cops IX. had no other reſource left than to 
incite Henry king of the Romans, ſon of Frede- 
rick II. againſt his father, in the ſame manner as 
Gregory VII. Urban II. and Paſchal II. had arm- 
ed the ſons of Henry IV. But Frederick more 
fortunate than Henry, ſeized on his rebellious ſon, 
cauſed him to be depoſed at the famous diet of 
Mentz, and condemned him to perpetual impri- 
ſonment. * 1 

It was eaſier for Frederick to obtain the con- 
demnation of his ſon at a German diet, than to 
raiſe money and troops at that aſſembly for the 
con queſt of Italy. He had ever a ſufficient force to 
make it the ſeat of war, but not to ſubdue it. 
The Guelphs, thoſe friends of the popedom, and 
ſtill more of liberty, formed always a counter balance 
to the emperor's adherents, the Gibellines. 

Sardinia was alſo a bone of contention between 


the ſubject of excommunications. The emperor 
made himſelf maſter of almoſt the whole iſland in 
1238: and then Gregory IX. publicly accuſed 
Frederick II. of not believing in Jeſus Chriſt, 
We have proofs,“ ſaid he in his circular letter, 
dated the 1& of July, 1239, „* that he has pub- 
&« licly declared, bow the world has been impoſed 
„ upon by three impoſtors, Moſes, og, 2 

vc 2110- 


3 
- i 


— 7 ĩͤ oo VY FF 


a  % A A. . a OR. 


—: ,, FE. en A A 


* — Q ca N * c—_ 


and his quarrels with the popes. 


« Mahomet, But he places Chriſt far beneath 
« the other two]; for he ſays that they lived in the 
« midſt of ſplendor and glory, whereas Chriſt 
« was a man of the dregs of the people, who 
e preached only to ſuch as himſelf. The empe- 
« ror, continues he, maintains, that the one only 
« (30d, creator of- the univerſe, could not be 
born of a woman, and eſpecially of a virgin.“ 
Theſe heavy charges, which had nothing to do 
with Sardinia, did not hinder the emperor from 
keeping poſſeſſion- of that iſland, The quarrels 
between Frederick and the holy ſee did not inter- 
fere at all with religion; and yet the popes ex- 
communicated that prince, publiſhed cruſades 
againſt him, and depoſed him. A certain cardi- 
nal named James, and who was biſhop of Pa- 


leſtine, brought letters with him into France 


from this pope Gregory to the young king Lewis 
IX.; whereby his holineſs having depoſed Frede- 
rick II. by his own authority, transferred the Impe- 
rial diadem to Robert count of Artois, brother of 
the French king. He had pitched upon a wrong 
time for this embaſſy, for France and England 
were then at war, and the French barons were 
up in arms in the minority of Lewis. It is ſaid 
they gave for anſwer, that the brother of a king 
of France had no need of the empire, and that the 
pope had leſs religion than Frederic II. Such an 
anſwer is too improbable to be true, 

There can be no better method of ſhewing the 
manners and cuſtoms of that time, than by relat- 
ing what paſſed in regard to this propoſal of pope 
Gregory. 

He addreſſed himſelf in theſe words to the 
monks of the abbey of Citeaux, whither he mw 

at 


333 


— — _—_——  — m 


G 
4 
' 
p* 
* x 
1 
W 
. 
4 


rte 
SD pw» 
CE ee Wai 


2 AS. + 
= — — wv — 
— — — 


— — 


Of Frederick 11, Ch. Mi. 


that St. Lewis was going in pilgrimage, in com- 
pany with his mother: Conjure the king to 
take the pope under his protection againſt Fre— 
& derick, the ſon of Satan; it behoves him to 
give me admittance into his kingdom, as Alex- 
& ander III. was ſheltered there from the perſe- 
c cution of Frederick I. and St. Thomas of 
Canterbury from that of Henry II. king of 
«© England.” | 

The king accordingly went to Citeaux, where 
he was received by five hundred monks, who con- 
ducted him to the chapter. There they all kneeled 
down before him, and with their hands joined 
begged of him to permit the pope to come into 
France. Lewis threw himſelf into the ſame kneel- 
ing poſture before the monks, and promiſed them 
that he would defend the church; but he told 
them alſo in plain terms, that he could not receive 
the pope into his dominions without the conſent 
of the barons of the kingdom, by whoſe advicea 
king of France ought to be directed. Gregory 
dicd ; but the ſpirit of Rome is immortal. Inno- 
cent IV. who had been Frederick's friend, while 


| cardinal, became his enemy of courſe, when 


1254. 


raiſed to the pontificate. His grand deſign was 
to weaken the Imperial power at any rate, and to 
repair the miſtake' committed by John XII. in 
calling the Germans into Italy. | 
After ſeveral fruitleſs negotiations, Innocent 
IV. calls the famous council of Lyons, concern- 
ing which. the Vatican library hath the following 
inſcription. The thirteenth general council, and the 
firſt of Lyons; Frederick II. is there declared an ene- 
my to the church, and deprived of the Imperial diadem. 
It ſeems to have been a very bold ſtep to de poſe 


2 ai) 


peace with the Mahometans; with having had 


and his quarrels with the popes. 


an emperor in an Imperial city; but Lyons at 
that time was under the protection of France; 
and its archbiſhops had ſeized on the regale. Fre- 
derick II. did not neglect to ſend ambaſſadors to 
defend his cauſe at this council, where he was to 
be publicly accuſed, 

The pope, who had ſet himſelf up as judge at 
the head of this council, acted alſo the part of his 
own advocate; and after having inſiſted ſtrong] 
on his right to the temporalities of Naples and 
Sicily, and to the patrimony of the counteſs Ma- 
tilda, he charged Frederick with having made a 


Mahometan concubines ; with not believing in 
Chriſt, and, in a word, with being a heretic. How 
could he be a heretic and an infidel at the ſame 
time? And how came they to repeat ſuch accuſa- 
tions ſo often in thoſe days? John XII. Stephen 
VIII. Frederick I. Frederick II. the chancellor 
des Vignes, Manfred the uſurper of Naples, and 
a great many more were charged with the ſame 
crime, The emperor's orators harangued in his 
defence with great ſpirit and reſolution, and accuſ- 
ed the pope in their turn of having been guilty of 
uſury and rapine. There were alſo ambaſſadors 
at this council from France and England : the 
latter complained as heavily of the pope, as the 
pope had done of the emperor. ©** You draw, 
«* ſaid they, by the means of your Italian emiſſa- 
* ries, above 60000 marks yearly out of the 
kingdom of England; you have lately ſent us 
%a legate, who has given away all the church 
* livings to Italians. He raiſes exceſſive taxes 
* upon all the religious houſes, and excommuni- 
** cates every body that complains of his extor- 

« tions, 


Of Frederic II. Ch. xlij, 


c tions. Let theſe grievances be therefore imme- 
% diately redreſſed, for we wilt no longer bear 
« with them.” 

The pope bluſhed, and made no anſwer, but 
proceeded to pronounce ſentence againſt the em- 
peror, by which he deprived him of his crown, 
One thing obſervable is, that he pronounced this 
ſentence, not, ſaid he, with the approbation, but 
in the preſence of the council. The fathers kept 
the wax candles lighted when the pope pronoun- 
ced the ſentence, and then extinguiſhed them ; 
when one party ſigned the deciſion, another went 
out, giving vent to their groans, 

The emperor was at Turin, which did not yet 
belong to the houſe of Savoy, being a fief of the 
empire governed by the marquis of Suza, He 
called for his ſtrong box, which was brought to 
him, and then he took out the Imperial crown, 
ſaying, <* This the pope and his council have not 
ce been able to take from me, and before they ſtrip 
„ me of it, much blood ſhall be ſpilt.” He did 
not fail firſt to write to all the princes of Germany 


and Europe, by the pen of his famous counſellor, 


Peter des Vignes, who was accuſed of having 
compoſed the wth of the Three Impoſtors. © 1 
« am not the firſt, ſays he in his letters, whom 
ce the clergy have treated ſo unworthily, and | 
ce ſhall not be the laſt: but you are the cauſe of 
it by obeying theſe hypocrites, whoſe ambi- 


te tion, you are ſenſible, is carried beyond all 


„ bounds. How many infamous actions ſhock- 
„ ing to modeſty, might you, if you were diſ- 
<« poſed to it, diſcover in the court of Rome! 
« While they are abandoned to the vices of the 
age, and intoxicated with pleaſure, the great” 

nets 


and his quarrels with the Popes. 


« neſs of their riches ſtifles in their minds all ſenſe 
« of religion. It is therefore a work of charity to 
« deprive them of theſe pernicious treaſures that 
c are their ruin, and it is your duty to labour with 
1- « me, &c.“ 

n. The pope having in the mean time declared the 
is empire vacant, wrote to ſeven princes or biſhops, 
ut who were the dukes of Bavaria, Saxony, Auſtria, 
pt and Brabant, and the archbiſhops of Saltzbourg, 
n- Cologne, and Mentz. This has raiſed a belief, 


|; that ſeven electors were then ſolemnly eſtabliſhed : 
nt but the other princes of the empire, and the other 
biſhops, alſo laid claim to the ſame right. 

et The emperors and popes thus mutually endea- 
he voured to depoſe each other, and their grand po- 
Te licy conſiſted in raiſing civil wars. 

to Conrad, the ſon of Frederick II. had been al- 
'n, ready elected king of the Romans in Germany; 
jot but in order to picaſe the pope, it was nece{lary to 
rip chuſe another emperor. This new Czefar was nei- 
did ther choſen by the dukes of Saxony, Brabant, Ba- 
ny varia, nor Auſtria, nor by any of the princes of the 
or, empire: but by the biſhops of Straſbourg, Wurti- 
ing bourg, Spires, and Metz, with thoſe of Mentz, 
1 Cologne, and Treves; who made choice of 


om the landgrave of Thuringia, ſtiled King of the 
dJ Prieſis. 


of What a ſtrange kind of a Roman emperor was 
bi- this landgrave, who received the crown only from a 

all few biſhops in that country! The pope cauſed the 
ck- cruſade to be renewed againſt Frederick ; and it 
diſ- was proclaimed by the preaching friars, now call- 
je! ed Dominicans, and the friars minors, called the 


the Cordeliers or Franciſcans; for this new militia of 


ate the popes began to be eſtabliſhed in Europe, The 
nets Vol. I. Q holy 


LL 


338 


1249. 


12 50. 


Of Frederick IT. Ch. Ali. 
holy- ſee was not however confined to theſe mea- 
ſures ; for the pope carried on confpiracies againſt 
the life of an emperor, who had the boldneſs to 
oppoſe councils, monks, and cruſades; at leaſt, 
the emperor complained, that the pope had hired 
aſſaſſins to murder him, and the pope returned no 
anſwer to theſe complaints, 

The ſame prelates, who had taken the liberty to 
make a Cæſar, raiſed up another after the death 
of their T huringian, and this was a count of Hol- 
land. The pretenſions of Germany to the Roman 
empire only ſerved to tear it in pieces: for theſe 
biſhops, who elected emperors, quarrelled amongſt 
themſelves, and their count of Holland was killed 
in the civil war. 

Frederick II. was obliged to ſtruggle with the 
popes from the extremity of Sicily, even to that 
of Germany. It is ſaid, that being in Apulia, 
he diſcovered, that his phyſician, corrupted by 
pope Innocent IV. reſolved to poiſon him. The 
fact, however, appears to me to be doubtful ; but 
the doubts raiſed by hiſtory, are ſufficient to con- 
vince us of the iniquity of the times. 

Frederick ſeeing with horror that it was impoſ- 
ſible to truſt his life to Chriſtians, was obliged to 
take Mahometans for his guard ; and yet it is pre- 
tended, that they could not ſecure him from the 
reſentment of Manfred, one of his baſtards, who 
ſtrangled him in his laſt illneſs. However that be, 
this great and unhappy emperor, who was king of 
Sicily from his cradle, having worn for thirty-eight 
years the empty crown of Jeruſalem, and that of 
the Cæſars thirty-three, died in his fifty ſecond 
year, in the kingdom of Naples, and left the world 


in as great confuſion at his death as it was at his 


birth, 


ms wa A FT — — 


— 2 — 


and his quarre's with the popes. 


birth, Notwithſtanding ſuch a multitude of trou- 
bles, the kingdoms of Naples and Sicily were ct- 
vilized and embelliſhed through his care, He 
built towns, founded univerſities, and gave en- 
couragement to letters, which in ſome meaſure 
ſeemed to revive. The Italian language, which 
is a compound of the Roman and Latin tongues, 
began at that time to be formed. There are ſome 
verſes of Frederick II. extant in that language. 
But the difficulties he underwent, were as pre- 
judicial to learning, as to his political deſigns. 
From the death of Frederick II. to the year 
1268, Germany was without a head ; but not in 
the ſame manner as Greece had been, or antient 
Gaul, or antient Germany, or Italy, before it 
ſubmitted to the Romans: for Germany was nei- 
tle: a republic, nor a country divided among 
many ſovereigns, but a body without a head, 
whoſe members tore each other in pieces. 

This was a fine opportunity for the popes; but 
they were ſo far from taking advantage of it, that 
they loſt Breſcia, Cremona, Mantua, and many 
0 {mall cities. To recover them, a pope who un- 
5 derſtood the art of war, was greatly wanting; 
but Rome had ſeldom a pope of this character. 
They indeed turned the world upſide down with 
their bulls, and gave away kingdoms. The pope 
in 1247, proclaimed by his own authority, Ha- 
quin king of Norway, making him lawfully be- 

gotten, though he was born a baſtard : he was 
crowned by the pope's legate, who received of him 
a tribute of 15,000 marks from the churches of 
Norway, which was, perhaps, half of the current 
money of ſo poor a country. 


Q 2 The 


340 


1251. 


Of Frederick II. Gc. Ch. xlii. 


The ſame pope Innocent IV. alſo created one 
Mandog, king of Lithuania; but he was only a 
king depending on Rome. s receive, ſaid he in a 
bull dated the 15th of July 1251, this new his gdim 
of Lithuania, as the right and property of St. Peter, 
laking you under our protection, you, your wife, and 
children, This was in ſome meaſure imitating the 
grandeur of the antient ſenate of Rome, who 
granted titles of kings and tetrarchs. Yet Lithuania 
was not then a kingdom ; 1t did not even embrace 
Chriſtianity till above a century after, 

The popes therefore aſſumed the ſtile of maſ- 
ters of the world, and yet could not act as maſters 
at home : the diſpoſal of ſtates coſt them only 
paper ; but they could not recover a village 
near Mantua or Ferrara, except by means of 
their intrigues. - 

Such was then the ſituation of affairs in Europe: 
Germany and Italy were rent in pieces, France 
was ſtill weak, and Spain was divided between 
the Chriſtians and Muſſulmen; theſe laſt were 
entirely diiven from Italy; England began to 
ſtruggle with their kings for liberty ; feudal te- 
nures were every where eſtabliſhed, chivalry was 
in faſhion, prieſts were become princes and war- 
riors, and the principles of government were al- 
moſt wholly. different from thoſe which at preſent 
animate Europe. All the counti ies under the Ro- 
man communion, ſeemed to form one great re- 
public, of which the emperor and the pope want- 
ed to be the head: yet this republic, though di- 
vided, agreed for a long time in the project of the 
cruſades, which have been the cauſe of ſuch grand 
and ſuch infamous actions ; which have ſpawned 
new kingdoms, new eſtabliſhments, new * 

and, 


Of the Laſt, Sc. 


and, in ſhort, which have been productive of 
much more unhappineſs than glory. 


ae a 0 Hũ. 92G 


| CHAP XEME 
Of the Eaſt at the time of the cruſades. 


ELIGIONS always laſt longer than em- 
pires: thus Mahometiſm flourtihed, when 

the empire of the caliphs was deſtroyed by the 

Turcomans. We fatigue ourſelves to no purpoſe, 
| in order to ſearch into the origin of thefe Þ[ urks, 
| fince it is the ſame as that of all conquering na- 
; tions; they have all been ſavages living on rapine. 
F The Turks formerly inhabited a country beyond 

mount Taurus and the Imaus, and at a great di- 

ſtance, it is ſaid, from the river Araxes: they 
were comprehended amongſt thoſe TT artars, who 
by the antients were called Scythians. This vaſt 
: continent of "Tartary, which is four times larger 
) than all Europe, has never been inhabited by any 
$ 


but Barbarians : and their antiquities, ſcarceſy de- 
ſerve better to be made the ſubject of a regular hi- 
ſtory, than the wolves and tygers of their country. 
- Towards the eleventh century they extended them- 


t ſelves on the ſide of Muſcovy, and along the 
- banks of the Caſpian and Black fea, The Arabs 
- under the firſt ſucceflors of Mahomet had ſubdued 
- almoſt all Aſia Minor, Syria, and Perſia; and 
tze Turcomans came at laſt and ſubdued the 
e Arabs. | 

: A. caliph of the dynaſty of the Abaſfides, 


named Motaſſem, ſon of the great Almamon, and 
* 23 grandſon 
5 


— o _ „ 


— 1 


2 —— — —— 


. . NO ͤ — „ * 
C 


- —— — — — 2 — 


342 


Of the Eaſt Ch. xliji 


grandſon of the celebrated Aaron Rachild, )ike 
them a protector of the arts, and cotemporary to 
Lewis the Debonnair, laid the firſt foundation of 
the ſtructure, by which his ſucceſlors at length 
were cruſhed. He called in Turkiſh folders for 
his guard : and never was there a ſtronger inſtance 
ot the danger from foreign troops. Five or ſix hun- 
dred Turks in Motaſſem's pay, laid the foundation 
of the Ottoman power, which has ſwallowed up 
all other governments from the banks of the Eu- 
phrates to the further end of Greece, and which 
in our memory laid ſiege to Vienna, Theſe 
Turkiſh guards having increaſed intime, proved the 
ruin of their maſters. A new ſucceſſion of Turks 
arrived, who took advantage of the civil wars that 
had been occaſioned by the caliphat. The caliphs 
of the dynaſty of the Abaſſides of Bagdat, ſoon 
were {tripped of Syria, Egypt, and Africa, by 


the caliphs of thedynaſty of the Fatimites. The 


Turks ſtripped both the Fatimites and Abaſ- 
ſides, | 

Togrul Beg, or Ortogrul Beg, from whom the 
Ottoman line is ſaid to deſcend, entered Bagdat 
ja the ſame manner almoſt as ſeveral emperors en- 
tered Rome. He made himſelf maſter of the city 
and of the caliph's perſon, while he proſtrated him- 
ſelf at his feet. He conducted the caliph Caiem 
to his palace, holding his mule by the bridle : but 
he was either more artful or more fortunate than 
the German emperors at Rome ; for he: eſtabliſh- 
ed his own power, and teft the caliphs no more 
than the care of beginning prayers at the moſque 
on Fridays, and the honour of granting the in- 
veſtiture to every Mahometan tyrant that erected 


a ſovereignty. 11 


— 082 — wes wy 


n.. — ]» , groin, —— 


_ 


at the time of the cruſades. 


It is worthy of obſervation, that as the Turco- 
mans imitated the Franks, Normans, and Goths, 
in their irruptions, they imitated them Jikewiſe 
in ſubmitting to the laws, the manners and reli- 
gion of the conquered. Other Tartars behave 
in the ſame manner to the Chineſe; an advantage 
which all polite nations, though never ſo weak, 
ought to have over Barbarians, though never (o 
ſtrong. | 

Thus the caliphs became only the chiefs of re- 
ligioa, like the Dairi, high pricit of Japan, who 
in appearance commands the Cubs/uma *, but 
obeys him in reali:v; or like the Cheri + of 
Mecca, who calls the Turkiſh ſultan his vicar ; 
or in ſhort like the popes under the kings of Lom- 
bardy. Far am I from comparing the ſeat of er- 
ror to that of truth : I only compare the revolu- 
tions, I obſerve that the caliphs were the moſt 
potent ſovereigns in the Eaſt, at the time when 
the Roman pontifs were nothing. The caliphat 
is gone for ever; but the popes are inſenſibly be- 
come great ſovereigns, ſettled in their dominions, 
reſpected by their neighbours, and have embelliſhed 
Rome ſo as to make it the fineſt city in the world. 

Therefore at the time of the firſt cruſade there 
was at Bagdat a caliph who gave inveltitures, and 


* The Cuboſama was heretofore the crown general; cubo is 
ſaid to ſignify head of the militia, and ſama, lord, Towards the 
end of the ſixteenth century, Taikoſama, the crown general, 
uſurped the empire, and left only the name and enſigns of royal- 
ty to the Dairi, See Charlevoix, Kempfer, &c, 

T This is an Arabic word, which in general implies noble, or 
raiſed in birth or dignity : it is a particular title bore by thoſe who 
deſcend from Mahomet by his daughter Fatima, and Ali his ſon- 
in-law, There were ſeveral of theſe Cheriffs, who founded par- 
ticular dynaſties in Africa, See D' Herbelot bibl. orient, 


24 a Turkiſh 


B64 


Of the Eaf Ch. xliii. 


a Turkiſh ſultan who had the real ſovereignty, 
Several other Turkiſh, and ſome Arabian, uſur- 
pers were diſperſed in Perſia, Arabia, and Aſia 
Minor. They were all divided, a circumſtance 
which ſeemed to preſege ſucceſs to the cruſaders, 
But they were nM armed, and upon their own 
ground; a circumſtance which gave them a con- 
ſiderable advantage. 
Ihe empire of Conſtantinople ſtill ſubſiſted, 
for all its princes had not been unworthy of the 
throne. Conſtantine Porphyrogenitus, the ſon 
of Leo the philoſopher, diſtinguiſhed his reign, 
as his father had done, by contributing to the fe- 
licity of his people; and though the government 
fell into contempt, under Romanus the ſon of 
Conſtantine, it regained its reſpect and influence 
under Nicephorus Phocas, who recovered Can- 
dia, in the year 961, before he became emperor, 
However, he was aſſaſſinated by John Zimiſces ; 
who, notwithſtanding his having ſtained the pa- 
lace with blood, and his adding hypocriſy to 
his guilt, defended the empire againſt the Turks 
and Bulgarians. But Michael Paphlagonatus 
loſt Sicily, and Romanus Diogenes almoſt all 
that remained in the Eaſt, except the province of 
Pontus. That province, which is now called 
Turcomania, fell ſoon after into the hands of 
Solyman the Turk ; who, already maſter of the 
greateſt part of Aſia Minor, eſtabliſhed the 
ſeat of his dominion at Nice, and from thence 
threatened Conſtantinople, at the beginning of 
the cruſades, 

The Grecian empire therefore, on the ſide of 
the Turks, was then almoſt confined to the 


Imperial city; but it ſtill extended through all 
| Greece, 


SY Wy DP My, en” WW, Gy WW 


vp 


ns od 


f 
” 
l 
, 


at the times of the cruſades. 


Greece, Macedonia, Epirus, Thrace, Illyricum ; 
and even the iſle of Candia was included in it. 
Continual, though always unſucceſsful, wars 
againſt the Turks, ſtill kept up ſome remains of 
courage amongſt the Greeks. All the wealthy 
Chriſtians of Aſia, who were unwilling to ſub- 
mit to the Mahometan yoke, retired into the 
Imperial city, which by that means was enrich- 
ed with the ſpoils of the provinces. In ſhort, 
notwithſtanding ſo many loſſes, notwithſtanding 
the vices and revolutions in the government, 
that city, declining indeed, but immenſe, po- 
pulous, opulent, and voluptuous, was in its own 
eſtimation the firſt city in the world. The in- 
habitants called themſelves Romans, and not 
Greeks; their ſtate was the Roman empire; and 
the people in the Weſt, whom they called 
Latins, were in their opinion barbarians, who 
had revolted from them. 

Paleſtine was then, what it is at preſent, the 
worſt of all the inhabited countries in Aſia. This 
little province, which is about forty-five leagues 
in length, and from thirty to thirty-five in breadth, 
is almoſt covered with barren rocks, on which 
there is not a handful of earth. If this little 
province was cultivated, we might compare 
it to Switzerland, The river Jordan, which in 
the middle of its courſe is not above fifty fect 
wide, reſembles the Aar, which flows through a 
valley leſs barren than the reſt of Switzerland: 
and the ſea of Tiberias may be compared to the 
lake of Geneva, However, all travellers who 
have carefully viſited both Switzerland and Pa- 
eſtine, give the preference to the former. It is 
indeed probable that Judea was antiently better 


Q 5 cultivated, 


345 


Of the Eaſt Ch. xliii. 
cultivated, when it was poſſeſſed by the Jews; 
for they were obliged to ſpread a little earth over 
the rocks, in order to plant their vines; and 
this ſmall quantity of earth, mixed with the 
ſhivers of the rocks, was ſupported by low walls, 
the remains of which are in ſome places ſtill to 
be ſeen. | | 

Paleſtine, in ſpite of all this care, was never 
able to ſubſiſt its inhabitants, and therefore, as 
the thirteen cantons ſend out the ſuperfluity of 
their people, to ſerve in the armies of thoſe princes 
who are capable of paying them, the Jews all 
went abroad, to follow the trade of brokers in 
different parts of Aſia, and Africa. Scarcely was 
Alexandria built, when they ſettled there. The 
trading Jews ſeldom reſided at Jeruſalem ; and 
I queſtion whether, in the moſt flouriſhng ſtate 
of that ſmall kingdom, it had any ſo wealthy 
as many of the Jews of Amſterdam and the 
Hague. | 

When Omar, the ſucceſſor of Mahomet, 
ſeized on the fertile country of Syria, he took 
Paleſtine ; and as Jeruſalem, in the opinion of 
the Mahometans, is a holy city, he enriched it 
with a magnificent moſque of marble covered with 
lead, and adorned within by a prodigious num- 
ber of filver lamps, among which there were 
many of pure gold. When the "Turkiſh Maho- 
metans made themſelves maſters afterwards of 
this place in 1055, they paid a reſpect to the 
moſque, and the town continued to be peopled 
by * or eight thouſand inhabitants. Theſe 
were as many as its incloſure could hold, and 
the adjacent territory could well maintain. They 


had no other means of growing rich than by 


2 the 


at the times of the cruſades. | 
the pilgrimages of Chriſtians and Mahome- 


tans : the latter went to viſit the moſque ; and 
the former the holy ſepulchre. They all paid a 
ſmall acknowledgment to the Turkiſh emir, who 
reſided in the town, and to a few Imans who 
ſubliſted by the curioſity of pilgrims, 


0000000000000 


CHAP. XLIV. 
Of the firſt Cruſade to the taking of Feruſalem.. 


UCH was the ſtate of Aſia Minor, when a 
pilgrim of Amiens raiſed up the cruſades: he 


had then no other name beſides Coucoupetre, or 


Cucupietre, as we are told by the daughter of the 
emperor Comnenus, who ſaw this hermit at 
Conſtantinople; but he is known to us by the 
name of Peter the Hermit. However, this Pi- 
card, who had all the obſtinacy of his country- 
men, was ſo exaſperated at the exactions which 
he had ſuffered at Jeruſalem, and talked of them 
at his return to Rome in ſuch pathetic terms and 
in ſuch lively colours, that Urban II. thought 


him a proper perſon to ſecond the grand deſign 


the popes had for a long time formed of arming 
Chriſtianity againſt Mahometiſm : he therefore 
ſent Peter from province to province, to com- 
municate, by the force of his ſtrong imagination, 


the warmth of his ſentiments, and to ſow the 


ſeeds of enthuſiaſm. 


Urban II. at laſt held a council in the open 
helds near Placentia, at which were preſent a 1094; 
6 


bove 


348 


1095. 


Of the firſt Ch. xliv, 
bove thirty thouſand ſeculars, beſides eccleſiaſtics, 
There they propoſed the manner of avenging 
the Chriſtian cauſe. Alexius Comnenus, the 
Grecian emperor, and father of that princeſs 
who wrote the hiſtory of her times, ſent ambaſ- 
ſadors to this council, to demand ſome aſſiſtance 
againſt the Muſſulmen; but he had no room to 
expect it, either from the pope or the Italians, 
The Normans had then taken Naples and Sicily 
from the Greeks; and as the pope deſired at leaſt 
to be lord paramount of theſe kingdoms, and was 
moteover the rival of the Greek church, he ne- 
ceſſarily became the declared enemy of the eaſtern 
emperors, as he was the private foe of the 
emperors of the Weſt ; conſequently he was ſo 
far from ſuccouring the Greeks, that he deſired 
to have all the Eaſt ſubject to the Latins. 

But though the proje& of invading Paleſtine 
was applauded by all who aſſiſted at the council 
of Placentia, there were none who embraced it. 
The principal Italian lords had too much buſineſs 
of their own to manage at home, and would not 
leave a delightful country, in order to go and 
fight on the borders of Arabia Petrza. 

Another council was therefore held at Cler- 
mont, in Auvergne, where the pope made a ſpeech 
in the market place. The Italians had wept over 
the calamities of the Chriſtians of Aſia, but the 
French took up arms. This country was peopled 
by a great number of new lords, who were relt- 
leſs, independent, fond of a life of war and diſ- 
ſipation, for the moſt part phunged in crimes that 
are the natural attendants of debauchery, and in 
an igno-ance equal to their guilt: but the pope 
propoſed to grant them the remiſſion of all _ 

ins, 


Cruſade. 


ſins, and to open to them the gates of heaven, 
only impoſing on them as a penance, the gratifica- 
tion of their predominant paſſion for plunder. 
They therefore took up the crofs with a ſpirit 
of emulation; and then the churches and cloiſters 
bought at a low rate many of the eſtates of the 
lords, who imagined that a little money and their 
arms were ſufficient to enable them to conquer 
kingdoms in Aſia. Thus, for example, Godfrey 
of Bouillon, duke of Brabant, fold his eſtate of 
Bouillon to the chapter of Liege, and Stenay to 
the biſhop of Verdun; the ſame biſhop alſo 
bought of Baldwin, Godfrey's brother, the lit- 
tle he poſſeſſed in that country. The meaneſt 
lords of manors ſet out at their own expence, 
and the poor gentlemen followed them as ſquires. 
The booty was to be divided according to their 
rank, and to the expence of the cruſaders. This 
was a great ſource of diviſion, but likewiſe a 
great incentive 'to the expedition. Religion, 
avarice, and inquietude, equally encouraged theſe 
migrations. "They inliſted an infinite number of 
infantry, and horſemen under a thouſand different 
banners. This crowd of cruſaders appointed 
their rendezvous at Conftantinople : monks, 
women, merchants, victuallers, mechanics, all 
ſet out, imagining that they ſhould find none on 
the road but Chriſtians, who would gain indu]- 
gences by furniſhing them with ſubſiſtence. A- 
dove eighty thouſand of theſe vagadonds ranged 
themſelves. under the ſtandard of Coucoupetre, 
whom I ſhall from henceforward call Peter the 
Hermit, who walked at the head of the army with 
ſandals on his feet, and a rope tied round his 
waiſt, . A new ſpecies of vanity ! _ 
e 


349 


$50 


Of the firſt Ch. xliv. 


The firſt exploit of this eremitical general, 
was his beſieging a Chriſtian city in Hungary, 
called Malavilla , becauſe its inhabitants had 
refuſed to furniſh with provifions the ſoldiers of 
Jeſus Chriſt, who notwithſtanding the ſanity 


of their enterprize behaved like a band of high- 


way robbers. This city was taken by ſtorm, 

ven up to be pillaged, and the inhabitants mur- 
= The hermit was then, no longer maſter 
of his cruſaders, who were — with the 
thirſt of plunder: one of Peter's lieutenants, 
called Gautier ſans Argent t, who commanded 
half his forces, behaved in the ſame manner in 
Bulgaria; but the country uniting to oppoſe theſe 
banditti, the greateſt part of them were cut off, 
and the hermit at length appeared before Con- 
ſtantinople with twenty thouſand perſons dying 
with hunger. | 

A German preacher, called Godeſcalcus, want- 
ed to act the ſame part, but met with ſtill worſe 
treatment. For as ſoon as he arrived with his 
diſciples in that fame Hungary, where his pre- 
deceflors had committed ſuch exceſſes, the red 
croſs they wore was like a ſignal, at the fight of 
which they were all maſſacred. 

Another ſwarm of theſe adventurers, compoſed 
of above two hundred thouſand: perſons, women, 
prieſts, ſcholars, and peaſants, imagining that 
they were going to defend Jeſus Chriſt, thought 
that they ought to exterminate all the Jews 
wherever they found them. There were great 
numbers of theſe on the frontiers of France, and 
the trade of the kingdom was all in their hands; 
theſe Chriſtians therefore, in order to execute the 

* Or bad city. + Gavtier without money. 
vengeance 


Cruſade. 


vengeance, of heayen, put all thoſe unhappy 
perſons to the ſword: never was there ſince the 
time of Adrian, ſo great a maſſacre of the people 
of that nation, who were exterminated at Ver- 
dun, Spires, Worms, Cologne, and Mentz ;. 
and many killed themſelves after having ripped 
open the bellies of their wives, to prevent their 
falling into the hands of thoſe barbarians. Hun- 
gary, however, was the grave of this third army 
of cruſaders. 54: | 
Peter, however, found before Conſtantinople 


| other Italian and German vagabonds who joined 


him, and ravaged all the country round the city. 
The emperor Alexius Comnenus was certainly a 
prince of great wiſdom and moderation ; fince he 
contented himſelf with getting rid, as ſoon as he 
was able, of ſuch troubleſome gueſts, by furniſh- 
ing them with veflels to tranſport them to the 
other fide of the Boſphorus. The general Peter 
at length ſaw himſelf at the head of a Chriſtian 
army within reach of the infidels; but Soly- 
man, ſultan of Nice, fell with his diſciplined 
Turks on this diſperſed multitude ; and Gautier 
ſans argent, with many of the poor nobility, 


were ſlain, The hermit, however, returned to 


Conſtantinople, where he was regarded as a 
fanatic, who had inliſted a multitude of madmen 
for his followers. 

But this was not the caſe with reſpect to all 
the chiefs of the cruſades, ſome of whom had 
more policy, leſs enthuſiaſm, and were more 
accuſtomed to command and lead troops that 
were a little better diſciplined. Godfrey of 
Bouillon was at the head of 70000. foot and 
h 10000 


— 


* 
by 
— — = — - $I <S — 5 S— XY 8 — — — —_ — 1. — — - — —— = — 2 =— - SI - I — y - _ - - IR RE y » Fe oY Ci - | 
; ö = ö = =" — v " A 4+. . * . : 
— ———— 7§7⅛ß ˙ *»! ˙¹ͤ ⁰ r ̃ b! 7˙⅛m— ẽꝰ QMM m ̃ ' ⁰ V ²·˙2. ÜſöE.im˙ ! m — » . ] ˙7— 7²˙»¾,f ˙ a... — 2 — 


352 


Of the firſt Ch. xliv. 


looo cavalry, armed cap-a · pee, under the ban- 
ners of many lords, who ranged. themſelves un- 
der his ſtandard. $2. 2 

In the mean time Hugh, brother to Philip I, 
king of France marched through Ttaly, with 
other lords who had joined him, in order to ſeek 
his fortune; for almoſt the whole he poſſeſſed 
was his title of brother to a king, who himſelf 
was not very powerful. But what appears moſt 
ſtrange is, that Robert duke of Normandy, eld. 
eſt ſon of William the conqueror of England, 
left his duchy, in which he was ſcarcely eſtabliſh- 
ed; and after being driven out of England by 
his youre brother, William Rufus, mortgaged 
Normandy to him, to raiſe money to defray the 
expence of this armament. He was ſaid to bea 
voluptuous and ſuperſtitious prince; and theſe 
two qualities, .which proceed from the weakneſs 
of the mental powers, prompted him to undertake 
this expedition. | 

Old Raymond, count of Foulouſe, who poſ- 
ſeſſed Languedoc and a part of Provence, and 
who had 50 fought againſt the Muſſulmen 
in Spain, did not think that his age, or the in- 
weſt of his country, were reaſons that ought to 
make him ſuppreſs the ardent defire he felt for 
oing into Paleſtine ; he was therefore one of the 
rſt who took up arms, and he ſoon paſſed the 
Alps, as it is ſaid, at the head of near an hun- 
dred thouſand men : but he did not foreſee, that 
very ſoon a cruſade would be preached up againſt 
his own family. 2 

The moſt politic of all the chiefs of the cru- 
ſades, and perhaps the only politician among 


them, was Bohemond, the ſon of Robert Guiſ- 


card, 


Cruſade. 


card, the conqueror of Sicily. This whole fa- 
mily, on its being tranſplanted into Italy, fought 
to aggrandize themſelves ſometimes at the expence 
of the pope, and at others on the ruins of the 
(Grecian empire. This Bohemond had himſelf 
for a long time maintained a war againſt the 
emperor Alexius, in Epirus and Greece ; and 
having no other inhetitance, beſides the petty 


principality of Tarentum, and his own courage, 


he took advantage of the epidemical enthuſiaſm 
of Europe, to aſſemble under his banner ten 
thouſand horſemen well armed, and ſome infan- 
try, with which he might conquer a few pro- 
vinces either from the Chriſtians or Mahometans, 
The princeſs Anna Comnena obſerves, that 
her father was alarmed at theſe prodigious emi- 
grations, which ruſhed into his country. One 
« would have imagined, ſays ſhe, that all Europe, 
e torn up from its foundations, was going to fall 
« upon Aſia.” | | 
A propoſal was made to the pope to put him- 
ſelf at the head of thoſe immenſe armies that 
were ſtill left; and indeed this was the only me 
thod of arriving at univerſal monarchy, which 
was then the principal view of the court of Rome: 
but this enterprize which pope Gregory VII. had 
3 to meditate, required the genius of a 
ahomet, or an Alexander. The difficulties were 
great, and Urban ſa nothing but difficulties. 
The pope and the princes engaged in the cru- 
fade, had in this grand affair very different views, 
and Conſtantinople was afraid of them all. The 
Latins were there hated, and conſidered as here- 
tics and barbarians. 


What 


IIS 


354 


Of the firſt Ch. xliv. 


What, the Greeks dreaded moſt, and that with 
reaſon, was Bohemond, and his Neapolitans, as 
being enemies to the empire. But ſuppoſing the 
views of Bohemond to have been juſt, what right 
had all theſe weſtern princes to come and ſeize for 
themſelves the provinces which the Turks had 
taken from the Grecian emperors ? 

We may form a judgment of the brutal arro- 
gance of theſe lords of the cruſade, from an in- 
cident related by the princeſs Anna Comnena of a 
certain French count, who in a public ceremony 
ſeated himſelf by the emperor's fide on his throne 
when Baldwin, the brother of Godfrey of Bouil- 
lon, taking hold of this indiſcreet perſon, to 
make him retire, the count cried aloud in his 
barbarous jargon, ©* A pretty clown of a Greek, 
te to keep himſelf ſeated before ſuch men as us !” 
Theſe words were interpreted to Alexius, who 
only ſmiled at this inſtance of folly. One or 
two indiſcretions of this kind are ſufficient to 
render a whole nation contemptible, 

It was morally impoſſible, that ſuch gueſts 
ſhould. not demand proviſions with arrogance, 
and that the Greeks ſhould not refuſe them with 
marks of il] nature; and indeed this was the cauſe 
of continual ſkirmiſhes between the natives and 
Godfrey's army, which was the firſt that appeared 


after the rapine committed by thoſe that followed 


Peter the Hermit: at length theſe animoſities 
were carried ſo far, that Godfrey attacked the 
ſuburbs of Conſtantinople, which were defended 
by the emperor, Monteil, biſhop of Puy in 
Auvergne, the pope's legate in the army of the 
cruſade, was abſolutely reſolved on their begin- 
ning their enterprizes againſt the infidels, by 
5 laying 


C uſade. 


laying ſiege to the city that was the reſidence of 
me chief of all the Chriſtian princes ; Bohe- 


mond, who was then in Sicily, gave the ſame 


advice, and ſent courier after courier to prevent 
Godfrey's coming to an agreement with the 
emperor. Hugh, brother to the king of France, 
was at the ſame time fo imprudent as to leave 
Sicily, where he had been with Bohemond, 
and to venture almoſt alone into the territories 


355 


of Alexius: he added to this indiſcretion, that 


of writing letters full of pride and preſumption, 
which was very ridiculous in a man who had not 
an army to ſupport his inſolence; in conſequence 
of this he was ſeized and kept ſome time priſoner. 
At length the prudent meaſures taken by the 
emperor, diverted theſe ftorms ; he furniſhed 
them with proviſions, prevailed on the princes 
engaged in the cruſade to pay him homage for 
all the lands they ſhould conquer, and after hav- 
ing loaded them with preſents, tranſported them 
into Aſia. Bohemond, whom he moſt dreaded, 
he treated with the. greateſt magnificence; for 
when this prince went to pay him homage at 
Conſtantinople, and was ſeeing the rarities of 
the palace, Alexius ordered that a cabinet ſhould 
be filled with curioſities in gold and filver of ex- 
quiſite workmanſhip, with jewels of all kinds 
heaped up without order, and that the door 
ſhould be left open. Bohemond in paſſing through 
the apartment ſaw the treaſure, to which his con- 
duQtors ſeemed to pay no attention; when filled 
with amazement, he cried out, ** Is it poſſible 
* that ſuch things as theſe ſhould be neglected? 
„Were they mine, I ſhould think myſelf the 
«© moſt powerful prince on earth.“ On which 
| the 


356 


Of the firſt Ch. xliv. 


the emperor ſent him the cabinet that very even- 
ing. This account is related by his daughter, 
who was an eye-witneſs of the whole affair. 
Such was the behaviour of this prince, whom every 
dilintereſted perſon will ſtile wiſe and munificent; 
but whom the greateſt part of thoſe who have 
wrote hiſtories of the cruſades, have treated as 
perhdious, only becauſe he would not be the ſlave 
of a dangcrous multitude. 
At length, after the emperor had happily got rid 
of them, and they were all paſſed into Aſia Mi- 
nor, the army was reviewed near Nice, when it 
was found to conſiſt of an hundred thouſand 
horſe, and ſix hundred thouſand foot, includin 
the women: and this number added to the ful 
cruſaders, who periſhed under the hermit and 
others, makes the total to amount to about one 
million one hundred thouſand : a number that 
one what is ſaid of the armies of the kings of 
erſia which poured in upon Greece, and alſo 
what is related of the tranſplantations of ſuch 
ſwarms of Barbarians. - The French, at length, 
and more particularly Raymond of Toulouſe, 
now found themſelves in the ſame country, 
which the ſouthern Gauls had over-run thirteen 
hundred years before, when they ravaged Aſia 
Minor, and gave their name to the province of 
Galatia, aon | 
Hiſtorians rarely mention the manner in which 
ſuch multitudes procured ſubſiſtence z and yet this 
was a Concern that required as much care as the 
war itſelf. The Venetians at firſt refuſed to ſup- 
ply them; for they at that time gained more than 
ever by their commerce with the Mahometans, 
and therefore feared to loſe the privileges they 
Me enjoyed 


r Þ_ a ao =o tw 


Cruſade. 357 


enjoyed amongſt them: but the Genoeſe, the Pi- 
ſans, and the Greeks, fitted out veſſels laden 
with proviſions, which they fold to the cruſaders 
along the coaſt of Aſia Minor; thus the Genocſe 
grew rich, and the world was aſtoniſhed to ſee 
that ſtate become a formidable power. 

Neither the old Turk Solyman, ſultan of Syria, 
who was in regard to the caliphs of Bagdat, the 
ſame as the mayors of the palace under the firſt 
race of the French kings, neither Solyman, 
I ſay, nor his ſon were able to ſtem the tor- 
rent of all theſe confederate princes engaged in 
the cruſade ; for their troops were better choſen 
than thoſe of Peter the Hermit, and diſciplined 
as well as their licentiouſneſs and enthuſiaſm 
would permit, b 

Nice was taken, and the troops of Soly- 
man's ſon were twice defeated; for neither the '097» 
Turks nor Arabians could at firſt ſuſtain the ſhock 
of ſuch multitudes caſed in iron, nor of their large 
horſes, nor of the foreſts of lances, to which 
th y were unaccuſtomed. | 

 Bohemond had the addreſs to obtain from thoſe 
engaged in the cruſade, the fertile country of :0gs, 
Antioch. Baldwin penetrated even into Meſo- 
potamia, where he took the city of Edeſſa, and 
formed there a ſmall ſtate. At length they be- 
lieged Jeruſalem, which was held for the caliph 
of Egypt by his lieutenants. The greateſt part 
of hiſtorians ſay, that the army of the beſiegers 
was diminiſhed by battles, ſickneſs, and by the 
garrifons put into the conquered towns, to twenty 
thouſand foot, and fifteen thouſand horſe; that 
Mruſalem was provided with every thing ne- 
ceſſary, and defended by a gariſon of forty _—_ 
AT * 


. —. . ²˙ ——x——— I mas: 
- * hd — = 


258 Of the firft Ch. xliy, 
and ſoldiers; and they do not fail to add, tz: 


beſides this gariſon, it contained twenty tho wiand Le 
reſolute inhabitants. Yet there is no reader, of ecc 
common ſenſe, who muſt not fee, that it i; to 
morally for an army of twenty thauſand to 
men, to — — place that has a gar on be 
of ſixty t but hiſtorians are always ford 0 
of the marvelos. 9 
It is certain however, that after 2 ſiege of w 6 
weeks Jeruſalem was taken by ſtorm, and that 3! 10 
who were not Chriſtians were maſlacred. The: 1100 
bermit Peter, who from being a general was be- elf 
come 2 chaplain, was preſent both at the tatig Vi 
of the city, and at the laughter of its inbab tant. 22 
Some Chriſtiana, whom the Muſſulmen had leif 
fered to live in that place, led the conquerors inta 4146 
the moſt private caves, in which the mothers hz 6hl 
hid themiclves with their children, and none 9 eve 
them were ſuffered to eſcape. All hiſtorians agree, * 
that after this butchery the Chr iſtians, guten v 
with human blood, went in procefion to tre WW 
ſpot which they were told was the ſepulchre of MW 9 
- Chrift, and burſt into tears. It is very 

X 


£5 £3 


Cruſade 


The lords, who were now maſters of Jeru- 
lem, aſſembled to chuſe a king, when the 
ecciefiaftics who followed the army repaired 
to the aflembly, where they had the preſumption 
to declare, that the election that was going to 
be made would be void, becauſe, faid they, the 
choice of a patriarch ought to precede that of a 
ſovereign. 

Godfrey of Bouillon was nevertheleſs elefted 
duke, but not king of Jeruſalem: ſome months 
iter, a legate, named D' Amberto, cauſed bhim- 
ſeif to be nominated patriarch by the clergy; 
vhen the frft thing he performed, was his tak- 
ing the little kingdom of Jeruſalem to him 
Kell, while Godfrey of Bouillon, who had con- 
quered the city at the hazard of his life, was 
obliged to yield it up to that biſhop : he ho- 
ever reſerved to himfelf the port of Joppa, and 
me privileges in Jerufalem, His own patri- 
nom which he had refigned, in order to embark 
in this expedition, was far preferable to what he 
xqured in Paleſtine. 


CHAP. XLV. 


Cruſades after the taking of Jeruſalem. 


VER fmce the fourth century a third part 
E of the globe was ravaged by almoſt con- 
2 — The Hans, who came from 
es the beak of — — 

WY 7 


Cruſades after Ch. xly. . 


Italy, they ſettled in Hungary. The Hetuli, 
and the Goths made themſelves maſters of Rome. 
The Vandals marched from the borders of the 
Baltic ' ſea to ſubdue Spain and Africa. The 
Burgundians invaded one part of Gaul, the 
Franks another. The Moors ſubdued the Vii 
oths who were in poſſeſſion of Spain; while the 
reſt of the Arabs extended their conqueſts into 
Perſia, Aſia Minor, Syria, and Egypt. The 
Turks iſſued from the borders of the Caſpian 
ſea, and divided the territories conquered by the 
Arabs. The European cruſaders over-ran Syria 
in far greater numbers, than all thoſe nations 
ever brought together in their ſeveral migrations; 
at the ſame time that the "Tartar Jenghiz-chan 
was completing the conqueſt of upper Al. 
And yet in a very little time there remained not 
the leaſt veſtige of the conqueſts of the cruſa- 
ders ; whereas Jenghiz, as well as the Arabs, the 
Turks, and others, made conſiderable ſcttlements 
at a great diſtance from their own country, 
Perhaps it will not be difficult to account for the 
miſcarriage of the cruſaders. 

The ſame circumſtances produce the ſame ef- 
feats. We have ſeen, that when Mahomet's 
ſucceſſors had conquered many kingdoms, they 
were divided by diſcord; and the cruſaders ſut- 
fered nearly the ſame fate: only they had fewer 
conqueſts, and were more divided. They had 
already formed three petty ſtates in Aſia, name- 
ly Antioch, Jeruſalem, and Edeſſa; and ſome 
years after a fourth was erected, that of Iri- 
poli, in Syria, which was given to young Ber- 
trand, ſon of the count of Toulouſe : but in 


order to conquer Tripoli, it was found neceſſary 
to 


(RN — aw Sn — 44 — onal Con — fn ha _ . 


amd % eas trudm. > «© a Haw _ Ax» YfFFe# FA «as E a Ay% _- cc] 


wEq x ' = *#5: / A. a A | 


oo 


2» ak IJ... 


the taking of Jeruſalem. 


to make uſe of the veſlels of the Venetians, who 
then entered into the cruſade, and obliged the 
others to yield them up a part of this conqueſt. 

Of all theſe new princes who had promiſed 
to pay homage for their acquiſitions to the Gre- 
cian emperor, none kept their promiſe, and 
all were jealous of each other. In a little time 
theſe new ſtates being divided, and ſubdivided, 
paſſed into many different hands; and there roſe 
up, the ſame as in France, many different Jords, 
as counts of Joppa, and marquiſes of Galilee, 
Sidon, Acra, and Ceſarea. Solyman, who had 
loſt Antioch and Nice, ſtill kept the open coun- 
try, which was inhabited by clans of Muſſulmen; 
ſo that under his reign, and after his deceaſe, 
there was a mixture of Chriſtians, Turks, and 
Arabians, conſtantly at war with each other; and 


361 


Turkiſh and Chriſtian caſtles were placed in the 


ſame neighbourhood, juſt as in Germany the eſ- 
tates of the proteſtants and catholics are mutually 
intermingled. 

Of the million that had entered into this cru- 
ſade, very few remained; but as the rumor of 
their ſucceſs was encreaſed by common fame, new 
adventurers {till ſet out from the Weſt. Prince 
Hugh, brother to Philip I. brought a new multi- 
tude, which encreaſed on the way, by his being 
joined by the Italians and Germans; theſe have 


been computed at 300, ooo; but if we reduce them 


to two thirds of this number, there will ſtill be 
200,000 men loſt to Chriſtendom: they were 
treated near Conſtantinople in much the ſame 
manner, as the followers of Peter the Hermit had 
been: thoſe who landed in Aſia were deſtroyed 


by Solyman ; and prince Hugh died almoſt deſert- 
ed in Aſia Minor, 


Vol. I, R | But 


— OC — — 
— —— ͤ ͤ—W'GGVJJV — ——— 
4 
„ ” 


392 


Cruſades after Ch. xlv. 


But what perhaps further proves the extreme 
weakneſs of the principality of Jeruſalem, is the 
eſtabliſhment of thoſe religious ſoldiers, called 
the Templars and Hoſpitallers; for it is certain 
that theſe monks, whoſe inſtitution at firſt was 
to ſerve the ſick, were not in ſafety, ſince they 


took up arms, Beſides, when the community 


in general is well governed, private aſſociations 
are ſeldom made. | 
The religious, conſecrated to the ſervice of the 
wounded, having made a vow. to take up arms in 
the. year 1118, there was ſuddenly formed a mi- 
litia of the ſame kind, under the name of Tem- 
plars; a title which they aſſumed from their 
living near a church, which was ſaid to have been 
fomerly Solomon's temple. Theſe eſtabliſh- 
ments. were founded by the French, or at leaſt by 
the natives of a country ſince annexed to France. 
Raymond Dupuy, firſt grand-maſter and found- 
er of the militia of Hoſpitallers, was born in 
Dauphiné. | | 
Scarcely were theſe two orders eſtabliſhed by 
the pope's bulls, when: they grew rich and turn- 
ed rivals; they then fought as often 1 1 
ether, as againſt the Muſſulmen. n aſter 


a new. order was-inſtituted in favour of the poor 


Germans, who had been abandoned in Paleſtine; 


theſe were the Teutonic monks, who afterwards 


in Europe became a militia of conquerors. 

At length. the ſituation of the Chriſtians was 
ſo. precarious, that Baldwin, the firſt king of 
Jeruſalem, who reigned aſter the death of God- 
frey his brother, was taken almoſt at the gates of 


the City: by:a _Furkiſh:priace:. 
3 - ” . . 5 i The 


Sm_ Ga ©, ax wo 


| a 4 


5. YR OV 


the taking of Feruſalem. 303 


The ſtrength of the Chriſtians in theſe con- 

quered countries decreaſed every day : the firſt 
conquerors were now dead, and their ſucceſſors 
were ſunk into effeminacy. Edeſſa was retaken 
by the Turks in the year 1140, and Jeruſalem 
was threatened, The Greek emperors finding 
their neighbours, the princes of Antioch, were 
only new uſurpers, made war upon them, and 
not without reaſon: and thus the Chriftians of 
Aſia, ready to be overpowered on every fide, ſo- 
licited Europe for a new cruſade. 

The French had begun the firſt inundation : 
application was therefore made to them to begin 
the ſecond. Pope Eugenius III. the diſciple of 
St. Bernard, the founder of Clervaux, wiſely 
choſe his firſt maſter to be the inſtrument of a 
new depopulation. No religious ever better re- 
conciled the hurry of . with the auſterity 
of his order: none ever arived like him at that 
reſpect which is purely perſonal, and is above au- 
thority itſelf, His fellow ſtudent, Suger the abbot, 
was prime mininiſter of France; his diſciple was 
pope: but Bernard, though no more than abbot 
of Clervaux, was the oracle not only of France, 
but of Europe. | 

At Vezelay in Burgundy, a ſcaffold was raiſed 1146. 
in the market place, on which Bernard was 
ſeated” by the ſide of Lewis the Young, - king 
of France. He ſpoke firſt; the king Reondet 
him, and then received the croſs from the hand 
of St. Bernard, and all who were preſent fol- 
lowed his example. Super, the prime miniſter, 
was however of opinion, that the king ought' 
not to abandon the certain advantages he might 
procure for his own 2 to go into Hun- 


: gary 


Cruſades after Ch. xlv. 


gary in ſearch of uncertain conqueſts ; but Ber. 
nard's eloquence, and the ſpirit of the times, 
without which that eloquence would have been 
uſeleſs, prevailed over the counſels of the mi- 
niſter. 

Lewis the Voung is repreſented as a prince 
more ſcrupulous than virtuous. In one of thoſe 
little civil wars which the feudal government in 
France rendered inevitable, the king's troops had 


burnt the church of Vitry, and all the people 


who had taken ſanCtuary in it had periſhed in 
the flames : it was therefore an eaſy matter to 


perſuade him that he could not expiate, but by 


going to Paleſtine, a crime which he might have 


better repaired by a wiſe adminiſtration. His 


young wife Eleanor of Guienne, went with the 
king in this cruſade, either becauſe ſhe then 
loved him, or becauſe 'decency in thoſe times 
required that ſhe ſhould accompany her huſband 
in thoſe wars. 

St. Bernard had acquired ſuch a ſingular repu- 
tation, that in a new aſſembly held at Chartres, 


he was elected chief of the cruſade; a fact that 


appears almoſt incredible; but nothing ought to 
be thought ſo that is produced by the religious 
frenzy of the multitude. Bernard, however, 
had too much ſenſe to expoſe himſelf to the ridi- 
cule with which he was threatened ; for the ex- 
ample of Peter the Hermit was recent: he there- 
ſore refuſed the poſt of general, and contented 
himſelf with that of prophet. 

From France he went into Germany, where 
he found another monk who preached up the cru- 
ſade; but this rival, who had not the pope's 
miſſion, he put to ſilence; at length he gave — 

| Ie 


- 


1 nen XAQcco& Aa YO, OT r 8 


„ A tm, % e wAA--, tws 7» !.. P ]] 


_ © 


8 (3 @ 1 <@O3 


the taking of Feruſalem. 


red croſs to the emperor Conrad III. and in the 
name of God publicly promiſed him ſucceſs over 
the infidels. Scon after one of his diſciples, 
named Philip, ſent word to France, that Ber- 
nard had performed many miracles in Germany : 
it was not indeed pretended, that he raiſed the 
dead to life; but the blind received ſight, the 
lame walked, and the ſick were healed. We 
may reckon amongſt theſe prodigies, that he 
every where preached to the Germans in French. 

The hopes of certain victory drew after the 
emperor and the king of France the greateſt part 
of the knights in their dominions ;z and it is ſaid, 
that in each army there were feckoned 70,000 
men in complete armour, with a prodigious number 
of light - horſe, excluſive of the infantry. We 
cannot ſuppoſe this ſecond emigration to conſiſt 
of leſs than 300,000 perſons, which added to 


1,300,000 ſent before, makes the whole hither- 


to conſiſt of 1,600,000 tranſplanted inhabitants, 
The Germans ſet out firſt, and the French fol- 
lowed them. It is natural, that ſickneſs ſhould 
carry off a great part of theſe multitudes on their 
paſſing into a different climate. Intemperance 
produced a mortality in Conrad's army, near 
the plains of Conſtantinople : and from thence 
thoſe rumours were ſpread through the Weſt of 
the Greeks poiſoning the wells and fprings. The 
ſame exceſſes that were committed by the former 
cruſaders, were renewed by theſe, which gave 
Manuel Comnenus the ſame apprehenſions as 
they had given his grandfather Alexius, 

Conn after having paſſed the Boſphorus, 
conducted his enterprize with an imprudence 


that ſeems to be inſeparable from a cruſade. 


NY The 


366 


Cruſades, Ort. 1 


The principality of Antioch was yet in being, 
and the emperor might have joined thoſe Chriſ- 
tians of Syria, and have waited for the king of 
France; they muſt then have overpowered the 
enemy by numbers: but the emperor of Ger- 
many, jealous both of the "cr of Antioch aud 
the king of France, threw himſelf into the midſt 
of Aſia Minor, where the ſultan of Iconium, 
who was a more able general than Conrad, drew 
his heavy German cavalry among the rocks; who 
being fatigued, diſpirited, and incapable of acting 
on ſuch ground, the Turks had no other trouble 
but that of killing them. The emperor wound- 
ed, and with only a few fugitive troops, ſaved 
himſelf by flying towards Antioch, and from 
thence went to 8 as a pilgrim, inſtead 
of appearing there as the general of an army. 
The famous Frederick Barbaroſſa, his nephew, 
who ſucceeded him in the government of the 
German empire, followed him in this expedi- 
tion, and learned among the Turks to exerciſe 
that courage, which the popes were to put to the 
ſevereſt proof. 

The enterprize of Lewis the Young met with 
the ſame ſucceſs; beſides, it muſt be confeſſed, 
that thoſe who accompanied him had not more 
prudence than the Germans, and that they acted 
with even leſs regard to juſtice, Scarce were 
they arrived in Thrace, when the biſhop of Lan- 
gres propoſed his rendering himſelf maſter of 
Conſtantinople : but the ſhame that would attend 
ſuch an action was too apparent, and the ſucceſs 
too dubious; the French army therefore croſſed 
the Helleſpont, and followed the ſteps of the 


emperor Conrad, I 


— > _eow aw w.o mm aDÞ@KHKK oa cz au mm ft o 


+ 


of Saladin. 367 
It cannot, I believe, have eſcaped the reader's 
obſervation, that theſe powerful Chriſtian armies 
waged war in the ſame country in which Alex- 
ander was always victorious, with much fewer 
troops, againft enemies far more powerful than 
the Turks and Arabs were at that time. There 
mult then have certainly been ſome fundamental 
defect, that neceſſarily rendered their courage 
uſeleſs; and this defect was probably that ſpirit 
of independence, which the feudal government 
had eſtabliſhed in Europe; ſo that chiefs, with- 
out either art or experience, led diforderly mul- 
titudes into unknown countries. The king of 
France was, like the emperor, ſurprized among 
the rocks towards Laodicea, and like him was 
defeated ; but at Antioch he ſuffered certain do- 
meſtic misfortunes, that more ſenſibly affected 
him than public calamities. Raymond prince of 
de Antioch, with whom he, and queen Eleanor his 
i- wife, had taken refuge, was ſuſpected of lovi 
ſe that princeſs; and it is ſaid, that ſhe forgot aſl 
the fatigues of ſo painful a journey in the arms 
of Saladin, a handſom young Turk. The con- 
cluſion of the whole enterprize was, that the 
emperor Conrad returned almoſt alone into Ger- 
many; and the king brought back to France 
none but his wife and a few courtiers. Act his 
return he diflolved his marriage with Eleanor of 
Guienne, and thus loſt that fine French province, 
after having loſt in Aſia the moſt flouriſhing army 
that his country had ever ſet on foot. A thou- 
ſand deſolated families in vain uttered their in- 
vectives againſt St. Bernard for his prophecies ; 
who, in his own vindication, compared himſelf 
to Moſes, who had, he ſaid, like him, promiſed 
It R 4 the 


„„ Ä 


> * . . 


368 


Cruſades, &c. Ch. xlv. 


the Iſraelites, in the name of God, to lead them 


into a happy country, and yet ſaw the firſt gene- 


ration periſh in the deſerts. | 

After theſe unhappy expeditions the Aſiatic 
Chriſtians grew more divided than ever, and the 
ſame factious ſpirit prevailed amongſt the Mufſul- 
men. The pretence of religion had no longer 
any ſhare in political affairs; on the contrary, 
about the year 1166, Amaury king of Jeruſalem 


entered into an alliance with the ſultan of Egypt 


againſt the Turks; but ſcarcely had the king 


of Jeruſalem ſigned the treaty, when he broke it. 


In the midſt of all theſe troubles aroſe the great 
Saladin: he was of Perſian extraction, from the lit- 
tle province of the Curdes, who have been always 
a warlike and independent nation. He was one 
of thoſe captains who ſeized on the dominions of 
the caliphs; but none of them were equal to him in 


power. In a ſhort time he ſubdued Egypt, Syria, 


Arabia, Perſia, and Meſopotamia, Having made 


himſelf maſter. of all theſe countries, he ſoon © 


formed the deſign of conquering the kingdom of 
Jeruſalem, when the violent factions, which tore 


in pieces this little ſtate, haſtened its ruin, Guy 
of Luſignan who had been crowned king, but 
-whoſe title had been diſputed, reaſſembled in 


Galilee all the divided Chriſtians whom the com- 


mon danger had united, and marched againſt 


Saladin; the biſhop of Ptolemais wearing a cope 


over his armour, and holding in his arms a croſs, 


which he perſuaded the Chriſtians was the ſame 


on which Chriſt died. However, all the Chriſ- 


tians were either killed or taken priſoners; when 
the captive king, who expected nothing but 


death, was aſtoniſhed at being treated by Saladin, 
as 


of Saladin. 


as priſoners of war are now treated by generals 
of the greateſt humanity. 

Saladin with his own hand preſented Luſignan 
a cup of liquor cooled with ſnow, when the king, 
after having drank, offered the cup to one of his 
captains, whoſe name was Rainaud de Chatillon. 
It was an inviolable cuſtom eſtabliſhed among the 
Muſſulmen, and is ſtill preſerved among ſome of 
the Arabians, never to put thoſe priſoners to death 
to whom they had given meat or drink, This 
antient law of hoſpitality was * as ſacred 
by Saladin, who would not ſuffer Rainaud de 
Chatillon to drink after the king; for the captain 
had frequently violated his promiſe, and the con- 
queror had ſworn to puniſh him. To ſhew there- 
fore that he knew how to puniſh as well as to 
ſhew mercy, he ſtruck off the head of the perfi- 
dious wretch with one blow of his ſabre. Being 


arrived at the gates of Jeruſalem, which the in- 1187, 


habitants were now incapable of defending, he 
granted the queen, Luſignan's wife, a capitulati- 
oh, which ſhe could not hope to obtain; and per- 
mitted her to retire whereſoever ſhe pleaſed, with- 
out demanding any ranſom from the Greeks who 
lived in the city. On his making his entry into 
Jeruſalem, many women came and threw them- 
ſelves at his feet ; ſome begging that he would re- 
ſtore to them their huſbands, and others their chil- 
dren or their fathers, who were his priſoners ; and 
he granted their requeſts with a generoſity, of 
which that part of the world had yet afforded no 
example. Saladin cauſed the moſque, which had 
been converted into a church, to be waſhed with 
roſewater by the Chriſtians themſelves, and placed 
in it a magnificent chair, which Noradin, ſul- 

| R 5 an 


370 


Cruſades, &c. Ch. xlv. 


tan of Aleppo, had made with his own hands: 
he alſo cauſed to be carved on the door theſe 
words, SALADIN THE KING, SERVANT OF 
Gop, SET UP THIS INSCRIPTION, AFTER 
Gord HAD TAKEN JERUSALEM BY BIS 
HANDS. 

He eſtabliſhed Mahometan ſchools ; but not- 
withſtanding his attachment to his religion, he 
reſtored to the Oriental Chriſtians the church of 
the holy ſepulchre. It muſt alſo be added, that 
within the compaſs of a year he granted Guy of 


Luſignan his liberty, on ſwearing never to take 


theſe idolaters, killing vaſt multitudes, and mak- 


up arms againſt his deliverer; but Luſignan paid 
no regard to his oath, 

While Aſia Minor continued thus the ſcene, 
on which ſo many thouſands of cruſaders acted 
their parts, ſome diſtinguiſhed by their zeal and 
love of glory, others by their crimes and diſ- 
trefles ; the fury of propagating religion by the 
ſword was ſpread to the extremity of the North. 

We have juſt ſeen Charlemaign convert the 
north of Germany with fire and ſword : we have 
afterwards beheld the idolatrous Danes making 
Europe tremble, and conquering Normandy, 
without ever attempting to force the conquered 
to embrace idolatry : but- ſcarcely was Chriſtianity 
eſtabliſhed in Denmark, Saxony, and Scandina- 
via, than a cruſade was preached up againſt the 
Pagans of the North, whom they called Sclaves, 
or Slaves; from whence the country which bor- 
ders on Hungary is named Sclavonia, The 
Chriſtians took up arms againſt them from Bre- 
men to the extremities of Scandinavia, Above 
100,000 eruſaders carried deſtruction among 


ing 


of Saladin. 371 
ing no converts. We may ſtill add the loſs of 
theſe 100,000 men to the 1,600,000, which the 
madneſs of thoſe times had coſt Europe. 

In the mean time the Chriſtians loſt all they 
had poſſeſſed in Aſia, except Antioch, Tripoli, 
Joppa, and the city of Tyre; all the reſt was 
in the poſſeſſion of Saladin, either in his own 
perſon, or by his ſon-in-law, the ſultan of Iconi- 
um or Cogni. 

At the rumour of Saladin's victories, all Eu- 
rope was in confuſion; and pope Clement III 
excited France, Germany, and England againſt 
bim. Philip Auguſtus, who then reigned in 188. 
France, and old Henry II. king of England, 
ſuſpended their quarrels, and only vied with each 
other in their readineſs to fuccour Aſia. They 
both ordered that ſuch of their ſubjects as would 
not take up the croſs, ſhould pay the value of 
the tenth part of their revenues and moveable 
effects to defray the expence of the armament. 
'This was called the Saladin tythe, which ſerved 
as a trophy of the conqueror's glory. 

The emperor Frederick Barbaroſſa, famous 
for the perſecutions he ſuffered from the popes, 
and for what he made them ſuffer, took up the 
croſs almoſt at the fame time. He feemed 
to be among the Chriſtians of Afia, what Saladin 
was among the Turks, an able politician, a good 
foldier, tried by fortune, and he was at the head 
of an army of 150,000 fighting men, He at firſt 
took the precaution to order, that none ſhould be 
fuffered to enter into the cruſade, but ſuch as had 
at leaſt 150 franks current money; to the end, 
that every one might by his own means prevent 

R 6 thoſs 


+ 


* 
: 
— = _— - ay an q 
? — ne ems <A ——_ Ee EX 3 — * r — 
= * * 8 of —R "Bd -- * 5 8 = - — — = 2 
— —— - . 8 — == — Sir. x 
Bo — — 1 8 — * — 
— — — — — a — — — — — — — 
3 4 7 3 - i _ — 2 — — dies ra 
2 5 122 2 <7 - —. — 
— — - 5 = 


© 46 — 

— - * — 
——— — 

v — . a $ 

+> = — 
— — 


— — 
— hy 4 „T 
8 — — 


M6 OR II 
2 3644 9 


— 


Cruſages, Sc. Ch. xlr. 


thoſe frightful dearths, which had contributed to 
the ruin of the preceding armies, 

The emperor was, however, obliged firſt to 
fight againſt the Greeks, The court of Con- 
ſtantinople, weary of being continually menaced 
by the Latins, entered at laſt into an alliance 
with Saladin, which was condemned by the ref 
of Europe, notwithſtanding its being apparently 
inevitable; for no alliance can take place between 
naturzl enemies, but from neceſſity, Our pre- 
ſent alliance with the Turks, though perhaps les 

ry, does not create ſuch murmurs. Fre- 
derick forced a paſſage through Thrace ſword in 
hand, againſt Iſaac Angelus the emperor, 2nd 
conquering the Greeks, he afterwards obtained 
two victories over the ſultan of Cogni; but 
bathing himſelf in a river, thought to be the 
Cydnus, when in a profuſe ſweat, he died, and 
his conqueſts proved of no advantage. Though 
they had doubtleſs been dearly bought, fince his 
fon the duke of Swabia could gather together no 
more than ſeven or eight thouſand men at maſt 
out of the 150,500 that had followed bis father : 
theſe he conducted to Antioch, and joined them 
to the remains of the army of Guy of Lufignan, 
king of Jeruſalem, who was flill reſolved ts at- 
tack Saladin his conqueror, notwithſtanding bis 
oath, and the inferiority of his forces, 

After many battles, none of which were deci- 
five, the fon of Frederick Barbatoſſa, who might 
have been emperor of the Weft, loft his life near 
Ptolemats. Thoſe who have written of his dying 
2 martyr to chaftity, and afferted, that he might 
have preſerred his life by the uſe of women, have 
Den that they are bald panegyriſts, and ä 


EF. “üV . _. MM .. + *$ = 228 82.8 


— * as —— . 


of Saladin. 


tle acquainted with natural philoſophy ; however, 
the ame compliment has ſince been paid to 
Lewis VIII. king of France. 

Aſia Minor was a gulf into which all 2 
were throwing themſelves, Not only was t 
immenſe army of the emperor Frederick Ioft, but 
the fleets of Engliſh, French, Italians, and Ger- 
mans, that preceded the arrival of Philip Au- 
guſtus, and Richard Coeur - de - Lion, brought 
freſh cruſaders, and freſh victims. 

The kings of France and England at length 
zrived before Ptolemais in Syria; and almoſt 
a! the Chriſtians in the Laſt bad united to beſtege 
that city. Saladin was then near the Euphrates, 
where he was embarrafled by a civil war; and 
when the two kings had joined their forces to 
thoſe of the eaſtern Chriſtiane, the whole army 
was computed to amount to above oo, ooo men. 


Ptolemais was indeed taken; but the diſcord %. 


that neceflarily aroſæ between two ſuch rivals 
in glory and in intereft, as Philip and Richard, 
tid more miſchief than theſe 200,000 performed 
ſucceſsful} explonts. Philip, tired with theſe divi- 
lors, and fill more with the ſuperiority aſſumed 
on all 6ccafions by Richard, whom be confider- 
et 2s his vaſſa!, returned into his own domi 
mons, Which he ought not perhaps to have leit, 
24 to which he ought not to have returned, 
2 bringing with him new acquifitions of 

. 

Richard remained mafter of the field of honour, 
but not of that multitude of cruſaders, who were 
more divided by their anmmotities than the two 
tings had been; which made the moſt heroic 
coaage ineſſectual. Saladin, who returned vice 

r 


274 Cruſades, &c. Ch. xlv. 


torious from Meſopotamia, gave battle to the cru- 
ſaders near Ceſarea, when Richard had the glory 
of diſmounting that prince, which was almoſt all 
that he gained in this memorable expedition. 
Fatigues, ſickneſs, ſkirmiſhes, and continual 
quarrels, ruined this great army, and Richard 
1191. returned with more glory indeed than Philip Au- 
uſtus, but in a manner much leſs prudent. He 
ſer ſail with a ſingle veſſel, and that being wreck- 
ed on the coaſt of Venice, he traverſed half of 
Germany in diſguiſe, and but ill attended. He 
had offended the duke of Auſtria while he was in 
Syria, by his haughty behaviour, and yet he was 
ſo imprudent as to paſs through his dominions: 
on which the duke made him priſoner, and deli- 
vered him up to the barbarous and cowardly em- 
1193. peror Henry VI. who kept him in confinement as 
an enemy taken in war, and demanded one hun- 
dred thouſand marks of filver for his ranſom. 
Saladin, who had entered into a treaty with 
Richard, by which he left the Chriſtians the ſea 
coaſt from Tyre to Joppa, continued faithful to 
1195, his engagement; but died three years after at 
Damaſcus, admired even by the Chriſtians. In 
his laſt illneſs, inſtead of the flags which uſed to 
be diſplayed before the pate of his palace, he 
ſubſtituted the ſheet in which he was to be buried ; 
and the perſon who carried this ſtandard of death, 
cried with a loud voice, This is all that Saladin, 
the conqueror of the Eaſt, has obtained by his 
* viRories.” It is ſaid, that he left by his laſt 
will benefactions ta be equally diſtributed amongſt 
the poor Mahometans, Jews, and Chriſtians; 
intending by his difpoſition, to teach this doc- 
trine, that all men are brethren, and that in rat 
5 | y 


of Saladin, 375 


der to entitle them to receive our aſſiſtance, we 
ought not to enquire what they believe, but 
} what they ſuffer. 

. The zeal for cruſades was not extinguiſhed ; 
neither did the wars carried on by Philip Au- 
guſtus againſt England and Germany prevent 2 


c great number of the French lords from turning 
* "6x j 

adventurers. The principal promoter of this 
, emigration was a Flemiſh prince, as Godfrey of 
c Bouillon had been the chief of the firſt, This 
| was Baldwin earl of Flanders: 4000 knights, 
4 9000 eſquires, and 25,000 foot, compoſed this 
new cruſade, which may be called the fifth, 


Venice, which ſupported its commerce by war, 
grew every day more formidable : it was thought 
expedient to apply to this republic for aſſiſtance, 
rather than to any other; for the Venetians were 
able to fit out larger fleets than the kings of Eng- 
land, Germany, and France. Theſe induſtrious 
republicans gained by this cruſade not only 
wealth, but additional territories, In the fisſt 
place, they were paid eighty five thouſand marks 
of ſilver merely to tranſport the troops; and 
then they employed this very army, to which 
they added fifty galleys, in making conqueſts in 
Dalmatia. | 1202. 

Pope Innocent III. either as a matter of form, 
or becauſe he already feared their encreaſing 
grandeur, excommunicated them; but theſe ex- 
communicated cruſaders nevertheleſs took Zara 
and its territories, which {till encreaſed the powet 
of the Venetians. : 

This cruſade was different from all the others ; 
for the cruſaders found Conftantinople divided, 
and the former ones had always to do with em- 

perors 


376 


Cruſades after Saladin. Ch. xly, 


perors well eſtabliſhed on the throne. The Ve- 
netians, together with the earl of Flanders, the 
marquiſs of Montferrat, and in fine the principal 


commanders, who are ſeldom deficient in point | 


of policy, when the multitude is wild and li- 


centious, perceived that the time was come for | 


executing the antient project againſt the Grecian 
empire. 

Iſaac Angelus had been deprived of his liberty 
and fight by his brother Alexius; but his fon 
was at the head of a party, and the cruſaders 
offered him their dangerous afliſtance. Such 
auxiliaries were equally odious to both parties ; 
however, they encamped without the city, which 
was always filled with tumult. Young Alexius, 
who was deteſted by the Greeks for having in- 
troduced the Latins, ſoon became the victim of 
a new faction; and one of his relations, ſur- 


named Murtzuphlus, ſtrangled him with his own 


1208. 


hands. | 

The cruſaders, who had then the pretence of 
revenging the death of their friends, took advan- 
tage of the ſeditions that deſolated the city, in 
order to plunder it. They entered almoſt without 
reſiſtance, and having put every one they met to 
the ſword, gave themſelves up to all the exceſs of 
avarice and fury, Nicetas afſures us, that the 
booty of the French lords alone amounted to four 
hundred thouſand marks of ſilver. The churches 
were pillaged ; and what ſufficiently ſhews, that 
the diſpoſition of the nation has never changed, 
is, that the French danced with the ladies in the 
ſanctuary of the church of St. Sophia. 
This was the firſt time that the city of Con- 


ſtantinople was taken and ſacked; and this was 


done 


Cruſades after Saladin. 


done by Chriſtians, who had made a vow to fight 
only againſt the infidels. ö 

In all theſe ſkirmiſhes, we do not find that 
the Greek fire, ſo much boaſted of by hiſ- 
torians, had the leaſt effect. If it had been what 
they repreſent it, it would always have ſecured 
the victory both by land and fea. If it was 
ſomething reſembling our phoſphorus, it might 
indeed be preſerved in water, but then in that 
element it would have produced no effect. In 
ſhort, notwithſtanding this ſecret, the Turks 
had taken almoſt all Aſia Minor from the Greeks, 
and the Latins took the reſt. 

Baldwin, earl of Flanders, the moſt power- 
ful perſon in the cruſade, cauſed himſelf to be 
elected emperor, and condemned Murtzuphlus, 
the other uſurper, to be thrown from the top of 
a high column. The other chiefs divided the 
empire among them, The Venetians took 
Peloponneſus, the iſle of Candia, and many cities 
on the coaſt of Phrygia, which had never ſub- 


mitted to the Turkiſh e The marquiſs of 


Montferrat took Theſſaly. Thus there was lit- 
tle left for Baldwin, beſides Thrace and Meſia. 
As to the pope, he gained, at leaſt for a time, 
the whole eaſtern church. This conqueſt how- 
ever might have been worth a kingdom in time; 
tor Conſtantinople was a much more valuable ace 


quiſition than Jeruſalem. 


Theſe cruſaders, who ruined the Chriſtians 
their brethren, might more eaſily than all their 
predeceſſors have driven the Turks out of Aſia; 
for the dominions of Saladin were diſmembered; 
but of ſuch a number of knights who had taken 
a vow to go and ſuccour Jeruſalem, there only 

5 paſſed 


48 


3205. 


Cruſades after Saladin. Ch. xly. 


paſſed into Syria a few of thoſe who were unable 
to get any ſhare in the ſpoils of the Greeks. One 
of theſe was Simon of Montfort, who having in 
vain attemped to obtain a ſovereignty in Greece 
and Syria, returned at length to 4 and put 
himſelf at the head of a cruſade againſt the Al- 
bigenſes, to uſurp the eſtates of Chriſtians under 
the banner of the croſs. 

There remained many princes of the family of 
the Comneni, who did not loſe their courage at 
the deſtruction of their empire. One of theſe, 
whoſe name was alſo Alexius, eſcaped with ſome 
veſſels to Colchis, and there, between the ſea and 
mount Caucaſus, founded a ſmall ſtate called the 
empire of Trebizond; ſo much has the word 
empire been abuſed. | 

Theodore Laſcaris, by whom Nice was retaken, 
eſtabliſhed himſelf in Bithynia, by opportunely 
making uſe of the Arabs againſt the Turks. He 
S2ulſed a patriarch to be elected of his own com- 
munion. Other Greeks entered into an alliance 
even with the Turks, and called to their aſſiſtance 
their antient enemies the Bulgarians againſt the 
new emperor Baldwin, who had yet ſcarcely 
enjoyed his conqueſt: having totally defeated 
him near Adrianople, they cut off his arms and 
legs, and left him a prey to wild beaſts. 

People are aſtoniſhed that the ſources of theſe 
emigrations were not dried up; but the contrary 
would have been as proper a ſubject of aſtoniſh- 
ment. The minds of mankind were ſet in agita- 
tion; penitents were ordered by their confeſlors 
to go tothe Holy Land, and by the falſe reports 
every day propagated, new hopes were _ 
oin, 


alſo took upon himſelf the title of emperor, and 


Cruſades after Saladin. 


Eſloin, a monk of Britany, about the year 
1204, conducted a multitude of his countrymen 
into Syria. "The widow of a king of Hungary 
took the croſs, with many other women, believ- 
ing that there was no other method of getting to 
heaven, beſides that of performing this journey. 
This epidemic frenzy ſeized even the children, 
thouſands of whom, conducted by their ſchool- 


maſters and the monks, left the houſes of their 


parents, on the faith of theſe words, Out of the 
mouth of babes and ſucklings thou haſt ordained 
ſtrength. Their conductors fold a part to the 
Mufſlulmen, and the reſt periſhed miterably. 

Antioch was the moſt conſiderable ſtate the 
Chriſtians had preſerved in Syria; and Ptolemais 
was the only place they poſſeſſed in the kingdom 
of Jeruſalem: yet it was the opinion of the 
Weſt, that Jeruſalem ought to have a king; and 
Emery of Luſignan, the titular ſovereign, dying 
about the year 1205, the biſhop of Ptolemars 
Propoſed to go to France to demand a king of 
Judea, when Philip Auguſtus nominated a younger 
ſon of the houſe of Brienne in Champaign, who 
had ſcarcely any eſtate, We may by the king's 
choice form a judgment of that kingdom, 

This titular king, together with thoſe knights, 
ſome people from Britany, who had croſſed the 
ſea, many German princes, a duke of Auſtria, 
Andrew king of Hungary, who was followed by 
pretty good troops, the templars and hoſpitallers, 
and the biſhops of Munſter and Utrecht, all 
together might have formed an army of con- 
querors, if they had had a good general ; but 
this they always wanted. 


The 


380 


Cruſades after Saladin. Ch. xlv. 


The king of Hungary retiring, a count of 
Holland undertook what ſo many kings and 
princes had been unable to perform. The Chriſ— 
tians ſeemed now to have a proſpect of retrieving 
their affairs; their hopes were ſtrengthened by 
the arrival of a multitude of knights brought by 
a legate from the pope: an archbiſhop of Bour- 
deaux, the biſhops of Paris, Angers, Autun, 
and Beauvais, accompanied the legate with a 
conſiderable body of troops; and beſides theſe, 


four thouſand Engliſh, and as many Italians, 


came under ſeveral banners: ſo that John de 


Brienne, who had arrived at Ptolemais almoſt 
alone, found himſelf at the head of near 100,000 
men. 

Saphadin, brother to the famous Saladin, who 
had ww joined Egypt to his other dominions, 
came to demoliſh the remains of the walls of Jeru- 


ſalem, which was no more than a ſmall ruinous 


town: but as Saphadin appeared but ill eſtabliſh- 
ed in Egypt, the cruſaders imagined they might 
eaſily obtain the poſſeſſion of that country. 

he paſſage from Ptolemais to the mouth of 
the Nile is very ſhort; and the veſſels which had 
brought ſuch numbers of Chriſtians, carried them 


in three days to the antient Peluſium. 


Near the ruins of Peluſium is built Damietta, 
on a cauſeway that defends it from the inunda- 
tions of the Nile. The cruſaders began the ſiege 
during the laſt illneſs of Saphadin, and continued 
it after his death, Meledin, his eldeſt fon, then 
reigned in Egypt, who was thought to be fonder 
of the laws, the ſciences, and a life of tranquil- 
lity, than of war: but Corradin, ſultan. of Da- 
maſcus, who was in the poſſeſſion of all Syria, 

came 


1 . 28 eayy @ 


r . 


˙ÿjk7qũ̃¶ af, Ay, 2 a65 . 


2 myy 


*  @® His (D $5 ww 


Cruſades after Saladin. 


came to his aſſiſtance, The fame of this ſiege, 
which laſted two years, ſpread through Europe, 
Aſia, and Africa, 

St. Francis of Aſſiſi, who had then eſtabliſhed 
his order, went himſelf to the camp of the be- 
ſiegers; and thinking that he ſhould eaſily con- 
vert the ſultan Meledin, he advanced with his 
companion, brother Illuminatus, to the Egyptian 
camp, where he was ſeized and conducted to the 
ſultan. Francis preached to him in Italian, and 
made a propoſal, to cauſe a large fire to be kind- 
led, into which the Imans on the one hand, and 
he and Illuminatus on the other, ſhould caſt 
themſelves to prove which was the true religion. 
The prince replied with a ſmile, that his prieſts 
were not of the number of thoſe who would 
leap into the fire in defence of their faith, Francis 
then propoſed to throw himſelf into it alone; 
but Meledin told him, that if he ſhould accept 
of ſuch a propoſal, he would be thought to doubt 
the truth of his religion; and in ſhort, plainly 
perceiving that Francis was incapable of being a 
dangerous ſpy, he diſmiſſed him with marks of 
his bounty. 

Damietta however was taken, which ſeemed 
to open a way for the conqueſt of Egypt; but 
Pelagius Albano, a Spaniſh Benedictine, who 


381 


was a cardinal and the pope's legate, proved the 


cauſe of its being loſt. The legate pretended, 
that the pope being the head of all the cruſades, 
he who — him, had an inconteſtable 
right to be general; and that as the king of 
Jeruſalem enjoyed his title only by the pope's 


permiſſion, he ought to pay an implicit obedience 


to his legate, Theſe diviſions took up ſome time; 


they 


— ———— 


382 


Cruſades after Saladin. Ch. xlr. 


they muſt write to Rome; and the pope com- 
manding the king to return to the camp, he 
obeyed, in order to ſerve under the BenediQine, 
This general intangled the army between two 
branches of the Nile, at the very time when that 
river began to overflow its banks. The ſultan, 
by the help of fluices, overflowed the Chriſtian 
camp on the one ſide, and burnt their veſſels on 
the other. The waters of the Nile continuing 


to riſe, threatened. to. ſwallow up the legate's 


4221, 


army, which was then in the fituation in which 
the 4 . are deſcribed under Pharoah, when 
they ſaw the ſea ready to roll in upon them. 

Cotemporary writers agree, that in this extre- 
mity they entered into a treaty with the ſultan, 
who obliged them to reſtore Damietta, and ſent 
their army into Phcenicia, after making them 
ſwear that they would not commit any acts of 
hoſtility againſt him for eight years; and he kept 
king John de Brienne as an hoſtage. 

All the hopes of the Chriſtians were now 


centered in the emperor Frederick II: John de 


Brienne being ſet at liberty, gave him his daughter 


in marriage, and his right to the kingdom of 


Jeruſalem, as her 2 | | 

The emperor Frederick II. was perfectly 
ſenſible- of the little advantage to be obtained 
by cruſades; but he was obliged to keep fair 
with the people, and to elude the power of the 


pope. In my opinion, the conduct he obſerved 


is a model of the meſt perfect policy. He 
carried on a negotiation at the ſame time with 
the pope and the ſultan Meledin; and the treaty 
between the ſultan and him being ſigned, he ſet 
out for Paleſtine; but it Was rather with a * 

OE . ar 


Cruſades after Saladin. 


than an army. Scarce was he arrived, when 
he made the treaty public, by which Jeruſalem, 
Nazareth, and ſome villages, were yielded up to 
him; and he cauſed it to be reported in Europe, 


that he had recovered the holy places without 


loſing a drop of blood. He was repoached with 
having left by the treaty a moſque- in Jeruſalem ; 
and the patriarch of that city treated him as an 
atheiſt 3 but in other places he was regarded as a 
prince who underſtood the art of government. 


- It muſt be confeſſed by every one who reads the 


hiſtory of thoſe times, that the writers of romance 
have ſcarce been able, by the force of imagina- 
tion, to exceed what truth has here furniſhed. 
A few years before this event, an earl of Flan- 
ders, having made à vow to go to the Holy 
Land, ſeizes in his way the empire of Conſtan- 
tinople: John de Brienne, a younger ſon of a 
family in Champaign, is made king of Jeruſalem, 
and on the point of conquering Egypt. All this 
we have ſeen; but it-is nothing as yet: the ſame 
John de Brienne having loſt his dominons, 
marches almoſt alone to the aſſiſtance of Con- 
ſtantinople: arrives there during an interregnum, 
and is elected emperor. His ſucceſſor Baldwin 
II. the laſt Latin emperor of Conſtantinople, 
conſtantly preſſed by Greece, runs with the 
pope's bull in his hand, in vain imploring aſſiſt- 
ance of the ſeveral princes in Europe. All the 


princes in Europe were at that time from home; 


the emperors of the Weſt were gone to the Holy 
Land; the popes were almoſt always in France; 
and the kings ready to ſet out for Paleſtine. 


383 


1224. 


Theobald of Champaign, king of Navarre, 


do celebrated for his love for the queen, mother 


of 


334 


1240, 


1244. 


Cruſades after Saladin. Ch. xly, 


of St. Lewis, and his ſongs, was one of thoſe 
who embarked for Paleſtine ; but he was ſo hap- 
py as to return the ſame year. About ſeventy 
French knights, who had reſolved to ſignalize 
their courage with him, were all taken and car- 
ried priſoners to Grand Cairo, where Melecſala, 
nephew to Meledin, who inherited both the 
dominions and the virtues of his uncle, treated 
them with humanity, and at length permitted 
them to return to their native country at a mo- 
derate ranſom. 

At this time the territory of Jeruſalem belong- 
ed neither to the Syrians, the Egyptians, the 
Chriſtians, nor the Muſſulmen : for a revolution, 
which has had no example, gave a new face to 
the greateſt, part of Aſia, Jenghiz-chan and 
his | ne ty th looſe from mount Caucaſus, 
Taurus, and Imaus, while the people, who 
fled before them like. ſavage beaſts chaced from 
their haunts by other more terrible animals, over- 
ran, in their turn, the countries that were aban- 
doned at their approach. 

The inhabitants of Khoraſſan, who were called 
Khouarazmians, puſhed forwards by the Taꝛrtars, 
ruſhed into Syria, as the Goths in the fourth 
century, impelled by the Scythians, over-ran the 
Roman empire. heſe Khouarazmians being 
idolaters, put all the Turks, Chriſtians, and Jews 
to the ſword. The Chriſtians, who remained in 


Antioch, Tyre, and Sidon, and. on the coaſt of 


Syria, for ſome time ſuſpended their private quarrels, 
and united to repel theſe new banditti. They 
were then in alliance with the ſultan of Damal- 
cus: and the templars, the knights of St. John, 


and the Teutonic knights, were champions = 


C ruſades after Saladin. 


in arms; for Europe was continually furniſhing 
ſome voluntiers. In ſhort, their united troops 
engaged the Khouarazmians, when the Chriſtians 
were entirely defeated : but this was not the laſt 
of their — ; freſh Turks came to ravage 
the coaſts of Syria after the Khouarazmians, and 
exterminated almoſt all the knights that were left. 
Yet theſe ſudden torrents ſtill left the Chriſtians 
in poſſeſſion of the cities on the coaſt. 
The Latins, ſhut up in their maritime towns, 
now found themſelves deprived of all aſſiſtance, 
and their animoſities encreaſed their misfortunes. 
The princes of Antioch were only employed 
about making war on ſome Chriſtians in Armenia. 
The factions of the Venetians, the Genoele and 
the Piſans, diſputed the poſleflion of the city of 


— may — —— 

—  — _ — Ü mw ER ro — — — 

: _— 
— — . . — — — 
— 6 3 — 22 > 
* — . on 
7 444 rr — 7 
— = * * Tx _ 
2 Fl 4 ** L 
5 2 1 


K Ptolemais; and the templars and the knights of 
0 St. John were embroiled with each other. Eu- 
n rope, now cooled, ſent ſcarcely any of theſe 
= armed pilgrims, ſo that the hopes of the Chriſtians 
1- in the Eaſt were extinguiſhed, when St. Lewis 


undertook the Jaſt cruſade. 


85 . 


0000000000000 


1 | CHAP. XUE 

in C/ St. Lewis and the laſt cruſade, 

of | 

ls, EWIS IX, ſeemed a prince deſtined to 
ef reform Europe, if that had been poſſible, to 
al- render France triumphant and polite, and to be 
* in every reſpect a model for mankind to follow, 
ti 


His piety, which was that of an anchoret, did 
in Vol. I. 8 not 


Of St. Lewis Ch. xlvi. 
not deprive him of any of the virtues of a king, 
His liberality was not in the leaſt inconſiſtent with 
a wiſe ceconomy, He knew how to reconcile a 
profound policy with an exact juſtice; and per- 
Haps he was the only ſovereign who deſerved this 
Praiſe, He was prudent and firm in the council, 
intrepid and yet cool in war, and as compaſſionate 
as if he had always been unhappy. In ſhort, it 
is not in the power of man to catry virtue to a 
greater height. | 

He had in conjunction with the regent his mo- 
ther, whounderſtood the art of government, given 
a check to the abuſe of eccleſiaſtic juriſdiction. The 
clergy inſiſted that the civil officers ſhould ſeize 
on the eſtates of excommunicated perſons, with- 
out examining whether the excommunication 
was juſt or not, The king wiſely diſtinguiſhing 
between the civil laws, to which the whole ſo- 
ciety ought to be ſubject, and the ordinances of 
the church, whoſe empire ought to extend only 
to conſciences, would not ſuffer that the laws 
of the Kingdom ſhould give way to this abuſe 
of excemmunications. Having begun his reign 
with confining the pretenſions of biſhops and the. 
laity within proper bounds, he put a ſtop to the 
factions of Britany ; and obſerved a prudent neu- 
trality, during the violent tranſports of ory 
IX, and the vindictive reſentment of Frederick II. 

The crown lands were already conſiderable ; 
and he improved them greatly by the purchaſe 
of ſeveral eftates. At that time the revenue of 
the kings of France aroſe only from their own 
demeſnes, and not from the purſes of the people. 
Their grandeur, like that of any private perſon, 
depended upon a judicious economy. = 


— 
r . f wa 


3 2 &@ re . eb DH0 


and the laſt cruſade. ER 


This adminiſtration had enabled him to raiſe 
very powerful armies againſt Henry III. king of 
England, and his vaſlals in France, who united 
with the Engliſh. Henry III. was neither fo 
rich, nor ſo well obeyed by his ſubjects ; he had 
neither ſuch good troops, nor were they ſo ſoon 
in readineſs. Lewis gained two victories over 
him, particularly the battle of Taillebourg in 
Poitou, where the king of England fled before 1241. 
him. This war was followed by an advantage- 
ous peace; the vaſlals of France returned to their 
obedience, without ever forfeiting it again; and 
the king obliged the Engliſh to pay 5000]. ſter- 
ling for the expence of the campaign. 
| lf we reflect, that when the king behaved with 
ſuch great prudence, he was only four and twenty 
years of age, and that his character was ever 
ſuperior to his fortune, we may eaſily imagine 
what glorious things he would have performed, 
had he continued to reſide in his own kingdom: 
and we ſhall be apt to lament that France was 
rendered fo unhappy even by his virtues, which 
under a more prudent direction might have bleſſed 
the whole world. hte 


In the year 1244, Lewis being attacked by a 


violent illneſs, _—_ it is faid, while in a 


7 


F trance, that he heard a voice which ordered him 
to take up the croſs againſt the infidels; and ſcarce 
; had he recovered his. ſpeech, when he made a 
- vow to carry on a cruſade, The two queens, 
f his mother, and wife, his council, and all about 
1 him, were ſenſible of the danger of this fatal vow :_ 
. even the biſhop of Paris repreſented the dangerous 
p conſequences with which it would be attended; 


but Lewis conſidered it as a ſacred bond, which 
men were not permitted to unlooſe, - He prepared | 
D 2 four . \ 


338 


1243. 


Of St. Lewis Ch. xlvi. 


four years for this expedition; and leaving the 
government of the kingdom to his mother, he 
ſet out with his wife, attended by his three bro- 
thers with their wives, and almoſt all the knights 
in France; among whom were near three thou- 
ſand knights bannerets. One part of the immenſe 
fleet, that carried ſuch a number of princes and 
ſoldiers, ſet out from Marſeilles, and the other 
from Aiguemortes, which is no longer a ſeaport. 

We find from St, Lewis's account, how greatly 
France was impoveriſhed by theſe cruſades. He 
gave eight thouſand livres to the lord of Vallery 
for thirty knights : the conſtable had three thou- 
ſand livres for fifteen, The archbiſhop of Rheims 
and the biſhop of Langres, received four thou- 
ſand livres for fifteen knights, whom each had 
under his command. A hundred and ſixty two 
knights dined at the king's table: fo that theſe ex- 
pences and preparations were immenſe, 

If the enthuſiaſm of cruſades, and a ſcrupulous 


obſervance of oaths, had ſuffered Lewis's virtue 


to liſten to the voice of reaſon, he would not 
only have ſeen the injury he did his country, but 
the extreme injuſtice of this armament, which 
appeared to him ſo juſt. | 

Had the project been only to put France in 
poſſeſſion of Jeruſalem, ſtill the French had no 


right to it: but he marched againſt the old, the 


wiſe Melecſala, ſultan of Egypt, who had cer- 
tainly never given offence to the king of France, 
Melecſala was a Muſſulman, and this was the 
only pretence for making war againſt him. There 


was certainly no more reaſon for ravaging Egypt, 


becauſe it was inhabited by thoſe who believed 
the doctrine of Mahomet, than there is at * 
. or 


a YT” TY” Sv ww 


and the laſt cruſade. 


for carrying a war into China, becauſe the inha- 
bitants of that empire are attached to the morals 
of Confucius, b 

Lewis put into Cyprus, where the king of 
that iſland joined him; and ſailing from thence 
they landed in Egypt. At that time the ſultan 
of this country was not in poſſeſſion of Jeruſalem. 
Paleſtine was ravaged by the Khouarazmians “, to 
whom the ſultan of Syria had relinquiſhed this 
wretched. province; while the caliph of Bagdat, 
intirely deſtitute of power, no longer concerned 
himſelf in theſe wars. The Chriſtians were ſtill 
in poſſeſſion of Ptolemais, Tyre, Antioch, and 
Tripoli: and by their diviſions they were con- 
tinually in danger of/ being a prey either to the 
Turkiſh ſultans orte the Khouarazmians. 

Things being thus circumſtanced, it is diffi - 
cult to conceive why the king of France ſhould 


* upon Egypt for the ſcene of war. Me- 


cfala, grown old and ſick, demanded a peace, 
which was refuſed. Lewis was reinforced b 
freſh ſuccours from France, conſiſting of 60000 
fighting men: he was obeyed, beloved, and 
as he had to do with an enemy already diſ- 
comfited, and with a ſultan who drew near his 
end, who would not have imagined that Egypt, 


The Khouarazmians were a people of upper Aſia, bordering 
en. the Parthians, to whom they were firſt ſubject, and after- 
wards to the Arabs, In the thirteenth century they were con- 


_ quered by the Tartars, and obliged to retire beyond the Tigris 


and Euphrates, from whence they addreſſed themſelves to the 
ſultan of Egypt, who gave them leave to invade Paleſtine, which 
they did with fire and (word, and made great havock among the 
Chriſtians, But the ſultan of Egypt afterwards expelled them 


his dominions, and moft of them were deſtroyed by the Saracens, 
Sce. Maimb, hiſt, des cruſ. 


8 3 and 


EE TT —Tↄ—ů — — 


390 


2250. 


| Of S. Lewis, Ch. xlvi. 
and afterwards Syria, would ſoon have ſubmit- 
ted? Yet half of this flouriſhing army died of 
ſickneſs, and the other half was defeated near 


Maſſoura. St. Lewis ſaw his brother Robert of 


Artois fall in the engagement, and was himſelf 
taken priſoner with his two other brothers, the 
count of Anjou, and the count of Poitiers, 
Melecſala now no longer reigned in Egypt, but 
was ſucceeded by Almoadan his ſon : this new 
ſultan had certainly a very great ſoul ; for king 
Lewis having offered him a million of beſants in 
gold for his own, and his fellow-priſoners ran- 
ſom, Almoadan forgave him a fifth part. 

This ſultan was murdered by the Mamalukes, 


whom his father had formed into a militia; and 


the government, on its being divided, ſeemed to 
promiſe no good to the Chriſtians. However, 


the Egyptian council continued to treat with 
the king; and the ſieur de Joinville aſſerts, that 


the emirs themſelves propoſed in one of their 


aſſemblies to chuſe Lewis for their ſultan. 


Joinville was priſoner with the king: and 
though what is related by a man of his character, 


has doubtleſs ſome weight; yet if we reflect how 


often in a camp, or in a houſe, we are miſinform- 


.ed of the particular facts that are performed in a 


neighbouring camp, or in the next houſe; and 


how improbable it is, that Muſſulmen ſhould 
think of chuſing for their king a Chriſtian enemy, 


who was neither acquainted with their language 
nor their manners, who deteſted their religion, 
and could only be conſidered by them as the chief 
of a band of foreign robbers, we ſhall find that 
Joinville has only related a popular ſubject of diſ- 
courſe, A faithful relation of what we hear, is 

| | frequently 


| 


* 


frequently nothing more than a repetition of what 


and the laſt cruſade. 


ought at leaſt to be ſuſpected. But we have not 


Joinville's genuine hiſtory ; it is only an inaccu- 


rate tranſlation, made in the reign of Francis I. 
of a writing which at preſent would be extremely 


difficult to underſtand. | 

I know not how to reconcile what hiſtorians 
ſay of the manner in which theſe priſoners were 
treated by the Mahometans. It is ſaid, that they 
brought them one by one out of the place in 


which they were confined, and aſked if they 


would renounce Jeſus Chriſt; then the heads 


of all thoſe were. cut off, who perſiſted in the 
Chriſtian faith. bins | 
On the other hand, they atteſt that an old 


emir aſked the priſoners by an interpreter, if they 
believed in. Chriſt, and they having anſwered 


in the affimative, he replied z © Take comfort 


then, ſince he died for you, and is riſen again, 
se he will certainly ſave you.“ | 
"Theſe two accounts ſeem a little contradictory; 


and what is a om contradiction ſtill, is, that 
the emits ſhould kill thoſe captives, from whom. 


they expected a ranſom. 


Upon the whole, theſe emirs demanded no 


more than 800,000 beſants, to which the 
ſultan had limitted the ranſom of the captives. 
And when in virtue of the treaty, the French 
troops in Damietta evacuated that city, we 125. 


do not find that the conquerors committed the 
leaſt outrage on the women, but diſmiſſed the 


queen, and her ſiſters- in- law, with marks of 
reſpect. Not that all the Mahometan ſoldiers 


behaved with moderation; for the vulgar in all 


countries are rude and brutiſn: there were doubt- 


84 leſs 


392 


Of St. Lewis Ch. xlvi. 


leſs many acts of violence committed, and cap- 
tives ill uſed and ſlain; but I confeſs, that I am 
aſtoniſhed that the Mahometan ſoldiery did not 


_ exterminate a greater number of theſe ſtrangers, 


award, which was in favour of Henry, 


who had failed from the ports of Europe, with- 
_ any reaſon, to lay waſte the kingdom of 
pt. 
Se. Lewis, on his being delivered from captivi- 
ty, retired to Paleſtine, and ſtayed there near 
Four years with the remains of his fleet and army, 
Inſtead of returning to France, he went to viſit 
Nazareth, and at length repaired to his own 
dominions, but not till after the death of queen 
Blanch his mother; and then only, in order to 
form a new cruſade. | 
His reſidence at Paris procured him many ad- 
vantages, and an encreaſe of glory. He had an 
honour done him, which none but a virtuous 
king could expect. Henry III. king of England, 
and his barons, pitched upon him as an 6. 
tor, to decide their differences. He pronounced 
His award like a ſovereign; and — this 
| id not 
put a ſtop to the troubles of England, it ſerved 
however to convince all the world, of the re- 
ſpe which mankind naturally pay to virtue. 
His brother the count of Anjou was indebted 
to Lewis's reputation, and to the good order 
which _prevailed throughout the kingdom, for 
the honour of being choſen king of Sicily by the 
ope. 
5 in the mean time Lewis increaſed his demeſ- 
nes by the acquiſition of Namur, Peronne, 
Avranches, Mortagne, and Perche. He might 


have ſtripped the kings of England of all their 
$i poſſeſ- 


and the laſt cruſade. 


poſſeſſions in France; the quarrels between Hen- 
ry III. and his barons affording him a very good 
opportunity : but he preferred juſtice to uſurpa- 
tion. He ſuffered them to enjoy Guienne, Pe- 
rigord, and the Limouſin; yet he obliged them 
abſolutely to relinquiſh Touraine, Poitou, and 
Normandy, which had been reunited to the 
crown by Philip Auguſtus. Thus he concluded: 
an honourable peace. —— 

He was the firſt that eſtabliſhed the ſuperior: 
courts of juſtice ;* in conſequence of which the 
ſubje&s, hitherto oppreſſed by the arbitrary deci- 
ſions of the judges of the baronies, began to have 
it in their power to remove their cauſe by appeal 
to four great royal bailiwics,. created on purpoſe 


393 


to redreſs their grievances. It was in his reign. 


that men of letters were firſt admitted to fit in 
parliament, where hitherto the lives and property 
of the ſubject were determined by gentlemen, who 
ſeldom: knew how to read. He thewed the piety 
of a recluſe, together with the prudence and reſo- 
lution of a king, in checking the encroachments of 
the court of Rome, by that famous pragmatic” 


ſanction, which preſerves the antient rights and 


liberties of the Gallican church. 

In ſhort, his preſence for thirteen years together- 
repaired the damage France had ſuffered by his 
abſence : but he was ſtill infatuated with a fondneſs- 
for crufades, which the popes encouraged, and 


Clement IV. granted him a tenth penny out of 


the revenues of the clergy for three years. At 
length he departed a ſecond time with nearly the 
ſame force as before; and his brother, whom 
he made king of Sicily, was to follow him : but: 
his devotion. led him to turn his arms neither 


* | to> 


394 


Of St. Lewis Ch. Alvi 


to-the coaſt of Paleſtine, nor to that of Egypt; 
he now directed his fleet towards Tunis. 

The Chriſtians of Syria were not deſcended 
from thoſe Franks who ſettled in Antioch and 


Tyre, They were a mongrel breed of Syrians 


Armenians, and Europeans. They were called 
Colts; and theſe weak remains were ſubject for 
the moſt part to the Egyptians. The Chriſtians 
had no other ſtrong towns left than Tyre and 


Ptolemais. | 


The knights templars and the hoſpitallers, 
who in ſome ſenſe may be compared to the mi- 


litia of the Mamalukes, were cutting one ano- 


ther's throats in theſe very towns; and it is men- 
tioned, that in an engagement between thoſe mi- 
litary monks, not one templar was left alive. 

But what had this ſituation of a few mongrel 
wretches, on the coaſt of Syria, to do with St. 
Lewis's voyage to Tunis? His brother Charles 
of Anjou, king of Naples and Sicily, an ambi- 
tious, cruel, and ſelfiſn prince, made the heroic 
piety of Lewis ſubſervient to his private views, 
by pretending that the king of Tunis owed him 
ſome arrears of tribute. He wanted to be ſove- 


reign of that country; and St. Lewis, according 


to the teſtimony of all hiſtorians (but I know 
not on what foundation), hoped to make a con- 
vert of the king of Tunis. Strange method of 
making a proſelyte ! He invaded this prince's 
dominions, and landed his forces near the ruins of 
Carthage. 

But Lewis himſelf was ſoon beſieged in his 
camp by the united forces of the Moors. The 
ſame diſtemper, which the intemperance of his 
tranſplanted ſubjects, and the change of _ 


and the laſt cruſade. 395 
had brought into his camp in Egypt, deſolated 
his Carthaginian camp; and one of his ſons, 
born during his captivity at Damietta, died of 
this kind of contagion before Tunis. At length 
this diſeaſe attacked the king, who cauſed him- 
ſelf to be laid in the duſt, and expired at the age 
of fifty-five, with the piety of a faint, and the 1270 
courage of a heroe. This is one of the moſt 

remarkable inſtances of the caprice of fortune, 
that the ruins of Carthage ſhould behold a Chriſ- 
tian reſigning his laſt breath, who was come to 
fight the Mabomeine in a country, where Dido 
had introduced the Syrian gods. Scarce was he 
dead, when his brother, the king of _— ar- 
rived, who concluded a peace with the Moors; 
| and the remains of the Chriſtians were brought 
back to Europe. | 
We cannot reckon leſs than 10e, ooo perſons 
ſacrificed in St. Lewis's two expeditions ; and if 
; we add to theſe the 50000 who followed Frede- 
rick Barbaroſſa, the 300,000 in the cruſade under 


, Philip Auguſtus and Richard, the 200, ooo at leaft - 
l in the time of John de Brienne, and alſo reckon 
ö the 160, oo who had before paſſed into Aſia, and 
; do not forget thoſe that periſhed in the expedition 
F to Conſtantinople, and in the wars that followed 
, this revolution, without mentioning the cruſade 
f in the North, and that againſt the Albigenſes, 
5 we ſhall find that the Eaſt was the tomb of above 
i two millions of Europeans, - 

Several countries' were depopulated and im- 
Ss BN poveriſhed by theſe expeditions. The ſieur de 
e Joinville ſays expreſsly, that he would not at- 
4 tend St. Lewis to the ſecond cruſade, becauſe he 


' could not; the former having ruined his eſtate. 
d 8 6 ; St, 1. 


396 


Of St. Lewis Ch. xlvi, 
St. Lewis's ranſom coſt eight hundred thou- 


ſand beſants*, that is, about nine millions of 


livres preſent currency in this year 1740. If out 
of two million who died in the Levant, each 
man carried with him only a hundred livres, this 
will make the expence amount to two hundred 
millions of livres to the nation. The Genoeſe, 
the Piſans, and eſpecially the Venetians, were en- 
riched by theſe expeditions; but France, Eng- 
land, and Germany were exhauſted. 

It is ſaid that the kings of France gained by 
theſe cruſades, becauſe St. Lewis encreaſed his 


demeſnes by purchaſing the eſtates of a few lords 


who were ruined ; but he encreaſed them only 
by his œconomy, during the thirteen years he 
reſided in the kingdom, 

'The only advantage procured by theſe enter- 
prizes, was the liberty which many boroughs 


purchaſed of their lords. Thus the municipal 


government grew ſlowly out of the ruin of the 
poſſeſſors of fiefs. By degrees theſe corporations 
being able to work and te carry on trade upon 
their own account, revived the arts and manu- 
factures, which had been diſuſed in times of 
Nlavery. | 

In the mean time this ſmall number of mon- 
grel Chriſtians, cantoned on the coaſt of Syria, 
were ſoon exterminated, or made ſlaves. Ptole- 
mais, their principal aſylum, and which indeed 


* A beſant, or bezant, was a coin of pure gold, of -uncertain 
vatue, ſo called from Byzantium or Conſtantinople, where it was 
truck in the time of the Chriftian emperors. This name was 
afterwards given to the coin of other Oriental nations, for there 


were Saracen beſants. Hence the gold offered by the king of 


England at che altar, is called beſant. 
Was 


end the laſt cruſade. 


was nothing better than a neſt of banditti, could 
not reſiſt the forces of Melecſeraph, ſultan. of 
Egypt, who took it in the year 1291. Tyre and 
Sydon ſurrendered to him alſo: in a word, to- 
wards the end of the 12th century, there was not 
the leaſt trace remaining in Aſia, of theſe numerous 
emigrations of Chriſtians, 


CHAP, XLVIL 


Continuation: of the taking. e Conſtantinople by the | 
cr uſader So 


HE feudal government of France pro- 
duced, as we have ſeen, many conquerors, 
The duke of Normandy, a peer of France, ſub-- 
dued England; private gentlemen conquered. 
Sicily and amongſt the crufaders, the lords of 
France were for ſome time in the poſſeſſion of 
Antioch. and Jeruſalem; in. ſhort, Baldwin, a 
peer of France, and earl of Flanders, took Con- 
ſtantinople. The Mahometans of Afia, as we 
have already obſerved, yielded Nice to the fugi- 
tive emperors of Greece, and they even joined 
in an alliance with the Greeks againſt the Franks 
and Latins, their common enemies: during this 
time, the irruptions of the Tartars in Aſia and 
Europe, prevented the Greeks from being op- 
preſſed by the Muſſulmen : the Franks, who poſ- 
ſeſſed Conſtantinople, elected their emperors, and 
the popes confirmed the election. 
Peter de Courtenay, count of Auxerre, of the 
bouſe of France, being elected, was crowned 1216, 
| an 


398 


The taking of Conſtantinople. Ch. xlvii. 


and conſecrated at Rome by pope Honorius 111. 


The popes then flattered themſelves that they diſ- 
poſed of the empires of the Eaſt and Weſt, 


We have already ſeen what ſort of a right they 
had to the empire of the Weſt, and what a deal 


of blood was ſpilt about this pretenſion. In re- 


gard to the Eaſt, the whole affair was reduced 
to Conſtantinople, and part of Thrace and Theſ- 


faly. Let the Latin patriarch, notwithſtanding 


his ſubmiſſion to the pope, pretended it was part 
of his office to crown his maſters ;. while the 
Greek patriarch, who reſided ſometimes at Nice, 
and ſometimes at Adrianople, anathematized the 
Latin emperor, together with the patriarch of 
that communion, and the pope himſelf. This 


-Latin empire of Conſtantinople was ſo incon- 
ſiderable, that Peter de Courtenay, returning 
from Rome, could not avoid falling into the 


hands of the Greeks; and after his death, his 
ſucceſſors poſſeſſed. only the city of Conſtanti- 
nople, and the territories belonging to it. Some 


of the French had Achaia, and the Venetians the 


Morea. 1 
Conſtantinople, which had been formerly ſo 


opulent, was grown ſo poor, that Baldwin II. 


(I can hardly tell how to call him emperor) 
pledged to the Venetians, for a ſum of money, 
the crown of thorns worn by Jeſus Chriſt, his 


linen, his coat, his napkin, and many pieces of 
the true croſs; which St. Lewis redeemed, and 
placed in the holy chapel of Paris, with other 
relics that are teſtimonies of his piety, rather than 


of his knowledge in antiquity. i 
We find that this Baldwin II. repaired in the 
year 1245 to the council of Lyons, in which 
is | pope 


The taking of. Conſtantinople. 399 


Innocent IV. ſo ſolemnly excommunicated 


Frederick II: he there in vain implored the aſſiſ- 


tance of a cruſade, and returned to Conſtanti- 


nople, only to ſee it fall at laſt into the hands of 
the Greeks, its lawful poſſeſſors. Michael Paleo- 


logus, emperor and guardian of the young em- 


peror Laſcaris, -retook the city. by means of a 1261, 
ſecret intelligence; Baldwin ſaved himſelf: by 
flight, and lived on the money for which he had 


ſold his marquiſate.of Namur to St. Lewis. Thus 


ended this empire of the cruſaders, 


The Greeks brought back their manners into 
their empire, and revived the cuſtom of putting 
out people's eyes. Michael Paleologus ſignalized 
the commencement of his reign, by depriving 
his pupil of his ſight and liberty. It was before 
the practice, on theſe occaſions, to make uſe of 


a red hot plate of metal ; but Michael uſed boil- 
ing vinegar; and the cuſtom is ſtill preſerved, for 


there is ſuch a thing as faſhion even in barbarities. 
Paleologus did not fail to get himſelf ſolemnly 
abſolved for this cruel action, by his patriarch 


and his biſhop, who, it is ſaid, burſt into tears of 


Joy at this pious ceremony. Paleologus beat his 
breaſt, aſked God pardon, but took care not to 
ſet his ward and ſovereign at liberty. 

When I ſay that ſuperſtition made its return 
to Conſtantinople along with the Greeks, I need 
only for proof what happened in 1284. , The 


empire being divided between two patriarchs ; the 


emperor ordained that each ſhould preſent a me- 
morial of his reaſons to the deity in the church of St. 


Sophia, that the two memorials ſhould be thrown 


into an hallowed pan of coals, and thus the dei 
would manifeſt his will. But the will of the deity 
| | Was 


— * 


De taking of Conſtantinople. Ch. xlviti 


was manifeſted no other way than by ſuffering 
both the papers to be burnt, and abandoning the 
Greeks to their eccleſiaſtical broils. 


The eaſtern empire however recovered a little 


ſtrength. Greece had been joined to it before 


the cruſades, but it had loſt almoſt all Aſia Mi- 


nor and Syria: Greece was ſeparated from it 
after the cruſades; but a little of Aſia Minor 


remained. 


The remainder of this empire was poſſeſſed 
by modern nations. Egypt fell a prey to the 
Mamalukes*, a militia compoſed at firſt of ſlaves, 
and afterwards” of conquerors. They were ſol- 


diers raiſed in the northern coaſts of the Black 


ſea: and this new militia was eſtabliſhed about 


the time of St. Lewis's captivity. 


The caliphate was drawing towards an end 


in the thirteenth century, at the ſame time that 


the Conſtantinopolitan empire was very near ex- 
piring. Twenty upſtart uſurpers were tearing. 


on every ſide the monarchy founded by Maho- 


met, while they ſubmitted to his religion. At 


length theſe caliphs of Babylon, named the ca- 
Itphs of the dynaſty of the Abaſſides, were intirely 
deſtroyed bythe family of Jenghiz-chan. 

'Thus in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries 


there was an uninterrupted ſeries of devaſtations 
throughout our whole hemiſphere. Nations. 
fell back upon one another by prodigious emi- 


grations, which laid the foundation of vaſt em- 


*The word fignifies a ſſave or ſoldier. They were a formida- 


ble power for above two centuries: Selim I, emperor of the 
Turks, defeated them, and flew. their ſultan Campſon, near 
Aleppo in Syria, the 26th of Auguſt 1517, after taking the city 


Grand Cairo; 


pires. 


e 
r 
1 a 


ö 
5 


The taking of Conſtantinople. 


pires, For while the cruſaders poured in great 
ſwarms upon Syria, the Turks were undermin- 
ing the Arabs; and at length ſtarted up the 
Tartars, who fell upon the Turks, the Arabs, 
the Indians, and the Chineſe. Theſe Tartars, 
under the command of Jenghiz-chan and his 
ſons, changed the whole face of the greater Aſia, 
while Aſia Minor and Syria were the grave of 
the Saracens and Franks, 


END of the Fixsr VoLuMB, 


40 


1 F 


A TABLE of ſovereign princes for the firſt 
volume of this hiſtory, which includes the 
ninth, tenth, eleventh, and twelfth centuries, 


Leo III. 
Stephen V. 
Paſchal I. 
Eugene II, 
Valentine 
Gregory IV, 
Sergius II, 
Leo IV. 
Benedict IIT, 
Nicholas I. 
Adrian II. 
ohn VIII. 

arinus II. 
Adrian III. 
Stephen VI. 
Formoſus 
Boniface VI. 
Stephen VII. 
Theodore II. 

ohn IX. 

edict IV. 

Leo V. 
Chriſtopher 
Sergius III. 
Anaſtaſius III. 
Landon 

ohn X. 

o VI. 
Stephen VIII. 

ohn XI. 

o VII. 
Stephen IX. 
Marinus III. 
Agapetus II. 

ohn XII. 

o VIII. 
Benedict V. 
— XIII. 

omnus II. 
Benedict VI. 
Boniface VII. 


Benedict VII. 


Popes. 


John XV. 


| John XVI. 


John VII. 
Gregory V. 
Sylveſter II. 
John XVIII. 
John XIX. 
Sergius IV. 
Benedict VIII. 
John XX. 
Benedict IX. 
Gregory VI. 
Clement 11, 
Damaſus II. 
St. Leo IX. 
Victor II. 


Stephen X. 


Nicholas II. 
Alexander II. 
Gregory VII. 
Victor III. 


Urban II. 


Paſchal II. 


6 | Gelaſus II. 


Calixtus II, 
Honorius II, 
Innocent II. 
Celeſtine II. 
Lucius II, 
Eugenius III. 
Anaſtaſius IV. 
Adrian IV. 
Alexander III. 
Lucius III. 


61 Urban III. 


Gregory VIII. 
Clement III. 
Celeſtine III. 
Innocent III. 


985 
996 
995 
996 


999 
1003 


1003 


100 


1012 


1024 


1034 
1044 
1046 
1048 
1049 
1054 
1057 
1059 
Tobr 
1073 
1086 
1088 
1099 
1118 
1119 
1124 
1135 
1143 
1144 
1145 
1153 
1154 
1159 
118 
1185 
1187 
1188 
1191 
1198 


Emperors of the Weſt, of the heuſ: 


of France, 


Charlemaign 


Lewis the Debonnair 


gco 
$14 


Lotharius 


s +% .* if 
m , io f VA £aQ nm m= oa 


_ = 


1 


LE Oo. C ¾—¼ ro ne es 


A Table of ſevereign princes, 


Lotharius I, 840 Romanus the Young * 959 
Lewis II. 8 5 5 Baſil and Conſtantine 3 
Charles II. or the Bald 875 Nicephorus Phocas 963 
Lewis III. or the 978 John Zimiſces 969 
Stammerer ; 7 Baſil II and Conſtantine 7 , 
Charles III. or the Fat 879] the Youre, reſtored: 5 975 
Arnold 387 Romanus 5 yropulus 1028 
Lewis IV. 899 Michael t ie eee 1034 
Michael Calaphates 1041 
German emperors, Zoe and Theodora 1042 
Conrad I, 12 | Conſtantine Monomachus 1042 
Henry I. or the Fowler 919 Theodora 1 
Otho I, or the Great 936 | Michael the Warrior 10565 
Otho II. or the Bloody 973 | Iſaac Comnenus 1057 
Otho III. 983 | Conſtantine Ducas 1059 
St. Henry II. fornamed 1002 | Romanus Diogenes 1068 
the Lame Michael Ducas 1074 
Conrad II. the Salic 1024 | Nicephorus Botoniates 1078 
Henry III. the Black 1039 Michael Ducas and Conftantine, 
Henry IV. the O's 1056 Alexius Comnenus * 108 
Rodolph I, 1077 — Comnenus 1118 
Henry V. 1106] Manuel Comnenus 1143 
Lotharius II, 1125| Alexius Comnenus 30 
Conrad III. ä 1139 the younger [ hs 
Frederick I, Barbarea 1153 Andronicus Comnenus 113 
Henry VI, 1190 Iaac Angelus 1185 
"Philip 1199 Alexius Angelus, . If 
f the Raf fc the Tyrant 95 
Emperors of the Eaff, or en- | | 
ftantinople, ate of mm — 1 tbe A 
Irene 797 
Nicephorus de n Mahomet, * 8 
Stauracius 811] Al-amin on 
Michael Curopalates - 3811 Almamon $13 
Leo V, $13 | Al-Moutaſem _. a3 
Michael II. the Stammerer - 925 Aaron II. f . $41 
Theophilus 3829 Motevaquel 845 
Michael III. 842 [Al-Mouſtanſer e 
Baſil 366 Mouſtain 8361 
Leo the Philoſepher ' 386 Moutaz : 366 
Alexander 911 Mouhtadi 368 
Conſtantine Porphy- 012 NMoutamid ; 869 
rogenitus | 9** | Moutadid $92 
Romanus Lecapene 919] Mouctaſi | gcn 
Chriſtopher, "(440 Mouctadir 910 
Conſtantine reſtored 944 Cahir 1 
Sepben. | Arradi or Radi 935 


" 


A Table of ſovereign princes. 


After whoſe death in 
942 the empire of the 
caliphs was ſubdivided 
among different chiefs, 
and the caliphs had on- 
ly the title left them, 


fa 
Fei Df 14g „ 


Sa Ga 
Siun Wa 
Nin Mio 
Montok u 
Sei Wa 
Þ Sei 
ooko 
Uda 
Dai Go 
Siu Sa Ku 
Murakami 
Ren Sei 
Jen Wo 
uaſſan 
1 Dfio 
Sand Sio 
Go Itſi Dſio 
Go Siuſaku 
Go Rei Sen 
Go San Dſio 
Siirakawa 
Forikawa 
To Ba | 
Sintoku 
Konjei 
Siirakawa II, 
Nid ſioo 
Roku Dſio 
Takakura 
Autoku 
To Ba . 
Truth Mikaddo 


| Emperors 0 Cbina. 

Am- cum 4 
Hien-cum 

| Mo-cum 


Kim-cum 
Ven-cum 
Vu-cum 
Siven-cum 
Y-cum 
Hi-gum- 
Chao-cum 


| Chao-Siven 


Tai-cu 
Mo-ti 
Chuam-cum 
Mim-cum 
Mim-gum 
Fi- ti 
Cao-cu 
Ci- vam 
Cao- u 
Vn- ti 
Tai-cu 
Xi-cum 
Cum-ti 
Tai-gu 
Tai-cum 
Chin-cum 
Gin-cum 
Ym-gum. 
Xig-gum 
Che- gum 
Hoei-gum- 
Kin-cum 
Cao-cum 
Hiao- gum 
Quam-cum 
Nym-cum 


974 
935 
936 
943 
947 
949 
951 
954 
960 
960 
977 
998 
1023 
1064 
1068 
1086 
1101 
1126 
1127 
1163 
1180 
1185 


Kings of Perſia of the Turkiſþ 


race after the extinfien of the 
Saracen empire, 
Togrul Beg 1056 
Adaduddaulas 1063 
Maliciahus 1071 
Mahmud 1092 
Barchiaruc 1094 
Ghayatuddin. 
Mahammedes 1104 
Abulcajem 1117 
ho Kings: 


. Wo x CR dpf —_N oa 


A Table of ſovereign princes; 


Kings of England of the Saxon 
race, 
Egbert 819 
Ethelwolf B37 
Ethelbald 857 
Ethelbert 858 
Ethelfred 863 
Alfred 873 
Edward the elder goo 
Athelſtan 924 
Edmund 940 
Edred 946 
Edwy 955 
Edgar 955 
Edward II. 971 
Ethelred | 978 
Edmund II. ſurnamed 1800 
Irenſide 
Daniſh kings. 
Canutus I, n 1017 
Harold 1037 


Canutus II. | 
Saxon kings reſtored, 


Edward III. ſurnamed 
the 4415 or | 1 
Harold II. 1066 

Norman line. 
William the conqueror 1067 
William II. 1089 
Henry I, 1102 
Stephen 1136 

The Saxon blood reſtored. 
Henry II. 11 g5 
Richard I, 1189 
John Lackland 1201 
Kings of France of the Carolo- 
vinian line. 

Charlemaign 769 
Lewis the Debonnair 815 
Charles II. or the Bald 841 
Lewis II. or the Stammerer 879 
Lewis III. 1 
Charles III. or the Far 3886 
Odo or Eudes 89 
Charles IV. or the Simple goo 
Rodolph 927 


Lewis IV. or Ultramarine 929 


| 


Lotharius 952 
Lewis V. 977 
Of the Capetine line. 
Hugh Capet 988 
Robert 997 
Henry I, 1031 
Philip I, 1061 
Lewis VI. 1110 
Lewis VII. 1 138 

Philip II. ſurnamed 8 
Auguſtus * 
Lewis VIII. 1224 
Kings of Aſturia and Leon. 
Alfonio II. ſurnamed 
the Chaſte $ 792 
Raymir 824 
Ordogno J. 8 50 
Alfonſo III. ſurnamed 86 
the Great 20 
Garcias 910 
Ordogno II, 913 
Froila II, 923 
Alfonſo IV. 924 
Raymir II. 931 
Ordogno III. 950 
Ordogno IV. ſurnamed J_ 
the af 955 
Sancho I, ſurnamed p 
the Fat 956 
Raymir IV. 967 
Veramund II. 982 
Alfonſo V. T1000 
Veramund III. 1027 
Killed in battle by his 
couſin Ferdinand the 
Great, who united the 
crowns of Caſtile and 
Leon. 
Kings of Caſtile, 
Ferdinand, ſurnamed * 
the Great 1035 
Sancho I. 106 5 
Alfonſo VI. 1072 
Alfonſo VII. 1109 
Alfonſo VIII. 5 1122 
Sancho II. 1157 
Alfonſo 


A Table of ſovertign princes, 


Alfonſo IX. ſurnamed 
the Good + 
Henry | 
Kings of Navarye, 
Innigo, ſurnamed Ariſta 
Ximenes Innigo 
Innigo Ximenes 
Garcias Innigo 
Sancho Garcias 
Garcias Sancho 
Sancho II. 
Garcias III. 
Sancho III. 
the Great 
Garcias IV. 
Sancho IV. diſpoſſeſſed 
by Sancho Raymir 
king of Arragon 
Peter king of Arragon 
Alfonſo, called the 
Warrior 
The laſt of the kings 
of Arragon reigning 
in Navarre, 
Garcias V, recovers the 
kingdom of Navarre 
Sancho VI, ſurnamed 
the Wiſe _ 
Sancho VII. 

Whodying without male 
iſſue, this crown 
went to — — the 

t, count o 

: 1 who married 

Sancho's daughter. 


Kings of Arra 
Sancho the great, ing 
of Navarre, dying in 
1035, divided his do- 
minions among his 
three ſons; the eldeſt 
 Garcias IV. was king 
of Navarre ; the young- 
eſt Ferdinand I, was 
king of Caftile, and 
Raymir his natural ſon 
— 


a 


fornamed } 


1158 
1214 


228 


Raymir I. 1035 
Sancho Raymir I, 1076 
Peter I. 1094 
Alfonſo I. 1104 
Raymir II. 1134 


Petronilla, Raymir'sdaugh- 


$50 
370 
905 
267 


L 


035 
2053 


1074 


1092 
1106 


1134 
11570 


1194 


ter, marries Raymond 
earl of Barcelona, who 


took upon him the title 
of king 
Alfonſo II. ſurnamed the 
Chaſte, ſon of Raymond 
and Petronilla 
Peter II. 
James I, 
Kings of Portugal. 
Henry the firſt earl of 
Portugal, father of Al- 
| fonſo the firſt king 
Sancho I 
Alfonſo II. 
Kings of Scotland, 
Congal III. 
Dongal TH 
Alpine 


Kenneth II. founder of 

the new ſucceſſion of 
that monarchy after 

ſubdving the Pits 

Donald II. 

Conftantine II. 


Ethus 


Donald III. 
Conſtantine III. 
Malcolm I, 


Kenneth III. 
Conſtantine IV. 
Malcolm II. . 
Duncan 

Macbeth the tyrant 
{| Malcolm III. 
Edgar 

| Alexander 

Ra 


* 


\ 


1138 


1162 
1196 
1213 


1139 
1185 


1212 


905 
824 
$39 


$39 
856 
$62 
875 
390 
903 
933 
949 
961 
991 
994 
1004 
1035 
1040 
1057 
1096 
1098 
1107 
1124 


Malcolm 


MN 


by bs 59 CO LIS t# 


Mm Am AnPHAHmRHTHHUSHOOATTOASO 


wet #44 bot £A - 


A Table of ſovereign princes, 


Malcolm IV. 
William 
Alexander II, 


Kings of Naples and Sicily of the 


Norman line. 


Robert Guiſcard duke of 
Apulia and Calabria, 


died 1 12 108 5 
Roger 1, ſurnamed the 

3 [ 108 5 
Roger II. 1102 
Roger III. c 4 1129 
William I. ſurnam 
wo Bad | 8 : hes 

illiam II. ſarname 

the Gd 1166 
Tancred the baſtard 1189 
Conſtance, married in 

1186 to Henry IV. of 1 1192 

the houſe of Swabia. 

The German line, 

Henry VI. 1192 
Frederick I. 1197 
Kin 0 Denmark, 

Olaus & of 311 
Honingus 815 
Siward I, 873 
Regnier. | 

Siward II, 
Ericus, 
Canutus. 
Frotho 880 
Gormo I. $86 
Harold 889 
Gormo II. 900 
Harold 11, 927 
Under him Denmark | 
was converted to 
Chriſtianity, 
Sueno I. or Swain 980 
_ we 1010 
anutus the great, king 
of England 7 9 
Canutus III. 1037 
Magnus 1045 
Sueno II. 1051 
Harold III. 1074 


1133 
1166 
1213 


St. Canutus 1076 
Olaus III. 1085 
Ericus III. 1095 
Harold Iv. 1102 
Nicholas 1133 
Ericus IV. 1135 
Ericus v. 1139 
Canutus IV. 1147 
Sueno III. 1155 
Waldemar I. called the 115 
Great 7 
Canutus V, 1165 
Waldemar II, 1202 
Kings of Sweden. 
Biornus 115 f $20 
Herotus 834 
Charles vT, $56 
Biornus III. 868 
Ingo II. 335 
Olaus I. the firſt Chriſ- 5 391 
tian king 
Ingol II. goo 
Ericus YI, 907 
Ericus VII, 917 
Ericus VIII, 980 
Olaus II. 1012 
Amandus 1019 
Edmundus I. 1035 
Haquinus III. 1041 
Stinkalis » 1069 
Ingo III. 1059 
Halſtenus II. 1064 
Philip 7080 
Ingo IV. 1110 
Ragualdus 1129 
Sherco II. 1140 
St. Ericus IX. 1160 
Charles VII, 1162 
Canutus 1168 
Sherco III. 1192 
Dukes of P oland, | 
Leſcus II. $04 
Leſcus III. 310 
Popielus I. 315 
Popielus II; 823 
Piaſtus _ 842 
| Zemovitus 


* 


A Table of ſovereign princes; 


Zemovitus 4 
Leſcus Iv. . 892 
Semoviſlaus 38 
Miciſlaus I. the firſt 
Chriſtian prince of 954 
this country 
Kings of P oland, 
Boleſlaus I. | 999 
Miciſlaus II. 102 5 
Caſimir I. 1034 
Boleſlaus II. 1059 
Ladiſlaus I, 1082 
Boleſlaus III. 1102 
Ladiſlaus II. 11 39 
Boleſlaus IV. 1746 
Miciſlaus III. 1173 
Caſimir II. 1177 
Leſcus v. 1195 
Czar $0 Mu C N 
Wolodomir . Ba... 
filius, he embraced 988 
Chriſtianity _ | 
— I. Wolſewold VI. 
olodomir II. Wolſewold VII, 


Wolſewold I. Wolſewold VIII. 
Wolſewold II. Wolſewold IX. 


Ladiſlaus II. 
Stephen Iv. 
Bela III. 
Emeric 
Ladiſlaus III. 


Beroald 


Humbert the white handed 1 


Otho 
Amadeus IT, 
Humbert II, 
Amadeus III, 
Humbert III. 
Thomas 


Doges of Venice. 
Obelerico Antenorio 
Angelo Participatio 
Giuſtiniano Participatio 
Pietro Gradenigo 
Orſo Participatio 
Giovanni Participatio 
Pietro Tribuno 
Orſo Badoaro 
Pietro Candiano 
Pietro Badoaro 
Pietro Candiano IT. 


WolſewoldIII.}George I. p; 
2 1 — —_ 
Wolſewold v. vitale Candiano 

ngs of Hungary. Tribuno Memo 

Geiſa —_ % . Pietro Orſeolo II. 

St. Stephen firſt — 1000 — mo 

ietro Barbolano 

„ 1 er Domenico Fiabanico 

O vo 1042 Domenico Contarini 

Peter the German reſtored 1044 Domenico Silvio 

Andrew V, 1046] Vitale Valieri 

Bela | 1061] Vitale Michieli 

Solomon 1063 Ordelafo Valieri | 

Geiſa II. 1074 | Domenico Michieli 

Ladiſlaus I. 1077] Pietro Polani : 

Coloman 1095 | Domenico Moroſini 

Stephen II. 1114 Vitale Michieli II. 

Bela II. 1132 | Sebaſtiano Ziani 

Geiſa III. 1141 = I 

Stephen III. 11611 Enrico Dandolo 

* F 1 N 7 S . 


1172 
1172 
1173 
1796 
1254 


Earls of Savoy and Maurienre. 


999 
024 
1048 
1060 


1095 
1103 


1149 
1188 


804 
809 


12 * 
« * < ö 
* 5 W I mY «YT. 7 


VY 4 K , * f , * * ST; - I? a * 182 * 
2 5 8 8 2 2 TOR + +4 Ve." 
. 2 . 14 1 p V — 4 * 1 L 4 
' 4 C EET - © TOTES * . 


*