'^M 


of  Californij 
[1  Regional 
^/  Facility 


55.( 


Kife 


A-i 


Km 


■& 


-M  -, 


""''^' ^Krf9s  mnt^^^^Hm;;  '          '^ 

■^■1 

pw 

-Hr' 

L     ;  t^K  fim  ^  lHBim4' 

li 

,  /  /  ■' 

^  r^  ^  1  ^^ 

ji 

1.  .2 

i 

iM^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^l 

)^ 


■*-.ejm^ 


^ 


r. 


N  BRANCH, 

')F  CALIFORNIA, 
':ary, 


les.  calif: 


GR 


MEMOIRS   OF  THE    REIGN 

OF 

KING    GEORGE    THE    THIRD 

IN  FOUR  VOLUMES 
VOL.  I. 


Seven  Hundred  and  Forty  Copies  printed  for  England 
Two  Hundred  and  Sixty  for  America 


No... 6..^. 


JcAn  SeffanY9i-i9ihxt. 


^W<l^Ktr  A,0^uttX.fK^c 


L 


'corqc    III. 


HORACE  WALPOLE 

MEMOIRS    OF    THE    REIGN    OF 
KING  GEORGE   THE   THIRD 

FIRST      PUBLISHED      BY      SIR 

DENIS   LE   MARCHANT   BART. 

AND    NOW    RE-EDITED    BY 

G.  F.  RUSSELL  BARKER 

WITH  SIXTEEN  PORTRAITS 
VOLUME     I 


LONDON 
LAWRENCE   AND   BULLEN 

l6  HENRIETTA  ST.,  COVENT  GARDEN 
1894 


NEW    YORK 
G.   P.   PUTNAM'S  SONS 


27  W,  TWENTY -THIRD  ST. 
1894 


61921 


■ « «  •   • 


•  •  *,'  •  • 


Edinburgh :  T.  and  A.  Constable,  Printers  to  Her  Majesty. 


J.  vv    i  b 

■v.\ 

i 


PUBLISHERS'   NOTE 


The  portraits  of  George  iii.,  Augusta  Princess  of 

Wales,  and  the  Marquis  of  Rockingham,  have  been 

o  reproduced,  by  gracious  permission  of  Her  Majesty 

■^  the  Queen,  from  the  originals  preserved  at  Bucking- 

^vj^ham  Palace.      For  permission   to  reproduce  other 

portraits,  the  publishers  desire  to  thank  his  Grace 

i"  the  Duke  of  Rutland,  K.G.,  the  Marquis  of  Hert- 

,     ford,  the  Earl  of  Wharncliffe,  and  Viscount  Dillon. 

"^   To  the  Hon.  Sir  Spencer  Ponsonby  Fane,  K.C.B. 

and  to  Mr.  George  Scharf,   C.B.,   Director  of  the 

National  Portrait  Gallery,  the  publishers  are  greatly 

^  indebted  for  valuable  advice. 


\ 


LIST    OF    PORTRAITS 


VOLUME  I. 

George  hi., Frontispiece 

From  a  Picture  by  John  Zoffany,  R.A.,  in   Buckingham  Palace, 
by  permission  of  Her  Majesty  the  Queen. 

To /ace  page 

The  Lady  Sarah  Lennox, 49 

From  a  Mezzotint  by  Fisher,   after  a    Picture    by  Sir    Joshua 
Reynolds,  P.R.A. 

Queen  Charlotte, 150 

From  a  Picture  by  Allan  Ramsay  in  the  National  Portrait  Gallery. 

Sir  Francis  Dashwood, 204 

From  a  Portrait  at  Ditchley,  by  permission  of  The  Right  Hon. 
Viscount  Dillon,  V.P.S.A. 


VOLUME  IL 
The  Earl  of  Bute,  K.G., Frontispiece 

From  a  Picture  by  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds,  P.R.A.,  at  Wortley  Hall, 
by  permission  of  The  Right  Hon.  the  Earl  of  Wharncliffe. 

Tojacepage 

Field-Marshal  Conway, 152 

From  a  Portrait  by  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds,  P.R.A.,  at  Ragley  Hall, 
permission  of  The  Most  Noble  the  Marquis  of  Hertford. 

The  Marquis  of  Rockingham,  K.G.,         .        .        .        .219 

From  a  Picture  by  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds,  P.  R.A.,  in  Buckingham 
Palace,  by  permission  of  Her  Majesty  the  Queen. 

The  Marquis  of  Granby, 300 

From  a  Picture  by  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds,  P.R.A,,  at  Belvoir  Castle, 
by  permission  of  His  Grace  the  Duke  of  Rutland,  K.G. 


viii  LIST  OF  PORTRAITS 

VOLUME  III. 

THE  RIGHT  Hon.  Edmund  Burke,    .        .        .  Frontispiece 

From  a  Portrait  by  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds,  P.R.A.,  in  the  National 

Portrait  Gallery. 

To /ace  page 

Colonel  Barr6,     .       •  ^''^ 

From  a  Mezzotint  by  Houston,  after  a  Portrait  by  Hamilton. 

John  Wilkes, 

From  a  Mezzotint  by  James  Watson,  after  a  Picture  by  R.  E. 
Pine. 

THE  Earl  of  Chatham, 253 

From  a  Portrait  by  Richard  Brompton  in  the  National  Portrait 
Gallery. 


VOLUME  IV. 

HORACE  WALPOLE, Frontispiece 

From  a  Portrait  by  Nathaniel  Hone.  R.A.,  in  the  National  Por- 
trait Gallery. 

To  face  page 

Lord  North,  K.G., 5^ 

From   a    Mezzotint    by  Burke,   after   a    Portrait   by  Nathaniel 
Dance,  R.A. 

The  Right  Hon.  Charles  James  Fox,     ....      192 

From  a  Picture  by  Karl  Anton  Hickel  in  the  National  Portrait 
Gallery. 

Augusta,  Princess  of  Wales, 241 

From  a  Portrait  in  a  Family  Group,  painted  by  Jean  Baptiste 
Vanloo,  in  Buckingham  Palace,  by  permission  of  Her  Majesty 
the  Queen. 


PREFACE 

Horace  1  Walpole,  the  author  of  these  Memoirs^ 
was  the  third  son  of  the  famous  Minister,  Sir  Robert 
Walpole,  afterwards  created  Earl  of  Orford,  by  his 
first  wife,  Catherine,  eldest  daughter  of  John  Shorter 
of  Bybrook,  near  Ashford,  in  Kent,  a  Norway  timber 
merchant.  The  statement  that  he  was  generally 
supposed  to  be  the  son  of  Carr,  Lord  Hervey,  rests 
mainly  on  the  authority  of  Lady  Louisa  Stuart.^ 
Though  there  would  seem  to  be  a  certain  amount  of 
evidence  in  support  of  this  scandal,  it  is  perfectly 
clear  that  no  suspicion  of  his  parentage  ever  crossed 
the  mind  of  Horace  Walpole,  and  it  is  equally  clear 
that  no  further  evidence  on  this  delicate  question 
can  be  looked  for. 

Horace  was  born  in  Arlington  Street,  Piccadilly, 


3 


^  He  was  christened  '  Horatio,'  but  always  called  himself  '  Horace.''  '  The 
name  Horatio  I  dislike.  It  is  theatrical ;  and  not  English.  I  have,  ever 
since  I  was  a  youth,  written  and  subscribed  Horace  as  an  English  name  for  an 
English  man.  In  all  books  (and  perhaps  you  will  think  of  the  mwierostis 
Horatius)  I  so  spell  my  name.' — Pinkerton's  Walpoliana,  vol.  i.  p.  62. 

2  See  Letters  and  Works  of  Lady  Mary  Wortley  Montague  (1837),  vol.  i. 
PP-  33-5-  It  is  also  '  to  be  found  asserted  as  a  current  story  in  the  Note  Books 
(unpublished)  of  the  Duchess  of  Portland.'  See  Mr.  Austin  Dobson's 
Horace  Walpole  (1890),  p.  14,  note. 

^  Sir  Robert  Walpole  became  a  resident  in  Arlington  Street  in  1716.  His 
house  was  on  the  west  side  of  the  street,  next  door  to  the  Earl  of  Bath's. 
VOL.  I.  b 


X  PREFACE 

on  24th  September  1717  (o.s.),  and  on  26th  April 
1727  was  sent  to  Eton,  where  he  remained  for  more 
than  seven  years.  While  at  school  he  was  entered 
at  Lincoln's  Inn  (27th  May  1731),  but  though  his 
father  intended  him  for  the  law  he  *  never  went 
thither,  not  caring  for  the  profession.'^  On  nth 
March  1735  he  was  admitted  to  King's  College, 
Cambridge,  where  he  resided  at  intervals  until  the 
end  of  1738,  but  did  not  graduate.  In  1737  he 
was  appointed  by  his  father  to  the  sinecure  post  of 
Inspector  of  the  Imports  and  Exports  at  the  Custom 
House,  a  post  which  he  resigned  on  being  made 
Chief  Usher  of  the  Exchequer  on  29th  January  1738. 
As  soon  as  he  came  of  age  Walpole  tells  us  that  he 
'  took  possession  of  two  other  little  patent  places  in 
the  Exchequer,  called  Comptroller  of  the  Pipe,  and 
Clerk  of  the  Estreats.'^  In  March  1739  he  set  out 
for  a  Continental  tour  with  his  friend  Gray,  whose 
acquaintance  he  had  made  at  Eton,  and  renewed  at 
Cambridge.  Walpole  remained  abroad  until  Sep- 
tember 1 74 1.  During  his  absence  from  England 
he  was  returned  to  the  House  of  Commons  for  the 
borough  of  Callington  in  Cornwall,  which  he  con- 
tinued to  represent  until  the  dissolution  of  Parliament 
in  April  1 754.     He  spoke  in  the  House  for  the  first 

Here  Horace  Walpole  was  born.  On  leaving  Downing  Street,  Sir  Robert 
removed  to  No.  5  (on  the  east  side  of)  Arlington  Street,  where  he  died. 
After  his  father's  death,  No.  5  became  Horace  Walpole's  London  residence 
until  his  removal  to  Berkeley  Square  in  1779.  It  is  now  distinguished  by  one 
of  the  familiar  tablets  of  the  Society  of  Arts. 

^  '  Short  Notes  of  my  Life.'    See  Walpole's  Letters  (1857),  vol.  i.  p.  Ixii. 

2  Ibid. 


PREFACE 


XI 


time  on  23rd    March   1742,  when  he  opposed  the 
motion  for  a  Secret  Committee  on  his  father.^     In 
spite   of   his    partiaHty    for   poHtics,    Walpole    was 
unsuited  for  parliamentary  life,  and  but  rarely  took 
any  part  in  the  debates.     He  was  elected  a  Fellow 
of  the  Royal  Society  in  1746,  and  a  Fellow  of  the 
Society  of  Antiquaries  in  1753.      In  the  latter  year 
he  was  appointed  a  trustee  of  the  Sloane  (afterwards 
British)    Museum.       Walpole    represented    Castle 
Rising    in    the    House   of    Commons    from    April 
1754  to  February  1757,  when  he  vacated  his  seat  in 
order  to  succeed  his  cousin  in  the  representation  of 
King's  Lynn,  the  corporation  of  which  reverenced 
*  his  father's  memory  so  much  that   they  will   not 
bear  distant  relations  while  he  has  sons  living.^    He 
was  again  returned  for  King's  Lynn  without  opposi- 
tion at  the  General  Election  in  March  1 76 1 .    Having 
become  somewhat  tired  of  parliamentary   life,  and 
being  threatened  with  a  contested  election,  Walpole 
retired  from  the  House  of  Commons  at  the  disso- 
lution in  March  1768.      In  1765  he  made  the  first 
of  several  visits  to  Paris,   where   he  became    well 
acquainted  with  the  secret  history  of  the  Court  of 
France.     On   the   death   of  his    nephew,    George, 
third  Earl  of  Orford,  in  December  1791,  Walpole 
succeeded  to  the  peerage,  but  he  nevertook  his  seat 
in  the  House  of  Lords.      He  died  in   London,   at 
No.  1 1  Berkeley  Square  on  2nd  March  1797,  aged  79, 

^  A  copy  of  his  maiden  speech  is  preserved  in  his  letter  to  Sir  Horace  Mann, 
dated  24th  March  1742.     See  Walpole's  Letters,  vol.  i.  pp.  147-8. 
*  Ibid.  vol.  iii.  p.  62. 


xii  PREFACE 

and  was  buried  at  Houghton  in  Norfolk.  With  him 
the  male  line  of  Sir  Robert  Walpole  terminated,  and 
the  barony  of  Houghton,  the  Viscounty  of  Walpole 
and  the  Earldom  of  Orford  became  extinct.  He 
was  succeeded  in  the  Barony  of  Walpole  of  Walpole 
by  his  first  cousin  Horatio,  second  Baron  Walpole  of 
Wolterton,  while  the  Houghton  Estate  descended  to 
George,  fourth  Marquis  of  Cholmondeley,  the  grand- 
son of  his  sister  Mary.  Walpole  left  some  ^91,000 
in  the  three  per  cents.  He  bequeathed  a  legacy 
of  ^10,000  to  his  niece  the  Duchess  of  Gloucester, 
and  legacies  of  ;^40oo  each  to  his  friends  Mary 
and  Agnes  Berry,  to  whom  also  he  left  for  their 
lives  '  Little  Strawberry  Hill,'  formerly  the  abode 
of  Kitty  Clive. 

Strawberry  Hill,  Walpole's  famous  residence  at 
Twickenham,  was  originally  a  cottage  belonging  to 
Mrs.  Chenerix  'the  noted  toy-woman,'^  from  whom 
he  purchased  the  remainder  of  the  lease  in  May 
1 747.  In  1 749  he  bought  the  freehold  by  Act  of  Par- 
liament, and  by  slow  degrees  transformed  the  cottage 
into  a  '  Gothic  Castle '  of  fantastic  shape,  where  he 
gradually  amassed  a  huge  collection  of  curiosities  of 
every  description.  Here  also  in  1757  he  established 
a  private  printing  press,  whence  were  issued  some 
thirty-nine  books  and  pamphlets,  all  of  which  have 
become  scarce,  and  fetch  high  prices.  ^    Walpole  left 

^   WalpoWs  Collected  Works  (1798),  vol.  ii.  p.  399. 

*  The  first  work  printed  was  *  Odes  by  Mr.  Gray'  (1757,  4to).  For  a  list 
of  books  printed  at  the  Strawberry  Hill  press  see  the  Appendix  to  Mr.  Austin 
Dobson's  Horace  Walpole. 


PREFACE 


xin 


Strawberry  Hill  and  its  contents  to  the  Hon. 
Mrs.  Anne  Darner,  the  only  daughter  of  his  friend 
Conway,  for  life,  together  with  a  sum  of  money  to 
keep  it  in  repair.  She  resigned  it  in  1811  to  the 
Countess  Dowager  Waldegrave,  in  whom  the  re- 
mainder was  vested.  It  subsequently  passed  into 
the  possession  of  George,  seventh  Earl  Walde- 
grave, who  sold  the  contents  by  public  auction  in 
1842.  The  sale  lasted  thirty-two  days  and  realised 
-^33.453-^  On  the  death  of  Lord  Waldegrave  in 
September  1846,  Strawberry  Hill  became  the 
property  of  his  widow  Frances,  Countess  Wal- 
degrave, who  married  in  1863  Mr.  Chichester 
Fortescue,  the  present  Lord  Carlingford.  After 
her  death,  in  July  1879,  the  house  and  grounds  were 
offered  for  sale,-  and  in  August  1883  Strawberry 
Hill  was  purchased  by  the  late  Baron  Stern,  in  the 
possession  of  whose  family  it  still  remains. 

Walpole  was  a  fastidious  and  capricious  man,  full 
of  whims  and  fancies,  with  affected  manners,  a  Hvely 
wit,  and  an  almost  feminine  fondness  for  mischief 
and  gossip.  He  was  a  charming  correspondent, 
but  a  touchy  companion.  Though  too  much  of  a 
trifler,  both  by  nature  and  education,  for  real  work 
either  in  politics  or  literature,  his  political  sagacity 
was  considerable,  and  his  powers  of  observation 
were  keen.     In  his  earlier  days  he  was  a  staunch 

1  See  Gentleinati's  Magazine,  1842,  part  ii.  pp.  16-24,  147-156,  257-265, 
377-381,  474-480,  599-610. 

-  A  sale  of  the  pictures,  china,  etc.,  including  many  of  the  items  not  dis 
posed  of  in  the  previous  sale  of  1842  took  place  in  Julv  188  V 


xiv  PREFACE 

Whig,  but  '  in  his  old  and  enfeebled  age  the  horrors 
of  the  first  French  Revolution  made  him  a  Tory.'  ^ 

Walpole  was  tall  and  slender  in  figure,  with  a 
high  and  pale  forehead  and  bright  and  penetrating 
eyes.  *  His  entrance  into  a  room  was  in  that  style 
of  affected  delicacy,  which  fashion  had  made  almost 
natural,  chapeati  bras  between  his  hands  as  if  he 
wished  to  compress  it,  or  under  his  arm  ;  knees 
bent,  and  feet  on  tiptoe,  as  if  afraid  of  a  wet  floor. 
His  summer  dress  of  ceremony  was  usually  a 
lavender  suit,  the  waistcoat  embroidered  with  a 
little  silver,  or  of  white  silk  worked  in  the  tambour, 
partridge  silk  stockings,  gold  buckles,  ruffles,  and 
lace  frill.  In  winter  he  wore  powder.  He  disliked 
hats,  and  in  his  grounds  at  Strawberry  would  even 
in  winter  walk  without  one.  The  same  antipathy, 
Cole  tells  us,  extended  to  a  greatcoat.  His 
appearance  at  the  breakfast  table  was  proclaimed, 
and  attended,  by  a  fat  and  favourite  little  dog,  the 
legacy  of  Madame  du  Deffand ;  the  dog  and  a 
favourite  squirrel  partook  of  his  breakfast.  He 
dined  generally  at  four.  ...  His  dinner  when  at 
home  was  a  chicken,  pheasant,  or  any  light  food,  of 
which  he  eat  sparingly.  Pastry  he  disliked,  as 
difficult  of  digestion,  though  he  would  taste  a 
morsel  of  venison  pie.  Iced  water,  then  a  London 
dislike,  was  his  favourite  drink.  The  scent  of  the 
dinner  was  removed  by  a  censer  or  pot  of  frank- 

^  Miss  Mary  Berry's  Advertisement  to  the  Letters  addressed  to  the  Misses 
Berry.     See  WalpoWs^Letters,  vol.  i.  p.  li. 


PREFACE 


XV 


incense.  The  wine  that  was  drunk  was  drunk 
during  dinner.  After  his  coffee  he  would  take  a 
pinch  of  snuff,  and  nothing  more  that  night.'  ^ 

Though  Walpole  disavowed  the  character  of  an 
author,  and  frequently  declared,  with  doubtful 
sincerity,  that  he  had  no  ambition  for  literary  fame, 
his  pen  was  seldom  idle.  His  principal  works 
published  in  his  lifetime  were  : — i.  A  Catalogue  of 
the  Royal  and  Noble  Authors  of  England,  with  a 
List  of  their  Works  (1758);  2.  Anecdotes  of 
Paintiiig  in  England,  ivith  some  account  of  the 
principal  Artists,  etc.  (1762-71)  ;  3,  A  Catalogue  of 
Engravers  who  have  been  bo7'n  or  resided  in 
England,  etc.  (1763);  and  4.  Historic  Doubts  on 
the  Life  and  Reign  of  King  Richard  the  Third 
(1768).  His  one  romance,  The  Castle  of  Otranto, 
was  published  on  24th  December  1764.  It  pur- 
ported to  be  *  a  story  translated  by  William 
Marshal,  Gent,  from  the  original  Italian  of 
Onuphrio  Muralto,  Canon  of  the  Church  of  St. 
Nicholas  at  Otranto,'  and  was  written  by  Walpole 
in  less  than  two  months.  It  met  with  a  brilliant 
success,  but  is  now  only  remembered  as  the  pro- 
genitor of  Mrs.  Radcliffe's  Mysteries  of  Udolpho, 
and  other  thrilling  works.  His  Mysterious  Mother, 
which  was  pronounced  by  Lord  Byron  to  be  *  a 
tragedy    of    the    highest    order,'    was    printed    at 

^  Mr.  Peter  Cunningham  in  his  Preface  to  the  Letters  of  Horace  Walpole, 
vol,  ix,  p.  xxii.  For  this  description  of  Horace  Walpole  Mr.  Cunningham  is 
mainly  indebted  to  the  Anecdotes,  Biographical  Sketches  and  Metnoirs  of 
Miss  E.  M.  Hawkins  (1822),  vol.  i.  pp.  105-6,  and  Pinkerton's  Walpoliana, 
vol.  i.  pp.  xl-xlv. 


xvi  PREFACE 

Strawberry  Hill  in  1768.  Though  Walpole  wished 
to  see  it  acted,  it  was  too  horrible  for  representa- 
tion, and  it  has  never  been  put  on  the  stage. 
Walpole  perfected  a  collective  edition  of  his  works 
in  1 768.  The  first  volume,  and  part  of  the  second, 
were  printed  at  the  Strawberry  Hill  Press,  but  he 
proceeded  no  further  with  his  task,  leaving  the 
completion  of  it  to  his  friend  Mr.  Berry,  to  be 
given  to  the  world  after  his  death.  This  edition, 
which  appeared  in  1798  in  five  quarto  volumes, 
contained  several  productions  new  to  the  public, 
includinof  the  admirable  Reminiscences  of  the  Courts 
of  George  the  First  and  Second,  and  the  first 
instalment  of  his  incomparable  Correspondence.  A 
sixth  quarto  volume,  containing  Walpole's  Letters 
to  George  Montagu,  was  published  in  18 18.  Other 
collections  of  his  Letters  followed,  all  of  which  were 
superseded  by  Mr.  Peter  Cunningham's  edition,  in 
nine  octavo  volumes  (1857-9),  of  what  was  then 
supposed  to  be  the  entire  correspondence  of 
Walpole,  arranged  in  chronological  order. 

Walpole's  most  important  historical  works,  viz.  : 
The  Memoirs  of  the  Reign  of  King  George  II.,  The 
Memoirs  of  the  Reigft  of  King  Geo7ge  Ill.y  and  the 
Journal  of  the  Reign  of  King  George  III,  from 
1 77 1  to  1783,  were  not  given  to  the  world  until 
many  years  after  his  death. 

Among  his  papers  at  Strawberry  Hill  the  fol- 
lowing memorandum  in  an  envelope,  on  which  was 
written,    *  Not  to   be  opened   until  after   my  will,' 


PREFACE  xvii 

was  found,  '  In  my  Library  at  Strawberry  Hill  are 
two  wainscot  chests  or  boxes,  the  larger  marked 
with  an  A,  the  lesser  with  a  B.  I  desire,  that  as 
soon  as  I  am  dead,  my  Executor  and  Executrix 
will  cord  up  strongly  and  seal  the  larger  box, 
marked  A,  and  deliver  it  to  the  Honourable  Hugh 
Conway  Seymour,  to  be  kept  by  him  unopened  and 
unsealed  till  the  eldest  son  of  Lady  Waldegrave,  or 
whichever  of  her  sons,  being  Earl  of  Waldegrave, 
shall  attain  the  age  of  twenty-five  years,  when  the 
said  chest,  with  whatever  it  contains,  shall  be 
delivered  to  him  for  his  own.  And  I  beg  that  the 
Honourable  Hugh  Conway  Seymour,  when  he 
shall  receive  the  said  chest,  will  give  a  promise  in 
writing,  signed  by  him,  to  Lady  Waldegrave,  that 
he  or  his  representatives  will  deliver  the  said  chest 
unopened  and  unsealed  by  my  Executor  and 
Executrix,  to  the  first  son  of  Lady  Waldegrave 
who  shall  attain  the  age  of  twenty-five  years.  The 
key  of  the  said  chest  is  in  one  of  the  cupboards  of 
the  green  closet,  within  the  blue  breakfast-room  at 
Strawberry  Hill,  and  that  key,  I  desire,  may  be 
delivered  to  Laura,  Lady  Waldegrave,  to  be  kept 
by  her  till  her  son  shall  receive  the  chest. 

March  2\st,  1790. 

(Signed)     Hor.  Walpole,  Earl  of  Orford. 

August  igtit,  1796.' 

In  accordance  with  these  directions  'the  larger 
box  marked  A '  was  corded  up  and  sealed  with  the 


XVIU 


PREFACE 


seals  of  Lord  Frederick  Campbell  and  the  Hon. 
Mrs.  Anne  Darner,  the  executor  and  executrix  of 
Horace  Walpole's  will,  and  delivered  by  them  to 
Lord  Hugh  Seymour,  by  whose  representatives  it 
was  handed  over  'unopened  and  unsealed'  to  John, 
sixth  Earl  of  Waldegrave,  in  1818,  on  his  attaining 
the  age  of  twenty-five.  Upon  examination,  the  box 
was  found  to  contain  several  bundles  of  letters, 
arranged  for  publication,  and  a  number  of  MS. 
volumes  entitled  Mentoires.  These  Memoirs  were 
placed  by  Lord  Waldegrave  in  the  hands  of  Henry, 
third  Lord  Holland,  who  published  the  Memoires 
of  the  last  ten  years  of  the  Reign  of  King  George 
the  Second  in  1822.  After  his  death  in  1840  it  was 
discovered  that  Lord  Holland  had  never  com- 
menced the  task  of  editing  the  Memoirs  of  the 
Reign  of  King  George  the  Third.  Whereupon  the 
Duke  of  Grafton  (then  Earl  of  Euston),  as  Lord 
Waldegrave's  surviving  executor,  intrusted  the 
editorship  of  these  Memoirs  to  Sir  Denis  Le 
Marchant,  by  whom  they  were  at  length  published 
in  1845  (London,  8vo,  4  vols.).  The  Journal  of 
the  Reign  of  King  George  the  Third  from  the  year 
1 77 1  to  1783,  the  last  of  Horace  Walpole's  works 
to  appear,  was  edited  by  Dr.  Doran  in  1859. 

In  spite  of  Walpole's  many  prejudices  and 
partialities,  which  he  took  little  pains  to  disguise, 
the  value  of  these  posthumous  Memoirs  to  the 
historical  student  can  hardly  be  overrated.  It 
should  always  be  borne  in  mind  when  criticising  their 


PREFACE  xix 

obvious  defects  that  Walpole  neither  claimed  the 
title    of    historian,     nor     made    any    pretence    to 
infallibility.       In    the    very    first    chapter    of    this 
volume  he  is  careful   to  remind   his  readers  that 
'these  are  memoirs,   not  history,'  and  goes  on  to 
add   that    '  the   inequality,    and    perhaps   even    the 
contradictory  opinions  which  may  appear  in  them, 
from  being  written  at  different  periods,  forbid  this 
work   to   aim   at   the    regular   march   of  history.'^ 
While  in  his  Jourfial  of  the  Reign  of  King  George 
the   Third,   after  remarking   that  authentic   papers 
would     'corroborate     the     authenticity     of    these 
memoirs,'  he  adds  'though  in  some  things  I  may 
have  been  misinformed,  and  in  others,  from  my  own 
passions,    I  may  have  exaggerated  faults.'^     Not- 
withstanding Mr.   Croker's  solemn  protests  in  the 
Quarterly  Review^  it  may  be  safely  said  that  no 
contemporary  writer  has   thrown   a  stronger  light 
upon  the  inner  workings  of  the  political  world  of  his 
day.      The  brilliant  and  vivacious  accounts  which 
he  gives  of  the  parliamentary  debates  alone  are  a 
valuable  addition  to  the  history  of  the  time,  while 
the  details  of  the  endless  negotiations  between  the 
various  political  factions,  and  the  masterly  descrip- 
tions of  the  men  and  manners  of  the  last  century 
add  still  further  to  the  value  of  his  Memoirs.     More- 
over, they  have  the  additional  merit  of  rarely  ever 
being  dull. 

^  See  infra,  p.  2,  2  ggg  ^q]    j_  p_  378. 

*  Vol.  xxvii.  pp.  178-215  and  vol.  Ixxvii.  pp.  253-298. 


XX  PREFACE 

'  Walpole's  writings,'  says  Mr.  Leslie  Stephen, 
'  belong  to  the  good  old-fashioned  type  of  history, 
which  aspires  to  be  nothing  more  than  the  quint- 
essence of  contemporary  gossip.  If  the  opinion  be 
pardonable  in  these  days,  history  of  that  kind  has 
not  only  its  charm,  but  its  serious  value.  If  not 
very  profound  or  comprehensive,  it  impresses  upon 
us  the  fact — so  often  forgotten — that  our  grand- 
fathers were  human  beings.  The  ordinary  historian 
reduces  them  to  mere  mechanical  mummies ;  in 
Walpole's  pages  they  are  still  living  flesh  and  blood. 
Turn  over  any  of  the  proper  decorous  history  books, 
mark  every  passage,  where  for  a  moment  we  seem 
to  be  transported  to  the  past — to  the  thunders  of 
Chatham,  the  drivellings  of  Newcastle,  or  the 
prosings  of  George  Grenville,  as  they  sounded  in 
contemporary  ears — and  it  will  be  safe  to  say  that, 
on  counting  them  up,  a  good  half  will  turn  out  to 
be  reflections  from  the  illuminating  flashes  of 
Walpole.  Excise  all  that  comes  from  him,  and  the 
history  sinks  towards  the  level  of  the  solid  Arch- 
deacon Coxe ;  add  his  keen  touches,  and  as  in  The 
Castle  of  Otranto,  the  portraits  of  our  respectable 
old  ancestors,  which  have  been  hanging  in  gloomy 
repose  upon  the  wall,  suddenly  step  from  their 
frames,  and  for  some  brief  space  assume  a  spectral 
vitality.'  ^ 

Walpole   commenced   the   task   of  writing    The 
Memoirs  of  the  Reign  of  King  George  the   Third 

^  See  Hours  in  a  Library  (1876),  2d  ser.,  pp.  155-6. 


PREFACE 


XXI 


(from  1760  to  1772)  on  i8th  August  1766,  and 
finished  them  in  1772,  '  intending  for  the  future  only 
to  carry  on  a  Journal.'^  These  Memoirs  cover  a 
period  of  the  greatest  political  importance  in  our 
national  history.  During  the  reigns  of  George  the 
First  and  George  the  Second,  the  Crown  had  leant 
upon  the  support  of  the  Whig  party.  In  1760  the 
Whigs  had  been  just  forty-five  years  in  office. 
George  the  Third  had  been  trained  to  regard  them 
as  usurpers  of  the  royal  authority,  and  upon  his 
accession  to  the  throne  he  determined  to  break 
down  the  power  of  the  great  Whig  families  and 
to  regain  for  the  Crown  the  power  which  it  had 
lost  since  the  Revolution.  By  sowing  dissensions 
among  the  Whigs,  he  broke  up  the  strong  Whig 
Ministry  of  Newcastle  and  Pitt,  which  had  raised 
England  from  the  depths  of  degradation  to  a  com- 
manding position  in  Europe.  Bute,  who  was 
appointed  First  Lord  of  the  Treasury  in  May  1762, 
succeeded  in  obtaining  the  peace  for  which  he  and 
his  master  were  so  eager,  and  on  loth  February 
1763  the  Treaty  of  Paris  was  signed.  Meanwhile, 
several  of  the  Whig  peers,  who  had  disapproved 
of  the  preliminaries  of  peace,  were  deprived  of 
their  lord-lieutenancies.  Whig  placemen  were  dis- 
missed for  their  votes  in  Parliament,  and  even 
inferior  officials,  who  had  owed  their  advance- 
ment to  Whig  patronage,  were  removed  from  their 
offices. 

^  Short  Notes  of  my  Life.     See  Walpole's  Letters,  vol.  i.  p.  76. 


xxii  PREFACE 

Bute,  frightened  by  his  unpopularity,  suddenly 
resigned  in  April  1763,  and  was  succeeded  by 
George  Grenville,  whom  the  King  regarded  as  one 
of  Bute's  followers.  In  this  Georee  soon  found 
himself  mistaken,  for  while  Bute's  object  had  been 
the  furtherance  of  the  King's  authority,  Grenville's 
aim  was  the  absolutism  of  Parliament.  The  trial  of 
John  Wilkes,  and  the  passing  of  the  Stamp  Act 
were  the  two  most  memorable  events  of  Grenville's 
Ministry,  which  had  been  strengthened  on  Lord 
Egremont's  death  by  the  accession  of  the  Duke  of 
Bedford.  Annoyed  by  the  omission  of  his  mother's 
name  from  the  Regency  Bill,  and  irritated  beyond 
endurance  by  Grenville's  lengthy  lectures  in  the 
royal  closet,  George  finally  turned  Grenville  out  of 
office  in  July  1765.  The  negotiations  with  Pitt 
having  failed,  the  Marquis  of  Rockingham,  a  man 
of  unblemished  character,  but  of  no  great  ability, 
was  placed  at  the  head  of  the  Treasury.  During 
Rockingham's  shortlived  Administration,  which  was 
distrusted  by  the  King  as  being  distinctly  a  Whig 
one,  the  American  Stamp  Act  was  repealed,  and 
General  Warrants  were  condemned  as  illegal  by  a 
resolution  of  the  House  of  Commons.  In  July 
1766,  Rockingham  was  dismissed,  and  for  the  third 
time  the  King  had  recourse  to  Pitt,  who  at  length 
consented  to  form  a  Government.  The  Duke  of 
Grafton  was  appointed  First  Lord  of  the  Treasury, 
Charles  Townshend,  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer, 
Conway   and    Shelburne   were    the    Secretaries  of 


PREFACE 


XXlll 


State,  while  Pitt  accepted  a  peerage  with  the  title 
of  the  Earl  of  Chatham,  and  took  the  insignificant 
office  of  Lord  Privy  Seal. 

In  January  1767,  Chatham's  health  gave  way, 
and  the  Ministry,  without  its  natural  leader,  fell 
into  a  state  of  weakness  and  division.  During  his 
absence,  Townshend's  reckless  scheme  for  taxing 
American  imports  received  the  royal  assent.  Be- 
fore the  close  of  1768  Chatham  recovered  his 
health,  and  formally  resigned  office.  In  1769, 
Wilkes,  who  had  been  elected  four  times  for  Middle- 
sex, was  declared  incapable  of  being  returned,  and 
Colonel  Luttrell,  the  Ministerial  nominee,  was  seat- 
ed in  his  place.  Grafton,  whose  unconstitutional 
actions  had  brought  discontent  to  the  verge  of 
open  outbreak,  resigned  in  January  1770.  He  was 
succeeded  by  Lord  North,  who  fully  acquiesced  in 
the  King's  policy,  and  was  content  to  become  a 
mere  instrument  of  the  King's  will.  At  first 
North's  tenure  of  office  was  exceedingly  precarious, 
but  the  death  of  George  Grenville  in  November 
1770  relieved  him  of  an  able  opponent,  and  the 
ranks  of  the  Opposition  became  still  more  broken 
up.  In  1 77 1  the  attempt  of  the  House  of  Com- 
mons to  prevent  the  publication  of  their  debates, 
was  foiled  by  the  action  of  Wilkes  and  the  city 
magistrates.  In  spite  of  this  popular  victory,  how- 
ever. North's  Ministry  continued  to  gain  in  strength, 
and  George,  at  last,  after  a  long  and  bitter  struggle, 
achieved    the    object    on   which    he    had    set   his 


xxiv  PREFACE 

heart.  With  the  death  of  the  Princess  Dowager  of 
Wales  in  February  1772,  whose  favourite  exhorta- 
tion, '  George,  be  a  King,'  had  made  such  a  deep 
impression  on  her  son,  Walpole  fitly  brings  his 
Memoirs  of  the  Reign  of  King  George  the  Third 
to  a  close. 

The  text  of  the  present  edition  has  been  printed 
from  Sir  Denis  le  Marchant's  edition  of  1845,  in 
the  preface  to  which  it  is  stated  that  the  Memoirs 
were  '  printed  exactly  as  the  author  left  them, 
except  that  it  has  been  thought  right  to  suppress 
a  few  passages  of  indecent  tendency,  and  following 
the  example  of  Lord  Holland,  "two  or  three 
passages,  affecting  the  private  characters  of  private 
persons,  and  nowise  connected  with  any  political 
event,  or  illustrative  of  any  great  public  character. 
have  been  omitted."  '  ^  Walpole's  own  annotations 
are  throughout  retained,  and  are  given  without  any 
distinguishing  mark.  Many  of  Le  Marchant's  notes 
have  been  dispensed  with.  Those  which  remain 
are  denoted  by  the  initials  L.  M.  Some  of  these  I 
have  silently  corrected,  where  the  alteration  in  the 
wording  has  been  slight,  or  where,  as  very  fre- 
quently happened,  the  quotations  were  faulty.  In 
those  cases  where  the  ms.  to  which  Le  Marchant 
referred  has  since  been  printed,  a  reference  to  the 
printed  copy  has  been  given.  The  references  to 
the  old  editions  of  Walpole's  Memoires  of  the  Reign 

^  The  passage  quoted  by  Sir  Denis  Le  Marchant  occurs  in  Lord  Holland's 
Preface  to  the  Memoires  of  the  Last  Teji  Years  of  the  Reign  of  King  George 
tie  Second  {1S22),  vol.  i.  p.  xxxii. 


PREFACE  XXV 

of  King  George  the  Second,  and  of  Walpole's  Letters 
have  been  altered  in  every  instance,  and  references 
to  the  second  edition  of  the  Memoirs  (1847),  and 
to  Mr.  Peter  Cunningham's  edition  of  the  Letters 
(1857-9)  have  been  substituted.  It  only  remains 
for  me  to  add  that  my  own  notes  are  distinguished 
from  those  of  Walpole  and  Le  Marchant  by  the 
letter  E. 

G.  F.  Russell  Barker. 


20  Old  Buildings, 
Lincoln's  Inn. 


VOL.  L 


CONTENTS 


OF 


THE    FIRST    VOLUME 


CHAPTER    I 

A.D.     Career  of  George  the  Second, . 

1 760.    Auspicious  circumstances  under  which  George  the  Third  ascended 

the  Throne       .  ... 

Firmness  of  the  Administration 
Our  Glory  and  Fortune  in  War 
Precipitate  Peace     ..... 
Communication  to  the  Prince  of  Wales  of  the 

the  Second        ..... 
His  conduct  to  the  Duke  of  Cumberland 
The  first  Council     ..... 
George  the  Second's  Will 
The  King's  Speech  to  his  Council     . 


death  of  George 


PAGE 

3 

ib. 

4 

ib. 

S 

ib. 

6 
ib. 
ib. 

7 


CHAPTER    H 

1760.    Plan  to  carry  the  prerogative  to  an  unusual  height  .         .  14 

Unpopularity  and  seclusion  of  the  Princess  of  Wales  .         .  ib. 

Intended  duel  between  the  Earl  of  Albemarle  and   General 

Townshend       .........  17 

Nov.  i8th,  Meeting  of  Parliament    ......  18 

The  King's  Speech ib. 

Increase  of  the  Court  Establishment ib. 

Interview  between  Lord  Bute  and  the  Duke  of  Richmond        .  20 

Irish  Disputes  ......  ...  23 

The  King  of  Prussia's  Victory  over  Marshal  Daun   ...  25 

Mauduit's  Pamphlet  on  the  German  War  ....  ib. 

Ways  and  Means  for  the  ensuing  Year 26 


XXVI  u 


CONTENTS 


CHAPTER    III 

PAGH 

1761.    New  Promotions      .........  27 

Lord  Bute 28 

Secret  Article  in  the  Treaty  with  the  Landgrave  of  Hesse         .  30 

New  tenure  of  the  Judges 31 

Lord  Bute  appears  more  ostensibly  in  the  character  of  Minister  ib. 

Ministerial  changes  ........  ib. 

Overtures  by  France  for  Peace 38 


CHAPTER    IV 


1761.    March  iSth,  Thanks  of  the  House  of  Commons  to  Mr,  Onslow, 
their  Speaker    . 
Lord  Bath's  Pamphlet      . 
Solicitations  by  France  for  P-eace 
Mr.  Pitt  disinclined  to  negotiate 
Expedition  against  Belleisle      . 
Negotiation  for  Peace 


39 

41 

42 

ib. 

ib. 

44 


CHAPTER    V 


1761.   July  Sth,  Announcement  of  the  King's  intended  Marriage 
The  Princess  Dowager's  aversion  to  her  Son's  Marriage 
Schemes  of  Mr.  Fox         ...... 

Colonel  Graeme  despatched  to  Germany  to  select  a  Queen 

Serious  crisis  in  the  Cabinet 

Lofty  conduct  of  Mr.  Pitt 

His  draught  for  a  Treaty  with  France 

Sept.  7th,  Arrival  of  the  new  Queen 

Her  mental  and  personal  characteristics 

Disposal  of  the  vacant  Bishoprics     . 

Lord  Talbot  and  the  Barons  of  the  Cinque  Ports 


48 
ib. 
49 
50 
52 
ib. 

5.3 
54 
55 
57 
58 


CHAPTER    VI 

1 76 1.    Interposition  of  Spain  in  behalf  of  France       ....  60 

Oct.  5th  and  9th,  Resignation  of  Mr.  Pitt  and  Lord  Temple     .  62 

Effect  on  the  Nation  of  Mr.  Pitt's  secession  from  tlie  Cabinet   .  63 

His  acceptance  of  a  Peerage  for  his  wife,  and  of  a  Pension  64 

His  injudicious  conduct    ........  66 

Address  to  him  from  the  Common  Council  of  London,  and 

from  Provincial  Towns      .......  ib. 

Nov.  3rd,  Meeting  of  Parliament      ......  67 


CONTENTS 


XXIX 


PAGE 

1761.    Choice  of  a  Speaker 67 

Nov.  6th,  The  King's  Speech 69 

The  Address    ..........  ih. 

Nov.  Qth,  The  King  and  Royal  Family  dine  in  the  City  with 

the  Lord  Mayor        ........  ib. 

Mr.  Pitt's  reception  in  Guildhall 70 

Riots ib. 


CHAPTER    VII 

1761.    Nov.  13th,  Mr.  Wilkes's  censures  on  the  King's  Speech 
The  Debate  on  continuing  the  War 
The  Queen's  Dowry  voted        ..... 
Ministerial  manceuvres  on  the  secession  of  Mr.  Pitt 
Nov.  25th,  Meeting  at  the  St.  Alban's  Tavern 

Policy  of  the  Court 

Debate  on  the  War  in  Germany       .... 
George  Grenville's  desertion  of  Pitt 


71 

72 

77 

ib. 

78 

79 
80 
81 


CHAPTER    VIII 

1761.    Debates  in  Parliament  on  the  German  War 

Dec.  Ilth,  Discussion  on  our  Affairs  with  Spain 
Colonel  Barre's  insulting  conduct  to  Mr.  Pitt 
Family  Compact  between  France  and  Spain     . 
Portugal  invaded  by  Charles  the  Third  of  Spain 


85 
88 

94 
97 
98 


CHAPTER    IX 

1762.    Jan.  1st,  Fuentes,  the  Spanish  Ambassador,  quits  England       .  lOO 

Jan  4th,  War  declared  against  Spain        .....  102 

Divisions  in  the  Council  respecting  the  War  with  Spain            .  103 

Expedition  to  the  Havannah ib. 

Jan.  19th,  Meeting  of  Parliament ib. 

Court  intrigues  in  France  against  Marshal  Broglio  and  his  brother  109 

Preponderating  influence  and  haughtiness  of  Lord  Bute   .         .  IIO 

The  Duke  of  York's  contempt  of  Lord  Bute  and  the  Scotch      .  ib. 
Proceedings  in  the  Parliament  of  Ireland          .         ,          .         .Ill 

March  19th,  Bill  for  continuing  the  Militia       ....  112 


CHAPTER    X 

1762.    March  22nd,  News  of  the  Conquest  of  Martinico 
War  in  Portugal      ...... 

Pacific  disposition  of  the  new  Czar 


113 

ib. 

118 


XXX 


CONTENTS 


PAGE 


1762.    His  Popular  measures      ........        119 

Meditated  War  with  Denmark  by  the  Czar  and  the  King  of  Prussia  1 19 
Insurrection  in  Ireland,  quelled  by  the  Earl  of  Hertford  .         .       121 


The  Portuguese  War,  and  the  War  in  Germany 
Private  negotiation  with  the  Court  of  Vienna   . 
April  28th,  Creation  of  new  Peers    . 
Buckingham  House  purchased  by  the  Queen    . 
Seclusion  of  the  King  and  Queen 


122 

124 

ib. 
125 


CHAPTER    XI 

1762.    May  1 2th,  Debate  in  the  House   of  Commons  on  a  Vote  of 

Credit  and  the  Support  of  Portugal  .....  127 

May  26th,  The  Duke  of  Newcastle's  resignation        .         .         .  133 

Lord  Bute  is  declared  First  Lord  of  the  Treasury      .         .         .  135 

Sir  Francis  Dashwood,  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer        .         .  ib. 


CHAPTER    XII 

1762.    Honours  heaped  on  Lord  Bute 

Lord  Halifax  appointed  to  the  Admiralty 

First  appearance  of  The  North  Briton 

Its  excessive  audacity       ..... 

Sketch  of  its  Author,  John  Wilkes 

Churchill,  Wilkes's  Associate 

Capture  and  re-capture  of  Newfoundland 

The  French  camp  surprised  by  Prince  Ferdinand 

Propensity  of  the  Court  for  Peace     . 

The  Empress  Catherine  .... 

Horrible  Conspiracy  against  Peter  the  Third    . 

Catherine  raised  to  the  Throne 

Murder  of  Peter       ...... 

Effect  of  the  Russian  revolution  on  the  King  of  Prussia 


139 
ib. 

140 
ib. 

141 

142 

144 

ib. 

145 

146 

ib. 

147 

ib. 

148 


CHAPTER    XIII 

1762.    August  1 2th,  Birth  of  the  Prince  of  Wales 
Treasure  of  the  Hermione 
Conquest  of  the  Havannah 
Indifference  of  the  Court  on  that  event     . 
Negotiations  for  Peace     .... 
Reception  in  France  of  the  Duke  of  Bedford 
Beckford  elected  Lord  Mayor 
Duel  between  Lord  Talbot  and  Wilkes    . 
Disgust  at  the  Union  of  Bute  and  Fox 
Purchase  of  a  majority  to  approve  the  Peace 


150 

ib. 
ib. 

151 

ib. 

ib. 

153 

ib. 

156 

157 


CONTENTS 


XXXI 


CHAPTER    XIV 

1762.  Nov.  8th,  Preliminaries  of  Peace  with  France  and  Spain 
Embassy  to  the  Court  of  Spain  offered  to  Lord  Sandwich 
Insult  to  the  Duke  of  Cumberland  .... 
Resignation  of  Lords  Ashburnham  and  Kinnoul 
Lord  Lincoln's  ingratitude  to  the  Duke  of  Newcastle 
The  Duke  of  York  obliged  to  go  to  Italy 
Attempt  to  propitiate  Walpole         .... 


PAGE 

162 
il?. 

163 
ib. 

164 

165 
168 


CHAPTER    XV 

1762.    Conference  between  the  Duke  of  Cumberland  and  Mr.  Pitt       .       173 
Nov.  25th,  Meeting  of  Parliament  .         .         .         .         .         .174 

Anxiety  of  the  Ministers  .......        175 

Dec.  9th,  Debates  in  both  Houses  on  the  Preliminaries  of  Peace        ib. 
The  Minority  on  the  Division  ......        184 

Exultation  of  the  Princess  of  Wales  on  the  Preliminaries  being  carried  ib. 
Severe  political  persecution      .......        ib. 

Numerous  dismissals  from  place       ......        ib. 


CHAPTER    XVI 

1763.   Jan.  2nd,  Death  of  John,  Earl  Granville 
Attack  on  Patent  places 
Triumph  of  the  Court      .... 
Favour  shown  to  the  friends  of  the  Stuarts 
Observance  of  the  Jacobite  fast 
Committee  to  inspect  madhouses 
Accounts  of  the  Navy      .... 
The  Standing  Army         .... 


186 
187 
190 

ib. 

ib. 
192 

ib. 
193 


CHAPTER    XVII 

1763.    Address  to  the  King 

Sir  Francis  Dashwood's  Budget        ..... 

Tax  on  Cider  ........ 

Discussion  on  Ways  and  Means        ..... 

Ardent  opposition  to  the  Cider  Tax  .... 

Petition  from  Newfoundland    ...... 

March  28th,  Debate  in  the  House  of  Lords  on  the  Cider  Bill 

March  30th,  Passing  of  the  Bill 

April  8th,  George  Grenville  First  Lord  of  the  Treasury  and 

Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer     ..... 
Removal  of  Sir  Francis  Dashwood  .... 

Ministerial  changes  and  promotions  .... 


196 
197 
198 

ib. 
198 
199 

ib. 
200 

204 
ib. 
ib. 


XXXll 


CONTENTS 


CHAPTER    XVIII 


1763.    The  Bedford  Faction 

Ambition  of  the  Duchess  of  Bedford 

Reversions  granted  by  Lord  Bute  before  his  resignation 

Walpole's  feelings  towards  that  Minister 

Bute's  political  acts  ...... 

April  8th,  Death  of  Lord  Waldegrave 


PAGE 

206 
ib. 

210 
ib. 

211 

212 


CHAPTER    XIX 

1763.    April  19th,  Lord  Bute's  pretended  abdication  of  business          .  214 

The  '  Triumvirate '  which  succeeded  him          ....  ib. 

Grenville's  ingratitude  to  Lord  Bute  .....  215 
April  23rd,  The  memorable  Forty-fifth  Number  of  the  North 

Briton 217 

April  30th,  Wilkes  apprehended  on  a  General  Warrant    .         .  219 

Committed  close  prisoner  to  the  Tower  .  .  .  .  .  ib. 
May  3rd,  He   is  taken  by  Habeas   Corpus  to  the  Court  of 

Common  Pleas          ........  220 

He  is  discharged  from  confmement           .         .         .         .         .  ib. 

Triumph  of  Wilkes 221 

His  endeavour  to  obtain  Warrants  against  the  Secretaries  of  State    ib. 

Discontent  in  the  Cider  counties      ......  222 

Mortifications  of  the  Court       .......  ib. 

Wilkes  challenged  by  Forbes  .......  223 

Aug.  2 1  St,  Sudden  death  of  Lord  Egremont     ....  224 


CHAPTER    XX 

1763.    Perplexity  of  the 'Triumvirate' 

Lord  Bute's  unsuccessful  manoeuvres 
Aug.  25th,  Lord  Halifax  and  Mr.  Grenville  remonstrate 
the  King  ...... 

Schemes  of  the  Bedford  Faction 

Aug.  28th,  Mr.  Pitt  sent  for  by  the  King 

Negotiation  with  the  former     . 

The  Treaty  broken  off     . 

Causes  of  the  rupture       .... 

The  King's  account  of  his  Interviews  with  Pitt 
Ministerial  arrangements  .... 


with 


225 

ib. 

226 
227 
228 

ib. 
229 

ib. 
230 
233 


CHAPTER    XXI 

1763.   Secret  power  of  Lord  Bute 

His  rupture  with  Pitt        .... 
Unanimous  attempt  to  destroy  Wilkes 


236 
237 
239 


CONTENTS 


XXXlll 


PAGE 

1763.    Death  of  Augustus  the  Third  of  Saxony 242 

The  Pope  invites  the  Duke  of  York  to  Rome            .         .         .  243 

Humiliation  of  the  helpless  Line  of  Stuart         ....  ib. 

Nov.  3rd,  Charles  Yorke  resigns  the  Attorney-Generalship       .  ib. 
Unfavourable  commencement  of  the   new  Lord  Lieutenant's 

power  in  Ireland       ........  244 


CHAPTER    XXII 

1763.    Nov.  15th,  Opening  of  Parliament 245 

Wilkes's  Essay  on  Woman  laid  before  the  House  of  Lords        .  ib. 

Persecution  of  Wilkes,     ........  248 

He  complains  in  the  House  of  Commons  of  a  Breach  of  Privilege  249 

Warm  Debate  on  the  Question          ......  ib. 

Wilkes  wounded  in  a  duel  by  Martin        .....  252 

Nov.  i6th.  The  King's  Speech  read  to  the  Commons        .         .  253 

Postponement  of  the  further  hearing  on  Wilkes         .         .         .  254 

Bestowal  of  the  Bishopric  of  Osnabrugh  .         .         .         .         .  ib. 


CHAPTER    XXIII 

1763.    Nov.  23rd,  Important  question  as  to  the  Privilege  of  Parliament 
Abandonment  of  General  Warrants 
Debate  on  the  proceedings  against  Wilkes 
The  Moderator,  a  new  scurrilous  paper     . 
Dec.  3rd,  Riot  on  the  attempt  to  burn  the  North  Briton 
Dec.  6th,  Debate  on  this  subject  in  the  House  of  Lords 
Triumph  of  Wilkes  ...... 

Attempt  to  assassinate  Wilkes  .... 

The  East  India  Company  and  Lord  Clive 
Outlawry  against  Wilkes  ..... 


25s 
257 

ib. 
262 

ib. 

ib. 
264 
265 

ib. 
266 


CHAPTER    XXIV 

1763.    Lord   Sandwich   offers  himself  for  the   High  Stewardship  of 
Cambridge        ....... 

His  '  Flying  Pension  '...... 

Disgraceful  grant  to  Count  Virri       .... 

Dismissal  of  General  A'Court  ..... 

Negotiation  between  Grenville,  Conway,  and  Walpole 


267 

ib. 

268 

ib. 


CHAPTER    XXV 

1764.    Jan.  1 6th,  Marriage  of  the  Princess  Augusta  with  the  Hereditary 

Duke  of  Brunswick  ........       275 

His  marked  opposition  to  the  wishes  of  the  King      .         .         .       277 
VOL.  I.  d 


xxxiv  CONTENTS 

FACE 

1764.    Jan.  19th,  Debates  on  Wilkes's  complaint  of  Breach  of  Privilege  278 

Jan.  20th,  Sir  William  Meredith  and  Sir  George  Saville  .         .  ib. 

The  Essay  on  Woman      ........  282 

Feb.  9th,  The  Marriage  Bill 285 

Feb.  13th,  Debate  on  Breach  of  Privilege         ....  286 

Cases  of  Carteret  Webbe,  and  Wood 288 


CHAPTER    XXVI 

1764.    Feb.  17th,  Debates  on  the  legality  of  General  Warrants,  and  the 

conduct  of  Wilkes,  continued 293 

Feb.  21  St,  Treatise  entitled  Droit  le  Roi  condemned  by  the  Lords      304 


CHAPTER    XXVII 

1764.    The  Earl  of  Egmont 308 

March  9th,  The  Budget 309 

Taxation  of  the  American  Colonies           .....  ih. 
March  23rd,  Appearance  of  the  Lettres,  Memoires,  et  Negocia- 

tions  dti  Chevalier  UEon,  etc.  .         .         .         .         .         .312 

Contest  at  Cambridge 3^4 

April  1 2th,  Lord  Clive  appointed  Governor-General  of  India   .  315 


CHAPTER    XXVIII 

1764.  April  19th,  Prorogation  of  the  Parliament  .  .  .  -319 
Walpole's  conduct  on  the  dismissal  of  General  Conway  .  .  320 
May  9th,  Mr.  Conway's  regiment  given  to  the  Earl  of  Pembroke  330 
May  22nd,  Trial  of  Carteret  Webbe  for  Perjury  .  .  .  332 
The  Earl  of  Northumberland  Lord- Lieutenant  of  Ireland  .         ib. 


MEMOIRS 


MEMOIRS 


OF   THE   REIGN   OF 


KING   GEORGE   THE   THIRD 


CHAPTER    I 


Motives  for  writing  these  Memoirs. — Tlieir  assistance  to  History. — Causes  of 
contradictory  Opinions  in  the  Writer. — Career  of  George  the  Second. — 
Auspicious  circumstances  under  which  George  the  Third  ascended  the 
Throne. — Firmness  of  the  Administration. — Our  Glory  and  Fortune  in 
War. — Precipitate  Peace. — Communication  to  the  Prince  of  Wales  of  the 
death  of  George  the  Second. — Mr.  Pitt  and  the  Princess  Amalie. — Anec- 
dotes of  the  Accession  of  the  new  King. — His  conduct  to  the  Duke  of 
Cumberland. — The  first  Council. — George  the  Second's  Will. — Anecdotes. 
— The  King's  Speech  to  his  Council. — Mr.  Pitt  and  Lord  Bute. — Duke  of 
Newcastle. — Duke  of  Devonshire. — The  King's  Mother. — Earl  of  Bute. — 
Views  of  other  Ministers. — Union  of  Pitt  and  Newcastle. — City  Politics. 
— Inscription  on  Blackfriars'  Bridge — ^Jacobites  at  St.  James's. 

Whoever  has  taken  the  trouble  of  reading  my  Me- 
moirs, which  relate  the  transactions  during  the  last  ten 
years  of  King  George  the  Second,  will  have  seen  that  I 
had  taken  a  resolution  of  interfering  no  more  in  public 
affairs.  It  was  no  ambition,  or  spirit  of  faction,  that  en- 
gaged me  in  them  again.  Inconstancy,  or  weariness  of 
retirement,  were  as  little  the  motives  of  my  return  to 
action.  I  am  going  to  set  forth  the  true  causes  ;  and  if  I 
am  obliged  to  make  more  frequent  mention  of  myself  than 
I  should  wish  to  do,  it  will  be  from  the  necessity  I  am  under 
of  unfolding  the  secret  springs  of  many  events  in  which  I 
was  unwillingly  a  considerable  actor.  It  is  to  gratify  no 
VOL.  I.  A 


2  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

vanity  that  I  relate  them  :  my  portion  was  not  brilliant. 
And  though  my  counsels  might  have  been  more  service- 
able to  my  country  and  to  my  friends  if  they  had  been 
more  followed,  they  were  calculated  to  produce  neither 
glory  nor  profit  to  myself,  and  were  much  oftener  neglected 
than  listened  to.  Nor  should  they  be  remembered  here, 
if  many  miscarriages  had  not  accrued  from  the  neglect  of 
them,  as  was  felt  and  confessed  by  those  to  whom  they  a 
had  been  suggested.  •* 

How  far  I  have  been  in  the  right  or  in  the  wrong,  I 
leave  to  the  judgment  of  posterity,  who  shall  be  impartially 
informed  ;  and  who  may  draw  some  benefit  from  the  know- 
ledge of  what  I  have  seen  ;  though  few  persons,  I  believe, 
profit  much  from  history.  Times  seldom  resemble  one 
another  enough  to  be  very  applicable  ;  and  if  they  do,  the 
characters  of  the  actors  are  very  different.  They,  too,  who 
read  history  most,  are  seldom  performers  in  the  political 
drama.  Yet  they  who  have  performed  any  part  in  it,  are 
at  least  able  to  give  the  best  account  of  it,  though  still 
an  imperfect  one.  No  man  is  acquainted  with  the  whole 
plot  ;  as  no  man  knows  all  the  secret  springs  of  the  actions 
of  others.  His  passions  and  prejudices  warp  his  judgment, 
and  cast  a  mist  before  the  most  penetrating  sagacity. 
Yet,  partial  as  the  narratives  of  the  actors  must  be,  they 
will  certainly  approach  nearer  to  truth  than  those  of  spec- 
tators, who,  beholding  nothing  but  events,  pretend  to  ac- 
count for  them  from  causes  which  they  can  but  suppose, 
and  which  frequently  never  existed.  It  is  this  assistance 
to  history  which  I  now  offer,  and  by  which  I  may  explain 
some  passages,  which  might  otherwise  never  be  cleared  up. 

I  have  a  new  reason  for  repeating  here  what  I  have  said 
in  former  pages,  that  these  are  memoirs,  not  history.  The 
inequality,  and  perhaps  even  the  contradictory  opinions 
which  may  appear  in  them  from  being  written  at  different 
periods,  forbid  this  work  to  aim  at  the  regular  march  of 
history.  As  I  knew  men  more,  I  may  have  altered  my 
sentiments  of  them — they  themselves  may  have  changed. 
If  I  had  any  personal  causes  for  changing  my  opinion,  I 


KING  GEORGE  III.  3 

have  told  them  fairly  that  the  fault  may  be  imputed  to  my 
passions,  rather  than  to  those  I  speak  of  The  actions  of 
the  persons  must  determine  whether  they  altered,  or  I  was 
prejudiced.  But,  though  this  dissonance  may  cast  un- 
equal colours  on  my  work,  I  choose  to  leave  it  as  I  wrote 
it,  having  at  each  period  spoken  truth  as  it  appeared  to 
me.  I  might  have  made  it  more  uniform  by  correction  ; 
but  the  natural  colouring  would  have  been  lost ;  and  I 
should  rather  have  composed  than  written  a  history.  As 
it  stands  an  original  sketch,  it  is  at  least  a  picture  of  my 
own  mind  and  opinions.  That  sketch  may  be  valuable  to 
a  few  who  study  human  nature  even  in  a  single  character. 

But  I  will  make  no  further  apology  for  a  work  which  I 
am  sensible  has  many  faults  ;  which  I  again  declare  I  do 
not  give  as  a  history  ;  and  to  which,  if  it  has  not  merits 
sufficient  to  atone  for  its  blemishes,  I  desire  no  quarter 
may  be  given.  Remember,  reader,  I  offer  you  no  more 
than  the  memoirs  of  men  who  had  many  faults,  written  by 
a  man  who  had  many  himself ;  and  who  writes  to  inform 
you,  not  to  engross  your  admiration.  Had  he  given  you  a 
perfect  history,  and  a  flattering  picture  of  himself,  his  work 
would  have  been  a  romance,  and  he  an  impostor.  He 
lived  with  a  contempt  of  hypocrisy  ;  and  writes  as  he  lived. 

George  the  Second,  contradicting  the  silly  presages 
drawn  from  parallels,  which  had  furnished  opposition  with 
names  of  unfortunate  Princes,  who  were  the  second  of 
their  name,  as  Edward,  Richard,  Charles,  and  James,  ter- 
minated his  career  with  glory  both  to  himself  and  his 
people.  He  died,  crowned  with  years  and  honours,  and 
respected  from  success ;  which  with  the  multitude  is  the 
same  as  being  beloved.  He  left  a  successor  in  the  vigour 
of  youth,  ready  to  take  the  reins,  and  a  ministry  universally 
applauded,  united,  and  unembarrassed  by  opponents. 

No  British  monarch  has  ascended  the  throne  with  so 
many  advantages  as  George  the  Third.  Being  the  first  of 
his  line  born  in  England,^  the  prejudice  against  his  family  as 

^  Born  in  Norfolk  House,   St.   James's  Square,   London,  on  24th  May 
1738.-E. 


4  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

foreigners  ceased  in  his  person — Hanover  was  no  longer 
the  native  soil  of  our  Princes  ;  consequently,  attachment 
to  the  Electorate  was  not  likely  to  govern  our  councils,  as 
it  had  done  in  the  last  two  reigns.  This  circumstance, 
too,  of  his  birth,  shifted  the  unpopularity  of  foreign  extrac- 
tion from  the  House  of  Brunswick  to  the  Stuarts.  In  the 
flower  and  bloom  of  youth,  George  had  a  handsome,  open, 
and  honest  countenance  ;  and  with  the  favour  that  attends 
the  outward  accomplishments  of  his  age,  he  had  none  of 
the  vices  that  fall  under  the  censure  of  those  who  are  past 
enjoying  them  themselves. 

The  moment  of  his  accession  was  fortunate  beyond  ex- 
ample. The  extinction  of  parties  had  not  waited  for,  but 
preceded,  the  dawn  of  his  reign.  Thus  it  was  not  a  race  of 
factions  running  to  offer  themselves,  as  is  common,  to  a 
new  Prince,  bidding  for  his  favour,  and  ready  each  to  be 
disgusted  if  their  antagonists  were  received  with  more 
grace  ;  but  a  natural  devolution  of  duty  from  all  men  to  the 
uncontroverted  heir  of  the  Crown,  who  had  no  occasion  to 
court  the  love  of  his  subjects,  nor  could  fear  interrupting 
established  harmony  but  by  making  any  change  in  a  sys- 
tem so  well  compacted.  The  administration  was  firm,  in 
good  harmony  with  one  another,  and  headed  by  the  most 
successful  genius  that  ever  presided  over  our  councils. 
Conquests  had  crowned  our  arms  with  wonderful  circum- 
stances of  glory  and  fortune  ;  and  the  young  King  seemed 
to  have  the  option  of  extending  our  victories  and  acquisi- 
tions, or  of  giving  peace  to  the  world,  by  finding  himself 
in  a  situation  so  favourable,  that  neither  his  ambition  nor 
moderation  could  have  been  equitably  reprehended.  The 
designs  and  offences  of  France  would  have  justified 
a  fuller  measure  of  revenge ;  moderation  could  want  no 
excuse. 

A  passionate,  domineering    woman,  and    a    Favourite, - 
without   talents,   soon    drew    a   cloud    over   this    shining 
prospect. 

Without  anticipating  events  too  hastily,  let  it  sufifice  to 
say  that  the  measure  of  war  was  pushed,  without  even  a 


KING  GEORGE  III.  S 

desire  that  it  should  be  successful  ;  and  that,  although 
successful,  it  was  unnaturally  checked  by  a  peace,  too 
precipitate,  too  indigested,  and  too  shameful,  to  merit  the 
coldest  eulogy  of  moderation. 

The  first  moment  of  the  new  reign  afforded  a  symptom 
of  the  Prince's  character ;  of  that  cool  dissimulation  in 
which  he  had  been  so  well  initiated  by  his  mother,  and 
which  comprehended  almost  the  whole  of  what  she  had 
taught  him.  Princess  Amalie,  as  soon  as  she  was  certain 
of  her  father's  death,  sent  an  account  of  it  to  the  Prince  of 
Wales ;  but  he  had  already  been  apprised  of  it.  He  was 
riding,  and  received  a  note  from  a  German  valet-de- 
chambre,  attendant  on  the  late  King,  with  a  private  mark 
agreed  upon  between  them,  which  certified  him  of  the 
event.  Without  surprise  or  emotion,  without  dropping  a 
word  that  indicated  what  had  happened,  he  said  his  horse 
was  lame,  and  turned  back  to  Kew.  At  dismounting  he 
said  to  the  groom,  '  I  have  said  this  horse  is  lame  ;  I  forbid 
you  to  say  the  contrary.' 

Mr.  Pitt  was  the  first  who  arrived  at  Kensington,  and 
went  to  Princess  Amalie  for  her  orders.  She  told  him 
nobody  could  give  him  better  counsel  than  his  own.  He 
asked  if  he  ought  not  to  go  to  the  Prince  ?  She  replied 
she  could  not  advise ;  but  thought  it  would  be  right.  He 
went.  I  mention  these  little  circumstances  because  they 
show,  from  Mr.  Pitt's  uncertainty,  that  he  was  possessed 
with  none  of  the  confidence  and  ardour  of  a  man  who 
thinks  himself  a  favourite. 

From  Kew  the  new  King  went  directly  to  Carleton 
House,^  which  belonged  to  the  Princess  Dowager  ;  order- 
ing his  servants  and  the  Privy  Council  to  wait  for  him  at 
Saville  House,  then  his  own  residence  ;  and  adjoining  to 

^  This  house  was  built  by  Henry  Boyle,  Baron  Carlton,  on  a  piece  of 
ground,  'parcel  of  the  Royal  Garden  near  St.  James's  Palace,'  leased  to  him 
by  Queen  Anne  in  1709.  Frederick,  Prince  of  Wales,  purchased  it  from  the 
Dowager-Countess  of  Burlington  in  1732.  It  subsequently  became  the 
residence  of  the  Prince  of  Wales,  afterwards  George  iv.,  and  was  pulled 
down  in  1827,  the  columns  of  the  portico  being  transferred  to  the  National 
Gallery.— E. 


6  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

Leicester  House/  where  the  Princess  usually  lived.  The 
Duke  of  Cumberland  went  to  Leicester  House,  and  waited 
two  hours ;  but  was  sent  for,  as  soon  as  the  King  knew  it, 
to  Carleton  House,  where  he  determined  to  stay,  and 
avoid  the  parade  and  acclamation  of  passing  through  the 
streets :  at  the  same  time  dismissing  the  guards,  and 
ordering  them  to  attend  the  body  of  his  grandfather. 

To  the  Duke  of  Cumberland  he  marked  great  kindness, 
and  told  him  it  had  not  been  common  in  their  family  to 
live  well  together ;  but  he  was  determined  to  live  well 
with  all  his  family.  And  he  carried  this  attention  so  far 
as  to  take  notice  to  the  Duke  after  council  that  his  friend 
Mr.  Fox  looked  in  great  health.  And  again,  when  the  Privy 
Council  had  made  their  address  to  his  Majesty  by  the 
mouth  of  the  Archbishop,  it  not  being  thought  decent  that 
the  compliment  on  the  death  of  his  father  should  be 
uttered  by  the  Duke,  the  King  remarked  it,  and  expressed 
an  apprehension  that  they  had  put  a  slight  upon  his 
uncle.  Nor  would  he  suffer  the  name  of  his  brother,  the 
Duke  of  York,  to  be  mentioned  in  the  public  prayers, 
because  it  must  have  taken  place  of  that  of  the  Duke  of 
Cumberland. 

At  that  first  council  the  King  spoke  to  nobody  in 
particular  but  his  former  governor.  Lord  Waldegrave. 
His  speech  to  them  he  made  with  dignity  and  propriety. 
In  whatever  related  to  his  predecessor  he  behaved  with 
singular  attention  and  decency,  refusing  at  first  to  give  the 
word  to  the  guard  ;  and  then  only  renewing  what  the 
late  King  had  given.  He  sent  to  Princess  Amalie  to 
know  where  her  father's  will  was  deposited.  She  said 
one  copy  had  been  entrusted  to  her  eight  or  nine  years 
before  ;  but  thinking  the  King  had  forgotten  it,  she  had 
lately  put  him  in  mind  of  it.  He  had  replied,  '  Did  not 
she  know,  that  when  a  new  will  was  made,  it  cancelled  all 
preceding } '     No   curiosity,  no   eagerness,  no   haste  was 

^  Leicester  House,  built  by  Robert  Sydney,  second  Earl  of  Leicester, 
formerly  stood  at  the  north-east  corner  of  Leicester  Square.  Adjoining  it  on 
the  west  stood  Saville  House. — E. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  7 

expressed  by  the  new  King  on  that  head  ;  nor  the  smallest 
impediment  thrown  in  the  way  of  his  grandfather's 
intentions.  A  Gentleman^  of  the  Bedchamber  was 
immediately  dismissed,  who  refused  to  sit  up  with  the 
body,  as  is  usual.  Wilmotand  Ranby,^  the  late  King's 
physician  and  surgeon,  acquainted  the  King  with  two 
requests  of  their  master,  which  were  punctually  complied 
with.  They  were,  that  his  body  might  be  embalmed  as  soon 
as  possible,  and  a  double  quantity  of  perfumes  used  ;  and 
that  the  side  of  the  late  Queen's  coffin,  left  loose  on 
purpose,  might  be  taken  away  and  his  body  laid  close  to 
hers. 

In  his  first  council  the  King  named  his  brother  the  Duke 
of  York,  and  Lord  Bute,"^  of  the  Cabinet.  As  no  notice 
was  taken  of  Lord  Huntingdon,  it  indicated  an  uncertainty 
whether  he,  who  had  been  Master  of  the  Horse  to  the 
King  when  Prince,  or  Lord  Gower,  who  had  held  that 
office  under  the  late  King,  should  fill  the  post.  To  the 
Speaker  of  the  House  of  Commons,  the  King  said  it 
should  not  be  his  fault  if  that  assembly  did  not  go  upon 
business  earlier  in  the  day  than  they  had  done  of  late  :  a 
flattering  speech  to  an  old  man  attached  to  old  forms. 

The  King's  speech  to  his  council  afforded  matter  of 
remark,  and  gave  early  specimen  of  who  was  to  be  the 

^  John  Clavering,  a  relative  of  Sir  Thomas  Clavering,  Bart.,  of  Axwell 
Park,  Co.  Durham.     He  died  on  23rd  May  1762.— E. 

^  Edward  Wilmot,  M.D.,  Physician-General  to  the  Forces;  was  created 
a  Baronet  on  15th  February  1759.  He  married  Sarah  Marsh,  daughter  of 
Richard  Mead,  Physician-in-Ordinary  to  George  11.,  and  died  on  2ist 
November  1786,  aged  ninety-three. — E. 

3  JohnRanby,  F.R.C.S.  and  F.R.S.,  Sergeant-Surgeon  to  the  King;  died 
on  28th  August  1773,  and  buried  at  Chelsea  Hospital.  He  attended  George  II. 
at  the  Battle  of  Dettingen.  See  Walpole's  Letters  (1857),  vol.  i.  p.  225. 
— E. 

■*  John  Stuart,  third  Earl  of  Bute. — This  nomination  was  severely  criticised 
in  publications  of  the  day.  It  is  treated  by  Mr.  Adolphus  as  a  simple 
nomination  to  the  Privy  Council,  and  is  defended  as  such,  on  the  ground  that 
the  Groom  of  the  Stole  had  been  always  constituted  a  Privy  Councillor. 
This  is  a  misconception.  The  empty  honour  of  the  Council  could  be  grudged 
by  no  one  to  a  great  officer  of  the  Royal  Household.  The  real  grievance  was 
his  admission  into  the  Cabinet — L.  M. 


8  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

confidential  minister,  and  what  measures  were  to  be 
pursued  :  for  it  was  drawn  by  Lord  Bute,  and  commu- 
nicated to  none  of  the  King's  servants.  It  talked  of  a 
bloody  and  expe7isive  war,  and  of  obtaining  an  Jionourable 
and  lasting  peace.  Thus  was  it  delivered  ;  but  Mr.  Pitt 
went  to  Lord  Bute  that  evening,  and,  after  an  altercation 
of  three  hours,  prevailed  that  in  the  printed  copy  the  words 
should  be  changed  to  an  expensive  but  just  and  necessary 
war ;  and  that  after  the  words  honourable  peace  should  be 
inserted,  in  concert  with  our  allies.  Lord  Mansfield  and 
others  counselled  these  palliatives  too  ;  but  it  was  two 
o'clock  of  the  following  afternoon  before  the  King  would 
yield  to  the  alteration.  Whether,  that  the  private  Junto 
could  not  digest  the  correction,  or  whether  to  give  an  idea 
of  his  Majesty's  firmness,  I  know  not :  but  great  pains 
were  taken  to  imprint  an  idea  of  the  latter,  as  character- 
istic of  the  new  reign  ;  and  it  was  sedulously  whispered 
by  the  creatures  of  the  Favourite  and  the  mother,  that  it 
was  the  plan  to  retain  all  the  late  King's  ministers,  but 
that  his  Majesty  would  not  be  governed  by  them,  as  his 
grandfather  had  been.  In  confirmation  of  part  of  this 
advertisement,  the  King  told  the  Duke  of  Newcastle  and 
Mr.  Pitt  that  he  knew  their  attachment  to  the  Crown,  and 
should  expect  theirs,  and  the  assistance  of  all  honest  men. 
Mr.  Pitt  was  too  quick-sighted  not  to  perceive  what 
would  be  the  complexion  of  the  new  reign.  His  favourite 
war  was  already  struck  at.  He  himself  had  for  some  time 
been  on  the  coldest  terms  with  Lord  Bute ;  for  possession  of 
power,  and  reversion  of  power  could  not  fail  to  make  two 
natures  so  haughty,  incompatible.  It  was  said,  and  I 
believe  with  truth,  that  an  outset  so  unpromising  to  his 
darling  measures  made  Mr.  Pitt  propose  to  the  Duke  of 
Newcastle  a  firm  union  against  the  Favourite ;  but  the 
Duke  loved  intrigues  and  new  allies  too  well  to  embrace  it. 
And  from  that  refusal  has  been  dated  Mr.  Pitt's  animosity 
to  Newcastle  ;  though  the  part  the  latter  took  more  openly 
and  more  hostilely  against  him  afterwards  was  sufficient 
cause  for  that  resentment.     Whether  these  two  men,  so 


KING  GEORGE  III.  9 

powerful  in  Parliament  and  in  the  nation,  could  have 
balanced  the  headlong  affection  that  attends  every  new 
young  Prince,  is  uncertain, — I  think  they  could.  A  war 
so  triumphant  had  captivated  the  whole  country.  The 
Favourite  was  unknown,  ungracious,  and  a  Scot  :  his 
connexion  with  the  Princess,  an  object  of  scandal.  He  had 
no  declared  party ;  and  what  he  had  was  insignificant. 
Nor  would  he  probably  have  dared  to  stem  such  a  body 
of  force  as  would  have  appeared  against  him.  At  least 
the  union  of  Pitt  and  Newcastle  would  have  checked  the 
torment,  which  soon  carried  everything  in  favour  of  Pre- 
rogative. Newcastle's  time-serving  undermined  Mr.  Pitt, 
was  destructive  to  himself,  threw  away  all  the  advantages 
of  the  war,  and  brought  the  country  to  the  brink  of  ruin. 

Yet  this  veteran,  so  busy,  so  selfish,  and  still  so  fond  of 
power,  for  a  few  days  acted  the  part  he  ought  to  have 
adopted  in  earnest.  He  waited  on  the  King,  pleaded  his 
age,  and  begged  to  be  excused  from  entering  on  a  new 
reign.  The  King  told  him  he  could  not  part  with  him. 
Fortified  with  this  gracious  and  comfortable  command, 
he  next  consulted  his  friends.  It  was  not  their  interest 
to  point  out  to  him  the  ridicule  of  thinking  to  rule 
in  the  Cabinet  of  a  third  George,  almost  a  boy.  Four 
days  more  determined  the  Duke  to  take  a  new  court-lease 
of  folly.i 

The  Duke  of  Devonshire,"-^  though  greatly  younger, 
might  not  have  been  without  difficulties  too,  if  he  had 
pleased  to  remember  them.  He  had  been  ill-treated  in  the 
late  reign  by  the  Prince  and  Princess  Dowager,  hated  the 
Favourite,  and  had  declared  he  would  quit  whenever  the 
new  reign  should  commence  ;  but  he  thought  better  of  it. 

1  The  Duke  very  soon  discovered  his  power  to  be  gone.  Lord  Bute's 
predilection  for  the  Tories  was  undisguised,  and  it  soon  became  evident  that 
the  Court  had  determined  to  break  up  the  Whig  party,  the  effect  of  which 
would  be  to  reduce  the  Duke  to  insignificance.  See  an  interesting  letter  from 
Mr.  Rigby  to  the  Duke  of  Bedford  (19th  December  1760),  giving  an  account  of 
an  interview  of  the  former  with  the  Duke  of  Newcastle.  Bedford  Correspond- 
ence (1842-46),  vol.  ii.  p.  423. — L.   M. 

'  William  Cavendish,  fourth  Duke  of  Devonshire,  and  Lord  Chamberlain. 


lo  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

The  Princess,  whose  ambition  yielded  to  none,  was  desir- 
ous to  figure  in  the  new  era,  and  demanded  to  be  declared 
Princess-Mother.  Precedents  were  searched  for  in  vain  ;  and 
she  missed  even  this  shadow  of  compensation  for  the  loss  of 
the  appellation  of  Queen — a  loss  which  she  showed  a  little 
afterwards  she  could  not  digest. 

The  Earl  of  Bute  seemed  to  act  with  more  moderation. 
His  credit  was  manifest ;  but  he  allotted  himself  no 
ministerial  office,contenting  himself  for  the  present  with  the 
post  of  Groom  of  the  Stole,  which  he  had  filled  under  the 
Prince,  and  for  which  room  was  prepared  by  removing 
the  Earl  of  Rochford  ^  with  a  large  pension.  Lord  Bute's 
agents  gave  out  that  he  would  upon  no  account  interfere  or 
break  with  Mr.  Pitt.  The  latter,  however,  did  not  trust  to 
these  vague  assurances,  but  endeavoured  to  maintain  the 
preceding  system  :  talked  to  the  King  of  the  Duke  of 
Newcastle  as  first  minister,  and  as  wishing  him  to  continue 
so  ;  and  said  he  had  never  chosen  any  other  channel  for 
his  addresses  or  demands  to  the  late  King — an  intimation 
that  he  would  make  none  through  Lord  Bute.  For  himself, 
he  had  meddled  with  nothing  but  the  war,  and  he  wished 
his  Majesty  to  give  some  mark  that  he  approved  the 
measures  of  the  late  reign. 

The  other  ministers  were  not  less  attentive  to  their 
own  views.  The  Duke  of  Bedford  ^  insisted  on  returning 
to  the  Government  of  Ireland,  and  that  Lord  Gower^ 
should  remain  Master  of  the  Horse ;  but  the  latter  point 

1  William  Henry  Nassau  Zulestein,  fourth  Earl  of  Rochford.  He  was 
descended  from  General  Zulestein,  a  natural  uncle  of  William  ill.  ;  and 
his  grandfather,  the  first  Earl,  had  been  one  of  the  favourite  generals  of 
that  Monarch.  Lord  Rochford  had  been  minister  at  Turin  from  1749  to 
1755,  when  he  was  appointed  Groom  of  the  Stole,  to  the  great  disappoint- 
ment of  Earl  Poulett,  the  first  Lord  of  the  Bedchamber,  who,  in  consequence, 
resigned  his  employment.  Walpole's  Memoirs  of  Geoi-ge  II.  (1847),  vol.  ii. 
p.  18.- L.  M. 

^  The  Duke  of  Bedford  was  no  favourite  of  Walpole,  owing  to  a  private 
quarrel.  There  is  no  reason  for  suspecting  that  it  could  have  been  intended 
to  remove  his  Grace  from  the  Government  of  Ireland,  a  post  which  he  had 
occupied  with  great  reluctance  (Walpole's  Memoirs  of  George  II.  (1847), 
vol.  ii.  p.  271),  and  was  glad  to  vacate  shortly  afterwards. — L.  M. 

'  Granville  Leveson,  Earl  Cower,  brother  of  the  Duchess  of  Bedford. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  n 

was  accommodated  by  the  removal  of  Sir  Thomas  Robin- 
son (with  a  pension)  from  the  Great  Wardrobe,  which  was 
bestowed  on  Lord  Gower ;  and  Lord  Huntingdon  con- 
tinued in  the  post  he  had  enjoyed  under  the  Prince.  Mr. 
Mackenzie,  the  Favourite's  brother,  was  destined  to  be 
Master  of  the  Robes,  but  was  forced  to  give  way  to  the 
Duke  of  Newcastle,  who  obtained  it  for  Mr.  Brudenel ;  ^ 
for,  though  bent  on  making  his  court,  his  Grace  as  often 
marred  his  own  policy  as  promoted  it. 

Yet  this  seeming  union  of  Pitt  and  Newcastle,  on  which 
the  influence  of  the  former  in  some  measure  depended, 
disgusted  the  city.  They  said  that  Mr.  Pitt  had  tem- 
porised with  Newcastle  before  from  necessity,  but  now 
it  was  matter  of  election.  Yet  by  the  intervention  of 
Mr.  Pitt's  agents,  the  City  of  London  recommended  to 
the  King  to  be  advised  by  his  grandfather's  ministers  ; 
and  they  even  hinted  at  the  loss  the  King  of  Prussia  would 
suffer  by  the  death  of  his  uncle.  Their  attachment  to 
their  idol  did  not  stop  there.  The  first  stone  of  the  new 
bridge  at  Blackfriars  was  laid  by  the  Lord  Mayor  a  few 
days  after  the  King's  accession,  and  on  it  was  engraved 
so  bombast  an  inscription  in  honour  of  Mr.  Pitt,  and  drawn 
up  in  such  bad  Latin,  that  it  furnished  ample  matter  of 
ridicule  to  his  enemies.^ 

The  Favourite,  though  traversed  in  his  views  by  the 
power  of  these  two  predominant  men,  had  not  patience 
to  be  wholly  a  cypher,  but  gave  many  lesser  and  in- 
direct marks  of  his  designs.  A  separate  standard  was 
to  be  erected.  Lord  George  Sackville  had  leave  to  pay 
his  duty  to  the  King,  and  was  well  received  ;^  which  gave 
such  offence  to  Mr.  Pitt,  that  Lord  George  was  privately 

^  James  Brudenel,  brother  of  the  Earl  of  Cardigan,  to  which  title  he 
afterwards  succeeded.    He  died  without  issue  in  i8i  I,  aged  eighty-six. — L.  M. 

2  This  bridge  was  built  by  Robert  Mylne.  When  first  opened  it  was  called, 
by  order  of  the  Common  Council,  '  Pitt  Bridge.'  It  was  demolished;  in  1864 
to  make  way  for  the  present  structure.  For  a  copy  of  the  inscription,  see 
Almon's  Anecdotes  of  William  Pitt,  Lord  Chatham  (1793),  vol.  iii.  p.  381. — E. 

^  He  had  been  dismissed  the  army  in  April  1760  for  disobedience  to  orders 
at  the  battle  of  Minden. — E. 


12  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

instructed  to  discontinue  his  attendance.  Lady  Mary 
Stuart,^  daughter  of  the  Favourite,  and  Lady  Susan  Stuart,^ 
daughter  of  the  Earl  of  Galloway,  a  notorious  and  in- 
temperate Jacobite,  were  named  of  the  Bedchamber  to 
the  Lady  Augusta,  the  King's  eldest  sister  ;  and  Sir  Henry 
Erskine  ^  was  restored  to  his  rank,  and  gratified  with  an 
old  regiment.  The  Earl  of  Litchfield,  Sir  Walter  Bagot, 
and  the  principal  Jacobites,  went  to  Court,  which  George 
Selwyn,  a  celebrated  wit,  accounted  for  from  the  number 
of  Stuarts  that  were  now  at  St.  James's. 

^  Eldest  daughter  of  John,  Earl  of  Bute  ;  afterwards  married  to  Sir  James 
Lowther. 

^  Afterwards  third  wife  of  Granville  Leveson,  Earl  Gower. 

'  He  had  been  dismissed  for  joining  Mr.  Pitt,  and  the  Prince  had  at  the 
time  promised  to  restore  him  upon  coming  to  the  throne.  See  the  Duke  of 
Richmond's  letter  of  2ist  June  1783,  in  the  Appendix  to  Dodington's  Diary. 
— L.  M. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  13 


CHAPTER    I  I 

Countenance  shown  to  Tories.— Effect  of  Tory  Politics  on  the  Nation.— Plan 
to  carry  the  Prerogative  to  an  unusual  height.  —  Unpopularity  and  Se- 
clusion of  the  Princess  of  Wales.  —  Difficulty  of  access  to  the  King.  — 
Manoeuvres  of  his  Mother. — Character  of  Lord  Bute,  and  his  Schemes  to 
conciliate  the  King. — Archbishop  Seeker.— Character  of  George  the  Third. 
— Intended  Duel  between  the  Earl  of  Albemarle  and  General  Townshend. 
— Cause  of  the  Quarrel.— The  King's  Speech.— Pitt  and  Beckford. — 
Increase  of  the  Court  Establishment. — The  Dukes  of  Richmond  and 
Grafton. — Interview  between  Lord  Bute  and  the  Duke  of  Richmond. — 
Advice  to  the  latter  by  the  Duke  of  Cumberland. — The  King's  Revenue. 
—The  Princess  Dowager's  Passion  for  Money.— The  Earl  of  Lichfield. — 
Viscount  Middleton. — Partiality  to  the  Tories. — Inconsistency  of  the  Duke 
of  Newcastle. — Irish  Disputes. — The  King  of  Prussia's  Victory  over  Mar- 
shal Daun.— Mauduit's  Pamphlet  on  the  German  War.— Ways  and  Means 
for  the  ensuing  Year. 

The  countenance  shown  to  the  Tories,  and  to  their 
citadel,  the  University  of  Oxford,  was  at  first  supposed 
by  those  who  stood  at  a  distance  from  the  penetralia,  the 
measure  of  Mr.  Pitt,  as  consonant  to  his  known  desire  of 
uniting — that  was  breaking — all  parties.  But  the  Tories, 
who  were  qualified  for  nothing  above  a  secret,  could  not 
keep  even  that.  They  came  to  Court,  it  is  true  ;  but  they 
came  with  all  their  old  prejudices.  They  abjured  their 
ancient  master,  but  retained  their  principles  ;  and  seemed 
to  have  exchanged  nothing  but  their  badge,  the  White 
Rose  for  the  White  Horse.  Prerogative  became  a  fashion- 
able word  ;  and  the  language  of  the  times  was  altered 
before  the  Favourite  dared  to  make  any  variation  in  the 
Ministry. 

These  steps  did  not  pass  unnoticed :  nor  was  the  nation 
without  jealousy,  even  in  the  first  dawn  of  the  reign. 
Papers  were  stuck  up  at  the  Royal  Exchange  and  in 
Westminster  Hall,  with  these  words,  No  Petticoat  Govern- 


14  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

ment ;  no  Scotch  Favourite.  An  intemperance  which  pro- 
ceeded so  far  afterwards,  that,  as  the  King  passed  in  his 
chair  to  visit  his  mother  in  an  evening,  the  mob  asked 
him  if  he  was  going  to  suck  ?  The  Princess  herself  was 
obliged  to  discontinue  frequenting  the  theatres,  so  gross 
and  insulting  were  the  apostrophes  with  which  she  was 
saluted  from  the  galleries. 

The  views  of  the  Court  were  so  fully  manifested  after- 
wards, that  no  doubt  can  be  entertained  but  a  plan  had 
been  early  formed  of  carrying  the  prerogative  to  very 
unusual  heights.  The  Princess  was  ardently  fond  of 
power,  and  all  its  appanages  of  observance,  rank,  and 
wealth.  The  deepest  secrecy  and  dissimulation  guarded 
every  avenue  of  her  passions ;  and  close  retirement  was 
adapted  to  these  purposes.  She  could  not  appear  in 
public  (after  the  arrival  of  the  Queen)  as  the  first  woman 
of  the  kingdom  :  her  unpopularity  made  her  pride  tremble  ; 
and  privacy  shrouded  such  hours  as  were  not  calculated 
to  draw  esteem  ;  and  it  contracted  her  expenses.  After 
the  King's  marriage  she  appeared  seldom  or  never  at  St. 
James's,  nor  deigned  to  accompany  the  ceremony  of  the 
coronation.  The  attendance  of  her  ladies  was  dispensed 
with  except  on  drawing-room  days  ;  and  by  degrees  even 
her  maids  of  honour  and  women  of  the  bedchamber  were 
removed  from  her  palace,  where  she  lived  in  a  solitude 
that  would  have  passed  for  the  perfection  of  Christian 
humility  in  the  ages  of  monkish  ignorance.  Jealousy  of 
her  credit  over  her  son  made  her  impose  almost  as  strict 
laws  of  retirement  on  him.  He  was  accessible  to  none 
of  his  Court  but  at  the  stated  hours  of  business  and  cere- 
mony :  nor  was  any  man  but  the  Favourite,  and  the  crea- 
tures with  whom  he  had  garrisoned  the  palace,  allowed  to 
converse  with  the  King.  Affection  had  no  share  in  this 
management. 

The  Princess,  who  was  never  supposed  to  disclose  her 
mind  with  freedom,^  but  on  the  single  topic  of  her  own 

^  Richard  Temple,   Lord  Cobham,   who  had   been  much   engaged   with 
Frederick,  Prince  of  Wales,  being  asked  by  Henrietta,  Lady  Suffolk,  what 


KING  GEORGE  III.  15 

children,  had  often  mentioned  her  eldest  son  with  con- 
tempt ;  and  during  the  life  of  her  husband  had  given  into 
all  his  partiality  for  the  Duke  of  York.  When  her  views 
of  governing  by  her  husband  were  cut  off,  she  applied  to 
the  untutored  inexperience  of  his  heir :  and  the  first  step 
towards  the  influence  she  meditated  was  by  filling  his 
mind  with  suspicions  and  ill  impressions  of  all  mankind. 
His  uncle,  the  Duke  of  Cumberland,  was  made  another 
instrument.  The  young  Prince  had  a  great  appetite :  he 
was  asked  if  he  wished  to  be  as  gross  as  his  uncle  ?  Every 
vice,  every  condescension  was  imputed  to  the  Duke,  that 
the  Prince  might  be  stimulated  to  avoid  them. 

The  Favourite,  who  had  notions  of  honour,  and  was 
ostentatious,  endeavoured  to  give  a  loftier  cast  to  the 
disposition  of  his  pupil,  though  not  to  the  disparagement 
of  the  vassalage  in  which  he  was  to  be  kept.  Lord  Bute 
had  a  little  reading,^  and  affected  learning.  Men  of  genius, 
the  arts  and  artists  were  to  be  countenanced.  The  arts 
might  amuse  the  young  King's  solitary  hours :  authors 
might  defend  the  measures  of  Government,  and  were  sure 
to  pay  for  their  pensions  with  incense,  both  to  their  passive 
and  active  protectors.  The  pedantry  and  artifice  of  these 
shallow  views  served  but  to  produce  ridicule.  Augustus 
fell  asleep  over  drawings  and  medals,  which  were  pushed 
before  him  every  evening ;  and  Maecenas  had  so  little 
knowledge,  and  so  little  taste,  that  his  own  letters  grew 
a  proverb  for  want  of  orthography  ;  and  the  scribblers  he 

was  the  real  character  of  the  Princess,  replied,  '  She  was  the  only  woman  he 
could  never  find  out :  all  he  had  discovered  was,  that  she  hated  those  most 
to  whom  she  paid  most  court.' 

^  This  criticism  of  Lord  Bute  is  not  borne  out  by  facts.  The  fine  collection 
of  pictures  made  by  his  lordship  at  Luton  prove  the  munificence  and  discern- 
ment with  which  he  patronised  painting.  Luton  itself,  the  building,  or  rather 
the  enlargement  of  which  he  is  known  to  have  personally  superintended,  with 
many  faults  had  likewise  many  beauties,  and  was  surpassed  in  taste  by  few 
of  the  mansions  of  that  date,  and  certainly  not  by  Strawberry  Hill.  He  had, 
in  fact,  a  genuine  love  both  of  painting  and  architecture,  and  his  eflbrts  to 
infuse  the  same  into  the  mind  of  his  royal  pupil  did  not  entirely  fail,  for 
George  ni.'s  example  was  unquestionably  a  great  improvement  in  this  respect 
on  his  immediate  predecessors. — L.  M. 


1 6  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

countenanced  were  too  destitute  of  talents  to  raise  his 
character  or  their  own.  The  coins  of  the  King  were  the 
worst  that  had  appeared  for  above  a  century  ;  and  the 
revenues  of  the  Crown  were  so  soon  squandered  in  pur- 
chasing dependants,  that  architecture,  the  darling  art  of 
Lord  Bute,  was  contracted  from  the  erection  of  a  new 
palace  to  altering  a  single  door-case  in  the  drawing-room 
at  St.  James's.  Yet  his  emissaries,  the  Scotch,  were  inde- 
fatigable in  coining  popular  sayings  and  sentences  for  the 
King.  It  was  given  out  that  he  would  suffer  no  money 
to  be  spent  on  elections.  Circumstances  that  recoiled 
with  force,  when  every  one  of  those  aphorisms  were  contra- 
dicted by  practice. 

But  the  chief  engine  to  conciliate  favour  was  the  King's 
piety.  The  Princess,  no  doubt,  intended  it  should  be  real, 
for  she  lived  in  dread  of  a  mistress.  But  mankind  was 
not  inclined  to  think  that  her  morals  could  have  imprinted 
much  devotion  on  the  mind  of  her  son  :  nor  was  any  man 
the  dupe  of  those  professions  but  Seeker,  the  Archbishop, 
who,  for  the  first  days  of  the  reign,  flattered  himself  with 
the  idea  of  becoming  first  minister  in  a  Court  that  hoisted 
the  standard  of  religion.  He  was  unwearied  in  attendance 
at  St.  James's,^  and  in  presenting  bodies  of  clergy  ;  and  his 
assiduity  was  so  bustling  and  assuming  that,  having  pushed 
aside  the  Duke  of  Cumberland  to  get  at  the  King,  his 
Royal  Highness  reprimanded  him  with  a  bitter  taunt. 
The  prelate  soon  discovered  his  mistake.  Nor  were  the 
Princess  or  the  Favourite  inclined  to  trust  the  King  in  the 
hands  of  a  Churchman,  whom  they  knew  so  well,  and 
whose  sanctity  was  as  equivocal  as  their  own. 

As  far  as  could  be  discerned  of  the  King's  natural 
disposition  it  was  humane  and  benevolent.  If  flowing 
courtesy  to  all   men   was  the  habit  of  his  dissimulation, 

^  Archbishop  Seeker  has  been  in  more  than  one  instance  misrepresented  by 
Walpole.  It  is  most  improbable  that  he  should  have  entertained  the  views 
here  ascribed  to  him.  As  the  head  of  the  Church,  it  necessarily  became  his 
duty  to  attend  frequently  at  Court  on  the  commencement  of  a  new  reign,  as 
has  since  happened  to  his  successors  without  their  incurring  any  such  imputa- 
tion.— L.  M. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  17 

at  least  it  was  so  suited  to  his  temper  that  no  gust  of 
passion,  no  words  of  bitterness,  were  ever  known  to  break 
from  him.  He  accepted  services  with  grace  and  appear- 
ance of  feehng  :  and  if  he  forgot  them  with  an  unrestrained 
facihty,  yet  he  never  marked  his  displeasure  with  harsh- 
ness. Silence  served  him  to  bear  with  unwelcome  ministers, 
or  to  part  with  them.  His  childhood  was  tinctured  with 
obstinacy  :  it  was  adopted  at  the  beginning  of  his  reign, 
and  called  firmness,  but  did  not  prove  to  be  his  complexion. 
In  truth,  it  would  be  difficult  to  draw  his  character  in 
positive  colours.  He  had  neither  passions  nor  activity. 
He  resigned  himself  obsequiously  to  the  government  of 
his  mother  and  Lord  Bute  :  learned,  and  even  entered  with 
art  into  the  lessons  they  inspired,  but  added  nothing  of 
his  own.  When  the  task  was  done,  he  relapsed  into 
indifference  and  indolence  till  roused  to  the  next  day's 
part.^ 

The  first  gust  of  faction  that  threatened  the  new  era 
was  an  intended  duel  between  the  Earl  of  Albemarle  ^  and 
General  George  Townshend.^  A  pamphlet  was  published 
against  the  latter,*  reflecting  bitterly  on  the  vanity  with 
which  he  had  assumed  a  principal  share  in  the  conquest  of 
Quebec,  though  the  honour  of  signing  the  capitulation  had 
only  fallen  to  him  by  the  death  of  Wolfe  and  the  wounds 

^  When  Prince  of  Wales,  Scott,  his  sub-preceptor,  reproached  him  with 
inattention  to  his  studies.  The  Prince  pleaded  idleness.  '  Idle  !  sir,'  said 
Scott ;  '  your  brother  Edward  is  idle  ;  but  do  you  call  being  asleep  being 
idle  ? ' 

2  George  Keppel,  third  Earl  of  Albemarle,  a  favourite  of  the  Duke  of 
Cumberland,  and  afterwards  conqueror  of  the  Havannah. 

^  George,  eldest  son  of  Charles,  Lord  Viscount  Townshend  (afterwards 
Marquis  of  Townshend).  His  name  often  appears  in  these  Memoirs.  [Town- 
shend had  served  at  Dettingen,  Fontenoy,  and  Culloden.  He  rose  to  the 
rank  of  a  General  in  the  army  on  20th  November  1782,  and  became  a  Field- 
Marshal  on  30th  July  1796.  He  held  the  post  of  Lord-Lieutenant  of  Ireland 
from  1767  to  1772,  and  on  31st  October  1787  was  created  Marquis  Townshend. 
He  died  on  14th  September  1807,  aged  eighty-three. — E.] 

*  A  Letter  to  the  Honourable  Brigadier-Gerieral,  Commander-in-Chief  of 
His  Majesty's  Forces  in  Canada  (London,  1760,  8vo).  A  pamphlet,  entitled  A 
Refutation  of  the  Letter,  etc.  (London,  1760,  8vo),  was  published  by  *an 
Officer  '  in  reply. — E. 

VOL.   T.  B 


1 8  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

of  Monckton  ;  an  honour  so  little  merited  that  he  had 
done  his  utmost  to  traverse  Wolfe's  plans.  The  pamphlet, 
too,  set  forth  the  justice  of  taking  such  freedom  with  a 
man  whose  ill-nature  had  seized  every  opportunity  of 
ridiculing  those  he  disliked  by  exhibiting  their  personal 
defects  in  caricatures,  which  he  had  been  the  first  to  apply 
to  politics.  His  uncle  the  Duke  of  Newcastle,  the  Duke 
of  Cumberland,  and  Mr.  Fox,  had  been  the  chief  objects 
of  those  buffoon  satires.  The  pamphlet  was  certainly 
written  under  the  direction  of  the  last,  and  could  not  fail 
to  be  agreeable  to  the  partisans  of  the  second.  It  wounded 
so  deeply  that  Townshend,  in  the  first  blindness  of  his 
rage,  concluded  it  came  from  the  person  he  hated  most 
and  had  most  offended — that  was  the  Duke  of  Cumber- 
land ;  and  as  Lord  Albemarle  was  the  first  favourite  of 
his  Royal  Highness,  thither  Townshend  addressed  his 
resentment,  though  no  man  was  less  an  author  than  the 
Earl.  A  challenge  passed,  was  accepted,  and  prevented 
in  time  by  Townshend's  want  of  caution. 

On  the  eighteenth  of  November  the  Parliament  met. 
Many  Tories,  though  they  had  received  no  formal  invitation, 
appeared  at  the  Cockpit  ^  to  hear  the  King's  speech  read. 
It  was  composed,  as  usual,  by  Lord  Hardwicke,  was  long 
and  dull,  and  had  received  additions  from  Pitt.  On  the 
Address  Beckford  proposed  to  push  the  war  with  more 
vigour,  the  end  of  the  last  campaign  having,  he  said,  been 
languid.  Pitt  fired  at  this  reproach  from  his  friend,  though 
certainly  not  levelled  at  him,  and  asked  Beckford  what 
new  species  of  extravagance  he  wished  for  ?  The  Address 
from  Oxford  had  other  objects  in  view.  They  boasted 
openly  of  their  attachment  to  Monarchy.  As  all  places 
were  already  filled  with  Whigs,  the  Court  was  forced  to 
increase  the  establishment  in  order  to  admit  their  devotees. 
The  King's  Bedchamber  received  six  or  eight  additional 

^  The  Cockpit,  erected  at  Whitehall  by  Henry  vni.,  was  altered  into  the 
Privy  Council  Office  at  the  end  of  the  seventeenth  century.  Though  used  as 
Government  offices,  it  long  retained  the  name  of  the  Cockpit.  See  Memoirs 
and  Corresponden>ce  of  Francis  Horner  (1843),  vol.  i.  pp.  182-3,  ^^^  The 
Grevilk  Memoirs,  ist  series  (1874),  vol.  ii.  p.  70. — E. 


KING  GEORGE  III. 


19 


Grooms  and  seven  Gentlemen.  Most  of  the  late  King's 
were  continued  ;  the  King's  own  were  joined  with  them  ; 
the  rest  were  taken  from  the  Tories. 

The  Duke  of  Richmond/  haughty  and  young,  was 
offended  that  his  cousin,  Colonel  Keppel,^  was  removed 
from  Gentleman  of  the  Horse,  which  the  King  destined 
for  one  of  his  own  servants.  The  Duke  asked  an  audience  ; 
but  began  it  with  objecting  to  the  distinction  paid  to  Sir 
Henry  Erskine.^  This  so  much  disgusted,  that  the  King 
would  not  hear  the  Duke  on  the  subject  of  Keppel.  On 
cooler  thoughts,  Lord  Bute  was  sent  to  the  Duke  to  offer 
him  to  be  of  the  King's  Bedchamber.  He  accepted  it  on 
condition  that  Keppel  should  remain  Gentleman  of  the 
Horse,  which  was  likewise  granted.  But  this  pacification 
lasted  few  days.  Lord  Fitzmaurice,^  a  favourite  of  Lord 
Bute,  was  made  Equerry  to  the  King  ;  though  inferior  in 
military  rank  to  Lord  George  Lenox  ^  and  Charles  Fitz- 
roy,^  brothers  of  the  Dukes  of  Richmond  and  Grafton. 
The  latter'^  had  been  of  the  Bedchamber  to  the  King,  when 
Prince,  but  had  quitted  it  from  dislike  of  court  attendance, 

^  Charles  Lennox,  third  Duke  of  Richmond. 

-  William  Keppel,  a  younger  son  of  William,  second  Earl  of  Albemarle,  by 
Lady  Anne  Lennox,  daughter  of  Charles,  first  Duke  of  Richmond.  He 
served  under  his  brother  in  the  expedition  to  the  Havannah.  He  became  a 
Lieutenant-General  26th  May  1772,  was  appointed  Commander-in-Chief  in 
Ireland  in  December  1773,  and  died  on  1st  March  1782. — E. 

^  There  is  a  slight  inaccuracy  in  this  statement.  The  Duke's  resentment  was 
not  so  generous.  The  object  of  his  interview  with  the  King  was  to  promote 
his  own  interest,  not  that  of  Colonel  Keppel.  See  the  Duke  of  Richmond's 
letter  of  21st  June  1783,  in  the  Appendix  to  Dodington's  Diary. — L.  M. 

*  William  Petty,  Lord  Fitzmaurice,  eldest  son  of  the  Earl  of  Shelburne, 
whom  he  succeeded  in  that  title  May  17,  1761  ;  and  by  which  title  he  will  be 
frequently  mentioned  in  the  following  Memoirs. 

^  Lord  George  Henry  Lennox  was  the  fourth  son  of  Charles,  second  Duke 
of  Richmond.  He  became  a  General  in  the  army  25th  October  1793,  and  died 
on  22nd  March  1805.— E. 

6  Charles  Fitzroy,  second  son  of  Lord  Augustus  Fitzroy,  second  son  of 
Charles,  second  Duke  of  Grafton,  and  only  brother  of  Augustus  Henry,  third 
Duke  of  Grafton.  He  distinguished  himself  at  the  battle  of  Minden,  where  he 
served  on  the  staff  of  Prince  Ferdinand  of  Brunswick.  He  was  created  Lord 
Southampton  in  1780,  and  died  on  the  21st  March  1797,  aged  sixty. — L.M. 

''  Augustus  Henry,  Duke  of  Grafton,  afterwards  First  Lord  of  the  Treasury. 


20  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

and  disgusted  with  the  haughty  statelincss  affected  by  Lord 
Bute.  Richmond  and  Grafton  were  much  of  an  age  ;  each 
regarded  himself  as  Prince  of  the  Blood ;  and  emulation  soon 
created  a  sort  of  rivalship  between  them.  The  Duke  of 
Richmond's  figure  was  noble,  and  his  countenance  singularly 
handsome.  The  Duke  of  Grafton  was  low,  but  manly,  and 
with  much  grace  in  his  address.  The  passions  of  both  were 
strong,  but  of  the  first,  ardent ;  of  the  latter,  slow  and  inflex- 
ible. His  temper  was  not  happy;  but  the  Duke  of  Rich- 
mond's, which  was  thought  worse,  because  more  impetuous, 
was  pliant,  and  uncommonly  easy  and  accommodating 
in  his  family  and  society.  Both  were  thought  avaricious  ; 
but  the  latter  very  unjustly,  generally  approaching  nearer 
to  the  opposite  extreme  of  profusion.  His  parts,  too, 
were  quicker  and  more  subtle  than  Grafton's,  and  more 
capable  of  application,  though  his  elocution  was  much 
inferior.  The  Duke  of  Grafton  had  a  grace  and  dignity 
in  his  utterance  that  commanded  attention,  and  dazzled  in 
lieu  of  matter  ;  and  his  temper  being  shy  and  reserved,  he 
was  supposed  to  be  endued  with  more  steadiness  than  his 
subsequent  conduct  displayed.  Neither  of  them  wanted 
obstinacy  ;  but  their  obstinacy  not  flowing  from  system, 
it  was  in  both  a  torrent  more  impetuous  in  its  course  than 
in  its  duration. 

The  Duke  of  Grafton  made  a  decent  representation  to 
the  King,  on  the  wrong  done  to  his  brother,  and  demanded 
rank  for  him.  The  other  Duke  carried  a  violent  memorial, 
and  commented  on  it  in  a  manner  which,  some  years  after- 
wards, he  found  had  never  been  forgotten  or  forgiven. 
The  next  day  he  resigned  the  Bedchamber,  but  not  his 
regiment.  In  a  few  days  he  repented  this  step,  and  went 
to  Lord  Bute  to  explain  away  his  resignation,  which,  he 
said,  might  not  be  known.  Lord  Bute  replied  all  the 
world  knew  it.  The  Duke,  thinking  this  coldness  pro- 
ceeded from  a  suspicion  that  he  was  influenced  by  Fox,^ 

1  Henry  Fox  had  married  Lady  Caroline  Lenox,  eldest  daughter  of  Charles, 
late  Duke  of  Richmond,  without  the  consent  of  her  father  and  mother,  who 
were  some  years  unreconciled  to  her. 


I  KING  GEORGE  III.  21 

his  brother-in-law,  disclaimed  all  connexion  with  him,  and 
said  he  had  never  approved  his  sister's  marriage.  Lord 
Bute,  who  even  then  probably  had  views  of  Fox's  support 
as  a  counterbalance  to  Pitt,  replied  that  Mr.  Fox's  alliance 
could  be  a  disgrace  to  no  man  ;  as  he  must  always  be  of 
great  use  and  weight  in  this  country.  Yet  the  Duke's 
youth  and  frankness  made  him  avow  what  he  had  said  to 
Fox  himself,  in  the  presence  of  Lord  Albemarle,  who, 
though  not  much  older,  had  far  more  worldly  cunning,  and 
no  doubt  reported  the  conversation  to  his  master,  the 
Duke  of  Cumberland  ;  for  Richmond  and  Albemarle, 
though  first  cousins,  were  no  friends  ;  and  the  latter  pos- 
sessed all  the  arts  of  a  court.  The  Duke,  rebuffed  by  the 
favourite,  next  consulted  the  Duke  of  Cumberland,  who 
told  him  prudently  that  he  was  sorry  the  Duke  of  Rich- 
mond, at  twenty-three,  had  quarrelled  with  the  King  at 
twenty-two  ;  and  advised  him  to  retire  into  the  country, 
which  he  did.  The  effects  of  these  squabbles  will  appear 
hereafter,  which  made  it  proper  to  state  them  here. 

The  King's  revenue  was  settled  and  fixed  to  eight  hun- 
dred thousand  pounds  a  year,  certain.  In  the  late  reign 
any  overplus  was  to  accrue  to  the  Crown,  but  had  ever 
produced  so  trifling  an  augmentation,  that  the  present 
boasted  restriction,  which  was  often  quoted  as  one  great 
merit  of  the  new  Government,  was  not  worth  mentioning. 
It  is  true  this  revenue  was  by  no  means  ample,  consider- 
ing the  large  incumbrances  with  which  it  was  loaded. 
The  Duke  of  Cumberland's  annuity  (exclusive  of  the 
Parliamentary  grant  of  twenty-five  thousand  pounds 
a  year)  was  fifteen  thousand  pounds  ;  Princess  Amalie's 
twelve  thousand.  The  King's  brothers  were  to  be  pro- 
vided for  out  of  it ;  so  was  a  future  Queen ;  and  the 
Princess  Dowager's  jointure  was  of  fifty  thousand  pounds 
a  year  from  the  same  fund.  Yet,  though  her  dower  was 
so  great — though  she  reduced  her  family,  and  lived  in  a 
privacy  that  exceeded  economy,  and  though  she  had  a 
third  of  the  Duchy  of  Cornwall,  which  produced  four 
thousand  pounds  a  year  more,  her  passion  for  money  was 


22  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

so  great  that  she  obtained  an  additional  annuity  of  ten 
thousand  pounds  a  year  from  her  son.^  The  Electorate 
suffered  for  these  exigencies  of  the  Crown.  Whatever 
money  could  be  drawn  from  thence  was  sunk  in  the  privy 
purse,  which  was  entirely  under  the  direction  of  Lord  Bute. 
The  Earl  of  Litchfield,'-  a  leader  of  the  Tories,  was 
added  to  the  King's  Bedchamber,  as  the  Earl  of  Oxford,^ 
and    Lord    Bruce  ^   had    been    before,   with   the    Scotch 

^  It  was  given  under  pretence  of  paying  the  late  Prince  her  husband's  debts. 
Whether  she  did  discharge  any  of  them  I  neither  know  nor  deny ;  some,  I 
have  heard,  remained  unpaid,  not  only  at  her  death,  but  in  the  year  1788. 

"^  George  Henry  Lee,  Earl  of  Lichfield,  High  Steward,  and  afterwards 
Chancellor  of  the  University  of  Oxford,  had  been  a  zealous  partisan  of  the 
House  of  Stuart,  of  which  he  was  an  illegitimate  branch,  his  grandfather, 
Edward,  the  first  Earl,  having  married  a  daughter  of  Charles  11.  by  the 
Duchess  of  Cleveland.  Lord  Lichfield  was  too  much  a  man  of  pleasure 
to  shine  in  politics,  or  he  might  at  this  crisis  have  taken  a  leading  part  in 
public  affairs,  for  his  abilities  were  considerable.  The  following  ironical 
character  of  him  is  almost  the  only  instance  in  which  Wilkes  has  described  an 
opponent  with  candour  and  truth  :  '  The  Captain  (Giddy)  was  a  sprightly 
fellow  in  his  youth,  and  is  remembered  about  twenty  years  ago  to  have  made 
a  very  good  speech  or  two  at  some  of  your  public  meetings  in  London.  From 
this  time,  however,  the  figure  he  hath  made  in  the  world  hath  not  been  much 
to  his  credit.  The  chief  of  his  company,  till  within  these  two  years,  have 
been  parsons  and  country  squires.  They  used  to  lead  him  about  to  races, 
cock-matches,  and  country  clubs,  where  he  was  apt  sometimes  to  drink  a  little 
too  freely.  A  course  of  life  of  this  sort  brought  on  a  swimming  in  his  head, 
so  that  he  hath  frequently  been  supposed  not  to  be  sensible  where  he  was,  or 
what  he  was  about.  Hence  he  hath  been  known  in  the  late  times  of  party 
violence,  in  the  same  sort  of  company,  and  within  a  few  days  of  each  other, 
to  drink  Exclusion  to  the  House  of  Hanover,  and  confusion  to  all  Jacobites.' 
— North  Briton,  No.  29.  Lord  Lichfield  died  in  1772.  The  title  did  not  go 
beyond  the  third  generation,  though  the  first  Earl  had  thirteen  sons,  of  whom 
six  lived  to  manhood. — L.  M. 

^  Edward  Harley,  Earl  of  Oxford  and  Earl  Mortimer,  was  grandson  of  the 
Lord  Treasurer's  brother,  on  whom  the  title  had  been  specially  limited,  on 
failure  of  issue  male  in  the  direct  line.     He  died  in  1 790,  aged  sixty-four.  — L.  M. 

•1  Thomas  Brudenell,  Baron  Bruce  of  Tottenham,  fourth  son  of  George,  third 
Earl  of  Cardigan,  by  Lady  Elizabeth  Bruce,  eldest  daughter  of  Thomas,  second 
Earl  of  Ailesbury.  Upon  the  death  of  his  maternal  uncle,  Charles,  third  and 
last  Earl  of  Ailesbury  (cr.  1664)  in  February  1747,  he  succeeded  to  the  barony 
of  Bruce  (cr.  1746)  and  the  bulk  of  the  Ailesbury  property.  He  assumed  the 
additional  surname  of  Bruce,  which  was  confirmed  to  him  by  the  King's  sign- 
manual,  9th  December  1767,  was  created  Earl  of  Ailesbury  8th  June  1776, 
and  died  19th  April  1814,  aged  eighty-five. — E. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  23 

Earls  of  March^  and  Eglinton.^  The  Lord  Viscount 
Middleton,^  an  Irish  Peer,  was  the  first  who,  in  the  House 
of  Commons,  here  broached  a  hint  of  jealousy  against  the 
channel  in  which  Court  favour  seemed  to  flow.  He  was 
ridiculed  for  it  by  Charles  Townshend  ;  but  the  spirit  of 
dissatisfaction  had  been  infused  into  the  former  by  the 
Duke  of  Newcastle,  who  openly  censured  the  new  par- 
tiality to  the  Tories.  Partiality  there  was,  but  the  griev- 
ance came  with  an  ill  grace  from  Newcastle.  Stone,*  sus- 
pected for  more  than  a  Tory,  had  been  placed  by  him  as 
preceptor  to  the  King  ;  Lord  Mansfield  had  been  his 
bosom  favourite  ;  and  to  gratify  that  favourite,  the  exten- 
sion of  the  Habeas  Corpus  had  been  prevented.  To  gain 
the  Tories  had  been  a  prudent  measure,  but  their  prin- 
ciples were  still  more  welcome  to  the  Court  than  their 
votes.  Having  only  votes  to  offer,  and  neithernumbers 
nor  abilities,  they  brought  much  discredit  on  their  patron, 
and  little  strength  to  his  assistance. 

In  Ireland  the  prospect  was  not  more  promising.  By 
Poyning's  law  the  Privy  Council  of  Ireland  are  to  transmit 
hither  all  heads  of  bills,  particularly  of  money-bills.  This 
latter  was  omitted  by  the  intrigues  of  the  Primate,  courting 
popularity.     The  bills  were  sent  back  with  a  severe  repri- 

1  William  Douglas,  third  Earl  of  March.  He  succeeded  his  cousin  Charles 
as  fourth  Duke  of  Queensberry  in  August  1788,  and  was  subsequently  known 
as  'Old  Q.'  He  died  at  his  house  in  Piccadilly  (now  No.  138)  on  23rd 
December  1810,  in  his  eighty-sixth  year. — E. 

2  Alexander  Montgomery,  Earl  of  Eglinton,  an  intelligent,  public-spirited 
nobleman.  Scotland  is  greatly  indebted  to  him  for  the  agricultural  improve- 
ments he  introduced  upon  his  estates  in  Ayrshire,  and  still  more  for  the  benefit 
of  his  example  on  other  large  landed  proprietors.  He  was  mortally  wounded 
in  an  accidental  scuffle  with  an  officer  of  Excise,  whom  he  found  poaching  in 
his  park,  and  died  on  the  25th  October  1769.  The  murderer  was  convicted, 
and  only  escaped  execution  by  hanging  himself  in  prison.  Wood's  Peerage 
of  Scotland,  vol.  i. — L.  ]\I. 

2  George  Brodrick,  third  Viscount  Middleton,  M.P.  for  Ashburton  from 
1754  to  1761,  New  Shoreham  from  1761  until  his  death,  which  occurred  on 
22nd  September  1765,  in  his  thirty-fifth  year.  He  married,  on  ist  May  1752, 
Albinia,  eldest  daughter  of  the  Hon.  Thomas  Townshend,  and  great-niece  of 
the  Duke  of  Newcastle. — E. 

*  Andrew  Stone,  of  whom  see  more  in  the  preceding  reign,  and  infra. 


24  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

mand  for  the  omission  of  a  money-bill.  Mr.  Pitt  alone 
took  up  the  defence  of  the  Irish  Commons,  and  would  not 
sign  the  message,  which  thirty-four  others  of  the  English 
Privy  Council  who  were  present  signed.  The  King 
thanked  the  Duke  of  Bedford  for  supporting  his  preroga- 
tive, but  the  Privy  Council  of  Ireland  wrote  angry  letters 
to  the  Duke  and  his  minister  Rigby,  telling  them  that 
they  must  not  come  into  that  kingdom  again.  The  Duke, 
a  little  before,  had  been  challenged  even  in  print  by  a  mad 
Lord  Clanrickard,^  whose  letter  being  complained  of  by 
his  Grace,  the  Council  here  ordered  the  Attorney-General 
to  prosecute  the  Earl :  Rigby,"  too,  sent  him  a  challenge, 
which  he  did  not  accept.  The  Lords  Justices  sent  over  a 
strong  remonstrance  in  vindication  of  their  conduct,  and 
there  the  matter  ended  for  the  present  ;  but  in  the  begin- 
ning of  the  next  year  the  Lords  Justices  renewed  the 
attack  on  their  Governor,  and  he  and  Rigby  were  burned 
in  effigy.  Mr.  Pitt  interposed,  and  prevailed  to  have  a 
temperate  memorial  sent  to  the  Justices,  arguing  the  point 
with  them,  and  to  that  he  offered  to  set  his  little  name, 
which  was  done.  The  Lords  Justices  submitted,  but  with 
threats  from  the  Primate  of  resigning  his  part  of  the 
government.  Nor  yet  did  they  send  a  new  bill,  but  a 
plan  for  raising  the  money  already  voted.  Lord  Clan- 
rickard,  in  answer  to  Rigby 's  challenge,  which  had  been 
printed  and  dispersed  in  Ireland,  replied  in  print  likewise, 
excusing  his  not  appearing  at  Holyhead,  the  appointed 
rendezvous,  on  account  of  the  prosecution  directed  against 
him,  though  the  prosecution  in  date  was  subsequent  to 
the  challenge  by  two  months.  The  Earl  affirmed  that  he 
had  proposed  to  Mr.  Rigby  a  new  place  of  meeting ;  but 
a  year  or  two  afterwards,  on  an  accidental  journey  of 
Rigby  to  Ireland,  the  earl  seemed  very  glad  that  an  inter- 
position was  made,  and  the  quarrel  accommodated.  The 
ill  humour  of  the  country,  however,  determined  the  Duke 

^  Smith  de  Burgh,  Earl  of  Clanrickard. 

-  Richard  Rigby  of  Mistley,  near  Manningtree,  in  Essex,  Secretary  to  the 
Duke  of  Bedford. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  25 

of  Bedford  to  quit  the  Government,  after  having  amply- 
gratified  his  family  and  dependants  with  pensions.  The 
Earl  of  Kildare,  for  taking  no  part  in  these  divisions,  was 
rewarded  with  a  marquisate. 

Foreign  affairs  fluctuated  with  their  old  vicissitude. 
The  Russians  and  Austrians  made  themselves  masters  of 
Berlin,  and  treated  it  with  more  lenity  than  could  be 
expected  from  such  barbarians  and  incensed  enemies. 
But  they  relinquished  it  in  a  few  days ;  and  before  the 
close  of  the  year  the  King's  fortune  and  arms  recovered 
their  lustre  by  a  signal  victory,  which  he  gained  in  person 
near  Torgau  over  his  great  competitor  in  glory,  Marshal 
Daun,  who  was  wounded  in  the  thigh,  and  carried  from 
the  field  ;  a  circumstance  that  did  not  impeach  his  fame, 
as  the  loss  of  the  day  was  attributed  to  his  absence. 

Yet  this  victory,  shining  as  it  was,  could  not  counter- 
balance the  new  spirit  that  was  gone  forth  in  England  to 
the  disparagement  of  the  war.  Lord  Hardwicke  had  long 
distasted  it;  and  under  his  countenance  had  been  published 
a  Tract,  setting  forth  the  burthen  and  ill-policy  of  our 
German  measures.  It  was  called  Cotisiderations  on  the 
German  War;  was  shrewdly  and  ably  written,  and  had 
more  operation  in  working  a  change  on  the  minds  of  men, 
than  perhaps  ever  fell  to  the  lot  of  a  pamphlet.  The 
author  was  one  Mauduit,^  formerly  a  Dissenting  teacher, 
and  at  that  time  a  factor  at  Blackwell  Hall.  How  agree- 
able his  politics  were  to  the  interior  of  the  Court,  soon 
appeared  by  a  place  being  bestowed  on  him  by  Lord 
Bute.  Still,  however,  the  Favourite  left  the  contest  to  be 
managed  by  other  hands  ;  and  he  had  acted  wisely  to  have 
adhered  to  that  plan.  A  new  and  formidable  expedition 
had  been  preparing.  Newcastle  and  Hardwicke  had 
quitted  the  Council  because  they  could  not  prevail  to 
have  it  laid  aside.     Yet  it  was  postponed  for  some  time. 

^  Israel  Mauduit,  on  leaving  the  ministry,  became  a  London  merchant  and 
agent  for  the  province  of  Massachusetts.  He  was  the  author  of  several 
anonymous  pamphlets,  and  died  on  14th  June  1787,  aged  seventy-nine.  See 
Nichols's  Lii.  Anec.  (1814),  vol.  viii.  pp.  465-466.— E. 


26  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

Pitt,  in  the  House  of  Commons,  taking  notice  of  the  pacific 
spirit  that  he  saw  arising,  said,  '  Some  are  for  keeping 
Canada  ;  some,  Guadaloupe ;  who  will  tell  me  which  I 
shall  be  hanged  for  not  keeping?' 

On  opening  the  ways  and  means  for  the  ensuing  year, 
George  Grcnville  opposed  the  intended  tax  on  ale  and 
beer  ;  the  first  overt  act  of  his  disagreement  with  Mr.  Pitt. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  27 


CHAPTER    III 

New  Promotions. — Pitt  and  Grenville. — Aggrandisement  of  Lord  Bute. — His 
haughtiness. — Sir  Henry  Erskine,  Home,  and  Worseley. — Debt  to  the 
Chancery  of  Hanover. — Secret  Article  in  the  Treaty  with  the  Landgrave 
of  Hesse. — Extravagance  of  the  War. — New  Tenure  of  the  Judges. — 
Approaching  general  Election. — Flagrant  Corruption. — Lord  Bute  appears 
more  ostensibly  in  the  character  of  Minister. — Mr.  Pitt  and  Lord  Holder- 

ness. — Injudicious    Conduct   of    Lord    Bute Ministerial    Changes.  —A 

strange  Exaltation. — The  Duke  of  Rutland. — Mr.  Legge  and  the  King. — 
General  Conway. — Overtures  by  France  for  Peace. 

The  new  year  opened  with  promotions.  The  Lord 
Keeper  Henley  was  made  Lord  Chancellor.  Lord  Den- 
bigh/ a  creature  of  the  Favourite,  Master  of  the  Harriers  ; 
and  George  Grenville  ^  was  called  to  the  Cabinet  Council. 
Pitt  had  ever  treated  him  with  contempt,  and  little 
expected  to  find  him  vain  or  daring  enough  to  enter  the 
lists  against  him.  Grenville's  conceit  of  himself  was  by 
no  means  measured  by  the  standard  of  modesty.  His 
ambition  was  equal  to  Pitt's  ;  and  his  plodding,  methodic 
genius  made  him  take  the  spirit  of  detail  for  ability. 
Avarice,  which  he  possessed  in  no  less  proportion  than 
his  other  passions,  concurred  to  lead  him  from  a  master 

^  Basil  Fielding,  Earl  of  Denbigh,  Lord  of  the  Bedchamber. 

"  Second  son  of  Richard  Grenville  of  Wotton  Underwood,  Bucks,  by 
Hester,  second  daughter  of  Sir  Richard  Temple,  Bart.,  of  Stowe,  created 
Countess  Temple  in  1749.  His  eldest  brother,  Richard,  Earl  Temple,  was  a 
man  of  unbounded  ambition  and  a  great  talent  for  intrigue.  His  sister  Hester 
married  William  Pitt,  on  6th  November  1754,  and  was  created  Baroness 
Chatham,  5th  October  1761. 

He  held  the  post  of  First  Lord  of  the  Treasury  from  April  1763  to  July  1765. 
He  was  an  obstinate  and  unpopular  minister,  and  his  administration  was  one 
series  of  blunders.  So  obnoxious  did  he  make  himself  to  the  King,  that  George 
is  said  to  have  declared  to  Colonel  Fitzroy,  '  I  would  rather  see  the  devil  in 
my  closet  than  Mr.  Grenville  '  (Lord  Albemarle's  Metnoirs  of  the  Marquis  of 
Rockingham,  vol.  ii.  50). — E. 


28  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

who  browbeat  and  treated  him  superciliously  to  worship 
the  rising  sun.  Lord  Bute  was  in  want  of  tools  ;  and  it 
was  a  double  prize  to  acquire  them  from  his  rival's 
shop. 

But  Fortune,  had  he  known  how  to  use  her  gifts,  was 
kinder  to  the  Favourite  than  his  own  politics.  His  wife's 
father,  old  Wortley  Montagu,  died  at  this  time,  and  left 
to  her  and  her  second  son  a  fortune  that,  at  four  per  cent, 
was  estimated  at  one  million  three  hundred  and  forty 
thousand  pounds.  This  was  the  third  death  within  twelve 
months  that  happened  to  aggrandise  Lord  Bute.  The 
decease  of  his  uncle,  the  Duke  of  Argyle,^  left  Scotland 
open  to  his  power  ;  and  that  of  the  late  King  put  the 
Crown  itself  into  his  hands.  The  estate  of  his  father-in-law 
was  all  he  was  qualified  to  enjoy.  What  could  be  expected 
from  a  boy  ^  locked  up  from  the  converse  of  mankind, 
governed  by  a  mother  still  more  retired,  who  was  under 
the  influence  of  a  man  that  had  passed  his  life  in  solitude, 
and  was  too  haughty  to  admit  to  his  familiarity  but  half  a 
dozen  silly  authors  and  flatterers  ?     Sir   Henry  Erskine,^ 

1  Archibald  Campbell,  Duke  of  Argyle,  died  suddenly,  March  15,  1761. 
[Walpole  is  not  quite  accurate:  the  Duke  died  a  month  later,  i.e.  on  the 
15th  of  April  1 79 1.  'He  was  abroad  in  the  morning,  was  seized  with  a 
palpitation  after  dinner,  and  was  dead  before  the  surgeon  could  arrive. 
There 's  the  crown  of  Scotland,  too,  fallen  on  my  Lord  Bute's  head ' 
(Walpole's  Letters  (1857),  iii.  396).— E.] 

^  The  King. 

^  Sir  Henry  Erskine,  though  a  moderate  poet,  was  not  meanly  accomplished. 
He  cultivated  literature,  and  was  a  very  lively  companion.  He  spoke 
frequently  in  the  House  of  Commons,  and  always  fluently  and  with  spirit, 
but  in  a  style  better  suited  to  the  hustings  than  to  a  deliberative  assembly. 
His  career  was  singular.  He  was  the  second  son  of  Sir  John  Erskine,  Bart. , 
of  Alva,  and  succeeded  to  his  title  on  the  death  of  his  brother,  Major  Sir 
Charles  Erskine,  at  Hoist,  just  before  the  battle  of  Lafeldt.  He  accompanied 
the  expedition  to  L' Orient,  as  Deputy  Quartermaster-General  of  the  Forces, 
under  his  uncle  General  St.  Clair.  Devoting  himself  afterwards  to  politics, 
he  shared  the  proscription  which  fell  on  the  adherents  of  Leicester  House, 
and  was  dismissed  the  service.  The  new  reign  amply  restored  his  fortunes. 
With  his  commission  he  soon  received  the  command  of  the  Royal  Scots  ;  and 
in  four  years  he  had  already  attained  the  rank  of  Lieutenant-General,  when 
he  died,  in  1765,  in  middle  life.  His  marriage  with  Miss  Wedderburn, 
little  as  it  promised  at  the  time  of  worldly  advantage,  brought  wealth  and 


KING  GEORGE  III.  29 

a  military  poet,  Home/  a  tragedy-writing  parson,  and 
Worseley,^  a  rider  of  the  great  horse  and  architect,  were 
his  principal  confidants.  The  nation  was  soon  governed 
accordingly.  And  yet  it  was  not  the  nation's  fault  if  it 
did  not  receive  the  yoke  even  from  this  Junto  ! 

No  trouble  was  given  to  the  Government  by  the  old 
Parliament,  which  still  subsisted,  and  continued  to  lend 
all  facilities  to  the  progress  of  the  war.  An  estimate  of 
three  hundred  thousand  pounds,  due  to  the  Chancery  of 
Hanover  for  forage  for  the  use  of  Hanoverians,  Prussians, 
and  Hessians,  was  voted  to  be  paid,  without  a  division, 
though  not  without  some  comments.  Sir  Francis  Dash- 
wood,  Cooke,3  Coventry,'^  and  Beckford  ^  opposed  it. 
Coventry  said  with  a  sneer  he  was  glad  so  just  a  debt 
was  demanded  before  the  nation  was  bankrupt,  and 
unable  to  discharge  it.  Beckford  imputed  the  extravag- 
ance of  the  war  (which  indeed  was  notorious)  to  the 
Duke  of  Newcastle,  who,  he  supposed,  intended  to  over- 
turn Mr.  Pitt's  system,  and  prevent  the  continuation  of 

rank  into  his  family ;  the  earldom  and  property  of  her  brother,  Lord 
Chancellor  Rosslyn,  having  devolved  subsequently  on  their  eldest  son,  owing 
to  the  death  of  that  nobleman  and  his  brother,  General  Wedderburn,  without 
issue. — L.  M. 

^  John  Home,  the  author  of  Douglas,  succeeded  Robert  Blair,  the  author  of 
The  Grave,  as  minister  of  Athelstaneford,  in  East  Lothian.  He  subsequently 
became  private  secretary  to  Lord  Bute,  and  tutor  of  the  Prince  of  Wales, 
who,  on  his  accession  to  the  throne  as  George  iii.,  gave  him  a  pension  of 
;^300  a  year.  He  died  at  Merchiston,  near  Edinburgh,  on  5th  September 
1808,  in  his  eighty-sixth  year.  Mackenzie's  edition  of  The  Works  of  John 
Ho>?ie,  Edinburgh,  1824,  8vo,  was  reviewed  by  Sir  Walter  Scott  in  the 
Quarterly  iox  ]\xnQ  1827,  pp.  167-216. — E. 

2  Thomas  Worseley,  Surveyor- General  of  the  Board  of  Works,  [of  Hoving- 
ham  Hall,  near  Malton,  in  the  North  Riding  of  Yorkshire.  He  was  M.P.  for 
Oxford  1761-8,  for  Callington  1768-74,  and  died  13th  December  1778. — E.] 

^  George  Cooke,  prothonotary  of  the  Common  Pleas,  and  member  for 
Middlesex.  Walpole  calls  him  elsewhere  a  '  pompous  Jacobite.'  He 
conducted  the  celebrated  Westminster  Petition  against  Lord  Trentham  in 
1751  ;  afterwards  attaching  himself  to  Mr.  Pitt,  he  was  appointed  joint  Pay- 
master-General in  1766,  and  died  in  1768. — L.  M. 

^  Thomas  Coventry,  member  for  Bridport.  A  barrister  and  director  of 
the  South  Sea  Company.  He  was  son  of  Thomas  Coventry,  who  was 
brother  of  William,  fifth  Earl  of  Coventry. — L.  M. 

^  Alderman  William  Beckford  of  Jamaica,  member  for  the  City  of  London. 


30  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

the  war  by  the  excess  of  the  expense  ;  and  he  commended 
the  management  of  the  Treasury  during  the  short  time  in 
which  it  had  been  in  the  Duke  of  Devonshire's  hands. 
Legge^  defended  the  measure,  and  both  Newcastle's  and 
Devonshire's  administrations.  Pitt  was  confined  with  the 
gout,  and  not  present. 

In  the  last  treaty  with  the  Landgrave  of  Hesse  had 
been  stipulated  a  secret  article  of  indemnification  to  that 
country.  Many  sums  had  been  allowed  to  them  to  avoid 
the  appearance  in  public  of  the  article  itself  Mr.  Pitt 
had  at  once  granted  them  sixty  thousand  pounds  on 
that  score.  Yet  now  at  last  was  Administration  forced 
to  lay  before  Parliament  a  demand  of  four  hundred 
thousand  pounds  for  indemnification  to  the  Landgravate. 
Legge,  who  knew  himself  fallen  into  disgrace  with  Lord 
Bute,  refused  to  make  the  motion,  on  which  he  received 
intimation  that  he  must  resign.  Lord  Winchelsea  ^  said 
Legge  had  had  more  masters  than  any  man  in  England, 
and  had  never  left  one  with  a  character.     Lord  Barring- 

^  Henry  Bilson  Legge,  the  fourth  son  of  William,  first  Earl  of  Dartmouth, 
was  at  one  time  private  secretary  to  Sir  Robert  Walpole.  After  holding 
several  minor  offices  he  became  Treasurer  of  the  Navy  in  April  1749,  and 
was  thrice  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer,  viz.  from  April  1754  to  November 
1755,  November  1756  to  April  1757,  and  July  1757  to  March  1761.  He 
died  on  23rd  August  1764,  aged  fifty-six.  Though  a  poor  speaker  he  was  an 
able  man  of  business.  Pitt  called  him  'the  favourite  child  of  the  Whigs,' 
and  Sir  Robert  Walpole  had  a  high  opinion  of  his  shrewdness  and  common 
sense. — E. 

^  Daniel  Finch,  Earl  of  Winchelsea  and  Nottingham,  Knight  of  the 
Garter.  Lord  Winchelsea  is  one  of  the  few  statesmen  of  the  reign  of 
George  il.  whose  character  is  worthy  of  a  purer  age.  He  was  the  son  of 
Lord  Winchelsea,  the  great  Tory  leader,  whose  disgrace  he  shared  when  that 
nobleman  was  dismissed  for  espousing  the  cause  of  the  Jacobite  peers  involved 
in  the  rebellion  of  1715-  He  subsequently  became  reconciled  to  Sir  Robert 
Walpole,  and  in  1742  [after  Walpole's  downfall]  was  appointed  First  Lord 
of  the  Admiralty.  Lord  Waldegrave  says  of  his  conduct  at  that  period, 
'  that  it  was  so  unexceptionable  that  faction  itself  was  obliged  to  be  silent ' 
{^Memoirs,  p.  139).  Horace  Walpole  is  equally  warm  in  his  praise.  This  is 
the  testimony  of  political  friends,  but  it  stands  uncontradicted.  Indeed,  Lord 
Winchelsea  appears  to  have  enjoyed  the  respect  of  all  parties.  His  public 
career,  to  use  the  words  of  Lord  Mahon,  '  without  being  illustrious,  was  long, 
useful,  and  honourable.'     He  died  in  1769,  aged  eighty-one. — L.  M. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  31 

ton,^  therefore,  made  the  demand.  Bcckford  again  de- 
claimed on  the  extravagance  of  the  war.  Sir  Francis 
Dashwood  said  he  had  always  disapproved  the  continental 
war,  but  would  agree  to  vote  the  money  (which  was  a 
sum  of  two  hundred  and  sixty  thousand  pounds  for  three 
years),  as  we  were  bound  by  treaty  to  pay  it  ;  and  he 
found  fault  with  more  authorities  not  being  laid  before 
Parliament.     This  money  too  was  granted  on  March  6th, 

Three  days  before,  the  King  had  gone  to  Parliament 
to  desire  that  the  places  of  the  judges,  which  were  held 
during  the  life  of  the  Prince  on  the  throne,  might  be  fixed 
to  them  for  their  own  lives.  This  was  one  of  Lord  Bute's 
strokes  of  pedantry.  The  tenure  of  the  judges  had 
formerly  been  a  popular  topic  ;  and  had  been  secured  as  far 
as  was  necessary.  He  thought  this  trifling  addition  would 
be  popular  now,  when  nobody  thought  or  cared  about  it. 
When,  not  long  afterwards,  the  advocates  for  the  Court 
were  puzzled  to  produce  instances  of  favour  to  the 
constitutipn  or  to  the  cause  of  liberty,  this  boon  to 
the  judges  was  sounded  high,  and  repeated  in  every 
panegyric. 

Nothing  more  of  note  occurred  in  this  session.  All 
attention  was  engrossed  by  the  approaching  general 
election  of  a  new  Parliament.  It  had  been  propagated 
that  the  King  had  forbidden  any  money  to  be  issued 
from  the  Treasury.  Nothing  was  less  true,  in  fact,  or 
proved  less  true  in  effect.  Both  the  Court  and  particulars 
went  greater  length  than  in  any  preceding  times.  In 
truth,  the  corruption  of  electors  met,  if  not  exceeded,  that 
of  candidates.  The  borough  of  Sudbury  was  so  shame- 
less as  to  advertise  itself  to  the  highest  bidder. 

But,  preparatory  to  a  new  Parliament,  and  as  an  intima- 
tion to  men  under  whom  they  should  list,  the  Favourite 
determined  to  appear  more  ostensibly  in  the  character  of 
Minister.  Accordingly,  on  the  12th  of  March,  orders  were 
suddenly  sent  to  Lord  Holderness  to  give  up  the  seals  of 

^  William  Wildman  Shute  Barrington,  Viscount  Barrington,  Treasurer  of 
the  Navy. 


32  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

Secretary  of  State  :  the  King  adding,  in  discourse,  that  he 
had  two  secretaries,  one  (Mr.  Pitt)  who  would  do  nothing, 
and  the  other  (Lord  Holderness)  who  could  do  nothing;  ^ 
he  would  have  one  who  both  could  and  would.  This  was 
Lord  Bute,  to  whom  the  Seals  were  immediately  delivered. 
Subduing  Europe  was  reckoned  nothing,  as  the  service 
was  ungracious  :  and  however  low  the  talents  of  Lord 
Holderness  deserved  to  be  estimated,  they  did  not  suffer 
by  comparison  with  those  of  his  successor.  Mr.  Pitt 
resented  the  fall  of  his  creature,  but  was  sweetened  by  the 
offer  of  cofferer  to  James  Grenville,^  Newcastle  rejoiced 
having  been  deserted  by  Holderness  ;  but  affected  to  be 
concerned  :  yet  was  not  struck  with  the  warning  that  this 
measure  ought  to  have  been  to  himself.  Mr.  Pitt  felt  it 
more  sensibly,  and  would  not  part  with  Lord  Temple,  who 
might  have  been  Lord  Lieutenant  of  Ireland,  but  was 
necessary  to  him  in  the  House  of  Lords,  where  his 
measures  had  no  other  champion.  Lord  Halifax  was 
named  to  that  great  office ;  the  Duke  of  Bedforjd  refused 

^  Robert  Darcy,  Earl  of  Holderness.  This  is  an  exaggeration  of  Lord 
Holderness's  incapacity ;  for  it  appears  by  the  Mitchell  papers  that  he  had 
attended  closely  to  the  business  of  his  office,  and  performed  it  respectably. 
His  talents,  however,  were  not  above  mediocrity.  His  foreign  connections 
had  recommended  him  to  George  li.,  whom  he  attended  as  Lord  of  the 
Bedchamber  at  the  battle  of  Dettingen,  and  he  was  afterwards  minister  at 
Turin  and  at  The  Hague.  The  Duke  of  Newcastle  succeeded  in  making  him 
Secretary  of  State,  against  the  opinion  of  Mr.  Pelham,  when  scarcely  thirty 
years  of  age.  His  qualifications  for  that  high  office  are  thus  summed  up  by 
the  Duke  in  a  letter  urging  the  appointment :  '  He  is  indeed,  or  was  thought, 
trifling  in  his  manner  and  carriage  ;  but  believe  me,  he  has  a  solid  understand- 
ing, and  will  come  out  as  prudent  a  young  man  as  any  in  the  kingdom.  He 
is  good-natured,  so  that  you  may  tell  him  his  faults,  and  he  will  mend  them. 
He  is  very  taciturn,  dexterous  enough,  and  most  punctual  in  the  execution  of 
his  orders.  He  is  got  into  the  routine  of  business,  and  knows  well  the 
present  state  of  it'  (Letter  from  Duke  of  Newcastle  to  Mr.  Pelham,  in 
CoyCs  Life  of  Pelham,  vol.  ii.  p.  387).  A  portrait  not  less  characteristic  of 
the  Duke  than  of  Lord  Holderness.  His  lordship  married  a  lady  of  the 
Fagel  family,  and  his  mother  was  daughter  of  the  last  Duke  of  Schomberg. 
He  died  in  1778,  without  issue  male,  and  his  earldom  became  extinct.  See 
more  of  him  in  Walpole's  Memoirs  of  George  II.  (1847),  vol.  i.  p.  19S  ;  and 
Lord  Waldegrave's  Memoirs,  p.  121. — L.  M. 

^  A  younger  brother  of  Richard,   Earl  Temple,  and  a  brother-in-law  of 
Pitt.— E. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  33 

to  accept  any  post ;  but  it  was  supposed  had  his  eye  on 
the  Seals,  which  everybody  expected  disgust  would  soon 
oblige  Mr.  Pitt  to  resign. 

Nothing  could  be  more  injudicious  than  this  step  taken 
by  the  Favourite.  The  conduct  he  ought  to  have  pursued 
was  obvious  ;  which  was,  lying  quiet,  till  some  or  all  of  a 
few  events,  most  probable  to  happen,  should  have  paved 
the  way  to  his  taking  the  reins.  Newcastle  was  old,  Mr. 
Pitt  very  infirm.  Their  deaths,  or  at  least  a  rupture 
between  them,  would  have  delivered  him  from  them  ;  at 
least  have  constituted  him  umpire  between  them.  Any 
sinister  event  of  the  war  might  have  demolished  Mr.  Pitt's 
popularity.  Prudence,  at  least,  should  have  dictated  to 
Lord  Bute  to  await  the  conclusion  of  the  peace,  which, 
however  good,  would  have  given  a  shock  to  Mr.  Pitt's 
credit,  from  the  impossibility  of  contenting  all  mankind. 
But  the  Favourite  was  as  impatient  to  have  the  honour  of 
making  that  peace,  as  if  he  had  intended  to  make  it  an 
honourable  one.  His  thrusting  himself  into  administration 
at  the  moment  he  did,  was  so  preposterous,  that  most  men 
thought  him  betrayed  into  it  by  malicious  advice.  The 
Duke  of  Bedford,  to  pay  his  court,  and  from  desire  of  peace, 
certainly  counselled  it,  but  Newcastle,  and  Hardwicke  too, 
were  generally  believed  to  have  infused  the  same  advice, 
with  a  view  to  his  destruction  ;  for  while  only  Groom  of 
the  Stole,  Lord  Bute  stood  in  no  responsible  place.  This 
was  the  more  likely,  as  what  emoluments  they  obtained 
for  their  friends  in  the  new  shuffling  of  the  cards  by 
no  means  compensated  for  the  credit  they  lost  by  the 
appearance  of  this  new  star  in  the  horizon  of  power. 

The  Duke  of  Rutland^  was  named  Groom  of  the  Stole  ; 
Lord  Sandys,-  First  Lord  of  Trade,  but  upon  the  ancient 
footing ;  the  West  Indies,  to  please  Mr.  Pitt,  being  again 

^  John  Manners,  Duke  of  Rutland,  Knight  of  the  Garter,  died  in  1779,  at 
the  age  of  eighty-two,  having  survived  his  gallant  and  amiable  son,  the 
Marquis  of  Granby. — L.  M. 

2  Samuel,  Lord  Sandys,  formerly  the  indefatigable  opponent  of  Sir  Robert 
Walpole ;  but  his  importance  had  greatly  diminished  since  that  minister's 
downfall.     He  died  in  1770. — L.  M. 

VOL.  L  C 


34  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

put  under  the  province  of  the  Secretary  of  State.  The 
Duke  of  Leeds  ^  was  turned  back  to  his  old  place  of 
Justice  in  Eyre,  in  the  room  of  Lord  Sandys,  but  with  an 
additional  salary  of  a  thousand  pounds  a  year.  Legge, 
who  refused  to  resign,  was  dismissed ;  and  Lord 
Barrington  made  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer ;  being 
succeeded  by  Charles  Townshend^  as  Secretary  at  War. 
Sir  Francis  Dashwood  was  made  Treasurer  of  the 
Chambers,  Elliot,^  another  of  Lord  Bute's  court, 
succeeded  James  Grenville  at  the  Board  of  Treasury. 
Lord  Villiers^  and  Thomas  Pelhani^  were  placed  in  the 
Admiralty,  as  John  Yorke,  Lord  Hardwicke's  fourth  son, 
Rice,^  son-in-law  of  Lord  Talbot,  and  Sir  Edmund  Thomas''' 
were  at  the  Board  of  Trade.    Mr.  Spencer^  and  Sir  Richard 

^  Thomas  Osborne,  fourth  Duke  of  Leeds,  K.G.  He  married,  6th  June  1 740, 
Lady  Mary  Godolphin,  the  youngest  daughter,  and  eventually  sole  heiress, 
of  Francis,  second  Earl  of  Godolphin,  and  died  23rd  March  1789,  aged 
seventy-five.  — E. 

"^  Charles  Townshend,  second  son  of  Charles,  Viscount  Townshend. 

^  Gilbert  Elliot,  afterwards  Sir  Gilbert.  [Elliot  had  been  a  Lord  of  the 
Admiralty  from  1756  to  1761.  He  became  Treasurer  of  the  Chamber  in  1762, 
Treasurer  of  the  Navy  in  1770,  and  died  at  Marseilles  on  lith  January  1777. 
He  was  father  of  Gilbert,  first  Earl  Minto,  Governor-General  of  India. — E.] 

^  George  Bussy  Villiers,  Viscount  Villiers,  only  son  of  the  Earl  of  Jersey, 
whom  he  afterwards  succeeded.  He  held  the  post  of  Vice-Chamberlain  from 
1765  to  1769,  and  subsequently  filled  other  high  offices  in  the  royal  household. 
He  died  in  August  1805,  aged  seventy. — L.  M. 

^  T.  Pelham  of  Stanmer,  afterwards  Lord  Pelham. 

®  George  Rice,  M.P.  for  Carmarthenshire,  1754-79.  He  married,  i6th 
August  1756,  Lady  Cecil  Talbot,  only  daughter  of  William,  Earl  Talbot, 
afterwards  Baroness  Dynevor.  He  was  appointed  Treasurer  in  1770,  and 
died  3rd  August  1779. — E. 

^  vSir  Edmund  Thomas  of  Wenvoe  Castle,  Wilts,  third  Baronet,  died  nth 
October  1767.  He  was  M.P.  for  Chippenham,  1741-54;  for  Glamorganshire, 
1761-7  ;  and  in  1763  was  appointed  Surveyor-General  of  Woods  north  and 
south  of  the  Trent. — E. 

^  John  Spencer,  only  son  of  John  Spencer,  brother  of  Charles,  Duke  of 
Marlborough.  He  was  a  person  of  very  resolute,  independent  spirit,  and 
warmly  attached  to  the  Whig  interest,  as  he  too  well  proved  at  the  celebrated 
Northampton  election,  which  seriously  impaired  even  his  immense  fortune, 
while  it  made  Lord  Northampton  an  exile  for  the  remainder  of  his  life,  and 
obliged  Lord  Halifax  to  sell  Horton  and  his  principal  estates.  With  the 
exception  of  a  very  brief  interval.  Lord  Spencer  remained  all  his  life  in 
Opposition.     He  died  greatly  respected  in  1783,  aged  forty-nine. — L.  M. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  35 

Grosvenor  (at  the  recommendation  of  Mr.  Pitt)  were 
created  Viscounts  ;  Sir  Thomas  Robinson/  Sir  Nathaniel 
Curzon,^  a  rich  Tory,  Sir  Wilh'am  Irby,^  chamberlain  to  the 
Princess,  were  made  barons,  along  with  Dodington,^  whose 
ambition  still  hovered  about  the  Court,  in  which  he  was  at 
last  likely  to  have  some  lead  by  his  connection  with  the 
Favourite.  Nor  did  Lord  Bath^  himself  quit  sight  of  the 
back-stairs  by  which  he  obtained  leave  to  hobble  up  to 
the  King  whenever  he  pleased. 

But  a  phenomenon  that  for  some  time  occasioned  more 
speculation  than  even  the  credit  of  the  Favourite,  was  the 
staff  of  Lord  Steward  being  put  into  the  hands  of  Lord 
Talbot,^   with  the  addition  of  an    earldom.     As    neither 

^  Sir  Thomas  Robinson,  created  Lord  Grantham,  had  been  minister  at 
Vienna,  and  Secretary  of  State.  He  was  the  fourth  son  of  Sir  WilHam 
Robinson,  Baronet.  His  fortunate  connection  with  Horace,  Lord  Walpole, 
to  whom  he  had  been  Secretary  in  1723,  quickly  raised  him  to  eminence. 
He  was  an  excellent  man  of  business,  and  highly  esteemed  as  a  diplomatist. 
His  despatches  are  written  with  great  spirit  and  clearness.  In  the  House  of 
Commons  he  failed,  as  might  have  been  expected  from  his  previous  pursuits,  and 
his  talents  have  in  consequence  been  much  underrated.  He  died  in  1770. — L.  M. 

^  Sir  Nathaniel  Curzon,  Bart. ,  of  Kedleston  Hall,  near  Derby,  created  Baron 
Scarsdale  in  the  County  of  Derby.  He  represented  Clitheroe  from  February 
1748  to  April  1754,  and  Derbyshire  from  April  1754  to  March  1761.  He  died 
on  5th  December  1804,  aged  seventy-seven. — E. 

^  Sir  William  Irby,  created  Lord  Boston.  He  had  been  Page  to  George  I. 
and  George  11.,  and  Equerry  to  the  Prince  on  the  arrival  of  the  latter  in 
England,  He  married  a  niece  of  Mr.  Selwyn,  and  died  in  1773,  aged 
sixty-six. — L.  M. 

*  George  Bubb  Dodington,  created  Lord  Melcomb. 

s  William  Pulteney,  Earl  of  Bath. 

®  Son  of  the  Lord  Chancellor.  He  had  in  his  youth  been  one  of  Sir 
Robert  Walpole's  most  violent  opponents.  The  Count  de  Fuentes,  in  a 
letter  to  Mr.  Wall,  of  27th  March,  says  that  this  appointment  was  ascribed 
to  the  Princess  of  Wales  :  of  whom,  he  adds,  '  they  speak  with  too  much  liberty' 
{Chatham  Correspondence,  vol.  ii.  p,  160).  The  adherence  of  Lord  Talbot 
to  the  Leicester  House  party  certainly  entitled  him  to  consideration,  but  he 
was  now  much  overpaid  ;  and  this  was  felt  even  by  his  patron  Lord  Bute, 
who  wanted  firmness  to  resist  pretensions  which  were  urged  with  impetuosit}', 
amounting  also  to  passion. — (Dodington's  Diary,  cited  in  note  to  the  letter 
supra.)  Lord  Talbot  had  talents,  was  resolute  and  ready  ;  and  his  speeches 
had  an  air  of  independence  and  a  plausibility  that  made  him  rather  a  favourite 
with  the  public,  notwithstanding  his  vices,  until  his  duel  with  Wilkes  brought 
ridicule  upon  his  name  not  to  be  effaced.  — L.  M. 


36  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

gravity,  rank,  interest,  abilities,  nor  morals  could  be 
abduced  to  countenance  this  strange  exaltation,  no  wonder 
it  caused  very  unfavourable  comments.  This  Lord  had 
long  affected  a  very  free-spoken  kind  of  patriotism  on  all 
occasions.  He  had  some  wit,  and  a  little  tincture  of  a 
disordered  understanding ;  but  was  better  known  as  a 
boxer  and  man  of  pleasure,  than  in  the  light  of  a  states- 
man.    The   Duchess  of had  been  publicly  divorced 

from  her  lord  on  his  account ;  and  was  not  the  only 
woman  of  fashion  who  had  lived  with  him  openly  as  his 
mistress.  He  was  strong,  well  made,  and  very  comely  ; 
but  with  no  air,  nor  with  the  manners  of  a  man  of  quality. 
No  wonder  the  promotion  of  such  a  minister,  in  a  reign 
that  advertised  piety,  strengthened  the  suspicions  already 
entertained  of  the  sincerity  of  the  Court.  It  grew  more 
comic  still,  when  the  new  statesman  appeared  to  be  a 
reformer  too.  As  the  Court  knew  that  the  measures  it 
had  in  contemplation  could  only  be  carried  by  money, 
every  stratagem  was  invented  to  curtail  the  common 
expenses  of  the  Palace.  As  these  fell  under  the  province 
of  the  Lord  Steward,  nothing  was  heard  of  but  cooks 
cashiered,  and  kitchens  shut  up.  Even  the  Maids  of  Honour, 
who  did  not  expect  rigours  from  a  great  officer  of  Lord 
Talbot's  complexion,  were  reduced  to  complain  of  the 
abridgment  of  their  allowance  for  breakfast.  The  public 
joined  in  the  cry,  and  the  shops  teemed  with  scandalous 
prints  against  the  reformer  and  his  patroness. 

The  Duke  of  Rutland  was  not  pleased  with  the  office 
of  Groom  of  the  Stole,  which  had  fewer  employments  in 
its  disposal,  and  which  was  therefore  given  to  Lord 
Holderness ;  but  the  very  next  day  the  Duke  was 
appointed  Master  of  the  Horse,  from  whence  Lord 
Huntingdon^  was  removed  to  be  Groom  of  the    Stole; 

^  Son  of  Selina,  Countess  of  Huntingdon.  He  remained  Groom  of  the  Stole 
till  1770.  Akenside,  who  was  one  of  the  least  adulatory  of  poets,  addressed 
to  him,  in  1747,  a  didactic  ode  on  his  setting  out  on  his  travels.  He  was 
an  amiable  and  accomplished  nobleman,  though  it  requires  some  partiality  to 
believe  of  his  early  youth  that  his  'breast  the  gifts  of  every  Muse  had  known.' 
Delicate  health  prevented  his  taking  an  active  part  in  public  business,  and  in 


KING  GEORGE  III.  37 

and  Lord  Holderness  was  laid  aside  with  a  large  pension, 
and  the  reversion  of  the  Cinque  Ports  after  the  Duke  of 
Dorset.  Lady  Bute  was  created  a  baroness,  that  her  son 
might  inherit  an  English  peerage. 

When  Legge  resigned  his  Seal,  he  lamented  being 
under  his  Majesty's  displeasure,  but  said  his  future  life 
should  testify  his  zeal.  The  King  replied  he  was  glad 
to  hear  him  say  so  ;  nothing  but  his  future  life  could 
eradicate  the  ill  impressions  he  had  received  of  him. 
His  disgrace  was  owing  to  his  not  having  seconded  the 
Favourite's  views  in  the  late  reign,  when  Lord  Bute  had 
been  desirous  of  bringing  a  Jacobite  friend  into  Parlia- 
ment for  Hampshire,  of  which  more  will  be  said  hereafter.^ 

General  Conway^  was  sent  to  command  in  Germany 
under  Lord  Granby.  The  Bedford  faction  opposed  it,  in 
favour  of  General  Waldegrave,^  who  had  served  there 
during  the  whole  war,  upon  the  supposition  that  Lord 
Granby  would  come  to  England,  and  that  Waldegrave 
might  succeed  him,  Mostyn  ^  not  being  equal  to  the  charge. 

1766  he  declined  the  embassy  to  Spain,  which  was  pressed  on  him  by  Lord 
Chatham.  [He  died  suddenly  on  2nd  October  1789,  aged  sixty,  when  the 
earldom  became  dormant,  and  the  ancient  baronies  of  Hastings,  etc.,  devolved 
upon  his  elder  sister  Elizabeth,  the  third  wife  of  John,  first  Earl  of  Moira. 
In  1818  Hans  Francis  Hastings  proved  his  right  to  the  dormant  earldom, 
and  on  14th  January  1819  took  his  seat  in  the  House  of  Lords  as  eleventh 
Earl  of  Huntingdon. — E.] 

1  See  page  30,  and  infra. 

2  Henry  Seymour  Conway,  only  brother  of  Francis,  Earl  of  Hertford. 

3  John  Waldegrave,  only  brother  of  James,  Earl  Waldegrave,  whom  he 
succeeded  in  the  title,  married  Lady  Elizabeth  Leveson  Gower,  sister  of 
Gertrude,  Duchess  of  Bedford.  His  presence  of  mind  and  intrepidity  at  the 
battle  of  Minden  established  his  character  as  a  soldier.— (Walpole's  Metnoirs  of 
George\II.  (1847)  vol.  iii.  p.  198).  He  was  appropriately  rewarded  with  the 
regiment  of  dragoons,  vacated  by  Lord  George  Sackville's  dismissal.  Sub- 
sequently he  obtained  one  of  the  regiments  of  foot-guards,  and  was  made 
Master  of  the  Horse  to  the  Queen.  His  love  of  state,  not  less  than  the  hand- 
some manner  in  which  he  lived,  well  adapted  him  to  any  great  office  at  Court. 
He  died  in  1784.  His  eldest  son,  a  most  respectable  nobleman,  and  also  an 
officer,  only  survived  him  five  years. — L.  M. 

•»  John  Mostyn,  brother  of  Sir  Roger  Mostyn,  Bart.,  and  Groom  of  the 
Bedchamber  to  the  King.  He  commanded  the  British  cavalry  with  dis- 
tinction in  Germany,  and  was  mainly  instrumental  in  gaining  the  battle  of 
Warburg,  the  credit  of  which  Lord  Granby  ascribed  entirely  to  him.     He 


e  1  Q  9  1 
O  .1  'J  ^v  .1 


38  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

Conway  obtained  to  be  sent,  but  without  a  certain  pro- 
mise of  replacing  Lord  Granby/  though  the  King  said 
Conway  was  a  man  of  abilities,  character,  sense,  and 
prudence,  such  as  was  greatly  wanted  there.  France  at 
this  time  made  earnest  overtures  for  peace. 

might  have  risen  high  in  the  army,  had  he  not  shrunk  from  the  responsibility 
of  great  commands.  He  refused  the  command  of  the  expedition  to  the 
Havannah,  on  the  ground  that  he  did  not  pretend  to  be  more  than  a 
cavalry  officer.  His  good  nature  and  conviviality,  as  well  as  his  quiet 
military  deportment,  made  him  popular  at  Court ;  and  George  n.  liked 
him  so  much  that  he  generally  formed  one  of  the  King's  evening  party. 
It  was  believed  he  might  have  been  a  favourite  if  he  pleased. — {Afemozrs 
of  Sir  James  Campbell  [i^t,2),  vol.  i.  p.  173.) — L.  M.  [He  was  appointed 
Governor  of  Minorca  on  i6th  February  1768,  and  became  a  full  General  on 
26th  May  1772.     He  died  on  13th  February  1779. — E.] 

^  John  Manners,  Marquis  of  Granby,  son  of  John,  Duke  of  Rutland. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  39 


CHAPTER    IV 

Thanks  of  the  House  of  Commons  to  Mr.  Onslow,  their  Speaker. — His 
Character. — Sir  John  Philipps. — Mr.  Legge. — Mr.  More  of  Shrewsbury. 
— Mr.  Onslow's  Retirement. — His  last  Address  to  the  House. — Lord 
Bath's  Pamphlet. — Solicitations  by  France  for  Peace. — Mr.  Pitt  dis- 
inclined to  negotiate. — Expedition  against  Belleisle. — Mr.  Pitt's  Obstinacy. 
— Lord  Bute's  Faction. — Mr.  Pitt  and  the  Duke  of  Bedford. — Negotia- 
tion for  Peace.  —  Monsieur  de  Bussy. — Mr.  Stanley. — Death  of  Archibald, 
Duke  of  Argyle,  and  of  Hoadley,  Bishop  of  Winchester. — Character  of 
those  Personages. — Their  Successors. 

The  last  day  of  the  session,  March  i8th,  was  fixed  for 
returning  the  thanks  of  the  House  of  Commons  to  Mr. 
Onslow,  their  Speaker,  who  had  filled  the  chair  with 
unblemished  integrity  during  the  whole  long  reign  of 
George  the  Second,  and  who  had  the  prudence  to  quit  the 
scene  before  his  years  and  growing  infirmities  made  him 
a  burthen  to  himself  and  the  public.^  No  man  had  ever 
supported  with  more  firmness  the  privileges  of  the  House, 
nor  sustained  the  dignity  of  his  office  with  more  authority. 
His  knowledge  of  the  Constitution  equalled  his  attachment 
to  it.  To  the  Crown  he  behaved  with  all  the  decorum  of 
respect,  without  sacrificing  his  freedom  of  speech.  Against 
encroachments  of  the  House  of  Peers  he  was  an  inflexible 
champion.  His  disinterested  virtue  supported  him  through 
all  his  pretensions ;  and  though  to  conciliate  popular 
favour  he  affected  an  impartiality  that  by  turns  led  him  to 
the  borders  of  insincerity  and  contradiction — and  though  he 
was  so  minutely  attached  to  forms  that  it  often  made  him 
troublesome  in  affairs  of  higher  moment,  it  will  be  difficult 
to  find  a  subject  whom  gravity  will  so  well  become,  whose 

^  Letter  (of  21st  March)  to  George  Montagu,  Walpole's  Litters  (1857), 
vol,  iii.  p.  388.— L.  M. 


40  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

knowledge  will  be  so  useful  and  so  accurate,  and  whose 
fidelity  to  his  trust  will  prove  so  unshaken. 

Sir  John  Philipps  ^  moved  the  address  of  thanks  to  him 
for  his  great  services,  but  so  wretchedly,  that  the  sensibility 
the  House  showed  on  the  occasion  flowed  only  from  their 
hearts,  not  from  any  impression  made  on  them  by  the 
eloquence  of  their  spokesman.  Legge  seconded  the 
motion  with  his  usual  propriety  and  brevity,  and  com- 
mended retreat,  God  knows  with  what  sincerity !  Others 
threw  in  their  word  of  panegyric  ;  and  Mr.  More  of 
Shrewsbury,  an  old  and  acute  member,  proposed  to  erect 
a  statue  to  the  Speaker's  memory,  with  great  encomiums 
on  the  authority  with  which  he  had  formerly  kept  in  order 
such  men  as  then  filled  the  Treasury  bench  and  composed 
the  Opposition,  naming  among  the  former  Sir  Robert 
Walpole  and  Mr.  Pelham,  the  latter  of  whom,  he  said,  had 
the  honour  of  dying  a  Commoner.  More  was  a  Whig  of 
the  primitive  stamp,  and,  though  attached  to  Sir  Robert 
Walpole,  had  withstood,  and,  by  the  force  of  his  honest 
abilities,  had  defeated  the  intended  clemency  of  that 
Minister  to  some  attainted  Jacobite  families  with  respect 
to  their  estates.  He  had  long  abstained  from  Parliament, 
returned  to  it  without  his  former  success,  and  now  appeared 
there  for  the  last  time. 

Henry  Archer  ^  proposed  to  address  the  Crown  to  bestow 
a  pecuniary  reward  on  the  Speaker's  services.  Sir  John 
Philipps  replied  he  knew  that  was  intended  ;  as  it  was  ; 
an  annuity  of  two  thousand  pounds  a  year  to  him  and  his 
son.  Sir  George  Saville  approved  the  reward,  but  desired 
the  Commons,  not  the  Crown,  might  have  the  merit  of 
bestowing  it.  Velters  Cornwall  made  one  of  his  absurd, 
ill-natured  speeches,  which  the  House  was  always  so  kind 

^  Sir  John  Philipps,  Bart,  of  Picton  Castle,  in  Pembrokeshire,  an  opulent 
and  influential  Jacobite.  He  was  the  second  son  of  Sir  John  Philipps,  and 
had  succeeded  to  the  title  and  estates  on  the  death  of  his  elder  brother.  He 
died  in  1764,  leaving  an  only  son.  Sir  Richard,  who  was  afterwards  created 
an  Irish  Peer  by  the  title  of  Lord  Milford,  and  died  without  issue  in  1823. — 
L.  M. 

^  Henry,  brother  of  Thomas,  Lord  Archer. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  41 

as  to  take  for  humour,  teazing  the  Speaker  under  pretence 
of  complimenting  him  ;  while  the  good  old  man  sat  over- 
powered with  gratitude,  and  weeping  over  the  testimonies 
borne  to  his  virtue.  He  rose  at  last,  and  closed  his  public 
life  in  the  most  becoming  manner ;  neither  over-acting 
modesty,  nor  checking  the  tender  sensibility  which  he 
necessarily  felt  at  quitting  the  darling  occupation  of  his 
life.  His  thanks  to  the  House  for  their  patient  sufferance 
of  his  errors,  and  for  their  gracious  acceptance  of  his 
endeavours  to  serve  them,  were  shortly,  but  cogently, 
expressed ;  and  his  voice,  and  the  tears  he  could  not 
restrain,  spoke  still  more  forcibly  how  much  his  soul  was 
agitated  by  laudible  emotions.  He  begged  to  have  the 
address  spared,  as  he  would  accept  nothing  for  himself, 
though  he  would  not  prejudice  his  family.  He  was  going, 
he  said,  into  the  most  close  and  obscure  retreat,  where  he 
should  want  little;  and  he  concluded  with  a  pathetic 
prayer  for  the  perpetuity  of  the  Constitution.  Sir  John 
Philipps  desired  that  what  he  had  uttered  might  be  inserted 
in  the  votes.  The  Speaker  protested  he  could  not  remem- 
ber his  own  words,  but  the  House  insisted,  as  Cornwall 
and  Sir  George  Saville  did  on  the  address,  to  which  the 
Speaker  at  last  acquiesced,  and  it  was  voted.  He  ended 
with  saying  this  was  the  greatest  day  and  the  greatest 
honours  ever  known,  for  they  could  only  be  conferred  by 
a  free  nation.^ 

The  next  day  the  Parliament  was  prorogued,  then 
dissolved,  and  a  new  one  chosen. 

In  this  month  was  published  a  pamphlet  called  Seasoft- 
able  Hints  from,  an  Honest  Man  on  the  present  Crisis. 
The  author,  and  some  of  the  doctrines  it  broached — not 
any  merit  in  the  composition — make  it  memorable.  It 
was  written  by  Lord  Bath,^  who,  having  surprised  the 
King  into  a  promise  of  the  Lord-Lieutenancy  of  Shrop- 
shire,  was   opposed    by   the    Duke    of    Newcastle,   who 

^  Mr.  Onslow  died  in  February  1768,  aged  seventy-six.  A  very  pleasing 
account  of  him  is  given  in  the  Preface  to  the  second  volume  of  HatselVs 
Precedents,  p.  vi. — L.  M. 

^  William  Pulteney,  Earl  of  Bath. 


42  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

supported  Lord  Powis.^  The  pamphlet,  therefore,  warmly 
attacked  his  Grace,  taxed  him  with  his  cabals  and  resigna- 
tion in  the  last  rebellion,  and  it  defended  the  measure  of 
admitting  the  Tories  to  a  participation  of  power.  In 
general,  the  language  of  the  pamphlet  was  that  of  the 
Court,  who  conducted  themselves  by  the  advice  bequeathed 
by  Lord  Bolingbroke,  who  had,  and  with  truth,  assured 
the  late  Prince  of  Wales  that  the  Tories  would  be  the 
heartiest  in  the  support  of  prerogative.  The  censure 
passed  on  pensions  was  not  equally  flattering  to  the  Court, 
the  new  reign  having  already  bestowed  them  profusely. 
Yet  much  the  book  vaunted  the  King's  declaration  against 
corruption  in  elections,  which  had  gone  no  farther  than  to 
undermine  the  Duke  of  Newcastle's  influence.  The  pri- 
vate junto  was  impatient  to  conclude  the  peace,  that  they 
might  prosecute  the  intended  war  on  the  old  ministry  at 
home,  the  established  harmony  being  solely  produced  by 
the  war,  as  had  often  been  the  case  at  Rome.  A  few 
pedantic  examples  were  the  sum  of  Lord  Bute's  know- 
ledge ;  yet  his  partisans  affected  to  celebrate  the  care  he 
had  taken  of  the  King's  education.  A  well-founded  pane- 
gyric on  a  man  who  was  deficient  in  the  orthography  of 
his  own  language  !  The  King  had  had  able  preceptors  ; 
the  Bishop  of  Norwich-  was  a  scholar  ;  the  Bishop  of 
Salisbury^  not  deficient.  Stone  and  Scott  had  taste  and 
knowledge.  Lord  Waldegrave,  for  forming  a  King,  was 
not  to  be  matched.  It  proved,  indeed,  that  his  Majesty 
had  learned  nothing,  but  what  a  man,  who  knew  nothing, 
could  teach  him. 

About  the  end   of  March,    France  renewed   the    most 

^  Henry  Arthur  Herbert,  Earl  of  Powis. 

^  Dr.  Hayter,  afterwards  Bishop  of  London.     Vide  infra. 

^  Dr.  Thomas,  afterwards  Bishop  of  Winchester.  [John  Thomas  was  born 
on  17th  August  1696.  He  was  a  son  of  Colonel  Thomas  of  the  Guards,  and 
'by  great  exertion  became  a  popular  preacher.'  He  was  consecrated  Bishop 
of  Peterborough  on  4th  October  1747,  and  succeeded  Hayter  in  1753  ^s  Pre- 
ceptor to  the  Prince  of  Wales.  He  was  translated  to  Salisbury  in  June  1757, 
to  Winchester  in  May  1761,  and  died  '  at  the  Episcopal  Palace  at  Chelsea '  on 
1st  May  1781.  See  Cassan's  Lives  of  the  Bishops  of  Winchester^  1827,  vol. 
ii.  pp.  270-277. — E.] 


KING  GEORGE  III.  43 

pressing  solicitations  for  peace.  They  frankly  avowed 
the  distress  of  their  affairs  ;  for  they  did  not  apprehend 
hard-heartedness  in  the  new  Court.  Augsburgh  they 
proposed  for  the  place  of  congress,  or  any  other  town  the 
King  should  name,  professing  they  would  treat  vis-d-vis  du 
Roi  de  la  Grande  Bretagne  ;  for  which  purpose  they  offered 
to  send  a  minister  hither,  where,  too,  might  be  one  from 
the  King  of  Prussia  ;  the  ministers  of  their  allies  should 
assemble  at  Paris.  The  two  Empresses,  they  said,  were 
grown  more  moderate  in  their  demands  ;  and  for  their 
own  part,  they  talked  of  yielding  to  us  all  Canada.  So 
much  ear  was  given  to  these  overtures,  that  the  Earl  of 
Egremont^  and  Sir  Joseph  Yorke^  were  named  to  go  to 
the  Congress.  But  so  little  was  this  measure  to  the  in- 
clination of  Mr.  Pitt,  that  he  prosecuted  with  unusual 
warmth  an  expedition  he  had  meditated  against  Belleisle  ; 
a  conquest  of  so  little  value,  and  so  inadequate  to  the 
expense  with  which  it  was  attended,  that  the  plan  was 
by  many  believed  calculated  solely  to  provoke  the  Court 
of  France,  and  break  off  the  negotiation.  France  was 
more  surprised  than  concerned  at  this  attack.  Sir  Edward 
Hawke  had  lain  before  it  for  two  years,  when  there  were 
not  five  hundred  men  on  the  island,  without  attempting  it. 
Now  they  had  had  time  to  fortify  it,  we  persisted  in  the 
conquest.  Both  Hawke  and  Boscawen^  earnestly  dissuaded 
the  enterprise.  Yet  Pitt  was  obdurate  ;  and  the  island 
was  taken  at  last  by  the  beginning  of  June,  after  an 
enormous  waste    of  money,  and  the  loss  of  some  men. 

1  Charles  Wyndham,  Earl  of  Egremont,  afterwards  Secretary  of  State. 
Vide  infra. 

^  Sir  Joseph  Yorke,  Ambassador  in  Holland,  third  son  of  Philip,  Earl  of 
Hardwicke.  He  had  been  a  Captain  of  the  Guards,  and  aide-de-camp  of  the 
Duke  of  Cumberland  at  the  battle  of  Fontenoy.  In  1751  he  was  appointed 
Minister  at  The  Hague,  where  he  remained  many  years,  and  became  almost 
naturalised,  having  married  a  Dutch  lady.  His  estimable  conduct,  and  also 
his  splendid  hospitality,  gave  him  great  consideration  in  Holland.  In  1788 
he  was  created  Lord  Dover.  He  died  in  1792  without  issue,  and  the  title 
became  extinct. — L.  M. 

^  Admiral  Edward  Boscawen,  brother  of  Lord  Viscount  Falmouth,  a  distin- 
guished naval  commander.     He  died  this  year,  at  the  early  age  of  fifty. — L.M. 


44  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

There  fell  Sir  William  Williams,  a  gallant  and  ambitious 
young  man,  who  had  devoted  himself  both  to  war  and 
politics.  The  island  is  a  barren  rock  ;  and  it  was  only  to 
humour  Mr.  Pitt,  that  France,  in  the  succeeding  negotia- 
tions, condescended  to  treat  it  as  an  object  of  the  smallest 
importance. 

The  indecent  and  injudicious  precipitation  with  which 
the  Favourite's  faction  hurried  towards  peace,  justified  any 
steadiness  Mr.  Pitt  could  exert  to  keep  the  balance  where 
he  had  placed  it,  in  our  own  hands.  Newcastle  and  Hard- 
wicke,  either  not  perceiving  the  symptoms  of  their  own 
fall,  or  hoping  to  ward  off  the  evil  hour,  truckled  to  the 
Favourite's  views.  The  Duke  of  Bedford  (who  in  his  heart 
admired  Pitt,  but  was  made  to  hate  him  by  Rigby,  at  the 
instigation  of  Fox,  and  inflamed  by  the  coldness  with 
which  Pitt  had  listened  to  the  representations  made  by 
his  Grace,  on  the  opposition  to  him  in  Ireland)  was, 
avowedly,  pacific ;  and  all  of  them  seemed  united  against 
the  warlike  minister.  Lord  Talbot  went  so  far  as  to  press 
the  dismission  of  him.  But  it  was  Lord  Bute's  nature  to 
provoke  first,  before  he  offended.  Gallitzin,  the  Russian 
minister,  was  reprimanded  by  him  for  carrying  the  pro- 
position of  peace  to  Mr.  Pitt,  instead  of  to  him  ;  though  it 
had  been  usual,  while  Lord  Holderness  held  the  Seals,  for 
the  foreign  ministers  in  his  department  to  address  them- 
selves to  the  effective  minister.  Mr.  Pitt's  temper,  soured 
by  these  associations  and  contradictions,  broke  out  first 
against  the  Duke  of  Newcastle.  At  a  great  council  held 
on  the  23rd  of  April,  Mr.  Pitt,  who  had  been  wont  to 
affirm  that  too  much  could  not  be  spent  on  the  war  in 
Germany,  made  severe  complaint  of  the  extravagance  in 
the  management  of  it  ;  and  imputed  it  to  the  fault  of  our 
commissaries  that  Prince  Ferdinand  had  been  disabled 
from  making  greater  progress  there.  Himself,  he  said, 
within  six  months,  would  move  for  an  inquiry  into  the 
conduct  of  the  war.  The  Duke  of  Bedford  took  up  the 
contrary  side  with  warmth,  and  made  a  speech  that  was 
much  admired  ;  and  so  little  attention  was  paid  to  the 


KING  GEORGE  III.  45 

views  of  Mr.  Pitt,  that  it  was  settled  Mr.  Stanley^  and 
Monsieur  de  Bussy  should  be  exchanged  to  conduct  the 
negotiations.  Bussy  was  an  Abb6  of  parts,  who  had 
formerly  resided  here  as  minister,-  and  had  given  much 
offence  to  the  late  King,  whom  he  treated  so  impertinently, 
that  the  King,  asking  him  one  day  in  the  circle,  '  Ce  qu'il  y 
avoit  de  nouveau  a  Paris  ? '  Bussy  replied  with  con- 
temptuous familiarity,  '  Sire,  il  y  gele.'  He  had  again 
been  imposed  on  that  Prince,  when  the  French  dictated  to 
him  a  neutrality  for  Hanover.  Bussy  was  not  likely  to  be 
so  presumptuous  now.  Yet  France,  trusting  to  our  pusil- 
lanimous impatience  for  peace,  had  the  confidence  to 
demand  that  the  man-of-war  that  carried  over  Stanley 
should  bring  back  Bussy.  But  Mr.  Pitt  was  yet  minister  : 
the  proposal  was  rejected  ;  and  it  was  settled  that  Stanley 
and  Bussy  should  be  at  Dover  and  Calais  on  the  22nd. 

Before  the  departure  of  Stanley,  it  was  agitated  in 
Council  whether  he  should  be  entrusted  with  full  powers. 
Mr.  Pitt,  who  had  named  Stanley  from  opinion  of  his 
abilities,  though  at  that  time  disunited  from  him  and  gone 
over  to  Newcastle,  confided  in  this  nomination,  and  thought 
it  would  leave  himself  master  of  the  negotiation,  if  Stan- 
ley, who  by  being  at  Paris  was  in  his  department,  were 
charged  with  conclusive  powers  ;  for  which,  therefore,  Pitt 
and  Lord  Temple  pleaded.  But  Bute,  and  the  rest  of  the 
Council,  who  chose  not  to  let  the  negotiation  pass  out  of 

1  Hans  Stanley,  one  of  the  Lords  of  the  Admirlaty,  and  afterwards  Cof- 
ferer. [He  was  a  grandson  of  Sir  Hans  Sloane,  President  of  the  Royal  College 
of  Physicians,  and  was  appointed  Cofferer  of  the  Household  in  1776.  He 
died  on  12th  January  1780,  when  his  picturesque  seat  at  Paultons,  in  the  New 
Forest,  passed  to  his  eldest  sister,  the  second  wife  of  Welbore  Ellis,  afterwards 
Baron  Mendip. — E.] 

-  M.  Bussy  was  one  of  the  chief  Commis  of  the  Foreign  Department  at 
Paris.  He  had  great  experience  in  business,  and  was  eminently  adroit  and 
persuasive  ;  qualities  to  which  he  owed  his  nomination  to  this  difficult  post. 
Formerly  he  had  been  private  secretary  to  the  Due  de  Richelieu,  through 
whose  interest  he  was  employed  on  a  mission  to  George  il.  in  Hanover 
in  1754. — (Flassan,  Hist,  de  la  Diplomatic  Fran^aise,  vol.  vi.  p.  388.)  See 
more  respecting  him  in  the  Appendix  to  Almon's  Anecdotes  of  William  Pitt, 
Lord  Chatham  (1793).  — L.  M. 


46  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

their  own  hands,  prevailed  to  have  Stanley's  instructions 
limited. 

During  these  discussions  died  two  considerable  men, 
Archibald,  Duke  of  Argyle,  and  Hoadley,  Bishop  of  Win- 
chester, The  character  of  the  former^  has  been  sufficiently 
set  forth  in  my  preceding  Memoirs.  The  last  will  be 
known  by  his  writings,  and  as  long  as  a  Churchman,  com- 
bating for  the  liberties  of  mankind,  shall  be  an  unusual 
phenomenon.2  Argyle  had  the  lowest  opinion  of  his 
nephew,  Lord  Bute,  who,  he  had  foretold,  would  rush  into 
power  without  having  formed  a  plan.  The  nephew  had 
in  truth  too  little  capacity,  and  too  much  presumption,  to 
let  himself  be  guided  by  so  shrewd  a  relation,  though  the 
uncle  would  not  have  been  obdurate  if  proper  deference 
had  been  paid  to  his  oracle.  The  last  effort  of  this  great 
Lord's  power  in  Scotland  had  miscarried.  The  city  of 
Edinburgh  had  recurred,  as  usual,  to  his  nomination  for 
the  election  of  their  representative  ;  that  is,  of  thirty-three 
electors,    twenty-two    still    acknowledged    their    ancient 

1  Walpole's  Memoirs  of  George  II.  (1847),  vol.  i.  pp.  275-8.  It  is  ably 
drawn,  and  not  unkindly,  considering  the  belief  long  entertained  by  the 
Whigs  of  the  Duke  having  betrayed  Sir  Robert  Walpole.  The  more  favour- 
able portrait  given  by  Archdeacon  Coxe  from  materials  supplied  by  his  family, 
is,  like  too  many  family  portraits,  feeble,  flattering,  and  indistinct.  His 
Grace  unquestionably  possessed  a  powerful,  active,  and  cultivated  mind.  He 
had  studied,  and  thoroughly  understood  the  weaknesses  of  men,  and  was  un- 
scrupulous in  the  practice  of  all  the  arts  of  intrigue.  Success  usually  crowned 
his  efforts,  and  notwithstanding  the  various  changes  of  Government,  he  main- 
tained much  of  his  power  to  the  last.  Disappointment  attended  only  his 
private  life,  which  was  chilled  by  the  aversion  to  his  wife  and  the  want  of 
children.  II  fid  ric/ie,  ilfut  litre,  ??iais  it  nc  fit  point  heureux — the  just  and 
natural  result  of  a  line  of  conduct  which,  as  Lord  Mahon  correctly  observes, 
was  seldom  on  any  occasion  swayed  either  by  virtue  or  generosity. — (Coxa's 
Life  of  Sir  R.  Walpole,  vol.  i.  pp.  235-6  ;  Mahon's  History,  vol.  iii.  p.  237.) 
— L.  M. 

-  This  prediction  has  not  been  realised.  The  Bangorian  controversy  has 
long  lost  its  interest,  and  great  as  was  their  success  in  their  day,  and  great 
their  reward — no  less  than  the  Bishopric  of  Winchester — the  three  massive 
folios  of  Hoadley's  works  now  slumber  on  the  shelves  of  theological  libraries. 
His  two  sons,  one  of  whom  was  chaplain,  and  the  other  physician  to  the  King, 
were  men  of  talent,  and  are  still  recollected  as  the  joint  authors  of  that  popular 
comedy,  '  The  Suspicious  Husband.'  They  were  the  last  of  their  family. — 
L.  M. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  47 

dictator.  He  named  Forester,  an  able  Scottish  counsellor, 
but  always  resident  in  England.  Six  days  before  the 
election,  such  violent  papers  were  dispersed  against 
Forester,  as  too  much  an  Englishman,  that  the  city  did 
not  dare  to  put  him  in  nomination,  but  were  forced  to 
choose  their  own  Provost.  How  much  did  Scotland  after- 
wards resent  parallel  nationalities,  when  exercised  against 
them  ! 

The  Marquis  of  Tweedale,i  succeeded  the  Duke  of 
Argyle,  as  Chief  Justiciary ;  and  Bishop  Thomas  of  Salis- 
bury, the  King's  former  preceptor,  was  made  Bishop  of 
Winchester.  Drummond,''  of  St.  Asaph,  whom  Newcastle 
had  destined  to  Winchester,  succeeded.  Thomas,  Earl 
Powis,  was  made  Comptroller  of  the  Household  on  the 
death  of  Lord  Edgcumbe.^ 

^  John  Hay,  Marquis  of  Tweedale,  had  been  Secretary  of  State  for  Scot- 
land. Lord  Tweedale  had  been  one  of  the  extraordinary  Lords  of  Session  in 
Scotland,  and  also  had  held  the  post  of  Secretary  of  State  for  that  country. 
He  was  the  last  person  that  filled  either  of  these  offices.  His  connection  with 
Lord  Granville,  whose  daughter  he  had  married,  brought  him  into  public  life 
in  opposition  to  Walpole,  and  he  shared  the  spoils  of  that  minister.  Like 
Lord  Granville,  he  possessed  considerable  knowledge  of  law.  He  is  said  also 
to  have  been  a  good  debater  in  Parliament.  He  died,  without  male  issue,  in 
December  1762. — L.  M. 

2  Dr.  Robert  Hay  Drummond,  brother  of  the  Earl  of  Kinnoul.    See  infra. 

^  Richard  Edgcumbe,  second  Lord  Edgcumbe,  an  intimate  friend  of  the 
author,  who  has  given  him  a  place  in  the  Noble  Authors,  1806,  iv.  p.  267. 
He  was  a  humourist,  and  had  a  turn  for  poetry  and  drawing,  of  which  some 
amusing  specimens  are  noticed  in  the  publications  of  his  day.  Walpole  says, 
'  He  never  had  a  fault  but  to  himself;  he  never  had  an  enemy  but  himself.' 
— L.  M.  [His  brother  George,  who  succeeded  as  the  third  Lord,  was  created 
Earl  of  Mount-Edgcumbe  on  31st  August  1789. — E.] 


48  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 


CHAPTER    V 

Solemn  and  unusual  Summons  of  the  Council. — Announcement  of  the  King's 
intended  Marriage  with  the  Princess  of  Mecklenberg  Strelitz. — The  Princess 
Dowager's  aversion  to  her  Son's  Marriage. — The  King's  attachment  to 
Lady  Sarah  Lennox. — Schemes  of  Mr.  Fox. — Remarkable  Speech  of  the 
King  to  Lady  Susan  Strangeways. — Frustration  of  Fox's  Intrigues. — 
Colonel  Grreme  despatched  to  Germany  to  select  a  Queen. — The  King's 
deference  to  his  Mother,  and  acceptance  of  the  Bride  she  had  chosen, — 
Lady  Sarah  Lennox. — Serious  Crisis  in  the  Cabinet. — Lofty  Conduct  of 
Mr.  Pitt. — His  Draught  for  a  Treaty  with  France. — Reception  of  this  by 
the  other  Ministers. — Arrival  of  the  new  Queen. — Her  mental  and  per- 
sonal Characteristics.  —Anecdotes. — Disposal  of  the  vacant  Bishopricks. — 
Lord  Talbot. — Coronation  Squabbles. — Sir  William  Stanhope's  bitter 
Speech  against  the  Scotch. — Lord  Talbot  and  the  Barons  of  the  Cinque 
Ports. 

While  the  attention  of  mankind  hung  on  the  negotia- 
tion, the  King's  messengers  were  suddenly  sent  forth  to  all 
Privy  Councillors  to  meet  at  one  o'clock,  at  St.  James's, 
July  8th,  on  urgent  and  important  business.  The  busi- 
ness itself  was  an  absolute  secret.  Everybody  concluded 
that  so  solemn  and  unusual  a  summons  of  the  Council  was 
to  give  fuller  sanction  to  peace.  How  great  was  the 
general  surprise  when  they  heard  his  Majesty  had  con- 
vened this  assembly  to  notify  his  intended  marriage  with 
the  Princess  of  Mecklenberg  Strelitz  !  A  resolution  taken 
and  conducted  with  so  much  mystery,  that  till  that  hour 
perhaps  not  six  men  in  England  knew  such  a  Princess 
existed. 

It  has  been  mentioned  with  what  aversion  the  Princess 
Dowager  had  opposed  a  marriage  projected  by  the  late 
King  between  his  heir-apparent  and  a  very  accomplished 
Princess  of  Brunswick.  A  wife  for  her  son,  not  chosen 
by  herself  nor  obliged  to  her,  by  no  means  suited  the 
views  of  the  Princess.     Could   she  have  chained  up  his 


■'^tr'fiwhutl  H^tf^la^.pina^. 


J^ish^r,  ttu.  i  la 


.Jrcu^ij  C)(r/'ti/i  .  ^ en tuu 


KING  GEORGE  III.  49 

body,  as  she  fettered  his  mind,  it  is  probable  she  would 
have  preferred  his  remaining  single.  A  mistress  would 
have  been  more  tremendous  than  a  wife.  The  next 
brother,  the  Duke  of  York,  was  not  equally  tractable,  had 
expressed  little  reverence  for  his  mother,  and  much  anti- 
pathy to  her  favourite.  If  the  King  should  die  and  leave 
even  an  infant,  a  minority  did  not  deprive  the  Princess  of 
all  prospect  of  protracting  her  rule. 

But  there  had  happened  circumstances  still  more  press- 
ing, more  alarming.  The  King  was  fallen  in  love  with 
Lady  Sarah  Lenox,  sister  of  the  Duke  of  Richmond  ;  a 
very  young  lady  of  the  most  blooming  beauty,  and  shining 
with  all  the  graces  of  unaffected,  but  animated  nature. 
What  concurred  to  make  her  formidable  to  the  mother 
and  favourite,  was,  her  being  under  the  tutorage  of  Mr. 
Fox,  her  eldest  sister's  ^  husband  ;  and  in  truth,  she  and 
her  family  spared  no  assiduity  to  fix  the  young  monarch's 
heart.  And  though  Fox  would  probably  not  have  been 
scrupulous  or  delicate  on  the  terms  of  cementing  that 
union,  the  King's  overtures  were  so  encouraging,  that 
Fox's  views  extended  even  to  placing  the  young  lady  on 
the  throne.  Early  in  the  winter,  the  King  told  Lady 
Susan  Strangways,'^  Mr.  Fox's  niece,  and  the  confidante 
of  Lady  Sarah,  that  he  hoped  she  (Lady  Susan)  would 
not  go  out  of  town  soon.  She  said,  she  should.  'But,' 
replied  the  King,  'you  will  return  in  summer,  for  the 
coronation  ? '  Lady  Susan  answered,  '  I  do  not  know  ; 
I  hope  so.'  '  But,'  said  the  King  again,  '  they  talk  of  a 
wedding.  There  have  been  many  proposals  ;  but  I  think 
an  English  match  would  do  better  than  a  foreign  one. 
Pray,  tell  Lady  Sarah  Lenox  I  say  so.'  The  next  time 
Lady  Sarah  went  to  Court  (and  her  family  took  care  that 
should  not  be  seldom)  the  King  said,  '  he  hoped  Lady 
Susan  had  told  her  his  last  conversation.' 

^  Lady  Caroline  Lenox,  eldest  daughter  of  Charles,  second  Duke  of  Rich- 
mond, married  to  Henry  Fox,  Paymaster  of  the  Forces. 

-  Eldest  daughter  of  Stephen  Fox,  Earl  of  Ilchester,  by  the  sole  daughter 
and  heiress  of  Mr.  Strangways  Horner,  whose  name  he  assumed. 

VOL.  L  D 


/ 


50  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

The  junto  was  not  blind  to  these  whispers  and  dialogues. 
Lady  Bute  was  instructed  to  endeavour  to  place  herself  in 
the  circle,  and  prevent  them.  And  the  Princess  Augusta 
marked  her  observation  of  what  was  going  forward  to 
Lady  Sarah  herself,  laughing  in  her  face,  and  trying  to 
affront  her.  But  Fox  was  not  to  be  so  rebuffed.  Though 
he  went  himself  to  bathe  in  the  sea  (possibly  to  disguise 
his  intrigues),  he  left  Lady  Sarah  at  Holland  House,^ 
where  she  appeared  every  morning  in  a  field  close  to  the 
great  road  (where  the  King  passed  on  horseback)  in  a 
fancied  habit,  making  hay. 

Such  mutual  propensity  fixed  the  resolution  of  the 
Princess,  One,  Colonel  Graeme,  was  despatched  in  the 
most  private  manner  as  a  traveller,  and  vested  with  no 
character,  to  visit  various  little  Protestant  Courts,  and 
make  report  of  the  qualifications  of  the  several  unmarried 
princesses.  Beauty,  and  still  less,  talents,  were  not,  it  is 
likely,  the  first  object  of  his  instructions.  On  the  testi- 
mony of  this  man,  the  golden  apple  was  giv^en  to  the 
Princess  of  Mecklenburg  ;  and  the  marriage  precipitately 
concluded.  The  ambassador  was  too  remarkable  not  to 
be  farther  mentioned.  This  Graeme,  then,  was  a  notorious 
Jacobite,  and  had  been  engaged  in  the  late  rebellion.  On 
a  visit  he  made  to  Scotland,  his  native  country,  after  this 
embassy,  David  Hume,  the  historian,  said  to  him,  '  Colonel 
Graeme,  I  congratulate  you  on  having  exchanged  the 
dangerous  employment  of  making  Kings,  for  the  more 
lucrative  province  of  making  Queens.' 

So  complete  was  the  King's  deference  to  the  will  of  his 
mother,  that  he  blindly  accepted  the  bride  she  had  chosen 
for  him  ;  though,  to  the  very  day  of  the  council,  he  carried 
on  his  courtship  to  Lady  Sarah  ;  and  she  did  not  doubt 
of  receiving  the  crown  from  him,  till  she  heard  the  public 
declaration  of  its   being   designed   for  another.     Yet,  in 

^  Holland  House,  beyond  Kensington,  the  seat  of  the  Earls  of  Warwick 
and  Holland;  now  of  Henry  Fox,  Lord  Holland.  [On  the  death  of  Mary 
Augusta,  Lady  Holland,  widow  of  Henry,  fourth  Lord  Holland,  in  September 
1 889,  Holland  House  became  the  property  of  the  present  Earl  of  Ilchester.  ] — E. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  51 

confirmation  of  the  trust  he  had  reposed  in  Lady  Susan 
Strangways,  himself  appointed  Lady  Sarah  to  be  one  of 
the  bridemaids  to  the  Queen.  Yet  Lord  Bute's  friends 
affected  to  give  another  turn  to  the  story  ;  and  insisted 
that  the  King  had  never  thought  of  Lady  Sarah  but  for 
his  mistress.  All,  they  affirmed,  he  had  said  to  Lady 
Susan  was,  to  bid  her  ask  Lady  Sarah  if  she  should  like 
a  place  in  the  family  of  the  new  Queen  ;  that  she  had 
accepted  it ;  and  that  the  King  had  destined  her  to  be 
Mistress  of  the  Robes.  Her  surprise  and  disappointment, 
however,  were  too  strongly  marked  to  make  this  legend 
credible.  Lady  Susan  adhered  to  the  truth  of  what  she 
had  reported,  in  various  examinations  by  her  father  and 
uncle.  And  the  resentment  Lady  Sarah  expressed,  and 
which  caused,  as  the  court  said,  her  not  being  placed  about 
the  new  Queen,  was  proof  enough  on  which  side  the  truth 
lay.  The  junto  persuaded  the  King  she  was  a  bad  young 
woman  ;  but  if  she  was,  what  hindered  her  becoming 
his  mistress  ?  Was  it  criminal  to  propose  being  his  wife 
rather  than  his  mistress  ?  And  what  became  of  the  King's 
boasted  piety,  if  he  intended  to  place  his  mistress  about 
his  wife?  Some  coquet  attempts,  which  Lady  Sarah 
afterwards  made  to  recover  his  notice,  and  her  stooping 
to  bear  the  Queen's  train  as  bridemaid,  did  her  more  pre- 
judice than  all  that  was  invented  against  her.  Pique  and 
extreme  youth  might  excuse  both  ;  and  her  soon  after 
preferring  a  clergyman's  son  to  several  great  matches, 
gave  evidence  that  ambition  was  not  a  rooted  passion  in 
her. 

In  my  own  opinion,  the  King  had  thoughts  of  her  as 
a  wife  ;  but  wanted  resolution  to  oppose  his  mother  and 
Lord  Bute.  Fortunately,  no  doubt,  in  this  instance  ;  for 
the  daughter  of  a  subject,  and  the  sister-in-law  of  so 
ambitious  and  exceptionable  a  man  as  Fox,  would  pro- 
bably have  been  productive  of  most  serious  consequences. 
To  avoid  returning  to  this  topic,  I  will  only  remember 
that,  during  the  wedding-service,  on  mention  of  Abraham 
and   Sarah,  the  King  could    not   conceal  his    confusion. 


52  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

r\nd  the  day  following,  when  everybody  was  presented 
to  the  Queen,  Lord  Westmoreland,^  old  and  dimsighted, 
seeing  Lady  Sarah  in  the  rich  habit  of  bridemaid,  mistook 
her  for  Queen,  and  was  going  to  kneel  and  kiss  her  hand. 
But  while  the  arrival  of  the  Queen  was  expected,  and 
the  approaching  ceremonies  of  the  wedding  and  coronation 
engrossed  the  attention  of  the  public,  affairs  grew  towards 
a  serious  crisis  in  the  Cabinet.  Prince  Ferdinand  had 
opened  the  campaign  with  vivacity  and  advantage,  driving 
the  French  before  him,  and  seizing,  or  reducing  them  to 
destroy  great  part  of  their  magazines ;  a  success  that 
enabled  him  to  form  the  sieges  of  Ziegenhayn  and  Cassel. 
Marshal  Broglio  was  not  disheartened  or  inactive  ;  but 
re-assembling  his  dispersed  troops,  he  attacked  the  Here- 
ditary Prince,  and  routed  the  body  under  his  command  ; 
in  consequence  of  which  the  sieges  were  raised,  and  Prince 
Ferdinand  retired,  abandoning  the  whole  country  of  Hesse 
to  the  enemy.  This  advantage,  it  was  apprehended,  would 
make  France  less  eager  for  peace.  Yet  she  continued  the 
negotiation  with  much  appearance  of  warmth  ;  and  though 
she  was  far  from  bringing  all  the  facilities  our  Court  wished 
for,  the  conclusion  of  the  treaty  seemed  to  be  rather  im- 
peded by  the  loftiness  and  firmness  of  Mr.  Pitt,  than  by 
the  insincerity  of  France.  Still,  as  it  afterwards  appeared, 
she  had  secret  resources  in  reserve ;  nor  could  she  fail  to 
hope  but  Mr.  Pitt  might  be  displaced,  and  her  condition 

^  John  Fane,  Earl  of  Westmoreland,  Chancellor  of  Oxford,  Lieutenant- 
General  in  the  Army,  and  formerly  Captain  of  one  of  the  troops  of  Horse 
Guards.  In  early  life,  when  a  younger  brother,  and  a  Whig,  he  had  served 
under  the  Duke  of  Marlborough  ;  and  afterwards  commanded  '  the  very  body 
of  troops  which  King  George  I.  had  been  obliged  to  send  to  Oxford,  to  teach 
the  University  the  only  kind  of  passive  obedience  which  they  did  not  approve.' 
He  subsequently  joined  the  Jacobites  in  their  opposition  to  Sir  Robert  Wal- 
pole,  and  became  a  high  Tory;  as  indeed  may  be  inferred  from  Lord  Arran 
appointing  him  High  Steward  of  the  University  in  1754,  and  from  his  suc- 
ceeding that  nooleman  as  Chancellor  in  1758.  He  was  comely  in  his  person, 
and  highly  respected  for  his  virtues  in  private  life.  Glover  describes  him  as 
'  a  veteran  patriot,  slow,  but  solid  ;  always  meaning  well,  and  therefore  judg- 
ing right.'  He  died  without  issue  in  1762,  at  a  very  advanced  age.  Walpole's 
Memoirs  of  George  IT.,  1847,  vol.  iii.  p.  167  ;  AIe»ioirs  by  a  Celebrated  Politi- 
cal and  Literary  Character,  1814,  pp.  96-97. — L.  M. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  53 

mended,  when  the  administration  should  fall  into  the 
hands  of  men  whose  honour  was  not  so  much  concerned 
in  the  event  of  the  war,  and  who  had  national  honour 
much  less  at  heart.  The  transactions  have  been  printed, 
and  will  appear  in  every  common  history.  My  part  is 
to  relate  by  what  steps  and  intrigues  the  negotiation  was 
broken  off. 

In  the  end  of  August,  the  council  had  ordered  their 
ultimate  concessions  to  be  drawn  and  sent  to  France.  Mr. 
Pitt  made  the  draught  and  carried  it  to  Council.  The 
other  ministers  thought  it  spoke  his  sense,  not  theirs  ;  or 
rather,  contained  more  of  an  ultimatum  than  they  were 
disposed  to  adhere  to.  In  defence  of  his  own  inflexi- 
bility, Mr.  Pitt  spoke  largely  on  the  haughtiness  of 
France. 

Lord  Hardwicke  ^  said  he  approved  our  not  submitting 
to  their  haughtiness,  and  congratulated  his  country  in 
not  having  been  behind  hand  with  them  in  that  respect. 
Lord  Granville  ^  took  the  draught,  and  applauded  it  ex- 
ceedingly ;  said  it  deserved  to  be  inserted  in  the  Acta 
Regia  ;  but  for  his  part  he  did  not  love  fine  letters  on 
business.  He  thought  even  bad  Latin  preferable  to  good 
in  negotiations. 

These  speeches  raised  Pitt's  choler  ;  and  with  reason. 
He  had  vindicated  the  honour  of  his  country ;  and  now 
was  supporting  it  with  a  dignity  it  had  never  known  since 
the  days  of  Cromwell.  He  saw  himself  abandoned  and 
ridiculed  by  his  master's  ministers  ;  but  he  was  not  a  man 
to  recoil  before  such  adversaries.  If  he  had  assumed  an 
unwarrantable  tone,  his  situation  might  well  justify  it. 
He  broke  out  with  great  asperity,  and  told  them  dictatori- 
ally,  they  should  not  alter  an  iota  of  the  letter.  Rhodo- 
montade  had  been  too  favourite  a  figure  with  Lord 
Granville  to  leave  him  the  dupe  of  it  in  another  man. 
He  himself  had  made  glory  but  a  step  to  ambition,  instead 
of  making  ambition   a  footstool   to   glory.      He  neither 

1  Sir  Philip  Yorke,  Earl  of  Hardwicke,  formerly  Lord  Chancellor. 

2  John  Carteret,  Earl  Granville,  sometime  Prime  Minister  to  George  II. 


54  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

admired  Pitt's  exalted  diction,  nor  exalted  views  ;  and, 
continuing  to  canvass  the  point  with  him,  said  he  had 
understood  from  Bussy — '  From  Bussy,'  interrupted  Pitt, 
'  nor  you,  nor  any  of  you  shall  treat  with  Bussy :  nobody 
shall  but  myself.' 

The  Duke  of  Bedford,  whom  the  rest  always  summoned 
when  they  wanted  to  combat  Pitt  and  did  not  dare,  said 
'  he  did  not  know  why  he  was  called  to  council,  if  he 
was  not  at  liberty  to  debate  ;  and  since  he  was  told  they 
were  not  to  be  permitted  to  alter  an  iota,  he  would  come 
thither  no  more,'  and  retired.  Some  of  the  others  were 
less  stout.  Lord  Bute  said  little,  but  that  he  thought  the 
King's  honour  was  concerned  in  sticking  to  our  own 
terms  ;  and  therefore  he  should  be  for  adhering  to  them. 
This  short  turn  in  the  Favourite  produced  a  like  sentiment 
in  some  who  waited  on  his  nod.  Besides  Mr.  Pitt  and 
Lord  Temple,  the  Chancellor,  Lord  Halifax,  and  Lord 
Ligonier  assented  to  the  Favourite's  opinion  ;  Hardwicke, 
Newcastle,  Mansfield,  and  Granville  adhered  to  the  softer 
method.  The  Duke  of  Devonshire  remained,  who  had 
uttered  no  opinion.  At  last  he  said,  if  they  were  not 
permitted  to  alter  the  draught  of  the  letter  (which  implied 
his  inclination  to  have  it  altered),  he  should  give  no 
opinion.  Mr.  Pitt  asked  what  he  should  report  to  the 
King  as  his  Grace's  advice  .-*  He  replied  as  he  had  said 
before,  '  he  would  give  no  opinion.' 

Newcastle  was  alarmed,  and  jealous  of  the  sudden  and 
unexpected  turn  Lord  Bute  had  taken,  but  was  soon 
satisfied  by  his  Lordship  that  he  was  in  no  connection 
with  Mr.  Pitt ;  and,  indeed,  it  is  probable  that  he  had  only 
been  overawed,  and  had  apprehended  being  taxed  by  Pitt 
with  any  unpopular  measure.  On  the  25th,  another  council 
was  held,  to  which,  notwithstanding  his  declaration,  the 
Duke  of  Bedford  returned.  He  and  Devonshire  seemed 
to  have  no  concern  but  lest  any  wayward  humour  of  New- 
castle should  be  crossed.  Pitt  at  this  council  was  more 
temperate,  and  submitted  to  some  small  concessions. 

On  the  7th  of  September,  the  new  Queen  landed  at 


KING  GEORGE  III. 


55 


Harwich.  Lord  Harcourt,^  whose  peace  had  been  made 
by  Lord  Talbot,  had  been  sent  to  fetch  her,  with  the 
Duchesses  of  Ancaster-  and  Hamilton  ;3  but  as  an  earnest 
of  the  prison  prepared  for  her,  and  to  keep  her  in  that 
state  of  ignorance  which  was  essential  to  the  views  of 
the  Princess,  they  were  forbidden  to  see  her  alone.  Her 
mother,  who  died  during  the  treaty  of  marriage,  ordered 
her  to  put  herself  entirely  into  the  hands  of  the  Princess. 
Mrs.  Katherine  Dashwood,^  of  a  Jacobite  family,  and 
intimate  of  Lady  Bute,  was  destined  to  live  in  the  palace. 
No  privy  purse  was  allowed  to  the  Queen,  but  Mr.  Stone  ^ 
received  twenty  thousand  pounds  a  year  to  pay  her 
servants. 

She  had  been  educated  in  that  strict  course  of  piety 
which  in  Germany  reaches  to  superstition ;  a  habit  in 
which  she  was  encouraged  to  such  a  degree,  that  when 
the  King  visited  his  mother,  which  he  soon,  at  the  desire 
of  the  Princess,  began  to  do,  without  the  Queen,  she  was 
afraid  of  staying  alone,  and  retired  to  her  two  German 

^  Simon,  Lord  Harcourt,  formerly  Governor  to  the  King.  [See  an  account 
of  his  resignation  of  that  post  in  the  preceding  reign,  Memoirs  of  George  11. , 
1847,  vol.  i.  p.  289. — L.  M.] 

-  Mary  Panton,  second  wife  of  Peregrine  Bertie,  Duke  of  Ancaster. 

*  Elizabeth  Gunning,  Duchess  Dowager  of  Hamilton,  married,  secondly, 
to  John  Campbell,  Marquis  of  Lorn,  eldest  son  of  John,  Duke  of  Argyle. 

4  Mr.  Hammond  had  been  in  love  with  her,  and  then  forsaken  her.  The 
poems  which  he  wrote  on  her  have  been  published.  (James  Hammond's  Love 
Elegies  were  published  in  1743.  They  will  be  found  in  Chalmers's  Collection 
of  English  Poets. — E.] 

^  Mr.  Andrew  Stone  was  appointed  Treasurer  to  the  Queen  on  her  arrival. 
He  was  the  well-known  confidant  of  the  Duke  of  Newcastle  and  Mr.  Pelham, 
over  both  of  whom  he  exercised  great  influence.  He  had  been  private,  and  after- 
wards under  secretary  to  the  former.  Latterly  he  had  been  sub-governor  to 
the  King  when  Prince  of  Wales.  He  was  a  fine  scholar,  and  had  distinguished 
himself  at  Oxford,  where  he  was  the  rival  and  friend  of  Murray  (Lord 
Mansfield).  Bishop  Newton,  who  knew  him  well,  says  that  his  tastes  and 
feelings  were  better  suited  to  the  Church  than  to  politics.  Lord  Waldegrave 
likewise  commends  his  integrity.  Walpole  can  find  no  fault  in  him,  except 
that  he  had  a  tendency  to  Jacobitism,  a  charge  which  his  conduct  and  con- 
nections proved  to  be  unfounded.  He  appears  to  have  been  entirely  devoid 
of  ambition,  honest,  and  most  disinterested.  He  died  in  1773,  aged  seventy- 
two.  The  best  account  of  Mr.  Stone  is  in  a  note  to  Coxe's  Life  of  Pelham, 
vol.  i.  p.  430. — L.  M. 


56  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

women  ;  her  English  ladies  not  being  suffered  to  keep 
her  company.  Yet  this  weakness  seemed  solely  the  result 
of  a  bad  education.  Her  temper  appeared  to  be  lively, 
and  her  understanding  sensible  and  quick.  Great  good- 
nature, set  off  by  much  grace  in  her  manner,  recommended 
all  she  said.  Her  person  was  small,  and  very  lean,  but 
well  made.  Her  face  pale  and  homely,  her  nose  something 
flat,  her  mouth  very  large.  Her  hair  was  of  a  fine  brown, 
and  her  countenance  pleasing. 

When  first  she  saw  the  palace  she  trembled.  The 
Duchess  of  Hamilton  smiled.  The  Queen  said,  'You 
may  laugh  ;  you  have  been  married  twice  ;  but  it  is  no 
joke  to  me.'  The  King  received  her  in  the  garden  of 
St.  James's  ;  she  would  have  kneeled,  but  he  raised  and 
embraced  her,  and  led  her  to  the  Princess,  where  they  and 
Lady  Augusta  dined  together.  Between  nine  and  ten  at 
night  they  went  to  chapel.  The  Duke  of  Cumberland 
gave  her  away,  and  after  the  ceremony  they  appeared  for 
a  few  minutes  in  the  drawing-room,  and  then  went  to 
supper.  She  played  and  sung,  for  music  was  her  passion, 
but  she  loved  other  amusements  too,  and  had  been 
accustomed  to  them  ;  but,  excepting  her  music,  all  the 
rest  were  retrenched,  nor  was  she  ^  ever  suffered  to  play  at 
cards,  which  she  loved.  While  she  was  dressing,  she  was 
told  the  King  liked  some  particular  manner  of  dress. 
She  said,  '  Let  him  dress  himself;  I  shall  dress  as  I 
please.'  They  told  her  he  liked  early  hours  ;  she  replied, 
she  did  not,  and  '  qu'elle  ne  voulait  pas  se  coucher  avec  les 
poules.'  A  few  weeks  taught  her  how  little  power  she  had 
acquired  with  a  Crown.  The  affection  she  conceived  for 
the  King  softened  the  rigour  of  her  captivity.  Yet  now 
and  then  a  sigh  stole  out,  and  now  and  then  she  attempted, 
though  in  vain,  to  enlarge  her  restraint.  What  must  have 
penetrated  deeper  was  that  policy  did  not  seem  to  be  the 
sole  motive  of  the  mortifications  she  endured.  At  times 
there  entered  a  little  wantonness  of  power  into  the 
Princess's  treatment  of  her.  The  King  made  her  frequent 
^  She  did  some  years  afterwards  with  the  King,  but  quite  in  private. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  57 

presents  of  magnificent  jewels,  and,  as  if  diamonds  were 
empire,  she  was  never  allowed  to  appear  in  public  without 
them.  The  first  time  she  received  the  sacrament  she 
begged  not  to  wear  them,  one  pious  command  of  her 
mother  having  been  not  to  use  jewels  at  her  first  com- 
munion. The  King  indulged  her ;  but  Lady  Augusta 
carrying  this  tale  to  her  mother,  the  Princess  obliged  the 
King  to  insist  on  the  jewels,  and  the  poor  young  Queen's 
tears  and  terrors  could  not  dispense  with  her  obedience. 

Previous  to  the  Coronation  the  vacant  Bishopricks  were 
bestowed.  The  Archbishoprick  of  York  was  given  to 
Dr.  Drummond,^  and  Hayter^  of  Norwich,  who  had  been 
disgraced  with  Lord  Harcourt,  was,  by  the  interest  of  the 
same  patron,  Lord  Talbot,  promoted  to  the  See  of  London. 
Newcastle  vehemently  opposed  it,  and  solicited  for  Thomas 
of  Lincoln,^  but  received  this  thundering  sentence  from 
Lord  Bute  : — '  If  Thomas  is  such  a  favourite  with  your 
Grace,  why  did   not  you   prefer  him  when  you  had  the 

^  The  Hon.  Robert  Hay  Drummond,  second  son  of  George,  seventh  Earl  of 
Kinnoul,  by  his  wife,  Lady  Abigail  Harley,  second  daughter  of  Robert,  first 
Earl  of  Oxford,  assumed  the  additional  name  of  Drummond  in  accordance  to 
the  deed  of  entail  of  his  great-grandfather,  William,  first  Viscount  Strathallan. 
He  was  educated  at  Westminster  and  Christ  Church,  Oxford,  and  attended 
George  11.  in  the  campaign  of  1743  in  the  capacity  of  chaplain.  He  was 
consecrated  Bishop  of  St.  Asaph  in  Kensington  Church  on  24th  April  1748, 
was  translated  to  Salisbury  in  June  1761,  and  to  York  in  the  following 
October.  Walpole  describes  him  as  being  '  a  sensible  worldly  man,  but  much 
addicted  to  his  bottle'  {Journal  of  the  Reign  of  George  III.,  vol.  ii.  p.  89). 
He  died  at  Bishopsthorpe,  loth  December  1776,  aged  sixty-five.  He  married 
Henrietta,  daughter  of  Peter  Auriol,  a  London  merchant,  by  whom  he  had 
a  numerous  family. — E. 

2  Thomas  Hayter,  the  eldest  son  of  the  Rev.  George  Hayter,  Rector  of 
Chagford,  Devonshire,  was  consecrated  Bishop  of  Norwich  on  3rd  December 
1749,  and  on  the  death  of  Frederick,  Prince  of  Wales,  was  appointed  pre- 
ceptor to  the  young  princes.  His  translation  to  London  was  confirmed  at 
Bow  Church  on  24th  October  1 761,  and  in  the  following  November  he  was 
admitted  to  the  Privy  Council.  He  died  on  9th  January  1762,  aged  fifty-nine. 
There  is  no  truth  in  Walpole's  scandalous  story  that  Hayter  was  a  natural 
son  of  Dr.  Lancelot  Blackburne,  Archbishop  of  York.  (See  Walpole's  Zfi//^rj, 
1858,  vii.  p.  472.)— E. 

^  There  were  at  this  time  two  bishops  of  the  same  name — Dr.  John  Thomas, 
Bishop  of  Winchester,  and  Dr.  John  Thomas,  Bishop  of  Lincoln.  The  latter 
had  been  promoted  by  Lord  Granville. 


58  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

power?'  The  Duke,  however,  obtained  the  mitre  of 
Norwich  for  Dr.  Yonge  ;  and  being  bidden  to  observe 
that  the  King's  answer  to  the  address  of  Oxford  on  his 
marriage  was  kinder  than  that  to  Cambridge,  he  repHed, 
it  is  true  ;  but  two  of  the  new  Bishops  are  Cambridge  men 
— so  easily  did  he  comfort  himself  even  with  the  shadow 
of  power  ! 

Here  ended,  almost  as  soon  as  it  began,  the  credit  of 
Lord  Talbot.  He  was  sometimes  well,  sometimes  ill  with 
Lord  Bute,  and  though  remaining  in  favour  at  Court, 
never  seemed  to  have  any  influence  there.  A  trifling 
circumstance,  because  it  occasioned  an  event  that  made 
much  noise  afterwards,  must  be  mentioned.  As  Lord 
Steward,  Lord  Talbot  composed  part  of  that  ridiculous 
pageant  at  the  coronation,  the  entry  of  the  Champion. 
So  fond  was  Lord  Talbot  of  his  share  in  this  mummery, 
that  he  rehearsed  his  part  on  his  steed  in  Westminster 
Hall,  and  carried  his  new  Bishop  of  London  to  be  witness 
of  his  feats.  The  Duke  of  York  calling  Hayter,  who  was 
lame,  up  to  the  haut pas,  which  he  ascended  with  difficulty, 
the  Bishop  said,  '  You  see,  sir,  how  hard  it  is  for  me  to  get 
a  step.'  When  the  day  came,  Lord  Talbot  piqued  him- 
self on  not  turning  his  back  to  the  King,  and  produced  a 
strange  hubbub  of  laughter  by  trying  to  force  his  horse  to 
retire  backwards  out  of  the  hall.  With  the  City,  with  the 
Knights  of  the  Bath,  and  the  Barons  of  the  Cinque  Ports, 
Lord  Talbot  had  various  squabbles,  by  retrenching  their 
tables  at  the  coronation.  Beckford  told  him  it  was  hard 
if  the  citizens  should  have  no  dinner,  when  they  were  to 
give  the  King  one,  which  would  cost  them  ten  thousand 
pounds.  This  menace  prevailed.  Sir  William  Stanhope, 
brother  of  Lord  Chesterfield,  a  man  of  not  less  wit,  and  of 
more  ill-nature  than  his  elder,  said,  '  It  was  an  aflront  to 
the  Knights  of  the  Bath  ;  for  some  of  us,'  added  he,  '  are 
gentlemen.'  It  was  a  more  bitter  speech  he  made  against 
the  Scotch  and  their  Protectress.  '  He  would  not  go  to 
Court,'  he  said,  '  for  fear  of  the  itch,  which  would  reduce 
him  to  go  to  the  Princess's  Court  for  brimstone.'     To  the 


KING  GEORGE  III.  59 

Barons  of  the  Cinque  Ports  Lord  Talbot  said,  '  If  they 
came  to  him  as  Lord  Steward,  their  request  could  not  be 
granted ;  if,  as  Lord  Talbot,  he  was  a  match  for  any  of 
them.'  This  boisterous  and  absurd  behaviour  drew  aside 
much  odium  from  the  Favourite  ;  but  as  puppet-shows 
were  not  exhibited  every  day,  the  zany  was  forgotten,  and 
the  hisses  of  the  mob  soon  fastened  on  the  principal 
performer. 


6o  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 


CHAPTER   VI 

Interposition  of  Spain  in  behalf  of  France. — The  Duke  of  Bedford  and 
Bussy. — Mr.  Pitt's  indignation  at  the  demands  of  Spain. — Resignation  of 
Mr.  Pitt  and  Lord  Temple. — Exultation  of  Lord  Bute  and  other 
ministers. — Lord  Talbot's  advice  to  the  Duke  of  Newcastle. — Effect  on 
the  Nation  of  Mr.  Pitt's  Secession  from  the  Cabinet. — His  acceptance  of 
a  Peerage  for  his  wife,  and  of  a  pension. — Insidious  conduct  of  the 
Court. — Mr.  Pitt's  Successors  in  Of¥ice. — George  Grenville. — Injudicious 
Conduct  of  Mr.  Pitt. — Address  to  him  from  the  Common  Council  of 
London,  and  from  Provincial  Towns. — Mrs.  Anne  Pitt's  sarcasm  against 
her  brother. — Meeting  of  Parliament. — Choice  of  a  Speaker. — Sir  John 
Cust. — The  King's  Speech. — The  Address. — Lord  Temple's  Speech. — 
The  King  and  Royal  Family  dine  in  the  City  with  the  Lord  Mayor. — 
Mr.  Pitt's  reception  in  Guildhall. ^Riots. 

It  was  not  without  reason  that  the  nation  took  an 
alarm,  when  almost  all  who  conducted  our  affairs  were 
determined  to  take  none.  Spain  for  some  time  had 
interposed  officiously  in  behalf  of  France,  which,  said  the 
Spaniards,  was  sufficiently  humbled,  and  must  not  be 
ruined.  It  was  known  that  they  had  furnished  her  with 
money ;  and,  as  if  they  sought  an  open  breach  with  us, 
they  demanded  for  all  Spain  the  same  privilege  as  Biscay 
and  two  other  provinces  enjoyed,  of  fishing  on  the  coasts 
of  Newfoundland.  This  was  peremptorily  refused  ;  and 
had  Mr.  Pitt's  influence  been  equal  to  his  spirit.  Lord 
Bristol  ^  had  been  immediately  recalled  from  Madrid. 
But  the  other  ministers,  who  desired  nothing  better  than 
an  excuse  for  their  pusillanimity,  begged  to  temporise. 
They  pretended  to  dread  being  overpowered,  but  were 
more  afraid  of  a  new  field  being  opened  to  success.  The 
Spanish   ministers  of  the  French  faction  had   blown  up 

^  George  William  Ilervey,  Earl  of  Bristol,  Ambassador  in  Spain,  son  of 
the  famous  John,  Lord  Hervey.     See  infra. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  6i 

their  opinionative  and  ignorant  Prince  ^  with  ideas  of 
holding  the  balance  between  England  and  France ;  but 
the  old  Spaniards  lamented  a  system  so  abhorrent  from 
the  true  interest  of  their  country.  The  King  of  Spain  was 
possessed  with  a  notion  that  his  lights  were  equal  to  his 
grandeur.  He  listened,  or  thought  he  listened,  to  no 
advice :  but  if  any  thing  is  more  fatal  to  a  nation  than  a 
foolish  indolent  prince,  it  is  a  foolish  one  that  is  active  and 
obstinate.  Our  ministers  cried  out  against  a  war  with 
Spain  as  unnatural  ;  but  when  the  interest  of  Spain  did 
not  direct  Spain,  were  we  to  act  as  if  it  did  ?  The  Duke 
of  Bedford,  who,  like  Don  Carlos,  could  be  made  to  take 
half  of  what  he  meant  for  the  whole,  was  clamorous  against 
a  Spanish  war ;  and  as  he  always  compensated  for  the 
arguments  he  leaped  over,  by  excess  on  the  other  side,  he 
told  Bussy  he  was  sorry  for  his  departure,  as  we  were  no 
longer  in  a  situation  to  make  war.^ 

Bussy,  however,  still  lingered,  and  invented  frivolous 
excuses  to  palliate  his  delay.  Lord  Hardwicke,  consider- 
ing a  treaty  in  the  light  of  a  bill  in  Chancery,  begged  some 
binding  words  might  be  inserted  in  the  treaty.  But 
Mr.  Pitt  had  fixed  his  resolution.  It  was  by  one  bold 
stroke  to  assert  the  honour  of  his  country,  or  to  quit  the 
rudder.  He  insisted  that  a  fleet  of  twelve  or  fourteen 
men-of-war  should  be  instantly  sent  to  Cadiz  ;  and  that 
Lord  Bristol  should  be  ordered  to  demand  a  sight  of  the 
treaty  between  Spain  and  France ;  and  if  not  accorded,  to 
leave  Madrid  without  delay.  When  Spain  had  given  such 
indications  of  her  partiality  to  France,  nothing  could  be 
more  justifiable  than  this  measure.  But  Spain  had  not 
restrained  herself  within  the  bounds  of  favour.  In  the 
midst  of  the  negotiation  between  us  and  France,  to  which 
Spain  pretended  to  offer  herself  as  guarantee,  she  had 
committed    a   most  flagrant  and    unheard-of  instance  of 

^  Charles  the  Third,  King  of  Spain,  and  before  of  Naples  ;  commonly 
called  Don  Carlos. 

^  The  Duke  positively  denied  having  made  any  such  communication  to 
Bussy.     See  infra. — L.  M. 


62  ^MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

taking  part,  nay,  of  adding  herself  as  a  party  to  the 
grievances  complained  of  Bussy,  tolerated  here  as  a 
necrotiator,  and  without  even  a  character  from  his  own 
Court,  presented  to  Mr.  Pitt  a  cavalier  note  in  the  name 
of  Spain,  demanding  restitution  of  some  prizes  we  had 
made  on  Spain  during  the  war,  satisfaction  for  the  viola- 
tion of  their  territory  by  the  navy  of  England,  liberty  of 
fishery  on  Newfoundland,  and  destruction  of  our  settle- 
ments on  the  Spanish  territory,  in  the  bay  of  Honduras. 
A  power  in  amity  with  us,  and  affecting  to  act  as  mediator, 
selects  our  enemy's  agent  to  convey  their  complaints ! — 
what  could  surpass  this  insult? — the  patience  of  our 
ministers  under  such  indignity — not  of  Mr.  Pitt.  He 
replied  with  the  majesty  of  the  Crown  he  served, — the 
vengeance  of  that  Crown  slept  in  other  hands. 

His  hands  tied,  the  nation  affronted,  and  duped  by  the 
partial  breaking  off  of  the  treaty  with  France,  no  proper 
resentment  permitted  against  Spain,  Mr.  Pitt  found  he 
could  do  no  farther  good.  His  character  had  been  lost  by 
acquiescence  ;  and  nothing  could  rouse  the  nation,  but  his 
quitting  the  sphere  of  business,  where  he  was  so  treacher- 
ously controlled.  He  had  desired  to  enter  his  protest  in 
the  council  books  against  the  temporising  advice  of  his 
colleagues.  He  and  Lord  Temple  delivered  to  the  King 
their  reasons  and  advice  for  a  war  with  Spain  ;  and 
October  2nd  Mr.  Pitt  took  leave  of  the  Council,  thanking 
the  ministers  of  the  late  King  for  the  support  they  had 
given  to  the  war;  and  on  the  5th  he  resigned  the  Seals. 
Lord  Temple  quitted  on  the  9th  following. 

It  is  difficult  to  say  which  exulted  most  on  this  occasion, 
France,  Spain,  or  Lord  Bute,  for  Mr.  Pitt  was  the  common 
enemy  of  all  three.  Newcastle,  Hardwicke,  Bedford, 
Devonshire,  Mansfield,  and  Fox  were  not  less  pleased,^ 

^  The  following  note  is  transcribed  from  the  manuscript  memoirs  of  Sir 
George  Colebrooke,  Bart.,  M.P. ,  Chairman  of  the  East  India  Company  ;  an 
eminent  merchant,  who  sat  many  years  in  Parliament,  and  possessed  the  con- 
fidence of  some  of  the  leading  statesmen  of  his  day  ; — 

'  During  the  time  I  attended  Newcastle  House  and  the  Treasury  Chambers 


KING  GEORGE  III.  63 

for  they  had  all  concurred  to  thwart  his  plan.  Lord 
Talbot  alone,  though  of  the  same  faction,  seemed  to  see 
farther  than  any  of  them.  He  advised  the  Duke  of  New- 
castle, '  not  to  die  for  joy  on  the  Monday,  nor  for  fear  on 
the  Tuesday.' 

The  nation  was  thunderstruck,  alarmed,  and  indignant. 
The  City  of  London  proposed  to  address  the  King  to 
know  why  Mr.  Pitt  was  dismissed  ;  but  it  being  replied, 
that  the  King  would  tell  them  he  had  not  dismissed 
Mr.  Pitt,  but  had  wished  him  to  continue  in  employment, 
the  motion  dropped.  Some  proposed  a  general  mourning  ; 
others,  more  reasonable,  to  thank  Mr.  Pitt  for  his  services  ; 
but  this  too  was  damped  ;  for  the  Favourite's  agents  were 
not  idle,  and   insinuated  that    Mr.   Pitt  had  acted  with 

on  the  Contract  business,  I  had  frequent  opportunities  of  knowing  how 
despotically  Mr.  Pitt  governed  his  ministerial  colleagues,  and  how  much  he 
was  dreaded  by  the  Duke.  Some  years  afterwards  I  recollect  His  Grace 
making  this  the  subject  of  lively  conversation  at  table,  at  Claremont  ;  but  it 
was  no  subject  of  merriment  at  the  time  the  transaction  passed.  More  than 
once  I  was  summoned  to  the  Treasury  to  give  an  account  of  the  state  of  the 
provisions,  and  of  the  money,  for  the  army,  Mr.  West  giving,  for  reason,  that 
Mr.  Pitt  threatened  the  Duke,  that  if  at  any  time  a  want  of  either  should  be 
found,  he  would  impeach  him  in  the  ensuing  session.  At  the  Treasury  I 
frequently  met  Mr.  Wallis,  Commissioner  of  the  Navy,  who  mentioned  the 
following  memorable  instance.  A  train  of  artillery  was  wanted  at  Ports- 
mouth for  an  expedition.  Mr.  Pitt  told  Wallis  that  it  must  be  down  by  a 
certain  day  he  named.  Wallis  made  some  excuse  for  the  delay,  either  that 
the  transports  were  not  ready  or  the  winds  were  contrary ;  upon  which 
Mr.  Pitt  insisted  that  they  should  go  by  land,  a  method  of  conveyance  which 
was  afterwards  pursued. 

'General  Harvey,  who  had  been  sent  by  Prince  Ferdinand  to  prepare 
matters  in  England  for  the  campaign,  and  to  carry  over  the  English  draughts, 
waited  on  Mr.  Pitt  to  take  his  leave.  Mr.  Pitt  asked  him  whether  he  had 
obtained  everything  he  wanted,  and  the  General  answered,  not ;  and  he 
therefore  came  to  lake  leave,  that  no  blame  might  fall  on  him  from  the 
Prince.  Mr.  Pitt  desired  the  General  to  enumerate  what  he  wanted,  and 
immediately  rang  his  bell  for  Mr.  Wood,  who  in  the  names  of  the  different 
Boards  signified  to  their  officers  His  Majesty's  commands  for  the  despatch  of 
what  was  required  for  Germany,  and  in  four  days  General  Harvey  had  in 
readiness  what  he  had  been  as  many  months  soliciting. 

'  West,  the  Secretary,  always  looked  frightened  ;  and  well  he  might,  for 
Mr.  Pitt  would  have  been  as  good  as  his  word,  which  was  to  impeach  the 
Commissioners  of  the  Treasury,  if  they  neglected  anything  needful  for  the 
war.     At  times  he  depended  so  little  on  them,  that,  notwithstanding  a  con- 


64  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

mischievous  views  ;  for  they  who  were  incapable  of  great 
views,  were  excellent  in  undermining.  The  King  was 
advised  to  heap  rewards  on  his  late  minister.  The  Princess 
pressed  it  eagerly.  A  peerage,  a  vast  pension,  the  govern- 
ment of  Canada  (as  a  mark  that  it  was  not  to  be  restored 
at  the  peace),  were  offered  to  him.  He  had  the  frailty  to 
accept  a  peerage  for  his  wife,  and  a  pension  of  three 
thousand  a  year  for  three  lives  ! 

The  Court,  impatient  to  notify  their  triumph,  and  to 
blast  his  popularity  at  once,  could  not  resist  the  impulse 
of  publishing  in  the  very  next  night's  Gazette^  Mr.  Pitt's 
acceptance  of  their  boons  ^ — the  first  instance,  I  believe, 

tract  to  supply  the  army,  he  caused  provisions  to  be  sent  by  victualling 
transports. 

'  Proceeding  in  the  way  I  have  mentioned,  of  writing  in  the  names  of  the 
different  public  officers,  there  were  numberless  hiatus  in  their  books  of  corre- 
spondence, and  instances  of  orders  carried  into  execution  without  their 
sanction.  The  name  of  Lord  Barrington  was  principally  used  as  Secretary 
at  War,  who  did  not  know  more  than  a  stranger  of  troops  being  ordered  on 
service,  till  the  embarkation  had  actually  taken  place. 

'  The  Duke  of  Newcastle,  Speaking  himself  of  the  cavalier  manner  with 
which  Mr.  Pitt  treated  the  Cabinet,  mentioned  the  instance  of  some  foreign 
expedition  which  Mr.  Pitt  had  proposed,  but  which,  in  the  opinion  of  the 
ministers,  and  of  Lord  Anson,  First  Lord  of  the  Admiralty,  deprived  Great 
Britain  of  too  great  a  part  of  its  internal  defence.  Lord  Mansfield  had  not 
yet  given  his  opinion  ;  but  Mr.  Pitt,  apprehensive  that  it  would  be  against 
him,  summed  up  the  opinions  of  Council,  a  majority  of  which  he  declared  to 
be  for  the  expedition  ;  adding,  "  The  Chief  Justice  of  England  has  no  opinion 
to  give  in  this  matter";  thereby  stopping  his  mouth.  The  Duke  told  Lord 
Coventry,  that  Mr.  Murray,  when  Attorney-General,  and  in  the  House  of 
Commons,  had  acknowledged  to  him  that  he  was  intimidated  by  Pitt.  The 
more  the  latter  found  Murray  to  be  intimidated,  the  more  he  naturally  pressed 
him. 

'  I  never  saw  the  Duke  in  higher  spirits  than  after  Mr.  Pitt,  thwarted  by 
the  Cabinet  in  his  proposal  of  declaring  war  against  Spain,  had  given  notice 
of  resignation.  The  Duke  had  done  more  wisely,  if  he  had  followed  Lord 
Hardwicke's  advice,  and  had  resigned  on  the  death  of  his  late  master.  The 
Duke  could  not  endure  to  part  with  his  power,  much  less  to  devolve  it  on 
one  who  meant  to  keep  it.  When  he  last  resigned  the  Treasury  to  the  Duke 
of  Devonshire,  it  was  with  a  view  to  have  it  back  again  at  a  convenient 
season.' — L.  M. 

^  The  following  extraordinary  notice  was  published  in  the  Gazette  of  the 
lOth  of  October :  '  The  Right  Hon.  William  Pitt  having  resigned  the  Seals 
into  the  King's  hands,  His  Majesty  was  this  day  pleased  to  appoint  the  Earl 


KING  GEORGE  III.  65 

of  a  pension  ever  specified  in  that  paper.^  At  the  same 
time,  to  decry  his  councils,  and  to  stigmatise  them  with 
rashness,  they  added  an  article  from  Spain,  setting  forth 
the  pacific  intentions  of  that  Court.  But  in  this  instance 
their  ardour  outran  their  discretion,  for  the  article  published 
was  dated  September  4th,  Other  letters  had  been  received 
from  thence  of  the  8th,  which,  not  being  divulged,  implied 
that  the  letters  of  the  8th  were  of  a  hostile  cast,  and  con- 
sequently justified  Mr.  Pitt's  sentiments.  Subsequent 
events  were  a  still  clearer  vindication  of  his  conduct. 

The  Seals,  which  Mr.  Pitt  had  resigned,  were  given  to 
Lord  Egremont ;  and  his  brother-in-law,  George  Grenville, 
was  entrusted  with  the  management  of  the  House  of 
Commons.  Grenville  had  been  destined  for  Speaker ;  an 
office  to  which  his  drudgery  was  suited  ;  and  which,  being 
properly  the  most  neutral  place  in  government,  would 
have  excused  him  from  entering  into  the  contest  between 
Mr.  Pitt  and  the  Favourite.  But  Grenville's  temper, 
though  plodding  and  laborious,  had  not  the  usual  con- 
comitant prudence.  He  lent  himself  to  the  views  of 
Lord  Bute  to  promote  his  own.  Lord  Temple,  who  had 
as  little  decency  as  his  brother  George  had  judgment, 
was  exasperated  beyond  measure ;  broke  out  in  bitter 
invectives  against  him,  and  threatened  to  leave  from  him 
the  paternal  estate  and  give  it  to  James,  the  third  brother, 
who  had  resigned  with  him  and  Mr.  Pitt. 

The  public,  though  staggered  by  the  pension,  did  not 

of  Egremont  to  be  one  of  His  Majesty's  principal  Secretaries  of  State.  And, 
in  consideration  of  the  great  and  important  services  of  the  said  Mr.  Pitt, 
His  Majesty  has  been  graciously  pleased  to  direct  that  a  warrant  be  prepared 
for  granting  to  the  Lady  Hester  Pitt,  his  wife,  a  Barony  of  Great  Britain,  by 
the  name,  stile,  and  title  of  Baroness  of  Chatham,  to  herself,  and  of  Baron 
of  Chatham  to  her  heirs  male,  and  also  to  confer  upon  the  said  William 
Pitt,  Esq. ,  an  annuity  of  three  thousand  pounds  sterling,  during  his  own  life 
and  that  of  Lady  Hester  Pitt,  and  their  son,  John  Pitt,  Esq.'— L.  M. 

^  It  certainly  is  not  the  practice  now  (1844)  to  insert  pensions  in  the 
Gazette.  Whether  it  ever  was  so  it  would  be  difficult  to  ascertain,  as  there 
is  no  index  prior  to  the  year  1787.  The  impression  of  two  very  old  officers, 
who  have  frequent  occasions  to  consult  the  Gazette,  is,  that  no  such  general 
practice  ever  prevailed. — L.  M. 

VOL.  I.  E 


66  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

abandon  their  idol.  At  first  the  Common  Council,  which 
had  been  summoned  to  thank  him  for  his  services,  dropped 
the  intention  and  separated,  after  voting  an  address  to 
Parliament  for  widening  the  streets.  But,  on  one  hand. 
Lord  Temple's  zeal  kept  alive  the  flame ;  and  on  the 
other,  the  rancour  with  which  Lord  Bute's  and  Fox's 
partisans  pursued  Mr.  Pitt,  only  served  to  alarm  the  nation, 
and  to  endear  the  man  to  them  who  they  saw  suffered 
for  his  patriotism.  Yet  his  own  conduct  was  not  judicious. 
Incensed  at  the  abuse  thrown  on  him,  he  wrote  a  letter 
into  the  City  to  explain  his  resignation,  pleading  that  he 
had  no  longer  been  allowed  to  guide.  A  term  so  engrossing 
gave  offence,  and  handle  to  ridicule.  Fox's  agents  did  not 
overlook  it,  but  published  some  cutting  pamphlets  on  Pitt's 
arrogance.  Yet  his  condescending  to  appeal  to  the  City 
against  the  Court  bore  down  all  opposition.  The  Common 
Council  agreed  to  thank  him,  and  to  instruct  their  mem- 
bers ;  and  though  Paterson,  an  agent  of  Fox,  opposed  the 
motion,  it  was  carried  by  109  to  15.  The  contagion  soon 
spread,  even  to  part  of  Scotland.  Stirling,  Exeter,  York, 
Chester,  and  other  cities  and  towns,  complimented  Mr.  Pitt 
on  his  conduct. 

His  own  sister,  Mrs.  Anne  Pitt,  who  was  of  the  opposite 
faction,  furnished  his  enemies  with  a  severe  sarcasm.  She 
had  been  Maid  of  Honour  to  Queen  Caroline,  and  was 
warmly  attached  to  her  brother,  with  whom  she  lived. 
On  his  promotion  to  the  Pay-office,  he  had  shaken  her 
off  in  an  unbecoming  manner.  She  had  excellent  parts 
and  strong  passions.  Lord  Bolingbroke  had  recommended 
her  to  the  late  Prince,  on  whose  death  she  had  been  made 
Privy-purse  to  the  Princess  ;  but  being  of  an  intriguing 
and  most  ambitious  nature,  she  soon  destroyed  her  own 
prospect  by  an  impetuosity  to  govern  her  mistress,  and 
by  embarking  in  other  Cabals  at  that  Court.  Her  disgrace 
followed,  but  without  dismission  ;  on  which  she  had  retired 
to  France.  On  her  return,  though  she  could  never  recover 
the  favour  of  the  Princess,  she  so  successfully  cultivated 
the  patronage  of  Lord  and  Lady  Bute,  that  she  kept  her 


KING  GEORGE  III.  67 

ground  at  Leicester  Fields,  and  obtained  a  large  pension. 
This  she  had  notified  by  letter  to  her  brother.  He  had 
coldly  replied,  that  he  congratulated  her  on  the  addition 
to  her  fortune,  but  was  grieved  to  see  the  name  of  Pitt  in 
a  list  of  pensions.^  On  his  accepting  one,  she  copied  his 
own  letter,  turning  it  against  himself;  and  though  restrained 
by  her  friends  from  sending  it  to  him,  she  repeated  what 
she  had  done,  till  it  became  the  common  talk  of  the  town. 
On  the  3rd  of  November  the  Parliament  met.  George 
Grenville  made  a  very  handsome  panegyric  on  the  late 
Speaker ;  and  then  the  House  proceeded  to  the  election 
of  his  successor.  The  choice  had  been  very  difficult :  not 
from  the  number  of  competitors,  but  from  a  total  deficiency 
of  proper  subjects.  Grenville,  who  would  have  filled  the 
chair  Avith  spirit  and  knowledge,  had  been  taken  off  to  a 
province  for  which  he  was  far  less  qualified.  Lord  Bute 
had  solicited  Prowse^  to  accept  the  office,  who  was  the 

^  It  was  by  such  expressions  as  this  that  Mr.  Pitt  created  the  disappoint- 
ment in  the  public  mind  that  followed  the  announcement  of  his  pension.  To 
use  the  words  of  Lord  Brougham  :  '  He  appears  to  have  been  very  far  from 
sustaining  the  exalted  pitch  of  magnanimous  independence,  and  utter  disregard 
of  sublunary  interests,  which  we  should  expect  him  to  have  reached  and  kept 
as  a  matter  of  course,  from  a  mere  cursory  glance  at  the  mould  in  which  his 
lofty  character  was  cast.' — Statesmen  of  the  Time  of  George  III.,  1st  series, 
p.  45.  A  pension  of  ;^4000  a  year  to  Lord  Holderness  passed  without  a 
murmur,  while  one  of  ;i^3000  a  year  to  Mr.  Pitt  raised  a  general  burst  of 
indignation,  only  because  the  country  regarded  the  latter  as  lowering  their 
idol  to  the  level  of  the  jobbing  statesmen  of  the  day.  The  cry  against  Mr.  Pitt 
was,  indeed,  almost  universal.  See  letter  to  Mr.  Conway,  vol.  iii.  of  Walpole's 
Letters  (1857),  pp.  453-4;  and  particularly  the  note  containing  the  opposite 
opinions  of  Mr.  Gray  and  Mr.  Burke.  Mr.  Pitt's  noble  refusal  of  the  vast 
emoluments  of  the  Pay-office,  which  so  enriched  those  who  preceded  and 
succeeded  him  as  Paymaster,  entitles  his  conduct  in  all  pecuniary  matters  to 
a  liberal  construction  from  posterity.  What  is  really  to  be  regretted  is  the 
humiliating  tone  of  his  correspondence  with  Lord  Bute,  in  accepting  the 
pension  {Chatham  Correspondence,  vol.  ii.  p.  152),  and  his  language  at  his 
interview  with  the  King  on  that  occasion. — Annual  Register  for  1761,  pp. 
44-45.  But  we  will  not  dwell  on  the  defects  of  a  man  who  certainly  was  far 
above  his  age,  not  only  in  talent,  but  in  real  independence. — L.  M. 

^  Thomas  Prowse,  member  for  Somersetshire,  which  he  had  represented 
in  five  successive  Parliaments,  having  been  every  time  unanimously  elected. 
He  was  an  opulent,  well-informed,  and  influential  country  gentleman.  He 
died,  after  a  long  illness,  on  ist  January  1767,  aged  fifty-nine,  and  was  buried 


68  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

most  knowing  and  the  most  moderate  of  the  Tories,  but 
he  had  decHncd  from  bad  health.  The  Duke  of  Newcastle 
had  proposed  Bacon,i  who  had  more  Whiggism  than 
abilities  ;  but  the  Favourite  determined  on  Sir  John  Cust,^ 
who  was  a  Tory,  and  had  nothing  but  industry  ;  he  was 
indeed  a  very  poor  creature.  Lord  Barrington  named 
him,  his  friend  Lord  Egmont  praised  him,  and  he  was 
chosen. 

Two  nights  before,  at  a  meeting  of  the  principal 
men  in  the  House  of  Commons,  to  hear  the  King's 
Speech,  and  the  respondent  Address,  read,  Charles 
Townshend,  who  was  offended  at  the  lead  being  assigned 
to  Grenville,  found  fault  that  there  was  no  mention  of  the 
militia.  Grenville  said  it  was  not  usual  to  insert  anything 
in  the  Address  which  was  not  touched  upon  in  the  Speech  ; 
and  added,  that  he  found  there  were  very  different  opinions 
in  members  of  Parliament  on  the  usefulness  of  the  militia. 
Lord  Barrington  and  Charles  Yorke  supported  Grenville  : 
Stanley  agreed  with  Townshend,  who  again  debated  the 
point  with  much  warmth.  The  next  night,  at  a  larger 
meeting  at  the  Cock-pit,  Townshend  recanted  to  Grenville 
all  he  had  said,  professed  he  believed  he  had  been 
infatuated,  begged  it  might  be  forgotten,  and  that 
Grenville  would  not  take  it  to  himself.     Grenville  replied, 

in  Axbridge  Church;  where  the  long  panegyric  on  his  tomb  states — 'That 
though  frequently  solicited,  he  never  could  be  prevailed  upon  to  accept  of  any 
employment  in  the  state '  (Collinson's  History  of  Somerset,  vol.  iii.  p.  562). 
— L.  M. 

^  Edward  Bacon  of  Earlham  Hall,  Norfolk,  Recorder  of  Norwich,  son  of 
Walter  Bacon,  M.  P.  for  Norwich.  He  was  M.P.  for  King's  Lynn,  1742-7; 
Collington,  1748-54;  Newport,  1754-6;  Norwich,  1756-84,  and  served  on 
the  Board  of  Trade  and  Plantations  from  1759  to  1765.  He  died  on  12th  March 
1786,  aged  seventy-three,  and  was  buried  in  Earlham  Church. — E. 

^  A  more  favourable  character  of  Sir  John  Cust  is  given  in  the  preface  of 
Moore's  General  Index  to  the  Journals  of  the  Hotise  of  Commons,  vol.  iv. 
pp.  xxiii.  -iv.  ;  a  very  useful  work,  to  the  compilation  of  which  he  contributed. 
He  added  to  great  industry  a  considerable  knowledge  of  Parliamentary  history 
and  constitutional  law ;  and  his  amiable  disposition  and  obliging  temper  were 
no  insignificant  recommendations  to  the  Speakership.  He  was  a  Lincoln- 
shire country  gentleman,  of  ancient  family,  and  had  inherited  a  great  estate 
from  his  mother,  the  heiress  of  the  Tyrconnels. — L.  M. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  69 

he  had  not :  that  for  himself  he  forgot  it ;  as  the  King's 
servant  he  could  not  forget  it. 

On  the  6th,  the  King  made  his  speech.  Lord 
Northumberland/  and  Lord  Berkeley^  of  Stratton  moved 
and  seconded  the  Address.  Lord  Temple  rose,  and 
opened  on  his  own  and  Mr.  Pitt's  resignations,  the  motives 
to  which  he  explained  ;  found  fault  that  no  mention  was 
made  of  the  militia,  and  that  the  Parliament  had  not  been 
thanked  for  establishing  it.  He  talked  on  Court  favour, 
and  on  those  who  disposed  of  all  things  ;  endeavouring  to 
provoke  Lord  Bute  to  rise.  He  said  the  crisis  for  a  war 
with  Spain  had  been  most  advantageously  held  out  to  this 
country,  and  complained  of  those  who  had  betrayed  the 
secrets  of  our  situation  to  Bussy.  It  was  a  time,  he  said, 
when  a  first  minister  was  necessary  ;  but  now,  who 
remained  fit  for  that  office  ?  Who  thought  himself  capable 
oi guidhig}  He  uttered  this  in  his  usual  languid  manner, 
though  the  matter  was  not  ill  conceived  ;  nor,  though 
indiscreet,  was  he  so  intemperate  as  had  been  expected. 
The  Duke  of  Bedford  replied  with  much  applause,  and 
said  he  did  not  know  why  the  militia  deserved  more  thanks 
than  the  grant  of  regular  troops.  He  declared,^  upon  his 
honour,  that  he  had  told  no  such  thing,  as  had  been  hinted 
at,  to  Bussy  ;  and  concluded  with  hoping  never  to  see  a 
first  minister.  Lord  Shelbourne,  attached  to  Fox,  and 
profuse  of  application  to  Lord  Bute,  spoke  against  the 
German  war.  The  Duke  of  Marlborough*  and  Earl 
Gower  moved  the  congratulation  to  the  Queen. 

The  decency  of  Lord  Temple's  prelude  to  new 
opposition  soon  changed  its  hue  in  a  manner  more  suited 
to  his  factious  turbulence.     On  the  9th,  the  King  and  all 

^  Sir  Hugh  Smithson  Percy,  Earl  of  Northumberland. 

2  John  Berkeley,  fifth  and  last  Lord  Berkeley  of  Stratton.  He  died  without 
issue  in  1773,  having  left  his  principal  estates  to  Lord  Berkeley. — L.  M. 

3  It  is  certain  that  Monsieur  de  Bussy  told  different  persons  what  the  Duke 
of  Bedford  had  said  to  him,  particularly  to  Lady  Hervey,  from  whom  I 
heard  it. 

*  George  Spencer,  Duke  of  Marlborough,  K.G.  He  was  son-in-law  of 
the  Duke  of  Bedford.     He  died  in  January  1817,  aged  seventy-eight.— L.M. 


^Q  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

the  Royal  family  dined  in  the  city  with  the  Lord  Mayor. 
Thither,  too,  went  Mr.  Pitt  and  Lord  Temple  in  a  chariot 
together, — a  step  justly  censured,  and  very  nearly  pro- 
ductive of  fatal  consequences.  To  them  all  acclamations 
were  addressed  ;  and  the  distinctions  paid  in  the  Guild- 
hall to  Mr.  Pitt,  to  the  total  neglect  of  the  King,  bestowed 
all  the  honour  of  the  triumph  on  the  former.  Little  was 
wanting  to  turn  the  pageant  into  a  tragedy.  Riots  ensued, 
and  many  persons  were  insulted.  The  Favourite  had 
taken  the  precaution  of  having  a  guard  of  butchers  and 
bruisers ;  and  by  the  defence  of  that  convoy  alone, 
escaped  mischief.  Sir  Samuel  Fludyer,  the  Lord  Mayor, 
caused  diligent  inquiry  to  be  made  into  the  proceedings 
of  the  day,  and  learned  that  Beckford  himself  had  visited 
several  public-houses  over  night,  and  had  appointed 
ringleaders  to  different  stations,  and  had  been  the  first  to 
raise  the  huzza  in  the  hall  on  the  entrance  of  Mr.  Pitt, 
//zi- joining  himself  to  a  pomp,  dedicated  to  a  Court  he  had 
just  quitted,  that  was  not  decent.  The  ambition  of  drawing 
to  himself  the  homage  of  the  people  was  not  modest.  To 
offer  himself  as  an  incentive  to  civil  tumult,  and  to  how 
dangerous  consequences  he  could  not  tell,  was  not  a 
symptom  of  very  innocent  intentions. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  71 


CHAPTER    VII 

Mr.  Wilkes's  censures  on  the  King's  Speech,  seconded  by  Dempster. — The 
Debate  on  continuing  the  War. — Speeches  of  Beckford,  Cust,  Harvey, 
Forester,  Pitt,  and  George  Grenville. — The  Queen's  Dowry  voted. — 
Ministerial  Manoeuvres  on  the  secession  of  Mr.  Pitt. — Meeting  at  the  St. 
Alban's  Tavern. — Discussion  on  the  Militia  Act. — Speech,  in  the  House 
of  Commons,  of  Charles  Townshend,  Secretary  at  War. — Policy  of  the 
Court. — Fox's  Faction. — Debate  on  the  War  in  Germany. — George 
Grenville's  desertion  of  Pitt. — Pitt's  Reply. — Walpole's  Reflections  on 
that  Statesman. 

On  the  13th  of  November  the  Address  to  the  King 
was  moved  in  the  House  of  Commons  by  the  Lords 
Middleton  and  Parker.^  Mr.  Wilkes,^  a  man  of  whom 
much  will  be  said  hereafter,  passed  some  censures  on  the 
King's  speech,  which,  in  the  language  of  Parliament,  he 
said  he  was  authorised  to  call  the  speech  of  the  minister ; 
though  of  what  minister  he  could  not  tell.  The  extra- 
ordinary Gazette,  he  said,  which  had  vaunted  the  pacific 
disposition  of  Spain,  had  been  contradicted  by  facts  :  it 
had  appeared  that  we  were  rather  in  a  state  of  war  with 
that  Crown.  Yet  no  notice  had  been  taken  of  those 
transactions  in  the  speech,  though  all  mankind  was 
apprised  of  their  notorious  insults.  He  himself  had  seen 
a  Spanish  memorial,  that  had  been  delivered  by  a  French 
agent.  Unless  some  communication  was  made  to 
Parliament,  how  could  Parliament  lay   the   state   of  the 

^  Thomas,  Lord  Parker,  elder  son  of  the  Earl  of  Macclesfield,  whom  he 
succeeded  in  that  title  in  March  1764.  Like  his  father,  he  cultivated  mathe- 
matics successfully,  and  was  much  respected.  He  had  been  defeated  in  the 
great  contest  for  the  county  of  Oxford  in  1754,  but  was  seated  on  petition. 
He  died  in  1795,  aged  seventy- two. — L.  M. 

^  The  famous  John  Wilkes,  member  for  Aylesbury,  and  author  of  The 
North  Briton. 


72  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

nation  before  his  Majesty  ?  As  little  mention,  he 
observed,  was  made  of  the  militia,  though  the  ground 
on  which  the  war  had  stood.  Dempster,^  a  young  Scotch 
member,  seconded  Wilkes,  though  less  peremptory  in 
opposition  ;  for  though  he  pleaded  for  the  extension  of 
the  militia  to  Scotland,  and  said  the  militia  had  felt  the 
heavy  hand  of  administration,  yet  he  censured  the  German 
war,  as  having  neither  object  nor  end  ;  condemned  faction, 
and  said  he  was  pleased  to  see  that  his  Majesty  had 
emancipated  himself  from  the  chains  that  had  been 
prepared  for  him. 

Beckford,  with  his  usual  rhodomontade,  said  our 
situation  had  never  been  so  comfortable,  nor  the 
national  union  ever  so  complete.  It  was  not  the  mob, 
nor  two  hundred  great  Lords  (who  received  more  from 
Government  than  they  paid  to  it),  that  made  us  so 
firm :  the  middling  rank  of  men  it  was  in  which  our 
strength  consisted,  and  who  called  upon  us  to  demand 
peace  sword  in  hand.  Nor  had  our  abilities  ever  been 
so  great.  He  was  astonished  our  ministers — who  they 
were  he  knew  not,  nor  did  he  look  on  Grenville  and  those 
in  the  House  of  Commons  but  as  subalterns — were  afraid 
of  any  power  upon  earth  :  he  was  amazed  they  could 
suffer  such  memorials  from  Spain,  so  derogatory  to  our 
honour.  The  answer  should  have  been  made  by  the 
mouth  of  cannon.  The  revenues  of  Spain  were  pitiful, 
were  foreign  :  must  be  brought  home, — and  that  we  might 
have  prevented.  You  are  near  shore,  continued  he ;  will 
you  go  back  ?  and  without  a  pilot  ?  A  King  should  not 
govern  by  a  faction  :  the  late  King  had  been  governed 
by  one,  who  resigned  in  the  midst  of  rebellion,  and  flung 
an  empty  purse  in  his  face ;  but  we  had  now  no  Earl  of 
Warwick,  no  king-makers.  Hope  must  come  from  the 
rising  generation  :  we  had  tried  the  old  in  vain.     The  war 

^  George  Dempster  of  Dunnichen,  Co.  Forfar,  a  director  of  the  East  India 
Company  and  M.P.  for  the  Forfar  District  of  Burghs,  1761-68  and  1769-90. 
He  was  appointed  Secretary  to  the  Order  of  the  Thistle  on  25th  August 
1765,  and  died  on  13th  February  1818,  aged  eighty-five. — E. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  73 

in  Germany  had  an  object,  and  had  almost  obtained  it. 
The  French  ought  to  be  kept  there.  He  did  not  desire 
to  see  France  and  England  engaged  single-handed.  France 
said,  let  us  both  get  out  of  Germany,  for  she  felt  the  mis- 
chief of  warring  there.  The  manner,  indeed,  in  which  we 
had  conducted  our  affairs  there,  had  been  too  expensive ; 
of  which  he  produced  instances  :  but  speak  out,  cried  he  ; 
will  you  quit  all  your  allies }  Two  points  must  be  ob- 
tained, the  security  of  America  and  of  our  fisheries.  We 
had  already  conceded  too  much :  he  was  sorry  for  it — was 
sorry  Mr.  Pitt  had  softened  at  all.  He  would  be  ready 
to  second  Mr.  Wilkes  in  moving  for  the  Spanish  papers, 
and  to  know  if  they  avowed  Bussy. 

Beckford  was  answered  by  Cust  ^  (the  Speaker's  brother), 
and  by  Harvey  ;  ^  the  last,  a  lawyer  ;  both  of  Tory  families, 
and  the  latter  very  sensible.  The  former  spoke  on  the 
burthen  of  the  war,  and  said,  that  to  raise  six  millions, 
we  ran  in  debt  two :  this  year  would  cost  us  between  nine 
and  ten.  He  would  appeal  to  our  very  successes  for  the 
impropriety  of  continuing  the  war.  The  King  had  told 
us  he  would  never  depart  from  our  true  interest :  if  we 
never  had  departed  from  it,  we  should  not  be  debating 
now.  Harvey  condemned  the  war  in  Germany,  and  justi- 
fied the  intentions  of  Spain.  Fuentes  had  declared  that, 
if  his  Court  had  had  any  hostile  designs,  it  would  itself 
have  made  the  demands ;  but  the  other  end  of  the  town, 
said  he,  will  always  promote  a  Spanish  war:  had  done 
so  in  the  last  reign  ;  had  driven  it  on  by  the  feigned 
cruelties  exercised  on  Captain  Jenkins,^  who,  however, 
died  with  his  ears  on  his  head.  Forester,  another  and 
still  shrewder  lawyer,  endeavoured  to  ward  off  the  rising 
spirit  by  showing  there  was  no  such  question  before  the 
House  as  what  was  then  in  debate,  Wilkes  not  having 

1  Peregrine  Cust.     He  is  mentioned  in  Churchill's  Satires. 

2  Eliab  Harvey,  brother  of  William  Harvey  of  Chigwell,  in  Essex,  died  in 
1769.     [M.P.  for  Dunwich,  1761-68.— E.] 

3  During  the  administration  of  Sir  Robert  Walpole  the  Opposition  propa- 
gated a  report,  which  was  universally  believed,  that  the  Spaniards,  though 
at  peace  with  us,  had  taken  one  of  our  ships,  and  cut  off  the  captain's  ears. 


74  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

made  any  motion  ;  (this  was  an  usual  art  in  old  members, 
and  often  served  the  purpose) ;  nor  was  the  militia  more 
the  subject  of  the  debate,  nor  as  yet  to  come  on.  Thus 
was  the  House  free  from  any  influence  but  of  gratitude 
to  the  militia,  as  they  had  been  encamped  without  law, 
and  only  because  we  had  a  greater  war  abroad  than  we 
could  bear.  He  hoped  that  night's  mail  would  not  carry 
to  the  Continent  news  of  disunion  in  the  new  Parliament. 
Mr.  Pitt,  on  whom  all  eyes  were  fixed,  rose  ;  and  said 
he  wished  the  turn  of  the  debate  had  permitted  him  to 
sit  still ;  but  he  found  himself  called  upon.  He  professed 
great  zeal  for  his  Majesty  and  for  the  administration, 
when  it  should  be  settled ;  and  was  desirous  to  leave  his 
own  justification  to  his  past  conduct.  For  the  militia, 
he  should  have  been  glad  it  had  been  mentioned  in  the 
speech.  He  had  advised  that  measure  last  year  against 
the  greater  part  of  the  Cabinet  Council.  For  a  war  with 
Spain,  the  motives  for  it  were  not  founded  on  the  French 
papers  :  those,  he  concluded,  would  be  published  here  : 
the  silence  of  the  ministers  made  him  conclude  so,  or  it 
would  be  unfair  dealing  with  the  Parliament.  When  those 
papers  should  appear,  he  would,  as  a  member  of  Parliament, 
speak  his  opinion  :  did  not  desire  on  that  question  that 
any  man  should  think  with  him,  but  form  his  judgment 
on  the  fact  itself  As  the  contrary  sentiment  had  been 
adopted  by  his  Majesty,  he  hoped  not  to  have  the  bulk 
of  the  nation  on  his  side.  God  alone  knew  what  the 
opinion  would  be,  when  the  whole  should  come  out.  The 
probability  was,  that  himself  had  been  erroneous.  His 
own  situation  was  awful ;  he  stood  there  to  be  examined — 
hoped  the  ministers  would  produce  the  advice,  signed  by 
Lord  Temple  and  him,  and  delivered  to  his  Majesty.  He 
would  conceal  nothing  as  far  as  was  consistent  with  his 
oath  of  Privy  Councillor.  Nor  would  he  inflame — how 
could  he — he,  who  stood  so  unsupported  ?  He  had  been 
taxed  with  assuming  to  guide.  He  declared  he  had  never 
abetted  the  publication  of  his  letter  to  Hodges — never 
had  consented  to  its  publication ;  but  now  published,  he 


KING  GEORGE  III.  75 

did  avow  it.  Early  he  had  contracted  an  indifference  to 
party-papers,  and  had  rather  read  two  passages  in  Virgil 
or  Horace.  He  had  resigned  the  Seals  in  order  not  to 
be  responsible  for  measures  he  was  no  longer  suffered  to 
guide,  and  from  seeing  the  question  of  Spain  in  the  light 
he  saw  it.  He  had  acted  from  conviction,  as  he  supposed 
the  great  Lords,  who  had  opposed  him,  had  done  likewise. 
He  blessed  himself  that  no  question  had  been  moved  that 
day  to  bar  unanimity.  All  vigour  was  recommended 
from  the  Throne  :  he  would  not  have  the  post  depart  with 
many  arraignments  of  the  German  war,  and  without  any 
minister  saying  a  word  in  its  behalf.  In  their  situation 
he  would  have  lain  by  :  did  they  advise  a  speech  of  vigour, 
and  yet  hold  their  peace,  when  vigorous  measures  were 
condemned  ?  Himself  was  never  stopped  by  popularity, 
or  by  the  turn  of  the  tide.  He  would  speak  though  a 
private  man  :  hoped  never  to  be  a  public  man  again.  He 
never  would  come  into  place  again  ;  he  never  could  ;  for 
he  never  could  but  by  his  own  accord.  He  had  been 
nursed  in  the  lap  of  fortune,  but  now  had  not  weight 
enough  to  make  but  one  Lord,  with  whom  he  would  live 
and  die,  of  his  opinion.  Hoped  his  Majesty's  rest  would 
not  be  disturbed,  as  his  had  been  :  he  had  been  robbed 
of  his  sleep  for  many  days,  and  now  should  be  robbed 
of  his  honour,  if  our  troops  were  recalled  from  Germany. 
Nothing  but  that  spectre  of  an  invasion,  which  the 
Ministry  had  not  had  constancy  enough  to  look  at,  had 
frightened  us  out  of  Mahon.  So  would  it  be  again,  if 
the  troops  of  France  found  themselves  at  liberty  to  quit 
Germany.  He  had  known  five  thousand  French  occasion 
our  recalling  seventy  or  fourscore  thousand  men  to  look 
them  in  the  face.  He  paid  a  handsome  compliment  to 
Admiral  Hawke  and  the  navy  ;  but  said,  ask  the  French 
whether  they  could  not  engage  you  hand  to  hand,  if 
delivered  from  the  war  in  Germany.  The  way  to  peace 
was  not  by  lessening  our  efforts.  England  was  equal  to 
both  wars,  the  American  and  the  German  ;  and  if  con- 
tinued, nothing  but  conquest  would  follow — all  owing  to 


76  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

the  German  war.  If  we  abandoned  our  allies,  God  would 
abandon  us.  When  we  had  spent  a  hundred  millions, 
should  we  throw  away  the  fruit,  rather  than  spend  twelve 
more?  Let  a  man  so  narrow-minded  stand  behind  a 
counter,  and  not  govern  a  kingdom.  [This  was  pointed 
at  Cust,  who  was  a  director  of  the  African  Company.] 
America  had  been  conquered  in  Germany}  Prince  Fer- 
dinand had  been  the  saviour  of  Europe,  and  had  shattered 
the  whole  military  power  of  that  military  monarchy, 
France.  It  was  not  from  what  young  members  had  said 
against  the  German  war,  but  from  what  had  7iot  been  said 
for  it,  that  he  augured  ill  for  this  country.  He  hoped  so 
insignificant  a  name  as  his  would  be  sent  to  every  hostile 
Court,  though  every  other  man  in  the  House  should  be 
against  the  German  war ;  he  would  stand  single,  and 
undergo  the  shame.  Government,  he  hoped,  would  in 
due  time  lay  open  the  proceedings  of  Spain,  lest  gentle- 
men might  be  misled  from  not  knowing  the  precise  time 
of  the  arrival  of  Fuentes.^  Harvey  was  sure  Spain  could 
not  have  acted  as  alleged,  yet  owned  he  knew  nothing  of 
the  matter.  But  were  people  to  go  away,  thinking  he 
himself  had  courted  a  war  with  Spain  ?  He  might  have 
declared  his  private  opinion  in  council ;  but  let  Parlia- 
ment see  the  whole  of  the  negotiation  :  let  them  know 
his  patience  and  long-suffering,  till  he  was  afraid  he  should 
be  answerable  for  it.  He  gave  a  flat  contradiction  to  the 
notion  of  his  having  courted  a  war  with  Spain,  and  pro- 
tested he  had  done  all  he  could  to  avoid  it.  He  had 
stated  his  opinion  in  writing,  lest  false  whispers  from 
those  who  ought  to  be  above  such  underhand  machina- 
tions should  prejudice  him  in  the  eyes  of  his  countrymen. 
In  delicacy,  not  in  obligation,  he  would  sit  down  rather 
than  divulge  what  had  passed.  Yet  altercation,  opposition 
would  have  ensued,  had  there  not  been  a  determination 
to  preserve  unanimity.     He  would  even  persuade  gentle- 

^  This  was  the  famous  sentence  so  often  quoted,  and  so  often  ridiculed,  in 
the  pamphlets  of  that  time. 

^  The  Spanish  Ambassador.     See  infra. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  77 

men  not  to  be  too  fastidious  in  their  criticisms  on  the 
Treasury  and  the  budget.  For  his  relaxing  on  the  article 
of  the  fisheries,  with  which  his  friend  Beckford  had  taxed 
him,  he  said  it  was  best  to  own  the  truth  ;  he  had  been 
overborne  by  numbers.  He  and  Lord  Temple  would 
have  made  exclusive  fisheries  the  sine  qua  non  of  the 
peace.  Were  the  negotiation  to  recommence,  provided 
circumstances  concurred,  he  would  stand  for  exclusive 
fisheries  ;  nor  sheathe  the  sword  till  they  were  given  up, 
even  at  the  expense  of  another  campaign.  He  was  going 
to  sit  down,  but  added  a  few  words  on  the  note  of  Fuentes, 
which,  said  he,  that  minister  knows  was  never  remitted 
to  me.  He  did  read  me  an  extract ;  it  was  to  the  effect 
alleged.  I  did  not  much  attend  to  it ;  said  I  had  written 
to  Lord  Bristol,  and  would  let  it  rest  there.  He  did  read 
something  like  it,  but  did  not  deliver  it. 

This  guarded,  artful,  and  inflammatory  speech  remained 
unanswered.  George  Grenville,  indeed,  said  a  few  words 
on  the  form  of  proceeding  ;  as,  that  it  would  be  precluding 
those  great  questions  to  insert  them  either  in  the  Speech 
or  Address,  and,  to  justify  Spain,  he  read  a  letter  in  which 
they  ordered  one  of  our  cutters  to  be  restored.  As  a  rising- 
minister  he  spoke  more  largely  on  himself,  disclaimed  any 
ambition,  and  professed  he  would  do  his  duty  without  fear. 
The  Address  passed  without  a  negative.  The  next  day 
Lord  Thomond  ^  and  Lord  Villiers  moved  the  Address  to 
the  Queen,  and  on  the  19th  her  dowry  was  voted. 

The  secession  of  Pitt,  and  his  popularity,  that  still  kept 
its  ground,  warned  the  administration  to  a  closer  union. 
At  least  the  old  ministers,  who  had  separated  from  him, 
thought  it  prudent  to  draw  nigher  to  the  Favourite.  The 
Duke  of  Devonshire,  governed  by  Fox,  who  hated  Pitt, 
and  aspired  to  be  lieutenant  to  Lord  Bute,  meditated  a 
coalition  of  the  latter  with  Newcastle.  The  house  of 
Bedford  were  already  devoted  to  the  Favourite,  and  con- 

^  Percy  Windham  O'Brien,  Earl  of  Thomond,  second  son  of  Sir  William 
Windham,  and  brother  of  the  Earl  of  Egremont.  Their  sister  was  married 
to  Mr.  George  Grenville. 


78  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

curred  in  that  connection.  In  consequence  of  this  con- 
junction, the  Privy  Seal  was  deHvered  to  the  Duke  of 
Bedford  ;  great  promises  were  made  to  Rigby.  Lord 
Thomond,  brother-in-law  of  Grenville,  was  appointed 
Cofferer ;  Lord  Powis  i  Treasurer  of  the  Household,  and 
Lord  George  Cavendish  ^  Comptroller. 

On  the  25th,  at  night,  some  forty  persons,  or  fewer,  met 
at  the  St.  Alban's  tavern,  in  Pall  Mall.  The  Act  that  had 
granted  the  militia  was  within  a  year  of  expiring.  It  was 
become  irksome  to  many  of  the  country  gentlemen,  was 
much  disliked  by  the  chief  ministers,  and  by  great  part  of 
the  House  of  Commons.  The  friends  of  the  measure  had 
wished  to  get  it  renewed  for  five  years  more.  Some 
desired  it  perpetual.  Pitt,  while  minister,  had  staved  off 
even  the  shorter  term.  He  now  went  to  this  meeting, 
spoke  four  times  warmly  for  the  perpetuity,  and  said  this 
was  the  moment  to  push  it.  Charles  Townshend,  who 
attended  the  meeting  too,  spoke  earnestly,  but  only  for 
the  term  of  five  years.  The  company  signed  a  paper, 
engaging  to  stand  by  one  another  in  the  measure,  and 
they  who  held  commissions  in  the  militia  promised  to 
throw  them  up  if  the  perpetuity  should  not  be  carried, 
agreeing  only  to  await  the  arrival  of  General  Townshend, 
the  patron  of  the  plan,  who  was  expected  from  the  army. 
The  Court  was  as  much  set  against  the  militia.  The 
Duke  of  Devonshire  told  George  Grenville  he  believed  he 
could  not  induce  his  own  brothers  to  vote  for  it.  The 
very  same  day  intelligence  had  been  received  of  an  intended 
invasion  from  France.  Grenville  told  the  Duke  he  could 
not  come  into  any  measure  that  would  disband  seven-and- 
twenty  thousand   men,  when  we  should   have   so  much 

^  Henry  Arthur  Herbert,  Earl  of  Powis,  having  become  male  heir  of  this 
illustrious  family  by  the  death  of  the  last  peer,  Henry,  Lord  Herbert  of 
Cherbury,  in  1738,  was  created  Lord  Herbert  in  1743,  and  Earl  of  Powis 
in  1748.  His  lordship  married  Barbara,  sole  daughter  and  heiress  of  Lord 
Edward  Herbert,  brother  of  the  last  Marquis  of  Powis,  and  died  in  1772, 
leaving  a  son,  on  whose  death,  in  1801,  the  earldom  became  extinct. 
— L.  M. 

^  Next  brother  of  the  Duke  of  Devonshire. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  79 

occasion  for  them :  it  would  be  better  to  grant  the  per- 
petuity, and  repeal  it  afterwards. 

The  same  morning  Charles  Townshend,^  now  Secretary 
at  War,  moved  for  the  land  forces,  which  were  granted 
without  opposition.  His  new  office  gave  him  an  oppor- 
tunity of  venting  his  vanity.  He  assumed  much,  and 
called  himself  trustee  for  the  honest  claims  of  the  officers. 
On  December  9th  he  opened  to  the  House  the  state  of  the 
foreign  troops  in  our  pay,  the  expense  of  which  came  to 
near  a  million.  Townshend  pleaded  the  inconsiderable 
loss  we  had  sustained  in  the  last  campaign,  not  above  two 
thousand  men,  which  would  easily  be  recruited ;  and  that 
next  year,  as  in  the  last  four,  we  should  cover  our  allies 
against  any  force  France  could  bring  against  us.  Should 
we  for  next  year  continue  the  same  army,  or  break  off 
abruptly?  The  Parliament  had  been  called  upon  day 
after  day  to  disapprove  or  ratify  the  measure,  and  had 
ratified  it.  The  totality  of  the  war  had  been  one  of  the 
great  causes  of  its  success.  Had  we  neglected  any  other 
part  for  Germany,  it  had  been  fatal ;  but  a  mixed  system, 
and  attention  to  the  whole,  had  given  us  victory  in  every 
quarter.  France  had  resisted  everywhere,  had  been  dis- 
graced everywhere.  Their  navy,  the  last  sanguine  promise 
of  still  another  minister,  was  annihilated.  We  ought  not 
to  desist  but  from  inability  to  pursue  up  the  blow.  It 
ought  to  be  manifest  that  we  were  disabled.  But  where 
was  a  symptom  of  decay  ?  In  our  trade,  credit,  agriculture, 
where  was  a  failure  .'*  Yet  he  thought  our  situation  nor 
comfortable,  nor  desperate.  Five  millions  he  allowed 
would  be  expended  this  year  on  the  war  in  Germany. 
He  concluded  with  high  encomiums  on  what  he  called 
Mr.  Pitfs  divine  plan  ;  but  added  that  a  larger  portion  of 
fame  remained  for  those  who  should  take  up  the  plan  and 
terminate  it  by  a  good  peace. 

The  Court,  who  wished  to  veil  their  eagerness  for  peace, 
and  who,  instead  of  attaining  that  peace,  were  on  the 
brink  of  a  war  with  Spain,  took  great  pains  to  prevent 
^  Second  son  of  Charles,  Lord  Viscount  Townshend. 


8o  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

their  creatures  from  openly  attacking  the  German  war. 
Lord  Egmont  was  persuaded  to  be  absent  from  the 
House  ;  but  Fox's  faction  was  more  intent  on  discrediting 
Pitt  than  even  on  paying  their  court — and  perhaps  knew 
how  easily  they  should  be  forgiven.  Rigby  said  he  had 
voted  for  all  very  large  sums  ;  was  sorry  he  began  to  have 
a  doubt ;  wished  an  end  was  put,  had  been  put,  to  the 
whole  war.  The  Germans  were  entitled  to  the  protection 
of  the  House,  but  ours  was  no  protection.  They  were  in 
a  worse  condition  than  if  conquered.  The  treaty  with 
Prussia  would  expire  on  the  12th  of  the  month  ;  he  hoped 
we  should  make  no  more  such  with  that  little  power.  Not 
to  quit  the  alliance  ought  only  to  be  a  condition  on  the 
party  subsidised.  In  no  one  treaty  did  there  exist  an 
article  that  obliged  us  to  continue  our  national  troops  in 
Germany.  Nor  could  we  supply  our  army  with  men  ; 
since  1758  we  had  sent  over  twenty-nine  thousand  men. 
We  had  but  thirteen  thousand  remaining.  Could  this 
country  furnish  four  thousand  men  a  year  to  Germany  ? 
Marshal  Ligonier  had  ordered  the  old  corps  to  be  recruited 
at  any  rate.  We  had  three  thousand  sick  in  hospitals, 
and  were  reduced  to  send  boys  of  ten  years  old — a  good 
way  to  make  the  war  last !  He  spoke,  he  said,  neither 
from  fickleness  nor  discontent  ;  was  very  well  contented  ; 
had  tried  to  swallow  the  measure,  but  found  it  would  not 
do.  If  these  troops  had  been  brought  home,  we  might 
have  disbanded  the  militia.  Wished  he  could  see  the 
negotiation  for  peace  renewed  ;  wished  even  a  bad  peace 
was  offered.  He  concluded  the  French  account  of  the 
rupture  was  authentic,  or  would  have  been  contradicted. 
He  spoke,  he  said,  to  the  country  gentlemen  ;  tJiey  were 
not  included  in  the  picture  of  our  comfortable  situation. 
If  so  much  was  given  to  glory,  their  cups  of  comfort  would 
not  be  drunk  so  often  as  they  used  to  be.  Sir  Robert 
Walpole,  whom  he  thought  the  greatest  minister  that  this 
country  had  known,  had  always  declared  the  nation  could 
not  stand  under  a  debt  exceeding  an  hundred  millions. 
Stanley  defended  the  measure  of  pursuing  the  German 


KING  GEORGE  III.  81 

war,  and  said  it  was  evident  from  every  page  of  the  printed 
negotiation  that  France  wished  to  get  out  of  Germany; 
that  she  was  not  equal  to  both  wars,  and  had  therefore 
neglected  everything  to  make  her  push  there,  hoping  it 
would  exasperate  the  people  of  England  against  Hanover. 
That  none  of  our  allies  were  in  a  situation  to  make  con- 
quests, and  therefore  we  must  part  with  some  of  ours,  to 
obtain  tolerable  conditions  for  them. 

George  Grenville  supported  the  question  solely  on  the 
foot  of  treaties,  which  he  recapitulated,  but  took  care  to 
assert  that  he  had  neither  advised  nor  approved  them  ;  he 
had  not  been  able,  he  said,  to  stop  a  torrent ;  let  those 
who  had  given  the  advice  drink  the  dregs !  he  did  not 
desire  to  steal  the  fame  due  to  another.  It  had  not  been 
the  German  war,  but  the  want  of  seamen,  that  had  dis- 
abled France  from  prosecuting  the  war  in  America  and 
from  invading  England.  Let  us  know  what  had  been  the 
obstacle  that  had  broken  off  the  treaty.  An  immense 
load  of  debt  had  been  laid  upon  us  :  he  would  not  call  on 
any  light  of  Government,  who  had  brought  us  into  these 
distresses,  to  help  us  out  of  them.  If  they  had  overlooked 
these  things,  he  must  be  sorry.  But  our  honour  was 
pledged,  and  he  would  not  be  for  an  ignominious  peace  ; 
nor,  on  the  other  hand,  would  he  intoxicate  the  people 
with  unattainable  objects.  He  would  not  hang  out  our 
distresses ;  to  know  them  was  the  first  point ;  to  conceal 
them,  the  second. 

Thus  were  hostilities  openly  commenced  by  Grenville, 
He  had,  during  the  last  reign,  avowedly  or  silently  sup- 
ported every  one  of  Pitt's  expensive  German  measures. 
Indeed,  he  had  held  by  Pitt's  favour  one  of  the  most 
lucrative  places  under  the  Government,  the  Treasurer 
of  the  Navy.  The  scene  was  changed,  and  Grenville 
with  it. 

Pitt  replied  in  a  long  speech,  but  with  much  temper, 
which  he  professed  he  would  keep,  though  so  marked  out ; 
but  in  contempt  of  Grenville,  he  affected  chiefly  to  answer 
Righy,  falling  into  the  familiar,  and   not  in  a  masterly 

VOL.  I.  F 


82  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

style  ;  desiring  to  expostulate,  not  to  altercate  on  who  was 
in  or  out  of  place  ;  but  considering  himself  as  in  a  council 
of  state,  engaged  to  find  out  the  point  of  truth,  and  how 
to  wind  up  the  war.  He  complimented  our  troops,  whom 
he  called  the  glory  of  Imvian  nature,  and  Charles  Townshend 
on  his  moderation  and  clear  method  of  stating  the  question. 
If  Rigby,  he  said,  had  had  communication  of  papers,  he 
must  have  seen  the  distresses  of  France,  but  would  advise 
him  to  reconsider  his  positions,  before  he  published  his 
political  code,  before  he  should  come  to  guide — but  begged 
pardon  for  his  levity  ;  he  chose  to  be  in  good  humour,  for 
fear  of  being  in  bad.  He  would  not  enter  into  the  wretched 
consideration  of  what  himself  had  done.  Grenville  had 
treated  his  counsels  as  pernicious — nobody  indeed  had 
asserted  it — somebody  did  shrewdly  convey  it — for  his 
part  he  liked  better  a  man  that  affirmed.  Grenville,  how- 
ever, would  not  entirely  take  away  the  lustre  of  this 
measure,  already  more  than  half  exploded  by  the  King's 
servants.  Himself,  an  individual,  had  been  called,  com- 
pelled to  the  service ;  he  had  found  this  measure  bound 
on  upon  the  nation,  both  by  the  concluding  and  breaking 
the  treaty  of  Closter  Severn.  It  was  an  electoral  measure, 
not  advised,  but  submitted  to  in  silence  by  the  piety  of 
the  Duke  of  Cumberland.  The  subsidy  to  Prussia  had 
been  dictated  by  Hanover,  not  by  Great  Britain.  Little 
Princes  are  subsidized,  when  not  worthy  of  reciprocation  ; 
but  necessity  had  driven  that  great  Prince  to  accept  our 
money  ;  yet  his  Prussian  Majesty  did  not  think  that  he 
thereby  lost  his  equality  of  not  being  deserted.  Both  the 
Empresses  had  received  subsidies  from  us.  He  himself, 
he  said,  had  resisted  the  measures  of  the  closet,  nor  would 
subscribe  to  them  till  qualified.  His  late  gracious  master 
had  suffered  his  representations  ;  and  he  had  boldly  urged 
them,  fearing  our  own  defence  and  America  would  be 
neglected ;  nor  would  he  agree  to  the  German  war,  till 
every  other  service  had  been  provided  for.  Was  it  candid, 
was  it  just,  to  throw  the  whole  burthen  on  him,  who  had 
been  but  an  acceder  to  a  plan  settled  ?  an  acceder  to  a 


KING  GEORGE  III.  83 

ministry  that  had  wanted  vigour.  He  had  borrowed  their 
majority  to  carry  on  their  own  plan.  He  had  seen  where 
they  had  been  right,  where  wrong.  He  had  brought  the 
American  war,  and  taken  up  the  German ;  had  seen  that 
we  must  be  strong  enough  to  baffle  France,  or  should  do 
nothing.  France  had  been  dedecoruin  pretiosus  emptor.  It 
was  true  our  expense  had  been  great,  and  he  offered  him- 
self confitenteni  renin,  if  he  had  not  thereby  annihilated 
their  power  both  in  East  and  West  Indies.  Perhaps  he 
had  done  it  the  wrong  way  ;  and  Mr.  Grenville  could  have 
done  it  some  other  way.  The  business,  however,  was 
done,  by  whatever  way  done ;  and  he  would  now  divide 
the  House  alone  against  abandoning  our  allies.  Relaxa- 
tion could  only  invite  inflexibility  in  our  enemies  ;  nor 
ought  we  to  give  the  money,  and  at  the  same  time  blast 
the  measure.  As  Germany  had  formerly  been  managed, 
it  had  been  a  millstone  about  our  necks  ;  as  managed 
now,  about  that  of  France.  Let  a  man  get  possession  of 
the  Government,  and  act  as  late  ministers  had  acted,  and 
he  would  endeavour  to  make  his  heart  ache.  Now  we 
were  leagued  with  the  King  of  Prussia,  who  was  born  to 
administer  military  wonders  to  the  world  ;  his  motto 
should  be,  adversis  reriim  inunersabilis  iindis.  To  him 
was  added  Prince  Ferdinand,  for  whom  he  could  not  find 
adequate  words.  That  great  Prince  had  stood  like  a 
rampart  to  cover  Germany — and  at  last,  comperit  invidiam 
supremo  fine  domari. 

Legge  spoke  a  few  words  in  praise  of  the  measure,  and 
against  abandoning  our  allies  ;  and  the  debate  ended  with- 
out a  division. 

The  recapitulation  of  many  speeches  may  perhaps  weary 
the  reader,  but,  in  equity,  he  must  remember  that  at  this 
period  at  least  it  was  essential  to  detail  them.  When 
Mr.  Pitt  was  driven  from  the  management  of  the  war,  he 
existed  as  a  public  man  ;  but  in  his  speeches  and  past 
services,  his  own  defence  of  his  measures  was  necessary 
from  his  own  mouth.  Libels  on  libels  were  published 
against  him,  and  he  wrote  none.     I  am  sensible  that  I  do 


84  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

not  do  justice  to  his  arguments,  and  less  to  his  eloquence  ; 
but  what  I  give  was  faithfully  taken  from  his  own  mouth 
in  the  House  of  Commons  ;  and  unless  better  transcripts 
appear,  this  rude  sketch  may  be  welcome  to  posterity. 
No  flattery  is  intended  to  him.  When  I  thought  him 
blameable,  I  have  marked  it,  as  will  appear  hereafter,  with 
the  same  impartiality.  The  debates,  too,  of  a  free  nation, 
arrived  at  the  summit  of  its  glory,  may  be  worthy  the 
attention  of  future  times.  Our  descendants  will  see  what 
their  ancestors  were  in  arms  and  eloquence,  and  what 
liberty  they  enjoyed  of  discussing  their  own  interests. 
Grant,  Heaven,  they  may  not  read  it  with  a  sigh ;  reading 
it  in  bondage  and  ignominy  ! 


KING  GEORGE  III.  85 


CHAPTER    VIII 

Mr.  Pitt's  Enemies. — Debates  in  Parliament  on  the  German  War,  and  on  our 
Affairs  with  Spain. — Speeches  of  the  leading  Members.  —  Mr.  Pitt's 
Defence  of  Himself. — Colonel  Barre's  insulting  Conduct  to  Mr.  Pitt. — 
Libellous  Pamphlets  against  that  Statesman  by  the  Rev.  Philip  Francis. — 
Justification  of  Mr.  Pitt's  Measures. — Family-compact  between  France 
and  Spain. — Portugal  invaded  by  Charles  the  Third  of  Spain. — The 
Queen's  desire  that  her  Brother  should  come  to  England. — Pratt  com- 
pelled to  be  Chief-Justice  of  the  Common  Pleas. — Lord  Hardwicke  and 
his  Son. 

Mr.  Pitt's  enemies  did  not  content  themselves  with 
traducing  him  in  pamphlets  and  satires.  A  deeper  blow 
was  meditated,  which,  though  not  carried  to  the  extent 
which  the  projectors  hoped,  could  not  but  wound  his  mind, 
and  did  to  a  degree  lower  him  in  the  opinion  of  some 
men,  though  the  brutality  with  which  it  was  conceived  and 
executed  raised  almost  general  indignation.  I  will  just 
touch  the  surprise  it  wrought  on  me,  which  may  convey 
some  idea  of  what  effect  it  must  have  had  on  others. 

The  report  on  the  foreign  troops  was  made  the  day 
after  they  had  been  removed.  Mr.  Bunbury,^  who  married 
Lady  Sarah  Lenox,  had  spoken,  for  the  first  time  in 
Parliament,  against  the  German  war.  Lord  George 
Sackville,  with  more  caution,  but  no  less  hostile  intention 
to  Pitt,  had  declared  for  the  measure,  as  no  alternative 
was  proposed,  though  he  hoped  ministers  would  concert 

1  Thomas  Charles  Bunbury,  called  after  his  father's  death  Sir  Charles 
Bunbury.  [M.P.  for  the  County  of  Suffolk  1761-1784  and  1790-1812.  Well 
known  as  a  fortunate  speculator  on  the  turf.  He  is  said  to  have  possessed  the 
finest  bred  stud  in  the  Kingdom,  and  was  the  owner  of  '  Diomed,'  the  winner 
of  the  Derby  in  1780,  of  '  Eleanor,'  the  winner  of  the  Derby  and  The  Oaks 
in  1 801,  and  of  '  Smolensko,'  the  winner  of  the  Derby  in  18 13.  He  died  on 
31st  March  1S21,  aged  eighty. — E.] 


86  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

with  our  allies  how  to  draw  us  out  of  this  scrape.     He  did 
not  believe  that  France  was  in  a  worse  situation  than  she 
had  been  at  Gertruydenburg,^  when  she  rejected  insolent 
terms.      She  could,  besides,  subsist  her  troops  on  easier 
terms  than  we  could.     She  brought  to  account  the  con- 
tributions raised  by  her  armies  ;  he  did  not  know  that  we 
did.    Lord  George  was  finishing  his  speech  as  I  came  into 
the  House,     My  ear  was  struck  with  sounds  I  had  little 
been   accustomed   to  of  late,  virulent  abuse  on  the  last 
reign,  and  from  a  voice  unknown  to  me.     I  turned,  and 
saw  a  face  equally  new  ;  a  black,  robust  man,  of  a  military 
figure,   rather    hard-favoured    than    not    young,   with    a 
peculiar  distortion  on  one  side  of  his  face,  which  it  seems 
was  owing  to  a  bullet  lodged   loosely  in  his  cheek,  and 
which  gave  a  savage  glare  to  one  eye.     What  I  less  ex- 
pected from  his  appearance,  was  very  classic  and  eloquent 
diction,  and  as  determined  boldness  as  if  accustomed  to 
harangue  in  that  place.     He  told  the  house  that  in  the 
late  King's  reign  we  had  been  governed  solely  by  Hano- 
verian measures  and  councils  ;  and  though  called  to  order 
(in  truth  unparliamentarily),  he  proceeded  with  the  same 
vociferous  spirit  to  censure  all  ministers  but  Lord  Bute  ; 
and  for  Mr.  Pitt,  who  was  not  present,  he  received  the 
appellation  of  a  profligate  minister,  who  had  thrust  him- 
self into  power  on  the  shoulders  of  the  mob.     The  present 
King  said  this  new  Courtribune  was  so  English,  that  he 
did  not  believe  he  had  looked  into  the  map  for  Hanover  ;2 
and    he  commiserated   the  present   ministers,  who  were 
labouring  through  the  dregs  of  German  councils. 

The  reader  must  imagine  the  astonishment  occasioned 
by  this  martial  censor.  He  was  a  Colonel  Barre,  of  French 
extraction,  born  at  Dublin,  and  had  served  for  some  years 
in  the  war  in  America  with  reputation,  prosecuting  his 
studies  with  assiduity  in  the  intervals  of  duty.  With 
General  Wolfe  he  had  been  intimately  connected,  both  as 

'  At  the  conferences  held  there  previously  to  the  Treaty  of  Utrecht. 
"  In  twenty-eight  years,   viz.   to  1 788,   the  King  has   not  once  been  at 
Hanover,  nor  seems  to  design  it. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  87 

an  officer  and  penman  ;  but  had  thought  himself  ill-used 
by  Mr.  Pitt,  though  the  friends  of  the  latter,  and  Lord 
Barrington,  lately  Secretary  at  War,  bore  witness  that 
Mr.  Pitt  had  made  it  a  point  to  serve  him.  In  his  younger 
years  he  had  acted  plays  with  so  much  applause,  that  it 
was  said  Garrick  had  offered  him  a  thousand  pounds  a 
year  to  come  upon  the  stage.^ 

This  man,  therefore,  had  been  selected  by  Lord 
Fitzmaurice  (become  Earl  of  Shelburne  by  the  death  of 
his  father)  as  a  bravo  to  run  down  Mr.  Pitt.  Lord 
Shelburne  held  a  little  knot  of  young  orators  at  his  house; 
but  Barre  soon  overtopped  them ;  and  Fox  had  pushed 
on  the  project  of  employing  him  to  insult  Pitt — to  what 
extent  was  surmised  by  all  the  world.  The  consequences 
will  appear  in  the  next  debate. 

Glover,^  the  author  of  Leonidas^  uttered  a  speech  in 
most  heroic  fustian,  but  not  without  good  argument,  to 
show  that  all  our  great  advantages  had  been  obtained 
before  we  went  deeply  into  the   German  war.      Charles 

^  Additional  particulars  respecting  Colonel  Barre  are  given  in  the  Chatham 
Correspondence,  vol.  ii.  pp.  41,  16S-171.  See  especially  the  notes,  containing 
extracts  from  the  Mitchell  MSS. — L.  M. 

"  Richard  Glover,  a  merchant  who,  by  superior  intelligence,  great  fluency 
of  speech  in  public,  and  some  reputation  as  a  poet,  had  gained  considerable 
influence  in  the  City,  and  was  thought  of  sufficient  importance  to  be  admitted 
into  the  councils  of  Leicester  House.  This  distinction,  and  the  success  of 
his  poems,  which  had  all  a  political  tendency,  made  him  fancy  himself  on  an 
equality  with  Pitt,  Lyttelton,  and  the  other  men  of  talent  who  surrounded 
the  Prince  of  Wales.  The  illusion  was  painfully  dispelled.  The  sudden 
death  of  the  Prince  broke  up  the  party  ;  Mr.  Glover's  services  were  no 
longer  required  ;  and  happening  to  be  at  the  time  under  commercial  embar- 
rassments, he  sunk  into  obscurity.  In  a  few  years,  however,  by  diligent 
application,  and  a  successful  speculation  in  the  copper  trade,  he  retrieved 
his  fortunes,  but  he  never  forgave  the  neglect  of  his  former  associates ;  and 
the  memoirs  he  left  behind  him  show  the  angry  feelings  he  entertained 
particularly  against  Mr.  Pitt.  To  this  circumstance  he  probably  owed  his 
seat  for  Weymouth,  the  borough  being  one  of  those  which  Mr.  Dodington 
placed  at  the  disposal  of  Lord  Bute.  Mr.  Glover  died  in  1785,  aged  seventy- 
three.  His  autobiography  from  1742  to  1757  was  published  in  181 3,  under 
the  title  of  Memoirs  of  a  Distinguished  Literary  and  Political  Character, 
etc.  They  are  not  without  spirit,  but  show  few  signs  of  a  powerful  mind, 
and  are  in  every  respect  inferior  to  what  might  have  been  expected  of  him. — 
L.  M. 


88  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

Yorke,  Attorney-General,  defended  the  measures  of  the 
late  King  against  Barr6  and  his  own  friend  Mauduit's 
pamphlet,  urging  that  his  Majesty  had  reduced  himself 
to  poverty  to  support  the  war  in  Germany.  Elliot  made 
an  admirable  oration  to  reconcile  himself  to  consistence : 
owned  he  had  opposed  the  treaties  in  1/55  ;  and  was  then 
told  they  were  calculated  to  prevent  a  war  in  Germany, 
He  had  since  been  dazzled  with  the  national  enthusiasm 
on  the  King  of  Prussia's  victories,  and  confessed  that  on 
the  like  appearances  he  should  again  be  led  to  approve 
the  German  war.  It  was  true  that  war  had  its  object, 
collateral  division  ;  but  would  the  House  wish  to  German- 
ize this  young  King,  and  make  him  turn  his  thoughts 
thither  more  than  he  did  ?  He  concluded  with  a  pathetic 
ejaculatory  wish  that  the  peace  had  succeeded. 

Oswald  1  took  the  same  turn  of  endeavouring  to  palliate 
his  inconsistencies ;  but  though  his  parts  were  still 
shrewder  and  quicker  than  Elliot's,  he  did  it  much  worse. 
Dr.  Hay  ^  attempted,  too,  an  apology  for  himself,  but  with 
the  worst  success  of  the  three ;  and  the  necessity  which 
the  principle  men  in  Parliament  found  themselves  under 
of  justifying  their  abandoned  corruption  and  versatility, 
stamped  disgrace  on  this  Parliament  itself,  which  it  did 
but  increase  by  fresh  and  repeated  instances  of  servility  in 
ensuing  sessions  on  every  change  of  Administration. 

The  next  day,  December  nth,  Mr.  Cooke ^  moved  for 
all  memorials  relating  to  our  fisheries,  etc.,  which  he  in- 
troduced by  saying  he  wished  to  know  what  was  the  state 
of  our  affairs  with  regard  to  Spain — he  hoped,  peaceable  ; 
but  desired  to  see  the  papers  relating  to  their  claims,  and 
to  know  if  they  had  treated  us  with  contempt  and  disdain. 
Beckford  seconded  him,  urging  that  the  Gazette  and 
Bussy's  memorial  contradicted  one  another.  The  King 
had  asked  advice  of  Parliament  :  if  ministers  should  refuse 

^  James  Oswald  of  Dunnikier,  joint  Vice-Treasurer  of  Ireland. 

^  Dr.  George  Hay,  of  the  Commons,  one  of  the  Commissioners  of  the 
Admiralty. 

^  George  Cooke,  prothonotary,  member  for  Middlesex.  [See  p.  29  supra. 
-K] 


KING  GEORGE  III.  89 

these  papers,  they  refused  to  comply  with  the  King's 
request.  He  did  not  know  who  were  the  ministers,  nor 
whether  we  had  a  single  minister,  or  a  minister  depute. 
It  was  necessary  to  have  ojie  minister. 

Grenville  replied,  that  though  he  had  heard  of  this 
motion,  he  could  not  believe  it  would  be  made.  It  was 
our  right  to  have  papers,  when  essentially  necessary  ;  but 
power  of  negotiations  belonged  to  the  Qrown ;  and 
negotiations  ought  not  to  be  made  public,  when  real 
mischief  might  be  the  consequence.  Had  his  Majesty 
asked  advice  as  to  Spain  ?  would  you  ground  advice  on 
those  papers  ?  or  were  they  wanted  to  answer  newspapers  ? 
Should  a  minister  or  minister  depute  make  that  answer? 
He  had  heard  with  surprise  that  one  man  ought  to  direct. 
What  had  been  the  constant  charge  against  Sir  Robert 
Walpole  but  his  acting  as  sole  minister?  Yet  his 
modesty  had  declined  the  appellation.  Prime  Minister 
was  an  odious  title :  he  was  sorry  it  was  now  thought  an 
essential  part  of  the  constitution.  He  did  believe  the 
Gazette  had  contained,  word  for  word,  the  sense  of  the 
dispatch.  The  assurances  of  a  peaceable  disposition  had 
been  given,  but  who  could  answer  that  they  were  to  be 
depended  upon  ?  It  would  be  breach  of  trust  to  com- 
municate the  papers  demanded  without  particular  leave ; 
nor,  should  they  be  communicated,  would  they  be  suffi- 
cient ground  for  advice.  Would  the  House,  if  they  contained 
offensive  words,  lay  them  before  the  public  to  inflame  the 
people  ?  The  subject  was  not  fit  at  that  hour  for  the 
intervention  of  Parliament.  If  ministers  are  called  upon 
and  tell  our  distresses,  they  are  repeated  abroad  :  if  silent, 
are  supposed  to  allow  them.  There  was  no  reason  to 
suspect  the  King  of  exercising  his  power  improperly. 

Lord  Strange  said  he  had  not  believed  that  any  men 
could  be  so  hardy  as  to  bring  on  this  affair,  and  thought 
they  could  not  word  it  so  as  to  obtain  his  assent :  but  the 
motion  was  now  so  unexceptionable,  that  he  could  not  object 
to  it.  No  letters  of  a  private  nature  were  demanded.  The 
House  had  a  right  to  tender  its  advice,  even  unasked. 


go  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

Who  doubted  but  Spain  had  communicated  all  those 
papers  to  France?  Yet  ministers  would  not  produce 
them  to  Parliament.  They  were  divided  amongst  them- 
selves ;  therefore  the  people  ought  to  interpose.  By- 
showing  no  confidence  to  the  people,  the  administration 
would  destroy  their  zealous  attachment  to  the  Crown. 

Wilkes  maintained  that  Spain  ought  to  be  considered 
as  hostile.  ,  Sir  Francis  Dashwood  said  he  would  agree 
to  the  motion,  if  he  saw  either  utility  or  meaning  in  it,  but 
such  as  he  would  not  express.  Parliament,  he  owned, 
had  a  right  to  all  papers,  yet  Parliament  had  a  right  too 
to  consider  if  there  were  any  use  in  asking  for  them.  He 
saw  a  proper  answer  had  been  made  to  the  memorial, 
and  the  Spanish  minister  had  been  desired  to  recant — 
(Mr.  Pitt  cried  out,  'Where?')  Spain  said  to  France,  you 
are  making  peace,  try  if  you  cannot  obtain  something  for 
me.  He  had  heard,  he  said,  of  no  faction  in  the  adminis- 
tration :  he  hoped  there  was  none  anywhere  else.  Why 
should  not  confidence  be  placed  in  the  King  and  ad- 
ministration, till  it  was  abused  ?  There  might  be  some- 
thing in  the  papers  which  Spain  would  not  like  the  city  of 
London  should  know — yet  he  supposed  there  was  not 
more  than  appeared.  Was  it  wished  to  address  the 
Crown  to  declare  war  ?  But  that  was  the  prerogative  of 
the  Crown.  Spain,  too,  would  probably  think  twice  before 
she  embarked  in  hostilities.  There  might  be  different 
opinions  in  the  council  of  Spain.  That  secret  we  were 
bound  in  honour  to  keep. 

Lord  Frederick  Campbell  ^  said  he  did  not  believe 
there  were  any  factions  in  the  ministry  ;  if  there  were,  the 
King  would  put  an  end  to  them  ;  but  if  the  administra- 
tion were  distracted,  this  measure  would  distract  them 
much  more.  He  had  great  hopes  that  these  ill  appearances 
would  end  in  peace.     Nugent  '^  lamented  there  being  any 

^  Third  son  of  John,  fourth  Duke  of  Argyll.  Lord  Clerk  Register  of 
Scotland  from  1767  until  his  death.     See  infra. — E. 

-  Robert  Nugent,  Esq.  of  Gosfield,  in  Essex,  afterwards  Earl  Nugent. 
See  infra. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  91 

divisions,  as  unanimity  was  never  more  necessary.  Bamber 
Gascoyne  said,  if  any  of  the  papers  were  of  too  secret  a 
nature,  a  secret  committee  might  be  appointed  to  examine 
them.  By  destroying  parties  we  had  created  factio?is} 
He  himself  had  never  been  in  a  minister's  house,  nor  ever 
intended  it.^  The  conduct  of  this  patriot  will  appear 
hereafter. 

Sir  John  Glynn  said  that  that  time  twenty  years  had 
been  famous  for  calling  for  papers  ;  with  intention  then  to 
condemn  a  minister ;  now  it  was  with  a  view  to  applaud- 
ing one.  A  paper  had  been  produced  at  that  time  which 
the  King  of  Prussia  never  forgave.  Himself  had  never 
seen  any  benefit  arise  from  motions  of  that  sort.  Rigby 
said,  he  should  be  sorry  if  that  motion  were  likely  to  be 
complied  with ;  but  that  did  not  seem  very  probable. 
But  what !  had  the  city  instructed  its  representatives  to 
demand  a  First  Minister?  He  had  heard  the  Excise 
adopted  by  a  sort  of  First  Minister.  He  would  tell  the 
House  who  were  the  Administration  ;  the  two  Secretaries 
of  State,  the  Chancellor,  the  President,  etc.,  and  in  their 
deliberations  there  had  been  twelve  against  two  ;  proof 
enough  of  union.  The  other  House  had  a  right  to  judge 
as  well  as  the  Commons  ;  and  was  the  natural  barrier 
between  the  Crown  and  people.  Whoever  sought  the 
Administration  might  find  them  in  the  Duke  of  Cumber- 
land's late  lodgings  at  St.  James's  (where  the  councils 
were  held).  At  a  time  when  not  a  man  whispered  to 
his  friend,  but  in  commendation  of  the  King,  would  the 
House  wish  to  set  a  First  Minister  over  him  ? 

Mr.  Pitt  expressed  much  concern  at  the  flame  that  had 

^  This  became  a  stronger  truth  every  day. 

^  Mr.  Gascoyne  was  the  only  son  of  Sir  Crisp  Gascoyne,  Lord  Mayor  of 
London,  from  whom  he  inherited  a  considerable  estate.  He  had  a  strong 
understanding,  and  was  esteemed  highly  as  a  man  of  business.  His  rough 
deportment  had  gained  him  at  the  University  (we  are  told  by  Wilkes)  the 
appellation  of  the  '  Butcher ' ;  and  he  took  no  pains  to  get  rid  of  it.  He  was 
also  called  '  the  King  of  Barking,'  his  country  residence  and  principal 
patrimony  being  in  that  village,  where  he  was  much  respected,  and  where  he 
lies  buried.  He  died  in  1791.  The  first  wife  of  James,  second  Marquess 
of  Salisbury,  was  his  granddaughter,  and  inherited  his  estates. — L.  M. 


92  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

arisen,  and  that  the  House,  by  losing  its  temper,  had  lost 
its  reason,  and  degenerated  into  barbarism.  His  friend 
Beckford,  he  feared,  had  thought  more  of  him  than  he  had 
done  of  himself;  but  the  word  guide,  commented  as  it 
had  been,  had  misled  him.  If  the  present  question  tended 
to  make  one  individual  minister,  he  should  be  against  it ; 
but  when  he  looked  at  the  complexion  of  the  House,  he 
had  no  such  apprehension.  Censured  as  he  had  been  for 
using  an  expression  so  much  condemned,  he  could  not 
find  reason  to  retract  it.  Lord  Egremont,  he  believed, 
would  not  hold  the  Seals  an  hour,  if  not  permitted  to 
guide  his  own  correspondence.  Thus,  he  himself,  who  he 
hoped  had  not  lessened  his  country,  had  insisted  on  the 
same  right.  In  the  Treasury,  in  the  Military,  in  the  Navy, 
he  had  never  assumed  or  claimed  any  direction :  had 
never  spoken  to  the  King  on  those  heads,  but  had  always 
applied  to  the  ministers  of  those  several  departments  ; 
had  transmitted  everything  through  the  channels  of  each 
office.  He  hoped,  he  said,  to  have  these  egotisms  par- 
doned ;  he  would  now  come  to  the  question  in  agitation 
with  a  temper  that  nothing  could  ruffle.  Even  the  virtues 
of  the  King,  on  which  the  House  had  been  so  much 
advised  to  rely,  must  be  a  little  the  fruit  of  time  ;  hoped  his 
Majesty  would  be  aided  by  wholesome  and  deep-sighted 
advice.  From  the  present  motion  what  mischief  could 
arise }  he  wished  some  necessity  had  made  him  absent — 
but  would  it  be  decorous  in  him  to  be  shy }  in  a  House 
where,  he  believed,  he  did  not  stand  too  well  ?  He 
believed  the  bottom  of  the  bottom  of  this  affair  would  be 
dangerous  ;  not  so,  while  confined  to  memorials.  Spain 
had  made  three  demands  in  a  most  extensive  manner  ; 
the  right  of  fishery,  which  he  had  said  he  would  as  soon 
give  up  the  Tower  of  London  as  grant  ;  nor  would  the 
King,  he  was  sure,  accord  it ;  himself  had  never  been 
ordered  to  hold  any  other  language.  But  why,  might  it  be 
said,  call  for  these  papers  ?  because,  if  you  temporized,  or 
let  Spain  think  you  temporized,  she  would  more  assuredly 
push  her  claims.     Suspense  might  be  wholesome,  if  they 


KING  GEORGE  III.  93 

were  prepared,  and  you   were  not.     The  contrary  being 
true,    contrary    nneasures    should   be   pursued.       Himself 
would  not  press  the  motion,  if  told  by  authority  that  it 
was  premature ;  but  then  let  the  ministers  say  so,  and 
mark  the  era,  without  moulting  a  feather  of  England's 
crest.     The  note  in  the  memorial,  said  to  be  delivered, 
was  no  departure  from    their  demands.     Did  'they  even 
say  they  would  not  impede  the  peace  on  the  consideration 
of  these  demands  ?     Let  ministers   declare  this,  and  he 
would  second   to  withdraw  the  motion — but  he  saw,  he 
said,  he  should  not  be  told  so.     Or  had  France  given  up 
her  insulting  menace,  that  she  would  stand  by  the  demands 
of  Spain  .''     This  was  the  Gordian  knot,  that  he  himself 
had  not  been  able  to  cut ;  had  feared  it  would  rise  in 
judgment  against  him  ;  hoped  it  would  not  against  any 
other  man.     Divisions  had  always   existed  ;    when  were 
twelve   men    cast  in  the  same  mould  ?     Divisions  were 
sometimes    salutary.      Queen    Elizabeth   had    promoted 
them  in  her  Councils.     When  he  left  administration,  had 
never  seen  such  unanimity ;  he  had  said  in  high  place, 
that  his  consolation  was  to  leave  such  men  in  power ;  and 
had  declared  that  he  would  only  oppose  what  he  would 
have  opposed  with  the   Seals  in  his  hand — but  to  have 
stayed  and  have  done  that,  would  only  have  been  pre- 
judicial.    It  was  the  extent  of  Spain's  claims  that  had 
shocked  him,  not  her  lofty  idioms,  the  most  insignificant 
of  all  things.    Whoever  should  cede  to  them  but  a  cockboat, 
ceded  all.     But  the  very  present  debate  would  strengthen 
the  King's  hands.     He  then  made  an  encomium  on  the 
diligence,  activity,  and  punctuality  of  the  Earl  of  Bristol. 
Should  the  fisheries  not  be  settled,  the  man  who  should 
give  them  up  would  one  day  or  other  be  impeached.     For 
himself  he  wished  he  had  not  been  so  much  in  the  right : 
wished  he  had  not  known  so  viiich  as  he  did.     What  he  did 
know  was  buried  in  the  centre  of  the  earth.     France  had 
told  us  with  good  faith,  that  if  we  did  not  make  up  with 
Spain,  they  wouI<i  break  off  the  Treaty  with  us.     If  Spain 
declared  war,  he  should  think  her  felo  de  se.     It  would  not 


94  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

be  equal  imprudence  in  her  to  abet  France.  Could  the 
House  proportion  its  supplies  without  knowing  in  what 
predicament  Spain  stood  with  France  ?  Should  the  former 
declare  war,  she  could  lend  money  to  the  latter.  The 
revenues  of  Spain  were  under  five  millions,  and  she 
employed  seventy  thousand  men  to  collect  them,  besides 
twenty  thousand  that  were  engaged  in  the  affair  of 
tobacco.  Was  this  a  formidable  enemy?  To  him  it  was 
indifferent  to  derive  justification  from  this  situation  of 
things  ;  should  he  prove  to  have  been  in  the  wrong,  he 
should  comfort  himself  with  having  thought  he  was  right. 
All  foreign  Courts,  especially  Spain,  would  think  the 
present  motion  wise.  Were  he  not  limited,  or  self-limited, 
he  could  enforce  his  arguments  with  more  strength.  The 
Gazette  had  been  printed  to  persuade  eight  millions  of 
people  that  Spain  was  amicable  ;  but  if  there  were  indis- 
putable proofs  to  the  contrary,  it  was  deceiving  all  the 
world.  It  was  of  no  consequence  to  establish  on  which 
side  lay  truth ;  Bussy's  memorial  had  proved  the  con- 
nection between  the  two  houses  of  Bourbon.  Should  the 
event  end  in  a  rupture,  we  had  lost  our  opportunity — if 
affairs  were  in  accommodation,  would  the  honour  of  Eng- 
land be  preserved  ?  Would  Spain  be  obliged  to  England 
who  bowed,  or  to  France,  who  should  extort  from  us,  in 
the  height  of  our  conquests,  advantages  for  Spain  ? 

Colonel  Barre,  whether  (as  he  gave  out  afterwards)  to 
show  that  he  had  not  taken  advantage  of  Mr.  Pitt's 
absence  to  abuse  him  the  day  before,  or  whether  (as  is 
more  probable)  to  pursue  the  point  to  which  he  had  been 
instigated,  rose,  and  renewed  the  attack  with  redoubled 
acrimony.  Insult  of  language,  terms,  manner,  were 
addressed,  and  personally  addressed,  to  Mr.  Pitt,  by  that 
bravo.  His  variations,  inconsistencies,  arts,  popularity, 
ambition,  were  all  pressed  upon  Pitt  with  energy  and 
bitterness,  and  the  whole  apostrophe  wore  the  air  of  an 
affront  more  than  of  a  philippic.  He  told  the  House  he 
could  not  amuse,  but  he  would  not  deceive  them.  That 
the  disagreeable  posture  of  our  affairs  with    Spain  was 


KING  GEORGE  III.  95 

solely  owing  to  the  late  resignation,  which  had  thrown 
our  councils  and  the  nation  itself  into  distraction.  That 
Mr.  Pitt,  though  professing  it,  had  no  confidence  in  the 
King  himself.  Here  Pitt,  who  had  remained  in  astonish- 
ment at  so  bold  and  novel  an  attack  from  a  new  speaker, 
called  him  to  order,  declaring  that  no  word  guilty  of  so 
foul  a  crime  as  want  of  confidence  in  the  King  had  fallen 
from  him,  and  sat  down,  leaving  Barre  to  proceed  in  his 
invective  ;  but  the  latter  was  interrupted  by  Fox,  who 
said  the  King's  name  was  never  to  be  mentioned  in  a 
debate  ;  that  the  House  had  listened  with  pleasure  while 
justice  was  done  to  his  Majesty's  virtues  ;  that  Colonel 
Barr6  had  a  right  to  show  to  what  he  thought  Mr.  Pitt's 
arguments  had  tended  ;  and  that  he  chose  to  give  the 
former  this  hint,  because  he  seemed  so  able  and  willing  to 
make  use  of  his  right.  Charles  Yorke  said  the  King's 
name  could  not  be  used  to  influence  debate.  Pitt  said  he 
had  referred  to  the  King's  speech,  because  it  asked  advice 
of  the  House.  Fox,  still  fearing  lest  the  interruption  and 
ignorance  of  the  forms  of  the  House  should  disconcert 
Barre,  replied,  that  the  speech  might  be  quoted,  because  it 
is  always  understood  as  the  speech  of  the  minister.  Barre 
went  on,  saying,  that  if  any  man  opposed,  and  not  from 
the  truest  reasons,  he  would  wish  him  to  be  silent.  Should 
there  be  a  man  whose  whole  life  had  been  a  contradiction 
and  a  series  of  popular  arts,  he  would  judge  him  from  his 
actions,  not  from  his  words.  Beckford  called  to  have  the 
question  read,  to  prevent  such  deviation  into  personality. 
Rigby  insisted  that  Beckford  always  deviated  more  than 
Barre  had  done.  Barre  added  that  he  had  less  reason  to 
deviate  than  Beckford,  not  allowing  himself  to  be  so  dis- 
tracted ;  and  that  his  front  was  not  broad  enough  to  write 
contradiction  on  ;  nor  would  he  desert  the  King's  service 
when  most  wanted. 

Pitt  made  no  manner  of  reply  ;  only  turning  to  Beck- 
ford, and  asking  pretty  loud,  *  how  far  the  scalping  Indians 
cast  their  tomahawks  ? '  It  seemed  to  some  a  want  of 
spirit,  but  it  was  evident  by  the  indignation  of  the  House, 


96  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

that  such  savage  war  was  detested  :  and  Pitt  perhaps  did 
not  care  to  put  them  in  mind  how  far  himself  had  often 
pushed  invective  ;  nor  chose  to  risk  their  preferring  the 
new  master  of  abuse  to  the  old.  It  had  not  been  unwise,  it 
should  seem,  to  have  uttered  a  few  words,  stating  to  Barr^ 
the  indccence  of  treating  an  infirm  and  much  older  man 
with  such  licence,  showing  him  that  insult  could  not  be 
resented  when  offered  in  a  public  assembly,  who  always 
interpose,  and  putting  both  him  and  the  audience  in  mind, 
that  a  man  who  had  gained  the  hearts  of  his  countrymen 
by  his  services,  could  only  forfeit  them  by  his  own  conduct, 
and  not  by  the  railing  of  a  private  individual.  With  the 
public  this  outrage  did  Mr.  Pitt  no  injury.  Barr6  was 
abhorred  as  a  barbarian  irregular,  and  Fox,  who  had  lent 
such  kind  assistance  to  a  ruffian,  drew  the  chief  odium  on 
himself.  Charles  Townshend,  being  asked  soon  after 
when  the  House  would  rise  for  the  holidays,  replied,^  '  I 
do  not  know ;  but  when  it  does,  the  roads  will  be  as 
dangerous  as  if  the  army  were  disbanded,'  And  Barr6 
having  said  that  he  would  not  answer  for  his  head,  but 
would  for  his  heart,  '  Yes,'  said  George  Selwyn,^  '  if  he 
could  not,  the  former  would  have  been  broken  long  ago.' 

The  debate  was  terminated  by  Lord  George  Sackville 
and  Elliot ;  the  latter  pleading  against  producing  papers 
in  the  height  of  a  negotiation  ;  and  adding,  '  Perhaps  an 
express  is  now  on  the  road  from  Spain  determined  for 
war.  The  motion  was  rejected  without  a  division,  scarcely 
six  voices  being  given  for  the  question.  Not  one  Tory 
spoke  in  the  debate  but  Sir  John  Glynn,  and  he  declared 
against  Pitt.  The  next  time  Barr6  went  to  Court,  the 
King  took  most  gracious  notice  of  him. 

The  city  of  Dublin  addressed  Mr.  Pitt  on  his  resignation. 
The  same  was  proposed  at  Lynn,  and  rejected  ;  and  at 
Leicester  such  a  motion  was  stopped  by  a  person  producing 

^  Soon  after,  seeing  another  member  give  Barre  a  biscuit,  Townshend  said, 
*  Oh  !  you  should  feed  him  with  raw  flesh, ' 

^  George  Augustus  Selwyn  of  Matson,  Gloucestershire,  the  well-known 
wit.  I  lis  correspondence  has  been  edited  by  J,  II.  Jesse,  under  tbft  title  of 
George  Selwyn  and  Ids  Conteviporaries  (London,  1843,  8vo,  4  vok. ). — E. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  97 

and  reading  a  libel  called  Mr.  Pitfs  Letter  versified.  It 
was  done  by  Francis/  a  clergyman  attached  to  Lord 
Holland,  who  supplied  the  notes.  Another,  by  the  same 
hand,  called  A  Letter  from  the  anonymous  Author  of  the 
Letters  versified,  was  published,  reviling  Mr.  Pitt  on 
bearing  Barre's  ill-usage.  Lord  Melcomb,  at  Lord  Bute's 
table,  constantly  held  the  same  language. 

These  specks  were  soon  efifaced  in  the  confusion  that 
fell  on  the  ministers  themselves,  and  by  the  justification 
which,  in  spite  of  them,  burst  forth  of  Mr.  Pitt's  measures. 
The  war  which  they  had  so  poorly  attempted  to  ward  off 
broke  upon  them  when  they  had  no  longer  his  assistance. 
A  courier  arrived  on  the  24th  from  Spain,  with  a  refusal 
of  showing  us  their  treaty  with  France.  This  treaty  was 
the  famous  Family  Compact,  to  which  even  the  House  of 
Austria  had  acceded,  of  which  Mr.  Pitt,  by  a  masterpiece 
of  intelligence,  had  got  notice,^  and  of  which  our  dastardly 
ministers  had  hoped  to  deprecate  the  effects  by  pusilla- 

^  Philip  Francis,  translator  of  Horace  and  Demosthenes,  was  the  father 
of  the  reputed  author  of  Junius.  He  was  ordained  in  Ireland,  and 
subsequently  kept  a  school  at  Esher,  where  Gibbon  was  a  pupil  for  a  short 
time.  Having  become  domestic  chaplain  to  Lady  Caroline  Fox,  he  acted  as 
tutor  to  her  son  Charles,  and  wrote  in  the  interests  of  her  husband.  He  was 
appointed  Rector  of  Barrow  in  Suffolk  in  1762,  and  from  1764  to  1768  held 
the  post  of  chaplain  of  Chelsea  Hospital.  He  died  at  Bath  on  5th  March 
1773.  Churchill  describes  him  in  The  Author,  as  'the  atheist  chaplain  of 
an  atheist  lord.'     Sqq  i7tfra. — E. 

2  '  Of  this  very  alarming  connection  Mr.  Pitt  had  the  most  early  and 
authentic  intelligence,  together  with  the  most  positive  assurances  from  persons 
of  undoubted  veracity,  who  are  at  this  moment  in  no  common  sphere  of  life.' — 
History  of  the  late  Minority,  p.  30.  Mr.  Adolphus  states  the  treaty  itself  to 
have  been  communicated  to  Mr.  Pitt  by  the  Earl  Marechal  Keith,  in 
gratitude  for  the  reversal  of  his  attainder,  but  'that  the  fact,  if  it  existed,  was 
not  disclosed  to  the  Cabinet.' — Adolphtis,  vol.  i.  pp.  44-5.  This  story 
receives  some  confirmation  from  a  contemporary  memoir  of  the  Earl  Marechal 
recently  published  by  the  Spalding  Society  of  Aberdeen,  and  supposed  to 
have  been  written  by  Sir  Robert  Strange,  who  had  once  been  a  zealous 
Jacobite.  Neither  the  Chathatn  Correspondetice  nor  the  Mitchell  manuscripts 
contain  anything  on  the  subject;  and  the  papers  of  the  Earl  Marechal,  at 
Cumbernauld,  have  never  been  thoroughly  examined.  The  Editor  is  disposed 
to  believe  the  intelligence  received  by  Mr.  Pitt  did  not  go  so  far  as  the 
existence  of  the  treaty,  but  consisted  of  facts  sufficient,  in  his  estimation,  to 
leave  no  doubt  of  the  object  of  the  negotiation  between  France  and  Spain, 

VOL.  L  G 


98  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

nimous  palliatives  and  submission :  a  compact  formed 
because  we  were  become  so  formidable,  and  the  very 
signature  of  which  had  terrified  Lord  Bute  and  his 
associates  into  departing  at  once  from  our  superiority. 
This  was  the  secret  at  which  Mr.  Pitt  had  so  often  hinted, 
and  which  he  had  now  the  satisfaction  of  hearing  published 
by  the  mouths  of  his  enemies.  We  had  avoided  the 
interception  of  the  Spanish  fleet,  as  Mr.  Pitt  had  earnestly 
recommended.  It  was  now  arrived,  and  they  temporised 
no  longer.  P^uentes  was  recalled,  and  Lord  Bristol  was 
consequently  forced  to  return.  Previous  to  his  departure 
Fuentes  delivered  a  memorial  to  the  foreign  ministers,  in 
which  Mr.  Pitt  was  arraigned  by  name  ;  an  honour  almost 
unheard  of  Alberoni  had  been  accused  by  George  the 
First ;  but  though  that  precedent  was  not  flattering,  Mr. 
Pitt  could  want  no  vindication,  when  the  Court  of  Spain, 
and  Barre,  the  tool  of  Lord  Bute,  conspired  to  charge  him 
with  being  author  of  the  war. 

We  had  been  the  zvilling  dupes  of  the  Spanish  House 
of  Bourbon.  It  was  a  more  horrid  insult  on  all  good  faith 
— on  humanity — on  ties  of  blood,  that  Spain  summoned 
Portugal  to  declare  against  us.  The  ruins  of  Lisbon  were 
almost  smoking  yet !  The  Queen  of  Portugal  was  the 
Spanish  monarch's  sister  ;  her  husband  and  children  were 
dwelling  in  tents  at  a  distance  from  their  late  capital. 
Assassination  and  conspiracies  had  beset  the  Throne. 
This  was  the  moment  that  Charles  the  Third  selected  to 
invade  their  kingdom  !  France,  it  was  said,  in  vain 
dissuaded  this  perfidy — not  from  delicacy ;  but  the 
meditated  conquest  of  Portugal  was  likely  to  engross  the 
whole  attention  of  the  Court  of  Madrid.  If  we  should 
support  Portugal,  it  might  be  a  division  of  our  forces  ; 
but  France  needed  all  the  assistance  Spain  could  lend. 

and  of  the  general  intentions  of  the  Spanish  Government.  These  facts  he 
had  imparted  to  Lord  Bute,  who  had  not  drawn  the  same  conclusions  from 
them. — History  of  the  late  Minority,  p.  33. — L.  M.  [See  the  Memoirs  of 
George  Keith,  Hereditary  Earl  Marechal  of  Scotland,  prefixed  to  '  A 
fragment  of  a  Memoir  of  Field-Marshal  James  Keith,'  etc.— Spalding  Club 
Soc.  Pub.  1843,  p.  xii. — E.] 


KING  GEORGE  III.  99 

Timber  was  wholly  exhausted  in  France.  She  had  sent 
even  to  Dalmatia,  and  to  little  purpose.  The  expense  of 
ship-building  is  far  greater  in  France  than  in  England. 
Her  cities  and  trading  companies  set  themselves  to 
building  ships  and  presenting  them  to  the  King,  but  this 
was  a  distant  and  slow  resource. 

The  Queen,  who  bore  great  affection  to  her  brothers, 
was  desirous  that  the  second,  Prince  Charles  of  Meck- 
lenburgh,  should  come  over.  The  King  would  not 
venture  to  propose  it  to  Lord  Bute,  but  wrote  to  him, 
and  after  a  reluctance  of  a  fortnight  on  the  part  of 
the  Favourite,  the  boon  was  granted. 

The  ministers  were  solicitous  to  remove  Pratt  ^  from 
the  House  of  Commons,  and  offered  him  the  dignity  of 
Chief  Justice  of  the  Common  Pleas.  He  demurred  ;  but 
was  forced  to  accept  it,  for  they  would  not  only  have 
removed  him  from  being  Attorney-General,  a  post  that 
required  a  more  pliant  officer,  and  which  he  was  willing 
to  give  up  ;  but  they  had  the  injustice  to  refuse  him  his 
gown  as  King's  counsel,  and  he  must  have  pleaded  below 
the  bar,  or  have  quitted  his  profession.  Mr.  Yorke  was 
made  Attorney,  and  Norton  Solicitor,  Generals.  This  en- 
forced destination  of  Pratt  to  be  Chief  Justice  preserved  the 
Constitution  afterwards  from  the  same  men  whose  policy 
exerted  such  rigour  against  him.  Mr.  Yorke  had  lost  the 
precedence  over  Pratt  when  the  latter  was  made  Attorney- 
General.  It  was  on  the  coalition  of  Mr.  Pitt,  after  the  affair 
of  Minorca,  with  the  Duke  of  Newcastle  and  Lord  Hard 
wicke.  Pitt  then  offered  to  restore  Lord  Anson  to  the  lead 
at  the  Admiralty,  or  to  make  Yorke  Attorney,  but  would  not 
grant  both.  Lord  Hardwicke  preferred  his  son-in-law  to 
his  son  ;  a  partiality  which  the  latter,  whose  eye  was  fixed 
on  the  great  Seal,  and  which,  by  these  means,  Pratt  after 
wards  obtained  to  his  prejudice,  never  forgave  to  his  father. 

^  Charles  Pratt  was  a  younger  son  of  Lord  Chief  Justice  Pratt,  and  became 
afterwards  Lord  Chancellor  and  Baron  Camden,  as  will  appear  in  these 
memoirs.  Pratt  had  been  made  Attorney-General  by  Pitt  in  1757,  and 
their  connection  was  too  close  for  the  Government  to  feel  easy  at  his 
continuing  any  longer  in  office. — L.  M. 


loo  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 


CHAPTER    IX. 

Fuentes,  the  Spanish  Ambassador,  quits  England. — Return  of  Lord  Bristol 
from  Madrid. — War  declared  against  Spain. — Projects  of  Lord  Bute, 
Mr.  Fox,  and  the  Duke  of  Cumberland. — The  Duke  of  Bedford. — Mr. 

-»Pitt's  influence  with  the  Nation. — Divisions  in  the  Council  respecting 
the  War  with  Spain. A-Expedition  to  the  Havannah. — Meeting  of 
Parliament. — Lord  Bute's  harangue. — Mr.  Pitt's  Speech  in  the  House  of 
Commons. — Rigby's  attempt  to  show  the  inutility  of  our  Conquests, — 
Other  Speakers  in  the  Debate. — Pacific  Disposition  of  the  new  Czar. — 

^Court  Intrigues  in  France  against  Marshal  Broglio  and  his  Brother. — 
Prejudices  and  resentments  of  the  Tories.  —  Preponderating  Influence  and 
Haughtiness  of  Lord  Bute. — The  Duke  of  York's  contempt  of  Lord 
Bute  and  the  Scotch. — Proceedings  in  the  Parliament  of  Ireland. — Lord 
Halifax. — William  Gerard  Hamilton. — Bill  for  continuing  the  Militia. 

On  the  first  day  of  the  year  Fuentes,  the  Spanish 
ambassador,  quitted  England,  and  was  received  at  Calais, 
and  all  the  way  to  Paris,  with  distinguished  honours,  as 
the  saviour  of  France.  He  was  a  dull,  cold  man,  and 
wedded   to    all    the    weakness    of    his    religion.^      Lord 

1  He  nevertheless  made  a  favourable  impression  on  the  Duke  of  Newcastle, 
at  their  first  interview  ;  and  at  a  later  period  we  find  him  very  handsomely 
mentioned  by  Lord  Rochford.  vSome  of  his  private  letters  in  the  Chatham 
Correspondence,  as  well  as  his  public  dispatches  in  the  Parliamentary 
Papers,  are  those  of  an  ambassador  who  understood  his  duty,  and  performed 
it.  He  laboured  hard,  in  conjunction  with  his  friend  the  Marquis  of  Grimaldi, 
to  restore  the  old  connection  of  his  country  with  France  ;  and  one  result  of 
their  success  was  the  appointment  of  Grimaldi  to  succeed  Wall  as  First 
Minister  of  Spain.  Fuentes,  then,  for  some  time,  replaced  Grimaldi  at  Paris  ; 
and  subsequently  returning  to  Spain,  he  employed  all  his  influence,  which  was 
considerable,  in  supporting  Grimaldi's  Administration,  until  the  latter 
imprudently  allowed  his  son,  the  Prince  of  I'ignatelli,  to  accompany  the 
expedition  to  Algiers,  under  the  Count  O'Reily,  in  1777,  where  the  Prince 
perished  ;  and  Fuentes,  who  had  refused  his  consent  to  his  going,  was  so 
deeply  offended,  that  he  immediately  joined  the  opposition  to  Grimaldi,  and 
contributed  essentially  to  his  retirement  from  office. — Coxe's  History  of  the 
icings  of  Spain  of  the  House  of  Bourbon,  vol.  iii. — L.  M. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  loi 

Bristol,^  a  very  Spaniard  too  in  formality  and  pride,  was 
recalled  at  the  same  time.  His  abilities  had  never  been 
esteemed,  and  were  now  much  called  in  question  ;  but  the 
publication  of  his  negotiations  did  him  much  honour. 
Though  he  stooped  to  be  the  tool  of  Mr.  Pitt,  he  had  not 
disliked  to  receive  instructions  that  authorised  him  to  be 
imperious.  His  very  parsimony  gave  way  to  any  ostenta- 
tion about  his  own  person. 

On  the  second,  the  King,  in  full  council,  declared  his 
resolution  of  making  war  on  Spain  :  for  the  ministers 
who  had  driven  out  Mr.  Pitt,  rather  than  embrace  this 
necessary  measure,  were  reduced  to  adopt  it  at  the 
expense  of  vindicating  him  and  condemning  themselves  ; 
and,  what  was  worse  to  the  nation  than  their  shame, 
had  not  him,  nor  his  spirit,  to  conduct  them.  Nor  yet 
were  they  unanimous  on  this  point,  or  on  any  other  part 
of  the  war.  Lord  Bute's  object  was,  peace  at  any  rate, 
that  he  might  pursue  his  plans  of  power  at  home.  Fox 
aimed  at  the  destruction  of  Pitt,  and  at  favour  with  and 
through  the  Favourite,  to  which  he  sacrificed  his  views 
of  wealth,  as  Paymaster,  in  the  German  war.  The  Duke 
of  Cumberland,  who  was  now  rather  openly  than  confiden- 
tially consulted,  was  inclined  to  support  the  German  war ; 
either  from  partiality  to  the  Electorate,  or  hoping  to  com- 
mand there  in  the  room  of  Prince  Ferdinand.  His  Royal 
Highness  was  reconciled  to  the  Duke  of  Newcastle,  who, 
to  please  the  Duke  and  Lady  Yarmouth,^  fliuctuated  again 
towards  the  war  in  Germany,  though  he  could  not  lead 
back  his  friend  Lord  Hardwicke^  to  that  side.     The  bias 

*  George  W^illiam  Hervey,  Earl  of  Bristol,  son  of  the  famous  John,  Lord 
Harvey,  and  grandson  of  John,  Earl  of  Bristol,  whom  he  succeeded  in  the 
title.  His  dispatches  prove  him  to  have  acted  with  great  prudence  as  long 
as  the  disposition  of  the  Spanish  Court  was  doubtful,  and  with  great  spirit 
afterwards.  His  connection  with  Mr.  Pitt  was  in  no  degree  of  a  servile 
character.  It  appears  to  have  strengthened  as  that  great  minister  was  losing 
his  ascendency  in  the  Cabinet,  and  it  stood  the  test  of  his  downfall.  Lord 
Bristol  died  unmarried,  in  March  1775,  aged  fifty-three.— L.  M. 

'  Amelia  Sophie  de  Walmoden,  Countess  of  Yarmouth,  mistress  of  George 
the  Second. 

3  Philip  Yorke,  Earl  of  Hardwicke,  Lord  Chancellor  in  the  preceding  reign. 


I02  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

too  had  been  too  strongly  given  to  the  Duke  of  Bedford, 
who  declared  he  would  move  in  Parliament  to  recall  our 
troops  from  Germany.  Lord  Bute,  fearing  the  Duke 
would  gain  too  great  popularity  by  this  conduct,  and 
inclined  enough  to  heap  any  mortifications  on  the  King 
of  Prussia  and  the  House  of  Brunswick,  took  the  same 
side  ;  but  was  persuaded,  as  the  money  was  already  voted 
and  the  contracts  made,  to  suffer  the  troops  to  make  one 
more  campaign  there.  The  Duke  of  Bedford  was  assured 
by  the  King  that  measures  would  be  taken  for  recalling 
the  troops,  without  recurring  to  the  authority  of  Parlia- 
ment. Yet  so  much  did  they  dread  the  effects  of  Mr. 
Pitt's  influence  with  the  nation,  and  of  their  own  unpopular 
measures,  that  they  agreed  to  give  the  King  of  Prussia 
his  subsidy  for  another  year,  but  would  not  renew  the 
treaty  with  him,  which  now  expired. 

They  were  still  more  divided  and  embarrassed  on  the 
war  with  Spain.  Unavoidable  as  it  was,  the  Dukes  of 
Newcastle  and  Bedford,  Lord  Hardwicke  and  Lord  Mans- 
fieldji  were  against  engaging  in  it ;  and  Hardwicke,  when 
the  affirmative  was  decided,  declared  he  would  return  no 
more  to  Council.  But  Lord  Bute,  Lord  Granville,^  Lord 
Egrcmont,  George  Grenville,  and,  I  think,  Lord  Ligonier, 
prevailed  for  the  declaration  of  war.  Lord  Anson  ^  was 
ill,  and  the  Duke  of  Devonshire  out  of  town. 

Yet,  though  the  war  with  Spain  was  a  popular  measure, 
the  City  and  the  country  had  so  mean  an  opinion  of  those 
who  were  to  direct  it,  that  the  stocks  immediately  fell  to 
66i,  though  in  the  Rebellion  they  had  never  been  lower 
than  72.  The  declaration  from  Spain  luckily  arrived 
three  days  after  the  first  subscription  on  the  new  loan  had 
been  paid — yet  it  sunk  four  per  cent. — three  days  sooner, 
and  it  would  not  have  been  paid  at  all. 

On   the  4th,  war  was  declared.     The  next  day  came 

^  William  Murray,  Lord  Mansfield,  Lord  Chief  Justice  of  the  King's  Bench. 
-  John  Carteret,  Earl  Granville,  President  of  the  Council,  and  formerly 
I'rime  Minister  to  George  the  Second. 
^  George,  Lord  Anson,  first  Lord  of  the  Admiralty. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  103 

news  of  the  reduction  of  Colberg,  almost  the  last  hope 
of  the  King  of  Prussia.  Nor  yet  were  the  ministers  ready- 
to  decide  whether  they  would  blow  up  the  fortifications 
of  Belleisle  and  abandon  it,  or  whether  they  should  under- 
take to  support  Portugal.  They  determined  first  to  send 
Lord  Tyrawley^  thither,  while  Lord  Albemarle  ^  kissed 
the  King's  hand  for  the  command  of  the  expedition,  which 
was  so  often  set  forth  and  so  often  countermanded,  and 
which  at  last  laboured  to  sea.  It  was  to  take  up  troops 
at  Martinico,  and  thence  sail  to  attack  the  Havannah. 

On  the  19th  the  Parliament  met,  and  the  King  ac- 
quainted both  Houses  with  the  new  war  he  had  under- 
taken ;  a  ceremonial  decorated  by  the  Favourite  himself, 
who,  as  if  he  had  wrenched  the  thunderbolt  out  of  Mr. 
Pitt's  hands  only  to  wield  it  himself  with  mightier  vigour, 
now  harangued  the  Parliament  for  the  first  time.  Every 
preparative  of  pomp,  attitude,  and  lofty  language  were 
called  in  to  make  him  worthy  of  himself  His  admirers 
were  in  ecstasies ;  the  few  that  dared  to  sneer  at  his 
theatric  fustian,  did  not  find  it  quite  so  ridiculous  as  they 
wished.  It  was  enough  for  the  former  that  their  god  was 
not  dumb,  and  there  was  no  danger  that  he  would  fami- 
liarise himself  too  often  with  the  multitude.  He  affected 
to  adopt  parliamentary  measures,  and  to  wish  that  all 
the  negotiations  with  Spain  might  be  laid  before  them  ; 
graciously  promising  to  beseech  the  King  that  not  only 
papers  might  be  produced,  but  that  the  Cabinet  Councillors 
themselves  might  be  permitted  to  divulge  the  opinions 
they  had  given.  This  was  a  puny  piece  of  chicane,  the 
ministers   endeavouring   to  prove   that  the  hostilities  of 

^  James,  Lord  Tyrawley,  formerly  Ambassador  at  Lisbon,  Governor  of 
Port  Mahon  and  Gibraltar,  and  Colonel  of  a  regiment  of  Guards.  [According 
to  Walpole,  James  O'Hara,  second  and  last  Baron  Tyrawley  (cr.  1706), 
returned  from  Portugal  in  1742  'with  three  wives  and  fourteen  children,'  one 
of  the  former  being  '  a  Portuguese,  with  long  black  hair  plaited  down  to  the 
bottom  of  her  back'  {Letters,  vol.  i.  pp.  215-216).  He  became  a, Field  Mar- 
shal on  loth  June  1763,  and  dying  at  Twickenham  on  14th  July  1773,  was 
buried  at  Chelsea  Hospital. — E.] 

-  George  Keppel,  third  Earl  of  Albemarle,  one  of  the  Lords  of  the  Bed- 
chamber to  William,  Duke  of  Cumberland. 


104  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

Spain  were  subsequent  in  date  to  the  period  in  which 
Mr.  Pitt  found  it  advisable  from  their  conduct  to  attack 
the  Spaniards.  He  had  early  detected  their  league  with 
France,  and  was  not  of  a  humour  to  weigh  dates  against 
facts,  or  memorials  against  combinations.  Nor  Hard- 
wicke's  forms  nor  Mansfield's  subtleties  could  persuade 
the  seeing  part  of  mankind  that  a  war  at  our  doors  ought 
to  be  treated  with  the  same  literal  circumspection  as  an 
action  of  trespass  or  battery  at  common  law. 

Mr.  Pitt  himself,  in  the  House  of  Commons,  with  much 
seeming  modesty,  assumed  the  honour  that  was  due  to 
his  intelligence  and  foresight ;  and  by  disclaiming  any 
triumph  on  the  necessity  into  which  the  ministers  had 
fallen  of  making  war,  asserted  the  right,  to  which  his 
counsels  had  entitled  him,  of  having  pointed  out  the 
moment  when  the  war  ought  to  have  commenced — a 
moment,  lost  by  his  enemies,  without  the  benefit  of  having 
warded  off  the  war  with  Spain.  Lord  North,i  who 
seconded  the  address  of  thanks  for  the  King's  speech, 
had  injudiciously  furnished  Pitt  with  an  opportunity  of 
vindicating  his  measures,  calling  him  an  abdicated  mini- 
ster, and  violently  taxing  him  with  a  fondness  for  new 
hostilities.  Nothing  could  be  more  cool  or  artful  than 
Pitt's  reply.  It  was  all  panegyric ;  all  gratitude  for  his 
Majesty's  resentment  of  Spain's  provoking  conduct,  and 
for  the  caution  with  which  he  promised  to  engage  in  so 
large  a  war.  In  his  own  particular  situation,  he  might 
be  supposed  not  to  like  such  firm,  and  yet  such  cautious, 
measures — but  he  did  ;  he  heartily  thanked  the  ministers 
for  their  caution  ;  and  meaned  to  conciliate  unanimity, 
which  he  hoped  would  spread  from  one  end  of  the  island 
to  the  other.  Himself  for  five  years  had  laboured  success- 
fully— but  he  did  not  mean  to  pride  himself  that  way — 
yet  he  had  proved  not  to  have  been  so  much  in  the  wrong 
as  his  enemies  had  thought ;  and,  however  Lord  North 
had  disparaged  his  intelligence,  activity,  and  discernment, 
he  hoped  his  successors  would  not  be  endowed  with  worse 
^  Frederick,  Lord  North,  eldest  son  of  Francis,  Earl  of  Guildford. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  105 

or  less ;  and  that  the  people  would  place  confidence  in 
the  Administration,  whose  large  and  wide-spread  connec- 
tions must  be  followed  by  confidence  and  favour.  A  poor 
individual  like  himself  could  have  no  such  favour  and 
following !  He  should  easily  have  been  blamed,  if  any 
slip  had  appeared  in  his  conduct.  Now  it  must  be  the 
King — it  must  be  the  Administration,  the  Parliament, 
nation,  army,  and  navy,  who  were  to  carry  on  the  war  ; 
and  he  prayed  to  God  it  might  all  be  enough !  Yet  he 
thought  us  equal  to  the  whole.  However,  he  had  not 
sought  the  Spanish  war ;  and  if  it  were  not  too  much  for 
a  poor  individual,  for  an  abdicated  minister,  to  say,  he 
hoped  it  would  appear  that  for  five  years  together  he  had 
made  much  political  court  to  Spain,  and  great  persons  had 
concurred  with  him  in  those  counsels.  The  sacrifices  he 
had  offered  would  show  how  much  he  and  they  had  been 
in  the  right ;  and  that  he  had  not  been  so  haughty  as  was 
represented  in  rejecting  Bussy's  memorial.  He  would 
never  call  for  the  papers  which  would  exemplify  the  temper 
he  had  used  towards  Spain.  If  his  Majesty  should  think 
they  would  satisfy  the  nation,  would  satisfy  Europe,  he 
knew  he  should  appear  to  have  had  the  unanimous  appro- 
bation of  the  whole  Cabinet  to  several  of  the  papers  he 
had  sent  to  Spain.  But  what  imported  it  what  one  man 
or  another  had  thought  three  months  before  ?  Since  that 
era  he  had  received  such  public  marks  of  Royal  approba- 
tion, together  with  a  pension  and  peerage  (for  his  wife), 
as  few  individuals  could  boast.  The  moment  was  come 
when  every  man  ought  to  show  himself  for  the  whole.  I 
do,  said  he,  cruelly  as  I  have  been  treated  in  pamphlets 
and  libels.  Arm  the  whole  !  Be  one  people  !  This  war, 
though  it  has  cut  deep  into  our  pecuniary,  had  augmented 
our  military,  faculties.  Set  that  against  the  debt,  that 
spirit  which  has  made  us  what  we  are.  Forget  everything 
but  the  public ! — for  the  public  I  forget  both  my  wrongs 
and  my  infirmities. 

Grenville  told  him  he  would  have  his  wish :  orders  were 
given  for  laying  before  the  House  all  the  papers  from  the 


io6  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

time  of  Bussy's  memorial.  '  I  have  no  wish  for  their 
coming-,'  replied  Pitt.  '  If  for  the  benefit  of  his  Majesty's 
affairs,  let  them  come  ;  and  if  they  do  come,  shall  it 
be  with  no  farther  retrospect  than  Bussy's  memorial? 
How  condescending  is  the  boon  !  how  futile  !  how  unsatis- 
factory ! ' 

Yet  notwithstanding  their  affected  alacrity  for  war  on 
this  occasion,  the  new  ministers  took  every  opportunity 
of  raising  disgust  in  the  nation  against  the  late  measures. 
Rigby,  at  the  instigation  of  Fox,  moved  that  Colonel  Boyd 
should  lay  before  the  House  of  Commons  the  muster-roll 
of  the  Hessians,  on  whom  he  threw  out  many  reflections, 
and  affirmed  that  9000  men  were  wanting  out  of  the 
22,000  which  they  ought  to  furnish.  He  said  the  muster- 
rolls  of  our  mercenaries  were  not  returned  to  the  office  of 
the  Secretary  at  War ;  and  complained  that  not  a  single 
order  was  gone  to  recruit  the  army  in  Germany,  which 
ought  to  amount  to  96,000  men.  He  hoped  Prince 
Ferdinand  would  be  allowed  to  give  no  more  orders  to 
British  troops.  He  pretended  to  approve  the  declaration 
against  Spain,  but  then  endeavoured  to  show  that  we  were 
unequal  to  a  new  war.  It  required,  he  said,  38,000  men 
to  garrison  our  conquests  ;  and  yet  those  garrisons  fell 
short  by  1 1,000  men.  Belleisle  alone  had  cost  near  half  a 
million  ;  yet  what  did  it  furnish  but  sprats  and  little  cows? 
Canada  gave  us  only  furs  ;  yet  hats  were  not  become 
cheaper ;  nor  were  sugar  or  rum  fallen  by  the  acquisition 
of  opulent  Guadaloupe ;  nor  negroes  by  the  conquest  of 
Goree ;  gum  was  the  only  commodity  reduced.  For 
Louisburg,  he  hoped  the  fortifications  would  be  blown  up. 
The  enemy  was  hurt,  but  were  we  enriched,  except  from 
the  successes  in  the  East  Indies  ?  He  wished,  in  short, 
not  to  keep  our  conquests,  and  to  put  an  end  to  a  ruinous 
war,  in  which  we  had  no  allies  but  mercenaries. 

Charles  Townshend  took  the  same  key,  and  said  it  had 
been  fortunate,  if  our  apprehension  of  Spain  had  driven  us 
to  make  peace  with  France,  He  feared  we  should  sink 
from  a  dream  of  ambition  to  a  state  of  bankruptcy. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  107 

Stanley  maintained  that  France  had  been  in  earnest  in 
the  negotiation,  but  had  been  buoyed  up  by  the  ambition 
and  revenge  of  Spain.  Was  France  so  weak,  and  yet  not 
in  earnest  ?  The  object  of  his  own  labours  had  been  to 
keep  France  divided  from  Spain,  and  with  that  view 
England  had  offered  to  yield  more  than  she  had  asked  in 
return.  This  was  a  strong  vindication  of  Mr.  Pitt's  con- 
duct, and  from  a  competent  witness. 

Grenville,  in  answer  to  Beckford,  said  he  would  pawn 
his  life  that  no  assurances  had  been  given  to  the  City  that 
there  would  be  no  Spanish  war.  Thomas  Walpole^  replied 
that  he  had  never  been  told  from  the  Treasury  that  there 
would  not  be  war  with  Spain  ;  yet  he  would  say,  that  had 
the  City  apprehended  it,  they  would  not  have  lent  their 
money  so  easily.  The  Hessian  papers  were  ordered  to  lie 
on  the  table. 

In  prosecution  of  the  same  hostilities  to  Pitt,  the  Duke 
of  Bedford,  resisting  the  most  earnest  entreaties  of  the 
Duke  of  Cumberland,  and  even  without  the  approbation 
of  the  Court,  determined  to  make  his  motion,  which,  how- 
ever, he  softened  from  a  proposal  of  recalling  the  troops 
from  Germany,  into  a  resolution  of  the  ruinous  imprac- 
ticability of  carrying  on  the  war.  He  might  as  decently 
have  termed  it  an  exhortation  to  Spain  not  to  dread  our 
arms.  Lord  Bute,  to  show  the  Court  did  not  countenance 
so  gross  a  measure,  moved  the  previous  question,  and  was 
supported  by  Newcastle,  Melcomb,  and  Denbigh.  Lord 
Temple  of  course  opposed  the  Duke  of  Bedford.  The 
Lords  Shelburne,  Pomfret,  and  Talbot  spoke  for  the 
motion ;  but  the  previous  question  was  carried  by  105  to 
16,  which  latter  were  the  friends  of  Bedford  and  Fox. 
Six  or  seven  even  protested. 

In  the  course  of  the  debate  Lord  Bute  dropped  hints  of 
important  good  news,  which  he  had  received  that  very 
morning.    It  was  supposed  to  mean  the  pacific  disposition 

•^  Thomas  Walpole,  second  son  of  Horatio,  Lord  Walpole,  only  brother  of 
Sir  Robert  Walpole,  Earl  of  Orford.  Thomas  married  the  eldest  daughter  of 
Sir  Joshua  Vanneck,  with  whom  he  dwelt  in  the  City. 


loS  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

of  the  new  Czar.  Elizabeth,  his  aunt,  was  just  dead,  and 
Peter  the  Third  had  mounted  the  Russian  throne.  So  far 
from  inheriting  her  animosity  to  the  King  of  Prussia,  the 
young  Emperor  was  his  enthusiastic  admirer,  and  more 
likely  to  war  under  his  banners  than  to  continue  to  over- 
whelm him  with  torrents  of  barbarians. 

The  Duke  of  Bedford  receiving  such  a  rebuff  from  the 
Lords,  the  faction  dropped  the  design  of  renewing  the 
motion  in  the  Commons,  the  consequence  having  been  a 
side-wind  of  approbation  to  Mr.  Pitt,  and  almost  applause 
to  Lord  Bute  for  taking  up  the  military  spirit — an  ap- 
probation the  latter  did  not  wish  to  receive,  nor  intend  to 
merit.  However,  5000  men  were  ordered  for  Portugal, 
and  the  command  destined  to  Lord  Tyrawley.  Lord 
Albemarle  too,  and  his  brothers,  Commodore  and  Colonel 
KeppeV  set  out  for  Portsmouth  on  the  expedition  to  the 
Havannah ;  but  they  did  not  sail  till  the  beginning  of 
March.  Lord  Tyrawley  went  to  Lisbon  at  the  same  time, 
Avhither  M.  Dunn,  or  Odunn,  who  had  married  a  daughter 
of  Parsons,-  a  famous  Jacobite  alderman  in  the  last  reign, 
was  dispatched  from  Versailles  to  traverse  his  negotia- 
tions. 

Dr.  Osbaldiston,^  the  aged  Bishop  of  Carlisle,  was  trans- 
lated to  the  See  of  London,  on  the  death  of  Bishop 
Hayter ;  and  was  succeeded  by  Lyttelton,*  Dean  of 
Exeter. 

^  Augustus  Keppel,  second  son,  and  William  Keppel,  Groom  of  the  Bed- 
chamber to  William,  Duke  of  Cumberland,  third  son  of  William  Anne,  second 
Earl  of  Albemarle. 

2  Humphrey  Parsons,  formerly  Lord  Mayor  of  London,  a  great  brewer. 
Odunn  was  an  Irishman. 

3  Richard  Osbaldiston  died  on  13th  May  1764,  and  was  succeeded  by 
Richard  Terrick,  Bishop  of  Peterborough. — E. 

*  Charles  Lyttelton,  brother  of  George,  first  Lord  Lyttelton.  Lord  Lyttelton 
was  called  to  the  Bar  at  the  Middle  Temple  in  1738.  He  subsequently  took 
orders,  and  in  1747  became  Rector  of  Alvechurch,  Worcestershire.  He  was 
Dean  of  Exeter  from  1748  to  1762,  and  was  consecrated  Bishop  of  Carlisle  at 
Whitehall  Chapel  on  21st  March  1762.  Lyttelton  was  a  member  of  Johnson's 
Literary  Club,  and  President  of  the  vSociety  of  Antiquaries.  He  died  on  22nd 
December  1768.  Bishop  Warburton  wrote  to  Dr.  Hurd  on  the  occasion : 
'  A  bishop  more  or  less  in  this  world  is  nothing  ;  and  perhaps  of  as  small 


KING  GEORGE  III.  109 

In  France,  Marshal  Broglio,  and  his  brother,  the  Count, 
were  disgraced  by  Court  intrigues.  They  were  the  best, 
and  almost  only  successful,  officers  in  the  French  service. 
The  marshal  ^  was  a  mere  disciplinarian,  of  no  parts.  The 
Count"  was  lively,  and  earnest  to  inform  himself;  and  by 
being  quicker  than  his  brother,  with  not  much  better  parts, 
was  only  more  likely  to  be  in  the  wrong :  but  they  were 
both  men  of  strict  honour.  Having  presented  a  memorial 
against  the  Prince  of  Soubize,  in  which  they  attacked 
Stainville,  brother  of  the  Duke  of  Choiseul,  the  latter, 
who  possessed  the  favour  of  Madame  de  Pompadour,  pro- 
cured the  marshal  and  his  brother  to  be  banished  to  their 
country-seats. 

The  Tories,  triumphing  in  the  partiality  of  the  Court, 
and  rather  offended  than  alarmed  at  the  jealousy  with 
which  they  were  beheld  by  the  Whigs,  who  in  power, 
property,  and  credit  were  beyond  comparison  the  pre- 
ponderating part  of  the  nation,  took  every  occasion  of 
displaying  their  old  prejudices  and  resentments.  On 
every  contested  election  they  acted  in  a  body  against  the 

account  in  the  next.  I  used  to  despise  him  for  his  antiquarianism  ;  but  of  late, 
since  I  grew  old  and  dull  myself,  I  cultivated  an  acquaintance  with  him  for 
the  sake  of  what  formerly  kept  us  asunder'  {Letters  to  Htird,  1809,  p.  428). 
— E. 

^  A  greater  military  critic,  General  Jomini,  was  of  a  different  opinion,  fie 
pronounces  Broglio  to  be  the  only  French  commander  of  that  day  whose 
operations  were  uniformly  skilful.  He  had  fought  in  more  battles  than 
perhaps  any  of  his  contemporaries.  An  authentic  account  of  his  life  would 
still  be  of  value,  but  his  fame  was  eclipsed  by  the  exploits  of  younger  heroes, 
and  he  had  even  ceased  to  be  an  object  of  interest  when  he  died  in  exile  at 
Munster,  in  1804,  at  the  advanced  age  of  eighty-six. — L.  M. 

^  The  Count  de  Broglio's  talents  were  undeniable.  It  was  his  misfortune, 
not  less  than  his  fault,  that  they  were  seldom  well  directed.  His  brilliant 
defence  of  Cassel,  during  the  Seven  Years'  War,  showed  that  he  had  no  mean 
capacity  for  war ;  but  his  ambition  was  to  shine  as  a  statesman,  and,  un- 
happily for  him,  the  enmity  of  Choiseul  excluded  him  from  civil  employments. 
Partly,  perhaps,  out  of  revenge,  and  partly  from  his  love  of  political  intrigue, 
he  condescended  to  take  charge  of  the  secret  correspondence  which  Louis 
the  Fifteenth  carried  on  for  many  years,  independently  of  his  ministers,  at  the 
principal  foreign  Courts,  a  system  which  made  it  almost  impossible  for  an 
honourable  man  to  serve  the  King  with  benefit.  M.  de  Broglio  eventually 
fell  into  disgrace,  and  died  in  obscurity  in  1 781,  aged  sixty-two. — L.M. 


no  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

old  Whigs,  or  later  converts,  however  attached  to  the 
Court.  Thus  they  exerted  all  their  interest  against  Lord 
Gower  ^  and  Lord  Orford  ^  on  election  causes,  and  against 
the  Duke  of  Bridgwater^  and  Lord  Strange,  on  a  bill  for 
a  new  northern  navigation — points,  on  every  one  of  which 
the  Tories  were  rancorous  and  unsuccessful.  Nor  was 
Scotland  wiser.  One  Haldane  had  stood  for  Bridport, 
lost  it,  and  petitioned.  Sir  Henry  Erskine,  a  creature  of 
the  Favourite,  had  the  indecency  and  folly  to  call  the 
English  party  in  the  House  of  Commons  a  profligate 
majority ;  an  offence  not  forgotten,  though  the  Scots  were 
beaten  by  three  to  one.  The  inconsiderable  number  that 
in  either  House  of  Parliament  adhered  to  Mr,  Pitt,  and 
the  almost  universal  acquiescence  to  the  Favourite's  in- 
fluence, persuaded  both  him  and  his  dependants,  that  they 
had  but  to  give  the  tone,  and  prerogative  would  master  all 
opposition.  Nor  did  his  partisans  do  more  than  was 
practised  by  the  Favourite  himself  If  they  insulted  the 
nation,  he  ruled  the  Court  with  a  rod  of  iron.  The  Queen, 
her  brother,  and  the  brothers  of  the  King,  were  taught  to 
feel  their  total  want  of  credit.  The  Duke  of  York,  as 
Lord  Anson  was  dying,  ambitioncd  the  post  of  Lord  High 
Admiral,  but  did  not  dare  even  to  ask  it.  Prince  William,* 
the  favourite  brother  of  the  King,  wished  also  to  be  em- 
ployed abroad,  and  ordered  Legrand/  his  governor,  to 
solicit  Lord  Bute  for  a  command.  The  haughty  Earl 
treated  Legrand  with  scurrilous  language  for  putting  such 
things  into  the  Prince's  head.  The  Duke  of  York,  who, 
though  the  elder,  was  by  far  the  more  indiscreet  of  the 
brothers,  openly  expressed  his  resentment  and  contempt 
of  Lord  Bute  and  the  Scotch  ;  and  as  a  mark  of  dis- 
obedience, went  to  a  hunting  party  at  the  Duke  of 
Richmond's,  to  which  he  had  been  invited  with  the  Prince 

^  Granville  Leveson  Gower,  Earl  Gower,  a  converted  Jacobite. 

2  George  Walpole,  Earl  of  Orford,  grandson  of  Sir  Robert  Walpole. 

3  Francis  Egerton,  Duke  of  Bridgwater,  author  of  the  famous  Navigation. 
■*  William  Henry,  afterwards  Duke  of  Gloucester. 

^  Edward  Legrand,  Esq. ,  Governor  to  Prince  William  and  Prince  Henry. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  1 1 1 

of  Mecklenburgh  ;  but  the  latter  was  not  suffered  to  go  to 
a  disaffected  house  in  disaffected  company. 

But  while  inactivity  reigned  in  the  Parliament  of  Eng- 
land, that  of  Ireland  was  not  idle.  Lord  Halifax/  their 
new  Lord-Lieutenant,  was,  like  most  of  his  predecessors, 
very  popular  at  first.  They  voted  him  an  additional 
salary  of  four  thousand  pounds  a  year.  He  had  the 
decency,  though  very  necessitous,  not  to  accept  it  for  him- 
self, but  desired  it  might  be  settled  on  his  successors. 
The  House  of  Commons,  however,  would  not  wait  till  it 
should  take  place,  to  pay  themselves,  but  passed  a  vote  to 
make  their  Parliaments,  whicfc  existed  during  the  life  of 
each  King,  septennial.  The  party  attached  to  the  Castle^ 
voted  for  it,  concluding  it  would  be  thrown  out  by  the 
Lords.  The  Lords,  as  provident  for  their  popularity, 
thinking  it  would  be  rejected  in  England,  passed  it  like- 
wise. It  was  rejected  here,  but  not  without  much  disposi- 
tion in  some  of  the  Council  to  have  it  granted.  Lord 
Hilsborough,^  who  had  great  weight  with  Lord  Halifax, 
stayed  with  him  in  Dublin,  and  openly  made  war  on  the 
Primate  ;*  while  William  Gerard  Hamilton,^  the  Secretary, 
gained  such  applause  in  that  Parliament,  that  a  motion 

^  George  Montagu  Dunk,  second  Earl  of  Halifax  (cr.  1715).  A  man  of 
great  ambition  and  extravagance.  As  Secretary  of  State  he  signed  the  general 
warrant  against  Wilkes  in  1763.  He  died  on  8th  June  1 771,  aged  fifty- 
four.— E. 

-  The  Court  of  the  Lords- Lieutenant. 

^  Wills  Hill,  Earl  of  Hillsborough,  afterwards  first  Marquis  of  Downshire. 
He  had  gone  over  to  Ireland  professedly  on  his  private  affairs  ;  a  large  estate 
having  recently  been  bequeathed  to  him  by  Sir  William  Cooper.  Letter  from 
Lord  Barrington  to  Sir  A.  Mitchell. — Ellis's  Original  Letters,  vol.  vii.  p.  443. 
— L.  M. 

^  Dr.  George  Stone,  Archbishop  of  Armagh.     See  the  preceding  reign. 

^  '  Single-speech  Hamilton,'  who  acquired  his  misleading  nickname  from  his 
celebrated  maiden  speech  on  13th  November  1755.  (See  Walpole's  Letters, 
vol.  ii.  p.  484).  He  made  another  speech  in  the  following  year,  and  '  shone 
again  '  {ibid.,  p.  510),  while  he  spoke  at  least  five  times  in  the  Irish  House  of 
Commons.  He  held  the  lucrative  office  of  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer  in 
Ireland  from  April  1763  to  April  1784,  when  he  was  granted  a  pension  of 
;{^2000  a  year.  He  died  on  i6th  July  1796,  aged  sixty-seven,  leaving  nothing 
behind  him  to  warrant  the  brilliant  reputation  which  he  possessed  during  his 
life.— E. 


112  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

for  augmenting  the  troops  was  carried  by  the  sole  power 
of  his  eloquence. 

March  19th,  the  bill  for  continuing  the  militia  for  seven 
years  was  passed  by  the  House  of  Commons  in  England  ; 
and  the  counties,  that  had  not  raised  theirs,  were  ordered 
to  pay  five  pounds  a  man.  This  was  settled  by  a  com- 
promise, lest  a  longer  term  should  be  insisted  on.  Its  own 
friends  were  sick  of  it,  and  had  clogged  it  with  many 
clauses,  in  hopes  it  would  be  rejected  by  their  opponents. 
But  the  ministers  would  not  risk  the  unpopularity  of  a 
negative,  and  were  even  afraid  to  part  with  so  large  a  body 
of  men. 


KING  GEORGE  III. 


"3 


CHAPTER    X. 

Conquest  of  Martinico. — War  in  Portugal. — Lord  Tyrawley. — Count  la  Lippe. 
— The  Cock  Lane  Ghost. — Pacific  disposition  of  the  new  Czar. — His 
Popular  Measures. — Count  Schouvalow. — Meditated  War  with  Denmark 
by  the  Czar  and  the  King  of  Prussia. — Insurrections  in  Ireland,  quelled 
by  the  Earl  of  Hertford. — Lord  Bute's  Ambition. — The  Duke  of  New- 
castle.— His  friends. — The  Portuguese  War,  and  the  War  in  Germany. — 
The  Duke  of  Bedford. — Fox's  Observation  to  Walpole. — Lords  Mans- 
field, Hardwicke,  and  Lincoln. — Newcastle's  tenacity  of  Power. — Creation 
of  seven  new  Peers. — Private  negotiation  with  the  Court  of  Vienna. — The 
new  Peers. — Buckingham  House  purchased  by  the  Queen. — Seclusion  of 
the  King  and  Queen. — The  King's  younger  Brothers. 

On  the  22nd  of  March  arrived  news  of  the  conquest  of 
Martinico  by  General  Monckton^  and  Admiral  Rodney  ',^ 
a  plan  ascribed  by  the  people  to  Mr.  Pitt,  though  executed 
under  the  auspices  of  the  Favourite.  In  truth,  the  valour 
of  the  nation  had  taken  such  a  bent,  that  Lord  Bute  could 
not  check  it ;  nothing  but  a  peace  could  chain  it  up.  If 
the  Earl  did  favour  any  part  of  the  war,  it  was  that  in 
Portugal.     Colonel  Burgoyne^  was  ordered   thither  with 

^  Robert  Monckton,  brother  of  Lord  Galway,  a  very  gallant  officer,  who 
signed  the  reddition  of  Quebec,  and  performed  other  memorable  services  in 
that  war. 

^  George  Bridges  Rodney,  afterwards  Lord  Rodney,  the  great  naval  com- 
mander.    He  died  in  1792. — L.  M. 

2  Colonel  John  Burgoyne,  natural  son  ofW.  Benson,  Lord  Bingley.  He 
proved  a  very  unfortunate  commander  in  the  subsequent  American  War.  He 
was  also  an  author,  and  wrote  that  excellent  comedy,  '  The  Heiress. '  [Though 
Walpole  repeats  the  statement  that  Burgoyne  was  a  natural  son  of  Lord  Bing- 
ley elsewhere  (Letters,  vi.  494),  it  seems  to  have  been  a  mere  piece  of  scandal- 
ous gossip  without  any  foundation  in  fact.  He  was  the  only  son  of  Captain 
John  Burgoyne  by  his  wife  Anne  Maria,  daughter  of  Charles  Barmeston  of 
Hackney,  Middlesex,  and  grandson  of  Sir  John  Burgoyne,  Bart.,  of  Sutton 
Park,  Bedfordshire.  He  died  on  3rd  June  1792,  and  was  buried  in  West- 
minster Abbey. — E.] 

VOL.  L  H 


1 14  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

five  thousand  foot  and  six  hundred  horse  ;  and  there  was  a 
plan  for  regimenting  twenty-five  thousand  papists  in  Ire- 
land for  the  same  service  ;  but  the  Irish  Government  did 
not  approve  of  giving  discipline  and  arms  to  such  danger- 
ous inmates.  For  General-in-Chief,  it  was  proposed  to 
send  to  Lisbon  the  Prince  of  Bevern.  He  had  been 
suspected  of  infidelity  by  the  King  of  Prussia/  had  been 
disgraced,  and  his  intellects  were  not  reckoned  sound. 
Lord  Tyrawley  sent  home  his  aides-de-camp,  affecting 
to  wonder  that  we  expected  any  invasion  of  Portugal. 
This  was  imputed  to  his  disgust  at  not  obtaining  the  com- 
mand himself ;  he  who  was  a  brave  and  old  general,  and 
who  was  perfectly  acquainted  with  the  country.^  The  Prince 
of  Bevern  declined  the  offer;  and  Count  la  Lippe  accepted  it. 
He  was  born  in  England,  had  distinguished  himself  in  every 
hussar-kind  of  service,  and  in  his  dress  and  manners  copied 
Charles  Xll.  of  Sweden,  though  with  more  politeness.  He 
found  the  Portuguese  troops  in  the  most  deplorable  state  of 
cowardice  and  want  of  discipline.  The  English  could  not, 
and  did  not,  disguise  their  contempt  of  them.  The  Spanish 
army  might  have  marched  to  Lisbon,  had  they  met  with 
no  obstruction  but  from  the  natives.  The  English  troops 
saved  that  country  ;  and  Count  La  Lippe,  before  he  left 
Portugal,  formed  a  regular  army  there.^ 

^  Infidelity  was  then  no  uncommon  charge  against  an  unsuccessful  com- 
mander. The  Prince  had  in  1757  been  worsted  at  Breslau,  where  he  had  only 
twenty-four  thousand  men  to  oppose  to  an  army  of  ninety  thousand  under 
Daun  and  Prince  Charles  of  Lorraine.  In  return,  he  defeated  Daun  in  1762 
at  Reichenbach,  a  victory  that  decided  the  fate  of  Schweidnitz,  and  thus  con- 
tributed to  the  final  success  of  Prince  Henry  of  Prussia  at  Freidberg. — L.  M. 

^  See  supra. 

^  This  remarkable  man  was  sovereign  of  Lippe  Buckebourgh,  a  petty  state, 
lying  on  the  confines  of  Hanover  and  Westphalia.  His  mother  was  daughter 
of  George  the  First,  by  the  Duchess  of  Kendal.  He  received  the  early  part 
of  his  education  in  England,  and  held  a  commission  in  the  Guards :  at  nine- 
teen, he  served  at  the  battle  of  Detlingen  ;  and  two  years  after  he  showed 
signal  intrepidity  as  a  volunteer  under  Prince  Lobkowitz,  in  Italy.  At  the 
outset  of  the  Seven  Years'  War  he  joined  the  Confederates  with  his  small 
contingent,  and  bore  a  prominent  part  in  the  various  military  operations  that 
ensued.  His  bravery,  in  common  with  his  opinions,  had  a  tinge  of  eccen- 
tricity, but  the  boldness  and  originality  of  his  mind  were  not  ill  directed.    He 


KING  GEORGE  III.  115 

The  facility  which  the  Favourite  found  of  mastering  so 
great  and  victorious  a  kingdom,  and  of  removing  the  man 
who  had  carried  the  glory  of  his  country  so  high,  was  not 
the  only  evidence,  that  however  enlightened  an  age  may 
be,  knavery  and  folly  need  never  despair.  The  tares  they 
sow  will  shoot  amidst  any  harvest.  Will  it  be  credited 
that,  while  the  Romish  superstition  was  crumbling  away 
even  in  Spain  and  Portugal,  a  set  of  enthusiastic  rogues 
dared  to  exhibit  in  the  very  heart  of  London,  a  pantomime 
of  imposture,  which  would  hardly  have  been  swallowed 
in  a  paltry  village  of  Castile  ?  The  methodists  had  en- 
deavoured to  establish  in  Warwickshire,  not  only  the 
belief,  but  the  actual  existence,  of  ghosts.  Being  detected, 
they  struck  a  bold  stroke,  and  attempted  to  erect  their 
system  in  the  metropolis  itself  A  methodist  family,  at 
first  out  of  revenge,  endeavoured  to  fasten  on  one  Parsons 
the  imputation  of  having  debauched  and  murdered  his 
wife's  sister.  A  young  girl  was  reported  to  be  visited  by 
the  deceased,  whom  she  called  Fanny,  and  with  whom  she 
established  a  correspondence  of  question  and  answer — 
not  by  words,  but  by  scratching.  A  certain  number  of 
scratches  signified  '  yes ' ;  another  number,  '  no.'  At  first 
this  farce,  which  was  acted  in  Cock  Lane,  in  the  city,  was 
confined  to  the  mob  of  the  neighbourhood.     As  the  rumour 

became  an  enterprising  and  successful  partisan,  and  an  able  commander  of 
artillery ;  in  which  latter  capacity  he  distinguished  himself  both  at  Minden 
and  at  Kampen.  Being  entrusted  with  a  separate  corps  for  the  reduction  of 
Munster,  he  not  only  captured  the  place,  but  defeated  General  Armentieres, 
who  had  been  sent  with  a  French  army  to  its  relief.  It  was  in  Portugal, 
however,  that  he  established  his  reputation.  'He  found  the  army  there,' 
says  his  biographer,  '  in  a  state  of  thorough  disorganisation,  without  either 
food  or  pay ;  even  the  guards  at  the  Royal  Palace  implored  alms  from 
strangers,  with  bended  knees  and  outstretched  caps.  The  officers,  impelled 
by  want,  followed  various  humble  crafts.  There  were  instances  of  the  hus- 
band working  as  a  journeyman  tailor,  while  the  wife  earned  her  subsistence 
as  a  washerwoman  ;  and  captains  might  be  seen  bringing  baskets  of  linen 
from  the  wash.  Many  were  servants  in  the  households  of  generals  and 
governors  ;  indeed,  servants  were  sometimes  presented  with  commissions  in 
order  that  their  pay  might  serve  in  lieu  of  wages.'  All  these  abuses  the 
Count,  unsupported,  if  not  opposed  by  the  Court  and  the  ministers,  succeeded 
in  rectifying.     With  the  assistance  of  the  English,  he  checked  the  progress  of 


Ii6  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

spread,  persons  of  all  ranks  thronged  to  the  house.  Two 
methodist  clergymen  constantly  attended  the  child,  who 
lay  in  bed  in  a  wretched  chamber,  with  only  a  dim  rush- 
light at  one  end.  These  worthy  divines  affected  to  cast 
an  air  of  most  serious  import  on  the  whole  transaction, 
and  by  their  interposition  prompted  Fanny  and  the  girl 
on  any  dilemma.  A  servant  wench  commented  and 
explained  Fanny's  oracle.  The  father  would  accept  no 
money  from  the  various  visitants,  for  which  he  was 
promised  an  adequate  recompense  by  the  chiefs  of  the 
sect.  When  the  story  had  gained  a  requisite  footing, 
Fanny  had  the  indiscreet  confidence  to  declare  that  her 
body  was  not  in  the  vault  where  it  had  been  interred. 
Samuel  Johnson,  author  of  the  Dictionary,  was  in  the 
number  of  the  deluded,  and  with  some  others  as  wise  as 
himself,  visited  the  vault,  where,  to  the  disappointment  of 

the  Spanish  troops,  and  defeated  them  in  several  encounters.  He  built  the 
citadel  of  Elvas.  He  organised  a  plan  for  the  defence  of  the  kingdom  ;  and 
at  the  end  of  the  war  he  quitted  Portugal,  followed  by  the  gratitude  and 
attachment  of  the  King  and  the  people.  Indeed,  the  House  of  Braganza 
were  not  under  greater  obligations  to  his  illustrious  predecessor.  Marshal 
Schomberg.  His  reforms  show  considerable  acuteness  and  knowledge  of 
character,  and  were  completely  successful.  One  of  the  most  questionable  was, 
that  while  he  punished  officers  in  Germany  for  accepting  a  challenge,  he 
punished  the  Portuguese  for  refusing,  with  the  view  of  restoring  a  martial 
spirit  among  the  troops.  The  remainder  of  his  life  he  passed  at  Buckebrough, 
tlie  chief  town  of  La  Lippe,  beloved  by  his  subjects,  and  always  employed  in 
promoting  their  prosperity,  though  he  has  been  charged  with  sometimes  mis- 
taking himself  for  a  great  monarch,  while  he  was  only  a  petty  prince.  He 
married  in  1765  the  Countess  of  La  Lippe  Bustafeld,  a  young  lady  of  great 
beauty  and  accomplishments,  and  had  one  daughter,  whose  early  death  was 
quickly  followed  liy  that  of  the  mother ;  and  the  Count,  inconsolable  under 
this  douljle  affliction,  fell  into  a  lingering  disorder,  of  which  he  died  in  1777, 
at  the  age  of  fifty-three.  He  enjoyed  the  warm  friendship  of  the  King  of 
Prussia,  the  Prince  Ferdinand  of  Brunswick,  and  other  great  commanders. 
They  entertained  a  high  opinion  of  his  military  capacity.  He  inspired  a  sort 
of  enthusiasm  in  all  around  him.  Even  the  Spanish  officers,  who  used  to 
ridicule  his  reforms,  and  when  they  first  descried  him  in  the  field,  with  his 
large  hat  and  little  sword,  contemptuously  asked  whether  the  Portuguese 
were  commanded  by  Don  Quixote,  eventually  partook  of  the  general  feeling 
of  admiration  that  attached  to  his  generosity — his  extreme  disinterestedness — 
his  abilities  and  valour. — Biographische  Denkmale,  von  K.  Barnhagen  von 
Ense.— L.  M. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  ilj 

their  credulity,  they  found  the  body.i  Had  the  precaution 
been  taken  of  conveying  it  away,  the  fury  of  the  people 
might  have  been  actuated  to  strange  lengths  ;  for  so  much 
credit  had  the  story  gained,  that  Parsons,  the  accused, 
fearing  a  prosecution,  began  first.  A  regular  trial  ^  in- 
stantly unravelled  the  'cheat :  the  girl  was  detected  of 
performing  the  scratchings  herself,  and  one  of  the  clergy- 
men proved  to  be  her  abettor.  Lord  Chief  Justice  Mans- 
field tried  the  cause  :  the  divine  had  the  impudence  to 
present  a  letter  to  him  on  the  bench  from  the  Archbishop 
of  Canterbury,^  interceding  on  his  behalf,  for  Seeker  had 
a  fellow  feeling  for  hypocritical  enthusiasm.  The  Chief 
Justice  put  the  letter  into  his  pocket  unopened,  saying  it 
was  impossible  it  could  relate  to  the  cause  in  question. 
Yet  the  punishment  of  these  impostors  was  very  moderate, 
whereas  the  same  judge  inflicted  most  severe  penalties  on 
one  Anett,  who  published  weekly  papers  against  the  book 
of  Genesis.  The  methodists  did  not  take  shame.  They 
turned  informers  against  profaners  of  the  Sabbath,  tried 
to  establish  great  rigour  on  Good  Friday  and  the  fast- 
days,  and  to  revive  the  superstition  of  holidays,  when 
even  the  late   Pope  himself,  Benedict  XIV.,*  had  struck 

^  Doctor  Johnson,  in  the  newspapers  of  the  day,  published  an  account  of 
this  inquiry.  His  weakness  consisted  in  so  far  giving  confidence  to  this 
flimsy  imposture,  as  to  think  a  solemn  inquiry  necessary. — Boswell  (G.  B. 
Hill),  vol.  i.  pp.  406-8  ;  vol.  iii.  p.  268.— L.  M. 

-  The  plot  was  devised  by  William  Parsons,  the  parish  clerk  of  St. 
Sepulchre's,  and  carried  out  by  his  daughter,  a  girl  of  twelve; years  old,  with 
the  object  of  maligning  a  certain  Mr.  William  Kent  of  Norfolk,  who  had 
sued  Parsons  for  debt.  Parsons  and  his  coadjutors  were  tried  for  conspiring 
to  injure  Kent's  character  on  lOth  July  1762,  and  after  a  trial  lasting  over 
twelve  hours  were  found  guilty.  The  house  in  Cock  Lane,  West  Smithfield, 
where  this  imposition  was  practised,  was  still  standing  in  1850.  {Notes  and 
Queries,  1st  series,  vol.  i.  p.  244.)  Walpole  gives  an  amusing  account  of  his 
visit  to  the  Ghost,  when  it  was  'the  reigning  fashion'  of  the  hour.  (See 
Letters,  iii.  479,  481-2. )  Goldsmith  wrote  an  account  of  the  Cock  Lane  Ghost 
in  an  anonymous  pamphlet  entitled  The  Mystery  Revealed,  etc.,  for  which  he 
received  three  guineas  from  Newberry. — E.  ^  Dr.  Thomas  Seeker. 

*  Prospero  Lambertini,  one  of  the  most  learned,  enlightened,  and  virtuous 
prelates  that  ever  filled  the  Papal  chair.  Protestants  have  vied  with 
Catholics  in  doing  honour  to  his  memory.  He  died  in  1758,  at  a  very 
advanced  age. — L.  M. 


Il8  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

several  out  of  the  calendar.  But  the  ritual  of  the  Church 
of  Rome  was  too  rich  in  materials  not  to  be  copied  by- 
new  zealots.  They  introduced  into  their  service  hymns 
sung  in  parts  by  children,  as  very  captivating  to  the 
multitude  ;  and  the  Countess  of  Huntingdon/  the  patron- 
ess of  the  rising  Church,  erected  a  chapel  at  Bath,  and  at 
other  places  of  drinking  waters,  the  sick  and  diseased 
being  an  obvious  prey  to  Reformers.  Hogarth  exerted 
his  last  stroke  of  genius  on  the  occasion  above  mentioned  ; 
the  print  he  published  on  the  Cock  Lane  Ghost  had  a 
mixture  of  humorous  and  sublime  satire,  that  not  only 
surpassed  all  his  other  performances,  but  which  would 
alone  immortalise  his  unequalled  talents. 

The  expectations  conceived  of  the  new  Czar  were  now 
verified.  He  declared  to  the  Empress  Queen,  to  France, 
and  to  Sweden,  that  he  was  ready  to  abandon  his  con- 
quests for  peace,  and  hoped  they  were  in  the  same  dis- 
position— not  at  the  same  price.  France,  indeed,  had 
many  losses  to  regain,  few  acquisitions  to  restore — but 
her  hopes  were  placed  on  Spain.  Sweden  had  made  no 
conquests,  and  must  obey  the  dictates  of  so  powerful  a 
mediator ;  but  the  Empress  Queen  was  far  from  being 
equally  tractable.  Peter,  however,  having  sacrificed  the 
first  moments  to  decency,  gave  the  next  to  the  gratifica- 
tion of  his  will  ;  and  without  stipulating  for  his  allies, 
whose  politics  and  procrastination  were  incompatible 
with  his  ardour,  he  not  only  made  peace  with  his  favourite 
monarch,^  but  promised  the  same  troops  which,  under  the 
late  Czarina,  had  almost  crushed  him.  Nor  was  this  a 
bare  promise,  but  faithfully  executed.  Such  admiration 
of  a  hero  was  not  likely  to  content  itself  with  merely 
becoming  his  ally.  Few  men  idolise  heroism  but  they 
who  feel  the  passion  in  their  own  breasts.    Having  obliged 

*  Selina,  Dowager  Countess  of  Huntingdon,  widow  of  Theophilus,  ninth 
Earl  of  Huntingdon,  who  died  in  October  1756.  The  first  regular  chapel  of 
the  '  connexion,'  which  she  founded,  was  built  at  Brighton  in  1761.  See  the 
Life  and  Times  of  Selina,  Countess  of  Huntingdon,  etc.,  London,  1839-40, 
8vo,  2  vols. — E. 

-  Frederick  the  Third,  King  of  Prussia. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  119 

Sweden  to  make  peace  too,  the  young  Czar  turned  his 
eye  towards  military  exploits  in  a  new  field,  and 
determined  to  attempt  the  conquest  of  the  duchy  of 
Sleswick  from  Denmark.  Yet  if  he  was  dazzled  by  the 
martial  talents  of  the  King  of  Prussia,  Peter  had  a  heart 
susceptible  of  the  most  extensive  humanity.  One  of  his 
first  acts  on  his  accession  was  to  bestow  liberty  on  the 
Russian  nobility.  For  the  poor  he  lessened  the  tax  on 
salt,  and  for  the  relief  of  all,  abolished  the  Inquisition  of 
the  State.  All  the  exiles  were  recalled,  or  received  great 
mitigation  of  their  punishments.  There  was  one  man  to 
whom  the  Czar,  though  not  so  bountiful  as  he  ought  to 
have  been,  was  very  kind.  This  was  Count  Schouvalow, 
the  favourite  and  supposed  husband  of  the  late  Czarina. 
A  man  who,  in  twelve  years  of  absolute  power,  had  never 
made  an  enemy  ;  and  who,  had  he  ambitioned  a  crown  as 
much  as  he  deserved  one,  might  have  reigned.  This  up- 
right man  told  the  Czar  that  he  had  in  his  possession  a 
very  large  sum  of  money,  which  he  believed  the  Empress, 
his  late  mistress,  had  intended  he  should  take  for  his  own 
use,  but  not  having  been  a  specific  gift,  he  thought  it  his 
duty  to  surrender  it  to  his  Majesty.  The  Emperor  said 
he  was  in  great  want  of  money,  took  it,  but  ordered  him 
to  choose  two  thousand  pounds  a  year  in  land  wherever 
he  pleased.  I  knew  this  amiable  person  afterwards, 
wandering  about  Europe,^  possessed  of  nothing  beyond 
that  revenue,  and  sighing  after  a  country  to  which  it  had 
been  imprudent  to  return. 

The  Czar  and  the  King  of  Prussia  wished  to  engage  us  in 
the  war  with  Denmark ;  but  though  the  Council  was  divided 
on  the  measure,  Denmark  was  too  intimately  connected  with 
us,  and,  as  a  maritime  power,  was  too  near  a  neighbour  to 
Scotland.  In  this  exigence  the  King  of  Denmark  marched 
with  a  considerable  force  to  Hamburgh,  and  obliged  that 
opulent  city  to  furnish  him  with  a  million  of  rix-dollars. 

In  Ireland  seemed  approaching  a  scene  of  a  new  kind. 

1  Count  Schouvalow  afterwards  passed  some  time  in  England,  and  was  a 
frequent  guest  at  Strawberry  Hill. — L.  M. 


120  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

The  jealousy  of  commerce  had  ever  swayed  England  to 
keep  that  Kingdom  in  a  state  of  humiliation  and  restraint, 
consequently  of  poverty.  The  lowest  class  of  people  in 
no  country  less  enjoyed  the  sweets  of  being ;  and  in  no 
country  sought  less  to  emerge  from  their  state  of  barbar- 
ism. Proud  and  slothful,  they  created  a  kind  of  dignity 
to  themselves  from  inactivity.  To  labour  no  more  than 
noblemen  was  a  sort  of  nobility  ;  and  ignorance  of  a 
happier  fate  was  happiness.  They  preserved  their  ancient 
poetry  and  traditional  genealogies  ;  hated  the  English 
settled  amongst  them  as  invaders,  and  necessarily  were 
bigoted  to  their  old  superstitions  in  opposition  to  the 
religion  of  their  masters.  In  short,  they  wanted  but 
luxury,  to  have  all  the  passions  and  prejudices  of  great 
lords.  A  considerable  part  of  the  island  was  plunged  in 
this  dismal  darkness  and  misery.  As  a  spirit  of  opposition 
and  independence  had  spread  amongst  the  Protestant 
inhabitants,  a  spirit  of  improvement  had  gone  forth  too. 
Manufactures  were  established,  roads  and  bridges  made, 
and  rivers  rendered  navigable.  Inclosures  for  cultivation 
of  lands  had  followed.  Occupation  of  commons  seemed 
usurpation  to  a  race  of  lazy  savages  ;  and  the  first  murmurs 
were  carefully  blown  up  to  rage  by  their  priests.  A 
massacre  had  been  the  last  instance  in  which  the  Catholics 
of  Ireland  had  had  any  superiority ;  and  Popish  priests 
are  historians  enough  to  be  ignorant  of  no  such  era.  It 
was  the  cause  of  property  to  throw  down  inclosures  ;  of 
heaven,  to  cut  the  throat  of  inclosers — and  of  France  and 
Spain,  to  promote  the  good  work.  The  tumults,  however, 
began  upon  the  single  foot  of  their  grievances.  Great 
insurrections  appeared  in  Waterford,  the  chief  improve- 
ments having  been  made  upon  the  Burlington  estate. 
The  rabble  soon  distinguished  itself  by  the  name  of 
White  Boys ;  and  their  instructors,  to  veil  one  nonsense 
under  a  greater,  taught  them  to  give  out  that  they  were 
subject  to  the  Queen  of  the  Fairies,  whom  they  called 
Sieve  Olttigh,  in  whose  name  their  manifestoes  were  signed. 
It  appeared  afterwards  on  the  trials  of  some  of  their  chiefs. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  I2l 

that  this  fairy  sovereign  resided  at  Versailles.  French 
officers  were  discovered  among  them ;  and  during  the 
Duke  of  Bedford's  regency,  a  rising  had  actually  been 
made  in  the  same  quarter  just  as  Thurot  landed.  After 
many  outrages,  they  proceeded  to  cruelty,  and  buried  three 
persons  up  to  their  chins,  who  had  declared  they  knew 
the  ringleaders.  As  their  numbers  and  impunity  increased, 
so  did  their  insolence.  They  obliged  the  town  of  Lismore 
to  hang  out  lights,  and  forced  a  justice  of  peace  to  fix 
up  a  proclamation  by  which  they  regulated  the  price  of 
provisions,  and  forbade  any  cheese  to  be  made  till  after 
Lent,  that  the  poor  might  have  the  milk — a  proof  that 
the  devotees  of  the  Queen  of  the  Fairies,  and  of  the  Virgin 
Mary,  were  equally  attached  to  the  observation  of  the 
Fast. 

For  six  weeks  this  insurrection  was  neglected  ;  and  two 
regiments  of  dragoons,  that  were  sent  against  them,  proved 
unequal  to  the  work.  At  last  the  House  of  Commons 
took  up  the  affair,  and  foot  being  ordered  out  against  the 
seditious,  the  matter  was  quashed,  though  not  entirely 
suppressed,  till  the  Earl  of  Hertford^  was  Lord-Lieutenant, 
who  refusing  to  pardon  some  of  the  chiefs,  notwithstanding 
very  considerable  intercession,  an  end  was  put  to  the 
affair — but  unless  that  country  is  more  civilised  and  re- 
claimed from  barbarism,  or  better  guarded  before  another 
war  breaks  out,  it  will  probably  be  selected  by  France 
and  Spain  for  the  first  scene  of  their  operations.  At  the 
time  of  which  I  have  been  speaking,  France  was  more 
earnest  to  make  a  general  peace,  than  to  incense  us  by 
opening  a  war  within  our  very  gates,^  and  which  might 
have  made  it  dangerous  for  the  Favourite  to  second  their 
views. 

^  Francis  Seymour  Conway,  Earl  of  Hertford,  appointed  Lord-Lieutenant 
of  Ireland  in  1765,  while  he  was  ambassador  in  France. 

2  Nevertheless,  the  French  were  at  the  time  suspected  of  promoting,  if  not 
of  originating,  the  insurrection.  Lord  Drogheda,  who  was  employed  with 
his  regiment  against  the  insurgents,  told  Sir  Richard  Musgrave  that  French 
money  was  found  in  the  pockets  of  some  of  those  killed,  by  the  soldiers. — 
Musgrave's  History  of  the  Rebellion  in  Ireland,  p.  33. — L.  M. 


122  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

He  was  hotly  pushing  his  schemes  to  projection  ;  and 
resolved  not  only  to  make  the  peace,  but  to  be  indisputably 
first  minister  when  it  should  be  made.  Mr.  Pitt  was 
removed,  who  could  have  obstructed  the  first  object ;  but 
while  the  Duke  of  Newcastle  held  the  Treasury,  there  was 
a  division  of  power,  which  all  the  lustre  of  favour  could 
not  entirely  surmount.  They  who  looked  forward,  bowed 
to  the  idol  ;  but  they  who  held  by  gratifications  to  the 
Treasury,  could  not  but  kiss  the  hand  that  dealt  the 
bribe.  At  first  it  was  designed  by  disgusts  to  drive  the 
Duke  to  resign.  Elliot  and  Oswald  ^  were  instructed  to 
treat  him  rudely  at  his  own  board  :  but  an  old  minister 
or  an  old  mistress  endure  many  shocks  before  they 
can  be  shaken  off:^  nor  could  all  his  own  treacheries 
persuade  the  Duke  of  Newcastle  that  Lord  Bute 
could  so  soon  forget  how  instrumental  his  Grace  had 
been  in  undermining  Mr.  Pitt.  He  still  had  a  mind 
to  be  of  the  plot,  though  himself  was  become  the  object 
of  it. 

Newcastle's  friends  were  quicker  sighted  ;  and  foreseeing 
that  they  must  again  range  under  Mr.  Pitt,  if  cast  off  by 
the  Court,  they  began  to  have  doubts  and  difficulties — 
and  did  but  hasten  their  fall  by  daring  to  resume  a  right 
of  opinion.  The  expense  of  the  Portuguese  war  adminis- 
tered their  first  pretence  of  complaint,  and  the  protection 
given  to  the  King  of  Prussia  by  the  Czar,  changed  the 
posture  of  his  affairs  so  advantageously,  that  it  had  no 
gross  appearance  when  the  Dukes  of  Cumberland,  New- 
castle, Devonshire,  and  their  faction  grew  earnest  for  the 
continuance  of  the  war  in  Germany.  The  Duke  of  Bedford, 
who  was  more  than  half-gained  to  the  Court,  but  who 
always  added  some  contradiction  of  his  own,  was  averse 
to  both  wars,  Portuguese  and  German  ;  and  Fox,  who  was 

1  Gilbert  Elliot  and  James  Oswald,  Scots,  and  Commissioners  of  the 
Treasury.     See  infra. 

■  It  appears  by  a  letter  from  the  Duke  to  Lord  Hardwicke,  of  the  7th  May, 
that  the  Duke's  earnestness  to  prosecute  the  German  war,  in  opposition  to 
the  wishes  of  Lord  Bute,  caused  a  final  breach  between  them. — Adolphus, 
vol.  i.  p.  68— L.  M. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  123 

willing  to  preserve  an  interest  in  the  Duke  of  Cumberland, 
had  a  difficult  part  to  act.  He  said  to  me,  *  The  Duke  of 
Devonshire  says  it  is  a  Tory  measure  to  abandon  the 
Continent ;  for  my  part  I  do  not  know  who  are  Whigs ; 
they  bore  the  partiality  of  the  Pelhams  ^  to  the  Tories, 
and  Mr.  Pitt's  declaration  in  their  favour,  who  had  com- 
plained that  they  enjoyed  none  of  the  favours  of  Govern- 
ment.' Lord  Mansfield  would  have  preserved  Newcastle 
to  the  Court,  but  Lord  Hardwicke  pulled  the  other  way. 
Lord  Lincoln  ^  was  devoted  to  Pitt,  and  wished  to  unite 
him  and  his  uncle  Newcastle.  The  Duke  of  Devonshire 
advised  the  latter  to  resign  ;  but  so  great  was  his  inclina- 
tion to  keep  even  the  dregs  of  power  with  the  dregs  of  life, 
and  so  great  his  fear  of  being  called  to  account  for  the 
waste  of  money  on  the  German  war,  that  though  the 
King,  as  a  fresh  affront,  declared  seven  new  peers,  without 
acquainting  him,  he  not  only  overlooked  it,  but  begged 
his  cousin,  Mr.  Pelham,^  might  be  added  to  the  number, 
and  got  the  barony  of  Pelham  bestowed  on  himself,  with 
reversion  to  that  relation. 

I  am  forced  to  detail  these  intrigues,  because  the  moment 
was  critical,  and  because  it  gave  birth  to  a  new  party,  and 
to  many  subsequent  events.  The  Court  was  the  more 
stiff,  because  they  had  conveyed  a  message  through  Count 
Virri,^  the  Sardinian  minister  in  England,  to  the  Bailli  de 
Solar,^  the  Sardinian  minister  at  Paris,  desiring  to  renew 

■^  Thomas,  Duke  of  Newcastle,  and  Henry  Pelham,  his  only  brother. 
^  Henry  Clinton,  Earl  of  Lincoln,  nephew  of  the  Pelhams,  and  afterwards 
Duke  of  Newcastle. 

^  Thomas  Pelham  of  Stanmer,  afterwards  Lord  Pelham. 

*  This  subtle,  insinuating  Italian  had  paid  his  court  to  Lord  Bute  in  the 
preceding  reign,  and  obtained  a  great  ascendency  over  him.  Though  a  man 
of  quality,  he  had  been  a  monk,  and  the  world  and  the  cloister  had  united 
to  make  him  an  accomplished  statesman.  He  eventually  rose  to  be  first 
minister  of  Sardinia.  His  main  fault  was  that  he  used  too  much  finesse  and 
precaution,  and  attached  too  great  importance  to  trifles.  Some  amusing 
anecdotes  of  him  are  told  in  Memoirs  of  a  Traveller  now  in  Retirement  (1806), 
vol.  ii.  pp.  65-78.— L.  M. 

*  The  Bailli  de  Solar  had  been  the  Sardinian  Ambassador  at  Rome  at  the 
same  time  that  the  Duke  de  Choiseul  was  the  French  Ambassador  there,  and 
a  warm  friendship  had  existed  between  them  from  that  period. — L.  M. 


124  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

the  negotiation  where  it  had  been  broken  off.  Lord  Bute 
had  gone  farther:  he  had  ordered  Sir  Joseph  Yorke  to 
treat  privately  with  the  Court  of  Vienna,  without  the 
knowledge  of  the  King  of  Prussia.  For  some  time  the 
Court  of  Vienna  did  not  vouchsafe  an  answer.  To  the 
confusion  of  the  Favourite,  the  first  news  he  had  of  any 
answer  to  come  was  from  the  Baron  de  Knyphausen,  the 
King  of  Prussia's  minister  here.^ 

April  28th,  the  new  peers  kissed  hands.  Lord  Went- 
worth"  and  Sir  William  Courtenay,^  Tories,  were  made 
Viscounts.  Lord  Egmont,*  Lord  Milton,^  Lord  Brudenel, 
the  Duke  of  Newcastle,  Sir  Edward    Hussy   Montagu,^ 

^  The  communication  made  by  Lord  Bute  to  the  Court  of  Vienna  appears 
to  have  originated  in  the  belief  that  the  Austrians  were,  on  national  grounds, 
more  inclined  to  peace  than  any  of  the  other  powers.  Considering  the  close 
connection  existing  between  the  Courts  of  Vienna  and  Paris,  and  the  certainty 
that  such  a  step  would  be  viewed  in  the  worst  light  by  the  King  of  Prussia, 
it  must  be  regarded  as  a  blunder.  The  correspondence  that  passed  on  the 
occasion  is  printed  in  the  Appendix  to  Adolphus,  vol.  i.  p.  575.  There  is  an 
able  Essay  on  the  subject  in  the  Appendix  to  the  5th  vol.  of  Bclsham,  p.  475. 
— L.  M. 

2  Sir  Edward  Noel,  Bart.,  Baron  Wentworth  of  Nettleshead,  created 
Viscount  Wentworth  of  Welsborough,  county  of  Leicester. 

3  Sir  William  Courtenay,  Bart.,  chief  of  the  great  house  of  Courtenay. 
He  had,  like  his  father,  represented  the  County  of  Devon  for  many  years. 
He  survived  his  creation  [as  Viscount  Courtenay]  only  ten  days.  The  title 
became  extinct  on  the  decease  of  his  grandson,  the  ninth  Earl  of  Devon. — 
L.  M. 

*  John  Percival,  second  Earl  of  Egmont,  an  Irish  peer,  created  Baron 
Lovel  and  Holland  of  Enmore,  in  the  County  of  Somerset.  His  anxiety  for 
an  English  peerage  is  recorded  in  Dodington's  Diary,  pp.  420-2. — E. 

^  Joseph  Damer,  first  Baron  Milton  in  the  peerage  of  Ireland,  and  M.P.  for 
Dorchester,  created  Baron  Milton  of  Milton  Abbey,  in  the  County  of  Dorset. 
He  was  subsequently  advanced  to  the  dignities  of  Viscount  Milton  and 
Earl  of  Dorchester,  and  died  on  12th  February  1798. — E. 

"  M.P.  for  Tiverton,  created  Baron  Beaulieu  of  Beaulieu,  in  the  County  of 
Southampton.  He  was  the  eldest  son  of  James  Hussey  of  Westown,  County 
Dublin,  and  married  Isabella,  Dowager  Countess  of  Manchester,  eldest 
daughter  of  John,  second  Duke  of  Montagu,  on  whose  death  he  assumed  the 
additional  surname  of  Montagu.  He  was  advanced  to  the  dignity  of  Earl  of 
Beaulieu  on  8th  July  1784,  and  died  on  25th  November  1802,  when  the  titles 
became  extinct.  Sir  Charles  Ilanbury  Williams  wrote  a  curious  lampoon  on 
the  occasion  of  Hussey's  marriage,  entitled  an  '  Ode  to  the  Honourable 
Henry  Fox,'  etc.  —  Works,  1822,  vol.  i,  90. — E. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  125 

Mr.  Vernon,*  of  Sudbury,  and  Mr.  Lane,^  the  two  latter 
Tories,  were  made  Barons,  and  Lady  Caroline  Fox,  a 
Baroness,  Lord  Ligonier's  Irish  peerage  was  entailed  on 
his  nephew.  Mr.  Vernon,^  clerk  of  the  Council,  and  Mr, 
Olmius,*  were  created  Irish  Barons.  The  Prince  of  Meck- 
lenburgh,^  brother  of  the  Queen,  was  made  a  Major-General. 
Lord  Bute  had  often  waived  her  request.  She  was  advised 
to  apply  to  the  Princess,  and  the  favour  was  immediately 
granted.  Soon  after,  Buckingham  House  ^  was  purchased 
and  bestowed  on  her  Majesty,  St.  James's  not  seeming  a 
prison  strait  enough.  There  the  King  and  Queen  lived 
in  the  strictest  privacy,  attended  absolutely  by  none  but 
menial  servants  ;  and  never  came  to  the  palace  but  for  the 
hours  of  levies  and  drawing-rooms.  The  King's  younger 
brothers  were  kept,  till  they  came  of  age,  in  as  rigid 
durance.  Prince  Henry,  the  third,  a  very  lively  lad,  being 
asked  if  he  had  been  confined  with  the  epidemic  cold, 
replied,  '  Confined  !  that  I  am,  without  any  cold '  ;  and 
soon   after,  when    the    Garter   was   bestowed   on    Prince 

■^  George  Venables  Vernon  of  Sudbury  Hall,  Derbyshire,  M.  P.  for 
Derby.  Created  Lord  Vernon,  Baron  of  Kinderton,  in  the  County  of  Chester. 
He  was  the  great-nephew  of  Peter  Venables,  last  Baron  Kinderton,  to  whose 
estates  he  had  succeeded.  He  died  on  21st  August  1780,  aged  seventy- 
one. — E. 

^  George  Fox  Lane,  created  Lord  Bingley — he  had  married  the  only 
daughter  and  heiress  of  the  last  Lord  of  the  same  name.  He  died  in  1773, 
without  issue. — L.  M. 

^  Francis  Vernon,  M.P.  for  Ipswich,  created  Baron  Orwell  of  Newry, 
County  Down.  He  was  advanced  to  the  Viscounty  of  Orwell  in  1776,  and  to 
the  Earldom  of  Shipbrook  in  1777,  and  died  in  1783,  when  his  titles  became 
extinct. — E. 

*  John  Olmius,  M.P.  for  Weymouth,  sometime  Deputy-Governor  of  the 
Bank  of  England,  created  Baron  Waltham  of  Philipstown,  King's  County.  He 
died  on  5th  October  1762. 

^  Charles  Lewis  Frederick,  Prince  of  Mecklenburgh,  brother  of  the  Duke 
of  Mecklenburgh  and  of  Queen  Charlotte.     Born  1741. — L.M, 

^  Buckingham  House,  in  St.  James's  Park,  built  by  John  Sheffield,  Duke 
of  Buckingham,  was  purchased  of  his  natural  son.  Sir  Charles  Sheffield,  and 
named  the  Queen's  Palace.  The  mob  called  it  in  derision,  Holyrood  House. 
[It  was  taken  down  in  1825,  and  the  present  hideous  palace  erected  in  its 
place. — E.] 


126  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

William  and  Lord  Bute,  Prince  Henry  said,  '  I  suppose 
Mr.  Mackenzie  ^  and  I  shall  have  the  green  ribands.' 

^  James  Stuart  Mackenzie,  only  brother  of  the  Earl  of  Bute.  He  had  been 
Minister  at  Turin  from  1758  to  1762,  when  he  was  appointed  to  Venice  ;  but, 
before  he  could  leave  Turin,  the  death  of  the  Duke  of  Argyle  caused  Lord 
Bute  to  bring  him  home  abruptly  to  take  the  direction  of  the  Government  in 
Scotland  ;  an  exercise  of  the  Favourite's  power,  wliich  proved  him  to  be 
virtually  at  the  head  of  the  Administration.  From  the  same  feelings  of 
exclusiveness,  Lord  Bute  subsequently  selected  Mr.  Mackenzie,  in  preference 
to  any  of  his  colleagues  in  the  Cabinet,  to  assist  him  in  the  early  part  of  the 
negotiations  for  peace.  Whatever  points  were  settled  by  his  Lordship  with 
the  King,  were  then  communicated,  through  Mr.  Mackenzie,  to  the  Count  de 
Virri,  by  whom  they  were  transmitted,  through  the  Bailli  de  Solar,  to  the 
Duke  of  Choiseul,  and  it  was  only  after  an  article  had  been  actually  agreed 
upon  that  it  came  officially  under  the  cognisance  of  the  Foreign  Department ; 
so  that  these  two  foreigners  appear  to  have  possessed  more  of  Lord  Bute's 
confidence,  as  well  as  more  influence  over  the  negotiation,  than  the  Secretary 
of  State,  Lord  Egremont;  a  circumstance  which  rather  explains  the  jealousy 
shown  by  the  Cabinet,  when  the  preliminaries  had  been  settled,  of  any  inde- 
pendent authority  being  given  to  the  Duke  of  Bedford.  These  duties  Mr. 
Mackenzie  discharged  irreproachably,  and,  far  from  sharing  his  brother's 
unpopularity,  was  much  esteemed  by  all  parties.  He  is  described  by  his 
secretary,  M.  Dutens,  as  having  been  most  amiable,  remarkably  cheerful  and 
pleasant  in  society,  with  very  simple  tastes,  and  no  ambition,  well  versed  in 
the  sciences,  '  particularly  in  mathematics,  algebra,  and  astronomy. '  He 
took  little  part  in  public  aff'airs  after  Lord  Bute's  resignation,  and  died  in 
iSoo,  at  the  age  of  eighty-one  years,  only  a  few  months  after  the  death  of  his 
wife,  the  daughter  of  John,  Duke  of  Argyle. — Memoirs  of  a  Traveller  now  in 
Retirement,  1806,  vol.  i.  pp.  160-1,  164-6;  vol.  iv.  pp.  227-9. — L.  M. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  127 


CHAPTER    XI. 

Debate  in  the  House  of  Commons  on  a  Vote  of  Credit  and  the  Support  of 
Portugal. — The  German  War. — Pitt's  Speech. — Colonel  Barre's  Reply  to 
Mr.  Pitt. — Lord  Bute's  Ambition. — The  Duke  of  Newcastle's  Resigna- 
tion.— Fox  and  the  Duke  of  Devonshire. — Ingratitude  of  the  Clergy  to 
Newcastle. — Unwise  conduct  of  Lord  Bute. — He  is  declared  First  Lord 
of  the  Treasury. — Sir  Francis  Dashwood,  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer. — 
His  unfitness  for  that  Office. — His  general  Character. — His  establishment 
of  a  Society  of  Young  Travellers. 

May  1 2th.  The  House  of  Commons  debated  on  a  vote 
of  credit,  and  the  support  of  Portugal.  Glover,  the  poet, 
pleaded  against  Portugal's  claim  to  our  assistance,  from 
their  many  infractions  of  treaties,  from  their  cramping  our 
trade,  and  from  the  impossibilities  our  merchants  had  found 
of  obtaining  redress  ;  a  complaint  that  seemed  to  bear 
hard  on  the  late  ministry :  to  which  he  added  reflections 
on  the  extravagance  of  the  German  war,  which,  contrary 
to  the  professions  of  ministers,  had  grown  from  ;!^200,ooo 
to  six  or  seven  millions.  Pitt  was  offended,  and  corrected 
Glover,  who  threw  his  information  on  some  nameless 
merchants,  by  whom  he  had  been  told  that  their  remon- 
strances on  the  difficulties  of  the  Portuguese  trade  had 
not  been  read  by  the  ministers.  Wilkes  censured  the 
weakness  and  irresolution  of  the  ministry  ;  their  abandon- 
ing Belleisle,  and  neglecting  to  send  over  the  officers  to 
Germany.  It  was  even  said,  he  affirmed,  that  they  had 
been  humiliating  themselves  at  the  Court  of  Vienna. 
Legge  more  gently,  and  Beckford  with  more  rhodomon- 
tade,  pressed  the  same  accusations.  The  latter  was  for 
invading  Spain  by  sea  ;  declared  that  the  City  suspected 
the  ministry  of  wavering,  and  demanded  to  have  their  old 
minister  again.     Grenville  answered  finely,  and  compared 


128  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

the  smallncss  of  the  sum  demanded,  ;^3OO,O0O,  with  the 
expense  in  Germany.  Belleisle  had  cost  more  than  what 
was  now  asked  for  Portugal.  That  Court  knew  how  we 
were  embarrassed,  and  asked  not  more  than  she  knew  we 
could  cfivc.  What  proof  was  there  of  irresolution  ?  was 
not  Martinico  conquered  .''  was  not  the  Havannah  likely 
to  follow }  or  did  Beckford  think  that  great  words,  blus- 
tered in  Parliament,  constituted  resolution  ?  Fluctuating 
reports  were  rather  owing  to  stockjobbers  than  to  fluctua- 
tion in  the  measures  of  Government.  He  affirmed  that 
not  one  step  had  been  taken  at  Vienna  derogatory  to  any 
of  our  connections.  We  had  only  tried  to  feel  how  they 
relished  the  family-compact  among  the  Bourbons.  But 
whether  the  resolution  was  taken  to  recall  our  troops  from 
Germany,  or  at  all  events  to  go  on,  would  it  be  prudent 
to  declare  which  was  to  be  the  measure  ? 

Lord  George  Sackville  was  liberal  in  blaming  the 
expense  of  the  German  war,  which  he  compared  with  that 
of  Queen  Anne;  tJie  whole  of  which,  he  maintained,  except 
in  171 1  and  171 2,  did  not  amount  to  what  this  German 
war  had  cost  alone,  though  we  had  then  employed  more 
British  and  other  troops  than  at  present.  Queen  Anne's 
war  had  never  exceeded  eight  millions,  including  garrisons, 
fleet,  etc.  The  expense  of  172,000  men  from  1709  to  171 1 
had  not  gone  beyond  what  one  year  had  recently  cost  in 
Germany.  If  there  had  not  been  new  inventions  for 
expense,  we  should  not  now  be  ready  to  beg  peace. 

Pitt,  in  a  very  capital  style,  took  up  the  cause  of  Por- 
tugal :  he  did  not  stoop  to  that  little  hackneyed  practice 
of  party,  opposing  whatever  was  the  measure  of  the  adver- 
sary. He  had  stood  forth  for  general  war,  and  for  reduc- 
tion of  the  House  of  Bourbon.  To  advise  still  larger  war 
was  constancy  to  the  same  plan  ;  and  it  was  still  safer  to 
advise  it,  when  he  was  no  longer  answerable  for  the  event. 
To  oppose  vigorous  steps  would  have  been  more  truly 
lending  aid  to  the  Court,  who  wanted  to  get  clear  of  the 
war. 

As  having  been  a  public  minister,  he  must  not,  he  said 


KING  GEORGE  III. 


129 


intrench  himself  within  his  present  private  situation,  but 
speak  his  opinion.  He  should  not  wait  for  events,  but  speak 
boldly  as  a  counsellor.  If  he  voted  for  this  measure,  it  was 
giving  the  Crown  his  advice,  as  if  he  was  called  to  Council. 
He  did  not  think  we  ought  to  support  Portugal,  both  for 
commercial  and  political  reasons.  Portugal  is  in  the  imme- 
diate predicament  of  nearness  to  us  after  Ireland  and  our 
Colonies.  It  assists,  without  draining  tis.  Assistance  was 
a  matter  of  justice  due  from  us  to  an  oppressed,  insulted 
ally.  There  had  not  been  such  an  infraction  of  treaties  as 
would  release  us  from  the  ties  of  treaties.  Should  we 
sit  with  folded  arms  while  the  two  branches  of  Bourbon, 
those  proudest  of  the  proud,  would  exclude  us  from 
neutral  ports .''  We  must  set  Portugal  on  its  legs,  not 
take  it  on  our  shoulders.  He  then  expatiated  on  the 
character  of  Carvalho,  the  Prime  Minister  of  Portugal,  his 
inflexibility  to  danger,  his  intrepidity ;  and  drew  a  picture 
that  might  almost  have  passed  for  his  own,  as  he  seemed 
to  mean  it  should.  Would  there  be  danger  in  this 
measure  ?  he  was  a  co-operator  in  it.  If  you,  as  a 
maritime  power,  cannot  protect  Portugal,  Genoa  will  next 
be  shut  against  you  ;  and  then  the  ports  of  Sardinia : — 
what !  ports  shut  against  the  first  maritime  power  in  the 
world !  He  then  turned  Glover  into  ridicule ;  said  he 
admired  his  poetry,  but  qiianto,  optimiis  omnium  poeta, 
tanto — he  would  not,  he  said,  go  on.  For  the  sum  de- 
manded, it  might  easily  be  raised,  or  a  million  more ;  and 
he  would  give  the  same  opinion,  whether  the  Duke  of 
Newcastle  continued  minister,  or  should  be  succeeded  by 
Mr.  Fox,  as  was  generally  said  to  be  the  intention.  The 
only  difficulty  was  to  find  funds.  It  had  been  predicated 
for  three  years  that  we  could  not  raise  more  money ; 
therefore  it  was  plain  we  could.  Lord  George  should 
have  put  into  the  scale  what  our  enemies  had  lost ;  they 
had  been  losing,  we  acquiring.  He  hoped  we  should  keep 
up  our  officers  and  our  marine,  and  not  decrease  the  latter, 
as  we  had  done  after  the  last  peace.  France  had  last 
year  spent  eight  millions  in  Germany.  To  outlast  an 
VOL.  I.  I 


I30  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

enemy  was  worth  perseverance.     But  we  would  not  dis- 
tinguish between  contracting  our  expenses  and  contracting 
our  operations.     He  paid  great  compliments  to  the  officers 
of  land  and  sea,  and  pleaded  earnestly  against  relinquish- 
ing Germany.     It  would  be  turning  loose  an  hundred  and 
forty  thousand  French  to  overrun  the  Low  Countries  and 
Portugal.     If  there  was  any  odium  from  the  German  war 
he  begged  it  might  fall  on  him  ;  though   he   had  never 
seen  a  contractor,  yet  he  would  not  disculpate  himself  by 
censuring  others  ;  and  he  spoke  in  mitigation  of  the  blame 
thrown  on  the  Treasury,  owning  he  thought  some  little 
might  have  been    saved,    but    not   suspecting    them    of 
dishonesty.     Yet,  were  an  inquiry  moved,  he  would  second 
it ;  he  would  screen  nobody.     After  the  King  of  Prussia 
had  been  so  ill-treated  on  our  account,  would  we   throw 
such  a  power  out  of  our  alliance,  only  to  save  three  or 
four  hundred  thousand  pounds  }     But  he  thought  he  had 
heard  the  army  was  not  to  be  recalled — was  transported  to 
find  Lord  Granby  was  going  to  it.     Himself  was  the  only 
man  that  agreed   with  the  whole  administration,  for  he 
approved  both  of  war  in  Germany  and  war  in  Portugal  ; 
and  he  was  so  far  from  meditating  opposition,   that   he 
should    regard  the  man  who  would  revive  parties  as  an 
enemy    to    his    country.      Himself   had    contributed    to 
annihilate  party,  but  it  had  not   been   to  pave  the    way 
for  those  who  only  intended  to  substitute  one  party  to  anotJier} 
Should  the  least  cloud  arise  between  London  and  Berlin, 
he  prayed  for  temper  and  reconciliation.     He  wished  to 
move  that  the    continuation   of  the   subsidy   to    Prussia 
might   be   added  to  the  vote  of  credit ;    but  it  did  not 
become  him  to  move  for  more  than  was  asked  by   the 
King's  servants  :  yet  he  wished  the  vote  of  credit  had  been 
greater,  and  knew  the  Duke  of  Newcastle  wished  so  too. 
He  should  rejoice  to  see  the  session  closed  with  the  grant 
of  a  large  sum  of  money,  because  England  could  not  well 
treat  but   at   the   head   of  all  her   force.       Russia   had 

^  Meaning  Lord  Bute,  who  was  introducing  the  Tories  in  the  place  of  the 
Whigs. 


KING  GEORGE  III. 


131 


acceded  to  Prussia — how  much  wiser  to  give  money  to 
that  monarch  now,  when  he  is  in  a  better  situation,  than 
as  you  would  do,  if  he  were  still  more  distressed !  Nay, 
that  little  teazing  incident,  Sweden,  was  removed  by  dread 
of  the  Czar.  Sweden  is  a  free  nation,  but  factions  and  a 
corrupted  senate  have  lowered  it  from  the  great  figure  it 
made  a7i  hundred  years  ago.  Act  now,  continued  he,  upon 
a  great  system,  while  it  is  in  your  power!  A  million 
more  would  be  a  pittance  to  place  you  at  the  head  of 
Europe,  and  enable  you  to  treat  with  efficacy  and  dignity. 
Save  it  not  in  this  last  critical  year !  Give  the  million  to 
the  war  at  large,  and  add  three,  four,  or  live  hundred 
thousand  pounds  more  to  Portugal ;  or  avow  to  the  House 
of  Bourbon  that  you  are  not  able  to  treat  at  the  head  of 
your  allies. 

This  speech,  so  artful,  elevated,  so  much  in  character, 
and  so  distressful  to  the  junto  that  were  endeavouring  to 
steal  disgrace  upon  themselves  and  their  country  in  the 
face  of  the  world,  by  setting  up  one  war  against  another, 
and  dividing  the  attention  of  the  public,  till  impotence 
and  mismanagement  should  render  peace  welcome, — this 
speech  did  Colonel  Barre  attempt  to  answer  ;  and  did 
answer  it,  only  in  length.  He  was  sensible  that  he  had 
disgusted  mankind  by  his  indecent  brutality  to  so  great 
a  statesman  :  his  friends  had  told  him  that  his  invectives, 
illiberal  as  they  had  been,  were  reckoned  the  produce  of 
study ;  and  that  he  must  shine  in  cool  argument,  lest  he 
should  be  thought  a  bully  rather  than  an  orator.  If  they 
apprehended  this,  the  result  of  their  lessons  was  a  proof 
that  their  apprehensions  had  not  been  ill-founded.  Nothing 
could  be  more  cold  and  dull  than  Barre's  reply  to  Mr. 
Pitt.  It  revenged  the  latter  for  the  former  insult. 
Calvert,^  a  mad  volunteer,  who  always  spoke  what  he 
thought,  and  sometimes  thought  justly,   was   so    struck 

^  Nicholson  Calvert  of  Hunsdon  House,  Hertfordshire,  M.P.  for  Tewkes- 
bury, 'a  Whig  and  something  more. '  He  was  the  eldest  son  of  Felix  Calvert  of 
Furneaux  Pelham,  in  the  same  county,  and  died  on  4th  May  1793,  in  the  sixty- 
ninth  year  of  his  age.    See  Cussans's  Herts — Hundred  of  Broughing,  p.  54.  — E. 


132  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

with  Barre's  phlegmatic  impropriety,  that  he  told  the 
House  it  had  put  him  in  mind  of  a  poet,  who  being  at  sea 
in  a  tempest,  and  being  missed  while  all  hands  were  on 
deck,  was  found  half  asleep  in  the  cabin  ;  and,  being  asked 
why  he  did  not  assist  to  save  the  ship,  replied,  he  was 
thinking  how  to  describe  the  storm  ?^  The  money  was 
voted,  and  nothing  more  of  consequence  passed  that 
session  in  Parliament. 

Both  Houses  thus  complaisant  and  submissive,  there 
wanted  but  the  office  of  Prime  Minister  to  glut  the 
Favourite's  ambition  :  and  no  wonder  that  he,  who  had 
dared  to  strike  the  name  of  the  first  monarch  in  military 
glory  in  Europe  from  the  list  of  Great  Britain's  pensioners, 
only  to  gratify  the  feminine  piques  of  the  backstairs  ;  and 
who  had  ventured  successfully  to  remove  Mr.  Pitt  from 
the  command  of  that  country  which  he  had  saved,  restored, 
exalted  ; — no  wonder  such  a  Phaeton  should  drive  over 
a  ridiculous  old  dotard,  who  had  ever  been  in  everybody's 
way,  and  whose  feeble  hands  were  still  struggling  for 
power,  when  the  most  he  ought  to  have  expected,  was, 
that  his  flattery  and  obsequiousness  might  have  moved 
charity  to  leave  him  an  appearance  of  credit.  It  was 
absurd  for  him  to  stay  in  place  ;  insolent  to  attempt  to 
stay  there  by  force,  and  impudent  to  pretend  to  patriotism 
when  driven  out  with  contempt.  Against  his  will  he  was 
preserved  from  having  a  share  in  the  infamy  of  the 
ensuing  peace. 

May  14th,  the  Duke^  acquainted  the  King  that  he 
would  resign,  who  answered  coldly,  '  Then,  my  Lord,  I 
must  fill  up  your  place  as  well  as  I  can.'  Still  Newcastle 
lingered  ;  and,  as  he  owned  afterwards  to  the  Duke  of 
Cumberland,  his  friends  had  laboured  to  prevent  the  fatal 
blow.  Lord  Mansfield,  he  said,  had  pleaded  with  Lord 
Bute  for  above  an  hour,  and  could  not  extract  from  him 

^  This  speech  '  is  said  to  have  silenced  all  future  attacks  by  the  poet  either 
on  Mr.  Pitt  or  his  administration,  and  was  well  received  on  all  sides.' — 
Hansard's  Parliamentary  History,  xv.  p.  1227,  note. — L.  M. 

=•  Of  Newcastle. 


KING  GEORGE  III. 


133 


a  wish  that  the  Duke  should  continue  in  the  Treasury. 
Fox  asked  Lord  Mansfield  if  this  was  true  ?  He  replied, 
'  Not  an  hour,  for  I  soon  saw  it  was  to  no  purpose.' 

Thus  disgraced,  and  disgracing  himself,  on  the  26th 
the  Duke  of  Newcastle  resigned  :  and  he,  who  had  begun 
the  world  with  heading  mobs  against  the  ministers  of 
Queen  Anne;  who  had  braved  the  Heir-apparent^  of  the 
new  family,  and  forced  himself  upon  him  as  godfather  to 
his  son  ;  who  had  recovered  that  Prince's  favour,  and 
preserved  power  under  him  at  the  expense  of  every 
minister  whom  that  Prince  preferred  ;  and  who  had  been 
a  victorious  rival  of  another  Prince  of  Wales  ;2  was  now 
buffeted  from  a  fourth  Court^  by  a  very  suitable  com- 
petitor, and  was  reduced  in  his  tottering  old  age  to  have 
recourse  to  those  mobs  and  that  popularity  which  had 
raised  him  fifty  years  before  ;  and  as  almost  the  individual 
crisis  was  revolved,  with  a  scandalous  treaty  and  a  new 
prospect  of  arbitrary  power,  it  looked  as  if  Newcastle 
thought  himself  young  again,  because  the  times  of  his 
youth  were  returned,  and  he  was  obliged  to  act  with  boys ! 

Such  pains,  however,  had  been  taken  to  disjoint  his 
faction,  that  his  exit  from  power  was  by  no  means 
attended  with  consolatory  circumstances.  The  Duke  of 
Devonshire  would  not  resign,  though  he  declared  he  would 
seldom  or  never  go  to  council.  Fox  had  warned  him  not 
to  be  too  hasty  in  embarking  in  a  party  in  which  Pitt 
must  be  a  principal  actor  ;  and  remembering  his  Grace 
how  large  a  share  Pitt  had  had  in  planting  the  Tories  at 
Court,  and  that,  speaking  of  Legge,  Pitt  had  said,  '  I  will 

^  George,  Prince  of  Wales,  afterwards  King  George  the  Second. 

-  Frederick,  Prince  of  Wales,  against  whom  the  Duke  of  Newcastle  carried 
the  chancellorship  of  Cambridge.  [It  would  appear  that  the  Prince  never 
went  to  the  poll,  as  the  Gentleman^ s  Magazine  for  December  1748  records 
that  the  Duke  '  was  unanimously  elected  in  a  very  full  Senate  in  room  of 
the  late  Duke  of  Somerset,'  p.  573. — E.] 

"^  Lord  Bute  had  the  ill-natured  arrogance  to  compliment  him  on  his 
retirement :  the  Duke  replied  with  a  spirit  that  marked  his  lasting  ambition, 
'  Yes,  yes,  my  Lord,  I  am  an  old  man  ;  but  yesterday  was  my  birthday,  and 
I  recollected  that  Cardinal  Fleury  bega7i  to  be  Prime  Minister  of  France  just 
at  my  age. ' 


134  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

have  no  more  car  for  Whig  grievances.'  The  rest  of 
Newcastle's  friends  were  as  little  disposed  to  follow  him :  but 
that  he  might  taste  the  full  mortification  of  being  deserted 
by  those  whom  he  had  most  obliged,  whom  he  had  most 
courted  and  most  patronised,  the  clergy  gave  the  most 
conspicuous  example  of  ingratitude.  For  thirty  years 
Newcastle  had  had  the  almost  sole  disposal  of  ecclesiastic 
preferments,  and  consequently  had  raised  numbers  of  men 
from  penury  and  the  meanest  birth  to  the  highest  honours 
and  amplest  incomes  in  their  profession.  At  this  very 
period  there  were  not  three  bishops  on  the  bench  who  did 
not  owe  their  mitres  to  him.  His  first  lev^e  after  his 
fall  was  attended  but  by  one  bishop,^  Cornwallis  of 
Litchfield  ;  who  being  a  man  of  quality,  and  by  his  birth 
entitled  to  expect  a  greater  rise,  did  but  reflect  the  more 
shame  on  those  who  owed  everything  to  favour,  and 
scarce  one  of  them  anything  to  abilities. 

The  conduct  of  Lord  Bute  was  not  more  wise  than 
that  of  Newcastle.  Instead  of  sheltering  himself  under 
that  old  man's  name  from  whatever  danger  there  might 
be  in  making  peace,  the  Earl  was  driving  together  all 
those  whom  he  ought  to  have  kept  divided,  and  really 
seemed  jealous  lest  himself  should  not  have  the  whole 
odium  of  sacrificing  the  glories  and  conquests  of  the  war  ; 
an  infatuation  that  so  far  excuses  him,  as  he  must  have 
thought  he  did  a  service  to  his  country  in  restoring  peace: 
but  what  must  his  understanding  have  been  if  he  could 
think  that  peace  would  be  a  benefit,  let  the  terms  be  what 
they  would  ?  He  supposed,  too,  that  Newcastle,  having 
in  opposition  to  Pitt  declared  for  peace,  could  not  retract, 
and  be  against  the  peace.  This  was  not  knowing 
Newcastle  or  mankind.  The  situation,  too,  was  materially 
changed  :  the  weight  of  Russia  was  transferred  from  the 
hostile  to  the  friendly  scale  ;  Martinico  was  fallen  ;  and 
Europe  could  scarce  amass  the  symptom  of  a  fleet.     A 

^  Frederic,  brother  of  Earl   Cornwallis,  and   afterwards    Archbishop    of 
Canterbury.     Young,  of  Norwich,  was  out  of  town,  but  adhered  faithfully  to 

Newcastle. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  135 

mind  less  versatile  than  Newcastle's  could  not  want 
arguments  against  a  precipitate  treaty.  Yet  was  it  not 
Newcastle,  nor  a  scandalous  treaty,  that  shook  the 
Favourite's  power.  It  was  his  ignorance  of  the  world ; 
it  was  a  head  unadapted  to  government,  and  rendered 
still  less  proper  for  it  by  morose  and  recluse  pride,  and  a 
heart  that  was  not  formed  to  bear  up  a  weak  head,  that 
made  him  embark  imprudently,  and  retreat  as  unadvisedly. 
Lord  Bute,  on  the  resignation  of  the  Duke  of  Newcastle, 
was  immediately  declared  First  Lord  of  the  Treasury. 
George  Grenville  succeeded  him  as  Secretary  of  State, 
and  Sir  Francis  Dashwood  was  made  his  Chancellor  of 
the  Exchequer ;  a  system  that  all  the  lustre  of  the 
Favourite's  power  could  not  guard  from  being  ridiculous, 
though  to  himself  mankind  bowed  with  obsequious 
devotion.  Grenville  was  ignorant  of  foreign  affairs,  and, 
though  capable  of  out-talking  the  whole  corps  diplomatique, 
had  no  address,  no  manner,  no  insinuation,  and  had,  least 
of  all,  the  faculty  of  listening.  The  Favourite  himself 
had  never  been  in  a  single  office  of  business,  but  for 
the  few  months  that  he  had  held  the  seals  :  of  the  revenue 
he  was  in  perfect  ignorance,  knew  nothing  of  figures,  and 
w^s  a  stranger  to  those  Magi  to  the  East  of  Temple-Bar, 
who,  though  they  flock  to  a  new  star,  expect  to  be  talked 
to  in  a  more  intelligible  language  than  that  of  inspiration. 
When  a  Lord  Treasurer  or  a  First  Lord  of  the  Treasury 
is  not  master  of  his  own  province,  it  suffices  if  the 
Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer  is  a  man  of  business,  and 
capable  of  conducting  the  revenue,  of  planning  supplies, 
and  of  executing  the  mechanic  duties  of  that  high  post. 
But  in  the  new  dispensation  it  was  difficult  to  say  which 
was  the  worst  suited  to  his  office,  the  minister  or  his 
substitute.  While  the  former  shrouded  his  ignorance  from 
vulgar  eyes,  and  dropped  but  now  and  then  from  a  cloud 
an  oracular  sentence  ;  the  deputy,  with  the  familiarity  and 
phrase  of  a  fish-wife,  introduced  the  humours  of  Wapping 
behind  the  veil  of  the  Treasury.  He  had  a  coarse,  blunt 
manner  of  speaking,  that,  looking  like  honesty,  inclined 


136  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

men  to  hold  his  common  sense  in  higher  esteem  than  it 
deserved  ;  but,  having  neither  knowledge^  nor  dignity,  his 
style,  when  he  was  to  act  as  minister,  appeared  naked, 
vulgar,  and  irreverent  to  an  assembly  that  expects  to  be 
informed,  and  that  generally  chooses  to  reprehend,  not 
to  be  reprehended.  When  a  statesman  ventures  to  be 
familiar,  he  must  captivate  his  audience  by  uncommon 
graces,  or  win  their  good-will  by  a  humane  pleasantry 
that  seems  to  flow  from  the  heart,  and  to  be  the  effusion 
of  universal  benevolence.  This  was  the  secret  as  well  as 
character  of  Henry  the  Fourth  of  France  :  even  the 
semblance  of  it  stood  his  grandson,  our  Charles  the  Second, 
in  signal  stead,  and  veiled  his  unfeeling  heart,  and  selfish 
and  remorseless  insensibility. 

Men  were  puzzled  to  guess  at  the  motive  of  so  improper 
a  choice  as  this  of  Sir  Francis  Dashwood.  The  banner  of 
religion  was  displayed  at  Court,  and  yet  all  the  centurions 
were  culled  from  the  most  profligate  societies.     Sir  Francis 

^  Sir  Francis  Dashwood's  want  of  knowledge  of  finance  opened  a  fine  field 
for  the  wits  of  the  day,  and  was  of  course  greatly  exaggerated.  One  of  them 
describes  him  as  '  a  man  to  whom  a  sum  of  five  figures  was  an  impenetrable 
secret.'  His  vocation,  certainly,  was  not  to  the  Exchequer;  and  he  was 
unfortunate  in  having  Mr.  Legge  for  his  predecessor.  There  were  other  high 
offices  of  the  Government  which  he  would  have  filled  with  credit,  for  he  had 
respectable  talents,  was  'frank,  spirited,  and  sensible,'  and  had  gained  the 
consideration  of  the  House. — (Smollett.)  He  was  the  only  son  of  Sir  Francis 
Dashwood,  Baronet,  M.  P.  for  Winchelsea,  by  Lady  Mary  Fane,  eldest 
daughter  of  Vere,  fourth  Earl  of  Westmorland.  In  his  youth  he  had 
travelled  much,  especially  in  Italy,  and  passed  some  time  at  Rome,  where 
he  was  long  recollected  from  the  following  anecdote  which  made  a  great 
noise  at  the  time.  '  It  was  on  Good-Friday,  when  each  person  who  attends 
the  service  in  the  Sistine  Chapel,  as  he  enters,  takes  a  small  scourge  from  an 
attendant  at  the  door.  The  chapel  is  dimly  lighted,  and  there  are  three 
candles  which  are  extinguished  by  the  priest,  one  by  one  :  at  the  putting  out 
of  the  first,  the  penitents  take  off  one  part  of  their  dress  ;  at  the  next,  still 
more  ;  and,  in  the  darkness  which  follows  the  extinguishing  of  the  third 
candle,  lay  on  their  own  shoulders,  with  groans  and  lamentations.  Sir 
Francis  Dashwood,  thinking  this  mere  stage  effect,  entered  with  others, 
dressed  in  a  large  watchman's  coat;  demurely  took  his  scourge  from  the 
priest,  and  advanced  to  the  end  of  the  chapel ;  where,  on  the  darkness 
ensuing,  he  drew  from  beneath  his  coat  an  English  horsewhip  and  flogged 
right  and  left  quite  down  the  chapel,  and  made  his  escape,  the  congregation 
exclaiming,  *  II  diavolo !    il  diavolo ! '  and  thinking  the  evil  one  was  upon 


KING  GEORGE  III.  137 

had  long  been  known  by  his  singularities  and  some 
humour.  In  his  early  youth,  accoutred  like  Charles  the 
Twelfth,  he  had  travelled  to  Russia  in  hopes  of  captivating 
the  Czarina;  but  neither  the  character  nor  dress  of  Charles 
were  well  imagined  to  catch  a  woman's  heart.  In  Italy, 
Sir  Francis  had  given  in  to  the  most  open  profaneness  ; 
and,  at  his  return,  had  assembled  a  society^  of  Young 
Travellers,  to  which  a  taste  for  the  arts  and  antiquity,  or 
merely  having  travelled,  were  the  recommendatory  in- 
gredients. Their  pictures  were  drawn,  ornamented  with 
symbols  and  devices  ;  and  the  founder,  in  the  habit  of 
St.  Francis,  and  with  a  chalice  in  his  hand,  was  represented 
at  his  devotions  before  a  statue  of  the  Venus  of  Medicis,  a 
stream  of  glory  beaming  on  him  from  behind  her  lower 
hand.  These  pictures  were  long  exhibited  in  their  club- 
room  at  a  tavern  in  Palace  Yard ;  but  of  later  years  Saint 
Francis  had  instituted  a  more  select  order.  He  and  some 
chosen  friends  had  hired  the  ruins  of  Medenham  Abbey, 

them  with  a  vengeance  !  The  consequences  of  this  frolic  might  have  been 
serious  to  him,  had  he  not  immediately  fled  the  Papal  dominions.' — (Private 
Information.)  His  political  life  was  by  no  means  discreditable  ;  and,  in  the 
unfortunate  affair  of  Admiral  Byng,  he  exhibited  kindness  of  feeling  not  less 
than  tact  and  decision,  which  Walpole  has  elsewhere  handsomely  noticed. — 
Memoirs  of  George  II.,  vol.  ii.  p.  318.  He  had  a  taste  for  the  arts,  and 
brought  sculptors  and  painters  from  Italy  to  decorate  his  country-seat  at  West- 
Wycombe,  in  Buckinghamshire,  where  he  laid  out  an  extensive  park  with 
skill  and  effect,  and  built  a  church  and  mausoleum.  His  private  life  was 
reported  to  be  very  licentious.  [Dashwood  was  born  in  December  1708,  and 
succeeded  his  father  as  the  second  Baronet  in  1727.  He  represented  New 
Romney  from  May  1741  to  March  1761,  and  Weymouth  from  March  1761  to 
April  1763,  when  he  was  called  to  the  House  of  Lords  as  Baron  Le  Despencer 
in  succession  to  his  uncle  John,  seventh  Earl  of  Westmorland,  who  had  died 
in  the  previous  August.  He  held  the  office  of  Treasurer  of  the  Chamber  from 
1761-62,  and  on  28th  May  1762  was  appointed  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer, 
a  post  which  he  resigned  in  the  following  April.  From  1763  to  1765  he  was 
Master  of  the  Great  Wardrobe,  and  on  29th  December  1766  he  was  appointed 
Joint  Paymaster-General.  He  married  Sarah,  the  daughter  of  Thomas 
Gould  of  Iver,  and  widow  of  Sir  Richard  Ellys,  Baronet,  by  whom  he  had 
no  children.     He  died  on  nth  December  1781. — E.] 

^  They  called  themselves  the  Dilettanti.  In  the  year  1770  they  published 
a  pompous  volume  on  some  rubbish  remaining  of  two  or  three  temples  in 
Ionia. — \Ionian  Antiquities,  parts  i.-iv.,  London,  1769,  1797,  1840,  1881, 
foL— E.] 


138  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

near   Marlow,    and    refitted    it    in    a    conventual    style. 
Thither  at  stated  seasons  they  adjourned  ;  had  each  their 
cell,  a  proper  habit,  a  monastic  name,  and  a  refectory  in 
common — besides  a  chapel,  the  decorations  of  which  may 
well  be  supposed  to  have  contained  the  quintessence  of 
their  mysteries,  since  it  was  impenetrable  to  any  but  the 
initiated.     Whatever   their  doctrines  were,  their  practice 
was    rigorously   pagan  :    Bacchus    and   Venus   were   the 
deities  to  whom  they  almost  publicly  sacrificed.     The  old 
Lord    Melcombe  was  one  of  the  brotherhood.     Yet  their 
follies  would  have  escaped  the  eye  of  the  public,  if  Lord 
Bute  from  this  seminary  of  piety    and  wisdom  had  not 
selected  a  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer.     But  politics  had 
no  sooner  infused  themselves  amongst  these  rosy  anchorites, 
than  dissensions  were  kindled,  and  a  false  brother  arose, 
who  divulged  the  arcana,  and  exposed  the  good  Prior,  in 
order  to  ridicule  him  as  Minister  of  the  Finances.     But,  of 
this,  more  hereafter. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  139 


CHAPTER    XII 

Honours  heaped  on  Lord  Bute. — His  first  Levee. — Archbishop  Seeker. — 
Lord  Halifax  appointed  to  the  Admiralty. — Lord  Melcombe  a  Cabinet 
Counsellor. — Lord  Bute's  Haughtiness. — First  appearance  of  The  North 
Briton. — Its  excessive  Audacity. — Sketch  of  its  Author,  John  Wilkes. — 
Churchill,  Wilkes's  Associate.— Earl  Temple. —Capture  and  re-capture 
of  Newfoundland. — The  French  camp  surprised  by  Prince  Ferdinand. — 
Propensity  of  the  Court  for  Peace. — General  Conway. —Peter  the  Third. 
— The  Czarina  Elizabeth.— The  Empress  Catherine. — Horrible  Con- 
spiracy against  Peter. — Catherine  'raised  to  the  Throne. — Murder  of 
Peter. — Effect  of  the  Russian  revolution  on  the  King  of  Prussia. 

Every  honour  the  Crown  could  bestow  was  now  to  be 
heaped  on  the  Favourite.  He  was  fond  of  his  own  person, 
and  obtained  the  Garter  in  company  with  Prince  William.^ 
His  first  levee  was  crowded  like  a  triumph.  Archbishop 
Seeker,  who  waited  at  it,  pretended  that,  seeing  a  great 
concourse  as  he  came  from  Lambeth,^  he  had  inquired  the 
occasion,  and  had  gone  in.  Lincoln's  Inn  Fields,  where 
the  Duke  of  Newcastle  lived,  was  not  now  in  the  way  to 
Lambeth.  About  the  same  time  died  Lord  Anson,  and 
left  the  Admiralty  too  at  the  disposal  of  the  Favourite. 
He  wished  to  bestow  it  on  Lord  Sandwich,  to  make  room 
for  Rigby,  as  Vice-Treasurer  of  Ireland  ;  but  the  shyness 
of  the  Duke  of  Cumberland,  whose  creature  Sandwich 
was,  made  that  measure  impracticable  ;  and  the  Admiralty 
was  bestowed  on  Lord  Halifax,  with  permission  to  retain 
Ireland    for   a   year.      Elliot,^   a   chief  confidant  of   the 

^  William  Henry,  third  son  of  Frederick,  Prince  of  Wales  ;  afterwards 
Duke  of  Gloucester. 

2  Lord  Bute  held  his  levees  at  the  Cockpit,  WTiitehall,  as  did  afterwards 
the  Duke  of  Grafton  and  Lord  North.  Till  then,  each  minister  saw 
company  at  his  own  house  ;  but  Lord  Bute,  who  lived  in  a  small  house  in 
Audley  Street,  Grosvenor  Square,  had  not  room  enough. 

^  Gilbert  Elliot.     See  supra,  p.  34,  note  3. 


I40  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

Favourite,  was  appointed  Treasurer  of  the  Chambers  ;  and 
Lord  Melcombe  a  Cabinet  Counsellor :  but  there  ended 
all  the  ambition  of  the  latter,  he  dying  of  a  dropsy  in  his 
stomach  a  few  weeks  afterwards. 

These  successes  and  the  tide  of  power  swelled  the  weak 
bladder  of  the  Favourite's  mind  to  the  highest  pitch.  His 
own  style  was  haughty  and  distant  ;  that  of  his  creatures 
insolent.  Many  persons  who  had  absented  themselves 
from  his  lev^e  were  threatened  with  the  loss  of  their  own, 
or  the  places  of  their  relations,  and  were  obliged  to  bow 
the  knee.  But  this  sunshine  drew  up  very  malignant 
vapours.  Scarce  was  the  earl  seated  but  one  step  below 
the  throne,  when  a  most  virulent  weekly  paper  appeared, 
called  the  North  Briton.  Unawed  by  the  prosecution  of 
the  Monitor  (another  opponent  periodic  satire,  the  author 
of  which  had  been  taken  up  for  abusing  favourites),  and 
though  combated  by  two  Court  papers  called  the  Briton 
and  the  Auditor  {i\\Q  former  written  by  Smollet,^  and  the 
latter  by  Murphy,^  and  both  which  the  new  champion 
fairly  silenced  in  a  few  weeks),  the  North  Briton  pro- 
ceeded with  an  acrimony,  a  spirit,  and  a  licentiousness 
unheard  of  before  even  in  this  country.  The  highest 
names,  whether  of  statesmen  or  magistrates,  were  printed 

^  Dr.  Smollett,  originally  a  ship-surgeon,  was  an  abusive  Jacobite  writer, 
author  of  a  compilation  of  the  History  of  England,  in  which  he  had  spoken 
most  scurrilously  of  the  Duke  of  Cumberland  for  suppressing  the  rebellion, 
and  had  been  punished  by  the  King's  Bench  for  slandering  Admiral  Knowles. 
[His  'genius,'  however,  to  use  the  words  of  Walter  Scott,  'has  raised  an 
imperishable  monument  to  his  fame,'  in  the  poems  and  novels  which 
Walpole  does  not  deign  to  notice  in  this  allusion  to  his  works.  Nor  is  the 
criticism  just  in  other  respects.  Smollett's  tracts  are  not  more  virulent  than 
most  publications  of  a  similar  character  of  that  day.  His  censure  of  the 
Duke  of  Cumberland  has  been  confirmed  by  subsequent  historians,  and  his 
punishment  for  the  libel  on  Admiral  Knowles  reflects  discredit  on  the 
Admiral,  rather  than  on  himself.  See  Sir  Walter  Scott's  Lives  of  the 
Novelists,  1825,  vol.  i.  pp.  90-156. — L.  M.] 

*  Murphy,  once  an  actor,  was  turned  hackney  writer,  and  had  engaged  in 
a  paper  called  the  Contest,  in  behalf  of  Lord  Holland.  He  stole  many  plays 
from  the  French,  and  published  other  things  long  since  forgotten.  ['  The 
Way  to  keep  Him,'  and  'All  in  the  Wrong,'  are  alone  a  sufficient  refutation 
of  the  above  harsh  criticism  on  Arthur   Murphy.      He  was  a   person   of 


KING  GEORGE  III.  141 

at  length,  and  the  insinuations  went  still  higher.  In 
general,  favouritism  was  the  topic,  and  the  partiality  of 
the  Court  to  the  Scots.  Every  obsolete  anecdote,  every 
illiberal  invective,  was  raked  up  and  set  forth  in  strong 
and  witty  colours  against  Scotland.  One  of  the  first 
numbers  was  one  of  the  most  outrageous,  the  theme  taken 
from  the  loves  of  Queen  Isabella  and  Mortimer.  No 
doubt  but  it  lay  open  enough  to  prosecution,  and  the 
intention  was  to  seize  the  author.  But  on  reflection  it 
was  not  thought  advisable  to  enter  on  the  discussion  of 
such  a  subject  in  Westminster  Hall  ;  and,  as  the  daring 
audaciousness  of  the  writer  promised  little  decorum,  it 
was  held  prudent  to  wait  till  he  should  furnish  a  less 
delicate  handle  to  vengeance :  a  circumspection  that 
deceived  and  fell  heavy  on  the  author,  who,  being  advised 
to  more  caution  in  his  compositions,  replied,  he  had  tried 
the  temper  of  the  Court  by  the  paper  on  Mortimer,  and 
found  they  did  not  dare  to  touch  him. 

This  author,  who  must  be  so  often  mentioned  in  the 
following  pages,  was  John  Wilkes,  member  of  Parliament 
for  Ailesbury.  He  was  of  a  plebeian  family,^  but  inherited 
a  tolerable  fortune  in  Buckinghamshire,  and  had  been 
bred    at    Oxford,   where    he    distinguished    himself    by 

considerable  accomplishments,  and  wanted  only  a  better  temper  and  more 
independence  of  character  to  have  risen  to  eminence.  He  died  at  an 
advanced  age  in  1S05. — L,  M.] 

Smollett  and  Murphy,  with  Dr.  Shebbeare,  who  was  in  Newgate  for 
abusing  King  George  the  First,  King  George  the  Second,  King  William, 
and  the  Revolution,  and  Dr.  Johnson,  another  known  Jacobite,  who  even 
in  a  Dictionary  had  vented  his  Jacobite  principles,  were  selected  by  Lord 
Bute  to  defend  his  cause,  and  pensioned  by  him  as  a  patron  of  learned  men. 
Johnson's  acceptance  of  a  pension  was  the  more  ridiculous,  as  in  his 
Dictionary  he  had  lashed  the  infamy  of  pensioners.  [Neither  Smollett  nor 
Murphy  were  pensioned  by  Lord  Bute.  The  bounty  of  the  Crown  was 
never  more  inexcusably  exercised  than  in  favour  of  Dr.  Shebbeare — a 
pamphleteer,  who  was  a  disgrace  to  his  party,  and  had  not  long  before  been 
concerned  in  some  fraudulent  practices  at  Oxford,  when  employed  by  the 
University  to  arrange  the  Clarendon  papers.  He  died  in  1788,  at  a  very 
advanced  age.  Dr.  Johnson's  pension  was  not  subjected  to  any  conditions. 
— Boswell  (G.  B.  Hill),  vol.  i.  p.  373-— L.  M.] 

^  His  father  was  a  distiller. 


142  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

humorous  attacks  on  whatever  was  esteemed  most  holy 
and  respectable.  Unrestrained  either  in  his  conduct  or 
conversation,  he  was  allowed  to  have  more  wit  than  in 
truth  he  possessed  ;  and,  living  with  rakes  and  second- 
rate  authors,  he  had  acquired  fame,  such  as  it  was,  in  the 
middling  sphere  of  life,  before  his  name  was  so  much  as 
known  to  the  public.  His  appearance  as  an  orator  had 
by  no  means  conspired  to  make  him  more  noticed.  He 
spoke  coldly  and  insipidly,  though  with  impertinence ; 
his  manner  was  poor,  and  his  countenance  horrid.  When 
his  pen,  which  possessed  an  easy  impudent  style,  had 
drawn  the  attention  of  mankind  towards  him,  and  it  was 
asked,  who  this  saucy  writer  was  ?  Fame,  that  had 
adopted  him,  could  furnish  but  scurvy  anecdotes  of  his 
private  life.  He  had  married  a  woman  of  fortune,  used 
her  ill,  and  at  last  cruelly,  to  extort  from  her  the  provision 
he  had  made  for  her  separate  maintenance ;  he  had 
debauched  a  maiden  of  family  by  an  informal  promise  of 
marriage,  and  had  been  guilty  of  other  frauds  and 
breaches  of  trust.  Yet  the  man,  bitter  as  he  was  in  his 
political  writings,  was  commonly  not  ill-natured  or  acri- 
monious. Wantonness,  rather  than  ambition  or  vengeance, 
guided  his  hand  ;  and,  though  he  became  the  martyr  of 
the  best  cause,  there  was  nothing  in  his  principles  or 
morals  that  led  him  to  care  under  what  government  he 
lived.  To  laugh  and  riot  and  scatter  firebrands  with  him 
was  liberty.  Despotism  will  for  ever  reproach  Freedom 
with  the  profligacy  of  such  a  saint ! 

Associated  with  Wilkes  in  pleasure  and  in  the  com- 
position of  the  North  Briton  was  a  clergyman  named 
Churchill,  who  stepped  out  of  obscurity  about  the  same 
period,  and  was  as  open  a  contemner  of  decency  as 
Wilkes  himself,  but  far  his  superior  in  the  endowments  of 
his  mind.  Adapted  to  the  bear-garden  by  his  athletic 
mould,  Churchill  had  frequented  no  school  so  much  as 
the  theatres.  He  had  existed  by  the  lowest  drudgery  of 
his  function,  while  poetry  amused  what  leisure  he  could 
spare,  or  rather  what   leisure   he  would  enjoy ;    for  his 


KING  GEORGE  III.  143 

Muse,  and  his  mistress,  and  his  bottle  were  so  essential  to 
his  existence,  that  they  engrossed  all  but  the  refuse  of  his 
time.  Yet  for  some  years  his  poetry  had  proved  as 
indifferent  as  his  sermons,  till  a  cruel  and  ill-natured 
satire  on  the  actors  had,  in  the  first  year  of  this  reign, 
handed  him  up  to  public  regard.  Having  caught  the 
taste  of  the  town,  he  proceeded  rapidly,  and  in  a  few 
more  publications  started  forth  a  giant  in  numbers, 
approaching  as  nearly  as  possible  to  his  model,  Dryden, 
and  flinging  again  on  the  wild  neck  of  Pegasus  the  reins 
which  Pope  had  held  with  so  tight  and  cautious  a  hand. 
Imagination,  harmony,  wit,  satire,  strength,  fire,  and  sense 
crowded  on  his  compositions  ;  and  they  were  welcome 
for  him — he  neither  sought  nor  invited  their  company. 
Careless  of  matter  and  manner,  he  added  grace  to  sense, 
or  beauty  to  nonsense,  just  as  they  came  in  his  way  ;  and 
he  could  not  help  being  sonorous,  even  when  he  was 
unintelligible.  He  advertised  the  titles  of  his  poems,  but 
neither  planned  nor  began  them  till  his  booksellers,  or 
his  own  want  of  money,  forced  him  to  thrust  out  the 
crude  but  glorious  sallies  of  his  uncorrected  fancy.  This 
bacchanalian  priest,  now  mouthing  patriotism,  and  now 
venting  libertinism,  the  scourge  of  bad  men,  and  scarce 
better  than  the  worst,  debauching  wives,  and  protecting 
his  gown  by  the  weight  of  his  fist,  engaged  with  Wilkes 
in  his  war  on  the  Scots  ;  and  sometimes  learning,  and  as 
often  not  knowing,  the  characters  he  attacked,^  set  him- 
self up  as  the  Hercules  that  was  to  cleanse  the  State, 
and  punish  its  oppressors :  and,  true  it  is,  the  storm 
'  that  saved  us  was  raised  in  taverns  and  night-cellars  ;  so 
much    more  effectual  were  the  orgies  of  Churchill    and 

^  Mr.  Southey,  opposed  as  lie  was  to  the  political  creed  of  Churchill, 
thought  more  favourably  of  him.  He  praises  the  generosity  and  straight- 
forwardness of  his  character,  and  says  of  his  poems  that  'manly  sense  is 
their  characteristic,  deriving  strength  of  expression  from  indignation,  and 
they  contain  redeeming  passages  of  sound  morality  and  permanent  truth.' — 
Southey's  Cowper,  1836,  vol.  i.  p.  93.  Cowper  had  a  higher  opinion  of 
him  than  of  any  other  contemporary  writer,  and  even  goes  so  far  as  to  style 
him  'the  great  Churchill.'— /^zi/.,  p.  87.— L.  M. 


144  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

Wilkes  than  the  daggers  of  Cato  and  Brutus.  The  two 
former  saved  their  country,  while  Catiline  could  not  ruin 
his, — a  work  to  which  such  worthies  seemed  much  better 
adapted. 

But  while  the  wit  and  revelry  of  Wilkes  and  Churchill 
ran  riot,  and  were  diverted  by  their  dissipation  to  other 
subjects  of  pleasantry  or  satire,  they  had  a  familiar  at 
their  ear,  whose  venom  was  never  distilled  at  random,  but 
each  drop  administered  to  some  precious  work  of  mischief. 
This  was  Earl  Temple,  who  whispered  them  where  they 
might  find  torches,  but  took  care  never  to  be  seen  to  light 
one  himself  Characters  so  rash  and  imprudent  were 
proper  vehicles  of  his  spite  ;  and  he  enjoyed  the  two 
points  he  preferred  even  to  power, — vengeance,  and  a 
whole  skin. 

This  triumvirate  has  made  me  often  reflect  that  nations 
are  most  commonly  saved  by  the  worst  men  in  them. 
The  virtuous  are  too  scrupulous  to  go  the  lengths  that  are 
necessary  to  rouse  the  people  against  their  tyrants. 

While  Wilkes  and  Churchill  attacked  the  plenitude  of 
the  Favourite's  power,  another  cloud  overcast  it,  which, 
though  inconsiderable  and  of  short  duration,  contributed 
to  lower  him  in  the  estimation  of  the  people.  An 
account  arrived  of  the  French  having  surprised  and  made 
themselves  masters  of  Newfoundland.  General  Amherst^ 
did  not  wait  for  orders  from  hence,  but,  detaching  his 
brother  with  a  body  of  forces,  recovered  the  island,  and 
made  the  French  commander  prisoner. 

Prince  Ferdinand,  not  less  active  and  vigilant,  had 
surprised  the  French  camp,  desirous  of  embarking  us 
farther  in  the  war,  and  hoping  that  new  successes  would 

^  Groom  of  the  Bedchamber  to  William,  Duke  of  Cumberland,  and 
Commander  in  America.  He  was  afterwards  Knight  of  the  Bath,  and 
called  vSir  Jeffrey  Amherst.  He  was  subsequently  made  a  Peer  and 
Commander-in-Chief,  [and  lastly  Field-Marshal.  He  had  been  the  favourite 
aide-de-camp  of  Lord  Ligonier  during  the  German  wars,  and  bore  through 
life  the  reputation  of  a  very  able  and  zealous  officer.  He  distinguished 
himself  particularly  in  America.  He  died  in  1797,  in  his  eighty-first 
year.— L.  M.] 


KING  GEORGE  III.  145 

animate  the  nation  to  resist  the  propensity  of  the  Court 
for  peace.  General  Conway  took  the  castle  of  Waldeck 
by  stratagem ;  and  the  Hessians  triumphed  in  other 
attempts.!  The  Prince  told  Mr.  Conway  that  we  might 
be  joined  by  a  body  of  Russians  for  a  trait  de  plume,  but 
neither  miscarriage  nor  success  could  beat  the  favourite 
from  his  plan  of  pacification  ;  though,  had  we  been 
inclined  to  listen  to  that  overture,  a  second  change  of 
scene  in  Russia  would  have  disconcerted  our  treating 
with  that  nation. 

Peter  the  Third,  with  a  humane  heart,  had  neither 
judgment  nor  patience.  He  meant  to  do  right,  and 
thought  absolute  power  could  not  be  better  employed 
than  in  doing  right  without  delay.  His  approbation  and 
contempt  were  prompt  and  strongly  marked  ;  and,  as 
his  understanding  was  incapable  of  embracing  many 
objects,  his  few  ideas  took  the  larger  possession  of  him. 
Being  educated  a  Lutheran,  he  despised  the  clergy  of  his 
empire,  and  had  offended  the  soldiery  by  enforcing 
discipline,  by  restoring  the  conquests  of  the  preceding 
reign,  by  manifesting  indiscreet  predilection  for  a  regiment 
of  Holstein,  his  native  country,  and  by  so  blind  a 
devotion  to  the  King  of  Prussia,  that  himself  wore  that 
Prince's  uniform.  Indolence  and  drunkenness  were  added 
to  this  want  of  conduct ;  but  he  had  to  struggle  with  a 
yet  more  dangerous  evil.  The  late  Czarina,  his  aunt, 
finding  no  issue  arise  from  his  marriage  with  the  Princess 
of  Anhalt  Zerbst,  questioned  the  latter ;  and,  it  is  said, 
was  informed  by  her  that  she  must  not  expect  any  lineage 
from  her  nephew.  Elizabeth  replied  the  State  demanded 
successors,  and  left  the  Grand  Duchess  at  liberty  to 
procure  them  by  whose  assistance  she  pleased.  A  son 
and  a  daughter  were  the  fruits  of  her  obedience.  But, 
though  her  politics  were  satisfied,  it  is  said  the  mind  of 

^  Alluding  to  the  defeat  of  the  French  near  Giessen  by  Prince  Ferdinand, 
on  the  26th  September,  when  he  drove  them  from  all  their  posts  and 
obliged  them  to  fly  with  precipitation  behind  the  Lahn. — Annual  Register, 
1762,  p.  49.— L.  M. 

VOL.  I.  K 


146  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

Elizabeth  was  not,  and  that  she  privately  saw  her  cousin, 
the  dethroned  Czar  Yvan.  The  opinion  is  general, 
though  at  what  time  it  happened  is  uncertain,  that  drugs 
to  destroy  his  understanding  had  been  administered  to 
that  poor  Prince.  Peter,  though  on  obtaining  the  diadem 
he  openly  exhibited  a  mistress,  could  not  but  know  that, 
if  his  wife  had  spoken  truth,  he  could  have  no  claim  to  be 
father  of  her  children  :  thence  he  had  the  same  curiosity 
as  his  aunt,  visited  the  Czar  Yvan,  and,  as  the  rumour 
went,  intended  to  name  him  his  successor.  Such  rumours 
were  sufficient  to  alarm  the  Empress,  who  was  slighted 
by  Peter,  and  had  reason  to  think  he  meant  to  divorce 
her.  That  bold  bad  woman,  who  had  all  the  talents  for 
empire  that  her  husband  wanted,  and  who  had  been 
educated  by  a  most  artful  and  intriguing  mother,  and 
who,  with  a  commanding  person,  had  a  heart  susceptible 
of  warm  impressions,  was  then  under  the  influence  of 
Orloff,  her  lover,  and  her  confidante,  the  Princess  Daskau, 
a  young  woman  little  above  twenty  years  of  age,  but  of 
an  adventurous  spirit,  and,  what  made  her  situation 
singular,  sister  of  the  Emperor's  mistress. 

This  junto  agreed  to  believe  that  Peter  would  not 
limit  his  aversion  for  the  Empress  to  mere  divorce,  but 
intended  to  put  her  to  death ;  a  charge  most  improbable, 
and  inconsistent  with  the  Emperor's  humane  and_  un- 
suspecting nature.  How  early  a  conspiracy  was  formed, 
I  pretend  not  to  say  ;  nor,  in  relating  the  events  of  so 
distant  a  country,  and  whence  truth  is  so  difficult  to  be 
procured,  do  I  pretend  to  give  more  than  the  outlines  of 
their  general  story,  collected  from  the  most  credible 
authority.  But,  however  dark  and  secret  the  measures 
were,  the  facts  resulting  from  them  were  so  glaring,  so 
horrid,  so  impious,  that  neither  the  lying  palliatives  set 
forth  by  the  criminals  themselves,  nor  the  mercenary 
flattery  of  the  learned,  will  be  able  to  wash  off  from  the 
Empress  the  foul  stains  of  treason,  murder,  and  usurpation. 

The  Emperor  had  not  reigned  above  six  months,  when 
the  plan  for  dethroning  him  was  formed,  and  ready  to 


KING  GEORGE  III.  147 

break  forth.  One  of  the  conspirators  being  arrested 
for  another  crime,  the  rest  concluded  the  whole  was 
discovered  ;  but,  instead  of  dispersing  or  seeking  safety 
by  flight,  the  chiefs  trusted  to  rashness  for  impunity. 
Orloff  galloped  off  to  the  Czarina,  who  was  absent  from 
the  capital  at  a  separate  villa  from  the  Emperor,  and 
told  her  she  had  not  a  moment  to  lose.  That  virago, 
having  ordered  her  women  to  report  she  was  confined  by 
sickness,  and  placing  guards  upon  the  road  to  prevent 
notice  of  her  march  being  sent  to  the  Czar,  rode  directly 
to  the  army  and  demanded  their  protection.  One  only 
regiment,  that  of  Holstein,  refused  their  support.  All 
the  rest  saluted  her  Empress ;  and  the  clergy,  who 
trembled  for  their  idols,  and  resented  the  loss  of  their 
beards,  ran  headlong  into  rebellion.  The  senate,  the 
nobility,  the  people,  all  concurred  to  raise  to  the  throne 
in  her  own  name  a  woman  who  had  no  one  claim  of  any 
sort  to  be  their  sovereign. 

Nariskin,  master  of  the  horse,  was  the  sole  subject  who 
had  fidelity  enough  to  make  his  escape  and  inform  the 
Emperor  of  the  catastrophe  that  awaited  him.  That 
poor  Prince  was  at  Oraniebaum,  a  villa.  Thunderstruck 
with  the  news,  he  had  not  presence  of  mind  to  prepare 
himself  to  save  either  his  empire  or  his  life.  He  lost  both 
by  losing  a  day,  which  he  wasted  in  drinking  and  vain 
consultation,  after  having  fruitlessly  sent  to  Peterhoff  to 
secure  the  Empress.  Next  morning  he  heard  that  his 
wife,  at  the  head  of  fourteen  thousand  men,  was  marching 
to  seize  him.  He  then  attempted  to  make  his  escape  to 
Holstein,  and  embarked  for  Cronstadt — but  it  was  too 
late !  The  garrison  had  received  orders  to  fire  on  him. 
Exhausted  with  perturbation  of  mind,  with  drink  and 
fatigue,  he  sunk  under  his  misfortunes,  surrendered 
himself,  and  desired  to  see  his  wife,  now  his  sovereign. 
As  incapable  of  pity  as  of  remorse,  she  refused  to  admit 
him,  ordering  him  to  sign  a  renunciation  of  his  crown, 
and  a  most  humiliating  recapitulation  of  his  errors.  Nor 
did  this  avail :  within  very  few  days  he  was  murdered. 


148  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

Thus  far  Catherine  had  acted  h"ke  other  monsters  of 
both  sexes.  Her  next  measures  were  as  weak  towards 
men  as  they  were  profane  in  the  face  of  Heaven.  In 
very  silly  manifestoes  she  endeavoured  to  justify  her 
crimes  ;  and  dared  even  to  call  on  the  Most  High  as  the 
instigator  of  her  abominations,  speaking  of  her  husband 
but  as  her  neighbour,  and  of  his  death  as  a  judgment. 
Vain  and  contemptible  was  this  attempt :  it  could  blind 
none  but  those  who  would  be  willing  to  acquit  her 
without  it. 

The  Princess  Daskau  soon  lost  the  favour  she  had 
so  blackly  merited  ;  and  Rosamouski,  Hetman  of  the 
Tartars,  whom  many  accused  as  the  very  assassin  of  his 
master,  but  who,  as  his  friends  urged,  was  forced  into  the 
conspiracy,  went  into  a  voluntary  exile.  Orloff  had 
gained  deeper  hold  on  his  mistress,  and  kept  her  in 
subjection.  Panin,  governor  of  her  son,  was  another  of 
the  principal  conspirators.  Bestuchefif,  the  late  chancellor, 
was  recalled  ;  and  thus  he,  Count  Munich,  Biron,  once 
Duke  of  Courland,  and  master  of  the  empire,  with  the 
various  exiles  of  the  late  reigns,  found  themselves  again 
together  at  Petersburgh.^ 

After  the  murdered  Prince  himself,  no  man  was  likely 
to  be  more  affected  by  this  revolution  than  the  King  of 
Prussia.  The  Russians,  so  lately  his  enemies,  had  not 
been  pleased  to  become  his  allies.  But,  though  the  new 
Empress  was  necessitated  to  comply  with  the  wishes  of 

^  This  narrative  of  the  dethronement  of  Peter  the  Third  has  been  confirmed 
in  many  essential  points  by  later  writers.— Tooke's  Catherine  the  Second ; 
Castera ;  Levesque,  Hist,  de  Russie,  vol.  v.  298.  The  precise  extent  of  the 
guilt  of  the  Empress  is  still  a  subject  of  dispute.  The  dethronement  of  her 
husband  might  be  an  act  of  self-defence,  for  he  seems  to  have  contemplated 
raising  his  mistress  to  the  throne.  His  murder  certainly  had  her  ready 
forgiveness,  if  not  her  acquiescence,  and  there  is  nothing  in  her  character  to 
controvert  its  having  been  committed  at  her  instigation.  The  attempt  to 
exculpate  her  in  the  Memoirs  of^he  Princess  Daschkow  (1840)  is  very  far  from 
satisfactory,  though  it  in  some  degree  elevates  the  character  of  the  authoress 
above  the  level  of  her  contemporaries  at  the  Court  of  St.  Petcrsburgh, — a 
court  in  those  days  without  a  parallel  for  the  prevalence  of  the  crimes  and 
vices  of  a  semi-barbarous  age. — L.  M. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  149 

her  subjects  in  withdrawing  them  from  that  service,  she 
was  not  disposed  in  so  critical  a  situation  to  renew  the 
war,  or  to  add  provocation  to  a  man  whom  she  had 
deprived  of  so  useful  and  essential  a  friend.  She 
therefore  only  made  the  requisition  of  the  thirty  thousand 
Russians  in  his  service,  but  allowed  him  for  a  few  days  to 
profit  by  their  assistance,  and  extricate  himself  out  of 
this  new  difficulty.  He  returned  for  answer,  that  he 
would  only  drive  Marshal  Daun  from  the  hills  before  him, 
and  her  troops  should  return.  He  did  so.  This  was 
taking  his  part  with  admirable  presence  of  mind.  He 
knew  that  Daun  must  in  a  day  or  two  learn  the  departure 
of  the  Russian  troops,  and  would  attack  him  when 
weakened. 


150  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 


CHAPTER    XIII 

Birth  of  the  Prince  of  Wales. — Treasure  of  the  Hermione. — Conquest  of  the 
Havannah. — Indifference  of  the  Court  on  that  event. — Negotiations  for 
Peace. — Not  popular  in  England. — Reception  in  France  of  the  Duke  of 
Bedford. — The  Due  de  Nivernois. — Beckford  elected  Lord  Mayor. — 
Duel  between  Lord  Talbot  and  Wilkes. — Lord  Bute's  Delegates  in  the 
House  of  Commons. — Grenville  and  Lord  Bute. — Union  of  Lord  Bute 
and  Fox. — The  latter  reproached  by  the  Duke  of  Cumberland. — Lord 
Waldegrave  and  the  Duke  of  Devonshire  decline  the  proposal  of  Fox. — 
Disgust  at  the  union  of  Bute  and  Fox. — Purchase  of  a  majority  to  approve 
the  Peace. — Fox's  revenge  against  the  Duke  of  Devonshire. — The  King 
and  the  Marquis  of  Rockingham. — Further  severity  to  the  Duke  of 
Devonshire. 

On  the  1 2th  of  August  the  Queen  was  delivered  of  a 
Prince  of  Wales  ;  and  the  same  morning  the  treasure  of 
that  capital  prize,  the  Hermione,  arrived  in  town  in  many 
waggons,  and  passed  through  the  City  to  the  Tower. 
The  sum  taken  amounted  to  near  eight  hundred  thousand 
pounds. 

In  the  beginning  of  the  following  month  came  the  first 
news  from  the  Havannah  ;  and  before  the  end  of  it  we 
learned  the  entire  conquest  of  that  important  place  by  the 
three  Keppels,^ — the  Earl  of  Albemarle,  the  Commodore 
and  the  Colonel,  his  brothers.  The  honour  they  won 
was  a  little  soiled  by  their  rapaciousness  and  by  our  great 
loss  of  men :  but  to  Spain  the  blow  was  of  the  deepest 
consequence,  and    the  place  irrecoverable   by  any  force 

^  George,  third  Earl,  Augustus,  and  William,  sons  of  William  Anne, 
second  Earl  of  Albemarle.  Frederic,  the  fourth  son,  was  on  this  occasion 
promoted  to  the  Bishoprick  of  Exeter.  Of  Augustus  (afterwards  Lord 
Keppel)  see  more  in  the  preceding  reign,  under  the  History  of  Admiral 
Byng. — Alemoirs  of  George  II.,  1847,  vol.  ii.  p.  351.  [A  Life  of  Augustus, 
Viscount  Keppel,  by  the  Hon.  and  Rev.  Thomas  Keppel,  was  published 
in  1842. — E.] 


,  iWaJi  ^^i^ajiM^.i^dizxt 


'lrul'lifri-P,'uta/Ci^n  Se 


■<Jlf  *"  ■"    i_)'^(^'  ^^(^Itc . 


KING  GEORGE  III.  151 

they  could  exert.  Yet  such  a  victory  seemed  to  infuse 
as  little  joy  into  the  Court  of  St.  James's  as  into  that  of 
Madrid.  The  Favourite  and  his  creatures  took  no  part  in 
the  transports  of  the  nation  ;  and,  when  he  declined 
availing  himself  of  any  merit  from  the  conquest,  it  was 
plain  he  was  grieved  either  to  have  more  to  restore  at  the 
peace,  or  less  reason  for  making  that  peace  but  on  the 
most  advantageous  terms :  but  he  was  infatuated,  and, 
breaking  through  all  the  barriers  of  glory,  he  sent  the 
Duke  of  Bedford  to  Paris  to  settle  the  preliminaries, 
whence  the  Due  de  Nivernois  arrived  for  the  same 
purpose. 

Sullen  and  silent  as  Mr.  Pitt  was,  and  feeble  and 
impotent  as  the  faction  of  Newcastle,  still  the  City  and 
merchants  showed  some  symptoms  of  indignation  at 
this  obstinate  alacrity  for  treating.  The  Duke  of  Bedford 
was  hissed  as  he  passed  through  the  principal  streets  ;  and 
treasonable  papers  were  dispersed  in  the  villages  around 
London.  But  in  France  the  Duke  was  received  as  their 
guardian  angel.  The  most  distinguished  and  unusual 
honours  were  paid  to  him  ;  and  the  principal  magistrate 
of  Calais,  thinking  him  descended  from  the  other  John, 
Duke  of  Bedford,  brother  of  Henry  the  Fifth,  complimented 
his  Grace  (and  no  doubt  felicitated  himself  on  the 
comparison)  on  seeing  him  arrive  with  as  salutary  and 
pacific,  as  his  great  ancestor  had  formerly  landed  there 
with  hostile  intentions. 

His  counterpart,  the  Due  de  Nivernois,  had  been  long 
employed  in  negotiations  at  Rome  and  Berlin,  but  had 
not  the  good  fortune  to  please  at  the  latter  Court,  where 
the  King  even  turned  into  ridicule  his  puny  and 
emaciated  little  figure.  His  ill-health,  the  titles  that  had 
centred  in  his  person,  and  had  filled  him  with  vanity  (for 
he  was  Peer  of  France,  Prince  of  the  Empire,  Grandee  of 
Spain,  and  a  Roman  Baron),  and  his  affection  for  polite 
learning,  had  disposed  him  to  live  in  a  retired  circle  of 
humble  admirers,  to  whom  he  almost  daily  repeated  his 
works  both  in  prose  and  verse,  but  not  without  having 


152  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

attempted  to  soar  higher.  He  had  assumed  devotion,  in 
hopes  of  being  Governor  of  the  Dauphin  :  but,  except  in 
concluding  the  peace,  which,  considering  our  eagerness, 
he  could  not  avoid  concluding,  he  had  never  met  with 
brilliant  success  in  any  of  his  pursuits ;  being  as  the 
celebrated  Madame  Geofifrin  ^  said  of  him,  '  Guerrier 
manque,  politique  manqu6,  bel  esprit  manque,  enfin, 
manque  partout.'  To  England  he  bore  no  good-will ; 
and  though,  till  the  treaty  was  signed,  he  concealed,  as 
much  as  peevishness  would  let  him,  the  disgust  he  took  to 
this  country,  and  was  profuse  in  attentions  to  all,  and  in 
assiduity  of  court  to  the  Favourite  and  his  faction,  yet, 
though  he  remained  here  a  very  little  time  after  the 
signature,  his  nature  broke  forth,  and  scarce  was  enough 
good  breeding  left  to  skin  over  the  sore  reluctance  of  a 
momentary  stay.^ 

The  nation  was  far  less  impatient  than  the  Court  for 
peace  ;  and,  though  no  great  burst  of  spirit  appeared 
against  it,  there  were  sufficient  symptoms  of  ill-humour 

^  Madame  Geofifrin  was  proprietor  of  a  great  manufacture  of  glass  ;  yet  by 
her  wit,  parts,  riches,  and  cabals,  and  by  patronising  authors,  and  the  modern 
philosophers  and  painters,  statuaries  and  architects,  and  by  keeping  an  open 
house  for  foreigners  of  all  nations,  she  was  much  considered,  and  had  great 
respect  paid  to  her  by  persons  of  the  first  rank  in  France.  [Marmontel  draws 
a  spirited  portrait  of  her  in  his  Memoirs.  — (Zz/ww  Posthumes,  1804,  ii. 
p.  102. — L.  M.] 

2  This  is  a  very  one-sided  view  of  the  character  of  the  Due  di  Nivernois. 
He  had  no  pretensions  to  the  character  of  a  soldier,  having  been  obliged  to 
quit  the  army  from  ill-health  at  an  early  age.  As  a  diplomatist,  he  certainly 
failed  at  Berlin — as  all  other  diplomatists  did,  who  brought  proposals  that  did 
not  suit  the  views  of  the  King  of  Prussia.  In  England  he  gave  great 
satisfaction  to  all  parties.  His  popularity  is  noticed  by  Lord  Chesterfield.— 
Letters,  1845,  vol.  i.  p.  286;  vol.  iv.  p.  356.  He  was  a  generous,  though 
not  perhaps  a  very  discriminating,  patron  of  letters,  and  a  respectable  writer 
for  one  who  made  literature  only  an  amusement.  His  private  life  was 
exemplary  ;  and  he  showed  no  common  strength  of  mind  in  the  firmness  with 
which  he  bore  the  loss  of  his  rank  and  property,  and,  above  all,  his  heavy 
domestic  misfortunes.  His  second  wife,  to  whom  he  was  tenderly  attached, 
died  a  few  days  after  marriage.  Of  his  two  sons-in-law,  the  Count  de  Gisors, 
his  destined  heir,  an  eleve  of  Marmontel,  fell  at  the  battle  of  Crevelt ;  the 
remaining  one,  the  Due  de  Brissac,  was  torn  to  pieces  by  the  mob  at  Paris, 
at  the  beginning  of  the  Revolution.  The  Due  de  Nivernois  died  in  1798,  at 
a  very  advanced  age. — L.  M. 


KING  GEORGE  III. 


DJ 


to  warn  the  prime  minister,  that,  without  redoubling  his 
industry  and  taking  more  solid  measures,  he  might  still  be 
foiled  in  the  attempt  of  forcing  an  inglorious  peace  on  the 
nation.  Beckford,  who  had  been  desirous  of  resigning  his 
alderman's  gown,  was,  against  his  will,  elected  Lord 
Mayor ;  a  mark  of  their  good-will  to  his  friend,  Mr.  Pitt. 
The  North  Briton  spread  the  alarm  as  much  as  possible  ; 
but  the  flippancy  of  the  author  began  to  draw  storms  on 
his  own  head.  Wilkes  having  in  one  of  those  papers 
ridiculed  the  flattery  of  Lord  Talbot,  who,  officiating  as 
Lord  High  Constable  at  the  Coronation,  had  endeavoured 
to  back  his  horse  to  the  gate  of  Westminster  Hall,  that  he 
might  not  turn  his  own  back  on  the  King,  was  challenged 
by  Lord  Talbot ;  and  after  a  series  of  letters,  which  had 
more  the  air  of  a  treaty  than  a  defiance,  and  consequently 
reflected  no  great  honour  on  either,  they  fought  a  bloodless 
duel  on  Bagshot  Heath. 

These  little  rubs  having  alarmed  the  Favourite,  he  began 
to  consider  how  ill  qualified  his  delegates  would  be  to 
support  his  treaty  in  the  House  of  Commons  if  either 
warmly  or  wittily  attacked.  It  was  too  precious  a  cause 
to  trust  to  Sir  Francis  Dashwood.  Grenville  had  not  much 
more  credit,  though  more  sense  and  gravity ;  but  was 
tedious  and  ill  heard,  and  had  been  trained  to  such 
obsequious  deference  for  Mr.  Pitt,  that  at  that  time  no 
man  thought  him  likely  or  proper  to  be  opposed  to  so 
capital  a  master.  Grenville  was  besides  unsatisfied  ;  and, 
aiming  higher,  had  been  unwilling  to  risk  an  appearance 
of  honesty  when  it  was  not  in  his  own  cause.  He  had 
neglected  to  traffic  with  the  members  of  the  House  of 
Commons  ;  had  secured  none  of  them  ;  and,  being  pressed 
by  Lord  Bute  on  that  head,  fairly  owned  he  would  not 
deal  with  them,  unless  the  power  was  his  own,  and  their 
dependence  rested  on  him.  Lord  Bute  was  startled,  and 
would  have  compromised,  as  himself  was  unacquainted 
with  the  men,  that  the  recommendation  of  members  to 
favour — that  is,  to  places  and  pensions — should  be  made 
through  Grenville  to  himself.    But  Grenville  was  obstinate. 


154  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

and  soon  had  cause  to  repent  both  his  frankness  and 
perverse  ambition.  It  was  instilled,  too,  into  Lord  Bute, 
that  Grenville  was  not  so  much  at  variance  with  his  family 
as  he  wished  to  be  thought — an  imputation  of  which  he 
soon  appeared  to  be  guiltless  :  but  the  die  was  cast  ;  and 
he  heard  with  unspeakable  astonishment,  and  with  a  rage 
not  to  be  described,  that  he  must  exchange  with  Lord 
Halifax,  that  is,  return  to  be  First  Lord  of  the  Admiralty, 
and  quit  the  seals,  and  with  them  the  management  of  the 
House  of  Commons,  which  Mr.  Fox  had  consented  to 
undertake.  The  blow  to  Grenville  was  grievous,  but 
could  not  be  avoided  or  resented — then.  No  retreat 
towards  his  brothers,  Pitt  and  Temple,  was  left  him. 
Avarice  decided  the  conflict,  and  he  submitted  to  accept 
the  Admiralty. 

When  Fox  thus  stooped  to  be  the  Favourite's  agent,  he 
gratified  many  more  passions  than  he  could  be  supposed 
to  mortify.  In  truth,  except  his  pride,  which  had  seldom 
restrained  him,  what  views  could  he  have  but  this  step 
would  gratify  ?  To  ravish  the  glories  of  the  war  from  his 
rival,  Mr.  Pitt,  to  sacrifice  them,  and  to  be  selected  to 
defend  that  sacrifice,  glutted  his  spirit  of  competition. 
Favourite  he  could  not  be,  for  the  Princess  ^  hated,  and 
Lord  Bute  feared,  him  :  but  to  be  necessary  to  both  was 
worth  ambition,  and  the  surest  means  of  gratifying  it ;  and 
to  be  master  of  the  secret  of  the  negotiation  promised 
that  superabundance  of  wealth  which  by  that  secret  he 
acquired.  Should  he  succeed  in  carrying  through  the 
peace,  he  would  have  the  first  weight  in  the  House  of 
Commons  (for  what  harmony  there  was  between  these 
?'/z'(2//>7>«</i' may  readily  be  conjectured) ;  should  he  fail, 
it  were  but  the  loss  of  the  Paymaster's  place,  inconsiderable 

^  Besides  his  crime  of  being  the  favourite  of  the  Duke  of  Cumberland,  Fox 
had  deeply  offended  the  Princess  by  advising  Mr.  Pelham,  the  very  day  after 
the  death  of  her  husband,  to  take  her  son,  the  present  King,  from  her,  that 
she  might  not  get  an  ascendant  over  him.  I  one  day  mentioned  this  fact  to 
Lord  Mansfield ;  he  said,  '  It  was  very  true,  and  he  believed  the  measure 
was  not  followed,  only  because  Mr.  Fox  had  advised  it' — so  jealous  was 
Mr.  Pelham  of  Fox  ! 


KING  GEORGE  III.  155 

in  peace  compared  with  its  produce  in  time  of  war  :  for  it 
must  be  noted  that  he  would  not  accept  the  seals,  and  thus 
stood  in  no  responsible  light ;  a  strain  of  prudence  that 
might  have  administered  alarm  to  the  Favourite  himself! 

Thus  in  the  space  of  four  months  were  the  Princess  and 
Lord  Bute  by  their  rash  and  ill-digested  measures  reduced 
to  lean  for  support  on  Fox,  whom  they  had  most  dreaded 
as  the  minister  of  the  Duke  of  Cumberland  ;  and  who 
would  add  his  own  unpopularity  to  that  of  Lord  Bute, 
and  would  necessarily  determine  Pitt  to  oppose  with 
increased  resentment. 

Fox  had  embraced  this  invitation  with  such  alacrity 
that  he  had  signed  the  treaty  with  Lord  Bute  without 
consulting  any  of  his  friends ;  concluding,  as  over-refined 
politicians  are  apt  to  do,  that  he  could  bring  them  to  his 
lure,  and,  while  he  paid  too  high  compliments  to  his  own 
abilities,  setting  too  slight  estimation  on  theirs.  His  first 
application  was  to  the  Duke  of  Cumberland.  That 
haughty  and  sensible  Prince  received  him  with  scorn, 
reproached  him  warmly  with  lending  himself  to  support 
a  tottering  administration,  and  bitterly  with  his  former 
*  declarations  of  having  given  up  all  ambitious  views.  The 
next  trial  made  by  Fox  was  on  Lord  Waldegrave,^  to 
whom  he  urged  that  his  Lordship  had  so  much  ridiculed 
the  Princess  and  Lord  Bute,  that  they  had  more  to 
complain  of  than  he  had  ;  and  he  endeavoured  to  enclose 
the  Earl  in  his  treaty  with  the  Court,  by  asking  him,  if  it 
should  be  proposed  to  call  his  Lordship  to  the  Cabinet 
Council,  whether  he  should  like  it  ?  The  Earl,  who  had 
been  bred  a  courtier,  who  was  of  too  gentle  manners  for 
opposition,  and  too  shrewd  not  to  see  that  the  power  of 
the  Crown  was  predominant,  desired  time  to  consider,  and 
went  to  Windsor  to  consult  the  Duke  of  Cumberland. 
His  Royal  Highness  acknowledged  the  attention  with 
many  thanks,  but  would  give  no  advice.  The  Earl,  who 
wanted  not  to  be  told,  that  not  advising  him  to  make  his 
court  when  he  was  disposed  to  it,  was  advising  him 
^  James,  Earl  Waldegrave,  Governor  to  George  the  Third  when  Prince. 


1 56  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

against  it,  was  not  courtier  enough  to  quit  a  Prince,  his 
friend,  for  a  Court  that  he  himself  despised  and  hated  ; 
and  immediately  wrote  to  Fox  to  desire  the  proposal 
might  not  be  made  to  him.  The  Duke  of  Devonshire^ 
was  in  like  manner  endeavoured  to  be  softened  by  Fox, 
who  wished  to  wear  the  credit  of  reconciling  his  own 
friends  to  the  peace,  and  bringing  their  support  to  the 
administration.  But  here  again  he  was  foiled.  The  Duke 
gave  him  a  civil  answer,  assured  him  of  his  personal  good 
wishes,  but  declined  any  connection  with  him  as  minister. 

Abandoned  by  his  highest  and  most  showy  friends,  Fox 
felt  the  mortification  of  discredit  both  with  his  patron 
and  the  public,  and  the  keenest  appetite  for  revenge.  As 
a  politician,  his  credit  was  saved  by  his  industry  and 
success  ;  and  by  his  arts  his  vengeance  was  soon  gratified 
on  two  of  those  that  thus  cast  him  off.  But  now  were  the 
seeds  sown,  which,  though  slowly,  produced  such  bitter 
crops  in  subsequent  years.  Detested  by  the  public.  Fox 
could  never  recover  from  the  stain  contracted  at  this 
period  ; — but  first  we  must  relate  his  triumph,  and  the 
temporary  victory  he  gained  for  the  Court. 

Nothing  was  so  unpromising  as  the  prospect  of  the  new 
system  at  first.  All  the  devotion  of  the  Tories  to  the 
Court  could  not  reconcile  them  to  the  nomination  of  Fox. 
They  knew  the  mischief  he  had  done  them,  and  had  not 
the  quickness  to  see  that  a  renegade  is  tied  to  make 
satisfaction  by  greater  benefits.  Lord  Mansfield,  not 
trusted,  as  he  had  expected  to  be,  by  Lord  Bute,  had 
blown  up  discontents  against  the  peace.  Lord  Egremont 
and  George  Grenville  had  adopted  those  doubts ;  and 
doubts  from  men  in  high  place  convey  extensive  influence. 
Had  the  peace  been  instantaneously  proposed  to  the 
House  of  Commons,  there  is  no  question  but  it  would 
have  been  rejected  ;  so  strong  a  disgust  was  taken  at  the 
union  of  Bute  and  Fox,  and  so  numerous  were  their 
several  personal  enemies.  Yet  in  one  respect  Bute  had 
chosen  judiciously  ;  Fox  was  not  to  be  daunted,  but  set 
^  William  Cavendish,  fourth  Duke  of  Devonshire,  Lord  Chamberlain. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  157 

himself  to  work  at  the  root.  He  even  made  applications 
to  Newcastle  ;  but  the  Duke  of  Cumberland  ^  had  inspired 
even  Newcastle  and  Devonshire  with  resolution  !  This, 
however,  was  the  last  miscarriage  of  moment  that  Fox 
experienced.  Leaving  the  grandees  to  their  ill-humour, 
he  directly  attacked  the  separate  members  of  the  House 
of  Commons  ;  and  with  so  little  decorum  on  the  part  of 
either  buyer  or  seller,  that  a  shop  was  publicly  opened  at 
the  Pay  Office,  whither  the  members  flocked,  and  received 
the  wages  of  their  venality  in  bank-bills,  even  to  so  low  a 
sum  as  two  hundred  pounds  for  their  votes  on  the  treaty. 
Twenty-five  thousand  pounds,  as  Martin,-  Secretary  of  the 
Treasury,  afterwards  owned,  were  issued  in  one  morning  ; 
and  in  a  single  fortnight  a  vast  majority  was  purchased  to 
approve  the  peace ! 

Bad  as  that  peace  proved,  it  was  near  being  concluded 
on  terms  still  more  disadvantageous ;  for  France,  re- 
ceiving earlier  intelligence  than  we  did  of  the  capture 
of  the  Havannah,  had  near  prevailed  on  the  Duke  of 
Bedford  to  sign  the  treaty — but  Aldworth,^  his  secretary, 

^  Many  causes  might  be  assigned  for  the  Duke's  dissatisfaction.  It  is  not 
improbable  that  a  generous  Prince  might  resent  the  indignity  offered  to  his 
country.  He  might,  too,  resent  the  unrelenting  hatred  of  the  Princess,  and  his 
total  exclusion  from  power.  He  might  feel  for  Germany,  his  other  country, 
which  he  saw  neglected  ;  or  he  might  have  hoped  that  the  aversion  of  the 
Princess  to  the  House  of  Brunswick  would  not  cease  without  disgusting  Prince 
Ferdinand ;  and  that  then,  if  the  war  had  continued,  the  command  would 
have  once  more  devolved  on  himself. 

^  Samuel  Martin,  a  West  Indian,  had  been  in  the  service  of  the  late 
Prince  of  Wales.  See  more  of  him  hereafter,  and  in  Churchill's  Duellist. 
[He  had  been  brought  into  the  Treasury  by  Mr.  Legge  when  Chancellor  of 
the  Exchequer  in  1758.  Sir  George  Colebrooke's  MS.  Memoirs  represent 
him  as  a  plain-spoken,  honest  man,  and  more  to  be  depended  upon  than  his 
joint  secretary,  Mr.  West. — L.  M.] 

^  Richard  Aldworth  Neville,  of  Billingbere,  Berkshire,  [son  of  Mr. 
Aldworth  of  Stanlake,  by  Catherine,  sister  of  Mr.  Henry  Neville  Grey  of 
Billingbere,  whose  estate  he  subsequently  inherited.  He  filled  for  some  years 
the  office  of  Under  Secretary  of  State  for  Foreign  Affairs,  which  occasioned 
his  being  employed  at  Paris  ;  and  he  represented  Wallingford,  Reading,  and 
Tavistock  in  different  Parliaments.  The  Barony  of  Braybrooke  descended 
on  his  only  son  by  a  special  limitation  in  the  patent  obtained  by  his  relative. 
Sir  John  Griffin,  Lord  Howard  de  Walden,  whose  large  estates  he  also 
inherited.     Lord  'Bxzyhrodko's  History  of  Audley  End,  1836,  p.  54. — L.  M.] 


158  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

had  the  prudence  or  foresight  to  prevent  that  precipitate 
step.^ 

The  Court  having  secured  the  obedience  of  Parliament, 
it  was  determined  to  assume  a  high  tone  of  authority ;  to 
awe,  and  even  to  punish,  the  refractory.  *  The  King,'  it 
was  given  out,  '  would  be  King, — would  not  be  dictated 
to  by  his  ministers,  as  his  grandfather  had  been.  The 
prerogative  was  to  shine  out ;  great  lords  must  be  humbled.' 
Fox — whose  language  ever  was  that  the  Crown  must 
predominate  whenever  it  would  exert  its  influence — 
warmly  upheld  the  doctrine  of  rewards  and  punishments  ; 
and,  having  employed  the  former  with  so  much  success, 
he  was  rejoiced  to  inflict  the  latter  to  glut  his  own 
vengeance.  The  first  fruit  of  these  councils  struck 
mankind  with  astonishment.  The  Duke  of  Devonshire, 
who  had  kept  himself  in  the  country,  coming  to  town  on 
the  28th  of  October,  went  to  pay  his  duty  to  the  King, 
and,  as  is  customary  with  the  great  officers,  went  to  the 
back-stairs,  whence  he  sent  the  page  in  waiting  to  acquaint 
his  Majesty  with  his  attendance.  'Tell  him,'  said  the 
King  angrily,  'I  will  not  see  him.'  The  page,  amazed, 
hesitated.  The  King  ordered  him  to  go  and  deliver  those 
very  words.  If  the  page  had  been  thunderstruck,  it  may 
be  imagined  what  the  Duke  felt.  He  had,  however,  the 
presence  of  mind  to  send  in  the  page  again  to  ask  what  he 
should  do  with  his  key  of  Lord  Chamberlain.  The  reply 
was,  '  Orders  will  be  given  for  that.'  The  Duke  went 
home  with  a  heart  full  of  rage,  and  tore  off  his  key,  which 

1  This  statement  rests  on  Walpole's  unsupported  testimony.  The  facts 
that  I  have  been  able  to  collect  on  the  subject,  in  the  quarters  likely  to  be  the 
best  informed,  are  these  :— On  the  7th  of  September  Lord  Egremont  wrote  to 
the  Duke  of  Bedford,  informing  him  of  the  King's  commands  that  he  should 
not  sign  the  preliminaries  without  first  sending  them  over  for  his  Majesty's 
approbation.  On  the  i8th  the  Duke  wrote  to  M.  de  Choiseul  that  he  was 
ready  to  sign,  and  that  he  only  waits  his  anstver  to  send  his  messenger  to 
London.  On  the  28th  or  29th  Lord  Egremont  wrote  by  the  French  courier 
of  M.  de  Nivernois  that  the  Havannah  was  taken.  On  the  30th  he  repeats 
the  news,  and  promises  fresh  instructions.  The  Duke  never  pretended  to 
sign  against  the  King's  orders,  though  he  complained  of  their  tenor.  Thus 
Walpole's  story  becomes  very  improbable. — L.  M. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  159 

immediately  after  he  carried  to  Lord  Egremont,  the 
Secretary  of  State  ;  and  the  next  morning  his  brother, 
Lord  George  Cavendish,  and  Lord  Besborough/  his 
brother-in-law,  resigned  their  places.  As  the  Court  urged 
that  the  Duke's  disgrace  was  owing  to  his  refusal  of 
attending  Councils,  his  Grace's  friends  pleaded  that  he 
had  asked  and  obtained  the  King's  leave  not  to  attend 
them,  as  he  seldom  had  attended  them  even  in  the  late 
reign ;  and  that,  his  summons  having  been  made  by  a 
commis  in  Lord  Egremont's  office,  the  Duke  did  not 
think  that  such  a  message  interfered  with  his  dispensation. 
Some  said  there  had  been  no  intention  to  dismiss  the 
Duke  ;  attributing  the  affront  to  a  sudden  start  of  passion 
in  the  King,  who,  coming  from  Richmond  that  morning, 
had  met  the  Dukes  of  Devonshire  and  Newcastle  together 
in  a  chariot,  whence,  suspecting  a  cabal,  he  had  gone  home 
in  anger,  and,  at  the  moment  the  Duke  arrived  at 
St.  James's,  was  writing  to  Lord  Bute  that  now  was  the 
time ;  words  which  proved  at  least  that  the  Duke's 
disgrace  had  been  meditated,  and  which  in  truth  nobody 
doubted.  The  Princess  had  more  than  once  termed  him 
ironically  the  Prince  of  the  Whigs ;  and  his  Grace  having 
dared  to  desert  from  Fox's  banner,  left  no  doubt  of  the 
latter  having  contributed  to  irritate  the  prejudice  already 
conceived.  Nor  could  Fox  wipe  off  the  suspicion  ;  though, 
as  soon  as  the  affront  was  known,  he  had  hurried  to 
Devonshire  House,^  and  protested  his  utter  ignorance  of 
any  such  design.  The  Duke  received  him  coolly,  did  not 
pretend  to  believe  him  ;  and  his  family  never  for- 
gave it. 

1  William  Ponsonby,  Earl  of  Besborough,  one  of  the  Postmasters-General, 
had  married  Lady  Caroline  Cavendish,  eldest  sister  of  the  Duke  of  Devon- 
shire. 

-  Mr.  Fox  did  not  go  to  Devonshire  House  '  to  protest  his  utter  ignorance 
of  any  such  design.'  Rewrote  to  the  Duke  at  Chatsworth  on  the  2nd  of 
November,  to  express  his  sorrow  at  what  had  happened,  and,  in  a  subsequent 
letter  of  the  9th,  assured  his  Grace  that  '  he  neither  knew  nor  had  the  least 
suspicion  '  of  the  intention  to  strike  his  Grace's  name  out  of  the  Privy 
Council. — Note  by  the  late  Mr.  Allen,  on  the  manuscript  copy  of  these 
Memoirs. — L.  M. 


i6o  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

The  fairness  of  the  Duke's  character,  his  decent  and 
timid  caution,  and  the  high  rank  in  which  he  stood  with 
the  party,  made  the  measure  much  wondered  at ;  yet  it 
was  far  from  producing  such  open  offence  as  might  have 
been  expected,  nor  did  the  consequences  spread.  The 
Marquis  of  Rockingham,  five  days  afterwards,  resigned 
the  Bedchamber  ;  but,  offering  to  explain  his  disgusts,  the 
King  with  much  haughtiness  refused  to  hear  him — 
another  strain  of  authority  much  vaunted,  and  not  without 
effect.  The  Peerage  itself  kissed  the  rod,  which  was 
declared  to  be  held  out  to  humble  them.  Nor  did  they 
take  the  alarm,  though  the  rigour  towards  the  Duke  of 
Devonshire  was  prosecuted  farther  ;  for,  a  Privy  Council 
being  summoned  November  the  3rd,  the  King  ordered  the 
Duke's  name  to  be  struck  out  of  the  Council-book ;  a 
severity  of  which  there  had  been  no  precedent  in  the  last 
reign,  but  in  the  cases  of  Lord  Bath  and  Lord  George 
Sackville  ;  the  first,  in  open  and  virulent  opposition  ;  the 
second  on  his  ignominious  sentence  after  the  battle  of 
Minden.  John,  Duke  of  Argyle,^  when  his  regiment  was 
taken  from  him,  was  not  thus  affronted  ;  nor  had  George 
the  First  refused  to  admit  Lord  Oxford  ^  to  kiss  his  hand 
on  the  Queen's  death,  nor  denied  an  audience  to  the  Earl 
Marichal,^  involved  in  Jacobitism. 

^  Turned  out  for  his  opposition  to  the  Excise  Scheme  in  1733. 

"^  Robert  Harley,  Earl  of  Oxford,  Prime  Minister  to  Queen  Anne. 

^  George  Keith,  loth  Earl  Marichal,  engaged  in  the  rebellion  of  1 715. 
When  he  came  out  of  the  King's  closet,  and  was  asked  what  the  King  had 
said,  he  replied  in  the  words  of  the  old  ballad; 

'  The  King  looked  over  his  left  shoulder, 

And  a  grim  look  looked  he, 
And  cried,  "  Earl  Marshal,  but  for  my  oath, 
Or  hanged  thou  should'st  be."  ' 

Lord  Marichal  was  afterwards  in  the  service  of  the  King  of  Prussia,  and 
Governor  of  Neufchatel.  He  was  pardoned  by  King  George  the  Second.  lie 
is  one  of  the  few  persons  whom  Frederic  appears  to  have  really  loved.  He 
was  a  philosopher  after  the  fashion  of  that  monarch,  but  a  more  practical  and 
amiable  one  ;  for  he  bore  the  loss  of  rank  and  wealth,  and  the  various 
discomforts  of  a  long  and  almost  hopeless  exile,  with  unostentatious  cheerful- 
ness, conducting  himself  all  the  while  so  prudently  that  amidst  his  many 


KING  GEORGE  III.  i6i 

political  opponents  he  had  not  a  single  personal  enemy.  The  general  esteem 
that  followed  him  through  life  afterwards  attached  to  his  memory ;  and  his 
name  is  rarely  to  be  found  mentioned  in  the  works  of  his  contemporaries 
without  some  expressions  showing  an  earnest  desire  to  represent  him  in  the 
fairest  colours.  D'Alembert  wrote  an  eloge  in  his  honour.  His  brother, 
Marshal  Keith,  was  a  man  of  far  superior  ability,  and  his  exile  was  a  serious 
loss  to  the  British  army.  Lord  Marichal  died  at  Potsdam  in  1778  in  his 
eighty-sixth  year. — Douglas's  Peerage  of  Scotland,  edited  by  J.  P.  Wood, 
vol.  ii.  pp.  196-7. — L.  M. 


VOL.  I. 


i62  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 


CHAPTER    XIV 

Preliminaries  of  Peace  with  France  and  Spain. — Secret  springs  of  political 
actions. — Embassy  to  the  Court  of  Spain  offered  to  Lord  Sandwich. — 
Insult  to  the  Duke  of  Cumberland. — Honours  and  preferments. — 
Resignation  of  Lords  Ashburnham  and  Kinnoul. — Lord  Lincoln's  in- 
gratitude to  the  Duke  of  Newcastle. — Bait  offered  to  Lord  Granby. — IMr. 
Conway. — The  Duke  of  York  obliged  to  go  to  Italy  — Profusion  exercised 
by  the  Court. — Charles  Townshend's  want  of  judgment. — His  bons-mots. 
— Attempt  to  propitiate  Walpole. — Correspondence  between  him  and  Fox 
respecting  the  Rangership  of  the  Parks  offered  to  Lord  Orford. — Conduct 
of  the  latter. 

On  the  8th  of  the  month  a  courier  arrived  with  the 
preHminaries  signed  by  France  and  Spain  I  shall  not 
detail  those  preliminaries,  too  well  known,  and  to  be 
found  in  all  common  histories.  It  is  my  part  to  explain, 
as  far  as  I  could  know  them,  the  leading  motives  of 
actions  and  events  ;  and,  though  the  secret  springs  are 
often  unfathomable,  I  had  acquaintance  enough  with  the 
actors  to  judge  with  better  probability  than  the  common 
of  mankind  ;  and  where  these  memoirs  are  defective  or 
mistaken,  still  they  may  direct  to  the  inquiry  after 
sounder  materials,  and  prove  a  key  to  original  papers 
that  may  appear  hereafter. 

The  peace  with  Spain,  as  it  opened  a  door  for  an 
embassy  to  that  Court,  afforded  Mr.  Fox  a  new  oppor- 
tunity of  revenge  ;  and  as  this  measure  at  least  he  could 
not  waive  the  honour  of  having  suggested,  so  did  it 
corroborate  the  belief  of  his  being  the  author  of  the  other 
too.^  He  immediately  offered  that  embassy  to  Lord 
Sandwich,^    who    as    greedily    accepted    it.       Sandwich, 

^  The  disgrace  of  the  Duke  of  Devonshire. 

^  John  Montagu,  Earl  of  Sandwich.     See  more  of  him  in  the  preceding 
reign,  and  in  the  subsequent  part  of  this  work. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  163 

rejected  and  exploded  by  all  mankind,  had  been  adopted, 
fostered,  patronized  in  the  most  kind  and  intimate  manner 
by  the  Duke  of  Cumberland  ;  nor  had  he  the  confidence 
now  to  consult  his  Royal  Highness,  or  to  venture  in  person 
to  notify  to  him  his  desertion.  He  wrote.  The  insult 
was  too  glaring,  and  could  not  be  pardoned  to  either  Fox 
or  Sandwich,  both  of  whom  were  for  ever  excluded  from 
the  Duke's  presence  but  at  his  public  levies,  and  there 
underwent  the  most  mortifying  neglect  from  him  ;  though 
Fox  often  sued  in  most  abject  manner  to  be  forgiven. 

Severity  gratified,  honours  and  preferments  were  amply 
proffered,  and  but  few  rejected.  The  Duke  of  Man- 
chester ^  had  been  named  to  the  Bedchamber  the  instant 
Lord  Rockingham  had  quitted  it.  The  Duke  of  Marl- 
borough- and  the  Earl  of  Northumberland  ^  were  made 
Lords  Chamberlains  to  the  King  and  Queen  ;  the  latter 
of  which  posts  Lord  Bristol  had  refused  to  accept,  from 
attachment  to  Mr.  Pitt,  Lord  Egmont  was  made  Post- 
master in  the  room  of  Lord  Besborough,  The  seals  of 
Secretary  of  State,  with  the  feiiille  de  benefices,  were  once 
more  offered  to  the  Duke  of  Newcastle  ;  but  he  replied 
it  would  be  time  enough  to  talk  of  business  when  the 
Parliament  met.  His  friend.  Lord  Ashburnham,*  resigned : 
and  so  did  his  other  friend,  Lord  Kinnoul,^  who,  though 

^  George  Montagu,  fourth  Duke  of  Manchester. 

"  George  Spencer,  third  Duke  of  Marlborough. 

^  Hugh  Smithson  Percy,  Earl  of  Northumberland,  afterwards  Duke  of 
Northumberland,  and  Lord-Lieutenant  of  Ireland. 

*  John,  second  Earl  of  Ashburnham,  Lord  of  the  Bedchamber,  and 
Ranger  of  St.  James's  and  Hyde  Parks.  He  subsequently  became  Groom 
of  the  Stole,  and  died  on  Sth  April  1S12,  aged  eighty-seven. — E. 

5  Thomas  Hay,  Earl  of  Kinnoul,  better  known  as  Lord  Dupplin.  He 
had,  in  the  preceding  reign,  held  with  credit,  at  different  times,  the  offices 
of  a  Lord  of  the  Treasury,  of  Paymaster,  Chancellor  of  the  Duchy  of 
Lancaster,  etc.,  and  was  a  frequent  and  useful  speaker  in  the  House  of 
Commons,  'where,'  says  Walpole,  'he  aimed  at  nothing  but  understanding 
business  and  explaining  it.'  The  Duke  of  Newcastle  chiefly  relied  upon  him 
in  the  distribution  of  the  secret  service  money  and  the  Government  patronage 
among  the  members.  His  embassy  to  Lisbon  is  remembered  by  the  satirical 
verse  of  Pope  : 

'  Kinnoul's  lewd  cargo  or  Tyrawley's  crew.' 

He  took  very  little  part  in  public  affairs  afterwards ;  residing  usually  on  his 


\ 


164  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

his  bosom-confidant,  dwelling  in  his  very  house,  had 
borne  his  disgrace,  and  now  affected  to  forget  him,  and  to 
plead  obligations  to  the  Duke  of  Devonshire,  at  the  same 
time  declaring  his  reluctance  to  break  with  the  Court ;  a 
reluctance  so  decisive,  that  he  retired  into  Scotland,  and 
came  no  more  to  London  till  the  year  1770. 

Lord  Lincoln,^  Newcastle's  favourite  nephew  and  heir, 
displayed  more  open  ingratitude.  He  asked  an  audience 
of  the  King,  called  his  uncle  a  factious  old  fool,  and  said 
he  could  not  forget  a  message  which  himself  had  brought 
from  his  uncle  to  his  Majesty  in  the  year  1757,  in  which 
the  Duke  had  signified  to  his  then  Royal  Highness,  that, 
if  he  would  not  disturb  the  tranquillity  of  the  rest  of  his 
grandfather's  reign,  the  Duke,  in  or  out  of  place,  though 
he  hoped  the  latter,  would  support  his  measures  to  the 
utmost.  It  was  justice  to  recollect  this  promise  ;  but 
Lincoln's  subsequent  conduct,  at  the  same  time  that  it 
was  inconsistent,  was  honourable  neither  towards  the 
King  nor  his  uncle.  He  had  a  second  audience,  in  which 
he  told  the  King  that  the  Duke  insisted  on  his  resigning  ; 
'  but  if  I  must,'  said  he,  '  I  will  show  but  the  more  warmly 
the  next  day  that  I  remember  the  message,  of  which  I 
have  kept  a  copy  in  writing.'  The  third  time,  when  he 
went  to  resign,  he  said  he  must  oppose.  The  King  told 
him  his  tone  was  much  changed  since  his  first  audience. 
But  the  Court  never  had  much  reason  to  complain  of 
Lord  Lincoln's  hostilities.  His  exceeding  pride  kept  him 
secluded  from  the  world,  and  rarely  did  he  appear  either 
at  Court  or  in  Parliament.     For  some  time  he  fluctuated 

estates  in  Scotland,  and  devoting  himself  to  rural  improvements  and  matters 
of  local  interest.  He  died  in  1787,  aged  seventy-seven,  without  issue,  and 
was  succeeded  by  his  nephew. — L.  M.  [See  Pope's  sixth  epistle  of  the  First 
Book  of  Horace,  p.  121,  and  the  notes  thereto,  in  Elwin  and  Courthope's 
edition  oi  Pope,  vol.  iii.  p.  325. — E.] 

^  Henry  Pelham-Clinton,  Earl  of  Lincoln,  Knight  of  the  Garter,  and  one 
of  the  Lords  of  the  Bedchamber,  was  the  son  of  Henry,  Earl  of  Lincoln,  and 
Lucy  Pelham,  sister  of  the  Duke  of  Newcastle  and  Henry  Pelham,  First 
Lord  of  the  Treasury ;  having  married  his  first  cousin,  Catherine,  eldest 
daughter  and  co-heiress  of  Mr.  Pelham,  the  Duke's  estate,  and  a  new 
creation  of  the  Duchy  of  Newcastle  in  reversion,  were  settled  on  him, — L.  M. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  165 

between  Lord  Bute  and  Mr.  Pitt,  to  the  latter  of  whom 
he  at  last  attached  himself;  but  with  constant  derision  of, 
and  insult  to,  his  uncle,  and,  whatever  were  the  Duke  of 
Newcastle's  faults,  cruel  and  unmerited.  The  truth 
was,  Lord  Lincoln's  avarice  was  as  unbounded  as  his 
haughtiness.  Though  possessed  of  two  places  for  life, 
and  one  of  them  the  most  lucrative  in  England,  the 
auditorship  of  the  Exchequer,  which  never  produces  less 
than  eight  thousand  pounds  a  year,  and  during  the  war 
had  brought  in  at  least  twenty,  he  had  resented  the 
Duke's  not  bestowing  on  him  two  more  places  for  the 
lives  of  his  younger  sons. 

As  every  door  was  to  be  opened  or  barricaded  that 
could  admit  or  exclude  friends  or  enemies  to  the  pre- 
liminaries, messengers  were  stationed  at  the  seaports  to 
waylay  Lord  Granby  on  his  return  from  the  army,  with 
the  most  advantageous  offers,  as  the  Ordnance  and 
command  of  the  army,  setting  aside  the  worthy  old 
Marshal  Ligonier  ^  with  a  large  pension  ;  a  bait  gulped  by 
the  former  without  scruple.  Mr.  Conway,  to  whom  they 
did  the  honour  of  thinking  they  could  not  bribe  him  (and 
whoever  they  could  not  bribe,  they  concluded,  could  not 
approve  their  treaty),  was  decorated  with  the  empty 
honour  of  conducting  home  the  army  ;  which  would,  and 
did,  prevent  his  return  before  the  discussion  of  the 
preliminaries  in  Parliament.  And  the  Duke  of  York, 
whom  they  would  not  silence  by  favours,  they  obliged  to 
go  on  an  idle  expedition  to  Italy. 

The  profusion  exercised  on  this  occasion,  and  which 
reduced    the   Court   to   stop    even  the   payments   of  the 

^  John,  Earl  Ligonier,  was  a  French  Huguenot.  He  distinguished 
himself  under  the  Duke  of  Marlborough  in  Flanders,  and  was  invested  by 
George  11.  with  the  Order  of  the  Bath  on  the  field  of  Dettingen.  He 
became  a  General  in  the  army  on  30th  December  1746,  Commander-in-Chief 
on  24th  October  1757,  and  Field-Marshal  on  28th  November  1757.  He  was 
created  Viscount  Ligonier  in  the  peerage  of  Ireland  on  21st  December  1757, 
and  on  27th  April  1763  was  made  a  Peer  of  Great  Britain  by  the  title  of 
Baron  Ligonier  of  Ripley,  in  the  County  of  Surrey.  He  was  further  advanced 
to  the  dignity  of  Earl  Ligonier  on  loth  September  1766,  and  died  on  28th 
April  1770,  aged  ninety-one. — E. 


i66  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

King's  bedchamber,  made  men  recall  severely  to  mind  the 
King's  declaration  on  the  choice  of  the  Parliament,  that 
he  would  not  permit  any  money  to  be  spent  on  elections. 

Their  greatest  difficulty  was  with  Charles  Townshend, 
who  slipped  through  their  fingers  at  every  turn,  and  could 
be  held  down  to  no  decision.  He  refused  to  be  First 
Lord  of  Trade  with  the  same  power  over  the  colonies  as 
had  been  granted  to  Lord  Halifax.  At  the  same  time  he 
was  loth  to  resign,  though  in  that  quarter  the  needle 
rested  at  last, — a  mark  of  that  want  of  judgment  that  was 
conspicuous  in  all  his  actions  ;  for,  having  fluctuated  from 
uncertainty  of  the  issue,  he  chose  the  losing  side  but  the 
very  day  before  the  great  victory  of  the  Court  on  the 
preliminaries.  His  post  of  Secretary  at  War  was  soon 
after  given  to  Ellis.^  Townshend's  bons-mots  wounded 
where  his  conduct  could  not.  It  being  reported,  to 
justify  the  treatment  of  the  Duke  of  Devonshire,  that  the 
King  complained  he  had  been  kept  prisoner ;  '  True,' 
said  Townshend,  '  he  is  a  prisoner,  but  he  mistakes  his 
jailor.'  Another  of  his  sayings  had  not  only  proved  a 
prophecy,  but  was  often  applied  in  the  following  years. 
He  had  said  of  the  last  arrangement  before  Fox  was 
set  at  the  head,  that  '  it  was  a  pretty  lutestring  adminis- 
tration which  would  do  very  well  for  summer  wear.' 

After  so  many  considerable  names,  it  will  look, 
perhaps,  like  vain  presumption  in  me  to  name  myself  as 
one  whom  it  was  thought  necessary  to  manage.  But,  as 
it  proves  how  low  the  arts  and  attention  of  Fox  could 
descend,  and  as  my  answer  (at  least,  I  have  always  sus- 
pected so)  contributed  to  an  event  of  much  consequence 
afterwards,  I  shall  be  excused  by  the  candid  for  giving 
some  account  of  it.  I  had,  soon  after  my  appearance  in 
the  world,  lived  in  much  intimacy  with  Fox,  had  warmly 

'  Wclbore  Ellis.  See  his  character  in  the  preceding  reign. — [Walpole's 
Memoirs  of  George  II.  (1S47),  vol.  ii.  pp.  141-2.  Ellis  was  at  this  lime  M.  P.  for 
Aylesbury  and  joint  Vice-Treasurer  of  Ireland.  He  subsequently  filled  the 
offices  of  Treasurer  of  the  Navy  and  Secretary  of  State  for  America,  and  was 
created  Baron  Mendip  on  13th  August  1794.  He  died  on  2nd  February  1802, 
aged  eighty-eight,  and  was  buried  in  Westminster  Abbey. — E.] 


KING  GEORGE  III.  167 

espoused  his  side  when  persecuted  by  the  Duke  and 
Duchess  of  Richmond,^  and  had  happened  to  have  con- 
ferred some  other  Httle  favours  on  him.  I  had  carefully 
avoided  receiving  the  smallest  or  the  greatest  from  him. 
As  his  character  opened  more  to  the  world,  I  declined  any 
connection  with  him  in  politics,  though  determining  never 
to  have  a  quarrel  with  him,  as  I  well  knew  his  vindictive 
nature.  When  he  united  with  the  Duke  of  Newcastle, 
he  had  offered  in  truth  slightly  enough  to  procure  the 
reversion  of  a  considerable  place,  which  I  hold  only  for  my 
brother's  life,  to  be  confirmed  for  my  own,  provided  I 
would  be  upon  good  terms  with  the  Duke.  I  had  ever,  in 
the  most  open  manner,  spoken  of  that  minister  with  con- 
tempt :  and  having  never  to  this  hour  received  a  favour 
from  any  minister,  I  shall  be  believed  that  I  never  would 
accept  one  from  Fox.  I  answered  accordingly  with  much 
scorn,  '  I  will  not  accept  that  reversion  from  the  Duke." 
Fox,  knowing  this  spirit,  and  knowing,  too,  that  I  had 
declared  to  Lord  Bute  that  I  would  receive  no  favour  from 
the  Court,  had  no  hope  of  fixing  me  to  his  measures  by 
any  offers  he  could  make.  Nor  yet  had  he  had  reason  to 
know  I  was  averse  to  the  preliminaries,  on  which  I  had 
kept  silent.  The  truth  was,  I  had  been  civilly  treated  on 
the  King's  accession,  and  had  so  much  disliked  Newcastle 
and  Hardwicke,  that  few  men  were  better  pleased  than 
myself  to  see  a  new  administration ;  and  had  not  the 
standard  of  Prerogative  been  hoisted,  and  disgrace  brought 
on  this  triumphant  country,  I  should  probably  have 
remained  a  satisfied  spectator.  Yet  was  I  not  so  steeled 
by  the  glories  of  the  war  as  to  be  insensible  to  the 
yearnings  of  humanity;  and  therefore,  ignominious  as 
the  articles  were,  my  conscience  would  not  suffer  me  to 
speak  against  a  treaty  that  would  stop  such  effusion  of 
blood.  Sentiments,  I  confess,  most  heroic  :  yet  I  blush 
not  to  own  that  they  divided  my  sensations,  and  forbade 
my  voting  against  the  preliminaries,  though  I    was    too 

^  Charles,  second  Duke  of  Richmond,  and  Sarah  Cadogan,  his  Duchess. 
Fox  had  stolen  their  eldest  daughter,  Lady  Caroline  Lennox. 


l68  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

much  an  Englishman  to  vote  for  them,  and  accordingly 
left  the  House  before  the  putting  of  the  question. 

As  doubtless  I  did  not  trust  Fox  with  this  situation  of 
my  breast,  nor  made  my  court  on  his  new  dignity,  he 
concluded  I  was  in  the  number  of  the  disapprovers. 
Direct  offers,  or  direct  threats,  would  be  vain  :  but  to  put 
me  in  mind  of  my  dependence  on  my  nephew,  by  whose 
interest  I  was  chosen  into  Parliament,^  and  which  depend- 
ence Fox  ought  to  have  remembered  I  had  braved ^  for 
his  sake ;  or  of  my  dependence  on  the  Treasury,  which  could 
hurt  me  severely^  by  stopping  the  payments  of  my  place 
in  the  Treasury  ;  he  wrote  me  the  following  letter : — 

Nov.  21,  1762. 

Dear  Sir, — As  soon  as  I  heard  that  the  Parks,^  which 
Lord  Ashburnham  had  quitted,  were  worth  ;^2200  a  year 
(as  they  certainly  are),  I  thought  such  an  income  might, 
if  not  prevent,  at  least  procrastinate,  your  nephew's  ruin.^ 
I  find  nobody  knows  his  Lordship's  thoughts^  on  the 
present  state  of  politics. 

^  For  the  Borough  of  Lynn,  in  Norfolk. 

^  On  the  contested  election  for  the  borough  of  St.  Michael,  in  Cornwall, 
Lord  Orford,  my  nephew,  had  quarrelled  with  me  for  taking  part  with  Fox. 
I  offered  to  resign  my  seat,  but  would  not  give  up  the  liberty  of  voting  as  I 
pleased. 

*  As  Usher  of  the  Exchequer,  I  advanced  a  very  large  sum  of  money  every 
year  to  furnish  the  Treasury  with  paper,  stationeiy  wares,  etc.,  and  to  pay 
the  workmen ;  so  that,  if  the  payments  are  kept  back,  I  am  a  considerable 
sufferer. 

^  The  Rangership  of  St.  James's  and  Hyde  Parks.  This  post  was  not  worth 
two  thousand  two  hundred  pounds  a  year  by  itself,  but  with  the  Bedchamber  ; 
as  Lord  Ashburnham  had  held  it.  Lord  Orford  was  already  Lord  of  the 
Bedchamber  ;  so,  though  I  did  not  know  it  at  that  time,  the  offer  was  grossly 
fallacious.     Fox,  however,  might  be  ignorant  too  of  this  circumstance. 

^  George  Walpole,  third  Earl  of  Orford,  grandson  of  Sir  Robert  Walpole. 
Not  only  his  grandfather  and  father  had  left  great  debts,  but  his  own  dissipa- 
tion had  involved  him  in  many  more. 

®  He  scarce  ever  had  any  thoughts  about  politics,  but  lived  almost  always  in 
the  country  and  at  Newmarket,  wasting  his  time  and  fortune  by  carelessness, 
rather  than  in  pleasures  and  expenses.  With  a  most  engaging  figure  and 
address,  he  profited  of  no  one  advantage  to  which  he  was  born  ;  and,  without 
any  view  of  advantage  to  himself,  disgusted  every  friend  he  had  by  insensibility, 
and  every  friend  he  might  have  had  by  insincerity. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  169 

Perhaps  he  has  none.  Now,  are  you  willing,  and  are 
you  the  proper  person,  to  tell  Lord  Orford  that  I  will  do 
my  best  to  procure  this  employment  for  him,  if  I  can  soon 
learn  that  he  desires  it  ?  If  he  does  choose  it,  I  doubt  not 
of  his  and  his  friend  Boone's^  hearty  assistance,  and 
believe  I  shall  see  you,  too,  much  oftener  in  the  House  of 
Commons.  This  is  offering  you  a  bribe,  but  'tis  such  a 
one  as  one  honest  good-natured  man  may  without  offence 
offer  to  another. 

If  you  undertake  this,  do  it  immediately,  and  have 
attention  to  my  part  in  it,  which  is  delicate.  If  you  do 
not  undertake  it,  let  me  know  your  thoughts  of  the 
proposal,  whether  I  had  better  drop  it  entirely,  or  put  it 
into  other  hands,  and  whose. 

You  '11  believe  me  when  I  tell  you  that  goodness  of 
heart  has  as  much  share  in  this  to  the  full  as  policy. — 
Yours  ever,  H.  Fox. 

This  artful  and  disingenuous  letter  the  messenger  was 
ordered  to  desire  I  would  answer  immediately.  I  deter- 
mined at  once  to  guard  my  expressions  in  such  a  manner 
that,  under  the  appearance  of  the  same  insincere  cordiality 
which  Fox  affected  to  wear,  it  should  not  be  possible  to 
fix  either  declaration  or  engagement  upon  me  ;  showing 
him  at  the  same  time  that  I  would  neither  accept  favour 
from  him,  nor  be  indirectly  obliged  to  him  through  my 
nephew.  I  was  aware  that,  if  I  refused  to  notify  the  offer 
to  Lord  Orford,  he  or  his  friends,  and  the  Court  too, 
would  raise  a  clamour  against  me  for  preventing  his 
receiving  a  favour  that  he  wanted  so  much :  and,  as  he 
was  already  Lord  of  the  Bedchamber,  there  could  be  no 
reason  in  honour  why  he  should  not  accept  an  addition  of 
income  ;  nor  was  there  anything  in  his  principles  that 
would  make  him  difficult  to  be  farther  bound.  With  these 
views  I  returned  the  following  answer  : — 

^  Charles  Boone,  brought  into  Parliament  by  Lord  Orford  for  Castlerising. 
Fox  had  already  sounded  Lord  Orford  through  Mr.  Boone,  but  without 
receiving  any  answer. 


I70  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

Nov.  21,   1762. 

Dear  Sir, — After  having  done^  what  the  world  knows 
I  have  done,  to  try  to  retrieve  the  affairs  of  my  family,  and 
to  save  my  nephew  from  ruin,  I  can  have  little  hopes  that  any 
interposition  of  mine  will  tend  to  an  end  I  wish  so  much. 
I  cannot  even  flatter  myself  with  having  the  least  weight 
with  my  Lord  Orford.  In  the  present  case  I  can  still  less 
indulge  myself  in  any  such  hopes.  You  remember  in  the 
case  of  the  St.  Michael  election  how  hardly  he  used  me  on 
your  account.  I  know  how  much  he  resented  last  year  his 
thinking  you  concerned  in  the  contest  about  the  borough^ 
where  he  set  up  Mr.  Thomas  Walpole  ;  and,  as  he  has  not 
even  now  deigned  to  answer  Mr.  Boone's  letter,^  I  can 
little  expect  that  he  will  behave  with  more  politeness  to 
me.  Yet  I  think  it  is  so  much  my  duty  to  lay  before  him 
anything  for  his  advantage,  and  what  is  by  no  means 
incompatible  with  his  honour,  that  I  will  certainly  acquaint 
him  immediately  with  the  offer  you  are  so  good  as  to  make 
him. 

You  see  I  write  to  you  with  my  usual  frankness  and 
sincerity  ;  and  you  will,  I  am  sure,  be  so  good  as  to  keep 
to  yourself  the  freedom  with  which  I  mention  very  nice 
family  affairs.  You  must  excuse  me  if  I  add  one  word 
more  on  myself.  My  wish  is,  that  Lord  Orford  should 
accept  this  offer  ;  yet,  I  tell  you  truly,  I  shall  state  it  to 
him  plainly  and  simply,  without  giving  any  advice,  not 

'^  This  alludes  to  my  having  projected  a  match  for  Lord  Orford  with  Miss 
Nicholl,  an  heiress  worth  one  hundred  and  fifty  thousand  pounds,  whom 
Lord  Orford  would  not  marry  ;  and  in  the  course  of  which  negotiation  I  had 
a  great  quarrel  with  my  uncle,  old  Horace  Walpole,  who  endeavoured, 
though  trusted  with  her  by  me,  to  marry  her  to  one  of  his  own  younger  sons. 
This  quarrel  had  made  very  great  noise,  and  many  persons  were  engaged  in 
it.  The  young  lady  afterwards  married  the  Marquis  of  Caernarvon,  [who 
succeeded  his  father  as  third  Duke  of  Chandos  in  November  i']']\\. 

"  Mr.  Fox  had  supported  Mr.  Sullivan  at  a  borough  in  the  W^est  against 
Mr.  T.  "Walpole  I  forget  whether  it  was  Callington  or  Ashburton.  [It  was 
the  latter.]     Lord  Orford  was  heir  to  estates  in  both  by  his  mother. 

^  Mr.  Boone  had  acquainted  me  with  this,  and  Mr.  Fox  thought  I  did  not 
know  it,  but  I  chose  to  let  him  see  I  did. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  171 

only  for  the  reasons  I  have  expressed  above,  but  because 
I  do  not  mean  to  be  involved  in  this  affair  any  otherwise 
than  as  a  messenger.  A  man,  who  is  so  scrupulous  as 
not  to  accept  any  obligation  for  himself,  cannot  be  allowed 
to  accept  one  for  another  without  thinking  himself  bound 
in  gratitude  as  much  as  if  done  to  himself  The  very 
little  share  I  ever  mean  to  take  more  in  public  affairs 
shall  and  must  be  dictated  by  disinterested  motives.  I 
have  no  one  virtue  to  support  me  but  that  disinterested- 
ness ;  and,  if  I  act  with  you,  no  man  living  shall  have  to 
say  that  it  was  not  by  choice  and  by  principle. — I  am,  dear 
Sir,  your  sincere  humble  servant, 

Horace  Walpole. 

There  were  truths  enough  to  displease,  and  they  did  not 
escape  Fox.  The  consequence  to  me  was,  that  by  his 
influence  with  Martin,  Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  my 
payments  were  stopped  for  some  months,  nor  made  but 
on  my  writing  to  Lord  Bute  himself;  which,  as,  notwith- 
standing this  persecution,  I  would  take  no  part  with  the 
administration,  proved  that  the  delay  had  not  flowed  from 
the  minister  himself,  but  from  his  associate,  my  good 
friend  :  nor  did  it  stop  there.  In  the  meantime  I  had 
written  thus  to  Lord  Orford  : — 

Arlington  Street,  Nov.   22,  1762. 

My  Dear  Lord, — I  must  preface  what  I  am  going  to  say, 
with  desiring  you  to  believe  that  I  by  no  means  take  the 
liberty  of  giving  you  any  advice ;  and  should  the  proposal  I 
have  to  make  to  you  be  disagreeable,  I  beg  you  to  excuse 
it,  as  I  thought  it  my  duty  to  lay  before  you  anything  that 
is  for  your  advantage,  and  as  you  would  have  reason  to 
blame  me  if  I  declined  communicating  to  you  a  lucrative 
offer. 

I  last  night  received  a  letter  from  Mr.  Fox,  in  which 
he  tells  me  that,  hearing  the  Parks,  vacant  by  Lord  Ash- 
burnham's  resignation,  are  worth  ;^220o  a  year,  he  will, 
if  you  desire  to  succeed  him,  do  his  best  to  procure  that 


172  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

employment  for  you,  if  he  can  soon  learn  that  it  is  your 
wish. 

If  you  will  be  so  good  as  to  send  me  your  answer,  I  will 
acquaint  him  with  it ;  or,  if  you  think  it  more  polite  to 
thank  Mr.  Fox  himself  for  his  obliging  offer,  I  shall  be 
very  well  content  to  be,  as  I  am  in  everything  else,  a  cypher, 
except  when  I  can  show  myself,  My  dear  Lord,  your 
very  affectionate  humble  servant, 

Horace  Walpole. 

To  this  letter,  nor  to  the  offer,  did  Lord  Orford  give 
himself  the  trouble  of  making  the  least  reply  ;  but,  arriv- 
ing in  town  on  the  very  day  the  Parliament  met,  he  came 
to  me,  and  asked  what  he  was  to  do  ?  I  replied  very 
coldly,  I  did  not  know  what  he  intended  to  do ;  but,  if  his 
meaning  was  to  accept,  I  supposed  he  ought  to  go  to  Mr. 
Fox,  and  tell  him  so,  I  having  nothing  farther  to  do  with 
it  than  barely  to  acquaint  him  with  the  offer.  Without 
preface  or  apology,  without  recollecting  his  long  enmity  to 
Fox  (it  is  true,  he  did  not  know  why  he  was  Fox's  enemy), 
and  without  a  hint  of  reconciliation,  to  Fox  he  went, 
accepted  the  place,  and  never  gave  that  ministry  one  vote 
afterwards  ;  continuing  in  the  country,  as  he  would  have 
done  if  they  had  given  him  nothing.  I  return  from  this 
digression. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  173 


CHAPTER    XV 

Conference  between  the  Duke  of  Cumberland  and  Mr.  Pitt. — Pitt's  lofty 
style  and  inconclusive  manner. — Want  of  union  in  the  Opposition. — 
Anxiety  of  the  Ministers. — Debates  in  both  Houses  on  the  Preliminaries 
of  Peace. — Sudden  and  unexpected  appearance  of  Mr.  Pitt. — Legge,  Fox, 
and  Beckford. — Prerogative. — Pitt's  Speech. — His  retirement  from  the 
House  when  Fox  rose  to  speak. — Speech  of  the  latter. — Charles  Town- 
shend's  versatility. — The  Minority  on  the  Division. — Exultation  of  the 
Princess  of  Wales  on  the  Preliminaries  being  carried. — Severe  political 
persecution. — Numerous  dismissals  from  place. 

The  rupture  between  the  Duke  of  Cumberland  and  Fox 
seemed  naturally  to  pave  the  way  for  a  connection 
between  that  Prince  and  Mr.  Pitt.  They  accordingly 
met,  and  had  a  conference  of  four  hours ;  but  there  their 
amity  commenced  and  ended.  The  good  sense  of  his 
Royal  Highness  could,  in  spite  of  all  his  haughtiness,  make 
him  bend  properly.  Pitt,  having  less  good  sense  than 
parts,  and  affecting  more  haughtiness  even  than  he  pos- 
sessed, and  being  full  of  schemes  rather  than  plans,  could 
not  be  brought  to  any  rational  system.  Meaning  to  make 
use  of  the  Prince  but  to  a  certain  degree, — that  is,  to 
thwart  the  Court,  or  to  give  it  jealousy,  not  to  erect  the 
Duke  as  head  of  a  party, — he  talked  in  his  usual  vague 
and  inconclusive  manner  ;  his  nearest  friends  having  often 
said,  that  between  the  uncommunicativeness  of  his  temper 
and  the  want  of  suite  in  his  reasoning  faculties,  it  was 
ever  impossible  to  pin  him  down  to  any  chain  of  definite 
propositions. 

This  the  Duke  experienced,  and  combated  in  vain.  All 
he  could  draw  from  Pitt  was  a  positive  demand  that  the 
peace  should  be  opposed  by  the  now  forming  party.  Yet 
would   he   not   submit   to   see  the  Duke  of  Newcastle  ; 


174  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

though,  in  his  lofty  style,  he  said  he  would  accept  of  the 
Duke  of  Cumberland's  guarantee  of  Newcastle's  fidelity. 
It  was  difficult  for  the  chiefs  to  coalesce  :  Lord  Hardwicke 
had  publicly  commended  the  preliminaries  ;  and  though 
he  had  rejected  large  offers  made  to  his  son,  Charles 
Yorke,  he  and  his  friends  knew  not  decently  how  to  fly  to 
Mr.  Pitt's  banner,  which  they  had  so  lately  levelled.  This 
want  of  union  in  the  Opposition  gave  all  the  remaining 
advantage  to  the  administration  that  they  yet  wanted. 
Mr.  Pitt  affected  to  be  a  chief  without  a  party,  and  the 
party  without  him  had  no  other  chief;  for  Newcastle  was 
worse  than  none,  and  the  Duke  of  Cumberland  had  too 
much  deference  for  the  Crown,  and  was  too  much  above 
courting  the  people,  to  be  fit  to  figure  as  a  ringleader. 

In  this  temper  of  things  did  the  Parliament  meet, 
November  25th.  Lord  Egmont  and  Lord  Weymouth  1 
moved  the  Address  in  the  Lords,  where  there  was  no 
opposition  :  Lord  Carysfort "-  and  Lord  Charles  Spencer 
in  the  Commons.  Nicholson  Calvert  made  a  warm  speech 
against  the  peace,  and  was  answered  by  Birt,  who  gave 
Mr.  Pitt  the  honour  of  the  first  plan  for  taking  Martinico. 
Beckford  was  yet  more  violent  against  the  treaty  ;  and 
compared  Florida,  which  was  to  be  ceded  to  us,  for  bar- 
renness to  Bagshot  Heath.  Charles  Townshend  made  a 
trimming  speech,  though  very  personal  against  Beckford, 
and  the  day  ended  without  a  division  ;  Mr.  Pitt  being 
confined  at  home  with  the  gout.  Without  doors  the  scene 
was  more  turbulent :  the  Favourite  was  assaulted  in  his 
chair  by  a  formidable  mob,  and  had  not  the  Guards 
arrived  opportunely,  would  hardly  have  escaped  with  life. 

On  the  30th  of  the  month  the  preliminaries  were  laid 
before  both  Houses,  who  were  acquainted  that  the  King 
had  ordered  them  to  be  printed  and  distributed  to  the 
members  on  the  morrow.     The  Duke  of  Grafton  in  the 

'  Thomas  Thynne,  Viscount  Weymouth,  afterwards  one  of  the  Secretaries 
of  State. 

2  Sir  John  Proby,  K.B.,  Lord  Carysfort  in  the  peerage  of  Ireland,  M.P. 
for  Huntingdonshire. — E. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  175 

Lords,  Calvert  and  Bamber  Gascoyne  in  the  Commons, 
objected  to  this  ;  it  being  usual  for  the  two  Houses  to 
give  the  orders  for  printing  papers  communicated  to  them  ; 
but  the  first  method  was  acquiesced  in,  and  the  Lords 
resolved  to  take  the  papers  into  consideration  on  the 
Thursday  sevennight  following.  Lord  Pomfret^  moved  to 
order  the  high  bailiff  of  Westminster  to  attend,  to  give  an 
account  why  he  had  taken  no  measures  to  disperse  the 
mob  on  the  first  day  of  the  session.  At  the  same  time 
the  ministers  endeavoured,  by  money  and  threats,  to 
silence  or  intimidate  the  printers  of  newspapers,  libels, 
and  satiric  prints,  and  succeeded  with  a  great  number. 

On  the  1st  of  December,  Calvert  moved  to  defer  con- 
sidering the  preliminaries  till  the  Thursday  sevennight 
following,  as  Mr.  Pitt  was  not  able  to  attend  ;  but  the 
ministers,  and  for  that  very  reason,  insisted  on  bringing 
them  on  upon  the  same  day  with  the  Lords,  and  carried 
their  motion  by  213  to  74  ;  so  unpromising  was  this  outset 
of  the  new  Opposition,  in  which  appeared  the  families  of 
Cavendish,  Fitzroy,  and  Townshend. 

The  memorable  day,  December  9th,  being  arrived,  both 
Houses  sat  on  the  preliminaries.  Lord  Shelburne  and 
Lord  Grosvenor  moved  to  approve  them.  The  Duke  of 
Grafton,  with  great  weight  and  greater  warmth,  attacked 
them  severely,  and,  looking  full  on  Lord  Bute,  imputed  to 
him  corruption  and  worse  arts.  The  Duke  was  answered 
by  the  Earl  of  Suffolk  ;  and  then  Lord  Temple  spoke 
with  less  than  usual  warmth.  The  P'avourite  rose  next, 
and  defended  himself  with  applause,  having  laid  aside 
much  of  his  former  pomp.  He  treated  the  Duke  of 
Grafton  as  a  juvenile  member,  whose  imputations  he 
despised  ;  and,  for  the  Peace,  he  desired  to  have  written 
on  his  tomb,  '  Here  lies  the  Earl  of  Bute,  who,  in  concert 

^  George  Fermor,  second  Earl  of  Pomfret,  brother-in-law  to  Earl  Gran- 
ville. He  was  clever,  and  a  ready  speaker  ;  but  so  hot,  headstrong,  and 
injudicious,  that  his  support  was  of  very  questionable  benefit  to  his  political 
friends.  Vide  an  amusing  anecdote  of  him  in  George  Selwyn  and  his  Con- 
temporaries, vol.  i.  p.  352. — L.  M. 


176  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

with  the  King's  ministers,  made  the  Peace.'  A  sentence 
often  re-echoed  with  the  ridicule  it  deserved,  and  more 
likely  to  be  engraven  on  his  monument  with  ignominy 
than  approbation.  The  Duke  of  Newcastle  and  Lord 
Hardwicke  censured  the  preliminaries,  which  the  latter 
said  were  worse  than  could  have  been  obtained  the  last 
year ;  and  he  reflected  on  the  assiduity  with  which  pre- 
rogative was  cried  up,  more  than  it  had  been  by  the  most 
ductile  Parliaments.  Henley  the  Chancellor  abused  them 
both  ;  but  the  fine  defence  of  the  treaty  was  made  by 
Lord  Mansfield,  which,  he  said,  though  he  had  concurred 
to  make,  he  should  still  retain  his  old  connections  and 
attachments  ;  a  promise  he  soon  violated,  with  as  little 
decency  as  his  late  friends  had  censured  prerogative.  At 
ten  at  night  the  preliminaries  were  approved  by  the  Lords 
without  a  division. 

But  it  was  the  other  House  on  which  expectation  hung. 
The  very  uncertainty  whether  Mr.  Pitt's  health  would 
allow  him  to  attend,  concurred  to  augment  the  impatience 
of  the  public  on  so  serious  a  crisis.  The  Court,  it  was 
true,  had  purchased  an  eft'ective  number  of  votes  to  ratify 
their  treaty ;  but,  could  Mr.  Pitt  appear,  he  might  so 
expose  the  negotiation,  and  give  breath  to  such  a  flame, 
that 'the  ministers  could  not  but  be  anxious  till  the  day 
was  decided,  and  they  knew  all  that  they  had  to 
apprehend  from  Mr.  Pitt.  Their  hopes  grew  brighter  as 
the  debate  began,  and  he  did  not  appear.  The  probability 
of  his  absence  augmented  as  Beckford  proposed  to  refer 
the  preliminaries  to  a  committee  of  the  whole  House;  a 
measure  that  seemed  calculated  to  gain  time,  and  that 
was  seconded  by  James  Grenville,  who  told  the  courtiers 
that  it  did  not  look  as  if  they  were  very  desirous  of  praise, 
so  eager  were  they  to  hurry  through  the  question.  The 
demand  was  opposed  by  Ellis,  Sir  Francis  Dashwood, 
and  Harris  of  Salisbury,  when  the  House  was  alarmed  by 
a  shout  from  without !  The  doors  opened,  and  at  the 
head  of  a  large  acclaiming  concourse  was  seen  Mr.  Pitt, 
borne  in  the  arms  of  his  servants,  who,  setting  him  down 


KING  GEORGE  III.  177 

within  the  bar,  he  crawled  by  the  help  of  a  crutch,  and 
with  the  assistance  of  some  few  friends,  to  his  seat ;  not 
without  the  sneers  of  some  of  Fox's  party.  In  truth, 
there  was  a  mixture  of  the  very  solemn  and  the  theatric 
in  this  apparition.  The  moment  was  so  well  timed,  the 
importance  of  the  man  and  his  services,  the  languor  of 
his  emaciated  countenance,  and  the  study  bestowed  on 
his  dress,  were  circumstances  that  struck  solemnity  into 
a  patriot  mind,  and  did  a  little  furnish  ridicule  to  the 
hardened  and  insensible.  He  was  dressed  in  black 
velvet,  his  legs  and  thighs  wrapped  in  flannel,  his  feet 
covered  with  buskins  of  black  cloth,  and  his  hands  with 
thick  gloves.  He  said  a  few  words  in  support  of  the 
motion  for  sending  the  preliminaries  to  a  committee  ;  not 
in  order  to  give  time  for  raising  animosities,  but  as  it  was 
for  the  dignity  of  the  King  and  the  country  to  weigh 
them  maturely.  Parts  of  the  treaty,  he  confessed,  were, 
beyond  his  expectation,  good  ;  but  his  mind  was  wounded 
by  what  regarded  our  trade  and  our  allies.  He  wished 
for  a  committee,  that  he  might  call  merchants  to  the  bar 
to  state  the  importance  of  what  we  were  to  keep,  of  what 
we  were  to  give  away.  He  would  be  convinced  we  were 
doing  right,  or  he  would  inflexibly  arraign.  Legge  said 
he  should  cavil  less  than  most  men,  but  could  not 
bestow  approbation  in  the  lump.  Fox  answered  as 
briefly,  that  nothing  could  ever  be  finished,  if  perfection 
was  insisted  on.  Beckford  replied  that  the  House  was 
as  insignificant  as  a  parliament  of  Paris,  if  treaties  were 
not  laid  before  them  for  advice,  but  only  for  approbation ; 
and  he  and  Calvert  laid  themselves  out  on  the  defence 
made  by  the  ministers,  that  it  was  the  King's  prerogative 
to  conclude  peace  or  war ;  and,  indeed,  no  occasion  was 
lost  of  sounding  high  any  branch  of  prerogative. 

The  Opposition  not  choosing  to  risk  a  division  on  the 
Committee,  Harris,  mentioned  above,  who  was  afterwards 
made  one  of  the  Lords  of  the  Treasury,  moved  roundly 
to  approve  the  preliminaries,  with  the  addition  of  words 
acknowledging  the  prerogative  in  question.  Had  the 
VOL.  I.  M 


178  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

treaty  been  glorious  or  salutary,  there  is  no  doubt  but  the 
prerogative  would  not  have  been  called  in  aid  ;  a  proof 
how  distinct  are  prerogative  and  the  welfare  of  the  nation. 
This  Harris^had  written  some  abstruse  books  on  language, 
and  possessed  a  good  share  of  reputation  within  a  certain 
sphere.  Lord  Ilchester  and  Fox  had  brought  him  forth, 
and  thought  to  make  him  a  man  of  business,  but  he  made 
only  a  very  pliant  courtier  and  wretched  orator ;  and  in 
the  end,  attaching  himself  to  George  Grenville,  closed 
with  all  his  arbitrary  measures,  and  fell  with  him,  with  no 
other  blemish  on  his  character  than  of  having  thought  too 
much  as  a  scholar,  and  too  little  as  a  senator.^  In  his 
motion  of  approbation  he  said,  '  Peace  was  not  made  for 
the  emolument  of  one  country,  but  of  many '  ;  a  truth  so 
home,  and  that  recoiled  so  forcibly  on  him,  that  it  was 
the  very  reason  why  this  country,  for  whose  emolument 
it  was  not  made,  ought  not  to  have  honoured  it  with  its 
acceptance. 

Stanley  spoke  well  and  handsomely  in  defence  of  the 
treaty ;  and  then  Mr.  Pitt  rose.  His  speech  it  would  be 
difficult  to  detail ;  it  lasted  three  hours  and  twenty-five 
minutes,  and  was  uttered  in  so  low  and  faint  a  voice  that 
it  was  almost  impossible  to  hear  him.  At  intervals  he 
obtained  the  permission  of  the  House  to  speak  sitting,  a 
permission  he  did  not  abuse ;  supporting  himself  with 
cordials,  and  having  the  appearance  of  a  man  determined 
to  die  in  that  cause  and  at  that  hour.  This  faintness  and 
the  prolixity  with  which  he  dwelt  on  the  article  of  the 
fisheries,  gave  a  handle  to  the  courtiers  to  represent  his 
speech  as  unmeasurably  dull,  tedious,  and  uninteresting. 
But  it  contained  considerable  matter,  much  reason,  and 
some  parts  of  great  beauty :  but  thunder  was  wanting  to 
blast  such  a  treaty,  and  this  was  not  a  day  on  which  his 
genius  thundered  !  His  health  or  his  choice  had  led  him 
to  present  himself  as  a  subject  of  affliction  to  his  country, 
and  his  ungrateful  country  was  not  afflicted. 

^  James  Harris,  M.  P.  for  Christchurch.     Author  of  Hermes,  and  father  of 
James,  first  Earl  of  Malmesbury. — E. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  179 

Some  passages  of  his  speech  I  shall  mention,  though, 
for  the  reasons  I  have  hinted  at,  and  for  that  I  sat  at  a 
great  distance,  I  could  but  very  imperfectly  collect  what 
he  said.  He  allowed  the  prerogative  of  the  Crown  in 
making  peace  or  war,  though  something  he  saw  squint 
at  what  would  subvert  the  liberties  of  this  country ;  and, 
though  such  prerogative  there  was,  still  was  it  gracious 
to  lay  the  treaty  before  Parliament.  The  Crown  might 
finally  sign  the  Treaty  ;  but  at  the  same  time  it  was  a 
fundamental  right  of  the  House  of  Commons  to  offer 
their  opinion.  If  this  was  not  the  question  confessed, 
he  would  stop  the  debate  to  insert  in  these  words,  as  it  is 
also  the  indubitable  and  fimdaniental  right  of  Parliament 
to  offer  advice.  From  this  he  launched  out  on  this 
venerable,  this  lovely  Constitution,  and  referred  to  the 
journals  to  show  what  answers  were  made  by  Parliament 
to  James  the  First  and  Charles  the  Second  ;  particularly 
to  the  unkingly  and  unconstitutional  messages  of  the 
former,  as  when  he  bade  them  not  meddle  beyond  their 
province,  with  a  ne  sutor  ultra  crepidain.  He  hoped  we 
had  no  new  cobbler  of  this  old  Constitution,  and  (looking 
at  Fox)  if  we  had,  that  man  should  not  stand  unaccused, 
unarraigned.  With  regard  to  the  peace,  it  could  not  be 
called  a  question  of  humanity,  for  one  campaign  more 
might  have  prevented  seven  hereafter.  In  all  other  wars 
our  commerce  had  been  interrupted  ;  in  this  alone, 
increased  ;  and  in  respect  of  commerce,  four  of  the  best 
provinces  in  old  France  were  not  worth  the  acquisitions 
we  had  made.  Those  France  might  have  reconquered  ; 
Guadaloupe  she  could  not  retake.  We  had  got  possession 
of  their  four  trades  of  the  world.  Thanks  to  God, 
General  Amherst  had  recovered  Newfoundland  !  Thanks 
to  Providence,  Amherst's  brother  had  behaved  like  his 
brother !  Thus  had  we  secured  two  of  those  trades,  the 
fisheries  and  the  sugar,  all  but  at  St.  Domingo,  and  that 
we  must  have  taken  the  next  campaign.  Our  conquests 
in  Africa  gave  us  the  Slave  Trade  ;  and  those  in  India 
the  exclusive   trade  of  the    Indies.      These  depe?ided  no 


i8o  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

longeron  the  chance  of  war !  He  believed  there  was  no 
disunion  between  France  and  Spain  ;  this  treaty  would 
manifestly  increase  their  weight :  the  Havannah  would 
add  to  it — the  Havannah  !  that  would  have  enabled  you 
to  supply  Spanish  America  with  British  manufactures 
and  implements  !  He  then  pronounced  the  preliminaries 
inadmissible ;  declared  he  had  thought  it  right  to  make 
peace  when  Mr.  Stanley  went  to  France,  and  had  been 
for  the  King  not  abusing  his  prosperity.  But  he  had 
pj'oved  that  France  was  not  in  earnest  then  ;  had  only 
meant  to  cajole  us,  and  deserved  no  management  from  us, 
after  forcing  us  to  the  expense  of  this  war,  particularly  by 
her  iniquitous  behaviour  in  the  two  Courts  of  Madrid  and 
Naples,  a  conduct  never  paralleled  in  the  unbridled 
behaviour  of  Louis  the  Fourteenth.  Yet  why  talk  of 
Naples,  which  was  Bourbon  weakness  coupled  with 
Bourbon  weakness !  Obstinate,  however,  as  himself  had 
been  in  pushing  forward  the  war  with  Spain,  he  supposed 
he  had  been  in  the  wrong,  as  nobody  had  joined  in 
sentiment  with  him  but  Lord  Temple.  They  two  were 
for  making  the  entire  maintenance  of  the  fisheries  the 
sine  qua  non  ;  but  all  the  rest  had  been  against  them, 
both  the  old  ministers  and  the  favoiired  minister  of  this 
King.  Soon  had  it  been  known  to  France  that  the 
exclusive  fisheries  would  not  be  made  a  sine  qua  non. 
He  had  not  thought  that  France  would  at  once  give  them 
up,  but  he  had  held  them  worth  trying  for  for  another 
campaign  or  two.  Before  the  death  of  the  Czarina — 
before  the  acquisition  of  Guadaloupe,  the  Havannah,  and 
Pondicherry — the  Due  de  Choiseul  had  asked  but  for  one 
rock  at  Newfoundland  ;  he  wished  he  had  made  his  stand 
there,  and  refused,  though  overwhelmed  with  most  illiberal 
calumny  and  scurrility  !  He  took  notice  of  the  thousands 
of  lives  thrown  away  at  the  Havannah  by  their  being 
sent  out  at  so  untimely  a  season,  when  the  work  might 
have  been  done  in  the  month  of  April  ;  but  he  had  retired 
first,  when  he  found  he  was  not  permitted  to  have  the 
least  weight.     Yes,  said  he  again,  the  French  had  cried 


KING  GEORGE  III.  i8i 

Donnez-nous  tin  rocker  swiplement.  I  replied,  I  did  not 
intend  to  give  them  the  garden  of  Eden.  But  what  they 
asked  for  their  bativients  pccheiirs  extended  to  much  more 
than  a  rock.  They  asked  for  fishing  vessels,  now  had 
been  given  them  a  fishery — en  toute  propriete,  in  full  right ; 
I  never  would  have  granted  it.  Then,  after  expatiating 
on  the  fisheries,  he  drew  attention  to  himself,  by  seeming 
to  bid  adieu  to  politics,  and  to  despair  of  his  own  health. 
He  might  never  come  to  the  House  again.  He  was 
unconnected,  followed  no  party,  respected  the  King's 
administration,  though  he  must  remonstrate  when  he  saw 
them  going  on  fatal  ground.  He  prayed  for  the  House 
of  Brunswick  ;  stood  on  revolution  principles  alone  against 
France  ;  had  a  deep-rooted  alienation  from  France  ;  acted 
on  the  spirit  of  King  William,  on  whose  maxims,  and  on 
the  maxims  on  which  they  came  thither,  the  House  of 
Brunswick  must  rest,  or  could  never  be  secure.  He  had 
seen  the  day  on  which  every  unsound  maxim  had  been 
disclaimed ;  now  saw  unhappy  clouds  darkening  our 
prospect  ;  wished  the  ministers  would  think  of  these 
important  matters  before  it  was  too  late ! 

He  then  went  through  the  points  to  be  ceded  in  America 
and  Africa  ;  and  declared  he  would  not  have  agreed  to 
any  terms  approaching  to  these  preliminaries.  He  in- 
veighed against  the  bad  faith  of  France,  and  showed  from 
their  losses  how  much  they  had  lain  at  our  mercy.  In 
the  campaign  of  Crevelt  alone  they  had  lost  forty  thou- 
sand men.  Every  year  had  cost  them  twenty  thousand 
more.  Would  you  still  treat  on  the  same  terms  you 
would  have  treated,  after  they  had  put  you  to  the  expense 
of  fourteen  additional  millions,  and  after  your  arms  had 
been  crowned  with  such  advantages?  It  could  not  be 
for  the  sake  of  Portugal  ;  for  you  had  been  told  from  the 
throne  that  a  stop  had  been  put  to  the  progress  of  the 
Spaniards  in  that  country.  We  must,  say  the  French, 
have  St.  Lucia,  for  cela  bonche  Martinique ;  is  that  a 
reason  to  be  given  to  a  British  Parliament?  France 
should  have   given  you   Guadaloupe,  or  she  and   Spain, 


i82  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

Hispaniola.  She  had  given  you  more  in  Canada  than 
she  knew  you  could  use,  and  more  than  he  had  contended 
for  ;  but  then  she  had  got  the  fisheries.  On  the  coast  of 
Bengal  we  should  never  have  suffered  her  to  come ;  yet 
did  she  affect  to  cede  all  her  conquests,  where  she  had 
made  none  ;  but,  alas !  no  nation  had  ever  lost  an  oppor- 
tunity so  happy,  so  almost  accomplished,  of  fixing  its 
ascendant  and  commerce  !  He  applauded  the  drawing  of 
the  article  of  Canada,  infinitely  better  executed  than  he 
could  have  done  it.  Spain,  too,  he  owned,  had  acknow- 
ledged our  right  of  cutting  logwood  as  fully  as  he  could 
find  any  authority  in  our  records  to  contend  for ;  but  the 
negotiators  had  not  been  equally  able  in  fixing  Spain  to 
acknowledge  our  right  of  fishery  in  Newfoundland.  Spain 
does  not  renounce  her  right  of  fishing  there,  but  desists. 
For  the  King  of  Prussia,  he  was  disavowed  !  given  up  1 
sacrificed  !  so  melancholy  was  the  effect  of  the  coldness 
that  was  grown  between  the  two  crowns  !  The  branches 
of  Bourbon  were  united  ;  we  and  our  allies  disunited ! 
He  had  seen  nothing  he  envied  in  French  councils  till 
now.  They  had  indulged  a  noble  delicacy  of  honour, 
and  obtained  everything  for  Spain  ;  nay,  had  treated 
Austria  with  punctilio.  We  did  not  so  remember  those 
who  had  served  us  !  The  moment  the  battle  of  Culloden 
should  be  forgotten,  this  country  would  be  undone !  We 
ought  to  have  made  a  family  compact  with  the  King  of 
Prussia. 

Stanley  said  a  few  words  on  his  own  part  in  the  negotia- 
tion ;  and  then  Mr.  Fox  rising  to  speak,  Pitt,  in  contempt, 
or  exhausted,  retired  out  of  the  House,  attended  by 
redoubled  huzzas  !  the  mob  re-echoing  the  duration  of  his 
speech,  'Three  hours  and  a  half!  three  hours  and  a  half!' 

The  secession  of  Pitt  struck  such  a  damp  on  Opposition, 
that  Fox  had  but  little  to  do  but  to  chant  Te  Dniui  for 
victory.  He  said  little,  very  little,  in  behalf  of  the  treaty, 
to  which  success  was  now  ensured.  He  rather  painted 
his  own  situation,  and  that  of  parties,  ranking  himself 
with  the  Whigs,  but  affecting  to  believe  a  general  union  of 


KING  GEORGE  III.  183 

all  factions  under  the  King.  He  had  been  called  out,  he 
said,  when  men  would  have  revived  those  distinctions,  and 
torn  the  Tories  from  the  support  of  the  Crown.  No  desire 
did  he  know  of  extending  prerogative ;  if  it  had  been 
exerted  unduly  in  signing  the  preliminaries,  ministers 
were  answerable  ;  but  he  vowed  to  God  he  did  not  know 
that  it  was  in  the  mind  of  any  man  to  enlarge  the  pre- 
rogative. Mr.  Pitt  had  thought  we  could  have  gone  on 
much  longer,  and  that  France  could  not  ;  he  himself 
thought  we  could  not  have  gone  on  much  longer :  but 
what  had  Mr.  Pitt  given  except  assertions  in  support  of 
his  persuasion  }  He  himself  had  been  told  that  our  com- 
merce was  declined.  If  England  would  apply  itself  to 
improve  this  peace,  it  would  turn  out  the  greatest  that 
ever  had  been  made. 

Charles  Townshend,  discontent,  expecting  much  severe 
animadversion  on  the  treaty,  and  dreading  to  differ 
with  Mr.  Pitt  when  the  latter  was  likely  to  exert  all  his 
powers,  had  come  to  the  House  prepared  to  arraign  the 
preliminaries.  Finding  his  mistake,  and  secure  by  the 
retreat  of  Pitt,  he  changed  his  battery,  defended  the  peace 
as  well  as  it  could  be  defended,  burned  incense  on  the 
altar  of  prerogative,  and  sang  almost  hosannahs  to  the 
praise  of  the  King.  It  happened  the  next  day  that 
Dempster,  commending  Mr.  Pitt,  and  calling  him  the 
arch-patriot,  Rigby  said,  Mr.  Pitt,  it  was  true,  had  spoken 
three  hours  and  a  half,  but  an  archer-patriot  had  said  more 
to  the  purpose  in  twenty-five  minutes. 

The  Duke  of  Newcastle  had  sent  to  his  friends  not  to 
divide  ;  on  which  they  retired.  This  not  being  known  to 
the  Duke  of  Cumberland,  his  adherents  stayed,  and  two 
of  his  own  servants,  Lord  Ancram  ^  and   General   Fitz- 

^  William  Henry  Kerr,  Earl  of  Ancram,  Lord  of  the  Bedchamber  to  the 
Duke,  and  M.  P.  for  Richmond.  He  acted  as  aide-de-camp  to  the  Duke  at 
Fontenoy,  where  he  was  severely  wounded,  and  commanded  the  cavalry  on 
the  left  wing  at  Culloden.  He  succeeded  his  father  as  fourth  Marquis  of 
Lothian  in  July  1767,  and  was  elected  a  Scotch  representative  peer  in  October 
of  the  following  year.  He  became  a  general  in  the  army  in  \T]o,  and  died 
on  I2th  April  1775,  aged  sixty-five. 


1 84  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

William/  were  in  the  minority — which  were  but  sixty-five 
against  three  hundred  and  nineteen.  The  Duke  was 
angry  that  his  people  had  been  left  alone :  on  which  it 
was  resolved  to  rally  on  the  Report,  but  with  no  better 
success ;  the  Court  were  still  two  hundred  and  twenty- 
seven  to  sixty-three,  Lord  Royston,  Lord  Hardwicke's 
son,  being  of  the  majority. 

Nothing  can  paint  the  importance  of  this  victory  to  the 
Court  so  strongly  as  what  the  Princess  of  Wales  said  on 
the  news  of  the  preliminaries  being  carried :  '  Now,'  said  she, 
'  my  son  is  King  of  England.'  The  ministers  ordered  that 
the  numbers  on  the  question  should  be  printed — had 
they  printed  the  names  too,  the  world  would  have  known 
the  names  of  the  sixty-five  that  were  7iot  bribed. 

Fox  having  thus  successfully  employed  rewards,  thought 
the  time  was  come  for  making  use  of  the  other  weapon  of 
government — punishment  A  more  severe  political  per- 
secution never  raged.  Whoever,  holding  a  place,  had  voted 
against  the  preliminaries,  was  instantly  dismissed.  The 
friends  2  and  dependants  of  the  Duke  of  Newcastle  were 
particularly  cashiered  ;  and  this  cruelty  was  extended  so 
far,  that  old  servants,  who  had  retired  and  been  preferred 
to  very  small  places,  were  rigorously  hunted  out  and  de- 
prived of  their  livelihood.  An  inquisition  was  held  at  Fox's 
house  ;  and  a  despotic  spirit  prevailed  so  rudely,  that  Lady 
Elizabeth  Waldegrave,^  sister  of  the  Duchess  of  Bedford, 

^  John  Fitzwilliam,  brother  of  the  Viscount  of  that  name.  [Groom  of 
the  Bedchamber  to  the  Duke,  and  M.P.  for  New  Windsor. — E.] 

2  If  there  was  any  hardship  in  this  step,  it  consisted  in  these  gentlemen  not 
having  received  previous  notice  from  Mr.  Fox  that  he  should  regard  opposition 
to  the  vote  in  the  light  of  such  direct  hostility  to  the  Government  as  would 
be  incompatible  with  the  tenure  of  office  under  it.  Previously,  there  appears 
to  have  been  no  settled  rule  as  to  the  claims  of  the  Government  on  the  support 
of  members  in  office.  Mr.  Pitt,  when  Paymaster,  not  only  voted  but  frequently 
spoke  against  the  Government.  It  would  now  be  considered  verj'  extraordinary 
in  any  member  of  the  administration,  however  subordinate,  to  vote  against  a 
Government  measure  without  a  previous  intimation  to  the  Premier  of  his 
readiness  to  resign. — L.  M. 

'  Fourth  daughter  of  John  Leveson,  first  Earl  (iower,  wife  of  General  John 
Waldegrave,  who  succeeded  his  brother  in  the  Earldom  of  Waldcgrave. 
[Lady  Elizabeth  was  the  fifth  daughter  of  Earl  Gower.  She  died  28th  April 
1784.-E.] 


KING  GEORGE  III.  185 

and  a  notable  politician,  desired  to  be  admitted  to  the 
junto  of  proscription. 

In  particular,  Mr.  Wilkinson^  and  Mr.  Earle^  were 
dismissed  from  the  Board  of  Ordnance  for  their  votes  ; 
as  was  the  younger  Thomas  Townshend  ^  from  the  green 
cloth,  without  the  smallest  notification.  Some  were  even 
sacrificed  who  had  given  no  offence,  as  the  worthy  Admiral 
Forbes,*  who  was  removed  from  the  Admiralty  to  make 
room  for  Cotes,  of  the  same  profession  and  a  friend  of  Fox. 
Schutz,  who  had  been  seven  years  of  the  King's  bed- 
chamber, was  turned  out,  for  no  reason  but  that  he  had 
not  a  seat  in  Parliament,  and  could  be  of  no  use  there.^ 

But  to  wind  up  the  year  with  more  dignified  rigour, 
the  Dukes  of  Newcastle  and  Grafton  and  the  Marquis  of 
Rockingham  were  dismissed  from  the  Lieutenancies  of 
their  several  counties.^  The  same  affront  being  designed 
for  the  Duke  of  Devonshire,  Fox  affected  to  make  a  point 
of  saving  him  ;  but  the  Duke,  with  proper  spirit,  scorned 
to  be  obliged  to  him,  and  resigned  to  accompany  his 
friends. 

^  Andrew  Wilkinson,  M.P.  for  Aldborough.  lie  was  re-appointed  Store- 
keeper of  the  Ordnance  in  1765. — E. 

^  Giles  Earle.  [This  is  a  mistake.  Giles  Earle  died  in  August  1758.  The 
Mr.  Earle  alluded  to  in  the  text  must  have  been  William  Rawlinson  Earle, 
M.P.  for  Newport  in  the  Isle  of  Wight,  and  Clerk  of  the  Ordnance.— E.] 

^  Eldest  son  of  Thomas,  one  of  the  Tellers  of  the  Exchequer,  second  son 
of  Charles,  Viscount  Townshend,  Secretary  of  State  to  George  I.  and  11. 

*  Younger  son  of  the  Earl  of  Granard. 

^  A  sufficient  reason  against  his  original  appointment,  but  a  bad  one  for 
his  dismissal.  Mr.  Schutz  was  very  rich,  having  succeeded  by  bequest  to  a 
large  estate  in  Essex,  from  Sir  J.  Tyrrel, — L.  M. 

s  This  certainly  was  a  very  harsh  proceeding.  No  Lord-Lieutenant  has 
since  been  dismissed  without  far  more  decided  provocation. — L.  M. 


i86  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 


CHAPTER   XVI 

Death  of  John,  Earl  Granville. — His  character. — Political  persecution 
originating  in  Fox. — Want  of  cordiality  in  the  Ministerial  League 
between  him  and  Bute. — Attack  on  Patent  Places. — Lord  Northington 
and  Sir  Fletcher  Norton. — The  Duke  of  Cumberland's  remark  on  the 
harsh  proceedings  of  Fox. — Triumph  of  the  Court. — Wilkes  and  Church- 
ill.— Favour  shown  to  the  friends  of  the  Stuarts. — Observance  of  the 
Jacobite  fast. — Calvert's  extraordinary  Speech. — Sir  John  Philipps' 
Motion  for  the  Accounts  of  the  Nation. — Folly  of  the  Tories. — Com- 
mittee to  inspect  Madhouses. — Accounts  of  the  Navy. — Calamities  of 
War. — No  famous  native  Generals  except  Wolfe  and  Lord  Clive. — Charles 
Townshend's  fickle  Politics. — The  Standing  Army. 

John,  Earl  Granville,  the  antagonist  of  one  Prime 
Minister,  Prime  Minister  himself,  and  then  assistant  to 
every  succeeding  Prime  Minister,  died  on  the  second  day 
of  the  new  year.  The  rhodomontadc,  to  which  he  was 
addicted,  was  set  off  by  parts  and  wit,  or  forgiven  to  his 
good-humour.  It  was  very  unlike  the  presumptuous 
ascendant  of  Pitt,  or  the  lofty  ignorance  of  Lord  Bute. 
Pitt,  unsociable  and  muffled  in  clouds,  was  adored  from 
the  terror  imprinted  by  his  lightnings.  Bute  thought 
distance  and  obscurity  sufficient  characteristics  of  divinity  ; 
but  Granville,  like  Bacchus,  rattled  his  car  among  men, 
and  was  but  the  more  admired  the  more  he  familiarized 
himself  with  mortals.  He  had  fallen  unpitied,  but  un- 
hatcd  :  and  sank  in  rank  without  sinking  in  esteem,  his 
fall  having  lessened  him  less  than  his  exaltation.  He 
seemed  so  proper  for  every  part,  that  in  him  it  did  not 
seem  mean  to  be  second,  after  commanding.^ 

^  Lord  Chesterfield's  brilliant  character  sketch  though  long,  must  be  in- 
serted here. 

'  Lord  Granville  had  great  parts  and  a  most  uncommon  share  of  learning 
for  a  man  of  quality.  He  was  one  of  the  best  speakers  in  the  House  of 
Lords,   both  in   the  declamatory  and  the  argumentative  way.     He  had  a 


KING  GEORGE  III.  187 

The  persecution,  set  on  foot  at  the  end  of  the  last  year, 
was  kept  up  with  unrelaxed  severity.^  A  place  of  ;£"200 
a  year  was  taken  from  Mr,  Legge's  nephew,^  a  boy  at 
school :  and  another  of  the  same  value  from  a  man  in 
Sussex,  who  had  been  rewarded  with  it  for  service  done 
against  an  inhuman  set  of  smugglers,  by  the  interest  of 
the  late  Duke  of  Grafton,  whom  Fox  had  hated.  In 
truth,  these  hardships  were  not  only  suggested  by  Fox, 
but  now  and  then  executed  without  the  knowledge  of  the 
Favourite,  who  often  disclaimed^   them,  and  sometimes, 

wonderful  quickness  and  precision  in  seizing  the  stress  of  a  question,  which 
no  art,  no  sophistry,  could  disguise  to  him.  In  business  he  was  bold,  enter- 
prising, and  overbearing.  He  had  been  bred  up  in  high  monarchical,  that 
is,  tyrannical  principles  of  government,  which  his  ardent  and  imperious 
^temper  made  him  think  were  the  only  rational  and  practical  ones.  He 
would  have  been  a  great  first  minister  in  France,  little  inferior,  perhaps, 
to  Richelieu  ;  in  this  government,  which  is  yet  free,  he  would  have  been 
a  dangerous  one,  little  less  so,  perhaps,  than  Lord  Strafford.  He  was 
neither  ill-natured  nor  vindictive,  and  had  a  great  contempt  for  money  ;  his 
ideas  were  all  above  it.  In  social  life  he  was  an  agreeable,  good-humoured, 
and  instructive  companion,  a  great  but  entertaining  talker. 

'  He  degraded  himself  by  the  vice  of  drinking,  which,  together  with  a 
great  stock  of  Greek  and  Latin,  he  brought  away  with  him  from  Oxford, 
and  practised  ever  afterwards.  By  his  own  industry  he  had  made  himself 
master  of  all  the  modern  languages,  and  had  acquired  a  great  knowledge  of 
the  law.  His  political  knowledge  of  the  interest  of  princes  and  of  commerce 
was  extensive,  and  his  notions  were  just  and  great.  His  character  may  be 
summed  up  in  nice  precision,  quick  decision,  and  overbearing  presumption.' 
— Chesterfield's  Letters,  1845,  vol.  ii.  p.  456. — E. 

^  This  persecution  is  inexcusable,  and  very  unlike  Mr.  Fox,  who  was  a 
very  good-humoured  man. — L.  M. 

^  Son  of  Heneage  Legge,  one  of  the  Barons  of  the  Exchequer. 

^  I  shall  give  two  instances  of  my  assertions.  Sir  William  Milner  held  a 
place  of  about  ;^2000  a  year  in  the  Custom  House,  the  greater  portion  of 
which  had  been  allotted  to  his  wife's  aunt,  Mrs.  Poyntz,*  as  a  jointure  on 
the  death  of  her  husband,  who  had  been  Governor  to  the  Duke  of  Cumber- 
land. This  was  now  taken  away,  and  bestowed  by  Lord  Bute  on  Mr. 
Poole,  to  make  him  amends  for  the  ravage  made  on  his  family  t  in  this  new 
persecution ;  Lord  Bute  intending  at  the  same  time  to  reserve  ;^6oo  a  year 
out  of  it  for  Mrs.  Poyntz.  Lord  Spencer,  who  had  married  her  daughter, 
wrote  to  the  King  representing  the  case,  and  begging  his  protection  for  Mrs. 
Poyntz.     The  petition  concluded  with  telling  the  King  that  this  application 

*  Anna  Maria  Mordaunt,  Maid  of  Honour  to  Queen  Caroline,  and  widow  of  Stephen 
Poyntz.  She  had  been  a  great  beauty  ;  the  poem  of  The  Fair  Circassian  was  written  by 
a  gentleman  who  was  in  love  with  her. 

t  Sir  Francis  Poole,  related  to  the  Duke  of  Newcastle,  had  been  turned  out,  with  others 
of  the  same  connection. 


1 88  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

to  load  his  associate,  made  recompense  to  the  parties 
aggrieved  ;  for  though  they  became  heartier  friends  after- 
wards, and  though  the  Favourite  bore  testimony,  in  a 
subsequent  period,  that  Fox  was  the  only  man  who  had 
not  deceived  him,  it  is  pretty  sure  that  their  ministerial 
league  was  far  from  cordial  ;  not  quite  sure  that  Bute  did 
not  deceive  Fox ;  and  certain  that  the  King  betrayed 
symptoms  of  satisfaction  on  hearing  that  the  blame 
of  all  this  violence  fell  on  Fox. 

He  had  meditated  going  still  greater  lengths.  Lord 
Lincoln,  whom  he  particularly  hated,  was  Auditor  of  the 
Exchequer  for  life,  the  amplest  sinecure  in  England, 
except  the  Archbishoprick  of  Canterbury.  Some  other 
great  patent-places  were  held  by  men  then  in  Opposition. 
Fox  himself  enjoyed  a  very  considerable  one  in  Ireland  ; 
yet  so  much  did  his  thirst  of  vengeance  surmount  his 
interest,   that   a   question    was    put   to    the    Chancellor, 

was  made  to  him,  because  probably  his  Majesty  would  hear  of  the  grievance 
no  other  way.  On  this  the  whole  was  stopped  ;  but  that  Fox  might  bear  all 
the  odium,  and  Lord  Bute  have  all  the  merit,  the  latter  sent  a  message  by 
Lord  Ancram  to  the  Duke  of  Cumberland,*  to  say,  that  if  his  Royal  High- 
ness would  take  it  as  a  favour,  the  King  would  continue  the  pension  to  Mrs. 
Poyntz  ;  and  it  was  accepted. 

The  other  was  the  case  of  Mrs.  Cavendish,  widow  of  an  Admiral  of  that 
name.  She  had  for  many  years  enjoyed  a  housekeeper's  place  in  one  of  the 
offices,  in  lieu  of  a  pension  as  an  Admiral's  widow.  Fox,  hunting  after 
employments  for  his  dependants  and  objects  of  vengeance  for  himself,  light- 
ing on  the  name  of  a  Cavendish,  took  away  her  place.  The  lady  of  a  respect- 
able family,  and  sister  of  Mrs.  Cartwright,  Maid  of  Honour  to  the  late 
Queen,  sent  the  latter  to  Lady  Suffolk, t  from  whom  I  heard  this  account, 
immediately  to  entreat  by  her  means  an  audience  of  Lady  Elizabeth 
Mackenzie.^  Mrs.  Cavendish  herself,  living  in  devotion  and  unknown  to, 
proved  to  be  a  relation  of  Lady  Bute  ;  to  whom  Lady  Elizabeth  Mackenzie 
had  instantly  applied.  Lady  Bute,  no  less  surprised,  sent  for  her  lord  up 
stairs.  He  said  the  story  could  not  be  true  :  it  was  one  Mrs.  Greening  that 
was  displaced,  to  make  room  for  Mrs.  Goldsworthy,  a  companion  of  the 
late  Duchess  of  Richmond. §  It  proved  that  Fox  had  thus  imposed  on  Lord 
Bute,  to  whom  the  name  of  Mrs.  Cavendish  had  never  been  mentioned,  and 
who  gave  her  immediate  redress. 

*  Eldest  son  of  the  Marquis  of  Lothian,  and  Groom  of  the  Bedchamber  to  the  Duke. 
t  Henrietta  Hobart,  Countess  of  Suffolk,  Mistress  of  the  Robes  to  Queen  Caroline, 
t  Wife  of  James  Stuart  Mackenzie,  brother  of  the  Earl  of  Bute. 
§  Sarah  Cadogan,  Duchess  of  Richmond,  mother  of  Lady  Caroline  Fox. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  189 

whether  the  King  could  not  take  away  patents  bestowed 
in  former  reigns,  and  whether  the  case  might  not  be  laid 
before  the  twelve  Judges.  The  Chancellor,  who  had  fits  of 
bluntness  and  honesty,  or  prophetically  affectionate  to 
grants  for  life,  so  profusely  heaped  on  him  afterwards, 
replied,  '  Yes,  they  might  lay  the  idea  before  the  Judges, 
and  then  refer  Magna  Charta  to  them  afterwards,  to 
decide  on  that  too.'  Norton,  Solicitor  General,  as  bold 
and  as  blunt,  but  never  as  honest  as  Lord  Northington, 
being  consulted  to  the  same  point,  advised  to  take  away  the 
places,  and  then  see  if  the  law  would  restore  them.  This 
man  now  rose  from  obscure  infamy  to  that  infamous 
fame  which  long  will  stick  to  him.  It  was  known  that 
in  private  causes  he  took  money  from  both  parties,  and 
availed  himself  against  one  or  other  of  them  of  the  lights 
they  had  communicated  to  him.^  Yet  his  abilities  were 
so  good,  and  his  knowledge  so  great,  that  no  man  had 
more  extensive  practice  in  Westminster  Hall.  In  Parlia- 
ment he  had  for  some  years  been  disregarded  ;  but  his 
foul  tongue  and  causidical  boldness,  his  clearness  in 
argument  or  facility  in  assertion,  his  attachment  to  Lord 
Mansfield,  and  his  total  alienation  from  all  principle, 
offered  him  as  a  proper  tool  to  a  Court  that  was  to  wade 

^  The  same  charge  is  brought  against  Sir  Fletcher  Norton  by  Junius 
(Letter  39),  who  applies  to  him  the  lines  of  Ben  Jonson,  describing  the 
lawyer  who, 

Gives  forked  counsel  ;  takes  provoking  gold 
On  either  hand,  and  puts  it  up  ; 
So  wise,  so  grave,  of  so  perplexed  a  tongue. 
And  loud  withal,  that  would  not  wag,  nor  scarce 
Lie  still,  without  afee. 

Though  Norton  had  the  character  at  the  bar  of  being  the  reverse  of  a 
liberal  practitioner,  it  is  very  improbable  that  Walpole's  assertion,  '  that  he 
took  money  from  both  parties '  in  a  suit,  should  be  literally  correct.  He  had 
too  many  rivals  as  well  as  enemies  in  the  profession  to  admit  of  such  conduct 
remaining  unpunished  ;  but  it  is  not  uncommon  for  a  counsel  to  feel  himself 
bound  in  honour  to  refuse  a  brief  which  he  could  not  accept  without  using 
knowledge  acquired  while  employed  by  parties  who  had  a  different  interest 
until  he  has  given  those  parties  the  option  of  employing  him  again ;  and 
Norton's  eagerness  for  gain  made  him  take  a  very  narrow  view  of  such 
questions. — L.  M. 


iQo  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 


through  the  letter  of  the  law  to  the  demolition  of  the 
spirit.  Yet  his  authority  alone  could  not  encourage  such 
a  violation  of  justice  as  had  now  been  in  agitation.  The 
Favourite,  too,  and  the  Favourite's  favourites,  might  think 
it  more  eligible  to  leave  patent-places  unmolested  ;  they 
must  have  coveted  them  more  than  they  could  wish,  to 
render  them  precarious. 

The  Duke  of  Cumberland,  on  these  harsh  proceedings, 
said  to  Lord  Waldegrave  :  '  Fox  has  deceived  me  grossly 
— not,  as  you  think,  by  giving  me  up ;  he  might  be  as 
angry  with  me  for  talking  to  Newcastle  and  Pitt — but  he 
has  deceived  me,  for  I  thought  him  good-natured  ;  but  in 
all  these  transactions  he  has  shown  the  bitterest  revenge 
and  inhumanity.' 

When  the  Houses  met  after  Christmas,  the  Court  was 
so  thoroughly  the  master,  that  scarce  an  attempt  was  made 
at  opposition.  Yet  Wilkes  and  Churchill  wrote  with  as 
much  intemperance  as  if  the  nation  had  been  overspread 
with  the  flame  of  faction.  The  latter  now  published  his 
PropJiecy  of  Famine,  one  of  the  severest  and  least  irregular 
of  his  works.  Their  poems  and  libels  seemed  to  have 
little  effect,  but  the  seeds  sown  by  them  took  deep  root. 
Nor  did  the  Court  trouble  itself  to  deny  what  was  charged 
on  it.  The  measures  of  the  House  of  Stuart  were  so 
thoroughly  copied,  that  even  the  rankest  friends  of  that 
family  were  adopted  at  St.  James's.  Sir  John  Philipps 
himself  was  made  a  privy  counsellor. 

It  happened  that  Lord  Strange,^  moving  a  common 
adjournment  to  the  following  Monday,  the  Speaker  said 
the  House  must  adjourn  till  Tuesday,  for  Monday  would 
be  the  30th  of  January.  Lord  Strange  laughed  at  such 
a  Saint's  day,  and  divided  the  House,  but  found  only 
thirty-six  persons  of  his  opinion  ;  one  hundred  and  three 
were  for  observing  the  ridiculous  fast.  Fox  was  of  the 
majority,  who,  very  few  years  before,  had  been  for  putting 
an  end  to  that  Jacobite  holiday — a  clear  indication  of  the 
principles  of  the  new  Court.     Lord  Strange  causing  that 

^  Only  son  of  the  Earl  of  Derby,  and  Chancellor  of  the  Duchy  of  Lancaster. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  191 

part  of  the  Act  of  Parliament,  which  ordains  observance 
of  the  day,  to  be  read,  and  affirming  that  the  words, 
Neither  Parliament  nor  People  can  pidge  the  Kiftg,  were 
contrary  to  the  constitution  ;  Fox  denied  it,  and  main- 
tained that  the  constitution  had  always  held  that  language. 
Rose  Fuller  and  Lord  Strange  moved,  another  day,  to 
abolish  the  observation  of  the  pretended  martyrdom,  but 
it  was  overruled  by  the  House  ;  however,  it  produced  a 
very  bold  and  extraordinary  speech  from  Calvert ;  he 
drew  a  picture  of  a  fictitious  family  in  Surrey,  whom  he 
called  the  Steadys,  describing  two  old  Steadys  and  a  young 
one ;  with  a  very  particular  account  of  young  Steady's 
mother,  and  of  her  improper  intimacy  with  a  Scotch 
gardener — he  hoped  the  true  friends  of  young  Steady 
would  advise  him  to  recall  his  old  friends,  and  turn  away 
the  Scotch  gardener.  No  reply  was  made,  for  none  could 
be  made,  without  carrying  the  application  too  home. 

Most  of  the  other  transactions  of  this  session  were  as 
trifling,  and  deserve  but  little  notice.  Sir  John  Philipps, 
to  preserve  a  semblance  of  patriotism,  or  instigated  by 
Bute  to  intimidate  Newcastle,  moved  for  the  accounts  of 
the  nation.  Fox,  who  did  not  like  any  clue  that  might 
lead  to  the  mysteries  of  the  pay-office,  opposed  it  ;  and 
Lord  Granby,  though  sold  to  the  Court,  warmly  defended 
the  Duke  of  Newcastle's  integrity.  Legge  objected  too, 
and  said  he  saw  no  end  such  a  motion  tended  to  ;  it  was 
like  asking  a  country  fellow  the  way — he  always  asks  you 
whence  you  came!  Aislabie^  reflected  on  Fox  for  not 
passing  his  accounts,  and  the  attack  was  received  with 
loud  marks  of  approbation  ;  but  when  neither  the  late 
nor  actual  ministers  encouraged  the  inquiry,  it  was  not 
likely  to  be  very  successful.  Sir  John  Philipps  accord- 
ingly desisted,  and  Sir  Francis  Dashwood  proposed  to 
name  a  select  committee  to  examine  any  accounts  that 
had  been  brought  in,  which  was  agreed  to ;  and  lists  were 
given  out,  from  whence  an  equal  number  being  chosen  of 

^  William  Aislabie,  Auditor  of  the  Imprest,  sou  of  Mr.  Aislabie,  who  was 
concerned  in  the  South  Sea  Scheme  in  the  reign  of  George  i. 


192  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

the  Court's  and  of  Newcastle's  friends,  no  more  came  of 
this  than  of  twenty  such  intended  inquiries.  Nor  was 
anything  memorable  in  the  outset,  but  that  the  Tories, 
meeting  in  a  body  to  consider  the  proposed  lists,  erased 
the  names  of  Fox's  four  chief  friends  ;  still,  so  blind  were 
those  dull  men  to  their  real  interest,  and  still  so  much 
addicted  to  be  led  by  mere  names,  they  even  objected  to 
the  large  army  proposed  to  be  maintained ;  proof  that 
they  had  not  one  sensible  man  of  their  body.  What 
should  a  large  army  achieve  but  the  work  of  monarchy  ? 
or  say  the  Tories  were  honest  men  and  lovers  of  liberty  ? 
Could  they  love  liberty  and  slavery  both }  or  did  they 
call  themselves  by  a  disgraceful  name  when  they  deserved 
to  wear  an  honourable  one?  In  truth,  all  the  sensible 
Tories  I  ever  knew  were  either  Jacobites  or  became 
Whigs  ;  those  that  remained  Tories  remained  fools. 

A  scheme  more  laudable,  more  necessary,  and  founded 
on  a  crying  evil,  met  with  no  fairer  success  than  the 
committee  of  accounts.  I  mean  the  committee  to  inspect 
and  redress  the  grievous  abuses  of  madhouses.^  Charles 
Townshend  took  great  pains  in  that  business,  distinguished 
himself,  was  content,  and  dropped  it.  The  lawyers  raised 
many  objections,  and  removed  none.  Poor  humanity ! 
how  ill  art  thou  treated  by  the  human  race !  We  fire 
at  the  relation  of  calamities,  denounce  vengeance  on  the 
perpetrators,  cry  out  for,  set  about  reformation,  and  in 
England,  give  us  our  due,  lavish  our  money  towards  it ; 
then  grow  cool,  and  never  think  of  the  woe  afterwards. 
Lawyers  never  suffer  correction  of  abuses  ;  they  defend 
them  even  where  they  do  not  commit  them. 

When  the  accounts  of  the  navy  were  brought  into  the 
House,  it  appeared  that  one  hundred  and  eighty-four 
thousand  seamen  had  been  raised  during  the  war.  Of 
these,  one  hundred  and  thirty  thousand  had  been  lost  to 

^  The  Report  of  the  Committee  is  given  in  the  Parliamentary  Debates,  vol. 
XV.  1283.  It  is  a  very  interesting  document,  but  the  only  fruit  of  it  was  a 
Resolution,  '  That  it  is  the  opinion  of  the  House  that  the  present  state  of 
the  madhouses  in  this  kingdom  requires  the  interposition  of  the  Legislature.' 
— L.  M. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  193 

the  nation  ;  and  yet,  scarce  will  it  be  believed,  sixteen 
hundred  only  had  been  killed !  ^  Many  had  deserted, 
and  had  enlisted  again  ;  others  went  into  other  services. 
Most  of  the  rest  died  of  distempers,  climates,  hardships, 
etc.  But  with  the  loss  of  sixteen  hundred  men  we  had 
destroyed  the  navies  of  France  and  Spain.  Glorious  con- 
sideration !  could  it  be  unmixed  with  the  remembrance 
of  the  other  hundred  and  twenty-eight  thousand  !  But 
glory  must  shed  more  tears  of  anguish  than  of  joy,  when- 
ever she  turns  accomptant.  What  if  returns  were  made 
of  all  the  other  lives  lost  in  that  war  all  over  the  face  of 
the  globe !  What  did  the  peasants  in  Germany  suffer  ? 
even  heroism  had  its  pangs.  Did  not  the  King  of  Prussia 
see  every  general  with  whom  he  commenced  that  short 
war  perish  before  his  eyes  ?  I  said  he  felt  a  pang — I 
hope  he  did.  It  is  an  observation  a  little  foreign  to  the 
reflection  with  which  I  set  out,  but  extensively  victorious 
as  that  war  was  to  Britain,  she  did  not  see  one  famous 
native  general  arise  out  of  that  war,  except  Wolfe,  who 
died  in  the  cradle  of  his  celebrity ;  and  unless  we  name 
Lord  Clive,  who  was  more  a  statesman  than  general,  and 
in  both  respects  not  matched  against  equal  rivals.  I  do 
not  mean  to  detract  from  his  merits  ;  he  was  born  to 
shine  in  the  Indies  :  at  home  he  never  stepped  beyond 
the  common  of  mankind. 

Charles  Townshend,  who  had  but  just  resigned,  and 
who  had  no  sooner  resigned  than  he  opposed  the  opposi- 
tion, perceiving  the  weakness  of  that  opposition,  that  Pitt 
would  not  lead  it,  and  afraid  to  lead  it  himself,  struck  in 
again  with  the  tide,  and  at  the  end  of  February  kissed 
hands  for  first  Lord  of  Trade,  with  a  nominal  rank  of 
Cabinet  Counsellor,  but  without  being  permitted  to  go 
in  to  the  King  with  state  papers,  except  with  those  relat- 
ing to  the  Board  of  Trade.  He  had  boasted  of  far  greater 
offers.  Lord  Sandys  was  removed  to  make  room  for  him. 
A  promiscuous  meeting  being  held  at  Sir  Francis  Dash- 
wood's,  to  consider  what  proportion  of  army  should  be 

^  This  does  not  include  those  who  died  of  their  wounds. 
VOL.  T.  N 


194  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

kept  up,  Ellis,  Secretary  at  War,  proposed  eighteen  thou- 
sand men  for  England,  ten  for  America,  and  the  usual 
twelve  thousand  for  Ireland  ;  but  hinted  at  raising  six 
thousand  more  for  the  latter  kingdom  ;  which  Fox  said 
the  King  desired.  Sir  Charles  Mordaunt,  a  chief  Tory, 
said  he  had  great  duty  for  the  King,  but  could  not  consent 
to  that  augmentation.  Charles  Townshend  seconded  his 
refusal,  and  it  was  given  up. 

Lord  Strange  said  the  King  must  know  what  force  was 
wanting,  and  if  necessary  it  must  be  granted  ;  but  if  the 
King  would  give  it  up,  it  showed  it  was  not  necessary  ; 
and  tiierefore  himself  should  be  for  the  lesser  number. 
Sir  John  Philipps,  Lord  George  Sackville,  and  Rigby, 
tried  in  Parliament  to  obtain  the  additional  six  thousand, 
but  could  not  carry  the  point,  though  they  endeavoured 
to  prove  that  the  King  was  not  limited  by  the  Act  of 
King  William  to  but  twelve  thousand  men  in  Ireland. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  195 


CHAPTER    XVII 

Mr.  Pitt's  opinion  on  the  Army  Reductions. — Address  to  the  King. — Symp- 
toms of  disunion  among  Ministers. — Fox's  rage. — Apprehensive  of 
treachery,  he  seeks  to  propitiate  his  old  connections. — Sir  Francis  Dash- 
wood's  Budget. — Tax  on  Cider. — Discussion  on  Ways  and  Means. — 
Pitt  and  George  Grenville. — Ardent  opposition  to  the  Cider  Tax. — Petition 
from  Newfoundland. — Humiliation  of  Fox. — Debate  in  the  House  of 
Lords  on  the  Cider  Bill. — Passing  of  the  Bill. — Lord  Bute's  alarm. — 
His  resignation. — Its  effect  on  Fox. — George  Grenville  first  Lord  of  the 
Treasury  and  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer. — Removal  of  Sir  Francis 
Dashwood. — Ministerial  changes  and  promotions. 

When  the  day  came  for  voting  the  army,  Mr.  Pitt 
attended.  He  approved  the  measure,  he  said,  as  far  as  it 
went,  but  wished  more  troops  were  allotted  to  America. 
That  he  had  a  very  different  opinion  from  many  of  the 
peace ;  thought  it  hollow  and  insecure,  and  that  it  ivojild 
not  last  ten  years.  He  showed  no  acrimony  to  Fox,  he 
and  Lord  Temple  both  seeming  more  hostile  to  Lord 
Bute ;  but  he  dropped,  that  if  anybody  would  point  out 
the  right  way  to  inquire  what  was  the  cause  of  so  many 
dismissions,  he  would  second  the  motion.  Beckford  hav- 
ing wished  the  army  more  reduced,  Pitt  said  such  reduc- 
tions had  hurt  us  formerly.  After  the  peace  of  Ryswick 
the  army  was  lessened  to  seven  thousand  ;  but  war  fol- 
lowed in  three  years.  After  the  treaty  of  Utrecht  but 
eight  thousand  men  were  kept  up,  but  that  reduction 
produced  a  rebellion  and  an  army  of  fifteen  thousand. 
Charles  Townshend,  dreading  the  lash  of  Pitt  on  his  late 
inconsistencies,  retired  early  in  the  debate  ;  but  the  Gen- 
eral, his  brother,  just  arrived  from  Portugal,  v/as  lavish 
in  encomiums  on  the  peace  and  peace-makers. 


196  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

In  a  few  days  after,  Beckford,  seconded  by  Pitt,  moved 
to  address  the  King  to  prefer  officers  on  half-pay  to  those 
whose  commissions  were  fresher  ;  and  though  Fox  and 
the  ministers  objected,  it  was  suffered  to  pass.  Sir  Henry 
Erskinc  in  the  course  of  the  debate  frequently  sounding 
the  King's  name,  Mr.  Pitt  severely  reprimanded  the 
Speaker  for  not  stopping  him. 

In  the  progress  of  these  debates,  it  was  observed  that 
at  least  the  Favourite's  faction,  if  not  himself,  were  hostile 
to  Fox.  On  the  committee  of  accounts,  Elliot  and  Lord 
North  had  been  so  personal  to  him,  that  he  lost  his 
temper  ;  and  Beckford  desiring  him  to  save  appearances, 
he  replied,  he  never  minded  appearances,  but — he  was 
going  to  say,  realities,  when  a  loud  burst  of  laughter  from 
the  whole  House  interrupted  him.  His  rage  was  so  great, 
that,  sitting  down,  he  said  to  Onslow,^  though  an  enemy, 
'  Did  you  ever  see  a  man  so  treated  in  my  situation  ?  but, 
by  G — ,  I  will  have  an  explanation  and  ample  submission, 
or  I  will  never  set  my  foot  in  this  House  again.'  Another 
symptom  of  disunion  was,  that  Lord  Ravensworth-  having 
moved  for  the  whole  accounts  of  the  war.  Lord  Hardwicke 
said  it  was  impossible  to  produce  them  yet  ;  the  pay- 
master had  a  deputy  abroad  who  could  not  have  made 
them  up.  This  being  understood  as  a  reflection  on  Fox, 
Lord  Hardwicke  said,  on  the  contrary,  he  had  meant  to 
vindicate  him.  Lord  Talbot  concurred  with  this  explana- 
tion :  adding,  '  Nobody  can  imagine  that  /want  to  screen 
Mr.  Fox  ' ;  an  expression  warmly  taken  up  by  Lord  Hils- 
borough,  one  of  Fox's  friends. 

If  Lord  Bute  countenanced  these  hostilities,  it  was  but 
consonant  to  the  folly  of  his  character.  Fox  had  boldness 
and  wickedness  enough  to  undertake  whatever  the  Court 
wished  to  compass.  Fox  seemed  so  apprehensive  of 
treachery,  that  he  cast  about  to  recover  his  old  connec- 

^  George  Onslow,  only  son  of  the  late  Speaker. 

-  Sir  Henry  Liddell,  Lord  Ravensworth,  father  of  the  Duchess  of  Grafton, 
a  connection  to  which  he  probably  owed  the  favourable  notice  of  him  in  the 
author's  Memoirs  of  George  //.  (1847),  vol.  i.  p.  303.— L.  M. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  197 

tions.  By  Lord  Albemarle,  Lord  Frederic  Cavendish/ 
and  Lord  Waldegrave,  he  laboured  to  be  reconciled  to 
the  Duke  of  Cumberland  and  the  Duke  of  Devonshire. 
He  asked  Lord  Waldegrave  if  the  former  was  still  in- 
censed against  him.  The  other  replied,  he  had  not  heard 
the  Duke  mention  him  of  late,  but  supposed  his  Royal 
Highness  could  not  be  ignorant  how  much  he  had  been 
abused  by  Murphy,  known  to  write  under  Fox's  direction. 
'  Formerly  he  did  so,'  said  Fox,  '  but  I  had  not  seen  him 
in  a  year  and  a  half,  till  hearhig  how  violent  the 
"  Auditors  "  were,  I  sent  for  him  and  stopped  them  ' — an 
excuse  too  \ve3kf0r  a  sensible  man  to  make  to  a  sensible 
man  through  a  sensible  man.  Lord  Waldegrave  suspected 
that  Fox's  views  went  deeper  than  reconciliation  ;  for 
shortly  after  this  conversation  Rigby  came  to  the  Earl, 
and  sounded  him  whether  he  would  not  take  the  Treasury, 
Lord  Bute,  he  said,  not  being  able  to  stand  his  ground. 
As  Lord  Waldegrave  had  married  my  niece,^  I  knew  all 
these  intrigues  from  him,  and  was  actually  in  his  house 
at  the  time  of  this  overture,  of  which  he  immediately  told 
me  with  an  expressive  smile,  which  in  him,  who  never 
uttered  a  bitter  word,  conveyed  the  essence  of  sense  and 
satire. 

We  must  now  quit  Fox,  to  make  room  for  a  doughty 
hero  of  more  comic  cast,  the  Chancellor  of  the  Ex- 
chequer.^ Hitherto  he  had  but  just  acted  enough  as 
minister,  to  show  that  he  neither  was  one  nor  was  fit  to  be 
one.  The  time  was  now  come  for  opening  the  budget, 
when  it  was  incumbent  on  him  to  state  the  finances,  debts, 
and  calls  of  Government ;  and  to  chalk  out  a  plan  of 
proper  supplies.  All  this  he  performed  so  awkwardly, 
with  so  little  intelligence  or  clearness,  in  so  vulgar  a  tone, 
and  in  such  mean  language,  that  he,  who  had  been 
esteemed  a  plain  country  gentleman  of  good  sense,  said, 

^  A  Lord  of  the  Bedchamber  to  the  Duke  of  Cumberland  and  a  brother  of 
William,  fourth  Duke  of  Devonshire.     See  infra. — E. 
'^  Maria,  second  daughter  of  Sir  Edward  Walpole. 
^  Sir  Francis  Dashwood. 


198  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

himself  afterwards,  '  People  will  point  at  me,  and  cry, 
There  goes  the  zvorst  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer  that  ever 
appeared !'  His  famous  measure  was  the  tax  on  cider  ;  and 
whoever  would  know  more  of  his  ability  in  conducting 
that  business,  will  find  it  amply  detailed  in  the  North 
Britons  ;  a  coarse  and  satiric  picture,  yet  but  little  ex- 
aggerated. The  tax  itself  deserves  far  more  than  the 
author  of  it  to  live  in  the  memory  of  English  history,  for 
the  crisis  it  occasioned  or  drove  on. 

In  the  discussion  of  these  ways  and  means,  George 
Grenville  complained  that  men  objected  to  laying  bur- 
thens on  the  sinking  fund,  and  called  rather  for  new  taxes. 
He  wished  gentlemen  would  show  him  where  to  lay  them. 
Repeating  this  question  in  his  querulous,  languid,  fatiguing 
tone,  Pitt,  who  sat  opposite  to  him,  mimicking  his  accent 
aloud,  repeated  these  words  of  an  old  ditty — Gentle 
Shepherd^  tell  me  where  !  and  then  rising,  abused  Gren- 
ville bitterly.  He  had  no  sooner  finished  than  Grenville 
started  up  in  a  transport  of  rage,  and  said,  if  gentlemen 
were  to  be  treated  with  that  contempt — Pitt  was  walking 
out  of  the  House,  but  at  that  word  turned  round,  made  a 
sneering  bow  to  Grenville,  and  departed.  The  latter  had 
provoked  him  by  stating  the  profusions  of  the  war.  There 
is  use  in  recording  this  anecdote  ;  the  appellation  of  The 
Gejitle  SJiepherd  long  stuck  by  Grenville  ;  he  is  mentioned 
by  it  in  many  of  the  writings  on  the  Stamp  Act,  and  in 
other  pamphlets  and  political  prints  of  the  time. 

The  tax  on  cider  raised  a  great  flame  in  the  western 
counties,  and  by  management,  that  flame  was  transported 
to  the  metropolis.  All  the  western  members,  however, 
attached  to  the  Court  could  not  avoid  defending  the 
interests  of  their  constituents ;  and  thus  joining  what 
standing  Opposition  there  was,  the  minority  often  divided 
near  120  ;  and  as  every  step  of  the  bill  was  ardently 
fought,  divisions  happened  frequently,  and  threw  a  kind  of 
vivacity  into  the  session.  In  the  City  Sir  William  Baker 
acted  strenuously  against  the  Court,  and  Wilkes's  pen  was 
never  idle. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  199 

In  the  meantime  Fox  received  another  humihation. 
He  had  received  a  petition  for  relief  from  the  sufferers  at 
Newfoundland.  It  was  objected  to  from  all  quarters  of 
the  House  :  general  indemnification  could  not  be  made 
to  all  the  sufferers  by  the  war,  why  then  partial  ?  Sir 
Francis  Dashwood,  Lord  Barrington,  and  Nugent,  sup- 
ported Fox  faintly  ;  Ellis  and  Rigby  warmly  ;  Lord 
George  Sackville  with  panegyric,  for  which  he  was  re- 
proved by  Lord  Strange,  who  with  G.  Grenville,  Stanley, 
and  Lord  Frederic  Campbell,  treated  Fox  and  his  petition 
harshly.  During  this  altercation  Lord  Middleton,  casting 
his  eye  over  the  paper,  observed  that^all  the  names  to  the 
petition  were  signed  by  the  same  hand.  This  occasioned 
such  an  uproar,  that  Fox  was  obliged  to  ask  pardon,  and 
withdraw  the  petition,  pleading  that  the  paper  had  been 
written  out  fair  from  the  original,  which  had  really  been 
signed  by  the  petitioners.  In  private,  he  said  that  there 
had  been  a  paragraph  not  worded  with  sufficient  respect 
to  the  House,  which  occasioned  his  having  the  petition 
copied  out  by  a  clerk,  and  there  had  not  been  time  to  get 
it  signed  again  ;  but  he  stood  so  ill  in  the  public  eye,  that 
whatever  he  did  received  the  worst  construction. 

March  28th. — The  cider  bill  had  now  laboured  through 
the  Commons,  and  was  read  for  the  second  time  by  the 
Lords.  Lord  Hardwicke  spoke  and  voted  against  it ;  but 
was  answered  well,  and  with  severity,  by  Lord  March- 
mont.^  Lord  Mansfield  made  a  bad  trimming  speech, 
but  voted  for  the  bill.  Lord  Lyttelton^  spoke  well  against 
it.  Lord  Pomfret  heaped  panegyrics  on  the  Favourite, 
whose   own   speech   was    languid    and    unargumentative. 

1  Hugh  Hume,  Earl  of  Marchmont  ;  called  in  his  father's  time  Lord  Pol- 
warth,  and  a  great  friend  of  Pope.  He  generally  succeeded  best  in  reply, 
for  he  could  then  best  employ  the  fire  and  acrimony  which  formerly  made 
him  shine  in  opposition.  —  L.  M. 

"  George,  Lord  Lyttelton,  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer  in  the  late  reign  ; 
another  friend  of  Pope,  and  author  of  Dialogues  of  the  Dead,  Life  of  King 
Henry  II.,  etc.  [P'ide  Walpole's  Memoirs  of  George  II.  (1847),  vol.  i.  pp. 
202-3,  for  his  character,  and  many  particulars  of  his  public  life,  written  in  no 
friendly  spirit. — L.  M.] 


20O  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

The  Tory  Lords  who  belong  chiefly  to  the  western 
counties  were  most  of  them  against  the  bill,  as  were 
nine  of  the  Bishops  ;  but  the  bill  was  committed  by  a 
majority  of  71  to  39. 

It  was  read  the  third  time  on  the  30th,  and  was  attacked 
with  energy  by  the  Duke  of  Grafton  ;  by  Lord  Dartmouth^ 
with  decency  and  propriety  ;  by  Lord  Lyttclton,  though 
with  censures  on  the  political  pamphlets  of  the  time  ;  and 
by  the  Duke  of  Newcastle,  who  complimented  the  rising 
generation.  It  having  been  reported  that,  on  hearing  the 
City  would  petition  the  King  against  the  bill,  as  they  had 
both  Houses,  on  the,  ground  of  the  bill  being  calculated 
to  extend  the  excise,  Lord  Bute  had  sent  word  to  the 
leading  men  of  the  City,  that  if  they  would  drop  their 
petition,  the  bill  should  be  repealed  the  next  session,  he 
thought  it  necessary  to  explain  the  foundation  of  that 
report  ;  he  had  only  sent  word,  he  said,  that  if  the  bill 
proved  a  bad  one,  which  he  did  not  believe  it  would,  he 
would  try  to  get  it  repealed.  This  was  one  of  his  best 
speeches,  though  not  divested  of  pomp,  and  with  much 
affected  contempt  of  popularity.  Lord  Ravensworth 
expressed  great  scorn  of  the  City  assuming  the  dictatorial 
tone.  Lord  Denbigh  w^as  still  more  bitter,  and  spoke 
with  so  much  wit  and  applause  that  in  very  few  days  he 
was  made  a  Lord  of  the  Bedchamber.  Lord  Temple  hav- 
ing in  both  debates  been  very  personal  to  the  Favourite, 
and  having  declared  in  favour  of  excise,  as  Lord  Bute 
had  against  it.  Lord  Denbigh  said  he  hoped  the  King,  to 
please  the  City,  would  remove  the  minister  who  was 
against  excise,  and  place  that  Lord  who  was  for  it  at  the 
head  of  the  Treasury.  The  bill  was  passed,  sixty-two 
lords  being  for  it,  thirty-eight  against  it.  After  the  first 
debate,  the  Lords   Oxford,  Foley,  and  Willoughby  pro- 

^  William  Legge,  Earl  of  Dartmouth,  nephew  of  Henry  Legge  ;  and  much 
attached  to  the  Methodist  sect ;  but  of  an  excellent  character. — [Richardson, 
when  asked  if  he  knew  an  original  answerable  to  his  portrait  of  Sir  Charles 
Grandison,  is  reported  to  have  said  that  he  might  apply  it  to  Dartmouth 
'if  he  were  not  a  Methodist.' — Southey's  Life  of  Cowper  (1836),  vol.  i. 
p.  243.     He  was  afterwards  Secretary  of  State. — L.  M.] 


KING  GEORGE  III  201 

tested  ;  the  first  and  last  of  the  King's  Bedchamber.  After 
the  second  debate,  the  Duke  of  Bolton/  Earl  Temple,  and 
Lord  Fortescue  protested. 

Immediately  after  the  House  rose  the  Sheriffs  hurried 
to  St.  James's  ;  and,  though  at  so  unusual  an  hour,  and 
without  having  previously  asked  leave,  presented  to  the 
King  a  petition  not  to  pass  the  bill ;  but  he  passed  it  the 
very  next  morning. 

Few  political  clouds  seemed  less  big  with  mischief  than 
this  storm,  unnaturally  conjured  up,  and  little  likely  to 
last ;  for  what  principle  of  union  could  there  be  in  common 
between  the  City  of  London  and  two  or  three  distant 
counties  whose  apples  were  to  be  taxed  ?  The  spell, 
excise,  was  pronounced,  but  had  lost  its  terrors.  They  who 
sounded  loudest  the  alarm,  neither  were  alarmed,  nor 
expected  to  breathe  much  dread  into  others.  But  there 
was  a  frame  of  nerves  more  easily  thrown  into  disorder ; 
fear  seized  on  the  Favourite  ;  he  said,  '  We  shall  have 
thirty  thousand  men  come  down  to  St.  James's  ! '  The 
assault  that  had  been  made  on  him  the  first  day  of  the 
session  had  left  a  lasting  impression  ;  and  he  had  showed, 
early  in  the  reign,  that  fortitude  was  not  a  ruling  ingredient 
in  his  composition.  He  had  appointed  himself  a  guard  of 
bruisers  the  day  of  his  attending  the  King  into  the  City 
in  1 76 1,  when  Mr.  Pitt  made  his  insolent  parade  thither 
at  the  same  time.  Now,  bating  the  slight  distemperature 
occasioned  by  the  cider-tax,  England  seemed  to  be 
willingly,  and  submissively,  prostrate  at  the  Favourite's 
feet.  Would  she  have  rebelled  for  a  partial  tax,  after 
acquiescing  in  the  peace  ?  Fear  does  not  calculate,  but 
lumps  apprehensions  in  the  gross.  The  panic  was  taken, 
and  on  the  seventh  of  April,  to  the  surprise  of  mankind,  it 
was  notified  that  Lord  Bute  intended  to  resign  the  next 
day,  and  to  retire  for  his  health,  not  being  able  to  go 
through  the  fatigue  of  business. 

It  is  true,  that  he  had  at  times  declared,  that  as  soon  as 

^  Charles   Paulet,   Duke   of  Bolton,    K.B.      lie   died  without   issue    in 
1765.— L.  M. 


202  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

he  had  made  the  peace,  he  would  quit  his  post ;  but  few 
had  heard  the  declaration,  and  fewer  believed  it.  The 
ministers  knew  nothing  of  his  intention  till  the  day  before 
it  was  publicly  notified  ;  and  Fox  was  so  entirely  out  of 
the  secret  that  he  reproached  the  Earl  bitterly  for  leaving 
him  in  that  ignorance  and  dilemma, — the  Favourite's  own 
speeches  in  Parliament  expressing  a  wish  of  retirement 
had  rather  confirmed  men  in  the  opinion  that  he  had  no 
thoughts  of  it.  No  one  act  had  had  the  least  air  of  his 
giving  up  his  power,  nor  had  any  measures  been  taken 
to  replace  him  or  carry  on  the  present  system  ;  but  the 
best  comment  on  his  behaviour  at  that  moment  was  his 
subsequent  conduct.  The  fondness  he  retained  for  power, 
his  intrigues  to  preserve  it,  the  confusion  he  helped  to 
throw  into  almost  every  succeeding  system,  and  his 
impotent  and  dark  attempts  to  hang  on  the  wheels  of 
Government,  which  he  only  clogged,  and  to  which  he 
dreaded  even  being  suspected  of  recommending  drivers, 
all  proved  that  neither  virtue  nor  philosophy  had  the 
honour  of  dictating  his  retreat  ;  but  that  fear,  and  fear 
only,  was  the  immediate,  inconsiderate,  and  precipitate 
cause  of  his  resignation.^ 

Yet  let  me  not  be  thought  to  lament  this  weak  man's 
pusillanimity.  I  am  condemning  his  want  of  policy,  but 
rejoice  at  it.  Had  he  been  firm  to  himself,  there  was  an 
end  of  the  constitution  !  The  hearts  of  Englishmen  were 
corrupt  and  sold,  and  the  best  heads  amongst  them  toiled 
in  the  cause  of  Despotism.  A  happy  panic  blew  up  the 
system  of  absolute  power  when  it  had  lasted  but  five 
months  ;  and  a  trifling  Opposition  overturned  in  a  fort- 

1  The  best  defence  of  his  resignation  is  given  by  Mr.  Adolphus,  vol.  i. 
p.  115,  from  private  information.  It  by  no  means  exculpates  him  from  the 
charges  in  the  text,  and  is  also  at  variance  with  the  statement  of  a  writer  who 
lived  on  terms  of  the  closest  intimacy  with  the  Bute  family.  M.  Dutens 
says,  that  '  he  resigned,  because  he  was  disgusted  with  the  bustle  of  business, 
indignant  at  the  behaviour  of  those  who  endeavoured  to  obtain  his  favour,  at 
the  baseness  of  some,  and  the  duplicity  of  others.' — Memoirs  of  a  Traveller 
7107V  in  Retirement  (1S08),  vol.  iv.  p.  181.  This  corresponds  with  all  that 
has  transpired  of  Lord  Bute's  character.— L.  M. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  203 

night  the  work  of  that  majority  which  a  fortnight  had 
purchased.  Yet  the  struggle  was  not  over.  The  rod  fell 
into  abler  and  more  resolute  hands  ;  the  mercenaries  were 
^  not  disbanded,  though  the  commander-in-chief  ran  away. 
*-  Fortunately  he  became  incompatible  with  his  successors  ; 
and  liberty  owed  its  salvation,  not  to  its  friends,  but  to 
discord  among  the  conspirators. 

I  have  mentioned  how  utterly  Fox  was  disconcerted  at 
this  unexpected  resignation.  His  first  movement  was  to 
press  Lord  Bute  to  retain  the  Treasury,  at  least  for  six 
months.  That  attempt  was  fruitless.  His  next  step  was 
to  secure  his  own  peerage.  Again  was  he  astonished  to 
be  told  that  he  had  agreed  to  cede  the  Pay-office  on  going 
into  the  House  of  Lords.  This  he  peremptorily  denied. 
But  he  had  dealt  with  a  worthy  pupil  of  his  own.  Lord 
Shelburne,  who  had  negotiated  between  him  and  Lord 
Bute,  when  Fox  undertook  the  conduct  of  the  House  of 
Commons,  had  told  the  Earl  that  Fox  would  quit  the 
Pay-office  for  a  peerage  ;  but  Fox  had  only  stipulated  to 
give  his  support  for  that  reward.  He  now  broke  out 
against  his  scholar,  reproached  him  for  concealing  Lord 
Bute's  intention  of  retiring,  and  spoke  of  Shelburne  to 
everybody  as  a  perfidious  and  infamous  liar  ;  those  were 
his  usual  words.  The  probability  was,  that  Shelburne 
intended  to  slip  into  the  Pay-office  himself  The 
Favourite,  who  would  have  declared  Fox  his  successor, 
excused  Lord  Shelburne  to  him,  and,  in  his  pedantic 
style,  called  the  secrecy  he  had  observed  a  pious  fraud ; 
for  P'ox,  he  said,  he  knew  would  not  have  engaged  in  the 
management  of  the  Parliament,  had  he  been  apprised  that 
he  (Bute)  intended  to  retire,  and  it  had  been  necessary  to 
the  King's  affairs  that  Fox  should  carry  them  through  the 
session.  This  very  offer  of  the  Treasury  to  Fox  showed 
how  little  the  Favourite  had  taken  any  measures  for 
carrying  on  his  master's  business  for  the  future,  and  cor- 
roborates the  presumption  that  a  sudden  panic  was  the 
immediate  cause  of  his  retreat. 

Fox  refusing  to  accept  them,  the  post  of  First  Lord  of 


204  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

the  Treasury  and  the  Seals  of  Chancellor  of  the  Ex- 
chequer were,  on  April  8,  the  very  day  on  which  the 
Favourite  resigned,  bestowed  on  George  Grenville.  Sir 
Francis  Dashwood  was  removed  to  the  Great  Wardrobe  ; 
and  the  barony  of  Despencer,  then  in  abeyance  be- 
tween him  and  his  nephew,  Sir  Thomas  Stapleton,  was 
granted  to  him  :  the  one  to  repair,  the  other  to  decorate, 
his  fall. 

Some  other  promotions  were  made  of  the  Favourite's 
and  Fox's  adherents  ;  and,  to  strengthen  the  new  system, 
many  favours  were  heaped  on  the  Duke  of  Bedford's 
dependants.  Of  the  first  sorts  was  the  preferment  of 
Oswald  to  be  Vice-Treasurer  of  Ireland;  of  Hunter^  and 
Harris  to  the  Treasury  ;  of  Lord  Digby^  to  the  Admiralty; 
to  which  board  were  added,  by  Grenville,  Lord  Howe,^ 
and  young  Thomas  Pitt.'^  The  Earl  of  Northumberland 
was  named  to  the  chief  government  of  Ireland,  which  had 
been  offered  to,  and  refused  by,  Lord  Granby,  who,  as  I 
hinted  before,  was  now  appointed  Master  of  the  Ordnance; 
from  which  old  Marshal  Ligonier  was  by  force  removed, 
but  softened  with  a  pension,  which  he  refused  to  accept 
till  accompanied  with  an  English  peerage.  General 
Townshend,^  though  only  a  Major-General,  was  made 
Lieutenant-General  of  the  Ordnance;  Lord  Harcourt'' 
replaced  Lord  Northumberland  as  Chamberlain  to  the 
Queen  ;  and,  in  the  room  of  the  former.  Lord  Weymouth 
was  made  her  Master  of  the  Horse.  The  Duke  of 
Oueensberry^  succeeded  the  deceased  Lord  Tweeddale  as 
Justice-General  of  Scotland  :  the  Seal  was  given  to  the 
Duke  of  Athol,^  and    the  Privy  Seal  to  Mr.  Mackenzie, 

1  Thomas  Orby  Hunter.  "  Henry,  Lord  Digby,  nephew  of  Mr.  Pox. 

'  Richard,  Viscount  Howe. 

*  Thomas  Pitt  of  Boconnock,  nephew  of  Mr.  WilUam  Titt,  with  whom  he 
was  at  variance. 

"  General  George  Townshend,  afterwards  Viscount. 

*  Simon,  Lord  Harcourt,  who  had  been  Governor  to  the  King. 

7  Charles  Douglas,  Uuke  of  Queensberry ;  he  had  been  Lord  of  the  Bed- 
chamber to  the  late  Prince  of  Wales. 

*  James,  Duke  of  Athol. 


lOiMlri  ncuJiiafi'li.,'!^. 


( ')///■  ^yh(vncAJ>  _yJa/i^u) yw/. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  205 

the  Favourite's  brother.  John  Pitt  ^  was  turned  out  to 
make  room  for  Sir  Edmund  Thomas.^  Lord  March  ^  and 
Lord  Cathcart  ^  obtained  green  ribands. 

1  A  friend  of  Mr.  William  Pitt. 

-  He  had  been  Groom  of  the  Bedchamber  to  the  late  Prince. 

^  James  Douglas,  Earl  of  March  and  Ruglen.     [See  supra,  p.  23.] 

^  Charles  Shaw,  Lord  Cathcart,  had  been  one  of  the  hostages  to  France, 
and  Lord  of  the  Bedchamber  to  William,  Duke  of  Cumberland  ;  he  was 
afterwards  Ambassador  in  Russia.     [He  died  14th  August  1776. — E.j 


2o6 


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 


CHAPTER    XVIII 


The  Bedford  Faction. — Ambition  of  the  Duchess  of  Bedford.— The  Dukes  of 
Marlborough  and  Rutland. — Lord  Gower. — Fox  raised  to  the  Peerage. — 
Ingratitude  of  his  friends,  particularly  of  Calcraft  and  Rigby. — Mr. 
(afterwards  Sir  Charles)  Bunbury. — Lord  Hertford  and  Mr.  Conway. — 
Charles  Townshend's  presumption. — Reversions  granted  by  Lord  Bute. — 
Walpole's  feelings  towards  that  Minister. — His  Political  acts. — Death  of 
Lord  Waldegrave. — His  character. 

The    Bedford    faction    were   not    to   be   contented    with 
empty  honours  or  sh'ght  emoluments.    They  sent  for  their 
Duke  from  France,  who,  to  grasp  the  more  by  seeming 
moderation,  resigned  the  Privy  Seal,  as  most  men  thought, 
with  views  on  the  Treasury  itself ;  at  least,  his  squadron 
vaunted   that  they  had  two  or  three  administrations  in 
readiness  before  the  King  should  be  obliged    to  employ 
the  Opposition.     The  P'avourite,  from  the  first  moment  of 
his  power,  had  made  it  a  point  to  gratify,  nay,  to  outrun, 
the  Duke  of  Bedford's   largest  wishes.     Nothing  he  had 
asked,  nothing  his  creatures  were  immodest  enough  to 
demand,  had  been  denied  ;  yet  Lord  Bute  was  balked  in 
his  hopes  of  purchasing  the  attachment  of  that  connection 
— not  from  their  usual  perfidy  ;  he  had  lost  them  before 
they  suspected  the  smallest  diminution  of  his  omnipotence. 
He  had  not  gratified  the  ambition  of  the  Duchess.^     She 
had    marked    for   herself  the    first   post   in    the    Queen's 
family  ;  but  with  more  attention  to  her  pride  than  to  her 
interest,  had   forborne  to  ask  it,  concluding  it  must  be 
offered  to  hei-.     The  Princess  and  Lord  Bute,  either  not 
suspecting,  or  glad  to  be  ignorant  of,  her  views,  were  far 
enough  from  seeking  to  place  so  dangerous  a  woman  in 
the  very  heart  of  the  palace.     This  neglect  the  Duchess 
^  Gertrude  Leveson,  Duchess  of  Bedford. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  207 

deeply  resented,  and  never  forgave.  She  was  even  so 
weak  as  to  declare  that  inveteracy  in  a  letter  to  her  sister, 
Lady  Elizabeth  Waldegrave,  from  Paris  ;  which  Lord 
Bute  intercepting,  there  first  learned  what  an  aspic  was 
lodged  near  his  bosom. 

But  though  the  Favourite,  persuaded  of  the  Duchess's 
implacability,  dropped  all  correspondence  with  that  fac- 
tion, he  was  far  from  checking  the  stream  of  the  Crown's 
graces  towards  them.  The  King  begged  the  support  of 
the  Duke  of  Marlborough,^  and  offered  to  make  him 
Master  of  the  Horse,  if  the  Duke  of  Rutland  -  could  be 
induced  to  part  with  it.  The  latter  consented  to  exchange 
it  for  Lord  Chamberlain  ;  but  that  post  the  Duke  of 
Bedford  insisted  upon  for  Lord  Gower.^  After  a  warm 
struggle  Lord  Govver  obtained  the  Chamberlain's  staff; 
the  Duke  of  Rutland  remained  in  his  old  situation  ;  and 
the  Duke  of  Marlborough,  though  so  very  young,  was 
appointed  Lord  Privy  Seal ;  and  his  brother.  Lord 
Charles  Spencer,  was  made  Comptroller  of  the  House- 
hold. 

Fox  obtained  his  barony,*  and  retained  his  place,  but 
not  without  experiencing  such  a  scene  of  ingratitude  as 
could  scarce  happen  but  to  a  man  who  had  selected  his 
friends  more  for  their  utility  than  their  merit.  In  the 
discussion,  and  during  the  defending  and  proving  what 
he  had  or  had  not  said  relative  to  the  cession  of  the 
Paymaster's  place,  Calcraft,^  his  own  creature,  his  cousin 

1  George  Spencer,  Duke  of  Marlborough. 

^  John  Manners,  Duke  of  Rutland,  father  of  Lord  Granby. 

^  Granville    Leveson   Gower,    Earl   Gower,    brother   of    the   Duchess   of 
Bedford. 

*  Henry  Fox  was  created  Baron  Holland  of  Foxley,  in  the  County  of  Wilts, 
on  i6th  April  1763. — E. 

^  John  Calcraft  began  with  being  clerk  in  the  War  Office  at  £afi  a 
year.  [Calcraft  held  the  lucrative  post  of  Deputy  Commissary  General  of 
the  Mustsrs,  and  was  subsequently  described  by  Junius  as  rioting  'in  the 
plunder  of  the  army.' — Letters  (1814),  vol.  ii.  p.  357.  He  had  deserted  his 
old  patron  for  Pitt,  whom  he  attempted  to  reconcile  with  the  Duke  of  Bed- 
ford.—  Correspondence  of  John,  fourth  Duke  of  Bedford  {1846),  vol.  iii.  p. 
236.— E.] 


2o8  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

raised  from  extreme  indigence  and  obscurity  to  enormous 
wealth,  to  opulence  so  excessive  that  the  vast  number 
of  regiments  to  which  he  was  agent,  and  the  outrageous 
plurality  of  places  he  held,  were  universally  believed  to 
be  deposited  with  him  only  for  Fox's  use,^  took  part 
with  Lord  Shelburne,  and  witnessed  to  the  latter's  tale. 
Fox  ordered  Calcraft  to  make  up  his  accounts,  dismissed 
him  worth  near  ^^300,000,  and,  though  so  rich  himself, 
grew  almost  justified  ;  and,  though  so  hated,  grew  almost 
pitied  ;  but  this  was  not  all.  The  man  he  most  loved 
was  Rigby  ;  and  though  Fox  had  not  crammed  him  with 
wealth  in  the  same  lavish  guise  with  which  he  had  en- 
riched Calcraft,  he  had  assisted  in  Rigby's  promotions, 
and  wished  to  push  him  forwards,  and  to  be  strictly  con- 
nected with  him  in  every  political  walk.  In  the  height 
of  his  quarrel  with  Shelburne  and  Calcraft,  Fox,  walking 
along  St.  James's  Street,  met  and  stopped  Rigby's  chariot, 
and,  leaning  on  the  door  of  it,  began  to  vent  his  com- 
plaints ;  when  the  other  unprovoked  and  unconcerned  in 
the  dispute,  interrupted  the  other  with  these  stunning 
sounds,  '  Yoii  tell  your  story  of  Shelburne ;  he  has  a 
damned  one  to  tell  of  you  ;  I  do  not  trouble  myself  which 
is  the  truth ' ;  and,  pushing  him  aside,  ordered  his  coach- 
man to  drive  away.  From  that  moment  Rigby  became 
the  enemy  of  Fox.^  The  necessity  of  relating  this  story 
will  appear  hereafter. 

The  Earl  of  Hertford  was  named  to  succeed  the  Duke 

1  This  charge  is  entirely  unfounded.  Had  there  been  any  truth  in  it,  the 
connection  between  Mr.  Fox  and  Mr.  Calcraft  would  not  have  been  so  easily 
dissolved. — L.  M. 

2  It  is  in  reference  to  Mr.  Rigby's  conduct  that  Lord  Holland  probably 
alludes  to  the  following  passage  of  a  letter  to  Mr.  Selwyn  of  October  5,  1763  : 
'  I  drop  all  politics  that  may  not  go  by  the  post  till  I  see  you,  when  I  will  tell 
you  all  I  know  of  them,  with  the  trait  I  mentioned.  Had  it  been  from  a 
political  friend  only,  I  should  be  ashamed  to  be  hurt  by  it.  No  politics 
will  or  can  mortify  me  ;  I  thought  this  man's  friendship  had  not  been  only 
political.  I  loved  him  ;  and  whether  to  feel  or  not  to  feel,  to  despise  or 
grieve,  on  such  an  occasion,  be  most  worthy  of  a  man,  I  won't  dispute  ;  but 
the  fact  is  that  I  have  been  and  still  am,  whenever  I  think  of  it,  very  un- 
happy.'— Geo7-ge  Sekvyn  and  his  Co7ile7)iporayies^  vol.  i.  p.  267. — L.  M. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  209 

of  Bedford  at  Paris.  Fox,  in  the  midst  of  his  quarrels 
and  mortifications,  found  leisure  to  think  of  his  friends, 
and  to  think  of  gratifying  his  hatred.  He  procured  his 
wife's  brother-in-law,  Mr.  Bunbury,  to  be  imposed  on 
Lord  Hertford  as  secretary  of  the  embassy,  an  affront 
Lord  Hertford  was  advised  not  to  digest :  but,  though  he 
acquiesced  in  it,  he  treated  Bunbury  with  such  obstinate 
coldness  that  the  latter  was  glad  to  quit  the  employment. 
I  never  knew  why  Fox  was  on  all  occasions  the  personal 
enemy  of  Lord  Hertford  and  Mr.  Conway,  neither  of 
them  being  hostile  to  him,  and  both  most  inoffensive 
men.  The  elder  brother  was  even  a  good  courtier,  and 
never  in  union  with  Fox's  enemies.  Mr.  Conway's  char- 
acter was  indeed  a  reproach  to  that  of  Fox,  and  antipathy 
is  as  often  the  cause  of  enmity  as  offence  is.  The  decorum 
and  piety  of  Lord  Hertford  occasioned  men  to  wonder, 
when,  in  the  room  of  Bunbury,  he  chose  for  his  secretary 
the  celebrated  free-thinker  David  Hume,  totally  unknown 
to  him  ;  but  this  was  the  effect  of  recommendations  from 
other  Scots,  who  had  much  weight  with  both  Lord  and 
Lady  Hertford.^ 

While  the  arrangement  of  the  new  drama  was  thus 
settling,  there  was  an  important  actor  to  be  made  easy  ; 
but  it  was  one  who,  whenever  he  appeared  of  most  conse- 
quence, was  sure  of  rendering  himself  insignificant.  This 
was  Charles  Townshend.  After  his  usual  fluctuation,  he 
accepted  the  post  of  First  Lord  of  the  Admiralty,  and 
actually  went  to  St.  James's  to  kiss  hands  for  it.  Pre- 
suming that  nothing  would  or  could  be  refused  to  him, 
without  asking  it,  without  even  naming  it  to  any  minister, 
and  as  if  the  seats  of  his  colleagues  at  that  Board  were  in 
the  nomination  of  the  First  Commissioner,  he  carried  to 
court  with  him  a  Mr.  Burrel,  one  of  his  followers,  intending 
the  latter  should  kiss  hands  along  with  himself  as  another 
Lord  of  the  Admiralty.  Thinking  his  honour  engaged 
to  carry  through  this  absurdity,  he  would  not  kiss  the 
King's  hand  unless  Burrel  was  admitted  too.    It  was  flatly 

^  Lady  Isabella  Fitzroy,  second  daughter  of  Charles,  Duke  of  Grafton. 
VOL.  I.  O 


2IO  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

refused,  and  Townshend  was  told  that  the  King  had 
no  further  occasion  for  his  service.  Lord  Shclburne 
was  immediately  named  to  succeed  him  at  the  head  of 
the  Board  of  Trade,  and  Lord  Sandwich  to  fill  up 
the  place  destined  to  Townshend  at  the  head  of  the 
Admiralty. 

These  were  all  the  public  promotions  calculated  to  oil 
the  new  springs  of  Government.  But  the  Favourite  did 
not  close  the  scene  of  his  administration  without  con- 
ferring still  more  solid  marks  of  his  power  and  friendship 
on  his  family  and  intimate  dependants.  The  reversion  of 
Auditor^  of  the  Imprest  was  obtained  for  his  own  son 
Lord  Mount-Stewart.  My  place  of  Usher  of  the  Ex- 
chequer was  granted  in  reversion  to  Samuel  Martin,^  and 
a  place  ^  in  the  Custom-house,  held  by  my  brother,  but 
the  far  greater  share  of  which  had  been  bequeathed  to  me 
by  my  father  for  my  brother's  life,  was  also  granted  in 
reversion  to  Jenkinson.'*  I  was,  I  confess,  much  provoked 
at  this  last  grant,  and  took  occasion  of  fomenting  the 
ill-humour  against  the  Favourite,  who  thus  excluded  me 
from  the  possibility  of  obtaining  the  continuance  of  that 
place  to  myself  in  case  of  my  brother's  death  ;  but  in 
truth,  except  in  the  want  of  that  attention,  I  had  no 
reason  to  complain.  I  had  refused  to  accept  the  grant  ^ 
from  Fox,  and  I  had  in  terms  told  Lord  Bute  that  I 
would  accept  no  favour  from  him,  though  with  great 
civility,  and  without  acting  in  any  shape  as  hostile  to 
him.  Thus  my  resentment  kept  no  deep  root :  and  I  can 
say  with  the  utmost  truth,  that  as  I  afterwards,  though 

1  Then  held  by  Mr.  Aislabie  for  life. 

-  Secretary  to  the  Treasury.  [M.P,  for  Camelford  from  July  1747  to 
March  1768,  for  Hastings  from  March  1768  to  September  1774.  lie  died  on 
20th  November  1788,  and  consequently  derived  no  benefit  from  this  appoint- 
ment.    See  jz^/ra,  p.  157. — E.] 

^  Collector  of  the  Customs.  Sir  Robert  Walpole  held  it  for  his  own  life 
and  for  the  lives  of  his  two  eldest  sons,  with  power  of  bequeathing  it  for  their 
lives  to  any  child  he  pleased. 

•*  Charles  Jenkinson,  private  secretary  to  Lord  Bute  [afterwards  Earl  of 
Liverpool. — L.  M.] 

*  It  was  again  offered  to  me  afterwards,  and  I  again  refused  it. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  211 

never  connected  with  him,  was  on  many  occasions  friendly 
to  that  great  favourite,  so  no  word  in  these  Memoirs 
to  his  prejudice  has  been  dictated  by  a  vindictive  spirit, 
but  the  whole  narrative  is  faithfully  the  representation 
of  what  I  knew  and  heard  of  him.  Infinite  ill  has  he 
occasioned  to  this  country,  in  which  light  only  it  is  my 
intention  to  pass  sentence  on  his  character.  In  other 
respects,  the  meanness  of  his  abilities  and  the  poorness 
of  his  spirit  place  him  below  resentment.  His  private 
virtues,  the  long  and  bitter  persecution  he  has  undergone, 
and  many  domestic  misfortunes,  would  extract  every 
sting  which  exact  or  necessary  justice  did  not  sharpen. 
The  last  transaction  I  am  going  to  mention  flowing 
notoriously  from  his  dispensation  was  of  a  nature  not  to 
be  palliated  or  forgotten.  To  see  it  in  its  full  force  of 
indignity  offered  to  so  mighty  a  country,  the  reader  must 
place  himself  at  the  moment  when  England,  triumphant 
over  France  and  Spain,  had  annihilated  their  navies  and 
sat  sole  arbitress  of  peace  and  war,  absolutely  secure  that 
Europe  combined  could  not  wrench  her  conquests  from 
her,  and  sure  of  proving  her  moderation  by  consenting  to 
peace  on  almost  whatever  terms  she  should  please  to 
dictate. 

At  that  moment  did  a  pusillanimous  favourite  not  only 
make  peace,  relinquishing  the  greater  and  most  valuable 
part  of  our.  acquisitions,  but  (what  never  entered  into  the 
imagination  of  distress  and  slavery  itself)  he  purchased 
that  scandalous  peace  of  the  envoy  of  a  little  prince  who 
was  not  even  a  party  in  the  war !  In  short,  it  now  came 
out  that  a  pension  on  Ireland  of  one  thousand  pounds  a 
year  for  thirty-one  years  to  Count  Virri,^  the  Sardinian 

^  This  was  not  the  only  favour  that  the  Count  owed  to  the  English  Govern- 
ment, for  they  prevented  his  recall  soon  after  the  King's  accession ;  and  it 
was  entirely  at  their  instance  that  he  obtained  permission  to  give  up  his  em- 
bassy to  his  son.  He  had  also  received  a  portrait  set  in  diamonds,  and  a 
suite  of  Gobelin  hangings  from  the  King  of  France.  Upon  his  resignation  he 
retired  to  his  estates  in  Savoy,  where  he  intrigued  until  he  had  succeeded  in 
replacing  the  Count  de  St.  Germaine  as  first  Minister  of  Savoy. — Memoirs 
of  a  Traveller  {iSoS),  vol.  ii.  pp.  65-6. — L.  M. 


212  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

Minister,  through  whose  hands  the  real  negotiation  ^  had 
passed,  was  the  price  and  tribute  of  that  shame  which 
Lord  Bute,  by  the  treaty  of  Paris,  heaped  on  Great 
Britain  ! 

The  very  day  on  which  the  Favourite  resigned  the 
reins  of  government  died  the  man  who,  of  all  England, 
would  perhaps  have  rejoiced  the  most  to  behold  that  event. 
James,  Earl  Waldegrave,  was  carried  off  by  the  small-pox, 
April  8th.  With  unbounded  benevolence,  and  of  the 
most  flowing  courtesy  to  all  men.  Lord  Waldegrave,  whose 
penetration  no  weakness  could  escape  nor  art  impose 
upon,  though  vice  he  overlooked,  and  only  abstained 
sometimes  from  connecting  with  black  and  bad  men, — 
Lord  Waldegrave,  I  say,  had  been  so  thoroughly  fatigued 
with  the  insipidity  of  his  pupil  the  King,  and  so  harassed 
and  unworthily  treated  by  the  Princess  and  Lord  Bute, 
that  no  one  of  the  most  inflammable  vengeance,  or  of  the 
coolest  resentment,  could  harbour  more  bitter  hatred  and 
contempt  than  he  did  for  the  King's  mother  and  favourite. 
This  aversion  carried  him  to  what  I  scarce  believed  my 
eyes  when  he  first  showed  me — severe  satires  against  them. 
He  has  left  behind  him,  too,  some  Memoirs^  of  the  few 
years  in  which  he  was  governor  to  the  Prince,  that  will 
corroborate  many  things  I  have  asserted,  and  will  not 
tend  to  make  these  Anecdotes  be  reckoned  unjust  and 
unmerciful. 

Lord  Waldegrave  died  most  unseasonably  for  his  own 
honour.  He  stood  so  high  in  the  esteem  of  mankind  for 
probity,  abilities,  and  temper,  that,  if  any  man  could,  he 

1  The  negotiation  was  conducted  by  Count  Virri,  Envoy  in  England,  and 
by  the  Bailli  de  Solar,  the  Sardinian  Minister  at  Paris,  the  intimate  friend  of 
the  Duchess  de  Choiseul ;  and  that  convenience  was  probably  a  reason  why 
Lord  Bute  yielded  to  the  treaty  being  settled  at  Paris,  though  the  King  of 
France  had  offered  to  treat  here  vis-h-vis  du  Roi  de  la  Grande  Britagne. 
\_Vide  notes  pp.  123  and  126  supra,  for  more  details  respecting  the  part 
taken  by  these  Sardinian  Ministers  in  the  negotiation. — L.  M.] 

-  These  Memoirs  from  1754  to  1758  were  published  in  1821  with  an  intro- 
duction by  the  third  Lord  Holland,  and  were  reA'iewed  by  John  Allen  in  the 
Edinburgh  Review  for  June  1822. — E. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  213 

might  have  accomplished  a  coalition  of  parties,  or  thrown 
sense  into  that  party,  which,  though  acting  for  the  cause 
of  liberty,  rather  wounded  than  served  it,  so  ill  were  they 
formed  for  counsel  or  conduct.  Had  he  lived  still  longer 
he  must,  by  the  deaths  of  the  chiefs,  have  been  placed  in- 
contestably  at  the  head  of  that  party  himself  Indeed, 
but  just  before  his  illness,  he  was  much  looked  up  to  by 
very  different  sets.  Lord  Bute  himself  had  thought  of 
him  for  a  considerable  share  on  his  own  retreat ;  and,  but 
the  day  before  Lord  Waldegrave  was  seized  with  the 
small-pox,  he  had  been  offered  the  Embassy  to  France 
or  Lord-Lieutenancy  of  Ireland,  both  of  which  he  per- 
emptorily declined.  And  yet,  after  his  death,  the  Court 
boasted  they  had  gained  him, — a  report  much  resented 
and  eagerly  contradicted  by  his  friend  the  Duke  of  Cum- 
berland. But  let  us  now  turn  to  the  opening  of  the  new 
Administration. 


:i4  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 


CHAPTER    XIX 

Lord  Bute's  pretended  abdication  of  business. — The  'Triumvirate'  (Mr. 
Grenville,  Lord  Egremont,  and  Lord  Halifax)  who  succeeded  him. — 
Character  of  those  personages. — Grenville's  ingratitude  to  Lord  Bute. — 
The  memorable  Forty-fifth  Number  of  the  North  Briton. — Wilkes  appre- 
hended on  a  General  Warrant. — Committed  close  prisoner  to  the  Tower. 
— His  spirit  and  wit. — His  bad  character. — He  is  taken  by  Habeas 
Corpus  to  the  Court  of  Common  Pleas. — His  Speech. — He  is  discharged 
from  confinement.  —  Chief  Justice  Pratt. — Triumph  of  Wilkes. — His 
endeavour  to  obtain  Warrants  against  the  Secretaries  of  State. — Lord 
Temple. — Discontent  in  the  Cider  counties. — Mortifications  of  the  Court. 
— Wilkes  challenged  by  Forbes. — Sudden  death  of  Lord  Egremont. 

The  Parliament  had  risen  on  April  19th,  everything 
being  then  outwardly  settled.  The  Favourite,  to  give 
some  colour  to  his  pretended  illness  and  to  his  still  more 
pretended  abdication  of  business,  went  to  drink  the  waters 
at  Harrowgate ;  having  first  protested  that  he  would 
neither  meddle  nor  offer  to  intercept  or  direct  the  channel 
of  the  King's  favours.  Trusting  to  this  declaration,  there 
started  up  a  triumvirate,  who  not  only  seemed  to  be,  but 
who  really  thought  themselves,  possessed  of  the  whole 
power  of  government.  They  seemed,  too,  to  have  divided 
amongst  themselves  the  whole  portion  of  the  Favourite's 
pride.  These  were  Mr.  Grenville,  his  brother-in-law,  Lord 
Egremont,  and  Lord  Halifax :  the  two  latter  Secretaries 
of  State. 

Mr.  Grenville^  had  hUherto  been  known  but  as  a 
fatiguing  orator  and  indefatigable  drudge,  more  likely  to 
disgust  than  to  offend.  Beneath  this  useful  unpromising 
outside  lay  lurking  great  abilities  :  courage  so  confounded 

^  George  Grenville,  next  Ijrothcr  of  Richard,  Earl  Temple.  He  married 
Elizabeth,  daughter  of  Sir  William  Windham,  and  sister  of  Charles,  Earl  of 
Egremont,  and  of  Percy  Windham  Obrien,  Earl  of  Thomond. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  215 

with  obstinacy  that  there  was  no  drawing  the  line  betwixt 
them  ;  good  intentions  to  the  pubHc,  without  one  great 
view ;  much  economy  for  that  pubHc,  which  in  truth  was 
the  whole  amount  of  his  good  intentions  ;  excessive 
rapaciousness  and  parsimony  in  himself;  infinite  self- 
conceit,  which  produced  impossibility  of  instructing,  con- 
vincing, or  setting  him  right ;  implacability  in  his  temper 
and  a  total  want  of  principles  in  his  political  conduct  ; 
for,  having  long  professed  himself  uncommonly  bigoted 
to  the  doctrines  of  liberty,  he  became  the  staunchest 
champion  of  unwarrantable  power.  As  all  his  passions 
were  expressed  by  one  livid  smile,  he  never  blushed  at 
the  variations  in  his  behaviour.  His  ingratitude  to  his 
benefactor.  Lord  Bute,  and  his  reproaching  Mr.  Pitt  with 
the  profusion  of  a  war  which  he  had  sometimes  actively 
supported,  and  always  tacitly  approved,  while  holding  a 
beneficial  place,^  were  but  too  often  paralleled  by  the 
crimes  of  other  men  ;  but  scarce  any  man  ever  wore  in 
his  face  such  outward  and  visible  marks  of  the  hollow, 
cruel,  and  rotten  heart  within. 

Lord  Egremont  ^  was  a  composition  of  pride,  ill-nature, 
avarice,  and  strict  good-breeding ;  with  such  infirmity  in 
his  frame,  that  he  could  not  speak  truth  on  the  most 
trivial  occasion.  He  had  humour,  and  did  not  want  sense, 
but  had  neither  knowledge  of  business,  nor  the  smallest 
share  of  parliamentary  abilities.^ 

^  Treasurer  of  the  Navy. 

^  Sir  Charles  Windham,  Earl  of  Egremont,  eldest  son  of  the  celebrated 
orator.  Sir  William  Windham,  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer  in  the  four  last 
years  of  Queen  Anne,  and  of  Lady  Catherine  SejTnour,  daughter  of  Charles, 
Duke  of  Somerset,  the  proudest  man  of  his  age. 

2  Had  Lord  Egremont  been  a  liar  of  the  '  monstrous  magnitude  '  stated  in 
the  text,  he  certainly  would  never  have  had  the  opportunity  of  refusing  the 
offer  of  being  Secretary  of  State  from  a  man  of  such  strict  honour  and  integrity 
as  Lord  Waldegrave  ;  an  offer,  be  it  observed,  which  Walpole  notices  in  his 
Memoirs  of  George  the  Second  w'lihowi  censure.  It  was  to  his  refusal  of  that 
offer,  and  to  his  subsequent  connection  with  Mr.  Grenville,  that  Lord  Egre- 
mont owed  this  severe  imputation.  He  was  proud,  obstinate,  and  hot- 
tempered  ;  but  that  he  was  not  without  talent  is  proved  by  his  answer  to  the 
Spanish  memorial,  a  State  paper  of  acknowledged  merit.     Bishop  Newton, 


2i6  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

Of  the  three,  Lord  Halifax  ^  was  by  far  the  weakest, 
and  at  the  same  time  the  most  amiable  man.  His  pride, 
like  Lord  Ei^remont's,  taught  him  much  civility.  He 
spoke  readily  and  agreeably,  and  only  wanted  matter  and 
argument.  His  profusion  in  building,  planting,  and  on  a 
favourite  mistress,  had  brought  him  into  great  straits, 
from  which  he  sought  to  extricate  himself  by  discredit- 
able means.  He  aimed  at  virtues  he  could  not  support, 
and  was  rather  carried  away  by  his  vices  than  sensible  of 
them. 

I  have  mentioned  Mr.  Grenville's  ingratitude  to  Lord 
Bute,  which  implies  preceding  obligation.  He  had  owed 
solely  and  entirely  to  Lord  Bute  the  rich  reversion  of 
a  Tellership  of  the  Exchequer  for  his  son.  Lord  Bute 
perhaps  thought  it  was  no  light  additional  favour  to  have 
made  over  his  power  into  Mr.  Grenville's  hands.  But 
the  latter  had  not  forgotten  how  contemptuously  he  had 

who  knew  him  well,  says,  that  if  he  '  had  entered  earlier  into  business,  he 
might  have  made  as  considerable  a  figure  as  his  father.  He  had  seldom 
occasion  to  speak  in  Parliament,  but  whenever  he  did  speak,  it  was  with 
great  clearness,  force,  and  energy  ;  and  he  was  thought  very  much  to  resemble 
his  father  in  manner  as  well  as  in  good  matter,  having  a  little  catch  and  im- 
pediment in  his  voice,  as  Sir  William  Wyndham  likewise  had.' — Newton's 
Works,  17S2,  vol.  i.  p.  68.— L.  M, 

^  Many  interesting  anecdotes  of  Lord  Halifax  are  given  in  the  Met?ioirs  of 
Richard  Cumberland,  who  had  been  his  private  secretary  for  many  years. 
He  describes  him  thus  :  '  I  am  persuaded  he  was  formed  to  be  a  good  man, 
he  might  also  have  been  a  great  one  :  his  mind  was  large,  his  spirit  active, 
his  ambition  honourable  ;  he  had  a  carriage  noble  and  imposing  ;  his  first 
approach  attracted  notice  ;  his  consequent  address  ensured  respect  :  if  his 
talents  were  not  quite  so  solid  as  some,  nor  altogether  so  deep  as  others,  yet 
they  were  brilliant,  popular,  and  made  to  glitter  in  the  eyes  of  men  :  splendour 
was  his  passion  ;  his  good-fortune  threw  opportunities  in  his  way  to  have 
supported  it ;  his  ill-fortune  blasted  all  these  energies  which  should  have  been 
reserved  for  the  crisis  of  his  public  fame  ;  the  first  offices  of  the  State,  the 
highest  honours  which  his  Sovereign  could  bestow,  were  showered  upon  him 
when  the  spring  of  his  mind  was  broken ;  and  his  genius  like  a  vessel  over- 
loaded with  treasure,  but  far  gone  in  decay,  was  only  precipitated  to  ruin  by 
the  very  freight  that,  in  its  better  days,  would  have  crowned  it  with  prosperity 
and  riches  '  (1807),  vol  i.  p.  247.  This  is  a  generous  portrait,  considering  that 
Cumberland  had  certainly  been  unkindly  treated  by  Lord  Halifax  ;  and,  had 
he  always  felt  thus,  he  would  not  have  furnished  Sheridan  with  the  model  of 
Sir  Fretful  Plagiary. — L.  M. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  217 

been  set  aside  the  last  year ;  and,  as  Lord  Bute  by  no 
means  observed  his  promise  of  abstaining  from  exerting 
his  influence  at  Court,  it  is  but  candid  to  allow  that  Lord 
Bute  diminished  the  favour  by  not  adhering  to  the  terms  on 
which  he  bestowed  it.  Be  that  how  it  would,  Grenville 
had  not  sat  a  month  at  the  Treasury  before,  remembering 
the  affront  and  forgetting  the  reversion,  he  set  himself  by 
all  manner  of  means  to  lessen  the  profits  of  the  other 
reversion  which  Lord  Bute  had  procured  for  his  own  son. 
Thus  auspiciously  commenced  the  new  administration ! 

As  soon  as  it  was  known  that  Lord  Bute  intended  to 
quit,  Wilkes  had  forborne  to  publish  his  North  Brito7is ; 
waiting  to  see  the  consequences  of  the  change.  The  tone 
he  had  given  did  not,  however,  stop.  In  the  City  they 
toasted  to  Wit,  Beauty,  Virtue,  and  Honour,  ironic 
designations  of  the  King,  Queen,  Princess  Dowager,  and 
Lord  Bute.  The  North  Briton,  too,  was  soon  resumed, 
and  on  the  23rd  of  April  was  published  the  memorable 
forty-fifth  number,  which  occasioned  so  much  trouble  to 
the  author,  procured  so  essential  a  correction  of  loose  and, 
till  then,  undefined  power,  and  produced  so  many  silly 
conundrums  and  wretched  witticisms  on  the  number 
itself  1  This  famous  paper  gave  a  flat  lie  to  the  King 
himself,  for  having,  by  the  Favourite's  suggestion,  assumed 
the  honour  of  obtaining  peace  for  the  King  of  Prussia.'^ 

Nothing  could  be  more  just  than  the  satire,  nothing 
more  bold  than  the  unmeasured  liberty  with  which  it  was 
uttered.^      The   Prussian  monarch  must  have  read   with 

^  The  figures  45  became  the  hieroglyphics  of  Wilkes's  party. 

-  Queen  Anne's  speech  on  the  Treaty  of  Utrecht  told  a  similar  lie  ;  so 
exactly  was  the  parallel  maintained  throughout. 

2  The  following  passages  are  those  to  which  the  text  refers :  '  This  week 
has  given  the  public  the  most  abandoned  instance  of  official  effrontery  ever 
attempted  to  be  imposed  on  mankind.  The  minister's  speech  last  Tuesday 
is  not  to  be  paralleled  in  the  annals  of  this  country.  I  am  in  doubt  whether 
the  imposition  is  greater  on  the  Sovereign  or  on  the  nation.  Every  friend 
of  his  country  must  lament  that  a  Prince  of  so  many  great  and  amiable  quali- 
ties, whom  England  truly  reveres,  can  be  brought  to  give  the  sanction  of  his 
name  to  the  most  odious  measures,  and  to  the  most  unjustifiable  public 
doctrines,  from  a  throne  ever  renowned  for  truth,  honour,  and  unsullied  virtue. 


2i8  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

scorn,  and  Europe  with  laughter,  so  absurd  a  boast  as  our 
vaunting  to  have  saved  an  ally  whom  we  had  betrayed 
and  abandoned.  Ridicule  might  have  handled  this  vain- 
glorious falsehood  with  full  severity  and  full  security, 
without  passing  the  bounds  which  law  allows.  But  when 
Parliament  had  connived  at  the  treachery,  could  it  be 
supposed  that  it  would  suffer  a  private  hand  to  wield  the 
bolt  which  had  slept  in  the  custody  of  so  many  corrupt 
representatives?  The  lie  given  in  print  to  the  Crown,  by 
an  obscure  man,  was  an  unparalleled  licence.  If  the  King 
had  a  particle  of  power  left,  or  his  servants,  or  his  magis- 
trates, of  spirit,  such  an  insult  could  not  be  passed  over. 
The  rashness  of  his  servants  contrived  to  involve  the 
Crown  and  themselves  in  inextricable  difficulties,  and 
to  make  the  unwarrantable  behaviour  of  Wilkes  appear 
innocent,  when  compared  with  the  excesses  they  com- 
mitted themselves. 

I  do  not  mean  to  lead  the  reader  through  the  maze  of 
vague  and  barbarous  law-proceedings,  which  sprang  out 
of  this  transaction.  It  did  but  lay  open  the  undefined 
or  unmeaning  magazine  of  terms  which  the  chicanery 
or  contradictions  of  ages  had  heaped  together,  and  it 
proved  that  the  Crown  and  the  subject  might  be  justified 

I  am  sure  all  foreigners,  especially  the  King  of  Prussia,  will  hold  the  minister 
in  contempt  and  abhorrence.  He  has  made  our  Sovereign  declare,  My 
expectations  have  been  fully  answered  by  the  happy  effects  which  the  several 
allies  of  my  crown  have  derived  from  this  salutary  measure  of  the  definitive 
treaty.  The  powers  at  war  with  my  good  brother,  the  King  of  Prussia,  have 
been  induced  to  agree  to  such  tervis  of  accommodation  as  that  great  Prince  has 
approved,  and  the  success  which  has  attended  my  negotiation  has  necessarily  and 
immediately  diffused  the  blessings  of  peace  through  every  part  of  Europe.  The 
infamous  fallacy  of  this  whole  sentence  is  apparent  to  all  mankind  ;  for  it  is 
known  that  the  King  of  Prussia  did  not  barely  approve,  but  absolutely  dictated 
•as  conqueror,  every  article  of  the  terms  of  peace.  No  advantage  of  any  kind 
has  accrued  to  that  magnanimous  Prince  from  our  negotiation  ;  but  he  was 
basely  deserted  by  the  Scottish  Prime  Minister  of  England.  He  was  known 
by  every  Court  in  Europe  to  be  scarcely  on  better  terms  here  than  at  Vienna, 
and  he  was  betrayed  by  us  in  the  treaty  of  peace.  What  a  strain  of  insolence, 
therefore,  is  it  in  a  minister  to  lay  claim  to  what  he  is  conscious  all  his  efforts 
tended  to  prevent,  and  meanly  to  arrogate  to  himself  a  share  in  the  fame  and 
glory  of  one  of  the  greatest  Princes  the  world  has  ever  seen.' — L.  M. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  219 

in  almost  any  excesses.  The  right  hand  of  Nonsense 
armed  the  King-,  and  her  left  defended  the  subject.  The 
lawyers  on  either  side  were  employed  in  discovering 
springes  or  loop-holes. 

After  a  week's  deliberation  Wilkes  was  seized,  April 
30th,  by  three  messengers,  on  a  general  warrant,  signed 
by  Lord  Halifax.  They  had  been  ordered  to  apprehend 
him  at  midnight,  but  abstained  till  noon  of  the  30th. 
Churchill,  his  friend,  then  with  him,  slipped  out  of  the 
house,  either  to  secure  himself  or  to  give  the  alarm.  Mr. 
Wood/  the  Under-Secretary,  and  Philip  Carteret  Webbe,^ 
a  most  villanous  tool  and  agent  in  any  iniquity,  seized 
his  papers,  though  he  had  received  intimation  time  enough 
to  convey  away  the  most  material.  He  was  conducted  to 
Lord  Halifax's,  where  he  behaved  with  much  firmness 
and  confidence,  and  grievously  wounded  the  haughty 
dignity  attempted  to  be  assumed  by  Lord  Egremont. 
They  committed  him  close  prisoner  to  the  Tower ;  a 
severity  rarely,  and  never  fit  to  be,  practised  but  in  cases 
of  most  dangerous  treason.  This  treatment  served  but 
to  increase  Wilkes's  spirit  and  wit.  He  desired  to  be 
confined  in  the  same  room  where  Sir  William  Windham, 
Lord  Egremont's  father,  had  been  kept  on  a  charge  of 
Jacobitism  ;  and  said  he  hoped,  if  there  could  be  found 
such  a  chamber  in  the  Tower,  that  he  might  not  be 
lodged  where  any  Scotchman  had  been  prisoner. 

About  the  same  time,  being  told  of  the  reasons  alleged 

1  Robert  Wood,  author  of  the  accounts  of  Balbec  and  Palmyra,  and  Under- 
Secretary  of  State.  He  had  been  so  made  by  Lord  Chatham,  but  had 
deserted  him.  [' Pah-n}Ta '  Wood  resigned  office  in  September  1763.  See 
Chathajn  Correspondence,  ii.  p.  246.  He  died  in  Gibbon's  old  house  at 
Putney  on  9th  September  1771,  and  was  buried  in  the  New  Cemetery, 
Upper  Richmond  Road,  where  a  monument  was  erected  with  an  inscription 
to  his  memory  written  by  Horace  Walpole. — E.] 

"  Philip  Carteret  Webbe,  M.P.  for  Haslemere,  and  Solicitor  to  the 
Treasury.  The  part  he  took  in  the  proceedings  against  Wilkes  savoured  too 
much  of  the  practice  of  the  Old  Bailey,  and  made  him  very  unpopular.  His 
character  otherwise  was  unexceptionable.  He  published  various  tracts  on 
law  and  antiquities,  and  was  a  great  collector  of  books  and  medals.  He 
died  in  1770,  aged  seventy. — L.  M. 


220  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

by  the  King  of  Spain ^  for  setting  aside  his  eldest  son,  two 
of  which  were,  that  the  Prince  squinted,  and  did  not 
beh'eve  the  mysteries  of  our  holy  religion  ;  then  said 
Wilkes,  '  I  can  never  be  King  of  Spain,  for  I  squint,  and 
believe  none  of  those  mysteries.' 

The  rigour  of  the  commitment  gave  serious  alarm  ;  but, 
the  very  day  on  which  it  happened,  Wilkes's  friends  ap- 
plied to  the  Court  of  Common  Pleas  for  his  habeas  corpus, 
expecting  it  from  Lord  Chief  Justice  Pratt,  and  scorning 
or  despairing  of  it  from  Lord  Mansfield. 

Lord  Temple  instantly  resorted  to  the  Tower,  but  was 
denied  admittance  to  the  prisoner  ;  a  restraint  the  ministers 
found  the  very  next  day  they  must  take  off.  Lord 
Temple  then  returned  to  visit  Wilkes,  as  did  the  Duke  of 
Grafton  and  some  few  others  of  rank  ;  but,  in  general,  the 
prisoner's  character  was  so  bad,  and  his  conduct  so  rash 
and  unguarded,  that  few  who  were  either  decent  or  cautious 
cared  to  be  concerned  with  him. 

The  habeas  corpus  being  granted,  Wilkes  was  carried 
to  the  Court  of  Common  Pleas,  May  3rd.  He  spoke  for 
an  hour,  said  '  attempts  had  been  made  to  corrupt  him, 
now  to  persecute  him  ;  he  had  been  worse  treated  than 
any  rebel  Scot'  The  crowd  in  Westminster  Hall  gave  a 
great  shout  ;  the  Chief  Justice,  with  great  dignity,  reproved 
them.  The  judges  took  time  to  deliberate.  The  people 
were  profuse  of  their  acclamations  to  the  sufferer. 

On  the  5th,  he  wrote  a  letter  to  his  daughter  (a  child 
whom  he  had  placed  in  a  convent  in  France  for  her 
education),  and  sent  it  open  to  Lord  Halifax  ;  it  congratu- 
lated her  on  living  in  a  free  country.  He  was  the  same 
day  turned  out  of  his  commission  in  the  militia. 

On  the  6th,  being  again  conveyed  from  the  Tower  to 
Westminster  Hall,  Pratt  and  the  other  judges  of  the 
Common  Pleas  unanimously  discharged  him  from  his  con- 
finement ;  the  Chief  Justice  delivering  their  opinions,  and 

^  When  Charles,  King  of  Naples,  on  the  death  of  his  brother,  King  Fer- 
dinand, succeeded  to  the  crown  of  Spain,  he  set  aside  his  eldest  son  as  an 
idiot,  made  the  second  Prince  of  Asturias,  and  the  third  King  of  Naples. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  221 

dismissing  him  on  his  parliamentary  privilege,  '  because, 
though  privilege  of  Parliament  does  not  hold  against  a 
breach  of  the  peace,  it  does  against  what  only  teiids  to  a 
breach  of  the  peace.  The  case  of  the  seven  bishops  was 
quoted  ;  the  judges  Wright,  Holloway,  and  Allibone  had 
been  against  them.  Allibone,  said  Pratt,  was  a  Papist ; 
Wright  and  Holloway  had  been  appointed  for  the  occa- 
sion ;  but  Powel,  an  honest  man,  had  declared  for  the 
bishops.  On  the  other  hand,  he  quoted  a  recent  case  of 
Lord  Tankerville,  who  having  been  arrested  on  a  prosecu- 
tion for  bribery  in  the  election  for  Windsor,  the  Lords  had 
declared  it  a  breach  of  privilege ' — we  shall  find  how  much 
less  tender  the  Commons  were  of  their  privileges. 

The  Chief  Justice  had  no  sooner  granted  the  enlarge- 
ment of  Wilkes,  than  two  of  the  King's  sergeants  presented 
letters  to  the  Court,  from  the  Attorney  and  Solicitor 
Generals,  demanding  to  be  admitted  into  the  Court,  as  the 
case  concerned  the  King's  interest.  The  Attorney,  it  is 
said,  has  a  right  of  interfering  in  any  Court  where  the 
King's  interest  is  agitated  ;  it  is  doubted  whether  the 
Solicitor  has  the  same  prerogative.  To  both  Pratt  an- 
swered that  they  had  applied  too  late.  Now  did  the  Court 
feel  the  consequence  of  having  forced  Pratt  to  be  Chief 
Justice  against  his  will. 

This  triumph  quite  overset  the  little  discretion  of  which 
Wilkes  had  been  master.  He  seemed  to  put  himself  into 
the  situation  of  a  King,  who,  not  content  with  the  out- 
works with  which  the  law  has  surrounded  his  person, 
attempts  to  employ  the  law  as  offensive  artillery.  Affect- 
ing to  have  been  robbed  of  moveables  when  his  papers 
were  seized,  Wilkes  entered  into  a  virulent  controversy, 
by  letter,  with  the  Secretaries  of  State ;  and  even  en- 
deavoured, though  in  vain,  to  obtain  warrants  for  search- 
ing their  houses.  This  wild  conduct  did  not  help  his 
cause.  His  next  step  fell  more  perniciously  on  his  own 
head.  He  erected  a  printing-press  in  his  own  house  ; 
and,  against  the  remonstrances  of  Lord  Temple,  who  never 
wanted  fear  where  there  was  room  for  it,  and  who  had  no 


222  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

taste  for  anything  that  did  not  lead  directly  home  to 
faction,  indulged  himself  in  realizing  those  sallies  of  his 
humour  and  intemperance,  which  are  scarcely  excusable 
when  transient  and  confined  to  the  jollity  of  intoxicated 
moments  at  table.  The  Court  regarding  Lord  Temple 
as  the  instigator,  not  as  the  Socrates,  of  this  Alcibiades, 
removed  him  from  the  Lord-Lieutenancy  of  the  county  of 
Buckingham.  The  printers,  who  had  been  vexed  in  their 
business  by  the  orders  of  the  Secretaries  of  State,  and 
encouraged  by  the  victory  of  Wilkes,  prosecuted  the 
messengers,  and  obtained  damages  to  the  value  of  ^300. 

The  same  spirit  spread  into  the  west.  In  the  cider 
counties  they  dressed  up  a  figure  in  Scotch  plaid,  with  a 
blue  riband,  to  represent  the  Favourite,  and  this  figure 
seemed  to  lead  by  the  nose  an  ass  royally  crowned.  At 
the  same  time  they  voted  instructions  to  their  members  to 
try  to  obtain  a  repeal  of  the  Act.  The  circumstance  of 
the  Act  being  passed  under  so  unpopular  an  administration 
was  most  unfortunate.  It  had  taken  thirty  years  to  open  the 
eyes  of  mankind  to  the  benefits  of  excise :  the  only,  at 
least  the  best,  method  of  improving  the  revenue  without 
imposing  new  burthens.  Being  started  at  so  ungracious  a 
moment,  the  old  prejudices  were  industriously  revived. 

The  Court  at  the  same  time  met  with  some  mortifica- 
tions in  their  pursuit  of  congratulatory  addresses  on  the 
peace,  which  they  sedulously  promoted.  One,  Judge 
Perrot,^  was  so  servile  as  to  recommend  it  from  the 
bench  on  the  circuit.  The  Duke  of  Newcastle  and  Lord 
Hardwicke,  the  one  Chancellor,  the  other  High  Steward 
of  the  University  of  Cambridge,  refused  to  go  to  St. 
James's   with   the   address    of    that    body.      Allen,^   the 

*  George  Perrot,  the  second  son  of  the  Rev.  Thomas  Perrot,  Prebendary  of 
Ripon,  was  appointed  a  Baron  of  the  Exchequer  in  January  1763.  He 
retired  from  the  bench  in  May  1776,  and  died  on  28th  January  1780,  aged 
sixty-nine.  There  is  a  monument  to  his  memory  in  Laleham  Church.  He 
was  never  knighted.  —  E. 

2  Ralph  Allen  of  Prior  Park,  near  Bath,  Master  of  the  Cross-posts.  [Hurd 
states  that  Warburton  married  '  Miss  Gertrude  Tucker,  Mr.  Allen's  favourite 
niece.' — Warburton's  Works  {^i%\\),  vol.  i.  p.  41. — E.] 


KING  GEORGE  III.  223 

ostentatious  patron  of  Pope  and  Warburton,  the  latter  of 
whom  had  married  his  natural  daughter,  prevailed  on  the 
city  of  Bath  to  thank  the  King  for  the  adequate^  peace, 
and  had  himself  the  insolence  or  folly  to  send  that  address, 
so  profligately  worded,  to  Mr.  Pitt,  with  whom  he  had 
maintained  a  mutual  intercourse  of  flattery.  Mr.  Pitt 
disdained  to  present  their  compliment  to  the  King,  and 
even  declared  he  would  represent  their  city  no  more. 

Wilkes,  in  the  meantime,  had  gone  to  France  to  visit 
his  daughter.  There  he  received  a  challenge  from  one 
Forbes,^  an  outlawed  Scot  in  the  French  service,  who 
could  not  digest  the  torrents  of  abuse  which  Wilkes  had 
poured  forth  on  his  country.  Alexander  Murray,  brother 
of  Lord  Elibank,  and  an  outlaw  too  since  the  Westminster 
Election  in  1751,^  was  the  go-between  in  this  quarrel,  not 
without  being  suspected  of  inflaming  it.  Wilkes  accepted 
the  defiance  for  the  next  morning,  but,  when  Forbes 
called  on  him,  affected  to  laugh  it  off,  saying,  he  was 

^  Mr.  Pitt  had  openly  pronounced  the  peace  inadequate,  and  it  seemed  to 
be  personally  levelled  at  him,  that  the  address  affected  to  call  it  adequate. 
[Bishop  Warburton  insists  on  Allen's  ignorance  of  Mr.  Pitt  having  applied 
the  term  '  inadequate  '  to  the  peace,  and  disclaims  any  concern  in  it  himself; 
though  he  admits  having  drawn  up,  promoted,  and  advised  a  similar  address 
from  the  clergy  of  Gloucester,  whose  interference,  on  this  occasion,  '  had  the 
fate,'  Mr.  Pitt  observed,  '  not  to  be  imitated  by  any  other  episcopal  see  in  the 
kingdom.'  Allen,  who  was  now  an  old  man,  felt  Mr.  Pitt's  resentment 
acutely,  and  immediately  withdrew  from  this  corporation.  He  died  on  the 
29th  June  of  the  following  year,  having  bequeathed  to  Mr.  Pitt  a  legacy  of 
;^iooo.  Mr.  Pitt's  letter  of  condolence  to  his  widow  shows,  that  whatever 
coolness  the  address  might  have  produced  in  their  intercourse  was  short- 
lived. The  correspondence  between  Mr.  Pitt  and  Allen  is  in  the  Annual 
Register  for  1763,  p.  206;  and  in  the  Chatham  Correspondence,  vol.  ii. 
p.  223  ;  see  also  pp.  253-259. — L.  M.] 

2  Captain  Forbes,  of  Ogilby's  regiment,  in  the  French  service.  He  was  of 
good  family  in  Scotland,  and  of  some  merit  in  his  profession,  as  may  be 
inferred  from  his  subsequently  attaining  the  rank  of  General  in  Portugal, 
where,  in  common  with  other  Scotch  exiles,  he  was  employed  and  trusted. — 
L.  M. 

'  Vide  Memoirs  of  the  year  1751,  [vol.  i.  p.  17  et  seq.  He  was  at  that 
time  residing  at  Paris  under  the  name  of  Count  Murray.  In  1 771  he  was 
recalled  by  letter  under  the  King's  privy  seal,  and  he  died  shortly  afterwards. 
— L.  M.] 


224  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

bound  to  fight  Lord  Egremont  by  preference  before  any- 
other  man.  When  that  excuse  availed  not,  he  asked 
Forbes  if  he  had  provided  a  second  ;  to  which  the  other 
replied,  such  preparation  was  too  dangerous  in  France. 
Altercations  thickened,  till  at  last  the  lieutenant  de  police 
was  sent  for,  who  obliged  Forbes  to  promise  not  to 
proceed  any  farther. 

Had  the  duel  with  Lord  Egremont  been  seriously 
intended,  from  that  too  would  Wilkes  have  been  delivered ; 
for  the  earl,  who  was  of  a  sanguine  and  apoplectic 
complexion,  of  which  he  had  felt  attacks,  and  though 
warned  in  vain  to  moderate  the  indulgence  of  his  palate, 
to  which  he  was  ungovernably  prone,  died  suddenly  on 
the  2ist  of  August,  and  put  an  end  to  a  triumvirate  which 
had  involved  their  master  and  themselves  in  such  a 
labyrinth  of  knotty  and  undecided  questions. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  225 


CHAPTER    XX 

Perplexity  of  the  'Triumvirate.' — Lord  Bute's  unsuccessful  Manoeuvres.— 
Lord  Halifax  and  Mr.  Grenville  remonstrate  with  the  King. — The 
Duchess  of  Bedford's  animosity  to  Lord  Bute  and  the  Princess  of  Wales. 
— Schemes  of  the  Bedford  Faction.  Mr.  Pitt  sent  for  by  the  King. — 
Negotiation  with  the  former.— The  Treaty  broken  off. — Causes  of  the 
Rupture. — The  King's  Account  of  his  Interviews  with  Pitt. — Pitt's 
Proposals. — Proscriptions. — Machinations  of  Lord  Sandwich. — Ministerial 
Arrangements. — Grenville's  Power. — Lord  Temple's  Conduct. 

But  it  was  not  the  affair  of  Wilkes  which  had  alone 
perplexed  the  Triumvirate.  They  found  they  were  by  no 
means  in  the  confidence  of  the  King.  He  was  continually 
suggesting  new  measures  to  them,  which  plainly  came 
from  a  hidden  quarter.  A  fortnight  before  the  death  of 
Lord  Egremont,  his  Majesty  had  hinted  to  Grenville 
that  he  wished  to  prevail  on  Lord  Hardwicke  to  return, 
if  not  to  his  service,  at  least  to  his  councils.  Whether 
the  blow  received  from  the  Common  Pleas  had  alarmed 
the  Favourite  (who  had  made  but  a  very  short  stay  at 
Harrowgate),  and  had  warned  him  to  look  out  for  more 
support ;  or  whether  he  thought  the  three  ministers 
insufficient ;  or  whether,  which  is  most  likely,  he  wished 
already  to  get  rid  of  them,  especially  having  detected  the 
underhand  practices  of  Grenville  against  his  son's  patent ; 
— in  short,  whatever  was  the  motive,  Grenville  could  not 
be  ignorant  who  was  author  of  the  advice,  and  only 
replied,  it  would  not  do.  The  King  insisted,  and  the 
overture  was  made ;  Hardwicke  rejected  it,  and  said  he 
would  not  abandon  Newcastle.  The  King  then  com- 
manded the  same  trial  to  be  made  on  Newcastle,  but 
with  exclusion  of  Mr.  Pitt ;  an  early  proof  of  those 
crooked  councils  of  division  with  which  the  Favourite 
VOL.  L  P 


226  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

was  afterwards  so  often  charged,  and  which  were  so 
agreeable  to  the  King's  natural  insincerity.  Newcastle 
haughtily  refused  the  offers  made  to  him.  Still  were  the 
King's  discourses  dark  and  ambiguous ;  and,  though 
affecting  to  call  out  for  new  strength  by  extending 
preferments,  he  had  refused,  at  Grenville's  recommenda- 
tion, to  make  the  Duke  of  Leeds  ^  President  of  the 
Council,  and  Lord  Hyde-  Chief  Justice  in  Eyre. 

On  this  behaviour  the  three  ministers  had  determined 
to  bring  his  Majesty  to  an  explanation.  Lord  Halifax 
broke  the  ice ;  complained  of  their  not  having  his 
countenance,  and  concluded  with  telling  him  that  he  had 
but  three  options  :  to  support  them  ;  to  try  a  coalition  of 
parties,  which  was  impracticable  ;  or  to  surrender  him- 
self, bound  hand  and  foot,  to  Mr.  Pitt.  Mr.  Grenville 
went  much  farther ;  reproached  him  with  violating  the 
assurances  he  had  given  them  that  Lord  Bute  should 
meddle  no  more,  and  with  abandoning  the  ministers  he 
had  himself  chosen.  The  King  renewed  his  professions, 
and  promised  to  be  firm  to  them.  Grenville  said  he 
should  go  into  the  country  for  a  fortnight,  and  begged 
the  King  to  take  his  final  resolution  against  that  time. 
At  Grenville's  return  the  King  had  renewed  his  pro- 
testations, and,  the  very  day  before  Lord  Egremont 
died,  Grenville  had  been  to  assure  him  of  the  King's 
promise  to  be  true  to  them  ;  but,  on  the  25th,  Grenville, 
through  great  professions  to  him,  perceived  that  his 
Majesty  was  not  without  a  disposition  of  recalling  Pitt, 
against  which  Grenville  made  a  warm,  not  to  say 
indecent,  remonstrance  and  protest. 

'  Thomas  Osborne,  fourth  Duke  of  Leeds. 

2  Thomas  ViUiers,  Baron  Hyde,  brother  of  William,  Earl  of  Jersey.  [He 
aad  been  Minister  at  Berlin  in  the  reign  of  George  the  Second,  and  received 
various  honours  from  Frederick  the  Great,  whose  preference  of  him  to  such 
men  as  Mr.  Legge  and  Mr.  Fox,  and  even  to  Sir  Andrew  Mitchell,  probably 
arose  from  the  same  reasons  that  induced  Nai)ole(m  to  bestow  the  warmest 
praise  on  such  of  his  enemy's  generals  as  he  most  wished  to  have  as 
opponents.  Lord  Hyde  was  an  amiable  nobleman,  of  very  comely  person, 
and  graceful  deportment ;  he  married  one  of  the  coheiresses  of  Lord 
Clarendon,  was  elevated  to  that  earldom  in  1776,  and  died  in  1786. — L.  M.] 


KING  GEORGE  III.  227 

The  Bedfords  in  the  interim  had  totally  renounced 
Bute.  The  Duchess  had  carried  her  animosity  still 
higher,  and  would  not,  on  her  return  from  the  French 
embassy,  be  prevailed  on  to  pay  her  duty  to  the  Princess 
of  Wales.  Casting-  about  for  allies  (for  Grenville  and 
Lord  Halifax  they  despised),  the  Bedford  faction  had 
not  been  without  views  of  connecting  with  the  Duke  of 
Cumberland  and  Newcastle ;  and  his  Royal  Highness 
had  at  this  very  juncture  been  invited  to  Woburn.  The 
death  of  Lord  Egremont  seeming  to  dissolve  that  ministry, 
a  bolder  stroke  was  struck  ;  and  the  Bedfords,  hoping 
under  him  to  get  possession  of  the  government,  deter- 
mined to  attempt  making  Mr.  Pitt  minister.  With  this 
view,  Rigby,  in  the  most  private  and  mysterious  manner, 
went  down  to  Woodstock,  and  sent  for  the  Duke  of 
Bedford,  who  was  then  at  Blenheim,  and  persuaded  him 
to  go  directly  to  town  to  the  King,  and  advise  him  to 
send  for  Mr.  Pitt.'  Lord  Shelburne,  who  in  his  separate 
department  had  affected  to  act  minister  too,  had  assured 
them  that  this  would  not  be  opposed  by  Lord  Bute  ;  but 
had  not  trusted  them,  or  was  not  trusted  himself,  with 
Lord  Bute's  real  disposition  that  way.  Rigby  had  no 
sooner  lighted  the  match  than  he  left  the  mine  to  take 
fire,  and  retired  to  his  own  house  in  the  country  ;  while 
the  Duke  of  Bedford  posted  to  the  King,  and  told  him 
that,  as  he  had  made  peace  abroad,  he  must  now  make  it 
at  home,  and  that  could  only  be  effected  by  sending  for 
Mr.  Pitt. 

Lord  Bute,  hearing  this  measure  had  been  prescribed 
by  the  Duke  of  Bedford,  thought  it  wiser  to  have  the 
merit  of  it  himself.  Mr.  Pitt,  though  trusting  to  the 
clamour  of  party  for  support,  had  seldom  openly  courted 
it ;  and,  since  he  had  had  such  eminent  services  to  boast, 
had   affected    to  despise  it.      He  had    kept  clear  of  all 

^  Mr.  Grenville  was  deeply  offended  at  this  interference  of  the  Duke  of 
Bedford  ;  and  his  friends,  inconsequence,  took  no  pains  to  defend  the  Duke 
when  the  current  of  popular  feeling  afterwards  turned  so  strongly  against 
his  Grace. — L.  M. 


228  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

transactions  with  Wilkes,  and  had  condemned  Lord 
Temple's  connection  with  him,  and,  yet  more,  his  visits 
to  that  incendiary  in  the  Tower.  Mr.  Pitt's  amity 
might  reconcile  the  people,  and  no  man  was  so  accom- 
modating a  partner  in  power ;  Pitt  having  {(i\v  or  no 
dependants,  and  scorning  to  meddle  in  the  distribution 
of  common  places  and  preferments.  On  these  grounds 
the  Favourite,  through  the  intervention  of  Alderman 
Beckford,  entered  into  a  negotiation  with  Mr.  Pitt,  and, 
finding  facilities  there  beyond  his  most  sanguine  hopes, 
induced  the  King  to  send  for  that  formidable  dictator. 

It  was  on  the  28th  of  August  that  Mr.  Grenville, 
arriving  at  Buckingham  House,  was  struck  with  the 
apparition  of  Mr.  Pitt's  chair  and  servants  in  the  Court. 
This  was  the  first  notice  he  or  the  public  received  of  a 
phenomenon  so  little  expected,  at  least  by  the  latter. 

Let  it  be  remarked  here,  that  I  do  not  pretend  to  give 
a  perfect  and  entire  account  of  the  following  negotiation. 
No  transaction  was  ever  involved  in  more  contradictions 
and  mystery ;  for,  though  the  retainers  of  both  sides 
spoke  out,  and  amply,  their  narratives  disagreed  materially, 
and  the  exact  truth  was  never  fully  known.  P'rom  all  I 
could  collect  then  or  since,  and  from  explanations  which 
I  have  gathered  by  commenting  on  the  subsequent 
behaviour  of  the  actors,  I  believe  the  ensuing  relation  is 
pretty  near  the  truth. 

The  Bedfords  had  sent  Calcraft  to  Hayes  ^  to  sound 
how  Mr.  Pitt  stood  affected  to  them,  and  Calcraft 
returned  with  a  most  favourable  account.  On  this 
assurance  had  the  Duke  of  Bedford  pushed  on  the 
measure  of  advising  the  recall  of  Mr.  Pitt.  Lord  Bute 
had  not  been  less  encouraged  by  the  report  of  Alderman 
Beckford,  for  Mr.  Pitt  had  determined,  if  ever  he  should 
return  to  Court,  not  to  make  himself  unwelcome  there. 
The  Favourite,  therefore,  saw  him  privately  at  his  house 
in  Jermyn  Street  before  he  saw  the  King,  and  advised 
him  not  to  propose  Lord  Temple  for  the  Treasury,  which 

^  Mr.  Pitt's  villa  at  Hayes,  near  Bromley,  in  Kent. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  229 

would  break  off  the  negotiation.  Pitt  thanked  him,  but 
did  not  take  his  advice, — and  on  this  rock  undoubtedly 
did  the  treaty  split ;  for  all  the  variations  I  have  hinted 
at  were  but  circumstances  artfully  seized  or  feigned  to 
colour  the  rupture,  or  misrepresent  it. 

The  Favourite  deceived,  or  deceiving  himself,  brought 
about  the  interview,  as  I  have  said,  between  the  King 
and  Mr.  Pitt.  It  lasted  three  hours,  and  the  bargain  was 
universally  thought  concluded.  But  the  King  had  not 
only  been  revolted  at  Mr.  Pitt's  terms,  though  without 
owning  it,  but  Mr.  Pitt  had  had  the  sagacity  to  discover 
his  Majesty's  repugnance ;  and  therefore  not  only  carried 
on  the  farce  of  returning  to  Court  the  next  day,  but  was 
so  dexterous  as  to  see  the  Duke  of  Newcastle,  with  whose 
interests  he  had  by  no  means  clogged  his  first  demands  ; 
and  assuring  his  Grace  of  his  zeal  for  his  service,  went  back 
to  the  King  with  a  schedule  of  terms  extremely  enlarged. 
These  were  peremptorily  rejected,  and  the  treaty  broke 
off,  on  pretences  which  the  one  had  not  meaned  to  ask, 
nor  the  other  cared  whether  he  granted  or  refused.  The 
Treasury  for  Lord  Temple  was  the  real  stone  of  offence.^ 

But  no  sooner  was  the  rupture  known,  than  all  tongues 
were  let  loose  to  inquire,  guess,  invent,  or  assign  causes. 
The  King  detailed  his  conversation  with  Mr.  Pitt  to  all 
that  came  about  him — and  almost  all  added  to  it,  as  their 
interest  or  malice  suggested.     Mr.  Pitt  saw  very  few,  and 

1  Walpole  is  mistaken  in  this  supposition  ;  for  the  King  himself  proposed 
Lord  Temple  for  the  Treasury. — Lord  Hardwicke's  letter  to  Lord  Royston. 
An  impartial  narrative  of  this  transaction  is  given  by  Mr.  Adolphus  (vol.  i. 
p.  127),  with  a  reference  to  the  contemporary  authorities,  of  which  the  most 
important  are  Lord  Hardwicke's  letter,  and  the  letters  in  the  Chatham 
Correspondence  (vol.  ii.  p.  236).  The  '  dexterity '  and  finesse  ascribed  in  the 
text  to  Mr.  Pitt  hardly  belong  to  his  character,  and  certainly  were  not 
exhibited  on  this  occasion.  His  private  correspondence  proves,  as  he  told 
the  King,  that  he  felt  throughout  the  impossibility  of  his  making  a  ministry, 
unless  it  rested  on  '  the  great  families  who  have  supported  the  Revolution 
Government,  and  other  great  persons,  of  whose  ability  and  integrity  the 
country  have  had  experience,  and  who  have  weight  and  credit  in  the  nation.' 
This  would  necessarily  have  involved  greater  changes  than  the  King  then 
contemplated,  though  not  greater  than  his  Majesty  subsequently  found 
inevitable. — L.  M. 


230  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

to  fewer  would  disclose  any  circumstances.  He  soon 
found  that  he  could  not  speak  without  flatly  contradicting 
what  his  Majesty  had  said,  or  was  reported  to  have  said. 
No  wonder  the  transaction  came  forth  loaded  with  un- 
certainties and  inconsistence ! 

The  substance  reported  was,  that  Mr.  Pitt  had  proscribed 
almost  all  the  ministry  then  existing-,  and  yet  had  been 
very  cool  in  recommendations  of  the  Opposition.  The 
first  part  was  not  very  credible,  for  though  his  haughtiness 
rendered  him  indifferent  to  those  who  affected  to  call 
themselves  his  party,  his  nature,  on  the  other  hand,  was 
not  vindictive :  and  it  was  true,  that  he  had  not  been 
worse  treated  by  the  one  set  than  by  the  other.  On  his 
second  audience,  I  believe  it  might  be  true  to  a  good 
degree  that  he  had  been  dictatorial ;  but  at  first  he  had 
been  far  more  moderate.  However,  it  was  given  out  that 
he  proscribed  all  who  had  made,  or  had  voted  for,  the 
peace :  whereas  he  had  spoken  tenderly  of  some  of  the 
negotiators  ;  and  had  said  of  the  treaty  itself,  that  he 
would  take  it,  and  make  the  best  he  could  of  it. 

The  King  himself,  relating  the  two  conversations,  took 
care  to  dwell  on  any  circumstances  that  would  most  affect 
the  persons  to  whom  he  made  the  confidence.  Thus,  to 
Lord  Hertford,  at  that  time  Lord  of  the  Bedchamber  in 
waiting,  the  King  said,  '  Mr.  Pitt  proscribed  several, 
particularly  your  friend  Lord  Powis:^  I  told  him,'  con- 
tinued his  Majesty,  '  that  he  might  restore  Lord  George 
Cavendish ;-  but  Lord  Powis  had  stuck  by  me,  and  I 
never  would  abandon  him.'^  I  will  stand  by  those  who 
have  stood  by  me.  He  said  little,'  continued  the  King, 
'of  Legge'  (another  of  Lord  Hertford's  friends,  consequently 
the  King  intended  Legge  should  be  informed),  'only,  having 
recommended  Lord  Temple  for  the  Treasury,  Mr.  Pitt 
said,  Mr.  Legge  may  be  his  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer, 
if  he  pleases — if  not.  Lord  Temple  will  name  atiother.     He 

^  Henry  Arthur  Herbert,  Earl  of  Powis. 

*  He  had  been  succeeded  as  Treasurer  of  the  Household  by  Lord  Powis. 

'  His  Majesty  did  not  give  him  up  in  less  than  two  years  on  the  next  change. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  231 

surprised  me,'  pursued  the  King  to  Lord  Hertford,  '  with 
saying  still  less  of  your  relation  the  Duke  of  Grafton  ;  and 
more,  with  crying  up  to  me  for  one  of  the  jfirst  men  of 
business  in  the  kingdom,  Lord  Rockingham,^  whom  he 
intended  for  First  Lord  of  the  Admiralty.  I  thought,' 
said  his  Majesty,  '  I  had  not  two  men  in  my  bedchamber 
of  less  parts  than  Lord  Rockingham.'  The  King  spoke 
handsomely  of  both  the  Dukes  of  Grafton  and  Devonshire, 
and  laid  his  treatment  of  the  latter  on  passion,  that  Duke 
not  having  made  the  least  excuse  for  not  coming  to 
council  when  he  had  been  summoned.  Knowing  that 
Lord  Hertford  was  not  well  with  Fox,  the  King  affirmed 
that  he  had  taken  the  latter  last  winter  against  his  inclina- 
tion ;  and  he  told  Lord  Hertford  that  the  Duke  ot  New- 
castle had  urged  the  Duke  of  Bedford  to  make  a  worse 
peace  than  Mr.  Pitt  had  projected,  and  had  promised  to 
defend  it :  and  that  the  Duke  of  Devonshire  had  recom- 
mended to  the  Duke  of  Bedford  to  make  any  peace  ;  and 
then,  fearing  to  be  reproached  with  that  advice,  always 
avoided  conversation  with  that  Duke.  '  When  he  took 
leave  of  me,'  added  the  King,  '  Mr.  Pitt  said  to  me,  Sir, 
the  House  of  Commons  will  not  force  me  upon  your 
Majesty,  and  I  will  never  come  into  your  service  against 
your  consent'  'You  see,'  said  Lord  Hertford,  when  he 
repeated  this  conversation  to  me,  '  that  if  they  did  not 
shut  the  King  up,  he  would  talk  enough  to  anybody!' — 
but  if  they  sometimes  debarred  him  from  talking,  he  was 
now  instructed  to  talk — and  every  grain  he  sowed  brought 
forth  an  hundred-fold. 

I  must  observe  that  his  Majesty  had  told  Lady  Holland, 
in  the  drawing-room,  that  he  should  never  forget  Mr.  Fox's 
undertaking  the  House  of  Commons  and  the  Peace  in  the 
last  winter.  It  is  certain  that  in  this  interview  with 
Mr.  Pitt,  the  King  proposed  to  take  the  Paymaster's  place 
from  Fox,  and  bestow  it  on  George  Grenville. 

Of  the  persons  really  proscribed,  the  chief  was  Lord 
Mansfield.  '  He  is  a  Jacobite,'  said  Pitt,  '  and  means,  sir, 
1  Charles  Watson  Wentworth,  Marquis  of  Rockingham. 


232  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

to  ruin  your  family.'  He  recommended  Pratt  for  a  peer- 
age, and  in  future  for  the  Chancellor's  Seals :  would  have 
saved  the  Duke  of  Marlborough,  as  a  young  man  misled  ; 
Elliot,  for  having  tried  to  preserve  union  between  him  and 
Lord  Bute  ;  and  of  Lord  Halifax  he  had  said,  '  that  he  was 
a  pretty  man,  and,  as  in  bad  circumstances,  might  be  Groom 
of  the  Stole  or  Paymaster.'  '  The  Duke  of  Newcastle,'  he 
said,  '  would  take  any  place  not  of  business.'  Charles 
Townshend  he  proposed  for  Secretary  of  State  with  him- 
self The  Secretary  at  War  should  not  be  of  consequence, 
as  it  was  now  under  Ellis,^  that  clerk  of  Fox  the  Paymaster, 
but  should  depend  on  him  whom  his  Majesty  should  think 
proper  to  command  his  army.  '  Then,'  said  the  King, '  we 
shall  agree  in  Lord  Granby ' ;  '  or,'  said  Pitt,  '  in  Lord 
Albemarle.'^  This  was  the  sole  approach  he  seemed  to 
make  towards  the  Duke  of  Cumberland  ;  but  never  would 
his  Majesty  have  trusted  his  army  with  a  creature  of  his 
uncle. 

Of  Lord  Gower  Pitt  spoke  not  favourably,  having  pro- 
bably discovered  that  it  was  the  way  to  make  his  court  to 
the  Favourite,  who,  having  perceived  that  that  Lord  aimed 
at  being  a  favourite  himself,  had  taken  care  to  alienate  the 
King's  mind  from  him.  Rigby  was  not  excepted  for  mercy,^ 
and  Lord  Sandwich  much  less.  Of  the  Duke  of  Bedford 
Mr.  Pitt  spoke  properly,  as  of  a  man  well-intentioned,  but 
shamefully  misguided,  and  who  might  hereafter,  if  in  proper 
hands,  be  useful  to  Government.  But  nothing  harsh  did 
Pitt  utter  against  the  peace  :  he  would  try  to  meliorate  it. 
Should  a  national  spirit  of  inquiry  arise,  he  would  not  resist 
it.  He  had  held  the  same  language  formerly  on  the  loss 
of  Minorca :  they  were  specious  words  then  and  now,  but 
with  no  sanguinary  intentions. 

^  Welbore  Ellis,  Esq. 

-  George  Keppel,  third  Earl  of  Albemarle. 

'  Walpole  is  in  error  here.  Wood  informed  Mr.  Pitt  of  the  report  that  he 
had  proscribed  Lord  Gower,  Rigby,  and  others  of  the  Bedford  party ;  and 
Mr.  Pitt's  reply,  though  it  has  not  been  preserved,  may  be  inferred,  from 
Wood's  acknowledgment  of  it,  to  have  amounted  to  a  positive  denial  of  the 
charge. —  Chatham  Correspondence,  vol.  ii.  p.  249. — L.  M. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  233 

When  Calcraft  was  reproached  by  the  Bedford  faction 
with  having  deceived  them  on  Pitt's  disposition  towards 
them,  he  could  not  evade  the  charge.  A  breach  ensued, 
and  he  remained  attached  to  Mr.  Pitt. 

Sandwich,  finding  himself  proscribed  by  Pitt,  made 
advantage  of  the  moment,  and  exerting  all  his  invention 
and  industry,  of  which  no  man  possessed  a  larger  receipt, 
he  set  himself  to  persuade  men  of  all  denominations  that 
they  had  been  marked  in  black  letters  in  the  dictator's 
catalogue  of  pains  and  penalties.  He  even  drew  every 
man's  character  to  himself,  and  selecting  their  faults  or 
deficiencies,  ascribed  to  Mr.  Pitt  both  the  recapitulation 
and  imaginary  sentence  that  followed  it.  Grenville  and 
Lord  Halifax  caught  the  righteous  flame,  and  diffused  it : 
Grenville  even  assembling  the  Commissioners  of  the  several 
boards,  and  assuring  them,  one  and  all,  that  they  had  been 
condemned  by  Mr.  Pitt  to  be  cashiered.  To  Woburn, 
where  the  Duke  of  Bedford  was  at  this  anxious  moment 
detained  by  his  royal  visitor,  the  Duke  of  Cumberland, 
Lord  Sandwich  wrote  inflammatory  letters,  telling  Bedford 
that  he  was  proscribed,  and  his  peace  to  be  attacked.  The 
warm  little  Duke  caught  fire  ;  but  Rigby,  to  whom  Sand- 
wich had  made  the  same  report,  doubted,  and  came  to 
town,  where  he  was  either  duped  into,  or  persuaded  to 
join  in,  the  imposition. 

Grenville  was  pressed  by  the  King  to  remain  minister, 
and  did  not  want  to  be  pressed.  The  Duke  of  Bedford,  in 
the  hot  fit  of  zeal  and  resentment,  accepted  the  post  of 
President  ;  and  Shelburne,  who  had  shuffled  round  the 
compass  with  so  ill  success,  and  lost  the  favour  of  Lord 
Bute,  choosing  now  to  adhere  to  Pitt,  and  resigning  the 
seals,  they  were  bestowed  on  the  only  man  who  could 
replace,  or  excel  him,  Lord  Sandwich.  It  was  fortunate 
for  Grenville  and  union,  that  the  faction  did  not  wish  to 
place  the  Duke  of  Bedford  at  the  head  of  the  Treasury, — 
but  they  could  not  trust  his  warmth  and  absurdities.  In 
Ireland  he  had  disgusted  everybody,  and  had  gone  so  far 
as  to  tell  the  Irish  themselves  that  theirs  was  no  Parlia- 


234  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

ment.  The  Court  had  wished  to  have  Charles  Townshend 
Secretary  of  State  with  Lord  Halifax  ;  but  he  too,  for  that 
time,  stuck  to  Mr.  Pitt,  and  refused. 

Thus,  from  a  strange  concurrence  of  jarring  causes, 
there  sprung  up  out  of  great  weakness  a  strong  and 
cemented  ministry,  who  all  acquiesced  in  the  predominant 
power  of  Grenville.  The  Favourite  hated,  had  tried  to 
shake  him  off,  and  he  knew  it.  How  much  must  his 
brother  Temple  have  been  detested  at  Court,  when,  under 
all  these  humiliating  aspects,  it  was  thought  preferable  to 
retain  Grenville ! 

In  truth,  nothing  could  be  more  offensive  than  Lord 
Temple's  conduct,  whether  considered  in  a  public  or 
private  light.  Opposition  to  his  factious  views  seemed 
to  let  him  loose  from  all  ties,  all  restraint  of  principles.  Of 
the  truth  of  this  assertion  he,  at  the  time  I  am  describing, 
gave  a  convincing  proof.'  His  brother  George  was  at  that 
moment  the  object  of  his  jealousy  and  resentment.  He 
had,  however,  been  prevailed  upon  by  his  family,  or  rather 
by  considerations  of  family,  to  suffer  Mr.  Grenville  to  be 
rechoscn  for  Buckingham  ;  but  on  this  sole  condition,  that 
Mr.  Grenville  should  give  up  a  paper  formerly  received 
from  him.  When  Dr.  Lyttelton,  Bishop  of  Carlisle,^  who 
had  negotiated  this  treaty,  gave  him  the  paper,  he  said, 
after  reading  it :  'It  is  true,  I  am  bound  in  honour  and 
by  promise  to  make  a  firm  entail  of  my  estate, — I  will  ; 
but  it  shall  be  on  my  brother  James.'-  The  case  was 
this  :  it  had  been  discovered  during  the  life  of  their  uncle, 
the  late  Lord  Cobham,  that  he  had  made  a  flaw  in  the 
settlement  of  his  estate.  A  meeting  of  his  nephews  was 
held  in  the  presence  of  his  sister,^  and  their  mother,  the 

^  Dr.  Charles  Lyttelton,  brother  of  George,  Lord  Lyttelton.  They  were 
sons  of  Christian,  sister  of  Richard,  Lord  Cobham,  consequently  first  cousins 
of  Lord  Temple. 

"  James  Grenville,  the  third  brother. 

^  Richard  Temple,  Lord  Cobham,  had  four  sisters,  Maria,  Hester, 
Christian,  and  Penelope.  Maria,  widow  of  Sir  John  Langham,  offended  him 
by  marrying  Mr.  West,  a  clergyman,  on  which  he  set  her  aside,  and  settled 
his  estate,  and  obtained  his  peerage  to  be  settled,  on  Hester,  the  second  sister, 


KING  GEORGE  III.  235 

late  Lady  Temple.  She  said,  '  My  son  Richard  is  ill  with 
my  brother ;  if  we  tell  my  brother  of  this  flaw,  he  may 
make  a  new  settlement,  and  give  his  fortune  from  my 
eldest  son.'  George  Grenville  consented  to  keep  the 
secret,  provided  his  brother  gave  him  the  most  solemn 
promise  in  writing  to  resettle  the  estate  when  he  should 
come  to  it.  Insensible  to  such  a  tie,  and  filled  with 
rancour,  he  had  the  mortification  of  seeing  that  very 
brother  preserved  in  power  merely  to  his  exclusion. 

Other  persons  preferred  on  the  new  settlement  were 
Lord  Egmont  to  the  head  of  the  Admiralty,  and  Lord 
Hyde  to  be  joint-Postmaster. 

and  her  issue,  who,  by  Mr.  Grenville,  her  husband,  were  Richard,  George, 
James,  Henry,  Thomas,  and  Hester,  the  wife  of  Mr.  Pitt.  [Maria  Temple, 
by  her  first  husband,  Dr.  Richard  West,  Archdeacon  of  Berks,  was  the  mother 
of  Gilbert  West,  the  author  of  the  treatise  on  the  Resurrection]. — E. 


J  36  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 


CHAPTER   XXI 

Secret  power  of  Lord  Bute. — His  rupture  with  Pitt. — The  late  Prince  of 
Wales's  character  of  Bute.  —Extraordinary  Anecdote. — Mr.  Legge's  impru- 
dent Manoeuvre. — Unanimous  attempt  to  destroy  Wilkes. — Governor 
Johnstone. — General  Wall.  — The  Comte  de  Guerchy. — His  character. — 
Madame  de  Guerchy. — The  Duke  de  Nivernois,  and  the  Chevalier 
d'Eon. — Death  of  Augustus  the  Third  of  Saxony. — The  Pope  invites  the 
Duke  of  York  to  Rome. — Humiliation  of  the  helpless  Line  of  Stuart. — 
Charles  Yorke  resigns  the  Attorney-Generalship. — Trimming  conduct  of 
the  Yorke  Family.— Unfavourable  Commencement  of  the  new  Lord  Lieu- 
tenant's power  in  Ireland, 

Still  did  the  same  grievance  remain,  the  favour  and 
secret  power  of  Lord  Bute.  Grenville  and  Lord  Halifax 
in.sisted  that  he  should  go  abroad  ;  and  it  was  said  to  be 
promised.  At  least  his  refusal,  or  breach  of  promise,  was 
made  the  pretence  for  depriving  him  of  the  custody  of 
the  King's  Privy-purse,  an  office  he  yet  retained.  The 
nomination  of  a  successor  showed  how  little  the  ministers 
had  gained,  and  how  vainly  they  endeavoured  to  destroy 
his  credit,  the  Purse  being  immediately  given  to  Sir 
William  Breton,^  who  was  groom  of  the  Bedchamber  to 
the  King,  as  he  had  been  to  the  King's  father,  and  who 
was  a  most  devoted  tool  of  the  Princess  and  her  favourite. 
A  stronger  proof  of  the  latter's  confidence  in  his  own 
power  was  given  by  himself  George  Grenville  having 
written  a  very  voluminous  letter  to  Sir  John  Philipps, 
cfivinp-  an  account  of  the  negotiation  with  Mr.  Pitt  and  its 
miscarriage,  of  which  letter  the  King  had  seen  and 
approved  every  paragraph,  Sir  John  wrote  a  warm 
expostulation   to  Lord  Bute  (who  he  did  not  know  had 

^  Breton  was   knighted   on   2ist   September   1761.        He   died    on    8th 
February  1773. — E. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  237 

been  concerned  in  that  treaty),  blaming  the  timidity  of 
sending  for  Mr.  Pitt.  Lord  Bute  returned  a  haughty 
answer,  in  which  he  said,  zuhatever  the  ministers  might 
tJiitik,  they  should  find  lie  himself  was  minister  still.  A 
memorable  sentence,  confirmed  by  facts,  and  of  which  the 
contrary  assertion  was  vainly  attempted  afterwards  to  be 
imposed  upon  the  world. 

The  mysteries  of  this  man's  conduct,  and  the  reserve 
and  eccentric  starts  of  Mr.  Pitt,  have  made  any  lights 
valuable  that  can  be  thrown  on  this  part  of  our  history. 
Mr.  Pitt's  was  the  character  suited  to  support  and  colour 
over  the  pusillanimity  of  the  Favourite,  but  his  jealousy 
and  their  mutual  pride  threw  them  at  a  distance.  The 
affair  of  George  Sackville,  who  was  attached  to  Lord  Bute, 
and  proscribed  by  Pitt  in  compliment  to  Prince  Ferdinand, 
had  given  the  finishing  stroke  to  their  rupture  ;  hastened, 
too,  by  that  very  attachment  of  Mr.  Pitt  to  the  foreign 
house  of  Brunswick.  Nor,  with  all  the  disposition  of  Pitt 
to  forgive  the  Favourite's  offences,  could  they  meet  again 
while  Lord  Temple  hung  upon  his  brother-in-law,  and  was 
the  sine  qua  non  of  Mr.  Pitt's  return  to  Court.  On  every 
occasion  of  moment  appeared  the  justness  of  the  character 
drawn  of  Lord  Bute  by  the  late  Prince  of  Wales,  who  did 
not  want  parts,  nor  ill-nature  to  sharpen  those  parts,  nor 
insolence  to  utter  what  either  of  them  dictated.  Growing 
tired  of  Lord  Bute  a  little  before  his  death,  he  said  to  him, 
'  Bute,  you  would  make  an  excellent  ambassador  in  some 
proud  little  Court  where  there  is  nothing  to  do.'  It  had 
been  happy  for  England,  and  for  Lord  Bute  too,  if  the 
Prince  could  have  made  that  destination  of  him — I  mean, 
without  living  to  execute  it  himself 

I  shall  relate  another  very  extraordinary  anecdote, 
which  will  not  be  mentioned  improperly  in  this  place, 
though  I  do  not  know  the  precise  time  in  which  it 
happened.  The  Princess  Dowager  dreamed  that  she  was 
in  the  palace  of  Saxe  Gotha :  the  window  was  open,  and 
the  moon,  level  to  it,  shook  with  a  tremulous  motion 
before  her   eyes,   to  her  great  disquiet.     She  bade  Lord 


238  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

Bute  try  to  fix  it.  Extending  his  arms  to  stop  its  motion, 
it  burst  in  his  hand  into  ten  thousand  fiery  splinters  ;  on 
which,  turning  to  the  Princess,  he  said  reproachfully,  '  See, 
Madam,  to  what  you  have  brought  me!'  This  dream  was 
the  Princess  so  weak  as  to  repeat  the  next  morning  to 
some  of  her  women  ;  one  of  whom,  I  g;uess  the  wife  of 
Velters  Cornwall,  told  it  to  Lady  Suffolk,^  who  trusted  it 
to  me.  She  did  not  name  her  authority,  but  said  she 
heard  it  from  one  of  the  Princess's  bedchamber  ;  and  Mrs. 
Cornwall  I  know  was  the  one  with  whom  Lady  Suffolk 
was  the  most  connected.  I  repeat  this  vision,  not  as 
prophetic  or  divine,  but  as  a  strong  picture  of  what  passed 
in  the  mind  on  which  it  painted  itself. 

Before  I  close  this  account  of  the  negotiation,  I  ought 
to  assign  the  reason  why  Mr.  Pitt  had  so  slightingly  or 
offensively  mentioned  Mr.  Legge,  the  second  in  opposi- 
tion, and  long  the  second  to  Mr.  Pitt  himself.  With  all 
his  abilities,  Legge  was  of  a  creeping  underhand  nature, 
and  aspired  to  the  lion's  place  by  the  manoeuvre  of  the 
mole.  While  yet  connected  with  Mr.  Pitt,  and  before  he 
had  lost  favour  at  Leicester  House,^  he  had,  before  the 
late  King's  death,  brought  about  a  secret  interview  with 
Newcastle  ;  but  with  so  much  circumspection  that,  meeting 

^  Henrietta  Ilobart,  sister  of  the  first  Earl  of  Buckinghamshire,  widow  of 
the  Earl  of  Suffolk,  and  afterwards  of  George  Berkeley,  brother  of  the  Earl 
of  Berkeley,  Mistress  of  the  Robes  to  Queen  Caroline,  and  mistress  of  King 
George  the  Second.  The  author  lived  in  great  friendship  with  her  the  last 
years  of  her  life  ;  her  house  at  Marble  Hill,  Twickenham,  and  his  at  Straw- 
berry Hill,  near  the  same  village,  were  within  a  mile  of  each  other,  and  he 
passed  three  or  four  evenings  every  week  with  her,  when  they  were  in  the 
country.  She  died  July  26,  1767,  aged  seventy-nine,  and  was  remarkable  for 
her  strict  and  minute  veracity  and  memory,  which  she  retained  to  the  last, 
as  well  as  eyesight,  teeth,  and  the  elegance  of  her  person.  [Her  Letters  were 
edited  by  J.  W.  Croker  in  1824,  London,  8vo. — E.] 

-  Leicester  House,  in  Leicester  Fields,  the  residence  of  the  Sydneys,  Earls 
of  Leicester,  was  hired  and  inhabited  by  King  George  and  Queen  Caroline, 
when  Prince  and  Princess  of  Wales,  on  their  quarrel  with  George  the  First ; 
as  it  was  afterwards,  on  a  similar  occasion,  by  Frederick,  Prince  of  Wales, 
whose  widow,  Augusta,  also  dwelt  there  till  after  the  accession  of  her  son 
to  the  Crown.  George  the  Third,  after  his  father's  death,  lived  at  Saville 
House,  the  next  door  to  her. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  239 

him  at  Lord  Dupplin's,  Legge  had  insisted  the  conversa- 
tion should  pass  without  candles  and  in  the  dark.  The 
Duke  was  charmed  with  the  mystery,  and  with  the  pleasure 
of  betraying  it  to  Mr.  Pitt.  Mr.  Elliot,  as  he  told  me  him- 
self, discovered  it  too,  and  acquainted  Lord  Bute — and 
thus  with  both  was  Legge  ruined.  I  now  return  to  the 
common  occurrences  of  the  year. 

In  one  point  the  Favourite  and  his  rivals  agreed  ;  that 
is,  in  the  destruction  of  Wilkes.  The  rashness  and 
despotic  conduct  of  the  triumvirate  had  made  them 
parties  in  the  same  cause  ;  they  pursuing  him  with  what 
they  called  Law,  and  the  Scotch  without  attention  to  any 
law.  Johnstone,  one  of  Lord  Bute's  American  governors,^ 
had  the  same  view  with  Forbes,  but  took  a  looser  plan. 
Having  been  reflected  on  in  a  North  Briton — I  think  then 
no  longer  written  by  Wilkes — he  challenged  the  author, 
whoever  it  was  ;  and,  to  be  sure  of  provoking  at  least  one 
person,  threw  out  in  his  challenge,  printed  in  the  news- 
paper, severe  sarcasms  on  Lord  Temple's  want  of  spirit. 

About  this  time  General  Wall,-  a  true  friend  to  the 
union  of  England  and  Spain,  finding  the  French  interest 
daily  making  greater  progress  at  Madrid,  desired   leave 

1  The  names  of  four  Scotchmen  appear  in  the  same  Gazette  to  appointments, 
or  as  governors  in  the  American  colonies,  George  Johnstone  being  one  of 
them.  He  was  the  third  son  of  Sir  James  Johnstone  of  Westerhall ;  he  was 
of  a  hot  and  most  pugnacious  temperament,  as  he  showed  some  years  later 
by  his  duel  with  Lord  George  Germaine.     He  died  in  1787. — L.  M. 

-  Don  Richard  Wall,  of  Irish  extraction,  was  Ambassador  here  from  Spain 
in  the  reign  of  George  the  Second.  He  was  a  most  artful,  agreeable  man, 
of  much  wit,  and  a  great  favourite  at  this  Court.  At  his  return  to  Madrid, 
he  had  been  made  Secretary  of  State  in  1754  [upon  the  downfall  of  Enseiiada. 
Sir  Benjamin  Keene,  by  his  advice  and  influence,  materially  contributed  to 
this  event,  which  proved  highly  favourable  to  the  British  interests  at  Madrid. 
The  intrigues  in  the  Spanish  Court  and  the  financial  difficulties  of  the  country 
made  Wall's  post  a  very  irksome  one.  He  discharged  its  duties  at  least  as 
ably  as  either  his  predecessor  or  his  successor.  The  King  was  unwilling  to 
part  with  him,  and  made  his  retirement  honourable  by  many  marks  of  dis- 
tinction. He  passed  the  remaining  years  of  his  life  chiefly  at  Soto  de  Roma, 
a  royal  castle,  in  the  lovely  valley  of  Grenada,  where  he  maintained  a  splendid 
hospitality.  Mr.  Swinburne  visited  him  there,  and  has  given  a  very  agreeable 
account  of  him.     He  died  1778.— L.  M.] 


240  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

to  resign  on  pretence  of  failure  of  his  eyesight.  Grimaldi  ^ 
was  immediately  ordered  home  from  Paris  to  succeed 
him  ;  a  man  devoted  to  France.  To  that  Court  Lord 
Hertford  set  out  on  the  13th  of  October,  and  Monsieur 
de  Guerchy  arrived  thence.  The  Comte  de  Guerchy^ 
was  an  amiable  soldier  ;  not  to  be  named  for  parts,  but 
far  better  qualified  for  his  situation  than  his  own  Court 
believed,  having  a  good  knowledge  of  the  world,  a  per- 
petual attention  to  his  employment,  consummate  discretion, 
much  natural  case  in  his  behaviour,  with  either  no  imper- 
tinence, or  with  thorough  mastery  of  it,  and  a  complaisance 
so  properly  applied,  that  he  was  agreeable  to  all  parties, 
and  yet  always  well  with  the  reigning  ministry  here.  It 
gave  him  a  ridicule  at  home,  that  he  was  enslaved  to  a 
penurious  and  deformed  wife ;  but  that  dominion  of  Madame 
de  Guerchy  was  his  greatest  felicity.  She  had  an  excel- 
lent understanding,  and  a  talent  for  learning  the  tempers, 
humours,  and  connections  of  England  ;  her  constant  appli- 
cation to  which,  and  the  necessary  curiosity  in  consequence, 
were  concealed  by  the  natural  coldness  and  reserve  of  her 
disposition.  Nor  did  her  attention  to  their  fortune  ever 
disgrace  her  husband,  nor  throw  even  an  air  of  economy 

^  Grimaldi  was  a  Genoese.  He  had  been  educated  for  the  Church,  and 
always  retained  the  soft  and  insinuating  manners  of  an  Italian  ecclesiastic.  It 
was  to  his  address,  rather  than  to  his  talents,  that  he  was  indebted  for  the  high 
situations  he  filled.  In  negotiating  the  celebrated  Treaty  of  Paris,  he  appears 
to  have  been  overmatched  by  Choiseul,  and  the  loss  of  the  Havannah,  and 
the  other  misfortunes  of  the  war,  were  the  immediate  fruits  of  his  eagerness 
for  a  French  alliance.  His  administration  in  Spain  was  neither  popular  nor 
successful.  It  ended  with  the  failure  of  the  expedition  to  Algiers.  His  chief 
merit  lay  in  the  encouragement  he  gave  to  literature,  his  patronage  of  the 
arts,  his  love  of  justice,  and  the  mildness  and  generosity  of  his  disposition. 
On  his  resignation,  in  1777,  he  was  created  a  Duke,  and  a  Grandee  of  Spain. 
Having  been  allowed  to  nominate  his  successor,  he  was  at  his  own  request 
appointed  Ambassador  at  Rome. — Coxe's  Kings  of  Spain,  vol.  iii.  ;  and 
Memoirs  of  a  Traveller  7iow  in  Retirement  (1808),  vol.  iv.  pp.  106-109. — 
L.  M. 

-  He  had  particularly  distinguished  himself  in  the  command  of  his  regiment 
at  Fontenoy,  where  his  valour  and  good  fortune  are  noticed  by  Voltaire 
(CEiivres  completes  de  Voltaire,  xii.  p.  231): — 

'  Guerchi  7^ est  pas/rappe,  la  vertu  pent  te  plaire.' 

— L.M. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  241 

on  his  table.  At  Paris  her  devotion  and  domestic  retire- 
ment had  passed  for  insipid  virtues  that  prevented  her 
good  sense  from  being  so  much  as  suspected.  At  the 
Count's  first  audience,  he  told  the  King,  with  pleasant 
candour,  that  it  was  a  proof  of  his  master's  intentions  to 
preserve  the  peace,  that  he  was  sent  over,  who  was  no  ma7i 
of  talents  or  intrigue. 

Thus  formed  to  succeed  and  never  to  offend,  no  man 
was  more  unfortunate  than  this  ambassador  ;  and   it  re- 
quired not  only  dexterity,  but  the  simplicity  of  his  conduct, 
to  surmount  the  most  cruel  and  disagreeable  ideas,  first 
carelessly  dropped,  and  then  maliciously  dispersed  to  his 
prejudice.     The  Due  de  Nivernois  had  brought  over  and 
left  here,  to  manage  the  affairs  of  their  Court  till  M.  de 
Guerchy's  arrival,  the  Chevalier  D'Eon,i  a  military  man, 
but  who  had  been  much  employed  in  secret  negotiations 
in  Russia,  for  which  he  had  been  largely  praised  and  very 
ill  paid.     The  man  had  notable  parts,  great  appearance 
of  bashful  merit,  and  learning  enough  to  charm  the  super- 
ficial pedantry  of  the  Duke,  who  had  treated  him  with  a 
fondness  and  intimacy  that  was  ridiculous  ;  and  that,  by 
being  over  kind,  proved  cruel  :  for  having  to  serve   him 
made   D'Eon   the   courier   of  the   peace,   the   Duke   went 
farther,  and   procured   him   to   be  styled   plenipotentiary 
during  the  absence  of  the  ambassador.     Vigils  and  vanity 
turned   the    poor   young    man's   head,   which   was   by   no 
means  ballasted  by  a  good  heart.     He  mistook  the  road 
of  fortune  for  fortune  itself,  and  thought  that  high-sound- 
ing titles   lifted  him  to  a  level  with  those  that  conferred 
them.     He  forgot  his  modesty,  and  learned  to  talk  loftily, 
or,  as  his   masters  thought,  arrogantly.     Under   this  un- 
happy intoxication  he  was  thunderstruck  with  a  declara- 
tion from  the  Due  de  Nivernois,  that  on  the  ambassador's 
arrival  he  was  to  sink  into  his  pristine  insignificance.     To 
laugh   this  off,  the  Duke  had   familiarly  pictured  him  to 
himself  as   sometimes   a   plenipotentiary   and    sometimes 
a  tool  of  office.      Other  accidents  concurred  to  aggravate 

^  See  an  account  of  him  in  the  Notes,  infra. — L.  M. 
VOL.  I.  Q 


242  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

this  mortifying-  notice.  He  could  obtain  no  arrears  ;  and 
having  made  free  with  the  remittances  of  his  new  master 
to  give  dignity  to  his  own  mission,  he  received  a  very 
humiliating  reprimand  from  Monsieur  de  Guerchy.  To 
crown  all,  Wilkes's  writings  had  breathed  a  spirit  of  inde- 
pendence into  a  poor  brain  born  to  crouch  at  a  desk 
or  to  rise  by  servility.  The  ambassador  was  no  sooner 
arrived,  than  the  Chevalier  behaved  in  a  manner  to  which 
French  ministers  are  little  accustomed  from  their  inferiors. 
At  the  same  time  D'Eon  took  it  into  his  fancy  that  one 
Treyssac  de  Vergy,^  an  adventurer,  was  brought  over  to 
assassinate  him  ;  and  on  this  belief  broke  out  so  out- 
rageously against  the  Count  after  dinner  at  Lord  Halifax's, 
that  the  Earl,  at  M.  de  Guerchy's  desire,  was  obliged  to 
send  for  Justice  Fielding,  and  put  D'Eon  under  arrest ; 
and  next  day  Vergy  swore  the  peace  ^  against  him.  The 
consequences  of  this  adventure  will  be  related  hereafter. 

Augustus  the  Third  ^  having  enjoyed  but  for  a  few 
months  the  cessation  of  war,  and  of  those  misfortunes 
which  a  vain  and  impertinent  favourite*  had  drawn  down 
upon  him,  died  about  this  time,  leaving  Poland  at  liberty 
to  get  rid  of  a  family  who  had  sacrificed  their  religion  for 
a  crown,  without  obtaining  essential  benefits  for  them- 
selves, or  conferring  any  on  subjects  so  dearly  purchased. 

^  This  Vergy  was  a  French  spy.  In  1771,  I  heard  Mr.  Phelps,  secretary 
to  Lord  Sandwich,  relate  that  Vergy  had  offered  him  to  act,  too,  as  a  spy  on 
Guerchy,  of  which  Mr.  Phelps  gave  the  ambassador  warning.  Vergy  re- 
mained here  several  years,  and  wrote  pamphlets  and  novels  for  a  livelihood. 

'-  When  they  talked  to  D'Eon  of  a  breach  of  the  peace,  he  understood 
English  so  imperfectly  that  he  thought  Lord  Halifax  threatened  to  break  the 
peace  between  the  two  nations,  of  which  he,  D'Eon,  had  been  the  messenger, 
and  that  inflamed  his  madness. 

'  Augustus  the  Third,  a  weak  and  unfortunate  monarch,  whose  reign  forms 
one  of  the  most  melancholy  epochs  in  the  annals  of  Saxony.  His  incapacity 
was  more  remarkable  from  his  being  opposed  to  Frederick  the  Great  and 
Catherine  the  Second.  He  died  in  1763,  and  with  him  ended  the  independ- 
ence of  Poland — his  successor,  Stanislaus,  being  merely  the  nominee  of 
Russia. — L.  M. 

^  Count  Bruhl.^[This  worthless  courtier,  who  exercised  for  many  years 
an  arbitrary  sway  over  Saxony  and  Poland,  and  inflicted  irreparable  injuries 
on  both  countries,  died  in  October  1764.] — L.  M. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  243 

The  new  Elector  of  Saxony,  his  son,  was  infirm  in  mind 
and  body,  and  survived  his  father  not  a  year. 

We,  on  whom  an  empty  favourite  had  heaped  httle 
less  disgrace  by  peace  than  Count  Bruhl  had  inflicted  on 
Saxony  by  war,  had  occasion  to  feel  how  wide  the  terror 
of  our  arms  had  extended  our  influence.  The  Duke  of 
York,  making  the  tour  of  the  Mediterranean,  and  being 
expected  at  Florence,  the  Pope^  ordered  Cardinal  Albani 
to  inform  Sir  Horace  Mann,  the  King's  Minister  in  Tus- 
cany, that  his  Royal  Highness,  if  he  pleased  to  visit  Rome, 
would  be  received  there  with  all  the  honours  due  to  his 
birth.  The  nuncio  at  Florence  was  commanded  too  to 
wait  on  the  Prince,  and  repeat  the  same ;  to  invite  him 
to  Rome  and  to  assure  him  of  all  safety,  honours,  and 
amusements.  His  Royal  Highness  accepted  the  invita- 
tion ;  and  the  son  of  James  the  Second,  and  his  grandson, 
a  cardinal  of  that  very  Church,  had  the  mortification  of 
being  forced  to  retire  to  Albano,  where  they  had  a  villa, 
lest  they  should  see  a  heretic  Duke  of  York  courted  and 
treated  in  that  holy  city  whence  the  thunders  of  the 
Vatican  had  been  hurled  against  the  great  Elizabeth. 
But  this  was  not  the  last  nor  least  humiliation  which  the 
wretched  and  helpless  line  of  Stuart  received  from  the 
hands  of  their  Pontiff,  and  from  that  Church  for  which 
they  had  sacrificed  themselves,  their  crowns,  and  their 
posterity. 

On  the  3rd  of  November  Charles  Yorke  resigned  the 
post  of  Attorney  General,  alleging  to  Mr.  Grenville  that 
his  father  and  the  Duke  of  Newcastle  had  insisted  upon 
it.  Yorke,  on  the  trial  of  the  printers,  had  made  a  warm 
speech  against  Wilkes,  and  was  to  carry  on  the  pro- 
secution. The  father  and  the  sons  were  certainly  in  their 
hearts  inclined  to  prerogative ;  but  interest  so  swayed 
their  actions,  and  it  was  so  much  the  point  of  the  whole 

^  Rezzonico,  Pope  by  the  name  of  Clement  the  Thirteenth  [filled  the  Papal 
Chair  from  1758  to  1769,  when  he  died  in  his  seventy-sixth  year.  His  life 
was  decent,  and  his  intentions  appear  to  have  been  honest,  but  his  policy  was 
unenlightened  and  vacillating,  and  is  strikingly  contrasted  by  that  of  his 
illustrious  successor. — L.  M.] 


244  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

family  that  Charles  Yorke  should  be  Chancellor,  that  we 
shall  find  one  perpetual  stream  of  dubitation  and  trimming 
run  through  their  conduct.  The  father,  indeed,  more 
soured,  and  with  pride  more  affronted,  towards  the  close 
of  his  life,  grew  more  settled  in  his  asperity  towards  the 
Court.  Nor  was  he  the  only  instrument  of  prerogative 
whom  the  Court  lost  because  it  could  not  reward  all  its 
devotees  up  to  their  ambition. 

In  Ireland  the  scene  commenced  unfavourably.  The 
new  Lord-Lieutenant,  the  Earl  of  Northumberland,^  lost 
a  question  the  first  day  in  the  House  of  Commons  there 
by  so  considerable  a  number  as  forty,  who  would  not 
sufifer  the  word  adequate  to  be  applied  to  the  Peace  in  the 
address. 

^  Sir  Hugh  Smithson,  who  assumed  the  name  of  Percy  on  marrying 
Lady  Elizabeth  Seymour,  daughter  of  Algernon,  Duke  of  Somerset,  and 
heiress  of  the  house  of  Percy  by  her  grandmother.  They  were  created  Earl 
and  Countess  of  Northumberland.  [This  note  is  inaccurate.  Sir  Hugh 
Smithson  married  Lady  Elizabeth  Seymour  on  i6th  July  1740,  and  succeeded 
his  father-in-law  as  second  Earl  of  Northumberland  on  7th  February  1750. 
He  took  the  name  of  Percy  on  12th  April  following,  and  on  22nd  October 
1766  was  created  Duke  of  Northumberland. — E.] 


KING  GEORGE  III.  245 


CHAPTER    XXII 

Opening  of  Parliament. — Lord  Gower  and  Lord  Temple. — Wilkes's  Essay 
on  Woman  laid  before  the  House  of  Lords. — Hypocrisy  of  Lord 
Sandwich. — Bishop  Warburton. — Kidgell. — Persecution  of  Wilkes. — He 
complains  in  the  House  of  Commons  of  a  breach  of  privilege  in  the 
seizure  of  himself  and  his  papers. — Warm  Debate  on  the  question. — Mr. 
Pitt's  Speech. — Arguments  of  Lord  North  and  others. — Wilkes  wounded 
in  a  duel  by  Martin. — The  King's  Speech  read  to  the  Commons. — Pitt's 
obscure  Speech. — Speech  of  Grenville.— Postponement  of  the  farther 
hearing  on  Wilkes. — Bestowal  of  the  Bishoprick  of  Osnabrugh. 

But  in  the  Parliament  of  England  lay  the  chief  seat 
of  the  war  ;  and  with  very  extraordinary  scenes  did  the 
campaign  open.  The  Houses  met  November  15th:  Lord 
Hilsborough  and  Lord  Suffolk  moved  the  Address  of  the 
Peers.  Lord  Temple  censured  the  Peace  ;  and  the  Duke 
of  Bedford  defended  it  with  temper.  Lord  Gower 
attacked  Lord  Temple  for  his  disrespect  to  the  King. 
He  denied  that  he  had  ever  shown  any  disrespect ;  and 
said  that  he  and  his  family  had  been  attached  to  this 
royal  family /«//<a;i-  long  as  his  lordship's  family  had  (who 
were  very  recent  converts  from  Jacobitism). 

As  soon  as  the   Address   was  voted,   Lord   Sandwich 
produced  a  poem,  called  an  Essay  on  Woman,^  with  notes 

^  No  authentic  copy  of  this  '  Essay  '  is  known  to  exist,  though  Mr.  Dyce 
was  '  inclined  to  think '  that  his  copy,  which  is  now  preserved  in  the  South 
Kensington  Museum  (Dyce  Catalogue,  No.  10,598),  was  'really  the  original 
edition  of  the  poem.'  Wilkes,  in  his  letter  to  the  electors  of  Aylesbury, 
stated  that,  '  Not  quite  a  fourth  part  of  the  volume  had  been  printed  at  my 
own  private  press.  The  work  had  been  discontinued  for  several  months  .  .  . 
of  that  fourth  part  only  twelve  copies  were  worked  off,  and  I  never  gave  one 
of  those  copies  to  any  friend'  {Gentleman^ s  Magazine,  1764,  p.  583) ;  while 
Curry,  in  his  evidence  before  the  House  of  Lords,  said  that  there  were 
thirteen  copies  printed. — {Journals  of  the  House  of  Lords,  xxx.  416.  See 
Allibone,  s.  n.  Wilkes,  John,  and  Notes  and  Qtceries,  2nd  series,  iv.  I2I,  Sth 
series,  vii.  409). — E. 


246  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

pretended  to  be  written  by  Bishop  Warburton.  It  was  a 
performance  bawdy  and  blasphemous  to  the  last  degree, 
being  a  parody  of  Pope's  Essay  on  Man,  and  of  other 
pieces,  adapted  to  the  grossest  ideas,  or  to  the  most 
profane.  Wilkes  and  Potter,^  son  of  the  late  Archbishop 
of  Canterbury,  had  formerly  composed  this  indecent 
patchwork  in  some  of  their  bacchanalian  hours  ;  and 
Wilkes,  not  content  with  provoking  the  vengeance  of  the 
King,  of  the  Princess,  of  the  Favourite,  of  twenty 
subaltern  ministers,  and  of  the  whole  Scottish  nation, 
had,  for  the  amusement  of  his  idle  hours,  consigned  this 
innocent  rhapsody  to  his  own  printing-press — a  folly 
unparalleled,  though  he  had  intended  to  restrain  the 
edition  to  twelve  copies.  However,  as  he  could  not 
commit  a  wanton  imprudence  without  giving  birth  to 
some  villany  or  tyranny  in  others,  this  very  poem  was 
now  laid  before  the  House  of  Lords  in  consequence  of  a 
train  of  both  kinds.  One  of  the  copies  had  been  seized 
among  his  papers  by  Philip  Carteret  Webbe.  Still  was 
even  that  ministry  ashamed  to  accuse  Wilkes  on  evidence 
which  had  fallen  into  their  hands  by  such  illegal  means — 
unanswerable  proof  that  they  were  conscious  of  their  guilt, 
and  knew  they  could  not  justify  their  proceedings.  But 
the  bloodhounds  having  thus  fallen  on  the  scent,  were 
not  to  be  turned  aside  by  delicacies.  Could  they  procure 
another  copy  the  business  would  be  effected — and  effected 

^  Thomas  Potter — see  more  of  him  in  the  preceding  reign.  [Walpole's 
Memoirs  of  George  II.  (1847),  vol.  i.  p.  69.  He  was  the  second  son  of 
Archbishop  Potter,  whose  fortune  he  inherited,  owing  to  his  elder  brother 
having  disobliged  his  father  by  an  imprudent  marriage.  In  1748  he  had 
been  appointed  secretary  to  the  Prince  of  Wales,  then  the  patron  of  all  the 
talent  in  the  House  opposed  to  the  Government,  and  from  that  time  he  took 
an  active  part  in  the  political  contests  of  the  day.  lie  was  a  clever  and 
impressive  speaker,  and,  with  application  and  steadiness  of  conduct,  might 
have  become  one  of  the  leaders  of  his  party.  Unfortunately,  he  had 
contracted,  in  early  life,  habits  of  dissipation,  under  which  his  constitution 
sunk,  just  as  his  ambitious  hopes  bade  fair  to  be  realized.  He  died  Vice- 
Treasurer  of  Ireland  in  June  1759.  Some  interesting  letters  from  him  to 
Mr.  Pitt  are  given  in  the  Chatham  Correspondence,  vol.  i. — L.  M.]  Potter 
was  probably  the  sole  author  of  the  '  essay.'  .See  Notes  and  Queries,  2nd 
series,  vol.  iv.  p.  41,  and  the  Dyce  Catalogue  before  referred  to. — E. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  247 

it  was.  Carteret  Webbe  set  his  tools  to  work,  for  even 
hangmen  have  deputies.  There  was  one  Kidgell,  a 
dainty  priggish  parson,  much  in  vogue  among  the  old 
ladies  for  his  gossiping  and  quaint  sermons,  and  chaplain 
to  the  Scotch^  Earl  of  March.  This  fellow  got  at  a 
proof-sheet ;  and  by  the  treachery  of  one  of  Wilkes's 
printers,-  who  thought  himself  ill-used,  and  by  the 
encouragement  of  his  patron,  who  consulted  Lord  Bute 
and  Lord  Sandwich,  and  was  egged  on  by  them  to 
proceed,  Kidgell  and  Webbe  purchased  the  whole  poem  : 
and  now  did  Sandwich,  who  had  hugged  this  mischief  for 
months  in  his  breast,  lay  open  the  precious  poem  before 
his  brother  Lords  in  strains  of  more  hypocrisy^  than 
would  have  been  tolerable  even  in  a  professed  Methodist. 
Parts  of  it  were  read,  most  coarsely  and  disgustingly 
blasphemous.  Lord  Lyttelton  groaned  in  spirit,  and 
begged  they  might  hear  no  more.  Bishop  Warburton, 
who  had  not  the  luck,  like  Lord  Lyttelton,  to  have  his 
conversion  believed  by  any  one,  foamed  with  the  violence 
of  a  Saint  Dominic  ;  vaunted  that  he  had  combated 
infidelity,  and  laid  it  under  his  feet ;  and  said,  the 
blackest  fiends  in  hell  would  not  keep  company  with 
Wilkes,  and  then  begged  Satan's  pardon  for  comparing 
them  together. 

Lord  Temple  had  got  no  intelligence  of  this  bomb,  and 
knew  little  what  to  say ;  but  concluding,  justly,  that  the 

1  James  Douglas,  Earl  of  March  and  Ruglen,  Lord  of  the  Bedchamber  to 
the  King.     St-e  p.  30,  supra. 

"^  The  London  Chronicle  for  14th  August  1778  contains  the  following 
notice: — '  Lately  died  at  his  lodgings  in  Norwich,  aged  56,  Michael  Curry, 
printer,  well  known  for  his  information  against  the  printer  and  publisher  of 
the  Essay  on  fVoman.' — E. 

3  Lord  Despencer  said  he  never  heard  the  devil  preach  before.  Yet 
Lord  Sandwich  had  a  precedent  in  a  great  Reformer  of  the  Church  :  '  Calvin 
eut  par  trahison  les  feuilles  d'un  ouvrage  que  Servet  faisait  imprimer 
secretement.  II  les  envoya  a  Lyon  avec  les  lettres  qu'il  avait  re9ues  de  lui  : 
action  qui  servirait  pour  le  deshonorer  a  jamais  dans  la  Societe.  .  .  .  Calvin  fit 
accuser  Servet  par  un  emissaire.  Quel  role  pour  un  Apotre  ! ' — Voltaire. 
[£ssai  sur  les  Maurs  et  L Esprit  des  Nations.  (Euvres  completes  de  Voltaire 
(1785),  xviii.  p.  191. — E.] 


248  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

piece  had  been  found  among  Wilkes's  papers,  condemned 
the  means  by  which  it  was  obtained.  It  was  instantly- 
voted  blasphemous,  and  a  breach  of  privilege  against  the 
person  of  the  Bishop  of  Gloucester.  Lord  Sandwich 
then  moved  that  Wilkes  should  be  voted  the  author ;  but 
even  Lord  Mansfield  condemned  so  hasty  and  arbitrary 
a  course,  and  said  it  was  previously  necessary  to  hear 
the  accused  person  in  his  own  defence :  on  which  the 
proceeding  was  adjourned  to  the  next  day  but  one.  I 
was  in  a  division  in  the  lobby  of  the  House  of  Commons, 
when  I  heard  what  was  passing  in  the  other  House,  and 
immediately  informed  Mr.  Pitt.  He  replied  with  indigna- 
tion, '  Why  do  not  they  search  the  Bishop  of  Gloucester's 
study  for  heresy  ?  ' 

Events  now  thickened  so  fast  that,  to  avoid  confusion, 
I  will  here  say  a  little  more  on  this  head.  The  plot  so 
hopefully  laid  to  blow  up  Wilkes,  and  ruin  him  in  the 
estimation  of  all  the  decent  and  grave,  had,  at  least  in  the 
latter  respect,  scarce  any  effect  at  all.  The  treachery  was 
so  gross  and  scandalous,  so  revengeful,  and  so  totally 
unconnected  with  the  political  conduct  of  Wilkes,  and 
the  instruments  so  despicable,  odious,  or  in  whom  any 
pretensions  to  decency,  sanctimony,  or  faith  were  so 
preposterous  that,  losing  all  sight  of  the  scandal  contained 
in  the  poem,  the  whole  world  almost  united  in  crying 
out  against  the  informers.  Sandwich,  in  opening  the 
discovery,  had  canted  till  his  own  friends  could  not  keep 
their  countenances.  Sir  Francis  Dashwood  was  not 
more  notorious  for  singing  profane  and  lewd  catches  ;  and 
what  aggravated  the  hypocrisy,  scarce  a  fortnight  had 
passed  since  this  holy  Secretary  of  State  himself  had 
been  present  with  Wilkes  at  a  weekly  club  to  which  both 
belonged,  held  at  the  top  of  Covent  Garden  Theatre,  and 
composed  of  players  and  the  loosest  revellers  of  the  age. 
Warburton's  part  was  only  ridiculous,  and  was  heightened 
by  its  being  known  that  Potter,  his  wife's  gallant,  had 
had  the  chief  hand  in  the  composition  of  the  verses. 
However,  an  intimacy  commenced   between   the   Bishop 


KING  GEORGE  III.  249 

and  Sandwich,  and  some  jovial  dinners  and  libations  of 
champagne  cemented  their  friendship.  Kidgell,  the 
jackall,  published  so  precise,  affected,  and  hypocritic  an 
account  of  the  transaction,  that  he,  who  might  have 
escaped  in  the  gloom  of  the  treachery,  completely  blasted 
his  own  reputation  ;  and  falling  into  debt,  was,  according 
to  the  fate  of  inferior  tools,  abandoned  by  his  masters, 
and  forced  to  fly  his  country.  Though  the  rank  and 
fortune  of  Sandwich  saved  him  from  disgrace  of  that 
kind,  he  had  little  reason  to  exult  in  his  machination. 
He  brought  a  stigma  on  himself  that  counterworked 
many  of  his  own  views  and  arts  ;  and  Churchill  the  poet 
has  branded  his  name  on  this  account  with  lasting 
colours.  The  public  indignation  went  so  far,  that  the 
Beggar's  Opera  being  performed  at  Covent  Garden 
Theatre  soon  after  this  event,  the  whole  audience,  when 
Macheath  says,  '  That  Jemmy  Twitdier  should  peacJi  me,  I 
own  surprises  me,'  burst  out  into  an  applause  of  appli- 
cation ;  and  the  nick-name  of  Jemmy  Twitcher  stuck 
by  the  Earl  so  as  almost  to  occasion  the  disuse  of  his 
title. 

While  the  destruction  of  the  character  and  fortune  of 
Wilkes  was  thus  prosecuted  in  one  chamber  of  Parlia- 
ment, a  plot  against  his  hfe  was  hatching  in  the  other  ; 
his  enemies  not  being  satisfied  with  all  the  severities  they 
could  wring  from  the  law  to  oppress  him.  Nor  were 
several  servants  of  the  Crown  sorry  to  make  his  outrages 
a  handle  for  curtailing  liberty  itself  The  House  was  no 
sooner  met,  than  Wilkes  rose  to  make  his  complaint  of 
the  breach  of  privilege  in  the  seizure  of  himself  and  his 
papers.  The  Speaker  interrupted  him,  and  said  the 
session  was  not  yet  open,  the  silly  form  of  reading  a  bill 
not  having  been  gone  through.  Grenville,  too,  urged  that 
there  was  a  message  from  the  Crown  that  ought  to  be 
received  before  any  other  business.  Beckford  and  Onslow 
pleaded  that  privilege  ought  to  take  place  of  every  other 
consideration.  A  long  and  warm  debate  ensued.  Mr. 
Pitt  strenuously  supported   the  precedence  of  privilege. 


V 


2  50  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

though  affecting  to  offer  to  take  privilege  and   message 
together.     Elliot  moved  to  have  a  bill  read.     Pitt  replied 
admirably,  and   said,  if  they  were  not  yet  a   House,  no 
member  could  have  been  sworn  ;  nor  was  it  necessary  to 
have  some  nonsense  read  to  which  nobody  would  attend. 
Suppose  it  should  have  been  forgotten,  and  the  House 
had    entered    on    some    arduous    business,   some    fool    of 
form    might    have    started    up   and    told    them, — '  Lord 
bless  us !   it  is  all  a  nullity  that  we  have  been  doing ! ' 
Privilege   waived    would    really   nullify   the    proceedings. 
The  House  would  be  a  company  of  men  put  under  force. 
The   man  who  would  waive   privilege   ought  to  have  a 
question  moved  on  him.    Lord  North,  Nugent,  and  Dyson, 
argued  against  privilege,  and  warm  words  passed  between 
Pitt  on    one   side,   Grenville   and   Norton    on    the   other. 
Yorke  said,  that  if  they  did  not  begin  regularly  with  a 
bill,  Westminster  Hall  would  not  know  how  to  date  the 
commencement  of  the    session,    unless    the  two    Houses 
started  together.     Pitt  replied,  that  if  the  House  should 
sit  till  three  in  the  morning,  it  would  still  be  deemed  the 
15th   of  November.      The   House  divided   at  six   in  the 
evening,  and   it  was  carried   by   300  to    iir,  that  a  bill 
should  first  be  read.    Grenville  then  delivered  the  message 
from    the  Crown,   acquainting   the   House   with   the    im- 
prisonment that  had  been  made  of  one  of  their  members  ; 
for  which  message  Lord  North  moved  the  thanks  of  the 
House  ;  together  with  an  assurance  that  they  would  forth- 
with go  into  the  consideration  of  the  offence.    Wilkes  then 
made  his  complaint.     Mr.  Pitt  approved  of  Lord  North's 
motion  of  thanks,  but  spoke  against  precipitation.    Wilkes's 
case,  he  said,  was  not  to  be  paralleled.     He  desired  to  be 
tried  by  his  peers, — and  if  he  did  not,  said  Pitt,  I  would 
force  him.      The  North  Briton^  No.  45,  was  then  read  ;  and 
two  printers  being  examined,  one  said  he  had  received  it 
from   Wilkes    in   his   own    handwriting  ;    the   other,  that 
Wilkes  and  Churchill  were  the  authors  of  that  periodic 
paper  in  general.     Lord  North,  who  had  undertaken  the 
conduct  of  the  parliamentary  prosecution  against  Wilkes, 


KING  GEORGE  III.  251 

held  forth  on  the  sedition  of  those  papers,  and  of  No.  45 
in  particular.  Wilkes,  replied  his  Lordship,  however,  had 
not  proved  that  it  contained  any  falsehoods.  Mr.  Pitt  said 
it  was  a  scandalous,  licentious  paper,  and  false  ;  but  always 
distinguishing  between  the  criminal  and  the  illegal  pro- 
ceedings of  the  ministers.  The  House,  he  said,  was  not  a 
proper  place  for  trying  a  libel ;  nor  did  this  tend  to  excite 
traitorous  insurrections.  Was  the  motion  calculated,  by 
inserting  the  word  traitorous,  to  justify  what  the  ministers 
had  done?  He  himself  could  never  learn  exactly  what 
was  a  libel.  Whoever  was  the  patron  of  these  doctrines, 
foBfium  habet  in  cormi.  Norton  said  he  did  think  the  paper 
tended  to  excite  insurrections.  Scandalous  reflections  on 
private  men  or  magistrates  were  a  libel.  Opposing  law 
was  treason.  Pitt  replied,  a  libel  could  not  be  treason. 
It  might,  said  North,  tend  to  excite  treason.  Pitt  moved 
to  omit  the  epithet  traitoro2is,  but  the  Ministry  upholding 
it,  the  House  divided  at  eleven  at  night,  and  the  ministerial 
phrase  was  carried  by  273  against  in;  Sir  Alexander 
Gilmour  and  Murray,  two  Scots,  and  the  only  two  of  that 
nation  in  opposition,  voting  with  the  rest  of  their  country- 
men on  that  occasion.  Lord  North  then  moved  to  have 
the  paper  burned  by  the  hangman,  which  was  ordered. 
Lord  North  affirmed  next,  that  privilege  did  not  extend  to 
libels,  nor  to  stay  justice  ;  which  Pitt  said  was  the  boldest 
assertion  and  attempt  ever  made  without  consulting  pre- 
cedents or  appointing  a  committee.  He  lamented  the 
King  was  so  ill  served  as  to  run  aground  on  the  liberties 
of  Parliament.  He  would  die,  he  said,  if  a  day  were  not 
appointed  for  hearing  Wilkes.  Norton  took  this  up  hotly, 
and  said  he  was  called  upon  by  insult  and  abuse.  Pitt 
replied  that  he  had  said  the  King  had  been  ill  served  by 
lawyers  and  others  ;  and  he  proposed  to  take  the  case  of 
privilege  into  consideration  the  next  day,  and  on  the 
following  day  to  hear  the  complaint  of  Wilkes,  which  was 
agreed  to  at  one  in  the  morning. 

The  next  day,  when  I  went  down  to  the  House,  I  found 
all  the  members  standing  on  the  floor  in  great  hubbub, 


252  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

questioning,  hearing,  and  eagerly  discussing  I  knew  not 
what.     I  soon  learned  that  Wilkes  about  two  hours  before 
had  been  dangerously  wounded  by  Martin  in  a  duel.     In 
the  foregoing  spring,  Wilkes,  in  one  of  his  North  Britons, 
had  pointed  out  Martin  by  name  as  a  low  fellow,  and 
dirty  tool  of  power.     Martin  had  stomached,  not  digested 
this  ;  but  in  the  debate  on  No.  45  the  day  before,  he  had 
risen   and   called   the   author  of  that  paper  on  himself  a 
cowardly,  scandalous,  and  malignant  scoundrel,  and  had 
repeated   the  words  twice,  trembling  with  rage.     Wilkes 
took  no   notice  ;  and  as   he  did   not,  the  House  did   not 
interfere,  as  is  usual,  when  personalities  happen,  and  seem 
to  threaten  a  duel.     The  next  morning  Wilkes  wrote  to 
Martin,  to  ask  if  the  words  used  the  day  before  were  meant 
to  be  addressed  to  him  as  the  supposed  author  of  the  paper 
in  which   Martin   had  been  abused.     If  Martin  had  thus 
intended  to  point  the  words,  Wilkes  owned  he  had  written 
that  paper.     Martin  replied  he  had  meant  him,  Wilkes  ; 
and  as  the  latter  had  avowed  himself  the  author,  he  should 
not  deny,  added   Martin,  what  he  had   said  before  five 
hundred  people,  and  gave  him  a  challenge.     About  noon 
they  went  into  Hyde  Park  ;  Martin  alone  ;  Wilkes  with 
Humphrey  Cotes  ^  in  a  post-chaise,  knowing  if  he  killed 
Martin  that  he  should  have  no  chance  of  pardon.     Cotes 
waited  at  a  distance.     They  changed  pistols,  both  fired, 
and  both  missed.     Martin  fired  a  second  time,  and  lodged 
a  ball  in  Wilkes's  side,  who  was  going  to  fire,  but  dropped 
his  pistol.     The  wound,  though  not  mortal,  proved  a  bad 
one. 

It  was  thought  an  ill  symptom  of  Martin's  heroism,  that 
he  had  smothered  the  affront  for  so  many  months,  nor  had 
eiven  vent  to  his  resentment,  till  the  affair  with  Forbes 
had  left  a  doubt  on  Wilkes's  courage.  If  Martin  got  rid 
of  this  imputation,  it  was  but  at  the  expense  of  a  worse 
charge.  It  came  out,  nor  could  he  deny  it,  that  his  neigh- 
bours in  the  country  had  observed  him  practising  to  fire 

^  A  broken  wine-merchant,    brother  of  Admiral   Cotes,    an   intimate   of 
Wilkes. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  253 

at  a  target  for  the  whole  summer.  I  shall  not  be  thought 
to  have  used  too  hard  an  expression,  when  I  called  this 
a  plot  against  the  life  of  Wilkes.  Churchill  wrote  The 
Duellist,  one  of  his  finest  satires,  on  this  occasion. 

On  the  1 6th,  the  King's  speech  was  read  to  the 
Commons,  when  Lord  Caernarvon  ^  and  Lord  Frederick 
Campbell  moved  the  address.  Pitt  made  an  obscure 
speech,  parts  of  which  seemed  to  aim  at  explaining  his 
conduct  in  the  late  negotiation  ;  but  all  that  could  be 
gathered  from  it  was,  that  he  had  not  excommunicated 
the  Peace-makers,  nor  the  Tories  ;  that  he  had  aimed  most 
at  Lord  Mansfield,  and  that  he  took  up  the  Whigs,  but 
not  as  enemies  to  prerogative.^  He  could  not  allow,  he 
said,  the  words  safe  and  honourable  Peace  in  the  address  ; 
he  did  not  think  it  was  either  ;  it  was  durante  bene  placito 
of  France  and  Spain  ;  yet  as  the  address  precluded  nobody 
from  speaking  their  sentiment  afterwards,  he  should  let 
the  words  pass.  For  himself,  no  minister  could  know  less 
what  to  do  with  the  Peace  ;  nor  did  any  man  more  bid 
adieu  to  the  political  world  than  he  did.  He  was  against 
reviving  party-names  ;  but  if  dissension  arose  on  principles, 
he  must  again  become  a  party-man.  Grenville  taking 
hold  of  Beckford's  objecting  to  the  proclamation  for  set- 
tling America,  made  artful  advantage  of  the  opportunity 
to  show  the  great  pains  taken  by  the  Ministry  to  settle  our 
conquests  and  colonies,  and  to  regulate  the  finances  at 
home.  In  one  article  they  had  struck  off  ^^250,000  of  the 
demands  made  from  Germany.  He  then  expatiated  on 
the  profusion  of  the  war,  and  attacked  Pitt  strongly  with- 

^  Only  son  of  the  Duke  of  Chandos.  [He  afterwards  succeeded  to  the 
Dukedom,  and  died  in  1789,  when  his  titles  became  extinct.— L.  M.] 

^  Mr.  Pitt's  speech  had  the  very  dubious  merit  of  pleasing  his  opponents 
rather  than  his  friends.  Lord  Barrington,  in  a  letter  to  Sir  Andrew  Mitchell, 
says,  that  '  if  fifty  thousand  pounds  had  been  given  f  >r  that  si  eech,  it  would 
have  been  well  expended.  It  secures  us  a  quiet  session.' — Chatham  Corre- 
spondence, vol.  ii.  p.  262,  note,  and  Walpole's  Letters,  vol.  iv.  p.  127.  In  fact 
Mr.  Pitt's  interviews  with  the  King  had  necessarily  blunted  the  edge  of  his 
opposition,  and  he  found  it  as  difficult  to  give  an  intelligible  defence  of  his 
proceedings,  as  all  succeeding  ministers  in  the  same  predicament  have  ex- 
perienced since. — L.  M. 


254  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

out  reserve  or  fear.     The  address  was  voted  without  a 
necfative. 

The  farther  hearing  on  Wilkes  was  deferred  on  account 
of  his  wound.^  After  the  debate  Pitt  had  a  meeting  with 
the  Dukes  of  Newcastle,  Devonshire,  and  their  friends,  and 
insisted  on  their  supporting  Chief  Justice  Pratt's  opinion 
in  behalf  of  privilege  against  Mr.  Yorke,  who  had  declared 
that  Wilkes's  case  was  not  within  the  pale  of  privilege. 

During  these  transactions,  the  King,  after  keeping  the 
bishoprick  of  Osnabrugh  open  near  three  years,  contrary 
to  the  custom,  which  allows  but  six  months,  bestowed  it 
on  his  son,  a  new-born  child,^  before  it  was  christened. 
The  Duke  of  York^  had  thought  it  his  due,  and  not  with- 
out reason.  It  could  not  be  conferred  on  the  Prince  of 
Wales  ;  nor  was  there  much  equity  in  reserving  it  for  a 
son  that  might  be  born.  The  interest  of  the  family  and 
of  the  Protestant  cause,  too,  seemed  to  point  out  the  Duke, 
as  an  infant  liable  to  so  many  accidents  might,  if  born, 
soon  fail,  and  then  the  turn  would  revolve  to  the  Papists  ; 
even  a  minor  in  possession  was  favourable  too,  to  that 
party,  for  of  the  revenue,  which  is  about  ;^2 5,000  a  year, 
only  ^2000  belong  to  the  Bishop  till  he  is  eighteen,  and 
the  rest  is  divided  amongst  the  Popish  chapter.  But  the 
Queen,  who  began  to  get  weight  with  her  husband  in 
German  affairs,  prevailed  to  reserve  for,  and  then  to  grant 
this  great  provision  to,  a  child  of  her  own  ;  and  the  Duke 
of  York's  little  reverence  for  his  mother,  and  antipathy  to 
the  Favourite,  excluded  him  from  a  grace  for  which  he  had 
so  much  occasion. 

■^  The  Lords  on  the  same  account  put  off  the  hearing  of  Wilkes's  defence  on 
the  Essay  on  Woman  to  the  22nd  ;  and  then  for  a  week  longer. 
-  Frederick,  second  son  of  George  the  Third. 
^  Edward,  Duke  of  York,  next  brother  to  the  King. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  255 


CHAPTER    XXIII 

Important  question  as  to  the  Privilege  of  Parliament. — Liberty  of  the 
Press.  —  Scandalous  Resignation  of  Privilege  by  the  House  of  Com- 
mons.— Abandonment  of  General  Warrants. — Debate  on  the  proceedings 
against  Wilkes.  —  The  Moderator,  a  new  scurrilous  paper. — Lord  Clive. — 
Riot  on  the  attempt  to  burn  the  North  Briton. — Debate  on  this  subject 
in  the  House  of  Lords. — Triumph  of  Wilkes  in  his  prosecution  against 
the  Under-Secretary  of  State. — Dismissals  by  the  Court. — The  Chevalier 
D'Eon. — Attempt  to  assassinate  Wilkes. — The  East  India  Company  and 
Lord  Clive. — Wilkes  and  the  Parliament. — Outlawry  against  Wilkes. 

On  the  23rd  of  November  came  on  the  important 
question  whether  the  Privilege  of  Parliament  preserved 
the  members  from  being  taken  up  for  writing  and  pub- 
lishing libels.  At  first  sight  a  disinterested  person  would 
perhaps  think  it  strange  that  it  should  be  a  question 
whether  a  seat  in  the  Legislature  should  not  secure  the 
Legislators  from  the  penalty  of  breaking  the  laws,  for 
publishing  a  libel  is  undoubtedly  illegal ;  but  to  those 
acquainted  with  our  Constitution,  it  will  perhaps  appear 
more  extraordinary  that  a  House  of  Commons  should 
suffer  such  a  question  to  be  proposed  to  them,  and  that 
they  should  condescend  to  agitate  it.  Will  our  posterity 
believe  that  a  House  of  Commons  gave  it  up?  but  it  was 
that  House  of  Commons  that  had  sold  itself  to  approve 
the  late  Peace.  Still  it  is  to  be  admired  that  this  cessa- 
tion of  their  privileges  should  be  wrung  from  them  after 
the  Court  of  Common  Pleas  had  declared  that  Privilege 
held  against  everything  but  treason,  felony,  and  breach  of 
the  peace.  A  libel,  at  most,  but  tended  to  a  breach  of  the 
peace. 

The  Legislature  consists  of  the  three  branches  of  King, 
Lords,  and  Commons.     Together  they  form  our  invaluable 


256  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

Constitution,  and  each  is  a  check  on  the  other  two.  But 
it  must  be  remembered,  at  the  same  time,  that  while  any 
two  are  checking,  the  third  is  naturally  aiming  at  ex- 
tending and  aggrandizing  its  power.  The  House  of 
Commons  has  not  seldom  made  this  attempt,  like  the 
rest.  The  Lords,  as  a  permanent  and  as  a  proud  body, 
more  constantly  aim  at  it :  the  Crown  always.  Of  liberty 
a  chief  and  material  engine  is  the  liberty  of  the  Press  ;  a 
privilege  for  ever  sought  to  be  stifled  and  annihilated  by 
the  Crown.  The  ministers  of  the  Crown  and  its  lawyers 
must  misrepresent  the  liberty  of  the  Press  before  they 
can  presume  to  request  the  suppression  of  it.  Every 
grievance  set  forth  in  print  is  misnamed  a  libel  ;  and 
grave  laws  necessarily  disapprove  libels.  If  the  Crown 
can  arrive  at  precluding  Members  of  Parliament  from 
complaining  in  print  of  grievances,  no  doubt  the  Crown 
could  debar  all  other  men,  who  are  of  less  importance, 
and  whose  persons  are  regarded  by  no  sacred  privilege. 
Liberty  of  speech  and  liberty  of  writing  are  the  two 
instruments  by  which  Englishmen  call  on  one  another 
to  defend  their  common  rights.  Liberty  of  speech  is 
communicated  but  a  little  way  ;  the  Press  gives  wings  to 
that  voice,  and  all  men  may  read  what  all  cannot  hear. 
Freedom  of  speech  in  Parliament  is  not  so  valuable  as 
freedom  of  writing.  A  man  may  hazard  many  necessary 
truths  in  print  when  he  may  conceal  his  name  which  he 
might  not  venture  to  utter  in  open  Parliament.  If  dis- 
covered, his  privilege  used  to  be  his  security.  Nor  is  this 
a  vindication  of  libels  properly  so  called  ;  but  a  Court 
will  call  a  libel  the  most  just  censure  of  tyranny.  Yet 
could  it  not  wrest  from  Members  of  Parliament  the  safety 
of  their  persons  without  their  own  consent — and  in  what 
instance  did  the  Court  ask  this? — in  what  instance  did 
the  House  of  Commons  yield  it?  Mr.  Wilkes,  one  of 
their  own  members,  had  been  taken  up  by  a  General 
Warrant,  in  which  his  name  had  not  so  much  as  been 
mentioned.  Contrary  to  all  precedent,  he  had  been  com- 
mitted close  prisoner  to  the  Tower — a  proceeding  so  arbi- 


KING  GEORGE  III.  257 

trary,  that  a  Court  of  Law  had  set  him  free.  The  House 
of  Commons  sacrificed  him  and  their  own  privileges,  and 
yet  shame — I  mean  disgrace,  so  soon  overtook  them,  that 
General  Warrants,  such  as  that  on  which  Wilkes  was 
arrested,  were  given  up,  condemned,  exploded — but  half 
the  wound  remains,  for  this  scandalous  vote  was  never 
rescinded ! 

It  is  true  that  on  the  debate  it  did  appear  that  there 
were  many  and  many  precedents  on  both  sides.  Often 
had  privilege  protected  a  member — often  it  had  not ;  but 
how  did  that  happen  to  be  the  case?  It  happened  be- 
cause there  had  been  various  cases  in  which  the  Crown 
was  not  concerned,  but  where  the  contest  had  lain  between 
subject  and  subject  ;  and  in  those  instances  the  House 
had  often  determined  different  ways.  But  on  the  great 
case  of  the  seven  Bishops  in  the  reign  of  James  the 
Second,  Privilege  of  Parliament  had  been  vindicated  and 
secured.  What  would  have  become  of  those  prelates 
if  the  Court  had  had  this  precedent  of  Wilkes  to  justify  its 
violence?  Even  allowing  that  privilege  were  not  inherent 
in  members,  but  had  been  decided  sometimes  for,  some- 
times against  them,  was  this  a  time — was  this  an  instance, 
in  which  the  House  should  have  waived  its  pretensions? 
Was  the  blow  it  gave  itself  likely  to  be  repaired  ?  But 
let  the  preceding  and  subsequent  conduct  of  this  ductile 
and  servile  House  of  Commons  tell  its  motives  ! 

The  debates  were  not  brilliant,  but  serious  and  solemn 
as  the  occasion  required.  Lord  North  ^  was  the  chief 
manager  for  the  Court,  supported  by  Norton,  George 
Grenville,  Morton,^  and  Elliot.  Lord  North's  mouthing 
and  boisterous  manner,  his  coarse  figure,  and  rude  un- 
tempered  style,  contributed  to  make  the  cause  into  which 
he   had   unnecessarily  thrust   himself  appear   still    more 

^  Frederick,  Lord  North,  eldest  son  of  the  Earl  of  Guildford. 

^  John  Morton,  Chief  Justice  of  Chester.  He  represented  Abingdon  from 
June  1747  to  February  1770,  when  he  was  unseated  upon  petition  ;  New 
Romney  from  March  1770  to  September  1774,  and  Wigan  from  May  1775 
until  his  death  in  1780.     See  infra. — E. 

VOL.  I.  R 


258  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

odious.  Pitt,  Beckford,  Legge,  Sir  George  Saville,  Sir 
William  Baker,  and  James  Grenville  defended  the  Con- 
stitution. Much  was  said  on  the  danger  to  which  every 
man's  private  papers  were  now  exposed,  and  more  on  the 
injustice  of  hurrying  on  this  decision,  when  Wilkes  could 
not  for  his  wound  appear  to  defend  himself,  when  he  was 
prosecutingboth. the  Secretaries  of  Stateand  the  messengers, 
and  when  he  was  to  be  tried  himself  for  the  libel.  What 
court,  what  judge,  what  jury,  but  must  be  prejudiced  by 
a  decision  of  the  House  of  Commons  against  him  ?  This 
plea  was  glaring,  was  crying.  The  lawyers  themselves 
many  of  them  allowed  it,  and  the  debate  took  that  turn  ; 
the  Opposition  endeavouring  to  stave  off  the  question  on 
Privilege,  the  courtiers  insisting  to  bring  it  on.  Charles 
Yorke  begged  for  delay,  but  it  was  a  delay  of  a  few  days  ; 
Eliab  Harvey,  though  bred  a  Tory,  pleaded  for  deferring 
their  decision.  Forester,  a  Scot  devoted  to  the  Duke  of 
Bedford,^  and  reckoned  no  squeamish  lawyer,  spoke  for 
procrastination,  and  voted  against  the  Court.  Wedder- 
burn,  another  Scot,  argued  for  farther  time  ;  and  even  old 
Wilbraham,^  the  Gamaliel  of  the  Jacobites,  could  not 
digest  such  indecent  hurry,  for  which  he  was  much  com- 
mended by  Pitt ;  yet  by  seven  in  the  evening  the  Court 
bore  down  all  obstruction,  and  carried  their  point  by  243 
to  166,  though  Sir  John  Philipps  and  Benjamin  Bathurst,^ 
two    high-prerogative    men,  were    in    the   minority,  with 

^  Mr.  Forester  had  been  originally  recommended  by  Alderman  Beckford 
to  the  Duke  of  Bedford  (when  the  Alderman  and  his  Grace  acted  together) 
for  a  seat  in  Parliament,  as  a  person  '  whose  steadiness,  honour,  and  elocu- 
tion are  not  exceeded  by  many  in  these  kingdoms. '  {Bedford  Correspondence, 
vol.  ii.  p.  150).  [Alexander  Forester,  M.P.  for  Oakhampton,  was  a  barrister 
in  considerable  practice.  He  appears  to  have  aspired  to  the  Speakership  in 
1761.     See  Bedford  Correspoiideiue,  vol.  iii.  p.  54. — E.] 

^  Randle  Wilbraham,  M.P.  for  Newton  and  Deputy  Steward  of  the  Uni- 
versity of  Oxford.  He  was  an  eminent  lawyer,  whose  politics,  like  those  of 
Mr.  Fazakerly,  prevented  his  attaining  the  honours  of  his  profession. —  Wal- 
pole's  Correspondence,  vol.  iv.  p.  135. — L.  M. 

^  Benjamin  Bathurst  of  Lydney,  in  Gloucestershire  [and  of  Mixbury  in 
Oxfordshire.  M.P.  for  Monmouth  Borough.  He  was  the  brother  of  Allen, 
Lord  Bathurst,  and  the  father  of  Henry  Bathurst,  Bishop  of  Norwich. — E.] 


KING  GEORGE  III.  259 

Glover,  and  four  general  officers — Conway,  Sir  John 
Griffin,^  A'Court,^  and  Honeywood.^  It  being,  however, 
too  late  to  commence  the  regular  debate,  it  was  adjourned 
till  the  next  day. 

The  24th,  a  letter  from  Wilkes  was  presented  protesting 
against  their  proceedings  and  promising  on  his  honour  to 
attend  in  his  place  as  soon  as  possible.  To  this  no  regard 
was  paid,  Grenville  moving  for  the  orders  of  the  day,  and 
Rigby  saying  that  Wilkes  could  not  have  written  that 
letter  but  on  misrepresentation  of  what  had  passed  the 
day  before.  Hussey,  the  Queen's  Solicitor,  a  man  of  most 
fair  life,  unambitious,  uninterested,  candid  in  his  conduct, 
and  gracefully  touching  in  his  delivery,  a  great  friend  of 
Pratt  and  lover  of  the  Constitution,  made  an  excellent 
speech  in  behalf  of  privilege  and  liberty.  Charles  Yorke, 
under  the  difficulties  of  disgusting  his  Whig  friends  and 
of  serving  a  Court  with  which  he  was  dissatisfied,  explored 
all  the  sources  of  distinction  and  law  subtleties,  to  defend 
his  opinion  against  privilege ;  and  spoke  for  two  hours 
with  great  applause  as  excellent  in  that  branch  of  his 
profession.  Pitt,  near  as  long  on  the  audaciousness  of 
the  Crown's  servants  and  their  contempt  of  Parliament ; 
declaring  that  this  proceeding  was  making  a  surrender 
from  that  day  of  every  man's  liberty  in  the  House  to  the 
discretion  of  the  Secretary  of  State.    Pitt  was  ill,  and  then 

•^  Sir  John  Griffin,  an  officer  of  some  distinction.  He  had  been  severely 
wounded  at  the  battle  of  Campen,  when  fighting  near  the  hereditary  Prince 
of  Brunswick.  He  was  M.P.  for  Andover  from  November  1749  to  August 
1784,  when  he  succeeded  to  the  ancient  Barony  of  Howard  de  Walden  ;  in 
1796  he  became  a  Field  Marshal;  and  he  died  in  1797,  having  devised 
Audley-End  and  his  other  estates  to  his  kinsman,  Richard  Aldworth  Neville, 
who,  at  the  same  time,  succeeded  to  the  Barony  of  Braybrooke,  which  had 
been  limited  over  to  him  on  the  death  of  Lord  Howard  de  Walden. — L.  M. 
[See  szipra,  p.  157,  Note  3. — E.] 

^  See  infra. 

^  Lieutenant-General  Philip  Honey  wood,  of  Mark's  Hall,  Essex,  M.P.  for 
Appleby.  He  was  promoted  to  the  rank  of  General  in  1777,  and  died  on 
20th  February  1785.  He  is  said  to  have  '  received  no  less  than  twenty-three 
broadsword  wounds  at  the  battle  of  Dettingen,'  as  well  as  'two  musket  shots 
which  never  were  extracted  to  the  day  of  his  death.' — Gentleman's  Magazine 
for  March  1785,  p.  235. — E. 


26o  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

went  away.  Norton  indecently  quoted  a  prosecution  for 
perjury  against  Sir  John  Rushout,^  the  most  ancient  mem- 
ber of  the  House,  then  sitting  at  the  end  of  the  same 
bench.  The  old  gentleman  was  stout  and  choleric  :  the 
prosecution  had  been  on  a  case  of  election,  and  he  had 
been  acquitted.  He  rose  with  warmth,  but  with  much 
propriety  told  his  story,  showed  the  prosecution  had  been 
instigated  by  Norton  himself  to  serve  an  election  purpose, 
and,  looking  defiance  at  that  attorney,  said,  '  It  was  all 
owing  to  that  honest  gentleman  ! — I  hope  I  do  not  call 
him  out  of  his  name ! '  The  shout  of  the  House  did 
justice  on  Norton. 

This  interlude,  however,  was  decent  and  calm  in  com- 
parison of  what  followed.  Rigby,  looking  at  Lord  Temple, 
who  was  sitting  at  the  end  of  the  House  to  hear  the 
debate,  as  he  constantly  practised,  drew  a  picture  of 
that  incendiary  peer,  described  him  in  his  blue  riband 
encouraging  mobs  from  windows  of  coffee-houses  ;  and 
more  particularly  as  the  instigator  of  Wilkes.  James 
Grenville  rose,  in  amazing  heat,  to  defend  his  brother, 
and  vomited  out  a  torrent  of  invectives  on  Rigby,  telling 
him  of  his  interestedness  and  ignorance  ;  harangued  on  so 
illiterate  a  man  being  a  Master  of  the  Rolls  ;  ^  and  painted 
his  flying  from  Ireland  to  avoid  being  hanged  by  the 
enraged  populace.  This  philippic  was  uttered  with  every 
vehemence  of  language  and  gesture  ;  the  bitterest  terms 
flowing  spontaneously  from  him  who  had  ever  been  the 
most  obscure  and  unready  speaker :  and  what  added  to 
the  outrage  of  the  diction  was,  that,  sitting  on  the  bench 
immediately  above  Rigby,  and  dashing  about  his  arm  in 
the  air,  he  seemed  to  aim  blows  at  the  latter,  who  was 
forced  to  crouch  lest  he  should  receive  them.     Grenville 

^  Sir  John  Rushout  had  taken  an  active  part  in  the  debates  against  Wal- 
pole's  Excise  Bill  in  1733.  He  was  made  a  Lord  of  the  Treasury  in  1742, 
and  in  the  following  year  Treasurer  of  the  Navy.  He  was  strongly  attached 
to  Pulteney,  and  had  the  sagacity  to  predict  the  consequences  of  that  states- 
man's refusal  to  take  office  on  the  resignation  of  Walpole.  He  lived  to  the 
great  age  of  ninety-one,  and  died  on  the  2nd  of  March  1775.  ^^'S  son  was 
created  Lord  Norlhwick. — L.  M.  -  In  Ireland. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  261 

had  no  sooner  finished,  than  the  Speaker  interposed — 
indeed  of  the  latest.  Rigby  replied,  with  ease  enough, 
that  in  Ireland  the  Mastership  of  the  Rolls  was  a  sinecure, 
and  a  man  as  ignorant  as  he  was  might  execute  the  office. 
The  House  then  insisted  on  their  giving  their  words  that 
this  altercation  should  have  no  consequences.  Grenville, 
sitting  obstinate  and  mute,  Rigby  gave  his  word  it  should 
end  there  ;  and  then  Grenville  in  like  manner. 

The  candour  of  Wilbraham  and  Phillips  on  the  preced- 
ing day  had  satisfied  their  consciences,  and  they  both  now 
spoke,  and  voted  with  the  majority.  The  House  dividing 
at  one  in  the  morning,  258  voted  for  relinquishing  their 
privilege;  only  133  for  maintaining  it.  Lord  North  then 
moved  to  communicate  their  resolutions  to  the  Lords, 
which  was  agreed  to. 

A  conference  being  accordingly  demanded,  and  held 
next  day,  the  Lords  though  in  a  very  thin  House,  and 
though  no  important  business  is  agitated  there  without 
summoning  the  Peers  [a  respect  their  Lordships  have  often 
paid  even  to  a  turnpike-bill],  were  precipitately  proceeding 
to  pass  the  like  votes  with  the  Commons  ;  but  the  Duke 
of  Richmond,  though  acting  with  the  Court,  was  struck 
with  the  indecency,  and  on  stating  it,  the  House  did  agree 
to  summon  the  Lords  for  the  29th.  Decency  thus  satisfied, 
their  Lordships  on  the  29th,  in  happy  harmony  with  the 
other  House,  made  a  parallel  compliment  of  their  privilege 
to  the  Crown.  One  hundred  and  fourteen  were  thus  loyal ; 
the  Duke  of  Cumberland  and  thirty-four  more  were  the 
minority.  The  Duke  of  Newcastle  defended  the  warrant 
of  the  Secretaries,  but  voted  against  the  resolutions.  The 
Chancellor^  was  very  warm  ;  said  he  did  not  wish  to  see 
the  House  unanimous  :  unanimity  had  cost  the  nation  sixty 
millions.^  Lord  Temple  disculpated  himself  from  en- 
couraging the  general  satire  in  the  North  Britons,  and  said 

1  Henly,  Earl  of  Northington.  [Robert,  Lord  Henley  had  been  appointed 
Lord  Chancellor  on  i6th  January  1761  ;  he  was  not  created  Earl  of 
Northington  until  19th  May  1764. — E.] 

^  Under  Lord  Chatham's  administration  in  the  war. 


262  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

he  had  always  condemned  the  attack  on  the  Scotch  and 
on  the  Tories  in  that  paper.  He  brought  a  protest,  drawn, 
as  was  supposed,  by  Lord  Chief  Justice  Pratt,  and  the 
longest  on  record,  and  signed  it  with  fifteen  other  Lords. 

At  this  very  period  that  Court  and  Parliament  were 
raging  so  hotly  against  libels,  a  new  paper,  called  the 
Moderator,  appeared.  It  was  so  scurrilous  against  the 
Chief  Justice  of  the  Common  Pleas,  that  his  court  took  up 
the  printer.  The  man  owned  directly  that  it  was  written 
by  Carteret  Webbe,  Solicitor  of  the  Treasury,  and  by  Dr. 
Shebbeare,  who,  having  been  committed  to  Newgate  by 
the  King's  Bench  in  the  late  reign  for  abusing  King 
William  and  the  House  of  Hanover,  had  been  gratified 
by  a  pension  of  ;{^200  a  year  by  Lord  Bute  ;  and  was  a 
proper  champion  of  measures  so  dissonant  from  those  of 
King  William,  and  from  those  to  which  the  House  of 
Hanover  owed  the  crown. 

Lord  Clive  had  last  year  been  thrown  out  of  his 
directorship  of  the  East  India  Company  by  the  intrigues 
of  Fox ;  and  the  new  directors  had  gone  so  far  as  to 
deprive  him  of  his  jaghire,  a  revenue  of  ;!^2 5,000  a  year 
conferred  on  him  by  the  Nabob.  This  act  had  driven 
Lord  Clive,  with  five  members  brought  into  Parliament 
by  him,  into  Opposition.  Grenville,  to  gain  a  man  so 
important,  promised  that  vast  revenue  should  be  restored 
to  him,  or  an  equivalent  given  ;  but  Walsh,  one  of  the 
five,  said  he  could  not  in  conscience  vote  with  such  iniqui- 
tous men,  and  offered  to  vacate  his  seat  :  Lord  Clive 
refusing  to  accept  it,  Walsh  abstained  from  attendance 
on  the  House. 

The  3rd  of  December  had  been  appointed  for  burning 
the  North  Briton  at  the  Royal  Exchange  ;  but  when 
the  magistrates  were  assembled  for  that  purpose,  and 
the  executioner  began  to  perform  the  ceremony,  a  great 
riot  ensued,  the  paper  was  forced  from  the  hangman,  the 
constables  were  pelted  and  beaten,  and  Mr.  Harley,^  one 
of  the  Sheriffs,  had  the  glass  of  his  coach  broken,  and 
'  Thomas  Harley,  a  merchant,  and  brother  of  the  Earl  of  Oxford. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  263 

himself  was  wounded  in  the  face  by  a  billet  snatched  from 
the  fire  that  was  lighted  to  burn  the  paper,  and  thrown 
at  him.  The  cry  was,  '  Wilkes  and  Liberty  ! '  A  jack- 
boot and  a  petticoat — the  mob's  hieroglyphics  for  Lord 
Bute  and  the  Princess,  were  burned  with  great  triumph 
and  acclamations. 

On  the  6th  the  Duke  of  Bedford,  who  had  moved  that 
the  Commons  might  be  desired  to  permit  Mr.  Harley, 
member  for  the  City,  to  attend  the  House  of  Lords, 
called  on  him,  and  Blount,  the  other  sheriff,  to  give  an 
account  of  the  late  riot.  They  said  the  mob  had  been 
encouraged  by  gentlemen  from  windows  and  balconies, 
particularly  from  the  Union  coffee-house.  One  low  man 
had  been  taken  into  custody  ;  another  had  been  rescued 
by  the  rioters.  One  witness  said  the  mob  had  united  two 
respectable  names  in  a  cry  of  approbation,  those  of  the 
Duke  of  Cumberland  and  Lord  Temple,  and  he  had 
joined  in  that  shout.  The  Duke  of  Grafton  shrewdly 
told  the  marshal's  man  he  must  have  seen  many  mobs  of 
party  against  party  ;  had  there  appeared  two  parties  on 
this  occasion  ?  *  No,'  replied  the  fellow,  '  all  were  of  one 
mind.'  The  Duke  of  Bedford,  spluttering  with  zeal  and 
indiscretion,  broke  forth  against  Bridgen,  the  Lord  Mayor, 
and  the  other  magistrates,  who,  though  within  hearing, 
had  taken  no  pains  to  quell  the  mob.  '  Such  behaviour,' 
he  said,  '  in  any  smaller  town  would  have  forfeited  their 
franchises.  The  Common  Council  had  long  been  setting 
themselves  up  against  the  Parliament,  and  last  year  had 
taken  on  them  to  advise  the  King  to  refuse  his  assent  to 
a  law^  that  had  passed  through  both  Houses.  He  hoped 
their  Lordships  would  resent  this  insult  and  disrespect 
to  their  orders.'  The  Chancellor,  alarmed  at  this  injudi- 
cious attack  on  the  City,  said  it  would  be  right  to  proceed 
without  delay  against  the  actors  and  abettors  of  the  riot ; 
but,  without  further  proofs,  he  would  not  believe  the 
magistrates  of  London  guilty.  He  moved  to  vote  the 
rioters   perturbators  of  the  peace.     This  was  voted,  and 

^  The  tax  on  cyder. 


264  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

thanks  to  the  sheriffs  for  their  behaviour.  The  Duke  of 
Richmond  seconded  the  Duke  of  Bedford  in  his  violence 
against  the  City,  and  in  a  proposal  of  offering  rewards  for 
discovery  of  the  ringleaders,  and  for  committees  of  inquiry. 
Lord  Mansfield  and  Lord  Lyttelton  interposed  to  discul- 
pate  the  magistrates,  and  obtained  to  adjourn  ;  the  former 
saying,  that  no  doubt  the  magistrates  were  actually  at 
that  time  sifting  to  the  bottom  of  the  commotion.  The 
Lords  then  conferred  with  the  House  of  Commons,  where 
Rigby  tried  to  propagate  his  master's^  spirit,  and  to  get 
the  Lord  Mayor  censured  ;  but,  on  reflection,  the  ministers 
chose  to  pass  over  the  insult,  rather  than  quarrel  seriously 
with  the  City  of  London.  They  all,  therefore,  concurred 
to  excuse  the  magistracy ;  and  the  affair  was  dropped  in 
an  address  to  the  King  to  order  the  offenders  to  be 
brought  to  justice.^ 

The  Common  Council,  neither  intimidated  nor  imitating 
the  moderation  of  Parliament,  put  a  negative  on  a  motion 
for  thanking  the  sheriffs,  and  for  prosecuting  Franklin,  the 
fellow  apprehended  in  the  tumult. 

Wilkes,  in  the  meantime,  went  on  triumphantly  with 
his  prosecutions  ;  and  on  the  6th  of  December  obtained  a 
verdict  of  ;^ I ooo  damages,  and  costs  of  suit,  against  Mr. 
Wood,  the  Under-Secretary  of  State.^ 

The  Court  was  exerting  its  authority  on  the  other  hand. 
Lord  Shelburne  was  dismissed  from  being  aide-de-camp  to 
the  King  ;  Colonel  Barre  from  being  adjutant-general  and 
governor  of  Stirling  Castle ;  and  Calcraft  lost  some  little 
places,  which  served  to  provoke  more  than  to  hurt  him. 

The  Chevalier  D'Eon,  the  mimic  of  Wilkes,  was  less 
fortunate.  Being  recalled  by  his  Court,  and  refusing  to 
return,  he  was  declared  to  be  no  longer  employed  here 
in  a  public  character,  and  was  accordingly  forbidden  to 
appear  at  St.  James's.* 

1  The  Duke  of  Bedford. 

-  Walpole's  Letters,  vol.  iv.  p.  145.  —  L.  M. 

*   Vide  Wilkes  v.  Wood.     State  Trials,  vol.  xix.  1153. — L.  M. 

■*   Vide  Mr.  Croker's  note  in  Walpole's  Letters,  vol.  iv,  p.  138. — L.  M. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  265 

While  the  world  was  anxiously  expecting  the  event  of 
Wilkes's  affair,  protracted  by  his  wound,  a  new  alarm  was 
given  of  an  intention  to  murder  him.  Mr.  Onslow  on  the 
9th  acquainted  the  House  of  Commons  that  one,  Alex- 
ander Dun,  a  Scotchman,  had  on  false  pretences  got  into 
Mr.  Wilkes's  house  the  night  before,  intending  to  assassin- 
ate him.  A  person  who  appeared,  and  made  oath  that 
he  had  heard  this  Dun  declare  that  he  and  twelve  more 
had  made  a  vow  to  murder  Wilkes,  had  given  notice  to 
the  latter  of  their  design,  on  which  he  had  prepared 
persons  to  seize  the  assassin,  which  they  had  done.  A 
new  penknife  was  found  upon  him,  and  he  prevaricated 
on  the  time  and  place  of  buying  it.  The  House  the  next 
day  examined  witnesses  on  this  accusation ;  but  it  being 
proved  that  Dun  had  been  discharged  from  a  ship  as  a 
lunatic,  he  was  dismissed  out  of  custody.  But  the  multi- 
tude were  far  from  not  continuing  to  believe  the  plot  (nor 
indeed  was  a  madman  an  improper  subject  to  be  set  on, 
if  there  was  such  a  design),  and  the  animosity  against  the 
Scotch  was  accordingly  augmented.  About  the  same 
time  the  printers  of  the  North  Briton  obtained,  in  the 
Court  of  Common  Pleas,  damages  to  the  amount  of  four 
hundred  pounds  against  the  messengers  of  the  Secretary's 
office. 

The  East  India  Company  were  untractable,  too,  and 
came  to  a  unanimous  resolution  of  neither  restoring  his 
jaghire  to  Lord  Clive,  nor  of  allowing  him  three  hundred 
thousand  pounds,  which  the  Ministry  had  engaged  to 
obtain  for  him  in  lieu  of  it.  It  occasioned  much  diversion 
that  his  father,  an  old  unfashioned  man,  who  did  not 
understand  how  decently  corruption  was  practised,  and 
how  ridiculous  it  is  to  talk  of  what  few  are  ashamed  of 
doing,  being  asked  by  the  King  in  the  drawing-room 
where  his  son  Lord  Clive  was,  replied,  with  all  the  honesty 
of  bargain  and  sale,  '  He  is  coming  to  town,  Sir,  and  then 
your  Majesty  will  have  another  vote.' 

The  House  of  Commons  having  ordered  that  Wilkes 
should  appear  before  them  on  the  24th,  and  suspecting 


266  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

that  his  delays  were  affected,  Lord  North,  George  Gren- 
ville,  and  Rigby  in  a  very  thin  house  proposed  that  Dr. 
Heberden,  and  Mr.  Hawkins  the  surgeon,  should  be  ordered 
to  attend  him.     This  was  warmly  opposed  ;  and  Charles 
Townshend,  who  knew  that  Pitt  was  provoked  at  his  late 
silence,  and  who  saw  Grenville  and  North  towering  above 
him,  and  perhaps  offended  too  that  the  Court  seemed  to 
despise  him,  broke  out  with  much  vehemence,  turned  Lord 
North  into  ridicule,  and  being  told  by  Grenville  that  it 
would  be  wiser  to  submit  to  this  motion,  replied  he  should 
often  differ  with  that  gentleman,  and  hoped  he  should  not 
have  more  wisdom  to  encounter  than  he  had  met  with 
that  day.     The  motion  was  carried  by  71  to  30.     Wilkes, 
however,  would  not   admit  the    parliamentary  physician 
and  surgeon  ;  and,  to  add  mockery  to  disobedience,  sent 
for  Doctors  Duncan  and  Middleton,  two  Scotchmen.     He 
had  at  first,  at  Martin's  request,  who  fled  to   Calais  till 
Wilkes  was  out  of  danger,  consulted  both  Hawkins  and 
Heberden.     Being  told  that  he  must  see  little  company 
for  fear  of  augmenting  his  fever,  he  said,  '  I  will  not  see  so 
much  as  my  own  wife.'     I  have  mentioned  that  they  were 
parted. 

It  was  to  the  no  small  satisfaction  of  the  Ministry  that 
on  the  26th  they  heard  that  Wilkes  was  privately  gone  off 
to  France.  It  was  a  sort  of  confession  of  guilt,  disburthened 
them  of  the  odium  of  punishing  him  personally,  and  left 
them  at  liberty  to  rage  against  him  by  outlawry  and  for- 
feitures. With  a  proper  executioner  they  had  just  pro- 
vided themselves,  having  raised  Norton  to  be  Attorney 
General.  He  was  succeeded  as  Solicitor  by  De  Grey,^  a 
man  of  a  fair  character  and  moderate  principles. 

1  William  de  Grey,  M.  P.  for  Newport,  Cornwall,  third  son  of  Thomas  de 
Grey  of  Merton,  Norfolk.  He  became  Attorney  General  in  August  1766,  and 
in  January  1771  succeeded  Sir  John  Eardley  Wilmot  as  Lord  Chief  Justice  of 
the  Common  Pleas.  Having  resigned  his  seat  on  the  bench  in  June  1780,  he 
was  created  Baron  Walsingham  on  17  th  October  following,  and  died  9th  May 
1781.— E. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  267 


CHAPTER    XXIV 

Lord  Sandwich's  unpopularity. — He  offers  himself  for  the  High  Stewardship 
of  Cambridge. — Animosity  between  him  and  Lord  Royston,  the  other 
Candidate. — Lord  Sandwich's  'Flying  Pension.' — Disgraceful  grant  to 
Count  Virri. — Dismissal  of  General  A'Court.  Grenville,  Walpole,  and 
General  Conway. 

The  effects  of  Lord  Sandwich's  conduct  began  already 
to  be  felt.  He  having,  to  thwart  the  Duke  of  Cumber- 
land, who  espoused  Mr.  Luther,  taken  the  opposite  side 
on  the  election  for  the  county  of  Essex,^  the  Court  lost 
the  election  by  dint  of  Sandwich's  unpopularity.  He 
himself,  foreseeing  the  approaching  death  of  Lord  Hard- 
wicke,  presented  himself  as  candidate  for  the  High 
Stewardship  of  Cambridge.  Nothing  could  occasion 
greater  ridicule  than  a  character  so  flagitious  offered  to  a 
religious  and  learned  society.  It  counter-worked  even  his 
own  indefatigable  industry.  Lord  Royston,^  son  of  Lord 
Hardwicke,  was  the  other  candidate  ;  and  the  animosities 
ran  so  high  that  the  two  parties  preached  against  each 
other.  The  sequel  will  appear  hereafter.  In  the  mean- 
time Sandwich  obtained  what  was  called  2l  flying  pension, 
that  is,  it  was  to  commence  if  he  lost  his  place.  The 
grant  was  of  ^^3000  a  year  on  Ireland  ;  but  when  the 
order  went  to  Dublin,  Lord  Northumberland,  having  pro- 
mised that  no  addition  should  be  made  to  the  pension-list 

^  After  a  most  expensive  contest  John  Conyers,  the  Court  candidate,  was 
defeated  by  209  votes.  His  successful  opponent,  John  Luther  of  Ongar, 
Essex,  continued  to  represent  the  county  until  the  dissolution  in  March  1784. 
Luther  died  on  13th  January  1786,  leaving  his  old  Cambridge  tutor,  Richard 
Watson,  Bishop  of  Llandaff,  the  sole  executor  of  his  will.  See  Anecdotes  of 
the  Life  of  Richa7-d  Watson,  1807,  pp.  10,  143-5. — E. 

2  Philip  Yorke,  Lord  Royston,  afterwards  second  Earl  of  Hardwicke.     See 
infra. 


268  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

during  his  administration,  was  forced  to  represent  so 
strongly  against  what  was  granted  to  Lord  Sandwich  that 
the  Court  was  obliged  to  recall  it.  The  Irish  House  of 
Commons  had  just  then  set  itself  to  examine  the  state  of 
pensions  charged  on  that  country,  and  it  had  been  found, 
as  they  published  to  the  world  in  their  votes,  that  since 
the  commencement  of  this  reign,  a  period  only  of  three 
years,  ;^  17,000  a  year  had  been  added  to  that  list.  There 
likewise  appeared  the  disgraceful  grant  to  Count  Virri, 
the  purchase  of  the  peace.  It  stood  in  the  name  of  one 
Charles. 

The  year  concluded  with  the  dismission  of  General 
A'Court,  whose  regiment  was  taken  from  him  for  having 
voted  for  the  Privilege  of  Parliament.  The  man  was 
obscure  and  of  no  importance,  had  a  large  family  and  no 
fortune  ;  ^  the  tyranny  therefore  was  the  more  flagrant, 
but  from  those  very  circumstances  made  the  less  noise. 
Lord  Sandwich  had  carried  in  to  the  King  a  list  of  sixteen 
officers  who  had  dared  to  act  with  spirit  and  independence 
against  the  arbitrary  measures  of  the  Court.  The  poor 
man  in  question  was  selected  for  an  example  of  terror ; 
but,  except  in  his  ruin,  the  ministers  found  no  cause  to 
exult.  A  much  more  considerable  man  had  taken  the  same 
part,  of  which  it  is  necessary  here  to  give  some  account. 

I  have  said  that  General  Conway,^  under  pretence  of 
bringing  home  the  troops,  had  been  kept  abroad  till  the 
peace  was  voted,  the  ministers  apprehending  that  they 
should  not  be  able  to  influence  him  to  approve  an  event 
so  ruinous  and  shameful  to  his  country.  At  his  return, 
no  man  being  less  factious,  he  had  entered  into  no  cabals, 

•■  Lieut. -General  William  A'Court,  M.  P.  for  Heytesbury,  was  dismissed 
from  the  2nd  Foot  Guards,  of  which  he  was  Lieut.  -Colonel.  He  was,  however, 
appointed  Colonel  of  the  nth  Foot  in  1775,  and  subsequently  inherited  a 
large  estate  and  the  borough  of  Heytesbury  from  his  great-uncle,  Edward  Ashe, 
whose  surname  he  assumed  in  addition  to  his  own.  He  became  a  General 
in  the  army  on  19th  March  1778,  and  died  on  2nd  August  1781.  His  grand- 
son was  created  Baron  Heytesbury  on  23rd  of  January  1828. — E. 

^  General  Henry  Seymour  Conway,  only  brother  of  Francis,  Earl  of 
Hertford. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  269 

had  attached  himself  to  no  party.     His  chief  friendships 

were  with  the  Duke  of  Devonshire,  with  his  own  brother 

the  Earl  of  Hertford,  and  with  me.     The  Duke,  though 

grievously  insulted  and  provoked,  was  of  so  decent  and 

cautious  a  nature,  that  he  was  the  last  man  on  earth  to 

think  of  exciting  his  friends  to  violent  measures  ;    and 

indeed,  after  the  first  sally  of  passion,  bore  his  affront  with 

too  much  patience.     Lord  Hertford  was  a  perfect  courtier, 

and  more  likely  to  dissuade  his  brother  from,  than  incite 

him  to.  Opposition.     I,  much  more  inclined  to  party-heat, 

had  been  very  seriously  alarmed  at  the  strides  I  had  seen 

made  towards  arbitrary  power ;   but  having  beheld    the 

cowardice   of  Lord    Bute,    and    knowing   that    of    Lord 

Mansfield,    and   finding    the    nation   delivered    from    the 

influence  of  Fox,  I  had  flattered  myself  the  danger  was 

over.     I  had  been  pleased,  too,  that  Grenville  was  become 

the    acting   minister ;    having   (I    confess   my   blindness) 

entertained   a    most  favourable  opinion  of  his  integrity. 

He  talked  nothing  but  reformation — which,  indeed,  alone 

would  not  have  duped  me — I  had  seen  too  much  of  patriot 

hypocrisy !  but  he  went  beyond  myself  in  his  principles 

of  liberty — I  mean,  in  his  discourse.     I   thought  him  a 

grounded   Republican  ;  had   heard   him  harangue  by  the 

hour  against  the   despotic  doctrines  of  Lord   Mansfield. 

Nor  had  his  venal  prostitution  of  himself  to  Lord  Bute  as 

yet  opened   my  eyes.     But   I  was  again   roused  by  the 

arbitrary  treatment  of  Wilkes,  committed  close  prisoner 

to  the  Tower  by  an  indefinite  warrant.     Lord  Bute,  I  saw, 

had    left   his    cloak  to    his   successors ;    yet   I   could   not 

believe  that  my  friend,  Algernon  Sydney  (for  Grenville 

appeared  to  me  as  scarce  a  less  Whig  saint),  was  capable 

of  concurring  in   such   measures.     In  truth,  when  I  saw 

Saint  Sandwich  added  to  his  rubric,  I  began  to  be  startled. 

I   saw  him   lean,  too,  on  the  Bedfords :    them  I  did   not 

love  ;  and  nothing  is  a  more  sovereign  cure  for  blindness 

in  friendship  than  a  connection  between  one's  friends  and 

one's  enemies.      I  laboured  by  those  most  in  Grenville's 

confidence  to  detach  him  from  so  disreputable  an  union  ; 


270  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

but  Grenville  knew  his  interest  better  than  I  knew  him. 
Still  I  had  not  the  most  distant  suspicion  of  what  his 
heart  was  capable  of,  nor  any  view  of  opposing  his 
administration.  Thinking  him  as  frank  and  candid  as 
myself,  and  thoroughly  shocked  at  the  use  made  of 
General  Warrants,  I  desired  Mr.  Thomas  Pitt,i  attached 
to  Mr.  Grenville,  and  my  own  friend,  to  tell  him  fairly  in 
the  summer,  that  I  believed  I  should  differ  with  him  when 
the  point  of  General  Warrants  should  be  agitated  in 
Parliament.  But  not  content  with  opposing  them  myself, 
I  earnestly  desired  that  Mr.  Conway  should  take  the  same 
step  ;  and  in  bringing  that  about,  I  by  no  means  piqued 
myself  on  the  same  frankness.  Should  Lord  Hertford 
conceive  the  least  suspicion  of  my  intentions,  I  knew  how 
sedulously  he  would  labour  to  prevent  his  brother  from 
involving  himself  against  the  Court.  He  might  procure 
Mr.  Conway  to  be  again  sent  aside  on  some  honourable 
commission,  or  contrive  to  have  his  gratitude  dipped  in 
favours  from  the  King,  before  he  should  be  aware  with 
what  view  they  were  bestowed.  I  waited  therefore  in 
silence  and  patience  till  Lord  Hertford  was  set  out  on  his 
embassy  to  Paris,  before  I  ever  named  the  term  General 
Warrants  in  the  presence  of  Mr.  Conway.  Then,  indeed, 
I  asked  him,  as  by  accident,  how  he  intended  to  vote  on 
that  business,  telling  him  I  should  wish  to  act  as  he  did. 
I  found  he  was  disgusted  at  the  Warrants ;  and  thence  I 
easily  entered  into  agreement  with  him  to  oppose  them,  as 

^  Thomas  Pitt  of  Boconnock,  only  son  of  Thomas  Pitt,  elder  brother  of 
the  famous  William  Pitt,  by  the  eldest  sister  of  George,  Lord  Lyttelton. 
[He  was  M.  P.  for  Old  Sarum  from  December  1761  to  March  1768,  for 
Oakhampton  from  March  1768  to  September  1774,  and  for  Old  Sarum  again 
from  October  1774  to  January  1784,  when  he  was  created  Baron  Camelford. 
He  was  a  Lord  of  the  Admiralty  from  April  1763  to  December  1765,  and 
died  at  Florence  on  19th  January  1793.  In  1804  Lord  Grenville  edited  The 
Letters  written  by  the  late  Earl  of  ChatJia/n  to  his  nephetv,  Thomas  Pitt,  Esq. 
(afterwards  Lord  Camelford),  then  at  Cambridge''  (London,  8vo).  The 
nephew's  replies  as  well  as  the  uncle's  letters  are  printed  in  the  Chatham 
Correspondence  (vol.  i.  p.  57  et  set/.).  A  number  of  Lord  Camelford's  letters 
to  Mr.  Hardinge  will  be  found  in  Nichols'  Illustrations  of  the  Literary 
History  of  the  iSth  Century,  vol.  vi.  pp.  74-139. — E.] 


KING  GEORGE  III.  271 

we  did,  no  other  person  living  having  any  previous 
intimation  of  his  intention.  The  Court  was  alarmed  ; 
and  Grenville  sent  Mr.  Thomas  Pitt  to  me  to  sound  me 
on  that  head  ;  both  of  them  believing  that  I  had  rather 
been  influenced  by  Conway,  than  he  by  me. 

Pitt  began  with  Mr.  Grenville's  concern  at  Mr.  Conway's 
behaviour,  wished  to  know  what  had  disgusted  him,  and 
was  ready  to  obtain  for  him  whatever  his  warmest  wishes 
could  aim  at.  I  assured  him  he  was  thoroughly  mistaken  ; 
that  no  disgust  had  taken  possession  of  Mr.  Conway  ;  that 
no  man  was  less  ambitious ;  and  that  I  advised  Mr. 
Grenville,  as  a  friend,  not  to  think  of  treating  Mr.  Conway 
as  a  man  to  be  bought.  That  really  would  disgust  him, 
and  might  throw  him  into  Opposition,  of  which  I  was  sure 
at  present  he  had  no  thoughts — and  thus  far  I  really  spoke 
with  good  wishes  to  Mr.  Grenville — but  the  scene  soon 
changed.  Finding  bribes  rejected,  Pitt  altered  his  tone ; 
said  it  could  not  be  suffered  to  have  men  in  the  King's 
service  acting  against  him, — and  then  dropped  this  un- 
guarded expression,  the  King  co2ild  not  trust  his  army  in 
such  hands.  I  started  !  '  Good  God  ! '  said  I,  '  Mr.  Pitt, 
what  are  they  going  to  do  with  the  army  ?  to  what  use  is 
it  to  be  put,  if  a  man  of  Mr.  Conway's  virtue,  and  tried 
loyalty  and  bravery,  cannot  be  trusted  with  a  regiment ! 
You  alarm  me  ! '  He  beat  about  backwards  and  forwards  ; 
sometimes  it  was  offers  and  promises,  sometimes  threats  ; 
but  I  had  taken  my  part,  and  had  got  hold  of  words  I  was 
determined  not  to  part  with  or  forget.  I  would  say  no 
more,  but  that  I  advised  Mr.  Grenville  to  have  patience  ; 
that  I  knew  Mr.  Conway  neither  was  in,  nor  was  going 
into.  Opposition  (for  they  were  jealous  of  his  connection 
with  the  Duke  of  Devonshire),  and  that  I  was  sure  he 
would  never  be  influenced,  would  never  act  but  from 
principle  ;  and  if  they  would  leave  him  to  himself,  they 
would  have  no  reason  to  be  dissatisfied — and  I  told  them 
the  truth,  if  they  had  had  sense  enough  to  believe  me. 
Mr.  Pitt  then  pressed  me  to  talk  it  over  with  Mr.  Grenville, 
which  I  declined.     I  said   I  would  certainly  never  give 


272  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

Mr.  Conway  any  dishonourable  advice  ;  would  never  try 
to  persuade  him  to  be  bribed  or  terrified  ;  nor  would  he 
forgive  me  if  I  should.  Pitt  persisted.  I  said,  '  Mr.  Pitt,  I 
am  persuaded  Mr.  Grenville  will  never  report  my  con- 
versation differently  from  the  truth  ;  but,  though  he  may 
not  intend  it,  he  may  mistake  me  ;  I  may  mistake  him.  I 
will  wait  on  him,  upon  condition  a  third  person  is  present. 
I  do  not  desire  it  may  be  a  friend  of  mine  and  not  his  ; 
you  are  a  friend  of  both  ;  and  though  justly  much  more 
attached  to  him  than  to  me,  I  am  persuaded,  if  any 
difference  should  arise  between  us  in  the  relation  of  the 
interview,  you  have  too  much  honour  not  to  do  strict 
justice  to  either.  If  you  may  be  present,  I  will  meet  him, 
— but  remember  I  tell  you,  it  will  be  to  no  purpose.'  In 
truth,  after  such  a  Star-chamber  sentence  as  the  King 
cannot  trust  his  army  in  the  hands  of  a  man  who  votes  in 
Parliament  against  him,  I  was  not  disposed  to  labour  in 
cementing  an  union  between  my  friend  and  a  man  of  such 
apostate  degeneracy.  From  that  hour  all  my  prejudices 
in  Grenville's  favour  were  dispelled.  I  saw  how  dangerous 
he  was  :  it  was  Fox  with  a  fairer  character. 

Though  I  had  given  too  little  encouragement  to  ex- 
pect any  alteration  either  in  Mr.  Conway's  or  my  own 
sentiments,  Grenville  persisted  in  the  interview.  I  went 
accordingly  to  Mr.  Thomas  Pitt's.  It  happened  to  be  the 
evening  of  the  riot  on  burning  the  North  Briton.  Grenville 
arrived  in  the  most  ridiculous  and  extraordinary  disorder 
I  ever  saw.  He  could  scarce  articulate  for  passion.  One 
would  have  thought  the  City  had  been  taken  by  storm 
and  the  guards  cut  to  pieces.  Yet  this  was  not  a  panic. 
It  was  rage  to  see  authority  set  at  nought  while  he  was 
minister.  His  subsequent  conduct  gave  evidence  that  this 
was  his  sensation  :  no  man  ever  bore  power  with  more 
pride.  For  some  time  I  could  scarce  learn  what  had 
provoked  him  :  the  confusion  of  his  ideas  made  him  talk 
as  if  Mr.  Conway  had  raised  a  rebellion.  Commanding 
my  laughter,  and  waiting  with  patience  till  the  torrent 
should  have  spent  itself,  but  to  no  purpose,  I  was  forced 


KING  GEORGE  III. 


273 


at  last  to  ask  what  the  riot  had  to  do  with  Mr.  Conway's 
case  ?  This  unfortunate  question,  like  snatching  a  pebble 
from  amidst  a  cascade,  did  but  make  it  dash  at  random  on 
all  sides.  From  seven  in  the  evening  till  ten  at  night,  I 
sat  to  hear  his  inundation  of  words,  scarce  uttering  ten 
myself;  and  we  parted  with  as  little  fruit  as  might  be 
expected  from  a  conversation  so  intemperate  and  dis- 
jointed ;  the  result  of  all  I  said  being  to  repeat  my  request 
that  he  would  have  patience,  and  assuring  him  that 
he  would  not  find  Mr.  Conway  engaged  in  any  regular 
opposition. 

Whether  it  proceeded  from  his  impatience  of  contra- 
diction, whether  from    eagerness   to   carry  his   point,  or 
whether  privately  instigated  by  the  Bedfords  to  push  on 
an  explanation  which  they  hoped  might  drive  Mr.  Conway 
into  settled   hostilities,  or  whether,  which  I   think  most 
likely,  they  flattered  themselves  they  should  regain  him 
from   my  influence,  Grenville  desired  an   interview  with 
Conway  himself     He  consulted  me,  and  we  agreed  that 
he  should  act  as  I  had  done,  and  insist  on  a  third  person 
being   present,   proposing   the    Duke  of  Richmond,^   his 
son-in-law,  who  however  could  not  be  exceptionable,  as 
he    acted    uniformly    with    the    Court.       This    demand 
produced  a  new  scene  of  ridiculous  distress.     Though  the 
meeting  had  been   proposed,  and   Mr.  Conway's  answer 
sent  by  noon,  it  was  not  till  ten  at  night  that  Mr.  Grenville 
could    bring   himself   to    any    resolution ;    being,    as    his 
servant  owned,  shut  up  for  the  greatest  part  of  the  time 
with  his  wife,2  a  proud,  ambitious,  and   sensible  woman, 
and   the    only  person    to  whom   he  would   listen.      She, 
indeed,  had   full    dominion    over  him.      The  precautions 
taken  both  by  Mr.  Conway  and  me  had  put  Grenville  on 
his   guard ;    not   a   word    dropped    from    him    intimating 

^  Charles  Lenox,  third  Duke  of  Richmond,  had  married  Lady  Mary  Bruce, 
daughter  of  the  last  Earl  of  Ailesbury  by  his  third  wife,  Caroline  Campbell, 
afterwards  married  to  General  Conway. 

2  Elizabeth,  only  daughter  of  Sir  William  Wyndham.  [She  was  the 
younger  daughter  of  Sir  William.  Her  elder  sister  Katherine  died  of 
smallpox  on  29th  April  1734,  aged  seventeen. — E.] 

VOL.  I.  S 


274  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

bribery.  The  meeting  ended  fruitlessly,  as  we  had 
foreseen.  Conway  was  naturally  cold,  and  Grenville  far 
from  being  master  of  ingratiating  persuasion.  Conway 
adhered  to  the  declaration  that  he  was  engaged  in  no 
opposition.  His  subsequent  behaviour  amply  confirmed 
that  assurance ;  but  a  new  measure  of  obedience  was  set 
up,  and  my  late  republican  friend  was  become  as  strict  a 
disciplinarian  as  the  most  arbitrary  of  his  predecessors. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  275 


CHAPTER     XXV 

Marriage  of  the  Princess  Augusta  with  the  Hereditary  Duke  of  Brunswick. — 
His  marked  opposition  to  the  wishes  of  the  King. — Debates  on  Wilkes's 
complaint  of  breach  of  privilege. — Sir  William  Meredith  and  Sir  George 
Saville. — The  Essay  on  Woman. — The  Marriage  Bill. — Debate  on  breach 
of  privilege. — Cases  of  Carteret  Webbe  and  Wood. 

So  early  as  in  the  late  reign  there  had  been  thoughts  of 
a  double  alliance  with  the  ducal  house  of  Brunswick  ;  but 
when  the  jealousy  of  the  Princess  Dowager  had  prevented 
the  marriage  of  her  son  with  a  princess  of  that  line,  there 
had  remained  no  great  propensity  in  the  Court  of 
Brunswick  to  the  other  match  between  the  hereditary 
Prince  and  Lady  Augusta.^  It  had,  however,  been 
treated  of  from  time  to  time  ;  and  in  1762  had  been 
agreed,  but  was  abruptly  broken  off  by  the  influence  of 
the  King  of  Prussia.  Lady  Augusta  was  lively,  and  much 
inclined  to  meddle  in  the  private  politics  of  the  Court. 
As  none  of  her  children  but  the  King  had,  or  had  reason 
to  have,  much  affection  for  their  mother,  she  justly 
apprehended  Lady  Augusta's  instilling  their  disgusts  into 
the  Queen.  She  could  not  forbid  her  daughter's  frequent 
visits  at  Buckingham  House,  but  to  prevent  any  ill 
consequence  from  them,  often  accompanied  her  thither. 
This,  however,  was  an  attendance  and  constraint  the 
Princess  of  Wales  could  not  support.  Her  exceeding 
indolence,  her  more  excessive  love  of  privacy,  and  the 
subjection  of  being  frequently  with  the  Queen,  whose 
higher  rank  was  a  never-ceasing  mortification,  all  concurred 
to  make  her  resolve  at  any  rate  to  deliver  herself  from  her 
daughter.  To  attain  this  end,  profusion  of  favours  to  the 
^  Augusta,  eldest  daughter  of  Frederick,  Prince  of  Wales. 


276  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

hated  House  of  Brunswick  was  not  thought  too  much. 
The  hereditary  Prince  was  prevailed  on  to  accept  Lady- 
Augusta's  hand,  with  fourscore  thousand  pounds,  an 
annuity  of  ;{^5000  a  year  on  Ireland,  and  ^3000  a  year  on 
Hanover.  Fourscore  thousand  pounds  were  given  with 
the  late  Princess  Royal  ^  to  the  Prince  of  Orange,  but  she 
was  a  King's  daughter.  The  Princess  Mary  ^  and  Louisa 
had  but  forty  thousand  each. 

Lady  Augusta  was  not  handsome,  but  tall  enough,  and 
not  ill-made  ;  with  the  German  whiteness  of  hair  and 
complexion,  so  remarkable  in  the  Royal  Family,  and  with 
their  precipitate,  yet  thick,  Westphalian  accent.  She  had 
little  grace  or  softness  in  her  manner :  yet  with  more 
attractions  she  might  have  failed  to  gain  a  heart  that  was 
not  inclined  to  part  with  its  liberty,  and  least  of  all  to  one 
of  her  family.  The  Prince  arrived  on  the  12th  of  January  ; 
and,  as  if  to  prejudice  him  against  his  bride,  the  plan  was 
formed  to  disgust  him  as  much  in  order  to  send  him  away 
as  soon  as  possible.  He  was  lodged  at  Somerset  House  :^ 
no  guards  were  stationed  there.  The  Lord  Steward  chose 
the  company  that  should  dine  with  him  ;  and  every  art 
was  used  to  prevent  his  seeing  Mr.  Pitt,  or  the  chiefs  of 
the  Opposition.  At  the  wedding,  which  was  on  the  i6th, 
the  servants  of  the  King  and  Queen  were  ordered  not  to 
appear  in  new  clothes.  But  though  these  little  artifices 
had  the  desired  effect  of  affronting  the  Prince,  they  only 
drew  mortifications  on  the  Court.  The  people,  enchanted 
with  novelty,  and  a  hero,  were  unbounded  in  their  ex- 
ultations wherever  he  appeared  ;  and,  as  the  behaviour  of 
the  Court  got  wind,  took  pleasure,  when  he  attended 
the  King  to  the  theatres,  to  mark  their  joy  at  the  presence 

1  Anne,  eldest  daughter  of  King  George  the  Second. 

"  Mary,  fourth  daughter  of  George  the  Second,  married  to  the  Prince  of 
Hesse  ;  and  Louisa,  his  fifth,  married  to  the  King  of  Denmark. 

^  This  was  the  old  palace  of  Protector  Somerset.  By  an  Act  passed  in 
1775  (Geo.  III.,  xxxiii.),  Buckingham  House  was  settled  upon  the  Queen  in 
lieu  of  '  Denmark  House,  orwise  Somerset  House,  orwise  Shand  House,' 
which  was  thereupon  pulled  down,  and  the  present  building  was  erected  by 
Sir  William  Chambers  on  the  old  site. — E. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  277 

of  the  Prince,  and  to  show  the  coldest  neglect  of  their 
Sovereign.  Nor  was  the  Prince  less  assiduous  to  intimate 
his  dissatisfaction,  even  to  ill-breeding,  turning  his  back  on 
the  King,  as  he  stood  over  against  him  in  the  box  at  the 
Opera  ;  and  even  going  away  during  half  the  representa- 
tion. To  the  Duke  of  Newcastle,  and  others  in  disgrace, 
he  was  full  of  attentions  ;  dined  twice  with  the  Duke  of 
Cumberland,  and  affectedly  lingered  there,  though  the 
King  and  Queen  waited  for  him  to  a  ball  ;  and,  as  he 
found  that  step  would  be  the  most  offensive,  though 
indeed  due  from  him  to  one  so  partial  to  his  family,  he 
made  a  visit  to  Mr.  Pitt,  at  Hayes.^  These  little  hostilities 
were  carried  on  with  such  vigour  on  both  sides  that,  not- 
withstanding all  his  curiosity  and  desires  expressed  of  a 
longer  stay,  the  King  forced  him  and  his  bride  to  depart 
on  the  25th, — only  thirteen  days  after  his  arrival.  They 
were  overtaken  in  a  great  storm  at  sea,  and  in  extreme 
danger  of  being  lost  ;  but  escaped,  not  only  with  good 
fortune  to  themselves,  but  to  the  Court  of  England,  who 
would  have  appeared  as  guilty  to  the  people  in  driving 
them  out  at  such  a  season,  as  if  they  had  raised  the 
tempest  by  sorcery.^ 

^  The  Prince  visited  Mr.  Pitt  on  the  22nd  of  January,  and  passed  two  hours 
with  him.  On  the  14th,  the  Prince  had  addressed  him  a  very  complimentary 
letter.  —  Chatham  Correspondence,  vol.  ii.  p.  271,  and  note. — L.  M. 

*  Charles  William  Ferdinand,  Hereditary  Prince  of  Brunswick- Wolfenbuttel, 
succeeded  to  the  dukedom  on  the  deathjof  his  father  in  1780,  and  for  some 
years  after  resided  at  Brunswick,  where  the  Princess,  who  was  throughout 
life  deservedly  esteemed,  made  his  Court  very  agreeable.  In  1787  he  com- 
manded the  Prussian  forces  which  took  possession  of  Amsterdam,  and  put 
down  the  republican  party  in  Holland.  His  campaigns  against  the  French 
republicans  were  less  successful,  and  his  well-known  manifesto  rendered  his 
failure  more  glaring.  He  was  mortally  wounded  at  Auerstadt,  and  expired 
at  Altona  on  the  loth  of  November  1S06,  leaving  behind  him  the  reputation 
of  a  bold  and  enterprising,  rather  than  of  an  able  general.  His  Duchess 
took  refuge  in  England,  where  she  died  at  an  advanced  age.  They  were  not 
happy  in  their  family  :  of  their  two  daughters,  the  elder  married  Prince 
Frederick  William  Charles,  afterwards  King  of  Wurtemburgh,  and  came  to  a 
miserable  end  in  Russia ;  the  younger  was  the  unfortunate  Queen  Caroline. 
Their  elder  son  was  of  weak  understanding,  and  the  younger,  '  Brunswick's 
fated  Chieftain,'  a  Prince  of  moderate  al)ilities  but  signal  courage,  fell  in 
middle  life  at  Quatre  Bras. — L.  M. 


278  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

The  Parliament  having  reassembled  on  January  i6th, 
the  House  of  Commons  on  the  19th  proceeded  on  the 
affair  of  Wilkes,  He  had  given  out  that  he  would  return 
from  Paris,  and  make  his  defence :  and  to  carry  on  the 
delusion,  a  dinner  was  bespoken,  and  company  invited 
to  meet  him  ;  but  on  the  day  destined  for  deciding  his 
fate,  a  letter  from  him  was  delivered  to  the  Speaker, 
accompanied  by  a  certificate  from  two  French  surgeons, 
attesting  his  incapacity  of  travelling,  from  the  ill  state  of 
his  wound.  The  Court  party  objected  even  to  the  reading 
of  the  certificates,  but  though  they  could  not  prevent  it,  so 
eager  was  the  curiosity  of  the  House,  they  did  frustrate  a 
motion  for  adjournment  by  239  to  102 ;  on  which  many 
of  the  minority,  finding  their  weakness,  left  the  House. 
Others  battled  for  the  criminal  till  near  four  in  the  morn- 
ing, but  their  numbers  still  dwindling  away,  Wilkes  was 
at  last  expelled  with  scarce  a  negative,  the  warmest 
sticklers  for  him  having  been  discountenanced  and  dis- 
couraged by  the  harsh  epithets  bestowed  on  him  by  Pitt 
in  one  of  the  former  debates. 

The  next  day  Sir  William  Meredith  and  Sir  George 
Saville  moved  to  have  Wilkes's  complaint  of  breach  of 
privilege  examined.  George  Grenville  tried  to  evade  it, 
but  was  strongly  attacked  by  Charles  Townshend,  and 
reproached  with  the  dismission  of  General  A'Court,  and 
with  the  arbitrary  influence  exerted  by  the  administration. 
Sir  John  Grifiin^  the  day  before  had  mentioned  too  the 
case  of  A'Court,  and  said  he  himself  would  not  be  intimi- 
dated by  the  disgrace  of  ten  more  generals.  The  Court 
at  last  yielded  the  point ;  and  the  26th  was  fixed  for 
hearing  the  complaint. 

Sir  William  Meredith-  and  Sir  George  Saville  were  both 
men   of  character,  and   both  singular  in  different  ways. 

^  A  General  officer.     [See  supra,  p.  259. — E.] 

^  Sir  William  Meredith,  Bart.,  M.P.  for  Wigan  from  1754  to  1761,  for 
Liverpool  from  176 1  to  1780.  He  was  a  Lord  of  the  Admiralty  from  August 
1765  to  December  1766,  and  in  March  1744  was  appointed  Comptroller  of 
the  Household  and  admitted  to  the  I'rivy  Council.  He  died  at  Lyons  on 
2nd  January  1 790,  when  the  baronetcy  became  extinct. — E. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  279 

The  first  was  a  convert  from  Jacobitism  ;  inflexibly 
serious,  and  of  no  clear  head  :  yet  practice  formed  him  to 
a  manner  of  speaking  that  had  weight  and  was  worth 
attending  to  by  those  who  had  patience  for  it.  He  was,  I 
believe,  an  honest  man,  though  not  without  personal 
views,  which  a  little  sharpened  his  scorn  of  those  who  had 
unlike  views,  and  were  not  equally  honest. 

Sir  George  Saville  had  a  head  as  acutely  argumentative 
as  if  it  had  been  made  by  a  German  logician  for  a  model. 
Could  ministers  have  been  found  acting  by  the  advice 
of  casuists  and  confessors.  Sir  George  would  still  have 
started  distinctions  to  hamper  their  consciences  ;  but 
though  they  walked  not  in  such  ruled  paths,  his  want  of 
ambition  carried  him  so  seldom  to  the  House,  that  they 
were  not  often  troubled  with  his  subtleties.  He  had  a 
large  fortune,  and  a  larger  mind  ;  and  though  his  reason 
was  sharp,  his  soul  was  candid,  having  none  of  the 
acrimony  or  vengeance  of  party  ;  thence  was  he  of  greater 
credit  than  service  to  that  in  which  he  listed.^ 

^  This  character  of  Sir  George  Savile  is  not  less  honourable  to  his  memory 
than  Mr.  Burke's  well-known  and  brilliant  panegyric  at  the  Bristol  election 
in  1780.  —  Works  of  Edtnund Burke,  1815,  iii.  p.  392.  Few  public  men  received 
more  respect  from  their  contemporaries — few,  perhaps,  have  so  well  earned 
it.  He  devoted  his  time,  his  talents,  and  his  purse  almost  exclusively  to  the 
public  service.  Neither  the  fashionable  nor  literary  circles  of  London,  nor 
the  pursuits  of  the  country,  had  any  charm  for  him  ;  he  seldom  resided  at 
Rufiford,  the  splendid  seat  of  his  ancestors  :  business  was  his  passion,  and 
•whether  in  town  or  country,  constituted  his  sole  occupation  ;  fortunately,  he 
had  abilities  to  perform  it  creditably,  and  his  generosity,  which  was  scarcely 
bounded  by  his  great  estate,  had  always  usefulness  for  its  object.  The  same 
discernment  appears  in  his  selection  of  the  Parliamentary  questions  with 
which  his  name  is  identified,  such  as  the  Limitation  of  the  Claims  of  the 
Crown  on  Landed  Estates  ;  the  Relief  of  Roman  Catholics  as  well  as  of  Pro- 
testant Dissenters,  and  the  Condemnation  of  General  Warrants,  and  lastly, 
the  Improved  Representation  of  the  People  ;  all  these  he  advocated  with  an 
earnestness  and  singleness  of  purpose,  and  consistency  of  action,  which 
extorted  the  admiration  even  of  his  opponents.  Though  not  an  impressive 
speaker,  he  was  always  sensible  and  very  fluent,  and  he  spared  no  pains  to 
understand  his  subject.  His  speeches,  indeed,  partook  of  one  of  the  char- 
acteristics of  his  mind,  which  was  a  simplicity  approaching  to  austerity,  and 
an  exemption  from  party,  or  even  popular  prejudices.  His  life  in  all 
respects  strictly  corresponded  with'his  principles,  and  was  unstained  by  vice, 


28o  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

On  the  23rd  these  two  Baronets  moved  to  put  off  the 
affair  of  Wilkes's  complaint  of  breach  of  privilege  to  the 
13th  of  February,  as  the  material  evidence,  Wilkes's  servant, 
was  in  France  with  him.  Sir  George  particularly  attacked 
Grenville  with  much  spirit.  Grenville,  as  usual,  spoke  too 
long,  though  not  ill,  insinuating  that  this  delay  was  cal- 
culated to  keep  up  the  flame.  '  He  had  always,'  he  said, 
'  been  averse  to  having  this  matter  discussed,  which  had 
better  never  be  decided  ;  and  that  he  had  only  given  way 
in  order  to  vindicate  Lord  Halifax  and  Lord  Egremont' 
It  was  perhaps  true,  that  in  some  cases  it  were  better  that 
certain  powers  should  not  be  defined.  It  might  be  of  use 
that  traitors  should  think  ministers  have  power  of  com- 
mitting by  General  Warrants  even  members  of  Parlia- 
ment ;  and  at  the  same  time  ministers  ought  not  to  have 
that  power  absolutely  bestowed  on  them.  But  when  once 
the  case  has  happened,  and  that  dormant  or  supposed 
power  has  been  abused,  it  must  be  inquired  into  and  regu- 
lated ;  or  acquiescence  constitutes  the  second  evil  hinted 
at  above.  But  in  any  case  Grenville's  argument  was 
faulty,  for  if  it  was  desirable  for  the  public  that  the  case 
should  not  be  defined,  the  private  vindication  of  two  men 
ought  not  to  supersede  that  utility.  However,  though  the 
minority  on  putting  the  question  were  not  loud  for  it,  the 
Ministry  gave  it  up.  Sir  George  Saville  took  occasion  to 
make  it  observed,  that  so  bad  was  his  opinion  of  Wilkes, 
he  had  taken  no  part  till,  the  man  being  expelled,  nothing 
but  the  cause  of  the  House  in  point  of  privilege  seemed 
to  remain.  This  did  honour  to  Sir  George,  but  prejudiced 
Wilkes  and  the  cause  of  liberty.  The  former's  character, 
as  I  have  said,  was  very  fair:  and  indeed  most  of  the 
Opposition  were  unexceptionable  in  that  light.  Yet 
Wilkes  had,  early  in  his  warfare  on  the  Court,  told  Rigby 

or  even  by  weakness  of  any  kind  ;  his  death  was  regarded  as  a  public  loss. 
He  died  in  1784,  unmarried,  aged  fifty-seven,  and  with  him  ended  this 
illustrious  line  of  the  family  of  Savile.  He  was  a  collateral  descendant  of  the 
Marquis  of  Halifax,  to  whose  estates  his  father  had  succeeded.  — L.  M.  [Savile 
was  M.P.  for  Yorkshire  from  January  1759  to  December  1783. — E.] 


KING  GEORGE  III.  281 

that  he  liked  the  ministers  better  than  their  opponents 
(no  great  compliment  to  the  first),  and  desired  him  to 
apply  to  Fox  to  make  him  (Wilkes)  Governor  of  Canada 
— a  proposal  Fox  rejected.  It  was  not  to  be  wondered 
at  that  Wilkes,  so  libertine  and  jovial,  should  not  be 
captivated  with  the  company  of  a  set  of  young  men  who 
were  as  free  from  the  spirit  and  vivacity  as  from  the 
vices  of  their  age.  The  chiefs  were  of  eminent  rank, 
and  besides  losing  the  power  they  thought  affected  to 
their  birth,  had  been  wantonly  insulted  by  the  Court. 
But  wanting  parts  to  preserve  their  power,  they  equally 
wanted  them  to  recover  it.  Yet  was  the  Court  itself 
alarmed  at  a  club  into  which  the  Opposition  formed 
themselves,  holding  their  weekly  meetings  at  a  tavern 
erected  on  the  occasion  by  one  Wildman,  in  Albemarle 
Street  ^ — a  circumstance  I  mention  rather  as  an  antiquary 
than  historian  ;  several  pamphlets  being  published  at  this 
time  addressed  to,  or  written  in  the  name  of,  that  society. 

On  the  24th,  Dowdeswell  proposed  a  Committee  of 
the  whole  House,  to  consider  the  Cider  Bill.  Grenville 
opposed  that  motion,  agreeing  only  to  have  a  Committee 
to  examine  the  grievances  occasioned  by  it,  and  to  suggest 

^  This  house,  in  which  James,  Earl  Waldegrave  died,  has  again  become 
remarkable  by  a  club  created  there  in  1769  by  several  ladies  of  first  rank; 
the  first  public  female  club  ever  known,  and  which  gave  great  offence,  though 
the  ladies  were  almost  all  of  distinguished  virtue.  Nor,  though  the  age  was 
notorious  for  divorces,  though  most  of  the  female  members  were  of  the  greatest 
beauty,  and  though  most  of  the  young  men  of  fashion  were  of  the  club,  did 
any  scandal  happen  from  that  society.  Even  gaming,  which  at  that  time 
raged  to  so  enormous  a  degree,  went  to  no  great  lengths  there.  So  that  vice 
and  satire,  which  prevailed  so  exceedingly,  did  not  always  meet  where  they 
deserved  to  meet.  The  King  and  Queen  marked  their  disapprobation  of  the 
club,  while  Lord  Despenser,  Lord  Talbot,  and  Lord  Pembroke  were  in  place, 
while  Lady  Berkeley  was  of  the  Bedchamber  to  the  Princess  Dowager,  though 
her  husband,  Lord  Clare,  had  disavowed  her  last  child,  and  while  Miss  Chud- 
leigh  had  remained  Maid  of  Honour  to  her,  though  she  had  owned  her  mar- 
riage with  Captain  Hervey  to  her  Royal  Highness,  till  she  openly  married 
the  Duke  of  Kingston,  though  Hervey  was  alive ;  and  was  received  by  all  the 
Royal  Family  as  Duchess,  after  having  been  publicly  kept  by  the  Duke  as 
his  mistress.  No  wonder  the  sanctity  of  the  Court  passed  for  hypocrisy. 
[See  Notes  and  Queries,  6th  series,  vol.  i.  pp.  293,  357 ;  7th  series,  vol.  v.  pp. 
127,  178. — E.] 


282  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

corrections,  but  not  with  power  to  repeal  the  Bill.  These 
restrictions  were  carried  by  167  to  125.^ 

The  same  day  the  House  of  Lords  sat  on  the  Essay 
on  Wo)nan.  Lord  Sandwich  moved  to  vote  Wilkes  the 
author  of  it,  and  to  order  him  to  be  taken  into  custody. 
The  Duke  of  Devonshire,  and  even  the  Duke  of  Rich- 
mond, though  a  courtier,  spoke  against  this  summary 
proceeding ;  and  warm  words  passed  between  Lord 
Temple  and  Lord  Marchmont,  the  latter  of  whom  said 
that  though  Wilkes  was  gone,  he  had  left  his  gang  behind 
him.  At  last  both  questions  were  formed  into  this  one, — 
that  it  appearing  to  the  House  that  Wilkes  was  the  author, 
he  should  be  taken  into  custody ;  but,  as  he  had  with- 
drawn himself,  a  Committee  was  appointed  to  search  for 
precedents  how  to  proceed. 

On  the  25th,  Sir  John  Glynn,  in  a  very  thin  House, 
moved  to  reconsider  the  Marriage  Act ;  and  a  Committee 
was  appointed.  Sir  John  Philipps,  too,  proposed  to  re- 
appoint the  Committee  of  the  last  year  for  inspecting  the 
public  accounts,  and  it  was  carried  by  90  to  30  odd.  Lord 
Holland  and  the  Duke  of  Newcastle  had  concurred  to 
bring  that  inquiry  to  nothing,  contriving  to  have  the  time 
wasted  on  the  accounts  of  the  ordnance. 

On  the  31st,  Dowdeswell  moved  a  question  against 
excise,  though  without  naming  it,  in  the  Committee  on 
the  Cider  Bill,  but  it  was  thrown  out  by  172  to  152,  seven 
of  the  minority  being  shut  out  when  the  question  was 
putting :  so  near  was  the  Court  run  by  the  minority, 
though  without  leaders,  and  frequently  obstructed  and 
distressed  by  the  fluctuation  of  the  family  of  Yorke,  and 
the  duplicity  of  Charles  Townshend,  who  oftener  spoke 
against  than  for  them,  and  that  generally  when  he  had 
given  the  most  solemn  assurances  of  his  support. 

On  February  3rd,  late  in  the  day.  Sir  William  Mere- 
dith moved  for  the  evidence  on  which  the  Secretaries  of 
State   had    granted    the  warrant    against   Wilkes.      The 

'  For  an  account  of  this  debate,  see  Chatham  Correspondence,  vol.  ii.  p. 
281.— L.M. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  283 

Ministry  complained  of  the  lateness  of  the  hour,  and 
Rigby  moved  to  adjourn.  Charles  Townshend  attacked 
Grenville  on  it,  and  was  even  seconded  by  his  brother, 
the  General ;  but  the  adjournment  was  carried  by  73  to  60. 

On  the  6th  there  was  a  good  debate  ^  on  Wilkes's  com- 
plaint of  breach  of  privilege,  when  Sir  W.  Meredith  and 
Sir  George  Saville  defended  themselves  against  the  im- 
putation of  want  of  candour,  in  having  made  their  motion 
late  in  a  thin  House ;  the  former  proving  that  many 
violent  questions  had  been  proposed  seven  hours  later 
than  theirs  had  been.  He  moved  for  the  warrant  on 
which  Wilkes  had  been  apprehended,  and  for  the  infor- 
mation on  which  it  had  been  grounded.  To  avoid  the 
demand,  Sir  John  Philipps  moved  the  previous  question, 
declaring  that  he  meant  to  discharge  the  complaint.  Lord 
Strange  was  at  first  for  having  the  warrant  produced  ;  but 
soon  retracted,  and  said  the  complaint  ought  to  be  dis- 
charged, as  the  suit  was  depending  at  common  law — an 
argument  that  had  been  pressed  on  the  ministers  when 
Wilkes's  expulsion  was  agitated,  and  which  they  then  had 
refused  to  admit. 

I  have  more  than  once,  in  the  former  part  of  these 
Memoirs,  touched  on  the  character  of  Lord  Strange,  as 
a  man  acting  on  notions  of  his  own,  unwedded  to  any 
faction,  and  above  temptations  of  money.  He  had,  how- 
ever, been  gained  by  Fox  to  the  Court,  in  the  present 
reign,  by  the  offer  of  the  post  of  Chancellor  of  the  Duchy 
of  Lancaster,  the  county  where  his  estate  and  interest  lay. 
The  large  number  of  places  in  the  disposal  of  that  officer 
could  gratify  his  passion  for  sway  in  his  own  province  ; 
so  true  was  the  maxim  of  Sir  Robert  Walpole,  that  every 
vian  has  his  price  ;'-^  and  so  judiciously  was  this  office  held 
out  to  Lord   Strange  ;  for  though  he  accepted  the  post 

^  A  graphical  description  of  this  debate  is  given  by  the  author  in  a  letter 
to  Lord  Hertford,  vol.  iv.  p.  179,  of  his  Letters. — L.  M. 

^  Mr.  John  Morley  asserts  that  Sir  Robert  Walpole  '  never  delivered  him- 
self of  that  famous  slander  on  mankind,'  but  that,  while  mocking  the  declama- 
tory professions  of  certain  patriots  in  opposition,  Walpole  declared  that  '  all 
these  men  have  their  price.' — Twelve  Eiiglish  Statesmen  :  Walpole,  p.  127. 


284  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

on  the  views  I  have  mentioned,  he  nobly  refused  to  take 
the  annexed  salary  of  ;^I200  a  year.  He  seldom  after- 
wards differed  with  the  successive  administrations,  but 
rarely  attended  Parliament. 

Sir  William  Meredith  consented  to  waive  his  demand 
of  the  information,  though  Beckford  protested  that  he 
himself  had  never,  as  a  justice  of  the  peace,  granted  a 
warrant  without  information  on  oath.  Norton  pleaded 
that  to  grant  it  would  instruct  the  accuser,  Wilkes,  in  the 
defence  of  the  accused  Secretaries  and  Under-Secretaries 
of  State ;  but  T.  Townshend  urged  that  it  had  already 
appeared  in  the  Court  of  Common  Pleas,  and  in  the 
ordinary  newspapers.  George  Grenville^  said  that  pro- 
ducing the  warrant  would  engage  the  House  to  pronounce 
on  the  legality  or  illegality  of  it.  Would  the  House 
declare  that  any  papers  might  be  seized  ?  Would  it 
declare  that  none  might?  Sir  Anthony  Abdy,- a  lawyer 
attached  to  the  Duke  of  Devonshire,  said  a  sight  of  the 
warrant  was  demanded  as  much  for  the  excuse  of  such 
members  of  the  House  as  had  been  concerned  in  it,  as 
for  blame  ;  and  General  Conway  added,  that  if  the  in- 
formation was  the  defence  of  Wood  and  the  others,  how 
would  it  hurt  them  ?  But,  said  he,  this  matter  is  treated 
as  too  high  for  our  inspection.  I  thought  I  lived  in  a  free 
country.  We  have  already  chosen  to  give  up  our  own 
privilege,  and  now  are  afraid  to  inquire  on  what  grounds 
it  is  taken  from  us.^  Nugent,  Morton,  Elliot,  Wilbra- 
ham,  Dr.  Hay,  Wood  himself,  Lord  Frederick  Campbell, 
Forester,  Oswald,^  Ellis,  Lord  North,  and  Sir  John  Glynn 

^  For  an  account  of  Mr.  Grenville's  speech,  see  James  Grenville's  letter  to 
Mr.  Pitt,  Chatham  Correspondence,  vol.  ii.  p.  285. — L.  M. 

-  Sir  Anthony  Thomas  Abdy,  Bart.,  of  Albins,  Essex,  M.P.  for  Knares- 
borough  from  P'ebruary  1763  until  his  death,  which  occurred  on  7th  April 
1775-     ^^c  became  a  King's  Counsel  in  1766. — E. 

^  This  speech  of  General  Conway's  appears  to  have  made  a  great  impres- 
sion on  the  House.     See  Walpole's  Letters,  iv.  p.  179. — L.  M. 

^  James  Oswald  of  Dunnikier,  represented  the  Kirkcaldy  district  of  burghs 
from  June  1741  to  June  1747,  and  May  1754  to  March  1768;  and  Fifeshire 
from  July  1747  to  April  1754.  He  successively  filled  the  posts  of  Commis- 
sioner of  the  Navy,  Lord  of  Trade  and  Plantations,  Lord  of  the  Treasury, 


KING  GEORGE  III.  285 

debated  the  question  for  the  Court,  besides  those  I  have 
mentioned  ;  on  the  other  side,  Hewet,^  King's  Sergeant, 
Mawbey,^  Lord  George  Sackville,  Dowdeswell,  Fitzherbert, 
Dempster,  Charles  Townshend,  and  Onslow  ;  but  the  pre- 
vious question  was  carried  by  217  to  122. 

The  next  day  the  Cider   Bill  was  compromised,  and 
two  shillings  imposed  instead  of  five. 

On  the  9th,  the  day  appointed  for  considering  the 
Marriage  Bill,  Charles  Yorke  opposed  going  into  Com- 
mittee, and  said  Sir  John  Glynn  should  have  stated  objec- 
tions, and  proposed  amendments  ;  wished  to  have  a  bill 
brought  in  for  that  purpose.  He  talked  of  the  wisdom 
and  temper  with  which  it  had  been  carried  through  before  : 
the  truth  of  which  may  be  seen  in  my  former  account  of 
that  bill.  Rigby  was  for  going  into  the  Committee,  his 
patron  the  Duke  of  Bedford  having  been,  and  continuing 
to  be,  its  warm  adversary.  Lord  Strange  ridiculed  ecclesi- 
astical law,  and  frankly  spoke  of  marriage  as  only  legal 
cohabitation.  George  Grenville  stayed  away,  and  Lord 
Holland's  friends  were  for  repealing  the  bill.  The  Opposi- 
tion, to  court  the  Yorkes,  were  against  altering  it  ;  but  it 
was  carried  by  157  to  79,  for  a  Committee  to  re-examine 
it.  It  was  then  proposed  to  go  into  the  Committee  on 
that  day  sevennight :  Charles  Yorke  and  General  Towns- 

and  Vice-Treasurer  of  Ireland,  and  was  sworn  a  member  of  the  Privy  Council. 
He  died  on  24th  March  1769.  He  was  a  soldier  as  well  as  a  politician,  and 
was  the  friend  of  Hume,  Lord  Kames,  and  Adam  Smith.  His  Correspond- 
ence was  published  in  1825  under  the  title  of  Memorials  of  the  Piiblic  Life  and 
Character  of  the  Right  Hon.  Jaynes  Oswald,  etc.  (Edin. ,  8vo). — E. 

^  James  Hewitt,  M.P.  for  Coventry,  was  appointed  to  a  puisne  judgeship 
of  the  King's  Bench  in  November  1766,  and  on  9th  January  1768  became 
Lord  Chancellor  of  Ireland.  He  was  successively  created  Baron  and  Viscount 
Lififord  in  the  peerage  of  Ireland,  and  died  at  Dublin  on  28th  April  1789. 
He  is  said  to  have  been  the  first  Lord  Chancellor  of  Ireland  whose  judgments 
have  been  preserved.  A  collection  of  them,  '  edited  from  the  original  Notes 
of  the  late  John  Wallis,  K.C.,'  by  James  Lyle,  was  published  in  1839. — E. 

^  Joseph  Mawbey  of  Botleys,  Surrey,  malt  distiller  and  vinegar  manufac- 
turer. He  was  M.P.  for  Southwark  from  April  1761  to  September  1774, 
and  for  Surrey  from  June  1775  to  June  1790.  He  was  created  a  Baronet  on 
30th  July  1765.  He  died  on  i6th  June  1798,  and  was  buried  at  Chertsey. 
See  The  Rolliad  {j.']^)^),  p.  296.— E. 


286  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

hend  for  the  Monday  sevennight  after.  Charles  Tovvns- 
hend,  who  had  shone  so  brightly  against  the  original  bill, 
kept  away  ;  but  it  was  carried  for  the  Wednesday  by  70 
to  39. 

On  the  13th,  the  House  of  Commons  entered  seriously 
on  the  great  question  of  breach  of  privilege  on  Wilkes's 
complaint,  and  the  first  day  sat  till  midnight,  four  hundred 
and  fifty  members  being  present.  Sir  William  Meredith 
opened  the  debate  with  calling  for  the  three  messengers 
who  had  executed  the  warrant,  and  for  Matthew  Brown, 
Wilkes's  servant,  who  gave  an  account  of  what  had  passed 
when  his  master  was  seized.  I  shall  not  recapitulate 
these  examinations,  which  may  be  found  in  the  journals 
of  the  House ;  nor  what  was  said  by  other  witnesses. 
Their  depositions  lasted  till  nine  at  night.  Philip  Carteret 
Webbe  then  made  his  defence  ;  and  it  was  so  scurvy,  that 
he  was  reduced  to  plead  inadvertence,  and  his  being  a 
servant  of  the  Secretary  of  State.  He  even  had  the 
front  to  affirm  that  there  had  been  no  intention  of  making 
Wilkes  close  prisoner.  He  then  offered  to  produce  his 
evidence,  but,  it  being  late,  G.  Grenville  asked  if  they 
would  proceed  or  not?  Mr.  Pitt  said  he  thought  they 
ought  not  to  stop  till  they  knew  whether  they  still  had  a 
Constitution  or  not  ?  Lord  Frederick  Campbell,  supported 
by  Rose  Fuller  and  General  Townshend,  moved  to  adjourn. 
Thomas  Townshend  the  younger  urged  that  the  House 
had  voted  the  expulsion  of  a  member  at  four  o'clock  in 
the  morning — would  not  they  proceed  to  hear  his  com- 
plaint at  eleven  at  night  ?  Mr.  Pitt  said  it  was  deroga- 
tory from  the  honour  of  the  House  to  adjourn.  His 
own  first  wish  had  been  to  crush  foreign  enemies ;  now  it 
was  to  crush  domestic.  When  that  was  done  he  should 
die  willingly.  The  question  was  then  put,  but  the 
ministers  not  caring  to  hazard  their  majority,  when  the 
House  seemed  inclined  to  proceed,  few  of  their  party 
went  out  in  the  division  ;  and  thence  it  was  carried  by 
379  to  3 1  to  go  on. 

The  record  of  the  writ  of   Habeas    Corpus,   and   the 


KING  GEORGE  III.  287 

returns  to  it,  were  then  read  ;  but  so  many  of  the  members 
had  retired  after  the  division,  to  eating-houses  and  coffee- 
houses to  refresh  themselves,  that  the  ministers  objected 
that  evidence  was  not  fairly  heard  on  their  side ;  and  Sir 
James  Lowther  moving  to  adjourn,  it  was  carried  without 
a  division  a  quarter  before  twelve. 

The  next  day  was  spent  in  hearing  precedents  of 
general  warrants,  in  which  there  appeared  but  too  much 
countenance  for  the  practice,  yet  founded  on  no  law. 
The  greater  part  had  been  issued  against  Jacobites,  on 
the  accession  of  the  present  Royal  Family,  when  their 
establishment  was  new  and  precarious.  The  Lord  Vis- 
count Townshend,^  a  zealous,  bold,  and  authoritative 
minister,  had  made  free  with  the  practice.  It  had  been 
used  even  in  cases  of  libels,  but  always  in  those  of  Jaco- 
bite tendency.  Many  in  times  of  rebellion  had  been 
issued  by  the  Duke  of  Newcastle,  and  three  by  Mr.  Pitt 
himself,  but  against  persons  suspected  of  treasonable 
practices.  These  documents  had  Carteret  Webbe  now 
collected  :  he  printed  them,  too,  in  his  justification.  But 
the  case  of  Wilkes  was  not  only  dissimilar,  but  was  im- 
portant enough  to  call  for  redress  of  a  power  so  obnoxious 
and  liable  to  abuse.  At  one  in  the  morning  Sir  William 
Meredith  commenced  the  debate,  and  to  what  I  have  said 
added  the  history  of  those  warrants.  Fifty  persons,  he 
owned,  had  been  taken  up  on  such  warrants ;  and  then 
Wilkes  on  a  like  indefinite  warrant.  His  very  pocket- 
book  had  been  seized  to  find  evidence  against  him.  The 
gentlemen  who  apprehended  him  were  mere  ministerial 
officers.  The  first  warrant  quoted  was  of  1662,  for  then 
was  passed  the  first  act  for  licensing  the  press :  and  as 
that  act  was  temporary,  and  has  not  been  revived,  it  is  a 

1  Charles,  Lord  Viscount  Townshend,  minister  at  the  Hague,  and  after- 
wards Secretary  of  State  to  the  Kings  George  the  First  and  Second.  By  his 
eldest  son,  Charles,  he  was  grandfather  of  General  George  Townshend,  after- 
wards Viscount,  and  of  the  famous  Charles  Townshend.  His  second  son, 
Thomas,  was  father  of  another  Thomas,  often  mentioned  in  these  Memoirs. 
William,  third  son,  was  father  of  another  Charles  Townshend,  called  the  Black 
or  Spanish  Charles,  from  having  been  Secretary  to  the  Embassy  at  Madrid. 


288  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

proof  that  there  is  no  law  since  to  authorise  such  restraint. 
The  warrants  themselves  have  been  found  by  the  Court 
of  Common  Pleas  to  be  illegal.  He  then  read  the  two 
resolutions  he  proposed  to  move  ;  the  first,  that  a  general 
warrant  for  seizing  authors  and  papers  is  not  law.  The 
second  that  seizing  Members  of  Parliament  by  general 
warrant  is  contrary  to  privilege.  Breach  of  privilege  he 
added,  might  be  committed  in  the  manner,  even  where 
there  is  no  privilege.  These  warrants  had  never  been 
used  but  in  times  of  danger,  and  then  were  followed  by 
Acts  of  Indemnity,  and  thence  never  came  to  be  ques- 
tioned. They  were  suspended  from  1675  to  1690,  and 
then  were  resumed  to  protect  the  Revolution.  Again  in 
17 1 5  and  1745,  the  years  of  the  Scottish  rebellions.  They 
were  now  used  for  such  a  trifle  as  a  libel  that  was  in 
every  man's  hand.  The  licentiousness  of  the  people  had 
been  checked  :  it  was  time  now  to  quiet  their  minds  by 
checking  the  licentiousness  of  power. 

Lord  Frederick  Campbell,  with  much  warmth,  called 
on   the    House   to    vindicate    Wood    and   Wcbbe,   their 
accused  members.     Wood  said  he  had  done  his  duty,  and 
hoped  to  be  restored  to  the  precise  situation   in  which 
he   had  stood  before  the  accusation.      Sir   W.   Meredith 
said,  Lord  Chief  Justice  Keeling  being  accused,  pleaded 
he  had  acted  by  precedent.     The  practice  was  censured 
before  the  person,  as  it  is  necessary  to  ascertain  the  crime 
ere  the  criminal  can  be  condemned.     Charles  Yorke  said 
he  hoped  to  hear  Keeling's  case  read  another  day,  and  then 
moved  to  adjourn.     Norton  said  he  was  willing  to  have 
the  general  case  adjourned,  but  not  the  particular  one  of 
the  accused.     The  debate  took  that  turn  of  postponing  the 
case  of  the  warrants,  but  the  ministers  insisted  on  disculp- 
ating  the  accused,  Grenville  particularly  declaring  for  dis- 
charging the  complaint  of  breach  of  privilege.    Pitt  replied, 
that  if  the  second  question  should  pass,  it  would  be  im- 
possible entirely  to  acquit  the  accused.     They  could  not 
be  acquitted  or  condemned  till  the  general  question  should 
be  affirmed  or  condemned.      If  the   warrant   should    be 


KING  GEORGE  III.  289 

declared  illegal,  he  would  extenuate  their  behaviour  as 
having  acted  by  precedent.  To  this  Wood,  with  much 
heat  and  arrogance,  replied  that  he  would  not  accept  of 
being  excused. 

Wood,^  originally  a  travelling  tutor  and  excellent  classic 
scholar,  is  well  known  from  those  beautiful  and  simple 
Essays  prefixed  to  the  additions  of  the  Ruins  of  Balbec 
and  Palmyra  ;  ^  whither  he  had  travelled  with  two  ^  young 
gentlemen  of  fortune  and  curiosity.  His  taste  and  in- 
genuity had  recommended  him  to  Mr.  Pitt  for  his  private 
secretary  when  Minister ;  but  the  observance  required  by 
Pitt,  and  the  pride,  though  dormant,  of  Wood,  had  been 
far  from  cementing  their  connection.  Wood  had  then 
attached  himself  to  the  Duke  of  Bridgewater,  and  through 
him  to  the  Bedford  faction  ;  but  remaining  in  office  when 
Mr.  Pitt  quitted,  had,  with  too  much  readiness,  complied 
with  the  orders  of  his  new  masters.  His  general  behaviour 
was  decent,  as  became  his  dependent  situation ;  but  his 
nature  was  hot  and  veering  to  despotic. 

Lord  George  Sackville  told  him  that  intentionally  he 
had  done  right,  but  was  not  ready  to  say  that  he  had 
done  legally  right.  Lord  Strange  said  he  would  not 
consent  to  postpone  the  acquittal  of  the  accused.  General 
Townshend  desired  to  have  the  debate  adjourned  to 
Friday  17th,  being  obliged  to  give  attendance  on  his 
father,  who  was  dying.  His  brother  Charles,  more 
decently  than  the  rest,  said  the  questions  were  the  same 
and  required  the  same  discussion  :  he  would  not  consent 
to  divide  them.  In  truth  there  could  be  no  thought  of 
separating  them  but  in  compliment  to  Wood,  for  few 
could  have  any  partiality  for  Webbe.  Sir  William 
Meredith  and  Sir  George  Saville,  both  candid  men,  had 
wished  to  avoid  naming  persons, — a  respect  detrimental 
in  great  national  questions  ;  for  not  only  the  multitude 

^  Robert  "Wood  died  in  September  1771  ;  he  was  writing  Dissertations  on 
Homer,  since  published. 

"  See  what   is   said   of  them   in   the   Advertisement  prefixed  to  the  first 
volume  of  the  Anecdotes  of  Paint mg. 

^  Mr.  Bouverie  and  Mr.  Dawkins. 
VOL.  I.  T 


290  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

will  more  easily  be  led  by  names  than  by  speculation  and 
theory,  but  what  Ministers  will  fear  to  offend,  if  censure 
only  touches  their  practice,  not  their  persons  ?  It  is  to 
the  honour  of  the  persons  who  composed  that  Opposi- 
tion that  their  delicacy  frequently,  nay,  constantly,  hurt 
their  cause.  Yet  should  that  delicacy  not  be  imitated. 
When  the  freedom  of  a  nation  is  at  stake,  what  chance 
has  liberty,  if  opponents  have  scruples  for  Ministers  who 
have  none  ? 

Charles  Yorke  and  Dowdeswell  then  moved  to  adjourn 
till  Friday  ;  and  General  Conway  observed  justly,  that  if 
the  accused  were  acquitted  first,  the  general  question 
would  not  be  left  entire  ;  for  could  the  House  vote  that 
general  warrants  were  illegal,  after  it  should  have  voted 
that  they  who  executed  those  warrants  were  blameless  ? 
Yet  Wood  continued  loudly  to  demand  his  justification. 
Mr.  Pitt  was  for  adjourning  the  whole  debate ;  and  said, 
if  this  was  not  agreed  to,  he  would  debate  the  whole. 
Sir  George  Saville  said  Wood  was  guilty  of  impatience, 
though  an  honest  one  ;  and  complained  that  he  and  Sir 
William  Meredith  were  not  suffered  to  prove  their  whole 
charge. 

At  half  an  hour  after  four  in  the  morning  the  House 
divided,  the  Opposition  being  for  adjourning  the  whole 
matter ;  and,  to  the  great  dismay  of  the  courtiers,  the 
Ministerial  party  were  but  207,  and  the  opponents  197 — 
a  triumph  in  parliamentary  cases  little  preferable  to  a  de- 
feat ;  so  strong  had  been  the  alarm  on  seizing  the  papers, 
and  so  evident  was  it  that  the  Ministerial  majority  had 
been  the  work  of  venality  against  conviction. 

Dr.  Hay  then  moved  to  discharge  the  complaint ;  but 
Pitt,  roused  by  this  swell  of  his  party,  and  feeling  the 
weight  of  so  large  a  minority,  poured  forth  one  of  his 
finest  rhapsodies  on  liberty,  though  at  that  late  hour,  and 
after  the  fatigue  of  so  long  an  attendance  and  attention  : 
and  he  severely  reprimanded  Wood's  insolence,  telling 
him  that,  if  he  would  not  accept  excuse,  he  deserved 
censure.     Grenville  asked  why  these  persons  were  blamed, 


KING  GEORGE  III. 


291 


and  not  all  their  predecessors  ?  ^  Pitt,  still  rising  in  fire 
and  importance,  took  the  whole  debate  on  himself,  asking 
what  he  had  done,  but  in  a  war  which  he  was  called  upon 
to  invigorate  ?  He  had  never  turned  out  officers  ;  he  had 
sought  for  merit  in  those  who  now  held  precarious 
commissions,  not  by  military  service.  They  had  not 
only  saved  their  country,  but  him  who  had  been  undone 
if  they  had  not  saved  their  country. 

Grenville,  not  losing  courage  on  this  turn  of  fortune, 
replied  ably  and  finely.  He  knew,  he  said,  the  nation  was 
left  on  the  brink  of  ruin.-  The  Ministers  had  had  enough 
to  do  without  hunting  in  alleys  for  libels.  He  then 
painted  faction,  first  setting  England  against  Scotland  ; 
then  reviving  party  names,  and  drawing  the  line  between 
the  Parliament  and  people.  Look !  said  he,  look  at 
Wilkes's  letters,  where  he  talks  of  rare  combustibles  ! 

Colonel^  Barre,  rising  to  speak,  and  being  pointed  to  by 
the  Speaker  under  that  military  appelation,  thanked  him, 
but  said  he  had  no  right  to  that  title ;  yet  it  gave  him 
occasion  to  ask  why  he  had  been  dismissed?  what  had 
his  Majesty  done  on  his  accession?  He  looked  out  if 
any  man  had  been  whispered  out  of  the  service,  and  did 
him  ample  justice.  (This  alluded  to  Sir  Henry  Erskine, 
dismissed  in  the  late  reign,  and  restored  to  his  rank  by 
the  present  King ;  a  speaking  instance  against  the  change 
of  measures  since  adopted.)  Himself,  he  said,  was  of 
no  consequence,  but  let  Ministers  take  care  how  they 
deprived  the  Crown  of  other  faithful  servants  at  the  end 
of  a  glorious  war.  Non  de  vectigalibus  agitur,  sed  de 
anima  nostra  res  agitur.  Precedents  did  not  justify: 
Charles  the  First  had  acted  on  precedents. 

Onslow  congratulated    Grenville  ironically  on    having 
never  given  one  vote  for  the  last  ruinous  war,  which  he 

^  Pitt  had  issued  two  general  warrants  during  the  war. 

-  Alluding  to  the  enormous  debt  contracted  by  the  war. 

^  Being  dependent  on  Lord  Shelburne,  Barre  had,  under  him,  connected 
himself  with  Mr.  Pitt,  whom  he  had  so  savagely  attacked  not  long  before, 
and  had  been  dismissed  from  the  army. 


292  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

now  so  much  condemned.  And  they,  said  he,  who  are 
for  acquitting  these  gentlemen,  ought  to  remember  who  in- 
sisted on  having  their  two  names  inserted,  when  Sir  George 
Saville  and  Sir  W.  Meredith  would  have  omitted  them. 
In  fact,  the  Ministers  had  got  the  names  inserted  with  the 
view  of  having  them  cleared  by  a  vote  of  the  House. 

Mawbey  then  moved  to  adjourn,  which  was  overruled 
by  208  to  184,  and  then  the  complaint  being  discharged, 
the  House  rose  at  half  an  hour  after  seven  in  the  morning, 
the  longest  sitting  on  record,^  exceeding  that  on  the 
Westminster  Election,  in  1742,  and  the  last  sitting  on  the 
Militia  Bill,  in  17 — ;  but  this  latter  was  less  a  debate 
than  the  perseverance  of  a  very  few  persons  who  sat  till 
six  in  the  morning  to  perfect  that  bill. 

The  Court  was  strangely  alarmed  at  this  sudden  rise 
of  the  Opposition,  and  set  them  roundly  to  oppose  its 
progress,  well  knowing  that  when  once  the  scale  turns,  it 
is  difficult  to  secure  even  the  venal,  who  hurry  over  to  the 
side  to  which  fortune  seems  inclining.  Nor  was  much 
time  given  them  to  rally  their  forces,  the  great  question 
coming  on  within  four  days. 

^  The  longest  sitting  on  record  in  the  history  of  the  House  of  Commons 
was  the  adjourned  debate  on  the  motion  for  leave  to  bring  in  Mr.  Forster's 
Protection  of  Person  and  Property  (Ireland)  Bill  in  1881.  The  House  sat  on 
this  occasion  from  Monday  the  31st  of  January  to  half-past  nine  on  Wednesday 
morning  :  an  unbroken  sitting  of  41  hours  and  a  half. — E. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  293 


CHAPTER    XXVI 

Debates  on  the  legality  of  General  Warrants,  and  the  conduct  of  Wilkes, 
continued. — Treatise  entitled  Di-oit  le  Roi  condemned  by  the  Lords. — 
Wilkes  found  guilty  of  being  the  author  of  the  North  Briton  and  the 
Essay  on  Wovian. 

February  17th  the  House  went  into  the  debate  on  the 
subject,  that  a  general  zu arrant  for  seizing  the  author, 
printer,  etc.,  of  a  seditious  libel  is  not  legal.  Dr.  Hay  said 
it  was  evident  this  had  been  the  practice,  nor  had  the 
Courts  below  condemned  it.  He  should,  therefore, 
propose  an  amendment,  that  the  question  might  be 
stated  clearly  and  precisely.  If  that  correction  was 
agreed  to,  he  intended  to  offer  others  that  should 
condemn  the  whole  practice  of  the  secretary's  office. 
He  then  moved  to  add  the  word  treasonable  after 
seditious  ;  and  then  he  would  propose,  he  said,  to  subjoin 
the  following  sentence,  though  such  warrant  hath  been 
according  to  the  practice  of  office,  and  has  not  been  condemned. 
by  any  courts  of  justice  in  which  such  warrants  have  been 
produced.  He  was  seconded  by  Wedderburn,  who  argued 
against  taking  up  one  particular  warrant,  half  excusing 
that  in  question  by  saying  he  would  not  affirm  that 
practice  makes  law.  Pitt  ridiculed  the  Doctor  and  the 
Ministry  for  trying  to  perplex  the  question  ;  but  owning 
handsomely  that  he  should  like  the  question  better  if 
spread  over  the  whole  practice,  and  not  confined  to  the 
single  instance  before  them.  If  his  own  practice  had 
been  faulty,  he  was  willing  to  bear  his  share  of  public 
blame.  He  called  on  the  Ministers  to  show  what  was 
really  the  subject-matter  of  the  question :  was  it  on 
seditious   libels  ?  then  do   not  cut   and    shuffle  with   our 


294  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

liberties  by  an  epithet.     We  had  seen  the  day  when  an 
epithet  would  defeat  Magna  Chaita.     Any  other  epithet 
of  four  syllables  would  throw  dust  in  the  eyes  of  members, 
as  well  as  treasonable.     But  now,  said  he,  they  parry  and 
twist,  and  I  like  it  the  better.     I   am  glad  that  all  the 
learned  doctor's  ^abilities  could  produce  was  an  epithet. 
But  keep  separate  things  separate  in  their  nature.     Vote 
the  general  question  on  seditions  first.     We  never  desire 
to   alter   the    practice   in   cases    of   high   treason.      The 
learned  gentleman,  he  supposed,  would  allow  that  there 
mieht  be  seditious  libels  without  treason  in  them.      It 
was  shallow,  the  artifice  of  attempting  to  draw  in  gentle- 
men to  condemn  seditious  warrants  by  coupling  the  word 
treasonable  to  them,  which  aggravates  the  offence  ;  but  by 
not  daring  to  let  the  question  stand  simply  on  its  own 
merits,  on  the  case  of  a  general  warrant  issued  against  a 
seditious  libel,  not  a  treasonable  one,  they  tacitly  avowed 
that  the  libel  not  being  treasonable,  their  own  conduct 
had    been    illegal.      But    no   general    warrant    to   search 
universally  without  specification    of  name  or  place  was 
allowable,  even  in  case  of  treason.     General  warrants  are 
always  zvrong ;  yet  if  this  amendment  left  the  House  at 
liberty  to  debate  on  the  whole  question,  and  not  on  that 
amendment  solely,  he  would  not  be  against  the  stating 
those  words.      Hay  was  hurt,  and  said  he  had  nowhere 
been  accustomed  to  the  manoeuvre  of  quibbles :  he  had 
only  affirmed  that  general  warrants  had  been  produced  in 
other   courts:   he   had    not    said    that   those   courts   had 
decided  on  them.     Conway  pursued  Pitt's  argument,  and 
showed  how  totally  the  original  question  and  the  proposed 
alteration  of  it  differed  ;  that  if  anything  could  authorise 
a   general  warrant,   it  was    treason.      By  inserting   that 
word,  the   Ministers  betrayed   the  badness  of  their  own 
cause  ;  he  feared  they  were  a    little  tender ;   that  they 
could  not  bear  the  last  division.     He  honoured  the  lights 
of  the  law,  but  feared  the  House  had  a  little  too  much 
of  them  :  yet  could  those  learned  men  prove  that  treason 
and  sedition  were  the  same  ?     Why  was  it  necessary,  too, 


KING  GEORGE  III.  295 

to  describe  historically  what  had  been  the  custom  ?  The 
case  was  clear  and  simple,  when  a  gentleman  came  and 
slipped  in  a  word  that  totally  varied  the  argument :  it 
was  white,  he  inserts  the  word  black ;  and  thus  would 
vote  that  the  Ministers  had  not  done  wrong  by  taking  up 
a  man  for  a  crime  of  which  he  had  not  been  guilty.  If  a 
general  warrant  is  good  against  treason,  and  not  against 
sedition,  and  yet  you  couple  them,  and  make  them  one 
crime,  are  Ministers  blameless  for  inflicting  on  sedition 
the  punishment  only  due  to  treason  ?  Separate  the 
questions,  and  vote,  if  you  can,  that  the  warrant  was  legal. 
Hussey^  said  he  liked  the  amendment,  because  he  dis- 
liked all  general  warrants  ;  for  what  was  to  follow,  he  did 
not  understand  it.  Did  it  mean  to  imply  that  the  silence 
of  the  King's  Bench  was  affirmation  ?  He  feared  some 
such  thing  was  meant  ;  but  it  would  be  a  libel  on  the 
judges  that  sit  there.  He  did  not,  however,  he  said,  mean 
to  extend  his  argument  to  high  treason.  He  wished  to 
have  general  warrants  condemned,  because  to  some  there 
stood  the  names  of  men  of  virtue,  which  seemed  to 
authorise  so  bad  a  practice.  Wedderburn  said  sharply, 
that  he  had  guarded  himself  by  alleging  that  the  practice 
of  the  King's  Bench  could  not  make  law ;  but  they  had 
been  taunted  with  epithets  ;  the  time  was  come  when  men 
would  no  longer  be  led  by  epithets  ^  and  flowery  declama- 
tion. It  was  hurting  our  country  to  study  popularity  by 
vilifying  the  profession  of  the  law.  Was  a  definition 
nothing  but  epithets  1  The  Opposition,  he  knew,  would 
be  glad,  if  they  could,  to  stand  clear  of  epithets.  Charles 
Yorke  was  for  adopting  the  amendments,  and  spoke  for 
temper.  Treasonable  corresponded  with  the  evidence 
given  at  the  bar.  The  common  warrants  had  that 
description  in  them.  He  was  for  stating  what  had  been 
the  common  usage,  and  then  for  condemning  it.     None  of 

^  Richard  Hussey,  K.C.,  M.P.  for  St.  Mawes,  Attorney-General  to  the 
Queen.  He  represented  East  Looe  in  the  Parliament  of  1768,  and  died  in 
August  1780. — E. 

-  Alluding  to  Mr.  Pitt. 


296  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

those  warrants  had  come  before  the  Courts  below  for 
argument  or  consideration.  Sir  WilHam  Meredith  said 
he  hoped  this  point  would  be  decided  by  the  spirit  of 
liberty,  not  by  law ;  and  with  some  heat  added,  '  I  never 
passed  my  life  with  the  vices  of  Wilkes.'  This  sentence, 
provoked  by  what  had  fallen  from  Wedderburn,  and  sup- 
posed to  be  aimed,  as  it  justly  might  have  been,  at  Dr.  Hay, 
who,  though  so  servile  now,  had  been  the  intimate  of 
Wilkes,^  was  levelled  at  Lord  Sandwich.  But  Wedderburn 
took  it  up,  and  said,  if  Sir  William  had  meant  anything 
unparliamentary,  he  might  have  taken  another  place. 
Dr.  Hay,  thinking  it  necessary  to  vindicate  himself,  did 
not  conciliate  more  favour.  He  had  long,  he  said,  known 
the  unhappy  man,  had  received  pleasure  and  instruction 
from  him,  but  with  many  good  qualities  he  had  grown 
profligate  ;  did  not  know  who  incited  him  ;  had  advised  him 
against  his  excesses  ;  yet,  said  he,  I  am  no  hypocrite ;  I 
have  told  him  he  was  grown  the  6'<?^  of  defamation  from 
keeping  seditious  company  ;  he  had  even  attacked  the 
Crown,  and  Xh^  parent  of  the  Crown  ;  for  himself,  he  pitied 
the  poor  devil.  Some  persons  interposing  to  prevent  a  duel. 
Sir  W.  Meredith  said,  he  had  every  day  been  aspersed 
as  taking  up  this  matter  for  the  sake  of  Wilkes.  This 
he  could  not  bear.  Wedderburn  had  taken  it  up  on  tip- 
toe, though  neither  pointed  at  him  nor  Dr.  Hay.  Himself 
would  last  year  have  stopped  Wilkes's  behaviour. 

Hussey  then  proposed  to  insert  the  words  in  the  King's 
Bench,  where  the  warrants  had  never  been  condemned  or 
approved,  tvhereas  they  had  been  condemned  in  the  Court  of 
Common  Pleas.  To  this  Norton  agreed,  though  he  said 
he  would  show  that  they  had  been  approved  in  the  King's 
Bench.     Prisoners  are  brought  thither  by  Habeas  Corpus, 

^  Wilkes  subsequently  published  a  very  friendly  letter,  dated  26th  March 
1763,  addressed  to  him  by  Mr.  Legge,  inviting  him  to  meet  Dr.  Hay  at 
dinner.  Indeed,  the  intimacy  of  Wilkes  was  a  reproach  shared  at  that  time 
with  Dr.  Hay  by  several  of  the  most  eminent  persons  in  the  kingdom.  And 
it  was  not  till  after  the  publication  of  the  forty-fifth  number  of  the  North 
Briton,  on  the  23rd  of  April  1763,  that  their  eyes  were  opened  to  the 
enormity  of  his  offences. — L.  M. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  297 

and  the  court  is  counsel  for  the  prisoner.  They  examine 
the  legality  of  the  commitment,  and  must  remit  him,  or  bail 
him,  or  remand  him.  Remanding  him,  or  requiring  bail, 
is  approving  the  commitment.  Pitt  proposed  to  add,  '  in 
which  court  (the  King's  Bench)  it  does  not  appear  that  the 
validity  of  general  warrants  has  been  brought  in  question.' 
Charles  Yorke  said  he  agreed  with  Pitt,  but  would  have 
the  sentence  run  thus,  '  although  hath  been  frequently  pro- 
duced to,  and  never  been  questioned  by,  the  King's  Bench.' 
Sir  William  said  he  could  not  agree  to  the  amendment, 
for  the  House  had  only  heard  evidence  ex-parte  for  ex- 
culpation of  the  accused  Ministers.  Pitt  objecting  strongly 
to  the  words,  never  questioned,  Charles  Yorke  offered  these, 
*  and  the  validity  never  debated.'  Forrester  approved  this, 
and  asked,  if  the  point  had  never  been  litigated,  why 
should  those  words  be  inserted  ?  George  Grenville  pro- 
tested that  nothing  should  make  him  say  that  all  those 
warrants  were  legal ;  but  with  Norton  he  desired  to  add, 
'  though  the  parties  have  been  remanded  and  bailed.'  Pitt, 
offended  that  the  opinion  of  some  Judges  had  been  quoted 
in  defence  of  the  warrant,  said  he  was  no  judge,  but  sat 
there  to  judge  Judges.  There  had  not  been  a  violation  of 
the  Constitution  but  had  been  sanctified  by  the  greatest 
Judges.  Let  Norton  turn  to  evidence  and  prove  such 
prisoners  had  been  remanded.  If  discharged,  let  the 
House  have  that  evidence  also.  Conway  treated  the 
whole  amendment  as  trifling ;  and  asked  if  they  would 
take  no  notice  of  the  decision  of  the  Common  Pleas 
against  the  legality  of  the  warrant,  and  yet  would  take 
notice  of  a  no  decision.  He  wished  to  have  the  whole  re- 
ferred to  a  committee.  Charles  Yorke  affirmed  that  none 
had  been  remanded  ;  but  agreed  with  Norton  that  they 
had  been  bailed.  Charles  Townshend  asked,  since  the 
lawyers  allowed  that  bail  might  be  given  on  an  erroneous 
warrant,  why  they  would  mention  it.  Norton  owned  that 
he  meant  from  thence  to  argue  for  the  legality.  The 
amendments  were  agreed  to. 

The  Court  having  carried  this  point,  Norton  impudently 


298  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

confessed  this  was  what  he  had  aimed  at  ;  and  as  there 
were  so  many  causes  connected  with  this  depending  in  the 
Courts  below,  he  should  move  to  put  off  the  question  for 
four  months.  The  Ministers  did  not  doubt  but  the  legaHty 
of  the  warrants  would  be  condemned  in  Westminster  Hall ; 
yet  a  previous  censure  in  Parliament  might  not  only  ensure 
that  decision,  but  produce  arraignment  of  the  Administra- 
tion. They  feared,  from  what  had  passed  in  the  fore- 
going day,  that  they  should  never  be  able  to  carry  an 
approbation  of  the  warrants, — and  if  they  could,  into  what 
confusion  must  the  nation  have  fallen,  if  such  warrants 
were  upheld  by  Parliament,  and  anathematised  in  the 
other  courts  !  Their  plan,  therefore,  was  to  jockey :  and 
the  Opposition  had  fallen  into  the  snare.  It  had  been 
proposed  that  Lord  Granby  should  move  the  adjourn- 
ment ;  he  refused,  and  yet  spoke  for  it, — and  was  im- 
mediately rewarded  with  the  Lieutenancy  of  Derbyshire, 
which  the  Duke  of  Devonshire  had  resigned,  and  wished, 
from  the  rivalship  between  their  families  in  that  county, 
to  see  in  any  other  hands. 

Norton,  continuing  to  triumph  in  the  arts  of  attorney- 
ship, asked  to  what  end  the  House  should  decide  on  the 
point  which  was  to  be  determined  elsewhere.  Let,  he 
said,  a  committee  be  appointed  to  draw  up  a  bill.  The 
practice  of  a  court  does  make  law.  For  Secretaries  of 
State  he  demanded  more  power  than  for  a  common  justice 
of  peace.  The  House  sits  to  make  laws,  not  to  expound 
them.  He  then  dropped  this  sentence,  so  decent,  yet  so 
worthy  of  the  mouth  it  fell  from,  and  so  often  flung  in  his 
teeth, — If  I  was  a  Judge  I  should  pay  no  more  regard  to 
this  resohition  than  to  that  of  a  drunken  porter  ; — a  sentence 
that  would  have  made  old  Onslow^  thunder  forth  indig- 
nation ;  Norton  then  moved  to  adjourn  the  debate  for 
our  months,  as  so  many  causes  were  depending  on  the 
illegality. 

Charles  Yorke  made  a  very  long  speech  against  post- 
poning a  present  decision,  as  against  the  dignity  of  the 
'  Arthur  Onslow,  Speaker  in  the  reitrn  of  George  the  Second. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  299 

House :  and  he  scrupled  not  to  pronounce  the  warrant 
illegal,  which  he  protested  he  had  never  seen  till  Wilkes 
was  taken  up  ;  nor  had  any  question  been  asked  of  the 
Attorney  or  Solicitor  Generals  by  the  Administration, 
Warrants  dated  from  the  Star  Chamber.  Himself  had 
always  been  for  taking  this  matter  up  in  Parliament,  not- 
withstanding its  pendency  below.  Previous  questions,  to 
avoid  debates,  may  be  useful  during  foreign  treaties,  but 
never  in  cases  of  privilege.  In  questions  of  this  sort  the 
House  ought  to  hold  the  balance  between  King  and 
people.  It  was  a  question  in  point  of  law  impossible  to 
be  denied.  Were  he  a  Judge,  he  should  pay  regard  to  the 
decision  of  the  House  of  Commons.  The  question  ought 
to  be  determined  for  the  sake  of  the  Secretaries  of  State. 
He  must  be  for  some  law. 

Notwithstanding  Yorke  disculpated  himself  of  not 
having  seen  the  warrant,  yet  the  Ministers  protested  that 
after  Wilkes  was  taken  up,  Yorke  had  given  his  opinion 
that  No.  45  was  a  libel,  and  had  advised  the  commitment 
of  him  to  the  Tower.  This  was  advising  a  man  to  knock 
down  another,  and  then  pleading  that  he  had  not  seen  the 
bludgeon.  Lord  North  said,  if  a  law  was  necessary,  a 
partial  resolution  was  trifling.  By  deferring  this,  they 
meant  to  introduce  something  much  better. 

Lord  George  Sackville  said,  it  would  only  alarm  the 
nation  to  fling  over  the  question  the  thin  parliamentary 
veil  of  adjournment.  When  could  a  question  of  liberty 
be  so  properly  taken  up  as  under  such  a  King  ?  It  was 
the  time  to  lop  such  an  excrescence.  Lord  North  had 
promised  much,  but  would  perform  nothing.  The  House 
of  Commons  singly  cannot  make  law  ;  but  can  declare 
upon  it.  He  thanked  God  that  on  this  question  the  whole 
body  of  lawyers  was  not  on  the  side  of  power  :  that 
battery  would  be  too  much  to  stand.  How  came  the 
Secretaries  of  State  by  this  practice,  but  from  the  Star 
Chamber  and  Licensing  Act  ?  It  had  never  been  abused 
till  now,  for  it  had  been  exercised  only  against  traitors. 
A  discretionary  power  must  always  be  at  the  peril  of  the 


300  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

Secretary  that  uses  it.  But  he  would  therefore  declare  it 
illegal  for  a  warning  to  them,  and  to  show  the  people  that 
they  had  a  watchful  House  of  Commons. 

Nugent  said,  Liberty  rings  round  the  House,  and  we 
may  all  be  unanimously  in  the  wrong.  We  are  not  likely 
to  be  tmanivwiisly  wrong,  replied  Conway,  nor  rash,  for 
nothing  was  ever  so  fully  debated.  The  Ministers  had 
narrowed  the  question  to  Wilkes,  and  then  called  it  too 
narrow.  The  previous  question  would  in  effect  be  a 
negative.  Wood  had  called  for  immediate  decision. 
There  had  been  issued  but  one  warrant  as  extensive  as 
this  down  to  the  time  of  Lord  Townshend,  and  that  had 
been  in  the  reign  of  Charles  the  Second.  He  that  gives  a 
power  of  tyranny  gives  tyranny.  Hussey  added,  that  the 
Licensing  Act  had  been  dropped  because  the  Peers  would 
not  consent  to  let  their  houses  be  searched. 

Lord  Frederick  Campbell  said  that  in  a  fortnight's  time 
general  warrants  would  be  determined  to  be  illegal  ;  and 
then,  what  Secretary  of  State  would  dare  to  sign  one  ? 
Lord  Granby,  declaring  he  thought  them  illegal  be- 
cause Lord  Chief  Justice  Pratt  had  thought  so,  said  no 
Secretary  of  State  after  that  opinion  would  venture  to 
issue  them. 

Charles  Townshend  made  a  most  capital  speech,  replete 
with  argument,  history,  and  law,  though  severe  on  the 
lawyers  :  a  speech,  like  most  of  his,  easier  to  be  described 
than  detailed.  How  great,  he  said,  must  be  the  talents  of 
Norton,  if  the  House  heard  him  with  patience,  though 
comparing  them  to  a  drunken  porter.  Whether  in  the 
House  or  out  of  the  House,  Norton,  he  feared,  would  be 
fatal  to  the  cause.  He  then  gave  the  history  of  the 
Licensing  Act,  and  read  the  resolution  of  the  year  1675, 
drawn  by  Mr.  Locke,  and  the  report  of  Lord  Chief  Justice 
Vaughan  of  usage  not  constituting  law.  Had  Norton 
lived  in  the  age  of  ship-money,  how  he  would  have  argued 
for  putting  off  the  decision  of  its  being  illegal !  But  it 
was  become  more  necessary  to  alter  this,  because  of  the 
many  precedents  in  its  favour.     He  then  gave  a  descrip- 


KING  GEORGE  III.  301 

tion  of  the  warrant  against  Wilkes,  and  how  long  they 
had  been  before  they  apphed  it  to  him.  He  abhorred 
Wilkes,  he  said  ;  and  drew  a  severe  picture  of  him,  and 
another  panegyrical  of  the  great  Whig  Lords  at  the  time 
of  the  Revolution,  and  of  those  at  the  accession  of  the 
present  Royal  Family.  But  it  seems,  continued  he,  we 
are  not  to  have  a  resolution,  but  a  bill.  The  first  time 
was  always  the  best  time ;  the  natural  mode  the  best 
mode.  One  advantage  had  been  derived  from  Wilkes ; 
he  had  stopped  a  growing  evil.  Nobody  could  think  what 
thirty  years  more  in  abler  hands  would  have  done.  This 
warrant  without  description  of  person  might  take  up  any 
man  under  any  description  of  a  libel.  If  the  House  did 
not  come  to  some  resolution,  what  dissatisfaction  it  must 
create !  Mankind  would  learn  that  the  lawyers  were 
divided  in  their  sentiments  on  the  legality,  and  would  be 
clamorous  to  have  settled  a  point  so  important  to  the 
security  of  their  persons,  houses,  and  papers.  But  do  not 
be  wheedled  by  promises  ;  who  gives  promises  gives 
deceit.  He  praised  Mr.  Pitt,  and  concluded  with  saying 
that  this  warrant  was  like  an  experiment  in  anatomy, 
which  might  be  tried  on  a  poor  man.  Wilkes  is  odious, 
cry  the  Ministers  ;  commit  him.  If  Parliament  suffers  it, 
you  may  strike  at  higher  objects. 

After  several  other  speeches,  Pitt  said  this  was  not  a 
warrant,  but  a  delegation  of  magistracy,  which  the  Crown 
could  not  give,  and  should  Secretaries  of  State  give  it? 
The  debate  had  been  carried  on  without  heat — indeed 
with  too  much  coldness.  Lawyers  term  this  warrant 
erroneous : — was  that  term  harsh  enough  ?  Hear  the 
language  of  Ministers  and  their  agents :  Carteret  Webbe 
said  he  had  settled  Wilkes  comfortably  in  the  Tower  with 
his  shaving  things !  Then,  they  say,  you  need  not  pro- 
nounce this  illegal ;  Secretaries  of  State  will  be  sufficiently 
frightened  ;  the  Judges  may  or  may  not  declare  it  illegal ; 
and  you  shall  have  a  law.  I  should  be  against  such  a 
law  ;  it  would  be  augmenting  the  power  of  the  Crown  by 
law.     What  will  our  constituents  say  if  we  do  not  ascer- 


302  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

tain  their  liberties  ?  How  do  you  know  the  Lords  will 
agree  to  the  bill  ?     Not  doing  is  doing. 

He  was  answered  by  Grcnville  and  Sir  John  Phillips  ; 
but  Lord  Howe/  though  a  Lord  of  the  Admiralty,  spoke 
against  the  adjournment.  Elliot  said,  if  there  must  be 
a  victim,  they  might  have  a  hecatomb  of  Ministers  who 
had  signed  such  warrants.  These  warrants,  it  seemed, 
had  stalked  about  unknown  to  Mr.  Pitt,  who  had  been 
Secretary  of  State,  and  to  Mr.  Yorke,  Attorney  General. 

Colonel  Barre  ridiculed  Lord  Barrington,  Elliot,  and 
Grenville,  with  much  humour.  Lord  Granby  thinks, 
added  he,  that  no  Secretary  of  State  will  venture  on  these 
warrants  after  Pratt's  opinion  ;  but  Grenville  says  that 
opinion  was  undue,  erroneous,  and  precipitate.  For  him- 
self, he  esteemed  the  professors  of  the  law,  but  detested 
the  profession.  Pratt  he  commended  ;  and  said,  shall 
France  deride  our  languor  when  her  parliaments  are 
making  such  strides  towards  liberty  ? 

At  five  in  the  morning  the  House  divided,  and  the 
adjournment  was  carried  by  232  against  218;  a  majority 
of  only  14.  The  world  expected  that  the  Ministers  would 
resign — at  least  endeavour  to  treat.- 

The  offensive  behaviour  of  Norton  in  the  preceding 
debate  brought  out  a  story  very  characteristic  of  his 
unfeeling  nature.  When  Dr.  Hensey  was  condemned  for 
treason  in  the  last  reign,  Lord  Mansfield  asked  Pratt,  the 
Attorney  General,  when  he  would  have  him  executed  ? 
Pratt,  struck  with  compassion,  could  not  bring  himself  to 
fix  the  day.  Lord  Mansfield  then  asked  Norton,  who, 
turning  to  the  prisoner,  said,  '  Doctor,  when  will  it  be 
agreeable  to  you  to  be  executed  ? '  ^ 

^  Lord  Howe  was  then  only  an  Irish  jieer.  He  had  succeeded  to  the  title 
on  the  death  of  his  elder  brother  at  Ticonderoga  in  1758.  His  great  services 
raised  him  to  the  English  peerage  in  1782  as  Viscount  Howe,  and  as  Earl 
Howe  in  1788.     He  died  in  1799. — L.  M. 

^  This  debate  is  described  in  the  author's  letters  to  Lord  Hertford. — Letters, 
vol.  iv.  p.  189. — L.  M. 

^  This  statement  is  probably  much  exaggerated.  There  is  no  doubt  that 
Pratt  applied  to  the  Court,  according  to  the  usual  practice,  to  appoint  a  day 


KING  GEORGE  III.  303 

While  mankind  expected  that  the  Opposition  would 
vigorously  pursue  the  advantage  of  so  large  an  increase  of 
their  numbers,  day  after  day,  and  week  after  week  slipped 
away  without  their  exerting  one  symptom  of  spirit  or 
activity.  No  motions  were  made,  no  inquiries  set  on  foot, 
no  zeal  expressed  to  keep  up  the  passions  and  hopes  of 
the  party.  Without-doors  all  hearts  were  with  them,  and 
ready  to  second  their  attempts  with  clamour  and  applause. 
At  first  they  seemed  to  expect  that  the  Ministers  would 
come  and  lay  their  places  at  their  feet.  The  dream  itself 
was  over  before  an  effort  was  made  to  realise  it.  Not  a 
pamphlet  was  written,  not  a  meeting  was  held,  to  concert 
farther  measures.  A  supineness  unparalleled  !  but  to  be 
accounted  for  from  the  composition  of  that  minority. 
Pitt  affected  to  be  courted  to  discountenance  party,  and 
to  be  placed  at  the  head  of  everything  without  seeming  to 
desire  it.  He  despised  Newcastle,  and  resented  the 
manner  in  which  he  had  been  treated  by  that  Duke,  by 
Devonshire,  by  Hardwicke,  and  the  Yorkes.  Charles 
Yorke  was,  besides,  incompatible  with  Pitt's  friend,  the 
Chief  Justice  Pratt,  as  the  Chancellor's  seal  was  equally 
the  object  of  both.  Lord  Temple,  the  soul  of  faction,  was 
detested  by  the  whole  party,  except  by  his  own  small 
connection.  Charles  Townshend  was  attached  to  nobody, 
and  trusted  by  nobody.  Legge  was  industrious,  but  not 
spirited  :  he  could  negotiate  for  himself,  but  not  for  a 
party.  Conway  had  singly  meant  to  arraign  the  warrants, 
and  had  no  thought  of  dipping  in  faction.  Some  were 
too  fair,  and  others  too  dirty,  to  take  the  general  steps 
that  might  lead  to  the  good  of  the  whole  party  ;  and  thus, 

for  Hensey's  execution.  Lord  Mansfield  desired  him  to  name  the  day,  and 
on  Hensey's  solicitor  asking  that  it  might  not  be  an  early  day,  Pratt  said  he 
was  ready  to  give  as  long  a  day  as  might  be  proper.  At  last  the  Court  agreed 
that  it  might  be  a  month. — Burr.  Reports,  vol.  i.  p.  651,  Rex.  v.  Hensey. 
The  sentimentality  imputed  to  Pratt  certainly  formed  no  part  of  his  character ; 
and  as  the  story  is  without  question  inaccurate,  we  may  fairly  doubt  whether 
Norton  was  guilty  of  so  curious  a  piece  of  brutality.  Hensey  was  respited  on 
the  very  morning  that  he  was  going  to  execution,  and  subsequently  obtained 
a  full  pardon. — L.M. 


304  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

where  there  was  no  concert,  and  in  truth  but  few  able 
men,  there  could  be  no  consequences  but  inactivity  and 
defeat.  That  defeat  fell  heavy  on  the  most  conscientious, 
who,  having  offended  the  Court  by  their  opposition,  were 
thus  exposed  a  sacrifice  to  its  resentments. 

Nor  was  this  conduct,  I  doubt,  solely  founded  on 
inability  and  outward  disunion.  Pitt  might  expect  to  be 
again  sent  for  by  Lord  Bute,  and  was  unwilling  to  be 
clogged  with  numerous  dependants,  odious  to  the  Favourite, 
and  distasteful  to  himself  He  and  Lord  Temple  had  far 
more  rancour  against  their  brother,  George  Grenville,  than 
against  Lord  Bute  ;  and  Pitt,  at  least,  had  never  been 
personal  against  the  Favourite,  who,  with  all  his  resentment 
to  Lord  Temple,  as  the  instigator  of  Wilkes,  had  received 
more  recent  stabs  from  George  Grenville.  Whether  during 
this  suspension  of  hostilities  any  negotiation  was  renewed, 
I  do  not  pretend  to  say  ;  nor  is  it  important,  as  it  certainly 
had  no  effect,  unless  that  material  one  of  cooling  the 
growing  party. 

The  Ministers,  on  the  other  hand,  wore  a  good  counten- 
ance, and  were  as  alert  as  their  adversaries  were  supine 
and  lifeless.  To  procure  votes,  to  work  underground,  to 
write  letters,  despatch  messengers,  and  collect  all  possible 
forces — this  was  the  fort  and  excellence  of  Sandwich's 
genius.  He  and  Rigby  were  desperate,  and  Grenville 
little  less  so.  They  soon  perceived  the  want  of  discipline 
in  the  enemy's  troops,  and  the  insufficiency  of  their  com- 
manders. With  some  address  of  their  own,  and  with  the 
defect  of  it  in  their  opponents,  they  weathered  the  session, 
obtained  full  power,  and  showed  that  they  dared  to  make 
use  of  it  despotically. 

On  the  very  day  of  the  last  great  debate  in  the  House 
of  Commons,  Lord  Lyttelton,  seconded  by  the  Duke  of 
Grafton,  acquainted  the  Lords  that  on  the  following 
Tuesday  he  should  lay  a  complaint  before  them  against  a 
new  book  called  Droit  le  Rot.  This  pestilent  treatise  was 
a  collection  from  old  statutes  and  obsolete  customs  of  the 
darkest  and  most  arbitrary  ages  of  whatever  tended,  or 


KING  GEORGE  III.  305 

had  tended,  to  show  and  uphold  the  prerogative  of  the 
Crown.  The  fulsome  flattery  and  servility  of  ancient 
lawyers  in  every  reign  were  amassed  together,  and  shoved 
upon  the  world  as  the  standing  law  of  England  ;  no  retro- 
spect had  to  all  the  immunities  obtained  since  by  the 
Civil  War,  by  the  Revolution,  and  by  various  other 
struggles  of  Parliaments  with  the  Crown.  Such  a  code 
obtruded  on  the  Crown,  as  a  codicil  to  the  stretch  of 
General  Warrants,  spoke  for  itself.  It  was  incense  laid 
on  an  altar  erected  to  power  on  which  human  sacrifices 
had  already  been  offered.  Without  metaphor,  such  a 
compilation  proved  that  prerogative  must  have  been  the 
object  of  the  Court  before  such  gross  adulation  could  dare 
to  step  forth  in  the  face  of  both  Houses  of  Parliament. 
The  author  was  one  Brecknock,  a  retainer  of  the  law,  and 
a  hackney  writer.  As  no  attempt  was  made  to  prove 
whether  he  wrote  by  instigation,  it  remained  problematic. 
Certain  it  is,  that  he  soon  afterwards  attached  himself  to 
the  Earl  of  Northumberland.^ 

On  the  2 1st,  Lord  Lyttelton  made  his  complaint,  and 
moved  for  a  censure  of  the  book  as  Jacobitical,  and 
violating  the  Bill  of  Rights  and  the  Revolution.  Ministers, 
he  said,  ought  to  have  taken  notice  of  it ;  but  they  who 
had  fallen  so  severely  on  seditious  pamphlets  had  over- 
looked this  tract,  so  subversive  of  all  liberty.  Lord 
Dartmouth  treated  the  book  with  still  more  severity. 
Lord  Halifax  affected  to  go  farther,  but  complained  of 
Lord  Lyttelton  for  not  acquainting  him  with  his  intention. 
Lord  Marchmont  to  the  censure  proposed  to  tack  a  com- 
pliment to  the  King  on  his  love  of  liberty  ;  for  so  servile 
are  some  men,  that  they  cannot  condemn  flattery  without 

1  Hugh  Smithson  Percy,  Earl  of  Northumberland.  His  eldest  son  married 
a  daughter  of  Lord  Bute.  Both  the  Earl  and  Brecknock  afterwards,  finding 
their  expectations  not  answered,  turned  against  the  Court.  Brecknock  was 
hanged  twenty  years  after  in  Ireland,  for  being  accessory  to  an  atrocious 
murder  perpetrated  by  Mr.  Htzgerald,  who  suffered  with  him.  [Timothy 
Brecknock  was  hanged  outside  Castlebar  Gaol  on  12th  June  1786.  See 
G.  J.  Browne's  account  of  The  Trials  of  George  Robert  Fitzgerald,  etc. 
(I786).-E.] 

VOL.  I.  U 


3o6  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

making  use  of  it.^  The  book,  thus  attacked  on  one  side 
and  given  up  on  the  other,  was  sentenced  to  be  burnt,  and 
the  author  ordered  to  be  taken  into  custody.  The  latter 
part  of  the  sentence  nobody  took  any  pains  to  execute. 

On  the  24th,  the  Lords  communicated  their  resolutions 
to  the  other  House,  who  concurred  in  the  same  judgment. 

On  February  the  21st,  Sir  John  Philipps,  as  he  had 
before  acquainted  the  House  he  would,  moved  for  leave 
to  bring  in  a  bill  to  ascertain  the  power  of  Secretaries  of 
State  in  granting  warrants — a  line  almost  impossible  to 
draw.  Treason  was  to  be  kept  in  awe  on  one  side  ;  the 
Ministers  themselves  on  the  other.  Nor  could  this  boon 
to  liberty  but  be  suspicious  when  offered  by  a  hand  so 
rankly  Jacobite !  The  Ministers  had  made  their  use  of 
the  idea,  and  desired  no  such  bill :  and  the  Opposition 
were  not  forward  to  let  them  draw  such  a  bill.  It  was 
therefore  dropped  with  scorn  by  both  sides  of  the  House  ; 
and  yet  the  Court  afterwards  affected  to  talk  of  this  bill 
as  a  tender  made  to  liberty,  and  rejected  by  its  advocates. 

The  same  day  was  Wilkes  found  guilty  in  the  King's 
Bench  of  being  author  of  the  North  Briton,  and  of  the 
Essay  on  Woman. 

The  City  of  London,  to  honour  the  steadiness  and 
services  of  Mr.  Pratt,  the  other  Chief  Justice,  presented 
him  with  the  freedom  of  the  City,  and  thanked  their  own 
representatives  for  their  behaviour  on  the  question  of  the 
warrants. 

On  the  6th  of  March,  it  was  agreed  to  amend  the  * 
Marriage  Bill  by  another  bill,  as  Mr.  Yorke  had  proposed  : 
and  the  same  day  died  his  father,  and  the  father  of  the 
bill,  Philip,  Earl  of  Hardwicke  ;  a  man  who,  during  his 
power,  had  coloured  over  very  confined  parts,  and  very 
few  virtues,  wnth.  a  gravity  that  was  construed  into  both, 
as  it  served  the  purpose  of  himself  or  his  dependants. 

^  The  compliment  was  not  insincere,  for  the  King  probably  entertained 
more  enlarged  views  of  constitutional  liberty  than  Lord  Marchmont.  His 
Lordship  clung  to  his  Jacobite  principles  to  the  last,  though  he  changed  their 
object.— L.  M. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  307 

Pride,  revenge,  and  avarice  were  his  true  features ;  and 
whatever  pictures  shall  be  drawn  of  him  where  those  lines 
do  not  predominate,  will  be  unlike,  false,  and  flattering. 
To  conceal  all  knowledge  of  his  vast  wealth,  his  sons  did 
not  prove  his  will  till  the  memory  of  him  was  faded  away.^ 

1  Lord  Holland  has  justly  observed,  *  that  wherever  that  great  magistrate 
{Lord  Hardwicke)  is  mentioned,  Lord  Orford's  resentments  blind  his  judg- 
ment and  disfigure  his  narrative.' — Mem.  of  the  Reign  of  George  II.  (1847), 
vol.  i.  p.  160,  note.  He  certainly  has  in  this  instance  drawn  a  caricature, 
of  which  there  is  no  merit  in  the  execution  to  compensate  for  the  faults  of 
the  design.  Lord  Chesterfield,  though  also  a  political  opponent,  has  done 
Lord  Hardwicke  more  justice.  —  See  Letters,  1845,  vol.  ii.  p.  461.  Admitting 
many  of  his  eminent  qualities,  he  elegantly  says  of  his  avarice,  that  though  it 
was  his  '  ruling  passion,  he  was  never  in  the  least  suspected  of  any  kind  of 
corruption ;  a  rare  and  meritorious  instance  of  virtue  and  self-denial,  under 
the  influence  of  such  a  craving,  insatiable,  and  increasing  passion. — See  also 
Lord  Mahon's  Hist.,  vol.  iii.  p.  200.  The  Editor  has  only  further  to 
observe,  that  none  but  a  lawyer  who  has  practised  in  the  Court  where  Lord 
Hardwicke  so  long  presided,  can  correctly  appreciate  his  discharge  of  the 
duties  of  that  high  office.  His  judgments  maintain  their  authority  to  the 
present  hour,  and  furnish  the  earliest  and  clearest  exposition  of  the  principles 
of  the  Equity  Jurisdiction  of  this  country.  And  whoever  may  have  had  the 
opportunity  of  examining  his  Lordship's  note-books,  will  see  the  patient 
attention  and  indefatigable  research  that  distinguished  every  part  of  his 
judicial  career. — L.  M. 


3o8  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 


CHAPTER    XXVII 

Tlie  Earl  of  Egmont. — The  Budget. — Taxation  of  the  American  Colonies. — 
New  Bridge  at  Blackfriars. — Appearance  of  the  Letlres,  Afemoires,  et 
Negotiations  du  Ciievalier  D' Eon,  etc. — Lord  Clive  appointed  Governor- 
General  of  India. — Contest  at  Cambridge. — Philip,  Earl  of  Hardwicke. — 
Jeremiah  Dyson. 

While  men  were  taken  up  with  the  politics  of  the  age, 
there  was  a  Minister  so  smitten  with  the  exploded  usages 
of  barbarous  times,  that  he  thought  of  nothing  less  than 
reviving  the  feudal  system.  This  was  the  Earl  of  Egmont,' 
who  had  actually  drawn  up  a  plan  for  establishing  that 
absurd  kind  of  government  in  the  island  of  St.  John.''^ 
He  printed  several  copies  of  his  scheme,  and  sent  them 
about  to  his  brother  peers.  And  so  little  were  they 
masters  of  the  subject,  and  so  great  was  the  inattention  of 
the  Ministry  to  the  outlying  parts  of  our  Empire,  that  his 
Lordship,  in  the  following  year,  had  prevailed  with  the 
Council  to  suffer  him  to  make  the  experiment,  if  General 
Conway  had  not  chanced  to  arrive  at  Council  and  expose 
the  folly  of  such  an  undertaking,  which  occasioned  its 
being  laid  aside.  Lord  Egmont  was  such  a  passionate 
admirer  of  those  noble  tenures  and  customs,  that  he  rebuilt 
his  house  at  Enmere  ^  in  Somersetshire  in  the  guise  of  a 
castle,  moated  it  round,  and  prepared  it  to  defend  itself 
with  cross-bows  and  arrows,  against  the  time  in  which  the 
fabric  and  use  of  gunpowder  shall  be  forgotten. 

^  John  Perceval,  second  Earl  of  Egmont.  [Sec  his  '  Memorial '  which  was 
presented  to  the  King  in  December  1763,  asking  for  '  a  grant  of  the  whole 
island  of  St.  John's  in  the  Gulph  of  Saint  Lawrence.' — E.] 

"  In  America. 

■^  Enmore  Castle,  near  Bridgwater,  was  purchased  by  Mr.  Nicholas  Broad - 
mead  in  1833,  and  subsequently  pulled  down. — E. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  309 

On  the  9th,  Mr.  Grenville  opened  the  budget,  fully,  for 
brevity  was  not  his  failing;  but  he  did  it  with  art  and 
ability  too,  though  not  disguising  how  much  he  was  hurt 
by  abuse.  He  said  it  had  been  written  in  pamphlets  that 
;^400,ooo  a  year  was  dealt  out  in  pensions  ;  pretending 
that  the  accusation  had  been  levelled  against  the  profusion 
of  those  granted  in  Ireland,  which  he  denied  to  be  so  great 
as  alleged,  particularly  in  that  bestowed  on  Lord  Sandwich, 
which,  as  I  have  said,  had  been  stopped.  But  in  truth  the 
charge  had  been  levelled  against  that  sort  of  corruption  in 
England ;  and  on  that  he  chose  to  be  silent.  Much  art, 
he  said,  had  been  used  to  dissuade  people  from  subscribing 
to  the  loans  of  Government ;  but  no  new  money  was  to  be 
raised — no  lottery  ;  the  latter  to  be  kept  in  reserve  for 
another  exigence.  He  hoped,  therefore,  people  would 
engage  in  the  funds — as  if  monied  men  would  not  keep 
their  cash  a  year  longer,  when  it  must  be  borrowed  !  He 
took  great  merit  on  the  revenue  being  managed  with  more 
frugality  than  in  the  late  reign,  and  on  the  increase  of  the 
customs,  particularly  in  the  duties  on  tea,  though  the 
increase  of  trade  had  much  more  share  in  that  rise  than 
his  regulations.  He  stated  the  debt  incurred  by  the  late 
war  at  sixty-four  millions  already  funded,  and  nine  that 
were  not.  But  above  all  he  praised,  and  justly,  the 
reduction  of  the  demands  from  Germany.  They  amounted 
to  ;^i,354,8o3  and  upwards,  of  which  ;^I03,355  had 
only  been  allowed.  £262,,2ii  had  been  suspended,  and 
^^988,237^  had  been  struck  off  The  time  had  been 
limited  for  the  demands  to  be  brought  in,  or  more  would 
have  been  asked  from  that  quarter :  and  yet,  our  taxes, 
he  said,  exceeded  by  three  millions  what  they  did  in  1754. 
He  then  opened  his,  famous  shall  I  call  it,  or  fatal,  plan 
for  collecting  a  revenue  from  America ;  '^   a  plan  which, 

^  All  the  sums  mentioned  in  this  speech  must  be  carefully  re-examined,  for 
I  am  not  sure  they  are  exact ;  [nor  has  the  Editor  been  able  to  verify 
them.— L.  M.] 

^  A  plan,  of  which  the  consequences  were  so  little  foreseen,  that  Walpole 
does  not  even  notice  it  in  a  letter  to  Lord  Hertford,  written  two  days  after- 
wards.— Letters,  vol.  iv.  p.  202. — L.  M. 


3IO  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

though  it  took  place  in  the  session  I  am  describing,  I 
will  not  unfold  here ;  for  though  the  regulation  was 
enacted  now,  the  consequences  did  not  appear  to  this 
country  till  the  winter  following.  I  shall  be  obliged  to 
say  so  much  on  that  head  hereafter,  that  to  avoid  repetition, 
and  to  introduce  the  detail  where  it  will  come  in  with 
more  propriety,  and  be  more  useful  to  the  reader,  I  shall 
pass  it  over  now  ; — and  would  to  God  that  at  the  moment 
I  am  writing,  at  the  end  of  1768,  the  subject  was  not  only 
fresh,  but  threatening  a  scene  of  long  and  terrible  calamity 
both  to  England  and  her  colonies !  His  object,  he  said, 
was  to  make  them  maintain  their  own  army.  Till  the  last 
war  they  had  never  contributed  to  their  army  at  all.  The 
extraordinaries  of  the  American  war  had  cost  England 
^^36,000  a  year.  He  had,  additionally,  a  plan  for  preventing 
the  colonies  from  trading  directly  to  France,  Holland, 
Portugal,  or  the  French  islands.  Thus  did  this  pedlar  in 
revenue  confound  the  tranquillity  both  of  America  and 
Great  Britain  ;  and  to  realise  farthings,  set  both  countries 
at  variance,  at  the  risk  of  treasure,  human  lives,  liberty, 
and  common  and  mutual  preservation. 

On  the  1 2th,  at  the  East  India  House,  which  had  been 
a  theatre  of  disputes  and  clashing  interests,  Mr.  Amyand.^ 
having  quarrelled  with  Sullivan,  the  leader  of  the  faction 
opposite  to  Lord  Clive,  suddenly  proposed  to  give  the 
government  of  Bengal,  with  full  powers  over  their  affairs 
to  that  lord,  if  he  would  undertake  the  commission. 
Lord  Clive,  then  present,  said  this  motion  was  totally 
unexpected  ;  yet  would  he  accept  the  offer,  if  a  board  of 
directors  on  whom  he  could  depend  should  be  chosen.  The 
election  was  then  at  hand.  The  train  caught  so  rapidly, 
that  it  was  proposed  directly  to  invest  him  with  his  jaghire, 
which  had  been  voted  as  precipitately  too,  if  somebody  '^ 

^  Afterwards  Sir  George  Amyand.  [He  was  one  of  the  leading  Directors 
of  the  East  India  Company,  and  an  eminent  merchant  in  the  City.  He  died 
in  1766.— L.  M.] 

-  It  appears  to  have  been  Lord  Clive  himself  who  made  this  observation, 
'  not  thinking  it  strictly  honourable  to  take  advantage  of  this  sudden  spirit 
of  generosity,  and  to  carry  merely  by  his  popularity  a  case  which  was  depend- 


KING  GEORGE  III.  311 

had  not  observed  that  a  lawsuit  being  commenced  on 
that  subject,  the  law  must  decide  it. 

The  City  of  London  applied  to  Parliament  for  more 
money  for  their  new  bridge  at  Blackfriars.  James  Gren- 
ville  objected  to  it.  Dr.  Hay  broke  out  and  abused  the 
Common  Council,  whose  late  behaviour,  he  said,  entitled 
them  to  no  favour.  He  alluded  to  their  thanking  their 
members  for  voting  against  general  warrants.  This  pro- 
duced as  warm  language  in  return  from  Beckford  and 
Onslow.  George  Grenville  interposed,  and  said  the 
question  was  not  whether  the  City  deserved  money,  but 
whether  it  could  be  afforded.  That  their  temporary 
bridge  having  been  burnt  by  accident,  they  ought  to  have 
a  gift  of  six  or  seven  thousand  pounds.  Sir  William  Baker^ 
in  disdain  moved  to  adjourn,  that  they  might  not  accept  it. 

The  printers  of  the  London  Evening  Post  and  Gazetteer 
were  called  before  the  House  of  Lords,  on  a  complaint 
made  by  the  Earl  of  Marchmont,  for  printing  a  letter 
(written  by  Wilkes)  reflecting  on  the  Earl  of  Hertford, 
ambassador  at  Paris,  for  employing  David  Hume  the 
historian  as  his  secretary,  and  representing  the  embassy 
as  totally  of  Scotch  complexion.  Wilkes,  then  an  outlaw, 
and  in  France,  had  gone  to  the  Earl's  chapel,  who  treated 
him  civilly,  but  neither  returned  his  visits  nor  invited  him  to 
dinner,  which  it  was  impossible  he  should  do,  representing 
the  person  of  the  King  so  grievously  outraged  by  that 
libeller.  Lord  Marchmont  proposed  to  inflict  a  fine  of 
£\QO  on  each  printer.  Lord  Weymouth  said  fifty  were 
sufficient ;  not  more  had  been  imposed  on  a  printer  of  a 
spurious  speech  for  the  King.  Lord  Temple  put  them  in 
mind  how  much  himself  and  the  Duke  of  Cumberland  had 

ing  at  law,  [he]  rose  and  requested  that  they  would  desist  from  their  liberal 
intentions  :  adding,  that  from  being  sensible  of  the  impropriety  of  going 
abroad  while  so  valuable  a  part  of  his  property  remained  in  dispute,  he 
would  make  some  proposals  to  the  Court  of  Directors,  which  would,  he 
trusted,  end  in  an  amicable  adjustment  of  this  affair.' — Malcolm's  Life  of 
Lord  Clive  (1836),  vol.  ii.  p.  230. — L.  M. 

^  One  of  the  Aldermen,  and  member  for  Plympton.     He  had  married  one 
of  the  coheiresses  of  Jacob  Tonson,  the  printer. — L.  M. 


312  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

been  abused  ;  and  in  answer  to  the  Duke  of  Bedford,  who 
had  complained  that  names  were  now  printed  at  length, 
said  that  practice  had  been  begun  when  himself  and  Mr. 
Pitt  had  resigned  the  last  time.  The  Duke  of  Richmond 
said  he  remembered  that  the  period  in  which  the  Duke  of 
Cumberland  had  been  most  traduced  was  in  the  year  1757. 
Lord  Temple  and  Mr.  Pitt  were  then  in  power.  The  truth 
was,  no  side  had  abstained  from  invectives  when  out  of 
place.  The  difference  was,  that  no  attempt  was  made  to 
punish  the  authors  and  printers  but  under  the  administra- 
tion of  Grenville,  Lord  Sandwich,  and  that  set. 

On  the  23rd  of  March  appeared  one  of  the  most 
extraordinary  books  ever  published,  and  though  written 
by  a  foreigner,  and  in  French,  by  no  means  inferior  in 
detraction  to  the  North  Britons.  It  was  a  large  quarto, 
called  Lettres,  Memoires,  et  Negotiations  particulieres  dti 
Chevalier  D'Eon,  etc.,  and  contained  the  history  of  his 
employments,  troubles,  quarrel  with  Monsieur  de  Guerchy, 
and  his  own  wonderfully  imprudent  and  insolent  letters  to 
the  Due  de  Praslin,  the  second  Minister  in  power  at  the 
Court  at  Versailles.  The  contempt  expressed  for  the 
Comte  de  Guerchy  was  transcendent  ;  but  yet  this  was 
not  the  most  reprehensible  part  of  the  work.  With  the 
most  indefensible  wantonness,  D'Eon  had  inserted  the 
childishly  fond,  but  friendly  letters,  of  his  patron  the  Due 
de  Nivernois.  With  still  greater  indiscretion,  he  published 
others  of  an  intimate  friend  employed  in  the  office  of  the 
Secretary  of  State  at  Versailles,  in  which  that  friend,  in 
confidence,  had  familiarly  censured  his  masters  :  and  with 
the  most  abominable  treachery  D'Eon  added  confidential 
letters  between  the  Dues  de  Nivernois  and  Praslin,  in 
which,  though  with  goodwill  towards  /?/;;/,  they  spoke  of 
their  intimate  friend  Monsieur  de  Guerchy  with  much 
contemptuous  pity,  which  might  be  excused  between  such 
near  friends,  though  never  to  be  pardoned  by  Guerchy. 
These  letters  D'Eon,  when  trusted  with  the  Due  de 
Nivernois'  keys,  had  stolen  or  copied.  To  such  lengths 
blind,  headstrong  revenge  had  driven  the  mad,  unprincipled 


KING  GEORGE  III. 


J'O 


wretch  !  But  what  satisfaction  did  it  create  here,  to  read, 
under  the  hands  of  the  chief  Ministers  in  France,  to  how 
low  an  ebb  that  Court  was  sunk  in  abiHties  !  the  two 
Dukes  owning  to  one  another  that  their  poor  Guerchy,  as 
they  call  him,  was  yet  the  fittest  man  they  had  to  employ. 
Among  such  a  heap  of  baseness  great  parts  appear  ;  and 
it  seemed  lucky  for  his  Court  that  a  man  so  likely  to  be 
raised,  and  so  capable  of  any  treachery,  unbosomed  him- 
self before  he  was  possessed  of  more  important  secrets. 
In  some  instances,  as  in  a  letter  to  his  mother,  D'Eon 
seemed  to  have  worked  himself  up  to  a  pitch  of 
frenzy  ;  throughout,  to  be  swayed  by  intolerable  vanity.^ 
The  blow  to  Guerchy  was  heavy  and  cruel  ;  and  scarcely 
less  mortifying  to  the  Due  de  Nivernois.  Praslin,  a  hard 
unfeeling  man,  took  it  with  implacable  resentment ;  and 
yet,  in  one  respect,  acted  sensibly  and  honourably  :  instead 
of  ruining  St.  Foix,  the  person  whose  letters  D'Eon  had, 
unprovoked  and  wickedly,  disclosed,  he  was  preferred, 
and  never  suffered  any  marks  of  his  master's  displeasure. 
Every  possible  attention  was  employed  here  to  console 
M.  de  Guerchy,  and  to  prevent  his  thinking  that  he  was 
lowered  in  the  public  esteem  ;  but  was  it,  alas  !  possible  he 
could  believe  so  ?  The  other  foreign  Ministers  demanded 
satisfaction  for  so  gross  an  insult  on  one  of  their  order ; 

^  The  book  displays  cleverness  rather  than  ^  great  farts. ^  D'Eon  was  an 
unprincipled  coxcomb,  bold,  ready,  and  plausible  ;  with  a  smattering  of 
literature,  and  more  than  common  powers  of  writing.  At  the  outset  of  the 
dispute  he  was  not  much  in  the  wrong,  for  the  difificulties  raised  to  the  pay- 
ment of  his  disbursements  as  Minister  were  ungenerous,  if  not  unjust ;  and 
M.  Guerchy's  lamentations  over  the  guinea  per  month  lavishly  expended  in 
English  Gazettes  would  have  put  the  forbearance  of  most  men  to  a  severe  test. 
In  his  passion  D'Eon  forgot  the  laws  of  decency  as  well  as  of  honour,  and 
the  publication  of  his  book  injured  him  certainly  not  less  than  his  enemies. 
It  had  an  immense  circulation,  and  the  attempts  to  suppress  it  at  Paris,  of 
course,  served  to  make  it  more  sought  after.  Lord  Holland,  who  happened  to 
be  there  at  that  time,  used  to  lend  his  copy  by  the  hour.  A  reply  to  D'Eon  was 
published,  under  the  title  of  Examen  des  Lettres,  etc.,  die  Chevalier  D'Eott 
dans  une  Lettre  h  M.  N. — and  is  smart  enough.  The  Critical  Review  (vol. 
xviii.  p.  179),  considered  that  D'Eon's  charges  refuted  themselves;  but  the 
public  continued  to  laugh  at  the  French  Ambassador  and  his  Government,  and 
they  fell  in  general  estimation  fully  to  the  extent  stated  in  the  text. — L.  M. 


314  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

and  the  Court  was  willing  enough  to  grant  any  reparation  in 
its  power.  But  what  reparation  could  it  make  proportioned 
to  the  offence?  All  it  could,  it  did.  The  Attorney  General 
was  ordered  to  file  an  information  against  D'Eon  for  a  libel. 
The  imbecility  of  the  Opposition,  notwithstanding  the 
large  accession  to  their  numbers  on  the  question  of  the 
warrants,  had  left  the  Ministry  in  possession  of  full  power. 
The  sense  of  the  nation  had  in  vain  appeared  to  be  averse 
to  them.  It  still  continued  so,  wherever  its  genuine  voice 
could  be  heard  ;  and  never  more  than  on  the  following 
occasion.  The  death  of  the  Earl  of  Hardwicke  had  left 
open  the  honour  of  High  Steward  in  the  University  of 
Cambridge.  Lord  Sandwich,  on  the  prospect  of  that 
event,  had  declared  himself  a  candidate  for  that  office, 
though  attended  with  neither  salary  nor  power.  Lord 
Royston,  son  of  the  deceased,  and  now  Earl  of  Hardwicke, 
was  his  competitor.  Ambitious  industry  was  never 
exerted  so  indefatigably  as  by  Sandwich  on  this  occasion. 
There  was  not  a  corner  of  England,  nay,  not  the  Isle  of 
Man,  unransacked  by  him  for  votes.  He  ferreted  out  the 
mad,  the  lame,  the  diseased,  from  their  poor  retreats,  and 
imported  them  into  the  University.  Letters  on  letters  were 
written,  and  fawning  applications  made  to  all  who  could 
influence  a  vote  of  any  country  clergyman.  Lord 
Hardwicke,  on  the  other  hand,  was  cold,  proud,  and  void 
of  generosity.^     With  the   clergy,  indeed,  he   had  much 

'  Walpole's  hatred  of  Lord  Chancellor  Hardwicke  may  be  traced  in  this 
portrait  of  his  son.  Lord  Hardwicke  was  one  of  the  best  informed  noblemen 
of  his  day.  The  Athenian  letters  which  he  wrote,  in  conjunction  with  his 
brother,  whilst  at  the  University,  rank  next  to  the  Travels  of  Anacharsis 
among  works  of  its  kind.  The  Correspondence  of  Sir  Dttdlcy  Carletofi  is 
more  curious  than  interesting ;  and  the  editor  seems  to  have  correctly 
appreciated  it,  by  restricting  his  first  edition  to  twenty  copies,  and  his  second 
to  fifty.  Perhaps  there  was  some  ostentation  in  terming  the  next  impression 
a  third  edition.  He  is  entitled  to  more  credit  for  his  State  Papers,  published 
in  two  volumes,  quarto, — a  work  of  value,  and  which  still  fully  maintains  its 
consideration.  Lord  Hardwicke's  health  was  very  delicate,  and  he  neither 
liked  nor  shone  in  general  society,  but  he  did  not  want  decision  of  character, 
and  had  a  strong  sense  of  honour.  He  was  firm  in  his  political  connections, 
and  exemplary  in  private  life.  A  biographical  account  of  him  is  given  in 
Cole's  Mss.  in  the  British  Museum,  Addit.  Mss.  5886. — L.  M. 


KING  GEORGE  III,  315 

connection  :  and,  being  a  man  of  no  vice,  and  by  poring 
ov^er  historic  MSS.  supposed  to  be  learned,  he  seemed 
adapted  to  fill  a  nominal  charge  in  a  society  that  is 
expected  to  be  devout  and  studious.  At  least,  the  pro- 
fligacy of  Sandwich  could  not  but  be  unsuitable  to  them, 
whether  they  had  the  reality,  or  only  the  semblance  of 
religion  and  learning.  When  the  day  of  election  came  on, 
the  votes  appeared  to  be  equal,  though  each  side  pretended 
to  have  a  majority  of  one.  Great  altercations  ensued,  and 
the  meeting  broke  up  in  confusion  ;  on  which  recourse 
was  had  to  common  law,  where,  after  many  months,  a 
decision  was  pronounced  in  favour  of  Lord  Hardwicke. 
Many  instances  appeared  of  bribery  practised  by  Lord 
Sandwich  ;  who,  besides  being  rejected,  experienced  many 
insults  and  indignities.  The  undergraduates  who,  having 
no  votes,  had  not  been  courted  by  him,  were  riotous,  and 
hissed  his  chief  agents  :  and  when  he  went  to  the 
University  in  the  month  following,  and  dined  in  the  hall 
of  Trinity  College,  they  marked  their  abhorrence  of  him 
by  quitting  the  hall,  and  refusing  to  dine  with  him  ! 
Young  Thomas  Pitt,^  and  Frederic  Montagu,^  Sandwich's 
own  cousin,  who  had  gone  down  to  support  him,  were  so 
disgusted  with  his  practices,  and  with  the  factious  confusion 
he  had  caused  in  the  University,  that  they  declared  they 
would  assist  his  cause  no  longer.  When  the  former  told 
him  he  would  ruin  the  University,  he  replied,  'That  would 
be  nothing  to  him :  it  would  be  the  better  for  Oxford.' 
Yet  himself  had  been  bred  at  Cambridge — but  Oxford 
was  cherished  by  the  Court. 

On  the  1 2th  of  April  came  on  the  election  of  East 
India  Directors,  when  Sullivan's  list  was  chosen,  though 
Clive  had  the  support  not  only  of  the  Administration,  but 
of  the  Duke  of  Devonshire.^     Sullivan  himself  was  elected 

^  Thomas  Pitt  ofBoconnock,  nephew  of  Mr.  William  Pitt,  but  attached  to 
Mr.  G.  Grenville,  and  by  him  made  a  Lord  of  the  Admiralty. 

^  Frederick  Montagu,  only  son  of  Charles  Montagu,  of  Paplewich,  in 
Northamptonshire,  Auditor  to  the  late  Prince  of  Wales.  [Papplewick  Hall  is 
in  Nottinghamshire. — E.] 

^  The  chief  of  the  Whigs  in  Opposition, 


3i6  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

by  a  majority  of  but  one  vote.  He  thought  that  in  the 
new  Direction  he  had  twelve  votes  to  ten  ;  but  before  the 
clay  of  their  balloting  for  their  chairman,  Lord  Clive  had 
bought  off  one  of  them.  When  the  election  came  on, 
Sullivan  desired  to  be  named  without  being  obliged  to  sub- 
mit to  a  ballot, at  the  same  time  cajoling  theotherparty  with 
great  professions  to  Lord  Clive.  His  antagonists  however, 
insisting  on  a  ballot,  the  numbers  appeared  to  be  eleven  and 
eleven.  Sullivan  finding  himself  betrayed  or  overreached, 
retired  with  heat,  and  Rous,  his  principal  enemy,  was 
chosen  chairman.  Had  Sullivan,  who  was  the  creature  of 
Lord  Shelborne,  succeeded.  Colonel  Barre  was  to  have 
gone  Governor  to  Bengal,  which  was  given  to  Lord  Clive, 
and  he  was  soon  after  decorated  with  the  Order  of  the 
Bath,  to  give  dignity  to  his  new  employment. 

At  the  same  time,  to  mark  that  parliamentary  services 
or  disobedience  were  the  leading  steps  to  favour  or  dis- 
grace, Mr.  Bridgman  ^  was  turned  out  of  the  Board  of 
Greencloth  for  his  vote  on  General  Warrants  ;  and  was 
succeeded  by  Richard  Vernon,'-  formerly  an  officer,  a 
jockey,  a  gamester,  and  brother-in-law  of  the  Duchess 
of  Bedford.  Mr.  Cadogan^  was  appointed  Surveyor  of 
the  Royal  Gardens  ;  and  Jeremiah  Dyson  was  made  one 
of  the  Lords  of  Trade.  Of  this  man  it  is  necessary  to  say 
a  few  more  words.  He  was  a  tailor's  son,  had  risen  under 
Nicholas  Hardinge  from  a  subaltern  clerk  of  the  House 
of  Commons,  to  succeed  him  as  first  clerk,  and  by  educa- 
tion and  principle  was  thought,  and  had  conversed  as  a 


^  .Son  of  Orlando  Bridgman,  after  whose  death  he  became  Sir  Henry ; 
[and  having  succeeded  to  the  estates  of  his  cousin  Thomas,  the  last  Earl  of 
Bradford  (cr.  1694),  who  had  died  without  issue,  was  in  1794  created  Baron 
Bradford.     He  died  at  an  advanced  age  in  1800.— L.  M.] 

-  Younger  brother  of  Henry  Vernon,  of  Hilton,  in  Staffordshire;  and 
married  to  Lady  Evelyn  Leveson,  Countess  Dowager  of  Ossory.  [Mr. 
Vernon's  later  life  was  more  creditable.  He  became  a  great  traveller,  and 
visited  the  East ;  and  he  served  with  distinction  as  a  volunteer  in  the  Spanish 
expedition  to  Algiers.  He  was  one  of  the  handsomest  men  of  his  day. — 
L.  M.] 

••  Charles  Sloane  Cadogan,  only  son  of  Charles,  Lord  Cadogan. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  317 

staunch  Republican.^  In  that  employment  he  had  com- 
ported himself  with  singular  decency  and  intelligence. 
In  truth,  his  parts  were  excellent :  he  was  quick,  subtle, 
shrewd,  clear,  both  in  conception  and  delivery,  and  was 
master  of  argumentative  eloquence,  though  void  of  every 
ornamental  part  of  it.  Being  of  an  unhealthy  complexion, 
and  very  fretful  temper,  he  had  quitted  his  laborious  post, 
and  was  now  come  into  Parliament,  secretly  sold  to  the 
Favourite  ;  but  from  his  behaviour  as  their  clerk,  having 
conciliated  much  goodwill  to  himself  among  the  members, 
he  was  for  some  time  heard  with  great  favour  and  satis- 
faction, an  indulgence  he  lost  afterwards,  when  his  warmth 
made  them  recollect  he  had  once  been  their  servant.  He 
now  appeared  as  devoted  to  George  Grenville,  and  indeed 
was  excellently  useful,  from  his  parts  and  great  know- 
ledge of  parliamentary  business,  to  all  who  employed  him. 
But  proving  both  slippery  to  his  friends  as  fast  as  they 
fell,  and  vexatious  to  his  enemies,  few  men  became  equall}- 
unpopular.  Having  deserted  Grenville  on  a  change  of 
times,  and  happening  to  convert  his  tied  wig  into  a  bag, 
Lord  Gower  being  asked  the  reason,  said,  '  It  is  because 
no  Tye  will  hold  him.'  ^  Dyson  will  appear  again  on  the 
stage  in  a  critical  moment. 

*  Dr.  Akenside,  by  some  thought  a  poet,  was  of  the  same  principles  with, 
and  an  intimate  friend  of,  Dyson,  who  obtained  his  being  named  Physician 
to  the  Queen.     To  that  mistress  and  to  that  friend  he  made  a  sacrifice  of  the 
word  Liberty^  in  the  last  edition  of  his  poem  on  the  Pleasures  of  the  Imagina- 
tion.    It  was  uncourtly,  a  personification  to  be  invoked  by  one  who  felt  the 
pulse   of  royalty.      [The  passage    in  the    first  edition  of  the   Pleasures  of 
Imagi7iation  (1744)  to  which  Walpole  probably  refers  is  as  follows  : — • 
'  Will  thou,  Eternal  Harmony,  descend, 
And  join  the  festive  train?  for  with  thee  comes 
The  guide,  the  guardian  of  their  lovely  sports, 
Majestic  truth  ;  and  where  truth  deigns  to  come, 
Her  sister  Liberty  will  not  be  far.' — Book  i.  lines  20-4. 

According  to  George  Hardinge  (Nichol's  Lit.  Anecdotes,  vol.   viii.  525), 
the  23rd  line  was  altered  by  Akenside  in  the  second  edition  to — 
'  Wise  order  ;  and  where  order  deigns  to  come.' 

This  alteration,  however,  is  not  to  be  found  in  the  editions  of  1754,  1763, 
1765,  1768,  and  1769,  and  appears  for  the  first  time  in  the  posthumous 
revision  of  1772. — E.] 

2  Mr.  Dyson  had  changed  his  politics  on  the  King's  accession,  when  he 


3iS  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

became  at  once  a  determined  Tory,  having  previously  professed  the  opposite 
creed.  lie  afterwards  formed  one  of  the  parly  that  went  under  the  name  of 
the  King's  friends,  a  political  section  which  can  hardly  be  said  to  have  existed 
in  preceding  reigns,  and  which  the  personal  character  of  George  the  Third 
rendered  very  influential  on  public  measures.  A  more  valuable  recruit  could 
not  easily  have  been  found.  He  was  certainly  a  most  able  parliamentary 
lawyer,  and  the  exactness  and  precision  that  characterised  his  mind,  caused 
his  opinion  to  be  always  depended  upon.  These  qualities,  added  to  his 
discretion,  gave  him  a  moral  influence  over  the  House  which  could  not  be 
the  result  of  his  political  conduct.  His  manners  were  obliging,  and  his 
private  life  irreproachable.  It  is  highly  to  his  credit  that,  when  Clerk  of  the 
House,  he  departed  from  the  example  of  his  predecessors,  by  making  no 
profit  of  his  patronage. — Nichol's  Literary  Anecdotes,  vol.  viii.  p.  523; 
Hatsell's  Parliamentary  Precedents  (1818),  vol.  i.  pp.  viii.-ix. — L.  M. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  319 


CHAPTER    XXVIII 

Prorogation  of  the  Parliament. — Walpole's  Conduct  on  the  Dismissal  of 
General  Conway  for  voting  against  Ministers  on  the  Question  of  the 
Legality  of  General  Warrants. — Trial  of  Carteret  Webbe  for  Perjury.— 
The  Earl  of  Northumberland  Lord-Lieutenant  of  Ireland. 

On  the  19th  the  Parliament  rose.  And  now  it  is  that 
I  am  obliged  to  weave  the  history  of  my  own  conduct 
into  a  large  part  of  the  following  narration.  Two  con- 
siderable eras  having  taken  their  complexion  from  my 
councils,  the  thread  of  my  story  would  be  imperfect  if  I 
omitted  what  relates  to  my  own  behaviour.  I  shall  give 
it  as  briefly  as  the  subject  and  clearness  will  permit,  and 
hope  the  reader  will  excuse  egotisms  where  no  glory  was 
the  result  of  my  actions.  Chance,  more  than  design,  pre- 
sented the  means  ;  and  if  the  moments  were  luckily  seized, 
it  was  from  no  merit,  no  foresight  of  mine,  that  those 
moments  were  brought  on. 

Having  fully  seen  the  incapacity  of  the  Opposition, 
sensible  how  ill  they  were  united,  and  foreseeing  that 
their  strength  would  rather  diminish  than  augment,  and 
at  the  same  time  flattering  myself,  from  the  resistance 
which  the  Ministry  had  experienced,  that  they  would  be 
less  flippant  in  their  innovations  on  liberty,  which  was 
fortified  by  getting  rid  of  general  warrants,  I  had  deter- 
mined to  give  over  politics  ;  and  to  withdraw  myself  from 
shallow  councils.  I  was  preparing  to  make  a  visit  to  my 
friend  and  relation,^  Lord  Hertford,  at  Paris,  when,  two 

1  Catherine  and  Charlotte  Shorter  were  daughters  of  John  Shorter  of 
Bybrook,  in  Kent.  Catherine  was  first  wife  of  Sir  Robert  Walpole,  and 
mother  of  the  author  of  these  Metnoirs.  Charlotte  was  third  wife  of  Francis 
Seymour,  Lord  Conway,  and  by  him  mother  of  Francis,  Earl  of  Hertford, 
and  of  General  Henry  Seymour  Conway. 


320  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

days  after  the  rising  of  the  Parliament,  I  was  stunned 
with  notice  of  Mr.  Conway  being  turned  out  of  the  King's 
bedchamber,  and  dismissed  from  the  command  of  his 
regiment  of  dragoons.  As  I  had  been  a  principal  cause 
of  this  unworthy  treatment,  and  of  this  destruction  of  his 
fortunes,  nothing  could  be  more  sensible  to  me  than  this 
blow.  Nor  could  I  remain  a  moment  in  doubt,  from  the 
complexion  of  some  in  power,  but  that  the  stroke  was 
aimed  still  more  at  me  than  at  Mr.  Conway,  though 
directly  I  was  out  of  their  reach.  The  Bedford  faction 
I  knew  were  my  mortal  enemies.  Yet  I  saw,  too,  that 
Mr.  Conway  had  a  share  in  the  resentment  of  others. 
Grenville  was  not  of  a  nature  to  pardon  the  slight  Mr. 
Conway  had  made  both  of  his  favour  and  power.  He 
had  offended  Lord  Sandwich,  too,  by  refusing  to  influence 
the  chaplain  of  his  regiment  to  vote  for  him  at  Cambridge  ; 
and  Lord  Holland  had  long  groaned  for  an  opportunity 
of  revenging  himself  on  Lord  Hertford  for  his  treatment 
of  Bunbury.  The  tone  of  the  ruling  Administration  was 
despotic,  nor  had  they  forgotten  how  lately  they  had 
trembled  with  apprehension  of  losing  their  power.  Here 
were  more  than  motives  sufficient  to  ^^^  on  general  or 
particular  vengeance.  And  in  general  I  must  leave  it ; 
for  after  long  search  and  much  information,  I  cannot  fix 
the  deed  on  any  single  man.  There  was  but  one  man 
among  the  suspected  that  ever  solemnly  denied  having 
a  share  in  it;  and  he  constantly  did  :  I  mean  Lord  Bute. 
All  the  rest  have  charged  it  on  others,  though  still  without 
disavowing  having  had  a  hand  in  it  themselves.  The 
King  often  afterwards  protested  to  Lord  Hertford  that 
his  Ministers^  forced  him  to  it.  Grenville  declared  that 
his  Majesty  was  more  eager  for  it  than  any  of  them.  The 
Duke  of  Bedford  alone  was  frank,  and  avowed  that  though 
he  had  not  recommended  the  measure,  he  had  told  his 

^  I  have  seen  a  letter  from  the  King  to  George  Grenville,  in  which  his 
Majesty  pressed  him  to  turn  out  Conway.  [It  was  owing  to  Grenville's 
advice,  however,  that  Conway  was  not  dismissed  until  the  recess. — Grenville 
Papers,  vol.  ii.  p.  229. — E.] 


KING  GEORGE  III.  321 

colleagues,  when  they  proposed  to  remove  Mr.  Conway 
from  the  bedchamber  only,  that  it  was  foolish  to  provoke 
him  by  halves  ;  and  that  to  leave  him  his  regiment,  and 
take  away  the  bedchamber,  would  be  telling  other  officers 
that  they  might  oppose  the  Court  with  impunity. 

Be  it  as  it  may,  the  boldness  of  the  step  was  almost 
unprecedented.  Sir  Robert  Walpole  had  dismissed  the 
Lords  Westmorland  ^  and  Cobham  ^  from  the  command 
of  regiments  ;  and  Mr.  Pitt  from  a  cornetcy ;  but  it  was 
not  till  by  a  personal,  violent,  and  constant  opposition 
that  they  had  made  themselves  as  obnoxious  as  possible. 
Yet  even  that  measure,  provoked  as  it  was,  had  occasioned 
great  clamour  ;  and  had  contributed  to  animate  the  Op- 
position, which  at  last  overthrew  that  Minister.  Mr. 
Grenville  had  joined  in  that  Opposition,  had  risen  on  that 
foundation  ;  and  the  Duke  of  Bedford  had  signed  a  pro- 
test against  the  measure  of  dismissing  officers  for  parlia- 
mentary reasons.  How  different  was  the  case  now  !  The 
temper  and  fairness  of  the  man  disgraced,  his  aversion  to 
faction,  the  disinterestedness  of  his  character,  his  general 
co-operation  with  the  measures  of  Government,  his  being 
recently  recommended  to  favour  by  Prince  Ferdinand 
for  his  services  in  Germany,  and  his  being  brother  to 
the  ambassador  at  Paris — all  these  were  considerations 
that  made  the  measure  amazing.  But  when  it  was  ob- 
served that  this  punishment  was  inflicted  for  a  single^ 
vote  in  Parliament,  when  it  was  evident  that  that  vote 
had  been  peculiarly  conscientious,  and  given  in  a  cause 
avowed  by  the  nation,  and  against  a  practice  certain  of 
being,  as  it  soon  after  was,  condemned  by  the  Courts  of 
Law,  and  though  maintained  by  Parliament  in  retrospect, 
yet  given  up  for  the  future  by  that  very  Parliament  as 
pernicious  ;  when  the  context,  too,  appeared  to  be,  that 
military  men  in  Parliament  were  to  forfeit  their  profession 

1  John  Fane,  Earl  of  Westmorland. 
^  Sir  Richard  Temple,  Lord  Viscount  Cobham. 

'  This  does  not  mean  the  vote  of  a  single  day,  but  all  the  votes  on  general 
warrants  considered  as  one  question. 

VOL.  L  X 


332  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

and  the  merit  of  their  services,  unless  implicitly  devoted 
to  the  Court ;  could  these  reflections,  when  coupled  with 
the  arbitrary  measures  which  the  nation  had  observed  to 
be  the  system  of  the  Court,  fail  to  occasion  the  blackest 
presages  ?  Lord  Bute,  in  truth,  had  slunk  away  from  his 
own  victory ;  but  Grenville  remained,  and  had  Bute's 
tools,  and  Sandwich  and  Rigby,  to  war  with  on  the  con- 
stitution, and  Lord  Mansfield  and  Norton  ready  to  turn 
the  law  against  itself. 

It  was  a  beautiful  contrast,  the  behaviour  of  the  person 
aggrieved.  His  temper,  decency,  and  submission  were 
unalterable  and  unequalled.  He  neither  complained  or 
tried  to  instil  a  sense  of  his  injuries  into  a  single  friend, 
though  he  wished  they  should  take  his  part,  and  resent 
for  him.  He  could  not  have  entertained  a  wish  worse 
founded  :  his  friends  were  rejoiced  at  not  being  called 
upon  ;  and  had  no  ambition  to  share  the  crown  of  his 
martyrdom.  There  lived  not  three  more  interested  men 
than  the  Duke  of  Argyle,^  Lord  Lorn,  and  Lord  Frederick 
Campbell,  the  father  and  brothers  of  Lady  Ailesbury,^ 
Mr.  Conway's  wife.  The  first  loved  money ;  and  had  in- 
curred unpleasant  suspicions  in  his  efforts  to  obtain  it.  Lord 
Lorn^  was  sordidly  covetous,  and  had  not  sense  enough 
to  foresee  a  blessing  in  futurity  beyond  the  first  half-crown 
that  glittered  in  his  eyes.     Lord  Frederick  *  was  sensible 

^  General  John  Campbell,  Groom  of  the  Bedchamber  to  George  the  Second, 
and  cousin  and  successor  of  John  and  Archibald,  Dukes  of  Argyle,  when  an  old 
man.  [He  married  in  1720  the  charming  Mary  Bellenden,  '  incontestably  the 
most  agreeable,  the  most  insinuating,  and  the  most  likeable  woman  of  her 
time.' — Harvey's  Memoirs  (1884),  vol.  i.  p.  55. — E.] 

-  Caroline,  daughter  of  the  latter  Duke  John,  third  wife  and  widow  of 
Charles  Bruce  last  Earl  of  Ailesbury,  by  whom  she  had  an  only  child,  Mary, 
Duchess  of  Richmond.  The  Countess  of  Ailesbury  married,  secondly, 
General  Henry  Seymour  Conway,  only  brother  of  Francis,  first  Earl  of  Hert- 
fort  of  that  branch. 

^  John  Campbell,  Marquis  of  Lome,  married  to  the  famous  beauty  Eliza- 
beth Gunning,  widow  of  James,  Duke  of  Hamilton. 

^  Lord  Frederick  Campbell  had  been  bred  to  the  law,  and  succeeded  well 
there,  but  quitted  the  profession  on  his  father's  attaining  the  dukedom.  [As  he 
was  brother-in  law  to  General  Conway,  Mr.  Walpole  seems  to  have  expected 
him  to  have  followed  Conway's  politics. — Mr.  Croker's  note  to  the  fourth 


KING  GEORGE  III.  323 

shrewd,  and  selfish  ;  and  on  this  and  a  subsequent  crisis 
showed  that  no  connection  or  obh'gation  could  stand  against 
the  eagerness  with  which  he  pursued  immediate  fortune. 
Nothing  else  weighed  with  him,  except  the  inveteracy  of 
national  prejudice.  As  Mr.  Conway  had  acted  in  opposi- 
tion to  Scottish  measures.  Lord  Frederick,  forgetting  Mr. 
Conway's  friendship  and  kindness,  and  his  own  youthful 
situation,  and  borne  away  by  a  hot  temper,  often  and 
indecently  attacked  him  in  Parliament,  though  without 
any  brilliancy  of  parts  to  colour  over  such  improper 
behaviour.  The  Duke  of  Richmond,  who  had  married 
Lady  Ailesbury's  daughter,  kept  himself  more  free  from 
blame.  He  had  been  witness  to  the  integrity  of  Mr. 
Conway's  conduct  at  the  conference  with  Mr.  Grenville, 
and  certainly  loved  him,  though  not  enough  to  participate 
his  disgrace.  The  Duke,  however,  offered  to  take  a  part 
in  Parliament  if  Mr.  Conway's  friends  would  move  for  an 
inquiry  into  the  cause  of  his  dismission  ;  but  that  offer 
did  not  include  his  Grace's  engaging  any  farther  against 
the  Court. 

There  was  still  another  relation  of  Mr.  Conway  more 
deeply  involved  in  his  disgrace,  and  more  immediately 
called  upon  to  resent  it  ;  his  brother,  Lord  Hertford. 
Yet  there  were  both  real  and  specious  reasons  for  his 
submitting  to  it.^     Mr.  Conway  had  taken  this  part  not 

volume  of  Walpole's  Letters,  p.  185.  Wraxall  says  of  him,  '  Devoid  of  shin- 
ing talents,  he  nevertheless  wanted  not  either  ability  or  eloquence  in  a  certain 
degree,  both  which  were  under  the  control  of  reason  and  of  temper '  {His- 
torical and  Posthumous  Memoirs,  1884,  vol.  iv.  p.  77).  His  figure  and 
deportment  were  remarkably  graceful.  He  married  the  Dowager  Countess 
Ferrers,  sister  of  Sir  William  Meredith,  and  died  at  an  advanced  age  in  1816. 
—  L.  M.] 

^  Lord  Hertford  could  not  reasonably  be  expected  to  court  a  share  in  the 
consequences  of  an  act  of  which  he  disapproved ;  and  he  was  of  a  tempera- 
ment that  too  easily  disposed  him  to  shrink  from  any  personal  sacrifice.  His 
political  principles  were  very  indefinite.  His  merit  was  of  a  different 
character.  Lord  Chesterfield  was  sincere  when  he  said  of  him,  in  a  letter 
not  intended  for  publication,  '  I  really  think  he  will  be  liked  [as  Viceroy],  for 
he  is,  in  my  opinion,  the  honestest  and  most  religious  man  in  the  kingdom, 
and  moreover  very  much  of  a  gentleman  in  his  behaviour  to  everybody. ' — 
Letters,  iv.  407.     His  administration  of  Ireland   was   respectable,   and   in 


324  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

only  without  consulting  him,  but  when  he  must  have 
known  how  unwelcome  it  would  be  to  Lord  Hertford, 
then  in  the  King's  service  both  at  home  and  abroad,  and 
well  treated  ;  connected  with  the  Ministry,  and  ever 
desirous  of  being  so  with  all  Administrations.  Lord 
Hertford  had  even,  after  his  brother's  first  vote,  made 
remonstrances  to  him  though  in  vain.  On  the  other 
hand,  honour,  interest  in  a  general  sense,  and  personal 
resentment,  called  on  Lord  Hertford  to  espouse  his 
brother's  quarrel.  Ambassador  in  France,  where  no 
officer  was  ever  broken  but  for  cowardice  or  some 
atrocious  crime,  it  could  but  strike  the  French  Court  that 
the  Ambassador  stood  in  little  estimation  at  home,  when 
such  an  affront  was  put  on  the  family.  Could  he  expect 
more  consideration  if  he  acquiesced  ?  On  the  other  hand, 
should  the  Opposition  succeed,  in  which,  besides  his 
brother,  were  his  wife's  nephew,  the  Duke  of  Grafton,^ 
and  his  old  friends,  whom  he  had  already  offended  by 
not  acting  with  them,  what  could  he  expect  but,  at  best, 
the  humiliating  circumstance  of  being  saved  by  his 
brother  whom  he  had  abandoned  ?  Nor  could  Lord 
Hertford  doubt  but  that  Mr.  Conway  partly  suffered  on 
his  account,  as  far  as  Lord  Holland  had  any  share  in  the 
measure.  Yet,  though  there  had  been  no  instance  of  such 
disgrace  remaining  unresented,  much  less  when  such  a 
character  was  so  unjustly  treated,  not  a  single  resignation 
marked  that  the  sufferer  had  either  a  friend  or  relation  in 
the  place.  He  was  at  once  sacrificed  by  the  Court,  and 
abandoned  by  his  own  family. 

It  became  the  more  incumbent  on  me  to  make  him  all 
the  reparation  in  my  power.  I  offered  him  six  thousand 
pounds,  which  he  refused  ;  and  I  altered  my  will,  giving 

general  approved  of,  and  it  passed  away  in  almost  uniform  tranquillity. — 
Hardy's  Life  of  Lord  Charlcmont  (1812),  vol.  i.  p.  224.  He  filled  many 
high  offices,  and  was  very  prosperous  throughout  life.  He  was  created 
Marquis  in  1793,  and  died  in  the  following  year,  leaving  a  large  family. — L.  M. 
^  Lord  Hertford  had  married  Lady  Isabella  Fitzroy,  youngest  daughter  of 
Charles,  Duke  of  Grafton,  who  was  succeeded  in  the  title  by  his  grandson, 
Augustus  Henry,  of  whom  much  will  be  said  in  some  of  the  following  pages. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  325 

him  almost  my  whole  fortune  unless  his  regiment  should 
be  restored  to  him  ;  a  destination  with  which  I  acquainted 
him.  And  though  it  certainly  would  not  augment  the 
gift,  I  determined  to  hazard  all  I  had  rather  than  not 
revenge  both  him  and  myself.  Grenville,  the  very  day 
before  the  dismission  of  Mr.  Conway,  whether  to  detach 
me  from  him,  or  fearing  I  should  make  use  of  the  in- 
discretion he  had  been  guilty  of,  ordered  the  payment  of 
my  bills  at  the  Treasury  ;  a  step  that,  far  from  soothing, 
but  served  to  increase  my  resentment.  I  dreaded  lest 
Mr.  Conway  should  think  I  had  kept  any  underhand 
measures  with  the  Treasury ;  but  I  soon  convinced  both 
him  and  the  world  how  steadily  I  embraced  the  cause  of 
my  friend.  Yet  for  the  first  time  in  my  life  I  acted  with 
a  phlegm  of  which  I  did  not  know  myself  capable.  I 
shut  myself  up  in  the  country  for  three  days,  till  I  had 
conquered  the  first  ebullitions  of  my  rage,  and  then 
returned  to  town  with  a  face  of  satisfaction,  which  some 
thought  indifference ;  and  others  joy  at  having  dipped 
Mr.  Conway  in  Opposition.  Both  were  mistaken.  I 
knew  that  both  Mr.  Conway  and  the  Opposition  were 
little  formed  for  the  business.  I  had  everything  to 
discourage  me,  and  nothing  but  perseverance  and  the 
firmness  of  my  own  temper  to  carry  me  on.  I  foresaw, 
indeed,  that  the  persecution  he  had  undergone  would 
raise  the  character  of  Mr.  Conway,  would  lend  him  an 
importance  he  would  never  have  assumed,  and  might  one 
day  place  him  at  the  head  of  this  country,  I  foresaw 
that  the  violence  and  unprincipled  rashness  of  the  Minis- 
ters would  conduct  them  to  a  precipice  ;  but  I  should 
far  overrate  my  own  sagacity,  if  I  pretended  to  have 
discovered  that  those  prospects  were  near  enough  to 
administer  any  comfort  to  my  impatience.  I  knew  the 
folly  of  those  I  was  to  act  with.  I  could  not  flatter  my- 
self it  would  be  exceeded  by  the  folly  of  those  I  was  to 
act  against. 

If  self-interest   restrained   Mr.    Conway's    family   from 
embracing  his  defence,  it  was  as  natural  that  the  Opposi- 


326  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

tion  should  caress  him.  A  martyr  is  as  creditable  to  a 
party  in  politics  as  to  a  sect  in  religion.  Yet  so  decent 
and  so  dignified  was  the  Opposition  of  that  time,  that 
they  expressed  none  of  the  heat  and  ardour  with  which 
parties  usually  seize  such  an  event.  The  Duke  of  Devon- 
shire, indeed,  came  to  me,  and  with  great  delicacy  desired 
that  I  would,  in  his  name,  make  an  offer  to  Mr.  Conway  of 
a  thousand  pounds  a  year,  till  his  regiment  should  be 
restored.^  This  noble  offer  Mr.  Conway  as  generously 
declined.  However,  it  gave  lustre  to  our  cause ;  and  it 
was  my  purpose  to  raise  as  high  as  I  could  the  character 
of  our  party,  and  to  spread  the  flames  of  emulation  from 
such  examples.  The  Ministerial  tools,  on  the  other  hand, 
were  not  idle,  but  began  to  defame  Mr.  Conway  as  a 
spiritless  and  inactive  General,  reviving  in  scandalous 
papers  the  miscarriage  at  Rochfort.-  This  artillery,  how- 
ever, we  turned  upon  them,  and  displayed  the  malignity  of 
not  being  content  with  ruining  him  without  proceeding  to 
the  grossest  defamation,  Mr.  Conway,  too,  by  my  advice, 
called  upon  the  detractors  to  avow  themselves,  and,  if  they 
dared,  take  up  the  weapons  like  men,  which  soon  silenced 
that  dirty  kind  of  war. 

But  these  prosperous  beginnings  were  almost  all  I  could 
accomplish.  Every  step  I  took  I  found  discouragement 
and  disappointment.  There  was  no  union  in  our  party, 
nor  could  I  bring  about  any.  At  first  I  laboured  to  form 
a  little  junto  of  the  most  considerable  of  our  friends  in  the 

^  The  Duke  subsequently  gave  the  best  proof  of  the  sincerity  of  this  offer 
by  bequeathing  General  Conway  a  legacy  of  ^5000. — L.  M. 

-  Conway  conducted  himself  less  well  than  Wolfe  at  Rochfort,  but  far 
better  than  the  other  generals.  '  Though  eminently  distinguished  for  his 
gallant  and  indefatigable  behaviour,  ...  he  has  never  had,'  says  Walpole, 
'  the  happiness  of  achieving  any  action  of  remarkable  eclat,  or  of  performing 
alone  any  act  of  singular  utility  to  this  country'  (Counter  Address  to  the 
Public  on  the  Dismissal  of  a  late  General,  Orford's  Works,  vol.  ii.  p.  551). 
lie  commanded  a  division  with  credit  in  the  Seven  Years'  War.  An  ill- 
natured  contemporary  critic  charges  him  with  being  a  tnartinet,  and  with  un- 
necessarily fatiguing  his  men,  but  admits  that  '  he  would  have  made  a  very 
good  general  if  he  had  not  been  spoilt  by  his  education  under  the  Duke  of 
Cumberland.' — Almon's  Anecdotes  of  the  Life  of  Lord  Chatham  (1793),  vol.  iii. 
p.  253.— L.  M. 


KING  GEORGE  III.  327 

House  of  Commons,  who  should  plan  our  future  measures 
and  conduct  them.  But  of  those  I  could  not  prevail  on 
any  three  to  assemble  and  enter  into  concert.  Legge 
was  dying;  Charles  Yorke  was  proud,  insincere,  waiting 
for  an  opportunity  of  making  his  own  bargain,  and 
offended  that  Mr.  Pitt  was  disposed  to  make  Pratt  Chan- 
cellor ;  though  the  latter,  for  the  good  of  the  cause,  was 
willing  to  waive  the  seals.  Charles  Townshend,  neglected 
by  the  Court,  seemed  zealously  attached  to  us;  unfor- 
tunately, we  could  neither  do  with  him  nor  without  him  ; 
yet  his  jealousy  of  Grenville  and  fear  of  Mr.  Conway  would 
have  fixed  him  if  anything  could.  There  was  another 
man  of  whose  art  and  abilities  I  had  a  high  opinion,  and 
who  was  as  practicable  as  the  others  I  have  mentioned 
were  little  so, — I  mean  Lord  George  Sackville.  But  in- 
superable difficulties  kept  him  from  us  too.  Pitt  had 
proscribed  him  ;  Newcastle  did  not  love  him  ;  the  Duke 
of  Devonshire  was  too  cautious  to  join  him  :  and  Conway, 
knowing  Lord  George  had  been  his  enemy,  though  it  had 
never  come  to  an  open  rupture,  would  not  listen  to  any 
connection  with  him,  but  pleaded  the  stains  on  his  char- 
acter and  the  enmity  borne  to  him  by  Prince  Ferdinand. 
I  lost  my  temper  at  finding  that,  whilst  our  enemies  stuck 
at  nothing,  every  phantom  and  every  fancy  was  to  clog 
our  councils  and  retard  our  advances.  The  dignity  of 
great  Lords  and  their  want  of  sense,  the  treachery  of  some, 
the  piques  of  others,  all  had  their  operation,  and  not  a 
single  prejudice  was  removed  to  facilitate  our  attempts. 
I  had  surmounted  my  repugnance  to  Newcastle,  and 
though  in  truth  to  little  purpose,  had  consented  to  advise 
with  him.  He  was  still  the  same ;  at  once  busy  and 
inactive,  fond  of  plotting,  but  impossible  to  be  put  in 
motion.  Nor,  indeed,  propose  what  I  would,  could  I 
obtain  to  have  a  single  measure  carried  into  execution. 

But  what  hampered  us  most  was  Mr.  Pitt.  He  justly 
resented  having  been  abandoned  by  Newcastle,  Devon- 
shire, and  the  Whigs.  He  despised  both  Charles  Yorke 
and  Charles  Townshend  ;  and  though  he  expressed  civil 


328  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

applause  of  Mr.  Conway,  would  neither  connect  with  him 
nor  see  him.  He  at  once  talked  of  an  Administration  to  be 
composed  of  great  Whig  Lords,  and  of  his  own  resolution 
not  to  force  himself  on  the  King ;  that  is,  he  wished  the 
great  Lords  should  force  him  on  the  King  without  his 
concurrence,  that  he  might  have  the  merit  of  disavowing 
them  and  of  profiting  of  their  weight.  Conway  was  as 
difficult  as  Pitt,  and  too  proud  to  make  any  advances  to 
him.  Thus,  wherever  I  turned,  there  were  no  facilities. 
Even  Lord  Temple,  accustomed  to  run  and  meet  faction 
in  the  highways,  seemed  cold  and  indisposed  to  connection 
with  us.  At  the  same  time  I  heard  that  a  treaty  was 
carrying  on  between  him  and  his  brother  George,  a  report 
which,  though  true,  greatly  deceived  me,  for,  concluding 
that  Lord  Temple  was  too  firmly  united  with  Mr.  Pitt  to 
negotiate  without  him,  I  imputed  the  coldness  of  both  to 
an  approaching  league  of  the  whole  family  ;  whereas  the 
truth  was,  though  then  a  secret  to  all  the  world,  that  Mr. 
Pitt  and  Lord  Temple  were  on  bad  terms,  the  former 
disapproving  the  violence  of  Temple,  and  Temple  being 
enraged  that  Mr.  Pitt  would  not  lend  himself  to  all  his 
passions. 

Perceiving  so  little  hope  of  union  amongst  ourselves,  I 
conceived  a  better  prospect  from  the  factions  of  the  Court, 
which,  by  every  art  I  could  devise,  I  endeavoured  to 
inflame.  I  soon  learned  how  wide  the  breach  was  growing 
between  Lord  Bute  and  Grenville  ;  and  though  I  then 
looked  on  the  former  as  the  more  dangerous  of  the  two, 
and  of  all  men  was  determined  not  to  connect  with  him, 
yet  to  his  friends  I  held  a  plausible  language,  insinuating 
that  it  was  possible  he  might  be  forgiven  by  our  great 
Lords,  and  left  them  to  think  that,  if  the  Favourite  with- 
drew his  protection  from  Grenville  and  the  Bedfords,  his 
case  would  by  no  means  be  desperate  with  the  Opposition. 
In  the  same  kind  of  style  I  talked  to  the  friends  of  Gren- 
ville, still  imputing  Mr.  Conway's  disgrace  alternately  to 
the  other  faction,  accordingly  as  I  conversed  with  either. 
I  saw  that,  hostile  as  they  were,  despair  must  cement  their 


KING  GEORGE  III.  329 

union.  Both  would  be  more  prompt  to  quarrel  if  they 
thought  themselves  not  proscribed  by  us. 

An  incident  fell  out  favourable  to  this  plan.  Grenville, 
ever  averse  to  Lord  Holland,  had  destined  his  place  of 
Paymaster  to  be  shared  between  Lord  North  and  Stanley, 
and  they  had  even  taken  joy  on  it.  But  Lord  Bute  pre- 
vented it  being  carried  into  execution,  and  Lord  Holland 
now  came  from  France,  stung  with  this  insult  ;  though  as 
the  passing  of  his  accounts  was  in  agitation,  he  for  the 
present  stifled  his  resentment  and  affected  to  pay  court  to 
Grenville.  As,  however,  to  hoodv/ink  me  to  his  own  share 
in  that  business  and  to  inflame  my  anger  to  Grenville,  he 
laid  the  chief  blame  of  Conway's  disgrace  on  the  latter,  I 
indulged  him,  as  usual,  in  the  imagination  that  he  de- 
ceived me  ;  and,  as  if  to  vent  my  own  passion,  blew  up 
his  as  high  as  I  could  against  Grenville.  From  Lord 
Holland  I  heard  what  had  escaped  me.  Conway  at 
the  end  of  the  Session,  on  a  motion  for  thanking  the 
King  for  reducing  the  German  demand,  had  made  a 
panegyric  on  Prince  Ferdinand  and  the  hereditary  Prince, 
saying  how  hard  it  was  that  their  country,  which  had 
suffered  so  much  for  us,  should  not  have  ample  indemni- 
fication. Grenville  had  answered  that  surely  if  the  King 
had  been  content  to  lower  the  demands  for  Hanover,  he 
was  at  liberty  to  reduce  those  of  Brunswick.  This  had 
passed  in  a  thin  debate ;  nor  had  I  been  present.  But 
Lord  George  Sackville  had  remarked,  and  said,  '  Conway 
has  undone  himself  It  was,  it  seems,  an  irremissible 
crime  to  applaud  the  hero  who  had  commanded  our 
armies  and  given  them  victory,  and  to  plead  for  another 
hero  who  had  married  the  King's  own  sister  and  fought 
his  battles ! 

I  shall  omit  the  detail  of  many  other  stratagems  that 
I  found  for  annoying  the  Administration,  they  having 
been  damped  or  annihilated  by  the  supineness  of  my 
confederates.  The  summer  was  in  every  respect  unfor- 
tunate to  us,  and  by  the  Session  following  we  scarce 
deserved  the  name  of  a  party.     Death  took  off  some  of 


330 


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 


our  chief  leaders,  who,  though  they  would  not  lead  us, 
yet  by  the  sanction  of  their  names  had  kept  together  an 
appearance  of  numbers,  which  dwindled  away  as  our 
hopes  of  success  vanished.  What  farther  regards  us  as 
a  party  will  be  mentioned  in  its  place.  I  now  return  to 
the  other  occurrences  of  the  year. 

Two  vacant  garters  were  bestowed  on  the  Duke  of 
Mecklenberg^  and  Lord  Halifax.  About  the  same  time 
died  at  Paris  the  King's  mistress,  Madame  de  Pompadour. 
She  retained  her  power  to  the  last,  though  their  amour 
had  long  been  exhausted.  The  Due  de  Choiseul,  whom 
she  had  destined  for  Minister,  succeeded  her  in  the  King's 
confidence  without  a  rival. 

May  4th,  Beardmore,  one  of  the  persecuted  writers, 
carried  his  cause  against  the  messengers,  and  recovered 
one  thousand  pounds  for  damages. 

On  the  9th,  Mr.  Conway's  late  regiment  was  given  to 
the  Earl  of  Pembroke ;  not  without  occasioning  remarks 
a  little  disadvantageous  to  the  standard  of  his  Majesty's 
piety.  Lord  Pembroke,  one  of  the  wildest  young  men  of 
the  times,  had  been  dismissed  from  the  King's  bedcham- 
ber for  debauching  and  eloping  with  a  young  lady  of 
distinction,  though  married  to  a  more  beautiful  woman, 
sister  of  the  Duke  of  Marlborough.  Nobody  could  tell 
what  the  King  had  to  do  to  interfere  in  that  intrigue  ;  but 
having  done  so,  it  seemed  little  consistent  to  reward  a 
young  profligate  ^  with  the  spoils  of  a  man  strictly  vir- 
tuous and  conscientious.  It  Avas  now  remembered  that 
at  the  beginning  of  this  reign,  the  Earl  of  Dartmouth,  a 
young  nobleman  as  pious  as  Lord  Pembroke  was  licen- 


^  The  Queen's  brother, 

-  Lord  Pembroke  was  again  made  a  Lord  of  the  Bedchamber  in  1769, 
without  applying  ;  and  exactly  at  a  time  when  he  was  said  to  have  carried  off 
another  woman,  a  young  Venetian  bride  (he  was  then  at  Venice),  the  very 
night  of  her  wedding.  [Lord  Pembroke  had  served  in  the  Seven  Years'  War, 
and  was  popular  with  the  officers  under  him,  though  not  much  of  a  soldier. 
He  was  dissolute  and  extravagant,  and,  notwithstanding  his  large  income,  left 
when  he  died  heavy  debts,  which  his  only  son,  the  eleventh  Earl,  a  very 
respectable  nobleman,  honourably  paid. — L.  M.] 


KING  GEORGE  III.  331 

tious,  had  applied  to  be  of  the  King's  bedchamber,  but 
had  been  rejected  by  Lord  Bute  lest  so  sanctimonious  a 
man  should  gain  too  far  on  his  Majesty's  piety.  An 
instance  that  if  it  proved  the  religion  of  the  King,  did  not 
bear  witness  to  that  of  the  P""avourite.  But  in  such  a 
theatre  of  hypocrisy  it  mattered  little  who  was  the  prin- 
cipal impostor. 

On  the  15th  died  Dr.  Osbaldiston,  Bishop  of  London; 
and  the  next  day  Lord  Chancellor  Henley  was  created 
Earl  of  Northington,  a  step  not  communicated  to  the 
Duke  of  Bedford,  who  much  resented  it.  But  Grenville 
was  more  mortified,  who  found  himself  excluded  from  the 
nomination  of  the  new  Bishop  of  London.  He  had 
wished  to  raise  Newton  ^  to  that  mitre,  but  Lord  Bute 
procured  it  for  Terrick.  This  man,  with  no  glimmering 
of  parts  or  knowledge,  had,  on  the  merit  of  a  sonorous 
delivery,  and  by  an  assiduity  of  back-stairs  address, 
wriggled  himself  into  a  sort  of  general  favour,  and  by 
timing  his  visits  luckily,  had  been  promoted  by  the  Duke 
of  Devonshire  to  the  See  of  Peterborough.  Yet  he  had 
been  of  the  first  notoriously  obliged  to  that  Duke,  to 
abandon  him  on  his  fall,  sailing  headlong  with  the  tide 
after  the  Favourite's  triumph.  Again,  when  the  Favourite 
retired,  Terrick,  who  was  minister  of  my  parish,^  was 
lavish  to  me  of  invectives  against  that  Lord,  and  sifted 
me  eagerly  to  learn  in  what  channel  Court  favour  was 
likely  to  flow.  Having  soon  perceived  his  mistake,  he 
had  made  out  a  distant  affinity  with  Worseley,^  a  creature 
of  Lord  Bute,  and  a  kind  of  riding-master  to  the  King ; 
and  now  to  Grenville's  surprise  rose,  all  unworthy  as  he 
was,  to  so  eminent  a  station  in  the  Church.  This  detail  I 
communicated  to  Dr.  Lyttelton,  Bishop  of  Carlisle,  who 
adhered  to  George  Grenville  amidst  their  family  breaches, 
and  who,  being  both  gossiping  and  mischievous,  kept  up 
an  acquaintance  with  me  of  ancient  date,  that  he  might 
from  my  warmth  collect  materials  to  carry  to  Grenville. 

^  Dr.  Thomas  Newton,  Bishop  of  Bristol.  -  Twickenham. 

"  Thomas  Worseley,  Surveyor  of  the  Board  of  Works.   [See  p.  29,  st<pra. — E.] 


332  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

I  took  care  to  furnish  him  according  to  his  wish.  It  was 
wormwood  to  Grenville  to  learn  this  proof  of  the 
Favourite's  still  subsisting  ascendant ;  and  when  I  had 
once  set  them  on  the  scent  I  knew  they  would  touch  on 
it  in  more  instances  than  this. 

On  the  22nd,  Philip  Carteret  Webbe  was  tried  for 
perjury,  being  accused  of  having  forsworn  himself  in  the 
cause  against  Wilkes.  The  jury  stayed  out  fifty-five 
minutes,  but  at  last  acquitted  him :  a  vindication  that  no 
more  cleared  his  character  than  conviction  would  have 
made  it  worse. 

The  Earl  of  Northumberland^  returned  from  Ireland, 
where  his  profusion  and  ostentation  had  been  so  great,- 
that  it  seemed  to  lay  a  dangerous  precedent  for  succeeding 
governors,  who  must  risk  unpopularity  if  more  parsi- 
monious ;  or  the  ruin  of  their  fortune,  should  they  imitate 
his  example.  At  his  departure  he  broke  with  William 
Gerard  Hamilton,^  his  secretary,  and  dismissed  him  to 
make  way  for  the  Earl  of  Drogheda,*  the  favourite  both  of 
Lady  Northumberland  and  the  Primate. 

Lord  Northumberland  had  an  advantageous  figure  and 
much  courtesy  in  his  address,  which  being  supported  by 
the  most  expensive  magnificence,  made  him  exceedingly 

^  Sir  Hugh  Smithson,  of  a  very  recent  family,  had  married  Lady  Elizabeth 
Seymour,  only  daughter  of  Algernon,  Duke  of  Somerset,  whose  mother  was 
heiress  of  the  Percies,  Earls  of  Northumberland  ;  on  which  foundation  Hugh 
and  Elizabeth  were  created  Earl  and  Countess  of  Northumberland.  [But  see 
supra,  p.  244. — E.] 

-  Dr.  Johnson  said,  in  allusion  to  it,  that '  he  is  only  fit  to  succeed  himself.' — 
Boswell  (G.  B.  Hill),  vol.  ii.  p.  132.— L.  M. 

^  He  had  been  likewise  Secretary  to  the  Earl  of  Halifax. 

■•  Charles,  sixth  Earl  and  first  Marquis  of  Drogheda,  K.P.  The  Primate 
had  four  years  before  importunately  pressed  Mr.  Pitt  to  give  this  nobleman 
the  rank  of  colonel ;  and  although  the  application  was  supported  by  the 
Duke  of  Devonshire  and  Lord  Bcsborough,  Mr.  Pitt  was  firm  in  resisting  it. 
'Among  the  very  many  lieutenant-colonels,'  he  said,  'above  his  lordship  on 
the  list,  there  are  not  a  few  who  cannot  be  postponed  without  great  hardship, 
and  loud  complaints  in  the  army.'  The  Primate's  letter  and  Mr.  Pitt's  reply 
are  given  in  the  Chatham  Correspondence,  vol.  ii.  p.  59.  The  transaction 
reflects  great  honour  on  Mr.  Pitt,  and  furnishes  an  additional  proof  of  the 
high  sense  of  public  duty  entertained  by  that  illustrious  statesman,  in  this,  as 


KING  GEORGE  III.  333 

popular  with  the  meaner  sort.  They  who  viewed  him 
nearer  were  not  the  dupes  of  his  affability  or  pretensions. 
The  old  nobility  beheld  his  pride  with  envy  and  anger  ; 
and  thence  were  the  less  disposed  to  overlook  the  littleness 
of  his  temper,  or  the  slender  portion  he  possessed  of 
abilities  ;  for  his  expense  was  a  mere  sacrifice  to  vanity, 
as  appeared  by  his  sordid  and  illiberal  behaviour  at  play. 
Nor  were  his  talents  more  solid  than  his  generosity. 
With  mechanic  application  to  every  branch  of  knowledge, 
he  possessed  none  beyond  the  surface  ;  and  having  an 
unbounded  propensity  to  discussion,  he  disgusted  his 
hearers  without  informing  them.  Yet  his  equals  were 
but  ill-grounded  in  their  contempt  of  him.  Very  few  of 
them  knew  so  much  ;  and  there  were  still  fewer  that  had 
not  more  noxious  vices,  and  as  ungenerous  hearts.  Lord 
Northumberland's  foibles  ought  to  have  passed  almost  for 
virtues  in  an  age  so  destitute  of  intrinsic  merit. ^ 

The  Countess  of  Northumberland  was  a  jovial  heap  of 
contradictions.  The  blood  of  all  the  Percies  and  Seymours 
swelled  in  her  veins  and  in  her  fancy  ;  while  her  person 
was  more  vulgar  than  anything  but  her  conversation, 
which  was  larded  indiscriminately  with  stories  of  her 
ancestors    and    her   footmen.      Show,    and    crowds,   and 

in  many  other  respects  so  superior  to  most  of  his  contemporaries,  not 
excepting  the  Primate  of  Ireland.  Lord  Drogheda  obtained  his  rank  in 
1762,  and  eventually  reached  almost  the  head  of  the  army  list,  having  in  his 
old  age  [19th  July  1821]  been  appointed  Field-Marshal.  He  died  at  Dublin 
in  December  1821,  in  his  ninety-second  year.  He  saw  little,  if  any,  foreign 
service,  but  he  had  been  constantly  employed  in  his  own  country,  where  he 
was  much  esteemed.  He  preserved  to  the  last  a  remarkable  elegance  and 
amiability  of  deportment. — L.  M. 

^  It  must  be  recollected  that  Walpole,  from  some  private  cause,  bore  Lord 
and  Lady  Northumberland  no  good  will,  and  frequently  sneers  at  them  in  his 
Correspondence.  A  childish  feeling  of  envy  at  Lord  Northumberland's 
brilliant  success  in  life  was  probably  at  the  bottom  of  this,  and  prevented 
Walpole's  making  due  allowance  for  the  temptations  attendant  on  great  and 
unexpected  prosperity.  His  Lordship  had  the  tastes  that  became  the  high 
rank  to  which  he  was  elevated.  He  patronised  the  arts,  and  was  generous  to 
men  of  letters.  His  vanity  was  unaccompanied  by  arrogance,  and  his 
feelings,  though  not  warm,  were  kind  and  amiable.  Neither  his  talents  nor 
acquirements  were  above  mediocrity.     He  died  in  1786. — L.  M. 


334  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 

junketing,  were  her  endless  pursuits.  She  was  familiar 
with  the  mob,  while  stifled  with  diamonds  ;  and  yet  was 
attentive  to  the  most  minute  privileges  of  her  rank,  while 
almost  shaking  hands  with  a  cobbler.  Nothing  was  more 
mean  than  her  assiduity  about  the  King  and  Queen,  whom 
she  termed  her  Master  and  Mistress ;  and  yet,  though 
indirectly  reprimanded  by  the  latter,  she  persisted  in 
following  her  Majesty  to  the  theatres  with  a  longer 
retinue  of  domestics  than  waited  on  the  Queen  herself 
She  had  revived  the  drummers  and  pipers  and  obsolete 
minstrels  of  her  family  ;  and  her  own  buxom  countenance 
at  the  tail  of  such  a  procession  gave  it  all  the  air  of  an 
antiquated  pageant  or  mumming  She  was  mischievous 
under  the  appearance  of  frankness  ;  generous  and  friendly 
without  delicacy  or  sentiment.^ 

Lord  Northumberland's  son,  Lord  Warkworth,  was 
married  to  the  third  daughter  of  the  Favourite ;  ^  on 
which  foundation  the  father  was  admitted  to  the  private 
junto,  which  now  met  daily  at  Mr.  Stone's.^  It  was 
composed  of  Lord  Bute,  Lord  Northumberland,  Lord 
Mansfield,  Norton,  Stone,  and  the  brother  of  the  latter, 
the  famous  Primate  of  Ireland,  who  had  followed  the 
Lord-Lieutenant  to  London ;  coming,  as  he  outwardly 
professed,  to  promote  harmony  and  reconciliation.  As  he 
died  soon  after,  before  he  had  given  any  specimens  of  his 
arts  here,  I  pretend  not  to  say  what  were  the  real  motives 
of  his  journey.  He  did  visit  Mr.  Pitt  ;  but  a  man  so 
notorious  for  cunning  as  the  Primate,  was  not  likely  to 

^  The  Duchess's  defects  are,  no  doubt,  greatly  exaggerated  by  Walpole. 
M.  Dutens  says  of  her  Grace,  that  '  she  possessed  great  elevation  of  mind, 
natural  and  easy  wit,  a  good  and  compassionate  heart,  and,  above  all,  a 
strong  attachment  to  her  friends,  whom  she  took  every  opportunity  to 
distinguish  and  to  serve.' — Memoirs  of  a  Traveller,  etc.  (1806),  vol.  ii. 
pp.  99-100.  She  met  her  death,  which  was  sudden,  with  great  firmness  and 
resignation. — E. 

^  The  marriage  was  unfortunate,  and  dissolved  in  1779.  Lord  Warkworth 
became  Duke  of  Northumberland  in  1786.  He  served  as  Lord  Percy  in  the 
American  war.  Unlike  his  father,  he  was  totally  devoid  of  ostentation,  and 
most  simple  and  retiring  in  his  habits.     He  died  in  1817. — L.  M. 

2  The  house  of  Andrew  Stone,  in  Privy  Garden. 


KING  GEORGE  HI.  335 

win  on  the  caution  of  Mr.  Pitt,  who  never  was  explicit,  and 
least  of  all  to  men  of  abilities.  It  appeared,  however,  from 
the  meetings  I  have  mentioned,  and  other  symptoms,  that 
the  Favourite  was  peeping  out  of  his  lurking-hole,  and 
was  disposed  to  let  his  power  be  felt.  Grenville,  though 
drunk  with  vanity  was  sober  enough  to  be  stung  with  any 
competition  ;  and  yet  his  obstinacy  disgusted  those  whom 
it  was  most  necessary  for  him  to  attach.  He  offended  the 
Duke  of  Bedford  and  Lord  Halifax  by  refusing  to  let  the 
Treasury  bear  the  whole  charge  of  the  fines  imposed  on 
the  messengers.  The  Duke  experienced  so  many  slights 
that  he  kept  retired  in  the  country,  and  Rigby  went  to 
France,  professing  that  it  was  to  be  absent,  lest  he  should 
be  blamed  if  the  Duke  should  submit  to  such  ignominious 
treatment ;  but  Rigby  had,  no  doubt,  secured  the  Duke's 
submission  before  he  ventured  to  leave  him,  as  he  called 
it,  to  himself.  However,  the  Duke  of  Cumberland  was  so 
much  misled  by  those  wayward  humours,  that  before  the 
end  of  the  summer  he  sent  Lord  Albemarle  ^  to  Woburn 
to  sound  their  dispositions  and  endeavour  to  draw  them 
from  the  Court.  Not  one,  not  his  own  sister,  Lady 
Tavistock,  would  talk  to  him  on  politics ;  only  the 
Duchess  said  drily,  that  her  husband  was  Minister,  and 
that  everything  was  done  that  he  desired.  Mr.  Pitt  had 
said  more  truly,  some  time  before  :  '  They  will  disgust  the 
Duke  of  Bedford  in  the  spring,  that  they  may  not  be 
teased  with  his  solicitations  ;  and  they  will  sweeten  him 
again  by  winter,  with  some  trifling  favour,  that  he  may 
give  them  no  trouble  in  Parliament.' 

^  George  Keppel,  third  Earl  of  Albemarle.  His  youngest  sister,  Lady 
Elizabeth,  was  married  to  Francis  Russell,  Marquis  of  Tavistock,  only  son  of 
John,  Duke  of  Bedford. 


END   OF   VOL.   L 


I 


Printed  by  T.  and  A.  Constable,  Printers  to  Her  Majesty, 
at  the  Edinburgh  University  Press. 


University  of  California 

SOUTHERN  REGIONAL  LIBRARY  FACILITY 

305  De  Neve  Drive  -  Parking  Lot  17  •  Box  951388 

LOS  ANGELES,  CALIFORNIA  90095-1388 

Return  this  material  to  the  library  from  which  it  was  borrowed. 


w 


c 


p. 


K 


3  1158  00610  8897 


rOHNiA. 


UC  SOUTHERN  REGIONAL  LIBRARY  FACILITY 


mill  iiiiiii  Ml 


AA    000  427  407    2 


ty  of  Ca 
em  Reg 
ary  Faci
