HISTORICAL 
MEMOIRS 


KIR 

XA'DiANIEL 

WILLIAM 

WRAXALL 

BART. 


THE    DRYDEN    HOUSE    MEMOIRS 

Price  3s.  6d.  net  per  volume  in  buckram, 
43.  6d.  net  in  limp  roan. 

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  LIFE  OF  COLONEL  HUTCHIN- 
SON.  By  Mrs.  HUTCHINSON. 

THE  MEMOIRS  AND  TRAVELS  OF  SIR  JOHN 
RERESBY,  BART. 

HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS  OF  MY  OWN  TIME  (1772 
to  1784).  By  Sir  NATHANIEL  WILLIAM  WRAXALL,  Bart. 

MEMOIRS  AND  TRAVELS  OF  MAURITIUS 
AUGUSTUS,  COUNT  DE  BENYOWSKI.  Written 
by  HIMSELF. 

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REIGN  OF  GEORGE  II.,  FROM 
HIS  ACCESSION  TO  THE  DEATH  OF  QUEEN 
CAROLINE.  By  LORD  HERVEY.  2  vols. 

Other  volumes  in  preparation. 


KEGAN  PAUL,  TRENCH,  TRUBNER,  AND  CO.,  LTD. 


~-—i..  ^      ^-— • — ^ 

RYDE 
HOVSE' 
MEMOIR 


SIR  NATHANIEL  WILLIAM  WRAXALL,  BART. 
(1751-1831) 


HISTORICAL 
MEMOIRS  °f 


TIME 


\ 


/ 


/ 


LOMDON-KEGAW 
PAVL-TREWCH 


All  rights  reserved 


HISTORICAL    MEMOIRS   OF 
MY   OWN   TIME 

PART  THE  FIRST,  FROM  1772  TO  1780 
PART  THE  SECOND,  FROM  1781  TO  1784 

BY 
SIR   N.    WILLIAM    WRAXALL, .  BART. 

WITH  AN  INTRODUCTION  AND  NOTES 

BY 

RICHARD    ASKHAM 


LIST    OF    ILLUSTRATIONS 

SIR    NATHANIEL    WILLIAM    WRAXALL,    BART.      .    Frontispiece 

GEORGE  in To  face  page  229 

EDMUND  BURKE  .  353 


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL  NOTE 


THE  present  issue  is  a  verbatim  reprint  of  the  first 
edition  of  Sir  N.  William  WraxalTs  Historical  Memoirs, 
which  appeared  in  two  volumes  in  1815,  "Printed  for 
T.  Cadell  and  W.  Davies,  in  the  Strand,"  by  J.  M'Creery, 
Black-Horse-Court,  London.  The  following  quotation 
from  Sallust  appeared  on  the  title-page : — 

"Igitur  ubi  Animus  requievit,  non  fuit  consilium 
socordia  atque  desidia  bonum  otium  conterere;  neque 
vero  agrum  colendo,  aut  venando,  servilibus  officiis 
intentum,  aetatem  agere.  Sed  a  quo  incepto  studio  me 
Ambitio  mala  detinuerat,  eodem  regressus,  statui  res 
gestas  carptim,  ut  quaeque  memoria  digna  videbantur, 
perscribere  :  eo  magis,  quod  mihi  a  spe,  metu,  partibus 
reipublicae,  Animus  liber  erat.  SALLUST." 

The  Preface  to  this  first  edition  was  as  follows : — 

PREFACE 

IT  is  my  intention,  in  continuation  of  the  present  Work, 
to  publish  the  Third  Part  of  these  Memoirs,  which 
circumscribes  the  space  of  full  five  Years,  from  the  25th 
of  March,  1784,  down  to  April,  1789.  The  last- 
mentioned  Year  may  be  considered,  under  every  aspect, 
as  one  of  the  most  important  that  took  place  in  the 
course  of  the  Eighteenth  Century.  First,  as  in  it  we 

ix  I 


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL  NOTE 

witnessed  His  Majesty's  happy  Recovery  from  that  great 
Attack,  which  involved  this  Country  in  temporary 
Confusion,  overturned  for  a  time  the  Administration, 
and  threatened  for  ever  to  bereave  us  of  the  Blessings  of 
his  Government.  Secondly,  as  having  originated,  a  few 
Months  later,  the  Calamity  of  the  French  Revolution : 
an  Event  which  may  be  said  to  stand  pre-eminent  for 
Atrocity  in  the  History  of  Modern  Ages,  and  which,  in 
its  results,  has  covered  Europe  with  Desolation.  The 
Year  1789  forms,  therefore,  a  period  from  which  dates 
a  totally  new  Order  of  public  Affairs ;  and  beyond  it  I 
have  no  design  of  continuing  the  Historical  Memoirs  of 
my  own  Time. 

N.  WILL*  WRAXALI, 

LONDON, 
Zd  April,  1815. 

The  first  edition  of  1000  copies  at  26s.  seems  to 
have  been  sold  in  thirty-three  days,  and  passages  in  it 
concerning  Count  Woronzow  caused  the  author  to  be 
tried  for  libel,  fined  ^500,  and  sentenced  to  six 
months'  imprisonment  (three  months  only  of  which  he 
had  to  endure).  A  second  edition  was  soon  published, 
with  the  "  libellous  "  statements  left  out,  and  it  was  soon 
taken  up  by  the  public.  A  third  edition,  considerably 
altered  and  added  to,  was  issued  in  1818,  divided  into 
three  parts,  but  still  ending  with  March,  1784,  and, 
therefore,  not  containing  the  Third  Part  of  which 
the  author  spoke  in  his  Preface  to  the  original  edition. 
This  third  issue  had  prefixed  to  it  Sir  N.  W.  WraxalFs 
"  Answers "  "  to  the  calumnious  misrepresentations  of" 
his  critics,  in  which  it  is  generally  admitted  that  he 
abundantly  refuted  the  accusations  that  had  been 
levelled  against  his  impartiality,  accuracy,  and  veracity. 
In  the  Preface  to  this  third  edition  he  says,  "  Having 
been  sent  to  the  King's  Bench  Prison,  in  May,  1816,  for 
a  most  unintentional  Act  of  Inadvertence  committed  in 


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL  NOTE 

the  first  Edition  of  these  Memoirs,  I  immediately  stopped 
the  Sale,  which  has  been  suspended  near  two  Years. 
During  that  Period  of  Time,  I  have  endeavoured,  by  very 
attentively  revising  and  correcting  the  present  Edition, 
to  avoid  a  similar  Error."  Not  content  with  thus 
"  toning  down "  certain  passages  and  adding  others, 
in  1818,  Sir  N.  W.  Wraxall  "left  at  his  death,"  says 
Mr.  H.  B.  Wheatley(his  latest  and  best  editor),  "an 
interleaved  copy  of  his  Historical  Memoirs  which  he 
had  most  carefully  corrected  throughout,"  and  from 
which  copy  Mr.  Wheatley's  edition  was  printed.  Since 
the  reader  can,  if  he  wish,  turn  to  these  various  ex- 
panded and  corrected  versions,  in  their  library  form, 
it  has  been  deemed  advisable  to  reprint  here  verbatim 
the  Memoirs  as  they  were  originally  published,  reserving 
for  a  supplementary  volume  of  the  present  series,  if  it 
should  be  called  for,  the  added  material.  "  Instructed 
by  experience  in  the  legal  dangers  and  penalties  that 
attend  the  premature  disclosure  of  historical  truth,"  Sir 
N.  W.  Wraxall  took  care  that  the  volumes  of  Memoirs 
intended  to  deal  with  the  years  succeeding  1784  should 
not  be  permitted  "to  see  the  light  till  I  shall  have 
been  removed  from  the  scene."  They  were  published 
in  1836  under  the  title  of  Posthumous  Memoirs  of  his 
Own  Time,  and  cover  the  five  years,  1784-89,  spoken 
of  in  the  Preface  to  the  original  edition  given  above. 
It  is  hoped  that  it  may  be  possible  to  add  these 
Posthumous  Memoirs,  at  no  very  distant  date,  to  the 
present  series,  since  they  abound  in  that  happy  gift  of 
vivid  character-drawing,  both  of  front-rank  and  secondary 
men,  and  in  those  stores  of  historical  anecdotes,  for 
which  the  earlier  Memoirs ',  here  reprinted,  are  so  justly 
famous. 


XI 


INTRODUCTION 

THESE  Historical  Memoirs  were  published  a  few  months 
before  the  battle  of  Waterloo,  their  author  being  then 
in  his  sixty-fourth  year.  They  mark  the  close  of  a 
public  career  which,  though  by  no  means  brilliant,  is  not 
without  interest. 

Born  in  Bristol  in  1751,  Nathaniel  William  Wraxall 
claimed  descent  from  an  ancient  family  which  is  sup- 
posed to  have  held  the  neighbouring  manor  of  Wraxall 
in  the  thirteenth  century.  Evidence  for  this  claim  is, 
however,  wanting.  His  father  and  grandfather  were 
merchants  of  his  native  city,  of  which  the  latter  had 
held  the  office  of  sheriff.  At  the  age  of  eighteen,  having 
completed  the  usual  schooling  of  a  well-to-do  commoner's 
son  in  the  provinces  who  did  not  aspire  to  University 
honours,  William — as  he  was  called  during  his  father's 
lifetime — entered  the  civil  service  of  the  East  India 
Company  and  went  out  to  Bombay.  He  filled  the 
posts  of  judge-advocate  and  paymaster  of  the  forces  in 
two  military  expeditions  in  Gujerat,  but  gave  up  the 
service  in  1772,  for  what  cause  is  not  known.  Though 
the  East  never  saw  him  again,  he  did  not  lose  the  keen 
interest  in  India  which  those  three  short  years  had 
aroused,  and,  when  he  afterwards  entered  Parliament,  at 
a  critical  period  in  Indian  affairs,  he  was  probably 
better  informed  upon  them  than  nine  out  of  ten  of  his 
fellow-members. 

xii 


INTRODUCTION 

He  returned  at  the  age  of  twenty-one,  to  take  up 
literature  as  a  profession ;  and  to  this  end,  he  began 
almost  at  once  the  first  of  that  series  of  European 
journeys  during  which  he  collected  so  many  anecdotes 
and  such  stores  of  historical  material  for  his  subsequent 
volumes.  He  must  have  had  considerable  means  to 
undertake  these  frequent  and  expensive  journeys,  where- 
in he  made  the  most  of  his  social  opportunities,  and 
formed  a  wide  circle  of  distinguished  acquaintances. 
But  this  need  not  surprise  us :  he  was  the  only  son  of 
a  merchant  family,  and,  even  if  he  came  back  from  the 
East  "  a  poor  man,"  he  can  never  have  been  dependent 
upon  his  pen. 

He  tells  us  in  these  Memoirs  that  he  visited  Lisbon 
in  1772,  and  found  the  royal  household  living  in  a  sort 
of  wooden  barracks,  haunted  still  by  the  terror  of  the 
great  earthquake.  Two  years  later,  after  a  tour  in 
Northern  Europe  which  provided  material  for  his  first 
volume,  he  came  in  the  course  of  his  travels  to  the 
Rhenish  castle  of  Zell,  near  Coblenz,  where  the  un- 
fortunate young  Queen  of  Denmark  and  sister  of 
George  III.  was  then  living  in  banishment.  Wraxall  seems 
to  have  entered  into  her  cause  with  zest,  making  several 
difficult  journeys  in  the  character  of  amateur  diplomatist, 
an  office  admirably  suited  to  his  tastes,  between  Zell, 
Hamburg — where  a  group  of  her  adherents  was  plot- 
ting revolution — and  the  English  court  at  St.  James's. 
But  next  year  her  death  put  an  end  to  the  hopes  of  the 
revolutionists,  and  to  the  most  romantic  passage  in  a 
life  which  was  so  full  of  incident  that  it  can  hardly  have 
been  without  adventure.  The  story  is  picturesquely 
told  in  the  Posthumous  Memoirs,  and  is  well  worth 
reading. 

His  first  book,  Cursory  Remarks  made  in  a  Tour 
through  some  of  the  Northern  Parts  of  Europe,  particu- 
larly Copenhagen,  Stockholm,  and  Petersburgh,  was 
published  at  this  time  (1775)  and  met  with  immediate 

xiii 


INTRODUCTION 

success,  a  third  edition  being  called  for  in  the  following 
year.  The  greater  part  of  1775-76  he  passed  in  France, 
where  Louis  XV.  had  recently  died,  a  king  whose 
character  he  afterwards  defended.  In  the  summer  of 
the  later  year  he  visited  Lord  Nugent  and  met  the  old 
Lord  Temple,  father  of  the  King's  friend  who  brought 
about  the  defeat  of  Fox's  India  Bill  in  the  Upper 
House.  Later,  we  find  him  dining  with  Wilkes  and 
others  at  Dilly,  the  bookseller's,  and  frequenting  the 
blue-stocking  drawing-rooms  of  Mrs.  Montague  and 
Mrs.  Vesey,  where  he  seems  to  have  met  Johnson, 
Burke,  Garrick,  Reynolds  and  many  other  persons  of 
note.  Interesting  though  he  found  them,  he  compared 
them  unfavourably  with  the  more  famous  salons  of 
Mme.  de  Deffand  and  Mile,  de  Lespinasse  in  Paris. 
In  1777  appeared  his  second  work,  the  entertaining 
and  "  invaluable "  Memoirs  of  the  Kings  of  France  of 
the  Race  of  Valois,  which  was  reprinted  after  eight 
years.  The  book  originally  contained  an  account  of 
his  French  travels,  but  these  were  subsequently  (1784) 
published  as  a  separate  volume.  Resuming  his  con- 
tinental journeys,  he  seems  to  have  spent  much  of  the 
next  two  years  abroad.  At  the  Hague,  he  was  pre- 
sented to  the  Prince  of  Orange:  he  visited  in  the 
diplomatic  circles  of  Warsaw,  Dresden  and  Vienna,  and 
in  1779  he  stayed  in  Florence,  Naples  and  Brussels.  At 
Warsaw  he  gathered  certain  gossip  about  the  Empress 
Catharine  and  her  court,  the  injudicious  use  of  which 
afterwards  involved  him  in  the  Woronzow  prosecution. 
He  saw  the  dissipated  wreck  of  the  young  Pretender  at 
Florence,  and  in  Naples  he  was  the  friend  of  Sir  William 
and  Lady  Hamilton.  The  literary  product  of  these 
travels  was  not  published  till  twenty  years  later. 

When  Wraxall  returned  in  the  autumn  of  1779,  full 
of  "  travelled  learning,"  his  countrymen  were  in  a  state 
of  lamentable  depression.  He  tells  us  that  he  found 
the  national  energy  depressed,  public  opinion  divided, 

xiv 


INTRODUCTION 

and  the  British  spirit  unnerved  by  the  nature  of  the 
conflict  in  which  they  were  engaged  with  the  American 
colonies.  The  navy,  enfeebled  by  party  faction,  had 
lost  control  of  the  sea  :  the  King  and  his  ministers  were 
near  the  nadir  of  their  unpopularity,  while  the  real 
leaders  of  the  nation  were  in  Opposition.  The  climax 
seemed  to  be  reached  in  the  following  June,  when  the 
Protestant  rioters  set  London  ablaze  in  thirty-six  places 
at  once,  and  Lord  George  Gordon  harangued  the  mob 
in  Palace  Yard.  Wraxall  and  Horace  Walpole  were 
both  witnesses  of  the  events  of  that  Black  Wednesday, 
and  their  descriptions  may  be  read  together.  In 
September,  through  the  influence  of  Lord  George 
Germain  (Sackville),  Wraxall  entered  Parliament  at 
the  age  of  twenty-nine.  As  member  for  Hindon,  and 
afterwards  for  Ludgershall  and  for  Wallingford,  he  sat 
in  the  House  for  fourteen  years,  without  holding  office,  or 
taking  any  considerable  part  in  debate.  His  seat  gave 
him,  however,  opportunities  for  observation  which  were 
invaluable  to  him,  as  the  pages  of  these  Memoirs  testify. 
Lord  Germain  was  Secretary  of  State  for  the 
American  Colonies  in  the  Ministry  of  Lord  North,  and 
Wraxall  continued  to  follow  the  latter  until,  in  1783, 
the  India  Bill  of  Fox  gave  him  an  opportunity  of 
deserting  the  Coalition,  which  was  distasteful  to  him, 
and  attaching  himself  to  the  minority  which  supported 
Pitt.  Though  Indian  questions  separated  him  at  times 
from  his  new  leader,  he  remained  a  follower  of  Pitt 
during  the  rest  of  his  Parliamentary  career.  It  was 
Pitt  who  asked  George  Selwyn  to  give  him  the  nomina- 
tion for  the  pocket -borough  of  Ludgershall,  in  the 
election  of  1784.  Selwyn  went  about  town,  wrote  the 
Duke  of  Wellington,  exclaiming,  "  Does  anybody  know 
who  is  this  Kascall  ?  .  .  .  I  wish  Mr.  Pitt  could  find  some 
man  with  a  more  creditable  name.  It  is  very  hard  on 
me  to  be  forced  to  bring  in  a  man  who  calls  himself 
Rascall.^  Wraxall  seems  to  have  taken  Selwyn's 

xv 


INTRODUCTION 

pleasantry  in  good  part ;  as  he  also  did  that  of  the 
authors  of  The  Rolliad,  who  poked  fun  at  the  geo- 
graphical disquisitions  which  earned  for  him  the  title  of 
"  Travelling  Tutor  to  the  House  of  Commons." 

His  entry  into  Parliament  brought  with  it  a  tardy 
recognition  by  the  Crown  of  his  services  to  the  King's 
sister,  in  the  form  of  a  gift  of  one  thousand  guineas,  and 
the  promise  (unfulfilled)  of  office.  He  was  made  one  of 
the  scrutineers  of  nominations  for  a  secret  committee 
of  the  House  which  inquired  into  the  causes  of  the 
war  in  the  Carnatic,  during  which  Hyder  Ali  devastated 
the  territories  of  England's  ally,  the  Nabob  of  Arcot. 
The  position  cannot  have  been  without  importance,  as 
the  Prime  Minister  was  also  a  scrutineer.  This  was 
the  war  which  indirectly  led  to  the  famous  trial  of 
Warren  Hastings,  in  which  Wraxall  repeatedly  voted 
against  his  Parliamentary  chief.  During  a  portion  at 
least  of  his  membership  of  the  House,  Wraxall  acted  as 
an  agent  (vakeel)  for  the  Nabob ;  and,  from  his  resent- 
ment of  the  attack  made  by  Pitt,  in  the  first  of  his 
Reform  speeches,  on  the  rotten  boroughs  "  within  the 
control  of  the  Carnatic,  and  under  the  immediate  in- 
fluence of  the  Nabob  of  Arcot,"  it  seems  possible  that 
his  may  have  been  one  of  these  seats.  He  was  often 
described  as  "the  member  for  Arcot."  In  1783,  he 
anticipated  the  Government,  and  practically  brought 
hostilities  in  the  East  to  a  close,  by  sending  out  to 
Madras  an  "Extraordinary  Gazette"  containing  the 
news  of  the  Peace  of  Versailles,  which  arrived  six  weeks 
earlier  than  the  official  duplicate.  During  this  summer 
he  was  in  Antwerp,  where  he  met  Thurlow,  Rose  and, 
perhaps,  Pitt. 

Four  years  later  an  anonymous  pamphlet  from  his 
pen  attracted  much  attention.  A  Short  Review  of  the 
Political  State  of  Great  Britain  had  a  great  sale,  and 
was  translated  into  French.  It  was  not  protected  by 
copyright,  and,  besides  the  17,000  copies  sold  by  the 

xvi 


INTRODUCTION 

publisher,  "  vast  quantities  "  are  said  to  have  been  dis- 
tributed in  Edinburgh  and  Dublin.  The  secret  of  its 
authorship  must  have  been  well  kept,  for  its  frank 
criticism  of  the  Prince  of  Wales,  which  that  personage 
much  resented,  did  not  prejudice  WraxalPs  subsequent 
relations  with  him. 

Wraxall  married,  at  the  age  of  thirty-eight,  Miss 
(Jane)  Lascelles,  by  whom  he  had  two  sons ;  and,  five 
years  after  his  marriage,  his  seat  at  Wallingford  being 
required  for  another  nominee,  he  accepted  the  Steward- 
ship of  the  Chiltern  Hundreds  and  withdrew  from 
Parliament.  He  was  now  able  to  give  more  of  his 
time  to  literary  work.  He  continued  his  French 
history  down  to  1614  (published  1795),  translated  a 
thick  French  pamphlet  of '92  (1797),  dedicating  it  to 
Pitt  and  Fox,  whom  he  urged  in  that  dismal  year  to 
unite  for  their  country's  sake,  and  in  1799  he  published 
those  Memoirs  of  the  Courts  of  Berlin,  Dresden,  Warsaw, 
and  Vienna  in  the  Years  1777,  1778,  and  1779,  of 
which  we  have  already  spoken.  These  last  were  re- 
printed in  the  following  year. 

Meanwhile,  he  had  become  a  frequent  visitor  at 
Carlton  House.  He  was  eventually  (1799)  requested  by 
the  Prince  to  wear  the  uniform  "exclusively  reserved 
for  his  family  and  friends,"  designated  his  future  his- 
torian, and  finally  (1813)  created  baronet  of  Wraxall, 
Somerset.  The  Historical  Memoirs  appeared  in  1815. 
Published  in  April,  the  first  edition  was  sold  out  in 
five  weeks,  and  the  demand  for  the  second  was  hardly 
less  keen.  But  the  latter  bore  the  marks  of  the  suit 
for  libel  brought  against  its  author  by  the  former 
Russian  Ambassador  at  St  James's,  in  consequence  of 
an  indiscretion  by  which  Count  Woronzow  was  alleged 
to  have  imputed  the  death  of  the  Princess  of  Wiirtem- 
berg  to  his  imperial  mistress.  The  Court  of  the  King's 
Bench  ordered  the  passage  to  be  expunged,  while 
Wraxall  was  mulcted  in  a  fine  of  £500,  and  spent 

xvii  c 


INTRODUCTION 

three  months  in  prison.  A  third  enlarged  edition 
appeared  in  1818,  the  last  of  WraxalFs  works  which 
was  published  during  his  lifetime.  His  Posthumous 
Memoirs -,  which  bring  the  narrative  down  from  1784  to 
1789,  were  not  published  till  1836,  while  his  Remini- 
scences remained  in  manuscript  till  1884.  He  died  at 
Dover  in  18S1,  on  his  way  to  Naples,  an  old  man  of 
some  eighty  years. 

The  fierce  and  lengthy  attacks  made  upon  the 
Memoirs  witness  to  their  importance.  Their  frank 
delineation  and  criticism  of  many  of  the  principal  actors 
on  the  stage  of  English  politics  in  the  momentous  years 
of  1780-84,  together  with  their  great  store  of  anecdotes, 
laid  them  open  to  the  assaults  of  the  Quarterly,  the 
Edinburgh  and  the  British  Critic.  The  Edinburgh 
described  them  as  "a  worthless  book";  but  for  that 
very  reason  the  Quarterly,  with  cynical  foresight, 
prophesied  for  them  a  longer  existence  than  they 
deserved,  quoting  "  Junius "  to  the  effect  that  "  trifles 
float  and  are  preserved,  while  what  is  solid  and 
valuable  sinks  to  the  bottom  and  is  lost  for  ever." 
Macaulay  carried  prejudice  so  far  as  to  speak  of  the 
Mendacium  Wraxallianum.  But,  in  spite  of  his  critics, 
Wraxall's  general  veracity  has  been  sufficiently  vindi- 
cated by  himself  and  others.  Unquestionably,  there 
are  occasional  misstatements  in  his  pages,  and  the 
judgments  upon  men  and  events  are  not  always  marked 
by  depth  of  insight,  or  measured  according  to  the 
highest  standard  of  equity,  but  the  Memoirs  are  a 
worthy  example  of  the  special  class  of  literature  to 
which  they  belong,  and,  in  addition  to  the  fund  of 
gossiping  anecdote  they  contain,  they  are  of  the  nature 
of  a  historical  document.  They  are  entertaining  ;  they 
give  us  a  perfect  picture  of  the  time.  His  detailed 
description  of  the  two  great  campaigns  in  the  House 
of  Commons,  the  one  conducted  by  the  Opposition 
against  North,  the  other,  in  which  the  majority  strove 

xviii 


INTRODUCTION 

in  vain  to  force  the  hands  of  Pitt  and  of  the  King, 
are  historically  invaluable.  His  pictures,  too,  of  the 
King  and  Prince  of  Wales,  of  Lord  North,  of  Fox, 
of  Burke  and  Pitt  and  Sheridan,  of  Welbore  Ellis, 
of  Powys  and  of  Courtenay,  are  vividly  drawn  from 
the  life,  while  that  of  North  is  specially  admirable. 
Had  it  not  been  for  WraxalPs  portrait  of  the  "  noble 
lord  in  the  blue  ribband,"  always  amiable,  witty  and 
charming  in  the  most  harassing  circumstances,  his 
memory  might  have  sunk  for  ever  under  the  obloquy 
of  the  American  war.  As  it  is,  he  gains  a  place  in 
our  affection  not  far  below  that  of  his  greater  con- 
temporary whose  "  irresistible  "  smile  is  so  well  suggested 
in  these  pages  (p.  338).  Burke,  on  the  other  hand, 
Wraxall  never  understood ;  he  could  not  sufficiently 
praise  the  great  Irishman's  oratory,  but  he  nearly  always 
mistook  his  motives  and  underestimated  his  character. 
In  this,  as  in  all  else,  Wraxall  was  essentially  a  man 
of  his  age.  These  Memoirs  are  steeped  in  the  atmo- 
sphere of  the  close  of  the  eighteenth  century.  The 
men  and  women  that  move  across  their  pages  are 
singularly  human,  but  their  manners,  their  thoughts, 
their  ideals  are  scarcely  ours.  Wraxall  wrote  his 
Memoirs  when  England  was  still  bearing  the  brunt 
of  the  conflict  with  Napoleon,  when  to  most  English- 
men democracy  was  synonymous  with  mob-rule  and 
revolution,  when  at  least  a  section  of  society  copied 
the  manners  of  the  Regent's  court,  and  public  opinion 
had  not  yet  set  its  face  against  political  corruption. 
In  literary  taste,  the  ideals  of  the  Augustan  age 
were  still  dominant :  when  he  reports  a  great  Parlia- 
mentary debate,  it  is  the  Latin  rhetoric,  the  classical 
allusion,  that  comes  first  to  WraxalPs  pen.  His  general 
knowledge  was  wide  rather  than  deep;  and  when,  in 
his  amiable  pedantry,  he  speaks  condescendingly,  as 
he  sometimes  does,  of  the  country  members,  on  whom 
these  flowers  of  learning  were  wasted,  we  cannot  but 

xix 


INTRODUCTION 

smile  at  the  London  man  of  fashion,  remembering  that 
his  own  academic  education  was  completed  in  a  Bristol 
school.  But  the  smile  he  raises,  whether  against  another 
or  against  himself,  is  always  a  kindly  one  ;  while  in 
respect  of  his  own  writing,  which  is  easy  and  readable, 
though  not  without  faults,  he  might  not  inappropriately 
have  quoted  the  words  of  Bishop  Burnet — with  whom 
he  ventured  to  compare  himself — where  he  says,  "  I  have 
on  design  avoided  all  laboured  periods  or  artificial 
strains,  and  have  writ  in  as  clear  and  plain  a  style  as 
was  possible,  choosing  rather  a  copious  enlargement 
than  a  dark  conciseness."" 

RICHARD  ASKHAM. 

LONDON, 
January  20,  1904. 


XX 


HISTORICAL    MEMOIRS    OF 
MY    OWN    TIME 

PART   THE   FIRST 

HAVING  long  meditated  to  compose  some  account  of 
the  national  events  which  I  have  witnessed  during  a 
part  of  my  life,  I  have  postponed  the  publication  of 
the  work,  till  nearly  all  those  persons  of  whom  I  must 
have  occasion  to  speak,  were  removed  from  the  scene. 
In  fact,  with  the  exception  of  a  very  small  number 
of  individuals,  respecting  whom  I  have  been  silent ; 
scarcely  any  of  the  leading  characters  now  survive, 
who  supported  or  opposed  Lord  North,  the  Marquis 
of  Rockingham,  the  Earl  of  Shelburne,  or  the  Coalition 
Administration.  The  lapse  of  more  than  thirty  years, 
has  removed  every  objection  of  that  nature;  and  the 
respect  that  I  owe  to  myself,  has  impelled  me  to 
dismiss  from  my  mind,  before  I  undertook  these 
Memoirs,  every  species  of  bias  or  partiality.  Not  that 
in  point  of  fact,  it  is  possible  to  speak  of  recent  or 
contemporary  events,  as  we  would  write  of  transactions 
that  took  place  under  Henry  the  Eighth  ;  nor  to  contem- 
plate Fox  and  Pitt  with  the  degree  of  abstraction  and 
composure,  that  we  regard  Marius  and  Sylla.  Such 
philosophic  superiority  to  passion,  whatever  preten- 
sions to  it  may  be  set  up,  is  not  given  to  man. 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

Tacitus,  who  wrote  of  events  recently  performed,  and 
who  intended,  as  he  himself  assures  us,  if  he  should 
attain  to  old  age,  to  compose  the  history  of  his  own 
times ;  says,  "  Dignitatem  nostram  a  Vespasiano  incho- 
"  atam,  a  Tito  auctam,  a  Domitiano  longius  provectam, 
"  nunquam  abnuerim  :  sed  incorruptam  fidem  professis, 
"  nee  amore  quisquam,  et  sine  odio  dicendus  est."  If 
I  might  be  allowed  to  parody  the  words  of  that 
historian,  applying  them  to  myself,  I  should  say,— 
"  That  I  consider  George  the  Third,  notwithstanding 
"  the  many  errors  of  his  government,  which  were  most 
"  conspicuous  in  the  beginning  of  his  reign,  as  one  of 
"  the  best  princes  who  ever  governed  this  country,  I 
"  readily  confess :  neither  will  I  deny  that  I  cannot 
"  recall  the  idea  of  Lord  North,  unconnected  with 
"  those  engaging  or  elevated  qualities  of  mind  and  of 
"  deportment,  which  conciliated  the  affection  even  of  his 
"  opponents.  Lastly,  that  Lord  Sackville  honoured  me 
"  with  his  friendship,  and  shewed  me  marks  of  confidence, 
"  I  avow  with  pride  and  satisfaction.  But,  none  of 
"  these  circumstances  would  induce  me  to  conceal  or  to 
"  misrepresent  any  fact,  for  the  purpose  of  drawing  a 
"  veil  over  their  errors  or  political  transgressions."  I 
may  further  add,  that  never  having  held  any  employ- 
ment, under  any  minister,  at  any  period  of  my  life,  I 
neither  can  be  accused  of  divulging  official  secrets ;  nor 
am  I  linked,  in  however  humble  a  degree,  with  any  of 
those  ephemeral  administrations,  which  took  place  with 
such  rapidity  between  1782  and  1784.  I  relate  the 
events  that  I  either  witnessed,  or  of  which  I  received  the 
accounts  from  respectable  testimony.  How  imperfect  a 
light  these  sources  of  information  enable  me  to  throw 
on  the  period  of  time  that  I  attempt  to  elucidate,  I  am 
fully  aware :  but,  unfortunately,  those  individuals  who, 
from  their  rank  and  situation,  know  most  of  the  secrets 
of  affairs,  will  generally  divulge  least ;  and  even  imperfect 
light  is  preferable  to  darkness. 


THE  AUTHOR'S  CREDENTIALS 

I  cannot  indeed  boast  of  having  enjoyed  the  same 
advantage  as  Dr.  Bumet,  Bishop  of  Salisbury,  who,  in 
the  "  History  of  his  own  Time,"  says,  "  I  have  had  the 
"  honour  to  be  admitted  to  much  free  conversation  with 
"  five  of  our  sovereigns,  King  Charles  the  Second,  King 
"  James  the  Second,  King  William  the  Third,  Queen 
"  Mary,  and  Queen  Anne.11  But,  between  1780  and 
1794,  during  all  which  period  I  sat  in  parliament,  I 
possessed  many  means  and  opportunities  of  knowing 
various  facts  from  high  authority  ;  and  in  some  instances, 
of  ascertaining  their  secret  causes  or  springs.  Lord 
Clarendon  and  Burnet  are  almost  the  only  persons  of 
eminence  among  us,  who  have  commemorated  with 
ability,  and  at  considerable  length,  the  events  of  their 
own  time.  We  cannot  sufficiently  regret  that  Prior 
did  not  live  to  accomplish  the  same  task.  That  he 
meditated  and  intended  it,  is  evident  from  the  words 
of  his  Epitaph  in  Westminster  Abbey  : — 

"  Sui  Temporis  Histonam  meditanti, 

Paulatim  obrepens  Febris 
Opens  simul  et  Vitae,  Filum  abrupit. 
Sep.  18.  An.  Dom.  1721." 

The  work  which  was  actually  published  under  that  name, 
in  1740,  contained  only  some  of  the  materials  collected 
for  it.  If  we  consider  the  official  or  diplomatic  situa- 
tions that  Prior  occupied  from  1690  down  to  1714 ; 
and  the  intimate  friendship  in  which  he  lived  with 
Charles,  Earl  of  Dorset,  the  Lord  Treasurer  Harley, 
and  Lord  Bolingbroke ;  we  must  admit  that  few  men 
could  have  been  more  competent  to  elucidate  the  Reigns 
of  William  the  Third,  and  of  Anne. 

How  much  have  we  to  lament  that  the  late  Mr.  Fox, 
during  his  long  exclusion  from  public  employment, 
between  1790  and  1805,  while  in  retirement  at  St. 
Anne's  Hill,  did  not  occupy  himself  in  composing  the 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

History  of  his  own  time!  Aspiring,  as  he  did,  not 
only  to  the  fame  of  a  statesman  and  an  orator,  but  to 
the  praise  of  an  historian  ;  how  infinitely  more  valuable 
a  legacy  might  he  have  bequeathed  to  his  countrymen, 
how  much  more  durable  a  monument  might  he  have 
erected  to  himself,  by  such  an  exertion  of  his  talents, 
than  he  has  done  by  exhausting  his  efforts  on  the  reign 
of  James  the  Second  !  Not  that  I  would  be  understood 
to  express  any  sentiment  allied  to  disrespect,  relative  to 
the  work  which  Lord  Holland,  with  pious  veneration 
for  his  Uncle's  memory,  has  given  to  the  world.  Every 
page  of  that  short  and  unfinished  production,  is  worthy 
of  its  author,  and  raises  him  in  my  estimation.  The 
"Introductory  Chapter'"  can  hardly  be  exceeded  for 
profound  reflexion,  elucidated  by  a  severe  and  philo- 
sophic cast  of  thought,  as  well  as  by  the  most  accurate 
and  laborious  disquisition  of  facts.  Impartial,  ardent 
for  freedom,  and  indignant  against  tyrants,  the  writer 
is  nevertheless  exempt  from  the  spirit  of  republicanism. 
The  small  portion  of  James's  reign  which  follows,  in- 
cluding Argyle's  and  Monmouth's  invasions,  may  in  a 
great  measure  be  characterized  by  similar  epithets  ;  and 
excites  regret,  from  presenting  only  a  fragment.  But 
if,  instead  of  collating  Rapin,  Hume,  and  Burnet ;  or 
employing  his  time  on  the  inspection  of  documents  in 
the  Depot  des  Archives  at  Paris;  he  had  dedicated  it  to 
a  delineation,  however  simple,  of  the  great  political 
scenes  in  which  he  had  acted  so  distinguished  a  part ; 
with  what  avidity  should  we  not  have  perused  the  work  ? 
We  might  then  have  beheld  as  in  a  mirror,  the  secret 
History  of  the  Rockingham,  and  the  Coalition  admini- 
strations, drawn  by  a  master  hand,  which  had  propelled 
the  ostensible  ministers  of  the  two  periods.  It  was  thus 
that  Clarendon  beguiled  the  hours  of  unmerited  disgrace 
and  exile,  when  he  wrote  his  "History  of  the  great 
"  Rebellion."  The  Cardinal  de  Retz,  a  man  to  whom 
Mr.  Fox  bore  some  analogy  in  certain  features  of  his 

4 


PAUCITY  OF  ANECDOTES 

political  life,  of  his  character,  and  fortune ;  made  the 
best  atonement  to  his  country,  and  to  posterity,  for 
the  irregularities  and  agitations  which  marked  the 
zenith  of  his  career,  by  tracing  with  his  own  hand,  in 
his  decline,  the  outline  of  those  transactions  which  he 
had  guided  or  produced.  We  forget  his  deviations 
from  prudence,  his  faction,  and  his  ambition,  in  the 
elegance  of  his  genius,  and  the  ingenuous  disclosure 
of  his  errors. 

Perhaps  no  portion  of  time  in  the  course  of  the  two 
last  centuries,  offers,  proportionably  to  its  duration,  so 
few  of  those  interesting  anecdotes  at  which  we  eagerly 
grasp,  where  the  Sovereign  comes  personally  forward  to 
our  inspection,  as  the  reign  of  George  the  Third.  The 
reason  is  obvious,  and  arose  out  of  the  King^s  character. 
Charles  the  Second,  and  Louis  the  Fourteenth,  sur- 
rounded by  mistresses,  and  all  the  dissipation  of  a 
Court,  presented  to  Burnet,  to  Grammont,  or  to  Vol- 
taire, perpetual  matter  of  entertaining  recital.  Even 
George  the  First  and  Second  offered  some  resources  of  a 
similar  nature,  to  Lord  Melcomb,  for  his  "  Diary  ; "  and 
to  Horace  Walpole,  for  his  "  Reminiscences."  But,  His 
present  Majesty's  whole  life,  from  the  age  of  twenty-two, 
down  to  the  lamented  period  at  which  he  ceased  to 
reign,  was  passed  either  in  the  severe  and  exemplary 
discharge  of  his  public  duties  of  every  description ;  or  in 
the  bosom  of  his  family,  amidst  domestic  sources  of 
amusement.  In  his  agricultural  occupations,  or  when 
engaged  in  the  diversions  of  the  field,  he  was  only  seen 
by  the  few,  who  from  their  official  situations  or  dignity, 
had  access  to  his  person.  No  splendid  assemblies  of 
both  sexes,  or  festive  entertainments,  to  which  beauty, 
rank,  and  pleasure  in  a  comprehensive  sense,  must  have 
contributed ;  by  levelling  him  in  some  measure  with  his 
guests,  presented  him  to  view,  divested  of  the  forms  of 
royalty.  Unlike  his  predecessor,  who  even  at  an 
advanced  age,  still  preserved  a  relish  for  those  enjoy- 

5 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

ments ;  George  the  Third,  while  a  young  man,  neither 
frequented  masquerades,  nor  ever  engaged  at  play,  nor 
passed  his  evenings  in  society  calculated  to  unbend  his 
mind  from  the  fatigues  of  business  and  vexations  of 
state.  All  the  splendour  of  a  court  was  laid  aside,  or 
only  exhibited  for  a  few  hours,  on  a  birth-day.  Rarely, 
during  the  first  twenty  years  after  his  accession,  did  he 
join  in  any  scene  of  public  amusement,  if  we  except  the 
diversion  of  the  theatre.  Still  more  rarely  did  he  sit 
down  at  table  with  any  of  his  courtiers  or  nobility. 
His  repasts,  private,  short,  and  temperate,  never  led  to 
the  slightest  excess.  Hence,  his  enemies  endeavoured 
to  represent  him,  most  unjustly,  as  affecting  the  state 
of  an  Asiatic  prince,  scarcely  ever  visible  except  on  the 
terrace  at  Windsor,  or  in  the  circle,  at  a  levee.  "  Junius," 
who  saw  him  through  the  most  unfavourable  medium, 
and  who  converted  his  very  virtues,  into  subjects  of 
accusation,  or  of  reproach ;  depictures  St.  Jameses  as  a 
court,  "  where  prayers  are  morality,  and  kneeling  is 
"  religion."  It  was  not  till  a  period  later  than  the 
point  of  time  at  which  these  Memoirs  stop,  that  the 
King  began  to  mix  in  a  select  company,  and  occasionally 
to  indulge  in  the  pleasures  of  society.  Previous  to  the 
year  1784,  it  is  only  in  the  foreign  or  domestic  transac- 
tions of  his  reign,  often  only  within  the  walls  of  one,  or 
of  the  other  House  of  Parliament,  that  the  materials  can 
generally  be  found  for  writing  the  internal  history  of 
the  time.  These  remarks,  I  am  sensible,  apply  princi- 
pally, though  not  exclusively,  to  the  part  of  the  present 
work,  where  the  scene  lies  wholly  in  England  :  whereas 
the  first  volume  traverses  the  Continent,  through 
different  countries,  from  Portugal,  round  to  Naples 
and  Tuscany. 

Soon  after  I  had  compleated  my  twenty-first  year, 
in  1772,  I  passed  over  to  Portugal ;  in  the  capital  of 
which  kingdom,  or  in  its  vicinity,  I  staid  a  considerable 
time.  Joseph,  son  and  successor  of  John  the  Fifth, 

6 


JOSEPH  L,  KING  OF  PORTUGAL 

then  occupied  the  throne;  but  the  kingdom  was 
governed  by  the  celebrated  Count  d'GEyras,  who  had 
been  recently  created  Marquis  de  Pombal.  Few  first 
ministers,  during  the  course  of  the  last  century,  dis- 
played greater  talents  for  administration,  or  exercised 
more  unlimited  authority.  The  King,  though  only 
third  in  order  of  descent,  was  fourth  in  succession 
from  the  Duke  of  Braganza,  denominated  John  the 
Fourth,  who  in  1640  recovered  Portugal  from  the 
Spanish  dominion ;  and  at  the  time  of  which  I  speak, 
he  had  passed  his  fifty-seventh  year.  He  was  of  a  good 
stature,  but  inclined  to  corpulency :  his  features  regular, 
his  eye  quick  and  lively,  if  a  habit  of  holding  his  mouth 
somewhat  open,  had  not  diminished  the  expression  of 
intelligence,  which  his  countenance  would  otherwise 
have  conveyed.  In  his  cheeks  he  had  a  high  scorbutic 
humour,  attributed  commonly  to  excesses  of  wine ; 
though  it  might  partly  arise  from  violent  exercise 
constantly  taken  under  a  burning  sun.  His  face, 
indeed,  was  nearly  as  dusky  as  that  of  a  Moor ;  and 
at  Fez  or  Mequinez,  habited  in  the  Turkish  dress,  with 
a  Turban  on  his  head,  he  might  easily  have  passed  for 
Muley  Ismael,  the  sovereign  of  Morocco.  Never  had 
any  Lusitanian  peasant,  coarser  and  darker  hands.  One 
could  not  look  at  him,  without  involuntarily  recollect- 
ing how  near  are  the  shores,  and  how  similar  are  the 
climates,  of  Portugal,  and  of  Africa. 

Two  passions  or  pursuits,  hunting  and  music,  prin- 
cipally occupied  his  time,  absorbed  his  thoughts,  and 
divided  his  affections :  nor  was  it  easy  to  decide  which 
of  them  possessed  the  strongest  ascendant  over  him. 
In  the  former  diversion  he  passed  the  far  greater  part 
of  the  day :  to  the  latter  amusement  his  evenings  were 
principally  or  wholly  dedicated,  either  in  public,  when 
at  the  Opera ;  or  in  private,  with  his  family.  No  royal 
house  in  Europe  was  then  so  musical  as  that  of  Portugal. 
Joseph  himself  performed  with  considerable  execution 

7 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

on  the  violin  ;  and  the  three  Princesses,  his  daughters, 
all  were  proficients  in  a  greater,  or  in  a  less  degree,  on 
different  instruments.  If  he  was  prevented  by  the  weather 
from  going  out  to  the  chace,  the  King  had  recourse  for 
occupation  to  his  Manege.  On  Sundays  he  seldom  or 
never  missed  attending  the  Italian  Opera  in  Lisbon ; 
but  he  likewise  maintained  another  Opera  at  Belem,  his 
residence  near  the  capital.  I  have  been  present  at  this 
latter  performance,  to  which,  only  foreign  ministers, 
officers,  persons  belonging  to  the  Court,  and  foreigners 
of  condition,  were  admitted ;  all  of  them,  gratuitously. 
The  house  itself  was  of  very  contracted  dimensions  ;  the 
pit  not  being  calculated  to  contain  more  than  about 
one  hundred  and  thirty  individuals.  Boxes,  indeed,  in 
the  proper  acceptation  of  the  term,  there  were  none ; 
the  King,  Queen,  and  Royal  Family,  being  seated 
in  a  gallery  fronting  the  stage,  elevated  considerably 
above  the  body  of  the  house.  One  small  box  was  con- 
structed on  each  side;  that  on  the  right  hand  being 
appropriated  to  the  Patriarch,  or  head  of  the  Portu- 
guese church,  whom  I  have  seen  present  at  the  per- 
formance. The  other  usually  remained  vacant,  being 
reserved  for  any  stranger  of  high  rank  who  might  visit 
Portugal. 

The  circumstance  which  distinguished  this  entertain- 
ment from  any  other  of  the  same  kind  which  I  ever 
witnessed;  and  which  may  appear  so  extraordinary 
as  hardly  to  obtain  credit;  consisted  in  the  total  ex- 
clusion of  women,  not  only  from  the  pit,  but  from  the 
stage ;  either  as  spectators,  or  as  actresses.  No  female 
could  obtain  admission.  The  reason  commonly  assigned 
by  the  Court,  for  proscribing  the  whole  sex  from  any 
participation  in  an  amusement,  of  which,  in  all  other 
European  countries,  they  constitute  the  principal 
ornament  and  the  soul ;  was,  that  there  were  no  proper 
places  for  ladies.  But  it  might  have  been  answered, 
that  nothing  could  be  easier  than  to  construct  side- 

8 


THE  KING'S  AMUSEMENTS 

boxes  for  their  reception.  Even  this  reason  could  not 
explain  their  exclusion  from  the  stage,  on  which  none 
except  Italian  Castrati  were  ever  admitted  to  sing,  or 
to  perform  any  part.  Battistini^  who  filled  with  great 
distinction  the  first  female  characters,  was  selected  and 
engaged,  not  only  for  his  superior  vocal  excellence,  but 
for  his  feminine  appearance,  and  admirable  resemblance 
to  a  woman,  when  he  was  dressed  in  female  attire.  So 
complete  indeed  was  the  deception,  that  I  think  it 
never  would  have  occurred  to  any  uninformed  person, 
to  doubt  for  an  instant,  of  his  being  what  he  per- 
sonated. Even  the  Ballets  were  all  performed  by  men 
or  boys,  habited  in  the  Costume  of  nymphs,  shepherd- 
esses, and  goddesses.  This  exclusion  of  all  females, 
except  the  Queen  and  Princesses,  rendered  the  spectacle, 
though  otherwise  magnificent  in  machinery  and  decora- 
tions, as  well  as  scientific  in  point  of  musical  execution ; 
comparatively  insipid,  dull,  and  destitute  of  interest 
or  animation.  Incredible  as  it  may  seem,  the  passion 
of  jealousy  constituted  the  cause  of  so  singular  a  pro- 
hibition. The  Queen  of  Portugal,  though  at  this 
time  she  was  considerably  advanced  towards  her  sixtieth 
year,  yet  watched  every  motion  of  her  husband,  with 
all  the  vigilant  anxiety  of  a  young  woman.  And  in 
order  the  better  to  secure  his  personal  fidelity,  she 
wisely  took  care  to  remove  from  before  his  eyes,  as  much 
as  possible,  every  temptation  to  inconstancy.  The 
ladies  in  waiting,  and  maids  of  honour,  who  attended 
Their  Majesties  in  public,  must  certainly  have  been 
selected  for  their  want  of  all  attractions ;  and  they 
were,  besides,  too  far  advanced  in  years,  to  be  longer 
capable  of  inspiring  any  sentiment  except  respect.  The 
Portugueze  females  who  accompanied  Catherine  of 
Braganza  in  1662,  when  she  came  over  to  England, 
in  order  to  espouse  Charles  the  Second,  whose  total 
deficiency  in  personal  charms  is  so  eloquently  described 
in  the  "  Memoires  de  Grammont ;"  could  not  possibly 

9 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

exceed  in  that  particular,  the  attendants  on  Marianna 
Victoria,  wife  of  Joseph  the  First. 

Nor  was  her  vigilance  by  any  means  confined  to  the 
Opera.  She  displayed  the  same  apprehensions,  and 
took  similar  precautions,  against  any  rival  or  intruder 
in  the  King's  affections,  whenever  he  went  out  to  the 
chace.  Whether  the  diversion  was  hunting,  or  shoot- 
ing, or  falconing,  she  was  constantly  at  his  side.  No 
woman  in  Europe,  indeed,  rode  bolder,  or  with  more 
skill.  Her  figure  almost  defied  the  powers  of  descrip- 
tion, on  these  occasions.  She  sat  astride,  as  was  the 
universal  custom  in  Portugal,  and  wore  English  leather 
breeches ;  frequently  black ;  over  which  she  threw  a 
petticoat,  which  did  not  always  conceal  her  legs.  A 

nt  of  cloth,  or  stuff,  and  a  cocked  hat,  sometimes 
,  at  other  times  without  ornament,  compleated  the 
masculine  singularity  of  her  appearance.  When,  after 
having  let  loose  the  falcon,  she  followed  him  with  her 
eye  in  his  flight,  she  always  threw  the  reins  on  her 
horsed  neck ;  allowing  him  to  carry  her  wherever  he 
pleased,  fearless  of  accidents.  She  was  admitted  to  be 
an  excellent  shot,  seldom  missing  the  bird  at  which  she 
fired,  even  when  flying:  but  this  diversion  had  nearly 
produced  a  most  tragical  result ;  as,  a  few  years  before 
I  visited  Portugal,  she  very  narrowly  missed  killing  the 
King  with  a  ball,  which  actually  grazed  his  temple. 
Few  princes  in  modern  times  have  had  more  hair- 
breadth escapes  from  danger  or  assassination,  than 
Joseph  the  First  experienced ;  on  which  subject  I  shall 
have  occasion  to  say  much,  in  the  course  of  these 
observations. 

In  the  year  1772,  the  Court  of  Lisbon  offered  scarcely 
any  sources  of  amusement  to  a  foreigner.  Neither 
levees,  nor  drawing-rooms  were  ever  held,  except  on 
birth-days,  and  on  a  few  particular  festivals.  The 
King,  Queen,  his  brother  Don  Pedro,  his  three  daughters, 
and  the  young  Prince  of  Beyra,  lived  all  under  the  same 


THE  COURT  OF  LISBON 

roof,  and  inhabited  a  long  wooden  range  of  apartments 
at  Belem,  lower  down  the  bank  of  the  Tagus  than 
Lisbon.  The  terrors  and  recollection  of  the  earthquake 
of  1755,  were  so  deeply  impressed  on  their  minds,  that 
they  preferred  residing  in  a  wooden  building,  however 
mean  or  inconvenient,  rather  than  encounter  the  perils 
annexed  to  a  stone  edifice.  Joseph  had  never  slept 
under  a  house,  properly  so  denominated,  during  near 
seventeen  years.  Wherever  he  moved,  either  wooden 
Barracks,  or  tents,  were  provided  for  his  accommodation. 
I  have  seen  tents  pitched  for  his  reception,  in  the  fields 
adjoining  the  palace  of  Maffra,  while  that  immense  and 
costly  edifice  was  totally  abandoned,  neglected,  and 
unfurnished.  These  precautions,  however  singular  and 
almost  pusillanimous  they  may  at  first  sight  seem,  were 
nevertheless  necessary.  Experience  had  fully  demon- 
strated, that  the  most  solid,  massy,  and  well-constructed 
buildings  of  stone,  only  exposed  the  inhabitant  to 
greater,  and  more  inevitable  destruction,  in  the  event 
of  an  earthquake ;  because  the  resistance  made  by  such 
materials  to  the  undulation  or  shock,  produced  their 
overthrow.  On  the  contrary,  any  structure  composed 
of  wood,  supported  like  the  Barracks  inhabited  by 
the  Royal  Family,  on  pillars  of  the  same  materials ; 
yielding  to  the  concussion  of  the  earth,  rocked  and 
waved  with  the  convulsion,  thus  escaping  its  worst 
effects. 

No  splendor  or  exhibition  of  state  was  maintained  by 
the  King  of  Portugal,  who,  though  he  scarcely  ever 
failed  to  attend,  with  the  Royal  Family,  every  week,  at 
the  Bull  Feasts,  and  at  the  Italian  Opera  in  Lisbon,  yet 
was  always  understood  to  be  present  incognito.  The 
only  deviation  from  this  practice  or  Etiquette,  took 
place  when  the  Court  went  annually,  as  was  the  invari- 
able custom  in  time  of  Carnival,  about  the  middle  of 
January,  to  the  Palace  of  Salva  Terra,  situated  several 
leagues  higher  up  the  Tagus  than  the  Metropolis.  The 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 


King  remained  there  till  the  month  of  March,  and  all 
the  foreign  ministers  usually  attended  him.  Hunting 
parties,  to  which  strangers  of  condition  were  admitted, 
constituted  the  occupation  of  the  day ;  followed  in  the 
evening  by  an  Opera,  like  that  of  Belem,  open  gratui- 
tously to  all  such  persons  as  had  been  presented  to  the 
Sovereign.  I  was  assured  that  Joseph  expended  no  less 
a  sum  than  about  forty  thousand  Pounds  Sterling 
annually,  on  the  diversion  of  the  Opera.  Yet  he  was 
likewise  fond  of  play,  and  passed  much  time  at  the  card 
table.  Previous  to  the  memorable  earthquake  of  1755, 
he  was  considered  as  temperate,  drinking  usually  water 
at  his  meals :  but  such  was  the  effect  produced  on  his 
mind,  and  so  severe  the  dejection  of  spirits  which  he 
experienced,  after  that  awful  visitation  of  Providence, 
that  it  was  apprehended,  his  health  would  be  seriously 
affected  by  it.  His  physicians  prescribed  the  use  of 
wine,  as  necessary  to  restore  his  constitution ;  a  pre- 
scription which  proved  so  agreeable  to  the  patient,  that 
it  was  commonly  believed,  His  Majesty  indulged  himself 
too  freely  in  its  use.  At  an  earlier  period  of  his  life,  he 
was  supposed  to  have  been  guilty  of  excesses  of  another 
kind,  and  to  have  given  the  Queen,  frequent  occasion 
for  jealousy :  nor  had  the  partiality  of  Joseph  towards 
the  sex,  by  any  means  become  extinct,  with  the  decline 
of  years.  But,  his  attachments  or  amours,  were  always 
secret,  decorous,  and  conducted  with  a  becoming  regard 
to  public  opinion,  as  well  as  with  a  due  attention  to 
his  domestic  and  conjugal  felicity.  No  mistress,  like 
Madame  de  Pompadour,  or  Madame  du  Barry  in  France, 
under  Louis  the  Fifteenth;  or  Madame  Chevalier  at 
Petersburgh,  under  Paul  the  First,  dishonoured  and 
disgraced  the  court  of  Portugal. 

Joseph,  considered  in  his  kingly  character  and 
capacity,  though  not  to  be  ranked  among  the  first 
princes  in  vigor  and  ability,  who  then  reigned  in  Europe, 
was  not  deficient  in  talents  or  qualities  befitting  the 


all 


THE  KING'S  HABITS 

throne.  If  he  felt  his  own  inability  to  govern,  he 
demonstrated  no  common  discernment  and  force  of 
mind,  in  the  selection  of  a  minister,  to  whom  he  dele- 
gated that  office.  The  Marquis  de  Pombal  exercised 
in  fact,  all  the  functions  of  the  monarchy.  He  possessed 
nearly  as  unlimited  an  ascendant  over  his  master,  as 
the  Cardinal  of  Lerma  did  over  Philip  the  Third,  or 
the  Conde  d'Olivarez  over  Philip  the  Fourth,  Kings  of 
Spain ;  and  was  accustomed  to  transact  public  business, 
at  hours  and  seasons  usually  dedicated  to  pleasure,  or 
lost  in  sleep.  The  King  very  frequently  signed  papers 
of  the  greatest  consequence  after  midnight,  before  he 
retired  to  rest ;  at  which  time  the  Marquis  commonly 
waited  on  him  for  the  purpose.  The  superstition  which 
characterized  the  house  of  Braganza,  ana  in  the  practice 
of  which  Joseph  himself  had  been  educated ;  which 
distinguished  his  father  John  the  Fifth,  and  which 
survived  in  the  present  reigning  Queen,  till  she  became 
alienated  in  mind ;  by  no  means  existed  in  him.  The 
seizure  and  expulsion  of  the  Jesuits,  sufficiently  mani- 
fested his  superiority  to  the  bigotted  veneration  felt 
for  that  order  of  men,  among  the  great  majority  of 
his  subjects.  If  he  possessed,  himself,  no  taste  for  the 
fine  arts,  nor  evinced  any  passion  for  learning  and  polite 
letters,  he  at  least  extended  protection  to  their  pro- 
fessors. During  the  period  of  two  and  twenty  years 
that  he  had  then  reigned  since  the  decease  of  John  the 
Fifth,  a  great  and  salutary  change  had  taken  place 
among  the  Portugueze,  in  all  the  attainments  of  a 
civilized  people.  Establishments  for  the  education  of 
the  young  nobility  and  gentry,  had  been  founded,  which 
would  have  done  honor  to  Great  Britain ;  and  which, 
though  originating  with  the  minister,  yet  could  only 
have  been  fully  accomplished  by  the  consent  of  the 
Sovereign. 

These  laudable  acts  of  Government,  were  nevertheless 
contrasted  with  corresponding  defects  of  administration  ; 

13 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

some  of  which  might  be  attributable  to  the  Marquis  de 
Pombal,  while  others  seemed  personally  to  reproach 
the  King.  The  people  universally  and  loudly  com- 
plained of  oppression.  In  the  royal  household,  mis- 
management prevailed  to  such  a  degree,  that  almost 
all  the  domestic  servants  and  menial  attendants  of  the 
Court,  having  been  unpaid  for  several  years,  were  in  the 
lowest  stage  of  distress.  The  reverse  had  been  the  case 
under  his  predecessor  John  the  Fifth.  Joseph's  revenues 
were  commonly  supposed  to  amount  to  two  Millions 
Sterling,  while  the  national  expenditure  did  not  usually 
exceed  a  moiety  of  that  sum.  Yet  the  footmen  who 
followed  the  royal  carriages  in  public,  were  left  almost 
without  the  means  of  even  procuring  sustenance.  I 
never  saw  the  King  and  Queen  in  any  carriage,  except 
a  sort  of  Caleche,  or  chaise,  drawn  by  two  mules  of  no 
uncommon  beauty.  In  this  equipage,  which  was 
nothing  less  than  royal,  they  always  attended  the  Bull 
Feasts.  When  Her  Majesty  accompanied  the  Princesses 
her  daughters,  to  say  Mass,  or  to  perform  her  devotions, 
at  some  church  in  the  vicinity  of  Lisbon ;  she  was 
drawn  in  a  coach,  with  only  a  pair  of  horses  of  a  very 
inferior  description,  and  such  a  set  of  harness  as  we 
should  scarcely  consider  to  be  good  enough  for  a  hackney- 
coach.  About  forty  horse-guards  accompanied  them, 
and  they  generally  distributed  some  money  to  the 
populace,  or  rather  the  beggars,  who  assembled  in 
groupes  at  the  door  of  the  church. 

I  went,  one  day,  to  look  at  the  royal  carriages,  kept 
at  Alcantara,  about  a  mile  out  of  Lisbon.  There  were 
at  least  thirty ;  some  of  which  had  cost,  as  the  people 
assured  me,  two  hundred  thousand  Crusadoes,  or  twenty 
thousand  Pounds  Sterling.  They  were  very  magnificent, 
and  had  all  been  built  either  in  Rome  or  at  Paris. 
London  had  not  then  begun  to  supply  the  Continent 
with  that  article  of  luxury.  Among  the  royal  carriages, 
I  was  struck  with  the  coach  in  which  John  the  Fourth 

14 


THE  ROYAL  CARRIAGES 

made  his  public  entry  into  the  capital,  after  recovering 
Portugal  from  the  Spaniards.  It  nearly  realized  the 
descriptions  given  us  of  those  vehicles,  soon  after  their 
first  appearance  or  invention  in  the  sixteenth  century. 
The  carriage  in  question,  which  had  been  constructed 
in  1641,  was,  consequently,  above  a  hundred  and  thirty 
years  old,  at  the  time  when  I  saw  it ;  and  might  more 
properly  be  denominated  a  chamber  on  wheels,  than  a 
coach  in  the  modern  acceptation  of  the  term,  as  it  was 
capable  of  containing  ten  or  twelve  persons  with  the 
utmost  convenience.  The  sides  were  open  ;  the  windows 
resembling  the  lattices  of  our  farm-houses,  divided  into 
small  panes,  with  casements  for  the  admission  of  air. 
It  was  preserved  with  pious  veneration,  as  a  monument 
of  the  emancipation  of  the  kingdom  by  the  first  Prince 
of  the  House  of  Braganza.  Henry  the  Fourth  was 
seated  in  just  such  another  coach,  when  he  was  stabbed 
by  Ravaillac,  in  the  year  1610,  in  the  Rue  de  la 
Ferronerie,  at  Paris. 

Joseph  the  First  had  twice  escaped  from  a  similar 
fate  to  that  of  Henry  :  the  first  time  in  1758  ;  and  the 
last,  only  two  years  before  I  visited  Lisbon.  The  former 
attempt,  which  occupies  a  memorable  place  among  the 
tragical  events  of  the  eighteenth  century,  may  rank 
with  Damien's  attempt  on  Louis  the  Fifteenth's  life, 
in  1755;  and  with  the  attack  made  in  1771,  on 
Stanislaus,  King  of  Poland.  I  allude  to  the  conspiracy 
of  the  Duke  d'Aveiro,  and  the  Marquis  de  Tavora  in 
1 758  ;  all  the  leading  particulars  of  which  I  have  often 
heard  recounted  by  contemporary  witnesses.  The 
Duke  d'Aveiro,  whose  family  name  was  Mascarenhas, 
descended  from  Don  George,  a  natural  son  of  John  the 
Second,  King  of  Portugal,  one  of  the  most  illustrious 
Princes  who  has  reigned  in  modern  ages ;  the  contem- 
porary of  our  Henry  the  Seventh ;  and  to  whose 
exertions  we  owe,  in  an  eminent  degree,  the  discovery 
of  a  passage  to  India,  round  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope. 

15 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

D'Aveiro's  talents  appear  to  have  been  very  moderate, 
and  his  courage  very  equivocal ;  but  his  temper, 
ferocious,  as  well  as  vindictive,  rendered  him  capable 
of  embracing  the  most  flagitious  measures  for  the 
gratification  of  his  revenge.  The  King  of  Portugal's 
escape,  which  was  altogether  fortuitous,  resulted  from 
the  coolness  or  presence  of  mind,  manifested  by  the 
coachman  who  drove  the  royal  carriage.  For,  this  man, 
finding  that  several  shots  or  balls,  had  passed  through 
it  behind ;  and  not  doubting  that  Joseph  was  wounded ; 
instead  of  proceeding  forward,  immediately  turned 
round  his  mules,  and  took  the  road  that  led  to  the 
house  of  the  King's  surgeon.  By  this  sudden  and  un- 
expected Manoeuvre;  Joseph  avoided  falling  into  the 
hands  of  four  other  armed  parties  of  Conspirators,  who 
were  posted  at  different  places,  where  it  was  known  he 
must  pass  in  his  way  to  the  palace. 

A  woman,  the  old  Marchioness  of  Tavora,  formed  the 
soul  of  this  sanguinary  enterprize,  which  conducted  the 
principal  persons  engaged  in  it,  to  a  cruel  and  ignomini- 
ous death.  Revenge,  heightened  by  personal  enmity 
towards  the  King  and  the  first  Minister,  who  had 
refused  to  raise  the  Marquis  of  Tavora  to  the  dignity 
of  a  Duke  ;  rather  than  any  well  ascertained  inten- 
tion, or  expectation  of  subverting  the  Government, 
and  dethroning  the  Braganza  family;  seem  to  have 
stimulated  the  Conspirators  to  so  atrocious  an  under- 
taking. 

Precisely  similar  motives  impelled  the  Duke  of 
Orleans  to  produce  those  commotions  which  eventually 
overturned  the  French  throne,  and  led  to  the  horrors 
of  the  Revolution.  It  was  not  ambition,  or  the  hope 
of  reigning,  but  personal  hatred  and  revenge.  The 
late  Duke  of  Dorset,  who,  from  the  situation  that  he 
occupied  during  several  years,  as  Embassador  to  the 
Court  of  Versailles,  had  opportunities  of  obtaining  the 
most  authentic  information,  has  many  times  assured  me 

16 


MOTIVES  OF  CONSPIRATORS 

of  this  fact.  He  knew  it  from  the  Queen  herself.  She 
constituted  the  principal  object  of  the  Duke  of  Orleans's 
detestation,  whose  malignity  was  not  so  much  levelled 
against  Louis  the  Sixteenth,  as  against  the  Queen. 
That  princess  had  given  him  many  causes  of  aversion  ; 
one  of  which  consisted  in  endeavouring  successfully  to 
prevent  the  marriage  of  his  daughter,  Mademoiselle 
D'Orleans,  with  the  Duke  d'Angoulesme.  Marie 
Antoinette  wished  to  unite  her  own  daughter  in 
marriage  with  the  young  Prince,  as  she  thereby  secured 
to  her  the  succession  to  the  throne  of  France,  in  case 
that  Louis  the  Sixteenth  should  not  leave  behind  him 
any  son.  The  Duke  of  Dorset  told  me,  that  as  early  as 
1786,  or  1787,  the  Queen  had  said  to  him,  on  her  seeing 
the  Duke  of  Orleans  at  Versailles :  "  Monsieur  le  Due, 
"  regardez  cette  homme  la.  II  me  deteste,  et  il  a  jure 
"  ma  perte.  Je  la  vois  dans  ses  yeux,  toutes  les  fois 
"  qu'il  me  fixe.  II  ne  sera  jamais  content,  jusqu'a  ce 
"  qu'il  me  voit  etendue  morte  a  ses  pieds."  He  lived, 
in  fact,  to  witness  her  tragical  end,  but  he  survived  her 
only  a  very  short  time.  I  return  from  this  digression, 
to  the  Portugueze  conspirators.  They  executed  their 
attempt,  like  men  destitute  of  courage :  for,  if  the  first 
band,  who  intercepted  the  King,  as  he  was  returning 
from  Belem,  had  fired  into  the  carriage  as  he  advanced, 
instead  of  waiting,  as  they  did,  till  he  had  passed,  before 
they  discharged  their  pieces,  he  must  have  fallen.  The 
ball  with  which  he  was  wounded,  passed  between  his 
side  and  his  arm,  tearing  the  flesh  of  both,  but  without 
inflicting  any  severe  wound. 

The  consternation  excited  by  the  attempt,  was 
augmented  by  the  obscurity  in  which  it  was  enveloped ; 
the  Court  remaining  some  weeks  in  total  ignorance  of 
the  authors  of  the  conspiracy  ;  as  the  Conspirators  did, 
on  the  other  hand,  in  equal  uncertainty,  respecting  the 
nature  and  consequences  of  the  King's  wounds.  It  is  a 
fact,  that  the  Duke  d'Aveiro  and  the  Marquis  of  Tavora 

17  2 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

repaired  almost  daily  to  the  King's  apartment,  to  make 
their  enquiries  in  person  after  his  health  ;  expressing 
the  utmost  abhorrence  of  the  treason.  They  were  even 
admitted  to  his  presence ;  but,  in  a  chamber  intention- 
ally kept  so  dark,  as  to  render  it  impossible  for  them  to 
ascertain  the  probability  of  his  recovery.  Meanwhile, 
the  vigilance  of  the  Marquis  de  Pombal,  aided,  as  is 
said,  by  some  imprudent  expressions  of  the  Duke 
d'Aveiro,  enabled  the  Minister  to  trace,  and  to  ascertain 
the  guilt  of  the  Conspirators.  They  were  then  arrested 
and  brought  to  trial.  The  Duke  d'Aveiro,  the  Marquis 
of  Tavora,  and  his  two  sons,  were  broken  on  the  wheel ; 
while  the  old  Marchioness,  who,  in  consideration  of  her 
sex,  was  sentenced  to  be  beheaded,  ascended  the  scaffold 
with  a  firm  step,  betrayed  neither  fear  nor  contrition, 
and  laid  down  her  head  on  the  block,  as  she  would  have 
done  on  a  pillow. 

Haughty  and  imperious  in  her  character,  she  was 
restrained  by  no  considerations  of  pity  or  of  humanity, 
when  her  vengeance,  her  ambition,  or  her  interest, 
impelled  her.  The  meetings  of  the  Conspirators  were 
frequently  held  in  a  summer  house,  situate  in  the  garden 
of  the  Marquis  of  Tavern's  palace  at  Lisbon,  with  which 
it  was  connected  by  a  long  wooden  gallery.  It  happened 
that  a  young  Portugueze  lady,  of  noble  extraction,  but 
of  reduced  circumstances,  who  lived  in  the  Marchioness's 
family ;  as  her  companion ;  surprized  at  observing 
lights,  one  evening,  in  this  summer  house,  and  al- 
together without  suspicion  of  the  cause ;  was  attracted 
by  curiosity  to  approach  the  place.  As  she  advanced 
along  the  gallery  that  led  to  it,  she  heard  voices  in 
earnest  conversation ;  and  on  coming  nearer,  soon 
distinguished  that  of  the  Marchioness,  who  seemed  to 
be  animated  by  some  cause,  to  a  pitch  of  uncommon 
violence.  She  listened  for  a  few  seconds ;  and  then, 
apprehensive  of  being  discovered  in  such  a  situation, 
she  was  about  to  return  from  whence  she  came,  when 

18 


FEARS  OF  DISCOVERY 

the  door  suddenly  opening,  the  Marchioness  herself 
appeared.  Their  surprize  was  mutual ;  and  the  latter 
demanded,  with  much  agitation,  what  cause  had  brought 
her  to  that  place  ?  She  answered,  that  her  astonishment 
at  observing  lights  in  the  summer  house,  had  led  her  to 
ascertain  the  reason.  "  You  have  then,  no  doubt,"  said 
the  Marchioness,  "  overheard  our  conversation  ?  "  The 
young  lady  protested  that  she  was  perfectly  ignorant  of 
any  part  of  it ;  and  that  as  soon  as  she  distinguished 
the  Marchioness's  voice,  her  respect  led  her  to  return  to 
the  palace,  which  she  was  about  to  do  at  the  moment 
when  the  door  opened.  But  the  Marchioness,  who  had 
too  much  at  stake  to  be  so  easily  satisfied  or  deceived, 
assuming  a  tranquil  air,  and  affecting  to  repose  a  con- 
fidence in  her,  "The  Marquis  and  I,"  rejoined  she, 
"  have  had  a  serious  and  a  violent  quarrel,  during  the 
"  course  of  which,  he  had  the  rudeness  to  contradict  me 
"  in  the  most  insulting  manner ;  and  he  even  carried  his 
"  audacity  to  such  a  point,  as  to  give  me  the  lie.  I 
"  burst  out  of  the  room,  unable  to  restrain  my  indigna- 
"  tion,  and  no  longer  mistress  of  my  emotions.  Did 
"  you  not  hear  him  give  me  the  lie  at  the  time  I  opened 
"the  door?"  "I  did,  Madam,"  imprudently  replied 
the  unfortunate  lady.  Aware  from  that  instant,  that 
the  nature  of  their  meeting,  and  of  the  subjects  agitated 
at  it,  was  now  in  some  measure  discovered,  she  instantly 
determined  to  prevent  the  possibility  of  its  being  further 
divulged.  Next  morning,  the  body  of  the  unhappy 
listener  was  found  in  one  of  the  streets  of  Lisbon,  wrapt 
in  a  sheet,  scarcely  cold,  and  the  blood  still  oozing  from 
various  wounds  inflicted  on  her  with  a  dagger.  It  was 
not  doubted  at  the  time,  that  she  had  been  put  to 
death  by  secret  directions,  issued  from  the  palace  of 
Tavora :  but  the  power  of  that  great  family,  and  the 
frequency  of  similar  spectacles  in  the  Portugueze 
capital,  silenced  all  judicial  enquiry  into  the  causes  of 
her  tragical  end.  The  Marchioness  expiated  her  crime 

19 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

on  the  scaffold.  Her  daughter-in-law,  the  young 
Marchioness  of  Tavora,  alone,  who  was  daughter  to  the 
Duke  d'Aveiro,  exempted  from  the  general  destruction 
of  her  family,  either  on  account  of  her  presumed 
innocence,  or,  as  was  pretended  by  others,  from  motives 
of  private  partiality  on  the  part  of  the  King,  was 
immured  in  a  convent.  She  was,  I  believe,  still  living 
in  1772,  under  confinement. 

The  second  attempt  made  on  Joseph's  life,  arose 
from  the  irritated  feelings  of  a  poor  Portugueze  peasant. 
This  man,  driven  to  despair  by  the  conduct  of  the 
King's  servants,  who  had  forcibly  seized  on  his  carts 
and  cattle ;  rushed  furiously  on  His  Majesty,  as  he  was 
going  out  to  hunt,  and  aimed  a  blow,  with  a  long  pole, 
at  his  head,  which  narrowly  missed  him.  It  happened 
at  the  palace  of  Villa  Viciosa,  the  ancient  patrimonial 
residence  of  the  Dukes  of  Braganza,  where  the  King 
used  sometimes  to  repair,  for  a  short  time.  The 
peasant  was  not  executed,  but  still  remained,  as 
common  rumor  asserted,  in  a  dungeon  at  Belem,  when 
I  was  in  Portugal.  Two  such  attacks,  though  of  very 
opposite  kinds,  yet  had  rendered  Joseph  timid,  and 
induced  him  to  take  many  precautions  for  his  preserva- 
tion against  similar  efforts  of  vengeance,  or  of  treason. 
Even  at  the  Italian  Opera  in  Lisbon,  which  he  scarcely 
ever  failed  to  attend,  yet  when  he  went,  as  was  his 
custom,  between  the  Acts,  from  the  royal  Box  in  front 
of  the  stage,  to  a  side  Box,  from  which  he  viewed  the 
Ballets;  he  always  passed  through  a  private  passage, 
well  secured,  constructed  on  purpose,  with  a  view  to 
protect  his  person  from  any  act  of  violence. 

Marianna  Victoria,  Queen  of  Portugal,  and  wife  of 
Joseph,  was  a  daughter  of  Philip  the  Fifth,  King  of 
Spain,  by  Elizabeth  Farnese,  his  second  wife,  heiress 
of  that  celebrated  family,  and  herself  a  woman  of  no 
ordinary  talents.  The  Princess  in  question  had  been, 
as  is  well  known,  betrothed,  when  a  child,  to  Louis  the 


THE  QUEEN  OF  PORTUGAL 

Fifteenth  ;  was  sent  to  France,  and  resided  in  that 
country  during  several  years :  but,  on  the  death  of  the 
Regent  Duke  of  Orleans,  in  December,  1723,  when  the 
government  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  Duke  de  Bour- 
bon ;  one  of  the  earliest  acts  of  his  administration,  was 
to  dissolve  the  unfinished  marriage,  and  to  send  the 
Princess  back  to  Madrid.  In  the  year  1729,  when  she 
was  not  more  than  eleven,  she  was  carried  by  her  father, 
Philip,  to  Badajoz,  and  married  to  Joseph,  then 
hereditary  Prince  of  Portugal,  who  himself  had  not 
attained  his  fourteenth  year.  The  nuptials  were 
immediately  solemnized ;  the  bride  and  bridegroom 
being  put  into  the  same  bed  together,  in  presence  of 
the  great  officers  of  the  court ;  but  it  was  near  six  years 
afterwards,  in  December  1734,  before  she  brought  into 
the  world  a  daughter,  the  present  Queen.  Marianna 
Victoria  was  said  to  have  been  very  agreeable  in  her 
person,  when  young ;  but  in  1772,  no  traces  of  that 
beauty  remained.  Her  figure  was  short  and  thick,  her 
face  red ;  her  nose  large,  and  her  manner  destitute  of 
softness  or  elegance.  There  was,  indeed,  nothing 
feminine  in  her  appearance  or  demeanour.  Neverthe- 
less, her  eyes,  which  were  dark,  lively,  and  piercing, 
retained  their  original  lustre.  She  wore  a  pro- 
fusion of  Rouge ;  her  neck  and  shoulders,  whether 
at  Church,  at  the  Opera,  or  at  a  Bull  Feast,  being 
always  bare ;  and  she  seemed  to  be  not  only  in 
possession  of  health,  but  capable  of  the  roughest 
exercise,  or  most  severe  fatigue.  Her  arms  were  brown 
and  sun-burnt,  from  her  perpetually  following  the 
chace.  Those  persons  who  knew  Her  Majesty  well, 
always  assured  me  that  she  neither  wanted  spirit,  nor 
ability,  though  she  never  attempted  to  possess  power, 
nor  had  ever  attained  any  political  influence.  All  her 
anxiety  seemed  to  be  confined  to  the  person  of  her 
royal  partner,  and  did  not  extend  to  the  guidance  of 
state  affairs.  If  any  opinion  might  be  formed  of  her 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

religion,  from  her  behaviour  at  Mass,  she  was  assuredly 
no  bigot.  I  was  accustomed  to  frequent,  from  motives 
of  curiosity,  the  church  of  the  Necessidadas,  and  that  of 
St.  Francisco  da  Paola,  where  she  constantly  attended, 
with  the  Princesses,  her  daughters ;  and  I  may  truly 
assert  that  I  never  saw  any  woman  who  manifested  so 
little  attention  while  at  her  devotions. 

Of  a  widely  different  character  from  her  Mother  in 
that  respect,  was  the  Princess  of  Brazil,  Maria,  eldest 
of  the  three  daughters  of  Joseph,  and  presumptive 
Heiress  to  the  Crown  of  Portugal.  In  her,  a  gloomy 
and  severe  spirit  of  superstition  formed  the  predominant 
feature.  Her  mind  was  said  to  be  deeply  impressed 
with  the  tragical  Catastrophe  of  the  Duke  d'Aveiro, 
and  his  associates,  whose  fate  she  was  believed  to  lament, 
as  having  been  unmerited,  or  unjust.  To  her  reflections 
upon  those  terrible  executions,  heightened  by  the  re- 
monstrances or  reproaches  of  her  Confessor,  has  been 
indeed  generally  attributed  the  subsequent  alienation 
of  her  understanding.  In  her  person  she  was  taller 
than  either  of  her  sisters,  as  well  as  thinner ;  of  a  pale 
and  wan  complexion,  that  seemed  to  indicate  melan- 
choly ;  her  features,  prominent,  strong,  and  altogether 
destitute  of  any  attractions.  In  all  the  duties  and 
departments  of  private  life,  she  was  exemplary. 
Married  to  her  Uncle,  only  brother  to  the  King,  they 
exhibited  a  model  of  nuptial  felicity.  The  union,  how- 
ever repugnant  to  our  modes  of  thinking,  and  in  some 
measure  contrary  to  nature,  yet  had  been  fruitful; 
they  had  then  two  sons  and  a  daughter  living.  The 
desire  of  preventing  any  possibility  of  a  disputed 
succession,  between  the  collateral  male  heir  to  the 
throne,  and  the  female  in  direct  descent,  dictated  this 
species  of  incestuous  marriage;  which,  whatever 
sanction  it  may  derive  from  antiquity,  among  the 
Ptolemies,  or  the  Seleucidse,  can  plead  no  parallel 
among  the  other  royal  houses  of  Europe.  It  is  not  the 


THE  PRINCESSES 

least  singular  circumstance  of  the  transaction,  that  so  far 
from  any  compulsion  having  been  used  to  accomplish 
it,  the  Princess,  from  her  early  youth,  entertained  a 
strong  partiality  and  attachment  towards  Don  Pedro, 
her  future  Husband.  She  was  near  thirty-eight  years 
old,  when  I  visited  Portugal. 

All  the  talents  of  the  female  part  of  the  Braganza 
Family,  were  said  to  be  concentrated  in  Donna  Maria 
Anna,  second  of  Joseph's  daughters.  Shorter  and 
thicker  in  her  person  than  the  Princess  of  Brazil,  she 
was  more  agreeable  in  her  countenance ;  possessing  a 
ruddy  complexion,  as  well  as  a  more  animated  expression 
of  features.  Her  mind  was  expanded,  and  her  under- 
standing cultivated  by  polite  knowledge.  Many  of  her 
hours  were  dedicated  to  reading,  and  she  was  regarded 
as  superior  to  bigotry.  In  addition  to  these  solid 
endowments,  she  joined  great  taste  and  skill  in  Music, 
with  a  fine  voice.  Though  the  most  accomplished  of 
the  three  sisters,  she  was  nevertheless  doomed  to  remain 
unmanned  in  her  father's  court,  having  attained,  in 
1772,  her  thirty-sixth  year.  Nature  had  been  in  some 
respects  more  bountiful  to  the  third  Princess,  Donna 
Maria  Benedicta,  who  was  likewise  considerably 
younger,  being  only  six  and  twenty  years  old  at  this 
time.  Though  low  in  stature,  clumsy,  and  much 
inclined  to  Embonpoint,  her  face  was  very  handsome ; 
her  eyes  dark  and  eloquent,  her  complexion  fair,  the 
contour  of  her  countenance  rather  round  than  oval,  and 
her  features  small,  as  well  as  delicate.  But  she  was 
not  considered  to  possess  the  superiority  of  mind  that 
distinguished  Maria  Anna.  About  seven  years  before 
the  time  of  which  I  speak,  a  treaty  of  marriage  had 
been  set  on  foot  between  this  Princess  and  the  Emperor 
Joseph  the  Second,  who  was  then  recently  become  a 
widower,  by  the  death  of  his  first  wife.  It  proceeded 
so  far,  that  preparations  were  made  for  transporting 
her  from  Lisbon  to  Flanders,  in  her  way  to  Vienna; 

23 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

and  a  ship,  constructed  expressly  for  the  purpose,  in 
the  Brazils,  magnificently  decorated,  lay  ready  in  the 
Tagus.  But,  the  intrigues  and  exertions  of  the  old 
Queen  Dowager  of  Spain,  mother  of  Charles  the  Third, 
and  grandmother  of  the  Princess  herself,  who  was 
incensed  at  the  endeavours  of  the  Marquis  de  Pombal, 
to  assume  the  exclusive  merit  of  this  alliance,  rendered 
the  plan  abortive.  It  is  probable,  and  I  have  been  so 
assured  at  Vienna,  that  the  pretext  used  to  indispose 
the  Austrian  court  from  accomplishing  the  projected 
nuptials,  was  the  representation  made  of  the  improba- 
bility of  her  producing  children,  on  account  of  her 
tendency  to  become  large  and  fat.  Incredible  and 
unnatural  as  it  may  seem,  she  was  actually  married, 
several  years  afterwards,  in  1777,  when  turned  of  thirty 
years  of  age,  to  her  own  nephew,  her  sister's  son,  the 
young  Prince  of  Beyra,  eventual  heir  to  the  Throne  of 
Portugal.  The  ceremony  was  performed  in  Joseph's 
apartments,  as  he  lay  expiring.  They  lived  together 
many  years,  but  never  had  any  issue.  There  seems  to 
have  been  no  rational  excuse,  or  adequate  motive 
assigned,  for  this  second  union  in  the  same  family, 
which  impresses  with  a  degree  of  horror,  or,  at  least, 
of  disgust;  and  was  the  more  remarkable,  as  the 
Portugueze  women  of  condition  seldom  bear  children, 
if  not  married  before  twenty-eight  or  thirty.  Catherine 
of  Portugal,  daughter  of  John  the  Fourth,  who  was  the 
wife  of  our  Charles  the  Second,  and  who  espoused  him 
at  an  earlier  age,  I  believe  about  twenty-four,  never 
brought  him  any  issue,  male  or  female;  but  Burnet 
says,  that  the  King  himself  told  him,  (Dr.  Burnet) 
that  "  she  had  been  with  child."  She  even  once  mis- 
carried, when  considerably  advanced  in  her  pregnancy, 
if  we  may  believe  the  same  historical  authority  :  but, 
as  Charles  had  no  fewer,  it  is  asserted,  I  think  by  Dr. 
Lucas,  in  his  History  of  England,  than  fifty-three 
natural  children,  by  different  mistresses,  in  the  course 


STRANGE  ROYAL  MARRIAGES 

of  his  life ;  we  must  suppose  that  his  failure  of  legiti- 
mate issue,  originated  on  the  side  of  his  Queen.  Some 
excuse  may  be  suggested  for  the  marriage  of  the  eldest 
daughter  of  Joseph,  with  his  brother,  Don  Pedro,  where 
there  existed  no  direct  male  issue  to  inherit  the  crown  ; 
but  it  was  reserved  for  the  family  of  Braganza  to 
exhibit  to  mankind,  in  the  eighteenth  century,  the 
extraordinary  spectacle  of  a  youth  of  fifteen,  espousing 
his  own  aunt,  at  thirty.  From  such  a  connexion,  it  can 
neither  excite  surprise  nor  regret,  that  no  descendants 
should  have  sprung. 

The  Prince  of  Beyra,  himself,  eldest  son  of  the 
Princess  of  Brazil  and  of  Don  Pedro,  was  then  the 
Marcellm  of  Portugal ;  towards  whom  all  eyes  were 
turned,  and  from  whose  future  auspicious  Government, 
political  miracles  were  fondly  anticipated.  It  may 
excite  the  more  surprize  that  such  expectations  should 
have  been  entertained,  when  I  add  that  in  1772,  he 
had  only  completed  the  eleventh  year  of  his  age.  I 
have  seen  him  many  times,  as  he  never  failed  to  attend 
the  Royal  family  in  public,  at  the  Bull  Feasts,  at 
Church,  and  every  where  except  at  the  Italian  Opera ; 
a  diversion  for  which  he  manifested  a  decided  aversion. 
He  was  tall  and  manly  for  his  age,  though  his  face  was 
pale  and  delicate ;  and  he  appeared  to  have  a  weak 
or  defective  sight.  His  features  and  his  expression  of 
countenance,  it  must  be  admitted,  indicated  intelligence. 
The  stories  related  of  his  capacity  and  dawning  expan- 
sion of  mind,  had  obtained  a  very  universal  credit. 
Some  well  attested  instances  of  the  goodness  of  his 
disposition,  and  the  liberality  of  his  temper,  I  have 
heard,  which  seemed  to  be  entitled  to  belief:  but,  no 
sort  of  inference,  as  to  his  future  character,  could  be 
safely  drawn  from  these  tales.  Joseph  the  First,  during 
the  reign  of  his  father,  had  excited  similar  expectations, 
which  he  by  no  means  fulfilled  after  he  ascended  the 
throne.  His  grandson,  who  was  likewise  named  Joseph, 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

died  at  about  twenty-seven  years  of  age,  in  1788,  of  the 
small-pox,  which  the  bigotted  prejudices  and  ignorance 
of  his  mother,  had  prevented  her  from  giving  him  by 
inoculation ;  leaving,  as  I  before  observed,  no  issue  by 
his  aunt,  to  whom  he  had  been  married  during  several 
years. 

With  Don  Pedro,  father  and  great  uncle  to  the  Prince 
of  Beyra,  I  shall  conclude  my  remarks  on  the  Royal 
House  of  Portugal.  He  was  several  years  younger  than 
the  King ;  not  inclined,  like  Joseph,  to  corpulency ;  of 
a  sallow  complexion ;  equally  destitute  in  his  person, 
as  in  his  manners,  of  elegance,  or  grace ;  and  no  way 
distinguished  by  natural  endowments  of  any  kind.  He 
excelled  in  no  exercises  of  the  body ;  and  possessed  in 
his  features  no  expression  of  intellect.  His  faculties 
were,  indeed,  very  contracted,  and  altogether  unfit  for 
the  conduct  of  public  affairs.  Possessing  neither 
political  power  nor  influence,  he  could  only  be  con- 
sidered as  a  fixture  of  the  Court ;  and  never  was  any 
Prince  a  more  perfect  cypher.  He  enjoyed  no  com- 
mand, military  or  civil ;  not  even  a  separate  establish- 
ment or  household.  When  the  King  hunted,  Don 
Pedro  accompanied  him ;  as  he  equally  did  to  the 
Opera,  or  to  Mass ;  never  absenting  himself,  except  on 
account  of  indisposition.  He  had  constructed  a  palace 
at  Cayluze,  about  six  English  miles  from  Lisbon  ;  but 
Don  Pedro  never  resided  there,  though  he  frequently 
attended  his  brother  to  the  chace ;  commonly  alighting, 
for  a  few  minutes,  in  order  to  hear  Mass  at  Cayluze. 
Those  who  knew  him  intimately,  assured  me  that  he 
was  of  a  devout,  friendly,  and  benevolent  disposition. 
On  Joseph^  decease,  in  February,  1777,  when  his 
consort  became  Queen  in  her  own  right,  he  was  made 
King  matrimonial,  by  the  name  of  Don  Pedro  the 
Third ;  as  Henry,  Lord  Darnley,  became  in  Scotland, 
on  his  marriage  with  Mary  Stuart.  He  survived  his 
elder  brother  above  nine  years,  dying  in  May,  1786. 

26 


THE  BULL  FEASTS 

The  public  entertainment  or  exhibition  which  then 
distinguished  Lisbon  from  all  other  capitals  of  Europe, 
was  the  celebration  of  Bull  Feasts.  They  were  held 
every  Sunday,  during  the  Summer  and  Autumn.  I 
have  been  present  at  many  of  them.  However  bar- 
barous the  diversion  might  justly  be  esteemed,  it  is  the 
only  one  that  I  ever  witnessed,  which  could  be  said  to 
realize  in  some  measure,  the  Amphitheatrical  games  of 
antient  Rome,  exhibited  in  the  Circus.  They  were 
already  extinct  in  Spain,  where  Charles  the  Third  had 
abolished  them,  on  his  ascending  the  throne  in  1759. 
Joseph,  and  the  Queen  his  wife,  on  the  contrary, 
nourished  the  strongest  partiality,  or  rather  decided 
passion,  for  these  games  of  Moresco  origin  ;  which  they 
never  failed  to  attend,  unless  prevented  by  illness.  I 
have  seen  the  King  there,  though  one  of  his  eyes  was 
swelled  and  bandaged ;  caused  by  the  effect  of  a  spark 
that  had  flown  into  it  from  the  flint  of  his  fowling 
piece,  when  firing  it  at  the  chace.  Those  persons  who 
have  formed  their  ideas  of  Bull  Feasts,  from  the  enter- 
taining descriptions  of  the  Countess  d'Aubnoi,  which 
she  has  enlivened  by  amorous,  as  well  as  by  tragical 
adventures ;  and  which  were  written  at  Madrid,  under 
the  reign  of  Charles  the  Second,  last  Prince  of  the 
Austrian  line,  in  1679  and  1680;  would  have  esteemed 
the  diversion  tame,  as  it  was  exhibited  at  Lisbon,  before 
Joseph  the  First.  Yet  was  it  not  altogether  divested 
of  something  that  reminded  me  of  the  Tournaments 
and  exercises  of  Chivalry,  with  which  our  imaginations 
are  so  warmly  impressed  in  youth.  The  Portugueze 
Bull  Feasts  were  celebrated  in  a  large  wooden  Amphi- 
theatre, capable  of  commodiously  containing  many 
thousand  persons ;  surrounded  with  benches  below,  to 
a  considerable  height,  which  were  surmounted  by  tiers 
of  boxes.  The  Arena  was  very  ample  and  spacious. 
When  the  Champion,  who  was  about  to  engage  the 
Bulls,  gaily  dressed,  mounted  on  a  spirited  horse,  a 

27 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

spear  in  his  hand,  appeared  upon  the  ground,  and 
saluted  the  Corporation  of  Lisbon,  as  was  the  custom, 
the  effect  of  the  Spectacle  is  not  easy  to  describe  in 
adequate  terms.  From  sixteen  to  twenty  Bulls  were 
regularly  sacrificed  every  Sunday ;  and  though  circular 
pieces  of  leather  were  fastened  on  their  horns,  in  order 
to  prevent  their  ripping  up  or  mortally  wounding  the 
combatants,  yet  I  have  witnessed  many  very  severe, 
and  several  nearly  fatal  accidents.  Prodigious  dexterity, 
vigor,  and  address,  were  displayed  by  some  of  the 
horsemen ;  particularly  by  a  Castilian,  who  generally 
made  his  appearance,  and  whom  I  have  often  seen 
drive  his  spear,  at  the  first  thrust,  direct  into  the 
Bull's  heart,  when  the  animal  was  running  furiously  at 
him.  The  Amphitheatre  then  rang  with  applauses. 

It  frequently  happened,  that  the  Bulls  wanted  spirit 
or  inclination  for  the  contest.  In  those  cases,  the 
Spectacle  became  rather  a  butchery,  than  a  combat, 
or  an  amusement :  but  some  of  them  would  not  have 
disgraced  a  Roman  Amphitheatre,  if,  (as  I  have  been 
assured  was  customary  a  century  earlier) ;  their  horns, 
instead  of  being  blunted  or  covered,  had  been  filed  and 
sharpened  to  a  point.  Several  of  the  men  who  fought 
on  foot,  exhibited  extraordinary  agility  and  coolness, 
in  eluding  the  rage  of  the  incensed  animal ;  but  it 
must  at  the  same  time  be  remembered,  that  they  were 
commonly  six  or  seven  combined,  all  armed  with  long 
spears.  I  have  seen  women  engage  the  bull,  ride 
up,  and  wound  him.  Two  in  particular,  who  were 
DancerinaS)  or  Posture  -  girls ;  one  a  Venetian,  the 
other  a  Spaniard,  habited  as  men,  and  sitting  astride, 
possessed  great  firmness,  and  excited  general  admira- 
tion. Sometimes  the  Bulls  were  furnished  by  the 
Court.  I  have  beheld  twenty  killed  in  the  course  of 
three  hours ;  eight  of  which  were  given  by  the  King, 
as  many  more  by  Don  Pedro  his  brother,  two  by  the 
Duke  de  Cadaval,  and  two,  (however  singular  it  may 

28 


THE  SPECTATORS 

seem,)  by  the  Patriarch  of  Lisbon.  After  having 
witnessed  several  of  these  Exhibitions,  I  confess  that  I 
became  disgusted  with  them.  The  most  interesting 
part  consisted  in  the  assemblage  of  spectators,  particu- 
larly Ladies,  who  filled  the  Boxes.  Even  the  seats  in 
the  Pit,  were  generally  crowded  with  females.  The 
Queen,  and  her  three  daughters,  never  failed  to  attend 
in  the  Royal  Box ;  though  they  were  considered  to  be 
there  Incognito.  However  barbarous  the  diversion 
must  be  regarded,  it  always  reminded  me  of  Milton's 
description  of  the  entertainments, 

"  Where  throngs  of  Knights  and  Barons  bold, 
In  weeds  of  peace,  high  triumphs  hold ; 
With  store  of  Ladies,  whose  bright  eyes 
Rain  influence,  and  judge  the  Prize." 

As  soon  as  the  Bull  Feast  ended,  which  was  commonly 
about  six  o'clock,  the  King,  Queen,  and  Royal  family 
immediately  repaired  to  the  Italian  Opera,  which  was 
at  a  very  inconsiderable  distance,  in  the  same  quarter 
of  Lisbon.  Such  was  the  invariable  Usage  or  Etiquette, 
every  Sunday.  Yet,  there,  as  at  the  Bull  Feast,  though 
seated  in  the  front  of  the  Theatre,  they  were  supposed 
to  preserve  their  Incognito.  Joseph's  dress,  on  these 
occasions,  was  always  a  full-trimmed  suit  of  silk,  or  of 
cloth ;  either  quite  plain,  or  embroidered  with  white 
silk ;  the  sumptuary  laws  of  Portugal  prohibiting 
embroidery  of  gold  or  silver.  He  wore  a  flowing  tye- 
wig,  as  we  see  George  the  Second  represented  in  his 
portraits ;  and  the  Portugueze  Order  of  Christ,  on  his 
breast.  The  Queen  and  Princesses  were  covered  with 
diamonds ;  in  particular,  the  Princess  of  Brazil :  but 
the  Queen  alone  wore  Rouge,  from  the  use  of  which  her 
daughters  abstained.  During  the  course  of  the  per- 
formance, His  Majesty  never  failed  to  go  round  to  his 
private  Box,  close  to  the  Stage,  in  order  to  view  the 

29 


WRAXALKS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

Ballets,  after  each  of  which  he  returned  to  the  Roy* 
family.  On  these  little  excursions,  which  he  always 
seemed  to  enjoy,  and  during  which  he  generally  made 
the  best  use  of  his  time,  with  his  Opera  glass,  in  con- 
templating the  female  part  of  the  audience  who  filled 
the  side  Boxes,  several  noblemen  accompanied  him. 
The  Count  de  Prado  alone  possessed  the  privilege  of 
being  seated,  when  with  the  Sovereign ;  a  mark  of 
distinguished  regard  and  predilection.  To  him,  Joseph 
appeared  to  communicate  all  his  confidential  discourse, 
while  the  other  individuals  in  attendance,  remained 
standing  behind  him.  Even  the  Duke  de  Cadaval, 
though  the  sole  person  of  that  high  rank  in  the 
kingdom  of  Portugal ;  there  being  no  other  since  the 
extinction  of  the  Dukedom  of  Aveiro ;  yet  was  never 
permitted  to  sit  down,  in  company  with  the  King. 
After  the  Count  de  Prado,  the  two  Counts  of  Cantineida, 
and  of  Arcos,  both  sons  of  the  Marquis  de  Marialva, 
whose  name  always  brought  Gil  Bias  before  my  imagina- 
tion ;  enjoyed,  in  1772,  the  highest  place  in  Joseph's 
personal  favor.  The  former,  I  mean  the  Count  de  Canti- 
neida, was  the  only  Nobleman  in  the  kingdom,  allowed  by 
a  special  grace  of  the  Crown,  to  drive  in  a  coach  and  six, 
with  which  equipage  the  King  himself  had  presented  him. 
The  memorable  Earthquake  of  the  1st  of  November, 
1755,  had  impressed  on  almost  every  part  of  Lisbon, 
the  most  awful  traces  of  its  existence  and  ravages,  at 
the  time  when  I  visited  that  capital.  Many  edifices 
still  remained  exactly  in  the  condition  that  they  were 
left ;  presenting  such  scenes  of  devastation  and  destruc- 
tion, as  would  have  been  vainly  sought  for  elsewhere. 
Among  them,  the  antient  palace  of  the  Dukes  of 
Braganza,  which  was  built  on  a  commanding  eminence, 
in  the  center  of  the  Metropolis;  and  the  Cathedral 
of  Lisbon,  stood  conspicuous.  Both  these  majestic 
structures  hourly  threatened  to  crush  the  tenant,  or  the 
devotee,  who  ventured  to  enter  them.  Yet  the  former 

30 


CERVANTES  AND  CAMOENS 

pile  was  inhabited  by  various  families  or  individuals, 
who  sought  shelter  under  the  tottering  roof;  and 
superstition  or  devotion  had  consecrated  chapels  in  the 
latter,  amidst  the  ruins  of  altars  and  domes,  where 
Masses  were  daily  celebrated.  I  was  peculiarly  led  to 
visit  the  Cathedral,  by  the  hope  of  finding  the  tomb  of 
Cam  bens,  the  celebrated  Portugueze  poet,  whose  body, 
as  I  had  been  assured,  was  there  interred.  But  I  could 
discover  no  proofs  of  any  such  interment,  though  I  made 
every  inquiry;  and  I  have  reason  to  believe,  after  all 
the  researches  in  my  power,  that  as  he  unquestionably 
expired  in  a  public  hospital,  of  a  disease  which,  from 
its  contagious  nature,  resembled  the  plague,  he  was 
thrown  into  a  common  grave,  with  a  number  of  other 
dead  bodies.  It  is  certain  that  no  monument  was  ever 
erected  to  his  memory. 

A  striking,  and  a  melancholy  conformity  exists, 
between  the  destiny  of  the  two  most  illustrious  men 
of  genius,  whom  Spain  and  Portugal  have  produced  in 
modern  ages.  I  mean,  Cervantes,  and  Camoens :  a 
conformity  which  reflects  no  honor  on  those  countries, 
or  on  the  sovereigns  and  Ministers,  who  thus  abandoned 
them  to  the  rigors  of  adversity.  Both  served  on  the 
expeditions  undertaken  against  the  Mahometans,  in  the 
capacity  of  private  soldiers ;  and  both  were  wounded. 
Camoens  lost  an  eye,  before  the  town  of  Ceuta  in 
Morocco ;  and  Cervantes  lost  his  left  hand,  at  the 
celebrated  naval  battle  of  Lepanto,  gained  by  Don 
John  of  Austria  in  1571,  over  the  Turks.  Each  of 
them  underwent  captivity,  shipwreck,  and  all  the 
calamities  of  adverse  fortune.  Returning  to  their 
native  country,  both  were  admired,  and  deserted.  John 
the  Third,  and  Sebastian,  Kings  of  Portugal,  seem  to 
have  done  as  little  for  Camoens,  as  Philip  the  Second 
and  Third,  the  Sovereigns  of  Spain,  did  for  Cervantes. 
Each  of  them  attained  to  an  advanced  age,  amidst  the 
pressure  of  diseases,  penury?  and  privations.  Camoens 

31 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

breathed  his  last  at  Lisbon,  in  1579,  at  about  sixty-two 
years  of  age,  in  an  Hospital ;  reproaching  his  country- 
men, as  is  asserted,  for  their  cruel  neglect.  Cervantes, 
worn  out  by  the  progress  of  a  dropsy,  rendered  more 
severe  by  want,  preserved  his  constitutional  gaiety  of 
disposition  to  the  last  moments  of  his  existence  ;  expired, 
it  may  be  almost  said,  with  the  pen  in  his  hand ;  and 
seemed  to  triumph  over  dissolution,  by  the  elasticity 
and  energy  of  his  mind.  He  died  at  Madrid,  in  1616  ; 
a  year  which  likewise  deprived  the  world  of  Shakespear ! 
The  author  of  the  "  Lusiad,"  and  the  writer  of  "  Don 
Quixote,""  were  both  thrown  into  the  ground,  without 
even  the  decencies  of  an  ordinary  funeral ;  nor  can  the 
spot  where  either  of  their  remains  are  deposited,  be 
even  ascertained  at  the  present  time.  It  is  impossible 
to  consider  these  facts,  without  emotions  of  mingled 
concern  and  indignation.  Yet,  Spenser,  Otway,  and 
Chatterton,  among  us,  appear  to  have  experienced  no 
milder  a  fate. 

If  I  could  not  discover  the  place  of  Camoens's  inter- 
ment, I  at  least  found  out  the  grave  and  tombstone  of 
the  author  of  "  Tom  Jones.1'  Fielding,  who  terminated 
his  life,  as  is  well  known,  at  Lisbon,  in  1754,  of  a 
complication  of  disorders,  at  little  more  than  forty 
seven  years  of  age,  lies  buried  in  the  Cimetery  appropri- 
ated to  the  English  Factory.  I  visited  his  grave,  which 
was  already  nearly  concealed  by  weeds  and  nettles. 
Though  he  did  not  suffer  the  extremity  of  distress 
under  which  Camoens  and  Cervantes  terminated  their 
lives ;  yet  his  extravagance,  a  quality  so  commonly 
characteristic  of  men  distinguished  by  talents,  embittered 
the  evening  of  his  days.  Fielding,  Richardson,  and  Le 
Sage,  seem  to  have  attained  the  highest  eminence  in 
that  seductive  species  of  composition,  unknown  to 
antiquity,  which  we  denominate  Novels.  Crebillon, 
Marivaux,  and  Smollett,  only  occupy  the  second  place. 
Voltaire  and  Rousseau  are  rather  satirical  or  philo- 


"AMELIA"  AND  "TOM  JONES" 

sophical  moralists,  than  Novellists.  "  Don  Quixote  "  is 
a  work  sui  generis,  and  not  amenable  to  ordinary  rules. 
"  Gil  Bias  "  seems  to  stand  alone,  and  will  probably  be 
read  with  avidity  in  every  age,  and  every  country. 
Though  the  scene  lies  in  Spain,  and  the  characters  are 
Spaniards,  the  manners  are  universal;  and  true  to 
nature  equally  in  Madrid,  in  Paris,  or  in  London. 
Richardson  and  Fielding  are  more  national,  and  cannot 
be  read  with  the  same  delight  on  the  banks  of  the 
Seyne,  or  the  Tyber,  as  on  those  of  the  Thames ;  though 
the  former  writer  transports  us  to  Bologna,  in  his  Sir 
Charles  Grandison.  Fielding  never  attempts  to  carry 
us  out  of  England,  and  his  actors  are  all  Aborigines. 
Foreigners  neither  can  taste  his  works,  nor  will  he  ever 
attain  to  the  fame  of  Richardson,  beyond  the  limits  of 
his  own  country.  Clementina  and  Clarissa  will  pene- 
trate, where  Sophia  Western  and  Parson  Adams  never 
can  be  known.  Joseph  Andrews  and  Amelia  are,  in 
point  of  composition,  to  Fielding,  what  Pamela  is  to 
Richardson. 

The  late  Alderman  Cadell,  who  was  one  of  the  most 
intelligent,  honourable,  and  superior  men  of  his 
profession ;  told  me  that  his  predecessor,  Millar,  the 
Bookseller,  bought  Fielding's  Amelia  of  the  author; 
giving  him  for  the  Copy  right,  eight  hundred  Pounds ; 
a  great  sum  at  that  time.  After  making  the  purchase, 
Millar  shewed  the  Manuscript  to  Sir  Andrew  Mitchell, 
who  subsequently  filled  the  post  of  British  Minister  at 
Berlin ;  requesting  to  have  his  opinion  of  the  work. 
Sir  Andrew  observed,  to  him,  that  it  bore  the  indelible 
marks  of  Fielding's  genius,  and  was  a  fine  performance  ; 
but,  nevertheless,  far  beneath  "  Tom  Jones ;"  finally 
advising  him  to  get  rid  of  it  as  soon  as  he  could.  Millar 
did  not  neglect  the  counsel,  though  he  was  too  able  a 
man  to  divulge  the  opinion  delivered  by  his  friend.  On 
the  contrary,  at  the  first  sale  which  he  made  to  the 
Trade,  he  said,  "  Gentlemen,  I  have  several  works  to 

33  3 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

"  put  up,  for  which  I  shall  be  glad  if  you  will  bid :  but, 
"  as  to  Amelia,  every  Copy  is  already  bespoke."  This 
Manoeuvre  had  its  effect.  All  the  Booksellers  were 
anxious  to  get  their  names  put  down  for  copies  of  it, 
and  the  edition,  though  very  large,  was  immediately 
sold. 

All  the  most  interesting  particulars  of  the  Earthquake 
of  1755,  have  been  recounted  to  me  by  many  of  those 
persons  who  shared  in,  and  survived  the  horrors  of  that 
calamitous  day,  on  which  near  forty  thousand  persons 
were  believed  to  have  perished.  They  agreed,  that  if 
it  had  taken  place  in  the  middle  of  the  night,  when  the 
fires  were  in  general  extinguished,  and  when  the  darkness 
would  have  prevented  the  greater  part  of  the  inhabitants 
from  quitting  their  houses  before  day-break ;  not  a 
fourth  part  of  the  lives  would  have  been  lost,  nor  de- 
struction have  followed.  Prodigious  numbers  were  swept 
off  from  the  Quays,  by  the  sudden  rise  of  the  Tagus  ;  and 
the  conflagration  which  succeeded  the  Earthquake, 
spread  even  greater  devastation  than  did  that  convulsion 
of  nature.  The  first  shock,  which  came  on  about  forty 
minutes  after  nine  in  the  morning,  seemed  to  be 
horizontal  in  its  direction  or  movement :  Jbut  the 
second  shock  was  perpendicular  or  vertical;  throwing 
up  the  pavement  of  the  streets  to  the  heighth  of  forty 
and  fifty  feet  into  the  air.  Near  an  hour  intervened 
between  the  two  concussions.  The  King,  Queen,  and 
Royal  Family,  by  good  fortune,  were  not  at  the  palace 
in  Lisbon,  but  at  Belem,  which  stands  near  two  miles 
lower  down,  on  the  same  side  of  the  river.  As  the 
apartments  which  they  inhabited,  were  all  built  on  the 
ground,  His  Majesty  leaped  out  of  the  window  of  his 
chamber,  into  the  garden,  on  first  perceiving  the  shock  ; 
while  the  three  Princesses,  his  daughters,  who  were 
either  not  yet  risen,  or  not  dressed,  followed  him, 
wrapped  in  the  bed-clothes. 

Lisbon  has,  in  all  ages,  been  subject  to  the  awful 
34 


EARTHQUAKES  OF  1522,  1755,  AND  1783 

visitation  and  ravages  of  Earthquakes.  History  com- 
memorates several,  during  the  lapse  of  the  last  six 
Centuries,  which  have  successively  laid  that  Capital  in 
ruins,  and  buried  or  ingulphed  a  large  part  of  the 
population.  The  most  destructive  in  modern  times, 
previous  to  1755,  happened  in  February,  1522,  soon 
after  the  decease  of  Emanuel,  in  the  first  year  of  the 
reign  of  his  son,  John  the  Third.  The  concussions  of  the 
earth  then  lasted  during  eight  days  ;  but  do  not  appear 
to  have  produced  a  conflagration  as  ruinous  or  extensive, 
as  that  which  took  place  under  Joseph ;  though  more 
than  fifteen  hundred  houses,  besides  churches,  palaces, 
and  public  edifices  of  every  kind,  were  destroyed.  Thirty 
thousand  persons  perished  in  Lisbon  alone;  while 
Santarem,  Almerin,  and  many  other  places,  were 
swallowed  up,  together  with  their  inhabitants.  John 
the  Third,  his  Queen,  and  the  royal  family,  were 
compelled  to  encamp  in  the  fields,  under  tents,  just  as 
Joseph  did  in  November,  1755.  Great  as  these  convul- 
sions of  Nature  were,  they  may  nevertheless  be  esteemed 
slight,  both  in  their  extent  and  in  their  effects,  if  compared 
with  those  which  desolated  Calabria,  in  more  recent 
periods,  as  late  as  the  year  1783. 

It  is  evident  that  the  Earthquake  of  1755,  ran  in 
a  kind  of  vein,  principally  ravaging  a  circle  or  space 
of  about  four  to  five  miles ;  which  was  reduced  to  a 
state  of  desolation,  by  the  fire  that  followed  it.  The 
"  Alfama,"  or  ancient  Moorish  city,  situate  higher  up 
the  river,  as  well  as  the  Suburb  of  Belem,  lower  down 
the  Tagus ;  though  both  may  be  said  to  form  a  part  of 
Lisbon,  nearly  as  Wapping  and  Westminster  constitute 
portions  of  London ;  yet  received,  comparatively,  little 
injury.  The  principal  edifices,  and  even  the  houses  in 
both,  remained,  if  not  unshaken,  yet  undemolished.  In 
1772,  rather  more  than  half  the  space  originally  laid 
waste  by  the  Earthquake  and  fire,  had  been  rebuilt. 
Some  of  the  new  streets  might  even  vie  in  regularity  and 

35 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

magnificence,  with  those  of  any  Capital  in  Europe; 
forming  an  astonishing  contrast  with  the  filth,  antiquity, 
and  barbarism,  characteristic  of  the  Eastern  extremity, 
or  "  Alfama." 

The  family  of  Braganza  has  not  produced,  even  down 
to  the  present  time,  any  Sovereign  endowed  with  talents 
such  as  distinguished  the  two  Kings,  John  the  Second, 
and  Emanuel,  who  reigned  over  the  Portugueze  in  the 
fifteenth  and  sixteenth  Centuries.  John  the  Fourth 
himself,  founder  of  the  Braganza  line,  though  he  effected 
the  recovery  of  their  national  independence,  seemed  to 
be  in  no  degree  qualified  by  nature,  for  the  performance 
of  so  perilous  a  task.  Gustavus  Vasa,  who  expelled  the 
tyrant  Christian  the  Second,  from  Sweden ;  Henry  the 
Fourth,  who  crushed  "  the  League  "  in  France ;  William 
the  First,  and  William  the  Third,  Princes  of  Orange, 
who  successively  liberated  the  Dutch ;  the  former,  from 
the  yoke  of  Spain,  and  the  latter,  from  the  arms  of 
Louis  the  XlVth  ; — all  these  were  superior  men,  endowed 
with  energies  such  as  Providence  confers  on  heroes. 
But,  the  Duke  of  Braganza  was  an  ordinary  individual, 
whose  abilities  were  of  the  most  moderate  description  : 
even  his  personal  courage  was  never  proved  in  the  Field. 
It  was  the  heroic  spirit  of  his  Consort,  which  supplying 
these  defects,  impelled  him  to  seize  the  Crown,  that  the 
weakness  and  incapacity  of  the  Spanish  Government 
might  be  said  to  tender  him.  She  was,  herself,  by  birth 
a  Spaniard,  daughter  of  the  Duke  of  Medina  Sidonia ; 
her  name,  Louisa  de  Guzman.  After  the  decease  of 
the  King,  her  husband,  in  1656,  she  continued  to  act  as 
Regent.  John  the  Fourth  left  two  sons,  the  eldest  of 
whom,  Alphonso  the  Sixth,  was  only  thirteen  years  of 
age.  Labouring  from  his  infancy  under  incurable 
maladies,  or  debilities  of  body  and  of  mind,  he  appears 
to  have  been  altogether  unfit  to  exercise  the  duties  or 
functions  of  Sovereign  Power.  While  his  mother  held 
the  reins  of  State,  Alphonso's  incapacity,  and  acts  of 

36 


ALPHONSO  VI.  AND  PEDRO  II. 

violence  or  of  imbecility,  were  prevented  from  exciting 
any  national  commotions  of  a  serious  nature :  but  after 
the  retreat  and  decease  of  that  illustrious  Princess  in 
1666,  his  deposition  speedily  followed.  It  was  merited 
by  his  excesses,  and  utter  inaptitude  for  Government. 
His  own  wife,  a  Princess  of  the  House  of  Nemours,  to 
whom  he  had  been  recently  married,  but  with  whom 
he  had  never  been  able  to  consummate  his  nuptials ; 
combining  with  Don  Pedro,  his  younger  brother,  a 
Prince  of  prudence,  energy,  and  ability ;  arrested  and 
deposed  Alphonso.  In  performing  this  Revolutionary 
act,  they  were  only  the  agents  and  instruments  of  the 
Nation,  who  unanimously  demanded,  sanctioned,  and 
maintained  it. 

Don  Pedro,  thus  called  to  the  supreme  authority  by 
the  voice  of  the  Portugueze,  at  twenty  years  of  age,  in 
1668,  did  not,  however,  assume  the  title  of  King.  Like 
the  present  Prince  Regent,  he  contented  himself  with 
that  denomination ;  but  he  married  Mary  of  Nemours, 
his  brother's  wife,  as  Henry  the  Eighth  of  England  had 
espoused  Catherine  of  Arragon.  Till  the  death  of 
Alphonso,  which  took  place  seventeen  years  later,  in 
1683,  Pedro  only  exercised  the  Regency.  Alphonso 
was  first  sent  to  the  Azores,  or  Western  Islands ;  where 
he  resided  for  some  years,  at  Terceira,  in  an  honorable 
restraint.  It  was  afterwards  judged  expedient  to 
conduct  him  back  to  Portugal,  and  to  confine  him  in 
one  of  the  royal  palaces,  at  Cintra  ;  a  village  not  remote 
from  Lisbon,  situate  towards  the  mouth  of  the  Tagus, 
in  a  country  abounding  with  natural  beauties  of  every 
kind,  which  render  it  one  of  the  most  delicious  and 
enchanting  spots  in  Europe.  At  a  more  recent  period, 
Cintra  has  attained  a  melancholy  celebrity,  from  the 
Convention  there  concluded  with  the  French,  in  1808. 
In  the  palace  at  that  place,  I  visited  the  apartment 
in  which  Alphonso  was  imprisoned,  and  where  he  ended 
his  days.  Though  become  somewhat  ruinous  in  1772, 

m 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

it  was  tolerably  spacious,  being  about  twenty  feet 
square,  and  proportionably  lofty.  He  passed  eleven 
years  as  a  captive  in  that  chamber.  Towards  the  latter 
part  of  his  life,  his  understanding,  naturally  very  weak, 
became  wholly  alienated.  He  grew  furious  to  such  a 
degree,  that  it  was  found  necessary  to  confine  him  by  an 
iron  rail,  which  surrounded  his  bed,  and  allowed  him 
only  a  space  of  about  fourteen  to  sixteen  feet,  for 
exercise.  The  bricks,  of  which  the  floor  was  composed, 
were  worn  away  in  this  track,  by  the  constant  action  of 
his  feet.  His  death,  however,  as  far  as  we  can  assert, 
or  are  warranted  to  conjecture,  was  not  accelerated  by 
any  act  of  violence.  It  is  an  extraordinary  circum- 
stance, that  Alphonso  terminated  his  unfortunate  life, 
on  the  12th  of  December,  1683  ;  and  that  his  former 
wife,  Mary  of  Nemours,  who  was  married  to  his  younger 
brother,  Don  Pedro,  died  on  the  17th  of  the  same 
month  and  year,  leaving  no  issue  by  that  Prince. 

Pedro  the  Second,  who  continued  to  reign  down  to 
the  commencement  of  the  last  Century,  in  1706  ;  was 
unquestionably  the  most  able  of  the  Sovereigns  that 
have  governed  Portugal,  from  1640  to  the  present  time. 
John  the  Fifth,  his  son  and  successor,  seems  to  have 
been  a  man  of  very  moderate  endowments;  fond  of 
show,  but  destitute  of  taste  ;  of  a  narrow  mind,  and 
enslaved  by  bigotry.  He  expended  forty-five  Millions 
of  Crusadoes,  or  near  four  Millions  Sterling,  in  the 
erection  of  a  Palace  at  Maffra,  about  five  leagues  north 
of  Cintra,  and  not  far  removed  from  the  shore  of  the 
Atlantic.  It  formed  a  monument  of  royal  prodigality, 
blended  with  superstition.  Who  can  believe,  that  in 
the  last  Century,  any  Prince  would  construct  a 
residence  in  imitation  or  emulation  of  the  Escurial  of 
Philip  the  Second  of  Spain  ?  John  did  not,  indeed, 
like  Philip,  build  the  Palace  of  Maffra,  in  the  form  of  a 
gridiron  ;  but  he  united  in  one  edifice,  precisely  as  that 
King  had  done,  a  Palace,  a  Church,  and  a  Convent. 

38 


THE  MARQUIS  DE  POMBAL 

The  church  occupied  the  centre  of  the  building; 
contiguous  to  it  being  placed  the  Cloisters;  together 
with  the  cells,  or  apartments  of  the  Monks.  Three 
hundred  Franciscan  Friars,  a  Monastic  order  distin- 
guished for  the  disgusting  filth  of  their  dress  and 
appearance,  were  there  stationed.  They  had  even  an 
hospital  in  the  central  part  of  the  edifice,  for  the  dis- 
eased and  infirm  members  of  the  Fraternity.  One  of 
the  first  acts  of  Joseph's  reign  was  to  dislodge  these 
religious  nuisances;  and  when  I  visited  Maffra,  they 
had  been  replaced  by  secular  priests,  fewer  in  number. 
The  palace,  dismantled,  forsaken,  and  forming  alto- 
gether an  appendage  to  the  Convent,  extended  in 
two  wings,  on  either  side,  and  behind  the  church :  but 
it  had  no  gardens,  nor  pleasure  grounds  of  any  kind. 
Such  was  Maffra,  the  Versailles  of  Portugal ;  placed, 
like  that  palace,  in  a  situation  little  favoured  by 
nature  !  John  the  Fifth  expended  more  beneficially  the 
treasures  of  the  state,  in  constructing  the  Aqueduct  of 
Alcantra,  scarcely  a  mile  out  of  Lisbon,  which  supplies 
the  capital,  in  a  great  measure,  with  water.  In  solidity 
and  grandeur,  it  is  a  work  worthy  of  ancient  Rome : 
crossing  a  deep  valley  or  Ravine,  from  one  mountain  to 
another,  on  arches;  the  central  one  of  which  is  three 
hundred  feet  in  height,  and  ninety  in  breadth.  The 
Earthquake  of  1755,  spared  this  monument  of  national 
utility,  which  received  little  injury  from  that  shock  ; 
and  the  construction  of  which  reconciled  me  in  some 
measure,  to  the  Sovereign  by  whom  it  was  raised. 

The  reign  of  Joseph  may  be  more  properly  de- 
nominated the  Administration  of  the  Conde  de  Oeyras, 
created  afterwards  Marquis  de  Pombal,  than  it  can  be 
characterized  by  any  other  description.  The  name  of 
this  Minister  was  Sebastian  Joseph  Carvalho.  His 
birth,  noble,  but  not  illustrious,  would  never  have 
opened  him  a  way  to  power,  if  it  had  not  been  aided 
by  extraordinary  talents.  Maria  Anna  of  Austria, 

39 


WRAXALKS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

daughter  of  the  Emperor  Leopold  the  First,  and  Queen 
of  John  the  Fifth,  recommended  him  to  her  son  Joseph  ; 
who,  on   his  accession  to  the  throne   in  1750,  named 
Carvalho,  Secretary  for  foreign  affairs.     His  own  abilities 
achieved   the   rest.     On   him   Joseph   seemed   to   have 
devolved  the  exclusive  and  absolute  Government  of  the 
State,  nor  was  he  unworthy  of  that  selection.     At  the 
time  that  I  saw  him,  he  had  attained  his  seventy-third 
year ;  but  age  appeared  neither  to  have  diminished  the 
vigor,   freshness,  nor  activity  of  his   faculties.     In  his 
person  he  was  very  tall  and  slender ;  his  face  long,  pale, 
meagre,  and  full  of  intelligence.     He  was  so  unpopular, 
and  so  many  attempts  had   been    made   to  assassinate 
him,  that  he  never  went  out  without  guards.     Even  in 
the    streets   of    Lisbon,   his    carriage    was    always   ac- 
companied or  surrounded  by  a  detachment  of  Cavalry, 
with  their  swords  drawn,  for  his  protection.     He  was, 
indeed,  not  less  odious  to  the  Nobility  and  Clergy,  than 
to   the   people ;    perhaps,   even   more   so ;   one   of  the 
great  objects  of  his  policy,  during  more  than  twenty 
years,   having   been    to   reduce    the    Aristocratic   and 
Ecclesiastical    Privileges    of    every   kind,   to    a    strict 
dependance   on  the  crown  and  government.     In  1772, 
the  state  prisons  were  full  of  unfortunate  victims.     The 
tower  of  Belem,  the  fort  of  the  Bougie,  situate  at  the 
mouth  of  the  Tagus,  and  the  castle  of  St.  Julien,  placed 
at  the  northern  entrance  of  that  river,  were  all  crowded 
with  prisoners,  of  which,  a  great  proportion  had  been 
Jesuits,  arrested  in  1758,  or  in  1763,  by  the  Minister. 
The  subterranean  Casemates  of  the  Castle  of  St.  Julien 
contained  above  a   hundred  individuals,  who  could  be 
seen  by  persons  walking  on  the  ramparts  of  the  fortress, 
through  the  iron  gratings  which  admitted  some  light  to 
those  gloomy  abodes.     I  have,  myself,  beheld  many  of 
them,  at  the  depth  of  fifty    or   sixty   feet  below   me, 
ing  to  and  fro ;  most  of  whom,  being  Jesuits,  were 
abited  in  the  dress  of  the  Order.     They  excited  great 

40 


GABRIEL  MALAGRIDA 

commiseration.  The  famous  Gabriel  Malagrida,  an 
Italian  Jesuit,  who  was  accused  of  having,  as  Confessor 
to  the  Marchioness  of  Tavora,  known  and  encouraged 
her  to  the  attempt  upon  Joseph's  life ;  after  being  long 
imprisoned  in  that  fortress,  was  burnt  at  the  stake  in 
1761.  He  appears  to  have  been  rather  a  visionary, 
and  an  imbecile  Fanatic,  than  a  man  of  dangerous  parts. 
His  public  execution,  when  near  seventy-five  years  of 
age,  must  be  considered  as  a  cruel  and  odious  act,  which 
reflects  disgrace  on  Joseph,  and  on  his  Minister.  Mala- 
grida's  name  is  become  proverbial  among  us,  to  express 
duplicity ;  and  has  been  applied  to  one  of  our  greatest 
modern  Statesmen,  by  his  political  opponents.  Many 
other  persons,  of  all  ranks,  either  known,  or  believed 
to  have  been,  implicated  in  the  Duke  d'Aveiro^s 
conspiracy,  remained  still  shut  up  in  the  various  State 
Prisons  of  Portugal.  Most,  or  all  of  these  unhappy 
sufferers  who  survived,  have,  I  believe,  been  since  liber- 
ated, in  1777,  on  the  Accession  of  the  present  Queen. 

In  extenuation,  if  not  in  justification  of  the  first 
Minister,  and  of  Joseph,  it  must  however  be  admitted, 
that  the  national  character  of  the  Portugueze,  at  once 
bigotted,  sanguinary,  and  vindictive,  demanded  a  severe 
Government.  They  were  neither  to  be  reformed,  en- 
lightened, nor  coerced,  by  gentle  and  palliative  remedies. 
At  the  decease  of  John  the  Fifth,  the  streets  of  Lisbon, 
even  in  the  most  frequented  quarters,  exhibited  per- 
petual scenes  of  violence,  and  of  murder,  during  the 
night.  Dead  bodies,  stabbed,  and  covered  with  wounds, 
were  left  exposed  in  the  squares  and  public  places.  But, 
before  1772,  the  Police,  introduced  and  rigorously 
enforced  by  the  Marquis  de  Pombal,  had  almost  ex- 
tinguished these  enormities;  and  had  rendered  the 
Capital  nearly  as  secure  as  London.  During  my 
residence  there,  of  many  weeks,  such  was  the  vigilance 
of  the  Patrole,  that  only  one  assassination  was  com- 
mitted ;  and  I  have  returned  home,  alone,  on  foot,  at 

41 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

the  latest  hours,  without  danger  or  -apprehension.  Nor 
were  the  cares  of  the  First  Minister  limited  to  the  mere 
protection  of  the  Metropolis.  Its  re-edification,  salu- 
brity, and  improvement  in  every  sense,  occupied  his 
capacious  mind.  Lisbon  might  truly  be  said  to  rise 
from  its  ashes,  as  antient  Rome  did  under  Augustus, 
renewed  and  beautified.  The  education  of  the  young 
Nobility  formed,  likewise,  a  distinguished  object  of  his 
regard.  A  College,  founded  solely  for  their  benefit,  at 
an  immense  expence,  was  already  nearly  completed.  I 
visited  it,  as  I  did  the  manufactures  of  silk,  of  lace,  of 
ivory,  and  many  others,  carrying  on  under  his  auspices. 
All  these  bespoke  a  great  and  elevated  understanding, 
intent  on  ameliorating  the  order  of  things,  and  ani- 
mated by  very  salutary  or  enlarged  views.  But,  the 
greater  number  of  the  Marquis  de  PombaPs  institutions, 
edifices,  and  fabricks,  being  incomplete,  demanded  time 
or  funds  for  their  entire  accomplishment.  The  detesta- 
tion in  which  he  was  held,  impeded  their  progress ;  nor 
was  it  doubted,  that  as  soon  as  the  present  Queen,  then 
Princess  of  Brazil,  should  succeed  to  the  throne,  her 
superstition,  or  her  prejudices,  would  overturn  all 
that  Joseph  and  his  Minister  had  done,  to  introduce 
improvements  or  reforms  into  Portugal.  The  event 
justified  this  prediction. 

Joseph's  reign,  which  had  been  marked  by  earth- 
quakes, conspiracies,  and  war,  was  regarded  by  the 
Portugueze  nation,  not  without  some  apparent  reason, 
as  a  most  calamitous  period.  Yet  if  we  compare  the 
misfortunes  of  that  time,  with  those  which  have  suc- 
ceeded, when  the  Sovereign,  the  Royal  Family,  and  the 
principal  Nobility,  have  been  compelled  to  abandon 
their  native  country,  in  order  to  seek  an  Asylum  in  South 
America ;  while  the  Capital  and  the  provinces  have 
been  occupied,  over-run,  and  plundered,  by  a  revolu- 
tionary enemy  of  the  most  rapacious  description  ; — how 
comparatively  tolerable  were  the  evils  endured  under 

42 


DISAPPEARANCE  OF  SEBASTIAN 

Joseph,  when  placed  near  those  to  which  Portugal  has 
been  subjected  under  his  daughter !  They  may  be  said 
to  have  equalled,  if  they  did  not  exceed,  between  1807 
and  1810,  the  degradation  and  subversion  which 
followed  the  death  of  Sebastian,  in  the  sixteenth 
century,  when  Philip  the  Second  rendered  himself 
master  of  the  kingdom.  Having  mentioned  Sebastian, 
I  shall  say  a  few  words  on  the  history  of  that  unfortu- 
nate prince.  It  is  well  known  that  he  perished  or 
disappeared,  in  the  famous  battle  of  Arzila,  on  the 
coast  of  Barbary,  fought  on  the  4th  of  August,  1578. 
I  have  seen,  in  the  royal  palace  at  Cintra,  a  little  open 
court  or  balcony,  adjoining  one  of  the  rooms  of  state, 
in  which  was  constructed  a  stone  chair  or  seat,  coated 
with  a  sort  of  coarse  porcelain ;  a  bench  of  the  same 
materials  extending  on  each  side.  In  that  chair,  while 
his  Ministers  sat  round  him,  Sebastian,  as  constant 
tradition  asserts,  held  the  memorable  Council,  in  which 
the  enterprize  against  Morocco  was  resolved  on,  contrary 
to  the  advice  and  opinions  of  his  more  prudent 
Counsellors.  That  he  was  no  more  seen  after  the  day 
of  the  battle  of  Arzila,  by  the  Portugueze,  is  certain ; 
but  it  is  not  absolutely  ascertained  beyond  all  doubt, 
that  he  perished  there.  His  body  was  never  found,  or 
at  least,  was  never  identified  ;  and  I  have  conversed  with 
very  judicious  men  at  Lisbon,  who  inclined  to  believe, 
that  the  individual  who  appeared  at  Venice  in  1598, 
asserting  himself  to  be  Sebastian,  was  really  that  prince. 
Joseph  had  one  sister,  named  Barbara,  who  was 
married,  at  seventeen  years  of  age,  to  Ferdinand, 
Prince  of  Asturias,  youngest  of  the  sons  of  Philip  the 
Fifth,  King  of  Spain,  by  his  first  queen,  and  who 
afterwards  succeeded  him  in  the  Spanish  throne.  This 
princess,  who  seems  to  have  been  entirely  under  the 
dominion  of  superstition  and  of  music ;  before  she 
quitted  Lisbon,  in  order  to  become  the  wife  of  Ferdi- 
nand, in  1729,  having  repaired  to  the  church  of  the 

43 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

"Madre  de  Dios,"  or  Mother  of  God,  situate  on  the 
banks  of  the  Tagus,  in  the  suburbs ;  there  made  a 
solemn  offering  to  the  Virgin,  of  the  rich  dress,  laces, 
and  valuable  jewels,  which  she  had  worn  at  the  ceremony 
of  her  espousals.  I  was  induced  to  visit  the  church,  for 
the  purpose  of  viewing  this  magnificent  sacrifice,  or 
renunciation  of  female  ornament.  The  image  was 
habited  from  head  to  foot,  in  the  finest  lace;  the 
stomacher,  necklace,  and  ear-rings,  being  altogether 
composed  of  Brilliants.  Lady  Wortley  Montagu 
remarks,  in  one  of  her  Letters,  written  from  some  part 
of  Germany,  I  believe,  from  Cologne  ;  that  in  her  time,  as 
early  as  1717,  or  1718,  the  knavery  of  the  priests  had 
already  removed,  in  most,  or  in  many  of  the  Catholic 
Churches,  the  precious  stones  which  devotees  had  pre- 
sented to  the  Saints ;  substituting  paste,  or  other  imita- 
tions in  their  place.  This  assertion  may  have  been  well 
founded,  relative  to  Germany ;  but  was  not  true  in 
Portugal,  at  a  much  later  period.  I  viewed  these 
diamonds,  by  permission  of  the  priests,  very  closely, 
through  the  Medium  of  a  glass  case,  in  which  the  Virgin 
herself  was  inclosed ;  and  I  have  not  the  slightest  doubt 
that  they  were  the  identical  jewels,  presented  by  the 
Princess  on  the  above-mentioned  occasion.  At  the  feet 
of  his  Mother,  secured  within  the  same  case,  lay  a  waxen 
figure  of  the  infant  Jesus,  wrapt  in  similar  attire,  and 
reposing  in  a  cradle  of  solid  silver.  How  long  these 
costly  articles  of  dress  may  have  remained  unremoved 
in  the  church  of  the  "  Madre  de  Dios,1'  since  I  saw  them, 
I  cannot  pretend  to  say  :  but  we  may  presume  that  the 
Prince  Regent,  when  he  embarked  for  Rio  Janeiro,  did 
not  leave  them  behind,  for  the  Duchess  of  Abrantes, 
or  the  revolutionary  rapacity  of  the  French  Generals ; 
who  would  no  more  have  spared  them,  than  the  Elder 
Dionysius  did  the  golden  beard  of  Esculapius,  or  the 
mantle  of  Jupiter. 

The  Princess  Barbara,  who  became  Queen  of  Spain  in 
44 


FERDINAND  VI.  OF  SPAIN 

1746,  constituted  the  supreme  felicity  of  Ferdinand  the 
Sixth  her  husband;  with  whom  she  lived  twenty-nine 
years,  in  a  state  of  such  conjugal  union  as  is  rarely  to 
be  found  in  human  life,  and  still  more  rarely  on  the 
throne.  They  nevertheless  remained  without  issue. 
Like  his  Queen,  Ferdinand  nourished  a  decided  passion, 
or  rather  rage  for  music ;  and  it  is  well  known  that  the 
celebrated  Farinelli  enjoyed  under  his  reign,  as  he  had 
previously  done  under  that  of  Philip  the  Fifth,  an 
almost  unbounded  ascendant  over  both  the  King  and 
Queen.  Such  was  Farinelli1s  prodigious  influence,  that 
he  may  be  said  to  have  shared  the  political  power  of  the 
state  with  Ensenada,  the  first  Minister  of  Ferdinand ; 
a  Prince  who,  though  he  reigned  in  our  own  times, 
is  hardly  known  or  remembered  beyond  the  limits  of 
Spain.  His  talents  were  very  confined,  but  his  inten- 
tions were  upright.  Notwithstanding  the  obligations 
of  the  "Family  Compact,"  he  refused,  on  the  com- 
mencement of  the  war  between  Great  Britain  and 
France  in  1756,  to  join  the  latter  power ;  or  to  sacrifice, 
as  his  successor  Charles  the  Third  did  in  1761,  the 
interests  of  his  people,  to  the  ties  of  consanguinity 
existing  between  him  and  Louis  the  Fifteenth.  Till  his 
decease,  which  took  place  in  1759,  Ferdinand  main- 
tained a  strict  neutrality.  His  death  was  unquestion- 
ably produced  by  grief  for  the  loss  of  his  Queen,  who 
had  been  carried  off  in  the  preceding  year.  From  that 
time  Ferdinand  became  a  prey  to  the  most  inveterate 
melancholy,  which  not  only  enfeebled,  but,  in  some 
measure  alienated  his  mind.  Abandoning  himself  to 
despair,  he  declined  all  society ;  refused  to  change  his 
linen,  or  to  take  any  remedies,  during  some  weeks 
before  he  expired ;  and  ultimately  died  the  victim  of 
conjugal  affection.  In  consequence  of  this  event,  his 
half-brother,  Charles,  son  of  Philip  the  Fifth  by  his 
second  wife,  and  who  then  reigned  at  Naples,  ascended 
the  throne  of  Spain. 

45 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

I  passed  a  great  part  of  the  years  1775  and  1776, 
in  France,  not  long  after  the  decease  of  Louis  the 
Fifteenth;  a  Sovereign  whose  character  and  actions 
always  appeared  to  me  to  be  depreciated  and  under- 
valued by  the  French,  nearly  in  the  same  proportion 
that  they  have  elevated  those  of  Louis  the  Fourteenth 
above  their  just  standard.  Like  his  predecessor,  he 
succeeded  to  the"  crown  while  in  childhood ;  but  he  had 
not  the  same  advantages  as  Louis  the  Fourteenth 
enjoyed,  whose  mother,  Anne  of  Austria,  watched  with 
maternal  solicitude  over  his  preservation.  Louis  the 
Fifteenth,  who  survived  both  his  parents,  was  left, 
during  the  Regency  of  Philip,  Duke  of  Orleans, 
principally  to  the  care  of  Fleury,  Bishop  of  Frejus, 
who  obtained  over  his  pupil,  an  early,  and  almost  an 
unbounded  ascendant.  The  Regency  lasted  above 
eight  years ;  and  there  is  no  period  of  time  since  the 
Abdication  of  James  the  Second  in  1689,  during  which 
France  and  England  have  been  so  closely  united  by 
political  ties.  George  the  First  and  the  Regent  Duke, 
both  dreaded  a  Pretender :  one,  in  the  son  of  James  ; 
the  other,  in  Philip  the  Fifth,  King  of  Spain.  Impelled 
by  this  apprehension,  the  two  Princes  equally  made  the 
policy  and  interests  of  their  respective  countries,  sub- 
ordinate to  their  personal  objects  of  acquisition  or 
ambition.  Philip,  Duke  of  Orleans,  was  undoubtedly, 
one  of  the  most  immoral  and  profligate  men  whom 
we  have  beheld  in  modern  ages.  The  Orgies  of  the 
"  Palais  Royal,"  probably  exceeded  in  depravity,  as  well 
as  in  enormity,  every  thing  of  the  same  kind  ever  acted, 
even  in  France.  But,  the  Regent  likewise  displayed 
some  of  the  greatest  endowments  and  talents,  fitted  both 
for  the  cabinet  and  for  the  field.  His  descendant,  who 
performed  so  detestable  a  part  in  the  late  French 
Revolution,  only  resembled  him  in  his  vices.  He  inherited 
neither  the  distinguished  personal  courage,  nor  the 
ardor  for  knowledge,  nor  the  military  skill,  nor  the 

46 


LOUIS  XV.  OF  FRANCE 

aptitude  for  public  business,  nor  the  elevated  mind  of 
the  Regent ;  who,  if  he  had  not  been  restrained  by 
some  considerations  of  goodness,  or  some  emotions  of 
affection,  might  easily  have  acted  by  Louis  the  Fif- 
teenth, as  we  suppose  that  Richard,  Duke  of  Gloucester, 
did  by  Edward  the  Fifth ;  or,  as  we  know  that  the  late 
Duke  of  Orleans  acted  by  Louis  the  Sixteenth,  and  his 
Queen.  To  the  Regent,  whose  life  was  terminated  in 
the  arms  of  the  Duchess  de  Valori,  abbreviated  by  his 
excesses,  succeeded  the  short  and  feeble  Ministry  of  the 
Duke  of  Bourbon,  comprising  scarcely  three  years ;  but, 
which  produced  one  event  peculiarly  interesting  to  the 
young  King,  and  to  France ;  I  mean,  his  marriage. 

There  is  no  instance  in  the  last  or  present  Century,  of 
any  female  attaining  so  great  an  elevation,  as  that  of 
Mademoiselle  de  Leczinska  to  the  throne  of  France : 
for,  we  cannot  justly  reckon  the  second  marriage  of  the 
Czar  Peter,  with  Catherine,  the  Livonian  peasant,  as  an 
exception.  Muscovy  could  scarcely  then  be  considered 
as  forming  a  portion  of  the  European  System,  nor  were 
its  sovereigns  altogether  subjected  to  our  usages.  That 
the  daughter  of  an  expatriated  Polish  Nobleman  or 
Palatine,  whom  Charles  the  Twelfth  of  Sweden  had 
nominally  forced  upon  the  Poles  as  their  King,  during 
a  few  years ;  but,  who  was  in  fact  only  a  needy  exiled 
adventurer,  driven  by  necessity,  to  take  shelter  in  an 
obscure  provincial  town  of  Alsace,  and  destitute  of 
territories,  or  almost  of  support; — that  a  Princess,  if 
such  she  might  indeed  be  properly  denominated,  who 
could  hardly  be  thought  a  suitable  match  for  one  of 
the  petty  sovereigns  on  the  banks  of  the  Elbe,  or  the 
Rhine,  should  have  been  selected  for  the  Consort  of  a 
King  of  France ;  may  assuredly  be  considered  as  one  of 
the  most  singular  caprices  of  fortune.  Its  singularity 
becomes  augmented,  when  we  reflect  that  the  young 
Monarch  was  already  not  only  betrothed  to  the 
daughter  of  Philip  the  Fifth,  his  uncle,  King  of  Spain  ; 

47 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

but,  that  the  Princess  destined  to  share  his  throne  and 
bed,  had  long  resided  in  France,  the  nuptials  being  only 
delayed  till  the  two  parties  should  attain  a  proper  age. 
Yet,  in  defiance  of  this  impediment,  did  the  Duke  of 
Bourbon  venture  to  send  back  Philip's  daughter  to 
Madrid  ;  and  I  met  her  at  Lisbon,  near  half  a  Century 
afterwards,  become  Queen  of  Portugal ;  transported 
from  the  banks  of  the  Seine,  to  those  of  the  Tagus : 
while  a  native  of  Poland,  brought  up  in  obscurity,  and 
hardly  accounted  among  the  female  candidates  for  an 
European  Crown,  supplied  her  place.  The  motive 
assigned  for  so  extraordinary  a  proceeding,  on  the  part 
of  the  Duke  of  Bourbon,  was  his  apprehension  that  the 
young  King,  whose  constitution  seemed  scarcely  to 
promise  his  attaining  to  manhood,  should  die  without 
issue. 

I  have  been  assured  by  persons  conversant  in  the 
secret  History  of  the  early  part  of  Louis  the  Fifteenth's 
reign,  that  when  the  Duke  of  Bourbon  determined  on 
dissolving  the  unconsummated  marriage  between  the 
young  King  and  Philip's  daughter,  he  found  himself 
under  the  greatest  embarrassment,  whom  to  substitute 
in  her  room.  He  had  a  sister,  Mademoiselle  de  Sens, 
born  in  1705,  whose  age  and  personal  accomplishments 
rendered  her  a  fit  bride  for  Louis.  She  then  resided  at 
the  Abbey  of  Fontevraud  in  Anjou,  under  the  protec- 
tion of  the  Abbess  ;  and  it  was  natural  for  the  Duke  to 
desire  to  raise  her  to  the  throne.  But,  he  was  himself 
enslaved  to  the  celebrated  Marchioness  de  Prie,  his 
mistress,  who  wished  to  have  the  merit  of  naming  the 
future  Queen ;  in  whose  household,  and  about  whose 
person,  she  aspired  to  occupy  a  distinguished  situation. 
On  the  other  hand,  they  both  equally  dreaded  giving 
a  wife  to  their  Sovereign,  whose  charms,  talents,  or 
ambition,  might  impel  her  to  assume  an  empire  over 
his  mind.  Louis,  then  only  entering  on  his  sixteenth 
year,  brought  up  in  great  seclusion,  scarcely  initiated 

48 


CHOOSING  A  QUEEN 

in  public  business ;  and  though  not  destitute  of  talents, 
yet  indolent,  of  very  reserved  habits,  modest,  and 
diffident  of  himself;  would,  not  improbably,  like  his 
uncle,  Philip  the  Fifth,  be  governed  by  a  queen  of 
energy  or  spirit.  Before  the  choice  fell  therefore  on  the 
Duke  of  Bourbon's  sister,  it  behoved  the  Marchioness 
to  ascertain,  whether,  if  selected  for  so  great  an  elevation, 
she  would  probably  manifest  ductility  of  character,  grati- 
tude, and  attachment  for  the  person  who  principally 
raised  her  to  that  eminence.  In  order  to  obtain  satis- 
faction on  a  point  so  important,  Madame  de  Prie 
determined  to  procure  an  interview  with  Mademoiselle 
de  Sens,  to  whom  she  was  unknown  by  person,  though 
not  by  reputation.  Assuming  therefore  a  fictitious 
name,  she  repaired  to  Fontevraud,  and  having  been 
presented  to  her,  found  means  to  turn  the  conversation 
on  the  Marchioness  de  Prie.  Unconscious  that  the 
stranger  to  whom  she  addressed  her  discourse,  was  the 
Marchioness  herself,  the  Princess  gave  full  scope  to  her 
antipathy  towards  a  woman,  whom  she  considered  as 
exercising  a  pernicious  influence  over  her  brother's 
mind.  This  disclosure  of  her  sentiments  at  once 
stopped  the  further  prosecution  of  Madame  de  Prie's 
plan,  for  placing  her  on  the  French  throne,  and  com- 
pelled her  to  turn  her  views  to  another  quarter. 

The  Duke  of  Bourbon,  not  discouraged  by  the 
obstacle  which  difference  of  religion  imposed,  next 
embraced  the  extraordinary  measure  of  demanding  for 
his  master,  the  hand  of  an  English  Princess;  and  he 
named  as  the  object  of  his  selection,  the  eldest  Grand- 
daughter of  George  the  First,  Anne,  who  afterwards 
married  William  the  Fourth,  Prince  of  Orange.  This 
event  took  place  in  1725.  However  strong  might  be 
the  objection  arising  from  her  profession  of  the 
Protestant  faith,  which  she  must  necessarily  have 
renounced,  in  order  to  ascend  the  throne  of  France, 
yet  the  offer  was  alluring;  and  Henrietta,  sister  of 

49  4 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOI&S 

Charles  the  Second,  had  married  Philip,  Duke  of 
Orleans,  brother  of  Louis  the  Fourteenth,  after  Charles's 
Restoration.  But,  George  the  First,  though  gratified 
by  the  proposition  of  seeing  one  of  his  female  descend- 
ants wear  the  French  crown,  yet  was  too  wise  to  accept 
it ;  well  knowing  that  such  an  alliance,  however  splendid 
in  itself,  or  whatever  political  advantages  it  might  seem 
to  present,  would  irritate  and  disgust  all  the  adherents 
of  the  succession  in  the  House  of  Hanover.  Thus 
foiled  in  two  attempts  to  dispose  of  Louis  the  Fif- 
teenth's hand,  and  firmly  resolved  on  effecting  his 
marriage,  Madame  de  Prie  cast  her  eyes  on  Maria 
Leczinska,  the  daughter  of  Stanislaus.  She  was  then 
living  with  her  father  at  Weissembourg,  in  Alsace ;  a 
town  situate  not  far  from  the  Rhine,  on  the  frontier  of 
Germany,  though  in  the  dominions  of  France;  where 
the  titular  King  of  Poland  resided  in  as  much  obscurity 
as  Charles  the  Second  lived  in  the  preceding  Century 
at  Cologne,  during  the  Protectorate  of  Cromwell.  So 
little  expectation  did  he  entertain  of  matching  his 
daughter  with  a  crowned  head,  that  he  had  already 
lent  a  favourable  ear  to  the  proposals  of  a  private 
Nobleman,  a  subject  of  France,  the  Count  d'Estrees, 
who  offered  her  marriage.  Stanislaus  accepted  the 
offer,  but  desired  to  delay  its  accomplishment,  till  he 
could  procure  the  honours  of  a  Duchess,  at  the  Court 
of  Versailles,  for  Mademoiselle  de  Leczinska.  With 
that  view  he  made  applications  to  obtain  a  Brevet  of 
Duke  for  the  Count  cTEstrees,  his  destined  son-in-law, 
though  without  success;  fortune  reserving  for  her  the 
first  diadem  in  Europe.  Her  principal  recommendation 
consisted  in  her  want  of  personal  attractions,  the 
humility  of  her  condition,  and  the  obligation  to 
gratitude  which  she  must  naturally  feel  for  the  authors 
of  so  wonderful  a  change  in  her  fortune.  In  fact, 
Nature  had  neither  bestowed  on  her,  beauty,  elegance 
of  manners,  nor  intellectual  endowments  of  any  kind. 

50 


CARDINAL  FLEURY'S  ADMINISTRATION 

Even  youth  she  could  scarcely  be  said  to  possess,  as 
she  was  twenty-three  years  of  age ;  while  her  destined 
husband  was  only  sixteen.  We  know  not  which  to 
admire  most,  the  singularity  of  such  a  choice,  or  the 
passive  apathy  displayed  by  Louis,  while  his  Minister 
and  Madame  de  Prie  thus  disposed  of  his  person. 
Maria  Leczinska  brought  him  nothing,  as  a  portion, 
on  the  day  of  her  nuptials,  except  modesty,  virtue,  and 
goodness  of  heart.  Yet  the  young  King,  during  eleven 
or  twelve  years  after  his  marriage,  exhibited  a  pattern 
of  conjugal  fidelity,  which  stands  strongly  contrasted 
with  Louis  the  Fourteenth's  dissolute  amours,  at  the 
same  period  of  life ;  though  Maria  Theresa,  daughter 
of  Philip  the  Fourth,  could  boast  of  much  superior 
charms  to  the  Polish  Princess.  The  Duchess  de  la 
Valiere,  Madame  de  Montespan,  and  Madame  de 
Fontanges,  disputed  for  the  possession  of  Louis  the 
Fourteenth's  youth.  It  was  not  till  the  afternoon  and 
evening  of  his  successor's  life,  that  he  sunk  into  the 
arms  of  the  Marchioness  de  Pompadour,  and  of  the 
Countess  du  Barry. 

The  Duke  de  Bourbon's  and  Madame  de  Prie's  period 
of  power  proved,  nevertheless,  of  short  duration.  He 
was  banished  in  1726,  to  Chantilly  ;  and  at  that  point 
of  time  commences  Cardinal  Fleury's  Administration. 
It  lasted  nearly  as  long  as  Richlieu's,  namely,  about 
seventeen  years ;  and  though  Fleury  was  far  inferior  in 
strength  of  character,  resources,  and  energy,  to  his 
predecessor,  yet  may  France  justly  feel  for  him  equal 
gratitude.  Pacific,  economical,  unostentatious,  and 
mild,  he  seemed  made  to  heal  the  wounds  inflicted  on 
their  country,  by  Louis  the  Fourteenth,  and  the  Regent. 
If  Richlieu,  as  we  are  assured  from  contemporary 
authority,  ventured  to  raise  his  eyes  to  Anne  of  Austria, 
and  to  make  her  propositions  of  a  libertine  nature ;  it 
is  equally  a  fact,  however  incredible  it  may  appear, 
that  Fleury,  then  above  seventy  years  of  age,  carried 

51 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

his  presumption  still  farther  with  respect  to  Maria 
Leczinska.  I  shall  not  relate  the  particulars.  That 
Princess,  conscious  nevertheless  of  the  ascendant  which 
the  Cardinal  had  obtained  over  her  husband,  possessed 
too  much  prudence  to  communicate  to  him,  in  the  first 
instance,  the  subject  of  her  complaint.  She  wisely 
preferred  making  a  Confidant  of  her  father.  To 
Stanislaus  she  revealed  the  temerity  of  the  aged 
Minister,  and  besought  him,  at  the  same  time,  to  give 
her  his  advice  for  her  conduct,  particularly  on  the 
point  of  her  acquainting  Louis  with  the  circumstance. 
Stanislaus  exhorted  her,  in  reply,  to  bury  the  secret  for 
ever  in  her  own  bosom ;  observing  at  the  same  time, 
that  sovereign  Princesses  are  placed  on  such  an  eminence, 
as  almost  to  render  it  impossible  for  any  disrespectful 
propositions  to  be  made  them,  unless  they  encourage, 
to  a  certain  degree,  such  advances.  The  Queen  was 
discreet  enough  to  adopt  this  judicious  and  paternal 
counsel.  If  I  had  not  received  the  anecdote  here 
related,  from  a  person,  whose  intimacy  with  the 
individuals  composing  the  Court  of  France  at  that  time, 
joined  to  his  rank  and  high  character,  left  no  doubt 
of  its  authenticity,  I  should  not  venture  to  recount 
the  fact. 

To  Louis  the  Fifteenth  France  stands  indebted  for 
the  acquisition  of  Lorrain,  a  territory  of  such 
inestimable  value,  as  to  mock  calculation ;  perhaps 
surpassing  in  real  importance,  any  augmentation  of  the 
French  dominions  made  by  arms,  within  the  three  last 
Centuries.  Henry  the  Second  had  conquered  Metz, 
Toul,  and  Verdun,  besides  re-annexing  Calais,  so  long 
held  by  the  English  Princes.  The  Counties  of  Bourg 
and  Bresse,  covering  the  Borders  on  the  side  of  Savoy, 
were  gained  by  Henry  the  Fourth.  His  son,  Louis  the 
Thirteenth,  or  more  properly  to  speak,  the  Cardinal  de 
Richlieu,  added  Rousillon  and  Cerdagne,  situate  at  one 
extremity  of  the  kingdom,  towards  Catalonia ;  while  in 

52 


ACQUISITION  OF  LORRAIN 

another  quarter,  he  reduced  Artois  and  Alsace  to  the 
French  obedience.  Lastly,  Louis  the  Fourteenth,  in  the 
course  of  his  long,  ambitious,  and  sanguinary  career, 
exceeding  in  duration  seventy  years,  not  only  enlarged 
or  strengthened  his  frontier  along  the  Rhine ;  but 
augmented  his  territories  by  the  addition  of  Franche 
Compte,  and  of  a  vast  portion  of  Flanders.  Yet  may 
we  justly  doubt,  whether  any  of  these  acquisitions 
conferred  such  strength  and  security,  as  the  possession 
of  Lorrain.  When  we  reflect  on  the  beauty  and  extent 
of  that  fine  province,  stretching  into  the  midst  of 
France,  and  separating  Champagne  from  Burgundy ; 
contiguous  on  the  East,  to  Germany,  while  on  the 
West,  its  limits  approached  Paris  itself; — we  must  own 
that  the  French  are  ungrateful  to  the  memory  of  a 
Prince,  who  permanently  retained  such  a  tract  of 
country.  It  affixed  the  seal  to  every  preceding  effort 
made  by  their  Kings,  for  the  security,  greatness,  and 
protection  of  France  ;  leaving  no  object  of  real  and 
wise  ambition,  unaccomplished.  Nor  can  we  too 
severely  censure  the  inert,  or  parsimonious  and  narrow 
policy  of  Walpole,  in  permitting  Cardinal  Fleury 
to  illustrate  his  Administration  by  such  an  act. 
France  did  not,  indeed,  instantly  take  possession  in  her 
own  name,  of  the  Duchies  of  Lorrain  and  Bar.  Fortune, 
after  raising  Maria  Leczinska  to  the  throne  of  France, 
conferred  on  her  father,  in  recompence  for  his  ideal 
Polish  Crown,  those  fertile  provinces,  the  enjoyment  and 
revenues  of  which  were  secured  to  him  for  his  life. 
Such  a  substitution  was,  in  fact,  exchanging  the  armour  of 
Diomed,  for  that  of  Glaucus  ;  a  barren  sceptre,  for  one 
of  gold. 

Stanislaus,  when  this  event  took  place  in  1736,  was 
already  near  sixty,  and  he  remained  during  thirty 
years,  Duke  of  Lorrain.  His  administration,  mild, 
beneficent,  and  liberal,  rendered  him  beloved  by  his 
new  subjects.  He  embellished  Nancy,  the  Capital ;  but 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

he  held  his  Court  and  residence  principally  at  Luneville, 
where  he  expired  in  consequence  of  a  singular  accident, 
having  been  burnt  to  death.  Charles,  King  of  Navarre, 
surnamed  the  Bad,  perished  nearly  in  the  same  manner, 
about  four  centuries  earlier,  at  Pampeluna.  The  late 
Lady  Mary  Churchill,  Sir  Robert  Walpole's  daughter, 
who  then  resided  with  her  husband  at  Luneville,  has 
more  than  once  recounted  to  me  all  the  particulars  of 
Stanislaus's  end.  Mr.  Churchill  and  Lady  Mary,  who 
lived  in  habits  of  intimacy  with  him,  dined  at  his  Villa 
of  Bon  Secours,  a  short  distance  from  Luneville,  on  the 
day  preceding  the  Catastrophe  which  terminated  his 
life.  She  assured  me,  that  though  extremely  bent  with 
age  and  infirmities,  being  then  near  eighty  nine  years 
old,  he  retained  both  his  faculties  and  his  good  humour. 
Naturally  gallant,  he  had  a  nominal  Mistress,  the 
Marchioness  de  Boufflers,  who  occupied  a  part  of  the 
Palace  of  Luneville,  and  to  whom  he  was  much  attached  ; 
though  he  manifested  neither  jealousy  nor  dissatisfaction 
at  her  preference  of  a  younger  rival.  His  own 
Chancellor  had  contrived  to  insinuate  himself  into 
Madame  de  Boufflers''  favour ;  a  fact  of  which  the  King 
was  not  ignorant.  Taking  leave  of  her,  one  evening, 
when  retiring  to  his  apartment,  after  embracing  her, 
"  Mon  Chancelier^  added  he,  "  vom  dira  le  reste " ;  a 
jocose  allusion  to  the  words  with  which,  as  is  well  known, 
the  French  Sovereigns,  when  holding  a  Bed  of  Justice, 
always  finish  their  harangues.  Stanislaus,  during  the  last 
years  of  his  life,  withdrew  to  rest  every  night,  at  nine 
o'clock,  and  his  departure  constituted  the  signal  for 
commencing  Faro.  All  the  persons  of  both  sexes, 
composing  his  Court  and  Household,  then  sat  down  to 
that  infatuating  game,  which  was  continued  without 
intermission  to  a  late  hour.  But,  a  circumstance 
seemingly  incredible  is,  that  the  rage  for  it  became  such, 
as  to  attract  by  degrees  to  the  table,  all  the  Domestics 
of  the  Palace,  down  to  the  very  Turnspits  or  Scullions ; 

54 


DEATH  OF  STANISLAUS 

who  crowding  round,  staked  their  Ecus  on  the  cards, 
over  the  heads  of  the  company.  Such  a  fact  sufficiently 
proves  the  relaxation  of  manners  which  prevailed  in  the 
Court  of  Lorrain,  under  Stanislaus. 

His  death,  as  Lady  Mary  Churchill  related  it  to  me, 
took  place  in  February,  1766,  in  the  following  manner. 
The  old  King,  who,  like  the  Poles  and  Germans,  was 
much  addicted  to  smoaking  Tobacco,  usually  finished 
several  pipes,  every  day.  Being  alone,  in  an  undress, 
while  endeavouring  to  knock  out  the  ashes  from  his 
pipe,  he  set  fire  to  his  gown  ;  and  his  Valet  de  Chambre, 
who  alone  exercised  the  privilege  of  entering  his  apart- 
ment, had  unfortunately  just  gone  into  the  town  of 
Luneville.  His  cries  were  not  immediately  heard ;  but 
when  they  reached  the  officer  stationed  on  guard  in  the 
outward  room,  he  flew  to  the  King's  assistance ;  and 
having  contrived  to  throw  him  down  on  the  floor,  the 
flames  were  speedily  extinguished.  He  might  even  have 
survived  and  recovered  the  accident,  if  it  had  not  been 
accompanied  with  a  singular  circumstance.  Stanislaus, 
who  had  become  devout  during  the  last  years  of  his 
life,  as  a  penance  for  his  transgressions,  constantly  wore 
under  his  shirt,  next  to  his  flesh,  a  "  Reliquaire"  or 
girdle  made  of  silver,  having  points  on  the  inside,  from 
space  to  space.  These  points  becoming  heated,  and 
being  pressed  into  his  body,  while  in  the  act  of 
extinguishing  the  fire,  caused  a  number  of  wounds  or 
sores  ;  the  discharge  from  which,  at  his  advanced  period 
of  life,  proved  too  severe  for  his  enfeebled  constitution. 
Conscious  that  his  end  approached,  and  only  a  short 
time  before  it  took  place,  he  expressed  a  warm  desire 
to  see  Mr.  Churchill  and  Lady  Mary.  They  having 
immediately  waited  on  him,  the  King  received  them 
with  great  complacency,  and  with  perfect  self  possession  ; 
took  leave  of  them  most  cheerfully ;  remarked  the 
singularity  of  his  fortune  throughout  life ;  and  added, 
alluding  to  the  strange  manner  of  his  death,  "//  ne 

55 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

manquoit  qu\me  pareille  mort,  pour  un  avanturier  comme 
moi."  He  soon  afterwards  expired,  retaining  his  senses 
and  understanding  almost  to  the  last  moments  of  his 
existence. 

If  Louis  the  Fifteenth,  by  the  peace  of  1736,  acquired 
Lorrain  for  France,  he  covered  himself  and  his  country 
with  military  glory,  during  the  war  that  commenced  in 
1741,  on  the  death  of  the  Emperor  Charles  the  Sixth. 
Fleury  was  no  more ;  he  and  Walpole  having  finished 
their  political  careers  nearly  about  the  same  time. 
History  can  present,  in  no  period  of  the  world,  an 
instance  of  a  first  Minister  commencing  his  administra- 
tion, like  Fleury,  at  seventy -three  years  of  age,  and 
retaining  his  power  till  he  was  ninety.  Such  a  fact 
must,  indeed,  be  considered  as  an  exception  to  the 
general  laws  of  nature,  moral,  as  well  as  physical. 
Cardinal  Ximenes  in  Spain,  who  approached  the  nearest 
to  him,  died  at  eighty-one.  In  1744,  the  year  after 
Fleury's  decease,  Louis  was  seized,  at  Metz,  with  a  fever, 
which  nearly  proved  fatal.  Had  he  expired  at  that 
time,  as  was  expected  to  happen  every  moment,  during 
several  successive  days,  his  memory  would  have  been 
embalmed  in  the  hearts  of  his  subjects,  and  of  mankind. 
Never  were  more  ardent,  or  more  universal  vows  offered 
up  to  Heaven  by  the  Roman  People,  for  the  recovery  of 
Germanicus,  than  were  made  by  the  French  Nation,  for 
his  restoration !  They  were  unfortunately  heard,  and 
we  are  forced  to  exclaim  with  Juvenal, 

"  Provida  Pompeio  dederat  Campania  Febres 
Optandas  :  sed  multae  Urbes,  et  publica  Vota 
Vicerunt." 

Though  Louis,  like  Pompey,  survived  these  testimonies 
of  popular  favour,  yet,  during  the  whole  course  of  that 
war,  down  to  its  termination  in  1748,  he  continued  to 
deserve,  and  to  retain,  the  affections  of  the  Nation. 
Four  brilliant  and  triumphant  Campaigns,  in  one  of 

56 


FRENCH  VICTORIES 

which  he  was  personally  present,  rendered  him  master 
of  all  the  Austrian  Netherlands.  The  military  Trophies 
of  Maryborough,  erected  forty  years  earlier  on  the  same 
plains,  were  lost  at  Fontenoy,  at  Raucoux,  and  at 
Lafeldt.  Greater  by  his  moderation,  than  even  by  his 
conquests,  he  gave  peace  to  Europe  at  Aix-la-Chapelle, 
when  Holland  lay  open  to  his  attack ;  and  when  Mr. 
Pelham,  who  was  then  at  the  head  of  the  Councils  of 
England,  possessed  neither  pecuniary  nor  military 
resources  for  maintaining  the  contest.  Louis  the 
Fourteenth  may  undoubtedly  have  inspired  more  terror 
at  certain  periods  of  his  reign ;  but  never  excited  more 
respect,  than  did  his  successor  at  the  conclusion  of  the 
great  war,  which  took  place  on  the  accession  of  Maria 
Theresa. 

It  forms  a  curious  subject  of  reflection,  that  the  armies 
of  France,  during  this  splendid  portion  of  Louis  the 
Fifteenth's  reign,  when  he  thus  over -ran  the  Low 
Countries,  were  commanded  by  Foreigners.  To  Conde, 
Turenne,  and  Luxembourg,  had  succeeded  Catinat, 
Vendome,  Boufflers,  and  Villars  :  but  these  last  Generals 
left  no  successors.  In  1734,  Villars,  at  near  four- 
score, remained  the  sole  survivor  of  those  illustrious 
Commanders,  who,  from  Rocroi  down  to  Denain,  from 
1643  to  1712,  had  carried  victory  over  so  many  countries 
of  Europe.  An  Englishman,  the  Duke  of  Berwick,  son 
of  James  the  Second,  was  placed  at  the  head  of  the 
French  forces  on  the  Rhine,  in  1734 :  while  a  German 
and  a  Dane  subjected  Flanders  to  Louis  the  Fifteenth, 
between  1743  and  1748.  Marshal  Saxe,  the  former 
of  these  Generals,  attained  a  reputation  hardly  exceeded 
by  any  individual  in  modern  Times.  Lowendahl,  the 
other,  was  immortalized  by  the  capture  of  Bergen-op- 
Zoom,  then  regarded  as  the  most  impregnable  fortress 
on  the  Continent.  Both  survived  the  peace  of  Aix-la- 
Chapelle  only  a  few  years.  I  have  been  in  the  apartment 
of  the  palace  of  Chambord,  near  Blois,  where  Marshal 

57 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

Saxe  expired  in  November,  1750;  extenuated  by 
pleasures  which  had  enervated  his  Herculean  frame, 
and  produced  his  premature  end  at  fifty-four  years  of 
age.  The  natural  son  of  Augustus  the  Second,  King 
of  Poland,  he  inherited  from  his  father,  an  extraordinary 
degree  of  bodily  strength ;  but,  like  Milo  in  Antiquity, 

"Viribusille 
Confisus  periit,  admirandisque  Lacertis." 

At  Chambord,  where  he  lived  in  a  magnificent  style, 
he  constantly  entertained  a  company  of  Comedians,  as 
if  he  had  been  a  Sovereign  Prince.  Mademoiselle  de 
Chantilly,  an  Actress  in  high  reputation  at  Paris, 
having,  from  her  personal  beauty,  no  less  than  from  her 
theatrical  merit,  attracted  the  Marshal's  attention,  he 
caused  proposals  to  be  made  her,  for  repairing  to 
Chambord,  to  perform  on  his  Theatre.  But  she,  who 
was  already  married  to  Favard,  an  Actor  on  the  French 
Stage,  knowing  the  Marshal's  designs  on  her  person, 
rejected  all  his  offers.  In  this  Dilemma,  determined  to 
gain  possession  of  her,  he  applied  to  Monsieur  de 
Berruyer,  then  Lieutenant  de  Police,  requesting  him  to 
compel  her  to  visit  Chambord.  Berruyer,  desirous  of 
obliging  Marshal  Saxe,  made  use  of  every  argument, 
and  enforced  them  by  very  ample  pecuniary  offers. 
Finding,  however,  all  his  exertions  fruitless,  he  sent 
her  a  Lettre  de  Cachet,  ordering  her  immediately  to 
prison,  or  to  Chambord.  We  must  own  that  this 
atrocious  abuse  of  power,  which  reminds  us  of  Appius 
Claudius  and  Virginia,  excites  indignation  against  a 
Government  capable  of  having  recourse  to  such 
expedients,  in  order  to  gratify  the  depraved  and 
licentious  appetites  of  an  exhausted  Voluptuary.  Thus 
pressed  between  imprisonment  and  the  sacrifice  of  her 
person,  she  preferred  the  latter  expedient;  as  many 
other  women  might  have  done  under  her  circumstances, 

58 


DEATH  OF  MARSHAL  SAXE 

without  perhaps  incurring  either  any  deep  degree  of 
culpability,  or  exciting  any  strong  emotions  of  moral 
reprobation.  Pity,  indeed,  rather  than  condemnation, 
arises  in  the  mind,  on  such  a  recital.  Arriving  at 
Chambord,  she  was  forced  to  gratify  the  Marshal's 
desires.  It  is  difficult  to  relate  the  sequel  of  the  story, 
without  involuntarily  wounding  decorum :  yet  may  the 
Moral  that  it  contains,  almost  apologize  for  such  a 
deviation,  or  in  some  degree  even  demand  it.  Ma- 
demoiselle de  Chantilly  having  been  reluctantly 
conducted  to  the  Marshal's  bed,  expressed  herself  with 
some  contempt  of  his  prowess  as  a  lover.  Piqued  at 
the  insinuation,  he  had  recourse  to  those  expedients  for 
recruiting,  or  resuscitating  his  decayed  powers,  which 
Pope,  one  of  the  most  correct  of  modern  Poets,  who 
exclaims, 

"  Curst  be  the  Verse,  how  soft  so'er  it  flow, 
That  serves  to  make  one  Honest  Man  my  Foe  ; 
Give  Virtue  Scandal,  Innocence  a  Fear, 
Or  from  the  soft-eyed  Virgin  steal  a  tear;" 

yet  has  not  hesitated  to  enumerate  in  his  "  January  and 
May ; "  but,  in  which  enumeration  I  cannot  venture  to 
follow  him.  Satyrion  and  Eringo  stand  at  the  head  of 
the  list.  The  auxiliary  proved  too  powerful  for  the 
principal,  and  produced  his  death  within  a  short  time ; 
a  dissolution  of  which  Mademoiselle  de  Chantilly 
formed  the  cause.  He  expired  nearly  in  the  same 
manner  as  the  Regent  Duke  of  Orleans  had  done,  about 
twenty-five  years  earlier ;  a  Prince  to  whom,  both  in  his 
virtues,  his  endowments  of  mind,  and  his  defects  or 
vices,  Marshal  Saxe  exhibited  some  Analogy. 

Louis  the  Fifteenth  not  only  occupied  the  most 
distinguished  place  among  the  European  Sovereigns  and 
Powers,  during  the  period  of  near  eight  years,  which 
intervened  between  the  Treaty  of  Aix-la-Chapelle,  and 

59 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

the  commencement  of  the  war  of  1756 ;  but,  for  a 
considerable  time  subsequent  to  that  rupture,  every 
success  was  on  the  side  of  France.  Beyond  the  Atlantic, 
in  the  Mediterranean,  in  Germany,  as  well  as  on  the 
French  coasts  and  shores,  her  arms  maintained  their 
ascendancy.  Mezerai,  or  Voltaire,  might  have  ex- 
patiated with  exultation  and  pleasure,  on  the  events 
of  Minorca,  of  Ticonderago,  of  Braddock's  defeat  in 
Carolina,  of  Closter-seven,  of  St.  Cas,  and  of  Rochfort ; 
as,  on  the  other  hand,  assuredly  neither  Hume  nor 
Smollett  could  have  derived  from  the  narration  of  those 
unfortunate  or  disgraceful  transactions,  any  subject  of 
triumph.  That  Louis,  no  less  than  his  people,  sunk 
under  the  energies  of  the  first  Mr.  Pitt,  between  1759 
and  1762,  must  be  admitted :  but,  all  the  atchievements 
of  that  great  Minister,  in  both  Hemispheres,  on  the 
land  and  on  the  water,  from  the  Philippines  to  Cuba, 
and  from  Cape  Breton  to  Senegal,  were  sacrificed  at  the 
peace  of  Fontainbleau.  We  seemed  to  have  humbled 
the  two  Branches  of  the  House  of  Bourbon,  only  to 
re-construct  their  fallen  power:  restoring  all  that  we 
ought  in  wisdom,  to  have  retained;  and  retaining  or 
acquiring  all  that  in  policy  we  should  have  surrendered 
to  France  and  Spain.  Witness  Canada  and  Florida, 
which  we  preserved !  Witness  the  Havanna,  Martinique, 
Guadaloupe,  and  so  many  other  islands  or  Settlements 
which  we  ceded ;  not  to  include  in  the  list,  Manilla,  a 
capture  unknown  to  the  British  Ministry  who  signed 
the  treaty,  and  of  which  the  ransom  has  never  been 
paid,  down  to  the  present  moment.  Well  might 
"  Junius  "  exclaim,  that  the  Embassador  who  subscribed 
such  unbecoming  conditions,  must  have  sold  his 
country  !  Well  might  scandal,  if  not  truth,  assert,  that 
the  Princess  Dowager  of  Wales  received  for  herself,  as  a 
present,  from  the  court  of  Versailles,  a  Hundred 
Thousand  Pounds ;  and  that  the  First  Minister,  Lord 
Bute,  retained  for  his  share,  ninety -six  Thousand ! 

60 


FRANCE  AND  CORSICA 

Even  the  popularity  of  George  the  Third,  sustained 
by  the  most  irreproachable  and  exemplary  display  of 
private  virtues,  could  not  stand  the  shock  of  such  a 
peace ;  which  covered  him  with  as  much  obloquy,  as 
that  of  Utrecht  had  inflicted  on  Queen  Anne. 

France,  from  1763  to  1770,  repaired  her  losses;  and 
while  her  Councils  were  guided  by  the  vigorous,  as  well 
as  enterprizing  mind  of  Choiseul,  Louis  the  Fifteenth, 
however  vanquished  he  might  have  been  in  the  preced- 
ing contest,  re-appeared  with  at  least  as  much  dignity 
on  the  Theatre  of  Europe,  as  Louis  the  Fourteenth  had 
done  after  the  War  of  the  Succession.  Choiseul,  secure 
on  the  side  of  Flanders  and  of  Germany,  by  the  alliance 
subsisting  with  the  House  of  Austria  since  1756, 
extended  succours  to  the  Polish  Insurgents,  against 
Catherine  the  Second;  laid  the  foundations  of  the 
Swedish  Revolution,  which  was  effected  by  Gustavus 
the  Third  in  1772 ;  and  reduced  to  the  obedience  of  his 
master,  the  Island  of  Corsica,  nearly  about  the  time 
when  that  country  gave  birth  to  a  man,  whose  relentless 
and  insatiable  ambition  or  vengeance,  have  equally  laid 
waste  the  territory  of  France,  and  polluted  by  his 
crimes,  or  converted  into  a  desert,  the  most  flourishing 
kingdoms  of  the  Continent.  The  universal  abhorrence 
excited  by  his  atrocities,  renders  it  unnecessary  to  name 
a  Monster,  whose  very  existence,  and  still  more,  whose 
favoured  place  of  retreat,  on  the  delicious  shore  of 
Tuscany,  surrounded  by  the  splendour  of  a  Prince, 
seem  to  reproach  the  justice,  no  less  than  the  policy, 
of  the  European  Powers. 

Louis  the  Fifteenth,  like  his  predecessor,  survived  his 
only  son ;  justifying  the  Roman  Poet's  remark  on  the 
evils  that  accompany  and  characterize  longevity,  when  he 
says,— 

"  Hsec  data  pcena  diu  viventibus,  ut  renovata 
Semper  clade  domus,  multis  in  luctibus,  inque 
Perpetuo  mcerore,  et  nigra  veste  senescant." 
61 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

The  Dauphin  Louis  died  at  Fontainbleau,  towards 
the  end  of  1765,  at  the  age  of  about  thirty -six. 
Whether  we  consider  his  death  abstractedly,  with 
reference  to  his  character  and  mental  qualities;  or 
whether  we  try  it  by  the  calamitous  reign  of  his  son, 
which  may  be  said  without  a  Metaphor  to  have  brought 
France  to  the  Block ;  we  must  be  compelled  to  regard 
the  Dauphin's  premature  end,  as  one  of  the  most  unfor- 
tunate events  which  could  have  taken  place  for  the 
French  Monarchy,  and  for  the  House  of  Bourbon.  It 
was  produced,  as  I  have  been  assured  by  persons  who 
had  frequent  access  to  him,  and  who  enjoyed  a 
distinguished  place  in  his  confidence,  from  the  effect  of 
medicines  which  he  took  in  order  to  repel  or  to  disperse 
an  eruption  that  appeared  near  his  mouth.  He  was 
supposed  to  have  caught  the  disorder  from  his  wife  the 
Dauphiness,  a  Princess  of  Saxony,  daughter  of  Augustus 
the  Third,  King  of  Poland,  who  had  a  violent  scorbutic 
humour  in  her  blood.  Malignity  proceeded  so  far,  as 
even  to  accuse  the  King  his  Father  of  having  caused 
the  Dauphin's  death,  by  administering  slow  poison ; 
a  circumstance  principally  founded  on  the  state  of 
extenuation  and  languor  to  which  he  was  reduced 
during  the  long  malady  that  brought  him  to  the  grave ; 
but,  for  which  imputation,  not  the  slightest  foundation 
existed  in  truth.  Louis  the  Fifteenth,  though  naturally 
indolent,  as  well  as  dissolute ;  and  profligate  towards 
the  close  of  his  life,  manifested  no  cruelty,  or  systematic 
atrocity  of  character.  He  neither  resembled  Louis  the 
Eleventh,  nor  Bonaparte.  His  son  possessed  firmness 
of  mind,  and  a  solid  understanding,  cultivated  by  polite 
letters.  For  the  society  of  men  distinguished  by  talents 
of  any  kind,  he  displayed  as  strong  a  partiality,  as  the 
King  betrayed  an  aversion  throughout  his  whole  reign. 
Devout,  and  in  some  degree  tinctured  with  bigotry,  he 
nevertheless  sought  occasions  of  conversing  with  in- 
dividuals known  to  have  embraced  ideas  adverse  to  the 


LAST  YEARS  OF  LOUIS  XV. 

Catholic  faith,  as  well  as  to  revealed  religion.  With 
Hume,  then  Secretary  to  the  Embassy  at  Paris,  and  at 
the  summit  of  his  reputation,  or  as  the  "Heroic 
"  Epistle "  says,  "  drunk  with  Gallic  wine,  and  Gallic 
"  praise,"  the  Dauphin,  not  a  great  while  before  his 
decease,  had  a  long  conversation,  principally  on  points 
connected  with  philosophical  disquisition.  When  Hume 
was  presented  to  him,  "  I  know,"  said  he,  "  that  you 
"  hold  very  free  opinions  on  matters  connected  with 
"  Revelation ;  but  my  principles  are  fixed,  and  there- 
"  fore  speak  out  to  me ;  for  otherwise  I  should  only  be 
"  conversing  with  a  man  in  a  mask."  He  was  the 
third  Dauphin  in  hereditary  descent,  who  had  attained 
to  manhood  without  ascending  the  French  throne, 
within  the  short  space  of  fifty-four  years.  His  death 
was  followed,  at  no  long  interval  of  time,  by  that  of 
the  Dauphiness  his  widow,  and  the  Queen  his  mother ; 
leaving  Louis  the  Fifteenth  at  near  sixty,  surrounded 
by  his  daughters,  and  his  grand-children. 

Unquestionably,  the  four  last  years  of  his  reign  were 
passed  in  a  manner  worthy  of  Sardanapalus  ;  oblivious 
of  his  public  duties,  insensible  to  national  glory,  and 
lost  to  every  sentiment  of  private  virtue,  or  even  of 
Decorum.  From  the  instant  that,  dismissing  Choiseul 
from  his  Councils,  and  rejecting  the  favorable 
opportunity  offered  him  by  the  dispute  which  arose 
between  England  and  Spain,  relative  to  the  Falkland 
Islands,  for  recovering  the  honor,  as  well  as  the  terri- 
tories lost  by  France  during  the  preceding  war ;  he 
abandoned  himself  to  pleasures  no  longer  suited  to  his 
age;  —  from  that  moment  he  became  an  object  of 
contempt  and  Opprobrium  to  his  own  subjects.  Un- 
fortunately for  his  fame,  he  has  been  tried  and  estimated 
by  this  inglorious  portion  of  his  life.  Yet,  even  while 
the  Dukes  of  Aiguillon  and  of  Richlieu  directed  public 
affairs,  while  the  Great  Seal  of  France  was  entrusted 
to  Maupeou,  while  the  Finances  were  abandoned  to  the 

63 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

Abbe  Terray,  and  while  a  woman  of  the  most  libertine 
description,  Madame  du  Barry,  presided  over  his  looser 
hours,  he  at  least  exerted  some  proofs  of  vigour  in  his 
treatment  of  the  Parliaments  of  his  kingdom,  whom  he 
controuled  and  banished :  unlike  his  yielding  Successor, 
who  suffered  himself  to  be  overwhelmed  under  the 
progressive  effects  of  popular  innovation.  When  we 
compare  the  concluding  years  of  Louis  the  Fourteenth's 
reign,  from  1712  to  1715,  with  the  termination  of  his 
great  grandson's  life,  from  1770  to  1774 ;  we  shall  see 
that  the  Court  was  alike,  in  both  instances,  completely 
under  female  controul.  It  would  indeed  be  as  unjust 
to  place  Madame  du  Barry  in  competition  with 
Madame  de  Maintenon ;  as  to  elevate  Thais  or 
Campaspe,  to  a  level  with  Aspasia,  or  with  Livia.  Yet 
did  the  Palace  and  Court  of  the  former  Prince,  exhibit 
as  degrading  a  scene  of  mingled  hypocrisy,  bigotry,  and 
superstition ;  as  Versailles  displayed  a  spectacle  of 
debauch  and  licentious  pleasure,  under  the  latter 
Sovereign.  If  it  were  permitted  to  cite  as  authority 
for  this  assertion,  the  "  Piicdle "  of  Voltaire ;  a  Poem 
no  less  captivating  from  its  wit,  than  dangerous  from 
its  spirit  and  tendency;  but,  the  historical  portraits 
scattered  throughout  which  production,  are  sketched 
with  admirable  ability  by  a  master  hand;  we  might 
there  behold  the  ignominious  figure  which  "the 
"  Phoenix  of  the  Bourbons "  presented  in  the  evening 
of  his  life,  surrounded  by  devotees,  priests,  and  monks, 

"Hercule  en  Froc,  et  Priape  en  Soutane." 

Louis  the  Fifteenth,  during  his  last  years,  excites 
nevertheless  more  disgust,  because  it  is  unqualified  by 
any  sentiment  of  pity,  or  of  respect.  His  death,  which 
took  place  under  these  circumstances,  was  hailed  by 
the  French,  as  the  Era  of  their  liberation  from  a  yoke 
equally  disgraceful  and  severe :  while  the  new  Reign 
awakened  in  a  nation  characterized  by  its  superficial  or 

64 


ROYAL  FAVOURS 

sanguine  frame  of  mind,  the  most  extravagant  visions 
of  future  felicity.  We  may  however  safely  assume,  that 
Louis  the  Fifteenth,  who  had  refused  to  join  Charles 
the  Third  of  Spain  in  1770,  when  every  circumstance 
invited  him  to  a  rupture  with  England ;  and  who  was 
known  to  have  taken  an  unalterable  determination  of 
terminating  his  life  in  peace ; — we  may  be  assured  that 
such  a  Prince,  at  sixty-eight  or  seventy,  would  not 
have  sent  La  Fayette  and  Rochambeau  across  the 
Atlantic,  there  to  imbibe  the  principles  of  rebellion  and 
Republicanism,  with  which  they  returned  to  inoculate 
France,  and  to  subvert  the  throne.  Louis  the 
Sixteenth,  only  four  years  after  his  Accession,  in  1778, 
embraced,  though  against  his  own  judgement,  this 
pernicious  and  improvident  measure,  from  which,  in  an 
eminent  degree,  flowed  the  destruction  of  his  House. 
So  true  is  it,  that — 

"  Evertere  domos  totas,  optantibus  ipsis, 
Di  faciles." 

We  cannot  reflect  without  some  surprize,  that  Louis 
the  Fifteenth  manifested  more  attention  during  his  last 
illness,  to  the  well-being  and  support  of  Madame  du 
Barry  after  his  decease,  than  his  predecessor  displayed 
for  Madame  de  Maintenon,  to  whom  he  had  been 
united  above  thirty  years,  by  the  ties  of  marriage. 
The  latter  possessed  nothing,  as  her  own  property,  on 
the  first  of  September,  1715,  when  Louis  the  Four- 
teenth breathed  his  last,  except  the  estate  of  Maintenon 
which  she  had  purchased,  and  a  Pension  of  two  thou- 
sand Louis  d'Ors  a  year :  while  the  former,  beside  the 
immense  gratifications  which  she  had  received  from  her 
Royal  Lover  during  the  period  of  her  favour,  was  pre- 
sented by  him  with  the  beautiful  Chateau  and  Estate 
of  Lusienne,  situate  near  Marley.  Yet  Louis  the 
Fourteenth,  before  he  expired,  contented  himself  with 

65  5 


WRAXALI/S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

only  recommending  his  future  widow  to  the  protection 
of  the  Duke  of  Orleans.  His  Successor,  on  the  contrary, 
at  an  early  period  of  his  disorder,  after  expressing  the 
utmost  anxiety  respecting  his  Mistress,  delivered  into 
the  Duke  d'Aiguillon's  hands,  confidentially  for  her  use, 
in  the  event  of  his  decease,  a  Port-Folio  containing  in 
Notes,  the  sum  of  three  Millions  of  Livres,  or  about 
one  hundred  and  twenty  thousand  Pounds  Sterling. 
The  Duke,  with  the  true  spirit  of  a  Courtier,  carried 
this  deposit  to  the  new  King. 

At  sixty-four,  Louis  the  Fifteenth  died  of  the  small- 
pox, at  Versailles;  as  his  grandfather,  the  Dauphin, 
only  son  of  Louis  the  Fourteenth,  was  carried  off  at 
the  Palace  of  Meudon,  by  the  same  malady,  in  1711. 
While  any  reasonable  expectations  of  his  recovery  were 
entertained,  Madame  du  Barry  continued  her  attend- 
ance about  his  person ;  every  idea  of  the  nature  of  his 
disease  being  studiously  concealed  from  him :  nor  was 
he  permitted  to  look  at  himself  in  a  glass,  lest  he 
should  discover  the  change  effected  in  his  countenance 
by  the  Pustules  which  covered  his  face.  The  Duke  de 
Richlieu  even  kept  guard  at  the  door  of  his  bed- 
chamber, to  prevent  the  intrusion  of  any  priest  or 
Ecclesiastic  who  might  procure  admission,  warn  him 
of  his  danger,  and  awaken  his  apprehensions  of 
eternity.  But,  no  sooner  was  his  alarming  situation 
understood,  and  the  apparent  improbability  of  his  sur- 
viving the  attack  of  so  malignant  a  distemper,  became 
disseminated  abroad  ;  than  Madame  Louisa  of  France, 
the  King's  youngest  daughter,  who  had  taken  the  Veil 
as  a  Carmelite  Nun,  quitting  the  Convent  of  which 
she  was  Prioress  at  St.  Denis,  repaired  to  Versailles. 
With  irresistible  importunity  she  demanded  admittance 
to  her  Father,  whom  she  admonished  of  his  perilous 
state,  and  impending  dissolution  :  he  was  already  sinking 
under  the  ravages  of  the  disease,  which  left  no  hope  of 
his  surmounting  its  violence.  Madame  du  Barry  had 

66 


ACCESSION  OF  LOUIS-XVI. 

been  sent,  some  days  before,  to  Lusienne.  The  King 
expired  in  a  narrow  white  bed,  placed  between  two 
windows  of  his  apartment,  which  were  constantly  kept 
open  on  account  of  the  heat  of  the  weather,  though  the 
season  of  the  year  was  by  no  means  advanced,  it  being 
only  the  10th  day  of  May,  1774.  These  particulars 
have  all  been  related  to  me,  not  long  after  they  took 
place,  by  a  Gentleman,  one  of  his  Pages,  who  attended 
him  throughout  the  whole  course  of  his  disorder. 

It  is  obvious  that  the  successor  of  Louis  the 
Fifteenth,  must  have  ascended  the  Throne  under  the 
most  favourable  Auspices.  To  the  majesty  of  the  first 
European  crown,  he  added  the  brilliancy  of  youth ;  not 
having  yet  completed  his  twentieth  year.  But,  though 
young,  he  possessed  neither  the  graces,  the  activity,  nor 
the  elasticity  of  mind  usually  characteristic  of  that 
period  of  life.  Heavy,  inert,  and  destitute  of  all  apti- 
tude for  any  exercises  of  the  body  except  Hunting,  he 
seemed,  like  James  the  First  of  England,  unfit  for 
appearing  in  the  Field.  His  manners  were  shy ;  a 
natural  result  of  his  neglected  education,  which  made 
Madame  du  Barry  commonly  call  him,  during  his 
Grandfather's  life,  "  Le  gros  Gar$on,  mal  ekve^  Yet 
never  did  any  Prince  manifest  more  rectitude  of  inten- 
tion, greater  probity,  or  a  warmer  desire  to  advance  the 
felicity  of  his  people.  Nor  was  his  understanding  by 
any  means  inadequate  to  fulfilling  those  beneficent 
designs.  He  even  endeavoured,  at  an  early  period  of 
his  reign,  to  repair  the  want  of  preceding  instruction, 
by  private  application.  For  Geography  he  displayed 
an  uncommon  passion  ;  and  it  is  well  known,  that  none 
of  his  Ministers  equalled  him  in  that  branch  of  know- 
ledge. Before  1778,  when  the  French  Cabinet  em- 
braced the  determination  of  aiding  the  Americans,  by 
sending  out  D'Estaign  with  a  Fleet  to  their  support ; 
the  King  had  rendered  himself  so  perfect  a  master  of 
the  Topography  of  the  Trans-atlantic  Continent,  that 

67 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

from  the  River  St.  Laurence,  to  the  Southern  extremity 
of  Florida,  not  a  head-land,  a  bay,  or  almost  an  inlet, 
were  unknown  to  him.  Warmly  attached  to  the  Queen 
his  wife,  his  nuptial  fidelity  could  admit  of  no  dispute ; 
and  in  all  the  relations  of  private  life,  he  might  be 
esteemed  not  only  blameless,  but  meritorious.  George 
the  Third  could  hardly  lay  claim  to  higher  moral 
esteem  and  approbation. 

Impressed  with  deep  sentiments  of  filial  piety,  and  of 
respect  for  the  memory,  as  well  as  for  the  precepts  or 
advice  of  his  Father  the  Dauphin,  he  selected  his 
Ministers,  in  compliance  with  that  Prince's  written 
instructions  which  he  had  carefully  preserved,  and 
religiously  obeyed.  Those  instructions  impelled  him 
to  place  the  Count  de  Maurepas  at  the  head  of  the  new 
Administration,  though  then  at  a  very  advanced  period 
of  life.  He  was,  indeed,  as  old  as  the  Cardinal  de 
Fleury,  when  he  assumed  the  management  of  affairs, 
having  attained  his  seventy-third  year  in  1774  ;  and 
having  passed  the  preceding  twenty-five  years  in  exile, 
at  Bourges,  the  obscure  Capital  of  the  central  and 
secluded  Province  of  Berri.  It  may  however  be  justly 
questioned,  whether  in  this  choice,  Louis  the  Sixteenth 
was  fortunate.  Maurepas,  though  a  man  of  superior 
talents,  who  preserved  in  age  all  the  freshness  of  his 
intellect,  yet  plunged  his  Country  into  the  alliance  with 
America,  which  proved  eventually,  at  no  great  distance 
of  time,  the  leading  source  of  all  the  Revolutionary 
Calamities  that  have  desolated  France.  In  his  selec- 
tion of  Vergennes  for  the  foreign  Department,  the  King 
apparently  manifested  more  discernment.  I  was 
at  Stockholm  in  June,  1774,  when  the  Courier  who 
brought  the  intelligence  of  Louis  the  Fifteenth's  death, 
delivered  to  Monsieur  de  Vergennes,  then  the  French 
Embassador  at  the  Court  of  Sweden,  letters  recalling 
him  to  Paris,  in  order  to  form  a  Member  of  the 
Cabinet.  Happily  for  themselves,  neither  Maurepas 

68 


STIRRINGS  OF  REVOLUTION 

nor  Vergennes  survived  to  witness  the  Commencement 
of  the  Revolution. 

If  a  combination  of  almost  all  those  qualities  or 
endowments,  which  in  a  private  station,  conciliate 
esteem  and  excite  respect,  could  have  secured  to  Louis 
the  Sixteenth  a  tranquil  reign,  he  might  justly  have 
pretended  to  that  felicity.  But,  unfortunately,  he 
wanted  the  bolder  and  more  affirmative  features  of  the 
mind,  which  confirm  dominion,  repress  or  extinguish 
innovation,  retain  the  various  classes  of  subjects  in 
their  respective  orbits,  inspire  becoming  apprehension, 
and  preserve  the  throne  from  insult  or  attack.  These 
defects  had  not  indeed  become  apparent  to  the  Nation 
at  large,  as  early  as  1776 ;  but  they  were  not  the  less 
obvious  to  such  as  had  access  to  his  Person  and  Court. 
Perhaps,  had  he  succeeded  in  more  tranquil  Times,  or  if 
he  had  been  the  successor  of  Louis  the  Fourteenth; 
under  whom,  though  the  Monarchy  was  convulsed,  and 
almost  overturned  by  foreign  enemies,  yet  the  Mon- 
archical principle  and  power  remained  firmly  rooted 
in  public  opinion ;  he  might  have  maintained  himself 
in  his  elevation.  But,  even  before  the  commencement 
of  the  American  war,  Voltaire  and  his  disciples  had 
undermined  both  the  foundations  of  the  throne  and 
of  the  altar,  by  inculcating  philosophical  principles, 
calculated  in  their  results,  to  propel  the  inferior  ranks 
upon  the  upper  Orders  of  society.  A  spirit  of  disquisi- 
tion, of  discontent,  of  complaint,  and  of  reform,  which 
pervaded,  not  only  the  mass  of  the  French  population, 
but  which  had  infected  even  the  Army,  the  Navy, 
and,  however  strange  it  may  seem,  the  Church  itself; 
menaced  the  most  alarming  consequences.  Henry  the 
Fourth  and  Sully  would  have  anticipated  and  suppressed 
it.  Louis  the  Thirteenth  and  Richlieu  would  have 
combated  and  vanquished  it.  Louis  the  Fourteenth 
and  Louvois  would  have  either  dispersed,  or  have 
overawed  and  intimidated  it.  Even  Fleury  or  Choiseul 

69 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

would  not  have  supinely  or  carelessly  allowed  it  to 
mature  its  destructive  powers,  till  it  burst  into  a  con- 
flagration. If  ever  France  stood  in  need  of  a  strong, 
and  even  a  severe  Ruler,  it  was  at  the  death  of  Louis 
the  Fifteenth ;  when  the  person  of  the  Prince,  and  the 
Throne  itself,  were  alike,  though  from  different  causes, 
fallen  into  contempt.  A  man  of  energy,  who  had 
possessed  military  talents,  and  who,  instead  of  breaking 
the  Household  Troops,  disarming  the  Sovereign 
Authority,  and  then  convoking  the  States  General ; 
would  have  mounted  on  horseback,  arrested  the  first 
instigators  to  sedition,  and  placed  himself  at  the  head 
of  his  army,  in  the  last  resort,  against  his  rebellious 
subjects ; — such  a  king  might  have  defied  the  Revolu- 
tion. But  Louis  the  Sixteenth  laboured  under  a  double 
inaptitude,  moral  and  physical.  He  was  the  only 
monarch  since  Philip  of  Valois,  if  not  the  single  instance 
since  Hugh  Capet,  the  founder  of  the  third  Dynasty, 
who  never  had,  on  any  occasion,  appeared  in  person 
among  his  soldiers.  Louis  the  Fifteenth,  and  his  son 
the  Dauphin,  though  neither  of  them  were  distinguished 
by  martial  ardor,  yet  assisted  in  the  field,  made  a 
campaign  in  the  Netherlands ;  and  were  stationed  by 
Marshal  Saxe  in  such  a  manner,  at  the  battle  of 
Fontenoy,  as  at  least  to  be  spectators  of,  if  not 
participators  in,  the  victory  gained  on  that  memorable 
day.  Their  ill-fated  descendant  could  never  be  pro- 
pelled into  such  exertions,  and  he  even  betrayed  a  dis- 
like towards  shewing  himself  at  the  peaceful  ceremony 
of  a  review. 

His  personal  courage  itself,  whatever  flattery  may 
assert,  or  candour  may  suggest,  was  problematical. 
That  he  displayed  considerable  presence  of  mind,  and 
contempt  of  death,  when  surrounded  by  a  furious 
populace,  in  October,  1789,  at  Versailles,  and  in  July, 
1792,  at  the  Tuilleries,  cannot  be  disputed;  but,  on 
the  scaffold,  in  January,  1793,  for  the  performance  of 

70 


EXECUTION  OF  LOUIS  XVI. 

which  last  act  he  must  nevertheless  have  been  prepared, 
by  all  the  aids  of  reflection,  and  all  the  supports  of 
religion,  he  did  not  comport  himself  with  the  serenity 
and  self  possession  that  characterized  Charles  the  First, 
and  Mary,  Queen  of  Scots,  when  laying  down  their 
heads  on  the  Block.  It  must  however  be  admitted 
on  the  other  hand,  that  the  Guillotine,  which  was 
only  an  atrocious  revolutionary  engine,  invented  not  so 
much  to  abbreviate  the  sufferings  of  the  condemned 
individual,  as  to  facilitate  the  dispatch  of  a  number 
of  victims  with  certainty,  in  a  shorter  space  of  time; 
bereaved  death  of  all  its  grace  and  dignity.  I  have 
likewise  seen  and  read  very  strong  attestations  to  the 
firmness  displayed  by  the  King  of  France  in  his  last 
moments.  On  the  26th  of  January  1793,  the  day  on 
which  the  official  account  of  his  execution  arrived  in 
London ;  being  alone  with  the  Duke  of  Dorset,  at  St. 
James's  Palace,  he  received  a  note,  which  he  immedi- 
ately shewed  me,  and  which  I  copied  on  the  spot.  It 
contained  these  words. 

"Paris,  21st  January,  12  o'clock. 

"  The  unfortunate  Louis  is  no  more.  He  suffered  death 
this  morning,  at  ten  o'clock,  with  the  most  heroic  courage." 

"To  the  Duke  of  Dorset." 

The  note  had  no  signature,  but  the  Duke  told  me 
that  he  knew  both  the  hand-writing  and  the  writer. 
Yet  I  have  been  assured  that  Louis  attempted  to  resist 
or  impede  the  executioners ;  who,  impatient  to  finish 
the  performance,  used  a  degree  of  violence,  threw  him 
down  forcibly  on  the  plank,  in  which  act  his  face  was 
torn,  and  finally  thrust  him  under  the  Guillotine. 
Marie  Antoinette  and  Madame  Elizabeth,  each,  ex- 
hibited in  turn,  one,  the  Heroism  of  an  elevated  mind ; 
the  other,  the  calm  resignation  of  a  Martyr,  under  the 
same  circumstances.  Even  the  Duke  of  Orleans, 

71 


WRAXALKS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

covered  as  he  was  with  crimes  and  turpitudes,  yet 
derived  from  despair  a  species  of  affirmative  courage, 
hurried  to  the  place  of  execution,  and  rushed  upon  his 
fate. 

In  the  Summer  of  1776,  when  I  quitted  France, 
Marie  Antoinette  may  be  said  to  have  reached  the 
summit  of  her  beauty,  and  of  her  popularity.  Her  favour 
with  the  Nation  declined  from  the  period  of  her  brother, 
the  Emperor  Joseph  the  Second's  visit  to  Paris,  in 
1777;  after  which  interview,  her  enemies,  with  equal 
falsity  and  malignity,  accused  her  of  sacrificing  both 
the  treasures  and  the  interests  of  the  French  Monarchy, 
to  her  Austrian  connexions.  Her  personal  charms 
consisted  more  in  her  elevated  manner,  lofty  demeanour, 
and  graces  of  deportment,  all  which  announced  a  Queen, 
than  in  her  features,  which  wanted  softness  and 
regularity.  She  had  besides  weak  or  inflamed  eyes : 
but,  her  complexion,  which  was  fine,  aided  by  youth  and 
all  the  ornaments  of  dress,  imposed  on  the  beholder. 
In  the  national  estimation,  her  greatest  defect  at  this 
period  of  life,  consisted  in  her  sterility;  she  having 
been  married  full  six  years,  without  any  apparent  pro- 
spect of  issue.  But,  Anne  of  Austria  had  remained 
near  two  and  twenty  years  under  the  same  reproach, 
before  she  brought  into  the  world  Louis  the  Fourteenth. 
The  Count  de  Provence  was  likewise  destitute  of  any 
children,  though  as  early  as  1771  he  had  espoused  a 
daughter  of  the  King  of  Sardinia;  while  the  Count 
d'Artois,  youngest  of  the  three  brothers,  married  to 
another  Princess  of  Savoy,  was  already  a  father.  His 
son,  born  in  1775,  had  been  created  Duke  d'Angouleme. 
Both  the  King  and  the  Count  de  Provence,  were  then 
generally  regarded,  in  different  ways,  as  equally  inapt 
for  the  purposes  of  marriage.  It  had,  nevertheless, 
been  ascertained  that  Louis  the  Sixteenth  laboured 
under  no  impediment  for  perpetuating  his  race,  except 
a  slight  defect  in  his  Organization,  easily  susceptible  of 


THE  KING'S  BROTHERS 

relief  by  a  surgical  operation ;  but,  to  undergo  which, 
he  for  a  long  time  manifested  great  repugnance.  The 
importance  of  the  case,  and  the  pressing  instances  which 
were  made  to  him,  having  at  length,  however,  sur- 
mounted his  scruples,  he  submitted  to  it ;  and  the 
Queen  lay  in  of  a  daughter,  in  December,  1778,  whose 
unmerited  sufferings  and  virtues  have  justly  endeared 
her  to  all  Europe.  But,  Marie  Antoinette  did  not 
produce  a  Dauphin  till  several  years  later. 

Of  the  three  Royal  brothers,  the  Count  d'Artois  had 
been  cast  by  Nature  in  the  most  graceful  mould.  All 
the  dignity  of  Louis  the  Fourteenth  had  descended  to 
him.  His  elder  brother,  the  Count  de  Provence,  who 
resembled  the  King  in  his  person,  was  less  known  to  the 
Nation,  in  1776,  than  either  of  the  others.  Moderate 
in  his  character,  and  of  retired  habits;  possessing  a 
strong  mind,  but  destitute  of  brilliant  or  of  dangerous 
talents,  he  approved  himself  the  most  submissive  of 
subjects.  Both  the  younger  Princes  resided  constantly 
at  Versailles,  in  the  Royal  Palace ;  accompanied  the 
King,  whenever  he  repaired  to  Compiegne  or  to  Fontain- 
bleau ;  commonly  attended  him  at  Mass,  as  well  as  to 
the  chace ;  and  never  absented  themselves,  even  on  an 
excursion  to  Paris,  without  his  permission.  Philip, 
Duke  de  Chartres,  too  well  known  to  us  by  his  vindic- 
tive and  criminal  political  intrigues,  which  at  a  more 
recent  period  have  conduced,  in  so  great  a  degree,  to 
the  subversion  of  the  House  of  Bourbon ;  was  already 
fallen,  in  1776,  under  the  public  condemnation  or  con- 
tempt. He  had  then  been  married  several  years,  to  the 
sole  daughter  and  heiress  of  the  Duke  de  Penthievre, 
last  male  of  the  illegitimate  descendants  of  Louis  the 
Fourteenth;  and  the  popular  voice  accused  him  of 
having  plunged  the  Prince  de  Lamballe,  his  brother- 
in-law,  the  Duke  de  Penthievre's  only  son,  into  the 
debaucheries  which  terminated  his  life  in  the  flower  of 
his  age.  That  young  Prince  espoused,  at  a  very  early 

73 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

period,  one  of  the  Princesses  of  Carignan,  collaterally 
descended  from  the  House  of  Savoy;  whose  tragical 
end  in  1792,  forms  a  revolting  feature  of  the  great  act 
of  blood,  denominated  "  The  French  Revolution.'1  As 
the  Prince  de  Lamballe  left  no  issue;  the  Duke  de 
Chartres  was  asserted  to  have  accelerated,  or  rather  to 
have  produced  his  death,  from  the  sordid,  as  well  as 
detestable  motive  of  inheriting,  in  right  of  his  Consort, 
the  vast  estates  of  Penthievre.  However  destitute  of 
proof,  and  perhaps  even  of  just  foundation,  may  have 
been  this  imputation :  yet  the  character  and  notorious 
profligacy  of  the  Duke,  obtained  for  it  universal  belief. 
Affecting  to  emulate  the  Regent  Duke  of  Orleans,  his 
great  Grandfather's  example,  whose  portrait  was  always 
suspended  close  to  his  Bed;  he  only  imitated  that 
Prince  in  the  licentious  depravity  of  his  manners,  and 
the  abandoned  nature  of  his  amours.  The  Regent, 
whether  in  Italy,  where  he  was  wounded  in  1706,  in  the 
trenches  before  Turin ;  in  Spain,  where  he  commanded 
the  French  armies  with  distinguished  lustre ;  or  at 
home,  while  conducting  the  helm  of  affairs,  during  the 
Minority  of  Louis  the  Fifteenth ;  whatever  vices  he 
displayed,  redeemed  them  in  some  measure  by  his  valour, 
loyalty,  and  capacity.  His  degenerate  descendant  in- 
curred the  abhorrence  of  all  Europe,  overturned  the 
throne  of  France,  perished  by  the  axe,  and  may  be 
esteemed  the  most  atrocious,  as  well  as  flagitious  indi- 
vidual who  has  arisen  in  modern  ages,  for  the  calamity 
of  mankind,  with  the  single  exception  of  Bonaparte. 

Returning  to  England,  in  the  summer  of  1776,  I 
went  down  soon  afterwards,  on  a  visit  to  Lord  Nugent, 
at  Gosfield  in  Essex;  a  seat  which  has  since,  in  the 
revolutionary  events  of  the  present  times,  afforded  a 
temporary  Asylum  to  the  representative  of  the  Capetian 
line,  when  expelled  from  a  country  over  which  his 
ancestors  had  reigned,  in  uninterrupted  male  succession, 
for  above  eight  hundred  years !  When  I  visited  Gos- 

* 


LORD  TEMPLE 

field,  among  the  guests  who  attracted  most  attention, 
might  justly  be  reckoned  the  late  Lord  Temple,  then 
far  advanced  in  life,  and  very  infirm.  In  his  person  he 
was  tall  and  large,  though  not  inclined  to  corpulency. 
A  disorder,  the  seat  of  which  lay  in  his  ribs,  bending 
him  almost  double,  compelled  him,  in  walking,  to  make 
use  of  a  sort  of  crutch :  but  his  mind  seemed  exempt 
from  any  decay.  His  conversation  was  animated, 
brilliant,  and  full  of  entertainment.  Notwithstanding 
the  nick-name  of  "  Squire  Gawkey,"  which  he  had 
obtained  in  the  satirical,  or  party  productions  of  those 
times,  and  which,  we  may  presume,  was  not  given  him 
without  good  reason ;  he  had  nevertheless  the  air  and 
appearance  of  a  man  of  high  condition,  when  he 
appeared  with  the  Insignia  and  Decorations  of  the 
Garter,  seated  at  table.  It  is  well  known  that  George 
the  Second,  who,  though  he  generally  yielded  to 
Ministerial  violence  or  importunity,  yet  manifested 
often  great  reluctance  and  even  ill  humor,  in  his  manner 
of  compliance  on  these  occasions,  strongly  disliked  Lord 
Temple.  Being  however  compelled,  in  consequence  of 
political  arrangements  very  repugnant  to  his  feelings,  to 
invest  that  Nobleman  with  the  Order  of  the  Garter,  the 
King  took  so  little  pains  to  conceal  his  aversion  both  to 
the  individual,  and  to  the  act ;  that  instead  of  placing 
the  Riband  decorously  over  the  shoulder  of  the  new 
Knight,  His  Majesty,  averting  his  head,  and  muttering 
indistinctly,  some  expressions  of  dissatisfaction,  threw 
it  across  him,  and  turned  his  back  at  the  same  instant, 
in  the  rudest  manner.  George  the  Third,  on  such 
occasions,  possessed  or  exerted  more  restraint  over  his 
passions,  than  his  grandfather.  Yet  even  he  did  not 
always  execute  the  commands  of  his  Minister,  where 
they  were  disagreeable  or  revolting  to  him,  without 
displaying  some  reluctance.  The  late  Duke  of  Dorset 
told  me,  that  being  present  at  the  ceremony  of  invest- 
ing the  present  Marquis  Camden  with  the  Garter,  where 

75 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

the  Duke  assisted  as  a  Knight  Companion  of  the  Order ; 
His  Majesty,  who  felt  no  little  unwillingness  to  confer 
it  on  him,  betrayed  a  considerable  degree  of  ill  humor 
in  his  countenance  and  manner.  However,  as  he  knew 
that  it  must  be  performed,  Mr.  Pitt  having  pertina- 
ciously insisted  on  it ;  the  King  took  the  Riband  in  his 
hand,  and  turning  to  the  Duke,  before  the  New  Knight 
approached,  asked  of  him,  if  he  knew  Lord  Camden's 
Christian  name.  The  Duke,  after  enquiring,  informed 
him  that  it  was  John  Jefferies.  "What!  What!" 
replied  the  King ;  "  John  Jefferies !  the  first  Knight 
"of  the  Garter,  I  believe,  that  ever  was  called  John 
"  Jefferies.'1  The  aversion  of  George  the  Second 
towards  Lord  Temple,  originated  partly  in  personal, 
but,  more  from  political  motives  or  feelings.  His 
present  Majesty's  disinclination  to  confer  the  Garter  on 
Lord  Camden,  probably  arose  merely  from  considering 
his  descent  as  not  sufficiently  illustrious.  But,  the 
great  talents  and  qualities  of  the  first  Earl,  had  diffused 
a  lustre  over  the  name  of  Pratt.  To  these  endowments 
of  the  father,  the  son  originally  owed  the  dignity  of  the 
Peerage,  which  devolved  on  him.  To  Mr.  Pitt's  friend- 
ship, he  was  subsequently  indebted  for  the  distinction 
of  the  Garter. 

Lord  Nugent  was  created  an  Irish  Earl,  during  the 
time  that  I  was  at  Gosfield,  having  antecedently  been 
raised  to  the  title  of  Viscount  Clare.  He  formed  a 
striking  contrast  to  Lord  Temple,  in  his  manners  and 
address.  Of  an  athletic  frame,  and  a  vigorous  constitu- 
tion, though  very  far  advanced  in  years,  he  was  exempt 
from  infirmity;  possessing  a  Stentorian  voice,  with 
great  animal  spirits,  and  vast  powers  of  conversation. 
He  was  indeed  a  man  of  very  considerable  natural 
abilities,  though  not  of  a  very  cultivated  mind.  His 
talents  seemed  more  adapted  to  active,  than  to  specu- 
lative life ;  to  the  Drawing  Room,  or  the  House  of 
Commons,  than  to  the  closet.  Having  sat  in  many 

76 


LORD  NUGENTS  "IRISH  STUFF" 

Parliaments,  he  spoke  fluently,  as  well  as  with  energy 
and  force;  was  accounted  a  good  Debater,  and  pos- 
sessed a  species  of  eloquence,  altogether  unembarrassed 
by  any  false  modesty  or  timidity.  In  the  progress  of  a 
long  life,  he  had  raised  himself  from  a  private  gentle- 
man, of  an  antient  family  in  Ireland,  and  a  considerable 
patrimonial  fortune,  to  an  Irish  Earldom ;  which 
dignity,  together  with  his  name,  he  procured  to  devolve 
on  the  late  Marquis  of  Buckingham,  then  Mr.  Grenville, 
who  had  married  his  only  daughter.  They  were  both 
likewise  at  Gosfield,  during  the  time  of  which  I  speak ; 
and  Lord  Nugent  having  gone  up  to  town,  for  the 
purpose  of  kissing  the  King's  hand,  upon  his  new 
Creation,  returned  from  thence  on  the  following  day, 
as  we  were  seated  at  table,  after  dinner.  The  object  of 
his  visit  to  St.  Jameses,  was  well  known  by  every  one 
present ;  but  he  immediately  announced  it,  as  soon  as 
he  had  taken  his  place,  by  filling  out  a  glass  of  wine, 
and  toasting  his  daughter's  health  as  Lady  Mary 
Grenville. 

Lord  Nugent,  when  young,  had  occupied  a  distin- 
guished place  in  the  favor  of  Frederic,  Prince  of 
Wales ;  and  was  more  than  once  destined  to  have 
filled  an  office  in  some  of  those  imaginary  Administra- 
tions, commemorated  by  Dodington,  which  were  per- 
petually fabricated  at  Leicester  House,  during  the  long 
interval  between  the  accession  of  George  the  Second, 
and  His  Royal  Highnesses  decease,  in  1751.  The 
Prince  died  considerably  in  his  debt ;  nor  was  the  sum 
so  due,  ever  liquidated,  unless  we  consider  the  offices 
and  dignities  conferred  on  Lord  Nugent  by  George  the 
Third,  at  different  periods  of  his  reign,  as  having  been 
in  the  nature  of  a  retribution  for  loans  made  to  his 
father.  In  return  for  these  marks  of  royal  favour,  he 
presented  verses  to  the  Queen,  accompanying  a  piece  of 
Irish  Stuff,  which  Her  Majesty  graciously  accepted. 
Both  the  poetry,  and  the  manufacture,  were  satirically 

77 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

said   to   be   Irish   Stuff.      They  began,  if  I   recollect 
right, 

"  Could  poor  I  erne  gifts  afford, 
Worthy  the  mistress  of  her  lord, 
Of  sculptur'd  gold,  a  costly  frame, 
Just  emblem  of  her  worth  should  flame." 

But  Lord  Nugent's  Muse  will  never  rank  him  with 
Prior,  nor  even  with  Lyttelton  and  Chesterfield.  He 
was  a  better  Courtier,  than  a  Poet ;  and  he  had  always 
been  distinguished  by  the  other  Sex.  Glover,  when 
speaking  of  him,  says,  "  Nugent,  a  jovial  and  voluptuous 
Irishman,  who  had  left  Popery,  for  the  Protestant 
religion,  money,  and  widows."  His  first  wife,  Lady 
Amelia  Plunket,  daughter  of  the  Earl  of  Fingal, 
brought  him  only  one  son,  Colonel  Nugent,  who  died, 
many  years  before  his  father.  Mrs.  Knight,  sister  and 
heiress  of  the  celebrated  Craggs,  Secretary  of  State 
under  George  the  First,  buried  in  Westminster  Abbey  ; 
(and  who  is  immortalized  by  Pope's  Epitaph  on  him, 
more  perhaps,  than  by  his  talents,  or  his  actions ;)  was 
Lord  Nugenfs  second  wife.  She  brought  him  neither 
felicity  nor  issue ;  but  she  brought  him  the  house  and 
estate  at  Gosfield,  one  of  the  finest  in  Essex.  To  the 
late  Countess  Dowager  of  Berkeley,  he  gave  his  hand  a 
third  time ;  though  not  under  fortunate  Auspices,  nor 
in  a  happy  hour.  The  late  Marchioness  of  Buckingham 
was  the  only  issue  of  this  match,  recognized  by  Lord 
Nugent.  But,  his  devotion  to  the  Sex,  which  remained 
proof  to  all  trials,  animated  him  even  to  the  close  of 
life.  Lord  Temple  and  he,  both,  composed  verses, 
after  this  time,  addressed  to  the  same  object.  I  believe 
it  was  in  the  month  of  August,  1776,  that  these  aged 
Peers  presented  some  couplets  of  their  respective  com- 
positions, to  the  late  Duchess  of  Gordon,  then  in  the 
Meridian  of  her  charms ;  when  Lord  Temple,  having 
entertained  her  and  the  Duke  at  Stow,  lighted  up  the 

78 


HUMOURS  OF  HIGH  LIFE 

Grotto  for  her  reception.  Lord  Nugent,  to  a  perfect 
knowledge  of  the  world,  joined  a  coarse  and  often  licen- 
tious, but  natural,  strong,  and  ready  wit,  which  no  place, 
nor  company,  prevented  him  from  indulging ;  and  the 
effect  of  which  was  augmented  by  an  Irish  Accent  that 
never  forsook  him.  It  is  well  known,  that  when  a  Bill 
was  introduced  into  the  House  of  Commons,  for  better 
watching  the  Metropolis ;  in  order  to  contribute 
towards  effecting  which  object,  one  of  the  Clauses  went 
to  propose,  that  Watchmen  should  be  compelled  to  sleep 
during  the  day-time ;  Lord  Nugent,  with  admirable 
humour,  got  up,  and  desired  that  "he  might  be 
personally  included  in  the  provisions  of  the  Bill,  being 
frequently  so  tormented  with  the  Gout,  as  to  be  unable 
to  sleep  either  by  day,  or  by  night." 

While  I  am  on  this  subject,  I  cannot  resist  relating  a 
frolick,  which  rendered  Lord  Nugent,  or  rather  Mr. 
Nugent,  he  being  then  a  Commoner,  not  a  little 
distinguished,  towards  the  end  of  George  the  Second's 
reign.  George,  Earl  of  Bristol,  eldest  of  the  three  sons 
of  the  famous  Lord  Hervey,  whom  Pope  has,  very 
unjustly,  transmitted  to  posterity,  as  "Lord  Fanny," 
and  as  "  Sporus  ; "  like  his  father,  inclined  to  a  degree 
of  effeminacy,  in  his  person,  manners,  and  dress. 
Probably,  these  characteristics  of  deportment,  while 
they  exposed  him  to  some  animadversion  or  ridicule,  led 
to  a  supposition  that  they  were  connected  with  want 
of  spirit ;  and  that  he  would  not  promptly  resent  insult. 
Certain  it  is  that  Mr.  Nugent,  then  a  man  of  considera- 
tion, fortune,  and  fashion,  living  in  the  highest 
company  of  the  Metropolis  ;  being  one  evening  at  Lord 
Temple's  house  in  Pall-Mall,  where  a  splendid  assembly 
of  both  sexes  was  collected  ;  laid  a  singular  bet  with 
Lord  Temple,  that  he  would  spit  in  the  Earl  of 
Bristol's  hat.  The  wager  was  accepted,  and  Mr. 
Nugent  instantly  set  about  its  accomplishment.  For 
this  purpose,  as  he  passed  Lord  Bristol,  who  stood  in  the 

79 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

door-way  of  one  of  the  apartments,  very  richly  dressed, 
holding  his  hat  under  his  arm,  with  the  inside  upper- 
most; Mr.  Nugent,  turning  round  as  if  to  spit,  and 
affecting  not  to  perceive  Lord  Bristol,  performed  that 
act  in  his  hat. 

Pretending  the  utmost  concern  and  distress  at  the 
unintentional  rudeness  that  he  had  committed,  Mr. 
Nugent  made  a  thousand  apologies  to  the  Earl  for  his 
Indecorum,  and  entreated  to  be  allowed  to  wipe  off  the 
affront  with  his  pocket  handkerchief :  but,  Lord  Bristol 
calmly  taking  out  his  own,  used  it  for  that  purpose ; 
besought  Mr.  Nugent  not  to  be  discomposed ;  assured 
him  that  he  was  not  discomposed,  himself;  wiped  the 
inside  of  his  hat ;  and  then  replacing  it  as  before,  under 
his  arm,  asked  Mr.  Nugent  whether  he  had  any  farther 
occasion  for  it  in  the  same  way  ?  Having  so  done,  the 
Earl,  without  changing  a  muscle  of  his  countenance,  or 
manifesting  any  irritation,  quitted  the  place  where  he 
stood ;  sat  down  to  play  with  the  party  he  usually  made 
at  cards,  finished  his  two  or  three  Rubbers,  and  returned 
home.  Mr.  Nugent,  after  triumphantly  winning  his 
Bet,  considered  the  matter  as  terminated ;  but  in  this 
supposition  he  counted  without  his  host.  Early  on  the 
following  morning,  before  he  was  risen,  he  received  a 
note,  similar  in  its  nature  and  contents  to  that  which 
Gil  Bias  tells  us  he  delivered  to  his  master,  Don  Mathias 
de  Sylva ;  but,  with  the  summons  contained  in  which, 
Mr.  Nugent  did  not  manifest  the  same  careless  prompti- 
tude to  comply,  as  the  Spanish  Grandee  exhibited, 
in  the  Novel  of  Le  Sage.  The  Note  acquainted  him, 
that  Lord  Bristol  expected  and  demanded  Satisfaction 
for  the  insult  of  the  preceding  night,  without  delay ; 
naming  time,  as  well  as  place.  An  instant  answer  was 
required. 

Mr.  Nugent  now  perceived  that  he  had  involved 
himself  in  a  very  serious  affair  of  Honour,  where  he  had 
only  meant  to  gratify  a  wanton  moment  of  frolick. 

80 


A  DOUBLE  APOLOGY 

However  personally  brave,  he  felt  that  the  Exertion 
of  his  Courage,  in  order  to  cover  or  justify  a  premedi- 
tated insult,  which  nothing  could  warrant  or  excuse, 
would  only  aggravate  his  offence.  Under  this  impression, 
having  determined  therefore  to  make  reparation,  he 
wrote  to  Lord  Bristol,  offering  every  possible  Apology 
for  the  act  committed ;  which,  he  admitted,  would  be 
inexcusable,  if  it  had  been  meant  as  any  Affront.  But, 
as  the  best  extenuation  of  so  gross  a  seeming  violation 
of  all  decorum,  he  added,  that  it  did  not  arise  from  the 
most  remote  intention  of  insulting  the  Earl,  the  whole 
Matter  having  originated  in  a  Bet.  He  concluded  by 
professing  his  readiness  to  ask  pardon  in  the  most 
ample  manner ;  requesting  that  the  business  might  not 
produce  any  further  consequences.  To  this  Application 
Lord  Bristol  replied,  that  though  he  was  disposed 
readily  to  admit,  and  to  accept  the  proffered  Repara- 
tion ;  yet,  as  the  Affront  had  been  committed  in  public 
company,  so  must  the  exacted  Apology  be  made ;  and 
he  named  the  Club-room  at  White's,  as  the  place  where 
he  would  receive  it  from  Mr.  Nugent.  Not,  however, 
by  any  means,  Lord  Bristol  added,  from  him  only ;  for, 
as  he  now  understood  that  the  Act  owed  its  rise  to  a 
wager,  it  became  clear  that  there  must  be  another 
person  implicated  in  the  Transaction.  He  insisted 
therefore,  on  knowing  the  name  of  that  individual,  from 
whom,  as  a  participator  in  the  Frolick,  he  should 
equally  exact  an  Apology ;  and  declaring  that  on  no 
other  conditions  would  he  relinquish  his  right  to 
demand  personal  satisfaction.  In  consequence  of  so 
peremptory  a  Requisition,  Mr.  Nugent  owned,  that 
Lord  Temple  was  the  person  to  whom  he  had  alluded ; 
and  both  the  Gentlemen  were  finally  reduced  to  comply 
with  the  terms,  by  asking  pardon  in  the  Club-room  at 
White's.  Lord  Bristol  then  declared  himself  satisfied, 
and  the  Business  at  an  end. 

The  late  Lord  Sackville  told  me,  that  when  young, 
81  6 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

he    was    well    acquainted   with   Lord   Mark   Kerr;    a 
Nobleman  whose  person  being,  like  Lord  Bristol's,  cast 
by  Nature  in  a  very  delicate  mould,  sometimes  subjected 
him   among   strangers,  to   insults,  from  a   supposition 
that  a  man  of  so  feminine  a  figure,  would  not  be  prone 
to   resent   an   affront.     In   this   calculation   they  were 
however   egregiously   deceived,   he   being   a   person   of 
decided  courage.     Shortly  after  the  battle  of  Dettingen, 
during   the   Summer   of  the   year   1743,  the   Earl   of 
Stair,  then  commanding  the  British  forces  in  Germany, 
under   George   the   Second,   entertained    at    his   table 
several  French  Officers,  who  had  been  taken  prisoners  in 
that  engagement.     A  numerous  company  sat  down  to 
dinner,  in  the  tent  of  the  Commander-in-chief,  among 
whom  was  Lord  Mark ;  who  being  son  to  the  Marquis 
of  Lothian,  and  nearly  related  to  Lord  Stair,  acted  as 
one  of  his  Aides  du  Camp.     Lord  Sackville  was  present 
on  the  occasion.     A  difference  of  opinion  having  arisen 
during  the  repast,  on  some  point  which  was  maintained 
by  one  of  the  French  Officers  with  great  pertinacity ; 
Lord  Mark  Kerr,  in  a  very  gentle  tone  of  voice,  ventured 
to   set   him   right   on   the   matter   of  fact.     But,  the 
Frenchman,  inconscious  of  his  quality,  and  perhaps  think- 
ing that  a  frame  so  delicate,  did  not  enclose  a  high  spirit ; 
contradicted  him  in  the  most  gross  terms,  such  as  are 
neither  used  nor  submitted  to  among  Gentlemen.     The 
circumstance  took  place  so  near  to  Lord  Stair  as  unavoid- 
ably to  attract  his  attention.     No  notice  whatever  was 
taken  of  it  at  the  time,  and  after  dinner  the  company 
adjourned   to   another   tent,  where  Coffee   was  served. 
Lord  Mark  coming  in  about  a  quarter  of  an  hour  later 
than   the   others,  Lord  Stair  no  sooner  observed  him, 
than  calling  him  aside,  "  Nephew,"  said  he,  "  I  think  it 
"  is  impossible  for  you  to  pass  by  the  affront  that  you 
"  received  from  the  French  Officer  at  my  table.     You 
"  must  demand  satisfaction,  however  much  I  regret  the 
"  necessity   for  it.11     "  Oh,  My  Lord,"  answered  Lord 

82 


A  HASTY  DUEL 

Mark,  "  you  need  not  be  under  any  uneasiness  on  that 
u  subject.  We  have  already  fought.  I  ran  him  through 
"  the  body.  He  died  on  the  spot,  and  they  are  at  this 
u  moment  about  to  bury  him.  I  knew  too  well  what  I 
"  owed  to  myself,  and  I  was  too  well  convinced  of  your 
"  Lordship's  way  of  thinking,  to  lose  a  moment  in 
"  calling  the  Officer  to  account." 

I  passed  the  ensuing  Winter,  of  1776-7,  in  London ; 
a  period  which  is  now  so  distant,  and  the  manners,  as  well 
as  the  inhabitants  of  the  Metropolis,  having  undergone 
since  that  time,  so  total  a  change,  that  they  no  longer 
preserve  almost  any  similarity.  The  sinister  events  of 
the  American  war,  had  already  begun  to  shed  a  degree 
of  political  gloom  over  the  Capital  and  the  kingdom ; 
but  this  cloud  bore  no  comparison  with  the  terror  and 
alarm  that  pervaded  the  firmest  minds  in  1792,  and 
1793,  after  the  first  burst  of  the  French  Revolution, 
and  the  commencement  of  the  Continental  war  in 
Flanders.  In  1777,  we  in  fact  only  contended  for 
Empire  and  Dominion.  No  fears  of  subversion, 
extinction,  and  subjugation  to  foreign  violence,  or 
revolutionary  arts,  interrupted  the  general  tranquillity 
of  society.  It  was  subjected,  indeed,  to  other  fetters, 
from  which  we  have  since  emancipated  ourselves ; 
those  of  dress,  Etiquette,  and  form.  The  lapse  of  two 
Centuries  could  scarcely  have  produced  a  greater  altera- 
tion in  these  particulars,  than  have  been  made  by  about 
forty  years.  That  Costume,  which  is  now  confined  to 
the  Levee,  or  Drawing-room,  was  then  worn  by  persons 
of  condition,  with  few  exceptions,  every  where,  and 
every  day.  Mr.  Fox  and  his  friends,  who  might  be 
said  to  dictate  to  the  Town,  affecting  a  style  of  neglect 
about  their  persons,  and  manifesting  a  contempt  of  all 
the  usages  hitherto  established,  first  threw  a  sort  of 
discredit  on  Dress.  From  the  House  of  Commons,  and 
the  Clubs  in  St.  James's  Street,  it  spread  through  the 
private  Assemblies  of  London.  But,  though  gradually 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

undermined,  and  insensibly  perishing  of  an  Atrophy, 
Dress  never  totally  fell,  till  the  Era  of  Jacobinism  and 
of  Equality,  in  1793,  and  1794.  It  was  then  that  Panta- 
loons, cropped  hair,  and  shoe-strings,  as  well  as  the  total 
abolition  of  buckles  and  ruffles,  together  with  the  disuse 
of  hair-powder,  characterized  the  men :  while  ladies, 
having  cut  off  those  Tresses,  which  had  done  so  much 
execution,  and  one  lock  of  which  purloined,  gave  rise  to 
the  finest  model  of  mock-heroic  Poetry,  which  our  own, 
or  any  other  language  can  boast ;  exhibited  heads 
rounded  "a  la  Victime  et  a  la  Guillotine"  as  if  ready 
for  the  stroke  of  the  axe.  A  drapery,  more  suited  to 
the  climate  of  Greece  or  of  Italy,  than  to  the 
temperature  of  an  Island  situate  in  the  fifty-first  degree 
of  Latitude ;  classic,  elegant,  luxurious,  and  picturesque, 
but  ill  calculated  to  protect  against  damp,  cold,  and 
fogs ;  superseded  the  ancient  female  attire  of  Great 
Britain ;  finally  levelling  or  obliterating  almost  all 
external  distinction  between  the  highest  and  the  lowest 
of  the  sex,  in  this  country.  Perhaps,  with  all  its 
incumbrances,  penalties,  and  inconveniences,  it  will  be 
found  necessary,  at  some  not  very  distant  period,  to 
revive,  in  a  certain  degree,  the  empire  of  Dress. 

At  the  time  of  which  I  speak,  the  "  Gens  de  Lettres?  or 
"  Blue  Stockings,"  as  they  were  commonly  denominated, 
formed  a  very  numerous,  powerful,  compact  Phalanx, 
in  the  midst  of  London.  Into  this  society,  the  two 
publications  which  I  had  recently  given  to  the  world ; 
one,  on  the  Northern  Kingdoms  of  Europe ;  the  other, 
on  the  History  of  France,  under  the  Race  of 
Valois ;  however  destitute  of  merit,  yet  facilitated 
and  procured  my  admission.  Mrs.  Montague  was 
then  the  Madame  du  Deffand  of  the  English 
Capital ;  and  her  house  constituted  the  central  point  of 
union,  for  all  those  persons  who  already  were  known,  or 
who  emulated  to  become  known,  by  their  talents  and 
productions.  Her  supremacy,  unlike  that  of  Madame 

84 


MRS.  MONTAGUE 

du  Deffand,  was,  indeed,  established  on  more  solid 
foundations  than  those  of  intellect,  and  rested  on  more 
tangible  materials  than  any  with  which  Shakespear 
himself  could  furnish  her.  Though  she  had  not 
as  yet  begun  to  construct  the  splendid  Mansion,  in 
which  she  afterwards  resided,  near  Portman  Square,  she 
lived  in  a  very  elegant  house  in  Hill  Street.  Impressed 
probably,  from  the  suggestions  of  her  own  knowledge  of 
the  world,  with  a  deep  conviction  of  that  great  truth 
laid  down  by  Moliere,  which  no  Man  of  Letters  ever 
disputed ;  that  "  Le  vrai  Amphytrion  est  celui  chez  qui 
Ton  dine ; "  Mrs.  Montague  was  accustomed  to  open  her 
house  to  a  large  company  of  both  sexes,  whom  she 
frequently  entertained  at  dinner.  A  service  of  plate, 
and  a  table  plentifully  covered,  disposed  her  guests  to 
admire  the  splendor  of  her  fortune,  not  less  than  the 
lustre  of  her  talents.  She  had  found  the  same  results 
flowing  from  the  same  causes,  during  the  visit  that  she 
made  to  Paris,  after  the  Peace  of  1763 ;  where  she 
displayed  to  the  astonished  Literati  of  that  Metropolis, 
the  extent  of  her  pecuniary,  as  well  as  of  her  mental 
resources.  As  this  topic  formed  one  of  the  subjects 
most  gratifying  to  her,  she  was  easily  induced  to  launch 
out  on  it,  with  much  apparent  complacency.  The 
Eulogiums  lavished  on  her  Repasts,  and  the  astonish- 
ment expressed  at  the  magnitude  of  her  income,  which 
appeared  prodigiously  augmented  by  being  transformed 
from  Pounds  Sterling  into  French  Livres ;  seemed  to 
have  afforded  her  as  much  gratification,  as  the  Pane- 
gyrics bestowed  upon  the  "  Essay  on  the  Genius  and 
Writings  of  Shakespear.11' 

Mrs.  Montague,  in  1776,  verged  towards  her  sixtieth 
year;  but  her  person,  which  was  thin,  spare,  and  in 
good  preservation,  gave  her  an  appearance  of  less 
antiquity.  From  the  infirmities  often  attendant  on 
advanced  life,  she  seemed  to  be  almost  wholly  exempt. 
All  the  lines  of  her  countenance  bespoke  intelligence, 

85 


WRAXALI/S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

and  her  eyes  were  accommodated  to  her  cast  of  features, 
which  had  in  them  something  satirical  and  severe, 
rather  than  amiable  or  inviting.  She  possessed  great 
natural  cheerfulness,  and  a  flow  of  animal  spirits ;  loved 
to  talk,  and  talked  well  on  almost  every  subject;  led 
the  conversation,  and  was  qualified  to  preside  in  her 
circle,  whatever  subject  of  discourse  was  started:  but 
her  manner  was  more  dictatorial  and  sententious,  than 
conciliating  or  diffident.  There  was  nothing  feminine 
about  her ;  and  though  her  opinions  were  usually  just, 
as  well  as  delivered  in  language  suited  to  give  them 
force,  yet  the  organ  which  conveyed  them,  was  not 
musical.  Destitute  of  taste  in  disposing  the  ornaments 
of  her  dress,  she  nevertheless  studied  or  affected  those  aids, 
more  than  would  seem  to  have  become  a  woman  profess- 
ing a  philosophic  mind,  intent  on  higher  pursuits  than 
the  Toilet.  Even  when  approaching  to  fourscore,  this 
female  weakness  still  accompanied  her ;  nor  could  she 
relinquish  her  diamond  necklace  and  bows,  which,  like 
Sir  William  Draper's  "  blushing  riband,11  commemorated 
by  "  Junius,"  formed  of  evenings,  the  perpetual  ornament 
of  her  emaciated  person.  I  used  to  think  that  these 
glittering  appendages  of  opulence,  sometimes  helped  to 
dazzle  the  disputants,  whom  her  arguments  might  not 
always  convince,  or  her  literary  reputation  intimidate. 
That  reputation  had  not  as  yet  received  the  rude  attack 
made  on  it  by  Dr.  Johnson  at  a  subsequent  period, 
when  he  appears  to  have  treated  with  much  irreverence, 
her  "  Essay  on  Shakespear,"  if  we  may  believe  Boswell. 
Notwithstanding  the  defects  and  weaknesses  that  I 
have  enumerated,  she  possessed  a  masculine  understand- 
ing, enlightened,  cultivated,  and  expanded  by  the 
acquaintance  of  men,  as  well  as  of  books.  Many  of  the 
most  illustrious  persons  in  rank,  no  less  than  in  ability, 
under  the  reigns  of  George  the  Second  and  Third, 
had  been  her  correspondents,  friends,  companions,  and 
admirers.  Pulteney,  Earl  of  Bath,  whose  portrait  hung 

86 


MRS.  VESEY 

over  the  chimney  piece  in  her  drawing  room ;  and 
George,  the  first  Lord  Lyttelton,  so  eminent  for  his 
genius,  were  among  the  number.  She  was  constantly 
surrounded  by  all  that  was  distinguished  for  attainments 
or  talents,  male  or  female,  English  or  foreign ;  and  it 
would  be  almost  ungrateful  in  me  not  to  acknowledge 
the  gratification,  derived  from  the  conversation  and 
intercourse  of  such  a  society. 

Though   Mrs.    Montague   occupied    the    first    place 
among  the  "beaux  Esprits™  at   this   period,  she   was 
not    without    female    competitors    for    so   eminent   a 
distinction.     Mrs.    Vesey    might    indeed    be    said    to 
hold   the  second   rank :   but,   unlike   Mademoiselle   de 
TEspmasse   at    Paris,   who   raised   a   separate   literary 
standard  from  Madame  du  Dejfand\   Mrs.  Vesey  only 
aspired  to  follow,  at  a  humble  distance,  the   brilliant 
track  of  Mrs.  Montague.     The  former  rather   seemed 
desirous  to  assemble  persons  of  celebrity  and  talents, 
under   her   roof,   or    at    her   table,   than   assumed   or 
pretended  to  form  one  of  them,  herself.     Though  not 
lodged  with  the  same  magnificence  as  Mrs.  Montague ; 
yet   she   entertained   with    less   form,   as   well   as   less 
ostentation.     Mrs.  Vesey's  repasts  were  at   once   more 
select,  and   more   delicate.     Farther   advanced   in   life 
than     Mrs.     Montague,    she    possessed     no     personal 
advantages  of  manner,  and   studied   no   ornaments   of 
dress.     Simplicity,  accompanied  by  a  sort  of  oblivious 
inattention   to   things   passing   under  her   very   sight, 
characterized   her.      In   absence   of  mind,   indeed,  she 
might  almost  be  said  to  equal  the   Duke  de  Brancas, 
Chamberlain   to   Anne   of  Austria,  relative   to   whose 
continual  violation  of  common  rules,  Madame  de  Sevigne 
has  consigned  to  us  so  many  amusing  Anecdotes.     With 
Mrs.  Vesey  this  forgetfulness  extended  to  such  a  point, 
that  she  sometimes  hardly  remembered  her  own  name. 
It   will  scarcely   be   credited,  that   she   could   declaim 
against   second  marriages,  to  a   Lady  of  Quality  who 

87 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

had  been  twice  married,  and  though  Mr.  Vesey  was  her 
own  second  husband.  When  at  last  reminded  of  the 
circumstance,  she  only  exclaimed,  "  Bless  me,  my  dear, 
"  I  had  quite  forgotten  it!"  There  was,  indeed,  some 
decay  of  mind  in  such  want  of  recollection.  Her  sister- 
in-law,  who  lived  in  the  same  house  with  her,  and  who 
formed,  physically,  as  well  as  morally,  a  perfect  contrast 
to  Mrs.  Vesey,  superintended  all  domestic  arrangements. 
From  their  opposite  figures,  qualities,  and  endowments, 
the  one  was  called  "  Body,"  the  other  "  Mind." 

In  these  two  houses  might  then  be  seen  many  or  most 
of  the  persons  of  both  sexes,  eminent  for  literary 
attainments,  or  celebrity  of  any  kind.  Mrs.  Thrale, 
still  better  known  by  the  name  of  Mrs.  Piozzi,  was  to 
be  met  with  frequently  in  this  society,  followed  or 
attended  by  Mr.  Thrale,  and  by  Dr.  Johnson.  Of  the 
former,  it  is  unnecessary  to  say  any  thing ;  and  relative 
to  the  last,  after  the  laboured,  minute  portraits  which 
have  been  drawn  of  him,  under  every  attitude,  what  is 
it  possible  to  say  new  ?  I  will  freely  confess  that  his 
rugged  exterior  and  garb,  his  uncouth  gestures,  his 
convolutions  and  distortions,  when  added  to  the  rude  or 
dogmatical  manner  in  which  he  delivered  his  opinions 
and  decisions  on  every  point ; — rendered  him  so  dis- 
agreeable in  company,  and  so  oppressive  in  conversation, 
that  all  the  superiority  of  his  talents  could  not  make 
full  amends,  in  my  estimation,  for  these  defects.  In 
his  anger,  or  even  in  the  warmth  of  argument,  where 
he  met  with  opposition,  he  often  respected  neither  age, 
rank,  nor  sex ;  and  the  usages  of  polished  life  imposed 
a  very  inadequate  restraint  on  his  expressions,  or  his 
feelings.  What  are  we  to  think  of  a  man,  who,  by  the 
testimony  of  his  own  Biographer,  denominated  Lord 
Russel  and  Algernon  Sidney,  "rascals;"  qualified 
Pennant  by  the  Epithet  of  "a  dog,"  because  in  his 
political  opinions  he  was  a  Whig;  gave  to  Fielding, 
the  appellations  of  "  a  blockhead,  and  a  barren  rascal ;" 

88 


JOHNSON'S  MANNERS  AND  INFLUENCE 

and  in  speaking  of  King  William  the  Third,  always 
termed  him  "  a  scoundrel  ?"  If  not  irascible,  he  was 
certainly  dictatorial,  coarse,  and  sometimes  almost 
impracticable.  Those  whom  he  could  not  always 
vanquish  by  the  force  of  his  intellect,  by  the  depth  and 
range  of  his  arguments,  and  by  the  compass  of  his 
gigantic  faculties,  he  silenced  by  rudeness ;  and  I  have, 
myself,  more  than  once,  stood  in  the  predicament  which 
I  here  describe.  Yet,  no  sooner  was  he  withdrawn,  and 
with  him  had  disappeared  these  personal  imperfections, 
than  the  sublime  attainments  of  his  mind  left  their  full 
effect  on  the  audience :  for  such,  the  whole  assembly 
might  be  in  some  measure  esteemed,  while  he  was  present. 
His  beautiful  compositions,  both  prose  and  poetical, 
the  unquestionable  benevolence  and  philanthropy  of  his 
character,  his  laborious  and  useful,  as  well  as  voluminous 
and  toilsome  productions,  when  added  to  his  literary 
fame  and  pre-eminence ; — all  these  combined  qualities 
so  overbore  or  subdued,  the  few  who  ventured  to 
contend  with  him,  that  submission  or  silence  formed 
the  only  protection,  and  the  ordinary  refuge,  to  which 
they  had  recourse. 

We  never  can  enough  regret,  that  a  man  who 
possessed  such  poetic  talents  as  are  displayed  in  his 
two  Imitations  of  Juvenal ;  "  London,"  and  the  "  Vanity 
of  Human  Wishes  ; "  should  have  neglected  that  Branch 
of  Composition,  in  which  he  might  have  attained  to 
such  comprehensive  eminence.  If  Pope's  Imitations  of 
Horace,  have  more  suavity,  delicacy,  and  taste,  than 
Johnson's  productions  can  boast ;  the  latter  breathe  a 
spirit  of  sublime  and  severe  morality,  mingled  with  a 
philosophic  grandeur  of  thought,  which  is  equally 
captivating,  as  it  is  impressive  and  instructive.  How 
admirable  is  his  picture  of  diaries  the  Twelfth^  as 
opposed  to  that  of  Hannibal!  How  fine  is  the 
Comparison  between  Wolsey  and  Sejanus !  What  can 
exceed  the  judgment  shewn  in  selecting  Charles  the 

89 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 


Seventh,  the   Bavarian   Emperor  of  1741,  as 
to  the  Xerxes  of  the  Roman  Satirist !     The  English 
language  offers,  perhaps,  nothing  more  chaste,  correct, 
and  yet  harmonious,  than  these  Verses,  which  are  free 
from   any  pedantry,  or   affectation   of  learning.     The 
fact,  however  is,  that   Johnson   did  not  dare  to  yield 
to  the  seductions  of  the  Muse,  or  to  abandon  himself 
to   the   Inspiration  of  Poetry.     He  was  compelled   to 
restrain   his   efforts,  to   the   more   temperate   walk   of 
Prose,  however  capable  he  felt  himself  to  be  of  emulat- 
ing Addison,  or  Gray,  or  Pope.     It  is  well  known,  that 
he  was  constitutionally  subject  to  a  melancholy,  morbid 
humour,  which,  advancing  with  his  years,  approached, 
on   certain   occasions,  to   something   like  alienation  of 
mind.     Well   aware   of  this   infirmity,  he  was   appre- 
hensive of  its  effects.     Topham   Beauclerk,  who  lived 
in   great  intimacy  with  him,  often   expressed   to   him 
the  astonishment  and  regret,  naturally  excited  by  his 
apparent   neglect   of    such    Poetic   Powers   as   Nature 
had  conferred  on  him.     Johnson  heard  him  in  silence, 
or  made  little  reply  to  these  remonstrances.     But,  on 
Mr.  Beauclerk^s  making  the  same  remark  to  Mr.  Thrale, 
that  gentleman  immediately  answered,  that  "  the  real 
"  reason  why  Johnson   did  not  apply  his   faculties  to 
"  Poetry,  was,  that  he  dared  not  trust  himself  in  such 
"  a  pursuit,  his  mind  not  being  equal  to  the  species  of 
"  Inspiration  which  Verse  demands ;  though  in  the  walk 
"  of  prose  composition,  whether  moral,  philological,  or 
"  biographical,  he  could  continue  his  labours,  without 
"  apprehension  of  any  injurious  consequences.11 

If,  nevertheless,  after  rendering  due  homage  to  his 
paramount  abilities,  which  no  testimony  of  mine  can 
affect,  I  might  venture  to  criticise  so  eminent  a  person, 
as  having  been  deficient  in  any  particular  branch  of 
Information  and  polite  knowledge,  I  should  say  that 
his  deficiency  lay  in  History.  Boswell  has  very  aptly 
compared  his  understanding  to  a  mill,  into  which 

90 


JOHNSON  CRITICISED 

subjects  were  thrown,  in  order  to  be  ground.  And 
Mrs.  Piozzi  somewhere  remarks,  in  better  language  than 
I  can  do  it  by  memory,  that  "  his  mind  resembled  a 
"  royal  pleasure  garden,  within  whose  ample  dimensions 
"  every  thing  subservient  to  dignity,  beauty,  or  utility, 
"  was  to  be  found,  from  the  stately  cedar  down  to  the 
"  lowliest  plant  or  herb."  That  this  assertion,  if  loosely 
and  generally  taken,  is  perfectly  just,  no  person  can 
dispute,  who  knew  him.  That  he  was  even  thoroughly 
conversant  in  the  modern  history  of  Europe,  for  the 
last  two  or  three  Centuries,  is  incontestable ;  and  still 
less  will  it  be  denied,  that  he  intimately  knew  all  the 
classic  periods  of  Greek  and  Roman  story,  most  of 
which  he  had  studied  or  perused  in  the  original  writers. 
But,  these  attainments  he  shared  with  many  of  his 
contemporaries.  In  the  history  of  Europe  during  the 
middle  Ages,  by  which  I  mean,  from  the  destruction  of 
the  Roman  Empire  in  the  West,  in  the  year  476, 
through  the  ten  Centuries  that  elapsed  before  the 
revival  of  letters,  I  always  thought  him  very  imperfectly 
versed;  if  not,  on  some  portions,  uninformed  and 
ignorant.  To  have  compared  his  knowledge,  on  these 
subjects,  with  the  information  which  Gibbon,  or  which 
Robertson  possessed,  would  have  been  an  insult  to 
truth.  But,  as  far  as  I  could  ever  presume  to  form 
an  opinion,  he  was  much  below  either  Burke,  or  Fox, 
in  all  general  historical  information. 

Even  as  a  Biographer,  which  is  a  minor  species  of 
History,  Johnson,  however  masterly,  profound,  and 
acute,  in  all  that  relates  to  criticism,  to  discrimination, 
and  to  dissection  of  literary  merit ;  has  always  appeared 
to  me  to  have  wanted  many  essential  qualities,  or  to 
have  evinced  great  inaccuracy  and  neglect.  I  do  not 
mean  to  speak  of  his  prejudices  and  political  partialities, 
which  hardly  allow  him  to  do  justice  to  Milton,  or  to 
Addison,  because  the  one  was  a  Republican,  and  the 
other  a  Whig ;  just  as  he  calls  Hampden,  "  the  Zealot 

91 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

of  Rebellion  : "  I  allude  to  errors,  which  could  only  have 
arisen  from  an  ignorance  of  facts,  with  which  he  might 
and  ought  to  have  been  acquainted.  What  shall  we 
say,  when  we  find  him  telling  us,  that  Stepney,  the 
Poet,  "was  invited  into  public  life  by  the  Duke  of 
Dorset?"  The  event  in  question  must  have  taken 
place  about  1683,  towards  the  end  of  Charles  the 
Second^s  reign.  But,  the  creation  of  the  Dukedom  of 
Dorset  only  originated  under  George  the  First,  in  1720. 
In  like  manner  he  informs  us,  that  Prior  published 
about  1706,  "a  volume  of  poems,  with  the  encomiastic 
"  character  of  his  deceased  patron,  the  Duke  of  Dorset." 
No  doubt  he  means  to  speak  of  Charles,  Earl  of  Dorset, 
who  died  nearly  at  that  time.  His  mistakes,  or  his 
omissions  and  defect  of  information,  in  the  life  of  that 
distinguished  Nobleman,  are  much  more  gross.  John, 
son  makes  him  succeed  to  James  Cranfield,  second  Earl 
of  Middlesex,  in  1674,  his  uncle ;  who  was  already  dead, 
many  years  antecedent.  It  was  the  third  Earl  of 
Middlesex,  Lionel,  to  whose  estates  and  title  the  Earl 
of  Dorset  succeeded,  or  was  raised  by  Charles  the 
Second.  On  all  the  interesting  particulars  of  his 
marriages,  his  private  life,  and  his  decease,  relative 
to  which  objects  curiosity  must  be  so  naturally  and 
warmly  excited,  the  Biographer  is  either  silent  or 
misinformed.  I  may  be  told,  that  these  inaccuracies, 
chiefly  chronological,  are  of  little  moment.  So  is  it, 
whether  the  great  Duke  of  Marlborough  died  in  1722, 
or  in  1723.  But,  he  who  undertakes  to  compose  an 
account  of  Churchill's  life,  is  bound  to  know,  and 
accurately  to  relate,  all  the  leading  facts  that  attended, 
or  distinguished  it.  Johnson,  we  may  be  assured, 
would  have  been,  himself,  the  first  to  detect  and  to 
expose  such  errors  in  another  writer. 

Mrs.  Thrale  always  appeared  to  me,  to  possess  at 
least  as  much  Information,  a  mind  as  cultivated,  and 
more  wit  than  Mrs.  Montague ;  but  she  did  not  descend 

92 


A  DISTINGUISHED  COMPANY 

among  men  from  such  an  eminence,  and  she  talked  much 
more,  as  well  as  more  unguardedly,  on  every  subject. 
She  was  the  Provider  and  the  Conductress  of  Johnson, 
who  lived  almost  constantly  under  her  roof,  or  more 
properly,  under  that  of  Mr.  Thrale,  both  in  town  and 
at  Streatham.  He  did  not,  however,  spare  her,  more 
than  other  women,  in  his  Attacks,  if  she  courted  or 
provoked  his  Animadversion.  As  little  did  he  appear 
to  respect  or  to  manage  Garrick,  who  frequently  made 
one  of  the  assembly.  His  presence  always  diffused  a 
gaiety  over  the  room  ;  but  he  seemed  to  shrink  from  too 
near  a  contact  with  Johnson,  whose  superiority  of  mind, 
added  to  the  roughness  and  closeness  of  his  hugs, 
reduced  Garrick  to  act  on  the  defensive.  Mrs.  Carter, 
so  well  known  by  her  erudition,  the  Madame  Dacier  of 
England;  from  her  religious  cast  of  character,  and 
gravity  of  deportment,  no  less  than  from  her  intellectual 
Acquirements,  was  more  formed  to  impose  some  check 
on  the  asperity  or  eccentricities  of  Johnson.  Dr. 
Burney,  and  his  daughter,  the  author  of  "  Evelina  "  and 
"  Cecilia,"  though  both  were  generally  present ;  I 
always  thought,  rather  avoided,  than  solicited,  notice. 
Horace  Walpole,  whenever  he  appeared  there,  enriched 
and  illuminated  the  conversation,  by  Anecdotes  personal 
and  historical ;  many  of  which  were  rendered  more 
curious  or  interesting,  from  his  having,  himself, 
witnessed  their  existence,  or  received  them  from  his 
father  Sir  Robert  Walpole.  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds, 
precluded  by  his  deafness  from  mixing  in,  or  con- 
tributing to  general  conversation ;  his  trumpet  held  up 
to  his  ear,  was  gratified  by  the  attention  of  those  who 
addressed  to  him  their  discourse  ;  a  notice  which  the 
resources  of  his  mind  enabled  him  to  repay  with 
interest.  Mrs.  Chapone,  under  one  of  the  most 
repulsive  exteriors  that  any  woman  ever  possessed, 
concealed  very  superior  attainments,  and  extensive 
knowledge.  Burke,  though  occupied  in  the  toils  of 

93 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

parliamentary  discussion,  and  of  ministerial  attack, 
which  left  him  little  leisure  to  bestow  on  literary  men 
or  subjects ;  yet  sometimes  unbent  his  Faculties  among 
persons  adapted  by  nature  to  unfold  the  powers  of 
delighting  and  instructing,  with  which  genius  and  study 
had  enriched  him.  His  presence  was,  however,  more 
coveted,  than  enjoyed.  Dr.  Shipley,  Bishop  of  St. 
Asaph,  accompanied  by  his  daughter,  Miss  Shipley, 
afterwards  married  to  Sir  William  Jones,  might  be 
frequently  seen  there.  The  Abbe  Raynal,  who  passed 
that  winter  in  London,  was  readily  admitted,  and 
eagerly  courted.  It  must  be  confessed  that  the  variety 
of  his  Information,  and  the  Facility,  as  well  as 
Readiness,  with  which  he  communicated  the  stores  of 
his  exuberant  Memory,  would  have  rendered  him  a 
valuable  accession  to  any  circle ;  but  his  Loquacity 
generally  fatigued  even  those,  whom  it  delighted  and 
improved.  The  present  Lord  Erskine,  who,  thirty 
years  later,  attained  to  the  Great  Seal,  had  not  yet 
commenced  his  career  of  Jurisprudence.  But,  the 
versatility  of  his  talents,  the  energy  of  his  character, 
and  the  vivacity  of  his  conversation,  sufficiently 
manifested,  even  at  that  time,  the  effect  which  such  a 
union  of  Qualities  might  produce,  when  powerfully 
urged  and  impelled  towards  one  object.  Happily  for 
himself,  he  did  not  want  the  strongest  impulse,  arising 
from  domestic  pledges  and  embarrassments,  well 
calculated  to  call  out  every  faculty  of  the  mind.  It  is 
curious  to  reflect,  that  if  he  had  been  born  one  step 
higher;  if,  instead  of  being  the  younger  son  of  a 
Scotch  Earl9  his  father  had  been  a  Marquis,  he  never 
could  have  been  called  to  the  Bar.  His  endowments, 
however  great,  assuredly  would  not,  in  any  other 
Profession,  have  raised  him  to  the  Peerage,  to  fortune, 
and  to  fame.  His  celebrity,  indeed,  if  we  may  believe 
Mr.  Fox's  Biographer,  had  not  extended  across  the 
Straits  of  Dover,  even  in  1802,  when  the  Corsican 

94 


THE  DUCHESS  OF  DEVONSHIRE 

First  Consul  appears  not  to  have  known  his  name. 
Mrs.  Boscawen,  though  inferior  in  literary  Reputation 
to  Mrs.  Montague,  and  perhaps  possessed  of  less 
general  information,  yet  conciliated  more  good-will. 
She  had  an  historical  turn  of  mind ;  and  in  the  course 
of  a  long  life  passed  among  the  upper  circles  of  society, 
she  had  collected  and  retained  a  number  of  curious  or 
interesting  Anecdotes  of  her  own  Times.  Mr.  Pepys, 
now  Sir  William  Pepys,  to  whose  acquaintance  and 
partiality  I  was  not  a  little  indebted,  for  facilitating  my 
entrance  into  this  Assembly  of  distinguished  Persons, 
is  the  last  individual  whom  I  shall  enumerate.  To  a 
mind  adorned  with  classic  images,  and  conversant  with 
classic  authors,  he  united  great  colloquial  powers.  The 
friend  of  the  first  Lord  Lyttelton,  of  Sir  James  Mac- 
donald,  and  of  Topham  Beauclerk,  he  was  in  principle 
a  staunch  Whig ;  and  as  Johnson  might  be  justly 
esteemed  a  violent,  as  well  as  a  bigotted  Tory,  much 
political  sparring  occasionally  took  place  between  them, 
in  the  progress  of  which,  many  sparks  of  historical  or 
philosophical  fire,  were  elicited  on  both  sides. 

Though  literary  reputation,  or  acknowledged  talents 
and  celebrity  of  some  kind,  seemed  to  constitute  the 
primary  title  to  a  place  in  those  conversations,  from 
which  every  species  of  play  was  altogether  excluded  ; 
yet  rank  and  beauty  were  to  be  found  there,  and 
contributed  to  render  them  interesting.  The  late 
Duchess  Dowager  of  Portland,  Grand-daughter  of  the 
Lord  Treasurer  Oxford,  herself  a  woman  of  distinguished 
taste  in  various  branches  of  art,  was  a  frequent 
visitant.  It  was  impossible  to  look  on  her,  without 
reflecting  that  while  still  in  early  childhood,  she  had 
been  the  object  of  Swift's  poetic  attention,  and  the 
subject  of  Prior's  expiring  Muse.  I  have  seen  the 
Duchess  of  Devonshire,  then  in  the  first  bloom  of  youth, 
hanging  on  the  sentences  that  fell  from  Johnson's  lips, 
and  contending  for  the  nearest  place  to  his  chair.  All 

95 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 


i    «,„ 


the  Cynic  moroseness  of  the  philosopher  and  the 
moralist,  seemed  to  dissolve  under  so  flattering  an 
approach ;  to  the  gratification  and  distinction  resulting 
from  which,  he  was  nothing  less  than  insensible.  We 
may  see  in  Boswell,  how  tractable,  gentle,  and  accom- 
modating he  became  while  at  Inverary,  seated  between 
the  Duke  and  Duchess  of  Argyle. 

It  is  natural  to  ask,  whether  the  literary  Society  of 
London,  at  the  period  of  which  I  am  speaking,  could 
enter  into  any  competition  for  extent  of  talents,  and 
superiority  of  attainments,  with  the  Society  of  Paris, 
that  met  at  the  apartments  of  Madame  du  Deffand,  and 
of  Mademoiselle  TEspmasse^  under  the  reigns  of  Louis 
the  Fifteenth  and  Sixteenth.  In  other  words,  whether 
the  persons  who  formed  the  Assemblies  in  the  English 
Capital,  can  support  a  comparison  for  ability  and  for  fame, 
with  those  who  were  accustomed  to  meet  in  the  French 
Metropolis.  If  I  were  to  presume  to  give  an  opinion  on 
this  question,  I  should  have  no  hesitation  in  saying, 
that  neither  in  the  period  of  its  duration,  nor  in  the 
number,  merit,  or  intellectual  eminence  of  the  principal 
members,  can  the  English  Society  be  held  up  on  any 
parity  with  that  of  France.  The  latter  Assemblies 
may  be  said  to  have  lasted  near  half  a  Century,  from 
1725,  or  1730,  down  to  1775,  or  1780,  either  in  the 
Houses  of  Madame  du  Deffand^  or  of  Mademoiselle 
TEspinasse,  or  in  both.  The  "  Blue  Stocking " 
Assemblies  at  Mrs.  Montague's  and  Mrs.  VeseyX  re- 
mained in  their  brilliant  state,  only  for  about  fifteen 
years,  from  1770,  to  1785.  Before  the  last  of  those 
periods,  Mrs.  Vesey  had  yielded  to  the  progress  of  time, 
and  of  infirmity;  while  Mrs.  Thrale,  become  Mrs. 
Piozzi,  had  removed  from  the  banks  of  the  Thames,  to 
those  of  the  Arno.  Mrs.  Montague,  indeed,  survived ; 
and  her  dinners,  as  well  as  her  assemblies,  were  per- 
petuated to  a  very  late  period  of  her  life ;  but  the 
charm  and  the  impulse  that  propelled  them,  had  dis- 

96 


ENGLISH  LITERARY  ASSEMBLIES 

appeared.  They  were  principally  supported  by,  and 
they  fell  with,  the  giant  talents  of  Johnson,  who  formed 
the  nuckus,  round  which  all  the  subordinate  members 
revolved.  It  became  impossible,  after  his  decease  in 
1786,  to  supply  his  place.  Burke,  as  I  have  already 
observed,  had  more  powerful  avocations,  and  aspired  to 
other  honors  and  emoluments,  than  those  which  mere 
literary  distinction  could  bestow  on  him.  Hume,  and 
Adam  Smith,  men  of  superior  endowments,  who  might 
have  contributed  to  support  such  a  society,  had  retired 
to  Scotland,  or  were  already  dead.  Robertson  resided 
at  Edinburgh,  and  only  visited  London  occasionally, 
on  business.  Gibbon,  I  believe,  never  emulated  to  be 
a  member  of  these  assemblies,  and  never  attended  them. 
He,  too,  like  Burke,  looked  more  to  politics,  than  to 
letters,  for  his  substantial  recompense;  being  at  once 
a  Member  of  the  House  of  Commons,  and  a  Lord  of 
Trade.  Perhaps,  indeed,  the  freedom  of  Hume's,  and 
of  Gibbon's  printed  opinions  on  subjects  connected 
with  religion,  might  have  rendered  their  admission 
difficult,  or  their  society  distasteful,  to  the  principal 
persons  who  composed  these  parties ;  where  nothing 
like  a  relaxation  on  points  so  serious,  found  protection 
or  support.  Johnson,  who,  as  we  know,  had  so  great  a 
repugnance  to  every  species  of  Scepticism  on  matters 
of  religious  belief,  that  when  composing  his  Dictionary, 
he  would  not  cite  Hobbes,  the  celebrated  philosopher, 
as  an  authority  for  any  word  or  expression  used  by 
that  writer,  merely  because  he  held  Hobbes's  principles 
in  aversion ; — Johnson,  who  blamed  Tyers,  for  only 
doing  justice  to  Hume,  upon  parts  of  his  character 
wholly  unconnected  with  his  writings ;  and  who  said, 
that  "he  should  just  as  soon  have  thought  of  praising 
"  a  mad  dog ; " — he  would  hardly  have  remained  in  the 
same  room  with  Hume  and  Gibbon ;  though  when 
taken  once  by  a  sort  of  surprize,  he  did  not  refuse  to 
dine  in  company  with  Wilkes,  of  whom  he  had  never- 

97  7 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

theless,    previously  said,  that  "he  would  as  soon  dine 
"  with  Jack  Ketch,  as  with  Jack  Wilkes." 

The  case  was  widely  different  in  Paris,  where  no 
political  pursuits  distracted  men  of  letters ;  and  where 
infidelity,  or  even  Materialism,  far  from  exciting  aliena- 
tion, would  rather  have  conduced  to  recommend  to 
notice,  the  persons  professing  such  tenets.  Among  the 
Constellation  of  eminent  men  and  women,  who  met  at 
Madame  du  DeffancFs,  and  at  Mademoiselle  TEspinasse'S) 
the  greater  number  were,  indeed,  avowedly  "  des  Esprits 
"  forts ;"  in  other  words,  Free  Thinkers,  who  not  con- 
tent with  being  so  themselves,  endeavoured  to  make 
proselytes  by  their  writings.  It  is  evident  therefore, 
that  the  circle  in  London,  was,  from  various  causes, 
necessarily  much  more  contracted,  than  in  France ; 
where  every  person  distinguished  by  talents,  with  few 
exceptions,  commonly  resided  altogether  in  the  Capital. 
For  Voltaire  was  virtually  banished  beyond  the  French 
confines,  by  the  government ;  and  lived  in  the  territory 
of  Geneva,  more  by  constraint,  than  by  choice  or  in- 
clination. Rousseau  was  a  Genevese  by  birth,  and  only 
visited  Paris  from  time  to  time.  After  stating  these 
facts,  which  may  explain  the  causes  of  the  superiority 
of  the  literary  society,  or  Assemblies  of  Paris,  over 
those  of  London ;  it  would  be  idle  to  contest  that  they 
altogether  eclipsed  ours,  in  almost  every  point  of  genius, 
science,  and  intellectual  attainment.  Who  in  fact,  met 
at  Mrs.  Montague's,  or  at  Mrs.  Vesey's,  that  can 
compete  with  the  names  of  Maupertuis,  Helvetius, 
Montesquieu,  Fontenelle,  Voltaire,  Madame  du  Chatelet, 
the  Marquis  d'Argens,  Mademoiselle  de  Launay,  the 
President  Renault,  D'Alembert,  Diderot,  Condamine, 
the  Duchess  de  Choiseul,  Marmontel,  Raynal,  the  Duke 
de  Nivernois,  Marivaux,  the  Abbe  Barthelemi,  Turgot, 
Condorcet,  and  so  many  other  illustrious  persons  of 
both  sexes,  who  composed  the  Literati  of  the  French 
Metropolis  ?  We  can  scarcely  be  said  to  have  any  thing 

98 


VITALITY  OF  FRENCH  ASSEMBLIES 

to  oppose  to  such  a  cloud  of  eminent  persons,  except 
the  single  name  of  Johnson. 

There  seems,  indeed,  to  be  something  in  the  National 
character  of  the  French ;  at  least  there  was  so  previous 
to  the  temporary  extinction  of  the  ancient  Monarchy, 
and  the  reign  of  Jacobinism,  or  military  Despotism ; 
more  congenial  to  these  mixed  assemblies  of  persons  of 
literary  endowments,  than  is  found  among  us.  From 
the  middle  of  the  seventeenth  Century,  as  long  ago  as 
the  Regency  of  Anne  of  Austria,  we  find  that  such 
meetings  existed  at  Paris,  and  enjoyed  a  great  degree 
of  celebrity.  The  Hotel  de  Rambouillet,  as  early  as 
1650,  constituted  the  point  of  re-union  for  all  the 
individuals  of  both  sexes,  distinguished  in  the  Career  of 
Letters.  Catherine  de  Vivonne,  (the  Madame  du  Deffand 
of  that  period,)  Marchioness  of  Rambouillet,  presided 
at  them  :  an  eminence  for  which  she  was  qualified,  by 
the  elegance  of  her  taste,  and  the  superiority  of  her 
mind.  In  her  house,  which  became  a  sort  of  Academy, 
the  productions  of  the  time  were  appreciated,  and 
passed  in  Review.  Dying  in  1665,  she  was  succeeded 
by  Henrietta  de  Coligny,  Countess  de  la  Suze,  who, 
though  with  inferior  reputation,  continued  to  assemble 
the  wits  and  "Beaux  Esprits"  at  her  Hotel.  Her 
high  birth,  her  extraordinary  beauty,  and  her  poetic 
talents,  attracted  to  her  circle  every  person  eminent  in 
the  Metropolis.  It  was  on  her,  that  the  four  classic  lines 
were  composed ; 

"  Quae  Dea  sublimi  vehitur  per  Inania  Curru  ? 
An  Juno,  an  Pallas,  an  Venus  ipsa  venit  ? 
Si  Genus  inspicias,  Juno  :  si  scripta,  Minerva  : 
Si  spectes  Oculos,  Mater  Amoris  erit." 

Subsequent  to  her  decease  in  1673,  these  conversa- 
tions seem  to  have  languished  for  near  fifty  years,  till 
they  were  revived  and  reanimated  by  the  Duchess  du 

99 


WRAXALI/S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

Maine,  a  Princess  of  the  royal  blood,  grand-daughter 
of  the  great  Conde,  married  to  the  Duke  du  Maine, 
natural  son  of  Louis  the  Fourteenth.  After  her  release 
from  the  Castle  of  Dijon,  to  which  Fortress  she  had 
been  committed  Prisoner  by  the  Regent  Duke  of 
Orleans,  in  1717,  for  her  participation  in  the  Con- 
spiracy of  Prince  Cellamare ;  about  the  year  1722,  she 
began  to  assemble  persons  of  literary  celebrity  under 
her  roof,  in  whose  society  she  passed  the  greater  part 
of  her  leisure.  These  meetings,  which  were  principally 
held,  not  in  the  Capital,  but  at  the  palace  of  Seaux, 
about  four  leagues  South  of  Paris,  continued  down  to 
the  Duchess  du  Maine's  decease,  in  1753;  and  were 
attended  by  many  of  the  persons  of  both  sexes,  who 
afterwards  formed  the  circles  at  Madame  du  Demand's, 
and  at  Mademoiselle  TEspinasse's  apartments.  During 
the  same  period  of  time,  Madame  de  Tencin,  sister  to 
the  Cardinal  of  that  name,  one  of  the  most  captivating 
women  in  France,  the  Aspasia  of  that  Country,  received 
at  her  Hotel,  the  "  Gens  de  Lettres,"  and  may  be  said  to 
have  rivalled  the  Duchess  du  Maine,  as  the  protectress 
of  taste  and  polite  knowledge. 

Nothing  of  a  similar  nature  or  description  appears 
to  have  existed  in  London,  between  the  Restoration  of 
Charles  the  Second  in  1660,  and  the  conclusion  of  the 
Century,  except  the  Society  that  met  at  the  house  of 
the  famous  Hortensia  Mancini,  Duchess  de  Mazarin, 
niece  to  the  Cardinal  of  that  name;  who,  from  1667, 
to  the  period  of  her  death  in  1699,  was  accustomed  to 
receive  at  her  apartments,  the  Literati  of  both  sexes. 
St.  Evre"mond,  an  exile,  a  foreigner,  and  a  fugitive,  like 
herself,  constituted  the  principal  support,  and  the 
ornament  of  these  parties ;  where  the  Chevalier  de 
Grammont,  so  well  known  by  the  Memoirs  published 
under  his  name,  was  likewise  to  be  found.  It  is  curious 
to  remark,  that  the  first  "  Blue  Stocking "  Assemblies, 
and  I  believe,  the  only  meetings  deserving  the  name, 

100 


SINISTER  INFLUENCE  OF  CLUBS 

which  have  ever  been  held  in  London,  down  to  those 
of  which  we  have  been  speaking,  were  set  on  foot  by 
natives  of  France,  expatriated  and  resident  here.  For 
neither  the  letters,  nor  the  writings  of  Addison,  Gay, 
Steele,  Swift,  or  Pope,  indicate  that  any  such  meet- 
ings existed  from  1700,  down  to  the  beginning  of  the 
present  reign.  Lady  Wortley  Montagu,  Lady  Hervey, 
the  Duchess  of  Queensberry,  and  various  other  females 
distinguished  by  their  talents,  no  less  than  by  their  rank, 
adorned  that  period  of  time  ;  but  they  do  not  appear  to 
have  emulated  the  line  which  Mrs.  Montague  so  success- 
fully undertook,  though  they  occasionally  received  in 
their  drawing  rooms,  the  wits  and  poets  of  the  reigns 
of  Queen  Anne,  of  George  the  First,  and  George  the 
Second.  Foreigners  have,  indeed,  with  reason  re- 
proached the  English  as  too  much  attracted  by  the 
love  of  play,  to  Clubs  composed  exclusively  of  men,  to 
be  capable  of  relishing  a  mixed  society,  where  researches 
of  taste  and  literature  constitute  the  basis  and  the 
central  point  of  union. 

I  quitted  England  in  the  summer  of  1777,  and  made 
some  stay  at  the  Hague,  where  I  was  presented  by  our 
Ambassador,  Sir  Joseph  Yorke,  to  the  Prince  of  Orange  ; 
with  whom  I  afterwards  had  the  honour  to  sup  at  "  the 
"  Palace  in  the  Wood,"  as  well  as  to  meet  him  in  private 
society.  This  Prince  has  become  so  well  known  to  us, 
since  his  precipitate  retreat  from  Holland  in  the  winter 
of  1795,  by  his  long  residence  in  England,  that  it  is 
unnecessary  to  enter  into  any  minute  details  relative 
to  his  character  and  qualities.  Even  at  the  period  to 
which  I  allude,  he  neither  inspired  public  respect,  nor 
excited  private  regard.  His  person,  destitute  of  dignity, 
corresponded  with  his  manners,  which  were  shy, 
awkward,  and  altogether  unfitted  to  his  high  situation 
as  Stadtholder.  If  he  displayed  no  glaring  vices,  he 
either  did  not,  or  could  not,  conceal  many  weaknesses, 
calculated  to  injure  him  in  the  estimation  of  mankind. 

101 


WRAXALKS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

A  constitutional  somnolency,  which  increased  with  the 
progress   of  age,  was   too   frequently  accompanied   by 
excesses  still  more  injurious,  or  fatal  to  his  reputation ; 
I  mean  those  of  the  table,  particularly  of  wine.     I  have 
seen  him  at  the  Hague,  of  an  evening,  in  a  large  com- 
pany, at  Sir  Joseph  Yorke's,  in  the  situation  that  I  here 
describe.     In  vigour,  ability,  or  resources  of  mind,  such 
as  might  enable  him  successfully  to  struggle,  like  William 
the  Third,  with  difficult  or  tumultuous  Times,  he  was 
utterly  deficient.     If  William  the  Fifth  had  possessed 
the   energies   of  that  great   Prince,  we  should  neither 
have  been  engaged  in  war  with  Holland,  as  happened 
towards  the  close  of  1780 ;  nor  would  the  Stadtholder- 
ate   have    been    overturned   in    1795,   and   the    Seven 
Provinces,  which  successfully  resisted  all  the  power  of 
Philip    the    Second,    have    ultimately    sunk    into    an 
enslaved   Province   of  the   Corsican   Ruler  of  France. 
John  and   Cornelius  de   Witt  became  to  William  the 
Third   as   formidable   opponents,   as   Van    Berkel   and 
Neufville  proved   to   his   successor:   but   William   the 
Fifth  allowed  the  French  Faction  at  Amsterdam,  act- 
ing under   the   direction  of  Vergennes,  to   consolidate 
their  strength,  to  conclude  a  treaty  with  the  American 
Insurgents,  and  to  precipitate  a  rupture  with  England. 
His  magnanimous  predecessor,  though  he  had  scarcely 
then  attained  to  manhood,  opposed  and  surmounted  all 
the  efforts  of  the  Republican  Party,  sustained  by  Louis 
the   Fourteenth   with   a   view   to   subject   Holland   to 
French  ambition.     Van  Berkel  merited  the  fate  of  the 
two   de   Witts,  and  only  escaped  it  by  the  inert  and 
incapable  conduct  of  the  Stadtholder,  who  permitted  the 
fairest  opportunity  to  pass  for  bringing  him  to  public 
punishment,  as   a   violator   of  the   laws  of  nations,  a 
disturber  of  the  public  peace,  and  an  enemy  to  his  own 
country.     Relative   to    William    the    Fifth's   personal 
courage,  no   opinion   can    be   formed,  as  it  was    never 
tried ;  but  he  possessed  neither  the  activity,  nor  any  of 

102 


PROBLEMS  IN  HEREDITY 

the  endowments  fitted  for  the  conduct  of  armies.  It 
must,  however,  be  admitted,  that  his  understanding  was 
cultivated,  his  memory  very  retentive,  his  conversation, 
when  unembarrassed,  entertaining  and  even  instructive, 
abounding  with  historical  information  that  displayed 
extensive  acquaintance  with  polite  letters ;  and  that  he 
joined  to  a  fine  taste  in  the  arts,  particularly  in  paint- 
ing, a  generous  protection  of  their  professors.  In  a 
period  of  repose  he  might  have  been  tolerated ;  but  the 
Stadtholderate,  at  every  time  since  its  commencement 
in  the  person  of  William  the  First,  and  the  revolt  of  the 
Low  Countries  from  Philip  the  Second,  has  demanded 
the  greatest  energies  in  the  individual  who  was  placed 
at  the  head  of  the  Dutch  Commonwealth. 

Nature,  which  rarely  confers  great  or  eminent  qualities 
of  mind  in  hereditary  descent,  seemed  to  have  departed 
from  that  rule,  in  the  House  of  Nassau- Orange ;  where 
she  produced  five  Princes  in  succession,  all  of  whom  were 
conspicuous  in  a  greater  or  a  less  degree,  for  courage, 
capacity,  and  the  talents  that  ensure  or  confirm  political 
power.  The  five  Roman  Emperors,  Nerva,  Trajan, 
Hadrian,  and  the  two  Antonines,  who  succeeded  each 
other  in  Antiquity,  were  altogether  unallied  by  ties 
of  consanguinity.  Adoption  alone  constituted  the 
connection  between  them :  and  Commodus,  whom  we 
suppose  to  have  been  the  son  of  Marcus  Aurelius,  the 
last  of  those  five  Caesars,  was  only  distinguished  by  his 
crimes,  or  by  his  incapacity.  William  the  First  and  his 
two  sons,  Maurice,  and  Frederic-Henry,  who  may  be 
said  to  have  successively  occupied  the  office  of  Stadt- 
holder,  or  Captain-General  of  the  United  Provinces, 
during  fourscore  years,  from  1567  to  1647,  without 
interruption  ;  were  three  of  the  most  illustrious  men 
whom  we  have  seen  in  modern  Ages.  Even  William 
the  Second,  though  his  end  was  premature,  and  in  some 
measure  unfortunate,  yet  manifested  no  less  strength  of 
character  and  vigour  of  mind,  than  his  three  predecessors. 

103 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

The  whole  existence  of  William  the  Third,  from  his 
early  youth  to  his  grave,  which  occupied  more  than 
thirty  years,  formed  a  perpetual  display  of  fortitude, 
endurance,  toil,  and  military,  as  well  as  civil  exertion. 
With  him  expired  in  1702,  the  great  Line  of  Nassau- 
Orange.  In  1747,  the  dignity  and  functions  of  Stadt- 
holder,  which  had  been  suspended  for  five  and  forty 
years,  were  revived  in  the  person  of  William  the  Fourth, 
head  of  the  branch  of  Nassau-Deete,  collaterally  related 
to  the  preceding  race.  However  little  favoured  by 
nature  in  his  bodily  formation,  which  was  very  defec- 
tive ;  and  however  moderately  endowed  with  intellectual 
powers  was  William  the  Fourth,  who  married  the 
Princess  Anne,  daughter  of  George  the  Second ;  he  at 
least  maintained  during  the  few  years  that  he  survived 
his  elevation,  an  external  dignity  of  deportment,  and  an 
irreproachable  moral  conduct.  But,  in  the  hands  of 
William  the  Fifth,  his  son,  may  be  said  in  every  sense 
to  have  become  eclipsed,  that  great  office  of  Stadtholder, 
in  itself  only  less  than  royal ;  and,  under  able  manage- 
ment, perhaps  even  more  formidable  than  the  kingly 
dignity ! 

The  reception  of  the  late  Prince  of  Orange  by  George 
the  Third,  when  he  sought  refuge  in  this  country  from 
the  French  Invasion,  in  1795,  was  no  less  affectionate, 
hospitable,  and  cordial,  than  the  treatment  which  James 
the  Second  experienced  in  1689,  from  Louis  the  Four- 
teenth. If  James,  justly  expelled  by  his  English  sub- 
jects for  tyranny,  political  and  religious,  was  lodged  at 
the  Castle  of  St.  Germain,  and  treated  with  Royal 
Honors,  by  the  French  Monarch  ;  William  was  equally 
placed  in  the  Palace  at  Hampton  Court.  The  Princes 
of  the  Royal  Family,  and  the  Nation  at  large,  vied  in 
demonstrations  of  respect,  compassion,  and  attention 
towards  him.  The  Princess  of  Orange,  a  woman  of  a 
far  more  elevated,  correct,  and  manly  character  than 
her  husband,  experienced  as  generous,  and  as  kind  a 

104 


PRINCE  FREDERIC  OF  ORANGE 

welcome,  from  the  King  and  Queen  of  Great  Britain, 
as  Mary  of  Modena,  the  Consort  of  James,  received  in 
France.  Of  a  stature  exceeding  the  height  of  ordinary 
women,  she  extremely  resembled  in  her  figure,  the  late 
King  of  Prussia,  Frederick-William  the  Second,  her 
brother,  who  was  cast  by  nature  in  the  same  Colossal 
mould.  Fortune,  which  had  persecuted  her  in  Holland, 
did  not  prove  more  favourable  to  her  in  England.  Her 
second  son,  Prince  Frederic  of  Orange,  a  young  man 
who  excited  the  liveliest  expectations,  and  gave  promise 
of  many  virtues,  had  entered  into  the  Austrian  Service, 
after  his  father's  expulsion  from  Holland.  By  his 
mother  he  was  regarded  with  peculiar  predilection,  as 
formed  to  support  the  honor  of  the  Houses  of  Nassau 
and  of  Brandenburgh,  from  both  which  he  equally 
descended.  Exemplary  in  the  discharge  of  all  his 
military  duties,  to  this  principle  his  premature  death 
was  to  be  attributed,  which  took  place  at  Venice,  in 
January,  1799  ;  occasioned  by  a  malignant  distemper 
or  fever,  caught  in  consequence  of  visiting  the  sick 
soldiers,  confined  in  the  hospitals  of  that  city. 

His  Britannic  Majesty  first  read  the  account  of  it  at 
the  Queen's  house,  in  one  of  the  French  newspapers,  on 
Thursday  night,  the  31st  of  January,  1799.  Shocked 
at  the  intelligence,  and  not  being  quite  sure  of  its 
authenticity,  he  put  the  newspaper  in  his  pocket ;  and 
taking  the  Queen  aside,  communicated  it  to  her  with 
much  concern.  As  the  probabilities  were  greatly  in 
favor  of  its  truth,  or  rather,  as  no  doubt  could  reason- 
ably be  entertained  on  the  point,  they  agreed  not  to 
delay  announcing  it  to  the  Prince  and  Princess  of 
Orange ;  who  might  otherwise  receive  so  melancholy  a 
notification  through  the  channel  of  the  English  news- 
papers, or  even  from  common  fame.  This  determin- 
ation they  executed  on  the  following  day,  at  the 
Queen's  house,  where  they  detained  the  Prince  and 
Princess  for  two  or  three  weeks,  till  the  violence  of  the 

105 


WRAXALKS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

emotions  occasioned  by  the  loss  of  their  son,  had  sub- 
sided.    Some   faint    hopes,    indeed,    were    entertained 
during  eight  or  ten  days  after  the  arrival  of  the  intelli- 
gence, that  it  might  prove  either  premature  or  untrue. 
It   was,  however,  soon  fully  confirmed.     All   mankind 
agreed  that  Prince  Frederic  eminently  possessed  talents, 
honor,   and   courage.      His    unfortunate    father,   after 
arriving  in  this  country  under  a  dark  political  cloud, 
and  after  residing  here  many  years,  without  acquiring 
the  public  esteem,  or  redeeming  his  public   character, 
finally  and  precipitately  quitted  England  under  a  still 
darker  cloud ;  only  to  bury  himself  in  the  obscurity  of 
Germany,    there    to     expire,    forgotten,    and     almost 
unknown.     Such  has  been  the  destiny,  in  our  time,  of 
the  Representative  of  that  August  House  ;  which,   in 
the  sixteenth  Century,  while  it  conducted   the   armies 
of  Holland,  opposed  and  humbled  Spain ;  and  which, 
in  the  seventeenth  Century,  affixed  limits  to  the  ambi- 
tion of  France,  under  Louis  the  Fourteenth.     A  Corsi- 
can    Adventurer    has    since   enslaved,   plundered,   and 
conscribed  during   many   years,  the  country  in   whose 
councils,  Barnevelt,  the  two   de  Witts,  and   Heinsius, 
once  presided ;  for  which  Van  Tromp  and  Ruyter  fought, 
conquered,  and  fell ;  and  where  the  spirit  of  freedom 
seemed  to  have   animated   every  individual,  when   the 
Duke  of  Alva  overran,  and  desolated  those  Provinces. 
It  is  in  making  these  reflections  on  the  modern  Dutch, 
and  contrasting  their  conduct  with  the  heroism  of  their 
ancestors,  that  we  involuntarily  exclaim  with  Goldsmith, 

"  Gods  !  how  unlike  their  Belgic  Sires  of  old  ! " 

At  the  time  when  I  visited  the  Hague,  in  July, 
1777,  Prince  Louis,  one  of  the  brothers  of  the  then 
reigning  Duke  of  Brunswic  Wolfenbuttel,  and  Com- 
mander-in-chief of  the  Dutch  Forces,  enjoyed  a  much 
higher  place  in  the  public  consideration,  than  the 
Stadtholder.  I  have  rarely  seen  in  the  course  of  my 

106 


FALL  OF  AMSTERDAM,  1787 

life,  a  man  of  more  enormous  bodily  dimensions. 
William,  Duke  of  Cumberland,  son  of  George  the 
Second,  whose  corpulency  was  extreme,  fell  far  short  of 
him  in  bulk.  But,  this  prodigious  mass  of  flesh,  which 
it  was  natural  to  suppose,  would  enervate  or  enfeeble 
the  powers  of  his  mind,  seemed  neither  to  have  rendered 
him  indolent  or  inactive.  The  strength  of  his  character, 
and  the  solidity  of  his  talents,  while  they  supplied  in 
some  measure  the  defects  of  the  Prince  of  Orange, 
animated  and  impelled  the  vast  machine  that  he 
inhabited.  Prince  Louis  manifested  no  somnolency 
when  in  company ;  nor  was  he  ever  betrayed  at  table, 
into  excesses  injurious  to  his  reputation.  On  the 
Parade,  and  in  his  military  capacity,  he  displayed  equal 
animation  and  professional  knowledge.  Attached  to 
the  interests  of  the  House  of  Orange,  and  to  those  of 
Great  Britain,  he  became  naturally  obnoxious  to  the 
French  faction  in  Holland ;  which  finally  effected  his 
removal  from  the  post  that  he  held  in  the  service  of  the 
Republic,  and  compelled  him  to  retire  out  of  the  Dutch 
Dominions,  a  few  years  later  than  the  period  of  which 
I  am  speaking.  He  died,  I  believe,  in  1788.  His 
dismission  and  departure  prepared  the  way  for  the 
overthrow  of  the  Stadtholderate,  notwithstanding  the 
temporary  triumph  of  the  late  Duke  of  Brunswic,  and 
the  capture  of  Amsterdam,  effected  in  the  Summer  of 
1787,  by  the  Prussian  forces. 

His  brother,  Prince  Ferdinand  of  Brunswic,  who 
commanded  the  allied  army  with  so  much  reputation, 
during  the  Seven  Years  War,  from  1757  down  to  1763 ; 
and  who  occupied  at  that  time  so  distinguished  a  rank 
in  the  history  of  Europe ;  was  unquestionably  an  able 
general,  and  a  good  Tactician ;  but  by  no  means 
endowed  with  superior  talents  of  any  kind.  In  order 
to  have  secured  the  degree  of  fame  that  he  had  acquired 
in  the  field,  it  may  be  asserted  that  he  ought  not  to 
have  survived  his  last  Campaign.  For,  he  soon  after- 

107 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

wards  abandoned  himself  to  the  doctrines  and  reveries 
of  the  Illumines,  who,  it  is  well  known,  obtained  such 
an  ascendant  about  that  time,  in  Germany.  They 
reduced  his  mind  to  a  degree  of  imbecility  which  could 
only  excite  compassion.  It  will  hardly  be  believed  that 
before  the  year  1773,  he  was  so  subjugated  by  them,  as 
frequently  to  pass  many  hours  of  the  night,  in  church- 
yards, engaged  in  evoking,  and  attempting  to  raise 
apparitions.  They  practised  successfully  on  his  credul- 
ity, making  him  conceive  that  he  beheld  spectres,  or 
aerial  forms.  These  occupations,  which  afforded  suffi- 
cient proofs  of  intellectual  decline,  having  impelled  the 
great  Frederic,  whose  sound  understanding  despised  the 
Illumines,  to  dismiss  Prince  Ferdinand  from  his  situation 
in  the  Prussian  service ;  he  then  retired  to  Magdeburg, 
of  the  Chapter  of  which  secularized  Archbishoprick.  he 
was  Dean.  In  that  city  he  principally  resided  till  his 
decease,  divested  of  any  military  command,  in  a  sort  of 
retreat ;  but,  keeping  a  good  table,  and  receiving 
strangers  occasionally  who  visited  Magdeburg.  His 
income,  a  considerable  part  of  which  consisted  in  a 
Pension  from  the  Crown  of  Great  Britain,  enabled  him 
to  maintain  an  establishment  becoming  his  rank.  An 
intimate  friend  of  mine,  now  no  more ;  about  that  time, 
Minister  of  England  at  the  Court  of  Dresden,  Mr. 
Osborn,  being  well  acquainted  with  Prince  Ferdinand, 
used  frequently  to  dine  with  him.  The  Prince,  who 
treated  him  with  great  regard,  wishing  to  make  a  Pro- 
selyte of  him,  one  day  proposed  that  they  should  go 
together  to  a  certain  churchyard,  on  that  same  night ; 
promising  him  that  a  ghost  would  infallibly  appear  to 
them.  Mr.  Osborn  agreed  to  accept  the  proposal,  and 
to  accompany  His  Serene  Highness  to  the  scene  of  these 
supernatural  exhibitions,  provided  that  he  would  order 
six  Grenadiers,  their  pieces  loaded  with  ball  cartridge, 
to  attend  them  ;  and  would  enjoin  the  Grenadiers  to 
fire  upon  whatever  object  might  assume  the  appearance 

108 


EFFECT  OF  THE  AMERICAN  WAR 

of  a  ghost.  But,  the  Prince  by  no  means  relished  the 
idea,  and  the  party  did  not  take  place.  Of  the  accuracy 
of  this  anecdote  I  can  have  no  doubt,  as  it  was  related 
to  me  by  Mr.  Osborn  himself,  whose  honor  and  veracity 
were  indisputable.  Prince  Ferdinand  continued  till 
the  period  of  his  death,  in  July,  1792,  to  be  a  dupe  and 
a  convert  of  the  Illumines. 

Sir  Joseph  Yorke,  afterwards  created  Lord  Dover, 
maintained  a  distinguished  rank  among  the  Members  of 
the  Corps  Diplomatique,  in  1777,  at  the  Hague.  His 
table,  splendid  and  hospitable,  was  open  to  strangers 
of  every  country.  Educated  under  Horace,  Lord 
Walpole,  and  the  first  Lord  Hampden,  his  manners 
and  address  had  in  them  something  formal  and 
ceremonious ;  but,  the  vigilance  and  ability  which 
he  displayed  during  above  five  -  and  -  twenty  years 
that  he  was  Embassador  of  England  to  the  States- 
General,  more  than  compensated  for  these  defects  of 
deportment.  Never,  perhaps,  at  any  period  of  modern 
time,  except  by  Sir  William  Temple,  under  Charles  the 
Second,  were  the  Interests  of  Great  Britain  so  zealously, 
yet  temperately  sustained,  as  by  him ;  for  whom  the 
Stadtholder  felt  and  expressed  a  sort  of  filial  regard. 
In  1777,  the  English  Sovereign  and  Nation  still 
continued  to  preserve  an  Ascendancy  in  the  Dutch 
Councils ;  till  the  augmenting  misfortunes,  and  accum- 
ulated disgraces  of  the  American  war,  finally  enabling 
France  to  obtain  a  predominating  influence,  compelled 
Lord  North  to  recall  Sir  Joseph  Yorke  from  the  Hague. 
With  another  of  His  Majesty's  foreign  Ministers,  Mr. 
Wroughton,  who  became  afterwards  Sir  Thomas 
Wroughton,  I  passed  a  considerable  part  of  the 
Summer  of  1778,  in  the  Court  and  Capital  of  Poland. 
Warsaw,  destined  to  become,  in  more  recent  periods, 
the  Theatre  of  carnage  and  revolution,  then  enjoyed  a 
delusive  calm ;  while  Austria,  Saxony,  and  Prussia, 
were  involved  in  war  relative  to  the  Bavarian  Succession. 

109 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

Wroughton,  at  the  time  of  which  I  speak,  was  about 
forty-six.  He  had  been  very  handsome  in  his  youth ; 
and  though  grown  somewhat  corpulent,  still  preserved 
many  of  the  graces,  and  much  of  the  activity  of  that 
period  of  life.  His  education,  if  it  had  not  given  him 
a  very  cultivated  mind,  had  completely  fitted  him  for 
the  world ;  and  a  residence  of  more  than  twenty  years 
at  the  two  Courts  of  Poland  and  Russia,  in  a  public 
character,  rendered  his  conversation,  upon  all  points 
connected  with  the  History  of  the  North  of  Europe,  no 
less  entertaining  than  informing.  From  him  I  learned 
a  number  of  curious  facts  respecting  the  two  Russian 
Empresses,  Elizabeth  and  Catherine;  which,  though 
they  assuredly  would  have  been  transmitted  to  posterity 
by  Brantome,  cannot,  without  violating  decorum,  be 
commemorated  in  the  present  Age. 

Sir  Thomas  Wroughton  was  sent,  at  three  or  four- 
and-twenty,  to  Petersburgh,  where  he  subsequently 
became  British  Consul,  during  the  reign  of  the  former 
of  those  Princesses.  No  man  was  better  acquainted 
with  her  character,  as  well  as  with  the  political  Intrigues 
which  distinguished  the  concluding  years  of  Elizabeth's 
life.  He  assured  me  that  she  died  a  victim  to  her 
own  excesses,  and  almost  with  a  saucer  of  cherry-brandy 
at  her  lips;  it  having  been  found  impossible,  by  any 
injunctions  of  her  physicians,  to  prevent  the  female 
attendants  about  her  person  and  bed,  from  indulging 
her  in  this  pernicious  gratification.  The  last  Princess 
of  the  Stuart  line  who  reigned  in  this  country,  has  been 
accused  of  a  similar  passion,  if  we  may  believe  the 
Secret  History  of  that  time,  or  trust  to  the  Couplet 
which  was  affixed  to  the  Pedestal  of  her  Statue  in  front 
of  St.  Paul's,  by  the  satirical  wits  of  1714.  The  Empress 
Elizabeth's  Amours  were  such  as  the  Messalinas  and 
Faustinas  of  Antiquity,  are  asserted  to  have  carried  on 
in  the  Capital  of  the  Roman  world,  without  delicacy, 
shame,  or  restraint.  Suetonius  might  have  found  it 

110 


CATHERINE  II.  OF  RUSSIA 

difficult  to  relate,  and  Juvenal  as  impossible  to  exag- 
gerate, the  particulars  of  Elizabeth's  gallantries.  Of 
Catherine,  Sir  Thomas  Wroughton  always  spoke  with 
admiration  and  respect,  though  with  freedom.  To  her 
notice  he  was,  indeed,  greatly  indebted  for  his  elevation 
in  life ;  she  having  been  instrumental  in  procuring  him 
the  appointment  of  Consul  to  Petersburgh.  As  he  was 
in  the  flower  of  his  age  at  that  time,  and  of  an  imposing 
figure,  he  attracted  her  attention,  and  was  honored  by 
her  with  such  distinguishing  marks  of  predilection,  as 
to  draw  upon  him  the  resentment  of  the  Grand  Duke, 
her  husband ;  who,  when  he  ascended  the  throne  early 
in  1762,  by  the  name  of  Peter  the  Third,  obtained, 
during  his  short  reign,  Wroughton's  removal  from 
Russia.  He  was  then  sent,  by  orders  from  his  own 
Court,  to  Dresden,  as  Minister  to  Augustus  the  Third, 
Elector  of  Saxony,  in  his  capacity  of  King  of  Poland ; 
and  he  accompanied  or  followed  that  Monarch  from 
Saxony  to  Warsaw,  in  the  last  visit  that  Augustus  made 
to  his  Polish  dominions.  As  Wroughton  had  become  an 
object  of  Peter's  unconcealed  dislike,  or  jealousy  ;  and  as 
Catherine  had  distinguished  him  by  personal  attentions 
of  the  most  flattering  nature,  it  was  not  an  improbable 
supposition,  that  she  might  have  carried  to  the  utmost 
extent,  her  preference  of  him.  But  he  always  assured 
me,  even  in  moments  of  the  greatest  confidence  and 
unreserve,  that  he  had  never  violated  for  an  instant,  the 
limits  of  the  most  profound  respect  towards  her ;  nor  had 
ever  received  from  her,  encouragement  for  such  presump- 
tion on  his  part.  "  Count  Poniatowski,"  said  he,  "  was 
"  her  Lover.  I  was  only  her  humble  Friend  and  Servant." 
He  told  me,  that  the  first  time  he  ever  heard  the 
name  of  Orloff  mentioned,  or  ever  saw  the  Officer  who 
afterwards  became,  as  Prince  Orloff,  the  avowed 
Favorite  of  Catherine  in  every  sense,  was  on  the 
following  occasion.  Crossing  the  court  of  the  Winter 
Palace  at  Petersburgh,  some  time  during  the  year  1760, 

111 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

the  Grand  Duchess,  who  leaned  on  his  arm,  pointed 
out  to  him  a  young  man  in  the  Uniform  of  the  Russian 
Guards,  then  in  the  act  of  saluting  her  with  his 
Spontoon ;  and  added,  "  Vous  voyez  ce  beau  jeune 
"  Homme  ?  Le  connoissez  vous  ? "  Wroughton  replying 
in  the  negative,  "  II  s'appelle  Orloff?  said  Catherine ; 
"  Croirez  vous,  qrfil  a  eu  la  Hardiesse  de  me  faire 
"  T amour ? "  " 77  est  bien  hardi,  Madame"  answered  he, 
smiling.  The  conversation  proceeded  no  further ;  but 
it  remained  deeply  imprinted  upon  Wroughton's 
recollection,  who  from  that  moment  silently  anticipated 
the  future  favor  of  Orloif.  Sir  Thomas  Wroughton 
always  spoke  to  me  of  Catherine's  Participation  or 
Acquiescence  in  the  death  of  Peter  the  Third,  as 
involuntary,  reluctant,  and  the  Result  of  an  insur- 
mountable Necessity.  He  even  considered  her  know- 
ledge of  the  destruction  of  the  unfortunate  Emperor 
Ivan,  who  was  stabbed  by  his  own  Guards  at  Schlussel- 
bourg,  in  1764,  with  a  view  to  prevent  his  being 
liberated  by  Mirowitsch,  as  exceedingly  problematical. 
But  he  believed,  in  common  with  all  Poland,  that 
Catherine  had  found  means  to  entrap  and  to  transfer 
to  Petersburgh,  the  Princess  Tarrakanoff,  a  daughter 
of  the  Empress  Elizabeth ;  where,  as  was  asserted,  she 
had  perished  in  prison,  by  the  waters  of  the  River  N«va 
entering  the  room  in  which  she  was  confined.  Alexis 
Orloff  so  well  known  in  the  Annals  of  Catherine's 
Reign,  who  then  commanded  the  Russian  Fleet  in  the 
Mediterranean ;  became,  no  doubt,  on  that  occasion, 
the  instrument  of  her  vengeance,  or  rather  of  her 
apprehensions,  by  enticing  on  board  his  ship,  in  the 
port  of  Leghorn,  the  unhappy  female  in  question. 
This  accusation,  sustained  by  many  strong  facts,  and 
apparent  proofs,  narrated  at  great  length,  has  since 
been  submitted  to  the  Tribunal  of  Europe,  in  "  La  Vie 
de  Catherine  Seconded  by  Castera,  published  in  1797, 
soon  after  the  Empress's  decease.  Sir  John  Dick,  who 


ALEXIS  ORLOFFS  VILLAINIES 

at  the  time  of  the  supposed  Princess's  seizure  by  Alexis 
Orloff,  was  British  Consul  at  Leghorn ;  is  named  in  the 
work  to  which  I  allude,  as  having  been  an  accomplice  in 
the  act  of  ensnaring,  and  carrying  her  off  to  the  Russian 

Admiral's   ship.     His   wife  is  likewise  charged  with  a 

.....  f    -,  .  & 

participation  in  so  foul  a  conspiracy. 

I  lived  during  several  years,  in  habits  of  familiar 
acquaintance  with  Sir  John  Dick,  who  retained,  at  four- 
score, all  the  activity  of  middle  life,  together  with  the 
perfect  possession  of  his  memory  and  faculties.  He 
was  an  agreeable,  entertaining,  well  bred  man,  who  had 
seen  much  of  the  world.  Dining  in  a  large  company, 
at  Mr.  Thomas  Hope's,  in  Berkeley  Square,  on  Sunday, 
the  10th  of  February,  1799,  I  sat  by  Sir  John  Dick  ; 
and  well  knowing  his  intimacy  with  Alexis  Orloff',  I 
enquired  of  him  where  the  Count  then  was  ?  "  He  is," 
answered  Sir  John  Dick,  "  at  present  at  Leipsic,  from 
"  which  place  he  wrote  to  me,  only  three  weeks  ago. 
"  The  Emperor  Paul  commanded  him  to  travel,  after 
"  having  made  him  and  Prince  Baratinskoi,  both  of 
"  whom  assisted  in  the  termination  of  Peter  the  Third's 
"  life,  assist  likewise  at  the  funeral  ceremonies  of  that 
"  Prince.  They  held  the  Pall,  and  actually  mounted 
"  guard  over  the  body,  in  the  church  of  the  Citadel  of 
"  Petersburgh,  remaining  the  whole  night  with  the 
"  corpse.  Alexis  went  through  this  function  with 
"  perfect  composure."  Encouraged  by  the  frankness  of 
this  reply,  I  ventured  to  ask  him  if  he  had  read  the 
Narrative  of  the  Princess  TarrakanofTs  seizure,  related 
in  "  La  Vie  de  Catherine  Seconde  ?  "  "  I  have  certainly 
"  perused  it,"  said  he,  "  and  not  without  some  concern, 
"  as  I  am  there  accused  by  name,  no  less  than  my  wife, 
"  of  having  been  a  party  to  the  act  of  transporting  by 
"  violence,  a  young  unsuspecting,  and  innocent  Princess, 
"  on  board  the  Russian  Fleet.  I  will  relate  to  you,  as 
"  a  man  of  veracity,  all  the  part  that  I  took,  and  all  I 
"  know,  relative  to  the  pretended  Princess  in  question, 

113  8 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

"  who  is  there  asserted  to  have  been  a  daughter  of 
"  Elizabeth,  Empress  of  Russia,  by  Alexis  Razoum- 
"  offsky. 

"  During  the  time  that  the  Russian  Squadron  lay  in 
"  the  harbour  of  Leghorn,  in  1771,  Alexis  Orloff,  who 
"  was  the  Admiral,  resided  frequently,  if  not  principally, 
"  at  Pisa,  where  he  hired  a  splendid  house.  One  morn- 
"  ing,  about  eleven  o'clock,  a  Cossack,  who  was  in  his 
"  service,  and  who  acted  as  his  Courier,  arrived  at  my 
"  door,  charged  with  a  message,  to  inform  me  that  his 
"  master,  with  some  company,  in  three  carriages,  meant 
"  to  dine  with  me  on  that  day.  I  accordingly  ordered 
"  a  dinner  to  be  prepared  for  his  reception.  When  he 
"  arrived,  he  brought  with  him  a  Lady,  whom  he 
"  introduced  to  my  wife  and  to  myself:  but  he  never 
"  named  her,  only  calling  her,  "  Questa  Dama"  She 
"  was  by  no  means  handsome,  though  genteel  in  her 
"  figure ;  apparently,  thirty  years  of  age ;  and  had  the 
"  air  of  a  person  who  had  suffered  in  her  health.  There 
"  seemed  something  mysterious  about  her,  which  excited 
"  my  curiosity,  but  which  I  could  not  penetrate. 
"  Considering  her  with  attention,  it  struck  me  forcibly 
"  that  I  had  seen  her  before,  and  in  England.  Being 
"  determined,  if  possible,  to  satisfy  myself  on  this  point, 
"  as  we  stood  leaning  against  the  chimney  piece  in  my 
"  drawing  room,  before  dinner,  I  said  to  her,  "  I  believe, 
"  Ma'am,  you  speak  English."  "  I  speak  only  one  little," 
"  answered  she.  "  We  sat  down  to  dinner,  and  after  the 
"  repast,  Alexis  Orloff  proposed  to  my  wife,  and  to 
"  another  Lady  who  was  there  present,  to  accompany 
"  him  and  the  female  stranger  on  board  his  ship.  They 
"  both  declining  it,  Orloff  took  her  with  him  in  the 
"  evening.  The  Boom,  or  chain,  was  then  stretched 
"  across  the  harbour :  but  a  boat  came  from  the  Russian 
"  Admiral's  ship,  into  which  he  put  the  Lady,  and 
"  accompanied  her  himself  safe  on  board. 

"  On  the  ensuing  morning,  when  Orloff  came  on  shore, 
114 


PLOT  AND  COUNTER-PLOT 

"  he  proceeded  to  my  house.  His  eyes  were  violently 
"  inflamed,  and  his  whole  countenance  betrayed  much 
"  agitation.  Without  explaining  to  me  the  cause  or 
"  the  reason  of  this  disorder,  he  owned  that  he  had 
"  passed  a  very  unpleasant  night ;  and  he  requested  me 
"  to  let  him  have  some  of  the  most  amusing  books  in 
"  my  library,  in  order  to  divert  the  Lady  who  was  on 
"  board  his  ship.  I  never  saw  her  again :  but  I  know 
"  that  soon  afterwards,  she  was  sent  by  Alexis,  in  a 
"  Frigate,  to  Cronstadt ;  where,  without  being  ever 
"  landed,  she  was  transferred  up  the  Neva,  to  the 
"  Fortress  of  Schlusselbourg,  at  the  mouth  of  the  lake 
"  Ladoga.  Catherine  there  confined  her,  in  the  very 
"  room  that  Peter  the  Third  had  caused  to  be  constructed, 
"  with  intent  to  shut  up  herself  in  it.  The  Lady 
"  unquestionably  died  in  that  prison,  of  Chagrin ;  but 
"  she  was  not  drowned  by  the  water  of  the  Neva  coming 
"  into  her  apartment,  as  is  asserted  in  "  La  vie  de 
"  Catherine  Seconde." 

"  Having  stated  to  you,"  continued  Sir  John  Dick, 
"  these  circumstances,  I  will  now  inform  you,  who,  and 
"  of  what  description  was  the  lady  in  question.  Far 
"  from  being,  as  is  pretended,  a  daughter  of  Elizabeth, 
"  Empress  of  Russia,  her  father  was  a  Baker  of  Nurem- 
"  berg  in  Franconia.  If,  on  this  point,  my  testimony 
"  should  appear  to  you  doubtful  or  suspicious,  the 
"  present  Margrave  of  Anspach,  who  is  in  this  country, 
"  and  who  knew  her  well,  is  ready  to  testify  the  same  fact. 
"  She  was  a  woman  of  pleasure,  during  a  short  time, 
"  both  in  Paris,  and  here  in  London ;  at  which  last 
"  mentioned  city,  she  had  picked  up  a  few  words  of 
"  English.  Prince  Nicholas  Radzivil,  who  was  driven 
"  out  of  Poland  by  the  Russians,  having  met  with  her, 
"  made  her  his  Mistress,  and  carried  her  with  him  into 
"  Italy.  In  order  to  revenge  himself  on  Catherine,  who 
"  had  expelled  him  from  his  native  country,  and 
"  confiscated  his  immense  estates  in  Lithuania ;  he 

115 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

"  resolved  on  calling  her  the  Princess  Tarrakanoff, 
"  pretending  that  she  was  Elizabeth's  daughter.  Such 
"  she  was,  in  fact,  considered  to  be  by  many  people ; 
"  and  the  report  acquiring  strength,  soon  reached 
"  Petersburgh.  Catherine,  naturally  alarmed  at  the 
"  existence  of  a  pretender,  who  might  lay  claim  to  the 
"  very  throne  of  Russia ;  and  being  informed  that  Prince 
"  Radzivil  asserted  her  right  to  the  empire,  as  a  legiti- 
"  mate  daughter  of  Elizabeth  by  Razoumoffsky,  to  whom 
"  she  had  been  secretly  married ;  thought  that  not  a 
"  moment  was  to  be  lost,  in  securing  the  person  of  so 
"  dangerous  a  rival.  She  issued  private  orders,  there- 
"  fore,  to  Alexis  Orloff,  enjoining  him  to  gain  possession 
"  of  the  pretended  Princess,  at  all  events,  and  by  every 
"  possible  means,  either  of  money,  or  violence.  To  so 
"  great  a  height  did  the  Empress's  apprehensions  rise, 
"  that  Orloff  avowed  to  me,  he  had  received  the  positive 
"  commands  of  Her  Majesty,  to  pursue  her  even  to 
"  Ragusa,  if  necessary ;  where  it  was  understood  she 
"  had  retired ;  to  demand  her  from  the  government  of 
"  that  small  Republic ;  and  if  they  should  refuse  to 
"  give  her  up,  to  bombard  the  city,  and  to  lay  it  in 
"  ashes.  But,  Alexis  found  means  to  entrap,  or  to 
"  entice  her,  without  either  disturbance,  or  hostility. 
"  He  treated  her  as  his  Mistress,  whjle  he  resided  at 
"  Pisa,  and  while  she  lay  on  board  his  ship  at  Leghorn. 
"  These  are  all  the  particulars  that  I  know  relative  to 
"  her,  and  all  the  share  that  I  had  in  her  detention,  or 
"  her  misfortunes." 

It  is  probable  that  this  recital,  however  natural  and 
plausible  it  may  appear,  or  however  true  it  may  be  in 
point  of  fact,  will  nevertheless  by  no  means  carry 
conviction  to  every  mind.  I  confess,  that  it  neither 
produced  that  sentiment  in  me,  at  the  time  when  Sir 
John  Dick  related  it;  nor,  on  the  fullest  considera- 
tion, am  I  thoroughly  persuaded  that  the  person  in 
question,  was  not  the  daughter  of  Elizabeth.  It  seems 

116 


CONTRADICTORY  STATEMENTS 

to  be  universally  admitted,  and  I  have  always  been  so 
assured,  that  the  Empress  did  privately  espouse  Razou- 
moffsky ;  that  she  had  by  him,  between  the  years  1740 
and  1745,  various  children ;  one  of  whom  was  brought 
up,  and  called  the  Princess  or  Countess  Tarrakanoff. 
Prince  Radzivil  might,  as  is  asserted  in  "La  Vie  de 
Catherine  Seconded  have  contrived  means  to  carry  her 
off;  and  after  accompanying  her  to  Rome,  might  there 
have  quitted  or  deserted  her.  It  is  unquestionable, 
even  by  Sir  John  Dick's  account,  that  Catherine  dreaded 
her ;  and  that  Orloff,  by  her  orders,  decoyed,  ensnared, 
and  made  himself  master  of  the  person  of  this  unfortunate 
female.  But,  that  in  order  to  effect  his  base  and 
barbarous  purpose,  Orloff  actually  married  her,  or 
pretended  so  to  do  ;  that  she  passed  several  days  under 
Sir  John  Dick's  roof,  in  amusement  and  dissipation ; 
that  "  the  Consul,  his  wife,  and  the  wife  of  Rear 
"  Admiral  Greig,  took  their  seats  by  her  in  the  Barge, 
"  which  conveyed  her  on  board  the  Russian  Squadron ;" 
finally,  that  a  British  Consul  would  dishonour  himself, 
his  Sovereign,  and  his  nation,  by  openly  facilitating  so 
perfidious  an  act ; — all  these  assertions  of  Castera,  and 
many  others  relative  to  her  treatment  on  board  Orloff's 
ship,  appear  to  me  wholly  undeserving  of  credit.  They 
are,  indeed,  completely  disproved  by  Sir  John  Dick's 
narrative  to  me,  unless  we  suppose  him  utterly  devoid 
of  truth  and  honour.  On  the  other  hand,  that  he 
should  have  remained  silent  under  such  a  charge,  made 
in  the  face  of  all  Europe,  without  attempting  to  repel, 
or  to  disprove  it,  in  as  public  a  manner  as  it  was  brought 
forward ;  seems  almost  like  a  negative  admission  of  its 
veracity.  His  denial  of  the  accusation,  given  in  private 
conversation  to  me,  could  not  redeem  his  character,  to 
the  world  at  large.  Sir  John,  we  may  likewise  remember, 
lay  under  personal  obligations  to  Catherine  the  Second, 
who  had  conferred  on  him  one  of  the  Russian  Orders  of 
Knighthood;  and  from  his  connection  with  whom, 

117 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

while  Orloff  lay  at  Leghorn  with  her  fleet,  he  had 
derived  great  pecuniary  advantages.  The  manner  in 
which  Alexis  treated  him,  by  bringing  to  his  house  a 
stranger,  whom  he  never  announced  to  Sir  John,  or  to 
his  wife,  by  name;  and  with  whom  he  lived  as  his 
Mistress  ; — these  facts  seem  to  imply  great  subservience 
on  the  part  of  the  British  Consul,  and  will  probably 
induce  us  to  pause,  before  we  give  implicit  belief  to  his 
assertions.  I  leave,  however,  the  decision  on  this  point, 
to  every  man's  own  opinion. 

But  was  the  Lady  in  question,  the  daughter  of  Eliza- 
beth, or  not  ?  It  seems  to  me  impossible,  for  want  of 
evidence,  to  reply  satisfactorily  to  the  question.  I 
confess,  however,  that  I  think  it  more  probable  she 
should  have  been,  as  Sir  John  Dick  asserted,  a  German 
woman,  whom  Prince  Radzivil  had  instructed,  or 
induced,  to  assume  the  name  and  title  of  Princess 
Tarrakanoff.  It  is  even  very  difficult  altogether  to 
condemn  the  Empress  Catherine,  for  endeavouring  to 
get  possession  of  her  person.  For,  had  she  passed 
over  to  Ragusa,  and  from  thence  into  the  Ottoman 
dominions,  she  would  have  been,  when  once  in  the  hands 
of  the  Turks,  with  whom  Russia  was  at  war,  a  most 
dangerous  competitor  to  the  throne.  We  must  re- 
collect, that  Catherine  herself  had  attained  the  imperial 
dignity  by  a  revolution,  and  the  consequent  destruction 
of  her  husband,  without  any  right  of  descent.  To  her, 
an  impostress  was  nearly  as  formidable  as  a  rightful 
pretender  to  the  throne.  The  history  of  the  false 
Demetrius,  in  the  beginning  of  the  seventeenth  Century, 
so  famous  in  the  Muscovite  Annals,  might  justly  inspire 
her  with  apprehension.  Similar  scenes  might  be  re- 
newed under  her  own  reign,  in  the  interior  of  that  vast 
Empire.  Pugatcheif  had  long  been  considered,  by  a 
great  part  of  the  Russian  people,  as  the  Emperor  Peter 
the  Third.  These  considerations  must,  at  least  in  a 
political  point  of  view,  justify  Catherine  for  taking 

118    ' 


CRIMES  OF  CATHERINE  II. 

measures  to  prevent  the  I^idy  in  question  from  being 
made  an  instrument  in  the  hands  of  vindictive  or 
ambitious  individuals,  to  accomplish  their  projects  of 
Vengeance  against  herself.  In  the  eyes  of  morality 
and  of  humanity,  the  whole  reign  and  Administration 
of  that  Empress,  however  brilliant  and  imposing  it  may 
appear,  through  the  medium  of  Voltaire's,  or  of  the 
Prince  de  Ligne's  writings,  cannot  bear  a  close  examina- 
tion, or  support  a  severe  scrutiny. 

We  shall  find  it  equally  difficult  to  palliate  her 
conduct  relative  to  the  first  Grand  Duchess  of  Russia, 
wife  of  Paul ;  who  is  believed  to  have  perished,  or 
rather,  to  have  been  put  out  of  life,  by  Catherine's 
directions  or  permission,  in  a  manner  still  more  tragi- 
cal than  the  pretended  Princess  Tarrakanoff.  I  have 
seen  the  Grand  Duchess  in  question,  at  the  Drawing- 
room  at  PeterhoflP,  in  1774,  soon  after  her  marriage. 
She  was  by  birth  a  Princess  of  Hesse  Darmstadt, 
having  been  chosen  in  preference  to  two  of  her  sisters, 
who  accompanied  her  from  Germany  to  Russia.  They 
must  have  been  very  deficient  in  personal  attractions, 
if  Paul's  selection  resulted  from  her  superiority  in  that 
respect,  above  her  sisters.  I  have  rarely  beheld  a  young 
person  less  favored  by  Nature.  She  had  a  scorbutic 
humour  in  her  face,  nor  did  her  countenance  indicate 
either  intelligence  or  dignity :  but  she  was  said  to  be 
amiable  and  pleasing  in  her  manners.  That  she  died 
during  the  course  of  her  confinement  after  lying-in, 
about  two  years  subsequent  to  her  marriage,  is  certain  ; 
and  it  is  equally  indisputable,  that  Imputations  of  the 
heaviest  nature,  were  on  that  occasion  revived  against 
the  Empress  Catherine,  accusing  her  as  the  author  of 
the  Grand  Duchess's  death.  I  shall  recount  the 
particulars  of  her  end,  on  the  testimony  of  two  Princes 
of  Hesse  Philipstahl,  who  were  allied  to  her  by  con- 
sanguinity, and  whom  I  met  at  Vienna  in  the  begin- 
ning of  1778,  at  Marshal  Haddick's,  as  well  as  at  other 

119 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

houses  in  that  Capital.  They  came  to  seek  service 
under  Maria  Theresa,  and  seemed  to  have  no  delicacy 
or  reserve  in  relating  the  story,  though  it  was  then  so 
recent  a  transaction.  Their  account  was  nearly  as 
follows. 

Wilhelmina,  Princess  of  Hesse  Darmstadt,  who,  on 
her  marriage  with  Paul,  assumed  the  name  of  Natalia 
Alexiewna,  proved  with  child  in  1775,  to  the  great  joy 
of  Catherine,  as  well  as  of  the  Empire  at  large,  which 
anxiously  expected  an  heir.  Unfortunately  for  the 
Grand  Duchess,  though  she  went  her  full  time,  yet  she 
had  so  long  and  dangerous  a  labour,  that  not  only  the 
child  of  which  she  was  delivered,  died  in  the  birth ; 
but,  she  was  herself  declared  by  the  physicians  and 
surgeons  who  attended  her,  to  have  received  so  much 
injury,  as  to  be  incapable  of  ever  again  producing 
children,  even  if  she  should  ultimately  recover.  The 
case  was  of  serious  consequence  to  Russia,  as  Paul 
having  neither  brother  nor  sister,  Heirs  were  indispens- 
able to  the  welfare  of  the  State.  On  the  point  being 
submitted  to  the  Empress,  and  a  few  select  advisers, 
as  a  political  Question,  after  mature  discussion,  it  was 
finally  determined  to  sacrifice  her  to  the  public  Interest, 
by  putting  her  quietly  out  of  the  way.  One  great 
Impediment  remained,  however,  to  be  surmounted. 
Paul  was  known  to  be  not  only  attached  in  the  warmest 
manner  to  his  wife ;  but  his  principles  of  morality  and 
humanity  would  not,  it  was  believed,  permit  him  to 
sanction  such  an  act.  In  fact,  when  the  idea  was  first 
suggested  to  him,  though  indirectly  and  ambiguously, 
he  manifested  the  utmost  indignation,  as  well  as  horror. 
With  a  view  to  extinguish  all  emotions  of  that  nature 
in  his  bosom,  and  to  induce  him  to  consent  to  the 
deed,  the  persons  who  were  employed  for  the  purpose, 
assailed  him  therefore  by  other  arguments  and  motives 
than  those  of  State  Policy  or  Necessity.  "Your  Im- 
"  perial  Highness  then  imagines,"  said  they,  "  that  the 

120 


HEARTLESS  INTRIGUE 

"  Grand  Duchess  was  true  to  your  Bed,  and  that  the 
"  Child  which  she  brought  into  the  world,  was  yours  ?" 
On  his  answering  in  the  affirmative,  they  assured  him 
that  she  had  carried  on  a  criminal  intrigue  with  one  of 
the  handsomest,  as  well  as  most  accomplished  young 
Noblemen  about  the  Court.  Paul  still  continuing, 
nevertheless,  incredulous,  they  put  into  his  hands 
various  of  her  own  Letters,  and  those  of  her  Lover ; 
which,  as  they  asserted,  had  been  discovered,  or  inter- 
cepted, containing  unequivocal  proofs  of  mutual  inter- 
course, sufficient  to  convince  the  Grand  Duke  of  her 
Infidelity.  He  then  abandoned  her  to  her  fate ;  and 
the  medical  attendants  having  received  proper  instruc- 
tions, completed  the  rest,  in  a  manner  equally  effectual 
and  expeditious. 

Such  was  the  account  given  by  the  Princes  of  Hesse 
Philipstahl ;  and  a  circumstance  which  augments  its 
probability  is,  that  the  Nobleman  himself,  who  was 
accused  of  being  the  Lover  of  the  Grand  Duchess,  then 
resided  at  Vienna ;  to  which  city  he  had  been  sent,  as 
common  report  affirmed,  by  Catherine,  on  the  com- 
plaints of  her  son,  immediately  after  the  death  of  the 
unfortunate  Princess  in  question.  I  knew  him  inti- 
mately, during  a  long  time,  while  at  Vienna.  He  since 
filled  the  post  of  Envoy  from  the  Empress  of  Russia, 
at  the  Court  of  Naples ;  where  he  was  believed  to  have 
carried  his  temerity,  and  his  success  even  higher  than 
he  had  done  at  Petersburgh.  Few  men  whom  I  have 
ever  seen  or  known,  were  more  formed  by  Nature  to  be 
beloved  by  women.  His  figure  was  advantageous ;  his 
manners,  though  lofty,  yet  were  gay  and  captivating 
whenever  he  desired  to  conciliate  good-will ;  and  his 
countenance,  which  somewhat  resembled  that  of  a 
Calmuck,  had  in  it  nevertheless  an  air  of  distinction, 
spirit,  and  intelligence.  He  had  served  in  the  Russian 
Fleet,  under  Alexis  OrlofF;  was  present  at  the  memor- 
able victory  of  Schisme,  on  the  coast  of  Natolia,  in 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 


1770,  where  the  Turkish  squadron  in  that  Bay  was 
destroyed;  and  had  acquired,  under  Admirals  Elphin- 
stone  and  Greig,  not  only  a  knowledge  of  naval  Tactics, 
but  of  the  English  language  likewise,  which  he  spoke 
with  admirable  ease  and  fluency.  When  we  contem- 
plate the  history  of  the  Imperial  Family  of  Russia, 
from  the  reign  of  Peter  the  First,  down  to  the  present 
time ;  we  shall  find  nothing  in  the  story  above  related, 
either  improbable,  or  inconsistent  with  the  measures  to 
which  the  Sovereigns  of  that  Empire  have  continually 
had  recourse,  under  similar  circumstances,  in  various 
instances. 

If  Catherine  did  not  hesitate,  by  the  commission  of  a 
crime,  to  render  her  son  a  widower,  she  was  at  least 
determined  to  lose  no  time  in  providing  him  a  second 
wife.  For  this  purpose,  she  applied,  almost  immedi- 
ately after  the  removal  of  the  unfortunate  Grand 
Duchess,  to  the  great  Frederic,  King  of  Prussia, 
requesting  him  to  select  for  Paul,  a  German  Princess, 
to  supply  the  vacancy  occasioned  in  her  family  by  death. 
She  even  sketched  out  with  her  own  hand,  the  promi- 
nent qualities  of  person  and  of  mind,  which  she  con- 
sidered as  principally  requisite  in  the  object  of  his 
choice.  This  delicate  commission  Frederic  executed 
with  great  ability;  and,  having  fully  sounded  the 
ground,  he  recommended  the  Princess  Sophia  of  Wir- 
temberg  to  the  Empress,  for  her  future  daughter-in-law. 
It  was,  perhaps,  impossible  to  have  made  a  more 
judicious  selection,  for  such  a  dangerous  eminence.  She 
was  not  quite  seventeen  years  of  age ;  and  she  possessed, 
besides  youth,  personal  attractions,  calculated  to  retain 
the  Grand  Duke's  affections.  Her  understanding,  solid, 
and  her  deportment,  blameless,  secured  universal  esteem  ; 
while,  at  the  same  time,  she  neither  displayed  such 
talents,  energy  of  character,  or  ambition,  as  could 
render  her  an  object  of  Catherine's  apprehension. 
Paul,  accompanied  by  Marshal  Romanzoff,  whose 

122 


was 


A  DINNER-TABLE  EPISODE 

victories  over  the  Turks  have  rendered  him  so  justly 
celebrated,  was  sent  by  Catherine,  in  1776,  to  Berlin ; 
where  Frederic,  after  contributing  to  procure  him  a 
wife,  entertained  him  at  Potzdam,  in  the  most  splendid 
manner.  At  one  of  these  entertainments,  given,  if  I 
recollect  right,  in  the  new  palace  near  Sans  Sotici ;  in 
the  midst  of  the  dinner,  a  large  piece  of  the  cieling  fell 
down  on  the  table,  involving  the  room  and  the  company 
in  dust,  confusion,  and  astonishment ;  not  unlike  the 
accident  which  Fundanius  relates  as  happening  at 
Nasidienus's  supper.  The  King,  with  admirable  presence 
of  mind,  instantly  throwing  his  arms  round  Paul,  who 
sat  next  him,  held  the  Grand  Duke  closely  embraced, 
without  suffering  him  to  stir,  till  the  cause,  as  well  as 
the  consequences  of  the  disaster,  were  ascertained. 
When  it  was  discovered  to  have  arisen  only  from  a 
defect  in  the  plaister  of  the  cieling,  and  to  have  been 
altogether  casual,  a  Courier  was  immediately  dispatched 
to  Petersburgh,  stating  the  particulars  to  Catherine ; 
assuring  her  at  the  same  time,  that  her  son  was  in 
perfect  safety.  We  cannot  help  admiring  the  quickness 
of  Frederic's  perception,  which,  ignorant  as  he  was  from 
what  cause  so  unusual  and  alarming  an  event  originated, 
led  him,  without  a  moment's  delay,  to  participate  the 
danger  and  the  misfortune,  if  such  existed,  with  the  Grand 
Duke.  In  fact,  they  must  have  perished  together,  if 
they  perished  at  all.  The  malignity  of  mankind  would, 
unquestionably,  have  suspected  or  attributed  treachery 
of  some  kind,  had  any  fatal  accident,  in  which  the  King 
was  not  enveloped,  befallen  his  guest.  Frederic,  by  his 
promptitude,  obviated  the  possibility  of  misrepresenta- 
tion, either  at  Petersburgh,  or  in  any  other  of  the 
Courts  of  Europe. 

During  the  first  ten  or  fifteen  years  of  the  reign  of 
Catherine  the  Second,  it  was  commonly  believed;  and 
in  Poland,  where  men  ventured  to  state  their  opinions  in 
conversation,  with  more  freedom  than  they  dared  to  do 


WRAXALKS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 


in  Russia,  I  have  heard  it  often  maintained  in  private 
Society ;  that  the  Grand  Duke  Paul  would,  sooner  or 
later,  disappear,  as  Peter  the  Third  did  in  1762,  and  as 
the  unfortunate  Emperor  Ivan  did  in  1764.  If  Cathe- 
rine had  dreaded  her  son,  such  an  event  might  have 
been  not  improbable :  but  she  knew  him,  and  did  not 
fear  him.  The  strongest  mark  of  her  superiority  to  all 
apprehension  from  his  machinations,  or  efforts  to  ascend 
the  Russian  Throne  before  his  time,  was  the  permission 
which  she  gave  him  to  travel  over  Germany,  France,  and 
Italy.  He  was  accompanied  on  his  Tour,  by  the  Grand 
Duchess,  for  whom  he  then  manifested  the  utmost  fond- 
ness ;  though  the  testimonies  which  he  gave  her  of  his 
affection,  were  not  always  regulated  by  delicacy  or 
propriety.  Sir  William  Hamilton  told  me,  that  when 
Paul  arrived  at  Naples,  in  1782,  he  had  the  honour  to 
accompany  the  Grand  Duke  and  Duchess,  on  their  excur- 
sions round  that  city ;  to  view  Portici,  Pompeia,  and  the 
other  principal  objects  of  curiosity,  visited  by  travellers. 
"  The  first  time,11  said  Sir  William,  « that  I  was  with 
"  them  in  a  coach,  we  had  not  proceeded  far,  when  Paul, 
"  as  if  unconscious  that  I  was  present,  throwing  his  arms 
"  about  the  Grand  Duchess,  began  to  kiss  her  with  as 
"  much  warmth  as  he  could  have  shewn  if  they  had 
"  been  alone,  and  newly  married.  I  was  somewhat 
"  embarrassed  at  this  unusual  display  of  matrimonial 
"  attachment,  hardly  knowing  which  way  to  direct  my 
"  view ;  for  there  was  no  other  person  with  us  in  the 
"  carriage  :  and  as  I  sat  opposite  to  their  Imperial  High- 
"  nesses,  I  could  not  easily  avoid  seeing  all  that  passed, 
"  though  I  affected  to  look  through  the  glass,  at  the 
"  objects  without.  At  length,  the  Grand  Duke  address- 
"  ing  himself  to  me,  said,  '  Monsieur  Le  Chevalier, 
"  J^aime  beaucoup  mafemme?  It  was  impossible  not  to 
"  credit  the  assertion,  after  the  proofs  which  he  had  just 
"  exhibited.  But  we  had  not  proceeded  a  mile  further, 
"  when  he  recommenced  the  same  demonstrations  of 


vafp 


FURTHER  CRIMES  OF  CATHERINE 

"*  attachment,  which  he  repeated  many  times  before 
"  we  arrived  at  Portici :  usually  observing  to  me,  each 
"time,  '  Vous  voyez  que  J^aime  beaucoup  ma  femme."1 
"  I  could  only  express  my  satisfaction  at  his  felicity, 
"  concealing  my  astonishment  at  the  testimonies  of  it 
"  which  I  had  witnessed."  It  would  have  been  happy 
for  this  violent  and  infatuated  Prince,  if  he  had  never 
ascended  the  Russian  Throne,  but  had  always  continued 
in  the  state  of  political  annihilation  to  which  his  mother 
had  reduced  him,  and  in  which  she  retained  him  to  the 
end  of  her  life. 

The  pretended  Princess  Tarrakanoflf,  and  the  first 
Grand  Duchess  of  Russia,  were  not  the  only  females  of 
high  rank,  whom  Catherine  the  Second  is  accused  of 
having  caused  to  be  put  out  of  life.  Augusta  Caroline, 
eldest  daughter  of  the  late  celebrated  Duke  of  Bruns- 
wick-Wolfenbuttel,  who  fell  at  Auerstadt,  perished  in 
a  manner  equally  mysterious ;  and,  as  some  persons 
believe,  not  less  tragical.  This  Princess,  who  was  born 
towards  the  end  of  the  year  1 764 ;  before  she  attained 
the  age  of  sixteen,  was  married  to  the  present  King, 
at  that  time  Prince,  of  Wirtemberg.  He  was  then 
about  twenty-six  years  old,  and  might  be  considered 
as  eventual  presumptive  heir  to  his  uncle,  the  reigning 
Duke  of  Wirtemberg,  Charles  Eugene.  When  I  was 
at  the  Court  of  Brunswic,  in  the  Autumn  of  1777, 
at  which  time  the  Princess  was  near  thirteen,  I 
saw  her  more  than  once,  in  the  apartments  of  her 
mother.  She  had  a  very  fair  complexion,  light  hair, 
pleasing  features,  and  an  interesting  figure.  Some 
years  after  her  marriage,  she  accompanied  the  Prince 
her  husband  into  Russia,  when  he  entered  into  the 
military  service  of  that  Crown  ;  to  the  Heir  of  which, 
as  has  been  already  stated,  his  sister  was  married. 
They  resided  during  some  time  at  Petersburgh,  or  in 
other  parts  of  the  Russian  Empire;  but  in  1787  he 
quitted  Catherine's  service  and  dominions ;  leaving 

125 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 


his  wife  behind,  of  whose  conduct,  it  was  asserted,  he 
had  great  reason  to  complain.  They  had  then  three 
children  living,  two  sons  and  a  daughter,  whom  the 
Empress  permitted  him  to  take  away,  when  he  with- 
drew from  her  employ ;  but  she  retained  the  Princess 
under  her  own  protection.  At  the  end  of  a  year  or 
two,  it  was  notified  to  the  Prince  of  Wirtemberg,  as 
well  as  to  the  Duke  of  Brunswic,  by  order  of  the 
Empress,  that  the  wife  of  the  one,  and  the  daughter  of 
the  other,  was  no  more.  The  Duke,  her  father,  immedi- 
ately demanded  in  the  most  pressing  terms,  that  her 
body  might  be  delivered  up  to  him :  but  this  request 
was  never  granted,  nor  did  he  even  receive  any  such 
authentic  proofs  of  her  decease,  and  still  less  of  the 
circumstances  attending  it,  as  could  satisfy  him  on  the 
subject.  Doubts  were  not  only  entertained  whether 
she  died  a  natural  death,  but  it  remained  question- 
able whether  she  did  not  still  survive,  and  was  not 
existing  in  Siberia,  or  in  the  Polar  Desarts ;  like  many 
other  illustrious  exiles  of  her  own  family,  who  had  been 
banished  thither  by  the  Empress  Elizabeth,  when  she 
ascended  the  Throne  in  1741,  on  the  deposition  of 
Ivan. 

I  have  heard  this  subject  agitated  between  1789  and 
1795,  when  great  uncertainty  prevailed  respecting  the 
point ;  though  it  seemed  to  be  generally  believed  that 
she  was  dead,  and  that  her  end  had  been  accelerated  or 
produced  by  poison.  It  was  natural  to  ask,  who  had 
caused  the  poison  to  be  administered  ?  Was  the  Empress 
herself  the  perpetrator  of  this  crime  ?  And  even  if  that 
fact  should  be  admitted,  was  not  the  Prince  of  Wirtem- 
berg tacitly  a  party  to  its  commission?  Though  no 
positive  solution  of  these  questions  could  be  given,  yet 
when  the  fact  of  the  Princess's  death  came  to  be 
universally  understood,  many  persons  doubted  the  inno- 
cence of  her  husband.  The  King  of  Great  Britain  him- 
self was  strongly  imbued  with  the  opinion,  of  which  he 

126 


Vm 


AN  ACCUSATION  INVESTIGATED 

made  no  secret.  In  1796,  when  the  first  overtures  were 
begun,  on  the  part  of  the  Court  of  Wirtemberg,  for  the 
marriage  of  their  Prince,  to  the  Princess  Royal ;  George 
the  Third  was  so  prepossessed  against  him,  for  having 
been  supposed  privy  to  the  death  of  his  wife,  that  he 
would  not  listen  to  the  proposal.  In  order  to  remove 
an  obstacle  of  such  magnitude,  the  Prince  sent  over  to 
London,  a  private  Agent,  instructed  to  ascertain  from 
what  quarter  the  accusation  came,  and  furnished  with 
documents  for  disproving  it.  That  Agent  I  personally 
knew,  while  he  was  here,  employed  on  the  above  mission. 
He  possessed  talents,  spirit,  zeal,  and  activity,  all  which 
he  exerted  in  the  cause.  Having  clearly  traced  the 
imputation  up  to  Count  Woronzoff,  who  long  had  been, 
and  who  then  was  the  Russian  Envoy  at  our  Court ; 
he  induced  the  Count,  by  very  strong  personal  re- 
monstrances, accompanied,  as  we  must  suppose,  by 
proofs,  to  declare  his  conviction  of  the  Princess  inno- 
cence, and  utter  ignorance  of  the  nature  or  manner  of 
his  wife's  end.  It  followed  of  course,  that  Catherine, 
under  whose  exclusive  care  she  remained,  could  alone 
be  accused  of  having  produced  it.  The  Agent  finally 
satisfied  His  Majesty,  that  the  Empress,  and  she  only, 
caused  the  Princess  to  be  dispatched,  without  the 
participation,  consent,  or  knowledge  of  her  husband ;  if 
after  all  she  did  not  die  of  a  natural  death. 

In  May,  1797,  the  Princess  Royal  of  England  was 
married  to  the  Prince  of  Wirtemberg,  who,  before  the 
conclusion  of  that  year,  became  Duke,  by  the  decease  of 
Frederic  Eugene  his  father.  Early  in  the  summer  of 
1798,  a  gentleman  conversing  with  me  on  the  subject 
of  the  first  Princess  of  Wirtemberg's  death,  assured  me 
that  he  had  seen  and  perused  all  the  papers  relative  to 
her  imprisonment  and  decease ;  which,  at  the  desire  of 
the  Prince,  and  by  his  authority,  had  been  transmitted 
to  George  the  Third;  who,  after  a  full  inspection  of 
them,  became  perfectly  convinced  of  his  having  had  no 

127 


WRAXALKS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

part  in  that  dark  and  melancholy  transaction :  lastly, 
he  gave  it  as  his  Opinion,  that  Catherine  had  alone 
caused  her  to  be  poisoned,  unless  her  decease  resulted 
from  natural  causes. 

"  Frederic  William,  reigning  Duke  of  Wirtemberg," 
said  he,  "  entered  when  young,  as  is  well  known,  into 
"  the  Prussian  service.  Old  Frederic  liked  and  dis- 
"  tinguished  him.  Wishing  to  attach  him  to  the  House 
"  of  Brandenburg  by  permanent  ties,  and  considering 
"  him  as  a  man  of  promising  abilities,  the  King 
"  himself  set  on  foot,  and  finally  concluded  his  mar- 
"  riage  with  the  eldest  daughter  of  his  own  favourite 
"  Nephew  and  General,  the  Duke  of  Brunswic.  This 
"  event  took  place  in  1780.  About  five  years  after- 
"  wards,  Frederic  being  disposed  to  form  a  second 
"  alliance  with  the  family  of  Wirtemberg,  by  marrying 
"  his  great  Nephew,  the  present  King  of  Prussia,  as 
"  soon  as  his  age  would  allow,  with  the  Princess  Eliza- 
"  beth,  sister  to  the  Prince  ;  dispatched  him  to  Peters- 
"  burgh  for  that  purpose.  His  instructions  were,  to 
"  apply  to  the  Grand  Duchess,  who  was  likewise  his 
"  sister,  for  the  exertion  of  her  influence  at  the  Court 
"  of  Stutgard,  in  order  to  prevail  on  the  Duke  to 
"  promise  his  niece  to  the  eventual  heir  of  the  Prussian 
"  Monarchy.  This  negotiation  was,  however,  rendered 
"  unsuccessful,  by  the  demand  which  the  Emperor 
"  Joseph  the  Second  made,  about  the  same  time,  of  the 
"  Princess  Elizabeth  of  Wirtemberg,  for  his  Nephew, 
"  Francis,  hereditary  Prince  of  Tuscany,  now  Emperor 
"  of  Austria ;  a  marriage  which  was  actually  accom- 
"  plished  early  in  1788. 

"  When  the  Prince  of  Wirtemberg  arrived  in  the 
"  Capital  of  the  Russian  Empire,  this  alliance  above 
"  mentioned,  was  already  settled ;  or  at  least,  was  too 
"  far  advanced,  to  be  overturned  by  his  interference. 
"  After  making,  therefore,  every  effort  in  his  power, 
"  through  the  Grand  Duchess,  to  prevent  its  accomplish- 

128 


CHARACTER  OF  THE  RUSSIAN  COURT 

"  ment ;  and  finding  these  exertions  fruitless,  he 
"  returned  to  Potzdam.  Whether  Frederic  suspected 
"  any  duplicity  or  insincerity  on  his  part ;  or,  whether 
"  it  was  the  result  merely  of  disappointment ;  it  is 
"  certain  that  he  received  the  Prince  very  coldly :  and 
"  the  Empress  of  Russia  having  soon  aiterwards  invited 
"  him  into  her  service,  he  quitted  that  of  Prussia,  and 
"  revisited  Petersburgh.  She  employed  him  in  the  war 
"  that  began  in  1787  against  the  Turks,  and  he 
"  commanded  one  of  the  three  armies  which  took  the 
"  field.  The  Van,  consisting  of  forty  thousand  men, 
"  was  entrusted  to  him.  He  is  said  to  have  displayed 
"  great  military  talent,  to  have  distinguished  himself 
"  much,  and  to  have  rendered  essential  services  to 
"  Catherine. 

"  At  the  time  that  he  entered  the  Russian  service, 
"  he  carried  the  Princess  his  wife  with  him  to  Peters- 
"  burgh,  as  well  as  the  two  sons  and  daughter  which 
"  she  had  brought  him.     Being   in    the   flower  of  her 
"  youth,  endowed  with  many  amiable  qualities  of  mind 
"  and  of  deportment,  she  soon    became  a  favourite  of 
"  Catherine ;  in  whose  society  and  intimate  confidence 
"  she  occupied   a  distinguished   place.     It   can   hardly 
"  however  excite  astonishment,  that  such  an  intercourse 
"  should  have  been  calculated  to   corrupt   her  morals. 
"  The  Court  and  Palace  of  the  Empress,  were  scenes  of 
"  dissipation  and  licentiousness.     Yet,  when  the  Prince 
"  went  to  serve  against  the  Turks,  he,  of  necessity  left 
"  his  wife  exposed  to  all  these  temptations.     In  effect, 
"  during  his  absence,  she  conducted  herself  so  impru- 
"  dently,  that  when  he  returned,  after  the  conclusion  of 
"  the  Campaign,    to    Petersburgh,    he    found   himself 
"  under  a   necessity  of  adopting  some  strong  measures 
"  respecting  her.     Being  placed  in  this  painful  situation, 
"  he   wrote    to   her   father,    the    Duke    of    Brunswic, 
"  informing   him    of  his   daughter's    misconduct,    and 
"  consulting  him  on  the  mode  of  action  proper  to  be 

129  9 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

"  pursued.  It  was  agreed  between  them,  that  as  a 
"  preliminary  step,  she  should  be  removed  out  of 
"  Russia ;  and  the  Prince  accordingly  demanded 
"  Catherine's  permission  to  quit  her  dominions,  together 
"  with  his  wife  and  his  family.  The  Empress  allowed 
"  him  to  retire,  and  to  take  with  him  his  children  ;  but 
"  she  peremptorily  refused  to  permit  him  to  carry  his 
"  wife  back  to  Germany.  All  remonstrance  proving 
"  vain,  the  Princess  therefore  remained  behind,  and  he 
"  quitted  Petersburgh,  with  his  sons  and  daughter,  to 
"  return  to  Wirtemberg. 

"  About  a  fortnight  after  his  departure,  the  Princess, 
"  without  any  reason  assigned,  was  sent  by  the  order  of 
"  Catherine,  to  the  Castle  of  Lhode,  about  two  hundred 
"  miles  from  Petersburgh ;  but,  in  what  part  or 
"  province  of  that  vast  empire,  I  am  unable  to  assert. 
"  There,  it  seems,  under  close  confinement,  she  remained 
"  about  eighteen  months :  but,  all  her  German 
"  attendants,  male  and  female,  were  withdrawn  from 
"  her.  At  the  end  of  that  time,  the  Prince  received 
"  letters  from  the  Empress,  informing  him  that  his 
"  wife  was  dead  of  an  Hemorrhage.  Similar  informa- 
"  tion  was  conveyed  by  Catherine,  to  the  Duke  of 
"  Brunswic,  the  unfortunate  Princess's  father.  No 
"  particulars  were  stated ;  nor,  as  far  as  appears,  were 
"  any  other  circumstances  ever  known  respecting  her. 
"  Thus  situated,  the  Duke  of  Brunswic,  conscious  that 
"  he  could  neither  bring  his  daughter  to  life,  nor  call 
"  the  Empress  to  account,  acquiesced  patiently  in  the 
"  calamity :  but,  during  some  years,  he  did  not  com- 
"  municate  to  the  Duchess  his  wife,  the  intelligence  of 
"  her  daughter's  death.  She,  therefore,  remaining  in 
"  ignorance  of  the  Catastrophe,  continued  to  believe 
"  that  the  Princess  was  still  confined  at  Lhode,  or 
"  somewhere  in  the  Deserts  of  Russia.  The  Duchess 
"  used  even  to  speak  of  her,  as  being  alive  in  Siberia  ;  and 
"  this  fact  will  account  for  the  universality  of  the  report." 
130 


FATE  OF  THE  PRINCESS  WIRTEMBERG 

If  the  account  given  me  by  Sir  John  Dick,  relative  to 
the  supposed  Princess  Tarrakanoff,  left  many  circum- 
stances dark  and  unexplained  in  the  history  of  that 
female ;  it  must  be  owned  that,  after  considering  this 
narrative,  no  less  uncertainty  still  pervades  the  story  of 
the  Princess  of  Wirtemberg.  It  is  natural  to  ask,  why 
did  Catherine  cause  the  Princess  to  be  imprisoned, 
or  poisoned?  Her  gallantries,  however  culpable  or 
notorious  they  might  be,  yet  constituted  no  crime 
against  the  Empress  of  Russia;  who  exhibited  in  her 
own  conduct,  an  example  of  emancipation  from  all 
restraint  and  decorum  on  the  article  of  female  irregu- 
larities. It  was  the  Prince,  her  husband,  whom  she  had 
dishonoured  and  incensed.  What  proof  is  adduced, 
except  assertion,  that  he  did  not  know  of  the  intentions 
of  Catherine  to  confine  and  banish  her  ?  In  the  case  of 
Peter  the  Third,  and  of  Ivan  ;  as  well  as  in  the  instances 
of  the  pretended  Princess  Tarrakanoff,  and  of  the  first 
Grand  Duchess  of  Russia ;  the  motives  for  her  com- 
mission of  a  crime,  by  putting  them  out  of  life,  are 
obvious.  But,  none  such  appear  in  the  instance  before 
us.  There  are,  moreover,  other  particulars  which  may 
lead  us  to  hesitate  in  forming  a  decisive  opinion  on  the 
subject.  The  death  of  the  Princess  of  Wirtemberg  at 
Lhode,  was  announced  and  stated  in  all  the  German 
Almanacks,  printed  bv  authority,  to  have  taken  place 
on  "the  27th  September,  1788."  Her  husband 
remained  a  widower,  near  eight  years  after  that  event, 
before  he  attempted  to  obtain  the  hand  of  the  Princess 
Royal  of  Great  Britain.  During  so  long  a  period  of 
time,  he  seems  to  have  adopted  no  measures  for  repel- 
ling the  calumnious  reports  circulated  all  over  Europe, 
of  his  participation  in  the  death  of  his  wife:  reports 
which  had  made  the  most  unfavourable  impression, 
even  in  England.  It  is  true  that  George  the  Third 
became  convinced  of  his  innocence,  before  he  consented 
to  the  union  of  the  Prince  with  his  eldest  daughter. 

131 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

But,  though  the  King  yielded  to  the  proofs  brought 
upon  this  point,  yet  it  is  well  known  that  he  did  it  with 
reluctance  and  hesitation ;  rather  giving  way  to  the 
Princesses  avowed  wishes  on  the  subject,  than  himself 
desiring,  or  approving  the  match.  So  far  indeed  was 
he  from  pushing  forward  the  alliance,  that  I  know  from 
good  authority,  he  offered  the  Princess,  after  all  the 
preliminaries  were  adjusted,  and  the  marriage  was  fixed, 
to  break  it  off,  if  she  chose  to  decline  it;  taking  on 
himself  personally,  the  whole  responsibility  of  its 
failure.  There  remains  still  another  important  fact, 
which  merits  consideration.  We  have  seen  that  Count 
Woronzoff  originally  maintained  his  Sovereign's  inno- 
cence of  the  Princess's  death,  though  he  was  after- 
wards induced  to  depart  from  that  assertion.  But, 
when  did  he  make  such  an  admission  ?  Much  depends 
on  the  time.  For,  Catherine  died  on  the  6th  of 
November,  1796 ;  and  after  her  death,  a  crime,  more 
or  less,  might  not  appear  to  be  of  much  consequence, 
where  so  many  could  be  justly  attributed  to  her.  Cer- 
tain it  is,  that  the  Negociation  advanced  much  more 
rapidly  after  the  decease  of  the  Empress,  and  on  the 
18th  of  May,  1797,  the  nuptials  were  solemnized.  Over 
the  nature,  as  well  as  over  the  author,  of  the  first 
Princess  of  Wirtemberg's  death,  a  deep  or  impenetrable 
veil  is  drawn.  We  must  leave  it  to  time  to  unfold,  if 
it  does  not  rather  remain,  as  is  more  probable,  for  ever 
problematical. 

Before  I  quit  this  subject,  I  cannot  help  remarking, 
that  during  the  course  of  the  eighteenth  Century,  the 
family  of  Brunswic,  in  its  different  Branches,  produced 
no  less  than  five  Princesses,  who  exhibited  in  succession, 
the  most  conspicuous  examples  of  human  infelicity. 
The  first  of  them  was  Sophia  of  Brunswic  Zell,  married 
to  George  the  First;  who,  for  her  alledged,  but  un- 
proved Gallantries  with  Count  Konigsmark,  was  con- 
fined during  near  forty  years,  at  the  sequestered  seat 


THE  BRUNSWIG  PRINCESSES 

of  Ahlden,  in  the  Electorate  of  Hanover,  where  she 
expired  in  1726.  Charlotte -Christina  of  Brunswic 
Blankenburg,  who  espoused  in  1711,  the  Czarowitz 
Alexis,  only  son  of  Peter  the  Great ;  a  Princess  endowed 
by  Nature,  with  almost  every  amiable  and  estimable 
quality  of  body  and  of  mind ;  equally  beautiful  and 
virtuous ;  fell  a  victim,  in  the  flower  of  her  youth,  to 
the  ferocious  treatment  that  she  experienced  from  her 
husband.  She  died  at  Petersburgh,  in  child-bed,  at 
twenty-one  years  of  age,  in  1715 ;  lamented  by  the 
whole  Empire,  except  by  Alexis,  whose  brutal  character 
rendered  him  incapable  of  appreciating  her  value. 
Brunswic  Wolfenbuttel  furnished  the  next  instance,  in 
the  person  of  Elizabeth,  married  in  1765,  to  the  late 
King  of  Prussia,  then  only  Prince  Royal ;  divorced  four 
years  afterwards,  for  her  irregularities ;  confined  at 
Stettin,  where  I  have  seen  her  in  1774 ;  and  who,  I 
believe,  still  survives,  forgotten  and  unknown,  in  some 
part  of  the  Prussian  dominions,  after  having  witnessed 
the  temporary  subversion  of  her  own  house,  and  the 
calamities  inflicted  on  that  of  Brandenburgh,  by  Bona- 
parte. Caroline  Matilda,  of  Brunswic  Lunenburgh, 
posthumous  daughter  of  Frederic,  late  Prince  of  Wales, 
and  sister  of  George  the  Third,  is  the  fourth  in  this 
enumeration.  Banished  by  a  Revolution,  from  Den- 
mark, in  1772,  effected  in  the  name  of  Christian  the 
Seventh,  her  imbecile  husband;  she  only  survived  it 
about  three  years,  terminating  her  short  career,  in  the 
prime  of  life,  at  Zell,  in  1775.  Augusta  Caroline,  of 
Brunswic  Wolfenbuttel,  whose  melancholy  history,  and 
whose  ambiguous  end,  we  have  been  surveying,  closes 
the  list.  It  must  be  esteemed  singular,  that  in  the 
lapse  of  scarcely  a  hundred  years,  such  a  fatality  should 
seem  to  have  marked  so  many  females  of  that  illustrious 
family. 

In  the  Autumn  of  1778,  I  visited  Dresden  for  the 
second  time:   a  Court  which   was   rendered   peculiarly 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

agreeable  to  the  English  at  that  period,  by  the  hospi- 
tality and  polished  manners  of  His  Majesty's  Minister  to 
Saxony,  Sir  John  Stepney ;  one  of  the  finest  Gentlemen 
who  has  been  employed  on  foreign  Missions,  during  the 
course  of  the  present  reign.  Dresden  was  then  a  place 
where  the  Illumines  had  made  a  deep  and  general 
impression  on  the  public  mind;  Schrepfer  having 
chosen  it,  only  a  few  years  earlier,  for  the  scene  of  his 
famous  Exhibition  of  the  Apparition  of  the  Chevalier 
de  Saxe.  Having  given,  in  a  former  work,  some 
account  of  that  extraordinary  imposition,  I  shall  not 
resume  the  subject  here ;  but  I  cannot  help  relating 
another  somewhat  similar  story,  which  was  told  me, 
during  my  residence  in  Dresden,  by  the  Count  de 
Felkesheim.  He  was  a  Livonian  Gentleman,  settled  in 
Saxony,  of  a  very  improved  understanding,  equally 
superior  to  credulity,  as  to  superstition.  Being  together 
in  the  month  of  October,  1778,  and  our  discourse  ac- 
cidentally turning  on  the  character  and  performances  of 
Schrepfer ;  "  I  have  conversed,11  said  he  to  me,  "  with 
"  several  of  the  individuals  who  were  present  at  the 
"  scene  of  the  spectre  or  phantom,  presented  by  him  in 
"  the  gallery  of  the  palace  of  the  Duke  of  Courland. 
"  They  all  agreed  in  their  account  of  the  leading  parti- 
"  culars.  Though  I  do  not  pretend  to  explain  by  what 
"  process  or  machinery,  that  business  was  conducted,  I 
"  have  always  considered  him  as  an  artful  impostor, 
"  and  his  audience  as  dupes.  Yet  am  I  not  so  decidedly 
"  sceptical  on  the  possibility  of  supernatural  appear- 
"  ances,  as  to  treat  them  with  ridicule,  because  they 
"  may  seem  to  be  unphilosophical.  I  received  my 
"  education  in  the  university  of  Konigsberg,  where  I  hacl 
"  the  advantage  of  attending  Lectures  in  Ethics  and 
;'  Moral  Philosophy,  delivered  by  a  Professor  who  was 
"  esteemed  a  very  superior  man  in  those  branches  of 
"  science.  He  had,  nevertheless,  though  an  Ecclesiastic, 
"  the  reputation  of  being  tinctured  with  incredulity,  on 


SPIRITUAL  APPEARANCES 

"  various  points  connected  with  revealed  Religion. 
"  When,  therefore,  it  became  necessary  for  him,  in  the 
"  course  of  his  Lectures,  to  treat  on  the  nature  of 
"  Spirit,  as  detached  from  Matter ;  to  discuss  the 
"  Immortality  of  the  Soul ;  and  to  enter  on  the 
"  Doctrine  of  a  Future  State  ;  I  listened  with  more 
"  than  ordinary  attention,  to  his  opinions.  In  speaking 
"  of  all  these  mysterious  subjects,  there  appeared  to  me 
"  to  be  so  visible  an  embarrassment,  both  in  his  lan- 
"  guage  and  his  expressions,  that  I  felt  the  strongest 
"  curiosity  to  question  him  further  respecting  them. 
"  Finding  myself  alone  with  him  soon  afterwards,  I 
"  ventured  to  state  to  him  my  remarks  on  his  deport- 
"  ment,  and  I  entreated  him  to  tell  me  if  they  were  well 
"  founded,  or  only  imaginary  suggestions. 

"The  hesitation  which  you  noticed,"  answered  he, 
"  resulted  from  the  conflict  that  takes  place  within 
"  me,  when  I  am  attempting  to  convey  my  ideas  on  a 
"  subject,  where  my  understanding  is  at  variance  with 
"  the  testimony  of  my  senses.  I  am,  equally  from  reason 
"  and  reflexion,  disposed  to  consider  with  incredulity 
"  and  contempt,  the  existence  of  Apparitions.  But,  a 
"  circumstance  which  I  have  witnessed  with  my  own 
"  eyes,  as  far  as  they,  or  any  of  the  perceptions  can  be 
"  confided  in ;  and  which  has  even  received  a  sort  of 
"  subsequent  confirmation,  from  other  circumstances 
"  connected  with  the  original  fact,  leaves  me  in  that 
"  state  of  Scepticism  and  suspense  which  pervaded  my 
"  discourse.  I  will  communicate  to  you  its  cause. 
"  Having  been  brought  up  to  the  profession  of  the 
"  church,  I  was  presented  by  Frederic  William  the 
"  First,  late  King  of  Prussia,  to  a  small  Benefice 
"  situated  in  the  interior  of  the  country,  at  a  considerable 
"  distance  South  of  Konigsberg.  I  repaired  thither,  in 
"  order  to  take  possession  of  my  Living,  and  found  a 
"  very  neat  Parsonage  House,  where  I  passed  the  night 
"  in  the  bed-chamber  which  had  been  occupied  by  my 

135 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

"  predecessor.  It  was  in  the  longest  days  of  Summer ; 
"  and  on  the  following  morning,  which  was  Sunday, 
"  while  lying  awake,  the  curtains  of  the  bed  being 
"  undrawn,  and  it  being  broad  daylight,  I  beheld  the 
"  figure  of  a  man,  habited  in  a  sort  of  loose  gown, 
"  standing  at  a  reading  desk,  on  which  lay  a  large 
"  book,  the  leaves  of  which  he  appeared  to  turn  over 
"  at  intervals.  On  each  side  of  him  stood  a  little  boy, 
"  in  whose  faces  he  looked  earnestly  from  time  to  time ; 
"  and  as  he  looked,  he  seemed  always  to  heave  a  deep 
"  sigh.  His  countenance,  pale  and  disconsolate,  indi- 
"  cated  severe  distress  of  mind.  I  had  the  most  perfect 
"  view  of  these  objects ;  but  being  impressed  with  too 
"  much  terror  and  apprehension  to  rise,  or  to  address 
<;  myself  to  the  appearances  before  me,  I  remained  for 
'•  some  time  a  silent  and  breathless  spectator,  without 
"  uttering  a  word,  or  altering  my  position.  At  length, 
"  the  man  closed  the  book,  and  then  taking  the  two 
"  children,  one  in  each  hand,  he  led  them  slowly  across 
"  the  room ;  my  eyes  eagerly  following  him,  till  the 
"  three  figures  gradually  disappeared,  or  were  lost 
"  behind  an  iron  Stove,  which  stood  at  the  farthest 
"  corner  of  the  apartment. 

"  However  deeply  and  awfully  I  was  affected  by  the 
"  sight  which  I  had  witnessed,  and  however  incapable 
"  I  was  of  explaining  it  to  my  own  satisfaction,  yet  I 
"  recovered  sufficiently  the  possession  of  my  mind,  to  get 
"  up  ;  and  having  hastily  dressed  myself,  I  left  the  house. 
"  The  sun  was  long  risen,  and  directing  my  steps  to 
"  the  Church,  I  found  that  it  was  open ;  but  the 
"  Sexton  had  quitted  it,  and  on  entering  the  Chancel, 
"  my  mind  and  imagination  were  so  strongly  impressed 
"  by  the  scene  which  had  recently  passed,  that  I  en- 
"  deavoured  to  dissipate  the  recollection,  by  considering 
"  the  objects  around  me.  In  almost  all  the  Lutheran 
"  Churches  of  the  Prussian  dominions,  it  is  an  estab- 
"  lished  usage  to  hang  up  against  the  walls  of  some 

136 


A  STRANGE  STORY 

"  part  of  the  building,  the  portraits  of  the  successive 
"  Pastors  or  Clergymen,  who  have  held  the  Living. 
"  A  number  of  these  paintings,  rudely  performed,  were 
"  suspended  in  one  of  the  Ayles.  But  I  had  no  sooner 
"  fixed  my  eyes  on  the  last  in  the  range,  which  was 
"  the  portrait  of  my  immediate  predecessor,  than  they 
"  became  ri vetted  to  the  object ;  as  I  instantly  recog- 
"  nized  the  same  face  which  I  had  beheld  in  my  bed- 
"  chamber,  though  not  clouded  by  the  same  deep  ex- 
"  pression  of  melancholy  or  distress. 

"The  Sexton  entered,  as  I  was  still  contemplating 
"  this  interesting  head,  and  I  immediately  began  a  con- 
"  versation  with  him,  on  the  subject  of  the  persons  who 
"  had  preceded  me  in  the  Living.  He  remembered 
"  several  Incumbents,  concerning  whom,  respectively,  I 
"  made  various  enquiries,  till  I  concluded  by  the  last, 
"  relative  to  whose  history  I  was  particularly  inquisitive," 
"  We  considered  him,"  said  the  Sexton,  "  as  one  of  the 
"  most  learned  and  amiable  men  who  have  ever  resided 
"  among  us.  His  charities  and  benevolence  endeared 
"  him  to  all  his  parishioners,  who  will  long  lament  his 
"  loss.  But  he  was  carried  off  in  the  middle  of  his  days, 
"  by  a  lingering  illness,  the  cause  of  which  has  given 
"  rise  to  many  unpleasant  reports  among  us,  and  which 
"  still  forms  matter  of  conjecture.  It  is  however 
"  commonly  believed,  that  he  died  of  a  broken  heart." 
My  curiosity  being  still  more  warmly  excited  by  the 
mention  of  this  circumstance,  I  eagerly  pressed  him  to  dis- 
close to  me  what  he  knew  or  had  heard,  on  the  subject. 
"  Nothing,"  answered  he,  "  is  absolutely  known,  but 
"  scandal  had  propagated  a  story  of  his  having  formed 
"  a  criminal  connection  with  a  young  woman  of  the 
"  neighbourhood,  by  whom,  it  was  even  asserted,  that 
"  he  had  two  sons.  As  a  confirmation  of  the  report, 
"  I  know  that  there  certainly  were  two  children,  who 
"  have  been  seen  at  the  parsonage ;  boys  of  about  four 
"  or  five  years  old.  But  they  suddenly  disappeared, 

137    ' 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

"  some  time  before  the  decease  of  their  supposed  father  ; 
"  though  to  what  place  they  are  sent,  or  what  is  become 
"  of  them,  we  are  wholly  ignorant.  It  is  equally  certain, 
"  that  the  surmises  and  unfavourable  opinions  formed 
"  respecting  this  mysterious  business,  which  must 
"  necessarily  have  reached  him,  precipitated,  if  they  did 
"  not  produce  the  disorder,  of  which  our  late  Pastor 
"  died  :  but  he  is  gone  to  his  account,  and  we  are  bound 
"  to  think  charitably  of  the  departed."" 

"It  is  unnecessary  to  say  with  what  emotions  I 
"  listened  to  this  relation,  which  recalled  to  my  imagina- 
"  tion,  and  seemed  to  give  proof  of  the  existence,  of  all 
"  that  I  had  seen.  Yet,  unwilling  to  suffer  my  mind  to 
"  become  enslaved  by  Phantoms  which  might  have  been 
"  the  effect  of  error  or  deception,  I  neither  communicated 
"  to  the  Sexton,  the  circumstance  which  I  had  just  wit- 
"  nessed,  nor  even  permitted  myself  to  quit  the  chamber 
"  where  it  had  taken  place.  I  continued  to  lodge  there, 
"  without  ever  again  witnessing  any  similar  appearance  ; 
"  and  the  recollection  itself  insensibly  began  to  wear 
"  away,  as  the  Autumn  advanced.  When  the  approach 
"  of  Winter  rendered  it  necessary  to  light  fires  through 
"  the  house,  I  ordered  the  iron  Stove  that  stood  in  the 
"  room,  and  behind  which  the  figure  which  I  had  beheld, 
"  together  with  the  two  boys,  seemed  to  disappear,  to 
"  be  heated  for  the  purpose  of  warming  the  apartment. 
"  Some  difficulty  was  experienced  in  making  the  attempt, 
"  the  Stove  not  only  smoking  intolerably,  but,  emit- 
"  ting  a  most  offensive  smell.  Having,  therefore,  sent 
"  for  a  blacksmith  to  inspect  and  repair  it,  he  discovered 
"  in  the  inside,  at  the  farthest  extremity,  the  bones  of 
"  two  small  human  bodies,  corresponding  perfectly  in 
"  size,  as  well  as  in  other  respects,  with  the  description 
"  given  me  by  the  Sexton,  of  the  two  boys  who  had  been 
"  seen  at  the  parsonage.  This  last  circumstance  com- 
"  pleted  my  astonishment,  and  appeared  to  confer  a  sort 
"  of  reality  on  an  appearance,  which  might  otherwise  have 

138 


SIR  WILLIAM  HAMILTON 

"  been  considered  as  a  delusion  of  the  senses.  I  resigned 
"  the  Living,  quitted  the  place,  and  returned  to  Konigs- 
"  berg ;  but  it  has  produced  upon  my  mind  the  deepest 
"  impression,  and  has,  in  its  effects,  given  rise  to  that 
"  uncertainty  and  contradiction  of  sentiment  which  you 
"  remarked  in  my  late  discourse."  Such  was  Count 
Felkesheim's  story,  which,  from  its  singularity,  appeared 
to  me  deserving  of  commemoration,  in  whatever  con- 
tempt we  may  hold  similar  anecdotes. 

One  of  the  most  interesting  portions  of  my  life,  was 
the  time  that  I  passed  at  Naples,  in  the  summer  of  1779. 
Sir  William  Hamilton,  His  Majesty's  Minister,  consti- 
tuted in  himself  the  greatest  source  of  entertainment, 
no  less  than  of  instruction,  which  that  Capital  then 
afforded  to  strangers.  He  honored  me  with  his  friend- 
ship, which  he  continued  to  the  end  of  his  life.  In  his 
person,  tho"1  tall  and  meagre,  with  a  dark  complexion,  a 
very  aquiline  nose,  and  a  figure  which  always  reminded 
me  of  Rolando  in  "  Gil  Bias ;"  he  had  nevertheless  such 
an  air  of  intelligence,  blended  with  distinction  in  his 
countenance,  as  powerfully  attracted  and  conciliated 
every  beholder.  His  mother,  Lady  Archibald  Hamil- 
ton, enjoyed,  as  is  well  known,  a  very  distinguished 
place  in  the  favour  of  Frederic,  late  Prince  of  Wales ; 
and  Sir  William  himself  was  brought  up  from  early  life, 
with  His  present  Majesty,  to  whom  he  became,  after  his 
accession  to  the  Crown,  an  Equerry.  At  a  very  early 
period  he  entered  into  the  army,  and  was  at  the  battle 
of  Fontenoy,  as  well  as,  I  think,  at  that  of  La  Feldt.  I 
wish  that  it  were  possible  to  relate  with  delicacy,  an 
Anecdote  that  he  recounted  to  me,  of  the  former 
action.  "  We  were  exposed,"  said  he,  "  on  that 
"  occasion,  as  is  well  known,  to  a  very  severe  and 
"  murderous  fire  of  artillery,  for  a  long  time,  without 
"  the  power  of  moving :  so  peremptory  were  the  orders 
"  issued,  that  we  should  remain  on  the  ground  where  we 
"  were  stationed.  The  cannon  balls,  from  time  to  time, 

139 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

"  swept  away  whole  Files,  and  produced  sensations  by 
"  no  means  agreeable,  even  among  the  firmest  persons 
"  present.  I  had  then  an  opportunity  of  seeing  exempli- 
"  fied,  the  physical  effects  of  fear  on  the  human  body. 
"  Many  of  the  British  Grenadiers,  though  capable  of 
"  actively  facing  death  in  any  shape,  and  ardently 
"  desirous  to  march  against  the  enemy,  yet  experienced, 
"  internally  and  involuntarily,  the  most  violent  pains. 
"  Unable  to  support  them,  pressed  by  an  irresistible 
"  necessity,  and  compelled  to  remain  fixed  in  the  same 
"  place,  several  of  them  se  detroussoient,  presentoient  le 
"  derriere  aux  canons  de  Tennemi,  $  firent  feu ,-  thus  en- 
"  deavouring  to  exhibit  a  proof  of  their  contempt  for 
"  the  very  danger,  of  which  they  felt  within  themselves 
"  the  strongest  sensations." 

The  versatility  of  Sir  William  Hamilton's  character, 
constituted  one  of  the  most  interesting  features  of 
his  composition.  Endowed  with  a  superior  understand- 
ing, a  philosophic  mind,  and  a  strong  inclination  to  the 
study  of  many  branches  of  science,  or  of  polite  letters, 
which,  as  is  well  known,  he  cultivated  with  distinguished 
success ;  he  was  equally  keen  as  a  sportsman,  in  all  the 
exercises  of  the  field.  After  being  actively  occupied  in 
studying  the  Phenomena  of  Vesuvius,  like  the  Elder 
Pliny ;  or  in  exploring  the  antiquities  of  Pompaeia,  and 
of  Stabia,  with  as  much  enthusiasm  as  Pausanias  did 
those  of  antient  Greece ;  he  would  pass  whole  days,  and 
almost  weeks,  with  the  King  of  Naples,  either  hunting 
or  shooting  in  the  royal  woods ;  or  more  laboriously 
engaged  in  an  open  boat,  exposed  to  the  rays  of  a  burn- 
ing sun,  harpooning  fish  in  the  bay  of  Castellamare. 
When  beyond  seventy  years  of  age,  he  preserved  un- 
diminished  his  love  of  these  sports,  particularly  of 
fishing,  which  he  followed  with  great  ardour;  thus 
mingling  pursuits  or  passions  of  the  mind  and  of  the 
body,  rarely  united  in  the  same  man.  I  have  seen  him, 
not  more  than  two  years  before  his  decease,  perform  the 

140 


THE  "TARENTELLA" 

"  Tarentella,"  an  Apulian  Dance,  which  as  it  is  un- 
doubtedly a  copy  of  the  Bacchant  amusements  of  Anti- 
quity, demanded  no  slender  portion  of  animal  strength 
and  spirits.  The  occasion  was  so  remarkable,  that  I  am 
induced  to  relate  the  particulars.  Intelligence  of  the 
glorious  victory  obtained  by  the  English  Fleet  under 
Lord  Nelson,  before  Copenhagen,  arrived  in  London,  on 
Wednesday,  the  15th  of  April,  1801 .  Sir  William  Hamil- 
ton then  resided  in  Piccadilly.  About  ten  o'clock,  that 
evening,  I  went  to  his  house,  with  Sir  John  Macpherson. 
We  found  assembled  there,  the  Dukes  of  Gordon  and 
Queensberry,  Lord  William  Gordon,  Monsieur  de 
Calonne,  Mr.  Charles  Greville,  (Sir  William's  nephew,) 
the  Duke  de  Noia,  who  was  a  Neapolitan  nobleman,  Mr. 
Kemble,  the  celebrated  Comedian,  and  his  wife,  the 
Reverend  Mr.  Nelson,  now  Earl  of  that  name,  with  some 
other  persons.  Lady  Hamilton,  inspired  by  the  recent 
success  of  Lord  Nelson  against  the  Danes,  of  which 
victory  he  had  transmitted  her,  with  his  remaining 
hand,  all  the  particulars  as  they  occurred,  from  the  1st, 
up  to  the  8th  of  April,  the  day  when  the  dispatches 
came  away ;  after  playing  on  the  Harpsichord,  and 
accompanying  it  with  her  voice,  undertook  to  dance  the 
"  Tarentella." 

Sir  William  began  it  with  her,  and  maintained  the 
conflict,  for  such  it  might  well  be  esteemed,  for  some 
minutes.  When  unable  longer  to  continue  it,  the  Duke 
de  Noia  succeeded  to  his  place ;  but  he,  too,  though 
near  forty  years  younger  than  Sir  William,  soon  gave 
in.  Lady  Hamilton  then  sent  for  her  own  maid 
servant ;  who  being  likewise  exhausted,  after  a  short 
time,  another  female  attendant,  a  Copt,  perfectly  black, 
whom  Lord  Nelson  had  presented  her,  on  his  return  from 
Egypt,  relieved  her  companion.  It  would  be  difficult 
to  convey  0ny  adequate  idea  of  this  Dance ;  but  the 
Fandango  and  Segiwdilla  of  the  Spaniards  present  an 
image  of  it.  We  must  recollect  that  the  two  performers 

141 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

are  supposed  to  be  a  Satyr  and  a  Nymph ;  or,  rather,  a 
Fawn  and  a  Bacchant.  It  was  certainly  not  of  a  nature 
to  be  performed,  except  before  a  select  company ;  as  the 
screams,  attitudes,  starts,  and  embraces,  with  which  it 
was  intermingled,  gave  it  a  peculiar  character.  I  only 
mentioned  it,  in  order  to  shew  Sir  William  Hamilton's 
activity  and  gaiety  at  that  advanced  period  of  life. 
Though  a  finished  Courtier,  he  preserved  such  an  in- 
dependance  of  manner,  without  any  mixture  of  servility 
or  adulation,  as  seemed  eminently  to  qualify  him  for 
the  diplomatic  profession.  His  conversation  offered  a 
rich  diversity  of  anecdote.  With  these  qualifications, 
it  cannot  excite  wonder  that  he  formed  the  delight  and 
ornament  of  the  Court  of  Naples.  No  foreign  Minister, 
not  even  the  family  embassadors  of  France  and  Spain 
resident  there,  enjoyed  in  so  eminent  a  degree  the 
favor  or  affection  of  His  Sicilian  Majesty.  Nor  was 
the  attachment  of  that  Prince  to  Sir  William,  merely 
limited  to  hunting,  or  fishing  parties.  He  gave  the 
English  Envoy  many  solid  proofs  of  sincere  regard ;  a 
regard  that  extended  to  the  British  crown  and  nation. 
One  striking  instance  of  this  partiality  took  place  in 
June,  1779,  while  I  was  at  Naples.  The  King  of  Spain, 
Charles  the  Third,  having  written  confidentially  to  his 
son  Ferdinand,  that  he  should  probably  be  induced 
soon  to  take  part  with  Louis  the  Sixteenth,  by  entering 
into  a  war  with  Great  Britain,  as  he  effectively  did 
immediately  afterwards ;  the  King  of  Naples,  though 
enjoined  by  his  father  to  secrecy,  communicated  the 
letter  itself  to  Sir  William  Hamilton.  He  even  accom- 
panied the  disclosure,  with  the  assurance  of  his  deep 
regret  at  such  a  line  of  policy,  and  his  firm  determina- 
tion never  to  enter  into  the  combination  against 
England,  though  himself  a  Prince  of  the  House  of 
Bourbon,  and  included  in  "the  Family  Compact"  by 
name.  Sir  William  transmitted  the  King's  communica- 
tion, as  well  as  his  assurance  on  the  point,  without 

142 


KING  AND  QUEEN  OF  NAPLES 

delay,  to  Lord  North,  then  first  Minister.  I  received 
this  anecdote  from  himself  at  Naples. 

It  was  in  Sir  William's,  and  the  first  Lady  Hamilton's 
company,  that  I  learned  a  number  of  curious,  as  well  as 
authentic  particulars  relative  to  the  King  and  Queen  of 
Naples.  Ferdinand  the  Fourth  was  then  in  the  twenty- 
ninth  year  of  his  age ;  tall,  muscular,  and  active  in  his 
frame,  capable  of  immense  fatigue,  and  apparently 
formed  for  long  life.  His  features  were  coarse  and 
harsh,  his  nose  immoderately  long,  like  that  of  his 
father  and  brother,  Charles  the  Third,  and  Charles 
the  Fourth,  Kings  of  Spain :  but,  nevertheless,  though 
the  component  parts  of  his  face  might  separately  be 
esteemed  ugly,  the  general  expression  of  his  countenance 
had  in  it  something  intelligent,  and  even  agreeable. 
There  was  an  unpolished  simplicity,  or  rather  a  rude 
nature,  in  his  manner,  attitudes,  deportment,  and 
conversation,  which  pleased  for  a  double  reason ;  on 
account  of  its  own  intrinsic  claim  to  be  liked,  and  as 
being  rarely  found  on  a  throne,  where  we  naturally 
expect  disguise,  artifice,  and  habits  of  concealment.  If 
he  conversed  little  with  strangers,  he  seemed  at  least, 
when  he  talked,  always  to  say  what  he  thought ;  and  he 
betrayed  no  defect  of  natural  understanding,  though  he 
was  altogether  destitute  of  that  elegance  and  art,  which 
frequently  veil  the  want  of  information.  He  always 
reminded  me  of  a  rustic,  elevated  by  fortune  or  accident, 
to  a  Crown :  but  it  was  an  amiable,  honest,  sensible, 
well  intentioned  rustic,  not  altogether  unworthy  of  such 
an  elevation. 

The  Queen  of  Naples,  who  was  not  quite  twenty- 
seven  years  old  at  this  time,  seemed  much  better  fitted 
to  represent  the  Majesty  of  the  Throne,  and  to  do  the 
honors  of  a  Court.  Though  neither  possessing  beauty 
of  face,  nor  loveliness  of  person,  yet  was  she  not 
absolutely  deficient  in  either ;  and  if  her  figure  might 
be  esteemed  too  large,  still  it  wanted  neither  grace, 

143 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

dignity,  nor  even  attractions.  She  is  the  only  Qu< 
whom  I  ever  saw  weep  in  public,  before  a  croud  of  both 
sexes,  assembled  in  her  own  Palace,  on  a  Gala  Day 
The  Festival  on  which  I  was  presented  to  her,  happened 
to  be  the  anniversary  of  the  loss  of  her  eldest  son,  who 
expired  exactly  a  year  before,  in  1778.  He  was  a  very 
fine  boy,  of  promising  expectations,  to  whom  his 
mother  was  passionately  attached.  The  ignorance  of 
the  Neapolitan  Physicians,  as  it  was  believed,  had 
caused  his  death :  for,  being  seized  with  a  violent  sick- 
ness and  pain  in  his  stomach,  from  which,  an  Emetick, 
promptly  administered,  might  probably  have  relieved 
him,  they  had  the  imprudence  to  bleed  him,  and  thereby 
brought  on  fatal  convulsions.  Such  was  the  Queen's 
distress,  at  the  recollection  of  the  event  which  had  taken 
place  on  this  painful  anniversary,  that  she  was  unable  to 
repress  her  emotions.  In  the  Presence  Chamber  of  the 
Palace  at  Naples,  she  stood  under  a  Canopy,  her  right 
hand  held  out  to  the  Nobility  and  Courtiers,  as  they 
approached  to  kiss  it;  holding  in  her  left,  a  handker- 
chief with  which  she  perpetually  wiped  her  eyes,  that 
were  suffused  in  tears.  It  was  difficult  not  to  be 
favorably  impressed  towards  a  Princess,  capable  of 
giving  such  an  involuntary  testimony  of  her  maternal 
tenderness,  in  a  place  and  situation,  where  it  was  im- 
possible to  suspect  her  of  artifice  or  affectation. 

Having  drawn  this  imperfect  outline  of  the  King  and 
Queen  of  Naples,  from  my  own  personal  observations,  I 
shall  enumerate  some  of  the  particulars  respecting  them, 
which  I  collected  in  the  course  of  conversation  from  Sir 
William  or  Lady  Hamilton.  I  mean,  his  first  wife,  woh 
was  a  most  accomplished  and  superior  woman. 

"No  European  Sovereign,  without  exception,"  said 
Sir  William,  "has  been  so  ill  educated  as  the  King 
"  of  Naples.  He  is  not  even  master  of  any  language, 
"  except  Italian,  without  making  a  painful  effort ;  and 
"  his  ordinary  Italian  is  a  Neapolitan  dialect,  such  as 

144 


HAMILTON'S  REMINISCENCES 

"  the  lowest  of  his  subjects,  the  Lazaroni,  speak  in  their 
"  intercourse  with  each  other.  It  is  true  that  he  under- 
"  stands  French,  and  converses  in  it  when  indispensable ; 
"  but  he  rarely  reads  any  French  author,  and  still  more 
"  rarely  attempts  to  write  in  that  language.  All  the 
"  correspondence  that  takes  place  between  him  and  his 
"  Father,  the  King  of  Spain,  is  carried  on  in  the 
"  common  Neapolitan  Jargon.  They  write  very  fre- 
"  quently  and  largely  to  each  other ;  but  seldom  does 
"  this  intercourse  embrace  political  subjects :  their 
"  letters,  of  which  I  have  seen  numbers,  being  filled 
u  with  accounts  of  the  quantity  and  variety  of  the 
"  game  respectively  killed  by  them,  in  which  the  great 
"  ambition  of  each  Prince,  is  to  exceed  the  other. 
"  Ferdinand,  indeed,  who  scarcely  ever  reads,  considers 
"  as  the  greatest  of  misfortunes,  a  rainy  day,  when  the 
"  weather  proves  too  bad  for  him  to  go  out  to  the 
"  chace.  On  such  occasions,  recourse  is  had  to  every 
"  expedient  by  which  time  may  be  killed,  in  order  to 
"  dissipate  His  Majesty's  Ennui,  even  to  the  most 
"  puerile  and  childish  pastimes.  The  King's  education 
"  was  systematically  neglected :  for  Charles  the  Third, 
"  alarmed  at  the  imbecility  of  his  eldest  son,  Philip, 
"  Duke  of  Calabria,  who,  on  account  of  his  recognized 
"  debility  of  understanding,  was  wholly  set  aside  from  the 
"  right  of  succession,  strictly  ordered,  at  his  departure 
"  for  Spain,  in  1759,  that  this,  his  third  son,  should  not 
"  be  compelled  to  apply  to  any  severe  studies,  or  be 
"  made  to  exert  any  close  application  of  mind. 

"I  have  frequently  seen  the  unfortunate  Duke  of 
"  Calabria,  who  has  only  been  dead  a  few  years,  and 
"  who  was  by  birth  heir  to  the  Spanish  Monarchy. 
"  He  attained  to  manhood,  and  was  treated  with  certain 
"  distinctions,  having  Chamberlains  placed  about  him 
"  in  constant  attendance,  who  watched  him  with  unre- 
"  mitting  attention ;  as  otherwise  he  would  have  com- 
"  mitted  a  thousand  excesses.  Care  was  particularly 

145  10 


WRAXALI/S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

"  taken  to  keep  him  from  having  any  connexion  with 
"  the  other  sex,  for  which  he  manifested  the  strongest 
"  propensity ;  but  it  became  at  last  impossible  to 
"  prevent  him  altogether  from  attempting  to  eman- 
"  cipate  himself  in  this  respect.  He  has  many  times 
"  eluded  the  vigilance  of  his  keepers,  and  on  seeing 
"  ladies  pass  through  the  apartments  of  the  palace, 
"  would  attack  them  with  the  same  impetuosity  as  Pan, 
"  or  the  Satyrs  are  described  by  Ovid,  when  pursuing 
"  the  Nymphs ;  and  with  the  same  intentions.  More 
"  than  one  Lady  of  the  Court  has  been  critically  rescued 
"  from  his  embraces.  On  particular  days  of  the  year, 
"  he  was  allowed  to  hold  a  sort  of  Court  or  Levee,  when 
"  the  foreign  Ministers  repaired  to  his  apartments,  to 
"  pay  their  compliments  to  him :  but  his  greatest 
"  amusement  consisted  in  having  his  hand  held  up  by 
"  his  attendants,  while  gloves  were  put  upon  it,  one 
"  larger  than  another,  to  the  number  of  fifteen  or  sixteen. 
"  His  death  was  justly  considered  as  a  fortunate  event, 
"  under  such  circumstances  of  incurable  imbecility. 

"  Before  the  present  King  fully  attained  his  seven- 
"  teenth  year,  the  Marquis  Tanucci,  then  Prime 
"  Minister,  by  directions  sent  from  the  Court  of  Madrid, 
"  provided  him  a  wife.  The  Archduchess  Josepha,  one 
"  of  the  daughters  of  the  Empress  Maria  Theresa,  being 
"  selected  for  Queen  of  Naples ;  and  being  represented 
"  to  young  Ferdinand,  as  a  Princess  equally  amiable  in 
"  her  mind,  as  she  was  agreeable  in  her  person ;  he 
"  expected  her  arrival  with  great  pleasure,  mingled  even 
"  with  some  impatience.  So  much  more  severely  was  it 
"  natural  that  he  should  feel  the  melancholy  intelli- 
"  gence,  when  it  arrived  from  Vienna,  that  she  was 
"  dead  of  the  small -pox.  In  fact,  he  manifested  as 
"  much  concern  at  the  event,  as  could  perhaps  be 
"  expected  in  a  Prince  of  his  disposition,  and  at  his 
"  time  of  life,  for  the  death  of  a  person  whom  he  had 
"  never  seen.  But,  a  circumstance  which  greatly  aug- 

146 


CONSOLATIONS  OF  A  MOURNER 

"  merited  his  chagrin  on  the  occasion  was,  it's  being 
"  considered  indispensable  for  him  not  to  take  his  usual 
"  diversion  of  hunting  or  fishing,  on  the  day  that  the 
"  account  reached  Naples.  Ferdinand  reluctantly  sub- 
"  mitted  to  such  a  painful  and  unusual  renunciation : 
"  but,  having  consented  to  it  from  a  sense  of  decorum, 
"  he  immediately  set  about  endeavouring  to  amuse 
"  himself  within  doors,  in  the  best  manner  that  cir- 
"  cumstances  would  admit ;  an  attempt  in  which  he 
"  was  aided  by  the  Noblemen  in  waiting  about  his 
"  person.  They  began  therefore  with  Billiards,  a  game 
"  which  His  Majesty  likes,  and  at  which  he  plays  with 
"  skill.  When  they  had  continued  it  for  some  time, 
"  leap-frog  was  tried,  to  which  succeeded  various  other 
"  feats  of  agility  or  gambols.  At  length,  one  of  the 
"  gentlemen,  more  ingenious  than  the  others,  proposed 
"  to  celebrate  the  funeral  of  the  deceased  Arch-Duchess. 
"  The  idea,  far  from  shocking  the  King,  appeared  to  him, 
"  and  to  the  whole  company,  as  most  entertaining ;  and 
"  no  reflexions,  either  on  the  indecorum,  or  want  of 
"  apparent  humanity  in  the  proceeding,  interposed  to 
"  prevent  its  immediate  realization.  Having  selected 
"  one  of  the  Chamberlains,  as  proper,  from  his  youth  and 
"  feminine  appearance,  to  represent  the  Princess,  they 
"  habited  him  in  a  manner  suitable  to  the  mournful 
"  occasion ;  laid  him  out  on  an  open  Bier,  according 
"  to  the  Neapolitan  custom  at  interments ;  and  in 
"  order  to  render  the  ceremony  more  appropriate,  as 
"  well  as  more  accurately  correct,  they  marked  his  face 
"  and  hands  with  Chocolate  drops,  which  were  designed 
"  to  imitate  the  pustules  of  the  small-pox.  All  the 
"  Apparatus  being  ready,  the  funeral  procession  began, 
"  and  proceeded  through  the  principal  Apartments  of 
"  the  palace  at  Portici,  Ferdinand  officiating  as  Chief 
"  Mourner.  Having  heard  of  the  Arch  -  Duchess's 
"  decease,  I  had  gone  thither  on  that  day,  in  order  to 
"  make  my  condolence  privately  to  His  Majesty  on 

147 


WRAXALI/S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

"  the  misfortune ;  and  entering  at  the  time,  I  became 
"  an  eye-witness  of  this  extraordinary  scene,  which,  in 
"  any  other  country  of  Europe,  would  be  considered  as 
"  incredible,  and  would  not  obtain  belief. 

"  The  Arch-Duchess  Caroline  being  substituted  in 
"  place  of  her  sister,  and  being  soon  afterwards  con- 
"  ducted  from  Vienna  to  Naples,  the  King  advanced  in 
"  person,  as  far  as  the  '  Portella,1  where  the  Neapolitan 
"  and  Papal  territories  divide,  in  order  to  receive  his 
"  new  bride.  She  was  then  not  sixteen  years  old,  and 
"  though  she  could  not  by  any  means  be  esteemed 
"  handsome,  yet  she  possessed  many  charms.  Ferdi- 
"  nand  manifested  on  his  part,  neither  ardor  nor 
"  indifference  for  the  Queen.  On  the  morning  after 
"  his  nuptials,  which  took  place  in  the  beginning  of 
"  May,  1768,  when  the  weather  was  very  warm,  he  rose 
"  at  an  early  hour,  and  went  out,  as  usual  to  the  chace, 
"  leaving  his  young  wife  in  bed.  Those  Courtiers  who 
"  accompanied  him,  having  inquired  of  His  Majesty 
"  how  he  liked  her ;  '  Dorme  com  un  amazzata,  replied 
"  he,  '  et  suda  com  un  PorcoS  Such  an  answer  would 
"  be  esteemed,  any  where  except  at  Naples,  most 
"  indecorous ;  but  here  we  are  familiarized  to  far 
"  greater  violations  of  propriety  and  decency.  Those 
"  acts  and  functions  which  are  never  mentioned  in 
"  England,  and  which  are  there  studiously  concealed, 
"  even  by  the  vulgar,  here  are  openly  performed. 
"  When  the  King  has  made  a  hearty  meal,  and  feels  an 
"  inclination  to  retire,  he  commonly  communicates  that 
"  intention  to  the  Noblemen  around  him  in  waiting, 
'*•  and  selects  the  favoured  individuals,  whom,  as  a  mark 
"  of  predilection,  he  chuses  shall  attend  him.  '  Sono  ben 
"  'pransatoj  says  he,  laying  his  hand  on  his  belly, 
"  '  Adesso  bisogna  un  buona  panchiata?  The  persons 
"  thus  preferred,  then  accompany  His  Majesty,  stand 
"  respectfully  round  him,  and  amuse  him  by  their 
"  conversation,  during  the  performance." 

148 


ITALIAN  MANNERS 

However  strong  this  fact  may  appear,  and  however 
repugnant  to  our  ideas  of  decency;  it  has  been  for 
successive  centuries,  perfectly  consonant  to  the 
manners  of  the  Italians  in  general,  and  scarcely  less 
so  to  those  of  the  French.  D\Aubigne,  a  grave  writer, 
in  the  "Memoirs  of  his  own  Life,"  does  not  hesitate 
to  relate  in  the  most  circumstantial  manner,  the  narrow 
escape  which  Henry  the  Fourth,  his  master,  had  of 
being  knocked  on  the  head,  while  engaged  in  this 
necessary  function.  Nay,  D^Aubigne  composed  a 
"  Quatrain "  on  the  adventure,  which  he  has  trans- 
mitted to  posterity.  The  story  is  so  naturally  related, 
and  is  so  characteristic  of  the  nation,  that  I  can't 
resist  giving  it  in  the  words  of  the  author,  which  I  shall 
not  however  venture  to  translate.  Henry,  who  was 
then  only  King  of  Navarre,  having  effected  his  escape 
from  Paris,  in  1575,  on  which  occasion  D'Aubigne 
accompanied  him ;  they  passed  the  River  Seine  at 
Poissy,  and  soon  afterwards  stopped  to  refresh  them- 
selves in  a  village.  Here,  says  D^Aubigne,  the  King 
"  etant  allefaire  ses  affaires  dans  un  tet  a  cochons,  une 
"  vieille  qui  le  surprit  en  cet  etat,  lui  auroit  f endue  la 
"  tete  par  derriere^  d'un  coup  de  Serpe,  sans  moi  qui 
"  parai  le  coup."  It  is  clear  from  this  circumstance, 
that  D'Aubigne  must  have  been  close  to  his  royal 
master  at  the  time.  Then  follows  the  ludicrous  Epitaph 
which  he  made  for  the  occasion,  on  a  supposition  that 
the  old  woman  had  killed  the  King. 

"  Cy  git  un  Roi,  grand  par  merveille, 
Qui  mourut  comme  Dieu  permet, 
D'un  coup  de  serpe  d'un  vieille, 
Ainsi  qu'il  chioit  dans  un  tet." 

His  predecessor,  Henry  the  Third,  it  is  well  known,  was 
stabbed  in  the  belly,  of  which  wound  he  died,  in  1589, 
while  sitting  on  the  Chawe  percee ;  in  which  indecorous 

149 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

situation  he  did  not  scruple  to  give  audience  to  Clement, 
the  regicide  Monk,  who  assassinated  him.  Marshal 
Suwarrow,  in  our  own  time,  received  his  Aids  du  Camp 
and  his  General  Officers,  precisely  in  a  similar  manner. 
Madame  de  Maintenon,  as  the  Duke  de  St.  Simon 
informs  us,  thought  those  moments  so  precious,  that  she 
commonly  accompanied  Louis  the  Fourteenth  to  the 
"  Garderobe."  So  did  Louvois,  when  Minister  of  State. 
The  Duke  de  Vendome,  while  commanding  the  Armies 
of  France  in  Spain  and  Italy,  at  the  commencement  of 
the  last  Century,  was  accustomed  to  receive  the  greatest 
personages,  on  public  business,  in  the  same  situation. 
We  have  Cardinal  Alberoni's  authority  for  this  fact. 
If  we  read  the  account  written  by  Du  Bois,  of  the  last 
illness  of  Louis  the  Thirteenth,  we  may  there  see  what 
humiliating  functions  Anne  of  Austria  performed  for 
that  Prince  in  the  course  of  his  malady ;  over  which,  an 
English  writer,  more  fastidious,  would  have  drawn  a 
veil.  Mademoiselle  de  Montpensier,  and  the  Palatine 
Duchess  of  Orleans,  though  women  of  the  highest  birth 
and  rank,  as  well  as  of  unimpeached  conduct,  conceal 
nothing  on  these  points,  in  their  writings.  The  former, 
speaking  of  the  Duchess  of  Orleans,  her  step-mother, 
second  wife  of  Gaston,  brother  of  Louis  the  Thirteenth, 
says,  "  She  had  contracted  a  singular  habit  of  always 
"  running  into  another  room,  pour  se  placer  sur  la 
"  Chaise  percee^  when  dinner  was  announced.  As  she 
"  never  failed  in  this  particular,  the  Grand  Maitre,  or 
"  Ix>rd  Steward  of  Gaston's  Household,  who  performed 
"  the  ceremony  of  summoning  their  Royal  Highnesses 
"  to  table ;  observed,  smelling  to  his  Baton  of  office, 
"  that  there  must  certainly  be  either  Senna  or  Rhubarb 
"  in  its  composition,  as  it  invariably  produced  the  effect 
"  of  sending  the  Duchess  to  the  Garderobe."  I  have, 
myself,  seen  the  late  Electress  Dowager  of  Saxony, 
daughter  of  the  Emperor  Charles  the  Seventh,  at  her 
own  palace,  in  the  suburbs  of  Dresden,  rise  from  the 

150 


A  ROYAL  WRESTLER 

table  where  she  was  playing,  when  the  room  has  been 
full  of  company  of  both  sexes ;  lay  down  her  cards, 
retire  for  a  few  minutes,  during  which  time  the  game 
was  suspended,  and  then  return,  observing  to  those  near 
her,  "  JTai  pris  Medicine  wyourcFhuy"  These  circum- 
stances sufficiently  prove  that  Ferdinand,  however  gross 
his  manners  or  language  seem  to  us,  by  no  means 
shocked  the  feelings,  or  excited  the  disgust  of  his  own 
courtiers. 

"  In  all  the  exercises  or  exertions  of  the  body,  that 
"  demand  vigour  and  address,"  continued  Sir  William, 
"  the  King  of  Naples  excels.  He  might  have  contended 
"  for  the  prize  at  the  public  games  of  ancient  Greece, 
"  at  Elis,  or  at  Olympia,  with  no  ordinary  prospect  of 
"  success.  He  likes,  in  particular,  wrestling,  and  having 
"  heard  that  a  young  Irish  Gentleman  of  the  name  of 
"  Bourke,  who  visited  Naples  not  long  since,  was  an 
"  expert  Wrestler,  he  caused  it  to  be  signified,  that  he 
"  should  like  to  try  a  fall  with  that  foreigner  :  but, 
"  Bourke  had  the  good  sense  to  decline  a  contest  for 
"  the  honours  of  the  Palaestra,  with  a  crowned  head. 
"  He  dances  violently  at  the  Court  Balls ;  on  one  of 
"  which  occasions,  some  years  ago,  I  witnessed  a  scene 
"  truly  original,  as  well  as  comic.  When  his  brother- 
"  in-law,  the  Emperor  Joseph,  being  on  his  travels, 
"  arrived  here,  a  superb  Ball  was  given  in  honor  of  his 
"  visit ;  at  which  entertainment,  however,  he  declined 
"  mixing  in  the  Dance.  While  his  Imperial  Majesty 
"  was  standing  near  the  dancers,  engaged  in  conversa- 
"  tion  with  me ;  Ferdinand  having  gone  down  the  set, 
"  and  being  in  a  most  profuse  state  of  perspiration, 
"  pulled  open  his  waistcoat :  then  taking  Joseph's  hand, 
"  he  applied  it  suddenly  to  his  own  shirt  behind, 
"  exclaiming  at  the  same  time,  *  Sentlte  qui,  Fratetto 
"  'mioS  The  Emperor  instantly  withdrew  his  hand, 
"  not  without  manifesting  great  discomposure ;  and  the 
"  two  Sovereigns  remained  for  a  few  seconds,  looking  in 

151 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

"  each  other's  faces.  Surprize  was  equally  painted  in 
"  the  features  of  both ;  for,  as  the  one  had  never  before 
"  been  invited  to  try  such  an  experiment,  so  the  other 
"  had  never  found  any  individual  who  did  not  esteem 
"  himself  honored  by  the  familiarity.  I  had  no  little 
"  difficulty  to  restrain  the  muscles  of  my  countenance 
"  on  the  occasion. 

"  Joseph,  who  held  his  brother-in-law's  understand- 
"  ing  in  great  contempt,  endeavoured  to  assume  over 
"  him  the  sort  of  superiority,  arrogated  by  a  strong, 
"  over  a  weak  mind.  But  Ferdinand,  though  con- 
"  fessedly  his  inferior  in  cultivation  and  refinement,  was 
"  by  no  means  disposed  to  adopt  his  political  opinions 
"  or  ideas.  He  even  manifested,  in  various  conversa- 
"  tions,  and  on  many  occasions,  that,  defective  as  his 
"  education  had  been,  he  possessed  as  much  plain  sense, 
"  and  even  acute  discernment,  as  the  Emperor,  or  his 
"  brother  Leopold,  Grand  Duke  of  Tuscany.  Joseph 
"  did  not,  indeed,  inspire  any  very  high  admiration,  by 
"  his  deportment,  or  general  conduct,  while  he  remained 
"  at  Naples.  He  was  irritable,  and  even  irascible, 
"  where  he  should  have  shewn  good  humour,  or  com- 
"  mand  of  temper.  I  accompanied  him  to  the  summit 
"  of  Vesuvius,  and  with  concern  saw  him  break  his  cane 
"  over  the  shoulders  of  the  Guide,  Bartolomeo,  for  some 
"  slight  offence  which  he  had  given  his  Imperial 
"  Majesty. 

"  Ferdinand's  passions  are  all  swallowed  up  in  his 
"  rage  for  the  pleasures  of  the  field  ;  hunting,  shooting, 
"  and  fishing :  for,  this  last  diversion,  peculiarly  adapted 
"  to  the  climate  of  Naples,  must  be  included  in  the 
"  number.  He  thinks  no  fatigue,  and  no  privations, 
"  too  great  for  its  indulgence.  The  quantity  of  game, 
"  by  which  I  principally  mean  deer,  wild  boar  of  all 
"  ages,  and  stags  of  every  kind,  preserved  in  the  Royal 
"  woods  or  parks,  at  Astruni,  at  Caserta,  Caccia  Bella, 
"  and  other  places,  exceeds  belief.  And  the  slaughter 

152 


SANGUINARY  DIVERSION 

"  made  of  them  in  some  of  the  hunting  parties,  is 
"  equally  beyond  credibility.  I  have  frequently  seen  a 
"  heap,  composed  only  of  the  offal  or  bowels,  reaching 
"  as  high  as  my  head,  and  many  feet  in  circumference. 
"  The  King  rarely  misses  a  shot ;  but,  when  he  is  tired 
"  with  killing,  then  commences  another  operation.  He 
"  next  dissects  the  principal  pieces  of  game,  of  which  he 
"  sends  presents  to  favored  Courtiers,  or  distributes  it 
"  among  his  attendants.  In  order  to  perform  this  part 
"  of  the  diversion,  he  strips,  puts  on  a  flannel  dress, 
"  takes  the  knife  in  hand,  and,  with  inconceivable 
"  dexterity  cuts  up  the  animal.  No  carcass-butcher  in 
"  Smithfield  can  exceed  him  in  anatomical  ability  ;  but 
"  he  is  frequently  besmeared  with  blood  from  head  to 
"  foot,  before  he  has  finished,  and  exhibits  an  extra- 
"  ordinary  spectacle,  not  easily  to  be  imagined.  The 
"  Queen  herself  is  sometimes  obliged  to  be  present  at  the 
"  scene,  though  more,  as  may  be  supposed,  in  compliance 
"  with  the  King's  wish,  than  from  her  own  inclination. 
"  He  is  equally  indefatigable  on  the  water,  in  harpoon- 
"  ing  or  in  catching  fish;  particularly  the  Pesce  Spada, 
"  or  Sword-fish ;  and  he  neither  regards  heat,  nor  cold, 
"  nor  hunger,  nor  danger.  On  these  occasions,  he  is 
"  usually  or  always  attended  by  a  number  of  chosen 
"  Liparots,  natives  of  the  Lipari  islands,  who  have 
"  been  in  all  Ages  most  expert  sailors,  divers,  and 
"  fishermen. 

"  It  is  thus  that  Ferdinand  passes  the  greatest 
"  portion  of  his  time ;  while  the  Potentates  of 
"  Germany,  England,  France,  and  Spain,  are  engaged 
"  in  war.  Not  that  he  is  indifferent  to  the  felicity  of 
"  his  subjects,  or  regardless  of  the  security  and  pros- 
"  perity  of  his  dominions.  On  the  contrary,  his  heart, 
"  which  is  animated  with  the  best  emotions  towards  his 
"  people,  impels  him  to  manifest  it  by  all  his  measures : 
"  but  his  defects  of  education,  render  him  shy,  em- 
"  barrassed,  and  awkward ;  nor  have  his  Ministers  any 

153 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

"  wish  to  awaken,  or  to  invigorate,  the  faculties  of 
"  his  mind.  Neither  Tanucci,  who  governed  Naples 
"  during  his  Minority,  nor  Sambuca,  the  present  First 
"  Minister,  desire  to  see  him  assume  an  active  part  in 
"  the  administration  of  public  affairs.  The  Chevalier 
"  Acton,  who  is  at  the  head  of  the  Marine,  has,  how- 
"  ever,  begun  to  put  the  Neapolitan  Navy  in-  a  more 
"  respectable  condition,  than  it  has  been  for  several 
"  Centuries.  Already  it  affords  some  protection  to  the 
"  coasts  of  Calabria  and  of  Sicily ;  which  have  been 
"  perpetually  infested  by  the  Algerines,  Tunisians,  and 
"  other  Pirates ;  who  were  accustomed  to  land,  and  to 
"  carry  off  whole  villages  into  slavery,  precisely  as 
"  Barbarossa  did,  two  hundred  years  ago.  Such 
"  calamities  are  even  now  by  no  means  unusual.  It 
"  is  a  fact,  that  I  narrowly  escaped  myself,  some  time 
"  since,  in  one  of  my  maritime  excursions  round  the 
"  Southern  Provinces  of  the  Kingdom,  being  surprized 
"  in  a  Sparonara,  while  lying  close  under  Cape  Sparti- 
"  vento.  Lady  Hamilton  was  of  the  party,  and  those 
"  Barbarians  would  not  have  respected  my  official 
"  character ;  nor  still  less  would  they  have  regarded 
"  the  reclamations  of  this  Government. 

"  The  power  of  the  Neapolitan  Kings  is  moreover 
"  fettered  by  many  impediments  which  would  be  very 
"  difficult  to  surmount,  even  for  a  Prince  of  the  greatest 
"  talents,  or  of  the  most  vigorous  character.  In  Apulia, 
"  as  well  as  in  Calabria  and  Sicily,  the  great  feudal 
"  Barons  still  retain  privileges,  that  render  them  almost 
"  independent  of  the  Crown  ;  and  which  they  consider 
"  as  imprescriptible,  having  constituted  their  birth- 
"  right  for  Ages,  under  the  various  Dynasties  that 
"  have  reigned  over  this  beautiful  country.  The 
u  Church  enjoys  revenues  and  immunities,  not  less 
"  incompatible  in  many  respects,  with  civil  order  and 
"  obedience.  But,  Ferdinand  is  greatly  beloved  by  his 
"  people,  who  know,  and  who  do  justice,  to  his  good 

154 


A  LICENTIOUS  CAPITAL 

"  intentions.  He  is  even  far  more  popular  than  the 
"  Queen.  That  Princess,  who  possesses  an  active  mind, 
"  and  very  considerable  parts,  as  well  as  ambition  and 
"  love  of  power,  has  assumed  a  share  in  the  Administra- 
"  tion,  for  which  she  is  by  no  means  unqualified :  yet 
"  is  she  less  esteemed  than  her  husband ;  who,  if  he 
"  is  not  ardently  attached  to  her  as  a  wife,  treats  her 
"  at  least  with  great  consideration,  kindness,  and  con- 
"  fidence.  They  live  together  in  conjugal  union,  though 
"  Her  Majesty  is  not  exempt  from  the  frailties  and 
"  weaknesses  of  her  sex.  Indeed,  the  air,  manners,  and 
"  society  of  this  Capital,  are  all  very  inimical  to  female 
"  virtue.  From  the  time  of  the  first  Jane,  Queen  of 
"  Naples,  so  famous  in  the  Annals  of  gallantry,  down 
"  to  the  present  day,  these  countries  have  exhibited 
"  scenes  of  dissolute  pleasure,  or  rather,  of  unrestrained 
"  licentiousness.  They  will  probably  ever  so  remain. 
"  Yet,"  concluded  Sir  William,  "  if  I  were  compelled  to 
"  be  a  King,  I  would  choose  Naples  for  my  Kingdom. 
"  Here,  a  Crown  has  fewer  thorns,  than  in  any  other 
"  country.  His  very  want  of  political  power,  ensures 
"  his  repose ;  and  the  storms  which  desolate  Europe, 
"  pass  over  his  head.  Placed  at  the  extremity  of  Italy, 
"  he  is  removed  out  of  the  way  of  contest  and  hostility. 
"  A  delicious  climate,  shores,  to  which  the  Romans 
"  retired  when  masters  of  the  world,  in  order  to  enjoy 
"  a  luxury  unattainable  elsewhere,  and  which  are  still 
"  covered  with  the  remains  of  Roman  splendor,  or 
"  Grecian  magnificence ;  all  the  productions  of  the 
"  Levant,  which  are  to  be  found  here,  blended  with 
"  those  of  the  Mediterranean ;  a  splendid  Capital, 
"  palaces,  wood,  game,  every  thing  seems  assembled 
"  in  this  enchanting  Bay,  that  can  conduce  to  human 
"  enjoyment.  Such  is  the  favored  position,  and  the 
"  enviable  lot  of  Ferdinand  the  Fourth."  Such,  indeed, 
as  here  described,  it  might  be  considered  without  ex- 
aggeration, in  1779;  though  during  the  awful  con- 

155 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

vulsions  which  have  shaken  Europe  since  that  period, 
produced  bj  the  French  Revolution,  his  situation  has 
undergone  a  material  change. 

The  impunity  with  which  the  great  Nobility  perpe- 
trated the  most  atrocious  crimes,  and  the  facility  that 
they  found  in  evading  enquiry,  or  in  eluding  justice, 
constituted  at  that  time,  one  of  the  worst  features  of 
the  Neapolitan  Administration.  Lady  Hamilton,  who 
had  been  several  years  resident  at  Naples,  where  she 
died  not  long  afterwards,  related  to  me  various  instances 
illustrative  of  this  fact.  "  Some  time  ago,"  said  she, 
"  a  Sicilian  lady  of  high  rank,  was  by  order  of  the 
"  Court,  brought  prisoner  here,  from  that  Island.  She 
"  had  committed  so  many  assassinations  or  murders, 
"  that  her  own  relations  having  denounced  her,  called 
"  on  the  Government  to  arrest  the  further  course  of  her 
"  crimes.  It  was  believed  that  she  had  dispatched  ten 
"  or  eleven  persons,  by  the  dagger,  or  by  poison ;  par- 
"  ticularly  by  that  species  of  poison,  denominated 
"  '  Aqiia  tophanaS  I  had  the  curiosity  to  visit  her, 
"  during  her  confinement.  She  received  me  in  her  bed, 
"  sat  up,  conversed  with  great  cheerfulness,  offered  me 
u  Chocolate  and  other  refreshments,  and  seemed  to  be 
"  perfectly  at  her  ease.  In  her  person  she  was  delicate, 
"  feminine,  and  agreeable,  her  manners  polite  and 
"  gentle.  Her  age  did  not  exceed  three  or  four  and 
"  twenty.  From  her  deportment,  one  could  not  have 
"  suspected  her  to  be  capable  of  such  atrocities. 
"  Though  her  guilt  was  unquestionable,  she  was  not 
"  put  to  death.  Confinement  for  life,  in  a  Convent  of 
"  a  severe  Order,  together  with  certain  acts  of  religious 
"  mortification  or  penance,  which  they  are  compelled 
"  to  undergo  ;  these  constitute  the  punishments  usually 
"  inflicted  here,  -on  culprits  of  high  birth." 

The  vicinity  of  the  northern  provinces  of  the  kingdom 
of  Naples,  to  the  Papal  territories,  and  the  ease  with 
which  malefactors  of  both  countries,  respectively  gained 

156 


MURDER  BY  PROXY 

an  Asylum,  by  passing  the  frontiers,  opened  another 
door  to  the  commission  of  the  most  flagitious  acts. 
Conversing  one  day,  at  Portici,  on  this  subject,  with 
Lady  Hamilton,  she  related  to  me  the  following  story, 
which  I  shall  endeavour  to  give  in  her  own  words. 
"  About  the  year  1743,  a  person  of  the  name  of  Ogilvie, 
"  an  Irishman  by  birth,  who  practised  Surgery  with 
"  great  reputation  at  Rome,  and  who  resided  not  far 
"  from  the  '  Piazza  di  Spagna,"*  in  that  city ;  being  in 
"  bed,  was  called  up  to  attend  some  strangers  who 
"  demanded  his  professional  assistance.  They  stopped 
"  before  his  house,  in  a  coach  ;  and  on  his  going  to  the 
"  door,  he  found  two  men  masked,  by  whom  he  was 
"  desired  to  accompany  them  immediately,  as  the  case 
"  which  brought  them,  admitted  of  no  delay,  and  not 
"  to  omit  taking  with  him  his  lancets.  He  complied, 
"  and  got  into  the  coach ;  but,  no  sooner  had  they 
"  quitted  the  street  in  which  he  resided,  than  they 
"  informed  him  that  he  must  submit  to  have  his  eyes 
"  bandaged ;  the  person  to  whom  they  were  about  to 
"  conduct  him,  being  a  lady  of  rank,  whose  name  and 
"  place  of  abode,  it  was  indispensable  to  conceal.  To 
"  this  requisition  he  likewise  submitted  ;  and  after  driving 
"  through  a  number  of  streets,  apparently  with  a  view  to 
"  prevent  his  forming  any  accurate  idea  of  the  part  of 
"  the  city  to  which  he  was  conducted,  the  carnage  at 
"  length  stopped.  The  two  gentlemen,  his  companions, 
"  then  alighting,  and  each  taking  him  by  the  arm,  con- 
"  ducted  him  into  a  house.  Ascending  a  narrow  stair- 
"  case,  they  entered  an  apartment,  where  he  was  released 
"  from  the  bandage  tied  over  his  eyes.  One  of  them 
"  next  acquainted  him,  that  it  being  necessary  to  put 
"  out  of  life  a  lady  who  had  dishonored  her  family, 
"  they  had  chosen  him  to  perform  the  office,  knowing 
"  his  professional  skill ;  that  he  would  find  her  in  the 
"  adjoining  chamber,  prepared  to  submit  to  her  fate ; 
"  and  that  he  must  open  her  veins  with  as  much  expedi- 

157 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

"  tion  as  possible ;  a  service,  for  the  execution  of  which, 
"  he  should  receive  a  liberal  recompence. 

"  Ogilvie  at  first  peremptorily  refused  to  commit  an 
"  act,  so  highly  repugnant  to  his  feelings.  But,  the 
u  two  strangers  assured  him,  with  solemn  denunciations 
"  of  vengeance,  that  his  refusal  could  only  prove  fatal 
"  to  himself,  without  affording  the  slightest  assistance 
"  to  the  object  of  his  compassion ;  that  her  doom  was 
"  irrevocable,  and  that  unless  he  chose  to  participate  a 
"  similar  fate,  he  must  submit  to  execute  the  office  im- 
"  posed  on  him.  Thus  situated,  and  finding  all  entreaty 
"  or  remonstrance  vain,  he  entered  the  room,  where  he 
"  found  a  Lady,  of  a  most  interesting  figure  and  appear- 
"  ance,  apparently  in  the  bloom  of  youth.  She  was 
"  habited  in  a  loose  undress ;  and  immediately  after- 
"  wards  a  female  attendant  placed  before  her  a  large  tub 
"  filled  with  warm  water,  in  which  she  immersed  her 
"  legs.  Far  from  opposing  any  impediment  to  the  act 
"  which  she  knew  he  was  sent  to  perform,  the  Lady 
"  assured  him  of  her  perfect  resignation ;  entreating 
"  him  to  put  the  sentence  passed  on  her  into  execution, 
"  with  as  little  delay  as  possible.  She  added,  that  she 
"  was  well  aware,  no  pardon  could  be  hoped  for  from 
"  those  who  had  devoted  her  to  death,  which  alone 
"  could  expiate  her  trespass :  felicitating  herself  that 
"  his  humanity  would  abbreviate  her  sufferings,  and  soon 
"  terminate  their  duration. 

"  After  a  short  conflict  with  his  own  mind,  perceiv- 
"  ing  no  means  of  extrication  or  of  escape,  either  for 
"  the  Lady,  or  for  himself;  being  moreover  urged  to 
"  expedite  his  work,  by  the  two  persons  without,  who, 
"  impatient  at  his  reluctance,  threatened  to  exercise 
"  violence  on  him,  if  he  procrastinated ;  Ogilvie  took 
"  out  his  lancet,  opened  her  veins,  and  bled  her  to 
"  death  in  a  short  time.  The  gentlemen  having  care- 
"  fully  examined  the  body,  in  order  to  ascertain  that 
"  she  was  no  more ;  after  expressing  their  satisfaction, 

158 


THREAT  OF  REVENGE 

"  offered  him  a  purse  of  Zechins,  as  a  remuneration ; 
"  but  he  declined  all  recompense,  only  requesting  to  be 
"  conveyed  from  a  scene,  on  which  he  could  not  reflect 
"  without  horror.  With  this  entreaty  they  complied, 
u  and  having  again  applied  a  bandage  to  his  eyes,  they 
"  led  him  down  the  same  staircase,  to  the  carriage.  But, 
"  it  being  narrow,  in  descending  the  steps,  he  contrived 
"  to  leave  on  one,  or  both  of  the  walls,  unperceived  by 
"  his  conductors,  the  marks  of  his  fingers,  which  were 
"  stained  with  blood.  After  observing  precautions 
"  similar  to  those  used  in  bringing  him  thither  from 
"  his  own  house,  he  was  conducted  home ;  and  at 
"  parting,  the  two  Masques  charged  him,  if  he  valued 
"  his  life,  never  to  divulge,  and  if  possible,  never  to 
"  think,  on  the  past  transaction.  They  added,  that 
"  if  he  should  embrace  any  measures,  with  a  view  to 
"  render  it  public,  or  to  set  on  foot  an  inquiry  into  it, 
"  he  should  be  infallibly  immolated  to  their  revenge. 
"  Having  finally  dismissed  him  at  his  own  door,  they 
"  drove  off,  leaving  him  to  his  reflections. 

"  On  the  subsequent  morning,  after  great  irresolution, 
"  he  determined,  at  whatever  risk  to  his  personal  safety, 
"  not  to  participate,  by  concealing  so  enormous  a  crime. 
"  It  formed,  nevertheless,  a  delicate  and  difficult  under- 
"  taking  to  substantiate  the  charge  as  he  remained 
"  altogether  ignorant  of  the  place  to  which  he  had  been 
"  carried,  or  of  the  name  and  quality  of  the  Lady  whom 
"  he  had  deprived  of  life.  Without  suffering  himself 
"  however  to  be  deterred  by  these  considerations,  he 
"  waited  on  the  Secretary  of  the  Apostolic  Chamber, 
"  and  acquainted  him  with  every  particular ;  adding 
u  that  if  the  government  would  extend  to  him  pro- 
"  tection,  he  did  not  despair  of  finding  the  house,  and 
"  of  bringing  to  light  the  perpetrators  of  the  deed. 
"  Benedict  the  Fourteenth,  (Lambertini),  who  then 
"  occupied  the  Papal  chair,  had  no  sooner  received  the 
"  information,  than  he  immediately  commenced  the 

159 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

*'  most  active  measures  for  discovering  the  offenders. 
"  A  guard  of  the  Sbirri,  or  Officers  of  Justice,  was 
"  appointed  by  his  order,  to  accompany  Ogilvie ;  who 
"  judging  from  various  circumstances,  that  he  had  been 
"  conveyed  out  of  the  city  of  Rome,  began  by  visiting 
"  the  Villas  scattered  without  the  walls  of  that 
"  Metropolis.  His  search  proved  ultimately  successful. 
"  In  the  Villa  Papa  Julio,  constructed  by  Pope  Julius 
"  the  Third,  (del  Monte)  he  there  found  the  bloody 
u  marks  left  on  the  wall  by  his  fingers,  at  the  same  time 
"  that  he  recognized  the  apartment  in  which  he  had  put 
"  to  death  the  Lady.  The  Palace  belonged  to  the  Duke 
"  de  Bracciano,  the  chief  of  which  illustrious  family,  and 
"  his  brother,  had  committed  the  murder,  in  the  person 
"  of  their  own  sister.  They  no  sooner  found  that  it 
"  was  discovered,  than  they  fled  to  this  city,  where  they 
"  easily  eluded  the  pursuit  of  justice.  After  remaining 
"  here  for  some  time,  they  obtained  a  pardon,  by  the 
"  exertions  of  their  powerful  friends,  on  payment  of  a 
"  considerable  fine  to  the  Apostolic  Chamber,  and  under 
"  the  further  condition  of  affixing  over  the  chimney 
"  piece  of  the  room  where  the  crime  had  been  perpetrated, 
"  a  plate  of  Copper,  commemorating  the  transaction, 
"  and  their  penitence.  This  plate  together  with  the 
"  inscription,  still  continued  to  exist  there  till  within 
"  these  few  years."" 

However  extraordinary  many  circumstances  of  this 
story  may  appear,  similar  events  or  accounts  have  been 
circulated  and  believed  in  other  countries  of  Europe. 
I  have  often  been  assured,  both  at  Vienna,  and  in 
various  places  of  the  German  Empire,  that  an  occurrence 
not  less  romantic,  and  more  enigmatical  in  its  nature, 
took  place  in  1774,  or  1775 ;  for  some  uncertainty 
prevailed  as  to  the  precise  time  when  the  fact  was 
pretended  to  have  happened.  It  is  well  known  that  the 
"  Bourreau,"  or  public  executioner  of  the  city  of  Stras- 
burgh,  although  that  place  has  formed  a  part  of  the 

160 


A  SECRET  EXECUTION 

French  Monarchy  ever  since  the  reign  of  Louis  the 
Fourteenth ;  yet  was  frequently  employed  during  a 
great  part  of  the  last  Century,  to  execute  the  functions 
of  his  office  on  the  other  side  of  the  Rhine,  in  Swabia, 
on  the  Territories  of  Baden,  and  in  the  Brisgaw,  all 
which  countries  constitute  a  portion  of  Germany.  Some 
persons  who  arrived  at  Strasburgh  about  the  period  to 
which  I  have  alluded ;  having  repaired,  as  it  is  said,  to 
the  house  of  the  executioner,  during  the  night,  demanded 
that  he  should  instantly  accompany  them  out  of  the 
town,  in  order  to  execute  a  criminal  of  condition ;  for 
which  service  he  should,  of  course,  receive  a  liberal 
remuneration.  They  particularly  enjoined  him  to  bring 
the  sword  with  which  he  was  accustomed,  in  the  discharge 
of  his  ordinary  functions,  to  behead  malefactors.  Being 
placed  in  a  carriage  with  his  conductors,  he  passed  the 
bridge  over  the  river,  to  Kehl,  the  first  town  on  the 
Eastern  bank  of  the  Rhine;  where  they  acquainted 
him  that  he  had  a  considerable  journey  to  perform  ; 
the  object  of  which  must  be  carefully  concealed,  as  the 
person  intended  to  be  put  to  death,  was  an  individual 
of  great  distinction.  They  added,  that  he  must  not 
oppose  their  taking  the  proper  precautions  to  prevent 
his  knowing  the  place  to  which  he  was  conveyed.  He 
acquiesced,  and  allowed  them  to  hoodwink  him.  On 
the  second  day  they  arrived  at  a  moated  Castle,  the 
draw-bridge  of  which  being  lowered,  they  drove  into 
the  court.  After  waiting  a  considerable  time,  he  was 
then  conducted  into  a  spacious  hall,  where  stood  a 
Scaffold  hung  with  black  cloth,  and  in  the  Centre  was 
placed  a  stool  or  chair.  A  female  shortly  made  her 
appearance,  habited  in  deep  mourning,  her  face  wholly 
concealed  by  a  veil.  She  was  led  by  two  persons,  who, 
when  she  was  seated,  having  first  tied  her  hands,  next 
fastened  her  legs  with  cords.  As  far  as  he  could  form 
any  judgment  from  her  general  figure,  he  considered 
her  to  have  passed  the  period  of  youth.  Not  a  word 

161  11 


WRAXALKS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

was  uttered ;  neither  did  she  make  any  complaints,  nor 
attempt  any  resistance.  When  all  the  preparations  for 
her  execution  were  completed,  on  a  signal  given,  he 
unsheathed  the  instrument  of  punishment,  according  to 
the  practice  adopted  in  the  German  Empire,  where  the 
Axe  is  rarely,  or  never,  used  for  decapitation ;  and  her 
head  being  forcibly  held  up  by  the  hair,  he  severed  it, 
at  a  single  stroke,  from  her  body.  Without  allowing 
him  to  remain  more  than  a  few  minutes,  he  was  then 
handsomely  rewarded,  conducted  back  to  Kehl,  by  the 
same  persons  who  had  brought  him  to  the  place,  and 
set  down  at  the  end  of  the  bridge  leading  to  Stras- 
burgh. 

I  have  heard  the  question  frequently  agitated,  during 
my  residence  in  Germany,  and  many  different  opinions 
stated,  relative  to  the  Lady  thus  asserted  to  have  been 
put  to  death.  The  most  generally  adopted  belief  rested 
on  the  Princess  of  Tour  and  Taxis,  Augusta  Elizabeth, 
daughter  of  Charles  Alexander,  Prince  of  Wirtemberg. 
She  had  been  married,  at  a  very  early  period  of  life,  to 
Charles  Anselm,  Prince  of  Tour  and  Taxis.  Whether 
it  proceeded  from  mutual  incompatibility  of  character, 
or,  as  was  commonly  pretended,  from  the  Princesses 
intractable  and  ferocious  disposition,  the  marriage 
proved  eminently  unfortunate  in  its  results.  She  was 
accused  of  having  repeatedly  attempted  to  take  away 
her  husband's  life,  particularly  while  they  were  walking 
together  near  the  Castle  of  Donau-Stauff,  on  the  high 
bank  overhanging  the  Danube,  when  she  endeavoured 
to  precipitate  him  into  the  river.  It  is  certain,  that 
about  the  year  1773,  or  1774,  a  final  separation  took 
place  between  them,  at  the  Prince's  solicitation.  The 
reigning  Duke  of  Wirtemberg,  her  brother,  to  whose 
custody  she  was  consigned,  caused  her  to  be  closely 
immured  in  a  Castle  within  his  own  dominions,  where 
she  was  strictly  guarded,  no  access  being  allowed  to  her. 
Of  the  last  mentioned  fact,  there  is  little  doubt ;  but  it 

162 


VICTIMS  OF  ROYAL  DISPLEASURE 

may  be  considered  as  much  more  problematical,  whether 
she  was  the  person  put  to  death  by  the  executioner  of 
Strasburgh.  I  have  dined  in  the  Autumn  of  the  year 
1778,  with  the  Prince  of  Tour  and  Taxis,  at  his  Castle 
or  seat  of  Donau-Stauff,  near  the  northern  bank  of  the 
Danube,  a  few  miles  from  the  city  of  Ratisbon.  He 
was  then  about  forty-five  years  of  age,  and  his  wife 
was  understood  to  be  in  confinement.  I  believe  that 
her  decease  was  not  formally  announced  as  having 
taken  place,  till  many  years  subsequent  to  1778 ;  but 
this  circumstance  by  no  means  militates  against  the 
possibility  of  her  having  suffered  by  a  more  summary 
process,  if  her  conduct  had  exposed  her  to  merit  it ; 
and  if  it  was  thought  proper  to  inflict  upon  her  capital 
punishment.  The  private  annals  of  the  great  Houses 
and  Sovereigns  of  the  German  Empire,  if  they  were 
divulged,  would  furnish  numerous  instances  of  similar 
severity  exercised  in  their  own  families,  during  the 
seventeenth  and  eighteenth  Centuries.  Some  of  these 
stories  might  realize  the  tragical  adventures  commemo- 
rated by  Boccace,  or  related  by  Margaret,  Queen  of 
Navarre,  sister  of  Francis  the  First,  in  her  "Tales;" 
which  last  are  not  fictions,  but  faithful  delineations  of 
the  Adventures  that  took  place  in  the  Court  of  Pau, 
where  she  resided,  near  the  foot  of  the  Pyrenees.  Count 
Konigsmarck  fell  a  victim,  at  Hanover,  to  the  resent- 
ment of  Ernest  Augustus,  father  of  King  George  the 
First :  and  we  know  how  narrowly  the  great  Frederic, 
afterwards  King  of  Prussia,  escaped  falling  by  the  same 
weapon  which  beheaded  his  companion  Katt,  arbitrarily 
sacrificed  by  Frederic  William  the  First,  for  only  en- 
deavouring to  facilitate  the  Prince's  evasion  from  his 
father's  Court. 

While  I  am  engaged  on  the  subject  of  extraordinary 
events,  I  shall  record  one  more  fact,  which  may  appear 
equally  curious  with  either  of  the  stories  that  I  have 
just  recounted.  During  the  first  Winter  that  I  passed 

163 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

at  Vienna,  in  1778,  I  became  acquainted  with  the 
Count  and  Countess  Podotski.  She  was  one  of  the 
most  beautiful  and  accomplished  women  of  high  rank, 
whom  I  have  seen  on  the  Continent.  Her  husband, 
a  great  Polish  Nobleman,  hereditary  Cup-bearer,  or 
"  Grand  Echanson  "  of  the  Crown,  had  become  in  some 
measure  an  Austrian  subject,  in  consequence  of  the 
first  partition  of  Poland,  which  took  place  in  1772. 
His  patrimonial  estates  lying  principally  in  that 
Southern  Portion  of  the  kingdom  which  fell  to  the 
share  of  Maria  Theresa,  he  of  course  repaired  fre- 
quently to  Vienna ;  between  which  capital  and  Warsaw 
he  divided  his  time.  During  the  Winter  of  1776,  as 
the  Count  and  Countess  Podotski  were  on  their  way 
from  Vienna  to  Cracow,  the  wolves  which  abound  in  the 
Carpathian  Mountains,  rendered  more  than  ordinarily 
bold  and  ferocious,  in  consequence  of  the  severity  of  the 
season ;  descending  in  great  numbers,  began  to  follow 
the  carriage  between  the  two  little  towns  of  Oswiezk 
and  Zator ;  the  latter  of  which  places  is  only  a  few 
Leagues  distant  from  Cracow.  Of  two  servants  who 
attended  him,  one  had  been  sent  forward  to  Zator,  for 
the  purpose  of  procuring  post  horses.  The  other,  a 
Heydiw,  to  whom  he  was  much  attached  on  account  of 
his  fidelity,  finding  the  wolves  rapidly  gaining  ground 
on  them,  rode  up,  and  exhorted  the  Count  to  permit 
him  to  abandon  to  these  animals  his  horse ;  as  such 
a  prey  would  naturally  arrest  their  impetuosity,  and 
allow  time  for  the  Count  and  Countess  to  reach  Zator. 
Podotski  immediately  agreed  to  the  proposal ;  and  the 
Heyduc  mounting  behind  the  carriage,  left  his  horse, 
who  was  soon  overtaken,  and  torn  in  a  thousand 
pieces. 

They  continued  their  journey  meanwhile  with  all 
possible  speed,  in  the  hope  of  getting  to  the  town,  from 
which  they  were  at  an  inconsiderable  distance.  But, 
their  horses  were  bad;  and  the  wolves,  become  more 


A  NOBLE  SERVANT 

ravenous,  as  well  as  eager,  by  having  tasted  blood, 
already  were  nearly  up  with  them.  In  this  extremity, 
the  Heyduc  said  to  his  master,  "  There  is  only  one  way 
"  left  to  save  us.  We  shall  all  be  devoured  in  a  few 
"  minutes.  I  am  ready  to  sacrifice  myself,  by  going 
"  to  meet  the  wolves,  if  you  will  swear  to  be  a  father 
"  to  my  wife  and  children.  I  shall  be  destroyed ;  but, 
"  while  they  are  occupied  in  falling  upon  me,  you 
"  may  escape.""  Podotski,  after  a  moment's  reluctance 
to  accept  such  an  offer,  pressed  nevertheless  by  the 
prospect  of  imminent  destruction  to  them  all,  and  see- 
ing no  prospect  of  any  other  means  of  extrication, 
consented ;  and  assured  him  that  if  he  were  capable  of 
devoting  himself  for  their  common  preservation,  his 
family  should  find  in  him  a  constant  protector.  The 
Heyduc  instantly  descending,  advanced  to  meet  the 
wolves,  who  surrounded  and  soon  dispatched  him.  But, 
his  magnanimous  sacrifice  of  himself,  by  checking  the 
ardour  of  their  pursuit,  allowed  Count  Podotski  time  to 
reach  the  gates  of  Zator  in  safety.  I  ought  not  to  omit 
that  the  Heyduc  was  a  Dissident  or  Protestant,  while  his 
master  professed  the  Catholic  religion  ;  a  circumstance 
which  greatly  added  to  the  merit  and  effect  of  the 
sacrifice.  I  believe  Count  Podotski  most  religiously 
fulfilled  his  engagement,  to  befriend  the  family  of  his 
faithful  servant.  For  the  honour  of  human  nature,  we 
ought  not  to  suppose  it  possible  that  he  could  fail  on 
such  a  point.  I  cannot  say  that  I  have  heard  him 
relate  this  story,  himself;  but  I  have  received  it  from 
those  persons  who  knew  its  authenticity,  and  who 
recounted  it  to  me  at  Vienna,  while  the  Count  was 
engaged  in  the  same  room  at  Play,  in  the  hotel  of  the 
French  Embassador,  the  Baron  de  Breteuil,  only  about 
two  years  after  it  took  place.  An  instance  of  more 
prompt,  cool,  and  generous  self-devotion,  is,  perhaps, 
not  to  be  found  in  the  History  of  mankind ;  nor  ought 
its  value  to  be  at  all  diminished  by  the  consideration, 

165 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

that  even  if  the  Heyduc  had  not  acted  as  he  did,  they 
must  all  probably  have  perished  together. 

If  Naples,  in  1779,  offered  a  number  of  enchanting 
objects  to  the  imagination  and  the  senses ;  Florence, 
where  I  likewise  passed  a  considerable  time  in  the  same 
year,  presented  others  not  less  captivating  to  the  mind. 
The  "  Palazzo  Vecchio,"  once  inhabited  by  Cosmo,  and 
by  Lorenzo  de  Medicis :  names  which  will  be  for  ever 
venerated ; — the  Chapel  of  St.  Lorenzo,  where  reposed 
the  remains  of  so  many  Princes  of  that  illustrious  family, 
whose  Monuments  were  adorned  by  the  hand  of  Michael 
Angelo ; — the  Gallery  constructed  for  the  reception  of 
all  those  Master-pieces  of  ancient,  and  of  modern  genius, 
which  taste  and  expence  had  collected  in  the  lapse  of 
Ages ;  —  even  the  surrounding  Scenery,  the  Arno, 
Fiesole,  Vallombrosa,  and  every  object,  awakened  classic, 
or  poetic  recollections.  Sir  Horace  Mann,  who  was 
then  the  British  Minister  at  the  Court  of  Tuscany,  had 
outlived  the  extinction  of  the  House  of  Medicis  ;  for 
which  line  of  Princes,  however,  he  seemed  to  preserve  the 
same  predilection,  which  Brantome  always  manifests  for 
that  of  Valois.  He  remembered,  and  personally  knew, 
the  last  Grand  Duke  of  the  Medicean  line,  John  Gas- 
ton,  who  died  in  1737 ;  and  in  consequence  of  whose 
decease  without  issue,  those  beautiful  countries,  consti- 
tuting his  dominions,  were  finally  tranferred  to  a  Prince 
of  Lorrain. 

Conversing  one  day  with  Sir  Horace  Mann,  on  this 
topic,  which  always  excited  his  regret ;  "  John  Gaston," 
observed  he  to  me,  "  was  one  of  the  most  superior 
"  and  accomplished  men,  whom  the  present  Century 
"  has  witnessed,  if  his  immoderate  pursuit  of  pleasures 
"  had  not  enervated  his  mind,  and  debilitated  his  frame. 
"  He  became,  long  before  his  death,  incapable  of  con- 
"  tinuing  his  family  :  but  that  inability  did  not  produce 
"  its  extinction.  A  sort  of  fatality  seemed  to  overhang 
"  the  House  of  Medicis,  and  to  render  ineffectual  all  the 

166 


THE  HOUSE  OF  MEDICIS 

"  measures  adopted   for   its  prolongation.     When   the 
"  fact   was   perfectly   ascertained,    that    John    Gaston 
"  could  not  perpetuate  his  line,  the  Cardinal  Hippolito 
"  de  Medicis,  his  Uncle,  was  selected  for  that  purpose ; 
"  and  a  dispensation  from  his  ecclesiastical  vows,  was 
"  obtained  from  the  Papal  See.     The  only,  and  the  in- 
"  dispensable  object  of  the  marriage,  being  the  attainment 
"  of  heirs  male  to  the  Grand  Duchy,  in  order  to  prevent 
"  its   seizure   by  foreign  violence,  or   its  incorporation 
"  with  the  Austrian,  French,  or  Spanish  Monarchies  ;  all 
"  Italy  was  searched,  to   find   a  young  and   handsome 
"  Princess,  from  whom  might  be  expected  a  numerous 
"  family.      A    Princess    of   Mirandola,   on   whom   the 
"  selection  fell,  seemed  to  unite  every  requisite  qualifica- 
"  tion.     The  nuptials  were  solemnized ;  and  the  bride- 
"  groom  being  of  a  feeble  constitution,  as  well  as  advanced 
"  in  life,  it  was  plainly  insinuated  to  the  Lady,  that  for 
"  reasons   of  state   necessity,  connected  with   the  very 
"  political   existence   of    Tuscany   under    the   reigning 
"  House,  she  must  produce  an  heir.     The  most  agree- 
"  able  youths  and  Pages  about  the  court  were  purposely 
"  thrown    in    her   way,   and    every    facility    was    fur- 
"  nished,  that    might   conduce  to   the   accomplishment 
"  of  the  object.     But,  so  sacredly  did  she  observe  the 
"  marriage   vow,   that   no   seductions    could  make    an 
"  impression  on   her,  and   she  remained  without  issue. 
"  Her  husband  died,  and  was  followed  by  John  Gaston. 
"  France  having  acquired  Lorrain,  and  Don  Carlos  being 
"  made  Sovereign  of  Naples,  Tuscany  was  delivered  over, 
"  as  a  conquered  country,  to  Francis,  Duke  of  Lorrain. 
"  But,  no  sooner   had  these  events   taken   place,  than 
"  Hippolito's  widow,  who  had  surmounted  every  tempta- 
"  tion  to  inconstancy  during  his  life,  gave  the  reins  to 
"  her  inclinations,  and  brought  into  the  world  two  or 
"  three  children,  within  a  few  years.     It  was  thus  that 
"  Florence,  the  repository  of  so  many  invaluable  monu- 
"  ments  of  Greek  and  Roman  Sculpture,  collected  dur- 

167 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

"  ing  successive  Centuries,  by  the  Princes  of  Medicis, 
"  passed  into  the  Austrian  Family."  Sir  Horace  little 
foresaw  at  that  time,  the  new  Revolutions  impending 
over  Tuscany,  about  to  issue  from  the  Volcano  of  the 
French  Revolution. 

That  beautiful  country,  the  cradle  of  the  fine  arts  in 
1779,  under  the  mild  and  parental  government  of  the 
Grand  Duke  Leopold,  enjoyed  a  great  degree  of  felicity, 
as  well  as  prosperity :  perhaps  as  much,  or  more,  than 
at  any  period  of  it's  History ;  either  when  a  Common- 
wealtn,  or  under  the  House  of  Medicis.  While  his 
father,  Francis,  retained  the  Sovereignty  of  Tuscany, 
it  was  considered  only  as  a  detached  Province  of  the 
Austrian  Monarchy,  rarely  visited,  and  the  internal  Ad- 
ministration of  which,  Francis  committed  to  Germans, 
or  to  subjects  of  Lorrain.  But,  with  the  accession  of 
Leopold,  Florence  assumed  a  new  aspect ;  and  though 
he  occasionally  repaired  to  Vienna,  in  order  to  pay  his 
duty  to  the  Empress  Maria  Theresa  his  mother,  yet  he 
was  not  partial  to  the  climate  or  manners  of  Austria. 
He  loved  the  banks  of  the  Arno;  dividing  his  time 
between  the  occupations  of  civil  government,  the 
education  of  his  numerous  family,  which  he  super- 
intended in  person  with  great  care ;  and  the  researches 
of  natural  Philosophy,  particularly  Chymistry ;  for 
which  last  mentioned  pursuit,  like  the  Emperor  Francis 
his  father,  he  nourished  a  strong  predilection.  In  imita- 
tion of  other  royal  Philosophers,  ancient  and  modern,  he 
sought  in  the  gratifications  of  female  society,  the  best 
relief  from  the  toils  and  cares  of  State.  The  Countess 
Cowper  was  at  this  time  distinguished  by  his  attach- 
ment ;  and  the  exertion  of  his  interest  with  Joseph  the 
Second  his  brother,  procured  her  husband,  Lord  Cowper, 
to  be  created  soon  afterwards  a  Prince  of  the  German 
Empire :  an  honor,  which  I  believe,  had  not  been  con- 
ferred on  any  English  subject,  since  the  beginning  of 
the  last  Century,  when  John  Churchill,  the  great  Duke 

168 


AN  UNFORTUNATE  REIGN 

of  Marlborough,  was  raised  to  the  dignity  of  Prince 
of  Mildenheim,  by  the  Emperor  Joseph  the  First,  after 
the  memorable  victory  of  Blenheim. 

While  I  am  engaged  on  the  subject  of  the  two 
brothers,  Joseph  and  Leopold,  who  were  successively 
Emperors  of  Germany,  I  shall  say  a  few  words  relative 
to  both  these  Princes.  The  reign  of  Joseph,  comprising 
more  than  nine  years,  from  November  1780,  to  February 
1790,  may  be  considered  as  one  of  the  most  unfortunate 
and  injurious  to  the  House  of  Austria,  which  occurs  in 
the  Annals  of  that  family.  He  possessed,  nevertheless, 
many  eminent  virtues ;  activity,  frugality,  enlargement 
of  mind,  facility  of  access,  indefatigable  application, 

freat  renunciation  of  pleasure,  the  desire  of  acquiring 
nowledge,  and  of  ameliorating  the  condition  of  his 
people.  But  he  was  theoretical,  precipitate,  ambitious, 
and  led  astray  by  his  anxiety  to  appear,  like  his 
contemporary,  Frederic  the  Second,  King  of  Prussia, 
his  own  General  and  Minister.  That  great  Prince  last 
named,  became  himself,  on  more  than  one  occasion, 
during  the  "  Seven  years  war,"  the  victim  of  his  temerity 
or  pertinacity  in  rejecting  the  advice  of  his  commanders. 
Joseph  attempted,  with  far  inferior  talents,  to  conduct 
the  military  operations ;  but  disaster  perpetually 
attended  him  in  the  field.  Laudohn  was  reduced  to 
the  necessity  of  forcing  him  to  quit  the  camp  in  Lower 
Hungary  during  the  war  carried  on  against  the  Turks ; 
and  his  arms  never  penetrated  beyond  the  Danube,  into 
Servia,  till  he  left  the  army,  and  retired  to  Vienna. 
His  alliance  with  Catherine  the  Second,  and  his  visits 
to  the  Crimea,  of  which  the  Prince  de  Ligne  has  given 
us  such  amusing  details,  produced  no  permanent 
advantages  to  his  Crown,  or  benefit  to  his  people.  We 
know  that  he  had  actually  made  with  the  Russian 
Empress,  a  partition  of  all  the  European  portion  of 
the  Turkish  Dominions,  and  of  some  of  the  Asiatic 
Provinces  lying  along  the  shore  of  the  Black  sea :  but 

169 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

the  two  Sovereigns  found  it  easier  to  divide  Poland, 
than  to  dismember  Turkey.  Joseph1s  imprudent, 
arbitrary,  and  impolitic  infractions  of  the  privileges,  or 
constitutional  rights  of  his  subjects,  when  aggravated 
by  his  suppression  of  many  of  the  Monastic  establish- 
ments ;  produced  either  an  insurrection  or  a  dangerous 
fermentation  among  the  Hungarians,  and  throughout 
the  Austrian  Netherlands.  While  he  fondly  anticipated 
the  conquest  of  th£  Ottoman  Provinces  beyond  Belgrade, 
which  Prince  Eugene  had  subjected  seventy  years  earlier ; 
the  Hungarians  opened  a  secret  Negociation,  of  the 
most  dangerous  nature,  with  the  Court  of  Berlin  ;  and 
the  Flemings  overturned  the  Imperial  Government  at 
Brussels.  Even  the  Archduchy  of  Austria  and  the 
Kingdom  of  Bohemia  manifested  symptoms  of  dis- 
affection :  while  the  French  Revolution,  which  had 
commenced  in  the  Summer  of  1789,  advancing  with 
gigantic  steps  towards  Democracy,  Anarchy,  and 
Violence,  painfully  attracted  his  attention  on  that 
vulnerable  quarter.  Such  was  the  critical  and  con- 
vulsed state  of  the  Austrian  Monarchy,  when  Joseph 
expired  at  Vienna,  in  the  Spring  of  1790,  at  the  age 
of  forty-nine ;  extenuated  by  diseases,  caused  or  ac- 
celerated in  their  progress,  by  his  own  irritability  of 
temper,  agitation  of  mind,  and  the  embarrassment  of 
his  affairs. 

Leopold,  who  succeeded  him,  and  who  was  unquestion- 
ably a  Prince  of  deep  reflexion,  enlarged  capacity,  and 
sound  judgment ;  perceived  the  misfortunes  which  had 
flowed  from  the  spirit  of  innovation,  reform,  and  rest- 
less activity  or  ambition,  that  had  characterized  his 
brother.  But  it  was  not  easy  to  withdraw  from  the 
political  connexions  formed  by  Joseph,  with  the  Empress 
Catherine  the  Second.  Yet,  alarmed  at  the  state  of 
Flanders  and  of  Hungary,  while  he  dreaded  the  issue  of 
the  revolutionary  struggle  in  which  his  brother-in-law, 
Louis  the  Sixteenth,  was  involved  with  his  subjects ; 

170 


POTEMKIN'S  RAGE 

Leopold,  after  many  doubts,  and  much  hesitation,  finally 
determined  to  quit  the  alliance  of  Russia.     A  circum- 
stance which   took  place  not   long  after  his  accession, 
confirmed  him  in  the  resolution.     Potemkin,  who  then 
governed  his  imperial  mistress  and  the  Court  of  Peters- 
burgh  ;  commanding  the  Armies  of  that  Power  in  the 
vicinity  of  Oczakow,  on  the  Coast  of  the  Black    Sea, 
pushed  his  conquests  against  the  Turks,  so  far  to  the 
Westward,  as  to  approach   the   Austrian  Frontier,  on 
the  Lower  Danube,  in  Servia.     Uneasy  at  the  advances 
of  such  a  neighbour,  the  Emperor  addressed  a  letter  to 
him,  couched  in  very  obliging  language,  but  intimating 
His  Imperial  Majesty's  wishes  that  he  would  desist  from 
prosecuting  his  advantages  any  further   on    that   side. 
Potemkin,    intoxicated    with     favour,    brutal    in    his 
manners,  insolent,  and  restrained  by  no  considerations 
of  policy,  or  of  respect  for  the  dignity  of  the  writer,  had 
the  audacity  to  throw  the  letter  on  the  ground,  to  spit 
upon  it,  and  to  trample  it  under  foot ;  adding  the  most 
injurious  or   insulting    Epithets  relative  personally  to 
Leopold.     These   barbarous    and   impolitic   ebullitions 
of    his    rage,    were   reported    soon   afterwards   to    the 
Emperor,  by  Foscari,  the  Venetian  Embassador  at  the 
Court  of  Petersburgh ;  who  having  returned  to  Venice, 
and  there  meeting   His  Imperial   Majesty,  acquainted 
him  with  the  facts.     Leopold  heard  the  Narration  with 
great   apparent    calmness,  but    such  an  insult  did  not 
make  the  less  deep  impression  on  his  mind.     We  may 
however    assume,    that    before    Potemkin    would   have 
ventured  on  so  outrageous  an  act  of  contempt  toward 
his  Sovereign's  ally,  he  had  good  reason  to  believe  that 
the  ties  between  the   two    Courts  or   Sovereigns,  were 
about  to  be  dissolved,  and  new  Alliances  to  be  formed 
by  Austria. 

In  fact,  Leopold,  from  an  early  period  of  his  Reign, 
turned  all  his  views  towards  the  two  Courts  of  Berlin 
and  London.  After  concluding  a  Treaty  at  Reichenbach, 

171 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

with  the  King  of  Prussia,  he  made  Peace  with  the 
Turks  at  Sistova;  renouncing  all  his  brother  Joseph's 
Conquests  in  Bosnia  and  Servia,  restoring  Belgrade  to 
the  Porte,  and  abandoning  his  connexions  with  Catherine. 
Impelled  by  an  anxious  desire  of  arresting  the  course  of 
the  French  Revolutionary  Principles,  which  he  foresaw, 
would,  if  not  checked,  eventually  involve  Europe  in  the 
greatest  calamities,  he  set  on  foot  the  celebrated 
Interview  of  Pilnitz.  In  the  Summer  of  1791,  having 
repaired  with  his  eldest  son,  the  present  Emperor 
Francis,  to  that  Castle  or  hunting  seat  of  the  Elector 
of  Saxony,  situate  near  Dresden ;  Frederick  William, 
accompanied  in  like  manner  by  his  successor  the  reigning 
King  of  Prussia,  there  met  Leopold.  The  conferences 
led  to  a  Treaty,  which  adopted  as  its  fundamental  Basis, 
the  Resolution  "not  to  make  war  on  France,  but  to 
"  arm  against  the  introduction  of  French  Revolutionary 
"  Principles  into  Germany  and  the  Low  Countries." 
The  Emperor,  who  had  formed  an  opinion  by  which  he 
systematically  adhered,  that  the  Republican  Faction 
in  Paris  would  only  be  aided  by  aggression  and  hostility  ; 
thought  that  War  must  therefore  be  avoided :  but  he 
conceived  that  the  great  Powers  of  Europe  should  arm 
against  French  Principles,  by  forming  a  military  Cordon 
round  France ;  thus  shutting  in  the  moral  or  political 
infection,  and  leaving  them  to  exhaust  their  rage  on 
each  other.  Such  was  the  unquestionable  object  and 
scope  of  that  memorable  Treaty,  relative  to  which 
so  much  has  been  said  and  written  within  the  last 
twenty  years.  How  far  the  plan  might  have  proved 
efficacious,  if  it  had  been  generally  acted  upon  by  all 
the  Germanic  Body,  as  early  as  1791  ;  and  if  Leopold, 
who  framed  it,  had  lived  to  conduct  its  operations ;  it 
is  difficult  to  venture  a  decided  opinion :  but  for  the 
authenticity  of  the  Fact  itself,  I  think  I  may  challenge 
contradiction.  Perhaps,  moral  and  political  principles 
are  not  to  be  shut  in  or  compressed  by  any  defensive 

172 


PITT  AND  FOX 

precautions  which  can  be  adopted  by  human  wisdom. 
I  am  fully  convinced  at  least,  that  when  Mr.  Pitt,  early 
in  1793,  declared  open  hostility  on  France,  he  could 
not  have  saved  England  by  temporizing  measures.  Nay, 
I  thought  at  the  time,  and  I  continue  so  to  think  now, 
after  the  lapse  of  more  than  twenty  years,  that  Mr.  Fox 
would  have  formed  the  same  Estimate,  and  have  acted 
precisely  in  the  same  manner,  if  he  had  been  seated  in 
Pitt's  place,  as  First  Minister,  on  the  Treasury  Bench. 
The  whole  difference  in  their  mode  of  seeing  and  appre- 
ciating the  tendency  of  the  French  Revolution,  lay  in  the 
possession,  or  the  negation,  of  political  power.  Indeed, 
the  fact  was  practically  proved,  when  Fox,  after  Pitt's 
decease  in  1806,  arrived  at  employment.  It  soon 
became  evident  how  much  his  attainment  of  a  seat  in 
the  Cabinet  had  illuminated  his  understanding,  as  well 
as  invigorated  his  measures,  in  opposition  to  revol- 
utionary principles  and  their  consequences. 

I  return  to  Leopold.  So  anxious  was  he  to  form  a 
defensive  League  against  the  French  Republican  con- 
tagion, that  on  the  very  day  succeeding  his  Coronation 
at  Frankfort,  as  Emperor  of  Germany,  in  the  Autumn 
of  1790,  he  dispatched  a  confidential  Agent  to  the 
Court  of  Berlin,  empowered  to  open  a  private  Negocia- 
tion  with  Frederick  William.  It  was  confined  to  the 
two  Sovereigns  ;  their  respective  Ministers,  Kaunitz  and 
Hertzberg,  being  excluded  from  any  knowledge  of  the 
transaction.  The  King  of  Prussia,  who  came  readily 
into  Leopold's  views,  employed  Bischoffswerder,  his 
favourite,  to  carry  back  his  assent.  But,  no  final  or 
effectual  Measures,  as  they  well  knew,  could  be  settled, 
without  the  participation  of  England.  Mr.  Pitt  and 
Lord  Grenville  entered  ardently  into  the  Plan,  which 
had  in  view  two  objects ;  to  arrest  the  arms  of  Catherine 
on  the  Shore  of  the  Euxine,  and  to  coerce  the 
Republicans  of  Paris,  without  making  offensive  War 
on  France.  The  former  of  these  points  would  un- 

173 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

questionably  have  been  attained  if  Mr.  Fox  had  not 
excited  so  formidable  an  opposition  in  the  House  of 
Commons,  as  compelled  the  Ministry  reluctantly  to 
recede  from  their  engagements.  He  at  the  same  time 
sent  Mr.  Adair  as  his  own  private  Agent,  to  Peters- 
burgh  ;  an  act,  for  which,  many  persons  thought  that 
he  deserved  Impeachment.  Leopold,  apprehensive  of 
Catherine's  resentment,  doubtful  of  Mr.  Pitt's  and 
Lord  Grenville's  sincerity,  nor  without  alarm  at  the 
murmurs  which  he  foresaw  would  arise  among  his  own 
troops,  on  the  evacuation  of  Belgrade,  and  the  Re- 
stitution of  his  conquests  in  Servia ;  said  to  a  Gentle- 
man, deep  in  his  confidence,  with  whom  he  was 
accustomed  to  unbosom  his  thoughts,  and  who  had 
formed  the  medium  of  his  intercourse  with  Frederic 
William,  "  J'ai  signe  la  Paix  avec  les  Turcs :  mais,  la 
Grande  Bretagne,  est  elle  sincere  ?  Me  tiendra  t'elle  ses 
engagement  ?  Catherine  sera  inexorable.  Je  Vai  vu  en 
songe,  hier,  la  nuit,  le  poignard  a  la  main.'1''  He  even 
disapproved  and  lamented  Pitt's  line  of  conduct  towards 
the  Empress,  in  the  business  of  Oczakow,  as  severe, 
irritating,  and  calculated  to  render  her  implacable. 
"  Why,"  observed  Leopold,  speaking  to  the  same  friend, 
"  rob  the  Empress  of  her  laurels,  and  humiliate  her  in 
"  the  eyes  of  Europe  ?  It  is  necessary  that  her  head 
"  should  be  incircled  with  glory,  in  order  to  hide  her 
"  feet,  which  are  all  stained  with  blood."  In  fact, 
Catherine,  who  never  forgave  either  Austria,  Prussia,  or 
England,  for  their  conduct  towards  her,  propelled  those 
Powers  to  commence  war  on  France  in  1792 ;  but  never 
aided  them  in  the  contest.  On  the  contrary,  she 
compelled  Frederick  William  to  withdraw  from  the 
great  Alliance,  and  to  return  home,  by  attacking 
Poland.  "  If,"  said  the  king,  "  I  had  not  marched  my 
"  army  back  into  my  own  dominions,  she  would  not 
"  only  have  taken  Warsaw,  but  have  entered  Berlin  like- 
"  wise."  It  was  Russia,  therefore,  which  acted  as  one 

174 


A  STYRIAN  WOMAN^S  WARNING 

great  cause  of  the  overthrow  of  the  first  Confederacy 
against  Republican  France. 

During  the  Autumn  of  the  year  1791,  Leopold  being 
on  his  way  from  Vienna  to  Florence,  stopped,  for 
refreshment,  at  a  small  post  house  in  the  Duchy  of 
Styria ;  where,  while  he  remained,  a  croud  of  people,  all 
of  whom  were  his  own  subjects,  pressed  round  to  look 
at  him.  Among  them  he  remarked  an  old  woman,  who, 
when  he  got  into  his  carriage,  approached  it ;  and 
knocking  against  the  glass  with  her  hand,  addressed 
some  words  to  him  in  a  tone  of  great  violence  and 
asperity,  accompanied  with  gestures  indicative  of  resent- 
ment :  but,  as  she  spoke  in  the  Styrian  Dialect,  he  was 
wholly  unable  to  comprehend  her  meaning.  Appre- 
hending that  she  might  have  some  complaint  to  prefer, 
or  might  have  received  some  injury  demanding  redress, 
he  ordered  his  attendants  to  question  her  on  the  subject 
of  her  application.  They  manifested  considerable  re- 
luctance in  explaining  to  him  its  nature ;  but,  on  his 
insisting  to  be  informed,  one  of  them  answered  that  she 
said,  "  Render  justice  promptly.  We  know  all  that 
"  the  Poissardes  have  done  at  Paris."  The  Emperor 
made  no  reply  ;  but  when  he  recounted  the  story  to  the 
Gentleman  who  related  it  to  me,  he  added,  "  You  may 
"  suppose  that  I  have  read  and  reflected  much  upon 
"  the  French  Revolution,  and  its  consequences :  but,  all 
"  that  has  been  said,  or  can  be  written  upon  it,  never 
"  carried  such  conviction  to  my  mind,  as  the  few  words 
"  uttered  by  the  old  woman  in  Styria." 

Notwithstanding  all  the  efforts  made  by  the 
Emigrants,  for  inducing  Leopold  to  commence  war 
with  France,  he  remained  inflexibly  steady  to  his 
System  of  arming  against  the  Revolution,  but  of  never 
attacking  the  French  Nation.  It  was  not  till  after  his 
decease,  under  Francis,  his  successor,  in  the  Summer  of 
1792,  that  the  Austrians  entered  Champagne,  in  con- 
junction with  the  Prussian  forces.  Leopold's  death 

175 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

took  place  on  the  first  day  of  March,  that  year,  at 
Prague ;  to  which  city  he  had  repaired  for  the  purpose 
of  being  crowned  King  of  Bohemia.  I  think  I  may 
venture  to  assert  with  confidence,  that  he  was  poisoned ; 
and  that  the  poison  was  administered  in  sweetmeats, 
which  a  Lady  presented  him  at  a  Masquerade.  Every 
endeavour  was  used  to  conceal  the  fact ;  and  with  that 
view,  it  was  pretended  that  his  end  had  been  produced 
by  some  drugs  or  incentives,  which  he  himself  prepared 
in  his  own  Laboratory :  for  he  passed  much  time  in 
chymical  researches  and  processes.  But,  Agusius,  his 
physician,  who  opened  his  body,  did  not  entertain  any 
doubt  that  he  fell  a  victim  to  poison.  During  the 
Spring  of  the  year  1798,  chancing  to  be  alone  with  a 
foreign  Nobleman,  whose  name  I  do  not  think  proper 
to  mention,  but  whose  veracity  was  unquestionable ; 
and  who,  as  having  been  the  Embassador  of  a  Crowned 
Head  at  the  Court  of  Vienna,  when  I^eopold's  death 
happened,  possessed  the  best  means  of  obtaining 
information ;  I  ventured  to  interrogate  him  on  the 
subject.  "  I  was  accustomed,"  answered  he,  "  during  the 
"  last  year  of  the  Emperor's  life,  to  see  him  frequently, 
"  and  to  have  long  audiences  of  him,  on  business,  in  his 
"  Closet.  During  these  interviews,  I  beheld  him 
"  divested  of  any  disguise ;  and  I  can  pronounce,  as  a 
"  matter  of  certainty,  that  his  mind  was  then  altogether 
"  broken,  and  his  faculties  enfeebled.  His  memory  in 
"  particular  had  become  so  weakened,  that  he  could  no 
"  longer  retain,  from  one  day  to  another,  the  facts  or 
"  images  committed  to  it.  He  rarely  recollected  the 
"  conversation  of  the  preceding  morning.  This  pre- 
"  mature  decay  of  his  intellectual  powers,  resulted  from 
u  his  inordinate  passion  for  the  other  sex,  which  had 
"  characterised  him  at  every  period  of  his  life,  and 
"  which  he  continued  to  indulge  when  it  proved 
"  destructive  to  his  frame.  The  Brain  was  parti- 
"  cularly  affected.  In  my  Audiences  of  Leopold,  he 

176 


THE  CHEVALIER  DE  ST.  GEORGE 

"  always  walked  up  and  down  the  apartment,  during 
"  the  whole  time.  On  his  table  lay  a  number  of  rolls 
"  of  wax,  which  he  bit  from  one  minute  to  another, 
"  spitting  out  the  pieces  on  the  floor.  When  he  quitted 
"  the  room,  whether  any  other  persons  were  present, 
"  or  whether  we  were  alone,  he  never  advanced  forward 
"  in  a  strait  line ;  but  he  went  round  the  sides  of  the 
"  chamber,  touching  with  his  hand  the  wainscot,  or  the 
"  window  shutters.  No  circumstances  could  more 
"  strongly  indicate  a  disordered  or  enfeebled  under- 
"  standing.  As  to  the  nature  of  his  death,  I  am  unable 
"  positively  to  pronounce  upon  the  Fact.  Certainly, 
"  his  body,  when  opened,  exhibited  every  mark  of 
"  poison.  But,  if  he  was  poisoned,  by  whom  was 
"  it  administered,  or  with  what  object  ?  I  cannot 
"  pretend  to  guess,  nor  even  to  form  a  Conjecture." 
Two  opinions,  as  I  have  been  assured,  prevailed  at 
Prague,  respecting  it ;  both  of  which  were  alike 
founded  on  Leopold's  well  known  determination  not 
to  engage  in  a  war  with  France.  One  party  main- 
tained that  the  Girondists,  which  Faction  then  pre- 
dominated at  Paris,  dreading  the  effects  of  his  defensive 
System,  as  most  injurious  to  their  tenure  of  power, 
removed  him  in  the  manner  related :  while  another 
party  accused  the  Emigrants  of  having  produced  his 
death,  as  the  only  means  left  them  of  regaining  their 
estates,  by  forcing  an  immediate  rupture  between  the 
Austrian  and  French  Governments.  I  must  leave  the 
fact  problematical.  Time  will  probably  elucidate  its 
nature. 

Among  the  objects  of  mingled  curiosity  and  com- 
passion, which  Florence  presented  in  1779,  to  the  view 
of  an  Englishman,  was  the  Chevalier  de  St.  George; 
or,  as  we  commonly  denominate  him,  the  Pretender.  It 
was  impossible  to  contemplate  him,  without  making 
many  reflections  on  his  own  destiny,  and  on  the  con- 
dition of  the  infatuated  Family  of  which  he  was  the 

177  12 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

representative.     Neither  antient,  nor  modern   History, 
presents  the  example  of  a  line  of  Princes  so  eminently 
unfortunate,  during  a  succession  of  Ages  !     The  calami- 
ties which  overwhelmed  the  House  of  Bourbon,  awful 
as  they  must  be  esteemed,  have  been  comprized  within 
the  space  of  five  and  twenty  years  :  but,  from  James  the 
First   of    Scotland,   murdered   in    the    most    inhuman 
manner  at  Perth,  in  1437,   down   to   the   last   of  his 
Descendants;   with  only  the  two  exceptions  of  James 
the  First  of  England^  and  Charles  the  Second  ;  all  the 
others  perished  by  the  hand  of  the  executioner,  or  by 
violent  and  premature  death,  or  in  exile,  maintained  by 
foreign  contribution.     It  was  not  however  merely  con- 
sidered as  the  grandson  of  James  the  Second,  and  the 
Inheritor   of  the  pretensions  of  the  Stuarts,  that   the 
Chevalier  de  St.  George  excited  an  interest  in  the  mind 
of  every  reflecting  spectator.     By   his  mother   he   de- 
scended from   the   celebrated   John   Sobieski,  King  of 
Poland,  who  was  his  maternal  great  Grandfather ;  the 
first  Chevalier  de  St.  George  having  carried   off'  from 
Inspruck,  about  the  year  1719,  and  married,  Clemen- 
tina Sobieska,  daughter  and  heiress   of  Prince   James 
Sobieski,  whom  Charles  the  Twelfth,  King  of  Sweden, 
meditated,  some  years  earlier,  to  have  placed   on   the 
Polish   Throne.     In   right   of  that   Princess,   her    son 
succeeded    to    very    considerable    patrimonial    estates, 
situated   in  Poland;    the  produce  of  which   formed   a 
much  more  solid  source  of  support,  than  the  precarious 
allowance  or  donations,  made  and  withdrawn  as  circum- 
stances impelled,  by  the  French  and  Spanish  Crowns,  or 
by  the  Apostolic  See.     Clement  the  Fourteenth  (Gan- 
ganelli),  when  he  refused  to  continue  to  the  Chevalier, 
the  public  Honors  previously  enjoyed  by  his  father  and 
himself  at  Rome,  where  they  had  a  canopy  decorated 
with  the  Royal  Arms  of  Great   Britain,  erected   over 
their   box   in    the    theatre;    retrenched    likewise    the 
pecuniary  Appointments,  antecedently  paid  him  out  of 

178 


OLD  AGE  OF  CHARLES  EDWARD 

the  Treasury  of  St.  Peter.  Nor  do  I  believe  that  they 
were  restored  by  Pius  the  Sixth,  after  his  election  to 
the  Papal  Chair  in  1775  :  but,  the  Pretender's  income 
at  the  time  of  which  I  speak,  might  be  estimated  at 
more  than  five  thousand  Pounds  sterling ;  a  sum  fully 
adequate,  at  Florence,  to  maintain  an  establishment 
becoming  his  situation. 

His  faculties,  even  in  their  Zenith,  appear  to  have 
been  very  moderate  :  but  his  valour,  though  not  heroic, 
was  never,  I  believe,  called  in  question  by  the  Scots, 
during  his  Campaign  in  1745  and  1746 ;  as  that  of 
Charles  the  Second  had  been  doubted  in  1652,  at  the 
battle  of  Worcester;  and  as  James  the  Second's 
courage  was  questioned,  on  various  occasions,  both  as 
Lord  High  Admiral  on  the  water,  and  on  the  land. 
Charles  the  First  is  indeed  the  only  Prince  of  the  Stuart 
Race,  after  their  accession  to  the  English  Throne, 
whose  bravery,  conspicuously  displayed  at  Edge  Hill, 
at  Newbury,  at  Naseby,  and  in  many  other  battles  or 
encounters,  equally  sustained  him  in  the  last  act  of  his 
life,  on  the  Scaffold.  In  1779,  Charles  Edward  ex- 
hibited to  the  world  a  very  humiliating  spectacle.  At 
the  Theatre,  where  he  appeared  almost  every  evening, 
he  was  led  in  by  his  Domestics,  who  laid  him  down  on 
a  species  of  Sofa,  in  the  back  part  of  his  Box  ;  while  the 
Countess  d'Albany,  his  consort,  occupied  the  front 
seat  during  the  whole  performance.  Count  Alfieri,  her 
"  Cavaliero  servante"  always  attended  on  her  in  public, 
according  to  the  established  usages  of  society  throughout 
Italy.  As,  for  obvious  reasons,  no  English  subject  could 
be  presented  to  a  man  who  still  laid  claim  to  the  British 
Crown  ;  there  was  not  any  opportunity  of  seeing  the 
Chevalier  de  St.  George  which  offered  itself,  except 
across  the  Theatre  :  and  even  there  he  lay  concealed,  as 
I  have  already  observed,  on  account  of  his  infirmities ; 
rarely  coming  forward  to  view. 

Being    desirous,    nevertheless,    to     obtain    a     more 
179 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

accurate  idea  of  his  face  and  person,  than  could  be 
acquired  at  such  a  distance ;  I  took  my  station,  one 
evening,  at  the  head  of  a  private  staircase,  near  the 
door  by  which,  when  the  performance  closed,  he  quitted 
the  Playhouse.  Previous  to  my  leaving  England  in 
1777,  His  Majesty  had  been  pleased,  at  the  application 
of  Lord  Robert  Manners,  who  then  commanded  the 
third  regiment  of  Dragoon  Guards,  to  give  me  a 
Lieutenant's  Commission ;  and  Lord  Robert  had 
allowed  me  to  wear  his  Uniform,  which  I  had  on  at  the 
time.  The  present  General  Manners,  now  first  Equerry 
to  the  King,  then  a  Cornet  in  his  father's  regiment, 
dressed  in  the  same  Uniform,  and  actuated  by  a  similar 
curiosity,  accompanied  me.  As  soon  as  the  Chevalier 
approached  near  enough  to  distinguish  the  English 
Regimental,  he  instantly  stopped,  gently  shook  off  the 
two  servants  who  supported  him,  one  on  each  side ;  and 
taking  off  his  hat,  politely  saluted  us.  He  then  passed 
on  to  his  Carriage,  sustained  by  the  two  attendants,  as 
he  descended  the  staircase.  I  could  not  help,  as  I 
looked  at  him,  recollecting  the  series  of  dangers  and 
escapes  which  he  underwent  or  effected,  for  successive 
months,  among  the  Hebrides,  after  his  defeat  at 
Culloden  ;  a  chain  of  adventures  which  has  no  parallel, 
except  in  those  equally  extraordinary  hardships  which 
distinguished  the  flight  of  Charles  the  Second  from 
Worcester.  Mrs.  Lane  gave  to  that  King,  the  same 
noble  proofs  of  disinterested  devotion,  which  Flora 
Macdonald  displayed  towards  the  Pretender  :  and  both 
Princes  were  eminently  indebted  for  their  final  preserva- 
tion, to  female  loyalty.  Charles  Edward's  complexion 
was  dark,  and  he  manifestly  bore  the  same  family 
resemblance  to  his  grandfather  James  the  Second,  that 
His  Britannic  Majesty's  countenance  presents  to  George 
the  First,  or  to  the  late  King.  On  the  occasion  just 
related,  he  wore,  besides  the  Decorations  of  the  Order 
of  the  Garter,  a  velvet  great  coat,  which  his  infirm 

180 


PLOT  TO  RESTORE  THE  STUARTS 

health  rendered  necessary  even  in  Summer,  on  coming 
out  of  the  Theatre ;  and  a  cocked  hat,  the  sides  of 
which  were  half  drawn  up  with  gold  twist.  His  whole 
figure,  paralytic  and  debilitated,  presented  the  appear- 
ance of  great  bodily  decay. 

The  strength  of  his  mind  had  likewise  become  extinct 
at  this  time ;  and  with  the  decline  of  his  intellectual 
powers,  the  suavity  of  his  temper  forsaking  him,  he 
became  irritable,  morose,  and  intractable,  particularly 
in  his  family.  An  unhappy  propensity  to  wine,  which 
he  gratified  to  excess,  while  it  enervated  his  system, 
rendered  him  frequently  an  object  of  pity  or  of  con- 
tempt, when  in  public ;  divesting  him  of  that  dignity 
which  would  otherwise  have  always  accompanied  the 
representative  of  so  many  Kings.  His  misfortunes, 
exile,  and  anomalous  situation,  aggravated  by  mortifica- 
tions of  various  kinds  which  he  had  undergone,  both  in 
France,  and  at  Rome ;  probably  induced  him  to  have 
recourse  to  the  grape,  for  procuring  oblivion,  or  tem- 
porary felicity.  That  melancholy  indulgence  extin- 
guished the  last  hope  which  fortune  ever  tendered  him, 
of  ascending  the  Throne  of  England,  justly  forfeited  by 
the  tyranny  and  imbecile  bigotry  of  James  the  Second. 

I  know  from  high  authority,  that  as  late  as  the  year 
1770,  the  Duke  de  Choiseul,  then  First  Minister  of 
France,  not  deterred  by  the  ill  success  of  the  attempts 
made  in  1715,  and  in  1745,  meditated  to  undertake  a 
third  effort  for  restoring  the  House  of  Stuart.  His 
enterprizing  spirit  led  him  to  profit  of  the  dispute 
which  arose  between  the  English  and  Spanish  Crowns, 
respecting  the  possession  of  Falkland  Islands,  in  order 
to  accomplish  the  object.  As  the  first  step  towards  it, 
he  dispatched  a  private  emissary  to  Rome,  who  signified 
to  Charles  Edward,  the  Duke's  desire  of  seeing  him 
immediately  at  Paris.  He  complied,  and  arrived  in 
that  city  with  the  utmost  privacy.  Having  announced 
it  to  Choiseul,  the  Minister  fixed  the  same  night  at 

181 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

twelve  o'clock,  when  he  and  the  Marshal  de  Broglio 
would  be  ready  to  receive  the  Pretender,  and  to  lay 
before  him  their  plan  for  an  invasion  of  England.  The 
Hotel  de  Choiseul  was  named  for  the  interview,  to 
which  place  he  was  enjoined  to  repair  in  a  hackney 
Coach,  disguised,  and  without  any  attendant.  At  the 
appointed  time,  the  Duke  and  the  Marshal,  furnished 
with  the  requisite  papers  and  instructions  drawn  up  for 
his  conduct  on  the  expedition,  were  ready :  but,  after 
waiting  a  full  hour,  expecting  his  appearance  every 
instant,  when  the  Clock  struck  one,  they  concluded  that 
some  unforeseen  accident  must  have  intervened  to 
prevent  his  arrival.  Under  this  impression  they  were 
preparing  to  separate,  when  the  noise  of  wheels  was 
heard  in  the  court  yard,  and  a  few  moments  afterwards, 
the  Pretender  entered  the  room,  in  a  state  of  such 
intoxication,  as  to  be  utterly  incapable  even  of  ordinary 
conversation.  Disgusted  as  well  as  indignant  at  this 
disgraceful  conduct,  and  well  convinced  that  no 
expedition  undertaken  for  the  restoration  of  a  man  so 
lost  to  every  sense  of  decency  or  self  interest,  could  be 
crowned  with  success ;  Choiseul,  without  hesitation, 
sent  him,  next  morning,  a  peremptory  order  to  quit  the 
French  Dominions.  The  Pretender  returned  to  Italy ; 
and  the  Nobleman  who  related  to  me  these  particulars, 
being  in  company  with  the  late  Duke  of  Glocester,  in 
1770,  while  walking  together  in  the  streets  of  Genoa, 
met  the  Chevalier  de  St.  George,  then  on  his  way  back 
from  France  to  Rome.  The  Duke  de  Choiseul  was 
soon  afterwards  dismissed  by  Louis  the  Fifteenth ;  new 
principles  of  policy  were  adopted  in  the  Cabinet  of 
Versailles ;  the  business  of  the  Falkland  Islands  being 
accommodated,  peace  continued  to  subsist  between  the 
Courts  of  France  and  England :  while  Charles  Edward, 
driven  by  the  mortifications  which  he  experienced  at 
Rome,  to  abandon  that  city,  sought  refuge  at  Florence ; 
where  he  finished  in  January,  1784,  his  inglorious  career, 

182 


DEATH  OF  CHARLES  EDWARD 

as   James  the   Second   had   done   at  the  palace  of  St. 
Germain,  in  1701. 

Louisa,  Countess  d1  Albany,  his  Consort,  merited  a 
more  agreeable  partner,  and  might  have  graced  a 
Throne.  When  I  saw  her  at  Florence,  though  she  had 
been  long  married,  she  was  not  quite  twenty-seven  years 
of  age.  Her  person  was  formed  on  a  small  scale,  with 
a  fair  complexion,  delicate  features,  and  lively,  as  well 
as  attractive  manners.  Born  Princess  of  Stolberg,  she 
excited  great  admiration  on  her  first  arrival  from 
Germany :  but  in  1779,  no  hope  of  issue  by  the  Cheva- 
lier could  be  any  longer  entertained ;  and  their  mutual 
infelicity  had  attained  to  such  a  height,  that  she  made 
various  ineffectual  attempts  to  obtain  a  separation. 
The  French  Court  may  indeed  be  censured  for  not 
having  earlier  negociated  and  concluded  the  Pretender's 
marriage,  if  it  was  desired  to  perpetuate  the  Stuart 
Line  of  Claimants.  When  Charles  Edward  espoused 
Louisa,  Princess  of  Stolberg,  he  was  past  his  fiftieth 
year,  broken  in  constitution,  and  debilitated  by  excesses 
of  many  kinds.  After  his  decease,  she  quitted  Italy, 
and  finally  established  herself  at  Paris.  In  the  year 
1787,  I  have  passed  the  evening  at  her  residence,  the 
Hotel  de  Bourgogne,  in  the  Fauxbourg  St.  Germain, 
where  she  supported  an  elegant  establishment.  Her 
person  then  still  retained  many  pretensions  to  beauty ; 
and  her  deportment,  unassuming,  but  dignified,  set  off 
her  attractions.  In  one  of  the  apartments  stood  a 
Canopy,  with  a  chair  of  state,  on  which  were  displayed 
the  royal  Arms  of  Great  Britain ;  and  every  piece  of 
plate,  down  to  the  tea  spoons,  were  ornamented  in  a 
similar  manner.  Some  of  the  more  massy  pieces,  which 
were  said  to  have  belonged  to  Mary  of  Modena,  James 
the  Second's  Queen,  seemed  to  revive  the  extinct 
recollections  of  the  Revolution  of  1688.  A  numerous 
company,  both  English  and  French,  male  and  female, 
was  assembled  under  her  roof,  by  all  of  whom  she  was 

183 


WRAXALKS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

addressed  only  as  Countess  d'Albany :  but  her  own 
domestics,  when  serving  her,  invariably  gave  her  the 
title  of  Majesty.  The  Honours  of  a  Queen,  were  in 
like  manner  paid  her  by  the  Nuns  of  all  those  Convents 
in  Paris,  which  she  was  accustomed  to  visit  on  certain 
Holydays  or  festivals.  She  continued  to  reside  in  the 
Capital  of  France,  till  the  calamitous  progress  of  the 
French  Revolution  compelling  her  to  abandon  that 
country,  she  repaired  to  London  ;  where  she  found  not 
only  personal  protection,  but  new  resources  in  the 
liberality  and  bounty  of  George  the  Third. 

While  I  am  engaged  on  the  subject  of  the  Stuart 
family,  I  shall  commemorate  a  fact,  which  will  probably, 
on  perusal,  impress  every  reader  with  as  much  astonish- 
ment as  it  did  myself  at  first  hearing  it.  Dining  at  the 
present  Earl  of  Hardwicke's,  in  London,  with  a  large 
company,  in  June,  1796  ;  among  the  persons  present, 
was  the  late  Sir  John  Dalrymple,  known  by  his 
"History  of  England,"  and  "State  Papers.11  The 
conversation  turning  on  historical  subjects,  he  assured 
us  that  the  Princess  Sophia,  mother  of  King  George  the 
First,  who  only  failed  in  ascending  the  throne  of  Great 
Britain  in  her  own  person,  by  dying  about  seven  weeks 
before  Queen  Anne;  was,  nevertheless,  a  determined 
Jacobite  in  her  political  principles.  On  our  expressing 
the  amazement  which  such  an  assertion  was  calculated 
to  produce,  he  declared,  that  while  he  was  occupied  in 
looking  over  the  Chest  in  Kensington  Palace,  from 
which,  in  the  beginning  of  the  present  reign,  he  took 
the  State  Papers  that  he  had  given  to  the  world ;  he 
found  a  bundle  of  Letters,  marked  on  the  back,  in  King 
WillianVs  own  hand-writing,  "  Letters  of  the  Electress 
"Sophia  to  the  Court  of  St.  Germain V1  Having 
perused  them,  he  ascertained  that  Sophia  was  really  in 
close  Correspondence  with  James  the  Second,  and 
attached  to  his  interests,  in  opposition  to  those  of 
William.  Lord  Rochford,  who  had  procured  for  Sir 

184 


THE  ELECTRESS  SOPHIA'S  LETTERS 

John  Dairy mple,  permission  from  His  Majesty,  to 
examine  and  publish  the  Papers  in  question  ;  being  then 
Secretary  of  State,  he  immediately  communicated  to 
that  Nobleman  his  discovery :  requesting  at  the  same 
time,  his  Lordship's  opinion  on  the  propriety  of  giving 
to  the  world,  the  Letters  of  the  Electress  Sophia. 
"  Publish  them  by  all  means,  Jack,"  answered  he.  Thus 
empowered,  from  such  authority,  Dalrymple  destined 
them  for  the  press :  but,  before  he  had  time  to  get  the 
Letters  copied,  Lord  Rochford  sent  to  him,  desiring  to 
have  them  delivered  back  to  himself,  in  order  that  he 
might  submit  them  to  His  Majesty's  inspection;  he 
having,  on  more  mature  reflection,  judged  it  proper  to 
take  the  King's  pleasure  on  a  matter  of  such  delicacy 
and  singularity.  Dalrymple  returned  them  therefore 
to  Lord  Rochford,  who  carried  them  to  the  Queen's 
House,  and  presented  the  Bundle  to  His  Majesty.  But, 
they  were  neither  restored,  nor  was  even  any  allusion  to 
them  ever  made  in  conversation  by  the  King ;  he  no 
doubt  conceiving  it  more  judicious  to  commit  such 
documents  to  the  flames,  than  to  permit  their  publica- 
tion. However  extraordinary  this  Anecdote  may 
appear,  it  ought  not  to  surprize,  on  full  consideration, 
that  Sophia  should  feel  the  warmest  attachment  to 
James  the  Second.  He  was  very  nearly  related  to  her 
by  Consanguinity,  her  mother,  Elizabeth,  the  unfor- 
tunate Queen  of  Bohemia  and  Charles  the  First,  his 
father,  being  brother  and  sister.  Nor  could  Sophia, 
during  many  years  subsequent  to  the  Revolution  of 
1688,  nourish  the  slightest  expectation  of  being  called 
to  the  British  throne,  while  the  Princess  Anne  and  her 
issue  interposed  between  the  House  of  Brunswic  and 
that  succession.  It  was  not  till  after  the  death  of 
William,  the  young  Duke  of  Glocester,  in  1700,  when 
the  Princess  Sophia  and  her  Descendants  being  named 
by  Act  of  Parliament,  to  succeed  eventually  to  the 
Crown  of  Great  Britain,  as  the  nearest  Protestant  heirs 

185 


WRAXALI/S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

of  the  Royal  line ;  her  interests  from  that  time,  became 
opposed  to  the  right  of  blood  existing  in  the  Stuart 
race. 

Brussels,  where  I  made  a  short  stay  in  the  Summer  of 
the  same  year,  1779,  exhibited  another  Prince  in  a  state 
of  corporal  and  mental  infirmity,  not  less  calculated  to 
excite  pity  than  the  Pretender.  The  Austrian  Nether- 
lands were  then  administered,  as  they  had  been  almost 
ever  since  the  Peace  of  Aix-la-Chapelle  in  1748,  by 
Prince  Charles  of  Lorrain.  His  double  alliance,  both 
by  consanguinity  and  by  marriage,  with  the  Emperor 
Francis  and  Maria  Theresa ;  being  brother  to  the  former, 
and  having  married  the  sister  of  the  latter  Sovereign ; 
— these  qualities  and  pretensions,  rather  than  any  mental 
endowments,  civil  or  military,  had  raised  him  to  the 

government  of  the  Low  Countries,  the  most  enviable 
elegation  of  sovereign  power  in  Europe.  Neither 
Hungary,  nor  the  Milanese,  nor  Sicily,  nor  Sardinia, 
nor  Ireland,  nor  Norway,  could  enter  into  any  political 
competition  with  the  rich  provinces  of  Flanders,  Hay- 
nault,  and  Brabant.  Brussels  constituted  one  of  the 
most  pleasing,  as  well  as  elegant  Courts  of  the  Con- 
tinent ;  its  local  position,  almost  central  between 
Germany,  Holland,  France,  and  England,  rendering  it 
far  more  important  in  a  diplomatic  point  of  view,  than 
either  Turin,  Warsaw,  or  Naples;  perhaps  even  than 
Copenhagen,  or  Stockholm.  Prince  Charles  of  Lorrain, 
having  been  bred  to  the  profession  of  arms  from  his 
early  youth,  and  possessing  an  athletic  frame  of  body, 
with  unquestionable  personal  courage,  had  more  than 
once  nominally  commanded  the  Austrian  armies.  His 
passage  of  the  Rhine  in  1744,  and  his  irruption  into 
Alsace,  acquired  him  a  degree  of  Reputation,  which  he 
by  no  means  afterwards  preserved,  during  the  memor- 
able "  Seven  years  War.11  To  Frederic,  King  of  Prussia 
he  was  indeed  a  most  unequal  antagonist,  as  that  great 
Prince  sufficiently  proved  at  the  battle  of  Lissa,  in 

186 


THE  GLOOM  OF  DEFEAT 

December,  1757,  where  he  defeated  the  Austrians,  and 
on  many  other  occasions.  When  I  was  presented  to 
Prince  Charles,  in  August  1779,  he  might  be  regarded 
as  performing  the  last  of  the  Seven  Ages  of  Man,  and 
as  sinking  fast  into  "  mere  oblivion."  At  his  Levee  he 
seemed  apparently  unconscious  of  any  thing  beyond  the 
mere  ceremony  of  the  hour,  even  his  speech  and  articula- 
tion being  rendered  very  indistinct  by  a  paralytic  affec- 
tion. He  expired  in  the  following  Summer,  at  his  palace 
in  the  vicinity  of  Brussels,  regretted  by  the  Flemings  for 
his  moderation :  and  was  succeeded  in  the  Government 
general  of  the  Netherlands,  by  the  Archduchess  Christina, 
the  favorite  daughter  of  the  Empress  Queen  Maria 
Theresa. 

Never  did  a  deeper  political  gloom  overspread  England, 
than  in  the  Autumn  of  1779,  when  I  arrived  in  London 
from  the  Continent.  I  question,  whether  at  the  time  of 
the  Destruction  of  the  ships  of  war  lying  in  the  Medway, 
burnt  by  the  Dutch,  under  Charles  the  Second ;  or  after 
the  defeat  of  the  English  and  Dutch  fleets  by  the  French, 
off  Beachy-Head,  in  1690,  under  William  and  Mary  ; 
which  constitute  two  of  the  most  calamitous  Epochas  in 
our  History ;  greater  despondency,  consternation,  and 
general  dissatisfaction  prevailed  throughout  the  King- 
dom. The  disgraceful  naval  Campaign  of  1778,  in 
which  KeppePs  engagement  off  Ushant  forms  the  princi- 
pal or  only  feature  ;  had  been  succeeded  by  another  year 
of  Hostilities,  still  more  humiliating  to  Great  Britain. 
D'Orvilliers,  at  the  head  of  the  fleets  of  France  and 
Spain,  rode  Master  of  the  Channel  for  a  considerable 
time  ;  and  the  total  want  of  enterprize,  or  of  information 
on  their  part,  alone  saved  the  Town,  as  well  as  the 
Dock-yards  at  Plymouth,  from  falling  into  the  enemy's 
possession.  Not  only  was  the  place  in  want  of  many 
indispensable  articles  for  repelling  an  Attack :  even 
flints  for  the  muskets,  however  incredible  the  fact  may 
appear,  were  deficient.  Sir  Charles  Hardy,  who  com- 

187 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

manded  our  fleet ;  inferior  in  numbers,  and  unapprized 
of  the  enemy's  approach  to  the  coast  of  England,  re- 
mained quietly  cruizing  in  the  Atlantic,  while  they  thus 
menaced  our  shores.  Happily,  the  defect  of  intelligence, 
or  of  mutual  confidence  in  the  combined  Squadrons, 
supplied  every  Ministerial  neglect ;  and  extricated  the 
country  from  a  calamity,  which,  had  it  taken  place,  must 
have  shaken  not  only  the  Administration,  but  would 
have  convulsed  the  Throne  itself.  Faction  did  not  how- 
ever less  pervade  the  Navy,  where  the  respective  adherents 
of  Keppel  and  of  Palliser,  carried  their  reciprocal  rancour 
to  the  utmost  height.  The  American  war,  after  four 
unsuccessful  Campaigns,  began  to  grow  odious  to  the 
nation :  while  the  Administration,  depressed  under  the 
weight  of  a  contest,  to  which  the  talents  of  the  great 
Earl  of  Chatham  might  have  been  found  unequal,  did 
not  manifest  or  exert  the  energy  demanded  by  the  nature 
of  the  emergency.  Even  the  King,  notwithstanding  a 
display  of  private  virtues,  which  since  Charles  the  First 
had  not  been  exhibited  by  any  Sovereign  of  Great 
Britain,  not  even  by  William  the  Third,  yet  fully 
participated  in  the  unpopularity  of  his  Ministers.  As 
he  was  supposed  to  feel  a  more  than  common  interest 
in  the  reduction  of  his  revolted  subjects,  so  he  was 
believed  to  exert  a  more  than  ordinary  personal  in- 
fluence over  the  Cabinet  which  directed  the  operations 
of  the  war. 

After  the  return  of  Lord  Howe  in  1778,  from  his 
unsuccessful  Campaigns  in  America,  the  supreme  naval 
command  on  that  coast,  as  well  as  in  the  West  Indies, 
devolved  on  Admiral  Byron.  He  was  a  brother  of  Lord 
Byron,  whose  Duel  with  Mr.  Chaworth  rendered  him 
unfortunately  conspicuous  in  the  Journals  of  the  House 
of  Peers.  At  an  early  period  of  his  life,  having  been 
wrecked  on  the  desart  Coast  of  Patagonia,  not  far 
from  Cape  Horn,  with  Captain  Cheap,  in  the  "  Wager  " 
Frigate,  he  there  endured  inconceivable  hardships, 

188 


"FOUL  WEATHER  JACK" 

during  a  great  length  of  time.  An  intrepid  and 
skilful,  no  less  than  an  experienced  naval  Officer,  he  was 
nevertheless  deficient  in  the  judgment,  promptitude, 
and  decision  of  character,  requisite  for  conducting  the 
operations  of  a  numerous  fleet.  On  the  element  of  the 
water,  an  evil  destiny  seemed  invariably  to  accompany 
him,  from  his  first  expedition  under  Commodore  Anson, 
down  to  the  close  of  his  professional  life.  So  well  was 
this  fact  known  in  the  Navy,  that  the  sailors  bestowed 
on  him  the  name  of  "  Foul  Weather  Jack,"  and  esteemed 
themselves  certain  of  stormy  weather,  whenever  they 
sailed  under  his  Command.  From  the  time  of  his 
leaving  England  in  1778,  till  his  return  about  two 
years  afterwards,  all  the  tempests  of  the  deep  seemed 
to  have  conspired  against  him.  No  man  could  less  say 
with  ^Eolus,  or  rather  with  Holstenius, 

"  Ventorumque  facis  Tempestatumque  potentem  ;" 
Virgil  having  written  the  line, 

"  Nimborumque  facis  Tempestatumque  potentem." 

During  the  action  which  Byron  fought  with  D'Estaign, 
in  July,  1779,  off  Grenada,  all  the  characteristic  valour 
of  the  British  was  displayed,  not  only  by  the  crews,  but 
by  the  Captains  and  their  Commander.  Yet  the  honors 
of  the  day  were  divided,  while  the  advantages  of  it 
were  reaped  by  France ;  though  the  slaughter  of  men 
on  the  side  of  the  French  prodigiously  exceeded  our 
loss.  But,  the  West  India  islands,  one  after  another, 
fell  into  the  enemy's  hands ;  and  after  the  surrender  of 
Grenada,  when  D'Estaign  quitted  Martinico,  to  carry 
the  arms  of  Louis  the  Sixteenth  against  Savannah,  he 
triumphantly  swept  the  coast  of  America.  We  must 
reluctantly  confess,  that  the  Navy  of  England  at  this 
period  of  the  present  Reign,  had  sunk  to  a  point  of 
depression  hardly  conceivable,  when  compared  with  the 

189 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

times  of  Hawke,  Saunders,  and  Boscawen ;  or  if  placed 
near  the  still  more  splendid  period  of  Jervis,  Duncan, 
and  Nelson.  We  may  incline  to  attribute  so  extra- 
ordinary a  contrast,  to  the  errors  or  inability  of  Lord 
North's  Administration  :  the  popular  voice,  I  well  know, 
sanctioned  that  accusation  :  but  its  cause  lay  principally 
in  the  nature  of  the  contest,  which  depressing  the 
national  energy,  unnerved  the  British  spirit,  and 
allowed  France,  during  near  four  years,  from  1778  to 
1782,  aided  by  Spain,  to  make  such  exertions,  as  ac- 
quired them  a  temporary  ascendant  on  the  Ocean. 
Byron,  recalled  from  his  Command  soon  afterwards 
revisited  England,  and  his  name  occurs  no  more  in  our 
naval  History :  but  it  has  derived  new  Celebrity  in  the 
present  times,  from  the  poetic  eminence  to  which  his 
grandson  has  attained,  by  productions  emulating  the 
fame  of  Spenser,  of  Gray,  of  Mason,  and  of  Scott. 

To  Byron,  succeeded  Rodney,  who  fills  so  dis- 
tinguished a  place  during  the  unfortunate  period  of 
the  American  war:  a  naval  Commander  as  much 
distinguished  by  the  prosperous  fatality  which  attended 
him,  as  Byron  seemed  to  be  under  the  influence  of  an 
unlucky  Planet.  Cardinal  Mazarin,  who,  before  he 
employed  any  individual,  always  asked,  "  Est  il 
heureux  ? "  had  he  been  First  Minister  of  England, 
might  have  selected  Rodney,  upon  that  principle,  from 
among  all  the  Admirals  in  the  Navy.  His  person  was 
more  elegant  than  seemed  to  become  his  rough  pro- 
fession. There  was  even  something  that  approached  to 
delicacy  and  effeminacy  in  his  figure :  but  no  man 
manifested  a  more  temperate  and  steady  courage  in 
Action.  I  had  the  honor  to  live  in  great  personal 
intimacy  with  him,  and  have  often  heard  him  declare, 
that  superiority  to  fear  was  not  in  him  the  physical 
effect  of  constitution ;  on  the  contrary,  no  man  being 
more  sensible  by  nature  to  that  passion  than  himself; 
but  that  he  surmounted  it  from  the  considerations  of 

190 


ADMIRAL  RODNEY 

honor  and  public  duty.  Like  the  famous  Marshal 
Villars,  he  justly  incurred  the  reputation  of  being 
"  glorieux  et  bayard;""  making  himself  frequently  the 
theme  of  his  own  discourse.  He  talked  much  and 
freely  upon  every  subject ;  concealed  nothing  in  the 
course  of  conversation,  regardless  who  were  present ; 
and  dealt  his  censures,  as  well  as  his  praises,  with 
imprudent  liberality :  qualities  which  necessarily  pro- 
cured him  many  enemies,  particularly  in  his  own 
profession.  Throughout  his  whole  life,  two  passions, 
both  highly  injurious  to  his  repose,  women  and  Play, 
carried  him  into  many  excesses.  It  was  universally 
believed  that  he  had  been  distinguished  in  his  youth, 
by  the  personal  attachment  of  the  Princess  Amelia, 
daughter  of  George  the  Second,  who  displayed  the 
same  partiality  for  Rodney,  which  her  cousin,  the 
Princess  Amelia  of  Prussia,  manifested  for  Trenck.  A 
living  evidence  of  the  former  connexion  existed,  unless 
fame  had  recourse  to  fiction  for  support.  But,  detrac- 
tion, in  every  age,  from  Elizabeth  down  to  the  present 
times,  has  not  spared  the  most  illustrious  females. 

The  love  of  Play  had  proved  more  ruinous  in  its 
effects  to  Rodney,  and  that  indulgence  compelled  him, 
after  quitting  England,  to  take  refuge  at  Paris.  So 
great  was  his  pecuniary  distress  while  he  resided  in  the 
French  Capital,  as  to  induce  him  to  send  over  his 
second  wife  to  London,  early  in  1777,  with  the  view 
of  procuring  a  subscription  to  be  opened  among  the 
Members  of  the  Club  at  White's,  for  his  relief.  Lady 
Rodney  finding  it  however  impracticable  to  raise  am 
supplies  from  that  source ;  after  much  ineffectual 
solicitation  among  Sir  George's  former  friends,  finally 
renounced  the  attempt.  The  old  Marshal  de  Biron 
having  soon  afterwards,  by  an  act  of  liberality,  enabled 
Rodney  to  revisit  his  country,  he  made  the  strongest 
applications  to  the  Admiralty  for  employment.  His 
private  circumstances,  indeed,  imperiously  demanded 

191 


WRAXALKS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

every  exertion  when  he  was  named,  towards  the  Autumn 
of  1779,  to  command  the  expedition  then  fitting  out  at 
Portsmouth,  for  the  West  Indies.  I  passed  much  time 
with  him,  at  his  residence  in  Cleveland  Row,  St.  Jameses, 
down  to  the  very  moment  of  his  departure.  Naturally 
sanguine  and  confident,  he  anticipated  in  his  daily  con- 
versation, with  a  sort  of  certainty,  the  future  success 
which  he  should  obtain  over  the  enemy;  and  he  had 
not  only  already  conceived,  but  he  had  delineated,  on 
paper  the  naval  Manoeuvre  of  breaking,  or  intersecting 
the  Line,  to  which  he  afterwards  was  indebted  in  an 
eminent  degree,  for  his  brilliant  victory  over  De  Grasse  : 
a  Manoeuvre  then  new  in  maritime  Tactics,  though 
now  become  familiar  to  us ;  and  which  Nelson  practised 
with  so  much  effect,  in  the  Battle  of  the  Nile,  as  well 
as  on  other  occasions.  Rodney  possessed  no  superior 
parts;  but,  unlike  Keppel,  his  enterprizing  spirit 
always  impelled  him  rather  to  risk,  than  to  act  with 
caution,  when  in  presence  of  the  enemy.  The  ardor  of 
his  character  supplied,  in  some  degree,  the  physical 
defects  of  his  health  and  constitution,  already  impaired 
by  various  causes:  while  his  happy  audacity,  directed 
by  the  nautical  skill  of  others,  controuled  by  science, 
and  propelled  by  favourable  circumstances,  at  length 
enabled  him  to  dissipate  the  gloom  that  had  so  long 
overhung  our  naval  Annals,  at  the  same  time  that  he 
covered  himself  with  great  personal  glory. 

The  Ministry  sustained  about  this  time,  a  diminution 
of  strength,  and  a  loss  of  talents  in  the  House  of  Peers, 
which  an  Administration  so  unpopular  could  ill  afford, 
by  the  defection  of  Lord  Lyttelton,  who  suddenly  went 
over  to  the  side  of  Opposition.  His  decease,  not  less 
sudden  in  its  nature,  took  place  immediately  afterwards. 
He  was  a  man  of  very  considerable  parliamentary 
abilities,  who,  notwithstanding  the  many  glaring  vices 
of  his  private  character,  might  have  made  a  conspicuous 
political  figure,  if  he  had  not  been  carried  off  in  the 

192 


THE  LYTTELTON  SPECTRE 

prime  of  life.  His  father,  the  first  Lord  Lyttelton, 
well  known  as  an  Historian  and  a  Poet,  derived  not  less 
respect  from  the  elevation  of  his  mind,  and  his  many 
domestic  virtues.  The  second  Lord  Lyttelton,  by  the 
profligacy  of  his  conduct,  and  the  abuse  of  his  talents, 
seemed  to  emulate  Dryden's  Duke  of  Buckingham,  or 
Pope's  Duke  of  Wharton  ;  both  of  whom  he  resembled 
in  the  superiority  of  his  natural  endowments,  as  well  as 
in  the  peculiarity  of  his  end.  Villiers,  the  "  Zimri "  of 
Dry  den's  Poem  of  "  Absalom  and  Achitophel ;"  after 
exhausting  his  health,  and  squandering  his  immense 
fortune  in  every  species  of  excess  or  riot,  expired,  as  is 
well  known,  at  a  wretched  tenement,  on  his  own  estate 
near  Helmsley,  in  Yorkshire,  abandoned  by  all  his 
former  admirers.  Wharton,  who  acted  a  part  under 
George  the  First,  hardly  less  distinguished  or  eccentric, 
than  Villiers  had  performed  under  Charles  the  Second ; 
terminated  his  equally  extraordinary  career,  exiled  and 
attainted,  among  the  Pyrenees,  in  an  obscure  Monastery 
of  Catalonia,  worn  out  by  his  pursuit  of  pleasures. 
Lyttelton,  when  scarcely  thirty-six,  breathed  his  last  at 
a  country  house  near  Epsom,  called  Pit  Place,  from  its 
situation  in  a  chalk  pit,  where  he  witnessed,  as  he  con- 
ceived, a  supernatural  appearance. 

Having  gone  down  there  for  purposes  of  recreation, 
with  a  gay  party  of  both  sexes,  several  among  whom  I 
personally  knew ;  he  had  retired  to  bed,  when  a  noise 
which  resembled  the  fluttering  of  a  dove  or  pidgeon 
heard  at  his  chamber  window,  attracted  his  attention. 
He  then  saw,  or  thought  he  saw,  a  female  figure,  which 
approaching  the  foot  of  the  bed,  announced  to  him 
that  in  three  days  precisely  from  that  time,  he  should 
be  called  from  this  state  of  existence.  In  whatever 
manner  the  supposed  intimation  was  conveyed,  whether 
by  sound  or  by  impression,  it  is  certain  that  Lord 
Lyttelton  considered  the  circumstance  as  real ;  that  he 
mentioned  it  as  such,  to  those  persons  who  were  in  the 

193  13 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

house  with  him,  that  it  deeply  affected  his  mind,  and 
that  he  died  on  the  third  night,  at  the  predicted  hour. 
About  four  years  afterwards,  in  the  year  1783,  dining 
at  Pit  Place,  I  had  the  curiosity  to  visit  the  bed- 
chamber, where  the  casement  window,  at  which,  as 
Lord  Lyttleton  asserted,  the  dove  appeared  to  flutter, 
was  pointed  out  to  me.  And  at  his  step-mother's,  the 
Dowager  Lady  Lyttelton\s,  in  Portugal  Street,  Gros- 
venor  Square,  who  being  a  woman  of  very  lively 
imagination,  lent  an  implicit  faith  to  all  the  super- 
natural facts  which  were  supposed  to  have  accompanied 
or  produced  Lord  Lyttelton's  end;  I  have  frequently 
seen  a  painting,  which  she  herself  executed  in  1780, 
expressly  to  commemorate  the  event.  It  hung  in  a 
conspicuous  part  of  her  drawing  room.  There,  the 
dove  appears  at  the  window,  while  a  female  figure, 
habited  in  white,  stands  at  the  bed  foot,  announcing 
to  Lord  Lyttelton  his  dissolution.  Every  part  of  the 
picture  was  faithfully  designed  after  the  description 
given  her  by  the  Valet  de  Chambre  who  attended  him, 
to  whom  his  master  related  all  the  circumstances. 
This  man  assured  Lady  Lyttelton,  that  on  the  night 
indicated,  Lord  Lyttelton,  who,  notwithstanding  his 
endeavours  to  surmount  the  impression,  had  suffered 
under  great  depression  of  spirits  during  the  three 
preceding  days,  retired  to  bed  before  twelve  o'clock. 
Having  ordered  the  Valet  to  mix  him  some  Rhubarb, 
he  sat  up  in  the  bed,  apparently  in  health,  intending 
to  swallow  the  medicine ;  but,  being  in  want  of  a  tea 
spoon,  which  the  servant  had  neglected  to  bring,  his 
master,  with  a  strong  expression  of  impatience,  sent 
him  to  bring  a  spoon.  He  was  not  absent  from  the 
room  more  than  the  space  of  a  minute ;  but  when  he 
returned,  Lord  Lyttelton,  who  had  fallen  back,  lay 
motionless  in  that  attitude.  No  efforts  to  restore 
animation,  were  attended  with  success.  Whether, 
therefore,  his  death  was  occasioned  by  any  new  shock 

194 


NORTH'S  PARLIAMENTARY  DIFFICULTIES 

upon  his  nerves,  or  happened  in  consequence  of  an 
Apoplectic  or  other  seizure,  must  remain  matter  of 
uncertainty  and  conjecture. 

It  is  however  to  be  observed,  that  the  Lyttelton 
family,  either  from  constitutional  nervous  irritability, 
or  from  other  causes,  was  peculiarly  susceptible  of 
impressions  similar  to  the  shock  which  seems  to  have 
produced  Lord  Lyttleton's  end.  His  father,  though  a 
man  of  very  distinguished  talents,  manifested  great 
credulity,  as  I  have  been  assured,  on  the  subject  of 
Apparitions :  and  his  cousin,  Miss  Lyttelton,  who 
married  the  present  Sir  Richard  Hoare,  died  in  a  way 
somewhat  similar,  about  four  years  later,  at  Stourhead. 
The  second  Lord  Lyttelton's  life  had  likewise  been 
of  a  nature  and  description  so  licentious,  not  to  say 
abandoned,  as  to  subject  him  continually  to  the  keenest 
reproaches  of  an  accusing  conscience.  This  domestic 
spectre,  which  accompanied  him  every  where,  was  known 
to  have  given  rise,  while  on  his  travels,  particularly  at 
Lyons,  to  scenes  greatly  resembling  his  last  moments. 
Among  the  females  who  had  been  the  objects  and  the 
victims  of  his  temporary  attachment,  was  a  Mrs. 
Dawson,  whose  fortune,  as  well  as  her  honor  and  reputa- 
tion, fell  a  sacrifice  to  her  passion.  Being  soon  for- 
saken by  him,  she  did  not  long  survive ;  and  distress  of 
mind  was  known  to  have  accelerated,  if  not  to  have 
produced  her  death.  It  was  her  image  which  haunted 
his  pillow,  and  was  supposed  by  him  to  have  announced 
his  approaching  dissolution  at  Pit  Place. 

Lord  North,  who  had  presided  during  ten  years  at 
the  head  of  Administration,  continued  in  the  Spring  of 
1780,  to  struggle  with  the  utmost  difficulty  through  the 
sixth  Session  of  Parliament,  against  a  numerous  and 
augmenting  Opposition  in  both  Houses.  His  resigna- 
tion, anxiously  anticipated,  seemed  to  be  inevitable,  and 
even  imminent :  but  the  ministerial  disgraces,  as  well 
as  the  triumphs  of  the  adverse  party,  were  equally 

195 


WRAXALI/S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

obliterated  in  a  Calamity,  which   for   the  time  of  its 
duration,  absorbed  all  attention. — I  mean  the  Riots  of 
June,  1780.     No  event  in  our  Annals  bears  any  analogy 
with  the  scene  then  exhibited  in   the   Capital,  except 
the  Fire  of  London  under  Charles  the  Second.     Even 
that  misfortune  wanted   some   of  the  melancholy  and 
sanguinary  features  which  characterized  the  tumults  in 
question.     During  the  conflagration  of  1666,  whatever 
stories   may    have   been   invented    by   party    rage,   or 
commemorated    on    public    Monuments,    by    religious 
Antipathy,  the  inhabitants  had  only  to  contend  with 
the    progress   of  a   devouring   element.     In   1780,  the 
flames  were  originally  kindled,  as  well  as  rendered  far 
more  destructive,  by  a  populace  of  the  lowest  and  vilest 
description,   who    carried    with    them,   wherever    they 
moved,  the  materials  of  universal  ruin.     It  was  only  in 
their   blood,  by  the  interposition  of  an  overwhelming 
military    force,    that    the    convulsion    became    finally 
arrested;   and   that   London,  after  being  desolated  by 
fire,  was  rescued   from  plunder,  bankruptcy,  and   sub- 
version.    Even   the    French    Revolution,   which    from 
July,  1789,  down  to  April,  1814,  either  under  the  forms 
of  a  Republic,  or  of  a  military  Despotism,  has  presented 
to   mankind  a  pattern   of  every   crime  revolting   and 
degrading  to  human  nature ;  yet  did   not  produce   in 
the  Capital  of  France,  any  similar  outrages.     At  Lyons, 
it  must  be  admitted  that   Collot   d'Herbois   in    1793, 
exercised  the  most  savage  vengeance  on  the  Buildings 
of  the   city,   as   well   as   on   the   unfortunate   Inhabi- 
tants.    But,  neither  Robespierre,  nor  Bonaparte,  though 
the   former   converted  the   Metropolis   into  a  charnel- 
house  ;   and  though  the  vengeance,  or  atrocious  ambi- 
tion of  the  latter  Adventurer  has  covered  Europe  with 
human  bones,  from  the  Tagus  to  the  Moskwa ;  yet  ever 
directed  their  destructive  efforts  against  the  public  and 
private  edifices  of  Paris. 

I    was    personally   present    at    many    of    the    most 
196 


THE  GORDON  RIOTS 

tremendous  effects  of  the  popular  fury  on  the  memor- 
able 7th  of  June,  the  night  on  which  it  attained 
its  highest  point.  About  nine  o'clock  on  that  even- 
ing, accompanied  by  three  other  Gentlemen,  who,  as 
well  as  myself,  were  alarmed  at  the  accounts  brought 
in  every  moment,  of  the  outrages  committed ;  and 
of  the  still  greater  acts  of  violence  meditated,  as 
soon  as  darkness  should  favor  and  facilitate  their 
further  progress ;  we  set  out  from  Portland-place,  in 
order  to  view  the  scene.  Having  got  into  a  hackney- 
coach,  we  drove  to  Bloomsbury-square ;  attracted  to 
that  spot  by  a  Rumour  generally  spread,  that  Lord 
Mansfield's  residence,  situate  at  the  North-east  corner, 
was  either  already  burnt,  or  destined  for  destruction. 
Hart-Street  and  Great  Russell-Street  presented,  each,  to 
the  view,  as  we  passed,  large  fires  composed  of  furniture 
taken  from  the  houses  of  magistrates,  or  other  ob- 
noxious individuals.  Quitting  the  coach,  we  crossed 
the  Square,  and  had  scarcely  got  under  the  wall  of  Bed- 
ford House,  when  we  heard  the  door  of  Lord  Mans- 
field's house  burst  open  with  violence.  In  a  few 
minutes,  all  the  contents  of  the  apartments  being  pre- 
cipitated from  the  windows,  were  piled  up,  and  wrapt 
in  flames.  A  file  of  foot-soldiers  arriving,  drew  up  near 
the  blazing  pile;  but,  without  either  attempting  to 
quench  the  fire,  or  to  impede  the  mob,  who  were  indeed 
far  too  numerous  to  admit  of  their  being  dispersed,  or 
even  intimidated,  by  a  small  detachment  of  Infantry. 
The  populace  remained  masters  ;  while  we,  after  survey- 
ing the  spectacle  for  a  short  time,  moved  on  into  Hoi- 
born,  where  Mr.  Langdale's  dwelling-house  and  ware- 
houses afforded  a  more  appalling  picture  of  devastation. 
They  were  altogether  enveloped  in  smoke  and  flame. 
In  front  had  assembled  an  immense  multitude  of  both 
sexes,  many  of  whom  were  females,  and  not  a  few  held 
infants  in  their  arms.  All  appeared  to  be,  like  our- 
selves, attracted  as  spectators  solely  by  curiosity,  with- 

197 


WRAXALKS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

out  taking  any  part  in  the  acts  of  violence.  The 
kennel  of  the  street  ran  down  with  spirituous  liquors, 
and  numbers  of  the  populace  were  already  intoxicated 
with  this  beverage.  So  little  disposition,  however,  did 
they  manifest  to  riot  or  pillage,  that  it  would  have 
been  difficult  to  conceive  who  were  the  authors  and 
perpetrators  of  such  enormous  mischief,  if  we  had  not 
distinctly  seen  at  the  windows  of  the  house,  men,  who 
while  the  floors  and  rooms  were  on  fire,  calmly  tore 
down  the  furniture,  and  threw  it  into  the  street,  or 
tossed  it  into  the  flames.  They  experienced  no  kind  of 
opposition,  during  a  considerable  time  that  we  remained 
at  this  place  :  but  a  party  of  the  Horse-Guards  arriving, 
the  terrified  crowd  instantly  began  to  disperse ;  and 
we,  anxious  to  gratify  our  farther  curiosity,  continued 
our  progress  on  foot,  along  Holborn,  towards  Fleet- 
Market. 

I  would  in  vain  attempt  adequately  to  describe  the 
spectacle  which  presented  itself,  when  we  reached  the 
declivity  of  the  Hill,  close  to  St.  Andrew's  Church. 
The  other  House  and  Magazines  of  Mr.  Langdale,  who, 
as  a  Catholic,  had  been  selected  for  the  blind  vengeance 
of  the  mob ;  situated  in  the  hollow,  near  the  North  end 
of  Fleet-Market,  threw  up  into  the  air  a  pinnacle  of 
flame  resembling  a  Volcano.  Such  was  the  beautiful 
and  brilliant  effect  of  the  illumination,  that  St.  Andrew's 
Church  appeared  to  be  almost  scorched  by  the  heat  of  so 
prodigious  a  body  of  fire ;  and  the  figures  on  the  Clock 
were  as  distinctly  perceptible  as  at  noon-day.  It  re- 
sembled indeed  a  Tower,  rather  than  a  private  Building, 
in  a  state  of  Conflagration ;  and  would  have  inspired 
the  Beholder  with  a  sentiment  of  admiration  allied  to 
pleasure,  if  it  had  been  possible  to  separate  the  object, 
from  its  causes  and  its  consequences.  The  wind  did  not 
however  augment  its  rage  on  this  occasion ;  for  the 
night  was  serene,  and  the  sky  unclouded,  except  when  it 
became  obscured  by  the  volumes  of  smoke,  which,  from 

198 


BURNING  THE  PRISONS 

time  to  time  produced  a  temporary  darkness.  The  mob, 
which  completely  blocked  up  the  whole  Street  in  every 
part,  and  in  all  directions,  prevented  our  approaching 
within  fifty  or  sixty  yards  of  the  Building:  but  the 
populace,  though  still  principally  composed  of  persons 
allured  by  curiosity,  yet  evidently  began  here  to  assume  a 
more  disorderly  and  ferocious  character.  Troops,  either 
horse  or  foot,  we  still  saw  none ;  nor,  in  the  midst  of 
this  Combination  of  tumult,  terror,  and  violence,  had 
the  ordinary  Police  ceased  to  continue  its  functions. 
While  we  stood  by  the  wall  of  St.  Andrew's  Church- 
yard, a  Watchman,  with  his  lanthorn  in  his  hand, 
passed  us,  calling  the  hour,  as  if  in  a  time  of  profound 
tranquillity. 

Finding  it  altogether  impracticable  to  force  our  way 
any  further  down  Holborn-Hill,  and  hearing  that  the 
Fleet  prison  had  been  set  on  fire,  we  penetrated  through 
a  number  of  narrow  lanes,  behind  St.  Andrew's  Church, 
and  presently  found  ourselves  in  the  middle  of  Fleet- 
Market.  Here,  the  same  Destruction  raged,  but  in  a 
different  stage  of  its  progress.  Mr.  Langdale's  houses 
were  already  at  the  height  of  their  demolition  :  the 
Fleet  prison  on  the  contrary  was  only  beginning  to 
blaze,  and  the  sparks  or  flaming  particles  that  filled  the 
air,  fell  so  thick  upon  us  on  every  side,  as  to  render 
unsafe  its  immediate  vicinity.  Meanwhile  we  began  to 
hear  the  Platoons  discharged  on  the  other  side  of  the 
river,  towards  St.  George's  Fields ;  and  were  informed, 
that  a  considerable  number  of  the  Rioters  had  been 
killed  on  Black -friar's  Bridge,  which  was  occupied  by 
the  Troops.  On  approaching  it,  we  beheld  the  King's 
Bench  prison  completely  wrapt  in  flames.  It  exhibited 
a  sublime  sight,  and  we  might  be  said  there  to  stand  in 
a  central  point,  from  whence  London  offered  on  every 
side,  before,  as  well  as  behind  us,  the  picture  of  a  city 
sacked  and  abandoned  to  a  ferocious  enemy.  The 
shouts  of  the  populace,  the  cries  of  women,  the  crack - 

199 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

ling  of  the  fires,  the  blaze  reflected  in  the  stream  of  the 
Thames,  and  the  irregular  firing  which  was  kept  up 
both  in  St.  George's  Fields,  as  well  as  towards  the 
quarter  of  the  Mansion-House,  and  the  Bank  ; — all  these 
sounds,  or  images  combined,  left  scarcely  any  thing  for 
the  imagination  to  supply ;  presenting  to  the  view  every 
recollection  which  the  classic  descriptions  in  Virgil,  or 
in  Tacitus,  have  impressed  on  the  mind  in  youth,  but 
which  I  so  little  expected  to  see  exemplified  in  the 
Capital  of  Great  Britain. 

Not  yet  satisfied,  and  hearing  that  an  obstinate 
conflict  was  going  on  at  the  Bank,  between  the  Soldiery 
and  the  Rioters,  we  determined,  if  possible,  to  reach 
that  spot.  We  accordingly  proceeded  through  St. 
PauTs  Churchyard  towards  it,  and  had  advanced 
without  impediment  to  the  Poultry,  within  about 
sixty  paces  of  the  Mansion  House,  when  our  progress 
was  stopped  by  a  Centinel,  who  acquainted  us  that  the 
Mob  had  been  repulsed  in  their  attempt  upon  the  Bank  ; 
but,  that  we  could  penetrate  no  further  in  that  direction, 
as  his  orders  were  peremptory,  not  to  suffer  the  passage 
of  any  person.  Cheapside,  silent  and  empty,  unlike 
the  Streets  that  we  had  visited,  presented  neither  the 
appearance  of  tumult,  nor  of  confusion ;  though  to  the 
East,  West,  and  South,  all  was  disorder.  This  contrast 
formed  not  the  least  striking  circumstance  of  the 
moment.  Prevented  thus  from  approaching  any  nearer 
to  the  Bank,  satiated  in  some  measure  with  the  scenes 
which  we  had  witnessed,  and  wearied  by  so  long  a  pere- 
grination, which,  from  our  first  alighting  near  Blooms- 
bury  Square,  had  all  been  performed  on  foot;  we 
resolved  to  return  to  the  west  end  of  the  town.  On 
Ludgate  Hill  we  were  fortunate  enough  to  find  a  Hack- 
ney Coach,  which  conveyed  us  safely  back,  about  four 
o'clock  in  the  morning. 

It  is  impossible  for  the  most  prejudiced  person  with- 
out violating  truth,  to  accuse  the  Opposition  of  having 

200 


DEVONSHIRE  HOUSE  IN  DANGER 

had  any  participation  as  a  body,  direct  or  indirect,  in 
these  outrages.  They  were  indeed  themselves,  individu- 
ally, the  objects  of  popular  prejudice  and  violence,  not 
less  than  the  Ministers ;  Sir  George  Savile's  house,  in 
Leicester  Square,  having  been  one  of  the  first  assailed 
and  plundered  by  the  mob.  Devonshire  House  in 
Piccadilly,  menaced  with  the  same  fate,  was  considered 
as  so  insecure,  that  the  Duchess  of  Devonshire  yielding 
to  her  fears,  did  not  venture  to  remain  in  it  after  dusk, 
for  a  considerable  time.  She  took  refuge  at  Lord  Cler- 
inonfs  in  Berkeley  Square,  where  she  deemed  herself 
safe  from  attack,  and  lay  down  for  successive  nights,  on 
a  Sofa,  or  a  small  tent  bed,  placed  in  the  Drawing  Room. 
Many  other  persons  of  both  sexes,  of  the  highest  rank, 
either  quitted  their  own  residence,  or  sent  their  most 
valuable  effects  and  jewels  into  the  country.  The  first 
Minister,  Lord  North,  passed  that  alarming  night  at 
his  official  residence  in  Downing  Street,  accompanied 
by  a  few  Friends,  who  had  repaired  thither  to  offer  him 
their  personal  aid,  if  circumstances  should  render  it 
necessary  for  his  protection. 

One  of  those  Gentlemen,  Sir  John  Macpherson,  has 
often  recounted  to  me  the  particulars  of  that  memorable 
evening,  which  I  shall  give  in  his  own  words,  and  which 
will  be  perused  with  no  common  interest.  "  A  day  or 
"  two  before  the  7th  of  June,"  said  he,  "  Count  Malt- 
"  zan,  then  the  Prussian  Minister  at  our  Court,  called 
"  on  me,  and  informed  me  that  the  Mob  had  deter- 
"  mined  to  attack  the  Bank.  He  added,  that  the  fact 
"  had  come  to  his  knowledge  through  an  authentic 
"  channel,  on  the  accuracy  of  which  I  might  depend. 
"  Having  conveyed  this  information  immediately  to 
"  Lord  North,  I  received  on  the  morning  of  that  day, 
"  an  intimation  to  be  at  his  house  in  Downing  Street, 
"  at  dinner.  When  I  got  there,  I  found  Mr.  Eden, 
"  (since  created  Lord  Auckland)  the  Honourable  General 
"  Simon  Fraser,  the  Honourable  John  St.  John,  and 

201 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

"  Colonel   North,   afterwards    Earl   of  Guilford.     Mr. 
"  Brummell,  Lord  North's  private  Secretary,  who  lived 
"  likewise  in  the  same   Street,  was  in  attendance,  but 
"  did  not  make  one  of  the  Company.     We  sat  down  at 
"  table,  and   dinner   had  scarcely  been  removed,  when 
"  Downing  Square,  through  which  there  is  no  outlet, 
"  became  thronged  with  people,  who  manifested  a  dis- 
"  position,  or  rather  a  determination,  to  proceed  to  acts 
"  of    outrage.     Lord   North,   with   his   habitual   good 
"  humour,  observed  to  me,  '  you  see,  Macpherson,  here 
"  is  much  confusion.     Who  commands  the  upper  tier  ? ' 
"  '  I  do,"  answered  Colonel  North, '  and  I  have  got  twenty 
"  or  more  Grenadiers  well  armed,  stationed  above  stairs, 
"  who  are  ready  on  the  first  order,  to  fire  upon  the  Mob/ 
"  General   Fraser   sat   silent ;   while   Mr.  Eden,  whose 
"  house  was  situated  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  Square, 
"  only  remarked  calmly  to  Colonel  North,  that  if  the 
"  Grenadiers  fired,  their  shot  would  probably  enter  his 
"  windows.     The  tumult  without  still  continuing,  and 
"  it  being  uncertain  from  one  minute  to  another,  whether 
"  the  populace  might  not  proceed  to  extremities ;  Lord 
"  North  said   to  me,  '  What  is   to  be  done,  Macpher- 
"  son  ?  "*     '  My  opinion,"  answered  I,  '  is  to  send  out  two 
"  or  three  persons,  who  mixing  among  the  mob,  may 
"  acquaint   them  that   there  are  troops   posted  in   the 
"  house,  ready,  without  waiting  for  the  Riot  Act  being 
"  read,  to  fire  on  them,  the  instant  that  they  commit 
"  any  outrage ;  exhorting  them  at  the  same  time,  for 
"  their  own  sakes,  to  disperse  peaceably  without  delay. 
"  But,"  added  I,  '  here  sits  General  Fraser,  who  knows 
"  far  better  than  any  of  us,  what  is  wisest  to  be  done, 
"  and  who  has  not  yet  opened  his  mouth.1     The  popu- 
"  lace  continued  to  fill  the  little    Square,  and  became 
"  very  noisy ;   but  they  never  attempted  to   force   the 
u  street  door.     Mr.  St.  John  held  a  pistol  in  his  hand ; 
"  and  Lord  North,  who  never  lost  an  occasion  of  jest- 
"  ing,  exclaimed,  '  I  am  not  half  so  much  afraid  of  the 

202 


A  NIGHT  OF  TUMULT 

"  mob,  as  of  Jack  St.  John's  pistol.'  By  degrees,  as  the 
"  evening  advanced,  the  people,  informed  from  various 
"  quarters,  that  there  were  Soldiers  posted  in  the  house, 
"  ready  to  fire  if  they  committed  any  violence  ;  began 
"  to  cool,  and  afterwards  gradually  to  disperse  without 
"  further  effort.  We  then  sat  down  again  quietly  to  the 
"  table,  and  finished  our  wine. 

"  Night  coming  on,  and  the  Capital  presenting  a 
"  scene  of  tumult  or  conflagration  in  many  various 
"  quarters,  Lord  North,  accompanied  by  us  all,  mounted 
"  to  the  top  of  the  house,  where  we  beheld  London 
"  blazing  in  seven  places,  and  could  hear  the  Platoons 
"  regularly  firing  in  various  directions.  '  What  is  your 
"  opinion  of  the  remedy  for  this  evil  ? '  said  Lord  North 
"  to  me.  '  I  should  try,  my  Lord,'  answered  I,  '  to  effect 
"  a  junction,  or  to  open  some  communication  with 
"  the  Heads  of  Opposition,  for  the  Protection  of  the 
"  Country.'  '  You  talk,'  replied  he,  '  as  if  the  thing 
"  could  be  done ;  but  it  is  not  practicable.'  I  know 
"  however  that  a  day  or  two  afterwards,  notwithstand- 
"  ing  the  opinion  so  given  by  Lord  North,  he  and  Mr. 
"  Fox  personally  met,  behind  the  Scenes  at  the  Opera 
"  House  in  the  Haymarket,  at  eleven  in  the  forenoon. 
"  They  held  a  conference  there ;  but  of  the  nature  of 
"  the  conversation  which  passed  between  them,  I  am 
"  wholly  ignorant."  Such  was  Sir  John  Macpherson's 
account  of  the  circumstances  to  which  he  was  an  eye- 
witness, at  that  moment  of  public  calamity. 

Lord  George  Germain,  like  the  first  Minister,  having 
assembled  some  Friends,  barricaded  the  passages  and 
entrance  to  his  house  in  Pall  Mall,  which  was  very 
susceptible  of  defence  ;  after  which,  he  coolly  waited  for 
the  attack  of  the  populace.  But,  the  Rioters  were  too 
well  informed  of  the  precautions  taken,  to  make  any 
attempt  on  him.  Even  the  King  himself  remained  on 
foot,  during  the  far  greater  part  of  that  memorable 
night,  which  he  passed  between  Buckingham  House  and 

203 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

the  Royal  Manege  contiguous ;  into  the  latter  of  which 
Buildings,  a  detachment  of  the  Horse  Guards  had  been 
early  admitted,  who  were  ready  to  have  sallied  out  upon 
the  Insurgents.  No  man  who  knows  the  steadiness  and 
firmness  which  His  Majesty  has  since  displayed  in  the 
most  trying  situations,  when  his  person  has  been  exposed 
to  danger,  can  doubt  that  he  would  have  given  on  that 
occasion,  had  it  been  unfortunately  necessary,  the 
strongest  proofs  of  courage.  He  would  not  have  acted 
the  part  which  Louis  the  Sixteenth  exhibited  on  the 
1  Oth  of  August,  1 792  ;  when,  under  similar  circumstances, 
surrounded  by  a  savage  mob,  instead  of  defending 
himself  to  the  last  extremity,  he  abandoned  the  defence 
of  his  Palace,  and  of  his  Family,  to  take  refuge  in  the 
National  Assembly.  George  the  Third  had  embraced 
the  resolution  of  repelling  force  by  force,  in  case  of 
necessity,  and  of  perishing  in  support  of  the  laws,  of 
civil  order,  and  regular  government,  rather  than  survive 
their  extinction.  But,  happily,  no  attempt  was  made 
by  the  Populace  to  attack  any  part  of  the  Queen's  House 
or  Offices. 

Various  were  the  opinions  and  assertions  hazarded, 
relative  to  the  numbers  that  perished  in  the  Riots 
between  the  third  and  the  seventh  of  June,  1780 ;  but 
as  no  certain  Data  can  be  obtained,  beyond  the  official 
returns  of  killed  and  wounded,  the  amount  must  always 
remain  matter  of  conjecture.  Probably,  it  far  exceeded 
the  computation  commonly  made;  and  from  the  con- 
curring testimony  of  those  persons  who  were  most 
competent  to  form  a  sound  judgment,  I  believe  it 
would  not  be  over-rated  at  seven  hundred  individuals, 
killed  and  wounded.  The  slaughter  was  most  consider- 
able at  the  King's  Bench,  at  the  Bank,  and  on  Black 
Friars  Bridge.  Colonel  de  Burgh,  a  Son  of  the  Earl  of 
Clanrickard,  commanded  one  of  the  Regiments  sent  to 
St.  George's  Fields.  All  the  Troops  did  their  duty, 
notwithstanding  the  efforts  which  the  Populace  exerted 

204 


TWO  SOVEREIGNS— A  CONTRAST 

to  seduce  them,  by  calling  on  them  as  Protestants,  and 
invoking  their  aid  or  their  protection.  Many  of  the 
Soldiers,  in  reply  to  these  blandishments,  exclaimed, 
that  they  would  not  hurt  the  mob.  A  great  Nobleman, 
now  alive,  who,  like  myself,  was  a  spectator  of  all  the 
scenes  of  devastation  committed  on  that  night ;  told  me 
that  he  felt  strong  doubts  whether  De  Burgh's  Regiment 
would  actually  draw  the  trigger.  Impressed  with  that 
conviction,  he  mentioned  his  apprehensions  on  the 
point,  to  the  Colonel ;  who  instantly  replied,  that  he 
knew  his  men,  and  could  rely  on  their  prompt  obedience. 
The  event  justified  his  confidence :  for,  no  sooner  had 
he  given  the  word  of  command  to  fire,  than,  levelling 
their  firelocks,  they  soon  compelled  the  Rioters  to  seek 
their  safety  in  immediate  dispersion.  If  the  "  Gardes 
"  Francaises  "  in  1789,  had  behaved  like  our  regular 
troops  in  1780,  the  French  Revolution  might  have  been 
suppressed  in  its  birth ;  and  Europe  would  not  have 
groaned  during  fourteen  years,  under  the  accumulated 
calamities  inflicted  on  it  by  Bonaparte.  But,  the 
difference  of  character  between  the  two  Sovereigns  of 
Great  Britain  and  of  France,  constituted  one  great  cause 
of  the  different  fate  that  attended  the  two  Monarchies. 
George  the  Third,  when  attacked,  prepared  to  defend 
his  Throne,  his  Family,  his  Country,  and  the  Constitu- 
tion entrusted  to  his  care.  They  were  in  fact  saved  by 
his  decision.  Louis  the  Sixteenth  tamely  abandoned 
all  to  a  ferocious  Jacobin  Populace,  who  sent  him  to 
the  scaffold.  No  man  of  courage  or  of  principle  could 
have  quitted  the  former  Prince.  It  was  impossible  to 
save,  or  to  rescue,  the  latter  ill-fated,  yielding,  and  passive 
Monarch. 

Many  of  the  Rioters,  who  fell  at  Black  Friars  Bridge, 
or  in  its  vicinity,  where  the  slaughter  was  most  consider- 
able, were  immediately  thrown  over  into  the  Thames, 
by  their  companions.  The  carnage  which  took  place 
at  the  Bank  likewise  was  great,  though  not  of  very  long 

205 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

duration ;  and  in  order  to  conceal  as  much  as  possible 
the  magnitude  of  the  number,  as  well  as  the  names  of 
the  persons  who  perished,  similar  precautions  were 
taken.  All  the  dead  bodies  being  carried  away  during 
the  night,  were  precipitated  into  the  River.  Even  the 
impressions  made  by  the  Musket  balls,  on  the  houses 
opposite  to  the  Bank,  were  as  much  as  possible  erased  next 
morning,  and  the  buildings  whitewashed.  Government 
and  the  Rioters  seem  to  have  felt  an  equal  disposition, 
by  drawing  a  veil  over  the  extent  of  the  calamity,  to 
bury  it  in  profound  darkness.  To  Colonel  Holroyd, 
since  deservedly  raised  to  the  British  Peerage  as  Lord 
Sheffield,  and  to  his  Regiment  of  Militia,  the  country 
was  eminently  indebted  for  repelling  the  fury  of  the 
mob  at  the  Bank  ;  where,  during  some  moments,  the 
conflict  seemed  doubtful,  and  the  assailants  had  nearly 
forced  an  entrance.  Lord  Algernon  Percy,  now  Earl  of 
Beverley,  marched  likewise  at  the  head  of  the  North- 
umberland Militia,  to  the  same  spot.  Their  arrival, 
together  with  the  energy,  promptitude,  and  decision 
which  Colonel  Holroyd  manifested,  principally  conduced 
to  ensure  the  safety  of  that  great  National  Establish- 
ment. Numbers  concealed  their  wounds,  in  order  to 
evade  discovery  of  the  part  which  they  had  taken  in  the 
disorders  of  the  Capital.  It  is  however  indisputable, 
that  almost  all  who  perished  were  of  a  low  and  obscure 
description. 

If  the  mob  had  been  conducted  by  leaders  of  system 
or  ability,  London  must  have  been  fundamentally  over- 
turned on  that  night.  The  Bank,  the  India  House, 
and  the  Shops  of  the  great  Bankers,  would  in  that  case 
have  been  early  attacked  ;  instead  of  throwing  away 
their  rage,  as  they  did,  on  Popish  Chapels,  private 
houses,  and  prisons.  When  they  began,  after  their 
first  fury  had  exhausted  itself,  to  direct  their  blows 
more  systematically  and  skilfully,  the  time  for  action 
was  passed.  Government,  which  was  accused  with 

206 


THE  RIOT  QUELLED 

reason  of  having  appeared  supine  during  the  first  days  of 
June,  awoke  early  enough  to  preserve  the  Metropolis  and 
public  credit,  from  sustaining  the  last  shock  of  popular 
violence.  In  fact,  from  the  instant  that  the  three 
Bridges  over  the  Thames  were  occupied  by  regular 
troops,  the  danger  was  at  an  end.  This  awful  convul- 
sion, which,  on  Wednesday,  the  seventh  of  June,  seemed 
to  menace  the  destruction  of  every  thing ;  was  so  com- 
pletely quelled,  and  so  suddenly  extinguished,  that  on 
the  eighth,  hardly  a  spark  survived  of  the  popular 
effervescence.  Some  few  persons  in  the  Borough  of 
South  war  k,  attempted  to  repeat  the  outrages  of  Wednes- 
day ;  but  they  were  easily  and  immediately  quelled  by 
the  military  force.  Never  was  a  contrast  exhibited 
more  striking,  than  between  those  two  evenings,  in  the 
same  city !  The  patroles  of  Cavalry,  stationed  in  the 
Squares  and  great  streets  throughout  the  West  End  of 
the  Town,  gave  London  the  aspect  of  a  Garrison  ;  while 
the  Camp  which  was  immediately  afterwards  formed  in 
St.  James's  Park,  afforded  a  picturesque  landscape  ;  both 
sides  of  the  Canal,  from  the  Queen's  House  down  to  the 
vicinity  of  the  Horse  Guards,  being  covered  with  tents 
and  troops. 

The  common  danger,  which  united  all  Parties  for  the 
time,  extinguished,  or  at  least  suspended,  in  some 
measure,  even  the  virulence  of  political  enmity. 
Alarmed  at  the  prospect  of  impending  Destruction, 
some  of  the  principal  Leaders  of  the  Opposition  re- 
paired, unasked,  to  St.  James's,  under  pretence  of 
offering  their  services  to  the  Administration ;  nearly 
as  the  Dukes  of  Somerset  and  Argyle  had  done  in  July, 
1714,  when  Queen  Anne  lay  insensible,  near  her  end. 
The  Marquis  of  Rockingham  hearing  that  a  Privy 
Council  was  summoned  to  meet  on  the  morning  of  the 
7th  of  June,  which  all  who  enjoyed  seats  at  that  Board, 
were  called  or  invited  to  attend,  made  his  appearance 
in  an  undress,  his  hair  disordered,  and  with  testimonies 

207 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

of  great  consternation.  Nor  did  he,  when  seated  at  the 
Table,  where  the  King  was  present,  spare  the  Ministers, 
for  having,  as  he  asserted,  by  their  negligence,  or  want 
of  timely  energy,  allowed  the  Assemblage  of  People  to 
take  place  in  St.  George's  Fields,  which  original  Meet- 
ing led  to  all  the  subsequent  Outrages.  It  is  neverthe- 
less incontestable,  that  to  the  Decision  manifested  by 
His  Majesty  on  that  occasion,  the  safety  of  the  Metro- 
polis, and  its  extrication  from  all  the  Calamities  that 
impended  over  it,  was  principally,  or  solely  to  be 
ascribed.  Elizabeth,  or  William  the  Third,  could  not 
have  displayed  more  calm  and  systematic  courage  in  the 
highest  sense  of  the  term,  than  George  the  Third 
exhibited  in  so  trying  a  moment.  Far  from  throwing 
himself  for  support  or  guidance  on  his  Cabinet,  as  a 
Prince  of  feeble  character  would  have  done;  he  came 
forward,  and  exhibited  an  example  of  self-devotion  to 
his  Ministers.  It  is  well  known  that  at  the  Council 
to  which  I  have  alluded,  the  King  assisted'  in  person. 
The  great  question  was  there  discussed,  on  which 
hinged  the  protection  and  preservation  of  the  Capital ; 
a  question,  respecting  which,  the  first  legal  characters 
were  divided;  and  on  which,  Lord  Mansfield  himself, 
was  with  reason  accused  of  never  having  clearly  ex- 
pressed his  opinion  up  to  that  time.  Doubts  existed, 
whether  Persons  riotously  collected  together,  and 
committing  Outrages  or  Infractions  of  the  Peace, 
however  great,  might  legally  be  fired  on  by  the  military 
power,  without  staying  previously  to  read  the  Riot 
Act.  Mr.  Wedderburn,  since  successively  raised  to  the 
dignity  of  a  Baron  and  of  an  Earl  of  Great  Britain, 
who  was  then  Attorney-general,  having  been  called  in 
to  the  Council  Table,  and  ordered  by  the  King  to 
deliver  his  official  opinion  on  the  point ;  stated  in  the 
most  precise  terms,  that  any  such  Assemblage  might  be 
dispersed  by  military  force,  without  waiting  for  forms, 
or  reading  the  Riot  Act.  "  Is  that  your  declaration  of 

208 


STRICTURES  OF  "JUNIUS" 

"  the  law,  as  Attorney  -  general  ?"  said  the  King. 
Wedderburn  answering  decidedly  in  the  affirmative, 
"Then  so  let  it  be  done,"  rejoined  His  Majesty.  The 
Attorney-general  drew  up  the  Order  immediately,  on 
which  Lord  Amherst  acted  the  same  evening,  and 
the  complete  suppression  of  the  Riots  followed  in  the 
course  of  a  few  hours.  Never  had  any  people  a 
greater  obligation  to  the  judicious  Intrepidity  of  their 
Sovereign  ! 

Nor  ought  we  to  deny  the  merit  due  to  Wedderburn, 
for  having  with  so  much  decision  cut  the  Gordian  knot, 
which  the  Lord  Chief  Justice  of  the  King's  Bench, 
either  could  not,  or  would  not  untie.  His  inexplicit 
Declarations  on  the  subject,  involuntarily  remind  us  of 
the  accusations  levelled  against  him  by  "  Junius,"  when, 
speaking  of  Lord  Mansfield,  he  says,  "Besides  his 
"  natural  timidity,  it  makes  part  of  his  political  plan, 
"  never  to  be  known  to  recommend  violent  measures. 
"  When  the  Guards  are  called  forth  to  murder  their 
"  fellow  subjects,  it  is  not  by  the  ostensible  advice  of 
"  Lord  Mansfield."  Here  we  see  him  in  1780,  acting 
precisely  as  he  had  done  twelve  years  earlier,  in  1768. 
Nor  is  it  a  less  curious  and  extraordinary  Fact,  that 
the  very  exertion  by  which  the  King  preserved  London 
in  June,  1780,  from  suffering  the  utmost  extremities  of 
violence  and  pillage,  constitutes,  as  a  principle,  the 
subject  of  "Junius's  severest  Reflexions  upon  him,  in 
"  March,  1770."  "  Did  His  Majesty,"  says  he,  "  consult 
"  the  laws  of  this  Country,  when  he  permitted  his 
"  Secretary  of  State  to  declare,  that  whenever  the  civil 
"  Magistrate  is  trifled  with,  a  military  force  must  be 
"  sent  for,  without  the  delay  of  a  moment,  and  effect- 
"  ually  employed  ?"  So  true  is  it,  that  at  every 
period  of  his  life,  the  King  manifested  the  same  con- 
sistency of  character,  and  superiority  to  personal 
apprehension.  When  nevertheless,  we  reflect  that  in 
1768,  a  Magistrate  of  the  county  of  Surry  had  been 

209  14 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

capitally  accused  and  brought  to  trial,  for  ordering  the 
Soldiery  to  fire  on  Rioters  engaged  in  the  most  violent 
acts  of  Outrage  in  St.  George's  Fields,  though  the  Riot 
Act  had  been  twice  read;  we  cannot  be  surprised  at 
the  apprehension  displayed  by  Lord  Mansfield,  to 
sanction  and  authorize  the  same  proceeding  in  1780. 
The  Sovereign  alone,  as  First  Magistrate,  impelled  by 
the  awful  nature  of  the  Emergency,  and  he  only,  could 
have  taken  upon  him  so  serious  a  Responsibility. 

No  individual  manifested  more  abhorrence  of  the 
Rioters,  or  exposed  himself  by  his  declarations  on  that 
subject,  to  more  personal  danger  than  Burke ;  whom 
his  enemies  accused  of  having  been  brought  up  in  the 
tenets  or  principles  of  the  Romish  faith.  This  conduct 
did  him  great  honour,  and  proved  him  superior  to  the 
meanness  of  Party.  His  house  in  the  Broad  Sanctuary, 
Westminster,  was  threatened,  but  not  attacked.  Fox 
contented  himself  with  condemning  the  Authors  of  the 
Disorders,  but  took  no  active  part  in  their  suppression. 
On  the  contrary,  he  refused  to  lend  any  personal 
support  to  Government,  when  pressed  in  the  House 
of  Commons,  to  co-operate  for  the  extrication  of  the 
Capital ;  though  Burke,  who  was  there  present,  loudly 
expressed  his  wish  for  unanimity  and  association  in 
that  moment  of  national  distress.  It  is  impossible  not 
to  recollect,  that  as  they  thus  diverged  in  different 
lines  during  the  Riots  of  1780,  so  in  1792,  twelve  years 
later,  they  exhibited  a  similar  diversity  of  conduct ; 
Burke  lending  his  powerful  aid  to  prop  monarchical 
Government,  while  Fox  remained  the  advocate  of 
Republicanism,  and  the  apologist  of  the  French 
Revolution.  Wilkes,  who  in  the  early  part  of  His 
Majesty's  reign,  had  made  so  glorious  a  resistance  to 
General  Warrants,  displayed  as  manly  a  resistance  to 
popular  violence,  during  the  whole  progress  of  the 
Riots ;  and  had  he  filled  the  chair  of  Chief  Magistrate, 
instead  of  Kennett,  would  unquestionably,  by  his 

210 


A  MISSING  NOBLEMAN 

vigour,   have   prevented   many   or   all   the   disgraceful 
Scenes  which  took  place  in  the  Capital. 

All  the  proofs  given  by  Opposition,  of  their  detesta- 
tion for  these  calamitous  Exhibitions  of  popular  fury, 
did  not,  however,  produce  complete  conviction.  Many 
persons  still  believed,  that  some  of  the  great  Parlia- 
mentary Leaders  secretly  fomented,  or  privately  en- 
couraged the  Rioters.  The  natural  expectation  of 
producing  a  change  in  Ministry,  was  imagined  to 
suspend  or  supersede  every  other  consideration ;  and  it 
was  even  pretended,  though  on  very  insufficient  grounds, 
that  Peers  did  not  scruple  io  take  an  active  part  in  the 
worst  excesses  of  the  night  of  the  Seventh  of  June. 
Public  clamour  selected  the  Earl  of  Effingham  in 
particular,  as  an  object  of  accusation.  It  was  generally 
asserted,  that  he  had  mingled  with  the  Rioters  on 
Black -friars  Bridge;  that  he  had  there  been  mortally 
wounded,  and  his  body  afterwards  thrown  into  the 
River,  by  those  of  his  own  party ;  but,  not  till  he  had 
been  identified  and  recognized  by  his  dress,  particularly 
by  his  laced  ruffles.  Those  who  were  acquainted  with 
that  Nobleman,  and  who  knew  his  style  of  dress, 
instantly  detected  the  absurdity,  as  well  as  falsity  of 
the  charge ;  for  no  man  was  ever  less  distinguished  by 
any  ornaments  of  apparel.  His  sudden  disappearance 
from  London,  where  he  certainly  had  been  seen  at  the 
commencement  of  the  Riots ;  the  general  ignorance  in 
which  people  remained,  of  the  place  to  which  he  had 
withdrawn ;  and  his  known,  as  well  as  violent,  dislike  to 
the  Administration  ; — all  these  circumstances  conduced, 
nevertheless,  to  maintain  the  delusion  for  a  considerable 
time.  At  the  beginning  of  the  ensuing  winter,  he  re- 
appeared in  the  House  of  Lords,  in  his  usual  health ; 
and  stated  to  his  acquaintance,  that  early  in  June,  he 
had  gone  down  to  his  seat  of  Grainge  Hall  in  York- 
shire, where  he  had  ever  since  resided.  Such  as  still 
remained  incredulous,  explained  his  absence  by  saying, 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

that  he  had  been  hurt  or  wounded  on  the  7th  of  June ; 
but  it  is  probable  that  the  report  originated  altogether 
in  calumny. 

Lord  George  Gordon,  the  primary  author  of  these 
outrages,  was  not  taken  into  custody,  till  two  or  three 
days  after  they  had  been  suppressed.  Ministers  were 
reproached  with  not  having  committed  him  to  the 
Tower  on  the  second  of  June,  when  he  assembled, 
harangued,  and  excited  the  mob  to  extort  compliance 
with  their  demands  from  the  House  of  Commons.  But, 
the  attempt  to  seize  and  to  send  him  to  prison,  at  a 
time  when  every  avenue  to  the  House  was  thronged 
with  multitudes,  when  the  Lobby  overflowed  with  them, 
and  when  the  doors  of  the  House  itself  might  have 
been,  every  instant,  forced  in ;  would  have  formed  an 
imprudent,  not  to  say  a  dangerous  experiment.  It  is 
difficult  to  find  any  instance  in  our  Annals,  when 
Parliament  received  a  grosser  insult;  or  when  the 
members  composing  both  Houses  incurred  a  greater 
risk  of  falling  victims  to  popular  violence.  The  mobs 
of  1641,  and  the  following  year,  under  Charles  the 
First,  directed  their  rage  against  the  Sovereign  and  his 
principal  advisers,  not  against  the  Representatives  of 
the  Nation.  Cromwell,  when  in  1653  he  drove  out  and 
dissolved  the  Rump  Parliament,  offered  no  outrage  to 
their  persons,  but  simply  broke  up  the  legislative 
Assembly  by  a  military  force.  The  tumults  in  1733, 
when  Sir  Robert  Walpole  first  attempted  to  introduce 
the  Excise  Laws,  seem  to  form  the  nearest  approach 
or  similarity  to  the  proceedings  in  1780 ;  but,  longo 
mtervallo. 

It  cannot  be  doubted  that  if  the  populace  had  forced 
their  way  into  the  House  of  Commons,  Lord  George 
would  not  have  survived  to  recount  the  exploit.  Many 
Members  who  were  there  present,  justly  indignant  at 
his  conduct,  threatened  him  with  instant  death,  as 
soon  as  any  of  the  rioters  should  burst  open  the  doors. 


LORD  GEORGE  GORDON 

The  late  Earl  of  Carnarvon,  then  Mr.  Henry  Herbert, 
followed  him  close,  with  that  avowed  determination ; 
and  General  Murray,  uncle  to  the  present  Duke  of 
Athol,  a  man  whom  I  intimately  knew,  and  who,  when 
incensed,  was  capable  of  executing  the  most  desperate 
resolution ;  held  his  sword  ready  to  pass  it  through 
Lord  George's  body,  on  the  first  irruption  of  the  mob. 
It  will  always  remain  disputable,  whether  ambition, 
fanaticism,  or  alienation  of  mind,  contributed  most 
to  the  part  which  he  acted,  in  assembling,  and  inciting 
the  people  to  acts  of  violence.  That  he  was  not  in- 
sensible to  the  political  consideration  which  he  obtained 
from  his  personal  influence  over  so  vast  a  multitude, 
cannot  be  questioned.  To  religious  enthusiasm  or 
conviction,  something  may  perhaps  be  fairly  attri- 
buted ;  but,  more  must  be  laid  to  the  deranged  state  of 
his  understanding,  though  nothing  in  his  conduct  or 
deportment  could  possibly  subject  him  to  be  considered 
as  insane.  He  appears  in  fact  to  have  been  perfectly 
master  of  himself,  and  in  possession  of  all  his  faculties, 
during  every  stage  of  the  Riots;  nor  is  it  to  be 
imagined  that  he  either  foresaw  or  intended,  any  of 
the  outrages  which  were  committed  after  the  second  of 
June.  But  he  had  put  in  motion  a  machine,  of  which 
he  could  not  regulate  or  restrain  the  movements :  and 
unquestionably,  the  mob  which  set  fire  to  London,  was 
of  a  far  more  savage,  as  well  as  atrocious  description, 
than  the  original  assemblage  of  people  who  met  in  St. 
George's  Fields.  The  late  Lord  Rodney,  who  was  then 
an  Officer  in  the  Guards,  told  me,  that  having  been 
sent  on  the  night  of  the  7th  of  June,  to  the  defence 
of  the  Bank  of  England,  at  the  head  of  a  detachment 
of  his  Regiment,  he  there  found  Lord  George  Gordon, 
who  appeared  anxiously  endeavouring,  by  expostula- 
tion, to  induce  the  populace  to  retire.  As  soon  as 
Lord  George  saw  Captain  Rodney,  he  strongly  ex- 
pressed his  concern  at  the  acts  of  violence  committed ; 


WRAX ALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 


adding,  that  he  was  ready  to  take  his  stand  by  Captain 
Rodney's  side,  and  to  expose  his  person  to  the  utmost 
risk,  in  order  to  resist  such  proceedings.  Rodney,  who 
distrusted  however  his  sincerity,  and  justly  considered 
him  as  the  original  cause  of  all  the  calamities,  declined 
any  communication  with  him ;  only  exhorting  him,  if 
he  wished  to  stop  the  further  effusion  of  blood,  and  to 
prevent  the  destruction  of  the  Bank,  to  exert  himself 
in  dispersing  the  crowd.  But,  whatever  might  be  his 
inclination,  he  was  altogether  destitute  of  the  power. 
The  military  force  alone  saved  the  Bank  from  being 
plundered,  and  prevented  the  temporary  subversion  of 
the  national  credit. 

I  knew  Lord  George  Gordon  well,  and  I  once 
accompanied  him  from  a  party  where  we  met,  in  Lower 
Grosvenor  Street,  at  the  late  Lord  Elcho's,  to  Ranelagh, 
in  the  summer  of  1782,  in  his  own  Coach :  in  his  person 
he  was  thin,  his  features  regular,  and  his  complexion 
pale.  His  manners  were  gentle,  his  conversation  agree- 
able, and  he  had  the  appearance,  as  well  as  the  deport- 
ment, of  a  man  of  quality.  There  was  however  some- 
thing in  his  cast  of  countenance  and  mode  of  expression, 
that  indicated  cunning,  or  a  perverted  understanding,  or 
both.  His  whole  income  consisted,  I  believe,  in  an 
annuity  of  six  hundred  Pounds  a  year,  paid  him  by  the 
Duke  of  Gordon,  his  brother.  It  forms  a  singular 
subject  of  reflection,  that  after  involving  London  in  all 
the  horrors  of  insurrection  and  Anarchy,  he  should 
have  escaped  any  punishment  for  these  proceedings, 
which  cost  the  lives  of  so  many  individuals,  and  the 
demolition  of  so  many  edifices ;  while  he  expiated  by  a 
rigorous  imprisonment  to  the  end  of  his  days,  in  New- 
gate, the  publication  of  a  libel  on  the  late  unfortunate 
Queen  of  France,  who,  herself,  perished  on  the  Scaffold. 
He  exhibited  the  strongest  attestation  of  the  sincerity 
of  his  conversion  to  Judaism,  by  submitting  to  one  of 
the  most  painful  ceremonies  or  acts  enjoined  by  the 


WEST  INDIAN  HURRICANE,  1780 

Mosaic  Law.  The  operation,  which  was  performed  at 
Birmingham,  confined  him  to  his  chamber,  if  not  to  his 
bed,  for  a  considerable  time;  and  he  preserved  with 
great  care,  the  sanguinary  proofs  of  his  having  under- 
gone the  amputation.  Few  individuals  occupy  a  more 
conspicuous,  or  a  more  unfortunate  place  in  the  Annals 
of  their  country,  under  the  reign  of  George  the  Third. 
He  will  rank  in  History,  with  Wat  Tyler  and  Jack 
Cade,  the  incendiaries  of  the  Plantagenet  times ;  or 
with  Kett,  so  memorable  under  Edward  the  Sixth. 

The  elements  seemed  to  conspire  with  all  the  foreign 
enemies  of  Great  Britain,  at  this  period ;  the  Hurricane 
of  October,  1780,  which  took  place  in  the  West  Indies, 
being  one  of  the  most  tremendous  in  its  nature,  as  well 
as  violent  in  its  effects,  commemorated  in  the  course  of 
the  eighteenth  Century.  Though  its  destructive  rage 
spread  devastation  in  a  greater  or  a  less  degree,  over 
the  whole  chain  of  the  Carribee  Islands,  yet  Barbadoes 
experienced  its  greatest  fury,  together  with  the  severest 
loss  of  lives  and  property.  A  friend  of  mine,  General 
James  Cunningham,  was  then  Governor  of  the  Colony. 
He  has  related  to  me,  that  after  remaining  above  ground 
as  long  as  it  was  practicable  with  safety,  he,  accom- 
panied by  a  number  of  his  family  and  domestics,  took 
refuge  in  a  small  cellar,  several  feet  lower  than  the 
level  of  the  Street,  at  Bridge  Town,  the  Capital  of  the 
settlement.  Here,  indeed,  they  found  themselves  secure 
against  being  crushed  under  the  ruins  of  the  house 
which  they  had  just  quitted,  or  from  being  completely 
borne  off  and  swept  away  by  the  force  of  the  wind. 
But,  they  were  soon  assailed  by  two  new  misfortunes, 
against  which  they  could  provide  no  sufficient  remedy. 
The  first  inconvenience  arose  from  the  severe  cold  which 
they  endured ;  the  climate  having  changed,  in  the 
course  of  a  few  hours,  from  intense  heat,  to  a  con- 
trary extreme.  The  other  evil,  which  was  of  a  still 
more  alarming  nature,  threatened  their  destruction, 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 


from  the  rain  which  flowed  in  upon  them  in  great 
quantity,  as  it  fell  in  torrents.  While  they  remained  in 
this  deplorable  situation,  up  to  the  knees  in  water, 
doubtful  whether  to  continue  in  the  cellar,  where 
about  twenty  of  them  huddled  together,  were  crouded 
into  a  very  narrow  space ;  or  whether  to  attempt  reach- 
ing some  more  secure  shelter ;  a  tall  athletic  Negro  of 
General  Cunningham's  family,  who  lay  upon  him,  in  a 
posture  which  did  not  admit  of  his  moving,  said  to 
the  General,  "  Massa,  if  I  not  make  water,  I  die.""  "  Do 
"  it  then  in  God's  name,"  answered  he.  The  Negro  had 
no  sooner  received  this  permission,  than  instantly 
availing  himself  of  it,  he  bedewed  the  General,  from  the 
nape  of  his  neck,  to  his  very  shoes ;  much,  as  we  are 
taught  to  believe,  in  the  manner  of  a  Hottentot  Priest, 
when  celebrating  the  nuptial  ceremony.  "  But,"  added 
Cunningham,  when  relating  the  story,  "never  did  I 
"  experience  a  more  grateful  sensation  than  was  pro- 
"  .duced  by  this  warm  libation,  which  seemed  to  ani- 
"  mate  my  frozen  frame,  and  to  revivify  my  body.  I 
"  regretted  when  it  stopped,  and  I  derived  from  it 
"  essential  service  in  the  horrors  of  that  indescribable 
"  night." 

The  situation  of  the  Negro,  impelled  by  a  necessity 
paramount  to  all  respect  or  restraint,  reminds  me  of  a 
fact  somewhat  similar,  which  took  place  at  the  palace 
of  Sans  Souci.  The  great  Frederic,  in  a  select  society, 
having  been  one  day  more  elevated  and  convivial  than 
usual  after  dinner,  was  induced  by  the  gaiety  of  the 
conversation,  to  prolong  the  accustomed  limits  of  the 
repast,  and  to  detain  his  guests  to  a  late  hour.  His 
Majesty  furnished,  himself,  the  chief  share  of  the  enter- 
tainment, by  the  brilliancy  of  his  sallies  ;  but  he  forgot, 
unfortunately,  that  his  guests  were  men.  One  of  them, 
an  old  General,  who  was  often  among  the  persons  in- 
vited to  the  royal  table,  but  whose  powers  of  retention 
had  suffered  in  the  course  of  twelve  Campaigns ;  antici- 

216 


MS*  ft  4- 


AUTHOR  ELECTED  MEMBER  FOR  HINDON 

pated  with  extreme  impatience,  the  moment  when  the 
King,  by  rising,  would  permit  of  his  quitting  the  apart- 
ment. In  this  hope  and  expectation,  he  long  supported 
with  unshaken  fortitude,  one  of  the  most  pressing 
demands  of  nature.  Overcome  at  length,  and  yielding 
to  a  power  stronger  than  himself,  he  suddenly  rose  from 
his  chair,  and  exclaiming,  "  Sire,  Tout  est  grand  dans 
"  Votre  Majeste^  jusqiCa  la  Vessie  meme.  Sire,  Je  me 
"  meurs"  ran  out  of  the  room.  Frederic  was  charmed 
with  the  ingenuity  of  the  compliment,  and  laughed 
heartily  at  the  General's  distress,  which  might  how- 
ever have  proved  fatal  to  him.  Tycho  Brahe's  death  was 
caused  by  a  precisely  similar  act  of  imprudent  respect. 

Parliament  having  been  dissolved  early  in  September, 
I  was  elected  one  of  the  Members  for  Hindon  in  the 
county  of  Wilts ;  and  the  new  House  of  Commons 
meeting  towards  the  end  of  October,  the  first  Debate 
turned  on  the  choice  of  a  Speaker.  Lord  George 
Germain,  not  Lord  North,  commenced  the  proceedings 
on  that  evening,  and  performed  the  principal  part.  It 
was  not  intended  by  Ministers,  that  Sir  Fletcher 
Norton,  who  during  near  eleven  years,  ever  since  the 
resignation  of  Sir  John  Cust  in  January,  1770,  had 
filled  the  Chair,  should  re-occupy  it  in  the  new  Parlia- 
ment. He  had  given  umbrage  during  the  Session  of 
1777,  both  to  the  Sovereign,  and  to  the  Administration, 
by  a  memorable  Speech,  which  he  addressed  to  the 
King,  while  standing  in  his  official  capacity,  at  the  Bar 
of  the  House  of  Peers.  And  though  the  admonition  or 
exhortation  that  he  thought  proper  then  to  use,  had 
met  with  the  approbation  both  of  the  House  of  Com- 
mons, and  of  the  Country,  yet  it  unquestionably  pro- 
duced his  eventual  exclusion  from  the  employment  of 
Speaker.  Lord  North  having  tried  the  ground  at  St. 
James's,  found  his  Majesty  determined  upon  the  point. 
Conscious,  nevertheless,  that  it  would  be  highly  unpopu- 
lar to  place  his  intended  dismission  on  such  a  basis, 

217 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

Ministers  availed  themselves  of  Sir  Fletcher's  ill  state  of 
health,  which  had  considerably  impeded  the  progress  of 
public  business  in  the  preceding  Session,  as  forming  a 
sufficient  cause  for  his  removal.  While,  therefore,  they 
passed  high  eulogiums  on  his  ability  and  talents,  they 
lamented  that  infirmities  of  body  rendered  it  improper 
to  ask  of  him,  or  to  accept  from  him,  a  continuance  of 
his  public  services.  Sir  Fletcher  however,  rising  in  his 
place,  and  speaking  from  the  Opposition  Bench,  while 
he  was  sustained  by  that  powerful  and  numerous  Pha- 
lanx, endeavoured  to  point  out  the  latent  enmity,  as 
well  as  the  obvious  nullity,  of  the  Ministerial  arguments. 
He  affected,  it  is  true,  to  disclaim  any  wish  of  being 
again  placed  in  the  Speaker's  Chair ;  but  he  took  care 
to  accompany  the  declaration,  by  an  assertion  of  his 
perfect  physical  capacity  to  meet  its  duties  and  fatigues. 
His  appearance  seemed  indeed  to  present  the  aspect  of 
a  man,  who,  though  somewhat  declined  in  years,  did 
not  manifest  any  tokens  of  decay.  All  the  attacks 
levelled  by  Norton's  friends,  on  the  Opposition  side  of 
the  House,  at  Lord  North,  personally,  could  neither 
induce  nor  provoke  the  First  Minister  to  open  his  lips 
on  the  occasion.  He  remained  profoundly  silent;  but 
Mr.  Rigby,  unintimidated  by  the  clamors  of  Sir 
Fletcher's  adherents,  after  boldly  avowing  that  he  was 
dismissed  for  his  political  trespasses,  justified  his 
exclusion  from  the  Chair,  on  parliamentary  or  on 
Ministerial  grounds.  Cornwall  was  chosen  Speaker,  by 
a  very  large  Majority. 

Sir  Fletcher  Norton,  though  perhaps  justly  accused, 
as  a  professional  man,  of  preferring  profit  to 
conscientious  delicacy  of  principle;  and  though 
denominated  in  the  coarse  Satires  or  Caricatures  of 
that  day,  by  the  Epithet  of  "Sir  Bullface  Doublefee;" 
yet  possessed  eminent  parliamentary,  as  well  as  legal 
talents.  Far  from  suffering  in  his  capacity  of  Speaker, 
by  a  comparison  either  with  his  immediate  predecessor 

218 


THE  SPEAKER'S  CHAIR 

or  successor  in  that  high  Office,  he  must  be  considered 
as  very  superior  to  both.  The  Chair  of  the  House  of 
Commons,  during  the  whole  course  of  the  eighteenth 
Century,  was  never  filled  with  less  dignity  or  energy, 
than  by  Sir  John  Cust,  whom  Wilkes  treats  in  all  his 
letters,  with  the  most  contemptuous  irony  or  insult. 
Cornwall  possessed  every  physical  quality  requisite  to 
ornament  the  place  ;  a  sonorous  voice,  a  manly,  as  well 
as  imposing  figure,  and  a  commanding  deportment : 
but  his  best  recommendation  to  the  Office,  consisted  in 
the  connexion  subsisting  between  him  and  Mr.  Charles 
Jenkinson,  then  Secretary  at  War,  which  the  marriage 
of  the  former  Gentleman,  with  the  sister  of  the  latter, 
had  cemented.  After  his  election,  Cornwall  gave  little 
satisfaction,  and  had  recourse  to  the  narcotic  virtues  of 
Porter,  for  enabling  him  to  sustain  its  fatigue :  an 
Auxiliary  which  sometimes  becoming  too  powerful  for 
the  Principal  who  called  in  its  assistance,  produced  in- 
conveniences. The  "  Rolliad,"  alluding  to  the  Speaker's 
Chair,  as  it  was  filled  in  1784,  says, 

"  There  Cornwall  sits,  and  ah  !  compelled  by  Fate, 
Must  sit  for  ever  through  the  long  Debate  ; 
Save  when  compelled  by  Nature's  sovereign  will, 

Sometimes  to  empty,  and  sometimes  to  fill." 

"  Like  sad  Prometheus  fastened  to  the  Rock, 

In  vain  he  looks  for  Pity  to  the  Clock ; 

In  vain  the  Powers  of  strengthening  Porter  tries, 

And  nods  to  Bellamy  for  fresh  supplies." 

We  may  here  remark,  as  a  curious  fact,  that  Sir 
Fletcher's  dismission  from  the  Office  of  Speaker, 
conducted  him,  within  eighteen  months  to  the  Dignity 
of  the  Peerage;  an  elevation  which  he  owed  solely  to 
the  jealousies  and  rivalities  that  arose  between  Lord 
Rockingham  and  Lord  Shelburne,  as  soon  as  they  got 
into  Power:  whereas,  Cornwall,  his  successful  com- 
petitor, after  presiding  more  than  eight  years  in  the 

219 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

House  of  Commons,  died  without  ever  entering  the 
House  of  Lords.  It  was  thus  that  Dunning  reached 
that  Goal,  while  Wallace  missed  it.  So  much  has  the 
disposition  of  events,  which  in  common  language  we 
denominate  Fortune,  to  do  with  the  affairs  of  Men,  in 
defiance  of  Juvenal's 

"  Nos  te, 
"  Nos  facimus,  Fortuna,  Deam,  Caeloque  locamus." 

Little  consolation  can  be  derived  during  this  gloomy 
period  of  our  History,  from  carrying  our  view  beyond 
the  Metropolis,  to  the  extremities  of  the  Empire,  or 
from  considering  the  operations  of  the  war  by  sea  and 
land.  As  Geary  had  succeeded  to  the  Command  of  the 
Channel  fleet,  by  Hardy's  death,  so  Darby  took  the 
same  Command  soon  afterwards,  in  consequence  of 
Geary's  resignation.  None  of  these  names  will  be 
pronounced  with  enthusiasm  by  Posterity.  Admiral 
Barrington,  by  his  repulse  of  D'Estaign  at  St.  Lucie, 
acquired  the  only  renown  gained  on  the  Ocean,  from 
the  commencement  of  Hostilities  in  July,  1778,  till  the 
period  when  Rodney  was  sent  out  to  the  West  Indies. 
The  disgraceful  disputes  between  Keppel  and  Palliser, 
which,  after  convulsing  the  Navy,  and  dividing  the 
Kingdom,  began  insensibly  to  fall  into  oblivion  ;  were 
again  revived  during  the  short  time  that  the  House  of 
Commons  remained  sitting  before  the  Christmas  Recess. 
In  consequence  of  Sir  Hugh  Palliser's  appointment  to 
the  Government  of  Greenwich  Hospital,  the  events  of 
the  27th  July,  1778,  were  discussed  anew,  with  all  the 
acrimony  of  Party.  Sir  Hugh,  in  his  defence,  read  at 
the  Table  of  the  House,  a  paper,  the  length,  dulness, 
and  insipidity  of  which,  put  the  patience  of  his 
auditors,  as  I  well  remember,  to  a  severe  trial.  I  have, 
however,  always  considered  him  as  an  able,  meritorious, 
and  calumniated  naval  Officer,  who  fell  a  sacrifice  to 
Ministerial  unpopularity.  Lord  North,  with  whom, 

220 


RUPTURE  WITH  HOLLAND 

not  to  be  defeated,  constituted  a  sort  of  victory ;  and 
who  generally  contented  himself  with  half  triumphs ; 
after  defending  Palliser  with  his  usual  ability,  and  with 
more  than  his  common  animation  ;  having  thus  rescued 
him  from  the  fangs  of  his  enemies,  aimed  at  no  further 
advantage,  but  moved  for  an  Adjournment  early  in 
December. 

As  if  to  complete  the  Climax  of  our  national  mis- 
fortunes at  this  humiliating  period,  Holland  was  added 
to  the  number  of  our  enemies ;  war  being  declared 
against  the  Seven  United  Provinces,  before  the  close  of 
1780,  notwithstanding  the  repugnance  equally  felt  at 
such  a  rupture,  by  the  King  of  Great  Britain,  and  by 
the  Stadtholder.  More  than  a  Century  had  then 
elapsed  since  we  had  been  engaged  in  Hostilities  with 
the  Dutch,  under  the  profligate  reign  of  Charles  the 
Second.  During  some  portion  of  the  intermediate  time, 
the  two  countries  had  been  governed  by  one  Prince  ; 
and  one  soul  might  be  said  to  animate  their  counsels 
after  the  expulsion  of  James  the  Second,  when  directed 
to  stem  the  current  of  Louis  the  Fourteenth's  arms  in 
the  Netherlands.  Even  subsequent  to  King  William's 
decease,  the  United  Provinces  made  common  cause  with 
his  successor,  under  Marlborough :  but  the  disgraceful 
termination  of  that  great  struggle,  dissevered  England 
and  Holland.  After  the  Peace  of  Utrecht,  no  close 
nor  cordial  union  subsisted  between  the  Cabinets  of  the 
Hague  and  of  St.  James's.  The  Dutch  were,  indeed, 
prevailed  on  to  join  George  the  Second,  as  auxiliaries, 
though  not  as  principals,  in  the  war  of  1743,  under- 
taken to  preserve  Maria  Theresa  on  the  throne  of  her 
father  Charles  the  Sixth.  Unfortunately,  the  English, 
Dutch,  and  Austrian  armies,  which,  while  conducted  by 
the  great  talents  of  Eugene  and  Marlborough,  had 
nearly  driven  Louis  the  Fourteenth  to  the  last 
extremities ;  when  led  by  Konigseck,  and  by  William, 
Duke  of  Cumberland,  were  every  where  defeated  on  the 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

same  plains.  Marshal  Saxe  demolished  the  Barrier  that 
protected  Holland  against  the  overwhelming  power  of 
France ;  and  only  the  moderation  or  indolence  of  Louis 
the  Fifteenth,  which  checked  his  conquests,  gave  peace 
to  Europe  in  1748,  at  Aix-la-Chapelle.  That  Prince, 
had  he  been  animated  by  the  ambition  of  his  pre- 
decessor, or  by  the  spirit  of  conquest  which  impelled 
the  French  Republic  in  1795,  might  have  entered 
Amsterdam,  and  have  subjected  the  Zuyder  sea  to  his 
dominion.  Escaped  from  this  imminent  peril,  the 
Dutch  remained  neutral  spectators  of  the  Contest  which 
took  place  between  us  and  France  in  1756,  when 
Flanders,  which  for  near  a  Century  had  constituted  the 
Palcestra  of  Europe,  became  a  country  of  repose ;  and 
the  House  of  Austria  for  the  first  time  joined  her 
inveterate  foe,  the  House  of  Bourbon.  It  was  reserved 
for  the  calamitous  Mra,  of  the  American  war,  which 
familiarized  us  with  disgraces  and  reverses,  to  witness 
Holland  openly  ranged  against  Great  Britain,  under 
the  banners  of  Louis  the  Sixteenth  and  Charles  the 
Third.  The  Opposition  exulted  at  the  Declaration  of 
Hostilities  taking  place  between  the  two  Countries,  as 
setting  the  seal  to  Lord  North's  ministerial  embar- 
rassments. Nor  could  it  be  denied,  that  the  necessity 
for  blocking  the  Mouth  of  the  Texel,  and  probably 
engaging  the  Dutch  Fleet  at  the  entrance  of  their  own 
ports,  in  the  depressed,  as  well  as  inferior  state  of  the 
British  Navy ;  augmented  the  difficulties  under  which 
the  Administration  laboured,  while  it  encreased  the 
unpopularity  of  the  Sovereign. 

Yet  never  did  any  Government  make  greater  efforts 
to  avert  and  avoid  a  rupture,  than  were  exerted  by 
Lord  North's  Cabinet.  Sir  Joseph  Yorke,  who,  by 
long  residence  in  Holland,  had  become  in  some  measure 
naturalized  at  the  Hague,  exhausted  every  art  of 
diplomacy,  to  stem  the  current  of  French  and  American 
politics.  The  Stadtholder,  no  less  than  the  majority  of 


DECLINE  OF  BRITISH  POWER,  1780 

the  people  throughout  the  Seven  United  Provinces, 
nourished  the  warmest  partiality  towards  Great  Britain  : 
but  the  Prince  of  Orange  had  lost  the  public  respect 
which  his  high  Office  ought  to  have  excited ;  and  the 
nation,  immersed  in  narrow  speculations  of  commercial 
advantage,  displayed  no  spark  of  that  public  spirit, 
which  had  operated  such  powerful  effects  against  Philip 
the  Second  and  Third,  during  the  sixteenth  and  seven- 
teenth Centuries.  The  Pensionary,  Van  Berkel,  acting 
under  the  impulse  of  Maurepas  and  of  Vergennes, 
precipitated  his  countrymen  on  war  with  England,  by 
signing  a  treaty  with  the  American  Insurgents  ;  pre- 
cisely as  Madison,  in  the  Summer  of  1812,  commenced 
hostilities  with  us,  by  the  suggestions  of  his  Corsican 
Director.  Nor  did  Fox  and  Burke  arraign  more 
severely  the  measures  of  Lord  North,  as  having  pro- 
duced the  rupture  with  Holland ;  than  the  Leaders  of 
Opposition  in  the  House  of  Commons,  inveighed  against 
the  line  of  conduct  on  the  part  of  Ministers,  which  led 
to  the  late  contest  with  America.  Both  wars  arose 
from  a  similar  cause ;  the  apparently  desperate,  or 
highly  alarming  condition  of  England.  In  1780,  we 
appeared  to  be  rapidly  sinking  under  the  combination 
of  European,  Asiatic,  and  American  foes.  In  1812, 
Bonaparte,  Master  of  the  Continent,  from  the  frontiers 
of  Portugal  to  those  of  Russia,  prepared  to  consummate 
the  subjugation  of  Europe,  by  a  march  to  Moscow.  To 
Van  Berkel,  and  to  Madison,  the  occasion  seemed 
equally  favourable  for  the  developement  of  their  ran- 
courous  enmity  to  the  English  Government.  The 
measures  of  the  former  Minister  led,  at  no  distant 
period  of  time,  in  the  space  of  about  fifteen  years,  to 
the  subjugation  and  subversion  of  the  Republic  of 
Holland.  Futurity  will  shew  whether  the  policy  of 
Madison,  if  his  base  subservience  to  Bonaparte  can 
merit  the  name,  will  prove  more  successful ;  and  how  far 
the  American  President  will  justly  challenge  the  future 

223 


WRAXALKS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

gratitude  of  his  countrymen,  more  than  the  Pensionary 
of  Amsterdam  merited  the  support  of  the  Dutch. 

Nearly  about  the  same  time,  Maria  Theresa,  Queen  of 
Hungary  and  Bohemia,  expired  at  Vienna,  after  a  reign 
of  forty  years,  during  which  she  had  exhibited  a 
memorable  instance  of  the  vicissitudes  of  fortune.  Like 
Frederic,  King  of  Prussia,  she  acceded  in  1740,  and  a 
great  portion  of  their  lives  was  passed  in  mutual 
hostility.  The  strength  of  her  mind,  and  the  tenacity 
of  her  character,  sustained  her  amidst  difficulties,  which 
a  woman  of  inferior  resolution  could  not  have  sur- 
mounted. Since  the  death  of  Elizabeth,  Queen  of 
England,  in  1603,  Europe  had  not  beheld  any  female 
on  the  Throne,  who  united  so  many  private  virtues,  to 
so  many  great  public  endowments.  Maria  Theresa 
manifested  a  masculine  mind,  blended  with  feminine 
qualities  calculated  to  conciliate  universal  affection.  As 
a  Sovereign,  she  possessed  far  greater  resources,  con- 
stancy, and  energy,  than  had  been  exhibited  by  her 
father,  the  Emperor  Charles  the  Sixth.  Her  caution, 
experience,  and  moderation,  restrained  the  pernicious 
activity  of  her  Son  and  Successor,  Joseph  the  Second. 
His  accession  to  the  Dominions  of  the  House  of 
Austria,  forms  an  unfortunate  JKra  in  the  history  of  that 
Family ;  and  was  one  of  the  many  concurring  circum- 
stances which  eventually  facilitated  the  progress  of  the 
French  Arms  in  the  Netherlands,  after  the  Revolution. 

Though  sinking  under  the  accumulated  pressure  of 
advancing  age,  as  well  as  of  disease  and  infirmity,  Maria 
Theresa  retained  the  possession  of  all  her  faculties, 
nearly  to  the  last  moments  of  her  life.  Religion  and 
resignation  smoothed  its  close.  Two  of  the  Arch- 
duchesses, her  daughters,  Maria  and  Elizabeth,  who 
remained  unmarried,  constantly  attended  about  her  bed  ; 
but  I  have  been  assured  that  they  could  not  prevail  on 
their  mother,  though  they  earnestly  entreated  it,  even 
a  short  time  preceding  her  dissolution,  to  bequeath  her 


MARIA  THERESA  AND  CATHERINE 

blessing  to  the  Archduchess  Amelia,  their  Sister.  That 
Princess,  who  had  been  married  to  Don  Ferdinand, 
Duke  of  Parma,  was  supposed  to  have  committed  great 
irregularities  of  every  kind.  Only  a  short  time  before 
Maria  Theresa  breathed  her  last,  having  apparently 
fallen  into  a  sort  of  insensibility,  and  her  eyes  being 
closed ;  one  of  the  Ladies  near  her  person,  in  reply  to 
an  enquiry  made  respecting  the  state  of  the  Empress, 
answered  that  her  Majesty  seemed  to  be  asleep.  "No,11 
replied  she,  "  I  could  sleep,  if  I  would  indulge  repose ; 
"  but  I  am  sensible  of  the  near  approach  of  death,  and 
"  I  will  not  allow  myself  to  be  surprized  by  him  in  my 
"  sleep.  I  wish  to  meet  my  dissolution,  awake."" 
There  is  nothing  transmitted  to  us  by  Antiquity,  finer 
than  this  answer,  which  is  divested  of  all  ostentation. 
Voltaire  himself,  Cynic  as  he  was,  and  always  severe 
upon  crowned  heads,  must  have  admired  it.  Even  the 
great  Frederic,  who  survived  Maria  Theresa  near  six 
years,  though  he  met  the  approach  of  death  with  phi- 
losophy and  fortitude,  yet  betrayed  much  ^reluctance, 
displayed  some  peevishness,  and  perhaps  a  little  affecta- 
tion or  vanity,  in  the  preparations  for  his  departure. 
Neither  Augustus,  nor  Vespasian,  nor  Adrian,  though 
each  of  these  Emperors  seems  to  have  contemplated 
death  with  a  steady  countenance,  and  almost  with  a 
smiling  look  ;  yet  manifested  more  perfect  self  posses- 
sion in  the  last  act  of  life.  Maria  Theresa  was  as  much 
superior  in  virtue  to  her  contemporary,  Catherine  the 
Second,  as  she  fell  beneath  that  Princess  in  brilliancy  of 
talents.  In  the  arts  of  reigning,  in  courage,  in  benignity 
of  disposition,  and  in  solid  endowments  of  understand- 
ing, the  Austrian  may  dispute  for  superiority  even 
with  the  Russian  Empress.  Posterity  will  perhaps 
confer  more  admiration  on  the  latter  Princess,  but  must 
reserve  its  moral  approbation  and  esteem  for  the  former 
Sovereign. 

END    OF    PART   THE    FIRST. 

225  15 


PART  THE  SECOND. 

JANUARY,  1781. 

I  AM  now  arrived,  in  the  course  of  these  Memoirs,  at 
the  beginning  of  the  year  1781.  Before,  however, 
we  enter  on  the  political  events  of  that  disastrous 
period,  it  seems  indispensable  that  we  should  survey  the 
character  of  the  Sovereign,  of  the  Cabinet  Ministers, 
of  the  Leaders  of  Opposition,  and  the  principal  persons 
in  both  Houses  of  the  new  Parliament.  Great  Britain 
did  not  then  present  the  same  august,  majestic,  and 
interesting  spectacle  to  mankind,  which  we  have  since 
exhibited,  even  during  the  most  disastrous  moments  of 
the  late  Revolutionary  War.  The  Empire,  under  Lord 
North^s  Administration,  was  shaken  and  convulsed  in 
almost  every  quarter.  Domestic  faction  pervaded  all 
the  Departments  of  Government,  infected  the  Navy, 
and  manifested  itself  in  every  Debate  of  either  House 
of  Parliament.  The  English  were  discontented ;  the 
Scots  were  sullen  ;  and  the  Irish  had  become  clamorous 
for  political,  as  well  as  for  commercial  emancipation, 
A  Ministry,  the  members  of  which  body  did  not  always 
act  in  union,  and  still  prosecuting  a  hopeless  contest 
with  America ;  whatever  ability  the  individuals  compos- 
ing it  might  separately  possess,  yet  inspired  no  public 
confidence  in  the  success  of  their  future  measures. 
National  Credit  began  to  droop  under  the  expences  of 
a  war  carried  on  across  the  Atlantic,  at  an  immense 

226 


1781.]  ATTITUDE  OF  CONTINENTAL  POWERS 

distance :  while  the  commerce  of  the  Country  suffered 
at  least  in  an  equal  degree,  from  the  depredations  of 
the  enemy.  Nor  had  Lord  North  provided,  as  Mr.  Pitt 
afterwards  did  in  1786,  any  Sinking  Fund  for  the 
gradual  extinction  of  the  Taxes  which  he  annually 
imposed.  The  Great  Continental  Powers  looked  on, 
either  as  unconcerned  spectators,  or  as  secret  enemies. 
Joseph  the  Second,  Emperor  of  Germany,  who  had 
recently  succeeded  to  the  Bohemian  and  Hungarian 
Thrones ;  imitating  in  this  instance  his  mother's  line 
of  policy,  and  occupied  with  domestic  Reforms  of 
various  kinds,  took  indeed  no  open  part.  But,  con- 
nected as  he  was  with  France,  by  his  sister's  marriage 
to  Louis  the  Sixteenth,  his  inclinations  might  be  sup- 
posed to  lean  towards  the  House  of  Bourbon.  The 
great  Frederic,  sinking  in  years,  as  well  as  under  the 
pressure  of  diseases  and  infirmities ;  satiated  with  mili- 
tary fame ;  attentive  principally  to  the  improvement  of 
his  dominions,  and  the  augmentation  of  his  Revenue ; 
always  attached  from  disposition,  to  the  manners, 
language,  and  crown  of  France ;  beheld  with  satis- 
faction, the  augmenting  embarrassments  of  the  English 
Government.  He  had  never  forgiven  Lord  Bute  for 
retaining,  when  First  Minister,  the  Subsidy  claimed  by 
Prussia  in  1762 ;  and  he  nourished  a  dislike  to  the 
Country,  which,  as  he  perhaps  justly  conceived,  had 
broken  its  faith  with  him  on  so  important  a  point. 
Catherine  the  Second,  ever  anxious  to  throw  a  veil  of 
glory  over  the  tragical  circumstances  which  placed  her 
on  the  Russian  throne,  by  aggrandizing  the  Russian 
Empire  ;  and  availing  herself  with  ability  of  the  distress 
of  England,  contending  against  so  many  adversaries  ;  set 
up  pretensions  to  a  maritime  exemption  from  the  Right 
of  Search,  claimed  and  exercised  by  Great  Britain  in 
time  of  War.  Placing  herself  at  the  head  of  the 
Baltic  Powers,  in  union  with  the  Courts  of  Copenhagen 
and  Stockholm,  which  made  common  Cause  with  her, 

227 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [1781. 

she  attempted  to  emancipate  their  Navies  from  any 
further  submission  to  the  British  Flag.  Lord  North, 
unable  to  resent,  or  to  oppose  the  policy  of  Catherine 
by  open  force,  temporized,  and  waited  for  more  pro- 
pitious times.  Portugal  alone,  amidst  the  general 
Hostility  or  Defection  of  Europe,  ventured  to  manifest 
her  amicable  disposition ;  and  had  the  generosity  to 
refuse  to  join  the  Baltic  Confederacy,  or  to  accede  to 
the  Armed  Neutrality  of  the  Northern  States. 

The  King  at  this  period  of  his  Reign,  was  far 
advanced  in  his  forty-third  year.  Though  he  came 
into  the  world  at  the  term  of  seven  Months ;  a  fact 
which  is  indisputable,  as  the  late  Duchess  of  Brunswic, 
his  sister's  birth,  took  place  on  the  llth  of  August, 
1737 ;  and  that  of  His  Majesty,  on  the  4th  of  June, 
1738 ;  yet  nature  had  conferred  on  him  a  sound  and 
vigorous  frame  of  body.  He  was  born  in  Norfolk 
House,  St.  James's  Square,  where  Frederic,  Prince  of 
Wales,  then  resided;  who  had  been  peremptorily 
ordered  only  a  short  time  before,  to  quit  St.  James's 
Palace,  by  George  the  Second.  I  saw,  not  much  more 
than  a  Year  ago,  the  identical  Bed  in  which  the 
Princess  of  Wales  was  delivered,  now  removed  to  the 
Duke  of  Norfolk's  seat  of  Worksop  in  the  County  of 
Nottingham  ;  and  it  forcibly  proves  the  rapid  progress 
of  domestic  elegance  and  taste,  within  the  last  Eighty 
years.  Except  that  the  furniture  is  of  green  silk,  the 
Bed  has  nothing  splendid  about  it ;  and  would  hardly 
be  esteemed  fit  for  the  accommodation  of  a  person  of 
ordinary  condition  in  the  present  times.  A  course  of  sys- 
tematic abstinence  and  exercise,  had  secured  to  George 
the  Third  the  enjoyment  of  almost  uninterrupted  health, 
down  to  the  time  of  which  I  speak.  So  little  had  he 
been  incommoded  by  sickness,  or  by  indisposition  of  any 
kind,  from  the  period  of  his  Accession  till  his  memor- 
able seizure  in  1788,  that  scarcely  was  he  ever  compelled 
to  absent  himself  on  that  account,  from  a  Levee,  a 


-tA^  JurrCr 


fuJ>. 


1781.]    PHYSIOGNOMIC  CHARACTERISTICS 

Council,  or  a  Drawing-room,  during  eight  and  twenty 
years.  One  only  exception  to  this  Remark  occurred  in 
the  Autumn  of  1765,  when  he  was  attacked  by  a  dis- 
order that  confined  him  for  several  weeks ;  relative  to 
the  nature  and  seat  of  which  Malady,  though  many 
conjectures  and  assertions  have  been  hazarded,  in  con- 
versation, and  even  in  print,  no  satisfactory  information 
has  ever  been  given  to  the  world. 

In  the  King's  countenance,  a  Physiognomist  would 
have  distinguished  two  principal  characteristics ;  firm- 
ness, or  as  his  enemies  denominated  it,  obstinacy ; 
tempered  with  benignity.  The  former  expression  was 
however  indisputably  more  marked  and  prominent 
than  the  latter  sentiment.  He  seemed  to  have  a 
tendency  to  become  corpulent,  if  he  had  not  repressed 
it  by  systematic  and  unremitting  temperance.  On  this 
subject  I  shall  relate  a  fact,  which  was  communicated 
to  me  by  a  friend,  Sir  John  Macpherson,  who  received 
it  from  the  great  Earl  of  Mansfield,  to  whom  the  King 
himself  mentioned  it ;  forcibly  demonstrating  that 
strength  of  mind,  renunciation  of  all  excess,  and 
dominion  over  his  appetites,  which  have  characterized 
George  the  Third  at  every  period  of  his  life.  Convers- 
ing with  William,  Duke  of  Cumberland,  his  uncle,  not 
long  before  that  Prince's  death  in  1764,  His  Majesty 
observed  that  it  was  with  concern  he  remarked  the 
Duke's  augmenting  corpulency.  "  I  lament  it  not  less, 
"  Sir,"  replied  he,  "  but  it  is  constitutional ;  and  I 
"  am  much  mistaken  if  Your  Majesty  will  not  become 
"  as  large  as  myself,  before  you  attain  to  my  age." 
"  It  arises  from  your  not  using  sufficient  exercise," 
answered  the  King.  "  I  use,  nevertheless,"  said  the 
Duke,  "  constant  and  severe  exercise  of  every  kind. 
"  But  there  is  another  effort  requisite,  in  order  to 
"  repress  this  tendency,  which  is  much  more  difficult 
"  to  practise ;  and  without  which,  no  exercise,  however 
"  violent,  will  suffice.  I  mean,  great  renunciation  and 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [i78i. 

"  temperance.  Nothing  else  can  prevent  Your  Majesty 
"  from  growing  to  my  size."  The  King  made  little 
reply ;  but  the  Duke's  words  sunk  deep,  and  produced 
a  lasting  impression  on  his  mind.  From  that  day  he 
formed  the  resolution,  as  he  assured  Lord  Mansfield,  of 
checking  his  constitutional  inclination  to  corpulency, 
by  unremitting  restraint  upon  his  appetite:  a  deter- 
mination which  he  carried  into  complete  effect,  in 
defiance  of  every  temptation. 

Perhaps  no  Sovereign,  of  whom  History,  ancient  or 
modern,  makes  mention  in  any  age  of  the  earth,  has 
exceeded  him  in  the  practice  of  this  virtue.  It  is  a 
fact,  that  during  many  years  of  his  life,  after  coming  up 
from  Kew,  or  from  Windsor,  often  on  horseback,  and 
sometimes  in  heavy  rain,  to  the  Queen's  House ;  he  has 
gone  in  a  Chair  to  St.  James's,  dressed  himself,  held 
a  Levee,  passed  through  all  the  forms  of  that  long  and 
tedious  ceremony,  for  such  it  was  in  the  way  that  he 
performed  it;  without  leaving  any  individual  in  the 
Circle,  unnoticed :  and  has  afterwards  assisted  at  a 
Privy  Council,  or  given  Audience  to  his  Cabinet 
Ministers  and  others,  till  five,  and  even  sometimes 
till  six  o'clock.  After  so  much  fatigue  of  body  and 
of  mind,  the  only  refreshment  or  sustenance  that  he 
usually  took,  consisted  in  a  few  slices  of  bread  and 
butter  and  a  dish  of  tea,  which  he  sometimes  swallowed 
as  he  walked  up  and  down,  previous  to  getting  into  his 
Carriage,  in  order  to  return  into  the  country.  His 
understanding,  solid  and  sedate,  qualified  him  admir- 
ably for  business,  though  it  was  neither  of  a  brilliant, 
lively,  nor  imposing  description.  But  his  manner  did 
injustice  to  the  endowments  of  his  intellect :  and 
unfortunately,  it  was  in  public  that  these  minute 
personal  defects  or  imperfections  became  most  conspi- 
cuous. Dr.  Johnson,  indeed,  thought  otherwise  on  the 
Subject :  for,  after  the  conversation  with  which  His 
Majesty  was  pleased  to  honor  that  great  literary 

230 


1781.]         JOHNSON  AND  GEORGE  III. 

character,  in  the  Library  at  the  Queen's  House,  in 
February,  1767,  he  passed  the  highest  Encomiums  on 
the  elegant  manners  of  the  Sovereign.  Boswell,  in 
Johnson's  Life,  speaking  of  this  Circumstance,  adds, 
"  He  said  to  Mr.  Barnard,  the  Librarian,  '  Sir,  they 
"  may  talk  of  the  King  as  they  will,  but  he  is  the 
"  finest  Gentleman  I  have  ever  seen.'  And  he  after- 
"  wards  observed  t(5  Mr.  Langton,  '  Sir,  his  manners 
"  are  those  of  as  fine  a  Gentleman,  as  we  may  suppose 
"  Louis  the  Fourteenth,  or  Charles  the  Second.'" 

Independant  of  the  effect  necessarily  produced  on 
Johnson's  mind,  by  so  unexpected  and  flattering  a  mark 
of  royal  condescension,  which  may  well  be  imagined  to 
have  operated  most  favourably  on  the  opinions  of  the 
Moralist ;  he  was  perhaps  of  all  men,  the  least  capable 
of  estimating  personal  elegance  of  deportment.  His 
vast  intellectual  powers  lay  in  another  line  of  dis- 
crimination. Had  Johnson  been  now  living,  he  might 
indeed  witness  the  finest  model  of  grace,  dignity,  ease, 
and  affability,  which  the  world  has  ever  beheld,  united 
in  the  same  person.  In  him  are  really  blended  the 
majesty  of  Louis  the  Fourteenth,  with  the  amenity  of 
Charles  the  Second.  But  George  the  Third  was 
altogether  destitute  of  these  ornamental  and  adventi- 
tious endowments.  The  oscillations  of  his  body,  the 
precipitation  of  his  questions,  none  of  which,  it  was 
said,  would  wait  for  an  answer;  and  the  hurry  of  his 
articulation,  afforded  on  the  contrary,  to  little  minds, 
or  to  malicious  observers,  who  only  saw  him  at  a 
Drawing  room,  occasion  for  calling  in  question  the 
soundness  of  his  judgment,  or  the  strength  of  his 
faculties.  None  of  his  Ministers,  however,  and  Mr. 
Fox,  if  possible,  less  than  any  other,  entertained  such 
an  opinion.  His  whole  Reign  forms  indeed,  the 
best  answer  to  the  imputation.  That  he  committed 
many  errors,  nourished  many  prejudices,  formed  many 
erroneous  estimates,  and  frequently  adhered  too  per- 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [mi. 

tinaciously  to  his  Determinations,  where  he  conceived, 
perhaps  falsely,  that  they  were  founded  in  reason,  or  in 
justice; — all  these  Allegations  maybe  admitted.  Nor 
can  the  injurious  effects  to  himself,  and  to  his  people, 
necessarily  flowing  in  various  instances,  from  such 
defects  of  Character  and  of  Administration,  be  alto- 
gether denied.  But  these  Infirmities,  from  which  no 
man  is  exempt,  cannot  impugn  his  right  to  the 
affectionate  veneration  of  posterity,  for  the  inflexible 
uprightness  of  his  public  conduct.  And  as  little  can 
they  deprive  him  of  the  suffrages  of  the  wise  and  good 
of  every  Age,  who  will  bear  testimony  to  the  expansion 
of  his  mind,  and  the  invariable  rectitude  of  his  inten- 
tions. 

It  would,  indeed,  be  difficult  for  History  to  produce 
an  instance  of  any  Prince  who  has  united  and  displayed 
on  the  Throne,  during  near  half  a  Century,  so  many 
personal  and  private  virtues.  In  the  flower  of  youth, 
unmarried,  endowed  with  a  vigorous  constitution,  and 
surrounded  with  temptations  to  pleasure  or  indulgence 
of  every  kind,  when  he  succeeded  to  the  Crown,  he 
never  yielded  to  these  seductions.  Not  less  affection- 
ately attached  to  the  Queen,  than  Charles  the  First  was 
to  his  Consort  Henrietta  Maria,  he  remained  neverthe- 
less altogether  exempt  from  the  uxoriousness  which 
characterized  his  unfortunate  predecessor,  and  which 
operated  so  fatally  in  the  course  of  his  Reign. 

Wilkes,  in  the  papers  of  the  "North  Briton,"  and 
"Junius"  always  affected,  by  drawing  comparisons 
between  the  two  Kings,  to  demonstrate  the  moral 
resemblance  that  existed  between  them :  but,  the 
pretended  similarity  was  only  external,  in  matters  of 
mere  deportment,  not  of  solid  character.  It  must  be 
apparent  to  every  impartial  man,  who  studies  their 
respective  reigns  and  line  of  political  action,  how 
superior  was  George  the  Third  to  Charles,  on  the  three 
great  points  that  constitute  the  essential  difference 


1781.]       CHARLES  I.  AND  GEORGE  III. 

between  men.  The  first  of  these  qualities  was  Firmness 
of  Mind.  To  his  weakness,  not  even  to  give  it  a  severer 
Epithet,  in  abandoning  Lord  Strafford  to  the  rage  of 
his  enemies,  we  may  trace  all  the  misfortunes  that 
accompanied  Charles  from  that  Time  to  the  close  of 
life ;  misfortunes  aggravated  by  the  reproaches  of  his 
own  conscience,  for  delivering  up  his  Minister  a  victim 
to  popular  violence.  His  present  Majesty  neither 
deserted  Lord  Bute,  when  most  unpopular,  in  1763 ; 
nor  the  Duke  of  Grafton,  amidst  the  Tumults  of  March, 
1769 ;  nor  Lord  North  in  the  more  awful  Riots  of 
June,  1780.  As  little  did  he  turn  his  back  on  Lord 
George  Germain,  after  the  defeats  of  Saratoga,  or  of 
York  Town,  amidst  the  disasters  of  the  American  war. 
Far  from  recurring  for  support  to  his  Ministers,  he 
constantly  extended  it  to  them ;  and  never  shrunk 
from  personal  risk,  responsibility,  or  odium.  His 
conduct  on  the  memorable  seventh  of  June,  1780,  both 
at  the  Council  Table,  and  during  the  course  of  that 
calamitous  night  which  followed,  will  best  exemplify 
the  assertion.  Charles,  though  personally  brave  in  the 
field,  and  perfectly  composed  on  the  Scaffold,  was 
deficient  in  political  courage,  steadiness  of  temper, 
and  tenacity  of  determination.  These  qualities, 
formed  the  distinguishing  characteristics  of  George 
the  Third,  who  seems,  when  assailed  by  misfortunes, 
to  have  taken  as  his  Motto,  the  sentiment  of  the 
Roman  Poet : 

"Tu  ne  cede  Mails ;  sed  contra,  audentior  ito." 

Nor  does  the  balance  incline  less  in  his  favour,  when 
compared  with  his  predecessor  of  the  Stuart  line,  on 
the  article  of  Judgment.  If  any  act  of  His  present 
Majesty's  Reign  or  Government,  may  seem  to  bear  an 
analogy  to  the  intemperate,  vindictive,  and  pernicious 
attempt  of  Charles,  to  seize  on  the  five  Members  of  the 
House  of  Commons ;  it  was  the  order  issued  by  a 

233 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [1781. 

General  Warrant,  to  take  Wilkes  into  custody.  Nor 
shall  I  undertake  the  defence  of  that  proceeding,  which 
I  have  always  considered  as  the  least  justifiable  measure 
embraced  since  the  King's  accession  to  the  Throne. 
But,  when  he  authorized  it,  in  April,  1763,  he  had  not 
completed  his  twenty-fifth  year.  Charles  the  First  was 
above  forty,  at  the  time  of  his  committing  the  rash  act 
in  question.  That  George  the  Third,  if  he  had  ever 
been  reduced  to  take  up  arms  against  his  subjects, 
might,  from  the  partialities  of  parental  affection,  have 
committed  an  error  similar  to  that  of  Charles  when  he 
entrusted  the  command  of  his  forces  to  Prince  Rupert ; 
I  will  even  admit  to  be  probable,  reasoning  from  the 
campaigns  of  1793,  1794,  and  1799.  But,  no  man  who 
has  followed  the  whole  chain  of  events  from  1760  down 
to  1810,  can  hesitate  in  pronouncing,  that  under  circum- 
stances the  most  appalling  to  the  human  mind,  demand- 
ing equal  fortitude  and  intellectual  resources,  he  has 
displayed  a  degree  of  ability  that  we  would  vainly 
seek  in  the  Stuart  King's  unfortunate  Administration, 
terminated  by  the  Scaffold. 

It  is  however  in  moral  Principle  and  good  Faiih^  that 
the  superiority  of  the  one  Sovereign  over  the  other, 
becomes  most  irresistible,  and  forces  the  completest 
conviction.  "  Charles  the  First,"  says  Junius, "  lived  and 
"  died  a  Hypocrite."  However  severe  we  may  esteem 
this  sentence,  we  cannot  contest  that  his  insincerity 
formed  a  prominent  feature  of  his  character,  and 
eminently  conduced  to  his  destruction.  It  was  proved 
by  a  variety  of  facts,  and  it  unquestionably  deterred 
Cromwell,  as  well  as  others  of  the  Republican  leaders, 
from  exhibiting  or  anticipating  the  conduct  of  Monk. 
Unable  to  trust  his  most  solemn  assurances,  they  found 
no  security  for  themselves,  except  in  bringing  him  to 
the  Block.  But,  George  the  Third  exhibited  a  model 
of  unshaken  fidelity  to  his  engagements;  even  those 
most  repugnant  to  his  own  feelings,  and  most  contrary 


1781.]  PRELIMINARIES  OF  PEACE 

to  his  own  judgment.  I  could  adduce  many  proofs  of 
the  fact.  How  magnanimous  was  his  reception  and 
treatment  of  Adams,  in  1783 ;  a  man  personally 
obnoxious ;  when  presented  to  him  at  his  Levee,  as 
Envoy  from  the  American  States !  In  terms  the  most 
conciliating,  yet  nobly  frank,  he  avowed  to  that  Minister, 
with  what  reluctance  he  had  consented  to  the  separa- 
tion of  the  Trans-Atlantic  British  Colonies  from  his 
Dominion  ;  "  But,"  added  he,  "  their  Independance  being 
"  now  consummated,  I  shall  be  the  last  man  in  my 
"  Kingdom  to  encourage  its  violation."  He  acted  in  a 
similar  manner,  when  the  Preliminaries  of  Peace  were 
signed  in  1801,  with  France.  No  Measure  of  State  in 
the  Power  of  Ministers  to  adopt,  could  have  been,  under 
the  existing  circumstances,  less  consonant  to  his  ideas 
of  safety,  policy,  and  wisdom :  a  fact  of  which  the 
Cabinet  was  so  perfectly  aware,  that  Lord  Hawkesbury 
affixed  his  signature  to  the  Articles,  not  only  without 
the  King's  consent  or  approbation,  but  without  his 
knowledge.  It  took  place,  as  is  well  known,  on  the  first 
of  October,  just  as  he  was  about  to  return  from  Wey- 
mouth  to  Windsor.  The  Cabinet  instantly  sent  off  a 
Messenger,  with  the  intelligence,  who  met  the  King  at 
Andover ;  and  the  Pacquet  was  brought  to  him  as  he 
stood  in  the  Drawing  Room  of  the  Inn,  engaged  in 
conversation  with  the  late  Earl  of  Cardigan,  and  two 
other  Noblemen.  His  Majesty,  wholly  unsuspicious 
of  the  fact,  and  not  expecting  to  receive  any  news  of 
importance,  ordered  them  not  to  leave  the  Apartment, 
as  they  were  preparing  to  do,  in  order  that  he  might 
have  time  to  peruse  the  Dispatch.  But,  on  inspecting 
its  contents,  he  betrayed  so  much  surprize,  both  in  his 
looks  and  gesture,  that  they  were  again  about  to  quit 
his  presence.  The  King  then  addressed  them,  and 
holding  the  Letter  open  in  his  hand,  "  I  have  received 
"  surprizing  news,"  said  he,  "but  it  is  no  secret. 
"  Preliminaries  of  Peace  are  signed  with  France.  I 


WRAXALL/S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [1781. 

"  knew  nothing  of  it  whatever ;  but  since  it  is  made, 
"  I  sincerely  wish  it  may  prove  a  lasting  Peace." 

Louis  the  Twelfth,  King  of  France,  surnamed  in 
History,  "  the  Father  of  his  people,"  is  said  to  have 
observed,  that  "  if  good  faith  were  banished  from  among 
men,  it  should  be  found  in  the  bosoms  of  Princes." 
This  sublime  maxim  or  sentiment,  seems  to  have  been 
inherent  in  the  intellectual  formation  of  George  the 
Third.  His  Coronation  Oath  was  ever  present  to  his 
mind;  and  he  dreaded  the  slightest  infraction  of  that 
solemn  Compact  made  with  his  people,  to  which  the 
Diety  had  been  invoked  as  a  party,  far  more  than  the 
loss  of  his  Crown  or  life.  When  Mr.  Pitt,  sustained  by 
four  of  the  Cabinet  Ministers,  made  the  experiment  of 
forcing  him  to  violate  it,  on  the  29th  of  January,  1801, 
relative  to  the  Question  of  "  Catholic  Emancipation  in 
Ireland ;"  they  instantly  found  themselves  out  of  Office. 
They  unquestionably  did  not  intend  to  resign :  but, 
having  compelled  the  King  no  less  than  four  times,  in 
the  course  of  a  few  years,  to  give  way,  where  the 
Majority  of  his  Cabinet  differed  from  him ;  they 
erroneously  assumed,  that  he  would  act  in  the  same 
manner,  where  his  Conscience  was  concerned.  Sustained 
however  by  his  principles,  he  did  not  hesitate  a  moment 
in  accepting  their  Resignation,  though  he  accompanied 
the  Acceptance  with  the  most  flattering  testimonies 
under  his  Hand,  of  esteem  and  personal  attachment. 
Uninstructed  by  such  a  warning,  Lord  Grenville,  who 
had  been  one  of  the  five  Cabinet  Members  alluded  to 
above,  aided  by  Lord  Grey,  repeated  the  Attempt  six 
years  later,  after  Fox's  decease,  with  similar  success. 
Charles  the  First  did  not  manifest  the  same  religious 
respect  for  the  sanctity  of  his  Oaths  and  Engagements. 
If  his  enemies  in  Parliament,  and  in  the  Field,  could  have 
reposed  the  unlimited  confidence  in  him,  which  George 
the  Third  challenged  from  his  Opponents,  that  unhappy 
Prince  might  have  died  in  his  Bed  at  Whitehall. 

236 


1781.]  THE  KING'S  REVERENCE 

I  will  subjoin  only  one  Anecdote  more,  on  a  point  so 
interesting,  which  vitally  characterizes  the  present  King. 
Towards  the  end  of  the  month  of  January,  1805,  at 
a  time  when  he  was  much  occupied  in  preparations 
for  the  Installation  of  the  Knights  of  the  Garter, 
destined  to  take  place  on  the  approaching  Twenty- 
third  of  April ;  and  while  conversing  on  the  subject 
with  some  persons  of  high  rank,  at  Windsor ;  one  of 
them,  a  Nobleman  deservedly  distinguished  by  his 
favour,  said,  "  Sir,  are  not  the  new  Knights,  now  meant 
"  to  be  installed,  obliged  to  take  the  Sacrament  before 
"  the  ceremony  ?"  Nothing  could  assuredly  have  been 
further  from  his  idea  or  intention,  than  to  have  asked 
the  Question,  in  a  manner  capable  of  implying  any 
levity  or  irreverence.  Nevertheless,  His  Majesty  in- 
stantly changed  countenance ;  and  assuming  a  severe 
look,  after  a  moment  or  two  of  pause,  "  No,"  replied  he, 
"  that  religious  Institution  is  not  to  be  mixed  with  our 
"  profane  ceremonies.  Even  at  the  time  of  my  Coro- 
"  nation,  I  was  very  unwilling  to  take  the  Sacrament. 
"  But,  when  they  told  me  that  it  was  indispensable,  and 
"  that  I  must  receive  it ;  before  I  approached  the 
"  Communion  Table,  I  took  off  the  Bauble  from  my 
"  head.  The  Sacrament,  my  Lord,  is  not  to  be  profaned 
"  by  our  Gothic  Institutions.'1'' — The  severity  of  the 
King's  manner  while  he  pronounced  these  words, 
impressed  all  present,  and  suspended  for  a  short  time, 
the  conversation.  Never  was  any  Prince  more  religiously 
tenacious  of  his  Engagements  or  Promises.  Even  the 
temporary  privation  of  his  intellect,  did  not  affect  his 
regard  to  the  Assurances  that  he  had  given  previous 
to  such  alienation  of  mind;  nor,  which  is  still  more 
wonderful,  obliterate  them  from  his  Recollection.  I 
know,  that  on  his  Recovery  from  the  severest  Visitations 
under  which  he  has  laboured,  he  has  said  to  his  Minister, 
in  the  first  moments  of  his  Convalescence ;  "  Previous  to 
"  my  attack  of  Illness,  I  made  such  and  such  Promises ; 

237 


WRAXALKS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [1781. 

"  they  must  be  effectuated."  How  deep  a  sense  of 
honour,  and  how  strong  a  moral  principle  must  have 
animated  such  a  Prince! 

The  education  of  George  the  Third  had  not  been 
conducted  or  superintended  in  many  respects,  with  as 
much  care,  as  his  birth,  and  the  great  prospects  to 
which  he  was  heir,  should  seem  to  have  claimed  from 
his  Predecessor.  He  was  only  between  twelve  and 
thirteen  years  of  age,  when  he  lost  his  father ;  and  the 
late  King  did  not  extend  any  very  enlightened  or 
affectionate  attention  to  that  important  national  object. 
Even  his  mother,  the  Princess  Dowager  of  Wales, 
appears  to  have  been  deeply  sensible  to  the  inefficiency 
of  the  various  Preceptors  successively  employed  about 
her  son.  Other  charges,  of  a  still  more  serious  nature, 
were  preferred  against  some  of  the  individuals  entrusted 
with  the  formation  of  his  Principles,  or  who  had 
constant  access  to  him  ;  as  if  they  endeavoured  to  imbue 
him  with  arbitrary  notions,  and  to  put  into  his  hands 
Authors  known  to  have  inculcated  tyrannical  Maxims 
of  Government.  These  accusations,  destitute  of  proof, 
and  denied  in  the  most  peremptory  manner  at  the  time 
when  they  were  made  in  1752  or  1753,  by  the  Princess 
Dowager,  rest  on  no  solid  Foundations.  If  we  wish  to 
contemplate  a  portrait  of  the  young  Prince  of  Wales 
at  seventeen  years  of  age,  drawn  by  his  own  mother  in 
August,  1755,  and  communicated  confidentially  to  a 
friend,  we  have  it  in  Dodington's  "  Diary."  She  said, 
that  "  he  was  shy  and  backward ;  not  a  wild,  dissipated 
"  boy,  but  good-natured  and  cheerful,  with  a  serious 
"  cast  upon  the  whole  :  that  those  about  him,  knew  him 
"  no  more  than  if  they  had  never  seen  him.  That  he 
"  was  not  quick  ;  but,  with  those  he  was  acquainted, 
"  applicable  and  intelligent.  His  education  had  given 
"  her  much  pain.  His  book-learning  she  was  no  judge 
"  of,  though  she  supposed  it  small  or  useless :  but  she 
"  hoped  he  might  have  been  instructed  in  the  general 

238 


1781.]      LIMITATIONS  OF  KNOWLEDGE 

"  understanding  of  things."  It  is  impossible  to  doubt 
the  accuracy  and  fidelity  of  this  Picture,  many  features 
of  which,  continued  indelible  throughout  his  whole 
Reign. 

In  modern  History  he  was  tolerably  well  instructed ; 
particularly  in  the  Annals  of  England  and  of  France, 
as  well  as  of  Germany :  but  in  classical  knowledge,  and 
all  the  compositions  of  Antiquity,  either  of  Greece  or 
of  Rome,  historical,  as  well  as  poetic,  he  was  little 
conversant.  So  slight  or  imperfect  was  his  acquaintance 
with  Latin,  that  at  Forty,  it  may  be  doubted  if  he 
could  have  construed  a  page  of  Cicero,  or  of  Ovid.  He 
never  delighted  indeed  in  those  branches  of  study,  nor 
ever  passed  much  of  his  time  in  sedentary  occupations, 
calculated  to  improve  his  mind,  after  his  Accession  to 
the  Crown.  A  newspaper,  which  he  commonly  took  up 
after  dinner,  and  over  which,  however  interesting  its 
contents  might  be,  he  usually  fell  asleep  in  less  than 
half  an  hour,  constituted  the  ordinary  extent  of  his 
application.  Nor  ought  we  to  wonder  at  this  circum- 
stance, if  we  consider  how  numerous  were  his  Avoca- 
tions ;  and  how  little  leisure  the  necessary  perusal  of 
public  Papers,  Dispatches,  and  Letters,  could  have  left 
him  for  literary  Research.  If,  however,  he  did  not 
possess  a  very  cultivated  understanding,  he  might 
nevertheless  be  justly  considered  as  not  deficient  in 
Accomplishments  befitting  his  high  station.  He 
conversed  with  almost  equal  fluency,  as  all  those  who 
frequented  the  Levee  or  the  Drawing -Room,  could 
attest,  in  the  English,  French,  and  German  languages ; 
nor  was  he  ignorant  of  Italian.  He  wrote  with  brevity, 
perspicuity,  and  facility.  I  have  had  opportunities  to 
see  or  hear  various  of  his  confidential  Notes,  addressed, 
during  the  Period  of  the  American  War,  to  a  Nobleman 
high  in  Office,  some  of  which  were  written  under  very 
delicate  circumstances.  In  all  of  them,  good  sense, 
firmness,  principle,  consistency,  and  self-possession,  were 

239 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [mi. 

strongly  marked  through  every  line.  In  Mechanics  of 
all  kinds,  he  delighted  and  indulged  himself;  a  relaxa- 
tion which  seems,  somewhat  unjustly,  to  have  excited 
much  animadversion,  and  still  more  ridicule.  But  it 
cannot  be  denied,  that  during  this  period  of  his  Reign, 
and  down  to  a  later  stage  of  it,  the  English  people, — 
for  I  will  not  say  the  Scotch, — viewed  all  the  failings  of 
their  Sovereign  with  a  microscopic  eye,  while  they  did 
injustice  to  his  numerous  excellencies.  They  have, 
however,  made  him  full  amends  since  1783,  for  their 
preceding  severity. 

For  Painting  and  Architecture  he  shewed  a  taste,  the 
more  admired,  as  his  two  immediate  predecessors  on  the 
Throne,  altogether  destitute  of  such  a  quality,  extended 
neither  favor  nor  protection  to  Polite  Letters.  Since 
Charles  the  First,  no  Prince  had  expended  such  sums  in 
the  purchase  of  productions  of  Art,  or  so  liberally 
patronized  Artists  of  every  kind.  Music  always  con- 
stituted one  of  his  favorite  recreations ;  and  towards 
this  time  of  his  life  he  began  to  take  a  pleasure  in 
hunting,  for  which  diversion  he  had  not  manifested  in 
his  youth  so  much  partiality.  But,  another  occupation 
or  passion,  which,  from  its  beneficial  tendency  and 
results,  as  well  as  from  the  tranquil  enjoyments  annexed 
to  it,  might  seem  peculiarly  analogous  to  his  character 
and  disposition,  employed  much  of  his  thoughts,  and  no 
inconsiderable  portion  of  his  leisure.  I  mean  Farming, 
and  Agricultural  pursuits.  He  may  be  said  to  have 
shewn  the  way,  and  to  have  set  the  example,  which  has 
since  been  imitated  by  the  late  Duke  of  Bedford,  Mr. 
Coke,  Lord  Somerville,  Sir  John  Sinclair,  and  so  many 
other  distinguished  persons.  Even  this  inclination, 
however  beneficial  and  laudable,  in  all  its  results,  yet 
exposed  him  to  satirical  reflexions,  which  malignity  or 
party  spirit  embodied  in  the  form  of  caricatures. 

Satisfied  with  the  legitimate  Power  entrusted  to  him 
by  the  British  Constitution,  and  deeply  impressed  with 

240 


1781.]    BRAVERY  AND  SELF-POSSESSION 

the  sanctity  as  well  as  inviolability  of  the  Oath 
administered  to  him  at  his  Coronation ;  George  the 
Third  did  not  desire  to  pass  the  limits  of  his  rightful 
Prerogative.  But,  equally  tenacious  of  his  just  pre- 
tensions, and  firm  in  resisting  popular  violence  or 
innovation,  he  never  receded  from  any  point,  or 
abandoned  any  measure,  under  the  impulse  of  personal 
apprehension.  His  courage  was  calm,  temperate,  and 
steady.  It  was  constitutional  and  hereditary;  but  it 
was  always  sustained  by  conviction,  sense  of  public  duty, 
and  Religion.  These  sentiments  inspired,  accompanied, 
and  upheld  him,  in  the  most  distressing  moments  of  his 
Reign.  Though  he  had  not,  like  George,  the  First, 
commanded  Armies,  and  made  Campaigns,  in  Hungary, 
or  on  the  Rhine ;  nor  had  he  proved  his  valor  in  the 
field,  like  George  the  Second,  who  fought  at  Oudenarde 
in  his  youth,  and  at  Dettingen  in  his  age;  yet  he 
possessed  no  less  bravery  than  his  Ancestors :  while  he 
joined  to  personal  steadiness,  a  quality  still  more  rare, 
political  resolution.  After  the  attempt  made  to 
assassinate  him  in  1787,  by  Margaret  Nicholson ;  an 
attempt  which  only  failed  from  the  knife  being  worn 
so  thin  about  the  middle  of  the  blade,  that  it  bent 
with  the  resistance  of  the  King's  waistcoat,  instead  of 
entering  his  body,  as  it  would  otherwise  have  done ; 
he  immediately  held  his  Levee,  with  the  most  perfect 
composure.  No  person  who  was  present  on  that  day  at 
St.  James's,  could  have  supposed  that  he  had  just 
escaped  from  so  imminent  a  danger. 

In  November,  1795,  when  the  Pebble  was  thrown  or  dis- 
charged into  the  Coach,  in  which  he  was  proceeding  to 
Westminster,  to  open  the  Session  of  Parliament ;  while 
surrounded  by  a  most  ferocious  mob,  who  manifested  a 
truly  Jacobinical  spirit,  he  exhibited  a  calmness  and  self 
possession,  prepared  for  every  event.  Few  of  his  sub- 
jects would  have  shewn  the  presence  of  mind,  and  atten- 
tion to  every  thing  except  himself,  which  pervaded  his 

16 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [i78i. 

whole  conduct,  on  the  evening  of  the  15th  of  May,  1800, 
at  the  time  that  Hadfield  discharged  a  Pistol  over  his 
head,  in  the  Theatre,  loaded  with  two  Slugs.  His  whole 
anxiety  was  directed  towards  the  Queen,  who  not  having 
entered  the  Box,  might,  he  apprehended,  on  hearing  of 
the  event,  be  overcome  by  her  surprize  or  emotions. 
The  Dramatic  piece  which  was  about  to  be  represented, 
commenced  in  a  short  space  of  time,  precisely  as  if  no 
accident  had  interrupted  its  performance ;  and  so  little 
were  his  nerves  shaken,  or  his  internal  tranquillity  dis- 
turbed by  it,  that  he  took  his  accustomed  doze  of  three 
or  four  minutes,  between  the  conclusion  of  the  Play,  and 
the  commencement  of  the  Farce,  precisely  as  he  would 
have  done  on  any  other  night.  This  circumstance, 
which  so  strongly  indicated  his  serenity,  did  not  escape 
the  notice  of  his  Attendants. 

He  received  during  the  course  of  his  Reign,  innumer- 
able anonymous  letters,  threatening  his  life,  all  which  he 
treated  with  uniform  indifference.  A  Nobleman,  who  is 
now  no  more,  and  who  during  many  years  was  frequently 
about  his  person,  as  well  as  much  in  his  confidence ; 
assured  me  that  he  had  seen  several  of  them,  which  His 
Majesty  shewed  him,  particularly  when  at  Weymouth. 
While  residing  there  during  successive  seasons,  he  was 
warned  in  the  ambiguous  manner  already  mentioned, 
not  to  ride  out  on  particular  days,  on  certain  roads,  if 
he  valued  his  safety:  but  the  King  never  failed  to 
mount  his  Horse,  and  to  take  the  very  road  indicated 
in  the  letter.  Speaking  on  the  subject  to  that  Noble- 
man, he  said,  "I  very  well  know  that  any  man  who 
"  chooses  to  sacrifice  his  own  life,  may,  whenever  he 
"  pleases,  take  away  mine ;  riding  out,  as  I  do  continu- 
"  ally,  with  a  single  Equerry  and  a  Footman.  I  only 
"  hope  that  whoever  may  attempt  it,  will  not  do  it  in  a 
"  barbarous  or  brutal  manner.'"  When  we  reflect  on  his 
conduct  under  these  circumstances,  as  well  as  during  the 
Tumults  of  March,  1769,  and  the  Riots  of  June,  1780 ; 


1781.]  COMPARISONS 


nd  if  we  contrast  it  with  the  weak  or  pusillanimous 
deportment  of  Louis  the  Sixteenth,  in  July,  1789,  when 
the  French  Monarchy  was  virtually  overturned;  in 
October  of  the  same  year,  at  the  time  of  his  being 
carried  Prisoner  from  Versailles  to  Paris ;  or,  on  the  10th 
of  August,  1792,  when  he  abandoned  the  Tuilleries,  to 
seek  refuge  in  the  National  Assembly; — we  shall  per- 
ceive the  leading  cause  of  the  Preservation  of  England, 
and  of  the  Destruction  of  France!  To  George  the 
Third,  considered  in  his  Kingly  capacity,  might  well  be 
applied  the  assertion, 

«  Tis  the  last  Key  stone 

"That  makes  the  Arch." 

He  seemed  as  if  raised  up  by  Providence,  in  its  bounty 
to  mankind,  like  an  impregnable  mound,  to  arrest  the 
fury  of  Revolution  and  Jacobinism.  How  can  we 
wonder  that  such  a  Prince  should  prefer  Pitt,  notwith- 
standing the  inflexibilities  of  his  character,  and  the 
intractability  of  his  natural  disposition,  for  First 
Minister;  rather  than  Fox,  who  was  the  Eulogist  of 
Washington,  of  I^iurens,  of  La  Fayette,  of  Condorcet, 
and  all  the  Saints  or  Martyrs  of  French  and  American 
insurrection ! 

That  George  the  Third  did  not  display  those  great 
energies  of  mind,  those  arts  of  condescending  popularity, 
and  that  assemblage  of  extraordinary  endowments, 
which  met  in  Elizabeth ;  and  which  rendered  her  at 
once  the  terror  of  Europe,  and  the  Idol  of  her  own 
subjects,  must  be  admitted.  That  he  could  not,  like 
Charles  the  Second,  balance  the  errors  or  the  vices  of 
his  Government,  by  the  seduction  of  his  manners ;  and 
induce  his  people,  like  that  Prince,  to  love  his  person, 
though  they  condemned  his  conduct ;  we  shall  as  readily 
confess.  That  he  had  not  the  advantage  of  being 
brought  up  amidst  privations  and  mortifications  of 
every  kind,  like  William  the  Third;  nor  was,  like 

243 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [1781. 

William,  compelled,  at  his  first  entrance  on  public  life, 
to  extricate  his  country  by  Arms,  from  a  powerful 
foreign  invader : — that  he  did  not  nourish  the  profound 
ambition,  or  develope  the  deep  policy  and  active  military 
spirit  of  that  illustrious  Sovereign ;  cannot  be  disputed. 
But,  if  he  was  less  distinguished  by  Talents  than 
William,  he  exhibited  greater  virtues.  He  resembled, 
indeed,  in  the  leading  features  of  his  character,  more  the 
Antonines,  than  Trajan  or  Augustus  ;  and  excited  greater 
respect,  than  he  awakened  admiration.  But,  Ages  may 
probably  elapse,  before  we  shall  again  behold  on  the 
Throne  a  Prince  more  qualified  on  the  whole  to  dis- 
pense happiness,  and  more  justly  an  object  of  universal 
affection,  blended  with  esteem. 

If  we  compare  him,  as  it  is  natural  to  do,  either  in 
his  public  capacity,  or  in  his  private  conduct,  with  his 
two  immediate  predecessors,  who  may  nevertheless  justly 
be  considered,  on  a  fair  review  of  their  characters,  as 
amiable  and  excellent  Sovereigns;  the  comparison  is 
highly  flattering  to  George  the  Third.  He  possessed 
indeed  some  advantages  not  enjoyed  by  either  of  those 
Princes.  His  birth,  which  took  place  in  this  island,  and 
that  complete  assimilation  with  the  people  of  England, 
which  can  only  result  from  the  joint  effect  of  habits, 
language,  and  education,  gave  him  a  superiority  over 
them,  and  placed  him  upon  higher  ground.  The  two 
preceding  Kings  were  Foreigners,  who  acceded,  or  were 
called  to  the  Throne,  at  an  advanced  period  of  life. 
George  the  First  had  attained  his  fifty-third,  and 
George  the  Second  his  forty-fourth  year,  at  their 
respective  accession.  They  naturally  and  necessarily 
considered  Hanover  as  their  native  country,  though  for- 
tune had  transported  them  to  another  soil.  Even  their 
policy,  their  treaties,  their  wars,  and  all  their  measures, 
were  warped  by  foreign  predilections,  to  which  they 
sacrificed  the  interests  of  Great  Britain.  From  these 
prejudices,  the  King,  who  had  never  visited  his  Electoral 

244 


1781.]         GEORGE  I.  AND  GEORGE  II. 

dominions,  nor  knew  Germany  except  by  description, 
was  exempt  in  a  great  degree.  Less  impetuous  and 
irascible  than  his  grandfather,  he  possessed  likewise  a 
more  capacious  mind,  more  command  of  temper,  and 
better  talents  for  government.  In  moderation,  judg- 
ment, and  vigour  of  intellect,  he  at  least  equalled 
George  the  First :  while  in  every  other  quality  of  the 
heart,  or  of  the  understanding,  he  exceeded  that  mon- 
arch. In  his  private  life  as  a  husband,  a  father, 
and  a  man,  he  was  superior  to  either.  The  conduct  of 
George  the  First  in  these  relations,  will  not,  indeed, 
bear  a  severe  inspection.  His  treatment  of  the  un- 
fortunate Sophia  of  Zell,  his  wife,  whom  he  immured 
during  the  greater  part  of  her  life,  in  a  solitary 
Hanoverian  Castle,  cannot  be  easily  reconciled  to  the 
feelings  of  justice,  or  even  of  humanity.  As  little  did 
he  consult  decorum,  or  public  opinion  and  morals,  in 
bringing  over  with  him  from  Hanover  to  this  country, 
his  two  German  Mistresses,  Sophia,  Baroness  Kilmanseck, 
and  Melesina,  Princess  of  Eberstein,  whom  he  respect- 
ively created,  the  one,  Countess  of  Darlington,  and  the 
other,  Duchess  of  Kendal.  We  may  see  in  Mr.  Wal- 
pole^s  "  Reminiscences,"  how  openly  they  were  received 
here  in  that  character.  Charles  the  Second  could  not 
have  observed  less  secrecy,  with  respect  to  Lady  Castle- 
maine,  or  the  Duchess  of  Portsmouth ;  nor  have  mani- 
fested less  scruple  about  raising  them  to  the  dignity 
of  the  British  peerage.  Even  at  sixty-seven  years  of 
age,  George  the  First,  it  appears,  was  about  to  have 
formed  a  new  connection  of  the  same  nature,  with  Miss 
Brett,  when  he  was  carried  off  by  an  apoplectic  stroke. 

His  Son  and  successor  displayed  indeed  the  utmost 
affection  for  his  Queen,  with  whom  he  not  only  lived  on 
terms  of  conjugal  union,  but,  whose  loss  he  deplored 
with  tears,  and  cherished  the  warmest  respect  for  her 
memory.  Yet  he  did  not  on  that  account,  restrain  his 
inclinations  for  other  women.  Mrs.  Howard,  who 

245 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [i78i. 

became  afterwards  Countess  of  Suffolk ;  and  Madame 
de  Walmoden,  better  known  as  Countess  of  Yarmouth ; 
the  one  previous,  and  the  other  subsequent  to  Queen 
Caroline's  decease ;  were  both  avowedly  distinguished 
by  the  strongest  marks  of  royal  favour.  The  latter  is 
accused  by  popular  report,  of  having  made  on  more 
than  one  occasion,  a  most  unjustifiable  use,  or  rather 
abuse,  of  her  interest  with  the  King.  Even  Peerages 
were  said  to  be  sold  and  distributed  for  her  pecuniary 
benefit :  a  charge  that  has  been  revived  from  the 
Treasury  Bench,  in  our  time.  George  the  Third 
exhibited  a  model  of  self-command  and  of  continence, 
at  twenty-two,  than  which  antiquity,  Greek  or  Roman, 
can  produce  nothing  more  admirable,  in  the  persons  of 
Alexander  or  of  Scipio.  It  is  well  known  that  before  his 
marriage  he  distinguished  by  his  partiality  Lady  Sarah 
Lenox,  then  one  of  the  most  beautiful  young  women 
of  high  rank  in  the  kingdom.  Edward  the  Fourth,  or 
Henry  the  Eighth,  in  his  situation,  regardless  of  con- 
sequences, would  have  married  her,  and  placed  her  on 
the  Throne.  Charles  the  Second,  more  licentious, 
would  have  endeavoured  to  seduce  her.  But,  the  King, 
who,  though  he  admired  her,  neither  desired  to  make 
her  his  wife  nor  his  mistress,  subdued  his  passion  by  the 
strength  of  his  reason,  his  principles,  and  his  sense  of 
public  duty.  When  we  reflect  on  these  circumstances, 
we  may  say  with  Horace,  addressing  ourselves  to  the 
British  Nation, 

"  Quando  ullum  inveniet  Parem  ?  " 

After  having  thus  faithfully  pourtrayed,  though  in 
the  seeming  language  of  panegyric,  the  Character  of 
George  the  Third,  it  is  impossible,  nevertheless,  without 
violating  truth  to  deny,  that  at  this  time,  far  from 
being  popular,  he  was  not  even  an  object  of  general 
affection.  We  may  justly  question  whether  Charles 
the  Second,  though  one  of  the  most  unprincipled,  pro- 

246 


1781.]  DEFICIENT  EDUCATION  OF  THE  KING 

fligate,  and  licentious  Sovereigns  who  ever  reigned  in 
this  country;  destitute  of  morals;  sunk  in  dissolute 
pleasures;  who  tamely  beheld  his  fleet  burned  by  the 
Dutch,  in  his  own  harbours ;  a  pensioner  of  France ; 
insensible  to  national  glory;  and  regardless  of  the 
subjection  of  the  Continent  to  Louis  the  Fourteenth ; — 
yet  was  ever  so  unpopular  at  any  period  of  his  reign. 
In  order  to  explain  this  seeming  Paradox,  and  to  shew 
how  a  Prince,  who,  apparently,  from  his  many  private 
virtues,  should  have  possessed  the  attachment  of  his 
subjects ;  was  nevertheless  considered  by  a  very  large 
proportion  of  them,  with  contrary  sentiments ;  we  must 
review  the  principal  features  of  his  Government.  That 
retrospect  will  fully  account  for  the  circumstance, 
while  it  elucidates  the  events  which  followed  the 
commencement  of  the  year  1781. 

To  the  confined  plan  of  education,  and  sequestered 
mode  of  life  which  the  King  led,  subsequent  to  the 
death  of  his  father,  before  his  own  accession  to  the 
Crown,  may  be  justly  traced  and  attributed,  at  least  in 
part,  many  of  the  errors,  as  well  as  the  misfortunes, 
that  mark  the  portion  of  the  British  Annals,  from  1760 
down  to  the  close  of  the  American  War.  During  near 
ten  years  which  elapsed  between  the  death  of  his  father, 
early  in  1751,  and  the  decease  of  his  grandfather;  a 
period  when  the  human  mind  is  susceptible  of  such 
deep  impressions;  he  remained  in  a  state  of  almost 
absolute  seclusion  from  his  future  people,  and  from  the 
world.  Constantly  resident  at  Leicester  House,  or  at 
Carlton  House,  when  he  was  in  London ;  immured  at 
Kew,  whenever  he  went  to  the  country;  perpetually 
under  the  eye  of  his  Mother  and  of  Lord  Bute,  who 
acted  in  the  closest  unity  of  design ;  he  saw  com- 
paratively few  other  persons :  and  those,  only  chosen 
individuals  of  both  sexes.  They  naturally  obtained, 
and  long  preserved,  a  very  firm  Ascendant  over  him. 
When  he  ascended  the  Throne,  though  already  arrived 


WRAXALL/S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [1781. 

at  manhood,  his  very  person  was  hardly  known,  and  his 
character  was  still  less  understood,  beyond  a  narrow 
Circle.  Precautions,  it  is  well  ascertained,  were  even 
adopted  by  the  Princess  Dowager,  to  preclude  as  much 
as  possible,  access  to  him :  precautions  which,  to  the 
extent  of  her  ability,  were  redoubled  after  he  became 
King.  It  will  scarcely  be  believed,  but  it  is  nevertheless 
true,  that,  in  order  to  prevent  his  conversing  with  any 
persons,  or  receiving  any  written  intimations,  anony- 
mous or  otherwise,  between  the  Drawing  Room  and  the 
Door  of  Carlton  House,  when  he  was  returning  from 
thence  to  St.  James's,  or  to  Buckingham  House,  after  his 
evening  visits  to  his  mother,  she  never  failed  to  accom- 
pany him  till  he  got  into  his  Sedan  chair.  "  Junius" 
in  May,  1770,  after  invidiously  comparing  Edward  the 
Second  and  Richard  the  Second,  two  of  the  weakest 
Princes  who  ever  reigned  in  this  Country,  with  George 
the  Third ;  adds,  when  summing  up  the  leading  features 
of  his  character,  "  Secluded  from  the  world,  attached 
u  from  his  infancy  to  one  set  of  persons,  and  one  set  of 
"  ideas,  he  can  neither  open  his  heart  to  new  con- 
"  nections,  nor  his  mind  to  better  information.  A 
"  character  of  this  sort,  is  the  soil  fittest  to  produce 
"  that  obstinate  bigotry  in  politics  and  religion,  which 
"  begins  with  a  meritorious  sacrifice  of  the  understand- 
"  ing,  and  finally  conducts  the  Monarch  and  the  Martyr 
"  to  the  Block." 

A  Prince  who  had  been  endowed  by  nature  with  great 
energies  of  mind,  would,  no  doubt,  nave  soon  liberated 
himself  from  such  fetters.  Yet  we  may  remember 
that  Louis  the  Fourteenth,  who  surely  must  be  con- 
sidered as  a  Sovereign  of  very  superior  intellectual 
Attainments ;  remained  under  the  tutelage  of  his 
Mother  and  his  Minister,  of  Anne  of  Austria  and 
Cardinal  Mazarin,  till  even  a  later  period  of  life  than 
twenty- two.  Nor  did  he  then  emancipate  himself.  It 
was  Death,  that  by  carrying  off  the  Cardinal,  allowed 

248 


1781.]  INNOCENT  GALLANTRIES 

the  King  to  display  those  qualities,  which  have  rendered 
so  celebrated  his  name  and  reign.  A  Prince,  on  the 
other  hand,  of  a  gay,  social,  dissipated,  or  convivial  turn, 
would  equally  have  burst  through  these  impediments. 
But,  Pleasure  of  every  kind,  in  the  common  acceptation 
of  the  term,  as  meaning  Dissipation,  presented  scarcely 
any  attractions  for  him,  even  previous  to  his  marriage. 
Stories  were  indeed  generally  circulated,  of  his  attach- 
ment to  a  young  woman,  a  Quaker,  about  this  time  of 
his  life ;  just  as  Scandal,  many  years  afterwards, 
whispered  that  he  distinguished  Lady  Bridget  Tolle- 
macne  by  his  particular  attentions.  The  former  report 
was  probably  well  founded  ;  and  the  latter  Assertion  was 
unquestionably  true  :  but  those  persons  who  have  enjoyed 
most  opportunities  of  studying  the  King's  character, 
will  most  incline  to  believe,  that  in  neither  instance  did 
he  pass  the  limits  of  innocent  Gallantry,  or  occasional 
familiarity.  As  little  was  he  to  be  seduced  by  the 
gratifications  of  the  table,  of  wine,  or  of  festivity.  To 
all  these  allurements  he  seemed  disinclined  from  natural 
constitution,  moral,  and  physical.  His  brother  Edward, 
Duke  of  York,  plunged  on  the  contrary  very  early,  into 
every  sort  of  excess.  But  the  example,  however  calcu- 
lated to  operate  it  might  seem,  produced  no  effect  on 
a  Prince,  modest,  reserved,  continent,  capable  of  great 
self-command,  and  seeking  almost  all  his  amusements 
within  a  narrow  domestic  circle. 

Before  he  succeeded  to  the  Crown,  Lord  Bute  consti- 
tuted in  fact  almost  his  only  constant  companion  and  con- 
fident. To  him  alone  the  Heir  Apparent  unbosomed  his 
thoughts :  with  him  the  Prince  rode,  walked,  read,  and 
conversed.  They  were  on  horseback  together,  upon  the 
25th  of  October,  1760,  not  far  from  Kew,  when  the 
intelligence  of  George  the  Second's  sudden  death  reached 
him ;  confirmed  immediately  afterwards  by  Mr.  Pitt  in 
person,  who  then  presided  at  the  head  of  His  Majesty's 
Counsels,  or  formed  at  least  the  Soul  of  the  Cabinet. 

249 


WRAXALKS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [1781. 

On  receiving  the  information,  they  returned  to  the 
Palace,  where  the  new  King  remained  during  the  whole 
day,  and  passed  that  night,  not  coming  up  to  St. 
James's  till  the  ensuing  morning.  Mr.  Pitt  having 
presented  him  a  Paper,  containing  a  few  sentences, 
which  he  suggested,  it  might  be  proper  to  pronounce  on 
meeting  the  Privy  Council;  the  King,  after  thanking 
him,  replied,  that  he  had  already  considered  the  subject, 
and  had  drawn  up  his  intended  Address,  to  be 
delivered  at  the  Council  Table.  The  Minister,  who 
perceived  that  Lord  Bute  had  anticipated  him,  made 
the  unavoidable  inference.  It  was  indeed  sufficiently 
obvious,  that  however  his  Administration  might 
nominally  continue  for  some  time,  yet  his  influence 
and  authority  were  eclipsed  or  superceded. 

Lord  Bute,  though  in  his  private  character,  if  not 
irreproachable  in  all  respects,  yet  at  least  decorous  and 
correct ;  nor  by  any  means  deficient  in  abilities  ;  appears 
to  have  been  nevertheless  a  very  unfit  Governor  for  such 
a  Prince.  There  exists  even  no  doubt  that  George  the 
Second  opposed  and  disapproved  his  Appointment  to 
that  important  Office ;  but  the  partiality  and  persever- 
ance of  the  Princess  Dowager,  prevailed  over  the  old 
King^s  repugnance.  The  circumstance  of  Lord  Bute^s 
being  a  native  of  Scotland,  exposed  him  necessarily  to 
malevolent  attacks  of  many  kinds ;  a  fact  at  which,  we 
who  live  in  the  present  Century,  ought  not  to  wonder, 
when  we  reflect  how  few  years  had  then  elapsed  since 
the  Rebellion  of  1745.  Wilkes  and  Churchill,  the  one 
in  prose,  the  other  in  poetry,  always  levelled  their 
keenest  shafts  against  the  Mother  and  the  Minister  of 
the  young  Sovereign.  His  very  virtues  became  matter 
of  reproach,  of  ridicule,  or  of  Satire.  "  Junius,"  some 
years  later,  improving  upon  these  first  Attempts  to 
degrade  him  in  the  estimation  of  his  subjects,  con- 
densed all  the  powers  of  Declamation  in  his  memorable 
"  Letter  to  the  King."  Yet,  the  Nation  at  large, 

250 


1781.]    DEATH  OF  THE  PRINCE  OF  WALES 

candid  and  just,  appreciated  him  fairly  on  his  own 
merits.  During  the  most  gloomy  periods  of  his 
Reign,  while  they  lamented  or  reprobated  the  Measures 
of  his  various  Administrations,  from  Lord  Bute  down 
to  Lord  North,  with  little  variation  or  exception ;  yet 
admitted  his  personal  virtues  to  form  no  slender 
extenuation  of  his  public  errors  or  demerits.  His 
exemplary  discharge  of  every  private  Duty,  balanced 
in  their  estimate,  the  misfortunes  which  his  pertina- 
city, inflexibility,  or  injudicious  selection  of  his  con- 
fidental  servants,  had  entailed  upon  the  Country,  and 
upon  the  Empire. 

It  is  well  known  that  George  the  Second  and  his 
son,  Frederic,  Prince  of  Wales,  during  several  years 
previous  to  the  Decease  of  the  latter,  lived  on  terms  of 
complete  alienation,  or  rather  of  hostility.  Scarcely,  in- 
deed, were  any  measures  observed,  or  was  any  veil  drawn, 
before  their  mutual  recriminations.  The  Prince  expired 
suddenly,  in  the  beginning  of  1751,  at  Leicester  House, 
in  the  arms  of  Desnoyers,  the  celebrated  Dancing- 
Master  ;  who  being  near  his  bed  side,  engaged  in  play- 
ing on  the  Violin  for  His  Royal  Highnesses  amusement, 
supported  him  in  his  last  moments.  His  end  was 
ultimately  caused  by  an  internal  Abscess,  that  had 
long  been  forming,  in  consequence  of  a  blow  which  he 
received  in  the  side  from  a  Cricket  Ball,  while  he  was 
engaged  in  playing  at  that  game,  on  the  lawn  at  Clief- 
den  House  in  Buckinghamshire,  where  he  then  princi- 
pally resided.  It  did  not  take  place,  however,  for 
several  Months  subsequent  to  the  accident.  A  collec- 
tion of  matter  having  been  produced,  which  burst  in 
his  throat,  the  discharge  instantly  suffocated  him.  The 
King,  his  father,  though  he  never  went  once  to  visit 
him  during  the  whole  progress  of  his  illness,  sent  how- 
ever constantly  to  make  inquiries  ;  and  received  accounts 
every  two  hours,  of  his  state  and  condition.  But  he 
was  so  far  from  desiring  Frederic's  recovery,  that  on 

251 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [i78l. 

the  contrary,  he  considered  such  an  event,  if  it  should 
take  place,  as  an  object  of  the  utmost  regret.  He  did 
not  even  conceal  his  sentiments  on  the  point :  for,  I 
know  from  good  authority,  that  the  King  being  one  day 
engaged  in  conversation  with  the  Countess  of  Yarmouth, 
when  the  Page  entered,  announcing  that  the  Prince  was 
better,  "There  now,"  said  His  Majesty,  turning  to  her, 
"  I  told  you  that  he  would  not  die."  On  the  evening 
of  his  Decease,  the  20th  of  March,  George  the  Second 
had  repaired,  according  to  his  usual  custom,  to  Lady 
Yarmouth's  Apartments,  situated  on  the  ground  floor 
in  St.  James's  Palace,  where  a  party  of  persons  of  dis- 
tinction of  both  sexes,  generally  assembled  for  the 
purpose.  His  Majesty  had  just  sat  down  to  Play,  and 
was  engaged  at  Cards,  when  a  Page,  dispatched  from 
Leicester  House,  arrived,  bringing  information  that  the 
Prince  was  no  more.  He  received  the  intelligence  with- 
out testifying  either  emotion  or  surprize.  Then  rising, 
he  crossed  the  room  to  Lady  Yarmouth's  table,  who 
was  likewise  occupied  at  Play;  and  leaning  over  her 
chair,  said  to  her  in  a  low  tone  of  voice,  in  German, 
"  Fritz  is  dode."  Freddy  is  dead.  Having  communi- 
cated it  to  her,  he  instantly  withdrew.  She  followed 
him,  the  company  broke  up,  and  the  News  became 
public.  These  particulars  were  related  to  me  by  the 
late  Lord  Sackville,  who  made  one  of  Lady  Yarmouth's 
party,  and  heard  the  King  announce  to  her  his  son's 
Decease. 

Frederic  seems  never  to  have  enjoyed  from  his  early 
youth,  a  distinguished  place  in  the  affection  of  his 
father,  whose  partiality  was  reserved  for  his  youngest 
son,  William,  Duke  of  Cumberland.  During  the  last 
twelve  years  of  Frederic's  life,  we  know  that  he 
passed  much  of  his  time  in  anticipations  of  his  future 
Sovereignty,  and  in  forming  Administrations,  which, 
like  his  own  Reign,  were  destined  never  to  be  realized. 
Among  the  Noblemen  and  Gentlemen  who  occupied 

252 


1781.]  THE  PRINCE'S  FRIENDS 

a  high  place  in  his  favour  or  friendship,  were 
Charles,  Duke  of  Queensberry,  the  patron  of  Gay,  who 
died  in  1778 ;  Mr.  Spencer,  brother  to  the  second 
Duke  of  Marlborough,  and  commonly  called  Jack 
Spencer;  Charles,  Earl  of  Middlesex,  afterwards  Duke 
of  Dorset,  and  his  brother  Lord  John  Sackville,  to- 
gether with  Francis,  E^arl  of  Guilford.  The  personal 
resemblance  that  existed  between  Lord  North,  (son  of 
the  last  mentioned  Peer,  who  was  subsequently  First 
Minister)  and  Prince  George,  was  thought  so  striking, 
as  to  excite  much  remark  and  pleasantry  on  the  Part 
of  Frederic  himself,  who  often  jested  on  the  subject 
with  Lord  Guilford;  observing,  that  the  world  would 
think  one  of  their  wives  had  played  her  husband  false, 
though  it  might  be  doubtful,  which  of  them  lay  under 
the  Imputation.  Persons  who  may  be  disposed  to  refine 
upon  the  Prince's  observation,  will  perhaps  likewise  be 
struck  with  other  points  of  physical  similarity  between 
George  the  Third  and  Lord  North ;  in  particular  with 
the  loss  of  sight,  a  privation  common  to  both  in  the 
decline  of  life.  Lady  Archibald  Hamilton  formed 
during  many  years,  the  object  of  Frederic's  avowed 
and  particular  attachment.  In  order  to  be  near  him, 
she  resided  in  Pall-Mall,  close  to  Carlton  House ;  the 
Prince  having  allowed  her  to  construct  a  Drawing- 
Room,  the  windows  of  which  commanded  over  the 
Gardens  of  that  Palace,  and  the  House  itself  communi- 
cated with  them.  Towards  men  of  Genius,  His  Royal 
Highness  always  affected  to  extend  his  protection. 
Glover,  the  Writer  of  "Leonidas,"  enjoyed  his  con- 
fidence ;  though  we  may  justly  doubt  how  much  of  it 
was  given  to  him  as  a  Member  of  Parliament,  the 
Friend  of  Pulteney  and  Pitt ;  how  much,  as  a  Poet. 
The  Prince  shewed  uncommon  deference  for  Pope, 
whom  he  visited  at  Twickenham,  a  circumstance  to 
which  that  Author  alludes  with  natural  pride,  when, 
after  enumerating  the  great  or  illustrious  Persons  who 

253 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [mi. 

honored  him  with  their  regard  and  friendship,  he  sub- 
joins, 

"  And  if  yet  higher  the  proud  List  should  end, 
"  Still  let  me  add,  no  Follower,  but  a  Friend." 

In  force  of  character,  steadiness,  vigor  of  mind,  and 
the  Qualities  that  fit  Men  for  Government,  even  his 
Friends  considered  the  Prince  to  be  deficient.  Nor  was 
Economy  among  the  virtues  that  he  displayed;  he 
having  before  his  Decease  contracted  numerous  Debts 
to  a  large  amount,  which  were  never  discharged.  Even 
through  the  medium  of  Dodington*s  Description,  who 
was  partial  to  Fredericks  Character  and  Memory,  we 
cannot  conceive  any  very  elevated  idea  of  him.  His 
Court  seems  to  have  been  the  center  of  Cabal,  torn  by 
contending  Candidates  for  the  Guidance  of  his  future 
imaginary  Reign.  The  Earl  of  Egmont,  and  Dodington 
himself,  were  avowedly  at  the  head  of  two  great  hostile 
Parties.  In  November,  1749,  we  find  his  Royal 
Highness,  in  a  secret  Conclave  held  at  Carlton  House, 
making  all  the  financial  Dispositions  proper  to  be 
adopted  on  the  Demise  of  the  King,  his  Father;  and 
framing  a  new  Civil  List.  At  the  close  of  these  mock 
Deliberations,  he  binds  the  three  Assistants  to  abide  by, 
and  support  his  Plans ;  giving  them  his  hand,  and 
making  them  take  hands  with  each  other.  The 
Transaction,  as  narrated  by  Dodington  who  was  himself 
one  of  the  Party,  reminds  the  Reader  of  a  similar 
Convocation  commemorated  by  Sallust,  and  is  not 
unlike  one  of  the  Scenes  in  "  Venice  Preserved. "  It 
was  performed,  however,  after  dinner,  which  may 
perhaps  form  its  best  Apology.  The  diversions  of  the 
Prince's  Court  appear  to  us  equally  puerile.  Three 
times,  within  thirteen  Months  preceding  his  Decease, 
Dodington  accompanied  him  and  the  Princess  of  Wales, 
to  Fortune-tellers ;  the  last  of  which  Frolicks  took 
place  scarcely  nine  Weeks  before  his  Death.  After  one 

254 


1781.]  GEORGE  II.  AND  PITT 

of  these  magical  Consultations,  apparently  dictated  by 
anxiety  to  penetrate  his  future  destiny,  the  Party 
supped  with  Mrs.  Cannon,  the  Princess's  Midwife. 
Frederic  used  to  go,  disguised,  to  Hockley-in-the-Hole, 
to  witness  Bull-baiting.  Either  Lord  Middlesex,  or 
Lord  John  Sackville,  Father  to  the  late  Duke  of  Dorset, 
were  commonly  his  Companions  on  such  Expeditions. 
As  far  as  we  are  authorized  from  these  Premises,  to 
form  a  Conclusion,  his  premature  Death  before  he 
ascended  the  Throne,  ought  not  to  excite  any  great 
national  Regret. 

George  the  Second,  who  survived  the  Prince  near  ten 
years,  died  at  last  not  less  suddenly  than  his  Son, 
though  at  the  advanced  age  of  Seventy-seven ;  a  period 
attained  by  no  Sovereign  in  modern  History,  except 
Louis  the  Fourteenth.  A  rupture  in  some  of  the 
vessels,  or  in  the  Membrane  of  the  Heart,  carried  him 
off*  in  a  few  minutes.  During  his  whole  life,  but 
particularly  for  a  number  of  years  before  his  decease, 
he  had  been  subject  to  such  constant  palpitations  about 
the  region  of  the  Heart,  especially  after  Dinner,  that  he 
always  took  off  his  cloaths,  and  reposed  himself  for  an 
hour  in  bed,  of  an  afternoon.  In  order  to  accommodate 
himself  to  this  habit  or  infirmity,  Mr.  Pitt,  when,  as 
Secretary  of  State,  he  was  sometimes  necessitated  to 
transact  Business  with  the  King  during  the  time  that 
he  lay  down,  always  knelt  on  a  cushion  by  the  bedside ; 
a  mark  of  respect  which  contributed  to  render  him  not 
a  little  acceptable  to  His  Majesty.  At  his  rising, 
George  the  Second  dressed  himself  completely  a  second 
time,  and  commonly  passed  the  evening  at  Cards,  with 
Lady  Yarmouth,  in  a  select  party.  His  sight  had 

freatly  failed  him,  for  some  time  preceding  his  Decease, 
have  heard  Mr.  Fraser  say,  who  was,  during  many 
years,  Under  Secretary  of  State,  that  in  1760,  a  few 
months  before  the  King  died,  having  occasion  to  present 
a  Paper  to  him  for  his  signature,  at  Kensington,  George 

255 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [mi. 

the  Second  took  the  pen  in  his  hand ;  and  having  as  he 
conceived,  affixed  his  name  to  it,  returned  it  to  Fraser. 
But,  so  defective  was  his  vision,  that  he  had  neither 
dipped  his  pen  in  the  ink,  nor  did  he  perceive  that  of 
course  he  had  only  drawn  it  over  the  Paper,  without 
making  any  impression.  Fraser,  aware  of  the  King's 
blindness,  yet,  unwilling  to  let  His  Majesty  perceive 
that  he  discovered  it,  said,  "  Sir,  I  have  given  you  so 
"  bad  a  pen,  that  it  will  not  write.  Allow  me  to 
"  present  you  a  better  for  the  Purpose.11  Then  dipping 
it  himself  in  the  ink,  he  returned  it  to  the  King,  who, 
without  making  any  remark,  instantly  signed  the  Paper. 
He  was  unquestionably  an  honest,  well-intentioned, 
and  good  Prince;  of  very  moderate,  but  not  mean 
talents  ;  frugal  in  his  expences,  from  natural  character ; 
more  inclined  to  Avarice  than  any  King  of  England 
since  Henry  the  Seventh ;  irascible  and  hasty,  but  not 
vindictive  in  his  temper.  Imbued  with  a  strong  enmity 
to  France,  and  as  warm  a  predilection  for  Germany,  he 
never  enjoyed  such  felicity  as  when  at  Herenhausen, 
surrounded  with  his  Hanoverian  Courtiers  and  subjects. 
William  the  Third  in  like  manner,  seemed  to  taste 
much  more  happiness,  while  hunting  at  Loo  in  the 
sterile  Sands  of  Guelderland,  than  at  Whitehall,  or  at 
Hampton  Court.  At  the  Battle  of  Dettingen,  in  1743, 
it  is  well  known  that  George  the  Second's  horse,  which 
was  unruly,  ran  away  with  him  to  a  considerable 
distance.  General  Cyrus  Trapaud,  then  an  Ensign,  by 
seizing  the  horse's  bridle,  enabled  His  Majesty  to 
dismount  in  safety.  "Now  that  I  am  once  on  my 
"  legs,"  said  he,  "  I  am  sure  I  shall  not  run  away." 
Having  enquired  Trapaud's  name,  the  King  always 
distinguished  him  afterwards  in  military  promotions. 
When  incensed  either  with  his  Ministers,  or  with  his 
Attendants,  he  was  sometimes  not  Master  of  his  Actions, 
nor  attentive  to  preserve  his  dignity.  On  these 
occasions,  his  Hat,  and  it  is  asserted,  even  his  Wig, 

256 


1781.]     TRIBUTE  TO  QUEEN  CAROLINE 

became  frequently  the  Objects  on  which  he  expended 
his  anger.  Queen  Caroline,  by  her  address,  her 
judicious  compliances,  and  her  activity  of  character, 
maintained  down  to  the  time  of  her  Decease  in  1737,  a 
great  Ascendant  over  him.  She  formed  the  chief  con- 
ducting wire  between  the  Sovereign  and  his  First 
Minister.  It  is  a  fact,  that  Sir  Robert  Walpole  and 
Her  Majesty  managed  Matters  with  so  much  Art,  as  to 
keep  up  a  secret  understanding  by  Watch-words,  even 
in  the  Drawing  Room,  when  and  where  George  the 
Second  was  present.  According  to  the  King's  temper, 
frame  of  mind,  or  practicability  on  the  Points  which 
Sir  Robert  wished  to  carry,  the  Queen  signified  to  him 
whether  to  proceed,  or  to  desist,  on  that  particular  day. 
This  communication  was  so  well  preconcerted,  and  so 
delicately  executed,  as  to  be  imperceptible  by  the  By- 
standers. Sir  Robert  lost  a  most  able  ana  vigilant 
Ally,  when  Queen  Caroline  died.  Her  decease  was 
indeed  a  Misfortune  to  her  husband,  to  her  children, 
and  to  the  Nation.  She  sacrificed  her  life  to  the  desire 
of  concealing  her  Complaint ;  a  rupture  of  the  Bowels, 
which  might  have  been  easily  reduced,  if  she  had  not 
delayed  the  disclosure  of  it  till  a  Mortification  took 
place.  We  have  not  possessed  since  Elizabeth's  death,  a 
Queen  of  more  Talent,  Capacity,  and  Strength  of  Under- 
standing, than  Caroline  of  Brandenburgh  Anspach. 
Mary,  wife  of  William  the  Third,  approached  the 
nearest,  but  did  not  equal  her  in  these  Endowments. 
At  the  time  of  his  Decease,  George  the  Second 
certainly  enjoyed  great  and  universal  Popularity :  but 
to  Mr.  Pitt,  afterwards  created  Earl  of  Chatham,  he 
was  eminently  indebted  for  this  gratifying  Distinction 
at  the  close  of  life,  when  Victory  was  said  to  have 
erected  her  Altar  between  his  aged  knees.  The  Mis- 
fortunes and  Disgraces  which  preceded  Pitt's  entrance 
into  Office,  had  in  fact  forced  him  upon  the  King ;  who, 
notwithstanding  that  Minister's  recognized  Talents, 

257  17 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [mi. 

did  not  employ  him  without  the  utmost  reluctance. 
The  inglorious  Naval  Engagement  in  the  Mediterranean, 
between  Byng  and  La  Galissoniere,  for  which  the  former 
of  those  Admirals  suffered ;  the  consequent  loss  of 
Minorca;  the  defeat  of  Braddock  in  Carolina;  the 
Repulse  sustained  before  Ticonderago ;  the  ignomini- 
ous Capitulation  of  William,  Duke  of  Cumberland, 
at  Closter  -  Seven ;  and  the  disgraceful  Expedition 
against  Rochfort ; — these  ill -concerted,  or  ill -exe- 
cuted Measures,  at  the  commencement  of  the  War 
of  1756,  had  not  only  brought  the  Administration 
into  contempt,  but  had  much  diminished  the  National 
Affection  borne  towards  the  Sovereign.  From  the 
period  of  Pittas  Nomination  to  a  Place  in  the  Cabinet, 
Success  almost  uniformly  attended  on  the  British  Arms. 
Though  only  occupying  the  Post  of  Secretary  of  State, 
he  directed,  or  rather  he  dictated  the  Operations,  at 
Home  and  Abroad.  The  Treasury,  the  Admiralty, 
the  War  Office,  all  obeyed  his  Orders  with  prompt  and 
implicit  submission.  Lord  Anson  and  the  Duke  of 
Newcastle,  sometimes,  it  is  true,  remonstrated,  and 
often  complained ;  but  always  finished  by  Compliance. 
In  the  full  Career  of  Pitt's  ministerial  Triumphs, 
George  the  Second  died ;  an  Event,  which  it  is  im- 
possible not  to  consider  as  having  been  a  great  national 
Misfortune,  when  we  reflect  on  the  Peace  which  took 
place  little  more  than  two  years  afterwards,  in 
November,  1762.  Mr.  Pitt,  we  may  be  assured, 
would  have  dictated  far  different  terms  to  the  two 
Branches  of  the  House  of  Bourbon.  The  new  King 
did  not  indeed  immediately  dismiss  so  able  and  popular 
a  Statesman;  but  it  was  soon  suspected  that  his 
Administration,  though  it  might  languish,  or  continue 
for  a  few  Months,  would  not  prove  of  long  duration. 
Lord  Bute  had  already  secured  the  exclusive  Regard 
and  Favor  of  the  young  Monarch. 

The  late  Mrs.  Boscawen,  widow  of  the  Admiral  of 
258 


1781.]  A  CARD  PARTY 

that  Name,  so  distinguished  in  our  Naval  Annals, 
whose  Connexions  enabled  her  to  collect  many  curious 
Facts  in  the  course  of  a  long  life;  has  often  assured 
me,  that  Lord  Bute's  first  personal  introduction  to  the 
Prince  of  Wales,  originated  in  a  very  singular  Accident. 
That  Nobleman,  as  is  well  known,  married  the  only 
daughter  of  the  celebrated  Lady  Mary  Wortley 
Montagu,  by  whom  he  had  a  very  numerous  Family. 
She  brought  him  eventually  likewise  a  large  landed 
Property :  but,  as  her  father,  Mr.  Wortley,  did  not 
die  till  the  year  1761  ;  and  as  her  brother,  the  eccentric 
Edward  Wortley  Montagu,  lived  to  a  much  later 
period,  I  believe,  down  to  1777  ;  Lord  Bute,  encumbered 
with  a  number  of  Children,  found  his  patrimonial 
Fortune  very  unequal  to  maintain  the  figure  befitting 
his  rank  in  life.  After  passing  some  years  in  profound 
Retirement,  on  his  estate  in  the  Isle  of  Bute,  he  re- 
visited England,  and  took  a  house  on  the  Banks  of  the 
Thames.  During  his  residence  there,  he  was  induced 
to  visit  Egham  Races,  about  the  year  1747.  But,  as 
he  either  did  not  at  that  Time  keep  a  Carriage,  or  did 
not  use  it  to  convey  him  to  the  Race  Ground,  he  con- 
descended to  accompany  a  medical  Acquaintance;  in 
other  words,  the  Apothecary  that  attended  His  Lord- 
ship's family,  who  carried  him  there  in  his  own  Chariot. 
Frederic,  Prince  of  Wales,  who  then  resided  at  Cliefden, 
honored  the  Races  on  that  day  with  his  presence  ;  where 
a  tent  was  pitched  for  his  accommodation,  and  that  of 
the  Princess,  his  Consort.  The  weather  proving  rainy, 
it  was  proposed,  in  order  to  amuse  his  Royal  Highness 
before  his  return  home,  to  make  a  party  at  Cards  :  but 
a  difficulty  occurred  about  finding  persons  of  sufficient 
rank  to  sit  down  at  the  same  table  with  him.  While 
they  remained  under  this  embarrassment,  somebody 
observed  that  Lord  Bute  had  been  seen  on  the  Race 
Ground;  who,  as  being  an  Earl,  would  be  peculiarly 
proper  to  make  one  of  the  Prince's  party.  He  was  soon 

259 


WRAXALL/S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [mi. 

found,  informed  of  the  Occasion  which  demanded  his 
Attendance,  brought  to  the  Tent,  and  presented  to 
Frederic.  When  the  Company  broke  up,  Lord  Bute 
thought  of  returning  back  to  his  own  House :  but  his 
Friend  the  Apothecary  had  disappeared ;  and  with  him 
had  disappeared  the  Chariot  in  which  his  Lordship  had 
been  brought  to  Egham  Races.  The  Prince  was  no 
sooner  made  acquainted  with  the  Circumstance,  than  he 
insisted  on  Lord  Bute's  accompanying  him  to  Cliefden, 
and  there  passing  the  night.  He  complied,  rendered 
himself  extremely  acceptable  to  their  Royal  Highnesses, 
and  thus  laid  the  Foundation,  under  a  succeeding  Reign, 
of  his  political  elevation,  which  flowed  originally  in 
some  measure  from  this  strange  contingency. 

Lord  Bute,  when  young,  possessed  a  very  handsome 
person,  of  which  advantage  he  was  not  insensible ;  and 
he  used  to  pass  many  hours  every  day,  as  his  enemies 
asserted,  occupied  in  contemplating  the  symmetry  of 
his  own  legs,  during  his  solitary  walks  by  the  side  of 
the  Thames.  Even  after  he  became  an  inmate  at 
Cliefden,  and  at  Leicester  House,  he  frequently  played 
the  part  of  "  Lothario,11  in  the  private  Theatricals 
exhibited  for  the  amusement  of  their  Royal  Highnesses, 
by  the  late  Duchess  of  Queensberry;  a  fact  to  which 
Wilkes  alludes  with  malignant  pleasantry,  in  more  than 
one  of  his  publications.  To  these  external  accomplish- 
ments, he  added  a  cultivated  mind,  illuminated  by  a 
taste  for  many  branches  of  the  Fine  Arts  and  Letters. 
For  the  study  of  Botany  he  nourished  a  decided  passion, 
which  he  gratified  to  the  utmost ;  and  in  the  indulgence 
of  which  predilection,  he  manifested  on  some  occasions, 
a  princely  liberality.  Of  a  disposition  naturally  retired 
and  severe,  he  was  not  formed  for  an  extensive  commerce 
with  mankind,  or  endowed  by  Nature  with  talents  for 
managing  popular  assemblies.  Even  in  his  family  he 
was  austere,  harsh,  difficult  of  access,  and  sometimes 
totally  inaccessible  to  his  own  children.  In  the  House 

260 


1781.J     LORD  BUTE'S  ADMINISTRATION 

of  Lords  he  neither  displayed  eloquence  nor  gracious- 
ness  of  manners.  But  he  proved  himself  likewise 
deficient  in  a  quality  still  more  essential  for  a  First 
Minister,  firmness  of  character.  Yet,  with  these 
political  defects  of  mind,  and  of  personal  deportment, 
he  undertook  to  displace,  and  he  aspired  to  succeed 
Mr.  Pitt,  at  a  moment  when  that  Minister  had  carried 
the  glory  of  the  British  Arms  to  an  unexampled  height, 
by  sea  and  land. 

After  an  Administration  of  about  two  years,  passed 
either  in  the  Post  of  Secretary  of  State,  or  as  First 
Lord  of  the  Treasury ;  during  which  time  he  brought 
the  war  with  France  arid  Spain  to  a  conclusion ;  Lord 
Bute  abandoning  his  royal  master,  quitted  his  situation, 
and  again  withdrew  to  privacy.  No  testimonies  of 
national  regret,  or  of  national  esteem,  accompanied  him 
at  his  departure  from  Office.  His  magnificent  resid- 
ence in  Berkley  Square,  exposed  him  to  very  malignant 
comments,  respecting  the  means  by  which  he  had 
reared  so  expensive  a  pile.  His  enemies  asserted  that 
he  could  not  possibly  have  possessed  the  ability,  either 
from  his  patrimonial  fortune,  or  in  consequence  of  his 
marriage,  to  erect  such  a  structure.  As  little  could  he 
be  supposed  to  have  amassed  wherewithal,  during  his 
very  short  Administration,  to  suffice  for  its  construction. 
The  only  satisfactory  solution  of  the  difficulty  therefore 
lay  in  imagining  that  he  had  either  received  presents 
from  France,  or  had  made  large  purchases  in  the  public 
Funds,  previous  to  the  signature  of  the  Preliminaries. 
"  Junius,"  addressing  the  Duke  of  Bedford,  who  signed 
that  Peace,  in  his  Letter  of  the  "19th  September, 
1769,*"  written  within  seven  years  afterwards ;  charges 
the  Duke,  in  the  most  unequivocal  terms,  with  betray- 
ing and  selling  his  country.  "  Your  Patrons,"  says  he, 
"  wanted  an  Embassador  who  would  submit  to  make 
"  concessions,  without  daring  to  insist  upon  any  honor- 
u  able  condition  for  his  Sovereign.  Their  business 

261 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [1781. 

"  required  a  man,  who  had  as  little  feeling  for  his  own 
"  dignity,  as  for  the  welfare  of  his  Country ;  and  they 
"  found  him  in  the  first  Rank  of  the  Nobility.  Belle- 
"  isle,  Goree,  Guadeloupe,  St.  Lucia,  Martinique,  the 
"  Fishery,  and  the  Havannah,  are  glorious  monuments 
"  of  your  Grace^s  talents  for  Negociation.  My  Lord, 
"  we  are  too  well  acquainted  with  your  pecuniary 
"  character,  to  think  it  possible  that  so  many  public 
"  sacrifices  should  have  been  made,  without  some 
"  private  compensations.  Your  conduct  carries  with 
"  it  an  internal  evidence,  beyond  all  the  legal  proofs 
"  of  a  Court  of  Justice."  No  answer  was  ever  made  to 
this  charge,  either  by  the  Duke,  or  by  any  of  his 
Friends,  if  we  except  Sir  William  Draper's  vague  and 
unauthorized  Letter  of  the  "  7th  of  October,  1769." 

Dr.  Musgrave,  an  English  Physician,  who  practised 
Medicine  at  Paris  in  1763,  and  whose  name  has  been 
known  in  the  Republic  of  Letters,  by  the  publication  of 
some  Tragedies  of  Euripides ;  did  not  scruple  to  assert 
publicly,  that  the  Princess  Dowager  of  Wales  and  Lord 
Bute  received  money  from  the  French  Court,  for  aiding 
to  effect  the  Peace.  I  am  acquainted  with  the  in- 
dividuals, Gentlemen  of  the  highest  honor  and  most 
unimpeached  veracity,  to  whom  Dr.  Musgrave  himself 
related  the  circumstance  at  Paris,  in  1764,  almost  im- 
mediately after  the  Treaty  of  Fontainbleau.  And  if  I 
do  not  name  them,  it  is  only  because  they  are  still 
alive.  Dr.  Musgrave  did  not  retract  his  accusation, 
when  he  was  examined  at  the  Bar  of  the  House  of 
Commons,  some  years  afterwards,  in  the  Month  of 
January,  1770,  upon  the  same  point.  He  maintained 
on  the  contrary,  his  original  assertion,  which  he  sup- 
ported by  facts  or  circumstances  calculated  to  authenti- 
cate its  truth,  though  the  House  thought  proper  to 
declare  it  "Frivolous,  and  unworthy  of  Credit." 
"Junius,"  writing  in  the  Month  of  May,  1770,  says, 
"  Through  the  whole  proceedings  of  the  House  of 


1781.]  "DUNKIRK  HOUSE " 

"  Commons  in  this  Session,  there  is  an  apparent,  a 
"  palpable  consciousness  of  guilt,  which  has  prevented 
"  their  daring  to  assert  their  own  dignity,  where  it  has 
"  been  immediately  and  grossly  attacked.  In  the 
"  course  of  Dr.  Musgrave's  Examination,  he  said  every 
"  thing  that  can  be  conceived  mortifying  to  individuals, 
"  or  offensive  to  the  House.  They  voted  his  informa- 
"  tion  Frivolous,  but  they  were  awed  by  his  firmness 
"  and  integrity,  and  sunk  under  it."  Dr.  Musgrave 
resided  in  this  country  during  the  last  years  of  his  life ; 
and  died,  I  believe,  at  Exeter,  in  the  Summer  of  the 
year  1780. 

Similar  reflexions  indeed,  at  different  periods  of  our 
History,  have  been  thrown  not  only  upon  Ministers, 
but  even  upon  Kings.  Lord  Clarendon,  when  Chan- 
cellor, under  Charles  the  Second,  having,  like  Lord 
Bute,  undertaken  to  build  a  magnificent  house  in 
London,  soon  after  the  sale  of  Dunkirk  to  Louis  the 
Fourteenth,  about  1664 ;  it  was  named  by  the  people 
"  Dunkirk  House,1'  on  the  supposition  of  its  having  been 
raised  by  French  money.  No  person  can  doubt  of 
Charles  the  Second  himself  having  received  large  sums 
from  the  Court  of  Versailles,  for  purposes  inimical  to 
the  interests  of  his  people.  So  did  his  successor,  James 
the  Second.  Bribes  were  even  confidently  said  and 
believed  to  have  been  given  to  various  of  the  Courtiers 
or  favourites  of  William  the  Third,  from  the  East- 
India  Company  and  other  Corporate  Bodies,  in  order  to 
procure  the  consent  or  approbation  of  the  Sovereign 
to  the  renewal  of  their  Charters.  The  Duchess  of 
Kendal,  Mistress  of  George  the  First ;  as  well  as  Craggs, 
father  of  the  Secretary  of  State  of  the  same  name,  and 
himself  at  the  time,  Post  Master  General ;  together 
with  other  individuals  about  the  court  or  person 
of  that  Monarch,  were  either  known  or  supposed  to 
have  been  implicated  in  the  transactions  of  the  memor- 
able South  Sea  Year,  1720,  when  such  immense  sums 

263 


WRAXALI/S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     fi78i. 

were  gained  and  lost  in  that  ruinous  speculation. 
Malignity  did  not  spare  the  King  himself,  who,  it  was 
asserted,  became  a  sharer  in  the  acquisitions.  Lord 
Bute,  at  the  distance  of  half  a  Century,  is  still  believed 
to  have  rendered  the  Treaty  of  Fontainbleau  subservient 
to  his  private  emolument :  a  supposition  which  was 
again  renewed  twenty  years  later,  at  the  conclusion  of 
the  Peace  of  1783,  against  Lord  Shelburne,  with  greater 
virulence,  and  with  bolder  affirmations !  Such  were  the 
unfortunate  results  of  the  Earl  of  Bute's  Ministry,  which 
must  be  considered  as  having  given  the  first  blow  to  the 
popularity,  enjoyed  by  the  King  at  his  Accession  to  the 
Throne. 

It  is  an  indisputable  fact,  that  Lord  Bute,  terrified  or 
disgusted  at  the  indications  of  resentment  shewn  by  the 
nation,  forsook  his  Master ;  and  that  he  was  not  dis- 
missed or  abandoned  by  the  Sovereign.  He  was  the 
first,  though  not  the  last  Minister,  who  in  the  course 
of  the  present  reign,  exhibited  that  example  of  timidity, 
or  weariness,  or  desertion.  But,  his  ostensible  relin- 
quishment  of  office,  by  no  means  restored  to  the  King, 
the  confidence  or  the  affections  of  his  subjects.  Even 
when  nominally  divested  of  power,  Lord  Bute  was  still 
supposed  to  direct  unseen,  the  wheels  of  Government. 
However  false  and  unfounded  might  be  this  imputation, 
and  such  I  have  ever  considered  it,  yet  it  operated  with 
irresistible  force.  A  cry  of  Secret  Influence  arose,  more 
pernicious  in  its  effects  on  the  Country  at  large,  than 
even  the  open  accusations  lately  levelled  against  the 
incapacity  or  venality  of  the  first  Minister.  The 
Grenville  Administration,  which  succeeded,  was  stig- 
matized as  being  only  a  machine,  the  puppets  of  which 
were  agitated  by  concealed  wires.  It  is  obvious,  that  no 
imputation  in  the  power  of  malevolence  to  invent  and 
circulate,  could  be  more  calculated  to  prejudice  the 
King  in  the  estimation  of  his  people.  But  it  became 
further  augmented  by  another  topic  of  abuse  and 

264 


1781.]  POPULAR  SUSPICION 

declamation,  founded  on  the  extraordinary  degree  of 
favour  enjoyed  by  Lord  Bute  at  Carlton  House,  and 
the  predilection  with  which  he  was  known  to  be 
regarded  by  the  Princess  Dowager  of  Wales.  Satirical 
prints,  generally  dispersed  throughout  the  kingdom,  in 
which  Her  Royal  Highness  was  not  at  all  spared, 
inflamed  the  public  mind.  Comparisons,  drawn  from 
English  History,  particularly  from  the  reign  of  Edward 
the  Third,  when  the  Queen  Dowager  Isabella,  and 
Mortimer  her  favourite,  were  known  or  supposed  to 
have  lived  in  a  criminal  union ;  these  allusions,  which 
were  disseminated  in  all  the  periodical  works  of  the 
Time,  and  particularly  in  the  "  North  Briton,"  made  a 
deep  impression. 

Even  the  filial  deference  and  respect,  manifested  by 
His  Majesty  after  his  accession,  down  to  the  last 
moment  of  her  life,  towards  his  Mother,  was  converted 
into  a  subject  not  only  of  Censure,  but  of  Accusation, 
as  originating  in  unworthy  Motives.  It  cannot,  how- 
ever, be  denied  that  Lord  Bute  enjoyed  a  higher  place 
in  that  Princess's  favor,  if  not  in  ner  affection,  than 
seemed  compatible  with  strict  propriety.  His  visits  to 
Carlton  House,  which  were  always  performed  in  the 
evening;  and  the  precautions  taken  to  conceal  his 
arrival ;  though  they  might  perhaps  have  been  dictated 
more  by  an  apprehension  of  insult  from  the  populace, 
to  whom  he  was  obnoxious,  than  from  any  improper 
Reasons  ;  yet  awakened  suspicion.  He  commonly  made 
use  on  these  occasions,  of  the  Chair  and  the  Chairmen 
of  Miss  Vansittart,  a  Lady  who  held  a  distinguished 
place  in  Her  Royal  Highnesses  family.  In  order  more 
effectually  to  elude  notice,  the  curtains  of  the  Chair 
were  close  drawn.  The  repartee  of  Miss  Chudleigh, 
afterwards  better  known  as  Duchess  of  Kingston,  at 
that  time  a  Maid  of  Honour  at  Carlton  House ;  when 
reproached  by  her  royal  Mistress,  for  the  irregularities 
of  her  conduct,  obtained  likewise  much  publicity. 

265 


WRAXALI/S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [mi. 

"  Votre  Altesse  Roy  ale  sait"  replied  she,  "  qiie  chacune 
a  son  But."  As  the  King  was  accustomed  to  repair 
frequently  of  Evenings  to  Carlton  House,  and  there  to 
pass  a  considerable  time,  the  world  supposed  that  the 
Sovereign,  his  Mother,  and  the  Ex-Minister  met,  in 
order  to  concert,  and  to  compare  their  ideas ;  thus 
forming  a  sort  of  interior  Cabinet,  which  controuled 
and  directed  the  ostensible  Administration. 

That  after  having  so  precipitately  thrown  up  the 
ministerial  reins  in  1763,  Lord  Bute  felt  desirous  of 
again  resuming  his  political  power,  I  know  from  good 
authority.  And  that  he  was  aided  in  the  attempt  by 
the  Princess,  with  all  her  influence,  is  equally  matter 
of  fact ;  but  their  joint  efforts  proved  unavailing  to 
effect  the  object.  A  Nobleman,  who  was  accustomed 
at  that  time  to  form  one  of  the  Party  which  met  at 
Carlton  House,  and  who  usually  remained  there  while 
His  Majesty  stayed ;  assured  me  that  every  measure 
had  been  concerted  between  her  Royal  Highness  and 
Lord  Bute,  for  the  purpose  of  bringing  him  again  into 
Ministry.  As  the  first  necessary  step  towards  its 
accomplishment,  they  agreed  that  he  should  endeavour 
to  obtain  permission  to  see  the  Dispatches,  which  were 
often  sent  to  the  King  from  the  Secretary  of  State, 
while  he  continued  with  his  mother.  On  those  occa- 
sions, when  the  green  Box,  containing  letters  or  papers, 
arrived,  he  always  withdrew  into  another  room,  in 
order  to  peruse  them  with  more  attention.  Lord  Bute, 
as  had  been  pre-arranged,  upon  the  messenger  bringing 
a  Dispatch,  immediately  took  up  two  candles,  and 
proceeded  before  the  King  to  the  closet ;  expecting 
that  His  Majesty,  when  they  were  alone  together, 
would  communicate  to  him  its  nature ;  and  that  he 
should  thus  begin  again  to  transact  business.  But  the 
King,  unquestionably  aware  of  the  intention,  and  pro- 
bably disgusted  at  the  want  of  firmness  which  his 
Minister  had  formerly  shewn,  or  from  other  unascer- 

266 


1781.]          LORD  BUTE  CHECKMATED 

tained  causes,  extinguished  at  once  the  hopes  entertained 
from  this  project.  When  he  came  to  the  door  of  the 
room,  he  stopped,  took  the  candles  out  of  Lord  Bute^s 
hand,  and  then  dismissing  him,  shut  the  door ;  after 
which  he  proceeded  to  examine  the  Dispatches,  alone. 
Lord  Bute  returned  to  the  company,  and  the  experiment 
was  never  repeated. 

If  the  selection  of  that  Nobleman  for  the  office  of 
First  Minister,  and  the  dismission  of  Mr  Pitt,  deprived 
the  King  of  the  affections  of  many  loyal  subjects ;  the 
terms  upon  which  the  Treaty  of  Fontainbleau  were 
concluded,  early  in  1763,  by  Lord  Bute,  excited  the 
strongest  sensations  of  general  disapprobation  through- 
out the  country.  I  am  old  enough  to  remember  the 
expressions  of  that  condemnation,  which  it  is  impossible 
not  to  admit  were  well  founded.  When  we  reflect  that 
the  Navy  of  France  had  been  nearly  annihilated,  as 
early  as  1759,  by  Sir  Edward  Hawke,  in  the  action  at 
Quiberon  ;  that  Spain  could  make  little  or  no  opposition 
to  us  on  the  Ocean ;  and  that  we  were  masters  of 
Quebec,  Montreal,  together  with  all  Canada;  Cape 
Breton,  Pondicherry,  Goree,  Belleisle,  the  Havannah, 
and  a  large  part  of  Cuba;  besides  the  islands  of 
Martinique  and  Guadaloupe ;  not  to  mention  the 
capture  of  Manilla,  which  was  not  then  known  :  while, 
on  the  other  hand,  the  enemy,  though  they  probably 
would  have  effected  the  conquest  or  reduction  of 
Portugal,  in  the  course  of  the  ensuing  Campaign,  yet 
had  taken  nothing  from  us,  which  they  had  retained, 
except  Minorca ; — when  we  consider  these  facts,  what 
shall  we  say  to  a  Peace,  which  restored  to  the  two 
Branches  of  the  House  of  Bourbon,  every  possession 
above  enumerated,  except  Canada  ?  —  for,  as  to  Cape 
Breton,  when  dismantled,  it  became  only  an  useless 
desart ;  accepting,  in  exchange  for  so  many  valuable 
Colonies  or  Settlements  in  every  quarter  of  the  globe, 
the  cession  of  the  two  Floridas  from  Spain,  together 

267 


WRAXALKS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [1781. 

with  the  restitution  of  Minorca  by  France.  At  the 
distance  of  more  than  half  a  Century,  when  the  passions 
and  prejudices  of  the  hour  have  ceased,  we  cannot 
consider  such  a  Treaty  without  astonishment  and 
concern.  Scarcely  indeed  does  the  Peace  of  Utrecht 
justly  awaken  warmer  feelings  of  indignation ;  for  con- 
cluding which,  its  authors  were  impeached,  imprisoned, 
or  compelled  to  fly  their  country.  If  Lord  Bute  escaped 
the  fate  of  Lord  Oxford  and  Lord  Bolingbroke,  he  has 
not  been  more  exempt  than  were  those  Ministers,  from 
the  censures  of  his  contemporaries  and  of  posterity. 
Nor  did  Queen  Anne  perhaps  sustain  a  greater  loss  of 
reputation  and  popularity,  by  signing  the  Treaty  of 
Utrecht,  than  George  the  Third  suffered  by  concluding 
that  of  Fontainbleau.  Its  impolicy  appears  not  less 

flaring,  nor  less  obvious,  than  its  defects  of  every  other 
ind.  The  expulsion  of  the  French  from  Canada,  and 
of  the  Spaniards  from  Florida,  by  liberating  the 
American  Colonies  from  all  apprehension  of  foreign 
enemies,  laid  the  inevitable  foundation  of  their  rebellion  ; 
and  effected  their  subsequent  emancipation  from  Great 
Britain,  within  the  space  of  twenty  years.  This 
necessary  result  of  such  measures,  perfectly  foreseen  at 
the  time,  was  pointed  out  by  Dr.  Tucker,  Dean  of 
Gloucester,  as  well  as  by  others.  The  House  of  Bourbon, 
soon  recovering  from  the  wounds  inflicted  by  Pitt,  con- 
tested anew,  with  better  success,  for  the  empire  of  the 
Sea.  Neither  the  Havannah,  Belleisle,  nor  Manilla, 
have  ever  passed  a  second  time  under  the  power  of  the 
English.  If  we  weigh  these  circumstances,  we  shall  not 
wonder  that  motives  unworthy  of  an  upright  Minister, 
or  of  an  able  Statesman,  were  attributed  to  Lord  Bute. 
Nor  shall  we  be  surprized,  that  the  incapacity  or  errors 
of  the  Administration,  diminished  in  no  small  degree 
the  respect  justly  inspired  by  the  private  virtues  of  the 
Sovereign. 

The  injudicious  persecution  of  Wilkes  completed  the 
268 


1781.]  THE  BAGSHOT  DUEL 

unpopularity,  which  Lord  Bute's  person  and  measures 
had  begun  to  produce  throughout  the  nation.  What- 
ever might  have  been  the  misconduct  of  Wilkes ;  and 
however  deficient  he  might  have  appeared  in  those 
moral  qualities  which  entitle  to  public  respect,  or  even 
to  individual  approbation  ;  yet,  from  the  instant  that  he 
became  an  object  of  Royal  or  Ministerial  resentment,  on 
account  of  his  attachment  to  the  cause  of  Freedom,  he 
found  protectors  in  the  public.  Neither  his  wit,  his 
talents,  nor  his  courage,  could  have  raised  him  to 
political  eminence,  if  he  had  not  been  singled  out  for 
severe,  not  to  say  unconstitutional,  prosecution.  The 
two  Secretaries  of  State,  and  the  Lord  Steward  of  the 
Household,  had  they  been  hired  by  his  worst  enemies, 
to  injure  their  Royal  Master  in  the  esteem  of  his 
people ;  and  to  throw,  as  it  were,  upon  him,  the  Odium 
of  their  violence,  or  incapacity,  or  ignorance  ;  could  not 
have  done  it  more  effectually,  than  by  the  line  of  action 
which  they  adopted.  Lord  Talbot  is  consigned  to 
eternal  ridicule,  (as  Pope  says  that  Cromwell  is 
"  Damned  to  everlasting  Fame  ; ")  in  that  incomparable 
Letter  written  by  Wilkes  to  the  late  Earl  Temple, 
descriptive  of  the  entertaining  Duel  fought  at  Bagshot, 
where  the  Lord  Steward  appears  in  the  most  con- 
temptible point  of  view.  The  Earls  of  Egremont  and 
Halifax,  by  issuing  a  general  Warrant  for  the  seizure 
of  Wilkes,  and  taking  his  person  into  Custody ;  while 
they  compromised  the  Majesty  of  the  Crown,  trampled 
on  the  Liberties  of  the  Subject,  and  violated  the  essence 
of  the  English  Constitution.  Men  who  commented 
with  severity  on  these  measures  of  impolitic  resentment, 
arraigned  them  as  more  characteristic  of  the  vindictive 
Administration  of  James  the  Second,  than  becoming 
the  mild  Government  of  George  the  Third.  Wilkes, 
nevertheless,  wounded  in  a  Duel,  repeatedly  menaced 
with  assassination,  pursued  by  the  House  of  Commons, 
and  outlawed  by  the  Court  of  King's  Bench,  withdrew 

269 


WRAXALKS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [mi. 

into  France,  where  he  insensibly  sunk  into  oblivion. 
His  very  name,  and  his  public  merits,  as  well  as  his 
private  sufferings,  seemed  to  be  equally  forgotten  by 
the  Nation,  during  two  or  three  years. 

But  the  Duke  of  Grafton,  who  had  become  first 
Minister,  after  the  extinction  of  the  feeble  Administra- 
tion of  Lord  Rockingham,  appeared  as  if  desirous  to 
improve  upon  the  errors,  and  to  renew  the  most  un- 
popular acts  of  his  predecessor,  Lord  Bute.  Instead  of 
wisely  extending  the  pardon  of  the  Crown  to  Mr. 
Wilkes,  or  treating  him  with  magnanimous  contempt, 
when  he  returned  from  Paris ;  the  Duke,  in  defiance  of 
their  past  intimacy  and  familiarity,  put  in  force  the 
penalties  of  his  sentence  of  outlawry ;  thus  rendering 
him  a  second  time,  the  object  of  general  compassion 
and  protection.  Rejected  as  a  Candidate  to  represent 
the  City  of  London,  he  was  elected  Member  for  the 
County  of  Middlesex.  Assemblies  of  the  people  in  St. 
George^s  Fields,  whom  it  was  esteemed  necessary  to 
repress  by  a  military  force,  and  in  performing  which 
service  some  individuals  were  killed  or  wounded,  ex- 
asperated the  Nation  against  the  author  of  such 
severities.  The  House  of  Commons  adopting  the 
principles,  as  well  as  the  enmities  of  the  Administra- 
tion, expelled  Wilkes  from  his  Seat,  declared  him 
ineligible  to  sit  among  them,  and  placed  Colonel 
Luttrell  in  his  room.  While  the  Pardon  of  the  Crown 
was  extended  to  persons  convicted  of  the  most  san- 
guinary outrages  and  riots,  during  the  Election  at 
Brentford;  by  measures  of  consummate  incapacity,  a 
popular  individual  was  singled  out  for  the  whole 
vengeance  of  the  Government  and  the  Legislature. 
The  tumults  of  London,  in  March,  1769,  which  menaced 
with  insult  or  attack,  even  the  Palace  of  the  Sovereign, 
bore  no  feeble  resemblance  to  the  riotous  disorders  that 
preceded  the  Civil  Wars,  under  Charles  the  First.  A 
Hearse,  followed  by  the  mob,  was  driven  into  the  Court 

270 


1781.]  ADVENT  OF  "JUNIUS,"  1769 

Yard  at  St.  James's,  decorated  with  Insignia  of  the 
most  humiliating  or  indecent  description.  I  have 
always  understood  that  the  late  Lord  Mountmorris, 
then  a  very  young  man,  was  the  person  who  on  that 
occasion  personated  the  Executioner,  holding  an  Axe 
in  his  hands,  and  his  face  covered  with  a  crape.  The 
King's  firmness  did  not  however  forsake  him,  in  the 
midst  of  these  trying  ebullitions  of  Democratic  rage. 
He  remained  calm  and  unmoved  in  the  Drawing-Room, 
while  the  streets  surrounding  his  residence,  echoed  with 
the  shouts  of  an  enraged  multitude,  who  seemed  dis- 
posed to  proceed  to  the  greatest  extremities.  But,  the 
Duke  of  Graf  ton  did  not  manifest  equal  constancy,  nor 
display  the  same  resolution  as  his  master.  It  seemed 
to  be  the  fate  of  George  the  Third  to  be  served  by 
Ministers,  as  much  his  inferiors  in  personal  and  political 
courage,  as  in  every  other  moral  or  estimable  quality. 

Another  opponent,  still  more  formidable  than  Mr. 
Wilkes,  had  arisen  amidst  these  convulsions  of  the 
Capital  and  the  Country ;  who,  from  the  place  of  his 
concealment,  inflicted  the  severest  wounds,  and  who 
seems  to  have  eluded  all  discovery,  down  to  the  present 
hour.  It  is  obvious  that  I  mean  "  Junius."  This  cele- 
brated writer,  wiiom  the  obtrusive  and  imprudent  vanity 
of  Sir  William  Draper,  even  more  than  his  own  match- 
less powers  of  Composition,  originally  forced  upon  the 
notice  of  the  Public,  appeared  in  January,  1769.  His 
first  Letter,  addressed  to  the  Printer  of  the  "Public 
u  Advertizer,"  then  a  popular  Newspaper,  depictures  in 
the  severest  colours,  the  situation  of  the  Country ;  dis- 
honoured, as  he  asserts,  in  the  eyes  of  foreign  nations ; 
disunited,  oppressed,  and  ill-administered  at  home. 
Like  Satan,  when  invoking  his  stupified  and  fallen 
Associates,  he  seems  to  exclaim,  while  endeavouring 
to  rouse  the  English  Nation  from  their  political 
Apathy, 

"  Awake,  arise,  or  be  for  ever  fallen  !  " 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [i78i. 

The  conclusion  of  his  opening  Address,  operated 
with  amazing  effect,  and  can  hardly  be  exceeded  in 
Energy.  "  If,"  says  he,  "  by  the  immediate  inter- 
"  position  of  Providence,  it  were  possible  for  us  to 
"  escape  a  Crisis  so  full  of  Terror  and  Despair,  Poster- 
"  ity  will  not  believe  the  History  of  the  present  Times. 
"  — They  will  not  believe  it  possible,  that  their 
"  Ancestors  could  have  survived  or  recovered  from  so 
"  desperate  a  Condition,  while  a  Duke  of  Grafton  was 
"  Prime  Minister ;  a  Lord  North,  Chancellor  of  the 
"  Exchequer ;  a  Weymouth,  and  a  Hillsborough, 
"  Secretaries  of  State  ;  a  Granby,  Commander  in  Chief : 
"  and  Mansfield,  Chief  Criminal  Judge  of  the  Kingdom." 
After  transfixing  with  his  keenest  shafts,  the  Commander 
in  Chief  of  the  Forces,  the  Lord  Chief  Justice  of  the 
King's  Bench,  and  the  Duke  of  Bedford,  he  fastened, 
like  a  vulture,  on  the  First  Minister.  With  an  acrimony 
and  ability  that  have  perhaps  never  been  equalled  by 
any  political  Writer,  he  endeavoured  to  point  the 
public  Indignation  equally  against  the  Person  and  the 
Measures  of  the  Duke  of  Grafton.  Superior  in  beauty 
of  Diction,  and  all  the  elegance  of  Composition,  to  Lord 
Bolingbroke ;  not  inferior  to  Swift,  in  closeness,  as  well 
as  correctness  of  Style,  and  in  force  of  Satire  ;  the  Letters 
of  "  Junius "  will  be  read  as  long  as  the  English  Lan- 
guage endures.  Nor  did  his  Pen,  after  exposing  the 
want  of  spirit  and  energy  in  the  Government,  respect 
even  the  Majesty  of  the  Throne.  In  his  memorable 
"  Letter  to  the  King,"  which  cannot  be  perused  without 
a  mixture  of  Admiration  and  Indignation,  he  too  success- 
fully labours  to  render  even  the  virtues  of  the  Sovereign, 
suspicious  and  odious ;  while  he  attempts  to  degrade 
the  royal  character,  in  the  opinions  of  his  Subjects.  The 
avidity  with  which  these  Publications  were  then  sought 
after  and  perused,  is  difficult  to  be  conceived  at  the 
present  time,  and  never  was  exceeded  at  any  period  of 
our  History.  "  Junius  "  may,  indeed,  justly  be  reckoned 

272 


1781.]      UNPOPULARITY  OF  MINISTERS 

among  the  leading   Causes  which   drove   the   Duke  of 
Grafton  from  the  helm. 

I  have  been  assured  by  persons  of  honor  and  veracity, 
who  were  in  the  habits  of  continually  seeing  Mr. 
Bradshaw,  then  Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  and  of 
knowing  his  private  sentiments ;  that  he  made  no  secret 
to  them,  of  the  agony  into  which  the  Duke  of  Grafton 
was  thrown  by  these  Productions.  Such  was  their 
Effect  and  Operation  on  his  mind,  as  sometimes  utterly 
to  incapacitate  him  during  whole  Days,  for  the  minis- 
terial duties  of  his  Office.  There  are  nevertheless, 
many  who  believe  and  assert,  that  his  sudden  Resigna- 
tion was  not  so  much  produced  by  the  Attacks  of 
"Junius,"  as  it  originated  from  another  quarter. 
It  has  been  pretended  that  the  Princess  Dowager 
of  Wales,  highly  indignant  at  the  mention  made 
of  her  Name,  in  the  Examination  and  Depositions 
of  Dr.  Musgrave  at  the  Bar  of  the  House  of  Commons  ; 
remonstrated  strongly  with  the  King,  on  the  Supineness 
of  his  first  Minister,  in  permitting,  or  rather  in  not 
suppressing  such  Enquiries.  However  the  Fact  may  be, 
it  is  certain  that  at  a  Moment  when  such  an  Event 
was  least  expected,  in  January,  1770,  he  resigned  his 
Office ;  giving,  as  Lord  Bute  had  done  before,  another 
instance  of  Ministerial  Dereliction,  but  not  the  last 
of  the  kind  which  has  occurred  in  the  course  of  the 
present  Reign.  Lord  North,  who  succeeded  to  his  Place, 
inherited  likewise  a  considerable  portion  of  his  Unpopu- 
larity. 

Having  mentioned  the  subject,  and  the  productions 
of  "Junius,"  it  seems  impossible  to  dismiss  them 
without  making  some  Allusion  to  their  Author.  I 
have  always  considered  that  Secret,  as  the  best  kept  of 
any  in  our  Time.  It  was,  indeed,  on  many  Accounts, 
and  for  many  reasons,  a  Secret  of  the  most  perilous 
nature.  For,  the  Offences  given,  and  the  Wounds 
inflicted  by  his  Pen,  were  too  deep,  and  too  severe,  to 

273  18 


WRAXALKS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [i78i. 

admit  of  Forgiveness,  when  we  reflect  that  Sovereigns 
and  Ministers  were  the  Objects  selected  for  his  Attack. 
I  have  been  assured,  that  the  King  riding  out  in  the 
Year  1772,  accompanied  by   General  Desaguliers,  said 
to  him  in  Conversation,  "  We  know  who  "  Junius "  is, 
"  and  he  will  write  no  more."     The  General,  who  was 
too  good  a  Courtier  to  congratulate  upon  such  a  piece 
of  Intelligence,  contented  himself  with  bowing,  and  the 
Discourse    proceeded   no   further.     Mrs.    Shuttleworth, 
who  was  General  Desaguliers's   Daughter,  believed   in 
the  Accuracy  of  this  Fact.     If,  however,  the  King  had 
penetrated  to  the  Secret,  I  do  not  believe  that  the  Duke 
of  Grafton,  or  the  first  Lord  Mansfield,  had  arrived  at 
any   Certitude  on  the  Point,  though   their   Suspicions 
might   be   strongly   directed   towards   some    one    Indi- 
vidual.    It  is  certain  that  Sir  William  Draper  died  in 
ignorance  of  his  Antagonist ;  and  that  he  continued  to 
express,  down  to  a  very  short  Time  before  his  Decease, 
which  took  place  at  Bath,  his  concern  at  the  Prospect 
of    going   out   of    Life,   uninformed   on   the    Subject. 
Lord  North  either  did  not  know,  or  professed  not  to 
know  his  Name.     The  late  Lord  Temple  protested  the 
same    Ignorance.     He    must,    nevertheless,    have    lain 
within    a   very    narrow    Circle ;    for,    every    Evidence, 
internal    and    external,   proves    him   to   have   been   a 
Person  of  pre-eminent  Parts,  admirable  Information,  high 
Connexions,  living  almost  constantly  in  the  Metropolis, 
and  in  good  Company ;  ignorant  of  nothing  which  was 
done  at  St.  Jameses,  in  the  two  Houses  of  Parliament, 
in    the  War    Office,    or   in   the   Courts    of  Law;   and 
personally  acquainted  with  many  Anecdotes  or  Facts, 
only  to  be  attained  by  Men  moving  in  the  first  Ranks 
of  Society.     I  do  not  speak  of  his  classical  Attainments  ; 
because  those  might  have  been  found  among  mere  Men 
of    Letters.     "  Junius "    was   a   Man    of    the    World. 
Henry    Sampson    Woodfall,   who   printed   the    Letters 
themselves,  was  ignorant  of  the  Name  or  Quality  of  the 

274 


1781.] 


WHO  WAS  "JUNIUS"? 


Writer,  and  remained  so  during  his  whole  life.     Who 
then,  we  repeat,  was  He  ? 

Many   Individuals  have  become  successively  Objects 
of  Suspicion,  or  of  Accusation.     Lord  George  Germain^ 
father   of    the    present   Duke   of    Dorset,  was   named 
among   others.       I    knew   him    very     intimately,    and 
have  frequently  conversed   with    him   on   the   subject. 
He  always  declared  his  ignorance  of  the   Author,  but 
he  appeared  to  be  gratified  and  flattered  by  the  Belief 
or  Imputation  lighting  on  himself.     As   far,  however, 
as  my  opinion  can  have  any  weight,  though  I  thought 
highly   of  Lord  George's   Talents,  I   considered   them 
as   altogether   unequal    to    such    Productions.     And    I 
possessed  the  best  Means,  as  well  as   Opportunities  of 
forming    my    judgment,    from    his    Conversation    and 
Correspondence,  both  which  I  enjoyed  for  several  Years. 
Indeed,  I  apprehend  it  is  unnecessary  to  waste    much 
Time   in   attempting   to   disprove  such  a  Supposition, 
which    has    few    Advocates     or     Supporters.       Those 
persons  who  originally  suggested,  or  who  continue   to 
maintain    it,    found   the    Opinion    principally    on    the 
Attack   of  Lord   Granby,   in   "  Junius's "   first  Letter. 
But,  if  we  examine  that  Production,  we  shall  see  that 
the  Marquis  is  by  no  means  singled  out  for   Animad- 
version.    He  only   attracts  his  portion  of  Satire,  as  a 
Member    of    the    Cabinet;    and    it    was   Sir   William 
Draper's    officious    Vanity    which     rendered    him    un- 
fortunately more  conspicuous  than  the  Duke  of  Graf- 
ton,   or    Lord   Mansfield.      "It   is    you,   Sir   William 
"  Draper,"   says    Junius,    "  who   have   taken    care    to 
u  represent  your  Friend  in  the  character  of  a  drunken 
"  Landlord,  who  deals  out  his  Promises  as  liberally  as 
"  his  Liquor,  and  will  suffer  no  Man  to  leave  his  Table 
"  either   sorrowful   or   sober.11     And    in    a   subsequent 
Letter  he  observes,  UI  should  justly    be   suspected   of 
"  acting  upon  Motives  of  more  than  common  Enmity 
"  to   Lord    Granby,  if  I  continued   to  give  you   fresh 

275 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [i78i. 

"  Materials,  or  Occasion  for  writing  in  his  Defence." 
If  Lord  George  Germain  was  "  Junius,"  his  powers  of 
Composition  had  suffered  a  Diminution  between  1770 
and  1780,  and  no  longer  continued  as  powerful  at  the 
latter  Period,  as  they  had  been  ten  Years  earlier  in  Life. 
But  no  Man  preserved  at  near  Seventy,  the  Freshness 
and  Strength  of  his  Faculties  in  every  Branch,  more 
perfect  or  undiminished  than  that  Nobleman. 

As  little  do  I  conceive  Wilkes  to  have  been  the  man. 
I  knew  him  likewise  well,  though  not  with  the  same 
intimacy  as  I  did  the  last  named  Nobleman.  It  must 
be  owned  that  Wilkes  possessed  a  classic  Pen,  keen, 
rapid,  cutting,  and  capable,  as  we  have  seen  in  the 
"  North  Briton,"  no  less  than  in  other  political  pro- 
ductions, of  powerfully  animating,  or  inflaming  the 
public  mind.  His  injuries  were  great ;  his  feelings, 
acute ;  his  spirit,  undaunted ;  and  his  compositions, 
full  of  talent.  But  it  was  not  "  Junius."  Wilkes^s  two 
Letters,  the  one  addressed  to  Lord  Temple,  in  October, 
1762,  from  Bagshot,  after  his  Duel  with  Lord  Talbot ; 
and  the  other,  written  from  his  house,  in  Great  George 
Street,  on  the  19th  December,  1763,  to  Dr.  Brocklesby, 
immediately  after  his  Duel  with  Martin ;  may  vie  in 
wit,  pleasantry,  and  powers  of  ridicule,  with  any  com- 
positions in  the  English  language.  His  Letter,  dated 
from  "Paris,  22d  October,  1764,"  appealing  to  the 
Electors  of  Aylesbury,  against  the  treatment  which  he 
met  with  from  both  Houses  of  Parliament,  and  from 
Lord  Mansfield,  challenges  equal  admiration.  Lastly, 
his  Address  to  the  Duke  of  Grafton,  written  likewise 
from  "Paris,  on  the  12th  December,  1766,"  contain- 
ing the  animated  relation  of  his  Arrest,  followed  by 
his  interview  with  the  Earls  of  Egremont  and  Halifax, 
at  the  House  of  the  former  Nobleman  in  Piccadilly; 
can  hardly  be  exceeded  in  energy,  severity,  and  powers 
of  reasoning.  They  charm,  as  much  as  the  writings  of 
"  Junius  ; "  but,  the  difference  between  the  two  produc- 

276 


1781.]       WILKES  ?  BO  YD  ?  ROSENHAGEN  ? 

tions  cannot  be  mistaken  by  any  man  who  allows  his  reason 
fair  play.  Wilkes  himself,  who  instead  of  shrinking  from 
the  avowal,  on  the  contrary  would  have  gladly  assumed 
the  fame  attending  on  it,  at  whatever  personal  risk,  dis- 
claimed any  title  to  such  a  distinction.  u  Utinam  scrip- 
sissem  !  "  Would  to  Heaven  I  could  have  written  them  ! 
was  his  reply,  when  charged  with  being  the  Author. 

Hugh  Mac.auley  Boyd,  a  Gentleman  who  accompanied 
or  followed  Lord  Macartney  to  Madras,  in  1781,  where 
he  died  a  few  years  afterwards;  has  been  named,  and 
his  pretensions  have  been  strongly  maintained  in  print, 
as  well  as  in  private  society.  It  has  been  attempted, 
both  in  his  case,  and  in  that  of  Wilkes,  to  prove  from 
facts  of  various  kinds,  and  Anecdotes,  either  true  or 
imaginary,  their  respective  right  to  the  works  of 
"  Junius."  But,  I  never  could  discover  in  the  avowed 
writings  of  Boyd,  any  similarity,  and  still  less  any 
Equality,  with  the  Letters  of  the  unknown  and  immortal 
person  in  question.  Nor  would  it  seem,  as  far  as  we  are 
able  to  judge,  that  Boyd  had,  or  could  have,  Access  to 
the  Information,  profusely  exhibited  through  almost 
every  page  of  "  Junius,"  and  which  very  few  Individuals 
were  competent  to  attain.  Boyd  did  not  live  in  the 
Circle  where  alone  such  Materials  were  to  be  found,  or 
to  be  collected. 

I  have  heard  the  Reverend  Philip  Rosenhagen  pointed 
out  as  "  Junius."  But  the  Opinion  never,  I  believe,  had 
many  Supporters,  nor  did  I  ever  regard  it  as  entitled 
to  serious  Refutation.  I  knew  him  as  an  Acquaintance, 
between  1782  and  1785.  He  appeared  to  me  to  be  a 
plausible,  well  informed  man,  imposing  in  his  manner, 
of  a  classic  mind,  and  agreeable  conversation ;  living 
much  in  the  world,  received  on  the  most  intimate  foot- 
ing at  Shelburne  House,  and  possessing  very  consider- 
able talents.  There  is,  however,  a  wide  interval  between 
such  abilities,  however  eminent,  and  those  displayed  by 
the  writer  under  examination. 

277 


WRAXALKS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [i78i. 

A  more  probable,  or  at  least,  a  better  concerted 
story,  confidently  circulated  at  the  time,  and  which  has 
been  lately  revived,  was,  that  Mr.  William  Greatrakes, 
a  native  of  Ireland,  who  lived  with  the  Earl  of  Shel- 
burne,  and  acted  as  his  private  Secretary,  composed  the 
Letters.  The  Materials  were  said  to  have  been  fur- 
nished by  Lord  Shelburne,  and  worked  up  by  his 
Secretary.  It  was  added,  that  he  died  in  August,  1781, 
at  Hungerford  in  Berkshire,  not  very  far  from  that 
Nobleman's  Seat,  of  Bow  Wood;  and  lies  buried  in 
Hungerford  Church-yard,  with  a  plain  Stone  over  his 
Remains,  together  with  a  short  Inscription  terminated 
by  the  three  Latin  Words, 

"  Stat  Nominis  Umbra  ; " 

The  Motto  usually,  or  always  prefixed  to  Junms's 
Letters.  I  have  never  considered  this  Narration,  how- 
ever plausible  it  appears,  as  worthy  of  credit,  or  as 
meriting  attention. 

It  has  been  recently  attempted  to  prove  that  Glover, 
the  distinguished  Author  of  "  Leonidas,"  was  "  Junius ;" 
and  the  confirmation  of  the  assertion  has  been  sought, 
in  the  u  Memoirs  of  a  celebrated  Literary  and  Political 
"  Character,"  lately  published.  But,  though  every  line 
of  those  "  Memoirs "  bespeaks  the  writer  to  be  a  man 
of  equal  ability  and  integrity,  living  in  a  high  Circle, 
himself  a  Member  of  the  House  of  Commons  during 
many  years  ;  though  the  same  ardent  spirit  of  Freedom, 
which  animates  Glover  as  a  Poet,  is  diffused  over  this 
production ;  and  though  various  passages  in  it  may 
seem  to  bear  a  degree  of  resemblance  or  Analogy  to  the 
animated  Apostrophes  of"  Junius  ;" — yet,  no  person  who 
has  perused  attentively  the  work  in  question,  can  for  an 
instant  persuade  himself  of  the  identity  of  the  two  men. 
If,  however,  these  grounds  of  belief,  drawn  from  the 
internal  evidence  contained  in  the  respective  Composi- 
tions, should  fail  in  producing  a  decided  opinion,  I  can 

278 


1781.]  GLOVER  ?  WEDDERBURN  ? 

adduce  better  proof.  Mr.  Glover,  son  of  the  Author  of 
"  Leonidas,"  and  whom  to  name,  is  sufficient  to  stamp 
the  authenticity  of  all  that  he  asserts ;  assured  me  only 
a  short  time  ago,  in  answer  to  my  enquiries  on  the 
subject,  that  "  he  had  not  the  slightest  reason  to  sup- 
"  pose,  or  to  believe,  that  his  father  composed  the 
"  Letters  of  Junius  :"  an  admission  far  outweighing  any 
real  or  fancied  similarity  between  those  writers.  Still 
more  recent  Attempts  have  been  made  in  favour  of  a 
Foreigner,  De  Lolme,  but,  however  speciously  supported 
on  some  Points,  they  rest  on  no  solid  Foundation. 

During  many  years  of  my  life,  notwithstanding  the 
severity  with  which  Wedderburn  is  treated  by  "  Junius," 
I  nourished  a  strong  belief,  approaching  to  conviction, 
that  the  late  Earl  of  Rosslyn,  then  Mr.  Wedderburn, 
was  himself  the  Author  of  those  Letters.  His  abilities 
were  eminent,  his  opportunities  of  information,  great ; 
and  his  political  connexions  between  January,  1769, 
and  January,  1772,  the  two  extreme  periods  of  the 
appearance  of  the  Compositions  in  question,  favor  the 
conjecture.  Though  Churchill  calls  Wedderburn, 

"  A  pert,  prim  Prater  of  the  Northern  Race," 

his  talents  of  every  kind  entitled  him  to  great  admira- 
tion ;  and  he  particularly  possessed  the  Legal,  Juris- 
prudential,  as  well  as  Parliamentary  knowledge,  lavishly 
exhibited  in  various  parts  of  "  Junius."  I  have  heard 
men  assert,  who  were  entitled  to  respect  and  credit, 
that  they  had  seen  several  of  the  Originals,  in  the  pos- 
session of  Woodfall ;  and  that  they  recognized  the 
hand-writing  to  be  that  of  Mrs.  Wedderburn,  his  first 
wife,  with  which  character  they  were  perfectly  ac- 
quainted. If  this  fact  indeed  were  to  be  admitted,  it 
might  seem  decisive :  but  such  assertions,  however 
apparently  well  sustained,  are  frequently  made  on 
erroneous  or  mistaken  foundations. 

All  circumstances  fully  weighed,  my  own  conviction 
279 


WRAXALKS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [1781. 

is,  that  the  Letters  of  "Junius"  were  written  by  the 
Right  Honorable  William  Gerard  Hamilton,  commonly 
designated  by  the  Nick  Name  of  "Single  Speech 
"  Hamilton,"  from  the  report  generally,  though  falsely 
circulated,  that  he  never  opened  his  mouth  more  than 
once  in  the  English  Parliament.  He  was  during  many 
years,  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer  in  Ireland,  and 
likewise  a  Member  of  the  House  of  Commons,  while  I 
sat  in  it :  but  I  had  not  the  honor  of  his  acquaintance ; 
and  my  opinion  is  founded  on  the  general  prevailing 
sentiment  of  those  persons,  who,  from  their  situation, 
rank,  and  means  of  information,  are  entitled  to  almost 
implicit  belief.  Throughout  the  various  companies, 
in  which,  from  1775,  down  to  the  present  time,  I  have 
heard  this  mysterious  Question  agitated,  the  great 
majority  concurred  in  giving  to  Hamilton,  the  merit  of 
the  Letters  under  examination.  Various  Noblemen  or 
Gentlemen,  who  lived  on  terms  of  intimate  friendship, 
and  of  almost  daily  intercourse  with  him,  during  the 
period  of  their  appearance  or  publication,  in  particular 
the  late  Earl  of  Clermont ;  have  protested  in  my 
hearing,  that  they  traced  or  recollected  in  "  Junius's " 
Letters,  the  "ipsissima  Verba"  the  precise  words  and 
expressions  of  Hamilton,  which  had  recently  fallen  from 
his  lips  in  conversation.  His  pen  is  universally  ad- 
mitted to  have  been  most  elegant,  classical,  correct,  and 
nervous.  This  opinion,  nevertheless,  by  no  means, 
amounts  to  demonstration,  or  approaches  to  certainty ; 
and  it  is  possible,  that  as  the  secret  has  not  been 
divulged  from  authority,  during  the  lapse  of  so  many 
Years,  Posterity  may  never  attain  to  any  absolute 
proof  upon  the  Subject,  and  must  rest  satisfied  with 
Conjecture. 

If  "  Junius "  could  be  supposed  still  alive,  obvious 
Motives  for  his  concealing  himself,  will  suggest  them- 
selves to  every  Man's  mind.  But  it  is  very  difficult  to 
imagine,  that  he  was  under  Forty  years  of  Age,  at  the 

280 


1781.]  FUTILE  GUESSES 

Time  when  he  wrote,  as  he  expressly  asserts,  that  he 
could  "  remember  the  great  Walpolean  Battles."  Now, 
Sir  Robert  Walpole  went  out  of  Office,  early  in  1743. 
If  therefore  "  Junius "  still  survive  among  us,  he  must 
have  considerably  passed  his  Eightieth  Year.  Yet,  if 
on  the  other  Hand,  he  be  no  more,  what  Reasons 
sufficiently  powerful  can  be  produced,  to  account  for 
the  voluntary  Renunciation  of  that  posthumous  Fame, 
which  after  his  Decease  might  have  been  reclaimed, 
without  Apprehension  of  any  injurious  Consequences 
to  himself?  This  Argument  or  Consideration,  long 
induced  me  to  suppose  that  "  Junius "  must  be  living ; 
and  that  his  Death,  whenever  it  took  place,  would 
infallibly  remove  the  Veil  which  conceals  his  Name.  On 
more  mature  Reflexion,  nevertheless,  very  strong  Causes 
for  continuing  to  preserve  his  Incognito  beyond  the 
Grave,  may  present  themselves.  If  he  left  behind  him 
lineal  Representatives,  he  might  dread  exposing  them 
to  the  hereditary  Animosity  of  some  "  of  the  worst,  and 
"  the  most  powerful  Men  in  this  Country."  Even 
should  he  have  left  no  Descendants,  it  is  possible  that 
he  might  dislike  the  Comparison  between  his  Actions 
and  his  Writings,  which  must  have  been  made  by 
Mankind.  If,  for  instance,  it  would  have  been  proved 
that  he  accepted  an  Office,  a  Pension,  or  a  Peerage, 
from  the  Sovereign  and  the  Minister  whom  he  had 
recently  accused  as  Enemies  to  their  Country,  or  as 
having  betrayed  its  Interests ; — would  not  the  moral 
Aversion  or  Contempt  excited  towards  his  Memory 
by  such  a  Disclosure,  have  overbalanced  the  Meed  of 
literary  Fame  obtained  from  the  Labours  of  his  Pen  ? 
Should  we  admit  the  Validity  of  this  Reasoning,  we 
shall  be  led  to  infer,  that  "Junius"  may  remain  as 
unknown  to  Posterity  a  Century  hence,  as  he  continues 
to  be  now  in  1815. 

There  is  still  another  Circumstance  applicable  to  the 
present  Times,  which  did  not    exist    when   Burnet,    or 

281 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [mi. 

Bulstrode,  or  Reresby,  wrote  their  "  Memoirs  ; "  and 
which  Fact  must  be  supposed  to  have  had  its  due 
Operation  on  "Junius."  Between  1660  and  1714,  a 
period  of  little  more  than  Fifty  Years,  three  Families 
in  succession  reigned  over  this  Country :  whereas  from 
1760,  down  to  1814,  only  one  Prince  has  occupied  the 
Throne,  who  still  lives,  though  we  lament  that  he  no 
longer  reigns.  Under  William  the  Third,  who  had 
expelled  his  Father-in-law,  and  who  could  not  feel  any 
Esteem  for  Charles  the  Second  ;  "  Junius,"  had  he  then 
flourished,  and  had  levelled  his  Shafts  against  those 
Kings,  might  have  unmasked,  and  boldly  avowed  his 
Writings.  When  the  two  Houses  of  Nassau,  or  of 
Stuart,  no  longer  swayed  the  Sceptre,  and  when  George 
the  First  was  called  to  the  Crown ;  the  severest  Attacks 
made  on  the  preceding  Sovereigns  or  Ministers,  could 
have  excited  only  a  feeble  degree  of  Resentment,  if 
they  did  not  even  give  Rise  to  opposite  Emotions. 
But  the  Case  is  widely  different  with  respect  to 
"  Junius,"  and  might  justly  challenge  from  him  another 
Line  of  Conduct.  Not  only  the  same  Family,  but  the 
same  Individual,  remains,  at  least  nominally,  King. 
And  that  Individual,  whatever  Errors  of  Judgment  he 
may  have  committed,  or  however  unpopular  he  was 
from  his  Accession  down  to  1783,  has  been  since  that 
Time  embalmed  in  the  Affections  of  His  People.  I 
must  leave  the  degree  of  Solidity  contained  in  these 
Observations,  to  the  Decision  of  every  Man's  Judgment, 
as  elucidatory  or  explanatory  of  the  Question  respecting 
"  Junius." 

In  addition  to  so  many  domestic  Causes  which 
weakened  the  Veneration  felt  towards  the  King,  Two 
foreign  Events  had  likewise  occurred,  productive  of 
National  Dissatisfaction.  The  first  arose  from  the 
Line  of  Policy,  or  rather  of  Conduct,  adopted  by 
Great  Britain  relative  to  Corsica.  That  Island,  which 
in  later  Times  has  attained  a  degree  of  odious  Celebrity, 


1781.]    PUBLIC  SYMPATHY  WITH  CORSICA 

by  giving  Birth  to  a  Man,  whose  military  Talents,  aided 
by  the  Progress  of  the  French  Revolution,  enabled  him 
to  overturn  during  many  Years,  the  antient  Order  and 
System  of  Europe;  was,  after  a  long  Series  of  Insur- 
rections against  the  Genoese  Government,  ultimately 
transferred  by  Genoa  to  France.  Choiseul,  a  Minister 
of  an  elevated  Mind,  and  of  ambitious  Designs  ;  anxious 
to  raise  the  French  Name,  as  well  as  the  Reputation  of 
Louis  the  Fifteenth,  from  the  state  of  Humiliation  into 
which  both  were  fallen  by  the  ill  Success  of  the  preced- 
ing War ;  undertook,  and  at  length  effected,  the  Reduc- 
tion of  Corsica.  It  may  however  be  justly  questioned, 
whether  the  Conquest  has  really  augmented  the  Strength 
or  Resources  of  France.  But,  the  Generosity  character- 
istic of  the  English  Nation,  the  Sympathy  felt  towards 
a  Race  of  brave,  oppressed,  and  unfortunate  Islanders, 
contending  for  Freedom ;  when  added  to  the  jealous 
Susceptibility  natural  to  a  State  always  apprehensive 
of  the  Aggrandizement  of  its  Rival ; — these  Feelings 
or  political  Opinions,  produced  a  powerful  Effect  on 
the  public  Mind.  They  were  sustained  by  Publications 
calculated  to  rouse  the  Country  from  its  Apathy  or 
Indifference  to  the  Fate  of  Corsica.  Pascal  Paoli, 
Chief  of  the  Insurgents,  was  depictured  in  them,  as 
another  Gustavus  Vasa,  or  William  Tell,  struggling 
against  Tyranny  and  Oppression :  while  the  English 
Ministry,  it  was  said,  pusillanimously  looked  on,  regard- 
less of  the  Event,  and  inattentive  to  so  important  an 
Accession  of  Power  acquired  by  our  natural  Enemy. 

Scarcely  had  the  impression  made  by  the  French 
conquest  of  Corsica,  ceased  to  operate,  and  sunk  into  a 
degree  of  oblivion,  when  another  Occurrence  awakened 
and  exasperated  the  Nation,  against  the  Spanish  Branch 
of  the  House  of  Bourbon.  The  immediate  cause  of 
this  Dispute  arose  from  the  possession  taken  of  the 
Falkland  Islands  by  England ;  but  the  Court  of  Madrid 
had  always  evaded  or  refused  Payment  of  the  Sum  due 

283 


WRAXALKS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [mi. 

for  the  ransom  of  Manilla.  Never,  perhaps,  was  any 
object  in  itself  less  valuable,  nor  less  worthy  of  public 
consideration,  than  the  Falkland  Islands :  yet  the 
manner  in  which  Spain  acted  on  the  occasion,  dis- 
played so  much  arrogance,  as  to  compromize  the  honour 
of  the  British  Crown,  and  to  demand  a  Reparation  no 
less  public  than  the  Affront.  The  Islands  in  question, 
situated  in  a  most  inclement  Latitude,  in  the  other 
Hemisphere,  not  far  removed  from  Cape  Horn ;  could 
scarcely  merit  from  their  intrinsic  Consequence, 
commercial  or  political,  that  any  Blood  should  be 
spilt  in  order  to  acquire,  or  to  retain,  their  Possession. 
But,  the  jealous  policy  with  which  the  old  Spanish 
Government  always  beheld  even  the  slightest  Approach 
of  any  foreign  Power  towards  that  vast  Continent  of 
South  America,  over  which,  though  they  could  neither 
colonize,  nor  subject  it,  they  nevertheless  claimed  a 
Dominion  ;  impelled  the  Court  of  Madrid  to  commence 
its  Operations,  in  a  manner  no  less  hostile  than  insult- 
ing to  us.  An  English  frigate  was  detained  in  the 
Harbour  of  Port  Egmont,  by  force.  It  must  be 
owned,  that  the  Vigor,  or  rather  Audacity  of  such  a 
Proceeding,  could  scarcely  have  been  exceeded  by 
Cardinal  Alberoni  himself,  when  he  presided  in  the 
Spanish  Counsels,  under  Philip  the  P'ifth.  The  Act 
was  indeed  only  committed  ostensibly  by  an  Individual, 
Buccarelli,  who  commanded  the  Forces  of  Charles  the 
Third  in  that  Quarter  of  the  Globe :  but  the  Govern- 
ment avowed,  justified,  and  supported  him. 

Lord  North,  on  whom  had  recently  devolved  the 
first  Place  in  Administration ;  while  he  appeared 
deeply  to  feel  the  Indignity  offered  to  his  Sovereign, 
manifested  a  Disposition  to  resent  it  in  the  most 
effectual  Manner.  But,  neither  the  State  of  the 
English  Navy,  nor  the  Preparations  made  in  our  Ports 
for  the  immediate  Equipment  of  a  powerful  Fleet,  were 
said  to  be  such  as  the  Exigency  obviously  demanded, 

284 


1781.]  EFFORTS  FOR  PEACE 

and  the  public  Honor  unquestionably  required.  A 
mitigated  Compromise,  by  which  Spain,  though  she 
consented  to  cede  the  Possession  of  Falkland  Islands  to 
Great  Britain,  yet  refused  to  admit  or  recognize  our 
Right  to  them  ;  was,  after  long  Discussions,  accepted 
by  Ministers.  It  prevented  a  War,  but  it  gave  no 
general  Satisfaction ;  more  especially,  as  any  Mention 
of  the  Manilla  Ransom  was  studiously  omitted  in  the 
Convention.  Assuredly,  the  Moment  seemed  favorable 
to  have  imposed  almost  any  Conditions  on  the  Spanish 
Crown.  Louis  the  Fifteenth,  sinking  in  Years,  and 
still  more  sunk  in  the  general  Estimation  of  his 
Subjects;  disgusted  at  the  ill  Success  of  the  former 
War,  and  determined  not  to  engage  again  in  Hostili- 
ties against  England ;  having  dismissed  the  Duke  de 
Choiseul  from  Office,  and  lost  to  every  Sense  of  public 
Duty,  or  national  Glory;  would,  it  was  well  known, 
have  disregarded  "the  Family  Compact,"  and  would 
have  abandoned  the  other  Branch  of  the  House  of 
Bourbon  in  the  Contest. 

But,  Lord  North,  who  preferred  pacific  measures, 
even  had  recourse  to  expedients  not  usually  adopted, 
in  order  to  avert  a  Rupture.  The  late  Sir  William 
Gordon,  whom  I  well  knew,  and  who  at  that  time  filled 
the  post  of  British  Envoy  at  the  Court  of  Brussels, 
was  selected  by  Ministers,  to  undertake  the  Commission 
of  preventing  a  War.  For  this  purpose  he  received 
private  Instructions  to  repair  in  the  most  secret,  but 
expeditious  manner,  to  Paris  ;  and  to  use  every  possible 
exertion  for  prevailing  on  Louis  the  Fifteenth,  and  the 
new  First  Minister,  the  Duke  d^Aiguillon,  to  compel 
the  Spanish  Court  to  accommodate  the  points  in  dispute. 
Gordon,  who  found  in  the  French  Sovereign  and  his 
Ministers,  the  warmest  disposition  to  preserve  Peace, 
succeeded  completely  in  the  object  of  his  Mission.  He 
told  me,  that  as  a  recompense  for  his  service,  he  received 
from  Lord  North,  a  Pension  of  Three  Hundred  Pounds 

285 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [1781. 

a  year ;  and  from  His  Majesty,  the  further  sum  of  One 
Thousand  Pounds,  as  a  Present,  but,  the  Convention  by 
which  Peace  was  made,  excited  universal  disapprobation  ; 
and  afforded  to  the  pen  of  "  Junius  "  an  occasion  which 
he  did  not  lose,  of  pointing  the  public  censure  with  in- 
conceivable severity  against  the  King  himself  personally, 
no  less  than  against  the  Administration. 

Even  after  the  interval  of  four  years,  which  elapsed 
between  the  termination  of  this  dispute,  and  the 
commencement  of  the  American  Rebellion  ;  though  the 
Nation  enjoyed  profound  Peace,  together  with  all  the 
advantages  of  Commerce,  augmenting  Opulence,  and 
progressive  Prosperity,  yet  the  Sovereign  was  by  no 
means  popular.  New  sources  of  discontent,  and 
imaginary  or  doubtful  subjects  of  complaint,  were 
ingeniously  discovered.  Lord  Bute  had,  indeed,  dis- 
appeared from  the  theatre  of  public  life;  and  the 
Princess  Dowager  of  Wales,  whose  supposed  influence 
over  her  Son,  rendered  her  always  an  object  of  attack, 
was  no  more.  She  expired  in  1772,  of  a  most  painful 
Disease,  which  she  supported  with  uncommon  firmness. 
But,  other  names  and  figures  succeeded  to  their 
pretended  influence  behind  the  Curtain  of  State. 
Bradshaw,  surnamed  "the  cream-coloured  Parasite," 
and  Dyson,  gave  place  to  the  superior  ascendancy  of 
Jenkinson,  who  was  accused  of  directing,  unseen,  the 
Resolutions  of  the  Cabinet,  and  of  possessing  the 
interior  Secret,  as  well  as  Confidence,  of  the  Crown. 
A  Prince,  distinguished  by  almost  every  domestic 
virtue,  animated  by  the  noblest  intentions,  and  by  the 
warmest  affection  for  his  people ;  was  represented  as 
despotic,  inflexible,  vindictive,  and  disposed  to  govern 
by  unconstitutional  Means  or  Engines.  His  very 
Pleasures,  his  Tastes,  and  his  private  Recreations,  were 
traduced  or  satirized,  as  bearing  the  same  Stamp  and 
Impression.  Poetry  lent  her  aid  to  expose  these 
personal  Weaknesses,  if  such  they  were,  to  public 

286 


1781.]   ATTEMFrED  TAXATION  OF  COLONIES 

Animadversion  or  Ridicule.  The  "Heroic  Epistle  to 
"  Sir  William  Chambers,"  (attributed  to  one  of  the 
finest  poetic  Writers  of  the  Period,  Mason ;)  rivalled 
"  Junius  "  in  Delicacy  of  Invective,  in  its  insulting  Irony, 
and  in  the  severity  of  its  Imputations.  Such  appeared 
to  be  the  State  of  public  Opinion,  and  such  the 
Prejudices  generally  entertained  against  the  King, 
throughout  the  Nation,  at  the  Period  when,  in  the 
Slimmer  of  1775,  Hostilities  began  on  the  American 
Continent. 

That  George  the  Third,  from  a  very  early  Period  of 
his  Reign,  had  imbibed  a  deeply-rooted  Opinion  of  the 
Right  inherent  in  the  Mother  Country  to  tax  her 
American  Colonies  ;  and  of  the  Practicability,  or  rather 
the  Facility,  of  the  Attempt,  if  made,  no  well-informed 
Man  can  entertain  a  Doubt.  As  early  as  1764,  His 
Majesty,  conversing  with  Mr.  George  Grenville,  then 
First  Minister,  on  the  subject  of  the  Finances,  which, 
after  the  close  of  the  triumphant  "  Seven  Years'  War," 
demanded  Economy,  no  less  than  Ability  to  re-establish  ; 
mentioned  to  him  as  one  great  Resource,  the  Measure 
of  taxing  America.  Mr.  Grenville  replied,  that  he 
had  frequently  revolved,  and  thoroughly  considered 
the  Proposition,  which  he  believed  to  be  not  only 
difficult,  but  impracticable  ;  and  pregnant,  if  undertaken, 
with  the  most  alarming  Consequences  to  the  Sovereign 
himself.  These  Apprehensions,  far  however  from  in- 
timidating or  discouraging  the  King,  made  no  Impres- 
sion on  his  Mind ;  and  in  a  subsequent  Conversation 
with  the  same  Minister,  His  Majesty  gave  him  plainly 
to  understand,  that  if  he  wanted  either  Nerves  or 
Inclination  to  make  the  Attempt,  others  could  be 
found  who  were  ready  to  undertake  it.  The  Words 
produced  their  full  effect  upon  the  Person  to  whom 
they  were  addressed ;  and  Mr.  Grenville  preferred 
endeavouring  to  realize  the  experiment,  however 
hazardous  he  might  esteem  it,  rather  than  allow  it  to 

287 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [mi. 

be  committed  to  other  hands.  It  failed  at  that  time, 
but  was  revived  ten  years  later,  with  more  serious 
national  results,  under  Lord  Nortfrs  Administration. 

I  have  always  considered  the  Principle  upon  which 
that  war  commenced,  and  peculiarly  as  affecting  the 
King,  to  have  been  not  only  defensible,  but  meritorious. 
Nor  have  I  ever  esteemed  the  political  and  military 
Conductors  of  the  American  Revolution,  as  other  than 
successful  Rebels  of  unquestionable  courage,  constancy, 
and  ability ;  whatever  Eulogiums  were  conferred  on 
them  in  Parliament,  by  Fox  and  Burke.  I  well  know 
that  the  names  of  Franklin  and  of  Washington,  have 
been  consecrated  by  a  very  numerous  part  of  the 
Inhabitants  of  Great  Britain.  The  former,  if  con- 
sidered as  a  natural  Philosopher,  a  Philanthropist,  and 
a  man  of  Genius,  doubtless  may  lay  claim  to  universal 
esteem.  Nor  are  the  abstract  pretensions  of  Washing- 
ton less  conspicuous,  as  a  General,  and  a  Citizen  of 
America.  In  both  capacities  he  may  rank  with  Cin- 
cinnatus,  or  with  the  younger  Cato.  But,  in  the 
estimation  of  all  who  regard  the  Supremacy  of  the 
Mother  Country  over  Colonies  which  had  been  not 
merely  planted,  but  likewise  preserved  by  the  expendi- 
ture of  British  Blood  and  Treasure,  as  constituting  an 
immutable  Principle ;  a  Sovereign  who  would  not  have 
maintained  that  Supremacy,  must  have  been  unworthy 
of  the  Sceptre. 

The  whole  life  of  William  the  Third,  from  his  attain- 
ment of  manhood,  down  to  the  last  moments  of  his 
existence,  was  passed  in  a  continual  struggle  to  preserve 
the  Liberties  of  his  own  Country,  or  those  of  England, 
against  arbitrary  power.  His  name  will  ever  be  con- 
nected with  Constitutional  Freedom,  and  as  such  is 
cherished  in  our  remembrance.  But,  does  any  person 
suppose  that  if  William  had  reigned  over  the  British 
Isles,  at  the  period  of  the  American  Rebellion  ;  whatever 
love  of  civil  Liberty  might  animate  him  as  a  man,  he 

288 


1781.]    POLICY  OF  THE  AMERICAN  WAR 

would  on  that  account  have  relinquished  the  Rights  of 
his  Crown  :  or  have  tamely  acquiesced  in  the  refusal  of 
his  American  Subjects,  to  contribute  by  indirect  Taxa- 
tion, to  the  general  wants  of  the  Empire  ?  Those  who 
venture  to  form  such  a  conclusion,  must,  as  it  appears 
to  me,  have  very  imperfectly  studied  the  Character, 
or  appreciated  the  Actions  of  that  illustrious  Prince. 
The  Wisdom  and  Policy  of  the  American  War,  may 
perhaps  appear  more  doubtful.  The  attempt  in  the 
first  instance  to  tax,  and  afterwards  to  reduce  by  force, 
a  vast  Continent,  separated  from  Great  Britain  by  an 
immense  Ocean,  inhabited  by  a  people  who  were 
individually  indebted  many  Millions  to  the  Mother 
Country,  ardent  for  Emancipation,  and  sufficiently 
unanimous  in  their  resistance  to  the  Parent  State,  to 
be  able  to  call  out  into  action  nearly  all  the  persons 
capable  of  bearing  Arms; — such  an  experiment,  even 
if  speculatively  considered,  would  doubtless  have  im- 
pressed any  wise  Statesman,  as  hazardous  in  itself,  and 
of  very  uncertain  issue.  In  the  case  before  us,  all  these 
impediments  acquired  additional  strength,  from  other 
concurring  circumstances.  A  large  proportion  of  society 
here  at  home,  regarded  the  American  Rebellion  with 
favorable  eyes,  and  secretly  wished  success  to  the  Cause ; 
because  they  dreaded  lest  the  British  Constitution 
itself  would  not  long  survive  the  encrease  of  Power  and 
Influence,  that  the  Crown  must  necessarily  derive  from 
the  Subjugation  of  the  Colonies  beyond  the  Atlantic. 
In  both  Houses  of  Parliament,  a  numerous,  active,  and 
encreasing  Party  openly  maintained  and  justified  the 
Insurrection,  rejoiced  in  their  triumphs,  and  reprobated 
in  Theory,  no  less  than  in  practice,  the  attempt  to 
subjugate  the  Revolted  States.  Even  those  who  did 
not  approve  such  political  principles,  yet  saw  in  the 
war,  if  it  should  prove  unsuccessful,  a  means  of  over- 
turning the  Administration.  The  inability  of  Great 
Britain  to  send  a  military  force  sufficiently  numerous 

289  19 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [1781. 

for  reducing  to  obedience  so  many  Provinces,  extending 
from  the  Frontiers  of  Canada,  to  the  Borders  of  Florida ; 
compelled  the  Government  to  obtain  additional  troops, 
by  application  to  various  of  the  German  Powers.  From 
the  Landgrave  of  Hesse  Cassel  in  particular,  many 
thousands  were  procured.  These  Stipendiaries,  though 
perhaps  not  more  justly  objects  of  moral  or  political 
condemnation,  than  were  the  Swiss  and  Grison  Regi- 
ments retained  in  the  service  of  France,  or  the  Scotch 
Corps  serving  in  the  Pay  of  Holland,  yet  encreased 
the  popular  cry,  and  furnished  subjects  of  Obloquy,  or 
of  Declamation.  That  France  must,  sooner  or  later, 
interfere  in  favor  of  the  Americans,  was  likewise 
obvious ;  because  the  French  Ministry,  listening  only 
to  the  narrow  suggestions  of  national  rivality,  did  not, 
or  would  not  perceive,  that  it  could  never  be  the  wise 
Policy  of  a  despotic  Government,  to  aid  the  cause  of 
Revolt,  by  sending  forces  out  of  the  Country,  to  imbibe 
principles  of  Freedom  and  Resistance  among  Rebels. 
It  is  an  unquestionable  fact,  that  the  late  unfortunate 
Louis  the  Sixteenth  possessed  enlargement  of  mind,  and 
sound  discernment,  sufficient  to  feel  this  truth.  He 
even  objected  strongly  to  the  policy  of  detaching 
French  Troops  to  the  assistance  of  Washington ;  and 
he  was  only  overruled  in  his  opposition  to  the  Measure, 
by  his  deference  for  the  Counsels  of  Maurepas  and 
Vergennes.  France  has  since  dearly  paid,  under  Robes- 
pierre and  Bonaparte,  for  her  deviation  from  the 
dictates  of  wisdom,  as  well  as  of  magnanimity,  in  thus 
supporting  Insurrection. 

It  is  however  in  the  Conduct  of  that  unfortunate 
Contest,  that  we  must  principally  seek  for  the  cause  of 
its  ill  success.  Near  three  years  elapsed  from  the  time 
of  its  commencement,  before  the  Court  of  Versailles 
ventured  openly  to  interpose  as  an  Enemy.  But,  the 
Howes  appear  to  have  been  either  lukewarm,  or  remiss, 
or  negligent,  or  incapable.  Lord  North's  selection  of 

290 


178L]        CONDUCT  OF  THE  CAMPAIGN 

those  two  Commanders,  excited  at  the  time,  just  con- 
demnation ;  however  brave,  able,  or  meritorious,  they 
might  individually  be  esteemed.  Their  ardor  in  the 
Cause  itself  was  doubted ;  and  still  more  questionable 
was  their  attachment  to  the  Administration.  Never, 
perhaps,  in  the  history  of  modern  war,  has  an  Army,  or  a 
Fleet,  been  more  profusely  supplied  with  every  requisite 
for  brilliant  and  efficient  service,  than  were  the  Troops 
and  Ships  sent  out  by  Lord  North's  Cabinet  in  1776, 
across  the  Atlantic.  But,  the  efforts  abroad,  did  not 
correspond  with  the  exertions  made  at  home.  The 
energy  and  activity  of  a  Wellington  never  animated  that 
torpid  mass.  Neither  vigilance,  enterprize,  nor  co- 
operation, characterized  the  Campaigns  of  1776,  and 
1777.  Dissipation,  Play,  and  Relaxation  of  Discipline, 
found  their  way  into  the  British  Camp.  New  York 
became  another  Capita.  The  defeat  at  Trenton,  which 
was  critically  unfortunate,  rescued  the  Congress  from 
the  lowest  state,  of  Depression.  After  Burgoyne's  Sur- 
render at  Saratoga,  little  rational  probability  of  success 
remained  ;  and  when  Clinton  succeeded  to  the  Command 
of  the  Army  at  New  York,  by  the  recall  of  Sir  William 
Howe,  the  French  were  on  the  point  of  declaring  in 
favor  of  the  Americans.  The  loyalty  and  courage  of 
Sir  Henry  Clinton  were  besides  more  distinguished, 
than  were  his  military  Talents.  Even  the  British 
Troops,  engaged  in  a  species  of  Civil  War,  did  not 
manifest  the  same  eagerness  or  alacrity,  as  when 
opposed  to  a  foreign  Enemy,  though  they  displayed 
in  every  Engagement,  their  accustomed  steadiness  and 
valor.  The  service  itself,  from  the  nature  of  the 
Country,  became  severe,  painful,  and  discouraging. 
Lakes,  Swamps,  Morasses,  and  almost  impenetrable 
Forests,  presented  at  every  step,  obstacles  not  easily 
overcome  by  the  bravest  Soldiers.  And  though  the 
scene  of  Hostilities  was  successively  shifted  from  Boston 
to  New  York ;  thence  to  the  Banks  of  the  Chesapeake 


WRAXALKS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [1781. 

and  the  Delaware ;  finally,  to  the  Southern  and  Central 
Provinces;  yet  the  results,  however  promising  they 
might  be  at  the  commencement,  proved  always  ultimately 
abortive. 

At  home,  a  gradual  and  encreasing  Discontent  over- 
spread the  Kingdom,  pervaded  all  classes,  and  seemed  to 
menace  the  Administration  with  the  effects  of  popular, 
or  national  resentment.  The  Navy,  divided  into  parties, 
no  longer  blocked  the  Enemy's  ports,  or  carried  victory 
wherever  it  appeared,  as  it  had  done  in  the  commence- 
ment of  His  Majesty's  Reign.  Our  distant  Possessions, 
unprotected,  fell  into  the  hands  of  France  or  Spain. 
Even  our  Commerce  was  intercepted,  captured,  and 
greatly  diminished.  Each  year  seemed  to  produce 
new  foreign  Adversaries,  and  to  augment  the  public 
embarrassments  or  distress.  Ministers  who  were  neither 
vigorous,  nor  fortunate,  nor  popular,  holding  even  their 
Offices  by  a  precarious  tenure,  inspired  no  confidence. 
The  Opposition,  though  diminished  by  the  exertions 
which  Government  had  made  to  secure  a  Majority  in  the 
Lower  House,  on  the  Convocation  of  a  new  Parliament ; 
was  numerous,  confident,  able,  and  indefatigable.  They 
saw,  or  believed  they  saw,  the  object  of  their  grasp,  at 
no  great  distance.  Futurity  presented  to  all  men,  a 
most  discouraging  prospect ;  and  Peace  appeared  to  be 
not  only  distant,  but  unattainable,  except  by  such 
sacrifices  of  National  Revenue,  Territory,  and  Honor, 
as  could  not  be  contemplated  without  a  degree  of 
dismay.  America  might  be  considered  as  lost ;  while 
our  Possessions  in  the  East  Indies  seemed  to  be  menaced 
with  total  subversion.  Those  who  remember  the 
Period  to  which  I  allude,  will  not  think  the  colors  of 
this  Description,  either  heightened,  or  overcharged. 
At  no  moment  of  the  Revolutionary  War  which  we 
almost  unintermittingly  sustained  against  the  French, 
from  1793  to  1814  ^neither  in  1797,  during  the 
Mutiny  in  the  Navy ;  nor  in  1799,  after  the  unsuccess- 


?1781.]          IMMOBILITY  OF  THE  KING 

i 

ful  Expedition  to  the  Helder ;  nor  in  1805,  subsequent 
to  the  Battle  of  Austerlitz ;  nor  in  1806,  when  the 
Prussian  Monarchy  fell  at  Auerstadt ;  nor  in  1807, 
at  the  Peace  of  Tilsit ;  nor  when  Sir  John  Moore  was 
compelled,  early  in  1809,  to  re-embark  at  Corunna, 
and  the  whole  Pyrenean  Peninsula  seemed  to  lie  at  the 
feet  of  its  Corsican  Master ; — though  each  of  these 
T^Eras  unquestionably  presents  images  of  great  National 
Depression,  did  a  deeper  Despondency  prevail  among 
all  ranks  of  society,  than  towards  the  close  of  the 
American  Contest,  as  the  Administration  of  Lord  North 
drew  to  its  termination. 

In  the  midst  of  so  universal  a  dejection,  the  King 
remained  altogether  unmoved.  Neither  Defeats,  nor 
Difficulties,  nor  the  number  of  his  foreign  Enemies, 
nor  domestic  Opposition,  unhinged  his  mind,  or  shook 
his  resolution.  Convinced  that  he  could  not  abandon 
the  struggle  in  which  he  was  engaged,  however  arduous 
or  doubtful  might  be  the  result,  without  renouncing  his 
own  Birth-right,  the  Interests  of  his  Crown,  and  the  best 
Portion  of  the  British  Empire ;  he  never  vacillated,  nor 
shewed  for  a  moment,  any  disposition  to  dismiss  his 
Ministers.  Whatever  irresolution,  difference  of  opinion, 
or  apprehension,  might  pervade  the  Cabinet  itself  at 
certain  moments,  none  of  these  sentiments  agitated  the 
Sovereign.  He  only  desired  to  abide  the  Issue,  and 
to  maintain  the  Contest.  It  is,  perhaps,  for  Posterity 
to  decide  on  the  degree  of  approbation  or  of  blame, 
political  and  moral,  which  such  a  character  and  conduct, 
under  such  circumstances,  may  justly  challenge :  but 
even  if  we  should  incline  to  censure,  or  to  condemn,  we 
cannot  help  in  some  measure  admiring  it.  As  however, 
His  Majesty's  opinions  and  wishes  were  universally 
known  or  understood  ;  a  proportionate  degree  of  un- 
popularity fell  personally  on  him  ;  and  he  was  regarded 
as  the  vital  principle  which  animated,  sustained,  and 
propelled  the  Administration.  When  we  consider  this 


WRAXALLS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [1781. 

fact,  in  addition  to  all  the  preceding  statements  given 
of  his  Measures  since  he  acceded  to  the  Thone ;  we 
shall  no  longer  wonder,  that  in  defiance  of  so  many 
claims  to  the  affectionate  veneration  of  his  People,  he 
was  nevertheless,  at  this  period  of  his  reign,  by  no 
means  an  object  of  general  partiality  or  attachment. 

Lord  North,  who  had  already  occupied  the  Posts  of 
first  Lord  of  the  Treasury,  and  Chancellor  of  the 
Exchequer,  during  eleven  Years,  was  then  in  the  full 
Vigor  of  his  Faculties,  having  nearly  accomplished  the 
Forty-ninth  Year  of  his  Age.  In  his  Person  he  was 
of  the  middle  size,  heavy,  large,  and  much  inclined  to 
Corpulency.  There  appeared  in  the  cast  and  formation 
of  his  Countenance,  nay  even  in  his  Manner,  so  strong 
a  resemblance  to  the  Royal  Family,  that  it  was  difficult 
not  to  perceive  it.  Like  them,  he  had  a  fair  Com- 
plexion, regular  Features,  light  Hair,  with  bushy  Eye- 
brows, and  grey  Eyes,  rather  prominent  in  his  Head. 
His  Face  might  be  indeed  esteemed  a  Caricature  of  the 
King ;  and  those  who  remembered  the  Intimacy  which 
subsisted  between  Frederic,  the  late  Prince  of  Wales, 
and  the  Earl,  as  well  as  Countess  of  Guildford,  Lord 
North's  Father  and  Mother,  to  which,  Allusion  has 
already  been  made ;  found  no  difficulty  in  accounting, 
though  perhaps  very  unjustly,  for  that  similarity.  He 
possessed  an  Advantage,  considered  in  his  ministerial 
Capacity,  which  neither  of  his  two  immediate  Pre- 
decessors, the  Marquis  of  Rockingham,  or  the  Duke  of 
Grafton,  could  boast ;  arid  in  which,  his  three  immedi- 
ate Successors  in  Office,  Lord  Rockingham,  Lord 
Shelburne,  and  the  Duke  of  Portland,  were  equally 
deficient.  I  mean,  that  being  not  a  Peer,  but  a 
Commoner,  he  had  attained  in  the  course  of  Years, 
that  intimate  Knowledge  of  the  House  of  Commons, 
its  formation,  and  the  Modes  of  conducting  or  influenc- 
ing it  as  a  Body,  which  nothing  can  confer,  except 
long  Habits  of  Debate,  and  of  personal  Attendance. 

294 


1781.]  A  LUDICROUS  ACCIDENT 

His  natural  Affability  rendered  him,  besides,  so 
accessible,  and  the  communicativeness  of  his  Temper 
inclined  him  so  much  to  Conversation,  that  every 
Member  of  the  House  found  a  facility  in  becoming 
known  to  him.  Never  indeed  was  a  First  Minister 
less  intrenched  within  the  forms  of  his  official  Situation. 
He  seemed  on  the  contrary,  always  happy  to  throw 
aside  his  public  Character,  and  to  relapse  into  an 
Individual. 

His  Tongue  being  too  large  for  his  Mouth,  rendered 
his  Articulation  somewhat  thick,  though  not  at  all 
indistinct.  It  is  to  this  Peculiarity  or  Defect  in  his 
Enunciation,  that  "Junius"  alludes  in  one  of  his 
Letters,  written  in  January,  1770,  when  he  says,  after 
mentioning  the  Duke  of  Grafton's  Resignation,  "The 
"  palm  of  Ministerial  Firmness  is  now  transferred  to 
"  Lord  North.  He  tells  us  so,  himself,  with  the 
"  Plenitude  of  the  Ore  rotundo"  He  did  not  however 
bedew  his  Hearers  while  addressing  them,  as  Burnet 
tells  us,  the  Duke  of  Lauderdale,  so  well  known  under 
Charles  the  Second"^  Reign,  always  did,  in  consequence 
of  the  faulty  Conformation  of  his  Tongue.  In  Parlia- 
ment, the  Deficiency  of  Lord  North's  Sight,  was  pro- 
ductive to  him  of  many  Inconveniences.  For,  even  at 
the  distance  of  a  few  Feet,  he  saw  very  imperfectly ; 
and  across  the  House,  he  was  unable  to  distinguish 
Persons  with  any  degree  of  Accuracy.  In  speaking, 
walking,  and  every  Motion,  it  is  not  enough  to  say  that 
he  wanted  Grace :  he  was  to  the  last  degree  awkward. 
It  can  hardly  obtain  Belief,  that  in  a  full  House  of 
Commons,  he  took  off  on  the  point  of  his  Sword,  the 
Wig  of  Mr.  Welbore  Ellis,  and  carried  it  a  considerable 
Way  across  the  Floor,  without  ever  suspecting,  or 
perceiving  it.  The  Fact  happened  in  this  Manner. 
Mr.  Ellis,  who  was  then  Treasurer  of  the  Navy,  and 
well  advanced  towards  his  Seventieth  Year,  always  sat 
at  the  lowest  Corner  of  the  Treasury  Bench,  a  few  Feet 

295 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [irsi. 

removed  from  Lord  North.  The  latter  having  occasion 
to  go  down  the  House,  previously  laid  his  Hand  on  his 
Sword,  holding  the  Chafe  of  the  Scabbard  forward, 
nearly  in  a  horizontal  Direction.  Mr.  Ellis  stooping 
at  the  same  Instant  that  the  First  Minister  rose,  the 
point  of  the  Scabbard  came  exactly  in  contact  with  the 
Treasurer  of  the  Navy's  Wig,  which  it  completely  took 
off,  and  bore  away.  The  Accident,  however  ludicrous, 
was  wholly  unseen  by  Lord  North,  who  received  the 
first  intimation  of  it,  from  the  involuntary  bursts  of 
Laughter  that  it  occasioned  in  every  quarter  of  the 
House.  Mr.  Ellis,  however,  without  altering  a  Muscle 
of  his  Countenance,  and  preserving  the  most  perfect 
Gravity  in  the  midst  of  the  general  Convulsion,  having 
received  back  his  Wig,  re-adjusted  it  to  his  Head,  and 
waited  patiently  till  the  House  had  recovered  from  the 
effect  of  so  extraordinary,  as  well  as  ridiculous  an 
Occurrence. 

In  addition  to  his  defect  of  Sight,  Lord  North  was 
subject  likewise  to  a  constitutional  Somnolency,  which 
neither  the  animated  Declamations  of  Fox,  nor  the 
pathetic  Invocations  of  Burke,  nor  the  hoarse  Menaces 
of  Barre,  could  always  prevent.  It  attacked  him  even 
on  the  Treasury  Bench,  sometimes  with  irresistible 
Force.  Nor  was  he  altogether  exempt  from  its  in- 
fluence in  private  society.  Having  called  on  a  Lady  of 
Condition,  one  Evening,  the  Charms  of  whose  Person 
and  Conversation  were  universally  acknowledged  at  the 
Time  of  which  I  am  writing,  he  found  her  engaged  in 
a  violent  Altercation  with  her  Sister-in-law.  Lord 
North,  with  his  characteristic  good  Humour,  attempted 
to  interpose  his  Mediation,  and  to  accommodate  the 
Quarrel :  but  they  were  not  to  be  pacified  without 
^recurring  to  legal  Assistance.  He  consented  therefore 
to  wait  till  the  Lady  of  the  House  should  return  from 
her  Solicitor's  Chambers  in  Lincoln's  Inn,  which  she 
promised  to  do  without  delay.  Seating  himself  in  an 

296 


1781.]     APPARENT  APATHY  OF  NORTH 

Arm-chair  before  the  Fire,  he  soon  fell  into  a  profound 
Sleep,  from  which  he  was  not  awakened  by  the  entrance 
of  one  of  the  Maid  servants;  who  seeing  a  corpulent 
Man,  with  a  blue  Riband  across  his  Breast,  asleep  in 
her  Mistress's  Drawing  Room,  and  being  unacquainted 
with  the  First  Minister's  person,  ran  down  into  the 
Kitchen,  to  give  the  Alarm.  Yet,  in  defiance  of  all 
these  physical  Infirmities,  whenever  he  rose  to  reply 
in  the  House  of  Commons,  he  displayed  no  want  of 
Recollection,  Presence  of  Mind,  or  Accuracy.  He 
seldom,  or  never,  took  Notes ;  trusting  to  his  Memory 
for  retaining  the  Facts  which  occurred  during  the  pre- 
ceding discussion.  Sir  Grey  Cooper,  however,  who 
commonly  sat  on  his  left  hand,  supplied,  on  particular 
Occasions,  that  Deficiency. 

Lord  North  was  powerful,  able,  and  fluent  in  Debate ; 
sometimes  repelling  the  Charges  made  against  him,  with 
solid  Argument ;  but  still  more  frequently  eluding  or 
blunting  the  Weapons  of  his  Antagonists,  by  the  force 
of  Wit  and  Humour.  He  rarely  rose  however  to  Sub- 
limity, though  he  possessed  vast  Facility  and  Command 
of  Language.  When  necessary,  he  could  speak  for  a 
long  Time,  apparently  with  great  Pathos,  and  yet 
disclose  no  Fact,  nor  reveal  any  Secret.  An  unalterable 
Suavity  and  Equality  of  Temper,  which  was  natural  to 
him,  enabled  him  to  sustain,  unmoved,  the  bitter 
Sarcasms  and  severe  Accusations,  levelled  at  him  from 
the  Opposition  Benches.  They  always  seemed  to  sink 
into  him,  like  a  Cannon  Ball  into  a  Wool  Sack.  Some- 
times, the  coarse  Invectives  of  Alderman  Sawbridge,  or 
the  fiery  Sallies  of  George  Byng,  roused  him  from  his 
seeming  Apathy ;  and  effected  the  Object,  which  the 
delicate  Irony,  or  laboured  Attacks  of  more  able 
Adversaries,  had  failed  to  produce.  Once,  and  only 
once,  during  the  Time  that  I  sat  in  Parliament,  I 
witnessed  his  rising  to  a  Pitch  of  the  most  generous 
Indignation.  Barre  attracted  this  Storm  on  himself,  by 

297 


WRAX  ALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [mi. 

the  Reproaches  which  he  made  on  the  First  Minister 
for  oppressing  the  People  with  Taxes :  Reproaches 
equally  uncalled  for  by  the  Occasion,  as  they  were 
delivered  with  insulting  Asperity  of  Language.  It 
happened  after  the  Close  of  that  memorable  Debate, 
when  General  Con  way,  on  the  22d  of  February,  1782, 
may  be  said  to  have  terminated  the  American  War; 
Administration  only  carrying  the  Question  by  a  single 
Vote.  Lord  North  alluding  to  this  recent  Triumph 
of  the  Opposition,  said  in  Reply  to  Barre,  that  "he 
"  presumed  the  Division  of  that  evening,  had  inflamed 
"  the  Colonel's  Valour  to  such  intemperate  Abuse," 
which  he  qualified  with  the  Epithets  of  "  insolent  and 
"  brutal."  The  Speaker  interposing,  mutual  Apologies 
were  offered.  Pitt  and  Tierney  met  on  Putney  Com- 
mon in  1798,  and  exchanged  Shots  for  less  Provoca- 
tion :  but,  a  Duel  between  Lord  North  and  Barre, 
would  have  excited  a  sort  of  Ridicule;  the  former 
seeing  very  imperfectly  with  both  Eyes,  and  the  latter 
having  only  one  defective  Eye.  Besides,  Anger  and 
Resentment  appeared  to  be  foreign  to  Lord  North's 
Nature,  and  as  if  only  put  on  occasionally  to  serve  a 
particular  purpose.  He  was  indeed  incapable  of  lasting 
enmity,  though  he  felt,  and  sometimes  expressed 
Contempt  for  those,  who  abandoned  him  from  mean 
and  mercenary  Motives. 

Baited,  harassed,  and  worried  as  he  always  was  in 
Parliament,  during  the  latter  years  of  his  Administra- 
tion, he  never  manifested  any  impatience  for  the 
termination  of  the  Session :  on  the  contrary,  doubts 
were  entertained  among  those  who  knew  him  best, 
whether  he  did  not  derive  a  gratification  from  keeping 
the  House  of  Commons  sitting.  That  Assembly  pre- 
sented in  fact  a  Theatre  on  which  he  acted  the  first 
Personage,  where  he  attracted  almost  all  attention,  and 
where  his  abilities  rendered  him  hardly  less  conspicuous 
than  his  Ministerial  situation.  In  opening  the  Budget^ 

298 


1781.]          PRESENTING  THE  BUDGET 

he  was  esteemed  peculiarly  lucid,  clear,  and  able.  On 
that  account  it  constituted  a  day  of  triumph  to  his 
friends  and  supporters,  who  exulted  in  the  talent  which 
he  displayed,  whenever  he  exhibited  the  state  of  the 
National  Finances,  or  imposed  new  pecuniary  burthens. 
I  was  twice  present  at  his  performance  of  this  arduous 
task ;  first,  in  1781,  and  afterwards,  in  the  following 
year,  when  he  executed  it  for  the  last  time.  Each 
performance  appeared  to  me,  very  deserving  of  the 
Encomiums  lavished  on  it ;  and  if  compared  with  the 
incapable  manner  in  which  the  Budget  was  opened  by 
his  successor,  Lord  John  Cavendish,  when  he  was 
Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer  in  1783,  I  still  continue 
of  the  same  opinion.  But,  Lord  North  could  sustain 
no  competition  with  the  late  Mr.  Pitt,  who  on  those, 
as  on  all  other  occasions,  manifested  a  perspicuity,  elo- 
quence, and  talent,  altogether  wonderful ;  which  carried 
the  Audience  along  with  him  in  every  Arithmetical 
statement,  left  no  calculation  obscure  or  ambiguous, 
and  impressed  the  House  at  its  close,  with  tumultuous 
Admiration. 

Lord  North  could  descend  without  effort,  I  might 
say,  with  ease  and  dignity,  from  the  highest  Offices  of 
his  public  situation  in  the  House  of  Commons,  to  the 
lowest  duties  of  a  private  Member.  In  the  Spring  of 
the  year  1781,  when  "the  Secret  Committee  for  enquir- 
"  ing  into  the  Causes  of  the  War  in  the  Carnatic,"  was 
appointed  by  Ballot,  I  was  named  one  of  the  Scrutineers, 
to  examine  the  names  of  the  Persons  chosen  to  compose 
it.  The  House  being  about  to  break  up,  we  were 
standing  round  the  Table,  when  some  voices  called 
out  the  name  of  Lord  North  for  a  Scrutineer.  Far 
from  declining  to  engage  in  such  an  Occupation,  which 
he  might  easily  have  done,  on  account  of  his  Official 
business  and  employments,  he  instantly  repaired  with 
the  Members  nominated,  to  one  of  the  Committee 
Rooms.  We  sat  till  a  late  hour  before  the  Scrutiny 

299 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [1781. 

was  finished,  and  dined  together  up  stairs.  And  if 
he  made  the  worst  Scrutineer,  he  was  certainly  the 
pleasantest  and  best  Companion,  during  the  whole 
time.  He  possessed  a  classic  mind,  full  of  information, 
and  always  enlivened  by  wit,  as  well  as  sweetened  by 
good  humour.  When  young,  he  had  travelled  over  a 
considerable  part  of  Europe,  and  he  knew  the  Continent 
well :  he  spoke  French  with  facility,  and  was  equally 
versed  in  the  great  writings  of  Antiquity.  It  was 
impossible  to  experience  dullness  in  his  society.  Even 
during  the  last  years  of  his  life,  when  nearly  or  totally 
blind,  and  labouring  under  many  infirmities,  his  equa- 
nimity of  temper  never  forsook  him,  nor  even  his  gaiety, 
and  powers  of  conversation.  I  have  frequently  seen 
him  display  the  utmost  chearfulness  under  those  circum- 
stances so  trying  to  human  nature. 

As  a  Statesman,  his  enemies  charged  him  with  irre- 
solution :  but  he  might  rather  be  taxed  with  indolence 
and  procrastination,  than  with  want  of  decision.  He 
naturally  loved  to  postpone,  though  when  it  became 
necessary  to  resolve,  he  could  abide  firmly  by  his 
Determination.  Never  had  any  Minister  purer  hands, 
nor  manifested  less  rapacity.  In  fact,  he  amassed  no 
wealth,  after  an  Administration  of  twelve  years.  When 
he  quitted  Office,  his  circumstances  were  by  no  means 
opulent,  and  he  had  a  numerous  family.  His  Adver- 
saries reproached  him  likewise,  that  though  incapable 
of  personally  descending  to  unworthy  means  of  enrich- 
ing himself,  he  allowed  peculations  or  abuses  to  be 
practised  by  those  employed  under  him.  Sawbridge, 
when  speaking  in  his  place,  as  a  Member,  alluding  to 
this  accusation,  exclaimed  with  Cato,  "  Curse  on  his 
"  virtues,  they've  undone  his  Country ! "  A  similar 
charge  was  made  against  the  late  Mr.  Pitt,  who,  after 
having  been  First  Minister  during  almost  his  whole 
life,  left  only  Debts  behind  him.  But  it  never  entered 
into  any  man's  mind,  however  inimical,  to  accuse  either 

300 


1781.]  MERITS  AND  DEFECTS 

Lord  North  or  Mr.  Pitt,  of  making  undue  purchases  in 
the  public  Funds,  or  of  turning  their  Ministerial  in- 
formation to  private  purposes  of  pecuniary  emolument. 
They  were  known  to  be  upright  and  disinterested. 
The  great  defect  of  Lord  North's  Government  arose 
from  the  easiness  of  his  natural  temper,  which  some- 
times perhaps  induced  him  to  adopt,  or  to  defend 
Measures,  that  had  not  always  the  sanction  of  his 
judgment.  Another,  and  perhaps  a  greater  evil,  aris- 
ing from  his  facility  and  want  of  energy,  was,  that  he 
did  not,  like  the  great  Earl  of  Chatham,  sufficiently 
coerce  the  other  Members  of  the  Cabinet ;  each  of 
whom,  under  Lord  North,  might  be  said  to  form  a 
sort  of  independant  Department.  They  were  in  fact, 
rather  his  co-equals,  than  his  subordinates,  as  they 
ought  to  have  been ;  and  the  public  Service  often 
suffered  from  their  want  of  union,  or  from  their  clash- 
ing interests,  and  private  animosities. 

The  want  of  political  courage  cannot  be  justly 
attributed  to  him.  If  we  reflect  that  his  Administra- 
tion equalled  in  length  of  time,  the  aggregate  of  the 
five  preceding  Ministers,  namely,  the  first  Mr.  Pitt's, 
Lord  Bute's,  Mr.  Grenville's,  Lord  Rockingham's,  and 
the  Duke  of  Grafton's ;  and  if  we  consider  how  critical, 
as  well  as  perilous,  were  the  Times,  particularly  during 
the  reverses  of  the  American  War,  and  in  the  Riots  of 
June,  1780,  which  last  convulsions  might  have  appalled 
the  stoutest  mind  ;  we  shall  not  refuse  him  a  just  claim 
to  the  praise  of  Ministerial  firmness.  Even  his  ultimate 
resignation  in  1782,  I  am  convinced,  arose  more  from 
disgust  and  weariness,  added  to  despair,  than  from 
personal  fear,  or  from  any  defect  of  nerves.  Though 
not  unguarded  in  private  Conversation,  or  in  Debate, 
he  was  careless  in  many  respects,  to  a  degree  hardly 
credible.  I  have  heard  a  Member  of  his  Cabinet  say, 
that  it  was  dangerous  to  trust  him  with  State  papers, 
which  he  perpetually  mislaid  or  forgot.  A  Letter  of 

301 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [i78i. 

the  first  political  importance,  addressed  to  him  by 
the  King,  which  he  had  lost,  after  a  long  search,  was 
found  lying  wide  open  in  the  water-closet.  A  strong 
and  mutual  affection  subsisted  between  His  Majesty  and 
him,  as  was  natural,  after  the  many  heavy  storms  that 
they  had  weathered  together,  for  so  many  years.  This 
attachment  on  the  part  of  the  former,  though  shaken 
and  interrupted  when  Lord  North  joined  Mr.  Fox  in 
1783,  yet  revived  in  the  Royal  bosom  at  a  subsequent 
period,  on  Lord  North  becoming  blind ;  a  circumstance 
at  which,  when  made  known  to  him,  His  Majesty 
expressed  the  deepest  concern  and  sympathy.  He  did 
not  then  probably  foresee  that  he  should  himself  be 
visited  with  the  same  affliction ;  a  point  of  similarity 
between  them,  which  is  not  a  little  remarkable. 

Besides  his  Ministerial  Offices,  Lord  North  was  Lord 
Warden  of  the  Cinque  Ports,  and  Lady  North  enjoyed 
the  Rangership  of  Bushy  Park.  It  was  there,  that, 
surrounded  by  his  family,  he  appeared  peculiarly  an 
object  of  esteem  and  of  attachment,  divested  of  all 
form  or  ostentation,  diffusing  gaiety  and  good  humour 
round  him.  Even  those  who  opposed  the  Minister, 
loved  the  Man.  I  have  had  the  honor  to  witness,  and 
to  participate  of  the  scene  that  I  here  describe ;  and 
may  say  as  Pope  does  of  Sir  Robert  Walpole, 

"  Seen  him  I  have,  but  in  the  social  hour 

"  Of  private  Converse,  ill  exchanged  for  Power." 

The  Earl  of  Guildford,  Lord  North's  father,  attained 
to  a  very  advanced  age:  I  believe,  to  eighty-six,  and 
had  nearly  survived  his  son,  only  dying  about  two  years 
before  him.  So  that  Lord  North,  like  his  predecessor, 
Sir  Robert  Walpole,  remained  a  Member  of  the  House 
of  Commons,  during  almost  his  whole  life.  Lord 
Guildford  had  been  three  times  married;  Dr.  North, 
the  present  Bishop  of  Winchester,  being  his  son  by 
the  second  wife.  Lord  North  sprung  from  his  first 

302 


1781.]  A  DIPLOMATIC  REQUEST 

marriage.  The  Minister  secured  the  Reversion,  if  I 
may  so  term  it,  of  the  Bishoprick  of  Winchester,  for 
his  Brother,  by  a  piece  of  Address.  For,  the  Archi- 
episcopal  See  of  York  having  become  vacant  on  the 
Decease  of  Dr.  Drummond ;  Lord  North,  who  knew 
that  the  King  had  destined  that  high  Ecclesiastical 
promotion  for  Dr.  Markham,  then  Bishop  of  Chester, 
determined  nevertheless  to  ask  it  for  Dr.  North,  Bishop 
of  Worcester.  Conscious  that  he  should  meet  with  a 
refusal,  for  which  he  was  prepared,  he  ably  made  it 
subservient  to  the  attainment  of  his  real  object, 
Winchester :  a  Mitre  that  might  be  reasonably 
expected  soon  to  drop,  from  the  age  and  infirmities 
of  its  possessor,  Dr.  Thomas.  When  Lord  North 
preferred  his  request,  the  King  replied,  that  it  was 
impossible  to  gratify  him,  as  the  Archbishoprick  of 
York  must  be  conferred  on  the  Bishop  of  Chester.  The 
First  Minister  insisted :  but  the  Sovereign  remained 
firm,  recapitulated  the  obligations  which  he  owed  to 
Dr.  Markham,  for  his  care  of  the  Prince  of  Wales's 
Education,  and  left  no  prospect  of  effecting  any  change 
in  his  resolution.  "Your  Majesty  then,"  said  Lord 
North,  "will,  I  hope,  have  no  objection  to  give  my 
"  Brother,  the  See  of  Winchester,  whenever  it  may 
"  become  vacant?"  "  Oh,  by  all  means,"  answered  the 
King.  "  You  may  rely  on  it ;"  a  Promise,  which  soon 
afterwards  received  its  Accomplishment. 

I  will  conclude  the  Subject  of  Lord  North,  on  which 
I  dwell  with  Complacency,  by  observing,  that  though 
he  cannot  be  esteemed  a  great  Statesman,  in  the  most 
comprehensive  Sense,  like  the  first  or  the  second  Mr. 
Pitt ;  though  he  was  even  a  very  unfortunate,  as  well 
as  a  most  unpopular  Minister,  during  the  far  greater 
part,  or  the  whole  course  of  his  Administration ;  yet 
he  possessed  distinguished  Claims  to  national  Esteem. 
The  American  War  formed  the  Weight  which  dragged 
him  down :  a  Load  that  would  have  sunk  the  great 

303 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [mi. 

Lord  Chatham  himself,  if  he  had  attempted  to  lift  it, 
notwithstanding  his  Talents  and  popular  Favor.  In 
the  Year  1 758,  when  that  eminent  Statesman  was  called 
to  the  Direction  of  public  Affairs,  not  by  the  Sovereign, 
but  by  the  Nation,  he  had  only  to  conduct  and  point 
the  Energies  of  the  Country  against  France.  His  son, 
in  1795,  beheld  himself  placed,  as  the  Champion  of 
Order,  Morals,  Religion,  and  Monarchical  Government, 
in  opposition  to  the  most  sanguinary  and  detestable 
Republic,  if  it  could  be  with  Justice  entitled  to  that 
Denomination,  which  ever  arose  among  Men.  Both 
Ministers  were  in  some  Measure  sustained  and  impelled 
by  the  very  Contest.  But  Lord  North,  who  derived 
little  Support  from  his  Countrymen,  and  none  from  the 
Nature  of  the  War,  could  only  look  to  the  Crown  for 
Protection  against  public  Clamor,  in  and  out  of 
Parliament.  In  the  Distribution  of  Honors  and 
Dignities,  he  was  far  more  sparing  than  his  Successor ; 
a  Fact  of  which  we  shall  be  convinced,  if  we  compare 
the  List  of  Peerages  created  between  1770  and  1782, 
with  those  made  by  Mr.  Pitt,  when  First  Minister, 
within  the  same  Portion  of  Time,  during  any  Period  of 
his  Administration.  Nor  was  Lord  North  equally 
profuse  of  the  Public  Money,  as  Mr.  Pitt,  whatever 
Severity  of  Censure  he  underwent  for  his  Extravagance 
or  Negligence,  in  the  Management  and  Expenditure  of 
the  Finances.  No  Impeachment  of  any  subordinate 
Minister,  or  of  any  Member  of  his  Cabinet,  ever  took 
place,  for  Defalcation,  or  Misapplication  of  Sums  which 
passed  through  his  Hands,  as  we  witnessed  in  1806. 
Yet  the  Opposition  in  the  Lower  House  of  Parliament, 
during  the  whole  Progress  of  the  American  War, 
exceeded  in  Numbers,  and  at  least  equalled  in  Virulence, 
the  Minority  which  impeached  Lord  Melville. 

As  a  Man,  considered  in  every  private  Relation,  even 
in  his  very  Weaknesses,  Lord  North  was  most  amiable : 
in  that  point  of  View,  his  Character  will  rise  on  a 

304 


1781.]  EULOGY  OF  NORTH 

Comparison  with  any  First  Minister  of  Great  Britain, 
during  the  Course  of  the  Eighteenth  Century ;  not 
excepting  Lord  Godolphin,  Mr.  Pelham,  or  the  Marquis 
of  Rockingham.  The  two  former  were  justly  accused 
of  a  passion  for  Play,  which  accompanied  them  through 
Life :  a  Vice  from  which  Lord  North  was  wholly 
exempt.  Burnet,  who  recounts  the  Fact  relative  to  the 
Lord  Treasurer  Godolphin,  says,  "he  loved  Gaming 
"  the  most  of  any  Man  of  Business  I  ever  knew ;  and 
"  gave  one  Reason  for  it ;  because  it  delivered  him  from 
"  the  Obligation  to  talk  much."  Dodington,  when 
relating  Mr.  PelhanVs  Attachment  to  the  same  Grati- 
fication, adds,  that  he  studiously  concealed  it  with  the 
utmost  Care.  Lord  North  possessed  better  intellectual 
Resources  in  himself.  He  possessed  likewise  the  highest 
Sources  of  Enjoyment  in  his  Family,  surrounded  by  his 
Children.  The  Marquis  of  Rockingham  was  childless ; 
and  Lord  Bute's  Fire-side  was  not  characterized  by  the 
same  Expansion  of  the  Heart,  the  same  Emancipation 
from  all  Severity  of  Form,  or  the  same  Ebullitions  of 
Fancy  and  Intellect.  His  immediate  Predecessor,  the 
Duke  of  Grafton,  respecting  whom  "  Junius"  observes, 
when  speaking  of  his  domestic  qualities,  "  Your  Grace 
"  has  now  made  the  complete  Revolution  of  the  political 
"  Zodiac,  from  the  Scorpion  in  which  you  stung  Lord 
"  Chatham,  to  the  hopes  of  a  Virgin  in  the  House  of 
"  Bloomsbury;" — the  Duke  could  stand  no  Competition 
with  Lord  North,  in  the  endearing  Charities  of  Life, 
where  the  Minister  becomes  merged  in  the  Father,  the 
Husband,  and  the  Individual.  If  we  would  try  to  find 
his  Equal  in  these  Endowments  and  Virtues,  we  must 
remount  to  Wriothesley,  Earl  of  Southampton,  or  to 
Hyde,  Earl  of  Clarendon.  —  Every  Beholder,  while 
contemplating  the  Monument  where  rest  the  Remains 
of  the  great  Earl  of  Chatham,  or  of  the  Second  Mr. 
Pitt,  must  be  penetrated  with  Emotions  of  Admiration 
and  Respect :  but  all  those  who  personally  knew  Lord 

305  20 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [i78i. 

North,  or  had  ever  mixed  with  him  in  Society,  while 
regarding  his  Tomb,  would  involuntarily  find  their 
Eyes  suffused  in  Tears. 

The  post  of  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Northern 
Department,  was  at  that  Time  filled  by  Lord  Stormont ; 
a  Nobleman  who  having  passed  great  Part  of  his  Life 
in  a  diplomatic  Capacity,  on  the  Continent,  principally 
at  the  Courts  of  Dresden  and  Vienna,  necessarily 
possessed  a  considerable  Knowledge  of  the  Interests 
and  Politics  of  Europe.  He  had  nevertheless  manifested 
no  great  Vigilance,  nor  displayed  any  superior  Penetra- 
tion, during  his  recent  Embassy  at  Paris ;  where,  it 
was  commonly  believed,  he  had  been  deceived  by  the 
Protestations,  or  duped  by  the  Artifices,  of  Maurepas 
and  of  Vergennes,  previous  to  the  open  Interference  of 
France  in  the  Affairs  of  America.  His  near  Alliance  to 
the  Earl  of  Mansfield,  of  whom  he  was  the  Nephew  and 
collateral  Heir,  if  it  conferred  no  Claim  to  popular 
Favor,  unquestionably  conduced  to  render  him  more 
acceptable  at  St.  James's.  Even  his  Enemies  admitted 
him  to  possess  Application ;  and  whenever  he  rose  in 
the  House  of  Peers,  he  displayed  a  thorough  Acquaint- 
ance with  the  Subject  on  which  he  spoke,  together  with 
great  Precision  of  Language,  and  force  of  Argument. 

The  Earl  of  Hillsborough,  who  held  the  Southern 
Department,  wanted  neither  Ability  nor  Attention  to 
public  Business  :  but  his  natural  Endowments,  however 
solid,  did  not  rise  above  mediocrity.  He  seemed  to 
have  owed  his  political,  as  well  as  personal  Elevation 
in  Life,  more  to  his  good  Sense,  Penetration,  and 
Address,  than  to  any  intellectual  Superiority.  I  have 
seen  him  much  embarrassed  and  disconcerted  in  the 
Session  of  1781,  when  called  on  officially  in  the  House 
of  Lords,  to  explain,  or  to  justify,  the  Measures  adopted 
in  Bengal :  an  Embarrassment  which  arose  from  his 
Ignorance  of  Names,  Places,  and  Circumstances  in  that 
Quarter  of  the  Globe,  with  which,  as  Secretary  of  State 

306 


1781.]  LORD  GEORGE  GERMAIN 

for  the  East  Indies,  he  ought  to  have  been  acquainted. 
We  must  however  recollect,  that  very  few  Persons, 
except  such  as  were  locally  connected  with  India,  had 
then  attained  any  accurate  Information  respecting  the 
Company's  Affairs.  Of  this  assertion  I  could  adduce 
many  proofs.  In  February,  1782,  when  Lord  Shelburne 
speaking  in  the  House  of  Peers,  made  Allusion  to  "  a 
"  King,  or  Supreme  Rajah  of  the  Mharattas,"  he  felt 
himself  compelled  to  explain  to  their  Lordships,  the 
Nature  and  narrow  Limits  of  that  nominal  Sovereignty ; 
with  which,  as  well  as  with  the  Office  of  "  Peshwa,"  or 
efficient  Ruler,  of  the  Mharatta  Empire,  nine-tenths  of 
his  Audience  were  utterly  unacquainted.  I  recollect 
the  Astonishment,  not  unmixed  with  some  degree  of 
Ridicule,  excited  in  the  House  of  Commons,  on  Governor 
John  stone's  first  Mention  and  Description  of  the  Har- 
bour of  Trincomale  in  the  Island  of  Ceylon  ;  a  Bay, 
which  probably,  till  that  Occasion,  had  never  been 
heard  of  by  the  greater  part  of  the  County  Members. 
Though  the  Irruption  of  Hyder  Ally  into  the  Carnatic 
in  1780,  powerfully  awakened  the  national  Attention 
to  the  Subject ;  it  was  Fox's  memorable  Bill,  followed 
at  a  short  Interval,  by  Hastings's  Trial,  that  diffused 
over  the  whole  Kingdom  an  Eagerness  for  Oriental 
Knowledge. 

But,  Lord  George  Germain,  who  presided  over  the 
American  Department,  attracted  from  a  variety  of 
Causes,  far  more  public  Consideration,  while  he  pre- 
sented a  fairer  Mark  for  parliamentary  Attack,  or  for 
popular  Declamation,  than  either  of  the  other  Secretaries 
of  State.  His  Abilities,  the  Circumstance  of  his  being 
a  Member  of  the  House  of  Commons,  even  the  Events 
of  his  former  Life,  and  above  all,  the  Object  of  the 
War  in  which  we  were  engaged ;  a  War,  that  at  the 
Commencement  of  1781,  still  professed  to  be  the 
Subjugation  of  the  revolted  Colonies;  —  these  united 
Circumstances  rendered  him,  after  Lord  North,  the 

307 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [i78i. 

most  prominent  Person  in  Administration.     As  I  had 
the  Honor  to  enjoy  a  place  in  his  Friendship,  and  to 
live  with  him  during  the  latter  Years  of  his  Life,  on 
terms  of  great  Intimacy,  I  may  pretend  to  have  known 
him  well.     Nor  will  I  deny  that  I  am  partial  to  his 
Memory  :  but,  that  Partiality  will  never  induce  me  to 
pervert,  or  to  misrepresent   any  Fact ;    though  I  am 
aware  that  it  may  unintentionally  bias  my  Opinions. 
He  had  completed  his  Sixty-fifth  Year  at  this  Time; 
but  a  frame  of  Body  naturally  robust,  and  a  vigorous 
Constitution,  secured  him  almost  uninterrupted  Health, 
together  with  the  Enjoyment  of  all  his  Faculties.     In 
his  Person,  which  rose  to  near  six  feet,  he  was  muscular, 
and  capable  of  enduring  much  bodily,  as  well  as  mental, 
Fatigue.     His  Countenance  indicated  Intellect,  particu- 
larly his  Eye,  the  Motions  of  which  were  quick  and 
piercing.     On  first  Acquaintance,  his  Manner  and  Air 
impressed  with  an  idea  of  proud  Reserve :  but  no  Man, 
in  private  Society,  unbent  himself  more,  or  manifested 
less  Self-importance.      In  the  midst  of  his  Family; — 
for  he  rarely  dined  from  home ;  and  in  the  Company  of 
a  few  select  Friends,  he  soon  forgot  the  Toils  annexed 
to   public   Life,   the    Asperities    of   Debate,   and   the 
Vexations  of  Office.     Even  after  the  latest  Nights  in 
the  House  of  Commons,  he  always  sat  down  to  Table, 
drank   a   pint   of  Claret,   and   passed   in   Review   the 
Incidents  of  the  preceding  Evening.     It  was  then  that 
his  Conversation  became  most  entertaining ;   seasoned 
with  curious  Anecdotes  collected  during  the  course  of 
a  long  Life,  passed  in  the  highest  Circles,  amidst  the 
greatest  Affairs,  in  England,  Ireland,  Scotland,  and  on 
the   Continent,  where  he   had   served ;  embracing  the 
Secret  History   of  the  present,  and   of  the   two   late 
Reigns. 

Though  Lord  George  Germain  was  so  highly  born, 
his  Education  did  not  altogether  correspond  with  his 
Extraction,  and  he  owed  far  more  to  Nature,  than  to 

308 


1781.]          POWERS  AND  LIMITATIONS 

Cultivation.  He  had,  indeed,  been  brought  up  in  the 
College  of  Dublin ;  but  he  possessed  little  Information 
derived  from  Books,  nor  had  he  improved  his  Mind  by 
extensive  Reading,  in  subsequent  Years.  Even  after 
his  Retreat  from  public  Employment,  in  the  decline  of 
Life,  when  at  Drayton,  where  he  had  a  fine  Library,  he 
rarely  opened  an  Author,  except  for  a  short  Time  on 
his  Return  from  coursing,  shooting,  riding,  or  other 
favourite  Exercises.  He  had  visited  Paris,  when  young, 
with  his  Father  the  Duke  of  Dorset ;  and  the  French 
language  was  familiar  to  him ;  but  with  Horace, 
Tacitus,  or  Cicero,  he  had  formed  little  Acquaintance. 
His  initiation  into  public  Life,  Politics,  and  Parliament, 
took  place  too  early,  to  admit  of  storing  his  Mind  with 
classic  Images  or  Ideas.  Though  he  was  versed  in 
English  History  since  the  Time  of  Elizabeth,  during 
which  Period  of  near  two  Centuries,  some  one  of  his 
immediate  Ancestors  had  almost  always  sat,  and  some- 
times presided,  in  the  Councils  of  the  Sovereign,  he  was 
not  conversant  in  our  Annals  of  an  earlier  Date.  But, 
on  the  other  hand,  he  had  witnessed  much  with  his  own 
Eyes,  he  had  heard  still  more  from  others,  he  seized 
with  Ease  on  whatever  was  submitted  to  his  Under- 
standing, and  he  forgot  nothing. 

In  Business  he  was  rapid,  yet  clear  and  accurate; 
rather  negligent  in  his  Style,  which  was  that  of  a 
Gentleman  and  a  Man  of  the  World,  unstudied  and 
frequently  careless,  even  in  his  official  Dispatches.  But, 
there  was  no  Obscurity  or  Ambiguity  in  his  Composi- 
tions. Capable  of  Application,  he  nevertheless  passed 
little  Time  at  the  Desk,  or  in  the  Closet :  and  while 
Secretary  of  State,  under  critical,  as  well  as  perilous 
Circumstances,  when  every  Courier  brought,  or  might 
bring,  Accounts  the  most  disastrous ;  no  Man  who  saw 
him  at  Table,  or  of  an  Evening  in  his  Drawing  Room, 
would  have  suspected  from  his  Deportment  and  Con- 
versation, that  the  Responsibility  of  the  American  War 

309 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [irsi. 

reposed  principally  on  his  Shoulders.  More  than  one 
Member  of  the  Cabinet  was  supposed  to  enjoy  a  greater 
degree  of  personal  Acceptability  with  the  King ;  but 
none  exercised  the  Privilege  of  speaking  with  more 
freedom  to  him.  Lord  George  seldom  hazarded  to  ask 
Favours ;  but  when  he  undertook  any  Cause,  he  never 
receded  till  he  had  obtained  the  Object.  Dr.  Eliot, 
who  then  practised  Physic  with  some  Celebrity,  and  of 
whose  medical  Skill  Lord  George  entertained  a  high 
Opinion ;  induced  him  to  exert  his  Interest  at  Court, 
for  procuring  the  Doctor  to  be  created  a  Baronet. 
The  King,  who  disliked  Eliot  personally,  and  regarded 
his  professional  Talents  with  as  little  Partiality,  dis- 
played much  Repugnance  to  grant  the  Request. 
Yielding  however  at  last,  "  Well,  my  Lord,"  said  he, 
"  since  you  desire  it,  let  it  be :  but  remember,  He  shall 
"  not  be  my  Physician."  "  No,  Sir,"  answered  Lord 
George,  bowing,  "He  shall  be  your  Majesty's  Baronet, 
"and  my  Physician."  The  King  laughed,  and  Eliot 
was  raised  to  the  Baronetage. 

In  the  House  of  Commons,  down  to  the  last  Hour 
that  Lord  George  remained  a  Member  of  that  Assembly, 
he  was  constantly  the  Object  of  the  severest,  and  most 
pointed  Attacks  of  the  Opposition ;  who  always  hoped 
to  force  from  his  Irritability,  the  Secret  or  the  Fact, 
which  they  had  vainly  attempted  to  extort  from  the 
Apathy  and  Tranquillity  of  Lord  North.  In  this 
Endeavour  they  frequently  succeeded  :  for,  Lord  George, 
goaded  by  Reproaches,  often  fictitious,  frequently  un- 
just, generally  started  up  sooner  or  later;  repelled  the 
Charges  advanced ;  and  in  so  doing,  sometimes  put  the 
Adversary  in  possession  of  the  very  Matter  which  they 
sought  to  discover.  He  spoke,  as  he  wrote,  without 
much  Premeditation,  from  the  impulse  of  the  Occasion  ; 
in  animated,  rather  than  in  correct  Language ;  with 
Vehemence,  but,  not  without  Dignity.  His  Voice  was 
powerful,  and  his  Figure  commanding ;  though  he  did 

310 


1781.]  SEEING   VERSUS  HEARING 

not  always  thoroughly  possess  himself,  nor  display  the 
Coolness  demanded  by  so  trying  a  Situation  as  that  of 
American  Secretary.  His  Opponents,  who  well  knew, 
availed  themselves  of  this  Defect  in  his  formation  of 
Mind.  On  the  other  Hand,  the  Keenness  of  his  Sight 
gave  him  a  prodigious  Advantage  over  Lord  North, 
when  in  the  House  of  Commons.  Lord  George  Germain 
had  no  sooner  taken  his  Seat,  than  he  pervaded  with  a 
Glance  of  his  Eye,  the  Opposition  Benches ;  saw  who 
attended,  as  well  as  who  were  absent ;  and  formed  his 
Conclusions  accordingly  on  the  Business  of  the  Day. 
He  used  to  say,  that  for  those  who  were  enabled  to 
exercise  this  Faculty,  every  Thing  was  to  be  seen  in  the 
House;  where,  on  the  contrary,  nothing  except  De- 
clamation, was  to  be  gained  by  the  Ear.  No  Man 
better  understood  the  Management  of  Parliament ; 
the  Prolongation  or  Acceleration  of  a  Debate,  according 
to  the  Temper  or  the  Number  of  the  Members  present ; 
and  every  Detail  of  official  Dexterity  or  Address,  re- 
quisite in  conducting  Affairs  submitted  to  a  popular 
Assembly.  To  all  these  Arts  of  Government,  he  had 
served  two  long  and  severe  Apprenticeships  in  Ireland, 
as  Secretary  to  his  Father,  the  Duke  of  Dorset,  when 
successively  Lord  Lieutenant  of  that  Kingdom.  In 
political  courage  and  firmness  he  was  not  deficient.  I 
have  seen  him  in  circumstances  which  sufficiently  put 
those  qualities  to  the  proof,  towards  the  close  of  the 
American  war,  when  intelligence  arrived  of  Lord  Corn- 
wallis's  surrender  at  York  Town :  a  Disaster  of  the 
most  irreparable  nature,  the  load  of  which  fell  almost 
exclusively  on  himself. 

While  summing  up  Lord  George's  Character,  it  is  so 
impossible  not  to  think  of  the  business  at  Minden,  and 
consequently  not  to  allude  to  it,  that  my  silence  on  the 
subject,  would  seem  to  imply  my  conviction  of  the 
Justice  of  the  Sentence  passed  on  him  by  the  Court 
Martial.  On  the  other  hand,  I  feel  how  delicate  and 

311 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [i78i. 

invidious  a  matter  it  is,  on  which  to  touch,  even  at  the 
distance  of  more  than  half  a  Century.  Yet,  as  personal, 
and  political  Courage,  though  altogether  dissimilar,  are 
commonly  considered  to  have  an  intimate  connexion ; 
as  we  are  even  with  difficulty  induced  to  allow,  or  duly 
to  estimate  any  virtues,  however  eminent,  in  a  man 
whom  we  suppose  to  have  been  deficient  in  the  former 
of  those  essential  qualities ;  as  general  prejudice  is 
certainly  in  Lord  George's  disfavor,  and  as  I  may  lay 
claim  to  some  information  on  the  subject ;  I  shall  enter 
briefly  into  the  Disquisition. 

I  lay  no  stress  on  Lord  George  Germain's  illustrious 
Extraction,  since  we  all  know  that  the  greatest  Houses 
have  produced  the  most  degenerate  descendants ;  in- 
stances of  which  in  point  have  occurred  in  our  own 
Times.  Pope  justly  exclaims, 

"  What  can  ennoble  Slaves,  or  Sots,  or  Cowards  ? 
"  Alas  !     Not  all  the  Blood  of  all  the  Howards  !  " 

It  is,  nevertheless,  an  incentive  to  noble  Achieve- 
ments, when  we  descend  from  those  who  have  performed 
such  actions.  The  memorable  Letter  of  Edward,  Earl 
of  Dorset,  describing  his  Duel  with  Lord  Bruce,  under 
the  reign  of  James  the  First,  commemorated  in  the 
"  Guardian ; "  and  the  celebrated  Song,  beginning, 

' *  To  all  you  Ladies  now  on  Land, 
"  We  Men  at  Sea  indite," 

which  was  composed  by  Charles,  Earl  of  Dorset,  Lord 
George's  Grandfather,  as  we  are  assured,  on  the  Night 
before  the  Engagement  between  the  English  fleet,  and 
that  of  Holland,  commanded  by  Opdam,  under  Charles 
the  Second's  reign  : — these  two  Productions,  which  are 
as  universally  known  as  the  Language  in  which  they 
are  written,  sufficiently  attest  that  he  drew  his  Lineage 
from  men  of  Courage.  His  maternal  Grandfather, 


1781.]      GERMAIN'S  MILITARY  CAREER 

Marshal  Colyear,  Brother  of  the  first  Earl  of  Port  more, 
and  Governor  of  Namur,  with  whom  Lord  George 
passed  much  time  in  his  youth ;  had  grown  grey  in  all 
the  Sieges  and  Battles  of  the  Low  Countries,  under 
William  the  Third.  As  soon  as  England  took  a  part 
in  the  War  occasioned  bv  the  Accession  of  Maria 
Theresa  in  1743,  Lord  George  was  sent  to  the  Con- 
tinent ;  where  he  served,  if  not  with  marked  distinction, 
certainly  without  the  slightest  reproach,  under  the 
Command  of  Lord  Stair,  and  of  His  late  Britannic 
Majesty.  In  1745,  at  the  Battle  of  Fontenoy,  where  a 
number  of  our  Officers  fell,  he  received  a  musket-ball 
in  the  breast,  and  was  thrown  upon  a  waggon,  with 
many  others.  He  had  preserved  the  Uniform  that  he 
wore  on  that  day,  which  I  have  seen  and  examined ; 
bearing  on  it  the  mark  of  the  Ball,  corresponding  to 
the  place  where  he  was  struck,  and  other  Holes  in  the 
Skirts  of  the  Coat,  perforated  by  Bullets.  During  the 
domestic  Rebellion  that  followed  the  Defeat  of  Font- 
enoy, being  recalled  to  his  own  country,  he  accompanied 
William,  Duke  of  Cumberland,  from  the  Commence- 
ment, to  the  Close,  of  the  Insurrection  in  Scotland ; 
where  great  commendation  was  bestowed  on  his 
Services. 

Among  the  Dorset  Papers,  which  I  have  seen,  were 
preserved  a  Series  of  Letters,  addressed  by  him  to  the 
Duke  his  father,  containing  many  interesting  incidents 
of  the  years  1745  and  1746,  while  he  was  serving  in 
the  Highlands,  against  the  Rebels.  On  the  breaking 
out  of  the  war  in  1756,  he  accompanied  the  late  Duke 
of  Marlborough,  on  those  desultory  Expeditions  to  the 
Coast  of  Normandy  and  Brittany,  when  we  bombarded 
St.  Malo,  and  demolished  Cherburgh.  After  the 
Demise  of  the  Duke,  which  took  place  at  Munster, 
towards  the  close  of  1758,  it  is  well  known  that  Lord 
George  commanded  the  British  Forces  during  the 
ensuing  Campaign,  and  in  particular  at  the  Battle  of 


1781. 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [i 

Minden.  That  he  did  not  advance  at  the  head  of  the 
Cavalry,  on  that  Occasion,  with  the  Celerity  that  might 
have  been  wished;  and  that  his  Delay  is  ever  to  be 
regretted  on  a  national  Account,  because,  if  he  had  so 
advanced,  the  Defeat  of  the  Enemy  would  have  been 
much  more  complete ;  that  consequently  he  became  a 
just  Subject  of  Blame  or  of  Censure,  if  we  judge  by 
the  Result,  and  not  by  the  Motive ; — all  these  Points 
must  be  conceded  to  his  Accusers.  But,  the  Question 
is,  whether  he  manifested  any  such  Backwardness  to 
lead  on  the  Horse,  after  he  received  Prince  Ferdinand's 
Orders  for  that  Purpose,  as  justly  rendered  him  liable 
to  the  Suspicion  of  Reluctance,  or  to  the  Imputation  of 
Cowardice  ? 

The  Depositions  of  Lieutenant  Colonels  Ligonier, 
Sloper,  and  Fitzroy,  would  certainly  seem  to  affix  on 
him,  either  one  or  the  other  of  these  Charges.  But, 
the  Evidence  of  Lieutenant  Colonel  Hotham,  as  well 
as  the  positive  Testimony  of  Captains  Lloyd  and 
Smith,  two  of  Lord  George's  Aid-du-Camps,  appear 
as  completely  to  exculpate  him.  There  were  even 
negative,  if  not  positive  Doubts,  stated  by  Hotham 
and  Smith,  relative  to  the  Accuracy,  not  to  say  the 
Truth  or  Existence,  of  the  asserted  Conversation  held 
by  Colonels  Fitzroy  and  Ligonier  with  Lord  George, 
when  they  successively  delivered  him  Prince  Ferdinand's 
Orders.  Captain  Smith,  Sir  Sidney  Smith's  Father,  I 
very  intimately  knew ;  who  was  himself  a  Man  of  dis- 
tinguished personal  Courage,  strictly  conscientious,  and 
incapable  of  asserting  any  Thing  that  he  disbelieved. 
He  never  entertained  an  Idea  that  Lord  George  was 
withheld  by  unbecoming  personal  Motives,  from  ad- 
vancing at  Minden.  The  Fact  plainly  appeared  to 
be,  even  on  the  Testimony  of  Fitzroy,  Sloper,  and 
Ligonier,  that  either  Prince  Ferdinand's  Orders  were 
in  themselves  contradictory,  or  were  misunderstood  by 
the  Aid-du-Camps,  or  were  imperfectly  delivered  by 


1781.]        PENALTY  OF  IRRESOLUTION 

them.  Lord  George  displayed  evident  Irresolution 
under  those  Circumstances.  He  first  halted,  and 
afterwards  did  not  cause  the  Cavalry  to  advance  with 
the  Rapidity  that  would  have  ensured  the  Enemy's 
entire  Defeat.  Probably,  similar  Accidents  happen 
in  almost  every  great  Engagement.  But,  the  World, 
which  pardons  the  Excesses  of  intemperate  Courage, 
never  forgives  the  slightest  Appearance  of  Backward- 
ness in  the  Field.  Prince  Rupert,  who  three  Times 
ruined  the  Affairs  of  Charles  the  First ;  who  by  his 
impetuous  Valour,  lost  him  the  three  Battles  of  Edge 
Hill,  of  Marston  Moor,  and  of  Naseby,  is  pardoned  by 
Posterity :  while  Admiral  Byng  and  Lord  George 
Sackville  remain  under  Imputation.  Such  will  ever 
be  the  Lot  of  military  Men  who  venture  to  hold  back, 
when  they  might  go  forward  in  Action. 

It  must  nevertheless  excite  no  small  Surprize,  that 
Prince  Ferdinand,  though  he  alludes  in  the  General 
Orders  issued  on  the  Day  following  the  Battle,  to  Lord 
George's  supposed  Misconduct;  yet,  in  the  first  Dis- 
patches sent  to  this  Country,  containing  the  Account 
of  the  Victory,  made  no  public  Mention  whatever  of 
it ;  and  some  Days  elapsed,  before  the  Prince  pre- 
ferred any  formal  Accusation  against  him.  I  have 
seen  among  the  Dorset  Papers,  a  Series  of  Lord 
George's  Letters  to  his  Father,  written  from  the  Allied 
Army,  during  that  Campaign,  extending  to  within 
very  few  Days  of  the  Action  at  Minden.  And  I  have 
likewise  perused  the  Notes  addressed  to  Lionel,  Duke 
of  Dorset,  from  the  Foreign  Office  of  the  Secretary  of 
State  here,  on  the  Arrival  of  the  official  Intelligence 
of  the  Engagement ;  felicitating  the  Duke  on  the 
Result  of  a  Battle  so  glorious  to  this  Country,  and 
in  which  He  must  necessarily  feel  so  deep  a  personal 
Interest.  Not  a  Word,  nor  a  Hint,  appears  in  these 
Notes,  of  Lord  George's  supposed  want  of  Alacrity. 
How  are  we  to  explain  this  line  of  Conduct  in  the 

315 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [1781. 

Prince?  It  would  seem  as  if  the  Charge  should  have 
instantly  followed  the  Act. 

George  the  Second,  it  must  be  remembered,  was  at 
this  Time  near  Seventy-six  Years  old ;  strongly  pre- 
judiced, as  we  well  know,  in  favour  of  his  Relative 
and  Countryman,  Prince  Ferdinand;  and  naturally 
chagrined  at  an  Event,  which,  even  though  it  should 
have  been  publicly  recognized  as  the  mere  effect  of 
Misconception  or  Mistake  in  the  Orders  sent,  yet 
equally  afforded  Subject  for  Regret,  on  account  of  its 
injurious  consequences.  Under  these  Circumstances 
the  Court  Martial  took  place,  and  the  King^s  senti- 
ments respecting  Lord  George^s  Culpability,  were 
universally  known  throughout  the  Country.  It  is  a 
fact,  that  His  late  Majesty  sent  him  a  Message,  ac- 
quainting him  of  his  own  Determination  to  put  into 
Execution  the  Sentence  of  the  Court,  whatever  it 
might  be,  without  Mitigation.  Lord  George  was 
tried  in  March,  1760.  Had  the  late  King  died  in 
October,  1759,  instead  of  October,  1760,  might  not 
the  Result  in  all  probability,  have  been  far  less  severe 
under  a  new  Reign,  when  the  Clamour  of  the  Hour 
had  subsided? 

In  1759  and  1760,  Prince  Ferdinand  of  Brunswic, 
occupied  a  high  Place  in  the  admiration  of  the  English 
Public,  by  whom  he  was  considered  as  only  inferior  in 
the  Field,  to  the  Protestant  Hero,  as  he  was  then 
absurdly  denominated,  Frederic,  King  of  Prussia.  But 
his  Popularity,  I  mean,  Prince  Ferdinand's,  proved  of 
very  short  duration.  As  early  as  January,  1761,  we 
may  see  in  "  Dodington's  Diary ,"  how  low  the  Prince 
had  fallen  in  general  Estimation,  and  what  serious 
Accusations  were  brought  against  him.  Dodington, 
relating  the  particulars  of  a  Conversation  which  he 
had  at  that  Time  with  the  Earl  of  Bute,  says,  I  told 
him,  "  that  I  thought  Prince  Ferdinand  was  become  as 
**  unpopular  in  the  Army,  as  he  was  once  popular :  that 

316 


1781.J  SERIOUS  CHARGES 

"  he  was  accused  of  three  great  Heads  of  Malversation. 
"  The  first  was,  that  he  had  exacted  complete  Pay  for 
"  uncomplete  Corps :  the  second,  that  not  One  Shilling 
"  of  all  those  devastating  Contributions,  had  been 
u  carried  to  the  Public  Account :  the  third,  that  he 
lk  had  received  good  Money,  and  had  paid  the  Troops 
"  in  bad,  to  a  very  great  Amount,  and  at  a  great  Dis- 
"  count.1"  These  Charges  do  not  appear  to  have  ever 
been  refuted.  The  precedent  of  Admiral  Byng,  shot 
very  unjustly,  on  an  Accusation  of  Cowardice,  was 
recent.  If  the  Members  of  the  Military  Tribunal  who 
tried  Lord  George,  believed  that  he  had  committed 
the  same  Crime  as  the  one  imputed  to  that  unfortunate 
naval  Commander,  why  did  they  not  pass  on  him  the 
same  Sentence  ?  There  can  be  only  one  Answer.  The 
Evidence  brought  forward,  fell  short  of  Proof;  and 
under  those  Circumstances,  they  doubtless  were  not 
convinced  that  he  merited  Death.  But,  still,  as  the 
Prejudices,  or  prevailing  Opinions  of  the  Time,  hardly 
admitted  on  the  other  Hand,  of  his  Acquittal,  they 
cashiered  him.  It  is  for  Posterity  to  revise,  perhaps  to 
reverse,  that  Sentence.  I  have  endeavoured  fairly  to 
state  the  leading  Facts,  on  which  they  may  found  a 
Judgment. 

Lord  George's  Duel  with  Governor  Johnstone,  is 
well  known.  On  that  Occasion,  even  by  his  Adversary's 
admission,  he  exhibited  perfect  Self-possession  ;  present- 
ing so  fair  and  erect  a  Mark,  while  he  calmly  waited 
for  the  Governor's  fire,  that  it  extorted  from  him  an 
involuntary  Testimony  to  Lord  George's  courage.  The 
late  Lord  Sydney,  then  Mr.  Townsend,  who  was  his 
Second,  equally  witnessed  and  attested  his  coolness. 
How  can  we  believe  or  conceive,  that  such  a  Man,  on 
such  a  Field  as  Minden,  before  so  many  Spectators, 
would,  from  personal  Fear,  have  at  once  covered  him- 
self with  Ignominy  ?  As  little  is  it  proved,  whatever 
we  may  suspect,  that  Motives  of  personal  Animosity 

317 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [1781. 

to  Prince  Ferdinand,  with  whom  we  know  he  was  on 
bad  terms,  operated  on  Lord  George's  Mind,  and  im- 
pelled him  to  delay  moving  forward  with  the  Cavalry, 
to  complete  the  Victory.  It  is  evident,  on  the  calmest 
and  most  dispassionate  Review  of  the  Transaction, 
which  has  obtained  such  a  melancholy  celebrity  in  our 
Military  Annals  under  George  the  Second;  that  an 
Ambiguity  in  Prince  Ferdinand's  Orders  to  Lord 
George,  or  a  Contradiction  in  them,  produced  the 
whole  Misfortune.  We  may  indeed  assert,  or  believe, 
that  the  British  Commander  intentionally  misunder- 
stood them.  But,  where  was  the  Proof  adduced  of 
that  Fact?  Captain  Ligonier  brings  an  Order  for 
the  whole  Cavalry  to  advance.  Colonel  Fitzroy,  al- 
most in  the  same  Moment,  orders  only  the  British 
Cavalry  to  advance.  On  receiving  these  opposite 
Messages,  Lord  George  halts  the  Cavalry,  while  he 
gallops  up  to  Prince  Ferdinand,  in  order  to  receive  his 
personal  Instructions.  There  might  be  error  in  this 
Delay,  and  public  Injury  might  accrue  from  it,  as 
Prince  Ferdinand  asserts  did  actually  ensue,  when  in 
his  "  General  Orders  "  above  alluded  to,  he  says,  that  if 
"  the  Marquis  of  Granby  had  been  at  the  Head  of  the 
"  Cavalry  of  the  Right  Wing,  he  is  persuaded,  the 
"  Decision  of  that  Day  would  have  been  more  com- 
"  plete  and  more  brilliant."  Still,  there  is  no  proof  of 
Lord  George's  voluntary  Misconstruction  of  the  Orders, 
or  of  his  Reluctance  to  execute  them ;  and  the  Error 
might  have  originated  in  Mistake,  as  well  as  in  Volition. 
How  easily  would  the  whole  Misfortune  have  been 
rendered  impossible,  if  Prince  Ferdinand  had,  like 
Prince  Eugene  of  Savoy,  whom  he  might  have  copied 
on  this  Point ;  only  sent  one  of  his  successive  Orders 
i/i  Pencil?  Prince  Eugene  expressly  says  in  his 
"  Memoirs,"  "  I  derived  much  Benefit  from  always 
"  carrying  in  my  Pocket  a  Pencil,  to  write  in  the 
"  Officer's  Memorandum  Book,  the  Order  which  I  gave 

318 


1781.]  THE  EARL  OF  SANDWICH 

"  him  to  carry."  Such  was  the  constant  Practice  of 
that  illustrious  Commander,  when  in  the  Field ;  a 
Practice  peculiarly  demanded  in  the  Instance  before  us, 
if  Prince  Ferdinand  thought  that  he  had  any  reason 
to  doubt  Lord  George's  prompt  and  ready  Obedience. 
I  return  from  this  Digression. 

The  Earl  of  Sandwich,  who  had  presided  during  ten 
Years  at  the  Head  of  the  Admiralty,  was  universally 
admitted  to  possess  eminent  Talents,  great  application 
to  the  Duties  of  his  Office,  and  long  Acquaintance  with 
public  Business.  A  distinguished  votary  of  Wit, 
Conviviality,  and  Pleasure ;  he  had  nevertheless  been 
early  initiated  into  political  Life,  and  was  sent  by  Mr. 
Pelham,  then  First  Minister,  as  one  of  the  Plenipo- 
tentiaries in  1748,  at  the  Treaty  of  Aix-la-Chapelle. 
In  all  his  official  Functions  he  displayed  Perspicuity, 
as  well  as  Dispatch.  No  naval  Officer  who  stated  his 
Demand  to  the  First  Lord  of  the  Admiralty,  with 
becoming  brevity,  ever  waited  for  an  Answer ;  and  he 
was  accustomed  to  say,  "  If  any  Man  will  draw  up  his 
"  Case,  and  put  his  Name  at  the  foot  of  the  first  Page, 
"  I  will  give  him  an  immediate  Reply.  Where  he 
"  compels  me  to  turn  over  the  sheet,  he  must  wait  my 
"  Leisure."  How  laconically,  yet  forcibly  he  could 
write,  with  what  Conciseness  and  Severity  blended,  he 
exhibited  in  his  memorable  Note  to  Mr.  Eden,  after- 
wards created  Lord  Auckland.  That  Gentleman,  when 
he  quitted  his  political  Friends  in  1786,  in  order  to 
join  Mr.  Pitt,  who  sent  him  over  to  Paris,  for  the 
purpose  of  negociating  the  Commercial  Treaty ; 
addressed  a  circular  Letter  to  them,  endeavouring 
to  explain  and  to  justify  his  Line  of  Conduct.  Lord 
Sandwich,  in  answer  to  the  Letter  that  he  received  on 
the  Occasion,  instantly  wrote  back  these  Words.  "  Sir, 
"  your  letter  is  before  me,  and  it  will  presently  be 
"  behind  me.  I  remain,  Sir,  your  most  humble  Ser- 
"  vant."  Polite,  accessible,  and  endowed  with  great 

319 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [mi. 

natural  Capacity,  it  might  have  been  expected  that  he 
would  acquire  the  public  Favour,  in  no  less  a  degree 
than  he  enjoyed  the  Confidence  of  his  Sovereign.  But, 
many  Causes  conduced  to  render  him  an  object  of 
popular  Dislike  or  Disapprobation ;  some  of  which 
were  personal,  others  political.  At  an  early  period  of 
His  Majesty's  Reign,  Wilkes  and  Churchill  combined 
their  Powers,  in  order  to  expose  his  Character  to 
universal  Condemnation.  The  former,  in  his  "Letter 
to  the  Electors  of  Aylesbury,"  written  from  Paris,  in 
October,  1764,  designates  Lord  Sandwich,  as  "  the  most 
"  abandoned  man  of  the  Age : "  while  Churchill,  in  his 
Poem  of  the  "  Candidate,1*  speaking  of  him,  says, 

"  Search  Earth,  search  Hell,  the  Devil  cannot  find, 
"  An  Agent  like  Lothario  to  his  Mind." 

However  unjust  or  exaggerated  might  be  these 
accusations ;  yet  we  must  own  that  the  part  he  took 
in  denouncing  the  "  Essay  on  Woman,"  to  the  House 
of  Peers,  laid  him  open  to  the  charge  of  breach  of 
confidence ;  and  attracted  towards  him  the  severest 
Animadversions  of  the  Author,  whose  pen  inflicted  the 
most  incurable  wounds.  Though  he  had  already 
attained  his  sixty-second  year,  his  licentious  mode  of 
life  seemed  more  befitting  a  Minister  of  Charles  the 
Second,  than  a  confidential  Servant  of  George  the 
Third.  His  Fortune,  which  did  not  altogether  cor- 
respond with  his  high  rank,  and  habits  of  gratification 
or  expence,  was  supposed  to  lay  him  open  to  seduction  ; 
or  at  least  to  render  him  capable  of  listening  to  pro- 
positions, that  a  more  independent  man  might  have 
disdained.  His  enemies,  who  were  numerous  and 
violent,  maintained  that  even  Official  Appointments 
were  sometimes  conferred  under  conditions  not  honor- 
able to  the  First  Lord  of  the  Admiralty.  Naval 
Commanders,  sent  to  important  Stations,  on  which 
great  Emoluments  might"  she  naturally  expected  to 

320 


1781.]  THE  INDIA  HOUSE 

arise  from  Captures,  were  asserted  to  have  a  fellow 
feeling  with  their  Patron,  and  even  to  divide  with  him 
a  certain  Proportion  of  their  Acquisitions.  However 
improbable  or  unproved  were  these  assertions,  which 
doubtless  originated  in  party  malevolence;  yet,  as 
Names  and  minute  Particulars  were  added  or  invented, 
they  obtained  general  credit,  and  made  a  deep  im- 
pression. All  the  eloquence  of  Fox  in  one  House  of 
Parliament,  and  all  the  laborious  pertinacity  of  the 
Duke  of  Richmond  in  the  other,  had  been  employed 
during  successive  Sessions,  not  without  effect,  in  im- 
pressing the  public  mind  with  unfavourable  sentiments 
towards  him.  Palliser  was  represented  as  the  object  of 
his  partiality ;  Keppel,  as  the  victim  of  his  persecution. 
During  the  Riots  of  the  preceding  Summer,  in  June, 
1780,  he  had  been  marked  out  by  the  Mob,  as  a 
sacrifice,  and  narrowly  escaped  the  effects  of  their 
blind  animosity. 

With  consummate  ability  Lord  Sandwich  had  con- 
structed a  species  of  Citadel  within  the  Ministerial 
Trenches,  which  acknowledged  hardly  any  other 
Commander  or  Comptroller  than  himself.  The  India 
House  constituted  this  Fortress,  of  which  he  was 
supposed  to  possess  the  secret  Keys.  Many  of  the 
leading  Directors,  among  whom  were  the  two  Chairmen, 
looked  for  Orders,  as  it  was  commonly  believed,  not  so 
much  to  Lord  North,  as  to  the  First  Lord  of  the 
Admiralty.  The  influence  conferred  by  such  a  source 
of  power,  at  a  time  when  the  East  India  Board  of 
Controul  had  no  existence,  cannot  easily  be  estimated. 
He  was  not  wanting  in  endeavours  to  sustain  it  by 
every  possible  means  ;  and  well  aware  of  its  importance, 
he  contrived  to  distribute  among  his  chief  Adherents 
in  Leadenhall  Street,  some  of  the  minor  Honours  of 
the  Crown.  On  all  great  occasions,  when  the  concealed 
Springs  of  that  complicated  Machine,  denominated  the 
East  India  Company,  were  necessary  to  be  touched, 


WRAXALI/S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [mi. 

application  was  made  to  Lord  Sandwich.  Even  the 
intimations  sent  from  the  Treasury,  often  remained 
inefficient,  till  confirmed  by  him ;  and  when  the  First 
Minister,  towards  the  close  of  the  year  1780,  was 
prevailed  on  to  recommend  Lord  Macartney  for 
Governor  of  Madras,  as  Successor  to  Rumbold,  he 
found  that  no  serious  attention  was  paid  to  his  wishes, 
before  the  Admiralty  lent  its  co-operation.  So  vast  a 
field  of  exclusive  patronage  and  favour,  rendered  its 
possessor  not  only  independent  of  his  Colleagues  in  the 
Cabinet,  but  formidable  to  them ;  and  he  might  justly 
be  accounted  one  of  the  most  powerful,  as  he  was 
certainly  one  of  the  most  able,  Members  of  the  Adminis- 
tration. 

With  Lord  Amherst  I  was  well  acquainted.  In  his 
person  he  was  tall  and  thin,  with  an  aquiline  nose,  and 
an  intelligent  countenance.  As  Commander-in-Chief, 
or  to  speak  more  accurately,  as  commanding-in-Chief 
the  Forces,  he  enjoyed  a  place  in  the  Cabinet.  To 
Lionel,  Duke  of  Dorset,  he  owed  his  first  entrance  into 
the  Army.  From  the  situation  of  a  private  Gentleman, 
descended  of  a  good  Kentish  family,  but  of  very  slender 
fortune ;  his  military  talents,  and  his  success  in  America, 
had  deservedly  elevated  him  to  the  British  Peerage. 
Selected  by  the  discerning  eye  of  the  Earl  of  Chatham, 
he  had  been  sent  out  as  the  Companion  of  Wolfe, 
whose  brilliant  Conquest  of  Quebec,  was  confirmed  by 
Amhersfs  subsequent  Reduction  of  Montreal  and 
Upper  Canada.  Under  the  Shade  of  these  Laurels, 
so  honourably  earned,  which  had  likewise  been  re- 
munerated with  the  Order  of  the  Bath,  he  seemed  to 
challenge  the  National  esteem,  not  to  say  their  grati- 
tude. Individually,  he  possessed  both :  but,  in  his 
Official  character,  at  the  Head  of  the  Army,  he  did 
not  escape  censure  on  various  points,  materially  affect- 
ing the  Discipline  and  the  Honour  of  the  Service. 
Not  that  I  would  be  understood  to  say  of  Lord 


1781.]  A  RETICENT  MINISTER 

Amherst,  what  "  Junius"  asserts  of  the  Marquis  of 
Granby,  in  his  first  memorable  Letter,  dated  21st 
January,  1769:  a  Letter,  which,  fortunately  for 
"Junius,"  induced  Sir  William  Draper  to  become 
Lord  Granby's  Defender,  and  thus  attracted  public 
notice  towards  the  Production.  He  there  charges  that 
Nobleman  with  "degrading  the  Office  of  Commander- 
"  in-Chief,  into  a  Broker  of  Commissions.'"  But, 
though  Lord  Amherst  was  not  liable  to  such  an 
imputation,  yet,  neither  he,  nor  any  subject,  except 
one  nearly  allied  to  the  Throne,  is  raised  by  Birth  and 
Situation,  sufficiently  above  the  Crowd  of  Petitioners 
who  assail  him  in  his  Military  capacity,  to  set  at 
defiance  private  clamour,  menaces,  and  importunity. 

As  a  Member  of  the  Administration,  no  ability, 
however  recognized  or  transcendent,  and  no  past  services, 
however  eminent,  could  have  secured  the  public  favour, 
to  Lord  Amherst,  in  the  midst  of  a  War  such  as  that 
carried  on  against  America,  marked  by  ill  success,  and 
now  become  almost  hopeless  in  its  prospective  objects. 
The  constitutional  tranquillity  of  his  temper,  secured 
him  however  from  being  ruffled  at  any  indications  of 
popular  dissatisfaction.  I  have  scarcely  ever  known  a 
man  who  possessed  more  stoical  Apathy,  or  command 
over  himself.  Naturally  taciturn  and  reserved,  he 
rarely  disclosed  his  sentiments  on  any  subject  of  a 
political  nature.  Even  at  the  Cabinet  Dinners,  which 
were  held  weekly,  I  have  heard  Lord  Sackville  say, 
that  though  he  usually  gave  his  decided  affirmative  or 
negative  to  the  specific  Measure  proposed,  yet  he  always 
did  it  in  few  words,  often  by  a  Monosyllable:  but 
never  could  without  great  difficulty  be  induced  to 
assign  the  reasons,  or  to  state  the  grounds  of  his 
opinion.  His  judgment  was  sound,  and  his  under- 
standing solid;  but,  neither  cultivated  by  Education, 
nor  expanded  by  elegant  knowledge.  From  the  sense 
entertained  of  his  early  Services  beyond  the  Atlantic, 

323 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [mi. 

he  would  have  attracted  universal  respect,  if  the  Official 
and  Ministerial  Posts  which  he  occupied,  had  not 
counterbalanced  the  operation  of  those  resplendent 
Services  on  the  public  mind. 

Lord  Thurlow,  who  at  this  time  had  held  the  Great 
Seal  between  two  and  three  years,  though  in  point  of 
age  the  Youngest  Member  of  the  Cabinet,  enjoyed  in 
many  respects  greater  consideration  than  almost  any 
other  individual  composing  it.  He  had  been  indebted 
in  his  youth,  to  the  indefatigable  exertions  and  impor- 
tunities of  the  celebrated  Duchess  of  Queensberry,  the 
friend  of  Gay,  Pope,  and  Swift,  for  first  procuring  him 
from  Lord  Bute  a  Silk  Gown,  to  which  distinction  he 
long  ineffectually  aspired.  His  talents  had  subsequently 
excited  Admiration  in  both  Houses  of  Parliament,  not 
less  than  at  the  Bar;  while  he  sat  in  the  House  of 
Commons,  as  Attorney  General,  during  more  than  seven 
years,  from  1771  to  1778. 

Lord  North  derived  the  greatest  assistance  from  his 
eloquence  and  ability.  His  removal  to  the  House  of 
Peers,  would  even  have  left  an  awful  blank  on  the 
Treasury  Bench  in  the  midst  of  the  American  War, 
if  his  place  had  not,  during  the  two  succeeding  years, 
been  ably,  perhaps  fully  supplied  by  Wedderburn.  As 
Speaker  of  the  Upper  House,  Lord  Thurlow  fulfilled 
all  the  expectations  previously  entertained  of  him. 
His  very  person,  figure,  voice,  and  manner,  were 
formed  to  lend  dignity  to  the  Woolsack.  Of  a  dark 
complexion,  and  harsh,  but  regular  features ;  with  a 
severe  and  commanding  demeanour,  which  might  be 
sometimes  denominated  stern  ;  he  impressed  his  Auditors 
with  awe,  before  he  opened  his  lips.  Energy,  acuteness, 
and  prodigious  powers  of  argument,  characterized  him 
in  Debate.  His  comprehensive  mind  enabled  him  to 
mebrace  the  question  under  discussion,  whatever  it 
might  be,  in  all  its  bearings  and  relations.  Nor,  if  we 
except  Lord  Camden,  who  was  already  far  advanced  in 


1781.]      LORD  CHANCELLOR  THURLOW 

life,  did  the  Opposition  possess  any  legal  talents  in  the 
House  of  Peers,  that  could  be  justly  put  in  competition 
with  those  of  Lord  Thurlow. 

These  admirable  parts  were  nevertheless  by  no  means 
unaccompanied  with  corresponding  defects.  As  Lord 
Chancellor,  he  was  accused  of  Procrastination,  in 
suffering  the  causes  brought  before  him  in  his  Court, 
to  accumulate  without  end.  Perhaps,  this  charge,  so 
frequently  made  against  those  who  have  held  the  Great 
Seal,  was  not  however  more  true,  as  applied  to  him, 
than  of  others  who  succeeded  to  his  Office.  But,  even 
in  Parliament,  his  temper,  morose,  sullen,  and  intract- 
able, sometimes  mastering  his  reason,  prevented  him 
from  always  exerting  the  faculties  with  which  nature 
had  endowed  him ;  or  at  least  clouded  and  obscured 
their  effect.  In  the  Cabinet,  these  defects  of  character, 
which  rendered  him  often  impracticable,  were  not  to  be 
surmounted  by  any  efforts  or  remonstrances.  It  can 
hardly  be  believed  that  at  the  Ministerial  Dinners, 
where,  after  the  cloth  was  removed,  Measures  of  State 
were  often  discussed  or  agitated ;  Lord  Thurlow  would 
frequently  refuse  to  take  any  part.  He  has  even  more 
than  once  left  his  Colleagues  to  deliberate,  while  he 
sullenly  stretched  himself  along  the  chairs,  and  fell, 
or  appeared  to  fall,  fast  asleep.  If  I  had  not  received 
this  fact  from  an  eye  witness,  and  a  Member  of  that 
Cabinet,  I  should  not  indeed  venture  to  report  so 
improbable  a  circumstance. 

Notwithstanding  the  ruggedness  and  asperity  which 
he  displayed;  qualities  that  procured  him  the  Nick- 
name of  The  Tiger;  no  man  could  at  times  appear 
more  pleasing,  affable,  and  communicative  in  conversa- 
tion. I  have  once  or  twice  seen  him  on  such  occasions, 
which  were  more  highly  valued,  because  they  were  rare 
or  unexpected.  During  the  period  of  his  youth,  he  had 
led  a  dissolute  life  ;  and  had  given  proofs  of  his  devotion 
to  pleasures,  scarcely  compatible,  as  it  might  have  been 

325 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [irsi. 

thought,  with  the  severe  Studies  and  Profession  of  the 
Law.  To  these  Irregularities,  the  Duchess  of  Kingston 
imprudently  ventured  to  allude,  while  on  her  trial  at 
the  Bar  of  the  House  of  Lords,  when  Thurlow  was 
Attorney  General.  Like  Henley,  Earl  of  Northington, 
his  Predecessor  in  the  high  office  of  Chancellor,  Thurlow 
mingled  Oaths  and  Execrations  with  his  common  Dis- 
course. In  the  afternoon  of  life,  conviviality,  wine,  and 
society,  unbent  his  mind.  It  was  with  Mr.  Rigby, 
Lord  Gower,  Lord  Weymouth,  Mr.  Dundas,  and  a 
few  other  select  friends,  that  he  threw  off  his  Constitu- 
tional severity.  At  the  Pay  Office  in  Whitehall,  where 
Rigby  then  resided,  Lord  Thurlow  forgot  the  double 
toils  annexed  to  his  situation,  as  Head  of  the  Law, 
and  as  Minister  of  State.  Possessed  of  faculties  so 
transcendent,  however  mingled  with  human  weakness 
and  infirmity,  he  must  always  be  considered  as  one  of 
the  most  distinguished  individuals  who  has  sat  in  the 
Councils  of  George  the  Third,  at  any  period  of  his  reign. 
We  descend  now  to  the  less  efficient  Members  of  the 
Cabinet.  Lord  Bathurst,  who  had  been  at  this  time 
President  of  the  Council,  ever  since  the  Resignation  of 
Lord  Gower,  in  the  Autumn  of  1779,  was  son  to  the 
celebrated  Allen  Bathurst,  created  a  Peer  by  Queen 
Anne,  in  1711 ;  and  who  might,  at  the  time  of  his 
decease,  be  considered  as  the  last  of  the  great  Knot  of 
Wits  and  Men  of  Genius,  that  rendered  in  some  measure 
illustrious,  the  short,  as  well  as  inglorious  Ministry,  of 
Oxford  and  Bolingbroke.  It  is  to  him  that  Pope 
addresses  the  "  Third  Epistle  of  his  Moral  Essays ; " 
to  him,  in  Conjunction  with  Lord  Burlington,  the 
famous  Architect,  that  he  alludes,  when  he  says, 

"  Who  then  shall  grace,  or  who  improve  the  Soil  ? 

"  Who  plants  like  Bathurst,  or  who  builds  like  Boyle  ? " 

He  lived  to  an  almost  patriarchal  age,  in  the  posses- 
sion of  nearly  all  the  faculties  of  his  body  and  mind ; 

326 


1781.]  CABINET  MEMBERS 

passing  the  greater  part  of  the  evening  of  his  life, 
amidst  those  Woods,  and  in  those  Shades  which  he 
had  reared,  immortalized  by  Pope,  at  Oakley  Grove  in 
Glocestershire ;  enjoying  the  rare  felicity  to  see  his  son 
hold  the  Great  Seal  of  England.  I  believe  he  died  in 
1775 ;  having  by  a  singular  destiny  which  perhaps  has 
no  parallel  in  our  History,  outlived  more  than  sixty 
years,  the  Princess  who  raised  him  to  the  Peerage. 

His  son  may  probably  be  considered  as  the  least  able 
Lawyer  to  whom  the  Great  Seal  of  this  Country  was 
confided,  in  the  course  of  the  eighteenth  Century.  For 
Lord  King,  who  became  Chancellor  under  George  the 
First,  though  he  survived  his  faculties,  and  is  said  to 
have  drivelled  on  the  Bench,  originally  displayed 
eminent  parts ;  which  deservedly  raised  him  from  an 
obscure  origin,  his  father  having  been  a  Bookseller 
at  Exeter,  to  that  great  legal  Dignity.  Yet,  Lord 
Bathurst  held  his  Office  during  seven  or  eight  years ; 
and  I  have  been  assured  that  his  Decrees,  while  at  the 
Head  of  the  Court  of  Chancery,  were  in  general  regarded 
by  the  Bar,  as  wise,  just,  and  unexceptionable.  He 
was,  of  all  the  Members  of  the  Cabinet,  the  most 
advanced  in  age  ;  nor  could  he,  like  his  father,  boast 
of  exemption  from  the  infirmities  usually  attendant  on 
that  period  of  life.  A  degree  of  Caducity  was  visible 
in  his  frame,  and  even  his  mind  did  not  appear  to  be 
wholly  exempt  from  Decay.  In  Parliament,  his  Talents 
were  rarely  exerted;  but  his  unsullied  Character,  and 
moral  Qualities,  entitled  him  to  universal  Respect. 

The  Earl  of  Dartmouth,  as  Lord  Privy  Seal,  in  right 
of  his  Office  filled  a  Seat  in  the  Cabinet.  His  near 
Affinity  to  Lord  North,  and  that  circumstance  alone, 
placed  him  ostensibly  in  Administration ;  Lord  Dart- 
mouth's Mother  having  married,  after  her  first  husband's 
Decease,  the  Earl  of  Guildford.  In  his  public  Character, 
whether  in  or  out  of  Parliament,  he  excited  little  or 
no  share  of  general  Attention. 

327 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [1781. 

The  Secretary  at  War,  on  the  contrary,  though 
possessing  no  place  in  the  Cabinet,  constituted  an 
Object  of  universal  Consideration,  and  attracted  all 
Eyes  towards  him.  Mr.  Charles  Jenkinson,  since 
created  Earl  of  Liverpool  occupied  in  1781,  that 
Employment.  Few  persons  in  the  course  of  this  long 
and  eventful  Reign,  have  played  so  important  a  Part 
behind  the  Curtain  of  State.  Still  fewer  Individuals 
have  attained  to  such  Eminence,  personal  as  well  as 
political,  unaided  by  the  advantages  of  high  Birth,  or 
of  natural  Connexions.  Descended  from  a  very  respect- 
able Family,  that  had  been  raised  to  the  Baronetage 
by  Charles  the  Second  in  1661,  his  paternal  Fortune 
was  nevertheless  of  the  most  limited  Description,  when 
he  commenced  his  career.  But,  his  Talents  soon  dis- 
persed the  Clouds  that  attended  the  morning  of  his 
Life.  They  recommended  him  to  Lord  Bute,  then  at 
the  Head  of  the  Treasury,  who  made  Mr.  Jenkinson 
his  private  Secretary ;  and  through  that  Nobleman  he 
became  personally  known  to  the  Sovereign.  When 
Lord  Bute  withdrew  in  1763,  from  the  post  of  First 
Minister,  Mr.  Jenkinson  still  continued  to  occupy  the 
same  confidential  employment  under  his  Successor, 
George  Grenville;  nor  was  he  displaced  till  Lord 
Rockingham  came  into  power,  when  Burke  succeeded 
him  in  that  situation.  Those  who  supposed,  or 
asserted,  that  a  secret  Communication  was  still  main- 
tained between  Lord  Bute  and  the  King ;  as  well  as 
all  those  who  chose  to  consider  Lord  Bute  as  the 
efficient,  though  concealed,  Mover  of  the  machine  of 
Government;  accused  Mr.  Jenkinson  of  forming  the 
confidential  Medium,  through  which  that  Intercourse 
was  principally  maintained.  So  delicate  a  Trust,  if 
we  assume  its  Existence,  necessarily  exposed  him  to 
popular  Clamour,  as  being  equally  unconstitutional  in 
itself,  and  dangerous  to  the  liberties  of  the  British 
People.  But,  in  proportion  to  the  Obloquy  that 

328 


1781.]          THE  SECRETARY  AT  WAR 

such  an  Imputation  excited,  was  the  respect  that  it 
attracted. 

As  Lord  Bute  gradually  retired  into  the  shade  of 
private  Life,  and  became  insensibly  forgotten,  Mr. 
Jenkinson  proportionably  came  forward  in  his  own 
person,  and  on  his  own  proper  Merits.  Throughout 
the  whole  period  of  Lord  North's  Administration,  from 
1770  down  to  1782,  his  Intercourse  with  the  King,  and 
even  his  Influence  over  the  Royal  Mind,  were  assumed 
to  be  constant,  progressive,  commensurate  with,  and 
sometimes  paramount  to,  or  subversive  of,  the  Measures 
proposed  by  the  First  Minister.  However  difficult  of 
proof  such  Assertions  were,  and  however  contrary,  as  I 
believe,  they  were  to  Truth  or  Fact,  they  did  not 
operate  the  less  forcibly  on  the  Bulk  of  the  Nation, 
and  were  not  less  eagerly  credited  by  Men  of  all  Parties. 
No  Denials  on  the  part  of  Persons  in  power,  could  erase 
the  impression,  which  Newspapers  and  Pamphlets 
industriously  circulated  through  the  Kingdom.  In 
the  House  of  Commons,  where  their  Operation  was 
widely  felt;  the  Speakers  in  Opposition  continually 
affected  to  consider  Lord  North,  together  with  the 
whole  Cabinet,  as  played  on  by  unseen  Agents,  who 
alone  possessed  the  Secret  of  State,  and  the  real  con- 
fidence of  the  Crown.  They  did  not  scruple  even  to 
designate  Mr.  Jenkinson  as  the  Depositary  of  this 
mysterious  and  undefined  influence ;  if  not  exclusively, 
yet  in  an  eminent  Degree.  Of  course,  whenever  he 
rose  to  speak,  all  Attention  was  absorbed  by  him,  as 
being  the  supposed  Oracle  who  knew,  and  might  pro- 
mulgate, those  hidden  Truths  of  State,  in  which 
Ministers  themselves,  it  was  pretended,  were  not  always 
allowed  to  participate,  and  of  which  he  constituted  the 
only  certain  channel. 

At  this  Time  he  was  about  Fifty-four  Years  of  age, 
and  in  his  person  he  rose  above  the  common  height. 
The  expression  of  his  Countenance,  I  find  it  difficult  to 

329 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [mi. 

describe,  as  without  having  in  his  Face  any  Lines 
strongly  marked,  it  was  not  destitute  of  deep  intelli- 
gence. Reflection  and  Caution  seemed  to  be  stamped 
on  every  feature ;  while  his  Eyes  were  usually,  even  in 
Conversation,  directed  downwards  towards  the  earth. 
Something  impervious  and  inscrutable  seemed  to  ac- 
company and  to  characterize  his  demeanour,  which 
awakened  Curiosity,  while  it  repressed  Enquiry.  His 
Enemies  asserted,  that  he  resembled  a  dark  Lanthorn  ; 
and  as  much  as  the  human  figure  or  physiognomy  can 
ever  be  supposed  to  offer  such  a  strange  Similarity, 
unquestionably  it  existed  in  him.  Even  the  twinkling 
Motion  of  his  Eyelids,  which  he  half  closed  from  time 
to  time  in  speaking,  made  the  Allusion,  however  fanci- 
ful, more  close  and  striking.  His  manners  were  polite, 
calm,  and  unassuming;  grave,  if  not  cold;  but  not 
distant,  without  any  mixture  of  Pride  or  Affectation. 
In  society,  though  reserved,  he  was  not  silent ;  and 
though  guarded  on  certain  Topics,  communicative  on 
ordinary  Subjects.  He  always  appeared  as  if  desirous 
to  disclaim,  and  to  reject  the  Consideration,  which  he 
involuntarily  attracted.  It  was  not  difficult,  on  a  short 
Acquaintance,  to  discover  that  he  had  read  Men,  more 
than  Books;  and  that  his  Education  had  been  of  an 
inferior,  as  well  as  limited  kind.  He  neither  manifested 
the  elegant  Information  acquired  by  visiting  foreign 
Countries,  nor  the  classic  Ideas  and  Images,  derived 
from  a  Familiarity  with  the  Productions  of  Antiquity. 
Even  his  knowledge  of  modern  History,  was  rather 
financial  and  commercial,  than  general  or  critical.  But, 
in  Recompence  for  these  Deficiencies,  he  possessed  more 
useful  and  solid  Attainments,  calculated  to  raise  their 
Possessor  in  Life. 

No  Man  in  official  situation,  was  supposed  to  under- 
stand better  the  principles  of  Trade,  Navigation, 
Manufactures,  and  Revenue.  He  had  written  and 
published  on  those  Subjects,  in  a  Manner  that  suffi- 

330 


1781.]       PAYMASTER  OF  THE  FORCES 

ciently  proved  his  profound  Acquaintance  with  them. 
Supple,  patient,  mild,  laborious,  persevering,  attentive 
to  improve  the  favourable  Occasions  which  presented 
themselves,  and  always  cool,  he  never  lost  the  Ground 
that  he  had  once  gained.  As  a  Speaker  in  the  House 
of  Commons,  he  rose  seldom,  unless  called  out  by 
particular  Circumstances ;  nor,  when  on  his  legs,  did  he 
ever  weary  the  Patience  of  his  Auditors.  No  ray  of 
Wit,  Humour,  or  Levity,  pervaded  his  Speeches.  He 
neither  introduced  into  them  Metaphors,  Digressions, 
nor  Citations.  All  was  Fact  and  Business.  His 
language  had  nothing  in  it  animated  or  elevated. 
Scarcely  was  it,  indeed,  always  correct,  or  exempt  from 
some  little  Inelegances  of  Diction.  But  it  never  was 
defective  in  the  Essentials  of  Perspicuity,  Brevity,  and 
thorough  Information.  He  used  to  remind  me  of  a 
Man  crossing  a  Torrent  on  Stones ;  and  so  carefully  did 
he  place  his  Foot  at  every  Step,  as  never  once  to  wet 
his  Shoe.  I  have  seen  him,  before  a  crowded  House, 
acquit  himself  with  wonderful  Dexterity,  while  Secretary 
at  War,  when  officially  addressing  Parliament.  Such 
Qualifications,  even  independent  of  the  supposed  Favor 
of  the  Sovereign,  necessarily  rendered  him  an  Object  of 
Respect  and  of  Attention  to  every  Party. 

Rigby,  sole  Paymaster  of  the  Forces,  occupied  scarcely 
an  inferior  Place  to  Jenkinson,  in  the  public  Estimation. 
As  if  he  had  meant  to  shew,  that  he  acted  independently 
of  Ministers,  he  never  sat  on  the  Government  side  of 
the  House ;  but  he  did  not  on  that  Account  give  the 
less  unqualified  Support  to  Administration.  When  in 
his  Place,  he  was  invariably  habited  in  a  full  dressed 
suit  of  Cloaths,  commonly,  of  a  purple  or  dark  colour, 
without  Lace  or  Embroidery,  close  buttoned,  with  his 
Sword  thrust  through  the  pocket.  His  Countenance 
was  very  expressive,  but  not  of  Genius ;  still  less  did  it 
indicate  Timidity  or  Modesty.  All  the  Comforts  of  the 
Pay-Office  seemed  to  be  eloquently  depictured  in  it; 

331 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [1781, 

and  the  "  Lumen  purpureum n  which  beamed  from  his 
Features,  served  as  a  Comment  on  the  Text  of  "  Junius," 
when  he  panegyrizes  the  Duke  of  Bedford's  solitary 
Protection  of  "  blushing  Merit "  in  Mr.  Rigby's  person. 
His  manner,  rough,  yet  frank,  bold,  but  manly,  admir- 
ably set  off  whatever  sentiments  he  uttered  in  Parlia- 
ment. Like  Jenkinson,  he  borrowed  neither  from 
antient,  nor  from  modern  Authors.  His  Eloquence 
was  altogether  his  own,  simple,  strong,  and  natural ; 
addressed,  not  to  the  Fancy,  but  to  the  plain  Com- 
prehension of  his  Hearers.  Whatever  he  meant,  he 
expressed  indeed  without  Circumlocution,  or  Declama- 
tion. There  was  a  happy  Audacity  about  his  Forehead, 
which  must  have  been  the  gift  of  Nature :  Art  could 
never  attain  to  it  by  any  Efforts.  He  seemed  neither 
to  fear,  nor  even  to  respect  the  House,  whose  composi- 
tion he  well  knew;  and  to  the  Members  of  which 
Assembly,  he  never  appeared  to  give  Credit  for  any 
portion  of  Virtue,  Patriotism,  or  Public  Spirit.  Far 
from  concealing  these  Sentiments,  he  insinuated,  or 
even  pronounced  them,  without  Disguise ;  and  from  his 
Lips  they  neither  excited  surprize,  nor  even  commonly 
awakened  Reprehension. 

If  Jenkinson  might  be  esteemed  the  secret  Oracle,  to 
whom  all  those  men  denominated  the  King's  Friends, 
constantly  looked  for  direction  in  difficult  Cases,  such 
as  occasionally  arose ;  Rigby  was  the  avowed  Standard 
round  which  they  rallied.  Their  Numbers  were  con- 
siderable, though  differently  reported;  and  they  were 
supposed  by  no  Means  to  take  their  Directions  implicitly 
on  all  Occasions,  from  the  Treasury.  "  Junius  "  treats 
them  with  his  accustomed  Severity.  "  Ministers,"  says 
he,  when  speaking  of  Parliament,  "  are  no  longer 
"  the  public  Servants  of  the  State,  but  the  private 
"  Domestics  of  the  Sovereign.  One  particular  Class 
"  of  Men  are  permitted  to  call  themselves  the  King's 
"  Friends,  as  if  the  body  of  the  People  were  the  King's 


1781.]  "THE  KING'S  FRIENDS" 

"  enemies :  or  as  if  His  Majesty  looked  for  a  Resource 
"  or  Consolation  in  the  Attachment  of  a  few  Favourites, 
"  against  the  general  Contempt  and  Detestation  of  his 
"  Subjects.  Edward  and  Richard  the  Second,  made 
"  the  same  Distinction  between  the  collective  Body  of 
"  the  People,  and  a  contemptible  Party  who  surrounded 
"  the  Throne."  As  they  grew  up  and  encreased  with  the 
American  War,  so  with  its  Termination,  they  seemed 
to  become  extinct.  After  Pitt's  victory  over  "the 
u  Coalition,"  and  the  Convocation  of  a  new  Parliament 
in  1784,  the  King's  Friends  were  found  in  every  part  of 
the  House  of  Commons.  But,  it  was  not  so  in  1781, 
under  Lord  North,  when  Jenkinson  and  Rigby  were 
supposed,  however  erroneously,  to  be  more  in  the  real 
Secret  of  the  Crown,  than  the  First  Minister  himself. 
A  very  select  Party  usually  adjourned  to  the  Pay 
Office,  after  late  Evenings  in  the  House  of  Commons, 
where  the  good  Cheer  and  the  Claret,  obliterated  all 
painful  Recollections  connected  with  public  Affairs. 

The  post  of  Treasurer  of  the  Navy  was  occupied  by 
Mr.  Welbore  Ellis,  whom  we  have  since  seen,  after 
ostensibly  filling  the  Office  of  Colonial  Secretary  of 
State,  for  a  few  Weeks,  on  the  Resignation  of  Lord 
George  Germain,  raised  in  the  Winter  of  Life,  by  Mr. 
Pitt,  like  so  many  other  individuals,  to  the  rank  of  a 
British  Peer.  He  might  be  considered  as  the  Nestor 
of  the  Ministry,  and  of  the  House  of  Commons.  In 
his  Figure,  Manner,  and  Deportment,  the  very  essence  of 
Form,  he  regularly  took  his  place  on  the  Treasury 
Bench,  dressed  in  all  Points  as  if  he  had  been  going 
to  the  Drawing  Room  at  St.  James's.  His  Eloquence 
was  of  the  same  description  as  himself,  precise,  grave, 
and  constrained ;  unilluminated  by  Taste,  and  calculated 
to  convince,  more  than  to  exhilarate,  or  electrify  his 
Audience.  The  respect  due  to  his  age,  character,  and 
employment,  rather  than  the  force  or  novelty  of  his 
arguments,  commonly  secured  him  a  patient  hearing; 

333 


WRAXALLTS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [1781. 

but  he  was  neither  listened  to  with  Enthusiasm,  nor 
regretted,  when  he  ceased  to  exert  his  abilities  in 
support  of  the  Measures  of  Administration. 

The  Attorney  General,  Wallace,  as  well  as  Mansfield, 
Solicitor  General,  were  men  of  acknowledged  talents, 
Parliamentary,  no  less  than  Professional.  But  it 
might  be  esteemed  in  some  degree  their  misfortune, 
that  having  recently  succeeded  two  persons  so  eminent 
as  Thurlow  and  Wedderburn,  the  House  could  not 
avoid  judging  of  them  more  by  comparison  with  their 
predecessors,  than  by  their  own  intrinsic  merit.  Both 
the  Attorney  and  Solicitor  General  were  moreover 
obscured  in  the  superior  Energy  that  characterized  Mr. 
Dundas,  then  Lord  Advocate  of  Scotland,  and  since 
created  Viscount  Melville.  His  figure  tall,  manly,  and 
advantageous ;  his  Countenance,  open,  cheerful,  and 
expressive,  prejudiced  in  his  favor.  Neither  the 
Scotticisms  with  which  his  Speeches  abounded,  nor  an 
Accent  peculiarly  Northern,  as  well  as  uncouth,  could 
prevent  his  assuming  and  maintaining  that  place  in  the 
Ministerial  ranks,  to  which  his  pre-eminent  parts 
entitled  him.  These  very  defects  of  Elocution  or  of 
Diction,  by  the  ludicrous  effect  that  they  produced, 
became  often  converted  into  advantages ;  as  they 
unavoidably  operated  to  force  a  smile  from  his  bitterest 
Opponents,  and  chequered  with  momentary  good 
humor,  the  Personalities  of  Debate.  The  apparent 
frankness  of  his  manner,  which  formed  a  striking 
contrast  with  Jenkinson,  conciliated  or  disarmed  in 
some  measure  those,  whose  political  opinions  were  most 
adverse  to  Government.  Never  did  any  man  conceal 
deeper  views  of  every  kind,  under  the  appearance  of 
careless  inattention  to  self-interest.  In  him  was 
exemplified  the  remark,  that  "  Ars  est  celare  Artem-," 
and  the  seeming  want  of  caution  or  artifice  in  his 
ordinary  intercourse,  capacitated  him  for  contending 
successfully  with  men  of  more  habitual  reserve.  His 

334 


1781.]    EAST-INDIA  COMPANY'S  AFFAIRS 

voice,  strong  and  sonorous,  enabled  him  to  surmount 
the  noise  of  a  popular  Assembly,  and  almost  to  com- 
mand attention,  at  moments  of  the  greatest  clamor  or 
impatience.  Far  from  shunning  the  post  of  danger, 
he  always  seemed  to  court  it ;  and  was  never  deterred 


from  stepping  forward  to  the  assistance  of  Ministers, 
by  the  Violence  of  Opposition,  by  the  Unpopularity  of 
the  Measure  to  be  defended,  or  by  the  Difficulty  of  the 


Attempt.  His  Speeches,  able,  animated,  ana  argu- 
mentative, were  delivered  without  Hesitation,  and  un- 
embarrassed by  any  Timidity.  If  they  displayed  no 
Ornaments  of  Style,  and  no  Beauties  of  Composition, 
it  was  impossible  to  accuse  them  of  any  Deficiency  in 
sterling  Sense,  or  in  solid  Ability.  He  was,  indeed, 
without  excepting  Lord  George  Germain  himself,  the 
most  powerful  Auxiliary  whom  Lord  North  could  boast 
of  possessing  in  the  Lower  House.  Though  elevated 
in  the  Trammels  of  Scotch  Jurisprudence,  and  long 
accustomed  to  plead  at  the  Bar  of  that  Country ;  his 
Mind,  which  disdained  so  confined  a  Sphere  of  Action, 
propelled  him  to  try  his  Force  on  a  greater  Theatre. 
Animated  by  this  Resolution,  he  quitted  the  Study  of 
Law,  for  the  career  of  Politics  ;  and  in  Defiance  of  every 
Impediment,  ventured  to  seek  Fortune  in  an  English 
House  of  Commons.  Conscious  of  his  own  intellectual 
Powers,  and  guided  by  a  profound,  but  well-regulated 
Ambition,  he  already  aspired  to  Offices  and  Situations, 
seemingly  beyond  the  Pale  of  his  legal  Profession. 
India,  he  thought,  and  wisely  thought,  opened  to  him 
a  Field  worthy  of  his  talents ;  and  the  state  of  Danger, 
as  well  as  of  Disorder,  into  which  those  extensive 
Dominions  had  been  thrown,  by  the  Mismanagement 
or  Incapacity  of  the  East-India  Company's  Servants, 
particularly  on  the  coast  of  Coromandel,  necessarily 
brought  their  affairs  under  Parliamentary  Discussion. 
The  Occasion  was  favourable,  and  he  availed  himself  of 
it  with  Promptitude  and  Decision.  Placed  soon  after- 

335 


WRAXALKS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [i78i. 

wards  at  the  Head  of  a  Secret  Committee,  appointed 
to  enquire  into  the  Causes  of  the  War  existing  in  the 
Carnatic;  he  there  laid  the  Foundation  of  the  Power 
which  we  have  since  seen  him  exercise  as  a  Minister  of 
that  Department,  under  the  Administration  of  Mr.  Pitt, 
during  many  successive  Years.  Expensive  from  natural 
Character,  always  blending  Conviviality  with  Business, 
and  regardless  of  Money,  except  as  constituting  the 
Source  of  Enjoyment;  he  never  failed  to  form  one  of 
the  festive  Party  which  met  at  the  Pay-Office.  Closely 
connected  in  Politics,  no  less  than  by  Habits  of  Life 
and  private  Friendship,  with  Rigby;  they  might  be 
said  to  act  indeed,  in  secret  Unison,  and  to  lend  each 
other  a  mutual  Assistance  on  every  Occasion. 

The  two  Secretaries  of  the  Treasury  occupied  a  very 
different  place  in  the  scale  of  Ministerial  importance, 
under  Lord  North's  Administration.  Sir  Grey  Cooper 
was  confined  to  the  mere  Official  duties  of  his  Post ;  but 
Robinson  might  be  considered  as  one  of  the  most 
essential  Functionaries  of  the  Executive  Government.  I 
knew  him  intimately,  both  in,  and  out  of  Office.  A 
Native  of  the  County  of  Westmoreland,  descended 
from  an  obscure  family,  and  unadorned  with  any 
accomplishments  of  Education,  he  nevertheless  displayed 
many  qualifications  that  fitted  him  admirably  for  his 
situation.  He  possessed  solid  judgment,  combined  with 
unaffected  and  conciliating  manners;  was  capable  of 
great  application,  and  by  no  means  wanted  decision. 

On  him  devolved  that  delicate  and  most  important 
Department,  then  known  by  the  denomination  of  The 
Management  of  the  House  of  Commons:  a  Branch  of 
Administration  unfortunately  interwoven  with,  and 
inseparable  from,  the  Genius  of  the  British  Constitu- 
tion ;  perhaps,  of  every  Form  of  Government  in  which 
Democracy,  or  popular  Representation,  makes  an 
essential  part.  Towards  the  close  of  an  unfortunate 
War,  when  the  Ministry  was  threatened  with  annual, 

336 


1781.]  THE  "LIVRE  ROUGE" 

or  almost  monthly  Dissolution,  and  when  a  numerous 
Opposition  acquired  strength,  in  proportion  to  the 
National  misfortunes;  this  management  required 
unceasing  vigilance.  Robinson  was  the  Depository  of 
the  "  Livre  rouge?  where  were  supposed,  or  asserted  to 
be  contained,  the  Names  of  those  Members  of  one,  if 
not  of  both  Houses  of  Parliament,  who  were  retained 
by,  and  devoted  to,  the  Administration.  But,  it  was 
not  only  in  the  secret  Arrangements  of  Official  Business, 
that  he  manifested  dexterity  and  energy  of  Character. 
He  more  than  once  exercised  with  equal  ability  and 
effect,  the  Functions  of  higher  Offices  of  State.  It  was 
he,  who,  on  the  Refusal  of  Lord  Weymouth,  then 
Secretary  for  the  Southern  Department ;  counter-signed 
the  Secret  Orders,  which  were  sent  out  to  Madras,  on 
the  14th  of  April,  1778,  by  the  Chairman  and  Deputy 
Chairman  of  the  East  India  Company,  authorizing  the 
immediate  Attack  of  Pondicherry.  To  the  manly 
decision  of  this  timely  Measure,  embraced  by  Lord 
North  at  a  moment  when  the  war  with  France,  though 
inevitable  and  impending,  was  not  actually  commenced ; 
we  owed  the  Capture  of  that  important  Settlement,  the 
chief  Establishment  of  the  Enemy  on  the  Coromandel 
Coast,  which  gave  us  an  Ascendant  over  the  French, 
during  the  whole  future  course  of  Hostilities  in  India. 

January.]  After  having  surveyed  the  members  of 
the  Cabinet,  and  the  principal  parliamentary  characters 
on  the  ministerial  side  of  the  House  of  Commons,  it 
is  natural  to  proceed  to  the  great  individuals  who 
composed  the  Opposition  in  that  assembly.  Mr.  Fox, 
from  the  union  of  birth,  connexions,  talents,  and 
eloquence,  which  met  in  his  person,  had  become,  in 
the  beginning  of  1781,  confessedly,  without  any 
competitor,  their  leader.  Having  attained  his  thirty- 
second  year,  he  consequently  united  all  the  ardour  of 
youth,  to  the  experience  acquired  in  maturer  life.  It 
was  impossible  to  contemplate  the  lineaments  of  his 

337  22 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    firsi. 

countenance,  without  instantly  perceiving  the  in- 
delible marks  of  genius.  His  features,  in  themselves 
dark,  harsh,  and  saturnine,  like  those  of  Charles  the 
Second,  from  whom  he  descended  in  the  maternal  line ; 
derived  nevertheless  a  sort  of  majesty,  from  the  addition 
of  two  black  and  shaggy  eyebrows,  which  sometimes 
concealed,  but  oftener  developed,  the  workings  of  his 
mind.  Even  these  features,  however  seemingly  re- 
pulsive, yet  did  not  readily  assume  the  expression  of 
anger,  or  of  enmity;  whereas  they  frequently,  and  as 
it  were  naturally  relaxed  into  a  smile,  the  effect  of 
which  became  irresistible,  because  it  appeared  to  be 
the  Index  of  a  benevolent  and  complacent  disposition. 
His  figure,  broad,  heavy,  and  inclined  to  corpulency, 
appeared  destitute  of  all  elegance  or  grace,  except  what 
was  conferred  on  it  by  the  emanations  of  intellect, 
which  at  times  diffused  over  his  whole  person  when 
speaking,  the  most  impassioned  animation.  In  his 
dress,  which  had  constituted  an  object  of  his  attention 
earlier  in  life,  he  had  then  become  negligent,  even  to  a 
degree  not  altogether  excusable  in  a  man,  whose  very 
errors  or  defects  produced  admirers  and  imitators.  He 
constantly,  or  at  least  usually  wore  in  the  House  of 
Commons,  a  blue  frock  coat,  and  a  buff*  waistcoat, 
neither  of  which  seemed  in  general  new,  and  sometimes 
appeared  to  be  threadbare.  Nor  ought  it  to  be  for- 
gotten, that  these  colours,  like  the  White  Rose  formerly 
worn  by  the  adherents  of  the  family  of  Stuart,  then  con- 
stituted the  distinguishing  badge  or  uniform  of  Washing- 
ton and  the  American  Insurgents.  In  this  dress  he  always 
took  his  seat,  not  upon  the  front  Opposition  bench,  but 
on  the  third  row  behind,  close  to  that  pillar  supporting 
the  gallery,  which  is  nearest  to  the  Speaker's  chair.  It 
was  not  till  1782,  or  rather  till  the  beginning  of  1783, 
that,  with  Lord  North  by  his  side,  he  first  began  to  sit 
on  the  Opposition  bench,  technically  so  denominated 
in  ordinary  language.  I  am  sensible  that  these  minute 


1781.]  A  DISPUTED  ANCESTRY 

particulars  are  in  themselves  unimportant,  but  they 
nevertheless  approximate  and  identify  the  object.  And 
that  object  is  Mr.  Fox. 

His  paternal  descent  was  by  no  means  illustrious, 
nor  was  the  elevation  of  his  family  sufficiently  antient, 
to  shed  over  it  that  species  of  genealogical  respect, 
only  to  be  derived  from  the  lapse  of  time.  Collins, 
indeed,  says,  in  his  "Peerage,""  when  treating  of  the 
Barony  of  Holland,  that  "  there  were  Foxes  in  England 
before  the  Norman  Conquest."  But,  I  have  always 
understood  that  his  grandfather,  who  rose  to  consider- 
able eminence,  and  was  created  a  Baronet  by  the  name 
of  Sir  Stephen  Fox,  had  been  a  chorister  boy  in  the 
Cathedral  of  Salisbury,  when  in  1652  he  accompanied 
Lord  Wilmot  to  France,  after  the  defeat  of  Charles 
the  Second,  at  the  battle  of  Worcester.  It  has  been 
maintained,  and  I  have  heard  it  asserted,  that  their 
names  were  originally  Palafox ;  that  they  formed 
a  branch  of  that  noble  Arragonese  family,  so  distin- 
guished in  the  present  age,  by  the  glorious  defence  of 
Sarragossa ;  and  that  they  first  came  into  this  country 
in  1588,  when  one  of  the  Spanish  Armada  being 
stranded  on  our  coast,  the  survivors,  among  whom  was 
a  Palafox,  settled  in  England.  I  have,  however,  always 
regarded  this  story  as  a  mere  fable.  Sir  Stephen  Fox, 
towards  the  end  of  a  long  life,  during  which  he  made 
great  advances  to  honours  and  dignities,  having  married, 
became  at  seventy  years  of  age,  the  father  of  two  sons 
born  at  the  same  birth.  These  twins  were  both  in 
process  of  time  elevated  to  the  Peerage ;  a  fact  which 
had  antecedently  been  realized  to  a  certain  degree  in 
the  Cecil,  as  well  as  in  the  Herbert  family,  under  James 
the  First.  Charles  the  First  again  exhibited  it  in  the 
house  of  Rich,  and  we  have  since  seen  it  exemplified  in 
the  families  of  Walpole,  and  of  Hood. 

While  the  elder  son  of  Sir  Stephen  Fox,  was  created 
Earl  of  Ilchester,  by  George  the  Second ;  the  youngest, 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [i78i. 

Henry,  acquired  a  Barony  in  the  beginning  of  the 
present  reign,  by  the  title  of  Lord  Holland.  He  was 
unquestionably  a  man  of  very  eminent  attainments, 
possessing  a  classic  mind,  cultivated  by  study,  adorned 
by  travel,  and  illuminated  by  a  taste  for  the  elegant 
arts.  But  he  is  better  known  in  the  political  history 
of  the  late  reign,  where  he  performed  a  principal  part 
in  the  ministerial,  as  well  as  parliamentary  annals,  till 
he  sunk  under  the  superior  ascendant,  sustained  by  the 
irresistible  eloquence,  of  the  first  Earl  of  Chatham.  Of 
immeasurable  ambition,  and  equally  insatiable  of  wealth, 
Lord  Holland  was  enabled,  by  possessing  the  lucrative 
post  of  paymaster  of  the  forces,  which  he  held  during 
several  years  in  time  of  war,  to  accumulate  an  immense 
fortune.  It  was  not  however  attained  without  great 
unpopularity  and  obloquy,  which  accompanied  him  to 
the  grave,  and  exposed  him  to  much,  perhaps  to  un- 
merited, abuse  or  accusation.  His  moral  character  did 
not  indeed  stand  as  high  in  the  national  estimation, 
either  in  a  public,  or  in  a  private  point  of  view,  as  did 
his  abilities.  But  he  cemented  the  greatness  of  his  family, 
by  allying  himself  with  the  ducal  House  of  Lenox. 

Of  his  three  sons,  Lord  Holland  early  perceived  the 
extraordinary  talents  which  nature  had  conferred  on  the 
second;  and  in  the  fond  anticipation  of  that  son's 
future  political  elevation,  exhausted  on  his  education, 
every  effort  which  might  expand  or  mature  his  opening 
capacity.  But,  he  adopted  a  vicious  and  dangerous 
principle,  in  ordering  that  the  boy  should  neither  be 
contradicted,  nor  punished,  for  almost  any  acts  in  his 
power  to  commit,  of  puerile  misconduct  or  indiscretion. 
"  Let  nothing  be  done  to  break  his  spirit,11  said  Lord 
Holland;  "the  world  will  effect  that  business  soon 
"  enough."  When  he  made  the  tour  of  France  and 
Italy,  he  was  accompanied  by  a  gentleman  of  eminent 
parts,  Mr.  Macartney;  who  afterwards,  towards  the 
close  of  a  life  passed  in  the  public  service,  attained, 

340 


1781.]         "JUNIUS"  ON  CHARLES  FOX 

himself,  to  the  Peerage.  We  may  see  in  the  letters  of 
Madame  du  Deffand  to  Horace  Walpole,  what  species 
of  impression,  Mr.  Fox's  endowments,  and  the  sallies  of 
his  juvenile  impetuosity,  made  on  the  minds  of  the 
Parisians.  They  seem  to  have  considered  him  as  a  sort 
of  Phenomenon,  which  dazzled  and  astonished,  more 
than  it  pleased  or  delighted  them.  Before  he  attained 
fully  to  the  age  at  which  he  could  constitutionally  vote, 
tho'  he  might  speak,  in  Parliament,  his  father  procured 
him  a  seat  in  the  House  of  Commons ;  and  his  talents, 
aided  by  his  connexions,  placed  him  towards  the  close 
of  1772,  on  the  ministerial  bench,  as  a  member  of  the 
Board  of  Treasury.  He  occupied  the  situation  about 
two  years.  This  early  association  to  Lord  North's 
administration,  might  nevertheless  be  considered  as  an 
unfortunate  circumstance,  since  it  involved  him  in  the 
unpopularity  attached  to  various  measures  then  adopted 
by  the  government,  which  subsequently  led  to  a  rupture 
with  America.  That  even  previous  to  his  attainment 
or  acceptance  of  office,  he  was  considered  by  the  enemies 
of  administration,  as  a  devoted  partizan  of  ministry,  in 
training  for  future  desperate  service,  is  evident  from  the 
manner  in  which  "  Junius  "  speaks  of  him.  Writing  to 
the  Duke  of  Grafton,  in  June,  1771,  he  says, — "In  vain 
"  would  he  (the  King)  have  looked  round  him  for 
"  another  character  so  consummate  as  yours.  Lord 
"  Mansfield  shrinks  from  his  principles.  His  ideas  of 
"  government  perhaps  go  farther  than  your  own,  but 
"  his  heart  disgraces  the  theory  of  his  understanding. 
"  — Charles  Fox  is  yet  in  blossom ;  and  as  for  Mr. 
"  Wedderburn,  there  is  something  about  him  which  even 
"  [treachery]  cannot  trust.11  These  ministerial  fetters 
did  not  however  long  detain  him.  The  sarcastic  mode 
of  expression  chosen  by  Lord  North,  to  communicate  Mr. 
Fox's  dismission  from  the  Treasury  Board,  is  well  known. 
"  His  Majesty,"  observed  the  First  Minister  to  some 
persons  near  him,  "has  named  new  Commissioners  of 

341 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [1781. 

"  the  Treasury,  among  whom  I  do  not  see  the  name  of 
"  the  Hon.  Charles  James  Fox."  From  that  period, 
having  enlisted  under  the  banners  of  Opposition,  and 
being  aided  by  the  misfortunes  of  the  American  war,  he 
attained  in  the  course  of  about  six  years,  to  the  highest 
eminence  among  the  formidable  body  of  men  who  then 
opposed  the  measures  of  the  Crown. 

Pleasures  of  every  description  to  which  his  constitu- 
tion or  inclinations  impelled  him,  divided  however  with 
political  pursuits,  the  early  portion  of  life ;  and  some  of 
which,  if  fame  reported  truly,  might  have  furnished 
matter  for  a  new  "  Atalantis."  It  may  be  curious 
nevertheless,  for  those  persons  who  only  remember  him 
either  as  a  leading  member  of  the  Minority,  or  in  office 
as  minister,  to  contemplate  Mr.  Fox  when  at  the  head 
of  the  Ton,  who  were  then  denominated  "  Macaronis." 
Mason  describes,  or  produces  him  under  that  character, 
in  the  "Herioc  Epistle  to  Sir  William  Chambers," 
published,  I  believe,  early  in  1774.  After  enumerating 
with  vast  felicity  of  humour  and  Satire,  the  Asiatic  diver- 
sions supposed  to  be  exhibited  for  the  amusement  of  the 
British  sovereign,  he  thus  concludes ;  I  cite  by  memory : 

"  But  hark  !     The  shouts  of  battle  sound  from  afar  ! 
The  Jews  and  Macaronis  are  at  war. 
The  Jews  prevail,  and  thundering  from  the  Stocks, 
They  seize,  they  bind,  they  circumcise  Charles  Fox. 
Fair  Schwellenbergen  smiles  the  sport  to  see, 
And  all  the  maids  of  honour  cry  Te  he." 

Neither  the  pleasures  of  refined,  nor  of  licentious  love, 
nor  the  social  conviviality  of  the  table,  although  he 
might  occasionally  indulge  in  each  of  those  gratifica- 
tions, constituted  however  his  predominant  passion. 
All  his  inclinations,  from  a  very  early  age,  seemed  to 
be  concentrated  in  a  more  fatal  attachment  to  play.  In 
the  prosecution  of  that  propensity,  he  had  squandered 
prodigious  sums  before  his  father's  decease,  with  which 

342 


1781.]         FOX'S  ADDICTION  TO  PLAY 

Lord  Holland's  paternal  fondness  furnished  him.  To 
the  same  pursuit,  or  rather  rage,  he  subsequently  sacri- 
ficed a  sinecure  place  of  two  thousand  Pounds  a  year  for 
life,  the  Clerkship  of  the  Pells  in  Ireland ;  of  which  he 
came  into  possession  by  the  demise  of  his  elder  brother, 
Stephen,  in  December,  1774.  After  holding  it  scarcely 
ten  months,  he  sold  it  to  Mr.  Charles  Jenkinson ;  and 
he  disposed  in  a  similar  manner,  of  a  fine  estate  situated 
at  Kingsgate  in  the  isle  of  Thanet.  The  office  had 
been  procured  for  him,  as  the  estate  had  been  be- 
queathed to  him,  by  his  father.  We  must  confess  that 
these  scandalous  irregularities  of  conduct,  or  rather 
vices  of  character,  remind  us  more  of  Timon  and  of 
Alcibiades,  than  of  Pericles,  or  Demosthenes. 

Fox  played  admirably  both  at  Whist,  and  at  Picquet ; 
with  such  skill  indeed,  that  by  the  general  admission 
of  Brookes's  Club,  he  might  have  made  four  thousand 
Pounds  a  year,  as  they  calculated,  at  those  games, 
if  he  would  have  confined  himself  to  them.  But,  his 
misfortune  arose  from  playing  at  games  of  chance,  par- 
ticularly at  Faro.  After  eating  and  drinking  plentifully, 
he  sat  down  to  the  Faro  table,  and  inevitably  rose 
a  loser.  Once  indeed,  and  only  once,  he  won  about 
eight  thousand  pounds  in  the  course  of  a  single  evening. 
Part  of  the  money  he  paid  away  to  his  creditors,  and 
the  remainder  he  lost  again  almost  immediately,  in  the 
same  manner.  The  late  Mr.  Boothby,  so  well  known 
during  many  years  in  the  first  walks  of  fashion  and 
dissipation  ;  himself  a  gamester,  and  an  intimate  friend 
of  Fox ;  yet  appreciated  him  with  much  severity,  tho"1 
with  equal  truth.  "Charles,"  observed  he,  "is  un- 
"  questionably  a  man  of  first-rate  talents,  but  so  deficient 
"  in  judgement,  as  never  to  have  succeeded  in  any  object 
"  during  his  whole  life.  He  loved  only  three  things, 
"  women,  play,  and  politics.  Yet,  at  no  period  did  he 
"  ever  form  a  creditable  connexion  with  a  woman.  He  lost 
"  his  whole  fortune  at  the  gaming-table ;  and  with  the 

343 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [i78i. 

"  exception  of  about  eleven  months,  he  has  remained 
"  always  in  Opposition."  It  is  difficult  to  dispute  the 
justice  of  this  portrait.  Perhaps  we  might  add,  that 
towards  the  close  of  his  career,  he  emulated  the  dis- 
tinction of  an  Historian ;  in  the  pursuit  of  which  object, 
he  made  great  efforts,  and  with  a  view  to  facilitate  it,  he 
appears  principally  to  have  undertaken  his  journey  to 
Paris  in  1802.  Whether  he  succeeded  better  than  in 
the  former  attempts,  posterity  will  determine:  but  he 
would  certainly  have  attained  a  more  elevated  place  in 
the  temple  of  historic  Fame,  by  imitating  the  line  of 
Xenophon  or  of  Sallust,  than  by  taking  Livy  for  a  model. 
Before  he  attained  his  thirtieth  year,  he  had  com- 
pletely dissipated  every  thing  that  he  could  either  com- 
mand, or  could  procure  by  the  most  ruinous  expedients. 
He  had  even  undergone  at  times,  many  of  the  severest 
privations  annexed  to  the  vicissitudes  that  mark  a  game- 
ster's progress ;  frequently  wanting  money  to  defray 
his  common  diurnal  wants  of  the  most  pressing  nature. 
Topham  Beauclerk,  himself  a  man  of  pleasure  and  of 
letters,  who  lived  much  in  Fox's  society  at  that  period 
of  his  life ;  used  to  affirm,  that  no  man  could  form  an 
idea  of  the  extremities  to  which  he  had  been  driven  in 
order  to  raise  money,  after  losing  his  last  guinea  at  the 
Faro  table.  He  has  been  reduced  for  successive  days 
to  such  distress,  as  to  be  under  a  necessity  of  having 
recourse  to  the  waiters  of  Brookes's  club,  to  lend  him 
assistance.  The  very  chairmen  whom  he  was  unable  to 
pay,  used  to  dun  him  for  their  arrears.  All  dignity  of 
character,  and  independence  of  mind,  must  have  been 
lost  amidst  these  scenes  of  ruinous  dissipation.  In 
1781,  he  might  however  be  considered  as  an  extinct 
Vulcano;  for  the  pecuniary  aliment  that  had  fed  the 
flame,  was  long  consumed.  Yet  he  then  occupied  a  house 
or  lodgings  in  St.  James's  Street,  close  to  the  Club  at 
Brookes's,  where  he  passed  almost  every  hour  which  was 
not  devoted  to  the  House  of  Commons ;  and  during 


1781.]  BROCKETS  CLUB 

Lord  North's  administration,  Parliament  usually  re- 
mained sitting,  with  short  adjournments,  from  November 
till  July.  That  Club  might  then  be  considered  as  the 
rallying  point  and  rendezvous  of  the  Opposition  ;  where, 
while  Faro,  Whist,  and  suppers  prolonged  the  night, 
the  principal  members  of  the  Minority  in  both  houses, 
met,  in  order  to  compare  their  information,  or  to 
concert  and  mature  their  parliamentary  measures. 

Nature,  besides  the  extraordinary  endowments  of 
mind  which  she  conferred  on  him,  had  given  him 
likewise  a  constitution  originally  capable  of  prodigious 
exertion.  But  he  had  early  impaired  his  bodily  powers, 
by  every  excess,  added  to  the  most  violent  mental 
agitations.  These  acts  of  imprudence  had  produced 
their  inevitable  consequences,  though  for  some  time 
counteracted  by  youth,  or  obviated  by  medical  aid. 
As  early  as  1781,  Mr.  Fox  was  already  attacked  with 
frequent  complaints  of  the  stomach  and  bowels, 
attended  by  acute  pain ;  to  moderate  the  symptoms  of 
which,  he  usually  had  recourse  to  Laudanum.  The 
strongest  frame  must  indeed  have  sunk  under  such 
physical  and  moral  exhausture,  if  he  had  allowed  him- 
self no  interval  of  relaxation  or  repose.  But  happily, 
his  passion  for  some  of  the  amusements  and  sports  of 
the  country,  almost  rivalled  his  attachment  to  the 
gaming-table.  No  sooner  had  the  shooting  season 
commenced,  than  he  constantly  repaired  to  Norfolk. 
Lord  Robert  Spenser  generally  accompanied  him ;  and 
after  visiting  various  friends,  they  sometimes  hired  a 
small  house  in  the  town  of  Thetford,  rose  at  an  early 
hour,  and  passed  the  whole  day  with  a  fowling-piece  in 
their  hands,  among  Coveys  of  partridges  and  pheasants, 
for  successive  weeks,  during  the  autumn.  These 
salutary  occupations  never  failed  of  restoring  the  health 
that  he  had  lost  in  St.  James's  Street,  and  in  the  House 
of  Commons. 

Nor  did  the  rage  of  play  ever  engross  his  whole  mind, 
345 


WRAXALI/S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [1781. 

or  wholly  absorb  his  faculties.  Nature  had  implanted 
in  his  bosom  many  elevated  inclinations,  which,  though 
overpowered  and  oppressed,  yet,  as  he  advanced  in  life, 
continually  acquired  strength.  If  ambition  formed  the 
first,  the  love  of  letters  constituted  the  second  of  these 
passions.  When  he  contemplated  the  extent  of  his 
own  talents,  and  compared  them  with  those  of  Lord 
North,  or  of  every  other  individual  in  either  House  of 
Parliament ;  it  was  impossible  for  him  not  to  perceive 
the  moral  certainty  of  his  attaining  by  perseverance,  in 
the  course  of  a  few  years,  almost  any  public  situation 
to  which  he  might  aspire.  In  the  possession  and  enjoy- 
ment of  power,  he  necessarily  anticipated  the  recovery 
of  that  independance  which  he  had  sacrificed  at  the 
gaming-table ;  as  well  as  the  means  of  recompensing  the 
zealous  friendship  or  devotion  of  his  numerous  adherents. 
No  man  in  public  life  ever  possessed  more  determined 
friends,  or  exercised  over  them  a  more  unbounded 
influence,  though  he  was  by  no  means  as  tractable  and 
amenable  to  reason  or  to  entreaty  on  many  occasions, 
as  the  apparent  suavity  of  his  disposition  seemed  to 
indicate.  Even  interest  could  not  always  bend  him  to 
a  compliance  with  its  dictates,  nor  expostulation  induce 
him  to  pay  the  most  ordinary  attention  to  persons  who 
had  materially  served  him.  In  1784,  at  the  election  of 
a  Member  for  Westminster,  which  was  very  obstinately 
contested,  Horace  Walpole,  afterwards  Earl  of  Orford, 
whose  age  and  delicate  health  prevented  him  from 
almost  ever  leaving  his  own  house,  yet  submitted  to  be 
carried  in  a  Sedan  chair  to  the  Hustings  in  Covent 
Garden,  to  vote  for  him.  But,  no  remonstrances  could 
prevail  on  Fox  to  leave  his  name  at  Mr.  Walpole's 
door,  though  he  passed  it  continually,  in  his  morning 
walks.  Hare  himself,  who  was  one  of  his  most  favoured 
associates,  vainly  exerted  every  effort  to  make  him  say 
a  few  civil  words  to  a  lady  of  quality,  by  whom  he 
was  seated  at  supper  in  a  great  public  company,  met 

346 


1781.]  FOX'S  OPPORTUNITIES 

expressly  to  celebrate  the  success  of  his  Election :  a 
success  to  which,  that  lady,  as  he  knew,  had  contri- 
buted by  every  means  in  her  power ;  and  who,  as  her 
reward,  only  aspired  to  attract  his  notice  or  attention 
for  a  few  minutes.  He  turned  his  back  on  her,  and 
would  not  utter  a  syllable. 

If  ever  an  individual  existed  in  this  country,  who 
from  his  natural  bias,  would  have  inclined  to  maintain 
in  their  fullest  extent,  all  the  just  prerogatives  of  the 
crown ;  and  who  would  have  restrained  within  due 
limits,  every  attempt  on  the  part  of  the  people,  to 
diminish  its  influence;  we  may  assert  that  Fox  was 
the  man.  The  principles  of  his  early  education ;  the 
example  and  exhortations  of  his  father,  for  whom  he 
always  preserved  an  affectionate  reverence,  which  con- 
stituted a  most  pleasing  feature  of  his  character;  his 
first  political  connections  ;  all  led  him  to  the  foot  of  the 
throne.  He  had  tasted  the  comforts  of  office  under 
Lord  North,  and  his  very  wants  rendered  indispensable 
a  return  to  power.  Nor,  whatever  moral  disapproba- 
tion his  private  irregularities  unquestionably  excited  in 
the  breast  of  a  Sovereign,  whose  whole  life  was  exempt 
from  any  breach  of  decency  or  decorum ;  could  those 
defects  of  conduct  have  formed  any  insurmountable 
impediment  to  his  attainment  of  the  highest  employ- 
ments. In  point  of  fact,  neither  the  Duke  of  Grafton, 
whom  "Junius"  stigmatizes  as  "a  libertine  by 
profession;"  nor  the  Earls  of  Rochford  and  Sandwich, 
nor  Lord  Weymouth,  nor  Lord  Barrington,  nor  Lord 
Thurlow,  had  been  distinguished  by  sanctity  of 
manners,  though  they  had  all  occupied  the  first 
situations  in  the  state.  Sir  Francis  Dashwood,  who 
afterwards  became  premier  Baron  of  England,  under  the 
title  of  Lord  Le  Despenser,  and  whom  Lord  Bute  made 
Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer  in  1762,  far  exceeded  in 
licentiousness  of  conduct,  any  thing  exhibited  since 
Charles  the  Second.  He  had  founded  a  society 

347 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [1781. 

denominated  from  his  own  name,  "  the  Franciscans," 
who,  to  the  number  of  twelve,  met  at  Medmenham 
Abbey,  near  Marlow  in  Bucks,  on  the  banks  of  the 
Thames.  Wilkes  was  a  member  of  this  unholy  frater- 
nity, of  which  he  makes  mention  in  his  letter  to  Earl 
Temple,  from  Bagshot,  in  September,  1762.  Rites,  of 
a  nature  so  subversive  of  all  decency,  and  calculated,  by 
an  imitation  of  the  ceremonies  and  mysteries  of  the 
Catholic  church,  to  render  religion  itself  an  object  of 
contumely,  were  there  celebrated,  as  cannot  be  reflected 
on  without  astonishment.  Sir  Francis  himself  officiated 
as  High  Priest,  habited  in  the  dress  of  a  Franciscan 
Monk,  pouring  a  libation  from  a  Communion-cup,  to 
the  mysterious  object  of  their  homage.  Churchill,  in 
his  poem  of  "  The  Candidate,"  has  drawn  him  under 
this  character,  at  Medmenham :  but  I  cannot  prevail 
on  myself  to  cite  the  passage.  Immorality  or  even 
profligacy,  abstractedly  considered,  formed  therefore  no 
oar  to  employment  under  George  the  Third. 

Fox's  error  arose,  if  not  wholly,  yet  principally,  from  a 
different  source.  In  the  ardor  of  political  opposition, 
stimulated  perhaps  by  domestic  wants  of  many  kinds, 
finding  himself  so  long  excluded  from  office,  and 
conscious  that  he  was  become  personally  obnoxious  to 
the  Sovereign,  by  embracing  the  cause  and  the  defence 
of  his  revolted  subjects  beyond  the  Atlantic ;  Fox  did 
not  always  confine  himself  within  a  constitutional  and 
temperate  resistance  to  the  measures  of  the  Crown. 
Mingling  the  spirit  of  faction  with  the  principles  of 
party,  while  he  appeared  only  to  attack  the  Minister, 
he  levelled  many  of  his  severest  insinuations  or  accusa- 
tions at  the  King.  He  consequently  obstructed  the 
attainment  of  the  object  which  lay  within  his  grasp. 
As  the  American  war  drew  towards  its  termination,  he 
observed  scarcely  any  measure  in  the  condemnation 
which  he  expressed  for  the  authors  of  the  contest. 

When  the  new  parliament  met  on  the  first  day  of 
348 


1781.]     A  CONTRAST  AND  A  PARALLEL 

November,  1780,  and  it  was  proposed  in  the  address  to 
the  Throne,  that  the  House  of  Commons  should  ac- 
knowledge, "the  sole  objects  of  the  King's  royal  care 
"  and  concern,  were  to  promote  the  happiness  of  his 
"  people ; "  words  merely  complimentary ;  Fox  rising  in 
his  place,  exclaimed, — "  We  are  called  on  to  recognize 
"  the  blessings  of  His  Majesty's  reign.  I  cannot  con- 
"  cur  in  such  a  vote,  for  I  am  not  acquainted  with  those 
"  blessings.  The  present  reign  offers  one  uninterrupted 
"  series  of  disgrace,  misfortune,  and  calamity ! "  Only 
a  few  weeks  afterwards,  in  January,  1781,  when  the 
debate  on  the  Dutch  war  took  place, — "  The  reign  of 
"  Charles  the  Second,"  observed  Mr.  Fox,  "  who  twice 
"  engaged  in  hostilities  with  Holland,  has  been  de- 
"  nominated  an  infamous  reign :  but,  the  evils  inflicted 
"  on  this  country  by  the  Stuarts,  were  happily  retrieved 
"  by  a  Revolution ;  while  the  ills  of  the  present  reign 
"  admit  of  no  redress."  He  even  proceeded  to  draw  a 
sort  of  parallel,  or  rather  contrast,  between  Catherine 
the  Second,  and  George  the  Third ;  who  having  ascended 
the  thrones  of  Russia  and  of  Great  Britain,  nearly  about 
the  same  time,  had  exhibited  an  opposite  line  of  con- 
duct ;  the  former  empire  rising  under  Catherine  into 
eminence;  while  England  governed  by  George,  sunk 
into  contempt.  In  November,  1779,  ne  far  exceeded 
even  the  foregoing  remarks,  when  he  did  not  hesitate  to 
compare  Henry  the  Sixth  with  His  present  Majesty ; 
and  to  assimilate  their  characters,  qualities,  and  the 
disgraces  of  their  respective  reigns,  as  affording  the 
most  complete  resemblance.  "Both,"  he  observed, 
"  owed  the  crown  to  revolutions :  both  were  pious 
"  princes,  and  both  lost  the  acquisitions  of  their  pre- 
"  decessor."  The  speeches  of  Fox,  it  must  be  owned, 
breathed  a  very  revolutionary  spirit,  throughout  the 
whole  progress  of  the  American  war.  Smarting  under 
such  reflections,  the  King  began  to  consider  the 
principles  and  the  doctrines  of  Fox,  as  inseparably 

349 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [irsi. 

implicated  with  rebellion.  From  that  instant,  the 
splendor  of  his  talents  only  enhanced  the  magnitude  of 
his  offence.  His  uncle  the  Duke  of  Richmond,  who 
seemed  to  emulate  the  same  distinction,  and  who  in- 
dulged himself  in  remarks  equally  severe  on  the  supposed 
interference  of  the  Crown  in  perpetuating  the  struggle, 
might  find  pardon  in  the  mediocrity  of  his  abilities. 
But,  Fox's  fault  necessarily  inspired  deeper  feelings  of 
resentment,  and  may  be  said  to  have  eminently  con- 
tributed to  the  misfortunes  of  his  political  life. 

Amidst  the  wildest  excesses  of  youth,  even  while  the 
perpetual  victim  of  his  passion  for  play,  his  elegant 
mind  eagerly  cultivated  at  intervals,  a  taste  for  letters. 
His  education  had  made  him  early  acquainted  with  the 
writers  of  Greece  and  Rome,  historical,  as  well  as 
philosophical  and  poetical.  The  beauties  of  Horace, 
Tacitus,  Juvenal,  and  Cicero,  which  were  familiar  to 
him,  seemed  always  to  present  themselves  to  his  memory, 
without  an  effort.  When  speaking  in  Parliament,  he 
knew  how  to  avail  himself  of  their  assistance,  with  a 
promptitude  and  facility  that  it  is  difficult  to  imagine. 
Burke  himself  was  not  his  superior  on  this  point.  So 
well  had  he  been  grounded  in  classic  knowledge,  that 
he  could  read  the  Greek,  no  less  than  the  Roman 
historians,  as  well  as  poets,  in  the  original ;  and  how- 
ever extraordinary  the  fact  may  appear,  he  found 
resources  in  the  perusal  of  their  works,  under  the  most 
severe  depressions  occasioned  by  ill  success  at  the  gam- 
ing table.  Topham  Beauclerk,  whom  I  have  already 
had  occasion  to  mention,  and  who  always  maintained 
habits  of  great  intimacy  with  Fox ;  quitted  him  one 
morning  at  six  o'clock,  after  having  passed  the  whole 
preceding  night  together  at  Faro.  Fortune  had  been 
most  unfavourable  to  Fox,  whom  his  friend  left  in  a 
frame  of  mind  approaching  to  desperation.  Beau- 
clerk's  anxiety  for  the  consequences  which  might  ensue 
from  such  a  state  of  agitation,  impelled  him  to  be 

350 


1781.]  FOX'S  LITERARY  TASTES 

early  at  Fox's  lodgings ;  and  on  arriving,  he  enquired, 
not  without  apprehension,  whether  he  was  risen.  The 
servant  replying  that  Mr.  Fox  was  in  the  drawing-room, 
he  walked  up  stairs ;  and  cautiously  opening  the  door, 
where  he  expected  to  behold  a  frantic  gamester  stretched 
on  the  floor,  bewailing  his  misfortunes,  or  plunged  in 
silent  despair ;  to  his  equal  astonishment  and  satisfac- 
tion, Beauclerk  discovered  him  intently  engaged  in 
reading  a  Greek  Herodotus.  "  What  would  you  have 
"  me  do,"  said  he,  "  I  have  lost  my  last  shilling ! " 
Such  was  the  elasticity,  suavity,  and  equality  of  dis- 
position that  characterized  him ;  and  with  so  little 
effort  did  he  pass  from  profligate  dissipation,  to  re- 
searches of  taste  or  literature.  After  staking  and  losing 
all  that  he  could  raise,  at  Faro ;  instead  of  exclaiming 
against  fortune,  or  manifesting  the  agitation  natural 
under  such  circumstances,  he  has  been  known  to  lay  his 
head  on  the  table ;  and  retaining  his  place,  but,  extenu- 
ated by  fatigue  of  mind  and  body,  almost  immediately 
to  fall  into  a  profound  sleep. 

Mr.  Fox  was  not  only  conversant  with  the  works  of 
antiquity :  modern  history,  polite  letters,  and  poetry, 
were  equally  familiar  to  him.  Few  individuals  were 
better  instructed  in  the  annals  of  their  own  country. 
Having  travelled  when  young,  over  France  and  Italy, 
he  had  studied  the  finest  productions  of  those  countries, 
so  fertile  in  works  of  genius,  at  the  fountain-head. 
Davila  and  Guicciardini  he  read  in  the  original.  Dante, 
Ariosto,  and  Tasso,  constituted  the  frequent  compan- 
ions of  his  leisure  hours,  whom  he  perused  with  delight ; 
and  the  beautiful  passages  of  which  authors,  as  he 
proceeded,  he  constantly  marked  with  his  own  hand. 
For  the  poem  of  the  "  Orlando  Furioso,"  I  know  that 
he  expressed  great  partiality.  Nor  was  he  devoid, 
himself,  of  some  portion  of  poetic  talent,  as  many 
compositions  of  his  pen,  which  remain,  sufficiently 
attest;  though,  for  ease,  delicacy,  and  playful  Satire, 

351 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

he  could  not  stand  a  competition  in  that  branch  of 
accomplishment,  with  his  friend  and  companion,  Colonel 
Fitzpatrick.  The  verses,  or  Epigram,  written  on 
Gibbon's  accepting  the  employment  of  a  Lord  of  Trade, 
in  1779,  beginning, 

"  King  George  in  a  fright, 

Lest  Gibbon  should  write 
The  hist'ry  of  England's  disgrace ; 

Thought  no  way  so  sure 

His  pen  to  secure, 
As  to  give  the  historian  a  place  ; " 

I  have  always  understood  to  be  from  Fox's  pen,  though 
it  is  disowned  by  Lord  Holland,  as  "  certainly  not  his 
"  uncle's  composition."  I  know,  however,  that  some 
years  afterwards,  when  his  effects  were  seized  for  debt, 
and  sold ;  a  set  of  Gibbon's  "  Decline  and  Fall  of  the 
"  Roman  Empire,"  in  the  first  leaf  of  which,  Fox  had 
with  his  own  hand  inserted  the  Stanzas  in  question ; 
sold  for  a  very  considerable  sum,  under  the  belief  or 
conviction  that  he  was  their  author. 

Fox  conversed  in  French,  nearly  with  the  same  purity 
and  facility,  as  he  did  in  English ;  writing  in  that 
language  not  less  correctly,  nor  with  less  elegance.  A 
man  of  his  high  birth  and  connexions,  possessing 
qualifications  so  rare,  independant  of  his  parliamentary 
talents,  seemed  to  be  pointed  out  by  nature,  for  the 
Superintendence  of  the  foreign  Department  of  state. 
Those  persons  who  anticipated  the  fall  of  Lord  North's 
administration,  already  imagined  that  they  beheld  Mr. 
Fox  in  that  situation,  for  which  talents  and  education 
had  evidently  designed  him.  Yet,  after  contemplating 
the  portrait  which  I  have  here  sketched,  and  which,  I 
imagine,  even  his  greatest  admirers  will  admit  to  do 
him  no  injustice;  it  is  for  impartial  posterity  to  de- 
termine, whether  on  full  examination  of  his  merits  and 
defects,  George  the  Third  may  be  considered  as  most 

352 


1781.]       QUALIFICATIONS  FOR  OFFICE 

deserving  of  approbation  or  of  blame,  in  never  having 
at  any  period  of  his  reign,  voluntarily  called  Mr.  Fox 
to  his  counsels.  If  energy  of  mind,  enlargement  of 
views,  firmness  of  character,  amenity  of  manners,  ac- 
quaintance with  foreign  courts  and  languages,  facility 
in  conducting  business,  and  prodigious  intellectual 
powers,  combining  eloquence,  application,  as  well  as 
discernment ;  —  if  these  endowments  are  considered  as 
forming  an  incontestable  claim  to  public  employment, 
unsustained  by  moral  qualities,  or  by  property;  we 
must  condemn  the  sentence  of  exclusion  passed  upon 
him.  Those  persons  on  the  other  hand,  who  consider 
all  talent,  however  eminent,  as  radically  defective, 
unless  sustained  by  decorum,  and  a  regard  for  opinion ; 
as  well  as  all  who  prefer  sobriety  of  conduct,  regularity 
of  deportment,  and  the  virtues  of  private  life,  above 
any  ability  which  nature  can  bestow  on  man ; — lastly, 
all  who  regard  judgment,  under  the  controul  of  strict 
principle,  as  the  most  indispensable  requisite  of  a 
minister  to  whom  the  public  honor  and  felicity  are  in 
some  measure  necessarily  entrusted ; — such  persons  will 
probably  hesitate  before  they  decide  too  hastily,  on  the 
degree  of  censure  or  of  commendation,  which  the  King's 
conduct  towards  Fox,  ought  to  excite  in  our  minds. 

If  Fox  occupied  the  first  place  in  the  ranks  of  opposi- 
tion, Burke  might  be  pronounced  without  contest,  the 
second  person  in  that  powerful  body.  His  extra- 
ordinary endowments  of  mind  superseded  every  defect 
of  birth,  fortune,  connexions,  or  country ;  and  placed 
him  on  an  eminence,  to  which  no  subject  in  my  time, 
unassisted  by  those  advantages,  with  the  single  ex- 
ception of  Mr.  Sheridan,  has  ever  attained  in  the 
public  estimation.  For  it  may  perhaps  be  justly 
questioned  whether  the  splendid  talents  of  the  first 
Mr.  Pitt,  would  have  forced  his  way  into  the  Cabinet, 
unaided  and  unsustained  by  his  alliance  with  the  family 
of  Grenville.  Of  years  much  more  advanced  than  Fox, 

353  23 


WRAX ALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [1781. 

Burke  had  already  attained  to  the  Acme  of  his  fame  as 
a  speaker,  and  could  not  well  augment  the  reputation 
which  he  had  acquired  in  that  capacity.  Perhaps,  if 
we  were  to  point  out  the  period  of  his  life  when  he 
stood  on  the  highest  ground  as  a  public  man,  in  the 
estimation  of  all  parties,  we  should  name  the  year  1781. 
His  recent  exertions  in  bringing  forward  the  Bill  for 
the  reform  of  the  Civil  List,  which  had  engaged  such 
general  attention  in  the  last  session  of  the  preceding 
Parliament,  continued  yet  fresh  in  recollection.  What- 
ever opinion  might  be  entertained  respecting  the 
necessity  or  the  eligibility  of  those  proposed  regula- 
tions in  the  royal  Household ;  only  one  sentiment 
pervaded  the  house  and  the  nation,  on  the  unexampled 
combination  of  eloquence,  labor,  and  perseverance, 
which  had  been  displayed  by  their  enlightened  author. 
They  covered  with  astonishment  and  admiration, 
even  those  who  from  principle  or  from  party,  appeared 
most  strenuous  in  opposing  the  progress  of  the  Bill 
itself,  through  every  stage.  The  very  rejection  which 
had  attended  many  clauses  of  it,  and  the  address  with 
which  others  were  finally  evaded  or  eluded,  had  con- 
duced to  raise  him  in  the  national  opinion. 

While  however  I  do  this  justice  to  his  talents  and  inten- 
tions, it  is  impossible  not  to  consider  with  very  different 
feelings,  the  splendid  Eulogium  which  he  made  on  that 
occasion,  of  which  Necker  formed  the  subject.  Burke, 
in  sublime  and  animated  language,  described  the  system 
of  public  credit  adopted  by  Louis  the  Sixteenth,  under 
the  guidance  of  his  Genevese  financial  Minister ;  which 
he  depictured  as  the  consummation  of  human  ability, 
economy,  and  judicious  calculation.  Neither  Sully,  nor 
Colbert,  he  said,  could  compete  with  Necker :  while  the 
Sovereign  of  France,  unlike  his  predecessors  on  the 
throne,  who  had  recourse  when  in  distress,  to  the  bold 
frauds  or  plunges  of  bankrupt  despotism,  for  raising 
pecuniary  supplies ;  built  all  his  plans  on  the  firm  basis 

354 


1781.]  EDMUND  BURKE 

of  national  confidence,  sustained  by  pecuniary  regula- 
tions calculated  to  pay  the  interest  of  the  debt  thus 
incurred.  Such  were  the  arts  and  assertions,  by  which 
George  the  Third,  Lord  North,  and  the  American  war, 
became  objects  of  reprobation!  If  Burke  really  be- 
lieved the  facts  that  he  laid  down,  what  are  we  to  think 
of  his  judgement !  But,  there  is  a  [wholly]  mistaken 
zeal  in  politics,  as  in  religion,  of  which  delusive  cup  he 
had  drank  deep.  The  intoxication  insensibly  dispersed 
after  1789;  and  before  1792,  he  beheld  Louis  the 
Sixteenth,  Necker,  and  their  insensate,  or  pernicious 
measures,  through  a  just  Medium.  He  then  en- 
deavoured to  counteract  the  effect  of  his  own  orations. 
In  1781,  the  delusion  subsisted  in  all  its  force.  The 
unqualified  condemnation  which  he  had  always  bestowed 
on  the  American  war,  from  the  period  of  its  commence- 
ment, seemed  to  be  at  least  justified  by  the  result  of 
the  contest ;  and  in  that  sentiment  he  was  then  sup- 
ported by  a  majority  of  the  British  people.  When 
to  the  operation  of  these  combined  causes,  we  add  the 
acknowledged  mediocrity  of  his  fortune,  which  left  him 
in  a  sort  of  dependance  on  the  Marquis  of  Rockingham  ; 
together  with  his  long  exclusion  from  office,  and  his 
unimpeached  moral  character,  contrasted  with  the  ir- 
regularities of  Fox's  conduct;  we  shall  not  wonder  at 
the  high  place  which  he  occupied,  within,  no  less  than 
without,  the  walls  of  the  House  of  Commons. 

All  those  persons  to  whom  his  memory  is  dear,  may 
like  to  contemplate  him  at  this  point  of  time,  when  he 
appears  most  resplendent,  as  well  as  free  from  many  of 
the  weaknesses,  inconsistencies,  and  infirmities,  to  which 
our  nature  is  subject,  and  from  which  he  was  by  no 
means  exempt.  His  admirers  will  recollect  with  concern, 
the  querulous  lamentations,  and  unseemly  reluctance, 
with  which,  in  1782  and  1783,  he  each  time  quitted  the 
Pay-office,  on  the  change  of  administration.  They  will 
remember  the  acts  of  imprudence  and  indiscretion,  not 

355 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

to  call  them  by  any  harsher  name,  which  characterized 
his  tenure  of  office,  during  the  existence  of  the  Coalition 
ministry ;  to  defend,  or  to  palliate  which,  demanded 
the  utmost  efforts  of  Fox's  parliamentary  abilities. 
They  will  probably  admit  and  lament,  his  too  ardent 
prosecution  of  Hastings,  for  political  errors  or  tres- 
passes, which,  even  though  they  had  existed  in  their 
utmost  extent,  ought  to  have  found  their  apology  in 
the  difficulties  of  his  situation ;  beset  with  domestic 
and  foreign  enemies,  in  charge  of  a  vast  empire,  and 
necessitated  to  find  resources  on  the  spot,  against 
internal  commotions,  no  less  than  against  external 
hostility.  They  will  reprobate  with  severity,  his  in- 
temperate and  indecorous  conduct,  as  a  Member  ol 
Parliament,  in  1788,  on  an  occasion  when  the  country 
at  large  felt  the  deepest  sympathy  and  distress  for  the 
illness  of  the  Sovereign.  And  finally,  though  they 
will  exult  in  the  meritorious  line  of  action  which  he 
embraced  on  the  commencement  of  the  French  Revolu- 
tion, as  equally  honourable  to  himself,  and  beneficial 
to  the  cause  of  order  and  government  throughout  the 
civilized  world ;  yet  they  cannot  forget  that  he  received 
from  Mr.  Pitt  soon  afterwards,  two  pensions  for  three 
lives,  of  eighteen  hundred  Pounds  a  year,  each,  as  his 
reward :  and  they  will  Perhaps  incline  to  admit,  that 
on  an  impartial  survey,  Mr.  Burke  appears  greater  and 
more  elevated  in  1781,  than  at  any  subsequent  period 
of  his  political  life. 

He  was  then  more  than  fifty  years  of  age,  of  which 
he  had  passed  fifteen  in  the  House  of  Commons.  I 
believe,  he  owed  his  first  seat  in  that  assembly,  not  to 
the  Marquis  of  Rockingham,  but  to  the  late  Earl 
Verney,  with  whom  he  had  formed  some  connections 
of  a  pecuniary  nature ;  during  the  continuance  of 
which,  both  that  nobleman  and  Mr.  Burke  became 
purchasers  to  a  considerable  amount,  of  East  India 
Stock.  The  latter,  as  it  was  asserted,  sold  out  in  time, 

356 


1781.]  BURKKS  ORATORY 

after  clearing  so  large  a  sum  by  the  transaction,  as 
with  it  to  have  purchased  the  estate  or  house  at 
Gregories,  near  Beconsfield  in  Bucks,  where  he  always 
resided  when  not  in  London.  Lord  Verney,  less  fortun- 
ate, or  less  prudent ;  though  possessed  of  a  vast  landed 
property,  was  almost  ruined  by  his  East  India  pur- 
chases ;  and  Richard  Burke,  Edmund's  brother,  who 
was  then  a  practitioner  at  the  Bar,  being  likewise 
involved  in  the  same  losing  concern,  was  said  to  be 
unable  to  fulfil  his  Stock  engagements ;  or  in  the 
language  of  Change  Alley,  to  have  waddled.  Hence, 
in  allusion  to  this  circumstance,  his  enemies,  instead 
of  Dick  Burke,  commonly  called  him  Duck  Burke. 
Edmund,  in  1781,  rented  a  house  in  the  Broad  Sanctu- 
ary, Westminster,  conveniently  situated  for  his  attend- 
ance in  Parliament;  but  entertained  very  little  com- 
pany; and  his  pecuniary  obligations 'to  the  Marquis  of 
Rockingham,  which  were  known  to  be  great,  sufficiently 
indicated  the  limited  nature  of  his  private  fortune. 

Nature  had  bestowed  on  him  a  boundless  imagination, 
aided  by  a  memory  of  equal  strength  and  tenacity. 
His  fancy  was  so  vivid,  that  it  seemed  to  light  up  by 
its  own  powers,  and  to  burn  without  consuming  the 
aliment  on  which  it  fed :  sometimes  bearing  him  away 
into  ideal  scenes  created  by  his  own  exuberant  mind, 
but  from  which  he  always  returned  to  the  subject  of 
Debate ;  descending  from  his  most  aerial  flights  by  a 
gentle  and  imperceptible  gradation,  till  he  again 
touched  the  ground.  Learning  waited  on  him  like 
a  handmaid,  presenting  to  his  choice,  all  that  Anti- 
quity had  culled  or  invented,  most  elucidatory  of  the 
topic  under  discussion.  He  always  seemed  to  be 
oppressed  under  the  load  and  variety  of  his  intellectual 
treasures,  of  which  he  frequently  scattered  portions 
with  a  lavish  hand,  to  inattentive,  impatient,  hungry, 
and  sleepy  hearers,  undeserving  of  such  presents.  Nor 
did  he  desist,  though  warned  by  the  clamorous  vocifera- 

357 


WRAXALKS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [1781. 

tion  of  the  House,  to  restrain  or  to  abbreviate  his 
speeches.  Every  power  of  Oratory  was  wielded  by  him 
in  turn :  for,  he  could  be  during  the  same  evening, 
pathetic  and  humorous ;  acrimonious  and  conciliating ; 
now  giving  a  loose  to  his  indignation  or  severity ;  and 
then,  almost  in  the  same  breath,  calling  to  his  assistance 
ridicule,  wit,  and  mockery.  Yet,  with  this  assemblage 
of  endowments,  which  would  have  sufficed  to  form  many 
Orators ;  though  he  instructed,  delighted,  and  astonished, 
he  frequently  fatigued,  because  his  faculties  were  not 
controlled  and  chastened  by  a  severe  judgement. 

In  his  dress  and  exterior  he  was  not  less  negligent 
than  Fox :  but,  the  spirit  of  party  did  not  blend  with 
the  colour  of  his  apparel ;  and  he  rarely  or  never  came 
to  the  House  in  Blue  and  Buff,  though  he  eulogized 
Laurens,  the  American  Ex-President,  when  a  prisoner 
in  the  Tower,  far  beyond  the  picture  which  Pope  has 
left  us  of  Atterbury,  under  the  same  circumstances. 
Burke  constantly  wore  spectacles.  His  enunciation  was 
vehement,  rapid,  and  never  checked  by  any  embarrass- 
ment :  for  his  ideas  outran  his  powers  of  utterance,  and 
he  drew  from  an  exhaustless  source.  But,  his  Irish 
accent,  which  was  as  strong  as  if  he  had  never  quitted 
the  banks  of  the  Shannon,  diminished  to  the  ear,  the 
enchanting  effect  of  his  eloquence  on  the  mind. 
Dundas,  who  laboured  under  a  similar  impediment, 
yet  turned  it  to  account,  if  I  may  so  express  myself; 
some  of  his  expressions  or  allusions,  by  the  variation 
in  pronouncing  a  single  letter,  or  pressing  too  hard 
upon  a  vowel,  frequently  producing  such  an  equivocal 
sound,  conveying  so  strange  an  impression  on  the  ears 
of  his  audience,  as  put  to  flight  all  gravity,  and  con- 
vulsed the  house  with  laughter.  In  brilliancy  of  wit, 
Lord  North  alone  could  compete  with  Burke ;  for 
Sheridan  had  not  then  appeared.  Burke  drew  all  his 
images  from  classic  sources :  a  fact,  of  which  he  dis- 
played a  beautiful  exemplification,  when  he  said  of 

358 


1781.]       BURKE  COMPARED  WITH  FOX 

Wilkes,  borne  along  in  triumph  by  the  mob,  that  he 
resembled  Pindar,  elevated  on  the  wings  of  poetical 
inspiration, 

"  Numerisque  fertur 

Lege  solutis." 

His  personal  qualities  of  temper  and  disposition,  by 
no  means  corresponded  with  his  intellectual  endowments. 
Throughout  his  general  manner  and  deportment  in 
Parliament,  there  was  something  petulant,  impatient, 
and  at  times  almost  intractable,  which  greatly  obscured 
the  lustre  of  his  talents.  His  very  features,  and  the 
undulating  motions  of  his  head,  were  eloquently  ex- 
pressive of  this  irritability,  which  on  some  occasions 
seemed  to  approach  towards  alienation  of  mind.  Even 
his  friends  could  not  always  induce  him  to  listen  to 
reason  and  remonstrance,  though  they  sometimes  held 
him  down  in  his  seat,  by  the  skirts  of  his  coat,  in  order 
to  prevent  the  ebullitions  of  his  anger  or  indignation. 
Gentle,  mild,  and  amenable  to  argument  in  private 
society,  of  which  he  formed  the  delight  and  the  orna- 
ment, he  was  often  intemperate  and  even  violent  in 
Parliament.  Fox,  however  irritated,  never  forgot  that 
he  was  a  chief.  Burke,  in  his  most  sublime  flights, 
was  only  a  partizan.  The  countenance  of  the  latter, 
which  rarely  relaxed  into  a  smile,  did  not  invite 
approach  or  conciliation.  His  enmities  and  prejudices, 
though  they  originated  in  principle,  as  well  as  in  con- 
viction, yet  became  tinged  with  the  virulent  spirit  of 
party ;  and  were  eventually  in  many  instances,  in- 
veterate, unjust,  and  insurmountable.  Infinitely  more 
respectable  than  Fox,  he  was  nevertheless  far  less 
amiable.  Exempt  from  his  defects  and  irregularities, 
Burke  wanted  the  suavity  of  Fox's  manner,  his  amenity, 
and  his  placability.  The  one  procured  more  admirers. 
The  other  possessed  more  friends.  Though  acting  to- 
gether to  a  common  point,  as  members  of  the  House  of 

359 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [i78i. 

Commons,  and  embarked  in  the  same  cause ;  their 
intimacy  seemed  always  to  commence,  and  to  cease, 
at  the  entrance  of  the  Lobby.  Burke  retired  from  the 
discharge  of  his  parliamentary  functions,  exhausted, 
chagrined,  and  often  irritated ;  to  repair  immediately 
to  his  family,  or  to  the  duties  and  avocations  of 
domestic  life.  Fox,  always  fresh,  and  never  more 
alert  than  after  a  long  Debate,  only  quitted  the  House, 
in  order  to  drive  to  Brookes's.  Even  in  their  nearest 
approximations,  there  were  always  essential  and  strik- 
ing distinctions  between  the  two  Opposition  leaders. 
In  genius,  in  learning,  in  eloquence,  in  politics,  they 
were  assimilated.  But,  in  their  occupations,  amuse- 
ments, society,  companions,  and  modes  of  life,  never 
were  two  men  more  discordant.  They  continued,  never- 
theless, to  act  together  through  succeeding  Parliaments, 
in  good,  and  in  adverse  fortune,  'till  the  French  Revo- 
lution finally  dissevered  them.  The  obvious  defect  of 
Burke,  was  want  of  temper  and  self-command.  Fox's 
latent  blemish  lay  in  his  dissolute  habits  and  ruined 
fortune,  which  enabled  his  enemies  to  compare  him  with 
Catiline.  Both  wanted  judgment  to  perceive,  that  even 
under  the  free  Constitution  of  Great  Britain,  the 
Cabinet,  though  it  may  be  taken  by  storm,  cannot  be 
long  held  except  by  favor.  Mr.  Fox,  in  1806,  appears 
to  have  thoroughly  come  up  with  this  great  truth,  of 
which,  in  1781,  he  was  either  regardless  or  ignorant. 

In  surveying  the  Opposition  side  of  the  House  of 
Commons  at  this  period,  the  idea  of  Barre  naturally 
and  unavoidably  suggests  itself  after  that  of  Burke. 
Both  were  natives  of  the  same  country,  Ireland ;  and 
both  had  attained  to  vast  celebrity  in  their  adopted 
country,  England.  But,  no  sort  of  comparison  could 
be  maiie  between  their  talents,  acquirements,  or  claim 
to  general  admiration  ;  in  all  which,  Burke  possessed  an 
infinite  superiority.  Of  an  athletic  frame  and  mould, 
endowed  with  extraordinary  powers  of  voice,  Barre,  as 

360 


1781.]          BARK£  AND  DUNNING 

a  speaker,  roughly  enforced,  rather  than  solicited  or 
attracted  attention.  Severe,  and  sometimes  coarse  in 
his  censures  or  accusations,  he  nevertheless  always 
sustained  his  charges  against  Ministers,  however  strong, 
with  considerable  force  of  argument  and  language. 
Slow,  measured,  and  dictatorial  in  his  manner  of 
enunciation,  he  was  not  carried  away  by  those  beauti- 
ful digressions  of  genius  or  fancy,  with  which  Burke 
captivated  and  entertained  his  audience.  Master  never- 
theless of  his  subject,  and  more  attentive  than  Burke, 
not  to  fatigue  the  patience  of  the  House,  when  eager 
to  rise,  he  frequently  obtained  a  more  indulgent  hear- 
ing. Deprived  already  of  one  eye,  and  menaced  with 
a  privation  of  both ;  advanced  in  years,  grey-headed, 
and  of  a  savage  aspect,  he  reminded  the  beholders  when 
he  rose,  of  Belisarius,  rather  than  of  Tully.  Yet 
possessing  a  cultivated  understanding,  conversant  with 
the  works  of  antiquity,  and  able  on  occasion  to  press 
them  into  his  service,  he  sometimes  displayed  a  great 
diversity  of  information. 

Near  him,  on  the  same  Bench,  in  the  front  ranks  of 
the  Minority,  usually  sat  his  friend  and  colleague, 
Dunning.  Never  perhaps  did  nature  enclose  a  more 
illuminated  mind,  in  a  body  of  meaner  and  more  abject 
appearance.  It  is  difficult  to  do  justice  to  the  peculiar 
species  of  ugliness  which  characterized  his  person  and 
figure,  though  he  did  not  labor  under  any  absolute 
deformity  of  shape  or  limb.  A  degree  of  infirmity, 
and  almost  of  debility  or  decay  in  his  organs,  augmented 
the  effect  of  his  other  bodily  misfortunes.  Even  his 
voice  was  so  husky  and  choaked  with  phlegm,  that  it 
refused  utterance  to  the  sentiments  which  were  dictated 
by  his  superior  intelligence.  In  consequence  of  this 
physical  impediment,  he  lay  always  under  a  necessity 
of  involuntarily  announcing  his  intention  to  address 
the  House,  some  time  before  he  actually  rose,  by  the 
repeated  attempts  which  he  made  to  clear  his  throat. 

361 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [i78i. 

But,  all  these  imperfections  and  defects  of  configuration, 
were  obliterated  by  the  ability  which  he  displayed.  In 
spite  of  the  Monotony  of  his  tones,  and  his  total  want 
of  animation,  as  well  as  grace ;  yet  so  powerful  was 
reason  when  flowing  from  his  lips,  that  every  murmur 
became  hushed,  and  every  ear  attentive.  It  seemed, 
nevertheless,  the  acute  Sophistry  of  a  lawyer,  rather 
than  the  speech  of  a  man  of  the  world,  or  the  eloquence 
of  a  man  of  letters  and  education.  Every  sentence, 
though  admirable  in  itself,  yet  resembled  more  the 
pleading  of  the  Bar,  than  the  oratory  of  the  Senate. 
So  difficult  is  it  for  the  most  enlightened  intellect  to 
throw  off  the  habits  of  a  profession.  Dunning  neither 
delighted,  nor  entertained  his  hearers ;  but  he  subdued 
them  by  his  powers  of  argumentative  ratiocination, 
which  have  rarely  been  exceeded.  They  soon  after- 
wards raised  him  to  the  Peerage ;  just  in  time  to 
attain  that  elevation,  as  his  constitution  speedily  sunk 
under  accumulated  disorders,  which  hurried  him  pre- 
maturely to  the  grave.  This  extraordinary  man,  who 
was  not  exempt  from  great  infirmity  of  mind,  felt,  or 
perceived  so  little  his  corporeal  deficiencies,  as  to 
consider  his  person  with  extraordinary  predilection. 
Fond  of  viewing  his  face  in  the  glass,  he  passed  no 
time  more  to  his  satisfaction,  than  in  decorating  him- 
self for  his  appearance  in  the  world.  He  and  Barre, 
who  were  fellow-labourers  in  the  same  vineyard,  repre- 
sented likewise  the  same  Borough,  Calne  ;  and  belonged, 
or  at  least  looked  up  to  the  same  political  Chief,  Lord 
Shelburne.  They  consequently  were  animated  by  no 
common  principle  of  union,  or  of  action,  with  Fox  and 
Burke,  except  one ;  that  of  overturning  the  Adminis- 
tration. On  all  other  points,  a  secret  jealousy  and 
rivality  subsisted  between  the  adherents  of  the  Shelburne, 
and  the  Rockingham  parties. 

Admiral  Keppel  might  likewise  be  accounted  among 
the  principal  members  of  Opposition  in  the  House  of 

362 


1781.]  KEPPEL  AND  HOWE 

Commons,  at  this  period;  though  his  talents  seemed 
to  be  no  more  conspicuously  exerted  in  Debate,  than 
they  had  appeared  while  he  remained  on  the  quarter 
deck,  during  the  memorable  action  of  the  27th  of  July, 
1778.  But  the  persecution  which,  as  it  was  pretended, 
he  had  undergone,  for  his  conduct  on  that  day ;  the 
accusation  brought  against  him  by  Palliser,  and  the 
ministerial,  as  well  as  royal  enmity,  which  he  had 
incurred ; — these  political  merits  elevated  him  to  a  con- 
sideration, which  he  could  otherwise  never  have  attained. 
Excluded  from  representing  the  Borough  of  Windsor, 
at  the  recent  general  Election  in  1780 ;  the  popular 
effervescence  of  the  moment,  inflamed  at  his  rejection, 
where  it  was  supposed  that  the  influence  of  the 
Sovereign  had  considerably  operated  to  his  prejudice, 
brought  him  in  for  Surrey :  a  County  in  which  he 
possessed  no  property,  nor  any  hereditary  interest. 
There  appeared  neither  dignity  in  his  person,  nor 
intelligence  in  his  countenance,  the  features  of  which 
were  of  the  most  ordinary  cast ;  and  his  nose,  which, 
in  consequence  of  an  accident  that  befel  him  in  the 
course  of  his  professional  life,  had  been  almost  laid  flat, 
gave  him  an  equally  vulgar  and  unpleasant  air.  His 
abilities  were  indeed  of  a  very  limited  description, 
altogether  unfit  for  such  a  theatre  as  Parliament :  but 
the  Minority  having  already  destined  him  to  succeed, 
and  to  supplant  Lord  Sandwich,  as  soon  as  they  could 
gain  possession  of  power,  it  became  indispensable  to 
sustain  him  on  every  occasion,  with  all  their  efforts. 

Another  distinguished  naval  Commander,  Lord  Howe, 
who  then  filled  a  seat  in  the  House,  might  likewise  be 
numbered  among  the  determined  opponents  of  govern- 
ment. Since  his  return  from  America,  he  had  not 
enjoyed  the  smiles  of  the  Court;  but  his  professional 
character  supported  him  with  the  public.  His  steady 
and  phlegmatic  courage,  added  to  the  wholesome  severity 
of  his  discipline  when  on  service,  deservedly  placed  him 

363 


WRAXALI/S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [1781. 

high  in  the  estimation  of  all  parties.  Among  the 
sailors  he  was  known,  from  his  dark  complexion,  by 
the  epithet  of  "Black  Dick."  If  no  genius  could  be 
discovered  in  the  lines  of  his  face,  there  was  in  them, 
an  expression  of  serene  and  passive  fortitude,  which 
could  not  be  mistaken.  His  Profile  bore,  indeed,  a 
very  strong  resemblance  to  the  portraits  of  George  the 
First,  from  whom,  by  his  mother,  he  descended.  She 
was  the  natural  daughter  of  that  Prince,  by  his  mistress, 
Madame  de  Platen,  whom  he  created  Countess  of 
Darlington,  some  years  after  his  accession  to  the  crown 
of  Great  Britain.  In  Parliament,  Lord  Howe  made, 
if  possible,  a  worse  figure  than  Keppel ;  who,  when  he 
addressed  the  House,  was  at  least  intelligible,  though 
he  might  not  greatly  illuminate  the  subject.  Lord 
Howe's  ideas  were  commonly  either  so  ill  conceived  by 
himself,  or  so  darkly  and  ambiguously  expressed,  that 
it  was  by  no  means  easy  to  comprehend  his  precise 
meaning.  This  oracular  and  confused  mode  of  delivery, 
rendered  still  more  obscure  by  the  part  of  the  House 
where  he  usually  sat,  which  was  on  a  back  row,  at  a 
distance  from  the  Speaker's  chair,  encreased  however 
the  effect  of  his  oratory;  and  seemed  to  exemplify 
Burke's  assertion,  that  "obscurity  is  a  source  of  the 
"  sublime." 

Sir  George  Savile,  who  represented  the  county  of 
York,  attracted  great  consideration.  His  known  in- 
tegrity and  disinterestedness,  joined  to  his  extensive 
landed  property,  elevated  him  more  than  any  endow- 
ments of  intellect,  or  parliamentary  ability.  He 
possessed  nevertheless,  plain  manly  sense,  and  a  facility 
of  utterance,  which,  even  independant  of  his  high 
character  and  ample  fortune,  always  secured  him 
attention. 

Lord  John  Cavendish  was  listened  to,  whenever  he 
rose,  with  similar  deference  or  predilection.  His  near 
alliance  to  the  Duke  of  Devonshire ;  his  very  name, 

364 


1781.]  "TOMMY  TOWNSEND" 

connected  with  the  Revolution  of  1688,  which  secured 
the  liberties  of  Great  Britain ;  his  unblemished  reputa- 
tion, and  his  talents,  though  very  moderate ; — all  these 
qualities  combined  to  impress  with  esteem,  even  those 
who  differed  most  from  him  in  political  opinion.  Nature 
had  in  the  most  legible  characters  stamped  honesty  on 
his  countenance :  but  she  had  not  accompanied  it  with 
any  ornamental  present.  The  Opposition  already  con- 
sidered him  as  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer  in  Embrio. 

General  Con  way,  though  by  no  means  a  man  of  first- 
rate  capacity,  or  a  superior  speaker,  yet  surpassed  in 
these  respects,  either  of  the  two  last-mentioned  persons. 
His  long  military  experience,  his  birth  and  descent, 
together  with  the  recollection  of  his  having  already 
occupied  one  of  the  most  eminent  employments  of 
state  under  a  former  administration ;  authorized  him 
to  expect  a  situation  no  less  conspicuous,  in  any  future 
ministerial  arrangement.  His  figure  and  deportment 
were  exceedingly  distinguished,  nor  did  he  want 
abilities;  but  his  enunciation,  embarrassed,  and  often 
involved,  generally  did  injustice  to  his  conceptions. 

Mr.  Thomas  Townsend,  commonly  denominated 
"  Tommy  Townsend,"  and  so  commemorated  in  Gold- 
smith's celebrated  Poem  of  "Retaliation,"  where  he 
describes  Burke, 

"  Tho'  fraught  with  all  learning,  yet  straining  his  throat, 
To  induce  Tommy  Townsend  to  lend  him  a  vote  ; " 

looked  confidently  forward,  no  less  than  General  Con- 
way,  to  a  high  place  in  some  future  Ministry,  when 
Lord  North  should  be  driven  from  power.  Nor  were 
his  expectations  eventually  disappointed.  He  was  a 
man  of  very  independant  fortune,  and  of  considerable 
parliamentary  interest,  present,  as  well  as  prospective ; 
two  circumstances  which  greatly  contributed  to  his 
personal,  as  well  as  political  elevation :  for,  his  abilities, 
though  respectable,  scarcely  rose  above  mediocrity. 

365 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

Yet,  as  he  always  spoke  with  facility,  sometimes  with 
energy,  and  was  never  embarrassed  by  any  degree  of 
timidity,  he  maintained  a  place  in  the  front  ranks  of 
Opposition. 

General  Burgoyne  would  not  deserve  any  place  in 
this  list,  if  respect  were  had  only  to  his  parliamentary 
talents :  but,  his  sufferings  in  the  cause  of  Opposition, 
which  elevated  him  to  the  rank  of  a  martyr,  like 
Keppel ;  Fox's  attachment  towards  him,  and  his  con- 
nexion by  marriage  with  Lord  Derby,  one  of  the 
Minority  chiefs  ; — these  merits  supplied  every  deficiency. 
It  was  difficult  to  contemplate  him,  without  in- 
voluntarily recollecting  the  disgraceful  colours  under 
which  "Junius"  has  designated  him,  as  "taking  his 
"  stand  at  a  gaming-table,  and  watching  with  the 
"  soberest  attention,  for  a  fair  opportunity  of  engaging 
"  a  drunken  young  nobleman  at  Picquet ; "  as  "  draw- 
"  ing  a  regular  and  splendid  subsistence  from  play ; " 
and  as  sitting  down  for  the  remainder  of  his  life,  "  in- 
"  famous  and  contented  with  the  money  received  from  the 
"  Duke  of  Grafton,  for  the  sale  of  a  patent  place  in 
"  the  Customs."  These  aspersions,  which  never  received 
any  public  answer,  did  not  prevent  his  occupying  a 
distinguished  place  in  Fox's  regard;  who  exhibited  a 
strong  proof  of  it,  by  becoming  Burgoyne's  Nominee 
on  the  Committee  appointed  to  try  the  contested  Elec- 
tion for  the  Borough  of  Preston,  which  he  represented, 
in  the  spring  of  1781.  Supported  by  such  ability,  the 
General  kept  his  seat.  I  have  been  assured  that  when 
he  returned  on  his  Parole  from  America,  in  May,  1778 ; 
the  Opposition,  apprehensive  of  his  taking  part  with 
Administration,  and  fearful  that  he  might  accuse  the 
adherents  of  Congress  in  this  country,  with  having 
contributed  by  their  language  in  Parliament,  if  not  by 
other  modes  of  encouragement,  to  the  resistance  that 
produced  the  disaster  of  Saratoga;  determined,  if 
possible,  to  gain  him.  For  that  purpose,  Fox  went 

366 


1781.]  WILKES'  CONSTITUTIONAL  LOYALTY 

down  privately  to  Hounslow,  where  he  met  Burgoyne 
soon  after  he  had  landed,  on  his  way  from  Plymouth  to 
London.  In  the  course  of  a  long  and  confidential 
interview,  Fox  convinced  him  so  thoroughly,  that  the 
Ministers  would  not  support  him ;  that  Lord  George 
Germain  must  accuse  him,  in  order  to  exculpate  him- 
self; that  the  King  had  imbibed  very  strong  prejudices 
against  him,  and  that  the  Administration  could  not 
last  a  twelvemonth ;  as  to  induce  the  General  to 
transfer  his  charges  of  misconduct,  from  the  Opposi- 
tion, to  the  Treasury  Bench.  Present  protection,  and 
future  employment,  whenever  they  should  attain  to 
power,  followed  of  course.  I  have  no  doubt  of  the 
accuracy  of  this  fact,  as  I  received  it  from  high  living 
Authority. 

Wilkes  could  not  properly  be  considered  as  a  member 
of  the  Minority,  because,  though  he  always  spoke  from 
that  side  of  the  House,  and  usually  voted  with  them, 
yet  he  neither  depended  on  Lord  Rockingham,  nor  on 
Lord  Shelburne :  but,  his  predilections  leaned  towards 
the  latter  Nobleman.  Notwithstanding  however  the 
personal  collision  which  may  be  said  to  have  taken 
place  between  the  King  and  him,  during  the  early 
portion  of  His  Majesty's  reign ;  Wilkes,  like  Burke, 
nourished  in  his  bosom,  a  strong  sentiment  of  consti- 
tutional loyalty.  He  gave  indelible  proofs  of  it,  during 
the  Riots  of  June,  1 780,  when  Bull,  one  of  the  Members 
for  London,  crouched  under  Lord  George  Gordon's  mob. 
And  though  Wilkes  lent  his  aid  to  overturn  Lord 
North's  Administration,  yet  he  never  yoked  himself  to 
Fox's  car.  On  the  contrary,  no  sooner  had  "the 
"  Coalition  "  unmasked  their  battery  of  "  the  East  India 
"  Bill,"  than  Wilkes  rallying  to  the  crown,  as  the  only 
protection  against  Fox's  ambition,  took  the  warmest 
part  against  that  measure :  acting  in  1784,  nearly  the 
same  part  which  Burke  did,  eight  years  later,  in  1792, 
after  the  French  Revolution,  when  he  sought  shelter 

367 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

behind  the  throne,  against  the  horrors  of  Anarchy, 
regicide,  and  insurrection :  horrors,  which  Fox  never 
could  perceive,  and  for  which  he  even  apologized  in  no 
small  degree. 

Such  was  the  aspect  which  the  House  of  Commons 
then  presented.  Pitt  and  Sheridan,  who  have  since  in 
different  ways  occupied  so  great  a  share  of  public 
attention,  had  not  either  of  them  as  yet  come  forward. 
In  order,  however,  to  form  a  more  complete  estimate  of 
the  principal  individuals  who  at  that  time  attracted 
general  notice,  either  as  supporters  of  Administration, 
or  as  Candidates  for  Office,  whenever  the  Opposition 
should  come  into  power ;  it  is  still  requisite  to  throw  a 
glance  over  the  House  of  Peers. 

The  great  Earl  of  Mansfield,  though  he  had  already 
advanced  beyond  that  period  of  life,  at  which  the 
faculties  of  the  human  mind  usually  begin  to  diminish 
in  vigour,  did  not  appear  to  have  lost  any  of  the 
strength  of  his  intellect.  In  the  court  of  King's  Bench, 
no  less  than  in  Parliament,  his  transcendent  abilities 
still  excited  equal  respect  and  admiration.  The  friend 
of  Pope,  of  Bolingbroke,  and  of  Sir  William  Wyndham, 
during  his  youth ;  he  united  the  finest  accomplishments 
of  Science,  to  the  most  profound  knowledge  of  the 
laws.  In  the  recent  Riots  of  1780,  the  populace, 
whether  considering  him  as  inclined  to  support  measures 
of  an  arbitrary  nature,  or  supposing  him  a  friend  to 
principles  of  religious  tolerance  repugnant  to  their 
feelings ;  selected  him  for  the  object  of  their  violence. 
His  house  and  his  papers  were  consumed :  but  he  had 
happily  escaped  any  personal  effects  of  their  rage ;  and 
though  not  individually  a  member  of  Administration, 
might  be  considered  as  disposed  on  all  occasions,  to 
extend  his  assistance  to  the  Government.  Yet  did  the 
constitutional  and  characteristic  timidity  which  dis- 
tinguished him,  prevent  his  ever  standing  forward  in 
moments  of  Crisis  or  danger,  like  Thurlow  and  Wedder- 

368 


1781.]          LAST  BLOWS  OF  "JUNIUS" 

burn,  as  the  champion  of  ministerial  measures.  With 
the  single  exception  of  the  Duke  of  Grafton,  no  man 
high  in  Office,  had  been  so  severely  treated  by  the  pen 
of  "  Junius ;"  and  though  time  had  skinned  over  the 
wound,  the  Cicatrice  still  remained.  That  able  writer, 
after  pursuing  the  Lord  Chief  Justice  with  inconceivable 
pertinacity,  through  all  the  sinuosities  of  legal  conceal- 
ment or  evasion,  under  which  he  attempted  to  shelter 
himself; — after  comparing  him  to  the  most  prostitute 
Judges  of  the  most  arbitrary  reigns ;  to  Tresillian, 
under  Richard  the  Second;  and  to  Jefferies,  under 
James  the  Second;  exclaims, — "Who  attacks  the 
"  liberty  of  the  press  ?  Lord  Mansfield.  Who  invades 
"  the  constitutional  power  of  juries  ?  Lord  Mansfield. 
"  What  Judge  ever  challenged  a  Juryman,  but  Lord 
"  Mansfield  ?  Who  was  that  Judge,  who,  to  save  the 
"  King's  brother,  affirmed  that  a  man  of  the  first  rank 
"  and  quality,  who  obtains  a  verdict  in  a  suit  for 
"  criminal  conversation,  is  entitled  to  no  greater 
"  damages  than  the  meanest  mechanic  ?  Lord  Mans- 
"  field."  At  him  "Junius"  levelled  his  last  blows, 
before  he  finally  disappeared,  as  a  political  writer.  In 
his  parting  letter,  addressed  to  Lord  Camden,  written 
towards  the  end  of  January,  1772,  exciting  and  invok- 
ing that  Nobleman  to  come  forward  as  the  accuser  of 
the  Lord  Chief  Justice  of  the  King's  Bench,  at  the  Bar 
of  the  House  of  Peers ;  "  Considering,"  says  he,  "  the 
"  situation  and  abilities  of  Lord  Mansfield,  I  do  not 
"  scruple  to  affirm,  with  the  most  solemn  appeal  to  God 
"  for  my  sincerity,  that  in  my  judgement,  he  is  the 
"  very  worst  and  most  dangerous  man  in  the  kingdom. 
"  Thus  far  I  have  done  my  duty  in  endeavouring  to 
"  bring  him  to  punishment.  But,  mine  is  an  inferior, 
"  ministerial  office  in  the  Temple  of  Justice.  I  have 
"  bound  the  victim,  and  dragged  him  to  the  altar." 
Severe,  and  perhaps  unmerited  as  these  accusations  may 
appear,  yet  Lord  Mansfield's  warmest  admirers  never 

369  24 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [1781. 

attempted  to  deny,  that  at  every  period  of  time  while 
he  presided  in  the  Court  of  King's  Bench,  his  opinions 
and  his  Decrees,  if  not  adverse  to  the  liberty  of  the 
Press,  and  to  the  freedom  of  the  subject,  uniformly 
leaned  towards  the  Crown.  Nor  is  it  possible  to 
justify,  either  in  a  moral,  or  in  a  legal  point  of  view, 
his  partial  and  oppressive  conduct  towards  Wilkes  in 
1763,  when  the  Charges  against  him  for  publishing  No. 
45  of  the  "  North  Briton,"  and  the  "  Essay  on  Woman,11 
were  tried  in  the  Court  of  King's  Bench ;  while  their 
author,  wounded  at  the  time  in  a  Duel,  was  absent  at 
Paris.  Lord  Mansfield's  enemies,  not  without  some 
reason  asserted,  that  he  was  better  calculated  to  fill  the 
office  of  a  Prcetor  under  Justinian,  than  to  preside  as 
Chief  Criminal  Judge  of  this  kingdom,  in  the  reign  of 
George  the  Third. 

Lord  Loughborough,  who  owed  to  Lord  North  his 
recent  elevation  to  the  Peerage,  constituted  one  of  his 
ablest  advocates,  and  most  zealous  supporters,  in  that 
House.  Wedderburn  had  risen  through  the  gradations 
of  the  law,  amidst  the  discussions  of  Parliament,  side 
by  side  with  Thurlow.  More  temperate,  pliant,  artful, 
and  accommodating  in  his  manners  than  the  Chancellor, 
he  equalled  that  Nobleman  in  eloquence,  if  he  did  not 
even  surpass  him.  Churchill,  in  one  of  his  Satires, 
has  thought  proper  to  describe  Wedderburn,  as  "  Mute 
at  the  Bar,  but  in  the  Senate  loud."  No  man  however 
in  public  life,  possessed  more  versatility  of  talents,  or 
abilities  better  adapted  to  every  situation.  He  proved 
himself  as  refined  a  Courtier  at  St.  James's,  as  he  was 
an  able  lawyer  at  Westminster.  His  defence  of  Lord 
Clive,  when  under  accusation  before  the  House  of 
Commons,  augmented  Wedderburn's  legal,  as  well  as 
parliamentary  reputation.  It  had  been  perpetually 
progressive  since  that  time,  and  rendered  him,  whether 
as  a  Member  of  the  lower,  or  of  the  upper  House,  one 
of  the  most  distinguished  ornaments  of  the  long  Robe. 

370 


1781.]  THE  OPPOSITION  PEERS 

Nor  did  the  Opposition  at  this  time  want  men  of 
distinguished  capacity,  professional  and  political,  in  the 
House  of  Lords,  though  the  Marquis  of  Rockingham 
was  not  to  be  accounted  among  the  number.  His  rank, 
his  integrity,  and  his  vast  patrimonial  property,  rather 
than  any  intellectual  endowments,  had  placed  him  at 
the  head  of  his  party.  During  the  short  period  of  time 
when  he  formerly  filled  the  post  of  First  Lord  of  the 
Treasury,  he  had  displayed  more  rectitude  of  intention, 
than  either  vigor  or  ability.  Even  his  constitution 
and  frame  of  body  appeared  inadequate  to  the  fatigues 
of  an  official  situation  demanding  energy  and  applica- 
tion. Lord  Camden  on  the  contrary,  though  much 
more  advanced  in  years,  had  retained  all  the  powers  of 
his  mind,  combined  with  personal  activity.  In  Debate, 
he  might  be  esteemed  equal  to  Lord  Mansfield  himself; 
while  his  exertions  at  every  period  of  his  life,  in  defence 
of  the  constitutional  liberties  of  the  subject,  gave  him 
a  sort  of  superiority  to  that  Nobleman,  and  greatly 
endeared  him  to  the  nation.  His  name,  almost  always 
united  with  the  great  Earl  of  Chatham,  ever  since  the 
accession  of  George  the  Third,  seemed  inseparable  from 
the  idea  of  Freedom. 

If  indefatigable  and  laborious  pertinacity,  could 
recommend  to  office,  or  qualify  for  public  employment, 
few  members  of  the  upper  House  possessed  a  better 
title  to  that  praise,  than  the  Duke  of  Richmond. 
However  limited  might  be  the  range  of  his  ideas,  he 
supplied  in  some  measure  by  application,  the  deficiency 
of  original  talent.  His  person,  manners,  and  address, 
were  all  full  of  dignity  ;  and  the  personal  beauty  which 
distinguished  Mademoiselle  de  la  Querouaille,  mistress 
of  Charles  the  Second,  his  great  grandmother,  was  not 
become  extinct  in  him.  She  is  known  to  have  retained 
her  charms,  down  to  a  very  late  period  of  her  life ;  and 
the  fables  related  of  Ninon  de  TEnclos,  were  in  some 
measure  verified  in  the  Duchess  of  Portsmouth.  The 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [1781. 

late  George  Selwyn,  who  had  seen  her  at  Richmond 
House  in  the  year  1733 ; — for,  she  survived  Charles  the 
Second,  near  fifty  years ;  assured  me  that  she  was  even 
then  possessed  of  many  attractions,  though  verging 
towards  fourscore.  Like  his  nephew,  Mr.  Fox,  the 
Duke  did  not  spare  the  King,  when  addressing  the 
House  of  Lords ;  and  he  was  considered  as  peculiarly 
obnoxious  at  St.  James's.  Accused  by  his  enemies,  of 
wanting  personal  courage,  he  manifested  at  least  no 
defect  of  political  resolution.  At  the  East  India 
House,  in  his  quality  of  a  Proprietor,  no  less  than  as 
a  Peer  of  Parliament,  at  Westminster,  he  was  ever 
active ;  vigilant  in  detecting  and  exposing  abuses,  real 
or  imaginary ;  perpetually  harassing  every  Department 
with  enquiries  ;  and  attacking  in  turn,  the  Army,  the 
Admiralty,  and  the  Treasury. 

But  no  individual  in  the  upper  House,  attracted  so 
much  national  attention  from  his  accomplishments, 
talents,  and  extensive  information  on  all  subjects  ol 
foreign  or  domestic  policy,  as  the  Earl  of  Shelburne. 
In  the  prime  of  life,  and  in  the  full  vigour  of  his  facul- 
ties, he  displayed  whenever  he  rose  to  speak,  an  intimate 
knowledge  of  Europe,  together  with  such  a  variety  of 
matter,  as  proved  him  eminently  qualified  to  fill  the 
highest  official  situation.  At  an  early  period  of  His 
Majesty's  reign,  in  1766,  he  had  occupied  with  great 
and  general  approbation,  the  post  of  Secretary  of  State 
for  the  Home  Department,  during  more  than  two  years  ; 
and  he  might  justly  look  forward  on  any  change  of 
Ministers,  to  be  again  employed  in  a  similar,  or  even 
in  a  higher  place  of  trust  and  power.  His  acquaintance 
with  the  Continent  was  minute  and  accurate,  the 
result  of  ocular  inspection  on  many  points,  corrected  by 
reflexion ;  and  improved  by  correspondence  or  com- 
munications with  foreigners  of  eminence,  whom  he 
assiduously  cultivated  and  protected.  Mr.  Fox  himself 
was  far  inferior  to  Lord  Shelburne  in  these  branches  of 


1781.]  "OMNISCIENT  JACKSON" 

information.  Nor  was  that  nobleman  less  versed  in  all 
the  principles  of  Finance  and  of  Revenue,  than  in  the 
other  objects  of  political  study  that  form  a  Statesman. 
His  house,  or  more  properly  to  speak,  his  palace  in 
Berkeley-square,  which  had  formerly  constituted  the 
residence  of  the  Earl  of  Bute ;  formed  at  once  the 
centre  of  a  considerable  party,  as  well  as  the  Asylum  of 
taste  and  science.  It  is  a  fact,  that  during  the  latter 
years  of  Lord  NortrTs  Administration,  he  retained  three 
or  four  Clerks  in  constant  pay  and  employment,  under 
his  own  roof,  who  were  solely  occupied  in  copying  state- 
papers  or  accounts.  Every  measure  of  Finance  adopted 
by  the  first  Minister,  passed,  if  I  may  so  express  myself, 
through  the  Alembic  of  Shelburne  House,  where  it  was 
examined  and  severely  discussed.  There,  while  Dunning 
and  Barre  met  to  settle  their  plan  of  action,  as  Members 
of  Parliament  on  the  Opposition  Bench  in  the  House  of 
Commons ;  Jackson,  who  likewise  sat  in  the  same 
assembly,  for  New  Romney,  and  the  variety  of  whose 
information  had  acquired  him  the  name  of  "  Omniscient 
"  Jackson,"  furnished  every  species  of  legal  or  general 
knowledge.  Dr.  Price  and  Mr.  Baring  produced 
financial  plans,  or  made  arithmetical  calculations, 
meant  to  controvert  and  overturn,  or  to  expose  those 
of  the  first  Lord  of  the  Treasury  :  while  Dr.  Priestley, 
who  lived  under  the  Earl  of  Shelburne^s  personal  pro- 
tection, (just  as  the  celebrated  Hobbes  had  done  at 
Chatsworth,  under  the  immediate  patronage  of  the 
Earls  of  Devonshire,  in  the  preceding  Century;)  pro- 
secuted in  the  midst  of  London,  his  philosophical  and 
chemical  researches.  Nor  ought  I  to  omit  in  this  list 
of  extraordinary  men,  the  distinguished  names  of  Jervis, 
and  of  Jekyll ;  one  of  whom  has  risen  to  such  naval 
honours ;  and  the  other  has  attained  to  an  equal 
eminence  at  the  Bar,  as  he  enjoys  from  the  charms  of 
his  conversation,  in  private  society. 

In    his   person,    manners,    and   address,  the    Earl  of 
373 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [1781. 

Shelburne  wanted  no  external  quality  requisite  to 
captivate  or  conciliate  mankind.  Affable,  polite, 
communicative,  and  courting  popularity,  he  drew 
round  him  a  number  of  followers  or  adherents.  His 
personal  courage  was  indisputable.  Splendid  and 
hospitable  at  his  table,  he  delighted  his  guests  by  the 
charms  of  his  conversation  and  society.  In  his  magni- 
ficent library,  one  of  the  finest  of  its  kind  in  England, 
he  could  appear  as  a  Philosopher  and  a  man  of  letters. 
With  such  various  endowments  of  mind,  sustained  by 
rank  and  fortune,  he  necessarily  excited  universal  con- 
sideration, and  seemed  to  be  pointed  out  by  Nature  for 
the  first  employments.  But,  the  confidence  which  his 
moral  character  inspired,  did  not  equal  the  reputation 
of  his  abilities.  His  adversaries  accused  him  of  system- 
atic duplicity  and  insincerity.  They  even  asserted  that 
unless  all  the  rules  of  Physiognomy  were  set  at  defiance, 
his  very  countenance  and  features  eloquently  indicated 
falsehood.  In  order  to  fix  upon  him  so  injurious  an 
imputation,  they  gave  him  the  Epithet  of  Malagridat 
from  the  name  of  a  Portuguese  Jesuit,  well  known 
in  the  modern  history  of  that  kingdom.  And  these 
insinuations,  though  not  perhaps  accompanied  with 
proofs,  were  nevertheless,  either  from  the  credulity  or 
the  malignity  of  mankind,  widely  circulated,  as  well  as 
very  generally  believed  throughout  the  nation. 

February.]  Among  the  circumstances  which  will 
always  render  the  Session  of  1781  peculiarly  interesting 
to  posterity,  must  be  accounted  the  active  appearance 
of  Pitt  and  of  Sheridan  on  the  floor  of  the  House  of 
Commons.  They  both  may  be  said  to  have  commenced 
their  brilliant  parliamentary  career,  nearly  at  the  same 
time,  within  a  few  days  of  each  other.  Both  spoke  on  the 
side  of  Opposition,  and  both  were  received  with  marked 
approbation,  by  every  part  of  their  audience.  I  was 
present  when  each  of  them  rose  for  the  first  time.  Pitt 
led  the  way,  on  the  second  reading  of  Burke's  Bill  for 

374 


1781.]  PUT'S  MAIDEN  SPEECH 

u  the  Reform  of  the  King's  Household  ; "  which,  though 
rejected  in  the  last  Session  of  the  preceding  Parliament, 
its  author  did  not  the  less  bring  forward  anew,  towards 
the  close  of  the  Month  of  February.  He  reiterated  the 
same  Encomiums  on  the  enlightened  retrenchments 
made  by  Necker,  with  which  he  had  entertained  the 
House  in  1780 ;  extolled  the  discernment  of  Louis  the 
Sixteenth,  in  making  choice  of  such  a  Minister  for 
Superintendant  of  the  Finances ;  and  asserted  that  the 
selection  would  produce  more  substantial  benefit,  as 
well  as  more  solid  glory  to  his  reign,  than  had  resulted 
from  all  the  deeds  of  Henry  the  Fourth.  But,  the 
measures  adopted  by  an  arbitrary  Prince  for  maintain- 
ing a  war,  in  which,  contrary  to  every  maxim  of  wise 
policy,  no  less  than  by  the  subversion  of  all  treaties 
subsisting  between  France  and  England,  he  had 
engaged  with  us,  did  not  appear  to  form  a  proper 
model  for  our  imitation.  After  a  Debate  of  consider- 
able length,  the  Bill  was  rejected  by  a  majority  of 
forty-three  Votes,  in  a  very  full  House.  Great  expecta- 
tions having  been  formed  of  Pitt,  a  sort  of  anxious 
impatience  for  his  coining  forward,  pervaded  the  assem- 
bly ;  which  was  strongly  impressed  from  common  report, 
with  a  belief  of  his  hereditary  talents  and  eloquence. 
He  unquestionably  commenced  under  most  auspicious 
circumstances  ;  his  Birth,  and  his  Name,  by  resuscitating 
as  it  were  the  first  Earl  of  Chatham,  whose  memory 
awakened  such  animating  recollections,  preparing  every 
ear  to  be  attentive ;  and  thus  removing  all  the  impedi- 
ments that  present  themselves  in  the  way  of  ordinary 
men,  when  attempting  to  address  Parliament.  But, 
sanguine  as  might  be  the  opinions  entertained  of  his 
ability,  he  far  exceeded  them ;  seeming  to  attain  at 
his  outset,  that  object,  which  other  Candidates  for 
public  fame  or  favour,  slowly  and  laboriously  effect  by 
length  of  time  and  regular  gradations. 

It  was  in  reply  to  Lord  Nugent  that  Pitt  first  broke 
375 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [i78i. 

silence,  from  under  the  Gallery  on  the  Opposition  side 
of  the  House.  The  same  composure,  self-possession, 
and  imposing  dignity  of  manner,  which  afterwards 
so  eminently  characterized  him  when  seated  on  the 
Treasury  Bench ;  distinguished  him  in  this  first  essay 
of  his  powers,  though  he  then  wanted  three  months  to 
have  compleated  his  twenty-second  year.  The  same 
nervous,  correct,  and  polished  diction,  free  from  any 
inaccuracy  of  language,  or  embarrassment  of  deport- 
ment, which,  as  First  Minister,  he  subsequently  dis- 
played, were  equally  manifested  on  this  occasion. 
Formed  for  a  popular  assembly,  he  seemed  made  to 
guide  its  deliberations,  from  the  first  moment  that  he 
addressed  the  members  composing  it.  But,  a  circum- 
stance which  will  more  forcibly  exemplify  this  assertion, 
than  any  description,  I  must  not  omit.  Lord  George 
Germain  having  occasion  to  make  some  verbal  com- 
munication to  Welbore  Ellis,  who  sat  near  him,  they 
continued  during  a  few  moments  to  whisper  each  other, 
while  Mr.  Pitt  was  speaking.  Offended  at  such  an 
apparent  inattention  on  the  part  of  two  individuals  so 
high  in  office,  he  suddenly  suspended  his  discourse ; 
and  then  looking  round  upon  the  House,  which  was 
all  ear,  he  said,  with  a  manner,  and  in  a  tone  still  more 
impressive  than  the  reproof,  "  I  shall  wait  till  the 
"Agamemnon  of  the  present  day,  has  finished  his 
"  consultation  with  the  Nestor  of  the  Treasury  Bench.11 
The  observation,  which,  independent  of  its  classic  beauty, 
and  its  severity,  arose  from  an  accident  impossible  to 
have  been  foreseen,  it  was  obvious,  could  not  therefore 
be  premeditated;  and  its  effect,  not  only  on  the  two 
persons  to  whom  it  was  specially  directed,  but  on  the 
House  at  large,  was  electrick.  Lord  George  and  Mr. 
Ellis,  in  some  confusion,  instantly  resumed  their  former 
attitudes,  and  Mr.  Pitt  experienced  no  further  interrup- 
tion. All  men  beheld  in  him  at  once  a  future  Minister ; 
and  the  Opposition,  overjoyed  at  such  an  accession  of 

376 


1781.]  CONGRATULATIONS  AND  PREDICTIONS 

strength,  vyed  with  each  other  in  their  Encomiums, 
as  well  as  in  their  predictions  of  his  certain  elevation. 
Burke  exclaimed,  that  "he  was  not  merely  a  chip  of 
"the  old  block,  but  the  old  block  itself."  Nor  did 
Fox  do  less  justice  to  the  talents  of  this  new  competitor 
for  power,  popularity,  and  employment.  Having  carried 
him  to  Brookes's  Club,  a  few  days  afterwards,  Pitt  was 
elected  a  member  of  that  society,  which  then  compre- 
hended almost  all  the  men  of  rank  and  great  talents 
engaged  in  parliamentary  Opposition  to  Ministers.  It 
is  a  fact,  that  Pitt  remained  during  several  years,  a 
member  of  Brookes's ;  but  he  rarely,  if  ever,  appeared 
there,  after  he  came  into  Office.  So  nice  was  his  tact, 
so  deep  his  penetration,  and  in  so  different  a  mould 
was  he  cast  from  Fox,  that  even  on  his  first  reception 
in  St.  JamesVstreet,  though  it  was  of  the  most  flattering 
description,  he  was  not  dazzled  nor  won  by  it.  On  the 
contrary  he  held  back,  and  never  coalesced  with  that 
party,  beyond  external  appearances.  Fox  himself  soon 
perceived  the  coldness  of  his  new  ally,  for  whom  play 
had  no  attractions :  but  neither  he  nor  Burke  were 
probably  aware  of  the  profound  and  regulated,  but 
soaring  ambition,  which  animated  him  to  aspire,  with- 
out passing  through  any  intermediate  stage,  to  the 
first  employments  of  the  State.  Still  less  could  they 
apprehend  or  foresee,  that  he  would  form  during  the 
greater  part  of  their  future  lives,  the  principal  and 
insurmountable  bar  to  their  own  attainment,  or  per- 
manent enjoyment  of  office. 

Mr.  Pitt,  when  he  thus  rose  for  the  first  time, 
represented  the  Borough  of  Appleby  in  Westmoreland, 
and  was  indebted  for  his  seat  in  the  House,  to  Sir 
James  Lowther ;  whose  property  and  parliamentary 
influence,  which  in  the  Counties  of  Cumberland  and 
Westmoreland  were  immense,  enabled  him  to  bring 
seven  or  eight  Members  into  that  assembly.  Sir 
James  was  rewarded  by  Mr.  Pitt,  for  this,  and  for 
*  377 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [1781. 

other  services,  with  an  English  Earldom,  little  more 
than  three  years  afterwards.  But  he  eagerly  embraced 
the  first  occasion  which  presented  itself,  to  obtain  a 
more  independent  seat  in  Parliament,  and  to  emancipate 
himself  from  any  dependance  on,  or  personal  connexion 
with  the  Lowther  Family.  The  matrimonial  alliance 
of  Sir  James  with  Lord  Bute,  one  of  whose  daughters 
he  had  married ;  the  name  of  Lowther,  which  had  been 
rendered  unpopular,  if  not  odious,  by  the  memorable 
contest  with  the  Duke  of  Portland,  in  the  beginning 
of  the  present  reign ;  and  even  the  character  of  Sir 
James  Lowther  himself,  tyrannical,  overbearing,  violent, 
and  frequently  under  no  restraint  of  temper,  or  of 
reason ; — all  these  combined  motives  impelled  Mr.  Pitt 
to  seek  elsewhere  a  more  independent  title,  to  call 
himself  one  of  the  representatives  of  the  people ; 
particularly  after  his  elevation  to  the  head  of  the 
Treasury.  He  was,  nevertheless,  compelled  to  wait  for 
such  an  occasion,  till  the  Dissolution  of  Parliament 
in  March,  1784,  during  all  which  period  he  sat  for 
Appleby,  even  when  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer, 
under  Lord  Shelburne's  Administration,  and  afterwards 
when  first  Lord  of  the  Treasury.  At  length,  in  the 
Spring  of  1784,  his  ministerial  weight,  rather  than  his 
individual  qualities  and  interest,  enabled  him  to  turn 
out  Lord  John  Townsend,  (then  Mr.  John  Townsend), 
and  to  place  himself  at  the  head  of  the  Poll  for  the 
University  of  Cambridge ;  an  election,  and  a  seat,  in 
every  sense  gratifying  to  his  feelings. 

It  was  not,  indeed,  to  the  personal  friendship  of  Sir 
James  Lowther,  that  he  originally  owed  his  entrance 
into  the  House  of  Commons.  He  was  indebted  for  that 
advantage,  which  conducted  him  with  such  rapidity,  to 
the  highest  offices,  principally,  if  not  solely,  to  the  late 
Duke  of  Rutland,  a  Nobleman  of  nearly  the  same  age 
as  Mr.  Pitt.  The  early  intimacy  which  subsisted 
between  them  at  the  University  of  Cambridge,  was 

378 


1781.]  A  REQUEST  FOR  A  SEAT 

cemented  by  the  political  ties  that  had  formerly  united 
their  fathers,  the  Marquis  of  Granby,  and  the  Earl  of 
Chatham,  during  the  reign  of  George  the  Second.  As 
every  circumstance  connected  with  the  public  life  and 
career  of  such  a  man  as  Mr.  Pitt,  becomes  interesting, 
I  shall  relate  from  my  own  personal  knowledge,  some 
facts  not  undeserving  of  commemoration,  upon  this 
subject. 

Among  the  persons  who  were  admitted  to  the 
familiarity  of  the  late  Duke  of  Rutland,  and  who  had 
access  to  him  at  almost  all  hours,  about  this  time,  was 
a  man  of  the  name  of  Kirkpatrick.  Possessing  a  small 
property  at  Penrith,  in  the  County  of  Cumberland, 
within  a  few  miles  of  Lowther  Hall,  he  was  known  to, 
and  protected  by  Sir  James  Lowther,  with  whom  he 
maintained  a  constant  and  habitual  intercourse.  The 
Duke  and  Sir  James,  both,  treated  him  as  a  sort  of 
Buffoon,  who  diverted  them  by  his  eccentricities,  and 
he  was  frequently  employed  between  them,  on  errands 
or  messages.  During  the  Autumn  of  the  year  1780, 
the  Duke  dispatched  Kirkpatrick  from  his  house  in 
Arlington-street,  to  Sir  James  Lowther,  who  resided 
in  Charles-street,  Berkeley-square ;  with  a  verbal  request, 
that  "  Sir  James  would  do  him  the  favour,  if  possible, 
"  to  reserve  a  seat  among  his  Boroughs,  for  a  friend  of 
"  the  Duke's,  Mr.  William  Pitt,  a  younger  son  of  the 
"  Earl  of  Chatham."  Kirkpatrick  has  often  related  to 
me  the  particulars  of  his  interview  and  conversation 
with  Sir  James  Lowther,  whom  he  found  in  the  act  of 
shaving  himself.  "  Well,  Kirk,"  for  so  he  was  always 
denominated ;  said  Sir  James,  "  what  may  be  your 
"  business  ?  "  "  I  am  come  from  Arlington  -  street," 
answered  he,  "  with  a  message  to  you  from  the  Duke." 
"  What  are  his  commands  ?  "  replied  Sir  James.  u  He 
"  requests  that  you  will  oblige  him  by  reserving  a  seat 
"  for  a  friend  of  his,  Mr.  Pitt,  Lord  Chatham's  brother, 
"  a  young  gentleman  of  vast  abilities,  whom  the  Duke 

379 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [1781. 

"wishes  to  bring  into  Parliament."  "I  wish  he  had 
"  sent  sooner  to  me ; "  returned  he ;  "  Is  he  very 
"  anxious  about  it,  Kirk  ?  "  "  Exceedingly  so,  you  may 
"  be  assured."  "  Then  go  back  to  the  Duke,"  was  his 
"  reply,  "  and  tell  him  that  I  will  see  him  in  the  course 
"of  this  day,  and  we  will  talk  the  matter  over  to- 
gether." Kirkpatrick  carried  back  the  answer:  Sir 
James  Lowther  and  the  Duke  of  Rutland  having  met, 
the  eventual  consequence  of  their  interview  was  that 
Mr.  Pitt  came  in  for  Appleby.  Not,  however,  at  the 
General  Election  which  took  place  in  September,  1780. 
Mr.  William  Lowther,  the  present  Earl  of  Lonsdale, 
having  succeeded  in  making  his  election  for  Carlisle,  as 
well  as  for  Appleby,  vacated  his  seat  for  the  latter 
place,  after  the  meeting  of  Parliament,  and  Mr.  Pitt 
was  then  returned  for  that  Borough.  This  event  did 
not  happen  before  the  beginning  of  1781,  towards  the 
close  of  January,  when  he  took  the  oaths  and  his  seat. 
He  remained  silent  about  five  weeks,  before  he  rose 
and  pronounced  his  first  Speech. 

Having  been  brought  up,  as  is  universally  known,  to 
the  profession  of  the  law,  he  went  the  Western  Circuit, 
as  a  Barrister,  in  the  Spring  of  the  year  1780.  But  he 
unquestionably  meditated  very  early,  a  shorter,  and 
more  brilliant,  though  perhaps  not  a  less  laborious, 
mode  of  attaining  to  personal  and  political  elevation. 
He  could  not  be  ignorant  of  the  prodigious  powers  with 
which  nature  had  endowed  him ;  which  talents,  his 
father,  who  must  equally  have  perceived  them,  had 
cultivated  with  the  utmost  care.  A  son  of  the  great 
Earl  of  Chatham,  however  narrow  might  be  his  fortune, 
yet  could  not  experience  much  difficulty  in  procuring 
entrance  into  the  House  of  Commons ;  and  never  was 
any  juncture  more  propitious  for  his  surmounting  all 
the  ordinary  impediments  in  the  way  to  high  employ- 
ment. In  1781,  Lord  North  palpably  and  evidently 
verged  towards  his  extinction  as  First  Minister.  With 

380 


1781.]      FAVOURABLE  CIRCUMSTANCES 

him,  it  was  obvious,  all  his  Colleagues  in  the  Cabinet 
must  pass  away,  and  a  new  order  of  things  would  arise. 
America  having  nearly  effected  her  emancipation,  peace, 
it  was  probable,  would  follow  that  event,  at  no  great 
distance  of  time.  The  King  was  unpopular ;  while  Fox 
had  become  an  object  of  general  attachment  throughout 
the  country,  in  defiance  of  his  excesses,  principally  by 
the  steady  opposition  which  he  had  given  to  the 
American  war.  But,  both  those  circumstances  rendered 
him  odious  to  His  Majesty,  who  disliked  his  political 
principles,  and  reprobated  his  personal  irregularities. 
Lord  Rockingham,  and  the  Duke  of  Portland,  were  only 
great  names,  and  heads  of  a  Party.  It  was  impossible 
for  the  Sovereign,  even  if  he  had  wished  it,  to  call  the 
Duke  of  Grafton  back  to  office :  Lord  Bute  himself 
would  have  been  less  obnoxious  to  the  country.  No 
individual  in  either  House  of  Parliament,  except  Lord 
Shelburne,  remained,  therefore,  who  could  rationally 
aspire  to  succeed  Lord  North,  unless  by  violence,  and 
against  the  King's  inclination.  Mr.  Pitt's  youth  might, 
indeed,  seem  at  first  sight,  an  insurmountable  impedi- 
ment to  his  being  placed  in  a  Cabinet  Office,  without 
first  passing  through  the  intermediate  stages.  But, 
common  rules  and  precedents  did  not  apply  to  him, 
whose  hereditary  claims  to  national  regard,  as  the  living 
representative  of  that  great  Minister  who  had  humbled 
the  House  of  Bourbon,  disposed  all  men  to  consider 
him  with  predilection.  Mr.  Fox  derived  no  such  moral 
inheritance  from  his  father ;  whose  memory,  far  from 
being  embalmed  in  the  veneration  of  the  English 
people,  laboured  on  the  contrary,  under  imputations  of 
peculation  the  most  generally  diffused.  There  existed, 
therefore,  no  solid  obstacle  to  Mr.  Pitt's  speedy  attain- 
ment, even  of  the  greatest  Ministerial  situations,  in  the 
course  of  a  very  short  time.  And  when  we  contemplate 
the  range  of  his  mind,  the  very  limited  fortune  that  he 
possessed,  the  coldness  of  his  constitution,  the  dominion 

381 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [1781. 


which  he  exercised  over  his  passions,  the  expansion  of 
his  intellect,  the  splendor  of  his  eloquence,  and  the 
immeasurable  ambition  or  thirst  of  power  which 
impelled  him ;  we  may  give  him  credit  for  having, 
almost  as  soon  as  he  came  into  Parliament,  foreseen, 
anticipated,  and  confidently  calculated  on  his  soon 
reaching  the  object  of  his  exertions. 

I  have  been  assured,  that  while  going  the  Circuit  to 
which  I  have  alluded,  he  was  retained  as  Junior  Counsel, 
in  a  Cause,  with  a  small  Fee,  by  Mr.  James  Dutton, 
who  became,  a  short  time  subsequent,  Member  for  the 
County  of  Glocester.  After  this  first  acquaintance 
made  with  each  other,  they  met,  however,  no  more, 
except  in  Parliament,  till  the  beginning  of  the  year 
1784.  At  the  time  Mr.  Pitt,  who,  though  First  Lord 
of  the  Treasury  and  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer,  could 
not  command  a  Majority  in  the  House  of  Commons, 
where  he  held  his  power  by  a  most  precarious  tenure ; 
was  anxiously  looking  round  for  assistance  and  support. 
Mr.  Dutton  having  requested  an  interview,  then  waited 
on  him  as  First  Minister,  and  stated  that  he  was 
disposed,  as  well  as  desirous,  to  support  His  Majesty's 
Government :  but,  that  as  it  was  highly  probable,  or 
rather  almost  certain,  the  conflict  between  the  two 
parties,  must  produce  a  speedy  Dissolution  of  Parlia- 
ment, if  Mr.  Pitt  retained  his  Office ;  and  as  it  would 
be  most  inconvenient  for  him  to  stand  a  contested 
Election  for  Glocestershire ;  he  therefore  hoped  for  the 
conditional  promise  of  being  recommended  to  His 
Majesty  for  a  Peerage,  in  return  for  his  interest  and 
vote.  To  this  proposition  Mr.  Pitt  replied,  that  he 
should  be  happy  to  receive  Mr.  Dutton's  aid,  and 
should  always  retain  a  becoming  remembrance  of  his 
friendship  or  assistance ;  but  that  he  did  not  desire, 
and  could  not  accept  it,  under  such  a  condition,  to 
which  he  could  in  no  degree  accede,  nor  would  come 
under  any  engagement  of  the  proposed  nature.  With 

382 


1781.]    SHERIDAN'S  CAREER  COMMENCES 

that  short  answer,  so  analogous  to  his  character,  he 
dismissed  Mr.  Button  ;  who  wisely,  however,  trusting  to 
his  gratitude,  voted  with  him  on  every  Division,  during 
the  critical  period  which  followed.  Nor  did  he  mis- 
calculate his  interests :  for,  within  four  months  after- 
wards, in  May  of  the  same  year,  he  received  his  reward, 
being  created  a  Peer,  by  the  title  of  Lord  Shireborne. 

Sheridan,  on  the  other  hand,  notwithstanding  the 
extent  and  variety  of  his  endowments,  which  many 
persons  may  perhaps  consider  to  have  been  even 
superior  to  those  of  Mr.  Pitt  himself;  did  not  instantly 
take  possession  of  the  House  in  the  same  commanding 
manner.  The  reason  was  obvious.  Though  Sheridan 
manifested,  from  the  first  time  that  he  presented  him- 
self to  public  notice  as  a  Speaker,  the  greatest  talents 
for  Debate  ;  yet  he  found  many  impediments,  prejudices, 
and  obstacles,  to  surmount  in  his  progress.  It  is 
likewise  to  be  remarked,  that  Mr.  Pitt,  when  he  rose 
for  the  first  time,  spoke  in  reply.  Sheridan,  who, 
though  he  had  previously  risen  in  the  House,  may  be 
said  to  have  commenced  his  career  by  introducing  three 
Motions,  respecting  "  the  interference  of  an  armed 
"  Force  in  suppressing  the  Riots  of  June,  1780  ;"  must 
naturally  have  arranged  his  ideas  with  more  order 
and  precision,  than  it  was  possible  to  do  in  answer  to  a 
preceding  Speech.  In  fact,  he  won  his  way  by  superior 
talent,  temper,  wit,  and  argument,  which  enabled  him 
to  triumph  over  every  difficulty.  Mr.  Pitt  might  be 
said  to  descend,  as  from  an  eminence,  on  the  House. 
Sheridan  laboured  up  hill,  with  slow,  but  uniform  pace, 
sustained  altogether  by  his  own  prodigious  parts,  and 
by  Fox's  steady  friendship.  His  father,  though  a  man 
of  genius,  could  lend  him  no  assistance.  Old  Sheridan 
was,  on  the  contrary,  in  such  contracted  circumstances, 
as  to  have  been  compelled,  for  his  support,  some  years 
after  the  period  of  which  I  am  now  speaking,  to  give 
Lectures,  at  a  very  low  price,  on  dramatic  Elocution  or 

383 


WRAXALKS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [i78i. 

Declamation,  at  a  public  room,  in  Gerrard-street,  Soho. 
Henderson,  the  celebrated  Actor,  was,  I  believe,  his 
Co-adjutor.  No  individual  in  my  time,  Burke  himself 
not  excepted,  owed  less  to  fortune,  or  was  more 
indebted  to  nature  for  his  vast  reputation  and  success, 
than  Sheridan.  He  did  not,  however,  succeed  in  the 
object  of  his  Speech,  which  evidently  meant  to  throw  a 
severe,  though  an  indirect  censure,  on  the  Sovereign,  as 
well  as  on  the  Administration,  for  issuing  those  Orders 
which  had  rescued  London  from  the  last  effects  of 
violence  and  outrage.  Lord  North  disdained  either  to 
demand,  or  to  accept,  indemnity  for  an  act,  which,  he 
was  conscious,  merited  the  highest  commendation ;  and 
the  House  rejected  by  a  large  Majority,  the  only  one  of 
Sheridan's  three  Motions  that  he  ventured  to  submit  to 
a  Division.  It  may  indeed  justly  excite  some  astonish- 
ment, that  any  Body  of  men  should  attempt  to  call 
into  question  the  rectitude  and  propriety  of  a  measure, 
only  applied  at  the  last  extremity,  in  order  to  rescue  the 
Capital  from  inevitable  conflagration,  and  public  Credit 
from  total  subversion.  But,  never  were  the  powers  of 
Government  fallen  into  such  debility,  as  towards  the 
close  of  the  American  War.  Nor  ever  did  Opposition 
venture  to  treat  Pitt,  or  Addington,  or  Perceval,  with 
the  contumelious  personality,  which  Fox  and  Burke  used 
towards  Lord  North,  on  a  variety  of  occasions. 

March.]  That  Minister,  though  supported  by  a 
Parliament  newly  elected,  and  though  he  had  carried 
the  Address  to  the  Throne  at  the  commencement  of 
the  Session,  by  sixty-nine  Votes,  yet  was  by  no  means 
master  of  its  deliberations.  He  retained,  indeed,  a 
Majority,  which  might  be  esteemed  considerable;  but 
it  was  nevertheless  fluctuating,  precarious,  and  destitute 
of  confidence  in  their  Leader.  The  Minority,  on  the 
contrary,  who  augmented  every  month  in  numbers  and 
animation,  considered  the  termination  of  the  American 
war,  as  the  term  of  the  existence  of  the  Administra- 

384 


1781.]       GROWTH  OF  THE  OPPOSITION 

tion  ;  and  they  already  predicted,  as  well  as  anticipated 
with  certainty,  the  ill  success  of  Lord  Cornwallis's 
expedition  against  the  Southern  Provinces.  Notwith- 
standing, indeed,  some  faint  gleams  of  hope  and  of 
success  which  appeared  in  the  Spring  of  1781,  few 
except  the  most  sanguine,  continued  to  expect  the 
reduction  of  America  to  obedience,  by  the  British 
arms.  Emboldened  by  the  disastrous  state  of  foreign 
affairs,  and  availing  themselves  of  the  unpopularity  of 
the  Ministry,  the  Opposition  attacked  in  the  severest 
terms,  Lord  North's  financial  measures.  The  Loan 
which  he  had  recently  negotiated,  having  risen  suddenly 
to  a  prodigious  Premium,  became  a  subject  of  bitter 
invective,  as  profuse,  improvident,  and  constituting  a 
systematic  engine  of  parliamentary  corruption.  And 
though  the  bargain  which  had  been  made,  was  ulti- 
mately maintained  by  a  Majority  of  more  than  fifty 
Votes ;  yet  the  impression  produced  by  Opposition, 
both  in,  and  out  of  the  House,  announced  an  approach- 
ing Crisis,  however  it  might  still  be  suspended  or  pro- 
tracted by  a  variety  of  events. 

I  cannot  too  often  repeat,  while  dwelling  on  this 
period  of  our  History,  that  no  virtues  of  the  Sovereign, 
however  eminent,  and  no  ability  of  Administration, 
however  recognized,  could  stem  the  unpopularity  of  the 
American  war.  With  the  two  exceptions  of  Johnson 
and  of  Gibbon,  the  former  of  whom  defended  in  print, 
the  measures  of  Government,  in  the  beginning  of  the 
contest ;  and  the  latter,  after  drawing  up  the  Manifesto 
issued  against  Spain  in  1779,  voted,  as  a  Member  of  the 
House  of  Commons,  in  support  of  Lord  North,  through- 
out the  whole  progress  of  hostilities ;  all  the  eminent 
or  shining  talents  of  the  country,  led  on  by  Burke, 
were  marshalled  in  support  of  the  Colonies.  The  aid 
of  Poetry  alone  seemed  wanting  to  compleat  the  de- 
lusion. Just  at  this  time  the  marriage  of  Lord 
Althorpe,  (the  present  Earl  Spencer,)  with  Miss 

385  25 


WRAXALKS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [i78l. 

Lavinia  Bingham,  took  place ;  an  event  which  I  only 
mention  incidentally,  as  it  gave  birth  to  one  of  the  most 
beautiful  lyric  productions  in  the  English  language. 
Mr.  Jones,  better  known  afterwards  as  Sir  William 
Jones,  emulating  at  once  the  fame  of  Milton  and 
of  Gray,  in  "The  Muse  recalled,"  reminded  us  of 
some  of  the  most  touching  passages  of  "  Lycidas,"  and 
of  "  The  Bard."  He,  too,  lent  his  powerful  assistance 
to  the  cause  of  Rebellion.  Like  Goldsmith,  who,  ten 
years  earlier,  erroneously  assumed  in  his  "  Deserted 
Village,"  as  the  Basis  of  his  Poem,  that  population 
and  rural  happiness  were  abandoning  England;  Jones 
carried  his  assumption  in  our  disfavour,  to  a  still  greater 
length.  Juvenal,  though  he  wrote  under  Domitian,  only 
asserts  that  female  modesty  and  justice  withdrew  from 
earth  to  heaven,  after  the  extinction  of  Saturn's  reign : 

"  Paulatim  deinde  ad  superos  Astraea  recessit, 
Hac  comite,  atque  duae  pariter  fugere  sorores." 

But  Jones,  after  lamenting  that  "  Freedom  and  Concord 
"  repudiate  the  sons  of  Albion,"  carries  off  all  the 
Virtues  from  this  degenerate  Island: 

"  Truth,  justice,  reason,  valour,  with  them  fly, 
To  seek  a  purer  soil,  a  more  congenial  sky." 

Impelled  by  the  prejudice  which  then  prevailed,  and 
borne  on  the  wings  of  poetic  as  well  as  of  Party 
violence,  he  transports  these  virtues  to  the  Chesapeake; 
and  the  Delaware : 

"  Beyond  the  vast  Atlantic  deep, 
A  dome  by  viewless  Genii  shall  be  rais'd, 
The  walls  of  Adamant,  compact  and  steep, 
The  portals  with  sky-tinctured  gems  emblaz'd. 
There  on  a  lofty  throne  shall  Virtue  stand  : 
To  her  the  youth  of  Delaware  shall  kneel ; 
And  when  her  smiles  rain  plenty  o'er  the  land, 
Bow,  Tyrants,  bow  beneath  th'  avenging  steel  ! " 
386 


1781.]         SYMPATHY  WITH  AMERICA 

Here,  in  a  fine  frenzy,  he  seems  to  behold  as  in  a 
vision,  the  modern  Washington,  and  the  Congress  met, 
after  successfully  throwing  off  all  subjection  to  Great 
Britain.  George  the  Third  is  pretty  clearly  designated 
in  the  last  line,  apostrophizing  tyrants.  It  was  not, 
however,  civil  liberty,  but  independence  of  the  mother 
country ;  it  was  not  freedom,  but  emancipation  from 
the  parent  stock,  that  America  emulated  to  attain  by 
arms.  She  might  have  been  admitted  to  participate 
in  the  blessings  of  our  free  Constitution ;  but  she 
must  then  have  paid  her  pecuniary  debts  to  British 
subjects,  all  which  became  liquidated  in  the  Crucible 
of  Insurrection.  Burke,  within  ten  years  after  the 
conclusion  of  the  American  war,  found  out  his  error, 
when  he  beheld  the  French  Revolution  spring  from  the 
ashes  of  Hancock  and  Adams.  He  then  endeavoured, 
as  he  said,  "  to  trim  the  boat  at  the  other  end."  Mr. 
Fox  never  could  discover  any  thing  wrong,  either  in  the 
one,  or  in  the  other  Revolution.  We  have  lived  to 
behold  the  virtuous  American  Government,  within 
thirty  years  from  the  period  of  their  emancipation, 
voluntarily  become  the  accomplices  and  allies  of  the 
most  sanguinary,  flagitious,  and  obdurate  tyrant,  who 
ever  appeared  among  men.  We  have  seen  this  virtuous 
people  yoke  themselves  to  his  car,  when  he  was  setting 
out  for  Moscow,  in  opposition  to  the  united  struggles 
of  all  Europe  for  deliverance ;  thus  endeavouring,  as 
far  as  their  power  extended,  to  cement  by  our  destruc- 
tion, his  detestable  empire.  Madison,  unlike  Thrasi- 
bulus  or  Brutus,  only  aspired  to  uphold  and  perpetuate 
the  dominion  of  his  Corsican  Master.  It  will  demand 
Ages  to  wipe  out  the  stain  of  such  national  turpitude, 
from  the  American  annals.  But,  under  Lord  Norths 
Administration,  the  Insurgents  beyond  the  Atlantic, 
were  generally  seen  through  the  most  partial  and 
favourable  Medium :  while  Philip  the  Second,  in  his 
attempt  to  extinguish  all  the  rights  of  human  nature 

387 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [i78i. 

among  his  subjects  in  the  Netherlands,  was  hardly 
stigmatized  with  severer  epithets,  than  the  Opposition 
applied  to  the  King  of  Great  Britain. 

The  consideration  of  East  India  affairs,  which  formed 
one  of  the  most  important  objects  of  the  Session,  en- 
grossed universal  attention.  As  early  as  February,  a 
Select  Committee  having  been  appointed,  ostensibly  for 
the  exclusive  purpose  of  reporting  on  the  state  and 
abuses  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  Judicature  in  Bengal, 
General  Richard  Smith  was  placed  at  their  head,  as 
Chairman.  His  local  knowledge  of  India,  seemed  to 
qualify  him  in  some  measure  for  the  situation.  He 
had  acquired  a  large  fortune,  while  in  that  part  of  the 
world ;  but,  which  he  was  supposed  to  have  squandered 
since  his  return.  Though  destitute  of  the  advantages 
of  education,  he  did  not  by  any  means  want  parts  ;  and 
he  displayed  some  talent  in  addressing  the  House.  But 
as  the  Committee  allowed  themselves  to  become  sub- 
servient to  the  purposes  of  Party,  and  particularly  to 
be  made  the  instrument  of  personal  enmities  or  resent- 
ments, they  soon  degenerated  into  an  engine  of  private 
attack,  and  of  individual  persecution. 

April.]  Intelligence  of  Hyder  Ally's  invasion  of  the 
Carnatic,  followed  by  the  defeat  of  the  British  forces 
under  Fletcher  and  Baillie,  which  reached  London  in 
April,  spread  universal  consternation.  In  order  fully 
to  appreciate  the  extent  of  that  calamity,  and  its 
operation  on  the  public  mind,  we  must  recollect  the 
state  of  the  British  Empire  at  the  period  under  our 
review.  The  fabrick  seemed  to  be  every-where  collaps- 
ing by  its  own  weight,  or  yielding  to  external  attack. 
In  the  Western  Hemisphere,  America  might  be  con- 
sidered as  already  lost.  Many  of  the  Windward  and 
leeward  Islands  were  reduced  to  the  obedience  of 
France;  and  the  remainder,  it  was  thought,  must 
speedily  fall.  Jamaica  itself  appeared  insecure.  At 
home,  the  public  Funds  experienced  a  progressive 


1781.]         TROUBLES  ON  EVERY  SIDE 

depression ;  while  Ireland  taking  up  arms,  demanded 
freedom,  sword  in  hand.  Cadiz  and  Brest  had  been 
crowded  with  our  captured  Merchantmen,  to  whom  the 
English  Navy  no  longer  afforded  its  accustomed  pro- 
tection. Under  these  circumstances,  the  eyes  and  hopes 
of  all  men  were  turned  towards  the  East,  as  the  only 
quarter  from  which  we  might  expect  relief.  But,  there, 
a  combination  of  European  and  Asiatic  enemies,  aided 
by  internal  Rebellion,  and  fomented  by  discord  among 
the  Members  of  the  Supreme  Government,  threatened 
the  subversion  of  our  power  on  the  Ganges,  no  less 
than  on  the  Coast  of  Coromandel.  Hastings  quitting 
Calcutta,  had  repaired  to  Benares,  in  order  to  arrest 
the  progress  of  Cheyt  Sing's  revolt.  At  Madras,  the 
Government  of  Rumbold  was  become  odious  for 
rapacity,  and  despicable  from  its  pusillanimity.  Nor 
must  it  be  forgotten  that  we  then  neither  possessed 
the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  nor  Ceylon,  nor  Guzerat,  nor 
the  Islands  of  Mauritius  and  Bourbon,  nor  Java,  nor 
the  Moluccas.  Even  the  Carnatic  belonged,  not  to 
us,  but  to  our  Ally,  the  Nabob  of  Arcot.  With  the 
Mharatta  Empire  we  were  at  war.  The  rich  Countries 
of  Mysore  and  of  Bidnoor,  occupying  a  central  portion  of 
the  Peninsula,  extending  through  several  degrees  of 
Latitude  along  the  Malabar  Coast,  and  intersecting"  all 
communication  by  land  between  the  two  Presidencies  of 
Madras  and  of  Bombay  ; — these  territories,  so  calculated 
to  annoy  us,  were  then  subjected  to  a  martial,  enter- 
prizing,  and  active  Prince,  animated  by  determined 
hostility  to  the  English,  assisted  by  French  Engineers, 
and  himself  habituated  to  the  European  system  of 
Tactics.  His  Cavalry  bursting  in  through  the  defiles 
of  the  mountains  of  the  Ghauts,  overran  the  fertile 
plains  of  the  Carnatic  and  of  Tanjore,  bearing  down 
all  resistance.  Madras  itself,  invested  by  the  enemy, 
was  scarcely  preserved  from  falling  into  Hyder\s  pos- 
session;  and  it  must  be  confessed  that  the  British 


WRAXALI/S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [1781. 

Dominions  in  Hindostan,  shook  to  their  founda- 
tion. 

May.]  Such  was  the  impression  produced  by  this 
unexpected  event,  which  seemed  imperatively  to  call  for 
measures  of  energy,  that  it  gave  rise  to  the  appointment 
of  a  Secret  Committee  in  the  House  of  Commons,  moved 
for  by  the  First  Minister  himself.  The  Lord  Advocate 
of  Scotland,  Mr.  Dundas,  being  constituted  their  Chair- 
man, they  were  specially  charged  to  enquire  into  the 
causes  of  the  war  existing  in  the  Carnatic.  Notwith- 
standing the  severe  animadversions  levelled  by  the 
Opposition,  on  the  Majority  of  the  names  chosen ; 
several  of  the  Members  were  men  of  equal  ability  and 
integrity,  whose  Reports  distinctly  pointed  out  the 
origin,  and  indicated  the  remedy,  for  those  abuses,  or 
acts  of  mal-administration,  which  had  produced  such 
complicated  distress  on  the  Coast  of  Coromandel.  Lord 
North,  in  the  critical  and  perilous  condition  of  the  East 
India  Company,  unable  to  obtain  from  the  Proprietors, 
or  from  the  Court  of  Directors,  such  advantageous 
pecuniary  terms  for  the  renewal  of  their  Charter,  as  he 
thought  the  Nation  was  authorized  to  demand ;  had 
recourse  to  his  ordinary  palliative,  Procrastination.  He 
renewed  the  Charter  for  a  very  limited  period ;  and  by 
that  measure  eventually  originated  the  memorable  Bill 
of  Fox,  towards  the  close  of  1783,  which  produced 
such  national  convulsions,  terminated  by  the  compleat 
destruction  of  the  "  Coalition  Ministry." 

June.]  Towards  the  middle  of  June,  Fox,  strenuously 
supported  by  Pitt,  made  an  ineffectual  effort  for  com- 
pelling the  Administration  to  abandon  the  further 
prosecution  of  the  American  War,  and  to  conclude 
peace  with  the  Colonies.  Neither  the  House,  nor  the 
Nation,  though  both  were  weary  of  the  contest,  could, 
however,  be  induced  to  relinquish  it,  while  Lord  Corn- 
wallis  seemed  to  be  advancing  with  his  army,  through 
the  central  Provinces,  towards  the  Chesapeake.  Fox's 

390 


1781.]    "THE  MARRIAGE  ACT"  AMENDMENT 

Motion  was  rejected  by  a  Majority  of  seventy-three. 
But,  the  most  interesting  Debate  of  the  Session,  and 
in  many  points  of  view,  one  of  the  most  interesting 
Discussions  which  I  ever  witnessed  in  the  House  of 
Commons,  took  place  on  the  Motion  for  amending,  or 
in  fact  virtually  repealing,  "The  Marriage  Act."  It 
stood  altogether  unconnected  with  Ministers,  or  with 
Party  politics,  though  originated  by  Fox,  at  a  very 
advanced  period  of  the  year.  The  Question  seemed  in 
itself  to  be  not  less  philosophical  and  moral,  than  a 
measure  of  State,  or  an  object  of  policy.  Never  did 
Fox  appear  to  me  in  a  more  elevated  light,  than  on 
that  occasion,  while  pleading  the  Cause  of  his  fellow- 
subjects  at  large,  against  the  shackles  and  impediments 
opposed,  as  he  asserted,  by  Aristocracy,  family  pride, 
and  wealth,  to  the  matrimonial  union  of  two  persons 
of  dissimilar  rank  and  condition.  His  father,  Lord 
Holland,  for  whom  he  nourished  the  warmest  filial 
affection,  had  manifested  similar  sentiments.  General 
Burgoyne,  who  supported  the  Bill,  and  whose  eloquence 
was  usually  tame,  as  well  as  destitute  of  entertainment, 
seemed  to  rise  above  himself,  and  to  be  inspired  by  the 
subject.  On  the  other  hand,  Burke,  with  no  less  ability 
than  Fox,  and  with  equal  powers  of  argument,  appealed 
to  many  of  the  strongest  passions  of  the  human  mind, 
while  he  opposed  the  measure  brought  forward  by  his 
friend.  They  completely  diverged  on  this  occasion,  in 
opposite  directions,  each  displaying  uncommon  in- 
genuity, enthusiasm,  and  profound  reasoning,  in  their 
respective  Speeches.  Lord  North,  as  might  be  expected, 
inclined  to  oppose  every  innovation  on  the  Marriage 
Act ;  and  there  could  have  been  little  doubt,  as  far  as 
the  temper  of  the  House  manifested  itself,  that  Fox's 
Bill  would  have  been  rejected  by  a  great  Majority,  if 
the  sense  of  the  Members  present  had  been  taken 
upon  it.  But,  no  Division  was  demanded ;  and  Fox, 
abandoning  it  for  the  present,  pledged  himself,  if  ever 

391 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [l?8i. 

he  should  come  into  Power,  to  renew  the  Motion  from 
the  Treasury  Bench.  This  pledge  he  never,  indeed, 
redeemed:  but  if  we  reflect,  for  how  short  a  time  he 
continued  in  Office,  when  Secretary  of  State  in  1782, 
as  well  as  in  1783,  together  with  the  multiplicity 
of  matter  which  then  pressed  upon  him ;  we  cannot 
wonder,  though  it  is  possible  we  may  regret,  his  not 
having  resumed  the  subject. 

July.]  Many  circumstances  contributed  to  sustain, 
and  to  prolong,  the  duration  of  Lord  North's  Adminis- 
tration, notwithstanding  the  misfortunes  and  disgraces 
which  continued  annually  to  mark  its  progress.  The 
Mutiny  in  the  Pensylvania  Line,  which  for  a  moment 
seemed  to  menace  the  American  Congress  with  internal 
revolt,  during  the  Spring  of  1781 ;  Lord  Cornwall's 
victory  over  Greene,  at  Guilford ;  followed  by  Lord 
Rawdon's  advantage  gained  over  the  same  General  at 
Camden,  in  North  and  South  Carolina;  lastly,  the 
expectations  formed  from  the  advance  of  the  British 
Forces  into  the  Province  of  Virginia : — all  these  events 
held  the  minds  of  men  in  suspense,  till  the  Prorogation 
of  Parliament  in  July,  allowed  the  Minister  to  retire 
for  some  time,  from  the  scene  of  his  political  exertion. 
The  Province  of  West  Florida  had  nevertheless  been 
conquered  by  Spain,  while  France  reduced  to  its  sub- 
jection the  Island  of  Tobago.  Our  only  acquisition 
consisted  in  the  seizure  of  the  defenceless  Island  of 
St.  Eustatius,  in  the  West  Indies,  belonging  to  the 
Dutch ;  a  capture  which  served  to  cover  Rodney  and 
Vaughan,  the  Naval  and  Military  Commanders  in  Chief, 
with  Obloquy,  on  account  of  their  severe  treatment  of 
the  inhabitants.  Even  on  the  element  of  the  Sea, 
every  encounter  with  the  enemy,  from  its  indecisive 
nature,  rather  tended  to  augment  their  courage,  as  well 
as  their  enterprize. 

August.]     The    severest    naval    action   which    took 
place  during  the  whole  course  of  the  American  War, 

392 


1781.]  A  GREAT  NAVAL  BATTLE 

was  the  battle  fought  at  this  time  between  Parker  and 
Zoutman,  who  commanded  the  English  and  Dutch 
squadrons  in  the  North  Sea,  off'  the  Dogger  Bank.  But, 
it  bore  no  resemblance  in  its  results,  to  the  glorious 
victory  obtained  in  our  time,  by  Duncan,  at  Camper- 
down;  and  might  more  aptly  be  compared  with  the 
sanguinary,  though  indecisive  conflicts  for  superiority 
under  Charles  the  Second,  when  the  Navies  of  Holland 
were  led  by  Tromp  and  Ruyter,  while  those  of  England 
were  conducted  by  James,  Duke  of  York,  by  Prince 
Rupert,  and  by  Montague,  first  Earl  of  Sandwich. 
On  this  occasion,  the  King,  departing  from  the  ordinary 
line  of  his  conduct,  embarked  on  the  Thames,  accom- 
panied by  the  Prince  of  Wales,  and  descended  the 
river  to  the  Nore,  where  he  visited  Admiral  Parker,  on 
board  his  ship,  the  "Fortitude."  One  of  the  defects 
attributed  to  His  Majesty 's  natural  character,  but,  which 
perhaps  principally  resulted  from  his  secluded  education 
during  his  grandfather's  reign,  and  the  retired  habits  ot 
life  which  he  then  imbibed  under  Lord  Bute's  tuition ; 
was  his  supposed  reluctance  to  become  personally 
acquainted  with  the  people  over  whom  he  reigned. 
His  enemies  described  him  as  a  Prince  averse  to  all 
communication  with  his  Subjects,  except  at  a  Levee. 
Thus  the  u  Heroic  Epistle "  exclaims, 

"  Our  sons  some  slave  of  greatness  may  behold, 
Cast  in  the  genuine  Asiatic  mould, 
Who  of  three  realms  shall  condescend  to  know 
No  more  than  he  can  spy  from  Windsor's  brow." 

Yet  when  the  King,  bursting  for  the  first  time  since 
his  accession  to  the  Throne,  through  the  restraints  which 
he  imposed  on  himself,  went  down  to  Portsmouth  in 
June,  1773,  to  inspect  his  fleet ;  with  what  severe 
raillery  did  not  the  same  poem  endeavour  to  expose  him 
to  derision  ? 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [i78i. 

"  There  shall  he  see,  as  other  folks  have  seen, 
That  ships  have  anchors,  and  that  seas  are  green ; 
Shall  count  the  tackling  trim,  the  streamers  fine, 
With  Bradshaw  prattle,  and  with  Sandwich  dine ; 
And  then  row  back,  amidst  the  cannon's  roar, 
As  safe,  as  sage,  as  when  he  left  the  shore." 

But  it  would  only  argue  folly  to  deny,  that  during 
the  first  twenty-three  years  of  his  reign,  from  1761,  as 
soon  as  Lord  Bute  came  into  Power,  to  the  end  of  1783, 
when  Fox  brought  forward  the  "East  India  Bill," 
George  the  Third  was  most  unpopular.  His  subjects, 
however,  made  him  ample  amends  for  so  long  withhold- 
ing from  him  the  testimonies  of  their  affection,  by  the 
general  and  unbounded  attachment  which  they  have 
since  manifested  towards  him,  down  to  the  moment 
when  he  ceased  to  sway  the  sceptre. 

September.]  Admiral  Darby,  who  continued  to  com- 
mand the  Channel  Fleet,  had  successfully  relieved  Gib- 
raltar, during  the  course  of  the  Spring,  when  reduced 
to  great  extremity.  But,  in  the  Autumn,  our  numerical 
inferiority  compelled  that  Commander  to  take  refuge  in 
Torbay  ;  while  the  combined  French  and  Spanish  Fleets, 
for  the  third  time  since  the  beginning  of  the  war, 
occupied  the  entrance  of  the  British  Channel,  and  even 
meditated  to  attack  us,  as  we  lay  at  anchor  on  our  own 
coast.  So  low  was  the  naval  power  of  England  reduced, 
towards  the  conclusion  of  Lord  NortrTs  Administration, 
amidst  the  exhausture  and  calamities  occasioned  by  the 
American  War !  But,  towards  America  itself,  all  eyes 
were  anxiously  turned ;  where,  it  became  evident,  affairs 
rapidly  tended  to  some  great  and  decisive  Crisis.  Lord 
Cornwallis  having  advanced  into  the  province  of  Vir- 
ginia in  June,  finally  established  himself  at  York  town 
in  August.  No  position  could  have  been  more  judi- 
ciously chosen  ;  and  it  might  unquestionably  have  been 
maintained  under  every  disadvantage,  against  the  united 

394 


1781.]    FROM  REBELLION  TO  REVOLUTION 

force  of  America  and  of  France,  if  a  chain  of  fortuitous 
accidents,  rather  than  a  series  of  measures,  had  not 
led  to  the  unavoidable  Catastrophe  which  terminated 
the  war.  De  Grasse,  who  commanded  the  French 
Fleet,  was  not  less  favored  by  fortune,  in  finding  the 
mouth  of  the  Chesapeake  unoccupied,  on  his  arrival 
there  from  the  West  Indies ;  than  he  derived  aid 
from  the  delays  that  prevented  the  English  Squad- 
ron under  Graves,  from  anticipating  his  seizure  of  that 
important  station.  Graves  and  Clinton,  both,  succes- 
sively failed,  only  by  the  short  interruption  of  a  few 
days :  the  first,  in  occupying  the  Chesapeake  with  a 
naval  force ;  the  last,  in  arriving  with  an  army,  before 
Lord  Cornwallis's  surrender,  and  thereby  rescuing  him 
from  the  necessity  of  capitulating  to  Washington.  In 
this  desperate  situation,  precluded  from  all  possibility 
of  relief,  Lord  Cornwallis  laid  down  his  arms ;  and  the 
American  Rebellion,  after  a  contest  of  more  than  six 
years,  finally  became  a  Revolution. 

October.]  It  is  at  this  point  of  time,  that  we  must 
place  the  highest  elevation  to  which  Louis  the  Sixteenth 
attained  during  his  reign :  an  elevation  only  to  be 
paralleled  in  the  French  annals,  by  recurring  to  the 
brilliant  Eras  of  Louis  the  Fourteenth.  For  his  grand- 
father Louis  the  Fifteenth  never  stood  on  such  an 
eminence  in  the  eyes  of  Europe ;  not  even  in  the  year 
1748,  previous  to  the  Peace  of  Aix-la-Chapelle,  though 
his  troops,  conducted  by  Marshal  Saxe,  after  defeating 
the  Allies  in  various  actions,  had  then  overrun  the 
Austrian  Low  Countries,  and  nearly  reduced  Brabant. 
In  October,  1781,  the  King  of  France  beheld  America 
finally  dissevered  from  Great  Britain,  by  the  union  of 
his  armies  with  those  of  the  Insurgents;  while  he 
received  at  the  same  period  Lord  Cornwallis's  sword, 
surrendered  to  La  Fayette.  His  forces  were  occupied 
in  pursuing  their  career  of  victory  throughout  the 
West  Indies ;  and  in  the  East,  Suffrein,  in  his  repeated 

395 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [i78i. 

Naval  engagements  with  Sir  Edward  Hughes,  not  only 
maintained  the  honour  of  his  Sovereign's  flag,  but  had 
nearly  succeeded  more  than  once,  in  obtaining  a  decided 
superiority  over  our  squadron  on  the  Coast  of  Coro- 
mandel.  The  Spanish  branch  of  the  House  of  Bourbon, 
acting  in  subservience  to  the  views  of  the  Court  of 
Versailles,  after  subjecting  Minorca  and  West  Florida, 
held  Gibraltar  besieged  by  sea  and  land ;  the  reduction 
of  which  fortress,  calculated  to  render  for  ever  illustrious 
the  reign  of  Charles  the  Third,  was  anticipated  with 
sanguine  impatience  by  the  two  Crowns.  Our  Commerce 
had  not  suffered  less  by  the  depredations,  than  our 
Colonies  had  been  diminished  by  the  arms,  of  France. 
Holland,  ranging  under  the  same  Standard,  made 
common  cause  with  Louis,  against  her  antient  Ally. 
It  only  remained  for  them  to  crush  the  Channel  fleet 
of  England,  in  order  to  dictate  the  terms  of  peace ; 
and  so  nearly  did  Guichen  and  Cordova,  who 
commanded  the  combined  Navies  of  France  and 
Spain,  appear  to  be  to  atchieving  that  last  object, 
as  to  impress  us  with  the  utmost  apprehension  of  its 
completion.  Who,  when  contemplating  such  a  scene, 
could  have  imagined  that  this  descendant  of  so  many 
Kings,  that  had  reigned  for  eight  hundred  years  over 
the  French,  would  perish  on  a  Scaffold,  in  his  own 
Capital,  scarcely  more  than  eleven  years  afterwards ; 
the  victim  of  his  inert  pusillanimity,  in  not  firmly 
resisting  the  first  ebullitions  of  popular  innovation  ! 

As  if  to  secure  and  perpetuate  the  Bourbon  line, 
the  Queen  of  France,  who  had  been  married  more  than 
ten  years,  without  giving  a  male  heir  to  the  Crown,  at 
length  brought  into  the  world  a  Son.  Catherine  of 
Medicis,  like  Maria  Antonietta  of  Austria,  had  re- 
mained childless  for  nearly  the  same  period  of  time, 
before  she  produced  a  successor.  The  young  Dauphin's 
baptism  was  performed  in  this  very  month,  with  extreme 
magnificence,  at  Versailles.  Happily  for  himself,  he 

396 


1781.]  THE  SONS  OF  LOUIS  XVI. 

expired  early  in  June,  1789 ;  only  a  few  weeks  before 
the  fatal  Revolution  which  took  place  in  July  of  that 
year,  swept  away  the  Monarchy,  to  place  Robespierre 
and  Bonaparte  successively  on  the  throne  of  Henry  the 
Fourth.  The  Dauphin  was  in  his  ninth  year,  when  he 
finished  his  short  career.  I  have  been  assured  by  those 
who  had  access  to  know  the  fact,  that  at  the  age  of 
seven  years,  when  the  charge  of  his  person,  according 
to  the  established  usage  of  the  old  French  Court,  was 
surrendered  up  by  the  Governess,  and  he  was  then  put 
under  the  care  of  men ;  the  Dauphin  being  stripped  in 
the  presence  of  professional  persons,  and  having  under- 
gone an  examination,  was  pronounced  to  be  without 
defect  in  his  formation.  But,  being  made  soon  after- 
wards to  sit  with  his  feet  in  a  wooden  machine  calculated 
to  turn  them  out,  the  spinal  marrow  became  speedily 
affected  by  it.  Whether  this  assertion  be  accurate  or 
not,  it  is  certain  that  the  Vertebrae  of  the  back  bone 
growing  crooked,  he  fell  into  a  state  of  languor,  accom- 
panied by  debility.  I  have  seen  him  more  than  once 
while  in  this  condition,  during  the  Summer  preceding 
his  decease,  taking  the  air  in  a  carriage  in  the  gardens 
of  St.  Cloud.  His  emaciated  appearance  awakened 
concern ;  but  he  was  said  not  to  want  intelligence, 
and  the  Queen  his  mother  manifested  the  warmest 
affection  for  him  while  living,  as  well  as  sorrow  for  his 
loss.  The  Duke  of  Normandy,  his  younger  brother, 
born  under  a  still  more  inauspicious  planet,  succeeded 
to  his  title,  and  became,  after  his  father's  execution, 
the  unfortunate  Louis  the  Seventeenth. 

November.]  During  the  whole  month  of  November, 
the  concurring  accounts  transmitted  to  government, 
enumerating  Lord  Cornwallis's  embarrassments,  and  the 
positions  taken  by  the  enemy,  augmented  the  anxiety 
of  the  Cabinet.  Lord  George  Germain  in  particular, 
conscious  that  on  the  prosperous  or  adverse  termination 
of  that  expedition,  must  hinge  the  fate  of  the  American 

397 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [1781. 

contest,  his  own  stay  in  office,  as  well  as  probably  the 
duration  of  the  Ministry  itself;  felt,  and  even  expressed 
to  his  friends,  the  strongest  uneasiness  on  the  subject. 
The  meeting  of  Parliament  meanwhile  stood  fixed  for 
the  27th  of  November.  On  Sunday,  the  25th,  about 
noon,  official  intelligence  of  the  surrender  of  the  British 
forces  at  York  Town,  arrived  from  Falmouth,  at  Lord 
George  Germain's  house  in  Pall-mall.  Lord  Walsing- 
ham,  who  previous  to  his  father  Sir  William  de  Grey's 
elevation  to  the  Peerage,  had  been  Under  Secretary  of 
State  in  that  department ;  and  who  was  selected  to 
second  the  Address  in  the  House  of  Peers,  on  the 
subsequent  Tuesday ;  happened  to  be  there  when  the 
messenger  brought  the  news.  Without  communicating 
it  to  any  other  person,  Lord  George,  for  the  purpose  of 
dispatch,  immediately  got  with  him  into  a  hackney- 
coach,  and  drove  to  Lord  Stormont's  residence  in  Port- 
land-place. Having  imparted  to  him  the  disastrous 
information,  and  taken  him  into  the  carriage,  they 
instantly  proceeded  to  the  Chancellor's  house  in  Great 
Russel-street,  Bloomsbury,  whom  they  found  at  home : 
when,  after  a  short  consultation,  they  determined  to  lay 
it,  themselves  in  person,  before  Lord  North.  He  had 
not  received  any  intimation  of  the  event,  when  they 
arrived  at  his  door,  in  Downing-street,  between  one  and 
two  o'clock.  The  First  Minister's  firmness,  and  even 
his  presence  of  mind,  gave  way  for  a  short  time,  under 
this  awful  disaster.  I  asked  Lord  George  afterwards, 
how  he  took  the  communication,  when  made  to  him  ? 
"  As  he  would  have  taken  a  ball  in  his  breast,"  replied 
Lord  George.  For  he  opened  his  arms,  exclaiming 
wildly,  as  he  paced  up  and  down  the  apartment  during 
a  few  minutes,  "Oh,  God!  it  is  all  over!"  Words 
which  he  repeated  many  times,  under  emotions  of  the 
deepest  agitation  and  distress. 

When  the  first  agitation  of  their  minds  had  subsided, 
the   four  Ministers  discussed  the  question,  whether  or 


1781.]  NEWS  OF  CAPITULATION 

not  it  might  be  expedient  to  prorogue  Parliament  for 
a  few  days :  but,  as  scarcely  an  interval  of  forty-eight 
hours  remained  before  the  appointed  time  of  assembling  ; 
and  as  many  Members  of  both  Houses  were  already 
either  arrived  in  London,  or  on  the  road ;  that  pro- 
position was  abandoned.  It  became,  however,  indis- 
pensable to  alter,  and  almost  to  model  anew  the  King\s 
Speech,  which  had  been  already  drawn  up,  and  com- 
pletely prepared  for  delivery  from  the  Throne.  This 
alteration  was  therefore  made  without  delay :  and  at 
the  same  time,  Lord  George  Germain,  as  Secretary  for 
the  American  Department,  sent  off  a  dispatch  to  His 
Majesty,  who  was  then  at  Kew,  acquainting  him  with 
the  melancholy  termination  of  Lord  Cornwallis's 
expedition.  Some  hours  having  elapsed,  before  these 
different,  but  necessary  acts  of  business  could  take 
place,  the  Ministers  separated,  and  Lord  George 
Germain  repaired  to  his  Office  in  Whitehall.  There 
he  found  a  confirmation  of  the  intelligence,  which 
arrived  about  two  hours  after  the  first  communication  ; 
having  been  transmitted  from  Dover,  to  which  place  it 
was  forwarded  from  Calais,  with  the  French  account  of 
the  same  event. 

I  dined  on  that  day  at  Lord  George's ;  and  though 
the  information,  which  had  reached  London  in  the 
course  of  the  morning,  from  two  different  quarters,  was 
of  a  nature  not  to  admit  of  long  concealment ;  yet  it 
had  not  been  communicated  either  to  me,  or  to  any 
individual  of  the  company,  as  it  might  naturally  have 
been  through  the  channel  of  common  report,  when  I 
got  to  Pall-mall,  between  five  and  six  o'clock.  Lord 
Walsingham,  who  likewise  dined  there,  was  the  only 
person  present,  except  Lord  George,  acquainted  with  the 
fact.  The  party,  nine  in  number,  sat  down  to  table.  I 
thought,  the  Master  of  the  Horse  appeared  serious, 
though  he  manifested  no  discomposure.  Before  the 
dinner  was  finished,  one  of  his  servants  delivered  him  a 

399 


WRAXALKS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [1781, 

letter,  brought  back  by  the  messenger  who  had  been 
dispatched  to  the  King.  Lord  George  opened  and 
perused  it :  then  looking  at  Lord  Walsingham,  to 
whom  he  exclusively  directed  his  observation,  "The 
u  King  writes,11  said  he,  "just  as  he  always  does,  except 
"  that  I  observe  he  has  omitted  to  mark  the  hour  and 
"  the  minute  of  his  writing,  with  his  usual  precision." 
This  remark,  though  calculated  to  awaken  some  interest, 
excited  no  comment ;  and  while  the  Ladies,  Lord 
George^s  three  daughters,  remained  in  the  room,  we 
repressed  our  curiosity.  But  they  had  no  sooner  with- 
drawn, than  Lord  George  having  acquainted  us,  that 
from  Paris  information  had  just  arrived  of  the  old 
Count  de  Maurepas,  First  Minister,  lying  at  the  point 
of  death ;  "  It  would  grieve  me,"  said  I,  "  to  finish  my 
"  career,  however  far  advanced  in  years,  were  I  First 
"  Minister  of  France,  before  I  had  witnessed  the  termina- 
*'  tion  of  this  great  contest  between  England  and 
"  America."  "  He  has  survived  to  see  that  event," 
replied  Lord  George,  with  some  agitation.  Utterly 
unsuspicious  of  the  fact  which  had  happened  beyond 
the  Atlantic,  I  conceived  him  to  allude  to  the  indecisive 
naval  action  fought  at  the  mouth  of  the  Chesapeake, 
early  in  the  preceding  month  of  September,  between 
Admiral  Graves  and  Count  de  Grasse;  which  in  its 
results  might  prove  most  injurious  to  Lord  Cornwallis. 
Under  this  impression,  "  My  meaning,"  said  I,  "  is,  that 
"  if  I  were  the  Count  de  Maurepas,  I  should  wish  to 
"  live  long  enough,  to  behold  the  final  issue  of  the  war 
"  in  Virginia."  "  He  has  survived  to  witness  it  com- 
"  pletely,"  answered  Lord  George :  "  The  army  has 
"  surrendered,  and  you  may  peruse  the  particulars  of 
the  Capitulation,  in  that  paper ;"  taking  at  the  same 
time  one  from  his  pocket,  which  he  delivered  into  my 
hand,  not  without  visible  emotion.  By  his  permission 
I  read  it  aloud,  while  the  company  listened  in  profound 
silence.  We  then  discussed  its  contents,  as  affecting 

400 


1781.]  THE  KING'S  FORTITUDE 

the  Ministry,  the  Country,  and  the  War.  It  must  be 
confessed  that  they  were  calculated  to  diffuse  a  gloom 
over  the  most  convivial  society,  and  that  they  opened 
a  wide  field  for  political  speculation. 

After  perusing  the  account  of  Lord  Cornwallis's 
surrender  at  York  Town,  it  was  impossible  for  all 
present,  not  to  feel  a  lively  curiosity  to  know  how  the 
King  had  received  the  intelligence ;  as  well  as  how  he 
had  expressed  himself  in  his  note  to  Lord  George 
Germain,  on  the  first  communication  of  so  painful  an 
event.  He  gratified  our  wish  by  reading  it  to  us, 
observing  at  the  same  time  that  it  did  the  highest 
honour  to  His  Majesty's  fortitude,  firmness,  and 
consistency  of  character.  The  words  made  an  im- 
pression on  my  memory,  which  the  lapse  of  more  than 
thirty  years  has  not  erased;  and  I  shall  here  com- 
memorate its  tenor,  as  serving  to  shew  how  that 
Prince  felt  and  wrote,  under  one  of  the  most  afflicting, 
as  well  as  humiliating  occurrences  of  his  reign.  The 
Billet  ran  nearly  to  this  effect :  "  I  have  received  with 
"  sentiments  of  the  deepest  concern,  the  communication 
"  which  Lord  George  Germain  has  made  me,  of  the 
"  unfortunate  result  of  the  operations  in  Virginia.  I 
"  particularly  lament  it,  on  account  of  the  consequences 
"  connected  with  it,  and  the  difficulties  which  it  may 
"  produce  in  carrying  on  the  public  business,  or  in 
"  repairing  such  a  misfortune.  But  I  trust  that  neither 
"  Lord  George  Germain,  nor  any  Member  of  the 
"  Cabinet  will  suppose,  that  it  makes  the  smallest 
"  alteration  in  those  principles  of  my  conduct,  which 
"  have  directed  me  in  past  time,  and  which  will  always 
u  continue  to  animate  me  under  every  event,  in  the 
"  prosecution  of  the  present  contest.11  Not  a  sentiment 
of  despondency  or  of  despair  was  to  be  found  in  the 
letter;  the  very  hand -writing  of  which  indicated 
composure  of  mind.  Whatever  opinion  we  may  enter- 
tain relative  to  the  practicability  of  reducing  America 

401  26 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [ml. 

to  obedience  by  force  of  arms  at  the  end  of  1781,  we 
must  admit  that  no  Sovereign  could  manifest  more 
calmness,  dignity,  or  self-command,  than  George  the 
Third  displayed  in  this  reply. 

Severely  as  the  general  effect  of  the  blow  received 
in  Virginia,  was  felt  throughout  the  nation,  yet  no  im- 
mediate symptoms  of  Ministerial  dissolution,  or  even  of 
parliamentary  defection,  became  visible  in  either  House. 
All  the  animated  invectives  of  Fox,  aided  by  the  con- 
tumelious irony  of  Burke,  and  sustained  by  the  dignified 
•denunciations  of  Pitt,  enlisted  on  the  same  side,  made 
little  apparent  impression  on  their  hearers,  who  seemed 
stupified  by  the  disastrous  intelligence.  Yet  never 
probably,  at  any  period  of  our  history,  was  more  indig- 
nant language  used  by  the  Opposition,  or  supported  by 
Administration.  In  the  ardoiir  of  his  feelings  at  the 
recent  calamity  beyond  the  Atlantic,  Fox  not  only 
accused  Ministers  of  being  virtually  in  the  pay  of 
France ;  but,  menaced  them  with  the  vengeance  of  an 
undone  people,  who  wrould  speedily  compel  them  to 
expiate  their  crimes  on  the  public  scaffold.  •  Burke, 
with  inconceivable  warmth  of  colouring,  depictured 
the  folly  and  impracticability  of  taxing  America  by 
force,  or  as  he  described  it,  "  shearing  the  wolf."  The 
Metaphor  was  wonderfully  appropriate,  and  scarcely 
admitted  of  denial.  Pitt  levelled  his  observations 
principally  against  the  Cabinet,  whom  he  represented 
as  destitute  of  principle,  wisdom,  or  union  of  design. 
All  three  were  sustained,  and  I  had  almost  said,  outdone 
by  Mr.  Thomas  Pitt,  who,  in  terms  of  gloomy  despond- 
ency, seemed  to  regard  the  situation  of  the  country  as 
scarcely  admitting  of  a  remedy,  under  such  a  Parliament, 
such  Ministers,  and  such  a  Sovereign.  Lord  North, 
in  this  moment  of  general  depression,  found  resources 
in  himself.  He  scornfully  repelled  the  insinuations  of 
-Fox,  as  deserving  only  contempt ;  justified  the  principle 
of  the  war,  which  did  not  originate-  =in  <a  despotic  wish 

402 


1781.]      OPPOSITION  TWICE  DEFEATED 

to  tyrannize  America,  but  from  the  desire  of  maintain- 
ing the  constitutional  authority  of  Parliament  over  the 
Colonies ;  deplored,  in  common  with  the  Opposition, 
the  misfortunes  which  had  marked  the  progress  of  the 
contest ;  defied  the  threats  of  punishment ;  and  finally 
adjured  the  House  not  to  aggravate  the  present 
calamity  by  dejection  or  despair,  but,  by  united  exer- 
tion, to  secure  our  national  extrication. 

The  efforts  of  the  First  Minister  were  not  unsuccess- 
ful, and  the  Address  to  the  Crown,  which  indirectly 
avowed  the  prosecution  of  the  war  beyond  the  Atlantic 
as  necessary,  was  carried  by  a  Majority  of  eighty-nine. 
Though  the  continuance  of  offensive  hostilities  in 
America,  was  unequivocally  renounced  by  Lord  North, 
and  virtually  or  silently  acquiesced  in  by  Lord  George 
Germain,  in  the  course  of  Debate ;  yet  so  far  did 
Ministers  seem  from  professing  a  readiness  to  acknow- 
ledge the  independance  of  the  thirteen  Colonies,  that 
they  warmly  maintained  the  wisdom  and  the  necessity 
of  still  prosecuting  a  defensive  war  in  that  portion  of 
the  Globe.  In  the  House  of  Peers,  a  still  greater  pro- 
portionate Majority  supported  Administration.  When 
Fox,  presuming  on  the  operation  of  the  recent  Mis- 
fortune in  the  Chesapeake,  soon  afterwards  attempted 
to  stop  the  progress  of  the  supplies,  the  Opposition 
experienced  a  second  defeat,  only  seventy-seven  persons 
voting  with  them,  while  Lord  North  had  one  hundred 
and  seventy-two.  It  seemed  by  no  means  clear,  during 
the  first  fortnight  after  Parliament  met,  whether  any 
official  change  whatever  would  take  place;  or  if  an 
alteration  should  be  made  in  the  Cabinet,  to  what 
extent  it  would  be  carried.  The  national  forces,  ex- 
hausted by  so  long  a  contest,  and  now  opposed  in  every 
quarter  by  a  vast  Confederacy,  were  indeed  evidently 
unequal  to  continue  the  effort  for  subjecting  America; 
and  it  therefore  became  obvious  that  new  Measures 
must  speedily  supercede  those,  which  had  been  prose- 

406 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [1781. 

cuted  during  so  many  years.  But,  the  same  First 
Minister  might  remain  in  Power,  under  a  total  or  a 
partial  change  of  system ;  and  in  that  case,  all  the 
labours  of  the  Minority  would  be  frustrated,  in  the 
moment  of  their  expected  completion.  The  King's 
firmness  was  well  understood  by  all  parties.  Lord 
North  shewed  hitherto  no  disposition  to  resign,  and 
Parliament  had  given  no  indications  of  having  with- 
drawn their  confidence  from  the  Administration.  Such 
appeared  to  be  the  aspect  of  public  affairs,  in  the  first 
week  of  December. 

December.]  Though  Fox  and  Pitt  seemed  at  this 
time  to  act  in  perfect  political  union,  yet  no  man 
who  attentively  considered  the  different  spirit  which 
animated  their  Speeches,  whenever  the  Sovereign  be- 
came indirectly  the  subject  of  their  animadversion, 
could  fail  to  remark  their  widely  dissimilar  line  of 
conduct.  Fox,  whether  he  was  impelled  by  his  con- 
sciousness that  the  King's  moral  repugnance  to  many 
parts  of  his  private  character,  and  to  the  irregularities 
of  his  life,  imposed  insurmountable  obstacles  to  his 
ever  attaining  the  royal  favour ;  or  whether,  having 
already  offended  in  his  political  capacity,  beyond  the 
hope  of  pardon,  he  relied  solely  on  his  own  talents, 
aided  by  Party,  to  force  his  way  into  the  Cabinet,  and 
to  maintain  himself  in  that  situation; — whichever  of 
these  motives  principally  actuated  him,  it  is  indis- 
putable that  in  all  his  allusions  to  the  King,  although 
he  might  affect  to  shelter  himself  under  the  forms  of 
Parliamentary  language,  yet  Fox  always  chose  to  con- 
sider him  as  animated  by  passions  and  sentiments 
unbecoming  his  station,  as  well  as  incompatible  with 
the  benignity  which  constitutes  the  most  enviable  Attri- 
bute of  Royalty.  Fox  designated  or  characterized 
him  in  fact,  as  under  the  dominion  of  resentment, 
unfeeling,  implacable,  and  only  satiated  by  the  con- 
tinuance of  war  against  his  former  subjects.  In  a 

404 


1781.]  A  GRAVE  INDICTMENT 

word,  more  as  a  tyrant  and  an  oppressor,  than  as  the 
head  of  a  free  country,  the  guardian  of  a  limited 
Constitution. 

On  the  first  day  of  the  Session,  when  an  Address  to 
the  Crown  was  proposed,  "Those,"  said  Fox,  "who 
"  are  ignorant  of  the  character  of  the  Prince  whose 
"  Speech  we  have  just  heard,  might  be  induced  to  con- 
"  sider  him  as  an  unfeeling  Despot,  exulting  in  the 
"  horrid  sacrifice  of  the  liberty  and  the  lives  of  his 
"  people.  The  Speech  itself,  divested  of  the  disguise 
"  of  royal  forms,  can  only  mean,  '  Our  losses  in  America 
"  have  been  most  calamitous.  The  blood  of  my  subjects 
"  has  flowed  in  copious  streams,  throughout  every  part 
"  of  that  Continent.  The  treasures  of  Great  Britain 
"  have  been  wantonly  lavished ;  while  the  load  of  taxes 
"  imposed  on  an  overburtheried  country,  is  become  in- 
"  tolerable.  Yet  will  I  continue  to  tax  you  to  the  last 
"  Shilling.  When,  by  Lord  Cornwallis's  surrender,  all 
"  hopes  of  victory  are  for  ever  extinct,  and  a  further 
"  continuance  of  hostilities  can  only  accelerate  the  ruin 
"  of  the  British  Empire,  I  prohibit  you  from  thinking 
"  of  peace.  My  rage  for  conquest  is  unquenched,  and 
"  my  revenge  unsated :  nor  can  any  thing  except  the 
"  total  subjugation  of  my  revolted  American  subjects, 
"  allay  my  animosity.' "  When  we  consider  the  severity 
and  acrimony  of  these  personal  imputations,  we  cannot 
wonder  that  they  excited  corresponding  sensations  of 
resentment  in  the  Royal  bosom.  What  accusations 
more  wounding,  could  we  frame,  what  motives  of  action 
more  atrocious,  could  we  suppose,  and  what  language 
more  abhorrent  to  our  feelings,  could  we  have  attributed 
to  that  monster,  whose  crimes  so  long  desolated  France 
and  Europe,  than  are  here  supposed  to  animate  George 
the  Third !  It  must  be  admitted  even  by  his  greatest 
admirers,  that  Fox,  however  eminent  were  his  talents, 
yet  by  the  want  of  moderation  sentenced  himself  during 
nis  whole  life,  to  perpetual  exclusion  from  office ;  verify- 

405 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [mi-, 


ing  in  his  own  person,  Juvenal's  remark  upon  the  in- 
juries attendant  on  eloquence,  when  he  says, 

ft  Torrens  dicendi  copia  multis, 
Et  sua  mortifera  est  facundia." 

Pitt,  on  the  contrary,  even  when  he  appeared  to  be 
most  animated  by  sentiments  of  indignation  against 
the  measures,  or  the  Ministers,  repressed  any  intem- 
perate expressions,  and  spared  the  Sovereign.  He  pro- 
nounced indeed  in  the  most  unqualified  terms,  his 
abhorrence  of  the  further  prosecution  of  the  American 
war ;  and  on  one  occasion  I  recollect  his  solemnly  in- 
voking the  Divine  vengeance  on  the  heads  of  the 
Administration,  who  had  reduced  the  Empire  to  such 
a  state  of  ruin  and  degradation.  But,  with  consum- 
mate ability,  he  separated  the  King  from  his  weak  or 
evil  counsellors ;  admitted  the  purity  of  intention  by 
which  he  was  ever  impelled ;  professed  his  ardent 
attachment  to  the  person,  as  well  as  to  the  family,  of 
the  reigning  Monarch ;  and  declared  that  it  would  be 
best  manifested  by  exposing  the  delusion  that  had  been 
practised  on  him.  The  Lord  Advocate  of  Scotland, 
whose  distinguishing  political  tact,  and  keen  discern- 
ment in  all  matters  where  his  own  interest  or  ambition 
were  concerned,  enabled  him  to  descry  a  Minister  in 
Embrio  ;  appears  early  to  have  been  impressed  with  a 
conviction  of  this  characteristic  difference  between  the 
two  Opposition  leaders.  While  he  continued  strenu- 
ously to  support  an  Administration,  the  approaching 
fall  of  which  he  nevertheless  probably  anticipated ;  he 
lavished  the  warmest  Encomiums  from  the  Treasury 
Bench,  on  the  hereditary  talents,  the  brilliant  oratory, 
and  early  indications  of  genius  in  Pitt ;  under  whose 
protection,  aided  by  his  own  parliamentary  powers,  he 
speedily  contrived,  after  Lord  North's  resignation,  to  re- 
appear on  the  ministerial  theatre. 

Notwithstanding   the  ostensible  degree  of  Harmony 
406 


1781.]  A  DIVIDED  CABINET 

and  Concert  which  seemed  to  animate  Ministers  in  the 
House  of  Commons,  during  the  first  days  of  the  Session  ; 
yet  before  the  middle  of  December  it  began  to  be 
apparent,  that  some  vital  Disunion  of  Sentiment  pre- 
vailed among  the  Members  of  Administration.  Lord 
North,  in  fact,  might  continue,  as  many  persons 
imagined,  First  Minister,  after  the  avowal  of  American 
Independance.  But,  Lord  George  Germain  could  not, 
by  any  Possibility,  remain  in  office  a  single  day  after 
such  a  Recognition.  At  this  Breach  the  Opposition 
poured  in,  and  were  aided  by  some  of  the  Adherents  of 
Government,  who  conceived  that  by  separating  the 
two  Ministers,  and  dismissing  the  latter,  Lord  North 
could  yet  be  preserved  at  the  head  of  His  Majesty's 
Councils.  Sir  James  Lowther  having  introduced  a 
Motion  tending  to  declare  that  "  All  further  Attempts 
"  to  reduce  the  Americans  to  obedience  by  Force, 
"  would  be  ineffectual ; "  after  a  long  and  very  animated 
Debate,  the  Order  of  the  Day  could  only  be  carried  by 
a  majority  of  Forty-one,  in  a  crouded  House,  where 
Four  hundred  Members  were  present.  Nor  was  the 
paucity  of  Numbers  the  only  apparent  symptom  of  a 
Ministerial  Crisis.  Rigby  and  Dundas  acting  on  this 
occasion  in  concert,  called  on  Lord  North  to  state,  in 
his  Place,  the  difference  of  Opinion  which  was  presumed 
to  exist  in  the  Cabinet.  Both  of  them  at  the  same 
time  avowed  and  admitted,  that  no  further  hope  could 
be  entertained  of  subjecting  America  by  arms.  The 
First  Lord  of  the  Treasury,  while  he  admitted  the  War 
with  the  Colonies  to  constitute  the  heaviest  Calamity 
of  his  life,  and  expressed  his  warmest  wishes  for  the 
attainment  of  Peace;  neither  owned,  nor  denied  the 
charge  brought  forward  by  the  Lord  Advocate  of 
Scotland  and  Rigby,  though  he  attempted  to  evade  it 
under  some  loose  and  general  Declarations.  Wearied 
at  length,  and  attacked  no  less  by  his  Friends,  than  by 
his  Opponents,  he  adopted  the  singular  Expedient  of 

407 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [i78i. 

quitting  the  Treasury  Bench,  and  withdrawing  to  one 
of  the  Seats  behind  it ;  leaving  Lord  George  Germain 
alone,  exposed  to  the  Attacks  of  the  Opposition.  This 
scene,  which  spoke  with  mute  eloquence,  and  from 
its  peculiarity  attracted  all  eyes,  left  no  room  to  doubt 
of  the  Dissimilarity  of  Opinion  among  Ministers,  on  the 
great  question  respecting  America. 

From  that  evening,  Lord  George  with  reason  con- 
sidered his  official  capacity  as  virtually  terminated, 
though  he  continued  to  exercise  its  Functions  till  a 
successor  should  be  appointed  to  the  Department.  The 
two  Houses  having  shortly  afterwards  adjourned  for  the 
Christmas  Recess,  he  then  came  to  a  full  explanation 
with  Lord  North.  At  that  Interview,  after  professing 
his  readiness  to  remain  in  his  situation  as  long  as  it 
could  be  beneficial  to  His  Majesty's  service,  while  the 
Independance  of  America  was  not  formally  recognized  ; 
he  at  the  same  time  earnestly  besought  Lord  North 
to  consider  nothing  except  the  Preservation  of  the 
Ministry,  and  the  interests  of  their  common  Master. 
For  that  purpose  he  advised  the  First  Minister  to 
strengthen  himself  by  a  Negociation  with  some  of  his 
political  Enemies ;  and  not  to  allow  any  personal  con- 
siderations towards  him  (Lord  George),  to  delay,  or  to 
impede,  for  an  instant,  the  Arrangements  judged  to  be 
proper  for  the  general  Security.  Adding,  that  he  had 
no  personal  Stipulations  to  make,  nor  Favours  to  ask  ; 
and  that  he  would  go  down  immediately  to  his  seat  at 
Drayton  in  Northamptonshire,  for  two  or  three  weeks, 
in  order  to  allow  time  to  select  a  successor  for  his  post ; 
after  which  he  would  return,  and  deliver  up  the  seal  of 
his  office,  on  the  shortest  notice,  into  His  Majesty's 
hands.  As  the  best  proof  of  his  sincerity  in  these 
Opinions,  he  left  London  a  very  few  days  after  the 
above  Conversation. 

January,   1782.]     It   might   naturally   be   supposed, 
that  Lord  North  could  not  have  hesitated,  under  such 

408 


1782.]         LORD  NORTH'S  HESITATION 

circumstances,  to  accept  Lord  George's  resignation ; 
and  that  he  could  as  little  delay  to  effect,  or  at  least  to 
attempt,  the  completion  of  the  Objects  recommended 
to  him.  Necessity  strongly  urged  them ;  and  the 
respite  which  the  Christmas  Recess  allowed  for  private 
Negociation,  afforded  him  time  for  making  every 
requisite  Stipulation.  Nevertheless,  Lord  North, 
though  he  did  not  either  oppose,  or  refuse,  by  no 
means  however  positively  accepted,  even  the  Resigna- 
tion of  the  American  Secretary.  And  when  Lord 
George  returned  to  London  from  Northamptonshire, 
towards  the  middle  of  the  ensuing  month,  to  his  no 
small  astonishment,  he  found  his  office  still  undisposed 
of,  and  his  Successor  not  more  fixed  than  before  he 
quitted  the  Capital.  He  therefore  waited  patiently 
till  the  progress  of  Events  should  propel  the  Indecision, 
or  hasten  the  Procrastination,  of  the  First  Lord  of  the 
Treasury. 

Perhaps  no  part  of  Lord  North's  Administration, 
and  no  feature  of  his  conduct  as  First  Minister,  during 
the  twelve  years  that  he  continued  in  office,  seems  more 
extraordinary ;  it  might  be  even  said,  inexplicable ; 
than  this  loss  of  time  at  so  critical  a  j  uncture.  Every 
thing  dictated  decision.  He  well  knew  the  Opposition 
to  be  principally  composed  of  two  parties,  called  after 
the  names  of  their  respective  leaders,  Lords  Rockingham 
and  Shelburne ;  which  bodies  of  men,  though  they 
agreed  in  endeavouring  to  dispossess  him  of  power, 
agreed  in  no  other  speculative  or  practical  principle  of 
policy.  Scarcely  could  they  even  be  with-held  from 
mutual  animosity,  by  the  near  prospect  of  the  prize  in 
view.  If,  therefore,  the  point  of  American  Independ- 
ance  was  once  conceded  by  Ministers,  there  seemed  to 
be  no  obvious  impediment  to  with-hold  Lord  Shelburne 
from  accepting  a  situation  under  government.  It  was 
even  well  known,  that  he  entertained  and  avowed  very 
strong  doubts  on  the  propriety  or  wisdom  of  making 

409 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [1782. 

such  a  concession  to  the  Colonies,  under  any  possible 
circumstances ;  doubts  which  were  re-echoed  by  his 
Adherents  in  the  House  of  Commons.  He  could  not, 
therefore,  it  was  presumed,  be  altogether  unacceptable 
to  the  King.  He  was,  besides,  a  man  of  great  abilities, 
the  professed  disciple  of  the  late  Earl  of  Chatham,  and 
possessed  considerable  Parliamentary  Interest.  Lord 
North  held  in  his  hand  various  means  of  conciliating 
and  acquiring  his  support.  Besides  the  post  of 
Secretary  of  State,  and  a  higher  rank  in  the  English 
Peerage,  to  which  he  might  aspire ;  four  Garters  were 
then  lying  on  the  King's  Table,  unbestowed;  one  of 
which  Lord  Shelburne  actually  seized  on,  as  his  share 
of  the  plunder,  when  he  came  into  Ministry,  within 
three  months  from  the  time  of  which  I  speak.  All 
these  circumstances  seemed,  therefore,  to  point  out  that 
quarter,  as  the  obvious  point  of  application. 

I  have  had  many  opportunities  of  discussing  this 
question,  with  those  who  were  well  informed  in  the 
secret  springs  and  history  of  Lord  North's  Administra- 
tion. But  they  differed  in  their  solution  of  the  difficulty. 
It  has  been  confidently  asserted,  that  the  King  objected 
to  disposing  of  one  of  the  vacant  Garters  in  favour  of 
Lord  Shelburne;  and  absolutely  refused  to  consent  to 
it,  when  the  proposition  was  made  to  His  Majesty,  by 
the  Minister.  Sanguine  hopes  were  entertained  at  St. 
James's,  that  even  though  all  further  attempts  to 
subjugate  America  should  be  abandoned,  yet  that  the 
same  Administration  might  still  continue  to  conduct 
the  national  affairs.  Nor  was  it  at  all  clear  that  such 
expectations  were  chimerical.  The  Session  of  1779  had 
sufficiently  proved,  that  even  after  being  left  in  a 
minority,  on  more  than  one  great  public  question,  a 
Minister  who  wished  to  remain  in  office,  possessed  the 
means  of  doing  it,  almost  in  defiance  of  the  House  of 
Commons.  If  America  was  admitted  to  be  independant, 
and  that  great  impediment  once  removed,  peace  would 

410 


1782.]  "URSA  MAJOR"  •  HW 

probably  follow  at  no  long  interval ;  and  however 
unfortunate  he  had  been  in  carrying  on  the  war,  Lord 
North  might  still  conclude  an  honourable  pacification. 
In  the  House  of  Peers  he  possessed  a  decided  majority ; 
and  in  the  lower  House  of  Parliament,  when  once 
Government  became  emancipated  from  the  American 
War,  it  was  with  reason  conceived,  that  the  Opposition 
would  again  diminish  in  energy,  as  well  as  in  numbers. 
These  reasons,  however  destitute  of  solidity  they 
eventually  proved,  may  perhaps  satisfactorily  account 
for  Lord  Nortfrs  seeming  supineness,  in  not  endeavour- 
ing, at  so  critical  a  moment,  to  divide  his  opponents, 
or  to  augment  his  own  strength. 

January  21.]  When  Parliament  met  again  for  the 
dispatch  of  business,  Lord  George  Germain  therefore 
attended  in  his  place,  in  the  House  of  Commons ;  but 
the  tide  of  Opposition,  which  had  been  so  long 
principally  directed  against  him,  as  the  American 
Secretary,  took  at  first  another  direction.  Lord  Sand- 
wich was  in  turn  attacked  by  Fox,  for  his  asserted 
mismanagement  of  the  Admiralty  department;  and 
the  First  Minister,  unable  to  shelter  him  from  investiga- 
tion, consented  to  institute  an  enquiry.  Among  the 
most  strenuous  defenders  of  the  First  Lord  of  the 
Admiralty,  was  Lord  Mulgrave ;  a  Nobleman  who 
enjoyed  a  place  at  that  Board.  His  early  expedition 
of  discovery  towards  the  North  Pole,  had  given  him 
some  celebrity ;  and  as  he  was  formed  on  rather  a 
heavy  colossal  scale,  the  Opposition,  to  distinguish  him 
from  his  younger  brother,  the  Honourable  Charles 
Phipps,  who  had  likewise  a  Seat  in  the  House, 
denominated  him  "Ursa  Major."  They  likewise  gave 
him  the  name  of  "  Alphesibasus ; "  I  suppose,  from 
some  fancied  Analogy  between  him  and  the  awkward 
imitator  of  the  Dancing  Satyrs,  commemorated  by 
Virgil,  in  the  fifth  Eclogue  of  his  Bucolics.  Lord 
Mulgrave  was  distinguished  by  a  singularity  of  physical 

411 


WRAXALI/S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [178 

conformation,  having  two  distinct  voices ;  the  one, 
strong  and  hoarse;  the  other,  weak  and  querulous; 
of  both  which,  he  occasionally  availed  himself.  So 
extraordinary  a  circumstance,  probably  gave  rise  to  a 
story  of  his  having  fallen  into  a  Ditch,  in  a  dark  night, 
and  calling  for  aid  in  his  shrill  voice.  A  countryman 
coming  up,  was  about  to  have  assisted  him :  but,  Lord 
Mulgrave  addressing  him  in  a  hoarse  tone,  the  Peasant 
immediately  exclaimed,  "  Oh,  if  there  are  two  of  you  in 
"  the  Ditch,  you  may  help  each  other  out  of  it.""  In 
debate,  if  not  animated,  he  was  able  and  pertinacious. 
Like  Dundas,  he  contrived,  after  Lord  Norths  Adminis- 
tration went  to  pieces,  to  attach  himself  to  Pitt ;  who, 
in  1784,  made  him  Joint  Paymaster  of  the  Forces,  and 
six  years  later  raised  him  to  the  British  Peerage. 

Towards  the  last  days  of  January,  after  long  fluctua- 
tion, Lord  North  at  length  communicated  to  Lord 
George,  His  Majesty's  determination  to  consent  to  his 
resignation,  so  repeatedly  offered ;  and  the  resolution 
taken  to  supply  his  loss,  by  Mr.  Welbore  Ellis.  It 
seemed  difficult  to  have  made  a  selection,  by  which 
less  strength  would  be  acquired  on  the  side  of  Adminis- 
tration ;  Mr.  Ellis's  talents  being  already  engaged  in 
favor  of  Government,  by  a  very  lucrative  place,  that 
of  Treasurer  of  the  Navy.  His  abilities,  however 
eminent  and  solid,  aided  by  his  long  experience  of 
Parliamentary  business,  were  nevertheless,  altogether 
unequal  to  contending  in  stormy  times,  with  the  vast 
energies  then  collected  on  the  Opposition  Benches.  He 
was,  besides,  far  advanced  in  years ;  and  though  his 
faculties  might  have  preserved  all  their  vigor  or 
freshness,  he  wanted  the  requisite  fire  and  animation. 
His  appointment  gave  satisfaction  only  to  the  enemies 
of  the  Minister,  who  exulted  in  a  choice  that  proved 
the  Paucity,  or  rather  Nullity  of  the  Sources,  from 
which  he  now  attempted  to  derive  support. 

Just   at   this   period    died    Lord   Falmouth,   at   an 


8, 


1782.]  A  COMEDY  OF  ERRORS 

advanced  stage  of  life;  a  Nobleman,  neither  distin- 
guished by  his  talents  or  his  virtues,  but  whose  name, 
Boscawen,  is  connected  with  Naval  recollections  of  the 
most  gratifying  kind.  Lord  Falmouth  commanded 
the  Yeomen  of  the  Guard,  at  the  time  of  his  death ; 
but,  my  sole  motive  for  mentioning  his  decease,  is  in 
order  to  commemorate  an  anecdote  respecting  him.  I 
have  been  assured,  that  towards  the  conclusion  of 
George  the  Second's  Reign,  when  Mr.  Pitt,  afterwards 
created  Earl  of  Chatham,  occupied  a  principal  place  in 
the  Cabinet ;  Lord  Falmouth  having  waited  on  him, 
at  his  Levee,  stated  his  wish  to  be  recommended  to 
His  Majesty,  for  the  first  vacant  Garter.  The  Secretary 
of  State  expressing  a  degree  of  reluctance  to  lay  the 
request  before  the  King,  and  manifesting  some  dis- 
approbation of  the  demand  itself ;  "  You  will  be 
pleased,  Sir,  to  remember,'1  said  Lord  Falmouth,  "  that 
"I  bring  in  five  votes  who  go  with  Ministry  in  the 
"House  of  Commons;  and  if  my  application  is  dis- 
"  regarded,  you  must  take  the  consequence.1'  "  Your 
"Lordship  threatens  me,"  replied  the  Minister  with 
warmth  ;  "  You  may,  therefore,  be  assured,  that  so  long 
"  as  I  hold  a  place  in  the  Councils  of  the  Crown,  you 
"shall  never  receive  the  Order  of  the  Garter."  Then 
turning  round,  he  exclaimed,  addressing  himself  to  those 
near  him, 

u  Optat  Ephippia  Bos  piger." 

Lord  Falmouth  comprehending  nothing  of  the 
meaning  of  these  words,  but  conceiving  that  the 
Monosyllable  Bos,  must  allude  to  his  name,  requested 
to  be  informed  what  the  Minister  meant  by  so  calling 
him  ?  "  The  observation,"  replied  Mr.  Pitt,  "  is  not 
"  mine,  but  Horace's."  As  little  familiar  with  the  Name 
of  the  Roman  Poet,  as  he  was  acquainted  with  his 
Writings,  Lord  Falmouth,  apprehending  that  Horace 
Walpole  had  said  something  severe  or  disrespectful 

413 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [17 

concerning  him  ;  under  that  second  mistake,  "  If  Horace 
Walpole,"  said  he,  "has  taken  any  liberties  with  my 
"  name,  I  shall  know  how  to  resent  it.  His  brother, 
"Sir  Robert,  when  he  was  alive,  and  First  Minister, 
u  never  presumed  so  to  treat  me."  Having  thus  ex- 
pressed himself,  he  quitted  Mr.  Pitt,  leaving  the 
audience  in  astonishment  at  the  effect  of  his  double 
misapprehension. 

February.]  Early  in  the  month  of  February,  Lord 
George  Germain  having  resigned  the  seal  of  his  office 
into  the  King's  hand,  received,  in  recompense  of  his 
services,  the  honor  of  the  Peerage.  The  circumstances 
attending  that  elevation,  which  became  immediately 
afterwards  a  subject  of  discussion  in  the  House  of 
Lords,  I  received  on  the  same  day  when  they  took 
place,  from  Lord  George's  own  mouth ;  and  they  are 
too  curious,  as  well  as  characteristic,  to  be  omitted  in 
these  Memoirs.  The  separation  between  the  Sovereign 
and  the  Secretary,  was  by  no  means  unaccompanied 
with  emotion  on  both  sides;  which  became  probably 
augmented  by  the  dark  cloud  overhanging  the  throne, 
together  with  the  circumstances  that  produced  the 
necessity  for  Lord  George's  resignation.  The  King, 
who  could  not  shut  his  eyes  to  these  facts,  doubtless 
foresaw  the  possibility,  if  not  probability,  of  greater 
changes  in  the  Administration,  as  imminent ;  of  which, 
the  removal  of  the  American  Secretary,  was  only  the 
forerunner  and  the  presage.  After  regretting  the 
unfortunate  events  that  had  dictated  the  measure,  and 
thanking  Lord  George  for  his  services,  His  Majesty 
added,  "  Is  there  any  thing  that  I  can  do,  to  express  my 
"  sense  of  them,  which  would  be  agreeable  to  you  ? " 
"  Sir,"  answered  he,  "if  Your  Majesty  is  pleased  to 
"  raise  me  to  the  dignity  of  the  Peerage,  it  will  form  at 
"  once  the  best  reward  to  which  I  can  aspire,  and  the 
"  best  proof  of  your  approbation  of  my  past  exertions 
"  in  your  affairs."  "  By  all  means,"  said  the  King,  "  I 

444 


. 


1782.]    2flIG  CREATING  A  PEERAGE    .".JI 

"  think  it  very  proper,  and  shall  do  it  with  pleasure.1" 
"  Then,  Sir,"  rejoined  Lord  George,  "  if  you  agree  to 
"  my  first  request,  I  hope  you  will  not  think  it  un- 
"  becoming,  or  unreasonable  in  me,  to  ask  another 
"favor.  It  is  to  create  me  a  Viscount,  as  should  I  be 
"  only  raised  to  the  dignity  of  a  Baron,  my  own  Secre- 
"  tary,  my  Lawyer,  and  my  father's  Page,  will  all  take 
"  rank  of  me."  The  King  expressing  a  wish  to  know 
the  Names  of  the  Persons  to  whom  he  alluded,  "  the 
"  first,"  replied  Lord  George,  "  is  Lord  Walsingham, 
"  who,  as  Your  Majesty  knows,  was  long  Under- 
"  Secretary  of  State  in  my  Office,  when  Mr.  de  Grey. 
"  The  second  is  Lord  Loughborough  who  has  been 
"  always  my 'legal  adviser.  Lord  Amherst  is  the  third, 
"  who,  when  Page  to  my  father,  the  late  Duke  of 
"  Dorset,  has  often  sat  on  the  braces  of  the  State 
"Coach  that  conveyed  him,  as  Lord  Lieutenant  of 
"  Ireland,  to  the  Parliament  House  at  Dublin."  The 
King  smiled,  adding,  "  What  you  say,  is  very  reason- 
"  able,  it  shall  be  so ;  and  now  let  me  know  the  title 
"  that  you  choose."  "  I  have  already,  Sir,"  answered 
Lord  George,  "in  the  possible  anticipation  of  Your 
"  Majesty 's  gracious  dispositions  towards  me,  spoken  to 
"  the  Duke  of  Dorset,  and  obtained  his  permission,  as 
"  the  head  of  my  family,  to  take  the  title  of  Sackwtte  ; 
"  having  been  compelled  to  -  renounce  my  own  name,  in 
"  order  to  avail  myself  of  the  bequest  of  the  Estate  of 
"  Drayton  in  Northamptonshire,  made  me  by  Lady 
"  Betty  Germain,  in  her  Will.  I  shall  therefore  in 
"  some  degree  recover  it  by  this  means."  "  I  quite 
"  approve  of  that  idea,"  replied  His  Majesty,  "and  if 
"  you.  will  state  to  me  your  title,  I  will  write  it  down 
"  myself,  before  we  part,  and  send  it  directly  to  the 
"  Chancellor."  The  King  immediately  placed  himself 
at  a  table,  took  the  pen  and  ink  lying  upon  it,  and 
having  '. committed  the  Viscounty  to  paper,  asked  him 
what  Barony  he  -chose  ?  Lord  George  answered,  "  that 

415 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [1782. 

"  of  Bolebrook  in  Sussex,  being  one  of  the  most  ancient 
"  estates  belonging  to  his  family ;  and  contiguous  to 
"  Buckhurst,  the  original  Peerage  conferred  by  Queen 
"  Elizabeth,  on  his  ancestor,  the  first  Earl  of  Dorset. " 
When  the  King  had  copied  it,  he  rose  up,  and  with  the 
most  condescending  expressions  of  concern,  as  well  as  of 
satisfaction,  allowed  Lord  George  to  withdraw  from  the 
Closet.  As  this  is  one  of  the  few  Peerages,  which,  in 
the  course  of  half  a  Century,  George  the  Third  has  been 
allowed  to  confer,  wholly  independant  of  ministerial 
intervention  or  recommendation,  from  the  impulse  of 
his  own  inclinations,  its  origin  and  creation  attain  an 
additional  interest. 

No  sooner  had  the  intention  of  calling  up  Lord 
George  Germain  to  the  House  of  Peers,  become  publicly 
known,  than  the  Marquis  of  Carmarthen  immediately 
brought  forward  the  subject  before  that  Assembly. 
He  endeavoured  to  shew,  that  it  would  be  derogatory 
to  their  honour,  as  a  body,  to  admit  among  them  a 
person  still  labouring  under  the  sentence  of  a  Court 
Martial :  and  though  his  motion  was  rejected  by  a  great 
majority,  on  the  7th  of  February ;  yet  he  renewed  the 
attack  as  soon  as  Lord  George  had  taken  his  seat,  on 
the  18th  of  the  same  month.  Conceiving  that  Lord 
North  must,  as  first  Minister,  have  advised  the  measure, 
the  Marquis  attempted  to  involve  him  in  the  responsi- 
bility or  culpability  of  giving  such  advice  to  the  Crown. 
But,  Lord  Sackville  having  exculpated  the  First  Lord 
of  the  Treasury,  from  any  participation  whatever  in  the 
transaction,  gave  the  House  clearly  to  understand,  that 
it  flowed  solely  from  the  volition  of  the  Sovereign.  His 
enemies  themselves  confessed  that  never  was  a  more 
able,  dignified,  or  manly  appeal  made  within  the  walls 
of  the  House  of  Peers,  than  Lord  Sackville  pronounced 
on  that  occasion.  He  observed,  that  even  admitting  in 
all  its  force,  the  justice  of  the  sentence  passed  by  the 
Court  Martial,  yet  that  Tribunal  had  only  declared  him 

416 


1782.]          A  PEERAGE  CHALLENGED 

"  guilty  of  disobeying  Prince  Ferdinand  of  Brunswic's 
"  orders ;  and  therefore  had  adjudged  him  unfit  to  serve 
"  His  Majesty  in  any  military  capacity  whatever."  But 
they  neither  had  imposed,  nor  could  they  inflict  upon 
him,  any  civil  disability  or  incapacity.  And  the 
attempt  of  the  King,  or  of  the  Minister  of  that  time,  to 
aggravate  the  nature  or  expressions  of  the  sentence,  by 
any  harsh  additions  and  personal  comments,  could  not 
add  to  its  force.  If,  after  considering  the  Sentence 
published  in  the  case  of  the  General  Officer,  who  com- 
manded on  the  expedition  sent  in  1806,  against  Buenos 
Ayres,  we  contemplate  the  tenor  of  the  Orders  that 
accompanied  it ;  and  then  compare  them  with  those 
used  in  the  instance  of  Lord  George  Sackville ;  we  shall 
perceive  the  contrast  presented  by  the  conduct  of  the 
two  Sovereigns,  in  the  strongest  point  of  view.  Though 
General  Whitelock  was  adjudged  to  be  "cashiered,  and 
"  declared  totally  unfit  and  unworthy  to  serve  His 
"  Majesty  in  any  military  capacity  whatever : "  conse- 
quently, though  the  sentence  implies  a  much  deeper 
degree  of  error  or  culpability,  than  was  attributed  to 
Lord  George  Sackville  at  Minden,  as  well  as  a  fault  far 
more  clearly  established  and  recognized  ;  yet  George  the 
Third,  unlike  his  predecessor,  subjoins  no  injurious 
reflections,  but  simply  enjoins  the  publication  of  it,  as  a 
memorial  and  warning  to  other  officers. 

The  Duke  of  Richmond,  who  took  a  very  active  part 
in  the  second  Debate  upon  Lord  Sackville's  elevation 
to  the  Peerage,  endeavoured  to  prove,  from  the  length 
of  time  which  elapsed  after  his  reception  of  Prince 
Ferdinand"^  Orders  to  advance,  that  disinclination  only 
on  his  part  to  obey  them,  could  have  produced  such 
a  delay.  As  the  Duke  had  been  personally  present  at 
Minden,  and  as  he  declared  that  he  held  his  watch 
within  his  hand,  during  the  whole  time  lost  in  obeying 
the  Prince's  Orders,  which,  he  asserted,  amounted  to  an 
hour  and  a  half ;  his  speech  might  have  been  expected 

417  27 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [i782. 

to  make  an  impression  on  the  House.  But,  only 
twenty-eight  Peers  could  be  found,  on  either  Debate, 
to  support  Lord  Carmarthen's  motion ;  though  the 
number  voting  against  it  rose  from  seventy-five  to  ninety- 
three,  between  the  two  Divisions,  on  the  7th  and  the 
18th  of  February.  It  happened  likewise,  most  un- 
fortunately for  the  Duke  of  Richmond,  that  while  he 
thus  attempted  to  attack  Lord  Sackville's  personal 
courage,  his  own  lay  under  very  general  suspicion.  He 
had  brought  forward,  only  a  few  days  before,  in  the 
House  of  Peers,  the  case  of  an  American  Colonel 
Haynes,  executed  at  Charlestown,  under  Lord  Rawdon's 
authority,  in  the  preceding  year.  The  expressions  or 
assertions  which  His  Grace  used,  in  relating  this  trans- 
action, gave  such  offence  to  the  Nobleman  against 
whom  they  were  levelled,  that  he  soon  afterwards  called 
the  Duke  to  a  severe  account.  But,  as  he  declined 
giving  any  individual  satisfaction,  Lord  Rawdon  com- 
pelled him  to  declare  in  his  place,  that  by  his  accusa- 
tion "he  had  not  intended  any  attack  on  Lord 
"  Rawdon's  justice  or  humanity."  A  declaration  ap- 
parently at  variance  with  his  preceding  charge.  Lord 
Sackville  was  restrained  by  the  exhortations  and  advice 
of  Lord  Amherst,  from  calling  on  the  Marquis  of 
Carmarthen  to  answer  to  him  personally,  for  this  double 
attack.  I  had  the  honour  to  know  him  before,  as 
well  as  after,  he  became  Duke  of  Leeds.  He  was  a 
Nobleman  highly  accomplished,  of  the  most  pleasing 
manners,  of  very  elegant  deportment,  of  a  lofty  mind, 
and  of  considerable  talents.  But,  the  part  which  he 
took  on  this  occasion,  did  not  constitute  the  most 
commendable  act  of  his  political  life.  Posterity  will 
form  their  opinion  on  it,  divested  of  prejudice.  His 
contemporaries  saw  it  merely  through  the  optics  of 
party,  the  most  deceptive  of  all  mediums.  While  only 
twenty-eight  Peers  supported  the  Motion  on  both 
occasions,  nearly  a  hundred  voted  against  it  on  the  final 

418 


1782.]  MINORITY  TRIUMPH 

Debate.  These  aggregate  numbers  appear  indeed  small 
to  its ;  but  we  must  recollect  the  limited  extent  of  the 
Peerage,  compared  with  the  present  times.  It  was 
neither  Lord  Bute,  nor  Lord  North,  but  Mr.  Pitt,  who 
augmented  the  members  of  that  House,  if  not  with  a 
profuse,  yet  unquestionably  with  an  unsparing  hand. 
In  ]  782  there  were  only  one  hundred  and  eighty-seven 
English  Peers.  We  have  now  above  three  hundred. 

While  Lord  Sackville  was  personally  attacked  in  one 
House  of  Parliament,  the  Earl  of  Sandwich  underwent 
no  less  severe  an  enquiry  into  his  official  conduct,  as 
First  Lord  of  the  Admiralty,  in  the  House  of  Commons. 
Fox,  acting  as  his  accuser,  united  the  keenest  sarcasms, 
with  the  most  able  and  laborious  investigation  of  the 
Naval  Administration.  He  was  supported  in  all  his 
Charges,  by  Mr.  Pitt,  by  Admiral  Keppel,  and  by  Lord 
Howe.  Under  this  accumulation  of  talent  and  of 
eloquence,  the  Minister  labored  hard  to  protect  his 
Colleague :  but  the  House  began  to  manifest  some 
indications  of  reluctance.  Animated  by  such  obvious 
symptoms  of  the  decline  of  the  influence  which  Lord 
North  had  exercised  during  so  many  years  in  that 
Assembly,  the  Opposition  renewed  their  efforts.  And 
if  they  did  not  overthrow,  they  at  least  shook  to  its 
base,  the  Ministry.  After  two  Debates,  protracted  to  a 
late  hour,  in  the  first  of  which,  the  Members  present 
fell  little  short  of  four  hundred,  a  Majority  of  only 
twenty-two  appeared  on  the  side  of  Administration.  In 
the  second  Debate,  on  the  20th  of  February,  where  more 
than  four  hundred  and  fifty  persons  actually  voted,  a 
still  smaller  Majority,  consisting  only  of  nineteen^ 
negatived  Fox's  proposition,  attributing  "gross  mis- 
" management"  to  the  Nobleman  at  the  Head  of  the 
Admiralty.  Two  such  divisions,  following  close  upon 
Lord  Sackville's  resignation,  afforded  ample  triumph  to 
the  Minority,  while  they  diffused  proportionate  appre- 
hension among  the  adherents  of  Government. 

419 


WRAXALI/S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [1782. 

I  have  heard  it  confidently  asserted  by  persons  who 
were  conversant  in  the  secret  History  of  those  Times, 
that  after  the  second  Debate,  Lord  Sandwich  received 
a  proposition,  the  object  of  which  was  to  induce  him  to 
give  in  his  immediate  resignation ;  offering  him  as  a 
recompense  for  this  service  to  the  Crown  and  to 
Administration,  the  Order  of  the  Garter,  together  with 
a  Pension  of  four  thousand  Pounds  a  year  for  life. 
Lord  Sandwich  rejected  the  proposal,  though  coming 
from  Lord  North ;  and  though  the  state  of  his  private 
fortune  was  such,  as  by  no  means  to  place  him  above 
the  necessity  of  looking  to  official  situation.  Such  a 
rejection  seems  to  prove  that  he  entertained  the  most 
sanguine,  though  the  most  fallacious  expectations,  of 
the  duration  of  Ministry.  In  less  than  six  weeks 
afterwards,  I  saw  his  furniture  carrying  off  from  the 
Admiralty,  of  which,  Keppel,  just  named  his  successor, 
was  taking  possession. 

Every  day,  from  this  time  down  to  the  20th  of  the 
subsequent  Month,  when  Lord  North  suddenly  threw 
up  the  Administration  of  affairs,  was  marked  by  the 
most  violent  exertions  on  both  sides.  Incredible  efforts 
were  made  to  procure  attendance  in  Parliament.  The 
Opposition,  conscious  that  not  a  moment  should  be 
lost,  gave  the  Minister  no  respite.  Scarcely  forty-eight 
hours  after  the  last  Debate  on  Lord  Sandwich,  General 
Conway  introduced  a  Motion  for  addressing  His 
Majesty,  "  to  renounce  any  further  attempts  to  reduce 
"America  by  force."  Notwithstanding  the  eloquence 
of  the  new  Secretary  of  State,  Mr.  Ellis,  who  on  this 
occasion  displayed  very  considerable  talents,  it  became 
impossible  to  induce  the  House  to  maintain  the  contest. 
Burke,  in  addition  to  all  the  arguments  suggested  by 
the  nature  of  the  subject,  and  the  exhausted  condition 
of  Great  Britain ;  oppressed  the  recently  appointed 
Minister,  under  the  flashes  of  intolerable  wit,  supported 
by  the  keenest  ridicule.  Never  on  any  occasion  was  he 


1782.]      THE  BIRTH  OF  A  BUTTERFLY 

more  happy  in  his  allusions,  or  more  pointed  in  his  irony. 
After  felicitating  Mr.  Ellis  on  succeeding  as  heir  to  the 
noble  Viscount,  at  whose  feet  he  had  been  brought  up, 
and  whose  political  opinions  he  implicitly  adopted ; 
Burke  compared  him  to  a  Caterpillar,  who  having  long 
remained  in  a  torpid  state,  within  the  silken  folds  of  his 
lucrative  employment  as  Treasurer  of  the  Navy,  now 
bursting  his  ligaments,  fluttered  forth,  the  Secretary  of 
the  Hour.  Pursuing  this  comparison  with  inconceivable 
humour,  he  directed  the  whole  force  of  his  powerful 
mind,  in  impelling  his  audience  no  longer  to  support  a 
hopeless,  ruinous,  and  unavailing  conflict.  On  that 
night,  the  American  War  may  indeed  be  said  to  have 
terminated ;  the  question  being  carried  on  the  part  of 
Government,  by  only  one  vote,  though  near  three 
hundred  and  ninety  Members  divided.  Many  of  those 
who  supported  the  Minister,  seemed  not  less  rejoiced  at 
the  apparent  conclusion  of  the  war,  than  the  persons  on 
the  opposite  side ;  and  it  has  been  supposed  that  Lord 
North  himself,  whose  disinclination  to  prosecute  hostili- 
ties beyond  the  Atlantic,  was  well  known,  did  not  really 
regret,  though  he  was  necessitated  to  oppose,  the  motion 
of  General  Conway.  Far  from  manifesting  any  in- 
tention of  laying  down  his  office  in  consequence  of  it, 
he  performed  one  of  the  most  important  functions  of 
First  Minister,  only  three  days  afterwards,  by  opening 
the  Budget,  and  proposing  a  Loan,  on  the  25th  of 
February.  It  is  true  that  he  postponed  the  task  of 
stating  the  Taxes  to  be  imposed ;  but  he  did  not  the 
less  declare  his  determination  to  continue  at  the  head  of 
His  Majesty's  Councils :  nor  did  those  persons  who 
were  most  in  his  confidence,  either  question  his  sincerity, 
or  doubt  his  resolution. 

It  became,  indeed,  apparent  from  this  time,  that 
though  a  Majority  of  the  House  of  Commons  might  be 
still  disposed  to  support  the  Ministry,  they  were  alto- 
gether weary  of  continuing  that  contest  for  the  reduc- 


WRAXALI/S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [1782. 


tion  of  America,  which  during  near  seven  years  had 
produced  only  an  accumulation  of  expence  and  of  mis- 
fortune. But,  on  the  other  hand,  the  Opposition  soon 
discovered,  that  the  compulsory  abandonment  of  the 
American  War,  and  the  resignation  of  Lord  North, 
constituted  by  no  means,  as  they  had  flattered 
themselves,  things  synonimous,  or  inseparable.  When 
General  Conway,  encouraged  by  the  event  of  his  late 
Motion,  brought  the  subject  again  before  the  House, 
he  indeed  out-numbered  the  Minister  on  the  Division, 
by  nineteen,  leaving  him  thus  in  a  Minority.  He  even 
carried  without  difficulty,  an  Address  to  the  Throne, 
soliciting  His  Majesty  "to  stop  the  prosecution  of 
"  further  offensive  war  against  the  Colonies."  But, 
the  King,  though  he  returned  a  gracious  Answer,  did 
not  the  less  make  a  vague  and  general  Reply  to  the 
Address,  when  it  was  presented  to  him  by  the  whole 
House.  Unable  to  resist  the  stream  while  it  ran  in 
this  direction,  Lord  North  no  longer  attempted  it ;  and 
allowed  the  Opposition,  who  on  the  subject  of  America 
constituted  the  Majority,  to  declare  "enemies  to  His 
"  Majesty,  and  to  their  country,  all  those  who  should 
"  advise,  or  attempt  to  prosecute  offensive  hostilities 
"  against  the  Americans.11  Desirous  to  meet,  and  to 
anticipate  their  wishes,  upon  a  point  evidently  so 
popular,  he  even  permitted  the  Attorney-General  to 
bring  in  a  Bill,  enabling  the  Crown  to  conclude  a  Truce, 
or  a  Peace,  with  the  Colonies.  Under  these  critical 
circumstances  the  month  of  March  opened,  while  the 
minds  of  all  men  were  attracted  towards  the  termina- 
tion of  a  scene  so  interesting  to  every  individual ;  but, 
the  issue  of  which  it  was  as  yet  impossible  to  foresee, 
from  the  conduct  or  the  protestations  of  the  First 
Minister. 

March.]  Unable  to  effect  his  removal,  or  to  provoke 
his  voluntary  resignation,  by  any  censuresjpassed  on  the 
conduct  of  the  American  War,  or  by  any  interdictions 


1782.]          RESOLUTIONS  OF  CENSURE 

of  its  future  prosecution;  the  Opposition  became  of 
necessity  compelled  to  bring  forward  a  personal  Ques- 
tion, inculpating  Administration.  And  it  must  be 
allowed  that  in  conducting  this  measure,  they  proceeded 
with  judicious,  as  well  as  with  cautious  steps.  A  retro- 
grade movement,  or  an  unsuccessful  attempt,  they  were 
well  aware,  would  at  once  undo  all  that  had  hitherto 
been  effected.  Lord  North,  who  was  individually  be- 
loved, in  and  out  of  the  House,  even  by  those  who 
most  disapproved  or  opposed  many  of  his  measures ; 
was  likewise  steadily  supported  by  the  Sovereign  :  while 
in  the  House  of  Lords,  no  prospect  of  any  defection 
or  change  had  hitherto  manifested  itself.  The  Session 
moreover  advanced  rapidly ;  and  if  Easter  arrived,  ex- 
perience had  proved  that  a  full  attendance  could  not  be 
obtained  after  that  period  of  the  year,  except  with  the 
utmost  difficulty.  All  these  facts  having  been  maturely 
considered  in  the  Meetings  which  took  place  among  the 
Opposition  Leaders,  they  determined  to  try  the  temper 
of  the  House  of  Commons,  without  delay.  On  the  8th 
of  March,  Lord  John  Cavendish,  seconded  by  Powis, 
(then  Member  for  Northamptonshire,  since  raised  by 
Pitt,  to  the  Peerage,)  introduced  various  Resolutions, 
imputing  the  misfortunes  of  the  war,  to  the  "  want  of 
"  foresight  and  ability "  in  Ministers.  After  a  very 
long  Debate,  in  a  crowded  House,  the  Administration 
not  venturing  directly  to  negative  the  Proposition,  yet 
found  themselves  unable  to  carry  the  Motion,  though 
only  for  the  Order  of  the  Day,  by  a  greater  Majority 
than  ten.  It  might  have  been  supposed  that  a  Govern- 
ment which  rested  on  so  precarious  a  Basis,  was  already 
virtually  at  an  end.  But,  Lord  North  gave  the  best 
indication,  as  it  was  considered,  of  his  own  intention  to 
remain  in  Office,  by  proposing,  only  three  days  after- 
wards, the  new  Taxes  which  he  meant  to  impose  for  the 
service  of  the  year.  The  contending  Parties,  therefore, 
prepared  for  new  struggles ;  and  from  every  part  of  the 


WRAXALKS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [1782. 

kingdom,  as  well  as  from  foreign  Courts,  attendance 
was  procured.  The  duration  of  the  Ministry  being 
now  evidently  at  issue,  and  probably  about  to  be 
decided  in  a  very  short  time,  not  exceeding  three 
weeks ;  it  is  difficult  to  convey  an  idea  of  the  anxiety 
which  agitated  the  Court,  the  Capital,  and  the  Country. 
The  last  Debate  which  preceded  Lord  North's 
resignation,  took  place  on  the  15th  of  March;  it  being 
moved  on  the  part  of  Opposition  to  declare,  that  "  the 
"  House  had  no  farther  confidence  in  Ministers.""  They 
imagined  that  if  this  Motion  was  carried,  no  Adminis- 
tration would  venture  to  continue  in  Office;  or  that 
if  they  should  be  bold  enough  to  defy  the  indignation 
of  Parliament,  the  same  Majority  would  next  address 
the  Crown  for  their  removal.  There  then  remained 
only  one  step  more  to  Impeachment.  But,  so  equally 
balanced  were  the  contending  Parties,  that  though  four 
hundred  and  sixty-three  Members  voted  on  the  Division, 
scarcely  any  ground  was  lost  or  gained  on  either  side. 
Government  still  remained  in  a  Majority  of  nine,  thus 
losing  one  since  the  preceding  Debate.  Yet,  even  that 
single  Vote  being  in  favor  of  the  Opposition,  seemed  to 
indicate  that  they  were  progressive  in  the  public  esteem. 
Every  artifice  of  Party  was  used  to  encourage  their 
friends,  and  to  terrify,  or  hold  out  to  popular  odium, 
the  adherents  of  Administration.  Lists  were  published, 
and  disseminated  throughout  the  kingdom,  containing 
the  names  of  the  Members  who  voted  on  each  Question ; 
those  voting  on  the  side  of  Government  being  printed 
in  red  letters,  while  the  names  of  the  Minority  appeared 
in  black.  Unimportant  or  contemptible  as  this  circum- 
stance may  appear,  it  produced  nevertheless  a  powerful 
effect  on  weak,  or  timid  individuals;  and  bore  some 
faint  resemblance  to  the  proceedings  of  the  memorable 
Parliament  which  met  in  1640,  under  Charles  the  First. 
Lord  North  appeared  likewise  to  entertain  strong 
apprehensions  respecting  the  consequences,  which  might 

424 


1782.]  A  LESSENING  MAJORITY 

ultimately  result  to  the  King,  if  not  to  himself,  from 
the  struggle  in  which  Ministers  were  engaged.  It  was 
generally  believed,  that  he  had  stated  these  fears  to 
His  Majesty  with  so  much  earnestness,  and  had  so 
warmly  depictured  the  painful  situation  in  which  the 
Sovereign  might  be  personally  involved,  if  his  Cabinet 
should  be  taken  by  storm  ;  as  to  have  obtained  the 
permission  of  negotiating,  and  even  of  surrendering  on 
terms.  Some  of  his  expressions  in  the  Debate  of  the 
15th  of  March,  which  intimated  his  readiness  or  dis- 
position to  withdraw  from  Office,  and  not  to  form  any 
impediment,  if  a  Coalition  could  be  formed  for  carrying 
on  the  public  service;  seemed  to  justify  the  belief, 
that  he  was  authorized  to  make  such  propositions.  They 
were,  however,  treated  with  affected  ridicule  or  scorn, 
by  his  opponents,  as  only  calculated  for  purposes  of 
delusion,  in  order  to  weaken  or  distract  their  efforts. 
Far  from  listening  to  any  overtures  of  accommodation, 
instant  notice  was  given  after  the  Division  of  nine,  that 
a  Motion  similar  in  its  import,  would  be  made  on  the 
subsequent  Wednesday,  being  the  20th  of  March. 

Never  were  moments  more  precious,  or  more  critical. 
It  being  well  known  that  the  House  of  Commons  would, 
according  to  regular  usage,  adjourn  on  the  28th  of 
March,  for  ten  or  eleven  days,  till  after  the  Easter 
Holidays,  which  in  that  year  happened  to  fall  early ;  Lord 
North  consequently  might  calculate  almost  the  number 
of  hours  that  he  had  to  hold  out  against  his  assailants  : 
for,  no  sanguine  expectation  of  successfully  renewing 
their  attack  upon  Ministry,  after  the  Recess,  could  be 
entertained  by  the  Opposition.  Every  thing  therefore, 
it  was  evident,  must  necessarily  be  wound  up  within  a 
week  or  two,  and  Government  made  the  strongest 
demonstrations  of  abiding  the  issue.  Between  the 
16th  and  the  20th  of  the  Month,  in  every  Department, 
positive  assurances  were  given,  that  no  compromise 
or  resignation  was  intended.  Robinson  protested  the 

425 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [1782. 

same  thing  to  me,  at  his  house  in  St.  JamesVsquare. 
Lord  North  himself,  whatever  fluctuations  of  mind 
he  might  internally  undergo,  personally  reiterated 
those  declarations  to  his  nearest  political  connexions. 
No  man  on  either  side  of  the  House,  doubted  the  firm- 
ness of  the  Sovereign,  or  suspected  him  of  abandoning  his 
Ministers  from  personal  timidity.  Each  Party  therefore 
prepared  to  try  their  force,  and  both  expressed  them- 
selves confident  of  success.  I  can  assert,  however,  from 
the  best  authority,  that  if  the  contest  had  been  main- 
tained, it  would,  according  to  every  probability,  have 
terminated  in  favor  of  Administration.  Robinson,  then 
Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  and  who  knew  better  than 
any  man,  the  Secret  of  affairs,  has  many  times  assured 
me,  that  Government  would  have  infallibly  divided/row 
fourteen  to  twenty  Majority,  on  the  day  when  Lord  North 
resigned ;  Robinson  having  received  the  written  assurances 
of  attendance  and  support,  from  many  Members  who 
were  absent  on  the  Question  of  the  15th.  Even  various 
of  the  country  gentlemen  who  had  hitherto  voted  with 
Opposition,  hesitated,  or  refused  to  push  the  contest  to 
the  utmost  extremity.  They  had  put  an  end  to  the 
American  War,  which  they  reprobated ;  and  they  wished 
for  a  change  of  men,  as  well  as  of  measures,  and  of 
system :  but  they  wished  it  with  moderation,  and  were 
averse  to  using  the  last  expedients  which  the  British 
Constitution  admits,  lest  the  Constitution,  or  the  State 
itself,  should  suffer  in  the  shock. 

20th  March.]  On  the  other  hand,  I  know  from 
authentic  channels  of  information,  that  Lord  North, 
during  the  last  four  months  of  his  continuance  in  Office, 
repeatedly  tendered  his  resignation  to  the  King ;  which 
His  Majesty  as  often  declined,  accompanying  his  refusal 
with  the  most  gracious  and  encouraging  expressions. 
On  Tuesday,  the  19th  of  March,  the  First  Minister, 
apprehensive  of  the  event  of  the  Debate  which  was 
fixed  for  the  ensuing  day  in  the  House  of  Commons, 

426 


1782.]    LORD  NORTH'S  DETERMINATION 

wrote  to  the  King  in  the  most  decided  terms,  resigning 
his  employment;  and  His  Majesty  being  down  at 
Windsor,  Lord  North  dispatched  a  Messenger  with  the 
letter.  When  it  arrived,  the  King  was  going  out  to 
hunt :  having  perused  its  contents,  for  which  he  was 
probably  not  unprepared,  he  calmly  put  it  in  his  pocket, 
made  no  observation,  and  mounted  his  horse.  But  he 
had  not  proceeded  more  than  a  few  paces,  when  a  Page 
came  running  after  him,  to  say  that  Lord  North's 
Messenger  had  received  orders  to  bring  back  a  Reply. 
"  Tell  him,11  said  the  King,  "  that  I  shall  be  in  town  to- 
"  morrow  morning,  and  will  then  give  Lord  North  an 
answer.11  Two  Noblemen  were  with  him  at  the  time, 
one  of  whom  was  the  late  Duke  of  Dorset :  the  other, 
Lord  Hinchinbrook,  (afterwards  Earl  of  Sandwich,) 
related  to  me  these  particulars.  Turning  immediately 
to  them, — "  Lord  North,11  observed  His  Majesty,  "  has 
"  sent  me  in  his  resignation ;  but  I  shall  not  accept  it.11 
If,  however,  the  King  was  apprized  of  Lord  Norths 
intention  or  determination  to  resign,  it  was  by  no  means 
known  in  London ;  and  on  the  morning  of  the  very 
day,  I  believe  that  few  individuals  of  either  Party, 
entertained  a  doubt  of  the  continuance  of  the  struggle. 
Still  less  did  any  person  conceive,  that  the  First 
Minister  would  spontaneously  lay  down  his  Office, 
without  giving  notice  to  his  friends,  and  contrary  to 
his  own  recent  professions.  He  went  soon  after  one 
o'clock,  to  the  Treasury,  from  whence  he  was  to  repair 
to  St.  James's,  where  the  King,  as  usual,  had  a  Levee. 
Robinson  told  me,  that  previous  to  his  quitting  the 
Treasury,  they  held  a  long  conversation  together;  in 
the  course  of  which,  he  shewed  Lord  North  on  paper, 
the  names  of  those  Members  who  had  promised  to 
support  him  on  the  ensuing  Question,  to  the  number 
of  nine,  ten,  or  eleven,  at  least ;  not  one  of  whom  had 
been  present  in  the  preceding  Division.  And  he  did 
not,  himself,  entertain  the  slightest  suspicion  of  the  First 

427 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [1782. 

Minister's  resignation,  from  whom  he  received  the  most 
satisfactory  assurances  of  his  intention,  in  every  case,  to 
abide  the  issue  of  the  approaching  Debate.  After  standing 
together  at  the  fire  in  the  Board-room,  till  Lord  North's 
carriage  drew  up,  they  parted,  about  ten  minutes  after 
two  o'clock ;  the  Minister  driving  strait  to  St.  James's, 
while  the  Secretary,  after  dispatching  a  variety  of  official 
business,  repaired  soon  after  four  o'clock,  to  the  House 
of  Commons. 

It  is  probable  that  the  conversation  which  took  place 
between  the  King  and  Lord  North,  on  that  occasion, 
was  never  minutely  reported  by  either,  to  any  third 
person :  but  we  may  safely  assume  that  His  Majesty 
endeavoured  to  prevail  on  his  Minister  not  to  abandon 
him.  Robinson  professed  himself  ignorant  of  all  the 
particulars ;  though  he  entertained  no  doubt  that  Lord 
North,  whether  from  weariness  and  disgust,  or  appre- 
hension of  the  consequences  that  might  accrue  to  his 
Sovereign,  to  himself,  and  to  the  Country,  had  made 
up  his  mind  as  he  drove  to  St.  James's,  to  state  at 
once  to  the  King,  the  determination  that  he  had 
irrevocably  embraced,  of  laying  down  immediately  his 
Power;  a  resolution  which  he  had  notified  under  his 
hand,  on  the  preceding  day.  It  is  certain  that  the 
interview  between  them  was  long;  lasting  above  an 
hour  and  a  half,  without  any  witness  present ;  at  the 
end  of  which  time  the  Minister  withdrew,  in  order  to 
attend  the  House  of  Commons.  I  have  rarely  witnessed 
so  full  an  attendance,  at  so  early  an  hour,  as  on  that 
day ;  not  less  than  four  hundred  Members  having  taken 
their  seats  before  five  o'clock ;  both  Parties  appearing 
impatient  to  proceed  to  business.  The  only  delay 
arose  from  the  absence  of  the  First  Minister;  and  he 
being  every  instant  expected  to  arrive  from  St.  James's, 
all  eyes  were  directed  towards  the  door,  each  time  that 
it  opened.  The  Members  on  both  Sides,  who,  it  was 
generally  expected,  would  speak  in  the  course  of  the 

428 


1782.]    RESIGNATION  OF  THE  MINISTRY 

ensuing  Debate,  were  well  known ;  and  as  the  ground 
of  controversy  had  been  so  often  gone  over,  as  well  as 
on  account  of  many  invalids  who  attended,  and  who 
were  unable  to  remain  long,  it  was  thought  that  the 
Question  would  be  brought  on  before  midnight. 

At  length  Lord  North  entering  in  a  full  dressed  suit, 
his  Riband  over  his  Coat,  proceeded  up  the  House, 
amidst  an  incessant  cry  of  "Order,  and  Places.*"  As 
soon  as  he  had  reached  the  Treasury  Bench,  he  rose 
and  attempted  to  address  the  Chair ;  but  Lord  Surrey, 
who  had  given  notice  of  a  motion  for  that  day,  being 
consequently  in  possession  of  the  right  to  speak  first, 
and  having  likewise  risen,  a  clamour  began  from  all 
quarters,  of  the  most  violent  description.  It  lasted 
for  some  moments,  in  defiance  of  every  effort  made  by 
the  Speaker  to  enforce  silence ;  'till  in  consequence  of 
the  earnestness  with  which  the  Minister  besought  a 
hearing,  and  some  expressions  relative  to  the  import- 
ance of  the  communication  that  he  had  to  make,  which 
pervaded  the  tumult,  the  Members  opposite  allowed 
him  the  precedence.  He  then  stated,  after  a  short 
preface,  that  "his  object  was  to  save  the  time  and 
"trouble  of  the  House,  by  informing  them  that  the 
"Administration  was  virtually  at  an  end;  that  His 
"  Majesty  had  determined  to  change  his  confidential 
"servants;  and  that  he  should  propose  an  Adjourn- 
"  ment,  in  order  to  allow  time  for  the  new  Ministerial 
"Arrangements  which  must  take  place.'1  It  is  not 
easy  to  describe  the  effect  which  this  declaration  pro- 
duced in  a  popular  assembly,  scarcely  an  individual  of 
which  did  not  hear  it  with  lively  sentiments  of  exulta- 
tion, or  of  concern,  both  of  which  were  heightened  by 
surprize.  No  painter  could  have  done  justice  to  the 
expression  depictured  in  many  countenances.  The 
Opposition,  without  much  difficulty  consented  to  the 

:roposed   Adjournment;    and   the   Members,  actuated 
y  very  opposite  emotions,  soon  dispersed  in  all  direc- 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [1782. 

tions,  to  carry  the  intelligence  through  the  capital. 
Not,  however,  till  Burke,  assuming  the  part  of  a 
Moderator,  had  endeavoured  to  temper  and  restrain 
the  vociferous  joy  of  his  friends,  on  so  sudden  and 
unexpected  an  event.  But  scarcely  could  he  obtain 
a  hearing,  amidst  the  impatience  of  men,  who  for  the 
first  time  beheld  before  their  eyes,  the  promised  land. 
Courtney,  on  the  other  side  of  the  House,  pronounced 
a  Panegyric,  or  more  properly,  an  Encomium  on  the 
personal  virtues  and  amiable  qualities  of  the  First 
Minister,  which  he  did  not  suspend,  on  account  of  the 
violent  indications  of  dissatisfaction  exhibited  from  the 
Opposition  Benches.  A  more  interesting  scene  had  not 
been  acted  within  the  walls  of  the  House  of  Commons, 
since  February,  1743,  when  Sir  Robert  Walpole  retired 
from  power.  Nor  did  that  First  Minister  by  any  means 
display  in  the  last  moments  of  his  political  life,  the 
equanimity,  suavity,  and  dignity  manifested  by  his 
successor.  Lord  North  ordered  his  Coach  to  remain 
at  the  House  of  Commons  in  waiting,  on  that  evening. 
In  consequence  of  so  unexpected  an  event  as  his  resig- 
nation, and  the  House  breaking  up  at  such  an  early 
hour,  the  housekeeper's  room  became  crowded  to  the 
greatest  degree ;  few  persons  having  directed  their 
carriages  to  be  ready  before  midnight.  In  the  midst 
of  this  confusion,  Lord  North's  Coach  drove  up  to  the 
door ;  and  as  he  prepared  to  get  into  it,  he  said, 
turning  to  those  persons  near  him,  with  that  unalterable 
equanimity  and  good  temper  which  never  forsook  him, 
"  Good  night,  Gentlemen,  you  see  what  it  is  to  be  in 
"the  secret.11 

However  extraordinary  and  unexpected  Lord  North's 
resignation  appeared  at  the  moment  when  it  took 
place ;  and  however  certain  I  esteem  it,  that  he  would 
have  carried  the  question,  on  the  evening  when  he  laid 
down  his  office,  by  a  larger  Majority  than  had  supported 
him  on  the  preceding  Debate  of  the  15th ;  yet  it  must 

430 


1782.]  A  GLOOMY  OUTLOOK 

be  admitted  that  he  could  assign,  not  only  to  himself, 
but  to  his  Sovereign,  and  to  the  country  at  large,  many 
cogent,  if  not  unanswerable  reasons,  for  retiring  from 
Power.  The  nation,  he  well  knew,  was  universally 
weary  of  a  war,  the  misfortunes  that  had  attended 
which,  though  perhaps  justly  impu table  to  many  other 
causes  or  persons,  were  attributed  principally  to  his 
errors  or  mismanagement.  He  beheld  himself  now 
engaged  in  hostilities,  direct  or  indirect,  with  half 
Europe,  in  addition  to  America.  Ireland,  availing 
itself  of  our  embarrassments,  loudly  demanded  com- 
mercial and  political  emancipation.  On  every  side,  the 
Empire  appeared  to  be  crumbling  into  ruin.  Minorca, 
long  invested,  had  already  surrendered,  after  a  defence 
protracted  to  the  last  extremity.  Gibraltar  was  closely 
besieged.  In  the  East  Indies,  our  difficulties,  financial, 
as  well  as  military,  threatened  the  total  subversion  of 
our  wide  extended  authority  in  that  quarter  of  the 
Globe;  where  Hyder  Ally,  though  expelled  by  Sir 
Eyre  Coote,  from  the  vicinity  of  Madras,  still  main- 
tained himself  in  the  Centre  of  the  Carnatic.  If  the 
First  Minister  looked  to  the  West  Indies,  the  prospect 
appeared  still  more  big  with  alarm.  St.  Christopher's, 
attacked  by  the  Marquis  de  Bouille,  might  be  hourly 
expected  to  surrender ;  and  he  had  already  re-captured 
St.  Eustatius,  either  by  surprize,  or  by  corrupting  the 
officer  who  commanded  the  garrison.  Of  all  the  chain 
of  Carribbee  Islands  which  had  belonged  to  the  Crown 
of  Great  Britain  at  the  commencement  of  the  War, 
only  Antigua  and  Barbadoes  remained.  Such  was  our 
maritime  inferiority,  that  Sir  Samuel  Hood,  whose 
abilities  had  been  vigorously  exerted,  at  the  head  of 
the  Fleet,  to  defend  St  Christopher's,  found  himself 
unable  to  hazard  an  engagement  with  De  Grasse. 
Rodney  had  indeed  sailed  from  England,  with  a  con- 
siderable reinforcement,  in  the  month  of  January,  to 
join  the  British  Admiral  at  Barbadoes.  But  Lord 

431 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [1782. 

North  could  not  foresee,  nor  did  his  most  sanguine 
adherents  venture  to  predict,  the  splendid  victory  which 
Rodney  obtained  over  De  Grasse,  scarcely  more  than 
three  weeks  after  the  resignation  of  the  Minister. 

Far  from  anticipating  any  such  event,  the  most 
alarming  apprehensions  were  entertained  relative  to  the 
safety  of  Jamaica  itself.  If  the  combined  Fleets  of 
France  and  Spain  in  the  West  Indies,  after  the 
reduction  of  St.  Christopher's,  should  effect  a  junction, 
they  would  have  exceeded  fifty  sail  of  the  line ;  while 
Rodney's  whole  force  scarcely  amounted  to  more  than 
thirty.  And  it  was  very  doubtful  whether  such  a 
junction  could  be  prevented.  The  loss  of  Jamaica 
would  complete  the  measure  of  the  national  calamities, 
by  involving  our  commerce  and  our  finances  in  almost 
total  ruin.  Under  such  an  accumulation  of  defeat  and 
of  disaster,  the  vengeance  of  the  country  might  demand 
some  victim ;  and  the  leaders  of  Opposition,  though 
neither  sanguinary  nor  vindictive  in  their  disposition, 
might  be  compelled  to  yield  to  the  torrent  of  popular 
indignation.  Fox,  as  well  as  Burke  and  Barre,  had  in 
fact  many  times  alluded  to  the  Axe  and  the  Block, 
amongst  the  opprobrious  Epithets  that  they  lavished 
on  the  Ministerial  errors ;  and  such  menaces  might  be 
realized  in  a  moment  of  national  depression  or  violence. 
The  Crown  might  be  even  unable  to  extend  protection 
to  its  servants ;  and  the  scenes  of  the  year  1641,  might 
be  renewed  under  the  reign  of  George  the  Third.  That 
this  picture  is  not  exaggerated,  the  history  of  the  period 
which  I  am  writing,  sufficiently  proves ;  and  however 
exempt  from  personal  pusillanimity  or  apprehension  we 
may  suppose  Lord  North  to  have  been,  it  was  impossible 
that  he  could  avert  his  view  from  these  considerations, 
or  not  allow  them  their  due  weight  over  his  mind. 
Though  it  seems  to  be  indisputable,  that  his  final 
resolution  to  resign,  was  at  last  somewhat  suddenly 
embraced,  yet  the  motives  which  led  to  it,  had  un- 


1782.]      CHOOSING  A  PRIME  MINISTER 

questionably  long   existed,  and  may   fully  explain,  as 
well  as  justify,  his  conduct. 

The  King,  thus  abandoned  by  his  Minister,  as  he 
had  repeatedly  been  deserted  at  earlier  periods  of  his 
reign,  by  other  Ministers,  chose  that  evil  which  he 
esteemed  to  be  the  least  in  his  situation.  Well 
acquainted  with  the  discordant  materials  of  which  the 
Opposition  was  composed,  he  sent  to  Lord  Shelburne, 
to  signify  a  desire  of  conferring  with  him,  on  the 
formation  of  a  new  Administration;  and  when  that 
Nobleman  attended  His  Majesty  for  the  purpose,  the 
King  proposed  to  him  to  accept  the  place  of  First  Lord 
of  the  Treasury.  But,  Lord  Shelburne,  however 
disposed  from  inclination,  to  comply  with  an  offer  so 
flattering  to  his  ambition,  felt  too  deeply  conscious  of 
his  inability  to  maintain  himself  in  Power,  independant 
of  the  Rockingham  party,  to  venture  on  its  acceptance. 
Having  stated  therefore,  the  necessity  under  which  he 
lay  of  declining  so  gratifying  a  distinction,  at  least  for 
the  present ;  he  urged  the  over-ruling  circumstances 
that  left  no  alternative  to  the  Crown,  except  placing  the 
Marquis  of  Rockingham  at  the  head  of  the  Ministry. 
Sensible  that  he  must  submit  to  the  measure,  however 
painful,  the  King  therefore,  on  the  subsequent  day, 
desired  Lord  Rockingham^s  attendance.  At  the 
Audience  which  took  place,  His  Majesty  consented  to 
the  conditions  on  which  the  Marquis  insisted,  before  he 
would  agree  to  accept  office ;  only  attempting  to  stipu- 
late as  a  Preliminary,  that  two  of  his  actual  Ministers, 
namely,  the  Chancellor  and  Lord  Stormont,  should  be 
continued  under  the  new  Administration.  He  could 
not  however  obtain  such  terms ;  nor  was  it  without 
great  repugnance,  and  after  considerable  difficulty,  that 
even  Lord  Thurlow  was  admitted  to  retain  his  situation. 
A  decided  negative  was  put  on  the  other  Nobleman, 
whom  it  was  determined  by  the  Rockingham  Party,  at 
all  events  to  exclude  from  any  place  in  the  Cabinet. 

433  28 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [1782. 

The  Leaders  of  that  powerful  body  were  nevertheless 
far  from  having  surmounted  all  the  impediments  to 
their  acquisition  of  Office  ;  and  they  soon  discovered  that 
the  expulsion  of  Lord  North,  though  it  might  open 
to  them  the  door  of  the  Cabinet,  by  no  means  secured 
the  durability  of  their  Administration.  From  the  first 
moment  that  the  new  competitors  for  Power  appeared 
at  St.  James's,  inextinguishable  jealousies  arose,  and 
mutual  distrust  manifested  itself  on  every  occasion. 
With  difficulty  could  they  be  prevented  from  immedi- 
ately proceeding  to  an  open  rupture ;  and  the  external 
appearances  of  political  union,  which  had  been  preserved 
during  several  years  of  parliamentary  Opposition,  dis- 
solved as  soon  as  they  came  to  divide  the  ministerial 
objects  of  plunder,  or  to  dispute  for  preference  in  the 
royal  favor.  The  Marquis  of  Rockingham,  conscious 
that  though  he  might  ostensibly  be  placed  at  the  head 
of  the  new  Administration,  yet  the  King  regarded  him 
and  his  adherents  with  sentiments  of  alienation ;  while 
he  considered  Lord  Shelburne  with  regard,  and  treated 
him  with  confidence ;  took  umbrage  at  the  distinction. 
In  this  situation  of  affairs,  before  the  formation  of  the 
new  Cabinet,  an  incident  which  displayed  the  superior 
interest  that  Lord  Shelburne  possessed  at  Court,  nearly 
terminated  at  once  the  compact  by  which  Lord  North 
had  been  expelled,  and  consequently  involved  the  whole 
Embrio  Ministry  in  total  confusion. 

Scarcely  could  the  Ministry  be  said  indeed  with 
propriety,  as  yet  to  have  any  real  existence ;  for  though 
Mr.  Fox  and  Lord  Shelburne  had  been  named  Secretaries 
of  State ;  and  though  Lord  Camden  had  accepted  the 
Presidency  of  the  Council,  while  the  Duke  of  Grafton 
was  made  Privy  Seal;  yet  neither  the  new  Boards  of 
Treasury  nor  of  Admiralty  were  constituted.  Lord 
John  Cavendish  alone  had  been  sworn  in,  as  the  new 
Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer;  but  the  Marquis  of 
Rockingham,  and  Admiral  Keppel,  who  were  destined 

434 


1782.]  JEALOUSY  OF  MINISTERS 

to  preside  at  the  two  Boards,  were  not  as  yet  regularly 
appointed.  The  post  of  Commander  in  Chief  of  the 
Forces,  as  well  as  the  Master  General  of  the  Ordnance, 
both  which  had  commonly  or  frequently  been  Cabinet 
offices,  still  remained  vacant.  No  individual  had  been 
proposed  to  be  raised  to  the  Peerage ;  when  Lord 
Shelburne  availing  himself  of  the  facility  which  he 
enjoyed  of  access  to  the  Sovereign,  induced  His  Majesty 
to  confer  the  dignity  of  a  Baron,  on  his  friend  and 
adherent,  Dunning.  The  business  itself,  which  neither 
the  King,  nor  Lord  Shelburne,  communicated  to  the 
Marquis  of  Rockingham ;  was  managed  with  such 
dexterity,  as  well  as  silence  and  dispatch,  that  the  first 
intimation  received  of  it,  even  by  the  persons  about 
the  Court,  arose  from  Dunning's  kissing  the  King's 
hand  at  the  Levee,  on  his  Creation.  But,  no  sooner 
had  the  intelligence  become  known,  than  it  produced 
the  most  violent  fermentation  and  resentment  among 
all  the  Rockingham  Party.  Considering  their  Chief  as 
equally  overreached  and  insulted  by  the  proceeding, 
since  it  was  evident  that  Lord  Shelburne  could  effect 
for  his  followers,  objects  of  the  highest  importance, 
which  proved  to  the  Public  his  superior  and  exclusive 
Ascendancy  at  St.  Jameses ;  they  determined  on  exact- 
ing immediate  reparation. 

Under  this  impression,  several  of  the  leading  persons, 
among  whom  were  Fox,  Burke,  and  George  Byng, 
having  repaired  to  Lord  Rockingham's  house  in  Gros- 
venor-square,  a  sort  of  tumultuary  consultation  was 
there  held  on  the  occasion.  They  unanimously  agreed 
that  the  First  Lord  of  the  Treasury  would  be  at  once 
dishonoured  in  the  Cabinet,  and  disgraced  in  the  public 
estimation ;  if  the  Secretary  of  State,  so  much  his 
inferior  in  official  rank,  could  thus,  without  his  know- 
ledge or  participation,  dispose  of  the  highest  dignities 
to  his  own  adherents.  It  was  maintained  that  the 
reparation  ought  to  be  no  less  public,  than  the  affront ; 

435 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [1782. 

and  that  in  order  to  wipe  it  away,  some  individual 
must  be  without  delay  raised  to  the  Peerage,  at  Lord 
RockinghanVs  personal  recommendation.  This  resolu- 
tion being  adopted,  it  was  next  debated  whom  to  choose 
for  the  honor.  The  selection  fell  on  Sir  Fletcher 
Norton,  late  Speaker  of  the  House  of  Commons ;  not 
indeed,  from  inclination,  but  from  necessity ;  no  other 
person  appearing  so  proper  to  be  created  a  Peer  at  the 
same  time  with  Dunning,  as  Sir  Fletcher ;  they  being, 
both,  Lawyers  of  great  eminence  in  their  profession, 
Members  of  the  House  of  Commons,  and  rival  Candidates 
for  Power  or  Office. 

On  the  following  day,  Thursday,  the  28th  of  March, 
the  new  First  Lord  of  the  Treasury  repaired  therefore 
to  St.  James's.  Having  obtained  an  audience  of  the 
King,  he  represented  the  impossibility  of  his  continu- 
ing at  the  head  of  the  intended  Administration,  after 
the  elevation  of  Mr.  Dunning  to  a  Peerage,  on  Lord 
Shelburne's  recommendation,  unless  His  Majesty  should 
be  graciously  pleased  to  confer  the  same  mark  of  royal 
favor  on  one  of  his  own  friends.  After  some  hesitation, 
the  King,  apprehensive  of  the  consequences,  to  himself 
and  to  the  public  tranquillity,  if  Lord  Rockingham  and 
his  followers  should  suddenly  resign,  as  they  menaced ; 
and  aware  that  Lord  Shelburne  could  not  support  him- 
self alone  ;  signified  his  assent  to  the  proposition  :  add- 
ing, that  the  person  named,  Sir  Fletcher  Norton,  might 
kiss  his  hand  at  the  first  Levee.  But,  the  Marquis 
peremptorily  insisted  on  that  ceremony  immediately 
taking  place  on  the  same  day.  In  vain  the  King 
stated  the  singularity  and  impropriety  of  such  an  act, 
contrary  to  all  the  usages  of  established  Court  Etiquette, 
inasmuch  as  no  individual  ever  was  known  to  be  pre- 
sented at  the  Queen's  Drawing  Room,  by  whatever 
Title,  till  he  had  previously  been  received  under  that 
denomination,  at  the  Levee.  Lord  Rockingham 
signified  in  Reply,  respectfully,  but  tenaciously,  that 

436 


1782.]         COURT  ETIQUETTE  DEFIED 

every  Form  must  give  way  on  the  present  occasion ; 
and  he  exacted  compliance.  Sir  Fletcher  being  brought 
forward,  actually  kissed  His  Majesty's  hand  on  his 
Creation  as  a  Baron,  by  the  title  of  Lord  Grantley, 
the  same  day,  in  the  Drawing  Room,  to  the  no  small 
astonishment  of  the  oldest  Courtiers ;  and  hardly  less 
so  of  the  newly  created  Peer  himself,  who  having  been 
apprized  of  this  extraordinary  Elevation,  attended  for 
the  purpose  at  St.  James's,  on  the  previous  notice  of 
only  a  few  hours.  No  instance  of  such  a  breach  of 
established  usage  has  occurred,  either  before  or  since, 
in  the  course  of  the  present  Reign. 

April.]  This  subject  of  contest  being  thus  regulated, 
and  the  Rockingham  Party  triumphant,  the  new 
Administration  was  at  length  formed,  though  of  very 
heterogeneous  materials.  Instead  of  nine  individuals 
who  constituted  Lord  North's  Cabinet,  eleven  were 
now  admitted ;  the  third  Secretaryship  of  State,  namely 
that  for  the  Colonies,  lately  occupied  by  Lord  Sackville, 
being  extinguished.  General  Conway,  as  the  recom- 
pense of  his  late  distinguished  services  in  Parliament, 
was  placed  at  the  head  of  the  Army.  The  separation 
of  the  Office  of  First  Lord  of  the  Treasury,  from  that 
of  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer,  made  way  for  Lord 
John  Cavendish's  entrance  into  the  Cabinet;  and  the 
introduction  of  the  Master  General  of  the  Ordnance, 
who  had  not  been  admitted  under  Lord  North,  brought 
in  the  Duke  of  Richmond :  while,  in  order  to  oppose 
some  little  balance  to  the  preponderating  ascendancy  of 
the  Marquis's  friends,  Lord  Ashburton,  contrary  to 
general  usage  or  precedent,  was  admitted  to  a  Seat, 
in  quality  of  Chancellor  of  the  Duchy  of  Lancaster. 

The  other  great  objects  of  ambition  or  acquisition, 
were  shared  with  tolerable  equality,  among  the  friends 
of  the  two  principal  Leaders.  The  Earl  of  Carlisle  was 
replaced,  as  Lord  Lieutenant  of  Ireland,  by  the  Duke 
of  Portland.  Rigby,  who  during  near  fourteen  years 

437 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [1782. 

had  enjoyed  the  prodigious  emoluments  of  the  Pay 
Office,  without  any  Colleague,  relinquished  that  enviable 
and  lucrative  Post  to  Burke.  Welbore  Ellis,  fallen  in 
an  instant  from  his  double  elevation  of  Secretary  of 
State,  and  Treasurer  of  the  Navy,  made  way  for  Barre 
in  the  latter  employment :  while  Jenkinson  was  suc- 
ceeded, as  Secretary  at  War,  by  Mr.  Thomas  Townsend. 
Kenyon  became  Attorney  General.  We  were  Colleagues 
for  the  Borough  of  Hindon  in  that  Parliament.  He 
possessed  a  deep  and  recondite  knowledge  of  the  Law, 
the  result  of  severe  application ;  and  was  supposed  to 
be  consulted  by  the  Chancellor,  on  all  cases  that  arose 
of  legal  difficulty.  Little  conversant  with  the  manners 
of  polite  life,  Kenyon  retained,  even  when  Lord  Chief 
Justice  of  the  King's  Bench,  to  which  high  dignity  he 
afterwards  rose,  all  the  original  coarse  homeliness  of  his 
early  habits.  Irascible  in  his  temper,  destitute  of  all 
refinement,  parsimonious  even  in  a  degree  approaching 
to  avarice;  he  nevertheless  more  than  balanced  these 
defects  of  deportment  and  character,  by  strict  morality, 
probity,  and  integrity.  As  a  Member  of  the  House  of 
Commons,  whenever  he  spoke,  though  he  wanted  grace, 
he  could  not  be  reproached  with  any  deficiency  in  the 
essential  qualities  of  perspicuity,  energy,  and  command 
of  language.  General  Burgoyne,  whose  exchange  had 
at  length  been  effected  against  Laurens,  the  late 
President  of  the  American  Congress ;  thus  liberated 
from  the  inabilities  which  his  surrender  at  Saratoga 
had  inflicted  on  him,  was  sent  to  replace  Sir  John  Irwin, 
as  Commander  in  Chief  in  Ireland. 

The  Duke  of  Bolton,  as  a  return  for  the  service  which 
he  had  rendered  in  the  Session  of  1781,  by  arraigning 
in  the  House  of  Peers,  the  conduct  of  the  First  Lord 
of  the  Admiralty,  was  made  Governor  of  the  Isle  of 
Wight.  During  his  elder  brother's  life,  when  Lord 
Harry  Powlett,  he  had  served  in  the  Royal  Navy, 
where,  however,  he  had  acquired  no  laurels  ;  and  he  was 

438 


1782.]  "CAPTAIN  WHIFFLE" 

commonly  supposed  to  be  the  "Captain  Whiffle11 
described  by  Smollett,  in  his  "Roderick  Random." 
Sheridan  received  the  appointment  of  one  of  the  Under 
Secretaries  of  State  in  Fox's  Office ;  who  having  taken 
for  himself  the  foreign  Department,  left  the  home 
Secretaryship  to  Lord  Shelburne;  a  partition  by  no 
means  grateful  to  the  latter.  Of  all  the  ostensible 
Candidates  for  employment,  whose  birth  and  talents 
seemed  to  call  him  forward  to  the  service  of  the  State, 
and  whose  eloquence  in  Parliament,  had  eminently 
conduced  to  the  triumph  obtained  over  the  late  Admin- 
istration, Mr.  Pitt  alone  remained  without  post  or 
situation.  Not  that  the  new  Ministers  manifested 
either  insensibility  to  his  merits,  or  indifference  to 
securing  such  abilities  in  their  immediate  support.  On 
the  contrary,  as  the  best  proof  of  their  consideration, 
they  offered  him  the  place  of  a  Lord  of  the  Treasury,  in 
the  formation  of  the  Board  about  to  be  constituted. 
But,  in  making  him  this  proposition,  they  appeared  to 
have  ill  appreciated  his  character,  and  least  of  all  to 
have  understood  the  extent,  as  well  as  the  depth,  of  his 
ambition.  Pitt  steadily  rejected  every  solicitation,  pre- 
ferring to  remain  for  the  present,  without  Office. 
Whether  this  refusal  originated  in  his  consciousness  of 
possessing  talents,  which,  from  their  pre-eminence,  en- 
abled him  at  once  to  seize  a  Cabinet  place,  without 
passing,  like  other  men,  through  any  inferior  gradations 
of  political  life ;  or  whether  it  rather  proceeded  from 
that  superior  intelligence  and  discernment,  which,  even 
at  so  early  a  period  of  youth,  shewed  him  that  a 
Ministry  imbued  with  such  discordant  principles,  and 
odious  to  the  Sovereign,  could  not  possibly  prove  of 
long  duration,  it  may  be  difficult  to  determine  with 
certainty.  Probably,  both  these  sentiments  concurred 
in  regulating  this  judicious  line  of  action. 

8th   April.]     Never    was   a    more   total   change    of 
Costume  beheld,  than  the  House  of  Commons  presented 

439 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [i782. 

to  the  eye,  when  that  assembly  met  for  the  dispatch  of 
business,  after  the  Easter  Recess.  The  Treasury  Bench, 
as  well  as  the  Places  behind  it,  had  been  for  so  many 
years  occupied  by  Lord  North  and  his  friends,  that  it 
became  difficult  to  recognize  them  again  in  their  new 
Seats,  dispersed  over  the  Opposition  Benches,  in  great 
coats,  frocks,  and  boots.  Mr.  Ellis  himself  appeared  for 
the  first  time  in  his  life,  in  an  undress.  To  contemplate 
the  Ministers  their  successors,  emerged  from  their 
obscure  lodgings,  or  from  Brookes's,  having  thrown  off 
their  blue  and  buff  uniforms  ;  now  ornamented  with  the 
appendages  of  dress,  or  returning  from  Court,  decorated 
with  swords,  lace,  and  hair  powder ;  excited  still  more 
astonishment.  Even  some  degree  of  ridicule  attached 
to  this  extraordinary  and  sudden  Metamorphosis,  which 
afforded  subject  for  conversation,  no  less  than  food  for 
mirth.  It  happened  that  just  at  the  time  when  the 
change  of  Administration  took  place,  Lord  Nugenfs 
house  in  Great  George-street  having  been  broken  open, 
was  robbed  of  a  variety  of  articles ;  among  others,  of  a 
number  of  pairs  of  laced  ruffles.  He  caused  the  particu- 
lars of  the  effects  stolen,  to  be  advertized  in  some  of  the 
daily  Newspapers,  where  they  were  minutely  specified 
with  great  precision.  Coming  down  to  the  House  of 
Commons  immediately  after  the  Recess,  a  Gentleman 
who  accidentally  sat  next  to  him,  asked  his  Lordship,  if 
he  had  yet  made  any  discovery  of  the  articles  recently 
lost  ?  "  I  can't  say  that  I  have,""  answered  he,  "  but  I 
"  shrewdly  suspect  that  I  have  seen  some  of  my  laced 
"  ruffles,  on  the  hands  of  the  Gentlemen  who  now 
"  occupy  the  Treasury  Bench."  This  Reply,  the  effect 
of  which  was  infinitely  encreased  by  the  presence  of  Fox 
and  Burke  in  their  Court  dresses,  obtained  general 
circulation,  and  occasioned  no  little  laughter. 

Even  the  Drawing  Room  at  St.  James's,  underwent 
considerable  Alteration  in  its  appearance,  as  well  as  the 
House  of  Commons,  in  consequence  of  the  political 

440 


1782.]  OLD  COURTIERS  MISSED 

Revolution  which  had  driven  the  late  Ministers  from 
Power.  The  Earl  of  Hertford,  one  of  the  "  antient, 
"  most  domestic  ornaments"  of  the  Court,  who  had 
held  the  White  Wand  of  Chamberlain  for  more  than 
fifteen  years,  and  whose  presence  in  the  Circle  seemed 
almost  essential  to  its  very  existence;  of  course  dis- 
appeared. The  Duke  of  Manchester  succeeded  him. 
Lord  Effingham,  whose  name,  since  the  Riots  of  June, 
1780,  had  scarcely  been  pronounced  on  the  theatre  of 
public  life,  became  Treasurer  of  the  Household,  in  the 
place  of  Lord  Salisbury.  No  individual,  dismissed  in 
consequence  of  the  change  of  Administration,  was  more 
personally  regretted  by  the  King,  than  Lord  Bateman, 
who  had  held  during  many  years,  the  Post  of  Master  of 
the  Buck  Hounds.  The  frankness  and  gaiety  of  his 
disposition,  rendered  his  society  peculiarly  agreeable  to 
the  Sovereign.  Lord  Bateman's  descent  on  the  maternal 
side,  was  very  illustrious ;  his  mother  having  been 
Grand  Daughter  to  John,  Duke  of  Marlborough,  and 
sister  to  the  second  Duke  of  that  name.  By  his 
paternal  ancestors,  he  inherited  only  civic  honors,  his 
grandfather  Sir  James  Bateman  being  knighted  when 
Lord  Mayor  of  London,  under  George  the  First.  At 
near  seventy  years  of  age,  Lord  Bateman  preserved  all 
the  activity  of  youth,  accompanied  by  an  elasticity  of 
mind  and  character  which  never  forsook  him.  He 
might  have  been  reinstated  in  the  employment  of 
Master  of  the  Buck  Hounds,  under  succeeding  Adminis- 
trations:  but  he  preferred  the  enjoyment  of  personal 
liberty,  and  passed  the  last  years  of  his  life  principally 
at  his  seat  of  Shobden,  in  the  County  of  Hereford. 
His  understanding  was  good,  but  he  loved  pleasure  of 
every  description,  more  than  business ;  and  he  possessed 
that  mediocrity  of  talents,  which  never  inspiring  awe, 
forms  the  best  recommendation  to  royal  favour. 
Curiosity  was  so  strongly  excited  to  see  the  new 
Ministers,  and  to  remark  the  demeanor  of  persons,  who 

441 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [1782. 

during  many  years  had  rarely  stood  in  the  presence  of 
the  Sovereign,  or  frequented  St.  James's ;  that  numerous 
individuals  attended  the  Levee  and  the  Drawing-room, 
from  no  other  motive.  Those  who  had  always  specu- 
lated on  the  short  duration  of  the  present  Adminis- 
tration, derived  additional  proofs  in  favor  of  their 
opinion,  from  the  very  looks  and  reciprocal  deportment 
of  the  principal  personages.  Every  attention  shewn  by 
the  King  to  Lord  Shelburne,  excited  the  instant 
jealousy  of  the  Rockingham  Party,  and  hastened  their 
final  separation.  Time  alone,  indeed,  was  necessary  for 
making  the  political  arrangements,  indispensable  before 
the  former  Nobleman  could  venture  to  throw  off  his 
subjection  to  his^Colleagues,  and  to  set  up  for  himself, 
as  First  Minister. 

April.]  Previous  to  Lord  North's  resignation  of 
power,  Mr.  Fox  had  more  than  once  insinuated  or 
maintained  in  the  House  of  Commons,  that  if  he  were 
Minister,  he  possessed  the  means  of  making  a  separate 
Treaty  with  the  Dutch,  and  of  detaching  them  from 
France.  His  friends  did  not  even  scruple  to  assert, 
that  "he  had  a  Peace  with  Holland  in  his  pocket ;" 
and  these  expressions,  uttered  in  a  period  of  misfortune 
and  despondency,  could  not  fail  of  producing  a  forcible 
impression  on  the  sanguine,  as  well  as  on  the  credulous, 
part  of  society.  One  of  his  first  attempts,  as  Secre- 
tary of  State  for  Foreign  Affairs,  became  in  fact 
directed  to  the  attainment  of  so  salutary  and  important 
an  object.  In  order  to  effect  it,  he  thought  proper  to 
address  a  letter  to  the  Russian  Minister  then  residing 
at  the  Court  of  London,  making  through  him,  the  offer 
of  an  immediate  suspension  of  hostilities  between  Great 
Britain  and  Holland,  as  a  step  preparatory  to  negotia- 
tion. This  proposal  was  afterwards  warmly  reiterated 
and  seconded,  by  the  Embassadors  of  Catherine  the 
Second  at  the  Hague.  But,  instead  of  the  nation 
deriving  any  benefit  from  Fox's  hasty  overture,  it  was 

442 


1782.]  OVERTURES  REBUFFED 

received  by  the  States  General  with  coldness,  and 
treated  with  contempt;  they  wisely  preferring  to 
negotiate  in  concert  with  France  and  Spain,  whenever 
a  plan  for  general  Pacification  should  be  set  on  foot. 
Baffled  in  this  experiment,  the  Cabinet  next  made 
propositions  at  the  Court  of  Versailles,  for  an  accom- 
modation, and  even  sent  Mr.  Thomas  Grenville  to 
Paris,  for  the  purpose :  while  Admiral  Digby  and  Sir 
Guy  Carleton  were  dispatched  to  America,  with  in- 
structions to  offer  an  immediate  acknowledgment  of 
the  independance  of  the  thirteen  Colonies.  The  Con- 
gress, however,  as  if  animated  by  the  same  spirit  with 
the  Dutch,  refused  to  receive  any  Messenger,  or  even 
to  grant  a  passport  to  the  person  deputed  by  the 
British  Commissioners,  for  commencing  a  negotiation. 
It  seemed  impossible  for  the  new  Ministers  to  begin  their 
foreign  diplomatic  labors  under  more  unpromising 
Auspices,  after  having  held  out  to  the  country  such 
delusive  expectations. 

They  found  it  much  easier  to  induce  the  House  of 
Commons  to  listen  to  their  Propositions,  than  to  per- 
suade or  to  conciliate  any  of  the  belligerent  Powers. 
No  opposition  whatsoever  was  experienced  from  Lord 
North,  who,  though  at  the  head  of  a  routed  Party,  yet 
remained  the  nominal  chief  of  a  numerous  body  of  men. 
He  attended  in  his  place,  and  might,  if  he  had  been 
so  disposed,  have  greatly  impeded,  if  not  wholly  pre- 
vented, many  of  the  measures  of  the  new  Government. 
But,  far  from  throwing  any  obstacles  in  their  way,  he 
allowed  them  without  molestation  to  complete  their 
projects  of  Reform,  in  every  direction.  Burke  opened 
the  System  of  domestic  Retrenchment,  by  bringing  in 
anew  his  famous  Bill  for  the  Reduction  of  the  civil 
List,  so  often  proposed,  and  so  often  rejected,  or  eluded, 
in  preceding  Sessions.  But  "  quantum  mutatus  ab  illo 
Hectore !  "  Instead  of  two  hundred  thousand  Pounds 
a-year,  which  by  a  species  of  political  Arithmetic,  he 

443 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    fi782. 

had  calculated  in  1779,  would  annihilate  ministerial 
influence  in  the  House  of  Commons,  commensurate  to 
fifty  Members  or  Votes  in  Parliament ;  he  now  proposed 
only  about  a  third  part  of  that  annual  sum  for  the 
scope  of  his  reduction.  Many  retrenchments  that  had 
appeared  to  be  indispensable,  while  he  was  in  Opposi- 
tion, were  abandoned  when  he  spoke  from  the  Treasury 
Bench.  Some  abuses  owed  their  prospective  toleration 
to  the  personal  respect  that,  he  said,  he  felt  for  the 
Individuals  who  presided  over  the  office  or  department. 
Others  were  perpetuated  from  deference  to  prejudice, 
or  popular  predilection.  The  Ordnance  might  be 
safely  trusted  to  the  Duke  of  Richmond's  vigilant 
frugality.  Lord  Ashburton  extended  his  protection  to 
the  Duchy  of  Lancaster.  The  Mint  was  left  un- 
touched ;  and  even  some  of  the  white  Wands,  as 
contributing  to  the  splendor  of  the  Court,  obtained 
grace.  Yet,  thus  mutilated,  and  hardly  recognizable, 
both  Burke,  and  Powis,  who  seconded  the  motion  for 
an  Address  of  Thanks  to  the  King,  on  his  Message 
relative  to  this  subject,  melted  into  Tears,  at  the 
prospect  of  their  approaching  Triumph  over  Court 
Profusion  and  Corruption. 

Two  Bills,  one  for  the  prevention  of  Contractors 
sitting  in  Parliament ;  the  other,  for  excluding  Officers 
of  the  Excise  and  Customs  from  voting  at  Elections ; 
were  likewise  passed  with  little  difficulty  or  delay, 
through  the  lower  House,  where  the  Administration 
carried  all  before  them.  But,  in  the  House  of  Peers, 
they  experienced  from  the  Chancellor,  as  well  as  from 
Lords  Mansfield  and  Loughborough,  the  most  decided 
Opposition.  These  Pillars  of  the  Law,  far  from  yield- 
ing to  the  temper  of  the  Times,  endeavoured,  though 
ineffectually,  to  stem  its  force.  Thurlow  in  particular, 
even  while  holding  in  his  hand  the  great  Seal  of  Eng- 
land, and  in  his  own  person  a  Member  of  the  Cabinet,  yet 
expressed  with  that  gloomy  indignation  which  character- 

444 


1782.]  SINECURES  SUPPRESSED 

ized  his  style  of  speaking,  the  disapprobation  that  he 
felt  at  such  inroads  on  the  majesty  of  the  Crown,  as 
well  as  on  the  franchises  of  the  Subject.  Una  wed  by 
the  appearance  of  Fox  and  Burke,  who,  in  order  to 
impress  him  with  respect,  as  well  as  to  display  the 
interest  that  they  took  in  the  success  of  these  Measures, 
usually  appeared  in  the  House  of  Peers,  on  the  steps  of 
the  Throne,  while  the  Bills  were  agitating ;  Lord  Thur- 
low  animadverted  on  them  with  the  utmost  severity, 
and  divided  in  the  Minority,  on  all  the  most  obnoxious 
clauses.  But  the  stream,  which  ran  with  too  much 
violence,  successfully  to  oppose  its  current,  soon  secured 
for  each  of  the  Bills,  the  concurrence  of  the  Sovereign. 

It  cannot  be  disputed  by  the  greatest  enemies  of 
Reform,  that  various  of  the  offices,  or  nominal  employ- 
ments, suppressed  by  Burke^s  Bill,  were  become  obsolete, 
destitute  of  any  real  function,  and  void  of  apparent 
utility.  Nor  will  it  be  denied,  that  the  annual  aggre- 
gate sum  which  the  measure  saved  to  the  country, 
though  now  reduced  from  two  hundred  thousand 
Pounds,  to  about  seventy  thousand  Pounds  a-year,  yet 
still  formed  a  considerable  object  of  national  economy. 
But,  on  the  other  hand,  the  extinction  of  so  many 
places,  deprived  the  Crown  of  that  species  of  majesty, 
produced  by  the  operation  of  time,  and  "  the  hoar  of 
"  ages ; "  advantages  which  no  man  knew  better  how  to 
appreciate  and  to  venerate,  as  well  as  to  celebrate  and 
sustain,  than  Burke  himself.  We  beheld  him,  scarcely 
ten  years  afterwards,  stand  forward  the  determined 
champion  of  monarchical  institutions,  and  the  zealous 
opposer  of  almost  every  kind  of  innovation.  We  may 
likewise  remark,  that  the  Board  of  Trade,  and  the 
office  of  Third  Secretary  of  State,  both  which  his  Bill 
abolished,  have  been  since  revived,  from  a  conviction 
of  their  respective  necessity  or  advantages.  Even  the 
"Great  Wardrobe,"  the  "Treasurer -of  the  Chamber," 
the  "  Jewel  Office,"  the  «  Clerks  of  the  Board  of  Green 

445 


WRAXALI/S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [1782. 

"  Cloth,"  and  some  other  appointments,  which  may 
appear  to  be  most  exceptionable  or  unnecessary;  yet, 
as  carrying  us  back  in  imagination  to  the  reigns  of  the 
Tudor S)  by  whom  they  were  instituted,  diffused  over  the 
Throne  itself,  a  Gothic  grandeur,  calculated  to  protect 
and  to  perpetuate  the  sanctity  of  the  monarchical  office. 
These  adventitious  aids  will  not  be  despised  by  those 
who  deeply  consider  the  nature  of  man,  and  of  all  human 
institutions.  Other  consequences  of  an  injurious  de- 
scription, not  foreseen  at  the  time,  or  from  which  the 
author  of  the  Bill  chose  to  avert  his  view,  have  flowed 
from  the  measure.  In  Burke's  eagerness  to  diminish 
the  supposed  overgrown  influence  of  the  Crown,  arising 
from  the  distribution  of  offices  among  the  Members 
of  the  House  of  Commons,  a  greater  injury  has  been 
probably  sustained  by  the  British  Constitution.  The 
Minister,  deprived  of  the  means  of  procuring  parlia- 
mentary attendance  and  support,  by  conferring  places 
on  his  adherents,  has  in  many  instances  been  compelled 
to  substitute  a  far  higher  remuneration ;  namely, 
Peerages.  A  review  of  Mr.  Pitt's  Administration,  will 
form  the  strongest  illustration  of  this  remark.  I  know 
indeed,  from  the  best  authority,  that  Burke  himself 
lived  to  adopt  the  opinion,  and  like  other  reformers  or 
innovators,  found  reason  to  lament  the  effects  of  his 
own  Bill.  Being  at  Bath,  in  a  declining  state  of  health, 
not  long  before  his  decease,  the  conversation  turned  on 
the  great  augmentation  made  by  Mr.  Pitt  to  the 
numbers  of  the  House  of  Lords,  during  the  preceding 
thirteen  years.  "  I  fear,'1  said  Burke,  "  that  I  am  partly 
"  accountable  for  so  disproportionate  an  increase  of 
"  Honours,  by  having  deprived  the  Crown  and  the 
"  Minister  of  so  many  other  sources  of  recompence  or 
"  reward,  which  were  extinguished  by  my  Bill  of  Reform." 
Mr.  Pitt  had  in  fact  little  left  him  to  bestow,  in  pro- 
portion to  the  croud  of  claimants,  except  dignities ;  and 
he  was  not  parsimonious  in  their  distribution.  The 

446 


1782.]  TWO  ANCIENT  OFFICES 

two  Bills,  excluding  Contractors  from  sitting  in  the 
House  of  Commons,  and  depriving  Custom-house  or 
Excise  Officers,  of  the  right  of  voting  at  elections  for 
Members  of  Parliament;  though  liable,  respectively, 
to  some  objections;  and  though  both  were  strongly 
reprobated  at  the  time,  by  the  greatest  legal  characters 
in  the  House  of  Peers ;  yet  appear  to  have  obtained, 
and  still  to  retain,  the  general  approbation  of  the 
country. 

Many  persons  of  high  rank  reluctantly  disappeared 
from  about  the  King's  person  and  Court,  in  consequence 
of  Burke's  Bill  of  Reform.  The  Earl  of  Darlington 
quitted  the  Jewel  Office ;  and  Lord  Pelham,  the  Great 
Wardrobe ;  the  first  of  which  Offices  owed  its  institution 
to  Elizabeth :  while  the  latter  remounted  to  the  times 
of  the  Plantagenets.  The  Earl  of  Essex  laid  down  the 
Stag  Hounds;  as  did  Lord  Denbigh,  the  Harriers: 
while  the  disasters  of  Saratoga  and  of  York  Town  were 
thus  felt  by  rebound,  through  every  avenue  of  St. 
James's.  Gibbon,  who  had  sat  at  the  Board  of  Trade 
since  1779,  being  dismissed  from  his  official  attendance 
in  Whitehall,  found  himself  more  at  leisure  to  continue 
that  great  historical  work  which  he  ultimately  com- 
pleated  on  the  banks  of  the  Lake  of  Geneva,  and  which 
will  perpetuate  his  name  to  distant  Ages.  George 
Selwyn  lost  a  lucrative  appointment  under  the  Board  of 
Works;  and  though  possessed  of  an  affluent  fortune, 
together  with  a  Borough,  yet  as  he  loved  money,  no 
man  who  suffered  in  consequence  of  the  reduction  of 
the  Civil  List,  retained  a  deeper  resentment  towards  the 
party  who  had  abridged  his  enjoyments,  and  diminished 
his  income.  I  knew  him  with  some  degree  of  intimacy, 
having  sat  as  his  Colleague  in  Parliament,  during  more 
than  six  years,  for  Ludgershall,  from  1784  to  1790. 
He  resided  in  Cleveland  Row,  in  the  house  rendered 
memorable  by  the  quarrel  which  took  place  between 
Sir  Robert  Walpole  and  Lord  Townsend,  under  the 

447 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [1782. 

reign  of  George  the  First ;  when  the  first  Minister  and 
the  Secretary  of  State  seized  each  other  by  the  throat : 
a  scene  which  Gay  is  supposed  to  have  pourtrayed  in 
"  The  Beggar's  Opera,"  under  the  characters  of  Peachum 
and  Lockitt.  Selwyn  was  a  Member  of  the  House  of 
Commons,  during  the  greater  part  of  his  life ;  and  down 
to  the  year  1780,  he  constantly  represented  Glocester, 
near  which  city  he  had  a  seat,  at  Matson.  He  told  me, 
that  during  the  memorable  siege  of  Glocester,  under- 
taken by  Charles  the  First  in  1643,  Charles,  Prince  of 
Wales,  and  James,  Duke  of  York,  who  both  in  turn 
ascended  the  Throne,  but,  who  were  then  boys,  remained 
at  Matson.  And  he  added,  that  James  the  Second, 
after  he  came  to  the  Crown,  used  frequently  to  mention 
the  circumstance  to  his  Grandfather  when  he  went  to 
Court;  observing,  "My  brother  and  I  were  generally 
"  shut  up  in  a  Chamber  on  the  second  Floor  at  Matson, 
"  during  the  day ;  where  you  will  find  that  we  have  left 
"  the  marks  of  our  confinement,  inscribed  with  our 
"  knives,  on  the  ledges  of  all  the  windows." 

Selwyn  possessed  infinite  wit.  He  had  indeed  suc- 
ceeded to  Philip,  Earl  of  Chesterfield's  Reputation  for 
Bon  Mots,  most  of  which  that  then  attained  to  any 
celebrity,  were  attributed  to  him.  Their  effect,  when 
falling  from  his  lips,  became  greatly  augmented  by  the 
listless  and  drowsy  manner  in  which  he  uttered  them ; 
for  he  always  seemed  half  asleep :  yet  the  promptitude 
of  his  replies  was  surprizing.  The  late  Duke  of  Queens- 
berry,  who  lived  in  the  most  intimate  friendship  with 
him,  told  me  that  Selwyn  was  present  at  a  public  dinner 
with  the  Mayor  and  Corporation  of  Glocester,  in  the 
year  1758,  when  the  intelligence  arrived  of  our  expedition 
naving  failed  before  Rochfort.  The  Mayor  turning  to 
Selwyn,  "  You,  Sir,"  said  he,  "  who  are  in  the  ministerial 
"  secrets,  can  no  doubt  inform  us  of  the  cause  of  this 
"  misfortune  ? "  Selwyn,  though  utterly  ignorant  on 
the  subject,  yet  unable  to  resist  the  occasion  of  amusing 

448 


1782.]  THE  EXECUTIONER  OF  CHARLES  I. 

himself  at  the  enquirer's  expence,  "I  will  tell  you  in 
"  confidence  the  reason,  Mr.  Mayor,1'  answered  he ; 
"  the  fact  is,  that  the  scaling  ladders  prepared  for  the 
"  occasion,  were  found  on  trial  to  be  too  short."  This 
solution,  which  suggested  itself  to  him  at  the  moment, 
was  considered  by  the  Mayor  to  be  perfectly  explanatory 
of  the  failure,  and  as  such,  he  communicated  it  to  all 
his  friends ;  not  being  aware,  though  Selwyn  was,  that 
Rochfort  lies  on  the  river  Charante,  some  leagues  from 
the  sea-shore,  and  that  our  troops  had  never  even 
effected  a  landing  on  the  French  coast. 

But  it  was  not  so  much  as  a  man  of  wit  that  I  culti- 
vated his  society.  He  was  likewise  thoroughly  versed 
in  our  History,  and  master  of  many  curious,  as  well  as 
secret  Anecdotes,  relative  to  the  Houses  of  Stuart  and 
of  Brunswic.  As  he  had  an  aversion  to  all  long  Debates 
in  Parliament,  during  which  he  frequently  fell  asleep ; 
we  used  to  withdraw  sometimes  to  one  of  the  Committee 
rooms  up  stairs,  where  his  conversation  was  often  very 
instructive.  Talking  to  him  of  the  death  and  execution 
of  Charles  the  First,  he  assured  me  that  the  Duchess  of 
Portsmouth  always  asserted,  as  having  been  communi- 
cated to  her  by  Charles  the  Second,  that  his  father  was 
not  beheaded  either  by  Colonel  Pride,  or  Colonel  Joyce  ; 
though  one  of  the  two  is  commonly  considered  to  have 
performed  that  act.  The  Duchess  maintained  that  the 
man's  name  was  Gregory  Brandon.  He  wore  a  black 
crape  stretched  over  his  face,  and  had  no  sooner  taken  off 
the  King's  head,  than  he  was  put  into  a  boat  at  White- 
hall Stairs,  together  with  the  Block,  the  black  cloth  that 
covered  it,  the  Axe,  and  every  article  stained  with  the 
blood.  Being  conveyed  to  the  Tower,  all  the  implements 
used  in  the  decapitation,  were  immediately  reduced  to 
ashes.  A  purse  containing  a  hundred  broad  pieces  of 
gold  was  delivered  to  him,  after  which  recompence  he 
received  his  dismission.  Brandon  survived  the  transaction 
many  years,  but  divulged  it  a  short  time  before  he 

449  29 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [1782. 

expired.     This  account,  as  coming  from  the  Duchess  of 
Portsmouth,  challenges  great  respect. 

From  his  own  Father,  who  had  acted  a  conspicuous 
part  during  Sir  Robert  Walpole^s  Administration, 
Selwyn  knew  many  of  the  secret  Springs  of  Affairs, 
under  George  the  First  and  Second.  He  told  me  that 
the  former  of  those  Kings,  when  he  came  over  here  from 
Hanover  in  1714,  understanding  very  imperfectly  the 
English  language,  found  himself  so  weary  while  assist- 
ing at  the  Service  in  the  Chapel  Royal,  that  he  frequently 
entered  into  conversation  in  French  or  German,  with 
the  persons  behind  him.  Among  the  few  individuals 
who  had  retained  under  the  new  Reign,  the  Places  that 
they  held  or  occupied  about  Queen  Anne,  was  Dr. 
Younger,  Dean  of  Salisbury.  Anticipating  the  change 
of  Sovereigns,  he  had  applied  with  such  success  to 
render  himself  Master  of  the  German  Language,  that 
he  was  continued  in  the  office  of  Clerk  of  the  Closet, 
which  gave  him  great  access  to  the  King,  behind  whose 
chair  he  usually  stood  at  Chapel.  With  Younger,  His 
Majesty  often  talked  during  the  Service ;  a  circumstance, 
which  as  being  indecorous,  naturally  excited  much 
offence.  Lord  Townshend,  then  one  of  the  Secretaries 
of  State,  animated  by  a  sense  of  loyal  affection,  ventured 
to  acquaint  him  that  his  deportment  at  Chapel,  gave 
cause  of  regret,  mingled  with  animadversion,  to  many 
of  his  most  attached  Subjects ;  beseeching  him  at  the 
same  Time  particularly  to  abstain  from  conversing  with 
Dr.  Younger.  Far  from  resenting  the  freedom,  His 
Majesty  promised  amendment;  and  Lord  Townshend 
strongly  enjoined  the  Clerk  of  the  Closet  to  observe  in 
future  the  most  decorous  Behaviour  on  his  part.  Find- 
ing however  that  they  resumed  or  continued  the  same 
practice,  Lord  Townshend  sent  Younger  a  positive  order, 
as  Secretary  of  State,  directing  him,  without  presuming 
to  present  himself  again  in  the  royal  presence,  to  repair 
immediately  to  his  Deanery.  Dr.  Younger,  conceiving 

450 


1782.]      SELWYN'S  MORBID  CURIOSITY 

the  injunction  to  proceed  from  the  King,  obeyed  with- 
out remonstrance  or  delay;  and  the  Secretary  waiting 
on  His  Majesty,  informed  him  that  the  Dean  had 
received  a  kick  from  a  horse  which  fractured  his  skull, 
of  which  accident  he  was  dead.  George  the  First 
expressed  the  deepest  concern  at  his  loss,  and  never 
entertained  the  most  remote  idea  of  the  deception 
which  had  been  practised  on  him.  Several  years  after- 
wards, before  which  time  Lord  Townshend  had  quitted 
his  employment,  the  King  going  down  to  review  some 
regiments  that  were  encamped  on  Salisbury  Plain,  the 
Bishop  and  Chapter  of  that  city  had  the  honour  to  be 
presented  to  him,  and  to  kiss  his  hand.  But,  when 
Younger  approached  for  the  purpose,  His  Majesty, 
overcome  with  amazement  at  beholding  again  a  man 
whom  he  had  long  considered  as  no  more,  could  scarcely 
restrain  his  emotions.  As  soon  however  as  circumstances 
permitted,  he  sent  for  the  Dean  into  his  presence,  and 
a  mutual  explanation  took  place.  Conscious  of  the 
rectitude  and  propriety  of  the  motives  which  had 
actuated  Lord  Townshend  in  his  conduct,  he  never 
expressed  any  sentiment  of  anger ;  but  contented  him- 
self with  promising  Younger  to  confer  on  him  a  Mitre, 
as  soon  as  an  occasion  should  present  itself:  an  assur- 
ance which  he  would  have  probably  realized,  if  the 
Dean  had  not  shortly  afterwards  been  carried  off  by 
death. 

Selwyn's  nervous  irritability,  and  anxious  curiosity 
to  observe  the  effect  of  dissolution  on  men,  exposed 
him  to  much  ridicule,  not  unaccompanied  with  censure. 
He  was  accused  of  attending  all  executions ;  and  some- 
times, in  order  to  elude  notice,  in  a  female  Dress.  I 
have  been  assured  that  in  1756,  he  went  over  to  Paris, 
expressly  for  the  purpose  of  witnessing  the  last  moments 
of  Damien,  who  expired  under  the  most  acute  torture, 
for  having  attempted  the  life  of  Louis  the  Fifteenth. 
Being  among  the  croud,  and  attempting  to  approach 

451 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [1782. 

too  near  the  Scaffold,  he  was  repulsed  by  one  of  the 
executioners;  but,  having  informed  the  person,  that 
he  had  made  the  journey  from  London  solely  with  a 
view  to  be  present  at  the  punishment  and  death  of 
Damien,  the  man  immediately  caused  the  people  to 
make  way,  exclaiming  at  the  same  time,  "  Faites  place 
"  pour  Monsieur.  (Test  un  Anglois,  et  un  Amateur" 
The  Baron  Grimm,  in  his  "  Correspondence,"  relates  this 
story  as  having  happened  to  Condamine.  Mr.  Pitt,  in 
order  to  recompense  Selwyn  for  the  place  of  "  Paymaster 
of  the  Works,"  of  which  he  was  deprived  by  Burke's 
Bill ;  made  him  in  1784,  "  Surveyor  General  of  the 
"  Crown  Lands,"  which  Office  he  retained  till  his 
decease,  in  1790. 

Wilkes,  who  during  more  than  thirteen  successive 
years,  in  various  Parliaments,  had  vainly  endeavoured 
to  expunge  from  the  Journals  of  the  House  of  Commons, 
the  memorable  Resolutions  relative  to  the  Middlesex 
Election  ;  after  being  so  often  foiled,  at  length  attained 
his  object.  The  Division  upon  this  question,  was 
attended  with  the  singular  circumstance  of  Lord  North 
and  Fox  dividing  together  in  the  Minority.  The  new 
Secretary  of  State,  whose  original  political  line  of 
conduct,  while  supporting  the  Administration  which 
he  had  recently  expelled,  and  of  which  he  once  formed 
a  part,  made  it  sometimes  difficult  for  him  to  maintain 
the  appearance  of  consistency ;  affected  to  speak  and 
to  vote  from  the  Treasury  Bench,  against  Wilkes^s 
Motion.  Having,  unfortunately  given  his  ministerial 
sanction  in  early  life,  to  various  measures  calculated 
for  affixing  parliamentary  disapprobation  on  that 
celebrated  Member  of  the  House ;  he  therefore  probably 
thought,  that  a  regard  to  his  own  character  compelled 
him,  however  contradictory  to  his  late  line  of  declama- 
tion and  of  action,  when  haranguing  his  Constituents 
in  Palace  Yard ;  to  abide  by,  and  to  attempt  a  justifi- 
cation of  his  conduct,  relative  to  the  Election  for 

452 


1782.]  DISPOSAL  OF  GARTERS 

Middlesex.  No  public  man,  indeed,  in  my  time,  ever 
appeared  to  me  to  consider  so  little  apology  requisite 
for  the  contradictions  and  derelictions  of  his  political 
principles ;  or  seemed  so  completely  to  regard  the 
House  of  Commons,  as  an  Assembly  fit  for  becoming 
the  willing  agents  and  instruments  of  every  delusion, 
however  gross  or  palpable,  as  Fox.  The  difficulties  of 
the  undertaking  never  deterred  or  intimidated  him ; 
and  his  splendid  talents,  which  could  lend  to  sophistry 
the  colours  of  truth,  emboldened  him,  by  turns,  to 
attack  and  to  defend,  according  to  the  situation  in 
which  he  stood,  almost  every  position  and  tenet,  either 
of  monarchical  authority,  or  of  constitutional  freedom. 

18th  April.]  While  the  House  of  Commons  was 
thus  occupied  in  Measures  of  Reform,  or  engaged  in 
retracting  their  past  political  errors ;  the  new  Ministers, 
as  if  they  anticipated  their  speedy  dismission,  employed 
the  precious  moments  of  their  precarious  power,  in 
distributing  among  themselves,  without  loss  of  time, 
the  honours  of  the  Crown.  Four  Garters,  which  had 
been  found  on  the  King's  Table,  unappropriated,  at 
the  time  of  Lord  North's  resignation,  they  naturally 
considered  as  lawful  plunder.  One  only  of  the  number 
fell  to  the  share  of  the  Sovereign,  which  he  was  allowed, 
though  not  without  some  difficulty,  to  confer  on  his 
third  son,  Prince  William  Henry,  now  Duke  of  Clarence. 
The  remaining  three  were  reserved  for  themselves,  with 
a  due  regard  to  their  respective  consequence,  party,  and 
pretensions.  Lord  Rockingham  having  long  since 
received  the  Order,  from  the  hands  of  George  the 
Second ;  the  Duke  of  Devonshire,  as  head  of  the  Whig 
Party,  was  invested  with  one  blue  Riband,  and  the 
Duke  of  Richmond  with  another.  Lord  Shelburne 
took  for  himself,  as  was  to  be  expected,  the  fourth 
Garter.  A  great  person,  who  was  present  at  the 
ceremony  of  the  Investiture,  observed  with  admirable 
discernment,  that  never  did  three  men  receive  the  Order 

453 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

in  so  dissimilar  and  characteristic  a  manner.  "The 
"  Duke  of  Devonshire  "  said  he,  "  advanced  up  to  the 
"  Sovereign,  with  his  phlegmatic,  cold,  awkward  air, 
"  like  a  clown.  Lord  Shelburne  came  forward,  bowing 
"  on  every  side,  smiling,  and  fawning,  like  a  Courtier. 
"  The  Duke  of  Richmond  presented  himself,  easy,  un- 
"  embarrassed,  and  with  dignity,  as  a  Gentleman." 

The  Earl  of  Ashburnham,  who  had  been  during  more 
than  six  years  Groom  of  the  Stole  laid  claim  to  one  of 
the  Garters,  under  a  promise  which  he  asserted  to  have 
received  from  the  King,  and  of  which  he  endeavoured 
to  enforce  the  performance.  His  royal  Master,  though 
he  did  not  deny  the  engagement,  pleaded  his  inability 
to  fulfil  it,  under  the  actual  circumstances  of  his  situa- 
tion, which  left  him  no  longer  any  option  in  distribut- 
ing the  decorations  in  question.  This  excuse  did  not, 
however,  satisfy  Lord  Ashburnham,  who  was  said  to 
have  addressed  to  the  King  a  letter  of  reproach  on  the 
occasion,  couched  in  language  rather  too  severe  from 
a  subject  to  his  Sovereign,  even  if  the  cause  of  offence 
had  been  better  proved,  or  more  legitimate.  His 
resentment  at  the  supposed  infraction  of  the  royal 
word,  impelled  him  to  resign  his  Office ;  which,  as 
being  in  the  King's  immediate  family,  and  near  his 
person,  has  always  been  considered  exempt  from  minis- 
terial interference.  Lord  Weymouth,  who  succeeded 
him,  had  acted  a  much  more  important  part  in  earlier 
periods  of  His  Majesty's  reign,  when  he  filled,  during  a 
very  considerable  time,  the  post  of  Secretary  of  State ; 
and  even  held  the  Lord  Lieutenancy  of  Ireland,  for  a 
few  months,  though  he  never  crossed  over  to  Dublin. 
He  was  a  man  of  talents,  highly  convivial,  whose  con- 
versation entertained  and  delighted :  but  in  order  to 
profit  of  his  society,  it  was  necessary  to  follow  him  to 
White's,  to  drink  deep,  of  Claret,  and  to  remain  at  table 
till  a  very  late  hour.  "  Junius,"  alluding  to  this  well 
known  circumstance,  when  addressing  the  Duke  of 

454 


1782.]  UNPOPULAR  MINISTERS 

Grafton,  in  June,  1771,  says,  referring  to  Lord  Wey- 
mouth,  "  Yet  he  must  have  bread,  my  Lord,  or  rather 
"  he  must  have  wine.     If  you  deny  him  the  cup,  there 
"  will   be   no    keeping    him   within    the   pale   of    the 
"  ministry."1     Lord  Gower,  the  Chancellor,  and  Rigby, 
were,  through  life,  his  intimate  friends  and  companions. 
His  application   to   business,   by  no  means   kept  pace 
with  his  abilities,  nor  was  he  ever  a  popular  minister. 
Indeed,  if  we  except  the  first  Mr.  Pitt ;  Henry  Bilson 
Legge,  who  was   Chancellor   of  the  Exchequer  during 
about   five   months  after   His   Majesty's   Accession   to 
the  Throne ;  and  perhaps  we  may  add  the  Marquis  of 
Rockingham ;  all  three  of  whom  were  devolved  on  him 
by  his  Grandfather,  or  forced  upon  him  by  the  Nation ; 
George   the   Third   cannot   be  said   to   have   had  any 
Minister,  in  any  Department,  previous  to  Lord  North's 
resignation,  who  enjoyed  popularity.     We  must  except 
from  the  remark,  Lord  Camden,  during  the  short  time 
that  he  held  the  great  Seal  as  Chancellor.     Lord  Wey- 
mouth  attracted  a  considerable  portion  of  the  indigna- 
tion which  characterizes  Junius's  opening  letter,  written 
in  January,  1769,  for  having  officially  signed  the  order 
which  authorized   the  military  to  fire  on  the  populace 
assembled   in   St.    George's   Fields.     "Recovered   from 
"  the  errors  of  his  youth,  from  the  distraction  of  Play, 
"  and  the  bewitching  smiles   of  Burgundy,"  says  that 
writer,   "behold   him   exerting  the  whole   strength   of 
"  his  clear,  unclouded   faculties,  in   the  service  of  the 
"  Crown."     He   had   preceded   Lord    Ashburnham,   as 
Groom  of  the  Stole,  in  1775,  and  was  succeeded  by  the 
Earl  of  Hillsborough,  in  1779,  as   Secretary  of  State 
for  the  Home  Department.     Ten  years  afterwards,  Pitt 
created  Lord  Weymouth  a  Marquis. 

Though  the  Administration  of  which  Lord  North  so 
long  constituted  the  head,  had  ceased  to  exist,  yet 
many  of  the  Parliamentary  Institutions  which  had 
originated  under  him,  still  continued  in  activity. 

455 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [1782. 

Among  the  principal,  might  be  esteemed  the  Secret 
Committee  for  enquiring  into  the  state  of  the  East 
India  Company's  affairs.  The  Lord  Advocate  of  Scot- 
land, as  their  Chairman,  brought  forward  at  this  time, 
to  the  consideration  of  the  House,  various  Reports, 
calculated  to  shew  the  causes,  not  only  of  the  disgraces 
and  calamities  sustained  in  the  Carnatic,  but  of  the 
improper  expenditure  of  blood  and  treasure  in  other 
parts  of  Hindostan.  Sir  Thomas  Rumbold,  late 
Governor  of  Madras,  and  two  of  his  Colleagues, 
Members  of  the  Council,  became  the  first  objects  of 
public  accusation.  The  second  blow  fell  by  rebound, 
on  Sir  Elijah  Impey,  who,  in  his  quality  of  Chief 
Justice  of  Bengal,  was  supposed,  or  asserted,  in  more 
than  one  instance,  to  have  lent  his  legal  aid  and  sup- 
port to  the  Supreme  Government,  from  self-interested 
motives,  and  for  unjust,  as  well  as  pernicious  pur- 
poses. Hastings  himself,  then  Governor  General  of 
Bengal,  and  Hornby,  Governor  of  Bombay,  became 
implicated  or  involved  in  these  criminations.  Measures, 
adapted  to  the  nature  of  the  imputed  offences,  or  mis- 
conduct of  each  of  the  above-mentioned  persons,  were 
adopted.  Rumbold,  who  had  arrived  from  India  early 
in  1781,  under  circumstances  that  rendered  him  highly 
unpopular,  was  restrained  from  either  leaving  the  king- 
dom, or  from  alienating  his  property,  by  Act  of  Parlia- 
ment ;  and  severer  steps  were  meditated,  or  set  on  foot, 
in  order  to  bring  him  to  justice.  He  contrived  never- 
theless to  protract  the  proceedings,  and  ultimately  to 
elude  all  punishment.  An  address  was  presented  to  His 
Majesty,  requesting  him  to  recall  Sir  Elijah  Impey  from 
his  judicial  situation  in  India.  Finally,  resolutions,  of 
a  nature  tending  to  hold  out  both  Mr.  Hastings  and 
Mr.  Hornby,  in  their  public  capacity,  as  men  who  had 
committed  acts  of  the  most  culpable  or  unjustifiable 
kind,  were  agreed  to  in  the  House.  But,  the  advanced 
period  of  the  Session,  and  the  unsettled  state  of  domestic 

456 


1782.]          NATIONAL  DESPONDENCY 

affairs  in  a  Cabinet  divided  by  Animosity,  prevented  or 
postponed  the  further  prosecution  of  these  interesting 
concerns,  to  the  subsequent  year. 

On  the  other  side  the  Atlantic,  misfortune  still 
accompanied  the  English  arms.  St.  Christopher's, 
after  a  long  and  gallant  defence,  surrendered :  the 
Islands  of  Nevis  and  Montserrat  were  lost.  Even  the 
valuable  Settlements  of  Demerara  and  Essequibo, 
situate  on  the  Continent  of  South  America,  which  we 
had  taken  in  the  preceding  year  from  the  Dutch,  were 
recaptured  by  France.  Rodney,  indeed,  having  arrived 
out,  joined  Sir  Samuel  Hood  at  Barbadoes :  but  he 
found  himself  unable  to  intercept,  or  to  prevent,  the 
arrival  of  a  Convoy  from  Brest,  which  brought  to  the 
French  Admiral,  De  Grasse,  supplies  the  most  essential 
for  his  projected  hostile  operations.  At  home,  general 
despondency  or  apathy  pervaded  the  country.  Every 
allegation  which  had  been  brought  forward  against  the 
late  First  Lord  of  the  Admiralty  while  in  office,  was 
renewed  with  augmented  violence,  now  that  he  had 
retired  to  private  life;  and  these  clamors  were  en- 
couraged by  the  new  Ministers.  Rodney  himself 
participated  largely  in  them ;  and  disasters  more  severe 
than  any  that  we  had  yet  experienced,  were  predicted  or 
anticipated,  as  about  to  happen  in  that  quarter  of  the 
globe  where  he  commanded.  Never  was  the  nation  less 
prepared  for,  nor  less  in  expectation  of  the  great  victory 
that  impended  in  the  West  Indies,  than  a  week,  or  even 
a  day,  before  the  intelligence  arrived.  It  required  the 
utmost  exertions  of  the  new  Admiralty  to  prevent  the 
Dutch  squadron,  which  quitted  the  Texel  at  this  time 
from  effecting  a  junction  with  the  combined  fleets  of 
France  and  Spain,  commanded  by  Guichen.  Lord 
Howe,  now  restored  to  the  British  Navy,  and  like 
Keppel,  created  a  Viscount,  effected  a  service  so  dis- 
tinguished, which  unquestionably  entitled  him  to  the 
gratitude  of  his  country. 

457 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [1782. 

May.]     If  Mr.  Pitt,  whether  from   the  dictates   of 
profound  ambition,  or  from  the  calculations  of  ordinary 
prudence,  had  thought  proper  to  refuse  accepting  any 
place  or  situation  under  the  new  Ministry ;  he  did  not 
on  that  account,  withdraw  his  individual  exertions  as  a 
Member  of  Parliament,  or  retire   in  any  degree  from 
public  view  and  admiration.     On  the  contrary,  he  came 
eminently   forward   at   this   time,   as   a   Candidate  for 
national  approbation,  in  the  delicate,  as  well  as  arduous 
character  of  a  political   Reformer.     The  spirit   of  the 
Times,  which  operated  greatly  in   his   favor,   removed 
many  of  those  obstacles,  that  might  have  impeded  him 
under  the  former  Administration.     While  Burke  carried 
retrenchment  into  the  Palace,  as  well  as  to  the  Table, 
of  the   Sovereign,   Pitt  aspired  to  renovate,  or  to  re- 
organise, the  national  representation.     In  the  progress 
of  a   speech,  conceived  with  consummate   ability,  and 
delivered  from  the  Treasury  Bench,  he  endeavoured  to 
shew  the  vices  of  the  actual  state  of  popular  Election, 
and  to   point   out  the    most    efficacious    or    salutary 
remedies.     The   abuses   alledged  to   exist,  which  were 
indeed   indisputable,   seemed   at   first   sight  loudly   to 
demand  redress.     But,  on  the  other  hand,  theory  and 
practice  might  be  found  greatly  at  variance ;  and  even 
the  Reformers  themselves,  it  was  well  known,  differed 
widely  in  their  ideas  or  opinions  on   the  point.     The 
Duke  of  Richmond,  who   carried  his   principles  to  an 
Utopian  and  visionary  length,  would  have  extended  the 
right   of  voting,   almost   to   the   whole   population  of 
Great  Britain.     Fox  supported  on  this  occasion,  both 
with   his   Eloquence   and  his  Vote,  the  plan  proposed 
by   Pitt :  but   Burke,   less   democratic  in  his   ideas  of 
Government,  refused  to  lend  his  powerful  aid  to  a  Cause 
which   he   disapproved.     The   Secretary   at   War,  Mr. 
Townshend,  equally  absented  himself,  as  did  others  of  the 
ministerial  followers.     Lord  North,  though  he  attended 
the  discussion,  and  opposed  all  innovation,  yet,  to  the 

458 


1782.]  THEORY  AND  PRACTICE 

surprise  of  his  friends,  took  no  active  part  in  the 
Debate.  Dundas,  however,  supplied  his  place,  and 
made  an  animated  Appeal  against  the  projected  Reform  ; 
as  did  Mr.  Thomas  Pitt,  at  great  length,  with  much 
ability.  The  measure  itself  not  being  a  party  question, 
though  of  a  nature  the  most  interesting,  by  no  means 
attracted  the  attendance  which  had  been  produced  by 
the  Motions  that  preceded  the  Dissolution  of  the  late 
Administration.  Scarcely  more  than  three  hundred 
Members  voted  upon  it,  while  near  five  hundred  had 
been  present  in  more  than  one  of  the  divisions  of  the 
Month  of  March.  Pitt's  proposition  "to  appoint  a 
"  Committee  for  enquiring  into  the  State  of  the 
u  National  Representation,"  though  it  could  only  be 
considered  as  a  preliminary  step,  yet  was  negatived  by 
a  Maj  ority  of  twenty. 

I  made  one  of  that  small  Majority,  and  it  is  a  Vote 
of  which  I  never  have  repented.  It  was  difficult  not 
to  reflect,  while  listening  to  the  Arguments  of  Mr.  Pitt, 
who  eloquently  depictured  the  corruption  of  the  rotten 
Boroughs,  among  which,  several,  he  said,  "  were  to  be 
"  considered  as  within  the  controul  of  the  Carnatic ;" 
that  he  was,  himself,  sitting  at  that  very  time,  for 
Appleby,  by  the  influence,  or  in  other  words,  by  the 
nomination  of  Sir  James  Lowther.  To  the  corrupted 
State  of  the  Representation,  therefore,  it  was  owing 
that  he  had  himself  obtained  a  place  in  the  House  of 
Commons.  It  was  equally  impossible  not  to  be 
conscious,  that  if  the  Regulation  which  enacts,  that 
every  Member  of  that  Assembly  shall  be  bona  fide 
possessed  of  three  hundred  Pounds  per  annum  freehold 
estate,  had  been  severely  and  literally  enforced ;  neither 
Fox,  nor  Pitt,  nor  Sheridan,  nor  many  other  eminent 
individuals,  could  ever  have  sat  in  Parliament. 
Probably,  indeed,  on  the  day  that  Mr.  Pitt  made  his 
Motion,  he  did  not  really  possess  any  property ; 
certainly,  no  landed  property :  and  as  to  Fox,  though 

459 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [i782. 

actually  Secretary  of  State,  he  was  known  to  be  plunged 
in  debts,  contracted  by  Play,  which  left  him  without 
fortune,  or  almost  means  of  support.  But  they  did  not 
less  constitute  the  two  most  distinguished  persons  of 
the  Age  in  which  they  lived,  the  ornaments  of  their 
country  in  different  lines.  Fox  always  maintained 
without  reserve,  in  private  conversation,  as  well  as  in 
Parliament,  that  to  enforce  rigidly  the  rule  relative  to 
the  Qualifications  of  Members,  would  be  at  once  to 
exclude  talents  from  obtaining  entrance  into  the  House. 
So  little,  indeed,  may  Speculation  and  Fact  agree,  that 
if  the  List  of  Representatives  for  the  County  of  York, 
of  Devon,  or  of  Lincoln,  ever  since  the  reign  of  Eliza- 
beth, were  to  be  compared  with  those  who  have  been 
sent  to  Parliament  during  the  same  period  of  time,  from 
the  vilest  Cornish  Borough,  we  shall  find,  that  in  every 
quality  justly  recommending  to  a  seat  in  the  Legisla- 
ture ;  namely,  high  birth,  extensive  property,  distin- 
guished talents,  or  public  principle  and  virtue ;  the 
superiority  will  be  found,  in  many  instances,  perhaps  in 
most,  on  the  side  of  the  persons  elected  for  the 
Boroughs.  Such  an  estimate  might  be  difficult  to 
make,  and  must  be  always,  in  some  measure,  open  to 
dispute ;  but  it  serves  to  prove,  that  various  principles 
in  Legislation,  as  well  as  various  abuses,  do  not  produce 
the  effects  which  might  naturally  be  expected  to  result 
from  them. 

18th  May.]  Scarcely  had  Mr.  Pitt's  proposition 
been  rejected  for  the  Reform  of  the  Representation, 
before  the  Capital  and  the  country  were  thrown  into 
a  delirium  of  joy,  on  receiving  the  intelligence  of 
Rodney's  Victory  over  De  Grasse,  gained  upon  the 
preceding  12th  of  April.  It  is  difficult  for  us  in  this 
Age,  who  have  been  accustomed  to  naval  advantages 
over  the  French ;  and  who  were  used  to  calculate 
beforehand,  on  the  destruction  of  every  fleet  that 
effected  its  escape  from  the  ports  of  France,  as  soon  as 

460 


1782.]  THE  JOY  OF  VICTORY 

we  could  come  up  with  them ;  to  appreciate,  or  to 
imagine  its  effect  on  the  public  mind.  We  had  been 
habituated,  during  so  long  a  time,  under  Keppel, 
Byron,  Hardy,  Parker,  Graves,  Geary,  Darby,  and  their 
successors,  to  indecisive  or  unfortunate  engagements, 
productive  of  no  beneficial  results,  that  the  nation 
began  to  despair  of  recovering  its  former  ascendancy 
on  the  Ocean.  In  fact,  during  near  twenty  years,  ever 
since  the  termination  of  the  war  with  France  in  1763, 
the  British  Flag  had  scarcely  been  any  where  triumph- 
ant; while  the  Navies  of  the  House  of  Bourbon, 
throughout  the  progress  of  the  American  contest, 
annually  insulted  us  in  the  Channel,  intercepted  our 
mercantile  Convoys,  blocked  our  harbours,  and  threat- 
ened our  coasts.  Under  these  circumstances,  the  excess 
of  the  public  exultation  was  prodigiously  augmented 
by  the  dejection  that  pervaded  all  ranks  during  the 
former  part  of  the  Month  of  May,  and  by  the  utter 
apparent  improbability  of  such  an  Event  taking  place. 

When  I  reflect  on  the  emotions  to  which  it  gave 
rise  in  London,  I  cannot  compare  them  with  any 
Occurrence  of  the  same  kind  that  we  have  since 
witnessed  in  this  country.  The  victory  of  Lord  Howe, 
gained  on  the  First  of  June,  1794,  glorious  and  salutary 
as  it  was  to  Great  Britain,  yet  seemed  to  be  more  a 
triumph  over  Jacobinism  and  Anarchy,  than  over  the 
French  nation  or  Navy.  It  was  Robespierre  and  his 
Regicide  Accomplices,  not  Louis  the  Sixteenth,  whom 
we  there  vanquished.  Lord  St.  Vincent,  and  Lord 
Duncan,  unquestionably  merited,  each,  the  highest 
Eulogiums ;  but  they  destroyed,  at  Cape  St.  Vincent, 
and  at  Camperdown,  the  fleets  of  Spain  and  of  Holland, 
not  those  of  France.  And  no  Englishman  is  insensible 
to  the  distinction.  The  sublime  victory  of  Trafalgar, 
itself,  was  clouded  by  the  death  of  Nelson,  which  checked 
and  tempered  the  general  joy.  If  I  were  to  mention 
any  naval  Action,  the  news  of  which  seemed  to  diffuse 

461 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [1782. 

sentiments  nearly  resembling  those  felt  in  May,  1782, 
I  should  incline  to  name  that  of  Aboukir.  But,  in  the 
battle  of  the  Nile,  where  the  destruction  of  the  enemy 
was  much  more  complete,  though  we  destroyed  and 
blew  up  the  French  Admiral's  ship,  we  did  not  either 
capture  her,  or  her  Commander.  There  was  combined 
in  Rodney's  victory,  as  Lord  Loughborough  at  the 
time  remarked  in  the  House  of  Peers,  all  "  the  pomp, 
"  and  pride,  and  circumstance  of  war."  It  commenced 
with  the  rising  sun,  and  only  terminated  with  that 
setting  luminary.  The  elements  were  hushed,  only  a 
light  air  prevailing,  and  the  contending  fleets  were  very 
nearly  matched.  Jamaica,  the  prize  contended  for  by 
the  two  Nations  was  preserved  by  the  Result ;  while 
all  the  promised  Conquests  of  France  and  Spain,  so 
near  their  apparent  realization,  disappeared,  no  more 
to  be  revived,  even  in  idea.  It  constituted  a  sort  of 
Compensation  to  Great  Britain,  for  so  many  years  of 
disgrace,  for  so  great  an  expenditure  of  blood  and 
treasure,  and  even  for  the  loss  of  America  itself.  The 
country,  exhausted  and  humiliated,  seemed  to  revive  in 
its  own  estimation,  and  to  resume  once  more  its  dignity 
among  Nations.  France,  amidst  all  her  past  success, 
declined  proportionably  in  the  opinion  of  Europe,  and 
has  never  since  arrogated  the  same  rank,  as  a  Naval 
Power.  It  formed  in  fact  the  last  triumph  of  England 
on  the  element  of  the  water,  over  the  House  of  Bourbon, 
before  that  great  family  itself,  after  reigning  eight 
hundred  years  over  the  French,  sunk  under  the  torrent 
of  Revolution. 

Lord  Cranston,  one  of  the  Captains  of  the  Formidable, 
Sir  George  Rodney's  ship,  who  brought  over  the  news 
to  this  country ;  having,  in  consequence  of  that  Com- 
mander's special  injunctions,  waited  on  Lord  Sackville, 
though  then  no  longer  in  office  as  American  Secretary, 
in  order  to  communicate  to  him  the  particulars  of  the 
Action ;  I  had  an  opportunity  of  hearing  Lord  Crans- 

462 


1782.]         THE  HORRORS  OF  DEFEAT 

ton's  account  of  the  Engagement.  He  was  sent,  after 
the  Ville  de  Paris  struck,  to  take  possession  of  her,  as 
well  as  to  receive  De  Grasse's  sword ;  and  he  described 
the  scene  which  the  French  Admiral's  ship  presented, 
on  his  ascending  her  side,  as  altogether  terrible.  Be- 
tween the  fore-mast  and  main-mast,  at  every  step  he 
took,  he  said  that  he  was  over  his  buckles  in  blood,  the 
carnage  having  been  prodigious ;  but  as  numbers  of 
cattle  and  sheep  were  stowed  between  decks,  they  had 
suffered  not  less  than  the  crew  and  troops,  from  the 
effects  of  the  cannon.  On  the  quarter-deck,  which 
remained  still  covered  with  dead  and  wounded,  only 
De  Grasse  himself,  together  with  two  or  three  other 
persons,  continued  standing.  The  French  Admiral  had 
received  a  contusion  in  the  loins,  from  a  splinter,  but 
was  otherwise  unhurt ;  a  circumstance  the  more  remark- 
able, he  having  been,  during  the  whole  action,  for  so 
many  hours,  exposed  to  a  destructive  fire,  which  swept 
away  almost  all  his  officers,  and  repeatedly  cleared  the 
quarter-deck.  He  was  a  tall,  robust,  and  martial  figure  ; 
presenting,  in  that  moment,  an  object  of  respect,  no  less 
than  of  concern  and  sympathy.  Lord  Cranston  said,  that 
De  Grasse  could  not  recover  from  the  astonishment  into 
which  he  was  plunged ;  the  expressions  of  which  he 
often  reiterated,  at  seeing,  in  the  course  of  so  short  a 
time,  his  vessel  taken,  his  fleet  defeated,  and  himself  a 
prisoner.  He  was  allowed  to  pass  the  night  on  board 
his  own  ship,  with  every  testimony  of  attention  and 
regard,  on  the  part  of  the  British  Commander. 

An  opinion  which  became  very  generally  prevalent 
at  the  time,  and  obtained  much  belief,  has  made  a  deep 
impression  on  the  public  mind;  namely,  that  this 
victory,  signal  as  it  must  ever  be  esteemed,  might  never- 
theless have  been  rendered  far  more  complete,  if  it  had 
been  immediately  improved  by  pursuing,  without  delay, 
the  flying  enemy.  The  friends  of  Sir  Samuel  Hood 
strongly  maintained  that  position  ;  and  partial  as  I  am 

463 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [1782. 

to  the  memory  of  Lord  Rodney,  I  confess  that  there 
always  appeared  to  me  to  have  been  some  foundation 
for  the  assertion.  He  was,  himself,  well  aware  of  the 
charge,  and  I  have  heard  him  defend  the  line  of  conduct 
which  he  adopted  subsequent  to  the  victory,  by  very 
plausible,  if  not  by  solid  and  unanswerable  reasons. 
He  observed,  that  it  was  altogether  unwarrantable,  and 
might  have  been  attended  with  the  most  ruinous  con- 
sequences, to  have  detached  twelve  or  more  ships  of  the 
line,  under  Sir  Samuel  Hood,  in  pursuit  of  twenty-five 
at  least  of  the  French;  which  number  remained  to- 
gether, as  was  believed,  after  the  Action,  and  still 
constituted  a  most  formidable  force.  If  any  check  had 
been  experienced  by  us,  in  consequence  of  such  Eager- 
ness or  Precipitation,  it  was  obvious  that  the  fruits  of 
the  victory  itself  might  even  have  been  lost.  Bougain- 
ville and  Vaudreuil,  who  commanded  under  De  Grasse, 
enjoyed  a  higher  reputation  for  naval  skill,  than  the 
Commander  in  chief,  and  might  have  repaired  the 
defeat.  How  far  these  Facts  or  assertions  may  carry 
conviction  to  every  mind,  I  cannot  venture  to  determine. 
Lord  Rodney,  after  his  return  to  England,  made  no 
scruple  of  declaring  in  mixed  company,  where  I  was 
myself  present ;  and  he  even  wrote  home  at  the  time, 
in  his  private  letters,  more  than  one  of  which  I  have 
seen ;  that  so  violent  was  the  spirit  of  party  and  faction 
in  his  own  fleet,  as  almost  to  supersede  and  extinguish 
the  affection  to  their  Sovereign  and  their  country,  in 
the  bosoms  of  many  individuals  serving  under  him.  To 
such  a  height  had  it  attained,  that  he  asserted  there 
were  among  them,  officers  of  high  rank,  and  of  un- 
questionable courage,  who  nevertheless  bore  so  inveterate 
an  animosity  to  the  Administration  then  existing; 
particularly  to  the  first  Lord  of  the  Admiralty,  the 
Earl  of  Sandwich ;  as  almost  to  wish  for  a  defeat,  if  it 
would  produce  the  dismission  of  Ministers.  Similar 
assertions  were  made  by  Members  of  the  House  of 

464 


1782.]  LITERARY  ERRORS 

Commons,  in  their  Speeches.  However  incredible  the 
fact  itself  may  appear,  and  however  lamentable  it  must 
be  considered,  if  it  was  well  founded;  yet  it  is  not 
easy  to  conceive  the  antipathies,  political  and  personal, 
that  had  grown  up  in  the  English  navy  during  the 
American  war.  They  formed  one  of  the  characteristic 
features  of  the  Times,  and  operated  to  the  inconceivable 
injury  of  the  British  name  and  nation. 

The  commencement  of  Rodney's  public  letter,  ad- 
dressed to  Mr.  Stephens,  the  Secretary  of  the  Admiralty, 
on  this  glorious  occasion,  excited  a  smile  among  the 
Critics  and  Grammarians ;  as  he  stated,  that  "  It  had 
"  pleased  God,  out  of  his  divine  providence,  to  grant 
"  to  His  Majesty's  arms  a  most  complete  victory  over 
u  the  fleet  of  his  enemy ; "  whereas,  it  seemed  rather  to 
have  been  an  act  performed  in  his  divine  providence. 
This  error  of  a  naval  Commander,  unaccustomed  to 
composition,  and  whose  profession  was  not  the  pen, 
but  the  sword;  did  not  however  attract  the  same 
comments,  as  an  official  Dispatch  which  we  have  since 
perused,  sent  from  one  of  His  Britannic  Majesty's 
Embassadors,  who,  addressing  the  Secretary  of  State, 
from  Constantinople ,  appeared,  by  some  Act  of  oblivious 
Inadvertence,  to  consider  himself  in  Asia.  Rodney's 
enemies,  of  whom  he  had  a  great  number,  asserted  that 
after  the  victory  was  gained,  he  gave  way  to  a  sort  of 
intoxication  of  mind,  on  finding  himself  master  of  the 
French  Admiral's  person  and  ship.  They  said  that  he 
seated  himself  in  an  arm  chair,  placed  on  the  quarter 
deck  of  the  " Formidable"  as  the  Moon  rose,  in  order 
to  indulge  his  sight  with  the  view  of  the  "  Vilk  de 
"  Paris"  which  lay  near  him  in  a  disabled  state,  and 
whose  sides  far  overtopped  those  of  his  own  vessel. 
And  they  added  that  he  burst  into  expressions  or 
exclamations  of  extravagant  self  praise  and  com- 
placency ;  mingled  with  some  reproaches  on  the  want 
of  ministerial  gratitude,  which  he  had  experienced  for 

465  30 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [i782. 

his  past  services.  Even  admitting  all  these  facts  to 
be  true  in  their  utmost  extent,  they  only  prove  the 
infirmity  of  human  nature;  and  similar  instances  of 
weakness  occur  in  the  history  of  the  most  illustrious 
Commanders.  Rodney,  like  the  celebrated  Marshal 
Villars,  so  distinguished  under  Louis  the  Fourteenth, 
talked  perpetually  of  himself,  and  was  the  hero  of  his 
own  story.  But,  posterity  will  never  forget  the  debt 
of  gratitude  due  to  his  services,  nor  cease  to  consider 
him  as  one  of  the  greatest  men  whom  the  English 
Navy  produced  in  the  course  of  the  eighteenth  Century. 
He  unquestionably  displayed  equal  coolness  and  science, 
on  the  day  of  the  12th  of  April ;  directed  in  person 
every  Manoeuvre,  and  preserved  during  twelve  hours 
that  the  action  lasted,  the  utmost  presence  of  mind. 
Lord  Cranston  said  that  he  never  quitted  the  quarter 
deck  for  a  minute,  nor  took  any  refreshment,  except 
the  support  he  derived  from  a  Lemon,  which  he  held 
constantly  in  his  hand,  and  applied  frequently  to  his 
lips. 

If  Rodney  did  not  spare  his  animadversions  on  the 
spirit  of  political  enmity  and  faction,  which  pervaded 
the  British  navy ;  his  opponent,  the  Count  de  Grasse, 
made  still  louder  accusations,  and  sent  home  stronger 
charges  to  the  Court  of  Versailles,  against  the  jealousies 
or  rivalities  which  actuated  the  officers  serving  under 
him,  on  that  memorable  day.  They  doubtless,  towards 
the  close  of  the  action,  abandoned  their  Commander  to 
his  fate,  and  sought  their  safety  in  flight :  but,  the 
unforeseen  Manoeuvre  by  which  Rodney  had  intersected 
the  French  line,  at  the  commencement  of  the  engage- 
ment, threw  the  whole  fleet  into  inextricable  confusion  ; 
and  it  is  very  doubtful,  whether  by  prolonging,  or  even 
by  renewing  the  contest,  Bougainville  and  Vaudreuil 
would  have  in  any  measure  retrieved  the  misfortune. 
De  Grasse,  it  is  admitted  on  all  hands,  displayed  the 
most  unconquerable  firmness.  But  perhaps  he  highly 

466 


1782.]  THE  MERIT  OF  SUCCESS 

merited  censure,  at  a  moment  when  he  saw  before  him 
in  full  prospect,  so  vast  an  object  as  the  conquest  and 
reduction  of  Jamaica,  not  to  have  suffered  one  or  two 
ships  of  the  French  line  to  fall  into  our  hands,  rather 
than  sacrifice,  as  he  did,  the  whole  plan  of  the  Campaign, 
to  their  preservation.  I  know  such  to  have  been  the 
general  opinion  entertained  throughout  France,  where 
De  Grasse  laboured  under  popular  odium  to  so  great  a 
degree,  that  while,  after  the  ensuing  peace,  Suffrein 
always  received,  on  entering  the  Theatres  at  Paris,  the 
warmest  testimonies  of  admiration,  from  every  part  of 
the  house;  De  Grasse  did  not  venture  to  present 
himself  at  the  public  Spectacles,  from  the  apprehension 
of  insult.  Even  the  Court  manifested  similar  senti- 
ments ;  and  though  decorated  with  the  Order  of  the 
"  St.  Esprit,"  he  could  not  obtain  permission  to  walk 
in  the  annual  "  Procession  du  Cordon  Bleu "  at 
Versailles,  for  several  years  subsequent  to  the  Defeat  in 
the  West  Indies. 

The  effect  of  so  splendid  a  service  rendered  to  his 
country,  at  a  moment  of  such  Dejection,  and  the 
popularity  which  it  justly  produced,  in  some  measure 
disarmed  the  meditated  attacks  of  Rodney's  opponents 
at  home.  Burke,  who  had  heaped  the  severest  accusations 
upon  him,  for  his  conduct  towards  the  inhabitants  of 
St.  Eustatius ;  and  who  was  preparing  to  bring  forward 
a  Motion  in  the  House  of  Commons,  tending  to  criminate 
him  for  his  acts  while  in  possession  of  the  island ; 
immediately  abandoned  the  intention.  With  one  of 
those  classic  allusions  which  were  familiar  to  his  elegant 
mind,  he  observed,  that  "the  great  national  benefit 
"  performed  by  the  English  Admiral,  obliterated  his 
"  errors ;  and  like  the  laurel  crown  decreed  by  the 
"  Roman  Senate  to  Julius  Caesar,  covered,  as  well  as 
"  concealed,  his  baldness.1'  Even  the  rancour  expressed 
by  the  new  Ministers  and  their  friends,  towards  Lord 
Sandwich,  seemed  to  be  blunted,  if  not  mollified,  by 

467 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [1782. 

this  undeniable  proof  of  his  meritorious  exertions,  in 
sending  out  a  fleet  to  the  West  Indies,  capable  of 
vanquishing  the  French  Naval  Force.  It  was  justly 
said  that  Alexander  had  conquered  with  the  troops  of 
Philip.  No  further  mention  of  impeachment  or  Prose- 
cution was  made,  against  the  late  first  Lord  of  the 
Admiralty.  The  Cabinet,  nevertheless,  evincing  in 
every  part  of  their  conduct,  the  reluctance  with  which 
they  remunerated  Rodney's  merits ;  had  already  super- 
seded him,  by  naming  Admiral  Pigot  to  the  command 
of  the  fleet  in  the  West  Indies.  But,  as  he  had  not 
quitted  England,  before  intelligence  arrived  of  the 
victory  gained  over  De  Grasse,  it  was  evidently  the 
wish  of  the  country,  loudly  expressed,  that  Rodney 
should  not  be  recalled,  at  a  moment  when  he  had  raised 
the  naval  character  of  Great  Britain,  humbled  France, 
and  saved  Jamaica.  The  new  Administration,  however, 
far  from  paying  any  regard  to  this  expression  of  the 
general  opinion ;  and  apprehensive  of  some  Motion 
being  made  on  the  subject,  in  one  or  the  other  of  the 
two  Houses  of  Parliament ;  instantly  sent  off  Pigot,  in 
a  quick  sailing  Frigate,  from  Plymouth,  with  orders  to 
replace  the  victorious  Commander. 

Severe  comments  were  passed  out  of  doors,  upon  the 
appointment,  made  under  such  circumstances ;  especially 
as  Pigot  had  been  already  constituted  a  member  of 
the  new  Board  of  Admiralty.  Even  the  House  of 
Commons,  though  since  Lord  North's  resignation,  the 
Majority  seemed  completely  subservient  to  Fox,  yet 
manifested  some  symptoms  of  disapprobation.  There 
were  not  wanting  persons  in  that  Assembly,  who  com- 
pared it  to  the  recall  of  the  Duke  of  Marlborough  from 
Flanders,  and  the  substitution  of  the  Duke  of  Ormond 
in  his  place,  under  Queen  Anne.  It  was  besides  com- 
monly asserted,  that  the  Secretary  of  State  for  Foreign 
Affairs,  lay  under  pecuniary  obligations  to  Pigot,  of 
several  thousand  Pounds,  for  losses  incurred  at  Play. 

468 


1782.]  QUESTIONABLE  REWARDS 

And,  though  such  a  report  might  have  originated  in 
error  or  malevolence,  yet  it  was  difficult  to  disprove ;  as 
Fox's  notorious  passion  for  gaming,  had  subjected  him 
to  similar  engagements  and  embarrassments.  Lord 
Keppel,  when  questioned  in  the  House  of  Peers  respect- 
ing the  fact  of  Pigot's  Appointment,  felt  so  conscious 
of  the  indefensibility  of  the  measure,  that  he  did  not 
dare  to  own  it ;  but  contrived  to  evade  the  enquiry,  by 
stating  the  want  of  evidence  before  them  to  prove  the 
nomination.  It  was  impossible  more  clearly  to  avow 
how  much  he  was  ashamed  of  such  a  transaction.  The 
Opposition,  during  Lord  North's  Administration,  in 
their  anxiety  to  decry  the  Earl  of  Sandwich,  then  First 
Lord  of  the  Admiralty,  asserted  that  Sir  Edward 
Hughes  was  bound  to  give  him  a  certain  proportion 
of  whatever  prize-money  he  might  acquire ;  as  a  return 
for  being  appointed  to  the  naval  Command  in  the  East 
Indies.  "Junius"  treats  the  Duke  of  Grafton,  when 
First  Minister,  in  various  letters,  with  indignation,  for 
having  given  a  Pension  of  five  hundred  Pounds  a  year, 
to  Sir  John  Moore,  whom  he  designates  as  a  "  Broken 
"  Gambler."  Nor  does  he  hesitate  to  add,  that  the 
Pension  was  "probably  an  acquittance  on  the  part  of 
"  the  Duke,  of  Favours  upon  the  Turf."  But,  how 
infinitely  less  culpable  were  Lord  Sandwich,  or  the  Duke 
of  Grafton,  had  the  allegations  been  ever  so  clearly 
proved,  than  was  Fox,  if  we  assume  the  truth  of  the 
fact  imputed  to  him,  in  acquitting  his  debt  to  Pigot, 
by  sending  him  out  to  the  West  Indies  ? 

Rodney's  victory,  if  it  had  taken  place  two  Months 
earlier,  would  probably  have  operated  to  retard,  or  to 
prevent,  Lord  North's  resignation.  Nor  did  any  man 
doubt  that  the  Admiral  himself  would  have  received 
more  distinguishing  marks  of  Ministerial  gratitude,  as 
well  as  of  Royal  bounty,  if  Lord  North  had  continued 
at  the  head  of  affairs,  than  were  conferred  on  him  by 
that  Nobleman's  successors.  Lord  Howe  and  Admiral 

469 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [1782. 

Keppel  had  just  been  raised  by  their  Party,  to  the 
dignity  of  Viscounts,  without  performing  any  Naval 
service.  Many  persons  thought  that  an  Earldom 
would  not  have  constituted  a  reward  too  eminent  for 
so  important  a  victory.  We  have  seen  that  high  rank 
of  the  Peerage  conferred  since  on  Sir  John  Jervis,  for 
the  battle  gained  over  the  Spaniards,  off  Cape  St. 
Vincent's ;  a  victory,  as  was  commonly  reported, 
principally  due  to  Sir  Horatio  Nelson.  Lord  Duncan, 
Lord  Hood,  and  Lord  Bridport,  have  all  been  created 
for  their  Exploits,  English  Viscounts.  It  was  not 
without  evident  marks  of  unwillingness,  that  a  Barony, 
and  a  Pension  of  two  thousand  Pounds  per  annum, 
were  rather  extorted  from,  than  spontaneously  given  by 
the  Ministry  to  Rodney;  accompanied  with  his  im- 
mediate supercession  in  the  Command  of  the  fleet.  It 
must  however  be  admitted  on  the  other  hand,  that 
previous  to  the  time  of  which  I  am  now  writing,  the 
most  distinguished  naval  services  rarely  conducted  to 
the  Peerage.  Anson,  it  is  true,  was  raised  to  it :  but 
neither  Saunders,  nor  Boscawen,  nor  Pocock,  attained 
to  that  honor.  Even  Hawke,  far  from  being  called  up 
to  the  House  of  Peers,  after  he  had  destroyed  the  fleet 
of  France  in  1759,  at  the  mouth  of  the  Loire,  was 
only  made  a  Baron  by  Lord  North,  near  seventeen  years 
afterwards ;  and  then,  in  company  with  several  other 
individuals  who  were  raised  to  the  same  dignity.  It  is 
for  posterity  to  judge  how  far  these  circumstances  may 
form  some  excuse  for  the  apparent  want  of  liberality 
towards  a  man  who  had  rendered  so  critical,  as  well  as 
so  distinguished,  a  service  to  his  country. 

June.]  While  the  victory  obtained  over  De  Grasse, 
produced  so  vast  and  beneficial  an  alteration  in  the 
affairs  of  Great  Britain  beyond  the  Atlantic,  time 
seemed  rapidly  maturing  another  important  change,  or 
rather  convulsion,  in  the  domestic  concerns  of  the 
kingdom.  From  the  first  formation  of  the  new  Cabinet, 

470 


1782.]  A  DIVIDED  CABINET 

its  jarring   materials  indicated,  in   the  opinions  of  all 
discerning  men,  their  speedy  disunion  and   separation. 
Fox,  conscious   of  the   alienation   in  which   the   King 
held  him,  morally,  as  well  as  politically,  possessed  too 
much   penetration   not   to   foresee,  and  to  predict,  an 
approaching  change  of  Administration.     He   was   not 
without   difficulty   restrained  from  precipitating  it,  by 
his   open   disapprobation   of  the  intended,  or  imputed 
measures,   of  some   of  his   Colleagues.     The   stern   in- 
flexibility of  Lord  Thurlow,  likewise,  who  as  Chancellor, 
thwarted  and  opposed,  in  the  House  of  Peers,  many  of 
his  measures,  greatly  irritated  him.     Nor  did  the  pre- 
ference shewn  towards  Lord  Shelburne,  on  all  occasions, 
by  His  Majesty,  tend  less  to  accelerate  a  rupture.     In 
this  situation  of  things,  the  decline  of  the  Marquis  of 
Rockingham's  health,  by  incapacitating  him  to  take  as 
active  a  part  in  public  affairs  as  he  had  previously  done, 
removed  the  only  remaining  serious  impediment :  while 
it  facilitated  the  accomplishment  of  those  objects,  which 
prudence   and   necessity  alone   had   hitherto  compelled 
the  Sovereign  to  delay,  till  the  arrival  of  a  favourable 
opportunity. 

No  rational  doubt  can  exist,  that  even  if  death  had 
not  carried  off  the  Marquis  of  Rockingham,  yet  a 
change  in  the  Administration  would  equally  have  taken 
place,  nearly  at  the  same  time,  and  in  the  same  manner, 
as  it  was  afterwards  effected.  The  necessity  of  making 
such  arrangements  as  might,  it  was  hoped,  secure  its 
duration,  and  enable  Lord  Shelburne  to  surmount  the 
Opposition  to  be  expected  in  Parliament,  had  solely 
prevented  him  hitherto  from  accepting  the  place  of 
first  Lord  of  the  Treasury.  But,  as  the  Session  drew 
towards  its  close,  that  difficulty  gradually  ceased ;  while 
the  period  which  must  of  course  elapse  between  the 
Prorogation  and  the  subsequent  meeting,  would  afford, 
in  all  probability,  if  well  improved,  various  means  of 
strengthening  the  new  Ministry.  Lord  Shelburne  had 

471 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [1782. 

already  made  advances  to,  and  had  sounded  Mr.  Pitt. 
His  talents,  eloquence,  and  popularity,  sustained  by  his 
illustrious  name,  rendered  him,  notwithstanding  his 
youth,  capable  of  being  successfully  opposed  to  Fox, 
in  the  House  of  Commons.  His  ambition,  which  had 
impelled  him  to  disdain  and  to  reject  a  secondary  place 
under  the  existing  Administration,  pointed  out  to  Lord 
Shelburne  the  obvious  bait,  by  which  he  might  be  in- 
duced to  lend  his  powerful  support ;  namely,  a  Cabinet 
Office.  The  decorum  and  regularity  of  his  private  life, 
altogether  untinctured  with  the  vices  of  Mr.  Fox's 
character,  gave  him  a  vast  superiority,  in  the  estima- 
tion of  all  those  who  considered  morality  as  indispens- 
able to  a  man  placed  in  public  situation.  In  the 
contemplation  of  these  circumstances,  and  with  these 
intentions,  it  is  well  known  that  the  King  had  fully 
determined  to  displace  such  Members  of  the  Cabinet 
as  constituted  the  Rockingham  Party ;  and  to  transfer 
the  management  of  the  Treasury  to  the  Earl  of  Shel- 
burne. The  lapse  of  a  few  days,  would  perhaps  have 
disclosed  and  produced  this  important  event,  when  the 
decease  of  the  first  Minister  spared  His  Majesty  the 
necessity  of  dismissing  him  from  his  post. 

1st  of  July.]  Lord  Rockingham,  though  hardly 
fifty- two  years  of  age,  already  sunk  under  an  infirm  and 
debilitated  constitution.  A  decay,  to  which  was  added 
a  slow  fever,  or  as  it  was  denominated,  Influenza,  had 
for  some  time  undermined  his  strength,  without  never- 
theless appearing  to  menace  his  immediate  dissolution. 
Early  in  June,  after  the  King's  birthday,  having  quitted 
Grosvenor-Square,  he  retired  to  Roehampton,  where 
his  recovery  was  confidently  expected  by  his  friends. 
Indeed,  neither  Fox  nor  Burke  seem  to  have  been 
prepared  for  his  decease,  though  the  former,  with  the 
manly,  but,  imprudent  decision  that  marked  his  politi- 
cal character,  instantly  determined  either  to  keep 
possession  of  the  Treasury  by  Proxy,  or  to  resign  his 

472 


1782.]  LORD  ROCKINGHAM 

office.  Burke,  though  he  personally  detested  Lord 
Shelburne,  yet  would,  I  believe,  have  gladly  retained 
his  situation,  under  a  new  first  Minister  of  the  King's 
Election :  but  he  could  not  separate  himself  from  Fox. 
On  that  day,  they  held  a  long  conversation,  evidently 
of  the  most  interesting  and  serious  description,  in  the 
Court  of  Requests,  where  they  continued  walking 
backwards  and  forwards,  long  after  the  Speaker  had 
taken  the  Chair.  At  length  they  both  repaired  to  the 
House,  where  the  Marquis's  death  being  announced, 
warm  Eulogiums  were  conferred  on  his  Memory  from 
various  quarters.  An  amiable  and  a  respectable  indi- 
vidual, rather  than  a  superior  man,  nature  had  not 
designed  him  to  be  the  first  Minister  of  a  great  country. 
Junius  well  characterizes  his  formation  of  mind,  when 
he  speaks  of  "the  mild,  but  determined  integrity  of 
"  Lord  Rockingham."  Yet  was  there,  as  that  Writer 
elsewhere  observes,  a  degree  of  "Debility"  in  his 
virtue :  but  the  moderation  of  his  character  tempered 
the  ardour  of  Fox,  and  imposed  limits  on  Burke's 
enthusiasm. 

The  state  of  his  frame  and  health,  which,  even  in  his 
youth  had  never  been  robust;  and  both  which  were 
believed  to  have  suffered  severely  in  consequence  of 
some  imprudent  gallantries,  while  pursuing  his  travels 
in  the  south  of  Italy,  at  an  early  period  of  his  life ; 
incapacitated  him  for  close  or  continued  application, 
during  the  short  period  of  his  Administration.  The 
Princess  of  Franca  Villa  was  commonly  supposed  to 
have  bestowed  on  him  the  same  fatal  present,  which 
the  "  Belle  Ferroniere"  conferred  on  Francis  the  First, 
King  of  France ;  and  which,  as  we  learn  from  Bumet, 
the  Countess  of  Southesk  was  said  to  have  entailed  on 
James,  Duke  of  York,  afterwards  James  the  Second. 
The  Princess  was  still  living  when  I  visited  Naples  in 
the  year  1779;  and  Sir  William  Hamilton  assured  me, 
that  she  always  expressed  the  utmost  concern  for  the 

473 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [1782. 

unintentional  misfortune  which  the  Marquises  attach- 
ment had  produced,  as  well  as  for  its  supposed  results. 
Leaving  no  issue,  the  greater  part  of  his  vast  landed 
property,  as  well  as  his  Borough  interests,  descended  to 
his  nephew,  Earl  Fitzwilliam.  In  Lord  Rockingham's 
person  too,  became  extinct  the  title  and  Dignity  of  a 
British  Marquis;  he  being  the  sole  individual  in  the 
Kingdom  who  then  possessed  that  high  rank  ;  to  which 
Mr.  Pitt  has  since  elevated  during  his  Administration, 
eleven  Individuals ;  besides  creating  nine  Irish  Marquises, 
where  there  did  not  previously  exist  one  Peer  of  that 
order.  Such  has  been  the  prodigious  encrease  of  Peer- 
ages, during  the  present  Reign !  Unquestionably,  Mr. 
Pitt,  in  thus  augmenting  the  numbers  of  the  House  of 
Lords,  was  not  animated  by  the  same  intention  as  the 
Romans  attributed  to  the  first  of  the  Caesars,  when  he 
encreased  the  Senate  to  nine  hundred ;  or  as  Suetonius 
expresses  it,  "Senatum  supple vit."  But,  it  will  be 
nevertheless  for  our  descendants  to  decide,  how  far  he 
has  practically  produced  a  similar  effect  on  the  Constitu- 
tion of  Great  Britain,  with  the  pernicious  consequence 
which  flowed  from  the  augmentation  of  the  Roman 
Senate  by  Caesar. 

If  Fox  would  have  submitted  to  retain  his  Office  as 
Secretary  of  State,  under  Lord  Shelburne,  after  the 
decease  of  the  Marquis  of  Rockingham,  it  is  not  to  be 
questioned  that  the  King,  whatever  personal  objections 
or  dislike  he  might  have  felt  towards  Fox,  would  from 
prudential  motives,  have  allowed  him  to  continue  in 
the  Cabinet.  Nor  can  it  admit  of  a  doubt,  that  Fox, 
by  consenting  to  hold  his  own  situation,  would  have 
induced  Lord  John  Cavendish,  over  whom  he  always 
exercised  an  unbounded  Ascendant,  to  follow  his  ex- 
ample. Burke,  who  manifested  the  greatest  reluctance 
to  quit  the  Pay  Office,  required  rather  to  be  impelled 
in  making  that  sacrifice,  than  appeared  to  feel  any 
spontaneous  disposition  towards  resigning  so  lucrative 

474 


1782.]  FOX'S  RESIGNATION 

an  appointment,  of  which  he  had  scarcely  tasted  the 
first  fruits.  Fox's  private  circumstances  were  moreover 
so  desperate,  as  to  dictate  some  attention  to  them ;  and 
many  of  his  friends  stood  in  a  similar  predicament. 
But,  his  indignation  at  seeing  the  helm  of  the  State 
transferred  to  Lord  Shelburne,  when  added  to  his 
knowledge  of  the  secret  machinations  which  had  pre- 
ceded it,  extinguished  or  superseded  every  other  senti- 
ment in  his  bosom.  He  peremptorily  demanded,  either 
that  the  Duke  of  Portland  should  be  immediately  re- 
called from  Ireland,  in  order  to  be  placed  at  the  head 
of  the  Treasury,  as  the  Representative  of  the  deceased 
Marquis,  and  the  acknowledged  Chief  of  the  Whig 
party ;  or  he  tendered  to  His  Majesty,  his  own  instant 
Resignation.  His  offer  was  accepted ;  and  that  of 
Lord  John  Cavendish,  as  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer, 
accompanied  it,  at  the  same  time. 

When  we  calmly  examine  the  motives  by  which  Fox 
was  actuated  in  thus  throwing  up  his  Office,  we  must 
admit  that  he  consulted  more  his  passions  than  his 
reason ;  since  he  lay  under  no  necessity  of  sacrificing 
either  his  country,  or  his  principles,  to  the  preservation 
of  his  employment.  Lord  Shelburne's  insincerity  or 
duplicity  could  not  operate  to  produce  the  public  ruin, 
except  by  the  measures  that,  in  his  capacity  of  first 
Minister,  he  might  bring  forward :  and  whatever  re- 
pugnance he  might  individually  feel  to  grant  the 
American  colonies  unconditional  independence,  yet  the 
majority  of  the  Cabinet,  after  Fox's  and  Lora  John 
Cavendish's  secession,  compelled  him  ultimately  to 
adopt  that  principle.  By  retaining  his  place  under 
the  new  first  Lord  of  the  Treasury,  Fox  would  there- 
fore have  secured  his  adherence  to  the  late  Marquis's 
plans ;  or  on  his  departure  from  them,  Fox  would  have 
carried  Parliament  and  the  Country  with  him,  by  in- 
stantly refusing  longer  to  co-operate  with  a  Minister, 
who  evaded  or  declined  recognizing  the  Sovereignty  of 

475 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [1782. 

the  thirteen  States.  Nor  could  Lord  Keppel  and  the 
Duke  of  Richmond  have  then  separated  themselves  from 
him.  If,  instead  of  the  violent  step  that  he  took,  he 
had  acted  with  temper,  he  would  have  advanced  the 
public  interests,  while  he  consolidated  his  own  tenure 
of  Office.  The  King  and  Lord  Shelburne,  however 
much  they  might  have  desired  to  dismiss  him,  could 
not  have  ventured  on  it,  without  a  pretence.  Pitt 
might  probably  have  become  Secretary  of  State  for 
the  Home  Department ;  and  a  very  strong  Government 
must  have  arisen,  from  which  Lord  North,  as  well  as 
his  adherents,  would  have  been  altogether  excluded. 
But,  in  order  to  have  produced  this  benefit  to  the 
State,  it  was  necessary  for  Fox  to  begin  by  obtaining 
a  triumph  over  himself.  He  preferred  more  dictatorial 
measures,  which,  in  the  course  of  a  few  months,  com- 
pelled him  either  to  behold  his  enemy  confirmed  in 
power,  after  making  Peace,  while  himself  and  his 
adherents  remained  on  the  Opposition  Bench ;  or 
regardless  of  consequences,  to  form  a  junction  with 
Lord  North,  and  storm  the  Cabinet  a  second  time. 
Such  was  the  injurious  result  of  his  intemperate  pre- 
cipitation. 

Fox,  in  taking  this  decisive  step,  probably  flattered 
himself  that  it  would  have  operated  to  a  wider  extent, 
than  actually  happened.  Though  he  could  not  ration- 
ally hope  that  either  Lord  Camden  or  the  Duke  of 
Grafton  would  resign ;  and  though  he  ought  not  to 
have  supposed  that  General  Conway  would  do  so ; 
since  not  one  of  these  Ministers  depended  on  the  late 
Marquis  of  Rockingham ;  yet  he  certainly  calculated 
that  his  uncle  the  Duke  of  Richmond,  as  well  as  Lord 
Keppel,  would  imitate  his  example.  In  this  expec- 
tation, he  was,  however,  disappointed.  They  both 
expressed,  indeed,  in  the  Upper  House  of  Parliament, 
their  great  regret  at  his  secession ;  but  they  declined 
following  him  out  of  the  Cabinet,  and  stated  the 

476 


1782.]  MINISTERIAL  CHANGES 

motives  for  their  determination.  It  remained  during 
some  time  doubtful,  whether  Mr.  Pitt  would  have  been 
appointed  one  of  the  Secretaries  of  State,  or  placed  in 
the  post  of  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer.  The  latter 
employment  was  finally  conferred  on  him.  Mr.  Thomas 
Townshend  succeeded  Lord  Shelburne  in  the  Home 
Department ;  leaving  the  post  of  Secretary  at  War 
to  Sir  George  Yonge.  The  Foreign  Office,  vacated  by 
Fox,  was  last  filled  up,  and  given  to  Lord  Grantham. 
However  inferior  in  energy  and  brilliancy  of  intellect 
to  his  predecessor,  he  possessed  solid,  though  not 
eminent  parts,  added  to  a  knowledge  of  foreign  affairs 
and  of  Europe,  having  resided  several  years  with 
great  reputation  as  Embassador  at  the  Court  of 
Madrid. 

Two  of  the  Lords  of  the  Treasury  followed  Mr.  Fox 
out  of  Office.  One,  Lord  Althorpe,  has  since  filled 
with  Honor  to  himself,  and  advantage  to  the  public, 
as  Earl  Spencer,  a  high  Cabinet  Office  under  Mr.  Pitt's 
Administration.  Frederick  Montagu,  the  other,  a  man 
equally  respectable  for  probity  and  for  talents,  after- 
wards raised  to  the  Dignity  of  a  Privy  Councillor ;  was 
a  devoted  adherent  of  the  Cavendish  and  Rockingham 
interest.  Mr.  Richard  Jackson,  and  Mr.  Edward  James 
Eliot,  succeeded  to  these  Vacancies.  The  former  gentle- 
man, one  of  Lord  Shelburne's  intimate  friends,  bred 
to  the  Bar,  had  obtained,  from  the  universality  of  his 
information  on  all  topics,  as  I  have  already  had  occasion 
to  remark,  the  appellation  of  "  Omniscient  Jackson." 
Mr.  Eliot  afterwards  married  Lady  Harriet  Pitt,  sister 
of  the  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer;  and  his  father, 
early  in  1784,  was  created  a  Peer,  while  the  new  first 
Minister  had  still  to  contend  against  a  Majority  in  the 
House  of  Commons.  The  remaining  Member  of  the 
Treasury  Board,  Mr.  James  Grenville,  whom  we  have 
likewise  seen  elevated  by  Mr.  Pitt  to  the  British 
Peerage,  at  a  later  period  of  his  Administration ;  did 

477 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [1782. 

not  think  proper  to  imitate  the  Example  of  his 
Colleagues.  Mr.  Thomas  Orde,  who  became  one  of  the 
two  Secretaries  of  the  new  Treasury;  like  Mr. 
Grenville,  terminated  his  career  as  a  Commoner,  on 
the  very  same  day,  fifteen  years  afterwards,  by  a  removal 
to  the  upper  House  of  Parliament.  The  Peerage 
formed,  indeed,  the  Euthanasia,  the  natural  Translation 
of  all  Mr.  Pitt's  favourite  adherents,  friends,  and 
relations,  either  by  consanguinity,  or  by  alliance.  It 
must  be  admitted  that  Mr.  Orde  had  a  double  pretension 
to  it,  from  his  services,  and  his  matrimonial  connection. 
While  a  Member  of  the  House  of  Commons,  he  had 
distinguished  himself  by  drawing  up  more  than  one  of 
the  most  able  Reports  of  the  "Secret  Committee," 
appointed  to  enquire  into  the  Causes  of  the  War  in 
the  Carnatic,  of  which  Committee  he  was  a  leading 
Member.  But,  his  best  claim  consisted  in  having 
married  the  natural  daughter  of  Charles,  Duke  of 
Bolton ;  in  virtue  of  which  union,  and  from  the  failure 
of  male  issue  in  the  person  of  the  succeeding  Duke,  Mr. 
Orde  became  eventually  possessed  of  some  of  the  finest 
estates  of  that  illustrious  family.  The  Title  itself, 
diminished  to  a  Barony,  was  revived  in  him,  together 
with  the  name  of  Powlett.  Lord  North  remained  an 
inactive,  though  not  an  unconcerned,  or  a  silent 
spectator,  of  this  new  convulsion  in  the  Councils  of  the 
Crown,  which  had  so  soon  expelled  from  the  Cabinet 
one  of  the  two  parties,  by  whom  he  was  himself  driven 
from  power.  Of  all  those  individuals  who  had  supported 
his  Administration,  or  occupied  any  eminent  situation 
under  it,  only  two  quitted  him,  in  order  to  be  received 
into  Lord  Shelburne's  confidence  and  ministry.  The 
Lord  Advocate  of  Scotland,  Mr.  Dundas,  after  eight 
years  adherence,  now  abandoned  altogether  his  antient 
political  leader ;  and  imitating  the  precedent  exhibited 
by  Mr.  Pitt,  took  office,  by  accepting  the  Treasurership 
of  the  Navy.  From  this  period,  they  continued  for  the 

478 


1782.]  LAVISH  DONATIONS 

remainder  of  their  lives,  inseparable  in  good,  as  well  as 
in  adverse  fortune.  Lord  Mulgrave  followed  Dundas's 
example.  The  Duke  of  Portland,  who,  as  being 
devoted  to  the  Rockingham  interest,  adopted  Mr.  Fox's 
line  of  conduct,  was  succeeded  in  the  Lord  Lieutenancy 
of  Ireland,  by  Earl  Temple;  a  Nobleman  of  very 
considerable  talents,  though  inferior  in  energy  of  mind 
and  character,  to  either  of  his  brothers. 

The  interruption  which  so  important  a  change  in  the 
Government  occasioned  in  the  ordinary  business  of  the 
House  of  Commons,  prevented  any  discussion  from 
arising  in  that  assembly  during  some  days,  relative  to 
the  causes  and  motives  of  Mr.  Fox's  resignation.  But 
an  occasion  soon  presented  itself,  which  enabled  him  to 
state  all  his  grievances,  to  unfold  some  portion  of  the 
mystery  that  pervaded  his  conduct,  and  to  bring  forward 
the  heaviest  charges  against  the  new  first  Lord  of  the 
Treasury.  A  pension  of  three  thousand,  two  hundred 
pounds  a  year  having  been  granted  to  Colonel  Barre,  by 
the  Administration  of  which  Lord  Rockingham  con- 
stituted the  head ;  and  another  very  considerable  pension 
given  at  the  same  time  to  Lord  Ashburton,  the  two 
principal  friends  of  Lord  Shelburne  in  both  Houses  of 
Parliament ;  these  grants,  the  consideration  of  which 
was  unexpectedly  brought  forward,  became  severely 
arraigned.  It  seemed,  indeed,  impossible  not  to  feel  a 
degree  of  astonishment  at  contemplating  such  profuse 
donations  of  the  public  money,  made  by  men  who 
condemned  Lord  North's  want  of  economy ;  who  were 
with  difficulty  induced  to  give  a  pension  of  two  thousand 
pounds  a  year  to  Lord  Rodney,  for  having  defeated  the 
French  fleet,  and  saved  Jamaica ;  who,  themselves  had 
recently  reduced  the  Household  of  the  Sovereign ;  and 
who  loudly  asserted  their  personal  disinterestedness. 
Fox  admitted  that  the  deceased  Marquis,  his  friend,  had 
concurred  in  recommending  the  pensions  conferred  on 
Lord  Ashburton,  and  on  Barre :  but  he  entreated  the 

479 


WRAXALI/S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [i782. 

House  to  observe,  that  while  Lord  Shelburne's  adherents 
received  such  distinguishing  marks  of  the  bounty  of  the 
Crown,  the  followers  of  Lord  Rockingham,  many  of 
whom  could  plead  equal  merit,  and  equal  want,  remained 
without  provision  of  any  kind. 

After  thus  in  some  measure  removing  the  odium 
attached  to  the  act,  from  that  party  of  which  he  formed 
a  member ;  he  accused  the  new  first  Minister  of  the  most 
unworthy  duplicity,  of  the  complete  abandonment  of 
every  political  principle  on  which  he  professed  to  have 
come  into  Office,  and  of  an  intention  to  protect,  as  well 
as  to  shelter  delinquents.  Having  next  enumerated 
the  great  points  on  which  Lord  Shelburne  and  he  had 
differed  in  the  Cabinet,  among  which  he  particularly 
specified  the  question  of  conceding  Independence  to 
America ;  he  concluded  by  heaping  upon  that  Noble- 
man, imputations  more  severe  and  humiliating,  if 
possible,  than  the  charges  with  which,  during  many 
years,  he  had  profusely  loaded  Lord  North.  In  the 
warmth  of  his  indignation,  he  even  ventured  to  predict 
the  probability,  that  with  a  view  to  maintain  possession 
of  the  power  so  acquired,  Lord  Shelburne  would  not 
scruple  to  apply  for  support,  to  the  very  men  whom 
the  House  and  the  nation  had  recently  driven  from 
their  official  situations.  He  unfortunately  did  not 
then  foresee,  that  within  seven  Months  from  the  time 
when  he  was  speaking,  he  should,  himself,  in  order  to 
re-enter  the  Cabinet,  form  a  junction  with  the  expelled 
Minister,  whom  he  had  so  long  held  up  to  national 
resentment,  and  towards  whom  he  still  professed  the 
utmost  alienation.  Such  were  the  inconsistencies  and 
contradictions,  into  which  the  Ambition  of  Fox  betrayed 
him ;  and  from  which,  all  the  splendor  of  his  talents 
could  not  extricate  his  public  character,  without  eventu- 
ally incurring  imputations,  nearly  as  heavy  as  those 
which  he  lavished  on  his  political  opponents. 

The  members  of  the  new  Administration  diverged 
480 


1782.]  RIVAL  STATESMEN 

on  this  occasion,  in  widely  different  lines.  General 
Con  way,  with  that  "  undetermined  discretion  "  imputed 
to  him  by  "  Junius,"  contented  himself  by  endeavouring 
to  justify  his  own  line  of  conduct,  and  that  of  the 
Cabinet  Ministers  who  had  declined  to  imitate  the 
example  of  Fox ;  which  he  did  rather  with  caution  and 
delicacy,  than  with  any  asperity  or  acrimony.  But, 
Pitt,  now  become  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer,  rising 
in  his  place,  and  observing  none  of  these  personal 
managements,  boldly  accused  the  late  Secretary  of  State 
with  sacrificing  his  country  to  his  ambition,  his  interest, 
or  his  enmities;  charged  him  with  being  at  variance, 
not  with  principles  or  measures,  but  with  men ;  and 
claimed  the  support  of  the  House  no  longer  than  he 
should  maintain  that  System,  on  which  the  late  Ad- 
ministration had  been  driven  from  power.  For  the 
first  time,  the  country  beheld  two  individuals,  who 
might  hitherto  be  said  to  have  fought  under  the  same 
standard,  openly  opposed  to  each  other ;  and  who  were 
destined  never  more,  during  their  lives,  under  any 
change  of  circumstances,  to  act  in  political  union.  In 
fact,  from  this  period,  though  Lord  North  remained 
ostensibly  at  the  head  of  one  great  party,  and  though 
Lord  Shelburne,  who  occupied  the  place  of  first 
Minister,  was  nominally  the  chief  of  another ;  yet  they 
ceased  to  be  considered  as  the  principal  personages  in 
the  state.  Pitt  and  Fox  attracting  far  more  attention, 
were  regarded  by  the  nation  at  large,  no  less  than  by 
Parliament,  as  rival  Candidates  for  the  future  govern- 
ment of  the  country. 

10th  July.]  Lord  Shelburne,  when  attacked  in  the 
House  of  Peers,  respecting  the  pensions  granted  to  his 
two  friends,  particularly  on  that  given  to  Barre,  which 
excited  the  greatest  comment ;  endeavoured  to  shift  the 
origin,  and  consequently  the  odium  of  having  conferred 
the  latter,  on  Lord  Rockingham.  In  this  attempt 
he  proved,  however,  eminently  unfortunate,  as  his 

481  31 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [i782. 

assertions  on  the  subject,  produced  in  both  Houses  of 
Parliament,  the  most  unqualified  contradictions  from 
the  connexions  or  adherents  of  the  deceased  Marquis. 
However  painful  or  humiliating  such  affronts  must  have 
been,  which  impeached  his  personal  veracity,  equally  as 
a  man,  and  as  a  Minister,  he  nevertheless  submitted  to 
them,  without  making  any  further  effort  to  justify  him- 
self in  the  opinion  of  the  public ;  and  the  circumstances 
that  attended  the  Prorogation  of  Parliament,  seemed  to 
indicate  his  impatience  under  the  deliberations  of  that 
Assembly,  as  well  as  his  apprehensions  of  the  impression 
made  on  many  individuals,  by  Fox's  accusations.  Lord 
Shelburne's  courage,  which  was  unquestionable,  had 
been  proved  in  the  duel  that  he  fought  with  Colonel 
Fullerton.  It  appeared  therefore  impossible  to  suppose 
that  he  would  have  tamely  endured  such  imputations  on 
his  private  character,  if  he  had  possessed  the  means  of 
effectually  repelling  them.  Even  on  the  subject  of 
granting  American  Independence,  there  was  so  much 
ambiguity,  if  not  tergiversation  and  contradiction  in  all 
his  Parliamentary  speeches,  as  greatly  tended  to  per- 
suade mankind,  that  Fox's  allegations  respecting  Lord 
Shelburne's  disinclination  to  concede  the  point,  must 
have  had  a  foundation  in  truth.  The  very  principle  on 
which  he  avowed,  when  addressing  the  House  of  Peers, 
that  he  retained  his  place  in  the  councils  of  the  Crown, 
seemed  incompatible  with  strict  regard  to  political 
rectitude.  For  he  declared  in  the  plainest  language, 
that  he  was  not  only  adverse  in  his  own  judgment,  to 
acknowledging  the  independence  of  the  thirteen 
Colonies ;  but  that  whenever  such  a  recognition  should 
be  extorted  from  this  country,  "The  sun  of  British 
"  glory  was  for  ever  set."  Yet  in  the  same  moment  he 
admitted,  that  as  the  majority  of  the  Rockingham 
Cabinet  were  of  an  opposite  opinion,  he  acquiesced  in 
the  measure  ;  which  measure,  though  destructive,  as  he 
conceived,  to  Great  Britain,  he  was  now  ready,  in  his 

482 


1782.]  LORD  SHELBURNE  CARICATURED 

new  capacity,  if  parliament  approved  it,  to  carry  into 
execution. 

No  imputation,  affixed  on  Lord  North,  had  operated 
with  more  force  in  his  disfavor,  on  the  minds  of  the 
public,  than  the  assertion  of  his  enemies,  that  he 
prosecuted  the  American  war  in  opposition  to  his  own 
conviction,  from  a  love  of  place,  or  from  unworthy 
subservience  to  the  Royal  will.  But,  to  a  similar 
charge,  the  new  First  Minister  appeared  voluntarily 
to  subject  himself.  Lee,  who  had  filled  the  office  of 
Solicitor  General  under  the  late  Administration,  but 
who  had  quitted  his  employment  at  the  same  time  with 
the  other  adherents  of  the  Marquis  of  Rockingham ;  a 
man  of  strong  parts,  though  of  coarse  manners ;  and 
who  never  hesitated  to  express  in  the  coarsest  language, 
whatever  he  thought ;  carried  his  indecorous  abuse  of 
the  new  First  Lord  of  the  Treasury,  to  even  greater 
lengths  than  any  other  individual  of  the  party  dismissed 
from  power.  He  described  Lord  Shelburne  as  deficient 
in  probity,  integrity,  and  every  estimable  quality  that 
ought  to  be  found  in  a  First  Minister  of  Great  Britain  ; 
though  he  admitted  that  Nobleman's  external  talents, 
comprehensive  information,  and  specious  accomplish- 
ments. The  House  of  Commons  formed  the  scene  of 
this  extraordinary  invective,  levelled  not  so  much 
against  the  public  conduct  or  measures,  as  against  the 
moral  character  of  a  person  placed  in  the  highest  office 
of  State.  As  if  to  complete  their  attacks,  the  daily 
Newspapers  accused  him  of  having  undermined  Lord 
Rockingham  in  the  Royal  esteem,  by  the  most  un- 
worthy arts,  in  order  to  get  possession  of  his  Office : 
while  the  political  Caricatures,  exhibited  in  the  shops  of 
the  Metropolis,  represented  Lord  Shelburne  habited  as 
Guy  Faux  ;  so  notorious  for  the  part  that  was  assigned 
him  in  the  "  Gunpowder  Plot,"  under  James  the  First ; 
holding  a  dark  lanthorn  in  his  hand,  advancing  under 
cover  of  the  night,  to  blow  up  the  Treasury. 

483 


WRAXALI/S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [1782. 

llth  July.]  Amidst  these  inauspicious  and  painful 
symptoms  of  public  opinion,  commenced  that  Noble- 
man's Administration.  Even  to  the  last  moment  that 
the  House  of  Commons  remained  sitting,  Burke,  among 
the  querulous  lamentations  that  he  uttered,  on  being  so 
suddenly  ejected  from  his  Office  of  Paymaster  of  the 
Forces;  a  misfortune  which  seemed  deeply  to  affect 
him ;  mingled  the  loudest  exclamations  against  the 
falsity  and  defect  of  Principle  in  the  First  Minister. 
His  Philippic  was  cut  short  in  the  middle,  by  the 
arrival  of  Sir  Francis  Molineux,  as  Usher  of  the  Black 
Rod,  sent  to  summon  the  attendance  of  the  Members, 
at  the  Bar  of  the  House  of  Lords;  where  the  King, 
already  seated  on  the  throne,  was  ready  to  prorogue  the 
Parliament.  A  singular  fact,  arising  out  of  the  late 
Reforms,  accompanied  this  ceremony.  Among  the 
Retrenchments  of  the  Royal  household  and  dignity, 
which  Burke's  Bill  had  made,  was  included,  as  has  been 
already  observed,  the  suppression  of  the  Jewel  Office ; 
the  business  of  which  was  principally  conducted  by  Mr. 
William  Egerton,  a  relation  of  the  Duke  of  Bridge- 
water,  and  a  Member  of  the  House  of  Commons.  The 
Bill  having  so  recently  passed  into  a  law,  no  new  official 
Regulation  had  been  adopted,  for  the  removal  or 
transportation  of  the  Paraphernalia  of  the  Crown.  On 
the  occasion  of  His  Majesty  going  to  Westminster,  to 
prorogue  the  two  Houses,  it  became  indispensable  to 
convey  thither  the  Crown  and  Sceptre,  together  with 
various  other  articles  of  State.  The  Master  of  the  Jewel 
Office  being  suppressed,  in  whose  Department  these 
dispositions  previously  lay;  application  was  made  to 
the  Lord  Steward,  and  to  the  Lord  Chamberlain, 
praying  that  Orders  might  be  issued  to  the  Keeper  of 
the  Jewels  in  the  Tower,  for  bringing  them  to  West- 
minster on  the  day  of  the  Prorogation.  But,  these 
great  Officers  of  State,  not  conceiving  themselves  to 
possess  a  power  of  interference,  directions  were  at 

484 


1782.]        CROWN  JEWELS  IN  BANGER 

length  dispatched  for  the  purpose,  from  the  Home 
Secretary  of  State's  Office.  After  some  consultation 
held,  relative  to  the  safest  mode  of  conveying  these 
Royal  ornaments;  none  of  the  King's  carriages  being 
sent  to  receive  them,  application  was  next  made  to  the 
Magistrates  at  Bow-Street,  who  detached  four  or  five 
stout  Agents  of  the  Police,  for  their  protection.  Two 
Hackney  Coaches  being  provided,  in  which  the  various 
articles  were  placed;  with  a  view  to  render  the  trans- 
portation of  them  more  private,  the  Procession  set  out 
circuitously  from  the  Tower,  by  the  New  Road ;  enter- 
ing London  again  at  Portland-Street,  and  so  proceeded 
down  to  Westminster.  The  blinds  were  kept  up  the 
whole  way;  and  after  the  Prorogation,  they  returned 
by  the  same  Road,  without  experiencing  any  accident. 
But,  it  is  unquestionable,  that  eight  or  ten  desperate 
fellows,  had  they  been  apprized  of  the  circumstance, 
might  have  easily  overpowered  the  persons  employed, 
and  have  carried  off  the  Jewels.  The  memorable  enter- 
prize  of  Colonel  Blood,  under  Charles  the  Second,  who 
got  possession  of  the  Crown  and  Sceptre,  though  he 
ultimately  failed,  was  in  fact  a  far  more  hazardous 
undertaking,  as  he  actually  entered  the  Tower  ;  where- 
as in  the  present  instance,  the  Attempt  might  have 
been  made  in  the  Street,  or  in  the  New  Road.  Any 
accident  of  the  kind  would  necessarily  have  thrown 
some  degree  of  ridicule,  as  well  as  of  blame,  on  a 
system  of  economy,  productive  of  such  consequences  in 
its  outset. 

Among  the  interesting  features  of  the  Session  of 
Parliament  before  us,  which,  on  account  of  a  degree 
of  mystery  or  ambiguity  accompanying  them,  greatly 
exercised  public  curiosity ;  may  be  reckoned  the  Pro- 
ceedings commenced  against  Sir  Thomas  Rumbold.  I 
say  commenced,  because  they  never  were  prosecuted  to 
any  consummation.  This  Gentleman  returned,  as  has 
been  already  mentioned,  from  Madras,  early  in  1781, 

485 


WRAXALI/S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [1782. 

under  Imputations  the  most  injurious  to  his  fame. 
He  was  accused  of  having,  while  Governor  of  that 
important  Settlement,  not  only  amassed  by  every  un- 
becoming means,  an  immense  fortune ;  but,  of  first 
provoking  a  war  with  Hyder  Ally,  by  acts  of  imprudent 
agression,  and  then  of  abandoning  the  country  en- 
trusted to  his  care,  with  pusillanimous  or  interested 
precipitation.  These  charges,  which  were  solemnly 
brought  against  him  by  Mr.  Dundas,  Lord  Advocate 
of  Scotland,  as  Chairman  of  the  Secret  Committee 
appointed  by  the  House  of  Commons,  to  enquire 
into  the  causes  of  the  War  in  the  Carnatic,  produced  a 
deep  impression  on  the  public  mind.  We  have  already 
seen  the  steps  which  were  immediately  adopted  by  the 
Legislature,  to  tie  up  and  impound  Sir  Thomas's  person, 
as  well  as  his  fortune.  But,  in  addition  to  these  pre- 
cautions, a  Bill  for  inflicting  on  him  pains  and  penalties, 
as  a  man  who  had  been  guilty  of  high  crimes  and  mis- 
demeanors, was  introduced  by  Mr.  Dundas  himself. 

Such  a  measure,  which  excited  general  approbation, 
appeared  to  be  worthy  the  national  justice,  exerted  in 
punishing  a  great  public  culprit.  The  line  of  policy 
pursued  by  Hastings,  when  Governor-General  of  Ben- 
gal, might  possibly  have  led  to  many  misfortunes,  and 
might,  perhaps,  merit  condemnation.  But  his  motives 
were  admitted,  even  by  his  enemies,  to  have  been 
splendid  and  elevated,  however  pernicious,  as  they 
asserted,  in  their  operation  or  consequences.  The  mal- 
administration of  Rumbold,  on  the  contrary,  seemed 
only  directed  to  sordid  and  selfish  purposes.  Every 
party,  it  was  therefore  hoped,  would  concur  in  carry- 
ing through  such  a  Bill ;  and  though  Mr.  Dundas, 
after  the  termination  of  Lord  North's  Ministry, 
no  longer  acted  in  an  official  situation,  yet,  in  his 
capacity  of  Chairman  of  "the  Secret  Committee,'" 
he  spoke  from  a  great  eminence,  and  might  expect 
universal  support.  Least  of  all,  it  was  supposed,  could 

486 


1782.]  PROGRESS  ARRESTED 

the  Rockingham  party,  who  had  just  come  into  power, 
who  professed  to  call  to  a  severe  account,  all  such  as 
had  plundered  or  injured  the  Country,  and  who  loudly 
demanded  an  Enquiry  into  East-India  delinquencies, 
attempt  to  throw  obstacles  in  the  path  of  justice. 
Under  these  circumstances,  all  men  expected,  and  most 
men  hoped,  that  the  Bill  in  question  would  have  speedily 
found  its  way  through  the  House  of  Commons,  and 
have  finally  passed  into  a  law.  The  fact,  nevertheless, 
turned  out  completely  otherwise.  Meanwhile  the  Session 
advanced:  a  full  attendance,  as  Mr.  Dundas  asserted 
and  complained,  could  not  be  procured:  and  whether 
from  the  operation  of  that  Cause,  or  from  any  other 
Reason  more  concealed,  no  progress  was  made  in  the 
business.  Sir  Thomas  RumbokTs  person  and  property 
remained,  it  is  true,  sequestered  or  restrained;  but, 
beyond  that  temporary  interposition,  no  permanent 
punishment  was  inflicted  on  him. 

Men  who  had  anticipated  much  more  vigorous  and 
speedy,  as  well  as  decisive  proceedings,  and  who  beheld 
the  supposed  criminal  thus  elude  or  escape,  as  it  were, 
the  grasp  of  national  pursuit ;  reasoned  and  commented 
on  the  Fact.  Malignity  or  Credulity  invented  reasons 
for  whatever  appeared  inexplicable  throughout  the 
Transaction.  Secret  springs  were  asserted  to  have  been 
touched,  which  had  arrested  or  paralyzed  the  exertions 
of  the  Prosecutor.  Time,  place,  and  circumstances, 
were  even  particularized ;  all  which,  though  perhaps 
untrue  or  imaginary,  seemed  nevertheless,  not  only  in 
themselves,  possible,  but,  so  well  fabricated,  and  so 
minutely  detailed,  as  to  appear  highly  probable.  I 
shall,  however,  relate  only  such  Facts  as  are  unquestion- 
ably authentic. 

Rumbold,  though  a  man  of  low  extraction,  and  of 
a  mean  education,  did  not  by  any  means  want  activity, 
judgment,  or  talents.  I  knew  him  well.  In  his  person 
he  was  well  made  and  handsome ;  but  his  features, 

487 


W&AXALKS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [i782. 

though  regular  and  manly,  contained  nothing  in  them 
prepossessing.  His  successful  exertions,  while  Governor 
of  Madras,  in  reducing  Pondicherry,  had  elevated  him 
to  the  dignity  of  a  Baronet.  On  his  arrival  in  England, 
aware  of  the  storm  that  impended  over  him,  he  immedi- 
ately contrived  to  get  into  Parliament ;  by  which  means 
he  came  into  daily  collision  and  communication  with 
those,  who  might  either  injure,  or  could  defend  him. 
That  he  was  not  idle,  is  certain  ;  and  he  attempted  in  his 
place,  as  a  Member  of  the  House,  to  justify  himself 
from  the  charges  exhibited  against  him,  with  some 
ability.  In  addition,  however,  to  these  efforts,  he  soon 
found  means  to  conciliate  a  Friend,  who  was  supposed  to 
have  laboured  efficaciously  towards  his  extrication. 

That  Friend,  who  was  Mr.  Rigby,  the  late  Paymaster 
of  the  Forces,  having  enjoyed  during  a  great  number 
of  years,  one  of  the  most  profitable  places  under  the 
Crown,  without  any  Colleague,  had  acquired  a  large 
fortune.  But,  his  luxurious  and  expensive  manner 
of  living  in  town;  his  magnificent  Seat  at  Mistley 
Hall  in  Essex,  where  he  maintained  a  splendid  establish- 
ment of  every  kind;  when  added  to  his  purchases  of 
landed  property,  had  exhausted  even  means  so  vast,  and 
left  him,  as  it  were,  necessitous  in  the  midst  of  wealth. 
In  this  situation  of  his  affairs,  the  sudden  termination 
of  Lord  Norths  Administration,  not  only  deprived 
him  of  his  Employment;  but,  in  consequence  of  the 
system  of  reform  adopted  by  the  new  Ministers,  and 
in  particular  from  the  Regulations  introduced  by 
Burke,  his  successor  in  the  Pay-office,  which  compelled 
him  to  pay  into  the  Exchequer,  the  immense  Balances 
of  public  money  remaining  in  his  hands  ;  Rigby  became 
involved  in  great  pecuniary  embarrassments.  These 
Balances  having  been  vested  by  him  in  Mortgages,  or 
in  other  securities  ;  and  the  public  Funds  suffering  then 
under  great  depression,  it  could  not  be  in  fact  an  easy 
matter,  to  find  the  means  of  answering  promptly  the 

488 


1782.]  PUBLIC  SUSPICIONS 

Demands  made  upon  him  by  Government,  for  repay- 
ment. 

Rumbold  had  brought  with  him  from  the  East,  as 
Verres  did  from  Sicily,  very  ample  Resources,  which  he 
well  knew  how  to  use,  in  time  of  need,  for  his  own 
protection  ;  and  Rigby's  situation,  which  was  generally 
understood,  might  render  a  loan  of  money  peculiarly 
convenient.  That  gentleman  having  no  children,  his 
sister's  son  was  destined  to  inherit  his  name  and  pro- 
perty. Rumbold  had  a  daughter,  whose  age  and  accom- 
plishments qualified  her  to  be  united  to  him  in  marriage. 
The  alliance  being  agreed  on,  it  was  supposed  that  by 
the  Secret  Articles,  the  Governor  advanced  to  his 
Friend,  such  a  sum  as  greatly  facilitated  those  payments 
of  the  public  money,  which  he  was  necessitated  to 
furnish  without  delay.  After  entering  into  so  close 
a  connection,  cemented  by  such  binding  ties,  it  might 
be  esteemed  natural,  and  even  venial,  that  Rigby  should 
lend  his  reciprocal  aid  to  Sir  Thomas  Rumbold.  Though 
no  longer  Paymaster  of  the  Forces,  Rigby  still  possessed 
great  capacities  of  being  useful ;  and  he  was  not  supposed 
to  lie  under  the  dominion  of  any  fastidious  scruples. 
Above  all,  his  intimate  friendship  with  Mr.  Dundas, 
who  took  the  lead  in  the  Parliamentary  Prosecution 
instituted  against  Rumbold,  might  enable  Rigby  to 
find  means  and  opportunities  of  diminishing  those 
Prejudices,  or  softening  those  Impressions,  that  operated 
most  injuriously  against  the  accused  person.  No  proof 
has  been,  indeed,  ever  produced,  that  improper  means 
were  used  to  effect  this  object ;  but  the  public  being 
in  possession  of  certain  facts,  and  observing  that  the 
proceedings  so  vigorously  begun  in  Parliament  against 
Rumbold,  seemed  unaccountably  to  languish  and  expire, 
instead  of  being  propelled ;  necessarily  inferred,  that 
there  must  exist  some  latent  cause,  which  had  blunted 
the  edge  of  the  weapon.  Rumbold,  it  is  certain,  finally 
extricated  himself;  though  whether  the  ostensible 

489 


WRAXALI/S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [1782. 

reasons  assigned  for  the  fact,  formed  the  only  circum- 
stances that  conduced  to  his  escape ;  or  whether  more 
efficacious  and  cogent  arguments  of  any  kind  were 
used,  must  always  remain  matter  of  conjecture  and 
assertion,  like  many  other  obscure  points  of  biographical 
history. 

The  Session  being  now  terminated,  Lord  Shelburne 
might  be  regarded  as  secure  in  the  possession  of  his 
newly  acquired  power,  at  least  for  several  Months. 
During  that  interval,  means,  it  was  naturally  imagined, 
could  easily  be  discovered,  of  cementing  and  confirming 
the  Ministry.  Negotiations  for  peace  were  already 
begun  with  America,  which,  if  successful,  it  was 
probable,  must  eventually  lead  to  a  treaty  with  our 
European  enemies.  The  talents  of  the  first  Lord  of 
the  Treasury,  were  considered  as  eminently  adapted  to 
diplomatic  discussions ;  in  the  conduct  of  which,  his 
knowledge  of  the  foreign  interests  of  Great  Britain,  and 
his  acquaintance  with  the  Continental  Courts,  enabled 
him,  it  was  said,  to  act  at  once  with  vigor  and  perspicuity. 
If  he  had  lost  the  abilities  of  Fox  and  Burke  in  the 
House  of  Commons,  he  had  on  the  other  hand  secured 
and  attached  to  him  two  men  no  less  able,  Pitt,  and 
Dundas.  He  moreover  possessed  the  confidence  of  the 
Sovereign,  who,  as  all  men  supposed,  would,  from 
necessity,  if  not  from  inclination,  support  a  Minister 
preferred  by  himself  to  his  present  Office.  Lord  North 
might  even,  it  was  hoped,  feel  a  far  stronger  disposition 
to  join  the  actual  Administration,  whenever  Parliament 
should  meet  again,  than  to  unite  with  the  Rockingham 
Party,  his  inveterate  enemies.  Under  this  aspect  of 
public  affairs,  though  Lord  Shelburne  neither  stood 
high  in  the  national  opinion,  as  a  man  of  severe 
integrity  and  probity,  like  his  deceased  predecessor, 
the  Marquis  of  Rockingham ;  nor  could  command  that 
Parliamentary  strength,  which  Lord  North  still  in  some 
measure  influenced  or  led ;  yet  many  persons  considered 

490 


1782.]  NAVAL  SUCCESSES 

his   tenure   of  Office   as  by  no  means   precarious,  and 
augured  well  of  its  duration. 

Burke^s  invectives  against  the  first  Minister,  which 
continued  to  the  last  instant  that  the  forms  of  Parlia- 
ment permitted,  were  nevertheless  suspended  while  the 
Prorogation  put  an  end  to  the  business  of  the  House 
of  Commons.  However  violent  he  might  be  in  his 
place,  Burke  never  carried  his  complaints  to  the  people. 
But,  Fox,  who  acted  no  less  as  a  Demagogue,  than  as 
the  Representative  of  Westminster;  and  who  always 
seemed  to  take  the  Gracchi  for  his  model ;  anxious  to 
appeal  from  his  late  dismission  by  the  King,  to  the 
popular  Suffrage,  convoked  his  Constituents,  in  order 
to  lay  before  them  the  reasons  for  his  resignation. 
They  met,  almost  immediately  after  the  Session  closed, 
in  Westminster  Hall,  where  he  reiterated  all  the  heads 
of  accusation  against  Lord  Shelburne,  which  he  had 
already  detailed  a  few  days  before,  in  the  House  of 
Commons :  but,  the  general  impression,  even  among 
that  audience,  which  heard  him  with  partiality,  seemed 
nevertheless  to  be,  that  personal  ambition  and  rivality, 
more  than  real  principle  or  patriotism,  had  regulated 
his  conduct.  The  specious  pretence  under  which  the 
Meeting  was  assembled,  namely,  that  of  petitioning  the 
Crown  for  a  more  equal  Representation  of  the  People, 
produced,  however,  an  unanimous  assent.  He  then  dis- 
missed them  till  the  ensuing  Winter. 

August.]  Sir  Samuel  Hood,  whom  the  victorious 
Admiral  in  the  West-Indies,  detached  a  few  days  after 
the  defeat  of  De  Grasse,  with  several  vessels,  in  pursuit 
of  the  flying  enemy ;  having  come  up  with  some  of 
them,  captured  two  more  French  line  of  battle  ships,  as 
well  as  two  Frigates,  off  the  east  end  of  the  Island  of 
St.  Domingo.  Though  these  eminent  naval  advantages 
secured  Jamaica  from  invasion  or  attack,  yet,  far  from 
regaining  any  of  our  insular  possessions  in  that  quarter 
of  the  Globe,  on  the  contrary,  such  was  our  state  of 

491 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [1782. 

exhausture,  that  Spain  fitted  out  an  expedition  against 
the  Bahama  Islands,  which  she  easily  reduced  to  her 
obedience.  But,  the  attention  of  the  Capital  and  the 
nation  became  more  powerfully,  as  well  as  painfully 
attracted,  by  the  Catastrophe  of  the  "  Royal  George," 
which  took  place  about  the  same  time,  than  by  the 
loss  of  any  Trans- Atlantic  Settlements.  This  ship,  the 
pride  and  ornament  of  the  British  Navy,  to  the  dis- 
grace of  a  nation  considered  as  superior  to  every  other 
people  in  nautical  skill,  disappeared  in  an  instant  on 
the  29th  of  August,  as  is  well  known,  in  the  midst  of 
Portsmouth  Harbour ;  carrying  with  her  to  the  bottom, 
an  English  Admiral ;  and  as  it  was  computed,  near  a 
thousand  persons  of  both  sexes.  It  is  impossible,  even 
at  this  distance  of  time,  to  reflect  on  such  an  event, 
without  amazement  as  well  as  horror.  The  gloom  and 
consternation,  diffused  by  the  intelligence  over  the 
Metropolis,  are  hardly  to  be  conceived;  and  the  in- 
credibility of  the  fact,  encreased  the  sense  of  the 
disaster.  No  parallel  circumstance  is  to  be  found  in 
our  naval  Annals :  probably,  not  in  those  of  any  other 
European  nation.  In  a  superstitious  Age,  it  would, 
no  doubt,  have  been  considered  as  ominous  of  the 
greatest  national,  or  royal  misfortunes.  That  tempests, 
fire,  or  rocks  and  quicksands,  should  swallow  up  and 
destroy  the  proudest  works  of  human  art,  is  natural ; 
often,  unavoidable.  When  Sir  Cloudesley  Shovel,  under 
the  reign  of  Queen  Anne,  perished  together  with  his 
ship  and  all  his  Crew,  wrecked  on  the  Scilly  Islands ;  or 
when  the  "  Victory,"  under  George  the  Second,  foundered 
in  the  Race  of  Alderney,  with  Admiral  Balchen,  and 
eleven  hundred  persons  on  board : — such  calamities 
were  in  the  order  of  things,  however  much  to  be 
deplored.  But,  in  the  present  instance,  only  an  utter 
disregard  to  common  prudential  precautions,  could 
have  produced  an  event  so  unprecedented.  Her  very 
name,  and  her  superiority  in  size,  as  well  as  in  strength, 

492 


1782.1    LOSS  OF  THE  "ROYAL  GEORGE'1 

to  every  other  ship  in  the  service,  she  carrying  a  hundred 
guns  ;  added  to  the  bitterness  of  the  reflexions  which 
her  loss  occasioned  throughout  the  kingdom.  Those 
who  recollect  that  the  "Queen  Charlotte,1'  a  man  of 
war  of  the  first  rate,  carrying  one  hundred  and  ten 
guns,  with  an  Admiral's  flag,  was  consumed  by  somewhat 
similar  negligence,  together  with  near  seven  hundred  of 
her  Crew,  on  the  17th  of  March,  1800,  near  the  Port 
of  Leghorn ;  may  find  ample  reason  for  speculation  on 
the  singularity  of  two  such  disastrous  events  having 
taken  place  under  the  same  reign. 

September.]  The  melancholy  impression  made  by 
the  Catastrophe  just  related,  became,  if  possible,  still 
more  strongly  excited  immediately  afterwards,  by  other 
naval  misfortunes  equally  afflicting  in  their  nature.  If 
the  fact  of  the  "  Royal  George "  going  down  at  her 
anchors,  when  no  danger  was  even  apprehended,  stands 
without  precedent  in  our  maritime  records ;  the  fatality 
which  seemed  to  pursue  the  ships  of  the  line  that  had 
been  captured  by  Rodney  on  the  12th  of  April,  as  well 
as  most  of  our  own  men  of  war,  accompanying  the 
French  prizes,  on  their  return  from  the  West  Indies, 
can  scarcely  be  equalled  in  modern  History.  The  chain 
of  shipwrecks  and  adverse  events,  that  attended 
Commodore  Anson's  expedition  round  Cape  Horn,  in 
1744,  which  so  greatly  reduced  the  numbers  of  his 
Squadron ;  even  the  disasters,  so  pathetically  related 
in  the  same  work,  that  ruined  the  fleet  of  the  Spanish 
Admiral  Pizarro,  nearly  in  the  same  Latitudes,  and  at 
the  same  time  ; — those  calamities,  however  extraordinary 
and  tragical,  they  appear,  yet  sink  on  a  comparison  with 
the  destruction  experienced  by  our  devoted  ships,  in 
1782,  when  crossing  the  Atlantic.  Captain  Inglefield 
has  commemorated  the  fate  of  the  "  Centaur,"  as  well  as 
his  own  astonishing  escape,  when  she  foundered  with 
her  officers  and  Crew.  That  affecting  narrative  may 
serve  as  too  faithful  a  picture  of  the  misfortunes  ex- 

493 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [1782. 

perienced  by  the  other  vessels.  The  "  Ramillies,"  a 
name  proverbially  unfortunate  in  the  English  Navy, 
was  set  on  fire,  when  it  became  impossible  any  longer 
either  to  navigate,  or  to  preserve  her.  One  of  the 
French  ships  of  the  line,  the  "  Hector,"  seemed  to  be 
reserved  for  more  severe  trials  of  every  kind ;  in  the 
course  of  which,  all  that  human  fortitude,  skill,  and 
courage,  when  combined,  could  effect,  was  performed  by 
our  officers  and  seamen.  They  were  almost  miraculously 
saved,  though  the  "  Hector  "  herself  perished. 

Over  the  closing  scene  of  the  "  Ville  de  Paris,'1  as 
well  as  over  the  fate  of  the  "  Glorieux,"  an  impenetrable 
curtain  is  drawn.  It  is  certain  that  the  second,  a 
French  seventy -four  gun  ship,  commanded  by  the 
Honourable  Captain  Cadogan,  disappeared  during  the 
middle  Watch,  on  the  night  of  the  17th  or  18th  of 
September,  after  firing  many  signals  of  distress.  Her 
lights  had  been  visible  till  that  time;  but,  when  day 
appeared,  no  vestiges  of  her  were  discovered,  and  she 
doubtless  foundered  during  the  storm.  Nor  was  De 
Grasse's  ship,  originally  purchased  with  so  vast  an 
effusion  of  blood,  and  herself  the  pride  of  the  French 
navy,  ever  destined  to  reach  an  English  port.  The 
hasty  repairs  given  her  at  Jamaica,  could  only  be  slight 
or  partial ;  and  it  was  confidently  asserted,  that  during 
the  gale  of  wind  which  proved  so  fatal,  her  guns 
breaking  loose,  tore  open  her  side,  and  accelerated,  if 
they  did  not  cause,  her  final  destruction.  Tidings  of 
her  were  long  expected,  and  the  nation  continued  to 
nourish  hopes  for  many  months,  of  her  re-appearance. 
About  this  time,  while  her  fate  still  remained  proble- 
matical, a  man  was  brought  to  the  Admiralty,  and 
there  examined,  who  had  been  taken  up  at  sea,  nearly 
senseless  and  extenuated ;  tied  to,  or  floating  on  a  hen 
coop.  He  asserted,  and  his  testimony  appeared  to  be 
entitled  to  credit ;  that  he  served  on  board  the  "  Ville 
de  Paris,"  as  a  common  sailor,  at  the  moment  when  she 

494 


1782.]  SIEGE  OF  GIBRALTAR 

foundered.  But  few,  or  no  particulars,  relative  to  the 
event  itself,  could  be  extracted  from  this  survivor,  who, 
as  I  was  assured  by  a  Flag  Officer  that  questioned  him, 
possessed  neither  faculties  nor  memory  to  recount 
almost  any  thing,  except  the  fact  of  her  loss.  Admiral 
Graves,  who  commanded  the  fleet,  was  censured  by  the 
popular  voice,  for  having  stood  some  Degrees  more  to 
the  Northward,  in  returning  home  across  the  Atlantic, 
at  that  season,  than  he  needed  to  have  done ;  or  than 
he  was  warranted  in  doing,  by  Lord  Rodney's  orders. 
But,  this  accusation  may  possibly  have  been  more 
severe  than  just ;  though  I  think  I  have  heard  Lord 
Rodney  himself  state  the  circumstance,  and  express  his 
conviction  of  the  injurious  consequences  that  resulted 
from  navigating  in  too  high  a  Latitude,  during  a  time 
of  Equinoxial  gales. 

Happily,  the  gloom  which  these  melancholy  events 
diffused,  was  speedily  relieved  and  dissipated,  by  scenes 
of  the  most  exhilarating  nature.  Minorca,  it  is  true, 
had  surrendered  early  in  the  Summer;  but  Gibraltar, 
which  still  resisted,  attracted,  no  less  from  the  pro- 
digious means  employed  for  its  reduction  by  the  enemy, 
than  from  the  energy  and  activity  exerted  in  its  defence, 
the  attention  of  all  Europe.  The  two  most  memorable 
sieges  which  are  recorded  in  modern  history ;  namely, 
that  of  Antwerp,  undertaken  by  Alexander  Farnese, 
Prince  of  Parma,  in  the  sixteenth  Century;  and  that 
of  Ostend,  begun  by  Spinola,  only  a  few  years  later; 
however  illustrious  they  have  been  rendered  from  the 
long  protracted  resistance  made  by  the  besieged,  were 
both  finally  crowned  with  success.  Gibraltar,  on  the 
contrary,  repelled  the  assailants  in  the  most  brilliant 
manner.  All  the  means  that  human  art,  expence,  and 
force,  could  collect  or  combine,  by  land,  as  well  as  by 
sea,  were  accumulated  under  its  walls ;  and  the  two 
Branches  of  the  House  of  Bourbon,  unconscious  of  the 
lamentable  destiny  preparing  for  themselves  in  the 

495 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [1782. 

womb  of  time,  seemed  to  vie  in  their  efforts  to  accele- 
rate its  fall.  Charles  the  Third,  who  then  reigned  in 
Spain,  already  anticipated  the  completion  of  an  event, 
which,  as  he  justly  conceived,  would  render  his  name 
and  reign  immortal  in  the  Spanish  Annals.  Under  the 
same  fallacious  expectation,  Louis  the  Sixteenth  dis- 
patched his  youngest  brother,  Count  d'Artois,  to  assist 
at  its  surrender ;  while  the  Barbary  Powers,  though  by 
no  means  indifferent,  or  uninterested  spectators  of  this 
great  contest,  and  though  they  are  said  to  have  put  up 
prayers  in  all  their  Mosques  for  our  success,  yet  quietly 
expected  the  result. 

If  Lord  Rodney  acquired  so  much  personal  glory  by 
his  victory  over  De  Grasse,  General  Elliot  did  not 
establish  a  less  brilliant  reputation,  by  his  repulse  and 
defeat  of  the  Spanish  floating  batteries,  on  the  13th 
of  September,  of  the  same  year.  The  American  war, 
which  at  Saratoga,  and  at  York  Town,  displayed 
spectacles  so  humiliating  to  the  British  arms,  terminated 
with  the  most  splendid  triumphs  over  our  European 
enemies ;  and  this  portion  of  the  reign  of  George  the 
Third,  (like  the  second  Punic  war  in  Antiquity,) 
exhibits,  between  1777  and  1782,  the  greatest  reverses 
of  adverse,  and  of  prosperous  fortune.  While  we  lost 
so  vast  an  empire  beyond  the  Atlantic,  we  humbled 
with  one  hand,  the  French  naval  force  in  the  West 
Indies;  annihilating  with  the  other,  the  combined 
efforts  of  France  and  Spain,  which  were  concentered  for 
the  subjugation  of  a  distant  Garrison,  apparently  left 
to  its  own  capacities  of  defence,  and  cut  off  from  the 
obvious  means  of  relief.  But,  even  after  the  destruc- 
tion of  the  Spanish  vessels  and  batteries,  it  seemed  still 
impossible  to  throw  into  Gibraltar  timely  supplies  of 
ammunition,  competent  to  recruit  the  expenditure  that 
had  taken  place  during  the  siege.  Provisions,  fuel, 
cloathing,  as  well  as  many  other  essential  or  indispens- 
able articles,  could  only  be  sent  out  from  England. 

496 


1782.]      LORD  HOWFS  NAVAL  TACTICS 

Near  fifty  French  and  Spanish  ships  of  the  line, 
which  occupied  the  Bay  of  Gibraltar,  appeared  to  set  at 
defiance  all  approach.  Notwithstanding  these  apparently 
insuperable  obstacles,  the  attempt  succeeded  in  opposi- 
tion to  every  impediment. 

October.]  So  low  had  sunk  the  numerical  naval  force 
of  Great  Britain  at  this  period,  as  compared  with  the 
strength  of  the  enemy,  that  the  utmost  exertions  of  the 
Admiralty,  under  the  new  Administration,  could  only 
equip  and  send  to  sea,  thirty-four  sail  of  the  line ;  which 
fleet  did  not  quit  Spithead,  till  nearly  the  day  on  which 
General  Elliot  had  already  repulsed  and  burnt  the 
floating  batteries,  under  the  walls  of  the  besieged  fort- 
ress. Yet  never  was  the  real  superiority  of  our  navy 
in  skill  and  science,  more  evidently  demonstrated,  than 
in  successfully  throwing  succours  into  a  place  invested 
by  sea  and  land,  without  committing  any  thing  to 
hazard,  or  affording  to  adversaries  so  numerous,  the 
slightest  advantage.  Lord  Howe,  who  conducted  and 
commanded  the  whole  enterprize,  manifested  such  a 
combination  of  Tactics  and  ability  in  his  Manoeuvres, 
as  place  his  name  deservedly  high  in  the  Annals  of  his 
country.  If  the  reputation  that  he  attained  on  this 
occasion,  seems  less  brilliant  than  the  fame  acquired  by 
Rodney  in  vanquishing  De  Grasse,  it  was  not  less 
permanent  or  solid.  Without  engaging,  he  defied  the 
combined  fleets ;  offered  battle,  but  did  not  seek  it ; 
effected  every  object  of  the  expedition,  by  relieving 
Gibraltar,  and  then  retreated ;  followed  indeed  by  the 
enemy,  but  not  attacked.  They  made,  it  is  true,  a 
shew  of  fighting,  but  never  ventured  to  come  to  close 
action.  And  with  such  contempt  did  Lord  Howe  treat 
the  Cannonade  commenced  by  the  van,  composed  of 
French  ships  under  La  Motte  Piquet,  that  having 
ordered  all  his  men  on  board  the  "Victory,"  to 
lye  down  flat  on  the  deck,  in  order  that  their  lives 
might  not  be  needlessly  exposed,  he  disdained  to 

497  32 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

return  a  single  shot  against  such  cautious  or  timid 
opponents. 

Pigot,  who  had  succeeded  to  Rodney  in  the  West 
Indies,  in  defiance  of  public  opinion,  by  no  means 
emulated  his  example  of  Activity  and  Enterprize. 
Though  placed  at  the  head  of  six  and  forty  sail  of  the 
line,  he  neither  effected  nor  attempted  any  object, 
during  more  than  six  months  that  he  held  the  command. 
Such  inactivity  seemed  to  reproach  the  Ministry  who 
had  sent  him  thither,  and  excited  severe  animadversions 
on  Fox.  In  the  East  Indies,  and  there  only,  where  Sir 
Edward  Hughes  was  opposed  to  Sufrrein,  France  still 
maintained  the  contest  on  the  water.  That  active  and 
intrepid  officer  last  named,  the  most  able  of  any 
employed  by  Louis  the  Sixteenth  during  the  whole 
progress  of  the  war,  made  repeated  though  ineffectual 
efforts  to  compel  the  English  squadron  to  abandon  the 
coast  of  Coromandel. 

November.]  While  Lord  Howe  thus  placed  in 
security,  the  most  brilliant  foreign  possession  of  the 
Crown  in  Europe ;  negociations  of  a  pacific  nature  were 
carrying  on  at  Paris,  both  with  America,  and  with  the 
other  Coalesced  Powers.  The  articles  concluded  with 
the  revolted  Colonies,  which  were  first  provisionally 
signed,  did  not  indeed  demand  either  any  considerable 
length  of  time,  or  superior  diplomatic  talents,  in  order 
to  conduct  them  to  a  prosperous  termination ;  where 
almost  every  possible  concession  was  made  on  the  part 
of  England,  merely  to  obtain  from  America  a  cessa- 
tion of  hostilities.  Not  only  their  independance  was 
recognized  in  the  most  explicit  terms :  territory,  rivers, 
lakes,  commerce,  islands,  ports  and  fortified  places, 
Indian  Allies,  loyalists;  all  were  given  up  to  the 
Congress.  In  fixing  the  Boundaries  between  Canada 
and  the  United  States,  ideal  limits  were  laid  down 
amidst  unknown  tracts.  Franklyn,  who,  as  one  of  the 
four  American  Commissioners  appointed  to  manage  the 


1782.]  BENJAMIN  FRANKLIN 

treaty,  affixed  his  name  to  the  instrument  of  provisional 
pacification ;  enjoyed  at  the  advanced  period  of  four- 
score years,  the  satisfaction  of  witnessing  the  complete 
emancipation  of  his  countrymen  from  Great  Britain, 
to  effect  which  he  had  so  eminently  contributed  by  his 
talents  and  exertions.  Few  subjects,  born  and  educated, 
like  him  in  the  inferior  classes  of  society,  have,  in  any 
age  of  the  earth,  without  drawing  the  sword  in  person, 
obtained  so  gratifying  a  triumph  over  their  legitimate 
Sovereign,  or  have  aided  to  produce  a  greater  political 
revolution  on  the  face  of  the  Globe. 

December.]  A  first  Minister  who  possessed  so 
slender  a  portion  of  moral  reputation,  of  popularity,  or 
of  influence  over  the  two  Houses  of  Parliament,  as  Lord 
Shelburne ;  would,  it  was  supposed,  have  employed  the 
interval  subsequent  to  the  Prorogation,  in  strengthening 
his  tenure  of  power.  Unless  he  either  regained  the 
Heads  of  the  Rockingham  Party,  or  conciliated  Lord 
North,  which  last  measure  seemed  to  be  more  natural ; 
it  was  obvious  that  he  might,  at  any  moment,  be 
crushed  by  the  union  of  those  leaders.  On  the  opening 
of  the  Session,  it  soon  however  became  evident  that  no 
such  approximation  had  taken  place,  and  that  the 
Administration  relied  for  support  on  its  own  proper 
strength.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  Lord  North  and 
Mr.  Fox,  though  both  acted  in  opposition  to  Govern- 
ment, and  though  both  joined  in  treating  with 
reprobation,  or  with  ridicule,  the  provisional  treaty 
concluded  with  America,  remained  nevertheless  still  in 
complete  and  hostile  separation.  Scarcely  did  they 
refrain,  on  every  occasion  that  presented  itself,  from 
personal  reflections  on  each  other ;  and  when  Fox 
ventured  to  divide  the  House,  on  the  question  of 
addressing  the  King,  to  lay  before  them  some  parts  of 
the  provisional  Articles,  he  was  left  in  a  Minority  of 
only  forty-six ;  while  the  Ministry,  supported  by  Lord 
North,  displayed  an  imposing  Majority  of  two  hun- 

499 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [1782. 

dred  and  nineteen.  Neither  the  peace  made  with  the 
American  States,  nor  even  the  recognition  of  their 
Independance  by  Great  Britain,  being  however  in 
themselves  complete,  till  a  Treaty  should  be  likewise 
concluded  with  France,  attention  became  wholly 
directed  to  the  issue  of  the  pending  negociations  with 
that  Court.  On  their  termination,  whether  it  should 
prove  hostile  or  pacific,  all  men  foresaw  that  the  two 
great  parties,  who  now  stood  at  bay,  without  joining 
each  other,  or  uniting  with  Lord  Shelburne ;  would 
necessarily  take  some  decisive  step,  most  beneficial,  or 
most  injurious  in  its  results,  to  the  Administration. 

Though  Parliament  sat  for  only  a  very  short  period 
during  the  month  of  December,  scarcely  exceeding  a 
fortnight,  previous  to  their  adjournment  till  after 
Christmas ;  yet  one  very  interesting  Debate,  which 
arose  in  the  House  of  Commons,  produced  a  material 
operation  on  some  articles  of  the  peace  then  negotiating 
with  the  House  of  Bourbon.  Rumours  which  acquired 
considerable,  if  not  implicit  credit,  were  circulated 
throughout  the  Metropolis,  stating  that  Lord  Shel- 
burne had  not  only  manifested  a  disposition,  but  had 
even  consented  with  the  approbation  of  the  Cabinet,  to 
cede  Gibraltar  to  Spain,  on  certain  conditions.  They 
were  indeed  of  such  a  nature,  as  in  the  estimation  of 
many  able  men,  would  have  fully  justified  Ministers  in 
restoring  to  the  Catholic  King,  that  expensive  fortress. 
I  have  been  assured  that  Charles  the  Third,  in  his 
eagerness  to  re -annex  Gibraltar  to  the  Spanish 
Monarchy,  offered  in  exchange  for  it,  the  Canary 
Islands,  together  with  Porto  Rico  in  the  West  Indies : 
the  former  of  which  possessions,  from  their  situation  in 
the  Atlantic,  their  Climate,  and  productions,  might  be 
rendered  most  valuable  acquisitions  to  Great  Britain ; 
while  the  latter  Island  must  be  considered  as  scarcely 
inferior  to  Jamaica  in  extent,  fertility,  and  political 
importance.  Gibraltar,  however  dear  to  the  national 

500 


1783.]  A  COVETED  POSSESSION 

vanity,  and  whatever  flattering  recollections  the  late 
glorious  defence  might  awaken,  could  not,  it  was 
imagined,  be  put  in  competition  with  the  Canaries  and 
Porto  Rico.  Sir  George  Howard,  who  was  himself  a 
General  Officer,  having  nevertheless  unexpectedly  pro- 
voked, and  brought  forward  in  the  House  of  Commons, 
a  discussion  relative  to  that  fortress,  and  the  possibility 
that  its  cession  or  alienation  to  Spain,  might  be  in  con- 
templation ;  it  soon  appeared  that  men  of  all  parties 
were  imbued  with  partialities  so  warm  and  violent  in 
its  favor,  and  such  indignation  was  manifested  at  the 
bare  idea  of  ceding  it,  even  for  any  equivalent  however 
valuable,  that  the  intention  was  relinquished.  The 
substance  of  the  Debate  having  been  taken  down  in 
short  hand,  by  a  person  stationed  in  the  Gallery,  and 
immediately  communicated  to  Lord  Shelburne,  he  dis- 
patched a  Messenger  with  it,  the  next  morning,  to  our 
Minister  at  Paris,  Mr.  Fitzherbert,  now  Lord  St. 
Helens ;  enjoining  him  to  lay  it  before  the  Count  de 
Vergennes,  and  the  Count  D'Aranda.  I  know  from 
good  authority,  that  the  latter  Nobleman,  who  was 
then  the  Spanish  Embassador  at  the  Court  of  Versailles, 
had  received  the  most  positive  instructions  not  to  sign 
any  peace  with  Great  Britain,  however  favourable  the 
terms  might  be  in  other  respects,  unless  the  cession  of 
Gibraltar  constituted  one  of  the  articles  of  the  treaty. 
Finding  nevertheless,  after  the  communication  above 
mentioned,  that  no  equivalent  would  be  accepted  for  its 
Restitution  ;  D'Aranda,  in  disobedience  to  these  orders, 
finally  affixed  his  name  to  the  Act,  taking  on  himself 
the  risk  and  the  responsibility. 

January,  1783.]  Throughout  a  considerable  part  of 
the  month  of  January,  the  greatest  fluctuation  of  public 
opinion  prevailed  relative  to  the  final  success  of  the 
Treaties  agitating  at  Paris ;  and  as  late  as  the  18th,  the 
Queen's  Birth-day,  the  prevalent  ideas  in  the  Drawing- 
room,  were  generally  adverse  to  the  probability  of  a 

501 


WRAXALI/S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [irss. 

favorable  issue  :  but,  five  days  afterwards,  intelligence 
arrived  of  Peace  having  been  signed  at  Versailles. 
Lord  Keppel,  either  repenting  of  his  conduct  in  having 
quitted  Fox  after  the  Marquis  of  Rockingham's  decease ; 
or  suspicious  of  the  approaching  Dissolution  of  the 
actual  Ministry ;  or,  as  he  asserted  afterwards  on  the 
Debate  which  took  place  in  the  House  of  Peers,  dis- 
approving the  Articles  of  the  Treaty  recently  con- 
cluded ;  immediately  resigned  his  employment  of  First 
Lord  of  the  Admiralty.  He  was  succeeded  by  Lord 
Howe,  and  early  in  the  month  of  February,  the  Marquis 
of  Carmarthen  was  named  Embassador  to  the  Court  of 
France.  Though  the  House  of  Commons  had  met  on 
the  21st  of  January,  pursuant  to  its  Adjournment,  yet 
no  business  of  moment  was  brought  forward,  either  by 
Ministers,  or  by  their  Opponents,  during  the  con- 
siderable interval  of  near  a  Month  which  elapsed, 
previous  to  the  Day  fixed  for  discussing  the  Articles 
of  the  Peace,  in  both  Houses  of  Parliament.  They 
had  intermediately  been  exchanged  and  ratified  by  the 
two  Governments.  A  more  than  ordinary  interest  was 
excited  on  the  subject  throughout  the  Nation ;  the 
stability  or  dismission  of  the  Administration,  evidently 
depending  on  the  parliamentary  approval  or  disappro- 
bation of  the  Treaty.  In  the  House  of  Lords,  there 
seemed  to  be,  indeed,  little  danger  of  incurring  a  Vote 
of  Censure.  But,  it  was  otherwise  in  the  Lower  House, 
where  the  Minister,  in  addition  to  his  own  slender 
personal  strength,  and  the  individuals  holding  Offices 
under  the  Crown,  could  only  expect  support,  either 
from  persons  inclined  to  maintain  indifferently  every 
government ;  or  from  those  independent  Members, 
who  disregarding  all  motives  of  party,  might  be  in- 
duced to  approve  the  treaties,  on  the  ground  of  their 
abstract  merits,  and  their  just  claim  to  national 
gratitude. 

Facts  such  as  these,  which  were  palpable  to  all,  could 
502 


1783.]  A  POLITICAL  ENIGMA 

not  possibly  escape  the  attention  of  him  who  was  most 
deeply  interested  in  their  result.  And  it  has  always 
appeared  to  persons  uninformed,  one  of  the  most  inex- 
plicable events  of  our  time,  that  Lord  Shelburne,  who 
must  have  perceived  the  impossibility  of  maintaining 
himself  in  power,  after  the  conclusion  of  peace,  without 
the  aid  of  one  or  of  the  other  of  the  two  great  parties 
in  Opposition  ;  yet  allowed  Parliament  to  meet,  for  the 
express  purpose  of  discussing  the  merits  of  the  peace, 
without  conciliating  previously  the  leaders  of  either 
side.  Was  he  then  indifferent  to  the  preservation  of 
that  Office,  which  he  had  acquired  with  so  much  address, 
and  not  unaccompanied  with  a  degree  of  obloquy  ?  No 
person  can  believe  or  suppose  it.  Neither  his  adherents 
nor  his  enemies  ever  maintained  such  an  opinion.  How 
therefore  are  we  to  interpret  a  conduct  so  contrary  to 
all  the  dictates  of  ambition,  policy,  and  self-interest  ? 
In  order  to  explain  it,  I  shall  state  such  circumstances 
as  have  been  related  to  me,  from  persons  well  informed, 
which  will  at  least  throw  considerable  light  upon  the 
subject. 

It  seemed  certainly  most  natural,  that  of  the  two 
parties  excluded  from  power,  Lord  Shelburne  should 
have  addressed  himself  to  that  body  of  men  which  still 
considered  Lord  North  as  it's  head.  To  many  of  the 
individuals  composing  it,  I  know  that  he  did  in  fact 
make  advances,  either  personally  or  by  his  friends.  The 
American  war  being  terminated,  the  principal  object  of 
disunion  between  the  late  and  the  present  First  Minister, 
was  at  an  end.  Lord  Shelburne  was  moreover  known 
to  have  pertinaciously  resisted  the  concession  of  Inde- 
pendence to  America.  His  reluctance  and  duplicity,  or 
ambiguity,  relative  to  granting  unconditional  Independ- 
ance  to  the  thirteen  Colonies,  formed  one  of  the  most 
prominent  points  of  accusation  against  him,  on  the  part 
of  Fox  and  the  Rockingham  party.  It  could  not  be 
doubted  that  the  King,  who,  availing  himself  of  favor- 

503 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [1783. 

able  circumstances,  had  elevated  the  First  Lord  of  the 
Treasury,  to  the  place  that  he  held ;  and  who  deprecated 
nothing  so  much  as  being  a  second  time  compelled  to 
take  Fox  into  his  councils ;  would  secretly  approve,  and 
would  sincerely  promote,  any  measure  tending  to  exclude 
him  from  Administration.  Of  all  political  unions  that 
could  be  effected,  an  alliance  between  Lord  North  and 
Lord  Shelburne,  it  was  therefore  assumed,  must  be  most 
agreeable  to  the  Sovereign.  Nor,  as  I  have  been  assured, 
did  there  exist  any  insurmountable  personal  antipathies 
or  impediments  between  those  two  noble  persons,  which 
could  have  prevented  such  an  event  taking  place.  But, 
though  they  might  have  been  willing  to  coalesce,  there 
were  other  individuals  in  the  Ministry,  not  of  so  tract- 
able or  so  conciliating  a  disposition.  Mr.  Pitt,  and  the 
Duke  of  Richmond,  both  inflexibly  refused  to  sit  in 
Cabinet  with  Lord  North,  whom  they  considered  as  the 
chief  author  of  the  American  war ;  and  they  remained 
firm  upon  that  article.  Such  an  obstacle  was  neither 
to  be  surmounted,  nor  to  be  removed.  The  Duke  of 
Richmond  might,  indeed,  have  been  dismissed,  without 
any  apprehension  of  very  injurious  results :  but  Mr. 
Pitt  was  essential  to  the  existence  and  duration  of  the 
Ministry.  His  high  character  and  his  name,  joined  to 
his  eminent  talents,  formed  the  best  security  that  Lord 
Shelburne  possessed,  for  carrying  any  measure  through 
the  House  of  Commons.  If,  therefore,  in  order  to  gain 
Lord  North,  he  had  thrown  Pitt  into  Opposition,  no 
exertions  could  have  long  resisted  his  and  Fox's  united 
attacks,  fighting  side  by  side.  And  the  House  itself 
would  probably  have  reprobated  such  a  junction,  when 
attained  by  the  expulsion  of  Pitt  from  power.  These 
causes  prevented  any  attempt  being  made  to  gain  Lord 
North's  support,  by  admitting  him  and  his  principal 
friends  to  places  in  the  Cabinet ;  and  his  friendship,  it 
was  obvious,  could  not  be  obtained  on  any  inferior  terms. 
February.]  In  this  perplexing  Dilemma,  overtures 
504 


1783.]  "THE  COALITION" 

of  Conciliation  were  made  to  Fox,  on  the  part  of 
Administration,  offering  to  replace  him  and  his  con- 
nexions in  Office,  under  Lord  Shelburne,  as  First 
Minister.  The  King  was  induced,  though  reluctantly, 
to  allow  and  to  approve  of  the  Proposals,  on  the  ground 
of  State  necessity ;  it  being  esteemed  a  less  evil,  to 
admit  Fox  into  the  Cabinet  by  negociation,  than  to 
incur  the  risk  of  his  entering  it  by  storm.  In  the  first 
case,  he  would  remain  still  in  a  Minority,  while  the 
Treasury  would  be  completely  independant  of  him ; 
whereas  in  the  second  event,  he  would  dictate  the  law. 
But  Fox,  though  he  professed  himself  willing  to  make 
a  part  of  an  Administration  formed  upon  a  broad  Basis, 
and  therefore  disposed  to  listen  to  the  proposition, 
exacted  one  indispensable  preliminary;  namely  Lord 
Shelburne^s  dismission  or  resignation.  Unless  the 
Treasury  were  placed  in  the  hands  of  the  Duke  of 
Portland,  as  the  new  recognized  head  of  the  Rocking- 
ham  Party ;  and  unless  Lord  Shelburne  were  wholly 
excluded  from  a  place  in  the  Cabinet,  he  peremptorily 
refused  to  accede  to  any  terms  of  accommodation. 
With  all  the  other  principal  individuals  composing  the 
Ministry,  he  declared  his  readiness  to  act ;  but, 
personally  to  Lord  Shelburne,  his  repugnance  con- 
tinued insurmountable,  and  could  not  be  removed 
by  any  efforts. 

Such,  as  I  have  always  understood,  were  the  two 
leading  principles  on  which  was  subsequently  reared 
that  celebrated  junction  between  Lord  North  and  Fox, 
which,  from  its  extraordinary  nature,  and  more  extra- 
ordinary effects,  has  obtained  in  English  History,  by 
way  of  distinction  from  all  other  political  unions  or 
alliances  ever  contracted  in  our  time,  the  name  of  "  The 
"  Coalition"  The  proscription  of  Lord  North  by  Pitt, 
and  of  Lord  Shelburne  by  Fox,  of  necessity  drove  these 
two  excluded  Ministers  into  each  others  arms ;  at  once 
obliterated  all  past  causes  of  offence  between  them  ;  and 

505 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [1783. 

impelled  them,  banishing  every  retrospect,  as  well  as  in 
some  measure  setting  public  opinion  at  defiance,  only  to 
look  forward  to  the  joint  possession  of  power.  As  the 
17th  of  February  stood  fixed  for  the  consideration  of 
the  Articles  of  Peace,  in  both  Houses  of  Parliament; 
and  as  Lord  North  disapproved  of  many  of  those 
Articles,  no  less  strongly  than  Fox ;  it  became  obvious 
that  they  must,  in  ;all  cases,  divide  together  on  that 
night,  against  the  Administration.  And  if  they  should 
find  themselves  in  a  Majority,  as  was  highly  probable, 
it  seemed  to  follow  that  the  Ministers  must  retire  from 
Office.  But,  in  order  to  avail  themselves  of  their 
triumph,  and  to  form  a  new  Administration,  some 
mutual  understanding,  if  not  some  principles  of  per- 
manent accommodation,  became  absolutely  necessary  to 
both  Individuals.  Otherwise,  however  victorious  they 
might  prove  in  Parliament,  they  would  probably  derive 
no  benefit  from  their  superiority  ;  and  Lord  Shelburne, 
though  vanquished  in  the  House  of  Commons,  might 
still  contrive  to  retain  his  seat  in  the  Cabinet,  as  First 
Minister. 

These  considerations,  in  themselves  most  forcible, 
acquiring  hourly  strength  as  the  day  approached  for 
the  discussion  of  the  Peace,  produced  some  symptoms  of 
mutual  tendency  towards  reconciliation.  Never,  per- 
haps, did  two  men  exist,  more  inclined  by  nature  to 
oblivion  of  injuries,  or  to  sentiments  of  forgiveness, 
than  Lord  North  and  Fox !  The  latter,  whatever 
might  be  his  defects  of  character,  possessed  in  an 
eminent  degree,  placability  and  magnanimity  of  mind. 
"  Amicitlce  sempiternce^  Inimicitice  placabiles?  was  a 
Maxim  always  in  his  mouth.  The  former,  too  indolent 
to  retain  the  burthen  of  enmity,  and  conscious  that 
Fox's  hostility  towards  him  had  always  been  more 
political  than  personal;  gladly  deposited  his  resent- 
ments and  his  injuries,  at  the  feet  of  his  interest  and 
ambition.  Both  equally  concurred  in  the  necessity  of 

506 


1783.]  DIVISION  OF  SPOIL 

agreeing  on  some  plan  of  concerted  action,  before  they 
took  their  places,  side  by  side,  on  the  Opposition  Bench. 
But,  however  deeply  they  might  be  impressed  with  these 
feelings,  they  nevertheless  abstained  from  any  direct 
interview,  leaving  all  matters  to  the  intervention  of 
mutual  friends.  The  Honorable  George  Augustus 
North,  eldest  son  of  Lord  North,  then  Member  for 
Harwich,  and  afterwards  himself  Earl  of  Guildford, 
acted  as  the  Negociator  for  his  father  on  this  occasion  : 
while  the  Honorable  Colonel  Fitzpatrick,  Fox's  intimate 
friend  and  companion,  conducted  the  treaty  on  the 
other  part.  Mr.  North  by  no  means  wanted  talents ; 
but  in  address,  capacity,  and  accomplishments,  the 
latter  possessed  an  infinite  superiority.  Each,  actuated 
by  a  warm  desire  to  conduct  the  business  to  a  successful 
issue,  exerted  his  utmost  efforts  for  the  purpose.  Two 
or  three  days  elapsed  in  conferences  and  discussions : 
Nor  was  it  till  a  very  late  hour  of  the  night  of  the 
16th  of  February,  that,  after  many  visits  to  and  fro, 
between  St.  Jameses  Street  and  Grosvenor  Square,  where 
Lord  North  then  resided,  they  finally  settled  the  out- 
lines of  a  Convention  ;  by  which,  on  the  part  of  the  two 
principals  it  was  stipulated,  that  if  they  effected  a 
change  of  Administration,  the  Treasury  should  be  given 
to  the  Duke  of  Portland  ;  that  Lord  North  should  like- 
wise take  a  Cabinet  Office ;  that  a  fair  partition  of  the 
spoils,  in  other  words,  of  the  great  posts  and  emolu- 
ments of  the  State,  should  be  made  between  the  two 
parties,  who  agreed  henceforward  to  coalesce.  And, 
lastly,  that  in  the  Debate  of  the  approaching  Evening, 
they  should  speak,  act,  and  divide  in  concert. 

17th  February.]  Such  were  the  general  Preliminaries 
of  the  "Coalition."  Many  difficulties  on  both  sides, 
which  impeded  the  progress  of  the  negociation,  pro- 
tracted its  termination;  nor  did  either  Lord  North 
or  Fox  retire  to  rest  till  four  or  five  o'clock  in  the 
Morning,  when  the  business  was  at  length  concluded. 

507 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [1783. 

Fox,  accustomed  to  pass  the  greater  part  of  the  night 
at  Brookes's,  appeared  in  the  House  of  Commons  with 
his  usual  freshness  on  the  ensuing  Evening;  and 
manifested  during  the  Debate  that  ensued,  neither 
inattention,  lassitude,  nor  fatigue.  But,  Lord  North, 
whose  natural  somnolency  was  encreased,  by  having  sat 
up  for  so  many  hours  of  the  preceding  night,  under 
circumstances  of  considerable  agitation,  as  well  as  by 
the  prodigious  heat  arising  from  a  crouded  house ;  after 
taking  his  seat  near  his  new  ally,  on  the  Opposition 
Bench,  found  himself  so  overcome  by  sleep,  that  its 
effect  became  irresistible.  Unwilling,  probably,  to 
exhibit  such  a  Spectacle,  at  such  a  moment,  which 
would  have  excited  matter  of  animadversion,  or  of 
ridicule,  to  both  parties ;  he  at  length  quitted  his  seat, 
and  came  up  into  the  Gallery.  I  had  placed  myself 
there ;  immediately  over  the  Treasury  Bench,  every  part 
of  the  House  below  being  filled.  Lord  North  having 
seated  himself  by  me,  made  various  efforts  to  keep  him- 
self awake ;  but  to  accomplish  it,  exceeded  his  power. 
As  the  discussion  had  already  taken  a  very  personal 
turn ;  severe  sarcasms,  as  well  as  reproaches,  being 
levelled  from  the  Treasury  Bench,  against  the  unnatural 
Coalition  just  formed ;  particularly  by  Mr.  Dundas, 
who  stigmatized  it  with  the  strongest  Epithets ;  he 
requested  me  to  awaken  him,  as  often  as  any  such 
expressions  should  be  used  by  Ministers.  I  did  so  many 
times ;  but,  when  he  had  listened  for  a  few  Minutes,  he 
as  often  relapsed  into  repose.  At  the  end  of  about  an 
hour  and  a  half,  during  the  greater  portion  of  which 
time  he  seemed  scarcely  sensible  to  anything  that 
passed,  he  began  to  rouse  himself.  By  degrees  he 
recovered  his  perception ;  and  having  heard  from  my 
mouth,  some  of  the  most  interesting,  or  acrimonious 
passages  that  had  taken  place  while  he  was  asleep,  he 
went  down  again  into  the  body  of  the  House,  placed 
himself  by  Fox  on  the  floor,  and  made  one  of  the  most 

508 


1783.]  EARNING  A  PEERAGE 

able,  brilliant,  as  well  as  entertaining  Speeches,  that  I 
ever  heard  him  pronounce  within  those  walls.  No  man 
who  listened  to  it,  could  have  imagined  that  he  had 
lost  a  single  sentence  of  the  preceding  Debate,  or  that 
his  faculties  had  been  clouded  by  fatigue  and  want  of 
rest. 

Lord  John  Cavendish,  whom  Fox  always  selected  for 
special  and  important  occasions ;  as  his  high  character 
for  integrity  and  uprightness,  spread  a  sort  of  veil  over 
the  irregularities  of  his  party ;  moved  an  Amendment 
on  that  night,  to  the  Address  proposed  by  the  friends 
of  Administration.  Lord  John's  Amendment  was  how- 
ever couched  in  terms  so  guarded,  with  a  view  to  secure 
as  many  Votes  as  possible,  that  it  might  rather  be 
termed  a  hesitation  in  approving,  than  any  direct 
censure  on  the  Peace.  Even  Lord  North,  who  after- 
wards proposed  a  second  Amendment,  in  which  he 
recommended  the  American  Loyalists  to  His  Majesty's 
consideration ;  implied,  more  than  he  asserted,  that 
they  had  been  forgotten  or  abandoned  by  the  framers 
of  the  Articles  of  Pacification  concluded  with  the 
thirteen  Colonies.  The  Coalition,  avowed  by  Fox,  was 
not  only  defended  with  the  boldness  and  decision  that 
marked  his  character;  but  he  retorted  on  the  Lord 
Advocate,  all  the  acrimonious  expressions  which  fell 
from  the  latter,  upon  the  sudden  union  of  two  such 
inveterate  Opponents.  Mr.  Townsend,  as  Secretary 
of  State,  excelled  himself  in  his  defence  of  the  Peace, 
and  may  really  be  said  to  have  in  some  measure 
earned  on  that  night,  the  Peerage  which  he  soon  after- 
wards obtained.  I  never  saw  him  display  so  much 
animation,  nor  heard  him  manifest  such  ability.  Nor 
was  Pitt  wanting  to  himself,  or  to  his  party.  But,  all 
their  efforts  proved  unavailing  to  sustain  an  Adminis- 
tration, which  had  been  originally  established  on  too 
shallow  foundations.  After  a  Debate,  protracted  till 
eight  o'clock  in  the  Morning,  they  were  left  in  a  Minority 

509 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [1783. 

of  sixteen.  Only  nine  Votes  therefore,  taken  from  the 
Coalition,  and  transferred  to  Ministers,  would  have 
given  them  a  Majority ;  and  above  four  hundred  and 
thirty  Members  voted  on  the  occasion. 

I  composed  one  of  the  Majority,  on  that  memorable 
night.  But  I  owe  it  nevertheless  to  truth  and  to 
candour  to  acknowledge,  that  when  I  consider  the 
articles  of  the  Peace  concluded  by  Lord  Shelburne,  after 
the  lapse  of  thirty  years,  I  am  inclined  to  view  it  through 
a  more  favourable  medium,  than  I  did  at  the  time. 
Unquestionably,  of  the  three  Treaties,  namely,  those 
signed  with  France ',  Spain^  and  America ; — for  with 


Holland  nothing  definitive  had  been  arranged ; — the 
American  Treaty  was  much  the  most  humiliating,  as 
well  as  injurious  to  Great  Britain.  Besides  the  uncon- 
ditional recognition  of  the  independance  of  the  Colonies, 
and  the  cession  of  so  many  fortified  places,  which  it  is 
difficult  to  suppose  that  the  Americans  could  ever  have 
taken  from  us  by  force  of  arms ;  our  abandoning  the 
Loyalists  seemed,  in  the  estimation  of  people  the  most 
dispassionate,  to  affix  a  degree  of  degradation  and  dis- 
honour on  the  Nation  itself.  To  Spain  we  likewise 
ceded  East  Florida,  in  addition  to  West  Florida  and 
Minorca,  of  both  which,  that  power  had  already  obtained 
possession.  But,  in  recompence  for  these  sacrifices,  it 
must  be  remembered,  that  France  restored  to  us  all  our 
captured  Islands  in  the  West  Indies,  with  the  single 
exception  of  Tobago ;  while  we  possessed  nothing  to 
offer  her  in  return,  except  the  restitution  of  St.  Lucie. 
All  the  stipulations  respecting  our  possessions  in  the 
East  Indies ;  those  relative  to  the  Gum  trade,  on  the 
coast  of  Africa ;  and  the  Articles  regulating  the  right 
of  fishery  on  the  banks  of  Newfoundland ;  if  not  favour- 
able or  advantageous  in  themselves,  might  yet  have 
been  signed  between  two  Crowns  treating  on  equal 
terms.  Nor,  when  we  consider  the  exhausted  state  of 
England  at  the  close  of  the  American  War,  could  they 

510 


1783.]     TREATY  WITH  UNITED  STATES 

justly  be  regarded  as  unbecoming  us,  in  order  to  dissolve 
the  formidable  combination  then  leagued  against  this 
country. 

While,  however,  I  thus  readily  admit  Lord  Shelburne's 
title  to  national  approbation,  if  not  gratitude,  for  the 
Peace  of  January,  1 783 ;  I  must  maintain,  and  I  trust 
satisfactorily  to  prove,  that  if  Lord  North,  instead  of 
going  out,  as  he  did,  in  March,  1782,  had  remained  in 
Office  ten  months  longer,  he  would  have  concluded  at 
least  as  advantageous,  if  not  a  more  beneficial  Treaty. 
We  shall  in  fact  find  on  examining  the  subject,  that 
Lord  North  either  adopted  or  laid  down  all  the  founda- 
tions, on  which  his  Successor  in  Office  reared  that 
superstructure.  In  other  words,  that  Lord  Shelburne 
only  used  the  materials  left  or  provided  him  by  his 
predecessor.  The  Peace  rested  on  seven  distinct  grounds 
or  principles,  of  which  the  first  was  the  Recognition  of 
American  Independence.  But,  Lord  North  manifested 
a  much  greater  readiness  to  obey  the  wishes  of  the 
House  of  Commons  on  that  leading  point,  than  was 
afterwards  shewn  by  Lord  Shelburne,  who  did  not  yield, 
till  he  was  outvoted  in  the  Cabinet :  whereas  Lord 
North,  after  General  Con  way's  successful  Motion  of  the 
22d  of  February,  declaring  "  the  Attempt  to  reduce  the 
"  Colonies  to  obedience  by  force,  impracticable,"  im- 
mediately took  Measures  for  the  purpose.  On  the  5th 
of  March,  a  fortnight  before  he  laid  down  his  power, 
Wallace,  then  Attorney-General,  moved  in  his  place, 
for  leave  to  bring  in  a  Bill,  "  to  enable  His  Majesty  to 
"  conclude  a  Truce  or  Peace  with  the  revolted  Colonies 
"  in  America."  Fox  affected  to  treat  it  with  derision, 
because  he  feared,  its  operation  on  Parliament,  and  on 
the  public  mind,  might  prolong  the  existence  of  an 
Administration  which  he  had  so  nearly  run  down :  but 
no  impartial  man  questioned  the  First  Minister's 
sincerity;  and  the  Victory  of  Congress  in  compelling 
Lord  North  to  treat  with  America  as  a  Sovereign 

511 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [1783. 

Power,  would  have  been  more  gratifying  to  the  States, 
than  the  same  triumph  obtained  over  any  other  Minister 
of  Great  Britain. 

The  second  cause  that  produced  Peace,  was  Sir  George 
Rodney's  victory  over  De  Grasse,  which  at  once  over- 
turning all  the  plans  of  Vergennes  in  the  West  Indies, 
secured  Jamaica  from  any  further  Attack  on  the  part 
of  France.  Of  this  splendid  victory,  though  Fox  reaped 
all  the  benefit,  Lord  North  and  Lord  Sandwich  had 
unquestionably  the  whole  merit.  We  may  even  safely 
assert  or  assume,  that  if  the  Rockingham  Administration 
had  forced  their  way  into  Office  three  Months  earlier, 
the  Action  of  the  12th  of  April  1782,  would  never  have 
taken  place,  or  might  have  had  a  very  different  termina- 
tion. It  is  not  pretended  that  Pigot  possessed  any 
other  merit  than  his  connexion  with  Fox,  cemented  at 
Brookes's.  The  Measure  itself,  of  sending  him  out  to 
deprive  Rodney  of  the  Command,  excited  just  indigna- 
tion :  nor  did  he  perform  a  single  act  of  energy  after 
his  arrival,  which  could  have  accelerated  or  facilitated 
the  negociations  of  Peace.  I  believe,  he  never  captured 
any  thing  except  a  Spanish  Polacre.  Elliot's  destruction 
of  the  Spanish  Gun-boats  before  Gibraltar,  on  the  13th 
September ;  by  overwhelming  all  the  Projects  of  Charles 
the  Third  for  the  reduction  of  that  Fortress,  laid  the 
third  foundation  of  the  Treaty,  as  it  disposed  the 
Cabinet  of  Madrid  to  terminate  the  war.  Happily, 
Fox  did  not  recall  Elliot,  as  he  had  done  Rodney,  nor 
send  Burgoyne  to  supersede  him.  Lord  Howe's  most 
able  Manoeuvres,  in  supplying  Gibraltar  with  Stores  of 
every  kind,  notwithstanding  the  opposition  of  France 
and  Spain,  formed  the  fourth  groundwork  of  the  Peace. 
In  the  nomination  of  that  great  Naval  Officer  to  the 
Command  of  the  Fleet,  and  in  that  Measure  solely,  had 
Lord  Shelburne  any  participation  or  share,  as  contri- 
buting to  terminate  the  contest.  Nor  would  it  be 
candid  to  deprive  him  of  the  merit  which  he  may  thereby 

512 


1783.]       THE  FOUNDATIONS  OF  PEACE 

claim;  but,  neither  ought  we  to  forget  that  Admiral 
Darby  had  effected  the  same  service  in  the  preceding 
year,  and  had  relieved  Gibraltar,  under  nearly  similar 
impediments. 

The  three  last  foundations  of  general  pacification 
were  laid  in  the  East ;  where,  as  early  as  1778,  Lord 
North  had  ably  anticipated  the  French  machinations, 
by  getting  possession  of  Pondicherry.  Of  these  leading 
causes,  the  most  essential,  perhaps,  may  be  deemed  the 
separate  Peace  made  with  the  Mharattas ;  a  measure 
exclusively  due  to  that  First  Minister,  who  in  the 
Spring  of  the  year  1781,  sent  out  Mr.  Macpherson,  since 
Governor  General  of  Bengal,  and  created  a  Baronet,  as 
a  Member  of  the  Supreme  Council.  I  know  that  his 
secret  Instructions  were,  to  endeavour  by  every  exertion 
in  his  power,  and  even  if  necessary,  by  considerable 
sacrifices,  to  terminate  the  Mharatta  War.  In  com- 
pliance with  those  directions,  on  his  arrival  at  Madras 
in  October,  1781,  without  waiting  to  consult  Hastings, 
who  was  then  at  a  distance  from  Calcutta ;  Mr.  Mac- 
pherson, together  with  Lord  Macartney,  Sir  Edward 
Hughes,  and  the  Nabob  of  Arcot,  Mahommed  Ally, 
acting  together  in  concert,  addressed  letters  jointly  to 
the  Peshwah,  at  Poonah,  expressing  to  him,  in  the  name 
of  the  Sovereign  and  Ministry  of  England,  their  sincere 
and  ardent  inclination  to  Peace.  It  followed  in  a  very 
short  space  of  time,  and  flowed  immediately  from  this 
source.  Lord  Sandwich,  who  sent  out  Sir  Edward 
Hughes  to  command  the  British  Fleet  in  the  East 
Indies,  may  claim  the  principal  or  exclusive  merit  of 
having  laid  the  sixth  Basis  of  the  pacification  of  January, 
1783.  For,  though  that  naval  Commander  did  not 
vanquish  Suffrein,  as  Rodney  defeated  De  Grasse,  yet 
he  repulsed  the  French  Admiral,  when  we  were  inferior 
to  him  in  number  of  ships  ;  disabled  the  enemy's  vessels, 
and  finally  compelled  him  to  postpone  his  projects  of 
co-operation  with  Hyder  Ally ;  thus  protracting  the 

513  33 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [17 

contest,  till  intelligence  of  a  general  pacification  reached 
India.  The  last  groundwork  of  peace,  was  due  to 
Hastings,  as  Governor  General  of  Bengal,  and  to  the 
Supreme  Council,  for  the  promptitude  with  which,  after 
Ryder's  successful  irruption  into  the  Carnatic  in  1780, 
they  dispatched  Sir  Eyre  Coote  with  military  and 
pecuniary  supplies,  to  the  aid  of  that  nearly  subverted 
Presidency.  He  first  arrested  the  progress  of  the  Sultan 
of  Mysore,  and  finally  compelled  him  to  retreat  across 
the  Mountains  of  the  Ghauts,  into  his  own  dominions. 
The  vast  fabrick  of  British  power  in  the  East,  originally 
convulsed  by  the  errors  or  incapacity  of  the  Bombay 
Government,  degraded  by  Rumbold's  mal-administration, 
and  perhaps  exposed  to  hazard  by  Hastings'^  ambition, 
was  ultimately  preserved  and  strengthened.  When  we 
fairly  examine  and  appreciate  these  facts,  we  shall  see 
that  though  Lord  Shelburne  signed,  or  rather  concluded 
the  Peace  of  1783,  yet  Lord  North's  Administration 
made  it.  In  fact,  though  no  Minister,  however  able  or 
popular,  could  have  longer  prosecuted  the  war  for 
subjugating  the  Colonies,  after  near  seven  years  of  a 
ruinous  and  disgraceful  contest ;  any  Minister,  however 
moderately  endowed  with  talents,  having  in  his  hands 
the  means  possessed  by  Lord  Shelburne,  might  have 
terminated  the  struggle  with  our  European  enemies,  on 
making  the  Recognition  of  American  Independance. 
Unquestionably  Lord  Shelburne  obtained  from  the 
French  Government,  great  restitutions  in  the  West 
Indies :  but  the  enemy  kept  possession  of  Tobago,  and 
we  restored  St.  Lucia ;  which  last  Island,  considered  as 
a  military  post,  was  inestimable  to  France. 

Spain  reaped  the  principal  benefit  of  the  Treaty ;  as 
in  addition  to  Minorca,  she  retained  or  acquired  the 
two  Floridas:  these  advantages  were  however  dearly 
purchased  by  her  severe  losses  before  Gibraltar,  in  men, 
money,  and  ships.  Louis  the  Sixteenth,  besides  Goree 
and  Senegal  on  the  Coast  of  Africa,  which  Possessions 

514 


rss. 


1783.]  EVIL  FOREBODINGS 

rendered  him  master  of  the  Gum  Trade,  recovered  the 
islands  of  St.  Pierre  and  Miquelon  situate  in  the  River 
St.  Laurence.  Pondicherry,  together  with  the  French 
Factories  throughout  Hindostan,  were  likewise  restored 
by  us :  but  Holland,  in  recompense  for  her  unwise,  as 
well  as  unjust  Aggression,  lost  Negapatam,  her  only 
Settlement  of  importance  on  the  Coast  of  Coromandel. 
America  triumphed  in  the  contest ;  and  the  greatest 
Statesmen  whom  England  had  produced,  though  they 
concurred  in  scarcely  any  other  political  opinion,  yet 
agreed  on  the  Point,  that  with  the  defalcation  of  the 
thirteen  Colonies  from  the  Crown,  the  glory  and  great- 
ness of  Britain  were  permanently  extinguished.  This 
sentiment  pervaded  Lord  Chatham's  last  Speech,  pro- 
nounced on  the  7th  of  April,  1778.  "I  will  never 
"  consent,"  exclaimed  he,  "  to  deprive  the  Royal  Off- 
"  spring  of  the  House  of  Brunswic,  the  Heirs  of  the 
"  Princess  Sophia,  of  their  fairest  Inheritance.  Where 
"  is  the  man  who  will  dare  to  advise  such  a  measure  ?  " 
He  considered  it  as  a  consummation  pregnant  with  the 
greatest  misfortunes.  Lord  Shelburne  even  surpassed 
him  in  the  expressions  of  despair,  at  contemplating 
the  consequences  inevitably  resulting,  as  he  conceived, 
from  the  loss  of  America.  Not  once,  but  many  times, 
he  repeated  this  sentiment,  in  the  House  of  Peers, 
previous,  as  well  as  subsequent,  to  his  becoming  First 
Minister.  On  the  10th  of  July,  1782,  when  constituted 
first  Lord  of  the  Treasury,  he  declared  that  "  when- 
"  ever  the  British  Parliament  should  recognize  the 
"  Sovereignty  of  the  thirteen  Colonies,  the  Sun  of 
"  England's  Glory  was  for  ever  set. — He  looked  for  a 
"  Spark  at  least  to  be  left,  which  might  light  us  up  in 
"  time  to  a  new  Day.  But  if  independence  were  once 
"  conceded,  if  Parliament  considered  that  measure  to 
"  be  advisable,  he  foresaw  in  his  own  mind  that  Eng- 
"  land  was  undone."  It  seemed  impossible  to  clothe 
his  ideas  of  despair,  in  stronger  or  more  energetic 

515 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [1783. 

Language.  Lord  George  Germain  entertained,  as  I 
know,  similar  apprehensions.  Speaking  in  the  House 
of  Commons,  on  the  12th  December,  1781,  he  main- 
tained, as  a  Position  admitting  of  no  doubt,  that  "  from 
"  the  instant  when  American  independence  should  be 
"  acknowledged,  the  British  Empire  was  ruined." 
Here  we  have  three  persons  distinguished  by  pre- 
eminent political  talents,  denouncing  national  ruin, 
as  inseparable  from  the  loss  of  America.  The  same 
sentiment  pervaded  all  classes  of  men  throughout  the 
country.  How  are  we  to  account  for  the  non-fulfil- 
ment of  these  predictions?  How  was  the  threatened 
calamity  averted ;  and  by  what  measures  was  Great 
Britain,  after  losing  thirteen  Colonies,  rendered  more 
formidable,  wealthy,  commercial,  and  great,  than  before 
her  misfortunes  ?  Three  Causes  appear  to  me  to  have 
principally  produced  so  extraordinary  a  Phenomenon, 
which  has  no  parallel  in  the  history  of  nations. 

The  first  and  leading  cause  was,  the  preservation 
of  the  British  Constitution.  Lord  North,  though  he 
lost  Armies,  commercial  Fleets,  Garrisons,  Islands,  and 
Provinces;  yet  defended  and  preserved  the  Palladium 
of  Civil  Liberty.  He  transmitted  to  Lord  Rockingham, 
in  March,  1782,  as  he  had  received  from  the  Duke  of 
Grafton,  in  January  1770,  that  invaluable  possession, 
inviolate.  Our  obligations  to  him  are  great  and  in- 
delible: for  never  perhaps  did  any  Minister  surmount 
more  severe  attacks  than  he  endured.  The  losses  and 
disgraces  of  the  American  war,  followed  by  heavy 
annual  Loans,  gave  rise  to  Meetings  and  Associations, 
whose  professed  object  was  not  only  a  change  of  Ad- 
ministration, but  to  effect  reforms  and  alterations  in 
the  parliamentary  Representation.  These  convocations 
of  Freeholders,  which  began  in  the  County  of  York, 
towards  the  end  of  1779,  soon  spread  over  the  Kingdom, 
and  were  adopted  in  the  Capital  at  an  early  period  of 
the  year  1780.  Their  Resolutions,  patriotic  in  pro- 

516 


1783.]  PETITIONS  AND  THREATS 

fession,  and  perhaps  in   their   intention,  were  not  the 
less  revolutionary  in  practice.     Like  the  Clubs  at  Paris 
in    1790,   they   immediately   appointed    Corresponding 
Committees,  whose   duty   it   was   to   prepare   Plans  of 
Association   for   ameliorating   the    Constitution.     Men 
of  the  highest  rank,  of  the  largest  property,  and  of  the 
most  unsullied  character,  carried  along  by  the  torrent, 
and  impatient  to  overturn  the  Ministry,  lent  themselves 
to  the  accomplishment  of  this  work.     As  early  as  Feb- 
ruary, 1780,  Sir  George  Savile,  when  presenting  in  the 
House  of  Commons,  the  York  Petition,  accompanied  it 
with  language  such  as  Ireton  or  Fleetwood  might  have 
used,  when  addressing  the  Rump  Parliament  in  1 652 : 
Language    calculated     to    intimidate,    and    appealing 
obviously    to    external    interference.      These    menaces 
were  outdone  by  Sir  James  Lowther,  in  April  of  the 
same  year,  on  bringing  up  the  Petition  from  Cumber- 
land.    He,  whom,  "  Junius "  denominates   "  the   little 
"  contemptible  tyrant  of  the  North,"  threatened  in  his 
Place,  that   if,  "the   Grievances  enumerated  were  not 
"  redressed,  the  Subscribers  would  withhold  the  Taxes  ; " 
thus  attempting  to  overawe  the  Legislative  Body  whom 
he   addressed.     Fox,  as   might   well   be   imagined,  far 
exceeded  his  adherents,  in  the  violence  of  his  appeal  to 
the  People.     On  the  6th  of  April,  1780,  the  Correspond- 
ing   Committee   having   convened   the    Inhabitants    of 
Westminster,  in  Palace  Yard,  Fox  read  and  commented 
on  the  Report  presented  by  that  Committee ;  while  the 
Dukes  of  Devonshire  and  of  Portland  were  present  at  his 
side  :  but  the  Marquis  of  Rockingham  absented  himself. 
Government  having  very  properly  ordered  out  a  Body 
of  the  Military  Force,  for  the  protection  of  Parliament, 
and  suppression  of  tumult  or  violence ;  Fox  proceeded 
so  far  as   to  declare  in  the   House  of  Commons,  that 
"  if  Soldiers  were  thus  let  loose  on  the  constitutional 
"  Assemblages  of  the   People,  all  who  attended  them, 
"  must  go  armed."     The  Cardinal  de  Retz,  when  con- 

517 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [1783. 

ducting  the  Parisian  populace,  and  attempting  to  over- 
turn the  first  Minister  of  that  day,  held  and  practised 
precisely  the  same  doctrine.  So  would  Mirabeau  have 
done  in  our  time ;  or  Sir  Francis  Burdett,  and  Home 
Tooke. 

Nor  were  these  the  only  adversaries  with  whom  Lord 
North  had  to  contend,  when  defending  the  Constitution. 
"  The  coldest  bodies,"  says  Junius,  "  warm  with  opposi- 
"  tion ;  the  hardest  sparkle  in  collision.11  Burke,  who 
ten  years  later,  drew  forth  his  powerful  artillery  in 
defence  of  Monarchy,  lent  himself  too  much,  at  this 
period  of  his  political  life,  it  must  reluctantly  be  owned, 
to  the  machinations  of  Party.  Many  of  his  parlia- 
mentary Speeches  between  1779  and  1782,  breathe  the 
Spirit  of  Faction,  blended  with  intemperance  of  language, 
sometimes  descending  even  to  invective.  Dunning, 
though  brought  up  to  the  Bar,  and  possessed  of  an 
ample  fortune  acquired  by  his  profession,  yet  levelled 
a  vital  blow  at  the  Constitution  of  his  Country,  when, 
on  the  24th  of  April,  1780,  he  moved  in  the  House 
of  Commons,  "  not  to  dissolve  Parliament,  or  to  pro- 
"  rogue  the  Session,  till  proper  measures  should  be 
"  adopted  for  diminishing  the  influence  of  the  Crown, 
"  and  correcting  the  other  evils  complained  of  in  the 
"  Petitions.11  It  is  obvious  that  if  such  a  resolution 
had  passed,  the  King  would  have  stood  in  the  situation 
of  Charles  the  First  in  1641,  as  the  Parliament  would 
have  been  placed  in  the  very  Position  of  the  House  of 
Commons  at  that  awful  period  of  our  history.  Happily, 
Dunning^  proposition  was  rejected  by  a  Majority  of 
fifty-one  Votes,  in  a  very  full  House.  Fox,  irritated  to 
the  most  violent  degree  at  the  subversion  of  his  hopes 
to  drive  Lord  North  from  power,  attributed  his  dis- 
appointment to  the  operation  of  ministerial  corruption 
among  the  Members  who  voted  on  the  occasion.  But, 
it  unquestionably  resulted j  from  the  alarm  excited 
among  the  moderate,  independent  part  of  the  Assembly, 

518 


1783.]    THE  CONSTITUTION  ENDANGERED 

who  desired,  indeed,  to  limit  and  to  reform,  but  not  to 
annihilate,  the  power  of  the  Crown.  No  man  can 
doubt  that  if  the  prerogative  of  Prorogation  and  of 
Dissolution  had  been  taken  from  the  Sovereign,  till 
every  alledged  grievance  had  been  redressed,  the  Con- 
stitution must  have  been  from  that  moment  subverted, 
and  a  renewal  of  the  Calamities  of  Charles  the  First's 
reign,  must  almost  inevitably  have  followed.  To  Lord 
North,  therefore,  sustained  by  the  King's  firmness  of 
character,  we  owe  our  Preservation  from  all  the  evils  of 
a  republican,  if  not  a  revolutionary  Government.  Since 
1688,  down  to  the  year  1792,  when  we  were  menaced  with 
the  horrors  of  French  Fraternization,  it  may  be  safely 
asserted  that  the  British  Constitution  never  incurred  so 
imminent  a  danger  of  subversion,  as  in  1780. 

To  Mr.  Pitt  we  are  indebted  for  the  second  leading 
cause  or  principle  of  our  national  Resuscitation  and 
recovery,  after  losing  America.  His  Institution  of  the 
Sinking  Fund  of  a  Million  Sterling,  in  the  Spring  of 
1786,  by  its  beneficial  operation  on  the  public  Credit, 
Commerce,  and  Finances,  might  be  said  to  revivify  the 
State,  and  still  continues  to  dispense  with  augmenting 
powers,  its  salutary  influence.  The  third  source  of  our 
prosperity  came  from  the  East,  where,  without  a 
Metaphor,  the  Sun  of  Britain  rose,  as  it  set  in  the 
West.  Since  1783,  our  acquisitions  and  possessions  in 
that  portion  of  the  Globe,  have  been  perpetually  in  a 
State  of  Progression.  All  our  losses  on  the  Delaware 
and  on  the  Chesapeake,  have  been  more  than  compen- 
sated by  our  Conquests  on  the  Ganges,  or  on  the  Coasts 
of  Coromandel  and  Malabar.  The  augmentations  of 
territory  in  Oude,  as  well  as  in  Corah  and  Dooab, 
including  Dehli  itself,  the  Metropolis  of  the  Mogul 
Princes  ;  the  seizure  of  the  Carnatic  ;  the  dissolution  of 
the  Mysore  Monarchy  in  the  person  of  Tippoo  Sultan  ; 
the  reduction  of  Ceylon,  and  of  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope, 
not  to  mention  many  inferior  objects  of  attention  ; — 

519 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [i7S3. 

these  prodigious  accumulations  of  Power  and  Wealth 
have  obliterated  almost  the  recollections  of  the 
American  struggle,  and  have  closed  all  the  wounds 
caused  by  that  unfortunate  War.  An  annual  Revenue 
of  more  than  fifteen  Millions  Sterling  raised  in  India, 
payable,  not  in  Paper,  but  in  Specie ;  together  with  the 
Commerce  of  the  East,  continually  poured  into  our 
Harbours  ;  have  enabled  us,  after  contending  for  nearly 
twenty  years  with  the  power  of  France,  successively 
wielded  by  Robespierre  and  by  Bonaparte,  to  terminate 
the  conflict  in  the  most  triumphant  manner.  I  return 
to  the  progress  of  public  affairs. 

However  much  the  Treaty  of  1783,  may  be  entitled 
to  national  approval,  yet  the  members  of  that  Adminis- 
tration at  the  head  of  which  Lord  North  had  so  long 
presided,  might,  nevertheless,  be  fully  justified  in 
severely  arraigning  a  Peace,  which  relinquished  to 
America  almost  every  point  or  object,  for  the  mainten- 
ance of  which  they  had  contended,  from  1775  down  to 
1782.  They  might  justly  feel  indignant  at  the  derelic- 
tion of  the  Loyalists ;  at  the  evacuation  of  New  York 
and  Charles  Town  ;  and  at  the  sacrifice  of  immense 
tracts  of  territory,  extending  through  near  twenty 
degrees  of  Latitude,  and  as  many  of  Longitude ;  in- 
cluding Indian  Nations  our  Allies,  and  containing 
incalculable  commercial  advantages.  When  Lord  Sack- 
ville  and  Lord  Stormont,  in  the  House  of  Peers,  com- 
pared such  a  Treaty  with  past  periods  of  our  history, 
and  accused  the  Ministry  of  doing  acts  more  culpable, 
than  even  Lord  Oxford  and  Lord  Bolingbroke  had 
committed  at  Utrecht;  they  might  at  least  be  con- 
sidered as  speaking  with  consistency,  and  in  conformity 
to  their  avowed  principles.  But,  it  seems  more  difficult 
to  conceive,  and  to  explain,  upon  what  ground  Fox 
could  reprobate  such  preliminaries.  He  had  loudly  and 
repeatedly  declaimed  for  successive  years,  on  the  indis- 
pensable necessity  of  obtaining  almost  any  Peace,  how- 

520 


1783.]      FOX'S  INCONSISTENT  CONDUCT 

ever  comparatively  bad,  as  imperiously  demanded  by 
the  fallen  condition  of  Great  Britain.  He,  who,  con- 
sidering the  Americans  as  originally  justified  in 
resisting  the  mother  country,  had  often  undertaken 
their  defence  in  the  House  of  Commons :  while  he 
always  stigmatized  the  Loyalists  with  every  opprobrious 
or  contemptuous  Epithet.  He,  whom  I  had,  myself, 
heard  declare  from  the  same  side  the  House,  not  twelve 
Months  before,  on  the  fifth  day  of  March,  1782,  that 
"  whenever  he  should  enter  into  any  terms  with  an 
"  individual  of  Lord  North's  Cabinet,  he  would  rest 
"  satisfied  to  be  called  the  most  infamous  of  mankind." 
Adding,  that  "he  never  could  nourish  the  idea  of 
"  coalescing  with  Ministers,  who  had  proved  themselves 
"  devoid  of  honour  and  honesty ;  as  in  the  hands  of 
"  such  men,  he  would  not  for  a  moment  entrust  his  own 
honour."  To  varnish  over,  therefore,  so  complete  a 
change  of  language,  sentiments,  and  system,  required 
all  those  talents,  that  bold  eloquence,  and  disregard 
of  public  opinion,  which  met  in  him.  I  never  indeed 
regarded  him  as  animated  by  any  other  motives,  in  his 
opposition  to  the  Peace  of  1783,  than  ambition  and 
desire  of  power.  Personally  odious  to  the  King,  as  he 
well  knew  himself  to  be,  on  account  of  his  private 
irregularities,  not  less  than  from  the  line  of  political 
action  which  he  had  embraced  during  many  years ;  he 
beheld  no  mode  or  chance  of  speedily  entering  the 
Cabinet,  except  by  uniting  at  once  with  Lord  North. 
Those  persons  who  think  that  abilities  such  as  his, 
ought  not  to  have  been  lost  to  his  country,  or  excluded 
from  the  Councils  of  the  Crown,  will  however  see  cause 
probably,  to  justify  in  some  degree,  his  sacrifice  of 
political  principle,  to  an  over-ruling  necessity.  But, 
it  became  apparent  by  the  events  that  soon  followed 
the  Coalition  of  1783,  how  different  a  sentence  the 
majority  of  the  nation  passed  on  that  memorable  union. 
The  people  beheld  in  it  a  complete  renunciation  of 

521 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [1783. 

every  object  for  which  Fox  had  affected  to  contend ; 
and  they  regarded,  not  merely  with  indifference,  but 
with  satisfaction,  his  subsequent  expulsion  from  Office. 

Lord  North's  junction  with  the  party  which  had  so 
long  opposed  him,  has  always  appeared  to  me  to  admit 
of  much  more  palliation,  than  the  conduct  of  Fox  and 
his  adherents.  The  former  Nobleman,  by  no  means  in 
very  affluent  circumstances,  encumbered  with  a  numer- 
ous family,  saw  himself  proscribed  and  excluded  from 
the  Cabinet,  for  having  unsuccessfully  maintained  the 
Prerogative  of  the  Crown,  and  the  Supremacy  of 
Parliament,  against  the  American  Insurgents.  In  this 
situation,  unprotected  by  the  Sovereign,  who  was 
unable  to  extend  any  assistance  to  him  ;  and  unpopular 
with  the  nation,  because  he  had  been  unfortunate  ;  Fox 
opened  his  arms,  and  offered  him  an  alliance.  Was  he 
bound  to  reject  it,  and  thus  pass  a  sentence  of  political 
exclusion  on  himself? — But,  even  if  he  had  so  done, 
worse  evils  presented  themselves  in  prospect.  A  union 
between  Fox  and  Pitt,  would  have  eventually  produced, 
in  all  probability,  his  own  impeachment,  and  that  of 
other  members  of  his  former  Cabinet.  Nor  could  he 
have  found  any  security  from  such  a  prosecution,  either 
in  the  royal  authority,  in  the  adherence  of  the  House 
of  Commons,  or  in  the  affection  of  the  country.  He 
might  have  been  made  the  victim  and  the  sacrifice,  for 
the  loss  of  empire,  for  the  disgraces,  defeats,  capitula- 
tions, and  ruinous  expenditure  of  an  unfortunate  war. 
Fox  and  Burke  had  a  hundred  times  menaced  him  with 
the  block.  Pitt,  who,  it  was  evident,  entertained 
similar  opinions  respecting  his  Administration,  did  not 
at  all  conceal  them.  By  accepting  the  overtures  of  the 
Rockingham  party,  Lord  North,  therefore,  at  least 
secured  his  personal  safety,  and  opened  to  himself  an 
avenue  to  the  resumption  of  power.  It  was  not,  as  I 
have  always  thought,  the  act  of  uniting  with  Fox,  that 
in  itself  disgraced  him  ;  but,  the  too  ready  subserviency 

522 


1783.]  PERSISTENT  ATTACKS 

with  which  he  afterwards  lent  himself  to  every  measure, 
which  that  enterprizing  and  ambitious  Statesman, 
having  again  forced  his  way  into  the  Cabinet,  thought 
it  necessary  to  adopt,  in  order  to  maintain  himself  in  a 
situation,  which  he  had  attained,  contrary  to  the  wishes 
of  his  Sovereign. 

The  victory  obtained  by  the  new  Coalition,  over 
Ministers,  in  the  House  of  Commons,  however  flatter- 
ing it  might  be  to  their  hopes,  yet  being  by  no  means 
decisive;  and  the  Peace  having  been  approved  in  the 
upper  House ;  in  order  to  compel  Lord  Shelburne's 
resignation,  it  became  necessary  to  express  in  more 
affirmative  language,  a  parliamentary  disapprobation  of 
the  Preliminaries.  For  this  purpose,  four  days  after 
the  first  Debate,  a  second  discussion  took  place,  when  a 
Motion  or  Resolution  to  the  effect  above  mentioned, 
was  brought  forward;  Lord  John  Cavendish  lending 
himself  again  to  introduce  the  business.  It  was  indeed 
a  service  of  some  danger  and  delicacy,  requiring  all  the 
reputation  which  that  Nobleman  enjoyed  for  political 
rectitude,  to  protect  his  friends  from  the  imputations 
excited  by  the  late  Coalition.  He  endeavoured  to 
justify  it  against  the  severe  animadversions  of  Powis, 
and  of  other  Members  who  had  generally  voted  with 
the  Rockingham  Party  ;  by  comparing  Fox's  union  with 
Lord  North,  to  the  Administration  formed  in  June, 
1757,  when  the  first  Mr.  Pitt  coalesced  with  the  Duke 
of  Newcastle,  whom  he  had  during  many  years  opposed 
and  reprobated.  But,  however  analogous  in  many 
respects  that  transaction  might  be,  yet  it  failed  in 
carrying  the  moral  conviction  to  the  minds  of  his 
hearers,  which  Lord  John  aspired  to  produce  by  his 
comparison.  The  Peace  was  again  attacked  and  defended 
on  its  own  proper  merits,  at  great  length,  with  equal 
ingenuity,  asperity,  and  profound  knowledge  of  the  sub- 
ject. Those  who  heard  Mr.  Pitt  address  the  House  on 
that  evening,  cannot  easily  forget  the  impression  made 


WRAXALi:S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [1783. 

upon  his  audience,  by  a  Speech  which  might  be  said  to 
unite  all  the  powers  of  argument,  eloquence,  and  impas- 
sioned declamation.  He  seemed  to  fight,  indeed,  as  Caesar 
did  at  Munda,  not  merely  for  empire,  or  for  power ; 
but,  for  life.  After  defending,  article  by  article,  the 
Treaties  concluded ;  he  finished  by  deprecating  "  the 
"ill  omened  and  baneful  alliance"  which  had  just 
taken  place  between  Lord  North  and  Fox,  as  teeming 
with  pernicious  effects  of  every  kind  to  the  country. 
Then  reverting  to  the  consequences  which  it  might 
produce  personally  to  himself,  he  professed  his  readiness 
to  retire  to  a  private  station  without  regret.  Alluding 
to  so  material  an  impending  change  in  his  own  condition, 
he  exclaimed, 

"  Fortuna  saevo  laeta  Negotio,  et 
Ludum  insolentem  ludere  pertinax, 
Transmutat  incertas  honores, 
Nunc  mini,  mine  alii  benigna. 
Laudo  manentem  :  si  celeres  quatit 
Pennas,  resigno  quae  dedit." 

With  an  admirable  presence  of  mind,  which  never 
forsook  him,  he  here  paused;  and  conscious  that 
the  words  of  the  Roman  poet  immediately  following, 
" et  mea  virtute  me  involve"  might  seem  to  imply  a 
higher  idea  of  his  own  merit  or  disinterestedness,  than 
it  would  become  him  to  avow,  he  cast  his  eyes  on  the 
floor.  A  moment  or  two  of  silence  elapsed,  while  all 
attention  was  directed  towards  him  from  every  quarter 
of  the  House.  During  this  interval  he  slowly  drew  his 
handkerchief  from  his  pocket,  passed  it  once  or  twice 
across  his  lips,  and  then  recovering  as  it  were  from  his 
temporary  embarrassment,  he  added  with  Emphasis, 
striking  his  hand  on  the  table, 

" probamque 

"  Pauperiem  sine  dote  quaero." 
524 


1783.]  PITTS  ORATORY 

Perhaps  a  more  masterly  and  beautiful  piece  of 
oratorical  acting,  is  not  to  be  found  in  Antiquity. 
Even  if  we  suppose  the  whole  passage  to  have  been 
studied  and  prepared,  yet  the  delicacy  of  the  omission 
is  not  less  admirable.  I  believe,  however,  that  both  the 
lines  which  he  cited,  and  the  one  which  he  suppressed, 
were  all  equally  suggested  to  him  by  his  feelings  and  his 
judgment  at  the  time.  Its  effect  on  that  part  of  the 
House  which  perfectly  understood  it,  corresponded  to 
its  merit.  But  Mr.  Pitt,  who  well  knew  how  large  a 
part  of  his  audience,  especially  among  the  Country 
Gentlemen,  were  little  conversant  in  the  writings  of  the 
Augustan  Age,  or  familiar  with  Horace,  always  displayed 
great  caution  in  borrowing  from  those  classic  sources. 
In  the  lapse  of  fourteen  years  that  I  have  heard  him 
almost  daily  address  the  House  of  Commons,  I  question 
if  he  made  in  all,  more  than  eight  or  ten  citations. 
Fox  and  Sheridan,  though  not  equally  severe  in  that 
respect,  yet  never  abused  or  injudiciously  expended  the 
stores  of  antient  literature  that  they  possessed.  Burke's 
enthusiasm,  his  exhaustless  memory,  and  luxuriant 
imagination,  more  frequently  carried  him  away  into 
the  times  of  Virgil  and  Cicero :  while  Barre  usually 
condescended,  whenever  he  quoted  Latin,  to  translate 
for  the  benefit  of  the  County  Members. 

21st  February.]  A  minority  of  seventeen,  in  which 
the  Ministry  remained  at  the  close  of  the  Debate, 
which  took  place  at  a  very  late  hour,  and  in  a  very 
crowded  House  of  Commons,  where  near  four  hundred 
Members  voted ;  seemed  to  secure  the  triumph  of  the 
Coalition.  Yet,  as  no  direct  censure  had  hitherto  been 
passed  upon  the  Administration  ;  and  as  the  condemna- 
tion expressed  relative  to  the  Peace,  was  couched  in 
very  moderate  terms ;  simply  stating  that  "  the  con- 
"  cessions  made,  were  greater  than  our  adversaries  were 
"  entitled  to  demand  ; "  it  did  not  by  any  means  follow, 
that  a  change  in  the  government  would  take  place. 

525 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [1783. 

Lord  North  himself  had  sufficiently  demonstrated, 
during  the  two  Sessions  of  1779  and  1780,  how  little 
effect  a  majority  had,  in  compelling  him  to  retire  from 
Office  ;  and  the  political,  if  not  moral  disapprobation, 
felt  at  the  recent  junction  of  two  men  who  had  so  long 
condemned  and  reprobated  each  other,  pervaded  to  a 
certain  degree,  all  ranks.  Even  the  very  majority 
which  had  disapproved  of  the  Treaties,  as  inadequate 
to  our  just  expectations,  yet  might  not  follow  up  their 
Vote  by  any  personal  attack  on  Ministers ;  or  if  they 
did,  might  fail  to  carry  the  House  with  them.  And  if 
so,  the  Coalition  would  remain  seated,  as  before,  on  the 
Opposition  Bench,  without  deriving  any  benefit  from 
their  late  success.  A  first  Lord  of  the  Treasury,  who, 
to  conscious  integrity,  joined  fortitude  and  resources 
of  character,  seemed  exempt  from  any  necessity  of 
resigning,  on  account  of  the  danger  of  Impeachment ; 
and  might  still,  by  protracting  the  struggle,  terminate 
it  advantageously  to  himself.  Such  were  the  opinions 
at  that  time  generally  entertained,  and  the  expectations 
formed,  both  in,  and  out  of  Parliament. 

But,  all  these  political  speculations  were  suddenly 
overturned  by  Lord  Shelburne's  immediate  resignation. 
Without  waiting  for  any  broader  hint,  or  trying  by 
any  exertions  to  perpetuate  his  possession  of  power,  hie 
retired  from  Ministry,  as  so  many  of  his  predecessors 
had  done  during  the  present  reign.  There  has  always 
appeared  to  be  something  mysterious  in  the  motives 
which  impelled  him  thus  precipitately,  if  not  pre- 
maturely, to  abandon  a  situation  which  he  had  attained 
with  so  much  labour,  as  well  as  address,  and  from  which 
he  can  scarcely  be  said  to  have  been  driven.  So 
singular  a  fact  was  variously  explained  or  interpreted 
at  the  time.  As  even  his  opponents  neither  attributed 
to  him  want  of  ambition,  nor  any  defect  of  firmness,  it 
became  requisite  to  discover  and  to  assign  other  reasons 
for  his  conduct.  Rumours,  which  sunk  deep  in  the 

526 


1783.]          RUMOURS  AND  SUSPICIONS 

public  mind,  were  not  only  spread,  but  remained  un- 
contradicted,  asserting  that  Lord  Shelburne  had  not 
scrupled  to  avail  himself  of  his  official  situation,  and 
the  knowledge  of  various  kinds  that  it  conferred,  for 
purposes  of  private  emolument.  It  was  pretended,  that 
during  the  period  which  preceded  the  late  Peace,  and 
while  the  Negociations  were  still  pending;  persons, 
subsequently  ascertained  to  have  acted  by  his  secret 
directions,  had  speculated  largely,  as  well  as  advantage- 
ously, in  the  public  Funds.  The  active  malignity  of 
his  enemies  impelled  them  to  trace  these  concealed 
agents,  and  to  obtain  proofs,  real  or  fictitious,  of  the 
fact.  Even  the  names  of  Brokers,  and  the  sums 
actually  purchased,  to  an  immense  amount,  which  were 
maintained  to  have  been  done  on  Lord  Shelburne's 
account,  were  accurately  specified.  Similar  accusations 
had  been,  indeed,  made,  as  I  have  before  observed, 
against  Lord  Bute  in  1762 ;  who  then  inhabited  the 
House  in  Berkeley  Square,  which  the  actual  First 
Minister  had  purchased  of  him,  and  now  occupied.  It 
was  commonly  said  "  to  have  been  constructed  by  one 
"  Peace,  and  paid  for  by  another."  If  these  reports 
originated  only  in  political  hostility,  it  must  be  admitted 
that  Lord  Shelburne  was  most  unfortunate ;  no  such 
imputations  having  been  ever  thrown  on  Lord  North, 
on  Fox,  or  on  Pitt  while  in  power,  even  by  their  most 
implacable  adversaries. 

In  addition  to  the  pretended  facts  above  related, 
others  were  invented  or  enumerated,  strongly  corrobor- 
ating them.  It  was  said  to  be  matter  of  notoriety, 
that  previous  to  his  coming  into  office  as  First  Minister, 
Lord  Shelburne's  landed  property  in  Ireland,  as  well  as 
his  estates  at  Bowood  in  Wiltshire,  were  all  greatly 
encumbered.  His  enemies  asserted,  that  soon  after  the 
conclusion  of  Peace,  the  mortgages  were  paid  off,  and 
his  debts  discharged.  But,  a  circumstance  which  made 
a  greater  impression,  arose  from  the  weight  which  Pitt 

527 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS      [178 

himself  involuntarily  gave  to  these  allegations,  by  his 
own  line  of  conduct  towards  Lord  Shelburne.  There 
seemed,  indeed,  an  internal  evidence  in  Pitt's  mode  of 
acting,  which  implied  his  disapprobation,  either  of  that 
Nobleman's  general  character,  or  of  some  censurable  act 
done  by  him  while  in  employment.  For,  though  scarcely 
ten  months  elapsed  before  Pitt  came  again  into  power, 
yet  he  never  associated  Lord  Shelburne  to  any  share  of 
it,  nor  would  even  consent  to  give  him  a  place  in  the 
Cabinet,  as  Lord  President,  or  as  Lord  Privy  Seal.  So 
pointed  an  exclusion  of  the  man,  who  had  first  called 
him  up  to  the  Councils  of  the  Sovereign,  and  placed 
him  there  as  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer,  at  three  and 
twenty,  can  scarcely  be  explained  or  accounted  for, 
except  by  some  such  supposition.  It  is  true  that  Pitt 
pronounced,  as  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer,  from  the 
Treasury  Bench,  the  highest  Encomiums  on  his  principal, 
during  the  course  of  the  discussions  relative  to  the 
Peace.  In  his  memorable  Speech  of  the  21st  of  February, 
he  even  alluded  with  indignant  warmth,  to  the  "  arts  of 
"  defamation  "  which  Lord  Shelburne's  enemies  adopted, 
for  the  purpose  of  degrading  him  in  the  national  esti- 
mation :  arts,  of  which  Pitt  professed  his  scorn,  as  well 
as  his  conviction  ot  their  falsehood.  But,  either  he 
subsequently  altered  his  opinion,  or  his  actions  contra- 
dicted his  professions.  That  towards  the  end  of  1784, 
when  Pitt  was  established  in  power,  he  advised  His 
Majesty  to  raise  Lord  Shelburne  to  the  rank  of  a 
British  Marquis,  must  likewise  be  admitted.  But,  that 
Title  was  understood  to  be  given,  (like  the  Earldom  of 
Lonsdale,  conferred  by  Pitt  on  Sir  James  Lowther, 
earlier  in  the  same  year),  as  payment  in  full  from  the 
first  Minister,  for  all  past  obligations  or  services.  Lord 
Shelburne,  after  his  resignation,  seemed  in  fact  to  be 
regarded  as  politically  extinct,  though  still  in  the  full 
enjoyment  of  all  his  faculties  of  body  and  mind,  nor  at 
all  supposed  to  want  ambition.  The  Marquis  of  Lans- 

528 


rss. 


1783.]  AN  "INTERREGNUM" 

down,  as  a  Peer  of  Parliament,  sometimes  took  a  part 
in  the  Debates  of  the  upper  House  ;  but  he  never  openly 
aspired  again  to  become  first  Lord  of  the  Treasury,  nor 
even  to  enter  the  Cabinet. 

March.]  Throughout  the  whole  proceeding  of  the 
Ministerial  change  that  took  place  at  this  time,  there 
was  something  personal,  which  attached  exclusively  to 
himself.  He  resigned,  almost  immediately  after  the 
second  Debate,  of  which  I  have  spoken ;  but  the 
Administration  was  by  no  means  on  that  account,  at 
an  end.  Pitt,  far  from  following  his  example,  remained 
in  office  more  than  five  weeks,  as  Chancellor  of  the  Ex- 
chequer, after  the  first  Lord  of  the  Treasury  had  retired ; 
a  circumstance  unprecedented  in  our  History ! — An 
extraordinary  and  anomalous  interval  of  time  followed 
Lord  Shelburne's  resignation,  during  which,  the  functions 
of  government  may  be  said  to  have  suffered  a  suspension  ; 
while  the  King,  the  Ministry,  and  the  Candidates  for 
power,  stood  looking  at  each  other.  William  the  Third 
never  displayed  more  steadiness  or  determination,  at 
any  period  of  his  life,  either  when  Prince  of  Orange,  or 
after  his  elevation  to  the  Crown  of  England,  than 
George  the  Third  manifested,  throughout  the  whole  of 
this  "Interregnum,"  as  it  was  denominated.  Though 
his  first  Minister  had  quitted  him,  he  did  not  abandon 
himself,  or  forsake  those  individuals  who  remained  faith- 
ful to  him.  On  the  contrary,  he  made  the  most  desperate 
efforts  to  avoid  passing  under  a  yoke,  which  he  considered 
as  equally  painful  to  himself,  and  pernicious  to  his  people. 

The  Coalition  having  twice  defeated  Administration 
in  the  House  of  Commons,  and  having  compelled  Lord 
Shelburne  to  retire,  considered  the  business  as  effected, 
and  their  triumph  secure.  Resting  therefore  on  their 
Arms,  without  attempting  to  push  their  advantages 

th( 


farther,  they  waited  till  the  King  should  send  to  the 
two  leaders,  in  order  to  form  a  new  Ministry.  But,  in 
this  expectation,  however  natural,  they  greatly  deceived 

529  34 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [1783. 


themselves.  That  Prince,  as  if  conscious  that  Lord 
Shelburne  constituted  the  principal,  and  the  most 
vulnerable  object  of  attack,  having  disembarrassed 
his  Councils  of  the  weight  that  encumbered  them, 
endeavoured  to  repair  the  breach,  and  to  form  a  new 
rampart  against  Lord  North  and  Fox.  It  might  per- 
haps have  been  imagined,  that  the  presence  of  the 
former  Nobleman  in  Cabinet,  and  the  share  of  Power 
which  must  necessarily  be  allotted  to  him  and  his  friends, 
in  the  formation  of  a  new  Government ;  would  have 
tranquillized  the  King's  mind,  by  affording  a  security 
against  the  attempts  or  character  of  the  latter  statesman. 
But,  he  knew  by  the  experience  of  many  years,  the  plia- 
bility and  easiness  of  Lord  North's  nature :  nor  was  he 
unacquainted  with  the  energy  of  Fox's  mind,  or  unap- 
prized  of  the  efforts  that  he  would  probably  make,  in 
order  to  cement,  and  to  perpetuate  that  elevation,  which 
he  had  now  nearly  attained  with  so  much  difficulty. 
The  King,  who  considered  Fox  as  a  man  ruined  in 
Fortune,  of  relaxed  morals,  and  surrounded  with  a 
crowd  of  followers  resembling  him  in  these  particulars ; 
deprecated  as  the  severest  misfortune  to  himself  and  to 
his  Subjects,  the  necessity  of  taking  such  a  person,  how- 
ever eminent  for  capacity,  into  his  confidence  or  councils. 
When  we  consider  these  circumstances,  we  shall  not 
wonder  at  the  long,  though  ineffectual  resistance  made 
by  His  Majesty,  before  he  submitted  to  receive  the  Law 
from  the  "  Coalition." 

During  the  course  of  the  Month  of  March,  every 
Measure  was  adopted  on  the  part  of  the  King,  that 

Eromised  to  avert  so  great  an  evil,  and  to  frustrate  the 
opes  of  the  new  Confederates.  Earl  Gower,  to  whom 
the  place  just  vacated  by  Lord  Shelburne,  was  offered, 
manifested  the  utmost  readiness  to  accept  it,  if  the 
probable  means  of  maintaining  himself  there,  could  be 
demonstrated.  But,  by  what  expedient  could  a  Minority 
of  the  House  of  Commons,  be  converted  by  him  at  once 

530 


1783.]  WANTED:   A  PREMIER 

into  a  Majority?  The  difficulties  being  considered  as 
insuperable,  the  experiment  was  therefore  at  length 
abandoned.  Meanwhile,  the  Coalition,  indignant  at  so 
long  a  delay,  began  to  manifest  symptoms  of  impatience. 
Mr.  Coke,  Member  for  the  County  of  Norfolk,  a  gentle- 
man equally  respectable  for  character,  and  distinguished 
for  his  immense  property,  having  given  notice  on  the 
19th  of  March,  that  if  no  Ministry  should  be  formed 
in  the  course  of  two  days,  he  would  move  an  address 
to  the  Crown,  on  the  subject ;  the  King,  conceiving  it 
dangerous,  as  well  as  useless,  to  protract  the  contest, 
sent  his  Commands  to  the  Duke  of  Portland  and  Lord 
North,  to  wait  upon  him  at  St.  James's.  I  have  been 
assured  that  at  the  Audience  which  took  place,  His 
Majesty  offered  to  concede  every  point  in  litigation, 
except  one ;  namely,  that  Lord  Thurlow  should  not  be 
deprived  of  the  Great  Seal.  If  that  Nobleman,  he  said, 
were  permitted  to  remain  in  Office,  he  would  allow  the 
new  Ministers  to  dispose  of  all  other  Employments  at 
their  pleasure.  But,  no  arguments  could  induce  the 
Coalition  to  relax  upon  so  essential  an  Article.  Fox 
equally  disliked  and  dreaded  the  Chancellor,  whose 
intractability,  when  added  to  his  influence  over  the 
Royal  mind,  in  a  place  which  rendered  him  the  Director 
of  his  Sovereign's  conscience ;  exposed  the  new  Candi- 
dates for  Office,  to  perpetual  danger.  They  insisted 
peremptorily  on  putting  the  Great  Seal  into  Commis- 
sion. Their  proposition  being  as  firmly  rejected  by  His 
Majesty,  the  Conference  terminated  without  any  pro- 
gress or  beneficial  result. 

19th  March.]  Just  at  this  critical  juncture  died  the 
Honourable  Dr.  Frederick  Cornwallis,  Archbishop  of 
Canterbury ;  a  man  of  amiable  character,  though  not 
distinguished  by  eminent  virtues  or  talents.  The  King, 
who  well  knew  that  the  Coalition,  or  in  other  words, 
that  Fox,  had  destined  that  great  ecclesiastical  Eleva- 
tion, for  Shipley,  Bishop  of  St.  Asaph,  or  for  Hinch- 

531 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [1783. 

cliffe,  Bishop  of  Peterborough ;  probably,  for  the 
former  of  them ;  and  who  was  also  aware  that  if  he 
wished  to  dispose  of  it,  himself,  he  had  not  an  hour 
to  lose;  immediately  sent  for  Dr.  Hurd,  Bishop  of 
Worcester.  That  excellent  Prelate,  whose  piety  and 
learning  rendered  him  one  of  the  ornaments,  as  well 
as  pillars  of  the  Anglican  Church,  having  waited  on 
His  Majesty,  was  informed  by  him,  that  the  See  of 
Canterbury  had  become  vacant ;  and  that,  as  he  knew 
no  person,  in  his  opinion,  more  worthy  to  fill  the 
Metropolitan  Chair,  he  wished  the  Bishop  to  accept 
it.  He  added,  that  in  the  actual  position  of  public 
affairs,  when  he  might,  every  day,  be  compelled  to  take 
new  Ministers  into  his  Councils,  he  hoped  that  the 
Bishop  would  interpose  no  unnecessary  delay.  But, 
Dr.  Hurd,  far  from  desiring  a  dignity  so  much  sought 
after,  besought  the  King  to  excuse  him  for  declining 
it :  stating,  that  neither  his  health,  nor  his  frame  of 
mind,  were  adequate  to  the  extended  duties  of  the 
Metropolitan  See,  though  equal  to  fulfilling  the  more 
limited  Functions  of  his  own  Diocese.  His  Majesty 
having,  not  without  great  reluctance,  yielded  to  these 
reasons,  then  insisted  that  the  Bishop  should  at  least 
name  the  person,  whom  he  conceived  most  proper  to 
succeed  Dr.  Cornwallis.  Hurd,  without  long  hesita- 
tion, mentioned  Dr.  Louth,  Bishop  of  London :  and  a 
messenger  was  instantly  dispatched  to  find  him,  at  his 
house  in  St.  James's  Square.  The  Bishop  arriving  in 
a  very  short  time,  had  no  sooner  entered  the  Closet, 
than  the  King  made  him  the  same  proposition  which 
he  had  done  to  Hurd.  Extraordinary  as  it  may 
appear,  he  met  from  that  Prelate  with  a  similar 
refusal ;  and  one  not  less  sincere,  as  well  as  inflexible, 
than  the  former.  In  this  unexpected  predicament, 
the  King  addressing  himself  to  them  both,  said,  "  My 
"  Lords,  I  will  not  press  either  of  you  further :  but, 
"  before  you  leave  this  room,  you  must  recommend  a 

532 


1783.]        APPOINTING  AN  ARCHBISHOP 

"  proper  successor  to  the  deceased  Archbishop ;  and 
"  whomsoever  you  shall  agree  to  name,  I  will  accept.11 
The  two  Prelates  having  requested  to  be  allowed  a 
short  time  for  consulting  together,  after  a  few  minutes 
deliberation,  without  quitting  the  royal  presence,  united 
in  nominating  Dr.  John  Moore,  Bishop  of  Bangor. 
Being  sent  for  to  St.  Jameses,  on  his  arrival,  to  his  no 
small  astonishment,  he  learned  the  reasons  for  which 
he  had  been  summoned  to  Court.  He  accepted  the 
preferment ;  but,  the  requisite  forms  incident  to  the 
Conge  d'elire,  and  other  ceremonies  indispensable  to 
the  Election,  prevented  the  Translation  from  being 
completed,  before  the  second  of  the  following  Month ; 
the  very  day  on  which  the  King  having  surrendered  at 
discretion,  the  Coalition  actually  took  possession  of  the 
Government. 

Dr.  Moore,  whom  we  have  beheld  during  two  and 
twenty  years  Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  and  who  owed 
his  elevation  to  that  high  dignity,  to  the  joint  recom- 
mendations of  Hurd  and  Louth ;  was  a  Prelate  of  an 
irreproachable  life,  added  to  a  solid  understanding. 
But,  his  first  advance  in  the  ecclesiastical  profession, 
arose  from  one  of  those  accidents,  which,  whatever 
Juvenal  may  have  said  to  the  contrary,  sometimes 
seem  to  determine,  no  less  than  merit,  the  color  of  our 
fate.  The  Duchess  Dowager  of  Marlborough,  after 
the  late  Duke^s  decease  in  1758,  having  occasion  for  a 
tutor  to  superintend  the  education  of  her  youngest  son, 
the  present  Lord  Robert  Spencer ;  applied  to  the  Dean 
of  Christ  Church,  Oxford,  requesting  him  to  recommend 
a  proper  person  to  her  for  the  purpose.  I  have  been 
assured,  that  Mr.  Moore,  then  a  Servitor  of  that 
College,  of  very  obscure  birth  and  connections  ;  happen- 
ing to  cross  the  Quadrangle,  at  the  precise  moment  of 
this  application ;  it  immediately  occurred  to  the  Dean's 
mind,  that  he  would  answer  the  description  of  the  tutor 
demanded  by  the  Duchess.  He  hesitated  nevertheless 

533 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

for  some  time,  whether  he  should  make  the  proposition 
to  Mr.  Moore ;  her  Grace  having  positively  insisted  on 
his   stipulating,  that   whatever   individual   she   should 
receive  into  her  family,  in  quality  of  Preceptor  to  her 
son,  should   not   be  admitted   to   have   the   honor   of 
dining  at   her   table.     The  offer,   when   made   by  the 
Dean,  was  however  accepted  under  that  exclusion  :  but, 
so  rapid  became  Mr.  Moored  progress  in  her  personal 
esteem,  no  less  than  in  her  affection,  that  within  a  very 
short  time  she  found  herself  unable  to  dine  without 
him.      Her    preference    assumed    even    so    decided   a 
character,  as  to  leave  him  no  room  to  doubt  of  her 
inclination,  if  he  had  encouraged  it,  notwithstanding 
the  prodigious  disparity  of  their  respective  situations  in 
life ;  to  have  bestowed  her  hand  on  him  in  marriage. 
Instead  of  thus  acting,  as  a  meaner  man  would  have 
done,  his  sense  of  honor  and  delicacy  of  sentiment  led 
him  to  communicate  the  advances  made  him  by  the 
Duchess,  to .  her  son  the  present  Duke.     A  conduct  so 
highly  disinterested,  and  principles  so  elevated,  could 
not  fail  ultimately  to  meet  their  just  reward.     By  the 
Duke  of  Marlborough's  interest,  being  promoted  in  the 
Church,  he  was   in  progress   of  time   made   Dean    of 
Canterbury;    from    which    situation    he   soon   became 
Bishop   of  Bangor :    passing  through  no   other  inter- 
mediate   Episcopal    stage,    'till    he    attained    to    the 
Metropolitan  dignity.     Such  an  impression  indeed  had 
his  merit  and  character  produced,  while  he  remained  at 
Canterbury,  that  on  his  promotion  to  the  See  of  Bangor, 
all   those    persons   who   came   to    take   leave   of  him, 
expressed  their  full  conviction  of  his  returning  to  them 
again   as   Archbishop.      "We   console   ourselves,   Mr. 
"  Dean,"  said  they  "  for  losing  you  at  present,  by  the 
"  confident    expectation   which   we    entertain   of  your 
"  speedy  restoration  to  us.11     I  return  to  the  course  of 
public  affairs. 

On  the  complete  failure  of  the  first  attempt  already 
534 


178*.]  A  PROPOSAL  OF  DESPAIR 

mentioned,  which  His  Majesty  made  to  form  a  new 
Administration ;  many  propositions  were  suggested  to 
prop  and  renovate  the  still  existing  Ministry,  however 
difficult  such  a  work  might  justly  be  esteemed  under 
the  actual  circumstances.  Mr.  Pitt,  desirous  to  meet 
the  King^s  wishes  on  a  point  which  coincided  with  all 
his  own  objects  of  personal  elevation  and  ambition, 
suffered  himself  to  be  persuaded  to  promise  that  he 
would  accept  the  post  of  First  Lord  of  the  Treasury, 
in  addition  to  the  office  of  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer ; 
and  during  twenty-four  hours,  he  might  be  said  to  have 
in  some  measure  actually  held  both  those  offices.  But, 
at  the  end  of  that  short  time,  finding  it  impracticable, 
after  full  examination,  to  set  up  any  Government  which 
promised  duration,  or  which  could  make  head  against 
the  "  Coalition  "  in  the  House  of  Commons,  he  reluct- 
antly retracted  his  engagement.  Reduced  almost  to 
despair  by  so  many  disappointments,  and  unable  to 
effect  his  emancipation,  the  King  unquestionably 
meditated  the  extraordinary  project  of  visiting  his 
Electoral  dominions,  and  relinquishing  for  a  time  to 
the  "  Coalition,11  the  power  of  which  they  had  forcibly 
possessed  themselves.  But,  on  communicating  his 
intentions  to  the  Chancellor,  that  Minister,  far  from 
encouraging  the  proposition,  gave  it  his  strongest 
disapprobation.  "There  is  nothing  easier,  Sir,"  said 
he,  with  his  characteristic  severity  of  voice  and  manner, 
"  than  to  go  over  to  Hanover.  It  may  not  however 
"  prove  so  easy  to  return  from  thence  to  this  country, 
"  when  your  Majesty  becomes  tired  of  Germany. 
"  Recollect  the  precedent  of  James  the  Second,  who 
"  precipitately  embraced  a  similar  expedient.  Your 
"  Majesty  must  not  think  for  a  moment,  of  adopting 
"  so  imprudent  and  hazardous  a  step.  Time  and 
"  patience  will  open  a  remedy  to  the  present  evils." 
The  King,  happily  for  himself,  acquiesced  in  Lord 
Thurlow's  wise  and  wholesome  advice. 

535 


WRAXALL^  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [irss. 

24th  March.]  While  these  interesting  scenes  passed 
at  St.  Jameses,  the  House  of  Commons,  completely  in 
the  hands  of  the  "Coalition,"  proceeded,  though  with 
great  caution  and  external  testimonies  of  respect,  to 
press  the  Sovereign  by  every  constitutional  means,  that 
he  would  put  an  end  to  the  Interregnum,  which  Fox 
denominated  "  the  most  insolent  domination  that  ever 
"  disgraced  a  free  country.11  On  the  Motion  of  Mr. 
Coke,  an  Address  to  that  purpose  being  voted,  was 
carried  up  to  the  foot  of  the  Throne :  but  the  King, 
neither  terrified  nor  shaken,  replied  to  it  in  general  and 
vague,  though  in  gracious  terms.  The  debate  which 
took  place  in  consequence  of  Mr.  Coke's  Motion  was 
attended  with  a  curious  and  interesting  circumstance. 
Irritated  by  the  delays  and  impediments  to  their  attain- 
ment of  Power,  the  "Coalition,11  affecting  to  consider 
them  as  caused  by  the  operation  of  secret  influence  on 
the  Royal  mind,  and  clearly  applying  the  imputation 
itself  to  Jenkinson  ;  that  gentleman,  who  was  present 
on  the  occasion,  repelled  the  charge,  so  often  preferred 
against  him  in  the  course  of  the  present  Reign,  with 
the  most  decided  and  peremptory  denial  of  the  fact. 
He  candidly  admitted  indeed,  that  he  had  seen  His 
Majesty  repeatedly  in  the  course  of  the  preceding 
month  :  but  he  justified  the  act,  as,  in  his  quality  of  a 
Privy  Councillor,  he  was  bound  to  obey  the  summons  of 
his  Sovereign,  and  to  repair  to  St.  James's,  whenever 
officially  required.  The  idea  of  secret  influence  he 
reprobated,  as  only  a  bait  for  the  multitude,  invented 
to  delude  the  Nation,  and  brought  forward  on  the 
present  occasion,  merely  to  serve  political  purposes. 
Having  exculpated  himself,  he  conjured  Lord  North, 
though  now  allied  with  Fox,  to  state  as  a  man  of 
honour  and  veracity,  whether  during  his  Administration 
of  many  years,  when  they  acted  together,  his  Lordship 
had  ever  found  or  felt  such  a  pretended  influence  lurk- 
ing behind  the  Throne.  Jenkinson  added,  that  so 

536 


1783.]  COERCING  THE  KING 

implicit  a  reliance  had  he  on  Lord  North's  principles  of 
honour,  as  willingly  to  abide  the  issue  of  his  declaration 
respecting  the  point.  Thus  called  on,  that  Nobleman 
rose,  and  in  terms  the  most  explicit,  confirmed  all  that 
Jenkinson  had  asserted ;  disdaining  to  swell  the  popular 
cry,  and  protesting  that  he  never  had  experienced  any 
concealed  agency  or  interposition  between  himself  and 
the  Sovereign,  while  he  had  presided  in  the  Councils  of 
the  Crown.  It  was  not  possible  for  a  declaration  to  be 
less  equivocal,  or  better  calculated  to  undeceive  the 
believers  in  secret  influence ;  but,  the  opinion  had  taken 
too  deep  a  hold  of  the  public  mind,  and  was  sustained 
with  too  much  art,  to  be  eradicated  even  by  such 
concurring  testimonies. 

No  impression  having  apparently  been  made  by  the 
Address,  and  His  Majesty  remaining  inflexible,  Lord 
Surrey  spoke  out  in  stronger  language:  while  Lord 
North,  on  the  other  hand,  preserving  more  deference  for 
the  royal  feelings,  deprecated  any  harsh  measures,  and 
advised  to  wait  with  patience  for  the  King's  pleasure. 
Fox,  however,  less  delicate,  did  not  hesitate  to  accuse 
Lord  Thurlow,  if  not  by  name,  yet  by  description,  as 
the  cause  of  so  culpable  a  suspension  of  all  Government ; 
stigmatizing  him  with  the  severest  epithets,  as  the 
grand  adviser  of  the  Crown  in  the  other  House.  Lord 
Surrey,  whose  manner,  person,  and  character,  seemed 
all  well  fitted  to  so  rough  a  task,  rising  again  in  his 
place,  proposed  more  affirmative  steps,  in  order  to  com- 
pel the  King  to  listen  to  the  wishes  of  the  Commons, 
by  forming  immediately  a  new  Administration.  He 
nevertheless  consented  to  postpone  them,  on  receiving 
Mr.  Pitt's  information  and  assurance,  given  from  the 
Treasury  bench,  that  he  had  resigned  his  office  of 
Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer.  This  Event,  which  took 
place  on  the  last  day  of  March,  terminated  the  struggle  ; 
and  forty  eight  hours  afterwards,  His  Majesty  finding 
it  vain  to  protract  his  resistance,  surrendered  at  dis- 

537 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [ires. 

cretion,  by  sending  a   second   time   for   the  Duke   of 
Portland. 

2d  April.]  If  we  consider,  by  the  abstract  principles 
of  the  British  Constitution,  as  recognized  at  the  Revolu- 
tion of  1688,  which  compels  the  Sovereign  to  listen  to 
the  voice  of  the  Majority  of  the  House  of  Commons ; 
the  Conduct  of  George  the  Third,  in  resisting,  for  near 
six  weeks,  their  votes,  and  their  addresses : — if  we 
reflect  moreover,  that  the  consequence  of  his  pertinacity, 
produced  a  suspension  of  many  of  the  essential  and 
vital  functions  of  the  executive  Government;  at  a 
moment  too,  when  the  exertions  of  a  vigorous  Ad- 
ministration were  peculiarly  demanded,  in  order  to 
reduce  various  of  the  military  and  naval  establishments, 
to  the  Standard  of  Peace : — if  we  try  his  actions  by 
these  Criterions,  we  may  be  tempted  to  accuse  him  of 
sacrificing  national  objects,  to  the  gratification  of  his 
private  resentments  or  prejudices.  But  theory  and 
practice  are  often  found  to  be  so  much  at  variance, 
that  it  becomes  unsafe  to  reason  always  from  the  former, 
however  solid  may  appear  the  foundations.  It  is 
certain,  that  though  the  country  anxiously  desired  to 
see  an  efficient  government  established,  and  deeply 
lamented  the  want  of  it  for  so  long  a  time ;  yet,  the 
King  by  no  means  suffered  in  the  estimation  of  his 
people  at  large,  on  account  of  the  desperate  contest  that 
he  had  maintained  against  the  "  Coalition."  The  nation 
in  general  regarded  the  union  formed  between  Lord 
North  and  Fox,  as  a  mutual  sacrifice  of  moral  and 
political  principle,  to  ambition,  or  rather,  to  the  love 
of  Office.  In  vain  did  those  leaders  endeavour  to 
justify  it,  by  recurring  to  past  periods  of  our  History, 
when  similar  Coalitions  were  said  to  have  been  made 
between  contending  Factions.  The  interval  of  eleven 
months,  which  had  scarcely  elapsed  since  Fox  and  Burke 
were  accustomed,  day  by  day,  to  denounce  their  new 
Ally,  as  the  most  incapable  and  wicked  of  Ministers, 

538 


1783.]  THE  KING  DISCLAIMS  RESPONSIBILITY 

appeared  too  short ;  and  the  transition  from  enmity  to 
friendship,  seemed  too  sudden,  to  admit  of  being  easily 
or  satisfactorily  explained  to  vulgar  comprehension. 
His  Majesty's  principles,  however  mistaken  they  might 
be,  were  admitted  to  be  upright,  and  intentionally 
directed  always  to  the  felicity  of  his  Subjects.  America, 
which  had  so  long  formed  the  object  of  contest,  being 
lost ;  with  the  termination  of  the  war,  terminated  like- 
wise the  King^s  unpopularity,  which  had  principally 
originated  from  that  source :  while  on  the  other  hand, 
Fox,  who  during  several  years  had  stood  so  high  in  the 
estimation  of  the  people,  as  a  Patriot ;  now  in  his  turn 
attracted  severe  observations  on  his  recent  junction  with 
a  Minister,  the  Author,  as  he  asserted,  of  all  the  mis- 
fortunes which  he  had  eloquently  depictured,  and  which 
were  deplored  throughout  the  country.  These  senti- 
ments and  opinions,  which  began  already  to  operate, 
and  which  only  required  time  to  mature,  protected  the 
King  against  any  effects  of  popular  disapprobation. 
But,  they  could  not  prevent,  or  longer  protract  his 
surrender  to  the  combined  leaders,  who  now  compelled 
him  to  receive  them  into  his  counsels,  without  further 
delay. 

In  the  Audience  that  he  gave  the  Duke  of  Portland, 
for  the  purpose  of  forming  a  new  Administration,  he 
did  not  affect  to  conceal,  or  even  to  disguise,  the 
emotions  by  which  he  was  agitated  on  the  occasion. 
He  observed  to  that  Nobleman,  that  the  ministerial 
Arrangement  to  which  he  now  submitted,  being  alto- 
gether compulsory,  the  new  Ministers  might  dispose  of 
the  Cabinet  places  and  other  offices,  as  they  should 
think  proper  :  that  he  would  not  oppose,  or  refuse  his 
signature  to  any  Act  presented  to  him  officially  for  his 
sanction  ;  but  that  the  responsibility  of  advising  such 
measures,  must  wholly  rest  with  them.  And  he  added, 
that  he  would  not  create  any  new  British  Peers,  at  their 
recommendation  ;  a  circumstance,  of  which  he  gave 

539 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [17 

them  distinct  and  early  notification.  The  "  Coalition  " 
having  acquiesced,  at  least  tacitly,  in  these  principles 
of  the  King's  Conduct,  took  possession  of  the  Govern- 
ment ;  the  Duke  of  Portland  being  placed  at  the  head 
of  the  Treasury  ;  and  Lord  John  Cavendish  a  second 
time  becoming  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer.  Fox 
returned  to  the  Foreign  Office,  as  was  naturally  to  be 
expected ;  leaving  to  Lord  North,  the  Secretaryship  of 
State  for  the  Home  Department.  Lord  Keppel,  who 
disapproving  of  the  Conditions  of  the  late  Peace,  had 
resigned  the  post  of  First  Lord  of  the  Admiralty, 
immediately  after  its  conclusion,  in  which  high  employ- 
ment he  had  been  replaced  by  Lord  Howe;  was  re- 
instated in  his  antient  functions :  while  Lord  Stor- 
mont  became  President  of  the  Council.  I  have  been 
assured  that  the  Nobleman  last  mentioned,  did  not 
accept  that  situation,  till  he  had  clearly  understood,  as 
he  conceived,  the  King's  pleasure  upon  the  subject ;  who 
not  only  approved,  but  wished  him  to  take  the  Office, 
as  it  would  exclude  an  enemy  from  occupying  so  im- 
portant a  place.  Yet  it  is  difficult  to  reconcile  this 
asserted  permission  and  approbation,  with  the  resentment 
that  His  Majesty  is  known  to  have  subsequently  ex- 
pressed, at  Lord  Stormonfs  thus  actively  joining  the 
Coalition.  The  Privy  Seal  was  lastly  given  to  the  Earl 
of  Carlisle. 

By  this  new  Ministerial  arrangement,  the  Cabinet, 
which  under  Lord  North  had  consisted  of  nine  in- 
dividuals ;  and  which,  under  the  two  succeeding 
Administrations,  was  augmented  to  eleven ;  became 
reduced  to  seven  persons.  At  first  inspection,  there 
seemed  however  to  be  something  like  an  equal  distri- 
bution of  power  between  the  two  leaders  and  parties 
who  had  recently  coalesced;  the  Rockingham  party 
reckoning  four,  and  their  new  Allies  counting  three 
Votes.  But,  on  closer  examination,  the  fallacy  became 
palpable,  and  it  was  evident  that  Fox  in  reality  possessed 

540 


. 


1783.]       CABINET  DOMINATED  BY  FOX 

the  whole  authority  of  Government.  Not  only  he  com- 
manded a  numerical  majority :  he  likewise  held  the 
Treasury  under  his  complete  influence.  Nor  was  this 
the  single  circumstance,  that  gave  him  a  preponderating 
weight  in  every  measure  or  deliberation.  The  energy 
and  activity  of  his  talents,  when  contrasted  with  the 
flexibility  and  indolence  of  Lord  North,  doubled  his 
personal,  as  well  as  political  consequence.  His  three 
friends  in  the  Cabinet,  were  moreover  incapable,  if  they 
had  even  been  desirous,  of  setting  limits  to  his  ambition, 
or  of  restraining  his  ascendancy.  To  Fox,  the  Duke  of 
Portland  might  indeed  be  said  to  owe  his  elevation  to 
the  post  of  First  Lord  of  the  Treasury ;  an  eminence 
to  which  his  own  very  moderate  abilities  could  not  of 
themselves,  have  conducted  him.  In  like  manner,  Lord 
Keppel  stood  indebted  for  both  his  place  and  his  Peerage, 
principally  to  Fox.  Lord  John  Cavendish,  from  his 
great  family  connexions,  and  recognized  integrity  of 
character,  might  be  esteemed  indeed  an  honor  and  an 
ornament  to  any  Ministry  :  but,  though  independant  in 
mind  and  in  fortune,  yet  he  appeared  to  be  not  the  less 
under  Fox^s  intellectual  dominion,  who  on  all  occasions 
propelled  and  guided  him,  in,  and  out  of  Parliament. 
Lord  North  likewise  by  no  means  possessed,  or  exerted 
the  same  influence  over  his  two  Cabinet  adherents,  as 
Fox  maintained  among  his  Co-ad jutors  :  Lord  Stormont 
in  particular,  might  be  considered  as  wholly  independant 
of  Lord  North^s  controul.  Nor  did  the  Offices  of  Presi- 
dent, and  of  Privy  Seal,  in  themselves  confer  the  same 
active  rights  of  Ministerial  interference,  as  the  Treasury, 
the  Exchequer,  and  the  Admiralty ;  all  which  Depart- 
ments lay  in  Fox^s  partition  of  Employments.  These 
circumstances  are  not  unessential,  when  we  speculate 
on  the  state  of  things  under  the  Duumvirs ;  and  may 
partly  explain  the  causes,  from  which  arose  some  of  the 
most  affirmative  measures,  subsequently  adopted  by  the 
"  Coalition." 

541 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS      [1783. 

If  Fox,  however,  took  effectual  care  to  secure  the  real 
power  of  the  State  in  his  own  hands,  he  in  return  allowed 
Lord  North  to  bestow  many  of  the  great  ostensible 
Offices  about  the  Court,  among  his  immediate  friends. 
The  Earl  of  Dartmouth,  instead  of  Privy  Seal,  as  he 
had  formerly  been,  was  made  Lord  Steward :  while  the 
Earl  of  Hertford  appeared  again  in  the  Drawing  Room, 
re-invested  with  his  white  Wand  of  Lord  Chamberlain. 
Lord  Townshend,  restored  to  his  antient  employment, 
replaced  the  Duke  of  Richmond  at  the  head  of  the 
Ordnance.  He  was  a  Nobleman  of  very  considerable 
ability,  but,  of  great  eccentricity  of  manners  and 
character.  Cheerful  in  his  disposition,  affable,  face- 
tious, and  endowed  with  uncommon  powers  of  conversa- 
tion, he  was  formed  to  acquire  popularity.  He  emi- 
nently possessed  the  dangerous  talent  of  drawing 
Caricatures,  which  faculty  he  did  not  always  restrain 
within  the  limits  of  severe  prudence,  though  he  no 
more  spared  himself,  than  he  did  others.  In  Ireland, 
while  administering  the  affairs  of  that  kingdom  during 
five  years,  he  gave  general  satisfaction  ;  and  I  remember 
Courtney  eulogizing  him  in  the  House  of  Commons,  as 
Lord  Lieutenant,  in  the  language  of  Horace  to  Augustus. 

"  Longas,  o  utinam,  Dux  bone,  Ferias 
Prcestes  Hibernice ;  dicimus  integro 
Sicci  mane  die,  dicimus  uvidi, 
Quum  Sol  oceano  subest." 

Indeed,  not  one  of  the  Viceroys  sent  over  to  Dublin 
in  the  course  of  twelve  years,  between  1772  and  1784, 
could  compete  with  Lord  Townshend  in  the  affection  of 
the  Irish.  Lord  Harcourt  was  too  grave  and  measured 
in  his  manners ;  the  Earl  of  Buckinghamshire  had  too 
cold,  stiff,  and  lofty  a  deportment ;  Lord  Carlisle  was 
too  fine  a  Gentleman,  and  too  highly  bred ;  the  Duke 
of  Portland  and  Earl  Temple,  both,  either  from  dis- 
inclination or  from  physical  inability,  observed  too 

542 


1783.]  NEW  APPOINTMENTS 

rigorously  the  virtues  of  temperance  and  abstemious- 
ness ;  virtues  by  no  means  congenial  to  the  soil : — lastly 
Lord  Northington  was  too  infirm  in  his  health,  to 
acquire  general  attachment  in  a  country,  where  no 
virtues,  however  eminent,  could  recommend  to  national 
approbation,  unless  accompanied  by  personal  sacrifices  of 
various  kinds.  The  Duke  of  Rutland,  whom  Pitt  sent 
over  to  the  Sister  Kingdom,  early  in  1784;  by  the 
magnificence  of  his  establishment,  the  conviviality  of 
his  temper,  and  the  excesses  of  his  table,  obliterated  or 
superseded  Lord  Townshend  in  their  regard :  but  he 
paid  for  the  triumph  with  his  life,  falling  a  victim 
in  the  vigor  of  his  age,  within  four  years,  to  his 
irregularities. 

Mr.  Charles  Townshend,  commonly  called  "  Spanish 
"  Charles,"  whom  Pitt  created  with  nine  other  in- 
dividuals, a  Peer  in  1797,  by  the  title  of  Lord  Bayning, 
was  made  Treasurer  of  the  Navy.  Wallace  became 
once  more  Attorney  General.  Lord  Sandwich,  instead 
of  presiding  over  the  Admiralty,  and  directing  that 
great  Department  of  State,  dwindled  into  Ranger  of 
the  two  Parks :  but  as  some  compensation  for  this 
official  degradation,  his  son  Lord  Hinchingbrook,  a 
Nobleman  deservedly  acceptable  to  His  Majesty,  as 
well  as  one  of  the  most  honest,  loyal,  frank,  and  friendly 
men  in  the  kingdom,  was  made  Master  of  the  Buck 
Hounds.  Sir  Grey  Cooper,  who  had  been  one  of  the 
joint  Secretaries  of  the  Treasury,  obtained  a  seat  at  the 
Board.  Not  that  Fox  appeared  by  any  means  oblivious 
of  his  friends ;  a  fault  which  never  could  be  imputed  to 
him.  Burke  went  back  with  great  alacrity  to  the  Pav 
Office;  as  did  his  brother  Richard  Burke,  to  the  joint 
Secretaryship  of  the  Treasury.  Mr.  Frederick  Montague 
resumed  his  place  at  that  Board :  while  the  Earl  of 
Surrey,  whose  recent  services  and  prominent  merit  in 
Parliament,  could  not  be  passed  over  without  remunera- 
tion, filled  the  remaining  vacancy.  Considerably  more 

543 


WRAXALKS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [1783. 

than  two  Centuries  had  elapsed,  since  the  gallant  and 
distinguished  Earl  of  that  name,  so  well  known  under 
Henry  the  Eighth,  the  last  who  bore  the  Title,  had 
occupied  a  situation  in  the  Councils  of  the  Crown. 

Colonel  Fitzpatrick  was  made  Secretary  at  War ;  and 
though  his  talents  always  appeared  to  me,  to  be  of  a 
description  more  elegant  than  solid;  more  adapted  to 
entertain,  than  fitted  for  the  Desk,  or  for  the  Cabinet ; 
yet  I  have  been  assured,  even  by  those  who  were  not 
partial  to  him  among  his  own  Profession,  that  he  gave 
great,  as  well  as  general  satisfaction,  while  he  held  that 
Employment.  His  person,  tall,  manly,  and  extremely 
distinguished ;  set  off  by  his  manners,  which,  though 
lofty  and  assuming,  were  nevertheless  elegant  and  pre- 
possessing ;  —  these  endowments  added  grace  to  the 
attractions  of  his  conversation.  No  man's  society  was 
more  eagerly  courted  among  the  highest  Orders,  by 
persons  of  both  sexes.  He  possessed  no  mean  poetic 
talents,  peculiarly  for  compositions  of  wit,  fancy,  and 
Satire,  in  all  which  he  far  exceeded  Fox.  They  had 
been  brought  up  together  from  early  life,  remained 
inseparable  to  the  last,  and  were  strongly  attached  to 
each  other.  Fitzpatrick,  like  his  friend,  was  a  constant 
votary  of  Brookes's  Club,  and  became  during  many 
years,  a  victim  to  play ;  but  he  possessed  one  advantage 
over  Fox,  namely  the  support  arising  from  a  Profession. 
As  a  Member  of  the  House  of  Commons,  he  obtained 
no  distinction  for  eloquence  ;  though  he  never  betrayed, 
when  addressing  Parliament,  any  want  of  ideas,  language, 
or  ability.  Under  Charles  the  Second,  he  would  have 
been  more  in  his  element  and  in  his  place,  than  under 
such  a  Prince  as  George  the  Third ;  of  whose  Court  he 
must  nevertheless  always  be  considered  to  have  formed 
a  Constellation  and  an  ornament.  In  the  "  Memoires 
u  de  Grammont "  he  would  assuredly  have  filled  a  very 
distinguished  nitch.  I  witnessed  the  painful  spectacle 
of  his  surviving  almost  all  the  personal  and  intellectual 

544 


1783.]  THE  GREAT  SEAL 

graces,  which  nature  had  conferred  on  him  with  so 
lavish  a  hand.  During  the  last  twelve  or  eighteen 
months  of  his  life,  it  might  be  said  of  Fitzpatrick,  as 
the  King  of  Prussia  observes  of  Prince  Eugene  in  the 
Trenches  before  Philipsburgh  in  1734,  "  Ce  rfetoit  que 
"  Tombre  du  grand  Eugene"  His  mind  and  body, 
perhaps  impaired  by  excesses,  had  equally  fallen  into  a 
state  of  premature  decay. 

Sheridan  became  the  other  Secretary  of  the  Treasury, 
and  Lee  was  replaced  in  his  former  situation  of  Solicitor 
General.  For  the  Lord  Lieutenancy  of  Ireland,  the 
Earl  of  Northington  was  selected  by  Fox.  His  person, 
unwieldy,  vaccillating,  and  destitute  of  grace,  seemed 
to  disqualify  him  for  any  active  exertions  of  body ;  nor 
were  his  faculties  brilliant:  but  I  have  always  heard 
that  he  gave  great  satisfaction,  and  was  as  much  beloved, 
as  his  infirmities  permitted,  during  the  period  of  his 
short  residence  in  that  kingdom.  The  embassy  to 
Paris,  Fox  destined  for  the  Duke  of  Manchester.  His 
figure,  noble;  his  manners,  affable  and  corresponding 
with  his  high  rank,  prepossessed  in  his  favor :  but  his 
fortune  bore  no  proportion  to  his  dignity.  Though  a 
man  of  very  dissipated  habits,  and  unaccustomed  to 
diplomatic  business,  he  did  not  want  talents.  Such 
were  the  leading  Arrangements  made  by  the  "  Coalition," 
on  their  coming  into  power.  The  Great  Seal,  which  no 
expostulations  on  the  part  of  the  King,  could  induce 
them  to  leave  in  Thurlow's  hands,  and  which  Wedder- 
burn  wisely  declined  accepting  under  the  circumstances 
of  the  time,  was  put  into  commission ;  Lord  Lough- 
borough  being  placed  at  its  head.  He  constituted  a 
valuable  acquisition  to  the  new  Ministry  in  the  House 
of  Peers. 

Lord  North,  it  must  be  reluctantly  confessed,  however 
circumstances  may  justify  his  union  with  Fox,  on 
principles  of  policy,  of  personal  safety,  or  of  necessity ; 
did  not  perform  in  this  great  Drama,  the  most  dignified 

545  35 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    fi783. 

part.  After  having  occupied  the  post  of  First  Minister, 
at  the  head  of  both  the  Treasury  and  the  Exchequer, 
for  twelve  Sessions,  it  seemed  to  ordinary  observers,  no 
little  degradation,  at  more  than  fifty  years  of  age,  to 
accept  the  Secretaryship  of  State  for  the  Home  Depart- 
ment, and  to  take  his  seat  as  such,  on  the  Treasury 
Bench  where  he  had  so  long  presided,  now  squeezed 
between  Fox  and  Burke.  I  own,  that  I  never  contem- 
plated him  in  that  situation,  without  reflexions  allied 
to  pity.  It  is  true  that  we  have  since  seen,  and  now 
actually  behold,  an  Ex-first  Minister  placed  in  the  same 
Department,  after  having  presided  at  the  helm  during 
more  than  three  years.  But  it  would  be  invidious,  and 
it  is  unnecessary,  to  draw  any  comparison  between  the 
two  individuals.  Neither  their  descent,  the  period  of 
their  respective  Administrations,  nor  even,  according  to 
my  estimate,  their  abilities,  can  be  considered  as  having 
any  similarity,  and  still  less  any  parity.  Mr.  Addington 
was  moreover  removed  from  the  immediate  scene  of  his 
fall  in  1804  and  translated  to  the  upper  House  of 
Parliament :  while  Lord  North  remaining  a  Commoner, 
with  the  insignia  of  the  Garter  across  his  breast,  ex- 
hibited a  spectacle  of  ministerial  greatness  in  Eclipse, 
like  Wolsey,  or  like  Clarendon,  or  like  Bolingbroke. 
Even  the  compliments  and  the  caresses  of  his  late  bitter 
opponents,  now  become  his  co-adjutors,  always  appeared 
to  me,  only  to  sink  him  in  the  estimation  of  the  House. 
But  he  seemed,  himself,  to  be  wholly  exempt  from,  or 
superior  to,  any  painful  emotions  at  the  political  change 
that  he  had  undergone.  The  same  cheerful  complacency, 
ready  wit,  and  unaffected  good  humour,  always  charac- 
terised him  under  every  circumstance.  Sometimes  he 
even  jested  on  his  own  descent  from  the  highest  situation, 
to  a  subordinate  place  in  Government.  The  Apartments 
constituting  the  Secretary  of  Staters  Office  at  the 
Treasury,  being  situate  on  the  second  floor,  he  ex- 
perienced some  fatigue  in  ascending  so  many  steps ;  and 

546 


1783.]        LORD  NORTH'S  EQUANIMITY 

I  recollect  his  once  complaining,  when  out  of  breath,  of 
the  length  of  the  staircase.  Frequently,  from  the  effect 
of  long  habit,  or  from  absence  of  mind,  forgetting  the 
change  in  his  official  situation,  he  went  strait  to  the 
Treasury  Chambers  on  the  first  floor.  Such  was  the 
oblivious  felicity  and  equality  of  his  temper,  that  these 
accidents,  which  would  have  distressed  more  irritable 
men,  never  externally  discomposed  him.  His  eldest 
son,  Colonel  North,  who  had  so  actively  exerted  himself 
to  effect  the  "Coalition,1"  was  made  one  of  the  two 
Under  Secretaries  in  his  father's  Office. 

April.]  It  is  unquestionable  that  there  existed  a 
desire,  if  not  an  intention,  on  the  part  of  the  new 
Administration,  about  this  time,  of  calling  up  Lord 
North  to  the  House  of  Peers.  But,  various  reasons  or 
impediments  probably  prevented  its  accomplishment. 
The  King  having  expressly  informed  the  Ministers,  when 
they  came  into  Office,  that  he  would  not  create  any 
English  Peer,  at  their  recommendation,  or  request ;  it 
was  not  likely  that  he  would  violate  his  resolution,  in 
order  to  elevate  Lord  North  to  that  dignity ;  against 
whom,  as  may  be  supposed,  he  felt  highly  offended,  or 
rather  indignant,  for  his  union  with  Fox.  Lord  North 
himself,  however  well  he  supported  appearances  to  the 
world,  yet  probably  would  not  have  disliked,  after  the 
recent  events,  to  have  quitted  a  scene  such  as  the  House 
of  Commons,  where  he  made  an  inglorious  figure,  and 
where  recollections  very  humiliating  must  continually 
intrude  on  his  mind.  Fox  on  the  other  hand,  could  not 
possibly  be  averse  to  such  a  removal,  as  he  wanted  no 
co-adjutor  to  aid  him  on  the  Treasury  Bench ;  while 
Lord  North's  retreat  would  have  left  him  sole  Minister, 
as  well  as  manager,  of  the  lower  House  of  Parliament. 
But,  for  that  very  reason,  Lord  North  ought  to  have 
felt  himself  in  some  measure  compelled  to  remain  a 
Commoner.  His  party,  already  shaken  and  diminished, 
he  well  knew,  would  have  soon  crumbled  away,  when 

547 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [i783. 


they  no  longer  beheld,  nor  could  have  had  daily  access 
to  their  leader.  Neither  would  he  have  attracted  the 
same  consideration  in  the  other  House,  as  he  excited  in 
his  actual  situation.  Pressed  between  the  amity  of  Fox, 
and  the  hostility  of  Pitt,  with  the  loss  of  America  about 
his  neck,  he  saw  himself  obliged,  after  having  so  long 
performed  the  first  figure,  to  become  only  the  third 
personage  in  the  State. 

The  public  business  of  every  kind,  which  had  been 
nearly  two  Months  delayed  by  the  extraordinary 
occurrences  that  we  have  contemplated,  at  length 
began  in  Parliament.  The  new  Chancellor  of  the 
Exchequer  opened  his  financial  Administration  with  a 
Loan ;  the  terms  of  which,  if  not  as  beneficial  or 
advantageous  to  the  Country  as  might  have  been 
wished,  were  nevertheless,  he  said,  as  good  as  could 
be  procured  under  the  circumstances  of  urgency  and 
retardment,  in  which  the  culpable  obstinacy  of  the 
late  Ministers  had  involved  every  Department.  Mr. 
Pitt,  who  had  now  taken  his  place  on  the  Opposition 
Bench,  and  who  from  this  time,  notwithstanding  his 
youth,  was  justly  considered  as  the  head  of  that  party 
in  the  House  of  Commons ;  opposed  and  censured  the 
terms  of  Lord  John  Cavendish's  Loan ;  but  without 
venturing  to  divide  the  House  upon  it,  as  the  "  Coali- 
"  tion,"  he  was  aware,  would  have  much  outnumbered 
him.  Nor  did  he  prove  more  successful  in  an  attempt 
which  he  soon  afterwards  renewed,  to  effect  a  Parlia- 
mentary Reform,  than  he  had  been  in  the  former 
Session.  He  pronounced  indeed,  a  most  eloquent 
address  upon  the  subject,  and  was  supported  in  his 
Motion,  by  Fox.  Two  Proselytes  likewise,  Mr.  Thomas 
Pitt,  and  Mr.  Dundas,  having  read,  each  their  political 
recantation,  adopted  his  principles  for  rendering  the 
Representation  more  extended,  as  well  as  more  pure 
and  incorrupt.  But,  the  House  remained  deaf  to  all 
these  arguments,  though  illustrated  by  examples ;  the 

548 


1783.]  A   SUGGESTED  SACRIFICE 

latter  of  which  did  not  even  appear  to  have  obtained 
for  those  who  exhibited  them,  the  praise  either  of 
disinterestedness,  or  of  sincerity.  Fox  and  Sheridan, 
while  they  sustained  Pitt's  proposition,  yet  treated 
with  contempt  and  derision,  the  pretended  sacrifice  of 
the  Borough  of  Old  Sarum,  which  Mr.  Thomas  Pitt 
affected  to  offer  up  at  the  shrine  of  the  British  Con- 
stitution, as  a  victim  to  its  renovated  purity.  If  we 
reflect  on  the  close  degree  of  consanguinity  that  existed 
between  William  and  Thomas  Pitt,  who  were  Cousins- 
gerrnan ;  a  relationship  strengthened  by  personal 
friendship : — and  if  we  likewise  recollect  that  Thomas 
represented  the  elder  Branch  of  the  family;  we  may 
perhaps  incline  to  think  that  he  relied  on  being  speedily 
raised  to  the  Peerage,  for  this  mark  of  devotion,  as 
effectively  took  place  scarcely  eight  months  afterwards. 
Dundas,  who  had  a  long  and  a  keen  political  sight, 
having  already  determined  on  attaching  his  future 
political  fortune  to  Pitt,  probably  thought  a  speculative 
political  Tenet,  undeserving  of  contention.  But,  the 
recantation  pronounced  by  both,  rather  tended  to  throw 
a  ridicule  on  the  proposition,  than  to  recommend  it  to  the 
House.  Lord  North  made  ample  amends  for  his  passive 
inactivity  during  the  preceding  session,  when  a  similar 
discussion  took  place.  He  spoke  with  uncommon 
ability,  wit,  and  force  of  argument,  against  all  repre- 
sentative innovation.  Powis,  who  rarely  coincided  with 
him  on  any  point,  joined  him  on  this  occasion.  Mr. 
Pitt's  Resolutions  were  finally  negatived  by  a  far  greater 
majority  than  in  the  preceding  year ;  out  of  near  four 
hundred  and  fifty  Members  who  voted,  only  one 
hundred  and  forty-nine,  having  divided  with  him. 

May.]  No  man  in  Office  made  a  more  conspicuous 
figure,  or  attracted  more  attention,  during  the  Session 
under  consideration,  than  Burke :  but  it  was  not  by 
any  means  such  as  his  friends  and  admirers  could  in 
all  respects  contemplate  either  with  pride,  with  pleasure, 

549 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [1783. 

or  with  approbation.  It  excited  indeed  great  regret, 
that  a  person  endowed  with  parts  so  eminent,  and 
animated  by  Philanthropy  so  extended,  should  never- 
theless allow  himself  at  times,  to  be  led  into  the  most 
unjustifiable  deviations  from  ordinary  prudence  and 
propriety  of  conduct.  In  the  present  instance  he 
involved  his  party,  as  well  as  himself,  in  equal  embar- 
rassment, by  his  intemperate  precipitation.  Two 
individuals,  Powell  and  Bembridge,  the  one,  Cashier, 
the  other,  Accountant,  of  the  Military  Pay  Office, 
having  been  accused  of  malversation  in  the  discharge 
of  their  functions,  had  been  dismissed  by  Colonel  Barre 
from  their  Offices,  while  he  was  Paymaster  of  the 
Forces,  under  Lord  Shelburne's  Administration.  On 
Burke  coming  again  into  that  Employment,  one  of  his 
first  acts,  without  previously  consulting  Fox  upon  the 
subject,  was  to  reinstate  both  those  persons  in  their 
respective  situations.  Such  a  proceeding  relative  to 
Functionaries  laboring  under  heavy  charges,  and  about 
to  become  subjects  of  criminal  prosecution  in  the  Court 
of  King's  Bench,  naturally  formed  an  object  of  discussion 
in  the  House  of  Commons,  where  it  excited  very  pointed 
animadversion.  Burke,  petulant  and  irritable,  defended 
with  warmth  the  step  that  he  had  taken,  though  a 
measure  in  itself  evidently  contrary  to  the  judgment  of 
all  parties.  Fox,  while  he  tacitly  lamented  and  dis- 
approved the  Act,  yet  as  he  never  abandoned  his  friends 
in  distress,  endeavoured  to  justify  its  author.  The 
interference  was  nevertheless,  peculiarly  painful  and 
delicate  on  his  part ;  Powell,  who  had  risen  under  his 
father,  the  late  Lord  Holland,  being  supposed  to  have 
connived  at  some  of  the  appropriations  of  public  money, 
committed,  by  that  Nobleman,  while  Paymaster  of  the 
Forces ;  or  of  which  appropriations  at  least,  he  stood 
loudly  accused  by  popular  prejudice.  It  was  for  the 
corrupt  concealment  of  a  sum  exceeding  forty  eight 
thousand  Pounds  in  the  Accounts  of  Lord  Holland, 

550 


1783.]  BURKED   IMPRUDENCE 

that  Powell  and  Bembridge  were  now  about  to  undergo 
a  trial.  No  circumstance  therefore  could  have  been  less 
agreeable  to  Fox,  while  standing  in  the  conspicuous 
situation  of  Secretary  of  State,  than  to  be  thus  com- 
pelled by  Burke's  imprudence  in  restoring  them  to  their 
places,  to  come  forward  as  the  Advocate  and  Apologist 
of  such  a  transaction. 

The  House  of  Commons,  however  much  they  shewed 
on  every  occasion,  a  disposition  to  approve  and  to 
sanction  the  general  measures  of  Administration  ;  mani- 
fested nevertheless  strong  disapprobation  of  Burke^s 
conduct  in  this  instance,  by  compelling  him  to  accept 
the  Resignation  of  Bembridge.  Powell,  overcome 
either  by  the  weight  of  his  own  reflections,  or  by  his 
inability  to  sustain  the  public  opinion  of  his  culpa- 
bility ;  after  losing  in  a  great  measure  the  use  of  his 
faculties,  put  an  end  to  his  existence  with  a  razor. 
Bembridge,  of  a  firmer  mind,  or  stronger  nerves,  was 
reserved  for  the  infamy  of  a  public  trial  and  condemna- 
tion, before  Lord  Mansfield.  The  prosecution,  reluct- 
antly, but  ably  and  fairly  conducted  by  Lee,  the 
Solicitor  General,  terminated  in  the  complete  exposure 
of  the  fraud  imputed  to  Bembridge,  for  which  the 
Court  sentenced  him  to  a  severe  fine  and  imprisonment. 
Every  exertion  which  the  purity  of  our  Jurisprudence 
will  allow,  was  made  to  soften,  or  to  avert,  the  Severity 
of  the  Stroke.  Burke,  who  did  not  hesitate  to  appear 
in  Court,  seated  upon  the  Bench,  during  the  proceedings, 
gave  the  strongest  attestations  to  Bembridge's  character 
for  integrity.  He  was  accompanied  there  by  Lord 
North,  who  likewise  condescended  to  join  in  a  similar 
testimony  to  the  good  conduct  and  probity  of  the 
accused,  during  the  time  that  he  had,  himself,  formerly 
held  the  Post  of  joint  Paymaster  of  the  Forces.  But, 
these  efforts,  which  proved  unavailing,  only  attracted 
censure  towards  the  persons  who  thus  attempted  to 
screen  from  punishment,  a  conspicuous  delinquent :  while 

551 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [1783 


the  proofs  exhibited  of  his  guilt,  impressed  the  public 
mind  with  opinions  highly  unfavorable,  not  merely  to 
Burke  himself,  at  least  in  a  prudential  point  of  view ; 
but  to  the  Ministry  in  which  he  filled  so  distinguished 
a  place. 

3d  June.]  Scarcely  had  this  affair  ceased  to  occupy 
attention,  when  Burke  plunged  himself  into  a  second 
embarrassment,  hardly  less  painful  to  his  friends.  A 
Bill  for  the  regulation  of  the  Pay  Office,  having  been 
brought  into  the  House  of  Commons  by  himself,  which 
gave  rise  to  much  discussion  and  difference  of  opinion, 
in  its  passage  through  the  Committee ;  the  contending 
parties  agreed  to  fill  up  the  Blanks  amicably,  after  the 
House  rose,  round  the  Speaker's  Chair.  Burke  being 
Paymaster  General,  of  course  took  an  active  part,  as 
did  many  other  Members ;  and  the  Clauses  were  under- 
stood to  have  been  settled  in  the  way  specified,  by 
mutual  consent.  But,  Mr.  Estwick,  Member  for  West- 
bury,  on  a  Motion  for  the  third  reading  of  the  Bill, 
to  the  astonishment  of  the  House,  rising  up  in  his 
place,  preferred  a  formal  charge  against  Burke ; 
accusing  him  of  having  gone  into  the  engrossing  room, 
after  the  Bill  in  question  had  been  carried  there ;  of 
expunging  three  Clauses,  and  altering  a  fourth,  which 
he  re-modelled  to  his  own  taste.  Such  an  act,  if  it  had 
been  proved,  might  have  led  to  very  grave  conse- 
quences; and  must  in  any  case  have  attracted  public 
censure,  or  produced  a  reprimand  from  the  Chair.  Fox 
immediately  came  forward  with  his  characteristic  manli- 
ness, to  the  aid  of  his  friend,  whose  conduct  was  severely 
arraigned  by  Pitt.  The  House  admitted  the  Secretary's 
justification,  and  did  not  inflict  any  mark  of  its  dis- 
approbation on  Burke ;  though  the  excuses  offered,  or 
reasons  alledged,  for  his  Conduct,  were  by  no  means 
such  as  completely  exculpated  him  in  the  opinions  of 
impartial  men.  It  appeared  however  by  the  testimony 
of  Cornwall  the  Speaker,  that  Burke  had  not,  as  he 

552 


1783.]  BURKE   DEFENDED 

was  accused  of  doing,  either  expunged  or  altered  any 
Clause  in  the  engrossing  Office.  The  Speaker  at  least 
asserted,  and  the  House  lent  credit  to  his  assurance, 
that  the  misconception  had  arisen  from  the  circumstance 
of  his  having  put  the  Question  on  the  four  Clauses,  in 
so  low  a  tone  of  voice,  that  they  all  passed  without 
notice.  Pitt  contended  that  even  though  this  extra- 
ordinary fact  were  true,  yet  the  expunged  Clauses  must 
be  restored,  and  debated  anew  by  the  House.  As  the 
proposition  could  not  be  refused,  they  were  therefore 
brought  up,  and  negatived  without  a  Division.  The 
Speaker's  testimony  extricated  Burke,  and  Fox  mani- 
fested the  generous  ardor  of  his  mind  throughout  the 
whole  transaction  ;  an  ardor  which  always  impelled  him 
to  cover  the  errors  of  those  with  whom  he  was  connected 
in  politics  or  friendship.  But,  he  did  not  the  less  in 
private  condemn  Burke's  imprudence ;  and  he  was  said 
to  have  warned  the  Paymaster  of  the  Forces,  as  he 
valued  his  Office,  not  to  involve  his  friends,  and  the 
Administration  of  which  he  composed  so  conspicuous 
a  Member,  in  a  third  similar  Dilemma,  during  the 
remainder  of  the  Session. 

Among  the  persons  of  Eminence  who  have  "  strutted 
"their  hour,"  under  the  reign  of  George  the  Third, 
and  who  about  this  time  disappeared  from  the  great 
public  Theatre,  may  be  named  General  Sir  John 
Irwin.  His  person,  manners,  and  conversation,  were 
all  made  for  the  Drawing  Room,  where  he  seemed 
always  to  be  in  his  native  element.  Though  declining 
in  life,  yet  his  figure,  tall,  graceful,  and  dignified,  set  off 
by  all  the  ornaments  of  Dress,  accompanied  with  a 
Riband  and  a  Star,  rendered  him  conspicuous  in  every 
company.  He  always  reminded  me  of  a  Marshal  of 
France,  such  as  they  are  described  by  St.  Simon,  under 
Louis  the  Fourteenth.  His  politeness,  though  some- 
what formal,  was  nevertheless  natural  and  captivating. 
Perhaps,  at  least  so  his  enemies  asserted,  his  military 

553 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [1783. 

talents  were  not  equally  brilliant  with  his  personal 
accomplishments ;  but  he  had  not  risen  the  more 
slowly  on  that  account,  to  the  honors,  or  to  the 
eminences  of  his  profession.  Besides  a  Regiment  and 
a  Government  conferred  on  him  by  the  Crown,  he  had 
held  during  several  years,  the  post  of  Commander  in 
Chief  in  Ireland,  with  very  ample  appointments  and 
advantages.  But,  no  income,  however  large,  could 
suffice  for  his  expences,  which  being  never  restrained 
within  any  reasonable  limits,  finally  involved  him  in 
irretrievable  difficulties.  The  fact  will  hardly  obtain 
belief,  that  at  one  of  the  entertainments  which  he  gave 
to  the  Lord  Lieutenant  in  the  year  1781,  at  Dublin, 
he  displayed  on  the  table,  as  the  principal  piece  in  the 
Dessert,  a  representation  of  the  Fortress  of  Gibraltar 
invested  by  the  Spanish  forces,  executed  in  Con- 
fectionary. It  exhibited  a  faithful  view  of  that 
celebrated  Rock,  together  with  the  works,  Batteries, 
and  Artillery  of  the  besiegers,  which  threw  sugar 
plumbs  against  the  walls.  The  expence  of  this  osten- 
tatious piece  of  magnificence,  did  not  fall  short  of 
fifteen  hundred  Pounds  ;  and  so  incredible  must  the 
circumstance  appear,  that  if  I  had  not  received  the 
assurance  of  it  from  Lord  Sackville,  I  should  not 
venture  to  report  it  in  these  Memoirs. 

The  greatest  intimacy  subsisted  between  that  Noble- 
man and  Sir  John,  who  owed  much  of  his  advancement 
and  success  in  life,  to  the  protection  of  Lionel,  Duke 
of  Dorset.  Lord  Sackville's  disinterested  friendship 
still  continued  to  bring  him  into  Parliament,  as  his 
Colleague  for  East  Grinstead,  after  Irwin's  return  from 
Ireland,  on  the  dissolution  of  Lord  North's  Adminis- 
tration, down  to  his  final  departure  from  England. 
Decorated  with  the  Order  of  the  Bath,  which  then 
conferred  much  distinction,  and  of  which  he  never 
failed  to  display  the  insignia  whenever  he  went  to  the 
House,  his  personal  appearance  was  imposing.  Even  of 

554 


1783.]  A   "GREAT   INJUSTICE" 

a  morning,  in  his  greatest  undress,  he  wore  a  small 
Star  embroidered  on  his  frock,  without  which  he  rarely 
appeared  any  where ;  and  his  travelling  Hussar  Cloaks 
bore  the  same  brilliant  badge  of  Knighthood.  No  man 
better  knew  the  value  of  external  figure,  aided  by 
manner ;  and  Philip,  Earl  of  Chesterfield  himself,  had 
not  more  successfully  studied  the  Graces.  It  was  im- 
possible to  possess  finer  manners,  without  any  affec- 
tation ;  or  more  perfect  good  breeding.  With  such 
pretensions  of  person  and  of  address,  it  cannot  surprize 
that  he  attained  to  a  great  degree  of  favor  at  St. 
Jameses.  The  King  considered  and  treated  Irwin,  as  a 
person  whose  conversation  afforded  him  peculiar  grati- 
fication. He  often  delighted  to  protract  the  discourse 
with  a  Courtier,  whose  powers  of  entertainment,  how- 
ever extensive,  were  always  under  the  restraint  of 
profound  respect ;  and  who  never  forgot  the  character 
of  the  Prince  whom  he  addressed,  even  for  a  single 
moment.  Irwin,  though  so  fine  a  gentleman,  loved  all 
the  indulgencies  of  conviviality,  in  which  gratifications 
he  never  restrained  himself.  The  King,  not  un- 
acquainted with  these  particulars,  having  said  to  him 
one  day,  at  the  Drawing  Room,  when  conversing  on 
his  common  mode  of  life,  "  they  tell  me,  Sir  John, 
"that  you  love  a  glass  of  wine;"  "Those,  Sir,  who 
"  have  so  reported  of  me  to  Your  Majesty,"  answered 
he,  bowing  profoundly,  "have  done  me  great  injustice. 
"  They  should  have  said  a  Bottle." 

Sir  John  Irwin's  first  wife,  a  daughter  of  the 
celebrated  Physician  Sir  Edward  Barry,  who  wrote 
with  so  much  elegance  and  information  on  the  "  Wines 
"  of  the  Ancients ; "  brought  him  no  issue :  but  he 
afterwards  contracted  a  more  obscure  matrimonial 
connexion.  On  his  return  to  England,  his  debts 
became  so  numerous,  and  his  creditors  so  importunate, 
that,  though  as  a  Member  of  Parliament,  his  person 
remained  secure,  he  found  it  impossible  to  reside  longer 

555 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [1783. 

with  comfort  in  this  country.  Quitting  therefore 
privately  his  elegant  house  in  Piccadilly,  he  retired 
to  the  Continent;  and  landing  in  France,  he  hired  a 
Chateau  in  the  Province  of  Normandy,  where  his 
military  rank  secured  for  him  every  testimony  of 
respect  from  the  surrounding  gentry.  He  nevertheless 
soon  experienced  such  pecuniary  difficulties,  that  having 
no  hope  of  ever  revisiting  his  native  country,  he 
removed  over  the  Alps  into  Italy.  I  believe  he  died 
at  Padua,  about  the  month  of  May,  1788,  in  great 
obscurity,  though  not  in  distress.  The  King,  who 
sincerely  regretted  his  departure  •  from  England,  and 
who  well  knew  the  causes  of  it,  often  expressed  his 
concern  for  Sir  John  Irwin's  misfortunes :  which  he 
endeavoured  to  alleviate  by  sending  Sir  John,  the  sum 
of  a  thousand  Pounds  from  his  Privy  Purse,  in  two 
separate  payments.  I  know  this  fact  from  the  late 
Sir  Charles  Hotham ;  who  was,  I  think,  himself,  the 
channel  through  which  His  Majesty  transmitted  the 
first  donation  of  five  hundred  Pounds. 

Lord  John  Cavendish,  though  he  had  negotiated  and 
brought  forward  the  Loan,  soon  after  he  entered  on 
Office,  yet  did  not  propose  the  Taxes  which  were  to 
pay  the  Interest  of  it,  untill  many  weeks  later  in  the 
Session.  He  at  length  laid  them  before  the  House  of 
Commons,  where,  on  the  whole  they  appeared  to  meet 
with  general  approbation,  and  even  attracted  some 
Encomiums.  But,  Lord  John,  whose  talents  were  not 
eminently  adapted  for  the  discussion  of  Measures  of 
Finance,  having  stated  his  Ways  and  Means  with 
tolerable  precision,  left  the  task  of  explaining  and 
defending  them,  principally  to  his  Associates  in  power. 
Fox  and  Lord  North,  who  undertook  it  with  great 
ability,  repelled  the  comments  made  from  the 
Opposition  side  of  the  House,  on  the  new  Taxes : 
while  the  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer,  quitting  his 
seat  on  the  Treasury  Bench,  retired  during  a  consider- 

556 


1783.]  WATCHING   A  DEBATE 

able  part  of  the  Debate,  behind  the  Speaker's  Chair; 
from  which  retreat  he  peeped  out  on  either  side,  as 
individuals  rose  for  the  purpose  of  approving,  or  of 
censuring  his  Budget.  Lord  John's  acknowledged 
purity  of  character,  when  joined  to  his  many  virtues ; 
not  to  dwell  on  his  high  Descent ;  rendered  him 
universally  respected :  and  the  advantage  which  his 
Party  derived  from  those  qualities,  in  the  public 
estimation,  was  incalculable.  The  Nation  even  seemed 
silently  to  demand  some  such  Guarantee,  when  the 
interests  of  the  Country  were  committed  to  a  man  of 
Fox's  ruined  Fortune,  and  dissipated  habits  of  life. 
Mr.  Pitt,  it  is  true,  who  had  been  so  recently  placed  at 
the  head  of  the  Exchequer,  scarcely  possessed  more 
property  than  his  rival.  But  the  people  of  England 
knew  how  to  discriminate  between  their  respective 
deficiency.  Pitt,  though  not  more  distinguished  by 
habits  of  economy  than  Fox,  yet  had  not  dissipated  his 
small  paternal  fortune  in  any  ostensible  vices :  while 
Fox,  besides  a  landed  Estate,  and  a  lucrative  Office, 
both  which  he  sold,  had  squandered  an  immense  sum 
of  ready  money.  Indeed,  though  Fox  always  appeared 
to  me,  whenever  Loans  or  Budgets  were  discussed  in 
Parliament,  to  display  a  capacity  for  arithmetical 
Calculation,  and  all  the  talents  for  a  Minister  of 
Finance,  scarcely,  if  at  all  inferior  to  Mr.  Pitt's  ability 
in  that  line ;  yet,  I  believe,  it  never  occurred  to  any 
man's  mind,  to  place  Fox  in  the  controul  of  the 
Treasury,  or  of  the  Exchequer,  at  any  period  of  his 
life.  Almost  as  well  might  Henry  the  Fifth  have 
placed  Falstaff  there.  Fox  himself  seemed  not  to 
emulate  a  higher  post  than  Secretary  of  State,  always 
interposing  Lord  John  Cavendish  in  the  guardianship 
of  the  public  money.  Nor  could  the  British  people 
confide  their  interests  to  more  incorruptible  integrity, 
than  distinguished  the  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer : 
but  he  could  not  sustain  the  slightest  comparison  with 

557 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [i?83. 

Pitt,  nor  even  with  Lord  North,  in  the  powers  of  his 
mind  and  understanding,  or  in  his  parliamentary 
talents,  and  knowledge  of  business. 

While  the  Rockingham  Party,  during  many  years 
had  been  excluded  from  Office,  they  loudly  declaimed 
against  Abuses  of  every  description,  particularly  against 
the  extravagant  expenditure  of  the  public  money  in 
various  Departments.  Nor,  during  the  very  short 
period  that  the  Treasury  was  under  their  controul,  which 
did  not  exceed  three  Months,  can  it  be  denied  that  they 
endeavoured  to  manifest  the  sincerity  of  their  engage- 
ments. Burke,  who  stood  forward  in  the  invidious 
character  of  a  Reformer,  acquired  no  inconsiderable 
merit  with  the  Country  at  large,  by  his  exertions  to 
reduce  exorbitant  demands,  or  to  abolish  obsolete  and 
overgrown  Establishments  of  every  kind.  But,  with 
Lord  Rockingham's  life,  these  efforts  wholly  ceased. 
From  the  period  of  their  union  with  Lord  North,  when 
they  began  confidently  to  count  on  a  quiet  possession 
of  power  and  emolument,  at  least  for  a  few  years,  in 
consequence  of  their  strength  in  both  Houses  of  Parlia- 
ment ;  they  seemed  to  have  greatly  relaxed  in  the 
severity  of  their  political  principles.  Above  all  they 
manifested  a  decided  aversion  to  any  Reforms  which 
did  not  originate  with  themselves,  and  which  were 
not  subjected  to  their  own  Ministerial  Controul.  A 
striking  exemplification  of  this  fact,  presented  itself 
before  the  end  of  the  Session. 

Mr.  Pitt,  who  watched  all  their  conduct,  and 
canvassed  all  their  measures,  with  jealous,  as  well  as 
unremitting  attention ;  having  brought  forward  a 
Bill,  in  order  to  establish  regulations  in  the  Fees, 
Perquisites,  and  other  emoluments  received  in  most  of 
the  public  Offices  ;  instead  of  finding  any  support  from 
the  other  side  of  the  House,  as  might  naturally  have 
been  expected,  met  with  the  warmest  opposition  in  that 
quarter.  Lord  John  Cavendish  possessed  indeed  too 

558 


1783.]  CRUSHING   A   MEASURE 

much  ingenuousness  of  character,  altogether  to  dispute 
the  utility  of  the  objects  proposed,  and  therefore  con- 
tented himself  with  partially  and  indirectly  resisting 
the  plan :  but  Fox  and  Burke  loaded  the  Bill,  its 
author,  and  the  Administration  of  which  he  had  lately 
composed  a  part,  with  the  severest  Epithets  or  Imputa- 
tions. Some  of  the  comparisons  and  allusions  made  by 
Burke  in  particular,  reflecting  contemptuously  on  Pitt, 
as  a  Projector  and  a  Reformer,  appeared,  when  falling 
from  his  lips,  to  affect  his  Audience  with  no  little 
surprize ;  he  having  so  recently,  himself,  laid  claim 
to  general  approbation,  in  the  same  character.  As  it 
might  nevertheless  have  seemed  too  indecorous,  not 
to  permit  the  Bill  to  pass  the  House  of  Commons, 
Ministers  allowed  it  to  go  up  to  the  Peers  :  but,  there, 
the  whole  force  of  government  drew  out  in  array 
against  the  Measure.  Even  the  Duke  of  Portland,  who 
seldom  exhibited  any  specimens  of  Eloquence,  stig- 
matized it  as  "  more  a  disease,  than  a  remedy ; "  while 
Lord  Fitzwilliam  decried  it,  as  being  both  trifling  and 
vexatious  in  its  Nature.  Thus  attacked,  the  measure 
was  finally  negatived.  Such  an  aversion,  demonstrated 
to  the  very  objects  of  retrenchment,  which  they  had 
themselves  affected  to  introduce  only  a  few  Months 
before,  with  so  much  zeal,  even  into  the  Palace,  and  at 
the  table  of  the  Sovereign  ;  evidently,  because  they 
were  now  proposed  from  a  hostile  source  ;  did  not  fail 
to  make  an  adequate  impression  on  the  public  mind. 
It  operated  to  the  disadvantage  of  the  Ministry  in 
every  quarter  of  the  Kingdom ;  and  by  unmasking 
them  in  some  measure,  it  silently  prepared  the  way  for 
those  astonishing  events  in  the  interior  of  the  Govern- 
ment, which  took  place  before  the  conclusion  of  the 
year. 

Some  of  the  Abuses  which  Pitt  had  attempted  to 
point  out  and  expose,  in  the  progress  of  the  Bill  which 
he  introduced  into  the  House  of  Commons,  were  indeed 

559 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [1788. 

of  a  description  so  singular,  as  to  excite  not  only 
astonishment,  but  even  to  produce  a  degree  of  ridicule. 
They  served  to  shew  what  extensive  depredations  had 
been  committed  upon  the  public,  in  many,  or  in  all 
the  principal  Offices,  previous  to  the  period  of  Lord 
North^s  resignation.  That  Nobleman  formed  the  mark, 
at  which  Pitt  levelled  his  severest  censures  ;  nor  could 
the  House  altogether  refrain  from  laughter,  at  one  of 
the  charges,  specifying  a  sum  of  three  hundred  and 
forty  Pounds,  paid  to  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  for 
the  article  of  Whipcord.  The  annual  expence  of  the 
first  Minister  for  his  individual  Stationary,  did  not  fall 
short,  as  it  appeared,  of  thirteen  hundred  Pounds. 
Lord  North,  when  called  on,  made  nevertheless  not  only 
a  plausible,  but  a  very  satisfactory  defence,  to  most  of 
the  alledged  Items.  Relative  to  the  consumption  of 
Whipcord,  which  had  excited  a  great  deal  of  mirth, 
having  professed  however  his  total  ignorance,  Robinson 
undertook  to  give  some  sort  of  explanation,  which 
however  ingenious  or  even  well  founded,  nevertheless 
diverted,  more  than  it  satisfied  his  hearers. 

It  is  certain  that  during  the  period  antecedent  to 
1782,  the  Abuses  practised  in  many  great  official 
Departments,  which  exceeded  all  reasonable  limits, 
loudly  demanded  parliamentary  regulation.  I  have, 
myself,  had  occasion  to  hear,  if  not  to  see,  specimens 
and  instances  of  depredation  ;  (for  they  well  merited 
the  name ;  which  will  hardly  obtain  belief  in  the 
present  days.  I  knew  with  some  degree  of  intimacy,  a 
Lord  of  Trade,  who  possessing  a  Borough,  and  a  very 
large  fortune,  was  himself  a  Member  of  the  House  of 
Commons  in  successive  Parliaments.  On  his  being 
sworn  in  at  the  Board  of  Trade,  he  issued  an  order  to 
provide  a  great  number  of  pewter  Inkstands  for  his  own 
use  ;  which  he  afterwards  commuted  into  one  composed 
of  Silver.  I  have  seen  him  at  the  Levee,  dressed  in  a 
suit  of  green  Velvet,  fabricated,  as  fame  reported,  out 

560 


1783.]  TRADE   IN   OFFICES 

of  the  materials  ordered  in  his  public  character,  for  the 
ostensible  purpose  of  making  bags  to  contain  Office 
papers.  His  friends  and  correspondents  could  recognize 
the  Stationary,  of  which  he  had  made  an  ample  pro- 
vision, more  than  ten  years  after  the  Board  of  Trade 
itself,  abolished  by  Burke's  Bill,  had  ceased  to  have  any 
existence.  Even  since  1782,  similar  facts  are  said  to 
have  taken  place.  This  Gentleman,  or  rather  his  wife, 
formed  one  on  the  List  of  British  Peerages,  intended  to 
have  been  either  revived  or  created,  by  Lord  North  and 
Fox ;  the  number  of  which,  as  I  recollect,  amounted  to 
thirty  two,  or  thirty  three ;  if  the  "  Coalition "  had 
forced  their  way  a  second  time  into  the  Cabinet,  in  the 
beginning  of  1784,  as  they  confidently  expected. 

Nor  were  these  the  only  official  and  Ministerial 
appropriations  of  the  Public  Money,  to  private 
purposes,  that  distinguished  the  Times  under  our 
review.  From  the  Ministry  of  Sir  Robert  Walpole, 
down  to  the  conclusion  of  Lord  North's  Government, 
few  places  of  considerable  emolument,  in  any  Depart- 
ment, were  given,  wholly  unfettered,  to  the  nominal 
occupant.  Even  under  Lord  Rockingham's  first  Ad- 
ministration in  1765,  we  find  Wilkes  quartered  on  the 
whole  of  the  Treasury  and  Admiralty  Boards,  to  the 
annual  amount  of  10401.  a  year;  the  Marquis  paying 
him  5001. :  the  inferior  Lords  of  the  Treasury,  601. 
each  ;  and  the  Members  of  the  Board  of  Trade,  each 
401.  This  curious  fact  is  stated  in  Home's  Letter  to 
"Junius,"  of  the  31st  July,  1771.  It  was  not 
attempted  to  be  denied.  When  the  Duke  of  Grafton, 
in  June  of  the  same  year,  1771,  accepted  the  Office  of 
Privy  Seal,  which  had  been  previously  destined  for  Lord 
Weymouth  ;  "  Junius "  more  than  insinuates,  that  the 
last  mentioned  Nobleman  was  quartered  by  the  Duke 
upon  Rigby,  who,  from  1768  to  1782,  nominally 
occupied  the  sole  Paymastership  of  the  Forces.  I  knew 
a  Lady  of  Quality,  who  having  been  daughter  to  a 

561  36 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [1783. 

person  high  in  Office,  was  commonly  said  to  have  rode 
sixteen  persons  at  one  time  ;  to  whom  her  father  had 
given  places,  under  that  express  condition  or  reserva- 
tion. I  believe  she  outlived  them  all.  Governments, 
military  Appointments,  Offices  in  the  Excise  and 
Customs  ;  in  a  word,  places  of  every  description,  at 
home  and  abroad,  were  frequently  loaded  with  Riders. 
These  practices  were  disdained  by  Mr.  Pitt,  when  he 
became  First  Minister ;  but  he  was  necessitated  in  many 
cases  to  commit  a  greater  inroad  on  the  Constitution, 
by  distributing  Honours  and  Dignities,  as  a  substitute 
for  emoluments. 

July.]  The  fruitless  attempt  made  by  Pitt,  to 
regulate  the  abuses  of  Fees  in  the  public  Offices,  did 
not  constitute  the  only  unsuccessful  parliamentary  effort 
undertaken  by  him,  during  the  Session.  A  short  time 
before  its  close,  Lord  John  Cavendish  having,  as  it 
would  appear,  somewhat  incautiously  or  inadvertently 
laid  on  the  Table  of  the  House,  a  List  of  public 
Accountants,  from  whom  Balances  of  money  exceeding 
in  the  whole  forty-four  Millions,  were  due  to  Govern- 
ment ;  Pitt  endeavoured  to  induce  the  House  to  vote 
an  Address  to  the  Crown,  requesting  His  Majesty  to 
take  measures  for  compelling  the  persons  named,  to 
account  for  the  sums  so  remaining  in  their  hands ;  and 
for  preventing  a  future  recurrence  of  the  same  Abuse. 
He  seemed  authorized  to  assume,  that  such  a  Motion 
would  be  too  analogous  to  the  avowed  disposition  and 
professions  of  the  Rockingham  party,  to  experience  from 
them  any  resistance.  All  the  ability,  eloquence,  wit, 
and  ingenuity  of  the  Ministerial  Benches,  were  never- 
theless called  out,  in  order  to  invalidate  the  authenticity 
of  the  very  Document,  laid  by  the  Chancellor  of  the 
Exchequer  on  the  Table ;  which  his  Colleagues  now  de- 
clared to  be  destitute  of  proper  authority,  and  con- 
sequently, an  unsafe,  as  well  as  inefficient  basis,  on 
which  to  found  the  proposed  Address  to  the  Throne, 

562 


1783.]  A  NOMINAL  LEADER 

This  treatment  of  Lord  John  in  his  official  capacity,  as 
Minister  of  Finance,  by  his  own  friends,  in  the  face  of 
the  House  of  Commons,  did  not  appear  at  first  sight, 
either  the  most  respectful  to  him,  or  even  the  most 
decorous  to  themselves.  Sheridan,  with  consummate 
Address,  contrived,  however,  to  render  it  in  some 
measure  palatable,  by  a  delicate  mixture  of  compliment 
to  his  integrity,  and  of  censure  on  his  prudence :  while 
Lord  North  and  Fox  played  their  whole  Artillery  upon 
Pitt.  The  two  Secretaries  of  State  seemed  on  that  day, 
to  act  in  perfect  concert,  and  to  be  cordially  united. 
Having  thus  extracted  almost  every  Clause  from  the 
Address,  which  rendered  it  efficient  or  useful,  they 
allowed  it,  when  mutilated  and  harmless,  to  pass  the 
House. 

16th  July.]  The  Session,  protracted  to  the  middle 
of  July,  now  drew  towards  a  termination.  During  the 
space  of  about  three  Months  that  Parliament  remained 
sitting  after  the  formation  of  the  new  Ministry,  both 
Houses,  in  particular  the  Commons,  had  manifested  the 
utmost  disposition  to  give  them  every  support.  The 
Opposition,  though  conducted  by  Pitt  and  Dundas, 
while  it  was  tacitly,  as  well  as  powerfully,  sustained  by 
Jenkinson ;  yet  rarely  ventured  on  a  Division,  which 
only  exposed  the  paucity  and  inferiority  of  their 
numbers.  Lord  North,  however  obscured  he  might  be 
by  the  superior  energy  of  Fox,  still  remained  the 
nominal  leader  of  a  very  numerous  body,  who  looked 
to  him  for  protection  against  the  violent  Members  of 
the  Rockingham  Party.  But  his  Colleague,  without 
the  title,  was  already  become  the  real  First  Minister ; 
as  the  great  Earl  of  Chatham  had  been  formerly,  under 
the  late  and  present  Reign,  when  only  Secretary  of 
State,  or  when  holding  the  Privy  Seal.  The  strength 
of  Fox's  character,  the  activity  of  his  mind,  the  warmth 
of  his  friendship,  and  the  splendor  of  his  talents  ; — this 
combination  of  endowments  naturally  attracting  ad- 

563 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [1783. 

herents,  enabled  him  to  absorb  the  whole  power  of 
Government.  Burke,  ardent,  indefatigable,  and  never 
losing  sight  of  his  object,  impatiently  looked  forward 
to  the  great  task  of  reforming  and  remodelling  India. 
The  advanced  season  of  the  year  at  which  the  Ad- 
ministration came  into  power,  and  that  circumstance 
only,  had  induced  him,  as  well  as  his  Colleagues,  to 
allow  the  present  Session  to  elapse,  without  immediately 
availing  themselves  of  the  patronage,  and  multiplied 
sources  of  advantage,  which  the  Indian  Empire  offered 
to  their  avidity.  It  presented  a  rich  harvest,  which 
they  devoured  by  anticipation ;  and  the  enjoyment  of 
which  they  reluctantly  postponed,  even  for  a  few 
Months.  But,  the  magnitude,  importance,  and  com- 
plicated nature  of  the  political  machine  by  which  India 
was  governed,  demanded  mature  deliberation,  before 
they  ventured  to  reconstruct  it,  as  they  meditated, 
entirely  on  new  principles.  It  was  therefore  finally 
determined  in  the  Cabinet,  to  call  Parliament  together 
early  in  the  approaching  Autumn,  for  the  purpose; 
and  the  King  was  expressly  made  to  declare  the 
Intention,  in  his  Speech  pronounced  from  the  Throne 
on  the  Prorogation.  Sheridan,  by  a  wonderful  com- 
bination of  almost  all  talents  which  can  meet  in  man, 
under  the  controul  of  unalterable  equality  of  temper, 
began  already  to  compete  with  Burke  in  parliamentary 
estimation  ;  and  frequently  obtained  a  more  ready  or 
patient  hearing  from  the  House.  Every  day,  while  it 
confirmed  the  ascendant  which  he  had  there  acquired, 
placed  him  higher  among  the  most  distinguished 
supports  of  Administration. 

If  the  Coalition  looked  round  at  home,  they  beheld 
at  this  period,  a  docile  Parliament,  originally  called 
together  by  Lord  North  ;  and  of  which  he  still  retained 
in  his  hands,  many  of  the  secret  Springs  or  Keys,  in 
both  Houses.  Abroad,  every  thing  announced  the 
continuance  of  Peace.  America  was  indeed  lost ;  but 

564 


1783.]         ALIENATION  OF  THE  KING 

the  emancipated  Colonies  had  ceased  to  be  hostile  to 
Great  Britain.  France,  exhausted  even  by  her  late 
advantages  beyond  the  Atlantic,  weak  in  her  Govern- 
ment, and  altogether  convulsed  or  deranged  in  her 
Finances ;  already  nourished  in  her  vitals  the  seeds  of 
that  fatal  Revolution,  which  since  overturned  order, 
religion,  morals,  and  the  antient  fabrick  of  Europe. 
Joseph  the  Second,  Emperor  of  Germany,  suppressing 
Monasteries  and  religious  Establishments  with  one 
hand ;  with  the  other,  in  direct  violation  of  all  subsist- 
ing Treaties,  rashly  and  wantonly  demolished  to  their 
foundations,  the  works  of  the  Garrison  cities  of  the 
Austrian  Netherlands.  I  witnessed,  myself,  during  the 
course  of  that  Summer,  the  expulsion  of  the  last  remains 
of  the  Dutch  troops  maintained  in  the  Barrier  towns, 
and  the  destruction  or  demolition  of  the  Fortifications 
themselves.  Except  Luxembourg,  placed  at  one  ex- 
tremity ;  and  the  Citadel  of  Antwerp  situate  at  the 
other,  it  was  obvious  that  scarcely  any  obstacle  re- 
mained to  exclude  France  from  overrunning  the  Low 
Countries  at  her  pleasure.  If  these  reflexions  appeared 
however  to  cause  no  uneasiness  to  Ministers,  yet,  a 
domestic  source  of  just  anxiety  which  they  could  not 
surmount,  presented  itself  in  the  fixed  and  unconquer- 
able Alienation  of  the  King.  In  vain  did  they  endeavour 
to  insinuate  themselves  into  his  favour.  He  received 
with  formality  and  coldness,  all  their  advances  ;  allowed 
them  to  dictate  measures ;  gave  them  Audiences,  signed 
papers,  and  complied  with  their  advice  ;  but  he  neither 
admitted  them  to  his  confidence,  nor  ceased  to  consider 
them  as  objects  of  his  personal  aversion.  The  con- 
sciousness of  this  sentiment  existing  in  the  royal  bosom, 
which  sunk  deep  into  Fox's  mind,  naturally  impelled 
him  to  substitute  other  foundations,  on  which  to  con- 
struct, and  to  perpetuate,  his  ministerial  Greatness. 

No  man  who  has  enjoyed  the  opportunities  of  study- 
ing  Fox's   character,   or   of  being  informed  respecting 

565 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [1783. 

his  political  line  of  action,  to  which  I  have  had  access ; 
can  however  doubt  that  he  would  have  preferred  gentle- 
ness before  force,  and  conciliation  in  preference  to 
harsher  methods  of  confirming  his  power,  if  the  means 
of  accomplishing  it  had  been  open  to  him.  He  well 
knew  how  difficult  it  was  to  retain  Office  in  defiance  of 
the  Sovereign ;  and  he  could  not  be  ignorant  that  by 
his  junction  with  Lord  North,  though  he  had  stormed 
the  Cabinet,  he  had  lost  his  popularity.  All  his 
original  principles  were  monarchical,  and  even  his 
ambition  partook  of  the  pliability  of  his  nature.  His 
very  necessities  rendered  him  ductile,  and  loudly  called 
on  him  to  bestow  some  attention  on  his  private  fortune. 
In  fact  we  may  question  whether  a  more  complying 
Minister,  or  one  more  disposed  to  have  gratified  his 
Master  in  every  legitimate  object  of  royal  desire,  could 
have  been  found  among  His  Majesty's  Subjects.  Mr. 
Pitt  manifested  by  no  means  the  same  acquiescence,  or 
the  same  suavity  and  ready  submission,  on  a  variety  of 
occasions,  when  afterwards  in  Office.  He  was  on  the 
contrary,  often  intractable  and  pertinacious,  even  upon 
points  painfully  interesting  to  the  King.  But,  if 
George  the  Third  did  not  regard  him  with  affection,  he 
at  least  considered  him  with  esteem  ;  and  unfortunately 
for  Fox,  it  was  not  easy  to  acquire  the  royal  favour, 
except  through  the  Channel  of  his  moral  approbation. 
" Hocfonte  derivata  Clades"  It  was  in  vain  that  the 
Secretary  watched  for  a  moment  of  weakness,  of  which 
he  would  no  doubt  have  profited.  There  was  no 
Mistress  to  facilitate  his  approaches,  to  soften  asperities, 
and  to  form  the  medium  of  reconciliation.  Under 
George  the  First,  the  Duchess  of  Kendal,  or  the 
Countess  of  Darlington,  would  have  performed  that 
office,  though  not  gratuitously;  as  Mrs.  Howard,  or 
Madame  de  Walmoden,  would  equally  have  done  with 
George  the  Second. 

Nor  can  we  reasonably  question  on  the  other  hand, 
566 


1783.]  FOX   IN   OFFICE 

that  His  Majesty  justly  appreciated  the  Secretary's 
character,  and  was  well  aware  that  he  would  not  prove 
more  intractable  or  rigid  while  in  Office,  than  other 
men.  But  he  did  not  choose  to  avail  himself  of  such 
assistance.  I  know  that  some  three  or  four  years  after 
the  time  of  which  I  now  speak,  the  King  finding  him- 
self alone  with  the  Duke  of  Queensberry,  who  had  been 
one  of  the  Lords  of  his  Bed-chamber  ever  since  his 
Accession  to  the  Crown,  and  with  whom  he  was  ac- 
customed to  converse  unreservedly  on  many  subjects ; 
the  discourse  turned  on  the  Coalition  Ministry.  "  Sir,11 
said  the  Duke,  "  Your  Majesty  might  safely  have 
"  allowed  Mr.  Fox  to  remain  in  Office,  and  you  would 
"  have  found  in  him  every  disposition  to  comply  with 
"  your  wishes.  I  can  assert  as  an  undoubted  fact,  that 
"  there  was  scarcely  any  proof  of  his  personal  devotion, 
"  or  any  sacrifice  that  he  would  not  have  made,  to 
"  acquire  your  favour."  "  He  never  said  as  much  to 
"  me,"  answered  the  King.  "  No,  Sir,"  replied  the 
Duke,  "assuredly  he  did  not,  because  Your  Majesty 
"  never  gave  him  any  encouragement  to  venture  on 
"  taking  such  a  step."  George  the  Third,  during  the 
eight  or  nine  months  of  his  captivity,  only  looked 
to  emancipation,  and  never  attempted  to  gain  his 
Ministerial  Jailors. 

Meanwhile  emerging,  as  the  Duties  of  his  high  Office 
compelled  him,  from  the  dissipation  and  society  of 
Brookes's;  Fox,  during  this  brilliant,  but  transitory 
portion  of  his  life,  fulfilled  with  universal  approbation, 
I  might  even  say,  admiration,  all  the  essential,  no  less 
than  the  ostensible  functions  of  Secretary  of  State.  At 
his  house  in  Grafton  Street,  he  received  and  entertained 
the  foreign  Ministers  then  resident  in  London  from  the 
various  European  Courts,  with  distinguished  Eclat. 
They,  who  were  never  weary  of  his  conversation, 
respected  his  talents,  while  they  admired  the  immense 
variety  of  his  information  on  all  diplomatic  points. 

567 


W&AXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [ms. 

Delighted  at  the  facility  with  which  he  wrote  or 
conversed  in  French,  they  were  not  less  gratified  by  the 
liberal  hospitality  of  his  table,  added  to  the  amenity 
and  frankness  of  his  manners.  Nor  can  it  be  sufficiently 
regretted,  that  a  man  so  much  formed  to  have  done 
Honor,  and  to  have  rendered  essential  service  to  his 
Country,  as  Fox ;  should,  by  the  errors  or  imprudencies 
of  his  own  conduct,  have  rendered  himself  obnoxious  to 
his  Sovereign,  and  thus  have  excluded  himself  from 
Office.  We  cannot  reflect  without  concern,  that  in  the 
course  of  a  life  prolonged  to  its  fifty-eighth  year,  Fox 
sat  only  about  nineteen  months  in  the  Cabinet,  taken 
all  together:  while  Pitt,  who  terminated  his  com- 
paratively short  career  at  forty-seven,  passed  almost  his 
whole  life  after  he  attained  to  manhood,  in  the  first 
employments;  or  rather  in  the  highest  situation  of 
State,  that  of  Prime  Minister.  However  we  may 
dispute  as  to  the  superiority  of  Talents  in  these  two 
extraordinary  and  illustrious  men,  posterity  will  be  at 
no  loss  to  decide  respecting  the  superiority  of  their 
Judgment. 

August.]  Pitt  availing  himself  of  this  Interval  of 
political  Leisure,  afforded  him  by  the  Triumph  of  the 
"  Coalition,"  and  the  Recess  of  Parliament,  endeavoured 
to  catch  a  hasty  glimpse  of  the  Continent,  which  he 
had  scarcely  ever  before  visited.  As  if  he  foresaw  that 
no  other  occasion  would  ever  again  present  itself  for 
the  gratification  of  his  curiosity,  he  crossed  over  to 
Calais,  and  directed  his  Course  in  the  first  instance, 
to  the  Low  Countries.  Mr.  George  Rose,  who  had 
been  one  of  the  two  Secretaries  of  the  Treasury,  when 
Pitt  filled  the  Post  of  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer,  and 
who  has  since  deservedly  risen  by  his  financial  talents 
or  services,  to  much  higher  official  situations,  accom- 
panied him.  I  met  them  by  accident,  at  Antwerp. 
Pitt  proceeding  afterwards  to  Paris,  was  presented  by 
our  Embassador,  the  Duke  of  Manchester,  to  Louis  the 

568 


1783.]    MARIE   ANTOINETTE  AND  PITT 

Sixteenth,  at  Fontainbleau,  where  the  French  Court 
always  passed  a  considerable  portion  of  the  Autumn. 
His  Name,  and  the  fame  of  his  distinguished  abilities, 
which  had  preceded  his  appearance,  disposed  all  to 
admire  him ;  but  the  King,  in  compliance  with  the 
stupid  Etiquette,  that  interdicted  him  from  speaking 
to  Foreigners,  when  presented  at  Court ;  added  to  his 
natural  shyness ;  did  not,  I  believe,  exchange  one  word 
with  Pitt.  The  Queen,  whose  superior  energy  of  mind 
emancipated  her  from  such  restraints,  treated  him  with 
the  utmost  distinction.  Marie  Antoinette  entered  into 
conversation  with  him,  as  far  as  his  cold  manner,  en- 
creased  by  an  imperfect  knowledge  of  the  French 
Language,  would  permit  her  to  engage  him  in  discourse. 
"  Monsieur"  said  she  to  him,  on  his  retiring,  with  a 
manner  even  more  expressive  than  the  words,  "  Je  suis 
"  charmee  de  vous  voir,  et  de  vous  avoir  vue"  Pitt 
took  care  to  return  to  London  from  his  short  excursion, 
in  time  to  attend  the  Meeting  of  Parliament. 

While  the  two  leaders  of  Ministry,  and  of  Opposition, 
were  thus  respectively  occupied,  the  one  in  his  official 
duties  at  home,  and  the  other  on  the  Continent ;  the 
King  became  a  prey  to  habitual  dejection.  Through- 
out all  the  troubles  of  his  reign,  when  Wilkes  and  when 
"Junius"  excited  disaffection  among  his  Subjects,  as 
well  as  during  the  most  distressful  periods  of  the 
American  War;  or  when  the  Capital  exhibited  scenes 
of  outrage  and  of  popular  violence  ;  he  had  maintained 
a  serene  countenance,  and  manifested  an  unshaken 
firmness.  But,  his  fortitude  sunk  under  the  bondage 
to  which  "the  Coalition'*''  had  subjected  him.  His 
natural  equality  of  temper,  suavity  of  manners,  and 
cheerfulness  of  deportment,  forsaking  him  in  a  great 
measure,  he  became  silent,  thoughtful,  taciturn,  and 
uncommunicative.  Sometimes,  when  he  resided  at 
Windsor,  mounting  his  horse,  accompanied  by  an 
Equerry  and  a  single  footman ;  after  riding  ten  or 

569 


WR  AX  ALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [1783. 


twelve  miles,  scarcely  opening  his  lips,  he  would  dis- 
mount in  order  to  inspect  his  hounds,  or  to  view  his 
farming  improvements :  then  getting  on  horseback 
again,  he  returned  back  to  the  Queen's  Lodge  in  the 
same  pensive  or  disconsolate  manner.  From  time  to 
time,  he  admitted  Mr.  Jenkinson  and  Lord  Thurlow, 
both  of  whom  were  Privy  Councillors,  to  pay  their 
respects  to  him.  He  even  repeated  to  the  latter  of 
those  distinguished  persons,  his  wish  already  expressed, 
of  going  over  to  his  Electoral  Dominions  for  a  few 
months ;  and  abandoning  to  the  Ministers,  the  power 
of  which  they  had  got  possession.  But  Lord  Thurlow, 
after  again  dissuading  him  from  having  recourse  to  any 
strong  or  violent  expedients  for  procuring  present 
emancipation;  exhorted  him  to  wait  for  a  favorable 
occasion,  which  Fox's  impetuosity  or  imprudence  would 
probably  furnish,  to  liberate  himself  from  the  yoke  of 
the  Coalition.  Time  soon  presented  the  propitious 
moment  for  putting  this  advice  into  execution. 

September.]  His  Majesty  remaining  inflexible  in 
his  resolution  not  to  create  any  British  Peers  on  the 
ministerial  recommendation,  they  contented  themselves 
with  tendering  him  a  list  of  eight  or  nine  Irish  peer- 
ages. However  reluctantly,  he  yet  consented  to  exercise 
this  act  of  the  Prerogative.  Nearly  about  the  same 
time,  the  definitive  Treaties  of  Peace  were  concluded 
with  France  and  Spain  ;  while  David  Hartley,  who  had 
been  sent  to  Paris  for  the  purpose,  signed  another 
Treaty  with  America.  Hartley,  who  was  Member  for 
Hull,  though  destitute  of  any  personal  recommendations 
of  manner,  possessed  some  talent,  with  unsullied  probity, 
added  to  indefatigable  perseverance  and  labour.  His 
sight  which  was  very  defective  compelled  him  always  to 
wear  spectacles.  The  Rockingham  Party  had  not 
among  them  a  more  zealous  adherent ;  but  in  Parlia- 
ment, the  intolerable  length,  when  increased  by  the 
dullness  of  his  Speeches,  rendered  him  an  absolute 

570 


1783.]  A   LONG   SPEECH 

nuisance,  even  to  his  own  friends.  His  rising  always 
operated  like  a  dinner  bell.  One  day,  that  he  had  thus 
wearied  out  the  patience  of  his  audience ;  having  nearly 
cleared  a  very  full  House,  which  was  reduced  from  three 
hundred,  to  about  eighty  persons,  half  asleep ;  just  at 
a  time  when  he  was  expected  to  close,  he  unexpectedly 
moved  that  the  Riot  Act  should  be  read,  as  a  document 
necessary  to  elucidate,  or  to  prove,  some  of  his  foregoing 
assertions.  Burke,  who  sat  close  by  him,  and  who 
wishing  to  speak  to  the  Question  under  discussion,  had 
been  bursting  with  impatience  for  more  than  an  hour 
and  a  half;  finding  himself  so  cruelly  disappointed, 
bounced  up,  exclaiming,  "The  Riot  Act!  my  dear 
"  friend,  the  Riot  Act !  to  what  purpose !  don't  you 
"  see  that  the  mob  is  already  completely  dispersed  ? " 
The  sarcastic  wit  of  this  remark,  in  the  state  of  the 
House,  which  presented  only  empty  Benches ;  encreased 
by  the  manner  and  tone  of  despair,  in  which  Burke 
uttered  it ;  convulsed  every  person  present  except 
Hartley,  who  never  changed  countenance,  and  insisted 
on  the  Riot  Act  being  read  by  one  of  the  Clerks. 

I  have  heard  the  late  Earl  of  Liverpool,  then  Mr. 
Jenkinson,  say,  that  Hartley  having  risen  to  speak, 
about  five  o'clock,  during  the  Session  of  the  year  1779, 
in  the  month  of  June,  or  of  July  ;  and  it  being  generally 
understood,  that  he  would  undoubtedly  continue  a  long 
time  on  his  legs,  as  he  was  to  conclude  with  making  a 
Motion ;  Mr.  Jenkinson  profited  of  the  occasion  to 
breathe  some  country  air.  He  walked  therefore,  from 
the  House,  to  his  residence  in  Parliament  Street ;  from 
whence  mounting  his  horse,  he  rode  out  to  a  place  that 
he  rented,  some  miles  from  town.  There  he  dined, 
strolled  about,  and  in  the  evening  returned  slowly  to 
London.  As  it  was  then  near  nine  o'clock ;  before  he 
went  down  a  second  time  to  the  House  of  Commons,  he 
dispatched  a  servant  to  Mrs.  Bennet,  the  Housekeeper, 
requesting  to  be  informed  of  the  names  of  the  principal 

571 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

persons  who  had  spoken  in  the  course  of  the  Debate, 
and  likewise  to  know  about  what  hour  a  Division  might 
probably  be  expected  to  take  place.  The  footman 
brought  back  for  answer,  that  Mr.  Hartley  continued 
still  speaking,  but,  was  expected  to  close  soon  ;  and  that 
no  other  person  had  yet  risen  except  himself.  In 
fact,  when  Mr.  Jenkinson  entered  the  House  soon  after- 
wards, Hartley  remained  exactly  in  the  same  place  and 
attitude  as  he  was,  near  five  hours  before ;  regardless  of 
the  general  impatience,  or  of  the  profound  repose  into 
which  the  majority  of  his  hearers  were  sunk.  However 
incredible  this  Anecdote  appears,  I  have  related  it 
without  exaggeration. 

October.]  Autumn  produced  universal  tranquillity  ;  a 
Peace  with  Holland,  following  the  Treaties  made  with 
France,  Spain,  and  America.  In  India,  hostilities  had 
been  long  terminated  with  the  Mharattas ;  and  the 
death  of  Hyder  Ally,  the  most  formidable  enemy  with 
whom  we  had  to  contend  in  the  East,  which  took  place 
in  December,  1782,  enabled  us  to  continue  the  contest 
with  France  in  that  quarter  of  the  world,  till  the  arrival 
at  Madras,  of  the  intelligence  of  a  general  pacification 
in  Europe.  I  availed  myself  of  a  fortunate  circumstance, 
to  convey  the  first  information  of  this  event  to  India, 
and  thereby  stopped  the  further  effusion  of  blood. 
Lord  Walsingham,  who  had  been  newly  sworn  in  a 
Member  of  the  Privy  Council,  in  January,  1783,  pos- 
sessing in  virtue  of  his  Office,  two  "  Extraordinary 
"  Gazettes,11  gave  me  one  of  them ;  which  Gazette  I 
forwarded  on  the  25th  of  that  Month,  by  the  common 
Post  overland,  through  Vienna,  Constantinople,  Aleppo, 
and  Bussora,  to  a  friend  at  Madras.  It  contained  the 
Preliminaries  of  Peace  just  signed  at  Paris,  between 
Great  Britain,  France,  and  Spain.  The  King's  Ministers, 
as  well  as  the  East  India  Company,  were  equally  bound 
by  every  principle  of  humanity  and  policy,  to  have 
anticipated  that  Gazette.  But,  Lord  Sydney,  then 

572 


1783.]        NEWS   OF   PEACE   DELAYED 

Secretary  of  State  for  the  Department,  having  delayed, 
on  account  of  the  unsettled  nature  of  the  Administration, 
which  remained  during  many  weeks  in  a  species  of 
suspension,  after  Lord  Shelburne's  resignation  to  dis- 
patch the  "Crocodile"  Frigate,  with  the  intelligence; 
and  the  Court  of  Directors  remaining  from  the  same 
cause  equally  torpid ;  my  letter  reached  Madras  about 
the  middle  of  the  following  Month  of  June.  Full  six 
weeks  elapsed  subsequent  to  that  time,  before  any 
official  information,  either  from  the  Court  of  Versailles, 
from  the  British  Government,  or  from  the  East  India 
House,  arrived  on  the  Coast  of  Coromandel.  Our 
position,  at  the  moment  when  my  account  was  received 
in  that  Quarter  of  the  Globe,  might  be  esteemed  most 
critical,  as  we  had  formed  the  Siege  of  Cuddalore,  and 
were  under  hourly  apprehension  of  a  Sally  being  made 
on  the  part  of  the  enemy ;  whose  Force  within  the 
Walls,  far  exceeded  our  own  Troops  stationed  in  the 
Trenches  before  the  place.  Under  these  circumstances, 
Lord  Macartney,  then  Governor  of  Madras,  having 
dispatched  his  Secretary,  Sir  George  Staunton,  to 
Cuddalore,  with  the  Gazette  which  my  friend  had  laid 
before  him  ;  Bussy,  who  commanded  the  French  Forces, 
recognized  its  authenticity,  and  consented  to  publish  an 
immediate  Cessation  of  Arms.  When  the  account  of 
so  extraordinary  a  fact  was  received  in  London  from 
Madras,  early  in  1784,  together  with  the  recognition  of 
its  beneficial  results  to  the  East  India  Company;  a 
Member  of  the  Court  of  Directors,  who  then  enjoyed 
great  Consideration  in  Leadenhall  Street;  impressed 
with  a  sense  of  the  public  Benefits  that  had  accrued 
from  it,  evinced  a  desire  of  procuring  for  me,  as  its 
author,  some  honorary  Mark  of  the  Company's  satisfac- 
tion or  gratitude.  But,  on  his  mentioning  the  subject 
to  the  Chairman  and  Deputy  Chairman,  they  observed, 
that  to  thank  me  for  sending  out  intelligence  of  the 
conclusion  of  Peace,  must  imply  a  tacit  condemnation 

573 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [1783. 


of  their  own  delay  in  so  long  withholding,  or  rather,  in 
neglecting  to  forward,  the  information.  The  business 
remained  therefore  in  oblivion :  but  I  do  not  the  less 
reflect  upon  it,  as  one  of  the  most  gratifying  acts  of  my 
whole  Life. 

Hyder  Ally,  who  had  raised  himself,  like  Buonaparte, 
from  the  rank  of  a  military  Officer  in  the  service  of  his 
native  Prince,  the  Rajah  or  Sovereign  of  Mysore,  to  the 
possession  of  Supreme  Power  in  that  Country ;  was, 
beyond  all  competition,  the  greatest  man  whom  India 
had  beheld,  since  the  entry  of  Nadir  Shaw  into  Dehli ; 
or  perhaps  since  the  death  of  Aurung  Zebe.  It  was 
twice  the  lot  of  Hyder,  to  overrun  the  Carnatic,  and  to 
penetrate  to  the  Gates  of  Madras.  His  first  irruption, 
which  took  place  in  1769,  may  even  be  said  to  have 
dictated  the  Treaty  of  Peace,  concluded  under  the  very 
walls  of  the  City.  Governor  Du  Pre,  who  then  presided 
over  the  East  India  Company's  affairs  on  the  Coast  of 
Coromandel ;  held  more  than  one  interview  with  Hyder, 
while  the  Negociations  were  pending,  in  order  to  adjust, 
or  to  accelerate  the  Conditions.  Insensibly,  during  these 
personal  conferences,  as  their  mutual  distrust  and 
distance  wore  off,  the  Nabob  put  many  questions  to 
Du  Pre,  indicating  equally  the  enlargement  of  his  mind, 
and  displaying  the  easy  familiarity  of  his  manners. 
One  of  the  circumstances  which  most  excited  the  English 
Governor's  astonishment,  was  to  see  that  Hyder  had  no 
eye-brows ;  nor,  indeed,  a  single  hair  left  on  any  part  of 
his  face.  A  man  constantly  attended  near  him,  whose 
sole  function  and  employment  consisted  in  pulling  out, 
with  a  pair  of  nippers,  the  first  hair  that  made  its 
appearance  on  the  Sultan's  countenance.  Hyder  per- 
ceiving the  surprize  which  this  fact  occasioned  in  Du 
Pre,  said  to  him,  "  I  observe,  that  you  wonder  at  my 
"  having  no  eye-brows ;  as  well  as  at  my  attention  to 
"  cause  every  hair  that  appears  on  my  face,  to  be 
"  immediately  eradicated.  The  reason  I  will  explain 

574 


1783.]       HYDER  ALLY'S   APPEARANCE 

"  to  you.  I  am  the  Nabob  of  Mysore,  and  it  is  an 
"  object  of  policy  with  me,  that  my  Subjects  should  see 
"  no  face  in  my  dominions,  resembling  the  countenance 
"  of  their  Sovereign.11  Du  Pre  assured  Sir  John  Mac- 
pherson,  to  whom  he  related  this  Anecdote,  that  he 
believed  Ryder's  practice  proved  him  to  possess  a 
consummate  knowledge  of  human  nature,  especially  of 
his  own  subjects.  "For,"  added  he,  "the  impression 
"  which  the  Nabob's  physiognomy  made  upon  myself, 
"  was  not  a  little  encreased  by  its  singularity."  From 
the  universal  testimony  of  all  those  Europeans  who  had 
opportunities  of  knowing  this  extraordinary  Prince,  it 
is  unquestionable  that  his  manners,  voice,  and  deport- 
ment, were  the  most  soft  and  ingratiating  to  be  imagined, 
whenever  he  wished  to  please,  or  affected  to  be  gracious 
and  benign  :  but  he  was  terrible,  and  often  ferocious  in 
his  anger,  like  the  Caliph  Haroun-Alraschid,  or  like 
Peter  the  First  of  Russia.  He  died  of  Abscesses,  or 
Cancers,  in  his  loins ;  probably,  the  consequences  of 
debauchery ;  which  carried  him  off  before  he  attained 
to  old  age.  After  a  war,  which  from  its  commencement 
at  Lexington  in  1775,  had  lasted  near  eight  years,  the 
world  began  to  enjoy  repose  :  but  the  efforts  made  by 
the  Coalition  to  consolidate  their  political  Power,  soon 
produced  at  home  the  most  violent  convulsions,  which 
terminated  in  their  total  downfall. 

Two  great  legal  characters  finished  their  course 
nearly  together,  in  the  Autumn  of  1783.  Dunning, 
in  August ;  and  Wallace,  in  November.  Both  were 
eminent  in  their  profession  ;  but  all  the  intellectual 
superiority  lay  on  the  side  of  the  former.  Yet  fortune 
had  a  greater  share  than  merit  or  talents,  in  elevating  the 
one  to  the  Peerage,  while  the  other  failed  of  attaining  to 
that  Eminence.  If  Lord  North's  Administration  had 
continued  two  or  three  years  longer,  and  consequently 
if  Lord  Shelburne  had  been  excluded  from  Office,  their 
destiny  might  probably  have  been  reversed.  I  have 

575 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [1783. 

been  assured,  that  a  short  time  before  Lord  Ashburton's 
decease,  these  two  distinguished  Lawyers  finding  them- 
selves by  accident  in  the  same  inn  at  Bagshot,  the  one,  on 
his  way  down  into  Devonshire,  and  the  other  returning 
from  thence  to  London ;  both  conscious  that  their 
recovery  from  the  disorders  under  which  they  laboured, 
was  desperate ;  expressed  a  strong  mutual  wish  to  enjoy 
a  last  interview  with  each  other.  For  that  purpose, 
they  were  carried  into  the  same  apartment,  laid  down 
on  two  Sofas  nearly  opposite,  and  remained  for  a  long 
time  in  conversation.  They  then  parted,  as  men  who 
could  not  hope  to  meet  again  in  this  world.  By 
Wallace's  decease,  Lee  became  Attorney-General,  and 
Mansfield  was  replaced  in  his  former  situation  of 
Solicitor-General,  which  he  had  filled  under  Lord 
North's  Administration. 

I  passed  a  considerable  part  of  the  Autumn  with 
Lord  Sackville,  at  Drayton  in  Northamptonshire. 
Though  in  his  sixty-eighth  year,  he  possessed  activity 
of  body,  chearfulness  of  temper,  and  the  perfect  posses- 
sion of  all  his  faculties.  Drayton  had  formerly  be- 
longed to  the  Mordaunts,  Earls  of  Peterborough, 
from  whom  it  passed  into  the  possession  of  Henry, 
Duke  of  Norfolk,  by  his  marriage  with  Lady  Mary 
Mordaunt,  under  the  reign  of  William  the  Third. 
He  did  not  however  long  retain  it,  having  been 
divorced  from  the  Duchess,  on  account  of  a  criminal 
connexion  which  she  carried  on  with  Sir  John  Germain  : 
and  as  the  Duke  had  no  issue  by  her,  Drayton  reverted 
to  the  lady.  The  room  which  had  been  occupied  by 
Sir  John  Germain,  when  a  visitor  there  in  the  Duke  of 
Norfolk's  time,  communicated  by  a  spacious  dark  closet, 
with  a  large  apartment,  then  the  Duchess's  bedchamber. 
This  closet  was  divided  by  a  wooden  partition,  of  about 
six  feet  high,  which  did  not  however  reach  to  the  ceiling. 
Sir  John  having,  through  the  closet  in  question,  gained 
access  to  the  Duchess's  bed,  was  one  day  nearly  sur- 

576 


1783.]  LORD  SACKVILLE'S  STORY 

prised  by  the  Duke ;  who,  coming  unexpectedly  to  the 
door,  which  he  found  shut  and  fastened,  demanded 
admittance.  The  lover,  thus  interrupted,  had  only  time 
to  jump  out  of  bed  in  his  shirt,  to  reach  the  closet,  and 
to  mount  astride  on  the  partition  ;  where  he  sat,  not 
daring  to  descend  on  the  other  side,  because  the  noise 
would  have  disclosed  the  place  of  his  retreat.  As  if  to 
encrease  his  apprehensions,  the  Duchess's  lap-dog,  which 
lay  near  her  bed-side,  alarmed  at  the  accident,  followed 
him  to  the  door  of  the  closet,  barking  violently  all  the 
time.  The  Duke,  nevertheless,  it  seems,  did  not  dis- 
cover him,  and  he  reached  his  own  room  in  safety,  after 
passing  some  minutes  in  a  most  perilous,  as  well  as 
awkward  situation. 

Lord  Sackville  having,  as  is  well  known,  assumed 
the  name  of  Germain,  and  having  inherited  the  Estate 
of  Drayton,  it  was  natural  to  enquire  how  he  came  to 
be  called  to  that  succession.  He  has  frequently  re- 
lated to  me  the  particulars,  which  I  shall  recount  in  his 
own  words. 

"  Sir  John  Germain's  extraction,"  said  he,  "  which 
"  was  uncertain,  and  variously  reported,  has  given  rise 
"  to  much  discussion.  His  reputed  father  bore  Arms, 
"  as  a  private  soldier,  in  the  guards  of  William  the 
"  Second,  Prince  of  Orange :  but  his  mother,  who 
"  possessed  great  personal  charms,  fame  asserted  to 
"  have  been  that  Prince's  mistress ;  and  her  son  was  be- 
"  lieved  to  stand  in  a  very  close  degree  of  consanguinity 
"  to  King  William  the  Third.  Other  circumstances 
"  confirm  this  opinion.  Sir  John  Germain  inherited 
"  no  paternal  Coat  of  Arms ;  but  he  assumed,  or  rather 
"  used,  as  his  seal  and  armorial  bearing,  a  red  Cross : 
"  meaning  thereby  probably  to  imply,  that  his  preten- 
"  sions  ascended  higher  than  his  ostensible  Birth.  Even 
"  when,  by  the  provisions  of  his  widow,  Lady  Betty 
"  Germain's  Will,  I  inherited  Drayton,  on  the  condition 
"  of  assuming  the  Name  of  Germain,  no  mention  was 

577  37 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [i783. 

made  of  the  Arms,  as  is  customary  in  almost  all 
similar  cases.  King  William,  with  whom  Sir  John 
came  over  here  from  Holland,  in  1688,  unquestionably 
regarded  him  with  distinguishing  affection,  and  ad- 
vanced him  in  life.  He  became  a  Member  of  Parlia- 
ment, received  the  honour  of  Knighthood ;  and  various 
pecuniary  grants  or  donations  to  a  considerable 
amount,  were  conferred  on  him  by  that  Prince. 
"  Sir  John  Germain,  who  possessed  a  very  handsome 
person,  was  always  a  distinguished  favourite  of  the 
other  sex.  His  connexion  with  the  Duchess  of  Nor- 
folk, finally  procured  him  this  place  and  Estate,  she 
having  married  him,  after  obtaining  a  Divorce  from 
her  first  husband.  They  lived  together  several  years  ; 
but  no  children  being  left  alive,  and  the  title  of 
Peterborough  having  reverted  to  a  collateral  branch 
of  the  Mordaunt  family,  she  bequeathed  to  him,  by 
her  will,  in  the  year  1705,  the  house  and  property  of 
Drayton,  which  lay  entirely  in  her  own  disposal.  Sir 
John,  who,  though  naturalized,  and  become  by  long 
residence  in  this  country,  in  a  great  degree  an  English- 
man, retained  nevertheless  many  of  the  habits  and 
particularities  of  a  native  of  Holland,  attached  him- 
self much  to  my  mother.  She  being  the  daughter 
of  Marshal  Colyear,  brother  to  the  first  Earl  of 
Portmore,  who  had  entered  early  into  the  Dutch 
service,  and  who  was  an  old  friend  of  Sir  John 
Germain ;  he  always  called  her  his  countrywoman, 
visited  frequently  at  my  father's  house,  and  was 
kindly  received  by  the  Duke  and  Duchess  of  Dorset. 
Finding  himself  in  possession  of  a  considerable  landed 
property,  after  the  death  of  his  wife ;  and  desirous  of 
transmitting  it  to  his  own  descendants,  but  being 
destitute  of  any  natural  connexions,  he  meditated 
to  engraft  himself  on  some  distinguished  family  of 
this  kingdom.  For  the  purpose,  while  resident  at 
Bristol  Wells,  on  account  of  his  health,  he  cast  his 
578 


1783.]          LORD  SACKVILLE'S  STORY 

"  eyes  upon  Lady  Betty  Berkeley,  a  daughter  of  the  Earl 
"  of  Berkeley,  whose  birth,  character,  and  accomplish- 
"  ments,  rendered  her  every  way  worthy  of  his  choice. 
"'  She  was  indeed,  many  years  younger  than  Sir  John ; 
"  but,  as  she  possessed  a  superior  understanding,  added 
"  to  the  most  correct  deportment,  she  acquired  great 
"  influence  over  him.  Having  been,  herself,  intimate 
"  with  the  Duchess  of  Dorset,  the  friendship  between 
"  the  two  families  became  cemented  by  the  alliance. 
"  Sir  John  Germain  had  several  children  by  her,  who 
"  all  died  young ;  and  in  the  evening  of  his  life,  be- 
"  coming  a  martyr  to  the  gout,  as  well  as  to  other  dis- 
"  eases,  Lady  Betty,  assiduously  performed  every  duty 
u  of  an  affectionate  wife,  and  of  a  careful  nurse,  about 
"  his  person. 

"  A  short  time  before  his  decease,  which  happened  in 
"  the  year  1718,  having  called  her  to  his  bedside  ;  '  Lady 
"  Betty,"  said  he,  '  I  have  made  you  a  very  indifferent 
"  husband,  and  particularly  of  late  years,  when  infirm- 
"  ities  have  rendered  me  a  burden  to  myself:  but  I 
"  shall  not  be  much  longer  troublesome  to  you.  I 
"  advise  you  never  again  to  marry  an  old  man :  but 
"  I  strenuously  exhort  you  to  marry  when  I  am  gone, 
"  and  I  will  endeavour  to  put  it  in  your  power.  You 
"  have  fulfilled  every  obligation  towards  me  in  an 
"  exemplary  manner,  and  I  wish  to  demonstrate  my 
"  sense  of  your  merits.  I  have,  therefore,  by  my  Will 
"  bequeathed  you  this  Estate,  which  I  received  from 
"  my  first  wife ;  and  which,  as  she  gave  to  me,  so  I 
"  leave  to  you.  I  hope  you  will  marry,  and  have 
**  children  to  inherit  it.  But,  if  events  should  deter- 
"  mine  otherwise,  or  if  you  should  not  have  issue  that 
"  survive  you,  it  would  give  me  pleasure  to  think,  that 
"  Drayton  descended  after  your  decease,  to  a  younger 
"  son  of  my  friend,  the  Duchess  of  Dorset."1  In  con- 
"  sequence  of  this  Wish,  expressed  by  Sir  John  Germain 
"  on  his  death-bed,  I  now  enjoy  the  Estate.  Lady 

579 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    fnas. 

"  Betty,  though  young  when  left  a  widow,  and  though 
"  she  survived  him  above  fifty  years,  never  married  a 
"  second  time.  Her  friendship  for  my  mother,  always 
"  continued,  without  diminution ;  and  her  respect  for 
"  the  desire  manifested  by  her  husband,  induced  her  to 
"  fulfil  his  wishes,  to  the  exclusion  of  any  of  her  own 
"  relations." 

While  writing  on  this  subject,  I  shall  endeavour  to 
throw  into  one  point,  some  of  the  numerous  particulars 
relative  to  his  own  family,  which  in  the  course  of  con- 
versation I  heard  from  Lord  Sackville.  They  all  may 
be  said  to  hold,  more  or  less  to  English  History.  In 
order  to  give  them  more  verity  and  accuracy,  I  shall, 
as  nearly  as  I  am  able,  present  them  in  his  own 
words. 

"  The  Sackvilles,"  said  he,  "  who  came  into  England 
"  with  the  Conqueror,  and  who  derived  their  name  from 
"  a  small  village  of  Low  Normandy,  have  never  branched 
"  in  the  lapse  of  more  than  seven  Hundred  years.  During 
"  the  two  last  Centuries,  the  family  has  produced  three 
"  distinguished  men,  of  whom  the  first  was  the  Lord 
"  Treasurer  Buckhurst,  whom  our  great  Elizabeth 
"  thought  worthy  to  succeed  Lord  Burleigh  in  that 
"  high  Office,  and  whom  James  the  First  created  Earl 
"  of  Dorset.  It  would  have  been  fortunate  for  the 
"  Scottish  King,  if  he  had  presided  longer  in  the 
"  Councils  of  the  Crown ;  but  he  soon  followed  his 
"  royal  Mistress,  and  made  way,  after  a  short  interval, 
"  for  those  favourites,  Carr  and  Villiers,  who  covered 
"  James  with  disgrace.  His  grandson,  Edward,  Earl 
"  of  Dorset,  the  friend  and  contemporary  of  Lord 
"  Herbert  of  Cherbury,  but,  better  known  by  his  Duel 
"  with  Lord  Bruce,  performed  an  eminent  part  under 
"  Charles  the  First.  He  accompanied  that  Prince 
"  during  the  civil  wars,  and  fought  in  most  of  the 
"  actions,  from  Edge  Hill,  down  to  Naseby.  But,  like 
"  the  virtuous  Lord  Falkland,  he  regretted  and  lamented 

580 


1783.]  LORD  SACKVILLE'S  STORY 

"  the  very  advantages  to  which  he  contributed  by  his 
"  sword.  Many  of  his  letters,  written  between  1643 
"  and  1646,  which  are  preserved  among  the  Dorset 
"  Papers ;  descriptive  of  the  scenes  of  havock  then 
"  acting  in  every  part  of  the  kingdom,  convey  a  high 
"  idea  of  his  principles.  His  days  were  embittered  and 
"  abbreviated  by  his  royal  Master's  tragical  end,  which 
"  he  only  survived  about  three  years. 

"  My  Grandfather,  Charles,  commonly  called  the 
"  witty  Earl  of  Dorset,  died  about  ten  years  before 
"  I  was  born,  after  having  survived  in  a  great  degree 
"  his  faculties.  He  was  during  his  whole  life,  the 
"  patron  of  men  of  genius,  and  the  dupe  of  women. 
"  Bountiful  to  both,  though  he  inherited  not  only  the 
"  paternal  Estate  of  the  Sackvilles,  but  likewise  that  of 
"  the  Cranfields,  Earls  of  Middlesex,  in  right  of  his 
"  mother ;  yet  at  his  decease,  my  father,  then  eighteen 
"  years  of  age,  possessed  so  slender  a  fortune,  that  his 
"  guardians,  when  they  sent  him  to  travel  on  the 
"  Continent,  allowed  him  only  eight  hundred  Pounds 
"  a  year,  for  his  provision.  Charles,  Earl  of  Dorset, 
"  married  three  times ;  but  only  one  of  these  marriages 
"  contributed  either  to  his  honour,  or  to  his  felicity. 
"  His  first  wife  was  the  celebrated  Countess  of  Falmouth, 
"  well  known  by  her  gallantries ;  the  Miss  Bagot  of 
"  "  Grammont's  Memoirs,'"  whom  Dryden  has  designated 
"as  'a  teeming  widow,  but  a  barren  wife.1  Happily 
"  she  left  him  no  issue ;  and  in  his  second  matrimonial 
"  connexion  he  consulted  not  only  his  inclination,  but 
"  his  judgment,  when  he  gave  his  hand  to  a  daughter 
"  of  the  Earl  of  Northampton.  He  had  then  nearly 
"  attained  his  fiftieth  year ;  and  as  he  was  only  twenty  - 
"  three  at  the  time  of  Charles  the  Second's  Restoration, 
"  the  excesses  of  that  dissolute  reign,  in  which  Lord 
"  Dorset  led  the  way,  had  already  enfeebled  his  con- 
"  stitution.  Strongly  attached  to  the  principles  of  civil 
"  liberty,  he  quitted  James  the  Second,  when  that  in- 

581 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [irss. 


fatuated  Prince  attempted  to  introduce  Popery ;  and 
conducted  the  Princess  Anne  of  Denmark  from  her 
father's  Palace  at  Whitehall,  to  the  Coach  which 
waited  for  her  in  St.  James's  Park,  in  order  to  convey 
her  to  Nottingham.  While  crossing  over  from  the 
Palace  to  the  Park,  by  night,  and  in  Winter,  one  of 
her  Royal  Highness's  shoes  sticking  fast  in  the  mud, 
the  accident  threatened  to  impede  her  escape :  but 
Lord  Dorset  immediately  drawing  off  his  white  glove, 
put  it  on  the  Princess's  foot,  and  placed  her  safely  in 
the  Carriage.  To  King  William,  my  Grandfather 
rendered  himself  not  less  acceptable,  than  he  had 
been  to  Charles  the  Second ;  and  I  have  always  been 
assured  that  it  only  depended  on  himself,  to  have 
been  raised  to  a  Dukedom  under  William's  reign  : 
but  his  wife's  relations,  the  Comptons,  treating  the 
matter,  when  he  mentioned  it  to  them,  with  great 
indifference,  he  said,  'the  Earldom  of  Dorset  was 
quite  good  enough  for  him.'  In  fact,  my  father  only 
attained  to  that  Dignity,  near  thirty  years  afterwards, 
under  George  the  First. 

"  Extenuated  by  pleasures  and  indulgencies,  the  Earl 
of  Dorset  sunk  under  a  premature  old  age ;  though 
not  as  early  as  Rochester,  Buckingham,  and  so  many 
others  of  his  contemporaries  had  done,  including 
Charles  the  Second  himself;  all  of  whom  fell  victims 
to  their  immoderate  pursuit  of  enjoyments.  A  few 
years  before  he  died,  he  married  a  woman  named 
Roche,  of  very  obscure  connexions,  who  held  him 
in  a  sort  of  captivity  down  at  Bath,  where  he  expired 
at  about  sixty  nine.  She  suffered  few  persons  to 
approach  him  during  his  last  illness,  or  rather  decay ; 
and  was  supposed  to  have  converted  his  weakness  of 
mind,  to  her  own  objects  of  personal  acquisition.  He 
was  indeed  considered  to  be  fallen  into  a  state  of 
such  imbecility,  as  rendered  it  necessary  to  appoint 
guardians,  with  a  view  to  prevent  his  injuring  the 
582 


1783.]  LORD  SACKVILLE'S  STORY 

"  family  Estate :  but  the  intention  was  nevertheless 
"  abandoned.  You  have  no  doubt  heard,  and  it  is  a 
"  fact,  that  with  a  view  of  ascertaining  whether  Lord 
"  Dorset  continued  to  be  of  a  sane  mind,  Prior,  whom 
"  he  had  patronized  and  always  regarded  with  predilec- 
"  tion,  was  sent  down  to  Bath  by  the  family.  Having 
"  obtained  access  to  the  Earl,  and  conversed  with  him, 
"  Prior  made  his  report  in  these  words.  '  Lord  Dorset 
"  is  certainly  greatly  declined  in  his  understanding ; 
"  but  he  drivels  so  much  better  sense  even  now,  than 
"  any  other  man  can  talk,  that  you  must  not  call  me 
"  into  Court,  as  a  witness  to  prove  him  an  idiot.1 

"  My  father  having  lost  his  own  mother  when  very 
"  young,  was  brought  up  chiefly  by  the  Dowager 
"  Countess  of  Northampton,  his  grandmother ;  who 
"  being  particularly  acceptable  to  Queen  Mary,  she 
"  commanded  the  Countess  always  to  bring  her  little 
"  grandson,  Lord  Buckhurst,  to  Kensington  Palace, 
"  though  at  that  time  hardly  four  years  of  age ;  and  he 
"  was  allowed  to  amuse  himself  with  a  child's  Cart  in 
"  the  Gallery.  King  William,  like  almost  all  Dutchmen, 
"  never  failed  to  attend  the  tea  table  every  evening. 
"  It  happened  that  Her  Majesty  having,  one  afternoon, 
"  by  his  desire,  made  tea,  and  waiting  for  the  King's 
"  arrival,  who  was  engaged  on  business  in  his  Cabinet,  at 
"  the  other  extremity  of  the  Gallery ;  the  boy  hearing 
"  the  Queen  express  her  impatience  at  the  delay,  ran 
"  away  to  the  closet,  dragging  after  him  the  Cart. 
"  When  he  arrived  at  the  door,  he  knocked  ;  and  the 
"  King  asking  '  Who  is  there  ? '  '  Lord  Buck,'  answered 
"  he.  '  And  what  does  Lord  Buck  want  with  me  ? ' 
"  replied  His  Majesty.  '  You  must  come  to  tea 
"  directly,'  said  he,  '  the  Queen  is  waiting  for  you.' 
"  King  William  immediately  laid  down  his  pen,  and 
"  opened  the  door  ;  then  taking  the  child  in  his  arms, 
"  placed  Lord  Buckhurst  in  the  Cart,  and  seizing  the 
"  pole,  drew  them  both  along  the  Gallery,  quite  to  the 

583 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [1783. 

"  room  in  which  were  seated  the  Queen,  Lady  North- 
"  ampton,  and  the  company.  But,  no  sooner  had  he 
"  entered  the  Apartment,  than,  exhausted  with  the 
"  effort,  which  had  forced  the  blood  upon  his  lungs, 
"  and  being  naturally  asthmatic,  he  threw  himself  into  a 
"  chair,  and  for  some  minutes  was  incapable  of  uttering 
"  a  word,  breathing  with  the  utmost  difficulty.  The 
"  Countess  of  Northampton,  shocked  at  the  con- 
"  sequences  of  her  grandson's  indiscretion,  which  threw 
"  the  whole  Circle  into  great  consternation,  would  have 
"  punished  him :  but  the  King  interposed  in  his 
"  behalf;  and  the  story  is  chiefly  interesting,  because, 
"  (as  serving  to  shew  how  kindly  he  could  behave 
"  towards  a  troublesome  child,)  it  places  that  Prince  in 
"  a  more  amiable  point  of  view,  than  he  is  commonly 
"  represented  in  History.  Henry  the  Fourth  of  France, 
"  when  playing  with  his  own  children,  could  not  have 
"  manifested  more  amenity.  The  Queen  being  ac- 
"  customed  to  take  Lord  Buckhurst  in  her  arms,  and  to 
"  caress  him  when  he  came  to  Kensington ;  his  Nurse, 
"  aware  of  the  circumstance,  gave  him  secretly  a 
"  written  paper,  which  she  charged  him  to  deliver 
"  privately  to  Her  Majesty.  He  did  so,  without  ac- 
"  quainting  Lady  Northampton,  who  being  present, 
"  would  have  interposed  to  prevent  him :  but  the 
"  Queen  insisted  on  perusing  its  contents.  It  contained 
"  a  petition  drawn  up  by  the  woman,  in  favour  of  her 
"  brother,  then  condemned  to  death  for  a  capital  crime. 
"  Queen  Mary,  touched  with  the  incident,  laid  it  before 
"  the  King,  who  caused  enquiry  to  be  made  into  the 
"  circumstances  of  the  case,  with  a  view  of  extending 
"  mercy  to  the  culprit.  On  examination,  the  crime 
"  from  its  magnitude,  not  admitting  of  pardon,  the 
"  Queen,  as  the  only  alleviation  left  in  her  power  to 
"  bestow,  gave  Lord  Buckhurst  a  purse  containing  ten 
"  Jacobusses  ;  enjoining  him  to  present  it  to  his  Nurse 
"  from  herself,  with  the  assurances  of  her  concern  at 

584 


1783.]  LORD  SACKVILLE'S  STORY 

"  the  impossibility  that  existed,  of  saving  her  brother's 
"life." 

"  I  was  born,"  continued  Lord  Sackville,  "  in  the  year 
"  1716,  in  the  Haymarket,  where  my  father  then 
"  resided ;  and  received  my  name  from  George  the 
"  First,  who  was  my  godfather,  having  honoured  the 
"  ceremony  of  my  baptism  by  his  personal  presence. 
"  One  of  the  earliest  circumstances  which  made  an 
"  impression  on  my  mind,  was  that  of  being  carried,  at 
"  five  years  of  age,  by  the  servants,  to  the  gate  of  St. 
"  Jameses  Palace,  in  order  to  see  the  great  Duke  of 
"  Marlborough,  as  he  came  out  of  Court.  He  was  then 
"  in  a  state  of  caducity ;  but  still  retained  the  vestiges 
"  of  a  most  graceful  figure,  though  he  was  obliged  to  be 
"  supported  by  a  servant  on  each  side,  while  the  tears 
"  ran  down  his  cheeks,  just  as  he  is  drawn  by  Dr. 
"  Johnson.  The  populace  cheered  him,  while  passing 
"  through  the  crowd  to  enter  his  carriage.  I  have 
"  however  heard  my  father  say,  that  the  Duke  of  Marl- 
"  borough  by  no  means  fell  into  irrecoverable  or  settled 
"  Dotage,  as  we  commonly  suppose  ;  but  manifested  at 
"  times  a  sound  understanding,  till  within  a  very  short 
"  period  of  his  Decease ;  occasionally  attending  the 
"  privy  Council,  and  sometimes  speaking  in  his  official 
"  capacity,  on  points  of  business,  with  his  former  ability. 

"  No  man  manifested  greater  zeal  than  my  father, 
"  for  the  succession  in  the  House  of  Brunswic.  After 
"  Queen  Anne's  death  in  1714,  he  was  sent  to  Hanover, 
"  returned  with  the  new  King  from  Keren  Hausen  to 
"  England  in  September,  and  had  the  honour  to  ac- 
"  company  George  the  First,  in  the  Coach  which  con- 
"  veyed  him  on  his  landing,  from  Greenwich  to  London. 
"  Thirty-three  years  before,  he  had  been  a  suitor  for 
"  the  hand  of  the  Queen,  whom  he  then  succeeded ; 
"  having  come  over  with  that  view  from  Germany  to 
"  this  country  in  1681,  by  permission  of  his  father, 
"  Ernest  Augustus ;  but  the  proposition  failed  of 

585 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [1783. 

"  success.  On  his  return,  riding  a  common  post  horse 
"  from  London  to  Gravesend,  where  he  took  shipping 
"  for  Holland,  the  horse  and  the  road  being  equally 
"  bad,  he  got  a  severe  fall,  and  arrived  at  Gravesend 
"  covered  with  mud.  The  King,  who  related  this  cir- 
"  cumstance  to  Lord  Dorset,  as  they  came  up  together 
"  in  the  Coach,  recognised  and  pointed  out  the  spot 
"  where  the  misadventure  befel  him. 

"  When  the  intelligence  of  his  decease,  which  took 
"  place  near  Osnabrugh,  in  the  end  of  July,  1727, 
"  arrived  in  London ;  the  Cabinet  having  immediately 
"  met,  thought  proper  to  dispatch  the  Duke  of  Dorset 
"  with  the  news,  to  the  Prince  of  Wales.  He  then 
"  resided  at  Kew,  in  a  state  of  great  alienation  from  the 
"  King ;  the  two  Courts  maintaining  no  communica- 
"  tion.  Some  little  time  being  indispensable  to  enable 
"  my  father  to  appear  in  a  suitable  manner  before  the 
"  new  Monarch,  he  sent  forward  the  Duchess  his  wife, 
"  in  order  to  announce  the  event.  She  arrived  at  Kew, 
"  just  as  the  Prince,  according  to  his  invariable  custom, 
"  having  undressed  himself  after  dinner,  had  lain  down 
"  in  bed.  The  Duchess  having  demanded  permission 
"  to  see  him  immediately,  on  business  of  the  greatest 
"  importance,  the  servants  acquainted  the  Princess  of 
"  Wales  with  her  arrival ;  and  the  Duchess,  without 
"  a  moment's  hesitation,  informed  her  that  George  the 
"  First  lay  dead  at  Osnabrugh ;  that  the  Cabinet  had 
"  ordered  her  husband  to  be  the  bearer  of  the  in- 
"  telligence  to  his  successor,  and  that  the  Duke  would 
"  follow  her  in  a  short  time.  She  added,  that  not  a 
"  moment  should  be  lost  in  communicating  so  great 
"  an  event  to  the  Prince,  as  the  Ministers  wished  him 
"  to  come  up  to  London  that  evening,  in  order  to 
"  summon  a  Privy  Council,  issue  a  Proclamation,  and 
"  take  other  requisite  measures  at  the  commencement 
"  of  a  new  Reign. 

"  To  the  propriety  of  all  these  measures,  the 
586 


1783.]  LORD  SACKVILLE'S  STORY 

"  Princess  assented ;  but  at  the  same  time  informed 
"  the  Duchess,  that  she  could  not  venture  to  go  into 
"  her  husband's  room,  as  he  had  only  just  taken  off 
"  his  cloaths,  and  composed  himself  to  Sleep.  '  Besides,1 
"  added  she,  '  the  Prince  will  not  give  credit  to  the 
"  intelligence ;  but  will  exclaim  that  it  is  a  trick, 
"  designed  for  the  purpose  of  exposing  him.''  The 
"  Duchess  continuing  nevertheless  to  remonstrate  with 
"  Her  Royal  Highness,  on  the  injurious  consequences 
"  of  losing  time ;  and  adding,  that  the  Duke  of  Dorset 
"  would  expect  to  find  the  Prince  not  only  apprized  of 
"  it,  but  ready  to  accompany  him  to  London ;  the 
"  Princess  of  Wales  took  off  her  shoes,  opened  the 
"  Chamber  door  softly,  and  advanced  up  to  the  Bed- 
"  side,  while  my  Mother  remained  at  the  threshold,  till 
"  she  should  be  allowed  to  enter  the  Apartment.  As 
"  soon  as  the  Princess  came  near  the  Bed,  a  voice  from 
"  under  the  cloaths  cried  out  in  German,  '  Was  is  das  ? ' 
"  '  I  am  come,  Sir,1  answered  she,  '  to  announce  to  you 
"  the  death  of  the  King,  which  has  taken  place  in 
"  Germany.1  '  That  is  one  damned  lye,  one  damned 
"  trick  von  my  father,1  returned  the  Prince,  '  I  do  not 
"  believe  one  word  of  it.1  '  Sir,1  said  the  Princess,  *  it 
"  is  most  certain.  The  Duchess  of  Dorset  has  just 
"  brought  the  intelligence,  and  the  Duke  will  be  here 
"  immediately.  The  Ministers  hope  that  you  will 
"  repair  to  town  this  evening,  as  your  presence  there 
"  is  indispensable.1  Her  Royal  Highness  then  threw 
"  herself  on  her  knees,  to  kiss  the  new  King^  hand ; 
"  and  beckoning  to  the  Duchess  of  Dorset  to  advance, 
"  she  came  in  likewise,  knelt  down,  and  assured  him  of 
"  the  indisputable  truth  of  his  father's  Decease.  Con- 
"  vinced  at  length  of  the  fact,  he  consented  to  get  up 
"  and  dress  himself.  The  Duke  of  Dorset  arriving  in 
"  his  Coach  and  six,  almost  immediately  afterwards, 
"  George  the  Second  quitted  Kew  the  same  evening,  for 
"  London.11  I  return  to  the  progress  of  public  affairs. 

587 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [1783. 

November.]  When  we  reflect  on  the  manner  in 
which  Fox  had  attained  to  Power ;  as  well  as  on  the 
long,  though  ineffectual  Resistance  made  by  the  King  ; 
followed  by  his  sullen  Resignation  under  a  Yoke  which 
he  found  it  impossible  to  elude,  or  to  throw  off; — 
when  we  consider  these  Facts,  it  cannot  excite  Sur- 
prize, that  Fox  should  meditate  the  Means  of  confirm- 
ing and  perpetuating  his  precarious  tenure  of  Office. 
He  felt  himself  personally  odious  to  the  Sovereign, 
whom  he  had  too  deeply  offended,  easily  to  obtain 
Forgiveness.  From  that  Quarter  therefore,  he  well 
knew  that  he  might  be  undermined  or  subverted ;  but 
he  could  not  hope  to  receive  a  cordial  Support. 
Unfortunately,  he  had  likewise  recently  lost  in  a  very 
considerable  Degree,  the  Confidence  and  Attachment 
of  the  People.  So  long  as  the  American  War  lasted, 
he  retained,  in  Defiance  of  his  private  Irregularities, 
their  ardent  Affection.  Of  this  Sentiment,  they  gave 
him  many  Proofs ;  particularly  after  his  Duel  with  Mr. 
Adam,  when  the  Wound  which  he  received,  exciting 
Apprehensions  for  his  Life,  the  Populace  surrounded 
his  Lodgings,  with  Testimonies  of  clamorous  Anxiety, 
as  well  as  of  corresponding  Resentment  against  his 
ministerial  and  personal  Opponents. 

Since  that  Time,  the  Inhabitants  of  Westminster 
manifesting  the  same  Partiality,  had  elected  him  one 
of  their  Representatives  in  Parliament ;  a  Situation 
which  enabled  him  not  only  to  defend  their  Liberties 
in  the  House  of  Commons ;  but,  conferred  likewise  the 
Means  of  convoking,  haranguing,  and  propelling  them 
in  tumultuary  Assemblies,  convened  in  Westminster 
Hall.  To  a  Man  of  Fox's  Energy  and  Talents,  this 
additional  Facility  of  thus  presiding  in  a  species  of 
Mob,  at  the  very  Door  of  the  two  Houses  of  Parlia- 
ment, as  well  as  at  a  very  inconsiderable  Distance 
from  the  royal  Residence,  doubled  his  Consequence; 
and  might  be  said  to  render  him  a  Tribune  of  the 

588 


1783.]        A  TRIBUNE  OF  THE  PEOPLE 

People,  in  the  most  literal  sense  of  the  Word,  nearly 
as  that  Office  was  exercised  in  ancient  Rome,  previous 
to  the  Subversion  of  the  Common- wealth.  Nor  had 
his  Popularity  suffered  at  all  in  the  general  Estimation, 
by  his  Acceptance  of  Office  under  Lord  Rockingham  ; 
though  the  Fallacy  and  Delusion  of  many  of  his 
Promises  or  Assertions  had  become  sufficiently  mani- 
fest, even  during  his  short  Stay  in  the  Cabinet,  under 
that  Administration.  On  the  Motives,  and  on  the 
Propriety  or  Necessity  of  his  Resignation,  after  Lord 
Shelburne's  Elevation  to  the  Head  of  the  Treasury, 
Mankind  seemed  indeed  divided ;  some  applauding  it, 
as  an  Act  of  magnanimous  public  Virtue  and  Self- 
Devotion ;  while  others  beheld  in  it  only  personal 
Rivality,  Enmity,  and  Resentment. 

But,  relative  to  his  Junction  with  his  present 
Colleague  Lord  North,  the  Suffrages  of  the  World, 
from  the  highest  down  to  the  lowest  Classes,  united 
to  reprobate  it  in  a  greater,  or  in  a  less  Degree.  And 
I  have  always  thought  that  Fox  himself,  in  his 
Impatience  to  regain  Office,  miscalculated,  or  did  not 
sufficiently  appreciate  the  Operation  on  the  public 
Mind,  of  nis  Conduct,  in  thus  taking  to  his  Bosom  in 
March,  1783,  the  very  Minister,  on  whose  Head,  in 
March,  1782,  he  had  invoked  the  utmost  Vengeance 
of  an  offended  and  ruined  Nation.  Some  longer 
interval  of  Time  was  required  to  reconcile  Men  to 
such  an  apparent  Dereliction  of  Principle,  and  total 
Sacrifice  of  Decorum,  at  the  shrine  of  Ambition. 
Here  the  Transmutation  had  been  so  rapid,  as  not 
only  to  shock  the  most  ordinary  Understanding ;  but 
even  to  impress  with  secret  Concern  or  Disgust,  many 
of  those  who,  nevertheless,  affected  to  justify,  and  to 
support  the  measure.  Pope  says, 

"  Lust,  through  some  certain  Strainers  well  refin'd, 
"  Is  gentle  Love,  and  charms  all  Female  kind." 
589 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [nss. 

But  it  must  pass  through  those  Refiners,  and  leave 
its  Dross  behind,  or  conceal  it,  before  Love  can  charm, 
or  challenge  Respect.  I  have  heard  Colonel  Macalister, 
late  Governor  of  the  island  of  Penang  in  the  East 
Indies,  frequently  assert,  that  there  existed  in  the 
Town  of  that  Colony,  a  Receptacle  or  Space  of  Ground, 
surrounded  by  walls,  into  which  was  commonly  thrown 
every  species  of  corrupted  and  putrified  Substance.  In 
a  hot  Climate,  the  process  from  Dissolution  to  Re- 
vivification, we  know,  is  very  quick.  Maggots  in 
immense  numbers,  of  a  prodigious  Size,  were  speedily 
generated  or  produced  from  this  Filth ;  which  the 
Chinese  Inhabitants  of  the  Settlement,  who  possessed 
no  Means  of  regular  Subsistence,  and  who  therefore, 
were  not  fastidious  about  their  Diet,  used  to  collect 
with  Rakes,  from  off  the  Heaps  of  Carcases,  and  to 
devour  immediately,  after  frying  them  in  Ghee,  or 
melted  Butter.  Colonel  Macalister  indeed  added, 
that  the  Chinese  who  used  such  Aliments,  became 
subject  to  cutaneous  and  leprous  Diseases  of  the  most 
inveterate  Kind.  We  perceive  however,  that  all 
animal  and  vegetable  Substances  perpetually  change 
their  Forms;  and  disgusting  as  this  Recital  may  be, 
that  Sentiment  only  arises  from  the  Rapidity  of  the 
Metamorphosis.  Precisely  of  the  same  Kind,  in  a 
political  Sense,  appeared  the  Coalition  between  Lord 
North  and  Fox ;  a  Transformation,  which  being  con- 
summated in  the  Space  of  a  few  Hours,  was  then 
imposed  upon  the  House  of  Commons  and  the  Nation. 
But,  the  English,  indignant  at  such  a  compact, 
rejected  in  general  with  Abhorrence,  the  Dish  served 
up  to  them,  and  dismissed  the  State  Cooks  who  had 
prepared  it  for  the  Country. 

Well  aware  as  Fox  was  therefore,  that  though  he 
had  a  second  time  forced  his  way  into  high  Employ- 
ment, yet  that  he  neither  enjoyed  the  favor  of  the 
Crown,  nor  any  longer  possessed  the  affection  of  the 

590 


1783.]    BIRTH  OF  THE  "  EAST  INDIA  BILL  " 

people  in  general ;  it  wasr natural  he  should  look  to 
some  other  Quarter,  for  permanent  support.  In  the 
two  Houses  of  Parliament,  where  he  commanded  a 
decided  majority,  he  beheld  the  foundation  on  which 
he  might  construct  a  Citadel,  unassailable,  as  he 
conceived,  either  by  the  Sovereign,  or  by  the  Nation. 
India,  which  presented  the  materials  for  his  edifice, 
seemed  to  invite  his  exertions  to  re-model  that  vast 
Empire,  convulsed  and  half  subverted  by  internal 
discord  or  corruption,  added  to  external  hostilities. 
Burke,  whose  friend  or  relation  of  the  same  name, 
William  Burke,  was  already  stationed  in  the  East,  as 
Agent  with  the  Rajah  of  Tanjore;  and  who  had, 
himself,  taken  a  most  active  part  in  all  the  Parlia- 
mentary Discussions  arising  out  of  the  Reports  of  the 
Secret  and  Select  Committees,  during  the  two  pre- 
ceding Sessions ;  aspired  with  equal  ardor,  to  second 
Fox  in  this  great  undertaking.  It  had  even  been 
announced  from  the  Throne,  when  the  King  terminated 
the  sitting  of  Parliament,  in  the  preceding  month  of 
July,  that  India  would  form  the  first  object  of  their 
Deliberations,  on  their  again  meeting  for  business. 

During  the  course  of  the  Autumn,  Fox  and  Burke 
therefore  drew  up,  and  prepared  the  memorable  Bill, 
which  it  was  intended  to  introduce,  as  soon  as  the 
Session  should  commence  in  November.  They  com- 
municated all  the  heads  and  outlines  of  it  to  Lord 
North ;  with  whom,  indeed,  as  being  in  his  Department, 
the  Measure  ought  strictly  to  have  originated:  but, 
who  was  induced  in  this  instance,  as  in  many  other 
cases,  to  allow  the  superior  energies  of  his  Colleague, 
added  to  the  superior  information  possessed  by  Burke 
on  the  subject,  to  supplant,  and  in  some  measure  to 
supercede  him  in  his  official  functions.  The  Bill,  thus 
far  organized,  and  having  been  approved  in  the  Cabinet, 
was  then  submitted  to  the  King,  for  his  perusal  and 
sanction ;  accompanied  with  becoming  expressions  of 

591 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [1783. 

the  wish  and  desire  entertained  by  Ministers,  to  ac- 
commodate it  to  His  Majesty's  ideas  upon  every  point, 
before  it  should  be  brought  into  Parliament.  Unable 
of  himself,  without  some  assistance,  to  form  a  competent 
judgment  upon  its  complicated  provisions,  operation, 
and  general  results,  it  was  understood  and  believed 
that  the  King  had  early  thought  proper  to  lay  it 
confidentially  before  Lord  Thurlow ;  desiring  at  the 
same  time  to  know  his  legal  opinion  respecting  its 
nature.  Common  rumour  added,  that  the  opinion 
delivered  by  Lord  Thurlow,  represented  it  as  calculated 
to  render  Ministers  independent  of  the  Crown,  and  as 
containing  many  Clauses  injurious  to,  or  nearly  sub- 
versive of  the  British  Constitution  itself ;  but  that  His 
Majesty  was  advised  to  wait  for  its  more  complete 
development,  before  he  expressed  any  disapprobation, 
or  attempted  any  resistance.  Such  might  be  con- 
sidered the  general  state  and  aspect  of  things  in  the 
first  days  of  November,  when  a  curious  incident 
which  unexpectedly  took  place  at  St.  James's,  and 
which  excited  no  little  speculation,  seemed  to  shew  that 
the  ground  on  which  the  Ministry  stood,  was  hollow  and 
treacherous. 

Sir  Eyre  Coote,  who  long  commanded  the  armies  of 
the  East  India  Company,  on  the  Coast  of  Coromandel, 
with  distinguished  reputation ;  after  repulsing  Hyder 
Ally,  and  rescuing  the  Carnatic,  expired  at  Madras, 
worn  out  and  extenuated  by  disease,  on  the  26th  of 
April,  1788;  having  survived  his  Antagonist  Hyder, 
scarcely  five  months.  The  intelligence  of  his  Decease, 
which  was  transmitted  overland,  reached  Leadenhall 
Street,  early  in  November.  No  sooner  had  it  been 
communicated  to  Fox,  than  he  immediately  destined 
the  Riband  of  the  Order  of  the  Bath,  which  became 
vacant  on  Sir  Eyre's  death,  for  one  of  his  intimate 
friends,  Mr.  Bielby  Thompson.  This  Gentleman,  who 
possessed  a  very  fine  Estate  in  Yorkshire,  at  Wetherby 

592 


1783.]  A  MISCALCULATION 

Grange,  near  the  town  of  that  name,  sat  at  the  time  in 
Parliament,  for  Thirske  in  the  County  of  York.  Fox, 
after  conferring  on  the  subject  with  the  Duke  of 
Portland  and  Lord  North,  whom  he  acquainted  with 
his  intentions,  repaired  to  St.  James's;  where  having 
gone  into  the  Closet,  he  announced  to  the  King  the 
event  that  had  taken  place  in  India.  He  then  men- 
tioned Mr.  Thompson,  as  the  person  whom  he  wished, 
on  the  part  of  Ministers,  to  recommend  for  the  vacant 
Riband ;  and  His  Majesty  in  answer,  seems  to  have 
expressed  that  species  of  acquiescence,  more  probably 
tacit,  than  couched  in  precise  words,  which  the  Secre- 
tary interpreted,  whether  judiciously  or  not,  to  consti- 
tute full  compliance.  Without  waiting  therefore,  for 
any  more  explicit  declaration  from  the  King  on  the 
subject,  as  prudence  seemed  to  dictate,  Fox  informed 
Mr.  Thompson,  of  his  having  received  the  royal  assent, 
and  added  that  the  Investiture  would  take  place  at  the 
next  Levee.  Directions  were  accordingly  issued  to 
Norroy  King  of  Arms,  and  the  proper  officers  belonging 
to  the  Heralds1  College,  to  attend  at  St.  James's  for  the 
purpose.  The  circumstance  being  publickly  known, 
Mr.  Thompson  was  felicitated  by  anticipation,  on  the 
honour  destined  for  him ;  but  the  sequel  proved  that 
Fox  had  either  miscalculated  or  misunderstood,  the 
whole  transaction. 

On  the  day  fixed,  His  Majesty  went  to  St  James's  at 
the  usual  hour,  to  prepare  for  the  Levee.  After  he  had 
finished  dressing,  he  sent  out  the  Groom  of  the  Bed 
Chamber  in  waiting,  as  was  his  frequent  custom,  to 
bring  him  information  relative  to  the  number  of  persons 
who  were  arrived.  The  Gentleman  returning,  ac- 
quainted the  King,  that  besides  a  great  croud  come 
to  attend  the  Levee,  the  Officers  of  the  Bath  stood 
likewise  without,  ready  for  the  Investiture.  With 
some  surprize  marked  in  his  countenance,  the  King 
asked,  what  Investiture  he  meant  ?  To  which  question 

593  38 


WRAXALi:S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [i783. 

he  replied,  not  without  hesitation,  that  he  understood 
it  was  intended  to  confer  the  Order  of  the  Bath  on  Mr. 
Bielby  Thompson,  who  was  there  in  person  for  that 
express  purpose.  His  Majesty  made  no  answer ;  and 
immediately  afterwards,  the  Duke  of  Portland  entering, 
went  into  the  Closet.  In  the  course  of  his  Audience, 
the  King  observed  to  him  that  no  official  account 
having  been  as  yet  received  from  India,  of  Sir  Eyre 
Coote's  death;  however  authentic  the  information  of 
that  event,  transmitted  from  Madras,  might  prove; 
and  his  Riband,  together  with  the  other  Insignia  of 
the  Order,  not  having  been  hitherto  delivered  back  to 
himself;  he  apprehended  it  informal  to  fill  up  the 
vacancy,  till  those  points  were  previously  ascertained 
and  executed.  The  Duke,  taken  by  surprize,  after 
attempting  respectfully  to  bring  His  Majesty  to  another 
way  of  thinking,  withdrew;  and  finding  Mr.  Fox  in 
the  next  room,  communicated  to  him  this  most  un- 
expected and  mortifying  piece  of  information. 

The  Secretary,  equally  astonished,  instantly  went  in, 
when  a  long  conversation  took  place  between  him  and 
the  Sovereign.  In  its  progress,  Fox  stated  that  having, 
some  days  preceding,  laid  the  business  before  His 
Majesty ;  and  conceiving  that  he  had  obtained  his  royal 
approbation  and  consent  to  confer  on  Mr.  Thompson 
the  vacant  Red  Riband,  it  had  been  so  signified  to  that 
gentleman  ;  who,  together  with  the  proper  Officers,  were 
then  without,  in  readiness  for  the  Ceremony.  He 
added,  that  no  possible  doubt  could  be  entertained  of 
Sir  Eyre  Coote's  death;  and  that  a  disappointment, 
after  the  preparations  and  publicity  of  the  affair,  could 
not  fail  to  be  attended  with  very  unpleasant  consequences 
to  Administration  in  the  general  opinion.  To  all  these 
arguments  and  expostulations,  the  King,  after  alledging 
his  own  reasons,  remained  inflexible.  Fox  therefore 
quitting  the  Closet,  returned  to  his  Colleagues,  various 
of  whom,  assembled  in  the  outer  room,  were  waiting 

594 


1783.]     A  HUMILIATING  DISAPPOINTMENT 

under  considerable  anxiety,  and  imparted  to  them  the 
result  of  his  Audience.  No  little  confusion  ensued 
among  them.  Mr.  Thompson,  apprized  of  the  fact, 
returned  home.  The  officers  of  the  Bath,  ordered  to 
withdraw,  were  acquainted  that  the  Ceremony  expected, 
would  not  take  place  on  that  day.  Every  person  present, 
formed  his  own  comments  or  conjectures,  respecting  the 
scene  which  had  just  passed  ;  and  the  old  Courtiers  did 
not  fail  to  draw  inferences  from  it,  highly  adverse  to 
Ministers.  It  was  obvious  that  the  King,  who  felt  no 
disposition  to  oblige  them,  had  got  possession  of  the 
advantage  ground  in  the  contest ;  whereas  Fox  had 
acted  with  some  degree  of  indiscretion,  in  presuming 
upon  an  assent,  rather  implied  or  assumed,  than  un- 
equivocally expressed.  Many  men  considered  the  whole 
proceeding  as  concerted,  and  the  result  of  deeper  causes 
than  were  apparent  to  common  observers.  By  exposing 
the  Administration  to  ridicule,  as  well  as  to  mortifica- 
tion, it  unquestionably  served  to  prepare  the  public 
mind,  for  some  approaching  convulsion  or  alteration  in 
the  government. 

If  the  business  of  Sir  Eyre  Coote's  Riband  was 
attended  with  these  unpleasant  results  to  the  Ministry, 
they  received  on  the  other  hand,  just  at  this  time,  a 
prodigious  accession  of  strength  and  consideration  from 
the  avowed  junction  of  the  Prince  of  Wales ;  who 
having  attained  his  twenty-first  year  in  the  preceding 
month  of  August,  had  recently  established  his  Court 
and  residence  at  Carlton  House.  Nature  had  bestowed 
uncommon  Graces  on  his  figure  and  person.  Convivial, 
as  well  as  social  in  his  temper,  destitute  of  all  reserve, 
and  affable  even  to  familiarity  in  his  reception  of  every 
person  who  had  the  honor  to  approach  him  ;  he 
presented  in  these  respects,  a  contrast  to  the  shy, 
correct,  and  distant  manners  of  the  King  his  father. 
Endowed  with  all  the  aptitudes  to  profit  of  instruction, 
his  mind  had  been  cultivated  with  great  care ;  and  he 

595 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [uss. 

was  probably  the  only  Prince  in  Europe,  Heir  to  a 
powerful  Monarchy,  competent  to  peruse  the  Greek,  as 
well  as  the  Roman  Poets  and  Historians,  in  their  own 
language.  Humane  and  compassionate,  his  purse  was 
open  to  every  application  of  distress ;  nor  was  it  ever 
shut  against  Genius  or  Merit.  Even  if  these  virtues 
were  mingled  with  alloy,  yet  his  facility,  his  love  of 
pleasure,  and  his  inattention  to  Economy,  all  might 
derive  some  Apology  from  his  youth,  and  the  Elevation 
on  which  he  stood ;  circumstances  that  necessarily  ex- 
posed him  to  great,  as  well  as  corresponding  temptations 
of  every  kind. 

Nor  ought  we,  if  we  candidly  examine  the  subject, 
to  feel  either  surprize,  or  any  degree  of  moral  dis- 
approbation, at  the  predilection  and  preference  which 
he  had  imbibed,  and  which  he  openly  manifested  for  an 
Administration,  odious  to  his  father.  When  he  looked 
back  on  the  twenty-three  years  of  George  the  Third's 
Reign,  he  beheld  little  matter  of  admiration,  though 
ample  reason  for  regret.  At  the  peace  of  1763,  Lord 
Bute  had  sacrificed  or  restored  to  France  and  Spain, 
almost  all  the  acquisitions  of  Pitt.  Wilkes  and 
"  Junius,"  aided  by  Churchill  and  Mason,  had  covered 
with  Opprobrium  or  with  Ridicule  the  Ministers  em- 
ployed between  the  Treaty  of  Fontainbleau,  and  the 
commencement  of  the  American  War :  nor  had  the 
Sovereign  himself  escaped  their  severe  animadversions 
on  his  personal  conduct  and  government.  In  the  gulf 
of  the  American  contest,  the  treasures  of  England  had 
been  expended,  her  Navy  disgraced,  her  commerce 
nearly  destroyed,  her  public  burthens  accumulated,  her 
national  Debt  immensely  augmented,  her  Armies  de- 
feated or  made  prisoners,  and  we  had  finally  lost  a 
vast  Empire  beyond  the  Atlantic.  Precisely  as  this 
calamitous  Consummation  took  place,  the  JPrince  of 
Wales,  emerging  from  the  restraint  under  which  he  had 
been  hitherto  held,  made  his  appearance  on  the  theatre 

596 


1783.]  THE  PRINCE  OF  WALES 

of  public  life,  and  emancipated  himself  from  parental 
superintendance  or  controul.  It  was  not  merely 
natural,  but  almost  unavoidable,  that  he  should  view 
those  events  through  the  Optics  and  representations  of 
Fox  and  Burke,  rather  than  through  any  other  medium. 
Neither  George  the  Second,  nor  Frederick  his  son,  could 
plead  the  same  Apology,  or  exhibit  such  causes  to 
justify  enlisting,  as  they  respectively  did,  under  the 
party  adverse  to  the  measures  of  the  Crown.  Fox  and 
his  Friends,  who  well  knew  how  to  improve  these 
favourable  circumstances,  contrived  to  effect  a  deep,  as 
well  as  a  permanent  impression  on  the  affections,  no 
less  than  on  the  understanding,  of  the  Heir  Apparent. 

llth  November.]  The  Session  of  Parliament  now 
commenced ;  a  Session  rendered  memorable  beyond  any 
other  of  the  long  Reign  of  George  the  Third,  by  the 
magnitude,  singularity,  and  importance  of  its  events. 
A  species  of  ostensible  unanimity,  like  the  Calm 
that  precedes  the  Storm,  characterized  its  opening; 
Mr.  Pitt  concurring  in  the  Address  to  the  Throne 
moved  by  Administration,  for  approving  the  definitive 
Treaties  concluded  with  France,  Spain,  and  America : 
though  he  did  not  fail  to  remark  with  indignant 
asperity,  on  the  inconsistence  of  thanking  the  Crown 
for  merely  consummating  the  very  work,  of  which  he 
and  his  Colleagues  had  laid  all  the  foundations,  in 
consequence  of  which  national  benefit,  they  had  been 
driven  from  Office.  Fox,  with  much  ingenuity, 
endeavoured  to  demonstrate  to  the  House,  that  the 
definitive  Treaties,  far  from  being  servile  transcripts 
of  the  Preliminaries,  were  on  the  contrary  materially 
altered  in  favour  of  this  Country.  And  with  a  view  to 
prove  his  assertion,  he  particularized  three  Articles,  on 
each  of  which,  as  he  asserted,  important  Ameliorations 
had  taken  place.  These  were  relative  to  the  condition 
of  the  British  inhabitants  of  the  Island  of  Tobago ;  an 
accurate  definition  of  the  Geographical  limits  within 

597 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     fi783. 

which  the  Gum  Trade  on  the  coast  of  Africa  might  in 
future  be  carried  on  ;  and  lastly,  the  precise  Boundaries 
affixed  to  the  possessions  of  our  Allies  in  the  East 
Indies.  I  own  however,  that  the  aggregate  merit  of 
these  concessions,  or  rather  alterations,  did  not  appear 
to  me  entitled  to  much  Encomium.  They  seemed  to 
be  rather  inaccuracies  or  inadvertencies,  which  every 
Administration  must  equally  have  perceived  and 
remedied,  after  the  Lapse  of  a  few  months. 

Pitt  made  no  answer  to  the  Secretary  of  State's 
Speech ;  in  the  progress  of  which  he  had  announced 
his  intention  of  bringing  forward  almost  immediately, 
his  plan  for  the  new  government  of  India.  But 
Governor  Johnstone,  with  the  warmth,  not  to  say 
violence,  which  characterized  every  sentiment  that 
usually  fell  from  his  lips,  claimed  for  Mr.  Hastings  all 
the  merit  of  expelling  Tippoo  Sultan  from  the  Carnatic, 
as  well  as  of  effecting  a  Treaty  of  peace  with  the 
Mharatta  Empire  :  Services  which,  if  they  were  justly 
due  to  the  ability  or  wisdom  of  the  Governor  General, 
might  have  challenged  higher  testimonies  of  national 
or  parliamentary  approbation,  than  Fox^s  improvements 
contained  in  the  definitive  Treaty  made  with  France. 
Johnstone  concluded  by  warning  the  Ministers  not  to 
enforce  any  plans  for  the  Administration  of  India, 
without  previously  consulting  the  persons,  who,  from 
local  knowledge  and  experience,  knew  the  remedies 
most  applicable  to  the  disorders  of  those  remote  and 
valuable  Possessions.  The  Treasury  Bench  observed  a 
profound  silence,  and  the  House  soon  afterwards  broke 
up ;  all  men  looking  forward  with  anxiety  to  the  great 
Measure  now  announced  from  official  authority,  and 
of  which  the  leading  features  were  already  known  to  be 
of  the  most  vigorous,  as  well  as  affirmative  nature. 
The  celebrated  "  East  India  Bill "  followed,  after  the 
interval  of  a  few  days.  It  was  natural  to  suppose  that 
Lord  North,  within  whose  Department  lay  all  regula- 

598 


1783.]  THE  "EAST  INDIA  BILL" 

tion  of  our  concerns  in  that  quarter  of  the  Globe, 
would  of  course  open  the  Measure  to  the  House.  But, 
instead  of  so  doing,  he  absented  himself  on  account  of 
indisposition,  leaving  Fox  to  perform  the  task ;  a  line 
of  conduct,  which,  whether  it  arose  from  real  necessity, 
or  whether  it  was  preconcerted,  operated  very  dis- 
advantageously  on  the  minds  of  many  individuals 
attached  to  Lord  North,  who  had  hitherto  supported 
the  Coalition.  They  beheld  themselves  in  fact,  com- 
pletely abandoned  by  their  antient  Leader,  who  seemed 
to  have  delivered  up  himself,  his  followers,  his  Sovereign, 
and  his  political  principles,  to  the  uncontroled  dominion 
of  his  new  Associates,  Fox  and  Burke. 

It  is  no  longer  possible,  after  the  lapse  of  above 
thirty  years,  to  deceive  either  ourselves  or  mankind, 
relative  to  the  nature,  provisions,  and  effects  of  the 
Bill  in  question.  Its  most  determined  enemies  cannot 
dispute  the  energy,  vigor,  and  decision,  which  breathed 
through  every  Clause;  nor  will  candid  men  refuse  to 
allow  the  beneficial  tendency  of  many  of  its  regulations. 
But,  neither  can  the  friends  of  Fox,  however  they  may 
idolize  his  memory,  deny  the  unwarrantable  spirit  of 
ambition,  rapacity,  and  confiscation,  by  which  it  was 
equally  distinguished.  The  instant  seizure  of  all  the 
effects,  papers,  and  possessions  of  a  great  chartered 
Company;  the  total  extinction  of  the  Court  of 
Directors,  who  had  so  long  conducted  its  affairs;  and 
the  substitution  of  two  new  Boards,  named  by  the 
Ministry,  through  the  medium  of  Parliament,  for  the 
future  Government  of  India ; — these  measures,  however 
their  necessity  might  apparently  be  made  out,  seemed 
rather  revolutionary  subversions  of  property  by  arbi- 
trary authority,  than  suited  to  the  mild,  moderate,  and 
equitable  spirit  of  the  British  Constitution.  Other 
features  of  the  Bill,  appeared  still  more  open  to 
objection,  since  they  evidently  vested  in  Administration, 
and  therefore  in  Fox,  as  the  Ministerial  Leader,  a 

599 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [1783. 

power  independant  of  the  Sovereign.  Such,  in 
particular,  might  be  esteemed  the  Clause,  which 
extended  the  duration  of  the  Act,  to  four  years  ;  a 
term  exceeding  the  possible  period  to  which  the  exist- 
ence of  the  House  of  Commons  then  sitting,  could  be 
protracted,  they  having  already  entered  on  their  fourth 
Session. 

Many  other  regulations,  growing  out  of,  or  connected 
with  the  measure,  excited  just  alarm.  Even  in  the 
selection  of  the  Seven  Commissioners,  who  were  to  be 
appointed  for  the  future  Administration  of  the  East 
India  Company's  affairs  at  home  and  abroad,  Fox's 
ascendant  over  his  Colleague  was  clearly  defined :  Lord 
Fitzwilliam,  as  the  personal  representative  of  the  deceased 
Marquis  of  Rockingham,  being  placed  at  the  head  of 
the  Board ;  while  Mr.  Frederick  Montagu,  another  most 
respectable  adherent  of  the  same  political  Party,  stood 
second  in  the  list.  Colonel  North,  Lord  Viscount 
Lewisham,  and  Sir  Gilbert  Elliot,  the  three  next 
Commissioners,  represented  Lord  North's  interest  and 
connexions.  But,  in  order  to  secure  at  once  the 
majority  of  voices,  together  with  the  efficient  con- 
troul  of  the  Board  itself,  Sir  Henry  Fletcher,  and 
Mr.  Robert  Gregory,  were  added  to  the  Members. 
Both  these  last  named  Gentlemen,  well  known  for 
their  devoted  attachment  to  Fox,  and  possessing  Seats 
in  the  House  of  Commons;  having  likewise  in  their 
own  persons,  recently  and  repeatedly  filled  the  highest 
situations  in  the  East  India  Direction ;  it  was  obvious, 
must  be  resorted  to  as  guides,  on  account  of  their  local 
knowledge  and  experience  in  the  Company's  concerns. 
No  measures  could  have  been  more  ably  concerted,  for 
bringing  under  Ministerial  influence,  and  for  permanently 
retaining  under  their  subjection,  the  immense  patronage, 
and  all  the  sources  of  power,  or  of  emolument,  connected 
with  India  :  while,  on  the  other  hand,  it  was  well  under- 
stood that  the  first  Employments,  civil  and  military, 

600 


1783.J  "INDECENT  ARDOR" 

from  the  post  of  Governor  General  of  Bengal,  or  Com- 
mander in  Chief  at  Calcutta,  down  to  the  Seats  in 
Council  at  Madras  and  at  Bombay,  were  already 
promised  or  filled  up,  principally  with  Members  of 
Parliament,  distinguished  for  their  adherence  to  Ad- 
ministration. The  names  of  the  individuals  destined 
for  these  high  situations,  became  circulated  in  every 
company ;  and  as  many  of  them  were  better  known 
among  the  Club  at  Brookes's,  than  in  Leadenhall  Street ; 
the  consciousness  of  all  India  being  speedily  subjected 
to  their  rapacious  hands,  by  no  means  tended  to  reconcile, 
or  to  tranquillize  the  public  mind. 

December.]  Fox  himself  gave  indeed  the  strongest 
indication  of  his  own  apprehensions,  from  the  operation 
of  time,  or  from  the  interposition  of  delay,  by  the  haste, 
not  to  say  the  precipitation,  with  which  he  propelled 
the  Bill  through  the  House  of  Commons.  Notwith- 
standing the  Opposition  given  to  it  in  every  stage,  by 
Mr.  Pitt  and  his  friends ;  in  defiance  of  petitions  pre- 
sented from  the  Proprietors,  as  well  as  from  the  Directors, 
of  the  East  India  Company ;  and  equally  contrary  to 
the  general  sentiment  of  the  Capital,  no  less  than  the 
almost  unanimous  voice  of  the  Nation,  which  soon  began 
to  manifest  itself;  he  pushed  forward  the  measure  with 
indecent  ardor.  Scarcely  three  Weeks  elapsed,  from 
the  time  of  his  moving  for  leave  to  bring  in  the  Bill, 
on  the  18th  of  November,  to  his  appearance  at  the  Bar 
of  the  House  of  Peers,  on  the  9th  of  December  ;  when 
he  presented  it  in  person,  " magna  comitante  Caterva" 
after  its  having  passed  the  House  of  Commons.  An 
ordinary  Turnpike,  Canal,  or  Enclosure  Bill,  if  opposed 
in  its  principles  or  progress,  might  have  taken  longer 
time,  than  did  this  gigantic  experiment  to  render  Ad- 
ministration in  some  measure  independant  of  the  Crown, 
and  of  the  People.  Yet,  so  well  had  the  Secretary 
meditated  his  plan,  such  was  the  parliamentary  strength 
possessed  by  the  "  Coalition,"  and  such  the  ascendancy 

601 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [1783. 

of  Fox  over  the  Lower  House,  that  upon  every  Division, 
he  carried  the  Question  by  a  vast  superiority  of  numbers, 
generally  exceeding  the  proportion  of  two  to  one.  On 
the  Question  of  going  into  the  Committee,  which  took 
place  on  the  first  of  December,  when  217  voted  with 
Government,  and  only  108  against  them ;  I  quitted 
Lord  North,  whom  I  had  commonly  supported  up  to 
that  time,  and  joined  the  Minority :  conceiving  it  to 
be,  upon  every  view  of  the  subject,  improper  longer 
to  adhere  to  a  Minister,  who  seemed  to  have  forsaken 
himself. 

The  consternation  which  Fox's  Bill  occasioned  in 
Leadenhall  Street,  among  that  description  of  men 
against  whom  its  Provisions  were  known  to  be 
peculiarly  levelled,  was  commonly,  though  errone- 
ously, said  to  have  proved  fatal  to  Sir  William  James, 
who  died  very  suddenly,  just  at  this  time.  It  is  how- 
ever true  that  he  was  seized  with  an  indisposition,  while 
in  the  House  of  Commons,  during  the  progress  of  the 
East  India  Bill,  which  compelled  him  instantly  to  return 
home ;  but  he  recovered  in  a  certain  degree  the  attack, 
though  he  never  afterwards  quitted  his  own  House. 
His  death  took  place  instantaneously,  during  the  per- 
formance of  the  Ceremony  of  his  only  daughter's  Marriage 
with  the  late  Lord  Rancliff,  then  Mr.  Boothby  Parkyns. 
I  knew  Sir  William  James  with  great  intimacy,  and 
discussed  with  him,  the  probable  results  of  the  East 
India  Measure,  during  the  short  interval  which  elapsed 
between  his  first  seizure,  and  the  day  of  his  decease,  at 
his  Residence  in  Gerrard  Street,  Soho.  His  Origin  was 
so  obscure,  as  almost  to  baffle  enquiry,  and  he  had 
derived  no  advantage  from  Education  ;  but  he  possessed 
strong  natural  Abilities,  aided  by  a  knowledge  of  Man- 
kind. Having  been  sent  out  early  in  life,  to  Bombay, 
in  the  East  India  Company's  Naval  Service,  he  there 
distinguished  himself,  by  commanding  the  memorable 
Expedition  undertaken  against  Angria  the  Pirate ;  when 

602 


1783.]  THE  BILL  REJECTED 

we  made  ourselves  masters  of  Fort  Geriah,  his  principal 
Establishment  on  the  Coast  of  the  Concan.  Returning 
to  his  native  country  after  this  successful  Enterprize, 
by  which  he  acquired  not  only  some  Fortune,  but  con- 
siderable Reputation  ;  he  rose  to  the  first  Employments 
at  the  India  House,  as  a  Member  of  the  Court  of  Direc- 
tors ;  sat  in  successive  Parliaments ;  was  elevated  by 
the  friendship  of  the  late  Earl  of  Sandwich,  when  First 
Lord  of  the  Admiralty,  to  the  Baronetage ;  and  had 
been  elected  Deputy  Master  of  the  Trinity  House,  in 
the  preceding  Month  of  June,  when  Lord  Keppel  was 
chosen  Master  of  that  Corporation.  Those  persons 
who  asserted  that  Fox's  Bill  killed  him,  seem  to  have 
forgotten  that  he  had  nearly  attained  his  Seventieth 
year,  when  he  expired.  As  his  dissolution  took  place 
on  the  16th  of  December,  he  had  not  the  satisfaction  to 
witness  the  Rejection  of  that  obnoxious  Measure,  by  the 
House  of  Peers,  which  happened  on  the  following  day. 

Never,  probably,  was  so  great  a  portion  of  intellect 
brought  to  bear  upon  one  point  or  subject,  in  so  short 
a  space  of  time,  as  the  House  of  Commons  exhibited 
between  the  opening  of  the  East  India  Bill,  and  its 
triumphant  Arrival  in  the  Upper  House  of  Parliament. 
All  the  sources  of  Argument,  Declamation,  Wit,  and 
Pathos,  were  successively  touched  by  master  hands. 
Every  species  of  information  enlightened  the  object 
under  discussion ;  nor  was  any  weapon  of  Sophistry, 
Humour,  or  even  severe  Invective,  left  untried,  which 
might  operate  on  the  understanding,  passions,  and 
feelings  of  the  Audience.  The  salient  points  of  Debate 
were  so  many,  so  striking,  and  so  animated,  as  to  defy 
the  powers  of  memory ;  leaving  on  the  hearer's  mind, 
only  a  confused  recollection  of  their  beauty,  delicacy,  or 
severity.  History,  antient  and  modern,  Poetry,  Scripture, 
all  were  successively  pressed  into  the  service,  or  rendered 
subservient  to  the  purposes  of  the  contending  parties. 
Will  it  be  believed  that  the  «  Apocalypse  "  of  St.  John 

603 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [i?83. 

furnished  images,  which,  by  a  slight  effort  of  imagination, 
or  by  an  immaterial  deviation  from  the  original  Text, 
were  made  to  typify  Fox,  under  the  form  of  "  the  Beast 
that  rose  up  out  of  the  Sea,  having  seven  Heads  ? " 
Their  application  to  the  seven  Commissioners  appointed 
by  the  Bill,  was  at  once  so  happy,  and  so  natural,  that 
it  could  not  be  mistaken,  and  stood  in  need  of  no  ex- 
planation. Mr.  Scott,  who  now  as  Lord  Eldon,  holds 
the  Great  Seal,  was  the  person  by  whom  so  curious  an 
allusion  was  presented  to  the  House.  But,  Sheridan, 
though  he  could  not  possibly  anticipate  an  attack  of 
such  a  nature,  yet  having  contrived  in  the  course  of 
the  Debate,  to  procure  some  Leaves  of  "  the  Book  of 
"  Revelations,"  with  admirable  ability  found  materials 
in  that  Work,  equally  suited  to  Fox's  Defence  or  Justi- 
fication ;  transforming  him  from  "  the  Dragon  and 
"  the  Beast,"  under  both  which  Types  he  had  been 
designated,  to  an  Angelic  Being,  by  producing  other 
quotations  from  St.  John,  full  as  applicable  to  the 
Secretary  of  State. 

The  powers  of  mind  exerted  throughout  the  progress 
of  the  Bill,  seemed  to  be  concentrated  in  the  memorable 
Debate  that  took  place  on  the  first  of  December,  which 
was  opened  by  Powis.  His  beautiful  and  severe  anim- 
adversion on  the  double  author  of  the  Measure ;  a 
Metaphor  drawn  likewise  from  Holy  Writ,  made  a  strong 
impression.  "I  hear  indeed,"  said  he,  "the  voice  of 
"  Jacob,"  meaning  Fox ;  "  but  the  hands  are  those  of 
"  Esau."  Lord  North,  who  was  present  at  the  time, 
though  much  indisposed,  quitted  the  House  in  the  course 
of  the  evening,  overcome  with  the  heat :  he  had  however 
delivered  his  opinions  with  equal  ability  and  energy,  on 
the  27th  of  November,  in  an  earlier  stage  of  the  business. 
Powis,  -  who  did  not  hesitate  to  denominate  the  Bill, 
"  the  Modern  Babel,  which  already  almost  reached  the 
"  Clouds ; "  and  who  compared  Fox's  treatment  of  the 
East  India  Company,  with  "Shylock's  demand  of  a 

604 


1783.]  SERVANT  OR  MASTER  ? 

"  Pound  of  flesh,  to  be  cut  nearest  the  Heart ; "  ex- 
pressed nevertheless  his  personal  respect  for  the  Secre- 
tary ;  but  added,  that  "  he  wished  to  see  him  the 
"  Servant,  not  the  Master,  of  his  Sovereign."  Burke, 
unable  longer  to  observe  silence  after  such  reflexions, 
then  rose ;  and  in  a  Dissertation,  rather  than  a  Speech, 
which  lasted  more  than  three  hours,  exhausted  all  the 
powers  of  his  mighty  mind,  in  the  justification  of  his 
friend's  Measure.  The  most  ignorant  Member  of  the 
House,  who  had  attended  to  the  Mass  of  Information, 
Historical,  Political,  and  Financial,  which  fell  from  the 
lips  of  Burke  on  that  occasion,  must  have  departed,  rich 
in  Knowledge  of  Indostan.  It  seemed  impossible  to 
croud  greater  variety  of  matter  applicable  to  the  subject, 
into  a  smaller  compass ;  and  those  who  differed  most 
widely  from  him  in  opinion,  did  not  render  the  less 
j  ustice  to  his  gigantic  range  of  ideas,  his  lucid  exposition 
of  events,  and  the  harmonic  flow  of  his  periods.  There 
were  portions  of  this  Harangue,  in  which  he  appeared 
to  be  animated  by  feelings  and  considerations  the  most 
benign,  as  well  as  elevated ;  and  the  Classic  Language 
in  which  he  made  Fox's  Panegyric,  for  having  dared  to 
venture  on  a  Measure  so  beset  with  Dangers,  but  so 
pregnant,  as  he  asserted,  with  Benefits  to  Mankind, 
could  not  be  exceeded  in  Beauty. 

But,  however  persuaded  Burke  himself  might  be,  of 
the  reality  and  truth  of  these  predicted  advantages 
which  were  to  flow  from  the  Bill  of  his  friend,  the  moral 
effect  of  his  own  Speech,  by  no  means  kept  pace  with 
the  admiration  excited  by  his  eloquence.  From  every 
quarter  of  the  House  the  keenest  shafts  were  aimed  at 
the  Measure;  some  of  which  penetrated  deep,  while 
others  only  appeared  to  graze  on  the  surface ;  but,  all 
left  their  impression.  While  Pitt,  sustained  by  Mr. 
William  Grenville,  and  Dundas,  attacked  it  with  the 
arms  of  reason ;  others  tried  the  operation  of  irony  and 
ridicule.  Arden,  who  soon  afterwards  became  Solicitor 

605 


WRAXALi:S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [1783. 

General,  on  the  change  of  Ministry,  clung  to  it  through 
every  stage  with  great  pertinacity  and  spirit,  not  un- 
accompanied by  legal  ability.  The  seven  Commissioners, 
and  their  eight  Assistant  Directors,  were  compared  by 
Mr.  Wilberforce,  to  so  many  Doctors  and  Apothecaries, 
summoned  for  the  purpose  of  putting  the  Patient,  the 
East  India  Company,  to  death,  according  to  the  Rules 
of  Art.  Many  Members,  long  accustomed  to  consider 
Fox  as  the  Star  by  which  they  guided  their  political 
course,  covered  him  on  this  occasion,  with  reproaches  or 
maledictions.  Mr.  Martin,  Member  for  Tewkesbury,  a 
man,  who  though  not  distinguished  by  superior  intel- 
lectual parts,  yielded  to  none  in  probity,  invoked  Curses 
on  the  Coalition,  as  the  Grave  of  all  Principle.  Wilkes, 
in  a  Speech  of  considerable  length,  acuteness,  and 
severity,  stigmatized  the  East  India  Bill,  as  "  a  Swindling 
"  Bill,  drawn  up  to  obtain  Money  on  false  Pretences." 
Sir  Richard  Hill,  to  whom  Scripture  was  familiar,  com- 
pared the  Secretary's  conduct  in  affecting  to  protect  and 
caress  the  East  India  Company,  while  he  immolated 
them  to  his  ambition,  with  the  Treachery  of  Joab  to 
Amasa,  who  at  the  moment  that  he  pretended  to 
embrace  him,  stabbed  him  to  the  heart.  In  more 
homely  language,  destitute  of  adventitious  ornament, 
Sir  Cecil  Wray  declared  that  the  measure  impressed 
him  with  Horror  from  its  Enormity,  Corruption,  and 
pernicious  Consequences  to  the  State.  Some  of  the 
finest  Passages  of  Shakespear,  taken  from  his  "Julius 
"  Caesar,"  were  applied  by  Scott  and  Arden,  to  Fox, 
with  extraordinary  effect.  Jenkinson,  temperately,  but 
in  language  of  energy,  depictured  the  unconstitutional 
nature  of  the  Power  thus  attempted  to  be  set  up,  which 
must  prove  subversive  of  the  Royal  Prerogative ;  and 
from  opposite  sides,  Fox  was  assailed  as  the  Enemy  of 
his  Country,  who  sacrificed  to  his  insatiable  Ambition, 
the  Fame,  the  Character,  and  the  Consideration,  that 
he  had  attained  by  a  long  series  of  public  Services. 

606 


1783.]      "A  MERE  SKIN  OF  PARCHMENT'1 

Not  that  he   by  any  means   wanted   Defenders   dis- 
tinguished   for    integrity,   as    well   as    for    legal   and 
parliamentary   ability.      Mr.    Erskine,   who    like    Mr. 
Scott,  has  since  attained   to   the   highest   honors   and 
dignities  of  the  Bar ;  first  spoke,  as  a  Member  of  the 
House   of    Commons,    in    support   of    this   obnoxious 
Measure.      His   enemies   pronounced   the   performance 
tame,  and  destitute  of  the  animation,  which  so  power- 
fully characterized  his  Speeches  in  Westminster   Hall. 
They  maintained  that,  however  resplendent  he  appeared 
as  an  Advocate,  while  addressing  a  Jury,  he  fell  to  the 
level  of  an  ordinary  man,  if  not  below  it,  when  seated 
on  the   Ministerial   Bench;   where   another   species   of 
Oratory  was   demanded   to  impress   Conviction,  or   to 
extort  Admiration.     To  me,  who  having  never  witnessed 
his  jurisprudential  talents,  could   not   make   any  such 
comparison,  he  appeared  to  exhibit  shining  powers  of 
declamation.     Lee,  the  Attorney  General,  in  a  Speech 
replete  with  that  coarse,  strong,  and  illiberal  species  of 
invective  which  usually  accompanied  his   Addresses  to 
the  House ;   and  which  always  appeared   to  me,  more 
befitting   the  Robinhood  Society,  than   accommodated 
to   a   Legislative   Assembly ;    treated   with    indignant 
contempt,  the   repugnance   manifested   to   violate   the 
Charter  of  the  East  India  Company.     He  did  not  even 
hesitate  to   describe   that  Charter,  esteemed   by  many 
Members  so  sacred,  and  incapable  of  subversion  except 
by  arbitrary  violence,  as  "  a  mere  Skin  of  Parchment,  to 
"  which  was  appended  a  Seal  of  Wax."     This  imprudent, 
if    not    censurable   Declaration,   however   qualified    or 
palliated    by   subsequent   Explanations,    operated    in- 
juriously to  Ministers.      The   Chancellor    of  the   Ex- 
chequer, irritated  at   the  severe   animadversions   made 
by  Mr.   Thomas   Pitt,   on   the   Rapacity   with   which 
Administration,  after   having   seized   on  the  Reins   of 
Government,  were  now  dealing   a  Death   Blow  to  the 
Constitution  of  their  Country ;  denied  the  Charge  with 

607 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [im. 

much  indignation.  His  Eloquence  fell  however  far 
short  of  his  Feelings,  and  was  addressed  rather  to  the 
moral  Sense  of  his  Auditors,  than  it  appealed  to  their 
Judgment. 

General  Burgoyne,  arriving  Post  from  Ireland, 
spontaneously,  as  he  asserted ;  and  quitting  the  meaner 
Duties  of  Commander-in-Chief,  which  Employment  he 
held  in  that  Kingdom,  in  order  to  fulfil  his  higher 
Obligations  as  a  Legislator  at  Westminster;  spoke 
warmly  in  favour  of  the  Bill.  Having,  many  Years 
earlier,  acted  as  Chairman  of  one  of  the  first  Com- 
mittees appointed  by  the  House,  for  enquiring  into  the 
Affairs  of  the  East,  he  was  heard  with  Attention.  He 
confirmed  all  the  Horrors  and  Enormities  attributed  by 
Burke,  to  the  Europeans  who  governed  Asia :  Atrocities, 
which  the  General  illustrated  by  a  Citation  prepared 
for  the  purpose,  extracted  from  the  Sixth  JEneid  of 
Virgil,  descriptive  of  the  Guilt  of  a  powerful  Criminal, 
such  as  Hastings  might  be  esteemed,  condemned  for  his 
Crimes  on  Earth,  to  the  pains  of  Tartarus.  Rigby, 
professing  an  equal  Contempt  for  Quotations  from 
Shakespear,  or  from  Milton,  and  expressing  his  Admira- 
tion at  hearing  Scripture  fall  from  the  lips  of  a  Lawyer ; 
with  none  of  which  Materials  for  Debate,  he  said,  that 
he  came  provided;  yet  professed  to  have  furnished 
himself  with  some  Arguments  applicable  to  the  Subject 
under  Discussion.  Without  Circumlocution,  or  any 
false  Scruples  of  fastidious  Delicacy,  he  declared  his 
utter  Disregard  of  the  chartered  Rights  of  the  Company, 
which  he  said  he  considered  "  as  a  Bugbear,  only  fit 
"  to  intimidate  Children."  He  even  advised  their 
Violation,  as  the  primary  Step  to  all  Reform  in  the 
Administration  of  India. 

No  Individual  distinguished  himself  more  throughout 
the  whole  Progress  of  these  interesting  Proceedings, 
than  Sheridan ;  whose  matchless  Endowments  of  Mind, 
equally  adapted  to  Contests  of  Wit  or  of  Argument, 

oUo 


1783.]  A  VIGOROUS  STRUGGLE 

and  ever  under  the  controul  of  imperturbable  Temper, 
enabled  him  to  extend  invaluable  Assistance  to  the 
Minister.  But,  neither  was  Fox  wanting  to  himself, 
or  to  his  Friends.  On  the  contrary,  performing  every 
Function  of  a  General  and  of  a  private  Soldier; 
combating  in  the  front  Ranks;  leaving  no  Charge 
unrepelled,  no  Insinuation  unnoticed,  no  Argument 
unrefuted;  he  filled  with  Astonishment,  as  well  as 
with  Admiration,  even  those  who  thought  themselves 
best  able  to  appreciate  the  Magnitude  and  Extent  of 
his  parliamentary  Talents.  After  defending  his  Bill 
from  the  severe  Attacks  of  Pitt,  he  did  not  disdain 
or  omit  to  answer  the  Allegations  made  by  various 
Members  of  inferior  weight.  To  Powis,  to  Scott,  to 
Dundas,  and  even  to  Martin,  he  directed  the  most 
pointed  Replies,  calculated  to  justify  him,  not  only  as 
a  Minister,  but  in  his  individual  and  moral  Capacity. 
Determined  on  carrying  through  the  Bill,  without  a 
Moment's  delay ;  apprehensive  of  new  Obstacles  arising, 
every  hour,  within,  as  well  as  without  the  walls  of  the 
House ;  and  seeming  to  regard  Parliament  as  convoked, 
not  for  the  purpose  of  Deliberation,  but  of  Decision ; 
he  refused  to  postpone  the  Measure,  even  for  a  single 
Night.  Vainly  Scott  adjured  him,  in  the  language  of 
Desdemona  to  Othello,  "Kill  me  not  to-night,  my 
"  Lord !  let  me  live  but  one  day ! "  The  Secretary 
never  relaxed  his  Exertions,  till,  having  surmounted  all 
Opposition,  he  carried  up  the  Bill,  accompanied  by  a 
vast  Number  of  his  Adherents,  who  participated  in  his 
Success,  to  the  Bar  of  the  House  of  Peers.  Its  passage 
through  that  Assembly  being  already  secured,  as  he 
justly  conceived,  on  solid  Grounds,  the  Measure  seemed 
apparently  to  be  placed  beyond  the  reach  of  Fortune. 

But  with  the  Arrival  of  the  East  India  Bill  in  the 
House  of  Lords,  terminated  nevertheless  the  prosperous 
Career  of  Ministers.  The  King,  whose  Opinions  and 
Wishes,  however  they  might  have  been  suspected  by, 

609  39 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [1733. 


or  even  known  to  a  few,  were  not  as  yet  publickly 
divulged,  or  ascertained;  now  coming  forward,  as  the 
Urgency  of  the  Occasion  seemed  to  demand,  com- 
municated through  authentic  Channels,  his  utter  Dis- 
approbation of  the  Measure.  Lord  Temple,  though 
one  of  the  first  Individuals  thus  authorized,  formed  by 
no  means  the  sole  or  exclusive  Medium  through  which 
the  Royal  Pleasure  was  so  signified  and  circulated. 
Very  little  Time,  in  fact,  remained  to  the  Sovereign, 
if  he  desired  to  avert  the  impending  Misfortune.  For, 
the  Secretary  of  State,  who  seems  to  have  been  well 
aware  that  as  soon  as  the  Measure  was  felt  and  under- 
stood, it  would  excite  universal  Alarm ;  had  betimes 
secured  such  a  Majority  in  the  Upper  House,  as  must 
speedily  have  left  to  the  Crown  no  possible  Means  of 
Relief,  except  one  scarcely  known  to  the  British  Con- 
stitution since  the  Revolution  of  1688;  namely,  a 
Refusal  of  the  Royal  Assent  to  the  Bill,  after  its 
passage  through  both  Houses  of  Parliament.  In  this 
critical  Juncture,  His  Majesty  caused  such  Arguments 
or  Expostulations  to  be  offered  to  many  Members  of 
the  House  of  Lords,  Spiritual,  as  well  as  Temporal ; 
and  the  Necessity  of  Resistance  was  so  strongly 
depictured  by  his  Emissaries,  as  to  overturn  all  Fox's 
Machinery  in  an  instant.  Proxies  given  to  the  Minister 
were  suddenly  revoked;  and  after  first  leaving  the 
Administration  in  a  Minority  of  Eight,  upon  the 
Question  of  Adjournment ;  the  Bill  itself  was  subse- 
quently rejected  two  Days  later,  on  the  17th  of 
December,  by  Nineteen  votes.  One  hundred  and 
seventy-one  Peers  voted  on  the  Occasion,  either  in 
Person  or  by  Proxy  ;  a  prodigious  Attendance,  if  we  con- 
sider the  limited  Numbers  of  the  Peerage  at  that  Time. 
The  Archbishops  of  Canterbury  and  of  York  led  the 
way,  though  the  former  Prelate,  whose  Connections, 
political  and  matrimonial,  seemed  to  connect  him  with 
the  "Coalition,"  had  been  previously  regarded  as  a 

610 


1783.]  SUDDEN  CHANGES 

firm  Supporter  of  the  Measure.  Nor  can  it  excite 
Surprize,  that  all  those  noble  Individuals  without 
Exception,  who  occupied  Situations  in  the  Royal 
Household,  or  near  the  King's  person,  should,  without 
fastidiously  hesitating,  give  the  example  of  tergiversa- 
tion. They  abandoned  Ministers,  and  joined  the 
Crown ;  manifesting  by  their  Votes,  how  vast  is  the 
personal  influence  of  the  Sovereign,  when  strenuously 
exerted,  over  the  Members  of  the  Upper  House  of 
Parliament.  The  Prince  of  Wales,  who,  when  it  was 
moved  to  adjourn  on  the  15th,  had  voted  in  person 
with  the  Administration  ;  having  received  a  notification 
of  his  Father's  disapprobation  of  the  East  India  Bill, 
absented  himself  on  the  second  Division,  when  that 
measure  was  finally  rejected.  Lord  Rivers,  one  of  the 
Lords  of  the  King's  Bedchamber,  who  had  given  his 
vote  by  proxy  to  the  "  Coalition,"  on  the  first  Question, 
withdrew  it  on  the  second  Division ;  as  did  the  Earls 
of  Hardwicke  and  Egremont.  Lord  Stormont,  though 
as  being  a  Member  of  the  Cabinet  and  President  of 
the  Council,  he  had  personally  supported  the  Bill  on 
the  15th,  yet  voted  on  the  other  side,  forty-eight  hours 
afterwards.  His  uncle,  the  Earl  of  Mansfield,  who  was 
supposed  to  have  influenced  him  in  this  determination, 
exhibited  the  same  example.  Both  were  present  in  the 
first  Division,  as  supporters  of  the  Measure ;  and  both 
appeared  in  the  House  as  enemies  to  it,  when  thrown 
out  on  17th  of  December.  The  Earl  of  Oxford,  one 
of  His  Majesty's  most  antient  servants,  who  had  been 
near  his  person  more  than  twenty  years,  in  the  capacity 
of  a  Lord  of  the  Bedchamber ;  having  been  induced  to 
support  the  "Coalition"  by  his  Proxy  on  the  15th, 
sent  it  to  the  opposite  Side,  on  the  subsequent  Division. 
Fox  and  Burke,  together  with  many  of  their  warmest 
Adherents,  who  during  the  progress  of  the  first  Debate 
had  remained  on  the  steps  of  the  Throne,  in  order  by 
their  Presence  to  encourage  their  Friends  in  the  Upper 

611 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [1783. 

House,  had  the  Mortification  to  witness  the  Defeat 
experienced  on  that  Evening ;  a  Defeat  which  served 
as  a  Warning  of  its  final  Destiny. 

The  Debates  which  took  place  in  the  upper  House, 
on  the  two  questions  of  Adjournment  and  of  Rejection  ; 
however  inferior  an  interest  they  excited,  when  com- 
pared with  the  discussions  that  agitated  the  House  of 
Commons  on  the  same  subject ;  yet  strongly  arrested 
national  attention.  Lord  Thurlow,  after  reprobating 
the  Bill,  and  treating  with  contemptuous  ridicule  the 
Reports  of  the  "  Select  Committee,"  on  which  defective 
or  erroneous  foundations  the  pretended  necessity  for 
the  measure  rested;  declared  that  "if  it  passed,  the 
"  King  would  in  fact  take  the  Diadem  from  his  own 
"  head,  and  place  it  on  the  head  of  Mr.  Fox."  In 
more  intemperate  language,  scarcely  befitting  so  digni- 
fied an  Assembly,  the  Earl  of  Abingdon,  a  Nobleman 
of  very  eccentric  character,  restrained  by  no  forms  in 
expressing  his  abhorrence  of  a  Coalition  which  had 
given  birth  to  this  political  monster ;  qualified  Charles 
James  Fox  by  name,  as  "  a  Mountebank  Secretary  of 
"  State,  accustomed  formerly  to  ascend  the  Stages  at 
"  Covent  Garden  and  at  Westminster  Hall,  from  which 
"  he  harangued  the  mob ;  but  now  calling  himself  the 
"  Minister  of  the  People,  though  animated  by  the 
"  criminal  ambition  of  Cromwell,  and  aiming  at  regal 
"  power."  He  even  accused  the  Secretary  with  exceed- 
ing in  violence,  by  his  seizure  of  the  East  India 
Company's  Charter,  the  worst  acts  of  those  Tyrants, 
Charles  the  Second,  and  his  brother  James.  With 
great  pertinacity,  the  Duke  of  Richmond  pointed  out 
the  injustice  of  the  Measure :  nor  did  the  ties  of 
Consanguinity  that  connected  him  with  Fox,  prevent 
him  from  severely  arraigning  the  recent  grant  of  a 
Pension  of  one  thousand  Pounds  a  year  made  to  Sir 
William  Gordon ;  in  order,  by  vacating  his  Seat  for 
Portsmouth,  to  enable  Government  to  introduce  Mr. 

612 


1783.1  INCREASED  OPPOSITION 

Erskine  into  the  House  of  Commons,  at  this  critical 
juncture.  Unsolicited,  and  unconnected  with  party, 
Lord  Camden  entered  his  strong  Protest  against  such 
an  infraction  of  all  law,  by  bringing  forward  an  Act, 
not  of  regulation,  but  of  rapacious  confiscation. 

Ministers,  thus  assailed,  if  they  exhibited  the  talents, 
by  no  means  displayed  the  energies,  exerted  by  their 
opponents.  Lord  Loughborough,  on  whom  devolved 
the  principal  weight  of  defending  the  Government, 
found  himself  ill  supported  in  that  attempt.  The 
Speaker,  Lord  Mansfield,  voted  indeed  with  Adminis- 
tration on  the  question  of  Adjournment ;  but  remained 
altogether  silent,  and  extended  no  active  assistance. 
Conscious  that  his  Colleagues  had  lost  the  confidence  of 
the  King,  the  Duke  of  Portland  alluded  with  warmth, 
in  the  course  of  Debate,  to  Lord  Temple's  recent 
Audience  of  the  Sovereign,  which  he  denounced  as  a 
violation  of  the  Constitution.  But,  that  Nobleman, 
avowing  the  fact,  and  justifying  it  as  the  privilege  of 
an  hereditary  Counsellor  of  the  Crown,  to  offer  advice, 
called  on  the  Duke  to  bring  forward  against  him  a 
specific  Charge.  Lord  Shelburne,  though  he  once,  I 
believe,  attended  in  his  place,  took  no  part  whatever  in 
the  discussions,  nor  ever  voted  on  the  Question,  either 
in  person  or  by  proxy :  a  line  of  conduct,  which,  when 
we  consider  that  he  had  been  expelled  from  power  by 
the  "  Coalition,"  only  a  few  Months  earlier,  opened  a 
wide  field  for  political  speculation,  on  the  motives  of 
his  silence  or  secession. 

It  will  be  readily  admitted,  that  if  we  try  the 
conduct  of  George  the  Third,  in  personally  interposing 
to  influence  the  Debates,  and  to  render  himself  master 
of  the  deliberations  of  the  upper  House,  by  the  spirit 
of  our  Constitution,  as  fixed  since  the  expulsion  of 
James  the  Second ;  it  appears  subversive  of  every 
principle  of  political  Freedom.  Such  an  ill-timed  and 
imprudent  interference,  had  in  fact  laid  the  foundation 

613 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [i78S. 

of  all  the  misfortunes  of  Charles  the  First.  But,  the 
same  line  of  conduct,  which  in  1641  excited  indigna- 
tion, in  1783  awakened  no  sentiment  of  national  con- 
demnation. On  the  contrary,  the  King's  position  being 
perfectly  understood,  the  impossibility  of  his  extrication 
from  the  Ministerial  toils,  appeared  so  clearly  demon- 
strated, unless  by  a  decided  personal  effort  to  arrest  the 
Bill,  that  the  Country  at  large  affixed  its  sanction  to 
the  act.  There  were,  nevertheless,  it  must  be  admitted, 
many  individuals  who  thought  that  the  royal  dis- 
approbation should  have  been  earlier  signified;  and 
who  inclined  to  accuse  the  King  of  something  like 
duplicity  or  deception,  in  his  treatment  of  Administra- 
tion. We  must  however  candidly  allow,  that  he  was 
not  bound  to  observe  any  measures  of  scrupulous 
delicacy,  with  men  who  had  entered  his  Cabinet  by 
violence,  who  held  him  in  Bondage,  and  who  meditated 
to  render  that  Bondage  perpetual.  Nor  was  it  easy  for 
him  to  discover  and  to  detect,  by  the  force  of  his  own 
intellect,  without  legal  assistance,  the  invasions  on  his 
independence  and  Prerogative,  contained  in  the  pro- 
visions of  the  Bill,  as  originally  submitted  to  him  ;  till 
they  were  exposed  and  made  manifest  by  the  discussions 
that  took  place  in  the  House  of  Commons.  The 
rapidity  with  which  it  was  carried  up  to  the  Peers,  and 
the  little  delay  which  Fox  evidently  meant  it  should 
there  undergo,  before  it  was  presented  for  his  con- 
currence, left  him  no  option,  and  very  little  time  for 
action.  These  reasons  exculpated  and  justified  an 
interference,  apparently  so  irreconcilable  with  the 
genius  of  the  British  Constitution.  A  fact  not  gener- 
ally known,  but  not  the  less  true,  is,  that  His  Majesty 
was  advised,  and  had  taken  the  resolution,  if  the  Bill 
had  actually  passed  the  House  of  Lords,  to  have  refused 
to  it  the  Royal  Assent.  He  would  then  have  instantly 
changed  his  Ministers,  dissolved  the  Parliament,  and 
thrown  himself  for  protection  upon  his  People.  Those 

614 


1783.]  THE  "JANIZARIES" 

who  have  had  the  best  opportunities  of  knowing  his 
Character,  and  his  firmness  under  the  most  alarming  or 
distressful  circumstances,  while  sustained  by  the  convic- 
tion of  acting  right ;  will  not  doubt,  or  disbelieve  the 
fact.  Nor  would  the  Nation,  probably,  have  con- 
demned his  conduct,  or  have  delivered  him  up  again 
into  the  hands  of  the  "  Coalition."  Happily  however, 
the  middle  line  which  he  adopted,  prevented  the 
necessity  of  recurring  to  such  painful  extremities. 

17th  December.]  Though  Fox's  Bill  was  thus  re- 
jected by  the  Upper  House,  he  still  remained,  together 
with  Lord  North,  in  possession  of  their  respective 
Offices,  no  change  whatever  in  Administration  having 
yet  taken  place.  Fox  even  delivered,  as  Secretary  of 
State,  from  the  Treasury  Bench,  the  most  bitter  and 
animated  Philippic  ever  pronounced  within  the  walls  of 
the  House  of  Commons ;  in  the  course  of  which,  he 
dealt  out  every  accusation  against  the  Sovereign,  and 
those  Members  of  the  House  of  Peers ;  the  Praetorian 
Bands,  or  rather  the  Janizaries,  as  he  dominated  them  ; 
who  had  strangled  the  measure  by  their  Sultan's  order. 
Nor  did  he  hesitate  to  compare  the  paper  entrusted 
by  His  Majesty  to  Lord  Temple,  which  had  operated 
such  injurious  effects  to  the  Administration,  with  the 
Rescript  of  Tiberius  sent  to  the  Roman  Senate  from 
Caprrea,  for  the  condemnation  of  Sejanus,  unheard  in 
his  defence,  and  without  proofs  of  his  guilt.  In  classic 
language,  and  in  the  words  of  Juvenal,  he  reprobated 
such  an  interference,  as  wholly  subversive  of  the  British 
Constitution. 

Vainly,  however,  Mr.  Pitt  urged  him  to  retire,  and 
thus  to  anticipate  his  dismission  from  Employment. 
Content  with  rendering  the  Majority  of  the  House 
subservient  to  his  views,  by  passing  various  Resolutions, 
calculated  to  stigmatize,  as  destructive  of  the  Constitu- 
tion, the  late  interference  of  the  Crown ;  and  intended 
at  the  same  time  to  prevent  the  interruption  of  their 

615 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [1783. 

Deliberations,  by  any  act  of  Prerogative ;  the  "  Coali- 
"  tion "  Ministers  refused  to  give  in  their  resignation. 
Under  these  circumstances,  which  called  for  decision, 
the  King  displayed  no  irresolution.  Conscious  that  he 
had  advanced  too  far  to  recede,  either  with  honor  or 
with  benefit,  he  passed  the  whole  of  the  18th  of 
December,  in  making  dispositions  for  the  formation 
of  a  new  Cabinet ;  and  finding,  at  a  late  hour  of  the 
Evening,  that  the  two  Secretaries  of  State  still  declined 
to  resign,  he  signified  to  them,  by  a  messenger,  that  he 
had  no  further  occasion  for  their  services.  They  re- 
ceived at  the  same  time  information,  that  a  personal 
interview  would  be  disagreeable  to  him,  and  were 
ordered  to  deliver  up  the  Seals  of  their  respective 
Departments,  through  the  medium  of  the  two  under 
Secretaries,  Fraser  and  Nepean.  Mr.  Fox  immediately 
complied;  but  Lord  North  having  deposited  the  Seal 
of  his  Office  in  the  hands  of  his  son,  Colonel  North,  one 
of  his  under  Secretaries,  who  could  no  where  be  found 
for  a  considerable  time ;  the  King  waited  patiently 
at  St.  James's  till  it  should  be  brought  to  him.  Mr. 
Pollock,  first  Clerk  in  Lord  North's  Office,  who  had 
already  retired  to  rest,  being  called  out  of  his  Bed,  in 
consequence  of  the  requisition  from  His  Majesty,  went 
in  search  of  Colonel  North.  After  a  long  delay,  he 
was  found,  and  produced  the  Seal ;  which  being 
brought  to  the  King  about  one  o'clock  in  the  Morning, 
he  delivered  it  into  Lord  Temple's  hands,  and  then 
returned  to  the  Queen's  House. 

19th  December.]  On  the  ensuing  Day,  it  being 
indispensable  to  form  a  Government  with  the  least 
possible  delay,  Mr.  Pitt,  notwithstanding  his  youth, 
was  placed  at  the  Head  of  the  New  Cabinet,  as  First 
Lord  of  the  Treasury  and  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer ; 
an  instance  without  precedent  in  our  Annals,  and 
which  will  probably  never  be  again  realized !  Lord 
Bolingbroke,  then  Mr.  St.  John,  had  indeed,  under 

616 


1783.]  THE  NEW  GOVERNMENT 

Queen  Anne  been  made  Secretary  at  War,  as  early  in 
life ;  and  we  have  since  seen  Lord  Henry  Petty,  now 
Marquis  of  Lansdown,  at  about  the  same  Age,  raised 
to  the  Chancellorship  of  the  Exchequer,  in  1806,  after 
Mr.  Pitt's  decease.  But  there  is  a  wide  interval,  from 
either  of  the  above  examples,  to  the  elevation  before  us. 
If  we  reflect  likewise  on  the  decided  majority  against 
which  Pitt  had  to  contend  in  the  House  of  Commons, 
conducted  by  such  energies  and  talents  as  Fox  possessed ; 
we  may  be  tempted,  at  first  sight,  to  accuse  him  of 
imprudence  and  temerity.  The  event  nevertheless 
proved,  that  in  accepting  Employment,  under  all  the 
disadvantages  here  enumerated,  he  had  maturely 
weighed  the  peril  and  the  consequences.  Other 
impediments,  not  less  serious,  presented  themselves  in 
the  interior  of  the  Cabinet  recently  formed;  where 
Lord  Temple  insisted  on  the  immediate  Dissolution  of 
Parliament,  as  necessary  to  their  ministerial,  if  not 
even  to  their  personal,  preservation.  But  Pitt,  with 
consummate  judgment,  while  he  retained  in  his  own 
hands  so  powerful  an  engine,  which  he  held  suspended 
over  the  House  of  Commons,  abstained  from  using  it 
till  the  progress  of  affairs  should  justify  the  inter- 
position. Conscious  that  no  act  of  the  Royal  Preroga- 
tive could  be  more  generally  repugnant  to  the 
inclinations  of  the  Members  of  the  Lower  House, 
than  a  Dissolution  before  they  had  sat  half  the 
period  for  which  they  had  been  elected,  he  resisted 
Lord  Temple's  proposition ;  who,  in  consequence 
immediately  resigned,  only  three  days  after  his 
Appointment :  thus  involving  the  half-formed  Ad- 
ministration in  confusion  and  embarrassment,  not 
wholly  exempt  even  from  some  degree  of  ridicule  and 
of  danger.  Never  did  any  Ministry  commence  its 
career  under  a  more  inauspicious  and  apparently 
desperate  predicament,  which  was  destined  so  long  to 
retain  possession  of  the  Reins  of  Government. 

617 


WRAXALKS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [irss. 


December.]  Even  after  Lord  Temple's  Resigna- 
tion, when  the  Cabinet  was  at  length  completed,  Pitt 
might  be  said  to  constitute  its  whole  strength  in  one 
House,  as  Lord  Thurlow  equally  did  in  the  other 
Assembly.  The  Great  Seal  was  entrusted  to  the 
latter,  for  the  fourth  time  under  the  Reign  of  George 
the  Third.  Lord  Gower,  made  President  of  the 
Council,  and  the  Duke  of  Rutland  appointed  Privy 
Seal,  brought  indeed  a  considerable  accession  of 
Parliamentary  interest  and  connexions;  but,  a  very 
scanty  addition  of  eloquence  or  of  talents.  The  new 
Secretaries  of  State,  Lord  Sydney,  and  the  Marquis  of 
Carmarthen,  even  if  their  Abilities  had  been  of  the 
most  brilliant  description,  yet  were  both  Members  of 
the  House  of  Peers;  a  disadvantage  only  to  be  sur- 
mounted by  Pitt's  taking  on  himself  the  whole  weight 
of  Business  in  the  House  of  Commons,  and  uniting  in 
some  measure  in  his  own  person,  the  Defence  of  every 
Department.  Lord  Howe,  restored  to  the  Admiralty, 
was  re-admitted  into  the  Cabinet  ;  and  the  Duke  of 
Richmond  returned  to  the  Ordnance  :  but  no  mention 
was  ever  made  of  Lord  Shelburne  for  any  place  in 
the  Administration.  He  seemed  to  be  extinct  in  the 
public  recollection. 

Sir  George  Howard  obtained  the  Command  of  the 
Forces;  but,  neither  he,  nor  the  Duke  of  Richmond, 
were  taken  into  the  Cabinet.  The  new  Commander- 
in-Chief,  who  had  long  been  decorated  with  the  Order 
of  the  Bath,  was  a  man  universally  esteemed,  highly 
bred,  and  a  gallant  Soldier  :  but,  like  Sir  John  Irwin, 
of  whom  I  have  had  occasion  to  speak,  he  owed  his 
military  Elevation  and  Employments,  more  perhaps 
to  Royal  favor,  than  to  any  distinguished  talents,  or 
professional  Services.  His  descent  from,  or  alliance 
with  the  Duke  of  Norfolk,  notwithstanding  the  evidence 
of  his  Name,  was,  I  believe,  not  established  on  incon- 
testable grounds.  He  attained,  as  did  General  Con- 

618 


1783.]  THE  DUKE  OF  DORSET 

way,  not  many  years  afterwards,  to  the  rank  of  Field 
Marshal ;  a  Dignity  of  which  the  British  service  had 
antecedently  furnished  only  a  few  examples.  For  the 
Embassy  to  Paris,  the  Duke  of  Dorset  was  selected. 
As  he  honored  me  with  his  friendship  down  to  the 
close  of  his  life,  it  may  be  naturally  expected  that  I 
should  say  a  few  words  respecting  him.  He  was  the 
son  of  Lord  John  Sackville,  elder  Brother  of  Lord 
George ;  and  succeeded  collaterally  to  the  Title,  on  the 
Demise  of  his  uncle,  Charles,  second  Duke  of  Dorset, 
mentioned  so  frequently  in  "  Dodington's  Diary,"  as 
Earl  of  Middlesex.  The  Duke,  when  named  Embas- 
sador  to  Versailles,  had  nearly  attained  his  fortieth 
year.  His  person  was  highly  agreeable;  his  manners 
soft,  quiet,  ingratiating,  and  formed  for  a  Court; 
destitute  of  all  Affectation,  but  not  deficient  in  Dignity. 
He  displayed  indeed,  neither  shining  parts,  nor 
superior  Abilities.  Yet,  as  he  possessed  good  sense, 
matured  by  knowledge  of  the  world,  had  travelled  over 
a  considerable  part  of  Europe,  and  had  improved  his 
understanding  by  an  extensive  acquaintance  with  man- 
kind, he  was  well  calculated  for  such  a  Mission.  He 
nourished  a  strong  passion  for  all  the  Fine  Arts,  and  a 
predilection  for  men  of  Talents  and  Artists  ;  a  taste 
which  he  indulged,  and  in  the  gratification  of  which, 
he  manifested  that  he  inherited  some  of  the  qualities 
of  his  Ancestor,  Charles,  Earl  of  Dorset.  But  the 
Mediocrity  of  his  Estate,  when  contrasted  with  his 
high  Rank,  imposed  limits  on  the  liberality  of  his 
disposition.  If  considered  as  Embassador  to  France, 
though  he  could  not  sustain  a  comparison  for  Diplo- 
matic Ability,  with  the  Earl  of  Stair,  or  with  the  first 
Horace  Walpole,  who  had  represented  the  English 
Sovereign,  at  the  Courts  of  Louis  the  Fourteenth  and 
Fifteenth ;  he  might  at  least  be  regarded  as  equal  to 
any  of  the  Noblemen  who  had  filled  that  Office  during 
the  last  years  of  George  the  Second,  or  under  the 

619 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [irss. 

Reign  of  George  the  Third,  if  we  except,  perhaps, 
Lord  Stormont.  To  Marie  Antoinette,  the  French 
Queen,  the  Duke  of  Dorset  rendered  himself  highly 
acceptable,  and  enjoyed  some  degree  of  her  personal 
favor:  a  circumstance  by  no  means  unessential  in  his 
situation,  as  that  Princess  performed  a  much  more 
important  part  in  the  Cabinet  and  Councils  of  Louis 
the  Sixteenth,  than  the  two  Queens  her  immediate 
predecessors.  Maria  Theresa,  daughter  of  Philip  the 
Fourth,  King  of  Spain,  who  espoused  Louis  the  Four- 
teenth ;  and  Maria  Leczinska,  Consort  of  his  Successor, 
possessed  no  political  power  or  interest.  Marie 
Antoinette's  protection,  aided  by  his  connexion  with 
the  Polignacs,  had  sufficed  to  procure  for  the  Count 
d'Adhemar,  at  the  conclusion  of  Peace,  the  Embassy  to 
the  Court  of  England :  but  he  was  a  Man  far  inferior 
in  every  accomplishment  of  mind  and  of  manners,  to 
the  Duke  of  Dorset. 

Mr.  Arden  became  Solicitor  General.  Nature  has 
seldom  cast  a  human  Being  in  a  less  elegant  or  pleasing 
mould.  Even  Dunning's  person  would  have  gained  by 
a  comparison  with  Arden.  Nor  were  his  legal  talents 
more  conspicuous  in  the  general  estimation  of  the  Bar. 
But,  his  early  acquaintance  with  Pitt,  which  time  had 
matured  into  friendship,  covered  or  concealed  every 
deficiency.  That  powerful  protection,  in  defiance  of 
Lord  Thurlow's  avowed  dislike,  conducted  the  new 
Solicitor  General  rapidly  to  the  Honors  and  Dignities 
of  the  Law ;  finally  placing  him,  where  almost  all  those 
individuals  patronized  by  the  Minister,  found  their 
ultimate  repose,  in  the  House  of  Peers.  It  must  how- 
ever be  admitted,  that  no  man  in  Parliament  had  given 
a  more  pertinacious  and  unremitting  opposition  to  Fox's 
East  India  Bill,  than  Arden.  The  last  Blow  aimed  at 
it,  before  it  passed  the  Lower  House,  came  from  his  lips. 
For,  I  recollect,  that  after  that  obnoxious  Measure  had 
been  carried,  on  the  Third  Reading,  by  a  Majority  of 

620 


1783.1  RESIGNATIONS 

more  than  two  to  one ;  the  Solicitor  General,  Mansfield, 
having  risen  to  move  for  leave  to  bring  up  a  Clause, 
declaring  it  to  be  a  Public  Bill ;  Arden  exclaimed,  that 
"  he  had  no  objection :  but,  that  he  was  not  surprized 
"  at  its  having  escaped  his  learned  friend's  memory,  as 
"  every  other  person  considered  the  Bill  to  be  a  Private 
"  Job"  With  that  Stigma  impressed  on  the  Measure, 
Fox  bore  it  in  triumph,  to  the  Bar  of  the  Lords. 

The  King's  Table,  covered  with  Badges  of  Office, 
Seals,  Wands,  and  Gold  Sticks,  profusely  given  in  by 
the  Adherents  of  the  dismissed  Ministers,  presented  an 
extraordinary  Spectacle.  Among  the  foremost  to  testify 
his  Ministerial  fidelity,  the  Honorable  Charles  Greville, 
next  brother  to  the  Earl  of  Warwick,  resigned  his  Office 
of  Treasurer  of  the  Household.  Possessing,  like  his 
uncle,  Sir  William  Hamilton,  an  elegant  mind,  and  a 
taste  for  many  branches  of  the  Fine  Arts,  which  pursuit 
had  earned  him  into  expences  beyond  the  bounds  of 
severe  prudence ;  his  Resignation  of  such  an  Employ- 
ment could  not  therefore  be  to  him  in  any  sense,  a 
matter  of  indifference.  I  have  heard  Mr.  Greville, 
whom  I  very  particularly  knew,  often  say,  that  the 
King  most  kindly  expostulated  with  him,  when  he 
entered  the  Closet  to  lay  down  his  Place,  and  urged 
him  by  no  means  to  commit  an  act  so  unnecessary ;  the 
Treasurership  of  the  Household  being,  not  a  Ministerial, 
but  a  personal  situation  in  the  family  of  the  Sovereign. 
I  ought  likewise  to  add  that  Fox,  who  well  knew  Mr. 
Greville's  private  Embarrassments,  had,  with  a  liberality 
of  mind  truly  noble,  exhorted  him  to  retain  his  Post ; 
absolving  him  at  the  same  time  from  all  considerations 
of  a  political  kind.  But,  his  feelings  of  honor  were  too 
delicate,  to  permit  of  his  following  either  the  suggestions 
of  convenience,  the  exhortations  of  Fox,  or  the  expostu- 
lations of  his  Sovereign.  He  retired  for  several  years 
from  Court,  and  from  public  life,  into  comparative 
obscurity. 


WRAXALKS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [1783. 


Lord  Hinchingbrook,  less  scrupulous,  and  with  better 
sense,  instead  of  quitting  his  Office  of  Master  of  the 
Buck  Hounds  ;  though  his  father,  the  Earl  of  Sandwich, 
followed  the  fortunes  of  the  "  Coalition  ; "  wisely  aban- 
doned that  Party,  and  declined  to  give  in  his  Resigna- 
tion. Sir  George  Yonge  went  back  to  his  Office  of 
Secretary  at  War,  which  he  had  held  under  Lord 
Shelburne^s  Administration ;  a  Post  that  seemed  to  be 
Hereditary  in  his  family;  his  father,  Sir  William 
Yonge,  having  occupied  it  with  much  distinction,  under 
the  Reign  of  George  the  Second.  Sir  William,  who 
performed  no  inconsiderable  part  in  the  Political 
Annals  of  that  Period,  was  equally  distinguished  like- 
wise among  the  men  of  Wit  and  Gallantry.  I  have 
heard  Lord  Sackville,  who  remembered  him,  say,  that 
Sir  William  Yonge,  when  Secretary  at  War,  having 
waited  officially  on  John,  Duke  of  Argyle,  then  Com- 
mander-in-chief of  the  Forces,  to  make  his  Report  on  a 
matter  of  Business ;  the  Duke  kept  him  standing,  while 
he  himself  remained  seated  for  a  considerable  time. 
Their  Ministerial  Conference  being  ended,  he  requested 
Sir  William  to  take  a  Chair.  "  No,  Sir,"  replied  he,  "  if 
"  the  Secretary  at  War  is  not  worthy  to  sit  down  in 
"  the  presence  of  the  Commander-in-chief;  it  would 
"  be  altogether  unbecoming  Sir  William  Yonge,  to  be 
"  seated  in  company  with  the  Duke  of  Argyle."  So 
saying,  he  quitted  the  room.  Sir  George  Yonge  did  not 
want  talents,  and  he  maintained  his  place  in  a  Debate ; 
but  in  ability  he  by  no  means  equalled  his  father. 

Meanwhile  Fox,  who  remained  completely  Master  of 
the  House  of  Commons,  where  Mr.  Pitt  could  not  even 
be  personally  present  during  the  Time  necessary  for  his 
Re-election,  in  consequence  of  having  vacated  his  Seat 
for  Appleby ;  might  be  said  .  to  sway  with  absolute 
Power,  the  Deliberations  of  that  Assembly.  His  first 
Cares  were  directed  to  prevent  either  a  Prorogation  or 
a  Dissolution  of  Parliament,  by  passing  Resolutions 


1783.]  A  CRIMINATING  ADDRESS 

calculated  to  render  each  of  those  Proceedings,  difficult 
and  dangerous  to  Ministers.  Having  carried  his 
Motion  by  a  large  Majority,  he  consented  to  pass  the 
Land-Tax  Bill :  but,  no  Assurances  given  by  Mr. 
Dundas  from  the  Treasury  Bench,  though  confirmed  by 
Mr.  Bankes,  as  the  Friend  and  Representative  of  the 
new  First  Minister,  declaring  in  his  Name,  and  by  his 
Authority,  that  he  would  neither  advise  such  an  Act  of 
Prerogative,  nor  would  continue  in  Office,  if  the  Crown 
had  Recourse  to  it ;  could  prevail  on  Fox  to  allow  of 
an  Adjournment  for  the  Christmas  Recess,  till  he  had 
voted,  without  a  Division,  an  Address  to  the  Throne, 
of  the  most  criminating  Nature,  which  was  ordered  to 
be  presented  by  the  whole  House.  On  receiving  the 
King's  Answer,  which,  though  gracious  and  conciliating, 
did  not  breathe  the  less  Determination ;  after  passing 
upon  it  the  most  severe  Comments,  as  a  Mixture  of 
Duplicity  and  Ambiguity,  Fox  then  permitted  of  an 
Adjournment  for  the  short  period  of  Sixteen  Days;  an 
interval  indispensably  requisite  to  complete  the  Minis- 
terial Arrangements.  The  Resignation  or  Dismission 
of  the  new  Administration,  was  however  confidently 
anticipated  by  the  Party,  and  announced  by  Fox  him- 
self in  one  of  his  Speeches,  when  he  ventured  to  predict, 
that  its  Duration  could  not  possibly  exceed  a  few 
Weeks.  The  most  experienced  Members  among  them, 
with  Welbore  Ellis  at  their  Head,  joined  in  this 
Opinion ;  which,  it  must  be  confessed,  was  built  upon 
all  the  Precedents  known  since  the  Elevation  of  the 
House  of  Hanover  to  the  Throne. 

Lord  North,  who  had  been  absent  from  the  effect  of 
Indisposition,  during  a  great  part  of  the  Debates,  while 
the  East  India  Bill  was  in  its  progress  through  the 
House  of  Commons ;  made  ample  Compensation  for 
his  short  and  involuntary  Retreat,  by  his  Presence  and 
Exertions  after  the  Dismission  of  Ministers.  During 
the  number  of  Years  that  I  sat  with  him  in  Parliament, 

623 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [1783. 

I  never  witnessed  a  more  brilliant  Exhibition  of  his 
Powers,  than  on  the  22d  of  December,  when  Erskine 
moved  for  an  Address  to  the  Throne,  deprecating  a 
Dissolution.  In  the  commencement  of  his  Speech, 
Lord  North  justified  by  cogent  Arguments,  his  Union 
with  Fox,  as  having  been  dictated  by  State  Necessity 
and  Utility;  eulogizing  in  animated  Language,  the 
Virtues,  no  less  than  the  Abilities,  of  his  late  Colleague, 
whom  he  wished  in  future  always  to  be  designated  as 
his  "Right  Honorable  Friend."  Then,  after  severely 
arraigning  the  Mode  of  Pitt's  Admission  into  the 
Cabinet,  he  diverged  with  inconceivable  Humour  into 
the  path  of  Ridicule,  so  analogous  to  his  formation  of 
Mind.  Alluding  to  the  Wish  expressed  more  than  once 
by  Mr.  Martin,  that  a  Starling  should  be  perched  on 
the  Speaker's  Chair,  who  might  incessantly  repeat  the 
Words,  "  Cursed  Coalition ! "  he  observed,  that  so  long 
as  an  honorable  Member  of  that  House,  "continued 
"  to  pronounce  those  Sounds,  as  if  by  Rote,  and  without 
"  any  fixed  Idea,  let  what  would  be  the  Subject  of 
"  Debate ;  he  conceived  the  Starling  to  be  unnecessary, 
"  inasmuch  as  the  Gentleman  would  make  just  as  great 
"  an  Impression  as  the  Bird,  on  his  hearers."  Having 
convulsed  the  House  with  Laughter  by  this  Remark, 
he  compared,  or  rather  he  contrasted,  the  Conduct  of 
the  two  Men  who  were  shut  up  in  the  Eddystone 
Lighthouse,  during  six  Weeks,  with  the  opposite  Line 
of  Action  embraced  by  Fox  and  himself.  "Those 
"  Men,"  said  he,  "  from  reciprocal  Enmity,  preferred 
"  letting  the  Fire  go  out,  and  beholding  the  Navy  of 
"  England  dashed  to  pieces,  rather  than  lend  each 
"  other  any  Assistance.  But  we,  animated  by  other 
"  and  more  enlarged  Sentiments,  considered  the 
"  Preservation  of  the  Vessel  of  State,  our  primary 
"  Duty ;  and  we  agreed,  that  at  all  Events,  the  Fire  in 
"  the  Lighthouse  should  not  be  extinguished."  An 
allusion  so  ingenious  as  well  as  felicitous,  almost 

624 


1783.]         FOX'S  WANT  OF  FORESIGHT 

electrified  his  Audience ;  and  if  Wit  could  have  sup- 
ported or  restored  the  "  Coalition,1"  it  must  have  over- 
borne every  Impediment.  But,  the  moral  Impression 
made  on  the  public  Mind,  to  their  Disadvantage,  daily 
acquired  Strength,  and  finally  compleated  their  Down- 
fall, though  protracted  for  more  than  Three  Months, 
by  various  circumstances. 

If  the  struggle  for  Power  had  lain  only  between  Pitt 
and  Fox,  the  former  of  whom,  whatever  might  be  the 
extent  of  his  Talents,  was  unable  to  command  a 
Majority  upon  any  Question  in  the  House  of  Commons, 
while  the  latter  carried  every  Motion ;  the  Contest 
would,  no  doubt,  have  been  soon  decided.  Or,  had 
the  Dispute  been,  as  under  Charles  the  First,  between 
the  Sovereign,  claiming  to  exercise  Prerogatives  anti- 
quated and  oppressive  on  the  one  Hand ;  and  the 
representative  Body  on  the  other,  propelled  and 
sustained  by  the  People,  as  their  Organs  and  Pro- 
tectors against  arbitrary  Violence; — the  Termination 
might  have  been  foreseen  without  much  Penetration. 
But  Fox,  though  he  was  become  by  his  union  with 
Lord  North,  Master  of  the  Deliberations  of  the  Lower 
House,  had  sacrificed  to  that  very  Union,  in  a  consider- 
able degree,  the  good  Opinion  of  the  Country ;  and  the 
remains  of  his  former  Popularity,  which  survived  his 
Coalition  with  Lord  North,  had  since  been  shipwrecked 
in  the  India  Bill.  He  had  therefore  imprudently, 
though  as  it  would  nevertheless  seem,  reflectively, 
engaged  in  a  Conflict,  where  the  Crown  and  the  Nation 
both  combined  against  him.  Without  the  aid  of  the 
People,  the  Sovereign  would,  indeed,  have  been  power- 
less. As  little  could  the  House  of  Peers,  unsupported 
by  the  public  Voice,  have  checked  his  career.  It  was 
their  Union  which  became  irresistable.  Fox,  who, 
whatever  his  Admirers  may  assert,  possessed  more 
Talent  than  Judgment ;  does  not  appear  to  have 
deeply  weighed  and  appreciated  these  Facts,  before  he 

625  40 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [1783. 

entered  the  Lists.  Unfortunately  for  him  too,  the 
Champion  wanted  by  the  Crown,  for  the  Conjuncture, 
presented  himself  in  Pitt.  His  Name,  rendered  illus- 
trious by  his  Father;  the  Decorum  of  his  Manners, 
so  opposed  to  those  of  Fox ;  even  his  very  Youth 
seemed  to  recommend  him  to  National  Favor.  The 
King  availed  himself  of  these  Aids,  to  overwhelm  the 
"  Coalition  "  under  the  ruins  of  the  Fortress  which  they 
had  constructed,  and  deemed  inassailable.  Only  Time 
was  still  wanting,  in  order  to  awaken  and  to  animate 
the  Nation  at  large ;  which,  not  yet  fully  informed  upon 
all  the  Points  of  Fox's  Bill,  required  to  be  roused  into 
Exertion,  before  the  last  Address  should  be  made  to 
them  as  Electors.  Pitt,  with  a  Judgment  beyond  his 
Years,  instead  of  prematurely  dissolving  the  House  of 
Commons,  as  a  Man  of  meaner  talents  would  have  done  ; 
undertook  the  experiment  of  endeavouring  first  to 
conciliate,  or  to  convince,  the  Majority;  thus  allowing 
the  popular  sentiment  full  leisure  to  expand,  and 
finally  to  overpower  all  resistance  :  while  he  reserved 
for  the  proper  moment,  whenever  it  should  be  fully 
matured,  his  final  appeal  to  the  Country,  by  a  Dis- 
solution. Such  was  the  real  state  of  Affairs  in  the 
last  Days  of  December,  1783,  at  the  time  when  Pitt, 
contrary  to  all  Precedent,  and  under  apparent  diffi- 
culties the  most  insurmountable,  ventured  to  accept  the 
Reins  of  Government. 

It  forms  an  object  of  the  most  natural  Curiosity, 
minutely  to  survey  him  at  this  critical  period  of  his 
life.  He  was  not  then  much  more  than  twenty-four 
years  and  a  half  old,  and  consequently  had  not  attained 
the  Age,  at  which  many  individuals,  under  the  testa- 
mentary dispositions  of  their  parents,  are  still  legally 
considered  to  be  in  a  state  of  tutelage  or  minority.  In 
the  formation  of  his  person  he  was  tall  and  slender,  but 
without  elegance  or  grace.  His  Countenance,  taken  as 
a  whole,  did  not  display  either  the  fine  expression  of 

626 


1783.1    PITTS  APPEARANCE  AND  MANNERS 

character,  or  the  intellect  of  Fox's  face,  on  every  feature 
of  which,  his  mind  was  more  or  less  forcibly  depictured. 
It  was  not  till  Pitt's  Eye  lent  animation  to  his  other 
features,  which  were  in  themselves  tame,  that  they 
lighted  up,  and  became  strongly  intelligent.  Fox, 
even  when  quiescent,  could  not  be  mistaken  for  an 
ordinary  man.  In  his  manners,  Pitt,  if  not  repulsive, 
was  cold,  stiff,  and  without  suavity  or  amenity.  He 
seemed  never  to  invite  approach,  or  to  encourage 
acquaintance ;  though,  when  addressed,  he  could  be 
polite,  communicative,  and  occasionally  gracious. 
Smiles  were  not  natural  to  him,  even  when  seated  on 
the  Treasury  Bench;  where,  placed  at  the  summit  of 
power,  young,  surrounded  by  followers,  admirers,  and 
flatterers,  he  maintained  a  more  sullen  gravity  than 
his  Antagonist  exhibited,  who  beheld  around  him  only 
the  companions  of  his  political  exile,  poverty,  and 
privations.  From  the  instant  that  Pitt  entered  the 
doorway  of  the  House  of  Commons,  he  advanced  up  the 
floor  with  a  quick  and  firm  step,  his  Head  erect  and 
thrown  back,  looking  neither  to  the  right  nor  to  the 
left ;  nor  favouring  with  a  nod  or  a  glance,  any  of  the 
individuals  seated  on  either  side,  among  whom  many 
who  possessed  five  thousand  a  year,  would  have  been 
gratified  even  by  so  slight  a  mark  of  attention.  It  was 
not  thus  that  Lord  North  or  Fox  treated  Parliament ; 
nor  from  them,  would  Parliament  have  so  patiently 
endured  it :  but  Pitt  seemed  made  to  command,  even 
more  than  to  persuade  or  to  convince,  the  Assembly 
that  he  addressed. 

In  the  flower  of  youth  when  he  was  placed  at  the 
head  of  Administration,  he  manifested  none  of  the 
characteristic  virtues  or  defects  usually  accompanying 
that  period  of  life.  Charles  the  Twelfth,  King  of 
Sweden,  could  not  have  exhibited  more  coldness, 
indifference,  or  apathy  towards  women ;  a  point  of 
his  character  on  which  his  enemies  dwelt  with  malig- 

627 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [1783. 

nant,  though  impotent,  satisfaction :  while  his  friends 
laboured  with  equal  pertinacity  to  repel  the  imputation. 
To  him  the  Opposition  applied,  as  had  been  done  to 
his  Father,  the  description  given  of  a  Roman  youth : 

"  Multa  tulit,  fecitque  Puer  ;  sudavit  et  alsit ; 
"  Abstinuit  Venere" 

In  order  to  justify  him  from  such  a  supposed  blank 
in  his  formation,  his  Adherents  whispered,  that  he  was 
no  more  chaste  than  other  men,  though  more  decorous 
in  his  pleasures ;  and  they  asserted  that  he  made 
frequent  visits  to  a  female  of  distinguished  charms, 
who  resided  on  the  other  side  of  Westminster  Bridge : 
but  I  never  could  learn  from  any  of  them  her  name  or 
abode.  Pittas  apparent  insensibility  towards  the  other 
sex,  and  his  chastity,  formed  indeed,  one  of  the  subjects 
on  which  the  Minority  exhausted  their  wit,  or  rather 
their  malevolence ;  as  if  it  had  been  necessary  that  the 
First  Minister  of  George  the  Third  should  be,  like  the 
Chancellor  of  Charles  the  Second,  "  the  greatest  libertine 
"  in  his  Dominions."  I  recollect,  soon  after  Pitt  be- 
came confirmed  in  power,  his  detaining  the  House  of 
Commons  from  the  Business  of  the  Day  during  a  short 
time,  while  he  went  up  to  the  House  of  Lords ;  and  as 
Mrs.  Siddons  was  to  perform  the  part  of  "  Belvidera " 
that  Evening,  when  Fox  never  failed,  if  possible,  to 
attend  in  the  Orchestra  at  Drury  Lane,  the  Opposition 
impatiently  expected  Pitt's  return,  in  order  to  propose 
an  Adjournment.  As  soon  as  the  Door  opened  and  he 
made  his  appearance,  one  of  them,  a  man  of  a  classic 
mind,  exclaimed, 

"Jam  redit  et  Virgo  /" 

If,  however,  the  Minister  viewed  Women  with  in- 
difference, he  was  no  enemy  to  Wine,  nor  to  the  social 
conviviality  of  the  table.  His  Constitution,  in  which 
a  latent  and  hereditary  Gout  early  displayed  itself; 

628 


1783.]  A  NARROW  ESCAPE 

which  Disorder,  heightened  by  political  distress, 
domestic  and  foreign,  carried  him  off  at  forty-seven ; 
always  demanded  the  aid  and  stimulus  of  the  Grape. 
It  was  not  therefore  in  him,  so  much  a  gratification 
or  an  indulgence,  as  a  physical  want,  though  he  un- 
questionably yielded  to  its  seductions,  without  making 
any  great  effort  at  resistance ;  resembling  in  this 
respect,  a  distinguished  Consular  Character  of  Anti- 
quity, relative  to  whose  virtue  Horace  says, 

"  Narratur  et  Prisci  Catonis, 
"  Saepe  Mero  caluisse  Virtus." 

In  the  autumn  of  1784,  he  had  indeed  nearly  fallen  a 
victim  to  one  of  those  festive  meetings,  at  which  no 
severe  renunciations  were  enjoined  by  the  Host,  or 
practised  by  the  Guests.  Returning  by  way  of  frolic, 
very  late  at  night,  on  horseback,  to  Wimbledon,  from 
Addiscombe,  the  seat  of  Mr.  Jenkinson,  near  Croydon, 
where  the  party  had  dined;  Lord  Thurlow,  then 
Chancellor,  Pitt,  and  Dundas,  found  the  Turnpike  Gate 
situate  between  Tooting  and  Streatham,  thrown  open. 
Being  elevated  above  their  usual  prudence,  and  having 
no  Servant  near  them,  they  passed  through  the  Gate 
at  a  brisk  pace,  without  stopping  to  pay  the  Toll ; 
regardless  of  the  remonstrances  or  threats  of  the  Turn- 
pike Man,  who  running  after  them,  and  believing  them 
to  belong  to  some  Highwaymen,  who  had  recently 
committed  depredations  on  that  road,  discharged  the 
contents  of  his  Blunderbuss  at  their  backs.  Happily 
he  did  no  injury.  To  this  curious  and  narrow  escape  of 
the  First  Minister,  which  furnished  matter  of  pleasantry, 
though  perhaps  not  of  rejoicing,  to  the  Opposition, 
Allusion  is  made  in  the  "  Rolliad  ; " 

"  How  as  he  wander' d  darkling  o'er  the  plain, 
His  reason  lost  in  Jenkinson' s  Champaign, 
A  peasant's  hand,  but  that  just  Fate  withstood, 
Had  shed  a  Premier's,  for  a  robber's  blood." 
629 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    fi783. 

Probably,  no  men  in  high  Office,  since  Charles  the 
Second's  time,  drank  harder  than  Pitt's  companions ; 
as,  in  addition  to  the  individuals  already  named,  we 
should  not  omit  the  Duke  of  Rutland  and  Lord  Gower, 
neither  of  whom  professed  mortification.  Once,  and 
once  only,  the  House  of  Commons  witnessed  a  deviation 
from  strict  Sobriety,  in  the  Minister  and  the  Treasurer 
of  the  Navy ;  who  having  come  down  after  a  repast,  not 
of  a  Pythagorean  description,  found  themselves  unable 
to  manage  the  Debate,  or  to  reply  to  the  arguments 
of  the  Minority,  with  their  accustomed  ability.  No 
illiberal  notice  or  advantage  was  however  taken  of  this 
solitary  act  of  indiscretion.  The  House  broke  up,  and 
it  sunk  into  oblivion.  Fox  never  subjected  himself, 
either  in,  or  out  of  Office,  to  similar  comments.  He 
was  always  fresh ;  but,  the  Treasury  Bench,  under  the 
Coalition  Ministry,  had  not  wanted  some  noble  Ad- 
vocates for  the  quick  circulation  of  the  Bottle. 

Pitt,  at  his  coming  into  Office,  was  soon  surrounded 
by  a  chosen  Phalanx  of  young  men  who  participated  in 
his  triumph,  pressed  near  him  on  a  day  of  expected 
Debate,  and  constituted  the  resource  of  his  leisure 
hours.  Powis,  when  describing  about  this  time,  "  the 
"  forces  led  by  the  Right  Honourable  Gentleman  on 
"  the  Treasury  Bench,"  in  his  Speech  of  the  9th  of 
March,  1784,  only  a  few  days  previous  to  the  Dissolu- 
tion of  Parliament ;  said,  "  The  first  may  be  called  his 
"  Body  Guard,  composed  of  light  young  troops,  who 
"  shoot  their  little  Arrows  with  amazing  dexterity, 
"  against  those  who  refuse  to  swear  Allegiance  to  their 
"  Chief."  High  Birth,  personal  devotion,  and  political 
connection,  more  than  talents,  formed  the  ordinary 
foundation  of  the  Minister's  partiality  for  those  dis- 
tinguished individuals;  most  of  whom,  with  only  one 
Exception,  we  have  since  seen  elevated  to  the  Peerage, 
or  loaded  with  preferments  and  sinecure  Appointments. 
In  general,  the  Duke  de  Montausier's  observation  to 

630 


1783.]  SHERIDAN'S  RETORT 

Louis  the  Fourteenth,  when  speaking  of  Versailles, 
"  Vous  avez  beau  faire,  Sire,  vous  rfen  ferez  jamais 
"  qu'unfavori  sans  merite"  might  well  apply  to  them. 
With  Fox's  associates  and  comrades,  Hare,  Fitzpatrick, 
and  Sheridan,  they  could  sustain  no  competition  for 
mental  endowments.  Lord  Grenville,  then  Mr. 
William  Grenville,  must  not  however  be  included  in 
this  Remark.  His  near  connexion  with  the  First 
Minister,  by  Consanguinity,  when  added  to  his  dis- 
tinguished Abilities,  placed  him  on  far  higher  ground. 

In  suavity  of  temper,  magnanimity  of  disposition, 
and  oblivion  of  injury  or  offence,  Fox  rose  superior  to 
Pitt.  Even  Dundas  possessed  more  liberality  of  charac- 
ter, as  he  manifested  on  many  occasions.  I  have  heard 
Fox,  after  dealing  out  the  severest  insinuations  or 
accusations  against  Lord  North,  when  that  Nobleman 
was  at  the  head  of  the  Treasury,  towards  the  end  of  the 
American  War ;  on  being  convinced  that  he  had  ex- 
ceeded the  fair  limits  of  Parliamentary  Attack,  or  had 
deviated  into  personal  Abuse,  explain,  retract,  and 
apologize  for  his  violence  or  indecorum.  Mr.  Pitt, 
though  he  rarely  committed  such  a  breach  of  propriety, 
and  was  more  measured  in  his  censure  or  condemnation, 
seldom,  if  ever,  made  concession.  He  even  tried  at  an 
early  period  of  his  Ministerial  Career,  to  overbear 
Sheridan,  by  making  sarcastic  allusion  to  the  theatrical 
employments  or  dramatic  avocations  of  that  eminent 
Member,  as  forming  a  more  appropriate  object  of  his 
attention  than  Parliamentary  declamation  and  pursuits  : 
Allusions,  which  however  classic  the  language  in  which 
they  were  couched,  might  be  justly  deemed  illiberal  in 
their  nature.  But,  Sheridan,  with  admirable  presence 
of  mind,  turned  against  him  his  own  weapons  ;  leaving 
behind  him  the  impression  of  his  genius,  drawn  from  the 
very  key  on  which  Pitt  had  pressed,  when  he  applied  to 
the  First  Minister  the  denomination  of  the  "  Angry  Boy," 
with  which  Ben  Jonson  furnished  him  on  the  instant. 

631 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [1783. 

In  classic  knowledge  and  acquirements  of  every  kind, 
as  drawn  from  Greek  and  Roman  sources,  Pitt  and  Fox 
might  dispute  for  pre-eminence :  but  the  latter  left  his 
rival  far  behind,  in  all  the  variety  of  elegant  informa- 
tion derived  from  Modem  History,  Poetry,  and  Foreign 
Languages.  We  ought  not,  indeed,  to  be  surprized  at 
this  superiority,  if  we  recollect  that  Fox  was  above  ten 
years  older  than  Pitt ;  that  he  nourished  a  much 
stronger  natural  attachment  to  polite  letters,  and  en- 
joyed infinitely  more  leisure  for  its  indulgence.  Pitt, 
as  far  as  my  means  of  information  ever  enabled  me  to 
form  a  judgment,  possessed  comparatively  small  general 
acquaintance  with  those  Authors,  which  furnished  the 
Libraries  of  Men  of  Taste  and  Science.  How  indeed, 
we  may  ask,  should  he  ever  have  attained  it  ?  Several 
months  before  he  compleated  his  twenty  second  year,  he 
found  himself  with  a  very  slender  fortune,  placed  in  the 
House  of  Commons,  which  opened  to  his  aspiring  and 
ambitious  mind,  the  most  brilliant  prospects  of  Eleva- 
tion. From  that  period,  if  we  except  the  Prorogation 
of  1781 ;— for  in  1782,  he  was  Chancellor  of  the  Ex- 
chequer, and  in  1783  he  visited  the  Continent ; — what 
portion  of  time  could  he  devote  to  literary  pursuits  or 
accomplishment?  Near  seven  years  later  than  the 
period  of  which  I  speak,  in  the  Autumn  of  the  year 
1790,  when  it  was  expected  that  a  rupture  would  have 
taken  place  between  the  Crowns  of  Great  Britain  and 
Spain,  respecting  the  affair  of  Nootka  Sound ;  con- 
versing with  him  on  the  subject  of  the  Spanish 
Possessions  lying  along  the  Shore  of  the  Pacific  Ocean, 
he  owned  that  he  not  only  never  had  read,  but,  he 
assured  me,  he  never  had  heard  of  Commodore  Byron's 
Narrative  of  his  Shipwreck  in  the  "Wager,""  on  the 
Coast  of  Patagonia:  —  a  Book  to  be  found  in  every 
Circulating  Library.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  the 
rapidity  and  facility  with  which  he  acquired,  digested, 
and  converted  to  purposes  of  utility,  his  knowledge, 

632 


1783.]  TRIBUNE  AND  CONSUL 

was  altogether  wonderful.  With  the  French  Language 
he  was  grammatically  conversant ;  but,  at  twenty-five, 
he  spoke  it  imperfectly,  and  wrote  in  it  without  free- 
dom or  facility,  though  he  subsequently  improved  in 
these  particulars.  I  repeat  it,  as  a  Secretary  of  State 
for  the  Foreign  Department,  he  could  have  sustained 
no  competition  with  Fox,  in  all  the  branches  of  solid, 
or  of  ornamental  Attainment,  that  qualify  for  such  a 
Situation. 

It  is  not  easy  to  decide  relative  to  their  respective 
superiority  in  Eloquence.  Fox's  Oratory  was  more 
impassioned :  Pitt's  could  boast  greater  correctness  of 
diction.  The  former  exhibited,  while  speaking,  all  the 
Tribunitian  rage :  the  latter  displayed  the  Consular 
dignity.  But,  it  must  not  be  forgotten  that  the  one 
commonly  attacked,  while  the  other  generally  defended ; 
and  it  is  more  easy  to  impugn  or  to  censure,  than  to 
justify,  Measures  of  State.  Had  they  changed  positions 
in  the  House,  the  character  of  their  Speeches  would 
doubtless  have  taken  a  tinge,  though  it  would  not  have 
been  radically  altered,  by  such  a  variation  in  their 
political  Destiny.  From  Fox's  finest  specimens  of 
Oratory,  much,  as  it  appeared  to  me,  might  have  been 
taken  away,  without  injuring  the  effect,  or  maiming  the 
conclusion.  To  Pitt's  Speeches  nothing  seemed  wanting, 
yet  was  there  no  redundancy.  He  seemed,  as  by  in- 
tuition, to  hit  the  precise  point,  where,  having  attained 
his  object,  as  far  as  Eloquence  could  effect  it,  he  sat 
down.  This  distinctive  and  opposite  Characteristic  of 
the  two  men,  arose,  partly  at  least,  from  an  opinion  or 
principle  which  Fox  had  adopted.  He  calculated,  that 
one  third  of  his  Audience  was  always  either  absent,  or 
at  Dinner,  or  asleep ;  and  he  therefore  usually  made  a 
short  resumption  or  Epitome  of  his  Arguments,  for  the 
benefit  of  this  part  of  the  Members.  So  that,  after 
speaking  at  great  length,  and  sometimes  apparently 
summing  up,  as  if  about  to  conclude ;  whenever  he  saw 

633 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [1783. 

a  considerable  influx  of  Attendance,  he  began  anew : 
regardless  of  the  impatience  manifested  on  the  part  of 
those,  whose  attention  was  already  exhausted  by  long 
exertion.  Pitt  never  condescended  to  avail  himself  of 
such  a  practice ;  neither  lengthening  his  Speeches,  nor 
abbreviating  them,  from  any  considerations  except  the 
necessity  of  fully  developing  his  Ideas.  Indeed,  so  well 
was  the  relative  proportion  of  time  generally  taken  up 
by  the  two  Speakers,  known  to  the  old  Members,  that 
they  calculated,  whenever  Fox  was  three  hours  on  his 
legs,  Pitt  replied  in  two.  In  all  the  corporeal  part  of 
Oratory,  he  observed  likewise  more  moderation  and 
measure  than  Fox;  who  on  great  occasions,  seemed 
like  the  Pythian  Priestess,  "  to  labour  with  ttf  inspiring 
God,"  and  to  dissolve  in  floods  of  Perspiration.  The 
Minister,  it  is  true,  became  sometimes  warmed  with  his 
subject,  and  had  occasionally  recourse  to  his  Handker- 
chief: but,  rather  in  order  to  take  Breath,  or  to  recall 
his  thoughts,  by  a  momentary  pause,  than  from  physical 
Agitation. 

A  vital  defect  in  Pitt's  composition  as  a  Man,  must 
be  esteemed  his  want  of  Economy :  it  was  hereditary, 
constitutional,  and  insurmountable.  The  great  Earl 
of  Chatham,  his  father,  had  to  contend  with  the  same 
deficiency ;  and  never  understood,  as  Lord  Holland  had 
done,  the  art  of  accumulating  a  Fortune.  But,  the  first 
Mr.  Pitt,  besides  the  lucrative  Sinecure  of  the  Privy 
Seal,  which  he  held  during  several  years,  enjoyed  the 
Estate  of  Burton  Pynsent  in  the  County  of  Somerset, 
bequeathed  to  him  by  Sir  William  Pynsent,  together 
with  a  Pension  of  three  thousand  Pounds  a  year,  be- 
stowed on  him  by  the  Crown.  None  of  these  possessions 
however  descended  to  his  second  son,  whose  whole  patri- 
monial inheritance  amounted,  I  believe,  only  to  five 
thousand  Pounds ;  and  it  never  received  any  ostensible 
augmentation,  except  a  Legacy  of  three  thousand  Pounds, 
bequeathed  him  in  October,  1787,  by  the  Duke  of  Rut- 

634 


1783.]  DISINTERESTED  CONDUCT 

land.  We  may  therefore  be  enabled,  with  these  Data, 
to  form  some  idea  of  the  Elevation  of  Pitt's  mind,  his 
contempt  of  Money,  and  his  disregard  of  every  selfish 
or  interested  object ;  when,  on  Sir  Edward  Walpole's 
decease  in  January,  1784,  he  disdained  to  take  the 
Clerkship  of  the  Pells  in  the  Exchequer,  though,  as 
the  Head  of  that  Department,  he  might  have  conferred 
it  on  himself;  though  Lord  Thurlow  pressed  him  not 
to  reject  such  a  fair  occasion  of  rendering  himself  inde- 
pendant ;  and  though  every  man  in  the  kingdom  must 
have  approved  the  act,  on  an  impartial  survey  of  his 
situation.  For  he  might  not  have  retained  his  official 
Employments,  a  single  Week.  Perhaps  it  is  to  be  re- 
gretted that  he  should  have  made  such  a  sacrifice  of 
private  interest,  to  Glory :  but  it  operated  throughout 
his  whole  life,  and  even  beyond  the  Grave,  by  its  effect 
on  Parliament  and  on  the  Nation.  Antiquity  cannot 
exhibit  any  more  shining  instance  of  disinterestedness, 
either  drawn  from  Theban  and  Athenian  Story,  or  from 
the  Consular  Ages  of  Rome.  JuvenaPs  observation  on 
human  nature, 

"  Quis  enim  virtutem  amplectitur  ipsam, 
"  Prsemia  si  tollas  ?  " 

did  not  seem  to  apply  to  Pitt.  Possibly,  however,  on 
a  deep  Estimate,  he  found  even  his  pecuniary  recompense 
in  this  noble  act  of  renunciation.  The  House  of 
Commons  would  hardly  have  bestowed  the  posthumous 
marks  of  solid  admiration  and  respect,  which  they  voted 
in  1806,  on  any  Minister  who  had  enjoyed,  during  two 
and  twenty  years,  a  sinecure  Place  of  three  thousand 
Pounds  per  Annum,  in  addition  to  his  Official  Emolu- 
ments. 

The  Salaries  annexed  to  the  place  of  First  Lord  of 
the  Treasury  and  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer,  even 
though  unaided  by  any  private  Fortune,  yet  undoubtedly, 
with  prudent  management,  might  have  been  found 

635 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [1783. 


adequate  to  Pitt's  expenditure.  But,  unsupported  by 
Economy,  they  proved  wholly  insufficient  for  the  purpose. 
When  he  was  appointed  First  Minister,  his  youngest 
sister,  Lady  Harriet  Pitt,  resided  with  him,  and  super- 
intended his  Establishment  in  Downing  Street.  She 
possessed,  in  addition  to  other  eminent  intellectual 
endowments,  that  quality  which  her  father  and  brother 
wanted ;  and  so  long  as  she  personally  controled  his 
domestic  affairs,  I  have  been  assured  that  they  were 
restrained  within  very  reasonable  limits.  Unfortunately 
for  him,  in  September,  1785,  within  two  years  after  he 
came  into  power,  Lady  Harriet  gave  her  hand  to  Mr. 
Elliot,  who  became  Lord  Elliot  on  his  father's  Demise ; 
and  subsequent  to  her  marriage,  Pitt's  concerns  fell  into 
the  utmost  disorder.  Debts  accumulated ;  and  it  was 
commonly  asserted,  that  the  Collectors  of  the  Taxes 
found  more  difficulty  in  levying  them  from  the  Chancellor 
of  the  Exchequer,  than  from  almost  any  other  Inhabitant 
of  Westminster.  Even  Tradesmen's  Bills  were  said  to 
be  frequently  paid,  not  in  money,  but,  by  ordering  new 
articles,  and  thus  augmenting  the  pressure  of  the  evil 
itself. 

It  was  not  till  1792,  on  the  Earl  of  Guildford's 
Decease,  that  Pitt  went  into  the  Closet,  and  asked  of 
His  Majesty  the  place  of  Lord  Warden  of  the  Cinque 
Ports,  which  the  King  immediately  conferred  on  him, 
though  it  had  been  previously  intended  by  the  Sovereign, 
as  I  know,  for  the  late  Duke  of  Dorset.  The  Salary, 
which  in  Mr.  Pitt's  person  was  rendered  nominally 
Three  thousand  five  hundred  Pounds  a  year,  might 
have  formed  a  very  handsome  addition  to  his  income : 
but,  the  necessary  deductions  of  many  kinds  to  be  made 
from  that  sum ;  the  expences  which  he  incurred  in 
altering  or  embellishing  Walmer  Castle;  and  more 
than  both,  his  facility  or  liberality  in  granting  small 
Pensions  to  invalided  or  aged  Artificers,  of  various 
descriptions,  belonging  to  the  Cinque  Ports ; — these 

636 


1783.]        PITT'S  "BURTHEN  OF  DEBT" 

combined  causes  reduced  the  real  receipt  below  half  its 
ostensible  amount.  Yet  when  he  went  out  of  Office  in 
1801,  loaded  with  Debts,  he  possessed  no  other  inde- 
pendant  means  of  subsistence.  It  is  indeed  true,  that 
as  early  as  1790,  he  had  been  elected  Master  of  the 
Trinity  House;  but  I  have  always  considered  that 
Appointment,  though  honourable,  as  unproductive  of 
any  pecuniary  Emolument.  When  we  reflect  on  the 
circumstances  here  enumerated,  we  may  regret,  but  we 
cannot  wonder,  that  after  holding  the  Reins  of  Govern- 
ment, almost  his  whole  life ;  and  conferring  so  many 
Dignities,  as  well  as  Offices,  during  near  nineteen  years ; 
he  should  die  not  only  poor,  but  oppressed  under  a 
Burthen  of  Debt.  Yet  must  we  distinguish  between 
a  sort  of  virtuous,  or  at  least  venial  Poverty,  if  I  may 
so  express  myself,  caused  by  want  of  Economy,  in  a 
man  who  devoted  his  exertions  to  the  Public  Service ; 
and  Fox's  similar  wants,  produced  by  a  rage  for  Play, 
which  not  only  reduced  him  from  Affluence  to  a  state 
of  Dereliction,  but  compelled  him  to  accept  an  elemo- 
synary  contribution  from  his  political  and  personal 
Friends,  in  order  to  furnish  him  with  the  means  of  sub- 
sistence. It  is  unnecessary  to  contrast  the  two  positions, 
which  undoubtedly  excite  in  our  minds  very  opposite 
sensations,  and  awaken  widely  different  degrees  of  moral 
censure  or  disapprobation. 

Pitt's  great  superiority  to  his  Antagonist,  and  his 
consequent  ministerial  success,  flowed  from  two  causes. 
The  first  was  his  admirable  Judgement.  That  intelli- 
gence restrained  his  parliamentary  exertions  during  the 
American  War,  and  induced  him,  while  heaping  accu- 
sations on  the  Ministers,  to  spare  the  King.  I  know 
that  he  received  a  hint,  soon  after  he  began  to  speak  in 
the  House  of  Commons,  warning  him  to  avoid  that  rock 
on  which  Fox  had  split,  and  to  be  cautious  how  he 
mentioned,  or  alluded  to,  the  Royal  Name.  He  did 
not  despise  the  advice.  The  same  superior  intelligence 

637 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [i783. 

impelled  him,  when  Lord  North  was  driven  from  Power, 
to  refuse  Office  under  an  Administration,  which,  he 
foresaw,  from  its  component  materials,  could  only  be 
of  short  duration.  It  dictated  to  him  to  take  the 
Chancellorship  of  the  Exchequer  under  Lord  Shelburne ; 
but  it  equally  suggested  to  him  the  impracticability  of 
retaining  the  situation  of  First  Minister,  when  pressed 
by  His  Majesty  in  March,  1783,  to  assume  that  high 
Office,  after  the  Earl  of  Shelburne's  Resignation.  In 
renouncing  a  situation  so  flattering  to  his  pride  and 
his  ambition,  though  it  lay  within  his  grasp,  he  ex- 
hibited, when  not  twenty-four,  the  deepest  and  calmest 
discernment :  for,  if  he  had  yielded  to  the  wishes  of 
the  Sovereign,  it  seems  certain  that  he  could  not  have 
maintained  himself  in  power  against  Fox  and  Lord 
North,  who  had  not  then  committed  any  other  Act 
calculated  to  excite  the  public  condemnation,  except 
the  mere  approximation  of  their  respective  Parliamen- 
tary Adherents,  and  their  own  political  union.  Pitt, 
with  consummate  Judgement,  waited  till  the  Coalition 
had  brought  forward  the  "  East  India  Bill,"  and  could 
no  longer  recede,  in  order  to  profit  of  their  indiscretion. 
He  accepted  in  December,  the  Employment,  which,  nine 
Months  earlier,  he  had  wisely  declined ;  exhibiting,  on 
both  occasions,  equal  ability :  but  he  never  associated 
Lord  Shelburne  to  his  power,  nor  allowed  him  a  place 
in  the  Cabinet.  His  whole  conduct,  while  struggling 
against  Fox's  Majority  in  the  House  of  Commons, 
during  successive  Months  formed  the  triumph  of 
paramount  capacity,  over  imprudence  and  rapacious 
Precipitation.  If  we  were  to  pursue  the  comparison 
lower  in  Pitt's  life,  we  should  trace  the  same  effects 
resulting  from  similar  causes,  during  the  critical  con- 
flict between  him  and  Fox,  in  the  Winter  of  1788 ; 
when  the  latter,  instead  of  advising  the  Heir  Apparent 
to  accept  the  Regency  under  any  conditions,  however 
severe,  on  which  Parliament  might  think  proper  to 

638 


1783.]    PITT'S  "RECTITUDE  OF  INTENTION" 

confer  it  during  the  King's  malady,  laid  claim  to  it  as 
a  matter  of  right.  The  Minister  instantly  perceived, 
and  fastened  like  an  Eagle,  on  his  adversary's  error; 
which,  by  producing  delay,  happily  allowed  time  for 
His  Majesty's  Recovery,  and  of  course  perpetuated  the 
duration  of  Pitt's  power. 

The  second  point  that  gave  him  an  ascendant  over 
Fox,  arose  from  the  correctness  of  his  deportment,  and 
regularity  of  life.  This  circumstance,  which,  under 
Charles  the  Second,  would  have  counted  for  little  in  the 
scale,  operated  with  decisive  effect  under  a  Prince  such 
as  George  the  Third.  Nor  did  it  produce  less  beneficial 
results  with  the  people  at  large.  Some  internal 
Guarantee,  drawn  from  moral  Character,  high  In- 
tegrity, and  indisputable  Rectitude  of  Intention,  seemed 
indeed  necessary,  in  order  to  justify  to  the  Nation,  the 
choice  of  the  Sovereign,  when  entrusting  to  a  young 
Man,  destitute  of  Property,  the  Finances  and  Concerns 
of  an  Empire,  reduced  by  a  long  and  disastrous  War, 
to  a  state  of  great  depression.  Pitt  had  in  fact  no 
other  stake  to  deposit,  unless  we  take  into  our  calcula- 
tion, his  possible  reversion  of  the  Earldom  of  Chatham. 
He  had  likewise  to  contend  with  another  deficiency. 
During  the  whole  course  of  the  eighteenth  Century, 
and  I  believe  I  may  say,  since  the  Accession  of 
Elizabeth,  he  is  the  only  English  First  Minister  who 
lived  and  died  in  a  state  of  Celibacy.  He  was  not 
therefore  attached  to  the  Commonwealth  by  those 
endearing  ties,  which  blend  the  Statesman,  with  the 
Husband  and  the  Father;  thus  giving  a  species  of 
compound  security  for  good  conduct,  to  the  Country. 
Mr.  Pelham,  who  presided  over  the  Councils  of  Great 
Britain  during  ten  years,  under  George  the  Second,  was, 
it  is  true,  only  a  younger  Son  of  a  Noble  House ;  but 
his  brother,  the  Duke  of  Newcastle,  might  be  justly 
considered  as  one  of  the  greatest  Subjects  in  Fortune, 
as  well  as  in  Rank,  to  be  found  within  the  Kingdom. 

639 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [1783. 

Mr.  Pelham,  who  married  a  daughter  of  the  Duke 
of  Rutland,  had  likewise  by  her  a  numerous  family, 
and  possessed  in  his  own  person,  considerable  landed 
property. 

Even  Fox,  though  he  remained  long  unmarried,  yet 
finally  entered  into  that  state ;  and  he  aspired  to  have 
done  it  much  earlier  in  life,  if  his  efforts  for  the  purpose 
had  not  proved  unsuccessful.  During  the  early  part  of 
Hastings's  Trial,  in  1787,  he  raised  his  eyes  and  hopes 
to  the  Duke  of  Newcastle's  Box  in  Westminster  Hall, 
where  usually  sat  Miss  Pulteney,  afterwards  created  by 
Pitt,  Countess  of  Bath  in  her  own  right ;  then  justly 
esteemed  one  of  the  greatest  Heiresses  in  the  Kingdom. 
After  exhibiting  his  powers  of  Oratory,  as  a  public 
Man,  in  the  Manager's  Box  below,  he  sometimes  as- 
cended in  his  private  capacity,  to  try  the  effect  of  his 
Eloquence  under  the  character  of  a  Lover.  All  his 
Friends  aided  a  cause,  which,  by  rendering  their  Chief 
independant  in  his  fortune,  would  have  healed  the 
wounds  inflicted  by  his  early  indiscretion.  General 
Fitzpatrick  usually  kept  a  place  for  him  near  the  Lady ; 
and  for  some  time  the  Courtship  assumed  so  aus- 
picious an  appearance,  that  I  remember,  Hare,  when 
speculating  on  the  probable  issue  of  the  marriage,  said 
that  "  they  would  inevitably  be  Duns,  with  Black  Manes 
"  and  Tails : "  alluding  to  the  Lady's  fair  Complexion 
and  red  Hair,  contrasted  with  Fox's  dark  hue.  The 
affair  nevertheless  terminated  without  success.  Pitt, 
though,  at  different  periods  of  his  life,  he  distinguished 
certain  Ladies,  some  of  whom  I  could  name,  by  marks  of 
predilection  ;  and  in  one  instance  seemed  even  to  meditate 
Marriage,  yet  never  persisted  in  the  attempt :  but  his 
Name,  Descent,  Abilities,  and  private  Character,  sur- 
mounted every  impediment  to  his  elevation.  Fox  could 
no  more  have  been  placed  at  the  head  of  the  Treasury, 
than  Dean  Swift  could  have  been  made  Archbishop  of 
Canterbury;  or  than  Lord  Bolingbroke  under  Queen 

640 


1783.]          AN  AWKWARD  MAJORITY 

Anne,  or  the  Duke  of  Wharton  under  George  the  First, 
could  have  filled  the  office  of  First  Minister.  He 
wanted  like  them,  an  essential  quality;  high  moral 
Character.  Of  this  deficiency  he  was,  himself,  sensible, 
and  was  said  to  have  once  expressed  his  conviction  of  it, 
in  laconic,  but  forcible  terms. 

While  Pitt  unquestionably  anticipated  the  probable 
necessity  of  ultimately  recurring  to  the  measure  of 
calling  together  a  new  House  of  Commons ;  he  by  no 
means  disdained  to  avail  himself  of  all  the  means  and 
modes  that  could  be  suggested,  for  diminishing,  and  if 
possible,  annihilating  the  majority,  to  which  Fox  owed 
his  actual  consequence.  Every  effort  was  exerted  by 
himself,  and  by  his  friends,  in  order  to  accomplish  that 
point.  The  Recess,  limited  to  little  more  than  a  fort- 
night, allowed  him  only  a  very  short  space  for  exertion ; 
and  the  numbers  which  had  hitherto  supported  the 
Coalition,  during  the  progress  of  the  "  East  India  Bill " 
through  the  House,  in  every  stage,  generally  amounted 
to  double,  or  almost  double  the  Votes  on  the  opposite 
side.  Two  hundred  and  seventeen  Members  had  voted 
for  its  Commitment ;  a  great  proportion  in  an  Assembly, 
then  composed  only  of  five  hundred  and  fifty-eight 
persons.  To  reduce  such  a  superiority,  first  to  some- 
thing approaching  an  equality,  and  finally  to  a 
Minority,  might  well  seem  a  hopeless  undertaking; 
even  admitting  all  the  venality,  want  of  principle,  or 
tergiversation,  with  which  that  Assembly  has  been  so 
often  reproached.  Much  more  success  was,  however, 
expected  from  applications  addressed  to  the  part  of  the 
Coalition  which  might  be  considered  as  holding  to  Lord 
North;  than  from  the  adherents  of  the  Rockingham 
Party,  or  among  the  personal  supporters  and  friends  of 
Fox.  Many  of  Lord  North's  political  connexions,  who 
had  in  fact  voted  with  him  on  the  India  Bill,  under  a 
conviction  of  the  Measure  itself  having  obtained  the 
consent  of  the  Crown  ;  were  disposed  to  withdraw  their 

641  41 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [i78». 

support,  if  not  to  transfer  their  services,  on  the  discovery 
of  their  mistake.  There  existed  only  three  ways  by 
which  Fox's  majority  might  be  reduced.  In  consequence 
of  the  attendance  of  new  Members  who  had  not  hitherto 
taken  any  part.  By  the  future  non-attendance  of  those 
who  had  supported  the  Coalition  up  to  the  present 
time ;  and  lastly,  by  desertion  from  the  enemy's  ranks, 
over  to  those  of  the  new  Administration.  The  latter 
Votes,  as  counting  double,  of  course  became  most  sought 
after  and  valued. 

A  separation  had,  indeed,  already  taken  place  among 
Lord  North's  immediate  personal  followers.  Of  the 
two  former  Secretaries  of  the  Treasury,  Sir  Grey  Cooper 
continued  to  support  him  invariably :  but  Robinson, 
conceiving  himself  absolved  from  any  Obligation  to 
accompany  his  antient  Principal,  through  all  the  con- 
sequences of  his  new  political  Alliances,  quitted  alto- 
gether that  Party.  No  man  in  the  House  of  Commons, 
as  I  have  had  Occasion  to  remark,  knew  so  much  of  its 
original  Composition ;  the  means  by  which  every  in- 
dividual attained  his  Seat ;  and  in  many  instances,  how 
far,  and  through  what  channels,  he  might  prove  accessible. 
Though  Mr.  Pitt  made  the  fifth  First  Minister,  whom 
that  Parliament  had  beheld  in  the  short  space  of  little 
more  than  twenty-one  Months ;  yet  the  individual 
Members  composing  the  Lower  House,  had  undergone 
only  a  very  trifling  variation,  since  the  general  Election. 
Recourse  was  therefore  had  to  Robinson,  under  the 
present  delicate  and  arduous  circumstances  of  public 
Affairs,  in  order  to  obtain  his  active  exertions  for 
Government.  He  complied  with  the  application,  and 
unquestionably  rendered  very  essential  service.  I  have 
always  considered  the  Earldom  of  Abergavenny,  as  the 
remuneration  given  for  that  assistance.  Robinson's 
only  daughter  and  child,  had  been  married  some  years 
before,  to  the  Honorable  Henry  Neville,  eldest  son  of 
Lord  Abergavenny ;  who  was  placed  at  the  head  of  the 

642 


1783.J     PARLIAMENTARY  CORRUPTION 

list  of  Earls,  created  by  Pitt,  on  the  llth  of  May,  1784, 
not  five  months  after  the  facts  took  place,  under  our 
discussion. 

While  I  am  engaged  on  the  Subject  of  the  House  ot 
Commons,  and  of  the  Influence  or  Corruption  by  which 
it  has  been  always  managed,  particularly  during  the 
last,  and  the  present  Reign  ;  I  shall  relate  some  Particu- 
lars, which  cannot  perhaps  be  introduced  with  more 
Propriety  than  in  this  Place.  We  may  see  in  the 
"  Memoirs  of  Prince  Eugene  of  Savoy,"  what  Influence 
he  attributes  to  the  "  Presents  of  Champagne  and 
"  Burgundy  "  made  by  Marshal  Tallard,  then  a  Prisoner 
of  War  in  England,  to  "  Right  Honourable  Members 
"  of  Parliament."  Nay,  the  Prince  asserts  positively, 
that  in  the  same  Year,  1711,  when  he  came  over  in 
Person  to  London,  with  the  avowed  object  of  retaining, 
if  possible,  Queen  Anne  and  her  Ministers  in  the  Grand 
Alliance  against  France;  he  had  recourse,  himself,  to 
Corruption.  "  Jefa  des  Presens"  says  he,  "  car  on  pent 
"  acheter  beaucoup  en  Angleterre"  If  such  constituted 
the  ordinary  practice  under  the  last  Princess  of  the 
Stuart  Line,  at  a  Time  that  Parliaments  were  not 
septennial,  but  only  triennial ;  we  may  be  quite  assured, 
that  they  did  not  become  more  virtuous  after  the  Acces- 
sion of  the  reigning  Family,  when  the  House  of  Commons 
was  elected  for  seven  Years. 

Proofs  of  the  Venality  practised  by  Sir  Robert 
Walpole,  during  the  whole  course  of  his  long  Ad- 
ministration, it  seems  unnecessary  to  produce,  as  that 
Minister  did  not  disclaim  or  resent  the  Imputation. 
Nor  did  his  political  Adversaries  disdain,  whatever 
Professions  of  public  Virtue  they  might  make,  to  have 
Recourse  to  the  same  unworthy  Expedients,  in  order  to 
effect  his  Removal.  We  have  the  authority  of  a  Member 
of  their  own  Body,  for  the  Fact.  "Don  Carlos," 
(Frederick,  Prince  of  Wales,)  says  Mr.  Glover  in  his 
"  Memoirs,"  recently  published,  "  told  me,  that  it  cost 

643 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [1783. 

"  him  Twelve  thousand  Pounds  in  Corruption,  particu- 
"  larly  among  the  Tories,  to  carry  the  Westminster  and 
"  Chippenham  Elections  in  1742,  and  other  Points, 
"  which  compelled  Lord  Orford,  at  that  Time  Sir 
"  Robert  Walpole,  to  quit  the  House  of  Commons." 
It  is  difficult  to  adduce  more  satisfactory  and  unim- 
peachable Proof  of  any  Fact,  as  Glover  was  a  man  of 
strict  Veracity.  Neither  was  Mr.  Pelham,  who,  after 
a  short  Interval  succeeded  Sir  Robert,  and  who  held 
his  situation  near  eleven  Years ;  though  he  may  be 
justly  esteemed  one  of  the  most  upright  Statesmen 
who  presided  in  the  Councils  of  George  the  Second ; 
less  liable  to  the  Accusation  of  corrupting  Parliament, 
than  his  Predecessor. 

A  friend  of  mine,  a  Man  of  Rank  and  high  Character, 
whom  I  do  not  name,  because,  being  still  alive,  I  consider 
myself  not  at  liberty  to  divulge  it ;  but,  whose  Name 
would  at  once  stamp  the  Veracity  and  Authenticity  of 
whatever  he  relates ;  has  frequently  assured  me,  that 
about  the  Year  1767,  he  was  personally  acquainted 
with  Roberts,  who  had  been  Secretary  of  the  Treasury 
under  Mr.  Pelham ;  but  who  was  then  old,  infirm,  and 
near  his  End.  He  lies  buried  in  Westminster  Abbey, 
in  Poets'  Corner,  where  his  Epitaph  describes  him,  as 
"  the  most  faithful  Secretary  of  the  Right  Honourable 
"  Henry  Pelham."  This  Gentleman  conversing  with 
Roberts,  upon  the  Events  of  those  Times  when  he  held 
a  place  under  Administration,  and  particularly  on  the 
Manner  in  which  the  House  of  Commons  was  then 
managed ;  Roberts  avowed  without  Reserve,  that  while 
he  remained  at  the  Treasury,  there  were  a  number  of 
Members  who  regularly  received  from  him  their  Pay- 
ment or  Stipend,  at  the  end  of  every  Session,  in  Bank 
Notes.  The  Sums,  which  varied  according  to  the  Merits, 
Ability,  and  Attendance  of  the  respective  Individuals, 
amounted  usually  from  Five  Hundred  Pounds,  to  Eight 
Hundred  Pounds,  per  Annum.  "  This  Largess  I  dis- 

644 


1783.1  BURNING  A  REGISTER 

"  tributed,"  added  Roberts,  "  in  the  Court  of  Requests, 
"  on  the  day  of  the  Prorogation  of  Parliament.  I  took 
"  my  stand  there ;  and  as  the  Gentlemen  passed  me,  in 
"  going  to,  or  returning  from  the  House,  I  conveyed 
"  the  Money,  in  a  squeeze  of  the  hand.  Whatever 
"  person  received  the  Ministerial  Bounty  in  the  manner 
"  thus  related,  I  entered  his  name  in  a  Book,  which  was 
"  preserved  in  the  deepest  secresy ;  it  being  never  in- 
"  spected  by  any  one,  except  the  King  and  Mr.  Pelham. 
"  On  the  decease  of  that  Minister  in  1754,  his  Brother 
"  the  Duke  of  Newcastle,  Mr.  Fox,  afterwards  Lord 
"  Holland,  and  others  of  the  Cabinet,  who  succeeded  to 
"  Power ;  anxious  to  obtain  an  accurate  Knowledge  of 
"  the  private  State  of  the  House  of  Commons,  and 
"  particularly  to  ascertain  the  Names  of  all  the  In- 
"  dividuals  who  received  Money  during  Mr.  Pelhaufs 
"  Life,  applied  to  me  for  Information.  They  further 
"  demanded  of  me  to  surrender  the  Book,  in  which,  as 
"  they  knew,  I  was  accustomed  to  enter  the  above 
"  Particulars.  Conceiving  a  Compliance  to  be  dis- 
"  honorable,  I  peremptorily  refused  to  deliver  it  up, 
"  except  by  the  King's  express  command,  and  to  His 
"  Majesty  in  person.  In  consequence  of  my  refusal, 
"  they  acquainted  the  King  of  the  circumstance,  who 
"  sent  for  me  to  St.  James's,  where  I  was  introduced  into 
"  the  Closet ;  more  than  one  of  the  above  mentioned 
"  Ministers  being  present.  George  the  Second  ordered 
"  me  to  return  him  the  Book  in  question,  with  which 
"  injunction  I  immediately  complied.  At  the  same 
"  time  taking  the  Poker  in  his  hand,  he  put  it  into  the 
"  fire,  made  it  red  hot,  and  then,  while  we  stood  round 
"  him,  he  thrust  the  Book  into  the  flames,  where  it  was 
"  immediately  reduced  to  ashes.  He  considered  it  in 
"  fact,  as  too  sacred  and  confidential  a  Register,  to  be 
"  thus  transferred  over  to  the  new  Ministers,  and  as 
"  having  become  extinct  with  the  Administration  of 
"  Mr.  Pelham." 

645 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [ms. 

It  is  unquestionable  that  the  Duke  of  Newcastle, 
though  he  failed  in  getting  possession  of  his  Brother's 
secret  information,  in  consequence  of  Roberts's  firm- 
ness; yet  pursued  the  same  mode  of  management,  on 
becoming,  himself,  First  Lord  of  the  Treasury.  Under 
Lord  Bute's  Government,  when,  from  a  variety  of 
causes,  a  violent  Opposition  in  Parliament  arose,  which 
required  the  whole  power  of  Ministry  to  stem,  similar 
practices  were  carried  to  a  greater  length.  John  Ross 
Mackay,  who  had  been  private  Secretary  to  the  Earl 
of  Bute,  and  afterwards,  during  seventeen  years  was 
Treasurer  of  the  Ordnance ;  a  man  with  whom  I  was 
personally  acquainted  ;  frequently  avowed  the  fact.  He 
lived  to  a  very  advanced  age,  sat  in  several  Parliaments, 
and  only  died,  I  believe,  in  1796.  A  Gentleman  of 
high  professional  rank,  and  of  unimpeached  veracity, 
told  me,  that  dining  at  the  late  Earl  of  Besborough's 
in  Cavendish  Square,  in  the  year  1790,  where  only  four 
persons  were  present,  including  himself;  Ross  Mackay, 
who  was  one  of  the  number,  gave  them  the  most  ample 
information  upon  this  subject.  Lord  Besborough  having 
called,  after  Dinner,  for  a  Bottle  of  excellent  Champagne, 
of  which  wine  Mackay  was  fond ;  and  the  conversation 
accidentally  turning  on  the  means  of  governing  the 
House  of  Commons,  Mackay  said  that  "  Money  formed, 
"  after  all,  the  only  effectual  and  certain  method." 
"The  Peace  of  1763,"  continued  he,  "was  carried 
"  through  and  approved  by  a  pecuniary  distribution. 
"  Nothing  else  could  have  surmounted  the  difficulty. 
"  I  was,  myself,  the  channel  through  which  the  money 
"  passed.  With  my  own  hand  I  secured  above  one  hundred 
"  and  twenty  Votes,  on  that  vital  question  to  Ministers. 
"  Eighty  thousand  Pounds  were  set  apart  for  the  pur- 
"  pose.  Forty  Members  of  the  House  of  Commons 
"  received  from  me,  a  thousand  Pounds  each.  To  eighty 
"  others,  I  paid  five  hundred  Pounds  apiece."  Mackay 
afterwards  confirmed  more  than  once,  this  fact,  to  the 

646 


1783.]  WILKES'  LETTER 

Gentleman  above  mentioned,  who  related  it  to  me. 
He  added,  that  Lord  Besborough  appeared,  himself, 
so  sensible  of  the  imprudence,  as  well  as  impropriety  of 
the  avowal  made  by  Mackay,  at  his  Table ;  that  His 
Lordship  sent  to  him,  and  to  the  fourth  person  who 
had  been  present  on  the  occasion,  next  morning,  to 
entreat  of  them,  on  no  account  to  divulge  it  during 
Mackay's  life. 

Wilkes  was  however  perfectly  well  instructed  on  the 
subject,  and  made  no  secret  of  his  information,  even  at 
the  time  when  the  Treaty  of  Fontainbleau  was  a  recent 
transaction.  In  his  memorable  Letter  addressed  from 
"Paris,  22d  October,  1764,"  to  the  Electors  of  Ayles- 
bury,  he  says,  "  I  will  not  compliment  the  present 
"  profligate  Majority  in  the  House  of  Commons,  so  far 
"  as  to  say,  they  were  so  well  informed,  that  they  knew 
"  the  exact  truth  of  every  assertion  in  the  '  North 
"  Briton,'  No.  45.  One  particular,  however,  came  with- 
"  in  their  knowledge ;  the  means  by  which  it  is  hinted 
"  that  the  entire  Approbation  of  Parliament,  even  of  the 
"  Preliminary  Articles  of  the  late  inglorious  Peace,  was 
"  obtained ;  and  the  previous  step  to  the  obtaining 
"  that  entire  Approbation,  the  large  Debt  contracted  on 
"  the  Civil  List.  They  knew  this  Assertion  was  ex- 
"  tremely  true,  and  I  am  as  ready  to  own  that  it  was 
"  extremely  scandalous?  It  is  impossible  to  convey  a 
charge  of  such  a  nature,  in  less  equivocal  or  ambiguous 
language. 

Relative  to  the  three  successive  Administrations  of 
George  Grenville,  the  Marquis  of  Rockingham,  and  the 
Duke  of  Grafton,  which  comprized  the  period  of  time 
between  April  1763,  and  January,  1770,  I  can  state 
nothing  from  my  own  personal  knowledge.  Bradshaw 
conducted  that  Department,  under  the  Duke  of  Grafton. 
The  same  System  certainly  continued  during  the  period 
of  the  American  War,  when  Robinson,  and  under  him, 
Brummell,  were  its  Agents.  I  incline  nevertheless  to 

647 


WRAXALKS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [1783. 

doubt  whether,  towards  the  termination  of  Lord  North's 
Ministry,  these  practices  subsisted  in  all  their  force; 
by  which  I  mean  to  say,  that  I  question  whether  any 
individual  Member  of  the  House  of  Commons,  was  paid 
for  his  vote  and  support  in  Bank  notes,  as  had  been 
done  under  Walpole,  Pelham,  and  most,  if  not  all  their 
Successors,  down  to  that  time.  More  refinement  had 
insensibly  been  introduced  into  the  distribution  of 
Gratifications ;  which  were  conveyed  in  oblique  shapes, 
such  as  Lottery  Tickets,  Scrip,  Jobs,  Contracts,  and 
other  beneficial  forms,  by  which  the  Majority  was  kept 
together,  in  defiance  of  a  most  unfortunate,  if  not  an 
ill  conducted  war.  Lord  North,  when  First  Minister, 
was  supposed  to  command  full  one  hundred  and  seventy 
Members  at  his  absolute  devotion,  who  were  prepared 
to  vote  with  him  upon  every  Question :  nor  would  his 
head,  indeed,  have  been  secure,  from  1777  down  to 
1782,  unless  he  could  have  counted  upon  such  a  steady 
and  numerous  support,  at  a  time  when  every  Month 
teemed  with  misfortunes  or  defeats.  Of  this  great 
Body,  only  a  comparatively  small  portion  had  however 
continued  to  adhere  to  him,  after  he  joined  with  Fox ; 
and  many  more  had  quitted  him  on  the  first  introduc- 
tion of  the  "  India  Bill."  Still,  even  in  the  last  days  of 
December,  1783,  when  dismissed  from  Employment,  he 
remained  the  nominal  head  of  a  considerable  Party ; 
upon  many  individuals  composing  which,  it  was  natural 
to  suppose,  that  an  impression  might  be  made,  by 
representations  addressed  to  their  principles,  their 
passions,  or  their  interests.  Nor  can  Mr.  Pitt,  standing 
as  he  did,  in  the  critical,  as  well  as  hazardous  pre- 
dicament, of  having  accepted  the  first  Offices  of  Govern- 
ment, unsupported  in  one  House  of  Parliament ;  be 
blamed  for  availing  himself  of  every  fair  or  honorable 
means,  to  diminish  the  Majority  possessed  by  his 
Adversaries.  I  am  at  the  same  time  persuaded,  from 
the  Elevation  of  his  mind,  and  the  purity  of  his 

648 


1783.]  PITT  SEEKS  SUPPORT 

principles,  that  he  was  incapable  of  authorizing,  no 
less  than  Robinson  would  have  disdained  to  practise, 
any  other  methods  of  procuring  Adherents,  than  such 
as  the  British  Constitution  either  recognizes,  or  which 
are  in  fact  inseparable  from  its  practical  Existence. 

Among  the  Persons  of  Eminence  to  whom  Mr.  Pitt 
had  recourse  for  support,  at  this  delicate  Crisis  of  his 
Ministerial  Life,  when  every  parliamentary  aid  which 
could  sustain  him  against  the  Coalition,  was  anxiously 
sought  after,  the  late  Lord  Sackville  attracted  his 
attention.  That  Nobleman  had  hitherto  taken  no 
decided  part  in  the  Debates  during  the  progress  of  the 
"  East  India  Bill,"  though  he  voted  against  it  personally 
in  both  the  Divisions  which  took  place  on  the  15th  and 
17th  of  December,  in  the  House  of  Peers.  He  had, 
indeed,  early  considered  it  to  be  a  Measure  which  would 
excite  great  fermentation  throughout  the  Country,  as 
well  as  opposition  on  the  part  of  the  Crown,  when  its 
political  consequences  came  to  be  well  appreciated  and 
understood.  He  even  repeatedly  predicted,  that  it 
would  probably  overturn  the  Ministry  of  Lord  North 
and  Fox.  Impressed  with  these  sentiments,  he  ex- 
horted his  Nephew,  the  Duke  of  Dorset,  who  arrived 
in  London  from  Paris,  soon  after  the  Session  opened ; 
to  be  cautious  how  he  engaged  himself  too  far  in 
supporting  it,  till  he  had  ascertained  and  sounded  the 
ground.  The  Duke  profited  of  the  Advice.  Lord 
Sackville,  besides  his  own  vote,  and  his  Brother-in-law 
Lord  Milton's  Proxy,  of  which,  from  his  influence  over 
that  Nobleman's  mind,  he  might  be  said  to  dispose,  in 
the  same  House  of  Parliament ;  brought  in  gratuitously 
two  Members  at  East  Grinstead ; — for  he  had  a  mind 
too  noble  ever  to  sell  either  of  the  Seats ; — thus  com- 
manding or  influencing  four  Votes,  in  addition  to  his 
own  personal  weight  and  connexions. 

During  the  Christmas  recess,  after  the  adjournment 
of  the  two  Houses,  having  quitted  London,  he  went 

649 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 


[1783. 

mK,wl 


down  to  his  Seat  at  Drayton.  Mr.  Pitt  having  applied 
to  a  Member  of  the  House  of  Peers,  requesting  his 
exertions  to  procure  Lord  Sackville's  personal  attend- 
ance and  support,  at  a  moment  of  such  difficulty  ;  he 
mentioned  my  name  to  the  Minister,  as  a  person 
capable,  from  the  friendship  with  which  Lord  Sackville 
honored  me,  of  facilitating  his  wishes  on  the  subject. 
The  Nobleman  in  question  having  subsequently  called 
on  me,  at  a  very  late  hour  of  the  night,  of  the  29th 
of  December,  after  I  was  in  bed,  acquainted  me  with 
the  above-mentioned  circumstances.  Impelled  by  the 
wish  of  serving  Mr.  Pitt,  I  waited  on  him,  at  his 
Brother  Lord  Chatham^  House  in  Berkeley  Square, 
next  Morning,  and  at  his  desire  undertook  the  service. 
But  I  candidly  informed  him  at  the  same  time,  that, 
from  my  knowledge  of  Lord  SackviHVs  sentiments,  and 
for  the  obvious  reasons  which  must  render  Lord  Howe, 
as  well  as  the  Marquis  of  Carmarthen,  who  were  both 
Members  of  the  New  Administration,  personally  dis- 
tasteful to  him ;  I  doubted  his  compliance,  unless  the 
solicitations  were  sustained  from  various  quarters. 
And  I  exhorted  him,  not  only  to  write,  himself,  to  Lord 
Sackville,  but  to  procure  similar  applications  from  his 
three  personal  Friends  in  the  Cabinet ;  the  Chancellor, 
the  Lord  President,  and  Lord  Sydney.  Mr.  Pitt 
readily  adopted  the  suggestion.  I  then  assured  him 
that  I  would  set  off  on  the  following  Day  ;  it  being 
previously  settled,  that  the  Messenger,  who  was  to  be 
charged  with  the  ministerial  letters  for  Drayton,  should 
not  pass  me  on  the  road,  but  allow  me  to  arrive  before 
him  at  my  destination. 

On  the  ensuing  Morning,  being  the  31st  of  December, 
I  left  London  very  early,  in  order  to  have  time  to  see 
and  to  converse  with  the  Duke  of  Dorset,  in  my  way  to 
Lord  Sackville.  The  Duke  was  then  on  a  visit  at  Lord 
Salisbury's,  at  Hatfield.  I  acquainted  him  with  the 
object  of  my  journey,  in  the  success  of  which  he  co- 

650 


1783.]    AUTHOR  SECURES  LORD  SACKVILLE 

operated  with  all  his  exertions.  It  was  past  ten  at 
night  when  I  reached  Drayton,  in  most  inclement 
weather.  Lord  Sackville,  whom  I  found  engaged  at 
Chess  with  his  youngest  Daughter,  expressed  some 
surprize  at  my  first  entrance  into  the  Apartment. 
But  his  natural  penetration  soon  led  him  to  conceive, 
that  my  visit  at  such  a  Season,  must  have  a  deeper 
motive  than  friendship  or  amusement.  As  soon  as  we 
were  alone,  I  therefore  told  him  the  cause  of  my 
unexpected  Arrival,  and  related  every  circumstance 
that  had  taken  place,  except  the  advice  which  I  had 
offered  Mr.  Pitt,  respecting  applications  from  his 
Friends  in  the  Cabinet.  Next  day,  the  Messenger 
brought  the  Dispatches;  and  Lord  Sackville,  after 
perusing  them,  returned  the  answer  which  I  had 
foreseen,  namely,  that  "though  he  would  accept 
"  no  Office  under  Ministry,  nor  ask  any  favour  from 
"  the  Administration  recently  formed ;  yet,  that  his 
"  Principles,  and  the  dutiful  submission  that  he  felt 
"  towards  His  Majesty,  would  impel  him  to  give 
"  every  support  to  the  New  Government,  in  the 
"  present  arduous  Crisis  of  affairs.11  He  punctually 
performed  this  promise,  evincing  himself  a  steady  Friend 
to  the  Ministry,  during  the  whole  future  progress  of 
the  eventful  Contest  then  carrying  on  in  Parliament. 

It  was  not,  however,  by  individual  applications  of 
any  kind,  nor  even  by  private  exertions  and  assistance, 
however  successful  they  might  be,  nor  by  the  inter- 
ference of  the  Sovereign  himself,  that  Mr.  Pitt  could 
have  been  maintained  in  Office.  The  Public,  and  the 
Public  only,  enabled  him  to  defeat  the  powerful 
Phalanx  drawn  up  against  him.  During  the  two 
first  weeks  of  December,  while  the  fate  of  the  "  India 
"  Bill "  remained  still  doubtful,  the  Committee  of 
Proprietors,  which  sat  unintermittingly  in  Leadenhall 
Street,  sounded  the  alarm  from  one  end  of  the  Kingdom, 
to  the  other  extremity.  A  Member  of  that  Committee, 

651 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [i783. 

who  took  an  active  part  in  their  Deliberations,  assured 
me,  that  in  the  circular  letters  which  they  addressed  to 
almost  every  Town  or  Corporate  Body  throughout 
Great  Britain,  they  contented  themselves  with  saying 
in  few  words,  "  Our  Property  and  Charter  are 
"  forcibly  invaded.  Look  to  your  own."  A  copy  of 
Fox's  Bill,  enclosed,  which  served  as  the  best  Com- 
mentary on  the  text,  soon  produced  a  corresponding 
and  general  effect.  Ridicule  and  Satyre  joined  their 
aid  to  expose  the  "  Coalition."  Two  Prints  in 
particular,  conceived  with  admirable  humour,  were 
circulated  throughout  the  Metropolis.  In  one,  Fox, 
under  the  Character  of  a  "  political  Sampson,"  appeared 
carrying  away  on  his  shoulders  the  India  House,  that 
he  had  pulled  down ;  out  of  the  windows  of  which 
Edifice,  the  terrified  Directors  were  endeavouring  to 
effect  their  escape.  The  other  Print,  denominated 
"  The  triumphal  entry  of  Carlo  Khan  into  Delhi ; " 
displayed  the  Secretary  of  State,  habited  in  the 
Costume  of  a  Mogul  Emperor,  seated  on  an  Ele- 
phant, whose  countenance  bore  a  most  striking 
resemblance  to  Lord  North  ;  and  preceded  by  Burke, 
as  his  Trumpeter.  It  is  difficult  to  conceive  the  moral 
operation  and  wide  diffusion  of  these  Caricatures,  through 
every  part  of  the  Country.  About  the  close  of  the 
year,  the  new  First  Minister  exhibited,  (perhaps  not 
without  profound  design,)  a  proof  of  Power,  which  his 
predecessors  had  never  been  able  to  display ;  in  elevat- 
ing his  relation  and  active  supporter,  Mr.  Thomas  Pitt, 
to  the  Peerage.  Before  the  Month  of  January  had 
elapsed,  two  other  individuals  were  raised  by  him  to 
the  same  Dignity.  He  probably  meant  to  shew  his 
Adherents,  as  well  as  his  Opponents,  in  the  House  of 
Commons,  the  facility  with  which  he  disposed  of  the 
Honors  of  the  Crown,  withheld  by  the  Sovereign  from 
the  "  Coalition ; "  and  consequently  the  rewards  which 
might  attend  the  early  repairing  to  the  royal  Standard. 

652 


1784.]  PROMISED  PEERAGES 

In  order  to  counteract  this  display  of  Ministerial  favor, 
and  to  keep  their  forces  together,  his  Antagonists  were 
said  to  have  promised  a  long  list  of  contingent  British 
Peerages,  exceeding  thirty  in  number,  to  their  principal 
friends  in  the  Lower  House.  The  names  of  these 
Gentlemen  were  in  general  circulation  ;  and  the  greater 
part  of  them  have  since,  at  different  periods  subsequent 
to  the  French  Revolution,  received  from  Pitt  the  Boon, 
which  they  had  failed  to  obtain  from  the  Coalition 
Administration. 

1784.  12th  January.]  Whatever  favorable  effect, 
the  Peerage  conferred  by  the  Minister  on  Mr.  Thomas 
Pitt,  might  produce  within  the  walls  of  the  House  of 
Commons ;  an  act  which  he  performed  soon  afterwards, 
operated  far  more  beneficially  for  him  without  doors, 
on  the  minds  of  the  Public.  Sir  Edward  Walpole's 
death  having  vacated  the  lucrative  post  of  Clerk  of  the 
Pells  in  the  Exchequer ;  Pitt,  instead  of  taking  it  for 
himself,  or  conferring  it  on  his  Brother  Lord  Chatham, 
as  might  not  only  have  seemed  natural  and  venial,  but 
as  he  was  urged  to  do  by  his  political  friends ; 
immediately  gave  it  to  Colonel  Barre,  in  order  to 
extinguish  the  ample  Pension  enjoyed  by  him  ever 
since  Lord  Shelburne's  accession  to  power.  So  unusual 
a  proof  of  superiority  to  pecuniary  temptation, 
exhibited  by  a  man  destitute  of  patrimonial  Fortune ; 
even  though  it  might  have  originated  in  deep  policy, 
more  than  in  disinterestedness,  as  his  enemies  asserted 
or  insinuated;  yet  attracted  just  admiration,  and 
extorted  general  applause.  Fox,  nevertheless,  while  he 
admitted  the  abstract  merit  of  the  action  itself,  did  not 
reprobate  with  less  severity,  the  principles  on  which 
Pitt  had  acquired  possession  of  Office.  Nor  did  he 
display  with  less  ostentation,  on  the  day  when  the 
House  of  Commons  met,  after  its  short  Adjournment, 
the  unlimited  command  that  he  exercised  over  the 
Majority  of  that  Assembly.  Of  this  empire  he  gave 

653 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [1784. 

the  most  convincing  proof,  by  not  only,  in  Parlia- 
mentary language,  taking  possession  of  the  House  when 
it  re-assembled;  but,  by  precluding  the  Chancellor  of 
the  Exchequer,  in  subversion  of  all  usage,  from  being 
heard,  though  charged  with  a  Message  from  the  King, 
till  Fox  had  submitted  and  carried  five  Resolutions,  in 
a  Committee  on  the  State  of  the  Nation.  Three  of 
these,  he  moved,  himself.  The  other  two,  he  delegated 
to  Lord  Surrey,  who  was  said  to  have  been  selected 
from  among  the  numerous  Candidates  for  Parlia- 
mentary Service,  in  consequence  of  a  classic  recom- 
mendation. It  having  been  agitated  at  the  Meeting 
of  the  Opposition,  held  on  the  preceding  Evening,  at 
Burlington  House ;  what  individual  to  choose  for 
bringing  forward  two  of  the  Resolutions  next  day,  in 
the  House  of  Commons ;  one  of  the  persons  present, 
on  being  appealed  to  for  his  opinion,  exclaimed  with 
Richard, 

"  Saddle  black  Surrey  for  the  field  to-morrow !  " 

Throughout  the  whole  Debate  which  took  place  on 
that  occasion,  Fox  appeared  as  the  Arbiter  of  the  scene, 
propelling,  restraining,  and  directing  the  machine,  ac- 
cording to  his  volition ;  while  the  Minister,  sustained 
only  by  the  vast  powers  of  his  mind,  and  a  consciousness 
of  possessing  equally  the  royal,  and  the  popular  favor, 
struggled  vainly  against  the  current.  He  was,  with  his 
followers,  borne  away  by  its  violence,  after  making  an 
eloquent  and  masterly  appeal  to  the  candor  of  his 
audience.  One  of  Lord  Surrey's  Motions,  calculated 
to  stigmatize  the  King  personally,  as  having  permitted 
"  his  sacred  Name  to  be  unconstitutionally  used,  in 
"  order  to  affect  the  Deliberations  of  Parliament ; "  was 
voted  by  a  very  considerable  Majority,  in  a  crowded 
House,  at  seven  o'clock  in  the  morning.  Yet,  even 
amidst  so  conspicuous  a  triumph,  Fox  might  find  subject 
for  just  apprehension,  in  his  already  diminished  numbers. 


1784.]  A  LESSENING  MAJORITY 

Instead  of  dividing,  as  he  had  done  before  the  Recess, 
nearly  two  to  one  upon  almost  every  Question,  he  carried 
the  first  Division  against  Administration,  upon  "  going 
"  into  the  Committee  on  the  Order  of  the  Day,"  by 
only  thirty-nine ;  though  four  hundred  and  twenty-five 
Members  voted  on  the  occasion.  Lord  Surrey's  Motion 
passed,  it  is  true,  by  fifty-four;  but,  as  only  three 
hundred  and  thirty-eight  persons  voted  on  that  Question, 
it  appeared  evident  that  the  augmentation  on  the  side 
of  Opposition,  arose  from  the  better  discipline  and  closer 
attendance  enforced  among  their  followers,  than  was 
observed  by  the  adherents  of  Government.  When 
Fox,  elated  by  his  advantage,  attempted,  four  days 
afterwards,  on  the  16th  of  January,  to  make  the  House 
declare,  that  "the  Continuance  of  Ministers  in  Office, 
"  was  contrary  to  the  Principles  of  the  Constitution,11 
he  found  his  Majority  declined  to  twenty-one,  on  a 
Division  where  three  hundred  and  eighty-nine  Mem- 
bers voted.  His  Parliamentary  Ascendancy  therefore 
palpably  rested  on  a  most  precarious  and  decaying 
foundation. 

Never,  in  the  History  of  Parliament,  were  Debates 
conducted  with  more  asperity  and  personal  recrimina- 
tion, than  during  the  period  of  Pitt's  and  Fox's  contest 
for  power.  Accusations  the  most  futile  and  unbecoming, 
were  preferred  on  both  sides,  with  the  view  of  rendering 
each  other  odious  to  the  Nation.  Sir  Richard  Hill, 
Member  for  Shropshire,  animadverted  with  some  severity, 
on  the  attendance,  and  marks  of  interest  exhibited  by 
the  Prince  of  Wales,  while  present  in  the  lower  House. 
His  Royal  Highness,  though  from  deference  to  his 
Father's  avowed  wishes,  he  had  absented  himself  on 
the  day  when  "the  East  India  Bill"  was  finally  rejected 
in  the  House  of  Peers ;  yet  did  not  the  less  retain  his 
predilection  for  its  authors.  His  presence  in  the  House 
of  Commons,  might  therefore  be  considered  as  indirectly 
encouraging  to  Fox  and  "the  Coalition."  Frederic, 

655 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    fi784. 

Prince  of  Wales,  his  Grandfather,  had  however  given 
the  same  marks  of  partiality  to  the  Minority  which 
drove  Sir  Robert  Walpole  from  power,  in  the  beginning 
of  1743,  without  exciting  any  comment  or  disapproba- 
tion. Pulteney,  then  at  the  head  of  Opposition,  even 
alluded  in  one  of  his  Speeches,  to  his  consciousness 
of  the  august  Personage  before  whom  he  spoke.  Sir 
Richard  Hill  was  one  of  the  most  upright,  disinterested, 
and  honest  men  who  ever  sat  in  Parliament.  Andrew 
Marvel  was  not  more  incorrupt :  but  his  religious  cast 
of  character  laid  him  open  to  the  shafts  of  ridicule. 
The  "  Rolliad  "  describes  him  as 

"  Friend  of  King  George,  but  of  King  Jesus  more." 

In  the  same  Manner,  the  Earl  of  Dartmouth,  while  a 
Member  of  Lord  North's  Cabinet,  being  likewise  known 
to  entertain  very  deep  sentiments  of  Religion,  had  ob- 
tained from  the  Opposition,  the  nick-name  of  "the 
'  Psalm  Singer.'1 

The  indecorous  personality  of  Debate  that  dis- 
tinguished the  Lower  House,  during  this  extraordinary 
crisis  of  affairs,  produced  scenes  apparently  unbecoming 
the  Assembly  where  they  originated,  and  such  as  we 
would  vainly  expect  to  find  in  more  tranquil  periods  of 
our  Parliamentary  History.  General  Ross  rising  in  his 
place,  accused  a  Lord  of  the  Bed-chamber,  the  Earl 
of  Galloway,  with  endeavouring  to  influence  his  Vote, 
by  allusions  or  direct  intimations  of  the  royal  displeasure 
at  his  supporting  "the  Coalition.1"  Lord  Galloway's 
Brother,  the  Honorable  Keith  Stewart,  read  a  written 
denial  of  the  assertion :  but  the  General  persisted  in 
maintaining  the  charge.  Lampoons,  a  weapon  in  the 
management  of  which,  the  Opposition  unquestionably 
excelled  their  opponents,  were  circulated  with  great 
assiduity  and  effect.  In  one  of  them,  Stewart  was  thus 
apostrophized ; 

656 


1784.]        PARLIAMENTARY  HUMOURS 

"  Captain  Keith,  Captain  Keith, 
Keep  your  tongue  in  your  teeth, 
Lest  you  Bedchamber  secrets  betray. 
And  if  you  want  more, 
Why,  my  bold  Commodore, 
You  may  borrow  of  Lord  Galloway." 

Keith  Stewart  had  incurred  some  censure  or  reflexions, 
perhaps  unjustly,  during  the  War  with  Holland,  for 
having  allowed  a  homeward  bound  Dutch  ship  of  war 
to  slip  through  the  Downs,  and  reach  the  Texel,  while 
he  was  said  to  have  been  on  shore  at  Deal.  His  Brother, 
Lord  Galloway,  having  very  defective  teeth,  it  was  well 
known,  used  a  complete  set  of  artificial  teeth.  Sir 
Richard  Hill,  who  almost  always  drew  his  allusions  or 
authorities  from  Holy  Writ,  endeavoured  to  prove  the 
benefit  of  secret  Influence,  by  adducing  the  instances  of 
Haman  and  of  Mordecai.  "The  honest  Israelite,"  he 
observed,  "  repaired  privately  to  Court,  and  averted  the 
"  danger  which  threatened  the  People  of  God  from 
"  Hainan's  Ambition ;  who  being  driven  from  the 
"  Cabinet,  was  finally  suspended  from  a  Gibbet." 
Even  Mr.  Dundas,  who  might  have  been  esteemed 
incapable  of  descending  to  such  modes  of  attack  ;  yet, 
referring  to  Lee's  very  imprudent  assertion,  that  "a 
"  Charter  was  only  a  Scroll  of  Parchment,  with  a  piece 
"  of  wax  dangling  to  it ; "  observed,  that  it  had  been 
asked,  "What  was  the  great  harm  of  hanging  an 
"  Attorney  General  ?  An  hanged  Attorney  General, 
"  was  only  a  carcase  dangling  at  the  end  of  a  rope." 
Sheridan,  however,  retorted  on  him  with  equal  ability 
and  severity,  for  this  Metaphor.  Lord  North  accused 
the  Ministers  with  canvassing  for  Votes,  from  one  ex- 
tremity of  the  kingdom,  to  the  other :  an  imputation 
repeated  in  still  stronger  language  by  General  Conway, 
who  denominated  their  Agents,  Rat  Catchers ;  but, 
which  Charge  was  repelled  by  the  Chancellor  of  the 
Exchequer,  as  destitute  of  proof.  On  the  other  hand, 

657  42 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [am 


Rigby  complained  that  Robinson,  in  the  anticipation 
of  a  speedy  Dissolution  of  Parliament,  had  made  use  of 
Ministerial  influence  to  affect  the  future  Election  of  a 
Member  for  the  Borough  of  Harwich,  though  he  did 
not  think  proper  to  ground  any  specific  Motion  on  his 
Complaint. 

Alluding  to  the  reflexions  thrown  out  by  Sir  Richard 
Hill,  on  the  Prince  of  Wales,  for  attending  Questions 
under  agitation  in  that  House,  Fox  exclaimed  with 
warmth,  "God  forbid,  that  Royal  Personage  should 
"  not  participate  in  its  political  concerns  !  Where  can 
"  he  so  well  imbibe  a  knowledge  of  the  principles  of  our 
"  Constitution,  as  within  these  walls  ?  How  can  he 
"  better  illustrate  the  excellence  of  his  Character,  than 
"  by  thus  blending  personal  respect  for  the  King  his 
"  Father,  with  attachment  to  his  Country  ? "  Not 
deterred  by  such  observations,  from  animadverting  on 
other  circumstances  connected  with  His  Royal  Highness's 
personal  appearance  under  the  Gallery;  the  new  Treasurer 
of  the  Navy  remarked  hypothetically,  that  "  if  the  great 
"  Personage  in  question,  not  content  with  merely  listen- 
"  ing  to  the  Debates,  should  on  any  occasion  testify  by 
"  his  behaviour  or  gesticulations,  while  in  the  House,  a 
"  predilection  or  partiality  for  any  set  of  men ;  such 
"  marks  of  his  preference  would  be  unbecoming,  and 
"  might  operate  as  a  means  of  influence."  No  answer 
was  given  to  the  supposed  case  thus  stated :  but  Lord 
North,  in  the  course  of  the  Evening,  after  expatiating 
on  the  eminent  virtues  of  the  Heir  Apparent,  expressed 
a  becoming  admiration  at  "  his  attending  the  House  of 
"  Commons,  where  he  might  imbibe  the  true  spirit  of 
"  our  Constitution,  and  become  acquainted  with  the 
"  nature  of  this  limited  Government,  rather  than 
"  listening  to  flatterers."  The  Comments  on  this 
delicate  subject,  proceeded  no  further,  and  were  not 
renewed  during  the  remainder  of  the  Parliament. 

16th  January.]  The  City  of  London  led  the  way  to 
658 


1784.]  PITTS  "EAST  INDIA  BILL" 

the  rest  of  the  Kingdom,  by  going  up  at  this  Juncture 
to  the  foot  of  the  Throne,  with  an  Address,  thanking 
His  Majesty  for  the  very  interference,  which  the  House 
of  Commons  had  pronounced  to  be  subversive  of  the 
Constitution.  They  retorted  at  the  same  time,  upon 
the  framers  of  Fox's  India  Bill,  the  charge  of  "  raising 
"  a  power  unknown  to  this  free  Government,  and  highly 
"  inimical  to  its  safety."  Encouraged  by  such  unequi- 
vocal demonstrations  of  the  affection  of  the  Metropolis, 
and  of  the  corresponding  defection  in  the  Ranks  of  the 
Opposition,  Pitt  ventured  to  propose  another  East  India 
Bill,  framed  by  himself,  the  second  reading  of  which 
took  place  on  the  23d  of  January.  All  the  faculties  of 
the  two  great  Leaders,  who  had  originated  those  re- 
spective Measures,  were  exerted  in  the  attack  and  the 
defence  of  Pitt's  Bill,  which  was  rejected  only  by  eight 
Votes,  out  of  four  hundred  and  thirty-six  persons  who 
divided.  Such,  indeed,  was  Fox's  consciousness  of  these 
Victories  finally  terminating  in  Defeat,  that  no  sooner 
had  he  thrown  out  the  Bill  of  the  Minister,  than  he 
moved  for  leave  to  introduce  his  own  Bill  a  second  time  ; 
but,  so  changed  and  modified  in  its  leading  Principles, 
as  to  be  scarcely  recognizable  for  the  same  Measure. 
He  unquestionably  perceived  when  too  late,  the  error 
into  which  his  own  ill  regulated  Ambition,  propelled  by 
Burke's  ardent  and  theoretical  Spirit,  had  precipitated 
the  Party.  In  order  therefore  to  conciliate  the  Favour 
of  the  House,  and  of  the  Country,  to  the  Measure,  he 
now  offered  to  abandon  almost  all  its  obnoxious  provi- 
sions ;  particularly  the  Patronage,  which  had  excited  so 
much  obloquy  and  clamour.  There  remained  only  two 
fundamental  principles  or  features,  which  he  declared 
himself  unable  to  retract ;  namely,  the  permanency  of 
the  System  for  the  Government  of  India,  under  Parlia- 
mentary Authority ;  and  secondly,  that  the  supreme 
Controul  itself  should  be  established,  not  on  the  Ganges, 
but  here  at  home.  The  proposition,  however,  appeared 

659 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [1784. 

to  be  no  longer  suited  to  the  Exigency.  It  is  impossible 
not  to  accuse  Fox  of  want  of  judgment,  throughout 
every  part  of  the  transactions  which  led  to  his  ministerial 
downfall.  A  cautious,  or  a  temperate  Politician,  would 
not  have  furnished  the  Sovereign,  to  whom  he  was 
personally  unacceptable,  with  the  means  of  precipitating 
him  from  the  elevation  to  which  he  had  attained  with 
so  much  labour.  Had  the  "  Coalition  "  made  a  j  udicious 
and  moderate  use  of  their  power,  the  King,  however  he 
might  have  lamented  his  situation,  could  not  have 
liberated  himself  from  their  yoke.  They  enabled  him, 
by  their  errors,  to  emancipate  himself.  When  we  reflect 
that  another  Coalition,  formed  by  Lords  Grenville  and 
Grey,  in  1807,  uninstructed  by  experience,  renewed  and 
exhibited  nearly  the  same  error,  followed  by  the  same 
results,  it  affords  no  common  matter  of  astonishment. 

After  the  rejection  of  the  Minister's  Bill  for  the 
Government  of  India,  Fox,  sustained  by  Members  in 
various  parts  of  the  House,  endeavoured  to  force  from 
Pitt  an  explicit  Declaration  of  his  intentions  relative  to 
a  Dissolution  of  Parliament :  but  neither  interrogatories 
nor  menaces  could  prevail  over  his  Determination  to 
observe  a  profound  silence  on  that  point.  He  was  with 
difficulty  induced,  on  the  following  day,  to  guarantee 
the  Existence  of  the  House  of  Commons,  even  for  eight 
and  forty  hours. 

23d  January.]  Notwithstanding  the  rising  indigna- 
tion of  the  Capital  and  the  Country,  which  every  day 
manifested  itself  with  augmenting  Energy,  in  favour  of 
Administration ;  yet  the  Minister's  situation  at  this 
juncture,  equally  painful  in  itself,  as  it  was  without 
precedent,  appeared  to  be  at  times  not  wholly  exempt 
from  personal  Danger.  Fox  might  be  said,  without 
either  Metaphor  or  exaggeration,  to  hold  suspended 
over  his  head,  the  severest  marks  of  the  indignation  of 
an  offended  House  of  Commons.  His  removal  from 
the  King's  Presence  and  Councils,  as  an  Enemy  to  his 

660 


1784.]  PITTS  SELF-POSSESSION 

Country ;  his  Impeachment,  or  his  Commitment  to  the 
Tower; — any,  or  all  of  these  propositions  might  pro- 
bably, nay  might  certainly  have  been  carried,  in 
moments  of  effervescence,  when  the  passions  of  a  Popular 
Assembly,  inflamed  by  such  a  Conductor  as  Fox,  seemed 
to  be  ripe  for  any  act  of  violence.  The  irritation  and 
impatience  produced  by  Debates,  protracted  or  repeated 
night  after  night,  rendered  his  followers  susceptible  of 
impressions  the  most  hostile  to  the  Minister ;  who,  in 
sullen  Majesty,  or  in  contumelious  Silence,  heard,  un- 
moved, their  clamorous  Denunciations,  seated  calmly  on 
the  Treasury  Bench.  Mr.  Pitt  displayed  in  that  situa- 
tion, during  successive  weeks,  a  combination  of  fortitude, 
self-possession,  and  ability,  which  I  never  recollect 
without  admiration.  He  did  not  indeed  manifest  the 
suavity,  amenity,  and  wit,  of  Lord  North,  or  of  Sheridan. 
But,  always  preserving  the  command  of  himself,  he  was 
never  led  into  deviations  from  caution  and  prudence, 
even  when  he  seemed  most  to  set  at  defiance  the  menaces 
of  his  Adversaries.  If  we  reflect  on  his  period  of  life, 
our  surprize  is  augmented.  He  constituted  indeed  in 
himself,  the  Administration  which  he  defended;  and 
which,  without  him,  could  not  have  been  maintained  in 
existence. 

It  may  naturally  be  asked  why  Fox,  holding  in  his 
hand  so  powerful  an  Engine  as  the  Majority  of  a  House 
of  Commons,  which  Assembly,  he  well  knew,  might 
every  day  be  dissolved;  and  the  individual  Members 
composing  which  superiority,  he  saw  diminishing  after 
almost  every  Debate  or  Division,  in  consequence  of  the 
natural  operation  of  a  variety  of  obvious  causes ;  yet 
should  never  have  let  fall  its  vengeance  on  the  Head  of 
the  Minister,  whom  he  apparently  held  in  his  Power  ? 
Why,  when  he  saw  all  the  ordinary  expedients  exhausted 
or  ineffectual,  which  might  compel  the  King  to  dismiss 
his  Administration,  or  induce  the  Ministry  to  resign ; 
did  he  tamely  wait,  till  Mr.  Pitt's  Measures  being  ripe, 

661 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [1784. 

and  the  Country  having  declared  almost  unanimously 
on  his  side,  a  Dissolution  reduced  the  "  Coalition "  to 
insignificance,  and  overwhelmed  their  ill  -  concerted 
schemes  for  perpetuating  their  Authority?  Fox 
wanted  neither  vigor,  decision,  nor  inclination,  to  have 
anticipated  his  own  downfall,  and  the  extinction  of  his 
ambitious  plans.  Nor  could  he  deceive  himself  relative 
to  the  political  destruction  which  impended  over  the 
"Coalition,""  if  they  did  not  prove  victorious  in  the 
actual  contest.  How  then  are  we  to  explain  this 
seeming  contradiction  ? 

Fox  possessed  no  absolute  certainty  in  the  first  place, 
whatever  he  might  believe,  that  the  same  Majority 
which  had  supported  him  in  voting  Remonstrances  to 
the  Throne,  would  either  stop  the  Supplies,  or  carry  up 
an  Address  for  Mr.  Pitt's  removal.  Various  Country 
Gentlemen  called  for  a  Union,  and  thought  that  no 
Administration  from  which  he  should  be  excluded,  was 
equal  to  the  National  Emergency.  Even  many  of  Fox's 
Supporters  among  them,  deprecated  all  extremities. 
They  might  abandon  him.  He  might  therefore  be  left 
in  a  Minority,  and  all  his  consequence,  as  the  Head  of 
a  great  Party,  would  thus  be  lost  by  one  imprudent 
Step.  But  granting  however,  as  seemed  most  probable, 
that  he  should  carry  a  personal  Question  against  Mr. 
Pitt,  by  ten,  twenty,  or  thirty  Votes,  in  a  crowded 
House ;  what  would  be  the  inevitable  effect  of  such  a 
victory  ?  That  the  King,  sustained  by  the  voice  of  the 
Country,  and  not  susceptible  of  Fear,  when  he  believed 
himself  to  be  acting  right;  instead  of  dismissing  his 
Ministers,  would  dissolve  the  Parliament,  and  confidently 
appeal  to  the  People,  against  their  own  Representatives. 
In  that  case,  Fox,  far  from  attaining  his  object,  would 
only  have  accelerated  a  Dissolution ;  and  would  afford 
to  his  Antagonist,  a  plausible,  if  not  a  solid  excuse,  for 
advising  the  Sovereign  to  adopt  that  Measure.  These 
were  unquestionably,  the  real  causes  of  Fox's  apparent 

662 


1784.]          A  DELICATE  EXPERIMENT 

moderation.  Nor  did  Pitt,  on  the  other  hand,  want 
motives  equally  powerful  in  restraining  him  from  any 
precipitate  movement.  The  County  Members  who 
supported  him,  were  adverse  to  a  Dissolution,  unless 
circumstances  rendered  it  indispensable.  By  temporizing 
and  protracting,  however  irksome,  and  even  in  some 
degree  humiliating,  might  be  considered  his  Situation 
in  Parliament ;  he  gave  time  for  the  public  Sentiment 
to  be  loudly,  as  well  as  generally  pronounced,  and  could 
avail  himself  of  it  at  any  moment.  Such  were  the  con- 
siderations which  mutually  withheld  the  two  Chiefs 
from  proceeding  to  extremities,  till  the  natural  and 
unavoidable  progress  of  Affairs,  produced  the  final 
Consummation. 

26th  January.]  The  idea  of  endeavouring  to  recon- 
cile two  Men,  who  combined  in  their  Characters,  almost 
all  the  great  Endowments  fitted  for  Government ;  if  it 
could  be  realized,  seemed  apparently  pregnant,  at  first 
view,  with  incalculable  benefit  to  the  Country.  Some 
Individuals  of  respectability  in  the  House  of  Commons, 
impelled  by  these  feelings,  undertook  the  Experiment. 
However  specious  in  Theory,  it  nevertheless  proved 
impracticable,  and  only  served  to  demonstrate  the 
futility  of  the  attempt.  The  St.  Alban's  Tavern  be- 
came the  scene  of  this  Exhibition,  to  which  place 
repaired  about  sixty  or  more  Members,  distinguished 
for  Character,  large  Property,  and  Uprightness  of 
Intention.  Though  they  chose  Mr.  Thomas  Grosvenor 
for  their  nominal  Chairman,  their  Deliberations  and 
Proceedings  were  chiefly  conducted  by  two  Gentlemen, 
who  had  already,  on  various  occasions,  taken  a  Lead  in 
the  Debates  carried  on  within  the  walls  of  the  House. 
The  first,  the  Honourable  Charles  Marsham,  Son  and 
Heir  of  Lord  Romney,  though  a  Man  by  no  means 
prepossessing  or  engaging  in  his  Manners,  which  were 
coarse  and  rude;  attracted  deservedly  general  con- 
sideration in  his  Parliamentary  Capacity.  The  other, 

663 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [i784. 


Mr.  Powis,  Member  for  the  County  of  Northampton, 
who  commonly  prefaced  his  Speeches,  on  occasions  of 
interest,  by  a  copious  discharge  of  tears,  which  he  seemed 
to  command  at  will ;  challenged  attention  from  his  re- 
cognized integrity,  and  assumed  impartiality.  The  Duke 
of  Portland,  as  nominal  head  of  one  Party,  and  Pitt,  as 
Leader  of  the  other,  affected  equally  to  receive  with 
deference  the  propositions  made  to  each,  on  the  part  of 
the  associated  Members.  It  is  probable,  however,  that 
the  Duke,  in  this  profession,  might  be  more  sincere  than 
the  Minister.  Difficulties  and  objections,  either  to  a 
personal  interview,  or  to  a  negociation,  were  started  in 
turn  by  both.  Pitt  refusing  to  resign,  or  even  to  hear 
of  a  virtual  resignation,  which  was  required  of  him,  as 
a  previous  step  to  any  conference  for  the  purpose  of 
forming  an  extended  Administration ;  the  overtures 
were  suspended,  and  finally  broken  off,  in  consequence 
of  these  preliminary  impediments.  But  the  patriotic 
zeal  of  the  St.  Alban's  Meeting,  was  not  to  be  overcome 
by  ordinary  obstacles  ;  and  they  returned  to  the  charge, 
apparently  under  more  propitious  Auspices.  In  com- 
pliance with  their  suggestion  and  wishes,  the  King  was 
even  induced  to  send  a  message  to  the  Duke  of  Port- 
land, recommending  a  conference  between  him  and  Pitt, 
with  a  view  to  constitute  a  Ministry,  on  "  a  wide  Basis, 
"  and  on  fair  and  equal  terms."  Instead  of  instantly 
closing  with  such  a  proposition,  from  which  neither  the 
Sovereign,  nor  the  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer,  what- 
ever might  have  been  their  secret  wishes,  could  easily 
recede,  without  incurring  the  imputation  of  insincerity ; 
the  Duke  of  Portland  and  Fox  thought  proper  to  cavil 
about  the  acceptation  of  the  term  "  equal."  At  this 
opening,  with  which  they  furnished  him,  Pitt  escaped, 
by  refusing  to  define  any  expressions,  before  the  pro- 
posed interview. 

All  further  efforts  were  abandoned  therefore,  with  a 
view  to  produce  a  political   union   between  two  Men, 

664 


1784.1      RECONCILIATION  IMPRACTICABLE 

whose  mutual  animosity  and  rivality  seemed  to  have 
derived  new  force,  from  the  unsuccessful  attempts  made 
to  effect  a  reconciliation.  With  whatever  complacency 
and  ostensible  alacrity,  Pitt  received  the  propositions 
for  such  a  junction,  it  is  difficult  to  persuade  ourselves 
that  he  could  cordially  desire  their  accomplishment. 
He  beheld  the  prize  for  which  they  were  contending, 
nearly  attained  and  secured.  His  Ambition  impelled 
him  to  govern  alone,  without  an  equal  and  a  Co-adjutor 
in  the  Cabinet,  of  such  energy  as  Fox.  Their  mutual 
recriminations  in  Parliament,  which  had  been  so  acri- 
monious and  so  recent,  seemed  hardly  to  admit  of 
being  buried  in  instant  oblivion.  We  are  warranted 
therefore  in  believing,  that  an  accommodation,  forced  on 
both  by  imperious  circumstances,  would  have  proved 
hollow,  insincere,  and  of  short  duration.  They  ap- 
peared to  be  not  formed  for  acting  together,  nor  did 
they  ever  coalesce  for  an  instant,  during  their  whole 
remaining  lives.  The  French  Revolution  itself,  which 
brought  over  to  Government,  as  to  an  Asylum  against 
Anarchy,  so  many  other  Individuals,  at  whose  head  were 
the  Duke  of  Portland,  Burke,  and  Windham ;  could  never 
induce  Fox  to  quit  the  Opposition  Bench.  He  remained 
fixed  there  above  two  and  twenty  years,  till  Death 
liberated  him  from  his  Antagonist ;  and  he  then  only 
became  a  Minister,  when  his  own  career  drew  to  its  close. 
February.]  The  Discussions  which  took  place  in  the 
House  of  Commons,  between  the  close  of  January,  and 
the  middle  of  the  ensuing  Month,  though  equally 
violent  and  acrimonious  with  the  preceding  Debates, 
contained  less  matter  of  interest,  or  of  novelty.  Ac- 
cusations, levelled  against  the  "  East  India  Bill,"  from 
the  Treasury  Bench ;  or  against  secret  influence,  from 
the  opposite  side ;  began  to  weary  their  hearers,  and 
made  little  impression.  Fox  continued,  it  is  true, 
master  of  the  deliberations  of  the  Lower  House  of 
Parliament;  his  Majorities  sometimes  falling  as  low  as 

665 


WRAXALI/S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [1784. 

nineteen,  and  at  other  times  rising  to  thirty-one :  but 
this  superiority  was  far  overbalanced  by  his  decline  in 
the  popular  esteem.  No  eloquence,  nor  any  exertions 
of  Sophistry,  could  reconcile  the  Public  to  his  Union 
with  Lord  North,  followed  immediately  by  a  measure 
obviously  calculated  to  cement  their  political  power  at 
the  expence  of  the  Crown,  which  it  must  have  reduced 
to  a  state  of  vassalage.  In  the  course  of  the  Debate 
that  arose  on  the  3d  of  February,  Sheridan  avowed 
without  circumlocution,  that  when  Fox  first  communi- 
cated to  him  the  proposition  of  coalescing  with  his 
antient  adversary,  he  advised  his  right  honorable  friend 
by  no  means  to  accede  to  it ;  as  the  insurmountable 

Erejudices  imbibed  throughout  the  Nation,  would  in- 
illibly  produce  the  loss  of  his  popularity,  character, 
and  general  estimation.  Sheridan  added  indeed,  that 
on  maturely  weighing  the  motives  of  State  Necessity  by 
which  it  was  dictated ;  when  sustained  by  his  experience 
of  the  honour,  principles,  and  steadiness  of  Lord  North  ; 
he  rejoiced  at  the  union  which  had  taken  place,  even  in 
contradiction  to  his  own  advice.  But,  it  is  evident 
from  this  disclosure  of  his  sentiments,  that  he  reasoned 
more  dispassionately  than  Fox ;  who,  seduced  by  his 
Ambition,  and  beholding  only  the  ascendant  which 
Lord  North's  junction  would  give  him,  in  one,  if  not  in 
both,  Houses  of  Parliament,  imagined  that  he  could 
coerce  the  Sovereign,  and  either  persuade,  delude,  or 
despise  the  People.  The  event  fully  j  ustified  Sheridan's 
opinion,  and  manifested  the  superiority  of  his  judg- 
ment :  since,  even  though  we  should  admit  that  Lord 
Shelburne  would  inevitably  have  remained  in  power,  if 
Fox  had  not  joined  Lord  North,  yet  the  former  must 
have  occupied  the  most  imposing  situation,  as  a  public 
Man,  while  maintaining  his  original  ground  of  Opposi- 
tion ;  and  could  not  have  been  long  excluded  from  a 
participation  in  the  Counsels  of  the  Crown,  even  by 
Pitt  himself. 

666 


1784.]  INEFFECTIVE  CHARGES 

In  vain  did  Sheridan,  with  admirable  wit,  endeavour 
to  shew  that  an  equal  sacrifice  of  all  political  principle 
had  taken  place  on  the  Ministerial  side  of  the  House, 
as  among  the  Members  opposite  them :  an  assertion 
which  he  attempted  to  illustrate  by  the  spectacle  which 
the  Treasury  Bench  exhibited,  where  the  individuals 
now  seated  side  by  side,  were  recently  acting  in  hostility 
towards  each  other.  But,  the  union  of  inferior  or  sub- 
ordinate persons,  did  not  excite  sentiments  of  equal 
repugnance,  nor  awaken  such  moral  condemnation,  as 
the  coalition  of  two  principals,  the  one  of  whom  had, 
for  successive  years,  been  loaded  by  the  other,  with  the 
severest  imputations,  and  denounced  as  a  just  object  of 
national  vengeance.  In  vain  did  Fox  accuse  the  First 
Minister,  "  after  assassinating  the  Constitution,  by  secret 
"  Influence  in  one  House  of  Parliament ;  with  having 
"  recourse  to  methods  of  the  basest  corruption,  in  order 
"  to  procure  a  majority  in  another."  As  vainly  did 
Rigby  reproach  Pitt  with  lavishing  Peerages  for  the 
same  purpose ;  while  it  was  notorious  that  the  late 
Administration  was  debarred  from  conferring  similar 
Dignities,  and  had  not  been  able  to  make  even  a  single 
British  Peer.  With  as  little  effect  did  Marsham  read 
the  Resolutions  adopted  by  the  Meeting  at  the  St. 
Alban's  Tavern,  affirming  "  that  any  Administration 
"  founded  on  the  total  exclusion  of  the  Members  of  the 
"  last,  or  of  the  present  Ministry,  would  be  inadequate 
"  to  the  public  exigencies : "  or  did  Powis  urge  the 
Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer  to  resign,  as  a  necessary 
preliminary  to  all  conciliation.  Pitt,  though  he  pro- 
fessed to  desire  an  union,  "  provided  it  could  be  effected 
"  without  a  sacrifice  of  principle  or  of  honour ; "  yet  not 
only  refused  previously  to  retire  from  Office,  but  started 
many  impediments  to  the  accomplishment  of  the  object 
itself. 

No  symptoms  of  approximation  between  the  contend- 
ing parties,  beyond  unmeaning  professions  of  mutual 

667 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [1784. 

disposition  to  bury  in  oblivion  past  animosities,  took 
place :  while  among  their  respective  adherents,  a  spirit 
of  inveterate  enmity  was  exhibited.  Lord  Mulgrave 
charged  Fox  with  "  trampling  the  House  of  Brunswic 
"  under  foot,"  by  his  "  East  India  Bill;11  and  though 
called  to  order  by  the  late  Secretary  of  State,  inveighed 
against  him  as  "  a  plunderer  and  an  invader."  Governor 
Johnstone  said  that  "if  an  election  for  a  King  were 
"  to  take  place  in  this  Country,  Mr.  Fox  should 
"  have  his  vote ;  so  high  an  opinion  did  he  entertain 
"  of  those  transcendant  Abilities  which  the  Right 
"  Honorable  Gentleman  possessed :  but,  wishing  to 
"  preserve  the  Constitution,  he  had  negatived  a  Bill 
"  which  would  have  placed  its  author  above  all  controul." 
Wilberforce  declared,  that  "even  if  that  obnoxious 
"  Measure  had  passed  the  House  of  Peers,  by  as  great 
"  a  Majority  as  it  did  the  Lower  House,  yet  he  should 
"  equally  have  thanked  the  Crown  for  dismissing  the 
"  late  Ministers."  Mr.  Beaufoy  levelled  his  censures 
against  Lord  North,  for  "  preserving  the  hilarity  of  his 
"  temper,  and  insulting  the  sorrows  of  Britain  with  his 
"  jokes,  after  ruining  her  finances,  shedding  the  Blood 
"  of  her  people,  and  losing  the  half  of  her  Empire." 
Pitt  himself,  treating  with  defiance,  as  well  as  with 
contempt,  Fox's  indirect  attempts  to  force  his  resigna- 
tion, called  on  his  Antagonist  to  come  boldly  forward ; 
and  either  to  criminate  his  conduct  as  a  Minister,  or  to 
move  a  personal  Question  for  his  removal  from  Office. 
Professing  his  own  purity,  both  as  a  man,  and  as  a 
public  functionary,  he  avowed  his  indifference  for  all 
the  clamour  of  Party,  or  the  unfounded  imputations 
brought  against  the  mode  of  his  attaining  power ;  and 
concluded  by  trusting  that  the  House  would  do  justice 
to  the  motives  which  actuated  his  present  line  of 
conduct. 

llth  February.]     Burke  by  no  means  took  the  same 
active  or  conspicuous  part  in  the  Debates  that  followed 

668 


1784.]         NORTH'S  SELF-EFFACEMENT 

the  rejection  of  the  "  East  India  Bill,11  as  he  had  ex- 
hibited while  the  measure  was  on  its  progress  to  the 
Upper  House.  With  the  loss  of  the  Pay  Office,  he 
seemed  to  have  lost  much  of  his  energy  of  mind.  Even 
Lord  North  scarcely  occupied  the  second  place  in  these 
parliamentary  convulsions,  where  Sheridan  and  Erskine, 
Powis  and  Marsham,  severally  attracted  almost  as  much 
attention,  as  the  late  First  Minister.  His  Blue  Riband, 
seen  conspicuous  among  the  great  Coats,  buff  Waist- 
coats, and  dirty  Boots  of  his  new  Allies,  involuntarily 
recalled  the  reflexion  of  his  having  given  the  law  from 
the  Treasury  Bench,  during  twelve  years,  to  the  same 
Assembly?  in  which  he  now  performed  so  humiliating 
and  inferior  a  character.  He  bore  nevertheless,  this 
political  change,  under  which  many  men  would  have 
sunk,  with  that  imperturbable  serenity  and  equality  of 
temper,  which  ever  distinguished  him  through  life.  He 
acquired  even  the  applauses  of  every  Party,  by  the 
manly  promptitude,  and  cheerful  readiness,  which  he 
shewed  to  sacrifice  all  personal  objects,  or  private 
interests,  to  the  public  tranquillity.  When  Pitt  avowed, 
that  however  highly  he  might  respect  that  Nobleman's 
abilities,  or  private  character,  yet  they  could  never  sit 
together  in  the  same  Cabinet;  Lord  North,  while  he 
loudly  censured  the  contemptuous  dignity,  and  un- 
accommodating spirit,  of  the  Chancellor  of  the  Ex- 
chequer; yet  declared,  that  no  considerations  relative 
to  himself,  should  for  an  instant  impede  the  formation 
of  a  new  Ministry,  consonant  to  the  general  wishes  of 
the  Country.  This  Declaration  called  out  the  warmest 
expressions  of  admiration  from  Marsham  and  Powis: 
Eulogiums  the  more  noticed,  as  no  individuals  in  the 
House,  had  treated  him  with  greater  acrimony,  when 
First  Lord  of  the  Treasury,  during  the  latter  part  of 
the  American  War.  He  was  nevertheless  unable  to 
prevent  the  Borough  of  Banbury,  for  which  place  he 
sat,  and  where  his  family  had  always  possessed  a 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [1784. 

decisive  influence;  from  joining  in  the  general  cry 
against  the  "  Coalition,"  and  even  framing  an  Address, 
thanking  His  Majesty  for  the  recent  dismission  from 
Office,  of  their  actual  Representative  in  the  House  of 
Commons.  A  Delegation  from  the  inhabitants  of 
Banbury,  waited  on  me  in  London,  bringing  with  them 
the  Address,  itself;  accompanied  by  a  request  that  I 
would  present  it  to  the  King,  on  the  first  Levee  Day 
at  St.  James's.  But,  on  full  consideration,  I  declined 
taking  such  a  personal  part  against  a  Nobleman  whom 
I  greatly  respected,  loved,  and  honoured,  though  I  had 
withdrawn  from  the  Party  with  which  he  had  connected 
himself.  Lord  North,  alluding  afterwards,  during  the 
Debate  which  took  place  on  the  27th  of  February,  to 
this  Address,  declared  that  "  he  had  the  consolation  to 
"  know,  it  was  not  signed  by  one  of  those  individuals, 
"  his  Constituents,  who  returned  him  to  Parliament." 
It  spoke  nevertheless,  the  sentiments  of  a  large  and 
respectable  portion  of  the  inhabitants  and  householders 
of  the  place. 

18th  February.]  No  circumstance  could  more  forcibly 
demonstrate  the  little  apprehension  felt  by  Pitt,  of  the 
indignation  of  Parliament,  or  prove  in  a  stronger  manner 
the  confidence  with  which  his  own  popularity  inspired 
him,  than  his  conduct  at  this  juncture.  Almost  im- 
mediately after  the  extinction  of  the  fallacious  expecta- 
tions awakened  by  the  St.  Alban's  Tavern  Meeting, 
the  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer  rising  in  his  place, 
calmly  acquainted  the  House,  that  "  the  King,  not- 
"  withstanding  their  Resolutions,  had  not  thought 
"  proper  to  dismiss  his  Ministers ;  and  that  they  had 
"  not  resigned."  Such  a  piece  of  information,  so 
delivered,  seemed  meant  to  force  the  "Coalition"  on 
some  measure  of  violence.  Fox,  nevertheless,  while  he 
did  not  affect  to  conceal  his  indignation  at  the  affront 
offered  to  the  legislative  Body,  and  at  the  defiance 
conveyed  in  the  Minister's  words ;  yet  knew  too  well 

670 


1784.]  ATTEMPTED  COMPROMISE 

the  feeble  state  of  the  Machine  over  which  he  presided, 
to  press  heavily  upon  its  springs.  He  reprobated 
indeed,  the  treatment  which  the  House  experienced ; 
a  treatment  demanding,  he  said,  exemplary  punishment. 
But  he  concluded  with  only  proposing  an  Adjournment 
of  eight  and  forty  hours,  in  order  to  give  the  Minister 
time  for  reflexion.  This  Motion  he  carried  by  twelve ; 
a  very  slender  superiority,  where  above  four  hundred 
Members  divided.  Fox,  on  this  occasion,  though  he 
pretended  to  deprecate  any  intemperate  step,  and  only 
demanded  a  respite  of  one  or  two  days;  exclaiming 
with  Dido,  while  he  accommodated  her  Complaints  to 
his  own  Feelings, 

"  Tempus  inane  peto  ;  spatium  requiemque  Furori ; " 

yet  endeavoured,  by  a  most  able  and  laboured  appeal  to 
the  wounded  Pride  of  the  House,  to  inflame  their  Passions, 
while  he  directed  their  resentment  against  the  Minister. 
Pitt,  on  the  other  hand,  charged  him  and  his  Ad- 
herents with  systematically  withholding  the  Supplies ; 
thus  sacrificing  their  Country  to  private  Faction, 
Enmity,  or  Ambition.  A  distinction  was  however 
drawn  by  the  Opposition,  between  withholding  the 
Supplies,  and  only  postponing  them  ;  which  latter  line 
of  conduct,  Powis,  in  moderate  language,  and  Marsham, 
with  much  stronger  asseveration,  declared  to  constitute 
their  sole  intention.  The  last  mentioned  Member 
recriminated  with  asperity  on  the  Chancellor  of  the 
Exchequer,  as  expecting  from  him  the  same  servile 
submission  in  registering  the  ministerial  Edicts,  which 
the  French  Sovereigns  exacted  in  the  Assemblies 
denominated  Parliaments.  With  more  ability,  Fox 
attempted  to  make  a  Compromise  with  the  Minister ; 
offering  instantly  to  vote  the  Supplies,  provided  that 
the  House  might  receive  assurances  from  him,  that 
"  His  Majesty  would  comply  with  the  desires  of  his 
"  faithful  Commons."  But,  Pitt,  after  first  declaring 

671 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [1784. 

the  conviction  of  "  his  personal  Honour  being  insepar- 
"  ably  connected  with  his  present  official  Situation,  and 
"  his  determination  never  to  resign,  as  a  prelude  to 
"  Negociation ; "  peremptorily  refused  to  barter  Office 
for  Supply,  or  to  enter  into  any  stipulation  on  the 
subject.  From  this  Resolution,  expressed  in  laconic, 
but  energetic  terms,  neither  menaces,  blandishments, 
nor  expostulations,  could  induce  him  to  recede :  and 
after  a  prolonged  Debate  of  two  successive  days,  Fox, 
as  the  Master  of  the  House,  finally  moved  to  adjourn  the 
sitting  on  the  State  of  the  Nation,  which  was  carried 
without  a  Division.  He  was  all-powerful  within  those 
Walls ;  but  Pitt's  superiority  lay  without  doors,  in 
every  County,  Town,  and  Village. 

Already,  Addresses  crowded  in,  from  London  down 
to  New  Sarum ;  a  Borough  which,  though  consisting 
only  of  one  solitary  Farm  House,  yet,  as  belonging  to 
Lord  Camelford,  who  had  just  been  elevated  to  the 
Peerage,  did  not  omit  to  offer  its  Tribute  of  Loyalty 
to  the  Crown,  and  of  abhorrence  for  the  Measures  of 
the  Opposition.  Middlesex,  Southwark,  even  West- 
minster, abandoning  Fox,  approached  the  Throne  with 
Congratulations,  or  with  Testimonies  of  Approbation 
at  the  Dismission  of  the  late  Ministers.  York,  a  City 
where  the  Cavendish  Interest  had  always  been  pre- 
dominant, and  which  place  the  late  Chancellor  of  the 
Exchequer  actually  represented  in  Parliament ;  Edin- 
burgh, Worcester,  Exeter,  and  many  other  inferior 
towns,  followed  the  example,  which  spread  with  rapidity 
throughout  the  whole  Island.  When  we  reflect  on 
these  facts,  we  shall  probably  think  that  Mr.  Pitt, 
whatever  professions  he  might  either  make,  himself,  or 
whatever  wishes  for  "  an  united  and  extended  Adminis- 
"  tration,"  he  might  judge  proper  to  put  into  his 
Royal  Master's  mouth,  in  reply  to  the  Addresses  of 
the  House  of  Commons ;  yet  could  have  nourished 
no  serious  intentions  of  dividing  his  power  with  Fox. 

672 


1784.]  TRANSFORMATIONS 

February  4th— 16th.]  The  House  of  Peers,  which 
Assembly,  after  arresting  the  progress  of  the  "East 
k4  India  Bill,"  as  if  exhausted  by  that  effort,  had  ever 
since  remained  silent  and  supine  spectators  of  the 
contest  between  the  Crown  and  the  Commons ;  ex- 
hibited some  symptoms  of  animation  about  this  time, 
by  adopting,  early  in  the  Month  of  February,  two 
Propositions,  of  a  nature  tending  to  condemn  the 
conduct  of  the  lower  House,  and  to  strengthen  the 
hands  of  the  Sovereign.  The  Earl  of  Effingham,  who 
during  many  years  of  his  life,  had  manifested  the  most 
decided  hostility  to  the  King's  Government ;  and  who, 
as  late  as  June,  1780,  was  accused  of  personally  mixing 
in  the  Riots  of  the  Capital ;  now  appeared  as  the 
zealous  Defender  of  Prerogative.  He  was  sustained  by 
the  Duke  of  Richmond,  whose  political  Character  and 
Opinions  had  undergone  since  1782,  a  similar  trans- 
formation :  while  on  the  other  hand,  the  Resolutions 
moved  by  Lord  Effingham,  found  the  warmest  Oppon- 
ents in  Lord  Mansfield,  in  Lord  Stormont,  and  Lord 
Loughborough,  so  long  the  systematic  Champions  of 
Royalty. 

Few  Debates  more  animated,  as  well  as  acrimonious 
and  personal,  have  ever  taken  place  within  the  Walls 
of  the  Upper  House,  than  occurred  on  this  occasion. 
While  Lord  Fitzwilliam  drew  the  most  unfavourable 
portrait  of  the  young  First  Lord  of  the  Treasury,  whom 
he  described  as  deficient  not  only  in  experience,  and 
averse  to  every  social  source  of  information,  but  as 
devoured  by  an  overweening  and  insatiable  thirst  of 
power ;  the  Duke  of  Richmond  panegyrized  his  Industry, 
his  Abstraction  from  Dissipation,  his  Application  to 
public  Business,  Frugality,  and  Elevation  of  Mind ; 
the  last  of  which  qualities  had  been  so  conspicuously 
displayed  in  his  recent  renunciation  of  a  lucrative 
sinecure  place.  Lord  Stormont  endeavoured  to  point 
the  public  indignation  against  him,  for  his  presumption 

673  43 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [1784. 

in  continuing  to  retain  his  situation,  in  defiance  of  the 
Votes  and  Resolutions  of  the  House  of  Commons : 
while  his  Predecessors  in  Office,  Sir  Robert  Walpole, 
Lord  North,  and  the  Earl  of  Shelburne,  had  each  in 
turn  anticipated,  or  respectfully  obeyed,  the  first 
demonstrations  of  the  pleasure  of  that  Branch  of  the 
Legislature.  The  Earl  of  Mansfield,  with  the  political 
timidity  so  characteristic  of  his  whole  life,  in  every 
situation,  judicial  or  parliamentary  ;  deprecated,  as  the 
greatest  of  calamities,  any  Resolution,  which,  by  in- 
terrupting the  harmony  subsisting  between  the  two 
Houses,  might  lead  to  a  Dissolution.  He  seemed  to 
contemplate  such  an  event,  as  commensurate  with  the 
destruction  of  the  British  Constitution  itself;  as  dis- 
banding the  Army,  laying  up  the  Navy,  suspending  the 
Functions  of  Government,  and  throwing  the  Country 
into  irremediable  confusion.  The  House,  neither 
deterred  nor  intimidated  by  these  Denunciations,  voted 
the  Resolutions  by  a  large  Majority  of  forty-seven ; 
and  followed  them  immediately  by  an  Address  to  the 
Throne,  expressive  of  their  reliance  on  His  Majesty's 
wisdom  in  the  selection  of  his  confidential  Servants,  as 
well  as  by  the  assurances  of  their  Support,  in  the  just 
exercise  of  those  Prerogatives  entrusted  to  him  for  the 
Protection  of  his  People.  It  was  difficult  to  imagine 
a  triumph  more  decisive  over  the  "  Coalition,11  or  a 
more  opportune  and  important  accession  of  strength 
to  the  First  Minister,  struggling  against  a  Majority  in 
the  House  of  Commons.  The  King  received  and  replied 
to  the  Address,  in  laconic,  but  warm  and  affectionate 
anguage. 

In  other  periods  of  our  History,  such  an  Interference, 
followed  by  such  a  Censure,  might,  and  unquestionably 
would,  have  called  out  the  Resentment  of  the  Repre- 
sentatives of  the  people.  But,  as  Fox  justly  dreaded 
all  Occasions  of  Rupture,  or  of  Dispute  between  the 
two  Houses,  which  might  afford  the  New  Ministers  a 

674 


1784.]          MENACE  AND  COMPLIMENT 

plausible  pretence  for  the  Dissolution  of  Parliament ; 
he  contented  himself  with  dictating  and  carrying  six 
Counter  Resolutions,  tending  to  justify  the  Line  of 
Conduct  that  had  been  adopted  by  the  House  of 
Commons.  Lord  Beauchamp  was  selected  for  the 
performance  of  this  service;  and  after  a  series  of 
Debates  which  occupied  eleven  days,  distinguished 
throughout  by  the  same  asperity  as  had  been  exhibited 
in  every  preceding  Discussion,  the  Resolutions  finally 
passed  without  a  Division.  In  the  progress  of  these 
gladiatorial  exhibitions  of  parliamentary  ability  and 
dexterity ; — for  such  they  could  only  be  deemed ; — 
Fox,  conscious  that  the  conflict  in  which  he  had 
engaged,  wore  from  day  to  day  a  more  sinister  appear- 
ance, and  must,  however  protracted,  terminate  in  his 
downfall ;  assumed  every  shape,  and  tried  every  means, 
of  inducing  his  Adversary  to  propose,  or  to  accept, 
some  Principles  of  Accommodation.  At  one  time  he 
denounced  the  First  Lord  of  the  Treasury,  and  held 
him  up  to  national  execration,  as  a  Conspirator,  who 
aimed  at  the  life  of  the  House  of  Commons  ;  whom  he 
at  the  same  time  daily  insulted  by  appearing  among 
them  as  a  confidential  Servant  of  the  Crown,  though 
destitute  of  their  Confidence  or  Support.  Changing 
altogether  his  tone,  a  few  days  afterwards,  in  soothing 
accents,  calculated  to  win  their  way  into  the  heart,  he 
complimented  Pittas  abilities ;  professed  respect  for  his 
political  Principles ;  expressed  his  readiness,  nay,  his 
eagerness,  to  form  an  Union,  provided  it  was  grounded, 
not  on  private  Interest  or  Aggrandizement,  but  on 
great  public  meritorious  motives  of  action ;  apologized 
for  any  harsh  or  unguarded  expressions  which  might 
have  occurred  in  the  warmth  of  Debate ;  avowed  his 
Ambition  and  love  of  Glory,  as  sentiments  which  he 
felt  in  common  with  the  First  Lord  of  the  Treasury ; 
and  finished  by  protesting  that  he  would  make  every 
personal  Sacrifice  at  the  Shrine  of  his  Country. 

675 


WRAXALKS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [1784. 

In  further  corroboration  of  these  conciliating  dis- 
positions, Fox  took  occasion  to  declare  that  he  was 
ready  to  accommodate  and  modify  his  obnoxious  Bill 
for  the  Government  of  India,  so  as  to  meet  the  public 
wish,  and  to  acquire  the  public  confidence.  He  would 
abandon  the  patronage  which  it  conferred,  and  would 
submit  every  Clause  or  Regulation  of  the  Measure 
itself,  to  the  Discussion  of  Parliament.  His  Noble 
Friend,  Lord  North,  would  prove  no  obstacle  to 
union  between  the  two  Parties.  Only  one  stipulation 
he  could  never  recede  from  ;  namely,  Mr.  Pitt's  virtual 
resignation,  as  indispensable,  and  as  an  expiation  to  the 
violated  Constitution  of  Great  Britain.  In  reply  to 
these  alternate  Menaces  and  Blandishments,  the 
Minister,  on  his  part,  affected  and  professed  an  equal 
desire  of  union,  on  bases  of  principle  and  honour ; 
disclaimed  all  personal  views  in  the  line  of  conduct 
which  he  had  adopted,  by  his  acceptance  of  Office ; 
declared  that  he  should  ever  think  he  had  performed 
an  essential  Service  to  his  Country,  by  defeating  a 
Measure  big  with  destruction  to  the  Constitution ; 
expressed  his  consolation  at  finding  that  Fox  was  dis- 
posed to  renounce  any  of  its  pernicious  features ; 
protested  that  he  and  his  Colleagues  were  all  ready 
to  resign  their  Employments,  as  soon  as  a  prospect 
presented  itself  of  forming  an  Administration  by  which 
the  State  might  be  effectually  served ;  but  concluded 
by  declaring,  that  he  could  neither  reconcile  it  to  the 
Duty  that  he  owed  his  Sovereign  and  the  people  of 
England,  nor  to  his  own  Honour,  to  lay  down  his 
Office,  before  he  beheld  such  a  prospect.  It  was 
evident  that,  amidst  these  reciprocal  professions  and 
demonstrations,  not  the  smallest  advance  was  made  on 
either  side,  towards  real  approximation. 

20th  February.]  However  decidedly  the  sentiments 
of  the  Capital  and  of  the  Nation  had  been  already 
pronounced  in  favour  of  the  new  Ministers,  yet  Fox 

676 


1784.]  A  NOMINAL  TRIUMPH 

still  retained  firm  possession  of  the  House  of  Commons, 
though  he  held  that  Assembly,  as  he  well  knew,  only 
by  a  frail  and  decaying  tenure.  Powis,  who  notwith- 
standing his  avowed  disapprobation  of  "  the  East  India 
"  Bill,"  and  his  invincible  repugnance  to  the  "  Coali- 
"  tion,"  did  not  the  less  condemn  and  oppose  the 
formation  of  the  new  Administration,  as  wholly  sub- 
versive of  the  dignity  and  inherent  rights  of  the  Lower 
House  of  Parliament;  rising  in  his  place,  originated 
another  effort  for  compelling  the  King  to  dismiss  the 
First  Lord  of  the  Treasury.  A  most  animated,  long, 
and  acrimonious  Debate  ensued,  terminated  in  favour 
of  Opposition,  at  a  very  late  hour  of  the  Morning, 
after  two  Divisions,  both  which  Fox  carried ;  the  first, 
by  a  Majority  of  twenty  ;  the  last  by  twenty -one.  The 
Address  voted,  was  ordered  to  be  presented  by  the 
whole  House.  But,  this  Triumph,  however  apparently 
gratifying,  might  be  considered  rather  as  nominal, 
than  real ;  not  extending  in  fact  beyond  the  threshold 
of  the  Lobby,  and  being  neither  calculated  to  intimi- 
date the  Sovereign,  nor  to  accelerate  the  First  Minister's 
resignation. 

I  have  never  witnessed  greater  oratorical  exertions 
made  by  Fox,  than  on  that  Evening.  In  a  speech 
of  prodigious  length,  which  might  be  said  to  try  the 
patience  of  the  House,  he  endeavoured  to  concentrate 
every  Argument,  and  to  exhaust  every  topic  of  Declama- 
tion. But,  his  Antagonist,  elevated  by  the  victories 
obtained  without  doors,  in  various  Towns  and  Counties  ; 
as  well  as  nearer  home,  at  Hackney,  where  the  Free- 
holders of  Middlesex  had  been  convened ;  and  above 
all  in  Westminster  itself,  where  Fox  had  just  received 
the  most  unequivocal  marks  of  the  disapprobation,  or 
rather  indignation,  of  his  own  Constituents ; — elated  by 
his  consciousness  of  these  advantages,  Pitt,  with  far 
more  brevity,  but  in  a  higher  tone  than  he  had  ever 
yet  assumed,  retorted  on  his  adversary  with  incon- 

677 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [1784. 

ceivable  severity.  After  exposing  to  derision,  the 
inconsistence  of  his  present  conduct  in  becoming  the 
Champion  of  a  small  Majority  of  the  House  of 
Commons,  instead  of  constituting  the  distinguished 
organ  of  the  popular  voice,  as  he  once  was ;  and 
complimenting  him  on  the  dexterity  with  which  he 
supported  in  turn  the  most  opposite  political  Char- 
acters; Pitt  justified  himself  from  the  charge  of 
imposture  in  representing  to  the  Nation,  the  pernicious 
consequences  to  the  Constitution,  that  must  have 
resulted  from  "  the  East  India  Bill."  Then  descending 
to  personal  objects,  "the  Right  Honourable  Gentle- 
"  man,"  said  he,  "  calls  me  a  mere  nominal  Minister,  the 
"  Puppet  of  Secret  Influence.  It  is  because  I  disdain 
"  to  become  his  puppet,  by  resigning  my  Office,  that 
"  he  thus  denominates  me.  But,  his  contemptuous 
"  expressions  shall  never  provoke  me  to  resignation. 
"  My  own  honour  and  reputation  I  never  will  resign, 
"  to  place  myself  under  his  protection,  to  accept  a 
"  nomination  from  him,  and  thereby  to  become  a  poor, 
"  powerless,  self-condemned,  unprofitable  Minister  in 
"  his  train :  a  Minister,  serviceable  to  him  perhaps, 
"  but  altogether  incapable  of  serving  my  King,  or  my 
"  Country."  He  concluded  by  levelling  the  severest 
reproaches  on  Fox,  for  stopping,  or  as  the  Opposition 
termed  it,  suspending  and  postponing  the  Supplies ; 
thus  sacrificing  the  public  interests,  to  private  Animosity 
or  Ambition.  No  reply  was  made  to  this  eloquent 
Harangue,  which  seemed  finally  to  extinguish  all  the 
fallacious  hopes  so  long  nourished  by  sanguine  or 
credulous  individuals,  of  beholding  an  Administration 
founded  on  a  broad  Basis.  It  became  evident  that  no 
intentions  of  such  a  nature  were  seriously  cherished 
or  encouraged ;  and  that  one  of  the  two  contending 
parties  must  ultimately  sink  under  the  superiority  of 
his  Opponent. 

21st — 27th    February.]       Already    Fox's    Majority 
678 


1784.]     THE  KING'S  HELP  TO  MINISTERS 

began  to  exhibit  symptoms  of  rapid  decay.  While 
some  Members  abandoned  the  "  Coalition,"  in  deference 
to  the  public  voice,  or  to  the  remonstrances  of  their 
immediate  Constituents ;  others  yielded  to  suggestions 
of  a  personal  or  interested  nature,  and  withdrew  from 
a  sinking  party,  whose  approaching  extinction  they 
anticipated.  These  latter  individuals  drew  on  them- 
selves the  bitterest  sarcasms  for  their  desertion,  not 
only  from  Fox,  but,  at  different  times,  from  various 
Members  of  the  Opposition.  The  King's  Answer  to 
the  last  Address,  drawn  up  with  consummate  skill, 
gracious  in  its  language,  conciliating  in  its  professions, 
declaring  how  anxiously  His  Majesty  desired  to  form 
"  a  firm,  efficient,  extended,  and  united  Administration  ; " 
but,  lamenting  the  inefficiency  of  his  efforts  for  that 
purpose ;  denying  that  it  would  be  advanced  or  facili- 
tated by  the  previous  dismission  of  his  Ministers, 
against  whom  no  charge  or  complaint  was  preferred ; 
observing  that  numbers  of  his  Subjects  had  expressed 
their  satisfaction  at  the  late  change  in  his  Councils ; 
and  finally  declining  to  vacate  the  essential  Offices  of 
executive  Government,  till  he  should  see  a  prospect  of 
such  a  union  as  his  faithful  Commons  recommended  : — 
this  reply  augmented  the  embarrassments,  while  it 
added  to  the  dismay  of  the  "Coalition"  Leaders. 

On  the  Question  being  agitated,  of  adjourning  its 
Consideration  for  two  or  three  Days ;  after  a  short 
Debate,  Fox  found  himself  indeed  still  in  a  Majority : 
but  it  consisted  only  of  seven,  though  near  three 
hundred  and  fifty  Members  voted.  He  made  neverthe- 
less, on  the  first  Day  of  the  ensuing  Month,  when  the 
Royal  Answer  was  read,  another  desperate  attempt  to 
carry  the  trenches  by  storm,  and  sustained  it  by  his 
accustomed  display  of  Eloquence.  The  Debates  them- 
selves had  however  ceased  to  excite  the  same  interest,  or 
to  awaken  the  same  attention,  as  they  had  produced  in 
earlier  stages  of  the  contest.  Yet  in  a  very  full  House, 

679 


WRAXALKS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [1784. 

falling  little  short  of  four  hundred,  the  Opposition 
maintained  their  superiority,  and  even  rose  to  twelve. 
Another  Address  was  voted;  but  though  it  still 
besought  the  Sovereign  "  to  lay  the  foundation  of  a 
"  strong  and  stable  Government,  by  the  previous 
"  removal  of  his  present  Ministers  ; "  it  lamented  "  the 
"  failure  of  his  endeavours  for  forming  an  united 
"  Administration ;  and  their  concern,  as  well  as  dis- 
"  appointment,  at  His  Majesty's  not  having  been 
"  advised  to  take  any  further  steps  for  effecting  the 
"  object."  It  was  impossible  more  clearly  to  admit 
their  inability  to  dictate  to  the  Crown,  and  their  desire 
of  dividing  with  Pitt  the  power,  of  which  it  had  become 
evidently  impracticable  wholly  to  deprive  him. 

4th  and  5th  March.]  In  his  Answer  to  their 
Address,  the  King  nearly  repeated  his  preceding 
Declaration  ;  only  subjoining,  that  "he  did  not  consider 
44  the  failure  of  his  recent  endeavours  to  form  an 
"  extended  and  united  Administration,  as  constituting 
"  a  final  bar  to  its  accomplishment,  if  it  could  have 
"  been  obtained  on  principles  of  fairness  and  equality." 
But,  as  though  he  had  been  desirous  at  the  same  time, 
of  extinguishing  any  such  expectations,  he  added,  "  I 
"  know  of  no  farther  steps  that  I  can  take,  that  are 
"  likely  to  remove  the  difficulties  that  obstruct  that 
"  desirable  end."  Fox,  who  beheld  as  in  a  mirror,  the 
sentence  of  his  perpetual  exclusion  from  Office,  con- 
veyed under  these  expressions  of  the  Sovereign ;  after 
first  postponing  the  Consideration  of  His  Majesty's 
reply  for  four  Days,  endeavoured  to  throw  an  insur- 
mountable barrier  in  the  way  of  Dissolution,  by  delay- 
ing the  progress  of  the  Mutiny  Bill  through  the  House. 
An  animated  Debate  ensued  on  the  subject ;  in  which, 
while  the  two  Leaders  took  only  a  comparatively 
inferior  share,  Lord  North  spoke  at  considerable  length, 
and  with  great  ability.  Under  the  possible  anticipation 
that  the  Majority  might  prevent  the  Mutiny  Bill  from 

680 


1784.]     SILENCE  UNDER  DENUNCIATION 

passing,  opinions  had  been  hazarded  from  the  Ministerial 
Benches,  that  even  though  that  annual  Act  should  be 
suffered  to  expire,  yet  the  King  might  keep  the  Army 
together,  both  the  Men,  and  the  Money  for  their  pay- 
ment, being  already  voted.  When  therefore  the  consent 
of  the  House  of  Peers  should  be  obtained,  the  Crown, 
it  was  asserted,  might  have  an  Army,  with  the 
recognized  approbation  of  Parliament.  This  Doctrine, 
which,  it  must  be  confessed,  was  not  to  be  found  in 
"  the  Bill  of  Rights ; "  and  which  might,  in  its  effects, 
have  proved  subversive  of  the  British  Constitution ; 
received,  it  is  true,  no  direct  sanction  from  Pitt ;  but  it 
did  not  the  less  provoke  and  produce  from  various 
quarters,  the  severest  animadversion.  Lord  North 
observed,  that  "  such  a  discovery,  if  founded  in  Law, 
"  might  well  make  every  man  tremble  for  his  Liberty. 
"  But,  those  who  maintained  it,  must  likewise  assert 
"  that  the  Army  might  be  kept  together  without 
"  discipline,  and  without  punishment ;  the  first  being 
"  only  enforced,  and  the  latter  only  inflicted,  under  the 
"  Mutiny  Act."  He  concluded  by  reminding  Ministers, 
"  that  notwithstanding  the  money  had  been  voted  for 
"  the  payment  of  the  Army,  yet  until  the  Act 
"  specifically  appropriating  it  to  that  branch  of  service 
"  had  passed,  no  power  or  right  existed  in  Administra- 
"  tion,  to  issue  any  sum,  however  small,  for  the 
"  purpose."  Finally  he  warned  them,  that  "as  a 
"  Prorogation  or  Dissolution  does  away  every  Vote  of 
"  Supply,  not  previously  carried  into  an  Act  of  Parlia- 
"  ment ;  if  therefore  the  Minister  should  have  recourse 
"  to  such  a  Measure,  the  Votes  of  Army,  Navy, 
"  Ordnance,  and  Supply  of  every  kind,  must  instantly 
"  be  destroyed  and  fall  to  the  ground."  No  Answer 
was  made  or  attempted  from  the  Treasury  Bench,  to 
these  Denunciations,  which  did  not  indeed  admit  of  any 
reply ;  and  only  served  to  shew  the  critical,  as  well  as 
awful  position  of  the  Country,  left  without  a  Govern- 

681 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [1784. 

ment,  and  apparently  on  the  verge  of  a  suspension  or 
extinction  of  all  its  Establishments. 

Powis  and  Marsham,  who  commonly  acted  in  concert, 
uniting  their  efforts  on  this  occasion,  attacked  the 
Minister  in  language  of  equal  energy  and  acrimony. 
The  former,  after  expressing  his  amazement  at  the 
King's  Answer,  and  wishing  for  time  to  shed  a  tear 
over  the  expiring  dignity  of  the  House  of  Commons ; 
lamented  that  Administration  appeared  to  be  deter- 
mined on  prosecuting  their  mad  career,  and  on  elevating 
Prerogative  above  Privilege.  Marsham  reiterated  the 
same  sentiments,  while  he  protested  that  no  Act  could 
be  more  remote  from  his  intention,  than  to  delay  the 
public  business,  or  to  plunge  the  Country  into  con- 
fusion. Rigby,  who  had  been  called  on  by  the 
Attorney  General,  only  a  few  days  before,  to  pay  into 
the  Exchequer,  the  vast  Balances  of  public  money 
remaining  in  his  hands ;  a  demand  of  which  he  loudly 
complained,  as  harsh  and  illiberal,  though  he  could  not 
venture  directly  to  oppose  or  resist  it;  came  forward 
very  conspicuously  in  the  course  of  the  Debate.  With 
that  blunt,  bold,  dictatorial,  and  coarse  Style  of  Oratory, 
which  always  characterized  him,  but  of  which,  since 
the  extinction  of  Lord  North's  Government,  he  had 
exhibited  very  few  Specimens ;  he  reprobated  the 
Audacity  of  a  Minister  who  presumed  to  remain  in 
Office,  with  a  Majority  of  the  House  of  Commons 
against  him :  observing,  that  it  was  reserved  for  the 
present  days  to  produce  a  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer 
who  said  to  Parliament,  "  I  care  not  for  your  Majority. 
"  The  King  has  appointed  me,  and  you  have  nothing  to 
"  do  with  the  business."  He  finished  by  declaring,  that 
his  Blood  boiled  with  indignation,  at  the  bare  mention 
of  retaining  an  Army  without  a  Mutiny  Bill.  Pitt  did 
not  condescend  to  notice  these  personal  Sarcasms  or 
Animadversions,  which,  he  well  knew,  however  they 
might  operate  within  the  Walls  of  the  Assembly  where 

682 


1784.]          FOX  ON  THE  KING'S  REPLY 

they  were  pronounced,  would  produce  no  injurious  con- 
sequences to  him  among  the  People  without  Doors. 
On  the  Division  for  adjourning  the  Committee  upon 
the  Mutiny  Bill,  he  was  again  left  in  a  Minority  of 
nine  ;  the  numbers  being  171  against  162 ;  Fox  still 
retaining  his  slender  possession  of  the  House. 

8th  March.]  But  the  termination  of  this  great  Con- 
flict, on  which  not  only  England,  but  all  Europe  had 
their  eyes  fixed,  and  which  had  already  lasted  near 
eleven  Weeks,  to  the  suspension  of  every  kind  of  public 
Business,  could  not  be  longer  protracted  by  any  efforts 
of  eloquence.  The  King,  in  terms  of  gracious,  yet  firm 
determination,  had  twice  refused  to  comply  with  the 
demand  of  a  Majority  of  the  Lower  House  ;  and  that 
Majority  was  become  not  less  odious  to  the  People, 
than  hostile  to  the  Crown  or  Administration.  So  un- 
natural a  state  of  things,  carried  in  its  essence  the  seeds 
of  its  speedy  extinction.  Fox  though  apparently 
Master  of  the  House,  found  himself  unable  to  advance ; 
and  he  could  not  remain  stationary  without  exposing 
his  Party  to  ridicule,  while  they  were  silently  under- 
mined from  day  to  day.  His  embarrassments,  which 
did  not  admit  of  concealment,  necessarily  augmented 
the  confidence  of  his  ministerial  Adversaries.  Nor  did 
he  attempt  to  disguise  them,  when  the  consideration  of 
His  Majesty ^s  Answer  to  the  last  Address,  came  before 
the  House.  In  terms  of  querulous  indignation,  he 
stigmatised  the  Reply,  as  a  compound  of  Contradiction, 
Duplicity,  Insult,  and  Violation  of  the  British  Constitu- 
tion. Having  attempted  to  justify  and  defend  the 
right  of  the  Commons  to  demand  the  removal  of 
Ministers,  without  stating  their  reasons,  or  assigning 
any  specific  cause  for  such  dismission ;  he  avowed  that 
the  only  becoming  Measure  now  left,  was  to  move  a 
Resolution,  that  "  whoever  should  advise  his  Majesty  to 
"  continue  his  present  Administration,  was  an  Enemy 
"  to  his  Country."  But,  however  disposed  and  desirous 

683 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [1784. 

he  might  be  to  proceed  to  this  Act,  he  was  restrained 
by  his  consciousness  that  he  could  not  carry  with  him 
even  a  Majority  of  the  most  limited  description,  if  he 
made  the  attempt.  Many  of  his  Adherents  had 
already  announced  to  him  their  determination  to  pro- 
ceed no  further,  accompanied  with  menaces  of  with- 
drawing their  support,  if  he  tried  so  desperate  an 
experiment.  Thus  situated,  Fox  stopped ;  and  after 
loading  Ministers  with  the  bitterest  reproaches,  for 
having,  as  he  asserted,  overset  the  Country,  involved 
public  Credit  in  remediless  confusion,  suffered  our 
foreign  concerns  to  run  to  ruin,  and  incurred  the  guilt 
of  leaving  our  East  Indian  Possessions  a  prey  to  every 
species  of  Enormity,  Peculation,  and  Tyranny ;  he 
declared  that  it  was  not  his  intention  to  stop  the 
Supplies.  While  he  charged  Pitt  with  inordinate 
Ambition,  as  well  as  with  having  manifested  a  decided 
aversion  to  political  union  ;  he  finished  by  only  moving, 
not  an  Address,  but  a  Representation  to  the  King.  It 
was  long,  expostulatory,  argumentative,  if  not  crimin- 
ating ;  and  recapitulated  all  the  points,  on  which  the 
Crown  and  the  Commons  had  so  obstinately  contended : 
but  it  contained  no  new  matter,  except  lamenting  that 
"  His  Majesty's  Advisers  had  not  thought  fit  to  suggest 
"  any  farther  steps  for  removing  the  difficulties  which 
"  impeded  the  formation  of  an  extended  Administra- 
"  tion." 

The  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer  took  little  or  no 
part  in  the  Debate  which  ensued  on  that  Evening. 
Dundas,  however,  supplied  his  place,  with  great  acute- 
ness,  energy,  and  severity.  Retorting  on  the  Opposi- 
tion, all  the  accusations  of  pursuing  a  mad  and 
desperate  career,  to  the  subversion  of  the  Constitution, 
whose  true  Principles  they  outraged,  he  endeavoured  to 
shew  that  Fox's  experience  proved  the  incapacity  of 
the  House  of  Commons  itself,  however  powerful  a 
Branch  of  the  Legislature  it  might  be,  to  enforce  its 

684 


1784.]  A  MAJORITY  OF  ONE 

own  unconstitutional  Resolutions.  He  treated  the 
Representation  as  a  Manifesto,  calculated  to  delude  the 
Nation,  by  disguising  the  real  intention  of  Fox,  which 
aimed  at  elevating  the  Speaker's  Mace  above  the  Royal 
Sceptre,  and  giving  virtually  to  the  Representatives  of 
the  People,  the  Right  of  naming  Ministers.  Towards 
the  conclusion  of  his  able  Harangue,  after  vindicating 
Pitt  from  the  imputation  of  opposing  a  union  of 
Parties,  if  it  could  have  been  effected  on  fair  and 
honourable  Principles ;  he  alluded  with  great  force, 
though  guardedly  and  hypothetically,  to  the  well 
authenticated  lists  of  Peerages,  Offices,  and  Emolu- 
ments, known  to  be  promised  to  their  Adherents,  by 
the  Opposition  Leaders,  who  thus  condescended  to  avail 
themselves  of  every  engine  of  seduction  or  corruption  : 
engines,  by  which,  it  was  obvious,  the  Country  might 
be  as  completely  enslaved,  and  the  Constitution  sub- 
verted, as  by  the  worst  Minion  of  the  most  wicked,  or 
arbitrary  Monarch.  Burke,  who,  ever  since  the  re- 
jection of  "  the  East  India  Bill,"  as  if  overcome  by  his 
second  dismission  from  the  Pay  Office,  had  scarcely  once 
risen  in  the  House,  or  taken  his  accustomed  share  in 
the  Discussions  within  its  Walls ;  made  ample  amends 
on  that  night,  for  his  preceding  silence.  He  spoke 
with  great  animation,  and  with  equal  Eloquence  :  but 
no  exertions  could  sustain  a  declining  Party,  or  infuse 
new  vigour  into  its  component  Members.  Even  the 
subject  of  controversy  itself,  agitated  and  exhausted  by 
so  many  repetitions,  no  longer  inspired  the  same 
interest ;  the  greatest  ingenuity  being  scarcely  able  to 
suggest  any  new  ideas,  or  to  strike  out  any  fresh  matter 
of  argument.  Uncommon  anxiety  was  manifested,  and 
impatience  displayed,  for  the  Division,  which  took  place 
about  Midnight;  when  Fox's  Majority  became  reduced 
to  one  solitary  Vote,  the  numbers  on  each  side  consider- 
ably exceeding  those  on  the  Division  of  the  5th  of 
March.  Three  hundred  and  eighty-five  Members  were 

685 


WRAXALKS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [1784. 

present,  of  whom  191  divided  with  Opposition,  and  190 
with  Administration.  Great  exultation  was  expressed 
by  the  ministerial  side  of  the  House,  while  correspond- 
ing depression  appeared  on  the  opposite  Benches,  at 
so  decisive  a  proof  of  the  approaching  fall  of  the 
"  Coalition." 

9th  March.]  The  Spell  which  had  so  long  suspended 
and  paralysed  all  the  functions  of  Government,  was  now 
dissolved ;  and  on  the  ensuing  day,  the  Mutiny  Bill,  no 
longer  opposed,  passed  through  the  Committee.  Fox, 
divested  of  that  controul  which  he  had  exercised  over 
the  Assembly  ever  since  it  met  in  November,  appeared 
there ;  but,  "  shorn  of  his  Beams  : "  nor  can  we  consider 
the  Discussions  which  subsequently  arose  on  various 
points,  as  other  than  mere  Conversations,  since  no 
Division  was  ever  again  attempted,  down  to  the  period 
of  the  Prorogation  and  Dissolution  of  Parliament. 
Yet  scarcely  any  Debate  which  took  place  during  the 
interesting  Session  under  our  review,  opened  more 
curious  matter  of  speculation  or  of  controversy,  than 
the  one  that  followed  Fox's  defeat.  Powis  and 
Marsham,  who  had  taken  so  conspicuous  a  part 
throughout  the  whole  contest,  appeared  for  the  last 
time  on  the  Theatre.  The  former,  in  a  Speech  replete 
with  pointed  animadversions,  and  conceived  with  great 
powers  of  mind,  endeavoured,  while  he  justified  himself 
from  the  charge  of  inconsistency  in  his  conduct,  to  throw 
on  Pitt  the  accusation  of  duplicity,  in  his  pretended 
negociation  for  forming  an  extended  Administration. 
He  admitted  that  the  House  of  Commons  was  con- 
quered; "for  though  scarcely  a  Century  had  elapsed, 
"  since  a  Vote  of  the  Commons  could  bestow  a  Crown, 
"  it  could  not,  in  1784  procure  the  dismission  of  a 
"  Minister."  Having  related,  with  apparent  exacti- 
tude, the  leading  points  on  which  had  hinged  the 
attempt  to  produce  an  interview  between  the  Duke  of 
Portland  and  the  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer,  as 

686 


1784.]  A  SPECIOUS  DEFENCE 

forming  the  first  indispensable  step  towards  union ;  he 
hesitated  not  to  declare,  that  "  all  the  concession  was 
"  on  one  side,  while  the  Minister  refused  either  ex- 
"  planation,  or  the  smallest  advance  leading  to  con- 
"  ciliation."  Pitt  made,  it  is  true,  a  prompt,  able,  and 
animated  reply  to  this  imputation :  but  I  will  fairly 
own  that  it  impressed  me  as  more  rhetorical  than  solid, 
and  carried  with  it  no  conviction ;  though  the  reasons 
assigned  by  him  for  the  rupture  of  the  proposed  Con- 
ference, if  not  severely  scrutinized,  appeared  specious 
and  reasonable  to  the  Ear. 

Those  persons  who  best  knew  the  secret  Springs  of 
Affairs,  at  the  period  under  our  review,  have,  I 
believe,  felt,  and  some  of  them,  have  candidly  avowed, 
that  the  First  Minister  could  not  sincerely  desire,  or 
even  mean,  to  form  a  Coalition  with  Fox.  Nor,  if  he 
had  wished  it,  can  we  easily  conceive  on  what  Basis  it 
could  have  reposed,  that  offered  a  prospect  of  comple- 
tion, and  still  less  of  duration.  The  Cabinet  must 
have  preponderated  in  favour  of  one,  or  of  the  other, 
Candidate  for  power.  And  which  of  them  would  have 
submitted  to  become  the  subordinate?  When  Lord 
North  struck  his  Bargain  with  the  Rockingham  Party, 
he  consented  to  act  under  them  a  secondary  part ; 
receiving  in  compensation,  a  share  of  the  ministerial 
Spoils,  and  obtaining  from  them  protection  against 
Impeachment,  for  the  errors  or  calamities  of  the 
American  War.  The  motives  therefore  for  his  conduct, 
were  obvious,  natural,  venial,  perhaps  justifiable  in 
every  sense.  Lord  North  did  not  demand  to  be 
received  among  his  New  Allies,  "on  fair  and  equal 
terms."  He  exacted  only  Indemnity,  Oblivion,  and  a 
Participation  of  Offices.  But  Pitt  must  have  begun, 
like  Sylla  in  Antiquity,  or  like  Fairfax  in  our  own 
History,  by  laying  down  his  power,  at  a  moment  too 
when  he  had  nearly  consolidated  it.  Other  motives  for 
avoiding  such  a  connexion  with  Fox,  would  unquestion- 

687 


WRAXALKS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS     [i 


,, 


ably  suggest  themselves  to  his  mind.  The  late 
Secretary  of  State  was  no  longer  an  object  either  of 
popular  affection,  or  of  Royal  Apprehension.  His  own 
imprudence,  Ambition,  and  rapacious  policy,  had 
precipitated  him  from  his  double  elevation.  Nor 
could  the  Minister  have  formed  a  junction  with  the 
Colleague  of  Lord  North,  the  author  in  his  own 
Person  of  the  "  East  India  Bill,"  without  perhaps 
incurring  some  degree  of  political  condemnation,  if  not 
of  moral  contamination  or  censure.  Fox,  indeed, 
might,  and  probably  would,  have  consented  to  modify 
that  obnoxious  Measure,  in  a  way  to  render  it  harmless 
to  the  Constitution.  But  experience  of  the  bitter 
fruits  produced  by  the  late  "  Coalition,"  held  out  no 
encouragement  to  Pitt  for  concluding  a  second  similar 
union.  He  stood  moreover  on  far  higher  ground  than 
his  Antagonist;  combining  at  once  the  favour  of  the 
Sovereign,  the  attachment  of  the  People,  and  the 
command  of  the  House  of  Peers.  How  is  it  to  be 
supposed  that  he  would  voluntarily  descend  from  such 
a  situation,  and  consent  to  mingle  his  future  fortunes 
in  some  measure  with  a  Man,  whose  line  of  public 
action  he  had  stigmatized  with  the  severest  Epithets ; 
merely  to  conciliate  the  suffrages  of  the  Gentlemen 
who  met  at  the  St.  Alban's  Tavern  ?  These  reflections 
may  probably  induce  us  to  believe,  that  neither  George 
the  Third,  nor  his  Minister,  could  really  intend  to 
replace  Fox  in  any  degree  on  the  Eminence  from  which 
he  had  fallen  ;  though  during  the  progress  of  a  contest, 
in  which  he  remained,  for  many  successive  weeks,  Master 
of  a  Majority  in  the  House  of  Commons,  Deference 
towards  that  Branch  of  the  Legislature,  dictated  an 
apparent  compliance  with  their  anxious  wishes. 

Pitt,  with  great  ability,  in  the  course  of  his  reply 
to  Powis,  probably  conscious  that  he  could  not 
altogether  disprove,  however  he  might  deny  or  repel, 
the  charge  of  insincerity,  contrived  to  bring  forward  a 

688 


1784.]  AMBIGUOUS  TERMS 

counter  accusation  against  him  and  Marsham ;  to  both 
of  whom  he  indirectly  applied  the  Appellation  of 
"  a  Spy,"  as  having  obtained  by  a  pretended  im- 
partiality, access  to  the  secrets  of  the  two  contending 
Parties.  They  took  fire  at  the  term ;  and  after 
respectively  vindicating  themselves  from  so  dis- 
honourable an  imputation,  Marsham  read  in  his 
place,  the  Letter  addressed  by  the  Duke  of  Portland 
to  the  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer.  It  served  fully 
to  prove  that  the  Chief  of  the  Opposition  Party,  as 
anxiously  desired  to  commence  a  Negociation  with  the 
First  Minister,  as  the  latter  dexterously  eluded  and 
avoided  a  Conference.  Marsham  professed  his  own 
perfect  conviction  of  the  fact.  So  did  Fox  himself, 
who  spoke  with  his  usual  ability,  though  not  in  the 
commanding  tone  that  had  characterized  him,  when 
conscious  that  he  could  dictate  his  pleasure  to  an 
obsequious  Majority.  With  more  bitterness  than  was 
natural  to  him,  he  felicitated  his  rival  on  "having 
"  attained  to  something  like  a  Majority  to  support 
"  him  ; "  nor  did  he  spare  his  severest  animadversions 
on  those  individuals,  who  having  long  voted  with 
Opposition,  had  recently  changed  sides,  and  joined  the 
Administration.  Fox  concluded  by  pointing  out  the 
delusion  of  Pitt's  proposition  to  treat  on  "  equal  terms," 
while  he  rejected  the  offer  made  by  the  Duke  of 
Portland,  that  the  Ministerial  Arrangement  should  be 
conducted  "  with  attention  to  principles  of  equity  and 
"  fairness."  There  could  remain  no  doubt  in  the  mind 
of  any  impartial  person,  that  the  expressions  "  fair  and 
"  equal,"  were  in  themselves  ambiguous,  and  under- 
stood in  different  or  opposite  senses,  by  the  two  con- 
tending parties.  But  these  recriminations,  however 
they  might  for  a  moment  agitate  the  minds  of  men,  no 
longer  impeded  the  progress  of  public  Business ;  the 
House  voting  on  the  ensuing  Evening,  the  Extra- 
ordinaries  of  the  Navy,  without  a  Division. 

689  44 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [1784. 

llth  March — £2d.]  It  became  indeed  more  and 
more  apparent  from  day  to  day,  that  Pitt's  Machinery 
being  now  nearly  complete,  a  Dissolution  of  Parlia- 
ment would  not  be  long  delayed.  Yet,  the  Opposition 
still  fondly  indulged  a  hope ;  for,  it  did  not  amount  to 
a  belief;  that,  as  no  Act  of  Appropriation  had  passed, 
though  the  Supplies  were  voted,  Ministers  would  not 
dare  to  apply  the  public  Money  to  specific  purposes, 
contrary  to  all  precedent,  if  not  to  law ;  and  in  direct 
violation  of  the  Prohibitions  of  the  House.  Various 
attempts  were  made  to  sound  the  Minister  on  this 
delicate  point,  but,  without  effect.  Fox  took  however 
no  personal  part  in  them  ;  and  though  he  occasionally 
attended  in  his  place,  I  believe  he  hardly,  if  ever,  spoke 
on  any  subject,  during  the  last  eleven  or  twelve  Days 
that  Parliament  continued  in  existence.  Burke  remained 
equally  mute ;  while  Powis  and  Marsham,  engaged  in 
Preparations  for  an  approaching  general  Election, 
disappeared  altogether  from  a  scene,  where  they  had 
recently  performed  the  principal  Characters.  The 
little  degree  of  opposition  experienced  by  the  Chancellor 
of  the  Exchequer,  arose  from  the  Adherents  of  Lord 
North,  or  was  made  by  that  Nobleman  himself.  Sir 
Grey  Cooper,  on  the  Order  of  the  Day  being  moved, 
for  going  into  a  Committee  of  Supply,  on  the  Estimates 
for  the  Extraordinaries  of  the  Army;  conscious  that 
it  offered  the  last  occasion  which  would  present  itself, 
for  protesting  against  a  Dissolution ;  expatiated  with 
considerable  energy,  on  the  Infraction  of  the  Con- 
stitution that  would  arise  from  such  a  Measure.  He 
at  the  same  time  warned  the  Ministers,  that  "  to  issue 
"  money  for  the  pay  of  the  Forces,  contrary  to  a 
"  Resolution  of  the  House,  declaring  such  an  Act  to  be 
"  a  high  Crime  and  Misdemeanour,  and  without  any 
"  Appropriation  Act,"  was  not  only  illegal,  but,  a 
subversion  of  the  very  tenure  by  which  the  King  held 
his  Crown.  No  answer  whatever  was  returned  to  these 

690 


1784.]  LAST  SPEECHES 

denunciations,  from  the  Treasury  Bench;  but  the 
Supply  being  voted  in  the  Committee,  without  any 
Division,  the  House  adjourned  to  the  following  Day. 

23d  March.]  As  the  immediate  Dissolution  of 
Parliament  had  now  become  matter  of  universal 
notoriety,  and  preparations  for  carrying  it  into  effect 
were  already  making  in  the  Public  Offices ;  a  consider- 
able attendance  was  produced  in  the  Lower  House,  by 
curiosity  to  witness  its  extinction,  rather  than  by  any 
other  Motive.  The  First  Minister  appearing  in  his 
place,  was  assailed  from  various  quarters,  on  the  question 
being  put  by  the  Speaker,  that  "the  Report  on  the 
Army  Extraordinaries,  should  be  read  a  First  Time." 
Mr.  Eden  led  the  way,  and  was  followed  by  Lord  North, 
as  well  as  by  General  Conway.  While  each  of  them 
avowed  that  they  considered  themselves  as  addressing 
for  the  last  time,  an  Assembly,  which  they  knew  was  on 
the  point  of  being  dissolved ;  they  did  not  remonstrate 
or  menace  in  less  animated  terms,  on  the  supposition 
that  such  a  measure  should  be  actually  carried  into 
execution.  Every  argument  adduced  in  the  preceding 
Debate,  was  reiterated,  pressed,  and  urged  with  aug- 
mented force  of  language.  The  Chancellor  of  the 
Exchequer  remaining  nevertheless  contumeliously  silent, 
the  Report  was  read :  but  on  a  Motion  being  made  for 
the  Second  Reading,  Lord  North  once  more  rose ;  and 
after  some  Expostulations  relative  to  the  contemptuous 
treatment  experienced  by  the  House  upon  the  present 
occasion,  demanded,  "on  what  principle  of  Law,  on 
"  what  doctrine  respecting  the  Constitution,  on  what 
"  argument,  or  on  what  authority,  when  Parliament 
"  should  be  dissolved,  would  Ministers  presume  to  issue 
"  Money  for  the  Subsistence  of  the  Army  ? " 

Pitt  had  not  however  advanced  so  far,  to  be  now 
deterred  from  consummating  his  triumph,  by  the  im- 
potent threats  of  a  powerless  and  exhausted,  as  well  as 
an  unpopular  Faction.  He  cut  the  knot,  which  he  was 

691 


WRAXALI/S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [1784. 

unable  to  untye ;  declined  any  discussion  of  those  great 
constitutional  points  which  he  could  not  solve,  and  the 
infraction  of  which  he  could  not  abstractedly  justify ; 
and  confidently  trusted  to  the  universal  sentiment  of 
national  Approbation,  for  covering  any  deviation  from 
Parliamentary  usage.  Like  lago,  who  in  reply  to  every 
Enquiry,  answers, 

"  Ask  me  no  questions  :  what  you  know,  you  know  ;  " 

he  briefly  observed,  that  "  Gentlemen  might  make  what- 
"  ever  Speeches  they  chose,  and  the  House  might  act 
"  as  it  thought  proper ;  he  would  not  say  one  word 
"  upon  the  subject."  The  Report  being  then  read  a 
second  time,  the  House  adjourned,  and  was  summoned 
on  the  following  Day,  to  attend  the  House  of  Peers ; 
where  the  King  having  prorogued  the  Parliament,  after 
pronouncing  a  short,  but  judicious  Speech  from  the 
Throne,  well  calculated  for  the  Emergency,  stated  it 
to  be  a  "  duty  which  he  owed  to  the  Constitution  and 
"  the  Country,  under  its  actual  circumstances,  to  recur 
"  as  speedily  as  possible,  to  the  sense  of  his  People,  by 
"  convoking  a  new  Parliament."  A  Dissolution  followed 
within  twenty-four  Hours ;  and  the  "  Coalition,"  con- 
founded, as  well  as  overwhelmed,  amidst  the  storm 
which  they  had  injudiciously  excited,  disappeared  in 
an  instant,  leaving  the  fragments  of  their  political 
Greatness  scattered  in  all  directions. 

25th  March.]  I  have  related  these  Events,  as  they 
passed  under  my  own  Eyes,  with  the  most  rigid  im- 
partiality. And  if  I  have  dwelt  minutely  on  the 
Transactions  or  Debates  that  took  place  in  the  House 
of  Commons,  during  the  contest  between  Fox  and  Pitt ; 
it  must  be  remembered,  that  within  the  walls  of  that 
Assembly,  the  History  and  the  very  Existence  of  the 
Country,  were  concentrated  during  more  than  three 
Months.  We  would  vainly  seek  them  elsewhere.  All 
the  functions  of  Government  stood  still :  while  the 


1784.]  THE  STRUGGLE  ENDED 

Sovereign,  the  Peers,  and  the  Nation  looked  on,  ex- 
pecting the  issue  of  so  extraordinary  a  conflict,  which 
must  necessarily  impress  a  new  character  on  the  opening 
year.  Never  did  any  King  of  Great  Britain  contend 
for  so  vast  a  stake,  since  Charles  the  First !  In  con- 
templating the  scene,  Mr.  Pitt  arrests  our  first  attention. 

Nothing  in  the  History  of  this  Country,  subsequent 
to  the  Accession  of  the  House  of  Brunswic,  bore  any 
Analogy  to  his  position.  When  we  consider  that  he 
struggled  against  a  Majority  of  the  House  of  Commons, 
conducted  by  such  Talents  as  those  of  Fox,  from  the 
19th  of  December,  1783,  up  to  the  9th  of  March,  1784  ; 
on  any  Day  of  which  interval,  he  might  possibly  have 
been  impeached :  and  if  we  reflect  that  he  vanquished 
so  vast  a  combination  of  Party,  without  prematurely 
recurring  to  a  Dissolution,  till  all  his  necessary  arrange- 
ments of  every  kind  were  completed,  and  the  whole 
Nation  had  declared  on  his  side;  we  shall  probably 
admit,  that,  as  no  such  instance  occurs  before  him,  no 
similar  example  will  probably  ever  be  again  exhibited. 
If  in  compliance  with  Lord  Temple's  opinion,  he  had 
begun  by  dissolving  the  Parliament  as  soon  as  he  was 
appointed  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer,  in  December, 
1783 ;  when  the  People  at  large,  and  when  even  the 
Inhabitants  of  London,  as  well  as  of  Westminster,  were 
imperfectly  informed  on  the  nature  and  tendency  of 
"  the  East  India  Bill ; "  it  is  possible  that  a  very  different 
result  might  have  been  the  consequence. 

Fox's  defeat  arose  from  one  fundamental  error  or 
miscalculation,  into  which  he  was  nevertheless  led  by 
the  experience  of  all  parliamentary  contest;  namely, 
that  a  Majority  of  the  House  of  Commons,  could  compel 
the  Crown  to  dismiss  its  Ministers,  or  could  oblige  the 
Ministers  themselves  to  give  in  their  own  resignation. 
In  his  hands,  this  constitutional  weapon,  hitherto  irre- 
sistible, lost  its  edge,  and  became  harmless.  He  attri- 
buted its  failure  to  a  spirit  of  Delusion,  which,  as  he 

693 


WRAXALI/S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [1784. 

asserted,  and  as  his  Adherents  maintained,  had  incapaci- 
tated the  British  People  to  distinguish  truth  from  error, 
imposture  from  reality.  There  is,  however,  no  Sophistry 
capable  of  blinding  completely  a  whole  Nation,  upon 
points  so  level  to  every  understanding ;  and  if  there 
existed  any  Delusion  in  the  estimate  formed  by  the 
Country,  respecting  the  nature  and  tendency  of  "the 
"  East  India  Bill,"  the  Delusion  still  survives  at  this 
day,  in  all  its  force.  But,  there  existed  another  Delusion 
into  which  Fox  himself  fell,  when  he  erroneously  con- 
ceived, that  a  Majority  of  the  Lower  House,  in  whatever 
manner  acquired,  and  whatever  measures  or  objects  it 
might  pursue,  must  necessarily  dictate  its  pleasure  to 
the  Sovereign,  to  the  House  of  Peers,  and  to  the  Public. 
The  two  former,  would,  indeed,  if  unsupported  by  the 
Body  of  the  People  of  England,  have  been  found  only 
dust  in  the  Balance,  when  engaged  in  a  struggle  with 
the  genuine  Representatives  of  that  People,  the  real 
organs  of  their  will  and  opinion.  Charles  the  First, 
and  James  the  Second,  each,  made  the  experiment ;  by 
which  the  former  lost  his  Head,  and  the  latter,  his 
Crown.  But,  George  the  Third,  neither  attempted  to 
exercise  oppressive  and  antiquated,  if  not  illegal  Pre- 
rogatives ;  nor  to  impose  on  us  a  Religion  prohibited 
by  Law,  and  odious  to  his  Subjects.  And  never  did 
the  British  Constitution  manifest  its  latent  Energies  so 
strongly,  as  in  the  very  Act  of  arresting  that  Assembly, 
which,  calling  itself  the  Representatives  of  the  Nation, 
became  in  the  instance  before  us,  the  instruments  of  the 
Ambition  of  a  Faction,  or  rather,  of  an  individual. 

The  steadiness,  the  principles,  and  the  repugnance  of 
the  King  towards  the  "  Coalition,"  operated  as  power- 
ful secondary  agents ;  but  they  were  not  primary 
causes.  Fox,  attentive  only  to  the  three  Branches  of 
the  Constitution,  which  he  considered  as  omnipotent, 
regarded  as  null  the  Nation  itself.  But,  when 
awakened,  roused,  and  informed,  the  People  hurled  him 

694 


1784.]       PITTS  SERVICE  TO  THE  KING 

in  an  instant  from  his  situation.  For,  it  was  not  the 
Dissolution  of  Parliament,  which  would  have  reduced 
him  and  his  Party  to  insignificance,  if  the  public  opinion 
and  confidence  had  accompanied  him.  Of  this  truth, 
a  great  example  was  exhibited  in  1780,  when  Lord 
North  dissolved  the  Parliament.  The  Government  was 
not  idle  on  the  occasion,  and  a  large  sum  was  expended 
in  endeavours  to  procure  favourable  returns  to  the 
new  House  of  Commons.  Yet  so  unpopular  was  the 
Sovereign,  so  weak  the  Administration,  and  so  odious 
the  American  War,  that  the  First  Minister  derived 
little  permanent  strength  or  advantage  from  the 
Measure.  He  held  out  with  difficulty  for  one  Session, 
and  surrendered  early  in  the  next,  on  the  20th  of 
March,  1782.  Fox,  on  the  contrary,  remained  for 
many  years,  only  an  illustrious  victim  of  his  inordinate 
Ambition,  seated  on  the  Opposition  Bench  ;  till  the 
memorable  Malady  of  His  Majesty  in  1788,  recalled 
him  for  a  moment  into  Day,  only  to  plunge  him 
deservedly  anew  into  greater  political  Depression. 

The  obligations  which  the  King  owed  to  Pitt,  for 
liberating  him  from  the  Chains  of  the  "  Coalition,11  at 
the  time  when  they  were  about  to  have  been  rivetted, 
were  certainly  of  the  first  magnitude.  No  other 
Subject  in  his  Dominions,  would  probably  have  at- 
tempted, but  assuredly  no  other  individual  would  have 
successfully  performed,  so  important  and  arduous  a 
service.  After  witnessing  the  formation  and  extinction 
of  three  Administrations,  within  the  space  of  little 
more  than  twenty  Months,  George  the  Third  beheld 
in  prospect,  domestic  tranquillity,  personal  freedom, 
and  national  prosperity.  Nor  were  these  the  only 
benefits  that  resulted  to  him,  from  the  events  that  we 
have  related.  All  the  errors  and  misfortunes  of  his 
Reign,  seemed  to  be  swallowed  up  and  forgotten,  in 
the  Grave  of  the  "  Coalition."  The  odium  of  Lord 
Bute's  Ministry,  and  the  Peace  of  1763,  aggravated  by 

695 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS    [1784. 

the  prosecution  of  Wilkes  ;  the  humiliating  Negociation 
and  Compromise  relative  to  Falkland  Islands,  which  the 
pen  of  "  Junius  "  had  consigned  to  perpetual  reproba- 
tion ;  lastly,  the  disgraces  of  the  American  War, 
followed  by  the  loss  of  an  Empire  beyond  the  Atlantic, 
for  which  national  defalcation  of  Power  and  Territory, 
the  King  was  regarded  by  a  large  portion  of  his 
Subjects,  as  peculiarly  responsible; — the  accumulated 
evils  of  three  and  twenty  years,  disappeared  at  once, 
and  were  obliterated.  Only  the  Virtues  of  the  Sovereign 
seemed  to  survive  in  the  memory  of  his  People.  The 
same  Prince,  who,  in  March,  1782,  laboured  under  a 
load  of  prejudice  and  unpopularity ;  was  considered,  in 
March,  1784,  as  the  Guardian  of  the  Constitution, 
worthy  the  warmest  testimonies  of  Affection,  Gratitude, 
and  Respect.  They  poured  in  upon  him  from  all 
quarters,  acknowledging  the  Blessings  of  his  paternal 
Government,  and  approving  the  recent  Interference  of 
his  Prerogative,  for  the  Destruction  of  an  unprincipled 
Faction.  Wilkes,  who  had  been  among  the  most  ardent 
opposers  of  "  the  East  India  Bill,"  and  among  the 
foremost  supporters  of  Pitt  in  Parliament,  as  Member 
for  Middlesex;  re-appeared  at  St.  James's,  where  he 
met  with  the  most  gracious  reception.  A  new  order  of 
Events,  and  a  new  JEra,  seemed  to  commence  from 
this  auspicious  date.  In  fact,  if  we  would  point  out 
the  period  of  time,  from  the  commencement  of  this  long, 
as  well  as  eventful  Reign,  during  which  the  Sovereign  and 
the  Country  equally  enjoyed  most  felicity  ;  we  should 
not  hesitate  to  name  the  interval,  comprising  about 
four  years  and  a  half,  that  succeeded  Pitt's  triumph  over 
Fox,  in  the  Spring  of  1784,  down  to  the  King's  severe 
seizure,  in  the  Autumn  of  1788.  Here,  therefore,  as  at 
a  Political  Land  Mark,  I  shall  conclude  the  Second  Part 
of  the  Historical  Memoirs  of  my  own  Time. 

FINIS. 


NOTES 


P.  1.  More  than  thirty  years.  The  Memoirs  were  published  in 
1815. 

P.  1.  Sylla,  for  Sulla. 

P.  3.  Dr.  Burnet.  Gilbert  Burnet,  Bishop  of  Salisbury  (1643- 
1715).  His  History  of  His  Own  Time  was  published  1723-1734. 

P.  3.  Between  1780  and  1794.  Wraxall  was  M.P.  for  the 
boroughs  of  Hindon  (1780),  Ludgershall  (1784),  and  Wallingford 
(1790).  He  resigned  his  seat  in  1794. 

P.  3.  Lord  Clarendon.  Edward  Hyde,  first  Earl  (1609-1674). 
His  True  Historical  Narrative  of  the  Rebellion  and  Civil  Wars 
was  published  1702-1704. 

P.  3.  Prior.  Matthew  Prior,  the  poet  (1664-1721).  Secretary 
in  the  negotiations  at  the  Treaty  of  Ryswick  (1697),  and  subse- 
quently Plenipotentiary  at  Paris  (U712).  The  Treaty  of 
Utrecht  (1713)  was  popularly  known  as  "Matt's  peace."  After 
joining  the  Tories  in  1702,  he  was  brought  into  close  association 
with  Harley  and  Bolingbroke.  The  Earl  of  Dorset  was  the 
patron  to  whom  he  dedicated  his  poems.  His  part  in  the 
compilation  of  the  History  of  His  Own  Time  (1740)  is  now 
considered  doubtful. 

P.  3.  Mr.  Fox.  Charles  James  Fox  (1749-1806)  entered 
Parliament  in  1768  ;  was  twice  a  member  of  Lord  North's 
Ministry  1770-1774 ;  became  Foreign  Secretary  under  Rocking- 
ham  in  1782,  and  was  joint  Secretary  with  North  in  the 
Coalition  Ministry  of  1783.  These  periods,  and  the  few  months 
before  his  death  in  which  he  was  again  Foreign  Secretary, 
represent  the  whole  of  his  official  life  during  a  brilliant  parlia- 
mentary career  of  thirty-eight  years.  From  1797  to  1802  he 
rarely  attended  the  House,  being  engaged  on  his  History  of  the 
Revolution  of  1688. 

697 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

P.  4.  Lord  Holland  published  the  History  in  1808. 

P.  4.  The  RocJcingham  and  Coalition  administrations.  The  former 
only  lasted  from  March  to  May  1782 ;  the  Coalition  Ministry 
formed  by  Fox  and  North  under  the  Duke  of  Portland,  from 
April  to  December  1783. 

P.  4.  Unmerited  disgrace  and  exile.  Clarendon,  having  sought 
to  restrict  the  authority  of  Parliament,  was  dismissed  from  the 
Chancellorship,  impeached  and  banished  in  1677.  He  spent  his 
last  years  in  France  writing  his  History  and  Autobiography. 

P.  5.  Cardinal  de  Retz  (1614-1709),  the  enemy  of  Richelieu 
and  Mazarin,  wrote  his  Memoirs  in  retirement  during  his  later 
years. 

P.  5.  To  Grammont.  The  Memoires  du  Comte  de  Grammont,  i.e. 
of  Philibert,  Comte  de  Grammont  (1621-1707),  were  written  by  his 
brother-in-law,  Anthony  Hamilton,  and  published  anonymously 
in  1713. 

P.  5.  To  Lord  Melcomb.  George  Bubb  Dodington,  Baron 
Melcomb  (1691-1762).  His  Diary  was  published  in  1784.  And 
to  Horace  Walpole.  Horatio  Walpole,  fourth  Earl  of  Orford 
(1717-1797),  wrote  his  Reminiscences  for  the  Misses  Berry  in  1788 
(published  1805). 

P.  6.  "Junius."  The  Letters  of  Junius  were  published  in 
Woodfall's  Public  Advertiser,  1768  to  1773.  They  are  full  of 
violent  attacks  upon  the  King  and  others,  Their  authorship  is 
unknown. 

P.  7.  Marquis  de  Pombal.  Sebastiao  Jose  de  Carvalho  e 
Mello  (1699-1782).  Joseph  I.  died  in  1777. 

P.  8.  Manege.    Manege,  a  school  for  riding,  or  for  training  horses. 

P.  8.  Belem,  three  miles  west  of  Lisbon. 

P.  9.  Castrati,  male  soprani. 

P.  9.   Battistini,  Francesco  (1747-1785),  an  Italian  improvisatore. 

P.  12.  Paul  I.  (1754-1802). 

P.  13.  Cardinal  of  Lerma,  died  1625. 

P.  13.  CondJ dOlivarez  (1587-1645). 

P.  13.  Expulsion  of  the  Jesuits,  1759. 

P.  14.  Crusado,  a  coin  worth  about  two  shillings. 

P.  15.  Ravaillac,  a  Jesuit. 

P.  15.  Damien's.  E.  F.  Damiens,  a  religious  fanatic,  was 
executed  with  terrible  torture,  but  made  no  confession. 

P.  16.  Duke  of  Dorset.  The  third  Duke  (1745-1799)  was 
Ambassador  to  France  1783-9. 

P.  17.  Her  own  daughter,  who  became  Duchesse  d'Angouleme 
in  1799. 

P.  18.  Were  broken  on  the  wheel,  and  the  title  of  Tavora  was 
abolished. 

P.  20.  Elizabeth  Farnese  was  Queen  of  Spain  1714-1766. 
698 


NOTES 

P.  21.  The  present  Queen.  Maria  Francesca  Isabella,  Queen  from 
1777  to  1792,  died  insane  1816. 

P.  22.  Among  Ptolemies.  Three  of  the  Ptolemies,  descendants 
of  Alexander's  general,  married  their  sisters.  Or  the  Seleucidx, 
descendants  of  another  general,  of  whom  Seleucus  IV.  is  said  to 
have  married  his  sister. 

P.  24.  Charles  the  Third,  of  Spain,  died  1788. 

P.  24.  Dr.  Lucas  in  his  History.  Presumably  Dr.  Charles 
Lucas's  Political  Constitutions  of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland 
(1759). 

P.  25.  Marcellus,  the  nephew  of  Augustus  and  his  destined 
successor,  who  died  young,  and  is  celebrated  by  Virgil  as  "  Child 
of  a  nation's  sorrow  "  (dEneid,  vi.  883). 

P.  26.  Inoculation.  Lady  Mary  W.  Montagu  told  of  its  use  in 
Turkey,  and  it  was  introduced  into  England. 

P.  26.  Darnley  never  attained  the  matrimonial  crown  at  which 
he  aimed. 

P.  27.  Aubnoi.  The  Comtesse  d'Aunoy,  author  of  various 
historical  memoirs  and  of  fairy-tales,  died  in  1705. 

P.  28.  Dancerinas.    Danzarina,  a  fine  dancer  (Spanish). 

P.  29.   Where  throngs  of  Knights.     From  L' Allegro. 

P.  29.  Sumptuary  laws,  i.e.  those  which  regulate  private 
expenditure.  The  most  celebrated  are  those  of  Sparta  and  of 
Rome  in  ancient  times  ;  and  in  the  Middle  Ages,  of  Frederick 
II.  in  Italy,  James  I.  in  Aragon  (1234),  Philip  IV.  in  France 
(1294)  and  the  second  and  third  Edwards  in  England.  The  last 
in  Great  Britain  was  a  Scottish  law  of  1621. 

P.  30.  Gil  Bias.  The  Marquis  de  Marialva,  the  great  lord  who 
should  contrive  for  Gil  Bias- an  eligible  fate  (bk.  vn.  ch.  ix.). 

P.  30.  The  memorable  Earthquake,  in  which  probably  60,000 
persons  perished. 

P.  31.  No  monument  was  ever  erected.  One  was  erected  by 
Gonzalo  Continho  in  1598,  but  destroyed  by  the  great  earthquake. 
"  He  lived  poor  and  miserable,"  it  declared,  "and  he  died  so." 

P.  31.  Cervantes  and  Camoens.  After  Lepanto,  the  former 
(1547-1616)  was  four  years  a  prisoner  of  the  Moors.  He  served 
later  in  the  Azores,  and  on  his  return  earned  his  living  as  a 
financial  agent.  Dom  Luis  de  Camoens  (1517-1579),  author  of 
the  Lusiad,  spent  many  years  in  the  East. 

P.  32.  Spenser,  Otway  and  Chatterton.  Edmund  Spenser's 
house  and  youngest  child  were  burnt  by  the  insurgents  of 
Munster ;  he  died  broken-hearted  in  London  in  1599.  Ben 
Jonson's  assertion  that  he  died  "for  lack  of  bread"  seems 
improbable.  Thomas  Otway,  the  dramatist,  is  said  to  have  died 
of  starvation  at  the  age  of  thirty-three  (1651-1685).  Thomas 
Chatterton  (1752-1770)  poisoned  himself  for  lack  of  recognition. 

699 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

P.  32.  Fielding.  Henry  Fielding  (1707-1754).  Tom  Jones 
appeared  in  1749.  The  Journal  of  his  Voyage  to  Lisbon  was 
published  after  his  death. 

P.  32.  Le  Sage.    A.  K.  Lesage  (1668-1747),  author  of  Gil  Bias. 

P.  32.  Grebillon.  C.  P.  Jolyot  de  Crebillon  (1707-1778), 
writer  of  tales.  "  Be  mine,"  wrote  Gray,  the  poet,  to  Richard 
West,  April  1742,  "  to  read  eternal  new  romances  of  Marivaux 
and  Crebiilon." 

P.  32.  Marivaux.  P.  Carlet  de  Marivaux  (1688-1763),  author  of 
Marianne,  said  to  be  the  original  of  Pamela. 

P.  33.  Sir  Charles  Grandison.  Samuel  Richardson  (1689-1761) 
published  Pamela  in  1740  and  Clarissa  in  1748.  His  Sir  Charles 
Grandison  appeared  in  1754.  Clementina  is  the  unfortunate 
lady  who  loved  Grandison. 

P.  33.  Cadell.  Thomas  Cadell  (1742-1802),  having  retired  with 
a  fortune,  was  elected  Alderman  in  1798.  Another  account  eays 
Millar  paid  £1000  for  Amelia  ;  a  second  edition  was  called  for  on 
the  day  of  publication. 

P.  35.  Which  desolated  Calabria.  Messina  and  other  towns 
were  destroyed  in  1783. 

P.  37.  The  retreat  and  decease.  Alphonso  declared  himself  of 
age  in  1662  and  compelled  his  mother  to  retire.  His  own  wife, 
Mile.  d'Aumale,  a  granddaughter  of  Henry  IV.  of  France. 
Convention  of  Cintra.  Permitted  the  free  return  of  the  French 
from  Portugal.  It  was  made  against  Wellesley's  advice. 

P.  38.  Leaving  no  issue.     She  left  a  daughter. 

P.  39.  Franciscan  Friars.  Certain  of  the  Observants,  or  strict 
Franciscans,  notably  those  of  Our  Lady  of  Salceda,  in  Castile, 
founded  1390,  carried  asceticism  to  great  lengths. 

P.  40.  Casemates,  originally  a  loopholed  gallery,  from  which  a 
garrison  could  fire  on  an  enemy  in  possession  of  a  ditch. 

P.  41.  Malagrida  was  burnt  alive,  ostensibly  for  heresy  and 
imposture ;  his  name  was  afterwards  applied  to  the  Earl  of 
Shelburne. 

P.  42.  The  present  Queen,  an  ardent  Catholic. 

P.  42.  To  seek  an  asylum.     They  fled  before  Junot,  1807. 

P.  43.  The  battle  of  Arzila,  in  which  Sir  Thomas  Stukeley 
perished,  was  fought  near  El-Kasr  el-Kebir.  Although  the  body 
of  the  King  was  identified  by  the  Portuguese  prisoners,  a  power- 
ful sect  sprang  up  in  Portugal,  called  the  Sebastianistas,  which 
continued  for  centuries  to  believe  in  his  reappearance. 

P.  44.  Lady  Worthy  Montagu,  in  a  letter  from  Ratisbon,  August 
30  [O.S.],  1716. 

P.  44.  OfAbrantes.     The  wife  of  Marshal  Junot. 

P.  44.  The  Elder  Dionysius  (430-367  B.C.),  tyrant  of  Syracuse, 
robbed  the  temples  to  pay  his  mercenaries. 

700 


NOTES 

P.  45.  Farinelli,  the  pseudonym  of  Carlo  Broschi,  a  Neapolitan 
singer  (1705-1782),  who  was  Handel's  rival  in  popular  favour 
during  his  visit  to  London  in  1734-6.  In  Spain,  he  is  said  to 
have  cured  both  Philip  and  his  son  of  melancholy  depression. 

P.  45.  Ensenada.     The  Marquis  de  la  Ensenada  (1690-1772). 

P.  46.  Louis  the  Fifteenth  (1710-1774)  became  king  at  the  age 
of  five. 

P.  46.  Fleury.  Andre  Hercule  de  Fleury  (1653-1743)  became 
Cardinal  and  Prime  Minister  in  1726. 

P.  46.  His  descendant.  "  Philippe  Egalite,"  his  great-grandson, 
guillotined  in  1793. 

P.  47.  Mademoiselle  de  Leczinska.  Maria,  only  daughter  of 
Stanislas  (Leczinski)  I.,  King  of  Poland.  Her  father  was  only 
King,  by  the  aid  of  Charles  XII.  of  Sweden,  from  1705  to  1709,  but 
retained  the  title,  and  was  also  (1736)  created  Duke  of  Lorraine 
and  Bar. 

P.  48.  A  proper  age.     She  was  then  only  nine  years  old. 

P.  48.  The  celebrated  Marchioness  de  Prie  (1698-1727). 

P.  50.  At  Weissembourg,  i.e.  Weissenburg  or  Wissembourg,  near 
Karlsruhe. 

P.  50.  Charles  the  Second  .  .  .  at  Cologne,  1654-6. 

P.  51.  De  la  Valiere.  De  la  Valliere,  familiar  to  readers  of  The 
Vicomte  de  Bragelonne.  Richlieu.  Cardinal  Richelieu  (1585-1642), 
First  Minister,  1624-42. 

P.  53.  Walpole.  Sir  Robert  (1676- 1745)  was  Premier  in  1715-7, 
and  from  1721  to  1742.  He  refused  to  further  George  II.'s  wish 
for  war,  and  co-operated  with  Fleury.  The  duchy  of  Lorraine 
was  ceded  to  Stanislas  in  1737,  reverting  to  the  crown  of  France 
on  his  decease. 

P.  53.  The  armour  of  Diomed.  Glaucus  exchanged  his  golden 
armour  for  the  iron  armour  of  Diomedes. 

P.  54.  Charles  (II.),  King  of  Navarre  (1332-1387),  was  acci- 
dentally burnt  to  death,  a  servant  letting  a  lighted  taper  fall  on 
to  the  brandy-soaked  linen  in  which  he  was  wrapped. 

P.  54.  Lady  Mary  Churchill.  Walpole's  daughter  by  his  second 
wife,  born  before  their  marriage.  Mr.  Churchill  was  the  son  of 
General  Churchill  and  the  actress  Mrs.  Oldfield. 

P.  54.  A  Bed  of  Justice.  Lit  de  justice,  the  King's  throne  when 
attending  his  Parliaments  ;  hence  a  formal  visit  to  Parliament, 
and,  later,  a  coercive  one. 

P.  55.  Ecus,  i.e.  crowns,  worth  2s.  6d. 

P.  56.  He  and  Walpole.  Fleury  died  in  1743  ;  Walpole  retired 
in  1742. 

P.  56.  Like  Pompey,  who  survived  his  third  triumph  thirteen 
years. 

P.  57.  Erected  forty  years  earlier,  at  Oudenarde,  etc.,  1708. 
701 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

P.  57.  At  Aix-la-Chapelle,  in  1748. 

P.  57.  Mr.  Pelham.     Henry  Pelham  was  Premier,  1743-1764. 

P.  57.  The  accession  of  Maria  Theresa,  in  1740. 

P.  57.  Villars  (1653-1734),  whose  victory  over  the  Dutch  and 
Aiistriaiis  (1713)  resulted  in  the  Peace  of  Utrecht. 

P.  57.  Duke  of  Berwick.  James  Fitzjames  (1670-1734),  whose 
mother,  Arabella  Churchill,  was  Marlborough's  sister. 

P.  57.  Marshal  Saxe.  Maurice,  Comte  cle  Saxe  (1696-1750), 
died  of  putrid  fever. 

P.  57.  Lowendahl.  The  Count  of  Lowendal  (1700-1755),  a 
German,  was  made  a  Marshal  of  France  after  taking  Bergen-op- 
Zoom  (1747). 

P.  58.  Augustus  the  Second.  Frederick  Augustus  II.  (1670- 
1733)  was  deposed  in  favour  of  Stanislas. 

P.  58.  Chambord.  Louis  XV.  had  given  him  this  estate  near 
Blois. 

P.  58.  Favard.  Marie  J.  B.  du  Roncerai,  Madame  Favart 
(1727-1772),  a  celebrated  comedienne. 

P.  58.  Virginia  was  rescued,  and  Appius  slain,  by  her  father. 

P.  60.  War  of  1756.  The  Seven  Years'  War  of  Frederick  the 
Great,  supported  by  Pitt,  against  France  and  Austria. 

P.  60.  Mezerai.  Francois  Eudes  de  Mezerai  (1610-1683),  author 
of  a  History  of  France  (1651). 

P.  60.  The  events  of  Minorca,  etc.  In  America,  General  Brad- 
dock,  sent  against  Fort  Duquesne,  was  killed  in  an  ambush,  and 
Abercrombie  failed  to  take  Ticonderoga.  In  Europe,  Admiral 
Byng  was  shot  for  his  failure  to  relieve  Minorca  (which  fell  in 
1756)  ;  the  Duke  of  Cumberland  signed  the  ignominious  conven- 
tion of  Klosterzeven  (1757)  ;  while  the  attack  on  Rochefort  (1757) 
and  the  attempt  on  St.  Malo  (Bay  of  St.  Cast,  1758)  both  failed. 

P.  60.  Peace  of  Fontainbleau.  Signed  November  1672  by  Bute, 
whose  name  was  scandalously  coupled  with  that  of  the  Dowager 
Princess  of  Wales.  "  This  peace  was  extremely  advantageous  to 
England,  but  there  was  hardly  a  clause  in  it  which  was  not  below 
what  she  might  reasonably  have  expected  "  (Lecky).  Guadaloupe 
had  been  three  years  in  English  hands.  Rich  Havanna  was  ex- 
changed for  barren  Florida.  The  value  of  Canada  was  hardly 
recognised. 

P.  60.  Manilla  .  .  .  ransom.  The  property-owners  agreed  to 
pay  a  ransom  of  £1,000,000  to  the  captors  ;  half  the  payment 
was  in  bills  on  Spain  which  were  never  honoured. 

P.  6i.  Choiseul.  The  Due  de  Choiseul  (1719-1785),  Minister  of 
Foreign  Affairs  in  1757  ;  of  War,  1761-1770.  Poland  was  dis- 
membered (1772-3)  after  his  fall. 

P.  61.  Gustavus  overthrew  the  nobles  in  a  bloodless  revolution. 

P.  61.  Corsica.     Napoleon  Bonaparte  born  at  Ajaccio,  1769. 
702 


NOTES 

P.  63.  Hume.  David  Hume  (1711-1776)  was  Secretary  to  the 
Embassy  in  Paris,  and  for  some  months  Chargtf  d' Affaires,  in 
1765. 

P.  63.  Heroic  Epistle.  Quoted  from  Mason's  Heroic  Epistle  to 
Sir  William  Chambers,  lines  21-26  (1773). 

P.  64.  Du  Barry.  The  Comtesse  du  Barry  (1746-1793,  guillo- 
tined), the  instigator  of  Choiseul's  dismissal. 

P.  64.  Abbe'  Ternay,  etc.  Maupeou,  D'Aiguillon  and  the  dis- 
solute Abbe  Ternay  retained  their  power  till  1774.  The  Due 
de  Richelieu  (1696-1788),  the  captor  of  Minorca,  and  victor  at 
Klosterzeven. 

P.  64.  Thais  or  Campaspe'.  Mistresses  of  Alexander  the  Great. 
Aspasia  lived  with  Pericles  and  was  the  friend  of  Socrates.  Livia, 
the  wife  of  Nero  and  of  Augustus. 

P.  64.   Voltaire's  "  Pucelle"    A  burlesque  on  Joan  of  Arc. 

P.  65.  In  1770.  The  Spaniards  having,  at  Choiseul's  instigation, 
driven  an  English  garrison  out  of  Fort  Egmont  in  the  Falkland 
Islands,  war  was  only  averted  by  his  fall. 

P.  65.  La  Fayette  and  Rochambeau.  The  Marquis  de  Lafayette 
(1757-1834)  went  to  America  in  1777  ;  he  returned  there  again 
with  reinforcements  in  1780,  accompanied  by  General  Rocham- 
beau (1725-1807). 

P.  66.  Madame  de  Maintenon  (1635-1719),  granddaughter  of 
D'Aubigne,  and  widow  of  Scarron,  became  Louis  XIV.'s  mistress 
and  afterwards  (1684)  his  wife. 

P.  67.  D'Estaign.  The  Comte  d'Estaing  (1729-1794,  executed), 
defeated  off  Savanna,  1779. 

P.  68.  Count  de  Maurepas  (1701-1781),  banished  from  court  for 
an  epigram  on  Madame  de  Pompadour,  1749. 

P.  68.   Vergennes.     The  Comte  de  Vergennes  (1717-1787). 

P.  69.  Henry  IV.  and  Sully,  etc.  The  Baron  de  Rosny,  after- 
wards Due  de  Sully  (1560-1641).  The  Edict  of  Nantes  was 
issued,  1598  ;  Biron  was  executed  for  conspiracy,  1602.  Louis 
XIII.  and  Richlieu  (Richelieu)  crushed  the  Huguenot  rising  and 
drove  the  English  from  La  Rochelle_  (1629).  Louis  XIV.  and 
Louvois  (Francois,  Marquis  de  Louvois,  1641-1691)  revoked  the 
Edict  of  Nantes,  1685. 

P.  70.  Philip  of  Valois  (1293-1350).     Hugh  Capet  (946-996). 

P.  70.  Fontenoy,  1745,  where  Saxe  defeated  the  English  and 
Dutch. 

P.  71.  Duke  of  Dorset.     The  third  Duke  ;  died  1799. 

P.  71.  Under  the  guillotine.  Louis  does  not  appear  to  have 
sought  for  delay,  nor  was  he  thrown  down.  Madame  Elizabeth, 
his  sister. 

P.  72.  In  1776.     She  was  twenty-one  years  of  age. 

P.  72.  Anne  of  A ustria(  1604-1 666),  Queen  of  Louis  XIII. 
703 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

P.  73.  Of  a  daughter.  Afterwards  Duchesse  d'Angouleme,  who 
died  1851. 

P.  73.  Count  d'Artois  .  .  .  Count  de  Provence.  Afterwards 
Charles  X.  and  Louis  XVIII.  Duke  de  Chartres,  became  Due 
d'Orleans  and  father  of  Louis  Philippe. 

P.  74.  One  of  the  Princesses  of  Uarignan.  Marie  de  Savoie 
Carignan  Lamballe  (1749-1792),  brutally  murdered  before  a 
revolutionary  tribunal. 

P.  74.  Lord  Nugent.    Kobert,  Earl  Nugent  (1702-1788). 

P.  74.  A  representative  of  the  Capetian  line.  Louis  Philippe  was 
frequently  in  England,  and  died  at  Claremont  in  1850. 

P.  75.  Lord  Temple.    Kichard,  the  first  Earl,  died  1779. 

P.  75.  Marquis  Camden.  John  Jeffreys  Pratt,  second  Earl 
(1759-1840).  Made  a  marquis  1812.  Jeffreys  was  his  mother's 
family  name.  The  first  Earl  was  one  of  the  principal  opponents 
of  North's  American  policy.  This  story  was  disputed  by  the 
Quarterly  Review,  because  the  Duke  died  before  the  Marquis  had 
the  Garter. 

P.  76.  Mr.  Pitt.  William  Pitt  (1759-1806)  entered  Parliament 
1781  ;  Chancellor  of  Exchequer  1782  ;  Prime  Minister  1783-1801, 
and  again  1804-6. 

P.  78.  Lyttelton  and  Chesterfield.  George,  first  Baron  Lyttelton 
(1709-1773),  author  of  various  poems  and  a  History  of  Henry  II. 
The  fourth  Earl  of  Chesterfield  (1694-1773),  author  of  the  Letters. 

P.  78.  Glover.  Kichard  Glover  (1712-1785),  poet,  best  known 
by  his  ballad,  "  Hosier's  Ghost." 

P.  78.  Craggs.  James  Craggs  the  younger  (1686-1721),  Secre- 
tary of  State  1718. 

P.  78.  Pope's  epitaph  on  him. 

"  Statesman,  yet  Friend  to  Truth  !  of  Soul  sincere, 
In  Action  faithful,  and  in  Honour  clear  ! 
Who  broke  no  Promise,  serv'd  no  private  End  ; 
Who  gained  no  Title,  and  who  lost  no  Friend  ; 
Ennobled  by  Himself,  by  All  appro v'd  ; 
Prais'd,  wept,  and  honour'd  by  the  Muse  he  lov'J." 

P.  79.  Lord  Hervey.  John,  styled  Lord  Hervey  (1696-1743), 
whose  Memoirs  of  the  Reign  of  George  II.  were  published  in  1848. 

P.  80.  Gil  Bias.     Smollett's  English  version  appeared  1761. 

P.  81.  White's.  White's,  the  Tory  club,  37-38  St.  James's 
Street,  established  1698  as  White's  Chocolate  House.  In  1781 
it  had  three  hundred  members. 

P.  81.  The  late  Lord  Sackville.  George  Sackville  Germain 
(1716-1785),  known  as  Lord  George  Sackville  till  he  assumed 
the  name  of  Germain  in  1770.  Created  Viscount  Sackville  in 
1782. 

704 


NOTES 

P.  82.  Lord  Mark  Kerr.    Made  a  general  1743,  died  1752. 

P.  82.  The  Earl  of  Stair.  John,  second  Earl  (1673-1747)  ; 
field-marshal,  1742. 

P.  83.  The  American  War.  Opened  1775  (Lexington),  and 
lasted  seven  years.  In  1777,  the  war  fever  was  at  its  height, 
and  the  Whigs,  among  whom  Fox  was  rapidly  taking  the  lead, 
were  despondent. 

P.  83.  Mr.  Fox  and  his  friends.  Fox  had  been  a  great  dandy, 
visiting  Paris  to  choose  a  waistcoat,  wearing  red-heeled  shoes, 
blue  hair-powder,  and  a  hat  feather,  but  had  now  become 
negligent. 

P.  84.  Dress  never  totally  fell  .  .  .  The  Revolution  brought 
great  changes  in  costume,  principally  in  the  direction  of  sim- 
plicity. 

P.  84.  Mock-heroic  Poetry.     Pope's  Rape  of  the  Lock. 

P.  84.  Blue  stockings.  From  Benjamin  Stillingfleet's  (1702- 
1771)  blue  stockings.  He  frequented  both  Mrs.  Montagu's  and 
Mrs.  Vesey's. 

P.  84.  The  two  publications.  In  1775  and  1777;  see  Introduc- 
tion. 

P.  84.  Mrs.  Montague.  Mrs.  Elizabeth  Montagu  (1720-1800) 
had  an  income  of  £6000,  and  wrote  an  Essay  on  the  Writings  and 
Genius  of  Shakespear,  1769.  Madame  du  Deffand,  Marquise  de  la 
Lande  (1696-1780),  mistress  of  the  Due  d'Orleans  and  President 
Henanlt.  She  was  blind  for  thirty  years. 

P.  85.  Le  vrai  Amphytrion  :  for  "  Le  veritable  Amphytrion  est 
1'Amphytrion  oil  Ton  dine"  (Moliere's  Amph.  iii.  5).  A  dispute 
having  arisen  as  to  the  identity  of  the  master  of  the  house,  owing 
to  a  visit  from  Jupiter  to  Amphytrion's  wife  Alcmene  (who 
became  the  mother  of  Hercules),  this  answer  was  given  by  Sosie, 
a  slave. 

P.  86.  Junius.  In  his  second  letter  to  Sir  William  Draper,  the 
captor  of  Manilla,  Junius  accuses  him  of  keeping  silence  in  the 
matter  of  the  ransom,  bribed,  perhaps,  by  "the  blushing  ribbon 
which  is  now  the  perpetual  ornament  of  your  person."  Draper 
received  the  red  ribbon  of  the  Bath  in  1766. 

P.  86.  If  we  may  believe  Boswell.  "  There  is  not  one  sentence 
of  true  criticism  in  her  book"  (Johnson  to  Reynolds). 

P.  86.  Pulteney,  Earl  of  Bath  (1684-1764),  Walpole's  opponent. 

P.  87.  Mrs.  Vesey.  Elizabeth  Vesey  (?  1715-1791)  became 
imbecile  in  1789.  Mademoiselle  de  VEspinasse  (1732-1776). 
Lespinasse  was  a  fancy  name. 

P.  87.  Madame  de  Sevigne.  The  Marquise  de  Sevigne  (1626- 
1696),  whose  Letters  were  published  in  1726. 

P.  88.  Mrs.  Thrale.  Hester  L.  Piozzi,  ne'e  Salusbury  (1741- 
1821).  Mr.  Thrale  was  a  wealthy  brewer,  and  Samuel  Johnson 

705  45 


WRAXALI/S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

(1709-1784)  almost  lived  at  their  house.  She  married  Gabriel 
Piozzi,  a  Roman  Catholic,  a  few  months  before  Johnson's  death. 
She  annotated  the  fourth  edition  (1836)  of  these  Memoirs. 

P.  88.  What  are  we  to  think  of  a  man  ?  Mrs.  Piozzi  says  "  dog  " 
and  "scoundrel"  were  used  in  play.  "Scoundrel,"  "blockhead" 
and  "  rascal "  were  favourite  epithets  of  Johnson. 

P.  88.  Lord  Russel  and  Algernon  Sidney.  William,  Lord 
Russell  (1639-1683),  and  Algernon  Sidney  (1622-1683),  executed 
for  implication  in  the  Rye  House  Plot. 

P.  88.  Pennant.  Thomas  Pennant  (1726-1798),  naturalist,  and 
friend  of  Gilbert  White  of  Selborne. 

P.  89.  William  the  Third.  Johnson,  "  the  last  of  the  Tories  " 
(Carlyle),  was  a  good  deal  of  a  Jacobite. 

P.  89.  Charles  the  Twelfth  and  Hannibal. 

"  On  what  foundation  stands  the  warrior's  pride, 
How  just  his  hopes  let  Swedish  Charles  decide." 

The  Vanity  of  Human  Wishes. 

P.  89.  Wolsey  and  Sejanus. 

"Shall  Wolsey's  wealth  with  Wolsey 's  end  be  thine  V'—Ibid. 
Pp.  89-90.  Charles  VII.  and  Xerxes. 

"  All  times  their  scenes  of  pompous  woes  afford, 
From  Persia's  tyrant  to  Bavaria's  lord." — Ibid. 

P.  90.  A  melancholy  morbid  humour,  which  made  him,  he  said, 
"  mad  all  his  life— at  least,  not  sober  "  (September  16,  1778). 

P.  90.  Topham  Beauclerk  (1739-1780),  Dr.  Johnson's  great 
friend. 

P.  92.  Stepney.  George  Stepney  (1663-1707),  envoy  to 
Brandenburg,  1692. 

P.  92.  Charles,  Earl  of  Dorset.  Charles  Sackville,  sixth  Earl, 
died  1706. 

P.  92.  Marlborough  died  in  1722. 

P.  93.  Garrick  David  Garrick  (1719-1779),  Johnson's  first 
pupil  at  Edial. 

P.  93.  Mrs.  Carter.  Elizabeth  Carter  (1717-1806),  translator 
of  Epictetus. 

P.  93.  Madame  Dacier  (1651-1720),  classical  translator. 

P.  93.  Dr.  Burney  and  his  daughter.  Charles  Burney,  Mus.D. 
(1726-1814).  Fanny  Burney,  Madame  d'Arblay  (1752-1840), 
wrote  Evelina,  1778,  and  Cecilia,  1782. 

P.  93.  Horace  Walpole,  fourth  Earl  of  Orford  (1717-1797), 
fourth  son  of  Sir  Robert  Walpole.  He  said  of  Wraxall,  "  He  is 
popping  into  every  spot  where  he  can  make  himself  talked  of  by 
talking  of  himself  "(1781). 

706 


NOTES 

P.  93.  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds  (1723-1792),  founder  of  the  Literary 
Club  known  as  Johnson's  Club,  1764. 

P.  93.  Mrs.  Ghapone  (1727-1801),  essayist,  and  friend  of  Samuel 
Richardson. 

P.  94.  Dr.  Shipley,  Bishop  of  St.  Asaph  (1714-1788).  Sir 
William  Jones  (1746-1794),  member  of  the  Literary  Club.  The 
AbbeRaynal  (1713-1796). 

P.  94.  Lord  Erskine.  Thomas,  first  Baron  Erskine  (1750-1823), 
was  Lord  Chancellor,  1806-7. 

P.  95.  Mrs.  Boscawen,  ne'e  Glanville,  died  1805 ;  wife  of 
Admiral  Bosca wen  (1711-1761);  "all  elegance  and  good  breed- 
ing "  (Madame  d'Arblay). 

P.  95.  Mr.  Pepys.  Sir  W.  W.  Pepys,  Bart.,  friend  of  Mrs. 
Thrale. 

P.  95.  Sir  James  Macdonald,  "  the  Marcellus  of  Scotland " 
(Bos  well),  died  young,  1766. 

P.  95.  Duchess  Dowager  of  Portland.     Died  1785. 

P.  95.  Duchess  of  Devonshire.  Georgiana  Spencer  (1757-1806), 
whose  beautiful  face  lives  in  Reynolds'  and  Gainsborough's 
portraits  of  her. 

P.  96.  At  Inverary.  "  What  I  admire  here,"  said  Johnson, 
"is  the  total  defiance  of  expense." 

P.  96.  To  the  Arno,  in  1784. 

P.  97.  Hume  and  Adam  Smith.  David  Hume  (1711-1776). 
Adam  Smith  (1723-1790)  had  been  a  member  of  the  Club. 
Edward  Gibbon  also,  who  was  M.P.,  1774-1782,  and  a  Lord 
Commissioner  of  Trade  at  £750  a  year  from  1779  to  1782. 

P.  97.  Hobbes.  Thomas  Hobbes  (1588-1679),  whose  Leviathan 
influenced  Rousseau.  Tyers.  Thomas  Ty era  (1726-1787),  "Tom 
Restless"  of  The  Idler. 

P.  98.  Jack  Ketch,  the  executioner  of  Russell  and  Sidney,  died 
1686.  John  Wilkes  (1727-1797).  The  words  quoted  are  not 
Johnson's,  but  only  a  supposition  of  Boswell. 

P.9S.  Maupertuis  (1698-1759),  mathematician;  Helvetius 
(1715-1771),  philosopher;  Montesquieu  (1689-1755),  author  of 
Esprit  des  Lois  ;  Fontenelle  (1657-1757) ;  Madame  du  Chatelet 
(1706-1749) ;  DArgens  (1704-1771)  ;  Mademoiselle  de  Launay,  i.e. 
the  Baroness  von  Staal  (1693-1750) ;  the  President  Renault 
(1685-1770),  historian,  etc. ;  D'Alembert  (1717-1783),  encyclo- 
paedist ;  Diderot  (17 13-1784),  encyclopaedist ;  Condamine,  C.  M.  de 
la  (1701-1774),  traveller  ;  the  Duchess  de  Choiseul,  wife  of  the 
Due  de  Choiseul  (1719-1785) ;  Marmontel  (1723-1799) ;  the  Duke 
de  Nivernois  or  Nivernais  (1716-1798)  ;  the  Abbe'  Barthelemi  or 
Barthelemy  (1750-1812)  ;  Turgot  (1727-1781),  economist. 

P.  99.  Marchioness  of  Rambouillet  (1588-1665). 

P.  99.  Countess  de  la  Suze  (1626-1673),  poetess. 
707 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

Pp.  99-100.  Duchess  du  Maine  (1676-1753). 

P.  100.  Gellamare.     Prince  Antonio  Cellamare  (1657-1723). 

P.  100.  De  Tencin.     The  Marquise  de  Tencin  (1681-1749). 

P.  100.  Mancini.     Ortensia  Mancini  (1646-1699). 

P.  100.  St.  Evrfmond.  The  Seigneur  St.  Evremond  (1613- 
1703),  one  of  the  most  brilliant  of  French  wits. 

P.  101.  Sir  Joseph  Yorke  (1724-3792),  created  Baron  Dover  1788  ; 
ambassador  at  the  Hague,  1761-1780.  The  Prince  of  Orange, 
William  V.  (1748-1806),  was  driven  from  Holland  by  the  French. 

P.  102.  War  ivith  Holland.  The  Stadtholder's  party  wished  to 
keep  strict  neutrality  towards  Great  Britain  and  the  American 
Colonies. 

P.  102.  John  and  Cornelius  de  Witt  Cornellis  born  1623  ; 
Jan  born  1625 ;  both  murdered  in  1672.  After  this  event 
William  of  Orange  (afterwards  William  III.  of  England) 
became  Stadtholder.  Van  Berkel.  Engelbert  Francis  Van  Berkel, 
counsellor  and  Pensionary  of  Amsterdam,  and  John  de  Neuf  ville, 
citizen  of  the  same,  whose  names  appeared  in  the  proposed 
treaty  with  the  United  States  taken  in  Laurens's  trunk  in  1780. 

P.  103.  William  I.  (1533-1584),  Stadtholder,  i.e.  chief  magis- 
trate of  the  United  Provinces. 

P.  103.  Commodus,  poisoned  by  a  concubine,  192. 

P.  103.  Maurice  (1567-1625)     Frederick-Henry  (1584-1647). 

P.  103.  William  II.  died  of  smallpox  in  1650. 

P.  104.  Vied  in  demonstrations.  The  Princess  was  given 
£60,000,  and  her  husband  £160,000. 

P.  105.  Frederick-William  II.  (b.  1744  ;  1786-1797). 

P.  106.  Barnevelt  (1549-1619),  the  Grand  Pensionary  (i.e. 
President  of  the  Dutch  Parliament),  who  won  the  recognition  of 
Dutch  independence  from  Spain.  Heinsius  (1641-1720). 

P.  106.  Alva  went  to  the  Netherlands,  1567. 

P.  107.  William,  Duke  of  Cumberland  (1721-1765),  the  signatory 
of  Klosterzeven. 

P.  107.  Ferdinand  of  Brunswic  (1721-1792)  commanded  the 
English  and  Hanoverian  troops  under  Frederick  the  Great. 

P.  108.  Illumines.  A  secret  political  society  founded  in  1776 
by  Adam  Weishaupt  (1748-1830). 

P.  108.  Mr.  Osborn.  John  Osborne,  envoy  extraordinary  to 
Saxony  in  1771. 

P.  109.  Lord  Walpole  (1678-1757),  uncle  of  the  letter-writer. 
Lord  Hampden  (1706-1783). 

P.  109.  Sir  William  Temple  (1628-1699),  a  friend  of  Jan  de  Witt. 

P.  109.  Mr.  Wroughton.  Afterwards  Sir  Thomas  Wroughton, 
K.B.,  Ambassador  to  Sweden  ;  died  1787. 

P.  110.  Brantome.  The  Seigneur  de  Brantome  (1540-1614), 
historian  of  French  ladies. 

708 


NOTES 


P.  110.  The 


"  Brandy-faced  Nan  has  left  us  in  the  lurch, 
Her  face  to  the  brandy-shop  and  her to  the  church." 

P.  110.  Messalinas  and  Faustinas,  dissolute  Empresses  of 
Claudius  I.  and  Antoninus  Pius. 

P.  111.  Elizabeth.  Elizabeth  Petrowna  (6.  1709;  1741-1761). 
Catherine.  Catherine  II.  (6.  1729  ;  1761-1796). 

P.  111.  Augustus  III.  (1696-1763). 

P.  111.  Count  Poniatowski.  Stanislas  Augustus  (1732-1798), 
last  King  of  Poland. 

P.  111.  Orlof.  Gregor  v.  Orloff  (1734-1783),  made  a  Prince 
of  the  German  Empire  by  Catherine. 

P.  112.  Spontoon,  a  kind  of  halberd. 

P.  112.  Alexis  Orloff  ( 1736-1808),  younger  brother  of  Gregor  v. 
Orloff. 

P.  112.  Emperor  Ivan  (1741-1764). 

P.  112.  Castera  published  his  Vie  de  Catharine  II.  in  1797. 

P.  112.  Sir  John  Dick,  Bart.  (?  1719-1804),  previously  Consul 
at  Genoa  ;  created  Knight  of  the  Russian  Order  of  St.  Alex- 
ander Newski  by  Catherine  II.  A  commissioner  for  auditing 
public  accounts.  Lady  Dick  died  in  1781. 

P.  113.  Mr.  Thomas  Hope  (1770-1831),  a  virtuoso  of 
Amsterdam,  settled  in  England  c.  1796. 

P.  114.  Eazoumo/sky  (1709-1771). 

P.  115.  Margrave  of  Anspach  (1736-1806),  died  in  England  ; 
a  nephew  of  Queen  Caroline. 

P.  116.  Rear-Admiral  Greig.  Sir  Samuel  Greig  (1735-1788), 
Russian  admiral. 

P.  118.  The  false  Demetrius  (1581-1606).  The  murdered 
Demetrius  was  personated  by  a  noble  monk,  who,  however, 
reigned  for  less  than  a  year. 

P.  118.  Pugatchetf  (mQ-lllb}  closely  resembled  Peter  III. 

P.  119.  Prince  de  Ligne  (1735-1814),  an  Austrian. 

P.  119.  Marshal  Haddick  (1710-1790),  Austrian  field-marshal. 

P.  121.  Schism^.  The  English  officers  in  the  Russian  service 
defeated  a  Turkish  fleet  at  Chesme  Bay  (variously  spelled). 

P.  121.  Calmuck  for  Kalmuck  ;  member  of  a  nomad  tribe  of 
Asia  and  Russia. 

P.  122.  Elphinstone.  John  Elphinstone  (1722-1785),  Russian 
admiral,  left  the  service  after  Chesme  Bay. 

P.  122.  Princess  Sophia,  for  Dorothea  (re-baptised  Maria 
Feodorowiia),  mother  of  Alexander  I.  She  married  Paul  1. 
(6.  1754  ;  1796-1801). 

P.  122.  Marshal  RomanzoffW  1730-1796). 

P.  123.  Fundanius  and  Nasidienus.     See  Horace,  Satires,  bk. 
709 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

ii.  8.  Fundanius,  a  Roman  comic  writer  of  the  Augustan  age, 
is  supposed  to  describe  a  vulgar  dinner  given  by  Nasidienus 
(Salvidienus  Rufus,  died  A.D.  40),  when  the  dusty  hanging 
tapestry  fell  on  the  dishes. 

P.  124.  Sir  William  Hamilton  (1730-1803),  Ambassador  at 
Naples,  1764-1800.  His  second  wife  was  Nelson's  and  Rornney's 
Lady  Hamilton. 

P.  125.  Auerstadt.  On  the  same  day  as  Jena,  1806.  He  is 
generally  described  as  the  Duke  of  Brunswick-Luneburg  (1735- 
1806).  *This  Princess,  sister  of  Queen  Caroline. 

P.  125.  The  present  King.  The  royal  title  was  granted  by 
Napoleon  and  afterwards  confirmed,  1815. 

Pp.  126-7.  I  have  heard  this  subject  .  .  .  die  of  a  natural  death. 
This  paragraph  does  not  appear  in  later  editions  (till  1884), 
having  been  struck  out  as  a  result  of  the  Woronzow  prosecution. 
See  Introduction.  Woronzow  (1741-1805)  was  a  son-in-law  of 
the  Earl  of  Pembroke. 

P.  127.  The  Prince  of  Wirtemberg,  afterwards  King  Frederick  I. 
(or  II.)  (1754-1816). 

P.  127.  A  gentleman.     Sir  John  C.  Hippesley  (1748-1825). 

P.  128.  Old  Frederick,  i.e.  the  Great. 

P.  128.  Francis  .  .  .  of  Austria  (1768-1835). 

P.  130.  The  Duchess.  Augusta,  daughter  of  Frederick,  Prince 
of  Wales,  died  in  London,  1813. 

P.  132.  Its  failure  .  .  .  were  solemnized.  Omitted  in  later 
editions.  The  Princess  died  in  1828. 

P.  132.  Sophia  of  Brunswic,  divorced  1694.  George  II.  was 
called  "young  Konigsmark"  by  his  enemies. 

P.  133.  Alexis,  afterwards  Czar,  died  1718. 

P.  133.  The  late  King  of  Prussia.  Frederick  William  II. 
(1744-1797). 

P.  133.  Christian  VII.  (b.  1749  ;  1766-1808).  Caroline  Matilda 
(1751-1775).  See  Introduction. 

P.  134.  Sir  John  Stepney,  Bart.  Ambassador  to  Saxony,  1775, 
and  to  Prussia,  1783. 

P.  134.  Schrepfer.  The  account  is  in  his  Memoirs  of  the  Courts 
of  Berlin,  Dresden,  etc.,  vol.  i.  283  et  seq.  The  ghost  was  to 
have  revealed  hidden  treasure. 

P.  139.  TJiat  capital,  i.e.  of  Naples  and  the  two  Sicilies. 

P.  139.  Frederick  (1707-1751).  And  Sir  William  himself  was 
the  future  George  III.'s  foster-brother ;  he  was  Equerry  before 
the  accession.  He  entered  the  Foot  Guards  at  the  age  of 
seventeen. 

P.  140.  The  Elder  Pliny  perished  in  the  eruption  of  A.D.  79. 
Pausanius,  author  of  the  Itinerary. 

P.  141.  In  Piccadilly.     After  Sir  William's  recall  (1800)  he  and 

710 


NOTES 

Emma,  (the  second)  Lady  Hamilton,  divided  their  time 
between  (the  former)  No.  23  Piccadilly  and  Nelson's  house  at 
Merton. 

P.  141.  Sir  John  Macpherson  (1745  -  1821).  Monsieur  de 
Calonne,  the  famous  minister  (1734-1802).  Mr.  Kemble  (1757- 
1823),  brother  of  Mrs.  Siddons,  married  Priscilla  Brereton  (nee 
Hopkins),  an  actress.  The  Reverend  Mr.  Nelson.  William,  the 
first  Earl  (1757-1835),  brother  of  Horatio  Nelson. 

P.  141.  The  Fandango  or  Seguedilla  (for  Seguidilla),  lively 
Spanish  dances. 

P.  143.  Ferdinand  IV.  of  Naples,  and  First  of  the  two  Sicilies 
(b.  1751  ;  1759-1825),  married  a  daughter  of  Maria  Theresa. 

P.  144.  His  first  wife,  ne'e  Barlow,  died  in  1782. 

P.  145.  Lazaroni,  Lazzaroni.  Homeless  Neapolitan  beggars 
who  find  refuge  in  the  Hospital  of  St.  Lazarus. 

P.  146.  Tanucci  (1698-1783),  succeeded  as  Prime  Minister,  in 
1777,  by  the  Marquis  Sambuca. 

P.  147.  Billiards.  In  origin,  probably  an  English  game.  Cp. 
"Let's  to  billiards"  (Ant.  and  Cleop.,  ii.  5).  Chocolate.  First 
English  mention  by  Pepys,  1664. 

P.  150.  Marshal  Suwarrow.  The  Count  Souvarof,  Soovorof, 
etc.,  Russian  general  (1729-1800).  Madame  de  Maintenon,  mistress 
of  Louis  XIV. 

P.  150.  St.  Simon.  Louis  de  Rouvroi,  Due  de  St.  Simon  (1675- 
1755),  of  the  Mtfmoires.  The  Duke  de  Vendome  (1654-1712). 
Cardinal  Alberoni  (1664  -  1752).  Du  Bois,  1  Girard  Dubois 
(1628-1696).  Mademoiselle  de  Montpensier  (1627-1793),  Duchesse 
de  Montpensier,  authoress  of  Memoires  and  daughter  of  Gaston, 
Due  d'Orleans  (1608-1660),  the  conspirator  against  Richelieu. 

P.  151.  Bourke.  On  November  24,  1801,Bourke  and  Belcher 
gave  a  pugilistic  exhibition  near  Maidenhead,  in  which  the  former 
was  worsted.  Lord  Say  and  Sele  and  other  men  of  fashion  were 
present.  The  Palcestra,  i.e.  wrestling-ground. 

P.  152.  Leopold.  Afterwards  the  Emperor  Leopold  II.  (1747- 
1792). 

P.  154.  Acton.  Sir  J.  F.  E.  Acton  (1736-1811),  prime  minister, 
and  generalissimo  of  the  fleet  and  army  of  Naples.  Barbarossa. 
The  emperor  Frederick  I.  (1121-1190). 

P.  155.  Jane,  Queen  of  Naples.  Joanna  I.  (1326-1382  ;  put  to 
death).  She  has  her  place  in  Fuller's  Profane  State. 

P.  156.  Aqua  tophana,  or  tofana.  An  arsenical  poison  first 
used  by  an  Italian  woman  of  this  name  in  the  seventeenth 
century. 

P.  159.  Zechins.  French,  sequin ;  Italian,  zecchino.  An  old 
Italian  and  Turkish  coin,  first  used  in  Venice  in  thirteenth 
century  :  gold,  worth  about  9s.  3d. 

711 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

P.  159.  Benedict  XIV.  (1675-1758). 

P.  160.  Sbirri,  i.e.  police  officers.  Pope  Julius  (b.  1487  ;  1550- 
1555). 

P.  163.  The  Prince  of  Tour  and  Taxis.  Charles  Anselme  (1733- 
1805).  The  Counts  of  Tour  and  Taxis  became  Princes  of  the 
Empire  in  1681. 

P.  163.  Boccace.  Giovanni  Boccaccio  di  Certaldo  (1313-1375), 
whose  Decameron  (1353)  was  written  for  Queen  Joanna  of 
Naples.  Margaret  (1492-1549)  wrote  the  Boccacciaii  tales  of  the 
Heptameron. 

P.  163.  Konigsmarck  (1640-1694  ;  assassinated).  Katt.  Von 
Katt  (1681-1730),  a  Prussian  officer  executed  for  assisting  Fred- 
erick to  escape  to  England. 

P.  164.  Heyduc,  or  haiduck  (Hungarian  Jiajdu).  A  noble's 
halberdier. 

P.  165.  Breteuil  (1733-1807). 

P.  166.  Cosmo,  or  Cosimo,  de  Medici  (1389-1464).  Lorenzo  the 
Magnificent  (1448-1492). 

P.  166.  Sir  Horace  Mann  (1701-1786).  Assistant  at  the  Em- 
bassy at  Florence,  1737-40,  and  afterwards  Ambassador.  Horace 
Walpole's  correspondent. 

P.  166.  Brantome.  Pierre  de  Bourdeilles,  Abbe  de  Brantome 
(1540-1614),  memoir-writer.  See  ante,  p.  110. 

P.  166.  Transferred  to  a  Prince  of  Lorraine,  who  afterwards 
became  the  Emperor  Francis  I. 

P.  168.  Leopold  ruled  in  Tuscany  from  1765  to  1790. 

P.  168.  The  Countess  Cowper.  Hannah  Anne  Gore,  married 
1775  to  George,  Earl  Cowper  and  Prince  of  Milan  (died  at 
Florence,  1789).  She  died  1826. 

P.  169.  Mildenheim.  Marlborough  was  made  Prince  of 
Mindelheim  in  1705. 

P.  169.  Laudohn.  G.  E.,  Baron  von  Laudon  (1716-1790), 
Austrian  general,  fought  against  the  Turks  1786-8.  Joseph,  is 
the  Emperor  Joseph  II.  (1741-1790).  The  Prince  de  Ligne,  whose 
Miscellanies,  Military,  Literary  and  Sentimental,  appeared  in  1795- 
1811,  in  thirty-four  volumes. 

P.  171.  Potemkin.     G.  A.,  Prince  Potemkin  (1736-1791). 

P.  171.  Foscari.  Francesco  Foscari  (1704-1790),  Ambassador 
at  Petersburgh  in  1781. 

P.  172.  Sistova,  1791. 

P.  173.  Fox,  after  Pitt's  decease.  When  he  assumed  office  he 
recognised  the  necessity  of  checking  Napoleon. 

P.  173.  Kaunitz  and  Hertzberg.  Von  Kaunitz  (1711-1794), 
" the  coachman  of  Europe."  E.  W.  von  Herzberg  (1725-1795). 
J.  R.  von  Bischoffswerder,  died  1803. 

P.  173.  Lord  Grenville.  William,  Lord  Grenville  (1759-1834), 
712 


NOTES 

was  Secretary  for  Foreign  Affairs  under  Pitt  in  1791,  and  became 
Premier  in  1806. 

P.  174.  Mr.  Adair,  afterwards  Sir  Robert  Adair  (1763-1855). 

P.  174.  Belgrade.  Restored  to  the  Turks  by  the  Peace  of 
Reichenbach,  1790.  The  business  of  Oczakow.  Potemkin  took 
Oczakow  from  the  Turks,  1788  ;  and  Pitt  vainly  demanded  its 
restitution. 

P.  175.   The  Poissardes,  fishwives,  low  people. 

P.  176.  A  victim  to  poison.     This  is  denied. 

P.  177.   Girondists  predominated  at  Paris,  1792-3. 

P.  177.  The  Chevalier  de  St.  George.  Charles  Edward  Stuart, 
the  Young  Pretender  (?  1720-1788),  who  escaped  from  Scotland 
in  1746.  His  wife,  Louisa,  "Countess  of  Albany"  (1753-1824), 
was  the  mistress  of  Alfieri,  the  poet.  Though  Charles  Edward 
spent  much  of  his  later  years  in  Florence,  he  died  in  Rome  in  1788. 

P.  178.  John  Sobieski  (1629-1696)  became  King  of  Poland  in 
1674.  The  Poles  afterwards  preferred  Augustus  of  Saxony  to 
John's  son,  James  Louis  Sobieski  (1667-1734). 

P.  179.  James  the  Second  became  Lord  High  Admiral  in  1660. 

P.  180.  Lord  Robert  Manners.  A  Lord  Robert  Manners  was 
M.P.  for  Cambridge  county  (?  died  1782  in  West  Indies).  A 
Colonel  Manners  figures  in  the  Diary  of  Mine.  D'Arblay,  in  1787 
and  1789.  He  was  then  at  court;  young  and  extremely  hand- 
some, irresistibly  diverting,  her  constant  friend.  This  may  be 
the  cornet  of  the  text.  A  General  Russell  Manners,  "  Colonel  of 
the  2Gth  Dragoons,"  died  in  1800. 

P.  180.  Mrs.  Lane,  afterwards  Lady  Fisher,  died  1689.  Charles 
escaped  as  her  man-servant. 

P.  181.  De  Choiseul  was  Prime  Minister,  1760-70. 

P.  182.  De  Broglio.  Victor  Frai^ois,  Due  de  Broglie  (1718- 
1804),  became  marshal,  1759.  The  late  Duke  of  Glocester.  William 
Henry,  George  III.'s  brother  (1743-1805). 

P.  182.  1784.     An  error  ;  see  ante,  note  to  p.  177. 

P.  184.  Liberality  and  bounty  of  George  III.  She  was  received 
at  St.  James's  as  Princess  of  Stolberg. 

P.  184.  Hardwicke.  Philip  Yorke,  third  Earl  (1757-1834). 
Became  Earl,  1790.  Sir  John  Dalrymple,  Bart.  (1726-1810), 
author  of  An  Essay  towards  a  General  History  of  Feudal  Property 
in  Great  Britain  and  Ireland  (1757),  and  Memoirs  (1771),  the 
latter  illustrated  by  English  and  French  state  papers. 

P.  184.  Lord  Rochford.  William  Henry,  fourth  Earl  (1717- 
1781),  was  Secretary  of  State,  1768-75. 

P.  185.   The  Queen's  House,  now  Buckingham  Palace. 

P.  185.  Queen  of  Bohemia.  Elizabeth  Stuart  (1596-1662), 
whose  husband  was  driven  into  exile,  1620.  The  young  Duke  of 
Glocester,  son  of  Anne. 

713 


WRAXALI/S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

P.  386.  Charles  of  Lorraine  (1712-1780),  Governor  of  the  Low 
Countries  from  1744.  He  was  Francis  I.'s  brother. 

P.  187.  Keppel's  engagement.  OffUshant,  July  27,  with  the  Comte 
d'Orvilliers  (1708-1791),  when  the  vice-admiral,  Palliser,  failed  to 
obey  Keppel's  signals,  and  the  French  fleet  escaped.  Keppel  neither 
defended  nor  accused  Palliser,  but  was  tried  by  court-martial  at 
the  latter's  instigation,  and  acquitted.  When  D'Orvilliers  rode 
Master  of  the  Channel,  he  had  sixty-six  ships  of  the  line,  and  Sir 
Charles  Hardy  only  thirty-eight.  Sir  diaries  Hardy  (1716- 
1780). 

P.  188.  Keppel  Augustus,  Viscount  Keppel  (1725-1786), 
admiral,  1778  ;  viscount,  1782.  Palliser.  Sir  Hugh,  Bart.  (1723- 
1796),  vice-admiral,  1778  ;  admiral,  1787. 

P.  188.  Lord  Howe.  Richard,  Earl  Howe  (1726-1799),  was 
in  retirement,  1778-82.  To  be  distinguished  from  his  brother, 
Sir  William,  afterwards  (1799)  Viscount  Howe  (1729-1814), 
commander  in  the  American  Colonies,  who  also  resigned  in 
1778. 

P.  188.  Byron.  John  Byron  (1723-1786),  grandfather  of  the 
poet.  Lord  Byron  killed  his  friend,  William  Chaworth  (1765),  at 
the  Star  and  Garter,  Pall  Mall,  was  condemned  by  the  Peers,  but 
discharged. 

P.  189.  Holstenius,  or  Holste,  Lucas  (1596-1661). 

P.  190.  North's  Administration,  1770-82. 

P.  190.  Mason.  William  Mason  (1724-1797)  published  An 
Heroic  Epistle,  1773. 

P.  190.  Rodney.     George  Brydges,  first  Baron  (1719-1792). 

P.  191.  Villars.  "As  vain  and  insolent  as  Marshal  Villars" 
(H.  Walpole).  Princess  Amelia.  Daughter  of  George  II.  (1711- 
1786).  Trenck.  Frederick,  Baron  von  Trenck  (1726-1794 ; 
guillotined).  A  living  evidence.  Supposed  to  be  a  Miss  Ashe, 
called  "Pollard  Ash"  by  H.  Walpole,  who  married  Captain, 
afterwards  Admiral,  Jonathan  Faulkner. 

P.  191.  Marshal  de  Biron.  Louis,  Due  de  Biron  (1700-1788), 
lent  Rodney  1000  louis,  that  he  might  return  to  England  in  May 
1778.  The  latter  sailed  again  from  Plymouth,  December  29, 1779. 

P.  192.  De  Grasse.  The  Comte  de  Grasse- Tilly  (1723-1788), 
taken  by  Rodney  off  Sa.  Lucia,  April  12,  1782. 

P.  192.  Lyttelton.  Thomas,  second  Baron  Lyttelton  (1744- 
1779),  "the  wicked  Lord  Lyttelton,"  a  notorious  profligate,  de- 
nounced the  ministry  in  April ;  son  of  the  "good  Lord  Lyttelton" 
(1709-1773),  author  of  a  History  of  Henry  II.,  Poems,  etc. 

P.  193.  Villiers.  George,  second  Duke  of  Buckingham  (1628- 
1687).  Pope's  description  of  his  death  (Moral  Essays,  Ep.  iii., 
299)  has  been  refuted.  Wharton.  Philip,  Duke  of  (1698-1731), 
created  "Duke  of  Northumberland "  by  the  Old  Pretender. 

714 


NOTES 

P.  194.  Pit  Place.  It  was  in  his  London  house  he  dreamed 
that  a  bird  which  changed  into  a  woman  warned  him.  He  had 
heart  disease,  and  took  "  drugs." 

P.  195.  Sir  Richard  Hoare.  Sir  R.  C.  Hoare,  Bart.  (1758-1838), 
whose  wife  died  in  1785,  two  years  after  their  marriage.  Mrs. 
Dawson  is  said  to  have  survived  Lord  Lyttelton,  and  received 
£1000  by  his  will. 

P.  195.  Lord  North.  Frederick,  Lord  North  (1732-1792), 
became  Earl  of  Guilford,  1790. 

P.  196.  The  Riots.  See  Barnaby  Rudge  and  Walpole's  Letters, 
vol.  in.  p.  385  et  seq.  Collot  d'Herbois  (1750-1796). 

P.  197.  Mansfield's  residence,  occupying  all  the  north  side  of 
Bloomsbury  Square.  His  own  Memoirs  were  burnt.  Mr.  Lang- 
dale1 's.  Langdale  had  £20,000  worth  of  spirits  in  his  great  ware- 
house in  Upper  Holborn,  and  another  £8,000  worth  at  Holborn 
Bridge.  He  lost  a  case  against  the  "Sun  Fire  Office"  in  1780, 
because  the  fire  was  caused  by  riots.  In  1781  he  sued  the  Lord 
Mayor  for  £50,000  damages,  and  was  awarded  over  £18,000. 

P.  199.  Platoons,  i.e.  volleys. 

P.  201.  Sir  George  Savile  (1726-1784),  M.P.  for  York.  His  Bill 
for  the  relief  of  Roman  Catholics  (1778)  was  the  cause  of  the 
riots.  The  Duchess  of  Devonshire.  The  celebrated  Georgiana, 
Duchess  of  Devonshire  (1757-1806).  Lord  Clermont.  William 
Henry,  Earl  of  Clermont  (1722-1806),  "  father  of  the  turf." 

P.  201.  Sir  John  Macpherson  (1745-1821),  Governor-General 
of  India,  1785-6.  Mr.  Eden.  William  (1744-1814),  created 
Baron  Auckland,  1793.  Fraser.  The  Master  of  Lovat  (1726- 
1782),  lieutenant-general  and  M.P.  St.  John  (1746-1793), 
nephew  of  Bolingbroke,  M.P.  and  author. 

P.  202.  Colonel  North.  George  Augustus,  third  Earl  (1757- 
1802),  M.P.  1778-92.  Mr.  Brummell.  William  Brummell,  died 
1794 ;  father  of  Beau  Brummell,  the  leader  of  London 
fashion. 

P.  204.  Colonel  de  Burgh,  afterwards  thirteenth  Earl  of  Clan- 
ricarde  (1744-1808). 

P.  206.  Holroyd.  John  Holroyd  (1735-1821),  M.P.  for 
Coventry.  Created  Earl  of  Sheffield,  1816.  Lord  Percy  (1750- 
1830)  became  Earl  of  Beverley  in  1790. 

P.  207.  The  Dukes  of  Somerset  and  Argyle.  At  Somerset's 
suggestion  they  entered  the  Privy  Council  meeting  and  pro- 
posed that  Anne  should  be  asked  to  make  Shrewsbury  Lord 
Treasurer,  with  the  object  of  securing  the  Hanoverian  succes- 
sion. Rockingham.  Charles,  second  Marquis  (1730-1782), 
Prime  Minister,  1765-6,  and  March  to  July  1782.  In  1780,  a 
leader  of  the  Whig  Opposition. 

P.  208.  Wedderburn.  Alexander  Wedderburn  (1733-1805), 
715 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

Baron    Loughborough,    1780;    Lord    Chancellor,    1793;     Earl 
Rosslyn,  1801. 

P.  209.  Amherst.  Jeffrey,  Baron  Amherst  (1717-1797),  Com- 
inander-in-chief,  1778. 

P.  209.  Mansfield.  William,  first  Earl  (1705-1793),  Lord 
Chief  Justice,  1756.  He  reversed  Wilkes's  outlawry  in  1768 
on  a  technical  flaw,  substituting  fine  and  imprisonment. 

P.  209.  A  Magistrate  of  the  county  of  Surrey.  Mr.  Gillam ;  he 
was  acquitted. 

P.  210.  Wilkes.  Arrested  on  a  general  warrant,  1763,  but 
obtained  verdict  with  damages  for  illegal  arrest,  1769.  General 
warrants.  Forty-nine  persons  were  arrested  on  that  for 
Wilkes. 

P.  210.  Kennett.  Alderman  Brackley  Kennett,  Lord  Mayor 
(1779-80),  was  better  at  feasting  than  at  fighting,  and  had 
financial  difficulties  with  the  Corporation,  who  finally  paid  him 
£1000  in  settlement.  He  was  examined  before  the  Privy  Council 
on  a  charge  of  gross  inactivity  during  the  riots  ;  Burke  con- 
temptuously apologised  for  him,  and  he  was  let  off  with  severe 
reprimand. 

P.  211.  Effingham.     Thomas,  third  Earl,  died  1791. 

P.  212.  Lord  George  Gordon  (1751-1793),  M.P.  for  Ludgershall, 
1774-81.  Having  libelled  the  British  Government  and  Marie 
Antoinette,  he  was  imprisoned,  and  died  in  Newgate  of  gaol 
distemper. 

P.  213.  Henry  Herbert,  Earl  of  Carnarvon  (1740-1811). 

P.  213.  General  Murray,  died  1794. 

P.  213.  The  late  Lord  Rodney,  son  of  the  admiral  (1753-1802). 

P.  214.  The  late  Lord  Elcho,  died  1787.  Ranelagh,  a  place  of 
public  entertainment,  1742-1803.  A  kind  of  covered  Vauxhall. 
Now  part  of  Chelsea  Hospital  garden. 

P.  215.  Kett.  Robert  Kett  blockaded  Norwich,  and  was 
executed  1549. 

P.  217.  Lord  George  Germain  was  Secretary  of  State  for  the 
Colonies,  1775-82. 

P.  217.  Sir  Fletcher  Norton  (1716-1789),  made  Baron  Grantley, 
1782 ;  attacked  by  Junius,  Letter  39.  He  said  he  feared 
his  duties  had  impaired  his  intellect.  Sir  John  Gust  (1718- 
1770),  Speaker  in  1761  and  1768-70. 

P.  218.  Rigby.  Richard  Rigby  (1722-1788).  Cornwall  Charles 
W.  Cornwall  (1735-1789),  Speaker,  1780-9. 

P.  219.  Jenkinson  (1727-1808).     First  Earl  of  Liverpool,  1796. 

P.  219.  Shelburne.  William,  second  Earl  (1737-1805),  was 
Home  Secretary  under  Rockingham  in  1782,  and  became 
Premier  on  his  death. 

P.  220.  Dunning  reached  that   Goal,   while    Wallace  missed  it. 

716 


NOTES 

John  Dunning  (1731-1783),  created  first  Baron  Ashburton,  1782. 
James  Wallace,  died  1783  ;  Solicitor-General,  1778-80 ;  Attorney- 
General,  1780-83. 

P.  220.  Of  Juvenal's.  "Tis  we  that  make  thee  a  goddess, 
Fortune,  and  place  thee  in  Heaven." 

P.  220.  Geary.  Admiral  Sir  Francis  Geary,  Bart.  (?  1710-1796). 
Sir  Charles  Hardy  died  in  1780.  Darby.  George  Darby,  Com- 
mander-in-chief, 1780,  rear-admiral,  1781,  died  1790.  Barrington. 
Admiral  Samuel  Barrington  (1729-1800)  took  Sa.  Lucia,  1778. 
Palliser  was  made  Governor  of  Greenwich  Hospital  in  1782. 

P.  221.  Eugene.  Fra^ois  Eugene,  Prince  of  Savoy  (1663- 
1736),  and  L.  J.  G.  Konigseck  (1673-1751),  Austrian  commanders. 

P.  223.  Madison.  James  Madison,  fourth  President  of  the 
United  States  (1751-1836). 

P.  223.  Asiatic  foes.  Hyder  Ali  seized  Madras  in  1780,  before 
the  war  with  the  Mahrattas  was  concluded. 

P.  226.  National  Credit.  Twelve  millions  added  this  year  to 
the  National  Debt. 

P.  227.  Lord  Bute  for  retaining,  that  is,  withdrawing,  the 
subsidy. 

P.  228.  Norfolk  House.  Rented  from  the  Duke  of  Norfolk  till 
Carlton  House  was  ready. 

P.  229.  Cumberland.  William  Augustus  (1721-1765),  "hero  of 
Culloden." 

P.  231.  In  him  are  really  blended,  i.e.  in  the  Prince  of  Wales, 
George  IV. 

P.  232.  North  Briton.  There  were  forty-six  numbers  ;  com- 
menced June  1762  ;  published  weekly  ;  No.  45  on  April  23, 
1763.  Wilkes  was  arrested  on  April  30,  and  expelled  from 
the  House  of  Commons  in  January  1764.  In  February  he 
was  convicted  of  republishing  No.  45. 

P.  233.  Bute.  He  resigned  after  the  Peace  of  Paris.  Grafton's 
ministry  was  tottering  in  1769,  and  fell  next  year. 

P.  234.  A  General  Warrant  did  not  specify  names  or  crimes 
alleged.  Cp.  lettres  de  cachet. 

P.  234.  Monk.  George  Monck  (1608-1670),  who  brought  in 
Charles  II.,  and  was  created  Duke  of  Albemarle. 

P.  235.  A  dams.  John  Adams  (1735-1826),  the  second  President 
of  the  United  States,  was  presented  at  St.  James's,  June  1785, 
and  has  left  an  account  of  it  in  his  Works,  vol.  viii.  p.  257. 

P.  235.  Hawkesbury.  Robert  Jenkinson  (1770-1828),  son  of 
Charles  Jenkinson.  Created  Baron  Hawkesbury,  1803,  and 
became  Earl  of  Liverpool,  1808.  He  was  Foreign  Secretary, 
1801-3.  Late  Earl  of  Cardigan.  John,  fifth  Earl  (1725-1811). 
The  two  other  noblemen  were  Philip,  Earl  of  Chesterfield,  and 
Lord  Walsingham. 

717 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

P.  236.  Did  not  intend  to  resign.  The  Quarterly  Review  denies 
this.  Lord  Grey.  Charles,  second  Earl  (1764-1845).  The 
ministry  resigned  in  consequence,  1807. 

P.  237.  One  of  them,  a  nobleman.     The  fifth  Earl  of  Chesterfield. 

P.  238.  Dodington's  Diary.  Dodington  passed  the  day  at  Kew. 
He  was  a  favourite  of  Frederick,  Prince  of  Wales. 

P.  240.  Agriculture.  Francis,  fifth  Duke  of  Bedford  (1765- 
1802),  first  President  of  the  Smithfield  Club.  Thomas  Coke, 
first  Earl  of  Leicester  (1752-1842).  John,  fifteenth  Baron 
Somerville  (1765-1819),  with  George  III.  introduced  merino 
sheep.  Sir  John  Sinclair,  Bart.  (1754-1835),  first  President  of 
the  Board  of  Agriculture. 

P.  240.  Caricatures.    As  "  Farmer  George." 

P.  241.  Margaret  Nicholson.  A  mad  housemaid.  She  attempted 
to  assassinate  George  III.  with  a  dessert  knife  in  1786.  See 
Shelley's  Posthumous  Fragments  of  Margaret  Nicholson. 

P.  242.  Hadfield.  James  Hadfield  was  also  mad.  It  was  at 
Drury  Lane.  Tumults  of  March  1769,  when  the  mob  pelted  a 
cavalcade  on  its  way  to  St.  James's. 

P.  243.  Laurens.  Henry  Laurens  (1724-1792),  Ambassador  to 
Holland,  1780.  Condorcet.  The  Marquis  de  Condorcet  (1743- 
1794). 

P.  245.  Sophia  (1666-1726),  divorced  in  1694,  and  imprisoned 
till  her  death. 

P.  245.  His  two  German  mistresses.  Madame  de  Kielmannsegge, 
made  Countess  of  Darlington  in  1722,  and  Melesia,  Mademoiselle 
de  Schulemburg,  made  Duchess  of  Kendal  in  1719.  Anne  Brett 
(1667-1743)  married  Sir  William  Leman,  Bart.,  in  1737. 

P.  245.  Mrs.  Howard.     Henrietta,  Lady  Suffolk  (?  1681-1767). 

P.  246.  Walmoden.  Amelia  Sophia,  Countess  von  Walmoden, 
made  Countess  of  Yarmouth,  1739. 

P.  246.  Lady  Sarah  Lennox,  daughter  of  Duke  of  Richmond. 
Married  Sir  T.  C.  Bunbury,  1762,  and  afterwards  Hon.  G.  Napier. 
Died  1815. 

P.  247.  Burned  by  the  Dutch.  In  the  Medway,  1667.  Charles 
was  a  pensioner  of  Louis  XIV. 

P.  249.  A  Quaker.  Supposed  to  be  Hannah  Lightfoot,  but  the 
story  is  very  doubtful.  Lady  Tollemache.  Bridget  Henley, 
daughter  of  first  Earl  of  Northington,  and  wife  of  the  Hon. 
John  Tollemache. 

P.  249.  The  Soul  of  the  Cabinet.  Pitt  was  Secretary  of  State, 
the  Duke  of  Newcastle  being  Prime  Minister.  Pitt  became  Earl 
of  Chatham  in  1766.  The  Quarterly  Review  disputed  the  incidents. 

P.  250.  Churchill.  Charles  Churchill  (1731-1764),  satirist. 
Junius's  Letter  to  the  King,  No.  35,  December  19,  1769. 

P.  251.  Cricket  Ball.    Should  be  tennis  ball. 
718 


NOTES 

P.  253.  Charles,  third  Duke  of  Queensberry  (1698-1778).  John 
Gay,  the  poet  (1685-1732).  Charles,  second  'Duke  of  Dorset  (1711- 
1769).  Lord  John  Philip  Sackville,  M.P.  for  Tamworth,  son  of 
the  first  and  father  of  the  third  Duke.  Francis,  Earl  of  Guildford 
(1704-1790),  created  Earl,  1753.  His  first  wife,  the  mother  of 
Lord  North,  was  Lady  Lucy  Montagu.  Frederick  acted  as 
godfather.  Lady  A.  Hamilton.  "  Delamira "  of  the  Tatler  (Letter 
52)  ;  Jane,  wife  of  Lord  Archibald  Hamilton  of  Somerwell,  and 
youngest  daughter  of  James,  Earl  of  Abercorn. 

P.  253.  Glover,  the  Writer  of  "  Leonidas  "  ( 1 712-1785).  Leonidas 
appeared  in  1737.  See  ante,  note  to  p.  78. 

P.  254.  Egmont.    John,  second  Earl  (1711-1770). 

P.  254.  In  "  Venice  Preserved,"  by  Thomas  Otway,  one  of  the 
greatest  of  English  tragedies. 

P.  255.  To  Hockley-in-the-Hole,  near  Clerkenwell  Green. 

P.  255.  Mr.  Fraser.  William  Fraser,  Under-Secretary  for 
Northern  Department  in  1760,  and  for  Foreign  Affairs  in  1782. 
In  1784  one  of  the  Commissioners  for  the  Privy  Seal. 

P.  256.  Herenhausen,  a  castle  and  village  in  Hanover. 

P.  256.  Trapaud(1 1714-1801). 

P.  257.  Queen  Caroline  (1682-1737). 

P.  258.  La  Galissoniere.  The  Marquis  de  la  Galissoniere  (1693- 
1756). 

P.  258.  Lord  Anson  and  the  Duke  of  Newcastle.  Admiral  George, 
Baron  Anson  (1697-1762),  was  first  Lord  of  the  Admiralty,  1751-6, 
1757-62.  Thomas,  the  first  Duke  of  Newcastle  (1693-1768). 

P.  259.  Bute.  John,  third  Earl  of  Bute  (1713-1792).  Egham 
is  near  Windsor. 

P.  260.  Lothario.  The  haughty  gallant,  gay  and  perfidious,  in 
Howe's  The  Fair  Penitent  (1703). 

P.  261.  Duchess  of  Queensberry.  Catherine  Douglas  (ne'e  Hyde), 
wife  of  the  third  Duke,  died  1777.  An  eccentric  woman  of 
fashion. 

P.  261.  Bute  retired  in  1763. 

P.  26 1 .  The  Duke  of  Bedford.  John,  seventh  Duke  (1710-1771), 
negotiated  the  Peace. 

P.  262.  Dr.  Musgrave  (1732-1780). 

P.  263.  Craggs.  James  Craggs,  the  elder  (1657-1721),  is  be- 
lieved to  have  poisoned  himself  to  escape  inquiry  when  the  South 
Sea  bubble  burst.  James  Craggs,  the  younger  (1686-1721),  died 
of  small-pox,  before  his  father. 

P.  264.  Shelburne  was  accused  of  using  official  information 
for  speculation  in  stocks.  The  Edinburgh  Review,  however, 
denied  this. 

P.  264.  Grenville  Administration,  1763-5.  George  Grenville 
(1712-1770),  called  "the  gentle  shepherd." 

719 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

P.  265.  Miss  Chudleigh.  Elizabeth  Chudleigh  (1720-1788)  be- 
came Countess  of  Bristol  and  afterwards  Duchess  of  Kingston. 
She  was  tried  for  bigamy  in  1774. 

P.  267.  I  am  old  enough.  Wraxall  was  born  in  1751.  Sir 
Edward  Hawke  (1705-1781).  Admiral  in  1757  ;  later  created 
Baron  Hawke. 

P.  268.  The  fate  of  Oxford  and  Bolingbroke,  who  were  im- 
peached. 

P.  268.  Dr.  Tucker.  Josiah  Tucker,  D.D.  (1712-1799),  opposed 
the  war. 

P.  269.  Lord  Talbot.  William,  the  first  Earl  (1710-1782), 
Steward  of  the  Household.  Wilkes  and  he  fought  on  Bagshot 
Heath,  1762.  The  late  Earl  Temple  (1711-1779),  "Squire  Gawkey." 
Earl  of  Halifax.  George,  second  Earl  (1716-1771),  Secretary  of 
State,  1762.  Triumvir  with  Lords  Egremont  and  Grenville  in 
1763. 

P.  270.  The  Duke  of  Grafton.  Augustus,  third  Duke  (1735- 
1811),  Prime  Minister,  1766-70. 

P.  270.  Colonel  Luttrell.  Henry  Lawes  Luttrell,  second  Earl 
of  Carhampton  (1743-1821). 

P.  271.  Lord  Mountmorris.  Hervey,  second  Viscount  Mount- 
morres  (?  1746-1797),  committed  suicide. 

P.  271.  Junius.  Letter  1,  January  21;  Draper's  reply,  January 
26. 

P.  273.  Bradshaw.  Thomas  Bradshaw,  secretary  to  the  Duke 
of  Grafton,  M.P.,  and  a  Lord  of  the  Admiralty,  etc.,  eventually 
committed  suicide,  1 774. 

P.  274.  Desaguliers.  Thomas  Desaguliers  (?  1725-1780),  lieu- 
tenant-general, 1777. 

P.  274.  Woodfall  (1739-1805)  conducted  the  Public  Advertiser, 
1758-93. 

P.  276.  Brocklesbury.  Dr.  Richard  Brocklesbury  (1722-1797), 
a  friend  of  Johnson.  Martin.  Samuel  Martin,  M.P.,  Secretary 
to  the  Treasury;  dangerously  wounded  Wilkes  (November  1763). 
The  house  .  .  .  in  Piccadilly,  No.  94;  now  the  Naval  and  Military 
Club. 

P.  277.  Boyd  (1746-1794).  Essayist.  Lord  Macartney.  George, 
first  Earl  (1737-1806),  Governor  and  President  of  Fort  St.  George, 
1780-6.  Eosenhagen(n  737-1 798).  A  gambler  ;  died  Archdeacon 
of  Colombo. 

P.  278.  Greatrakes  (?  1723-1781).  A  barrister.  Memoirs  of  a 
Celebrated  Literary  and  Political  Character  from  17J{.2  to  1757, 
by  R.  Duppa  ;  published  in  1813  ;  attempt  to  prove  that  Glover 
wrote  Junius. 

P.  279.  De  Lolme  (1740-1806).  A  Swiss  political  writer, 
author  of  The  Constitution  of  England,  1771.  Wedderburn,  Alex. 

720 


NOTES 

ander  (1733-1805).  In  1769  he  deserted  the  Tories,  and  sup- 
ported Wilkes  ;  in  1770  he  attacked  North's  administration,  and 
became  Solicitor-General  in  1771.  Junius  said  of  him,  "There 
is  something  about  him  that  even  treachery  cannot  trust."  The 
first  Mrs.  Wedderburn  was  Bettv  Anne  Dawson. 

P.  280.  Hamilton  (1729-1796).  He  became  an  M.P.  in  1755. 
Mrs.  Piozzi  also  credited  him  with  the  Letters. 

Pp.  281-2.  Burnet,  or  Bulstrode,  or  Reresby.  Burnet's  History 
was  written  c.  1710-15.  Sir  Richard  Bulstrode  (1610-1711) 
wrote  a  Life  of  James  II.  Sir  John  Reresby  (1634-1689)  wrote 
Memoirs,  published  1734,  and  Travels  and  Memoirs,  published 
1813.  The  Question  respecting  Junius.  "  Since  I  wrote  the  pre- 
ceding observations,  a  perusal  of  the  work  lately  published,  de- 
nominated "  The  Identity  of  Junius  with  a  Distinguished  Living 
Character  Established,"  leaves  little  or  no  doubt  in  my  mind 
that  those  celebrated  productions  are  to  be  attributed  to  Sir 
Philip  Francis  "  (Wraxall). 

P.  283.  Paoli.     Pasquale  Paoli  (1726-1807),  died  in  London. 

P.  284.  Alberoni.  Julio  Alberoni  (1664-1752),  Minister  of 
Philip  V. 

P.  285.  Sir  William  Gordon.  Died  1798.  He  was  Minister 
at  Brussels  in  1763,  and  K.B.  in  1775.  UAiguillon  (1720- 
1798). 

P.  286.  Dyson.  Jeremiah  Dyson  (1722-1776),  nicknamed 
"  Mungo,"  a  Lord  of  the  Treasury. 

P.  290.  The  Landgrave  of  Hesse  Cassel  married  Mary,  George 
II.'s  fourth  daughter.  The  Howes.  Admiral  Earl  Richard  and 
General  Viscount  William  Howe. 

P.  291.  Burgoyne.  John  Burgoyrie  (1722-1792),  general  and 
dramatist,  surrendered  at  Saratoga,  1777.  Sir  Henry  Clinton,  the 
elder  (1 1738-1795). 

P.  292.  The  Mutiny  in  the  Navy,  etc.  At  Spithead,  for  arrears 
of  pay  ;  but  again,  more  serious,  at  the  Nore,  led  by  Parker,  who 
was  hanged.  The  expedition  to  the  Helder  captured  the  Dutch 
fleet.  Napoleon  crushed  Austria  at  Austerlitz,  and  Prussia,  in 
one  day,  at  Auerstadt  and  Jena.  He  allied  himself  with  Russia 
by  the  Treaty  of  Tilsit. 

P.  294.  The  Marquis  of  Rockingham.  The  ministries  referred 
to  are  as  follows  : — Rockingham's,  1765  ;  Grafton's,  1766  ;  North's, 
1770  ;  Rockingham's,  1782  ;  Shelburne's,  1782  ;  Portland's,  1783  ; 
Pitt's,  1783.  The  Duke  of  Grafton.  William  Henry,  the  third 
Duke  (1738-1809). 

P.  295.  Lauderdale.  John,  first  Duke  (1616-1682).  Welbore 
Ellis  (1713-1802)  became  Baron  Mendip,  1793.  H.  Walpole 
calls  him  Fox's  "Jackal." 

P.  296.  Barre'.     Isaac  Barr6  (1726-1802),  M.P.  for  Calne. 
721  46 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

P.  297.  Sir  Grey  Cooper.  Died  1801.  Secretary  of  Treasury, 
1765-82.  M.P.  for  Saltash. 

P.  297.  Alderman  Sawbridge.  John  Sawbridge,  Alderman  of 
Langbourn  (?  1732-1795),  M.P.  for  London.  Lord  Mayor,  1775-6. 
George  Byng.  M.P.  for  Middlesex. 

P.  298.  Pitt  and  Tierney.  On  May  27.  George  Tierney  (1761- 
1830),  M.P.  for  Southwark,  felt  himself  insulted  by  a  speech  of 
Pitt's.  Neither  of  the  antagonists  was  hurt. 

P.  299.  The  National  Finances.  North  had  been  Chancellor  of 
the  Exchequer  in  1767. 

P.  299.  Cavendish  (1732-1796)  was  Chancellor  of  the  Ex- 
chequer, 1782-3. 

P.  302.  A  very  advanced  age.  1704-1790.  Three  times  married. 
His  first  wife  was  Lady  Lucy  Montagu  ;  his  second,  Lady  Lewis- 
ham  ;  his  third,  Catherine,  Countess  of  Eockingham.  Dr. 
Brownlow  North  (1741-1820),  Bishop  of  Winchester,  1781. 

P.  303.  Dr.  Drummond.  Robert  Hay  Drunimond  (1711-1776), 
became  Archbishop,  1761.  Dr.  Markham.  William  Markham 
(1719-1807),  Archbishop  in  1777.  Dr.  Thomas.  John  Thomas 
(1696-1781). 

P.  304.  Lord  Melville.  Henry  Dundas  (1742-1811),  First  Lord 
of  the  Admiralty.  Read  1805  for  1806. 

P.  305.  Lord  Godolphin,  etc.  Sidney,  first  Earl  (1645-1712), 
Prime  Minister,  1702-10 ;  Henry  Pelham,  1743-54  ;  and  Lord 
Rockingham,  1765-6  and  1782. 

P.  305.  Southampton,  etc.  Henry,  third  Earl  (1573-1624), 
Shakespeare's  patron.  Edward  Hyde,  first  Earl  of  Clarendon 
(1609-1674). 

P.  306.  Lord  Stormont.  David,  seventh  Viscount  (1727-1796), 
became  Earl  of  Mansfield  in  1793.  Wraxall  was  in  error ;  he 
was  Secretary  for  the  Southern  Department  (Diet.  Nat.  Biog.). 
Wills  Hill,  second  Earl  of  Hillsborough  (1718-1793),  was  Secre- 
tary for  the  Northern  Department,  1779-82  ;  later  he  became 
Marquis  of  Downshire.  In  1782  the  secretaryship  for  the 
American  (Northern)  Department  was  abolished,  and  thence- 
forward there  were  three  secretaries  —  Home,  Foreign,  and 
Colonial. 

P.  307.  Governor  Johnstone.  Captain  (later  Commodore)  George 
Johnstone  (1730-1787),  Governor  of  West  Florida  in  1765  ;  M.P. 
for  Lostwithiel ;  East  India  Company  Director. 

P.  309.  Tlie  Duke  of  Dorset.  Lionel,  the  first  Duke  (1688-1765). 
He  was  Lord-Lieutenant  of  Ireland,  1730-7. 

P.  310.  Dr.  Eliot.  Sir  John  Elliott,  Bart.,  M.D.  (1736-1786). 
The  anecdote  is  also  told  of  the  first  Lord  Melville  and  Sir 
Walter  Farquhar. 

P.  312.  The  Memorable  Letter  of  Edward,  Earl  of  Dorset 
722 


NOTES 

(1591-1652),  who  killed  Edward  Bruce,  Lord  Kinross,  in  1613. 
The  letter  is  copied  in  the  Guardian,  Nos.  129  and  133. 
Charles,  Earl  of  Dorset  (1638-1706),  said  to  have  written  the 
verses  on  the  night  of  June  2-3,  1665  ;  but  Pepys  seems  to  have 
had  them  on  January  2. 

P.  313.  Marshal  Colyear.  W.  F.  Colyear  died  1747.  The  late 
Duke  of  Marlborough.  Charles,  the  second  Duke.  The  two 
expeditions  were  in  1758. 

P.  314.  Minden,  on  the  Weser,  1759. 

P.  314.  Captain  Smith.  Captain  John  Smith,  of  the  Guards. 
Sir  Sidney  Smith  (1764-1840). 

P.  317.  Lord  George's  duel.  Johnstone  had  abused  him  in  the 
House.  They  fought  on  December  17,  1770.  Lord  Sydney. 
Thomas  Townshend,  first  Viscount  (1733-1800). 

P.  319.  The  Earl  of  Sandwich.  John  George,  fourth  Earl 
(1718-1792).  Mr.  Eden.  William  Eden,  first  Baron  Auckland 
(1744-1814). 

P.  320.  "  The  Candidate"  appeared  June  1764,  and  was  an  attack 
on  Sandwich's  candidature  for  High  Stewardship  of  University 
of  Cambridge.  "  The  Essay  on  Woman  "  was  probably  Thomas 
Potter's  (1718-1759)  ;  it  was  denounced  by  Sandwich. 

P.  321.  In  Leadenhall  Street.  The  East  India  House  was 
between  Leadenhall  Market  and  Lime  Street. 

P.  322.  Macartney.  Sir  George,  afterwards  Earl,  Macartney 
(1737-1800).  Lord  Amherst.  Jeffrey,  first  Baron  Amherst,  K.B., 
died  1797  ;  he  was  Commander-in-chief,  1778-95.  He  com- 
manded in  America,  1758-64.  Wolfe.  James  Wolfe  (1727- 
1759). 

P.  324.  Lord  Thurlow.  Edward,  first  Baron  (1731-1806),  of 
whom  Pitt  said,  "  He  opposes  everything,  proposes  nothing,  and 
agrees  to  anything."  Pope.  Alexander  Pope  (1688-1744); 
Jonathan  Swift  (1667-1745). 

P.  326.  On  her  trial,  for  bigamy,  1776.  Northington.  Robert, 
first  Earl  (1708-1772),  the  Lord  Ringbone  of  Anstey's  New 
Bath  Guide:— 

' '  I  protest,  my  dear  mother,  'twas  shocking  to  hear 
The  oaths  of  that  reprobate,  gouty  old  peer." 

P.  326.  Lord  Gower.  Granville  Leveson,  second  Earl,  first 
Marquis  of  Stafford,  died  1803.  Lord  President  of  the 
Council,  1767-79  ;  Lord  Privy  Seal,  1784-94.  Lord  Weymouth. 
Thomas  Thynne,  Viscount  (1734-1796),  Marquis  of  Bath,  1789. 
Lord  Bathurst.  Henry  Apsley,  second  Earl  (1714-1794),  built 
Apsley  House,  Piccadilly.  His  father  was  Allen  Apsley,  first 
Earl  of  Bathurst  (1684-1775).  The  quotation  is  from  Epistle  IV. 
to  Richard  JBoyle,  Earl  of  Burlington. 

723 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

P.  326.  Burlington.  Richard  Boyle,  fourth  Earl  of  Cork  and 
third  Earl  of  Burlington  (1695-1753),  altered  Burlington  House. 

P.  327.  Lord  King.  Peter,  Lord  King  (1669-1734),  Chancellor, 
1725-33.  The  Earl  of  Dartmouth.  William,  second  Earl  (1731- 
1801). 

P.  328.  Jenkinson  (1727-1808),  became  Earl  of  Liverpool,  1796. 
In  1761,  Under-Secretary  of  State ;  1763-5,  Secretary  to  Treasury  • 
1778,  Secretary  at  War ;  1786,  President  of  Board  of  Trade  and 
Chancellor  of  Duchy  of  Lancaster. 

P.  331.  Rigby.  Entered  public  life  as  secretary  to  Bedford, 
Lord-Lieutenant  of  Ireland,  in  1758.  He  was  M.P.  in  1745,  and 
attached  himself  to  Frederick. 

P.  334.  Wallace  and  Mansfield.  James  Wallace,  Attorney- 
General,  1780  and  1783 ;  James  Mansfield,  Solicitor-General, 
1780-2  and  1783. 

P.  336.  Robinson.  John  Robinson  of  Wyke  House,  Isleworth 
(1727-1808),  Secretary  of  Treasury,  1770-82  ;  joined  Pitt  in 
1783. 

P.  337.  Mr.  Fox.  The  son  of  Henry  Fox,  first  Lord  Holland 
(1705-1774),  and  Lady  Georgiana  Lennox,  daughter  of  second 
Duke  of  Richmond  ;  thus  a  descendant  of  Charles  II. 

P.  339.  Collins.  Arthur  Collins  (?  1690-1760),  compiler  of 
The  Peerage  of  England,  first  edition,  1709.  Sir  Stephen  Fox 
(1627-1716). 

P.  339.  In  the  Gedl  as  well  as  in  the  Herbert  family.  Thomas 
Cecil,  cr.  Earl  of  Exeter  in  1605,  and  Robert,  Earl  of  Salisbury 
in  the  same  year.  Edward  Herbert,  cr.  Baron  of  Castle  Island, 
1624;  Philip,  Earl  of  Montgomery,  1605.  Henry  Rich,  Earl 
of  Holland,  1624;  Robert,  Earl  of  Warwick,  1618.  Robert 
Walpole,  cr.  Earl  of  Orford  in  1742  ;  Horatio,  Baron  Walpole, 
1756.  Alexander  Hood,  Viscount  Bridport,  1801  ;  Samuel, 
Viscount  Hood,  1796.  Earl  of  Ilchester.  Stephen  (1704-1776). 

P.  340.  Of  his  three  sons.  There  were  four  ;  the  second,  Henry, 
died  young. 

P.  341.  In  the  House  of  Commons.  M.P.  for  Midhurst,  Surrey, 
1768.  Became  a  Lord  of  the  Admiralty  in  1770,  and  a  Lord  of 
the  Treasury,  1772. 

P.  342.  Atalantis.  Mrs.  Mauley's  Court  Intrigues :  in  a  Collec- 
tion of  Original  Letters  from  the  Island  of  the  New  Atalantis  (1711), 
a  satire  on  the  Whigs  of  William  III.'s  reign.  Macaroni's.  The 
Maccaroni  Club,  founded  in  1764;  "composed  of  all  the 
travelled  young  men  who  wear  long  curls  and  spying  glasses" 
(Walpole). 

P.  342.  /  cite  by  memory.     The  first  line  should  read— 

1 '  But  hark !    The  voice  of  battle  shouts  from  far  1 " 

724 


NOTES 

Schwellenbergen.  Madame  Schwellenbergen,  keeper  of  the  robes 
to  the  Queen,  died  at  an  advanced  age  in  1797. 

P.  344.  Beauclerk.  Another  great-grandson  of  Charles  II. 
(1739-1780). 

P.  345.  Lord  Robert  Spenser,  son  of  the  third  Duke  of 
Marlborough. 

P.  346.  Hare.  James  Hare  (1749-1804),  M.P.,  Ambassador  at 
Warsaw,  1779-82.  A  lady  of  quality.  Albinia  Hobart,  Countess 
of  Buckinghamshire,  who  died  1816. 

P.  347.  Rochford.  William  Henry,  fourth  Earl.  Sir  Francis 
Dashwood  (1708-1781)  founded  the  u  Hell-fire  Club"  c.  1755  ;  an 
account  of  his  "  Franciscans "  was  written  by  Charles  Johnston 
in  Chrysal,  1768. 

P.  350.  Richmond.     Charles,  third  Duke  (1735-1800). 

P.  351.  Davila  and  Guicciardini.  Enrico  C.  Davila  (1576- 
1631)  and  Francesco  Guicciardini  (1482-1540),  Italian  historians. 

P.  352.  Colonel  Fitzpatrick.  Richard  Fitzpatrick  (1747-1813), 
one  of  the  writers  of  The  Rolliad.  Became  a  general,  and  was 
Secretary  at  War  in  1783  and  1806-7. 

P.  352.  Fox  conversed  in  French.  But  his  French  correspond- 
ence was  not  of  the  best. 

P.  353.  Burke.  Edmund  Burke  (1729-1797)  was  the  son  of 
a  Dublin  attorney.  He  brought  in  his  Bill  for  the  reform  of 
the  Civil  List  in  1780. 

P.  353.  The  family  of  Grenville.  He  married  the  sister  of 
George  Grenville  and  Earl  Temple. 

P.  354.  Necker.    Jacques  Necker  (1732-1804). 

P.  355.  Acts  of  imprudence  and  indiscretion.  Particularly  the 
reinstatement  and  defence  of  Bembridge  and  Powell,  dismissed 
for  fraud  by  his  predecessor  at  the  Pay  Office. 

P.  355.  Hastings.  Burke  opened  the  case  for  the  impeachment 
in  1788.  Two  pensions.  (1)  £1200  a  year  for  his  own  and  Mrs. 
Burke's  life.  (2)  £2500  a  year.  The  late  Lord  Verney.  Ralph, 
second  Earl  (?  1712-1792),  M.P.  for  Wendover,  1753-91. 

P.  357.  Richard  Burke.     Edmund  Burke  had  a  son  Richard  also. 

P.  358.  Laurens  was  President  of  the  Continental  Congress 
in  1777,  but  resigned  and  was  sent  as  Minister  Plenipotentiary 
to  Holland  in  1778.  He  was  captured  en  route  by  the  English. 
Pope,  on  Atterbury — 

"  How  shined  the  soul,  unconquer'd  in  the  Tow'r  ! " 

Epil.  to  Satires,  Dial.  II.  83. 

Atterbury.  Dr.  Francis  Atterbury,  Bishop  of  Rochester,  and 
Jacobite,  died  1731. 

P.  359.  Numerisque  fertur.  "  Onward  sweeps  on  numbers  freed 
from  law"  (Horace,  Odes,  iv.  2.  12). 

725 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

P.  360.  Barre.  Isaac  Barre  became  blind  before  his  death. 
Belisarius,  Justinian's  general,  blinded  for  supposed  treason. 

P.  361.  His  friend  and  colleague.  Dunning  called  his  son 
Richard  Barre". 

P.  362.  The  memorable  action,  i.e.  off  Ushant.  Lord  Howe. 
Lord  Richard  Howe. 

P.  362.  Madame  de  Platen,  better  known  as  Baroness  Kiel- 
mannsegge. 

P.  364.  Lord  John  Cavendish  (1732-1796),  brother  of  William, 
fourth  Duke  of  Devonshire.  William,  the  first  Duke,  was  one  of 
those  who  invited  William  of  Orange  to  England  in  1687-8. 

P.  365.  General  Conway.  Henry  Seymour  Conway  (1721- 
1795)  became  Commander-in-chief,  1782-3.  He  was  Horace 
Walpole's  great  friend,  and  the  brother  of  Francis  Edward, 
Marquis  of  Hertford. 

P.  366.  General  Burgoyne.  John  Burgoyne  (1722  -  1792) 
married  Charlotte,  daughter  of  Lord  Derby.  After  surrendering 
at  Saratoga  (N.Y.),  1777,  he  returned  to  England  on  parole. 

P.  367.  Wilkes.  Now  "  an  extinct  volcano."  Bull.  Alderman 
Frederick  Bull,  Lord  Mayor,  1773-4. 

P.  368.  Mansfield.  Now  seventy-six.  Sir  William  Wyndham 
(1687-1740). 

P.  369.  To  Tresillian.  Sir  Robert  Tresillian,  Chief  Justice  of 
the  King's  Bench,  died  1388.  To  Jeffries.  George,  first  Baron 
Jeffreys  (1648-1689).  Than  the  meanest  mechanic.  The  Earl  of 
Grosvenor  recovered  £10,000  damages  from  the  Duke  of  Cumber- 
land, 1770. 

P.  371.  Lord  Gamden  (1714-1794)  studied  Spanish  in  his 
old  age.  Duke  of  Richmond  (1735-1806).  Querouaille.  Louise 
Renee  de  la  Keroualle  (1649-1734),  Duchess  of  Portsmouth  and 
Aubigny.  Ninon  de  VEndos  (1615  -1 705)— 

"Some  never  grow 
Ugly  ;  for  instance,  Ninon  de  Leuclos." — Don  Juan. 

She  was  the  correspondent  of  St.  Evremond. 

P.  372.  Selwyn  was  born  in  1719.  Shelburne.  William  Petty 
(1737  - 1805),  Marquis  of  Lansdowne.  He  had  served  in 
Germany,  and  was  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Southern  Department, 
1766,  and  for  the  Home  Department  in  1782. 

P.  373.  Jackson.  Richard  Jackson,  M.P.,  died  1787.  Dr. 
Price.  Richard  Price  (1723-1791).  Mr.  Baring.  ?Sir  Francis 
Baring  (1740-1810).  Dr.  Priestley.  Joseph  Priestley  (1733- 
1804).  Thomas  Hobbes  (1588-1679)  was  secretary  and  tutor 
to  the  second  Duke  of  Devonshire  and  his  son.  Jervis.  John 
Jervis,  Earl  of  St.  Vincent  (1735-1823).  Joseph  Jekyll  (?1750- 
1837),  K.C.  in  1805,  and  Master  in  Chancery,  1815. 

726 


NOTES 

P.  376.   Welbore  Ellis,  then  Treasurer  of  the  Navy. 

P.  377.  Sir  James  Lowther  (1736-1802),  Earl  of  Lonsdale, 
married  Lady  Mary  Stuart,  Bute's  oldest  daughter.  The  memor- 
able contest.  With  the  third  Duke  of  Portland,  about  some 
property  ;  it  lasted  from  1765  to  1771. 

P.  378.  Rutland.    Charles,  fourth  Duke  (1754-1787). 

P.  379.  Kirkpatrick.  Probably  Robert  Kirkpatrick,  Inspector- 
General  of  Taxes,  who  prosecuted  Thomas  Creevey,  M.P.,  for 
libel  in  1813. 

P.  382.  Button,  originally  James  Naper  (1744-1820),  was 
member  for  Gloucester,  1781-4.  He  was  made  Baron  Sherborne 
in  1784. 

P.  383-4.  Sheridan,  etc.  Richard  Brinsley  Sheridan  (1751- 
1816);  Thomas  Sheridan  (1719-1788).  John  Henderson  (1747- 
1785). 

P.  384.  Addington.  Henry  Addington,  first  Viscount  Sidmouth 
(1757-1844),  Prime  Minister,  1801-4.  Spencer  Perceval  (1762- 
1812),  Premier,  1809-12. 

P.  385.  Johnson  and  Gibbon.  Johnson  wrote  Thoughts  on  the 
late  Transactions  respecting  the  Falkland  Islands,  1771.  But  on 
the  fall  of  North's  administration  he  said,  "Such  a  bunch  of 
imbecility  never  disgraced  a  country."  Edward  Gibbon  (1737- 
1794)  drew  up  a  Memoire  Justicatif  in  answer  to  a  French 
manifesto,  1779.  He  was  afterwards  made  a  Commissioner  of 
Trade  and  Plantations,  1779-82.  Just  at  this  time.  Sir 
William  Jones's  poem  is  entitled,  The  Muse  recalled:  an  Ode  on 
the  Nuptials  of  Lord  Viscount  Althorp  and  Miss  Lavinia  Bingham, 
etc.,  March  6th,  1781.  George  John,  second  Earl  Spencer  (1758- 
1834).  Lady  Spencer  (1762-1831). 

P.  387.  Hancock  and  Adams.  John  Hancock  (1737-1793)  and 
John  Adams. 

P.  388.  Hyder  Ali,  sovereign  of  Malabar  (1717-1782),  invaded 
the  Carnatic  with  100,000  men,  in  conjunction  with  the 
Mahrattas,  the  Nizam  and  the  French  Commandant  Lally.  The 
public  funds.  Consols  averaged  £63. 

P.  388.  Fletcher  and  Baillie.  Lieutenant-Colonels  Fletcher  and 
Baillie  were  defeated  and  imprisoned  by  Hyder  Ali,  1780. 

P.  389.  Rumbold.  Sir  Thomas  Rumbold  (1736-1791)  was 
regarded  as  responsible  for  the  invasion  and  dismissed.  Warren 
Hastings  (1732-1818).  Cheyt  Sing  or  Chait  Singh,— Rajah  of 
Oude.  The  Nabob  of  Arcot, — Mahommed  Ali. 

P.  391.  The  Marriage  Act.  Lord  Beauchamp  having  amended 
the  Act  of  1751,  Fox's  motion  for  further  amendment  was 
lost. 

P.  392.  Mutiny  in  the  Pennsylvania  Line.  In  January,  1300 
men  hutted  at  Morris-town,  turned  out  on  account  of  deficiencies 

727 


WRAXALKS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

in  pay  and  provisions,  but  eventually  rejoined  the  American 
ranks.  Charles,  first  Marquis  of  Cornwallis  (1738-1805),  defeated 
General  Nathaniel  Greene  (1742-1786)  at  Guildford  (U.S.A.) 
on  March  15 ;  while  Greene  was  again  worsted  at  Camden 
(April  19)  by  Francis,  -Lord  Rawdou,  afterwards  first  Marquis 
of  Hastings  (1754-1826). 

P.  392.  Vaughan.  Sir  John  Vaughan,  K.B.  (?  1748-1795), 
made  lieutenant-general,  1782. 

P.  393.  Parker  and  Zoutman.  Admiral  Zoutman  was  promoted 
for  this  action.  Sir  Hyde  Parker,  Bart.  (1714-1782).  Duncan. 
Adam,  Viscount  Duncan  (1731-1804),  who  defeated  De  Winter, 
1797. 

P.  395.  Graves.  Admiral  Thomas,  Baron  Graves  (?  1725-1802). 
Su/r&in.  Pierre  Andre  de  Suffren  St.  Tropez  (1726-1788). 

P.  396.  Hughes.  A  dmiral(?  1720-1794).  Guichen.  Luc,  Comte 
de  Guichen  (1712-1790).  Cordova.  Dom  Luis  de  Cordova. 

P.  398.  Lord  Walsingham.  Thomas  de  Grey,  second  Baron 
Walsingham  (1748-1818).  Sir  William  de  Grey  (1719-1781),  raised 
to  peerage,  1780.  The  Chancellor's  House  was  No.  45  Great  Ormond 
Street. 

P.  399.  Master  of  the  Horse.    Read  "  House." 

P.  401.  York  Town.     October  18,  1781. 

P.  402.  Thomas  Pitt  (1737-1793),  first  Baron  Camelford, 
1784. 

P.  406.  The  Lord  Advocate  of  Scotland,  i.e.  Dundas. 

P.  406.  Torrens  dicendi.  "  His  eloquence  is  a  rushing  and  fatal 
abundance  of  expression  about  many  things." 

P.  411.  Lord  Mulgrave.  Captain  Constautine  John  Phipps, 
second  Baron  Mulgrave  (1744-1792),  M.P.  for  Huntingdon. 
Commanded  the  Racehorse  in  the  Polar  Expedition  of  1773  when 
Nelson  was  a  midshipman.  Captain  Charles  Phipps,  R.N., 
was  M.P.  for  Scarborough.  Alphesibceus.  "The  dances  of  the 
Satyrs  shall  be  imitated  by  Alphesibseus." 

P.  412.   Welbore  Ellis,  then  sixty-eight  years  of  age. 

P.  412.  Lord  Falmouth.  Hugh  Boscawen,  second  Viscount 
(1707-1782),  brother  of  the  admiral. 

P.  413.  Optat  Ephippia  Bos  piger.  "The  lazy  ox  longs  for 
housings  "  (Horace,  Epistles,  i.  14.  43). 

P.  415.  Lady  Betty  Germain  (1680-1769),  second  wife  of  Sir 
John  Germain  ;  left  her  estate  and  £20,000  to  Lord  George 
Sackville,  who  took  the  name  of  Germain  in  1770. 

P.  416.  The  first  Earl  of  Dorset.  Thomas  Sackville  (1536- 
1608),  made  Baron  Buckhurst  in  1557,  and  Earl  of  Dorset  in 
1604.  Marquis  of  Carmarthen.  Francis  Godolphin  Osborne 
(1751-1799),  Foreign  Secretary  under  Pitt,  1783-91  ;  became 
fifth  Duke  of  Leeds,  1789. 

728 


NOTES 

P.  417.  General  Whitelocke.  John  Whitelocke  (1757-1833), 
sent  to  recover  Buenos  Ayres,  1807.  Court-martialled,  1808. 

P.  418.  Haynes.  Colonel  Isaac  Haynes,  executed  July  31, 
1781.  The  Duke  apologised  to  Lord  Rawdon. 

P.  423.  Poms.  Thomas  Powys  (1743-1800),  M.P.  for  Northants 
till  1797,  when  he  became  Baron  Lilford. 

P.  426.  In  St.  James's  Square.  No.  16,  corner  of  King 
Street. 

P.  429.  His  Riband.  The  blue  ribbon  of  the  Garter  ;  made 
E.G.,  1772.  Lord  Surrey.  Charles,  Earl  of  Surrey  (1746-1815), 
M.P.  for  Carlisle  ;  Duke  of  Norfolk  in  1786. 

P.  430.  1743  read  1742.  In  the  Secret.  It  was  a  stormy 
night,  and  Lord  North  said,  "I  protest,  gentlemen,  this  is  the 
first  time  in  my  life  I  ever  derived  any  personal  advantage  from 
being  in  the  secret." 

P.  431.  Sir  Eyre  Coote  (1726-1783).  The  Marquis  de  Bouille 
(1739-1800)  was  complimented  by  the  Queen  of  England  in 
1783.  Sir  Samuel  Hood  (1724-1816)  became  Viscount  Hood, 
1796. 

P.  435.  Dunning  became  Baron  Ashburton  and  died  next 
year. 

P.  437.  Earl  of  Carlisle.  Frederick,  fifth  Earl  (1748-1825). 
William  Henry,  the  third  Duke  of  Portland,  became  Prime 
Minister  next  year. 

P.  438.  Kenyan.  Lloyd,  first  Baron  Kenyori  (1732-1802), 
Lord  Chief  Justice  in  1788.  Bolton.  Admiral  Harry  Poulet, 
Duke  of  Bolton  (1719-1794). 

P.  439.  Sheridan.     Under-Secretary  for  Foreign  Affairs. 

P.  441.  Hertford.  Francis,  Earl  and  Marquis  of  Hertford 
(1719-1794),  was  Lord  Chamberlain  from  1766  to  1782.  Man- 
chester. George,  fourth  Duke  (1737-1788).  Effingham.  Thomas, 
third  Earl  (1746-1791).  Bateman.  John,  second  Viscount  (1721- 
1802),  and  M.P.  for  Woodstock.  His  mother,  Anne,  was 
only  daughter  of  the  Earl  of  Sunderland.  Under  George  I., 
i.e.  1717. 

P.  442.  The  Russian  Minister,  M.  Simolin  (Wraxall). 

P.  443.  Thomas  Grenville  (1755-1846),  M.P.  for  Bucks.  Digby. 
Admiral  Robert  Digby  (1732-1815).  Sir  Guy  Garleton  (1724- 
1808),  Baron  Dorchester,  K.B. 

P.  443.  Quantum  mutatus.  "  How  changed  from  that  glorious 
Hector  ! " 

P.  446.  Not  long  before  his  decease.  Wraxall  adds,  "  I  believe 
in  1797." 

P.  447.  Darlington.  Henry  Vane,  second  Earl  (?1 726-1792). 
Pelham.  Thomas,  first  Earl  of  Chichester  (1728-1805).  Essex. 
William  Anne  Hollis  (1732-1799).  Denbigh.  Basil  Fielding 

729 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

sixth  Earl  (?  1719-1800).  Geneva.  At  Lausanne  in  1783,  com- 
pleting his  Decline  and  Fall.  Selwyn  had  been  Paymaster  of 
the  Works,  a  post  abolished  in  1782.  Townshend.  Charles, 
second  Viscount  (1674-1738). 

P.  448.  The  Beggar's  Opera.     In  1728. 

P.  448.  Chesterfield.  The  author  of  the  Letters.  Rochfort.  In 
1757. 

P.  449.  Duchess  of  Portsmouth.  Mile  Keroualle.  Pride.  Thomas 
Pride  (d.  1658)  signed  the  death-warrant,  and  Colonel  George 
Joyce  was  active  in  promoting  the  trial.  Brandon.  Gregory's 
son,  Richard,  executed  Charles  I. 

P.  450.  Dr.  Younger.  John  Younger  became  Dean,  1705  ;  died 
1728. 

P.  451.  Damien,  for  Damiens.  The  execution  was  in  1757. 
See  ante,  note  to  p.  15. 

P.  452.  Grimm.  Friedrich  Melchior,  Baron  von  Grimm  (1723- 
1807).  Sektt/Ti  became  Surveyor-General  of  Works,  1783.  Wilkes. 
"  The  memorable  Resolutions  "  incapacitated  him  from  sitting  as 
a  member,  February  17,  1769. 

P.  453.  Duke  of  Clarence,  became  William  IV.  (1765-1837). 
Devonshire.  The  fifth  Duke,  Georgiana's  husband. 

P.  454.  Ashburnham.     John,  second  Earl  (1724-1812). 

P.  455.  Legge  (1708-1764),  Chancellor  of  Exchequer,  1754-5, 
1756-7,  1757-61.  Hillsborough  was  Secretary  for  the  Northern 
Department,  1779-82.  Weymouth  became  Marquis  of  Bath. 

P.  456.  Rumbold.  Sir  Thomas  (1736-1791),  whose  name  was 
erased  as  M.P.  for  Shaftesbury  in  1781  ;  but  he  became  member 
for  Yarmouth,  Isle  of  Wight.  Impey.  Sir  Elijah  Impey  (1732- 
1809),  recalled  1783,  and  impeached.  Hastings.  Governor- 
General  of  Bengal  in  1773  ;  left  India,  1785.  Hornby.  William 
Hornsby  (?  1732-1803). 

P.  457.  Demerara  and  Essequibo,  in  British  Guiana.  Howe  and 
Keppel  were  made  Viscounts  in  April. 

P.  459.  Controul  of  the  Carnatic.  Wraxall  himself  acted  as 
agent  for  the  Nabob  of  Arcot.  See  Introduction. 

Pp.  461-2.  Cape  St.  Vincent,  1796.  Camperdown,  1797.  Aboukir 
Bay,  or  "  the  Nile,"  1798.  Trafalgar,  1805. 

P.  462.  Cranston.     James,  eighth  Baron  (1755-1796). 

P.  464.  Bougainville.  Louis  Antoine  Bougainville  (1729-1814). 
Louis  Philippe,  Marquis  de  Vaudreuil  (1724-1802). 

P.  465.  Mr.  Stephens.  Sir  Philip  Stephens,  Bart.  (1723-1818), 
sixty-one  years  in  the  public  service. 

P.  467.  De  Grasse,  guillotined,  1794. 

P.  468.  Pigot.  Hugh  Pigot  (1721-1792).  Marlborough  was 
recalled  in  1712,  and  James,  second  Duke  of  Ormond  (1665-1745), 
was  directed  to  remain  imaggressive  in  Flanders. 

730 


NOTES 

P.  469.  Sir  Edward  Hughes  (1 1720-1794).  Sir  John  Moore 
(1718-1779),  admiral. 

P.  470.  Jervis  became  Earl  of  St.  Vincent  in  1797.  Samuel 
Hood  (1724-1816),  Viscount  Hood,  1796,  and  his  brother  Alexander 
(1727-1814),  Viscount  Bridport. 

P.  470.  Saunders.  Admiral  Sir  Charles  Saunders  (?  1713-1775). 
Pocock  Admiral  Sir  George  Pocock  (1706-1792)  took  Havanna 
in  1762. 

P.  472.  Influenza.  Supposed  in  Italy  to  be  due  to  the  influence 
of  the  stars. 

P.  473.  The  Belle  Ferroniere.  The  mistress  of  Francis,  whose 
name  has  been  erroneously  given  to  Leonardo's  portrait  in  the 
Louvre,  died  about  1540.  Tradition  says  that  her  husband, 
Jean  Ferron,  infected  his  wife  with  a  poison  which  the  King 
took  from  her.  The  account  of  Anne,  Countess  of  Southesk, 
Pepys's  "  Lady  Kerneguy "  (died  about  1670),  is  in  Burnet's 
History  of  his  Own  Times,  i.  227-8.  Rockingham  was  supposed 
to  have  been  poisoned  by  the  "  succession  powder  "  administered 
in  cake  chocolate. 

P.  474.  Fitzwilliam.    William,  second  Earl  (1748-1833). 

P.  477.  Grantham.  Thomas  Robinson  (1738-1786).  Althorpe 
became  Earl  Spencer  in  1783,  and  First  Lord  of  the  Admiralty 
in  1794.  Montagu  (1733-1800)  was  made  a  Privy  Councillor  in 
1790.  Eliot.  Married  1785,  was  Remembrancer  of  the  Ex- 
chequer. Baron  Eliot  (1721-1804:).  James  Grenvilk(  1742-1 825) 
became  Baron  Glastonbury  in  1797. 

P.  478.  Orde.  Afterwards  Thomas  Orde-Powlett  (1746-1805), 
M.P.  for  Aylesbury.  Made  first  Baron  Bolton  in  1797.  His 
wife  was  Jean  Powlett. 

P.  478.  Temple,  afterwards  Marquis  of  Buckingham. 

P.  482.  Shelburne's  duel  Fought  March  22,  1780,  with 
Lieutenant-Colonel  William  Fullarton  (1754-1808). 

P.  483.  Lee.  John  Lee  (1733-1793),  Attorney- General  in  1783. 
M.P.  for  Higham  Ferrers. 

P.  484.  William  Egerton.  J.  W.  Egerton,  member  for 
Brackley  Borough. 

P.  484.  Sir  Francis  Molineux,  last  Baronet,  died  1812. 

P.  485.  Colonel  Blood.  Thomas  Blood  (1 1618-1680)  tried  to 
steal  the  crown,  1671. 

P.  492.  Shovel.  Sir  Clo wdisley  Shovell  (1650-1707).  Admiral 
Sir  John  Balchen  (1670-1744).  The  "Queen  Charlotte,"  Lord 
Keith's  flagship,  accidentally  burnt.  Commodore  George  Anson 
(1697-1762).  Captain  John  N.  Inglefield  (1748-1828).  The 
"Centaur,"  "Ramillies,"  "Ville  de  Paris,"  "Glorieux,"  and 
"Hector"  foundered  in  the  hurricanes  of  September  1782  ;  only 
the  "  Caton  "  and  "  Canada  "  escaped. 

731 


WRAXALKS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

P.  495.  Farnese.  Duke  of  Parma  (1546-1592)  besieged  Antwerp 
for  Spain,  1584-5  ;  and  Ambrogio  Marchese  di  Spinola  (1569- 
1630)  took  Ostend,  1604,  in  the  same  service. 

P.  496.  General  Elliot.  George  Augustus  Eliott,  Lord  Heath- 
field  (1717-1790),  commander  of  Gibraltar,  1775-83. 

P.  497.  Piquet.  Toussaint  Guillaume  de  la  Motte-Piquet 
(1720-1791). 

P.  498.  FranUyn.  Benjamin  Franklin  (1706-1790),  Ambassador 
to  France,  1776,  was  now  seventy-six  years  old.  His  father  was 
a  tallow-chandler. 

P.  501.  Sir  George  Howard  (?  1720-1796),  M.P.  for  Stamford. 
Mr.  Fitzherbert.  Alleyn  Fitzherbert  (1753-1839)  negotiated  the 
preliminaries  of  the  peace  ;  he  became  Baron  St.  Helens  in  1791. 
Charles  Gravier,  Comte  de  Vergennes  (1717-1787),  Minister  for 
Foreign  Affairs,  1774-87.  Pedro  Conde  ffiAranda  (1718-1799), 
Spanish  Ambassador  at  Paris. 

P.  507.  George  Augustus  North  (1757-1802)  became  third  Earl 
of  Guilford  in  1792.  He  was  then  (1783)  North's  under-secretary. 
Fitzpatrick  was  M.P.  for  Tavistock,  and  Secretary  at  War  in  1783. 

P.  508.  Fox  .  .  .  at  Brookes's.  Walpole  writes  of  Fox's  "  days," 
"  And  the  evening  and  the  morning  and  the  next  day  were  the 
first  day  "(viii.  245).  Brookes's.  No.  60  St.  James's  Street.  Founded 
as  a  gaming-club  in  Pall  Mall,  1764 ;  transferred  to  St.  James's 
Street,  1778.  Fox,  Selwyn,  and  Sheridan  appear  to  have  been 
the  chief  gamblers. 

P.  509.  Toumshend  became  Baron  Sydney  in  1783.  The 
minority  was  of  17. 

P.  513.  Macpherson.  Sir  John  Macpherson  (1745-1821), 
Governor-General  of  India,  1785-6.  Mharatta,  for  Mahratta. 
Peshwah.  The  Brahman  minister  of  the  Mahratta  king,  and 
virtual  sovereign.  Poona  was  his  capital. 

P.  514.  The  Sultan  of  Mysore,  i.e.  Hyder  Ali. 

P.  515.  On  the  10th  of  July,  1782.  Cp.  Horace  Walpole,  January 
27,  1781  :  "  We  shall  be  but  a  little  browbeaten  island,  and 
that  is  not  the  England  in  which  I  was  born." 

P.  516.  1779.  The  first  meeting  was  held  in  a  private  room 
in  December.  A  committee  of  sixty-one  was  appointed  for  corre- 
spondence, and  to  prepare  fora  National  Association  for  Economical 
Reform  ;  twenty-five  counties  and  eleven  large  towns  joined 
the  movement. 

Pp.  517-8.  De  Retz  led  the  Fronde,  1649-52.  Honore 
Gabriel,  Comte  de  Mirabeau  (1749-1791),  President  of  the 
National  Assembly.  Sir  Francis  Burdett  (1770-1844).  John 
Home  Tooke  (1736-1812),  tried  for  high  treason,  1794. 

P.  519.  The  year  1792,  when  the  Revolution  Society  sent  shoes 
to  the  French  army. 


NOTES 

P.  519.  Tippoo  Sultan.  Tippoo  Sahib,  successor  of  Hyder  All 
as  Sultan  of  Mysore,  1782-1799  ;  killed  at  Seringapatam. 

P.  520.  Robespierre  and  Bonaparte.  The  former  fell  in  1794, 
the  latter  became  First  Consul,  1799. 

P.  520.  Oxford.  Robert  Harley,  first  Earl  (1661-1724).  The 
Peace  of  Utrecht  (1711)  figured  in  his  impeachment,  1717. 

P.  523.   That  evening.     He  was  ill  during  the  sitting. 

P.  524.  At  Munda.  The  last  of  Julius  Caesar's  battles;  he 
defeated  Pompey's  troops. 

P.  526.  Rumours,  which  sunk  deep.  But  were  afterwards  dis- 
credited. 

P.  528.  A  British  Marquis.  Marquis  of  Lansdowne,  1784. 
The  Edinburgh  Review  says  it  was  at  the  Duke  of  Rutland's  (not 
Pitt's)  request. 

P.  531.  Mr.  Coke.  Thomas  William  Coke  of  Holkham  (1752- 
1842),  first  Earl  of  Leicester,  "  King  of  Norfolk." 

Pp.  531-2.  Gornwallis  (1713-1783)  became  Archbishop,  1768. 
Jonathan  Shipley  (1714-1788),  "the  bloody  bishop."  John 
Hinchcli/e  (1731-1794).  Richard  Hurd  (1720-1808).  Robert 
Louth  or  Lowth  (1710-1787). 

P.  533.  Dr.  John  Moore  (1730-1805).  Duchess  of  Marlborough. 
Elizabeth,  widow  of  Charles,  third  Duke,  and  daughter  of  Thomas, 
Baron  Trevor,  died  1761. 

P.  536.  Jenkinson.  Leader  of  the  King's  friends  after  Bute's 
retirement. 

P.  542.  Courtney.  John  Courtenay  (1741-1816),  M.P.  for 
Tamworth. 

P.  542.  Prcestes  for  Praestes. 

Pp.  542-3.  The  Viceroys  from  1772  to  1784.  Lord  Townshend, 
1767-72  ;  Simon,  first  'Earl  Harcourt  (?  1712-1777),  1772-7  ; 
Buckinghamshire  (1723-1793),  1777-80;  Carlisle  (1748-1825), 
1780-2  ;  Portland,  1782  ;  Temple,  1782-3  and  1787-9  ;  Northing- 
ton,  1783-4  ;  Rutland,  1784-7. 

P.  543.  Charles  Townshend  (1728-1810),  M.P.  for  Yarmouth. 

P.  544.  The  gallant  and  distinguished  Earl.  Henry,  Earl  of 
Surrey  (by  courtesy)  (?  1517-1547),  the  poet. 

P.  545.  Manchester.  George,  fourth  Duke  (1737  -  1788). 
Wedderburn  became  Baron  Loughborough  in  1780. 

P.  546.  An  ex-first  Minister.  Henry  Addington  (1757-1854), 
Viscount  Sidmouth,  was  Prime  Minister,  1801-4,  and  Home 
Secretary,  1812-21. 

P.  550.  Powell  and  Bembridge.  John  Powell  was  the  cashier, 
and  Charles  Bembridge  the  accountant,  to  the  Paymaster  of  the 
Forces.  Bembridge  was  fined  £2500,  and  given  six  months  in 
the  King's  Bench,  being  discharged  May  1784. 

P.  552.  Estwick.     Samuel  Estwick,  died  1795. 


WRAXALKS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

P.  553.  Irwin.  He  was  made  K.B.  in  1779,  and  had  been  a 
protdgtf  of  Lionel,  Duke  of  Dorset. 

P.  555.  Barry  (1696-1776).  Lady  Irwin  died  1805.  In  later 
editions  Wraxall  omits  "  more  obscure "  in  his  description  of  the 
third  marriage. 

P.  556.  Hotham.    General  Sir  Charles  Hotham,  Bart.,  K.B. 

P.  557.  Falstaff.  "  Rob  me  the  Exchequer,  the  first  thing 
thou  dost "  (Falstaff  to  Prince  Henry,  /  Henry  IV.  iii.  3). 

P.  559.  Fitzwilliam  was  to  have  been  the  head  of  Fox's  India 
Board. 

P.  561.  From  the  Ministry  of  Walpole,  .  .  .  i.e.  1742-82. 
Horne.  Rev.  John  Home,  afterwards  Home  Took ;  quarrelled 
with  Wilkes  in  1771.  Weymouih  gained  the  King's  favour  by 
vigorous  suppression  of  the  riots  of  1768.  He  left  the  govern- 
ment in  1770. 

P.  563.  As  the  great  Earl  of  Chatham,  .  .  .  i.e.  in  1757-61  and 
in  1766-8. 

P.  565.  Joseph  II.  (1741-1790),  whose  Catholic  reforms  caused 
a  Belgian  revolt. 

P.  566.  Hocfonte  derivata  Glades.  "  From  this  fount  the  calamity 
is  sprung  "  (Horace,  Odes,  iii.  6.  19). 

P.  568.  Rose  (?  1744  - 1818),  joint  Paymaster  -  General  and 
Treasurer  of  the  Navy.  Pitt  does  not  appear  to  have  visited 
Antwerp. 

P.  570.  David  Hartley,  the  younger  (1732-1813),  the  philo- 
sopher's son. 

P.  572.  Extraordinary  Gazette,  a  special  official  notice. 

P.  573.  Staunton.  Sir  George  Leonard  Staunton,  Bart.,  M.D. 
(1737-1801).  Bussy.  Charles,  Marquis  de  Bussy-Castelnau 
(1718-1785). 

P.  574.  Nadir  Shaw,  or  Kuli  Khan,  Shah  of  Persia  (1688-1747). 
Aurung  Zebe,  Mussulman  Emperor  of  Hindustan  (1619-1707). 

P.  576.  Lady  Mary  Mordaunt,  wife  of  Henry,  seventh  Duke 
of  Norfolk,  divorced  in  1700  ;  married  to  Sir  John  Germain 
(1650-1718)  in  1701.  Germain  afterwards  married  Lady  Betty 
Berkeley — the  Lady  Betty  Germain  of  Lord  Sackville.  * 

P.  578.  Mi/  mother.  Elizabeth  (1687-1768),  daughter  of 
Lieutenant-General  Walter  Philip  Colyear. 

P.  580.  Buckhurst.  Thomas,  first  Earl  of  Dorset,  became  Lord 
Treasurer  in  1599.  Carr.  Robert  Carr  (or  Ker),  Viscount 
Rochester  and  Earl  of  Somerset,  died  in  1645  ;  in  1614  he  was 
displaced  as  favourite  by  Villiers.  Herbert  of  Cherbury.  Edward, 
first  Baron  (1583-1648).  Charles,  Earl  of  Dorset,  the  poet.  The 
Countess  of  Falmouth.  Elizabeth  (ne'e  Bagot),  in  the  Me'moires, 
"the  only  one  who  was  possessed  of  virtue  and  beauty  among 
the  maids  of  honour." 

734 


NOTES 

P.  582.  Roche.  He  married  Anne  Eoche  in  1704,  and  died 
in  1706. 

P.  583.  The  Dowager  Countess  of  Northampton,  his  grandmother. 
His  mother  was  Mary,  daughter  of  the  Earl  of  Northampton. 

P.  584.  Ten  Jacobusses.     Gold  pieces  of  James  I.,  worth  25s. 

P.  585.  Marlborough  had  a  paralytic  stroke  in  1716,  but 
recovered  enough  to  attend  Parliament.  He  died  in  1722.  The 
Quarterly  denied  the  "tears  of  dotage." 

P.  586.  The  Duchess  his  wife.  She  became  Groom  of  the  Stole 
to  Caroline. 

P.  588.  Mr.  Adam.  William  Adam  (1751-1839),  M.P.  ;  Sir 
Walter  Scott's  friend. 

P.  590.  Macalister.  Colonel  Archibald  Macalister,  of  the 
Thirty-fifth  Foot. 

P.  591.  William  Burke,  M.P.  for  Great  Bedwin,  1766-74 ; 
bankrupt,  1769 ;  in  India,  1777-1792.  Lived  with  Edmund 
Burke  at  Beaconsfield,  1792-8. 

P.  599.  The  Bill  in  question.  There  is  no  reason  to  doubt  that 
the  India  Bill  was  introduced  with  disinterested  motives. 

P.  600.  Lewisham.  George,  third  Earl  of  Dartmouth  (1755- 
1810),  M.P.  for  Staffordshire.  Sir  Gilbert  Elliot,  first  Earl  of 
Minto  (1751-1814),  M.P.  for  Morpeth.  Fletcher  (1727-1807), 
M.P.  for  Cumberland.  Gregory,  M.P.  for  Rochester. 

P.  602.  Sir  William  James,  Bart.  (1721-1783),  M.P.  for  West 
Looe.  He  was  chairman  of  the  East  India  Company's  directors. 
He  captured  Angria's  stronghold,  Severndroog,  in  1755,  and  Fort 
Gheriah  in  1757.  Boothby  Parkyns  (1755-1800)  became  Lord 
Rancliffe,  1795.  Married  Elizabeth  Anne  James 

P.  604.  Mr.  Scott.  John,  Earl  Eldon  (1751-1838),  M.P.  for 
Weobley,  June  16,  1783  ;  hence  his  plea  on  p.  609.  Lord  Chan- 
cellor, 1801  ;  Earl,  1821. 

P.  605.  Arden.  Richard  Pepper  Arden  (1745-1804),  "  Poivre 
Ardent"-,  Solicitor-General,  1782-3;  Attorney- General,  1784; 
Baron  Alvanley,  1801. 

P.  606.  Wilberforce.  William  Wilberforce  (1759-1833),  the 
philanthropist.  Martin.  James  Martin,  M.P.  for  Tewkesbury, 
1776-1806.  Sir  Richard  Hill  (1732-1808),  brother  of  Rowland 
Hill,  the  preacher.  Sir  Cecil  Wray  (1734-1805)  unsuccessfully 
contested  Westminster  against  Fox  and  Hood  in  1784. 

P.  607.  Mr.  Erskine.  Thomas,  first  Baron  Erskine  (1750-1823), 
became  Lord  Chancellor  in  1806.  Robinhood  Society.  A  debating 
club  in  Essex  Street  (c.  1754),  largely  composed  of  lower  middle- 
class  secularists.  Burke  was  at  one  time  a  member.  East  India 
Company.  The  first  charter  is  dated  1600. 

P.  610.  Lord  Temple  carried  a  note  in  which  the  King  declared 
"that  he  should  deem  those  that  should  vote  for  the  Bill,  not 

735 


WRAXALKS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

only  not  his  friends,  but  his  enemies."  The  Bill  was  thrown  out 
by  95  to  76. 

P.  611.  Lord  Rivers.  George  Pitt,  first  Baron  Elvers  (?  1722- 
1803).  Egremont.  Sir  George  O'Brien  Wyndham,  third  Earl  of 
Egremont  (1751-1837),  patron  of  Turner  and  Constable. 

P.  612.  Abingdon.  Willoughby,  fourth  Earl  (1740-1799),  a 
friend  of  Wilkes,  and  also  of  the  Revolution. 

P.  613.  The  Speaker.  Mansfield  was  Speaker  of  the  Lords, 
February  to  December  1783. 

P.  615.  The  Rescript  of  Tiberius.  An  ambiguous  letter  sent  to 
the  Senate  in  31  from  Capri,  saying  he  wished  to  be  protected 
against  ^lius  Sejanus,  who  was  promptly  executed. 

P.  615  (1.  20).  Dominated  for  denominated. 

P.  616.  Fraserand  Nepean.  William  Fraser  and  Sir  Evan  Nepean, 
Bart.  The  latter  became  Governor  of  Bombay,  1812. 

P.  616.  Lord  Bolingbroke.  Pitt  was  in  his  twenty-fifth  year, 
Petty  in  his  twenty-sixth,  and  St.  John  was  twenty-six.  Lord 
Henry  Petty.  Henry  Petty-Fitzmaurice,  third  Marquis  of  Lans- 
downe  (1780-1863). 

P.  617.  Lord  Temple  was  a  Secretary  of  State,  and  would  have 
led  in  the  House  of  Lords. 

P.  618.  Sir  George  Howard  (?  1720-1796),  made  field-marshal, 
1793. 

P.  619.  Dorset.  John  Frederick,  third  Duke  (1745-1799),  was 
ambassador,  1783-9.  His  ancestor,  Charles,  the  poet.  The  Earl 
of  Stair.  John,  second  Earl  (1673-1747),  at  Paris,  1715-20.  The 
first  Horace  Walpole,  the  letter- writer's  uncle,  was  at  Paris 
1723-30. 

P.  620.  The  Polignacs.  Yolande,  Duchesse  de  Polignac,  gover- 
ness of  the  royal  children  (?  1749-1793),  and  her  husband,  who 
was  made  Duke  in  1780,  and  died  in  1817. 

P.  621.  Mansfield.  James  Mansfield.  Hon.  Charles  Greville, 
whose  mistress  afterwards  became  the  second  Lady  Hamilton. 

P.  622.  Lord  Hinchingbrook.  John  Montagu,  fifth  Earl  of 
Sandwich  (?  1743-1814).  Sir  George  Yonge  (1731-1812)  remained 
Secretary  at  War  till  1 794.  Sir  William  Yonge,  died  1755.  John, 
second  Duke  of  Argyle  (1678-1743). 

P.  622.  Mr.  Pitt  was  re-elected  in  January  1784. 

P.  623.  Bankes.  Henry  Bankes  (1757-1834),  M.P.  for  Corfe 
Castle. 

P.  624.  The  Eddy  stone  Lighthouse,  completed  1759. 

P.  627.  Charles  the  Twelfth  (1682-1718).  He  was  very  frugal, 
and  did  not  marry. 

P.  628.  Mrs.  Siddons.  Sarah  (ne'e  Kemble)  (1755-1831).  Bel- 
videra  in  Venice  Preserved  was  at  this  time  one  of  her  favourite 
parts. 

736 


NOTES 

P.  629.  Threats  of  the  Turnpike  Man.  It  seems  to  have  been  a 
farmer  who  fired.  The  quotation  is  not  accurate ;  e.g.,  for 
"peasant,"  read  "rustic." 

P.  630.  Montausier.    Charles,  Due  de  Montausier  (1610-1690). 

P.  631.  Hare  was  M.P.  for  Knaresborough  (1749-1804).  Lord 
Grenville  (1759-1834)  married  Anne,  daughter  of  Thomas,  the 
younger  William  Pitt's  first  cousin. 

P.  631.  "  Angry  Boy."    Mr.  Wheatley  explains  this  as  "  roarer." 

P.  632.  Nootka  Sound.  Vancouver's  Island  :  Spain  destroyed 
the  English  settlement  there  in  1789.  The  difficulty  was 
arranged  in  1790.  Byron.  John  Byron  (1723-1786),  whose 
Narrative  was  published  in  1768. 

P.  634.  The  Estate  of  Burton  Pynsent.  Worth  £40,000.  Sir 
William  Pynsent,  Bart.  (c.  1680-1765).  The  Clerkship  of  the 
Pells  was  worth  £3000  a  year.  Pitt  gave  it  to  Barre. 

P.  635.  Quis  enim  virtutem.  "  For  who  would  embrace  virtue 
herself,  if  thou  take  recompense  away." 

P.  635.  Solid  admiration  and  respect.  £40,000  was  voted  for 
his  debts,  estimated  in  1801  at  £45,064. 

P.  636.  Lady  Harriet  Pitt  (1758-1786).  1792.  Lord  North 
had  become  Earl  of  Guilford  in  1790. 

P.  639.  The  Duke  of  Newcastle.  Thomas  Pelham-Holles  (1693- 
1768)  succeeded  Pelham  as  Prime  Minister  in  1754.  Henry 
Pelham  (?  1695-1754)  had  two  sons  and  six  daughters. 

P.  640.  Miss  Pulteney.  Henrietta  Laura  Pulteney  (died  1808) 
married  General  Sir  James  Murray  (?  1751-1811),  who  took  her 
name.  She  was  made  Baroness,  1792,  and  Countess  in  her  own 
right,  1803.  She  is  reputed  to  have  been  engaged  to  Fox. 

P.  640.  Than  Dean  Swift,  whose  Tale  of  a  Tub  is  a  satire  on 
ecclesiastical  and  theological  shams.  Bolingbroke  was  the  Old 
Pretender's  secretary,  and  Wharton  embraced  the  cause  of 
"James  III." 

P.  642.  Abergavenny.     George,  first  Earl  (1727-1785). 

P.  643.  Tallard.  Camille,  Due  de  Tallart  (1652-1728) 
Glover's  Memoirs,  from  1742  to  1757,  were  published  in  1813 

P.  644.  Pelham.  Walpole  resigned  1742  ;  was  succeeded  by 
the  Earl  of  Wilmington,  who  gave  place  to  Pelham  in  1743. 
Roberts.  John  Roberts  (?  1712-1772). 

P.  646.  Mackay.  John  Ross  Mackie,  M.P.  for  Kirkcudbright. 
The  late  Earl  of  Besborough.  William,  second  Earl  (1704-1793). 

P.  649.  The  Duke  of  Dorset.  John  Frederick,  the  third  Duke, 
Ambassador  to  France,  1783-9.  Lord  Milton.  John  Darner 
(1718-1798),  became  Earl  of  Dorchester,  1792.  He  married 
Caroline,  daughter  of  Lionel,  Duke  of  Dorset. 

P.  650.  The  Chancellor,  Thurlow.  The  Lord  President,  Gower. 
Salisbury.  James,  twentieth  Earl  (1748-1823) ;  Marquis,  1789. 

737  47 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 

P.  652.  The  Other  Print.  A  caricature  by  James  Sayer  (1748- 
1823),  who  began  about  1780  working  for  Pitt  against  Fox. 
Two  other  individuals.  Henry  F.  Carteret  and  Edward  Eliot. 

P.  654.  Burlington  House.     Then  the  Duke  of  Portland's. 

P.  656.  1743.  Read  1742.  Hill.  A  rigid  Calvinist  with  a 
vulgar  wit,  nicknamed  "  Scriptural  Killigrew."  Andrew  Marvel 
(1621-1678),  poet  and  republican.  Dartmouth.  William,  the 
second  Earl  (1731-1804),  held  various  offices.  He  was  strongly 
attached  to  the  Methodists.  Ross.  Colonel  (afterwards  General) 
Charles  Ross,  M.P.  for  Wick  (1762-1814).  Galloway.  John, 
seventh  Earl  and  Baron  Stewart  (1736-1806).  Stewart.  Admiral 
the  Hon.  Keith  Stewart,  M.P.  for  Wigtownshire,  died  1795. 

P.  660.  Grenville  and  Grey  formed  a  coalition  on  the  death  of 
Pitt,  1806,  which  fell  next  year. 

P.  663.  St.  Alban's  Tavern.  In  Pall  Mall,  celebrated  for 
political  and  fashionable  dinners  and  meetings.  Thomas 
Grosvenort  brother  of  Earl  Grosvenor,  died  1795.  Charles 
Marsham,  Earl  of  Romney  (1744-1811),  became  Earl  in  1801. 

P.  665.   Windham.     William  Windham  (1750-1810). 

P.  668.  Beaufoy.  Henry  Beaufby,  M.P.  for  Minehead,  died 
1795. 

P.  673.  The  Resolutions  moved  by  Lord  Ejffingham  (1784).  The 
first  sought  to  prevent  the  control  by  the  Commons  of  the 
Revenue  ;  the  second  declared  the  King  alone  had  power  to 
appoint  the  great  officers  of  the  executive. 

P.  671.  Tempus  inane.  "Vacant  time  I  seek,  in  love  with 
leisure  and  repose." 

P.  675.  Lord  Beauchamp.  Francis  Ingram-Seymour  (1743- 
1822),  known  as  Viscount  Beauchamp  till  1794,  when  he  be- 
came fifth  Marquis  of  Hertford.  He  was  M.P.  for  Oxford,  1768- 
1794. 

P.  680.  The  Mutiny  Bill  dates  from  1689.  It  is  an  annual 
Bill  to  enable  the  Sovereign  to  maintain,  govern,  and  pay  a 
certain  number  of  soldiers. 

P.  684.  The  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer  was  Pitt,  who  was  also 
Prime  Minister. 

P.  687.  Like  Sylla.  Lucius  Cornelius  Sulla  (138-78  B.C.) 
resigned  the  dictatorship  in  79.  Like  Fairfax.  Thomas,  third 
Baron  Fairfax  (1612-1671),  resigned  his  office  of  Commander-in- 
chief  in  1650. 

P.  695.  In  1788,  when  Fox  sought  to  have  the  Prince  of 
Wales  made  Regent,  but  failed,  owing  to  Pitt's  delays  and  the 
King's  recovery. 


738 


INDEX 


ABERGAVENNY,    Henry,    Earl 

642. 

Abingdon,  Earl  of,  612. 
Atlanta's,  Duchess  of,  44. 
Acton,  Chevalier,  154. 
Adair,  Mr.,  174. 
Adam,  Mr.,  588. 
Adams,  John,  235,  387. 
Addington,  Henry,  384,  546. 
Addison,  90,  91,  101. 
Adhemar,  Comte  d'.  620. 
;£olus,  189. 
-<Esculapius,  44. 
Agamemnon,  376. 
Agusius,  176. 

Aiguillon,  Due  d',  63,  66,  285. 
Albany,   Louisa,  Countess  of,   179, 

183,  184. 

Alberoni,  Cardinal,  150,  284. 
Alcibiades,  343. 
Alembert,  d',  98. 
Alexander,  246,  468. 
Alexis,  133. 
Alfieri,  179. 
Alphesibaeus,  411. 
Alphonso    VI.     and    his     Queen, 

36-8. 
Althorpe,  Lord  (afterwards  Earl  of 

Spencer),  385,  477. 
Alva,  Duke  of,  106. 
Amasa,  606. 
Amelia,  Archduchess,  225. 

Princess  of  Prussia,  191, 

Amherst,    Lord,   209,    322-4,   415, 

418. 


of,  1  Angouleme,  Due  d',  17,  72. 
Angria,  602. 
Anne,  Queen,  3,  61,  101,  184,  185, 

207,  268,  326,  450,  468,  492,  582, 

585,  617,  640,  643. 
of  Austria,  46,  51,  72,  87,  99, 

150,  248. 

Princess  of  Orange,  49,  104. 

Anson,  Commodore,  189,  493. 

Lord,  258,  470. 

Anspach,  Margrave  of,  115. 
Antonines,  the,  103,  244. 
Aranda,  Conde  d',  501. 
Arcos,  Conde  d',  30. 
Arden,  R.  P.,  605-6,  620-1. 
Argens,  Marquis  d',  98. 
Argyle,  Duke  of,  4,  207. 

Duchess  of,  96. 

John,  Duke  of,  622. 

Ariosto,  357. 

Artois,  Comte  d1,  72,  73,  496. 
Ashburnham,  Earl  of,  454-5. 
Aspasia,  64,  zoo. 
Athol,  Duke  of,  213. 
Atterbury,  Francis,  358. 
Aubigne",  D.,  149. 
Auckland,  Lord.    See  Eden. 
Augustus,  42,  225,  244,  542. 

II.,  King  of  Poland,  58. 

III.,  King  of  Poland,  in. 

Aulnoi,  Comtesse  d',  27. 

Aurelius,  Marcus,  103. 

Aurung  Zebe,  574. 

Aveiro,  Duke  d',  15,  16,   17,  18,  22, 

41. 


739 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 


BAGOT,   Miss.      See  Countess   of 

Falmouth. 

Baillie,  Lieut.  -Col.,  388. 
Balchen,  Admiral,  492. 
Bankes,  Mr.,  623. 
Baratinskoi,  Prince,  43. 
Barbara,  Queen  of  Spain,  43-45. 
Barbarossa.     See  Frederick  I. 
Baring,  Mr.  ,  373. 
Barrington,  Admiral,  220. 

-  Lord,  347. 
Barnard,  Mr.,  231. 
Barnevelt,  106. 

Barre",    Isaac,   296-8,    360-2,    373, 
432,  438,  479,  481,  525,  550,  653. 
Barry,  Sir  Edward,  555. 
Barthelemi,  Abbe",  98! 
Bartolomeo,  152. 
Bateman,  Lord,  441. 

-  Sir  James,  441. 

Bath,  Earl,  Countess,  and  Marquis 

of.     See  Pulteney. 
Bathurst,  first  Lord,  326-7. 

-  second  Lord,  326-7. 
Battistini,  9. 

Bayning,  Lord.    See  Charles  Town- 

shend. 

Beauchamp,  Lord,  675. 
Beauclerk,   Topham,   90,   95,    344, 


Beaufoy,  Mr.  ,  668. 

Bedford,  Duke  of,  261,  272,  332. 

-  "the  late"  Duke  of,  240. 
Belisarius,  361. 
Bembridge,  J.  ,  550-1. 
Benedict  XI  V.  ,  159. 
Bennet,  Mrs.,  571. 

Berkel,  Van,  102. 

Berkeley,    Countess    Dowager    of. 
See  Lady  Nugent. 

-  Earl  of,  579. 
Berruyer,  M.  de,  58. 
Berwick,  Duke  of,  57. 
Besborough,  Earl  of,  646-7. 
Beyra,  Prince  of,  10,  24-26. 
Bingham,  Lavinia,  Countess  Spen- 

cer, 386. 

Biron,  Marshal  de,  191. 
Bischoffswerder,  173. 
Blood,  Colonel,  485. 
Boccaccio,  163. 
Bolingbroke,     Lord     (Henry     St. 

John),  3,  268,  272,  326,  368,  520, 

546,  616,  640. 


Bolton,  Charles,  Duke  of,  478. 

Harry  Powlett,  Duke  of,  438. 

See  Thomas  Orde. 

Bonaparte.     See  Napoleon. 

Boothby,  Mr.,  343. 

Boscawen,  Admiral,  190,  259,  470. 

Mrs. ,  95,  258. 

Boswell,  James,  86,  90,  96,  231. 

Boufflers,  de,  57. 

Marquise  de,  54. 

Bougainville,  464-6. 

Bouille1,  de,  431. 

Bourbon,  Due  de,  21,  47,  48,  49. 

Bourke,  151. 

Boyd,  H.  M.,  277. 

Boyle,  Earl  of  Burlington,  326. 

Bracciano,  Duke  of,  160. 

Braddock,  General,  258. 

Bradshaw,  273,  286,  394,  647. 

Braganza,  Dukes  of,  30,  36. 

Brahe,  Tycho,  217. 

Brancas,  Due  de,  87. 

Brandon,  Gregory,  449. 

Brantome,  no,  166. 

Brazil,  Princess  of,  25,  29,  42. 

Breteuil,  Baron  de,  165. 

Brett,  Miss,  245. 

Bridgewater,  Duke  of,  484. 

Bridport,  Alexander  Hood,  Lord, 
470. 

Bristol,  George,  Earl  of,  79-82. 

Brocklesby,  Dr.,  276. 

Broglie,  Marshal  de,  182. 

Bruce,  Lord,  312,  580. 

Brummell,  Mr. ,  202,  647. 

Brunswick,  Duchess  of,  130,  228. 

Duke  of,  106-7,  126,  128-130. 

Princesses  of,  133. 

Brutus,  387. 

Buccarelli,  284. 

Buckhurst,  Lord  Treasurer,  after- 
wards Earl  of  Dorset,  580. 

Lord.  See  Lionel,  Duke  of 

Dorset. 

Buckingham,  Greenville,  Marquis 
of,  77. 

his  wife,  78. 

second  Duke  of,  582. 

Villiers,  Duke  of,  193.  See 

also  Villiers. 

Buckinghamshire,  Earl  of,  542, 

Bull,  Frederick,  367. 

Bulstrode,  282. 

Buonarotti,  Michael  Angelo,  166. 


740 


INDEX 


Burdett,  Sir  F. ,  518. 

Burgh,  Colonel  de,  204,  205. 

Burgoyne,  General,  366-7,  391,  438, 
512,  608. 

Burke,  Edmund,  91,  93,  97,  210, 
223,  288,  296,  328,  350,  353-36o. 
362,  364-7,  377,  384-7,  391,  402, 
421,  432-447,  452, 458,  467,  472-4. 
484,  490-1,  518,  522,  538,  543, 
546-553-  558-56i,  564,  571,  588, 
591.  597-9,  605,  611,  652,  665, 
668-9,  685,  690. 

Richard,  357,  543. 

William,  591. 

Burleigh,  Lord,  580. 

Burlington,  326. 

Burnet,   Bishop,   3,  4,  5,   24,   281, 

295,  305,  473- 

Burney,  Dr.,  93. 

Fanny,  Madame  d'Arblay,  93. 

Bussy,  573. 

Bute,  Earl  of,  60,  227,  233,  247, 
249-51,  258-270,  273,  286,  301, 
305,  324.  328-9,  347,  373,  378, 
381,  393-4,  419,  527,  596,  646,  695. 

Byng,  Admiral,  258,  315,  317. 

George,  297,  435. 

Byron,  Admiral,  188,  189,  190,  461. 

Commodore,  632. 

Lord,  188. 


CADAVAL,  Duke  de,  28,  30. 

Cade,  Jack,  215. 

Cadell,  Alderman,  33. 

Cadogan,  Hon.  Captain,  494. 

Calabria,  Philip,  Duke  of,  145. 

Calonne,  M.  de,  141. 

Camden,  first  Earl  of,  76,  324,  369, 

371,  434-  455-  476,  613- 
second  Earl  and  Marquis  of, 

75,  76. 

Camoens,  31,  32. 
Campaspe",  64. 
Cannon,  Mrs.,  255. 
Cantineida,  Count  of,  30. 
Cardigan,  Earl  of,  235. 
Carignan,  Princess  of,  74. 
Carleton,  Sir  Guy,  443. 
Carlisle,  Earl  of,  437,  540,  542. 
Carlo  Khan.     See  C.  J.  Fox. 
Carlos,  Don,  167. 
Carmarthen,    Marquis    of,     416-8, 

502,  618,  650. 


Caroline,    Queen,    242,    246,    257, 
586-7. 

Queen  of  Naples,  148. 

Matilda,   Queen  of  Denmark, 

133- 
Carr,  Robert,  Viscount  Rochester, 

580. 

Carter,  Mrs.,  93. 
Castera,  112,  117. 
Castlemaine,  Lady,  245, 
Catherine,  Queen  of  Charles  II.,  9, 

24. 

of  Arragon,  37. 

II.  of  Russia,  47,  61,  110-130, 

169-174,  225-8,  349,  442. 
Catiline,  360. 
Catinat,  57. 
Cato,  288,  300,  629. 
Cavendish,   Lord  John,   299,   364, 

423,  434,  474-5,  509,  523,  540-1, 
548,  556-8,  562-3,  607-8,  672. 

Cecil  family,  the,  339. 
Cellamare,  Prince,  100. 
Cervantes,  31. 

Chambers,  Sir  William,  287,  342. 
Chantilly,  Mile,  de,  58,  59. 
Chapone,  Mrs.,  93. 
Charles,  I.,  71,  179,  185,  188,  212, 
232-4,  236,   240,  270,    315,    339, 

424,  448-9,    518-9,    580-1,   614, 
625,  693-4. 

II.,  3,  5,  9,  24,  27,  50,  92,  loo, 

109,   178-180,   187,    193,    196,    221, 
231,    243,     245-6,     263,     282,    295, 

312,   320,    328,    338-9,    347,   349, 
371-2,  393,  448-9,  485,  544,  58i- 

2,  6l2,  628,  630,  639. 

III.  of  Spain,  27,  45,  65, 142-5, 

222,  284,  396,  496,  500. 

IV.,  143. 

VI.,  Emperor,  56,  221,  224. 

VII.,  Emperor,  90,  150. 

XII.  of  Sweden,  47,  89,    178, 

627. 

King  of  Navarre,  54. 

Edward,     Chevalier    de     St. 

George,  177-183. 
Chartres,  Philip,  due  de,  73-4. 
Chatelet,  98. 
Chatham,   William  Pitt,    Earl   of, 

188,  249-50,  253,  255,  257-8,  261, 

267-8,  301,  303-5,  322,  340,  371, 

375.  379-8°,  4*0,  4*3- 4,  5*5,  523, 

563,  596,  626,  634. 


741 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 


Chatham,  second  Earl  of,  650,  653. 

Chatterton,  32. 

Chaworth,  Mr.,  188. 

Cheap,  Captain,  188. 

Chesterfield,    Philip,   Earl    of,    78, 

448,  555- 

Chevalier,  Madame,  12. 
Cheyt  Sing,  389. 
Choiseul,  Due  de,   61,  63,   69,  98, 

181-2,  283,  285. 
Christian  II.  of  Sweden,  36. 

VII.  of  Denmark,  133. 

Christina,  Archduchess,  187. 
Churchill,  Charles,  250,   279,  320, 

348,  370,  596. 

Lady  Mary,  54-5. 

Mr.,  S4-5- 

Cicero,  239,  309,  350,  361,  525. 
Cincinnatus,  288. 
Clanrickard,  Earl  of,  204. 
Clarendon,  Edward  Hyde,  Earl  of, 

3,  4,  263,  305,  546,  628. 
Claudius,  Appius,  58. 
Clement,  a  monk,  150. 

XIV.,  178. 

Clermont,  Lord,  201. 

Clinton,  Sir  Henry,  291,  395. 

Coke,  Mr.,  240,  531,  536. 

Colbert,  354. 

Coligny,  Henrietta  de,  Countess  de 

la  Suze,  99. 
Collins,  A.,  339, 

Colyear,  Marshal  W.  P.,  313,  578. 
Commodus,  103. 
Comptons,  family  of,  582. 
Condamine,  98. 
Cond6,  57,  100. 
Condor cet,  98,  243, 
Conway,  General,  298,  365,  420-2, 

437,  476,  481,  511,  618,  653,  691. 
Cooper,  Sir  Grey,   297,   336,    543, 

642,  690. 
Coote,    Sir    Eyre,    431,    514,    592, 

594-S- 

Cordova,  396. 
Cornwall,  218-9,  552-3. 
Cornwallis,    Lord,   311,    385,    390, 

392,  394-5,  397,  399,  401,  405. 

Dr.  F. ,  531-2. 

Courland,  Duke  of,  134. 
Courtenay,  or  Courtney,  430,  542. 
Cowper,  Countess,  168. 

Earl  of,  168. 

Craggs,  James,  Sr.,  263. 


Craggs,  James,  Jr.,  78,  263. 
Cranfields,     Earls    of    Middlesex, 

family  of,  581. 
Cranston,  Lord,  462-3,  466. 
Crebillon,  32. 
Cromwell,  Oliver,  50,  212,  234,  269, 

612. 
Cumberland,    Dukes  of,    107,   221, 

229-30,  252,  258,  313,  369. 
Cunningham,       General       James, 

215-6. 
Cust,  Sir  John,  217,  219. 


DACIER,  Madame,  93. 

Dalrymple,  Sir  John,  184-5. 

Damiens,  15,  451-2. 

Dante,  351. 

Darby,  Admiral,  220,  394,  461,  513. 

Darlington,  Sophia,  Baroness  Kiel- 

mannsegge,  Countess  of,  245,  364, 

566. 

Earl  of,  447. 

Darnley,  Henry,  Lord,  26. 

Dartmouth,  Earl  of,  327,  542,  656. 

Dash  wood,  Sir  F. ,  347-  8. 

Dauphin,  "the  young,"  396. 

Dairla,  351. 

Dawson,  Mrs.,  195. 

Demetrius,  118. 

Demosthenes,  343. 

Denbigh,  Lord,  447. 

Derby,  Lord,  366. 

Desaguliers,  General,  274. 

Desdemona,  609. 

Desnoyers,  251. 

Devonshire,  Duchess  of,  95,  201. 

Duke  of,  364,  453-4,  517. 

Earls  of,  373. 

Dick,  Lady,  117. 

Sir  John,  112-3,  IJ5-8,  131. 

Diderot,  98. 

Dido,  671. 

Digby,  Admiral,  443. 

Diomedes,  53 

Dionysius,  the  elder,  44. 

Dodington,  G.  B.,  Lord  Melcomb, 

5,  254,  305,  316,  619. 
Domitian,  386. 
Dorset,        Duchess        of,        Lord 

Germain's  mother,  578-9,  586-7. 

Dukes  of— Charles,  619. 

George.    See  Lord  George 

Germain. 


742 


INDEX 


Dorset,  Dukes  of—  John  Frederick, 
*6>  i?>  75-6,  255,  619,  620,  649, 
650. 

--  Lionel,  Lord  Germain's 
father,  71,  309,  311,  315,  322, 

415,  427,  554,  583-7- 
--  "the  present,"  275. 
-  Earls  of  —  Buckhurst,  first,  416, 

580. 
--  Charles,  the  poet,  3,  92, 

312,  581-3,  619. 
--  Edward,  312,  580-1. 
Dover,  Lord,  109. 
Draper,  Sir  W.,  86,  262,  274-5,323. 
Drummond,  Dr.,  303. 
Dryden,  193,  581. 
Du  Barry,  Madame,  12,  51,  64-7. 
Du  Bois,  150. 
Du  Deffand,  Mme.,  84-5,  87,  96- 

100,  341. 
Duncan,  Admiral  Lord,  190,  393, 

461,  470. 
Dundas,    Henry,     Lord    Melville, 

304,  326,  334-6,  358,  390,  406-7, 

412,  458,  478-9,  486-7,  490,  508, 

548-9,    563,  605,    609,   623,   629, 

631,  657. 
Dunning,  J.  ,  Lord  Ashburton,  220, 

361,  373.  435-7,   444,   479,    5l8« 

575-6,  620. 

Du  Pre\  Governor,  574-5. 
Dutton,  James,  382. 
Dyson,  286. 

EBERSTEIN,  Melesina,  Princess  of, 

245.  See  also  Duchess  of  Kendal. 

Eden,    William,    Lord    Auckland, 

201,  202,  319,  691. 

Edward  II.,  248. 


, 
-  V.,  47. 

-  VI.,  215. 

Effingham,  Earl  of,  211,  441,  673. 

Egerton,  William,  484. 

Egmont,  Lord,  254. 

Egremont,  Earl  of,  269,  276,  611. 

Elcho,  Lord,  214. 

Eldon,  Lord,  formerly  Mr.   Scott, 

604,  606-9. 
Eliot.     See  Elliot. 
Elizabeth,   Queen,    191,    208,    224, 

243,  257,  309,  447,  460,  580,  639. 

-  Archduchess,  224. 


Elizabeth,  Empress  of  Russia,  110- 

12,  114-9,  I26. 

Farnese,  20. 

Madame,  71. 

Queen  of  Bohemia,  185. 

Elliot  (or  Eliot),  Baron,  477,  636. 

Dr. ,  310. 

E.  J. ,  477,  636. 

General,  496-7,  512. 

Sir  Gilbert,  600. 

Ellis,  Welbore,  295,  333-4,  376,  412, 

420,  438,  440,  623. 
Elphinstone,  Admiral,  122. 
Emanuel  of  Portugal,  35,  36. 
Ensenada,  45. 
Ernest  Augustus,  163,  585. 
Erskine,  Lord,   94,  607,  613,  624, 

669. 

Esau,  604. 
Espinasse,  Mile,  de  1".    See  Lespin- 

asse. 

Essex,  Earl  of,  447. 
Estaing,  d',  67,  189,  220. 
Estrees,  Comte  d',  50. 
Estwick,  Samuel,  552. 
Eugene,  Prince,  221,  318,  545,  643. 
Euripides,  262. 

FAIRFAX,  Lord,  687. 
Falkland,  Lord,  580. 
Falmouth,  Countess  of,  581. 

Lord,  412-3. 

Falstaff,  557. 

Farinelli,  45. 

Farnese,  Alessandro,  495. 

Favart,  58. 

Fawkes,  Guy,  483. 

Felkesheim,  Count  of,  134,  139. 

Ferdinand    of    Brunswick,     107-9, 

314-9,  417. 

IV.  of  Naples,  140-7,  151-6. 

his  queen,  143-4, 153,  155. 

VI.  of  Spain,  43,  45. 

Fielding,  Henry,  32-3,  88. 

Fingal,  Earl  of,  78. 

Fitzherbert,  Mr.,  Lord  St.  Helens, 

501. 
Fitzpatrick,  Col.  Richard,  352,  507, 

544-5,  631,  640. 
Fitzroy,  Lieut. -Col.,  314,  318. 
Fitzwilliam,    Earl,   474,    559,   600, 

673- 

Fleetwood,  517. 
Fletcher,  Lieut. -Col.,  388. 


743 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 


Fletcher,  Sir  Henry,  600. 

Fleury,  Cardinal,  46,  51,  53,  56, 
68-9. 

Fontanges,  Madame  de,  51. 

Fontenelle,  98. 

Foscari,  F.,  171. 

Fox,  Charles  James,  i,  3,  5,  83,  91, 
94,  173-4,  203,  210,  223,  231,  236, 
243,  288,  302,  307,  321,  337-362, 
366-7,  372,  377,  381,  384,  390-1, 
402,  405,  411,  419,  432,  434-5, 
440,  442,  445,  453,  458-9,  468- 
475-  479-482,  490-1.  499,  502  12, 
517-527,  530-1.  536, 553, 556-570, 
588-606,  609-616,  620,  642,  648-9, 
652  e t  seq. 

Henry.     See  Lord  Holland. 

Sir  Stephen,  339. 

Stephen,  Lord  Ilchester,  343. 

Franca  Villa,  the  Princess  of,  473. 

Francis  I. ,  Emperor,  168,  186. 

II.,  Emperor,  128,  172,  175. 

I.  of  France,  163,  473, 

Franklin,  Benjamin,  288,  498-9. 

Fraser,  Hon.  General  Simon,  201, 
202. 

William,  252-6,  616, 

Frederick  I.,  Barbarossa,  154. 

II.  of  Prussia  (the  Great),  108, 

122-3, 128-9,  163,  169,  186,  216-7, 
224-5,  227,  3l6- 

Prince  of  Orange,  105-6. 

Prince  of  Wales,  77,  133,  139, 

228,  238,  247,  251-5,  259-60,  294, 
597,  643,  655. 

his  wife.  See  Dowager 

Princess  of  Wales. 

Henry,  Prince  of  Orange,  103. 

William  I.,  135,  163,  545. 

II.,  105,  128,  133. 

III.,  128,  172-4. 

Fullarton,  Col.,  482. 

Fundanius,  123. 

GALLOWAY,  Earl  of,  656-7. 

Garrick,  93. 

Gay,  John,  101,  253,  324,  448. 

Geary,  Admiral,  220,  461, 

George  I.,  5,  46,  49-50,  78,  92,  101, 
132,  180,  193,  241,  244-5,  263, 
282,  327,  364,  441,  450-1,  566, 
582,  585-6,  641. 

II.,  5.  29,  75,  77,  79.  82,  86, 

101,   107,   l8o,  221,  228,    238,    241, 


244-5,    247,    249-52,     255-8,     313, 

316,  318,  339,  379,  413,  450,  453, 
492,  566,  586-7,  597,  619,  622, 
639,  643-5. 

George  III.,  2,  5,  6,  61,68,  75-7,  86, 
104-5,  126-7,  131-3,  180,  184, 
188,  203-5,  208-10,  215,  217,  221, 
228-253,  258,  264-273,  283-8,  293, 
302-4,  310,  320,  326-31,  341,  347- 
9,  352-6,  363,  367,  370-2,  381, 
385-8,  394-6,  399,  402-6,  410, 
414-7,  422-8,  432-4,  439,  442-4, 
453-  5,  464,  471-2,  475,  483,  490, 
496,  499,  5"-3,  518-23,  529-539, 
543.  547,  553-6,  559-7O,  591-6, 
599-600,  605-6,  609-616,  620-6, 
634-9,  643,  649  et  seq. 

his  queen,  77,  105,  232. 

IV.,   Prince   of  Wales,   393, 

595-6,  611,  638,  655,  658. 

Don,  15. 

Germain,  Lady  Betty  (Berkeley), 
415.  577,  58o. 

Lord  George,  also  known  as 

Lord  Sackville  and  the  Duke  of 
Dorset,   2,   81-2,   203,   217,   233, 
252,  275-6,  307-19,  323,  333,  335, 

367,  376,  397,  403,  407-9.  4H-4I9, 
437,  462,  516,  520,  554,  576,  587, 
619,  622,  636,  649-51. 

Sir  John,  576-9. 

his  parents,  577. 

Germanicus,  56. 

Gibbon,  Edward,  91,  97,  352,  385, 

447- 

Gil  Bias,  80. 
Glaucus,  53. 
Gloucester,  Richard,  Duke  of,  47. 

"  the  late  "  Duke  of,  182. 

William,  Duke  of,  185. 

Glover,  Richard,  78, 253,  278,  643-4. 

Richard,  jun.,  his  son,  279. 

Godolphin,  Lord,  305. 
Goldsmith,  Oliver,  106,  365,  386. 
Gordon,  Duke  of,  141,  214. 

Lord  George,  212-4,  367. 

Lord  William,  141. 

Sir  William,  285,  612. 

Gower,   Earl,   326,   455,    530,   618, 

630,  650. 
Gracchi,  491. 
Grafton,  Duke  of,  233,  270-5,  294-5, 

301,  305,  34i.  347,  366,  369,  381, 

434,  455,  469,  476,  516,  561,  647. 


744 


INDEX 


Grammont,  5,  TOO,  544,  581. 
Granby,  Marquis  of,  272,  275,  318, 

323,  379- 

Grantham,  Lord,  477. 
Grasse,   de,    192,   395,   400,  431-2, 

457,  460,  463-8,  470,  491,  494-7, 

512-3. 
Graves,   Admiral,    395,    400,    461, 

495- 

Gray,  Thomas,  90,  190,  386. 
Greatrakes,  William,  278. 
Greene,  General  N. ,  392. 
Gregory,  Sir  Robert,  600. 
Greig,  Admiral,  and  his  wife,  117, 

122. 
Grenville,   George,    264,   287,    301, 

328,  647. 

James,  477. 

Lady  Mary,  77. 

Thomas,  443. 

Lord  William,  173,  174,  236, 

605,  631,  660. 

family,  the,  353. 

Greville,  Charles,  141,  621. 

Grey,  Lord,  236,  660. 

Sir  William  de,  398.     See  also 

Lord  Walsingham. 
Grimm,  Baron  Von,  452. 
Grosvenor,  Thomas,  663. 
Guicciardini,  351. 
Guichen,  396,  457. 
Guilford,  Countess  of,  Lord  North's 

mother,  294,  327. 
Francis,  Earl  of,  Lord  North's 

father,  253,  294,  302,  327. 
Frederick,  Earl  of.     See  Lord 

North. 

Gustavus  III.,  61. 
Vasa,  36,  283. 

HADDICK,  Marshal,  49. 

Hadfield,  242. 

Hadrian,  103,  225. 

Halifax,  Earl  of,  269,  276. 

Haman,  657. 

Hamilton,    Lady  Archibald,    139, 

2S3- 
first    Lady,    143,    144,    154, 

156-7- 

second  Lady,  141. 

Sir    William,      124,    139-144, 

151.  155,  473- 

W.  G.,28o. 

Hampden,  John,  91. 


Hampden,  Lord,  109. 
Hancock,  387. 
Hannibal,  89. 
Harcourt,  Lord,  542. 
Hardwicke,  Earl  of,  184,  6n. 
Hardy,  Sir  Charles,  187,  220,  461. 
Hare,  James,  346,  631,  640. 
Harley,  Lord  Treasurer,  3. 
Haroun-Alraschid,  575. 
Hartley,  David,  570-2. 
Hastings,   Warren,  307,    356,   389, 

456,  486,  513-4,  598,  608,  640. 
Hawke,  Sir  Edward,  190,  267,  470. 
Hawkesbury,  Lord,  235. 
Haynes,  Col.  Isaac,  418. 
Heinsius,  106. 
Helvetius,  98. 
He"nault,  President,  98. 
Henderson,  John,  384. 
Henrietta,  sister  of  Charles  II.,  49. 

Maria,  Queen,  232. 

Henry  V.  of  England,  557. 

VI.  of  England,  349. 

VII.  of  England,  15,  256. 

VIII.  of  England,  i,  37,  246, 

544- 

II.  of  France,  52. 

III.,  149- 

IV. ,  15,  36,  52,  149,  375,  397, 

584- 
Herbert,  Henry,  afterwards  Earl  of 

Carnarvon,  213. 
Herbert  family,  the,  339. 
Herbert  of  Cherbury,  Lord,  580. 
Herbois,  Collot  d1,  196. 
Herodotus,  351. 
Hertford,  Earl  of,  441,  542. 
Hertzberg,  173. 

Hesse-Cassel,  Landgrave  of,  290. 
Hesse   Philipstahl,  Princes  of,  119, 

121. 

Hervey,  Lady,  101. 

Lord,  79. 

Hill,  Sir  Richard,  606,  655,  656-8. 
Hillsborough,  Wills,  Earl  of,  272, 

306,  455- 

Hinchcliffe,  Bishop,  531. 
Hinchinbrook,  Lord,  427,  543,  622. 
Hoare,  Sir  Richard,  195. 
Hobbes,  Thos.,  4,  97,  373. 
Holland,  Lord,  C.  J.  Fox's  father, 

340,  343.  39i.  550.  634,  645- 
Lord,    C.  J.   Fox's  nephew, 

352. 


745 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 


Holroyd,  Colonel,  206. 
Holstenius,  189. 

Hood,  Alexander.  See  Lord  Brid- 
port. 

-  Sir  Samuel,  afterwards  Lord, 
43i.  457,  463-4.  470,  49i- 

-  family,  the,  339. 
Hope,  Thomas,  113. 

Horace,  89,  109,  246,  309,  350,  359, 

413.  525,  542,  629. 
Home,  Rev.  J.     See  Home  Tooke. 
Hornsby,  456. 
Hotham,  Lieut.  -Col.,  314. 

-  Sir  Charles,  556. 

Howard,  Mrs.,  afterwards  Countess 
of  Suffolk,  245,  566. 

-  Sir  George,  501,  618. 

Howe,  Admiral  Richard,  Viscount, 
188,  290-1,  363-4,  419,  457,  461, 
469,  497-8,  502,  512,  540,  618, 
650. 

-  William,  Earl,  290-1. 
Hugh  Capet,  70. 

Hughes,  Sir  Edward,  396,  469,  498, 

5i3- 

Hurd,  Dr.  ,  532. 

Hyde,  Edward.     See  Clarendon. 
Hume,  David,  4,  60,  63,  97. 
Hyder  Ali,  307,  388,  431,  486,  513- 

4,  572,  574-5- 

I  AGO,  692. 

Ilchester,  Stephen,  Earl  of,  339. 
Impey,  Sir  Elijah,  456. 
Inglefield,  Captain,  493. 
Ireton,  517. 

i,  Sir  John,  4 
Ivan,  Emperor  of  Russia,  112,  124, 


Irwin,  Sir  John,  438,  553-6,  618. 


JACKSON,  Richard,  373,  477. 
Jacob,  604. 

James  I.  of  England,  178,  312,  339, 
483.  58o. 

-  II.,  3,  4,  46,  57,  67,  104,  178-9, 
181-5,   221,   263,    269,    282,    369, 
393,   448,    473,   535,    581,  612-3, 
694- 

-  Sir  William,  602-3. 
Jane,  Queen  of  Naples,  155. 
Jefferies,  Judge,  369. 
Jekyll,  Joseph,  373. 

Jenkinson,  Charles,  219,  286,  328- 


334,  343,  438,  536-7,  563,  57O-2, 
606,  629. 
Jervis,  Sir  John,  Lord  St.  Vincent, 

190,  373,  470- 
Joab,  606. 
John  II.  of  Portugal,  15,  36. 

III.  of  Portugal,  31,  35. 

IV.  of  Portugal,  7,  36. 

V.  of  Portugal,  7,  13,  14,  38- 

9,  41' 

of  Austria,  Don,  31. 

St.,  603-4. 

Johnson,  Samuel,  86-99,  230,  355, 

585- 
Johnstone,  Gov.  George,  307,  317, 

598,  668. 

Jones,  Sir  William,  94,  386. 
Jonson,  Ben,  631. 
Joseph    II.,    Emperor,   72,    151-2, 

168-70,  172,  224,  227,  565. 
I.,  King  of  Portugal,  7-29,  34- 

II.,  21,  23. 

Prince  of  Portugal,  25. 

Josepha,  Archduchess,  146-7. 

Joyce,  Colonel,  449. 

Julius  III.,  Pope,  160. 

Julius  Caesar,  467,  474,  524. 

Junius,  6,  60,  86,  209,  232-4,  248, 
250,  261-2,  271-282,  286-7,  295, 
305,  323,  332,  341,  347,  366,  369, 
454-5,  469,  473,  481,  517-8,  561, 
569,  596,  696. 

Jupiter,  44, 

Justinian,  370. 

Juvenal,  56,  89,  in,  220,  350,  386, 
406,  615,  635. 


KATT,  von,  163. 

Kaunitz,  173. 

Kemble,  Mr.,  141. 

Kendal,  Duchess  of,  245,  566. 

Kennett,  Brackley,  210. 

Kenyon,  Lloyd,  438. 

Keppel,  Admiral  Lord,  187-8,  192, 
220,  321,  362-366,  419,  434,  457, 
461,  469-70,  476,  502,  540-1,  603. 

Kerr,  Lord  Mark,  82. 

Ketch,  Jack,  98. 

Kett,  215. 

Kielmannsegge,  Sophia,  Baroness. 
See  Countess  of  Darlington. 

King,  Lord,  237. 


746 


INDEX 


Kingston,  Miss  Chudleigh,  Duchess 

of,  265,  326. 
Kirkpatrick,  379. 
Knight,  Mrs.,  Lady  Nugent,  78. 
Konigseck,  221. 
Konigsmark,  Count,  132,  163. 

LA  BELLE  Ferroniere,  473. 

Lafayette,  65,  243,  395. 

La  Galissoniere,  Admiral,  258. 

Lamballe,  Prince  de,  73,  74. 

La  Motte-Piquet,  497. 

Lane,  Mrs.,  180. 

Langdale,  Mr.,  197-9. 

Langton,  Mr.,  231. 

Lansdowne,  first  Marquis  of.     See 

Lord  Shelburne. 

second  Marquis  of,  617. 

Lauderdale,  Duke  of,  295. 
Laudohn,  169. 
Launay,  Mile,  de,  98. 
Laurens,  Hy.,  243,  358,  438. 
Leczinski,  Maria,  Queen  of  Louis 

XV. ,  47,  50-53,  620. 
Lee,  John,  483,  545,  551,  576,  607, 

657- 

Leeds,  Duke  of,  418. 
Legge,  Henry  Bilson,  455. 
Lenclos,  Ninon  de,  371. 
Lennox,  Lady  Sarah,  246. 
Leopold,   Emperor,   40,    152,   168- 

176. 

Lerma,  Cardinal  of,  13. 
Le  Sage,  32. 

Lespinasse,  Mile.,  87,  96,  98,  100. 
Lewisham,  Lord,  600. 
Ligne,  Prince  de,  119,  169. 
Ligonier,  Lieut.-Col.,  314-318. 
Lisbon,  Patriarch  of,  29. 
Liverpool,  Earl  of.     See  Jenkinson. 
Livia,  64. 
Livy,  344. 
Lloyd,  Cap.,  314. 
Lockitt,  448. 
Lolme,  de,  279. 
Lorraine,  Charles,  Prince  of,  186-7. 

Francis,  Duke  of,  167-8. 

Lothario,  260,  320. 
Lothian,  Marquis  of,  82. 
Loughborough,  Lord.     See  also  A. 

Wedderburn,  415,  444,  462,  613, 

673. 

Louis  XI.  of  France,  62. 
XII.,  236. 


Louis  XIII.,  52,  69,  150. 

XIV.,  5,  36,  46-7,  50-3,  57, 

61,  64-5,  69,  73,  100  6,  150,  161, 
221,  231,  247-8,  255,  263,  395, 
466,  553.  619-20,  631. 

XV.,  12,  15,  20,  45-52,  56-70, 

74,  96,  l82,  222,  283-5,  451,  619-20. 

XVI.,  17,  62-73,  96,  142,  170, 

189,     204-5,     222,     227,    243,    200, 

354-5.  395,  461,  496-8,  514,  568, 
620. 

XVII. ,  Due  de  Normandy,  397. 

Prince  of  Orange,  106-7. 

Louisa  of  France,  66. 

de  Guzman,  Queen  of  Portugal, 

36. 

Louth,  Dr.,  532. 

Louvois,  69,  150. 

Lowendale,  57. 

Lowther,  Sir  James,  first  Earl  of 
Lonsdale,  377-80,  407,  459,  517, 
528. 

William,  second  Earl  of  Lons- 
dale, 380. 

Luttrell,  Colonel,  270. 

Luxembourg,  57. 

Lyttelton,  Dowager  Lady,  194. 

George,  first  Lord,  78,  87,  95, 

!93-5. 

second  Lord,  192-5. 

Miss,  195. 

MACALISTER,  Col.,  590. 
Macartney,    Lord,    277,   322,    340, 

5i3,  573- 

Macdonald,  Sir  James,  95. 
Mackay,  J.  R.,  also  spelled  Mackie, 

646-7. 
Macpherson,  Sir  John,  141,  201-3, 

220,  513. 

Madison,  James,  223,  387. 
Mahommet  Ali,  389,  513. 
Maine,  Duke  and  Duchess  de,  100. 
Maintenon,  Mme.  de,  64-6,  150. 
Malagrida,  Gabriel,  41,  374. 
Maltzan,  Count,  201. 
Manchester,  Duke  of,  441,  545,  568. 
Mann,  Sir  Horace,  166,  168. 
Manners,  General,  180. 

Lord  Robert,  180. 

Mansfield,    Earl    of,    197,    208-10, 

229-30,   272-4,   275-6,  306,   341, 

368-70,  444,  551,  611-3,  673-4. 
James,  334,  576,  621. 


747 


WRAXALL'S  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 


Margaret,  Queen  of  Navarre,  163, 
Maria,  Archduchess,  224. 

Princess  of  Brazil,  22. 

Anna,  Queen  of  Portugal,  23- 

39- 

Benedicta,  Princess  of  Portugal, 

23. 

Theresa,  Empress,  51,  57,  120, 

164,  168,  186-7,  221.  224~7.  3J3. 
620. 

Marialva,  Marquis  de,  30. 

Marianna  Victoria,  Queen  of  Portu- 
gal, 9  -10,  20-22,  26-9,  34. 

Marie  Antoinette,  17,  71-3,  214, 
227,  396-7,  569,  620. 

Marius,  i. 

Marivaux,  32,  98. 

Markham,  Dr.,  303. 

Marlborough,  Dowager  Duchess  of, 


in    Churchill,     first    Duke 
of,    57,   92,    168,   221,   441,   468, 

585- 

second  Duke  of,  313. 

third  Duke  of,  534. 

Marmontel,  98. 

Marsham,  Charles,  663,  667,  669, 

671,  682,  686,  689,  690. 
Martin,  James,  606,  609,  624. 

Samuel,  276. 

Marvell,  A.,  656. 

Mary  II.    (wife  of   William   III.), 

Queen  of  England,  3,   187,  257, 

583-4- 

Queen  of  Scots,  26,  71. 

wife  of  James  II.,  105,  183. 

Mason,  William,  190,  287,  342,  393, 

596. 

Maupeou,  63. 
Maupertuis,  98. 
Maurepas,  Count  of,  68,  223,  290, 

306,  400. 

Maurice  of  Holland,  103. 
Mazarin,  Cardinal,  190,  248. 

Duchesse  de,  100. 

Medici,  Catherine  de,  396. 

Cosmo  de,  166. 

Gaston  de,  166-7. 

Hippolito  de,  167. 

Lorenzo  de,  166. 

Medina  Sidonia,  Duke  of,  36. 
Melcomb,  Lord,  see  Dodington. 
Melville,  Lord,  see  H.  Dundas. 
Mezerai.  60. 


Middlesex,   Charles,   Earl  of,   and 

Duke  of  Dorset,  253. 

James  Crawford,  Earl  of,  92. 

Lionel,  Earl  of,  92. 

Lord,  255. 

Millar,  33. 

Milo,  58. 

Milton,  John,  91,  386,  608. 

Lord,  649. 

Mirabeau,  518. 

Mirandola,  Princess  of,  167. 

Mitchell,  Sir  Andrew,  33. 

Moliere,  85. 

Molineux,  Sir  Francis  >  484. 

Monk,  234. 

Monmouth,  4. 

Montagu,    or  Montague,    Edward 

Wortley,  259. 

Frederick,  477,  543,  600. 

Lady  Mary  Wortley,  44,  101, 

259- 

Mrs.,  84-7,  92,  95-6,  98. 

Montausier,  Due  de,  630. 
Montespan,  Mme.  de,  51. 
Montesquieu,  98. 
Montpensier,  Mile,  de,  150. 
Moore,  Dr.  John,  533-4,  610. 

Sir  John,  293^  469. 

Mordaunt,  family  of,  576-8. 

Lady  Mary,   see   Duchess   of 

Norfolk. 
Mordecai,  657. 
Mountmorres,  Lord,  271. 
Muley,  Ismael,  7. 
Mulgrave,  Lord,  411-2,  479,  668. 
Murray,  General,  213. 
Musgrave,  Dr.,  262-3,  273- 

NADIR,  Shah,  574. 

Naples,  King  of,  see  Ferdinand  IV. 

Napoleon  Bonaparte,  62,  74,   102, 

106,  133,  196,  205,  223,  283,  290, 

293..  387,  397,  520,  574- 
Nasidienus,  123. 
Necker,  J.,  354-5,  375. 
Nelson,    Lord,  141,  190,  192,  461, 

470. 

Nepean,  Sir  Evan,  616. 
Nerva,  103. 
Nestor,  376. 
Neufville,  102. 
Newcastle,  Duke  of,  258,  523,  639- 

40,  645-6. 
Nicholson,  Margaret,  241. 


748 


INDEX 


Nivernais,  Due  de,  98. 

Noia,  Due  de,  141. 

Norfolk,  Duchess  of  (Lady  M. 
Mordaunt),  576-8. 

Duke  of,  576-7,  618. 

Norroy  King  of  Arms,  593. 

North,  Col.  George  Augustus,  202, 
507.  547.  600,  616. 

Dr.,  302-3. 

Lady,  302. 

Lord,  afterwards  Earl  of 

Guilford,  i,  2,  109,  143,  190,  195, 
201-3,  2I7--28,  233,  251-3,  272- 
4,  284-5,  288-91,  294-307,  310, 
321-9,  333-8,  341,  345-7,  352, 
355,  358,  365-7,  373.  38o,  384-7. 
390-4,  398-412,  416,  419,  432-4, 
437,  440-3,  452-5,  458,  468-70, 
476-482,  486-490,  499,  503-527. 
530-1.  536-566,  575.  589-93.  598- 
604,  615-6,  623-7,  631,  636-7, 
641-2,  648-9,  652,  656,  657-8, 
661,  666,  669-70,  674-6,  680-2, 
687-694. 

Northampton,  Dowager  Countess 
of,  583-4. 

Earl  of,  581. 

Northington,  Henley,  Earl  of,  326, 

543~5- 
Norton,      Sir      Fletcher,       Baron 

Grantly,  217-9,  436-7. 
Nugent,  Lady.     See  Mrs.  Knight. 
Lady   (Countess   Dowager  of 

Berkeley),  78. 
Lord,  74-81,  375,  440. 

OGILVIE,  Dr.,  157-160. 

Olivarez,  Condd  d',  13. 

Opdam,  312. 

Orange,   Prince    of,   101-6,   222-3. 

See  also  William. 

Princess  of,  104-5. 

Orde,   Thos.  Orde-Powlett,    Baron 

Bolton,  478. 

Orford,  Lord.     <&?<?  Walpole. 
Orleans,  Duchesses  d',  150. 
Due  d1,  16,  17,  21,  46-7,  50, 

59,  71,  74,  100,  150. 

Mile  d1,  17. 

Orloff,  Alexis,  121. 

Gregory,  m-8. 

Ormond,  Duke  of,  468. 
Orvilliers,  d',  187. 
Osborn,  Mr.,  108,  109. 


Othello,  609. 
Otway,  32. 
Ovid,  146,  239. 

Oxford,  Earls  of,  95,  268,  326,  520, 
611. 


PALLISER,  Sir  Hugh,   188,  220-1, 

321,  363- 

Paoli,  Pasquale,  283. 
Parker,  Admiral,  393,  461. 
Parkyns,  Boothby,  Lord  Rancliffe, 

602. 

Parma,  Ferdinand,  Duke  of,  225. 
Paul,  Czar,  12,  113,  119-124. 

his  wife,  119-24,  128. 

Pausanias,  140. 
Peachum,  448. 
Pedro  II.  of  Portugal,  38. 

Dom,  10,  25-8,  37-8. 

Pelham,  Henry,  57,  305,  319,  639- 

40,  644-8. 

Lord,  447. 

Pennant,  88. 

Penthie"vre,  Due  de,  73. 

Pepys,  Sir  William,  95. 

Perceval,  384. 

Percy,    Lord    Algernon,    Earl    of 

Beverley,  206. 
Pericles,  343. 
Peshwa,  the,  307,  513. 
Peter  I.   the  Great  of  Russia,  47, 

122   133,  575- 

III.,  111-5,  IJ8,  124,  131. 

Peterborough,  Earls  of,  576-8. 
Petty,    Henry.       See    Marquis    of 

Lansdowne. 
Philip  of  Macedon,  468. 
Philip   II.    of   Spain,    31,    38,    43, 

102-3,  223,  387. 

III.,  31,  223. 

IV.,  13,  51,  620. 

V.,  20- 1,  43-9,  284. 

Phipps,  Hon.  Charles,  411. 
Pigot,  Admiral,  468-9,  498,  512. 
Pindar,  359. 
Piozzi,  Mrs.,  formerly  Mrs.  Thrale, 

88,  91,  92,  93,  96. 
Pitt,  Lady  Harriet,  477,  636. 
Thomas,    Baron     Camelford, 

402,  459,  548-9,  607,  652. 
William,  the  elder.     See  Earl 

of  Chatham. 
William,  the  younger,  i,  60, 


749 


WRAXALUS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 


76, 173-4.  227,  236, 243,  298-305, 

3i9.  333.  336,  353-8.  374~84>  402- 

6,   419,  423,   439-446,  452,  458- 

60,  472-4,  477-8,  481,  490,  504-5, 

509,  5i9.  522-9,  535-7,  543-  548~ 

9.   552-3.    557-9,   562-3,    566-9, 

597-8,   601,    605,    609,  615-642, 

648-  653,  657  et  seq. 
Pius  VI.,  179. 
Pizarro,  Adm.,  493. 
Plantagenets,  the,  447. 
Pliny  the  elder,  140. 
Plunket,  Amelia,  Lady,  afterwards 

Lady  Nugent,  78. 
Pocock,  Admiral,  470. 
Podotski,    Count     and     Countess, 

164-5. 
Polignac,   Duke  and    Duchess  of, 

397,  620. 

Pollock,  Mr.,  616. 
Pombal,  Marquis  de,  7,  13,  14,  18, 

24,  39-42. 

Pompadour,  Madame  de,  12,  51. 
Pompey,  56. 

Poniatowski,  Count,  in. 
Pope,  Alexander,  79,  89,  90,   101, 

193,   253,  269,  302,   312,   324-6, 

358.  368,  589. 

Portland,  Dowager  Duchess  of,  95. 
Duke  of,  294,  378,   381,  437, 

479.  505-7,  517,  53i.  538-42,  559. 

593-4.  613,  664-5,  686,  689. 
Portsmouth,   Duchess  of,  Mile,  de 

la  Keroualle,  245,  371,  449-50. 
Portugal,  Princesses  of,  34. 
Potemkin,  171. 
Potmore,  Earl  of,  313. 
Powell,  J.,  550-1. 
Powys,  Thomas,  Baron  Lilford,  423, 

444.  523,  579.  604,  609,  630,  664, 

667-71,  677,  682,  686-90. 
Prado,  Count  of,  30. 
Pratt,  J.  J.     See  Earls  of  Camden. 
Price,  Dr. ,  373. 
Pride,  Col.,  449. 
Prie,  Marquise  de,  48-51. 
Priestley,  Dr.,  373. 
Prior,  Matthew,  3,  78,  92,  583. 
Provence,  Comte  de,  72-3. 
Pugatcheff,  118. 
Pulteney,   Earl  of  Bath,   86,   253, 

656. 

Miss,  Countess  of  Bath,  640. 

Pynsent,  Sir  W.,  634. 


QUEENS  BURY,  Duchess  of,  101, 
260,  324. 

Duke  of,  141,  253,  448,  567. 

Querouaille  (or  Keroualle),  Made- 
moiselle de  la.  See  Duchess  of 
Portsmouth. 

RADZIVIL,  Prince  Nicholas,  115-8. 
Rambouillet,  Marquise  de,  99. 
Rancliffe,      Lord.       See    Boothby 

Parkyns. 
Rapin,  4. 
Ravaillac,  15. 
Rawdon,  Lord,  afterwards  Marquis 

of  Hastings,  392,  418. 
Raynal,  Abbe",  94-98. 
Razoumoffsky,  Alexis,  114-6. 
Reresby,  282. 
Retz,  Cardinal  de,  5,  517. 
Reynolds,  Sir  Joshua,  93. 
Rich  family,  the,  339. 
Richard,  654. 
—  II.,  248,  333,  369. 
Richardson,  Samuel,  32-3. 
Richelieu,  Cardinal,  51-2,  69. 

Due  de,  63,  66. 

Richmond,  Duke  of,  321,  350,  371-2, 

417-8,  437,  444,  453-4,  458,  476, 

504,  542,  612,  618,  673. 
Rigby,    Richard,    218,  326,    331-3, 

336,  407,  437,   455,   488-9,    561, 

608,  658,  667,  682. 
Rivers,  Lord,  6n. 
Roberts,  644-6. 
Robertson,  91,  97. 
Robespierre,  196,  290,  397,  461,  520. 
Robinson,  336-7,  425-8,    560,  642, 

647,  649,  658. 
Rochambeau,  65. 
Roche,  Anne,  582. 
Rochester,  Lord,  582. 
Rochford,  Earl  of,  184-5,  347. 
Rockingham,     Marquis     of,     and 

party  of,  i,  207-8,  219,  270,  294, 

301,   328,   355-7,   362,  367,   371, 

381,  409,    433,   437,  442,   453-5, 

471-83,  490,  499-505.  512,  516-7, 

522-3,  540,  558,  561-3,  570,  589, 

600,  641,  647,  687. 
Rodney,  Lady,  191-2. 
Rodney,    Lord    G.    B.,    190,    220, 

392,  431-2,  457.  460-6,  470,  479, 

493-8,  512-3. 
Rodney,  Capt.,  213-4. 


750 


INDEX 


Romanzoff,  Marshal,  122. 

Romney,  Lord,  663. 

Rose,  George,  568. 

Rosenhagen,  Philip,  277. 

Ross,  General,  656. 

Rousseau,  J.  J.,  32,  98. 

Royal  (Charlotte),  Princess,  daughter 

of  George  III.,  127. 
Rumbold,  Sir   Thomas,  322,   389, 

456,  485-490,  514. 
Rupert,  Prince,  234,  315,  393. 
Russell,  Lord,  88. 
Rutland,    Duke  of,  378,   380,   475, 

543,  630,  634,  640. 
Ruyter,  106,  393. 

SACKVILLE,     Lord.       See     Lord 

George  Germain. 

Lord  John,  253-5,  619. 

family  of,  580. 

St.  Evremond,  100. 
St.  George,  first  Chevalier  de,  178. 
St.  John,  Henry.    See  Bolingbroke. 
St.  John,  the  Hon.  John,  201-2. 
St.  Simon,  Due  de,  150,  553. 
St.  Vincent,  Lord,  461. 
Salisbury,  Bishop  of,  3. 

Lord,  441,  650. 

Sallust,  254,  344. 

Sambuca,  154. 

Samson,  652. 

Sandwich,  Lord,  319-322,  347,  363, 

393-4.  4".  4i9.  457,  464.  467-9. 

512-3.  543)  603,  622. 
Sardanapalus,  63. 
Sardinia,  King  of,  72. 
Saturn,  386. 

Saunders,  Admiral,  190,  470. 
Savile,  Sir  George,  201,  364,  517. 
Sawbridge,  Alderman,  297. 
Saxe,  Chevalier  de,  134. 

Marshal,  57-9,  70,  222,  395. 

Saxony,  Elector  of,  172. 

Electress,  Dowager  of,  150. 

Schrepfer,  134. 
Schwellenbergen,  Mme.,  342. 
Scipio,  246. 
Scott,  Mr.     See  Lord  Eldon. 

Sir  Walter,  190. 

Sebastian  of  Portugal,  31,  43. 

Sejanus,  89,  615. 

Selwyn,     George    Augustus,    372, 

447-8,  451-2. 
his  father,  450. 


Sens,  Mile,  de,  48-9. 

Sevigne1,  Madame  de,  87. 

Shakespere,  85-6,  606,  608. 

Shelburne,  Lord,  i,  219,  264,  278, 
294,  307,  362,  367,  372-4,  378, 
381-3,  409-10,  433,  437-9,  442. 
453-4.  471-84,  490-1.  499-506, 
510-5,  523,  526-9,  550,  572,  575. 
589,  613,  618,  621,  638,  653,  666, 
674. 

Sheridan,  R.  B.,  353,  358,  368,  374, 
383-4,  439,  459,  525,  545,  549, 
604,  608-9,  631,  653,  661,  666-9. 

Thomas,  383. 

Shipley,  Bishop,  94,  531. 

Miss,  94. 

Shovell,  Sir  C.,  492. 

Shuttleworth,  Mrs.,  274. 

Shylock,  604. 

Siddons,  Mrs.,  628. 

Sidney,  Algernon,  88. 

Sinclair,  Sir  John,  240. 

Sobieski,  Clementina,  178. 

James,  178. 

John,  178. 

Somerset,  Duke  of,  207. 

Somerville,  Lord,  240. 

Sophia,  Princess  of  Brunswick,  184- 

5.  575- 

wife  of  George  I. ,  132. 

Southampton,  Wriothesly,  Earl  of, 

305- 

Southesk,  Countess  of,  473. 
Sloper,  Lieut. -Col.,  314. 
Smith,  Adam,  97. 

Captain,  314. 

Gen.  Richard,  388. 

Sir  Sidney,  314. 

Spencer,  Countess.  See  L.  Bingham. 

Mr. ,  253. 

Smollett,  Tobias,  32,  60,  439. 
Spenser,  Edmund,  32,  190. 

Lord  Robert,  345,  533-4. 

Spinola,  495. 

Stair,  Lord,  82,  313,  619. 

Stanislas,  King  of  Poland,  15,  50-4. 

Staunton,  Sir  George,  573. 

Steele,  Richard,  101. 

Stephens,  Mr.,  465. 

Stepney,  George,  92. 

Sir  John,  134. 

Stewart,  Keith,  656-7. 

Stolberg,  Princess  of,  and  Countess 

of  Albany,  183. 


751 


WRAXALKS  HISTORICAL  MEMOIRS 


Stormont,    Lord,    306,    398,    433, 

520,  540-1,  611,  620,  673. 
Stow,  Duke  of,  78. 
Strafford,  Lord,  233. 
Suetonius,  no,  474. 
Suffolk,    Countess    of.      See    Mrs 

Howard. 

Suffren,  395,  498. 
Sully,  69,  354. 
Surrey,  Lord,  429,  537,  543-4,  634, 

655- 

Suwarrow,  Marshal,  150. 
Swift,  Jonathan,  95,  101,  272,  324, 

640. 

Sydney,  Lord,  317,  572,  618,  650. 
Sylla  or  Sulla,  i,  687. 
Sylvan,  Don  Malthus  de,  80. 


TACITUS,  2,  200,  309,  350. 
Talbot,  Lord,  269,  276. 
Tallart,  Marshal,  643. 
Tanjore,  Rajah  of,  591. 
Tanucci,  Marquis,  146,  154. 
Tarrakanoff,  Princess,  112-3, 

125,  131- 
Tasso,  351. 

Tavora,  family  of,  15-20,  41. 
Tell,  William,  283. 
Temple,  Richard,  first  Earl,  75-81, 

269,  274,  276,  348. 
George,  second  Earl,  479,  542, 

610,  613-8,  693. 

Sir  William,  109. 

Tencin,  Madame  de,  too. 
Terray,  Abbe",  64. 
Thais,  64. 
Thomas,  Dr.,  303. 
Thompson,  Bielby,  592-5. 
Thrale,  Mr.,  88,  90,  93. 

Mrs.     See  Mrs.  Piozzi. 

Thrasibulus,  387. 

Thurlow,   Lord,   324-6,  334,    347, 

368,  398,  433.  445,  471,  53L  535- 

7i  545,  57°,  592'  612,  618,  620, 

629,  635,  650. 
Tiberius,  615. 
Tierney,  298. 
Timon,  343. 
Tippoo,  519,  598- 
Tollemache,  Lady  Bridget,  249. 
Tooke,  Rev.  J.  Home,  518,  561. 
Tour  and  Taxis,  Augusta  Elizabeth, 

Princess  of,  162-3. 


Tour  and  Taxis,  Charles  Anselme, 

Prince  of,  162-3. 
Townshend,        Charles,        second 

Viscount,  447,  450-1. 

Charles,  Lord  Bayning,  543. 

George,  fourth  Viscount,  542. 

Lord  John,  378. 

Thomas,  365-6,  438,  458,  477, 

509. 

Trajan,  103,  244. 
Trapaud,  General  Cyrus,  256. 
Trenck,  von,  191. 
Tresillian,  369. 
Tromp,  Van,  106,  393. 
Tucker,  Dr.,  268. 
Tudors,  the,  445. 
Turenne,  57. 
Turgot,  98. 
Tyers,  97. 
Tyler,  Wat,  215. 

VALLIERE,  Duchesse  de  la,  51. 

Valois,  Philip  of,  70. 
j  Valori,  Duchess  of,  47. 
1  Van  Berkel,  223. 

Vansittart,  Miss,  265. 

Vaudreuil,  464-6. 

Vaughan,  392. 

Venddme,  Due  de,  57,  150. 

Vergennes,  Comte  de,  68,  102,  223, 
290,  306,  501,  512. 

Verney,  Earl,  356-7. 

Verres,  489. 

Vesey,  Mrs.,  87,  96,  98. 

Vespasian,  225. 

Villars,  Marshal,  57,  191,466. 

Villiers,  Duke  of  Buckingham.    See 
also  Buckingham,  193,  580. 

Virgil,  189,  200,  411,  525,  608. 

Virginia,  58. 

Vivonne,  Catherine  de,  99. 

Voltaire,  5,  32,  60,69,  98,  119,  225. 

WALES,  Prince  of.    See  George  IV. , 
Wales,    Dowager   Princess   of,   60, 

238,  247-50,  254,  259,  262,  265-6, 

273,  286. 
Wallace,  James,  220,  334,  511,  543, 

575-6- 
Walmoden,      Mme.        See     Mile. 

Kielmannsegge. 
Walpole,  Sir  E.,  635,653. 

Horace,  Baron  Walpole,  109, 


619. 


752 


INDEX 


Walpole,  Horace,  Earl  of  Orford, 
5>  93,  245,  339,  341,  346,  413. 

Sir  Robert,  Earl  of  Orford, 

53-6,  93,  212,  257,  281,  302,  414, 
430,  447,  450,  56i,  643-4,  648, 
656,  674. 

Walsingham,  Lord.  See  also  de 
Grey,  398-9,  415,  572. 

Warwick,  Earl  of,  621. 

Washington,  George,  243,  288,  290, 
338,  387- 

Wedderburn,  Alex.,  Lord  Lough- 
borough  (g.v.},  208-9,  279,  324, 
334,  34i,  368-71,  456,  545. 

Mrs. ,  279. 

Wellington,  Duke  of,  291. 

Weymouth,  Lord,  272,  326,  337, 
347,  454—5,  561. 

Wharton,  Duke  of,  193,  641. 

Whitelocke,  General,  417. 

Wilberforce,  William,  606,  668. 

Wilhelmina,  Princess  of  Hesse 
Darmstadt,  120. 

Wilkes,  John,  97-8,  210,  219,  232-4, 
250,  265,  268-71,  276-7,  320,  348, 

359,   367,  370,  452-3,  56i,   569, 

,  606,  647,  696. 

illiam  III.  of  England,  3,  89, 
102-4,  184,  187-8,  208,  221,  243- 
4,  256,  263,  282,  288-9,  313,  529, 
576-8,  582-4. 

IV.,  453- 

I.  of  Holland,  36,  103. 


IV.,  104. 

• V.,  102,   104. 

Windham,  W.,  665. 


Witt,  Cornellis  de,  102,  106. 

Jan  de,  102,  106. 

Wolfe,  322. 

Wolsey,  Cardinal,  89,  546. 
Woodfall,  H.  S.,274,  279. 
Woronzow,  Count,  127,  132. 
Wortley,  Mr.,  258. 
Wraxall,  W.  N.,  1-7, 14,  22,27-48, 
52-4,   71-4,   81-92,    101-2,    106, 

127,   131-4,  139-144,  150,  157, 

160-6,  172-3,  176,  179-87,  192- 
201,  213-7,  228,  234,  239-40, 
255,  267,  273-80,  288,  299,  308, 
399-400,  438,  447,  459,  508,  5x0, 
521,  560,  602,  607,  621,  646-7, 
650-1,  670,  692. 

Wray,  Sir  Cecil,  606. 

Wroughton,  Sir  Thomas,  109-11. 

Wurtemberg,  Duke  of,  125-8,  162. 

Princes  of,  125-131,  162. 

Princesses  of,  122,  125,  131. 

Wyndham,  Sir  Wm.,  368. 

XENOPHON,  344. 

Xerxes,  90. 

Ximenes,  Cardinal,  56. 

YARMOUTH,  Countess  of,  246,  252, 

255- 
Yonge,  Sir  George,  477,  622. 

Sir  William,  621. 

Younger,  Dr.,  450-1. 
York,  Archbishop  of,  610. 

Edward,  Duke  of,  249. 

Yorke,    Sir    Joseph,     101-2,     109, 

222. 

ZOUTMAN,  Admiral,  393. 


PRINTED    BY    NEILL   AND   CO.,    LTD.,    EDINBURGH. 


Wraxall,  N.  DA 

506 

Historical  memoirs  of  my       .W9  * 
own  time. . .  AIT
