LETTERS OF SAMUEL JOHNSON

G.   BIRKBECK HILL

VOL.  II.

PRINTED AT THE CLARENDON PRESS

BY HORACE HART,    PRINTER TO THE UNIVERSITY

LETTERS

OF

SAMUEL JOHNSON,  LL.D.

COLLECTED AND EDITED

BY GEORGE BIRKBECK HILL,   D.C.L.

PEMBROKE COLLEGE,  OXFORD

EDITOR OF BOSWELL'S v LIFE OF JOHNSON  '

IN TWO VOLUMES:     VOL.    II
Jan.  15,  1777  —  Dec.  18, 1784

NEW YORK

HARPER   &    BROTHERS,    FRANKLIN SQUARE

1892

AUG 3 1 1955

LETTERS OF DR.  JOHNSON.

506.

TO MRS.    THRALE1.

Wednesday,  Jan.  15,  One in the morning,  1777.

Omnium rerum vicissitude2.  The night after last Thursday
was so bad,  that I took ipecacuanha the next day.  The next
night was no better.  On Saturday I dined with Sir Joshua.
The night was such as I was forced to rise and pass some hours
in a chair,  with great labour of respiration.  I found it now time
to do something,  and went to Dr.  Lawrence 3,  and told him I
would do what he should order,  without reading the prescription.
He sent for a chirurgeon 4 and took about twelve ounces of blood,
and in the afternoon I got sleep in a chair.

At night,  when I came to lie down after trial of an hour or
two,  I found sleep impracticable,  and therefore did what the
Doctor permitted in a case of distress  ;  I rose,  and opening the
orifice,  let out about ten ounces more.  Frank and I were but
awkward  ;  but,  with Mr.  Levet's help 5,  we stopped the stream,

1 Piozzi Letters,  i.  343.  surgeon.'     Under Surgeon he writes

2  '  Omnium rerum heus vicissitudo      '  corrupted by conversation from chi-

est.'  rurgeon?    Dr.  Murray in his Diction-

TERENCE.    Eunuchus,  ii.  2.  45.  ary gives no later instance in prose

For  '  the sad vicissitude of things,'  of this spelling than one found in one

see Life,  v.  117.  of Johnson's Letters.

3 Ante,  i.  47,  n.  2.  5 Levett,  '  the obscure practiser in

4 Johnson in his Dictionary under physic,'    had a room in his house.
Chirurgeon,  says  'it is now generally  'I have heard Johnson say,'  writes
pronounced,  and by many written,  Boswell,  '  he should not be satisfied,

VOL.  II.  B and

To Mrs.  Aston.

[A.D.  1777.

and I lay down again,  though to little purpose  ;  the difficulty of
breathing allowed no rest.  I slept again in the day-time,  in an
erect posture.  The Doctor has ordered a second bleeding,
which I hope will set my breath at liberty x.  Last night I could
lie but a little at a time.

Yet I do not make it a matter of much form.  I was to-day at
Mrs.  Gardiner's 2.  When I have bled to-morrow,  I will not give
up Langton,  nor Paradise 3.  But I beg that you will fetch me
away on Friday.  I do not know but clearer air may do me
good  ;  but whether the air be clear or dark,  let me come to you.

I am,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.
To sleep,  or not to sleep 4

507.

To JAMES BOSWELL.
[London],  February 18,  1777.     Published in the Life,  iii.  104.

508.

To GEORGE STEEVENS.
[London],  February 25,  1777.     Published in the Life,  iii.  100.

509.

To MRS.  ASTON 5.
DEAR MADAM,  Bolt-Court,  March 8, 1777.

As we pass on through the journey of life,  we meet,  and
ought to expect,  many unpleasing occurrences,  but many like-
wise encounter us unexpected.  I have this morning heard from
Lucy6 of your illness.  I heard,  indeed,  in the next sentence

though attended by all the College
of Physicians,  unless he had Mr.
Levet with him.'  Life,  i.  243.

1 Johnson wrote to Boswell on
February 18  :— <  I have been so dis-
tressed by difficulty of breathing that
I lost,  as was computed,  six and
thirty ounces of blood in a few days.'
Ib.  iii.  104.  See ib.  iii.  152,  n.  3,  for
his resort to bleeding.

'The wife of a tallow chandler
on Snow Hill,  not in the learned way,
but a worthy good woman.'  Id.  i.  242.

3 Ante,  i.  314.

4 He is parodying Hamlet,  Act iii.
sc.  I,  1.  56  :— '  To be,  or not to be.'

5 Published in Croker's Boswell,
page 528.

6 Miss Porter,  Mrs.  Aston's near
neighbour at Lichfield.

that

I

Aetat.  67.]  To Mrs.    AstOU.

that you are to a great degree recovered.  May your recovery,
dearest Madam,  be complete and lasting  !  The hopes of paying
you the annual visit is one of the few solaces with which my
imagination gratifies me ;  and my wish is,  that I may find you
happy.

My health is much broken ;  my nights are very restless,  and
will not be made more comfortable by remembering that one of
the friends whom I value most is suffering equally with myself.
Be pleased,  dearest lady,  to let me know how you are ;  and if
writing be troublesome,  get dear Mrs.  Gastrell z to write for you.
I hope she is well and able to assist you ;  and wish that you may
so well recover,  as to repay her kindness,  if she should want
you.  May you both live long happy together  !

I am,

Dear Madam,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

510.

To JAMES BOSWELL.
[London],  March n,  1777.     Published in the Life^  iii.  105.

511.

To MRS.  ASTON 2.
DEAREST MADAM,

The letter with which I was favoured  [by]  the kindness of
Mrs.  Gastrel has contributed very little to quiet my solicitude.
I am indeed more frighted than by Mrs.  Porter's account.  Yet
since you have had strength to conquer your disorder so as to
obtain a partial recovery,  I think it reasonable to believe that
the favourable season which is now coming forward,  may restore
you to your former health.  Do not,  dear Madam,  lose your
courage,  nor by despondence or inactivity give way to the
disease.  Use such exercise as you can bear,  and excite cheerful
thoughts in your own mind.  Do not harrass  \sic\  your faculties

1 Mrs.  Aston's sister.    Ante,  i.  160,      well,  page 529.     Corrected by me
n.  4.  from the original in Pembroke

2 First published in Croker's Bos-      College Library.

B 2,  with

To Mrs.   Thrale.  [A.D.  1777.

with laborious attention,  nothing is,  in my opinion,  of more
mischievous tendency in a state of body like yours,  than deep
meditation,  or perplexing solitude.  Gayety is a duty when
health requires it1.  Entertain yourself as you can with small
amusements or light conversation,  and let nothing but your
devotion ever make you serious.  But while I exhort you,  my
dearest lady,  to merriment,  I am very serious myself.  The loss
or danger of a friend is not to be considered with indifference  ;
but I derive some consolation from the thought,  that you do not
languish unattended,  that you are not in the hands of strangers
or servants,  but have a Sister at hand to watch your wants and
supply them.  If at this distance I can be of any use by con-
sulting Physicians or for any other purpose I hope you will
employ me.

I have thought on a journey to Staffordshire,  and hope in
a few weeks to climb Stowhill2,  and to find there the pleasure
which I have so often found.     Let me hear again from you.
I am,  dear Madam,

Your most humble servant,

SAM.-  JOHNSON.

March 15,  1777.

512.

TO MRS.   THRALE3.

MADAM,  March 19,  1777.

Be pleased to procure the bearer credit for a linen gown,
and let her bring the bill to me.

Did you stay all night at Sir Joshua's?  and keep Miss up
again  ?    Miss Owen had a sight—  all the Burkes—  the Harris's—

'  This was a lesson which he often so useful as not to think.'     Ante,  i

taught:     Grief has its time  'he said.  293.      When Mr.  Thrale died,   he

£*/#,  iv.  i2i.       Grief is a species of wrote to his widow  :—  <  I think busi-

idleness he wrote to Mrs.  Thrale.-  ness the best remedy for grief,  as

Ante,  i 212       'Encourage yourself soon as it can be admitted'    Post

m bustle,  and variety,  and cheerful-  Letter of April u,   1781.     To Dr

**  "^  ^  Taybr he Wrote  :~'  Sad^ss only

A«*         <%      y SUTVmg S0n'      multiplies self''    p<"*>  Let**  of Au-
Ante,  i.  406.     <  Even to think in the ust 0

gust 3,  1770

2 Her h°USe was on St™  Hill.
,    is for the present not 3 Piozzi Letters,  \.  345.

Miss

Aetat.  67.]

To Mrs.   Thrale.

Miss Reynolds — what has she to see more  ?  and Mrs.  Horneck,
and Miss1.

You are all young,  and gay,  and easy;  but I have miserable
nights,  and know not how to make them better ;  but I shift
pretty well a-days,  and so have at you all at Dr.  Burney's
to-morrow2.

I never thought of meeting you at Sir Joshua's,  nor knew that
it was a great day.  But things,  as sages have observed,  happen
unexpectedly;  and you thought little of seeing me this fortnight
except to-morrow.  But go where you will,  and see if I do not
catch you.  When I am away,  every body runs away with you,
and carries you among the grisettes,  or whither they will,
I hope you will find the want of me twenty times before

you see me.

I am,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

1  *  Miss '  who was kept up again
was Miss Thrale.  Miss Burney de-
scribes her at this time as just  '  verg-
ing on her teens.  She is certainly
handsome,  and her beauty is of a
peculiar sort ;  fair,  round,  firm,  and
cherubimical ;  with its chief charm
exactly where lies the mother's failure
— namely in the mouth.  She is reck-
oned cold and proud ;  but I believe
her to be merely shy and reserved.
She was very silent,  but very ob-
servant ;  and never looked tired
though she never uttered a syllable.'
Memoirs of Dr.  Burney,  ii.  88.  See
also Early Diary of Frances Burney,
ii.  153.  'Miss Owen,  who is a re-
lation of Mrs.  Thrale's,  is good-
humoured and sensible enough.  She
is a sort of butt,  and as such is
a general favourite  ;  though she is
a willing,  and not a mean butt ;  for
she is a woman of family and fortune.'
Memoirs of Dr.  Burney,  ii.  88.

'All the Burkes'  would be Ed-
mund Burke and his wife,  his brother
Richard,  and his friend and distant
relative William Burke,  both of whom

together with Edmund are described
in Goldsmith's Retaliation.

Harris was '  Hermes '  Harris.  Life,
ii.  225,  and post,  Letter of April 25,
1780.  His wife,  Miss Burney de-
scribes as  '  in nothing extraordinary ;
a so,  so,  sort of woman.'  Early
Diary,  &c.,  ii.  57.  The editor in a
note protests against this judgment,
appealing to the merits of her pub-
lished letters.

For the Hornecks see Life,  \.  414,
and ante,  i.  221,  n.  3.

2 Miss Burney,  on January 9, 1788,
in the days of her servitude at Court,
records that the first volume of John-
son's Letters to Mrs.  Thrale,  as yet
unpublished,  was lent to her.  '  The
book belongs to the Bishop of Car-
lisle [Dr.  Douglas],  who lent it to
Mr.  Turbulent  [a gentleman who read
to the Queen],  from whom it was
again lent to the Queen,  and so
passed on to Mrs.  Schwellenberg.
Our name once occurs ;  how I started
at its sight!  'Tis to mention the
party that planned the first visit to
our house  :  Miss Owen,  Mr.  Seward,

To

To Henry Thrale.

[A.D.  1777.

513.

To HENRY THRALE x.
DEAR SIR,

This is a letter of pure congratulation.

1.  That you are alive2.

2.  That you have got my mistress fixed again after her excen-
tricities.

3.  That my mistress has added to her conquests the Prince of
Castiglione3.

April 9,  1777.
I congratulate you,

Mrs.  and Miss Thrale,  and Dr.  John-
son. How well shall we ever,  my
Susan,  remember that morning ! '
The next day she records : — '  Mrs.
Schwellenberg told me that in the
second volume I also was mentioned.
It has given me a sickness at heart
inexpressible.  It is not that I expect
severity;  for previous to the mar-
riage with Piozzi,  if Mrs.  Thrale loved
not F.  B.  where shall we find faith
in words  ?  But her present resent-
ment of my constant disapprobation
of her conduct may prompt some
note,  or other mark,  to point out her
change of sentiments.'  The Queen
said to Miss Burney  : — '  I said to
Mr.  Langton at the Drawing-room :
—"Your friend,  Dr.  Johnson,  Sir,
has had many friends busy to publish
his books,  and his memoirs,  and his
meditations,  and his thoughts ;  but
I think he wanted one friend more."
"What for?  Ma'am,"  cried he.  "A
friend to suppress them,"  I an-
swered.' Mme.  D'Arblay's Memoirs,
iv.  15,  19,22.

Miss Burney in a letter written at
the time describes the party at her
father's  :— <  Mrs.  Thrale is a very
pretty woman still ;  she is extremely
lively and chatty ;  has no supercilious
or pedantic airs,  and is really gay
and agreeable.'  Early Diary,  &c.,
ii.  153.  This letter she published
fifty-five years later in an altered

form.  In it she says  : — '  I liked her
in every thing except her entrance
into the room,  which was rather florid
and flourishing,  as who should say,
"  It's I  ! — No less a person than
Mrs.  Thrale.'"  Memoirs of Dr.
Burney,  ii.  88.

In the original letter she gives
a long and curious description of
Johnson.  '  He is indeed very ill-
favoured  ;  is tall and stout,  but stoops
terribly;  he is almost bent double.'
He had on his best clothes,  'being
engaged to dine in a large company ;
a large wig,  snuff-colour coat and
gold buttons,  but no ruffles to his
[shirt];  doughty fists,  and black
worsted stockings.'  There is an
erasure in the original ;  the editor
suspects that  'doughty fists'  was
originally '  dirty fists.'  Early Diary,
&c.,  ii.  154.

According to Wraxall  (Memoirs,
ed.  1815,  i.  138),  'the total abolition
of buckles and ruffles  '  was not made
'  till the era of Jacobinism and of
Equality in 1793 and 1794.'  Sir P.
J.  Clerk,  though a strong Whig,  wore
'very rich laced ruffles'  as late as
1781.  Life,  \v.  80.

1 Piozzi Letters,  i.  346.

2  '  His death had appeared in the
newspapers.'     Life,  iii.  107.

3  '  Prince Gonzaga di Castiglione,
when dining in company with Dr.
Johnson,  thinking it was a polite as

4.  That

Aetat.  67.]  To John Ryland.  7

4.  That you will not be troubled with me till to-morrow,  when
I shall come with  *  *  *  *.

5.  That  *****  will go away in the evening.

I am,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

614.

To JOHN RYLAND I.

SIR,

I have sent you the papers.  Of this parcel I have rejected
[?  ejected]  no poetry2.  Of the letters there are some which
I should be sorry to omit,  some that it is not proper to
insert,  and very many which as we want room or want matter
we may use or neglect.  When we come to these we will have
another selection.  But to these I think the present plan of pub-
lication will never bring me.  His poems with his play will
I think make two volumes,  The Adventurers will make at least
one,  and for the fourth,  as I think you intend four,  which
will make the subscription a guinea,  if you subscribe,  we have so
much more than we want that the difficulty will be to reject.

If Mrs.  Hawkesworth sells the copy3,  we are then to consider
how many volumes she sells,  and if they are fewer than we have
matter to fill,  we will be the more rigorous in our choice.

I am for letting none stand that are only relatively good,  as
they were written in youth.  The Buyer has no better bargain

well as gay thing to drink the Doc-  2 Had Hawkesworth's Poems been

tor's health with some proof that he published perhaps there would be

had read his works,  called out from found included among them some

the top of the table to the bottom, —  poor pieces of verse assigned to

At your good health,  Mr.  Vagabond?  Johnson, but I am convinced,  wrongly

Piozzi's Synonymy,  ii.  358.  assigned.     Life,  i.  177-8.     Hawkes-

1 From the original in the pos-  worth wrote,  it is stated,  the pieces in

session of Mr.  Alfred Morrison of the Gentleman's Magazine for 1746

Fonthill House.  -8 signed GREVILLE.    See id.,  1779,

It was sold by Messrs.  Sotheby  &  p.  72,   (where wrong references are

Co.,  on May 10,  1875,  for  £&  15S-  given).    This may be a mistake.    See

(Lot 95),  and by Messrs.  Christie  &  ante,  i.  p.  60,  n.  2,  for Hawkesworth's

Co.,  on June 5, 1 888  (Lot 36),  for  ^10.  friendship with Fulke Greville.

For the subject of this Letter see 3 The copyright.
ante,  i.  412-3.

when

8

To John Ryland.

[A.D.  1777.

when he pays for mean performances,  by being told that the
authour wrote them young1.

If the Lady can get an hundred pounds a volume,  I should
advise her to take it.  She may ask more.  I am not willing to
take less.

If she prints them by subscription the volumes should be four,
if,  at her own expense,  I still do not see considering the great
quantity of our matter how they can be fewer.  But in that
I shall not be obstinate.

I have yet not mentioned Swift's Life2,  nor the Novel3 which
together will go far towards a volume.

Who was his Amanuensis  ?  that small hand strikes a reader
with terrour.  It is pale as well as small 4.

Many little things are,  I believe,  in the magazine5,  which
should be marked and considered.  I do not always know them
but by conjecture.

The poetry I would have printed in order of time,  which he
seems to have intended by noting the dates,  which dates I should
like to preserve,  they shew the progress of  [word torn off]  mind,
and of a very powerful mind6.  The same  [word torn off]  may
be generally observed in the prose pieces.

What we have to consider,  and what I have considered,  are
the Authour's credit,  and the Lady's advantages.

I should be glad to take over the whole,  when you can spend
an hour or two with,  Sir,

Your most humble servant,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

April 12,  1777.
To Mr.  Ryland.

'For his early pieces Milton
seems to have had a degree of fond-
ness not very laudable  ;  what he has
once written he resolves to preserve,
and gives to the public an unfinished
poem  [The Passion],  which he broke
off because he was  "nothing satisfied
with what he had done/'  supposing
his readers less nice than himself.'
Johnson's Works t vii.  118.
2 Johnson begins his own Life of

Swift by praising Hawkesworth's.

3 Almoran andHamet;  an Oriental
Tale.   By John Hawkesworth,  LL.D.
Gentleman's Magazine,  1761,  p.  273.

4 Hawkesworth twenty years ear-
lier had attacked Johnson's   'pot-
hooks.'    Ante,  i.  60,  n.  2.

5 The Gentleman's Magazine.

6 Hawkesworth was     'Johnson's
closest imitator  ;  though,'  adds Bos-
well,  'when he had become elated

To

Aetat.  67.]

To the Reverend Dr.   Taylor.

515.

To JAMES BOSWELL.
May 3,  1777.     Published in the Life,  iii.  108.

516.

To THE REVEREND DR.  TAYLOR r.
DEAR SIR,

The weather now begins to grow tempting,  and brings my
annual excursion2 into my mind.  It is now an interesting
question whether you intend to come hither again,  for if you do,
I shall endeavour to accompany you back :  if you let idleness
prevail,  and stay at home,  I have my own course to take.

Mr.  Lucas has just been with me.  He has compelled me to
read his tragedy,  which is but a poor performance,  and yet may
perhaps put money into his pocket ;  it contains nothing immoral
or indecent,  and therefore,  we may very reasonably wish it
success3.

My nights continue to be very flatulent,  and restless,  and my
days are therefore sluggish and drowsy.  After physick I have
sometimes less uneasiness,  as I had last night,  but the effect is
by no means constant ;  nor have I found any advantage from
going to bed either with a full or an empty stomach.

Let me know what you resolve about your journey,  as soon as
you have taken your resolution.
I am,  Sir,

Your affectionate humble servant,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

May 3,  1777.
To the Reverend Dr.  Taylor in Ashbourne,  Derbyshire.

by having risen into some degree of
consequence,  he,  in a conversation
with me,  had the provoking effrontery
to say he was not sensible of it.'
Life,  \.  234,  252.

1 From the original in the posses-
sion of Messrs.  J.  Pearson and Co.,
of 5 Pall Mall Place,  S.W.

2 His annual excursion was toLich-
field and Ashbourne.    In the thirteen

years 1767-1779  (inclusive)  he only
failed thrice to visit these places.
He often stayed at Oxford and
Birmingham on his way.  Life,  iii.
452.

3 This paragraph is scored out in
the original.  In Baker's Biog.
Drammed.  1782,  i.  289,  Henry Lucas
is described as a student at the
Middle Temple,  and son of the

To

10

To the Reverend Dr.   Taylor.          [A.D.  1777.

517.

To CHALLES O'CONNOR.
[London],  May 19,  1777.     Published in the Life,  iii.  in.

518.

To MRS.  THRALET.

MADAM,  May 19, 1777.

I have written to Dr.  Taylor,  you may be sure,  but the
business is pretty much out of the Doctor's way.  His acquaint-
ance [is or lies]  with the Lord Cavendishes,  he barely knows the
young Duke and Duchess2.  He will be proud to shew that
he can do it ;  but he will hardly try,  if he suspects any danger of
refusal.

You will become such a gadder,  that you will not care a penny
for me.  However,  you are wise in wishing to know what life is
made of;  to try what are the pleasures which are so eagerly
sought,  and so dearly purchased.  We must know pleasure
before we can rationally despise it.  And it is not desirable that
when you are,  with matronal authority,  talking down juvenile
hopes and maiden passions,  your hearers should tell you,  like
Miss P ,  '  You never saw a.  fete!

That you may see this show I have written,  because I am,
Madam,

Your most humble servant,

SAM  :  JOHNSON.

510.

To THE REVEREND DR.  TAYLOR 3.
DEAR SIR,

I am required by Mrs.  Thrale to solicite you to exert your

celebrated Irish patriot,  Dr.  Lucas.
\Life, \.  311.]  He is the author of
one play,  printed in a volume of
miscellanies.  It is entitled The Earl
of Somerset,  1780.'  He was perhaps
the dramatic writer of whom John-
son said  : — '  I never did the man an
injury  ;  but he would persist in read-
ing his tragedy to me.'  Gentleman's
Magazine,  1791,  p.  500.

1 Piozzi Letters,  i.  347.

This letter is explained by the one
that follows.

2 William,  fifth Duke of Devon-
shire, born 1748;  succeeded,  1764;
married 1774,  Georgiana,  daughter
of Earl Spencer.     The Lord Caven-
dishes were the Duke's uncles.

3 First published in Notes and
Queries,  6th S.,  v.  423.

interest,

Aetat.  67.]  To the Reverend Dr.   Taylor.  1 1

interest,  that she may have a ticket of admission to the
entertainment at Devonshire house1.  Do for her what you
can.

I continue to have very troublesome and tedious nights,
which I do not perceive any change of place to make better
or worse.  This is indeed at present my chief malady,  but this
is very heavy.

My thoughts were to have been in Staffordshire before now.
But who does what he designs  ?  My purpose is still to spend
part of the Summer amongst you ;  and of that hope I have no
particular reason to fear the disappointment.

Poor Dod was sentenced last week.  It is a thing almost
without example for a Clergyman of his rank to stand at the bar
for a capital breach of morality.  I am afraid he will suffer.  The
clergy seem not to be his friends.  The populace that was
extremely clamorous against him,  begins to pity him.  The
time that was gained by an objection which was never con-
sidered as having any force,  was of great use,  as it allowed the
publick resentment to cool 2.  To spare his life,  and his life is all
that ought to be spared,  would be now rather popular than
offensive.  How little he thought six months ago of being what

he now is.

I am,  Sir,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

May 19,  1777.

520.

To THE RIGHT HON.  CHARLES JENKINSON.
[London,  June 20,  1777].     Published in the Life,  iii.  145.

1 There is a print of Devonshire been taken,    was competent.      On
House in Piccadilly as it was in 1761,  June 27,    Dodd was hanged at
in Dodsley's London and its Envi-  Tyburn.     Annual Register,  1777,  i.
rons,  ii.  225.  168,  I77>  187,  232.     Horace Walpole

2 Dr.  Dodd,  on February 22,  had wrote two days after his execution  :—
been found guilty of forging a bond  '  Are you not glad,  Madam,  there is
for  ^4200 in the name of the young an end of talking of poor Dr.  Dodd  ?
Earl of Chesterfield,  and had been I felt excessively for him,   without
sentenced to death.     On April 18,  a good opinion,  for between the law
eleven of the twelve Judges  (the Lord and his friends he suffered a thousand
Chief Justice being absent)  decided deaths.'     Letters,  vi.  449.     See Life,
that the evidence of one of the wit-  iii.  119-122,  139-148.

nesses,  against which exception had

To

12

To Mrs.  Boswell.

[A.D.  r;

521.

To THE REVEREND DR.  DODD.

[London,  June 22,  1777].     Published in the Life,  iii.  145.

522.

To JAMES BOSWELL.
[London],  June 24,  1777.      Published in the Life,  iii.  124.

523.

To THE REVEREND DR.  DODD.
[London],  June 26,  1777.     Published in the Life,  iii.  147.

524.

To JAMES BOSWELL.
[London],  June 28,  1777.     Published in the Life,  iii..  120.

525.

To BENNET LANGTON.
[London],  June 29,  1777.     Published in the Life,  iii.  124.

526.

To W.  SHARP,  Junior.

Bolt-court,  July 7,  1777.     Published in the Life,  iii.  126,  where it is
wrongly stated to be addressed to Edward Dilly.

527.

To THE REVEREND DR.  VYSE  '.
[London],  July 9,  1777.     Published in the Life.  iii.  125.

528.

To JAMES BOSWELL.
[London],  July 22,  1777.     Published in the Life,  iii.  127.

529.

To MRS.  BOSWELL.
[London],  July 22,  1777.    Published in the Life,  iii,  i2g.

To

Aetat.  e?.]          To the Reverend Dr.  Farmer.  13

530.

To THE REVEREND DR.  FARMER x.
SIR,

The booksellers of London have undertaken a kind of body
of English poetry,  excluding generally the dramas,  and I have
undertaken to put before each authour's works a sketch of his life,
and a character of his writings.  Of some,  however,  I know very
little,  and am afraid I shall not easily supply my deficiencies.
Be pleased to inform me whether among Mr.  Baker's 2 manuscripts,
or anywhere else at Cambridge,  any materials are to be found.
If any such collection can be gleaned,  I doubt not of your
willingness to direct our search,  and will tell the booksellers to
employ a transcriber.  If you think my inspection necessary,
I will come down ;  for who that has once experienced the civilities
of Cambridge would not snatch the opportunity of another
visit3?

I am,  Sir,

Your most humble servant,

SAM  :  JOHNSON.

Bolt-court,  Fleet-street,  July 22,  1777.
To Dr.  Farmer,  Emanuel Coll.,  Cambridge.

1 First published in the Gentle-      writing two months after the date of
marts Magazine,  1835,  part i.  page Johnson's letter,  and offering to write
47-  the non-juror's Life,  says  : — '  When

Johnson recorded in his Diary this martyrs are as sensible as Mr.  Baker,

year  :    '  March 29,  Easter Eve.      I I doubt my own understanding more

treated with booksellers on a bar-  than his.     I know I have not his

gain,   but the time was not long.'  virtues,  but should delight in doing

Pr.  and Med.,  p.  155.     On April 24,  justice to them.'      Letters,  vi.  488.

Boswell wrote to ask   '  about this Baker had collected a great mass of

edition of  "  The English Poets,  with materials for a work which should do

a Preface,  biographical and critical,  for Cambridge what Anthony Wood

to each Authour,  by Samuel John-  had done for Oxford.      They fill

son,  LL.D."  which I see advertised.'  forty-two folio volumes.     'An index

Life)  iii.  108.  to the whole series was published in

2 Thomas Baker    (1656-1740),  a 1848,  and a  "Catalogue  "  of the con-
non-juror,  who on the accession of tents of the Cambridge volumes in
George I was deprived of his fellow-  1867.'     Diet,  of Nat.  Biog.,  iii.  18.
ship at St.   John's College,    Cam-  3 Johnson had paid a short visit to
bridge,   for refusing to take the Cambridge in 1765,   when he was
abjuration-oath.      Horace Walpole,  promised,  he said,  '  an habitation in

To

To Henry Thrale.

[A.D.  1777.

531.

To THE REVEREND DR.  VYSE x.

July 22,  1777.

If any notice should be taken of the recommendation which
I took the liberty of sending you,  it will be necessary to know
that Mr.  De Groot is to be found at No.  8,  in Pye-street,  West-
minster. This information,  when I wrote,  I could not give you ;
and being going soon to Lichfield,  think it necessary to be left
behind me.  More I will not say.  You will want no persuasion
to succour the nephew of Grotius.

I am,  Sir,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

532.

To HENRY THRALE2.

DEAR SIR,  [Oxford],  July 31, 1777.

I came hither on Monday,  and find every thing much as I

expected.     I shall not stay long,  but if you send any letters to me

on Saturday,  to University College,  I shall receive them.     Please

to make my compliments to mistress and Queeney.     I have

Emanuel College,'  of which Dr.
Farmer was Master.  Life,  i.  487,
517.  He did not,  I believe,  visit the
University a second time.  See Life,
iii.  427,  for another Letter asking
Farmer for information about Am-
brose Philips,  Broome and Gray.

1 First published in Malone's
edition of BoswelL

Dr.  Vyse was Rector of Lambeth
(see ante,  i.  148,  n.  3,  for his father).
Johnson on July 9 had  'requested
his assistance in recommending an
old friend to the Archbishop,  as
Governor of the Charter-house.  His
name is De Groot ;  he was born at
Gloucester ;  I have known him many
years.  He has all the common claims
to charity,  being old,  poor,  and infirm,
in a great degree.  He has likewise
another claim,  to which no scholar

can refuse attention  ;  he is by several
descents the nephew of Hugo Grotius ;
of him,  from whom perhaps every
man of learning has learnt something.
Let it not be said that in any lettered
country a nephew of Grotius asked a
charity and was refused.'  The appli-
cation was successful.  Life,  iii.  125.
'  In the Charter-house are main-
tained eighty pensioners,  who,  accord-
ing to the institution,  are gentlemen,
merchants,  or soldiers,  who are fallen
into misfortunes.  These are provided
with handsome apartments,  and all
the necessaries of life except clothes ;
instead of which each of them is
allowed a gown and  £]  per annum!
Dodsley's Environs of London,  ii.  98.

2 Piozzi Letters,  i.  348.

Johnson had arrived at Oxford on
Monday,  July 28.

picked

Aetat.  67.]

To Mrs.   Thrale.

picked up some little information for my Lives at the library.
I know not whether I shall go forward without some regret.  I
cannot break my promise to Boswell and the rest J ;  but I have
a good mind to come back again.

I am,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

533.

TO MRS.    THRALE2.

DEAR MADAM,  [Oxford],  August 4, 1777.

I did not mean to express much discontent nor any ill-
humour in my letter.  When I went away I knew that I went
partly because I had talked of going,  and because I was a little
restless.  I have been searching the library for materials for my
Lives,  and a little I have got.

Things have not gone quite well with poor Gwynne.  His
work was finished so ill that he has been condemned to pay
three hundred pounds for damages,  and the sentence is considered
as very mild.  He has however not lost his friends,  and is still
in the best houses,  and at the best tables 3.

I shall enquire about the harvest when I come into a region

1 He had written to Boswell on
May 3  : — '  My health is very bad,  and
my nights are very unquiet.     What
can I do to mend them  ?      I have
for this summer nothing better in
prospect than a journey into Stafford-
shire and Derbyshire,  perhaps with
Oxford and Birmingham in my way.'
Life,  iii.  109.     Boswell proposed that
they should meet at Carlisle,  a city
which Johnson wished to see  (ib.  p.
1 1 8)  ;  but Johnson was loath to go
so far north  (ib.  p.  123).     On July 22
he wrote  : — '  I shall go to Ashbourne,
and propose to make Dr.  Taylor in-
vite you'  (ib.  p.  127).

2 Piozzi Letters,  i.  349.

3 I have searched in vain in the
records of the City of Oxford for an
account of this sentence.      I had
hoped in the set of Jackson's Oxford
Journal\T\  the Bodleian to find a report

of the action at law in which Gwynn
was condemned,  but the number is
missing in which in all likelihood a
report was given of the Summer
Assize.  In 1771 John Gwynn was
appointed Surveyor to the new Board
of Commissioners of the Oxford
Paving Act,  at a salary of  ^150 a
year.  He directed the demolition of
the old gates,  &c.  The new Mag-
dalen Bridge was designed by him,
the Market and the Workhouse.
Owen,  in John Chambers's Bio-
graphical Illustrations of Worcester-
shire, ed.  1 820,  p.  504,  described him
from personal recollection as  '  lively,
quick and sarcastic,  of quaint ap-
pearance and odd manners.'  He
built moreover bridges at Worcester
and Shrewsbury.  Seejtar/,  Letter of
January 30,  1778.

where

l6 To Mrs.   Thrale.  [A.D.  1777.

where any thing necessary to life is understood1.  I do not
believe that there is yet any great harm,  if the weather should
now mend.  Reaping time will only be a little later than is

usual.

Dr.  Wetherell is abroad,  I think at London ;  Mr.  Coulson is
here,  and well2.  Every body that knows you,  enquires after

you.

Boswell's project is disconcerted,  by a visit from a relation of
Yorkshire,  whom he mentions as the head of his clan3.  Boszy,
you know,  makes a huge bustle about all his own motions,  and
all mine.  I have inclosed a letter to pacify him,  and reconcile
him to the uncertainties of human life.

I believe it was after I left your house,  that I received a pot of
orange marmalade from Mrs.  Boswell.  We have now,  I hope,
made it up.  I have not opened my pot4.

I have determined to leave Oxford to-morrow 5,  and on Thurs-
day hope to see Lichfield,  where I mean to rest till Dr.  Taylor
fetches me to Ashbourne,  and there I am likely enough to stay
till you bid me come back to London.

I am,  &c.,

SAM  :  JOHNSON.

534.

To JAMES BOSWELL.
Oxford,  August 4,  1777.     Published in the Life,  iii.  130.

1 Johnson in a letter to the Master Coulson see ante,  i.  313,  323.

of University College speaks of  '  our 3 Squire Godfrey Bosville,  of Gun-

scholastick ignorance of mankind.'  thwait,  '  my Yorkshire chief,3 as Bos-

Life,  ii.  425.  It had been complained well calls him.     Life,  ii.  169  ;  iii.  439.

of before his time,  as is shown by the For Johnson's pacifying letter see ib.

following passage in The Guardian,  iii.  130.

No.  X,  March 23,  1712-13: — 'I am 4 Johnson's acknowledgment of

very glad to hear,  being myself a the pot does not seem strictly accu-

Fellow of Lincoln College,  that there rate.     He wrote to Mrs.  Boswell on

is at last in one of our Universities July 22  :  '  Though I am well enough

arisen a happy genius for little things.  pleased with the taste of sweetmeats,

It is extremely to be lamented,  that very little of the pleasure which I re-

hitherto we come from the college as ceived at the arrival of your jar of

unable to put on our own clothes as marmalade arose from eating it.'    Ib.

we do from nurse.'  iii.  129.

2 For Dr.     Wetherell and Mr.  5 Tuesday,  August 5.

To

Aetat.  67.]  To Mrs.  Thrale.

535.

TO MRS.    THRALE1.

DEAR MADAM,  Lichfieid,  August 7, 1777.

On Tuesday I left Oxford,  and came to Birmingham.  Mr.
Hector is well ;  Mrs.  Careless 2 was not at home.  Yesterday
I came hither.  Mrs.  Porter is well.  Mrs.  Aston 3,  to whom I
walked before I sat down,  is very ill,  but better.  Whether she
will recover I know not.  If she dies I have a great loss.  Mr.
Green4 is well,  and Mrs.  Adey5,  more I have not yet seen.  At
Birmingham I heard of the death of an old friend,  and at Lich-
fieid of the death of another6.  Anni prcedantur euntes1 .  One
was a little older,  the other a little younger than myself.

But amidst these privations the present must still be thought
on,  we must act as if we were to live.  My barber,  a man not
unintelligent,  speaks magnificently of the harvest  ;  and Frank,
whom I ordered to make his observations,  noted fields of very
fine shew as we passed along.

Lucy thinks nothing of my prologue for Kelly,  and says she
has always disowned it8.  I have not let her know my trans-
actions with Dr.  Dodd9.  She says,  she takes Miss's corre-
spondence very kindly.

I am,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

1 Piozzi Letters,  i.  351.  ministry,  in one of the newspapers,  it

2 Hector's sister.     Ante,  i.  164.  fell a sacrifice to popular fury,  and in

3 Ante,  ii.  3.  the playhouse phrase,  was damned.

4 Ante,  i.  161.  By the generosity of Mr.  Harris,  the

5 Ante,  i.  331.  proprietor of Covent Garden theatre,

6 Post,  p.  20.  it was now exhibited for one night,  for

7  '  Singula de nobis anni prasdantur the benefit of the author's widow and

euntes.'  children.'    Life,  iii.  113.     *  Lucy '  is

HORACE.     2 Epis.  ii.  55.  his step- daughter,  Miss,  or as she

'  Years following years steal was now called,  Mrs.  Porter.

something every day.'  9 Johnson wrote petitions and

POPE.     Imitations,  1.  72.  letters for Dodd,  as well as his speech

8  '  He wrote a Prologue which was when sentence of death was about to
spoken before A Word to the Wise,  be pronounced,  and The Convict's
a comedy by Mr.  Hugh Kelly which Address to his unhappy Brethren.
had been brought upon the stage in Ib.   iii.    121,    141.       In the British
1770  ;  but Kelly being a writer for Museum   (Add.  MSS.  24419),  in a

VOL.  II.  C TO

i8

To Mrs.  Thrale.

A.D. 1777.

536.

TO MRS.    THRALE1.

DEAR MADAM,  Lichfield,  August 9, 1777-

No great matter has happened since I wrote,  but this place
grows more and more barren of entertainment.  Two whom I
hoped to have seen are dead.  I think that I am much more
unwieldy and inert than when I was here last ;  my nights are
very tedious.  But a light heart,  &c.2

Lucy said,  '  When I read Dr.  Dodd's sermon to the prisoners
I said,  Dr.  Johnson could not make a better.'

One of Lucy's maids is dreadfully tormented by the taenia,  or
long-worm.     She has taken many medicines without effect,  and

Letter dated Rectory,  Great Warley,
Essex,  December 18,  1834,  from
Hastings Robinson,  B.D.,  Late
Fellow and Tutor of St.  John's
College,  Cambridge,  to John Murray
of Albemarle Street,  is the following
anecdote  '  communicated to me many
years since,'  says the writer,  '  by one
of the party,  and taken down in writ-
ing at the time  '  :— '  Miss Seward,
her father,  the Rev.  R.  G.  Robinson of
Lichfield,  and Dr.  Johnson were pass-
ing the day at the Palace at Lichfield,
of which Mr.  Seward was the oc-
cupier. The conversation turned
upon Dr.  Dodd,  who had been
recently executed.  It proceeded as
follows  : —

'Miss SEWARD.  — "I think,  Dr.
Johnson,  you applied to Mr.  Jenkin-
son in his behalf."

'  DR.  JOHNSON.  —  "  Why yes,
Madam.  I knew it was a man
having no interest writing to a man
who had no interest ;  but I thought
with myself,  when Dr.  Dodd comes
to the place of execution he may say,
'Had Dr.  Johnson written in my be-
half, I had not been here,'  and  (with
great emphasis)  I could not bear the
thought."

'  Miss SEWARD.—"  But,  Dr.  John-
son, would you have pardoned Dr.
Dodd?"

'DR.  JOHNSON. — "Madam,  had I
been placed at the head of the legis-
lature, I should certainly have signed
his death-warrant ;  though no law
either human or divine forbids our
deprecating punishment either for
ourselves or others." '

Johnson's letter to Jenkinson
(afterwards Earl of Liverpool)  is in
the Life,  iii.  145.  It is most improb-
able that he spoke of him as  '  a man
who had no interest.'  He was at
this time Secretary at War,  and justly
suspected for his private influence
with the King.  Burke,  on May 14 of
this year,  attacked him in the House
'  as the real Minister.'  ParL Hist.,
xix.  251.

1 Piozzi Letters,  i.  352.

'  Had she been light,  like you,
Of such a merry,  nimble,  stir-
ring spirit,
She might ha'  been a grandam

ere she died  ;
And so may you  :  for a light

heart lives long.'
Love's Labour's Lost,   Act v.

SC.  2.

it

Aetat.  67.]  To Mrs.  Tkrale.

it is much wished that she could have the Knightsbridge powder.
I will pay for it,  if you,  dear Madam,  will be so kind as to pro-
cure it,  and send it with directions.  Can it be franked1  ?  If it
cannot,  the best way will be to unite it with something of greater
bulk.  I have promised Lucy to give her Cook's last voyage,  for
she loves prints  ;  but the last voyage cannot be well understood
without some knowledge of the former.  If you will lend us
Hawkesworth's books,  they shall be carefully returned 2.  If you
will do this for us,  the powders may be easily put up with the
books.

Please to make my compliments to Master 3,  and to Queeney.

I am,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

637.

TO MRS.    THRALE4.

DEAR MADAM,  Lichfieid,  August 13, 1777.

Such tattle as filled your last sweet letter prevents one great
inconvenience of absence,  that of returning home a stranger and
an enquirer.  The variations of life consist of little things.
Important innovations are soon heard,  and easily understood.
Men that meet to talk of physicks or metaphysicks,  or law or
history,  may be immediately acquainted.  We look at each other
in silence,  only for want of petty talk upon slight occurrences5.
Continue therefore to write all that you would say.

1 The weight of a packet franked under the title of A Voyage towards
by a Member of Parliament could not the South Pole,  and round the World
at this time exceed two ounces.     It in the years 1772-5.

was afterwards reduced to one ounce.  3 Mr.  Thrale.

Official franks,  before the abolition of 4 Piozzi Letters,  i.  354.

the system,  'had been used to free a 5 Johnson never for one moment

great coat,  a bundle of baby-linen,  felt as Wordsworth did about  '  per-

and a piano-forte.'     Letters of Hume sonal talk.'      He would never have

to Strahan,  p.  188,  n.  n.  said: —

2 Cook's  '  former voyage  '  was in  '  Better than such discourse doth
the years 1768-1771.     The account silence long,

of it is in volume ii.  of Hawkesworth's Long,  barren silence square with
Voyages in the Southern Hemisphere,  my desire.'

published in 1773 in 3 vols.     His See Life,  ii.  359,  where he says: —
'  last voyage '  was published in 1777,      'That is the happiest conversation

c 2 You

20

To Mrs.  Thrale.

[A.D.  1777.

You have Lord Westcote J and every body when I am away,
and you go to Mr.  Gator's2,  and you are so happy.

Miss Turton and Harry Jackson are dead3.  Mrs.  Aston is,  I
am afraid,  in great danger.  Mr.  Green,  Mr.  Garrick4,  and Mr.
Newton5 are all well.  I have been very faint and breathless
since I came hither,  but fancy myself better this day.  I hope
Master's walk will be finished when I come back,  and I shall
perambulate it very often.

There seems to be in this country scarcely any fruit,  there
never indeed was much6 ;  but great things have been said of the
harvest,  and the only fear is of the weather.  It rains here almost
every day.

I dined yesterday with the corporation,  and talked against a

where there is no competition,  no
vanity,  but a cairn quiet interchange
of sentiments.'  'Those persons,'
writes Burke,  'who creep into the
hearts of most people,  who are
chosen as the companions of their
softer hours,  and their reliefs from
care and anxiety,  are never persons
of shining qualities nor strong virtues.'
On the Sublime and Beautiful,  ed.
1759,  P-  206.

1 Lord Westcote was the Mr.
Lyttelton who invited Johnson to
Hagley in 1771   (ante,  i.    177),  and
whom he visited with the Thrales in
1774,  when  *  they were disappointed
of the respect and kindness that they
expected.5 Life,  v.  456.     Baretti in
a note on Piozzi Letters,  i.  42,  says
that  '  Johnson was never pleased a
moment with Lord Westcote's con-
versation,   which indeed is dull
enough.'

2 Ante,  i.  355.

3 Miss Turton was,  I suppose,  the
friend whose death Johnson heard
of at Birmingham,  and Harry Jack-
son the friend whose death he heard
of at Lichfield.     Ante,  ii.  17.     For
Jackson see ante,  i.  378.

4 Peter Garrick,  the actor's eldest

brother.  The two brothers for a short
time had been partners in the wine
trade in Durham Yard in the Strand.
'  Peter was calm,  sedate,  and metho-
dical ;  David was gay,  volatile and
impetuous.'  Davies's Life of Gar-
rick, \.  1 6.  Boswell describes Peter
Garrick as  'strongly resembling
David in countenance and voice,  but
of more sedate and placid manners.'
Life,  ii.sii,  462.

5 The Thrales and Johnson had
called on Mr.  Newton in July,  1774.
Ib.  v.  428.  He was perhaps related
to Thomas Newton,  Bishop of Bristol,
who was a Lichfield man.  Ib.  iv.
285.

'  BOSWELL.—"  Is not a good
garden a very common thing in Eng-
land, Sir?"  JOHNSON:  "Not so
common,  Sir,  as you imagine.  In
Lincolnshire there is hardly an
orchard  ;  in Staffordshire very little
fruit.'"  Ib.  iv.  205.  'The greater
part of the apples,  and even of the
onions,  consumed in Great Britain,
were in the last century  [the seven-
teenth] imported from Flanders.'
Wealth of Nations,  ed.  1811,  i.  105.
See ib.  p.  210.

workhouse

Aetat.  67.]

To Mrs.  Thrale.

21

workhouse1 which they have in contemplation12— there's the word
now.  I do not know that they minded me,  for they said nothing
to me.

I have had so little inclination to motion that I have always
gone the shortest way to Stowhill,  and hardly any where else,  so
that I can tell you nothing new of Green's museum,  but I design
to visit him,  and all friends.

I hope for a letter to-morrow,  for you must not forget that
I am,  Madam,

Your most humble servant,

SAM  :  JOHNSON.
P.S.  Why cannot Queeney write?

538.

TO MRS.   THRALE3.

DEAR MADAM,  Lichfield,  August 23, 1777.

At Lichfield  ?     Yes  ;  but not well.     I have been trying a
great experiment with ipecacuanha,   which Akensyde4 had

1 Johnson defines workhouse as  '  a
place where idlers and vagabonds are
condemned to labour.'  Hutton in
his History of Derby,  published in
I79I  (p-  59)»  savs tnat the design of
workhouses,  all of which had been
established within memory,  'was an
asylum for distress and a cure for the
beggar.'  As they are managed  '  they
are the nurseries of idleness,  the
corrupters of manners,  the slaughter-
houses of infants,  and the plagues of
old age.'  In them perhaps not one
infant in ten arrives at maturity.  The
old and weak  'are brow-beaten by
the governor,  and hunted by the
rude.'  Hutton had been an active
Overseer of the Poor,  and so spoke
with authority.  In G.  M.  Berkeley's
Poems,  published in 1797,  Introduc-
tion, p.  3 10,  it is stated that '  most well-
regulated Bridewells are Paradises
compared to the Oxford Work-
house. Nothing out of the infernal

regions can be worse or worse con-
ducted.'

2 Land or in his Imaginary Con-
versations: Johnson and Home Tooke,
makes Tooke say  : — '  We do many
things now which we never thought
of doing formerly.     We contemplate
going to a ball and dancing a
fandango.'       Lander's Works,    ed.
1876,  iv.  249.  •    To contemplate John-
son defines  : — '  To muse,  to think
studiously with long attention.'

3 Piozzi Letters,  i.  356.

4 Mark Akenside,   the poet and
physician.      He used to frequent
Tom's Coffee-house in Devereux
Court,   close to Johnson's haunts,
where no doubt the two men often
met.     One evening   'Saxby of the
Custom House'   attacked the pro-
fession of physic,  which Akenside
defended.      'Doctor,'    said Saxby,
'  after all you have said,  my opinion
of the profession of physic is this :

inclined

22

To Mrs.  Thrale.

[A.D.  1777.

inclined me to consider as a remedy for all constrictions of the
breath.  Lawrence1 indeed told me that he did not credit him,
and no credit can I find him to deserve.  One night I thought
myself the better for it,  but there is no certainty.  On Wednes-
day night I took ten grains ;  the night was restless.  On
Thursday morning I took ten grains  ;  the night again was rest-
less. On Friday night I took twenty grains,  which Akensyde
mentions as the utmost that on these occasions he has ventiired
to give  ;  the night was perhaps rather worse.  I shall therefore
take truce with ipecacuanha.  Tell me,  if you can,  what I shall
do next.

Mr.  Thrale's heart may be at rest.  It is not fine Mrs.  Anne
that has been caught by the taenia2,  but Mrs.  Anne tumbled
down stairs last night,  and bruised her face.  Both maid and
mistress are very grateful to you for the kindness with which you
procured the powders,  and directed their use.  They have not
yet been tried.  It has been washing week  ;  and I suppose every
body shrinks a little from such rough remedies,  of which at last
the success is doubtful.  However it will,  I think,  be tried in all
its formalities.

My master may plant and dig till his pond is an ocean,  if he
can find water,  and his parterre a down 3.  I have no doubt of a
most abundant harvest ;  and it is said that the produce of barley
is particularly great.  We are not far from the great year of a
hundred thousand barrels,  which,  if three shillings be gained

The ancients endeavoured to make
it a science,  and failed ;  and the
moderns to make it a trade,  and have
succeeded.'  Hawkins's Johnson,  pp.
244-6.  In my edition of the Life,  iii.
22,  n.  4,  I assign by mistake this
sarcasm to Ballow,  a lawyer.  Burton
in the Anatomy of Melancholy,  ed.
1660,  p.  373,  quotes Mat.  Riccius as
saying of the physic in China there
is  '  no science,  no school,  no art,  no
degree,  but like a trade every man in
private is instructed of his master.'
Dry den in his Prologue to the Uni-
versity of Oxford,  says  :—

'So poetry,   which is in Oxford

made
An art,    in London only is a

trade.'
Dryden's Poems,  Aldine ed.  iii.  89.

1 Ante,  i.  47,  n.  2.

2 Ante,  ii.  18.

3 Johnson defines parterre as  '  a
level division of ground that for the
most part faces the south and best
front of an house,  and is generally
furnished with greens and flowers,
&c.}     Greens he does not define in
its modern sense as a vegetable food,
but as  '  leaves  ;  branches  ;  wreaths.'

upon

Aetat.  67.]

To Mrs.  Thrale.

upon each barrel,  will bring us fifteen thousand pounds a-year.
*****  never pretended to more than thirty pounds a-day,
which is not eleven thousand a-year.  But suppose we shall get
but two shillings a barrel,  that is ten thousand a-year.  I hope
we still have the advantage.  Would you for the other thousand
have my master such a man as  *****  *  ?

I showed dear Queeney's letter to Mrs.  Aston and Mrs.  Porter,
they both took her remembrance of them very kindly.

It was well done by Mr.  Brooke to send for you.  His house is
one of my favourite places.  His water is very commodious,  and
the whole place has the true old appearance of a little country
town2.  I hope Miss goes,  for she takes notice.

1 Mrs.  Piozzi in a marginal note
fills up the gap with the name of
Whitbread,  and adds  :— '  He asked
me to marry him after Mr.  Thrale's
death,  when his fortune was much
increased  ;  on my refusal  (he had
three children)  Lady Mary Corn-
wallis accepted his hand.'  Hayward's
Piozzi,  i.  309.  Horace Walpole in
1781 speaks of  'Mr.  Whitbread,  the
brewer,  and his insolent wealth.'
Letters,  vii.  496.  Johnson,  post,
Letter of October 24,  1778,  speaks of
'  the ambition of out-brewing Whit-
bread ' ;  and Letter of November 16,
1779,  of  *  Mr.  Thrale's desire of being
the first brewer.'  See ante,  i.  194,
n.  i,  for Johnson's identification of
himself with the Thrales in his use
of we.  In 1759-60 Whitbread was
second and Thrale eighth among the
brewers,  the amount of barrels brewed
by each being as follows  : —

Whitbread     .         .         .     63,400
Thrale  ....     32,700
Annual Register,   1760,  i.  174.     In
1786-7 Whitbread was first and
Thrale third,  as is shown in Pennant's
London,  ed.  1790,  p.  279  : —

Barrels.

Whitbread,  Samuel  .  150,280
Calvert,  Felix  .  .  131,043
Thrale,  Hester  .  .  105,559

The Annual Register for 1797,  ii.
37,  shows that Thrale's Brewery is
second  : —

1795-6.

Barrels.

Whitbread  .        .        .    202,000
Thrale         .        .        .     137,810

1796-7.

Whitbread  .         .         .     192,740
Thrale         .        .        .     I4i>59o
Calvert had fallen to the fifth place.
Though Mrs.  Thrale sold her brewery
to Messrs.   Barclay and Perkins in
1781  (Life,  iv.  132),  the style of the
firm was not,   it seems,   changed
so late as 1797.

2 Mr.  Francis Brooke,  'an eminent
attorney-at-law,'  lived near the Abbey
at Town Mailing or West Mailing,  a
small country town on the road
between Wrotham and Maidstone.
Hasted's History of Kent,  ed.  1782,
ii.  219.  Johnson,  as his Diary shows,
spent his birthday there in 1 768.  Pr.
and Med.,  p.  81.  Mrs.  Thrale wrote
to him on September 18,  1777  : —
'  Come,  here is news of Town-mailing
— the quiet old-fashioned place in
Kent,  that you like so because it was
agreeable to your own notions of a
rural life  ;  I believe we were the first
people,  except the master of it,  who
had for many years taken delight in

The

To Mrs.  Thrale.

[A.D.  1777.

The races are next week.  People seem to be weary
of them,  for many go out of town I suppose to escape the
cost of entertaining company.  Dr.  Taylor will probably
come,  and probably take me away  ;  and I shall leave Mrs.
Aston.

Do not you lose,  nor let Master lose,  the kindness that
you have for me.  Nobody will ever love you both better

than,  dear Madam,

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

539.

To MRS.  THRALE  '.
DEAR MADAM,  Lichfield,  [Wednesday],  August 27,  1777.

Our correspondence is not so vigorous as it used to be ;
but now you know the people at Lichfield,  it is vain to describe
them,  and as no revolutions have happened,  there is nothing to
be said about them.  We have a new Dean,  whose name is
Proby  ;  he has the manners of a gentleman,  and some spirit
of discipline,  which brings the cathedral into better method.
He has a lady that talks about Mrs.  Montague and Mrs.
Carter2.

the old coach without springs,  the
two roasted ducks in one dish,  the
fortified flower garden,  and fir trees
cut in figures. — A spirit of innovation
has however reached even these at
last. — The roads are mended  ;  no
more narrow shaded lanes,  but clear
open turnpike trotting.  A yew hedge,
or an eugh hedge if you will  [see
ante,  i.  286,  n.  5],  newly cut down
too by his nephew's desire.  Ah
those nephews !  And a wall pulled
away,  which bore incomparable fruit
— to call in the country — is the
phrase.  Mr.  Thrale is wicked enough
to urge on these rough reformers  ;
how it will end I know not.  For
your comfort,  the square canals still
drop into one another ;  and the

chocolate is still made in the room
by a maid,  who curtsies as she
presents every cup.  Dear old Daddy
Brooke looks well and even hand-
some at eighty-one years old  ;  while
I saw his sister,  who is ninety-four
years old,  and calls him Frankey,  eat
more venison at a sitting than Mr.
Thrale.'  Piozzi Letters,  1.376.  There
was a fashion at this time,  not only
to pull away garden walls,  but to cut
down fine avenues,  so as to call in
the country — to give a wider view,
that is to say.  See Life,  v.  439.

1 Piozzi Letters,  i.  359.

2 For the old Dean see ante,
i.  300.

The new Dean's lady was,  it seems,
a somewhat haughty lady.     I heard

On

Aetat.  67.]  To Mrs.  Thrale.  25

On next Saturday I go to Ashbourne,  and thither must my
letters be sent,  if you are pleased ever to write to me.

When I came hither I could hardly walk,  but I have got better
breath,  and more agility.  I intend to perambulate Master's
dominions x every day at least once.  But I have miserable,  dis-
tressful, tedious nights ;  do you think they will mend at Bright-
helmstone  ?

When I come to Ashbourne I will send my dear Queeney an
account how I find things,  for I hope she takes an interest in
Dr.  Taylor's prosperity.

This is race week  ;  but Mrs.  Aston,  Mrs.  Porter,  and myself
have no part in the course,  or at the ball.  We all sit at home,
and perhaps pretend to wonder that others go,  though I cannot
charge any of us with much of that folly 2.  Mrs.  Gastrel,  who
wraps her head in a towel,  is very angry at the present mode of
dress and feathers 3.

But amidst all these little things,  there is one great thing.
The harvest is abundant,  and the weather a la merveille 4.  No
season ever was finer.  Barley,  malt,  beer,  and money.  There
is the series of ideas.  The deep logicians call it a sorites.  I
hope my master will no longer endure the reproach of not
keeping me a horse 5.

The puppies played us a vile trick when they tore my letter,
but I hope my loss will be repaired to-morrow.  You are in the
way of business and intelligence,  and have something to write.

at Lichfield the following verse 3 Ante,  i.  258.     Mrs.  Gastrell was

quoted from some lines written Mrs.  Aston's sister.

against her  :—  4 He ought to have said d mer-

1 She would far sooner from the veille.       The earlier part of the

steeple fling her,  summer had been very wet.     Ante,

Than let a tradesman touch her ii.  16.      Horace Walpole wrote on

highborn finger.5 August 4  :— *  One would think the

Her talk about Mrs.  Montagu elements this summer came from

and the learned Mrs.  Carter shows Scotland.'     But on September 29 he

that she was somewhat of a Blue-  wrote  :  — '  I did not use to love

stocking.  September,  with all its betweenity of

1 Mr.  Thrale's park at Streatham.  parched days and cold long evenings,

2  '  Sir,'   said Johnson,    '  I am a but this has been all lustre and
great friend to public amusements  ;  verdancy.'     Letters,  vi.  464,  489.

for they keep people from vice.'          5 For Johnson's hunting see ante,
Life,  ii.  169.  i.  349>  «•  4-

I am

26 To Mrs.  Thrale.  [A.D.  1777.

I am here in unactive obscurity,  and have little other pleasure
than to perceive that the poor languishing lady x is glad to see
me.  I hope,  dearest Lady,  you will be glad to see me too  ;  and
that it will be long before disease lays hold upon you.

I am,  dear Madam,

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

540.

To JAMES BOSWELL.
[Ashbourne],  August 30,  1777.     Published in the Life,  iii.  131.

541.

To JAMES BOSWELL.

Ashbourne,  September i,  1777.     Published in the Life,  iii.  132.

542.

TO MRS.   THRALE2.

DEAREST LADY,  [Ashbourne],  Sept.  6,  1777.

It is true that I have loitered,  and what is worse,  loitered
with very little pleasure.  The time has run away,  as most time
runs,  without account,  without use,  and without memorial.  But
to say this of a few weeks,  though not pleasing,  might be borne,
but what ought to be the regret of him who,  in a few days,  will
have so nearly the same to say of sixty-eight years  ?  But com-
plaint is vain.

If you have nothing to say from the neighbourhood of the
metropolis,  what can occur to me in little cities and petty towns  ;
in places which we have both seen,  and of which no description
is wanted  ?  I have left part of the company with which you
dined here,  to come and write this letter;  in which I have
nothing to tell,  but that my nights are very tedious.  I cannot
persuade myself to forbear trying something.

As you have now little to do,  I suppose you are pretty dili-
gent at the Thraliana  \  and a very curious collection posterity

'  Mrs.  Aston.     Ante,  ii.  17.  a  ,  Thraliana is contained in six

Ptozzt Letters,  i.  361.  books,  of about 300 page seach,  and

will

Aetat.  67.]  To Mrs.  Tkrale.  27

will find it.  Do not remit the practice of writing down occur-
rences as they arise,  of whatever kind,  and be very punctual in
annexing the dates.  Chronology you know is the eye of
history ;  and every man's life is of importance to himself.  Do
not omit painful casualties,  or unpleasing passages,  they make
the variegation of existence ;  and there are many transactions,
of which I will not promise with  ^Eneas,  et hcec olim meminisse
juvabit x.  Yet that remembrance which is not pleasant may be
useful.  There is however an intemperate attention to slight
circumstances which is to be avoided,  lest a great part of life be
spent in writing the history of the rest 2.  Every day perhaps
has something to be noted,  but in a settled and uniform course
few days can have much.

Why do I write all this,  which I had no thought of when I
begun  ?  The Thraliana drove it all into my head.  It deserves
however an hour's reflection,  to consider how,  with the least loss
of time,  the loss of what we wish to retain may be prevented.

Do not neglect to write to me,  for when a post comes empty,
I am really disappointed.

Boswell,  I believe,  will meet me here.

I am,  dearest Lady,

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

extends over thirty-two years and a it was  [in 1861],  'deemed it of too

half.      The first entry is in these private and delicate a character to be

words  : — "  It is many years since Dr.  submitted to strangers.'    He supplied

Johnson advised me to get a little Mr.  Hayward however with informa-

book and write in it all the little tion extracted from it.     Hay ward's

anecdotes which might come to my Piozzi,  i.  7,  237.     See her Anecdotes^

knowledge Mr.   Thrale has p.  45,  and Life,   iv.   343.    Johnson

now treated me with a repository,  often urges her to  '  annex the dates  '

and provided it with the pompous to her letters,  but with little effect,

title of Thraliana.   I must endeavour For his advice to keep a Journal see

to fill it with nonsense,  new and old. —  ante,  i.  362,  n.  i.
1 5th September,    1776."   .   .  .  The          *  A£neid,\.  203:—
last:— "3oth March,  1809.— Every-        'An hour will come with pleasure
thing most dreaded has ensued.  ...  to relate

All is over,  and my second husband's Your sorrows past as benefits of
death is the last thing recorded in Fate.'  DRYDEN.

my first husband's present. — Cruel 2  '  He again advised me to keep a

Death  !  "  '     Mr.  Hayward adds that journal fully and minutely,  but not to

Mr.  Salusbury,  in whose possession mention such trifles as,  that meat

To

28

To Mrs.  Thrale.

[A.D.  1777-

543.

To MRS.  THRALE  '.

DEAR MADAM,  Ashbourne,  Sept.  8,  1777.

Surely the same vexatious interruption of our correspond-
ence happens now that happened once when I was at Oxford 2.
I write often,  yet you seem not to have my letters.  I charged
Frank with trusting some other hand to the post-office,  this he
denies  ;  and indeed I have answers to other letters.

I came hither on Saturday,  August 3Oth.  The books were
not then come ;  but I suppose,  according to Davies's letter,  they
came that evening3.  Of the receipt of the powders I wrote
word,  and told that the girl delayed a little while to take them.
From this place I wrote to Miss last Thursday,  and to you last
Saturday.  Nothing has been mentioned by you of which I have
not taken proper notice,  except that I have said nothing of
*  *  *  *  *  * 4.  Many instances there are of the vanity of human
solicitude,  and it is not strange to find another.  We were all
planning out for him some mode of life,  and disease was hover-
ing over him.  If he dies,  his mother will lose what has engaged
her care,  and incited her vanity.  The son and the estate go
away together.  But life occupies us all too much to leave us
room for any care of others beyond what duty enjoins  ;  and no
duty enjoins sorrow or anxiety that is at once troublesome and
useless.  I would readily help the poor lady,  but if I cannot do
her good by assisting her,  I shall not disturb myself by lamenting

was too much or too little done,  or
that the weather was fair or rainy.'
Life,  ii.  358.

1 Piozzi Letters,  i.  364.

2 Ante,  i 327.

3 The books were Cook's Voyages.
Ante,    ii.    19.      Davies was most
likely Tom Davies,  the bookseller.
Life,  i.  390.

4 Mrs.  Thrale in a note,    dated
September 18,    says that she is
anxious about Queeney,  '  whose first
cousin  *  *  *  *  is now absolutely dying

of a consumption.'  Piozzi Letters,  i.
375.  Johnson,  post,  pp,  29,  34,  38,
alludes to the same case.  Baretti in
his notes says that Lady Lade,  Mr.
Thrale's sister  (ante,  i.  219,  n.  3),  is
the mother,  and Sir John Lade the
invalid son.  He describes him as
*  a most hopeful gentleman that has
married a harlot.'  See Life,  iv.  412,
for an account of him,  and for the
verses which Johnson wrote on his
coming of age.

her:

Aetat.  67.]  To Mrs.  Tkrale.

29

her J :  yet I suppose his death will be as hard a blow as is com-
monly felt.  Let me know if you hear how he goes on.  I go on
but uneasily.

I am in hopes of seeing Mr.  Boswell,  and then he may perhaps
tell me something to write,  for this is but a barren place.  Not
a mouse stirring 2.

I am,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

544.

To JAMES BOSWELL.
Ashbourne,  September,  n,  1777.     Published in the Life,  iii.  135.

545.

TO MRS.    THRALE3.

DEAR MADAM,  Ashbourne,  Sept.  13,  1777.

Now I write again,  having just received your letter dated
the loth.

You must not let foolish fancies take hold on your imagina-
tion. If Queeney grows tall,  she is sufficiently bulky,  and as
much out of danger of a consumption as nature allows a young
maiden to be 4.  Of real evils the number is great,  of possible
evils there is no end.  ***** 5 is really to be pitied.  Her
son in danger ;  the estate likely to pass not only from her,  but
to those on whom,  I suppose,  she would least wish it bestowed,
and her system of life broken,  are very heavy blows.  But she
will at last be rich,  and will have much gratification in her power,
both rational and sensual.

1  '  Talking of our feeling for the 4 This must be an answer to one
distresses of others,  Johnson said  : —  of Mrs.  Thrale's Letters,  dated in her
"  Why,  Sir,  there is much noise made Collection five days later,  in which
about it,  but it is greatly exaggerated.  she writes  :  —  '  Something always
No,  Sir,  we have a certain degree of happens when you go to Lichfield ;
feeling to prompt us to do good :  and our sitting down thirteen to table
more than that,  Providence does not yesterday made my fool's nerves
intend.     It would be misery to no flutter for Oueeney.    *    *    *    Mr.
purpose.'"     Life,  ii.  94.     See ante,  Murphy said,     she had a hectic
1.141.  colour.3 Piozzi Letters,  i.  375.

2 Hamlet,  Act i.  sc.  I.  5 Ante,  ii.  28.

3 Piozzi Letters,  i.  366.

Boswell,

To Mrs.  Aston.

[A.D.  1777.

Boswell,  I believe,  is coming.  He talks of being here to-day.
I shall be glad to see him.  But he shrinks from the Baltick
expedition,  which I think is the best scheme in our power.
What we shall substitute,  I know not.  He wants to see Wales,
but except the woods of Bachycraigh what is there in Wales  ?
What can fill the hunger of ignorance,  or quench the thirst of
curiosity x  ?  We may perhaps form some scheme or other,  but,
in the phrase of Hockley in the Hole,  it is a pity he has not a
better bottom 2.

Tell my young mistress that this day's letter is too short,  and
it brings me no news either foreign or domestick.

I am going to dine with Mr.  Dyot,  and Frank tells sternly,
that it is past two o'clock 3.

I am,  dearest Madam,

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

546.

To MRS.  ASTON 4.
DEAR MADAM,

As I left you so much disordered,  a fortnight is a long time

1 Boswell had written to Johnson
on September 9  : — *  Let us,  by all
means,  have another expedition.     I
shrink a little from our scheme of
going up the Baltick.     I am sorry
you have already been in Wales  ;  for
I wish to see it.'   Life,  iii.  134.   After
Johnson had returned from Wales he
wrote  : — *  Wales is so little different
from England that it offers nothing
to the speculation of the traveller.'
Ib.  ii.  284.     Bachycraigh  (the name
is spelt in a variety of ways)  was the
property of Mrs.  Thrale.    Johnson
visited it in 1774.     Ib.  v.  436.

2 Hockley in the Hole in Clerken-
well is described in the Spectator,
No.  436,   as   'a place of no small
renown for the gallantry of the lower
order of Britons.'     See Life,  iii.  134,
n.  i.     In an account of a prize-fight
on Wimbledon Common on April 6,
1796,  we read:— 'The combatants

set to soon after two o'clock,  and
after four rounds only the Irishman
was declared victor.  The want of
what in the language of boxers is
termed bottom on the part of the
combatants disgusted the company
exceedingly.  The parties fought in
a hollow,  very near the foot of Abber-
shaw's Gibbet,  who seemed to regard
the combat with the utmost apathy.
When the victor had been duly
crowned with a wreath of shamrock,
and quaffed a libation to the memory
of Big Ben  [Abbershaw,  I conjecture]
in a pint of Liptrap's best gin,  the
cavalcade moved towards the metro-
polis with becoming decency.'  Sport-
ing Magazine for April,  1796,  p.  46.

3 Mrs.  Dyot has been mentioned
before.      Ante,  i.  342.     Frank was
Johnson's black servant.

4 First published in Croker's Bos-
well, page 539.      Corrected by me

to

Aetat.  67.]  To Mrs.  Thrale.

to be without any account of your health.  I am willing to
flatter myself that you are better,  though you gave me no reason
to believe that you intended to use any means for your recovery.
Nature often performs wonders,  and will,  I hope,  do for you
more than you seem inclined to do for yourself.

In this weakness of body with which it has pleased God to
visit you,  he has given you great cause of thankfulness,  by the
total exemption of your Mind from all effects of your disorder.
Your Memory is not less comprehensive or distinct,  nor your
reason less vigorous and acute,  nor your imagination less active
and spritely than in any former time of your life.  This is a
great Blessing,  as it respects enjoyment of the present,  and
a blessing yet far greater as it bestows power and opportunity to
prepare for the future.

All sickness is a summons.     But as you do not want exhorta-
tions, I will send you only my good wishes,  and intreat x you to
believe the good wishes very sincere,  of,
Dear Madam,

Your most humble servant,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

Ashbourne,  Sept.  13,  1777.

To Mrs.  Aston,  at Stowhill,  Lichfield.

547.

TO MRS.    THRALE2.

DEAR MADAM,  [Ashbourne],  Sept.  15,  1777-

Do you call this punctual correspondence?  There was
poor I writing, and writing,  and writing,  on the 8th,  on the nth3,
on the 1 3th;  and on the i5th I looked for a letter,  but I may
look and look.  Instead of writing to me you are writing the
Thraliana 4.  But — he must be humble who would please 5.

Last night came Boswell.  I am glad that he is come.  He
seems to be very brisk and lively,  and laughs a little at  ***** 6.

from the original in Pembroke 3 This letter is not published.
College Library.  4 Ante,  ii.  26,  n.  3.

1 Johnson in his Dictionary only 5 Ante,  i.  352,  n.  i.

gives entreat,  but Bailey gives the 6  '  On Sunday evening,  September
word under both forms.  14, 1 arrived at Ashbourne,  and drove

2 Piozzi Letters,  i.  368.  directly up to Dr.   Taylor's door.

I told

To Mrs.  Thrale.

[A.D.  1777.

I told him something of the scene at Richmond r.  You find,
now you have seen the progenies Langtoniana,  that I did not
praise them without reason  ;  yet the second girl is my
favourite.

You talk of pine-apples and venison.  Pine-apples it is sure
we have none ;  but venison,  no forester that lived under the
green-wood-tree ever had more frequently upon his table.  We
fry,  and roast,  and bake,  and devour in every form.

We have at last fair weather in Derbyshire 2,  and every where
the crops are spoken of as uncommonly exuberant.  Let us now
get money and save it.  All that is paid is saved,  and all that is
laid out in land or malt.  But I long to see twenty thousand
pounds in the bank,  and to see my master visiting this estate and
that,  as purchases are advertised 3.  But perhaps all this may be
when Colin's forgotten and gone 4.  Do not let me be forgotten
before I am gone,  for you will never have such another,  as,
Dearest dear Madam,

Your most humble servant,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

Dr.  Johnson and he appeared before
I had got out of the post-chaise,  and
welcomed me cordially.'  Life,  iii.
135.  It was Taylor whom Bos well
laughed at.  For his account of that
'  hearty English  'Squire,  with the
parson super-induced,'  see ib.  ii.
473  ;  iii.  180,  and for Johnson's laugh
at Taylor,  post,  Letter of May 25,
1780.

1 Mrs.  Thrale replied  :  —  'I am
glad the Richmond scene diverted
you  ;  my master laughed when I read
it over to him.'  Piozzi Letters,  i.
377.  The next passage in Johnson's
letter leads me to think that Bennet
Langton was at this time living at
Richmond,  and that it was his mode
of life which was described.  Life,
iii.  48,  338.  Mrs.  Thrale in her letter
of the 1 8th says:— 'Mr.  Thrale is

cured of his passion for Lady R

already.'      Langton's wife was the

dowager Lady Rothes.    For his three
lovely children see ante,  i.  393.

2 The weather in Staffordshire had
been extraordinarily fine nearly three
weeks earlier.    Ante,  ii.  25.

3  '  Even Johnson could not help
dreaming felicities for himself,  and,
what is more ridiculous,  for others.
The two last years of Thrale's life his
Brewery brought him thirty thousand
a year neat profit.     Was it happy on
that account  ?    He died.' — BARETTI.

4  '  While Colin forgotten and gone
No more shall be talked of or

seen  ;
Unless when beneath the pale

moon,
His ghost shall glide over the

green.'

ROWE.  Campbell's British Poets,
ed.  1845,  P-  334-  See/^/,  Letter of
April n,  1780.

TO

Aetat.  68.]  To Mrs.   Thrale.

33

548.

To MRS.  THRALE  *.

DEAR MADAM,  Ashboume,  Sept.  18, 1777.

Here is another birth-day.  They come very fast.  I am
now sixty-eight.  To lament the past is vain ;  what remains is
to look for hope in futurity.  Queeney has now passed another
year 2.  I hope every year will bring her happiness.

Boswell is with us in good-humour ;  and plays his part with
his usual vivacity3.  We are to go in the Doctor's vehicle and
dine at Derby to-morrow.

Do you know any thing of Bolt-court?  Invite Mr.  Levet
to dinner,  and make enquiry what family he has,  and how they
proceed 4.  I had a letter lately from Mrs.  Williams.  Dr.  Lewis5
visits her,  and has added ipecacuanha to her bark :  but I do not
hear much of her amendment.  Age is a very stubborn disease.
Yet Levet sleeps sound every night6.  I am sorry for poor
Seward's pain  ;  but he may live to be better7.

Mr.  *****  's erection of an urn looks like an intention to
bury me alive ;  I would as willingly see my friend,  however
benevolent and hospitable,  quietly inurned.  Let him think for
the present of some more acceptable memorial 8.

1 Piozzi Letters,  i.  370.  4 I should never have expected

2  'Thursday,  September 1 8.     Last that Levett  (Life,   i.   243)  was ad-
night Dr.    Johnson had proposed mitted to Mrs.  Thrale's table.     For
that the crystal lustre,  or chandelier,  the enquiry about him see /#.$•/,  p.  39.
in Dr.  Taylor's large room,  should 5 He is mentioned post,  Letter of
be lighted up some time or other.  October 16,  1779.

Taylor said,  it should be lighted up 6 He slept too soundly one night

next night.     "  That will do very well more than four years later,  when

(said I),  for it is Dr.  Johnson's birth-  '  Death broke at once the vital

day."  '     When we were in the Isle of chain,

Sky,  Johnson had desired me not to And freed his soul the nearest

mention his birth-day.     He did not way.'

seem pleased at this time that I Life,  iv.  137-9^

mentioned it,  and said   (somewhat 7 Ante,  i.  346,  n.  I.     He lived till

sternly)    "he would not have the 1799.  Mme.D'ArbUy'sZ&*O',vi.2l7.

lustre lighted the next day." '     Life,  8 Colonel Myddelton set up an

iii.  157.     Queeney's birth-day came a urn to him  ;  but not,  the inscription

day earlier.  seems to show,  till after his death.

3  '  That is,  he makes more noise Life,  iv.  421,  n.2.  Boswell told John-
than anybody in company,   talking son,  when they were at Auchinleck,
and laughing loud.'— BARETTI.  that he intended to erect a monu-

VOL.  II.  D Does

34

To Mrs.   Thrale.

[A.D.  1777.

Does nobody tell  *  *  *  *  that a warmer climate and a clearer
air is likely to help her son,  and that it may be convenient to
run away from an English winter,  before he becomes too weak
for travel  ?  It appears to me not improbable that change of air,
and the amusement and exercise of easy journeys,  might enable
one so young to overcome his disease1.

Dr.  Taylor has another buck.  You must not talk to us of
venison.  Fruit indeed we have little,  and that little not very
good  ;  but what there is has been very liberally bestowed 2.

Mr.  L 3 and the Doctor still live on different sides of the

street.

We have had,  for some time past,  such harvest weather as
a Derbyshire farmer dares scarcely hope.  The harvest has this
year been every where a month backward,  but so far as I can
hear,  has recompensed the delay by uncommon plenty.  Next
year will,  I hope,  complete Mr.  Thrale's wish of an hundred
thousand barrels4.  Ambition is then to have an end,  and he
must remember,  that non minor cst virtus quam qucerere,  parta
tuere5.  When he has climbed so high,  his care must be to keep

himself from falling.

I am,  dear Madam,

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

549.

TO MRS.   THRALE6.

DEAR MADAM,  Ashboume,  Sept.  20, 1777.

I do not remember what has happened that you write on
mourning paper,  and use black wax.

ment to him there.  '  He could not
bear to have death presented to him
in any shape  ;  for his constitutional
melancholy made the king of terrours
more frightful.  He turned off the
subject,  saying,  "  Sir,  I hope to see
your grand-children  !  " '  Life.  v.  380.

1 Ante,  ii.  28,  n.  4.

2  '  I have heard Dr.  Johnson pro-
test that he never had quite as much
as he wished of wall-fruit except once
in his life,  and that was when we were
all together at Ombersley.'     Piozzi's

Anecdotes,  p.  103.

3 Mr.  Langley.     Ante,  i.  347.

4  '  Thraie went greatly beyond his
hundred thousand barrels,   and a
good deal of their produce is now
enjoyed by a paltry singing-master.'
BARETTI.    Ante,  ii.  23.

5 Tueri.     OVID.   Ars Amat.  ii.  13.
This misprint illustrates what John-
son said of Mrs.   Thrale  : — '  Her
learning is that of a school-boy in
one of the lower forms.'  Life,  i.  494.

6 Pio-2zi Letters,  i.  379.

B

Aetat.es.]  To Mrs.   Thrale.

35

B liked S better as he knew him more,

and seems well pleased to be remembered by him and my
master1.

Pretty dear Queeney!  I wish her many and many happy
birth-days.  I hope you will never lose her,  though I should go
to Lichfield,  and though she should sit the thirteenth in many
a company 2.

You have nothing to say because you live at Streatham,  and
expect me to say much when I return from Lichfield and
Ashbourne,  places to be considered as abounding in novelty,  and
supplying every hour materials for history.  It is as much as
I can do to furnish every post with a letter ;  I keep nothing
behind for oral communication.

I took Boswell yesterday to see Keddlestone 3,  and the silk
mills 4,  and the china work at Derby ;  he was pleased with all.
The Derby china is very pretty,  but I think the gilding is all
superficial ;  and the finer pieces are so dear,  that perhaps silver
vessels of the same capacity may be sometimes bought at the
same price  ;  and I am not yet so infected with the contagion of
china-fancy,  as to like any thing at that rate which can so easily
be broken 5.

1 B is Boswell,   and S pp.    I93-2O5-      Johnson's definition

Seward,  who had lately visited Edin-  of mill does not include a silk-
burgh.     Life, iii.  123,  6.  mill;  he defines it as  'an engine or

2 Ante,  ii.  29,  n.  4.  fabrick in which corn is ground to

3 Lord Scarsdale's seat.       Here meal,  or any other body is commi-
Johnson saw lying  '  in his Lordship's nuted.'

dressing-room his small Dictionary'-,  5  'The same fashion a few years

showing it to Boswell he said :—  ago prevailed in Genoa,  which still

'  Look   'ye.      Quae regio in terris has place in England and Holland,  of

nostri non plena laboris  ? '      Life,  using services of China-ware instead

iii.  161.  of plate;  but the senate,  foreseeing

4 The silk-mills were those in the consequence,  prohibited the use
which William Hutton just forty of that brittle commodity beyond a
years earlier had brought his servi-  certain extent ;     while the use of
tude of  *  intolerable severity '  to an silver-plate was left unlimited.     And
end.     He describes them as  '  a place I suppose in their late distresses they
most curious and pleasing to the eye,  felt the good effect of this ordinance,
but which gave me a seven years'  Our tax on plate is perhaps in this
heart-ache.'  Life of William Hutton,  view somewhat impolitic.'     Hume's
p.  24,  and Hutton's History of Derby,  Essays,  ed.  1770,  ii.  93.

Master

To Mrs.   Thrale.

[A.D.  1777.

Master is very inconstant to Lady R '.  Did he not

hold out against forty such repellents from Mrs.  P ?  He

grows nice I find ;  let him try whether nicety will make him
happy.

Boswell has spent more money than he expected,  and I must
supply him with part of his expences home2.  I have not much
with me,  and beg Master to send me by the next post a note of
ten pounds,  which I will punctually return,  not in opportunities
of beneficence,  though the noblest payment in the world,  but in
money,  or bank-paper.  Do not let him forget me.

Do not suppose that I wrote this letter on purpose to borrow.
My soul disdains it.  I did not think on it when I began to
write.  When I miss a post,  I consider myself as deviating from
the true rule of action.  Seeing things in this light,  I consider
every letter as something in the line of duty ;  upon this foot
I make my arrangement,  and under whatever circumstances of
difficulty,  endeavour to carry them into execution ;  for having in
some degree pledged myself for the performance.  I think the
resolution both of my head and my heart engaged,  and reprobate
every thought of desisting from the undertaking 3.

1 Perhaps Lady R is Lady

Rothes,  the wife of Bennet Langton.
The Thrales apparently had visited
them at their house at Richmond.
Ante,  ii.  32.    Another Lady Rothes
had married Dr.  Lucas Pepys.  Early
Diary of Fanny Burney,  ii.  306,  n.

2.     If she were meant,  Mrs.  P

might be a former Mrs.  Pepys.

2  '  When I happened to mention that
the expence of my jaunt would come
to much more than I had computed,
he said,  "  Why,  Sir,  if the expence
were to be an inconvenience,  you
would have reason to regret it :  but,
if you have had the money to spend,
I know not that you could have pur-
chased as much pleasure with it in
any other way."  '    Life,  iii.  196.

3 Boswell records that during this
visit to Ashbourne,    Johnson one
day  'found fault with me for using

the phrase to make money.  "  Don't
you see  (said he)  the impropriety of
it  ?  To make money is to coin it :
you should say get money."  *  *  *
He was at all times jealous of infrac-
tions upon the genuine English
language,  and prompt to repress col-
loquial barbarisms;  such as, pledg-
ing myself,  for undertaking ;  line,  for
department,  or branch,  as,  the civil
line,  the banking line?  Life,  iii.  196.
In a note on The Merry Wives of
Windsor,  Act iv.  sc.  7,  he says  : —
'  To come off seems to mean what is
in our time expressed by to come
down,  to pay liberally and readily.
These accidental and colloquial
senses are the disgrace of language
and the plague of commentators.'
Mrs.  Piozzi,  in her Synonymy,  i.  93,
repeating no doubt what she re-
membered from Johnson's talk,

Howel

Aetat.  68.]

To Mrs.   Thrale.

37

Howel tells of a few words in Spanish,  the true utterance of
which will denominate the speaker bueno Romanciador ;  the last
sentence will un bueno politico  \  He that can rattle those words
well together may say all that political controversy generally
produces.

I am,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.
P.S.  Nay,  but do enquire after Bolt-court.

550.

TO MRS.    THRALE2.

DEAR MADAM,  Ashbourne,  Sept.  22,  1777.

Now to sit down to tell me a long newspaper story about
Lord Harcourt and his dog 3. — I hoped when you had seen Levet
you would have learned something that concerned me.

says: — 'A man cannot lie under
circumstances,  because they are sure
to stand around him.'  Landor says
that  '  Kurd writes,  "  under the cir-
cumstances." Circumstances are
about us,  not above us.'  Lander's
Works,  ed.  1876,  v.  108.  Murray
(afterwards Lord Mansfield),  in his
legal opinion about Johnson'slibellous
definition of Excise,  given in 1755,
says :— '  Under 2\\  the circumstances.'
Life,  i.  295,  n.  9.  Johnson surely
forgets his fourteenth definition of
under,  as  '  in a state of being liable
to,  or limited by,'  where he quotes
'  under pain of greater displeasure/
'  under a necessity/  &c.

1 Howell,  in a letter written from
Madrid on August i,  1623  (Book ii.
No.  71),  says  :— 'The conclusion of
this rambling letter shall be a rhyme
of certain hard throaty words which
I was taught lately,  and they are
accounted the difficultest in all the
whole Castilian language  ;  insomuch
that he who is able to pronounce
them is accounted Btten Romantista,

a good speaker of Spanish  :  Abeja y
oueja y piedra que rabeia,  pendola
tras oreja,  y lugar en la ygreia,
dessea a su hijo la vieja?  Johnson
says that in like manner the last
sentence of the letter in the text,  con-
taining as it does the cant phrases of
the orators or political writers of the
day,  will denominate the speaker a
good politician.

2 Piozzi Letters,  i.  382.

3 Horace Walpole wrote on Sept.
1 8 about  'an amazing piece of news
that I have this moment received
from town.      The dinner-bell had
rung — where  ?   at Nuneham.      The
Earl  [Lord Harcourt]  did not appear.
After much search,  he was found
standing on his head in a well,  a
dear little favourite dog upon his
legs,  his stick and one of his gloves
lying near.'     He added in his next
letter that   '  in all probability he
perished by trying to save his dog.
You know how that must touch me!
Letters,  vi.  481,  3.

I hope

To Mrs.   Thrale.

[A.D.  1777.

I hope Master has been so kind as to send me the ten
pounds,  else I shall be forced to borrow at Ashbourne or
Lichfield.

Boswell has been this morning with me to see Ham Garden T.
He talks of going away this week,  and I shall not think of
staying here much longer,  though the wind whistles very prettily.
My nights are still such as I do not like ;  but complaint will not
mend them.

If  *  *  *  * 2 holds life to one-and-twenty,  he will probably live
on  ;  for his constitution,  if it does not grow weaker,  will become
firmer.  The harvest in Staffordshire has been such for plenty,
and so well gathered,  as to be mentioned with admiration3.
Make your most of these golden years,  and buy liberally what
will now be liberally allowed.  I hope to partake a little of
the general abundance — But I am now sixty-eight.  Make good
use,  my dear Lady,  of your days of health and sprightliness.
Sixty-eight is coming fast upon you; — let it not find you
wondering what has become of all the past.

If Aunt4 comes now,  she can do but little harm,  for she will
hardly go with you to Brighthelmstone,  and she cannot long
trouble you at Streatham.

I hope soon to come to Lichfield,  and from Lichfield to
London.

Taylor and Bos.  send their compliments with those of,
Madam,

Your most humble servant,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

1 Ham or Islam in Dovedale.  It
had been formerly the seat of the
Congreves.  Boswell was shown a
recess in which Congreve was said
to have written his Old Bachelor.
It was on the road to Ham that
Johnson told Boswell how the Plan
of the Dictionary came to be in-
scribed to Lord Chesterfield.  The
Thrales and Johnson had seen the
place in 1774.  Life,  i.  183,  n.  4;
iii.  187  ;  v.  429.

=  Sir John Lade.  Ante,  ii.  28,  n.  4.

3 The Earl of Carlisle wrote from
Castle Howard on September 12  :  —
4 We have great quantities of fruit,
and better flavoured than I ever
remember.      The weather is very
favourable for the harvest,  and there
are great appearances of plenty.
Our farmers will be puzzled for
cause of complaint.'     Selivyn and
his Contemporaries,    ed.    1882,    iii.
228.

4 She is mentioned,  post,  pp.  44,
47-

To

Aetat.  es.]  To Mrs.   Thrale.

39

551.

TO MRS.    THRALE1.

DEAR MADAM,  Ashboume,  Sept.  25, 1777.

Boswell is gone  ;  and is,  I hope,  pleased that he has been
here ;  though to look on any thing with pleasure is not very
common.  He has been gay and good-humoured in his usual
way 2,  but we have not agreed upon any other expedition.  He
had spent more money than he intended,  and I supplied him  ;
my deficiencies are again made up by Mr.  Thrale's bill,  for which
I thank him.

I will send directions to the taylor to make me some cloaths
according to Mr.  Thrale's direction 3,  though I cannot go with
you to Brighthelmstone,  having loitered away the time I know
not how ;  but if you would have me,  I will endeavour to follow
you,  which upon the whole may perhaps be as well.  I am here
now on the 25th,  and am obliged by promise to take Lichfield
in my way,  so that the 3oth will come upon me too soon.

The Levet that has been found in the register must be some
other Levet 4 ;  I dare say our friend does not in his heart believe
that it is he.

I am glad that the Benedictines found you at last.  Father
Wilkes,  when he was amongst us,  took Oxford in his way.
I recommended him to Dr.  Adams,  on whom he impressed

1 Piozzi Letters,  i.  384.  the dark colour,    from which he

2  '  That is,  in his noisy and silly never deviated,   was enlivened by
way.'     BARETTI.     '  From this meet-      metal buttons.'    Life,  iii.  325.

ing at Ashbourne,'  writes Boswell,  4 Mrs.  Thrale had written on
'I derived a considerable accession September 18  : — 'My husband bids
to my Johnsonian store.'  Life,  iii.  me tell you that he has examined
208.  He stayed there but ten days ;  the register,  and that Levet is only
nevertheless the account of the visit seventy-two.'  Piozzi Letters,  i.  374.
fills 74 pages of my edition of the Johnson,/^,  Letter of August 14,
Life.  In the quietness of the country 1780,  speaks of him as being four-
he found it no doubt much easier  '  to score.  In the lines he wrote on his
keep his Journal very diligently.'  death in 1782,  he says  :—

3 Boswell says that    '  by asso-  '  His frame was firm,  his powers
ciating with Mrs.  Thrale Johnson's were bright,

external appearance was much im-  Though now his eightieth year
proved.  He got better clothes  ;  and was nigh.'  Life,  iv.  138.

a high

To Mrs.   Thrale.  [A.D.I???.

a high opinion of his learning.  I am glad that my cell is
reserved z.  I may perhaps some time or other visit it,  though
I cannot easily tell why one should go to Paris twice.  Our own
beds are soft enough 2.  Yet my master will tell you,  that one
wants to be doing something.  I have something like a longing
to see my master's performances 3 ;  a pleasure which I shall
hardly have till he returns from Brighthelmstone.  I beg that
before you go you will send the Bibliographia Britannica to my

habitation 4.

I am,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.
P. S.  Let your next be sent to Lichfield.

552.

TO MRS.    THRALE5.

DEAR MADAM,  Ashbourne,  Sept.  27,  1777.

I think I have already told you that Bos.  is gone.  The day
before he went,  we met the Duke and Duchess of Argyle in the
street,  and went to speak to them while they changed horses 6  ;
and in the afternoon Mrs.  Langton and Juliet 7 stopped in their

1 See ante,  i.  401,  406.  the Hebrides.      'Other people,'  he

2 Mrs.  Thrale had written  : — *  Mr.      said,  '  may go and see the Hebrides.'
Cowley  [the Prior of the Benedict-      Life,  iii.  134;  iv.  199.

ines]  says that a cell is kept ready for 3 His alterations at Streatham.

your use.    We asked Lord Mulgrave Ante,  ii.  22.

to meet him,  and he said a thing so 4 It was,  I think,  the Biographia

like a thing of your saying,  that I Britannica that he wanted to see.

will repeat it directly.     We talked of He told Boswell at Ashbourne that

England and France. — The beds  '  he had been asked to undertake the

are softer there than here,  quoth my new edition of that work,  but had

master.     Softer,  if you will,  but not declined it.'      Life,   iii.    174.      Bolt

so clean,  Sir,  replied the Prior. — No,  Court,  it may be noticed,   he here

no,  dirty enough to be sure,  con-  speaks of as his habitation ;    his

fessed Mr.   Thrale,  but exceeding home was at Streatham.     Ante,  i.

soft.      Why then,   interrupts Lord 129,  and post,  Letter of November 7,

Mulgrave,  one may infer,  that a hog 1779.

in England lives just like a gentle-  s Piozzi Letters,  i.  386.

man in France I find — so there let 6 They had dined with them in In-

the parallel rest.     Now was not that verary Castle in October,  1773.  Life,

speech quite in the spirit of our dear v.  353.     It is strange that Boswell in

Mr.  Johnson?'      Piozzi Letters,   i.  the Life of fohnson passes over this

374.    Just as Johnson did not care meeting in silence;    the omission

to see Paris twice,  so neither did he must,  I think,  have been intentional,

care to visit a second time Wales or 7 If these ladies were Bennet

way

Aetat.  ea]  To Mrs.   Thrale.  41

way to London,  and sent for me ;  I went to them,  and sent for
Boswell,  whom Mrs.  Langton had never seen.

And so,  here is this post without a letter.  I am old,  I am old,
says Sir John Falstaff  *.  '  Take heed,  my dear,  youth flies apace.'
You will be wanting a letter sometime.  I wish I were with you,
but I cannot come yet.

Nives et frigora Rheni

Me sine sola vides  :    Ah,  ne te frigora laedant !.
Ah,  tibi ne teneras glacies secet aspera plantas ! 2

I wish you well ;  B and all ;  and shall be glad to know

your adventures.  Do not however think wholly to escape me ;
you will,  I hope,  see me at Brighthelmstone.  Dare you answer
me,  as Brutus answered his evil genius 3  ?

I know not when I shall write again,  now you are going to the
world's end.  Extra anni solisque mas4,  where the post will be
a long time in reaching you.  I shall,  notwithstanding all distance,
continue to think on you,  and to please myself with the hope of
being once again,

Madam,

Your most humble servant,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

Langton's mother and sister they Johnson applies these lines.

were not on the direct road to Lon-  3  *  BRUTUS.     Speak to me what

don from the family seat in Lincoln-  thou art.

shire.     A passage in the next letter GHOST.     Thy evil spirit,  Brutus.

seems however to show that some BRUTUS.     Why comest thou?

actress and her daughter or com-  GHOST.     To tell thee thou shalt

panion were described.  see me at Philippi.

1 2 Henry IV,  Act ii.  sc.  4.  BRUTUS.    Well :  then I shall see

2 VIRGIL.    Eclogues,  x.  47.  thee again  ?
'While you   (alas,   that I should GHOST.    Ay,  at Philippi.

find it so  !)  BRUTUS.    Why,  I will see thee

To shun my sight your native at Philippi then.'

soil forego,  Julius Cczsar,  Act iv.  sc.  3.

And climb the frozen Alps,  and 4 VIRGIL.     &neid,  vi.  796.

tread the eternal snow.  '  Beyond the solar year,  without

Ye frosts and snows her tender the starry way.'

body spare.  DRYDEN.

Those are not limbs for icicles to Virgil is a second time brought in to

tear/  describe the remoteness of Brighton.

DRYDEN.  See also post,  p.  45.     In 1770 the

It is to a visit to Brighton that post,  which had hitherto gone four

To

To Mrs.   Thrale.

[A.D.  1777.

553.

TO MRS.    THRALE1.

DEAR MADAM,  Ashbourne,  Michaelmass day,  1777.

And so because you hear that Mrs.  Desmoulines 2 has
written,  you hold it not necessary to write ;  as if she could write
like you.  or I were equally content with hearing from her. — Call
you this,  backing your friends 3  ?  She did write,  and I remember
nothing in her letter,  but that she was discontented that I wrote
only Madam to her,  and Dear Madam to Mrs.  Williams4.
Without any great dearness in the comparison,  Williams is,
I think,  the dearer of the two.  I am glad that she mends,  but
I am afraid she cannot get the start of the season,  and Winter
will come before she is prepared for it.

But at Streatham there are dears and dears,  who before this
letter reaches them will be at Brighthelmstone.  Wherever they
be,  may they have no uneasiness but for want of me.

Now you are gone,  I wonder how long you design to stay;
pray let me know when you write to Lichfield,  for I have not
lost hope of coming to you,  yet that purpose may chance to fail.
But my comfort is,  that you cannot charge me with forgetting
you when I am away.  You perhaps do not think how eagerly
I expect the post.

Mrs.  *****  grows old,  and has lost much of her undulation
and mobility.  Her voice likewise is spoiled  ;  she can come upon

days a week to Brighton,  began to
go every day but Sunday,  from Mid-
summer to Michaelmas in every
year.  For the other nine months it
still went only four days.  Dodsley's
Environs of London,  v.  221,  and
Court and City Register for 1775,
p.  121.

1 Piozzi Letters,  i.  388.

2 Boswell going up to London in
the following March writes  : — '  I
found Dr.  Johnson at his own house,
sitting with Mrs.  Williams,  and was
informed that the room formerly
allotted to me was now appropriated
to a charitable purpose  ;  Mrs.  Des-

moulins,  and I think her daughter,
and a Miss Carmichael,  being all
lodged in it.  Such was his human-
ity, and such his generosity,  that
Mrs.  Desmoulins herself told me,  he
allowed her half-a-guinea a week.
Let it be remembered,  that this was
above a twelth part of his pension.'
Life,  iii.  222.  She was the daughter
of his godfather.  Ante,  i.  6,  n.  3.

3  'Call you that backing of your
friends  ? '     i Henry IV,  Act ii.  sc.  4.

4 See post,  Letter of Nov.  7,  1779,
for  '  Discord keeping her residence
in this habitation,'    and Life,    iii.
461.

the

Aetat.  es.]  To Mrs.   Thrale.  43

the stage now only for her own benefit x.  But Juliet is airy and
cheerful,  and has I hope done lamenting the inconstancy of
man.  My mistress is represented as unable to bear them
company.  There was not time for many questions,  and no
opportunity of winding and winding them,  as Mr.  Richardson 2
has it,  so as to get truth out without questions.  I do not indeed
know that I am any great winder.  I suspect a winder to be
always a man vacant,  and commonly little-minded.  I think my
dear little mistress no great proficient at winding,  though she
could wind if she would,  contemnit potius quam nescit.

Dr.  Taylor desires always to have his compliments sent.  He
is,  in his usual way,  very busy;  getting a bull to his cows,
and a dog to his bitches.  His waterfall runs very well.  Old
Shakespeare is dead,  and he wants to buy another horse for his
mares 3.  He is one of those who finds every hour something new
to wish or to enjoy 4.

Boswell while he was here saw Keddlestone and the silk mills,
and took Chatsworth in his way home 5.  He says,  his wife does
not love me quite well yet,  though we have made a formal
peace6.  He kept his journal very diligently;  but then what
was there to journalize.  I should be glad to see what he says

1 Ante,  ii.  40,  n.  7.  5 For Keddlestone and the silk-

2 Mrs.  Piozzi,  in a marginal note mills see ante,    ii.  35.     It was at
on her own copy of the Piozzi Let-  Edensor Inn,  close by Chatsworth,
ters,  says  : — '  Dr.  Johnson said,  that that the landlord told Boswell that
if Mr.  Richardson had lived till  /  'the celebrated Dr.    Johnson had
came out,   my praises would have been in his house.     I inquired who
added two or three years to his life.  this Dr.  Johnson was,  that I might
"  For,"    says Dr.   Johnson,    "  that hear mine host's notion of him.
fellow died merely for want of  "  Sir,  (said he,)  Johnson,  the great
change among his flatterers:     he writer;    Oddity,   as they call him.
perished for want of more,   like a He's the greatest writer in England  ;
man obliged to breathe the same he writes for the ministry;  he has
air till it is exhausted." '     Hayward's a correspondence abroad,  and lets
Piozzi,  i.  311.  them know what's going on." '    Life,

3 Ante,  i.  341.  Hi.  209.

4  '  Blest madman,  who could every 6 It was she who said to her hus-

hour employ band  :— '  I have seen many a bear

With something new to wish or led by a man,  but I never before
to enjoy  ! '  saw a man led by a bear.'      Id.  ii.

DRYDEN.    Absalom and Achito-      269,  n.  i.
phel,  1.  553-

of

44

To Mrs.   Tkrale.

[A.D.  1777.

of*********1.      I think I told you that I took him to
Ham2.

Why should you suspect me of forgetting lilly lolly 3  ?  Now
you will see the Shellys 4,  and perhaps hear something about the
Cottons s ;  and you will bathe,  and walk,  and dress,  and dance,
and who knows how little you will think on,  Madam,

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

554.

TO MRS.    THRALE6.

DEAR MADAM,  Ashbourne,  October 6,  1777.

You are glad that I am absent ;  and I am glad that you are
sick 7.  When you went away,  what did you do with your aunt  ?
I am glad she liked my Susy;  I was always a Susy,  when
nobody else was a Susy 8.  How have you managed at your new
place?  Could you all get lodgings in one house,  and meat at
one table?  Let me hear the whole series of misery;  for,  as
Dr.  Young says,  /  love horrour.

Methinks you are now a great way off;  and if I come,  I have
a great way to come to you  ;  and then the sea is so cold,  and the
rooms are so dull ;  yet I do love to hear the sea roar and my

1 Beauclerk,  I suspect,  is the name
omitted.     It suits the number of the
asterisks.     Johnson had just heard
from Boswell a story to his  [John-
son's]  disadvantage told by Beau-
clerk.    Life,  iii.  194,  209,  211.

2 Ham.     Ante,  ii.  38,  n.  I.

3 Mrs.   Piozzi explains this in a
marginal note.     A Welsh squire had
a half-witted son — his sole heir,
whom he brought to a Christmas
party at Llewenney Hall.     '  "  What
does the child say  ?  "  cries my aunt ;
"  it sounds like lilly lolly."    "  Indeed,
my Lady Betty,"  replies the mother,
in a sharp Welsh accent.    "  Dick
does say lilly lolly,  sure enough  ;  but
he mains: — How do you do,    Sir
Robert Cotton." '  Hayward's Piozzi,

4 The Letters of October 31,  1778,
and August 25,  1780,  show that the
friend of the Thrales was Sir John
Shelley,  of Maresfield Park,  Sussex.
He was not an ancestor of the poet
Shelley.

5 Johnson in his tour to Wales in
1774 had visited Combermere,  the
seat of Sir Lynch Salusbury Cot-
ton, Mrs.  Thrale' s cousin.     Life,  v.

433-

6 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  I.

7 This is explained by a passage in
his first letter to Boswell after they
parted  : — '  Mrs.  Thrale is in hopes of
a young brewer.'     Life,  iii.  210.     On
July 3 of the following year he
wrote  : — '  Mrs.   Thrale,   poor thing,
has a daughter.'     Ib.  p.  363.

*Ante>  i.  354.

mistress

Aetat.  68.]  To Mrs.   Thrale.  45

mistress talk — For when she talks,  ye gods !  how she will talk T.
I wish I were with you,  but we are now near half the length of
England asunder.  It is frightful to think how much time must
pass between writing this letter and receiving an answer,  if any
answer were necessary 2.

Taylor is now going to have a ram  ;  and then,  after Aries and
Taurus,  we shall have Gemini.  His oats are now in the wet ;
here is a deal of rain.  Mr.  Langdon bought,  at Nottingham fair,
fifteen tun of cheese ;  which,  at an ounce a-piece,  will suffice
after dinner for four hundred and eighty thousand men 3.  This
is all the news that the place affords.  I purpose soon to be at
Lich field,  but know not just when,  having been defeated of
my first design.  When I come to town,  I am to be very busy
about my Lives. — Could not you do some of them for me?

I am glad Master unspelled 4 you,  and run you all on rocks,
and drove you about,  and made you stir.  Never be cross about
it.  Quiet and calmness you have enough of — a little hurry stirs

life — and,

Brushing o'er,  adds motion to the pool5.

Now pool brings my master's excavations into my head.
I wonder how I shall like them ;  I should like not to see them,
till we all see them together.  He will have no waterfall
to roar like the Doctor's.  I sat by it yesterday,  and read
Erasmus's Militis Christiani Enchiridion 6.  Have you got that
book?

Make my compliments to dear Queeney.     I suppose she will

1 Ante,  i.  p.  207.  And brushing o'er adds motion

2 He was at Ashbourne and she to the pool.3

at Brighton.  DRYDEN,   quoted in Johnson's

3 Johnson must have reckoned a Dictionary under To Brush.
ton as made up of 20 cwt.  of 100 Ibs.  6 It was translated into English in
each.     For his  '  delight in exercising 1 544 under the following title :— '  En-
his mind on the science of numbers,'  chiridion Militis Christiani ;    which
see Life,  i.  72 ;  iii.  207.  may be called in Englysche,  the

4 This word is not in Johnson's hansome weapon of a Chrysten
Dictionary.  Knyght,    replenysched with many

5  '  Nor love is always of a vicious goodly and godly preceptes  ;  made

kind,  by the famus clerke ERASMUS of

But oft to virtuous acts inflames Rotterdame,    and newly corrected

the mind  ;  and imprinted.'

Awakes the sleepy vigour of the soul,

dance

To Mrs.    Thrale.

[A.D.  1777.

dance at the Rooms1,  and your heart will go one knows not
how.

I am,  dearest,  and dearest Lady,

Your most humble servant,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

555.

TO MRS.    THRALE2.

DEAR MADAM,  [Ashbourne],  October 13,  1777.

Yet I do love to hear from you.  Such pretty kind letters
as you send.  But it gives me great delight to find that my
master misses me.  I begin to wish myself with you more than
I should do,  if I were wanted less.  It is a good thing to stay
away till one's company is desired,  but not so good to stay after
it is desired

You know I have some work to do.     I did not set to it very
soon ;    and if I should go up to London with nothing done,

what would be said,  but that I was who can tell what?

I therefore stay till I can bring up something to stop their
mouths,  and then 3.

1 Miss Burney.  going to the Rooms
at Brighton in October 1782,   de-
scribes the staring and whispering as
she passed  :  —  '  That's she  !     That's
the famous Miss Burney ! '      Mme.
D'Arblay's Diary,   ii.    160.       Once
when Queeney  '  was consulting with
a friend about a new gown and
dressed hat she thought of wearing
to  [sic]  an assembly,  suddenly Mr.
Johnson called out :  —

"  Wear the gown and wear the

hat,
Snatch thy pleasures while

they last ;
Hadst thou nine lives like a

cat,

Soon those nine lives would
be past." '

Piozzi's Anecdotes,  p.  165.

2 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  6.

3 Boswell says that when they

were at Ashbourne he talked to
Johnson about the projected edition
of the English Poets.  He adds  :—
'  My friend seemed now not much to
relish talking of this edition.'  Life,
iii.  137.  In Murray's Johnsoniana,
p.  227,  it is recorded on the authority
of the Rev.  Mr.  Parker,  who had it
from Mrs.  Aston and her sister,  that
'  a great portion of the Lives of the
Poets was written at Stow Hill
[Lichfield].  Johnson had a table by
one of the windows,  which was
frequently surrounded by five or six
ladies engaged in work or conver-
sation. Mrs.  Gastrel had a very
valuable edition of Bailey's Diction-
ary to which she  [a misprint,  no
doubt,  for he~\  often referred.  She
told him that Miss Seward said that
he had made poetry of no value by
his criticism.  "Why,  my dear lady,"
Though

Aetat.  68.]  To Mrs.   Thrale.  47

Though I am still at Ashbourne,  I receive your dear letters
that come to Lichfield,  and  [do]  you continue that direction,  for
I think to get thither as soon as I can.

One of the does died yesterday,  and I am afraid her fawn will
be starved  ;  I wish Miss Thrale had it to nurse ;  but the Doctor
is now all for cattle,  and minds very little either does or hens.

How did you and your aunt part T  ?  Did you turn her out of
doors to begin your journey?  or did she leave you by her usual
shortness of visits  ?  I love to know how you go on.

I cannot but think on your kindness and my master's.  Life
has,  upon the whole,  fallen short,  very short,  of my early ex-
pectation :  but the acquisition of such a friendship,  at an age
when new friendships are seldom acquired,  is something better
than the general course of things gives man a right to expect.
I think on it with great delight,  I am not very apt to be
delighted.

I am,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

556.

TO MRS.   THRALE2.

DEAREST LADY,  Ashbourne,  Oct.  16, 1777.

I am just going out,  and can write but little.  How you
should be long without a letter I know not,  for I seldom miss
a post.  I purpose now to come to London as soon as I can,  for
I have a deal to look after,  but hope I shall get through the
whole business.

I wish you had told me your adventure,  or told me nothing.
Be civil to Lord  *  *  *  *,  he seems to be a good kind of man3.
Miss may change her mind  ;  and will change it,  when she finds
herself get more credit by dancing than by whist 4 ;  and though
she should continue to like,  as she likes now,  the harm is none.

replied he  ;  "  if silver is dirty,  it is 3 Mrs.    Thrale in her letter of

not the less valuable for a good October I,   had mentioned   'Lord

scouring." '     It is a great exaggera-  *  *  * ,  who talks a great deal,  and

tion to say that he wrote  *  a great from a very fashionably furnished

portion of the Lives'  at Stow Hill.  mind.'     Piozzi Letters •,  i.  392.

1 See ante,  ii.  38.  4 c Miss Thrale never could be

2 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  8.  brought to love dancing.'    BARETTI.

DO

48 To Mrs.   Thrale.  0.0.1777.

Do not yet begin,  dear Madam,  to think about the last*.  You
may well dance these dozen years,  if you keep your looks as you
have yet kept them  ;  and I am glad that Hetty 2 has no design
to dance you down.

The poor P 3.    I am sorry for the girl ;  she seems to be

doomed,  before her time,  to weakness and solicitude.  What is
that Bedrider 4 the supervisor  ?  He will be up again.  But life
seems to be closing upon them.

I hope you still continue to be sick 5,  and my dear master to
be well.

I am no sender of compliments,  but take them once for all,
and deliver them to be kept as rarities by Miss Owen,  Mrs.
Nesbit 6,  Miss Hetty,  and Dr.  Burney.

Still direct to Lichfield,  for thither I am hastening ;  and from
Lichfield to London,  and from London I hope to Brighthelm-
stone,  and from Brighthelmstone qua terra patet1 .
I am,  dearest of all dear Ladies,

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

557.

TO MRS.    THRALE8.

DEAR MADAM,  Lichfield,  October 22,  1777.

I am come,  at last,  to Lichfield,  and am really glad that
I am got away from a place where there was indeed no evil,
but very little good 9.  You may,  I believe,  write once to Lich-

1 Johnson refers,  I think,  to the 4 Bedrider is not in Johnson's
passage in his last Idler,  where he Dictionary.      According to Skeat
says,    '  there are few things,    not  (Etymo.  Diet.},    '  bedridden is cor-
purely evil,  of which we can say with-  rupted from Anglo-Saxon bedrida,
out some emotion of uneasiness,  this lit.  "  a bed-rider ;  "  one who can only
is the last'  ride on a bed,  not on a horse.'

2 Miss Thrale,  whose name was 5 Ante,  ii.  44,  n.  7.

Esther.  6 For Miss Owen see ante,  ii.  5,

3 A Mrs.   P has been men-      n.  I,  and for Mrs.  Nesbit,  ante,  i.  221,

tioned,   ante,   ii.  36.      Mrs.    Thrale n.  3.

some years later  (Piozzi Letters,  ii.          7 Ovid.     Metamorphoses,    i.    241.

359)  speaks of poor P 's ill state Quoted ante,  i.  226.

of health,  where P ,  I suspect,  is 8 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  10.

Perkins,  Thrale's clerk and successor.          9 He wrote to Boswell on Nov.

field

Aetat.  68.]  To Mrs .  Tkrale.

49

field after you receive this,  but after that it will be best to direct
to London.

Your throat is,  I suppose,  well by this time.  Poor Mrs.  *  *  *  *
it is impossible to think on without great compassion. — Against
a blow so sudden,  and so unexpected,  I wonder that she supports
herself.  The consolations of  *****  }s girls must indeed be painful.
She had intended to enjoy the triumph of her daughter's superi-
ority x.  They were prepared to wish them both ill,  and their wishes
are gratified.  There is in this event a kind of system of calamity,
or conflagration of the soul.  Every avenue of pain is invaded at
once. — Pride is mortified,  tenderness is wounded,  hope is disap-
pointed.— Whither will the poor Lady run from herself?

My visit to Stowhill has been paid.  I have seen there a col-
lection of misery.  Mrs.  Aston paralytick,  Mrs.  Walmsley lame,
Mrs.  Hervey blind,  and I think another lady deaf.  Even such is
life2.

I hope dear Mrs.  Aston is a little better ;  it is however very
little.  She was,  I believe,  glad to see me  ;  and to have anybody
glad to see me is a great pleasure 3.

I will tell,  while I think on it,  that I really saw with my own
eyes Mr.  Chaplin of Lincolnshire's letter4 for Taylor's cow,
accompanied with a draught on Hoare for one hundred and
twenty-six pounds to pay for her.  Frank says,  the young bull is
not quite so big as the old one ;  Taylor,  I think,  says he is bigger.

I have seen but one new place this journey,  and that is Leek
in the Morlands5. — An old church,  but a poor town.

25  :— '  I staid long at Ashbourne,  Such is life.     Let us try to pass it

not much pleased,  yet awkward at well,  whatever it be,  for there is

departing.'    Life,  iii.  211.  surely something beyond it/    Ib.  iii.

1 She is referred to again,  post,  211.

p.  54.  3 See ante,  i.  316,  where he says:

2 Mrs.  Walmsley was the sister of  — '  I am always proud and pleased
Mrs.  Aston,  and the widow of John-  to have my company desired.'
son's friend and patron,    Gilbert 4 Mr.  Chaplin was,  I suppose,  an
Walmsley.  Mrs.  Hervey was another ancestor of the present President of
sister,  the widow of the Hon.  Henry the Board of Agriculture.     See ante,
Hervey.     Life,  i.  83,  n.  4.     Johnson i.  166,  for  'the man who offered an
wrote to Boswell  :— '  I went to Lich-  hundred guineas for the young bull.'
field,   where I found my friend at r It was at Leek that Johnson's
Stow Hill very dangerously diseased,  father served his apprenticeship.

VOL.  II.  E The

50 To Mrs.   Thrale.  [A.D.  1777.

The days grow short,  and we have frosts ;  but I am in all

weathers,  Madam,

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

558.

TO MRS.   THRALE1.

DEAR MADAM,  Lichfield,  October 25,  1777.

Cholmondely's story shocks me,  if it be true,  which I can
hardly think,  for I am utterly unconscious of it ;  I am very sorry,
and very much ashamed 2.

I am here for about a week longer,  and then I purpose to
hasten to London.  How long do you stay at Brighthelmstone  ?
Now the company is gone,  why should you be the lag 3  ?  The
season of brewing will soon be here,  if it is not already come.
We have here cold weather,  and loud winds.

Miss Porter is better than is usual,  and Mrs.  Aston is,  I hope,
not worse,  but she is very bad  ;  and being,  I fancy,  about sixty-
eight,  is it likely that she will ever be better 4  ?

It is really now a long time that we have been writing and
writing,  and yet how small a part of our minds have we written 5  ?
We shall meet,  I hope,  soon,  and talk it out.

Life,  i.  37.     Here the slight shock of  *  <  Mr.  Cholmondely's running a-

an earthquake had been felt the night way from his debtors.'     BARETTI.

that Boswell rested there on his way In this Baretti is wrong ;   for why

to Ashbourne.    Ib.  iii.  136.     In an should Johnson be ashamed of it  ?

edition of Harwood's History of For his act of rudeness and for his

Lichfield in the Bodleian Library apology,  see Life,  iv.  345.

has been inserted at p.  487 the origi-  3  <  Him while he past the monster

nal of the following document : —  blind bespoke  :

'Leek,  3 Decmb.  1745.  What makes my'ram the lag of

To the Headborrow of Endon.  au the flock  ? '

You are required imediatly   [sic]  POPE>S Homer's*  Odyssey,  ix.  525.

to bring to Leek Twenty Able Horses 4 He was thinking of himse]f,  for

with proper Carts under pain of sixty-eight was his own age.

Military Execution for the Service s When Goldsmith at the Literary

of the Prince of Wales.  Club said to Johnson,  ' "  There can

'JAMES URQUHART.'  now be nothing new among us:

Johnson in his Dictionary,  defin-  we have travelled over one another's

ing mor eland as  '  a mountainous or minds,"    Johnson seemed a little

hilly country,'   adds :— '  A tract of angry,  and said:— "Sir,   you have

Staffordshire is called the Mor lands:  not travelled over my mind,    I

1 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  12.  promise you.'"     Life,  iv.  183.

You

Aetat.  68.]  To Mrs.    Thrale.  5 1

You are not yet sixty-eight,  but it will come,  and perhaps you
may then sometimes remember me.

In the mean time,  do not think to be young beyond the time ;
do not play Agnes I ;  and do not grow old before your time,  nor
suffer yourself to be too soon driven from the stage 2.  You can
yet give pleasure by your appearance  ;  show yourself therefore,
and be pleased by pleasing.  It is not now too soon to be wise ;
nor is it yet too late to be gay.

Streatham is now,  I suppose,  the eighth wonder of the world 3 ;
I long to see it,  but do not intend to go till,  as I once said before,
my master,  and you,  and I,  and nobody else shall be with us —
perambulate it together.

Cicely,  I warrant you,  will do well enough 4.  I am glad you
are so sick,  and nobody to pity.  Now for another pretty little
girl. — But we know not what is best.

I am,  dearest Lady,

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

P.  S. — Pay my respects to Miss Owen.

559.

TO MRS.    THRALE5.

DEAR MADAM,  Lichfield,  October 27,  1777-

You talk of writing and writing,  as if you had all the writing
to yourself.  If our correspondence were printed,  I am sure
posterity,  for posterity is always the authour's favourite 6,  would

1 He refers,  I conjecture,  to Agnes 3 He is referring to Mr.  Thrale's
in L'£cole des Femmes by Moliere.         improvements.     Ante,  ii.  45.

2 Pope gives different advice  :—  4 Cecilia Thrale married John
'  Walk sober off ;  before a spright-      Meredith Mostyn,  and died on May

Her age I,  1857,  aged 80,  as is shown by her

Comes titt'ring on,   and shoves tomb-stone at Streatham.

you from the stage.'  5 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  14.

Imit.  of Horace,  2 Epis.  ii.  324.  6 Goldsmith,  in the Preface to his

Johnson too in his Vanity of Essays,  says  :— '  As my drafts are in

Human Wishes,  1.  307,  tells how some danger of being protested at

*  New forms arise,   and diff'rent home,  it may not be imprudent upon

views engage,  this occasion to draw my bills upon

Superfluous lags the vet'ran on Posterity.     Mr.  Posterity.   Sir,  nine

the stage.'  hundred and ninety-nine years after

E 2 say

52 To Mrs.   Thrale.  [A.D.I???.

say that I am a good writer too. — Anctiio sono pittore x.  To sit
down so often with nothing to say :  to say something so often,
almost without consciousness of saying,  and without any remem-
brance of having said,  is a power of which I will not violate
my modesty by boasting,  but I do not believe that every body
has it.

Some,  when they write to their friends,  are all affection ;  some
are wise and sententious ;  some strain their powers for efforts of
gaiety :  some write news,  and some write secrets  ;  but to make a
letter without affection,  without wisdom,  without gaiety,  without
news,  and without a secret,  is,  doubtless,  the great epistolick
art2.

In a man's letters,  you know,  Madam,  his soul lies naked,  his
letters are only the mirrour of his breast ;  whatever passes
within him is shown undisguised in its natural process ;  nothing
is inverted,  nothing distorted  ;  you see systems in their elements ;
you discover actions in their motives.

Of this great truth,  sounded by the knowing to the ignorant,
and so echoed by the ignorant to the knowing,  what evidence
have you now before you  !  Is not my soul laid open in these
veracious pages3?  Do not you see me reduced to my first

sight hereof,  pay the bearer,  or order,  is: — '  Ut clavis portam,   sic pandit

a thousand pounds'  worth of praise,  epistola pectus.'      Johnson in the

free from all deductions whatsoever,  Life of Pope says  :— '  It has been so

it being a commodity that will then long said as to be commonly be-

be very serviceable to him,  and place lieved,  that the true characters of

it to the accompt of,   &c.'      Gold-  men may be found in their letters,

smith's Works,   ed.    1801,   iv.   301.  and that he who writes to his friend

Porson ends his Preface to his lays his heart open before him.    But

Letters to Mr.  Archdeacon Travis by the truth is that such were the

saying:— 'Mr.   Travis and I may simple friendships of the Golden

address our letters to posterity ;  but Age,  and are now the friendships

they will never be delivered accord-  only of children.  .  .  .  There is in-

ing to the direction!  deed no transaction which offers

'  It was this that made Correggio stronger temptations to fallacy and

cry out on seeing Raphael's works,  sophistication than epistolary inter-

"I also am a painter:"    he felt a course.'     Works,  viii.  314.

kindred spirit in his own breast.'  Boswell instances veracious as one

Conversations of Northcote,  p.  168.  of '  the three uncommon or learned

2 Epistolick is not in Johnson's words'  which Johnson used in the
Dictionary.  Lives of the Poets.     Life,  iv.  39.

3 The motto of Howell's Letters

principles  ?

Aetat.  68.]  ToMrs.   Thrale.  53

principles  ?  This is the pleasure of corresponding with a friend,
where doubt and distrust have no place,  and every thing is said
as it is thought.  The original idea is laid down in its simple
purity,  and all the supervenient conceptions are spread over it
stratum super stratum,  as they happen to be formed.  These are
the letters by which souls are united,  and by which minds
naturally in unison move each other as they are moved them-
selves. I know,  dearest Lady,  that in the perusal of this,  such is
the consanguinity of our intellects,  you will be touched as I am
touched.  I have indeed concealed nothing from you,  nor do I
expect ever to repent of having thus opened my heart.

I am,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

560.

TO MRS.    THRALE1.

DEAR MADAM,  Lichfield,  October 29,  1777.

Though after my last letter I might justly claim an interval
of rest,  yet I write again to tell you,  that for this turn you will
hear but once more from Lichfield.  This day is Wednesday,
on Saturday I shall write again,  and on Monday I shall set out
to seek adventures  ;  for you know,

None but the brave deserve the fair 2.

On Monday we hope to see Birmingham,  the seat of the
mechanick arts 3 ;  and know not whether our next stage will be
Oxford,  the mansion of the liberal arts ;  or London,  the resi-
dence of all the arts together.  The chymists call the world
Academia Paracelsi ;  my ambition is to be his fellow-student —
to see the works of nature,  and hear the lectures of truth.  To
London therefore — London may perhaps fill me  ;  and I hope to
fill my part of London.

In the mean time,  let me continue to keep the part which I

1 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  14.  city of philosophers  ;  we work with

2  '  None but the brave deserves our heads,  and make the boobies of

the fair.'  Birmingham work for us with their

DRYDEN.    Alexander's Feast.        hands.'    Life,  ii.  464.
^  'Sir,'   said Johnson,  'we are a

have

54

To Mrs.   Thrale.

[A.D.  1777.

have had so long in your kindness,  and my master's ;  for if that
should grow less,  I know not where to find that which may
supply the diminution.  But I hope what I have been so happy
as to gain I shall have the happiness of keeping.

I always omitted to tell you that Lucy's maid took the worm-
powder with strict regularity,  but with no great effect z.  Lucy
has had several letters from you,  but cannot prevail on herself to
write  ;  but she is very grateful.

Mrs.  Walmsley has been at Stowhill,  and has invited me,
when I come to Bath,  to be at her house.  Poor Mrs.  Aston
either mends not at all,  or not perceptibly;  but she does not
seem to grow worse.

I suppose  ********  is by this time recovered,  and perhaps
grown wiser,  than to shake his constitution so violently a second
time 2.

Poor Mrs.  *  *  «  *  * 3 !  One cannot think on her but with great
compassion.  But it is impossible for her husband's daughters
not to triumph ;  and the husband will feel,  as Rochefoucault
says,  something that does not displease him 4.  You and I,  who
are neutral,  whom her happiness could not have depressed,  may
be honestly sorry.

I am,  dear Madam,

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

1 Ante,  ii.  18.

2 Johnson,  I think,  is writing of
Topham Beauclerk,   whom he had
seen at Brighthelmston this autumn.
Life,    iii.    210.      Horace Walpole
wrote on July 6,     1779:  —  'Lord
Bolingbroke,  I hear,  will live.     At
first they thought he had taken
laudanum.     It would have been a
monstrous injustice in opium to kill
him,  when it will not despatch Beau-
clerk.3 Letters,  vii.  221.  The injustice
would have consisted in the fact that
his divorced wife was married to
Beauclerk with whom she had first
lived in adultery.     For Beau clerk's
ill-health,  see Life,  iii.  104.

3 Ante,  ii.  49.

4  'Dans 1'adversite"  de nos meil-
leurs amis nous trouvons toujours
quelque chose qui ne nous deplait
pas.'

LA ROCHEFOUCAULD.    Reflexions
Morales,  xcix.
'As Rochefoucault his maxims

drew

From nature,  I believe them true ;
They argue no corrupted mind
In him ;  the fault is in mankind.
This maxim more than all the rest
Is thought too base for human

breast ;

"  In all distresses of our friends
We first consult our private ends  ;

To

Aetat.  68.]

To Mrs.   Thrale.

55

561.

To MRS.  THRALE  *.

DEAR MADAM,  Lichfield,  November 3,  1777.

This is the last time that I shall write,  in this excursion,
from this place.  To-morrow I shall be,  I hope,  at Birmingham ;
from which place I shall do my best to find the nearest way
home.  I come home,  I think,  worse than I went ;  and do not
like the state of my health.  But,  vive hodie 2,  make the most of

life.     I hope to get better,  and sweep the cobwebs.     But I

have sad nights.     Mrs.  Aston has sent me to Mr.  Green 3 to be
cured.

Did you see Foote at Brighthelmstone  ? — Did you think he
would so soon be gone? — Life,  says Falstaff,  is a shuttle 4.  He
was a fine fellow in his way ;  and the world is really impover-
ished by his sinking glories 5.  Murphy ought to write his life,  at
least to give the world a Footeana 6.  Now,  will any of his con-
temporaries bewail him  ?  Will Genius change his sex to weep 7  ?
I would really have his life written with diligence 8.

While Nature kindly bent to ease

us
Points out some circumstance to

please us." '

SWIFT.  On the Death of Dr.
Swift.  Works,  ed.  1803,  xi.  240.

1 Piozzi Letters,  i.  398.

This letter is inserted by Mrs.
Piozzi under the date of October 3.
Johnson in his last letter written on
Wednesday,  October 29,  says  : — '  On
Monday we hope to see Birmingham.'
Monday was November 3.  This
letter was therefore written in the
beginning of November.  I have
altered the month but kept the day
of the month.  Probably he delayed
his journey one day.

2  '  Non est,  crede mihi,  sapientis

dicere,  Vivam.

Sera nimis vita est crastina :
vive hodie.'

MARTIAL,  i.  16.  n.

3 The Lichfield apothecary,   and

proprietor of the Museum.     Ante,  i.
161,  n.  5.

4 Merry Wives of Windsor,  Act
v.  sc.  i .

5 Johnson in his Lives of the Poets
applied the same thought to Gar-
rick's death,  'which has,'  he said,
'  eclipsed the gaiety of nations,  and
impoverished the public stock of
harmless pleasure.'     Life,  i.  82.

6  '  One half of it had been a
string of obscenities.'    BARETTI.

7 See Life,  iii.  374,  where he said
to a bard who made him read his
Ode to the Warlike Genius of Bri-
tain:— 'Here is an error,  Sir;  you
have made Genius feminine/

8 Foote had died at Dover on his
way to France on October 20,  broken
in spirit by a charge which had been
brought against him,  as false as it
was infamous.     Though it had been
at once demolished when it was tried
in the Court of King's Bench,  with

It

56 To Mrs.   Thrale.  [A.D.1777.

It will be proper for me to work pretty diligently now for
some time.  I hope to get through,  though so many weeks have
passed.  Little lives and little criticisms may serve.

Having been in the country so long,  with very little to detain

me,  I am rather glad to look homewards.

I am,  &c.5

SAM:  JOHNSON.

562.

TO MRS.    THRALE1.

DEAR MADAM,  [Bolt Court],  November 10,  1777.

And so,  supposing that I might come to town and neglect
to give you notice,  or thinking some other strange thought,  but
certainly thinking wrong,  you fall to writing about me to Tom
Davies 2,  as if he could tell you any thing that I would not have
you know.  As soon as I came hither,  I let you know of my
arrival ;  and the consequence is,  that I am summoned to
Brighthelmstone through storms,  and cold,  and dirt,  and all the
hardships of wintry journies.  You know my natural dread of all
those evils  ;  yet to shew my master an example of compliance,
and to let you know how much I long to see you,  and to boast
how little I give way to disease,  my purpose is to be with you
on Friday.

I am sorry for poor Nezzy,  and hope she will in time be
better ;  I hope the same for myself.  The rejuvenescency 3 of Mr.
Scrase gives us both reason to hope,  and therefore both of us
rejoice in his recovery.  I wish him well besides,  as a friend to
my master.

Lord Mansfield as judge,    Mrs.  This letter like the last is mis-

Piozzi persisted in believing in it.  dated.       It was written not on

'Dr.    Johnson,'   she adds,    'never October 10,  but on November 10—

could persuade himself that things Lord Mayor's Day,  as the context

were as bad as the sufferer or his shows.     November 9 that year fell

friends represented them ;  he thought on a Sunday,  so that the Show had

it wrong to believe so,  and steadily been put off till the morrow,

made the best orit?      Hayward's 2 The bookseller of Russell Street,

Piozzi,   i.  311.     For an interesting Covent Garden.     Life,  i.  390.

account of Foote see John Forster's 3 This word is not in Johnson's

Biographical Essays,  ii.  293.  Dictionary.      For Mr.   Scrase see

1 Piozzi Letter s,  ii.  4.  ante>  i.  395,  n.  2.

I am

Aetat.  68.]

To Mrs.  Thrale.

57

I am just come home from not seeing my Lord Mayor's shew,
but I might have seen at least part of it1.  But I saw Miss
Wesley and her brothers  ;  she sends her compliments 2.  Mrs.
Williams is come home,  I think a very little better.

Every body was an enemy to that wig3. — We will burn it,  and
get drunk;  for what is joy without drink.  Wagers are laid in
the city about our success,  which is yet,  as the French call it,
problematical4.  Well,  but seriously I think I shall be glad to
see you in your own hair;  but do not take too much time
in combing,  and twisting,  and papering,  and unpapering,  and
curling,  and frizzing 5,  and powdering,  and getting out the powder,
with all the other operations required in the cultivation of a
head of hair  ;  yet let it be combed at least once in three months,
on the quarter-day — I could wish it might be combed once at
least in six weeks  ;  if I were to indulge my wishes,  but what are
wishes,  without hopes,  I should fancy the operation performed —
one knows not when one has enough — perhaps every morning.

I am,  dearest Lady,

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

1 The Lord Chancellor,  when the
Lord Mayor elect had been pre-
sented to him,  told him  '  what plea-
sure they must feel on a return of
that dignity,  peace and tranquillity,
which had been lost and disturbed
for many years past ;    and hoped
that matters would return to the old
channel.'      Annual Register ',    I777>
i.  208.      See Life,  iii.  356,  459,  for
the return of the City to the old
custom of appointing its Mayors by
seniority.

2 Southey in his Life of Wesley
(ed.  1846),  on p.  368 of vol.  i.  speaks
of John Wesley as having only three
sisters who grew up.      These were
all married — Mrs.    Wright    (ib.    p.
378),  Mrs.  Whitelamb  (ib.},  and Mrs.
Hall   (ante,  i.  372).     He mentions,
however,  on p.  372 Kezia,  who died
unmarried at an early age.     I can-

not find any mention of an unmarried
sister at this time.

3  '  Madam wore a wig during many
years in conformity with the Jew-
women,  having a great notion that in
time the Jews will be again the great
Favourites of God.     But about this
time she fell acquainted with Piozzi,
who disliked a shaven poll in a
woman,  and that drew out of her all
her Jewish notions.'    BARETTI.

4 Problematical is in Johnson's
Dictionary.    Horace Walpole writing
on November 13 about the reports
that Washington had lost 1500 or
500 men on the nth or the 25th,
continues :— '  In short,    it is the
House that Jack built,  except that it
loses a story in the hands of every
new builder.'    Letters,  vii.  7.

5 Johnson has to frizle in his
Dictionary,  but not to frizz.

To

58 To Mrs.  Aston.  00.1777.

563.

To MRS.  ASTON  *.

DEAR MADAM,  London,  NOV.  20, 1777.

Through Birmingham and Oxford I got without any diffi-
culty or disaster to London,  though not in so short a time
as I expected,  for I did not reach Oxford before the second
day.  I came home very much incommoded by obstructed
respiration,  but by vigorous methods am something better.
I have since been at Brighthelmston,  and am now designing to
settle.

Different things,  Madam,  are fit for different people.  It is fit
for me to settle,  and for you to move.  I wish I could hear of
you at Bath,  but I am afraid that is hardly to be expected from
your resolute inactivity.  My next hope is that you will en-
deavour to grow well where you are.  I cannot help thinking
that I saw a visible amendment between the time when I left
you to go to Ashbourne,  and the time when I came back.  I
hope you will go on mending and mending,  to which exercise
and cheerfulness will very much contribute.  Take care there-
fore, dearest Madam,  to be busy and cheerful.

I have great confidence in the care and conversation of dear
Mrs.  Gastrel.  It is very much the interest of all that know her,
that she should continue well,  for she is one of few people that
has the proper regard for those that are sick.  She was so kind
to me that I hope I never shall forget it,  and if it be trouble-
some to you to write I shall hope that she will do me another
act of kindness by answering this letter,  for I beg that I may
hear from you by some hand or another.
I am,  Madam,

Your most obedient servant,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

The address,  'To Mrs.  Aston,  Stow Hill,  Lichfield,'  is in Mr.  Thrale's
writing,  the Letter being franked by him.

1 First published in Croker's Bos-  the original in Pembroke College
well,  p.  565.  Corrected by me from Library.

TO

Aetat.68.]  To Mrs.  Porter.

59

564.

To MRS.  PORTER x.
DEAR LOVE,  London,  Nov.  20,  1777.

You ordered me to write you word when I came home.
I have been for some days at Brighthelmstone,  and came back
on Tuesday night.

You know that when I left you I was not well ;  I have taken
physic very diligently,  and am perceptibly better;  so much
better that I hope by care and perseverance to recover,  and see
you again from time to time.

Mr.  Nollekens,  the statuary,  has had my direction to send you
a cast of my head 2.  I will pay the carriage when we meet.
Let me know how you like it ;  and what the ladies of your rout 3
say to it.  I have heard different opinions.  I cannot think where
you can put it.

I found every body here well.  Miss4 has a mind to be
womanly,  and her womanhood does not sit well upon her.
Please to make my compliments to all the ladies and all the
gentlemen to whom I owe them,  that is,  to a great part of the
town.

I am,  dear Madam,

Your most humble servant,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

565.

To JAMES BOSWELL.
London,  November 25,  1777.     Published in the Life,  iii.  210.

1 First published in Croker's Bos-  who,  after he had sat an hour,  refused
well,  page 565.  to take a shilling,   stating that he

2 An engraving from this bust is could have made more by begging,
given in Fielding's quarto edition of  *  *  *    Upon hearing the name of
the Dictionary and in Murray's an eminent sculptor mentioned John-
Johnsoniana,  p.  400.     'Johnson was son observed: — "Well,  Sir,  I think
very much displeased at the man-  my friend Joe Nollekens can chop
ner in which the head had been out a head with any of them." '
loaded with hair,      which the Nollekens and his Times,   by J.  T.
sculptor insisted upon,  as it made Smith,  i.  51.

him look more like an ancient 3 Johnson does not in his Die-

poet.     It had been modelled from tionary give rout in the sense in

the flowing locks of a sturdy Irish which it is used here,

beggar,   originally a street pavior,  4 Miss Thrale.

To

60 To Mrs.  Gastrell.  [A.D.  1777.

566.

To MRS.  GASTRELL x.
DEAR MADAM,

Your long silence portended no good  ;  yet I hope the
danger is not so near us as our anxiety sometimes makes us
fear.  Winter is indeed to all those that any distemper has
enfeebled a very troublesome time,  but care and caution may
pass safely through it,  and from Spring and Summer some
relief is always to be hoped.  When I came hither,  I fell to
taking care of myself,  and by physick and opium had the con-
striction that obstructed my breath very suddenly removed.
My nights still continue very laborious and tedious,  but they do
not grow worse.

I do not ask you,  dear Madam,  to take care of Mrs.  Aston,
I know how little you want any such exhortations,  but I
earnestly entreat her to take care of herself.  Many lives are
prolonged by a diligent attention to little things,  and I am far
from thinking it unlikely that she may grow better by degrees.
However,  it is her duty to try,  and when we do our duty we
have reason to hope.

I am,  dear Madam,

Your most humble servant,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

Bolt-court,  Fleet-street.
Dec.  27,  1777.

567.

To JAMES BOSWELL.
[London],  December 27,  1777.     Published in the Life,  iii.  214.

568.

To JAMES BOSWELL.
[London],  January 24,  1778.     Published in the Life,  iii.  215.

1 First published in Croker's Bos-  from the original in Pembroke Col-
well,  page 566.  Corrected by me lege Library.

To

Aetat.  68.]  To Thomas Cade II.  61

569.

To THOMAS CADELL x.
SIR,

If you should obtain what Mr.  Davies tells me you design
to ask,  the office of Bookseller and Printer to the royal Academy,
I take the liberty of requesting,  and I request with great earnest-
ness, that for any thing to be printed for the Academy,  you will
make use  [of]  Mr.  Allen's press in Bolt court.  Mr.  Allen has
hitherto done the work without payment,  and having so long
laboured only to his loss,  it is reasonable that he should at last
have some profit,  at least some recompense.

Mr.  Allen's business is not extensive,  and he will be glad of
work which greater Printers do not want,  nor value,  and if you
continue him in the employment you will confer a great favour
upon,

Sir,
Your most humble servant,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

Jan.  28,  1778.
To Mr.  Cadell.

570.

To 2.

SIR,

Poor Mr.  Gwyn is in great distress under the weight of the
late determination against him,  and has still hopes that some
mitigation may be obtained.  If it be true that whatever has

1 From the original in the posses-  I am informed by Mr.    F.  A.

sion of Messrs.  Puttick and Simpson Eaton,     Secretary to the Royal

of 47 Leicester Square.  Academy,  that Thomas Cadell was

Thomas Cadell was the apprentice,  printer to the Royal Academy from

partner and successor of Andrew 1778 to 1793.

Millar.    In conjunction with William Edmund Allen was    '  Johnson's

Strahan he published the Histories landlord and next neighbour in Bolt

of Robertson and Gibbon,  the later Court.'    Life,  iii.  141.

editions of Hume's Works,  and some 2 From the original in the posses-

of the later works of Johnson.     He sion of Mr.    M.    M.     Holloway of

was not related to Sir Walter Scott's Hillbrow,  St.  Julian's Road,  Streat-

publisher,   Robert Cadell of Edin-  ham.     First published in my edition

burgh.     Hume's Letters to Strahan,  of the Life of Johnson,  v.  454,  n.  2.

p.  92,  n.  5.  See ante,  ii.  15.

by

62

To Mrs.  Porter.

[A.D.  1778.

by his negligence been amiss,  may be redressed for a sum
much less than has been awarded,  the remaining part ought
in equity to be returned,  or,  what is more desirable,  abated.
When the money is once paid,  there is little hope of getting
it again.

The load is,  I believe,  very hard upon him  ;  he indulges some
flattering opinions that by the influence of his academical friends
it may be lightened,  and will not be persuaded but that some
testimony of my kindness may be beneficial.  I hope he has
been guilty of nothing worse than credulity,  and he then cer-
tainly deserves commiseration.  I never heard otherwise than
that he was an honest man,  and I hope that by your countenance
and that of other gentlemen who favour or pity him some relief
may be obtained.

I am,  Sir,

Your most humble servant,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

Bolt Court,  Fleet Street,
Jan.  30,  1778.

571.

To SAUNDERS WELCH.
[London],  February 3,  1778.     Published in the Life,  Hi.  217.

572

To MRS.  PORTER x.
DEAR MADAM,  Feb.  19, 1778.

I have several little things to mention which I have hitherto
neglected.  You judged rightly in thinking that the bust would
not please.  It is condemned by Mrs.  Thrale,  Mrs.  Reynolds,
and Mrs.  Garrick  ;  so that your disapprobation is not singular 2.

1 First published in Croker's Bos-
well,  page 568.

2 For the bust see ante,  ii.   59.
Nollekens thought it one of his best
works,  and Chantrey thought it his
finest work.      Croker's Boswell,   p.
568,  n.  2.     Mrs.  Thrale's judgment
was perhaps somewhat partial,  if she

had already entered Nollekens'
studio that morning,  when not know-
ing her,  he called out to Dr.  Johnson
who accompanied her  :  —  ( "  I like
your picture by Sir Joshua very much.
He tells me it's for Thrale,  a brewer,
over the water ;  his wife's a sharp
woman,  one of the blue-stocking

These

Aetat.  68.]

To Mrs.  Montagu.

6

These things have never cost me any thing,  so that I do not
much know the price.  My bust was made for the Exhibition,
and shown for honour of the artist,  who is a man of reputation
above any of the other sculptors.  To be modelled in clay costs,  I
believe,  twenty guineas,  but the casts,  when the model is made,  are
of no great price  ;  whether a guinea,  or two guineas,  I cannot tell.

When you complained for want of oysters,  I ordered you a
barrel weekly for a month  ;  you sent me word sooner that you
had enough,  but I did not countermand the rest.  If you could
not eat them,  could you not give them away  ?  When you want
any thing,  send me word.  I am very poorly,  and have very rest-
less and oppressive nights, but always hope for better.  Pray for me.

I am,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

573.

To MRS.  MONTAGU  '.
MADAM,  March 5, 1778.

And so you are alarmed,  naughty lady 2  ?     You might know

people."  "Nolly,  Nolly,"  observed
the Doctor,  "  I wish your maid would
stop your foolish mouth with a blue-
bag."  '  Nolle kens and his Times,  \.
114.  The author of this book,  J.  T.
Smith,  Keeper of the Prints,  &c.  in
the British Museum,  says  : — '  I re-
member well when I was in my eighth
year Mr.  Nollekens taking me to
Oxford Road to see Sixteen-string
Jack go to Tyburn for robbing Dr.
William Bell.  He was dressed in a
pea-green coat,  with an immense
nosegay in the button-holes,  which
had been presented to him at St.
Sepulchre's Steps,  and his nankin
small clothes,  we were told,  were
tied at each knee with sixteen strings.
After he had passed,  and Mr.
Nollekens was leading me home by
the hand,  I recollect his stooping
down to me,  and observing in a low
tone of voice  : — "  Tom,  now,  my little
man,  if my father-in-law,  Mr.  Justice
Welch,  had been High Constable,  we
could have walked by the side of

the cart all the way to Tyburn.'"
Nollekens and his Times,  by J.  T.
Smith,  1828,  i.  24.  Welch had once
been High Constable of Westminster,
when he had been seen  '  dressed in
black,  with a large wig,  highly
powdered,  with long flowing curls,  a
high three-cornered hat and his black
baton tipped with silver at either end,
riding on a white horse to Tyburn
with the malefactors.3 Ib.  p.  121.
Sixteen-string Jack— John Rann —
was hanged on November 30,  1774.
Gentleman's Magazine,  1774,  p.  592-
4 Sixteen-string Jack/  said Johnson,
'  towered above the common mark.'
Life,  iii.  38.  The Rev.  Dr.  Bell who
was robbed was probaoly the Pre-
bendary of Westminster mentioned
ante,\.  118.

1 First published in Croker's Bos-
well,  page 569.

For Mrs.  Montagu see ante,  i.  87.

2 The alarm of Johnson's illness
reached Edinburgh and distressed
Boswell.       In one of the London

that

64 To Mrs.  Montagu.  [A.D.  177*

that I was ill enough when Mr.  Thrale brought you my excuse.
Could you think that I missed the honour of being at  (your)
table for any slight reason  ?  But you  (have)  too many to miss
any one of us,  and I am  (proud)  to be remembered at last.  I
am much better.  A little cough remains,  which will not confine
me.  To houses of great delicacy I am not willing to bring it.

Now,  dear Madam,  we must talk of business.  Poor Davies,
the bankrupt bookseller,  is soliciting his friends to collect a small
sum for the repurchase of part of his household stuff1.  Several
of them gave him five guineas ;  It would be an honour to him to
owe part of his relief to Mrs.  Montagu.

Let me thank you,  Madam,  once more,  for your inquiry;  you
have,  perhaps,  among your numerous train not one that values a
kind word or a kind look more than,

Madam,

Yours,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

574.

To MRS.  MONTAGU 2.
MADAM,  March 6,  1778.

I hope Davies,  who does not want wit,  does not want grati-
tude, and then he will be almost as thankful for the bill as I am
for the letter that enclosed it.

If I do not lose,  what I hope always to keep,  my reverence for
transcendent merit,  I shall continue to be with unalterable
fidelity,

Madam,

Yours,  &c.,

SAM  :  JOHNSON.

575.

To JAMES BOSWELL.
[London],  April 23,  1778.     Published in the Life,  iii.  277.

papers  '  the approaching extinction x Life,  iii.  223.
of a bright luminary  '  was announced.          2 First published in Croker's Bos-
Life,  iii.  221.  well,  page 570.

To

Aetat.  68.]

To Mrs.  Thrale.

576.

TO MRS.    THRALE1.

DEAR MADAM,  April 30, 1778.

Since I was fetched away from Streatham,  the journal stands
thus :      Saturday.— Sir J.  R

Sunday. — Mr.  Hoole 3.
Monday. — Lord Lucan 4.
Tuesday. — Gen.  Paoli5.
Wednesday. — Mr.  Ramsay.
Thursday.— Old Bailey6.
Friday. — Club 7.
Saturday. — Sir J.  R 8.
Sunday. — Lady Lucan 9.

1 Piozzi Letter s,  ii.  18.

April 30,  the day on which Johnson
wrote,  was a Thursday.

2 Sir Joshua Reynolds.     See Life,
iii.  317,  for an account of the dinner.

3 Life,  ii.  289,  n.  2.

4  '  At the house of Lord and Lady
Lucan Johnson often enjoyed all that
an elegant table and the best com-
pany can contribute to happiness.'
Life,  iv.  326.

5 See ib.  iii.  324 for an account of
this dinner and p.  331 for an account
of the dinner at Mr.  Allan Ramsay's.

6  '  The dinner at the Old Bailey,'
says Mr.  Croker,  '  is one given during
the Sessions to the judges,  counsel,
and a few guests.     The venerable
Mr,  Clarke,  Chamberlain of London,
who died in 1831,  in his ninety- third
year,  told me that he remembered
having taken Johnson to this dinner,
he being then sheriff.     The judges
were Blackstone and Eyre.       Mr.
Justice Blackstone conversed with
Johnson on the subject of their
absent friend,  Sir Robert Chambers/
Croker's Boswell,  p.  610,  n.  i.     '  The
Sessions which began on Wednesday
last,   April 29,  at the Old Bailey,
ended on Tuesday,    May 5,   when

VOL.  II.  F

fourteen convicts received sentence
of death.'  Gentleman's Magazine,
1778,  p.  235.

7 Boswell wrote on April 4, 1775  :—
'  I dine,  Friday,  at the Turk's Head,
Gerrard- street,   with our Club,   Sir
Joshua Reynolds,  &c.,  who now dine
once a month,  and sup every Friday.
Letters of Boswell,  p.  186.     He was
not there this Friday.

8 At this dinner,  says Boswell,
'there were several people by no
means of the Johnsonian School,  so
that less attention was paid to him
than usual,  which put him out of
humour ;  and upon some imaginary
offence from me,  he attacked me with
such rudeness,  that I was vexed and
angry,  because it gave those persons
an opportunity of enlarging upon his
supposed ferocity,  and ill treatment
of his best friends.     I was so much
hurt,   and had my pride so much
roused,  that I kept away from him
for a week;    and,  perhaps,  might
have kept away much longer,  nay,
gone to Scotland without seeing him
again,   had not we fortunately met
and been reconciled.3 Life,  iii.  337.
For the reconciliation see ib.  p.  338.

9  '  Lady Spencer,'    said Samuel

Monday.

66 To Mauritius Lowe.  [A.D.  1778.

Monday.— Pray let it be Streatham,  and very early ;  do now
let it be very early.  For I may be carried away— just like
Ganymede of Troy.

I hope my master grows well,  and my mistress continues bad T.
I am afraid the ladies will be gone,  and I shall say,

She's gone,  and never knew how much I lov'd her.

Do now let me know whether you will send for me — early —
on Monday.  But take some care,  or your letter will not come
till Tuesday.  r  ^  dearest LadVj

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

577.

To MAURITIUS LowE2.
SIR,  [London,  (?)  May 1 5, 1778.]

I spoke at the Exhibition to Sir Joshua and Mr.  Garrick,
and found them both cold enough.  Mr.  Garrick,  however,
seemed to relent,  and I think you have reason to expect some-
thing from him  ;  but he must be tenderly handled.  I have just,
however,  received what will please and gratify you.  I have sent
it just as it came.  Write to return thanks.

Your humble servant,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

Mr.  Lowe,  Hedge Lane.

Rogers,  '  recollected Johnson well,  as who is mentioned,  died in January

she used to see him often in her girl-  1779-     It was probably written on

hood.      Her mother,   Lady Lucan,  May 15,  1778,  as is shown by a letter

would say,  "  Nobody dines with us in the Garrick Correspondence,  ii.

to-day  ;  therefore,  child,  we'll go and 306,   in which Lowe on that day

get Dr.  Johnson."     So they would acknowledges the receipt from

drive to Bolt Court and bring the Garrick of ten pounds.     It was very

doctor home with them.'     Rogers's likely that sum which Johnson sent

Table Talk,  p.  10.  on  'just as it came.'
1 Ante,  ii.  44,  n.  7.  A fortnight or so earlier,   when

a First published in the Examiner driving with Boswell,     '  Johnson

for May 24,  1873,  by Mr.  G.  Turreff stopped first at the bottom of Hedge

of Aberdeen,  who had been shown the Lane,  into which he went to leave a

original of this and others of John-  letter,  "  with good news for a poor

son's letters by Lowe's daughter,  man in distress,"  as he told me.'

Johnson's god-child.     The letter is Life,   iii.   324.     For an account of

wrongly dated by him 1782.  Garrick,  Lowe see Life,  iii.  380  ;  iv.  201.

TO

Aetat.  68.]  To James Elphinston.  67

578.

To JAMES BOSWELL.
London,  July 3,  1778.     Published in the Life,  iii.  362.

579.

To WILLIAM STRAHAN.
London,  July 27,  1778.     Published in the Life,  iii.  364.

580.

SIR,  To JAMES ELPHINSTON x.

Having myself suffered what you are now suffering,  I well
know the weight of your distress,  how much need you have of com-
fort, and how little comfort can be given.  A loss such as yours
lacerates the mind,  and breaks the whole system of purposes and
hopes.  It leaves a dismal vacuity in life,  which affords nothing
on which the affections can fix,  or to which endeavour may be
directed.  All this I have known,  and it is now,  in the vicissitude
of things,  your turn to know it 2.

But in the condition of mortal beings,  one must lose another.
What would be the wretchedness of life,  if there was not some-
thing always in view,  some Being immutable and unfailing,  to
whose mercy man may have recourse.  To*>  irp&rov Kivovvra

Here we must rest.     The greatest Being is the most bene-
volent.    We must not grieve for the dead as men without hope 4,

1 First published in Memoirs of the retrace the past or anticipate the
Life and Writings of Dr.  Johnson,      future.     The continuity of being is
London,  1785,  page 168.  lacerated  ;  the settled course of senti-

For Elphinston see ante,  i.  17.  ment and action is stopped  ;  and life

2 Eighteen months later Johnson stands suspended and motionless,  till
wrote to his friend Dr.  Lawrence who it is driven by external causes into
had just lost his wife  :—  *  He that out-  a new channel.      But the time of
lives a wife whom he has long loved,  suspense is dreadful.'    Life,  iii.  419.
sees himself disjoined from the only See also ante,  i.  383.

mind that has the same hopes,  and 3  "Eon yap n 6 aei Kivel ra KIVOV-

fears,  and interest  ;    from the only p.eva ml TO TTP&TOV KIVOVV UKIVIJTOV
companion with whom he has shared aurdV Aristotle,  Metaph.  iii.  8 sub
much good or evil  ;  and with whom finem.
he could set his mind at liberty,  to 4 I Thessalonians,  iv.  13.

F 2 because

68

To John Nichols.

[A.D.  1778.

because we know that they are in his hands.     We have indeed
not leisure to grieve long,  because we are hastening to follow
them.     Your race and mine have been interrupted by many
obstacles,  but we must humbly hope for an happy end.
I am,  Sir,

Your most humble servant,
July 27, 1778.  SAM:  JOHNSON.

581.

c;IR To JOHN NICHOLS x.

You have now all Cowley.  I have been drawn to a great
length,  but Cowley or Waller never had any critical examination
before.  I am very far advanced in Dry den,  who will be long
too.  The next great life I purpose to be Milton s 2.

It will be kind if you will gather the Lives of Denham,  Butler,
and Waller,  and bind them in half binding in a small volume,
and let me have it to shew my Friends,  as soon as may be.     I
sincerely hope the press shall stand no more.
I am,  Sir,

Your most humble servant,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

July 27,  1778.
To Mr.  Nichols.

582.

SIR,

To JOHN NICHOLS

August,  1778.

You have now the life of Dry den and you see it is very long.
You must however have an appendix.

1 First published in the Gentle-
man^ s Magazine for 1785,  page 9.

This is the first of a series of letters
written to John Nichols,  printer,
editor,  and author,  while the Lives of
the Poets were going through the
press.  Most of these letters were
published by Nichols in the Gentle-
man's Magazine  (1785,  p.  9)  of which
he was editor.  Some of them Bos-
well inserted in a note in the Life,  iv.
36.  The originals are in the British

Museum.  From them I have supplied
some omissions.

Johnson had once thought of pub-
lishing an edition of Cowley.  Ib.  iii.  29.
'  His Life of Cowley he considered
as the best of the whole.'  Ib.  iv.  38.

2  'Milton's Life was begun in
January,    1779,  and finished in six
weeks.'  Gentleman's Magazine,  1785,
p.  9,  n.  I.

3 First published in the Gentle-
man's Magazine,  1785,  page 9.

The

Aetat.69.]  To Mrs.  Thrale.  69

1.  The invocation to the Georgicks from Milbourne1   (this
in the small print).

2.  Dryden's remarks on Rymer,  which are nearly transcribed 2.

3.  Dryden's letter from Lambeth,  which is promised me 3.

I am,
Sir,  &c.,

[SAM:  JOHNSON.!

To Mr.  Nichols.

583.

TO MRS.    THRALE4.

DEAREST MADAM,  October 15, 1778.

You that are among all the wits,  delighting and delighted,
have little need of entertainment from me,  whom you left at
home unregarded and unpitied,  to shift in a world to which you
have made me so much a stranger ;  yet I know you will pretend
to be angry if I do not write a letter,  which,  when you know the
hand,  you will perhaps lay aside to be read when you are dress-
ing to-morrow ;  and which,  when you have read it,  if that time
ever comes,  you will throw away into the drawer and say — stuff !

As to Dr.  Collier's epitaph,  Nollekens has had it so long,  that I
have forgotten how long.  You never had it.  So you may set
the S s at defiance 50

1  '  The invocation before the Magazine for that year,  p.  248.     He
Georgicks is here inserted from Mr.  had been a constant guest at the
Milbourne's version,  that,  according house of Lady Salusbury,  where Mrs.
to his own proposal,  his verses may Thrale had passed much of her girl-
be compared with those which he hood.      Speaking of her suitors she
censures.'   Johnson's Works,  vii.  348.  says  : — '  It was my sport to mimic

2 These remarks were written by some,  and drive others back,  in order
Dryden on the blank leaves of to make Dr.  Collier laugh,  who did
Rymer's Remarks on the Tragedies not perhaps wish to see me give a
of the last Age.     Johnson had had heart away which he held completely
them copied from the original,  which in his hand,  since he kindly became
was in Garrick's possession.    Ib.  p.  my preceptor in Latin,  logic,  rhetoric,
350.  &c.'   Hay ward's Piozzi,  i.  250.   '  The

3 Ib.  p.  358.  S s,'  she says,  means  '  the Streat-

4 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  20.  field,'  forgetful of the final s.     She

5 The death of Dr.  Arthur Collier accused Miss Streatfield     *  of en-
of Doctors Commons on May 23,  deavouring to supplant her in the
1777,  is recorded in the Gentleman's esteem of Mr.  Thrale;'   and adds

There

7o

To Mrs.  Thrale.

[A.D.  1778.

There is a print of Mrs.  Montague,  and I shall think myself
very ill rewarded for my love and admiration if she does not give
me one J ;  she will give it nobody in whom it will excite more
respectful sentiments.  But I never could get any thing from her
but by pushing a face  ;  and so,  if you please,  you may tell her.

I hope you let Miss S 2 know how safe you keep her

book.  It was too fine for a scholar's talons.  I hope she gets
books that she may handle with more freedom,  and understand
with less difficulty.  Do not let her forget me.

When I called the other day at Burney's,  I found only the
young ones at home  ;  at last came the Doctor and Madam,  from
a dinner in the country,  to tell how they had been robbed as they
returned.  The Doctor saved his purse,  but gave them three
guineas and some silver,  of which they returned him three-and-
sixpence,  unasked,  to pay the turnpike 3.

I have sat twice to Sir Joshua,  and he seems to like his own
performance.  He has projected another,  in which I am to be
busy 4 ;  but we can think on it at leisure.

Mrs.  Williams is come home better,  and the habitation is all
concord and harmony;  only Mr.  Levet harbours discontent.

With Dr.  Lawrence's consent,  I have,  for the two last nights,

'  that she was very dangerous indeed
both from her beauty and learning.'
Ib.  p.  297.  See also ib.  ii.  329,  and
Mme.  D'Arblay's Diary,  i.  203,  for
an account of this young lady.

1 See/^j/,  Letter of March 1 8, 1 779,
where Johnson says  : — '  1 called for
the print,  and got good words.'     He
had in his dining-room,   he said,

*  portraits of some very respectable
people.'     Mme.  D'Arblay's Diary,  ii.
41.     In the Auction Catalogue of his
Library the last lot is a print of Mrs.
Montagu,  framed and glazed.

2 Probably Miss Streatfield,  who
had read the first eight books of
Homer.     Johnson said of her that

*  taking away her Greek she was as
ignorant as a butterfly.'    Mme.  D'Ar-
blay's Diary,  i.  221.

3 James Grainger,  the author of

the Sugar Cane,  wrote to Dr.  Percy
on March 24,  1764  :— '  I was robbed
about 3 o'clock of the Day we parted,
about three miles on this side St.
Albans.  Luckily he did not ask for
my watch,  and went off by telling
me he was sorry to take our money.
So civil are our Highwaymen.  In
France or Spain our death would
have preceded the robbery.'  Messrs.
Sotheby's Auction Catalogue for
November 27,  1889.  Lot 75.

4 Mr.  Taylor is inclined to think
that the former of these two pictures
is the one which is now in the
Common Room of Pembroke College,
Oxford,  and the latter the picture in
which Johnson holds a book close
to his eyes.  Leslie and Taylor's
Reynolds,  ii.  223.

taken

Aetat.  69.]  To J^homas Cadell.  71

taken musk  ;  the first night was a worse night than common,  the
second a better,  but not so much better as that I dare ascribe
any virtue to the medicine.  I took a scruple each time.

Now Miss has seen the camp,  I think she should write me
some account of it.  A camp,  however familiarly we may speak
of it,  is one of the great scenes of human life J.  War and peace
divide the business of the world.  Camps are the habitations of
those who conquer kingdoms,  or defend them.

But what are wits,  and pictures,  and camps,  and physick  ?  There
is still a nearer concern to most of us. — Is my master come to him-
self? Does he talk,  and walk,  and look about him,  as if there were
yet something in the world for which it is worth while to live  ?  Or
does he yet sit and say nothing 2  ?  He was mending before he
went,  and surely he has not relapsed.  To grieve for evils is
often wrong ;  but it is much more wrong to grieve without them.
All sorrow that lasts longer than its cause is morbid,  and should
be shaken off as an attack of melancholy,  as the forerunner of
a greater evil than poverty or pain.

I never said with Dr.  Dodd that I love to prattle upon paper ^  but
I have prattled now till the paper will not hold much more than
my good wishes,  which I sincerely send you.

I am,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

584.
To THOMAS CADELL.

[London],  October 17,  1778.

In Messrs.  Sotheby and Co.'s Auction Catalogue for May 10,  1875,
Lot 96 is  'a Letter of Johnson to Mr.  Cadell,  one page quarto,  dated
October 17,  1778.     Apologises for the delay in returning the proof
sheets,  mentioning those of the Life of Dry den'
It was sold for  ^5 zs.  6d.

1 In the alarm of a French invasion places to learn the world in.'  Letters
the militia had been called out.  to his Son,  i.  276.
Bennet Langton,  as a Captain in the 2  '  The poor man could never sub-
Lincolnshire Militia,  was this month due his grief on account of his son's
encamped on Warley Common.  Life,  death.'— BARETTI.  The following
iii.  365.  Lord Chesterfield said that summer he had anattack of apoplexy.
*  Courts and Camps are the only Post,  p.  94.

To

To Mrs.  Thrale.  [A.D.  1778.

585.

TO MRS.    THRALE1.

DEAREST LADY,  London,  October 24, 1778.

I have written Miss such a long letter 2,  that I cannot tell
how soon I shall be weary of writing another,  having made no
new discoveries since my last,  either in art or nature,  which may
not be kept till we see each other  ;  and sure that time is not far
off.  The Duchess is a good Duchess for courting you while she
stays,  and for not staying to court you,  till my courtship loses
all its value.  You are there as I would have you,  except your
humours.  When my master grows well,  must you take your
turn to be melancholy  ?  You appear to me to be now floating
on the springtide of prosperity ;  on a tide not governed by the
moon,  but as the moon governs your heads  ;  on a tide therefore
which is never likely to ebb but by your own faults.  I think it
very probably in your power to lay up eight thousand pounds
a-year for every year to come,  encreasing all the time,  what
needs not be encreased,  the splendour of all external appearance3.
And surely such a state is not to be put into yearly hazard for
the pleasure of keeping the house full>  or the ambition of out-
brewing Whitbread*.  Stop now and you are safe — stop a few
years and you may go safely on hereafter,  if to go on shall seem
worth the while.

I am sorry for Mrs.  *  *  *  * ;  we never could make any thing of
the lawyer,  when we had him among us.  *  *  *  *  has got some
vanity in her head.  Vanity always oversets a lady's judgment.
I have not told,  unless it be Williams,  and I do not know that I
have told her.  If Streatfield has a little kindness for me,  I am
glad.  I call now and then on the Burneys,  where you are at the
top of mortality. When will you come home  ?

1 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  24.  written to Boswell : — '  Mr.  Thrale

2  *  Miss Thrale refused to give up dislikes the times like the rest of us.'
that and some other letters the doctor Life,  iii.  363.

wrote her when her mother applied 4  *  Which was Thrale's only ambi-
to her for them.'— BARETTI.  tion.'— BARETTI.    See ante,  ii.  23.

3 Yet on July 3 of this year he had

Two

Aetat.  69.]  To Mrs.  Tkrale.  73

Two days ago Dr.  Lawrence ordered a new medicine,  which I
think to try to-night,  but my hopes are not high.  I mean to
try however,  and not languish without resistance.

Young Desmoulins J is taken in an under something of Drury-
lane  ;  he knows not,  I believe,  his own denomination.

My two clerical friends,  Darby and Worthington,  have both
died this month 2.  I have known Worthington long,  and to die
is dreadful.  I believe he was a very good man.

I am,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

586.

TO MRS.   THRALE3.

DEAR MADAM,  October 31, 1778.

Your letter seemed very long a-coming,   and was very
welcome at last ;  do not be so long again.

Long live Sir John Shelly 4,  that lures my master to hunt.  I
hope he will soon shake off the black dog 5,  and come home as

light as a feather.     And long live Mrs.  G ,  that downs6 my

mistress.     I hope she will come home as flexible as a rush.     I
see my wish is rather ambiguous,  it is to my mistress that I wish

flexibility.     As to the imitation imputed to Mrs.  G ,  if she

makes any thing like a copy,  her powers of imitation are very

1 He was the son of Mrs.  Des-  visited Dr.  Worthington at Llan-
moulins  (ante,  i.  6,  n.   3),  and the rhaiadr.     Life,  v.  453.     Derby,  not
grandson of Johnson's god-father Darby,  was the name of Johnson's
Dr.  Swinfen.     He had one famous other friend.

day in his life.     At Johnson's funeral 3 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  26.

he rode in the same carriage as 4 Ante,  ii.  44.

Burke and Windham.    See list of the 5 Johnson uses the same expres-

persons at the funeral in the British sion of Thrale,/^/,  p.  76  ;  of himself,

Museum,  Add.  MSS.  33,498.  post,  Letter of June 28,  1783,  and of

2  '  October 6,  1778.     Dr.  William Boswell,  Life,  iii.  414.     Mrs.  Thrale
Worthington,    sen.,    of Llanrhadra,  replied to Johnson from Brighton  : —
Denbighshire,    Prebendary of St.  '  My master swims now,  and forgets
Asaph.       The Rev.    John Derby,  the black dog.'  Piozzi Letters ;  ii.  33.
Rector of Southfleet and Longfield 6 See Life,  iii.  335,  where Johnson
in Kent.     He was editor of Bishop said :— '  Robertson was in a mighty
Pearce's posthumous works.'  Gentle-  romantic humour,  he talked of one
man's Magazine,  1778,  p.  495.     In whom he did not know ;  but I downed
1774 Johnson and the Thrales had him with the King of Prussia.'

great,

74

To Mrs.  Thrale.

[A.D.  1778.

great,  for I do not remember that she ever saw me but once.  If
she copies me she will lose more credit by want of judgment
than she will gain by quickness of apprehension.

Of Mrs.  B x I have no remembrance  ;   perhaps her voice

is low.

Miss  *  *  *  *  is just gone from me.  I told her how you took
to them all ;  but told her likewise how you took to Miss  *  *  *  *.
All poisons have their antidotes.

Sir Joshua has finished my picture,  and it seems to please
every body,  but I shall wait to see how it pleases you.

Of your conditions of happiness,  do not set your heart upon
any but what Providence puts in your own power.  Your debts2
you may pay — much you may lay up.  The rest you can only
pray for.  Of your daughters,  three are out of the danger of
children's distempers,  the other two have hardly yet tried
whether they can live or no.  You ought not yet to count them
among your settled possessions.

Is it true that Mrs.  D 3 is enceinte  ?     It will give her great

influence.

To-day Mrs.  Williams and Mrs.  Desmoulines had a scold,  and
Williams was going away,  but I bid her not turn tail,  and she
came back,  and rather got the upper hand 4.

I wish you would come back again to us all  ;  you will find
nobody among your fine ladies that will love you as you are
loved by,

Dearest Lady,

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

1 Perhaps Mrs.     Byron.      Post,
p.  79.

2 See ante,  i.  192,  n.  3.

3 Perhaps the Mrs.  D men-
tioned ante,  i.  333.

4 For the inmates of Johnson's
house see Life,   iii.   368,   461.      J.
Cradock said that  '  he once accom-
panied Dr.  Johnson and Mr.Steevens
to Marylebone Gardens to see La
Serua Padrona performed.  Steevens,
being quite weary of the Burletta,

exclaimed : — "  There is no plot,  it is
merely an old fellow cheated and
deluded by his servant ;  it is quite
foolish and unnatural."  Johnson
instantly replied : — "  Sir,  it is not
unnatural ;  it is a scene that is acted
in my family every day in my life."
This did not allude to the maid-
servant so much as to the two dis-
tressed ladies who were always
quarrelling.'  Nichols's Lit.  Anec.,
ix.  779.

To

Aetat.69.]  To Mrs.  Thrale.

75

587.

To CAPTAIN LANGTON.
[London],  October 31,  1778.     Published in the Life,  iii.  365.

588.

To THE REVEREND DR.  WHEELER.
London,  November 2,  1778.     Published in the Life,  iii.  376.

589.

To THE REVEREND DR.  EDWARDS.
London,  November 2,  1778.     Published in the Life,  iii.  367.

590.

TO MRS.  THRALE1.
DEAR MADAM,  NOV.  9,  1778.

The Lord Mayor has had a dismal day. — Will not this
weather drive you home  ?  Perhaps you know not any body that
will be glad to see you.  I hope our well will yield water again,
and something fuller you will find the pond;  but then all the
trees are naked,  and the ground damp — but the year must go
round.

While you are away I take great delight in your letters,  only
when you talk so much of obligations to me,  you should consider
how much you put me into the condition of honest Joseph 2.

Young Desmoulines thinks he has got something,  he knows
not what,  at Drury-lane  ;  his mother talks little of it. — Sure it is
not a humm^t Mr.  Levet,  who thinks his ancient rights invaded,
stands at bay,  fierce as ten furies 4.  Mrs.  Williams growls and
scolds,  but Poll 5 does not much flinch.  Every body is in want.

1 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  28.  fessessious way with you,  as that I

2 Johnson refers to Joseph Leman hardly know whether you are in jest
in Clarissa,    who wrote to Love-  or earnest,  when your honner calls
lace  : — '  Be pleased howsomever,   if me honnest so often.'     Clarissa,  ed.
it like your honner,  not to call me 1810,  ii.  370.

honnest Joseph,  and honnest Joseph 3 A hoax.     Not in Johnson's Dic-

so often.     For althoff I think myself tionary.

verry honest and all that,  yet I am 4 Paradise Lost,  ii.  671.

touched a littel,  for fear I should not 5 A Miss Carmichael whom he had

do the quite right thing  ;    and too taken in.     Life,  iii.  222,  368.

besides your honner has such a

I shall

To Mrs.  Thrale.

[A.D.  1778.

I shall be glad to see Streatham again,  but I can find no reason
for going to Brighthelmstone,  but that of seeing my master and
you three days sooner.

I am,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

591.

TO MRS.   THRALE1.

DEAREST MADAM,  Nov.  14, 1778.

Then I really think I shall be very glad to see you all safe
at home.  I shall easily forgive my master his long stay,  if he
leaves the dog behind him.  We will watch,  as well as we can,
that the dog shall never be let in again,  for when he comes the
first thing he does is to worry my master.  This time he gnawed
him to the bone.  Content,  said Rider's almanack2,  makes a
man richer than the Indies.  But surely he that has the Indies
in his possession,  may without very much philosophy make him-
self content.  So much for my master and his dog,  a vile one it
is,  but I hope if he is not hanged he is drowned  ;  with another
lusty shake he will pick my master's heart  .out.

I have begun to take valerian  ;  the two last nights I took an
ounce each night — a very loathsome quantity.  Dr.  Lawrence
talked of a decoction,  but I say,  all or nothing.  The first night
I thought myself better,  but the next it did me no good.

Young Desmoulines says,  he is settled at a weekly pay of
twenty-five shillings,  about forty pounds a-year 3.  Mr.  Macbean

1 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  37.

2 Riders British Merlin began in
1655 and ended in 1840.      A few
months after the date of Johnson's
letter Lord North brought in a Bill
to vest the sole right of printing
Almanacks in the two Universities of
Oxford and Cambridge and the Com-
pany of Stationers.     Their supposed
exclusive patent had been recently
certified void by the Court of Common
Pleas.     Erskine,  speaking at the Bar
of the House against the Bill,  said  : —
'  It is notorious that the Universities
sell their right to the Stationers'
Company,  who make a scandalous

job of the bargain,  and,  to increase
the sale among the vulgar,  publish
under the auspices of religion and
learning,  the most senseless ab-
surdities. I should have been glad to
cite some sentences from the H3th
edition of Poor Robiris Almanack,
published under the revision of the
Archbishop of Canterbury and the
Bishop of London.  But I know no
house  —  but a brothel  —  that could
suffer the quotation.'  The Bill was
lost.  Parl.  Hist.,  xx.  608.

3 No doubt Drury Lane Theatre at
which he was engaged was closed
many weeks each year.

has

Aetat.  69.]

To Mrs.  Thrale.

77

has no business x.  We have tolerable concord at home,  but no
love.  Williams hates every body.  Levet hates Desmoulines,
and does not love Williams.  Desmoulines hates them both.
Poll loves none of them.

Dr.  Burney had the luck to go to Oxford the only week in the
year when the library is shut up.  He was however very kindly
treated  ;  as one man is translating Arabick,  and another Welsh,
for his service 2.  Murphy told me that you wrote to him about
Evelina.  Francis wants to read it 3.

him with  *  discouraging readers by
neglect and incivility.'  The copy of
Cook's Voyages,  which had been pre-
sented by the King,  he had lent to
the Rector of Lincoln College,  'telling
him that the longer he kept it the
better,  "  for if it was known to be in
the Library he should be perpetually
plagued with enquiries after it." '  Ib.
p.  269.  How much the Library was
neglected in those days is shown by
the fact that the present year  (1891)
it possesses for the first time a copy
of Johnson's edition of the English
Poets ;  neither has it an earlier edition
of the Lives than the one of 1805.

Dr.  Radcliffe's Library was in a
state of even greater neglect.  On the
death of Johnson's friend,  Dr.  Kenni-
cott,  Canon of Christ Church and
Radclivian Librarian,  a writer in the
Gentleman's Magazine for 1783  (p.
718)  says: — '  There are several chests
of books unopened.  The late learned
Orientalist in this respect only trod
in the steps of his predecessor,  but it
is high time a different track should
be pursued.  If the librarianship
must be given to a person too old or
too easy for the employment,  some-
thing decent might be spared out of
near  ,£400 a year to a young man of
genius and learning to act as deputy,
and open to public inspection one of
the first collections in the universe.'

3 Miss Burney's Evelina had been
published in January of this year.

And

1 Ante,  \.  319,  and/^j/,  p.  81.

2 Burney was seeking materials for
a History of Music.     The two intro-
ductions which Johnson gave him
were dated November 2.     Life,  iii.
366.     By the Statutes of 1768 the
Library was opened every day but
Sundays,  Christmas Day,   and the
other great festivals of the Church,
and the days appointed for the in-
spection of the Library by the
Curators.     At this period the inspec-
tion was held once a year— on
November 8.      Corpus Statutorum
Universitatis Oxoniensis,  1768.    Ap-
pendix, pp.  10,  1 8.    The custom had
apparently arisen of closing the Li-
brary for a week beforehand for the
sake of preparing for the great day.
This custom was sanctioned by the
Statutes of 1813.     At the present
time it is closed for cleaning the first
week of October,  and for inspection
on November 7 and 8 ;    for Good
Friday and Easter Eve,  Ascension
Day,     Commemoration Day,     and
from Christmas Day to January I.
'  In 1713 every stranger admitted to
read in the Library had to pay nine
shillings in fees.'     Macray's Annals
of the Bodleian,  ed.    1890,  p.    185.
Apparently the fees were the same
at the time of Dr.  Burney's visit.
The Rev.  John Price was Librarian
at this time.     In 1787 Dr.  Beddoes,
the Reader in Chemistry,    in a
Memorial to the Curators charged

78 To Mrs.  Thrale.

And on the 26th Burney is to bring me.  Pray why so  ?  Is it
not as fit that I should bring Burney  *  ?  My master is in his old
lunes 2,  and so am I.  Well,  I do not much care how it is,  and
yet  —  at it again.

Pray make my compliments to Mr.  Scrase3.  He has many
things which I wish to have,  his knowledge of business and of
the law.  He has likewise a great chair4.  Such an one my
Master talked of getting  ;  but that vile black dog  -

Mrs.  Queeney might write to me,  and do herself no harm  ;  she
will neglect me till I shall take to Susy 5,  and then Queeney
may break her heart,  and who can be blamed?  I am sure I
stuck to Queeney as long as I could.

Does not Master talk how full his canal 6 will be when he comes
home.  Now or never.  I know not how the soil was laid  ;  if it
slopes towards the canal,  it may pour in a great deal of water,
but I suspect it slopes the wrong way.

This is but the fourteenth day  ;  there are twelve more to the
twenty-sixth.  Did you ever hear of notching a stick  ?  however
we have it in Horace  —  truditur dies die1  ;  as twelve days have
gone,  twelve days will come.

Hector of Birmingham just looked in at me.  He is come to
his only niece,  who is ill of a cancer  ;  I believe with very little
hope,  for it is knotted in two places.

I think at least I grow no worse  ;  perhaps valerian may make
me better.  Let me have your prayers.

I am,  dearest Lady,

Yours,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

Mme.     D'Arblay's Diary,     i.     37.  often find comfort in a great chair.

Francis was Johnson's black ser-  5  '  I was always a Susy when

vant.  nobody else was a Susy.'    Ante,  ii.

1  '  See how touchy was Johnson  !  44.

He thought himself degraded by the 6 Canal was generally used of an

phrase Burney shall bring you here ornamental piece of water.  What we

on the 2.6th.'    BARETTI.  now call a canal was at this time

2  'Why,  woman,  your husband is often called a navigation,  whence
in his old lunes again.'  Merry Wives comes navvy.

of Windsor,  Act iv.  sc.  2.  7 HORACE.    2 Odes xviii.  15.

3 Ante,  i.  395.  '  Day presses on the heels of day.'

4 Johnson with his asthma would FRANCIS.

To

Aetat.  eg.]  To Mrs.  Thrale*  79

592.

TO MRS.    THRALE1.

DEAR MADAM,  Nov.  21, 1778.

I will write to you once more before you come away ;  but —
nil mihi rescribas 2 — I hope soon to see you.  Burney and I have
settled it ;  and I will not take a post-chaise,  merely to shew my
independence.

Now the dog is drowned 3, 1 shall see both you and my master
just as you are used to be,  and with your being as you have
been,  your friends may very reasonably be satisfied. — Only,  be
better if you can.

Return my thanks,  if you please,  to Queeney for her letter.  I
do not yet design to leave her for Susy ;  but how near is the
time when she will leave me,  and leave me to Susy,  or any body
else that will pick me up.

Currit enim ferox

^Etas,  et illi,  quos tibi demserit,
Apponet annos. 4

Queeney,  whom you watched while I held her,  will soon think
our care of her very superfluous.

Miss Biron,  and,  I suppose,  Mrs.  Biron,  is gone 5.  You are by
this time left alone to wander over the Steine 6,  and listen to the
waves. — This is but a dull life.  Come away and be busy,  and
count your poultry,  and look into your dairy,  and at leisure
hours learn what revolutions have happened at Streatham.

I believe I told you that Jack Desmoulines is rated upon the
book at Drury-lane five-and-twenty shillings a-week.

1 Piozzi Letters^  ii.  40.  was the wife of Admiral Byron and

2  '  Nil mihi rescribas ;     attamen grandmother of the poet.       Miss

ipse veni.'  Byron was her daughter Augusta.

OVID.     Heroides,  i.  2.  See Mme.  D'Arblay's Diary,  i.  331,

3 Ante,  ii.  73,  n.  5.  383,  and^r/,  Letters of November 4,

4 HORACE.     2 Odes,  v.  13.  1779,  and November 12,  1781.
'Time to her shall count each 6 Mrs. Thralewritingfrom Brighton

day on July 19,  1780,  says  :— '  My master

Which from you it takes away.3 is gone out riding,  and we are to

FRANCIS.  drink tea with Lady Rothes ;   after

5 In the Letter of November 2,  which the Steyne hours begin,  and
I779>  Johnson correctly writes these we cluster round Thomas's shop.'
ladies'  name Byron.     Mrs.   Byron Mme.  D'Arblay's Diary,  i.  417.

Baretti

8o

To John Nichols.

[A.D.  1778.

Baretti has told his musical scheme to B %  and B

will neither grant the question nor deny.  He is of opinion,  that
if it does not fail it will succeed,  but if it does not succeed he
conceives it must fail.

It is good to speak dubiously about futurity.  It is likewise
not amiss to hope.

Did I ever tell you that  *  *  *  *  was married  ?  It so fell out,
that  *  *  *  *  fell in love with a girl whose fortune was so small
that he perhaps could not mention it to his father ;  but it
happened likewise,  by the lottery of love,  that the father liked
her so well,  as himself to recommend her to  »  *  *  * .  Such
coincidence is rare.

Come now,  do come home as fast as you can :

Come with a whoop,  come with a call,
Come with a good will,  or come not at all.

I am,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

593.

To JAMES BOSWELL.
[London],  November 21,  1778.     Published in the Life,  Hi.  368.

594.

To JOHN NICHOLS 2.

Mr.  Johnson will hope for Mr.  Nichols'  company to tea about
six this afternoon,  to talk of the index,  and settle the terms.
Monday.

1  'Burney.  The musical scheme
was the Carmen Seculare,  that
brought me  ^150 in three nights,
and three times as much to Philidor,
whom I got to set it to music.  It
would have benefited us both,  if
Philidor had not proved a scoundrel,
greatly more than those sums.'
BARETTI.  *  The Carmen Seculare
of Horace had this year been set to
musick,  and performed as a pub-

lick entertainment in London,  for the
joint benefit of Monsieur Philidor
and Signer Baretti.'  Life,  iii.  373.
Philidor was famous as a chess-
player. He came to England in
1771 with an introduction to Dr.
Burney from Diderot.  The Early
Diary of Frances Burney,  i.  1 16.

2 First published in the Gentle-
man's Magazine for 1785,  p.  9.

To

Aetat.  69.]    To the Honourable Thomas Fitzmaiirice.        8 1

SIR,

595.

To JOHN NICHOLS T.

I am very well contented that the Index is settled,  for
though the price is low,  it is not penurious.

Mr.  Macbean having been for some time out of business,  is in
some little perplexities from which twelve guineas will set him
free.  This,  we hope,  you will advance,  and during the continuance
of the work subject to your inspection he desires a weekly pay-
ment of sixteen shillings,  the rest to remain till it is completed.

I am,  Sir,

Your most humble servant,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

Nov.  26,  1778.

SIR,

596.

To THE HONOURABLE THOMAS FITZMAURICE

Good wishes are the necessary consequence of friendship,
and of my good wishes,  I hope,  you make no doubt.     But now

1 First published in the Gentle-
man's Magazine for 1785,    part i.
page 9.

Macbean made a useful Index to
the English Poets,  giving what he
calls  '  a synoptical view of them  '  in
several particulars.  It fills the last
two volumes of the Collection.  In
the Preface to the Index in the edition
of 1790 it is stated that the original
plan had received Johnson's sanction.
For Macbean see ante,  i.  319.

2 From the original in the posses-
sion of the Reverend Canon Moor,
St.  Clement's near Truro.

There is no address to this Letter ;
I have however no doubt that it was
written to the Hon.  Thomas Fitzmau-
rice,  the younger brother of the Earl
ofShelburne.  On December2i,  1777,
he had married Mary,  afterwards
Countess of Orkney in her own right ;
VOL.  II.  G

their only son was born on October
2,  1778.  Ann.  Reg.,  1778,  i.  218,
and Burke's Peerage under LANS-
DOWNE and ORKNEY.  Lady Shel-
burne was the Dowager Lady,  who
died in December,  1780.  Horace
Walpole writes  :— '  How has she left
her fortune,  once so great,  but which
with superabundant cunning she had
rendered almost as crazy as she was
latterly  ? '  Letters,  vii.  475.  The first
wife of the Earl had died on January
5,  1771,  he married his second wife
in 1779.  Gentleman's Magazine ,17 7  \,
p.  47,  and Burke's Peerage.  Fitz-
maurice was living in Lleweney Hall,
which,  according to Mrs.  Piozzi,  '  had
been in possession of the Salusburys
a thousand years.'  Li/e,v.  435.  He
invited Johnson to pass part of the
summer of 1780 with him there.  Post,
Letter of May 7,  1780.

you

82 To Mrs.  Aston.

you have a son I know not well what more to wish you except
more sons,  and a few daughters  ;  the sons to be all brave and
the daughters all beautiful,  and both sons and daughters to be
wise and good.

Now you have a son what can you want  ?  You have a mother
to rejoice in her grandson,  and a Lady to partake in all your
felicities.  With Lady Shelburn I once had the honour of con-
versing, and entreat you,  Sir,  to let her know that I have not
forgotten it  ;  to your Lady I am a stranger,  but who can doubt
the excellence of her,  who  [sic]  you have chosen,  and who has
chosen you  ?

If encrease of happiness cannot be expected it still remains to
wish the continuance,  and very long it will continue,  if there be
any power in the desires of,

Sir,
Your most humble servant,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

Dec.  7,  1778.

597.

To JOHN NICHOLS.
[London],  December,  1778.     Published in the Life,  iv.  36,  «.  4.

598.

To THE REVEREND JOHN HUSSEY.
[London],  December 29,  1778.     Published in the Life,  iii.  369.

599.

To MRS.  ASTON  \
DEAR MADAM,

Now the new year is come of which I wish you and dear
Mrs.  Gastrel many and many returns,  it is fit that I give you
some account of the year past.  In the beginning of it I had
difficulty of breathing,  and other ilness  [sic],  from which however
I by degrees recovered and from which I am now tolerably free.
In the spring and summer I flattered myself that I should come

1 First published in Croker's Bos-  from the original in Pembroke Col-
vuell,  page 622.  Corrected by me lege Library.

to

Aetat.  69.]  To Mrs.  Porter.  83

to Lichfield,  and forebore to write till I could tell of my inten-
tions with some certainty,  and,  one thing or other making the
journey always improper,  as I did not come,  I omitted to write,
till at last I grew afraid of hearing ill news.  But the other day
Mr.  Prujean  *  called,  and left word that you,  dear Madam,  are
grown better,  I know not when I heard any thing that pleased
me so much.  I shall now long more and more to see Lichfield,
and partake the happiness of your recovery.

Now you begin to mend,  you have great encouragement to
take care of yourself,  do not omit any thing that can conduce to
your health,  and when I come I shall hope to enjoy with you and
dearest Mrs.  Gastrel many pleasing hours.  Do not be angry at
my long omission to write,  but let me hear how you both do,  for
you will write to nobody to whom your welfare will give more
pleasure than to,

Dearest Madam,

Your most humble servant,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

London,  Bolt-court,  Fleet-street.
Jan.  2,  1779-

600.

To MRS.  PORTER 2.

DEAREST LOVE,  Bolt Court,  Fleet Street,  Jan.  2,  1779.

Though I have so long omitted to write,  I will omit it no
longer.  I hope the new year finds you not worse than you have
formerly been  ;  and I wish that many years may pass over you
without bringing either pain or discontent.  For my part,  I think
my health,  though not good,  yet rather better than when I left you.

My purpose was to have paid you my annual visit in the
summer,  but it happened otherwise,  not by any journey another
way,  for I have never been many miles from London,  but by such
hindrances as it is hard to bring to any account.

Do not follow my bad example,  but write to me soon again,
and let me know of you what you have to tell ;  I hope it is all
good.

1  *  He married the youngest of the 2 First published in Croker's Bos-
Misses Aston.'  CROKER.  well,  page 622.

G 2 Please

To Miss Reynolds.

[A.D.  1779.

Please to make my compliments to Mrs.  Cobb,  Mrs.  Adey,
and Miss Adey,  and all the ladies and gentlemen that frequent
your mansion.

If you want any books,  or any thing else that I can send you,
let me know.

I am,  dear Madam,

Your most humble servant,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

601.

To MRS.  GARRICK  '.

Dr.  Johnson sends most respectful condolence to Mrs.  Garrick,
and wishes that any endeavour of his could enable her  \sic\
support a loss which the world cannot repair.

Feb.  2,  1779.

602.

To Miss REYNOLDS 2.

DEAREST MADAM,  [Streatham],  Feb.  15, 1779.

I have never deserved to be treated as you treat me.    When

1 From the original in the pos-
session of Mr.  Edward Ford,  Old
Park,  Enfield.  Garrick died on
January 20.  Johnson's note was
written the day after the funeral.
'  I saw,'  writes Cumberland,  '  old
Samuel Johnson standing beside
Garrick's grave,  at the foot of Shake-
speare's monument,  and bathed in
tears/  Cumberland's Memoirs,  ii.
210.  'Garrick's widow is buried in
the same grave.  She survived him
forty-three years — "a little bowed-
down old woman,  who went about
leaning on a gold-headed cane,
dressed in deep widow's mourning,
and always talking of her dear
Davy."  (Pen and Ink Sketches,
1864).'  Stanley's Westminster Abbey,
ed.  1868,  p.  305.

Captain Alfred C.  Christopher of
the Seaforth Highlanders has given
me the following note made by his

ancestor,  Sir Henry Wilmot Seton,
who died in 1848.  *  I saw Mrs.  Gar-
rick on her ninetieth birthday,  and
by her express permission kissed
her.  Her words,  pronounced with
all the grace and dignity of a Royal
Command,  were  "  Kiss me." '

2 First published in Croker's Bos-
well,  page 623.

This letter probably refers to that
'  small degree of coolness '  which for
some time existed between Miss
Reynolds and her brother.  'Dr.
Johnson,'  says Northcote,  '  partici-
pated with her in her troubles,  and
offered to write a letter himself,
which when copied should pass as
her own.  It began thus  : — "  I am
well aware that complaints are
always odious,  but complain I must."
She saw that the intended deception
would no more have passed with Sir
Joshua than if Johnson had attired

you

Aetat.  69.]

To Mrs.  Aston.

you employed me before,  I undertook your affair and succeeded,
but then I succeeded by choosing a proper time,  and a proper
time I will try to choose again.

I have about a week's work to do,  and then I shall come to
live in town,  and will first wait on you in Dover-street z.  You
are not to think that I neglect you,  for your nieces 2 will tell you
how rarely they have seen me.  I will wait on you as soon as
I can,  and yet you must resolve to talk things over without
anger,  and you must leave me to catch opportunities ;  and be
assured,  dearest dear,  that I should have very little enjoyment of
that day in which I had neglected any opportunity of doing
good to you.

I am,  dearest Madam,

Your humble servant,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

603.

To JOHN NICHOLS.
[London],  March i,  1779.     Published in the Life,  iv.  36,  n.  4.

604.

To MRS.  ASTON 3.
DEAR MADAM,
Mrs.  Gastrell and You are very often in my thoughts,  though

himself in her cap and gown,  and
endeavoured to impose his identical
person upon him as his sister.'
Northcote's Reynolds,  i.  203.  Rey-
nolds had had built for himself  'a
chariot,  on the panels of which were
painted the seasons of the year in
allegorical figures.  The wheels were
ornamented with carved foliage and
gilding.  He insisted on it that his
sister should go out with it as much
as possible,  and let it be seen in the
streets to make a show,  which she
was much averse to,  being a person
of great shyness of disposition.  This
anecdote,  Northcote says,  'he had
from her own mouth.'  Leslie and
Taylor's Reynolds,  i.  183.  See also

ib.  p.  91,  n.  2,  and Memoirs of Dr.
Burney,  i.  331.

1 Miss Reynolds lodged in the
house of Hoole,   the translator of
Ariosto.     Taylor's Reynolds,  i.  91,  n.
2.    Perhaps he lived in Dover Street.

2  '  Sir Joshua's nieces,  the Miss
Palmers,  the elder afterwards Mar-
chioness of Thomond,  the younger
Mrs.   Gwatkin,   lived with him oc-
casionally, and one of them after-
wards habitually.'    Memoirs of Dr.
Burney,  i.  332.

3 First published in Croker's Bos-
well,  page 623.     Corrected by me
from the original in Pembroke Col-
lege Library.

I do

86 To Mrs.  Porter.

I do not write so often as might be expected from so much love
and so much respect.  I please myself with thinking that I shall
see you again,  and shall find you better.  But futurity is uncer-
tain, poor David1 had doubtless many futurities in his head,
which death has intercepted,  a death,  I believe,  totally unex-
pected ;  he did not in his last hour seem to think his Life in
danger.

My old complaints hang heavy on me,  and my nights are very
uncomfortable and unquiet  ;  and sleepless nights make heavy
days.  I think to go to my Physician,  and try what can be done.
For why should not I grow better as well as you  ?

Now you are better,  pray,  dearest Madam,  take care of your-
self. I hope to come this Summer and watch you.  It will be
a very pleasant journey if I can find you and dear Mrs.  Gastrel
well.  I sent you two barels  [sic]  of oysters.  If you would wish
for more,  please to send your commands to,

Madam,

Your most humble servant,

Bolt-court,  March 4,  1779.  SAM  :  JOHNSON.

605.

TO MRS.    PORTER2.

MY DEAR LOVE,  Bolt Court,  Fleet Street,  March 4,  1779.

Since I heard from you,  I sent you a little print,  and two
barrels of oysters,  and I shall have some little books to send you
soon 3.  I have seen Mr.  Pearson 4,  and am pleased to find that he
has got a living.  I was hurried when he was with me,  but had
time to hear that my friends were all well.

1 David Garrick.  *  He had,'  writes of the Lives of the Poets which were
Davies,   '  so little apprehension of published this spring.

death being so near that,  I am well 4 The Rev.  John B.  Pearson was

informed,  he said to the servant who Perpetual Curate of St.   Michael's

gave him a draught a day or two Church from 1774 to 1782.     Har-

before he died,  "Well,  Tom,  I shall wood's Lichfield,  p.  517.     He must

do very well yet,   and make you have received this year some other

amends for all this trouble."  '  Davies's preferment.     He was Lucy Porter's

Life of Garrick,  ii.  353.  legatee.  From his widow Mr.  Croker

2 First published in Croker's Bos-  received copies of many of Johnson's
well,  page 623.  letters to his step-daughter.  Croker's

3 No doubt the first four volumes Boswell,  Preface,  p.  xiv.

Poor

Aetat.69.]  To Mrs.   Thrale.  87

Poor Mrs.  Adey x was,  I think,  a good woman,  and therefore
her death is less to be lamented ;  but it is not pleasant to think
how uncertain it is,  that,  when friends part,  they will ever meet
again.  My old complaint of flatulence,  and tight and short
breath,  oppress me heavily.  My nights are very restless.  I think
of consulting the doctor to-morrow.

This has been a mild winter,  for which I hope you have been
the better.     Take what care you can of yourself,  and do not
forget to drink 2.    I was somehow or other hindered from coming
into the country last summer,  but I think of coming this year.
I am,  dear love,

Your most humble servant,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

606.

To MRS.    THRALE3.

[Bolt Court],  March 10,  1779.

And so,  dear Madam,  it is a mumm 4 to see who will speak
first.  I will come to see you on Saturday,  only let me know
whether I must come to the Borough,  or am to be taken up
here.

Baretti's golden dream is now but silver.  He is of my mind ;
he says,  there is no money for diversions 5.  But we make another
onset on Friday,  and this is to be the last time this season.

I got my Lives,  not yet quite printed,  put neatly together,
and sent them to the King ;  what he says of them I know not.
If the King is a Whig,  he will not like them ;  but is any king
a Whig6?

1 Ante,  i.  139.  he had got the money on the loan,

2 Ante,  i.  368,  n.  i.  and is happy to get it under eight

3 Pio22i Letters,  ii.  42.  per cent.'    Letters,  vii.  181.

4 This,  like    '  a humm '  of ante,  6 It was the first four of the ten
ii.  75,  is  '  a cant word '  not in John-  volumes which Johnson sent to the
son's Dictionary.  King.      Horace Walpole says that

5 See ante,   ii.    80,   n.    i.     There four years earlier George III  'had
was great distress owing to the sent for Johnson's Journey to the
heavy taxation caused by the Ameri-  Western Islands in MS.,  and then
can War.    Horace Walpole wrote on wondering said,  "  I protest,  Johnson
February 25  : — '  It was but yester-  seems to be a Papist and a Jaco-
day Lord North could tell the House bite  !  "  '    Letters,  vi.  179.

So

88

To Mrs.  Thrale.

[A.D.  1779.

So far had I gone,  when in came Mr.  Thrale,  who will have the

honour of bringing it.

I am,  &c.5

SAM  :  JOHNSON.

607.

To JAMES BOSWELL.
[London],  March 13,  1779.     Published in the Life,  iii.  372.

608.

TO MRS.    THRALE1.

DEAR MADAM,  March 18, 1779.

There is some comfort in writing,  when such praise is to be
had.     Plato is a multitude 2.

On Monday I came late to Mrs.  Vesey3.  Mrs.  Montague was
there ;  I called for the print 4,  and got good words.  The evening
was not brilliant,  but I had thanks for my company.  The night
was troublesome.  On Tuesday I fasted,  and went to the Doctor ;
he ordered bleeding.  On Wednesday I had the teapot,  fasted,
and was blooded.  Wednesday night was better.  To-day I have
dined at Mr.  Strahan's at Islington 5,  with his new wife.  To-night

1 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  43.

2 Ante,  i.  374.

3 Hannah More,  in 1783  (Memoirs,
i.  286),  describes  *  Mrs.  Vesey's plea-
sant parties.     It is a select society
which meets at her house every other
Tuesday,  on the day on which the
Turk's Head Club dine together.   In
the evening they all meet at Mrs.
Vesey's,   with the addition of such
other company as it is difficult to find
elsewhere.'    Miss More addressed to
her The Bas Bleu which begins  : —

1 Vesey  !    of verse the judge and

friend,

Awhile my idle strain attend.'
See Life,  iii.  424,  for an account of
the brilliant company which one
evening at her house gathered four
or five deep round Johnson's chair.

4 Ante,  ii.  70.

5 The Rev.  George Strahan,  Vicar
of Islington  (ante,  i.  95).    '  His house
afforded Johnson an agreeable change
of place and fresh air/    Life,  iv.  416.
Lamb,  in a Sonnet written seventeen
years later,  says  : —

'  I turn my back on thy detested

walls,
Proud City,  and thy sons I leave

behind.

*  *  *  *

I pass not thee so lightly,  humble
spire,

That mindest me of many a plea-
sure gone,

Of merriest days,   of Love and
Islington,

Kindling anew the flames of past
desire  ;

there

Aetat.  69.]

To Thomas Cadell.

there will be opium.  To-morrow the teapot.  Then heigh for
Saturday.  I wish the Doctor would bleed me again.  Yet every
body that I meet says that I look better than when I was last
met.

I am,  dearest Lady,

Your,  &c.5

SAM:  JOHNSON.

SIR,

609.

To THOMAS CADELL '.

The Duty of Man is not the right.  Nelson is bound in
Sheepskin,  a thing I never saw before.  I was bred a Bookseller,
and have not forgotten my trade 2.

Do not let us teize one another about books.  That they are
lent about I suppose is true,  but it must be principally by those
that have bought them,  which would have been done much less,
if you had united every writer's life to his works,  for then the
borrower might have carried away near twenty volumes,  whereas
he now takes but four.  I will venture to say that of those which
I have given very few are lent.  But be that as it may,  you must
supply me with what I think it proper to distribute among my
friends 3.

And I shall muse on thee,  slow

journeying on,
To the green plains of pleasant

Hertfordshire.'
Ainger's Letters of Charles Lamb,

i.  4.  See also ib.  ii.  82.
The Old Vicarage was pulled
down about 1885  ;  its site is occupied
by the premises of the Metropolitan
Fire Brigade.  The Academy,  Jan.
5,  1889,  p.  2.

1 From the original in the posses-
sion of Messrs.  Puttick and Simpson,
47 Leicester Square,  London.

For Thomas Cadell see ante,  ii.  61,
n.  I,  and Life,  ii.  425,  n.  2.

2  'Nelson'   is no doubt Robert
Nelson's Festivals and Fasts.
Johnson,  in the two years which he
spent at home after he left school

and before he went to Oxford,  was
partly employed in his father's shop.
'  I have heard him say,'  writes Haw-
kins, 'that he was able to bind a
book.'  Life,  i.  56,  n.  2.  It was said
in 1819 that 'books of his binding
are still extant in Lichfield.'  Murray's
Johnsoniana,  p.  465.

3 Cadell,  it seems,  had complained
that the copies of the first four
volumes of the Lives of the Poets
which Johnson had given to his
friends had been lent about,  and so
the sale had been hindered.  John-
son replies,  'had you not printed the
Lives separately the borrowers — who
borrowed mostly from those who
bought the books — must have carried
away near twenty volumes.  This
would have rendered borrowing

Let

go To Mrs.  Aston.  [A.D.  1779.

Let me have no dispute about it.     I think myself not well

used.

I am,  Sir,

Your very humble servant,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

April 3,  1779.
To Mr.  Cadel.

610.

To JAMES BOSWELL.
Harley Street,  [April 26,  1779].     Published in the Life,  iii.  391.

611.

To JOHN NICHOLS.

[London],  May 2,  1779.     Published in the Life,  iv.  36,  n.  4.
The date of this Letter,  in which Johnson mentions Hughes's Letters,
is in the original,  but not in Boswell.

612.

To THE REVEREND JOHN WESLEY.
[London],  May 3,  1779.     Published in the Life,  iii.  394.

613.

To MRS.  ASTON x.
DEAR MADAM,  May 4, 1779.

When I sent you the little books 2,  I was not sure that you
were well enough to take the trouble of reading them,  but have
lately heard from Mr.  Greeves that you are much recovered.
I hope you will gain more and more strength,  and live many and
many years,  and I shall come again to Stowhill,  and live as
I used to do,  with you and dear Mrs.  Gastrell.

much more inconvenient.'       Con-  well,  page 631,  where it is stated

sidering  '  his extraordinary modera-  that the original is in Pembroke

tion '  in the payment which he had College.       Probably the statement

demanded for writing the Lives was incorrect ;     at all events the

(Life,  iii.  in,  n.  i),  this complaint of Letter is not there now.

CadelPs is pitiful.  2 No doubt the first four volumes

1 First published in Croker's Bos-  of the Lives.

I am

Aetat.  69.]  To Mrs.   Thrale.  91

I am not well :  my nights are very troublesome,  and my
breath is short ;  but I know not that it grows much worse.
I wish to see you.  Mrs.  Harvey x has just sent to me to dine
with her,  and I have promised to wait on her to-morrow.

Mr.  Green comes home loaded with curiosities 2,  and will be
able to give his friends new entertainment.  When I come,  it will
be great entertainment to me if I can find you and Mrs.  Gastrell
well,  and willing to receive me.

I am,

Dearest Madam,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON,

614.

To MRS.  PORTER.
[London],  May 4,  1779.     Published in the Life,  iii.  393.

615.

To MRS.    THRALE3.

DEAR MADAM,  May 20, 1779.

The vicissitudes of things,  and the eddies of life,  are now
carrying you southward,  and me northward4.  When shall we
meet again  ?

I must beg of you to send Mr.  Watson's papers to my house,
directed for him,  and sealed up.  I know not whether he does
not think himself in danger of piracy 5.

Take care that Susy sees all that Sophy has seen,  that she may
tell her travels,  and give them a taste of the world.  And take

1 Most likely Mrs.  Hervey,  Mrs.  Thrale's house is in West Street,
Aston's sister.    Ante,  i.  182.  which is the Court end of the town.'

2 For his Museum at Lichfield.  Mme.  D'Arblay's Diary,  i.  209.

3 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  44.  5 Mr.  Watson was probably Pro-

4 He was going to Lichfield and fessor Watson of Aberdeen,  whose
Ashbourne,  she to Brighton.     Miss History of Philip II Johnson had
Burney wrote from that town on May offered to revise.       Ante,    i.   412.
26 :— '  Mr.,   Mrs.,  Miss Thrale,  and The last volume was published this
Miss Susan Thrale and I travelled year.     The piracy which was feared
in a coach with four horses,  and was,  I suppose,  that of piratical pub-
two of the servants in a chaise,  be-  lishers,  such as those of Dublin,
sides two men on horseback.      Mr.

care,

92 To Mrs.  Thrale.  [A.D.  1779.

care,  and write to me very often,  till we meet again;  and keep

Master in good thoughts of me. Vale.

SAM:  JOHNSON.

616.

TO MRS.   THRALE1.

MADAM,  Lichfield,  May 29,  1779.

I have now been here a week,  and will try to give you my
journal,  or such parts of it as are fit in my mind for com-
munication.

On Friday. — We set out about twelve,  and lay at Daventry 2.

On Saturday. — We dined with Mr.  Rann at Coventry.  He
intercepted us at the town's end.  I saw Tom Johnson 3,  who had
hardly life to know that I was with him.  I hear he is since
dead.  In the evening I came to Lucy,  and walked to Stowhill ;
Mrs.  Aston was gone or going to bed  ;  I did not see her.

Sunday. — After dinner I went to Stowhill,  and was very
kindly received.  At night I saw my old friend Brodhurst 4 — you
know him — the play-fellow of my infancy,  and gave him a
guinea.

Monday. — Dr.  Taylor came,  and we went with Mrs.  Cobb to
Greenhill Bower.  I had not seen it perhaps for fifty years.  It
is much degenerated 5.  Every thing grows old.  Taylor is to
fetch me next Saturday.

1 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  45.  5  <  A Court is held by the Bailiffs

2 Seventy-two miles from London.  on Whit Monday in the Guild Hall,
Falstaff with his soldiers had taken which is immediately adjourned to
the same road,  when the one shirt in an open mount called Green Hill
all his company was  '  stolen from  (at which time also a Court Leet is
my host at Saint Alban's,   or the held),  when the names of all the
red-nose innkeeper of Daventry.'  householders of the twenty-one
I Henry IV,  Act iv.  sc.  2.   He would wards of the City are called over,  as
not go with his men the rest of owing suit and service to this Court,
the road.     '  I'll not march through It was anciently called The Court of
Coventry with them,    that's flat.'  Array,  or View of Men and Arms.
Coventry was 19 miles from Daven-  Processions are made by the Con-
try,  and Lichfield 25!   miles from stables and Dozeners  [ante,  i.  162,
Coventry.  n.  3]  of each ward,  who anciently

3 Ante,  i.  154.  bore tutelary saints,  but which are

4 I find no other mention of him.  now converted into garlands or em-

Mr.  Green

Aetat.69.]  To Mrs.  Thralc.

93

Mr.  Green came to see us,  and I ordered some physick.

Tuesday. — Physick,  and a little company.  I dined,  I think,
with Lucy both Monday and Tuesday.

Wednesday.  |    I had a few visits,  from Peter Garrick z among

Thursday.  )  the rest,  and dined at Stowhill.  My breath
very short.

Friday.— I dined at Stowhill.  I have taken physick four days
together.

Saturday. — Mrs.  Aston took me out in her chaise,  and was
very kind.  I dined with Mrs.  Cobb,  and came to Lucy,  with
whom I found,  as I had done the first day,  Lady Smith and Miss
Vyse 2.

This is the course of my life.  You do not think it much
makes me forget Streatham.  However it is good to wander
a little,  lest one should dream that all the world was Streatham,
of which one may venture to say,  none but itself can be its parallel1'.

I am,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

617.

TO MRS.    THRALE4.

DEAR MADAM,  Ashbourne,  June 14,  1779.

Your account of Mr.  Thrale's illness is very terrible  ;  but when

blems of their trade.     They are          "None but thyself can be thy
attended by Morice dancers,    who parallel.'"

dance sarabands  £c.,  in imitation of In Martinus Scriblerus,  ch.  vii,  it is

the Moors,  and on the following day suggested that  '  it is borrowed from

beg for money.     During the day the the thought of that master of a show

inhabitants of the wards are regaled in Smithfield,   who writ in large

with cold meat,  cake and wine at the letters over the picture of his ele-

expense of the Corporation.'      Har-  phant :  — "  This is the greatest

wood's History of Lichfield,  p.  352.  Elephant in the world except Him-

1 Ante,  i.  4,  n.  5.  self."  '     Warton says in a note that

2 Lady Smith is mentioned,  ante,  '  this line of Theobald,    which is
i.  329,  and Miss Vyse,  ante,  i.  334.  thought to be the masterpiece

3  'None but thyself can be thy of absurdity,    is evidently copied
parallel '  is from Theobald's Double from a line of Seneca in the Hercules
Falsehood.     Pope calls it  '  a marvel-  Furens  : —

lous line,'  and thus introduces it in  "  Quaeris Alcidae parem  ?

The Dunciad,  first edition,  iii.  271 :—  Nemo est nisi Ipse." '

'  For works like these let deathless Warton's Pope's Works,  vi.  208.

Journals tell,  4 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  47.

I remember

94

To Mrs.  Thrale.

[A.D.  1779.

I remember that he seems to have it peculiar to his constitu-
tion, that whatever distemper he has,  he always has his head
affected,  I am less frighted.  The seizure was,  I think,  not apo-
plectical1,  but hysterical,  and therefore not dangerous to life.
I would have you however consult such physicians as you think
you can best trust.  Bromfield seems to have done well,  and
by his practice appears not to suspect an apoplexy2.  That is
a solid and fundamental comfort.  I remember Dr.  Marsigli3,
an Italian physician,  whose seizure was more violent than Mr.
Thrale's,  for he fell down helpless,  but his case was not con-
sidered as of much danger,  and he went safe home,  arid is now
a professor at Padua.  His fit was considered as only hysterical.
I hope Sir Philip 4,  who franked your letter,  comforts you as
well as Mr.  Seward.  If I can comfort you,  I will come to

1  *  He was mistaken ;  it was a
downright apoplectic fit.  That,  which
was but the second,  he got over,
but died soon after of a fourth fit.'
BARETTI.  Mrs.  Piozzi in a marginal
note says: — 'I was sitting in the
drawing-room when my servant Sam
opened the door with un air effart
saying: — "  My master is come home,
but there is something amiss."  I
started up,  and saw a tall black fe-
male figure who cried,  "Don't go
into the library ;  don't go in I say."
My rushing by her somewhat rudely
was all her prohibition gained  ;  but
there sate Mrs.  Nesbitt holding her
brother's hand,  who,  I perceived,
knew not a syllable of what was pass-
ing.' She adds that  '  he had dropped
as if lifeless from the dinner-table at
Mrs.  Nesbitt's house,  and had been
brought five or six miles out of town
in that condition '  without being seen
by a doctor.  Hay ward's Piozzi,  i.
299.  Miss Burney wrote a day or
two later  : — '  At dinner everybody
tried to be cheerful ;  but a dark and
gloomy cloud hangs over the head of
poor Mr.  Thrale,  which no flashes of
merriment or beams of wit can pierce

through ;  yet he seems pleased that
everybody should be gay.'  Mme.
D'Arblay's Diary,  i.  220.

2  '  Dr.  Bromfield of Gerrard Street,
my old accoucheur,'    writes Mrs.
Piozzi.     '  He convinced me it was an
apoplectic seizure.'  Hayward's Piozzi,
i.  300.     See ante,  i.  178,  n.  6.

3 He was in England in 1757.
Life,  i.  322.

4 Sir Philip Jennings Clerk.    Life,
iv.  80.     Mr.  Thrale was,  no doubt,
too ill to frank his wife's letter.     She
seems however to have been in the
habit of imitating his writing,  for in
a letter to Johnson dated May 16,
1776,   she says:— Til make Mr.
Thrale frank this letter himself  [the
italics are hers]   for a fancy.'     On
this Baretti says in a marginal note  :
—'She franked for Mr.    Thrale.'
Piozzi Letters,  i.  332.     If she did so
she was guilty of felony,  and liable
to transportation for seven years.
Gentleman! s Magazine,  1764,  p.  184.
In the summer assizes at Exeter in
1783,    'a young gentleman'    was
sentenced to transportation for this
offence.  Gentleman's Magazine,  1783,
p.  708.

you

Aetat.eo.j To Mrs.  Tkrale.

95

you,  but I hope you are now no longer in want of any help
to be happy.

I am,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

The Doctor *  sends his compliments ;  he is one of the people
that are growing old.

618.

TO MRS.    THRALE2.

DEAR MADAM,  Ashbourne,  June 14, 1779.

How near we all are to extreme danger.  We are merry or
sad,  or busy or idle,  and forget that death is hovering over
us.  You are a dear lady for writing again.  The case,  as you
now describe it,  is worse than I conceived it when I read your
first letter.  It is still however not apoplectick,  but seems to
have something worse than hysterical,  a tendency to a palsy,
which I hope however is now over.  I am glad that you have
Heberden 3,  and hope we are all safer.  I am the more alarmed
by this violent seizure,  as I can impute it to no wrong practices,
or intemperance of any kind 4,  and therefore know not how any

1 Dr.  Taylor.  den.'  Cowper's Poems,  ed.  1786,  i.  272.

2 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  49.  4  '  The mere grief he could not

3  ( Johnson on being asked in his overcome of his only son's loss,
last illness what physician he had Johnson knew it,  but would not tell
sent for,  "  Dr.  Heberden,"  replied he,  it.'  BARETTI.    Mrs.  Thrale recorded
"  ultimus Romanorum,   the last of in her Diary soon after his seizure  :
the learned physicians." '     Seward's  — '  Few people live in such a state
Biographiana,  p.  601.    An interest-  of preparation for eternity,  I think,
ing Memoir of Heberden was pub-  as my dear master has done since I
lished in 1879 by Mr.  A.  C.  Buller.  have been connected with him  ;
Great though Heberden's learning regular in his public and private
was,  in one matter he acted in a manner devotions,  constant at the Sacrament,
unworthy of a scholar.    Hearing that temperate in his appetites,  moderate
a publisher had offered Dr.  Middle-  in his passions — he has less to ap-
ton's widow  ;£ 1 50 for an unpublished prehend from a sudden summons
work of her husband's,  entitled The than any man I have known who
Inefficacy of Prayer,   he gave her was young and gay,   and high in
^200,  and destroyed the manuscript.  health and fortune like him.'     Hay-
Life and Works of Heberden,  p.  14.  ward's Piozzi,    ii.    29.      After his
Perhaps it was partly on account of attack,  when his mind perhaps was
this action that Cowper addressed weakened,  he indulged too much in
him as  '  virtuous and faithful Heber-  eating.  Seepost,  p.  97,  n.  2,  and Life,

defence

96

To Henry Thrale.

[A.D.  1779.

defence or preservative can be obtained.  Mr.  Thrale has cer-
tainly less exercise than when he followed the foxes,  but he is
very far from unwieldiness or inactivity,  and further still from
any vicious or dangerous excess.  I fancy,  however,  he will do
well to ride more.

Do,  dear Madam,  let me know every post how he goes on.
Such sudden violence is very dreadful ;  we know not by what it
is let loose upon us,  nor by what its effects are limited.

If my coming can either assist or divert,  or be useful to any
purpose,  let me but know.  I will soon be with you.

Mrs.  Kennedy,  Queeney's Baucis,  ended last week a long life of
disease and poverty r.  She had been married about fifty years.

Dr.  Taylor is not much amiss,  but always complaining.

I am,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

P.  S.  Direct the next to Lichfield.

619.

To HENRY THRALE2.
DEAR SIR,  June 15, 1779.

Though I wrote yesterday to my mistress,  I cannot forbear
writing immediately to you,  my sincere congratulation upon your
recovery from so much disorder,  and your escape from so much
danger.  I should have had a very heavy part in the misfortune
of losing you,  for it is not likely that I should ever find such
another friend 3,  and proportionate at least to my fear must be
my pleasure.

iii.  422,  where Mrs.  Thrale writes to
Johnson  : — '  Mr.  Thrale looks well
enough,  but I have no notion of
health for a man whose mouth can-
not be sewed up.'  Miss Burney,
after describing in May 1779,  'a
very grand dinner,'  adds that  '  it was
nothing to a Streatham dinner.'
Mme.  D'Arblay's Diary,  i.  211.

1 Miss Thrale had visited Lich-
field in 1774.  Life,  v.  428.  Baucis's
hut is described in Ovid's Metamor-
phoses, viii.  630,  as

'  Parva quidem,  stipulis et canna

tecta palustri.'

Perhaps Queeney had read Swift's
Baucis and Philemon  ;  she might
however have read the original,  for
Johnson gave her Latin lessons.
Post,  p.  98,  n.  2.

2 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  57.

This letter is wrongly dated July
15.  It was no doubt written the
day after the letter to Mrs.  Thrale of
June 14.

3 Post,  Letter of April 5, 1781.

As

Aetat.  69.]  To Mrs.   Thrale.  97

As I know not that you brought this disease upon yourself by
any irregularity,  I have no advice to give you.  I can only wish,
and I wish it sincerely,  that you may live long and happily,  and
long count among those that love you best,  dear Sir,

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

620.

TO MRS.    THRALE1.

DEAR MADAM,  Ashbourne,  June 17,  1779.

It is certain that your first letter did not alarm me in pro-
portion to the danger,  for indeed it did not describe the danger
as it was.  I am glad that you have Heberden,  and hope his
restoratives and his preservatives will both be effectual.  In the
preservatives dear Mr.  Thrale must concur;  yet what can he
reform  ?  or what can he add to his regularity and temperance 2  ?
He can only sleep less3.  We will do,  however,  all we can.
I go to Lichfield to-morrow,  with intent to hasten to Streatham.
Both Mrs.  Aston and Dr.  Taylor have had strokes of the
palsy.  The Lady was sixty-eight,  and at that age has gained
ground upon it ;  the Doctor is,  you know,  not young,  and he is
quite well,  only suspicious of every sensation in the peccant arm.
I hope my dear master's case is yet slighter,  and that as his age
is less,  his recovery will be more perfect.  Let him keep his
thoughts diverted,  and his mind easy4.

I am,  dearest and dearest,

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

1 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  5 1.  eat much or little.    A strange man  ! '

2 Mrs.  Piozzi said that after this 3 Mme.    D'Arblay mentions his
attack  '  Mr.  Thrale's natural disposi-  '  immoderate sleep after meals.     Dr.
tion to conviviality degenerated into Johnson,'   she adds,   '  was so little
a preternatural desire for food.'  Hay-  aware of the insalubrity of his
ward's Piozzi,  i.  300.     Baretti says course of life that he often laughingly
that  'Dr.  Johnson knew that Thrale said,  "  Mr.  Thrale will out-sleep the
would eat like four,   let physicians Seven Sleepers." '     Memoirs of Dr.
preach.     May be he did not know it,  Burney,  ii.  206.

so little did he mind what people were 4  'That was impossible:  his lost
doing.  Though he sat by Thrale at son was always uppermost in his
dinner he never noticed whether he mind.'  BARETTI.

VOL.  II.  H T°

98 To Henry Thrale.  [A.D.  1770.

621.

TO MRS.    THRALE1.

DEAR MADAM,  Lichfieid,  June 19, 1779.

Whether it was that your description of dear Mr.  Thrale's
disorder was indistinct,  or that I am not ready at guessing
calamity,  I certainly did not know our danger — our danger,  for
sure I have a part in it,  till that danger was abated.

I am glad that Dr.  Heberden,  and that you perceive so plainly
his recovery.  He certainly will not be without any warning that
I can give him against pernicious practices.  His proportion of
sleep,  if he slept in the night,  was doubtless very uncommon ;
but I do not think that he slept himself into a palsy.  But
perhaps a lethargick is likewise a paralytical disposition.  We
will watch him as well as we can.  I have known a man,  who
had a stroke like this,  die forty years afterward without another.
I hope we have now nothing to fear,  or no more than is unalterably
involved in the life of man.

I begin now to let loose my mind after Queeney and Burney 2.
I hope they are both well.  It will not be long before I shall be
among you ;  and it is a very great degree of pleasure to hope that
I shall be welcome.

I am,  dear Madam,

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

622.

To HENRY THRALE 3.

DEAR SIR,  Lichfieid,  June 23,  1779.

To shew you how well I think of your health,  I have sent

1 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  52.  most learned scheme I know not ;

2 Burney is Miss Burney.     '  They but,  as I have always told you,  I am
were,'  writes Mrs.  Piozzi,  '  learning sure I fag more for fear of disgrace
Latin of him  ;  but Dr.  Burney would than for hope of profit.'     In Decem-
not let his girl go on:  he thought her,  1780,  she wrote :—' Miss Thrale
grammar too masculine a study for and I renewed our Latin exercises
misses.'     Hay ward's Piozzi,  i.  317.  with Dr.   Johnson,   and with great
Miss Burney writing on July 20 of tclat of praise.'     Mme.    D'Arblay's
this year says  : — '  Dr.  Johnson gives Diary,  i.  243,  427.

us a Latin lesson every morning.          3 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  54.
What progress we may make in this

you

Aetat.69.]  To Mrs.   Thrale.

99

you an hundred pounds to keep for me.  It will come within
one day of quarter day,  and that day you must give me '.  I
came by it in a very uncommon manner,  and would not confound
it with the rest 2.

My wicked mistress talks as if she thought it possible for me
to be indifferent or negligent about your health or hers.  If I
could have done any good,  I had not delayed an hour to come
to you,  and I will come very soon to try if my advice can be of
any use,  or my company of any entertainment.

What can be done you must do for yourself;  do not let any
uneasy thought settle in your mind.  Cheerfulness and exercise
are your great remedies.  Nothing is for the present worth your
anxiety.  Vivite laeti is one of the great rules of health 3.  I
believe it will be good to ride often,  but never to weariness,  for
weariness is itself a temporary resolution of the nerves,  and is there-
fore to be avoided 4.  Labour is exercise continued to fatigue —
exercise is labour used only while it produces pleasure.

Above all,  keep your mind quiet,  do not think with earnestness
even of your health,  but think on such things as may please
without too much agitation  ;  among which I hope is,  dear Sir,

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

623.

TO MRS.    THRALE5.

DEAR MADAM,  [Lichfieid],  June 24, 1779.

Though I wrote yesterday to Mr.  Thrale,  I think I must write

1 Quarter Day was the 24th.  John-  gentleman,  "live pleasant."'     Life,
son,  I think,  means to say that the i.  344.     Perhaps Johnson had seen
hundred pounds will reach Mr.  the motto round the picture of
Thrale on the 25th,  but that he must Racket,    Bishop of Lichfieid and
pay interest on it for the whole Coventry  : — '  Inservi Deo et Icetare!
quarter as if he had received it on 4 See post,  p.  102,  where Johnson
the 24th.  writes  : — '  I take the true definition

2 See/^/,  Letter of March 5,  1781,  of exercise to be labour without
where he says that he had received weariness.'    Resolution Johnson uses
one hundred pounds as part pay-  in a sense which he does not give in
ment of the sum due for the Lives.  his Dictionary  ;    though he comes
It is possible that it was this sum that near to it when he defines it as dis-
he would not confound with the rest.  solution,  and instances f the resolu-

'  Mr.     Burke once admirably tion of humidity congealed.'
counselled a grave and anxious 5 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  55.

H 1 this

ioo To Miss Reynolds.  [A. D.  1779.

this day to you  ;  and I hope this will be the last letter,  for I am
coming up as fast as I can ;  but to go down cost me seven
guineas z,  and I am loth to come back at the same charge.

You really do not use me well in thinking that I am in less
pain on this occasion than I ought to be.  There is nobody left
for me to care about but you and my master,  and I have now
for many years known the value of his friendship,  and the im-
portance of his life,  too well not to have him very near my heart.
I did not at first understand his danger,  and when I knew it,
I was told likewise that it was over — and over I hope it is for
ever.  I have known a man seized in the same manner,  who,
though very irregular and intemperate,  was never seized again.
Do what you can,  however,  to keep my master cheerful,  and
slightly busy,  till his health is confirmed ;  and if we can be sure
of that,  let Mr.  Perkins 2 go to Ireland and come back as oppor-
tunity offers,  or necessity requires,  and keep yourself airy,  and be

a funny little thing 3.  ...

I am,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

624.

TO MlSS REYNOLDS4.

DEAR MADAM,  London,  June 27, 1779.

I have sent what I can for your German friend.     At this
time it is very difficult to get any money,  and I cannot give much 5.
I am,  Madam,

Your most affectionate

and most humble servant,

SAM:  JOHNSON,

625.

To CHARLES DILLY.
[London,  July 13,  1779.]     Published in the Life,  iii.  394.

1 Ante,  i.  328, n.  I.  sort of clothes,  however;  they are

2 The superintendant of Mr.  unsuitable in every way.       What !
Thrale's Brewery and his successor.  have not all insects gay colours?"'

3 Funny is no doubt a misprint for Life,  i.  495.

sunny.     The words are,  I suspect,  a 4 First published in Croker's Bos-

quotation.   One day  '  on Mrs.  Thrale well,  page 632.

appearing before him in a dark-  5 For the difficulty of getting

coloured gown he said,  "  You little money see ante,  ii.  87,  n.  5.
creatures should never wear those

To

Aetat.  69.]          To the Reverend Dr.    Taylor.  101

626.

To JAMES BOSWELL.
[London],  July 13,  1779.     Published in the Life,  iii.  395.

627.

To THE REVEREND DR.  TAYLOR x.

DEAR SIR,

Since my return hither I have applied myself very diligently
to the care of my health.  My nights grew better at your house,
and have never since been bad  ;  but my breath was very much
obstructed ;  yet I have at last got it tolerably free.  This has
not been done without great efforts  ;  of the last fifty days I have
taken mercurial physick,  I believe,  forty,  and have lived with
much less animal food than has been my custom of late z.

From this account you may,  I think,  derive hope and comfort.
I am older than you,  my disorders had been of very long con-
tinuance, and if it should please God that this recovery is lasting,
you have reason to expect an abatement of all the pains that
encumber your life.

Mr.  Thrale has felt a very heavy blow.  He was for some time
without reason,  and,  I think,  without utterance.  Heberden was
in great doubt whether his powers of mind would ever return.
He has however perfectly recovered all his faculties and all his
vigour 3.  He has a fontanel 4 in his back.  I make little doubt
but that,  notwithstanding your dismal prognostication,  you may
see one another again.

He purposes this autumn to spend some time in hunting on

1 First published in Notes and way as well as in his neighbours'.'
Queries,  6th S.  v.  461.  Mme.  D'Arblay's Diary,  i.  245.

2 Miss Burney had written five 3  '  Mr.  Thrale is as well as ever he
days earlier to Mr.  Crisp  :— '  I fear was in health,  though the alarming
you are not so steady in your in-  and terrible blow he so lately received
tended reformation as to diet and has,  I fear,  given a damp to his spirits
exercise as you proposed being.    Dr.  that will scarce ever be wholly con-
Johnson has made resolutions exactly quered.     Yet he grows daily rather
similar to yours,  and in general ad-  more cheerful.'    Jb.

heres to them with strictness  ;  but the 4  '  An issue  ;  a discharge opened
old Adam,  as you say,  stands in his in the body.'     Johnson's Dictionary.

the

102 To Mrs.  Thrale.

the downs of Sussex.  I hope you are diligent to take as much
exercise as you can bear.  I had rather you rode twice a day
than tired yourself in the morning.  I take the true definition
of exercise to be labour without weariness  '.

When I left you,  there hung over you a cloud of discontent
which is I hope dispersed.  Drive it away as fast as you can.
Sadness only multiplies self.  Let us do our duty,  and be

cheerful.

Dear Sir,  your humble Servant,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

August 3,  1779-

To the Revd Dr.  Taylor at Ashbourne,  Derbyshire.

628.

To JAMES BOSWELL.
Streatham,  September 9,  1779.     Published in the Life,  iii.  396.

629.

TO MRS.    THRALE2.

DEAR MADAM,  Monday,  Oct.  4,  1779-

I had intended to send you such a card as I have inclosed,
when I was alarmed by hearing that my servant had told in the
house,  for servants never tell their masters,  his opinion  —  that for
the two last days Mr.  Thrale was visibly worse.  His eyes are
keen,  and his attention upon such occasions vigorous enough.

I therefore earnestly wish,  that before you set out,  even though
you should lose a day,  you would go together to Heberden,  and
see what advice he will give you.  In this doubtful pendulous
state of the distemper,  advice may do much  ;  and physicians,  be
their powers less or more,  are the only refuge that we have in
sickness3.  I wish you would do yet more,  and propose to
Heberden a consultation with some other of the doctors  ;  and if
Lawrence is at present fit for business4,  I wish he might be
called,  but call somebody.  As you make yourselves of more
importance,  you will be more considered Do not go away with

1 Ante,  ii.  99.  4 Perhaps he had had the first

2 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  58.  attacks of the palsy which three

3 Johnson's piety here seems to years later made him unable to write.
slumber.  Life,  iv.  144,  n.  3.

any

Aetat.  70.]

To Mrs.  Thrale.

103

any reason to tax yourselves with negligence.  You are in a
state in which nothing that can be done ought to be omitted.
We now do right or wrong for a great stake.  You may send the
children and nurses forward to-morrow,  and go yourselves on
Wednesday T.  Little things must not now be minded,  and least
of all must you mind a little money.  What the world has is to be
sold,  and to be enjoyed by those that will pay its price.  Do not
give Heberden a single guinea,  and subscribe a hundred to keep
out the French 2 ;  we have an invasion more formidable,  and an
enemy less resistible by power,  and less avoidable by flight.  I
have now done my duty.

I am,  dearest Lady,

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

630.

TO MRS.    THRALE3.

DEAR MADAM,  Oct.  5, 1779.

When Mr.  Boswell 4 waited on Mr.  Thrale in Southwark,  I
directed him to watch all appearances with close attention,  and
bring me his observations.  At his return he told me,  that with-
out previous intelligence he should not have discovered that Mr.
Thrale had been lately ill.

It appears to me that Mr.  Thrale's disorder,  whether grumous
or serous 5,  must be cured by bleeding ;  and I would not have
him begin a course of exercise without considerable evacuation 6.

1 They were going to Tunbridge
Wells.

2 Adolphus in his History of Eng-
land, iii.  158,  writing of this year
when we were at war with the United
States,  France and Spain,  says  : —
'Individuals andpublic bodies entered
into large subscriptions for raising
troops,  giving bounties to seamen,
and equipping privateers.'     Johnson
ridiculed the fears of an invasion.
Post,  p.  109.

3 Pioisxi Letters,  ii.  60.

4 Boswell,  who had made a sudden
journey to London,   had called at

Johnson's house the morning before
and found him in bed.  *  He called
briskly,  "Frank,  go and get coffee,
and let us breakfast in splendour."  '
Life,  iii.  400.  Unfortunately Boswell
was very indolent in keeping his
Journal this visit.

5 Grumous Johnson defines as
'thick,    clotted';     serous as   'thin,
watery  ;  used of the part of the blood
which separates in congelation from
the grumous or red part .'

6 Johnson had written to Boswell
on September 9 : — '  Mr.Thrale goes to
Brighthelmstone about Michaelmas

To

104 To Mrs.  Thrale.  0.0.1779.

To encrease the force of the blood,  unless it be first diluted and
attenuated,  may be dangerous.  But the case is too important
for my theory.

The weakness in my ankles left them for a day,  but has now
turned to a pain in my toe,  much like that at Brighthelmstone.
It is not bad,  nor much more than troublesome ;  I hope it will
not be greater,  nor last long.

You all go with the good wishes of,  dear Madam,

Your,  &c.5

SAM:  JOHNSON.

631

TO MRS.    THRALE1.

DEAR MADAM,  London,  Oct.  8, 1779.

I begin to be frighted at your omission to write  ;  do not tor-
ment me any longer,  but let me know where you are,  how you
got thither,  how you live there,  and every thing else that one
friend loves to know of another.

I will show you the way.

On Sunday the gout left my ankles,  and I went very commo-
diously to Church.  On Monday night I felt my feet uneasy.
On Tuesday I was quite lame.  That night I took an opiate,
having first taken physick and fasted.  Towards morning on
Wednesday the pain remitted. — Bozzy came to me,  and much
talk we had 2.  I fasted another day ;  and on Wednesday night
could walk tolerably.  On Thursday,  finding myself mending,  I
ventured on my dinner,  which I think has a little interrupted my
convalescence.  To-day I have again taken physick,  and eaten
only some stewed apples.  I hope to starve it away.  It is now
no worse than it was at Brighthelmstone.

This,  Madam,  is the history of one of my toes  ;  the history of
my head would perhaps be much shorter.  I thought it was the

to be jolly and ride a hunting.'  Life,  to say when he was indolent with his

Hi.  397.     For Johnson's  '  dabbling in Journal  :  —  '  During this visit to

physic'  see Life,  iii.  152.  London I had several interviews with

1 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  61.  Dr.  Johnson,  which it is unnecessary

2 Boswell has no record of this to distinguish particularly.'    Life,  iii.
day.     He says,  as he was accustomed 400.

gout

Aetat.  TO.]  To Mrs .   Thrale.

gout on Saturday.  It has already lost me two dinners abroad,
but then I have not been at much more charges,  for I have eaten
little at home.

Surely I shall have a letter to-morrow.

I am,  &c.,

SAM  :  JOHNSON.

632.

TO MRS.    THRALE1.

DEAR MADAM,  London,  Oct.  u,  1779.

I thought it very long till I heard from you,  having sent a
second letter to Tunbridge,  which I believe you cannot have
received 2.  I do not see why you should trouble yourself with
physicians while Mr.  Thrale grows better.  Company and bustle
will,  I hope,  complete his cure.  Let him gallop over the
Downs in the morning,  call his friends about him to dinner,
and frisk in the rooms at night 3,  and outrun time and outface
misfortune.

Notwithstanding all authorities against bleeding,  Mr.  Thrale
bled himself well ten days ago.

You will lead a jolly life,  and perhaps think little of me  ;  but
I have been invited twice to Mrs.  Vesey's conversation4,  but
have not gone.  The gout that was in my ankles when Queeney
criticised my gait,  passed into my toe,  but I have hunted it,  and
starved it,  and it makes no figure.  It has drawn some attention,
for Lord and Lady Lucan sent to enquire after me.  This is all
the news that I have to tell you.  Yesterday I dined with Mr.

1 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  63.  4 Conversation is apparently a

2 They soon left Tunbridge Wells translation of conversazione.    John-
for Brighton.       Mme.     D'Arblay's son uses it again,  post,  Letter of
Diary,  i.  267.  December 31,  1783.     In the Letter

3  '  In the evening we went to the of June 15,  1780,  he writes  :— 'I was
rooms,  which at this time are open at Kenny's conversation?      As we
every other night at Shergold's,  or have not the originals a misprint is
the New Assembly Rooms,  and the possible.     Hawkins writes of  '  a tea-
alternate nights at Hick's or the Ship conversation.'  Post,  p.  1 13,  n.  3.   For
Tavern.     There was very little com-  Mrs.  Vesey see ante,  ii.  88,  n.  3,  and
pany.     Almost everybody but our-  for Lady Lucan,  ii.  65.

selves went to cards.'     Ib.  p.  268.

Strahan,

io6 To Mrs.  Thrale.  [A.D.  1779.

Strahan,  and Boswell was there x.  We shall be both to-morrow
at Mr.  Ramsay's 2.  Now sure I have told you quite all,  unless
you yet want to be told that

I am,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

633.

To MRS.    THRALE3.

DEAR MADAM,  Oct.  16, 1779.

The advice given you by Dr.  Pepys 4 agrees very exactly
with my notions.  I would not bleed but in exigencies.  Riding
and cheerfulness will,  I hope,  do all the business.  All alive and
merry,  must be my master's motto.

How did you light on your specifick for the tooth-ach  ?  You
have now been troubled with it less.  I am glad you are at last
relieved.

You say nothing of tt\z younglings* ;  I hope they are not
spoiled with the pleasures of Brighthelmston,  a dangerous
place,  we were told,  for children.  You will do well to keep them
out of harm's way.

From the younglings let me pass to a veteran  ;  you tell me

nothing of Mr.  S 6 ;    I hope he is well,  and cheerful and

communicative.  Does Mr.  Thrale go and talk with him,  and do
you run in and out  ?  You may both be the better for his
conversation.

I am sorry for poor Thomas7,  who was a decent and civil

1 Life,  iii.  400.  who was now at Brighton.     Mme.

2 Life,  iii.  407.  D'Arblay's Diary,  i.  285  ;  v.  300.

3 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  64.  7  '  Mrs.   Thrale entered all our

4 Sir Lucas Pepys.     Boswell call-  names at Thomas's,  the fashionable
ing on Johnson on March 22,  1783,  bookseller;  but we find he has now a
says : — '  He was better,  but I per-  rival,  situated also upon the Steyn,
ceived he was but an unruly patient,  who seems to carry away all the
for Sir Lucas Pepys,  who visited him,  custom and all the company.     This
while I was with him said,  "If you is a Mr.  Bowen who is just come
were tractable,   Sir,    I should pre-  from London.     Mrs.  Thrale,  at the
scribe for you."  '     Life,  iv.  169.  same time that she sees his manage-

5 Miss Burney and Miss Thrale.  ment and contrivance,    so much

6 Perhaps Mr.  Scrase  (ante,  i.  395)  admires his sagacity and dexterity,
or a Mr.    Selwin to whom Miss that,   though open-eyed,   she is as
Burney took  '  a prodigious fancy,'  easily wrought upon to part with her

man.

Aetat.  TO.]  To Miss Reynolds.  107

man.  It is hard that he should be overwhelmed by a new-comer.
But thou by some other shall be laid as low.  Bowen's day may
come.  A finer shop may be erected,  kept by yet a fairer man,
and crowded by greater numbers of fine gentlemen and fine
ladies.

My foot gives me very little trouble ;  but it is not yet well.
I have dined,  since you saw me,  not so often as once in two
days.  But I am told how well I look ;  and I really think I get
more mobility.  I dined on Tuesday with Ramsay,  and on
Thursday with Paoli,  who talked of coming to see you,  till I told
him of your migration.

Mrs.  Williams is not yet returned  ;  but discord and discontent
reign in my humble habitation as in the palaces of monarchs. —
Mr.  Levet and Mrs.  Desmoulins have vowed eternal hate.
Levet is the more insidious,  and wants me to turn her out1.
Poor Williams writes word that she is no better,  and has left off
her physick.  Mr.  Levet has seen Dr.  Lewis,  who declares
himself hopeless of doing her any good.  Lawrence desponded
some time ago.

I thought I had a little fever some time,  but it seems to be
starved away.  Bozzy says,  he never saw me so well.  I hope
you will say the same when you see me :  methinks it will be
pleasant to see you all — there is no danger of my forgetting
you.  Only keep or grow all well,  and then I hope our meeting

will be happy.

I am,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

634.

TO MlSS REYNOLDS2.

DEAREST MADAM,  Oct.  19, 1779-

You are extremely kind in taking so much trouble.  My
foot is almost well ;  and one of my first visits will certainly be
to Dover Street 3.  You will do me a great favour if you will

money as any of the many dupes in T Ante,  ii.  74,  77.

this place whom he persuades to 2 First published in Croker's Bos-

require indispensably whatever he well,  page 639.

shows them.'     16.  i.  267.  3 Ante,  ii.  85,  n.  I.

buy

1 08

To the Reverend Dr.  Taylor.          [A.D.

buy for me the prints of Mr.  Burke,  Mr.  Dyer J,  and Dr.  Gold-
smith, as you know good impressions.  If any of your own
pictures are engraved,  buy them for me.  I am fitting up a little

room with prints.

I am your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

635.

To THE REVEREND DR.  TAYLOR 2.

DEAR SIR,

[When I found that the Deanery had given you no uneasi-
ness, I was satisfied,  and thought no more of writing.  You may
indeed be very well without it,  and  [I]  am glad to find that you
think so yourself.  You have enough,  if you are satisfied 3.]

Mr.  Thrale,  after whose case you will have a natural curiosity,
is with his family at Brighthelmston.  He rides very vigorously,
and runs much into company,  and is very angry if it be thought
that any thing ails him.  Mrs.  Thrale thinks him for the present
in no danger.  I had no mind to go with them,  for I have had
what Brighthelmston can give,  and I know not they much
wanted me.

I have had a little catch 4 of the gout ;  but as I have had no
great opinion of the benefits which it is supposed to convey,  I
made haste to be easy,  and drove it away after two days 5.

1 Samuel Dyer,  a member of the
Ivy Lane Club and the Literary
Club.  Life,  iv.  10,  436.  Johnson
consulted him about a piece of Latin,
saying : — *  Sir,  I beg to have your
judgment,  for I know your nicety.'
Ib.  iv.  ii.  Sir Joshua Reynolds
thought  '  he was the author oijuntus
assisted by Edmund and William
Burke/  Prior's M r alone •,  p.  419.
The print of him which Johnson
wanted was the mezzotinto from
Reynolds' s portrait.  *  It has been
copied for the Lives of the Poets by
mistake,  as if it were the portrait of
John Dyer,  author of a poem called
the Fleece?  Ib.  p.  423.

8 First published in Notes and

Queries ;  6th S.  v.  461.

3 This paragraph is erased in the
original.      The only Deanery that
had been filled up this summer was
that of Rochester,  on June 16.     Le
Neve's Fast.  Eccl.  AngL,  ii.   579.
See post.  Letter of November 14,
1781,  for Taylor's longings after
another Deanery.

4 There is no instance in Johnson's
Dictionary or in Dr.   Murray's of
catch used in this sense.

5 Horace Walpole writing after an
attack of the gout,  says  : — (  The pain
would be endurable were it to end
here  ;  but being the wicket through
which one squeezes into old age,  and
the prospect pointing to more such

Publick

Aetat.  70.]          To the Reverend Dr.   Taylor.

109

Publick affairs continue to go on without much mending,  and
there are those still who either fright themselves or would fright
others with an invasion z ;  but my opinion is that the French
neither have nor had in any part of the Summer a number of
ships on the opposite coast equal to the transportation of twenty
or of ten thousand Men.  Such a fleet cannot be hid in a creek,
it must be safely  [easily  ?]  visible and yet I believe no man has
seen the man that has seen it.  The ships of war were within
sight of Plymouth,  and only within sight.

I wish,  I knew how your health stands.  My friends con-
gratulate me upon my looks,  and indeed I am very free from
some of the most troublesome of my old complaints,  but I have

wickets,  I cannot comfort myself
with that common delusion of inter-
mediate health.  What does the
gout cure that is so bad as itself  ? '
Letters,  v.  260.  Nevertheless twelve
years later he wrote  : — '  The gout
prevents other illnesses and prolongs
life.  Could I cure it,  should not I
have a fever,  a palsy,  or an apo-
plexy ? '  Ib.  viii.  362.  John Wes-
ley refers to the same delusion when
he writes  : — '  Regard not them who
say,  "The gout ought not to be
cured." '  Primitive Physick,  ed.  1762,
p.  70.

1 The Earl of Carlisle wrote to
George Selwyn on June 18 of this
year : — '  I never saw less despond-
ency, and more spirit manifested in
a difficult moment,  than at the pre-
sent. Our common practice is to be
alarmed for two or three days,  and
then to go to all the balls and operas,
as if the country was in the greatest
safety.'  G.  Selvvyn's Life,  £c.,  ed.  by
Jesse,  iv.  198.

Susan Burney,  who was staying
at Chesington in Surrey,  wrote on
August 25  : — 'A report reached us
from Kingston that the French and
Spaniards were landed.  Mr.  Crisp,
who spends his life in perpetual ap-
prehension of terrible national ca-

lamities, went to Kingston the next
morning,  and came back with a
countenance calculated to terrify and
crush temerity itself.  He could eat
no dinner.  Troops of French and
Spaniards were landed at Falmouth,
whilst the combined Fleets were
throwing bombs into Plymouth.
This day and the next we spent
really very miserably.  Sunday we
received intelligence from my father,
who was at Mr.  Charmer's  [the
Under Secretary of State],  that the
French had not yet attempted to
land,  and though much was to be
dreaded,  there yet remained some-
thing to hope.'  Early Diary of
Fanny Burney ',  ii.  263.

Mrs.  Barbauld writing in July,
1803,  when Napoleon was threaten-
ing England,  says  :— *  Pray are you
an alarmist?  One hardly knows
whether to be frightened or diverted
on seeing people assembled at a
dinner-table,  appearing to enjoy ex-
tremely the fare and the company,
and saying all the while with a most
smiling and placid countenance,  that
the French are to land in a fortnight,
and London is to be sacked and
plundered for three days— and then
they talk of going to watering-places.'
Barbauld's Works^  ii.  92.

gained

no

To Mrs.  Thrale.

[A.D.  1779.

gained this relief by very steady use of mercury and purgatives,
with some opium,  and some abstinence.  I have eaten more fruit
this summer than perhaps in any since I was twenty years old,
but though it certainly did me no harm,  I know not that I had
any medicinal good from it x.

Write to me soon.  We are both old.  How few of those whom
we have known in our youth are left alive !  May we yet live to
some better purpose.

I am,  Sir,  your most humble Servant,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

London,  Oct.  19,  1779.
To the Revd Dr.  Taylor in Ashbourne,  Derbyshire.

636.

TO MRS.    THRALE2.

DEAR MADAM,  October 21, 1779.

Your treatment of little  *  *  *  *  was undoubtedly right;
when there is so strong a reason against any thing as uncon-
querable terrour,  there ought surely to be some weighty reason
for it before it is done.  But for putting into the water 3 a child
already well,  it is not very easy to find any reason strong or
weak.  That the nurses fretted,  will supply me during life with
an additional motive to keep every child,  as far as is possible,
out of a nurse's power.  A nurse made of common mould will
have a pride in overpowering a child's reluctance.  There are
few minds to which tyranny is not delightful ;  power is nothing
but as it is felt,  and the delight of superiority is proportionate to
the resistance overcome 4.

I walked yesterday to Covent-garden,  and feel to-day neither

1 In his Life of Swift he scoffs at
that writer's notion that the giddi-
ness from which he suffered had
been caused by eating too much
fruit in his youth.      '  Almost every
boy eats as much fruit as he can get,
without any great inconvenience.'
Works,  viii.  194.

2 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  67.

3 No doubt into the sea,  for they
were at Brighton.

4 Johnson in the Rambler,  No.
114,  after showing how flattering and
delightful are power and superiority,
continues  : — '  We love to overlook
the boundaries which we do not wish
to pass ;  and as the Roman satirist
remarks,  he that has no design to
take the life of another is yet glad to
have it in his hands.'  The Roman
satirist is Juvenal.  Satires,  x.  96.

pain

Aetat.  70.]  To Mrs.  Thrale.  \  \  \

pain nor weakness.  Send me,  if you can,  such an account of
yourself and my master.

Sir Philip x sent me word that he should be in town,  but he has
not yet called.  Yesterday came Lady Lucan and Miss Bingham2,
and she said it was the first visit that she had paid.

Your new friend Mr.  Bowen,  who has sold fifty sets,  had but
thirty to sell,  and I am afraid has yet a set or two for a friend.
There is a great deal of fallacy in this world.  I hope you do not
teach the company wholly to forsake poor Thomas 3.

The want of company is an inconvenience,  but Mr.  Cumber-
land is a million 4.  Make the most of what you have.  Send my
master out to hunt in the morning,  and to walk the rooms in the
evening;  and bring him as active as a stag on the mountain,
back to the borough.  When he is in motion he is mending.

The young ones are very good in minding their book.  If I do
not make something of them,  'twill reflect upon me,  as I knew not
my trade;  for their parts are sufficiently known,  and every body
will have a better opinion of their industry than of mine.  How-
ever, I hope when they come back,  to accustom them to more
lessons 5.

Your account of Mr.  Scrase gives me no delight.      He was

1 Sir Philip J.  Clerk.     Ante,  ii.  94.  3 For Bowen and Thomas,   see

2 Bingham is the family name of the ante,  ii.  106,72.6.  The 'sets' were sets
Earls of Lucan.     Miss Bingham mar-  of the first four volumes of the Lives.
ried in 1781 the second Earl Spencer ;  See next Letter where Johnson owns
and by him was the mother of Vis-  that he did Bowen wrong.

count Althorp,  the Leader of the 4 Boswell quotes this passage in a
House of Commons from 1830 to 1834.  note.  Life,  iv.  384,  n.  2.  Northcote,
During the time that her husband according to Hazlitt  (Conversations
was at the head of the Admiralty  *  she of Northcote,  p.  275),  said that John-
is often touchingly mentioned in the son and his friends  '  never admitted

letters of Nelson and Collingwood,      C [Cumberland]  as one of the

as one who was sure to sympathise set ;  Sir Joshua did not invite him

with them in their difficulties.     She to dinner.     If he had been in the

used playfully to call Nelson her bull-  room,  Goldsmith would have flown

dog.'     Memoir of Viscount Althorp,  out of it as if a dragon had been

p.   20.      Gibbon described her in there.      I remember Garrick once

1785 as    'a charming woman who saying,  "  D— n his dish-clout face;

with sense and spirit has the sim-  his plays would never do,  if it were

plicity and playfulness of a child.'  not for my patching them up and

Gibbon's Misc.  Works,  ii.  384.     See acting in them."  '

ante,  ii.  65,  nn.  4,  9.  5 Ante,  ii.  98,  n.  2.

a friend

112

To Mrs.   Thrale.

[A.D.  1779.

a friend upon all occasions,  whether assistance was wanted from
the purse or the understanding '.  When he is gone,  our barrier
against calamity is weakened  ;  and we must act with caution,  or
we shall be in more danger.  Consult him,  while his advice is yet
to be had.

What makes C hate B .     D is indeed a rival,  and

can upon occasion provoke a bugle.     But what has B done  ?

Does he not like her look 2  ?

*  *  *  *  has passed one evening with me.  He has made great
discoveries in a library at Cambridge,  and he finds so many
precious materials,  that his book must be a porter's load.  He
has sent me another sheet 3.

I am,  dearest of all dear Ladies,
Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

637.

TO MRS.    THRALE4.

DEAR MADAM,  London,  October 25,  1779.

Let me repair an injury done by misinformation to Mr.
Bowen.  He had at first indeed only thirty,  that is,  two shares ;
but he afterwards purchased two shares more 5.  So all that he
says I suppose is true.

jealousy.  He had by this time
brought out only one of his seven
tragedies — Hecuba — and that had
reached only the third night.  Baker's
Biog.  Dram.,  ii.  289.

*  Provoke a bugle,'  if it is not
a quotation,  was perhaps one of
the catch- words of the Streatham
set.  Johnson gives as one of
the meanings of bugle,  'a sort of
wild ox.'

1 Ante,  \.  348,  395.

2 C—  is Cumberland,    B—  Miss
Burney,  and D —  Dr.  Delap,  who
had with him  '  another tragedy,  and
told Miss Burney she would have it
to read.'     He begged Mrs.    Thrale
for a prologue.  Cumberland avoided
Miss Burney,   because,   as all the
folk said,  it had got abroad that she
was  '  to bring out a play that season.
Though in all other respects he is an
agreeable and a good man,  he is
notorious for hating and envying
and spiting all authors in the dra-
matic line.     He had given evident
marks of displeasure at Dr.  Delap's
name whenever Mrs.   Thrale has
mentioned it.'      Mme.    D'Arblay's
Diary,  i.  272,  275,  and Hayward's
Piozzi,  i.  302.     Dr.  Delap's success
had not been so great as to justify

3 See.  post,  p.  1 1 8,  where the same
author is probably mentioned.     I
suspect that Dr.  Burney is meant,
who a year earlier had gone to Ox-
ford in search of materials for his
History of Music.    It fills four quarto
volumes.    Johnson's name is in the
list of subscribers.

4 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  70.

5 As is shown by the title-page of

On

Aetat.  TO.]  To Mrs.  Thrale.  113

On Saturday I walked to Dover-street1,  and back.  Yesterday
I dined with Sir Joshua.  There was Mr.  Elliot of Cornwall 2,
who enquired after my master.  At night I was bespoken by
Lady Lucan ;  but she was taken ill,  and the assembly was put
off.  I am to dine with Renny 3 to-morrow.

I hope Mr.  Thrale scours the country after the early horn,  and
at night flutters about the rooms,  and once a- day makes a lusty
dinner.  I eat meat but once in two days,  at most but four times
a-week,  reckoning several weeks together ;  for it is neither
necessary nor prudent to be nice in regimen.  Renny told
me yesterday,  that I look better than when she knew me
first.

It is now past the postman's time,  and I have no letter ;  and
that is not well done,  because I long for a letter ;  and you should
always let me know whether you and Mr.  Thrale,  and all the
rest,  are or are not well.  Do not serve me so often,  because your
silence is always a disappointment.

Some old gentlewomen at the next door are in very great dis-
tress. Their little annuity comes from Jamaica,  and is therefore
uncertain  ;  and one of them has had a fall,  and both are very
helpless ;  and the poor have you to help them.  Persuade my
master to let me give them something for him.  It will be
bestowed upon real want.

I hope all the younglings go on well,  that the eldest are very
prudent,  and the rest very merry.  We are to be merry but a
little while  ;  Prudence soon conies to spoil our mirth.  Old Times

the Lives,  thirty-six firms of book-  With cream and sugar temper'd

sellers had shares in it.     J.  Bowen's well,

name comes last.  Another dish of tea.

'  Where Miss Reynolds lodged.  Nor fear that I?  my gentle maidj

f Ar"'       5'    A T A TTV TT t,     A ShaU  ^  ******  ^  °UP>

Afterwards Lord Eliot.     He had When Qnce untQ the bottom l
travelled with Philip Stanhope,  Lord Haye dnmk the Hquor up<

Chesterfield's illegitimate son.     Life,  .

iv<  332>  Yet hear at last this mournful

3 Miss Reynolds.     '  At a tea-con-  truth>

versation,'  writes Hawkins,  «  Johnson Nor hear Jt wlth a,  fro^n>

addressing himself to Miss Reynolds Thou canst not make the tea so
went on rhyming thus  : —

"  I pray thee,  gentle Renny dear,  As I can gulp it down.

That thou wilt give to me,  HAWKINS'S Life of Johnson,  p.  389.

VOL.   II.                                              I have

To Mrs.  Aston.

[A.D.  1779.

have bequeathed us a precept,  to be merry and wise,  but who has
been able to observe it.

There is a very furious fellow writing with might and main
against the life of Milton T.

I am,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

638.

To MRS.  ASTON 2.
DEAREST MADAM,

Mrs.  Gastrel is so kind as to write to me,  and yet I always
write to you,  but I consider what is written to either as written
to both.  Publick affairs do not seem to promise much amend-
ment, and the nation is now full of distress.  What will be  [the]
event of things none can tell,  we may still hope for better times3.

My health,  which I began to recover,  when I was in the country,
continues still in a good state ;  it costs me indeed some physick,
and something of abstinence,  but it pays the cost.  I wish,  dear
Madam,  I could hear a little of your improvements.

Here is no news.  The talk of the invasion4 seems to be over.
But a very turbulent Session of Parliament is expected 5,  though
turbulence is not likely to do any good.  Those are happyest
who are out of the noise and tumult.  There will be no great
violence of faction at Stowhill,  and that it may  [be]  free from
that and all other inconvenience and disturbance,  is the sincere
wish of all your friends.

I am,

Dear Madam,

Your most humble servant,
Oct. 25, 1779.  SAM:  JOHNSON.

Bolt-court,  Fleet-street.

1  '  Against his Life of Milton the
hounds of Whiggism have opened in
full cry.'     Life,  iv.  40.

2 First published in Croker's Bos-
well,  page 640.  Corrected by me from
the original in Pembroke College
Library.

3 Horace Walpole,   a week later,
lamenting the decay of England,
says  :— '  Ambition I never felt,  but

was content with being an individual
in so free and splendid a nation.
'Tis all gone,  Madam,  and methinks
one sinks in one's own estimation in
proportion.'  Letters,  vii.  268.  John-
son's tone,  when he speaks of public
affairs,  henceforth is gloomy.

4 Ante,  ii.  109.

5 Parliament met on November 25.
Par I.  Hist.  xx.  1020.

To

Aetat.  70.]

To Mrs.  Thrale.

639.

To JAMES BOSWELL.
London,  October 27,  1779.     Published in the Life,  in.  413.

640.

To MRS.  THRALEJ.

DEAR MADAM,  London,  October 28, 1779.

Some days before our last separation,  Mr.  Thrale and I had
one evening an earnest discourse about the business with Mr.
Scrase.  For myself,  you may be sure I am very willing to be
useful ;  but surely all use of such an office is at a very great dis-
tance2. Do not let those fears prevail which you know to be
unreasonable  ;  a will brings the end of life no nearer 3.  But with
this we will have done,  and please ourselves with wishing my
master multos etfelices.

C L—  - 4 accuses  *  *  *  *  of making a party against her

play.     I always hissed away the charge,  supposing him a man
of honour ;  but I shall now defend him with less confidence.

1 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  72 .

2 For Mr.  Scrase,  the solicitor,  see
ante,  i.  395.     The office that John-
son was to fill was that of one of Mr.
Thrale's executors.     Life,  iv.  85,  and
post,  pp.  119,  126.

3  '  Thus I gather that death is dis-
agreeable to most citizens,  because
they commonly die intestate ;    this
being a rule that when their will is
made they think themselves nearer
a grave than before  :  now they,  out
of the wisdom of thousands,  think to
scare destiny,  from which there is no
appeal,  by not making a will,  or to
live longer by protestation of their
unwillingness to die.'     An Essay on
Death.      Bacon's Works,   ed.    1803,
ii.  476.    (In Spedding's Bacon,  vi.
594,  it is maintained that this Essay
is not Bacon's.)     Johnson with all
his wisdom was with difficulty brought
to complete his own will,  and only
finally executed it five days before

his death.     Life,  iv.  402.

4  '  Charlotte Lennox.'  BARETTI.
*  Dr.  Goldsmith,  upon occasion of
Mrs.  Lennox's bringing out a play,
said to Dr.  Johnson at the CLUB,
that a person had advised him to go
and hiss it,  because she had attacked
Shakspeare in her book called Shak-
speare Illustrated.  JOHNSON.  "  And
did not you tell him he was a rascal  ?"
GOLDSMITH.  "No,  Sir,  I did not.
Perhaps he might not mean what he
said."  JOHNSON.  "  Nay,  Sir,  if he
lied,  it is a different thing."  Colman
slily said,  (but it is believed Dr.
Johnson did not hear him,)  "  Then
the proper expression should have
been, — Sir,  if you don't lie,  you're a
rascal." '  Life,  iv.  10.  The play,  it
is believed,  was The Sister,  brought
out in 1769.  Gentleman's Magazine
for 1769,  p.  199.  Cumberland very
likely was the person Mrs.  Lennox
accused.  Ante,  ii.  112,  n.  2.
2 Nequid

1 1 6 To Mrs.  Thrale.  [A.D.  177

Nequid nimis.  Horace says,  that Nil admirari is the only thing
that can make or keep a man happy1.  It is with equal truth the
only thing that can make or keep a man honest.  The desire of
fame not regulated,  is as dangerous to virtue as that of money.
I hope C scorns his little malice2.

I have had a letter for  *  *  *  * 3,  which I have inclosed.  Do
not lose it ;  for it contains a testimony that there may be some
pleasure in this world ;  and that I may have a little of the little
that there is,  pray write to me.  I thought your last letter long
in coming.

The two younglings,  what hinders them from writing to me.
I hope they do not forget me.

Will Master give me any thing for my poor neighbours  ?  I
have had from Sir Joshua and Mr.  Strahan ;  they are very old
maids,  very friendless and very helpless.

Mrs.  Williams talks of coming home this week from Kingston,
and then there will be merry doings*.

I eat meat seldom,  and take physick often,  and fancy that I
grow light and airy 5.  A man that does not begin to grow light
and airy at seventy,  is certainly losing time,  if he intends ever to
be light and airy.

I dined on Tuesday with  *  *  *  *6 and hope her little head
begins to settle.  She has,  however,  some scruples about the
company of a lady whom she has lately known.  I pacified her
as well as I could.  So no more at present ;  but hoping you are

1 Horace,  i Epis.  vi.  I.  friends faster than he can want them?'

'  Not to admire is all the art I know Life,  iii.  413.

To make men happy,  and to keep 4  '  So here are merry doings,'  he

them so.'  writes,  post,   Letter of October 27,

CREECH.  1781.

8 C ,  I suppose,  is Charlotte.  5 Airy is a favourite word with

3 I suspect Johnson wrote not  'for,'  Johnson.  Mrs.  Cholmondely he called

but   *  from Boswell.'      Boswell had  '  a very airy lady.'      Life,    v.   248.

written to him in high spirits from In Rasselas,  ch.  xxv,  he says,  'the

Chester,   and begged two lines in daughters of many houses were airy

reply,  so as  '  to keep his lamp burn-  and cheerful.'     He defines it as  'gay,

ing bright.'    Johnson wrote back on sprightly,  full of mirth,'  &c.

the 27th  :— '  Of what importance can 6  «  I could fill up this blank if I

it be to hear of distant friends to chose,  but will not,  as thereby hangs

a man who finds himself welcome a tale.'     BARETTI.
wherever he goes,  and makes new

all

Aetat.  70.]  To Mrs.    Thrale.  \  \  7

all in good health,  as I am at this time of writing,  (excuse

haste)'  I am,  dearest dearest Lady,

Your,  &c.,

SAM  :  JOHNSON.

641.

To MRS.  THRALE x.
DEAR MADAM,  London,  NOV.  2, 1779.

This day I thought myself sure of a letter,  but so I am
constantly served.  Mr.  Cumberland and Mrs.  *  *  *  *  ,  and Mrs.
Byron2,  and any body else,  puts me out of your head  ;  and
I know no more of you than if you were on the other side of the
Caspian.  I thought the two young things were to write too  ;  but
for them I do not much care.

On Saturday came home Mrs.  Williams,  neither better nor
worse than when she went ;  and I dined at  *  *  *  *  's,  and found
them well pleased with their Italian journey.  He took his
Lady and son,  and three daughters.  They staid five months
at Rome.  They will have now something to talk of.

I gave my poor neighbour3 your half guinea,  and ventured
upon making it two guineas at my master's expence.  Pray,
Madam,  how do I owe you half a guinea?

I dined on Sunday with Mr.  Strahan,  and have not been very
well for some little time.  Last night I was afraid of the gout,
but it is gone to-day.

There was on Sunday night a fire at the north end of London-
bridge,  which has,  they say,  destroyed the water- work4.

Does Mr.  Thrale continue to hunt in fields for health unbought?5

1 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  74.  mon stream of the tide-water of the

2 Ante,  ii.  79.  Thames.     In the first arch next the

3 Johnson,  I suspect,  wrote neigh-  City  [the north end of the bridge]
hours.     Ante,\\.  113.  is one wheel with double work of

4  'In the year 1582 Peter Morice,  sixteen forcers.'     Dodsley's London
a Dutchman,    contrived a water-  and its Environs,  ed.  1761,  iv.  146.
engine to supply the citizens with For the fire see Gentleman's Maga-
Thames water  ;  this was about fifty zine,  1779,  p.  562.

years ago improved by Mr.  Sorocold,          5  '  Better to hunt in fields for health
and since that time by that great unbought

master of hydraulics,    Mr.  Hadley.  Than see the doctor for a nau-

The wheels placed under the arches seous draught.'

of the Bridge are moved by the com-  DRYDEN.  Lines to John Driden.

If

u8

To Mrs.  Thrale.

[A.D.  1779.

If his taste of former pleasures returns,  it is a strong proof of his
recovery.     When we meet,  we will be jolly blades.

I know not well how it has happened,  but I have never yet

been at the B s.     *****  has called twice on me,  and I have

seen some more sheets — and away we go '.

I am,  &c.,

SAM  :  JOHNSON.

642.

TO MRS.    THRALE2.

MADAM,  London,  Nov.  4,  1779.

So I may write and write,  and nobody care ;  but you can
write often enough to Dr.  Burney.  Queeney sent me a pretty
letter,  to which  *  *  *  added a silly short note,  in such a silly
white hand,  that I was glad it was no longer3.

I had heard before that  *  •*  *  *  had lost not only ten thousand,
as you tell me,  but twenty thousand,  as you with great consist-
ency tell Dr.  Burney ;  but knowing that no man can lose what
he has not,  I took it little to heart.  I did not think of borrowing ;
and indeed he that borrows money for adventures deserves to
lose it.  No man should put into a lottery more than he can

spare.     Neither D ,  however,  nor B have given occasion

to his loss4.

Notice is taken that I have a cold and a cough ;  but I have
been so long used to disorders so much more afflictive,  that I have

1 The B s are,    I think,  the

Burneys.    Ante,  ii.  112,  n.  3.

2 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  76.

3  '  Do you know I have been writing
to Dr.  Johnson  !    I tremble to men-
tion it ;  but he sent a message in a
letter to Mrs.  Thrale,  to wonder why
his pupils did not write to him,  and
to hope they did not forget him.
Miss Thrale therefore wrote a letter
immediately,  and I added only this
little postscript :— "  P.S.  Dr.  Johnson's
other pupil a little longs to add a
few lines to this letter, — but knows
too well that all she has to say might

be comprised in signing herself his
obliged and most obedient servant,
F.  B. :  so that's better than a long
rigmarole about nothing."'  Mme.
D'Arblay's Diary,  i.  285.
4 The person who had had the loss

is described,/^/,  p.  123,  as C .

Cumberland would seem to be the

man,  the more so as D and B

would fit in with what has been said
about Dr.  Delap and Miss Burney.
Ante,  ii.  1 12,  n.  2.  For Mrs.  Thrale's
'  laxity of narration,'  see Life,  iii.
243.

thought

Aetat.  70.]  To Mrs.  Aston.  119

thought on them but little.  If they grow worse,  something
should be done.

I hear from every body that Mr.  Thrale grows better.  He is
columen domus I ;  and if he stands firm,  little evils may be over-
looked. Drive him out in the morning,  lead him out at night,
keep him in what bustle you can.

Do not neglect Scrase.  You may perhaps do for him what
you have done for  *  *  *  *  The serious affair I do not
wonder that you cannot mention  ;  and yet I wish it were trans-
acted while Scrase can direct and superintend it2.  No other
man,  if he shall have the same skill and kindness,  which I know
not where to find,  will have the same influence.

Sir Philip 3 never called upon me,  though he promised me to
do it.  Somebody else has laid hold upon him.

I live here in stark solitude.  Nobody has called upon me
this live-long day ;  yet I comfort myself that I have no tortures
in the night.  I have not indeed much sleep ;  but I suppose
I have enough,  for I am not as sleepy in the day-time as

formerly.

I am,  &c.,

SAM  :  JOHNSON.

643.

To MRS.  ASTON 4.

DEAREST MADAM,

Having had the pleasure of hearing from Mr.  Boswel that
he found you better than he expected,  I will not forbear to tell
you how much I was delighted with the news5.  May your
health encrease and encrease,  till you are as well as you can
wish yourself,  or I can wish you.

My Friends tell me that my health improves too.  It is certain
that I use both physick and abstinence,  and my endeavours have
been blessed with more success than at my age I could reason-
ably hope.  I please myself with the thoughts of visiting you

1 Ante,  i.  405.  from the original in Pembroke College

2 Ante,  ii.  115,  n.  2.  Library.

3 Ante,  ii.  94,  n.  4.  5 Boswell,  on his return from his

4 First published in Croker's Bos-  autumn visit to London,  had passed
well,  page 640.     Corrected by me a night at Lichfield.    Life,  iii.  411.

next

1 20 To Mrs.  Aston.  [A.D.  1779.

next year in so robust a state that I shall not be afraid of the
hill between Mrs.  Gastrel's house and yours,  nor think it neces-
sary to rest myself between Stowhill and Lucy Porter's.  Of
publick affairs I can give you no very comfortable account.
The Invasion has vanished for the present as I expected.  I
never believed that any invasion was intended x.  But whatever
we have escaped we have done nothing,  nor are likely to do
better another year.  We,  however,  who have no part of the
nation's welfare entrusted to our management,  have nothing
to do but to serve God,  and leave the world submissively in
his hands.

All trade is dead,  and pleasure is scarce alive.  Nothing
almost2 is purchased but such things as the buyer cannot be
without,  so that a general sluggishness and general discontent
are spread over the town.  All the trades of luxury and elegance
are nearly at a Stand3.  What the Parliament when it meets
will do,  and indeed what it ought to do is very difficult to
say.

Pray set Mrs.  Gastrel,  who is a dear good lady,  to write to me
from time to time,  for I have great delight in hearing from you,
especially when I hear any good news of your health.
I am,

Dear Madam,

Your most humble Servant,

SAM.-  JOHNSON.

London,  Bolt-court,  Fleet-street.
Nov.  5,  1779.

1 Ante,  ii.  109.  lish,  ask how we did before tea and

2 See Life,  ii.  446,  for a note on sugar were known.   Better,  no doubt ;
almost nothing.     Beattie,  like Bos-  but as I did not happen to be born
well's     'accurate English friend,'  two or three hundred years ago,   I
looked upon it as not English.     See cannot recollect precisely whether
his Scoticisms,  p.  9.  diluted acorns and barley bread,

3 Horace Walpole wrote ten days spread with honey,    made a very
later  :— '  The friends of Government,  luxurious breakfast.'  Letters,  vii.  275.
who have thought of nothing but of On November 16 he wrote:— 'Dis-
reducing us to our islandhood,  and tress and dissatisfaction do begin to
bringing us back to the simplicity of murmur everywhere.     Men do per-
ancient times,   when we were the ceive that they cannot live upon
frugal,  temperate,  virtuous old Eng-  loyalty and dissipation.'    Ib.  p.  277.

To

Aetat.  70.]  To Mrs.  Thrale.  1 2 1

644.

TO MRS.    THRALE1.

London,  November 7,  1779.

Poor Mrs.  ****,!  am glad that she runs to you at last for
shelter.  Give her,  dear Madam,  what comfort you can.  Has
any calamity fallen upon her?  Her husband,  so much as I hear,
is well enough spoken of;  nor is it supposed that he had power
to do more than has been done2.  But life must have its end,  and
commonly an end of gloomy discontent,  and lingering distress.

While you are vigorous and sprightly,  you must take into your
protection as many as you can of those who are tottering under
their burden.  When you want the same support,  may you
always find it.

I have for some time had a cough and a cold,  but I did not
mind it ;  continuance,  however,  makes it heavy  ;  but it seems to
be going away.

My master,  I hope,  hunts and walks,  and courts the belles,  and
shakes Brighthelmston.  When he comes back,  frolick and
active,  we will make a feast,  and drink his health,  and have
a noble day.

Of the Lucans3 I have never heard since.  On Saturday,  after
having fasted almost all the week,  I dined with Renny4.  For

1 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  78.  Horace Walpole,   writing on Sep-

2 I only arrived at the clue to this tember 16 about the capture of
passage by the discovery that a letter Grenada,   says  : — '  The subsequent
of Mrs.  Thrale given in Mme.  D'Ar-  narrative of the engagement is more
blay's Diary under the date of 1781 favourable.     It allows the victory to
(ii.  3)  must have been written in the the enemy,  but makes their loss of
autumn of 1779.     In it she writes  : —  men much the more considerable.'
'  In the midst of my own misery Letters,  vii.  252.     For an account of
I felt for my dear Mrs.   Byron's  ;  the French conquests in the West
but Chamier    [Under Secretary of Indies see Ann.  Reg.   1779,  i.   199.

State,  Life,  i.  478,  n.  i]  has relieved Poor Mrs.  B and her husband

that anxiety by assurances that the were,  I conjecture,  Admiral and Mrs.

Admiral behaved quite unexception-  Byron,   grand-parents of the poet,

ably,  and that as to honour in the Ante,  ii.  79,  n.  5,  and post,  Letter of

West Indies all goes well.      The November 12,  1781.

Grenadas are a heavy loss indeed,          3 Ante,  ii.  65,  nn.  4,  9.

nor is it supposed possible for Byron 4 Miss Reynolds.     Ante,   ii.  113,

to protect Barbadoes and Antigua.'      n.  3.

Wednesday,

122

To Mrs.  Thrale.

[A.D.  1779.

Wednesday I am invited by the  *  *  *  *  s,  and if I am well,
purpose to go.  I imagine there will be a large company.  The
invitation is to dine and spend the evening.  Too much at
a time.  I shall be in danger of crying out,  with Mr.  Head,
catamaran,  whatever that may mean,  for it seemed to imply
tediousness and disgust1.  I do not much like to go,  and I do
not much like to stay away.

Have you any assemblies at this time of the year  ?  and does

Queeney dance?  and does B dance too?  I would have

B dance with C ,  and so make all up2.

Discord keeps her residence in this habitation,  but she has for
some time been silent.  We have much malice,  but no mischief.
Levet is rather a friend to Williams,  because he hates Desmou-
lines more.  A thing that he should hate more than Desmoulines,
is not to be found 3.

1 Mrs.  Piozzi says that Mr.  Head's
real name was Plunkett.     He was a
low Irish parasite,  whom Mr.  Thrale
and Mr.    Murphy once made per-
sonate some lord whom they had
promised to introduce to the beauti-
ful Miss Gunnings  {Life,  v.  359,  n.  2]
when they came over to make their
fortunes.    '  The girls played off their
best airs,  till the fellow wearied with
his ill-acted character burst out on a
sudden as they sat at tea,  and cried
"  Catamaran  !  young gentlemen with
two shoes and never a heel :  when will
you have done with silly jokes now  ?
Ladies,"  turning to the future peer-
esses, "never mind these merry boys ;
but if you really can afford to pay
for some incomparable silk stock-
ings,  or true India handkerchiefs,
here they are now  "  ;  rummaging his
smuggler's pockets ;    but the girls
jumped up and turned them all three
into the street,   where Thrale and
Murphy cursed their senseless as-
sistant, and called him Head,  because
they swore he had none.'  Hayward's
Piozzi,  i.  317.

2 Miss Burney and Cumberland.

They had met at the Rooms,  but he
had at once turned round.  *  Mrs.
Thrale,'  writes Miss Burney,  c told
me the conversation she had just had
with him.  As soon as I made off,  he
said with a spiteful tone of voice,
"  Oh  !  that young lady is an author,
I hear."  "Yes,"  answered Mrs.  Thrale,
"author of Evelina?  "Humph!— I
am told it has some humour."  "Ay,
indeed,  Johnson says nothing like
it has appeared for years."  "  So,"
cried he,  biting his lips,  and waving
uneasily in his chair,  "  so,  so  ! "
"Yes,"  continued she,  "And Sir
Joshua Reynolds told Mr.  Thrale he
would give fifty pounds to know the
author."  "So,  so  !— oh  !  vastly well!"
replied he,  putting his hand on his
forehead.  "Nay,"  added she,  "Burke
himself sat up all night to finish it."
This seemed quite too much for him  ;
he put both his hands to his face,
and waving backwards and forwards
said  : — "  Oh  !  vastly well ! — this will
do for anything!"  with a tone as
much as to say,  "  Pray,  no more." '
Mme.  D'Arblay's Diary,  i.  276.
3 Ante,  ii.  107.

I hear,

Aetat.70.]  To Mrs.  Tkrale.

123

I hear,  but you never tell me any thing,  that you have at last
begun to bathe x.  I am sorry that your toothach kept you out
of the water so long,  because I know you love to be in it.

If such letters as this were to cost you any thing,  I should
hardly write them 2 ;  but since they come to you for nothing,
I am willing enough to write,  though I have nothing to say ;
because a sorry letter serves to keep one from dropping totally
out of your head ;  and I would not have you forget that there
is in the world such a poor being as,

Madam,

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

645.

TO MRS.    THRALE3.

DEAR MADAM,  London,  NOV.  8, 1779.

You are a dear dear lady.  To write so often,  and so
sweetly,  makes some amends for your absence.  Your last letter
came about half an hour after my last letter was sent away;
but now f have another.  You have much to tell me,  and I
have nothing to tell you ;  yet I am eager to write,  because
I am eager for your answer.

I thought C had told you his loss4.     If it be only report,

I do not much credit it.  Something perhaps he may have
ventured,  but I do not believe he had ten thousand pounds,

or the means of borrowing it.     Of B ,  I suppose the fact is

true,  that he is gone ;  but for his loss,  can any body tell who
has been the winner  ?  And if he has lost a sum disproportionate
to his fortune,  why should he run away when payment cannot
be compelled  ?

Of Sir Thomas5 I can make no estimate;    but if he is

1 The month of November is late to Mr.  Thrale,  who,  as a member of
in the year for sea-bathing.   We find parliament,  received them free of
Johnson,   when he was sixty-seven charge.

years old,  bathing near the end of 3 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  81.

October.     Life,   iii.   92.     See post,  4 Ante,  ii.  118.

Letter of November 14,  1782,  n.  5  '  Sir Thomas Mill.'     BARETTI.

2 Johnson no doubt addressed them

distressed,

124

To Mrs.  Thrale.

[A.D.  1779.

distressed,  I am sorry;  for he was in his prosperity civil and
officious.

It has happened to  ,  as to many active and prosperous

men,  that his mind has been wholly absorbed in business,  or at
intervals dissolved in amusement ;  and habituated so long to
certain modes of employment or diversion,  that in the decline of
life it can no more receive a new train of images,  than the hand
can acquire dexterity in a new mechanical operation.  For this
reason a religious education is so necessary.  Spiritual ideas
may be recollected J in old age,  but can hardly be acquired.

You shall not hide Mrs.  *  *  *  * 2 from me.  For if she be a
feeler 3,  I can bear a feeler as well as you ;  and hope,  that in
tenderness for what she feels from nature,  I am able to forgive
or neglect what she feels by affectation.  I pity her,  as one in a
state to which all must come ;  and I think well of her judgment
in chusing you to be the depository of her troubles,  and easer of
her bosom.  Fondle her,  and comfort her.

Your letters have commonly one good paragraph concerning
my master,  who appears to you,  and to every body,  to mend
upon the whole  ;  though your vigilance perceives some accidental
and temporary alterations,  which,  however,  I am willing to hope
are more rare and more slight than they were at first.  Let him
hunt much,  and think little,  and avoid solitude.  I hope time
has brought some company whom you can call now to your

table4.  Does he take to  ?  Does he love her as you

profess to love ?  with a fifth part of the kindness that she

has for me 5.  I am well rewarded for what I have taught you

1 Johnson defines to recollect as
'to recover to memory.'     See Life,
iv.  126,  where he distinguishes be-
tween remember and recollect.

2 Ante,  ii.  121.

3  'BOSWELL.  "  I have often blamed
myself,  Sir,  for not feeling for others
as sensibly as many say they do."
JOHNSON.  "  Sir,  don't be duped by
them any more.     You will find these
very feeling people are not very
ready to do you good.    They pay
you  \>y feeling"'    Life,  ii.  95.

4  '  We had a large party of gentle-

men to dinner.  Among them was
Single  -  speech Hamilton.'  Mme.
D'Arblay's Diary,  i.  293.  Miss Bur-
ney gives amusing reports of the
conversation at the Rooms and else-
where. Ib.  278-296.

5 Mrs.  Thrale replied  : — '  Poor
Mrs.  *  *  *  *  is past dissembling her
cares,  or their consequences,  a ruined
constitution :  my master does not
like her much,  nor dislike her  :  he is
all so gay now — up among the boughs,
as Miss Owen calls it.'  Piozzi Letters,
ii.  85.

of

Aetat.7o.]  To Mrs.  Thrale.  I2g

of computation  \  by seeing our friendship divided into factions ;
so we stand,  do we  ?  as two to ten.  A pretty appearance upon
paper,  and still prettier in the heart.  Well— go thy ways old
Jack*.

Of the capture of Jamaica nothing is known,  nor do I think
it probable or possible3.  How the French should in a few
day take from us an island,  which we could not in almost a
century take from a few fugitive Negroes whom the Spaniards
left behind them,  is not easily imagined4.  If you stay much
longer in Sussex,  you may perhaps hear that London is
taken.

We have a kind of epidemick cold amongst us,  of which I
have had my part,  but not more than my part ;  and I think
myself growing well.     I have lived very sparingly,  but shall have
some dinner to-day ;  and Baretti dines with me 5.
I am,  dearest Madam,

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

646.

To JAMES BOSWELL.
London,  November 13,  1779.     Published in the Life,  in.  416.

1 Post,  Letter of July 24,  1783.  took possession of the island,  after it

2 i Henry IV,  Act ii.  sc.  4.  had been in the possession of the

3 Horace Walpole wrote on No-  Spaniards 161 years.      The slaves,
vember 6  : — '  If there is a sprig of called Maroons,  who had fled to the
truth left growing in Bedfordshire mountains,     continued formidable.
I entreat your Ladyship to spare me Down to the end of the eighteenth
a cutting,  for there is not a leaf to be century their disaffection caused
had in town for love or money ;  much trouble.     Encyclo.  Brit.,  Qth
everything is so dear!  and yet false-  ed.,  xiii.  550.

hood bears a still higher price.          5  '  That I did as seldom as I could,

Jamaica is taken,  and it is not  ;  the though often scolded for it,  but I

combined fleets are sailed,  and they hated to see the victuals gnawed by

are not,'  &c.     Letters,  vii.  270.  poor Mrs.  Williams,  that would often

4 Near the end of the reign of carve though stone-blind.'  BARETTI.
Elizabeth,  and again in the reign of Boswell who dined at Johnson's house
Charles I,  the English made attacks describes everything as  '  in very good
on Jamaica but did not occupy it.  In order.'     Life,  ii.  215.

1655 an expedition sent by Cromwell

To

126

To Mrs.  Thrale.

[A.D.  1779.

647.
TO MRS.    THRALE1.

DEAR MADAM,  London,  Nov.  16, 1779.

Pray how long does a letter tarry between London and
Brighthelmston  ?    Your letter of the I2th I received on the i.5th.

Poor Mrs.  *  *  *  *  is a feeler 2.  It is well that she has yet power
to feel.  Fiction durst not have driven upon a few months such a
conflux of misery.  Comfort her as you can.

I have looked again into your grave letter.  You mention
trustees.  I do not see who can be trustee for a casual and
variable property,  for a fortune yet to be acquired.  How can
any man be trusted with what he cannot possess,  cannot ascer-
tain, and cannot regulate?  The trade must be carried on by
somebody who must be answerable for the debts contracted 3.
This can be none but yourself;  unless you deliver up the
property to some other agent,  and trust the chance both of his
prudence and his honesty.  Do not be frighted  ;  trade could not
be managed by those who manage it,  if it had much difficulty4.
Their great books are soon understood,  and their language,

If speech it may be call'd,  that speech is none
Distinguishable in number,  mood,  or tense5,

is understood with no very laborious application.

The help which you can have from any man as a trustee,  you
may have from him as a friend  ;  the trusteeship may give him
power to perplex,  but will neither increase his benevolence to
assist,  nor his wisdom to advise.

Living on God,  and on thyself rely.

Who should be trustee but you,  for your own and your children's
prosperity  ?  I hope this is an end of this unpleasing speculation,
and lighter matters may take their turn.

1 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  90.

2 Ante,  ii.  124.

3 The brewery was carried on in
her name after her husband's death.
Ante,  ii.  23,  n.  I.

4 Post,  Letter of April n,  1781.

5 A parody of Paradise Lost,  ii.
667:—
'  If shape it might be called that

shape had none

Distinguishable in member,  joint
or limb.'

What

Aetat.  70.]  To Mrs.  Thrale.  1 2 7

What Mr.  Scrase says about the Borough is true,  but is
nothing to the purpose.  A house in the square will not cost so
much as building in Southwark ;  but buildings are more likely
to go on in Southwark if your dwelling is at St.  James's  *.
Every body has some desire that deserts the great road of pros-
perity, to look for pleasure in a bye-path.  I do not see with
so much indignation Mr.  Thrale's desire of being the first Brewer,
as your despicable dread of living in the Borough 2.  Ambition
in little things,  is better than cowardice in little things ;  but both
these things,  however little to the publick eye,  are great in their
consequences to yourselves.  The world cares not how you brew,
or where you live  ;  but it is the business of the one to brew in a
manner most advantageous to his family,  and of the other to
live where the general interest may best be superintended.  It
was by an accidental visit to the Borough that you escaped great
evils last Summer.  Of this folly let there be an end,  at least an
intermission.

I am glad that Queeney danced with Mr.  Wade 3.  She was
the Sultaness of the evening ;  and I am glad that Mr.  Thrale
has found a riding companion whom he likes 4.  Let him ride,  say
I,  till he leaves dejection and disease behind him  ;  and let them

1 Mr.  Scrase,  I think,  had urged was as unaccountably attached now
them to take a house at St.  James's as he had been in his father's time
as cheaper than building in South-  averse from both.'  Hay ward's Piozzi,
wark.     Johnson replied,  'Yes;    but i.  256.

if you leave Southwark Mr.  Thrale 3 In a note on one of her letters

will be more likely to begin enlarging written from Bath a year later Mrs.

his Brewery  ;    for he would not be Piozzi says,  that Mr.  Wade had been

inconvenienced by the building going  '  hooted out of Bath for showing a

on close to his house.     His great lady's love-letters to him ;   such is

ambition is to enlarge his Brewery,  the resentment of all the females that

so as to outbrew Whitbread.'  even the housemaid refused to make

2  'Mr.   Thrale took a ready-fur-  his bed.'     Piozzi Letters,   ii.    134;
nished house in Grosvenor Square.'  Hayward's Piozzi,  i.  320.
BARETTI.     See Life,  iv.  72.     From 4 Perhaps Single-speech Hamilton
an old physician   '  I learnt,'   writes who was at Brighton.  One day riding
Mrs.  Piozzi,  'what had determined after the hounds with Dr.  Johnson
my husband's choice to me.  He had,  on. the Brighton Downs,  'he called
the doctor said,  asked several women,  out,   "Why Johnson rides as well,
naming them,  but all except me re-  for aught I see,  as the most illiterate
fused to live in the Borough,  to which fellow in England." '    Piozzi's Anec-
and to his business,  he observed,  he dotes,  p.  206.

limp

128

To Mrs.   Thrale.

[A.D.  1779.

limp after him an hundred years without overtaking him.  When
he returns,  let me see him frolick and airy,  and social,  and busy,
and as kind to me as in former times.

You seem to be afraid that I should be starved before you
come back.  I have indeed practised abstinence with some
stubbornness,  and with some success ;  but as Dryden talks of
writing with a hat*,  I am sometimes very witty with a knife
and fork.  I have managed myself very well ;  except that having
no motive,  I have no exercise.

At home we do not much quarrel ;  but perhaps the less we
quarrel the more we hate.  There is as much malignity amongst us
as can well subsist,  without any thoughts of daggers or poisons.

Mrs.  is by the help of frequent operations still kept

alive  ;  and such is the capricious destiny of mortals,  that she will
die more lamented by her husband,  than I will promise to
usefulness,  wisdom,  or sanctity.  There is always something
operating distinct from diligence or skill.  Temple therefore
in his composition of a hero,  to the heroick virtues adds good

fortune 2.

I am,  &c.,

SAM  :  JOHNSON.

648.

TO MRS.    THRALE3.

London,  Nov.  20,  1779.

Indeed,  dear Madam,  I do not think that you have any
reason to complain of Mr.  ,  or Mr.  4.  What

1  *  I'll write a Play,  says one,  for I

have got

A Broad-brim'd Hat,  and Waste-
Belt towards a Plot.

Says th'  other,  I have one more
large than that,

Thus they out-write each other

with a Hat.'
Prologue to the Conquest of Granada.

2 Sir William Temple in his Essay
Of Heroic Virtue,   says that   'the
excellency of genius  '  must not only
*  be cultivated by education and in-
struction,' but also  '  must be assisted
by fortune to preserve it to maturity ;

because the noblest spirit or genius
in the world,  if it falls,  though never
so bravely,  in its first enterprises,
cannot deserve enough of mankind
to pretend to so great a reward as
the esteem of heroic virtue.'  Temple's
Works,  ed.  1757,  Hi.  306.

3 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  94.

4 Baretti fills up these two blanks
with the names of Crutchley and
Cator,  who were joint executors with
Johnson.     Life,  iv.  202,   n.  i;    313.
'  Mrs.  Thrale suspected Crutchley to
be the natural son of Thrale.'    Hay-
ward's Piozzi,  ii.  351.

I proposed

Aetat.  TO.]  To Mrs.  Porter.

129

I proposed is,  I suppose,  unusual.  However,  Mr.  Thrale knows
that I have suggested nothing to you that I had not first said to
him.  I hear he grows well so fast,  that we are not likely to try
whose way is best ;  and I hope he will grow better,  and better,
and better ;  and then away with executors and executrixes.
He may settle his family himself.

I am not vexed at you for not liking the Borough,  but for not
liking the Borough better than other evils of greater magnitude.
You must take physick,  or be sick  ;  you must live in the
Borough,  or live still worse.

Pray tell my Queeney how I love her for her letters ;  and tell
Burney that now she is a good girl,  I can love her again.  Tell
Mr.  Scrase,  that I am sincerely glad to hear that he is better.
Tell my master,  that I never was so glad to see him in my life,
as I shall be now to see him well ;  and tell yourself,  that except
my master,  nobody has more kindness for you,  than,

Dear Madam,  your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

649.

To MRS.  PORTER  \  Dec 2>  i;79

I have enclosed Mr.  Boswell's answer.  I still continue better
than when you saw me,  but am not just at this time very well,
but hope to mend again.  Publick affairs remain as they were.
Do not let the papers fright you.

650.

To DR.  LAWRENCE.
[London],  January 20,  1780.     Published in the Life,  iii.  419.

1 Printed in Messrs.  Sotheby and forwarding  *  Lucy Porter's petition,'

Co.'s Auction Catalogue for Au-  said  :— « Return me her letter,  which

gust 21,  1872,  Lot 80.  One page I have sent that you may know the

quarto.  whole case,  and not be seduced to

Miss Porter wanted Boswell  'to anything that you may afterwards

inquire concerning the family of a repent.  Miss Doxy perhaps you know

gentleman who was then paying his to be Mr.  Garrick's niece.'  Life,  iii.

addresses to Miss Doxy.'  Johnson,  417.

VOL.  II.  K TO

130

To John Nichols.

[A.D.  1780.

651.

To JOHN NICHOLS  '.

[Early in 1780.]

Mr.  Johnson purposes to make his next attempt upon Prior,
at least to consider him very soon,  and desires that some volumes
published of his papers,  in two vols.  8vo,  may be procured 2.

The turtle and sparrow can be but a fable 3.  The Conversation
I never read.

652.

To JOHN NICHOLS.

[Early in 1780].

Dr.  Warton tells me that Collins's first piece is in the G.  M.
for August,  1 739 4.  For August there is no such thing.  Amasius

1 This and the next two notes were
first published in the Gentlemaris
Magazine for 1785,  pages 9,  10.

They refer to the Lives of Prior,
Granville and Collins.  These,  as we
learn by Johnson's Letter to Mrs.
Thrale of May 9,  1780,  were finished
before that date.

2 Miscellaneous Works of the late
Matthew Prior,  Esq.,  2 vols.  %vo.,
advertised in the Gentleman's Maga-
zine, 1739,  P-  556.

3  'This refers,'  says Nichols in a
note,  *  to a hint given him in conse-
quence of what is said in the Life of
Prior  [  Works,  viii.  1 5]  that  "  of his
Tales there are only four." '     Johnson
was right in his statement,  for The
Turtle and Sparrow,  if it is a tale,
is An Elegiac Tale,  occasioned by the
Death of Prince George,  1708,  and
Conversation,  though it also is called
a tale,  does not any more than the
other belong to the class of which
Johnson was thinking.

4 Johnson,  in his Life of Collins,
says that  *  he first courted the notice
of the public by some verses to a
Lady Weeping,    published in the
Gentleman's Magazine?     As a kind

of appendix to the Life we find the
following  : —

'  Mr.  Collins's first production
is added here from the Poetical
Calendar  : —

TO MISS AURELIA G R,

ON HER WEEPING AT HER SISTER'S
WEDDING.

Cease,  fair Aurelia,  cease to mourn ;

Lament not Hannah's happy state ;
You may be happy in your turn,

And seize the treasure you regret.

With Love united Hymen stands,
And softly whispers toyour charms ;

"  Meet but your lover in my bands,
You'll find your sister in his
arms."'

Among Collins's Poems — far too few
in number — this piece has been
always given.  Henceforth,  I fear,  it
must no longer appear in that grace-
ful company.  It was first published
in the Gentleman's Magazine for
I739?  P-  4J>  and is signed Amasius.
Its author therefore was Dr.  Swan.

Collins's first piece was published,
not in the August number of the
Gentleman's Magazine,  as Dr.

was

Aetat.  70.]

To Mrs.   Thrale.

was at that time the poetical name of Dr.  Swan,  who translated
Sydenham x.

Where to find Collins I know not.    I think I must make some
short addition to Thomson's sheet,  but will send it to-day.

653.

CIR To JOHN NICHOLS.

LR>  [Early in 1780.]

In examining this Book I find it necessary to add to the life
the preface to the British Enchanters,  and,  you may add,  if you
will,  the notes on Unnatural Flights*.

I am,
Friday.  Q.       o

To Mr.  Nicol  [sic].

654.

DEAREST LADY,     To MRS'  THRALES-  April 6,  1780.

You had written so often.     I have had but two letters from

Warton said,  but in that for October
(p.  545).  It,  too,  is about a Lady's
tears  ;  hence perhaps the confusion
between the two poems.  It is as
follows : —
'  When Phcebe form'd a wanton smile,

My soul !  it reach'd not here  :
Strange that thy peace,  thou trembler,
flies

Before a rising tear  !
From midst the drops my love is born,

That o'er those eyelids rove  ;
Thus issued from a teeming wave

The fabled queen of love.'
Johnson,  I conjecture,  mentions
Amasius in his Letter,  because in
the August number there are some
lines signed with that name which
Nichols might have attributed to
Collins.  Hawkins says that Cave,
the editor of the Magazine^  showed
him one day Collins's beautiful poem
To Fair Fidel e1 s grassy tomb.  '  Cave,'
he adds,  '  could not be convinced of
the propriety of the name Fidele  ;  he

K

thought Pastora a better one,  and so
printed it.'  Hawkins's Joftnson,  p.  49.
It is thus printed in the Gentleman's
Magazine for 1749,  p.  466.  Johnson
in 1765 published it in his edition of
Shakespeare at the end of Cymbeline.

I have found the following entry
among The Orders of the Delegates
of the Clarendon Press  : —

'Februarys,  1769.  Mr.  Collins's
Copy of Verses to Sir Thos.  Hanmer
to be inserted after the Preface  [of
Hanmer's edition of Shakespeare].'

1 Sydenham,  the great physician,
whose Life Johnson has briefly
written   (Works,  vi.  405)  published
his medical treatises in Latin.

2 The Essay on Unnatural Flights
in Poetry and The British Enchanters
are by George Granville,  afterwards
Lord Lansdowne.  Neither the preface
nor the notes are added to his Life.
See/^/,  Letter of August 8,  1780.

3 Piozzi Letters ,  ii.  95.

This letter is misdated 1 779.    Miss
2 Bath,

To Mrs.  Thrale.

[A.D.  17J

Bath,  and the second complains that the first,  which you call so
many,  was neglected,  and you pretend to be afraid of being for-
gotten. I wonder what should put you out of my mind.  You
say rightly,  that I shall not find such another ;  for there is not,
if I had the choice of all,  such another to be found.

It is happy,  both for you and Mrs.  Montague z,  that the fates
bring you both to Bath at the same time.  Do not let new
friends supplant the old  ;  they who first distinguished you have
the best claim to your attention ;  those who flock about you
now,  take your excellence upon credit,  and may hope to gain
upon the world by your countenance.

I have not quite neglected my Lives 2.  Addison is a long one,
but it is done.  Prior is not short,  and that is done too.  I am
upon Rowe,  who cannot fill much paper 3.  If I have done them
before you come again,  I think to bolt upon you at Bath ;  for I
shall not be now afraid of Mrs.  Cotton 4.  Let Burney take care
that she does me no harm.

Burney,  writing from Bath on April 7,
1780,  describes the journey.  'Mr.
Thrale,'  she says,  'was charmingly
well and in very good spirits,  and
Mrs.  Thrale must be charming,  well
or ill.'  On their journey they slept
one night at the Bear Inn,  Devizes.
They saw the landlord's son, '  a most
lovely boy of ten years of age,  who
seems to be not merely the wonder
of their family,  but of the times,  for
his astonishing skill in drawing.  We
found that he had been taken to town,
and that Sir Joshua Reynolds had
pronounced him,  the mother said,  the
most promising genius he had ever
met with.'  The boy was Thomas
Lawrence,  afterwards President of the
Royal Academy.  Mme.  D'Arblay's
Diary,  i.  310,  312.

1  '  I am very glad,'  writes Miss
Burney, '  at this opportunity of seeing
so much of Mrs.  Montagu  ;  for,  allow-
ing a little for parade and ostentation,
which her power in wealth and rank
in literature offer some excuse for,
her conversation is very agreeable  ;

she is always reasonable and sen-
sible, and sometimes instructive and
entertaining ;  and I think of our
Mrs.  Thrale,  we may say,  the very
reverse,  for she is always entertain-
ing and instructive,  and sometimes
reasonable and sensible  ;  and I write
this because she is just now looking
over me — not but what I think it too.'
Ib.  i.  325-

2  'In 1780,  the world was kept in
impatience for the completion of his
Lives of the Poets,  upon which he
was employed so far as his indolence
allowed him to labour.'  Life,  iii.  418.

3 In a note on the Life of Rowe,
Nichols says  : — 'This Life is a very
remarkable instance of the uncommon
strength of Dr.  Johnson's memory.
When I received from him the MS.
he complacently observed that the
criticism was tolerably well done,
considering that he had not read one
of Rowe's plays for thirty years.3
Works,  vii.  417.

4 No doubt the Mrs.   C ,   a

relation of Mrs.  Thrale,  whom Miss

The

Aetat.  70.]

To Mrs.  Thrale.

The diligence of Dr.  Moisy1 I do not understand.  About
what is he diligent?  If Mr.  Thrale is well,  or only not well
because he has been ill,  I do not see what the physician can do.
Does he direct any regimen,  or does Mr.  Thrale regulate himself?
Or is there no regularity among you?  Nothing can keep him
so safe as the method which has been so often mentioned,  and
which will be not only practicable but pleasant in the Summer,
and before Summer is quite gone,  will be made supportable by
custom.

If health and reason can be preserved by changing three or
four meals a week,  or if such a change will but encrease the
chances of preserving them,  the purchase is surely not made at
a very high price.  Death is dreadful,  and fatuity is more dread-
ful, and such strokes bring both so near,  that all their terrours
ought to be felt.  I hope that to our anxiety for him,  Mr.  Thrale
will add some anxiety for himself.

Seward called on me one day,  and read Spence 2.  I dined
yesterday at Mr.  Jodrel's3 in a great deal of company.  On

Burney describes as  '  an ugly,  proud
old woman,  but marvellous civil to
me.3 Mme.  D'Arblay's Diary,  i.  313.
Mrs.  Thrale says  : — '  Miss Burney
was much admired at Bath  (1780)  ;
the puppy-men said,  "  She had such
a drooping air and such a timid in-
telligence "  ;  or  "  a timid air,"  I think
it was,  "  and a drooping intelligence,"
never sure was such a collection of
pedantry and affection  [i.e.  affectation]
as filled Bath when we were on that
spot.'  Hayward's Piozzi,  ii.  341.

1 Mrs.  Thrale in one of her letters
says  : — '  Oh,  here comes Dr.  Moysey,
to talk about Whig and Tory,  and
the reign of King Charles the Second;
how that style of conversation does
wear one out,  especially from a pro-
fessional man,  and when one is
wishing to bring forward a subject
really interesting.'  Piozzi Letters,  ii.
130.
died
Nichols's Lit.  Anec.,  ix.  538.

'  Abel Moysey,  M.D.  of Bath,
August ii,    1780,    aged 64.'

2 S pence's Anecdotes were pub-
lished in 1820.     Warburton,  Joseph
Warton,  Johnson,  and Malone had
been allowed to read them in the
manuscript,   as we are told in the
Preface.     See Life,  iv.  63.     Johnson
described Spence as  'a weak con-
ceited man.'     BOSWELL.     'A good
scholar,  Sir?'   JOHNSON.   *  Why,  no,
Sir.'    BOSWELL.    '  He was a pretty
scholar.'      JOHNSON.      'You have
about reached him.'     Ib.  v.  317.

'  He was,'  writes Horace Walpole,
'  a good-natured,  harmless little soul,
but more like a silver penny than a
genius.  It was a neat fiddle-faddle,
bit of sterling,  that had read good
books and kept good company,  but
was too trifling for use,  and only fit
to please a child.'  Letters,  vii.  366.

3 Richard Paul Jodrell was the
author of The Persian Heroine,  a
Tragedy,   which,    in Baker's Biog.
Dram.,  i.  400,  is wrongly assigned to
his son Sir R.    P.    Jodrell,   M.D.

Sunday

134

To Mrs.  Porter.

[A.D.  1780.

Sunday I dine with Dr.  Lawrence,  and at night go to Mrs.  Vesey.
I have had a little cold,  or two,  or three,  but I did not much mind
them,  for they were not very bad.

Make my compliments to my master,  and Queeney,  and
Burney,  and Mrs.  Cotton,  and to all that care about me,  and
more than all — or else.

Now one courts you,  and another caresses you,  and one calls
you to cards,  and another wants you to walk ;  and amidst all
this,  pray try to think now and then a little of me,  and write
often.  Mrs.  Strahan is at Bath,  but,  I believe,  not well enough

to be in the rooms.         T  ,  ,. ,    ,

I am,  dearest Madam,

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

655.

To JAMES BOSWELL.
[London],  April 8,  1780.     Published in the Life,  iii.  420.

656.

DEAR MADAM,        To MRS'  PORTER  '•  London,  April 8, 1780.

I am indeed but a sluggish correspondent,  and know not
whether I shall much mend :  however,  I will try.  I am glad
that your oysters proved good,  for I would have every thing
good that belongs to you ;  and would have your health good,
that you may enjoy the rest.  My health is better than it has
been for some years past ;  and,  if I see Lichfield again,  I hope
to walk about it.

Your brother's request I have not forgotten.  I have bought
as many volumes as contain about an hundred and fifty sermons,
which I will put in a box,  and get Mr.  Mathias to send him2.  I
shall add a letter.

Nichols's Lit.  Anec.,  ix.  2.  He was
a member of Johnson's Essex Head
Club  (Life,  iv.  254),  and lived at 21,
Portland Place,  the house at present
occupied by Mr.  Alexander Mac-
millan,  the publisher.  Here it was
that Johnson dined with him.

1 First published in Croker's Bos-
well,  page 643.

3 He wrote four days later  : — ( I
am sorry that Mr.  Porter has not had
his box  ;  but by sending it to Mr.
Mathias,  who very readily undertook
the conveyance,  I did the best I

We

Aetat.  70.]  To Mrs.  Thralc.  135

We have been lately much alarmed at Mr.  Thrale's.  He has
had a stroke,  like that of an apoplexy ;  but he has at last got so
well as to be at Bath,  out of the way of trouble and business,  and
is likely to be in a short time quite well.  I hope all the Lichfield
ladies are quite well,  and that every thing is prosperous among
them.

A few weeks ago I sent you a little stuff gown,  such as is all
the fashion at this time.  Yours is the same with Mrs.  Thrale's,
and Miss bought it for us.  These stuffs are very cheap,  and are
thought very pretty.

Pray give my compliments to Mr.  Pearson,  and to every body,
if any such body there be,  that cares about me.

I am now engaged about the rest of the Lives,  which I am
afraid will take some time,  though I purpose to use despatch  ;
but something or other always hinders.  I have a great number
to do,  but many of them will be short.

I have lately had colds ;  the first was pretty bad,  with a very
troublesome and frequent cough ;  but by bleeding and physic it
was sent away.  I have a cold now,  but not bad enough for
bleeding.

For some time past,  and indeed ever since I left Lichfield last
year,  I have abated much of my diet,  and am,  I think,  the better
for abstinence.  I can breathe and move with less difficulty;  and
I*am as well as people of my age commonly are.  I hope we
shall see one another again some time this year.

I am,  dear love,

Your humble servant,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

657.

TO MRS.  THRALE1.
DEAR MADAM,

On Sunday I dined with poor Lawrence,  who is deafer than
ever 2.     When he was told that Dr.  Moisy visited Mr.  Thrale,  he

could.'    Life,  iv.   89.     For Mathias in January of this year.    Life,  iii.4i8.

see ante,   i.    159,   n.   4,   and Early Two years later Johnson wrote :-

Diary of Frances Burney,  ii.  307,  9.  '  Poor Lawrence has almost lost the

1 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  98.  sense of hearing  ;  and I have lost the

2 Dr.  Lawrence had lost his wife conversation of a learned,  intelligent,

enquired,

136

To Mrs.  Thrale.

[A.D.  1780.

enquired,  for what  ?  and said that there was nothing to be done,
which Nature would not do for herself.  On Sunday evening I
was at Mrs.  Vesey's,  and there was enquiry about my master,  but
I told them all good.  There was Dr.  Barnard of Eaton,  and we
made a noise all the evening  ;  and there was Pepys,  and Wraxal
till I drove him away x.  And I have no loss of my mistress,  who
laughs,  and frisks,  and frolicks it all the long day,  and never thinks
of poor Colin 2.

If Mr.  Thrale will but continue to mend,  we shall,  I hope,  come
together again,  and do as good things as ever we did ;  but per-
haps you will be made too proud to heed me,  and yet,  as I have
often told you,  it will not be easy for you to find such another.

Queeney has been a good girl,  and wrote me a letter ;  if Burney

and communicative companion,  and
a friend whom long familiarity has
much endeared.  Lawrence is one of
the best men whom I have known. —
Nostrum omnium miserere Deus.'
Life,  iv.  143.

1 For Bennet Langton's account of
this evening see Life,  iii.  424.  Dr.
Barnard was Provost of Eton College.
'  He was,'  said Johnson,  '  the only
man that did justice to my good
breeding.'  Piozzi's Anecdotes,  p.  36.
Pepys,  afterwards Sir William Weller
Pepys,  Baronet,  was a Master in
Chancery.  His second son became
Lord Chancellor and Earl of Cotten-
ham.  Samuel Pepys,  the author of
the Diary,  was of the same family.
Burke's Peerage,  article Cottenham.
Johnson speaking of Pepys,  'when
they had been disputing about the
classics for three hours together one
morning at Streatham,  said  :  —  "I
knew the dog was a scholar  ;  but
that he had so much taste and so
much knowledge I did not believe.  I
might have taken Barnard's word
though,  for Barnard would not lie." '
Piozzi's Anecdotes,  p.  142.  Pepys,
when he was eighty-four years old,
told Mme.  D'Arblay that he and

Hannah More were the only sur-
vivors of the original set of the Bas
Bleu.  Memoirs of Dr.  Burney,  ii.
263.  Wraxall was the author of the
Historical Memoirs of My Own Time.
He was perhaps thinking of this
evening when he wrote  : — '  Those
whom Johnson could not always
vanquish by the force of his intellect,
by the depth and range of his argu-
ments, and by the compass of his
gigantic faculties,  he silenced by
rudeness  ;  and I have myself more
than once stood in the predicament
which I here describe.  Yet no sooner
was he withdrawn,  and with him had
disappeared these personal imperfec-
tions, than the sublime attainments
of his mind left their full effect on
the audience  :  for such the whole
assembly might be in some measure
esteemed while he was present.'
Memoirs,  ed.  1815,  i.  147.

2  '  Then to her new love let her go  ;
And deck her in golden array  ;
Be finest at every fine show
And frolic it all the long day.'

ROWE.  Colin' s Complaint.  Camp-
bell's British Poets,  ed.  1845,  P-  334-
See /<?.$•/,  p.  139,  n.  i.

said

Aetat.  70.]

To Mrs.  Thrale.

said she would write,  she told you a fib.  She writes nothing to
me.  She can write home fast enough.  I have a good mind not
to let her know,  that Dr.  Bernard T,  to whom I had recommended
her novel,  speaks of it with great recommendation ;  and that the
copy which she lent me,  has been read by Dr.  Lawrence three
times over.  And yet what a gypsey it is.  She no more minds
me,  than if I were a Brangton 2.  Pray speak to Queeney to write
again.

I have had a cold and a cough,  and taken opium,  and think I
am better.  We have had very cold weather  ;  bad riding weather
for my master,  but he will surmount it all.  Did Mrs.  Browne
make any reply to your comparison of business with solitude,  or
did you quite down her3?  I am much pleased to think that

1 Dr.  Barnard.

2 Miss Burney writes on April 13: —
'  Dr.   Johnson has sent a bitter re-
proach to Mrs.  Thrale of my not
writing to him,  for he has not yet
received a scrawl I have sent him.
He says Dr.  Barnard,  the Provost of
Eton,  has been singing the praises of
my book.'     Mme.  D'Arblay's Diary,
i.   323.       The Branghtons are the
family of a silversmith of Snow Hill,
described in Miss Burney's Evelina,
Letter xvii.     In her Memoirs of Dr.
Burney,  ii.  193,  she describes a visit
Boswell paid to Streatham soon after
Evelina had been published.     At
lunch he had left his seat and placed
himself behind Johnson's chair.
'  The Doctor turned angrily round
upon him,   and clapping his hand
rather loudly upon his knee said in a
tone of displeasure,  "What do you
do there,  Sir  ?     Go to the table,  Sir."
Boswell presently recollected some-
thing that he wished to exhibit,  and
was running away in its search,  when
the Doctor calling after him said,
"What are you thinking of,    Sir?
WThy do you get up before the cloth
is removed  ?     Come back to your
place,  Sir."     Again,  and with equal

obsequiousness,  Mr.  Boswell did as
he was bid  ;  when the Doctor,
pursing his lips,  not to betray rising
risibility,  muttered half to himself : —
"  Running about in the middle of
meals  !  One would take you for a
Branghton  !  "  "A Branghton,  Sir ? "
repeated Mr.  Boswell with earnest-
ness. "  What is a Branghton,  Sir  ?  "
"  Where have you lived,  Sir,"  cried
the Doctor laughing,  "and what com-
pany have you kept not to know
that  ? "  Mr.  Boswell,  now doubly
curious,  yet always apprehensive of
falling into some disgrace with Dr.
Johnson,  said in a low tone to Mrs.
Thrale  :— "  Pray,  Ma'am,  what's a
Branghton  ?  Do me the favour to
tell me.  Is it some animal here-
abouts ?  "  Mrs.  Thrale only laughed
heartily,  but without answering.  But
Mr.  Seward cried  :  — "  I'll tell you,
Boswell,— I'll tell you — if you will
walk with me into the paddock  ;  only
let us wait till the table is cleared  :
or I'll shall be taken for a Branghton
too."  '

Boswell forgot to record this scene
in the Life.

3 Mrs.  Thrale writing to Johnson

on May 9,  says: — '  Why Mrs.  Browne

Mrs.  Cotton

138

To Mrs.  Thrale.

[A.D.  1780.

Mrs.  Cotton thinks me worth a frame,  and a place upon her wall.
Her kindness was hardly within my hope,  but time does wonder-
ful things.  All my fear is,  that if I should come again,  my print
would be taken down.  I fear I shall never hold it.

Who dines with you  ?  Do you see Dr.  Woodward or Dr.  Har-
rington r  ?  Do you go to the house where they write for the
myrtle 2  ?  You are at all places of high resort,  and bring home
hearts by dozens  ;  while I am seeking for something to say about
men of whom I know nothing but their verses,  and sometimes
very little of them.  Now I have begun,  however,  I do not de-
spair of making an end.  Mr.  Nicholls holds that Addison is the
most taking of all that I have done.  I doubt they will not be
done before you come away.

Now you think yourself the first writer in the world for a letter
about nothing.  Can you write such a letter as this  ?  So mis-
cellaneous, with such noble disdain of regularity,  like Shake-
speare's works  ;  such graceful negligence of transition,  like the
ancient enthusiasts  ?  The pure voice of nature and of friendship.
Now of whom shall I proceed to speak?  Of whom but Mrs.
Montague?  Having mentioned Shakespeare and Nature,  does
not the name of Montague force itself upon me3?  Such were

should be called a Methodist you
must tell ;  for  'tis considered always
a term of reproach,  I trust  ;  because
I never yet did hear that any one
person called himself a Methodist.'
Piozzi Letters,  ii.  1 19.  For downing
see ante,  ii.  73,  n.  6.

1  '  D r.  Woodward called this morn-
ing.    He is a physician here,  and a
chatty,  agreeable man.   At dinner we
had Dr.  Harington,  another physician.
It is his son who published those
remains of his ancestor,    Sir John
Harington,  under the title of Nugce
Antiquce?     Mme.  D'Arblay's Diary,
i.  317,  341.     See Life,  iv.  180.

2 Lady Miller  *  held a Parnassus-
fair every Thursday '  at her villa at
Bath-Easton.       *  A Roman vase,
dressed with pink ribands and
myrtles,  received the poetry.'    Wai-

pole's Letters,  vi.  171.  Miss Burney
records in her Diary at this time  : —
'Do you know now that,  notwith-
standing Bath-Easton is so much
laughed at in London,  nothing here
is more tonish than to visit Lady
Miller.  She is a round,  plump,
coarse-looking dame of about forty,
and while all her aim is to appear an
elegant woman of fashion,  all her
success is to seem an ordinary woman
in very common life,  with fine clothes
on.'  Mme.  D'Arblay's Diary,  i.
364-

3 Mr.  Croker takes this humorous
passage as serious praise.  *  Com-
pare,' he writes,  '  this with two
former phrases in which Shakespeare
and Mrs.  Montagu are mentioned,
and wonder at the inconsistencies to
which the greatest genius and the

the

Aetat.  70.]

To Mrs.  Thrale.

139

the transitions of the ancients,  which now seem abrupt,  because
the intermediate idea is lost to modern understandings.  I wish
her name had connected itself with friendship  ;  but,  ah Colin,
thy hopes are in vain x.  One thing however is left me,  I have
still to complain 2 ;  but I hope I shall not complain much while
you have any kindness for me.  I am,

Dearest and dearest Madam,

Your,  &c.,

London,  April 11,  1780.  SAM:  JOHNSON.

You do not date your letters 3.

658.

TO MRS.    THRALE4.

DEAREST MADAM,  April 15, 1780.

I did not mistake Dr.  Woodward's case ;   nor should have

highest spirit may be reduced !
Perhaps Johnson's original disposi-
tion to depreciate Mrs.  Montagu
may have arisen from his having
heard that she thought Rasselas an
opiate  (Carter's Letters,  iii.  108).
His later praise was no doubt pro-
duced by her charity to Mrs.
Williams.  This,  though it may ex-
plain, does not excuse the incon-
sistencies.' Croker's Boswell,  p.  644.
It almost passes belief that such
nonsense as this should have been
written by a man of intelligence,  and
should have been repeated in suc-
ceeding editions.  Johnson despised
Mrs.  Montagu's Essay on Shakespeare
because it is as worthless as it is pre-
tentious.

1  'What though I have skill to

complain,
Though the Muses my temples

have crown'd ;
What though,  when they hear my

soft strain,

The virgins sit weeping around  ?

Ah,  Colin !  thy hopes are in vain,

Thy pipe and thy laurel resign,

Thy false one inclines to a swain

Whose music is sweeter than
thine.'

ROWE.     Campbell's British Poets,
ed.  1845,  p.  334.

As early as September,  1778,  John-
son said that he believed that he was
not in Mrs.  Montagu's good graces.
Life,  iv.  64,  n.  I.  In 1781 his Life of
Lyttelton  '  produced a declaration of
war against him from her.'  He said,
'  Mrs,  Montagu has dropped me.
Now,  Sir,  there are people whom one
should like very well to drop,  but
would not wish to be dropped by.'
Id.  iv.  64,  73.  Miss Burney,  writing
to him on November 19, 1783,  recalls
a saying of his about her outcry.
'  What,  as you said of a certain great
lady,  signifies the barking of a lap-
dog,  if once the lion puts out his
paw? '  Memoirs of Dr.  Burney,  ii.  357.

2 Johnson,  no doubt quoting Rowe,
wrote,  '  I have skill to complain.'

3 Johnson himself in early life had
not always been careful to date his
letters.     Life,  i.    122,   3.     He often
urges Mrs.  Thrale to date hers,  but
with no result.

*  Piozzi Letters,  ii.  102.

wanted

140 To Mrs.   Thrale.  [A.D.i?8o.

wanted any explanation.  But broken J is a very bad word in
the city.

Here has just been with me  *  *  *  * 2,  who has given — What
has he given  ?  Nothing,  I believe,  gratis.  He has given fifty-
seven lessons this week.  Surely this is business.

I thought to have finished Rowe's life to-day,  but I have five
or six visitors who hindered me  ;  and I have not been quite well.
Next week I hope to dispatch four or five of them.

It is a great delight to hear so much good of all of you.  Fanny 3
tells me good news of you,  and you speak well of Fanny ;  and all
of you say what one would wish of my master.  And my sweet
Queeney,  I hope is well.  Does she drink the waters?  One glass
would do her as much good as it does her father 4.

You and Mrs.  M must keep Mrs.  *  *  *  *  about you  ;  and

try to make a wit of her 5.  She will be a little unskilful in her
first essays ;  but you will see how precept and example will
bring her forwards.

Surely it is very fine to have your powers.  The wits court
you,  and the Methodists love you6,  and the whole world runs
about you  ;  and you write me word how well you can do without
me :  and so,  go thy ways poor Jack 7.

That sovereign glass of water is the great medicine ;  and though
his legs are too big,  yet my master takes a glass of water.  This
is bold practice.  I believe,  under the protection of a glass of
water drank 8 at the pump,  he may venture once a-week upon a
stevv'd lamprey9.

1  '  The King's grown bankrupt,  like 6 Ante,  ii.  137,  n.  3.

a broken man.'  7  '  Old Jack.'     Ante,  ii.  125,  n.  2.

Richard II,  Act ii.  sc.  I.  1.  257.  8 Johnson in his Dictionary gives

3 Perhaps Dr.  Burney.  drunk and drunken as the past

3 Miss Burney.  participle of to drink  ;  but in a quota-

4 Mrs.  Thrale wrote in reply  : — *  I tion which he gives from Arbuthnot
think the one glass of water which we find  '  he had drank.'

you scorn so has an effect  [on Mr.  9 Lampreys,  it should seem,  were

Thrale],  and that not a good one — it a favourite dish with Mr.   Thrale.

gives dizziness.'      Piozzi Letters,  ii.  Mrs.  Piozzi says that when Johnson

131.  once urged temperance, '  he answered

5 Mrs.    Piozzi fills up the blanks him only by inquiring when lamprey
with the names of Montagu and season would come in.'     Hayward's
Byron.     Hayward's Piozzi,  i.  319.  Piozzi,  i.  303.

I wish

Aetat.  70.]  To Mrs.  Thrale.

141

I wish you all good  ;  yet know not what to wish you which
you have not.  May all good continue and increase.

I am,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

659.

To MRS.  THRALET.

DEAR MADAM,  London,  April 18, 1780.

Of the petticoat government I had never heard 2.  Of the
Shakespeare,  I was once told by Miss Lawrence ;  and that is all
that I know of it.  I have not seen nor heard of any body that
has seen the wonders.  You may be sure I should tell you any
thing that would gratify your curiosity,  and furnish you for your
present expences of intellectual entertainment.  But of this dra-
matick discovery I know nothing 3.

I cannot see but my master may with stubborn regularity
totally recover.  But surely,  though the invasion has been re-
pelled from life,  the waste it has made will require some time
and much attention to repair it.  You must not grow weary of
watching him,  and he must not grow impatient of being watched.

Pray,  of what wonders do you tell me  ?  You make verses,  and
they are read in publick,  and I know nothing about them.  This
very crime,  I think,  broke the link of amity between Richardson

and Miss M 4,  after a tenderness and confidence of many

years.  However,  you must do a great deal more before I leave
you for Lucan5 or Montague,  or any other charmer;  if any other
charmer would have me.

I am sorry that you have seen Mrs.  W 6.     She and her

1 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  104.  4  '  Miss Mulso.'    BARETTI.    Miss

2 Johnson refers to petticoat Mulso is better known as  '  the ad-
government,  post)  pp.  151,  2.     It is mirable Mrs.    Chapone.'     She was
possible that some political pamphlet one of the literary ladies who sat at
had lately been brought out under Richardson's feet.    I cannot find any
that title,  in imitation of one by John account of this quarrel in Richard-
Dunton in 1702.  son's Correspondence,  ed.   by Mrs.

3 Perhaps  '  the Shakespeare  '  was Barbauld.

Malone's Supplement to the Edition 5 Lady Lucan.     Ante,  ii.  65.
of Shakespeare's Plays by Samuel 6 Most probably the lady men-
Johnson and George Steevens,  pub-      tioned ante,  ii.  128.
lished this year.

husband

142

To Mrs.  Thrale.

[A.D.  1780.

husband exhibited two very different appearances of human
nature.  But busy,  busy,  still art thou x.  He prevailed on himself
to treat her with great tenderness  ;  and to show how little sense
will serve for common life,  she has passed through the world with
less imprudence than any of her family.

Sir Philip's bill has been rejected by the Lords.  There was,
I think,  nothing to be objected to it,  but the time at which it
was proposed,  and the intention with which it was projected.  It
was fair in itself,  but tended to weaken government when it is
too weak already 2.

*  *  *  *  has no business about you,  but to be taught.  Poor

B 's 3 tenderness is very affecting.  Comfort her all you can.

I sincerely wish her well.  Declining life is a very awful scene.

1  '  But busy,  busy still art thou
To bind the loveless,  joyless vow,
The heart from pleasure to delude,
To join the gentle to the rude.'
A Song.     Thomson's Works,  ed.
1775,  ii-  268.     It is Fortune who is
so cruelly busy.

2 Miss Burney records in February
1779 that one day at Streatham Sir
Philip J.  Clerk,  *  a professed minority
man/  described  'a bill he had in
agitation against contractors.  Dr.
Johnson at first scoffed at it;  Mr.
Thrale betted a guinea it would not
pass,  and Sir Philip that he should
divide a hundred and fifty upon it.
Dr.  Johnson having made more
particular inquiries into its merits
first softened towards it,  and then
declared it a very rational and fair
bill,  and joined with Mrs.  Thrale in
soliciting Mr.  Thrale's vote.  Sir
Philip was quite delighted.  He
opened upon politics more amply,
and declared his opinions,  which
were so much bordering upon the
republican principles that Dr.  John-
son suddenly took fire  ;  he called
back his recantation,  and begged
Mr.  Thrale not to vote for the bill.
"  It ought,"  said he,  "  to be opposed
by all honest men.  In itself and

considered simply,  it is equitable,  and
I would forward it ;  but when we
find what a faction it is to support and
encourage,  it ought not to be listened
to.  All men should oppose it who
do not wish well to sedition."  '  Mme.
D'Arblay's Diary,  i.  192.  The bill,
which is known as the Contractors'
Bill,  was to restrain any member of
parliament from being concerned in
any Government contract unless the
contract were made at a public
bidding.  Leave to bring it in was
carried by 158 to 143,  so that Sir
Philip won his guinea.  It was lost
however upon the motion for referring
it to a Committee.  ParL Hist.,  xx.
124.  The following year it was
carried without a division,  but it was
lost in the Lords.  Ann.  Reg.,  1780,  i.
153,  1 81.  It was brought in again in
March,  1782,  and was carried through
both Houses.  Ann.  Reg.,  1782,  i.
308,  and Chitty's Statutes,  iv.  1124,
ed.  1880,  where the date is wrongly
given as 1749.  In  ^oi after the
Union a similar provision was made
for Ireland by 41 George III,  c.  52,
sec.  4.

3 Probably Mrs.  Byron.  Ante,  ii.
121,  n.  2.  See Mme.  D'Arblay's
Diary,  i.  317,  331.

Please

Aetat.  TO.]  To the Reverend Dr.  Taylor.

Please to tell Mr.  Thrale,  that I think I grow rather less ;  and
that I was last week almost dizzy with vacuity.     I repeat my
challenge to alternate diet I ;  and doubt not but both of us,  by
adhering to it,  may live more at ease,  and a much longer time.
Though I am going to dine with Lady Craven 2,

I am,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

660.

To THE REVEREND DR.  TAYLOR 3.
DEAR SIR,

The quantity of blood taken from you appears to me not

1 The challenge has not been given
in any previous letter.     Each,  I con-
jecture, was to abstain from animal
food,  every other day.     See^r/,  pp.
147,  164,  181.

2  '  The beautiful,  gay and fascinat-
ing Lady Craven,'  as Boswell calls
her.     <  Lord Macartney,'   he adds,
'  told me that he met Johnson at her
house,  and that he seemed jealous of
any interference.  "  So  (said his Lord-
ship smiling)  I kept back"'    Life,  iii.
22.     She was the daughter of the
fourth Earl of Berkeley,   and wife
first of the sixth Lord Craven and
afterwards of the Margrave of
Anspach.     In 1825 she published her
Memoirs.     Walpole's Letters,  ix.  75,
n.  i.

3 First published in the Catalogue
of Mr.  Alfred Morrison's Autographs,

».  343-

This Letter,  though it is dated
1778,  must have been written in 1780,
improbable as it seems that John-
son should have fallen into such a
blunder.  Thrale's first attack was in
June,  1779,  when he was in extreme
danger.  Ante,  p.  93  ;  Life of Johnson,
iii.  397,  and Hay ward's Piozzi,  \.  299
(where 1770 is a misprint for 1779)  ;
ii.  28.  Johnson had the remission of
the convulsions which he mentions

on June 18,  1779.  He recorded on
June 1 8,  1780:—'  In the morning of
this day last year I perceived the
remission of those convulsions in my
breast which had distressed me for
more than twenty years.  I returned
thanks at church for the mercy
granted me,  which has now continued
a year.'— Prayers and Meditations,
p.  183-

Three days later he wrote to Mrs.
Thrale  :—

'  It was a twelvemonth last Sunday
since the convulsions in my breast
left me.  I hope I was thankful when
I recollected it ;  by removing that
disorder a great improvement was
made in the enjoyment of life.'  Post,
Letter of June 21,  1780.

He was at Ashbourne on June 18,
1779.  Life,  iii.  453.

On April 20,  1778,  the very day of
which this letter bears the date,  he
recorded  : —

'  After a good night,  as I am forced
to reckon,  I rose seasonably.  .  .  .
In reviewing my time from Easter,
1777,  I found a very melancholy and
shameful blank.  So little has been
done that days and months are with-
out any trace.  My health has,  indeed,
been very much interrupted.  My
nights have been commonly not only
sufficient.

144

To Dr.  Biirney.

[A.D.  1780.

sufficient.  Thrale was almost lost by the scrupulosity1 of his
physicians,  who never bled him copiously till they bled him in
despair ;  he then bled till he fainted,  and the stricture or
obstruction immediately gave way and from that instant he
grew better.

I can now give you no advice but to keep yourself totally
quiet and amused with some gentle exercise of the mind.  If
a suspected letter comes,  throw it aside till your health is re-
established ;  keep easy and cheerful company about you,  and
never try to think but at those stated and solemn times when
the thoughts are summoned to the cares of futurity,  the only
real cares of a rational Being.

As to my own health I think it rather grows better ;  the
convulsions which left me last year at Ashbourne have never
returned,  and I have by the mercy of God very comfortable nights.
Let me know very often how you are,  till you are quite well.

I am,  Sir,
Your affectionate humble servant,

London,  April 20,  1778  [?  1780].  SAM  :  JOHNSON.

To the Rev.  Dr.  Taylor in Ashbourne,  Derbyshire.

661.

TO DR.    BURNEY2.

Mr.  Johnson received an invitation from Mrs.  Ord for to-
morrow, and having forgotten her street,  desires to be informed

restless,  but painful and fatiguing.
.  .  .  Some relaxation of my breast
has been procured,  I think,  by opium,
which,  though it never gives me
sleep,  frees my breast from spasms.' —
Prayers and Meditations,  p.  169.

1 See Life,  iv.  5,  n.  2,  for instances
of Johnson's use of scrupulosity,
which was remarked on by Sir
William Jones.  Adam Smith I have
found using the word in his Theory
of Moral Sentiments,  ed.  1801,  ii.
49,  where he describes the prudent
man as  'respecting with an almost

religious scrupulosity all the estab-
lished decorums and ceremonials of
society,'  and a second time,  p.  334,
where he writes of  *  a frivolous and
weak scrupulosity of conduct.'

2 From the original in the posses-
sion of Mr.  Millin Chamberlain of
the Boston Public Library,  Boston,
United States.

As there is nothing to fix the date
of this letter I enter it here,  because
in the next letter Johnson for the
first time mentions his having visited
Mrs.  Ord.  Hannah More describes

where

Aetat.  70.]

To Mrs.  Tkrale.

H5

where she lives.     If Dr.  Burney goes to-morrow,  Mr.  Johnson
will call on him,  and beg the favour of going with him.
Wednesday.

To Dr.  Burney — or any Burney1.

662.

DEAR MADAM,         To MRS-  THRALE2-

Mr.  E 3 and Mr.  P 4 called on me to-day with

your letter to the electors,  and another which they had drawn
up,  to serve in its place.  I thought all their objections just,  and
all their alterations proper.  You had mentioned his sickness in
terms which gave his adversaries advantage,  by confirming the
report which they already spread with great industry,  of his
infirmity and inability.  You speak,  in their opinion,  and in
mine,  with too little confidence in your own interest.  By fearing,
you teach others to fear.  All this is now avoided,  and it is to
take its chance.

how,  in 1780,  she went to one of that
lady's assemblies at a time when  '  the
mourning for some foreign Wilhel-
mina Jaquelina was not over.  Every
human creature was in deep mourn-
ing, and I,  poor I,  all gorgeous in
scarlet.  Even Jacobite Johnson was
in deep mourning.'  Life and Cor-
respondence of Hannah More,  i.  170.

1 One of the last letters which
Johnson wrote was on his return to
London less than a month before his
death,  in which he says  : — '  Mr.  John-
son who came home last night sends
his respects to dear Dr.  Burney and
all the dear Burneys,  little and great.'
Life,  iv.  377.     See also post,  Letter
of November 14,  1781.

2 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  106.

On April 6 Dunning's famous
motion  '  that the influence of the
Crown has increased,  is increasing,
and ought to be diminished'  had
been carried by a majority of 18 —
233 to 215.  '  The blow seems to me
decisive,'  wrote Horace Walpole two
VOL.  II.

days later.  Letters,  vii.  348.  On
the nth he wrote: — 'Religious pro-
phets were more prudent than I ;
they commonly formed their predic-
tions after events,  not before.  .  .  .  Not
but the Administration was beaten
again yesterday ;  yet only by two.'
Ib.,  p.  349.  On the 25th,  the date of
Johnson's letter,  he wrote  : — '  Dun-
ning moved yesterday to address the
King that the Parliament might not
be prorogued or dissolved till the
demands of the petitions  [respecting
an economical reform,  &c.]  are satis-
fied. The motion was rejected by
254 to 203.  .  .  .  The session will
probably end much sooner than was
expected.'  Ib.,  p.  357-  Parliament
was dissolved in the following Sep-
tember. Parl.  Hist.  xxi.  767.

3  '  Mr.  Evans.'    BARETTI.    Post,
p.  154.

4  'Mr.  Perkins.'     BARETTI.     See
Life,  iii.  440,  for an address to the
Electors written for Thrale by John-
son.

How

146

To Mrs.  Thrale.

[A.D.  1780.

How do you think I live  ?  On Thursday I dined with
Hamilton x,  and went thence to Mrs.  Ord 2.  On Friday,  with
much company at Reynolds's.  On Saturday,  at Dr.  Bell's 3.
On Sunday,  at Dr.  Burney's,  with your two sweets from Kensing-
ton, who are both well ;  at night came Mrs.  Ord,  Mr.  Harris 4,
and Mr.  Greville 5,  &c.  On Monday,  with Reynolds 6,  at night
with Lady Lucan  ;  to-day with Mr.  Langton  ;  to-morrow with
the Bishop of St.  Asaph 7 ;  on Thursday with Mr.  Bowles 8 ;

Friday,  ;  Saturday,  at the Academy9 ;  Sunday,  with

Mr.  Ramsay I0.

I told Lady Lucan how long it was since she sent to me ;  but
she said I must consider how the world rolls about her.  She
seemed pleased that we met again  ".

The long intervals of starving I do not think best for Mr.
Thrale,  nor perhaps for myself,  but I knew not how to attain
any thing better ;  and every body tells me that I am very well,
and I think there now remains not much cause for complaint :
but O for a glass,  once in four-and-twenty hours,  of warm water  !
Can warm water be had only at Bath,  as steam was to be found

1 William Gerard Hamilton.

2 Perhaps it was the evening de-
scribed by Hannah More.     '  I was
the other night at Mrs.  Ord's.    Every-
body was there,  and in such a crowd
I thought myself well off to be
wedged in with Mr.  Smelt,  Langton,
Ramsay and Johnson.     Johnson told
me he had been with the King that
morning,  who enjoined him to add
Spenser to his Lives of the Poets.
I seconded the motion  ;  he promised
to think of it,  but said the booksellers
had not included him in their list of
the poets.'     H.  More's Memoirs,  \.
174.      Of this interview with the
King nothing more is known than
we learn here.

3 Probably the Rev.  Dr.  Bell,  Pre-
bendary of Westminster.     Life,    ii.
204,  n.  i.    See ante,  i.  1 18  ;  ii.  62,  n.  2.

4  '  Hermes'  Harris,  'a sound sullen
scholar,'  but  '  a prig and a bad prig.'
Life,  iii.  245.    Miss Burney describes

him as  'a most charming old man.'
Early Diary of Frances Burney,  ii.
97.  Perhaps this Sunday evening at
Dr.  Burney's Johnson heard  'a little
concert,'  as the Dean of Winchester
had heard one on a Sunday evening
a few years earlier,  and was not
shocked.  Ib.  ii.  1 14.

5 Richard Fulke Greville.    Ante,
i.  60,  n.  2.

6  *  Reynolds's pocket-book has  "  4.
Dr.  Johnson,  Lady Lucan." '     Leslie
and Taylor's Reynolds,  ii.  287.     '4,'
I suppose,  is the hour of the dinner.

7 Dr.  Shipley.     Ante,  i.  400.

8 Johnson visited him in 1783 at
his seat at Heale,  near Salisbury.
Life,  iv.  234.

9 Post,  p.  150.

10 Allan Ramsay,     the portrait
painter,  son of Allan Ramsay,   the
poet,  a man who could give    'a
splendid dinner.'    Life,  iii.  336.

11 Ante,  ii.  65,  in.

only

Aetat.  70.]  To Mrs.  Thrale.  147

only at Knightsbridge T.  Nature distributes her gifts,  they say,
variously,  to show us that we have need of one another ;  and in
her bounty she bestowed warm water upon Bath,  and condemned
the inhabitants of other places,  if they would warm their water,
to make a fire.  I would have the young ladies take half a glass,
every third day,  and walk upon it.

I not only scour the town from day to day,  but many visitors
come to me in the morning ;  so that my work makes no great
progress,  but I will try to quicken it.  I should certainly like to
bustle a little among you,  but I am unwilling to quit my post
till I have made an end 2.

You did not tell me in your last letter how Mr.  Thrale goes
on.  If he will be ruled,  for aught appears,  he may live on these
hundred years*.  Fix him when he comes in alternate diet.

I am,  dearest Lady,   .

Your,  &c.,
London,  April 25,  1780.  SAM  :  JOHNSON.

Now there is a date  ;  look at it.

663.

TO MRS.  THRALE4.
DEAREST MADAM,

Mr.  Thrale never will live abstinently,  till he can persuade
himself to abstain by rule.  I lived on potatoes on Friday,  and
on spinach to-day  ;  but I have had,  I am afraid,  too many dinners

1 For the glass of hot water,  see On the death of Dr.  Swift.     Swift's
ante,  ii.  140.     'I knew a lady,'  said Works,  ed.  1803,  xi.  245.
Johnson,  *  who came up from Lin-  4 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  109.
colnshire to Knightsbridge with one Boswell gives in the Life,  iii.  421,
of her daughters,    and gave five a letter from Mrs.  Thrale to Johnson,
guineas a week for a lodging and dated April 28 of this year,    thus
a warm bath  ;    that is,  mere warm prefacing it  : — '    shall present my
water.     That,  you know,  could not readers with one of her original letters
be had in Lincolnshire  !    She said,  to him at this time,  which will amuse
it was made either too hot or too them probably more than those well-
cold there.'     Life,  v.  286.  written but studied epistles which

2 Of his Lives.  she has inserted in her collection,

3  'Had he been ruled,  for aught because it exhibits the easy vivacity

appears,  of their literary intercourse.'     He

He might have lived these gives moreover part of Johnson's
twenty years.'  reply — the letter in the text.

L 2 of

148

To Mrs.  Thrale.

[A.D.  1780.

of late.  I took physick1 too both days,  and hope to fast to-
morrow. When he comes home,  we will shame him,  and Jebb2
shall scold him into regularity.  I am glad,  however,  that he
is always one of the company,  and that my dear Queeney is
again another.  Encourage,  as you can,  the musical girl 3.

Nothing is more common than mutual dislike where mutual
approbation is particularly expected.  There is often on both
sides a vigilance not over benevolent ;  and as attention is strongly
excited,  so that nothing drops unheeded,  any difference in taste
or opinion,  and some difference where there is no restraint will
commonly appear,  it  \sic~\  immediately generates dislike4.

Never let criticisms operate upon your face or your mind  ;  it
is very rarely that an author is hurt by his criticks 5.  The blaze
of reputation cannot be blown out,  but it often dies in the socket ;
a very few names may be considered as perpetual lamps that
shine unconsumed.  From the author of Fitzosborne's Letters 6

1 By physick Johnson in these
Letters always,  I think,  means  'a
purge.'  In his Dictionary^  defines
physick>  in its third meaning,  as  '  in
common phrase,  a purge.'

8 Sir Richard Jebb.  Horace Wai-
pole writing of him on Jan.  29 of this
year says  : — '  Sir Richard Jebb pro-
nounced the poor girl in a consump-
tion ;  but he is such a raven that I
did not believe him,  nor do.5 Letters,
vii.  320.  Miss Burney wrote the
following year: — 'Dr.  Johnson is
very good and very clubable,  but Sir
R.  Jebb is quite a scourge to me.
He is so haughty,  so impracticable a
creature.'  Mme.  D'Arblay's Diary,
ii.  9.

5 Mrs.  Thrale had written  :— '  Poor
Queeney 's sore eyes have just re-
leased her  ;  she had a long confine-
ment, and could neither read nor
write,  so my master treated her very
good-naturedly with the visits of a
young woman in this town,  a taylor's
daughter,  who professes musick,  and
teaches so as to give six lessons a

day to ladies,  at five and threepence
a lesson.  Miss Burney says she is
a great performer ;  and I respect the
wench for getting her living so
prettily :  she is very modest and
pretty-mannered,  and not seventeen
years old.'  Life,  iii.  422.

4 Mrs.  Thrale had written  :— '  Yes-
terday's evening was passed at Mrs.
Montagu's  :  there was Mr.  Melmoth,
I do not like him though,  nor he me ;
it was expected we should have
pleased each other ;  he is,  however,
just Tory enough to hate the Bishop
of Peterborough for Whiggism,  and
Whig enough to abhor you for
Toryism.'     Ib.

5 Mrs.   Thrale had written  :— '  I
felt my regard for you in my face last
night when the criticisms were going
on.'    Ib.     For the silence with which
attacks should be met,  see Life,  ii.
61,  n.  4.

6 Mr.  Melmoth,  'Pliny'  Melmoth
as he was called.     Ib.  iii.  422,  n.  2 ;
iv.  272,  n.  4.

I cannot

Aetat.  70.]

To Mrs.  Thrale.

149

I cannot think myself in much danger.  I met him only once
about thirty years ago,  and in some small dispute reduced him
to whistle  ;  having not seen him since,  that is the last impression.
Poor Moore the fabulist z was one of the company.

Mrs.  Montague's long stay,  against her own inclination,  is very
convenient.  You would,  by your own confession,  want a com-
panion ;  and she is par pluribzis,  conversing with her you may
find variety in one 2.

At Mrs.  Ord's I met one Mrs.  B 3,  a travelled lady,  of

great spirit,  and some consciousness of her own abilities.  We
had a contest of gallantry an hour long,  so much to the diversion
of the company,  that at Ramsay's last night,  in a crowded room,
they would have pitted us again.  There were Smelt4,  and the
Bishop of St.  Asaph,  who comes to every place5;  and Lord
Monboddo6,  and Sir Joshua,  and ladies out of tale.

1 The author of Fables for the
Female Sex,  and of the tragedy of
The Gamester,  and editor of The
World.     Goldsmith,  in his Present
State of Polite Learning  (ch.  x.),
after describing the sufferings of
authors,    continues  : — '  Let us not
then aggravate those natural incon-
veniences by neglect;  we have had
sufficient instances of this kind al-
ready.    Sale and Moore will suffice
for one age at least.     But they are
dead,  and their sorrows are over.'

2  '  For here the false unconstant

lover,
After a thousand beauties

shown,
Does new surprising charms

discover,
And finds variety in one.'

The Spectator,  No.  470.

3 Mrs.  Buller.     Miss Burney de-
scribes her as  '  tall and elegant in her
person ;     she is a famous Greek
scholar,  a celebrated traveller upon
the Continent to see customs and
manners ;    and a woman every way
singular for her knowledge and enter-

prising way of life.'  Mme.  D'Arblay's
Diary,  ii.  243.  H.  C.  Robinson
describes her in 1811 as  'a most
accomplished lady of the old school.
The poems of Scott and Southey she
has put into her Index Expurga-
torius.  She cannot bear the irregu-
larity of their versification.'  H.  C.
Robinson's Diary,  i.  321.  See also
ib.  p.  392.

4 Leonard Smelt was sub-governor
to the  'Prince of Wales  (George IV).
For his  'singular virtues and char-
acter'   see Walpole's Memoirs of
George III,   iv.   312.      He is often
mentioned in Mme.     D'Arblay's
Diary.

5  '  Dr.    Johnson disapproved of
bishops going to routs,  at least of
their staying at them longer than
their presence commanded respect.
He mentioned a particular bishop.
"Poh!      (said Mrs.     Thrale)     the

Bishop of is never minded at

a rout.'"   Life,  iv.  75.    The Bishop
of St.  Asaph was most likely the one
censured.

6 See Life,  v.  74,  for Johnson's visit

The

To Mrs.  Thrale.

[A.D.  1780.

The exhibition,  how will you do,  either to see or not to see !
The exhibition is eminently splendid.  There is contour,  and
keeping,  and grace,  and expression,  and all the varieties of arti-
ficial excellence x.  The apartments were truly very noble.  The
pictures,  for the sake of a sky light,  are at the top of the house  ;
there we dined,  and I sat over against the Archbishop of York 2

to Monboddo's house in 1773.  'I
knew they did not love each other,'
writes Boswell.  When they met in
1784 at a friend's house Boswell
observed that  *  Monboddo avoided
any communication with Johnson.'
Ib.  iv.  273,  n.  i.  Beattie mentions
'Monboddo's hatred of Johnson,
though he never heard Johnson say
anything severe of him.'  Forbes's
Beattie,  p.  333.  Monboddo's conceit
might have provoked ridicule.  Lord
Hailes says in a note  : — '  Lord Mon-
boddo said to me,  23 Dec.  1789,  I
have forgotten more of antiquities
than any man now living knows,
idque addito juramento sanxit!  Hist.
MSS.  Comm.  1874,  p.  532.  John-
son moreover might have laughed at
him as a wooer,  for  'he had lately
[written of April,  1782]  proposed
twice,  without success,  to Mrs.
Garrick.'  Leslie and Taylor's Rey-
nolds, ii.  361.

1 Mrs.    Thrale replied  :— < When
did I ever plague you about contour,
and grace,  and expression?     I have
dreaded them all three since that
hapless day at Compeigne,  when you
teized me so,  and Mr.  Thrale made
what I hoped would have proved a
lasting peace.'      Piozzi Letters,   ii.
116.

2 The Royal Academy this year,
for the first time,   held its Exhi-
bition in Somerset House.      Leslie
and Taylor's Reynolds,     ii.     288.
Horace Walpole wrote early in
May:— 'You know,  I suppose,  that

the Royal Academy at Somerset
House is opened.  It is quite a
Roman palace,  and finished in per-
fect taste as well as boundless ex-
pense. It would have been a glorious
apparition at the conclusion of the
_great war ;  now it is an insult on our
poverty and degradation.'  Letters,
vii.  359.

'  Mr.  Seward saw Dr.  Johnson
presented to the Archbishop of York,
and described his Bow to an ARCH-
BISHOP, as such a studied elabora-
tion of homage,  such an extension of
limb,  such a flexion of body,  as have
seldom or ever been equalled.'  Life,
iv.  198.  Jeremy Bentham,  who had
been under the Archbishop when he
was Master of Westminster School,
thus describes him  : — '  Our great
glory was Dr.  Markham ;  he was a
tall portly man,  and  "  high he held
his head."  He married a Dutch
woman,  who brought him a consider-
able fortune.  He had a large quantity
of classical knowledge.  His business
was rather in courting the great than
in attending to the school.  Any
excuse served his purpose for desert-
ing his post.  He had a great deal
of pomp,  especially when he lifted
his hand,  waved it,  and repeated
Latin verses.  If the boys performed
their tasks well,  it was well ;  if ill,  it
was not the less well.  We stood
prodigiously in awe of him  ;  indeed
he was an object of adoration.'  Bent-
ham's Works,  x.  30.

See

Aetat.  70.]

To Mrs.  Thrale.

See how I live when I am not under petticoat govern-
ment1.

I am,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

London,  May I,  1780.

Mark that — you did not put the year to your last2.

MADAM,
Mr.  P-

664.

TO MRS.    THRALE3.

Bolt-court,  Fleet-street,  May 7,  1780.
4 has just been with me,  and has talked much
talk,  of which the result is,  that he thinks your presence neces-
sary for a few days.  I have not the same fulness of conviction  ;
but your appearance would certainly operate in your favour,  and
you will judge better what measures of diligence and of expence

are necessary.     Money,  Mr.  P says,  must be spent ;  and he

is right in wishing that you be made able to judge how far it is
spent properly.  Perhaps,  it is but perhaps,  some desire that
I have of seeing you,  makes me think the better of his reasons.

Can you leave Master  ?     Can you appoint Mrs. governess  ?

If you can,  the expence of coming is nothing,  and the trouble
not much ;  and therefore it were better gratify your agents.
Levy behaves well.

I dined on Wednesday with Mr.  Fitzmaurice,  who almost
made me promise to pass part of the Summer at Llewenny5.
To-morrow I dine with Mrs.  Southwel6;  and on Thursday with
Lord Lucan.  To-night I go to Miss Monkton's7.  Thus I

1 Ante,  ii.  141,  n.  2.

2 She had succeeded in putting
the day of the month — April 28.

3 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  112.

4  '  Perkins.'    BARETTI.

5 Johnson with the Thrales had
stayed at Lleweney Hall in Den-
bighshire in 1774.     It was then the
residence of Mrs.   Thrale's cousin
Robert Cotton,  Life,  v.  435.     In her
utter indifference to dates and ac-
curacy she said that it had stood a
thousand years.    Hayward's Piozzi,
ii.   206.     It was afterwards bought

by the Hon.  Thomas Fitzmaurice,
brother of the Earl of Shelburne.
Pennant's Wales,  ed.  1810,  ii.  144.
For Johnson's intimacy with the
Earl see Life,  iv.  191.  See also ante,
ii.  81.

6 For the Southwells see ante,  i.
205,  n.  3.

7  *  The lively Miss Monckton  (now
Countess of Corke),   who used to
have the finest bit of blue at the
house of her mother,  Lady Galway.'
Life,  iv.  108.     The bit of blue is an
allusion to the Blue-stocking Club,  Ib.

scramble,

152 To Mrs.  Tkrale.  [A.D.  rzso.

scramble,  when you do not quite shut me up  ;  but I am miserably
under petticoat government,  and yet am not very weary,  nor
much ashamed.

Pray tell my two dear girls that I will write to both of them
next week  ;  and let Burney know that I was so angry —

I am,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

I know of Mrs.  Desmoulines'  letter x.    It will be a great charity.
Let me know when you are to come.

665.

TO MRS.    THRALE2.

DEAR MADAM,  Bolt-court,  Fleet-street,  May 8,  1780.

Would you desire better sympathy — At the very time when
you were writing,  I was answering your letter.

Having seen nobody since I saw Mr.   P 3,  I have little

more to say,  than when I wrote last.  My opinion is,  that you
should come for a week,  and shew yourself,  and talk in high
terms ;  for it will certainly be propagated with great diligence,
that you despair and desist ;  and to those that declare the
contrary,  it will be answered,  Why then do they not appear?
To this no reply can be made that will keep your friends in
countenance.  A little bustle and a little ostentation will put
a stop to clamours,  and whispers,  and suspicions of your friends,
and calumnies of your opponents.  Be brisk,  and be splendid,
and be publick.  You will probably be received with much
favour ;  and take from little people the opportunity which your
absence gives them of magnifying their services,  and exalting
their importance.  You may have more friends and fewer ob-
ligations.

It is always necessary to shew some good opinion of those
whose good opinion we solicit.  Your friends solicit you to come ;
if you do not come,  you make them less your friends,  by dis-
regarding their advice.  Nobody will persist long in helping those
that will do nothing for themselves.

1 For Mrs.  Desmoulines,  see ante,          2 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  114.
ii.  42,  n.  2.  3  <  Perkins.'    BARETTI.

The

Aetat.  70.]  To Mrs.  Thrale.  153

The voters of the Borough are too proud and too little
dependant to be solicited by deputies  ;  they expect the gratifica-
tion of seeing the candidate bowing or curtseying before them.
If you are proud,  they can be sullen1.

Such is the call for your presence ;  what is there to withhold
you?  I see no pretence for hesitation.  Mr.  Thrale certainly
shall not come  ;  and yet somebody must appear whom the people
think it worth the while to look at 2.

Do not think all this while that I want to see you. — I dine on
Thursday at Lord Lucan's,  and on Saturday at Lady Craven's ;
and I dined yesterday with Mrs.  Southwel.

As to my looks at the Academy,  I was not told of them ;  and
as I remember,  I was very well,  and I am well enough now,  and

Dearest Lady,

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

666.

TO MRS.    THRALE3.

DEAR MADAM,  Bolt-court,  Fleet-street,  May 9,  1780.

This morning brought me the honour of a visit from Sir
Philip 4,  who has been to survey Streatham,  and thinks it will be
long before you can return thither;  which he considers as a loss
to himself of many pleasant days which your residence might

have afforded.      We then talked about our mistress,  and s ;

and I said you had most wit,  and most literature.

1  *  A Borough election/  writes Mrs.  Anecdotes,  p.  214.

Piozzi,  'once showed me Mr.  John-  2 Johnson wrote on October 17  : —

son's toleration of boisterous mirth.  '  Mr.  Thrale's loss of health has lost

A rough fellow,  a hatter by trade,  him the election/     Life,  iii.  442.

seeing his beaver in a state of decay 3 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  124.

seized it suddenly with one hand,  and 4 Sir Philip Jennings Clerk.  Ante,

clapping him on the back with the ii.  5 n.  2.

other,  "Ah,  Master Johnson,"  says 5  'Mrs.    Montagu for a penny.'

he,  "  this is no time to be thinking BARETTI.   '  As to Mrs.  Montagu she

about hats?     "  No,  no,  Sir,"  replies reasons well,  and harangues well,  but

our Doctor in a cheerful tone,  "  hats wit she has none.     Mrs.  Thrale has

are of no use now,  as you say,  except almost too much  ;  for when she is in

to throw up in the air and huzza spirits it bursts forth in a torrent

with,"  accompanying his words with almost overwhelming.'     Mme.  D'Ar-

the true election halloo.'      Piozzi' s blay's Diary,  i.  335.

Mr.  Evans

154

To Mrs.  Thrale.

[A.D.  1780.

Mr.  Evans1 brought me your letter,  to which I had already
sent the answer ;  nor have I any thing to add,  but that the more
I reflect,  and the more I hear,  the more I am convinced of the
necessity of your presence.  Your adversaries will be for ever
saying,  that you despair of success,  or disdain to obtain it by the
usual solicitation.  Either of these suppositions generally re-
ceived ruins your interest,  and your appearance confutes both.

Cette Anne si belle,
Qu'on vante si fort,
Pourquoi ne vient t'elle  ?
Vraiment elle a tort.

While you stay away your friends have no answer to give.

Mr.  P ,  as I suppose you know,  has refused to join with

H 2,  and is thought to be in more danger than Mr.  Thrale.

Of 's letter,  I would have you not take any notice ;  he

is a man of no character.

My Lives creep on.  I have done Addison,  Prior,  Rowe,
Granville,  Sheffield,  Collins,  Pitt,  and almost Fenton.  I design
to take Congreve next into my hand.  I hope to have done
before you can come home,  and then whither shall I go 3  ?

What comes of my dear,  sweet,  charming,  lovely,  pretty,
little Queeney's learning4?  This is a sad long interruption,  and

1 Ante,  i.  393,  n.  2.

2 Mr.  P was Nathaniel Polhill,

Thrale's colleague  ;   H was Sir

Richard Hotham.     At the close of
the poll on September 15,  the num-
bers were : —

Hotham    .     .     .     1177
Polhill  .     .     .     .     1025
Thrale  ....      769
Annual Register,  1780,  i.  227.

3 On August 21 Johnson wrote to
Bos well : — *  I have sat at home in
Bolt-court,  all the summer,  thinking
to write the Lives,  and a great part
of the time only thinking.     Several
of them,  however,  are done,  and I
still think to do the rest.'     Life,  iii.
435.     They were finished in March,
1781.     Ib.  iv.  34.

4 He was thinking of the Latin
lessons which he gave her.  Ante,
ii.  98,  n.  2.  Miss Burney nine months
earlier describes her as  '  coldly civil
as usual.'  Of her singing she says  : —
'  Her voice is very sweet,  and will
improve with practice.  She has
much to do,  but nothing to undo-,
however,  "  Manca Fanima,  e Vanima
sempre mancara"'  Early Diary of
Frances Burney,  ii.  257,  9.  Char-
lotte Burney,  writing of her two years
later,  says  : — 'Miss Thrale was to my
no small astonishment civil to me,
and sat by me the whole evening.
She has taken it into her head to be
civil to people this winter,  I hear.'
Ib.  p.  306.

wicked

Aetat.  70.]      To the Reverend Thomas Warton.  1 5 5

the wicked world will make us no allowance,   but will call
us   .

Lady Lucan says,  she hears Queeney is wonderfully accom-
plished, and I did not speak ill of her.

Did I tell you that Scot and Jones both offer themselves to
represent the University in the place of Sir Roger Newdigate x.
They are struggling hard for what others think neither of them
will obtain.

I am not grown fat.  I did thrive a little,  but I checked the
pernicious growth,  and am now small as before.

I am,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

667.

To THE REVEREND THOMAS WARTON 2.
SIR,  Bolt Court,  Fleet Street,  May 9,  1780.

I have your pardon to ask for an involuntary fault.  In
a parcel sent from Mr.  Boswell I found the enclosed letter,  which,
without looking on the direction,  I broke open  ;  but,  finding

1 Newdigate,  who had been mem-  Horace Walpole wrote to Mason in

ber since 1751  (Parl.  Hist.  xiv.  76),  1780:— 'Mr.  Jones,   the orientalist,

was retiring.     To obtain the seat is candidate for Oxford.    On Tuesday

Jones  '  would,'  he said,  '  have cheer-  was se'nnight Mrs.  Vesey presented

fully sacrificed to it not only an him to me.     The next day he sent

Indian Judgeship of six thousand a me an absurd and pedantic letter,

year,  but a Nabobship with as many desiring I would make interest for

millions.'     Finding however that he him.      I answered it directly,   and

had no chance of success he with-  told him I had no more connection

drew,   and offered to support Dr.  with Oxford than with the Antipodes,

Scott     (afterwards Lord Stowell).  nor desired to have.'     He adds : —

Life of Sir W.  Jones,  pp.  216,  228,  '  The man,   it seems,  is a staunch

231.     Scott also withdrew,  and Sir Whig,    but very wrong-headed/

William Dolben and Francis Page Letters,  vii.  361.     It seems strange

were elected without opposition.  to our notions that the strength of

Jackson's Oxford Journal,     Sep-  a staunch Whig should lie,  as Jones

tember 16,  1780.     It is not the only said his did,  'among the non-resi-

time in the history of the University dent voters.'     Life of Jones,  p.  224.

that the men of acres have triumphed 2 First published in Croker's Bos-

over the men of learning.     In the well,  page 647.

Parl.  Hist.   xxi.   780 Newdigate is For Thomas Warton see Life,  i.

wrongly entered as elected in 1780.  270.
Scott in 1 80 1 succeeded Page.

I did

156 To the Reverend Dr.  Joseph Warton.  [A.D.

I did not understand it,  soon saw it belonged to you.  I am
sorry for this appearance of a fault,  but believe me it is only the
appearance.  I did not read enough of the letter to know its

purport.

I am,  Sir,

Your most humble servant,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

668.

To THE REVEREND DR.  JOSEPH WARTON x.
DEAR SIR,  May 23, 1780.

It is unnecessary to tell you how much I was obliged by
your useful memorials.  The shares of Fenton and Broome in the
Odyssey I had before from Mr.  Spence.  Dr.  Warburton did not
know them 2.  I wish to be told,  as the question is of great
importance in the poetical world,  whence you had your intelli-
gence ;  if from Spence,  it shows at least his consistency ;  if from
any other,  it confers corroboration.  If any thing useful to me
should occur,  I depend upon your friendship.  Be pleased to
make my compliments to the ladies of your house,  and to the
gentleman that honoured me with the Greek Epigrams,  when
I had,  what I hope sometime to have again,  the pleasure of
spending a little time with you at Winchester 3.
I am,  dear Sir,

Your most obliged

and most humble servant,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

1 First published in Wooll's Me-
moirs of Dr.  Warton,  page 390.

2  '  Pope,  weary of the toil,  called
Fenton and Broome to his assistance ;
and,  taking only half the work upon
himself,  divided the other half be-
tween his partners,  giving four books
to Fenton and eight to Broome.'    In
a note  '  he mentions only five books
as written by the coadjutors.  ...  A
natural curiosity after the real con-
duct of so great an undertaking,  in-
cited me once to inquire of Dr.

Warburton,  who told me in his warm
language,  that he thought the relation
given in the note  "a lie";  but that
he was not able to ascertain the
several shares.  The intelligence which
Dr.  Warburton could not afford me,
I obtained from Mr.  Langton,  to
whom Mr.  Spence had imparted it.'
Johnson's Works,  viii.  230.  See also
ib.  pp.  56,  273,  338.

3 For Johnson's visit,  see Life,  i.
496,  n.  2  ;  iii.  367.

To

Aetat.  70.]

To Mrs.  Thrale.

157

669.

To MRS.  THRALEJ.
DEAR MADAM,  May 23, 1780.

Your letter told me all the good news.  Mr.  Thrale well,
Queeney good,  and yourself not so ill but that you know how to

be made well ;  and now is gone 2,  you have the sole and

undivided empire of Bath ;  and you talk to many whom you
cannot make wiser,  and enjoy the foolish face of praise 3.

But 4 and you have had,  with all your adulations,

nothing finer said of you than was said last Saturday night of

Burke and me.  We were at the Bishop of  's,  a bishop

little better than your bishop 5 ;  and towards twelve we fell into
talk,  to which the ladies listened,  just as they do to you ;  and
said,  as I heard,  there is no rising unless somebody will cry
fire.

I was last night at Miss Monkton's ;  and there were Lady
Craven and Lady Cranburne,  and many ladies and few men.
Next Saturday I am to be at Mr.  Pepys's6,  and in the inter-
mediate time am to provide for myself as I can.

You cannot think how doggedly I left your house on Friday

1 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  127.

Mrs.  Thrale had returned to Lon-
don from Bath on electioneering
business.  '  Let me see you at the
Borough-house as soon as I get
there,'  she wrote to Johnson on May
9.  '  Everybody says I must come up
directly.'  Piozzi Letters,  ii.  122.
Miss Burney,  who had accompanied
her,  describes her as  '  involved in
business,  electioneering,  canvassing
and letter-writing.'  On the morning
of their return to Bath,  'we rose,'
she writes,  'at four o'clock,  and
when we came down stairs,  to our
great surprise found Dr.  Johnson
waiting to receive and breakfast with
us.'  They reached Bath that same
day.  Mme.  D'Arblay's Diary,  i.  354.

2  '  Mrs.  Montagu we miss cruelly.'
Ib.  p.  357.

3 Pope.     Prologue to the Satires^

1.  212.

4 Miss Burney.

5 The first Bishop was most likely
the Bishop of St.  Asaph,  and the
second Hinchliffe,  Bishop of Peter-
borough,  who was at Bath.     '  He
adores,  and is adored in return by
Mrs.     Thrale.'       Mme.     D'Arblay's
Diary,  i.  356.

6 For Miss Monckton see ante,
ii.  151,  n.  7,  and for Lady Craven,
ii.  143.     Lady Cranbourne's husband
succeeded his father this year as
seventh Earl of Salisbury.     In 1789
he was created Marquis.     She met
a miserable end in the fire which
burnt the west wing of Hatfield
House on November 27,  1835.     Her
grandson is the present Marquis.
For Pepys,  see ante,  ii.  136,  n.  i.

My

158

To John Nichols.

[A.D.  1780.

morning,  and yet Mrs.  Abbess gave me some mushrooms ;  but
what are mushrooms without my mistress  ?

My master has seen his hand-bill x ;  will he stand to it  ?
I have not heard a word from the Borough since you went
away.

Dr.  Taylor is coming hastily to town,  that he may drive his
lawsuit forward.  He seems to think himself very well.  This
lawsuit will keep him in exercise,  and exercise will keep him well-
It is to be wished that the law may double its delays.  If Dr.
Wilson dies,  he will take St.  Margaret's,  and then he will have
the bustle of the parish to amuse him2.  I expect him every
day.

I am,  dear Lady,

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

670.

To JOHN NICHOLS 3.

[?May,  1780.]

In reading Rowe in your edition,  which is very impudently
called mine,  I observed a little piece unnaturally and odiously
obscene.  I was offended,  but was still more offended when
I could not find it in Rowe's genuine volumes.  To admit it had
been wrong ;  to interpolate it is surely worse.  If I had known
of such a piece in the whole collection,  I should have been angry.
What can be done  ?

1 No doubt his Address to the
Electors.     Ante,  ii.  145.

2 For Dr.  Taylor's law-suit in 1776,
see ante,  i.   379.     Dr.  Wilson had
the living of St.  Margaret's,  West-
minster.    He lived nearly four years
longer.    Post,  p.  163,  and Letter of
May 13,  1784.

3 First published in the Gentle-
man's Magazine for 1785,  page 10.

Johnson,  it must be remembered,
was not the editor of The English
Poets.  'The edition,'  writes Bos-
well,  'for which he was to write
Prefaces and Lives,  was not an

undertaking directed by him :  he
was to furnish a Preface and Life
to any poet the booksellers pleased.
I asked him if he would do this to
any dunce's works,  if they should ask
him.  JOHNSON.  "Yes,  Sir;  and say
he was a dunce."'  Life,  iii.  137.
Nichols says in a note to the Gentle-
man's Magazine,  that the piece of
which Johnson complained  *  has not
only appeared in the Works of Rowe,
but has been transplanted by Pope
into the Miscellanies he published in
his own name and that of Dean
Swift.'

To

Aetat.  70.]

To Mrs.   Thrale.

159

671.

To JOHN NICHOLS z.

[May 24,  1780.]

Mr.  Johnson is obliged to Mr.  Nicol for his communication,
and must have Hammond again.  Mr.  Johnson would be glad of
Blackmore's Essays for a few days.

672.

TO MRS.  THRALE2.
DEAR MADAM,

Here has been Dr.  Lawrence with me,  and I showed him your
letter ;  and you may easily believe we had some talk about my
master3.  He said,  however,  little that was new,  except this,
which is of great importance,  that if ever he feels any uncommon
sensation in his head,  such as,  heaviness,  pain,  or noise,  or giddi-
ness, he should have immediate recourse to some evacuation,  and
thinks a cathartick most eligible.  He told me a case of a lady,
who said she felt a dizziness,  and would bleed  ;  to bleed,  how-
ever, she neglected,  and in a few days the dizziness became an
apoplexy.  He says,  but do not tell it,  that the use of Bath
water,  as far as it did any thing,  did mischief.  He presses
abstinence very strongly,  as that which must do all that can be
done  ;  and recommends the exercise of walking,  as tending more
to extenuation4 than that of riding.

1 First published in the Gentle-
man's Magazine for 1785,  page
10.

Johnson says of Blackmore's
Essays that  '  they can be com-
mended only as they are written for
the highest and noblest purpose,  the
promotion of religion.  Blackmore's
prose is not the prose of a poet ;  for
it is languid,  sluggish,  and lifeless  ;
his diction is neither daring nor
exact,  his flow neither rapid nor easy,
and his periods neither smooth nor
strong.  His account of wit will show
with how little clearness he is content
to think,  and how little his thoughts

are recommended by his language.'
Works,  viii.  43.

2 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  135.

3 Mrs.  Thrale had written that '  the
one glass of water,'  which Mr.  Thrale
took every day at Bath,  caused dizzi-
ness.    Ib.  ii.  131.

4 Dr.   Norman Moore,    whom I
have consulted on this passage,  in-
forms me that he thinks Johnson
means by  '  extenuation  '  reduction of

fat.  In his Dictionary he defines
to extenuate,  in its fifth meaning,  as
to make lean.  See post,  Letter of
October 27,  1781,  where it seems to
mean  '  loss of flesh.'

has

i6o

To Mrs.  Thrale.

[A.D.  1780.

T has let out another pound of blood,  and is come to

town,  brisk and vigorous,  fierce and fell,  to drive on his lawsuit.
Nothing in all life now can be more profligater than what he is  ;
and if,  in case,  that so be,  that they persist for to resist him,  he is
resolved not to spare no money,  nor no time 2.  He is,  I believe,
thundering away.  His solicitor has turned him off ;  and I think
it not unlikely that he will tire his lawyers.  But now don't you
talk.

My dear Queeney,  what a good girl she is.  Pray write to me
about her,  and let me know her progress in the world.  Bath is
a good place for the initiation of a young lady.  She can neither
become negligent for want of observers,  as in the country ;  nor
by the imagination that she lies concealed in the crowd,  as in
London.  Lady Lucan told me,  between ourselves,  how much
she had heard of Queeny's accomplishments  ;  she must therefore
now be careful,  since she begins to have the public eye upon
her.

A lady has sent me a vial,  like Mrs.  Nesbit's3 vial,  of essence
of roses.  What am I come to  ?

Congreve,  whom I dispatched at the Borough while I was
attending the election4,  is one of the best of the little lives  ;  but
then I had your conversation.

You seem to suspect that I think you too earnest about the
success of your solicitation :  if I gave you any reason for that
suspicion,  it was without intention.  It would be with great dis-
content that I should see Mr.  Thrale decline the representation
of the Borough,  and with much greater should I see him ejected.
To sit in Parliament for Southwark,  is the highest honour that
his station permits him to attain5;  and his ambition to attain it,

1 Dr.  Taylor.     Ante,  ii.  158.     He
was in the habit of having himself
bled periodically.     Life,  iii.  152.

2  'This was the elegant phrase-
ology of that doctor.'    BARETTI.

3 Mrs.  Nesbitt was Mr.  Thrale's
sister.     Ante,  i.  219,  n.  3.

4 Ante,  ii.  157,  n.  i.

5 Brewers had not as yet been
made peers.     Mrs.  Piozzi,  in a letter

to Johnson just after her second mar-
riage, said,  it is stated  : — *  My second
husband is a gentleman,  which is
more than could be said of my first.'
Miss Hawkins's Memoirs,  i.  66.  Bos-
well,  where he first speaks of Mr.
Thrale,  after mentioning his great
wealth,  says  : — *  There may be some
who think that a new system of gen-
tility might be established upon prin-

is

Aetat.  70.]

To Mrs.  Thrale.

161

is surely rational and laudable.  I will not say that for an honest
man to struggle for a vote in the legislature,  at a time when honest
votes are so much wanted,  is absolutely a duty,  but it is surely
an act of virtue.  The expence,  if it was more,  I should wish him
to despise1.  Money is made for such purposes as this.  And the
method to which the trade is now brought,  will,  I hope,  save him
from any want of what he shall now spend.

Keep Mr.  Thrale well,  and make him keep himself well,  and
put all other care out of your dear head.

Sir Edward Littleton's business with me was to know the
character of a candidate for a school at Brewood in Staffordshire ;
to which,  I think,  there are seventeen pretenders2.

ciples totally different from what have
hitherto prevailed.'  After stating
'the specious but false arguments'
for such a proposition he continues : —
'To refute them is needless.  The
general sense of mankind cries out
with irresistible force,  "  Un gentil-
homme est toujours gentilhomme" '
Life,  i.  491.  Boswell seems at times
to mark his sense of Mr.  Thrale's
inferiority by speaking of him as
Thrale and his house as Thrale's.
He never,  I believe,  is thus familiar
in the case of Beauclerk,  Burke,
Langton,  and Reynolds.

1 See Life,  ii.  153,  where Johnson
says  : — '  A very rich man from low
beginnings may buy his election in
a borough ;  but,  cateris paribus,  a
man of family will be preferred  ; '  and
v.  1 06,  where he says that  '  the
Nabob will carry an election by
means of his wealth in a country
where money is highly valued,  as it
must be where nothing can be had
without money.'  In Moore's Life of
Sheridan,  ed.  1826,  i.  405,  is given an
account of Sheridan's  '  Expenses at
the Borough of Stafford for Election,
Anno 1784.'  The first entry is

248 Burgesses paid  £$  $s.  each

^1302.

VOL.  II.  M

2 Johnson records that when he
was at Hagley in 1774 he met at
dinner Sir Edward Littleton of Staf-
fordshire. Life,  v.  457.  With Sir
Edward's death the baronetcy ex-
pired. He was succeeded in his
estates by his grand-nephew,  who in
1835 was created Baron Hatherton.
Burke's Peerage.

Johnson himself forty-four years
earlier had sought the post,  not of
master,  but of an assistant to the
master of Brewood School.  Life,  iv.
407,  n.  4.

Pretender he merely defines as
'one who lays claim to anything.'
Its present meaning of  'one who
falsely lays claim to a thing '  he does
not mention.  The title of Pretender
therefore when first applied to the
son of James II was nothing more
than Claimant.  By the time Bos-
well published his Tour to the Hebri-
des, and no doubt much earlier,  it
had acquired its secondary and offen-
sive meaning.  Boswell speaking of
Charles Edward says  :— '  I do not
call him the Pretender,  because it
appears to me as an insult to one
who is still alive,  and,  I suppose,
thinks very differently.'  Life,  v.  185.

Do

1 62 To Henry Thrale.  [A.D.  1780.

Do not I tell you every thing?  what wouldst thou more of
man?  It will,  I fancy,  be necessary for you to come up once
again at least,  to fix your friends and terrify your enemies.
Take care to be informed,  as you can,  of the ebb or flow of your
interest ;  and do not lose at Capua the victory of Cannae.
I hope I need not tell you,  dear Madam,  that

I am,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

Thursday,  May 25,  1780.
No.  8,  Bolt-court,  Fleet-street,  London.

Look at this,  and learn x.

673.

To THE REVEREND DR.  FARMER.
[London]  May 25,  1780.     Published in the Life,  iii.  427.

674.

To HENRY THRALE2.

DEAR SIR,  London,  May 30,  1780.

You never desired me to write to you,  and therefore cannot
take it amiss that I have never written.  I once began a letter,
in which I intended to exhort you to resolute abstinence ;  but I
rejoice now that I never sent,  nor troubled you with advice which
you do not want.  The advice that is wanted is commonly un-
welcome, and that which is not wanted is evidently impertinent.

The accounts of your health,  and of your caution,  with which
I am furnished by my mistress,  are just such as would be wished,
and I congratulate you on your power over yourself,  and on the
success with which the exercise of that power has been hitherto
rewarded.  Do not remit your care ;  for in your condition it is
certain that security 3 will produce danger.

You always used to tell me,  that we could never eat too little ;
the time is now come to both of us,  in which your position is
verified.  I am really better than I have been for twenty years

1 She was to learn to date her 3 Johnson gives as the first mean-
letters,  ing of security,  '  carelessness  ;  free-
a Piozzi Letters,  ii.  139.  dom from fear.'

past;

Aetat.  70.]  To Mrs.  Thrale.  163

past x ;  and if you persist in your present laudable practice,  you
may live to tell your great-grandchildren the advantages of
abstinence.

I have been so idle,  that I know not when I shall get either to
you,  or to any other place  ;  for my resolution is to stay here till
the work is finished,  unless some call more pressing than I think
likely to happen should summon me away.  Taylor,  who is gone
away brisk and jolly,  asked me when I would come to him,  but
I could not tell him.  I hope,  however,  to see standing corn in
some part of the earth this Summer,  but I shall hardly smell hay,
or suck clover flowers 2.

I am,  &c.,

SAM.-  JOHNSON.

675.

To MRS.  THRALES.

DEAR MADAM,

You mistake about Dr.  Taylor's claim upon the Abbey;  the
prebends are equal,  but the senior prebendary has his choice of
the livings that are in the gift of the chapter,  of which St.  Margaret's
is one ;  which if Wilson dies,  he may take if he pleases 4.  He went
home lusty and stout ;  having bustled ably about his lawsuit,
which at last,  I think,  he will not get.

Mr.  Thrale,  you say,  was pleased to find that I wish him well ;
which seems therefore to be a new discovery.  I hoped he had
known for many a year past that nobody can wish him better.
It is strange to find that so many have heard of his fictitious re-
lapse, and so few of his continual recovery.

And you think to run me down with the Bishop and Mrs.
Carter,  and Sir James5;  and I know not whether you may not

1 See post)  p.  1 8 1.     It is worthy of did visit Brighton in October.    Life,
notice that the great improvement in iii.  453.

Johnson's health took place in the 3 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  141.

years when he was at work on the 4 Ante,  ii.  158.

Lives of the Poets.     It is very likely 5 The Bishop was the Bishop of

that the occupation,  by keeping his Peterborough.     Ante,  ii.   157,  n.   5.

mind from dwelling so much on Miss Burney,  who was introduced to

itself,  had benefited his bodily health.  Mrs.  Carter at Bath,  describes her as

2 He lost both his summer and his  'really a noble-looking woman;    I
autumn ramble this year,  though he never saw age so graceful in the

M 2 win

1 64

To Mrs.  Thrale.

[A.D.  1780.

win a heat,  now the town grows empty.  Mrs.  Vesey suspects still
that I do not love them since that skrimage*.  But I bustle
pretty well,  and shew myself here and there,  and do not like
to be quite lost.  However,  I have as many invitations to the
country as you ;  and I do not mind your breakfasts,  nor your
evenings.

Langton is gone to be an engineer at Chatham 2 ;  and I sup-
pose you know that Jones and Scot oppose each other for what
neither will have 3.

If Mr.  Thrale at all remits his vigilance,  let the Doctor loose
upon him.  While he is watched he may be kept from mischief,
but he never can be safe without a rule ;  and no rule will he find
equal to that which has been so often mentioned,  of an alternate
diet4;  in which,  at least in this season of vegetation,  there is
neither difficulty nor hardship.

I am,  dearest Madam,

Your,  &c.5

London,  No.  8,  Bolt-court,  Fleet-street.  SAM :  JOHNSON.

June 6,  1780 5.

Mind this,  and tell Queeney.

female sex yet ;  her whole face seems
to beam with goodness,  piety and
philanthropy.'  Mme.  D'Arblay's
Diary,  i.  373.  Sir James was pro-
bably the same man as Sir J.  C

who invited far more people to his
party than his rooms would hold  ;  '  a
bawling old man.'  Ib.  pp.  367,  376.

1 Neither skrimage nor scrimmage
is in Johnson's Dictionary.      It is
the same word as skirmish.     The
'  skrimage,'  I suppose,  was the party
where he and Dr.  Barnard  '  made a
noise all the evening.'     Ante,  ii.  136.

2 He was an officer in the Lincoln-
shire militia.    Life,  iii.  360.    Jones,
writing in the autumn of this year,
says  : — *  At Chatham I sought in vain
for Mr.   Langton among the new
ravelines and counterscarps.'     Life
of Sir William Jones,  p.  235.     He
took a house at Rochester,  where
Johnson visited him in 1783.  Life,  iv.

232.  Johnson defines engineer as
*  one who manages engines  ;  one who
directs the artillery of an army.'

3 Ante,  ii.  155.

4  '  Nobody ever had spirit enough
to tell him that his fits were apoplectic;
such is the blessing of being rich
that nobody cares to speak out.' —
BARETTI.    For  '  alternate diet '  see
ante,  ii.  143.

5 It is strange that Johnson does
not mention the Gordon Riots,  of
which he gives an account in his
next letter to Mrs.   Thrale.      Miss
Burney recorded on June 9: — 'Dr.
Johnson has written to Mrs.  Thrale,
without even mentioning the exist-
ence of this mob  ;   perhaps at this
very moment he thinks it  "  a hum-
bug upon the nation,"  as George Bo-
dens called the parliament.'     Mme.
D'Arblay's Diary,  i.  401.     The riot
was rising to its worst while Johnson

To

Aetat.  70.]          To the Reverend Dr.  Taylor.  165

676.

To THE REVEREND DR.  TAYLOR  '.

DEAR SIR,

Just as you went away you asked me whether I thought
mercury would do you any good 2.  I never had considered it
before,  but the mention of it made an impression upon me,  and
I am of opinion,  that as your disorders apparently arise from an
obstructed circulation,  mercury may help you.  I would have
you try it cautiously,  by adding two grains of calomel to your
pill at night.  Thus taken,  it will remain in your body all night,
and will be directed downwards in the morning.  So small a
quantity can have no sudden effect,  good or evil,  but if in a
month you think yourself better continue it,  if worse,  leave it off,
and rid yourself of it by a brisk purge.  I hope it will do good.
You will add very little to the bulk of your pill,  and taste it has
none,  and as it is combined with a purgative it can never ac-
cumulate. Let me know whether you take it or not.

Be sure,  whatever else you do,  to keep your mind easy,  and
do not let little things disturb it 3.  Bustle about your hay and
your cattle,  and keep yourself busy with such things as give you
little solicitude.

I am,  Sir,

Your affectionate St  [servant],

June 6,  1780.     London.  SAM  :  JOHNSON.

To the Reverend Dr.  Taylor,  in Ashbourne,  Derbyshire.

was writing,  but no doubt he had physic'    see Life,   iii.    152.      Miss

posted his letter before Newgate was Burney wrote of him on September

attacked.     That in the midst of the 14,  1781  : — 'Dr.  Johnson has been

general alarm he should have passed very unwell indeed.      Once I was

the whole tumult over in silence,  quite frightened about him;  but he

and insisted on the importance of continues his strange discipline —

accurately dating a letter,  is certainly starving,     mercury,     opium  ;      and

a curious trait of character.  Perhaps though for a time half demolished by

he did not want to alarm Mr.  Thrale.  its severity,  he always in the end

In his Letter to Dr.  Taylor of the rises superior both to the disease and

same day he is equally reticent.  the remedy,  which commonly is the

1 From the original in the posses-  most alarming of the two.'     Mme.
sion of Mr.  J.  C.  Brooks of Newcastle D'Arblay's Diary,  ii.  107.

on Tyne.  3 For the art of managing the mind

2 For Johnson's     'dabbling in see Life,  ii.  440 ;  iii.  164.

To

166

To Mrs.  Thrale.

[A.D.  1780.

677.

To

MRS.    THRALE1.

DEAR MADAM,  London,  [Friday]  June 9,  1780.

To the question,  Who was impressed with consternation  ?  it
may with great truth be answered,  that every body was impressed,
for nobody was sure of his safety 2.

1 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  143.

The riots described in this and the
next few letters were caused by
Protestant bigotry.  The severe
penal provisions against the Roman
Catholics had been relaxed so far as
England was concerned by an Act
passed the year before.  Popish
priests,  or Papists keeping school,
were no longer liable to perpetual
imprisonment.  The Catholics were
still subject to all the penalties
created in the reigns of Elizabeth,
James I,  Charles II,  and in the first
ten years of William III.  Scotland
was alarmed by the report that the
Scotch Catholics were in like manner
to be relieved.  The spirit of bigotry
broke out there into acts of violence
and cruelty,  and the Government was
timid and feeble.  The success of
these Scotch bigots seems to have
given rise to the Protestant Associa-
tion in England,  of which Lord
George Gordon was the head.  Ann.
Reg.,  1780,  i.  254-6:  1781,  i.  237.
Horace Walpole wrote on February
11,  1779:— 'The good people of
Edinburgh have set but an ugly
example.  There has been a serious
insurrection against the Papists,  and
two mass-houses were burnt,  and the
Provost quieted the tumult only by
promising that the toleration of
Popery should not be extended to
Scotland.'  Letters,  vii.  174.  On
March 1 8 Burke,  attacking the supine-
ness of the Ministers towards the
Scotch rioters,  '  hoped that Govern-
ment was not dead but only asleep.

At this moment he looked directly at
Lord North who was asleep,  and said
in the Scripture phrase,  "  Brother
Lazarus is not dead but sleepeth."
The laugh was not more loud on one
side of the House than on the other.3
Parl.  Hist.,  xx.  326.  Horace Wal-
pole, to his disgrace, '  always disliked
and condemned the repeal of the

Popish statutes Papists and

liberty are contradictions.'  Letters,
vii.  378  ;  viii.  426.  Gibbon wrote on
June 27  : — *  The month of June,  1780,
will ever be marked by a dark and
diabolical fanaticism which I had
supposed to be extinct,  but which
actually subsists in Great Britain,
perhaps beyond any other country in
Europe.'  Misc.  Works,  ii.  241.

2 Horace Walpole wrote on June
7  : — '  Yet I assure your Ladyship
there is no panic.  Lady Aylesbury
has been at the play in the Hay-
market,  and the Duke and my four
nieces at Ranelagh this evening.'
Letters,  vii.  388.  The following
Monday he wrote  : — '  Mercy on us  !
we seem to be plunging into the
horrors of France,  in the reigns of
Charles VI and VI I ! — yet,  as ex-
tremes meet,  there is at this moment
amazing insensibility.  Within these
four days I have received five appli-
cations for tickets to see my house ! '
Ib.  p.  395.  Gibbon,  who lived in
Bentinck Street,  Manchester Square,
wrote on June 8  : — '  Our part of the
town is as quiet as a country village.'
Misc.  Works,  ii.  240.

On

Aetat 70.]

To Mrs.  Thrale.

On Friday  [June 2]  the good Protestants met in St.  George's
Fields,  at the summons of Lord George Gordon,  and marching
to Westminster,  insulted the Lords and Commons,  who all bore
it with great tameness J.  At night the outrages began by the
demolition of the mass-house 2 by Lincoln's Inn.

An exact journal of a week's defiance of government I cannot
give you.  On Monday,  [June 5],  Mr.  Strahan,  who had been
insulted,  spoke to Lord Mansfield,  who had I think been in-
sulted too,  of the licentiousness of the populace  ;  and his Lord-
ship treated it as a very slight irregularity 3.  On Tuesday night

1 Horace Walpole wrote on June
3  : — '  I smile to-day— but I trembled
last night ;  for an hour or more I
never felt more anxiety.     I knew the
bravest of my friends were barricaded
into the House of Commons,  and
every avenue to it impossible.  .  .  .
The Duke of Gloucester had reached
the House with the utmost difficulty,
and found it sunk from the temple of
dignity to an asylum of lamentable

objects Mr.  Con way and Lord

F.  Cavendish told me there was a
moment when they thought they
must have opened the doors and
fought their way out sword in hand.
Lord North was very firm,  and at
last they got the Guards and cleared
the pass.'       Walpole's Letters,    vii.
375-7.     The poet Crabbe describes
how he met  'a resolute band of vile-
looking fellows,  ragged,  dirty,  and in-
solent, armed with clubs,  going to
join their companions'    at West-
minster.    Crabbe's Works,  ed.  1834,
i.  82.

2  '  He means the Sardinian Chapel,
as it is commonly called.     But so
illiberal was Johnson made by religion
that he calls here that chapel a Mass-
house,  by way of contempt,  alluding
to the names si bun-house,  chop-house,
slaughter-house,  and other such  ;  yet
he hated the Presbyterians.' — BA-
RETTI.    Johnson used the common

term— the one used by Horace Wal-
pole (see last note).  In the Gentle-
man'.$•  Magazine for 1767,  p.  141,  there
is an account of two  *  private mass-
houses  '  which were entered by the
peace-officers.  The Sardinian Chapel
was attached to the house of the
Sardinian Minister in Lincoln's Inn
Fields.  The House and Chapel of
Count Haslang,  in Golden Square,
were also plundered.  'As,'  writes
Horace Walpole,  'he is a Prince of
Smugglers as well as Bavarian
Minister,  great quantities of run tea
and contraband goods were found in
his house.  This one cannot lament ;
and still less,  as the old wretch has
for these forty years usurped a hired
house,  and,  though the proprietor for
many years has offered to remit his
arrears of rent,  he will neither quit
the house nor pay for it.'  Letters,
vii.  381.  It was no doubt by an abuse
of the protection which he enjoyed
as a Foreign Minister that he was
able to swindle his landlord.

3 Johnson wrote to Boswell : —
'  Mr.  Strahan got a garrison into his
house,  and maintained them a fort-
night;  he was so frighted that he
removed part of his goods.'  Life,  iii.
435.  Strahan was to have sat this
week to Sir Joshua Reynolds for his
portrait ;  but  '  the appointments
between Monday and Thursday have

they

i68

To Mrs,  Thrale.

[A.D.  1780.

they pulled down Fielding's house,  and burnt his goods in the
street x.  They had gutted on Monday Sir George Savile's house,
but the building was saved2.  On Tuesday  [June 6]  evening,
leaving Fielding's ruins,  they went to Newgate to demand their
companions who had been seized demolishing the chapel.  The
keeper could not release them but by the Mayor's permission,
which he went to ask ;  at his return he found all the prisoners
released,  and Newgate in a blaze 3.  They then went to Blooms-
bury and fastened upon Lord Mansfield's house,  which they
pulled down ;  and as for his goods,  they totally burnt them.
They have since gone to Cane-wood,  but a guard was there
before them 4.  They plundered some Papists,  I think,  and burnt
a mass-house in Moorfields the same night.

a pen drawn through them.'  Leslie
and Taylor's Reynolds,  ii.  302.
Horace Walpole describes how at the
riot at Westminster on the 2nd,  *  Lord
Mansfield,  whose  [carriage]  glasses
had been broken,  quivered on the
wool-sack like an aspen.'  Letters,
vii.  376.  '  He was the Speaker pro-
tempore in the absence of the Lord
Chancellor.'  Parl.  Hist.,  xxi.  665.
Lord Campbell praises his great
courage this day.  Lives of the Chief
Justices,  ed.  1849,  ii.  521.  He
mentions,  however,  his  'want of moral
courage.'  Ib.  p.  576.  It seems likely
that his answer to Strahan was due
to his timidity.  See Letters of Hume
to Strahan,^.  125.

1 Sir John Fielding,  half-brother of
Henry Fielding,   the novelist,   was
blind from birth ;    nevertheless he
had been associated with his brother
as assisting-magistrate for Middlesex
and Westminster,  and succeeded him
on his death.      His house was in
Bow Street.     He outlived the riot
only three months,   and died on
September 4 of this year.    Diet,  of
Nat.  Biog.,  xviii.  424.

2 Savile had brought into Parlia-
ment the bill in favour of the Catholics.

He lived in Leicester Fields.  Ann.
Reg.,  1780,  i.  260.  'The rails torn
from his house were the chief weapons
and instruments of the mob.'  Wai-
pole's Letters,  vii.  402.  Reynolds,
who lived in the same Square,  most
likely witnessed the scene of destruc-
tion.

3 Crabbe,  who was present,  says  : —
'  I saw about twelve women and eight
men ascend from their confinement
to the open air,  and they were con-
ducted through the street in their
chains.'      Crabbe's Works,     i.    83.
There were about three hundred
prisoners in all.     Ann.  Reg.,  1780,  i.
260.

4  '  Wednesday,  five o'clock,  June 7.
George Selwyn came into my chaise
in a fury,  and told me Lord Mans-
field's house is in ashes,  and that
five thousand men were marched to
Caen Wood— it is true,  and that one
thousand of the Guards are gone

after them Caen Wood is

saved  ;  a regiment on march met the

rioters June 9,  at night.     My

bosom,    I think,    does not want
humanity,  yet I cannot feel pity for
Lord Mansfield.     I did feel joy for
the four convicts who were released

On

Aetat.  70.]

To Mrs.  Thrale.

169

On Wednesday  [June 7]  I walked with Dr.  Scot r to look at
Newgate,  and found it in ruins,  with the fire yet glowing.  As I
went by,  the Protestants were plundering the Sessions-house at
the Old Bailey.  There were not,  I believe,  a hundred  ;  but they
did their work at leisure,  in full security,  without sentinels,  with-
out trepidation,  as men lawfully employed,  in full day.  Such is
the cowardice of a commercial place2.  On Wednesday they

from Newgate within twenty-four
hours of their execution  ;  but ought
not a man to be taught sensibility
who drove us cross the Rubicon  ?  I
would not hurt a hair on his head ;
but if I sigh for the afflicted innocent,
can I blend him with them?  .  .  .
June 10.  How poor a sketch I have
given of what Guicciardini would
have formed a folio  !  yet we would
forget the wretched wives and
mothers that will rue that night,  and
expatiate on the precious manuscripts
burnt in Bloomsbury  [in Lord Mans-
field's house].'  Walpole's Letters,  vii.
385,  6,  392,  7.  Jeremy Bentham,
speaking of an old friend,  said : — '  I
remember joining him to deplore the
loss of Lord Mansfield's manuscripts
by the mob ;  I should now think
such a loss a gain.'  Bentham's
Works,  x.  51.  Dr.  Warner wrote
to George Selwyn on June 8 : —
'  Barnard's Inn — what remains of it
—Thursday morning,  5 o'clock.  The
fire they say is stopped,  but what a
rueful scene has it left behind  !  Sunt
lachrymae rerum,  indeed  :  the sen-
tence that struck me upon picking up
a page of Lord Mansfield's Virgil yes-
terday, in Bloomsbury Square.  Sortes
VirgiliancE/*'  Selwyn and his Con-
temporaries, iv.  334.  Lord Mansfield,
with a touch of eloquence which must
have deeply moved his hearers,  when
giving his opinion in the House of
Lords on the lawfulness of employing

soldiers for quelling riots,  said  :  —  '  I
have not consulted books  ;  —  Indeed
I have no books to consult.'  ParL
Hist.,  xxi.  694.  Caen Wood is close
to Hampstead Heath.  In the Went-
worth Papers,  p.  298,  it is said that
'  it was sold in 1712 by Lord Berkeley
of Stratton to Lord Blantire for

1 Dr.      Scott,     afterwards Lord
Stowell.     His younger brother John,
afterwards Lord Eldon,    with the
other    'youngsters at the Temple
armed themselves as well as they
could,   and drew up in the court
ready to follow out a troop of soldiers
who were there on guard.     When
however they had passed through the
gate it was,'  he continues,  '  suddenly
shut in our faces,  and locked  ;  and
the officer in command shouted from
the other side,  "  Gentlemen,  I am
much obliged to you for your intended
assistance  ;  but I do not choose to
allow my soldiers to be shot,    so
I have ordered you to be locked
in.'"      Twiss's Eldon,   ed.    1846,  i.

S3-

Johnson's house was only a few
minutes'  walk from Newgate.

2  '  Not two in all London could
resolve of joining to each other in
their own defence.   The English gave
me a very mean idea of themselves
upon that occasion.'  —  BARETTI.    At
Bath there was just as much
cowardice as at London.       Miss

a Sortes Virgiliance is a mode of divination.     He who would try it opens Virgil by
chance,  and from the line which first catches his eye divines some future event.

broke

170

To Mrs.  Thrale.

[A.D.  1780.

broke open the Fleet,  and the King's-bench,  and the Marshalsea,
and Woodstreet-counter,  and Clerkenwell Bridewell,  and released
all the prisoners.

•  At night they set fire to the Fleet,  and to the King's-bench,
and I know not how many other places ;  and one might see the
glare of conflagration fill the sky from many parts.  The sight
was dreadful x.  Some people were threatened  ;  Mr.  Strahan ad-
vised me to take care of myself.  Such a time of terror you have
been happy in not seeing.

The King said in council,  that the magistrates had not done
their duty,  but that he would do his own ;  and a proclama-
tion was published,  directing us to keep our servants within
doors,  as the peace was now to be preserved by force 2.  The
soldiers were sent out to different parts,  and the town is now
at quiet.

What has happened at your house you will know,  the harm is
only a few butts of beer  ;  and I think you may be sure that the

Burney,  describing the burning of
the Roman Catholic Chapel in that
town,  says  : — '  The rioters do their
work with great composure,  and
though there are knots of people in
every corner all execrating the authors
of such outrages,  nobody dares oppose
them.'  Mme.  D'Arblay's Diary,  i.  403.

1  '  Wednesday night,  past two in
the morning,    June 7.      I was at
Gloucester House between nine and
ten.  The servants announced a great
fire,  we went to the top of the house,
and beheld not only one but two vast
fires.'     Walpole's Letters,   vii.    386.
Sir John Macpherson,  who was at
Downing Street this same night,
says  : — '  Lord North accompanied
by us all mounted to the top of the
house,    where we beheld London
blazing in seven places,  and could
hear the platoons regularly firing
in various directions.'      Wraxall's
Memoirs,  ed.  1815,  i.  336.

2  'June 5.    Have you faith enough
in me to believe that the sole

precaution taken was,  that the
Cabinet Council on Thursday em-
powered the First Lord of the
Treasury to give proper orders to the
civil magistrates to keep the peace, — •
and his Lordship forgot it !  ...  June 9.
The Magistrates intimidated by the
demolition of Fielding's and Justice
Hyde's houses,  did not dare to act.
A general Council was summoned at
Buckingham House,  at which the
twelve judges attended.  It was
determined not to shut up the Courts,
but to order military execution.'
Walpole's Letters,  vii.  380,  391.  For
the Proclamation see Ann.  Reg.,
1780,  i.  265.  The following General
Order was issued from the Adjutant-
General's Office on June 7  : — *  In
obedience to an order of the King in
Council the military to act without
waiting for directions from the civil
magistrates,  and to use force for dis-
persing the illegal and tumultuous
assemblies of the people.'  Jb.  p.
266.

danger

Aetat.  70.]

To Mrs.  Thrale.

171

danger is over.     There is a body of soldiers at St.  Margaret's
Hill '.

Of Mr.  Tyson I know nothing,  nor can guess to what
he can allude ;  but I know that a young fellow of little
more than seventy,  is naturally an unresisted conqueror of
hearts 2.

Pray tell Mr.  Thrale that I live here and have no fruit,
and if he does not interpose,  am not likely to have much ;  but
I think he might as well give me a little,  as give all to the
gardener 3.

Pray make my compliments to Queeney and Burney.

I am,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

1 Johnson wrote to Boswell on
August 21  : — 'In the late disturb-
ances, Mr.  Thrale's house and stock
were in great danger  ;  the mob was
pacified at their first invasion,  with
about fifty pounds in drink and meat ;
and at their second,  were driven away
by the soldiers.'  Lift;,  iii.  435.  The
Brewery was saved by the manage-
ment of Perkins,  the Superintendent.
4 Perkins,'  Johnson wrote on June
1 5,  *  seems to have managed with
great dexterity.'  Post,  p.  178.  Miss
Burney,  who was at Bath with the
Thrales,  has the following entries in
her Diary.  '  Saturday  [June 10].
Mrs.  Thrale had letters from Sir P.
Clerk and Mr.  Perkins to acquaint
her that her town-house had been
three times attacked,  but was at last
saved by guards,  —her children,  plate,
money and valuables all removed.
Streatham also threatened,  and
emptied of all its furniture.  The
same morning we saw a Bath and
Bristol paper in which Mr.  Thrale
was asserted to be a Papist.  .  .  .
Perhaps he may himself be a marked
man for the fury of the mob.  We
are going directly from Bath,  and
intend to stop only at villages.  All

the Catholics in the town have
privately escaped.'  Mme.  D'Arblay's
Diary,  i.  399,  403.  The Thrales fled
to Brighton,  whence Mrs.  Thrale
went to Streatham.  On her return
she wrote to Miss Burney on June
29  : — '  My master was not displeased
that I had given Perkins two hundred
guineas,  instead of one — a secret I
never durst tell before,  not even to
Johnson,  not even to you.'  Ib.  p.  409.
St.  Margaret's Hill is in Southwark.
At the Court House there,  on the six
days beginning with July 10,  many of
the rioters were tried,  and twenty-
four capitally convicted.  Ann.  Reg.,
1780,  i.  220,  277.  Here thirty-four
years earlier many of the Scotch
Rebels had been tried,  seventeen of
whom were put to death with torture
on Kennington Common.  Smollett's
Hist,  of England,  iii.  188.

2 Miss Burney describes Mr.  Tyson
as  '  a very civil Master of the Cere-
monies.'     Mme.  D'Arblay's Diary,
i.  376.     Johnson himself was  '  little
more than seventy.'

3 This passage very likely was
meant to give Mr.   Thrale a little
confidence.

To

172

To Mrs.  Thrale.

[A.D.  1780.

678.

To MRS.  THRALE x.

DEAR MADAM,  [Saturday],  June 10,  1780.

You have ere now heard and read enough to convince you,
that we have had something to suffer,  and something to fear,  and
therefore I think it necessary to quiet the solicitude which you
undoubtedly feel,  by telling you that our calamities and terrors
are now at an end.  The soldiers are stationed so as to be every
where within call 2 ;  there is no longer any body of rioters,  and
the individuals are hunted to their holes,  and led to prison  ;  the
streets are safe and quiet ;  Lord George was last night sent to
the Tower3.  Mr.  John Wilkes4 was this day with a party of
soldiers in my neighbourhood,  to seize the publisher of a seditious
paper.  Every body walks,  and eats,  and sleeps in security5.  But
the history of the last week would fill you with amazement,  it is
without any modern example.

Several chapels have been destroyed,  and several inoffensive
Papists have been plundered,  but the high sport was to burn the

1 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  152.

2  '  I bless every soldier I see/
wrote Dr.  Burney to his daughter ;
'  we have no dependence on any
defence from outrage but the military.'
Mme.     D'Arblay's Diary,    i.    407.
Horace Walpole wrote on the same
day as Johnson  :— '  While in the
thick of the conflagration I was all
indignation and a thousand passions.
Last night,  when sitting silently alone,
horror rose as I cooled  ;  and grief
succeeded,    and then all kinds of
gloomy presages.      For some time
people have said,  where will all this
end  ?     I as often replied,  where will
it begin?     It is now begun,  with a
dreadful overture,  and I tremble to
think what the chorus may be  !     The
sword reigns at present,  and saved
the capital !     What is to depose the
sword  ?  '     Letters,  vii.  394.

3  '  The tower is much too dignified
a prison for him — but he had left no
other.'     Ib.   vii.   398.     'The guards
that attended him were by far the
greatest in number ever remembered
to guard a state prisoner.'     Ann.
Reg.,  1780,  i.  263.

4 Wilkes had been lately elected
City Chamberlain,  and was no longer
'  a Wilkite.'  Life,  iii.  430,  n.  4.    Ten
years later he was seen going up to
vote against Fox at Westminster
'  amidst the hisses and groans of a
multitude.'  Moore's Life of Sheridan,
ed.  1826,  ii.  120.

5 For security see ante,   ii.    162,
n.  3.     On Thursday in this week —
two days before the date of Johnson's
Letter — even though the soldiers
had poured in fast  '  the shops were
universally shut from Tyburn to
Whitechapel.'  Ann.  Reg.,  1780,  i.  262.

jails.

Aetat.  70.]

To Mrs.  Thrale.

173

jails.  This was a good rabble trick.  The debtors and the
criminals were all set at liberty1;  but of the criminals,  as has
always happened,  many are already retaken,  and two pirates
have surrendered themselves,  and it is expected that they will
be pardoned2.

Government now acts again with its proper force  ;  and we are
all again under the protection of the King and the law.  I thought
that it would be agreeable to you and my master to have my
testimony to the publick security;  and that you would sleep
more quietly when I told you that you are safe.

I am,  dearest Lady,

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

679.

TO MRS.    THRALE3.

DEAR MADAM,  London,  June 12,  1780.

All is well,  and all is likely to continue well.     The streets

1  '  June 9.     We have now super-
abundantly to fear robbery ;     300
desperate villains were released from
Newgate.       Lady Albemarle was
robbed at Mrs.  KeppePs door in Pall
Mall at twelve at night.      Baron
D'Aguilar's coach was shot at here
last night,  close to the Crown   [at

Twickenham] June 12.     One

hears of nothing but robberies on the
highway.'      Walpole's Letters,    vii.
392,  9.     Miss Burney's sister wrote
to her  : — '  There have been gangs of
women going about to rob and
plunder.      Miss Kirwans went on
Friday afternoon to walk in the
Museum Gardens,  and were stopped
by a set of women,  and robbed of
all the money they had.'      Mme.
D'Arblay's Diary,  i.  408.

2 The two pirates had been found
guilty on March 31 at a Court of
Admiralty,  of causing a revolt in a
privateer,  and sentenced to death.
They were to have been hanged on
May 4,  but they were respited  '  in con-
sequence of notice taken of the case

in the House of Commons.  The
captain,  it seems,  had been con-
cerned in some illicit practices,  and
they had resisted going into port for
fear of being pressed.'  Gentleman's
Magazine,  1780,  pp.  199,  248.  A
correspondent states that  '  the judge
omitting to pass sentence of death,
and only saying they should be
carried  "to the usual place of exe-
cution," a doubt arose,  and this
weighed in their favour as much as
the alleviating circumstances.  Dur-
ing the late riots they are said to
have surrendered themselves to the
judge,  and offered to defend him
when he fled from the fury of the
populace.'  Ib.  p.  374.  A man
named Purse,  who was under
sentence of death for rape,  and  '  sur-
rendered himself again into the
custody of Mr.  Akerman,'  received a
free pardon on July 15.  Ann.  Reg.,
1780,  i.  212,  220.  For Akerman,
the Keeper of Newgate,  see Life,  iii.

43i?  3-

3 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  1 54.

are

To Mrs.  Thrale.

[A.D.  1780.

are all quiet,  and the houses are all safe z.  This is a true answer
to the first enquiry which obtrudes itself upon your tongue at
the reception of a letter from London.  The publick has escaped
a very heavy calamity.  The rioters attempted the Bank on
Wednesday night,  but in no great number ;  and like other
thieves,  with no great resolution.  Jack Wilkes headed the party
that drove them away 2.  It is agreed,  that if they had seized the
Bank on Tuesday,  at the height of the panick,  when no resistance
had been prepared,  they might have carried irrecoverably away
whatever they had found.  Jack,  who was always zealous for
order and decency,  declares,  that if he be trusted with power,  he
will not leave a rioter alive 3.  There is however now no longer
any need of heroism or bloodshed  ;  no blue riband is any longer
worn 4.

called on Friday at Mrs.  Gardiner's5,  to see how she

escaped or what she suffered  ;  an4 told her,  that she had herself
too much affliction within doors,  to take much notice of the dis-
turbances without.

It was surely very happy that you and Mr.  Thrale were away

1 Wraxall records a curious fact
which he witnessed when the riot
was at its height.     In Holborn,  at a
short distance from the blazing
premises of a large distillery,    'a
watchman,'     he says,     'with his
lanthorn in his hand passed us,
calling the hour,  as if in a time of
profound tranquillity.'      Wraxall's
Memoirs,  ed.  1815,  i.  329.

2 Crabbe,   at eleven o'clock that
night,  met  '  large bodies of horse and
foot soldiers coming to guard the
Bank.'  Crabbe's Works, \.  84.  Horace
Walpole,  writing three hours later,
says  : — *  Colonel Jennings told me
there had been an engagement at the
Royal Exchange to defend the Bank,
and that the Guards had shot sixty
of the mob  ;     I have since heard
seventy.'     Letters,    vii.    387.      The
number is no doubt exaggerated.
According to the Annual Register,

1780,  i.  262,  'several fell,  and many
were wounded.'

3  *  Wilkes has very sensibly ridden
home on Lord George Gordon,  and
distinguished himself by zeal and
spirit.'     Walpole's Letters,  vii.  401.
See Life,  iii.  77,  430,  n.  4.

4 The     '  Protestants '     wore blue
ribbons in their hats.     Horace Wal-
pole wrote on Wednesday,  June 7: —
'  It will probably be a black night ;  I
am decking myself with blue ribbons
like a May-day garland.     Horsemen
are riding by with muskets.'     Letters
vii.  386.     Two days later he wrote
that  'now the soldiers tear away blue
cockades.'    Ib.  p.  390.

5 Johnson's friend,  the wife of a
tallow-chandler,  on Snow Hill.  Life,
i.  242.     She must have seen Newgate
blazing hard by on one side,  and the
great distillery on the other.

in

A'etat.  70.]

To Mrs.  Thrale.

in the tumult ;  you could have done nothing better than has
been done,  and must have felt much terrour which your absence
has spared you.

We have accounts here of great violences committed by the
Protestants at Bath ;  and of the demolition of the masshouse.
We have seen so much here,  that we are very credulous x.

Pray tell Miss Burney that Mr.  Hutton2 called on me yesterday,
and spoke of her with praise  ;  not profuse,  but very sincere,  just
as I do.  And tell Queeney,  that if she does not write oftener,  I
will try to forget her.  There are other pretty girls that perhaps
I could get,  if I were not constant.

My Lives go on but slowly.  I hope to add some to them this
week.  I wish they were well done.

Thus far I had written when I received your letter of battle
and conflagration 3.  You certainly do right in retiring ;  for who
can guess the caprice of the rabble  ?  My master and Queeney
are dear people for not being frighted 4.  I wrote to you a letter
of intelligence and consolation ;  which,  if you staid for it,  you
had on Saturday ;  and I wrote another on Saturday,  which per-
haps may follow you from Bath,  with some atchievement of John
Wilkes.

1 For the demolition of the mass-
house see ante,  ii.  167,  n.  2.     Horace
Walpole wrote on the 1 2th:— 'Last
night,  at Hampton Court,  I heard of
two Popish chapels demolished at
Bath,  and one at Bristol.    My coach-
man has just been in Twickenham,
and says half Bath is burnt ;  I trust
this is but the natural progress of lies,
that increase like a chairman's legs
by walking.'     Letters,  vii.  395.     For
Johnson's general habit of incredulity
see Life,  iii.  229.

2 Hutton the Moravian.    See Life,
iv.  410,  Letters of Hume to Strahan,
pp.  364-9,  and The Early Diary of
Fanny Burney,    i.    294,    where a
curious account is given of his intro-
duction to the Burney family.

3 Mrs.  Thrale gives this letter,  or
a substitute,  for it.  It belongs to those

'  well-written but studied epistles '
which Boswell evidently did not think
authentic.  Ante,  ii.  147,  n.  4.  It
is not easy to believe that writing as
she says she was at 3 o'clock in the
morning,  after a night of  '  trembling
agitation,'  she quoted Shakespeare,
and drew a simile from  *  the iron bed
of the tyrant Procrastes '  (sic).  Part
of the letter nevertheless may be
genuine,  though we should like to
know how she got the original.  She
scarcely made a copy of it in her
'  trembling agitation.'

4  *  Miss Burney is frighted,  but she
says better times will come.  Mr.
Thrale seems thunderstricken,  he
don't mind anything;  and Queeney's
curiosity is stronger than her fears.'
Piozzi Letters,  ii.  147.

Do

176

To Mrs.  Thrale.

[A.D.  1?80.

Do not be disturbed;  all danger here is apparently over:  but
a little agitation still continues.  We frighten one another with
seventy thousand Scots to come hither with the Dukes of Gordon
and Argyle,  and eat us,  and hang us,  or drown us ;  but we are
all at quiet z.

I am glad,  though I hardly know why,  that you are gone to
Brighthelmstone rather than to Bristol.  You are somewhat
nearer home,  and I may perhaps come to see you.  Brighthelm-
stone will soon begin to be peopled,  and Mr.  Thrale loves the
place;  and you will see Mr.  Scrase2;  and though I am sorry
that you should be so outrageously unroosted 3,  I think that Bath
has had you long enough.

Of the commotions at Bath there has been talk here all day.
An express must have been sent ;  for the report arrived many
hours before the post,  at least before the distribution of the letters.
This report I mentioned in the first part of my letter,  while I was
yet uncertain of the fact.

When it is known that the rioters are quelled in London,  their
spirit will sink in every other place,  and little more mischief will
be done.

I am,  dear Madam,

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

680.

TO MRS.    THRALE4.

DEAR MADAM,  London,  June 14, 1780.

Every thing here is safe and quiet.  This is the first thing
to be told ;  and this I told in my last letter directed to Bright-
helmstone. There has indeed been an universal panick,  from

1 Lord George Gordon was the
son of the third Duke of Gordon.
Two days later Horace Walpole,
after mentioning that Lord George
Gordon was in the Tower,  con-
tinued : — '  What a nation is Scotland;
in every reign engendering traitors
to the State,  and false and pernicious
to the Kings that favour it the most !

National prejudices,  I know,  are very
vulgar  ;  but if there are national
characteristics,  can one but dislike
the soils and climates that concur to
produce them  ? '  Letters,  vii.  400.

2 Ante,  i.  395.

3 This word Johnson gets from
The Winter's Tale,  Act ii.  sc.  3.

4 Piozzi Letters^  ii.  158.

which

Aetat.  70.]  To Mrs.  Thrale.  177

which the King was the first that recovered.  Without the con-
currence of his ministers,  or the assistance of the civil magistrate,
he put the soldiers in motion,  and saved the town from calamities,
such as a rabble's government must naturally produce1.

Now you are at ease about the publick,  I may tell you that
I am not well ;  I have had a cold and cough some time,  but it is
grown so bad,  that yesterday I fasted and was blooded,  and to
day took physick and dined :  but neither fasting nor bleeding,
nor dinner,  nor physick,  have yet made me well.

No sooner was the danger over,  than the people of the Borough
found out how foolish it was to be afraid,  and formed themselves
into four bodies for the defence of the place ;  through which they
now march morning and evening in a martial manner 2.

I am glad to find that Mr.  Thrale continues to grow better  ;  if
he is well,  I hope we shall be all well :  but I am weary of my
cough,  though I have had much worse.

I am,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

681.

TO MRS.    THRALE3.

DEAR MADAM,  London,  June 15, 1780.

Last night I told you that I was not well ;  and though you
have much else to think on,  perhaps you may be willing enough
to hear,  that by the help of an opiate,  I think myself better
to-day.

Whether I am or am not better,  the town is quiet,  and every
body sleeps in quiet,  except a few who please themselves with

1 The King,   it must be remem-  wark  .  .  .  have formed themselves
bered,  was solely answerable for the into very useful,  and at the same
choice of a set of Ministers' of whom time unexceptionable associations  ;
Johnson said : — '  Such a bunch of and if something of the same kind
imbecility never disgraced a country.'  was adopted in the City there is no
Life,  iv.  139.  doubt but much use and great secu-

2 Several inhabitants of the City,  rity would arise therefrom;  but the
who had proposed to arm themselves using of fire-arms is improper,  un-
for their common preservation,  re-  necessary,  and cannot be approved.'
ceived from the Adjutant-General on Ann.  Reg.  1780,  i.  266.

June 12 the following letter:— 'The 3 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  159.
inhabitants of the Borough of South-

VOL.  II.  N guarding

178 To Mrs.  Tkrale.  [A.D.

guarding us now the danger is over.  Perkins seems to have
managed with great dexterity.  Every body,  I believe,  now sees,
that if the tumult had been opposed immediately,  it had been
immediately suppressed J ;  and we are therefore now better pro-
vided against an insurrection,  than if none had happened.

I hope you,  and Master,  and Queeney,  and Burney,  are all well.
I was contented last night to send an excuse to Vesey,  and two
days ago another to Mrs.  Horneck 2 ;  you may think I was bad,
if you thought about it ;  and why should you not think about me
who am so often thinking about you,  and your appurtenances.
But there is no gratitude in this world.

But I could tell you,  Doris,  if I would ;

And since you treat me so,  methinks I should.

So sings the sublime and pathetick Mr.  Walsh 3.  Well !  and
I will tell you too.  Among the heroes of the Borough,  who
twice a-day perambulate,  or perequitate4 High-street and the
Clink 5,  rides that renowned and redoubted knight,  Sir Richard
Hotham6.  There is magnanimity,  which defies every danger
that is past,  and publick spirit,  that stands sentinel over property

1 Horace Walpole wrote on the Johnson ends his brief Life of him
same day  : — '  I can give you little by saying  : — '  In all his writings
account of the original of this shock-  there are pleasing passages.    He has
ing affair ;  Negligence was certainly however more elegance than vigour,
its nurse,  and Religion only its god-  and seldom rises higher than to be

mother The lowest and most pretty.'     Works,  vii.  244.

villanous of the people,  and to no 4 Johnson does not give in his

great amount,  were almost the sole Dictionary equitate,    equitation,  or

actors.3 Letters,  vii.  402.  perequitate.     Boswell,    seven years

2 Ante,  i.  344.  earlier,  had written  : — '  This day we

3  *  Yet I could tell you,  fair-one,  if were to begin our equitation,  as I

I would,  said ;    for  /  would needs make a

And since you treat me thus,  word to°-'    Life>  v.  131.

methinks I should.'  5  ' Clink Street begins at Dead-

Eclogueu.     Chalmers's English man's Place and extends to St.  Mary

Poets,  ed.  1810,  viii.  415.  Overy's Dock.  Clink Prison m Clink

Po^e introduces Walsh in the A*-      SEl^C^iS 7,  ^

7  *  *7 a  *-  i Bishop of Winchester,  called the
logue to the Satires.  L MS i —  £«•  i T M.  •  v i

Clink Liberty,  but is little used.  It

4 But why then publish  ?   Granville is a very dismal hole,  where debtors

the polite,  are sometimes confined.'     Dodsley's

And knowing Walsh would tell me London,  ii.  147.

I could write.'  6 Ante,  ii.  1 54,  n.  2.

that

Aetat.  70.]  To Miss Reynolds.  i 79

that he does not own.  Tell me no more of the self-devoted
Decii,  or of the leap of Curtius.  Let fame talk henceforward
with all her tongues of Hotham the Hatmaker.

I was last week at Kenny's conversatione x,  and Renny got her
room pretty well filled ;  and there were Mrs.  Ord,  and Mrs.
Horneck,  and Mrs.  Bunbury a,  and other illustrious names,  and
much would poor Renny have given to have had Mrs.  Thrale
too,  and Queeney,  and Burney:  but human happiness is never
perfect ;  there is always une vuide affreuse,  as Maintenon com-
plained 3,  there is some craving void left aking in the breast.
Renny is going to Ramsgate ;  and thus the world drops away,
and I am left in the sultry town,  to see the sun in the crab,  and
perhaps in the lion 4,  while you are paddling with the Nereids.

I am,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

682.

TO MlSS REYNOLDS5.

DEAR MADAM,  Bolt Court,  June 16, 1780.

I answer your letter as soon as I can,  for I have just
received it.  I am very willing to wait on you at all times,  and
will sit for the picture,  and,  if it be necessary,  will sit again,  for
whenever I sit I shall be always with you 6.

1 Renny was Miss Reynolds.    For in gender says  : — '  I have some
conversatione see ante,  ii.  105,  n.  4.  notion that he wrote it right,  and

2 H.  W.  Bunbury,  the caricaturist,  the ignorant woman made it wrong,
had married one of Mrs.  Horneck's thinking she was doing right.'
daughters.     Forster's Goldsmith,  ii.  4 The sun enters the Crab on June
283.    See ante,  i.  344,  n.  2.    See Ap-  21,  and the Lion on July 22 or 23.
pendix A.  5 First published in Croker's Bos-

3 Madame de Maintenon wrote to well,  page 649.

Madame de la Maisonfort : — '  J'ai 6 For Johnson's sitting to Miss

&e*   jeune et jolie;    j'ai goutd des Reynolds for his portrait see post,

plaisirs ;     j'ai etc"    aime'e partout.  Letter of August 20,  1783.    Though

Dans un age plus avance,  j'ai passd he often sat to her he once said that

des anndes dans le commerce de  'he thought portrait -painting an

1'esprit ;  je suis venue a la faveur,  et improper employment for a woman,

je vous proteste,  ma chere fille,  que  "  Public practice of any art  (he ob-

tous les etats laissent un vide affreux.'  served)  and staring in men's faces is

VOLTAIRE,  Sihle de Louis XIV,  ch.  very indelicate in a female." '    Lifet

27.    Baretti,  noticing Johnson's error ii.  362.

N 2 Do

i8o

To Mrs.   Thrale.

[A.D.  1780.

Do not,  my love,  burn your papers.  I have mended little but
some bad rhymes z.  I thought them very pretty,  and was much
moved in reading them.  The red ink is only lake and gum,  and
with a moist sponge will be washed off.

I have been out of order,  but,  by bleeding and other means,
am now better.  Let me know on which day I shall come to

you.

I am,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

Sir,

683.

To JOHN NICHOLS 2.

I have been out of order,  but by bleeding and physick think
I am better,  and can go again to work.

Your note on Broome will do me much good.  Can you give
me a few dates for A.  Philips?  I wrote to Cambridge about
them,  but have had no answer 3.

I am,
Sir,

Your humble servant,

June 16,  1780.  SAM:    JOHNSON.

To Mr.  Nicol.

684.

TO MRS.    THRALE4.

DEAR MADAM,  Wednesday,  June 21,  1780.

Now you come to a settled place5 I have some inclina-
tion to write to you ;  for in writing after you there was no
pleasure.  All is quiet ;  and that quietness is now more likely to
continue than if it had never been disturbed.  's case,  if

1  '  Of a poem now before me.
Johnson read it attentively,  and made
numerous corrections ;   but after all
it is not worth much.'    CROKER.

2 First published in the Gentle-
marts Magazine for 1785,  page 10.

3 Johnson on May 25 had written
to Dr.  Farmer for  '  the dates or other
informations which College or Uni-

versity registers can supply relating to
Ambrose Philips,  Broome and Gray.
Life,  iii.  427.  His correspondent's
neglect to answer is apparent in the
Lives of these men.  The informa-
tion which was not supplied by him
was not obtained elsewhere.

4 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  162.

5 Brighton.

it

Aetat.  70.]  To Afrs.  Thrale.  181

it be not affected,  is ridiculous ;  but there is in the world much
tenderness where there is no misfortune,  and much courage where
there is no danger.

My cold is grown better,  but is not quite well,  nor bad enough
now to be complained of.  I wish I had been with you to see the
Isle of Wight ;  but I shall perhaps go some time without you,
and then we shall be even.

What you told me of Mr.  Middleton frighted me  ;  but I am
still of my old opinion,  that a semivegetable diet will keep all
well.  I have dined on Monday and to-day only on peas  *.

I suppose the town grows empty,  for I have no invitations ;
and I begin to wish for something,  I hardly know what :  but
I should like to move when every body is moving;  and yet
I purpose to stay till the work is done,  which I take little care to
do.  Sic labitur cetas 2.

The world is full of troubles.     Mrs. has just been with

me to get a chirurgeon 3 to her daughter ;  the girl that Mrs.
Cumins 4 rejected,  who has received a kick from a horse,  that has
broken five fore-teeth on the upper side.  The world is likewise
full of escapes ;  had the blow been a little harder it had killed
her.

It was a twelvemonth last Sunday since the convulsions in my
breast left me 5.  I hope I was thankful when I recollected it :
by removing that disorder,  a great improvement was made in
the enjoyment of life.  I am now as well as men at my age can
expect to be,  and I yet think I shall be better.

I have had with me a brother of ,  a Spanish merchant,

whom the war has driven from his residence at Valencia ;  he is
gone to see his friends,  and will find Scotland but a sorry place
after twelve years'  residence in a happier climate.  He is a very
agreeable man,  and speaks no Scotch 6.

1 Post,  p.  184,  we find the word 4 In the Letter of October 31,
spelt pease,  in accordance with the 1781,  there is mention of Cummins
rule given in Johnson's Dictionary and of Mrs.  Cumyns.     Perhaps in
under Pease.     See ante,  ii.  143,  for these three ways of spelling one
his alternate diet.  name only is included.

2  '  Cito pede labitur aetas.'     OVID,  5 See ante,  ii.  143,  n.  3.

Ars.  Am.  iii.  65.  6 Boswell's brother David was this

3 Ante,  ii.  I,  n.  4.  'very agreeable man.'  Boswell quotes

Keep

182

To Mrs.  Thrale.

[A.D.  1780.

Keep Master to his diet,  and tell him that his illwillers1 are
very unwilling to think that he can ever sit more in parliament,
but by caution and resolution he may see many parliaments.
Pay my respects to Queeney and Burney.  Living so apart we
shall get no credit by our studies 2 ;  but I hope to see you all again
some time.  Do not let separation make us forget one another.

I am,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

685.

TO MRS.    THRALE3.

DEAR MADAM,  London,  July 4, 1780.

You are too happy for any body but yourself to travel in
such pretty company,  and leave every thing safe behind you,  and
find every thing well when you arrive ;  and yet I question if you
are quite contented,  though every body envies you 4.  Keep my
master tight in his geers 5,  for if he breaks loose the mischief will
be very extensive.

Your account of Mr.  S and of Miss O is very melan-
choly; I wish them both their proper relief from their several

this passage and says in a note : —
*  Mrs.  Piozzi has omitted the name,
she best knows why.'  Life,  iii.  434.
Writing of him to Temple he says : —
'In Spain he gave up all philoso-
phizing, and applied himself to real
business.  He says he found out that
men who speculate on life,  as you and
I do,  are not successful in substantial
concerns.'  Letters of Boswell,  p.  254.
Johnson had spoken very differently
of the effect of climate eight years
earlier,  when Boswell talked to him
about this same brother  : — *  I men-
tioned a friend of mine who had re-
sided long in Spain,  and was un-
willing to return to Britain.  JOHN-
SON. "  Sir,  he is attached to some
woman."  BOSWELL.  "I rather be-
lieve, Sir,  it is the fine climate which
keeps him there."  JOHNSON.  "  Nay,
Sir,  how can you talk so  ?  What is

climate to happiness?  Place me in
the heart of Asia,  should I not be
exiled?  What proportion does cli-
mate bear to the complex system of
human life  ?  You may advise me to
go to live at Bologna to eat sausages.
The sausages there are the best in
the world  ;  they lose much by being
carried."'  Life,  ii.  195.

1 Illwiller is not in Johnson's
Dictionary.

2 See ante,  ii.  98,  for the lessons
in Latin which he gave to Queeney
and Miss Burney.

3 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  164.

4 Mrs.  Thrale had been to Streat-
ham and returned to Brighton.
Mme.  D'Arblay's Diary,  i.  409.

5 Gears in Johnson's Dictionary —
'  the traces by which horses or oxen
draw.'

maladies.

Aetat.  70.]

To Mrs.  Thrale.

183

maladies x.  But I am glad that Queeney continues well ;  and
hope she will not be too rigorous with the young ones,  but allow
them to be happy their own way ;  for what better way will they
ever find 2  ?

C'est que Tenfant toujours est homme;

C'est que 1'homme est toujours enfant.

I have not seen or done much since I had the misfortune of
seeing you go away.  I was one night at Burney's.  There were  [sic]
Pepys,  and there were Mrs.  Ord,  and Paradise,  and Hoole,  and
Dr.  Dunbar of Aberdeen,  and I know not how many more.
And Pepys and I had all the talk 3.

To-day called on me the Dean of Hereford 4,  who says that the
barley-harvest is likely to be very abundant.  There is something
for our consolation.  Don't forget that I am,

Dear Madam,

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

1 Mrs.  Thrale wrote to Miss Bur-
ney on June 29  : — *  This morning I
carried a bunch of grapes to Mr.
Scrase,  who was too ill to swallow
one,  or to see even me.     My master
however is quite in rosy health,  and
jokes Peggy Owen for her want of
power to flash.'     Mme.  D'Arblay's
Diary,  i.  409.

2  '  Mr.  Johnson,'  writes Mrs.  Piozzi
(Anecdotes,  p.  21),  '  was exceedingly
disposed to the general indulgence of
children,  and was even scrupulously
and ceremoniously attentive not to
offend them.     He had strongly per-
suaded himself of the difficulty people
always find to erase early impressions
either of kindness or resentment.'
See Life,  iv.  196.     This perhaps he
had got from South,  who,  addressing
'  the educators of youth,'   says  : —
'  Let them remember that excellent
and never to be forgotten advice,
that boys will be men;  and that the
memory of all base usage will sink
so deep into,  and grow up so in-

separably with them,  that it will not
be so much as in their own power
ever to forget it.'  South's Sermons,
ed.  1823,  iii.  398.

3 Miss Burney wrote to Mrs.  Thrale
on July 8 : — '  I have not seen Dr.
Johnson since the day you left me,
when he came hither,  and met Mrs.
Ord,    Mr.    Hoole,    Mrs.    Reynolds,
Baretti,  the Paradises,  Pepys,  Castles,
Dr.  Dunbar and some others  ;  and
then he was in high spirits and good
humour,  talked all the talk,  affronted
nobody,   and delighted everybody.
I never saw him more sweet,   or
better attended to by his audience.'
Mme.     D'Arblay's Diary,    i.    412.
Johnson had met Dr.   Dunbar at
Aberdeen.    Life,  iii.  436  ;  v.  92.    He
was the uncle of Sir James Dunbar
of Boath,  Capt.  R.N.,  whose widow
died in 1888,  aged 93.

4 Dr.  Nathan Wetherell,  who was
also Master of University College,
Oxford.    Le Neve's Fast.  Eccl.  Angl.
iii.  538.

To

1 84

To Mrs.  Thrale.

[A.D.  1780.

686.

TO MRS.    THRALE1.

DEAR MADAM,  London,  July 10, 1780.

If Mr.  Thrale eats but half his usual quantity,  he can hardly
eat too much.  It were better however to have some rule,  and
some security.  Last week I saw flesh but twice,  and I think fish
once,  the rest was pease.

You are afraid,  you say,  lest I extenuate myself too fast,  and
are an enemy to violence :  but did you never hear nor read,  dear
Madam,  that every man has his genius,  and that the great rule
by which all excellence is attained,  and all success procured,  is,
to follow genius ;  and have you not observed in all our conversa-
tions that my genius is always in extremes  ;  that I am very noisy,
or very silent ;  very gloomy,  or very merry ;  very sour,  or very
kind?  And would you have me cross my genius •,  when it leads
me sometimes to voracity and sometimes to abstinence 2  ?  You
know that the oracle said follow your genius.  When we get
together again,  (but when alas will that be  ?)  you can manage me,
and spare me the solicitude of managing myself.

Poor Miss O 3 called on me on Saturday,  with that fond

and tender application which is natural to misery,  when it looks
to every body for that help which nobody can give.  I was
melted  ;  and soothed and counselled her as well as I could,  and
am to visit her to-morrow.

She gave a very honourable account of my dear Queeney ;  and
says of my master,  that she thinks his manner and temper more
altered than his looks,  but of this alteration she could give no
particular account ;  and all that she could say ended in this,  that
he is now sleepy in the morning.  I do not wonder at the scanti-
ness of her narration,  she is too busy within to turn her eyes
abroad.

I am glad that Pepys4 is come,    but hope that resolute

1 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  166.

2  'Johnson,  though he could be
rigidly abstemious,  was not a tem-
perate man either in eating or drink-
ing.    He could refrain,  but he could
not use moderately.'    Life,   i.   468.

For Johnson's extreme of silence see
ib.  iii.  307.

3 Miss Owen.     Mme.   D'Arblay's
Diary,  i.  410.

4 Sir Lucas Pepys,  the physician.
Ante,  ii.  106,  n.  3.

temperance

Aetat.  70.]  ToMrs.   Tkrale.  185

temperance will make him unnecessary.     I doubt he can do no
good to poor Mr.  Scrase.

I stay at home to work,  and yet do not work diligently;  nor
can tell when I shall have done,  nor perhaps does any body but
myself wish me to have done  ;  for what can they hope I shall do
better?  yet I wish the work was over,  and I was at liberty1.
And what would I do if I was at liberty?  Would I go to Mrs.
Aston and Mrs.  Porter,  and see the old places,  and sigh to find
that my old friends are gone  ?  Would I recal plans of life which
I never brought into practice,  and hopes of excellence which
I once presumed 2,  and never have attained  ?  Would I compare
what I now am with what I once expected to have been  ?  Is it
reasonable to wish for suggestions of shame,  and opportunities of
sorrow  ?

If you please,  Madam,  we will have an end of this,  and contrive
some other wishes.  I wish I had you in an evening,  and I wish
I had you in a morning ;  and I wish I could have a little talk,
and see a little frolick.  For all this I must stay,  but life will
not stay.

I will end my letter and go to Blackmore's Life 3,  when I have
told you that

I am,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

687.

TO MRS.    THRALE4.

London,  July 27,  1780.
And thus it is,  Madam,  that you serve me.     After having

1  '  This paragraph paints him to Lives now  ?  that of Blackmore will
the very life.'    BARETTI.  be very entertaining I dare say,  and

2 Johnson does not give in his he will be rescued from the old wits
Dictionary any instance of this con-  who worried him,  much to your dis-
struction.  Perhaps however he means liking  :    so a little for love of his
'  which I once presumed to attain.'  Christianity,  a little for love of his

3 Blackmore was one of the four physick,    a little for love of his
poets who,  by his recommendation,  courage — and a little for love of con-
were added to the collection.   Watts,  tradiction,  you will save him from
Pomfret,  and Yalden were the others.  his malevolent criticks,  and perhaps
Life,  iii.  370  ;    iv.  54.    Mrs.  Thrale do him the honour to devour him
wrote to him on May 9 of this year : —  yourself.'    Piozzi Letters,  ii.  122.

*  Shall we have some chat about the 4 Piozzi Letters^  ii.  169.

kept

1 86 To Mrs.  Thrale.  [A.D.  1730.

kept me a whole week hoping and hoping,  and wondering and
wondering what could have stopped your hand from writing,
comes a letter to tell me,  that I suffer by my own fault.  As if
I might not correspond with my Queeney,  and we might not
tell one another our minds about politicks or morals,  or any
thing else.  Queeney and I are both steady,  and may be
trusted  ;  we are none of the giddy gabblers,  we think before we
speak.

I am afraid that I shall hardly find my way this summer into
the country,  though the number of my Lives now grows less.
I will send you two little volumes in a few days1.

As the workmen are still at Streatham,  there is no likelihood
of seeing you and my master in any short time ;  but let my
master be where he will so he be well.  I am not,  I believe,  any
fatter than when you saw me,  and hope to keep corpulence away ;
for I am so lightsome and so airy,  and can so walk,  you would
talk of it if you were to see me.  I do not always sleep well ;
but I have no pain nor sickness in the night.  Perhaps I only sleep
ill because I am too long a-bed 2.

I dined yesterday at Sir Joshua's with Mrs.  Cholmondely,  and
she told me,  I was the best critick in the world  ;  and I told her,
that nobody in the world could judge like her of the merit of
a critick 3.

On Sunday I was with Dr.  Lawrence and his two sisters-in-
law,  to dine with Mr.  G 4 at Putney.  The Doctor cannot

hear in a coach better than in a room,  and it was but a dull

1 Miss Burney wrote to Mrs.  Thrale fortunate in my own family,'  wrote

on August 16:— 'Dr.  Johnson has Horace Walpole on December 5,

delighted me with another volume of 1746;  '  my nephew,  Captain Chol-

liis Lives — that which contains Black-  mondeley,   has married a player's

more,  Congreve,  &c.,  which he tells sister.'    Letters,  ii.  68.    The Captain

me you have had.3 Mme.  D'Arblay's afterwards quitted the army and took

Diary,  i.  420.    These volumes were orders.   Ib.  n.  4.    Boswell dined with

not yet published.  her at Sir Joshua Reynolds's,  when

'  That was true enough.' BARETTI.  'she was in a high flow of spirits,

3 Mrs.  Cholmondeley was a younger and exhibited some lively sallies of

sister of Peg Woffington.     She mar-  hyperbolical compliment to Johnson,

ried the Hon.  Robert Cholmondeley,  with whom she had been long ac-

second son of the third Earl of quainted,  and was very easy.'     Life,

Cholmondeley and grandson of Sir iii.  318.

Robert Walpole.    *  I have been un-  4  '  Gawler.5 BARETTI.

day;

Aetat.  70.]  To Lord West cote.  187

day;  only I saw two crownbirds,  paltry creatures1,  and a red
curlew.

Every body is gone out of town,  only I am left behind,  and
know not when I shall see either Naiad or Dryad  ;  however,  it is
as it has commonly been,  I have no complaint to make but of
myself.  I have been idle,  and of idleness can come no goodness.

Mrs.  Williams was frighted from London as you were frighted
from Bath.  She is come back,  as she thinks,  better.  Mrs.
Desmoulins has a disorder resembling an asthma ;  which I am
for curing with calomel and jalap,  but Mr.  Levet treats it with
antimonial wine.  Mr.  Levet keeps on his legs stout,  and walks,
I suppose,  ten miles a-day 2.

I stick pretty well to diet,  and desire my master may be told of
it ;  for no man said oftener than he,  that the less we eat the better.

Poor ,  after having thrown away Lord 's patronage

and three hundred a-year,  has had another disappointment.    He

procured a recommendation from Lord to the Governor of

Jamaica  ;  but to make this useful,  something was to be done by
the Bishop of London,  which has been refused.  Thus is the
world filled with hope and fear,  and struggle,  and disappointment.

Pray do you never add to the other vexations,  any diminution
of your kindness for,

Madam,

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

688.

To LORD WESTCOTE3.

MY LORD,  Bolt Court,  Fleet Street,  July 27,  1780.

The course of my undertaking will now require a short life

1  '  Very rare and singular birds  ;  tops,  like those of an Earl's coronet,

but Johnson cared for little but books,  of a yellowish colour.'

and more books.'    BARETTI.     There 2  '  His frame was firm,  his powers

is a print of a crown-bird in the were bright,

Gentleman's Magazine for 1750,  p.  Though now his eightieth year

264,  where it is described as  '  a very was nigh.'

stately fine fowl,  of the bigness of a Life,  iv.  138.

large turkey.    Upon the top of its 3 Published in Croker's Boswell,

head grow certain shafts or stalks,  page 650.     For Lord Westcote,  see

bearing little round balls on their ante,  i.  177,  n.  4.

of

1 88 To Lord Westcote.  [A.D.  1780.

of your brother,  Lord Lyttelton.  My desire is to avoid offence,
and to be totally out of danger x.  I take the liberty of proposing
to your lordship,  that the historical account should be written
under your direction by any friend you may be willing to employ,
and I will only take upon myself to examine the poetry.  Four
pages like those of his work2,  or even half so much,  will be
sufficient.  As the press is going on,  it will be fit that I should
know what you shall be pleased to determine.

I am,

My Lord,
Your lordship's most humble servant,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

689.

To LORD WESTCOTE 3.

MY LORD,  Bolt Court,  Fleet Street,  July 28,  1780.

I wish it had been convenient to have had that done which
I proposed.  I shall certainly not wantonly nor willingly offend 4 ;
but when there are such near relations living,  I had rather they
would please themselves.  For the life of Lord Lyttelton I shall
need no help — it was very public,  and I have no need to be
minute.  But I return your lordship thanks for your readiness to
help me.  I have another life in hand,  that of Mr.  West s,  about
which I am quite at a loss ;  any information respecting him
would be of great use to,

My Lord,
Your lordship's most humble servant,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

1 For the offence which he gave,  acknowledgments'    to the Critical
see Life,  iv.  57.  Reviewers.

2 By  '  his work '  Johnson means,  5 Gilbert West.     His mother and
I suppose,  his History of Henry 77,  the mother of Lyttelton and West-
which was published in quarto.  cote were sisters— daughters of Sir

3 Published in Croker's Bos-well,  Richard Temple of Stovve.     Burke's
page 650.  Peerage.     Johnson,    in writing his

4 He forgot this promise when in Life,  says:— 'The intelligence which
the Life he described  '  poor Lyttel-  my inquiries have gained is general
ton with humble gratitude returning and scanty.'

To

Aetat.  70.]  To Mrs.  Thrale.  189

69O.

TO MRS.    THRALE1.

MADAM,  London,  August i,  1780.

I had your letter about Mr.  S and Miss O 2 ;  but

there was nothing to which I had any answer,  or to which any
answer could be made.

This afternoon Dr.  Lawrence drank tea,  and,  as he always
does,  asked about Mr.  Thrale  ;  I told him how well he was when
I heard  ;  and he does not eat too much,  said the Doctor ;  I said,
not often ;  and the return was,  that he who in that case should
once eat too much,  might eat no more.  I keep my rule very
well 3,  and,  I think,  continue to grow better.

Tell my pretty dear Queeney,  that when we meet again,  we
will have,  at least for some time,  two lessons in a day.  I love
her,  and think on her when I am alone ;  hope we shall be very
happy together,  and mind our books.

Now August and Autumn are begun,  and the Virgin takes
possession of the sky.  Will the Virgin do any thing for a man of
seventy  ?  .1 have a great mind to end my work under the Virgin 4.

I have sent two volumes to Mr.  Perkins to be sent to you,  and
beg you to send them back as soon as you have all done with
them.  I let the first volume get to the Reynolds's,  and could
never get it again 5.

I sent to Lord Westcote about his brother's life,  but he says he
knows not whom to employ;  and is sure I shall do him no
injury.  There is an ingenious scheme to save a day's work,  or
part of a day,  utterly defeated 6.  Then what avails it to be wise  ?
The plain and the artful man must both do their own work. —
But I think I have got a life of Dr.  Young 7.

1 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  172.  his Life of Gray]  says Mr.  Cole,  'I

2 Mr.  Scrase and Miss Owen.  gave him several anecdotes,  but he

3 Ante,  ii.  143.  was very anxious as soon as possible

4 The sun enters Virgo on August 23,  to get to the end of his labours.'
and leaves it on September 22 or 23.  Matthew Arnold's Essays in Criti-

5 Sir Joshua lost one of the epi-      cism,  2nd series,  1888,  p.  71.

taphs which Johnson wrote for Gold-          7 From Herbert Croft.     It was of
smith.    Ante,  i.  407.  this Life that Burke said  :— '  No,  no,

6  *  When Johnson was publishing it is not a good imitation of Johnson  ;

Susy

To Mrs.  Thrale.

Susy and Sophy have had a fine Summer  ;  it is a comfort to
think that somebody is happy.  And they make verses,  and act
plays1.

Mrs.  Montague is,  I think,  in town,  and has sent Mrs.  Williams
her annuity2;  but I hear nothing from her,  but I may be con-

tented if I hear from you,  for

I am,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

691.

TO MRS.   THRALE3.

DEAR MADAM,  August 8,  1780.

What do you scold so for about Granville's life  ;  do you
not see that the appendage neither gains nor saves any thing to
me  ?  4 I shall have Young's life given me,  to spite you.

Methinks it was pity to send the girls to school  ;  they have
indeed had a fine vacation,  dear loves,  but if it had been longer
it had been still finer.

Did Master read my books  ?  You say nothing of him in
this letter  ;  but I hope he is well,  and growing every day nearer
to perfect health.  When do you think of coming home  ?

I have not yet persuaded myself to work,  and therefore know
not when my work will be done.  Yet I have a mind to
see Lichfield.  Dr.  Taylor seems to be well.  He has written to
me without a syllable of his lawsuit 5.

You have heard in the papers how  *  *  *  is come to age  ;  I
have enclosed a short song of congratulation,  which you must

it has all his pomp without his force  ;  2 Ante,  i.  371,  n.  I.

it has all the nodosities of the oak 3 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  174.

without its strength  ;  it has all the 4  '  Somebody offered to write an

contortions of the Sybil without the appendage to the Life of Granville

inspiration.'    Life,  iv.  59.  after his doing it  ;  but that did not

1 Mrs.  Thrale wrote to Miss Bur-  square with his idleness,  as he wished

ney on June 29  :  —  '  Susan and Sophy to save himself the trouble of writing

have taken to writing verses  —  'tis the that life.'    BARETTI.    This explana-

fashion of the school they say,  and tion seems improbable.    Mrs.  Thrale

Sophy's are the best performances must,   I think,  have seen the Life

of all the misses,  except one monkey before the additions mentioned ante,

of eighteen years old.'    Mme.  D'Ar-  ii.  131.

blay's Diary,  \.  409.  s Ante,  ii.  158.

not

Aetat.  TO.]  To Mrs.  Tkrale.  191

not show to anybody x.  It is odd that it should come into any
body's head.  I hope you will read it with candour ;  it is,
I believe,  one of the author's first essays in that way of writing,
and a beginner is always to be treated with tenderness.

My two gentlewomen are both complaining.  Mrs.  Desmoulins
had a mind of Dr.  Turton 2 ;  I sent for him,  and he has
prescribed for Mrs.  Williams,  but I do not find that he promises
himself much credit from either of them.

I hope it will not be long before I shall have another little
volume for you,  and still there will be work undone.  If it were
not for these Lives,  I think I could not forbear coming to look
at you,  now you have room for me.  But I still think to stay
till I have cleared my hands.

Queeney is not good.  She seldom writes to me,  and yet
I love her,  and I love you all,  for

I am,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

692.

TO MRS.    THRALE3.

DEAR MADAM,  August 14, 1780.

I hope my dear Queeney's suspicions are groundless.
Whenever any alteration of manner happens,  I believe a small
cathartick will set all right 4.

I hope you have no design of stealing away to Italy before

1 The song was on Sir John Lade,  2 For the phrase  '  to have a mind

Mr.  Thrale's nephew.  In the Gentle-  of a person or thing,'  see ante,  i.  314,

man's Magazine for 1759,   p.   392,  343.    Turton attended Goldsmith on

among the Births is recorded on his death-bed.     'When Goldsmith

August i :— '  Relict of Sir John Lade,  was dying,  Dr.  Turton said to him,

Bt,  of a son and heir,  who is im-  "Your pulse is in greater disorder

mediately entitled to a very large than it should be,  from the degree of

estate.'    Johnson,  a fortnight before fever which you have  :  is your mind

he died,  repeated the song  'with at ease?"    Goldsmith answered it

great spirit,   saying he had never was not.'  Life,  iii.  164.

repeated it but once since he com-  3 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  176.

posed it,  and had given but one copy 4 The suspicions,  no doubt,  were

of it.'     It is printed in the Life,  iv.  about a change for the worse in Mr.

413.  Thrale's health.

the

192

To Mrs.  Thrale.

[A.D.  1780.

the election,  nor of leaving me behind you x ;  though I am not
only Seventy,  but Seventy-one2.  Could not you let me lose a
year in round numbers  ?  Sweetly,  sweetly,  sings Dr.  Swift,

Some dire misfortune to portend,
No enemy can match a friend3.

But what if I am Seventy-two ;  I remember Sulpitius says of
Saint Martin  (now that's above your reading),  Est animus victor
annorum,  et senectuti cedere nescius*.  Match me that among
your young folks.  If you try to plague me,  I shall tell you that,
according to Galen,  life begins to decline from Thirty-five 5.

1  '  A man who has not been in
Italy,5 said Johnson,  '  is always con-
scious of an inferiority,  from his not
having seen what it is expected a
man should see.'    Life,  iii.  36.    They
had been on the point of going there
in 1776,   but had abandoned their
intention on the sudden death of
Mr.  Thrale's son.  Ante,  i.  389.    Miss
Burney records on March 23,  1781,
that  *  Mr.  Thrale had resolved upon
going abroad ;  first to Spa,  next to
Italy,  and then whither his fancy led
him !   that Dr.  Johnson was to ac-
company them.'     Mme.   D'Arblay's
Diary,  ii.  n.   Thrale's death,  which
followed within a fortnight,  for a
second time barred Johnson's hopes
of seeing Italy.     In the last year of
his life,  for the third time,  a prospect
opened before him of visiting that
country,    but it came to nothing.
Life,  iv.  336.

2 He was not yet seventy-one.

8  'Some great misfortune to por-
tend,
No enemy can match a friend.'

SWIFT'S Works,  ed.  1803,  xi.  243.

4 Saint Martin was Bishop of
Tours in the fourth century.  *  The
saint,'  writes Gibbon,  '  once mistook
(as Don Quixote might have done)
an harmless funeral for an idola-
trous procession,  and imprudently

committed a miracle.'  Decline and
Fall,  ed.  1807,  v.  88.  Johnson's quo-
tation is from the Third Epistle of
Sulpicius Severus.  The dying Saint
is represented as saying  : — *  Sub
signis tuis,  quoadusque ipse jusseris,
militabo ;  et quamvis optata sit seni
missio post laborem,  est tamen ani-
mus victor annorum,et cedere nescius
senectuti.'  Bibliotheca Patrum La-
Una Patrologice,  xx.  182.

5  'As I went into his room the
morning of my birthday once,  and
said to him,  "Nobody sends me
any verses now because I am thirty-
five years old  ;  and Stella was fed
with them till forty-six,"  he burst out
suddenly : —

"  Oft in danger,  yet alive,
We are come to thirty-five ;
Long may better years arrive,
Better years than thirty-five.
Could philosophers contrive
Life to stop at thirty-five,
Time his hours should never drive
O'er the bounds of thirty-five.
High to soar and deep to dive,
Nature gives at thirty- five.
Ladies,  stock and tend your hive,
Trifle not at thirty-five.
For howe'er we boast and strive
Life declines from thirty-five.
He that ever hopes to thrive
Must begin by thirty-five  ;

But

Aetat.  70.]  To Mrs.  \Miss\  Prowse.  193

But as we go off,  others come on :  Queeney's last letter was
very pretty.  What a hussey she is to write so seldom.  She
has no events,  then let her write sentiment as you and I do  ;
and sentiment you know is inexhaustible.

If you want events,  here is Mr.  Levet just come in at four-
score from a walk to Hampstead,  eight miles,  in August.  This,
however,  is all that I have to tell you,  except that I have three
bunches of grapes on a vine in my garden x  ;  at least,  this is all
that I will now tell of my garden.

Both my females are ill,  both very ill ;  Mrs.  Desmoulins
thought that she wished for Dr.  Turton 2 ;  and I sent for him,
and then took him to Mrs.  Williams,  and he prescribes for both,
though without much hope of benefiting either.  Yet physick has
its powers :  you see that I am better  ;  and Mr.  Shaw 3 will
maintain,  that he and I saved my master.  But if he is to live
always away from us,  what did we get by saving him  ?  If we
cannot live together,  let us hear ;  when I have no letter from
Brighthelmston,  think how I fret,  and write oftener ;  you write
to this body and to that,  and nobody loves you like

.  Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

693.

MADAM,  To MRS>  ^Miss]  PROWSE 4.

For the loss which you have suffered I will not recall your
grief by the formality of condolence.      I believe all to whom

And all who wisely wish to wive Court was a garden which he took

Must look on Thrale at thirty-  delight in watering.'      Hawkins's

five.  Johnson,    p.   531.     'He sometimes

And now,"    said he,    "  as I was employed himself in watering and

writing them down,   you may see pruning a vine.'  Life,  iii.  398.  (  Lord

what it is to come for poetry to a Eldon often speaks of the fine fruit

Dictionary-maker  ;  you may observe of Gower Street,  when he lived in

that the rhymes run in alphabetical the house now No.  42.'    Nollekens

order exactly."'    Piozzi's Anecdotes,  and his Times,  i.  33.

p.  164.     Stella was not quite forty-  2 Ante,  ii.  191,  n.  2.

six when she died.  Swift wrote verses 3 A Mr.  Shaw is mentioned ante,

on her last birthday,  March 1 3, 1 726-7.  i.  397.

Swift's Works,  ed.  1803,  xi.  21.  4 First published in Notes and

1  '  Behind Johnson's house in Bolt Queries,  4th S.  v.  441.     Copied by

VOL.  II.  O Mrs.

1

194

To Mrs.  [Miss]  Prowse.

[A.D.  1780.

Mrs.  Prowse was known,  consider the world as deprived by her
departure of a very bright and eminent example.

The allowance which she was pleased to make towards the
maintenance of the unhappy girl,  has been long discontinued,
how long,  I really do not know,  and am afraid of favouring my-
self by a conjectural account.

Not knowing whether the payment was withheld by negligence
or intention,  I sometimes purposed to have written to the
Lady,  but never did it.  Perhaps your accounts can set you
right.

It may be,  Madam,  in your power,  to gratify my curiosity.
Your servants,  I suppose,  go frequently to Froome T,  and it will
be thought by me a favour if you will be pleased to bid them
collect any little tradition that may yet remain,  of one Johnson,
who more than forty years ago was for a short time a Book-
binder or Stationer in that town 2.  Such intelligence must be
gotten by accident,  and therefore cannot be immediately
expected,  but perhaps in time somebody may be found that
knew fiim-.

me from the original in the posses-
sion of the Rev.  Edward B.  Edgell
of Bromham Rectory,  Chippenham.
Miss Prowse,  Johnson's correspond-
ent, married the Rev.  J.  M.  Rogers,
Mr.  EdgelPs great-uncle.

The  '  unhappy girl '  about whom
Johnson writes was a lunatic— his
first cousin according to Hawkins
(Hawkins's Johnson,  p.  603) ;  who
adds that  'upon her discharge from
Bethlem Hospital as incurable,  he
had placed her in a mad-house at
Bethnal Green.'  Johnson in his letter
of February 17,  1784,  calls her
Phoebe Herne,  and in his will,
Elizabeth Herne.  Life,  iv.  403.  He
does not mention any relationship.
T.he bills for her keeping,  says Haw-
kins, amounted to  ^25 a year,  to-
wards which  '  Mrs.  Prowse had be-
queathed her an annuity of  ^10.'  It
is clear from the above letter that

during her life-time Mrs.  Prowse had
made her an allowance,  though she
had discontinued it for some years.
On the third sheet,  which is blank,
is written  : — '  Not finding in my
Mother's Books any acct.  of the
money having been paid for six
years I sent him the whole.'  See
also post,  Letters of May 7, 1781,  and
June 4,  1782.

1 Johnson's frequent indifference
to the spelling of proper names is
shown in this letter,  for,  while here
he writes Froome,  in the direction he
spells it Frame.

2 See/0j-/,  Letter of December 9,
1780,  for a further account of this
man,  and Letter of November 29,
1784,  for Johnson's inquiries after his
relations.    See also his will for his
legacies to such as he could discover.
Life,  iv.  403.

The

Aetat.  70.]  To John Nichols.  1 95

The great civility of your letter has encouraged me to this
request.

The money x which your excellent Mother's liberality makes
payable to me may be remitted by a note on a Banker,  or on

the Bank to,

Madam,

Your most humble Servant,

Bolt Court,  Fleet Street,  London.  SAM:  JOHNSON.

August 14,  1780.

694.

To JOHN NICHOLS 2.

There is a copy of verses by Fenton on the first fit of the gout,
in Pope's miscellanies,  and I think,  in the last volumes of
Dryden.  In Pope's I am sure.

To Mr.  Nicol.

695.

To JOHN NICHOLS.

I should have given Fen ton's birth to Shelton in Staffordshire,
but that I am afraid there is no such place 3.  The rest I have,

1 The annuity for the mad girl.  JOHNSON.'      The most humorous

2 This and the next four Letters couplet is the following : —

were first published in the Gentle-  '  Thou that dost oft from pampered
man's Magazine for 1785,  page 10,  prelate's toe
where Nichols says in a note that Emphatically urge the pains below.'
'  The verses On the Gout are printed Fenton died of the gout — 'of in-
from Fenton's Collection in the Select dolence and inactivity,'  as Pope
Collection,  1780,  vol.  iii.  p.  177.'  wrote to Gay.  (Elwin and Court-
By  'Dryden'  Johnson no doubt hope's Pope,  vii.  436.)  'A woman
means Miscellany Poems,  By the that once waited on him in a lodging
most eminent Hands.  Published by told him,  as she said,  that he would
Mr.  Dryden.  The first edition was  "lie a-bed,  and be fed with a spoon."'
brought out when Fenton was an Johnson's Works,  viii.  58.  Never-
infant,  but after Dryden's death theless Pope in his Epitaph on him
many pieces were added and several says,  he

omitted.     Lowndes's BibL Man.,  p.  '  From Nature's temp'rate feast rose

678.     Fenton's verses are inserted in satisfy 'd.'                   Ib.  p.  358

the English Poets,   ed.  1790,  xxxv.  3  '  Shelton,  a township and chap-

378,  with the following note  :— '  The elry in the parish and newly-erected

compilers having omitted some pretty borough of Stoke-upon-Trent,  County

verses I have put them in here.    DR.  of Stafford,  two miles E.N.E.  from

O 2,                                            except

196

To John Nichols.

[A.D.  17*

except his Secretaryship,  of which I know not what to make.
When Lord Orrery was in office,  Lewis was his Secretary.
Lewis lived in my time ;  I knew him z.  The Gout verses were
always given to Fenton,  when I was young,  and he was living.
Lord Orrery told me that Fenton was his tutor  ;  but never
thought he was his Father's Secretary2.  Pray let me see
the Oxford and Cambridge  [Verses]  &c.  [1707].  If you
are sure it was published by Fenton I should take notice
of it 3.

696.

To JOHN NICHOLS.

[?  Summer of 1780.]

Mr.  Johnson desires Mr.  Nicols to send him

Ruffhead's life of Pope 4.

Pope's Works.

Swift's Works with Dr.  Hawkesworth's life 5.

Lyttelton's Works,

and with these he hopes to have done.
The first to be got is Lyttelton.

Newcastle  -  under  -  Lyme,  containing
with the hamlet of Etruria and part
of Cobridge,  9267 inhabitants/
Lewis's Top.  Diet,  of England,  ed.
1835.  Fenton,  in his Latin epitaph
on his father,  describes him as
*  Johannes Fenton de Shelton.'  John-
son's Works,  viii.  54.

1 Perhaps he was  '  Mr.  F.  Lewis '
who translated some of the mottoes
to the Rambler, (  whom Johnson thus
described to Mr.  Malone : — "  Sir,  he
lived in London,   and hung loose
upon society." '    Life,  i.  226.

2  *  Fenton was awhile secretary to
Charles,  Earl of Orrery,  in Flanders,
and tutor to his young son,   who
afterwards mentioned him with great
esteem and tenderness.'    Johnson's
Works,  viii.  55.

3  'He published in 1707 a col-
lection of poems.'    Ib.  p.  56.     It was
in 1717 that this collection was pub-
lished under the title of Poems on
Several Occasions.

4  'Dr.    Johnson censured Ruff-
head's Life of Pope,  and said,  "he
knew nothing of Pope,  and nothing
of poetry."'  Life,  ii.  166.

5 Johnson begins his Life of Swift
by saying: — 'An account of Dr.
Swift has been already collected with
great diligence and acuteness by Dr.
Hawkesworth,  according to a scheme
which I laid before him in the in-
timacy of our friendship.'     On Sep-
tember 1 8 of this year Johnson re-
corded in his Diary  : — '  I have Swift
and Pope yet to write;    Swift is
just begun.'  Pr.  and Me d.,  p.  185.

To

Aetat.  70.]

To Mrs.  Thrale.

197

697.

To JOHN NICHOLS.  [Summer of 1780.]

Mr.  Johnson being now at home desires the last leaves of the

Criticism on Pope's Epitaphs,  and he will correct them x.

Mr.  Nichol is entreated to save the proof Sheets of Pope

because they are promised to a Lady who desires to have

them 2.

698.

To JOHN NICHOLS.
SIR,  [August 16,  1780 Vj

I expected to have found a life of Lord Lyttelton prefixed
to his Works.      Is there not one before the quarto Edition?
I think there is — if not,    I am with respect to him,   quite
aground.
Wednesday.

699.

TO MRS.    THRALE4.

DEAR MADAM,  August 18, 1780.

I lost no time,  and have enclosed our conversation.  You
write of late very seldom.  I wish you would write upon
subjects* ;  any thing to keep alive.  You have your beaux,

1 This criticism Johnson had first
published in 1756 in The Universal
Visitor.    Life,  i.  306.     He added it
to his Life of Pope.

2 It was to Miss Burney that he
gave them.    In her Memoirs of Dr.
Burney,  ii.   178,   she says that Dr.
Burney wished to have a proof sheet,
'  but left to his daughter the risk of
the petition.    A hint however proved
sufficient.    He offered an entire Life,
adding with a benignant smile,
"  Choose your poet."   Without hesi-
tation the choice was Pope.     He
composed with so ready an accuracy
that he sent his copy to the press
unread,  reserving all his corrections
for the proof sheets ;    and conse-

quently they were at times liberally
marked with changes.'  Boswell had
been promised the proof sheets.  Life,
iii.  371.  He was presented with the
greatest part of the manuscript.  Ib.
iv.  36.

3 The date is in Nichols's hand-
writing.

There is no Life prefixed to the
quarto edition of Lyttelton's Works.

4 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  179.

5 In his last letter to her he had
said  : — '  Queeney has no events,  then
let her write sentiment as you and I
do ;    and sentiment,   you know,   is
inexhaustible.'     Apparently it had
proved exhaustible on her side.

and

198 To Mrs.  Thrale.  [A.D.ITSO.

and your flatterers,  and here am poor I forced to flatter myself ;
and any good of myself I am not very easy to believe,  so that I
really live but a sorry life.  What shall I do with Lyttelton's
life  ?  I can make a short life,  and a short criticism,  and conclude.
Why did not you like Collins,  and Gay,  and Blackmore x,  as well

as Akenside?  ,         ,,    ,

I am,  Madam,

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

700.

To THE REVEREND DR.  BEATTIE.
Bolt Court,  August 21,  1780.     Published in the Life,  iii.  434.

701.

To JAMES BOSWELL.
London,  August 21,  1780.     Published in the Life,  iii.  435.

702.

TO MRS.    THRALE2.

DEAR MADAM,  London,  August 24, 1780.

I do not wonder that you can think and write but of
one thing.  Yet concerning that thing you may be less uneasy,
as you are now in the right way.  You are at least doing,  what
I was always desirous to have you do,  and which,  when despair
put an end to the caution of men going in the dark,  produced
at last all the good that has been obtained.  Gentle purges,  and
slight phlebotomies,  are not my favourites  ;  they are pop-gun
batteries 3,  which lose time and effect nothing.  It was by bleed-
ing till he fainted,  that his life was saved 4.  I would,  however,

1 She replied  : — 'Blackmore's Life 4 Mrs.  Piozzi has the following note
is admirable  ;  who says I don't like on this  : — '  Here is another allusion
it  ?    I like all the Whig Lives pro-  to that famous bleeding which
digiously.'   Piozzi Letters,  ii.  182.  certainly in Southwark did save the

2 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  185.  life of Mr.  Thrale,  and by its im-

3  '  Life is not weak enough to be mediate effects ruined my nerves for
destroyed by this popgun artillery of ever.'    Hayward's Piozzi,  i.  302.    In
tea and coffee.' — CHEYNE.     Quoted spite of her ruined nerves she married
in Johnson's Dictionary under Pop-  a second time and lived till she was
gun.  eighty.     'Twenty years passed in

now

Aetat.  70.]  To Mrs.  Thrale.  1 99

now have him trust chiefly to vigorous and stimulating cathartics.
To bleed,  is only proper when there is no time for slower
remedies.

Does he sleep in the night  ?  if he sleeps,  there is not much
danger ;  any thing like wakefulness in a man either by nature or
habit so uncommonly sleepy,  would put me in great fear.  Do
not now hinder him from sleeping whenever heaviness comes
upon him.  Quiet rest,  light food,  and strong purges,  will,
I think,  set all right.  Be you vigilant,  but be not frighted.

Of Mr.  R z I very well remember all but the name.

*  He had a nice discernment of loss and gain.'  This I thought
a power not hard to be attained.  What kept him out then
must keep him out now ;  the want of a place for him.  Mr.

P 2 then observed,  that there was nothing upon which he

could be employed.  Matters will never be carried to extremities.

Mr.  P cannot be discharged,  and he will never suffer a

superiour.  That voluntary submission to a new mind is not a
heroick quality ;  but it has always been among us,  and therefore
I mind it less 3.

The expedition to foreign parts you will not much encourage,
and you need not,  I think,  make any great effort to oppose it ;
for it is as likely to put us out of the way to mischief,  as
to bring us into it.  We can have no projects in Italy.  Exercise
may relieve the body,  and variety will amuse the mind.  The
expence will not be greater than at home in the regular course

of life.  And we shall be safe from B and G ,  and all

instigators to schemes of waste.  Si te fata fer ant,  fer fata.

Piozzi's enchanting society seemed,'  designs on Mr.  Thrale's purse,

she said,   '  like a happy dream of 2 Perkins,  no doubt,

twenty hours.'    Ib.  p.  305.  3 See ante,  i.  192,  n.  3,  for the

1 Mrs.    Thrale had written to way in which Mr.  Thrale had been

Johnson on the 2oth  :— *  We had a duped.     '  Some fellow,'  writes Mrs.

visit yesterday from Mr.    R ;  Piozzi,    'had incited our master to

whom perhaps you remember,  begin a new and expensive building
perhaps not :  but our morning con-  to the amount of  ,£20,000,  after the
versation with him will not be easily progress of which he was ever in-
forgotten by me,  I thought it would quisitive,  and kept the plan of it in
drive me wild upon the spot.'  Piozzi his bedchamber.'  Hayward's Piozzi,
Letters,  ii.  180.  He was probably i.  302.
some schemer or projector who had

The

200 To Mrs.  Thrale.  [A.D.i?8o.

The chief wish that I form is,  that Mr.  Thrale could be made
to understand his true state ;  to know that he is tottering upon
a point ;  to consider every change of his mental character as the
symptom of a disease  ;  to distrust any opinions or purposes that
shoot up in his thoughts  ;  to think that violent mirth is the
foam,  and deep sadness the subsidence of a morbid fermentation  ;
to watch himself,  and counteract by experienced remedies every
new tendency,  or uncommon sensation.  This is a new and
an ungrateful employment  ;  but without this self-examination
he never can be safe.  You must try to teach it,  and he to learn
it gradually,  and in this my sweet Queeney must help you  ;  I am
glad to hear of her vigilance and observation.  She is my pupil.

I suppose the S scheme is now past ;    I saw no great

harm in it,  though perhaps no good.  Do not suffer little things
to embarrass you.  Our great work is constant temperance,
and frequent,  very frequent evacuation ;  and that they may not
be interrupted,  conviction of their necessity is to be prudently
inculcated z.

I am not at present so much distressed as you,  because
I think your present method likely to be efficacious.  Dejection
may indeed follow,  and I should dread it from too copious
bleeding  ;  for as purges are more under command,  and more
concurrent with the agency of nature,  they seldom effect
any irremediable change.  However,  we must expect after such a
disease,  that the mind will fluctuate long before it finds its center.

I will not tell you,  nor Master,  nor Queeney,  how I long to be
among you  ;    but I would be glad to know when we are to
meet,  and hope our meeting will be cheerful.
I am,  dearest Lady,

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

703.

TO MRS.    THRALE2.

DEAR MADAM,  London,  August 25, 1780.

Yesterday I could write but about one thing.     I am sorry

1 What taste in a woman to publish treatment proper for her husband  !
these and suchlike passages about the 2 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  189.

to

Aetat.  70.]  To Mrs.   Thrale.  201

to find from my dear Queeney's letter to-day,  that Mr.  Thrale's
sleep was too much shortened.  He begins however now,  she
says,  to recover it.  Sound sleep will be the surest token of
returning health.  The swelling of his legs has nothing in
it dangerous ;  it is the natural consequence of lax muscles,  and
when the laxity is known to be artificial,  need not give any
uneasiness.  I told you so formerly.  Every thing that I have
told you about my dear master has been true.  Let him take
purgatives,  and let him sleep.  Bleeding seems to have been
necessary now ;  but it was become necessary only by the
omission of purges.  Bleeding is only for exigences.

I wish you or Queeney would write to me every post while
the danger lasts.  I will come if I can do any good,  or prevent
any evil.

For any other purpose,  I suppose,  now poor Sam :  may be
spared ;  you are regaled with Greek and Latin,  and you are
Thralia Castalio semper amata choro  ;  and you have a daughter
equal to yourself.  I shall have enough to do with one and the
other.  Your admirer has more Greek than poetry;  he was
however worth the conquest,  though you had conquered
me.  Whether you can hold him as fast,  there may be some
dram of a scruple iX,  for he thinks you have full tongue enough,
as appears by some of his verses ;  he will leave you for some-
body that will let him take his turn,  and then I may come
in again  :  for,  I tell you,  nobody loves you so well,  and therefore
never think of changing like the moon,  and being constant only
in your inconstancy 2.

I have not dined out for some time but with Renny or
Sir Joshua  ;  and next week Sir Joshua goes to Devonshire3,  and
Renny to Richmond,  and I am left by myself.  I wish I could
say nunquam minus,  &>c. 4,  but I am not diligent.

1  '  No dram of a scruple.'  Twelfth 3 See Leslie and Taylor's Life of
Night,  Act iii.  sc.  4.  Reynolds,  ii.  305.     In her brother's

2  '  The world's a scene of changes  ;      absence Miss Reynolds very likely

and to be stayed at his house at Richmond.

Constant in Nature were incon-          4  '  P.  Scipionem,  Marce fili,  eum

stancy.'  qui primus Africanus appellatus est,

COWLEY.    Inconstancy :  Johnson's dicere solitum scripsit Cato,  qui fuit

English Poets,  ed.  1790,  viii.  13.  ejus fere aequalis,  numquam se minus

I am

2O2

To Viscountess Southwell.

[A.  D.  1780.

I am afraid that I shall not see Lichfield this year,  yet
it would please me to shew my friends how much better I am
grown :  but I am not grown,  I am afraid,  less idle  ;  and
of idleness I am now paying the fine by having no leisure.

Does the expedition to Sir John Shelly's  'go on  ?  The first
week of September is now at no great distance ;  nor the
eighteenth day,  which concludes another of my wretched years 2.

It is time to have done.  T p

1 am,  cxc.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

704.

To A YOUNG CLERGYMAN.
Bolt Court,  August 30,  1780.     Published in the Life,  Hi.  436.

705.

To VISCOUNTESS SOUTHWELL 3.

MADAM,  Bolt Court,  Fleet Street,  Sept.  9,  1780.

Among the numerous addresses of condolence which your
great loss must have occasioned,  be pleased to receive this from
one whose name perhaps you have never heard,  and to whom
your ladyship is known only by the reputation of your virtue,
and to whom your lord was known only by his kindness and
beneficence.

Your ladyship is now again summoned to exert that piety of
which you once gave,  in a state of pain and danger,  so illustrious
an example 4 ;  and your lord's beneficence may be still con-
tinued by those who with his fortune inherit his virtues.

otiosum esse quam quum otiosus,
nee minus solum quam quum solus
esset.'— CICERO.  De Officiis,  iii.  I.
Burton,  introducing the quotation in
the Anatomy of Melancholy,  ed.
1660,  p.  89,  translates it : — '  Never
less solitary than when he was alone,
never more busy than when he seemed
to be most idle.'

1 Ante,  ii.  44,  73.

2 On his birth-day he recorded  : —
*  I am now beginning the seventy-
second year of my life with more

strength of body and greater vigour
of mind than I think is common at
that age.'  Pr.  and Med.,  p.  185.

3 First published in Malone's Bos-
welL Viscountess Southwell was
the wife of Thomas George,  third
Baron and first Viscount Southwell,
who died on August 29 of this year.
Debrett's Peerage,  ed.  1820,  ii.  1135.

4  'The    "illustrious example of
piety and fortitude"   to which Dr.
Johnson alludes,  was the submitting,
when past her fiftieth year,  to an

I hope

Aetat.  70.]  To William Strahan.  203

I hope to be forgiven the liberty which I shall take of inform-
ing your ladyship,  that Mr.  Mauritius Lowe,  a son of your late
lord's father *,  had,  by my recommendation to your lord,  a quar-
terly allowance of ten pounds,  the last of which,  due July 26,  he
has not received  :  he was in hourly hope of his remittance,  and
flattered himself that on October 26,  he should have received
the whole half-year's bounty,  when he was struck with the
dreadful news of his benefactor's death.

May I presume to hope,  that his want,  his relation,  and his
merit,  which excited his lordship's charity,  will continue to have
the same effect upon those whom he has left behind ;  and that,
though he has lost one friend,  he may not yet be destitute.
Your ladyship's charity cannot easily be exerted where it is
wanted more ;  and to a mind like yours,  distress is a sufficient
recommendation.

I hope to be allowed the honour of being,

Madam,  &c.,
To Viscountess Southwell,  Dublin.  SAM  :  JOHNSON.

708.

To WILLIAM STRAHAN 2.
SIR,

Having lost our Election at Southwark we are looking for
a Borough less uncertain 3.  If you can find by enquiry any seat
to be had,  as seats are had without natural interest,  you will by
giving immediate notice do a great favour to Mr.  Thrale.  The
messenger shall call to-morrow for your answer.  There are,  I

extremely painful surgical operation,  3 The poll did not close till two

which she endured with extraordinary days after Johnson wrote  (ante,  ii.

firmness and composure,  not allow-  154,  n.  2)  ;  but Thrale was so far

ing herself to be tied to her chair,  behind the other two candidates that

nor uttering a single moan.'  -  his defeat was certain.      Johnson

MALONE.  wrote to Boswell on October 17  : —

1 Ante,  ii.  66,  and post,  Letter of  *  Mr.  Thrale's loss of health has lost
October 22,  1782.  him the election.'   Life,  iii.  442.   For

2 From the original in the posses-  Johnson's identification of himself
sion of Mr.  Alfred Morrison of Font-  with the Thrales see ante,   i.   194,
hill House.  n.  i.

suppose

204

To the Reverend Samuel Hardy.      [A.D.  rzso.

suppose,  men who transact these affairs,  but we do not know
them r.     Be so kind as to give us what information you can.

I am,  Sir,

Your humble servant,
Sept.  13, 1780.  SAM:  JOHNSON.

To William Strahan,  Esq.

SIR,

707.

To THE REVEREND SAMUEL HARDY2.

I should be very sorry to be thought capable of treating
with neglect or disrespect such a Man as You,  or such an attempt
as yours.  I certainly wrote my opinion such as it was,  long ago,
I did not value it enough to keep a copy,  and therefore must
now tell it again,  when the remembrance of your arguments is
weakened by time.

You will be pleased,  Sir,  to recollect that I professed myself
unskilful in Biblical criticism  ;  my profession was very sincere,
and I am far from desiring to obtrude my notions as decisive.

I admitted without difficulty your prophesy by action,  all types
are prophesies of that kind.  But I know not whether the
admissions of such prophesies will support your interpretation
as there seems to be no action done.

1 Johnson might here have been
properly reminded of what he had
said five years earlier,  that    'the
statutes against bribery were in-
tended to prevent upstarts with
money from getting into Parliament.5
Life,  ii.  339.

2 From the original in the posses-
sion of the Rev.  John W.  Hardy,
Hildenborough,  Kent,  great-grand-
son of the divine to whom it is ad-
dressed.

The Rev.  Samuel Hardy,  D.D.,
afterwards Rector of Little Blaken-
ham,  Suffolk,  and at this time After-
noon Lecturer at the Parish Church
of Enfield,  Middlesex,  published in
1784 The Scripture  -  Account of
the Nature and ends of the Holy

Eucharist.  In it he maintains  (p.  4)
'  that the sixth chapter of St.  John is
to be primarily interpreted of the
Eucharist?  The miracle of the
loaves was,  he goes on to assert, '  a
Prophecy by Action '  (p.  21).  He in-
dicates passages in the Old Testa-
ment where also may be found other
Prophecies by Action  (pp.  15-19).
He begins his Preface by saying  : —
'  Afflicted as I have been in body by
the excruciating tortures of the gout ;
distressed as I have been in mind by
the barbarous murder of my son.'

In Nichols's Lit.  Hist.,  iv.  709,
there is a slight notice of Dr.  Hardy
and of his son,  the Rector of Lough-
borough.

Whether

Aetat.  71.]  To J ohn Nichols.  205

Whether your explication or that which is generally received
be considered as true,  the use and importance of the Sacrament
is the same,  and therefore I cannot think the question such as
in the present disposition of the world can properly or usefully
be moved.  Why should you run the hazard of being wrong,
when Religion gains nothing by your being right  ?

Your arguments from the Old Testament do not appear to
me to have any force,  or to be applied with any probability to
your present purpose.  You will gain more upon the reader by
omitting them,  and trusting only to the passage in itself and to
general reasoning.  And if you publish your thoughts I think it
best to give them the appearance rather of enquiry and con-
jecture than of assertion and dogmatism.

Once more,  Sir,  I do not pretend to decide the question which
was new to me,  and of which I have not perhaps the previous
knowledge necessary to the examination.  Enquire of men more
learned in the Scriptures.  You have from me the respect due
to all diligent searchers after sacred Truth,  and my wishes that
you may be long able to continue your studies,  to your own
improvement,  and instruction of others.
I am,  Sir,

Your most humble Servant,

Bolt Court,  Fleet Street,  SAM:  JOHNSON.

Sept.  23,  1780.

708.

To JAMES BOSWELL.
[London],  October 17,  1780.     Published in the Life^  Hi.  441.

709.

0 To JOHN NICHOLS  *.

I think you never need send back the revises unless some-

1 First published in the Gentle-      me to go with him  ;  and how long I
man's Magazine for 1785,  page n.          shall stay,  I cannot tell.     I do not

Nine days earlier Johnson,  after much like the place,  but yet I shall
telling Boswell of Thrale's loss of the go,  and stay while my stay is desired.'
election,   continued  :— '  He is now Life,  iii.  442.
going to Brighthelmston,  and expects

thing

206

To Mrs.  [Miss]  Prowse.

[A.D.  1780.

thing important occurs.  Little things,  if I omit them,  you will
do me the favour of setting right yourself.  Our post is awkward
as you will find,  and I fancy you will find it best to send two

sheets at once.

I am,  Sir,

Your most humble servant,

Brighthelmstone,  SAM:  JOHNSON.

Oct.  26,  1780.
To Mr.  Nicol.

710.

To MRS'

PROWSE''

MADAM,

I return you very sincere and respectful thanks for all your
favours.  You have,  I see,  sent guineas when I expected only
pounds.  It was beside my intention that you should make so
much enquiry after Johnson.  What can be known of him must
start up by accident.  He was not a Native of your town or
country,  but an adventurer who came from a distant part in
quest of a livelihood,  and did not stay a year.  He came in 36,
and went away in 37.  He was likely enough to attract notice
while he staid,  as a lively noisy man,  that loved company.  His
memory might probably continue for some time in some favourite
alehouse.  But after so many years perhaps there is no man
left that remembers him.  He was my near relation.

The unfortunate woman for whom your excellent Mother has
so kindly made provision is,  in her way,  well.  I am now sending
her some cloaths  [sic].  Of her cure there is no hope.

Be pleased,  Madam,  to accept the good wishes and grateful

regard of,

Madam,

Your most obedient,

and most humble Servant,
Dec.  9,  1780.  SAM:  JOHNSON.

[Leaf torn off,  no address.]

1 First published in Notes and
Queries,  4th S.  v.  441.  Copied by me
from the original in the possession of
the Rev.  Edward B.  Edgell.  For the

sum of money which was sent to
Johnson,  and for an account of his
'  near relation/  and the  '  unfortunate
woman,'  see ante>  ii.  194.

To

Aetat.  71.]  To William Strahan.  207

711.

To THE REVEREND DR.  VYSEZ.
SIR,  Dec.  30,  1780.

I hope you will forgive the liberty I take,  in soliciting
your interposition with his grace the archbishop  :  my first petition
was successful,  and I therefore venture on a second.

The matron of the Chartreux is about to resign her place ;
and Mrs.  Desmoulins,  a daughter of the late Dr.  Swinfen,  who
was well known to your father 2,  is desirous of succeeding her.
She has been accustomed by keeping a boarding-school to the
care of children,  and I think is very likely to discharge her duty.
She is in great distress,  and therefore may probably receive the
benefit of a charitable foundation.  If you wish to see her,  she
will be willing to give an account of herself.

If you shall be pleased,  Sir,  to mention her favourably to his
grace,  you will do a great act of kindness,  to,

Sir,

Yours,  &c.,
To the Rev.  Dr.  Vyse at Lambeth.  SAM :   JOHNSON.

712.

To WARREN HASTINGS.

[London],  January 29,  1781.     Published in the Life,  iv.  70.
The date is wrongly given by Boswell as January 9.     The original
is in the British Museum.

713.

CIR To WILLIAM STRAHAN3.

Having now done my lives I shall have money to receive,
and shall be glad to add to it what remains due for the Hebrides,
which you cannot charge  [me]  with grasping very rapaciously 4.

1 First published in Malone's Bos-  3 From the original in the posses-
ses//.    For Dr.  Vyse and Johnson's sion of Mr.  Frederick Barker,  of 41
'  first petition'  about the Chartreux Gunterstone Road,  West Kensington,
or Charter House,  see ante,  ii.  14.  4 The Journey to the Hebrides was

2 Dr.  Vyse's father was a Lichfield published at the beginning of 1775.
Clergyman,  and Dr.  Swinfen,  John-  Four thousand copies were printed,
son's godfather,  was a physician of A second edition was not called for
the same city.  till 1785.     Life,  ii.  310.

The

208

To Thomas Cadell.

[A.D.  1781.

The price was two hundred guineas or pounds ;    I think first
pounds then guineas x.     I have had one hundred.

There is likewise something due for the political pamphlets2,
which I left without bargain to your liberality and Mr.  Cadel's.
Of this you will likewise think that I may have all together.

I am,  Sir,

Your humble Servant,

March 5,  1781.  SAM  :  JOHNSON.

To William Strahan,  Esq.

714.

To THOMAS CADELL.

[London]  March 5,  1781.

In Messrs Puttick and Simpson's Auction Catalogue for December
19,  1850,  Lot 300 is an autograph Letter of Johnson to Mr.  Cadell,
dated March 5,  1781 : — c Desiring payment to be made for some sets of
the Poets and Lives sent on his account to Mr.  Boswell.  He refers to
his last work,  the Lives of the Poets,  in the conclusion of the letter.  "  I
am glad that the work is at last done." '

Johnson  '  sent a set both of the Lives and the Poets to dear Mrs.
Boswell in acknowledgment of her marmalade.'  Life,  iii.  372.

This Letter was sold by Messrs.  Sotheby and Co.  on May 10,  1875,
for  £$  17*  6d-  (Lot 97)-

715.

To JAMES BOSWELL.
[London],  March 14,  1781.     Published in the Life,  iv.  71.

716.

To SIR JOSHUA REYNOLDS.
[London,  April 4,  1781.]     Published in the Life^  iv.  84.

1 Dilly,  the bookseller,  said  : —
1 As to the terms it was left entirely
to the Doctor to name his own ;  he
mentioned two hundred guineas ;  it
was immediately agreed to.'  Life,
iii.  in.  'The booksellers spon-
taneously added a third hundred.'
Ib.  iv.  35,  n.  3.  Malone says that
'  had he asked one thousand,  or even

fifteen hundred guineas,  the book-
sellers, who knew the value of his
name,  would doubtless have readily
given it.'  Ib.  iii.  in,  n.  I.  See ante,
i.  79,  n.  i.

2 His four political pamphlets were
collected into a volume in 1776,  with
the title Political Tracts.  Life,  ii.
315-

TO

Aetat.  71.]

To Mrs.  Thrale.

209

717.

To MRS.  THRALE x.
DEAREST MADAM,  London,  April 5, 1781.

Of your injunctions,  to pray for you and write to you,  I
hope to leave neither unobserved  ;  and I hope to find you
willing in a short time to alleviate your trouble by some other
exercise of the mind.  I am not without my part of the calamity.
No death since that of my wife has ever oppressed me like this 2.
But let us remember,  that we are in the hands of Him who knows
when to give and when to take away;  who will look upon us
with mercy through all our variations of existence,  and who in-
vites us to call on him in the day of trouble.  Call upon him in
this great revolution of life,  and call with confidence.  You will

1 Piozzi Letters )  ii.  191.

Boswell who had come up to
London on March 19  'had found
Mr.  Thrale very ill.  He had removed
to a house in Grosvenor Square.  I
was sorry,'  he adds,  '  to see him
sadly changed in his appearance.'
Life,  iv.  72.  Nevertheless the usual
hospitality went on.  Miss Burney
describes  '  a very gay party to dinner '
less than a week before his death.
Mme.  D'Arblay's Diary,  ii.  14.  A
note which she had from Mrs.
Thrale  *  is endorsed  :— "  Written a
few hours after the death of Mr.
Thrale,  which happened by a sudden
stroke of apoplexy on the morning of
a day on which half the fashion of
London had been invited to an
assembly at his house."'  Ib.  p.  15.
Johnson recorded in his Diary : — '  At
night I was called to him,  and found
him senseless in strong convulsions.
I staid in the room except that I
visited Mrs.  Thrale twice.'  Johnson
said:  —  'His servants would have
waited upon him in this awful period,
and why not his friend  ? '  Life,  iv.
84,  n.  4.

As Mrs.  Thrale had fled to Bath

VOL.  II.

after her son's death  (Life,  iii.  6,  n.  i)
so she hurried away from her dead
husband.  *  Pepys,'  she writes,  '  came
at ten  [on the night Mr.  Thrale was
attacked],  and never left the house
till early light showed me the way to
Streatham  ;  and from thence,  hoping
still less disturbance,  to Brighthelm-
stone,  where we had a house of our
own,  and whither you will see the
letters all addressed.'  Hayward's
Piozzi,  i.  304.  Thrale died about
five o'clock in the morning.  Life,  iv.
84,  n.  4.

2 Yet he had lost  'his beloved
friend Dr.  Bathurst,  of whom he
hardly ever spoke without tears in
his eyes'  (Life,  i.  190),  and his
mother,  '  whose death was one of the
few calamities,'  he said,  'on which
he thought with terror'  (ante,  i.
20)  ;  not to mention Goldsmith and
Beauclerk.  See ante,  ii.  100,  where
he writes to Mrs.  Thrale :—' There
is nobody left for me to care about
but you and my master,  and I have
now for many years known the value
of his friendship,  and the importance
of his life,  too well not to have him
very near my heart.'

then

210

To Mrs.  Thrale.

[A.D.  1781.

then find comfort for the past,  and support for the future.  He
that has given you happiness in marriage,  to a degree of which,
without personal knowledge,  I should have thought the descrip-
tion fabulous,  can give you another mode of happiness as a
mother x ;  and at last,  the happiness of losing all temporal cares
in the thoughts of an eternity in heaven.

I do not exhort you to reason yourself into tranquillity.  We
must first pray,  and then labour;  first implore the blessing of
God,  and  [then employ]  those means which he puts into our
hands.  Cultivated ground has few weeds ;  a mind occupied by
lawful business,  has little room for useless regret 2.

We read the will to-day 3 ;  but I will not fill my first letter
with any other account than that,  with all my zeal for your ad-
vantage, I am satisfied ;  and that the other executors 4,  more

1 Five months later she recorded
or pretended to record in her
Journal:  —  'September,  1781.  —  My
five fair daughters too  !     I have so
good a pretence to wish for long life
to see them settled.     Like the old
fellow in  "  Lucian  "  one is never at a
loss for an excuse.     They are five
lovely creatures to be sure,  but they
love not me.  Is it my fault or theirs  ? '
Hayward's Piozzi,   ii.    342.       Two
years after her husband's death she
wrote  : — '  Mr.  Thrale had not much
heart,  but his fair daughters have
none at all.'    Ib.  p.  344.     Of these
five daughters the eldest was at the
time of their father's death sixteen,
and the youngest two.   This last died
two years later — not five years old
and without a heart.    Post,  Letter of
May i,  1783.

2 Gibbon wrote to Lord Sheffield
on hearing of the death of Lady
Sheffield  : — '  I will not expatiate on
those common-place topics which
have never dried a single tear ;  but
let me advise,  let me urge you to force
yourself into business,  as I would
try to force myself into study.     The
mind must not be idle  ;  if it be not

exercised on external objects it will
prey on its own vitals.'  Gibbon's
Misc.  Works,  i.  400.

3 In a long note on this passage
Mrs.  Thrale writes  : — '  It was neither
kind or civil,  you will say,  to open

the will in my absence My

husband left me the interest of
,£50,000 for my life,   doubtless in
return for my diligence during our
distresses in 1772,    because it is
specified to be given over and above
what was provided in our marriage
settlement.   He left me also the plate,
pictures and linen of both houses,
forgetting even to name Brighthelm-
stone,  so all I had bought for that
place fell to the ladies  [her daughters]
who said loudly what a wretched
match their poor papa had made.'
Hayward's Piozzt,  i.  293.

4 Miss Burney,    who had been
staying with Mrs.  Thrale,  wrote on
April 29  : — '  The four executors,  Mr.
Cator,   Mr.   Crutchley,    Mr.    Henry
Smith and Dr.  Johnson have all be-
haved generously and honourably.
She is to carry on the business jointly
with them.'   Mme.  D'Arblay's Diary ,
ii.  20.

used

Aetat.  71.]  To Mrs.  Thrale.  2 1 1

used to consider property than I,  commended it for wisdom and
equity.  Yet why should I not tell you that you have five
hundred pounds for your immediate expenses,  and two thousand
pounds a-year,  with both the houses and all the goods  ?

Let us pray for one another,  that the time,  whether long or
short,  that shall yet be granted us,  may be well spent ;  and that
when this life,  which at the longest is very short,  shall come to
an end,  a better may begin which shall never end.
I am,  dearest Madam,

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

718.

TO MRS.    THRALE1.

DEAR MADAM,  April;,  1781.

I hope you begin to find your mind grow clearer.  My part
of the loss hangs upon me.  I have lost a friend of boundless
kindness at an age when it is very unlikely that I should find
another 2.

If you think change of place likely to relieve you,  there is no
reason why you should not go to Bath 3 ;  the distances are un-
equal, but with regard to practice and business they are the same.
It is a day's journey from either place ;  and the post is more
expeditious and certain to Bath4.  Consult only your own in-
clination, for there is really no other principle of choice.  God
direct and bless you.

1 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  193.  to waste your health in unprofitable

3 On his next birthday he wrote : —  sorrow,   but go to Bath,  and en-

'  My first knowledge of Thrale was deavour to prolong your own life.'

in 1765.     I enjoyed his favour for Life,  iv.  100.

almost a fourth part of my life.'    Pr.  4 The other place was Brighton,

and Med.,   p.    191.       Miss Burney to which,  at this season of the year,

records how he had often with her the post went only four days a week,

'  long and melancholy discourses whereas to Bath it went every night

about our dear deceased master,  but Sunday.   See post,  p.  216,  where

whom indeed he regrets incessantly.'  it is stated that a letter written by

Mme.  D'Arblay's Diary,  ii.  63.  Mrs.  Thrale at Brighton on Wednes-

3 Two or three weeks later he day was received by Johnson on

wrote to Mrs.  Strahan who had lost Saturday,
her son  : — '  Let me counsel you not

P 1 Mr.  C

212

To Mrs.  Thrale.

[A.D.  1781.

Mr.  C

•  has offered Mr.  P x money,  but it was not

wanted.  I hope we shall all do all we can to make you less
unhappy,  and you must do all you can for yourself.  What we,
or what you can do,  will for a time be but little ;  yet certainly
that calamity which may be considered as doomed to fall in-
evitably on half mankind,  is not finally without alleviation 2.

It is something for me,  that as I have not the decrepitude I have
not the callousness of old age 3.    I hope in time to be less afflicted.

I am,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

710.

To MRS.  THRALE 4.
DEAREST MADAM,  London,  April 9, 1781.

That you are gradually recovering your tranquillity,  is the
effect to be humbly expected from trust in God.  Do not repre-
sent life as darker than it is.  Your loss has been very great,  but
you retain more than almost any other can hope to possess.  You
are high in the opinion of mankind  ;  you have children from
whom much pleasure may be expected  ;  and that you will find
many friends,  you have no reason to doubt.  Of my friendship,
be it worth more or less,  I hope you think yourself certain,  with-
out much art or care.  It will not be easy for me to repay the
benefits that I have received  ;  but I hope to be always ready at
your call.  Our sorrow has different effects  ;  you are withdrawn
into solitude,  and I am driven into company 5.  I am afraid of

1  '  Cator and Perkins.'— BARETTI.
Cator was one of the executors  ;  he
offered no doubt to advance money
to Perkins,  the Superintendent of the
Brewery,  if any were needed.

2 I think that Johnson says here
what he said to Mr.  Elphinston on
the death of his wife  (ante,  ii.  67) ,: —
4 In the condition of mortal beings
one must lose another.     What would
be the wretchedness of life,  if there
was not something always in view,
some Being,  immutable and unfailing,
to whose mercy man may have re-
course ! '

3 For Johnson's not having the

decrepitude of old age,  see ante,
ii.  202,  n.  2,  and Life,  iii.  302,  336.
For the callousness,  see Rambler,  No.
78,  where he writes  : — *  I believe men
may be generally observed to grow
less tender as they advance in age.'
Chesterfield says  :— '  The heart never
grows better by age  ;  I fear rather
worse  ;  always harder.'  Letters to
his Son,  iii.  18.

4 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  195.

5 Two days after Thrale's death
Johnson carried Boswell to his City
Club in St.  Paul's Church-yard,  com-
posed of men who were not patriots.
Life,  iv.  87.

thinking

Aetat.  71.]  To Mrs.  Thrale.  213

thinking what I have lost.    I never had such a friend before.    Let
me have your prayers and those of my dear Queeney.

The prudence and resolution of your design to return so soon
to your business and your duty deserves great praise ;  I shall
communicate it on Wednesday to the other executors.  Be
pleased to let me know whether you would have me come to
Streatham to receive you,  or stay here till the next day.

I am,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

720.

To THE REVEREND DR.  VYSE x.
REV.  SIR,  Bolt Court,  April 10,  1781.

The bearer is one of my old friends,  a man of great learning,
whom the chancellor has been pleased to nominate to the Char-
treux.  He attends his grace the archbishop,  to take the oath
required ;  and being a modest scholar,  will escape embarrassment,
if you are so kind as to introduce him,  by which you will do a
kindness to a man of great merit,  and add another to those favours
which have already been conferred by you on,

Sir,  &c.,
To the Rev.  Dr.  Vyse at Lambeth.  SAM  :  JOHNSON.

721.

TO MRS.    THRALE2.

DEAR MADAM,  London,  April n,  1781.

I am glad to hear from my dear Miss 3,  that you have re-
covered tranquillity enough to think on bathing ;  but there
is no disposition in the world to leave you long to yourself.

Mr.  P pretends that your absence produces a thousand

difficulties,  which I believe it does not produce.     He frights
Mr.  C  *  *  *  * 4.      Mr.  C —   -  is of my mind,  that there is no

1 Published in Croker's Boswell,  a Piozzi Letters,  ii.  196.

page 654.  3  *  Miss Thrale,'  wrote Miss Bur-

The bearer of the letter was John-  ney on April 29,  '  is steady and con-
son's old amanuensis,  Alexander stant,  and very sincerely grieved for
Macbean,  whom  '  by the favour of her father.'  Mme.  D'Arblay's Diary,
Lord Thurlow he got admitted a poor ii.  20.

brother of the Charter-house.'     Life,          4  '  P is Perkins and C

1.1875111.441.   For Macbean's death Cator.'    BARETTI.
see /or/,  Letter of June 26,  1784.

need

214 To Mrs.  Thrale.  [A.D.  i?8i.

need of hurry.  I would not have this importunity give you
any alarm or disturbance ;  but,  to pacify it,  come as soon as
you can prevail upon your mind to mingle with business.  I
think business the best remedy for grief as soon as it can be
admitted.

We met to-day,  and were told of mountainous difficulties,  till
I was provoked to tell them,  that if there were really so much
to do and suffer,  there would be no executors in the world z.
Do not suffer yourself to be terrified.

I comfort you,  and hope God will bless and support you ;  but
I feel myself like a man beginning a new course of life.  I had
interwoven myself with my dear friend 2 ;  but our great care
ought to be,  that we may be fit and ready,  when in a short time
we shall be called to follow him.

There is,  however,  no use in communicating to you my heavi-
ness of heart.  I thank dear Miss for her letter.

I am,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

722.

To MRS.    THRALE3.

DEAREST MADAM,  London,  April 12, 1781.

You will not suppose that much has happened since last
night,  nor indeed is this a time for talking much of loss and
gain.  The business of Christians is now for a few days in their
own bosoms.  God grant us to do it properly.  I hope you gain
ground on your affliction.  I hope to overcome mine.  You and
Miss must comfort one another.  May you long live happily
together.  I have nobody whom I expect to share my uneasiness,
nor,  if I could communicate it,  would it be less.  I give it little
vent,  and amuse it as I can4.  Let us pray for one another.

1 See ante,  ii.  126,  and Life,  iv.  after his death have made particular
85,  n.  2,  for the interest Johnson had supplication for his surviving family
long taken in Thrale's business.  to this day.'  Pr.  and Med.  p.  198.

2 On September 2 of this year he 3 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  198.
recorded:— *  When Thrale's health 4 It was on this day that,  though
was broken,    for many months,    I it was the day before Good Friday,
think,  before his death,  I constantly he dined abroad— for the second
mentioned him in my prayers  ;  and time this Passion Week.    It was true

And,

Aetat.  71.]  To Mrs.  Tkrale.  2 1 5

And,  when we meet,  we may try what fidelity and tenderness
will do for us.

There is no wisdom in useless and hopeless sorrow * ;  but
there is something in it so like virtue,  that he who is wholly
without it cannot be loved,  nor will by me at least be thought
worthy of esteem 2.  My next letter will be to Queeney.

I am,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

723.

To MRS.  PORTER.
London,  April 12,  1781.     Published in the Life,  iv.  89.

724.

To MRS.  THRALE 3.
•DEAR MADAM,  April 14, 1781.

My intention was to have written this day to my dear
Queeney;  but I have just heard from you,  and therefore this
letter shall be yours.  I am glad that you find the behaviour of
your acquaintance such as you can commend.  The world is not
so unjust or unkind as it is peevishly represented.  Those who
deserve well seldom fail to receive from others such services as they
can perform  ;  but few have much in their power,  or are so stationed
as to have great leisure from their own affairs,  and kindness
must be commonly the exuberance of content 4.  The wretched
have no compassion,  they can do good only from strong prin-
ciples of duty.

he dined at a Bishop's  —  which him,  not because he soon forgets his

supplied him with that   ( ingenious grief,  for the sooner it is forgotten

defence '   which Boswell has pre-  the better ;  but because we suppose,

served.  Life,  iv.  88.    It is very likely that if he forgets his wife or his

however that he was,   as he said,  friend soon,  he has not had much

'  driven into company '  by his friend's affection for them." '  Life,  iii.  137.
death.    For amuse see ante,  i.  283,          3 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  199.
n.  5.  4  'Really it is wonderful,'   said

1  '  Johnson never grieved much for Johnson,  *  considering how much at-
anything.    His trade was wisdom.'  tention is necessary for men to take
BARETTI.  care of themselves,  and ward off im-

2  '  BOSWELL.    "  But,   Sir,    we do mediate evils which press upon
not approve of a man who very soon them,  it is wonderful how much they
forgets the loss of a wife or a friend."  do for others.'  Life,  iii.  236.
JOHNSON.    "Sir,  we disapprove of

I purpose

216

To Mrs.  Thrale.

[A.D.  1781.

I purpose to receive you at Streatham,  but wonder that you
come so soon.

I sent immediately to Mr.  Perkins to send you twenty pounds,
and intended to secure you from disappointment by inclosing a
note in this;  but yours written on Wednesday nth,  came not
till Saturday the i4th,  and mine written to-night,  will not come
before you leave Brighthelmston,  unless you have put Monday
next for Monday sevennight,  which I suspect,  as you mention no

alteration of your mind.

I am,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

725.

TO MRS.    THRALE1.

DEAR MADAM,  London,  April 16, 1781.

As I was preparing this day to go to Streatham,  according
to the direction of your letter of the i ith,  which I could not know,
though I suspected it,  to be erroneous,  I received two letters,
of which the first effect was,  that it saved me a fruitless journey.
Of these letters,  that which I perceive to have been written first
has no date of time or place  ;  the second was written on the
i4th,  but they came together.

I forbore,  because I would not disturb you,  to tell you,  that

last week Mr.  • •  came to talk about partnership,  and was very

copious.     I dismissed him with nothing harsher than,  that I was
not convinced 2 .

1 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  202.

2 Mr.  Perkins,  no doubt,  was the
copious talker.   Mrs.  Piozzi writes  : —
'On Mr.  Thrale's death I kept the
counting-house from nine every morn-
ing till five o'clock every evening till
June,  when God Almighty sent us
a knot of rich Quakers who bought
the whole,   and saved me and my
coadjutors from brewing ourselves
into another bankruptcy ;     which
hardly could,    I think,   have been
avoided,  being,  as we were,  five in
number,  Cator,  Crutchley,  Johnson,
myself and Mr.  Smith,  all with equal

power,  yet all incapable of using it
without help from Mr.  Perkins,  who
wished to force himself into partner-
ship, though hating the whole lot of
us,  save only me.  Upon my promise
however that if he would find us a
purchaser,  I would present his wife
with my dwelling-house at the
Borough and all its furniture,  he
soon brought forward these Quaker
Barclays,  and they obtained the
Brewhouse a prodigious bargain.
Among all my fellow-executors none
but Johnson opposed selling the
business.  He found some odd de-

You

Aetat.  71.]

To Mrs.  Thrale.

217

You will have much talk to hear.  Mr.  C x speaks with

great exuberance,  but what he says,  when at last he says it,  is

commonly right.  Mr. 2 made an oration flaming with the

terrifick,  which I discovered to have no meaning at all ;  for the
result was,  that if we stopped payment we should lose credit.

I have written to Mr.  Robson 3 to send the will.  There were
two copies,  but I know not who has them.

You are to receive five hundred pounds immediately 4.  Mr.
Scrase shall certainly see the will,  if you and I go to Bright-
helmston on purpose,  which,  if we have any difficulty,  may be
our best expedient.

I am encouraged,  dearest lady,  by your spirit.  The season
for agues is now over 5.  You are in your civil character a man.

light in signing drafts for hundreds
and thousands,  to him a new,  and,
as it appeared,  delightful occupation.'
Hay ward's Piozzi,  i.  294.

Miss Burney thus writes of the day
of the sale  :— *  Mrs.  Thrale went
early to town,  to meet all the ex-
ecutors, and Mr.  Barclay,  the Quaker,
who was the bidder.  She was in
great agitation of mind,  and told me
if all went well she would wave a
white handkerchief out of the coach-
window.  Four o'clock came and
dinner was ready,  and no Mrs.
Thrale.  Queeny and I went out
upon the lawn,  where we sauntered in
eager expectation,  till near six,  and
then the coach appeared in sight,
and a white handkerchief was waved
from it.'  Mme.  D'Arblay's Diary,
ii.  34.  The brewery was sold for
^135,000.  Life,  iv.  132.  See post,
p.  222.

I hoped to ascertain from Burke's
Landed Gentry which of the de-
scendants of the author of the
Apology for Quakers purchased the
great Brewery ;  but apparently it was
thought too trifling a matter in the
history of the family to require any
record.

1  'Cator.'  BARETTI.  Miss Burney
gives the following specimen of his
talk at this time.   '  One speech  (she
adds)  will do for a thousand  : — "  As
to this here question of Lord Lyttel-
ton I can't speak to it to the purpose,
as I have not read his Life',   for I
have only read the Life of Pope ;
I have got the books though,   for
I sent for them last week,  and they
came to me on Wednesday,  and then
I began them  ;    but I have not yet
read Lord Lyttelton.     Pope I have
begun,  and that is what I am now
reading.     But what I have to say
about Lord Lyttelton is this here;
Mr.  Seward says that Lord Lyttel-
ton's steward dunned Mr.  Shenstone
for his rent,  by which I understand
he was a tenant of Lord Lyttelton's.
Well,   if he was a tenant of Lord
Lyttelton's,  why should not he pay
his rent?"     Who could contradict
this  ?'  Mme.  D'Arblay's Diary,  ii.  48.

2  'Perkins.'  BARETTI.

3 See next letter.

4 In accordance with the direction
in the will.     Ante,  ii.  211.

5  'This ague fit of fear is over-

blown.'

Richard 77,  Act Hi.  sc.  2, 1.  190.
You

218 To Mrs.  Thrale.

You may sue and be sued x.  If you apply to business perhaps
half the mind which you have exercised upon knowledge and
elegance,  you will need little help,  what help however I can give
you,  will,  I hope,  be always at call.

(Make my compliments to Mr.  Scrase.)

I am,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

726.

To JOHN NICHOLS 2.

Mr.  Johnson desires Mr.  Nicol to send him a set of the last
lives,  and would be glad to know how the octavo edition goes
forward.

Monday,  April 16,  1781.
To Mr.  Nicol.

727.

To MRS.  THRALE 3.
DEAR MADAM,  April 17,  1781.

Mr.  Norris  (Mr.  Robson's partner)  4 promised to send the
will to-morrow  ;  you will therefore have it before you have this
letter.  When you have talked with Mr.  Scrase,  write diligently
down all that you can remember,  and,  where you have any diffi-
culties, ask him again,  and rather stay where you are a few days
longer than come away with imperfect information.

1  *  If the wife be injured in her wise,  in all respects as if she were a

person or her property she can bring feme sole.'

no action for redress without her 2 First published in the Gentle-

husband's concurrence,   and in his marts Magazine for 1785,  page II.

name as well as her own  ;   neither The Lives were published sepa-

can she be sued,  without making the rately as well as in the collected

husband a defendant.'   Blackstone's edition of the Poets.     In 1779 four

Commentaries,  ed.  1775,  i.  443.     By volumes duodecimo were published,

the death of her husband she re-  and in 1781 the remaining six.     In

gained the rights of a single woman,  the same year an octavo edition in

By the Married Women's Property four volumes was brought out.

Act,  1882  (45 and 46 Viet.  c.  75),  'a 3 Piozzi Letter  -s,  ii.  200.

married woman shall be capable of This letter is misplaced by Mrs.

entering into and rendering herself Piozzi,  as it should have followed,

liable in respect of and to the extent not preceded,  that of April 16.

of her separate property on any con-  4 No doubt they were Mr.  Thrale's

tract,  and of suing and being sued,  solicitors.
either in contract or in tort,  or other-

The

Aetat.7i.]  To Mrs.  [Miss]  Prowse.  219

The executors will hardly meet till you come,  for we have
nothing to do till we go all together to prove the will.

I have not had a second visit from Mr. ,  for he found

his discourse to me very unavailing.     I was dry;  but if he goes

to he will be overpowered with words as good as his

own. appears a very modest inoffensive man,  not likely

to give any trouble T.  The difficulty of finding executors
Mr.  Scrase has formerly told you,  and among all your ac-
quaintance, except P ,  whom you pressed into the service,

and who would perhaps have deserted it2,  I do not see with
whom you could have been more commodiously connected.
They all mean well,  and will,  I think,  all concur.

Miss told me that you intended to bathe ;  it is right :  all
external things are diversions  :  let her bathe too.  I regain that
tranquillity which irremediable misfortunes necessarily admit,
and do not,  I hope,  think on what I have lost,  without grateful
recollection of what I have enjoyed.

I am,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.
728.

To MRS.  STRAHAN.
[London],  April 23,  1781.     Published in the Life,  iv.  100.

729.

MADAM  ^°  MRS.  [Miss]  PROWSE 3.

Having lately had a melancholy occasion to search my

1 The first of these three men is,  2 See ante,  ii.  126,  for Johnson's
I conjecture,  Perkins,  the second letter about trustees.  Perkins was
Crutchley,  and the third Henry not an executor,  so that Johnson
Smith  (ante,  ii.  210,  n.  4).  Mrs.  means,  I think,  that Mrs.  Thrale had
Piozzi says  : — '  Crutchley hated Per-  tried to have him made one.
kins,  and lived upon the verge of 3 First published in Notes and
a quarrel with him every day while Queries,  4th S.  v.  441.  Copied by
they acted together.  Smith cursed me from the original in the pos-
the whole business,  and wondered session of the Rev.  Edward B.
what his relation,  Mr.  Thrale,  could Edgell,  of Bromham Rectory,  Chip-
mean by leaving him  ,£200,  he said,  penham.

and such a burden on his back to For the subject of the Letter see

bear for it.'    Hay ward's Piozzi,  i.  295.  ante,  ii.  193.

chests

220

To John Nichols.

[A.D.  1781.

chests for mourning,  I found in one of the pockets this tattered
letter,  which seems to prove that you have remitted to me more
money than was due I  ?

You see,  Madam,  that I was paid,  or might have been paid by
your good Mother to  -76.  It is not likely that I neglected to
call on the Banker,  yet it is possible,  but the Banker's books will
clear the question.  I am willing to suppose that I received it,
for it would be hard that Chanty should be cheated 2.

In a few weeks will be published with my name some Lives
of the Poets 3,  of which if you will be pleased to favour me by
accepting a copy,  I beg that you will let me know to whom in
London I may send them,  that they may be conveyed to you.
I am,  Madam,

Your most humble Servant,

N.B.  Bolt Court,  Fleet Street,  London.
May 7,  1781.

730.

SAM:  JOHNSON.

To MR.  PERKINS.
[London],  June 2,  1781.     Published in the Life,  iv.  118.

731.

To JOHN NICHOLS 4.

oIRj

My desire being to complete the sets of lives which I have
formerly presented to my friends,  I have occasion for few of the

1 The letter,   as is shown in the
next paragraph,  was written in 1776.
In the spring of that year he wore,
no doubt,   the mourning for the
funeral of young Harry Thrale,  as
he now wore it for the funeral of
Harry's father.      He had attended
also Garrick's funeral in 1779.    Life,
iv.  208.

2 On the blank sheet of the paper
is written  : — '  On searching Child's
accounts I found the year 76 had
been paid.     I therefore omitted the
present year's payment,  and acknow-
ledged the Books which I soon after

received.'  She had sent him back-
payments for six years from 1780.
Ante,  ii.  193,  n.  4.  She should,  it
seems,  have omitted two years'  pay-
ments, unless no payment had been
made for 1775.

3 The octavo edition in four
volumes,  published this year.

4 First published in the Gentle-
man's Magazine for 1785,  page II.

Johnson had presented the first
four volumes published in 1779 to
his friends.  With the issue of the
last six in 1781 he had received fresh
sets of the first four,  of most of which

first

Aetat.  7i.]  To Miss Reynolds.  221

first volumes,  of which by some misapprehension I have received
a great number,  which I desire to exchange for the latter volumes.
I wish success to the new edition.

Please to present to Mr.  Steevens a complete set of the Lives

in ismo1.

I am,  Sir,

Your most humble Servant,

June 10,  1781.  SAM:  JOHNSON.

To Mr.  Nicol.

732.

To BENNET LANGTON.
Bolt Court,  June 16,  1781.     Published in the Life,  iv.  132.

733.

To SIR JOSHUA REYNOLDS.
[London],  June 23,  1781.     Published in the Life,  iv.  133.

734.

TO MlSS REYNOLDS2.

DEAR MADAM,  25th June,  1781.

You may give the book to Mrs.  Horneck 3,  and I will give
you another for yourself.

I am afraid there is no hope of Mrs.  Thrale's custom for your
pictures  ;  but,  if you please,  I will mention it.    She cannot make
a pension out of her jointure4.
I will bring the papers myself.
I am,  Madam,

Your most humble servant,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

he had no need.    What he wanted well,  page 697.
was enough of the last six volumes 3 Ante,  i.  344,  n.  2.
to complete the sets of those friends 4  '  Miss Reynolds,  it seems,  wished
to whom he had given the first four.  to dispose of her collection,   and
1 The new edition '  was the one in thought that Mrs.  Thrale might pur-
octavo,  chase and pay for it by an annuity.'

1 Steevens had supplied him with CROKER.    She had bought a few
some anecdotes and quotations.  very fine pictures in Paris at a very
Life,  iv.  37.  small price.     Northcote's Life of

2 First published in Croker's Bos-  Reynolds,  i.  202.

TO

222

To Miss Burney.

[A.D.  1781.

SIR,

735.

TO    [MR.    PERKINS]1.

Mrs.  Thrale has informed me of the iron resolution of Mr.
Cator and Mr.  Crutchley.  They have law on their side,  and
cannot be opposed.  What then can be done  ?  If time will do
any thing for you,  that you may apply to your friends,  I will
struggle for that.  I think Mr.  Barclay's interest so much requires
your concurrence and assistance,  that if you cannot procure
security,  he must help you.  His difficulties are only niceties.
Do not be bashful,  use all the efforts that you can.

I am,  Sir,

Your humble Servant,
July 2, 1781.  SAM:  JOHNSON.

I shall come to you this morning,  but I will meet Mrs.  Thrale
to-morrow about twelve.

736.

To Miss BURNEY 2.
DEAR MADAM,

Pray let these books be sent after the former to the gentle-
man whose name I do not know.

I am,  Madam,

Your most humble servant,
July 9, 1781.  SAM:  JOHNSON.

1 From the original in the pos-
session of Mr.  W.  G.  Anderson,  of
Beechhill,  Fairfield,  Liverpool.

On the day on which this letter
was written,  Miss Burney in her
Diary praises  '  Mrs.  Thrale's gene-
rosity to Mr.  Perkins,  whom she does
not like.  Everything in her power
is she doing to establish him com-
fortably in the Brewhouse,  even to
the lending all her own money that
is in the Stocks.'  Miss Burney adds
that Mr.  Crutchley, '  though he cared

not himself if Perkins were drowned,
offered to lend him a thousand
pounds,  merely by way of giving
pleasure to Mrs.  Thrale.'  Mme.
D'Arblay's Diary,  ii.  72.  Perkins,
who had knowledge of the business,
had not,  it is clear,  capital enough
at his command to pay for his share.

2 First published in The Early Diary
of Frances Burney,  ed.  1889,  i.  169.

The gentleman was William Bewly
a country-surgeon,  'well known in
Norfolk by the name of the Philoso-

To

Aetat.  71.]

To Miss Reynolds.

223

737,

To THOMAS ASTLE.
[London],  July 17,  1781.     Published in the Life,  iv.  133.

738.

To Miss REYNOLDS x.
DEAREST MADAM,  Bolt Court,  July 21, 1781.

There is in these  [papers f~\  such force of comprehension,
such nicety of observation,  as Locke or Pascal might be proud
of.  This I say with an intention to have you think I speak my
opinion.  They cannot,  however,  be printed in their present
state.  Many of your notions seem not very clear in your own
mind  ;  many are not sufficiently developed and expanded for the
common reader :  the expression almost every where wants to

pher of Massingham]  a great ad-
mirer of Johnson's writings.  '  When
Dr.  Burney visited Dr.  Johnson at
the Temple he arrived there before
he was up.  Being shown into the
room where he was to breakfast,
finding himself alone,  he examined
the contents of the apartment,  to
try whether he could undiscovered
steal any thing to send to his friend
Bewley,  as another relick of the ad-
mirable Dr.  Johnson.  But finding
nothing better to his purpose,  he cut
some bristles off his hearth-broom,
and enclosed them in a letter to his
country enthusiast,  who received them
with due reverence.  The Doctor was
so sensible of the honour done him
by a man of genius and science,  to
whom he was an utter stranger,  that
he said to Dr.  Burney,  "  Sir,  there is
no man possessed of the smallest
portion of modesty,  but must be
flattered with the admiration of such
a man.  I'll give him a set of my
Lives,  if he will do me the honour
to accept of them." '  He sent them
to Dr.  Burney 's house directed,  '  For

the Broom Gentleman.'  Life,  iv.  134  ;
Early Diary,  &C.,  i.  18,  n.  I,  and
Memoirs of Dr.  Burney,  ii.  180.
The books which he now sent were
the later volumes of the Lives.

1 First published in Croker's Bos-
well,  page 697.

In the sixth edition of Boswell
(1811),  iv.  143,  is given a version of
this letter which differs in not a few
words.  It was perhaps written down
from memory by some one who had
been allowed to read the original.

Miss Reynolds's work,  writes North-
cote,  was called An Essay on Taste.
'  It was privately printed,  but was
never published.'  He gives some
specimens of it,  of which the follow-
ing is perhaps the best : — '  There is
always something respectable in the
object that excites the strongest ridi-
cule, otherwise it would want the
contrast which makes it ridiculous.'
Life of Reynolds,  ii.  115-8.  Respect-
able, at this time,  meant worthy of
respect.

There is no copy of Miss Reynolds's
work in the British Museum.

be

224

the Reverend Dr.  Thomas Patten.   [A.D.  1781.

be made clearer and smoother.     You may,  by revisal and im-
provement, make it a very elegant work.
I am,

My dearest dear,

Your most humble servant,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

739.

To THE REVEREND DR.  THOMAS PATTEN x.
DEAR SIR,  Sept.  25, 1781.

It is so long since we passed any time together,  that you
may be allowed to have forgotten some part of my character ;
and I know not upon what other supposition I can pass without
censure or complaint the ceremony of your address.  Let me
not trifle time in words,  to which while we speak or write them
we assign little meaning.  Whenever you favour me with a letter,
treat me as one that is glad of your kindness and proud of your
esteem 2.

1 First published in the Gentle-
man's Magazine for April,  1819,  i.

293-

Dr.  Patten was Rector of Childrey
near Wantage,  where he died on
February 28,  1790.  Gentleman's
Magazine,  1790,  p.  368,  where is
given a list of his publications.  The
Rev.  Thomas Wilson,  Head Master
of Clitheroe Grammar School,  pub-
lished in 1782 an Archaological
Dictionary;  or Classical Antiquities
of the Jews,  Greeks and Romans,
alphabetically arranged.  It was dedi-
cated to Johnson,  who acknowledged
the honour in a letter in the Life,
iv.  162.  The book is a small octavo.
'  It will,  I trust,'  says the author in
his Preface,  '  be found a ready Oracle
to the Student and Gentleman of
Classical Taste,  and an useful Re-
membrancer to the Man of Erudi-
tion.' A curious account of Wilson
is given in some numbers of the
Preston Guardian at the end of
December,  1888.

a In his letter to Johnson,  Dr.
Patten had said  : — '  Nothing would
more highly gratify my taste and my
pride than a correspondence with my
dear and honoured friend Johnson.'
But he is afraid,  he continues,  of
'  the Master of the Sentences.'  He
concludes by signing himself  '  one of
your most faithful and most affec-
tionate friends.'  Of his intimacy with
him nothing,  I believe,  is known.  In
his letter he quotes the following
lines in Miscellany Poems on several
Occasions.  Written by a Lady,  1713: —
'Now the Jonquille o'erwhelms the

feeble brain,
We faint beneath the aromatic

pain.'

They are the source,   he says,   of
Pope's lines in the Essay on Man,  i.
199:—
'  Or,  quick effluvia darting thro'  the

brain,

Die of a rose in aromatic pain  ?  *
Gentleman's Magazine,  1819,  i.
291.

The

Aetat.  72.]      To the Reverend Dr.  Thomas Patten.         225

The papers which have been sent for my perusal I am ready
to inspect,  if you judge my inspection necessary or useful:  but
indeed,  I do not ;  for what advantage can arise from it  ?  A
Dictionary consists of independent parts,  and therefore one page
is not much a specimen of the rest.  It does not occur to me
that I can give any assistance to the Author,  and for my own
interest I resign it into your hands,  and do not suppose that I
shall ever see my name with regret where you shall think it
proper to be put.

I think it,  however,  my duty to inform a writer who intends
me so great an honour,  that in my opinion he would have con-
sulted his interest by dedicating his Work to some powerful
and popular neighbour,  who can give him more than a name.
What will the world do but look on and laugh when one scholar
dedicates to another?

If I had been consulted about this Lexicon of Antiquities
while it was yet only a design,  I should have recommended
rather a division of Hebrew,  Greek,  and Roman particulars
into three volumes,  than a combination in one z.  The
Hebrew part,  at least,  I would have wished to separate,  as it
might be made a very popular book,  of which the use might
be extended from men of learning down to the English
reader,  and which might become a concomitant to the Family
Bible.

When works of a multifarious and extensive kind are under-
taken in the country,  the necessary books are not always known.
I remember a very learned and ingenious Clergyman,  of whom,
when he had published Notes upon the Psalms,  I enquired what
was his opinion of Hammond's Commentary,  and was answered,
that he had never heard of it2.  As this gentleman has the
opportunity of consulting you,  it needs not be supposed that he
has not heard of all the proper books ;  but unless he is near

1  '  I remember,'  writes Dean Percy,  2 Johnson in his character of the

'  Dr.  Johnson once told me he had Rev.  Zachariah Mudge mentions that

intended in an early part of his life divine's Notes upon the Psalms.  Life,

to compose a Dictionary of English iv.  77.  Even Lucy Porter read Ham-

or British Antiquities.'  Letters of mond's Commentary on the Psalms.

Dr.  Percy to George Paton,  p.  73.  Ante,  i.  357.

VOL.  II.                                         O some

226 To Mrs.  Thrale.  [A.D.  mi.

some Library,  I know not how he could peruse them ;  and if
he is conscious that his supellex is nitnis angusta x,  it would
be prudent to delay his publication till his deficiences may be
supplied.

It seems not very candid to hint any suspicions o'f imperfection
in a Work which I have riot seen,  yet what I have said ought to
be excused,  since I cannot but wish well to a learned man,
who has elected me for the honour of a Dedication,  and to whom
I am indebted for a correspondence so valuable as yours.  And
I beg that I may not lose any part of his kindness,  which I con-
sider with respectful gratitude.  Of you,  dear Sir,  I entreat that
you will never again forget for so long a time,

Your most humble servant,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

Bolt-court,  Fleet-street.
Sept.  24,  1781.

740.

To MAURITIUS LOWE.  Oct.  15,  1781.

In one of Messrs.  Sotheby and Company's Auction Catalogues,  the
reference to which I have mislaid,  Lot.  157 is a Letter from Dr.  Johnson
to Mr.  Lowe,  dated Oct.  15,  1781.

1 Has put Mr.  Kearsley's note into the hands of Mr.  Allen,  to whom
he owes rent.'

Mr.  Lowe was,  I suppose,  the needy Mauritius Lowe,  ante,  ii.  203.
Kearsley was a bookseller in Fleet Street.  Life,  i.  214.  Nichols writing
of his shop describes it as  '  the political storehouse of George Kearsley.'
Lit.  Hist.  v.  428.  Edmund Allen,  the printer,  was Johnson's landlord
and next neighbour in Bolt Court.  Life,  iii.  141.

741.

TO MRS.    THRALE2.

DEAR MADAM,  Oxford,  Oct.  17, 1781.

On Monday evening arrived at the Angel Inn at

1 Johnson has quoted before  (ante,      (  res angusta domi.'      Satires,    iii.
i.  64)    'curta supellex'    from Per-       165.
sius,    Satires,   iv.  52.      Juvenal has 2 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  205.

Oxford,

Aetat.  72.]

To Mrs.  Thrale.

227

Oxford x,  Mr.  Johnson and Mr.  Barber 2,  without any sinister
accident.

I am here ;  but why am I here  ?  On my way to Lichfield,
where I believe Mrs.  Aston will be glad to see me.  We have
known each other long,  and,  by consequence,  are both old  ;  and
she is paralytick  ;  and if I do not see her soon,  I may see her
no more in this world 3.  To make a visit on such considerations
is to go on a melancholy errand.  But such is the course of life.

This place is very empty,  but there are more here whom I
know,  than I could have expected 4.  Young Burke 5 has just
been with me,  and I have dined to day with Dr.  Adams6,  who

1 The Angel Inn stood in the High
Street,  but was pulled down to make
way for the New Schools.    Twenty-
seven years before Johnson's visit,
Pitt and a party of his friends were
at the window of the Inn,  when a
lady in the company sang God save
great George our King.  '  The chorus
was re-echoed by a set of young lads
drinking at a college over the way
[Queen's],  but with additions of rank
treason.'    Pitt described the scene to
the House of Commons.     Walpole's
Georgell^.  1822,1.358.  Johnsonand
Boswell,  in March,  1776,  passed two
evenings in the Angel  '  in easy and
familiar conversation.'  Life,  ii.  440, 9.

2 Johnson's black servant,  Frank
Barber.

3 He made the following record in
his Diary  : — '  Sunday,   October 14,
1781  (properly Monday morning).    I
am this day about to go by Oxford
and Birmingham to Lichfield and
Ashbourne.   The motives of my jour-
ney I hardly know.    I omitted it last
year,  and am not willing to miss it
again.    Mrs.  Aston will be glad,   I
think,  to see me.    We are both old,
and if I put off my visit I may see
her no more  ;    perhaps she wishes
for another interview.    She is a very
good woman.

Hector is likewise an old friend,

Q

the only companion of my childhood
that passed through the school with
me.  We have always loved one
another.  Perhaps we may be made
better by some serious conversation,  of
which however I have no distinct hope.

At Lichfield,  my native place,  I
hope to show a good example by
frequent attendance on public wor-
ship. [Perhaps by way of penance for
his habit of playing truant from
church in his boyhood.  Life,  i.  67.]

At Ashbourne I hope to talk seri-
ously with Taylor.'  Pr.  and Med.
p.  201.

4 By October 17 one would have
expected the University to be full.
A young student of Queen's writing
on October 7,    1779,   says: — ' The
University is yet thin and desolate.
As the term does not begin till the
tenth,  few of the absentees will think
of returning till the last minute.'
Letters of Radcliffe and James,  p.
85.    See ante,  i.  361,  n.  i.

5 Edmund Burke's only son,   of
whom the fond father is reported to
have said  : — '  How extraordinary it
is that I,  and Lord Chatham,  and
Lord Holland,  should each have a son
so superior to ourselves.'    Miss Haw-
kins's Memoirs,  i.  304.     Lord Hol-
land's son was Charles James Fox.

6 Master of Pembroke College.

i seems

228

To Mrs.  Thrale.

[A.D.  1781.

seems fond of me.  But I have not been very well.  I hope
I am not ill by sympathy,  and that you are making haste to
recover your plumpness T and your complexion.  I left you
skinny and lean.

To-morrow,  if I can,   I shall go forward2,  and when I see
Lichfield I shall write again.

Mr.  Parker,  the bookseller 3,  sends his respects to you  :  I send
mine to the young ladies.  I ani)  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

742.

TO MRS.   THRALE4.

DEAR MADAM,  Lichfield,  Oct.  20, 1781.

I wrote from Oxford,  where I staid two days;  on
Thursday I went to Birmingham,  and was told by Hector that
I should not be well so soon as I expected  ;  but that well I
should be 5.  Mrs.  Careless 6 took me under her care,  and told
me when I had tea enough.  On Friday I came hither,  and have
escaped the post-chaises all the way.  Every body here is as
kind as I expected,  I think Lucy 7 is kinder than ever.  I am
very well.  Now we are both valetudinary,  we shall have some-
thing to write about.  We can tell each other our complaints,
and give reciprocal comfort and advice,  as — not to eat too
much — and — not to drink too little8,  and we may now and
then add a few strictures of reproof :  and so we may write and
write till we can find another subject.  Pray make my com-
pliments to all the ladies,  great and little.

I am,  &c.,

SAM  :  JOHNSON.

1 Boswell describes Mrs.  Thrale
as  'short,  plump,  and brisk.'    Life,
i.  494.

2 His   'power of departure de-
pended upon accidental vacancies in
passing coaches/  unless he would go
to the expense of a post-chaise.  Ante,
i.  325.

3 For a description of Johnson's
'  old friend,  Sack.  Parker,'  see Life,

iv.  308.  Mrs.  Thrale had probably
seen him when in September,  1774,
she  '  wandered about the University.'
Ib.  v.  459.

first

4 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  205.

5 Post,  p.  236.

6 Hector's sister,   Johnson's
love.    Ante,  i.  41,  n.  2.

7 His step-daughter,  Lucy Porter.

8 Ante,  i.  223,  368,  408.

To

Aetat.  72.]  To Mrs.  Tkrale.  229

743.

To MRS.  THRALEX.

DEAR MADAM,  Lichfieid,  Oct.  23, 1781.

I had both your letters,  and very little good news in either
of them.  The diminution of the estate,  though unpleasing and
unexpected,  must be borne,  because it cannot be helped  ;  but
I do not apprehend why the other part of your income should
fall short.  I understood that you were to have  ^1.5°°  yearly
from the money arising from the sale,  and that your claim was
first.

I sincerely applaud your resolution not to run out 2,  and wish
you always to save something,  for that which is saved may be
spent at will,  and the advantages are very many of saving 3
some money loose and unappropriated.  If your ammunition
is always ready,  you may shoot advantage as it starts,  or
pleasure as it flies.  Resolve therefore never to want money 4.

The Gravedo 5 is not removed,  nor does it increase.  My
nights have commonly been bad.  Mrs.  Aston is much as I
left her,  without any new symptoms  ;  but,  between time and
palsy,  wearing away.  Mrs.  Gastrel is brisk and lively.

Burney told me that she was to go,  but you will have my
dear Queeney;  tell her that I do not forget her,  and that  !
hope she remembers me.  Against our meeting we will both

1 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  206.  interpreted through one of his

2 Johnson in his Dictionary quotes physicians,  Dr.  Heberden,  and the
from Swift : —  term gravedo taken to mean a dis-

'And had her stock been less,  no order with  "cold in the head"  ac-

doubt,  companied by pains in the limbs.

She must have long ago run out.'  '  Heberden says  : — "  Necessarium

3 Johnson,     I conjecture,     wrote est os et fauces et nares atque oculos
having.  assidue madere  ;  quapropter humor

4  '  Resolve never to be poor.'  Life,  manat de quibusdam glandulis,  et
iv.  163.  membranis  ;  qui si modum naturalem

5 The following note I owe to the excedat,    dicitur destillatio gravedo
kindness of Dr.    Norman Moore.  vel catarrhus."    He had known such
•'  Gravedo is commonly used as a an habitual gravedo followed by
synonym for catarrh and for coryza.  palsy,  and by asthma.    Both symp-
Catarrh in its widest sense includes toms to some extent formed part of
general rheumatic pains.      I think Dr.    Johnson's illness.'     See post,
that Dr.  Johnson's meaning may be Letter of February 17,  1782.

make

230

To Mrs.   Thrale.

[A.D.  1781.

make good resolutions,  which on my side,  I hope to keep ;  but
such hopes are very deceitful.  I would not willingly think the
same of all hopes,  and particularly should be loath to suspect
of deceit,  my hope of being always,

Dearest Madam,

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

744.

TO MRS.    THRALE1.

DEAREST DEAR LADY,  [Lichfieid],  Oct.  27, 1781.

Your Oxford letter followed me hither,  with Lichfieid put
upon the direction in the place of Oxford,  and was received at
the same time as the letter written next after it.  All is there-
fore well.

Queeney is a naughty captious girl,  that will not write because
I did not remember to ask her.  Pray tell her that I ask her
now,  and that I depend upon her for the history of her own time.

Poor Lucy's illness has left her very deaf,  and,  I think,  very
inarticulate.  I can scarcely make her understand me,  and she
can hardly make me understand her.  So here are merry doings 2.
But she seems to like me better than she did.  She eats very
little,  but does not fall away.

Mrs.  Cobb and Peter Garrick are as you left them.  Garrick's
legatees at this place are very angry that they receive nothing 3.
Things are not quite right,  though we are so far from London 4.

1 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  208.

2 Ante,  ii.  116.

3 Garrick left large legacies to his
two brothers,  sister,  two nephews and
a niece,  '  to be paid,'  he said,  '  out of
the residue of my personal estate
which shall remain after paying the
legacies  [of  ^6,000]  to my wife,  and
securing the annuities as aforesaid.
[She was to have an annuity of
^1,500 if she lived in England,  and
of  ;£i,ooo if she resided in Scotland,
Ireland,   or beyond sea.]     If there
shall not be sufficient to pay all the
legacies,  the legacies shall abate in

proportion to their legacies,  and wait
until the death of my wife,  &c.'
Davies's Life of Garrick,  ii.  427.
She perhaps outlived them all,  for
she survived her husband 43 years.
See post,  Letter of April 30,  1782,
where Johnson writes  :  —  *  Poor
Garrick's funeral expenses are yet
unpaid,  though the undertaker is
broken.'
4  *  Resolved at length from vice

and London far

To breathe in distant fields a
purer air.'

JOHNSON'S London,  1.  5.
Mrs.  Aston

Aetat.72.]  To Mrs.  Thrale.  231

Mrs.  Aston is just as I left her.  She walks no worse;  but I
am afraid speaks less distinctly as to her utterance.  Her mind
is untouched.  She eats too little,  and wears away.  The ex-
tenuation J is her only bad symptom.  She was glad to see me.

That naughty girl Queeney,  now she is in my head again,  how
could she think that I did not wish to hear from her,  a dear
sweet. — But he must suffer who can love.

All here is gloomy;  a faint struggle with the tediousness of
time ;  a doleful confession of present misery,  and the approach
seen and felt of what is most dreaded and most shunned 2.  But
such is the lot of man.  i am3 dearest Madam,

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.
•

745.

TO MRS.    THRALE3.

DEAR MADAM,  Lichfieid,  Oct.  31, 1781.

It almost enrages me to be suspected of forgetting the
discovery of the papers relating to Cummins's claim4.  These
papers we must grant the liberty of using,  because the law will
not suffer us to deny them.  We may be summoned to declare
what we know,  and what we know is in those papers.  When
the evidence appears,  *  *  *  *  will be directed by her lawyers to
submit in quiet.  I suppose it will be proper to give at first only
a transcript.

Your income,  diminished as it is,  you may,  without any painful
frugality,  make sufficient.  I wish your health were as much in
your power,  and the effects of abstinence were as certain as those
of parsimony.  Of your regimen I do not think with much ap-
probation ;  it is only palliative,  and crops the disease,  but does
not eradicate it.  I wish you had at the beginning digested full
meals in a warm room,  and excited the humour to exhaust its
power upon the surface.  This,  I believe,  must be done at last.

1 Ante,  ii.  159,  n.  4.  the thoughts of it."  '    Life,  ii.  93.

2  '  BOSWELL.      "  Is not the fear 3 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  210.

of death natural to man  ? "  JOHN-  4 Mrs.  Cumins is mentioned ante,
SON.  "So much so,  Sir,  that the ii.  181,  and Mrs.  Cumyns further on
whole of life is but keeping away in the present letter.

Miss Seward

232 To Mrs.  Thrale.  [A.D.  1781.

Miss Seward has been enquiring after Susan Thrale,  of whom
she had heard so much from Mrs.  Cumyns,  as excites her cu-
riosity. If my little dear Perversity continues to be cross,  Susy T
may be my girl too ;  but I had rather have them both.  If
Queeney does not write soon she shall have a very reprehensory 2
letter.

I have here but a dull scene.  Poor Lucy's health is very much
broken.  She takes very little of either food or exercise,  and her
hearing is very dull,  and her utterance confused;  but she will
have W aits' s Improvement of the Mind3.  Her mental powers
are not impaired,  and her social virtues seem to increase.  She
never was so civil to me before.

Mrs.  Aston is not,  that I perceive,  worse than when I left her  ;
but she eats too little,  and is somewhat emaciated.  She likewise
is glad to see me,  and I am glad that I have come.

There is little of the sunshine of life,  and my own health does
not gladden me.  But to scatter the gloom — I went last night to
the ball 4,  where,  you know,  I can be happy even without you.
On the ball which was very gay,  I looked awhile,  and went
away.  I am,  dear Madam,

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

746.

To MRS.  THRALE 5.

DEAREST MADAM,  Lichfieid,  NOV.  3, 1781.

You very kindly remind me of the dear home which I have

1 See ante,    ii.    44,     where he 4 Miss Burney recorded the follow-
writes  : — '  I was always a Susy when ing year at Brighton  : — '  October 28,
nobody else was a Susy.'  1782.     Dr.  Johnson accompanied us

2 Reprehensory is not in Johnson's to a ball,  to the universal amazement
Dictionary.  of all who saw him there  ;  but he

3 No doubt she had been reading said he had found it so dull being
in Johnson's Life of Watts the quite alone the preceding evening,
passage where he says  :  —  '  Few that he determined upon going with
books have been perused by me us ;  "  for,"  said he,    "  it cannot be
with greater pleasure than his Im-.  worse than being alone."'      Mme.
provement of the Mind.1 Works,  D'Arblay's Diary,  ii.  161.

viii.  385.  s Piozzi Letters,  ii.  219.

left;

Aetat.  72.]  To Mrs.  Thrale.  233

left r ;  but I need none of your aids to recollection,  for I am here
gasping for breath,  and yet better than those whom I came to
visit.  Mrs.  Aston has been for three years a paralytic crawler  ;
but,  I think,  with her mind unimpaired.  She seems to me such
as I left her ;  but she now eats little,  and is therefore much ema-
ciated. Her sister thinks her,  and she thinks herself,  passing fast
away.

Lucy has had since my last visit a dreadful illness,  from which
her physicians declared themselves hopeless of recovering her,
and which has shaken the general fabrick,  and weakened the
powers of life.  She is unable or unwilling to move,  and is never
likely to have more of either strength or spirit 2.

I am so visibly disordered,  that a medical man,  who only saw
me at church,  sent me some pills.  To those whom I love here
I can give no help,  and from those that love me none can I re-
ceive. Do you think that I need to be reminded of home and you  ?

The time of the year is not very favourable to excursions.  I
thought myself above assistance or obstruction from the seasons 3 ;
but find the autumnal blast sharp and nipping,  and the fading
world an uncomfortable prospect.  Yet I may say with Milton,
that I do not abate much of heart or hope 4.  To what I have
done I do not despair of adding something,  but what it shall be
I know not.  i amj Madam,

Most affectionately yours,

SAM  :  JOHNSON.

747.

TO MRS.    THRALE5.

DEAR MADAM,  Ashboume,  NOV.  10, 1781.

Yesterday I came to Ashbourne,  and last night I had very

1  *  Come home,'  she had written,  seasons see Life,  i.  332,  and for his
'for  'tis dull living without you.'  discovery that he had himself become
Piozzi Letters,  ii.  216.     For his use dependent upon the weather,  ib.  iv.
of the term home see ante,  i.  129.  353,  360.

2 She lived till January,    1786.  'nor bate a jot
Miss Seward's Letters,  i.  109.  Of heart or hope.'

3 For Johnson's belief that a man MILTON.     Sonnet,  No.  xxii.
could make himself superior to the 5 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  221.

little

234

To Mrs.  Thrale.

[A.D.  1781.

little rest.  Dr.  Taylor lives on milk,  and grows every day better,
and is not wholly without hope.  Every body enquires after you
and Queeney ;  but whatever Burney may think of the celerity of
fame,  the name of Evelina had never been heard at Lichfield till
I brought it.  I am afraid my dear townsmen will be mentioned
in future days as the last part of this nation that was civilised x.
But the days of darkness are soon to be at an end ;  the reading
society ordered it to be procured this week.

Since I came into this quarter of the earth I have had a very
sorry time,  and I hope to be better when I come back.  The
little paddock and plantations here are very bleak.  The Bishop
of Chester is here now with his father-in-law2;  he sent us a
message last night,  and I intend to visit him.

Most of your Ashbourne friends are well.  Mr.  Kennedy's
daughter has married a shoemaker,  and he lives with them,  and
has left his parsonage.  I ani)  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

748.

TO MRS.    THRALE3.

DEAR MADAM,  Ashbourne,  NOV.  12, 1781.

I have a mind to look on Queeney as my own dear girl ;
and if I set her a bad example,  I ought to counteract it by good
precepts ;  and he that knows the consequences of any fault is
best qualified to tell them.  I have through my whole progress
of authorship honestly endeavoured to teach the right,  though I
have not been sufficiently diligent to practise it,  and have offered

1 Evelina had been published
nearly four years.       Nevertheless
Johnson had boasted to Boswell that
the inhabitants of Lichfield were
'  the genteelest in proportion to their
wealth,  and spoke the purest English.'
Life,  ii.  463.     In their ignorance of
Evelina they were not behind some
of the great people in London.     See
Mme.  D'Arblay's Diary,  ii.  121.

2 Beilby Porteus,afterwards Bishop
of London.     Life,  iii.  279.     He had

married the daughter of  '  Brian
Hodgson,  Esq.,  of Ashbourne.'
Porteus's Works,  ed.  1811,  i.  17.  In
a curious correspondence in Notes
and Queries  (7th S.  v.  241,  294,  330,
494)  it is shown that Brian Hodg-
son, before he retired to Ashbourne,
had kept the George Inn at Stam-
ford. By mistake in this corre-
spondence Ashbourne is stated to be
in Kent.
3 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  222.

mankind

Aetat.  72.]

To Mrs.  Thrale.

235

mankind my opinion as a rule,  but never professed my behaviour
as an example x.

I shall be very sorry to lose Mr.  ;  but why should

he so certainly die  ?  *  *  *  *  needed not have died if he had

tried to live.  If Mr. will drink a great deal of water,  the

acrimony that corrodes his bowels will be diluted,  if the cause
be only acrimony;  but I suspect dysenteries to be produced by
animalcula,  which I know not how to kill.

If the medical man did me good,  it was by his benevolence  ;
by his pills I never mended 2.  I am,  however,  rather better than
I was.

Dear Mrs. 3,  she has the courage becoming an admiral's

lady,  but courage is no virtue in her cause.

I have been at Lichfield persecuted with solicitations to read
a poem  ;  but I sent the authour word,  that I would never review
the work of an anonymous authour ;  for why should I put my
name in the power of one who will not trust me with his own.
With this answer Lucy was satisfied,  and I think it may satisfy
all whom it may concern 4.

1 Lady Macleod     (speaking of
Cheyne's book on the gout)    *  ob-
jected that the author does not
practise what he teaches.   JOHNSON.
"  I cannot help that,  madam.     That
does not make his book the worse.
People are influenced more by what
a man says,  if his practice is suitable
to it, — because they are blockheads.
The more intellectual people are,  the
readier will they attend to what a
man tells them.     If it is just,  they
will follow it,  be his practice what it
will.     No man practises so well as he
writes.     I have,  all my life long,  been
lying till noon,  yet I tell all young
men,    and tell them with great
sincerity,  that nobody who does not
rise early will ever do any good."  *
Life,  v.  210.

2 Ante,  ii.  233.

3 Mrs.  Byron.     Ante,  ii.  121,  n.  2.
Lord Byron in his Epistle to Augusta

compares himself to his grandfather,
the admiral : — '  He had no rest at
sea,  nor I on shore.'  In a note it is
stated that  '  Admiral Byron was re-
markable for never making a voyage
without a tempest.  He was known
to the sailors by the facetious name
of  "  Foul-weather Jack."  '  Byron's
Works,  ed.  1854,  iv.  202.

4 Miss Seward says  : — '  I cannot
imagine what anonymous poem it
could be.'  Letters,  ii.  44.  I think it
not unlikely that it was Erasmus
Darwin's Loves of the Plants,  which
was published anonymously in 1789.
Darwin states in the Advertisement
that  '  he has withheld it many years
from the press,  hoping to have
rendered it more worthy the accept-
ance of the public.'  He had lived at
Lichfield till some time in this year.
C.  Darwin's Life of Erasmus Darwin,
p.  27.  Edge worth says that parts of

If

236

To Mrs.  Tkrale.

[A.D.

If C -y1 did nothing for life but add weight to its burden,

and darkness to its gloom,  he is kindest to those from whom he
is furthest.  I hope,  when I come,  not to advance perhaps your
pleasures,  though even of that I shall be unwilling to despair ;
but at least not to increase your inconveniencies,  which would
be a very unsuitable return for all the kindness that you have
shewn to,  Madam,  '

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

749.

TO MRS.    THRALE2.

DEAREST MADAM,  Ashbourne,  Nov.  14, 1781.

Here is Doctor Taylor,  by a resolute adherence to bread
and milk,  with a better appearance of health than he has had for
a long time past3;  and here am I,  living very temperately,  but
with very little amendment.  But the balance is not perhaps
very unequal :  he has no pleasure like that which I receive from
the kind importunity with which you invite me to return.  There
is no danger of very long delay.  There is nothing in this part of
the world that can counteract your attraction.

The hurt in my leg has grown well slowly,  according to
Hector's prognostick 4,  and seems now to be almost healed  :  but
my nights are very restless,  and the days are therefore heavy,
and I have not your conversation to cheer them.

I am willing however to hear that there is happiness in the

the poem were shown from time
to time to his intimate acquaint-
ance. Memoirs of Rdgevuorth,  p.
398.  Perhaps it was Darwin who
sent Johnson the pills.  Ante,  ii.

233-

Johnson does not use to review in
the modern sense.  He defines it
as  '  to survey ;  to overlook ;  to
examine.'  Neither does he give a
definition of the substantive review,
in its sense of  'a periodical with
critical examinations of books.'

1 Crutchley.  Ante, 11.219,71.1.  Miss
Burney,  writing in September of this

year,  describes him as a man of  '  a
cold and splenetic turn/  and says
that  '  he has now left Streatham
without much intention to frequently
revisit it.'  Mme.  D'Arblay's Diary,
ii.  105.  Mrs.  Thrale,  writing on the
same day as Johnson,  says that
Crutchley had left them on Monday
(the 6th).  Ib.  p.  109.

2 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  224.

3 Dr.  Taylor lived on a milk diet,
which gave him a very disagree-
able complexion.'     Miss Hawkins's
Memoirs,  i.  164.

4 Ante,  ii.  228.

world,

Aetat.  72.]

To Mrs.  Thrale.

237

world,  and delight to think on the pleasure diffused among the
Burneys.  I question if any ship upon the ocean goes out attended
with more good wishes than that which carries the fate of Burney1.
I love all of that breed whom I can be said to know,  and one or
two whom I hardly know I love upon credit,  and love them be-
cause they love each other.  Of this consanguineous unanimity
I have had never much experience2;  but it appears to me one
of the great lenitives of life ;  but it has this deficience,  that it is
never found when distress is mutual — He that has less than
enough for himself has nothing to spare,  and as every man feels
only his own necessities,  he is apt to think those of others less

1 Mrs.  Thrale had written to John-
son in a letter she dates November
2  : — '  Captain Burney has got a fifty-
gun ship,  and we are all so rejoiced.'
Piozzi Letters,  ii.  218.  Miss Burney
had written to her on November 4,
in a letter assigned in her Diary to
1780,  but evidently written in 1781  : —
'We had just done tea on Friday,
and were sitting down to cards,  when
we were surprised by an express
from London,  and it brought a
"Whereas we think fit,"  from the
Admiralty,  to appoint Captain
Burney to the command of the
Latona,  during the absence of the
Hon.  Captain Conway.  This is one
of the best frigates in the navy,  of
thirty-eight guns.  Jem was almost
frantic with ecstacy of joy;  he sang,
laughed,  drank to his own success,
and danced about the room with
Miss Kitty till he put her quite out of
breath.  His hope is to get out im-
mediately, and have a brush with
some of the Dons,  Monsieurs,  or
Mynheers.  [We were at war with
Spain,  France,  Holland,  and the
United States]/  Mme.  D'Arblay's
Diary,  i.  43 1.  Mrs.  Thrale in a letter
dated November 12 in the Diary  (ii.
109)  quotes,  or rather misquotes,
Johnson's letter of November 14.
Part of what he had written appears

as her own reflection.  What with
the original inaccuracy of Miss
Burney and Mrs.  Thrale,  and the
superadded inaccuracy of Mme.
D'Arblay's editor and of Mrs.  Piozzi
as her own editor,  it is not easy
through their pages to track the
truth.

For Johnson's love of the Burneys
see ante,  ii.  145,  n.  I.  In the begin-
ning of 1783,  talking to Miss Burney
of the Captain,  he said: — '  I should be
glad to see him if he were not your
brother  ;  but were he a dog,  a cat,  a
rat,  a frog,  and belonged to you,  I
must needs be glad to see him.'
Mme.  D'Arblay's Diary,  ii.  233.

2  '  I who have no sisters nor
brothers look with some degree of
innocent envy on those who may be
said to be born to friends.'  Life,
i.  324.  See also post,  Letter of May
I,  1783.  Nevertheless he had not
got on well with his only brother,
who complained that '  he had scarcely
used him with common civility.'  Life,
i.  90,  n.  3.  Carlyle on February 3,
1835,  wrote to Emerson,  who had
lately lost a brother  : — '  Had one no
brother one could hardly understand
what it was to have a Friend  ;  they
are the Friends whom Nature chose
for us.'  Carres,  of Carlyle and
Emerson,  i.  37.

pressing,

238 To Mrs.  Thrale.  [A.D.  ITSI.

pressing,  and to accuse them of with-holding what in truth they
cannot give.  He that has his foot firm upon dry ground may
pluck another out of the water ;  but of those that are all afloat,
none has any care but for himself1.

We do not hear that the deanery is yet given away,  and,  though
nothing is said,  I believe much is still thought about it 2.  Hope

travels through 3

I am,  dearest of all dear ladies,

Your,  &c.}

SAM:  JOHNSON.

750.

TO MRS.   THRALE4.

DEAR MADAM,  Ashbourne,  NOV.  24, 1781.

I shall leave this place about the beginning of next week,
and shall leave every place as fast as I decently can,  till I get
back to you,  whose kindness is one of my great comforts.  I am
not well,  but have a mind every now and then to think myself
better,  and I now hope to be better under your care.

It was time to send Kam to another master ;  but I am glad
that before he went he beat Hector,  for he has really the appear-
ance of a superior species to an animal whose whole power is
in his legs,  and that against the most defenceless of all the in-
habitants of the earth.

Dr.  Taylor really grows well,  and directs his compliments to
be sent.  I hope Mr.  Perkins will be well too 5.

But why do you tell me nothing of your own health  ?  Perhaps
since the fatal pinch of snuff I may have no care about it,  I am
glad that you have returned to your meat,  for I never expected
that abstinence would do you good.

Piozzi,  I find,  is coming in spite of Miss Harriet's prediction,
or second sight,  and when he comes and I come,  you will have
two about you that love you ;  and I question if either of us

1 Ante,  i.  141.  3  '  Hope travels through,  nor quits

2 See ante,   ii.  108,  for Taylor's us when we die.'
longings for another Deanery.     The POPE.     Essay on Man,  ii.  273.
Deanery of Lincoln was filled up on 4 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  226.
December 22.  Ann.  Reg.,  1781,  i.  209.  5 See Life,  iv.  153.

heartily

Aetat.  72.]  To Edmund Allen.  239

heartily care how few more you have z.  But how many soever
they may be,  I hope you keep your kindness for me,  and I have
a great mind to have Queeney's kindness too.

Frank's wife 2 has brought him a wench ;  but I cannot yet get
intelligence of her colour,  and therefore have never told him how
much depends upon it.

The weather here is chill,  and the air damp.  I have been only
once at the waterfall,  which I found doing as it used to do,  and
came away.  I had*  not you nor Queeney with me.

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

751.

To EDMUND ALLEN 3,

Bolt Court.
DEAR SIR,  Ashbourne,  Nov.  26,  1781.

I am weary enough of the country to think of Bolt Court,
and purpose to leave Ashbourne,  where I now am,  in a day or
two,  and to make my way through Lichfield,  Birmingham,  and
Oxford,  with what expedition I decently can,  and then we will
have a row4 and a dinner,  and now and then a dish of tea
together.

1 Mrs.  Thrale had written  : — '  In-  3 First published in Croker's Bos-
stead of trying the Sortes Virgiliance well,  page 699.  '  Communicated to
{ante,  ii.  169,  n.  a]  for our absent me by Mr.  P.  Cunningham,'  writes Mr.
friends,  we agreed after dinner to-day Croker, '  who found also in a pocket-
to ask little Harriet what they were book of Allen's,  memoranda of John-
doing now who used to be our common son's departure and return.  "  October
guests at Streatham.  "Dr.  Johnson"  15,  1781,  Dr.  Johnson set out about
(says she)  "  is very rich and wise,  Sir 9 A.M.  to Oxford,  Lichfield,  and Ash-
Philip is drown'd in the water — and bourne'''  "December n,  1781,  Dr.
Mr.  Piozzi is very sick and lame,  Johnson returned from Derbyshire." '
poor man !  "  What a curious way of Edmund Allen was Johnson's land-
deciding  !  all in her little soft voice.'  lord and next neighbour in Bolt
Piozzi Letters,  ii.  217.  Baretti has Court.  Life,  iii.  141.
the following note on the passage in 4 I do not understand what this
Johnson's letter: — '  Impudent b !  means.  Johnson defines the sub-
How could she venture upon forging stantive row as  '  a rank or file  ;  a
this paragraph !  Johnson to put number of things ranged in a line.'
himself abreast with such an ignorant He does not recognise the sense of
dog as Piozzi ! '  'an excursion in a rowing-boat.'

3 The wife of his black servant,  Neither was it likely that in his

Francis Barber.     Life,  i.  237.  weak health he would go on the

I doubt

240

To Mrs.  Thrale.

[A.D.  1781.

I doubt not but you have been so kind as to send the oysters
to Lichfield,  and I now beg that you will let Mrs.  Desmoulins
have a guinea on my account.

My health has been but indifferent,  much of the time I have
been out,  and my journey has not supplied much entertainment.
I shall be at Lichfield,  I suppose,  long enough to receive a
letter,  and I desire Mrs.  Desmoulins to write immediately what
she knows.     I wish to be told about Frank's wife and child.
I am,  dear Sir,

Your most humble servant,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

752.

TO MRS.   THRALE1.

DEAR MADAM,  Lichfield,  Dec.  3, 1781.

I am now come back to Lichfield.  where I do not intend to
stay long enough to receive another letter.  I have little to do
here but to take leave of Mrs.  Aston.  I hope not the last leave.
But Christians may  [say]  with more confidence than Sophonisba

Avremo tosto lungo lungo spazio

Per stare assieme,  et sara forse eterno 2.

My time past heavily at Ashbourne,  yet I could not easily get
away,  though Taylor,  I sincerely think,  was glad to see me go.
I have now learned the inconveniences of a winter campaign ;
but I hope home will make amends for all my foolish sufferings,

I do not like poor  '  Burney's vicarious captainship V Surely
the tale of Tantalus was made for him.  Surely he will be in
time a captain like another captain,  of a ship like another ship.

You have got Piozzi again,  notwithstanding pretty Harriet's
dire denunciations4.  The Italian translation which he has brought,

river so late in the year.     I suspect
an error in the copyist.
1 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  228.
* '  Ma tu pur cerca mantenerti in

vita ;

Che tosto aremo un lungo lungo
spazio

Di star insieme,   e sara forse
eterno.'

SOFINISBA,    Tragedia di G.
G.     Trissino,     ed.     1785,

p.  93-

3 Ante,  ii.  237,  n.  I.

4 Ante,  ii.  239,  n.  i.

you

Aetat.  72.]  To John Nichols.

you will find no great accession to your library for the writer
seems to understand very little English.  When we meet we can
compare some passages.  Pray contrive a multitude of good
things for us to do when we meet.  Something that may hold
all together  •;  though if any thing makes me love you more,  it is

going from you.

I am,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

753.

TO MRS,    THRALE1.

DEAR MADAM,  Birmingham,  Dec.  8,  1781.

I am come to this place on my way to London and to
Streatham.  I hope to be in London on Tuesday or Wednesday,
and at Streatham on Thursday,  by your kind conveyance.  I
shall have nothing to relate either wonderful or delightful.  But
remember that you sent me away,  and turned me out into the
world,  and you must take the chance of finding me better or
worse.  This you may know at present,  that my affection for you
is not diminished,  and my expectation from you is encreased.
Do not neglect me,  nor relinquish me z.  Nobody will ever love
you better or honour you more than,

Madam,

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

754.

To JOHN NICHOLS 3.

Mr.  Johnson being much out of order sent in search of the
book,  but it is not found.  He will,  if he is better,  look him-
self diligently to-morrow He thanks Mr.  Nichols for all his
favours.

Dr.  [December]  26,  [1781].
To Mr.  Nicols.

1 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  230.  affection for him may lessen.

2 Johnson's letters henceforth often 3 First published in the Gentle-
contain expressions of fear that her man's Magazine for 1785,  page II.

VOL.  II.  R To

242

To Mrs.  Thrale.

[A.D.  1782.

755.

To MAURITIUS LOWE.

jan

In one of Messrs.  Sotheby's Auction Catalogues,  the reference to
which I have mislaid,  Lot 156 is a Letter of Johnson to Mr.  Lowe
dated Jan.  i,  1782.

756.

To JAMES BOSWELL.
[London],  January 5,  1782.     Published in the Life,  iv.  136.

757.

To Dr.  LAWRENCE.
[London],  January 17,  1782.     Published in the Life,  iv.  137.

758.

TO MRS.    THRALE1.

DEAREST LADY,  January 28,  1782.

I was blooded on Saturday  ;  I think,  not copiously enough,
but the Doctor would permit no more.  I have however his
consent to bleed again to-day.  Since I left you I have eaten
very little,  on Friday chiefly broath,  on Saturday nothing but
some bread in the morning,  on Sunday nothing but some bread
and three roasted apples.  I try to get well and wish to see you  ;
but if I came,  I should only cough and cough.  Mr.  Steevens 2,

1 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  250.

Mrs.  Piozzi dates this letter June
28,  1781,  but inserts it among those
of June 1 782.  It is clear that Jtme is
a mistake for January,  and 1781 for
1782.  Johnson mentions the consent
of his Doctor  *  to bleed again '  on the
day on which he wrote.  He adds
also  : — '  We are all three sick,  and
poor Levet is gone.'  He wrote to
Mrs.  Strahan on February 4, 1782  : —
'  Of the four inmates  [of my house]
one has been suddenly snatched
away;  two are oppressed by very
afflictive and dangerous illness  ;  and
I tried yesterday to gain some relief
by a third bleeding from a disorder

which has for some time distressed
me.'  Life,  iv.  140.  On July 8 he
wrote to Dr.  Taylor  : — '  I came back
from Oxford in ten days,  and was
almost restored to health.  .  .  .  My
cough is gone.'  He went to Oxford
in June.  Post,  Letter of June 8.  On
June 28,  therefore,  he was in tolerable
health.  His sick companions were
Mrs.  Williams and Mrs.  Desmoulins.
9 Mr.  Steevens was George
Steevens who helped him in a new
edition of his Shakespeare.  Life,  ii.
115.  'He passed,'  says Boswell,
'  many a social hour with Dr.  John-
son during their long acquaintance.'
Ib.  iv.  324.

who

Aetat.  72.]  To Recorder Beatniffe.  243

who is with me,  says that my hearing is returned.     We are here
all three sick,  and poor Levet is gone.

Do not add to my other distresses any diminution of kindness

for'  Madam,

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

759.

To MRS.  STRAHAN.
[London],  February 4,  1782.     Published in the Life,  iv.  140.

760.

To RECORDER BEATNIFFE T.

SIR,  Bolt Court,  Fleet Street,  February 14,  1782,

Robert Levett,  with whom I have been connected by a
friendship of many years,  died lately at my house.  His death
was sudden,  and no will has yet been found ;  I therefore gave
notice of his death in the papers,  that an heir,  if he has any,  may
appear.  He has left very little ;  but of that little his brother
is doubtless heir,  and your friend may be perhaps his brother.
I have had another application from one who calls himself his
brother ;  and I suppose it is fit that the claimant should give
some proofs of his relation.  I would gladly know,  from the
gentleman that thinks himself R.  Levett's brother,

In what year,  and in what parish,  R.  Levett was born  ?

Where or how was he educated  ?

1 First published in Croker's Bos-  very low condition.'     Ib.  p.  143.

well)  page 701.  Hawkins says that Johnson learnt,

Levett had died suddenly on in reply to his enquiries,  that Levett

January 1 7 of this year.     '  He was an was born at Kirk Ella about five

old and faithful friend,'     Johnson miles from Hull.     He had acquired

recorded in his Diary.     '  I have some knowledge of Latin and had a

known him from about  '46.'    Life,  propensity to learning.      He had

iv.  137.     He wrote to Lucy Porter on tried more than one calling,  and had

March 19  : — *  I have by advertising dabbled in physic.     He had been in

found poor Mr.  Levett's brothers in France and Italy,  and had attended

Yorkshire,  who will take the little he the hospitals in Paris.     Hawkins's

has left ;  it is but little,  yet it will be Johnson,  p.  396.     See Lifey i.  243,

welcome,  for I believe they are of n.  3,  for another account.

R 2 What

244

70 Mrs.  Tkrale.

[A.D.  1782.

What was his early course of life  ?

What were the marks of his person  ;  his stature  ;  the colour of
his eyes1?

Was he marked by the small-pox  ?

Had he any impediment in his speech  ?

What relations had he,  and how many are now living  ?

His answer to these questions will show whether he
knew him ;  and he may then proceed to show that he is his
brother.

He may be sure,  that nothing shall be hastily wasted or re-
moved. I have not looked into his boxes,  but transferred that
business to a gentleman in the neighbourhood,  of character above
suspicion.

SAM:  JOHNSON.

To Mr.  Beatniffe,  Recorder of Hull.

761.

TO MRS.    THRALE2.

DEAREST LADY,  [Bolt Court],  Feb.  16, 1782.

I am better,  but not yet well ;  but hope springs eternal 3.

As soon as I can think myself not troublesome,  you may be

sure of seeing me,  for such a place to visit nobody ever had.
Dearest Madam,  do not think me worse than I am  ;  be sure at
least,  that whatever happens to me,  I am with all the regard
that admiration of excellence and gratitude for kindness can

excite,  ,,    ,

Madam,

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

1  '  His person was middle-sized
and thin  ;  his visage swarthy,  adust,
and corrugated.  When in dishabille
he might have been mistaken for an
alchemist,  whose complexion had
been hurt by the fumes of the crucible,
and whose clothes had suffered from
the sparks of the furnace.'  Gentle-
man's Magazine,  1 785,  p.  102.  Haw-

kins adds  *  a dictum of Johnson re-
specting him — that his external ap-
pearance and behaviour were such
that he disgusted the rich and terrified
the poor.'  Hawkins's/0/te0;tf,  p.  400.

2 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  231.

3  *  Hope springs eternal in the

human breast.'

Essay on Man,  \.  95.

To

Aetat.  72.]  To Mrs.   Thrale.  245

762.

TO MRS.    THRALE1.

DEAR MADAM,  Feb.  17, 1782.

Sure such letters would make any man well2.  I will let
them have their full operation upon me ;  but while I write I am
not without a cough.  I can however keep it quiet by diacodium,
and am in hope that with all other disturbances it will go away,
and permit me to enjoy the happiness of being,

Madam,  your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

763.

TO MRS.    THRALE3.

DEAREST MADAM,  Bolt-court,  Feb.  21, 1782.

I certainly grow better.  I lay this morning with such
success,  that I called before I rose for dry linen.  I believe I
have had a crisis.

Last night called Sir Richard Jebb 4 ;  and many people call or
send  :  I am not neglected nor forgotten.  But let me be always
sure of your kindness.  I hope to try again this week whether
your house is yet so cold,  for to be away from you,  if I did not
think our separation likely to be short,  how could I endure  ?

1 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  235.  complains of a general gravedo"

2 Mrs.  Piozzi inserts a letter of hers cries the Doctor  ;  "  but he speaks
to him dated February 16 in which too good Latin for us."     "  Do you
she says  : — '  I told Dr.  Lawrence that take care,  at least,  that it does not
the Gravedo  \ante,  ii.  229,  n.  5]   of increase long,"  quoth I.     (The word
which you complain should be kept gravedo makes gravedinis,  and is
from increasing long in this case,  and therefore said to increase long in the
as he is as good a grammarian as he genitive case.)    I thought this a good,
is a physician I hope he will take the stupid,  scholarlike pun,  and Johnson
hint.'     Piozzi Letters,  ii.  233.     She seemed to like that Lawrence was
wrote to Miss Burney this same pleased.'     Mme.   D'Arblay's Diary,
month that she had found Dr.  ii.  123.    Johnson,  it is clear,  heard
Lawrence with Dr.  Johnson  : — '  I put the pun  ;    it seems likely therefore
my nose into the old man's wig  [Dr.  that her letter to him was a fabrica-
Lawrence's],  and shouted;  but got tion,  for she would not have told him
none except melancholy answers — so what he had so lately heard from her.
melancholy that I was forced to 3 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  235.

crack jokes for fear of crying.     "  He 4 The physician.    Ante,  ii.  148.

You

246 To Mrs.   Thrale.  [A.D.i?82.

You are a dear dear lady,  and your kind attention is a great part

of what life affords to,  ,  ,    ,

Madam,

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

764.

To EDMOND MALONE.
[London],  February 27,  1782.     Published in the Life,  iv.  141.

765.

To MRS.  PORTER.
London,  March 2,  1782.     Published in the Life,  iv.  142.

766.

To EDMOND MALONE.

[London],  March 7,  1782.     Published in the Life,  iv.  141.
In Messrs.  Sotheby and Co.'s Auction Catalogue of May 10,  1875,
the date is given as March 2.     The Letter  (Lot 98)  was sold for  ££>  6*.

767.

TO MRS.    THRALE1.

DEAREST OF ALL DEAR LADIES,  March 14, 1782.

That Povilleri should write these verses is impossible.     I
am angry at Sastres 2.

Seven ounces !  Why I sent a letter to Dr.  Lawrence,  who is
ten times more timer some than is your Jebb,  and he came and
stood by while one vein was opened with too small an orifice,
and bled eight ounces and stopped.  Then another vein was
opened,  which ran eight more.  And here am I sixteen ounces
lighter,  for I have had no dinner 3.

1 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  236.  blooded three times  ;  having tried to

2 An Italian master.     See post,  ease the oppression of my breast by
Letter of August 21,  1784.  frequent opiates,    which kept me

3 Johnson recorded in his Diary waking in the night and drowsy the
on March 18  : — '  Having been from next day,  and subjected me to the
the middle of January distressed by tyranny of vain imaginations  ;  having
a cold which made my respiration to all this added frequent catharticks,
very laborious,  and from which I sometimes with mercury,  I at last
was but little relieved by being persuaded Dr.  Lawrence on Thurs-

I think

Aetat.  72.]          To the Reverend Dr.   Taylor.  247

I think the loss of blood has done no harm  ;  whether it has
done good,  time will tell.     I am glad that I do not sink without

resistance z.  T  ,        , ,    ,

I am,  dear Madam,

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

768.

To MRS.  PORTER.
Bolt Court,  March 19,  1782.     Published in the Life,  iv.  142.

769.

To MRS.  ASTON.

London,  March 19,  1782.

On March 19,  Johnson recorded in his Diary: — 'I wrote to Aston/
Prayers and Meditations,  page 206.

770.

To CAPTAIN LANGTON.
Bolt Court,  March 20,  1782.     Published in the Life,  iv.  145.

771.

To EDMUND HECTOR.
London,  March 21,  1782.     Published in the Life,  iv.  146.

772.

To EDMUND HECTOR.
Undated.     Published in the Life,  iv.  147.

773.

To THE REVEREND DR.  TAYLOR.

London,  March 22,  1782.

On March 22 of this year,  Johnson recorded in his Diary : — *  I wrote
to Taylor about the pot.'     Prayers and Meditations,  page 208.
For the silver coffee-pot see post,  p.  262.

day,  March 14,  to let me bleed more word in the Streatham set.    Johnson

copiously.  Sixteen ounces were taken on his death-bed reproached Heber-

away,  and from that time my breath den with being  '  timidorum timidis-

has been free,  and my breast easy.'  simus.'    Life,  iv.  399,  n.  6.

Pr.  and Med.,  p.  203.  *  See ante,  i.  378,  n.  3.
Timorsonie was perhaps a catch-

TO

248 To Mrs.  Gastrell and Mrs.   Aston.    [A.D.1782.

774.

To WILLIAM GERARD HAMILTON.

March 22,  1782.

On March 22,  1782,  Johnson recorded in his Diary. — 'I wrote to
Hamilton about the Fczdera?     Prayers and Meditations,  page 208.
The Fcedera was,  no doubt,  Rymer's work.

775.

To JAMES BOSWELL.
London,  March 28,  1782.     Published in the Life,  iv.  148.

776.

To MRS.  GASTRELL AND MRS.  ASTON x.

DEAREST LADIES,

The tenderness expressed in your kind letter makes me
think it necessary to tell you that they who are pleased to wish
me well,  need not be any longer particularly solicitous about
me.  I prevailed on my Physician to bleed me very copiously,
almost against his inclination.  However he kept his finger on
the pulse of the other hand,  and,  finding that I bore it well,  let
the vein run on.  From that time I have mended,  and hope I
am now well.  I went yesterday to Church without inconvenience 2,
and hope to go tomorrow.

Here are great changes in the great world,  but I cannot tell
you more than you will find in the papers.    The Men are got in,

1 First published in Croker's Bos-  that I prayed for her.   Perhaps Tetty
well,  page 706.     Corrected by me is now praying for me.    God help
from the original in Pembroke Col-  me.  .  .  .  We were married almost
lege Library.  seventeen years,  and have now been

2 In Johnson's Diary there are parted thirty.  ...    29,  Good Friday,
the following entries at this date :—  After a night of great disturbance
'  March 28,  Thursday.    The weather and solicitude,  such as I do not re-
which now begins to be warm gives member,  I rose,  drank tea,  but with-
me great help.     I have hardly been out eating,  and went to church.     I
at church this year  ;    certainly not was very composed. ...  A kind letter
since the 1 5th of January.  My cough from Gastrel  [Mrs.  Gastrell].'  During
and difficulty of breathing would not the whole of the day he ate nothing
permit it.     This is the day on which but some buns at tea.    The next day
in 1752 dear Tetty died.      I have he records  :— '  I was faint ;  dined on
now uttered a prayer of repentance herrings and potatoes.'     Pr.    and
and contrition  ;  perhaps Tetty knows Med.,  p.  209.

whom

Aetat.  72.]  To Miss Reynolds.  249

whom I have endeavoured to keep out,  but I hope they will do
better than their predecessors ;  it will not be easy to do worse1.

Spring seems now to approach,  and I feel its benefit,  which I
hope will extend to dear Mrs.  Aston.

When Dr.  Falconer 2 saw me,  I was at home only by accident,
for I lived much with Mrs.  Thrale and had all the care from her
that she could take,  or that could be taken.  But I have never
been ill enough to want attendance,  my disorder has been rather
tedious than violent,  rather irksome than painful.  He needed
not have made such a tragical representation.

I am now well enough to flatter myself with some hope of
pleasure from the Summer.  How happy would it be if we could
see one another,  and be all tolerably well.  Let us pray for one

another.  T

I am,  dearest Ladies,

Your most obliged,  and

most humble Servant,

March 30,  1782-  SAM:  JOHNSON.

London,  Bolt Court,  Fleet Street.

777.

TO MlSS REYNOLDS3.

DEAREST MADAM,  April 8, 1782.

Your work4 is full of very penetrating meditation,  and very
forcible sentiments.  I read it with a full perception of the sub-
lime, with wonder and terror ;  but I cannot think of any profit
from it ;  it seems not born to be popular.

Your system of the mental fabric is exceedingly obscure,  and,
without more attention than will be willingly bestowed,  is unin-
telligible. The plans of Burnaby 5 will be more safely6 understood,

1 On March 20 Johnson recorded :      Falconer of Bath.    Seward's Letters,
— 'The Ministry is dissolved.      I v.  222.

prayed with Francis and gave 3 First published in Croker's Bos-

thanks.'    Pr.  and Med.,  p.  207.     On well,  page 706.

the afternoon of that day Lord North 4 For other works which Miss

announced in the House of Commons Reynolds had submitted to Johnson,

'  that his Majesty's Ministers were no see ante,  pp.  180,  223.

more.'  Parl.  Hist.  xxii.  1215.     The 5 Burnaby,    I conjecture,   was a

Rockingham Ministry took their place.  character in the book.

2 Miss Seward mentions a Dr.  6 Perhaps Johnson wrote easily.

and

250

To Mrs.   Thrale.

[A.D.  1782.

and are often charming.     I was delighted with the different
bounty of different ages.

I would make it produce something if I could,  but I have
indeed no hope.  If a bookseller would buy it at all,  as it must
be published without a name,  he would give nothing for it worth

your acceptance.

I am,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

778.

,,  TO MRS.    THRALE1.       A      -,  r o i

MADAM,  April  [24 or 25, 1782].

I have been very much out of order since you sent me away ;
but why should I tell you,  who do not care,  nor desire to know?
I dined with Mr.  Paradise on Monday,  with the Bishop of St.
Asaph yesterday,  with the Bishop of Chester2 I dine to-day,
and with the Academy on Saturday 3,  with Mr.  Hoole on Monday,
and with Mrs.  Garrick on Thursday the 2d of May 4,  and then —
what care you  ?  what then  ?

1 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  237.

Mrs.  Piozzi gives no other date to
this letter than April.  The Academy
dinner was on Saturday,  April 27.
Johnson did not write on Friday,  or
he would have said : — '  I dine with
the Academy to-morrow.'  Neither
did he write on Tuesday,  as he was
going,  he said,  on the day he wrote
to dine out for the third time that
week;  the first time was Monday.
He wrote therefore either on Wednes-
day the 24th or Thursday the 25th.

2 The Bishop of St.  Asaph was
Dr.    Shipley,    and the Bishop of
Chester Dr.  Porteus.    Hannah More
was at the Bishop of Chester's din-
ner.   '  Johnson was there,'  she writes,
'and the Bishop was very desirous
to draw him out,  as he wished to
show him off to some of the company
who had never seen him.  He begged
me to sit next him at dinner,  and to
devote myself to making him talk.
To this end I consented to talk more

than became me,  and our stratagem
succeeded.  .  .  .  He was very good-
humoured and gay.  One of the
company happened to say a word
about poetry.  "  Hush,  hush,"  said
he,  "  it is dangerous to say a word
of poetry before her ;  it is talking of
the art of war before Hannibal."
He continued his jokes,  and lamented
that I had not married Chatterton,
that posterity might have seen a pro-
pagation of poets.'  Hannah More's
Memoirs,  i.  251.

3 In the Exhibition of this year
there were fifteen of Sir Joshua's
pictures.     In the Academy Archives
there is the following entry about
the dinner this year  : — '  That Mr.
Fitz- Walter dress the dinner at the
Academy for  ^42.     The wines to be
claret,  Madeira,  port and Caracavalla
(Calcavella).'     Leslie and Taylor's
Reynolds,  ii.  361.

4  '  I have found,'  he had written a
few weeks earlier,  '  the world willing

The

Aetat.  72.]

To Mrs.   Thrale.

251

The news run,  that we have taken seventeen French trans-
ports x  —  that Langton's lady is lying down with her eighth
child,  all alive — and Mrs.  Carter's Miss Sharpe is going to
marry a schoolmaster sixty-two years old 2.

Do not let Mr.  Piozzi nor any body else put me quite out of
your head 3,  and do not think that any body will love you like

Your,  &c.5

SAM  :  JOHNSON.

779.

TO MRS.    THRALE4.

DEAREST MADAM,  April 30, 1782.

I have had a fresh cold and been very poorly 5.  But I was
yesterday at Mr.  Hoole's,  where were Miss Reynolds and many
others.  I am going to the club.

Since Mrs.  Garrick's invitation I have a letter from Miss
Moore 6,  to engage me for the evening.  I have an appointment

enough to caress me,  if my health
had invited me to be in much com-
pany.' Life,  iv.  147.

1  *  April 27.    Letters from Admiral
Barrington confirm the capture of
the Pegasus,  and four of the French
transports.'    Ann.  Reg.  1782,  i.  206.

2 Mrs.    Carter had two or three
times  '  made long journeys with Miss
Sharpe,  a single lady of large fortune,
who afterwards married the Rev.
Osmund Beauvoir,  D.D.'    Mrs.  Car-
ter's Memoirs,  i.  457.     Mrs.  Thrale
wrote to Miss Burney on April 24  : —
*  Miss Sharp will marry the old
schoolmaster too  !  Did you ever hear
Baretti talk of the Tromba Marino
man that the girl in Venice would
absolutely marry for the comfort of
combing his beard?'     Mme.  D'Ar-
blay's Diary,  ii.  138.

3  'These words again are of her
own fabrication.5 BARETTI.

4 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  238.

5 Johnson wrote to Lawrence on
the next : — *  NOVUM frigus,    nova

tussis,  nova spirandi diffictdtas,
novam sanguinis missionem suadent,
quam tamen teinconsulto nolim fieri?
Life,  iv.  143.  The cold weather had
returned.  Horace Walpole wrote on
May 5  :— '  It is the depth of winter.
Never was there such a spring!
After deluges of rain we have had
an east wind that has half-starved
London,  as a fleet of colliers cannot
get in.  Coals were sold yesterday
at seven guineas a chaldron ;  nor is
there an entire leaf yet on any tree.'
Letters,  viii.  216.  The chaldron,  ac-
cording to Johnson's Dictionary,
shotald weigh 2000 pounds  —  240
pounds less than a ton.  Horace
Walpole's numbers,  as he would have
himself allowed,  are always to be
received with doubt.

6 Hannah More,  who when she
visited London,  generally lived at
the Garricks'.  She has no record of
this evening,  though very probably
it was then that Johnson told her
'he hated to hear people whine

to

252

To Mrs.   Thrale.

[A.D.  1782.

to Miss Monkton x,  and another with Lady Sheffield at Mrs.
Way's 2.

Two days ago Mr.  Cumberland had his third night,  which,
after all expences,  put into his own pocket five pounds.  He has
lost his plume 3.

Mrs.  S refused to sing,  at the Duchess of Devonshire's

request,  a song to the Prince of Wales 4.  They pay for the
5 neither principal nor interest ;  and poor Garrick's funeral

about metaphysical distresses,  when
there was so much want and hunger
in the world.  I told him,'  she con-
tinues, '  I supposed then he never
wept at any tragedy but Jane Shore,
who had died for want of a loaf.
He called me a saucy girl  [she was
thirty-seven years old],  but did not
deny the inference.'  Hannah More's
Memoirs,  i.  249.  Miss Burney de-
scribes Mrs.  Garrick as receiving her
'with a politeness and sweetness of
manners inseparable from her.'  Early
Diary of Fanny Burney,  i.  168.

1 Miss Monckton.     Ante,  ii.  151,
n.  7.

2 Lady Sheffield was the wife of
Gibbon's friend,    Colonel Holroyd,
first Baron Sheffield.      Gibbon de-
scribed her on her death as   'an
amiable and affectionate friend,  whom
I had known and loved above three
and twenty years,  and whom I often
styled by the endearing name of
sister.'     Misc.  Works,  i.  398.     Mrs.
Way,  Johnson describes as her rela-
tion.  Post,  Letter of October 6,  1783.
Lady Sheffield was a Miss Way.
Burke's Peerage,    article Earl of
Sheffield.     Gibbon wrote to Colonel
Holroyd in 1772  :— *  As Mr.  Way has
probably unladen all the politics,  and
Mrs.  Way all the scandal of the
town,    I shall for the present only
satisfy myself with the needful.'
Misc.  Works,  ii.  79.

3 Cumberland had brought out at
Covent Garden on April 20 his
comedy of The Walloons.  It was acted

six nights.  Baker's Biog.  Dram.  iii.
389.  In his Memoirs,  ii.  193,  he
passes over its reception.  The author
for a long time had had for his pay
the profit of the third night.  After-
wards a second night and later on
a third night was added.  Johnson's
Works,  vii.  271.  Johnson's Irene,
ran,  says Boswell,  nine nights  ;  *  so
that he had his three nights'  profits.'
Life,  i.  198.  Murphy says that  '  Gar-
rick's play-house  (Drury Lane)  for
some years held no more than  ,£220,
during that period the charge on the
author's night was sixty guineas.  In
1762 the house was enlarged to a
receipt of  ^335  ;  the deduction from
the author's benefit was raised to
seventy guineas.'  Life of Garrick,
p.  362.

4 Mrs.  S is Mrs.  Sheridan,  the

wife of R.  B.  Sheridan.     See Life,
ii.    369,    where in 1775 Johnson
praised Sheridan's    '  determination
that she should no longer sing in
public.'     I cannot find in Moore's
Life of Sheridan any mention of the
refusal to sing before the Prince.

5 Theatre.    In 1776 Sheridan with
two others bought Garrick's moiety
of the patent of Drury Lane Theatre
for  ,£35,000;    in 1778 he made a
further purchase of the property.
'  By what spell all these thousands
were conjured up,'  writes Moore,  '  it
would be difficult accurately to ascer-
tain.   That happy art of putting the
future in pawn for the supply of the
present must have been the chief

expences

Aetat.72.]  To Mrs.   Thrale.

253

expences are yet unpaid,  though the undertaker is broken x.
Could you have a better purveyor for a little scandal  ?  But I
wish I was at Streatham.  I beg Miss to come early,  and I may
perhaps reward you with more mischief.

I am,  dearest and dearest Lady,

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

780.

MADAM,  To MRS-  THRALE2.  May 8>  I782>

Yesterday I was all so bonny,  as who but me  ?  At night
my cough drove me to diacodium,  and this morning I suspect
that diacodium will drive me to sleep in the chair.  Breath
however is better,  and I shall try to escape the other bleeding 3,
for I am of the chymical sect,  which holds phlebotomy in abhor-
rence 4.

But it is not plenty nor diminution of blood that can make me
more or less,  My dearest dear Ladyj

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.
I send my compliments to my dear Queeney.

781.

To THE REVEREND MR.  ,  at Bath.

[London],  May 15,  1782.     Published in the Life,  iv.  150.

resource of Mr.  Sheridan in all these p.  387,   an account is given of the

later purchases.'      Moore's Life of strife between the practisers of

Sheridan,    ed.     1825,    i.    180,     191,  chymical physic and the Galenists,

263-4.  though phlebotomy is not mentioned

1 Ante,  ii.  230,  n.  3.  there.  Johnson,  in spite of his abhor-

2 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  240.  rence,  had by March 20 lost  '  about

3 He had the first bleeding no fifty ounces of blood'  (Life,  iv.  146),
doubt as the result of his Latin letter and was not even then satisfied,
to Lawrence.     Ante,  ii.  251,  n.  5.  He should have consulted Dr.  San-

4 In Burton's Anatomy,  ed.  1660,  grado.

To

254 To James Boswell.  [A.D.  1732.

782.

To GEORGE KEARSLEY.
[London],  May 20,  1782.     Published in the Life,  i.  214,  «.  i.

783.

To  .

May 27,  1782.

In Messrs.  Sotheby and Co.'s Auction Catalogue of May 10,  1875,
Lot No.  99 is a Letter of Dr.  Johnson,  two pages quarto,  dated May
27,  1782.  'He mentions the necessity of rectifying the passage about
Death ;  concludes by saying,  "  I have been for a long time very ill." '

The Letter was sold for  £3 5^.

A clergyman at Bath had drawn Johnson's attention to a passage in
a selection from his writings,  entitled The Beauties of Johnson,  which
was supposed by some readers to recommend suicide.  Johnson replied
in a letter dated May 15,  published in the Life,  iv.  150.  On May 20
he wrote to George Kearsley the publisher of the book,  asking him to
call on him with a copy.  Ib.  i.  214,  n.  i.  On May 29 he had an
announcement inserted in the Morning Chronicle showing that it was
not suicide but exercise which he had recommended.

784.
To  '.

SIR,

I have collected the dates of our business.  I shall be at
home to-morrow morning.  I am not well,  but hope that you
are better.  Please to make compliments to all the Company of
Wednesday.

Your most,  &c.,
May 28,  1782.  SAM  :  JOHNSON.

785.

To JAMES BOSWELL.
London,  June 3,  1782.     Published in the Life,  iv.  151.

1 From the original in the pos-  as one of Mr.  Thrale's executors,

session of Mr.  J.  C.  Brooks,  of 14 often had business,  and who two

Loraine Place,  Newcastle.  months later had to take a very long

This Letter was perhaps written journey in the hope of recovering his

to Mr.  Perkins,  with whom Johnson,  health.  Life,  iv.  153.

To

Aetat.  72.]  To Mrs .   Thrale.  255

786.

TO MRS.   THRALE1.

MADAM,  London,  June 4,  1782.

Wisely was it said by him who said it first,  that this world
is all ups and downs.  You know,  dearest Lady,  that when I
prest your hand at parting I was rather down.  When I came
hither,  I ate my dinner well,  but was so harassed by the cough,
that Mr.  Strahan said,  it was an extremity which he could not
have believed without the sensible and true avouch of his own
observation 2.  I was indeed almost sinking under it,  when
Mrs.  Williams happened to cry out that such a cough should be
stilled by opium or any means.  I took yesterday half an ounce
of bark,  and knew not whether opium would counteract it,
but remembering no prohibition in the medical books,  and
knowing that to quiet the cough with opium was one of Law-
rence's last orders,  I took two grains,  which gave me not sleep
indeed,  but rest,  and that rest has given me strength and
courage.

This morning to my bed-side came dear Sir Richard 3.  I told
him of the opium,  and he approved it,  and told me,  if I went to
Oxford,  which he rather advised,  that I should strengthen the
constitution by the bark,  tame the cough with opium,  keep the
body open,  and support myself by liberal nutriment.

As to the journey I know not that it will be necessary,  desine

mollium tandem querularum* . This day I dined upon skate,

pudding,  goose,  and your asparagus,  and could have eaten more,
but was prudent.

Pray for me,  dear Madam  ;  I hope the tide has turned.  The
change that I feel is more than I durst have hoped,  or than I
thought possible ;  but there has yet not passed a whole day,

1 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  241.  3 Sir Richard Jebb.

2  '  Before my God,  I might not this 4 querelarum.     HORACE,  2 Odes,

believe ix.  17.

Without the sensible and true          '  At length these weak complaints

avouch give o'er.'

Of mine own eyes.'  FRANCIS.

Hamlet,  Act i.  sc.  I.

and

256

To Mrs.   Thrale.

[A.D.  1782.

and I may rejoice perhaps too soon.     Come and see me,  and
when you think best,  upon due consideration,  take me away.

I am,  dear Madam,

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

787.

MADAM,  To MRS-  [Missl PROWSE'.

I have thus long omitted the acknowlegement  [sic]  of your
letter and bill — not by levity or negligence but under the pres-
sure of ilness  [sic]  long continued and very distresful  [sic\.  I
am now better,  but yet so far from health that I have been
purposing to seek relief from change of air by a journey to
Oxford.

Your health,  Madam,  I hope allows you the full enjoyment of
this blooming season2.  I have yet been able to derive little
pleasure from verdure or from fragrance.

I am,  Madam,
Your most humble servant,

Bolt Court,  Fleet Street.  SAM  :  JOHNSON.

June 4,  1782.

788.

TO MRS.    THRALE3.

DEAR MADAM,  Saturday,  June 8,  1782.

Perhaps some of your people may call to-morrow.     I have

1 First published in Notes and
Queries,  4th S.  v.  442.  Copied by
me from a copy in the possession of
the Rev.  Edward B.  Edgell,  of Brom-
ham Rectory,  Chippenham.  On the
copy is written  : — *  The original in
the possession of John Sheppard,
Esqre,  Frome,  given to him by my
father,  the Rev.  Edward Edgell,
of East Hill,  near Frome.  This
letter is curious as containing three
words which vary from Dr.  Johnson's
own Dictionary's spelling — acknow-

legement,  distresful,  and ilness.    It
is his receipt to Mrs.    Prowse of
Berkeley for Miss Hearne's  ^10.'
For Miss Hearne see ##/<?,  11.193,72.4.

2 Horace Walpole wrote the same
day  : — '  Stonhewer has been very ill
of the influenza,  and Palgrave a little,
but we have had two dry days after
fifty-three of rain,  and begin to wear
our rainbow again.'  Letters,  viii.  229.

3 Piozzi Letters,   ii.    251.       This
letter is wrongly dated by Mrs.
Piozzi,  July 8.

this

Aetat.  72.]

To Mrs.   Thrale.

257

this day taken a passage  '  to Oxford for Monday.  Not to frisk
as you express it with very unfeeling irony,  but to catch at the
hopes of better health.  The change of place may do something.
To leave the house where so much has been suffered affords
some pleasure.  When I write to you write to me again,  and let
me have the pleasure of knowing that I am still considered as

Madam,

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.
789.

TO MRS.    THRALE2.

DEAR MADAM,  Oxford,  June u,  1782.

Yesterday I came to Oxford without fatigue or incon-
venience. I read in the coach before dinner3.  I dined mode-
rately, and slept well ;  but find my breath not free this morning.

Dr.  Edwards,  to whom I wrote word of my purpose to come,
has defeated his own kindness by its excess.  He has gone out
of his own rooms for my reception4,  and therefore I cannot

1 Johnson does not in his Dic-
tionary give a definition of passage
which suits the sense in which he
here uses it.    Passenger,  however,  he
defines as   '  one who hires in any
vehicle the liberty of travelling.'

2 Piozzi Letters,   ii.    261.       This
letter is wrongly dated by Mrs.
Piozzi,  June n,    1783.     It belongs
without any doubt to June,  1782.

3 It was at a coach-dinner on the
road to Oxford that two years later
he scolded the waiter for the roast
mutton,   saying  : — '  It is as bad as
bad can be  ;  it is ill-fed,  ill-killed,  ill-
kept,  and ill-drest.'    Life,  iv.  284.

4 Hannah More wrote this same
month  : — '  I am engaged to dine on
my return to Oxford with the
learned Dr.  Ed wards of Jesus College,
to meet Dr.     Johnson,     Thomas
Warton,  and whatever else is most
learned and famous in this Univer-
sity.'    H.   More's Memoirs,  i.   262.
See post,  Letter of May 31,   1784,

VOL.   II.  S

where Johnson speaks of Edwards
as  '  my convivial friend.'  It is strange
that while in the Hebrides Johnson's
room is shown in some of the houses
which he visited,  of this visit of his
to Jesus College no tradition is pre-
served.    In fact it is,  I believe,  a
discovery of mine that he resided
there.     Where Johnson was lodged
we cannot be sure.     His host was
Vice- Principal,  and probably I am
told in that capacity occupied the
rooms in the south-western corner of
the outer quadrangle,  the first floor
right.     Johnson's fame in Oxford at
this time is shown by an anecdote
which I have from the Master of
Balliol College.     Boswell mentions
Dr.  Wall,  a physician at Oxford,  who
drank tea with Johnson in 1784.  Life,
iv.  292.     His widow was alive when
the Master entered Balliol.       She
used to narrate that she had seen a
double line of people waiting to see
Dr.  Johnson enter the Cathedral.

decently

258 To Mrs.  Thrate.  [A.D.i?82.

decently stay long,  unless I can change my abode,  which it will
not be very easy to do :  nor do I know what attractions I shall
find here.  Here is Miss Moore J at Dr.  Adams's,  with whom
I shall dine to-morrow.  Of my adventures and observations
I shall inform you,  and beg you to write to me at Mr.  Parker's,
bookseller 2.

I hope Queeney has got rid of her influenza,  and that you
escape it.  If I had Queeney here,  how would I shew her all the
places 3.  I hope,  however,  I shall not want company in my stay

here.  .

I am,  dear Madam,

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

790.

TO MRS,  THRALE4.

DEAR MADAM,  Oxford,  June 12, 1782.

My letter was perhaps peevish,  but it was not unkind.
I should have cared little about a wanton expression,  if there
had been no kindness 5.

I find no particular salubrity in this air6,  my respiration is
very laborious ;  my appetite is good,  and my sleep commonly
long and quiet ;  but a very little motion disables me.

I dine to-day with Dr.  Adams7,  and to-morrow with Dr.

1 Hannah More.  4 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  243.

2 Ante,  ii.  228.  5 Johnson,    I conjecture,     wrote

3 Mrs.  Thrale,  in the reply which  *  any kindness.'     The   *  wanton ex-
she publishes to this letter,  says  : —  pression'  was  'frisk.'     Ante,  ii.  257.

4 It would have been a fine advantage 6 Ayliffe in his State of the Uni-
indeed could Miss Thrale have seen versify of Oxford  (1723,  i.  240)
Oxford now in your company ;  when speaks of  *  the sweetness and com-
we enjoyed it she was too young to modiousness of the situation of
profit of the circumstance.'  Piozzi Oxford.'  In A Pocket Companion
Letters,  ii.  267.  Unfortunately for for Oxford  (1762,  p.  3),  we read that
her credit she dates her letter June  'the soil is dry,  being on a fine gravel,
15,  1783,  and in it refers to a letter which renders it as healthful and
of Johnson's written two days earlier.  pleasant a spot as any in the King-
In June 1783 Johnson did not visit dom.'

Oxford.  Having by mistake inserted 7  '  Dr.    Adams,'    writes Hannah

Johnson's letter in the text in the More,  '  had contrived a very pretty

wrong year she fabricates her answer piece of gallantry.       After dinner,

to include it and one written twelve Johnson begged to conduct me to see

months and two days later.  the College  ;    he would let no one

Wetherel.

Aetat.  72.]  To Mrs.   Thrale.  259

Wetherel r.  Yesterday Dr.  Edwards invited some men from
Exeter college,  whom I liked very well.  These variations of
company help the mind,  though they cannot do much for the
body.  But the body receives some help from a cheerful mind.

Keep up some kindness for me ;  when I am with you again,
I hope to be less burdensome,  by being less sick2.

I am,  dearest Lady,

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

791.

To MRS.  THRALE 3.
DEAR MADAM,  Oxford,  June 13, 1782.

Yesterday a little physick drove away a great part of my
cough,  but I am still very much obstructed in my respiration,  and
so soon tired with walking,  that I have hardly ventured one
unnecessary step.  Of my long illness much more than this does
not remain,  but this is very burthensome.  I sleep pretty well,
and have appetite enough,  but I cheat it with fish.

Yesterday I dined at Dr.  Adams's with Miss More,  and other
personages of eminence.  To-day I am going to Dr.  Wetherel ;
and thus day goes after day,  not wholly without amusement.

show it me but himself.     "  This was to hang in the Hall.     '  His answer

my room  ;  this Shenstone's."     Then,  was that he had no right to be placed

after pointing out all the rooms of among the Founders and Benefactors

the poets who had been of his college,  of the College in the Hall ;  that the

"  In short,"  said he,  "  we were a nest most he could aspire to would be a

of singing-birds."     When we came place in the Lodgings  [the Master's

into the common-room,  we spied a house],  if the Master could find room

fine large print of Johnson,  hung up for his picture there.'       Messrs,

that very morning,  with this motto: —  Sotheby and Co.'s Auct.    Catal.,

And is not Johnson ours,  himself a November 27,   1889,  Lot 90.     The

host  ?    Under which stared you in late Mr.  Andrew Spottiswoode a few

the face — From Miss Morels  "  Sensi-  years ago gave the College a fine

bility"     This little incident amused portrait of Johnson by Reynolds,

us  :  but,  alas  !  Johnson looks very ill  '  Dr.   Wetherell was Master of

indeed — spiritless and wan.     How-  University College,

ever,  he made an effort to be cheer-  2  '  Dr.  Johnson,'  writes Mrs.  Piozzi,

ful.'     H.   More's Memoirs,   i.   261.  'required less attendance,  sick or

Dr.  Adams,  writing about the print,  well,   than ever I saw any human

says that Miss Adams told Johnson creature.'     Piozzi's Anecdotes,  p.  275.

that he ought to give them his picture 3 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  244.

S 2 I think

260 To Mrs.   Thrale.  [A.D.1782.

I think not to stay here long.  Till I am better it is not
prudent to sit long in the libraries,  for the weather is yet so cold,
that in the penury of fuel,  for which we think ourselves very
unhappy,  I have yet met with none so frugal as to sit without

fire1.  TV/T    ,

I am,  Madam,

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

Poor Davis 2 complained that he had not received his money
for Boyle.

792.

To MRS.  THRALES.
DEAR MADAM,  Oxford,  June 17, 1782.

I have found no sudden alteration or amendment,  but I am
grown better by degrees.  My cough is not now very trouble-
some to myself,  nor I hope to others.  My breath is still short
and encumbered  ;  I do not sleep well,  but I lie easy.  By change
of place,  succession of company,  and necessity of talking,  much
of the terrour that had seized me seems to be dispelled;

Oxford has done,  I think,  what for the present it can do,  and
I am going slyly to take a place in the coach for Wednesday,
and you or my sweet Queeney will fetch me on Thursday,  and
see what you can make of me.

To-day I am going to dine with Dr.  Wheeler4,  and to-morrow
Dr.  Edwards has invited Miss Adams and Miss More.  Yester-
day I went with Dr.  Edwards to his living 5.  He has really done

1 For    'the penury of fuel'    at August 20,  1783,  and May 31,  1784.
London,    see ante,    ii.    251,    n.   5.  His talk no doubt was full of variety,
Horace Walpole writing on the same for he had been Fellow of Magdalen
day as Johnson,  says  : — '  You had College,    Professor of Poetry,  Pro-
better put an erratum at the end of fessor of Natural Philosophy,   and
your Almanac,      for June read Regius Professor of Divinity,  as well
January'     Letters,  viii.  232.  as Canon of Christ Church and Pre-

2 Most likely Tom Davies,  the bendary of St.    Paul's      (Alumni
bankrupt bookseller.     Life,  iii.  223.  Oxonienses).     Many of these offices

3 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  249.  he held at the same time.     He died

4 Johnson,  after Wheeler's death,  July 22,  1783.

spoke of him as  *  the man with whom 5 He was Rector of Besselsleigh,
I most delighted to converse '  and as Berkshire,  a small village about five
'  my learned friend.'  Post,  Letters of miles from Oxford.  It was on a

all

M

Aetat.  72.]          To the Reverend Dr.   Taylor.

261

all that he could do for my relief or entertainment,  and really
drives me away by doing too much x.

I am,  Madam,

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

When I come back to retirement,  it will be great charity in
you to let me come back to something else.

793.

To THE REVEREND DR.  TAYLOR 8.
DEAR SIR,

You are doubtless impatient to know the present state of the
court.  Dr.  Hunter 3,  whom I take to have very good intelligence,
has just left me,  and from him I learn only that all is yet uncer-
tainty and confusion.

Fox,  you know,  has resigned,  Burke's dismission is expected.
I was particularly told that the Cavendishes were expected to
be left out in the new settlement4.  The Doctor spoke,  however,

Sunday that he took Johnson to his
living.  No doubt they returned the
same evening.  The old manor-house
was then standing which had be-
longed to Lenthall,  the Speaker.
Johnson was no doubt gravely told
that i Cromwell,  who was a frequent
visitor here,  usually concealed him-
self in a room to which the only access
was by a chair let down and drawn
up with pulleys.'  Lewis's Topog.
Diet,  of England,  article Bessels-
leigh.

1 By the kindness of my friend the
Rev.  Llewelyn Thomas,  Vice-Prin-
cipal of Jesus College,  I am able to
give further proof of the hospitality
of his predecessor.  The Battel-book
for 1784 shows that the average
battels or weekly bills were not much
over ioj.  Johnson was there part of
two weeks.  In the week beginning
June 7 the Vice-Principal's battels
rose to  £2,  i6s.  $d.,  and in the next
week to  ^4 is.  In the second week

many of the Fellows and Scholars had
unusually high battels— one over  ^3
— so that there seems to have been
some general feasting.  Well did
Johnson call Edwards  '  my convivial
friend.'

8 First published in Notes and
Queries,  6th S.  v.  461.

The Prime- Minister,  the Marquis
of Rockingham,  died on July I ;  Lord
John Cavendish,  Chancellor of the
Exchequer,  and Fox,  one of the
Secretaries of State,  resigned on the
5th;  Burke's resignation as Pay-
master-General followed almost im-
mediately. The Earl of Shelburne
succeeded Rockingham.  Ann.  Reg.,
I782,i.  182,  213.

3 Dr.  William Hunter.     Life,  iv.
220.     See Appendix B.

4 Taylor,  forty years earlier,  had
been hoping for preferment through
the Duke of Devonshire,  the head of
the Cavendishes.     Ante,  \.  12,  n.  I.
His hopes were once more baffled by

with

262 To the Reverend Dr.   Taylor.         [A.D.  1782.

with very little confidence,  nor do I believe that those who are
now busy in the contest can judge of the event.  I did not think
Rockingham of such importance as that his death should have
had such extensive consequences.

Have you settlefd]  about the silver coffeepot *  ?  is it mine or
Mrs.  Fletcher's  ?  I am yet afraid of liking it too well.

If there is any thing that I can do for Miss Colliers2,  let me
know.  But now you have so kindly engaged in it,  I am willing
to set myself at ease.

When you went away,  I did not expect so long absence.  If
you are engaged in any political business,  I suppose your opera-
tions are at present suspended,  as is,  I believe,  the whole political
movement.  These are not pleasant times 3.

I came back from Oxford in ten days and was almost restored
to health.  My breath is not quite free,  but my cough is gone.

I am,  Sir,

Your most,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

London,  July 8,  1782.

To the Rev.  Dr.  Taylor at Ashbourne,  Derbyshire.
[Redirected,  Market Bosworth,  Leicestershire4.]

794.

To Miss LAWRENCE.
[London],  July 22,  1782.     Published in the Life,  iv.  144,  n.  3.

795.

To THE REVEREND DR.  TAYLOR 5.
DEAR SIR,

I do not hear that the Cavendishes are likely to find their
[way]  soon into publick offices,  but I do not doubt of the Duke's
ability to procure the exchange for which he has stipulated,  and
which is now not so much a favour as a contract.

his friends going out of power on says of England  : — '  We seem to be

Rockingham's death.     See the next sinking.'

letter.  4 Taylor was Rector of Market

1 Ante,  \\.  247.  Bosworth.     Ante,  i.  13,  n.  6.

2 Miss Collier is mentioned,  post,  5 First published in Notes and
pp.  269,  270.  Queries,  6th S.  v.  462.

3 See post,  p.  264,  where Johnson

Your

Aetat.  72.]  To the Reverend Dr.   Taylor.  263

Your reason for the exchange I do not fully comprehend,  but
I conceive myself a Gainer by it,  because,  I think,  you must be
more in London.

Mr.  Burke's family is computed to have lost by this revolution
twelve thousand a year  \  What a rise,  and what a fall !  Shel-
burne speaks of him in private with great malignity 2.

I have heard no more from the Miss Colliers 3.  Now you have
engaged on their side,  I am less solicitous about them.  Be on
their side as much as you can,  for you know they are friendless.

Sir Robert Chambers slipped this session through the fingers
of revocation,  but I am in doubt of his continuance.  Shelburne
seems to be his enemy.  Mrs.  Thrale says they will do him no
harm.  She perhaps thinks there is no harm without hanging.
The mere act of recall strips him of eight thousand a year4.

I am not very well,  but much better than when we parted,  and
I hope that milk and summer together are improving you,  and
strengthening you against the attack of winter.
I am,  dear Sir,

Your most affectionate

SAM:  JOHNSON.

London,  July 22,  1782.
To the Rev.  Dr.  Taylor at Market Bosworth,  Leicestershire.

1 Burke,  in a letter dated April 24 of Shelburne.'     Lz/e,   iv.   191.     He
of this year,  says  : — '  The office is to knew also his brother,    Mr.   Fitz-
be  ,£4,000 certain.      Young Richard maurice.   Ante,  ii.  8 1.     Burke spoke
[his son]  is the deputy,  with a salary of Shelburne with great violence.   In
of  .£500. ...    Something considerable 1783 he described him in a letter
is also to be secured for the life of to a private friend as  '  this wicked
young Richard,  to be a security for man,  and no less weak and stupid
him and his mother.  .  .  .  My brother than false and hypocritical.'    Payne's
has before him the option of the Select Works of Burke^  vol.  i.  p.  xvi.
Secretaryship of the Treasury,  with 3 Their mother as is shown,  post,
precedence in the office.'     Burke's by the Letter of January 16,  1783,
Correspondence,  ii.  483.     In the short had married a Mr.  Flint.     She had
time in which he was in office,  by his brought him,  Johnson thought,  about
reform,    '  £47,000 per annum was  £200 a year.     She was dead,  and he
saved to the public,  of which sum apparently was attempting to keep
,£25,300 were the usual and avowed the property to himself,
perquisites of the Paymaster.'  Prior's 4 Chambers,  in 1773,  had been ap-
Burke,  ed.  1872,  p.  218.  pointed second Judge in the Supreme

2  '  Johnson was at a certain period Court of Bombay with  £6,000 a year,
of his life a good deal with the Earl He had been one of Nuncomar's

To

264

To the Reverend Dr.  Taylor.          [A.D.  1782.

796.

To MR.  PERKINS.
[London],  July 28,  1782.     Published in the Life,  iv.  153.

797.

To THE REVEREND DR.  TAYLOR x.

DEAR SIR,

The refusal of Mr.  Dixie2,  if it be peremptory and final,
puts an end to all projects of exchange.  You may,  however,  if
your friends get into power,  obtain preferment.  But do not be
any further solicitous about it ;  leave the world a-while to itself.

I now direct to Ashbourne,  where I suppose you are settled
for a-while,  and where I beg you to do what you can for the poor
Colliers.

I have no national news that is not in the papers,  and almost
all news is bad.  Perhaps no nation not absolutely conquered
has declined so much in so short a time.  We seem to be sinking3.
Suppose the Irish having already gotten a free trade and an
independent Parliament,  should say we will have a King,  and
ally ourselves with the house of Bourbon,  what could be done to
hinder or to overthrow them 4  ?

Judges.  Lord Shelburne had only
been in office two or three days when
he transmitted to Sir Elijah Impey,
the Chief Justice,  the message by
which that judge was recalled.
Chambers,  however,  was not touched.
In 1789 he was made Chief Justice.
See Life,  ii.  264,  and Nuncomar and
Impey by Sir J.  F.  Stephen,  i.  35  ;
ii.  6.

1 First published in the Catalogue
of Mr.    Alfred Morrison's Auto-
graphs, ii.  343.

2 He was probably a relation of
Sir Wolfstan Dixey,  the patron of
Taylor's living of Market Bosworth.
Ante,  i.  13,  n.  6.

3 Horace Walpole wrote at the end
of the month  :  —  *  This country is
absolutely lost.     I mean,   past re-

covery. .  .  .  Ireland has shaken us
off — not unfortunately,  if it goes no
farther ;  for it will flourish,  which our
jealousy hindered.'  Letters,  viii.  271.
4 In the session of 1779-80 Lord
North,  yielding to Ireland's demand
for  '  a free and unlimited commerce
with the whole world,'  carried through
Parliament three bills which greatly
freed her trade.  Ann.  Reg.,  1780,  i.
25,  78.  Horace Walpole wrote on
December 20, 1779 :— *  Great conces-
sions to Ireland have been adopted,
are sailing through both Houses with
favourable gales,  have been notified
to Ireland,  and have pleased there,
and we trust will restore harmony
between these islands.'  Letters,  vii.
293.  The independent Parliament
was the work of Lord Rockingham's

Poor

Aetat.  72.]          To the Reverend Dr.  Taylor.  265

Poor dear Dr.  Lawrence is gone to die at Canterbury.  He has
lost his speech and the action of his right side,  with very little
hope of recovering them x.

We must all go.  I was so exhausted by loss of blood,  and
by successive disorders in the beginning of this year that I am
afraid that the remaining part will hardly restore me.  I have
indeed rather indulged myself too much,  and think to begin
a stricter regimen.  As it is my friends tell me from time to
time that I look better,  and I am very willing to believe them.
Do you likewise take care of your health,  we cannot well spare
one another.

I am,  dear Sir,

Yours affectionately,
London,  August 4,  1782.  SAM:  JOHNSON.

798.

To THE REVEREND DR.  TAYLOR 2.
DEAR SIR,

I calculate this letter to meet you at Ashbourne,  whither
I hope you are well enough to come according to your purpose.
And I write to warn you very carefully against useless and
unnecessary vexation.  To be robbed is very offensive,  but you
have been robbed of nothing that you can feel the want of.  Let
not the loss,  nor the circumstances of the loss,  take any hold
upon your mind.  This loss will in a short time repair itself,  but
you have a greater loss,  the loss of health which must be repaired
by your own prudence  -and diligence,  and of which nothing can
more obstruct the reparation than an uneasy mind.

But how are you to escape uneasiness?  By company and
business.  Get and keep about you those with whom you are
most at ease,  and contrive for your mornings something to do,
and bustle about it as much as you can.  If you think London

short Ministry.  Walpole wrote on May demand a dissolution of the Union.'
18, 1782  (ib.  viii.  222): — '  Both Houses 1 He died at Canterbury in June of
in very few hours signed the absolute the following year.  Life,  iv.  230,  n.  2.
independence of Ireland.  I shall not 2 From the original in the posses-
be surprised if our whole trinity is sion of Messrs.  J.  Pearson and Co.,
dissolved,  and if Scotland should 5 Pall Mall Place,  S.W.

a place

266 To the Reverend Dr.   Taylor.         [A.D.  1782.

a place of more amusements come hither,  or take any other kind
of harmless diversion,  but diversion of some kind or other you
cannot at present be without.  To muse and think will do you
much harm,  and if you are alone and at leisure,  troublesome
thoughts will force themselves upon you x.

Be particularly careful now to drink enough2,  and to avoid
costiveness ;  you will find that vexation has much more power
over you,  ridiculous as it may seem,  if you neglect to evacuate
your body.

I have now had three quiet nights together,  which,  I suppose,
I have not for more than a year before 3.  I hope we shall both
grow better,  and have a longer enjoyment of each other.

I am,  dear Sir,

Yours affectionately,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

London,  August 12,  1782.
To the Reverend Dr.  Taylor,  in Ashbourne,  Derbyshire.

799.

To THE REVEREND DR.  TAYLOR 4.

DEAR SIR,

Though I follow you thus with letters,  I have not much to
say.  I write because I would hear from you the state of your
health and of your mind.  Upon your mind in my opinion your
health will very much depend,  and I therefore repeat my
injunction of bustle and cheerfulness.  Do not muse by yourself;
do not suffer yourself to be an hour without something to do.
Suffer nothing disagreeable to approach you after dinner.

Of the publick I have nothing to say,  there seem to be ex-
pectations of a violent session when the factions meet.  Nor have
I much to say of myself but that I think myself freed from all the

1 See Life,    ii.  440,   iii.  415,    for to the middle of June I was battered
Johnson's art of managing the mind.  by one disorder after another.'    Life,

2 See ante,  i.  368 ;  ii.  87.  iv.  153.

3 On August 24 he wrote to Bos-          4 From the original in the posses-
well  : — *  This year has been very sion of Mr.  George Peck,  of 25 Ches-
heavy.     From the middle of January ham Place,  Belgrave Square,  S.W.

supervenient

Aetat.72.]      To the Reverend George Strahan.  267

supervenient distempers of this year,  and as well as when I was
with you.  My great complaint now is unquietness in the night.
Do not let me write again before I am told how you do.  It is
reasonable that you and I should be anxious for each other ;  our
ages are not very different,  and we have lived long together.

I am,  dear Sir,

Your affectionate,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

August 17,  1782.

To the Reverend Dr.  Taylor,  in Ashbourne,  Derbyshire.
Do not fret.

800.

To THE REVEREND GEORGE STRAHAN z.

SIR,

I have not yet read your letter through and therefore cannot
answer it particularly.  Of what you say so far as I have read
all is,  I think,  true but the application.  What I told him 2 of your
discontent on many occasions was to not provoke him but to pacify
him,  by representing that discontent of which he complained
so much,  not as any personal disrespect to him but as a cast of
mind which you had always had.  Your discontent on many
occasions has appeared to me little short of madness,  which
however I did not tell him 3.  Then your uneasiness at Oxford
was a weak  [?]  thing which passed for an instance by which I do
not see how he could be inflamed.  The whole tendency of what
I said was this,  *  He is you say discontented,  if he is,  it is not
by any personale  [sic]  disesteem to you,  he is apt to be dis-
contented.'

As to the matter of the money I am much of the mind that
you have represented.  But I did not think nor think now that
I said anything that would hinder your father from any act of
liberality4.

1 From the original in the posses-  writing to him when a boy at school
sion of Mr.   William R.   Smith,  of was anxious not to be suspected of
Greatham Moor,  West Liss,  Hants.  betraying his state of mind.

2 George Strahan's father,  William 4 William Strahan wrote to David
Strahan the printer.  Hume on January 25,  1773  :— '  My

3 See ante,  i.  95,  where Johnson son George is now Vicar of Islington,

You

268 To the Reverend George Strahan.     [A.D.  1782.

You may be sure,  I am sure,  I had no intention to hurt you,
and if I have hurt you,  nothing that I can do shall be omitted to
repair the hurt.

You may well be at a loss to conjecture why I should injure
you,  whom certainly I have no reason to injure,  and whom I
would suffer much  [rather]  than injure by design,  and shall be
very sorry if I have done it by that train of talk which I was
drawn into without design and almost without remembrance.
If I have really done you harm I shall live in hope of doing you
sometime as much good,  though good is not so easily done.

I am,  Sir,

Your most,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

Aug.  19,  1782.

[Sent in a cover addressed to the Reverend Mr.  Strahan.]

801.

To JAMES BOSWELL.
[London],  August 24,  1782.     Published in the Life,  iv.  153.

802.

To Miss LAWRENCE.
[London],  August 26,  1782.     Published in the Life,  iv.  144,  n.  2.

803.

To JAMES BOSWELL.
London,  September 7,  1782.     Published in the Life,  iv.  154.

804.

To MRS.  BOSWELL.
London,  September 7,  1782.     Published in the Life,  iv.  156.

805.

To JAMES BOSWELL.

London,  September or October.  One paragraph only of this Letter
is published in the Life,  iv.  155.

with an income of between  ^300 and less than these things usually come
^400 a year.  The purchase however to.'  Hume's Letters to Stratum,  p.
cost a good deal of money,  though 261.

To

Aetat.  73.]          To the Reverend Dr.    Taylor.  269

806.

To THE REVEREND DR.  TAYLOR x.
DEAR SIR,

Your letter about a week ago told me that your health is
mended.  Health is the basis of all happiness of  [sic]  this world
gives.  Your loss likewise seems to be less than I had feared.

Of the probability of Shelburne's continuance 2 I can make no
judgment.  Sickness has this year thrown me out of the world ;
but I think myself growing better.

The proposal of Miss Colliers seems to be wild.  If I under-
stand it right,  they wish that he should lend them money,  that
they may sue him for the estate 3.

I hope to let them know that if they send me their Grand-
father's will,  I will get some opinion upon it.

If they want money to procure it from the registry I will
repay you what you advance as far as ten pounds.

Take great care of your health.  Let nothing disturb you.
Particularly avoid costiveness,  and open no letter of business but
in the morning.

If you would have me write to Mr.  Hayley4,  about Miss
Colliers,  let me know.  I will do anything for them that is proper.

I am,  Sir,

Yours affectionately,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

Sept.  21,  1782.
To the Reverend Dr.  Taylor,  in Ashbourne,  Derbyshire.

807.

To THE REVEREND DR.  TAYLOR 5.
DEAR SIR,

To help the ignorant commonly requires much patience,  for

1 From the original in the posses-  4 Mr.  Chamberlain is not sure of
sion of Mr.  Mellin Chamberlain,  of the name,   and thinks it may be
the Boston Public Library,  United Layley.      I believe it is Langley.
States.  See ante,  ii.  34,  n.  3,  and post,  Letter

2 The Shelburne Ministry lasted of January 16,  1783.

from July 13,  1782 to April 5,  1783.  5 First published in Notes and

3  'He'   is their step-father,   Mr.      Queries,  6th S.  v.  462.
Flint.     Ante,  ii.  263,  n.  3.

the

270 To the Reverend Dr.  Taylor.          [A.D.  1782,

the ignorant are always trying to be cunning  '.  To do business
by letters is very difficult,  for without the opportunity of verbal
questions much information is seldom obtained.

I received,  I suppose,  by the coach a copy of Dunn's will,  and
an abstract of Mr.  Flint's  (?) 2 marriage settlement.  By whom
they were sent I know not.  The copy of the Will is so worn,
that it is troublesome to open it,  and has no attestation to evince
its authenticity.  The extract is,  I think,  in Mr.  Flint's own
hand,  and has not therefore any legal credibility.

What seems to me proper to be done,  but you know much
better than I,  is to take an exemplification 3 of the will from the
registry.  We are then so far sure.  This will I entreat you to
send.  If it be clear and decisive against the girls,  there can be
no farther use of it.  If you think it doubtful,  send it to Mr.
Madox,  and I will pay the fee.

When the will is despatched,  the marriage settlement is to be
examined,  which if Mr.  Flint refuses to shew,  he gives such
ground of suspicion as will justify a legal compulsion to shew it.

It may perhaps be better that I should appear busy in this
matter than you,  and if you think it best,  I will write to Lich-
field that a copy of the will may be sent to you,  for I would
have you read it.  I should be told the year of Mr.  Dunn's
death.

I think the generosity of Mr.  Flint somewhat suspicious.  I
have however not yet condemned him nor would irritate him too
much,  for perhaps the girls must at last be content with what he
shall give them.

My letter,  which you shewed to Miss Collier,  she did not
understand,  but supposed that I charged her with asking money
of Mr.  Flint,  in order to sue him.  I only meant that her pro-
posal was to him eventually the same,  and was therefore,  as I
called it,  wild.

J  'Every man wishes to be wise,  1774 visited Mr.  Flint at Ashbourne.

and they who cannot be wise are Life,  v.  430.

almost always cunning  .  .   .  nor is 3 The only definition Johnson gives

caution ever so necessary as with of exemplification in his Dictionary

associates or opponents of feeble is as it is here used — '  a copy ;   a

minds.'     The Idler,  No 92.  transcript.'

2 See ante,  ii.  263.     Johnson in

I hope

Aetat.  73.]       To the Reverend James Compton.  271

I hope your health improves.  I am told that I look better
and better.  I am going,  idly enough,  to Brighthelmston.  I
try,  as I would have you do,  to keep my body open,  and my
mind quiet.

I hope my attention grows more fixed.  When I was last at
your house I began,  if I remember right,  another perusal of the
Bible,  which notwithstanding all my disorders I have read
through except the Psalms.  I concluded the twenty second of
last month.  I hope,  for as many years as God shall grant me,
to read it through at least once every year x.

Boswel's Father is dead,  and Boswel wrote me word that he
would come to London for my advice.  [The]  advice which I
sent him is to stay at home and  [busy]  himself with his own
affairs2.  He has a good estate]  considerably burthened by
settlements,  and he is himself in debt.  But if his wife lives,  I

think he will be prudent 3.  T 0.

I am,  Sir,

Yours affectionately]
SAM:  JOHNSON.

London,  Oct.  4,  1782.
To the Rev.  Dr.  Taylor in Ashbourn,  Derbyshire.

808.

CIR To THE REVEREND JAMES COMPTON 4.

I have directed Dr.  Vyse's letter to be sent to you,  that you
may know the situation of your business.     Delays are incident

1 On Easter Eve,  1772,   Johnson August 30 to say that his father had
recorded  : — '  I resolved last Easter died that morning,  and received an
to read within the year the whole answer dated September 7.    Life,  iv.
Bible,  a very great part of which I 154.     '  In answer to my next letter/
had never looked upon.     I read the continues Boswell,  '  I received one
Greek Testament without construing,  from him dissuading me from hasten-
and this day concluded the Apo-  ing to him,  as I had proposed.'  John-
calyse.'     Pr.  and Med.,  p.  112.     A son's advice was,  no doubt,  prudent,
week later he recorded  :  —  ' It is a but the Life of Johnson is all the
comfort to me that at last,  in my poorer for it.    He commonly,  perhaps
sixty-third year,  I have attained to always,  spelt Boswell Boswel.
know even thus hastily,  confusedly,  3 She died in June,  1789.

and imperfectly,  what my Bible con-          4 First published in Malone's Bos-
tains.'    Ib.  p.  118.  well,  iv.  225.

2 Boswell wrote to Johnson on Compton was the Librarian of the

to

272

To the Reverend George Strahan.     [A.D.i?82.

to all affairs ;  but there appears nothing in your case of either
superciliousness or neglect.     Dr.  Vyse seems to wish you well.
I am,  Sir,

Your most humble servant,
Oct.  6, 1782.  SAM:  JOHNSON.

To the Reverend Mr.  Compton.

SIR,

809.

To THE REVEREND GEORGE STRAHAN T.

When I called last week,  to do a little business in New
Street 2,  I found the difference between you and your Father still
subsisting,  and though I have reason to think you sufficiently
prejudiced against my advice,  I will,  without much  'anxiety
about my reception,  suggest some reasons,  for which,  in my
opinion,  you ought to make peace as soon as you can.

All quarrels grow more complicated by time,  and as they
grow more complicated,  grow harder to be adjusted

When a dispute is made publick by references and appeals,
which neither your Father nor you have enough avoided,
there mingles with interest or resentment a foolish feint of honour.
Perhaps each part will yield,  were not each ashamed.

Your dispute has already gone so far,  that the first concession
ought to come from you,  since you may without any disgrace
yield to your Father,  and your Father will hardly yield to you,
but with some dishonour to both.

Convent of the Benedictines in which
Johnson had a cell appropriated to
him in his visit to Paris in 1775.
Compton came over to England  *  and
renounced the errors of Popery.'
Being in great distress he called on
Johnson,  who having heard his story
*  with the warmest expressions of
tenderness and esteem put into his
hand a guinea,  assuring him that he
might expect support from him till a
provision for him could be found.  He
furnished him with decent apparel,
and introduced him to the Bishop of
London,  who licensed him to preach
in his diocese.'  Hawkins's Johnson,

p.  530.  Malone in a note gives
further information.  See post,  Letter
of April 19,  1783.

1 From the original in the posses-
sion of Mr.  William R.  Smith,   of
Greatham Moor,  West Liss,  Hants.

2 New Street,  Fetter Lane,  'whither
in February,  1770,  the King's print-
ing-house was removed from what is
still called Printing House Square.'
CROKER.     In 1770 William Strahan
had purchased from George Eyre  '  a
share of the patent for King's Printer.'
Letters of Hume to Strahan,  p.  xliii.
For the difference between the father
and son,  see ante,  ii.  267.

You

Aetat.  73.]  To John Nichols.  273

You might therefore properly make the first advances,  even
if your Father were in the wrong,  of which,  if I understand the
question,  you will find it difficult to convict him.

When a man is asked for money which he does not owe he has
a right to enquire,  why the demand is made.

When you tell him that you ask for money because you want
it,  he may again very reasonably enquire why you are in want
who have already much more than is generally appendant to
your station.

To this question it is my advice that you give a calm,  decent,
and general answer.  Neither your Friends wish,  nor,  I suppose,
your Father wishes that you should show bills and receipts,
though of those you need not be ashamed.,  for nobody suspects
your expences of anything vitious,  but that you should tell in a
manly and liberal way why your income falls short of your desires.

With a general account,  such as may liberally give him the
victory,  your Father will probably be satisfied,  and this account
it will be prudent rather to write than to give in person,  though
to a written account there may be objections.  You will use
your discretion.

My serious,  and whatever you may think,  my friendly advice
is that you make haste to reconciliation.  Those who encourage
either to persist,  mean ill to one of you,  perhaps without meaning
well to the other,  or without much malice or any kindness divert
themselves with your discord,  and are quietly amused by guessing

the event.  T 0.

I am,  Sir,

Your most humble Servant,

Brighthelmston ',  Oct.  10,  1782.  SAM:  JOHNSON.

To the Reverend Mr.  Strahan at Islington,  London.

810.

gIR To JOHN NICHOLS 2.

While I am at Brighthelmston,  if you have any need of

1 Johnson wrote to Boswell : — '  I 2 First published in the Gentle-
came to Brighthelmston in a state man's Magazine for 1784,  page 893  ;
of so much weakness that I rested and subsequently in part in the Life,
four times in walking between the iv.  161.
inn and the lodging.'    Life,  vi.  1 56.

VOL.  II.  T consulting

2 74

To Mauritius Lowe.

[A.D.  1782.

consulting me,  Mr.  Strahan will do us the favour to transmit our
papers under his frank.

I have looked often into your Anecdotes J,  and you will hardly
thank a lover of literary history for telling you that he has been
informed and gratified.  I wish you would add your own dis-
coveries and intelligence to those of Dr.  Rawlinson,  and under-
take the Supplement to Wood 2.  Think on it.

I am,  Sir,

Your humble servant,

Brighthelmston,  Oct.  10,  1782.  SAM:  JOHNSON.

To Mr.  Nicol.

811.

-  To MAURITIUS LOWE 3.

oIR,  October 22,  1782.

I congratulate you on the good that has befallen you.  I
always told you that it would come.  I would not,  however,
have you flatter yourself too soon with punctuality.  You must
not expect the other half year at Christmas.  You may use the
money as your needs require  ;  but save what you can.

You must undoubtedly write a letter of thanks to your bene-
factor in your own name.     I have put something on the other

side4.

I am,  Sir,

Your most humble servant,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

1 John Nichols published in 1782
Anecdotes of William Bowyer,
Printer.    In 1812-15 he brought out
this work,  recast and enlarged,  under
the title of Literary Anecdotes of the
Eighteenth Century.

2 Rawlinson had made MS.  col-
lections for a continuation of Wood's
Athenae.

3 First published in Croker's Bos-
well,  page 709.

For Mauritius Lowe,  see ante^  ii.  203.

4  '  Amongst the papers of Mr.  Lowe
was found,  in Dr.  Johnson's hand-
writing,   the following draft of a
letter  :—

"Mv LORD,

The allowance which you are
pleased to make me,    I received

on the by Mr.  Puget.    Of

the joy which it brought your lord-
ship cannot judge,  because you
cannot imagine my distress.  It was
long since I had known a morn-
ing without solicitude for noon,  or
lain down at night without foreseeing,
with terror,  the distresses of the
morning.  My debts were small,  but
many;  my creditors were poor,  and
therefore troublesome.  Of this misery
your lordship's bounty has given me
an intermission.  May your lordship

To

Aetat.  73.]

To John Nichols.

275

812.

To JOHN NICHOLS  *.
DEAR SIR,

You somehow forgot the advertisement 2 for the new edition.
It was not enclosed.

Of Gay's Letters I see not that any use can be made,  for they
give no information of any thing.  That he was a member of
the Philosophical Society is something ;  but surely he could
be but a corresponding member.  However,  not having his
life here,  I know not how to put it in,  and it is of little
importance 3.

What will the Booksellers give me for this new edition  ?  I know
not what to ask 4.  I would have 24 sets bound in plain calf,  and
figured with  [the]  number of the volumes.  For the rest they
may please themselves.

I wish,  Sir,  you could obtain some fuller information of Jortin,

live long to do much good,  and to do
for many what you have done for,
my Lord,  your lordship's  &c.,

"  M.  LOWE."  '
Croker's Bosivell,  ed.  1844,  vii.  346.

'  My Lord '    was probably Lord
Southwell.

1 First published partly in the
Gentleman's Magazine for 1785,  page
II,  and partly in the Life,  iv.  36,  n.
4,  161.

2 The brief Preface to the Lives
Johnson,    in accordance with the
usage of the time,  heads Advertise-
ment.

3 The Philosophical Society was
probably the Spalding Society,   *  a
Society of Gentlemen for the sup-
porting of mutual Benevolence,  and
their Improvement in the Liberal
Sciences and Polite Learning.'     Of
this Society Nichols gives an ac-
count in his Literary Anecdotes,  vi.
28.  In the list of Members we find  : —
'  John Gay,  esq.  lepidissimus Poeta ;
October 3 1, 1 728.  Died 1732.' Ib. p. 84.

4 On December 7 of this year
Johnson wrote to Boswell : — *  Of my
Lives of the Poets they have printed
a new edition in octavo,  I hear of
three thousand.'  Life,  iv.  157.  In
Mr.  Alfred Morrison's Collection of
Autographs I have seen the follow-
ing curious document : —

'  Received February 19,  1783,  of
the Proprietors of the Lives of the
Poets by the hands of Thomas Cadell
One Hundred Pounds for Revising
the last Edition of that Work.
;£ioo o o SAM.  JOHNSON.'

(The signature alone is in John-
son's hand.)

Below this receipt is pasted on
the following paper in his writing  : —
'  It is great impudence to put

Johnson's Poets on the back
of books which Johnson neither

recommended nor revised.
He recommended only Blackmore
on the Creation and Watts.     How
then are they  "Johnson's  ?   This is in-
decent.'
T a Markland,

276

To William Strahan.

[A.D.  1782.

Markland,  and Thirlby1.     They were three contemporaries of
great eminence.  j am>  sifj

Your most humble servant,

[Brighthelmstone],  Oct.  28,  1782-  SAM:  JOHNSON.

This is all that I can think on,  therefore send it to the press,
and fare it well.     SAM  :  JOHNSON.

813.

To SIR JOSHUA REYNOLDS.
Brighthelmstone,  November 14,  1782.     Published in the Life,  iv.  161.

SIR,

814.

To WILLIAM STRAHAN

Your kindness gives you a right to such intelligence relating
to myself as I can give you.

1 For these three men see Life,  iv.
161.  Jortin is said to be the author
of the line,  Palmam qui meruitferat.

When on his death-bed he was
offered some nourishment  'he said
with great composure  : — "  No,  I have
had enough of everything."  A worthy
clergyman asked him why he did not
publish his Sermons.  "They shall
sleep,"  he replied,  "till I sleep."'
Nichols's Lit.  Anec.  ii.  570.

Of Jeremiah Markland Nichols
gives a long account in Lit.  Anec.
iv.  272.  Person thought so highly
of him as a scholar that  '  he went to
see the house near Dorking where
he had spent his later years and
where he died.'  Table-Talk of S.
Rogers,  ed.  1856,  p.  322.  In his
early manhood,  when the vote came
on before the Senate at Cambridge
for the degradation of Bentley,  he
might have  '  saved by his single
voice the great hero of literature
from the unseemly fate that awaited
him.  But in the heat and clamour
of that day the voice of learning had
little chance of being heard.'  Monk's
Life of Bentley,  ed.  1833,  ii.  59,  169.

Of Thirlby Nichols records the
following anecdote on Johnson's
authority.  '"He went through my
school,"  says Mr.  Kilby,  "in three
years  ;  and his self-conceit was cen-
sured as very offensive.  He thought
he knew more than all the school."
"Perhaps,"  said a gentleman,  to
whom this was told,  "he thought
rightly."'  Lit.  Anec.  iv.  264.  For
his insolence towards Bentley see
Monk's Life of Bentley,  i.  289 ;  ii.
167.  He supplied Theobald with
emendations of Shakespeare's text,
of which the following is one of the
most ingenious.  A couplet in
Oberon's song in A Midsummer-
Nights Dream,  Act iv.  sc.  I,  used
to run  : —
'  Dian's bud,  or Cupid's flower

Hath such force and blessed power.'
He altered it  :—
'  Dian's bud o'er Cupid's flower,

&c.'
JOHNSON'S Shakespeare,  \.  152.

2 From the original in the posses-
sion of Mr.  R.  B.  Adam,  of 448
Delaware Avenue,  Buffalo,  N.  Y.,
United States.

My

Aetat.  73.]  To the Reverend Dr.   Taylor.  277

My friends all tell me that I am grown much better since my
arrival at this place.  I do not for my own part think myself
well,  but certainly I mend.

I shall not stay here above a week longer,  and indeed it is
not easy to tell why we stay so long,  for the company is gone x.

Last Friday or Saturday there was at this place the greatest
take of herrings that has been ever known.  The number caught
was eight lasts,  which at eight thousand a last,  make eight

hundred thousand 2.  T          <_,.

I am,  Sir,

Your most humble servant,

SAM  :  JOHNSON.
Make my compliments to dear Mrs.  Strahan.

Brighthelmstone,  Nov.  14,  1782.
To William Strahan,  Esq.,  M.P.,  London.

815.

To JAMES BOSWELL.
London,  December 7,  1782.     Published in the Life,  iv.  156.

816.

To THE REVEREND DR.  TAYLOR3.
DEAR SIR,

Your letter contained almost an answer to that which you
had not received

Take great care of your health.  I am sorry that you are still
subject to unprovoked disorders ;  but now you are better,  be
very tender of yourself.  Had you been costive  ?  or had any

1 When the company was there candle-light,  and as soon as we could

Johnson had been much neglected.  get Dr.  Johnson ready we set out

Life,  iv.  159,  n.  3.     On November upon our journey in a coach and a

20 Miss Burney,   who was of the chaise and arrived in Argyll Street

party,  records in her Diary: — 'Mrs.  at dinner time.'     Mme.  D'Arblay's

and the three Miss Thrales and my-  Diary,   ii.    184.     See ante,  ii.    123,

self all arose at six o'clock in the n.  I.

morning,   and   "  by the pale blink 2 Johnson must have meant to

of the moon "  we went to the sea-  write  :— '  The number caught was a

side,   where we had bespoke the hundred lasts.'

bathing-women to be ready for us,          3 Copied from the facsimile of the

and into the ocean we plunged.    We original in Mr.  Alfred Morrison's

then returned home,    dressed by Catalogue of Autographs,  ii.  342.

thing

278 To William Strahan.  [A.D.  1732.

thing disturbed you  ?     I have but two rules for you,  keep your
body open,  and your mind quiet.

Sickness concentrates a man's attention so much in himself,
that he thinks little upon the affairs of others  '.  Now I have a
little gleam of health,  I have the business of the Miss Colliers
almost to begin  :  I do not know what it is that Mr.  Flint offers 2.
Make me as much master of the business as you can,  yet I am
afraid of giving you trouble.  I would write to the Miss Colliers
if I knew how.  Shall I send my letter under cover to you,  or to
any other person  ?

Miss Collier writes well,  and can perhaps tell me something of
importance.  Let me know what I shall do.

Take a scrupulous and diligent care of your health,  that we
may yet have a little comfort in each other.

I am,  Sir,

Your most affectionate,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

London,  December 9,  1782.
To the Reverend Dr.  Taylor,  in Ashbourne,  Derbyshire.

817.

To WILLIAM STRAHAN 3.
SIR,

In your letter there is no need of alteration,  it may serve its
purpose very well as it is,  but if you change any thing,  I think
you may better say nothing of his cloaths,  for if you allow him
five suits in two years,  they will cost near  £4$  and the other

will easily go for linen shoes and all other parts of cloathing 4.

1  '  Depend upon it,  Sir,'  said John-  Greatham Moor,  West Liss,  Hamp-
son,  '  when a man knows he is to be shire.

hanged in a fortnight it concentrates For the subject of the letter see

his mind wonderfully.'     Life,  iii.  167.  ante,  ii.  272.      That it should have

On February II,  1784,  he wrote to come,  as it did,  into the possession

Boswell who had sent him a Pamph-  of the son was scarcely fair to

let  :  —  '  You will forgive a man Johnson.

struggling with disease his neglect 4 In the Life of Bishop Porteus is

of disputes,  politics and pamphlets.'  the letter of a poor clergyman written

Ib.  iv.  260.  in 1778.    For 42 years he had been

2 Ante,  ii.  270.  Curate of Wood Plumpton,    near

3 From the original in the posses-  Preston  ;    '  where I have led,'   he
sion of Mr.  William R.    Smith,  of writes,    '  an obscure contemplative

Suppose

Aetat.  73.]  To Mrs.  Thrale.  279

Suppose you concluded your letter with something like
this.

You express your desire of seeing me,  and therefore I think
it  [word omitted]  to let you know,  that whenever you bring
with you that respect and gratitude to which I am entitled,  you

shall find me no longer  „      ,    ,  0

Your offended  &c.

This is all that occurs,  except that perhaps it were as well not
to insist on a minute knowledge of the wife's expences,  but to
blame the first article as indistinct,  without requiring it to be

reformed.

I am,  Sir,

Your most humble Servant,
Dec.  11, 1782.  SAM:  JOHNSON.

818.

TO MRS.    THRALE1.

DEAR LADY,  December 20,  1782.

I hope the worst is at last over.  I had a very good night,
and slept very long.  You can hardly think how bad I have been
while you were in all your altitudes,  at the Opera 2,  and all the
fine places,  and thinking little of me.  Sastres 3 has been very
good.  Queeney never sent me a kind word.  I hope however

life.     I have brought up six sons and 2  '  Thursday  [December 19]  Mrs.

six daughters to men's and women's Thrale and her daughter carried me

estates.    All my annual income is to the Opera House.'    Mme.  D'Ar-

something more than   ^40 a year.  blay's Diary,  ii.   203.    A few days

Such is the indigence I am reduced later she records : — '  I went in the

to at present,  that were it not for evening to call on Mrs.  Thrale,  and

religious prospects I should be tore myself away from her to go to

wretched beyond the utmost energy Bolt Court to see Dr.  Johnson,  who

of language to express.'     Porteus's is very unwell.    He received me with

Works,  i.  49.    The Vicar of I sling-  great kindness,  and bade me come

ton was every year to spend in oftener,  which I will try to contrive,

clothes alone within five or six pounds He told me he heard of nothing but

of this Curate's income.     Goldsmith me,  call upon him who would  [she

spent on a single suit twelve guineas had lately published her Cecilia]  ;

(Life,  ii.  83,  n.  3) ;  but a clergyman and though he pretended to growl

in his dress could not go to the same he was evidently delighted for me.'

height of extravagance as a poet.  Ib.  p.  21 1.

1 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  252.  3 The Italian master.

to

280 To the Reverend Dr.  Taylor.          [A.D.i?82.

to be with you again in a short time,  and shew you a man

again.  .,    ,

I am,  Madam,

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

819.

To SIR JOSHUA REYNOLDS.       j)ec 2^  I^2.

In Messrs.  Sotheby and Co.'s Auction Catalogue of May 10,  1875,
Lot 126 is an autograph note on a card of Johnson to Sir Joshua
Reynolds,  dated Dec.  26,  1782,  declining an invitation on account of
illness.

On Dec.  27 Miss Burney found Dr.  Johnson at Mrs.  Thrale's house,
and found him  'very comic and good-humoured.  Susan Thrale had
just had her hair turned up and powdered,  and has taken to the womanly
robe.  Dr.  Johnson sportively gave her instructions how to increase
her consequence,  and to  "  take upon her  "  properly.  "  Begin,"  said he,
"Miss Susy,  with something grand — something to surprise mankind.
Let your first essay in life be a warm censure of Cecilia."1 Mme.
D'Arblay's Diary,  ii.  215.  Miss Burney was at the dinner at Sir
Joshua's the following day.  Ib.  p.  216.

820.

To THE REVEREND THOMAS WILSON.
[London],  December 31,  1782.     Published in the Life,  iv.  162.

821.

-P.          CTTI To THE REVEREND DR.  TAYLOR x.
DEAR SIR,

Your last little note was very unsatisfactory.  That a silly
timorous unskilful Girl has behaved improperly,  is a poor reason
for refusing to tell me what expectations have been raised by
the will,  and what questions I must ask the Lawyers,  questions
which if you do not like to answer them,  I must ask elsewhere,
and I am unwilling to mingle this affair with any name that
you may hear with disgust 2.

1 First published in Notes and Collier,  and the name that Taylor
Queries,  6th S.  v.  462.  might hear with disgust that of Mr.

2 The silly girl was no doubt Miss Langley.  Ante,  i.347,and/^p.282.

This,

Aetat.  73.]

To John Nichols.

281

This,  my dear Sir,  is the last day of a very sickly and melancholy
year1.  Join your prayers with mine,  that the next may be
more happy to us both.  I hope the happiness which I have
not found in this world,  will by infinite mercy be granted in

another.

I am,  dear Sir,

Yours affectionately,

SAM  :  JOHNSON.

Dec.  31,  1782.
To the Reverend Dr.  Taylor in Ashbourne,  Derbyshire.

822.

SIR)  To JOHN NICHOLS 2.  Jan.  10,1783.

I am much obliged by your kind communication of your
account of Hinkley3.  I knew Mr.  Carte as one of the Preben-
daries of Lichfield,  and for some time Surrogate of the Chan-
cellor. Now I will put you in a way of shewing me more
kindness.  I have been confined by ilness  [sic]  a long time,  and
sickness and solitude make tedious evenings.  Come sometimes,

and see,  Sir,

Your humble servant,

To Mr.  Nichol.  SAM  :  JOHNSON.

1 On his birthday in 1781   (Sep-
tember 1 8)  he had recorded: — 'As
I came home from church I thought
I had never begun any period of life
so placidly.'    Pr.  and Med.  p.  198.

2 First published in Nichols's
Literary Anecdotes,  ii.  551,  and com-
pared by me with the original in the
British Museum.     It is possible that
this letter is misdated 1783 instead
of 1784,   as by January 10,    1783,
Johnson,  though ill,   had not been
long confined to the house.     On the
4th he had dined at Dr.  Burney's.
*  He was very ill,'  writes Miss Bur-
ney,  'and only from an extreme of
kindness did he come.    All dinner
time he hardly opened his mouth

but to repeat to me  : — "  Ah  !  you
little know how ill I am."  He was
excessively kind to me in spite of
all his pain.  He was so ill that after
dinner he went home.'  This was
unfortunate,  as in the evening Dr.
Parr came.  Mme.  D'Arblay's Diary,
ii.  227.

3 Nichols published in 1782,  The
History and Antiquities of Hinskley
in Leicestershire.  Lit.  Anec.  vi.  632.
In his History of Leicestershire,  ii.
1 68,  the Rev.  Samuel Carte is praised
as  'a most judicious antiquary.3
Carte was admitted Prebendary of
Lichfield in 1682.  Le Neve's Fast.
Ecc.  Ang.  i.  629.

To

282 To the Reverend Dr.   Taylor.         [A.D.  i?83.

823.

To THE REVEREND DR.  TAYLOR1.

DEAR SIR,

I have for some time been labouring under very great
disorder of Body,  and distress of Mind.  I wish that in our
latter days we may give some comfort to each other.  Let us at
least not be angry,  nor suppose each other angry.  We have no
time to lose in petulance.  I beg you not to take amiss that I
trouble you once more about the Colliers.  I have but you and
Mr.  Langley to consult,  and him I never have consulted,  because
you dislike him 2.

I would shew the Lawyers the papers,  but that I know not
what questions to ask nor can state the case,  till I am informed
with regard to some particulars 3.

What do Miss Colliers suppose will be discovered in the writings?

Had Mr.  Flint a son by their Mother  ?  I think he has.  What
had he with their Mother?  I think about  £200 a year.  What
do they ask from Mr.  Flint  ?

What does he offer them  ?  This you have told me,  but my
memory is not distinct about it,  and I know not how to find your
letter.  Tell me again.

All that has a bad appearance on Flint's part,  is his requisition
of a discharge from future claims.  If they have no claims,  what
is the discharge  ?  Yet this may be only unskilfulness in him.

I think there is no reason to suppose that Mrs.  Flint's estate
could be settled by her father exclusively upon Collier's children,
or that she should be advised at her marriage with Mr.  Flint to
debar herself from providing for her future children,  whatever
they might be,  in their due proportions.

Do answer this,  and add what it is necessary for me to know,
and I hope to trouble you no more about it.  When I have
your answer I will transact with Mr.  Flint and Miss Collier  ;  or
with as little trouble to you as I can.

You and I have lived on together to the time of sickness and
weakness.  We are now beginning another year ;  may the

1 First published in Notes and Queries  ^  6th S.  v.  462.
2 Ante,  ii.  280,  n.  2.  3 Ante ii.  263,  269.

merciful

Aetat.  73.]        To the Reverend George Strahan.  283

merciful God protect us both.     Let us not neglect our salvation,
but help each other forward in our way as well as we can.

I am,  dear Sir,

Your affectionate

London,  Jan.  16,  1783.  SAM:  JOHNSON.

To the Rev.  Dr.  Taylor in Ashbourne,  Derbyshire.

824.

To THE REVEREND GEORGE

OlRj

I had very lately a visit from Mr.  Strahan,  our talk was of
you,  and I am sure he will tell you that I have never been your
enemy.  What passed is too long to be written,  but if you will
call on me to-morrow in Bolt court,  where I shall be in the
afternoon on purpose to receive you,  I hope that Peace may be

made.

I am,  Sir,

Your most humble servant,
Thursday,  Jan.  16,  1783,  SAM  :  JOHNSON.

825.

To THE REVEREND GEORGE STRAHAN2.
SIR,  [?  January,  1783.]

You seem to suppose that your Father had some influence
on my Letter.  You are utterly mistaken.  He knows nothing

1 From the original in the pos-  shire.     The letter is imperfect.
session of Mr.   William R.   Smith,  The following mention of George
Greatham Moor,  West Liss,  Hamp-  Strahan by Benjamin Franklin,    I
shire.    For the subject of the Letter,  have only discovered since my earlier
see ante,   ii.  272.    On the back is notes were in type  :  —  Franklin wrote
written,  no doubt in George Strahan's to W.  Strahan on June 10,  1763:  —
hand  :  '  Mr.  G.  Strahan presents his  '  Tell me whether George is to be
best Respects to Dr.  Johnson,    is a Church or Presbyterian parson.
much obliged to him for any service I know you are a Presbyterian your-
he may have done him,   and will self;  but then I think you have more
wait upon him To-morrow according sense than to stick him into a priest-
to his Appointment.  hood that admits of no promotion.

'Islington,  January 16,  1783.'  If he was a dull lad it might not be

2 From the original in the pos-  amiss,   but George has parts,  and
session of Mr.  William R.    Smith,  ought to aim at a Mitre.'    Franklin's
Greatham Moor,  West Liss,  Hamp-  Works,  ed.  1887,  iii.  240.

of

284

To Joseph Cradock.

[A.D.1783.

of it.  My reason for writing was,  if I had done any mischief to
undo it as far as I could by good counsel.  You have done what
I wished to be done,  and I have nothing more to recommend.
Of promises I know nothing,  and have nothing to say.

The conference may perhaps as well be forborn  [sic],  but if
must be,  it will probably be made by the pressure of others
shorter and more moderate ;  and may therefore do less harm,
if it does no good.

[A part of the letter cut off.]

Debts of kindness there may be,  but surely those debts are
not very niggardly paid,  when nothing is required but to show
that they are wanted.

I flatter myself that by this time peace and content are restored
among you,  if not,  I wish I could recal  [sic]  them.

I am,  Sir,

Your humble Servant,

SAM  :  JOHNSON.

826.

To JOSEPH CRADOCK J.

Jan.  20,  1783.

Mr.  Johnson is very glad of any intelligence,  and much obliged
by Mr.  Cradock's favour and attention.  The book which he has
now sent shall be taken care of;  but of a former book mentioned
in the note Mr.  Johnson has no remembrance,  and can hardly
think he ever received it,  though bad health may possibly have
made him negligent.
To Mr.  Cradock.

1 First published in Literary and
Miscellaneous Memoirs,  by Joseph
Cradock,  1828,  i.  243.  Cradock says
that he had borrowed for Johnson
from Lord Harborough  'a folio
volume of manuscripts,  magnificently
bound,  which contained poems by
James I and others.'  On receiving
Johnson's letter,  he consulted Steevens
who said  :— <  That then is the book
which now lies under his inkstand  ;
it is neatly packed up and sealed,

and I never was able to make out what
it was.'  Cradock was at Marseilles
when the news of Johnson's death
reached him.  He at once wrote to
Reynolds and Cadell about the book.
They replied that they had found it
unopened on the very spot where
Steevens had seen it,  and they had
returned it to Lord Harborough.
For a brief notice of Cradock,  see
Life,  iii.  38.

To

Aetat.  73.]  To the Reverend Dr.   Taylor.  285

827.

To THE REVEREND DR.  TAYLOR1.

DEAR SIR,

I am glad that your friends are not among the promoters
of equal representation,  which I consider as specious in theory,
but dangerous in experiment,  as equitable in itself,  but above
human wisdom to be equitably adjusted,  and which is now pro-
posed only to distress the government 2.

An equal representation can never form a constitution,  because
it can have no stability ;  for whether you regulate the repre-
sentation by numbers or by property,  that which is equal to-day,
will be unequal in a week.

To change the constituent parts of government must be
always dangerous,  for who can tell where changes will stop  ?
A new representation will want the reverence of antiquity,  and
the firmness of Establishment.  The new senate will be con-
sidered as mushrooms which springing in a day may be blasted
in a night.

What will a parliament chosen in any new manner,  whether
more or less numerous,  do which is not done by such parlia-
ments as we have  ?  Will it be less tumultuous,  if we have more,
or less mercenary,  if we have fewer  ?  There is no danger that
the parliament as now chosen should betray any of our important
rights,  and that is all that we can wish.

If the scheme were more reasonable,  this is not a time for

1 First published in Notes and Horace Walpole,  who belonged to
Queries,  6th S.  v.  481.  the same party among the Whigs

2 On May 7 in the previous year as those described by Johnson as
the younger Pitt had moved for a Taylor's friends,  wrote on the mor-
Committee to enquire into the row of Pitt's defeat  : — '  The object
present state of the representation,  of altering the Representation I think
and had been defeated by only most dangerous.     We know pretty
twenty votes.    ParL Hist.  xxii.  1416.  well what good or evil the present
On the same day in the next year state of the House of Commons can
(1783)  he brought forward a motion do,    what an enlargement might
for a Reform in Parliament.     It was achieve,  no man can tell.'    Letters,
lost by 144 votes.     Ib.  xxiii.   827.  viii.  362.

innovation.

286

To Sir Joshua Reynolds.

[AD.  1783.

innovation.     I am afraid of a civil war.     The business of every
wise man seems to be now to keep his ground  '.
I am very glad you are coming.

I am,  &c.,

SAM  :  JOHNSON.

Jan.  21,  1783.
To the Reverend Dr Taylor in Ashbourne,  Derbyshire.

828.

To Miss LAWRENCE.
Bolt-court,  February 4,  1783.     Published in the Life,  iv.  144,  n.  2.

SIR,

829.

To SIR JOSHUA REYNOLDS2.

Mr.  Mason's address to you deserves no great praise 3 ;  it
is lax without easiness,  and familiar without gaiety.  Of his trans-
lation I think much more favourably,  so far as I have read,  which
is not a great part.  I find him better than exact ;  he has his
author's distinctness and clearness without his dryness and
sterility 4.

1 Burke speaking about Reform of
Parliament,  said  : — '  Too dangerous
an experiment to risk.  Not any re-
form proposed yet that did not seem
to him highly hazardous.  The least
exceptionable that of Lord Chatham's
"  adding fifty Knights of the shire  "  ;
but this,  as well as the rest already
proposed,  not to be thought upon in
such times as these,  or perhaps ever.'
Mr.  Burke's Table-Talk,  Misc.  of the
Philobiblon Society ',  vii.  52.  Gibbon
wrote on May 30,  1792 : — '  If you do
not resist the spirit of innovation in
the first attempt,  if you admit the
smallest and most specious change
in our parliamentary system,  you are
lost.'  Misc.  Works,  i.  349.  In the
same year Fox said  'he might be
asked,  why his name was not on the

list of the Society for Reform.  His
reason was,  that though he saw
great and enormous grievances he
did not see the remedy.'  Moore's
Life of Sheridan,  ed.  1826,  ii.  182.

2 First published in Leslie and
Taylor's Life of Reynolds,  ii.  392.

3 Mason translated into English
verse Du Fresnoy's Latin poem De
Arte Graphica,   prefixing in verse
An Epistle to Sir Joshua Reynolds.
Reynolds illustrated the translation
with a series of notes.

4  '  The version of Fresnoy I think
the finest translation I ever saw.     It
is a most beautiful poem,  extracted
from as dry and prosaic a parcel of
verses as could be put together.'
Walpole's Letters,  viii.  73.

As

Aetat.  73.]

To Sir Joshua Reynolds.

As I suppose you have lost your Lives I desire you to accept
of these volumes,  and to keep them somewhere out of harm's
way,  that you may sometimes remember the writer '.

I am,  Sir,,

Your most humble servant,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

February 19,  1783.

830.

To SIR JOSHUA REYNOLDS2.
SIR,  March 4,  1783.

I have sent you back Mr.  Crabbe's poem,  which I read with
great delight.  It is original,  vigorous,  and elegant.

The alterations which I have made I do not require him to
adopt,  for my lines are,  perhaps,  not often better  [than]  his
own  ;  but he may take mine and his own together,  and perhaps
between them produce something better than either 3.  He is not
to think his copy wantonly defaced  ;  a wet sponge will wash all
the red lines away,  and leave the pages clean.

His Dedication will be least liked :  it were better to contract

1 Johnson had probably given
Reynolds the first four volumes of
the Lives,   when they appeared in
1779.     In assuming that he had lost
them he has perhaps a pleasant hit
at his loss of Goldsmith's epitaph.
Ante,  i.  407.      The original of this
Letter,  together with the ten volumes
whole bound in calf which had ac-
companied them,  was sold for  ,£1 2 1 5 s.
by Messrs.  Sotheby  &  Co.  on May
10,  1875  (Lot 100).

2 Published in Croker's Boswell,
page 716,  and in Crabbe's Works,
ed.  1834,  ii.  12.

In 1780 Crabbe had come up to
London with three pounds in his
pocket,  as a Literary Adventurer,
and for some months had lived a
life of baffled hope.  Rejected by the
publishers,  his last shilling gone,  he

wrote to Burke.  '  He was  "  a made
man  "  from that hour.'  Burke spoke
of him to Reynolds.  'He has the
mind and feelings of a gentleman/
he said.  At Sir Joshua's table he
met Johnson ;  and a few days after-
wards he called on him in Bolt
Court.  '  Never fear,'  said Johnson,
'putting the strongest and best
things you can think of into the
mouth of your speaker,  whatever
may be his condition.'  Reynolds,  in
forwarding to Crabbe Johnson's letter,
said : — 'If you knew how cautious
Dr.  Johnson was in giving com-
mendation, you would be well satis-
fied with the portion dealt to you in
his letter.'  Crabbe's Works,  i.  91-
100 ;  ii.  12.

3 Of these alterations Boswell gives
a specimen.    Life,  iv.  175.

it

288

To Joseph Fowke.

[A.D.  1783.

it into a short sprightly address T.     I do not doubt of Mr.  Crabbe's

success.

I am,  Sir,

Your most humble servant,
SAM:  JOHNSON.

831.

To DR.  SCOTT.

In Messrs.  Christie and Go's Auction Catalogue of June 5,  1888,  Lot
52 is a Letter of Johnson to Dr.  Scott  [afterwards Lord Stowell],  one
page quarto,  dated March 4,  1783.  'Asking him to give employment
to a young man for whom he is interested ;  and saying,  "  He is not
without literature,  and I hope he will be diligent." '

It is very likely that the young man was Crabbe,  for whom his friends
were seeking for employment.  Burke was struck with his fund of
general knowledge.  '  Mr.  Crabbe,'  he said to Sir Joshua Reynolds,
*  appears to know something of every thing.'  Crabbe's Works,  i.  97.

832.

To SIR JOSHUA REYNOLDS.
[London],  April 12,  1783.     Published in the Life,  iv.  201.

833.

To JAMES BARRY.
[London],  April 12,  1783.     Published in the Life,  iv.  202.

834.

To JOSEPH FOWKE 2.
DEAR SIR,  April 19, 1783.

To shew you that neither length of time,  nor distance of
place,  withdraws you from my memory,  I have sent you a little
present3,  which will be transmitted by Sir Rob.  Chambers4.
To your former letters I made no answer,  because I had none

1 Neither Dedication nor Address
was adopted.     Crabbe's Works,  ii.

13,*- I-

2 First published in Original
Letters,    ed.    by Rebecca Warner,
1817,  page 207.

For an account of Joseph Fowke,
who was in India,  see ante,  i.  409.

3 No doubt his Lives of the Poets.

4 One of the Judges in the Su-
preme Court.    Ante,  ii.  263,  n.  4.

to

Aetat.  73.]  To Joseph Fowke.  289

to make.  Of the death of the unfortunate man J,  I believe
Europe thinks as you think  ;  but it was past prevention ;  and it
was not fit for me to move a question in public which I was not
qualified to discuss,  as the enquiry could then do no good  ;  and
I might have been silenced by a hardy denial of facts,  which,  if
denied,  I could not prove.

Since we parted,  I have suffered much sickness of body and
perturbation of mind.  My mind,  if I do not flatter myself,  is
unimpaired,  except that sometimes my memory is less ready ;
but my body,  though by nature very strong,  has given way to
repeated shocks.

Genua labant^  vastos quatit ceger anhelitus artus 2.  This line
might have been written on purpose for me.  You will see,
however,  that I have not totally forsaken literature.  I can
apply better to books than I could in some more vigorous parts
of my life,  at least than I did ;  and I have one more reason for
reading ;  that time has,  by taking away my companions,  left me
less opportunity of conversation 3.  I have led an inactive and
careless life  ;  it is time at last to be diligent.  There is yet pro-
vision to be made for eternity.

1 Nuncomar.    Ante,  i.  410,  n.  i.          before the date of this Letter,  says  : —

2  '  But each vast limb moves stiff     '  I found him in his arm-chair by the

and slow with age,  fire-side,  before which a few apples

And thick short pantings shake were laid.    He was reading.    I asked

the lab'ring sage.'  him what book he had got.     He said

C.  PITT.    jtEneid)  v.  432.  the History of Birmingham.    Local

3 In 1763 Johnson said to Bos-  histories,  I observed,  were generally
well :— '  Sir,  in my early years I read dull.    "  It is true,  Sir ;  but this has
very hard.    It is a sad reflection but a peculiar merit with me ;  for I passed
a true one,  that I knew almost as some of my early years,  and married
much at eighteen as I do now.'   Life,  my wife there."     I supposed the
i.  445.    In 1766 he wrote to Langton:  apples were preparing as medicine.
— *  I continue to rise tolerably well,  "  Why,  no,  Sir ;    I believe they are
and read more than I did.'    Ib.  ii.  only there because I want something
20.    In 1767 he told the King that to do.    These are some of the soli-
'  he thought more than he read ;  tary expedients to which we are
that he had read a great deal in the driven-  by sickness.     I have been
early part of his life,   but having confined this week past ;    and here
fallen into ill health,  he had not been you find me roasting apples,  and
able to read much compared with reading the History of Birming-
others.'    Ib.  ii.  36.    Malone,  who had ham  " '    Prior's Malone,  p.  92.
called on him two or three months

VOL.  II.  U Let

290 To the Company of Mercers.

Let me know,  dear Sir,  what you are doing.  Are you accu-
mulating gold,  or picking up diamonds  ?  Or are you now sated
with Indian wealth,  and content with what you have?  Have
you vigour for bustle,  or tranquillity for inaction?  Whatever
you do,  I do not suspect you of pillaging or oppressing  ;  and
shall rejoice to see you return with a body unbroken,  and a mind
uncorrupted.

You and I had hardly any common friends  ;  and therefore I
have few anecdotes to relate to you.  Mr.  Levet,  who brought
us into acquaintance,  died suddenly at my house last year,  in
his'  seventy-eighth year,  or about that age.  Mrs.  Williams,  the
blind lady,  is still with me,  but much broken by a very weari-
some and obstinate disease.  She is,  however,  not likely to die ;
and it would delight me if you would send her some petty token
of your remembrance.  You may send me one too.

Whether we shall ever meet again in this world,  who can tell  ?
Let us,  however,  wish well to each other :  prayers can pass the
Line and the Tropics x.

I am,  dear Sir,

Yours sincerely2,

SAM  :  JOHNSON.

835.

To THE WORSHIPFUL COMPANY OF THE MERCERS 3.
GENTLEMEN,

At the request of the Reverend Mr.  James Compton,  who
now solicits your votes to be elected Under Master of St.  Paul's
School,  I testify with great sincerity,  that he is,  in my opinion,
a man of abilities sufficient,  and more than sufficient,  for the
duties of the office for which he is a candidate.
I am,  Gentlemen,

Your most humble servant,
Bolt-court,  Fleet-street,  April 19,  1783.  SAM  :  JOHNSON.

1 Prayers apparently would take      {  Yours sincerely.'

the longer course round the Cape of 3 First published in Malone's
Good Hope.  Boswell.      For Mr.    Compton see

2 No other letter of Johnson's ends ante,  ii.  271.

To

Aetat.  73.]  To the Earl of Dartmouth.  291

836.

To THE EARL OF DARTMOUTH r.
MY LORD,  April 25, 1783.

The bearer,  Mr.  Desmoulins,  has persuaded himself that
some testimonial from me will be useful to him in his application
to your Lordship,  and I hope that what I yield merely to his
importunity will not be imputed to any vain conceit of my own
importance.

He desires indeed nothing to be said but what is true ;  that
he is not in difficulties by his own fault ;  that he has a brother
and sister in great distress,  and that if he should by your Lord-
ship's favour now obtain any little employment,  he will,  I hope,
do the business faithfully,  and use the income properly.
I am,  my Lord,

Your Lordship's most obedient

and most humble servant,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

837.

TO MRS.    THRALE2.

DEAR MADAM,  London,  [Thursday]  May-day,  1783.

I am glad that you went to Streatham,  though you could

1 First published in the Reports Richardson said,  he would have been

of the Historical Manuscripts Com-  called the living Sir Charles Grandi-

mission,  volume xi,  appendix v,  page son,  had he not been a Methodist ;

447.  and the peer not too proud to pray,

The Earl of Darmouth on April 9 celebrated by Cowper.'

had been made Lord Steward of the 2 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  255.

Household.    Book of Dignities,  ed.  Mrs.    Piozzi publishes a letter

1890,  p.  290.    Johnson might have written by her at Bath on Good

made his acquaintance at the time Friday,  in which she says,  *  Harriet

of the Cock Lane Ghost,  of which,  is dead ;  Cicely is dying,'  and that

according to Horace Walpole(Z>/&?r.r,  she was hurrying up to London,

in.  481),  'the Earl was one of the Piozzi Letters,     ii.     253.       'Dear

two great patrons.'    Walpole de-  Harriet,'  she says,  'died of measles,

scribes him as sitting  '  in the odour hooping-cough and strumous swell-

of devotion'  at Dr.  Dodd's Chapel.  ings in the neck and throat.'     Hay-

Ib.  p.  282.    Cunningham says in a ward's Piozzi,  i.  271.    Why she had

note on this passage: — 'William left her dying child,  and the other

Legge,    second Earl of Dartmouth who was thought to be dying,   to

(died 1801),    the same of whom strangers to nurse she forgets to

U 2 not

To Mrs.   Thrale.

[A.D.  1783.

not save the dear pretty little girl.  I loved her,  for she was
Thrale's and your's,  and by her dear father's appointment in
some sort mine z :  I love you all,  and therefore cannot without
regret see the phalanx broken,  and reflect that you and my
other dear girls are deprived of one that was born your friend.
To such friends,  every one that has them,  has recourse at last,
when it is discovered,  and discovered it seldom fails to be,  that
the fortuitous friendships of inclination or vanity are at the
mercy of a thousand accidents 2.  But we must still our disquiet
with remembering that,  where there is no guilt,  all is for the best.
I am glad to hear that Cecily is so near recovery.

For some days after your departure 3 I was pretty well,  but I
have begun to languish again,  and last night was very tedious
and oppressive.  I excused myself to-day from dining with
General Paoli,  where I love to dine4,  but I was griped by the
talons of necessity.

On Saturday I dined,  as is usual,  at the opening of the Ex-
hibition. Our company was splendid,  whether more numerous
than at any former time I know not 5.  Our tables seem always
full.  On Monday,  if I am told truth,  were received at the door
one hundred and ninety pounds,  for the admission of three

mention.  Mr.  Hayward calls her
letter an answer to Johnson's last
(ante,  ii.  279),  though she wrote on
Good Friday and he had written
before Christmas.  She had been at
the Opera at the time when he
wrote.  For little Harriet's pretty
speech,  see ante,  ii.  239,  n.  I.  The
child's name was Henrietta Sophia ;
she was buried at Streatham on
April 25.

1 Johnson had been left their
guardian.    Post,  p.  303.

2 For Johnson's  '  innocent envy of
those who may be said to be born
to friends,'  see ante,   ii.  237,    n.   2.
He was sadly discovering that his
'  fortuitous friendship '    with Mrs.
Thrale was rapidly coming to an
end.

3 Hawkins found the following

entry in Johnson's Diary. — '1783,
April 5.  I took leave of Mrs.  Thrale.
I was much moved.  I had some
expostulations with her.  She said
that she was likewise affected.  I
commended the Thrales with great
good-will to God  ;  may my petitions
have been heard.'  Hawkins's Life of
Johnson,  p.  553.  Sttpost,  p.  303.

4 Boswell quotes these words,  Life,
iv.  330.

5  '  It was more numerous ;  80  (at
8s.)  against 57 in 1781.'    Leslie and
Taylor's Reynolds,  ii.  397,  n.  i.     If
it was more numerous than in 1782
the dinner was less costly ;   for 80
guests at 8^.  each would amount to
£32,  whereas in 1782 the dinner cost
£42,  which,    at the same charge,
would give 105 guests.    Ante,  ii.  250,
n.  3.

thousand

Aetat.  73.]

To Mrs.   Thrale.

293

thousand eight hundred spectators x.  Supposing the shew open
ten hours,  and the spectators staying one with another each an
hour,  the rooms never had fewer than three hundred and eighty
justling against each other.  Poor Lowe met some discouragement,
but I interposed for him,  and prevailed 2.

Mr.  Barry's exhibition was opened the same day,  and a book
is published to recommend it,  which,  if you read it,  you will find
decorated with some satirical pictures of Sir Joshua Reynolds
and others.  I have not escaped.  You must however think with
some esteem of Barry for the comprehension of his design 3.

I am,  Madam,
Your,  &c.,

SAM  :  JOHNSON.

1 The first Exhibition was held in
1769,  and was kept open for a month.
The receipts at the door were just
short of  £700.     Leslie and Taylor's
Reynolds,  i.   321.     Two years later
they amounted to  ,£1125.     70.1.405.

2 Lowe's picture was refused ad-
mission, but Johnson wrote to Rey-
nolds and to Barry in his behalf,  and
it was admitted.     It was hung how-
ever in an empty room.    According
to Northcote  '  it was execrable be-
yond belief.'  Life,  iv.  201,  and North-
cote's Reynolds,  ii.  141.

3 Barry had spent many years in
decorating the great room of the
Society of Arts, '  living chiefly on oat-
meal porridge.'     Leslie and Taylor's
Reynolds,  ii.  179,  397.     It was these
decorations that he now exhibited.
His book was entitled,  An account
of a Series of Pictures in the Great
Room of the Society of Arts,  at the
Adelphi.    Horace Walpole writing of
it on May II,   says: — 'Barry has
expounded all in a book which does
not want sense,  though full of passion
and self,  and vulgarisms and vanity.'
Letters,  viii.  366.     In one passage
Barry praises Johnson  : — '  My ad-
miration,' he writes,  'of the genius
and abilities of this great master of

morality,  Dr.  Johnson,  cannot be
more than it is  ;  but my estimation
of his literary abilities is next to
nothing when compared with my
reverence for his consistent,  manly,
and well-spent life — so long a writer
in such a town as London,  and
through many vicissitudes,  without
ever being betrayed into a single
meanness that at this day he might
be ashamed to avow.'  Barry's Works,
ed.  1809,  ii.  339.  The passage in
which Johnson  '  has not escaped  '  is,
I believe,  the following,  which comes
in the midst of an insolent attack on
Reynolds  : — '  The affluence which
may arise from the vogue for making
portraits may by little necessary arts
and industrious puffing be made to fill
up for the moment the little minds
of the thoughtless rabble,  whether of
the polite or vulgar sort,  or both,  and
will even help to confound matters
still further,  and give our names a
consequence with some of those dis-
pensers of fame,  the book-makers  ;
who,  however knowing in what they
may have really studied,  can,  with a
very few exceptions,  hardly be con-
sidered for their knowledge of the arts
as in anything differing from the mere
herd.'  Ib.  p.  309.  SeeZz)£,  iv.  224.

To

294

To Mrs.   Thrale.

[A.D.  1783.

838.

To SIR JOSHUA REYNOLDS.
[London],  May 2,  1783.     Published in the Life,  iv.  219.

839.

TO MRS.    THRALE1.

DEAR MADAM,  London,  [Thursday]  May 8,  1783.

I thought your letter long in coming.  I suppose it is true
that I looked but languid at the exhibition,  but have been worse
since.  Last Wednesday,  the Wednesday of last week,  I came
home ill from Mr.  Jodrel's 2,  and after a tedious,  oppressive,  im-
patient night,  sent an excuse to General Paoli,  and took on
Thursday two brisk catharticks and a dose of calomel.  Little
things do me no good.  At night I was much better3.  Next
day cathartick again,  and the third day opium for my cough.
I lived without flesh all the three days4.  The recovery was
more than I expected.  I went to church on Sunday quite at
ease.

The exhibition prospers so much,  that Sir Joshua says it will
maintain the academy.  He estimates the probable amount at
three thousand pounds5.  Steevens is of opinion that Croft's
books will sell for near three times as much as they cost,  which
however is not more than might be expected.

Favour me with a direction to Musgrave of Ireland ;    I

1 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  257.

2 Ante,  ii.  133,  n.  3.

3 Boswell called on Johnson on the
evening of this day,  and records what
he said on the strangeness of there
being  '  so little reading in the world
and so much writing.'    Life,  iv.  218.

4 On the last of the three days,
Saturday,  May 3,  he dined at Mrs.
Garrick's.     '  Poor Johnson,'    wrote
Hannah More    (Memoirs,   i.   280),
'  exerted himself exceedingly,  but he
was very ill and looked so dreadfully,
that it quite grieved me.    He is more

mild and complacent than he used
to be.  His sickness seems to have
softened his mind,  without having at
all weakened it.  I was struck with
the mild radiance of this setting sun.
As we all paid him the homage he
both expects and deserves he was
very communicative,  and of course in-
structive and delightful in the highest
degree.'

5 The receipts are not given for
this year in Leslie and Taylor's
Reynolds.  The following year,  1784,
they were  .£2444.  Ib.  ii.  441.

have

Aetat.  73.]  To Mr.  and Miss Wilkes.  295

have a charitable office to propose to him.     Is he Knight or
Baronet1?

My present circle of enjoyment is as narrow for me as the
Circus 2 for Mrs.  Montague.  When I first settled in this neigh-
bourhood I had Richardson and Lawrence,  and Mrs.  Allen
at hand 3.  I had Mrs.  Williams,  then no bad companion,  and
Levet for a long time always to be had.  If I now go out I must
go far for company,  and at last come back to two sick and dis-
contented women,  who can hardly talk,  if they had any thing
to say,  and whose hatred of each other makes one great exercise
of their faculties 4.

But,  with all these evils,  positive and privative,  my health in
its present humour promises to mend,  and I,  in my present
humour,  promise to take care of it,  and if we both keep our
words,  we may yet have a brush at the cobwebs in the sky.

Let my dear loves write to me,  and do you write often your-
self to,

Dear Madam,
Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

840.

To MR.  AND Miss WILKES 5.         May 2

Mr.  Johnson returns thanks to Mr.  and Miss Wilkes for their
kind invitation  ;  but he is engaged for Tuesday to Sir Joshua
Reynolds,  and for Wednesday to Mr.  Paradise.

1 Sir Richard Musgrave,  an Irish doubt,  the wife of Johnson's landlord
Baronet,  who had succeeded to the and next neighbour.

title on December 2,  1782.    Debrett's 4 Mrs.  Williams and Mrs.   Des-

New Peerage,    ed.    1820,    ii.    1425.  moulins.    See post,  p.  309,  for the

Miss Burney describes him as   '  a same melancholy complaints.

caricature of Mr.  Boswell,  who is a s First published in Almon's Cor-

caricature of all other of Dr.  Johnson's respondence of John Wilkes,  ed.  1 805,

admirers.'     She gives a very amusing iv.  321.

account of him.      Mine.  D'Arblay's Boswell had written to Wilkes on

Diary,  ii.  84.     See ante,  i.  399.  May 21  :  —  '  Mr.    Boswell's compli-

2 The Circus at Bath,  no doubt.  ments to Mr.  Wilkes.     He rejoices

3 Richardson the novelist lived in to find he is so much better as to be
Salisbury Court,  now known as Salis-  abroad.     He finds that it would not
bury Square.     Mrs.   Allen was,   no be unpleasant to Dr.  Johnson to dine

To

296

To the Reverend Dr.  Hamilton.        [A.D.  1733.

841.

To THE RIGHT HONOURABLE WILLIAM WINDHAM.
London,  May 31,  1783.     Published in the Life,  iv.  227.

842.

To SIR JOSHUA REYNOLDS.
[London],  June 2,  1783.     Published in the Life,  iv.  227.

843.

To  -  June 2,  1783.

In Messrs.  Sotheby and Co.'s Auction Catalogue of Nov.  27,  1889,
Lot 98 is a Letter of Johnson,  one page quarto,  dated June 2,  1783,
4 ordering that a set of Ramblers should be delivered to the bearer z '.

844.

To THE REVEREND UR.  HAMILTON2.
REVEREND SIR,  Bolt Court,  June 4, 1783.

Be pleased to excuse this application from a stranger in
favour of one who has very little ability to speak for herself.
The unhappy woman who waits on you with this,  has been

at Mr.  Wilkes's.  The thing would be
so curiously benignant,  it were a pity
it should not take place.  Nobody
but Mr.  Boswell should be asked to
meet the doctor.  Mr.  Boswell goes
for Scotland on Friday the 3oth.  If
then a card were sent to the doctor
on Monday,  Tuesday or Wednesday,
without delay,  it is to be hoped he
would be fixed ;  and notice will be
sent to Mr.  Boswell.'  Ib.  p.  314.

Four days later he sent the fol-
lowing note :— '  South Audley Street,
25th May,  1783.  Mr.  Boswell pre-
sents his best compliments to Mr.
and Miss Wilkes:  encloses Dr.
Johnson's answer ;  and regrets much
that so agreeable a meeting must be
deferred till next year,  as Mr.  Bos-
well is to set out for Scotland in a
few days.  Hopes Mr.  Wilkes will

write to him there.'    Ib.  p.  321.

It is strange that Boswell makes
no mention of this invitation in the
Life.  He may have thought that it
was not worthy of Johnson to be
willing to visit a man so infamous
as Wilkes.

1 Perhaps Johnson had met some
other old acquaintance,    who,   like
his fellow-collegian,  Oliver Edwards,
'  had been told that he had written a
very pretty book called The Rambler.
"I was unwilling,"    said Johnson,
"  that he should leave the world in
total darkness,  and sent him a set." '
Life,  iv.  90.

2 First published in Croker's Bos-
well, page 757.

Dr.  Hamilton was Vicar of St.
Martin's in the Fields.

known

Aetat.  73.]  To Mrs.   Thrale.  297

known to me many years.  She is the daughter of a clergyman
of Leicestershire,  who by an unhappy marriage is reduced to
solicit a refuge in the workhouse of your parish,  to which she has
a claim by her husband's settlement x.

Her case admits of little deliberation  ;  she is turned out of her
lodging into the street.  What my condition allows me to do
for her I have already done,  and having no friend,  she can have
recourse only to the parish.

I am,  reverend Sir,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

845.

TO MRS.    THRALE2.

DEAR MADAM,  London,  June 5, 1783.

Why do you write so seldom  ?  I was very glad of your
letter.  You were used formerly to write more,  when I know not
why you should  [have]  had much more to say.  Do not please
yourself with showing me that you can forget me,  who do not
forget you.

Mr.  Desmoulins'  account of my health rather wants confirma-
tion. But complaints are useless.

I have,  by the migration of one of my ladies,  more peace at
home ;  but I remember an old savage chief that says of the
Romans with great indignation — ubi solitudinem faciunt,  pacem
appellant 3.

Mr. was not calamity,  it was his sister,  to whom I am

afraid the term is now strictly applicable,  for she seems to have
fallen some way into obscurity;  I am afraid by a palsy4.

1 The law of settlement is the law Commentaries,  ed.  1775,  i.  363.

which determines the parish to which 2 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  259.

a pauper belongs,  where he has the 3 It was Mrs.  Desmoulins who had

right to be maintained,  and which gone away.      Life,    iv.    233.     The

gives the power of removing him to quotation is from The Agricola of

it.     Penny Cyclo.,  ed.  1840,  xviii.  400.  Tacitus,  c.  xxx.

'  A new settlement may be acquired 4 Johnson,  post,  p.  310,  refers to

several ways,  as by marriage.     For  '  new calamities,'  and mentions a lady

a woman,   marrying a man that is left  *  very slenderly supplied.'     It is

settled in another parish,  changes possible that this letter is misplaced

her own settlement.'     Blackstone's by Mrs.  Piozzi.

Whence

298

To Mrs.  Thrale.

[A.D.1783.

Whence your pity arises for the thief that has made the hang-
man idle,  I cannot discover.  I am sorry indeed for every suicide,
but I suppose he would have gone to the gallows without being
lamented1.

You will soon see that Miss H ,  if she finds countenance,

and gets scholars,  will conquer her vexations.  Is not Susy like-
wise one of her pupils  ?  I owe Susy a letter,  which I purpose to
pay next time.

I can tell you of no new thing in town,  but Dr.  Maxwel2,
whose lady is by ill health detained with two little babies at
Bath.

You give a cheerful account of your way of life.  I hope you
will settle into tranquillity.

When I can repay you such a narrative of my felicity,  you
shall see description.

I am,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

846.

TO MRS.    THRALE3.

DEAR MADAM,  London,  June 13, 1783.

Yesterday were brought hither two parcels directed to Mrs.
Thrale,  to the care of Dr.  Johnson.  By what the touch can
discover,  they contain something of which cloaths are made ;  and
I suspect them to be Musgrave's4 long-expected present.  You
will order them to be called for,  or let me know whither I shall
send them.

Crutchley has had the gout,  but is abroad again.  Seward
called on me yesterday.  He is going only for a few weeks  ;  first
to Paris,  and then to Flanders,  to contemplate the pictures of

1 It is possible,  though not likely,
that Johnson refers to Powell,  the
Cashier in the Army Pay Office,  in
whose accounts a great deficiency
had been discovered.  He cut his
throat towards the end of May.  It
does not seem likely that he would
have been tried oa a capital charge.
His accomplice Bembridge was sen-

tenced to pay a fine of  ,£2,600,  and
to be imprisoned for six months.
Walpole's Letters,  viii.  371,  and
Ann.  Reg.,  1783,  i.  221.

2 Perhaps his friend the Rev.  Dr.
Maxwell,  who supplied Boswell with
some Collectanea.     Life,  ii.  116.

3 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  262.

4 The Irish baronet.    Ante,  ii.  294.

Claude

Aetat.  73.]  To Mrs.   Thrale.  299

Claude Loraine ;  and he asked me if that was not as good a way
as any of spending time — that time which returns no more — of
which however a great part seems to be very foolishly spent,  even
by the wisest and the best1.

That time at least is not lost in which the evils of life are
relieved,  and therefore the moments which you bestow on Miss
H are properly employed.  She seems to make an un-
common impression upon you.  What has she done or suffered
out of the common course of things?  I love a little secret
history.

Poor Dr.  Lawrence and his youngest son died almost on the
same day2.

Mrs.  Dobson,  the directress of rational conversation,  did not
translate Petrarch,  but epitomised a very bulky French Life of
Petrarch.  She translated,  I think,  the Memoirs of D'Aubigne3.

Your last letter was very pleasing';  it expressed kindness to
me,  and some degree of placid acquiescence in your present mode
of life,  which is,  I think,  the best which is at present within your
reach.

My powers and attention have for a long time been almost
wholly employed upon my health,  I hope not wholly without
success,  but solitude is very tedious.

I am,  Madam,
Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

1 Of Johnson's opinion of art see this lady as  *  exhausting her store of
Life,  i.  363,  n.  3.  compliments on her,  and then quitting

2 According to the Gentleman's her to go and give another dose of
Magazine,  1783,  p.  542,  Dr.  Lawrence flummery to Mrs.   Thrale.'       She
died at Canterbury on June 13,  his boasted that  'she had made  ,£400 of
second son died on the I5th.     But,  her Petrarca?       Mme.    D'Arblay's
if we may trust Munk's Roll of the Diary,  i.  352.     An anonymous Life
College of Physicians,  ii.  153,  on the of LfAubigne is reviewed in the
father's tomb-stone June 6 is given Gentleman's Magazine for 1772,  p.
as the day of his death.     If he died 281.  She was the wife of Dr.  Matthew
on June 13 or his son on the I5th Dobson,  a Liverpool physician.  Mrs.
Johnson's letter must be misdated.  Thrale says that during this visit to

3 Susanna Dobson's Life of Bath  '  Dr.  Dobson from Liverpool '
Petrarch was reviewed in the Gentle-  was one of her  '  medical advisers.' . . .
man's Magazine for 1775,  PP-   J86,  Kay ward's Piozzi,  i.  272.

240.     Miss Burney in 1780 describes

To

300

To Mrs.   Thrale.

[A.D.  1783.

847.

To EDMUND ALLEN.
[London],  June 17,  1783.     Published in the Life,  iv.  228.

848.

To THE REVEREND DR.  TAYLOR.
[London],  June 17,  1783.     Published in the Life,  iv.  228.

849.

To THOMAS DAVIES.
[London],  June 18,  1783.     Published in the Life,  iv.  231.

850.

TO MRS.    THRALE1.

DEAR MADAM,  Bolt-court,  Fleet-street,  June 19,  1783.

I am sitting down in no cheerful solitude to write a narrative
which would once have affected you with tenderness and sorrow,
but which you will perhaps pass over now with the careless
glance of frigid indifference.  For this diminution of regard how-
ever, I know not whether I ought to blame you,  who may have
reasons which I cannot know,  and I do not blame myself,  who
have for a great part of human life done you what good I could,
and have never done you evil.

I had been disordered in the usual way,  and had been relieved
by the usual methods,  by opium and catharticks,  but had rather
lessened my dose of opium.

On Monday the i6th I sat for my picture2,  and walked a con-
siderable way with little inconvenience.  In the afternoon and
evening I felt myself light and easy,  and began to plan schemes
of life3.  Thus I went to bed,  and in a short time waked and sat

1 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  268.

The greater part of this Letter is
given by Boswell in the Life,  iv.  229.
There too are given other letters in
which Johnson describes the stroke
of palsy which came upon him in the
morning of June 17.

2 No doubt to Miss Reynolds.
Post,  p.  327.

3 On his birthday in 1764 he re-
corded in his Diary  : — '  I have now
spent fifty-five years in resolving;
having,  from the earliest time almost
that I can remember,  been forming
schemes of a better life.  I have done
nothing.'  Pr.andMed.,  p.  58.  Ante,
\.  250,  n.  4.

up,

Aetat.  73.]  To Mrs.  Thrale.  301

up,  as has been long my custom,  when I felt a confusion and
indistinctness in my head,  which lasted I suppose about half
a minute ;  I was alarmed,  and prayed God,  that however he
might afflict my body,  he would spare my understanding.  This
prayer,  that I might try the integrity of my faculties,  I made in
Latin verse1.  The lines were not very good,  but I knew them
not to be very good  :  I made them easily,  and concluded myself
to be unimpaired in my faculties.

Soon after I perceived that I had suffered a paralytick stroke,
and that my speech was taken from me.  I had no pain,  and so
little dejection in this dreadful state,  that I wondered at my own
apathy,  and considered that perhaps death itself when it should
come would excite less horrour than seems now to attend it.

In order to rouse the vocal organs I took two drams.  Wine
has been celebrated for the production of eloquence.  I put
myself into violent motion,  and I think repeated it ;  but all was
vain.  I then went to bed,  and,  strange as it may seem,  I think,
slept.  When I saw light,  it was time to contrive what I should
do.  Though God stopped my speech he left me my hand,
I enjoyed a mercy which was not granted to my dear friend
Lawrence 2,  who now perhaps overlooks me as I am writing,  and
rejoices that I have what he wanted.  My first note was neces-
sarily to my servant,  who came in talking,  and could not imme-
diately comprehend why he should read what I put into his
hands.

I then wrote a card to Mr.  Allen3,  that I might have a discreet
friend at hand to act as occasion should require.  In penning this
note I had some difficulty,  my hand,  I knew not how nor why,
made wrong letters.  I then wrote to Dr.  Taylor4 to come to me,

1  'Nocte,  inter i6et 17 Junii,  1783.  2 The palsy had deprived Dr.

Summe pater,  quodcunque tuum de Lawrence of the power of writing

corpore Numen some time before his death.    Life,

Hoc statuat,    precibus Christus iv.  144,  n.  3.

adesse velit :  3 His landlord and next neighbour.

Ingenio parcas,  nee sit mihi culpa See Life,  iv.  228,  for the letter.

rogasse,  4 This is one of the very few letters

Qua solum potero parte placere which Taylor allowed Boswell to

tibi.'  publish.     Ib.     The following exact

Works,  i.  159.  reprint of it is given by Professor

and

302

To Mrs.   Tkrale.

[A.D.  1783.

and bring Dr.  Heberden,  and I sent to Dr.  Brocklesby,  who is
my neighbour1.  My physicians are very friendly and very disin-
terested, and give me great hopes,  but you may imagine my
situation.  I have so far recovered my vocal powers,  as to repeat
the Lord's Prayer with no very imperfect articulation.  My
memory,  I hope,  yet remains as it was  ;  but such an attack
produces solicitude for the safety of every faculty.

How this will be received by you I know not.     I hope you
will sympathise with me ;  but perhaps

My mistress gracious,  mild,  and good,
Cries !    Is he dumb  ?   Tis time he shou'd 2.

But can this be possible  ?    I hope it cannot.    I hope that what,

Mayor in Notes and Queries,  6th
S.  v.  481.  'The repetitions be-
tray,' he says,  'the writer's agita-
tion '  :—

DEAR SIR,— It has pleased God
by a paralytick stroke in the night to
deprive me of speech.

I am very desirous of Dr Heber-
den['s]  assistance as I think my case
is not past remedy.  Let me see
you as soon as it is possible.  Bring
Dr Heberden with you if you can,
but come yourself,  at all events.  I
am glad you are so well,  when when
[sic]  I am so dreadfully attacked.

I think that by a speedy applica-
tion of stimulants much may be done.
I question if a a  [sic]  vomit vigorous
and rough would not rouse the organs
of speech to action.

As it is too early to send I will try
to recollect what I can that can be
suspected to have brough[t]  on this
dreadful distress.

I have been accustomed to bleed
frequently for an asthmatick com-
plaint, but have forborn for some
time by Dr Pepys's persuasion,  who
perceived my legs beginning to swell.

I sometimes alleviate a painful,  or
more properly an oppressive constric-
tion of my chest by opiates,  and have

lately taken opium frequently,  but the
last,  or two last times in smaller
quantities.  My largest dose is three
grains,  and last night I took but two.

You will suggest these thing[s],
and they are all that I can call to
mind,  to Dr Heberden.
I am,  &c.,

SAM  :  JOHNSON.

June 17,  1783.

Dr Brocklesby will be with me to
meet Dr Heberden,  and I shall have
previously make master of the case
as well as I can.

To the Revd Dr Taylor.

1 In the British Museum in the
Grace Collection,  xi.  60,  is a picture
of Dr.  Heberden's house on the south
side of Pall Mall ;  the only freehold
in Pall Mall,  the site of the house
given to Nell Gwynne by King
Charles II.'      Brocklesby in 1788,
and probably at this time too,  was
living in Norfolk Street,    Strand.
Burke's Correspondence,  iii.  78.

2  '  The queen so gracious,  mild,  and

good
Cries,  "  Is he gone  ?  'tis time he

should." '

On the Death of Dr.  Swift.  Swift's
Works,  ed.  1803,  xi.  245.

when

Aetat.  73.]  To Mrs.   Thrale.  303

when I could speak,  I spoke of you,  and to you,  will be in
a sober and serious hour remembered by you1 ;  and surely it
cannot be remembered but with some degree of kindness.  I have
loved you with virtuous affection  ;  I have honoured you with
sincere esteem.  Let not all our endearments be forgotten,  but
let me have in this great distress your pity and your prayers.
You see I yet turn to you with my complaints as a settled and
unalienable friend  ;  do not,  do not drive me from you,  for I have
not deserved either neglect or hatred.

To the girls,  who do not write often,  for Susy has written only
once,  and Miss Thrale2 owes me a letter,  I earnestly recommend,
as their guardian and friend,  that they remember their Creator
in the days of their youth3.

I suppose you may wish to know how my disease is treated by
the physicians.  They put a blister upon my back,  and two from
my ear to my throat,  one on a side.  The blister on the back has
done little,  and those on the throat have not risen.  I bullied
and bounced,  (it sticks to our last sand4)  and compelled the
apothecary to make his salve according to the Edinburgh Dis-
pensatory5, that it might adhere better.  I have two on now of
my own prescription.  They likewise give me salt of hartshorn,
which I take with no great confidence,  but am satisfied that what
can be done is done for me.

0 God !  give me comfort and confidence in Thee  :  forgive my
sins;  and if it be Thy good pleasure,  relieve my diseases for
Jesus Christ's sake.     Amen.

1 am almost ashamed of this querulous letter,  but now it is
written,  let it go.

I am,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

1 Ante,  ii.  292,  n.  3.  '  Time that on all things lays his

2 He does not call her Queeney.  lenient hand

3 Ecclesiastes,  xii.  i.  Yet tames not this ;   it sticks to

4 Johnson says that his old habit our last sand.'

of bullying and bouncing will stick  *  In the Gentleman's Magazine for

to him till the last sand is running 1747,  p.  548,  is advertised The Edin-

out.     '  It sticks to our last sand '  is a burgh Pharmacopceia,  edited by W.

quotation from Pope's Moral Essays,  Lewis,  M.B.
i.  224  :—

TO

304 To Mrs.  Thrale.  [A.D.  rzss.

851.

To MRS.  THRALE  '.

DEAREST MADAM,  London,  June 20, 1783.

I think to send you for some time a regular diary.  You
will forgive the gross images which disease must necessarily
present.  Dr.  Lawrence said,  that medical treatises should be
always in Latin2.

The two vesicatories3 which I procured with so much trouble
did not perform well,  for,  being applied to the lower part of the
fauces,  a part always in motion,  their adhesion was continually
broken.  The back,  I hear,  is very properly flayed.

I have now healing application to the cheeks,  and have my
head covered with one formidable diffusion of cantharides 4,  from
which Dr.  Heberden assures me that experience promises great
effects.  He told me likewise,  that my utterance has been im-
proved since yesterday,  of which,  however,  I was less certain ;
though doubtless they who see me at intervals can best judge.

I never had any distortion of the countenance,  but what Dr.
Brocklesby called a little prolapsus,  which went away the second
day.

I was this day directed to eat flesh,  and I dined very copiously
upon roasted lamb and boiled pease :  I then went to sleep in
a chair,  and when I waked,  I found Dr.  Brocklesby sitting by
me,  and fell to talking with him in such a manner as made me
glad,  and,  I hope,  made me thankful.  The Doctor fell to repeat-
ing Juvenal's ninth satire ;  but I let him see that the province
was mine 5.

I am to take wine to-night,  and hope it will do me good.

I am,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

1 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  273.  to raise blisters.'     Ib.

2 Mrs.  Thrale,  if I understand one 5 Eighteen months later Dr.
of her letters rightly,  was not too Brocklesby,  when attending John-
nice to make a coarse medical joke son on his death-bed,  and talking on
to Dr.  Lawrence.     Mme.  D'Arblay's the subject of prayer,  '  repeated from
Diary,  ii.  123.  Juvenal, —

3  '  Vesicatory.     A blistering medi-  "  Orandum est,  ut sit mens sana in
cine.'     Johnson's Dictionary.  corpore sane"

'  Cantharides.  Spanish flies used and so on to the end of the tenth

To

Aetat.  73.]  To Mrs.  Thrale.  305

852.

To MAURITIUS LowE1.
SIR,  Friday,  June 20,  1783.

You know,  I suppose,  that a sudden illness makes it imprac-
ticable to me to wait on Mr.  Barry,  and the time is short.  If it
be your opinion that the end can be obtained by writing,  I am
very willing to write,  and,  perhaps,  it may do as well ;  it is,  at
least,  all that can be expected at present from,
Sir,

Your most humble servant,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

If you would have me write,  come to me :    I order your
admission.

853.

TO MRS.    THRALE2.

DEAR MADAM,  London,  June 21, 1783.

I continue my journal.  When I went to bed last night,
I found the new covering of my head uneasy,  not painful,  rather
too warm.  I had however a comfortable and placid night.  My
physicians this morning thought my amendment not inconsider-
able ;  and my friends who visited me said,  that my look was
spritely and cheerful.  Nobody has shown more affection than
Paradise 3.  Langton 4 and he were with me a long time to-day.
I was almost tired.

satire  ;  but in running it quickly over,  ii.  66,  293,  and for James Barry ante,

he happened,  in the line,  ii.  293.     Johnson in the midst of his

"  Qui spatium vitce extremum inter own troubles does not forget his poor

munera ponat?  friend.

to pronounce supremum for ex-  2 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  275.

tremum  ;  at which Johnson's critical 3 Johnson in a letter to him written

ear instantly took offence,  and dis-  on October 20,  1784,  speaks of his

coursing vehemently on the un-  great and constant kindness to him.

metrical effect of such a lapse,  he Life,  iv.  364.

shewed himself as full as ever of 4 Langton the following spring

the spirit of the grammarian.3 Life,  '  took a little lodging in Fleet Street

iv.  401.  in order to be near,  to devote himself

1 First published in Croker's Bos-  to Dr.  Johnson.'      Hannah More's

page 735.  Memoir s^  i.  310.

For Mauritius Lowe see ante,

VOL.  ii.                                       x When

306 To Mrs.  Thrale.

When my friends were gone I took another liberal dinner,  such
as my physicians recommended,  and slept after it,  but without
such evident advantage as was the effect of yesterday's siesta.
Perhaps the sleep was not quite so sound,  for I am harassed by
a very disagreeable operation of the cantharides,  which I am
endeavouring to control by copious dilution.

My disorders are in other respects less than usual  ;  my disease,
whatever it was,  seems collected into this one dreadful effect.
My breath is free  ;  the constrictions of the chest are suspended,
and my nights pass without oppression.

To-day I received a letter of consolation and encouragement
from an unknown hand,  without a name,  kindly and piously,
though not enthusiastically written x.

I had just now from Mr.  Pepys a message,  enquiring in your
name after my health,  of this I can give no account 2.

I am,  Madam,

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

854.

TO MRS.    THRALE3.

DEAR MADAM,  London,  June 23,  1783.

I thank you for your kind letter,  and will continue my
diary.  On the night of the sist I had very little rest,  being kept
awake by an effect of the cantharides,  not indeed formidable,  but
very tiresome and painful.  On the 22d the physicians released

1 Johnson,  I think,  uses enthusi-  versation,  which made his acquaint-

astically in the sense in which he ance shunned.     It was such a letter

defines enthusiasm in his Diction-  as many a one,  on the receipt of it,

ary:  —  '  A vain belief of private revela-  would have destroyed.     On the con-

tion  ;   a vain confidence of divine trary Johnson placed it in his bureau

favour or communication.'  He quotes in a situation so obvious that it might

from Locke  :  —  '  Enthusiasm is look him in the face.'     Hawkins's

founded neither on reason nor divine Johnson^  p.  601,  note.

revelation,  but rises from the conceits 2 He cannot,  that is to say,  under-

of a warmed or overweening brain.'  stand why Mr.  Pepys who was in

Hawkins tells how after Johnson's London should make such an enquiry

death he found among his papers in the name of Mrs.  Thrale who was

another letter    '  from an unknown in Bath and in constant correspond-

hand  '  not of consolation but reproof.  ence with him.

It pointed out  '  his evil habits in con-  3 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  277.

me

Aetat.  73.]  To Mrs.  Thrale.  307

me from the salts of hartshorn.  The cantharides continued their
persecution,  but I was set free from it at night.  I had however
not much sleep,  but I hope for more to-night.  The vesications
on my back and face are healing,  and only that on my head
continues to operate.

My friends tell me that my power of utterance improves daily,
and Dr.  Heberden declares that he hopes to find me almost well
to-morrow.

Palsies are more common than I thought.  I have been visited
by four friends who have had each a stroke,  and one of them
two.

Your offer,  dear Madam,  of coming to me,  is charmingly kind ;
but I will lay up for future use,  and then let it not be considered
as obsolete  ;  a time of dereliction1 may come,  when I may have
hardly any other friend,  but in the present exigency I cannot
name one who has been deficient in civility or attention.  What
man can do for man has been done for me.  Write to me very
often

I am,  Madam,

Your,  &c.,

SAM  :  JOHNSON.

855.

TO MRS.  THRALE2.

DEAR MADAM,

The journal now,  like other journals,  grows very dry,  as
it is not diversified either by operations or events.  Less and
less is done,  and,  I thank God,  less and less is suffered every
day.  The physicians seem to think that little more needs to
be done.  I find that they consulted to-day about sending me
to Bath,  and thought it needless.  Dr.  Heberden takes leave
to-morrow.

This day I watered the garden 3,  and did not find the watering-
pots more heavy than they have hitherto been,  and my breath is
more free.

1 Dereliction Johnson defines as          *  Piozzi Letters,  ii.  278.
'  an utter forsaking or leaving ;  an 3 Ante,  ii.  193.
abandoning.'

X 2 Poor

308

To Mrs.  Porter.

[A.D.  1783.

Poor dear

has just been here with a present1.     If it

ever falls in your way to do him good,  let him have your favour.
Both Queeney's letter and yours gave me to-day great pleasure.
Think as well and as kindly of me as you can,  but do not
flatter me2.  Cool reciprocations of esteem are the great comforts
of life ;  hyperbolical praise only corrupts the tongue of the one,

and the ear of the other.

I am,  &c.,

London,  June 24,  1783.  SAM:  JOHNSON.

Your letter has no date.

856.

To MRS.  PORTER 3.
DEAR MADAM,  London,  June 25, 1783.

Since the papers have given an account of my illness,  it is
proper that I should give my friends some account of it myself.

Very early in the morning of the i6th4 of this month I per-
ceived my speech taken from me.  When it was light I sat down
and wrote such directions as appeared proper.  Dr.  Heberden
and Dr.  Brocklesby were called.  Blisters were applied,  and
medicines given.  Before night I began to speak with some
freedom,  which has been increasing ever since,  so that I have now
very little impediment in my utterance.  Dr.  Heberden took his
leave this morning5.

Since I received this stroke I have in other respects been
better than I was before,  and hope yet to have a comfortable
summer.  Let me have your prayers.

1 Perhaps Tom Davies the bank-
rupt bookseller.    Ante,  ii.  64.    John-
son writing to him on the i8th said
that he was   'strongly affected by
Mrs.  Davies's tenderness.'    Life,  iv.
231.  When he was dying Davies sent
him a present of pork.     Ib.  iv.  413,
n.  2.  The poor fellow may have hoped
to find a place in Johnson's will.

2 It was in vain that Johnson had
protested against her habit of flattery.
Ante,  i.  220-1,  313,  329.

3 First published in Croker's Bos-
well,  page 736.

4 It was not on the i6th,  but very
early in the morning of the I7th that
he was attacked.

5 Hawkins found the following note
in Johnson's Diary : —

'June 16.  I went to bed,  and,  as I
conceive,  about 3 in the
morning,  I had a stroke
of the palsy.

„  17.  I sent for Dr.  Heberden
and Dr.  Brocklesby.  God
bless them.

„     25.     Dr.  Heberden took leave.'

Hawkins's Johnson,  p.  558.

If

Aetat.  73.]  To Mrs.  Thrale.  309

If writing is not troublesome,  let me know whether you are
pretty well,  and how you have passed the winter and spring.
Make my compliments to all my friends.
I am,  dear Madam,

Your most humble servant,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

857.

TO MRS.    THRALE1.

DEAREST MADAM,  London,  June 28, 1783.

Your letter is just such as I desire,  and as from you I hope
always to deserve.

The black dog I hope always to resist,  and in time to drive,
though I am deprived of almost all those that used to help me 2.
The neighbourhood is impoverished.  I had once Richardson
and Lawrence in my reach.  Mrs.  Allen is dead.  My house has
lost Levet,  a man who took interest in every thing,  and therefore
ready at conversation 3.  Mrs.  Williams is so weak that she can
be a companion no longer.  When I rise my breakfast is solitary,
the black dog waits to share it,  from breakfast to dinner he con-
tinues barking,  except that Dr.  Brocklesby for a little keeps him
at a distance.  Dinner with a sick woman you may venture to
suppose not much better than solitary4.  After dinner,  what
remains but to count the clock,  and hope for that sleep which
I can scarce expect.  Night comes at last,  and some hours of
restlessness and confusion bring me again to a day of solitude.
What shall exclude the black dog from an habitation like this  ?

1 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  280.  choly way.  My old friend Mr.  Levett

2 For    'the black dog'  see ante,  is dead,  who lived with me in the
ii.  73.     It was Mrs.  Thrale and her house,  and was useful and companion-
husband who had saved him from his able  ;  Mrs.  Desmoulins is gone away ;
severest fit of depression nearly and Mrs.    Williams is so much
twenty years earlier.  Ante,\.  332,  n.  I.  decayed,  that she can add little to

3 Johnson alone knew of his merits another's gratifications.     The world
as a converser,  for  '  he seldom said a passes away,  and we are passing with
word while any company was present.'  it  ;  but there is,  doubtless,  another
Life,  i.  243.     See ante,  ii.  295.  world,  which will endure for ever.

4 A week later he wrote to Mrs.  Let us all fit ourselves for it.'     Id.
Porter : — *  I live now but in a melan-  iv.  233.

If

3io

To Mrs.  Thrale.

[A.D.  1783.

If I were a little richer,  I would perhaps take some cheerful
female into the house.

Your Bath news shews me new calamities.     I am afraid Mrs.
L  -  s I is left with a numerous family,  very slenderly supplied.

Mrs.  Sheward is an old maid,  I am afraid,  yet sur

-  ,  if he were well,  would be well enough liked  ;  his daughter
has powers and knowledge,  but no art of making them agreeable.
I must touch my journal.     Last night fresh flies were put to
my head,  and hindered me from sleeping.    To-day I fancy myself
incommoded by heat.

I have,  however,  watered the garden both yesterday and to-
day, just as I watered the laurels in the island 3.

I am,  Madam,

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

858.

TO MRS.    THRALE4.

DEAR MADAM,  Dune 30,  1783.]

Among those that have enquired after me,  Sir Philip5 is
one  ;  and Dr.  Burney was one of those who came to see me 6.
I have had no reason to complain of indifference or neglect.
Dick Burney is come home five inches taller7.

1 John Lewis,   Dean of Ossory,
who had married Johnson's friend
Charlotte Cotterel  (Life,  i.  382),  died
on June 28.     Gentlemaris Magazine,
1783,  p.  628.

2  'litre sur le pave",  n'avoir point de
domicile,  et fig.  n'avoir point de con-
dition, d'emploi.'     Littrt.

3 In an island no doubt in the pool
which Mr.  Thrale dug at Streatham.
Ante,  i.  360.    Susan Burney,  describ-
ing her visit to the Thrales in 1779,
says  : — '  We strolPd about the sweet
plantations,  and saw the summer-
house,  and Dick's island.'      Early
Diary of Frances Burney,  ii.  259.

4 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  282.

Mrs.  Piozzi does not give the date
of this letter.     Johnson says,  '  yester-

day I went to church.'  His letter to
Bos well shows that it was on Sunday
that he went to church.  Life,  iv.
232.  Sunday was the 29th.

5 Sir Philip Jennings Clerk.  Ante,
ii.  142.

6 Miss Burney records in her
Journal on June 19,  that hearing of
Johnson's illness she and her father
went instantly to his house.  '  He had
earnestly desired me,  when we lived
so much together at Streatham,  to see
him frequently if he should be ill.  He
saw my father ;  but he had medical
people with him,  and could not
admit me upstairs,  but he sent me
down a most kind message.'     Mme.
D'Arblay's Diary,  ii.  269.

7 He was the boy whom Johnson

Yesterday

Aetat.  73.]  To Mrs.  Thrale.  311

Yesterday in the evening I went to church,  and have been to-
day to see the great burning glass,  which does more than was
ever done before by the transmission of the rays,  but is not equal
in power to those which reflect them.  It wastes a diamond placed
in the focus,  but causes no diminution of pure gold.  Of the rubies
exposed to its action,  one was made more vivid,  the other paler x.
To see the glass,  I climbed up stairs to the garret,  and then up
a ladder to the leads,  and talked to the artist rather too long ;
for my voice,  though clear and distinct for a little while,  soon
tires and falters.  The organs of speech are yet very feeble,  but
will I hope be by the mercy of God finally restored :  at present,
like any other weak limb,  they can endure but little labour at
once.  Would you not have been very sorry for me when I could
scarcely speak  ?

Fresh cantharides were this morning applied to my head,  and
are to be continued some time longer.  If they play me no
treacherous tricks,  they give me very little pain.

Let me have your kindness and your prayers  ;  and think on
me,  as on a man who,  for a very great portion of your life,
has done you all the good he could,  and desires still to be

considered,

Madam,

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

859.

TO MRS.    THRALE2.

DEAREST MADAM,  London,  July i,  1783.

This morning I took the air by a ride to Hampstead3,  and

five years or so earlier had accom-  2 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  284.

panied when he first went to Win-  3 Hampstead,  which is now joined

Chester School.     Life,  iii.  367,  and to London by an unbroken line of

Early Diary of Frances Burney,  ii.  houses,  is described in 1761 as    'a

284.  pleasant village situated near the top

1 In the Gentleman's Magazine,  of a hill about four miles on the

for 1774,  p.  220,  an account is given north-west side of London.     On the

of    '  experiments tried with Mr.  summit of this hill is a heath,  which

Villette's burning-glass in 1718.     A is adorned with many gentlemen's

diamond lost seven-eighths of its houses.'     Dodsley's London and its

weight.'  Environs,  iii.  134.     It was here that

this

312

To Mrs.   Thrale.

[A.D.  1783.

this afternoon I dined with the club1.  But fresh cantharides
were this day applied to my head.

Mr.  Cator called on me to-day,  and told that he had invited
you back to Streatham.  I shewed the unfitness of your return
thither,  till the neighbourhood should have lost its habits of de-
predation 2,  and he seemed to be satisfied.  He invited me very
kindly and cordially to try the air of Beckenham,  and pleased me
very much by his affectionate attention to Miss Vezy.  There
is much good in his character,  and much usefulness in his
knowledge 3.

Queeney seems now to have forgotten me.  Of the different
appearance of the hills and vallies an account may perhaps be
given,  without the supposition of any prodigy.  If she had been
out and the evening was breezy,  the exhalations would rise from
the low grounds very copiously ;  and the wind that swept and

Johnson in 1749 had brought his sick
wife for change of air,  and it was here
that he had written most,  if not the
whole,  of his Vanity of Human
Wishes.  Life,  i.  192.

1 Miss Burney records  : — '  I had
the satisfaction to hear from Sir
Joshua that Dr.  Johnson had dined
with him at the Club.     I called the
next morning to congratulate him,
and found him very gay and very
good-humoured.'     Mme.  D'Arblay's
Diary,  ii.  271.     In her Memoirs of
Dr.  Burney,  ii.  345,  she adds that she
offered to make his tea.     He had
given her his own large arm-chair
which was too heavy for her to move
to the table.     '  "  Sir,"  quoth she,  "  I
am in the wrong chair."     "  It is so
difficult,"   cried he with quickness,
"  for anything to be wrong that be-
longs to you,  that it can only be I
that am in the wrong chair to keep
you from the right one."  '     He kept
her for two hours,  and  '  endeavoured
most earnestly to engage her to stay
and dine with him and Mrs.  Williams.'

2 For Mr.  Cator,  one of Mr.  Thrale's
executors,    see ante,   ii.   128,   n.  4.

The  'habits of depredation'  were
testified to by the capital convictions.
At the Surrey Summer Assizes nine
men were sentenced to death for
robberies,  and at the Old Bailey  '  a
very long and fatiguing session '  was
brought to a close on August 2 by
the same sentence passed on twelve
robbers.  Gentleman's Magazine,\ 783,
p.  710.  Horace Walpole,  writing
on June 20,  says that some young
ladies who were visiting Strawberry
Hill,  on evening coming on,  '  were
seized with a panic of highwaymen,
and wanted to go.  I laughed and
said,  I believed there was no danger,
for that I had not been robbed these
two years.  However I was not quite
in the right ;  they were stopped in
Knightsbridge by two footpads.'
Letters,  viii.  381.

3 Boswell quotes this praise of
Cator and adds  :  —  'Dr.  Johnson
found a cordial solace at that gentle-
man's seat at Beckenham,  in Kent,
which is indeed one of the finest
places at which I ever was a guest ;
and where I find more and more a
hospitable welcome.'  Life,  iv.  313.
cleared

Aetat.  73.J To Mrs.   Thrale.  3 1 3

cleared the hills,  would only by its cold condense the vapours of
the sheltered vallies x.

Murphy is just gone from me ;  he visits me very kindly,  and I
have no unkindness to complain of2.

I am sorry that Sir Philip's3 request was not treated with
more respect,  nor can I imagine what has put them so much out
of humour :  I hope their business is prosperous.

I hope that I recover by degrees,  but my nights are restless ;
and you will suppose the nervous system to be somewhat en-
feebled.

I am,  Madam,

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

860.

TO MRS.    THRALE4.

DEAR MADAM,  London,  July 3,  1783.

Dr.  Brocklesby yesterday dismissed the cantharides,  and I
can now find a soft place upon my pillow.  Last night was cool,
and I rested well,  and this morning I have been a friend at a
poetical difficulty 5.  Here is now a glimpse of day-light again  ;
but how near is the evening  —  none can tell,  and I will not
prognosticate  ;  we all know that from none of us it can be far
distant  ;  may none of us know this in vain  !

I went,  as I took care to boast,  on Tuesday,  to the club 6,  and

p.  320,  n.  i.  wrote verses,  but who literally had

2 Murphy says that he found him no other notion of a verse,  but that
reading Dr.    Watson's Chymistry.  it consisted of ten syllables.     Lay
'Articulating with difficulty he your knife and your fork,  across your
said  :  —  "  From this book he who plate,  was to him a verse  :

knows nothing may learn a great Lay your knife and your fork,  across

deal,   and he who knows will be your plate.

pleased to find his knowledge recalled As he wrote a great number of verses,

to his mind in a manner highly he sometimes by chance made good

pleasing."  '     Murphy's Life of John-  ones,  though he did not know it.'

son,  p.  121.  Life,  ii.  51.

3 Sir Philip Jennings Clerk.  6 At this meeting of the Club the

4 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  286.  father of Lord Palmerston,  the prime-

5 Perhaps some author had sought minister,  was proposed,  and against
his aid.     '  I used once,'  he said,  '  to Johnson's opinion was rejected.     Ib.
be sadly plagued with a man who iv.  232.

hear

314 To Mrs.  Thrale.  [A.D.  1733.

hear that I was thought to have performed as well as usual.  I
dined on fish,  with the wing of a small Turkey chick,  and left
roast beef,  goose,  and venison pye untouched.  I live much on
peas,  and never had them so good,  for so long a time,  in any year
that I can remember.

When do you go to Weymouth  ?  and why do you go  ?  only I
suppose to a new place,  and the reason is sufficient to those who
have no reason to withhold them.

*  *  *  *  knows well enough how to live on four hundred a year,
but where is he to have it  ?  Had  *  *  *  *  any thing of his own
unsettled  ?

I am glad that Mrs.  Sheward talks of me,  and loves me,  and
have in this still scene of life great comfort in reflecting that I
have given very few reason to hate me I :  I hope scarcely any
man has known me closely but for his benefit,  or cursorily but
to his innocent entertainment.  Tell me,  you that know me best,
whether this be true,  that according to your answer I may con-
tinue my practice,  or try to mend it.

Along with your kind letter yesterday came one likewise very
kind from the Astons at Lichfield ;  but I do not know whether,
as the summer is so far advanced,  I shall travel so far,  though I
am not without hopes that frequent change of air may fortify me
against the winter,  which has been,  in modern phrase,  of late
years very inimical*  to,

Madam,

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

861.

To JAMES BOSWELL.
London,  July 3,  1783.     Published in the Life,  iv.  231.

1 Johnson,  who had seen Chester-  hate you more and longer than if you

field's Letters to his Son,  might have tell him plainly that you think him a

thought differently had his eye fallen rogue.'    Vol.  ii.  p.  58.     See the Life,

on the passage where the writer iv.  280,  for the comical scene when

says  : — '  Men are much more un-  Langton pointed out to Johnson that

willing to have their weaknesses and he thought him deficient in Christian

their imperfections known than their charity,  and Johnson  '  belaboured his

crimes  ;    and if you hint to a man confessor.'

that you think him silly,  ignorant,  2 Inimical is not in Johnson's

or even ill-bred,  or awkward,  he will Dictionary.

To

Aetat.  vs.]  To Mrs.   Tkrale.  315

862.

To MRS.  PORTER.
London,  July 5,  1783.     Published in the Life,  iv.  232.

863.

TO MRS.    THRALE1.

DEAR MADAM,  London,  July 5, 1783.

That Dr.  *  *  *  *2 is offended I am very sorry,  but if the same
state of things should recur,  I could not do better.  Dr.  Brocklesby
is,  you know,  my neighbour,  and could be ready at call ;  he had
for some time very diligently solicited my friendship  :  I depended
much upon the skill of Dr.  Heberden,  and him I had seen lately
at Brocklesby's.  Heberden I could not bear to miss,  Brocklesby
could not decently be missed,  and to call three,  had made me
ridiculous by the appearance of self-importance.  Mine was one
of those unhappy cases in which something must be wrong.  I
can only be sorry.

I have now no Doctor,  but am left to shift for myself as op-
portunity shall serve.  I am going next week with  *  *  *  *  to
*  *  *  * 3,  where I expect not to stay long.  Eight children in a
small house will probably make a chorus not very diverting.  My
purpose is to change the air frequently this summer.

Of the imitation of my stile,  in a criticism on Gray's Church-
yard, I forgot to make mention.  The author is,  I believe,  utterly
unknown,  for Mr.  Steevens cannot hunt him out4.  I know little
of it,  for though it was sent me I never cut the leaves open.  I
had a letter with it representing it to me as my own work ;  in

1 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  288.  Broome's  [her new brother-in-law].

2 Probably either Pepys or Jebb.  He has as much native humour as he

3 With Langton to Rochester.  has acquired erudition  ;  he has a face
Ante,  ii.  164,  n.  2,  and/^/,  p.  317.  that looks all honesty and kindness,

4 The book was entitled A Criti-  and manners gentle and humble.     I
cism on Gray's Elegy in a Country had expected a sharp,  though amus-
Churchyard,  and the author was John ing,  satirist,  from his very comic but
Young,  a Glasgow Professor.     Life,  sarcastic imitation of Dr.  Johnson's
iv.  392.     Mme.   D'Arblay describes Lives?      Mme.   D'Arblay's Diary,
him as  '  a man whose learning sits vi.  194.

upon him far lighter than Mr.

such

To Miss Susanna Thrale.

[A.D.  1783.

such an account to the publick there may be humour,  but to
myself it was neither serious nor comical.  I suspect the writer
to be wrongheaded  ;  as to the noise which it makes I have never
heard it,  and am inclined to believe that few attacks either of
ridicule or invective make much noise,  but by the help of those
that they provoke J.

I think Queeney's silence has something either of laziness or
unkindness ;  and I wish her free from both,  for both are very
unamiable,  and will both increase by indulgence.  Susy is I be-
lieve at a loss for matter.  I shall be glad to see pretty Sophy's
production.

I hope I still continue mending.     My organs are yet feeble.

I am,  Madam,

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

864.

To Miss SUSANNA THRALE2.

DEAREST Miss SUSY,  [About July 5, 1783.]

When you favoured me with your letter,  you seemed to be
in want of materials to fill it,  having met with no great adventures
either of peril or delight,  nor done or suffered any thing out of
the common course of life.

When you have lived longer,  and considered more,  you will
find the common course of life very fertile of observation and
reflection.  Upon the common course of life must our thoughts
and our conversation be generally employed.  Our general course
of life must denominate us wise or foolish  ;  happy or miserable  :
if it is well regulated we pass on prosperously and smoothly;  as
it is neglected we live in embarrassment,  perplexity,  and un-
easiness.

Your time,  my love,  passes,  I suppose,  in devotion,  reading,
work,  and company.  Of your devotions,  in which I earnestly
advise you to be very punctual,  you may not perhaps think it
proper to give me an account ;  and of work,  unless I understood

1 See Life,  ii.  61,  n.  4,  for parallel
passages from Johnson and other
authors.

2 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  290.
For Susanna Thrale see ante,  i.
354 5  ".  44-

it

Aetat.  73.]  To Mrs.  Tkrale.  317

it better,  it will be of no great use to say much ;  but books and
company will always supply you with materials for your letters
to me,  as I shall always be pleased to know what you are reading,
and with what you are pleased ;  and shall take great delight in
knowing what impression new modes or new characters make
upon you,  and to observe with what attention you distinguish
the tempers,  dispositions,  and abilities of your companions.

A letter may be always made out of the books of the morning
or talk of the evening  ;  and any letters from you,  my dearest,  will

be welcome to

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

865.

TO MRS.    THRALE1.

DEAR MADAM,  London,  July 8, 1783.

Time makes great changes of opinion.     *  *  *  *   ran per-
petually after in the lifetime of that lady,  to whom he

so earnestly desired to be reunited in the grave.     I am glad

2 is not left in poverty,  her disease seems to threaten her

with a full share of misery.

Of Miss H—  -3,  whom you charge me with forgetting,  I know
not why I should much foster the remembrance,  for I can do her
no good ;  but I honestly recommend her to your pity ;  for
nothing but the opportunity of emptying her bosom with con-
fidence can save her from madness.  To know at least one mind
so disordered is not without its use  ;  it shows the danger of ad-
mitting passively the first irruption of irregular imaginations.

Langton and I have talked of passing a little time at
Rochester together,  till neither knows well how to refuse,  though
I think he is not eager to take me,  and I am not desirous to be
taken4.  His family is numerous,  and his house little.  I have

1 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  292.  recorded this month*: — *  Mr.  Cam-

2 Probably Mrs.  L s mentioned bridge asked after Dr.    Johnson's

ante,  ii.  310.  health.  "  He is very much recovered,"

3 Ante,  ii.  298.  I answered,  "  and out of town at Mr.

4 For Johnson's visit to Rochester Langton's.     And there I hope he will
see Life,  iv.  8,  22,  233.  Miss Burney entertain him with enough of Greek."

*  The entry is misdated  '  Feb.  23.'    It was certainly written in July.

let

318 To William Strahan.  [A.D.

let him know,  for his relief,  that I do not mean to burden him
more than a week.  He is however among those who wish me
well,  and would exert what power he has to do me good.

I think you will do well in going to Weymouth,  for though it
be nothing,  it is,  at least to the young ones,  a new nothing,  and
they will be able always to tell that they have seen Weymouth x.
I am for the present willing enough to persuade myself,  that a short
succession of trifles may contribute to my re-establishment,  but
hope to return,  for it is surely time,  to something of importance.

I am,  dear Madam,

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

866.

To  .  July ii,  1783-

In Messrs.  Puttick and Simpson's Auction Catalogue of July 16,  1866,
Lot 275 is an autograph of Johnson  : — 'Note on a card,  July u,  1783.'

867.
gIR To WILLIAM STRAHAN 2.

I have enclosed the receipt ;  and a letter to Mrs.  Williams 3
which you  [will]  do me the favour of sending to her.

"Yes,"  said Mr.  Cambridge,  "and It was here that the Queen read
make his son repeat the Hebrew aloud to Miss Burney Mrs.  Piozzi's
alphabet to him." '  Mme.  D'Arblay's Journey.  Here Mrs.  Gwynn,  the
Diary,  ii.  260.  Johnson complained younger of the Miss Hornecks  (ante,
that  '  Langton had his children too i.  344),  *  talked over with Miss
much about him.'  Life,  iii.  128.  Burney anecdotes of their former
1 It was six years later that by the acquaintances  —  Dr.  Johnson,  Sir
visit of George III and his Court Joshua Reynolds,  Mrs.  Thrale,
Weymouth became famous.  Miss Baretti,  and her old admirer,  Dr.
Burney has described  '  the band of Goldsmith,  of whom she relates — as
music concealed in a neighbouring who does not  ?  a thousand ridiculous
bathing-machine,  which the moment traits.'  Mme.  D'Arblay's Diary,  v.
he popped his royal head under 36.  If only Miss Burney had been
water struck up God save great as careful in recording these anec-
Great George our King!  She has dotes,  as she always was with the
told us too of the Mayor who refused compliments paid to her as an author,
to kneel when the Queen offered her how grateful should we have been,
hand for him to kiss.  ' "  You should 2 From the original in the posses-
have knelt,  Sir,"  said Colonel Gwynn.  sion of Mr.  John Graham,  of the
"  Sir,"  answered the poor Mayor,  "  I Scottish Club,  Dover Street,
cannot."  "  Everybody does,  Sir."  3 Perhaps Johnson had received a
"  Sir, — I have a wooden leg."  '  further payment for his Journey to

The

Aetat 73.]  To Mrs.  Thrale.  319

The house where I am,  is very airy,  and pleasant,  and over-
looks the Medway where the channel is very broad,  so that I
hardly imagine a habitation more likely to promote health,  nor
have I much reason to complain ;  My general health is better
than it has been for some years — My breath is more free,  and
my nights are less disturbed.  But my utterance is still impeded,
and my voice soon grows weary with long sentences.  This,  I
hope,  time will remedy.  I hope dear Mrs.  Strahan continues

well.

I am,  Sir,

Your humble servant,

Rochester,  July 15,  1783.  SAM:    JOHNSON.

To William Strahan,  Esq.,  M.P.,  London.

868.

To Miss WILLIAMS.
Rochester,  July 15,  1783.     Mentioned in the last Letter.

869.

TO MRS.    THRALE1.

DEAR MADAM,  London,  July 23, 1783.

I have been thirteen days at Rochester,  and am just now
returned.  I came back by water in a common boat twenty miles
for a shilling,  and when I landed at Billingsgate I carried my
budget myself to Cornhill before I could get a coach,  and was
not much incommoded 2.

the Hebrides.     The Letter to Mrs.  at Gravesend at the landing of people

Williams has not,  I fear,  been pre-  from London to carry them to

served.  Rochester.'   At Gravesend surely the

1 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  294.  bell was rung at low tide,  so that the

2 Johnson had taken boat at boat might be carried up on the flow.
Gravesend.      In Dodsley's London By the tilt-boat which carried forty
and its Environs,  1761,  iii.   55,  vi.  passengers the fare was nine-pence;
266,  it is stated that  '  the Watermen's by the wherry which carried only
Company are by act of parliament ten,  a shilling.   From Billingsgate the
obliged to provide officers at Billings-  most convenient way for Johnson
gate and at Gravesend,  who,  at every would have been to take a sculling-
time of high water by night and day,  -boat to the Temple Stairs,  but doubt-
are at their respective places to ring less the state of the tide rendered it
publicly a bell for fifteen minutes,  to impossible or at least dangerous to
give notice to the tilt boats and pass under London Bridge,  where
wherries to put off;  and coaches ply there often was a fall of five feet.

I have

320

To Miss Sophia Thrale.

[A.D.  1783.

I have had Miss Susy's and Miss Sophy's letters,  and now I
am come home can write and write.  While I was with Mr.  Lang-
ton we took four little journies in a chaise,  and made one little
voyage on the Medway,  with four misses and their maid,  but
they were very quiet.

I am very well,  except that my voice soon faulters,  and I have
not slept well,  which I imputed to the heat,  which has been such
as I never felt before for so long time z.  Three days we had of
very great heat about ten years ago.  I infer nothing from it but
a good harvest.

Whether this short rustication 2 has done me any good I cannot
tell,  I certainly am not worse,  and am very willing to think my-
self better.  Are you better  ?  Sophy gave but a poor account of
you.  Do not let your mind wear out your body.

I am,  Madam,

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

870.

To Miss SOPHIA THRALE3.

DEAREST Miss SOPHY,      ,  London,  July 24, 1783.

By an absence from home,  and for one reason and another,

Pennant's London,  ed.  1790,  p.  296.
See Life,  1.458,  n.  2.

Budget Johnson defines as  '  a bag,
such as may be easily carried.'  The
sense in which it is now commonly
used,  as  *  the yearly financial state-
ment of the Chancellor of the Ex-
chequer,' is not given in his Dic-
tionary. In his Letter to Taylor,
post,  p.  322,  he calls his budget his
portmanteau.

1 Horace Walpole wrote on July

15  : — 'As much as I love to have

summer in summer,  I am tired of

this weather —

"  The dreaded east is all the wind

that blows  *."

It parches the leaves,  makes the turf
crisp,  claps the doors,  blows the
papers about,  and keeps one in a

constant mist that gives no dew,  but
might as well be smoke.  The sun
sets like a pewter plate red-hot ;  and
then in a moment appears the moon,
at a distance,  of the same complexion,
just as the same orb in a moving
picture serves for both.'  Letters,
viii.  386.  '  In 1783 Europe was
covered with a dense dry haze for
several months during the summer,
and the sun was shorn of its rays
during a long period of dry weather.
The haze extended from the sea-level
to an elevation higher than the tops
of the Alps.  It followed a great
eruption in Iceland.'  The Eruption
of Krakatoa,  p.  195.

2 Rustication is not in Johnson's
Dictionary.

3 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  295.

The Rape of the Lock,  iv.  20.

I owe

Aetat.73.]  To Miss Sophia Thrale.  321

I owe a great number of letters,  and I assure you that I sit down
to write yours first.  Why you should think yourself not a
favourite,  I cannot guess ;  my favour will,  I am afraid,  never be
worth much ;  but be its value more or less,  you are never likely
to lose it,  and less likely if you continue your studies with the
same diligence as you have begun them.

Your proficience in arithmetick is not only to be commended,
but admired.  Your master does not,  I suppose,  come very often,
nor stay very long ;  yet your advance in the science of numbers
is greater than is commonly made by those who,  for so many
weeks as you have been learning,  spend six hours a day in the
writing school I.

Never think,  my Sweet,  that you have arithmetick enough ;
when you have exhausted your master,  buy books.  Nothing
amuses more harmlessly than computation,  and nothing is oftener
applicable to real business or speculative enquiries.  A thousand
stories which the ignorant tell,  and believe,  die away at once,
when the computist takes them in his gripe.  I hope you will
cultivate in yourself a disposition to numerical enquiries;  they
will give you entertainment in solitude by the practice,  and re-
putation in publick by the effect 2.

If you can borrow Wilkins' s Real Character 3,  a folio,  which

1 By writing-school Johnson,    I i.  72,  and for instances where  *  he
think,  meant that part of a public takes stories in his gripe,'  ib.  iv.  171,
school in which English subjects 204.

were taught.  3 An Essay towards a Real

2  '  Useful,  and what we call every-  Character and a Philosophical
day knowledge had the most of Language,  by John Wilkins,  D.D.,
Johnson's just praise.      "  Let your 1668.       Wilkins was at one time
boy learn arithmetic,  dear Madam,"  Warden of Wadham College,  and
was his advice to the mother of a afterwards Bishop of Chester.     He
rich young heir.     "  He will not then married a sister of Oliver Cromwell,
be a prey to every rascal which this He was one of the founders of the
town swarms with ;  teach him the Royal Society.      Burnet describes
value of money,  and how to reckon him as  '  a great observer and a pro-
it.     Ignorance to a wealthy lad of one moter of experimental philosophy,
and twenty is only so much fat to a which was then a new thing,  and
sick sheep  ;  it just serves to call the much looked after.'    History of His
rooks about him."'     Piozzi's Anec-  Own Times,  ed.  1818,  i.  207.  Accord-
dotes,  p.  195.     The boy was no doubt ing to Addison,  'the Bishop was so
SirJohnLade.  Ante,  ii.i9i,«.i.  For confident of success in the art of flying
Johnson's love of arithmetic see Life,  that he says he does not question but

VOL.  II.  Y the

322

To the Reverend Dr.   Taylor.         f A.D.

the bookseller can perhaps let you have,  you will have a very
curious calculation,  which you are qualified to consider,  to shew
that Noah's ark was capable of holding all the known animals
of the world,  with provision for all the time in which the earth
was under water.  Let me hear from you soon again.

I am,  Madam,

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

871.

To THE REVEREND DR.  TAYLOR T.

DEAR SIR,

When your letter came to me I was with Mr.  Langton at
Rochester.  I was suspicious that you were ill.  He that goes
away,  you know,  is to write,  and for some time I expected a letter
every post.

My general health is undoubtedly better than before the
seizure.  Yesterday I came from Gravesend by water,  and carried
my portmanteau from Billingsgate to Cornhil  \sic\,  before I could
get a coach 2,  nor did I find any great inconvenience in doing it.

in the next age it will be as usual to
hear a man call for his wings when
he is going a journey as it is now to
call for his boots.'  The Guardian,

No.   112.

In a  *  Digression  '  Wilkins replies
to  '  hereticks of old and Atheistical
scoffers in these later times who have
confidently affirmed that it was
utterly impossible for the Ark to hold
so vast a multitude of Animals,  with
a whole year's provision of food for
each of them.'  He calculates that
'  the beasts of the rapacious carni-
vorous kinds were but forty in all or
twenty pairs,  which upon a fair calcu-
lation are supposed equivalent,  as to
the bulk of their bodies and their
food,  unto twenty-seven Wolves  ;  but
for greater certainty let them be sup-
posed equal to thirty Wolves  ;  and
let it be further supposed that six

Wolves will every day devour a whole
Sheep;  according to this computa-
tion five Sheep must be allotted to be
devoured for food each day of the
year,  which amounts in the whole to
1825.'  He gives a picture and a
plan showing how all the animals
and their food can be stowed away.
P.  166.

1 First published in Notes and
Queries,  6th S.  v.  481.

2 Hume,  writing of the year 1635,
says  : — '  There remains a proclama-
tion of this year prohibiting hackney-
coaches from standing in the street.
WTe are told that there were not
above twenty coaches of that kind in
London.     There are at present near
eight hundred.'      Hist,  of Eng.,  ed.
1773)  vi.   308.     In the first edition
he had said  '  above a thousand '  and
in the second  '  near a thousand.'     In

My

Aetat.  73.]  To Miss Susanna Thrale.  323

My voice in the exchange of salutations,  or on other little
occasions,  is as it was,  but in a continuance of conversation it
soon tires.  I hope it grows stronger,  but it does not make very
quick advance.

I hope you continue well,  or grow every day better ;  yet the
time will come when one of us shall lose the other.  May it come
upon neither of us unprepared.

I am,  dear Sir,

Yours affectionately,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

July 24,  1783.

To the Reverend Dr.  Taylor in Ashbourne,  Derbyshire.

872.

To Miss SUSANNA THRALE x.

DEAR MlSS SUSAN,  London,  July 26,  1783.

I answer your letter last,  because it was received last ;  and
when I have answered it,  I am out of debt to your house.  A
short negligence throws one behindhand.  This maxim,  if you
consider and improve it,  will be equivalent to your parson and
bird,  which is however a very good story,  as it shews how far
gluttony may proceed,  which where it prevails is I think more
violent,  and certainly more despicable,  than avarice itself.

Gluttony is,  I think,  less common among women than among
men 2.  Women commonly eat more sparingly,  and are less
curious in the choice of meat ;  but if once you find a woman
gluttonous,  expect from her very little virtue.  Her mind is en-
slaved to the lowest and grossest temptation.

A friend of mine,  who courted a lady of whom he did not
know much,  was advised to see her eat,  and if she was voluptuous
at table,  to forsake her.  He married her however,  and in a few
weeks came to his adviser with this exclamation,  '  It is the dis-
turbance of my life to see this woman eat.'  She was,  as might

Dodsley's London,  1761,  iii.  124,  it is the number of the coaches had risen
stated  : — '  The number of coaches is to a thousand.     Life,  iv.  330.
limited to eight hundred.     The fare z Piozzi Letters,  ii.  297.
for any distance not exceeding a mile 2 For Johnson's own love of good
and a half is one shilling.'     By 1784 eating see Life,  i.  467.

Y 2,  be

324

To Mrs.   Thrale.

[A.D.  1783.

be expected,  selfish and brutal,  and after some years of discord
they parted,  and I believe came together no more.

Of men,  the examples are sufficiently common.  I had a friend,
of great eminence in the learned and the witty world,  who had
hung up some pots on his wall to furnish nests for sparrows.  The
poor sparrows,  not knowing his character,  were seduced by the
convenience,  and I never heard any man speak of any future en-
joyment with such contortions of delight as he exhibited,  when
he talked of eating the young ones T.

When you do me the favour to write again,  tell me something
of your studies,  your work,  or your amusements.

I am,  Madam,

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

873.

To WILLIAM CUMBERLAND CRUIKSHANK.

London,  July 30,  1783.  Mentioned with other letters to the same
surgeon in the Life,  iv.  240.

874.

To DR.  JOHN MUDGE.

London,  July and August,  1783.  Several Letters from which extracts
are given in the Life,  iv.  240.

875.

TO MRS.    THRALE2.

DEAR MADAM,  London,  August 13, 1783.

Your letter was brought just as I was complaining that you
had forgotten me.

1 According to Mrs.  Piozzi this
friend was Isaac Hawkins Browne.
Hayward's Piozzi,  i.  320.  *  The
pretty Mrs.  Cholmondely said she
was soon tired of him,  because the
first hour he was so dull,  there was
no bearing him  ;  the second he was
so witty,  there was no bearing him  ;
the third he was so drunk,  there was
no bearing him.'  Ib.  i.  152.  'He
drank freely for thirty years/  said

Johnson,  'and wrote his poem De
Animi Immortalitate in some of the
last of these years.'  Life,  v.  156.
According to Mrs.  Piozzi  (Anecdotes,
P-  I73)>  Johnson spoke of him as
'  the most delightful converser with
whom he ever was in company.'  In
Campbell's British Poets are given
specimens of his verses.
s Piozzi Letters,  ii.  299.

I am

Aetat.  73.]

To Mrs.   Thrale.

325

I am glad that the ladies find so much novelty at Weymouth.
Ovid says,  that the sun is undelightfully uniform z.  They had
some expectation of shells,  which both by their form and colours
have a claim to human curiosity 2.  Of all the wonders,  I have
had no account,  except that Miss Thrale seems pleased with
your little voyages.

Sophy mentioned a story which her sisters would not suffer
her to tell,  because they would tell it themselves,  but it has
never yet been told me.

Mrs.  Ing is,  I think,  a baronet's daughter,  of an ancient house
in Staffordshire.  Of her husband's father,  mention is made in the
life of Ambrose Philips 3.

Of this world,  in which you represent me as delighting to live,
I can say littlfe.  Since I came home I have only been to church,
once to Burney's,  once to Paradise's,  and once to Reynolds's.
With Burney I saw Dr.  Rose4,  his new relation,  with whom I
have been many years acquainted.  If I discovered no reliques
of disease I am glad,  but Fanny's trade is fiction 5.

1 Johnson,  I conjecture,  wrote not
sun but sea.    The ladies had just
arrived at the sea-side.

2 Johnson's ignorance of the im-
portance of natural history is shown
by the following passage in The
Rambler,  No.  83  : — *  To mean under-
standings it is sufficient honour to
be numbered amongst the lowest
labourers of learning ;    but different
abilities must find different tasks.
To hew stone would have been un-
worthy of Palladio;    and to have
rambled in search of shells and
flowers had but ill-suited with the
capacity of Newton.'     See Life,  ii.
468,  for his attack on Brydone for
his repeating the observations of a
Sicilian geologist.

3  '  Philips had great sensibility of
censure,  if judgment may be made
by a single story which I heard long
ago from Mr.  Ing,  a gentleman of
great eminence in Staffordshire.
"Philips,"   said he,   "was once at

table,  when I asked him how came
the King of Epirus to drive oxen,
and to say Pm goaded on by love.
After which question he never spoke
again."  '  Works,  viii.  394.  Theodore
William Inge of Thorpe Constantine,
near Tamworth,  the son of  'the
gentleman of great eminence/  mar-
ried Henrietta,  daughter of Sir John
Wrottesley.  Burke' s Landed Gentry,
ed.  1882,  i.  849.

4 Dr.  Rose was a schoolmaster of
Chiswick.    One of his daughters had
married Dr.  Burney's son Charles,
the Greek scholar,  on June 24 of this
year.     Gentleman's Magazine,  1783,
p.  540.    Another daughter,  who mar-
ried a Mr.  Foss,  was the mother of
Edward Foss,  the author of the
Judges of England.    Diet,   of Nat.
Biog.  xx.  51.

5 It was Miss Burney,  a writer of
fiction,  who had reported to Mrs.
Thrale that Johnson showed no
traces of disease.

I have

326

To Mrs.   Thrale.

[A.D.  1783.

I have since partaken of an epidemical disorder,  but common
evils produce no dejection x.

Paradise's company,  I faracy,  disappointed him ;  I remember
nobody.  With Reynolds was the archbishop of Tuam,  a man
coarse of voice and inelegant of language 2.

I am now broken with disease,  without the alleviation of familiar
friendship or domestick society ;  I have no middle state between
clamour and silence,  between general conversation and self-tor-
menting solitude.  Levet is dead,  and poor Williams is making
haste to die :  I know not if she will ever more come out of her
chamber.

I am now quite alone,  but let me turn my thoughts another

way.

I am,  Madam,

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

876.

TO MRS.    THRALE3.

MADAM,  London,  August 20,  1783.

This has been a day of great emotion  ;  the office of the Com-
munion of the Sick has been performed in poor Mrs.  Williams's
chamber.  She was too weak to rise from her bed,  and is there-
fore to be supposed unlikely to live much longer.  She has,  I

1 Johnson's position may be illus-
trated by the following passage in
one of his Adventurers  (No.  Ill) : —
1 It is asserted by a tragic poet that
est miser nemo nisi comparatus,  "  no
man is miserable but as he is com-
pared with others happier than him-
self." '     Horace Walpole wrote on
September i : — *  The summer has
been wonderfully hot,   and of late
very unhealthy.      Our globe really
seems to be disordered.'     Letters,
viii.  404.    See ante,  ii.  320,  n.  I.

2 The following anecdote in the
Memoir of Goldsmith prefixed to his
Misc.  Works,  ed.  1801,  i.  no,  though
dated August 7,  1773,  no doubt be-
longs to this year  :— *  I was dining

at Sir Joshua Reynolds's,  August 7,
1773,  where were the Archbishop of
Tuam and Mr.  (now Lord)  Eliot,
when the latter making use of some
sarcastical reflections on Goldsmith,
Johnson broke out warmly in his
defence,  and in the course of a
spirited eulogium said,  "  Is there a
man,  Sir,  now who can pen an essay
with such ease and elegance as Gold-
smith?"' On August 7,  1773,  John-
son was on his way to Scotland.
Ante,  \.  223.  In 1784 Reynolds
exhibited the portrait of Dr.  Bourke,
Archbishop of Tuam.  Taylor's Rey-
nolds, ii.  435.
3 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  301.

hope,

Aetat.  73.]

To Mrs.   Thrale.

327

hope,  little violent pain,  but is wearing out by torpid inappetence z
and wearisome decay ;  but all the powers of her mind are in their
full vigour,  and when she has spirits enough for conversation,  she
possesses all the intellectual excellence that she ever had.  Surely
this is an instance of mercy much to be desired by a parting
soul 2.

At home I see almost all my companions dead or dying.  At
Oxford I have just left3 Wheeler,  the man with whom I most
delighted to converse.  The sense of my own diseases,  and the
sight of the world sinking round me,  oppress me perhaps too
much.  I hope that all these admonitions will not be vain,
and that I shall learn to die as dear Williams is dying,  who
was very cheerful before and after this aweful solemnity,  and
seems to resign herself with calmness and hope upon eternal
mercy.

I read your last kind letter with great delight ;  but when I
came to love and honour,  what sprung in my mind  ? — How loved,
how honoured once,  avails thee not 4.

I sat to Mrs.  Reynolds yesterday for my picture,  perhaps the
tenth time5,  and I sat near three hours with the patience of
mortal born to bear;  at last she declared it quite finished,  and
seems to think it fine.  I told her it was Johnsons grimly ghost.

1 Johnson gives in his Dictionary
not inappetence but inappetency,
defining it as  *  want of stomach or
appetite.'

2 When near his end he refused
opiates  ;    '  for,'    said he,    '  I have
prayed that I may render up my
soul to God unclouded.'    Life,  iv.
415.

3 Left is no doubt a misprint for
lost.     Johnson's s is easily mistaken
for/.     Dr.  Wheeler died on July 22,
1783.     Hannah More who was at
Oxford at the time writes  :— '  Poor
Dr.  Wheeler  !  but don't you pity the
excellent Bishop of London  ?     He
sent off an express,  as soon as his
daughter died,  to hasten Dr.  Wheeler
up to be with and console him ;  an

express from the doctor's sister to
say he was dead met the Bishop's
messenger on the road.'  H.  More's
Memoirs,  i.  294.  Miss Lowth,  the
Bishop's last surviving child,  died
suddenly on July 21,  and Dr.  Wheeler
died suddenly the next day.  Gentle-
marts Magazine,  1783,  p.  629.

4 He is quoting a line in Pope's
Elegy to the Memory of an Un-
fortunate Lady.

3 He had sat to her three years
earlier.  Ante,  ii.  179.  According to
Northcote,  Reynolds said of his
sister's oil-paintings,  'they make
other people laugh and me cry.'
'  She generally,'  Northcote adds, '  did
them by stealth.'  Life of Reynolds,
ii.  1 60.

It

To Mrs.  Tkrale.

[A.D.  1783.

It is to be engraved,  and I think in glided,  &c.T will be a good

inscription.

I am,  Madam,

Your,  &c,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

877.

TO MRS.    THRALE2.

DEAR MADAM,  London,  August 26, 1783.

Things stand with me much as they have done for some
time.  Mrs.  Williams fancies now and then that she grows better,
but her vital powers appear to be slowly burning out.  Nobody
thinks however that she will very soon be quite wasted,  and as
she suffers me to be of very little use to her,  I have determined
to pass some time with Mr.  Bowles near Salisbury3,  and have
taken a place for Thursday.

1  '  'Twas at the silent solemn hour
When night and morning meet ;

In glided Margaret's grimly ghost,
And stood at William's feet.'

Margarefs Ghost.  Percy Ballads,
iii.  3,  16.

3 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  303.

3 For Johnson's visit to Heale,
near Salisbury,  see Life,  iv.  234-9.
One of Johnson's fellow-travellers in
the stage-coach described the journey
in the Monthly Magazine,  quoted in
Croker's Boswell,  ed.  1844,  x.  151.
I abridge his account.  '  Upon enter-
ing the coach,'  he writes,  '  I per-
ceived three gentlemen,  one of whom
strongly attracted my notice.  He
was a corpulent man,  with a book
in his hand,  placed very near to his
eyes.  He had a large wig which did
not appear to have been combed for
an age  ;  his clothes were threadbare.
I was struck with his resemblance
to the print of Dr.  Johnson,  given as
a frontispiece to the Lives of the
Poets.  The gentleman by the side
of him remarked,  "  I wonder,  Sir,
that you can read in a coach which

travels so swiftly  [with halts for
meals it took nearly fifteen hours to
go eighty-two miles] ;  it would make
my head ache."  "  Ay,  Sir,"  replied
he,  "  books make some people's head
ache."  This appeared to me John-
sonian. I knew several persons with
whom Dr.  Johnson was well ac-
quainted. "Do you know Miss
Hannah More,  Sir?"  "Well,  Sir;
the best of all the female versifiers."
We now reached Hounslow,  and
were served with our breakfast.
[Hounslow is 9^  miles from Hyde
Park Corner].  "May I take the
liberty,  Sir,  to enquire whether you
be not Dr.  Johnson  ? "  "  The same,
Sir."  "  I am happy,"  replied I,  "  to
congratulate the learned world that
Dr.  Johnson,  whom the papers lately
announced to be dangerously indis-
posed, is re-established in his health."
"  The civilest young man I ever met
with in my life"  was the answer.
From that moment he became very
gracious towards me.  I was then
preparing to go abroad.  "  What
book of travels,  Sir,  would you advise

Some

Aetat.  73.]

To Mrs.   Thrale.

329

Some benefit may be perhaps received from change of air,
some from change of company,  and some from mere change of
place.  It is not easy to grow well in a chamber where one has
long been sick,  and where every thing seen and every person
speaking revives and impresses images of pain.  Though it be
that no man can run away from himself1,  he may yet escape from
many causes of useless uneasiness.  That the mind is its own
place2,  is the boast of a fallen angel that had learned to lie.
External locality has great effects,  at least upon all embodied
beings.  I hope this little journey will afford me at least some
suspense of melancholy.

You give but an unpleasing account of your performance at
Portland.  Your scrambling days are then over.  I remember
when no Miss and few Masters could have left you behind,  or
thrown you out in the pursuit of honour^  or of curiosity.  But tempus
edax rerum*,  and no way has been yet found to draw his teeth.

I am,  dear Madam,

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

me to read,  previously to my setting
off upon a tour to France and Italy?"
"  Why,  Sir,  as to France,  I know no
book worth a groat ;  and as to Italy,
Baretti paints the fair side,  and
Sharp the foul;  the truth perhaps
lies between the two."  [See Life,  ii.
57;  iii.  55.]  I observed that at
dinner he drank only water.  I asked
him,  whether he had ever tasted
bumbo,  a West Indian potation,
which is neither more nor less than
very strong punch.  "  No,  Sir,"  said
he.  I made some.  He tasted  ;  and
declared that if ever he drank any-
thing else than water it should be
bumbo.  When the sad moment of
separation at Salisbury arrived,  "Sir,"
said he,  "  let me see you in London,
upon your return to your native
country.  I am sorry that we must
part.  I have always looked upon
it as the worst condition of man's
destiny that persons are so often torn

asunder,  just as they become happy
in each other's society."  '
1  '  Caelum non animum mutant
qui trans mare currunt : '
'  For they who through the ven-
turous ocean range
Not their own passions,  but the

climate change.'

FRANCIS.  HORACE,  i Epistles,  xi.
27.
2 '  The mind is its own place,  and

in itself

Can make a heaven of hell,  a
hell of heaven.'

Paradise Lost,  i.  254.

3  '  Whene'er did Juba,  or did Por-

tius show

A virtue that has cast me at a
distance,

And thrown me out in the pur-
suits of honour.'

ADDISON.    Cato,  Act i.  scene I.

4  (  Tempus edax rerum,  tuque invi-

diosa vetustas

To

330

To the Reverend Dr.  Taylor.          [A.D.  i?83.

878.
To DR.  BROCKLESBY.

Heale near Salisbury,  August 29,  1783.     Published in the Life,  iv.
234.

879.

To THE REVEREND DR.  TAYLOR'.
DEAR SIR,

I sat to Opey as long as he desired,  and I think the head is
finished,  but it  [is]  not much admired.  The rest he is to add
when he comes again to town 2.

I did not understand that you expected me at Ashbourne,  and
have been for a few days with a Gentleman in Wiltshire.    If you
write to me at London,  my letters will be sent,  if they should
happen to come before I return.
I am,  Sir,

Your most humble servant,

SAM  :  JOHNSON.

Heale near Salisbury,  Sept.  3,  1783.
To the Reverend Dr.  Taylor at Ashbourne,  Derbyshire.

Omnia destruitis.'
OVID.    Metamorphoses,  xv.  234.
'  Thy teeth,  devouring time,  thine,

envious age,

On things below still exercise your
rage.'

DRYDEN.

1 First published in Notes and
Queries,  6th S.  v.  481.

2 Opie who was only twenty-two
years old,  had been brought up to
London in 1781 by Dr.  Wolcot.     He
is described by a brother Cornish-
man as  '  that unlicked cub of a car-
penter.'   His father was glad to part
with him.     He said,  'the boy was
good for nothing— could never make
a wheel-barrow — was always gazing
upon cats,  and staring volks in the
face.'   R.  Polwhele's Traditions,  &>c.,

ed.  1826,  i.  77.  In London at first
he was all the rage.  'The street
where he lived was so crowded with
coaches of the nobility as to become
a real nuisance to the neighbourhood ;
so that,  as he jestingly observed to
me,'  writes Northcote, '  he thought he
must place cannon at his door to
keep the multitude off.  He was only
the embryo of a painter ;  when he
had proved himself to be a real artist
the capricious public left him with
disgust because he was a novelty no
longer.'  Northcote's Reynold's,  ii.
126.  Hawkins believes that the por-
trait of Johnson was never finished.
Hawkins's Johnson,  p.  569.  In 1889
it was given to the Athenaeum Club,
London,  by Mr.  T.  Humphry Ward.
Athenceum,  August 10,  1889.

To

Aetat.  73.]  To Miss Susanna Thrale.  331

880.

To Miss SUSANNA THRALE1.

DEAR MISS,  [Heale],  September 9,  1783.

I am glad that you and your sisters have been at Portland.
You now can tell what is a quarry and what is a cliff.  Take all
opportunities of filling your mind with genuine scenes of nature  :
description is always fallacious,  at least till you have seen
realities you cannot know it to be true.  This observation might
be extended to life,  but life cannot be surveyed with the same
safety as nature,  and it is better to know vice and folly by report
than by experience.  A painter,  says Sydney,  mingled in the
battle that he might know how to paint it ;  but his knowledge
was useless,  for some mischievous sword took away his head 2.
They whose speculation upon characters leads them too far into
the world,  may lose that nice sense of good and evil by which
characters are to be tried.  Acquaint yourself therefore both with
the pleasing and the terrible parts of nature,  but in life wish to
know only the good.

Pray shew Mamma this passage of a letter from Dr.  Brocklesby :
'  Mrs.  Williams,  from mere inanition,  has at length paid the great
debt to nature 3,  about three o'clock this morning,  (Sept.  6).  She
died without a struggle,  retaining her faculties entire to the very
last,  and as she expressed it,  having set her house in order4,  was
prepared to leave it at the last summons of nature/

I do not now say any thing more than that I am,

My dearest,

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

881.

To FRANCIS BARBER 5.
DEAR FRANCIS,  Heale,  Sept.  16, 1783.

I rather wonder that you have never written ;  but that is

1 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  308.  Essays:  Of Death.

2 It was the painter's hands that        'Your son,  my Lord,  has paid a
were struck off.     '  So he returned,  soldier's debt.'

well skilled in wounds,  but with never Macbeth,  Act v.  sc.  8.

a hand to perform his skill.'   Arcadia,          4 2 Kings xx.  I.

ed.  1725,  i.  359.  5 First published in Croker's Bos-

3  *  The fear of death,  as a tribute well,  page 739.
due unto nature,  is weak.'    Bacon's

now

332

To Mrs.  Thrale.

[A.D.  1783.

now not necessary,  for I purpose to be with  [you]  on Thursday
before dinner.  As Thursday is my birth-day1,  I would have
a little dinner got,  and would have you invite Mrs.  Desmoulins,
Mrs.  Davis2 that was about Mrs.  Williams,  and Mr.  Allen and

Mrs.  Gardiner.

I am,

Yours,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

882.

To DR.  BURNEY.
[London],  September 20,  1783.     Published in the Life,  iv.  239.

883.

TO MRS.    THRALE3.

DEAR MADAM,  London,  Sept.  22, 1783.

Happy are you that have ease and leisure to want intelli-

1 See ante,  i.  250,  for Johnson's
unwillingness to have his birthday
recalled to his thoughts.  In 1781
he viewed the day with calmness,
if not with cheerfulness.  He writes : —
'  I rose,  breakfasted,  and gave thanks
at church for my creation,  preserva-
tion, and redemption.  As I came
home,  I thought I had never begun
any period of life so placidly.  I
have always been accustomed to let
this day pass unnoticed,  but it came
this time into my mind that some
little festivity was not improper.  I
had a dinner  ;  and invited Allen and
Levet.'  Pr.  and Med.,  p.  198.  On
his return to London he wrote to
Dr.  Burney  : — '  I came home on the
1 8th at noon,  to a very disconsolate
house.'  Life,  iv.  239.  The following
day at the Old Bailey,  a few minutes'
walk from Johnson's house,  fifty-eight
convicts received sentence of death.
Gentleman? s Magazine,  1783,  p.  802.

3 Not the wife of Tom Davies,  of
whom Churchill wrote  : —

'That Davies hath a very pretty

wife.'
Churchill's Poems,  ed.  1766,  i.  16.

This Mrs.  Davis was most likely
the woman whom Miss Burney found
at Bolt Court the day before Johnson's
death.  She writes  :— '  All the rest
went away but a Mrs.  Davis,  a good
sort of woman,  whom this truly
charitable soul had sent for to take
a dinner at his house.  I then went
and waited with her by the fire.
Mr.  Langton then came.  He could
not look at me,  and I turned away
from him.  Mrs.  Davis asked how
the Doctor was.  "  Going on to death
very fast,"  was his mournful answer.
"Has he taken,"  said she,  "any-
thing ? "  "  Nothing at all.  We carried
him some bread and milk — he re-
fused it,  and said  : — '  The less the
better.""  Mme.  D'Arblay's Diary,

".  337-

For Mr.  Allen see ante,  ii.  61,  and
for Mrs.  Gardiner,  ante,  ii.  174.

3 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  310.

gence

Aetat.  74.]

To Mrs.  Thrale.

333

gence of air-ballons1.  Their existence is I believe indubitable;
but I know not that they can possibly be of any use.  The con-
struction is this.  The chymical philosophers have discovered
a body  (which I have forgotten,  but will enquire),  which,  dissolved
by an acid,  emits a vapour lighter than the atmospherical air2.
This vapour is caught,  among other means,  by tying a bladder,
compressed upon the bottle in which the dissolution is performed  ;
the vapour rising swells the bladder,  and fills it.  The bladder is
then tied and removed,  and another applied,  till as much of this
light air is collected as is wanted.  Then a large spherical case is
made,  and very large it must be,  of the lightest matter that can
be found,  secured by some method,  like that of oiling silk,  against
all passage of air.  Into this are emptied all the bladders of light
air,  and if there is light air enough it mounts into the clouds,
upon the same principle as a bottle filled with water will sink in
water,  but a bottle filled with aether would float.  It rises till it
comes to air of equal tenuity with its own3,  if wind or water does
not spoil it on the way.  Such,  Madam,  is an air ballon.

1 In the Gentleman's Magazine
for 1783,  p.  795,  under date of '  Paris,
September 2,'  it is reported that  '  a
discovery has been made,  of which
the Government hath thought proper
to give notice,  in order to prevent
the terrors which it might excite
among the people.'  The balloon is
then described.  No person went up
till a few weeks later.  Post,  Letter
of December 13,  1783.  Cowper
wrote the day after Johnson: —
'  French philosophers amuse them-
selves, and,  according to their own
phrase,  cover themselves with glory
by inventing air-balls,  which by
their own buoyancy ascend above
the clouds,  and are lost in regions
which no human contrivance could
ever penetrate before.  An English
tailor,  an inhabitant of the dung-
hills of Silver End,  prays,  and his
prayer ascends into the ears of the
Lord of Sabaoth. — He indeed covers

himself with glory,  fights battles,
and gains victories;  but makes no
noise.  Europe is not astonished at
his feats,  foreign Academies do not
seek him for a member ;  he will
never discover the art of flying,  or
send a globe of taffeta up to heaven.
But he will go thither himself.'
Cowper's Works,  iv.  305.

Johnson in his Dictionary has
ballon,  or balloon,  but not,  of course,
in the sense which it was henceforth
to bear.  In the Ann.  Reg.  for 1783,
i.  215,  the word is spelt ballon.

2 The  '  body '  was iron-filings,  the
acid sulphuric acid,  and the vapour
nitrogen.

3  '  It has been found that a ball
filled with inflammable air could
mount of itself towards the sky,  with-
out stopping till both the airs were
in equilibrium,  which must be at a
very great height.'      Gentlemaris
Magazine,  1783,  p.  795.

Meteors

334

To Mrs.  Thrale.

[A.D.  1783.

Meteors have been this autumn very often seen1,  but I have
never been in their way.

Poor Williams has I hope seen the end of her afflictions.  She
acted with prudence and she bore with fortitude.  She has left

me.

Thou thy weary task hast done,

Home art gone,  and ta'en thy wages2.

Had she had good humour and prompt elocution,  her universal
curiosity and comprehensive knowledge would have made her
the delight of all that knew her.  She left her little to your
charity school 3.

1 On August 1 8 a great meteor
was seen at such distant places as
Ostend,  London,  Edinburgh,  and the
North of Ireland.  Gentleman's Maga-
zine, 1783,  pp.  711,  712,  795,  885.
The poet Crabbe and his wife saw
this  *  glorious phenomenon,  as it
burst forth as large as the moon,
but infinitely more brilliant.  My
mother,'  writes their son,  '  who hap-
pened to be riding behind,  said that
even at that awful moment  (for she
concluded that the end of all things
was at hand)  she was irresistibly
struck with my father's attitude.
He had raised himself from his horse,
lifted his arm,  and spread his hand
towards the object of admiration and
terror,  and appeared transfixed with
astonishment.'  Crabbe's Works,  i.
124.  Cowper,  in the Second Book
of the Task,  alluding,  as he says
in a note,  to this meteor and also
'to the fog that covered both Eu-
rope and Asia during the whole of
this summer'  (ante,  ii.  320,  n.  i),
writes : —
*  Fires from beneath,  and meteors

from above

Portentous,  unexampled,  unexplained,
Have kindled beacons in the skies,

and th'  old
And crazy earth has had her shaking

fits

More frequent,    and foregone her

usual rest.
Is it a time to wrangle,   when the

props

And pillars of our planet seem to fail,
And Nature with a dim and sickly

eye
To wait the close of all  ? '

COWPER'S Poems,  ed.  1786,  ii.  48.

2  '  Thou thy worldly task,  &c.'

Cymbeline,  Act iv.  sc.  2.

3 The Charity School was The
Ladies'  Charity School in the Parish
of St.  Sepulchre,  mentioned in the
Life,  iv.  246.    It was founded in 1702,
with the object of training young
girls for domestic servants.      Mrs.
Thrale was one of the Managers,
and Johnson was a subscriber from
1777 till his death.     It is recorded
in the Minutes on March 12, 1783 : —
'  Dr.  Johnson,  having turn,  presents
Mary Ann Austin,  daughter of Charles
and Amey Austin,  living at the top
of Goswell Street,  at one Mr.  Mason's,
near the prison bar.'    Mrs.  Williams,
a few weeks before her death,  had
given the School    ^200 ;    the re-
mainder of her substance,  amounting
to  ;£i57,  she left to it in her will.
Probably the money which she had
made by the benefit that Garrick had
given her at Drury Lane,  amounting
to  ^200,  had been invested.    Ib.  i.

The

Aetat.  74.]

To Mrs.   Thrale*

335

The complaint about which you enquire is a sarcocele :  I
thought it a hydrocele1,  and heeded it but little.  Puncture has
detected the mistake  :  it can be safely suffered no longer.  Upon
inspection three days ago it was determined extrema ventura.
If excision should be delayed there is danger of a gangrene.
You would not have me for fear of pain2 perish in putrescence.
I shall I hope,  with trust in eternal mercy,  lay hold of the possi-
bility of life which yet remains.  My health is not bad  ;  the gout
is now trying at3 my feet.  My appetite and digestion are good,
and my sleep better than formerly :  I am not dejected,  and I am
not feeble.  There is however danger enough in such operations
at seventy-four.

Let me have your prayers and those of the young dear people.

I am,  dear Madam,

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

Write soon and often.

393,  n.  i.  In the possession of the
Charity are her four silver tea-spoons,
and sugar-tongs,  and her portrait.
It shows a woman of a strong but
not very amiable character.  It is
perhaps the work of Miss Reynolds.
The same Charity possesses six tea-
spoons which by tradition belonged
to Johnson.  They were made,  as
the hall-mark shows,  in the year of
Mrs.  Williams'  death.  He had always
taken tea with her.  When her spoons
were given to the Charity he had to
supply their place.  With them he
had stirred countless cups of tea.
Goldsmith and Boswell had used
them with pride when  '  they went to
Miss Williams  '  (Life,  i.  421).  Rey-
nolds doubtless had often handled
them,  and Burke and many a famous
msn besides.

The School was first established
in King Street,  Snow Hill.     In 1847

it was moved to John Street,  Bed-
ford Row ;  thence to Queen's Square,
Bloom sbury,  and lastly to Powis
Gardens,  Netting Hill,  where it is
carried on with efficiency.  Since its
foundation more than 1 500 girls have
been started in life.*

1 John Wesley suffered from the
same complaint.     'After two years
he submitted to an operation,  and
obtained a cure.    A little before this
he notices in his Journal the first
night that he had passed in wakeful-
ness  ;  "  I believe,"  he adds,  "  few can
say this ;  in seventy years I never
lost one night's sleep.'"    Southey's
Life of Wesley ',  ed.  1846,  ii.  384.

2 See Life,  iv.   399,  418,  for his
eagerness to endure pain if thereby
life could be prolonged.

3 Johnson in his Dictionary gives
no instance of this use of try.

*  For most of this information I am indebted to Miss A.  M.  Moore,  of Oakfield,
Eltham,  the Hon.  Secretary of the School.

To

336

To Mrs.  Montagu.

[A.D.  1783.

884.

To MRS.  MONTAGU  '.

September 22,  1783.

MADAM,

That respect which is always due to beneficence makes it fit
that you should be informed,  otherwise than by the papers,  that,
on the 6th of this month,  died your pensioner,  Anna Williams,
of whom it may be truly said,  that she received your bounty with
gratitude,  and enjoyed it with propriety2.  You perhaps have
still her prayers.

You have,  Madam,  the satisfaction of having alleviated the
sufferings of a woman of great merit,  both intellectual and moral.
Her curiosity was universal,  her knowledge was very extensive,
and she sustained forty years of misery with steady fortitude.
Thirty years and more she had been my companion,  and her
death has left me very desolate.

That I have not written sooner,  you may impute to absence,
to ill-health,  to any thing rather than want of regard to the
benefactress of my departed friend.
I am,  Madam,

Your most humble servant,

SAM  :  JOHNSON.

1 First published in Croker's Bos-
well,  page 739.

2 For Mrs.  Montagu's kindness to
Mrs.  Williams,  see ante,  i.  371,  n.  i.
Mr.   Croker,  with a grossness and
confusion of thought which were not
uncommon in him,  says in a note
that    '  Mrs.   Montagu's pension to
Mrs.  Williams was in truth an in-
direct benefaction to Johnson him-
self, and was probably so meant by
the delicate and courteous charity of
that excellent lady.'

This letter brought to a close
Johnson's quarrel with Mrs.  Mon-
tagu. Ante,  ii.  139,  n.  I,  and /<?.$•/,  p.
340.  He told Miss Burney of his
letter and added  : —

1 "  And I had a very kind answer
from her."

"  Well then,  Sir,"  cried I,  « I hope
peace now will be again proclaimed."

"  Why,  I am now,"  said he,  "  come
to that time when I wish all bitterness
and animosity to be at an end.  I have
never done her any serious harm —
nor would I  ;  though I could give
her a bite!  but she must provoke
me much first.  In volatile talk,  in-
deed, I may have spoken of her not
much to her mind  ;  for in the tumult
of conversation malice is apt to grow
sprightly;  and there,  I hope,  I am
not yet decrepid." '  Mme.  D'Arblay's
Diary )  ii.  292.

To

Aetat.  74.]  To Miss Reynolds.  337

885.

To THE REVEREND DR.  TAYLOR  *.
DEAR SIR,

My case is what you think it,  of the worst kind,  a Sarcocele2.
There is I suppose nothing to be done but by the knife — I have
within these four days been violently attacked by the gout,  which
if  [I]  should continue in its grip3 would retard the other business;
but I hope it will abate.

I am,  dear Sir,

Your humble servant,
Sept.  24, 1783.  SAM:  JOHNSON.

To the Reverend Dr.  Taylor in Ashbourne,  Derbyshire.

886.

To BENNET LANGTON.
London,  September 29,  1783.     Published in the Life,  iv.  240.

887.
To BENNET LANGTON.

[London,  September or October,  1783].     Two letters quoted in part
in the Life,  iv.  241.

888.

To JAMES BOSWELL.
[London],  September 30,  1783.     Published in the Life,  iv.  241.

889.

TO MlSS REYNOLDS4.

DEAR MADAM,  October i,  1783.

I am very ill indeed,  and to my former illness is superadded
the gout.  I am now without shoes,  and I have been lately almost
motionless.

To my other afflictions is added solitude.     Mrs.  Williams,

1 This copy of the original I owe 3 Johnson perhaps wrote gripe,  in
to the kindness of Mr.  John S.  H.      accordance with the spelling in his
Fogg,    of 481 Broadway,    Boston,      Dictionary.

United States.  4 First published in Croker's Bos-

2 See ante,  ii.  335,  and Life,  iv.  239.      'well,  page 740.

VOL.  II.  z a companion

338

To Mrs.  Thrale.

[A.D.  1783.

a companion of thirty years,  is gone.     It is a comfort to me to

have you near me.

I am,  Madam,

Your most humble servant,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

890.

To MR.  TOMKESON  '.
SIR,  ist October,  1783.

I have known Mr.  Lowe very familiarly a great while.
I consider him as a man of very clear and vigorous understand-
ing, and conceive his principles to be such that whatever you
transact with him you have nothing to expect from him unbe-
coming a gentleman,

I am,  Sir,

Your humble servant,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

891.

TO MRS.    THRALE2.

MADAM,  London,  Oct.  6,  1783.

When I shall give a good and settled account of my health
I cannot venture to say;  some account I am ready to give,
because I am pleased to find that you desire it.

I yet sit without shoes,  with my foot upon a pillow,  but my
pain and weakness are much abated,  and I am no longer crawling
upon two sticks.  To the gout my mind is reconciled by another
letter from Mr.  Mudge,  in which he vehemently urges the
excision,  and tells me that the gout will secure me from every
thing paralytick3:  if this be true,  I am ready to say to the
arthritick pains,  Deh  !  venite ogni di,  durate un anno 4.

1 First published in Croker's Bos-
well,  page 823.

For Mauritius Lowe see ante,
ii.  203.  The name Tomkeson is not
in the indexes of the Gentleman's
Magazine.  Perhaps the copyist has
been at fault.

2 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  313.

3 See ante,  ii.  108,  n.  5.    Mr.  Mudge,
Boswell describes as  '  the celebrated
surgeon,     and now physician,     of
Plymouth.'     Life,  i.  378.     For John-
son's letters to him about his health
see ib.  iv.  240.

4 Mrs.   Piozzi in her Anecdotes,
p.  69,  quotes  '  the famous distich of

My

Aetat.  74.]

To Mrs.  Tkrale.

339

My physician in ordinary is Dr.  Brocklesby,  who comes almost
every day;  my surgeon in Mr.  Pott's absence is Mr.  Cruikshank,
the present reader in Dr.  Hunter's school z.  Neither of them
however do much more than look and talk.  The general health
of my body is as good as you have ever known it,  almost as
good as I can remember.

The carriage which you supposed made rough by my weakness
was the common Salisbury stage,  high hung,  and driven to
Salisbury in a day.  I was not fatigued2.

Mr.  Pott has been out of town,  but I expect to see him soon,
and will then tell you something of the main affair,  of which
there seems now to be a better prospect.

This afternoon I have given to Mrs.  Cholmondely,  Mrs.  Way,

an Italian impr outsat ore,  when the
Duke of Modena ran away from the
comet in the year 1742 or 1743  : —

Se al venir vostro i principi sen'
vanno

Deh venga ogni di — durate un

anno,

"  which,"  said Dr.  Johnson,  "  would
do just as well in our language
thus  :—

If at your coming princes disappear,

Comets !  come every day — and stay
a year." '

PIOZZI'S Anecdotes,  p.  69.

1 In 1784 Reynolds exhibited Pott's
portrait in the Academy.  Taylor's
Reynolds,  ii.  435.

Dr.  William Hunter in 1 770 opened
at his own expense an Anatomical
School in Great Windmill Street,  with
a Museum attached.  Cruikshank was
successively his pupil,  anatomical-
assistant,  and partner.  On Hunter's
death he and Dr.  Baillie carried on
the School.  '  He occasionally in-
dulged himself too freely with the
bottle although never to intoxication
or insensibility.'  He died of apoplexy
at the age of 55 on June 27,  1800.
His Christian names,  William Cum-
berland, were given by his parents —

Z 2

he was a Scotchman — '  out of com-
pliment to the hero of Culloden.'
If he was born,  as is stated,  in 1745,
that battle had not yet been fought,
and the Duke was neither hero nor
butcher.  '  Cruikshank attended Dr.
Johnson in his last illness,  and was
termed by him,  in allusion to his
benevolent disposition,  "  a sweet-
blooded man."  When he was lancing
the dying man's legs to reduce the
dropsy,  Johnson called out to him,
"  I want life and you are afraid of
giving me pain — deeper,  deeper."'
Gentleman's Magazine,  1800,  ii.  694,
792 ;  Chalmers'  Biog.  Diet,  xviii.
325,  and Diet,  of Nat.  Biog.  xiii.  260.
See also Life,  iv.  219,  for Johnson's
letter to Reynolds recommending
Cruikshank as Hunter's successor as
Professor of Anatomy to the Royal
Academy.

See Appendix B for Dr.  Brock-
lesby's Report of a conversation with
Johnson and Boswell on March 30,
1783,  the day of Hunter's death.

2 He had written to Dr.  Brocklesby:
— '  I was no more wearied with the
journey,  though it was a high-hung
rough coach,  than I should have
been forty years ago.'  Ib.  iv.  234.

Lady

340 To Mrs.  Thrale.  [A.D.  ms.

Lady Sheffield's relation,  Mr.  Kindersley the describer of Indian
manners1,  and another anonymous lady.

As Mrs.  Williams received a pension from Mrs.  Montagu,  it
was fit to notify her death.  The account has brought me
a letter not only civil but tender ;  so I hope peace is proclaimed2.

The state of the Stocks I take to be this :  When in the late
exigencies the ministry gave so high a price for money,  all the
money that could be disengaged from trade was lent to the
publick.  The stocks sunk because nobody bought them 3.  They
have not risen since,  because the money being already lent out,
nobody has money to lay out upon them till commerce shall by
the help of peace bring a new supply.  If they cannot rise,  they
will sometimes fall ;  for their essence seems to be fluctuation  ;
but the present sudden fall is occasioned by the report of some,
new disturbances and demands which the Irish are machinating4.

I am,  Madam,

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

892.

To MRS.  THRALES.

London,  October 9,  1783.

Two nights ago Mr.  Burke sat with me a long time;  he
seems much pleased with his journey.  We had both seen Stone-
henge this summer for the first time.  I told him that the view

1 For Mrs.     Cholmondeley see never more to return to that house.
ante,  ii.  1 86,  and for Mrs.  Way,  ante.  The stocks fell considerably.    At
ii.  252.     Mr.  Kinsdersley is a mis-  one period the three per cent,  consols
take for Mrs.   Kinsderley,   who in were done at 58^.      Such a peace
1777 published Letters from the price was never before known in this
Island of Teneriffe,  Brazil,  the Cape country.'     Ib.  p.  803.

of Good Hope,  and the East Indies.  4 Horace Walpole wrote five days

2 Ante,  ii.  336,  n.  2.  later  : — '  The aspect of Ireland is

3 On September 9 the three per very tempestuous.     I doubt they will
cent,  consols were at 64  ;  by October hurt us materially without benefitting
6 they had fallen to 59.      Gentle-  themselves.    If they obtain very short
maris Magazine,  1783,  pp.  808,  896.  parliaments,  they will hurt themselves
*  Thursday,  September 25.    This day more than us,  by introducing a con-
Nathan Solomon,    the great Jew fusion that will prevent their im-
broker,  sent a letter to the Stock provements.'    Letters,  viii.  417.
Exchange,   declaring his intention 5 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  315.

had

Aetat.  74.]

To Mrs.  Thrale.

had enabled me to confute two opinions which have been
advanced about it.  One,  that the materials are not natural
stones,  but an artificial composition hardened by time.  This
notion is as old as Camden's time  ;  and has this strong argument
to support it,  that stone of that species is no where to be found.
The other opinion,  advanced by Dr.  Charlton,  is,  that it was
erected by the Danes x.

Mr.  Bowles2 made me observe,  that the transverse stones were
fixed on the perpendicular supporters by a knob formed on the
top of the upright stone,  which entered into a hollow cut in the
crossing stone.  This is a proof that the enormous edifice was
raised by a people who had not yet the knowledge of mortar  ;
which cannot be supposed of the Danes who came hither in
ships,  and were not ignorant certainly of the arts of life.  This
proves likewise the stones not to be factitious ;  for they that
could mould such durable masses could do much more than make
mortar,  and could have continued the transverse from the upright
part with the same paste.

You have doubtless seen Stonehenge,  and if you have not,
I should think it a hard task to make an adequate de-
scription.

It is,  in my opinion,  to be referred to the earliest habitation of
the Island,  as a Druidical monument of at least two thousand
years ;  probably the most ancient work of man upon the Island.

1  '  It is the opinion of some/  writes
Camden,  '  that these stones are not
natural,  or such as are dug out of the
quarries,  but artificial,  of fine sand
cemented together by a glewy sort of
matter.'  Camden's Britannia,  ed.
1722,  i.  121.  Walter Charleton pub-
lished in 1663 Chorea Gigantum;  or
the most famous Antiquity of Great
Britain,  vulgarly called Stone-Heng,
standing on Salisbury Plain,  restored
to the Danes.  He maintained that
it was  '  principally,  if not wholly,  de-
signed to be a Court Royal,  or Place
for the Election and Inauguration of
their Kings.'  Ed.  1725.  The Epistle
Dedicatory,  p.  3.  Dry den addressed

to him some lines in which he says  : —
'  Through you,  the Danes  (their short

dominion lost)
A longer conquest than the Saxons

boast.
Stone-Heng,  once thought a Temple,

you have found
A Throne,  where Kings,  our Earthly

Gods,  were crowned.'
Pepys records on July 28,  1666,
some  *  very pretty discourse of Dr.
Charleton's,  concerning Nature's
fashioning every creature's teeth
according to the food she intends
them.'  Diary,  ed.  1851,  iii.  245.

2 Johnson's host at Heale.    Ante,
ii.  328.

Salisbury

342 To the Reverend Dr.  Taylor.  [A.D.  1733.

Salisbury cathedral,  and its neighbour Stonehenge,  are two
eminent monuments of art and rudeness,  and may show the first
essay,  and the last perfection,  in architecture.

I have not yet settled my thoughts about the generation of
light air1,  which I indeed once saw produced,  but I was at the
height of my great complaint.  I have made enquiry,  and shall
soon be able to tell you how to fill a ballon.

I am,  Madam,

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

893.

£IR To THE REVEREND DR.  TAYLOR 2.

Your prohibition to write till the operation is performed is
likely,  if I observed it,  to interrupt our correspondence for a long
time.

When Mr.  Pot3 and Mr.  Cruikshank examined the tumid
vessicle,  they thought it a Sarcocele.  or flesh swelling,  I had
flattered myself that it was only an hydrocele,  or Water swelling.
This could be determined with certainty only by puncture,  which
at my request was made by Mr.  Pot,  and which confirmed their
opinion.  They advised some palliative,  and I went to a Friend
in Wiltshire 4,  from whom the bulk and pain of the encreasing
tumour drove me home for help.

Mr.  Pot seemed to think that there was no help but from the
knife,  and only postponed the operation to his return from a
journey of a week.  In that week the puncture burst open,  and
by its discharge,  abated the inflammation,  relaxed the tension,
and lessened the tumor by at least half.  Mr.  Pot at his return
found so much amendment,  that he has left the disease for a time
to nature.  Mr.  Cruikshank would cut another orifice,  but Mr.

1 Ante,  ii.  333.     Johnson had  'at-  3 Johnson lops off superfluous con-
tended some experiments that were sonants.     As he always writes Bos-
made by a physician at Salisbury on ivel,   Gastrel,    instead of Boswell,
the new kinds of air.'    Life,  iv.  237.  Gastrell,  in like manner he cuts down

2 From the original in the posses-  Pott.

sion of Mr.  Alfred Morrison,  of Font-  4 Mr.  Bowles of Heale.  Ante,
hill House.  ii.  328.

Pot

Aetat.  74.]  To Mrs.  Thrale.  343

Pot is not yet willing.     In the mean time I have no pain,  and
little inconvenience.

When all was at the worst,  I consulted Mudge x of Plimouth,
a very skilful man,  and Dr.  Heberden,  who both vehemently
pressed the excision,  which perhaps would at last be the safer
way,  but Mr.  Cruikshank is afraid of it.  We must at present sit
still.

I have for some weeks past had a sharp fit of the gout,  to
which I am reconciled by Mr.  Mudge,  who thinks it a security
against the palsy ;  and indeed I recollect none that ever had
both 2.  I have now nothing of the gout,  but feet a little tender,
and ankles somewhat weak.  I am in my general health better
than for some years past.

I am,  Sir,

Your most humble servant,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

London,  Oct.  20,  1783.

To the Reverend Dr.  Taylor in Ashbourne,  Derbyshire.

894.

TO MRS.    THRALE3.

DEAR MADAM,  London,  October 21,  1783.

I have formerly heard,  what you perhaps have heard too,

that—

The wheel of life is daily turning round,

And nothing in this world of certainty is found.

When in your letter of the eleventh,  you told me that my two
letters had obliged,  consoled,  and delighted you,  I was much
elevated,  and longed for a larger answer ;  but when the answer
of the nineteenth came,  I found that the obliging,  consolatory,
and delightful paragraphs had made so little impression,  that
you want again to be told what those papers were written to tell
you,  and of what I can now tell you nothing new.  I am as I
was  ;  with no pain and little inconvenience from the great com-
plaint, and feeling nothing from the gout but a little tenderness
and weakness.

Physiognomy,  as it is a Greek word,  ought to sound the G  :

1 Ante,  ii.  338,  n.  3.  3 Ante,  ii.  338.  3 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  318.

but

344

To Mrs.  Thrale.

[A.D.  1783.

but the French and Italians,  I think,  spell it without the G  ;  and
from them perhaps we learned to pronounce it.  G,  I think,  is
sounded in formal,  and sunk in familiar language.

Mr.  Pott was with me this morning,  and still continues his
disinclination to fire and sword.  The operation is therefore
still suspended ;  not without hopes of relief from some easier and
more natural way.

Mrs.  Porter the tragedian,  with whom spent part of his

earlier life,  was so much the favourite of her time,  that she
was welcomed on the stage when she trod it by the help of a
stick I.  She taught her pupils no violent graces  ;  for she was
a woman of very gentle and ladylike manners,  though without
much extent of knowledge,  or activity of understanding.

You are now retired,  and have nothing to impede self-examina-
tion or self-improvement.  Endeavour to reform that instability
of attention which your last letter has happened to betray.  Per-
haps it is natural for those that have much within to think little
on things without ;  but whoever lives heedlessly lives but in
a mist,  perpetually deceived by false appearances of the past,
without any certain reliance on recollection.  Perhaps this begins
to be my state ;  but I have not done my part very sluggishly,  if
it now begins.

The hour of solitude is now come,  and Williams is gone.  But
I am not,  I hope,  improperly dejected.  A little I read,  and a
little I think.  j am>  &c<j

SAM:  JOHNSON.

895.

TO MRS.    THRALE2.

MADAM,  London,  October 27,  1783.

You may be very reasonably weary of sickness  ;  it is neither
pleasant to talk nor to hear of it.     I hope soon to lose the dis-

1  '  She died about the year 1762.
When Johnson,  some years before
her death,  paid her a visit she ap-
peared to him so wrinkled that,  he
said,  a picture of old age in the
abstract might be taken from her
countenance.'  Davies's Dram.  Misc.

iii.  500.  He said that he had never
seen her equalled  '  in the vehemence
of rage.'  Life,  iv.  243.  According
to Horace Walpole  'she surpassed
Garrick in passionate tragedy.'
Letters,  iv.  336.
2 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  320.

gusting

Aetat.  74.]

To Mrs.  Thrale.

345

gusting topick ;  for I have now neither pain nor sickness.  My
ancles are weak,  and my feet tender.  I have not tried to walk
much above a hundred yards,  and was glad to come back upon
wheels.  The Doctor and Mr.  Metcalf x have taken me out.  I
sleep uncertainly and unseasonably.  This is the sum of my
complaint.  I have not been so well for two years past.  The
great malady is neither heard,  seen,  felt,  nor — understood.  But
I am very solitary.

Semperque relinqui

Sola sibi,  semper longam incomitata videtur

Ire viam2.

But I have begun to look among my books,  and hope that I
am all,  whatever that was,  which I have ever been.

Mrs.  Siddons in her visit to me behaved with great modesty
and propriety,  and left nothing behind her to be censured or
despised.  Neither praise nor money,  the two powerful corrupters
of mankind,  seem to have depraved her.  I shall be glad to see
her again.  Her brother Kemble calls on me,  and pleases me
very well.  Mrs.  Siddons and I talked of plays  ;  and she told me
her intention of exhibiting this winter the characters of Constance,
Catherine,  and Isabella in Shakespeare 3.

1 In the autumn of the previous
year Mr.  Philip Metcalfe had taken
Johnson out in his carriage,    at
Brighton.     Life,  iv.  159.     '  Mr.  Met-
calfe seems,'  writes Miss Burney,  *  to
have taken an unaccountable dislike
to Mrs.  Thrale,  to whom he never
speaks.'      Mme.  D'Arblay's Diary,
ii.  172.

2 VIRGIL.    ALneid,  iv.  466.

'  She seems alone
To wander in her sleep through ways

unknown,
Guideless and dark.'

DRYDEN.

3 This passage is quoted by Bos-
well in the Life,  iv.  242.     To Mrs.
Siddons's modesty testimony is borne
by Horace Walpole,  who wrote at
Christmas,    1782  :  — '  Mrs.   Siddons
continues to be the mode,  and to be

modest and sensible.  She declines
great dinners,  and says her business
and the cares of her family take up
her whole time.'  Letters,  viii.  320.
Kemble,  who gave Boswell a minute
of what passed at the interview with
Johnson,  says that the Doctor  '  asked
her which of Shakspeare's characters
she was most pleased with.  Upon
her answering that she thought the
character of Queen Catharine,  in
Henry the Eighth,  the most
natural :— "  I think so too,  Madam,
(said he  ;)  and whenever you perform
it,  I will once more hobble out to the
theatre myself."  '  Life,  iv.  242.

Eighteen years earlier in his
edition of Shakespeare  (ed.  1765,  v.
491)  he had written: — 'The meek
sorrows and virtuous distress of
Catharine have furnished some scenes

I have

346

To Miss Reynolds.

[A.D.  1783.

I have had this day a letter from Mr.  Mudge ;  who,  with all
his earnestness for operation,  thinks it better to wait the effects
of time,  and,  as he says,  to let well alone.  To this the patient
naturally inclines,  though I am afraid of having the knife yet to
endure when I can bear it less.  Cruickshank was even now in
doubt of the event ;  but Pott,  though never eager,  had,  or dis-
covered, less fear.

If I was a little cross,  would it not have made patient Grisel
cross,  to find that you had forgotten the letter that you was
answering  ?  But what did I care,  if I did not love you  ?  You
need not fear that another should get my kindness from you ;
that kindness which you could not throw away if you tried,  you
surely cannot lose while you desire to keep it.

I am,  Madam,

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

I have a letter signed S.  A.  Thrale ;  I take S.  A.  to be Miss
Sophy :  but who is bound to recollect initials  ?  A name should
be written,  if not fully,  yet so that it cannot be mistaken.

896.

TO MlSS REYNOLDS1.

MY DEAREST DEAR,  London,  October 27,  1783.

I am able enough to write,  for I have now neither sick-
ness nor pain ;  only the gout has left my ancles somewhat
weak.

While the weather favours you,  and the air does you good,
stay in the country:  when you come home,  I hope we shall often

which maybe justly numbered among
the greatest efforts of tragedy.  But
the genius of Shakespeare comes in
and goes out with Catharine.  Every
other part may be easily conceived
and easily written.'

Horace Walpole wrote on January
15,  1788  :— '  I asked Mrs.  Siddons in
which part she would most wish me
to see her.  She named Portia in the
Merchant of Venice ;  but I begged to

be excused.  With all my enthusiasm
for Shakespeare,  it is one of his plays
that I like the least.  The story of
the caskets is silly,  and except the
character of Shylock,  I see nothing
beyond the attainment of a mortal.
Euripides,  or Racine,  or Voltaire
might have written all the rest.'
Letters^  ix.  124.

1 First published in Croker's  £os-
well,  page 741.

see

Aetat.  74.]

To Mrs.  Thrale.

347

see one another,  and enjoy that friendship to which no time is
likely to put an end on the part of,
Madam,

Your most humble servant,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

897.

TO MRS.    THRALE1.

MADAM,  London,  Nov.  i,  1783.

You will naturally wish to know what was done by the
robbers at the brewhouse 2.  They climbed by the help of the
lamp iron to the covering of the door,  and there opening the
window,  which was never fastened,  entered and went down to
the parlour,  and took the plate off the sideboard ;  but being in
haste,  and probably without light,  they did not take it all.  They
then unlocked the street-door,  and locking it again,  carried away
the key.  The whole loss,  as Mr.  Perkins told me,  amounts to
near fifty pounds.

Mr.  Pott bade me this day take no more care about the tumour.
The gout too is almost well in spite of all the luxury to which my
friends have tempted me by a succession of pheasants,  partridges,
and other delicacies.  But Nature has got the better.  I hope to
walk to church to-morrow.

An air ballon has been lately procured by our virtuosi,  but it
performed very little to their expectation 3.

1 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  323.

2 The following entries in the
Gentleman's Magazine at this time
show the dreadful state of the com-
munity : —

'  October 28.  Eleven malefactors
were executed at Tyburn.  Notwith-
standing these numerous sacrifices to
the justice of the country,  no less
than 1 60 criminals were to be tried
at the Sessions at the Old Bailey
that were to begin the very next day.'

P.  973-

'  November i.  To such a pitch
of audacious villainy are the robbers
about London arrived that ten of
them armed with cutlasses and
pistols,  in two boats,  boarded a vessel

near Union Stairs,  Wapping,  about
two this morning and stole thereout
two bales of woollens.3 Ib.

'  November 4.  The Sessions for the
City of London ended,  when six con-
victs received sentence of death,
which with twelve condemned on
Saturday for Middlesex,  make
eighteen in all capitally convicted
this Sessions.  Villains increase so
fast,  that a bare recital of their names
and atrocious crimes would more
than fill our Magazine?  P.  974.

3 On November 26 one made of
yellow taffety was launched in the
Artillery Ground,  in the sight of an
almost incredible number of people.
No one ascended.  Ib.  p.  977.

The

348 To Mrs.  Porter.  [A.D.  rzss.

The air with which these balls are filled,  is procured by dis-
solving filings in the vitriolick  (or I suppose sulphureous)  acid J ;
but the smoke of burnt straw may be used,  though its levity is
not so great.

If a case could be found at once light and strong,  a man might
mount with his will,  and go whither the winds would carry him.
The case of the ball which came hither was of goldbeaters'  skin.
The cases which have hitherto been used are apparently defective,
for the ball came to the ground  ;  which they could never do,
unless there were some breach made.

How old is the boy that likes Rambler better than apples and
pears  ?

I shall be glad of Miss Sophy's letter,  and will soon write to
S.  A. ;  who,  since she is not Sophy,  must be Susy.  Methinks it
is long since I heard from Queeney.

I am,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

898.

To MRS.  PORTER x.
DEAR MADAM,

The death of poor Mr.  Porter 3,  of which your maid has sent
me an account,  must have very much surprised you.  The death
of a friend is almost always unexpected :  we do not love to think
of it4,  and therefore are not prepared for its coming.  He
was,  I think,  a religious man,  and therefore that  [sic]  his end
was happy.

Death has likewise visited my mournful habitation.  Last
month died Mrs.  Williams5,  who had been to me for thirty
years in the place of a sister :  her knowledge was great,  and her
conversation pleasing.  I now live in cheerless solitude.

My two last years have passed under the pressure of successive
diseases.  I have lately had the gout with some severity.  But
I wonderfully escaped the operation which I mentioned,  and am
upon the whole restored to health beyond my own expectation.

1 Ante,  ii.  333,  n.  2.  4 He probably wrote    'think on

2 First published in Malone's Bos-      it.'

well.  5 She had died on September 6 —

3 H er second brot her.  Life^\. 94,^.3.      more than two months before.

As

Aetat.  74.]

To Richard Jackson.

349

As we daily see our friends die round us,  we that are left must
cling closer,  and,  if we can do nothing more,  at least pray for one
another  ;  and remember,  that as others die we must die too,  and
prepare ourselves diligently for the last great trial.
I am,  Madam,

Yours affectionately,  &c.,
Bolt-court,  Fleet-street,  Nov.  10,  1783.  SAM:  JOHNSON.

899.

DEAR SIR,  To RICHARD JACKSON*.

The Readership of the Temple 2 being vacant,  I take the

1 From the original in the posses-
sion of Mr.  Frederick Barker,  of 41,
Gunterstone Road,  West Kensington,
London.

The letter is not addressed,  but at
the foot is written in another hand,

*  Richard Jackson,   Esq.'     Johnson
spoke of Jackson as  'the all-know-
ing ' ;    on which Boswell has the
following note  : — 'A gentleman,  who
from his extraordinary stores of
knowledge,  has been stiled omnis-
cient. Johnson,  I think very properly,
altered it to all-knowing,  as it is a
verbum solenne,  appropriated to the
Supreme Being.'     Life,  iii.  19.

Wraxall,  who speaks of him as

*  Omniscient Jackson,'  says that he
was an intimate friend of Lord Shel-
burne and a member of his Ministry.
Wraxall's Memoirs,  ed.  1815,  ii.  6l,
235.     '  There was a silk gownsman,'
said Bentham,  '  who had never any
business,  but who went by the name
of Omniscient Jackson.     I gave the
name to Macculloch  (Dr)  who was
all omniscience,  and prtzterea niJiil?
Bentham's Works,  x.  285.

Charles Lamb thus describes Jack-
son in The Old Benchers of the Inner
Temple  : — '  Jackson— the omniscient
Jackson he was called— was of this
period.  He had the reputation of

possessing more multifarious know-
lege than any man of his time.  He
was the Friar Bacon of the less
literate portion of the Temple.  I
remember a pleasant passage of the
cook applying to him,  with much
formality of apology,  for instructions
how to write down edge bone of beef
in his bill of commons.  He was sup-
posed to know,  if any man in the
world did.  He decided the ortho-
graphy to be— as I have given it —
fortifying his authority with such
anatomical reasons as dismissed the
manciple  (for the time)  learned and
happy.'

'  Since the reign of Henry VIII.
there has been a divine belonging to
this church,  named a master or
custos.  Besides the master there is
a reader,  who reads divine service
twice a day,  at eight o'clock in the
morning and at four in the afternoon.'
Dodsley's London and its Environs,
vi.  113.  The Reader at this time
would have but little help from the
Master,  Thomas Thurlow,  who was
also Dean of St.  Paul's and Bishop
of Lincoln.  Letters of Raddiffe and
James,  p.  232,  n.  I.

Mr.  Hoole read the church-service
to Johnson on his death-bed.  Life,
iv.  409.

liberty

350

To Mrs.   Thrale.

[A.D.  1783.

liberty of entreating your Countenance and vote for Mr.  Hoole,
a young clergyman,  whom I have known for a great part of his
life,  and whom I can confidently offer to your notice,  as a Man
of uncommon parts,  and blameless character.

I am,  Sir,

Your most humble servant,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

Bolt-cour  [sic]  Fleet Street,  Nov.  u,  1783.

90O.

T-.  , ,  To MRS.  THRALE T.

DEAR MADAM,

Since you have written to me with the attention and tender-
ness of ancient time,  your letters give me a great part of the
pleasure which a life of solitude admits.  You will never bestow
any share of your good will on one who deserves better.  Those
that have loved longest love best.  A sudden blaze of kindness may
by a single blast of coldness be extinguished,  but that fondness
which length of time has connected with with  [sic]  many circum-
stances and occasions,  though it may for a while  [be]  suppressed
by disgust or resentment,  with or without a cause,  is hourly revived
by accidental recollection.  To those that have lived long together,
every thing heard and every thing seen recals some pleasure
communicated,  or some benefit conferred,  some petty quarrel,  or
some slight endearment.  Esteem of great powers,  or amiable
qualities newly discovered,  may embroider a day or a week,  but
a friendship of twenty years is interwoven with the texture of
life.  A friend may be often found and lost,  but an old friend
never can be found,  and Nature has provided that he cannot
easily be lost.

I have not forgotten the Davenants 2,  though they seem to have
forgotten me.  I began very early to tell them what they have
commonly found to be true.  I am sorry to hear of their building.
I have always warned those whom I loved,  against that mode of
ostentatious waste 3.

1 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  325.  Corrected
by me from the original in the pos-
session of the late Mr.  SJ.  Davey,  of

47,  Great Russell Street,  London.

2 Ante,  i.  333,  «.  i.

3 Ante,  i.  99.

You

Aetat.  74.]

To Miss S.  A.  Thrale.

You seem to mention Lord Kilrmirrey J as a stranger.  We
were at his house in Cheshire  ;  and he one day dined with Sir
Lynch.  What he tells of the epigram is not true,  but perhaps
he does not know it to be false.  Do not you remember how he
rejoiced in having no park  ?  He could not disoblige his neigh-
bours by sending them no venison.

The frequency of death,  to those who look upon it in the leisure
of Arcadia 2,  is very dreadful.  We all know what it should teach
us ;  let us all be diligent to learn.  Lucy Porter has lost her
brother.  But whom I have lost — let me not now remember3.
Let not your loss be added to the mournful catalogue.  Write
soon again to Madam>

Your most humble servant,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

London,  Nov.  13,  1783.
To Mrs.  Thrale at Bath.

901.

TO MlSS S.    A.    THRALE4.

DEAR Miss,

Here is a whole week,  and nothing heard from your house.
Baretti said what a wicked house it would be5,  and a wicked
house it is.  Of you however I have no complaint to make,  for

1 When Johnson was at Comber-
mere,    he visited Lord Kilmorey's
house — Shavington Hall,  in Shrop-
shire. '  He shewed the place with too
much exultation,'  he recorded.     '  He
has no park,  and little water.'    Life,

v.  433-

2 He had quoted Sidney's Arcadia
a few weeks earlier.     Ante,  ii.  331.

3 He was thinking of that friend
'whose face for fifteen years had
never been turned upon him but with
respect and benignity — whose favour
he enjoyed for almost a fourth part of
his life.'     Life,  iv.  84-5.     The ninth
day after the date of Johnson's letter
Miss Burney  *  passed in nothing but
sorrow — exquisite sorrow for my dear
unhappy friend,  who sent me one

letter that came early by the Bath
Diligence and another by the post.'
Her friend was Mrs.  Thrale,  whose
unhappiness was caused by her
struggles to overcome her love for
Piozzi,  to whom she had engaged
herself in the spring of this year.
Mme.  D'Arblay's Diary,  ii.  285,  and
Hayward's Piozzi,  i.  105.

4 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  327.

Miss S.  A.  Thrale was Susanna
Thrale,  as is shown,  ante,  ii.  348.
Of her alone of all Mrs.  Thrale's
children I have not been able to ob-
tain a certificate of birth or baptism.

5  'A hint I gave to Johnson,  but
he would not take it,   because he
never thought or would think of
Piozzi.'—  BARETTI.

I owe

352

To Miss S.  A.   Thrale.

[A.D.  1783.

I owe you a letter.  Still I live here by my own self,  and have
had of late very bad nights  ;  but then I have had a pig to dinner,
which Mr.  Perkins gave me.  Thus life is chequered.

I cannot tell you much news,  because I see nobody that you
know.  Do you read the Tatlers  ?  They are part of the books
which every body should read,  because they are the sources of
conversation1,  therefore make them part of your library.  Bicker-
staff,  in the Tatler,  gives as a specimen of familiar letters,  an
account of his cat 2.  I could tell you as good things of Lily the
white kitling,  who is now at full growth,  and very well behaved  ;
but I do not see why we should descend below human beings,
and of one human being I can tell something that you will like
to hear.

A friend,  whose name I will tell when your Mamma has tried
to guess it,  sent to my physician to enquire whether this long
train of illness 3 had brought me into any difficulties for want of
money,  with an invitation to send to him for what occasion re-
quired. I shall write this night to thank him 4,  having no need
to borrow.

I have seen Mr.  Seward since his return only once ;  he gave
no florid account of my mistress's health 5.  Tell her that I

1  *  It is said by Addison,  in a sub-
sequent work,  that the Tatler and
Spectator had a perceptible influence
upon the conversation of that time,
and taught the frolic and the gay to
unite merriment with decency;  an
effect which they can never wholly
lose,  while they continue to be among
the first books by which both sexes
are initiated in the elegancies of
knowledge.'     Johnson's Works,  vii.
430.     The  '  subsequent work '  is The
Freeholder,  No.  45.

2 Writing of his little dog and cat
he says  : — '  They both of  'em sit by
my fire every night,  expecting my
coming home with impatience  ;  and
at my entrance never fail of running
up to me,  and bidding me welcome,
each of  'em in his proper language.
As they have been bred up together
from their infancy and seen no other

company,  they have learned each
other's manners,  so that the dog often
gives himself the airs of a cat,  and
the cat,  in several of her motions and
gestures,  affects the behaviour of the
little dog.'  The Tatler,  No.  112.

3 Johnson had perhaps in mind
*  the train of ills  '  in Addison's Cato,
Act iii.  sc.  2.

4 See Life,  iv.  245,  for his letter to
W.   G.  Hamilton,   dated the next
day.

5 Mrs.     Thrale wrote to Miss
Burney three months later : — *  Mr.
Seward's disapprobation  [of her affec-
tion for Piozzi]  is merely external,  and
by no means,  like yours,  the growth
of his heart ;  but the coarseness of
his expressions he has to himself,  and
I cannot guess how I have deserved
them.'       Mme.    D'Arblay's Diary,
ii.  306.

hearken

Aetat.  74.]

To Miss Burney.

353

hearken every day after a letter frorrT her IJ and do not be long
before you write yourself to,

My dear,

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

902.

To Miss BURNEY 2.
MADAM,

You have been at home a long time,  and I have never seen
you nor heard from you.  Have we quarreled  ?

I have sent a book which I have found lately,  and im-
agine to be Dr.  Burney's.  Miss Charlotte3 will please to
examine.

Pray write me a direction of Mrs.   Chapone4,   and pray

1 Johnson gives as one definition
of hearken,    'to listen by way of
curiosity ' ;  and quotes from Richard
///,    Act i.    sc.    i,    'He hearkens
after prophecies and dreams,'   and
from Rogers  [?  Dr.  John Rogers]  '  he
hearkens after any expedient that
offers to shorten his way to it.'

2 From the original in the posses-
sion of Mrs.  Haly,  25 Mount Sion,
Tunbridge Wells,  to whom it was
given by a daughter of Admiral
Burney — Miss Burney's brother.    In
Mme.  D'Arblay's Diary,  ii.  283,  and
in her Memoirs of Dr.  Burney,  ii.
356,  an incorrect copy is given,  which
Miss Burney,  not having the letter
by her,  wrote down from memory.
She gives also her reply as follows  : —

'DEAR SIR,

May I not say dear  ?  for
quarrelled I am sure we have not.
The bad weather alone has kept me
from waiting upon you  ;  but now you
have condescended to give me a
summons,  no lion shall stand in the

way of my making your tea this after-
noon, unless I receive a prohibition
from yourself,  and then I must
submit ;  for what,  as you said of a
certain great lady,  signifies the bark-
ing of a lap-dog,  if once the lion puts
out his paw  ?

The book was very right.  Mrs.
Chapone lives at either No.  7 or 8 in
Dean Street,  Soho.

I beg you,  Sir,  to forgive a delay
for which I can only  "  tax the elements
with unkindness  *,"  and to receive
with your usual goodness and indul-
gence, your ever most obliged and
most faithful humble servant,

F.  BURNEY.

St.  Martin's Street,  Nov.  19, 1783.'

The  'great  'lady'  was Mrs.
Montagu.  Memoirs of Dr.  Bitrney,
ii.  357 note.

3 Charlotte Burney,     afterwards
Mrs.    Broome.       Mme.    D'Arblay's
Diary,  vi.  193.

4 Johnson wrote to Mrs.  Chapone
on the 28th.     Life,  iv.  247.

VOL.  II.

*  King Lear,  Act iii.  sc.  2.

A a

let

354

To Miss Burney.

[A.D.  1783.

let me sometimes have the honour of telling you,  how much
I am,

Madam,

Your most humble servant,
Bolt-court,  Nov.  19,  1783.  SAM:  JOHNSON  '.

At the foot of this letter is written in Miss Burney's hand : — '  F.  B.
flew to him instantly and most gratefully.'

903.

To Miss BURNEY 2.

Mr.  Johnson begs of Miss Burney that she will favour him

with a copy of Cecilia to lend a friend.

Saturday.

1 Miss Burney with an overstrained
delicacy refused to allow Boswell to
print Johnson's letters to her.     '  One
I have from him,'  she writes, '  that is
a masterpiece of elegance and kind-
ness united.  'Twas his last.'  Boswell,
she says,  called upon her when she
was at Windsor,  and begged for her
help  :—

'"My help?"

"  Yes,  Madam  ;  you must give me
some of your choice little notes of the
Doctor's  ;  we have seen him long
enough upon stilts ;  I want to show
him in a new light.  Grave Sam,  and
great Sam,  and solemn Sam,  and
learned Sam,— all these he has ap-
peared over and over.  Now I want
to entwine a wreath of the graces
across his brow ;  I want to show him
as gay Sam,  agreeable Sam,  pleasant
Sam ;  so you must help me with
some of his beautiful billets to your-
self." '  She was too shy by nature to
yield,  and moreover at this time she
was oppressed by the propriety of
a Court.  Mme.  D'Arblay's Diary,
v.  167.  See also Memoirs of Dr.
Burney ',  iii.  1 14.

2 From the original in the pos-
session of Mrs.   E.  V.  Chappel,  of
East Orchard,  Shaftesbury.

Cecilia was published in the sum-
merof 1782,  more than four years after
Miss Burney's first novel Evelina.
Boswell wrote to Mrs.  Thrale from
Edinburgh on December 20, 1782  : —
'Everybody here is running after
Cecilia,  and I am vain of telling that
I have had the pleasure of being
frequently in Miss Burney's company
at Mrs.  Thrale's.'  From an Auto-
graph Letter in the possession of the
late Mr.  S.  J.  Davey.  He had met
her six months earlier in Johnson's
house.  '  I mentioned Cecilia.  JOHN-
SON (with an air of animated satis-
faction). "  Sir,  if you talk of Cecilia,
talk on." '  Life,  iv.  223.  Mrs.  Bar-
bauld wrote to her brother on January
2,  1784  : — 'Next to the balloon.  Miss
B.  is the object of public curiosity.
She is a very unaffected,  modest,
sweet,  and pleasing young lady; —
but you,  now I think of it,  are a
Goth,  and have not read Cecilia}
Barbauld's Works,  ii.  23.  Horace
Walpole wrote on September 17,
1785  :— '  Dr.  Burney and his daughter
Evelina-Cecilia,  have passed a day
and a half with me.  He is lively and
agreeable,  she half-and-half sense
and modesty,  which possess her so
entirely that not a cranny is left for

To

Aetat.  74.]  To the Reverend Dr.  Taylor.  355

904.

To THE REVEREND DR.  TAYLOR x.

DEAR SIR,

You desire me to write often,  and I write the same day,  and
should be sorry to miss any thing that might give you ease or
pleasure 2.

From the fatigue of your journey no harm,  I hope,  will ensue.
Exercise short of great fatigue must be your great medicine,  but
painful weariness I would wish you to avoid 3.  You will do well,
if you have recourse again to milk,  which once restored you be-
yond expectation,  and will now perhaps help you again 4.

It does not appear from your Doctor's prescription that he
sees to the bottom of your distemper.  What he gives you
strikes at no cause,  and is only intended for an occasional exciter
of the stomach.

Exercise yourself every morning,  and when you can catch a
momentary appetite,  have always something ready.  Toast and
hot wine will be good,  or a jelly,  or potted meats,  or anything
that can be eaten without trouble,  and dissolves of itself by
warmth and moisture.  Let nothing fret you ;  Care is all  [?  al-
ways] a slow,  and may now be to you a quick poison.  No
worldly thing but your health is now worth your thought,  if any
thing troublesome occurs,  drive it away without a parley.  If I
were with you,  perhaps I might help to keep you easy,  but we
are at a great distance.

I do not think that you have so much to hope from physick as
from regimen.  Keep a constant attention to petty conveniencies.
Suffer neither heat nor cold in a disagreeable degree.  Beware of
costiveness.  Take the air every morning,  and very often let me
know how you do,  and what you eat or drink and how you rest.

affectation or pretension.'     Letters,  feelings.'   Lockhart's Scott,  ed.  1839,

ix.  13.     More than forty years later,  ix.  50.

on November 18,   1826,  Sir Walter  *  From the original in the posses-
Scott describes her as  '  an elderly sion of Messrs.  J.  Pearson  &  Co.,  of
lady,   with no remains of personal 5 Pall Mall East,
beauty,  but with a simple and gentle 2 Dr.  Taylor was ill.    Post,  p.  357.
manner,   a pleasing expression of 3 Ante,  ii.  99,  102.
countenance,  and apparently quick 4 Ante,  ii.  234,  236.

A a 1 My

To Mrs.  Thrale.

[A.D.  1783.

My nights are restless,  but my sarcocele  *  gives me no trouble,
and the gout is gone,  and my respiration when I am up not
uneasy.

Let us pray for one another.

I am,  dear Sir,

Yours affectionately,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

London,  Nov.  19,  1783.
To the Reverend Dr.  Taylor in Ashbourne,  Derbyshire.

905.

To THE RIGHT HON.  WILLIAM GERARD HAMILTON.
[London],  November 19,  1783.     Published in the Life,  iv.  245.

906.

TO MRS.    THRALE2.

DEAR MADAM,  London,  Nov.  20, 1783.

I began to grieve and wonder that I had no letter,  but not
being much accustomed to fetch in evil by circumspection or
anticipation,  did not suspect that the omission had so dreadful
a cause as the sickness of one of my dears.  As her physician
thought so well of her when you wrote,  I hope she is now out of
danger.  You do not tell me her disease  ;  and perhaps have not
been able yourself fully to understand it.  I hope it is not of the
cephalick race3.

That frigid stillness with which my pretty Sophy melts away,
exhibits a temper very incommodious in sickness,  and by no
means amiable in the tenour of life4.  Incommunicative taciturnity
neither imparts nor invites friendship 5,  but reposes on a stubborn
sufficiency self-centered,  and neglects the interchange of that

1 Ante,  ii.  335.

2 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  329.

3 Johnson defines cephalick as
'  that which is medicinal to the head.'
He does not give a definition which
includes  '  that which pertains to the
head.'    What he dreaded was an
illness of the same kind as that
which had carried off many of Mrs.
Thrale's children.

4 Johnson in The Idler,  No.  103,
has  'an even and unvaried tenour
of life.'     When he wrote this he
perhaps had in his mind    *  the
noiseless tenour of their way'    of
Gray's Elegy.

5  '  This is the present case of
Hetty  [Miss Thrale— Queeney]  rather
than Sophy.'    BARETTI.

social

Aetat.  74.]  To the Reverend Dr.  Taylor.

357

social officiousness x by which we are  'habitually endeared to one
another.  They that mean to make no use of friends,  will be at
little trouble to gain them  ;  and to be without friendship,  is to be
without one of the first comforts of our present state.  To have
no assistance from other minds,  in resolving doubts,  in appeasing
scruples,  in balancing deliberations,  is a very wretched destitution.
If therefore my loves have this silence by temper,  do not let
them have it by principle ;  show them that it is a perverse and
inordinate disposition,  which must be counteracted and reformed.
Have I said enough  ?

Poor Dr.  Taylor represents himself as ill ;  and I am afraid is
worse than in the summer.  My nights are very bad  ;  but of the
sarcocele I have now little but the memory.

I am,  Madam,

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

907.

To THE REVEREND DR.  TAYLOR 2.
DEAR SIR,

You desired me to write often,  and I now write though
I have nothing new to tell you,  for I know that in the tediousness
of ill health a letter always gives some diversion to the mind,
and I am afraid that you live too much in solitude.

[I]  feel the weight of solitude very pressing ;  after a night of
broken and uncomfortable slumber I rise to a solitary breakfast,
and sit down in the evening with no companion 3.  Sometimes
however I try to read more and more.

1 Johnson defines officiousness as
'forwardness of civility,  or respect,
or endeavour.  Commonly in an ill
sense.'  Mrs.  Piozzi,  criticising the
line in which he praises Levett as
'  Officious,  innocent,  sincere,'
says  : — '  Johnson,  always thinking
neglect the worst misfortune that
could befall a man,  looked on a
character of this description with
less aversion than I do.'  British
Synonomy,  ii.  79.  She did not under-
stand that he used officious in the

sense of  '  kind  ;  doing good offices,'
and not in the sense of '  importunely
forward.'

2 First published in Notes and
Queries,  6th S.  v.  482.

3 Levett had  '  always waited upon
him every morning,    through the
whole course of his late and tedious
breakfast,'   and with Mrs.  Williams
he had always taken tea,  however
late he might be in coming home.
Life,  i.  243,  421.

You

358

To Sir John Hawkins.

[A.D.  1783.

You must likewise write to me and tell me how you live,  and
with what diet.  Your milk kept you so well that I know not
why you forsook it,  and think it very reasonable to try it again x.
Do not omit air and gentle exercise.

The ministry talk of laying violent hands on the East India
company,  even to the abolition or at least suspension of their
charter 2.  I believe corruption and oppression are in India at an
enormous height,  but it has never appeared that they were
promoted by the Directors,  who,  I believe,  see themselves de-
frauded, while the country is plundred  ;  but the distance puts
their officers out of reach 3,  and I doubt whether the government,
in its present state of diminished credit,  will do more than give
another evidence of its own imbecillity  \sic\  4.

You and I however have more urgent cares,  than for the East
Indian company.  We are old and unhealthy.  Let us do what
we can to comfort one another.

I am,  dear Sir,  &c.,

London,  Nov.  22,  1783-  SAM  :  JOHNSON.

To the Rev.  Dr.  Taylor in Ashbourne,  Derbyshire.

908.

DEAR SIR To SIR JOHN HAWKINS 5.

As Mr.  Ryland was talking with me of old friends and past

1 Ante,  ii.  355.

2 On November 20,    Fox had
brought in his East India Bill,  'a
singularly bold and original plan for
the government of the British terri-
tories in India.    What was proposed
was that the whole authority,  which
till that time had been exercised over
those territories by the East India
Company,  should be transferred to
seven Commissioners who were to
be named by Parliament,  and were
not to be removable at the pleasure
of the Crown.'    Macaulay's Miscel-
laneous Writings,  ed.  1871,  p.  406.

'  '  All distant power,'  said Johnson,
'is bad.  I am clear that the best
plan for the government of India is
a despotick governour ;  for if he be
a good man,  it is evidently the best

government ;  and supposing him to be
a bad man,  it is better to have one
plunderer than many.'  Life,  iv.  213.

4 Johnson showed more foresight
than Horace Walpole,   who wrote
early in December  : — '  Mr.    Fox's
competitor,  Mr.  Pitt,  appears by no
means an adequate rival.  .  . .  The
opponents of the Bill have no hopes
but in the House of Lords,  where
however I do not believe they expect
to succeed.     Mr.  Pitt's reputation is
much sunk.'    Letters,    viii.    437-9.
On December 19 Pitt became First
Lord of the Treasury,  and formed
that Ministry which lasted seventeen
years.

5 First published in Hawkins's
Life of Johnson,  page 562.

Hawkins records that Johnson said
times,

Aetat.  74.]

To Mrs.  Thrale.

359

times,  we warmed ourselves into a wish,  that all who remained of
the Club should meet and dine at the house which once was
Horseman's,  in Ivy-lane.  I have undertaken to solicit you,  and
therefore desire you to tell on what day next week you can con-
veniently meet your old friends.
I am,  Sir,

Your most humble servant,
Bolt-court,  Nov.  22,  1783.  SAM:  JOHNSON.

909.

TO MRS.    THRALE1.

DEAR MADAM,  London,  NOV.  24, 1783.

The post came in late to-day,  and I had lost hopes.  If the
distress of my dear little girl keep me anxious,  I have much
consolation from the maternal and domestick character of your
dear letters.

I do not much fear her pretty life,  because scarcely any body
dies of her disorder ;  but it is an unpromising entry upon a new
period of life  :  and there is,  I suspect,  danger lest she should have
to struggle for some years with a tender,  irritable,  and as it is
not very properly called,  a nervous constitution 2.  But we will
hope better ;  and please ourselves with thinking that nature,  or

to him this month: — 'What a man
am I,  who have got the better of
three diseases,  the palsy,  the gout,
and the asthma,  and can now enjoy
the conversation of my friends with-
out the interruptions of weakness
or pain  ! '  It was,  in what Hawkins
calls  '  this seeming spring-tide of his
health and spirits'  that Johnson
wrote this Letter.  The old Club
'had been formed in the winter of
1749,  and had met weekly at the
King's Head,  a famous beef-steak
house in Ivy-lane,  near St.  Paul's,
every Tuesday evening.'  Ib.  p.  219,
and Life,  i.  190  ;  iv.  253,  435.  « Ivy-
lane runs from Paternoster Row into
Newgate Street.  This lane took its
name from the Ivy which grew on
the walls of the prebends'  houses,

formerly situated here.  Stow!  Dods-
ley's London and its Environs,  iii.
265.  Goldsmith in his Essay on
Clubs says : — 'If a man be phleg-
matic he may sit in silence at the
hum-drum club in Ivy-lane.'  Gold-
smith's Works,  ed.  1801,  iv.  302.
According to a writer in the Builder
(December,  1884), '  The King's Head
was burnt down twenty-five years
ago,  but the cellarage remains be-
neath No.  4,  Alldis's dining-rooms,
on the eastern side.'

1 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  331.

2 Johnson in his Dictionary gives
as the second meaning of nervous,
(  relating to the nerves ;  having the
seat in the nerves.    [In medical cant]
Having weak or diseased nerves.'

physick,

360 To Mrs.  Thrale.  [A.D.  i?83.

physick,  will gain a complete victory ;  that dear Sophy will
quite recover,  and that she and her sister will love one another
one degree more for having felt and excited pity,  for having
wanted and given help.

I received yesterday from your physicians a note,  from which
I received no information  ;  they put their heads together to tell
me nothing.  Be pleased to write punctually yourself,  and leave
them to their trade.  Let me have something every post till my
dear Sophy is better.

My nights are often very troublesome,  so that I try to sleep in
the day.  The old convulsions of the chest have a mind to fasten
their fangs again upon me.  I am afraid that winter will pinch
me.  But I will struggle with it,  and hope to hold out yet against

heat and cold.

I am,  Madam,

Your,  &c.,

SAM  :  JOHNSON.

910.

TO MRS.    THRALE1.

DEAR MADAM,  London,  Nov.  27, 1783.

I had to-day another trifling letter from the physicians.  Do
not let them fill your mind with terrours which perhaps they
have not in their own ;  neither suffer yourself to sit forming
comparisons between Sophy and her dear father ;  between whom
there can be no other resemblance,  than that of sickness to sick-
ness. Hystericks and apoplexies have no relation.  Hystericks
commonly cease at the times when apoplexies attack  ;  and very
rarely can be said to shorten life.  They are the bugbears of
disease,  of great terrour but little danger.

Mrs.  Byron2 has been with me to-day to enquire after Sophy  ;
I sent her away free from the anxiety which she brought with her.

Do however what the Doctors order ;  they know well enough
what is to be done.  My pretty Sophy will be well,  and Bath
will ring with the great cure.  T  „

SAM:  JOHNSON.

1 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  332.  2 Ante,  ii.  79.

To

Aetat.  74.]  To Mrs.  Thrale.  361

911.       "

To MRS.  CHAPONE.
[London],  November 28,  1783.     Published in the Life,  iv.  247.

912.

TO MRS.    THRALE1.

DEAR MADAM,  London,  NOV.  29, 1783.

The life of my dear,  sweet,  pretty,  lovely,  delicious Miss
Sophy is safe ;  let us return thanks to the great Giver of exist-
ence, and pray that her continuance amongst us may be a blessing
to herself and to those that love her.  Multosetfelices,  my dear girl2.

Now she is recovered,  she must write me a little history of her
sufferings,  and impart her schemes of study and improvement 3.
Life,  to be worthy of a rational being,  must be always in
progression ;  we must always purpose to do more or better than
in time past.  The mind is enlarged and elevated by mere
purposes,  though they end as they begin by airy contemplation.
We compare and judge,  though we do not practise4.

She will go back to her arithmetick again ;  a science which
will always delight her more,  as by advancing further she discerns
more of its use,  and a science devoted to Sophy's ease of mind  ;
for you told in the last winter that she loved metaphysicks
more than romances.  Her choice is certainly as laudable as it
is uncommon ;  but I would have her like what is good in both.

God bless you and your children ;  so says,

Dear Madam,

Your old Friend,

SAM  :  JOHNSON.

1 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  334.  iv.  396,  n.  4.    With  '  airy contempla-

2  '  And so say I.'  BARETTI.  Their tion  '  compare line 10 in The Vanity
prayer that many happy years might of Human Wishes,  where the poet
fall to her lot was only granted in describes how man —

part.     '  She died on November 8,  *  Shuns fancied ills,  or chases airy

1824,  at Sandgate,  the wife of Henry good.'

Merrick Hoare.     She never had any In Rasselas,  ch.  44,  he says  : — (  No

children.'     MS.  note in the copy of man will be found in whose mind

the Piozzi Letters which had be-  airy notions do not sometimes tyran-

longed to Baretti.  nise,  and force him to hope or fear

3 For Johnson's  '  schemes of life '  beyond the limits of sober proba-
see ante,  ii.  300,  n.  3.  bility.'

4 Boswell quotes this passage.  Life,

To

362

To the Reverend Dr.  Taylor.         [A.D.

913.

To THE REVEREND DR.  TAYLOR  '.
DEAR SIR,

Your Doctor's fixed air recommends him but little to my
esteem2;  I like Doxy's3 prescription better,  and your own
regimen better than either.  By persevering in the use of milk,
I doubt not but you will gain health enough to keep your
residence 4,  and that we can consult at leisure what may be best
for both.  This is but at two months distance.  If your health
or safety could be much promoted by any attention of mine,
I would come down,  but my own sickliness makes me unwilling
to be far from my Physicians,  and unless I were sure of some
considerable good,  such a journey is not to be undertaken.  If
I come to you,  I must go to Lichfield.

While milk agrees with you,  do not be persuaded to forsake
it.  Go to bed,  and rise,  as Nature dictates,  not by rule but
according to convenience.  Make your mind easy,  and trust God.

My time passes uncomfortably,  my nights have been of late
spasmodick without opium and sleepless with it.  I hope that when
we meet we shall both be better5.
I am,  Sir,

Your most humble servant,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

London,  Nov.  29,  1783.

To the Reverend Dr.  Taylor in Ashbourne,  Derbyshire.

1 From the original.     I have care-
lessly failed to record the name of
the correspondent to whose kindness
I owe a copy of this Letter.

2  '  Carbonic acid was long known
before its nature was understood.
Black gave it the name of fixed air.'
Penny Cyclo.,  ed.  1836,  vi.  282.     In
a review in the Gentlemaris Maga-
zine for 1773,  p.  447,  of Dr.  Priest-
ley's Observations on different Kinds
of Air it is stated that  '  the three
terms in common use for distinguish-
ing the different kinds of air are
Fixed air,  Mephitic and Inflammable.'
The use which Taylor's doctor would
have made of '  fixed air '  is perhaps

explained in the same review,  where
mention is made of  'the effects of
fixed air applied by way of clyster in
the case of a putrid fever.'  See also
ib.  p.  553.

3 See ante,  ii.  129,  n.  i,  for mention
of Garrick's niece,  Miss Doxy.

4 He had to keep his residence as
Prebendary of Westminster.    Life,

ii-  473-

5 In 1783,  probably about this time,
for it was when Johnson was very
poorly,  he dined with the Duke of
Chaulnes at the Adelphi,  as the fol-
lowing letter shows : —

'  The Duke of Chaulnes'  best com-
pliments to Doctor Burney:     he

To

Aetat.  74.]

To Sir John Hawkins.

363

014.

To MRS.  PORTER.
London,  November 29,  1783.     Published in the Life,  iv.  256.

915.

To SIR JOHN HAWKINS'.
DEAR SIR,

In perambulating Ivy-lane,  Mr.  Ryland found neither our
landlord Horseman nor his successor.  The old house is shut up,
and he liked not the appearance of any near it;  he therefore
bespoke our dinner at the Queen's Arms,  in St.  Paul's Church-
yard2, where,  at half an hour after three,  your company will be
desired to-day by those who remain of our former society.

Your humble servant,
Dec.  3  [1783.]  SAM:  JOHNSON.

desires the favour of his company
to dinner with Doctor Johnson on
Sunday next,  between about three
and four o'clock,  which is the hour
convenient to the excellent old Doctor,
the best piece of man,  indeed,  that
the Duke ever saw.'  Memoirs of
Dr.  Burney,  ii.  338.

1 First published in Hawkins's
Life of Johnson,  page 563.

'  With this invitation,'  writes Haw-
kins, '  I cheerfully complied,  and
met all who could be mustered of
our society,  namely Johnson,  Mr.  Ry-
land, and Mr.  Payne of the Bank.
In the evening we regaled with coffee.
At ten we broke up,  much to the
regret of Johnson,  who proposed
staying ;  but finding us inclined to
separate,  he left us with a sigh that
seemed to come from his heart,
lamenting that he was retiring to
solitude and cheerless meditation.'

John Payne had been a bookseller,
but was now Chief Accountant of the
Bank.  Life,  i.  317,  n.  i.  '  He was,'
says Isaac Reed,  'of a very diminu-
tive appearance.  Once Johnson in
a gaiety of humour proposed to run

a race with him.  Before they had
run half the distance Johnson caught
his little adversary up in his arms,
and without any ceremony placed
him upon the arm of a tree which
was near,  and then continued running
as if he had met with a hard match.'
Croker's Boswell,  ed.  1835,  x.  145.

2 It was at the Queen's Arms
that Johnson's City Club met,  which
was composed of men who were
not patriots,  collected for him by
Mr.  Hoole.  Life,  iv.  87.  Jeremy
Bentham was a member.  'Tasso
Hoole,'  he writes,  '  was one of Dr.
Johnson's lickspittles.  He had,  I
think,  a place at the East India
House  ;  and got money by plays and
translations,  which he got people to
subscribe for.  He even asked me
for subscriptions,  though he lived in
style — asked me who lived in beg-
gary !  He got me to subscribe,  and
Chamberlain Clarke forced him to
give back the money.'  Bentham's
Works, K.  184.  For Hoole's generous
conduct about one of his plays which
had not succeeded,  see Life,  ii.  289,
n.  3.

To

364 To Mrs.  Thrale.  [A.D.  i?83.

916.

To SIR JOSHUA REYNOLDS.
[London],  December 4,  1783.     Published in the Life,  iv.  253.

917.

TO MRS.   THRALE1.

DEAR MADAM,  London,  Dec.  13, 1783.

I think it long since I wrote,  and sometimes venture to hope
that you think it long too.  The intermission has been rilled with
spasms,  opiates,  sleepless nights,  and heavy days.  These vellica-
tions2 of my breast shorten my breath  ;  whether they will much
shorten my life I know not,  but I have been for some time past
very comfortless.  My friends here ever continue kind,  and much
notice is taken of me.

I had two pretty letters from Susy and Sophy,  to which I will
send answers,  for they are two dear girls.  You must all guess
again at my friend 3

I dined about a fortnight ago with three old friends ;  we had
not met together for thirty years,  and one of us thought the
other4 grown very old.  In the thirty years two of our set
have died 5 ;  our meeting may be supposed to be somewhat

1 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  339.  members were alive but Hawkes-
From the day after that on which wortrT and Dyer.     The Club which

he wrote this letter he was confined Hawkins describes had ten mem-

to the house for 129 days.     Post,  bers, —  Johnson,    Hawkins,  Ryland,

Letters of March 10 and April 21,  Payne,  Barker,  Salter,  Dyer,  M'Ghie,

1784.  Bathurst and Hawkesworth.  Of these

2  *  Vellication.  Twitching ;  stimu-  the last six were dead.    Hawkins
lation.'     Johnson's Dictionary.  adds that it was formed in the winter

3 Ante,  ii.  352.  of 1749,   and broke up about the

4 Johnson,  I conjecture,  wrote  '  the year 1756.     Hawkins's Johnson,  pp.
others.'     It was Hawkins perhaps 219,   361.     The difference between
who thought his friends grown old.  his account and Johnson's is irre-
'  I could not but compare our meet-  concilable.  I conjecture that the Old
ing,'  he writes,  '  to that of the four Club was dissolved earlier than he
old men in the Senile Colloquium of states,  and that a second was formed
Erasmus.'      Hawkins's Johnson,   p.  composed only of six members.    Ac-
563.  cording to Nichols   (Lit.  Anec.  ix.

5 Johnson,  post,  p.  390,  says that 502)  the Club was known as The
it was three and thirty years ago Rambler Club.      Perhaps this was
that the Club met,  and that all the a second Club.

tender.

Aetat.  74.]  To the Reverend Dr.  Taylor.  365

tender.  I boasted that I had passed  'the day with three friends,
and that no mention had been made among any of us of the air
ballon,  which has taken full possession,  with a very good claim,
of every philosophical mind and mouth I.  Do you not wish for
the flying coach 2  ?

Take care of your own health,  compose your mind,  and you
have yet strength of body to be well.

I am,  Madam,

Your,  &c.,

SAM  :  JOHNSON.

918.

To THE REVEREND DR.  TAYLOR 3.
DEAR SIR,

Perhaps you wonder that I do not write.  I am very severely
crushed  [?  harassed]  by my old spasm which suffers  [?  suffering]
me to get no sleep in the night,  necessarily condemns the day to
sluggishness and restlessness.  I am indeed exceedingly distressed.
I think you have chosen well,  in taking a later month for
yourself4,  but I was sorry to miss you so long a time.  I am

1 Horace Walpole wrote a few tumee : — "  Eh !  a quoi bon 1'enfant

days earlier  : — '  Balloons occupy qui vient de naitre  ? " '     Memoires

senators,  philosophers,  ladies,  every-  Historiques,    &c.      Par Grimm et

body.  . .  .  All this may be very im-  Diderot,  ed.  1814,  iii.  66.

portant ;  to me it looks somewhat 2 Eight years later Darwin wrote

foolish.'     Letters,    viii.    438.      Ben-  in his Economy of Vegetation,   i.

jamin Franklin wrote to Sir J.  Banks 289  : —

from Passy near Paris on November  '  Soon shall thy arm,   unconquer'd

21 : — 'A few months since the Idea Steam!  afar

of Witches riding through the Air Drag the slow barge,  or drive the

upon a Broomstick and that of rapid car ;

Philosophers upon a bag of Smoke Or on wide-waving wings expanded

would have appeared equally im-  bear

possible and ridiculous.'     Messrs.  The flying-chariot through the fields

Sotheby  &  Co.'s Auction Catalogue,  of air.'

March u,  1886,  Lot 1281.  'Beaucoup 3 From the original in the Dreer

de gens qui se piquent de rester Autograph Collection belonging to

froids au milieu de 1'enthousiasme the Historical Society of Pennsyl-

public n'ont pas manque de repe"ter  :  vania.     I owe the copy to the kind-

— "Mais quelle utilite retirera-t-on ness of Mr.  John W.   Jordan the

de ces experiences  ?  A quoi bon cette Assistant Librarian,

decouverte dont on fait tant de 4 The month,  no doubt,  in which

bruit."     Le vdndrable Franklin leur he should reside as a Prebendary of

rdpond avec sa simplicity accou-  Westminster.

indeed

366 To Miss Reynolds.  [A.D.  i?83.

indeed heavily loaded with distempers.  Sometimes I fancy that
exercise would help me,  but exercise I know not how to get.
Sometimes I think that a warmer climate would relieve me,  but
the removal requires a great deal of money.  At present I subsist
by opiates,  and with them shall try to fight through the winter,
and try something efficacious,  if life be granted me,  in the Spring.
The  [?  sarcocele]  continues well.  Write to what comfort you can.
We are almost left alone.

I am,  Sir,

Your affectionate,  &c.}

SAM:  JOHNSON.

London,  Dec.  20,  1783.
To the Reverend Dr.  Taylor in Ashbourne,  Derbyshire.

919.

To Miss REYNOLDS T.
DEAREST MADAM,  December 23, 1783.

You shall doubtless be very welcome to me on Christmas
day.     I shall not dine alone,  but the company will all be people
whom we can stay with or leave.     I will expect you at three,  if
I hear no more.     I am this day a little better2.
I am,  dear Madam,

Your most humble servant,

SAM JOHNSON.

I mean,  do not be later than three  ;  for as I am afraid I shall
not be at church,  you cannot come too soon.

920.

To JAMES BOSWELL.
London,  December 24,  1783.     Published in the Life,  iv.  248.

1 First published in Croker's Bos-  better since,  though still in a most
well,  page 744.  alarming way.     Indeed,  I am very

2 Miss Burney recorded on De-  much afraid for him.     He was very,
cember 16  :— '  I spent the afternoon very kind.     Oh  !  what a cruel,  heavy
with Dr.   Johnson,   who indeed is loss will he be ! '     Mme.  D'Arblay's
very ill,  and whom I could hardly Diary,  ii.  293.

tell how to leave.    But he is rather

To

Aetat.  74.]  To Mrs.  Thrale.  367

921.

TO MRS.    THRALE1.

DEAR MADAM,  London,  Dec.  27, 1783.

The wearisome solitude of the long evenings did indeed
suggest to me the convenience of a club in my neighbourhood,
but I have been hindered from attending it by want of breath.
If I can complete the scheme,  you shall have the names and the
regulations 2.

The time of the year,  for I hope the fault is rather in the
weather than in me,  has been very hard upon me.  The muscles
of my breast are much convulsed.  Dr.  Heberden recommends
opiates,  of which I have such horrour that I do not think of them
but in extremis*.  I was however driven to them last night for
refuge,  and having taken the usual quantity durst not go to bed,
for fear of that uneasiness to which a supine posture exposes me,
but rested all night in a chair with much relief,  and have been
to-day more warm,  active,  and cheerful.

You have more than once wondered at my complaint of
solitude,  when you hear that I am crowded with visits.  Inopem
me copia fecit 4.  Visitors are no proper companions in the chamber
of sickness.  They come when I could sleep or read,  they stay
till I am weary,  they force me to attend when my mind calls for
relaxation,  and to speak when my powers will hardly actuate my
tongue.  The amusements and consolations of languor and
depression are conferred by familiar and domestick companions,
which can be visited or called at will,  and can occasionally be
quitted or dismissed,  who do not obstruct accommodation 5 by
ceremony,  or destroy indolence by awakening effort.

1 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  340.  to Boswell three days earlier  : — '  I

2 For   '  the little evening club in am now a little better.     But sickness
Essex Street,  in the Strand/  see Life,  and solitude press me very heavily,
iv.  253,  436.  I could bear sickness better if I were

3 Boswell records that having called relieved from solitude.'    Id.  iv.  249.
on Johnson on March 23 in this year The quotation is from Ovid's Meta-
he found him relieved by opium.  morphoses,  iii.  466.

'  He however protested against it 5 Accommodation is a favourite

as a remedy that should be given word with Johnson.  He defines it : —

with the utmost reluctance,  and only  *  i.  Provision of conveniences.    2.  In

in extreme necessity.'    Life,  iv.  171.  the plural,  conveniences,  things re-

4 Ante,  ii.  326.     He had written quisite to ease or refreshment.'     In

Such

368

To Mrs.  Thrale.

[A.D.  1783.

Such society I had with Levet and Williams  ;  such I had
where — I am never likely to have it more J.

I wish,  dear Lady,  to you and my dear girls many a cheerful

and pious Christmas.

I am,

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

922.

TO MRS.    THRALE2.

DEAR MADAM,  London,  Dec.  31, 1783.

Since you cannot guess,  I will tell you that the generous
man was Gerard Hamilton.  I returned him a very thankful and
respectful letter 3.

Your enquiry about Lady Carlisle4 I cannot answer,  for I

The Rambler,  No.  145, he says : — 'The
meanest artizan or manufacturer con-
tributes more to the accommodation
of life than the profound scholar and
argumentative theorist.'  The Duke
in Measure for Measure,  Act iii.  sc.  I,
1.  13,  reasoning with life says  : —

'  Thou art not noble  ;

For all the accommodations that
thou bear'st

Are nursed by baseness.'
See Life,  v.  310,  n.  3 for accommodate.
1 Mme.  D'Arblay records that
some day in the autumn of this year
she called on him.  Hitherto he had
never mentioned to her his fears
about Mrs.  Thrale.  As she sat with
him,  'a sudden change from kind
tranquillity to strong austerity took
place in his countenance ;  startled
and affrighted she held her peace.
A silence almost awful succeeded.
Then see-sawing violently in his
chair,  as usual when he was big with
any powerful emotion whether of
pleasure or of pain,  he seemed deeply
moved;  but without looking at her,
or speaking,  he intently fixed his
eyes upon the fire.  Then suddenly

turning to her with an air of mingled
wrath and woe he hoarsely ejacu-
lated :— "  Piozzi !  "  He evidently
meant to say more;  but the effort
with which he articulated that name
robbed him of any voice for amplifi-
cation, and his whole frame grew
tremulously convulsed.  At length,
and with great agitation,  he broke
forth with  : — "  She cares for no one.
You,  only — you,  she loves still.  But
no one — and nothing else.  You she
still loves—."  A half smile now,
though of no very gay character,
softened a little the severity of his
features,  while he tried to resume
some cheerfulness in adding  : — "  as
— she loves her little finger."  He
saw how distressing was the theme
to a hearer whom he ever wished to
please,  not distress ;  and he named
Mrs.  Thrale no more.'  Memoirs of
Dr.  Burney,  ii.  358-63.  (I have
abridged the account.)

2 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  342.

3 Life,  iv.  245,  and ante,  ii.  352,  364.

4 The wife of the fifth Earl of
Carlisle and daughter of the first
Marquis of Stafford.

never

Aetat.  74.]

To Mrs.   Thrale.

369

never saw her,  unless perhaps without'  knowing her at a con-
versation \

Sir Joshua has just been here,  and knows nothing of Miss
Bingham  ;  if one of Lord Lucan's daughters be meant,  the eldest
is now Lady Spencer  ;  she is languishing in France with a diseased
leg,  and the third is a child 2.

Pray send the letter which you think will divert me,  for I have
much need of entertainment;  spiritless,  infirm,  sleepless and
solitary,  looking back with sorrow and forward with terrour : —
but I will stop.

Barry of Ireland had a notion that a man's pulse wore him
out 3 ;  my beating breast wears out me.  The physicians yester-
day covered it with a blister,  of which the effect cannot yet be
known 4.  Good God prosper their endeavours !  Heberden is of
opinion that while the weather is oppressive we must palliate.

In the mean time I am well fed ;  I have now in the house
pheasant,  venison,  turkey and ham,  all unbought.  Attention and
respect give pleasure,  however late or however useless.  But they
are not useless when they are late  ;  it is reasonable to rejoice,  as
the day declines,  to find that it has been spent with the appro-
bation of mankind 5.

1 Ante,  ii.  105,  n.  4.

2 For Johnson's acquaintance with
Lord Lucan's family see ante,  ii.  65,
nn.  4,  9.     Gibbon,  writing from Lau-
sanne on September 5, 1785 about his
English visitors says  : — *  Those who
have repaid me for the rest were Lord
and Lady Spencer.    He is a valuable
man,    and where he is familiar a
pleasant companion  ;  she a charming
woman,  who with sense and spirit
has the simplicity and playfulness of
a child.'     Gibbon's Misc.  Works,  ii.
384.     Jones composed an Ode on
their marriage,    of which Horace
Walpole wrote  : — '  If it is not perfect,
still the eighth,    ninth and tenth
stanzas have merit enough to shock
Dr.  Johnson,   and such sycophant
old nurses,  and that is enough for
me.    How precious is any line of De-

VOL.  II.  B

mosthenes that offended King Philip
and the whole Court of Macedon!'
Letters,  viii.  74.

3  *  His notion was that pulsation
occasions death by attrition  ;  and that
therefore the way to preserve life is
to retard pulsation.'     Life,  iii.  34.

4 MissBurney records: — 'Tuesday,
December 30.     I spent the evening
with Dr.  Johnson.    There were some
very disagreeable people with him ;
and he once affected me very much
by turning suddenly to me,    and
grasping my hand,  and saying  : —
'  The blister I have tried for my
breath has betrayed some very bad
tokens ;  but I will not terrify myself
by talking of them  ;  ah,  priest Dieu
pour moi?     Mme.  D'Arblay's Diary,
ii.  295.

5  '  Our uncertainty concerning our
b The

370

To the Reverend Dr.   Taylor.         [A.D.  1734.

The ministry is again broken,  and to any man who extends his
thoughts to national consideration the times are dismal and
gloomy z.  But to a sick man what is the publick  ?

The new year is at hand ;  may God make it happy to me,  to
you,  to us all,  for Jesus Christ's sake  !  Amen 2.

I am,  Madam,

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

923.

DEAR SIR      ^°  THE  ^EVEREND DR.  TAYLOR 3.

I was intending to write to you,  to quarrel with your silence,
when waking after a short sleep in my chair,  I found your kind
letter lying on the table.

Since your Milk has restored you,  let it preserve you,  do not
forsake it again for any length of time.  As for me I know not
on which side to turn me,  I am irregular in nothing.  My breast
is now covered with a blister,  which is,  I believe,  to be kept open ;
it gives no pain,  and perhaps has hitherto produced no benefit,
for though I have not since its application,  suffered anything
from Spasms,  I have never been without opium,  and therefore

own merit,  and our anxiety to think
favourably of it,  should together
naturally enough make us desirous
to know the opinion of other people
concerning it  ;  to be more than
ordinarily elevated when that opinion
is favourable.'  Adam Smith's Theory
of Moral Sentiments,  ed.  1801,  i.
259.

1 To Boswell he had written a
week earlier : — *  The present dreadful
confusion of the publick ought to
make you wrap yourself up in your
hereditary possessions,  which,  though
less than you may wish,  are more
than you can want ;  and in an hour
of religious retirement return thanks
to GOD,  who has exempted you from
any strong temptation to faction,
treachery,  plunder,  and disloyalty.'

Life,  iv.  249.  Earl Temple,  who on
the 1 9th entered Pitt's Ministry as
Secretary of State,  had resigned on
the 22nd.  Parl.  Hist.  xxiv.  227.
*  The heart of the young minister,
stout as it was,  almost died within
him.  He could not once close his
eyes on the night which followed
Temple's resignation.'  Macaulay's
Misc.  Works,  ed.  1871,  p.  407.

2 In Messrs.    Sotheby    £    Co.'s
Auction Catalogue of May 10,  1875,
Lot 119 is   ( a beautiful and most
pious prayer in the autograph of Dr.
Johnson,  dated January i,  p.m.  n,
1784.'     It was sold for eight guineas.

3 From the original in the posses-
sion of Mr.  Alfred Morrison,  of Font-
hill House.

know

Aetat.  74.]  To Mrs.   Thrale.  371

know not,  which has helped me ;  nor am I helped much,  for in
bed I scarce get any sleep  ;  what I have is in a chair.  Dr.  Heberden
tells me that I must be content to support myself by opiates in
the winter,  and try to get better help in hotter weather.

In spring I have a desire of trying milk somewhere in the
country.  My lower parts begin to swell.  May we all be received
to mercy.

There is likely to be a vacancy soon in Wicher's Alms-
houses in Chappel street x,  which it will  [be]  your Dean's turn to
fill up.  A poor relation of mine wants a habitation.  His name
is Heely.  I intend to ask Dr.  Bell's interest,  and if you  [think]
it proper,  wish you would write to the Dean in Heely's favour 2.

I wish us both a happy year.

I am,  Sir,

Affectionately yours,

London,  Jan.  3,  1784.  SAM  :  JOHNSON.

Write soon and often.
To the Reverend Dr.  Taylor in Ashbourne,  Derbyshire.

924.

To CHARLES DILLY.
[London],  January 6,  1784.     Published in the Life,  iv.  257.

925.

DEAR MADAM,       To MRS'  THRALE3-    London,  Jan.  12, 1784.

If,  as you observe,  my former letter was written with trepi-
dation, there is little reason,  except the habit of enduring,  why

1 Chapel Street,  Broad Way,  West-  against Johnson by Hawkins of
minster.      Dodsley's London,  ii.  90.  neglecting this man,    says : — *  Sir
*  Your Dean '  was the Dean of West-  John chooses to call him a relation
minster.  For Dr.  Bell see ante i.  1 1 8.  of Dr.  Johnson's.'      Life,    iv.    370.

2 For Heely see ante,  i.  306.      He Johnson however here speaks of him
was elected to the Almshouse.  Haw-  as  '  a poor relation of mine.'  Relation
kins visited him there,  and was in-  he defines as a person related by birth
formed by him that  *  the endowment or marriage.     Heely's second mar-
yielded him an allowance of half-a-  riage,  especially as he had no children
crown a week,  and half a chaldron by his first wife,   Johnson's cousin,
of coals at Christmas.'     Hawkins's did,  as Boswell says,   dissolve the
Johnson,  p.  602.     Boswell,  properly connection.

censuring the unjust charge brought 3 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  344.

B b 3 this

372

To Mrs.   Thrale.

[A.D.  1784.

this should shew more steadiness.  I am confined to the house ;
I do not know that any things grow better  ;  my physicians direct
me to combat the hard weather with opium ;  I cannot well
support its turbulence,  and yet cannot forbear it,  for its immediate
effect is ease  ;  having kept me waking all the night it forces
sleep upon me in the day,  and recompenses a night of tediousness
with a day of uselessness.  My legs and my thighs grow very
tumid x :  in the mean time my appetite is good,  and if my
physicians do not flatter me death is  [not]  rushing upon me2.
But this is in the hand of God.

The first talk of the sick is commonly of themselves ;  but if
they talk of nothing else,  they cannot complain if they are soon
left without an audience.

You observe,  Madam,  that the ballon engages all mankind,  and
it is indeed a wonderful and unexpected addition to human
knowledge3 ;  but we have a daring projector,  who,  disdaining the
help of fumes and vapours,  is making better than Dsedalean
wings,  with which he will master the ballon and its companions
as an eagle masters a goose.  It is very seriously true that a sub-
scription of eight hundred pounds has been raised for the wire
and workmanship of iron wings 4 ;  one pair of which,  and I think
a tail,  are now shown in the Haymarket,  and they are making
another pair at Birmingham.  The whole is said to weigh two
hundred pounds — no specious preparation for flying,  but there
are those who expect to see him in the sky.  When I can leave
the house I will tell you more.

1 Tumid is one of  '  the three un-
common or learned words'  which
Boswell discovers in the Lives of
the Poets.    Johnson describes Wal-
ler's legs as growing tumid.   Life,  iv.

39-

2 I have inserted not which clearly
seems omitted.     See the next letter
for Dr.   Heberden's favourable re-
port of his state.

3 Mrs.  Thrale wrote to Miss Bur-
ney from Bath on January 15  : —
'  Air balloons go no faster than post-
horses at last.     I caught my death
almost by looking at one the other

day which went to Bristol in an hour
from hence.  I dare say Sir John
Lade's phaeton would have beaten
our Icarus out of sight.'  Mme.  D'Ar-
blay's Diary,  ii.  300.

4 Johnson,  in Rasselas,  ch.  vi,  in
'  A Dissertation on the Art of Flying,'
had ridiculed the invention of wings.
'  In a year,'  he writes,  '  they were
finished,  and on a morning appointed
the maker appeared,  furnished for
flight,  on a little promontory :  he
waved his pinions awhile to gather
air,  then leaped from his stand,  and
in an instant dropped into the lake.'

I had

Aetat.  74.]

To Mrs.   Thrale.

373

I had the same old friends to dine with me on Wednesday  ",
and may say that since I lost sight of you I have had one pleasant

I am,  Madam,

Your,  &c.5

SAM:  JOHNSON.
Pray send me a direction to Sir Musgrave in Ireland 2.

926.

TO MRS.    THRALE3.

DEAR MADAM,  London,  Jan.  21, 1784.

Dr.  Heberden this day favoured me with a visit ;  and after
hearing what I had to tell him of miseries and pains,  and com-
paring my present with my past state,  declared me well.  That
his opinion is erroneous,  I know with too much certainty;  and
yet was glad to hear it,  as it set extremities at a greater distance  :
he who is by his physician thought well,  is at least not thought
in immediate danger.  They therefore whose attention to me
makes them talk of my health,  will.  I hope,  soon not drop,  but
lose their subject.  But,  alas 1 I had no sleep last night,  and sit
now panting over my paper.  Dabit Deus his quoque finem*.
I have really hope from spring ;  and am ready,  like Almanzor,  to
bid the sun^y swiftly,  and leave weeks and months behind him 5.
The sun has looked for six thousand years upon the world to
little purpose,  if he does not know that a sick man is almost
as impatient as a lover.

Mr.  Cator gives such an account of Miss Cecy6,  as you and all

1 Ante,  ii.  364.

2 Sir Richard Musgrave.    Ante,
ii.  295,  n.  I.

3 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  346.

4  '  This too the gods shall end.'

jEneidi.  199.

Windham,  who called on him this
day,  found him too ill to admit him  ;
as was the case also on the 24th and
25th.  Windham's Diary,  p.  2.

3 Almanzor's speech is at the end
of Dryden's Conquest of Granada  : —

'  Move swiftly,  Sun,  and fly a lover's

pace;
Leave weeks and months behind

thee in thy race.'

Johnson no longer says,  as he had
said twenty-five years earlier in the
strength of his manhood,  that  '  the
distinction of seasons is produced
only by imagination operating on
luxury.  To temperance every day
is bright.'  The Idler,  No.  xi.
6 For Mr.  Cator,  one of Mr.

of

374 To the Reverend Dr.   Taylor.         [A.D.1784.

of us must delight to hear;  Cator has a rough,  manly,  inde-
pendent understanding,  and does not spoil it by complaisance  ;
he never speaks merely to please,  and seldom is mistaken in
things which he has any right to know.  I think well of her for
pleasing him,  and of him for being pleased ;  and at the close x,
am delighted to find him delighted with her excellence.  Let
your children,  dear Madam,  be his care,  and your pleasure  ;  close
your thoughts upon them,  and when sad fancies are excluded,
health and peace will return together.

I am,  dear Madam,

Your old Friend,

SAM  :  JOHNSON.

927.

To MR.  PERKINS.
[London],  January 21,  1784.     Published in the Life,  iv.  257.

928.

T,          0 To THE REVEREND DR.  TAYLOR 2.
DEAR SIR,

I am still confined to the house,  and one of my amusements
is to write letters to my friends,  though they,  being busy in the
common scenes of life,  are not equally diligent in writing to me.
Dr.  Heberden was with me two or three days ago,  and told me
that nothing ailed me,  which I am glad to hear,  though I knew
it not to be true.  My nights are restless,  my breath is difficult,
and my lower parts continue tumid.

The struggle,  you see,  still continues between the two sets of
ministers  :  those that are out and in one can scarce call them,  for
who is out or in is perhaps four times a day a new question 3.

Thrale's executors,  see ante,  i.  355,  the Life,  vol.  iv,  page 260,  from the
n.  7.   Cecy is Mrs.  Thrale's daughter,  original in the possession of Mr.  M.
Caecilia.  She did not die till seventy-  M.  Holloway of Hillbrow,  Streatham.
three years after this good account 3 Pitt had come into office on
was given of her.  December 19 of the previous year,
1  ' At the close*  \&,  I think,  a very not by a vote of the House of
uncommon expression for in short or Commons,  but by the favour of the
mfS:  King.    Ante,  ii.  370, ».  I.    <  His con-
First published in my edition of test against the House of Commons

The

Aetat.  74.]         To the Reverend Dr.  Taylor.  375

The tumult in government is,  I believe,  excessive,  and the efforts
of each party outrageously violent,  with very little thought on
any national interest,  at a time when we have all the world for
our enemies,  when the King and parliament have lost even the
titular dominion of America x,  and the real power of Government
every where else.  Thus Empires are broken down when the
profits of administration are so great,  that ambition is satisfied
with obtaining them,  and he that aspires to greatness needs do
nothing more than talk himself into importance.  He has then
all the power which danger and conquest used formerly to give  ;
he can raise a family and reward his followers.

Mr.  Burke has just sent me his Speech upon the affairs of
India,  a volume of above a hundred pages closely printed 2.  I will
look into it;  but my thoughts seldom now travel to great distances.

I would gladly know when you think to come hither,  and
whether this year you will come or no.  If my life be continued,
I know not well how I shall bestow myself.

I am,  Sir,

Your affectionate  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

*  London,  Jan.  24,  1784.'
'  To the Rev.  Dr.  Taylor in Ashbourne,  Derbyshire.

lasted from the I7th of Decem-  his heirs and successors relinquished

ber,    1783,   to the end of March,  all claims to the government,  pro-

1784.     In sixteen divisions the op-  priety and territorial rights of the

position triumphed.  Again and again United States of America and every

the King was requested to dismiss his part thereof.'

ministers.     But he was determined 2 Burke's Speech in the House of

to go to Germany rather than yield.'  Commons on December I,  1783,  on

Macaulay's Misc.   Works,  ed.  1871,  Fox's India Bill.     Parl.  Hist.,  xxiii.

p.  407.     Horace Walpole wrote on 1312.     It was published by Dodsley.

February 2  : — '  Once or twice a week In this speech describing the English

there is a day which it is said will be rule in India he said  : — *  England has

decisive.     To-day is in that number  ;  erected no churches,  no hospitals,  no

yet I expect it so little,  that I am palaces,   no schools ;    England has

writing to you at ten at night,  with-  built no bridges,  made no high roads,

out inquiring whether the House of cut no navigations,    dug out no

Commons,where action was expected,  reservoirs.      Every other conqueror

is up,  without knowing what was to of every other description has left

be there.'     Letters,  viii.  453.  some monument,  either of state or

1 By the first article of the Treaty of beneficence,  behind him.     Were we

Peace signed at Paris on September to be driven out of India this day,

3,   1783.     George III,  'for himself,  nothing would remain to tell that it

To

376 To Mrs.   Thrale.

929.

To RICHARD CLARK.
[London],  January 27,  1784.     Published in the Life,  iv.  258.

930.

DEAR SIR,  To DR"  HEBERDEN'-

When you favoured me with your last visit,  you left me full
of cheerfulness and hope.  But my Distemper prevails,  and my
hopes sink,  and dejection oppresses me.  I entreat you to come
again to me and tell me if any hope of amendment remains and
by what medicines or methods it may be promoted.  Let me see
you,  dear Sir,  as soon as you can.
I am,  Sir,

Your most obliged and

most humble servant,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

Bolt-court,  Fleet Street,  Feb.  6,  1784.

931.

DEAR MADAM,        To MRS'  THRALE*-    London,  Feb.  9,  1784.

The remission of the cold did not continue long enough to
afford me much relief.  You are,  as I perceive,  afraid of the
opium  ;  I had the same terrour,  and admitted its assistance only
under the pressure of insupportable distress,  as of an auxiliary
too powerful and too dangerous.  But in this pinching season I
cannot live without it  ;  and the quantity which I take is less than
it once was.

My physicians flatter me,  that the season is a great part of my
disease  ;  and that when warm weather restores perspiration,  this
watery disease will evaporate.  I am at least willing to flatter
myself.

I have been forced to sit up many nights by an obstinate

had been possessed during the in-      sion of the Rev.  C.  G.  Andrews,  of
glorious period of our dominion,  by Wouldham Rectory,    Rochester,   a
anything better than the ouran-      great-grandson of Dr.  Heberden.
outang or the tiger.'    Ib.  p.  1333.  2 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  348.

1 From the original in the posses-

sleeplesness,

Aetat.  74.]

To Mrs.   Tkrale,

377

sleeplesness,  which makes the time in bed intolerably tedious,
and which continues my drowsiness the following day.  Besides,
I can sometimes sleep erect,  when I cannot close my eyes in a
recumbent posture.  I have just bespoke a flannel dress,  which I
can easily slip off and on,  as I go into bed,  or get out of it.  Thus
pass my days and nights in morbid wakefulness,  in unseasonable
sleepiness,  in gloomy solitude,  with unwelcome visitors,  or un-
grateful exclusions,  in variety of wretchedness.  But I snatch
every lucid interval  *,  and animate myself with such amusements
as the time offers.

One thing which I have just heard,  you will think to surpass
expectation.  The Chaplain of the factory at Petersburg relates,
that the Rambler is now,  by the command of the Empress,  trans-
lating into Russian2;  and has promised when it is printed to
send me a copy.

1 Johnson gives in his Dictionary ex-
amples of lucid interval from Bacon,
Dry den,    The Tatler,   and Bentley.
He defines it     'bright with the
radiance of intellect ;   not darkened
with madness?     Gibbon tells how he
was sent to school  '  in a lucid interval
of comparative health.'  Misc.  Works,
i.  31.

2 The Chaplain was the Rev.
William Tooke,  author of A view of
the Russian Empire during the Reign
of Catherine II.    Nichols introduced
him to Johnson,  and heard him tell
him that '  translations of the Rambler
and of Blackstone's Commentaries
had been made into the Russian
language by the especial command of
the Empress.'     Nichols's Lit.  Anec.,
ii.  553.     Three months later,  at the
Essex-Head Club, ( Johnson called to
us,3 writes Boswell,  'with a sudden
air of exultation,   as the thought
started into his mind,  "  O  !  Gentle-
men, I must tell you a very great
thing.     The Empress of Russia has
ordered the Rambler to be translated
into the Russian language,  so I shall
be read on the banks of the Wolga.

Horace boasts that his fame would
extend as far as the banks of the
Rhone;  now the Wolga is farther
from me than the Rhone was from
Horace."  BOSWELL.  "You must
certainly be pleased with this,  Sir."
JOHNSON.  "  I am pleased,  Sir,  to be
sure.  A man is pleased to find he
has succeeded in that which he has
endeavoured to do." '  Life,  iv.  276.

In this he was mistaken.  Rasselas
was translated into Russian in 1795,
but the Rambler remains untrans-
lated. Ib.  vi.  p.  Ixiv.

Among the subscribers to Mickle's
Lusiad published in 1776 I find
'  Basilius Nitikin,  Esq.,  Gent,  of
Russia,  St.  Mary Hall,  Oxford,  and
Mr.  Prochore SuvorofT,  Gent,  of
Russia,  Queen's College,  Oxford.'

Johnson defines Factory as  *  I.  A
house or district inhabited by traders
in a distant country.  2.  The traders
embodied in one place.'  Its modern
sense of a manufactory is not given.
Manufactory is not in his Dictionary.
In the Gentleman's Magazine for
1766,  p.  385,  where mention is made
of the British Factory,  the town is

Grant,

378

To the Reverend Dr.  Hamilton.        [A.D.  1784.

Grant,  O Lord,  that all who shall read my pages,  may become
more obedient to thy laws  * ;  and when the wretched writer shall
appear before thee,  extend thy mercy to him,  for the sake of
Jesus Christ.  Amen.  I am,  Madam,

Your,  &c.,

•SAM:  JOHNSON.

932.

To JAMES BOSWELL.
[London],  February n,  1784.     Published in the Life,  iv.  259.

933.

To THE REVEREND DR.  HAMILTON 2.
SIR,  Bolt Court,  Feb.  11,  1784.

My physicians endeavour to make me believe that I shall
sometime be better qualified to receive visits from men of ele-
gance and civility like yours.

Mrs.  Pelle shall wait upon you,  and you will judge what will
be proper for you to do.     I once more return you my thanks,

and am'  Sir,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

934.

MADAM,  To MRS-  ROGERS 3.

A very dangerous and enervaiting  [sic]  distemper admonishes
me to make my will.  One of my cares is for poor Phebe Herne,

called,  as Johnson calls it,  Peters-
burg and not St.  Petersburg.  See
also ib.,  p.  337.

1 In his last Rambler he says  : —
'  It has been my principal design to
inculcate wisdom or piety.   ...   I
shall never envy the honours which
wit and learning obtain in any other
cause,  if I can be numbered among
the writers who have given ardour to
virtue and confidence to truth.'

2 First published in Croker's Bos-

well,  page 758.  For Dr.  Hamilton
see ante,  ii.  296.

3 First published in Notes and
Queries,  4th S.  v.  442.  Compared by
me with the original in the posses-
sion of the Rev.  Edward B.  Edgell,  of
Bromham Rectory,  Chippenham.

See ante,  ii.  194,  206,  for Johnson's
Letters to Mrs.  [Miss]  Prowse,  who
had subsequently married the Rev.
J.  M.  Rogers,  about Phebe or Eliza-
beth Herne,  a lunatic.

to

Aetat.  74.]

To Mrs.  Rogers.

379

to whom your worthy Mother left so kind a legacy.  When I am
gone who shall pay the rest of her maintenance  ?  I have not
much to leave,  but if you,  Madam,  will be pleased to undertake
it,  I can leave you an hundred pounds.  But I am afraid that is
hardly an equivalent,  for my part has commonly amounted to
twelve pounds or more.  The payment to the house is eight
shilling  \_sic\  a week,  and some cloaths  \sic\  must be had how-
ever few or coarse.

Be pleased,  Madam,  to let me know your resolution on my
proposal,  and write soon,  for the time may be very short x.
I am,  Madam,

Your most humble servant,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

Bolt Court,  Fleet Street,  Feb.  17,  1784.

935.

To MRS.  PORTER.
[London],  February 23,  1784.     Published in the Life,  iv.  261.

936.

To JAMES BOSWELL.
London,  February 27,  1784.     Published in the Life,  iv.  261,

1 This letter shows by the hand-
writing how ill Johnson was.  He did
not complete his will till December
8,  five days before his death.  Mrs.
Rogers sent the following answer : —

'SiR,  —  I received your Letter
yesterday with the most sincere con-
cern, I hope it will please God yet to
prolong a Life so valuable to the
publick as well as to your private
Friends  ;  in the mean time your kind
and generous desire to provide for
those that must experience such a loss,
ought I am sure to be complyed  [sic\
with and Mr.  Rogers desires me to
inform you that he will accept of the
hundred pounds,  and will so far be
answerable for Mrs.  Hearne's main-
tenance as to secure to her an annuitty

[sic]  of  ,£23,  instead of that we now
pay her which will make a certain
provision to her in case of accident
to us.  I name him instead of myself
as all I am entitled to of course is
his,  and every business more easily
settled by him  [sic].  In case you
should approve of this to save time
and trouble,  the necessary descrip-
tion will be the Revd.  John Methuen
Rogers of Berkley,  Somerset.  I beg
leave to add our good wishes and to
subscribe myself Sir,

<  Your faithful and

'  Obedient Servant,

'  MARY ROGERS.'
Endorsed : —

'  Dr.    Johnson's Letter and my
answer.     February 1784.'

To

380

To Mrs.   Thrale.

[A.D.  1784.

937.

To JAMES BOSWELL.
[London],  March 2,  1784.     Published in the Life,  iv.  262.

938.

TO MRS.   THRALE1.

MADAM,  London,  March 10,  1784.

You know I never thought confidence with respect to
futurity any part of the character of a brave,  a wise,  or a good
man.  Bravery has no place where it can avail nothing  ;  wisdom
impresses strongly the consciousness of those faults,  of which it
is itself perhaps an aggravation ;  and goodness,  always wishing
to be better,  and imputing every deficience to criminal negligence,
and every fault to voluntary corruption,  never dares to suppose
the condition of forgiveness fulfilled,  nor what is wanting in the
crime supplied by penitence.

This is the state of the best,  but what must be the condition
of him whose heart will not suffer him to rank himself among
the best,  or among the good  ?  Such must be his dread of the
approaching trial,  as will leave him little attention to the opinion
of those whom he is leaving for ever ;  and the serenity that is
not felt,  it can be no virtue to feign 2.

The sarcocele ran off long ago,  at an orifice made for mere
experiment.

The water passed naturally,  by God's mercy,  in a manner
of which Dr.  Heberden has seen but few examples3.  The

1 Pi 02 21 Letters,  ii.  350.

Mrs.  Thrale wrote to Miss Burney
on February 18  :— 'Johnson is in a
sad way doubtless  ;  yet he may still
with care last another twelvemonth,
and every week's existence is gain to
him who,  like good Hezekiah,  wearies
Heaven with entreaties for life.  I
wrote him a very serious letter the
other day.'  Mme.  D'Arblay's Diary,
ii.  305.  She had much better have
gone and  *  exchanged confidence by
the fireside  '  with him.

2 Boswell quotes this passage.

Life,  iv.  395.  Hawkins says that
calling on Johnson about this time
he  '  found him labouring under great
dejection of mind.  With a look that
cut me to the heart he told me that
he had the prospect of death before
him,  and that he dreaded to meet

his Saviour He uttered this

passionate exclamation  : — "  Shall I
who have been a teacher of others
myself be a castaway  ?  "  '  Hawkins's
fohnson,  p.  564.

3 Boswell,  who came up to London

early in May,  writes :— '  One morning

chirurgeon

Aetat,  74.]  To Mrs.    Porter.  381

chirurgeon x has been employed to heal some excoriations ;  and
four out of five are no longer under his cure.  The physician laid
on a blister,  and I ordered,  by their consent,  a salve  ;  but neither
succeeded,  and neither was very easily healed.

I have been confined from the fourteenth of December,  and
know not when I shall get out ;  but I have this day dressed me,
as I was dressed in health.

Your kind expressions gave me great pleasure ;  do not reject
me from your thoughts.  Shall we ever exchange confidence by
the fireside again 2  ?

I hope dear Sophy is better ;  and intend quickly to pay my
debt to Susy.  j  ^  ^^

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

939.

To MRS.  PORTER 3.
MY DEAREST LOVE,  Bolt-court,  loth March,  1784.

I will not suppose that it is for want of kindness that you
did not answer my last letter;  and I therefore write again to
tell you that I have,  by God's great mercy,  still continued to
grow better.  My asthma is seldom troublesome,  and my dropsy

when I found him alone,  he com-  that on that day   'he had ordered

municated to me,     with solemn Frank not to admit any one to him,

earnestness,  a very remarkable cir-  and,  the better to enforce the charge,

cumstance which had happened in had added these awful words  : — "For

the course of his illness,  when he was your master is preparing himself to

much distressed by the dropsy.     He die."'    Hawkins's Johnson,  p.  565.

had shut himself up,  and employed x Ante,  ii.  I,  n.  4.

a day in particular exercises of re-  2 A few days later Mrs.  Thrale

ligion,  —  fasting,    humiliation,    and wrote from Bath to Miss Burney  : —

prayer.     On a sudden he obtained  '  My going to London would be a

extraordinary relief,    for which he dreadful expense,   and bring on a

looked up to Heaven with grateful thousand inquiries and inconveni-

devotion.     He made no direct in-  ences — visits to Johnson and from

ference from this fact ;  but from his Cator  [one of Mr.  Thrale's executors];

manner of telling it,  I could perceive and where must I live for the time

that it appeared to him as something too?'  Mme.  D'Arblay's Diary,  ii.  307.

more than an incident in the common 3 First published in Croker's Bos-

course of events.'      Life,  iv.   271.  well,  page 749.
Hawkins says that Johnson told him

has

382 70 Mrs.  Gastrell and Miss Aston.     [A.D.  i?84.

has ran itself almost away,  in a manner which my physician says
is very uncommon.

I have been confined from the I4th of December,  and shall not
soon venture abroad ;  but I have this day dressed myself as I
was before my sickness.

If it be inconvenient to you to write,  desire Mr.  Pearson to
let me know how you do,  and how you have passed this long
winter.  I am now not without hopes that we shall once more
see one another.

Make my compliments to Mrs.  Cobb and Miss Adey,  and to
all my friends,  particularly to Mr.  Pearson.
I am,  my dear,

Your most humble servant,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

940.

To MRS.  GASTRELL AND Miss ASTON J.

DEAR LADIES,

The kind and speedy answer with which you favoured me
to my last letter,  encourages me to hope,  that you will be glad
to hear again that my recovery advances.  My Disorders are an
Asthma and Dropsy.  The Asthma gives me no great trouble
when I am not in motion,  and the water of the dropsy has passed
away in so happy a manner,  by the Goodness of God,  as Dr.
Heberden declares himself not to have known more than four
times in all his practice.  I have been confined to the house
from December the fourteenth,  and shall not venture out till the
weather is settled,  but I have this day dressed myself as before
I became ill.  Join with me in returning thanks,  and pray for me
that the time now granted me may not be ill spent.

Let me now,  dear Ladies,  have some account of you.    Tell me
how the  [sic]  You,  have endured this long and sharp winter 2,  and

1 First published in Croker's Bos-  many places even into the farm-yards,
well,    page 750.      Corrected by me where they have done much mischief,
from the original in Pembroke The northern seas too,  if the reports
College Library.  from Brest be true,  have felt the

2 In the Gentleman's Magazine for unusual rigour of the season.     Be-
1784,  p.  306,  under date of March 16 tween Quimperley and Lauvau 33
it is stated that in France    'the whales have been taken.'
weather has driven the wolves in

gives

Aetat.  74.]  To Mrs.   Thrale.  383

gives  \_sic\  me hopes that we may all  'meet again with kindness
and cheerfulness.

I am,

Dear Ladies,

Your most humble servant,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

March n,  1784.

941.

TO MRS.   THRALE1.

DEAR MADAM,  London,  March 1 6,  1784.

I am so near to health,  as a month ago I despaired of being.
The dropsy is almost wholly run away,  and the asthma,  unless
irritated by cold,  seldom attacks me.  How I shall bear motion
I do not yet know.  But though I have little of pain,  I am
wonderfully weak.  My muscles have almost lost all their
spring ;  but I hope that warm weather,  when it comes,  will re-
store me.  More than three months have I now been confined.
But my deliverance has been very extraordinary.

Of one thing very remarkable I will tell you.  For the asthma,
and perhaps other disorders,  my physicians have advised the
frequent use of opiates.  I resisted them as much as I could  ;  and
complained that it made me almost delirious.  This Dr.  Heberden
seemed not much to heed ;  but I was so weary of it,  that I tried,
when I could not wholly omit it,  to diminish the dose,  in which,
contrarily to the known custom of the takers of opium,  and
beyond what it seemed reasonable to expect,  I have so far
succeeded,  that having begun with three grains,  a large quantity,
I now appease the paroxysm with a quarter of an ounce of dia-
codium 2,  estimated an equivalent only to half a grain  ;  and this
quantity it is now eight days since I took.

That I may send to Mrs.  Lewis 3,  for when I shall venture out
I do not know,  you must let me know where she may be found,
which you omitted to tell me.

I hope my dear Sophy will go on recovering.     But methinks

1 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  352.  Dean of Ossory,  who married one of

2  'The syrup of poppies.'    John-  J ohnson's friends, M iss Cotterel.  Ante
son's Dictionary.  ii.  310,  n.  I,  and^/,  p.  393.

3 The wife or widow of John Lewis,

Miss

To Mrs.   Thrale.

[A.D.  1784.

Miss Thrale rather neglects me  ;  suppose she should try to write
me a little Latin letter.

Do you however write to me often,  and write kindly ;  perhaps
we may sometime see each other.

I am,  Madam,

Your,  &c,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

942.

To JAMES BOSWELL.
London,  March 18,  1784.     Published in the Life,  iv.  264.

943.

TO MRS.    THRALE1.

MADAM,  London,  March 20,  1784.

Your last letter had something of tenderness.  The accounts
which you have had of my danger and distress were I suppose
not aggravated.  I have been confined ten weeks with an asthma
and dropsy.  But I am now better.  God has in his mercy
granted me a reprieve  ;  for how much time his mercy must
determine.

On the 1 9th of last month I evacuated twenty pints of water,
and I think I reckon exactly;  from that time the tumour has
subsided,  and I now begin to move with some freedom.  You
will easily believe that I am still at a great distance from health  ;
but I am,  as my chirurgeon expressed it,  amazingly better.
Heberden seems to have great hopes.

Write to me no more about dying with a grace ;  when you
feel what I have felt in approaching eternity — in fear of soon
hearing the sentence of which there is no revocation,  you will
know the folly 2 ;  my wish is,  that you may know it sooner.
The distance between the grave and the remotest point of human
longevity,  is but a very little  ;  and of that little no path is certain.

1 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  354.

2  *  If he who considers himself as
suspended over the abyss of eternal
perdition only by the thread of life,
which must soon part by its own
weakness,    and which the wing of

every minute may divide,  can cast his
eyes round him without shuddering
with horror,  or panting for security  ;
what can he judge of himself,  but that
he is not yet awakened to sufficient
conviction?&c.'  TkeRambler^o.no.

You

Aetat.74.]  To Miss Susy Thrale.  385

You knew all this,  and I thought that I knew it too;  but
I know it now with a new conviction z.  May that new con-
viction not be vain  !

I am now cheerful ;  I hope this approach to recovery is a
token of the Divine mercy.  My friends continue their kindness.
I give a dinner to-morrow.

Pray let me know how my dear Sophy goes on.  I still hope
that there is in her fits 2 more terrour than danger.  But I hope,
however it be,  that she will speedily recover.  I will take care
to pay Miss Susy her letter.  God bless you all.

I am,  Madam,

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

944.

To Miss SUSY THRALE 3.

MY DEAREST MlSS SUSY,  London,  Mar.  25,  1784.

Since you are resolved to stand it out,  and keep mum till
you have heard from me,  I must at last comply;  and indeed
compliance costs me now no trouble,  but as it irritates a cough,
which I got,  as you might have done,  by standing at an open
window 4 ;  and which has now harassed me many days,  and is too
strong for diacodium,  nor has yet given much way to opium itself.
However,  having been so long used to so many worse things,  I
mind it but little.  I have not bad nights ;  and my stomach
has never failed me.  But when I shall go abroad again,  I know
not.

With Mr.  Herschel it will certainly be very right to cultivate

1 Cowper,    whose mind took a 3 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  356.

deeper gloom from religion than even 4 Boswell,    writing of Johnson's

Johnson's,  wrote on May 10 to the  '  particularities  '  eleven years earlier,

Rev.   John Newton: — 'We rejoice says: — '  He sets open a window in the

in the account you give us of Dr.  coldest day or night,  and stands be-

Johnson.   His conversion will indeed fore it.     It may do with his consti-

beasingularproofoftheomnipotence tution ;    but most people,  amongst

of Grace  ;  and the more singular,  the whom I am one,  would say,  with the

more decided.'     Southey's Cowper,  frogs in the fable,   "  This may be

xv.  150.  sport to you ;  but it is death to us." '

2 She was hysterical.      Ante,   ii.  Lije,v.  306.
360-1.

VOL.  ii.  c c an

386

To Miss Susy Thrale.

[A.D.  1784.

an acquaintance  ;  for he can show you in the sky what no man
before him has ever seen,  by some wonderful improvements
which he has made in the telescope x.  What he has to show is
indeed a long way off,  and perhaps concerns us but little;
but all truth is valuable,  and all knowledge is pleasing in
its first effects,  and may be subsequently useful.  Of whatever
we see we always wish to know  ;  always congratulate ourselves
when we know that of which we perceive another to be ignorant.
Take therefore all opportunities of learning that offer themselves,
however remote the matter may be from common life or common
conversation2.  Look in Herschel's telescope;  go into a chy-
mist's laboratory;  if you see a manufacturer at work,  remark
his operations.  By this activity of attention,  you will find in
every place diversion and improvement 3.

Now dear Sophy is got well,  what is it that ails my mistress  ?
She complains,  and complains,  I am afraid,  with too much cause  ;
but I know not distinctly what is her disorder 4.  I hope that
time and a quiet mind will restore her.

I am,  my dearest,
Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

1 Horace Walpole wrote on July 4,
1785 : — '  Mr.  Herschel has discovered
that the Milky Way is not only a
mob of stars,  but that there is another
dairy of them still farther off,  whence
I conclude comets are nothing but
pails returning from milking,  instead
of balloons rilled with inflammable
air,  which must by this time have
made terrible havoc in such thickets
of worlds,  if at all dangerous.'  Letters,
viii.    569.      Miss Burney,  who met
Herschel in 1786,  says  :— '  He has
not more fame to awaken curiosity
than sense and modesty to gratify it.
.  .  .     He has discovered 1,500 uni-
verses.'    Mme.  D'Arblay's Diary,  iii.
129,  262.

2  'It is evident that the earliest
searchers after knowledge must have
proposed knowledge only as their

reward,  and that science,  though
perhaps the nursling of interest,  was
the daughter of curiosity.'  The
Rambler,  No.  103.  '  Sir,'  (said Dr.
Johnson)  '  a desire of knowledge is
the natural feeling of mankind  ;  and
every human being,  whose mind is
not debauched,  will be willing to give
all that he has to get knowledge.'
Life,  i.  458.

3  '  I have enlarged my notions,'  he
recorded,  after seeing some iron and
copper- works.  Life,  v.  442.    In look-
ing over the silk-mill at Derby he
taught Boswell  '  not to think with a
dejected indifference of the works of
art.'    Id.  iii.  164.

4 Miss Burney wrote in the previous
November  : — '  Dr.  Pepys had a long
private conference with me concern-
ing Mrs.  Thrale,  with whose real state

To

Aetat.  74.]  To John Nichols.  387

945.

To BENNET LANGTON.
[London],  March 27,  1784.     Published in the Life,  iv.  267.

946.

To JAMES BOSWELL.
London,  March 30,  1784.     Published in the Life,  iv.  265.

947.

To OZIAS HUMPHRY.
[London],  April 5,  1784.     Published in the Life,  iv.  268.

948.

To BENNET LANGTON.
April 8,  1784.     Published in the Life,  iv.  267.

949.

To OZIAS HUMPHRY.
[London],  April 10,  1784.     Published in the Life,  iv.  269.

950.
SIR(  TOJOHNN.CHOLS'.  April I2>  I?84.

I have sent you inclosed a very curious proposal from Mr.
Hawkins,  the son of Sir John Hawkins,  who,  I believe,  will take

of health he is better acquainted than down  ;  and letters from my grieving

any body,  and sad indeed was all that lover,  when they did come,  helped to

he said.  ...  I am sorry not to be more render my life miserable.'  Hay ward's

explicit.     I can only now tell you that Piozzi,  i.  276.     Those who were  'at

I love Mrs.  Thrale with a never-to-  home '     were her daughters,    and

cease affection,  and pity her more among her guardians was Johnson,

than ever I pitied any human being ;  in whose letters not a single  '  spiteful

and,  if I did not blame her,  I could,  expression '  has been seen.

1 should,  I believe,  almost die for r First published in Nichols's

her.'  Mme.  D'Arblay's Diary,  ii.  284.  Literary Anecdotes,  ix.  35.

Mrs.   Piozzi,   writing of this time,  The work which John Sidney

says  : — '  Insults at home,  and spiteful Hawkins proposed to edit was

expressions in every letter from the George Ruggle's Ignoramus.     '  He

guardians broke my spirits quite has been fortunate enough,'  writes

C c 2 care

388 To Mrs.  Thrale.  [A.D.  1734.

care that whatever his son promises shall be performed.  If you
are inclined to publish this compilation,  the editor will agree for
an edition on the following terms,  which I think liberal enough.
That you shall print the book at your own charge.  That the
sale shall be wholly for your benefit till your expenses are repaid  ;
except that at the time of publication you shall put into the
hands of the editor,  without price,  .  .  .  copies for his friends.
That,  when you have been repaid,  the profits arising from the
sale of the remaining copies shall be divided equally between
you and the editor.  That the edition shall not comprise fewer
than five hundred.

I am,  Sir,

Your most humble servant,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

951.

To THE REVEREND DR.  TAYLOR.
London,  April 12,  1784.     Published in the Life,  iv.  270.

952.

To BENNET LANGTON.
[London],  April 13,  1784.     Published in the Life,  iv.  268.

953.

To MRS.  THRALET.
DEAR MADAM,  London,  April 15, 1784.

Yesterday I had the pleasure of giving another dinner to
the remainder of the old club 2.  We used to meet weekly about
the year fifty,  and we were as cheerful as in former times ;  only
I could not make quite so much noise  ;  for since the paralytick
affliction,  my voice is sometimes weak.

Metcalf and Crutchley,  without knowing each other,  are both

Dr.  Lort, 'to be in possession of the Hist.,   vii.    473.      His edition was
Italian play of Baptista Porta,  whence published in 1 787.
Ruggle is said to have borrowed his x Piozzi Letters,  ii.  361.
design,  and which was Ruggle's own 2 Ante,  ii.  364.    '  We were/  says
copy.  Farmer hunted this out among Hawkins,     'very cheerfully enter-
some literary lumber thrown aside in tained by him.'     Hawkins's Johnson,
Clare Hall Library.'     Nichols's Lit.  p.  563.

members

Aetat.  74.]

To Mrs.  Thrale.

389

members of parliament for Horsham in Sussex.     Mr.  Cator is
chosen for Ipswich  *.

But a sick man's thoughts soon turn back upon himself.  I
am still very weak,  though my appetite is keen,  and my digestion
potent  ;  and I gratify myself more at table than ever I did at
my own cost before.  I have now an inclination to luxury which
even your table did not excite ;  for till now my talk was more
about the dishes than my thoughts.  I remember you com-
mended me for seeming pleased with my dinners when you had
reduced your table ;  I am able to tell you with great veracity,
that I never knew when the reduction began,  nor should have
known that it was made,  had not you told me.  I now think
and consult to-day what I shall eat to-morrow.  This disease
likewise will I hope be cured 2.  For there are other things,  how
different!  which ought to predominate in the mind of such a
man as I :  but in this world the body will have its part ;  and my
hope is,  that it shall have no more.  My hope but not my con-
fidence ;  I have only the timidity of a Christian to determine,
not the wisdom of a Stoick to secure me.

I hope all my dears are well.  They should not be too nice
in requiring letters.  If my sweet Queeney writes more letters
like her last,  when franks come in again I will correct them and
return them 3.

I am,  Madam,

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

1 For Metcalfe see ante^  ii.  345,  and
for Crutchley,  ii.  128,  n.  4.    Cator was
declared   'not duly elected.'     Parl.
Hist.,  xxiv.  789.

2 Boswell dined with Johnson a
few weeks later at General Paoli's.
'  There was a variety of dishes much
to his taste,  of all which he seemed to
me to eat so much,  that I was afraid
he might be hurt by it  ;     and I
whispered to the General my fear,
and begged he might not press him.
"  Alas  !  (said the General),  see how
very ill he looks ;  he can live but a
very short time.     Would you refuse

any slight gratifications to a man
under sentence of death  ?  There is a
humane custom in Italy,  by which
persons in that melancholy situation
are indulged with having whatever
they like best to eat and drink,  even
with expensive delicacies."'  Life,
iv.  330.  Beattie,  who dined with him
about the same time,  said : — '  I verily
believe that on Sunday last he ate as
much to dinner as I have done in all
for these ten days past.'  Life of
Beaitie^  ed.  1824,  p.  316.

3 There were no franks for there
was no Parliament.    The old one had

To

390

To Mrs.  Thrale.

[A.D.  1784.

954.

TO MRS.    THRALE1.

DEAR MADAM,  London,  April 19, 1784.

I received in the morning your magnificent fish,  and in the
afternoon your apology for not sending it.  I have invited the
Hooles and Miss Burney to dine upon it to-morrow.

The club which has been lately"  instituted is at Sam's 2 ;  and
there was I when I was last out of the house.  But the people
whom I mentioned in my letter are the remnant of a little club
that used to meet in Ivy Lane about three-and-thirty years ago,
out of which we have lost Hawkesworth and Dyer,  the rest are
yet on this side the grave 3.  Our meetings now are serious,  and
I think on all parts tender.

Miss Moore has written a poem called Le Bas Bleu  ;  which is
in my opinion a very great performance 4.  It wanders about in
manuscript,  and surely will soon find its way to Bath.

I shall be glad of another letter from my dear Queeney;  the
former was not much to be censured.  The reckoning between
me and Miss Sophy is out of my head.  She must write to tell
me how it stands.

been dissolved on March 25 ;  the
new one met on May 18.  Part.  Hist.,
xxiv.  775.  Queeney probably had
written in Latin as he had suggested,
ante,  ii.  384.

1 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  363.

2 The Club met at the Essex Head,
*  kept by Samuel Greaves,  an old
servant of Mr.  Thrale's.'     Life,  iv.
253,  and ante,  ii.  367.     'Your friend
Sam,'    Susan Burney called him,
writing to Miss Burney.       Early
Diary of Frances Burney,  ii.  267.

3 Ante,  ii.  364,  n.  5.

4 Hannah More,    writing in this
month,  said  :—  *  I cannot spare time
to write another word,  as I am very
busy copying the Bas Bleu for the
king who desires to have it.     Did I
tell you I went to see Dr.  Johnson  ?
He said there was no name in poetry

that might not be glad to own it.
You cannot imagine how I stared ;
all this from Johnson,  that parsi-
monious praiser.  I told him I was
delighted at his approbation ;  he
answered quite characteristically : —
"  And so you may,  for I give you the
opinion of a man who does not rate
his judgment in these things very
low,  I can tell you." '  H.  More's
Memoirs,  i.  319.  Horace Walpole
wrote to thank her for  '  her charming
and very genteel poem.'  Letters,
viii.  475.  See also Life,  iv.  108.  The
poem is so little known that I will
quote a few lines as specimens  : —
'  Or how Aspasia's parties shone
The first Bas-bleu at Athens known.

1.7-

'Hail,  conversation,  heav'nly fair,
Thou bliss of life,  and balm of care  !

I am

Aetat.  74.]

To Mrs.  Thrale.

39i

I am sensible of the ease that your repayment of Mr.  *  *  *  *  *
has given T ;  you felt yourself genee by that debt ;  is there an
English word for it  ?

As you do not now use your books,  be pleased to let Mr.
Cator know that I may borrow what I want.  I think at present
to take only Calmet 2,  and the Greek Anthology.  When I lay
sleepless,  I used to drive the night along by turning Greek
epigrams into Latin.

I know not if I have not turned a hundred 3.

It is time to return you thanks for your present.  Since I was
sick,  I know not if I have not had more delicacies sent me than
I had ever seen till I saw your table.

It was always Dr.  Heberden's enquiry,  whether my appetite
for food continued.  It indeed never failed me ;  for he con-
sidered the cessation of appetite as the despair of nature yielding
up her power to the force of the disease.

I am,  Madam,

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

Call forth the long-forgotten know-
ledge

Of school,  of travel,  and of college.
For thee,  best solace of his toil,
The sage consumes his midnight oil ;
And keeps late vigils to produce
Materials for thy future use.'

1.  232.
*        *        *        *

Then speaking of the traveller she
continues  : —

'  For this he bids his home farewell,
The joy of seeing is to tell.
Trust me,   he never would have

stirred

Were he forbid to speak a word ;
And Curiosity would sleep,
If her own secrets she must keep.'
1.  256.

1  *  My uncle's widow,  Lady Salus-
bury,'  writes Mrs.  Piozzi,  'had
threatened to seize upon my Welsh
estate if I did not repay her money,
lent by Sir Thomas Salusbury to my

father This debt not having

been cancelled stood against me as
heiress.  I had been forced to borrow
from the ladies  ;  and Mr.  Crutchley,
when I signed my mortgage to them
for  £7,000,  said  :— "  Now,  Madam,
call your daughters in and thank
them  ;  make them your best curtsey
(with a sneer)  for keeping you out of
a gaol."  He added  ^500 or  ^800
more,  and I paid that off as alluded
to  ;  but Dr.  Johnson knew how I was
distressed,  and you see how even he
had been writing  !  ! '  Hayward's
Piozzi,  i.  276.

2 Probably Augustin Calmet's Dic-
tionary of the Bible.

3  'During his sleepless nights he
amused himself by translating into
Latin verse,  from the Greek,  many
of the epigrams in the Anthologia.
These translations,  with some other
poems by him in Latin,  he gave to his
friend Mr.    Langton,    who,    having

To

392

To Mrs.  Thrale.

[A.D.  1784.

955.

TO MRS.    THRALE1.

London,  April 21,  1784.

DEAR MADAM,

I make haste to send you intelligence,  which,  if I do not
still flatter myself,  you will not receive without some degree of
pleasure.  After a confinement of one hundred twenty-nine days,
more than the third part of a year,  and no inconsiderable part of
human life,  I this day returned thanks to God in St.  Clement's
church,  for my recovery ;  a recovery,  in my seventy-fifth year,
from a distemper which few in the vigour of youth are known to
surmount ;  a recovery,  of which neither myself,  my friends,  nor
my physicians,  had any hope  ;  for though they flattered me with
some continuance of life,  they never supposed that I could cease
to be dropsical.  The dropsy however is quite vanished,  and the
asthma so much mitigated,  that I walked to-day with a more
easy respiration than I have known,  I think,  for perhaps two
years past.  I hope the mercy that lengthens my days,  will
assist me to use them well.

The Hooles,  Miss Burney,  and Mrs.  Hall  (Wesley's sister),
feasted yesterday with me very cheerfully on your noble salmon 2.
Mr.  Allen could not come,  and I sent him a piece,  and a great
tail is still left.

Dr.  Brocklesby forbids the club at present,  not caring to ven-
ture the dullness of the evening ;  but I purpose to shew myself
on Saturday at the Academy's feast.  I cannot publish my
return to the world more effectually ;  for,  as the Frenchman says,
tout le monde sy trouvera.

For this occasion I ordered some cloaths ;  and was told by
the taylor,  that when he brought me a sick dress,  he never

added a few notes,  sold them to the
booksellers for a small sum,  to be
given to some of Johnson's relations,
which was accordingly done  ;  and
they are printed in the collection of
his works.'  Life,  iv.  384,  and Works,
i.  175-

1 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  365.

2  'The day,'  writes Miss Burney,
'  was tolerable  ;  but Dr.  Johnson is
never his best when there is nobody
to draw him out ;  but he was much
pleased with my coming,  and very
kind indeed.5 Mme.  D'Arblay's
Diary,  ii.  310.

expected

Aetat.  74.]  To Mrs.  Thrale.  393

expected to make me any thing of any other kind.     My re-
covery is indeed wonderful.

I am,  dear Madam,

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

956.

To MRS.  THRALE  '.
MADAM,  London,  April 26,  1784.

On Saturday I shewed myself again to the living world at
the Exhibition;  much and splendid was the company:  but like
the Doge of Genoa at Paris 2,  I admired nothing but myself.  I
went up all the stairs to the pictures without stopping to rest or
to breathe,

'  In all the madness of superfluous health 3.'

The Prince of Wales had promised to be there ;  but when we
had waited an hour and half,  sent us word that he could not
come 4.

My cough still torments me ;  but it is only a cough,  and much
less oppressive than some of former times,  but it disturbs my
nights.

Mrs.  Davenant called to pay me a guinea,  but I gave two for
you.  Whatever reasons you have for frugality,  it is not worth
while to save a guinea a-year by withdrawing it from a public
charity.

I know not whether I told you that my old friend Mrs.  Cot-
terel,  now no longer Miss,  has called to see me.  Mrs.  Lewis is
not well 5.

Mrs.  Davenant says,  that you regain your health.  That you
regain your health is more than a common recovery;  because I

1 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  367.  portraits of Fox,  and Mrs.  Siddons

2 At Versailles.    Ante,  i.  270,  n.  2.  as the Tragic Muse.      Leslie and

3 POPE.     Essay on Man,  iii.  3.  Taylor's Reynolds,  ii.  436.

4 He who was slowly to ripen into 5 Miss Cotterel,  like Miss Carter,
the First Gentleman in Europe was Miss Porter,     Miss Aston,     and
but twenty-one when he treated men Miss Reynolds,    having reached a
like Johnson and Reynolds with this certain age had taken the title of
insolence.     Reynolds exhibited six-  Mrs.      Mrs.  Lewis was her sister,
teen pictures,    among them the Ante,  ii.  383,  n.  3.

infer,

394

To Mrs.  Thrale.

[A.D.

infer,  that you regain your peace of mind.  Settle your thoughts
and controul your imagination,  and think no more of Hesperian
felicity.  Gather yourself and your children into a little system,
in which each may promote the ease,  the safety,  and the pleasure
of the rest *.

Mr.  Howard called on me a few days ago,  and gave  [me]  the
new edition,  much enlarged,  of his Account of Prisons 2.  He has
been to survey the prisons on the continent ;  and in Spain he
tried to penetrate the dungeons of the Inquisition,  but his
curiosity was very imperfectly gratified.  At Madrid they shut
him quite out ;  at Villadolid they shewed him some publick
rooms.

While I am writing,  the post has brought your kind letter.
Do not think with dejection of your own condition ;  a little
patience will probably give you health,  it will certainly give you
riches,  and all the accommodations that riches can procure 3.

I am,  Madam,

Your,  &c.5

SAM  :  JOHNSON.

1 Mrs.  Piozzi has on this the follow-
ing marginal note  :—*  Mrs.  Davenant
neither knew nor cared,  as she wanted
her brother,  Harry Cotton,  to marry
Lady Keith    [Queeney,  married in
1808 to Admiral Lord Keith],  and I
offered my estate with her.     Miss
Thrale said she wished to have
nothing to do either with my family
or my fortune.       They were all
cruel and all insulting.'     Hayward's
Piozzi,  i.  321.     Mme.  D'Arblay,  to
whom the secret of Mrs.  Thrale's at-
tachment had been confided,  says
that  '  Miss Thrale's conduct,  through
scenes of dreadful difficulty,  notwith-
standing her extreme youth,   was
even exemplary.'      Memoirs of Dr.
Burney,  ii.  246 .

2 In the Sale Catalogue of John-
son's Library,  Lot 286 is Howard's
State of the Prisons in England and
Wales,  1784.     The first edition was
published in 1777.

Erasmus Darwin,  addressing Be-
nevolence, tells how —
'From realm to realm,  with cross or

crescent crown' d,
Where'er Mankind and Misery are

found,
O'er burning sands,  deep waves,  or

wilds of snow,
Thy Howard journeying seeks the

house of woe.'

The Botanic Garden,  vol.  ii,  canto 2,
1.  439.  Horace Walpole speaks of
Howard as  '  the apostle of humanity.'
Letters,  ix.  177.

3 For accommodation see ante,
ii.  367,  n.  5.  Boswell records that
when they were looking at Lord
Scarsdale's seat at Keddlestone he
remarked  : — '  "  One should think that
the proprietor of all this must be
happy."  "  Nay,  Sir,"  said Johnson  ;
"all this excludes but one evil —
poverty."'  Life,  iii.  160.  In The
Rambler,  No.  53,  Johnson says that

To

Aetat.  74.]  To Miss Reynolds.  395

957.

To MRS.  PORTER  *.
MY DEAR,  London,  April 26,  1784.

I write to you now,  to tell you that I am so far recovered
that on the 2ist I went to church to return thanks,  after a con-
finement of more than four long months.

My recovery is such as neither myself nor the physicians at all
expected,  and is such as that very few examples have been
known of the like.  Join with me,  my dear love,  in returning
thanks to God.

Dr.  Vyse 2 has been with  (me)  this evening ;  he tells me that
you likewise have been much disordered,  but that you are now
better.     I hope that we shall some time have a cheerful inter-
view.    In the mean time let us pray for one another,
I am,  Madam,

Your humble servant,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

953.

TO MlSS REYNOLDS3.

DEAR MADAM,  Bolt-court,  3oth April,  1784.

Mr.  Allen 4 has looked over the papers,  and thinks that one
hundred copies will come to five pounds.

Fifty will cost 4/.  10^.,  and five and twenty will cost 4/.  $s.
It seems therefore scarcely worth while to print fewer than a
hundred.

Suppose you printed two hundred and fifty at 61.  ics.,  and,
without my name 5,  tried the sale,  which may be secretly done.
You would then see the opinion of the public without hazard,  if

'wealth is chiefly to be valued as it well,  page 753.

secures us from poverty  ;   for it is For Miss Reynolds's writings see

more useful for defence than acquisi-  ante,  ii.  180,  223,  249.

tion,   and is not so much able to 4 Mr.   Allen,    Johnson's landlord,

procure good as to exclude evil.'  was a printer.

1 First published in Malone's Bos-          3 I conjecture that Johnson wrote
well.  '  without any name.'     His Letter of

2 Ante,  ii.  14.  May 28,  post,  p.  398,  shows that she

3 First published in Croker's Bos-  laid aside the thought of printing.

nobody

396

To Mrs.  Thrale.

[A.D.  1784.

nobody knows but I.     If any body else is in the secret,  you shall
not have my consent to venture.
I am,  dear Madam,

Your most affectionate

and most humble servant,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

959.

To Miss JANE LANGTON.
[London],  May 10,  1784.     Published in the Life,  iv.  271.

960.

TO MRS.    THRALE1.

Now I am broken loose,  my friends seem willing enough to
see me.  On Monday I dined with Paradise ;  Tuesday,  Hoole ;
Wednesday,  Dr.  Taylor ;  to-day,  with Jodrel ;  Friday,  Mrs.
Garrick ;  Saturday,  Dr.  Brocklesby ;  next Monday,  Dilly 2.

But I do not now drive the world about ;  the world drives or

1 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  369.
Johnson does not seem to have

known that Mrs.  Thrale had spent
some days in London early in this
month.  Mme.  D'Arblay's Diary,

11.314-

2 Boswell dined with Johnson at
Paradise's and at Joddrel's,  but was
too indolent to record the talk.     At
Joddrel's was Lord Monboddo,  '  who
avoided any communication with Dr.
Johnson.'     Life,  iv.   272.     At Mrs.
Garrick's Johnson met Fanny Burney
and Hannah More  (ib.  p.  275)  ;  but
neither of them gives any account of
the evening,  though Miss Burney just
mentions it.  Mme.  D'Arblay's Diary,
ii.    315.       Of the dinner at Dr.
Brocklesby's Boswell gives some
record.      Life,   iv.  273.      Windham
also was there,  who records in his
Diary,   p.   9 : — '  After dinner took
Johnson an airing over Blackfriars
Bridge,  thence to the Club.'     The
Club was the Essex-Head Club,
where,  says Windham,  'there were

present Boswell,  Murphy, Brocklesby,
Berry,  Mr.  Bowles,  Hoole and his
son,  and a son of Dr.  Burney,  he that
was expelled from Cambridge.'  This
must have been Charles Burney the
Greek scholar,  who left Cambridge
without taking his degree,  though the
degree of M.A.  was conferred on him
about thirty years later.  Porson told
how he had once called on Burney to
borrow a book,  and not finding him
at home carried it off.  Burney soon
returning,  '  pursued him in a chaise,
and recovered it.  Porson talked of
this affair with some bitterness.
"Did Burney suppose,"  he said,
"  that I meant to play his old tricks  ?  "
(alluding to a well-known circum-
stance in the earlier part of Burney's
history).'  Table Talk of Rogers,

P- SIS-

Of the talk which Johnson had
that evening at the Essex-Head
Club Boswell gives some account
(Life,  iv.  275),  and also of the dinner
at Dilly's on Monday.  Ib.  p.  278.

draws

Aetat.  74.]  To Miss Reynolds.  397

draws me  *.  I am very weak ;  the old distress of sleeplessness
comes again upon me.  I have however one very strong basis
of health,  an eager appetite and strong digestion.

Queeney's letter I expected before now :  Susy is likewise in
debt.  I believe I am in debt to Sophy,  but the dear Loves
ought not to be too rigorous.

Dr.  Taylor has taken St.  Margaret's,  in Westminster,  vacant
by Dr.  Wilson's death 2 :  how long he will keep it I cannot guess  :
it is of no 'great value,  and its income consists much of voluntary
contributions.

I am,  Madam,
Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

London,  Thursday,  May 13,  1784.

You never date fully.

961.

MADAM,  To Miss REYNOLDS 3.  May 28,  1784.

You do me wrong by imputing my omission to any captious
punctiliousness.     I have not yet seen Sir Joshua,  and,  when

1 Johnson perhaps had in mind a with respect to the propriety of Dr.
line in Dryden's Character of a Good Wilson's conduct in putting up this
Parson:  —  'And forced himself to statue.     He did not at first hear the
drive,  but loved to draw.'     In speak-  question  ;   on its being repeated by
ing of Warburton he said  : — '  When Miss Seward he replied  :  —  "  Aye,
I read Warburton first and observed aye  ;     poor foolish Wilson  !    why,
his force,  and his contempt of man-  Madam,  he was a fool for doing it,
kind,  I thought he had driven the and she was a fool for permitting
world before him.'   Life,  v.  93.  it to be done]*."  '     British Museum,

2 Ante,  ii.  158.      Dr.   Wilson was Add.MSS.mv)-    Horace Walpole
also Rector of St.  Stephen's,  Wai-  speaks of Wilson as  '  Mrs.  Macaulay's
brook.     In this church  *  he erected a idolater  —  that dirty disappointed
statue to the celebrated female hunter of a mitre,     Dr.    Wilson.'
historian     [Mrs.     Macaulay]    while Letters,  vii.  42.

living,  which was boarded up till her 3 First published in Croker's Bos-

death by authority of the Spiritual well,  page 757.

Court.'  Gentleman's Magazine,  1784,  For Johnson as a negotiator with

i.   317.      In a small party at the Sir Joshua Reynolds on behalf of

Bishop's Palace in Lichfield Dr.  Miss Reynolds see ante,    ii.    84,

Johnson was asked for  '  his opinion n.  2.

*  The MS.  is imperfect.

I do

398 To Mrs.  Thrale.  [A.D.  1734.

I do see him,  I know not how to serve you.  When I spoke
upon your affairs to him,  at Christmas,  I received no encourage-
ment to speak again.

But we shall never do business by letters.  We must see one
another.

I have returned your papers,  and am glad that you laid aside
the thought of printing them x.

I am,  Madam,

Your most humble servant,

SAM  :  JOHNSON.

962.

To OZIAS HUMPHRY.
[London],  May 31,  1784.     Published in the Life,  iv.  269.

963.

TO MRS.    THRALE2.

DEAR MADAM,  London,  May 31, 1784.

Why you expected me to be better than I am I cannot
imagine :  I am better than any that saw me in my illness ever
expected to have seen me again.  I am however at a great
distance from health,  very weak and very asthmatick,  and troubled
with my old nocturnal distresses  ;  so that I am little asleep in the
night,  and in the day too little awake.

I have one way or other been disappointed hitherto of that
change of air,  from which I think some relief may possibly be
obtained ;  but Boswel and I have settled our resolution to go to
Oxford on Thursday 3.  But since I was at Oxford,  my convivial
friend Dr.  Edwards and my learned friend Dr.  Wheeler are both
dead 4,  and my probabilities of pleasure are very much diminished.
Why,  when so many are taken away,  have I been yet spared !
I hope that I may be fitter to die.

How long we shall stay at Oxford,  or what we shall do when
we leave it,  neither Bozzy nor I have yet settled  ;  he is for his

1 Ante,  ii.  395.  Life,  iv.  283—311.

2 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  370.  4 For Edwards and Wheeler see

3 For the Journey to Oxford see ante,  ii.  257,  260,  327.

part

Aetat.  74.]        To the Reverend Dr.  Hamilton.  399

part resolved to remove his family to London and try his fortune
at the English bar x :  let us all wish him success.
Think of me,  if you can,  with tenderness.

I am,  Madam,

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

964.

To SIR JOSHUA REYNOLDS.
[London],  June  [?  i],  1784.     Published in the Life,  iv.  283.

965.

To THE REVEREND DR.  HAMILTON 2.
SIR,  [London],  June 2,  1784.

You do every thing that is liberal and kind.  Mrs.  Pelle is a
bad manager for herself,  but I will employ a more skilful agent,
one Mrs.  Gardiner 3,  who will wait on you and employ Pelle's
money to the best advantage.  Mrs.  Gardiner will wait on you.
I return you,  Sir,  sincere thanks for your attention to me.  I
am ill,  but hope to come back better,  and to be made better still
by your conversation.

I am,  Sir,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON4.

966.

To MRS.  THRALES.
DEAR MADAM,  London,  June 17, 1784.

I returned last night from Oxford after a fortnight's abode

1 Boswell records a conversation 2 First published in Croker's Bos-

which passed between him and John-  well,  page 758.

son at Oxford on this subject.     Life,  For Dr.   Hamilton see ante,   ii.

iv.  309.     See also ante,  i.  316.     To 296,  378.

Bishop Percy he wrote from Carlisle 3 Ante,  i.  156,  n.  3.

on July 8  : — '  I have at length re-  4 In Messrs.    Sotheby and Co.'s

solved,  with Dr.  Johnson's approba-  Auction Catalogue of May 10,  1875,

tion,  to try my fortune at the English Lot 116 is: — 'Brief Autographic

bar,  a scheme of which your Lord-  Memoranda in Latin and English of

ship talked to me in an animating Dr.  Johnson's feelings,  &c.,  on the 8th,

strain when I was hospitably enter-  9th,  loth June,  1784.    "Very breath-

tained by you at this place.'  Nichols's less and dejected,"  on the first date.'

Lit.  Hist-,  vii.  303.  5 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  372.

with

4OO

To Mrs.  Thrale.

[A.D.  1784.

with Dr.  Adams,  who treated me as well as I could expect or wish  ;
and he that contents a sick man,  a man whom it is impossible to
please,  has surely done his part well x :  I went in the common
vehicle with very little fatigue,  and came back I think with less 2.
My stomach continues good,  and according to your advice I
spare neither asparagus nor peas 3 and hope to do good execution
upon all the summer fruits 4.  But my nights are bad,  very bad  ;

1 Boswell quotes this passage,
Life,\v.  311.  Mr.  John Coke Fowler,
Resident Magistrate at Swansea,  who
matriculated at Pembroke College in
1837,  tells the following anecdote  : —
1 The old porter who lived for more
than fifty years after Dr.  Johnson's
last visit to Oxford told me that the
Doctor desired to mount the narrow
stairs which led to his old rooms.
He was then very unwell and infirm.
Consequently the porter went behind
him up the stairs,  and in a manner
hardly consistent with dignity applied
his strength to that ponderous part
of Dr.  Johnson's frame which might
otherwise have brought him back-
wards.'  Recollections of Public Men.
Published in The Red Dragon,  p.

239-

2 It was on the way down that
Johnson scolded the waiter for the
roast mutton which was set before the
passengers at dinner.     Ante,  ii.  257,
n.  3.     His conversation in the coach
charmed his fellow-travellers,  'two
very agreeable ladies from America.
"How he does talk!"  one of them
said to me aside  (writes Boswell) ;
"  Every sentence is an essay."  '   Life,
iv.  284.

3 Johnson dined one day at the
house of W.  J.  Mickle,  the translator
of the Lusiad,  who lived at Wheatley,
*  a very pretty country place,  a few
miles from Oxford.'    Life,  iv.  308.    I
am informed that    'it is handed
down as a tradition among Mickle's
descendants that at this dinner
Johnson said that his host was the

first Scotchman at whose house he
had had enough of green pease.'  In
the Sporting Magazine for October,
1806,  p.  10,  the following anecdote is
told of this same dinner : — '  A gentle-
man of the company said that what-
ever genuine patriotism remained in
the country was to be found only
amongst the Whigs.  Johnson asked
him if he knew who was the first
Whig.  The gentleman replied in the
negative.  "  Well then,  Sir,"  said the
Doctor,  "I'll tell you who he was;
his name was Lucifer,  and for his
patriotism he was kicked out of
heaven."'  Johnson is described as
being  '  rather a man of taciturnity,'
and as  'putting on his spectacles.'
The spectacles throw doubt on the
whole story  ;  perhaps it is nothing
but a modification of Johnson's
saying  '  that the first Whig was the
Devil.'  Life,  iii.  326.

4 Johnson wrote on July 20  : — '  My
appetite still continues keen enough  ;
and what I consider as a symptom of
radical health,  I have a voracious
delight in raw summer fruit,  of which
I was less eager a few years ago.'  Ib.
iv.  353.  Sir William Temple,  with
whose writings he was familiar,
says  : — '  No part of diet in any
season is so healthful,  so natural,
and so agreeable to the stomach as
good and well-ripened fruits.  I can
say it for myself at least and all my
friends that the season of summer
fruits is ever the season of health
with us.'  Temple's Works,  ed.  1757,
iii.  236.

the

Aetat.  74.]          To the Reverend Dr.  Taylor.  401

the asthma attacks me often,  and the dropsy is watching an
opportunity to return.  I hope I have checked it,  but great
caution must be used,  and indeed great caution is not a high
price for health or ease.

What I shall do next I know not ;  all my schemes of rural
pleasure have been some way or other disappointed.  I have
now some thought of Lichfield and Ashbourne.  Let me know,
dear Madam,  your destination J.

I am,  Madam,

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

967.

e To THE REVEREND DR.  TAYLOR 2.

When we parted last night,  I thought worse of your case,
than I think since I have thought longer upon it.  Your general
distemper is,  I think,  a hectic fever,  for which the bark is
proper,  and which quietness of mind,  and gentle exercise,  and
fresh air may cure.  Your present weakness is the effect of such
waste of blood as would weaken a young man in his highest
vigour.  It might be necessary,  but it must sink both your
courage and strength.

Dr.  Nichols 3 hurt himself extremely in his old age by lavish

1 It was probably on the very day of his countrymen,  a man very low
Johnson wrote this letter that Piozzi in his profession.'    Life,  ii.  354.    See
in Milan received the letter from Mrs.  also ib.  iii.  163.     In the Gentleman 'j
Thrale's doctor at Bath which brought Magazine,  1 785,  i.  1 3,  is a Memoir of
him back post haste to England.  Nicholls where it is stated that on
Hay ward's Piozzi,  i.  277.  the death of George II,  'this most

2 I owe the copy of this Letter to skilful physician was superseded to
the kindness of Mr.  F.  Locker-Lamp-  make way for one  (Sir W.  D.)  who,
son,  of Rowfant,  Crawley,  in whose not long before,  had been an army
possession is the original.  surgeon of the lowest class.     By this

3 Frank Nicholls.  Johnson speak-  exchange the upstart rose to dignity
ing of the Earl of Bute's   'undue and riches.'     Nicholls a few years
partiality for Scotchmen '    said : —  earlier had satirised the Scots in an
'  He turned out Dr.  Nichols,  a very anonymous pamphlet.      To  '  lavish
eminent man,  from being physician phlebotomy'  he had no doubt re-
to the King,  to make room for one sorted as a remedy against  '  an in-

VOL.  II.  D d phlebotomy.

4O2

To the Reverend Dr.  Taylor.         [A.D.  1734.

phlebotomy.     Do not bleed again very soon,  and when you can
delay no longer be more moderate.

I think you do right in going home,  and hope you will have
an easy and pleasant journey.

I am,  dear Sir,

Yours affectionately,

SAM  :  JOHNSON.

Bolt Court,  June 19,  1784.

To the Reverend Dr.  Taylor.

968.

To THE REVEREND DR.  TAYLOR  *.
DEAR SIR,

It is now Wednesday Evening 2.  I hope you are lodged
easily and safely in Ashbourne.  Since we parted I have not
been well.  I dined on Saturday with Dr.  Brocklesby,  and was
taken ill at his house,  but went to the club 3.  On Monday I was
so uneasy that I staid at home.  On Tuesday I dined at the
club 43 but was not well at night,  nor am well to day but hope

veterate asthmatic cough '  which
carried him off in his eightieth year,
just as Johnson,  under a similar
distress,  had had taken from him
about fifty ounces of blood  (ante,  ii.

253).

W.  D.  was William Duncan,  who
in 1764 was made a baronet.  He
married a sister of the Earl of Thanet.
Walpole's Letters,  vi.  130,  and Gen-
tleman's Magazine,  1764,  p.  399.

For Taylor's phlebotomy see ante,
ii.  1 60.

1 From the original in the posses-
sion of Mr.  Alfred H.  Huth,  of Bolney
House,  Ennismore Gardens,  London.

2 Boswell had visited Johnson in
the morning of this day,  after first
seeing fifteen men in a batch hanged
before Newgate.     From the scene of
this  '  legal massacre '  (to use John-

son's own words)  Bolt Court was
distant but a few minutes'  walk.  Life,
iv.  328.

3 The Essex Head Club which met
on a Saturday and two evenings be-
sides.   Ib.  iv.  254,  275.    Ante,  ii.  396,
n.  2.

4 The Literary Club.     '  On Tues-
day,  June 22,'    writes Boswell,   'I
dined with him at the Literary
Club,  the last time of his being in
that respectable society.     He looked
ill ;  but had such a manly fortitude,
that he did not trouble the company
with melancholy complaints.     They
all shewed evident marks of kind
concern about him,  with which he
was much pleased,  and he exerted
himself to be as entertaining as his
indisposition allowed him.'    Ib.  iv.
326.

the

Aetat.  74.]  To Mrs.  Thrale.  403

the fit is abating.  Boswel has a great mind to draw me to
Lichfield,  and as I love to travel with him,  I have a mind to be
drawn if I could hope in any short time to come to your house,
for Lichfield will,  I am afraid,  not be a place for long continuance,
and,  to tell the truth,  I am afraid of seeing my self so far from
home,  as I must return alone J.

Sir John Hawkins has just told me that you preached on
Sunday with great vigour.  You have therefore a great fund of
strength left,  which I entreat you not to bleed away 2.

I am,  Sir,

Yours affectionately,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

June 23,  1784.

To the Reverend Dr.  Taylor in Ashbourne,  Derbyshire.

969

TO MRS.    THRALE3.

DEAR MADAM,  London,  June 26, 1784.

This morning I saw Mr.  Lysons 4 :  he is an agreeable young
man,  and likely enough to do all that he designs.  I received
him as one sent by you has a right to be received,  and I
hope he will tell you that he was satisfied ;  but the initiatory 5

1 Boswell,  who was returning to 3 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  373.
Scotland,  no doubt wanted Johnson 4 Samuel Lysons,       afterwards
to accompany him as far as Lichfield.  Keeper of the Records in the Tower,
Johnson told Mrs.  Knowles that  'he then a law-student.       *  He made,'
was the best travelling companion in writes Mrs.  Piozzi,  '  my bargain with
the world.'     Life,   iii.   294.     At the the bookseller  [for the Anecdotes of
beginning of the Journey to the Dr.  Johnson\,   from whom on my
Hebrides he praises   '  his gaiety of return I received  ,£300,  a sum un-
conversation and civility of manners.'  exampled in those days for so small
Life,  v.  52,  and ante,  i.  291.     Had a volume.'    Hayward's /Y0227,  ii.  126.
they gone together a most interesting Lysons,    '  though a great friend
addition would have been made to of Mrs.  Piozzi's,  said that Johnson
the Life.    As it was,  Johnson started not only revised throughout her poem
less than a fortnight after Boswell.  of The Three Warnings,  but supplied

2 For Taylor's habit of '  periodical several new lines.'     Prior's Malone,
bleeding '  see Life,-  iii.  152.     Perhaps p.  413.     Boswell did not know of this.
Johnson thought that he himself had Life,  ii.  26.

bled his strength away by the fifty 5 Initiatory is not in Johnson's
ounces which he had had taken from Dictionary.
him in the spring of 1782.  Ib.  iv.  146.

D d 2 conversation

404

To Mrs.  Thrale.

[A.D.  1784.

conversation of two strangers is seldom pleasing or instructive
to any great degree,  and ours was such as other occasions of the
same kind produce.

A message came to me yesterday to tell me that Macbean,
after three days of illness,  is dead of a suppression of urine.  He
was one of those who,  as Swift says,  stood as a screen between
me and death*.  He has I hope made a good exchange.  He
was very pious ;  he was very innocent ;  he did no ill ;  and of
doing good a continual tenour of distress allowed him few oppor-
tunities :  he was very highly esteemed in the house 2.

Write to me if you can some words of comfort.  My dear
girls seem all to forget me.

I am,  Madam,

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON 3.

1  'The fools,  my juniors by a year,
Are tortured with suspense and

fear,
Who wisely thought my age a

screen,
When death approached,     to

stand between.'

On the Death of Dr.  Swift:  SWIFT'S
Works,  ed.  1803,  xi.  246.

2 The Charterhouse,  of which he
was    'a poor brother.'      Ante,    ii.
213.

3 Instead of '  the words of comfort '
which he asked for he received in a
few days the following letters un-
signed.    That they were unsigned
was clearly intentional.    Mrs.  Thrale
was not yet married to Piozzi,  but
she wished Johnson to believe,  as his
answer shows he inclined to believe,
that she was married.     In publishing
the first of the letters — the second
she left unpublished — she heads it

'Mrs.  Piozzi to Dr.  Johnson,'  as in
like manner she heads his letter of
July 8,  '  Dr.  Johnson to Mrs.  Piozzi.'
'We were married,'  she says,  'in
London by the Spanish ambassador's
chaplain,  and returned hither  [to
Bath]  to be married by Mr.  Morgan,
of Bath,  at St.  James's Church,  July
25,  1784.'  Hay ward's Piozzi,  1.277.
In Jackson's Oxford Journal,  for
July 31,  is the following curious
announcement  :  '  Bath,  July 28.
Sunday  (and not before)  was married
at St.  James's Church in this city,
Gabriele Piozzi,  Esq.,  of that Parish
to Mrs.  Thrale,  Widow of Henry
Thrale,  Esq.,  of St.  Saviour's,  South-
wark.'  The Rev.  H.  R.  Laughton,  the
Chaplain of the Spanish Chapel,  in-
forms me that he has examined the
records which go back to 1734,  but
has not discovered any trace of the
marriage.

'MRS.  PIOZZI TO DR.   JOHNSON.
'  MY DEAR SIR,  Bath,  June 30.

'  The enclosed is a circular letter which I have sent to all the guardians,
but our friendship demands somewhat more ;  it requires that I should beg

To

Aetat.  74.]  To Mrs.  Thrale.  405

970.

MADAM,  To MRS.  THRALE'.

If I interpret your letter right,   you are ignominiously

your pardon for concealing from you a connexion which you must have heard
of by many,  but I suppose never believed a.  Indeed,  my dear Sir,  it was con-
cealed only to save us both needless pain  ;  I could not have borne to reject
that counsel it would have killed me to take,  and I only tell it you now be-
cause all is irrevocably settled,  and out of your power to prevent.  I will say,
however,  that the dread of your disapprobation has given me some anxious
moments,  and though,  perhaps,  I am become by many privations the most
independent woman in the world,  I feel as if acting without a parent's consent
till you write kindly to

Your faithful servant.'

Piozzi Letters,  ii.  374.

•SIR,  CIRCULAR.

'As one of the executors of Mr.  Thrale's will and guardian to his
daughters,  I think it my duty to acquaint you that the three eldest left Bath
last Friday for their own house at Brighthelmstone in company with an
amiable friend,  Miss Nicholson,  who has sometimes resided with us here,
and in whose society they may,  I think,  find some advantages and certainly
no disgrace.  I waited on them to Salisbury,  Wilton,  &c.,  and offered to
attend them to the seaside myself,  but they preferred this lady's company to
mine,  having heard that Mr.  Piozzi is coming back from Italy,  and judging
perhaps by our past friendship and continued correspondence that his return
would be succeeded by our marriage.

I have the honour to be,  Sir,  your obedient servant.
Bath,  June 30,  1784.'

Hayward's Piozzi,  i.  1 10.

Miss Nicholson, '  who,'  Mrs.  Piozzi September 17,  1764,  and so was only

says, '  has sometimes resided with us nineteen.     Baretti has the following

here,'  was  '  directed to her door by note on Mrs.  Thrale's first letter : —

Providence 'early in the very month in  '  She was not yet married when she

which she wrote this letter.  Ib.  ii.  334.  wrote her last letter but one to John-

Inanotherpassage she writes: — 'Miss son.     This letter of hers is falsified

Thrale was of age by now,  and I left for the purpose of this edition,  and

Miss Nicholson,  the Bishop's grand-  the answer to it  [Letter 972]  is a mere

daughter,  whom they appeared to forgery of hers.   But this I shall prove

like exceedingly,  with them,  but she in another place.'     Johnson's letter

soon quitted her post on observing was not forged,  as Mr.  Hayward saw

that they gave people to understand the original.    It was not,  however,  as

she was a cast mistress of dear Piozzi,  it is made to appear by Mrs.  Piozzi,

who never saw her face out of their an answer to her first letter,
company,  except once at a dinner x First published in Hayward's

visit.'     Ib.  i.  275.     Miss Thrale was Piozzi,  i.  in.
not of age.       She was born on In the Gentlemarts Magazine for

a This line is quoted by Boswell,  Life,  iv.  339.

married  ;

406 To Mrs.  Thrale.

married  ;  if it is yet undone,  let us once z more talk together.  If
you have abandoned your children and your religion,  God forgive
your wickedness  ;  if you have forfeited your fame and your
country,  may your folly do no further mischief.  If the last act
is yet to do,  I who have loved you,  esteemed you,  reverenced
you.  and served you,  I who long thought you the first of woman-
kind, entreat that,  before your fate is irrevocable,  I may once
more see you.  I was,  I once was,

Madam,  most truly yours,

July 2,  1784.  SAM:  JOHNSON.

I will come down if you will permit it2.

December,  1784,  ii.  893,  a spurious printed in Croker's Boswell,  p.  777.
copy of this letter is given  —  '  an          '  '  The four words which I have

adumbration  '  of it as Johnson,  ac-  printed in italics are indistinctly

cording to Hawkins,     called it.  written,  and cannot be satisfactorily

Hawkins's Johnson,  p.  569.     It is re-  made out.'     Note by Mr.  Hayward.

2 To this letter Mrs.  Thrale sent the following answer  :  —

'SIR,  'July 4,  1784-

'  I have this morning received from you so rough a letter in reply to one
which was both tenderly and respectfully written,  that I am forced to desire
the conclusion of a correspondence which I can bear to continue no longer.
The birth of my second husband is not meaner than that of my first  ;  his
sentiments are not meaner  ;  his profession is not meaner,  and his superiority
in what he professes acknowledged by all mankind.  It is want of fortune
then that is ignominious  ;  the character of the man I have chosen has no
other claim to such an epithet.  The religion to which he has been always
a zealous adherent will,  I hope,  teach him to forgive insults he has not
deserved  ;  mine will,  I hope,  enable me to bear them at once with dignity
and patience.  To hear that I have forfeited my fame is indeed the greatest
insult I ever yet received.  My fame is as unsullied as snow,  or I should think
it unworthy of him who must henceforth protect it.

I write by the coach the more speedily and effectually to prevent your
coming hither.  Perhaps by my fame  (and I hope it is so)  you mean only
that celebrity which is a consideration of a much lower kind.  I care for that
only as it may give pleasure to my husband and his friends.

Farewell,  dear Sir,  and accept my best wishes.  You have always com-
manded my esteem,  and long enjoyed the fruits of a friendship never
infringed by one harsh expression on my part during twenty years of familiar
talk.  Never did I oppose your will,  or control your wish  ;  nor can your
unmerited severity itself lessen my regard  ;  but till you have changed your
opinion of Mr.  Piozzi let us converse no more.  God bless you.'

Hay ward's Piozzi,  i.  in.

In this letter by the use of the word Johnson to believe that she is already
husband she evidently wishes to lead married.

To

Aetat.  74.]

To Mrs,  Thrale.

407

971.

To SIR JOSHUA REYNOLDS.
[London],  July 6,  1784.     Published in the Life,  iv.  348.

072.

TO MRS.    THRALE1.

DEAR MADAM,  London,  July 8, 1784.

What you have done,  however I may lament it,  I have no
pretence to resent,  as it has not been injurious to me :  I there-
fore breathe out one sigh more of tenderness,  perhaps useless,
but at least sincere 2.

I wish that God may grant you every blessing,  that you may
be happy in this world for its short continuance,  and eternally
happy in a better state ;  and whatever I can contribute to your
happiness I am very ready to repay,  for that kindness which
soothed twenty years of a life radically wretched.

Do not think slightly of the advice which I now presume to
offer.  Prevail upon Mr.  Piozzi to settle in England 3 :  you may

Johnson,  speaking of her to Miss
Burney in the following November,
said : — '  If I meet with one of her
letters I burn it instantly.  I have
burnt all I can find.'  Mme.
D'Arblay's Diary,  ii.  328.  The one
just quoted escaped the fire,  and
being found among his papers was
returned by Hawkins,  one of his
executors,  to the writer.  Memoirs
of Miss Hawkins,  i.  66.  The other
two executors,  Sir Joshua Reynolds
and Sir William Scott,  seven years
later,  talking in Malone's presence,
'  concerning that despicable woman,
Mrs.  Piozzi,'  told him of these two
letters  '  which she had suppressed.
She said in hers,  as both Sir W.  Scott
and Sir Joshua agreed,  that however
she might have disgraced Miss
Salusbury by marrying the brewer
she could not disgrace Mrs.  Thrale
by marrying Piozzi.'  Prior's Malone,

p.  412.  Johnson praised Reynolds
for the truthfulness of his stories
(Piozzi's Anecdotes,  p.  1 16)  ;  in Scott
who became a great Judge we should
have looked for accuracy.  Yet how
wide was their report from the truth  !

1 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  375.
According to the heading there

given this letter was addressed  *  To
Mrs.  Piozzi.'  Mr.  Hayward however
says that both this letter and that of
the 2nd were addressed,  *  To Mrs.
Thrale.'  Hayward's Piozzi,  i,  109.
Nevertheless with strange careless-
ness in printing it he heads it  *  To
Mrs.  Piozzi.'

2  '  How could Johnson have ever
written such stuff?'— BARETTI.

3 On this Mrs.    Piozzi has the
following note  :  —  *  Dr.    Johnson's
advice corresponded exactly with
Mr.  Piozzi's intentions.     He was im-
patient to show Italy to me and me

live

408

To Mrs.  Thrale.

[A.D.  1784.

live here with more dignity than in Italy,  and with more security  :
your rank will be higher,  and your fortune more under your own
eye.  I desire not to detail all my reasons,  but every argument
of prudence and interest is for England,  and only some phantoms
of imagination x seduce you to Italy.

I am afraid however that my counsel is vain,  yet I have
eased my heart by giving it.

When Queen Mary took the resolution of sheltering herself
in England,  the Archbishop of St.  Andrew's,  attempting to dis-
suade her,  attended on her journey;  and when they came to the
irremeable 2 stream that separated the two kingdoms,  walked by
her side into the water,  in the middle of which he seized her
bridle,  and with earnestness proportioned to her danger and his
own affection pressed her to return.  The Queen went forward3.

to the Italians,  but never meant to
forbear bringing his wife home again,
and showing he had brought her.
Well aware of the bustle his marriage
made,  it was his most earnest wish
that every doubt of his honour and
of my happiness should be dispelled  ;
so that whilst our ladies  [her
daughters]  and Madame D'Arblay,
that was Miss Burney,  and Baretti,
and all the low Italians of the Hay-
market who hated my husband,  were
hatching stories how he had sold my
jointure,  had shut me up in a con-
vent, &c.,  we made our journey to
our residence in Italy as showy as
we possibly could.  All the English
at every town partook of our
hospitality ;  the inhabitants came
flocking,  nothing loth,  and we sent
presents to our beautiful daughters
by every hand that would carry
them.'  Hay ward's Piozzi,  i.  275.

1 In the opening lines of Rasselas
Johnson addresses those  '  who pursue
with eagerness the phantoms of hope.'

2 '  Occupat  ^Eneas aditum custode

sepulto,

Evaditque celer ripam irreme-
abilis undae.'

'The keeper charm'd,  the chief

without delay

Pass'd on and took the irreme-
able way.'

DRYDEN.    ^Enetd,  vi.  424.
See ante,  i.  130.

3 Mary did not cross the Solway
on horseback,  but the arm of the sea
in a fishing-boat,  from Dundrennan
in Galloway to Workington.  John-
son's story,  which I did not find in
Robertson,  Hume, Keith or Anderson,
I traced to Adam Blackwood,  who
gives the following account : —

'  Messire Jean Hamilton,  Ascheues-
que de sainct Andre*,  et primat de
1'Eglise d'Escosse,  h6me fort aagd,
et de longue experience,  ne peust
jamais trouuer ceste opinion bonne,
cognoissant de tout temps l'infidelit£
du conseil d'Angleterre.  *  *  *  Mais
tout cela ne peut oster de la teste de
ceste Princesse 1'asseurance qu'elle
auoit pris aux promesses de sa cousine.
Quoy voyant ce venerable Prelat,  et
qu'elle se precipitoit en un peril tout
euident,  ainsi qu'elle se mettoit sur
1'eau pour descendre en cette terre
fatale,  il se mit a genoux,  la saisit au
corps auec les deux bras,  et auec

If

Aetat.  74.]          To the Reverend Dr.  Adams.  409

If the parallel reaches thus far,  may it go no further. — The

tears stand in my eyes.

I am going into Derbyshire,  and hope to be followed by your
good wishes,  for I am,  with great affection,

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.
Any letters that come for me hither will be sent me  \

973.

To JAMES BOSWELL.

[London],  July n,  1784.  Published in part in the Life,  iv.  351,
where it is misdated June 1 1 .

974.

0 To THE REVEREND DR.  ADAMS 2.

DEAR SIR,

I am going into Staffordshire and Derbyshire in quest of
some relief3,  of which my need is not less than when I was
treated at your house with so much tenderness.

I have now received the collations for Xenophon,  which I have
sent you with the letters that relate to them.  I cannot at
present take any part in the work,  but I would rather pay for a

larmes luy dist,  qu'   elle auroit la x  '  In a memorandum on this letter

peine de le trainer,  si elle passoit plus Mrs.  Piozzi says  : — "  I wrote him a

outre.   Mais en fin la voyant obstinee very kind and affectionate letter."  '

en son malheur,    et ne pouuant Hay ward's Piozzi)  i.  1 14.

resister a sa volontd,  apres luy avoir 2 First published in Croker's Bos-

encores une fois remonstre que sa well,  page 782.      Corrected by me

Majeste"    s'alloit perdre,   son estat,  from the original in the possession of

son Royaume,  ses bons seruiteurs,  Messrs.  J.   Pearson  &  Co.,   5 Pall

et la foy Catholique,  il lui demanda Mall Place,  S.W.

cong£    de se retirer,'  &c.      Adami The Letter bears no address and

Blacvodasi  [Adam Blackwood]  Opera is misdated June 1 1.  It was evidently

Omnta,  1644,  p.  589.    Blackwood,  or written in July.  On June n Johnson

his French printer,  makes a strange was with Boswell at Dr.   Adams's

hash of the names of places.    We find house.     It is curious that a Letter

Dundreuen,  Vvirkinton,  Cokirmouth written to Boswell was also misdated

and Courberlande.     The  '  venerable June 1 1.     Life,  iv.  351.

prelate,' who was a man of the loosest The original was sold by Messrs,

life and a cruel persecutor,  was hanged Christie  &  Co.  on June 5,  1888  (Lot

three years later.     Froude's Hist,  of 49),  for  ,£5 5^.

England,  ed.  1870,  vi.  221,  3 ;  ix.  419.  :i He set out on July 13.  Zz/<?,iv.353.

collation

4io To the Reverend Dr.  Adams.         [A.D.  1734.

collation of Oppian,  than see it neglected  ;  for the Frenchmen
act with great liberality.     Let us not fall below them r.

I know not in what state Dr.  Edwards left his book 2.  Some
of his emendations seemed to me to  (be)  irrefragably certain,  and
such therefore as ought not to be lost.  His rule was not  (to)
change the text,  and,  therefore,  I suppose he has left notes to be
subjoined.  As the book is posthumous some account of the
Editor ought to be given.

You have now the whole process of the correspondence before
you.  When the Prior is answered,  let some apology be made
for me 3.

I was forced to devide  \sic\  the collation,  but as it is paged,
you will easily put every part in its proper place.

Be pleased to convey my respects to Mrs.  and Miss Adams 4.
I am,  Sir,

Your most humble servant,

London,  June  [July 11],  1784.  SAM:  JOHNSON.

975.
To THE REVEREND MR.  BAGSHAW.

[London],  July 12,  1784.     Published in the Life,  iv.  351.

1 The collation was probably who had the use of his manuscripts,
wanted for an edition of Oppian by  '  The Frenchmen '  had collated the
Belin de Ballu of which one volume three manuscripts in the King's
was published at Strasbourg in 1786.  Library at Paris.      The book was
The editor was     '  conseiller a la published in 1785.

cour des monnaies  '  at Paris.     He 3 The Prior was,  no doubt,   the

does not seem to have received the Prior of the English Benedictines in

collation from Oxford a.  whose convent Johnson had a cell

2 For Dr.    Edwards see ante,  appropriated to him.     Life,  ii.  402.
ii.  257.     Johnson wrote to him on See ante,  i.  402,  for Johnson's Letter
November 2,   1778: — 'What comes to Dr.  Adams in which he introduces
of Xenophon  ?    If you do not like the  '  a learned Benedictine.'

trouble of publishing the book,  do 4  'Miss Adams happened to tell

not let your commentaries be lost.'  him that a little coffee-pot,  in which

Life,  iii.  367.     He lived long enough she had made his coffee,  was the

to complete the Greek text and the only thing she could call her own.

Latin version of the Memorabilia,  the He turned to her with a complacent

work on which he was engaged.    The gallantry,  "  Don't say so,  my dear  ;

notes and the various readings were I hope you don't reckon my heart as

supplied by his friend,  Henry Owen,  nothing."  '     Life,  iv.  292.

a I am indebted for this information to Mr.  H.  Omont of the Bibliotheque Nationale,
Paris.

To

Aetat.  74.]

To John Ryland.

411

976.

To BENNET LANGTON.
[London],  July 12,  1784.     Published in the Life,  iv.  352.

977.

DEAR SIR,  To JOHN RYLAND  '•

Mr.  Payne 2 will pay you fifteen pounds towards the stone
of which you have kindly undertaken the care.  The Inscrip-
tion is in the hands of Mr.  Bagshaw,  who has a right to inspect
it before he admits it into his Church.

Be pleased to let the whole be done with privacy,  that I may
elude the vigilance of the papers.

I am going for a while into Derbyshire in hope of help from
the air of the country.

I hope your journey has benefited you.     The Club 3 prospers  ;
we meet by ten at a time.

God send that you and I may enjoy and improve each other.
I am,  dear Sir,

Your most humble servant,

July 12, 1784.  SAM  :  JOHNSON.

To Mr.  Ryland
in Muscovy Court
Tower hill.

1 First published in Notes and
Queries,  5th S.  vii.  381.  Corrected
by me from the original in the
possession of Mr.  Alfred Morrison,  of
Fonthill House.

For Mr.  Ryland see ante,  i.  56.

On the same day Johnson wrote
the following letter  : —
'  To the Reverend Mr.  Bagshaw,  at
Bromley.

'SIR,

Perhaps you may remember,
that in the year 1753  [1752],  you
committed to the ground my dear wife.
I now entreat your permission to lay
a stone upon her ;  and have sent the
inscription,  that,  if you find it proper,
you may signify your allowance.

You will do me a great favour by
showing the place where she lies,
that the stone may protect her re-
mains.

Mr.  Ryland will wait on you for
the inscription,  and procure it to be
engraved.  You will easily believe
that I shrink from this mournful
office.  When it is done,  if I have
strength remaining,  I will visit
Bromley once again,  and pay you
part of the respect to which you have
a right from,  Reverend Sir,

Your most humble servant,

SAM:  JOHNSON/
Life,  iv.  351.

2 Ante,  ii.  363,  n.  I .

3 The Essex Head Club.

TO

412 To Sir John Hawkins.  [A.D.  i?84.

978.

To SIR JOHN HAWKINS.

Ashbourne,  [?July,  1784].

In Hawkins's Life of Johnson,  page 571,  the following extract is given
from a letter written by Johnson to Hawkins from Ashbourne : —

*  Poor Thrale !  I thought that either her virtue or her vice would
have restrained her from such a marriage.  She is now become a
subject for her enemies to exult over,  and for her friends,  if she has
any left,  to forget or pity.'

By  '  her virtue '  Hawkins understood he meant the love of her
children,  and by her vice,  her pride.  '  He looked upon the desertion
of children by their parents,  and the withdrawing from them that pro-
tection, that mental nutriment which in their youth they are capable
of receiving,  the exposing them to the snares and temptations of the
world,  and the solicitations and deceits of the artful and designing,  as
most unnatural.'

979.

To DR.  BROCKLESBY.
Ashbourne,  July 20,  1784.     Published in the Life,  iv.  353.

980.

To SIR JOSHUA REYNOLDS.
Ashbourne,  July 21,  1784.     Published in the Life,  iv.  366.

981.

To JAMES BOSWELL.
Ashbourne,  July 26,  1784.     Published in part in the Life,  iv.  348,

378-9.

982.

To JAMES BOSWELL.
[AshbourneJ,  July 28,  1784.     Published in part in the Life,  iv.  379.

983.

To DR.  BROCKLESBY.
[Ashbourne],  July 31,  1784.     Published in the Life,  iv.  354.

984.

To DR.  BURNEY.

[Ashbourne],  August 2,  1784.     Published in part in the Life,  iv.  360.

To

Aetat.  74.]  To Dr.  Brocklesby.  413

985.

To DR.  BROCKLESBY.
[Ashbourne],  August 5,  1784.     Published in part in the Life,  iv.  354.

986.

To JOHN HOOLE.
[Ashbourne],  August 7,  1784.     Published in the Life,  iv.  359.

987.

To DR.  BROCKLESBY.
[Ashbourne],  August 12,  1784.     Published in the Life,  iv.  354.

988.

To HEELY.

Ashbourne,  August 12,  1784.     Published in the Life,  iv.  371.

989.

To JOHN HOOLE.
[Ashbourne],  August 13,  1784.     Published in the Life,  iv.  359.

990.

To DR.  BROCKLESBY.
[Ashbourne],  August 14,  1784.     Published in the Life,  iv.  354.

991.

To THOMAS DAVIES.
[Ashbourne],  August 14,  1784.     Published in the Life,  iv.  365.

992.

To DR.  BROCKLESBY.
[Ashbourne],  August 16,  1784.     Published in the Life,  iv.  354.

993.

To DR.  BROCKLESBY.
[Ashbourne],  August 19,  1784.     Published in the Life,  iv.  355.

994.

To GEORGE NICOL.
Ashbourne,  August 19,  1784.     Published in the Life,  iv.  365  \

1 See Appendix C.

To

To Francesco Sastres.

[A.D.  1784.

995.

To SIR JOSHUA REYNOLDS.
[Ashbourne],  August 19,  1784.     Published in the Life,  iv.  366.

996.

To THE RIGHT HON.  WILLIAM WINDHAM.
[Ashbourne,  about August 21,  1784.]     Published in the Life,  iv.  362.

997.

To DR.  BROCKLESBY.
[Ashbourne],  August 21,  1784*.     Published in the Life,  iv.  355.

998.

To FRANCESCO SASTRES T.
DEAR SIR,  Ashbourne,  August 21,  1784.

I am glad that a letter has at last reached you ;  what became
of the two former,  which were directed to Mortimer instead of
Margaret Street 2,  I have no means of knowing,  nor is it worth
the while to enquire ;  they neither enclosed bills,  nor contained
secrets.

1 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  405.

Boswell,  perhaps to punish Mr.
Sastres for not letting him pub-
lish Johnson's letters to him,  thus
contemptuously mentions him  : — 'Dr.
Johnson associated with persons the
most widely different in manners,
abilities,  rank,  and accomplishments.
He was at once the companion of
the brilliant Colonel Forrester of the
Guards,  who wrote The Polite Phi-
losopher, and of the aukward and
uncouth Robert Levet ;  of Lord
Thurlow,  and Mr.  Sastres,  the Italian
master  ;  and has dined one day with
the beautiful,  gay,  and fascinating
Lady Craven,  and the next with
good Mrs.  Gardiner,  the tallow-
chandler,  on Snow-hill.'  Life,  iii.  21.
Mr.  Sastres was present when John-
son, a few days before his death,

burnt his mother's letters.  'They
drew from him a flood of tears.
When the paper they were written
on was all consumed he saw him
cast a melancholy look upon their
ashes,  which he took up and ex-
amined to see if a word was still
legible.'  Piozzi Letters,  ii.  383.
'  The good Mr.  Hoole,'  writes Miss
Burney, '  and equally good Mr.  Sastres
attend Dr.  Johnson rather as nurses
than friends,  for they sit whole hours
by him without even speaking to him.
He will not,  it seems,  be talked to —
at least very rarely.  At times,  indeed
he re-animates ;  but it is soon over,
and he says of himself,  "  I am now
like Macbeth — question enrages me."  '
Mme.  D'Arblay's Diary,  ii.  333.

2 Mortimer Street is close to Mar-
garet Street.

My

Aetat.  74.]  To Francesco Sastres.  415

My health was for some time quite 'at a stand,  if it did not
rather go backwards ;  but for a week past it flatters me with
appearances of amendment,  which I dare yet hardly credit.  My
breath has been certainly less obstructed for eight days ;  and
yesterday the water seemed to be disposed to a fuller flow.  But
I get very little sleep ;  and my legs do not like to carry me.

You were kind in paying my forfeits at the club J ;  it cannot
be expected that many should meet in the summer,  however
they that continue in town should keep up appearances as well
as they can.  I hope to be again among you.

I wish you had told me distinctly the mistakes in the French
words.  The French is but a secondary and subordinate part of
your design  ;  exactness,  however,  in all parts is necessary,  though
complete exactness cannot be attained ;  and the French are so
well stocked with dictionaries,  that a little attention may easily
keep you safe from gross faults ;  and as you work on,  your
vigilance will be quickened,  and your observation regulated ;
you will better know your own wants,  and learn better whence
they may be supplied.  Let me know minutely the whole state
of your negotiations.  Dictionaries are like watches,  the worst is
better than none,  and the best cannot be expected to go quite
true 2.

The weather here is very strange summer weather ;  and we
are here two degrees nearer the north than you.  I was I think
loath to think a fire necessary in July,  till I found one in the

1 The Essex-Head Club.     '  The out ten." '     Hayward's Piozzi,  i.  324.

terms are lax,'  wrote Johnson,  'and 2 This and Johnson's three next

the expenses light.     We meet thrice letters to Sastres show that his friend

a week,  and he who misses forfeits was hoping to publish a Dictionary

twopence.'   -Life,  iv.  254.    Mrs.  Piozzi in which the French was to be given,

has the following note on this pas-  Perhaps it was to be a rival to

sage: — 'There is a story of poor Bottarelli's Dictionary  '  of the three

dear Garrick,  whose attention to his most fashionable languages in Europe'

money-stuff never forsook him— re-  — English,  French and Italian — pub-

lating that when his last day was lished in 1777.     The design seems

drawing to an end,   he begged a to have come to nothing.     In 1789

gentleman present to pay his club-  Sastres published      //     Mercurio

forfeits,  "and don't let them cheat Italico,    a monthly magazine,   with

you,"  added he,  "for there cannot the Italian and English in parallel

be above nine,  and they will make columns.

servants'

4i 6 To Francesco Sastres.  [A.D.  1734.

servants'  hall,  and thought myself entitled to as much warmth
as them1.

I wish you would make it a task to yourself to write to me
twice a week  ;  a letter is a great relief to,

Dear Sir,

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

999.

To BENNET LANGTON.
[London],  August 25,  1784.     Published in the Life,  iv.  361.

1000.

To DR.  BROCKLESBY.
[Ashbourne],  August 26,  1784.     Published in the Life,  iv.  356.

1001.

To DR.  BROCKLESBY.
[Ashbourne],  September 2,  1784.    Published in the Life,  iv.  356.

1002.

To SIR JOSHUA REYNOLDS.
[Ashbourne],  September 2,  1784.     Published in the Life,  iv.  366.

1003.

To FRANCESCO SASTRES2.
DEAR SIR,  Ashbourne,  Sept.  2,  1784.

Your critick seems to me to be an exquisite Frenchman;
his remarks are nice ;  they would at least have escaped me.  I
wish you better luck with your next specimen ;  though if such

1 On August 2 he wrote to Dr.  by arriving too late  :  the day is going

Burney  : — '  I am now reduced to to bed before he makes his appear-

think,  and am at last content to talk ance.'    Letters,  viii.  502.     '  It is ill

of the weather.     Pride must have a with me,'  wrote Charles Lamb, '  when

fall.'     Life,  iv.  360.    On September 7 I begin to look which way the wind

Horace Walpole wrote  : — 'The sum-  sets.     Ten years ago,  I literally did

mer is come at last,  My Lord,  dressed not know the point from the broad

as fine as a birthday,   though not end of the vane,  which it was that

with so many flowers on its head,  indicated the quarter.5 Lamb's Letters,

In truth,  the sun is an old fool,  who ed.  by Ainger,  ii.  147.
apes the modern people of fashion 2 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  407.

slips

Aetat.  74.]  To Francesco Sastres.  417

slips as these are to condemn a dictionary,  I know not when
a dictionary will be made.  I cannot yet think that gourmander
is wrong ;  but I have here no means of verifying my opinion.

My health,  by the mercy of God,  still improves ;  and I have
hope of standing the English winter,  and of seeing you,  and reading
Petrarch r at Bolt-court ;  but let me not flatter myself too much.
I am yet weak,  but stronger than I was.

I suppose the club is now almost forsaken  ;  but we shall I hope
meet again.  We have lost poor Allen  ;  a very worthy man,  and
to me a very kind and officious neighbour 2.

Of the pieces ascribed by Bembo to Virgil,  the Dirce  (ascribed
I think to Valerius Cato),  the Copa and the Moretum are,  together
with the Culex and Ceiris,  in Scaliger's Appendix ad Virgilium.
The rest I never heard the name of before.

I am highly pleased with your account of the gentleman and
lady with whom you lodge;  such characters have sufficient
attractions to draw me towards them ;  you are lucky to light
upon them in the casual commerce of life.

Continue,  dear Sir,  to write to me ;  and let me hear any thing
or nothing,  as the chance of the day may be.

I am,  Sir,

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

1004.

To DR.  BURNEY.
[Ashbourne],  September 4,  1784.     Published in part in the Life,  iv.  360

1005.

To WILLIAM CUMBERLAND CRUIKSHANK.
Ashbourne,  September,  4,  1784.     Published in the Life,  iv.  365.

1 For Johnson's knowledge of Ita-  2 Writing about Allen's death to

lian see Life,  i.  1 1 5.    In 1776  '  he pro-  Dr.  Brocklesby on July 31 he says  : —

posed to apply vigorously to the study  '  I thought your letter long in coming,

of it.'   Ib.  iii.  90.    At 3 p.m.  on August v But,  you know,   nocitura petuntur,

9, 1781,  he recorded,  'in the summer-  the letter which I so much desired,

house at Streatham:— Having prayed,  tells me that I have lost one of my

I purpose to employ the next six best and tenderest friends.'     Ib.  iv.

weeks upon the Italian language,  for 354.     For officious see ante,  ii.  357,

my settled study.'     Ib.  iv.  134.  n.  i.

VOL.  II.                                             E e TO

41 8 To Francesco Sastres.  [A.D.  i?84.

1006.

To JOHN HOOLE.
[Ashbourne],  September 4,  1784.     Published in the Life,  iv.  360.

1007.

To SIR JOSHUA REYNOLDS.
Ashbourne,  September 9,  1784.     Published in the Life,  iv.  348,  367.

10O8.

To THE LORD HIGH CHANCELLOR THURLOW.
[Ashbourne],  September  [9],  1784.     Published in the Life,  iv.  349.

1009.

To DR.  BROCKLESBY.
[Ashbourne],  September 9,  1784.     Published in the Life,  iv.  357.

1010.

To DR.  BROCKLESBY.
[Ashbourne],  September u,  1784.     Published in the Life,  iv.  357.

1011.

To DR,  BROCKLESBY.
[Ashbourne],  September 16,  1784.     Published in the Life,  iv.  357.

1012.

To FRANCESCO SASTRES  *,  .

DEAR SIR,  Ashbourne,  Sept.  16,  1784.

What you have told me of your landlord and his lady at
Brompton,  has made them such favourites,  that I am not sorry
to hear how you are turned out of your lodgings,  because the
good is greater to them than the evil is to you.

The death of dear Mr.  Allen gave me pain.  When after some
time of absence I visit a town,  I find my friends dead ;  when I
leave a place,  I am followed with intelligence,  that the friend
whom I hope to meet at my return is swallowed in the grave.
This is a gloomy scene ;  but let us learn from it to prepare for

1 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  409.

our

Aetat.  75.]  To John Ryland.  419

our own removal.      Allen is gone;    Sastres and Johnson are
hasting after him  ;  may we be both as well prepared  !

I again wish your next specimen success.  Paymistress can
hardly be said without a preface,  (it may be expressed by a word
perhaps not in use,  Pay mistress T).

The club is,  it seems,  totally deserted ;  but as the forfeits go
on,  the house does not suffer;  and all clubs I suppose are un-
attended in the summer.  We shall I hope meet in winter,  and
be cheerful.

After this week,  do not write to me till you hear again from
me,  for I know not well where I shall be ;  I have grown weary
of the solitude of this place,  and think of removal 2.

I am,  Sir,

Your,  &c.,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

1013.

To SIR JOSHUA REYNOLDS.
[Ashbourne],  September 18,  1784.    Published in the Life^  iv.  368.

1014.

DEAR SIR,  To J°HN RYLANI)3-

You are not long without an answer.  I had this day in three
letters three histories of the Flying Man in the great Ballon.  I
am glad that we do as well as our neighbours.  Lunardi,  I find,
forgot his barometer and therefore can  [sic]  to what height he
ascended 4.

Direct,  if you please,  your next letter to Lichfield,  I am

1 The passage within brackets is,  Queries ;  $th S.  vii.  381.     Compared
I suppose,  the preface which Sastres by me with the original in the posses-
is to use.     '  Johnson disapproved of sion of Mr.  Frederick Barker,  of 41
parentheses,'  writes Boswell,  '  and I Gunterstone Road,  West Kensington,
believe in all his voluminous writings London.

not half-a-dozen of them will be 4 The balloon started from the

found.'     Lzfe,  iv.  190.  Artillery Ground,  Finsbury.     There

2 Five days earlier he had written was a delay in providing enough  *  in-
to Dr.  Brocklesby  : — *  I have no com-  flammable air,3 and Lunardi,  fearful
pany here,  and shall naturally come lest the mob should break in,  went
home hungry for conversation.5 Ib.  up alone.      In the pocket of his
iv.  357.  companion,    Mr.    Biggins,   was the

3 First published in Notes and barometer.     *  We saw everything so

E e 2 desirous

420

To John Ryland.

[A.D.  1784.

desirous of going thither;  I live in dismal solitude,  and being now
a little better and therefore more at leisure for external amuse-
ments, I find the hours sometimes heavy,  at least for some reason
or other I wish for change.

Mr.  Wyndham x was with me,  a day here,  and tried to wheedle
me to Oxford,  and I perhaps may take Oxford in my way home.

I am,  Sir,

Your most affectionate
Sept.  is,  1784 2.  SAM:  JOHNSON.

To Mr.  Ryland,  Merchant in London.

distinctly,'  wrote a spectator,  'and
were so much satisfied with the safety
of the attempt that it was by no
means that awful or solemn scene
that I expected — everybody greatly
interested,  but cheerful and gay.'
Lunardi landed three miles beyond
Ware  [Ware is twenty-one miles from
London].  The balloon was brought
back that night,  '  and was lodged,
amidst the acclamations of a great
mob,  at Biggins'  house in Essex
Street.'  Bentham's Works,  x.  136.
Windham,  calling at Burke's
country-house on the I3th,  had
' found them all going to London the
next day on the same errand as my-
self, viz.,  to see Lunardi ascend.'
Windham's Diary,  p.  22.  Horace
Walpole wrote on September
30  : — ( I cannot fill my paper,  as the
newspapers do,  with air-balloons ;
which,  though ranked with the in-
vention of navigation,  appear to me
as childish as the flying kites of
schoolboys.  ...  I was even disap-
pointed after Lunardi's expedition
had been prosperous  ;  you must know
I have no ideas of space  :  when I
heard how wonderfully he had soared,
I concluded he had arrived within a
stone's throw of the moon — alas  !  he
had not ascended above a mile and a
half.'  Letters,  viii.  505.  See Life,
iv-  356,  358.

1 For Windham's visit see Life,  iv.

356,  and for his record of Johnson's
talk see Appendix D.

2 On this day which was his birth-
day he composed the following
prayer.  The original is in the posses-
sion of Mr.  Alfred Morrison,  of Font-
hill House : —

*  Ashbourne,

September 18,  1784.

Almighty God,  merciful Father,
who art the giver of all good,  enable
me to return Thee due thanks for the
continuance of my life and for the
great mercies of the last year,  for
relief from the diseases that afflicted
me,  and all the comforts and allevia-
tions by which they were mitigated  ;
and O my gracious God make me
truly thankful for the call by which
thou hast awakened my conscience,
and summoned me to Repentance.
Let not thy call,  O Lord,  be forgotten
or thy summons neglected,  but let the
residue of my life,  whatever it shall be,
be passed in true contrition,  and
diligent obedience.  Let me repent
of the sins of my past years and so
keep thy laws for the time to come,
that when it shall be thy good
pleasure to call me to another state,
I may find mercy in thy sight.  Let
thy Holy Spirit support me in the
hour of death,  and O Lord grant me
pardon in the day of Judgement,  for
the sake of Jesus Christ,  our Lord.
Amen.'

To

Aetat.  75.]

To John Ryland.

421

1015.

To DR.  BROCKLESBY.
Lichfield,  September 29,  1784.     Published in the Life,  iv.  357.

1016.

DEAR SIR,  To JOHN RYLAND'-

At my return hither I had the gratification of finding two
of my friends,  whom I left as I thought,  about two months ago,
quite broken with years and disease,  very much recovered.  It is
great pleasure to a sick man to discover that sickness is not
always mortal,  so for age yet living to greater age.  This is how-
ever, whatever Rochefoucault or Swift may say,  though certainly
part of the pleasure,  yet not all of it2.  I rejoice in the welfare
of those whom I love and who love me,  and surely should have
the same joy if I were no longer subject to mortality.  As a being
subject to so many wants,  Man has inevitably a strong tendency

to  ,  so I hope as a Being capable of comparing good and

evil he finds something to be preferred in good,  and is therefore
capable of benevolence,  and supposing the volution of a good
and bad man as to his own interest the same,  would rejoice more
in the prosperity of the good.

I have for a little while past felt or imagined some declension
in my health.  I am still much better than I lately was,  but I am
a little afraid of the cold weather.

You have not lately told me of Payne,  in whom I take a great

1 First published in Notes and       'In all distresses of our friends

Queries,  5th S.  vii.  381.  The copyist
seems in places to have been at fault,
for the meaning is not always to be
discovered.

2 Swift's lines On the Death of Dr.
Swift  'were occasioned,'  he says,
'by reading the following. maxim in
Rochefoucault  —  "  Dans Padversite
de nos meilleurs amis nous trou-
vons toujours quelque chose qui ne
nous deplait pas.'"  The following
verses were perhaps in Johnson's
thoughts : —

We first consult our private ends ;
While Nature kindly bent to ease us
Points out some circumstance to

please us.
*  *  *  *

Yet should some neighbour feel a

pain

Just in the parts where I complain ;
How many a message would he

send!
What hearty prayers that I should

mend ! '

SWIFT'S Works,  ed.  1803,  xi.  241, 4.
interest

422 To John Ryland.  [A.D.  i?84.

interest.     I think he may by indulgence recover,  and that in-
dulgence, since his employers allow it him x,  he will be very
culpable if he denies himself.
I am,  dear Sir,

Your affectionate humble servant,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

Lichfield,  Sept.  29,  1784.

To Mr.  Ryland,  Merchant in London.

1017.

To THE RIGHT HON.  WILLIAM WINDHAM.
Lichfield,  October 2,  1784.     Published in the Life,  iv.  362.

1018.

To SIR JOSHUA REYNOLDS.
[Lichfield],  October 2,  1784.     Published in the Life,  iv.  368.

1019.

To MR.  PERKINS.
Lichfield,  October 4,  1784,     Published in the Life,  iv.  363.

1020.

To DR.  BROCKLESBY.
[Lichfield],  October 6,  1784.     Published in the Life,  iv.  358.

1021.

DEAR SIR,  To J°HN RYLAND*'

I am glad so many could yet meet at the club,  where I do
not yet despair of some cheerful hours.  Your account of poor
dear Payne makes me uneasy ;  if his distemper were only the
true Sea Scurvey,  it is incurred easily,  and I believe infallibly
curable.  But I am afraid it is worse,  not a vitiation of particular
humours,  but a debilitation of the whole frame,  an effect not of

1 Payne was Chief Accountant of original is in the possession of the
the Bank of England.     Life,  i.  317,  Historical Society of Pennsylvania,
n.  i.  as I learn from Mr.  John W.  Jordan

2 First published in the Literary the Assistant- Librarian.
Gazette of December 8,  1849.     The

casualty

Aetat.  75.]  To Dr.  Heberden.  423

casualty but of time.     I wish his recovery,  and hope that he
wishes and prays for mine.

I have for some days,  to speak in the lightest and softest
language,  made no advances towards health.  My breath is much
obstructed,  and my limbs are wells of water.  However I have
little cause to complain.

My mind,  however,  is calmer than in the beginning of the year,
and I comfort myself with hopes of every kind,  neither despairing
of ease in this world,  nor of happiness in another.

I shall,  I think,  not return to town worse than I left it,  and
unless I gain ground again,  not much better.  But God,  I humbly
hope,  will have mercy on me.

I am,  dear Sir,

Your most humble servant,

Lichfield,  Oct.  6,  1784.  SAM  :  JOHNSON.

To Mr.  Ryland,  Merchant in London.

1022.

TO DR.    HEBERDEN1.

Though I doubt not but Dr.  Brocklesby would communicate
to you any incident in the variation of my health which appeared
either curious or important,  yet I think it time to give you some
account of myself.

Not long after the first great efflux of the water,  I attained as
much vigour of limbs and freedom of breath,  that without rest or
intermission,  I went with Dr.  Brocklesby to the top of the painters'
Academy 2.  This was the greatest degree of health that I have
obtained,  and this,  if it could continue,  were perhaps sufficient ;
but my breath soon failed,  and my body grew weak.

At Oxford  (in June)  I was much distressed by shortness of
breath,  so much that I never attempted to scale the library3:  the
water gained upon me,  but by the use of squills was in a great
measure driven away.

In July I went to Lichfield,  and performed the journey with

1 I owe the copy of this Letter to Croker's Boswell,  page 789.

the kindness of Mr.  Godfrey Locker-  2 Ante,  ii.  393,

Lampson,of Rowfant,  Crawley,  where 3 The Bodleian Library,  the ascent

the original is preserved.  The greater to which is one of sixty-five steps,
part of it had been published in

424 To Dr.  Heberden.  [A.D.  i?84.

very little fatigue in the common vehicle,  but found no help from
my native air.  I then removed to Ashbourn,  in Derbyshire,
where for some time I was oppressed very heavily by the asthma  ;
and the dropsy had advanced so far,  that I could not without
great difficulty button me at my knees.  Something was now
to be done ;  I took opium as little as I could,  for quiet  [?]  and
squills,  as much as I could,  for help  ;  but in my medical journal z,
August 10,  I find these words,  nee opio,  nee squillis quidquam
sensi  [?]  effectum.  Animus jacet.  But I plied the vinegar of
squills to an hundred drops a day,  and the powder to 4 grains.
From the vinegar I am not sure that I ever perceived any con-
sequence. [Here follow statements of the effect produced by these
and other medicines.]  I rose in the morning with my asthma
perceptibly mitigated,  and walked to Church that day with less
struggle than on any day before.

The water about this time ran again away,  so that no hydro-
pical humour has been lately visible.  The relaxation of my
breath has not continued as it was at first.  But neither do I
breathe with the same angusticz and distress as before the re-
mission. The summary of my state is this  :

I am deprived by weakness and the asthma of the power of
walking beyond a very short space.

I draw my breath with difficulty upon the least effort,  but not
with suffocation or pain.

The dropsy still threatens,  but gives way to medicine.

The Summer has passed without giving me any strength.

My appetite is,  I think,  less keen than it was,  but not so abated
as that its decline can be observed by any one but myself2.

Be pleased to think on me sometimes.
I am,  Sir,

Your most obliged

and most humble servant,

Lichfield,  Oct.  13,  1784.  SAM:  JOHNSON.

1  '  Dr.  Johnson had for some time than the 8th of November  ;  finding,

kept a journal in Latin of the state of I suppose,  that it was a mournful and

his illness,  and the remedies which unavailing register.'    Life,  iv.  381.
he used,  under the title of  ^Egri 2 Dr.  Taylor thought he ate too

Ephemeris,  which he began on the much.     Post,  p.  425,  «.  3.
6th of July,  but continued it no longer

To

Aetat.  75.]  To Francesco Sastres.  425

1023.

To THE REVEREND GEORGE STRAHAN x.

In Messrs.  Puttick and Simpson's Auction Catalogue of August 20,
1 86 1,  Lot 625 is a Letter of Johnson to the Rev.  Mr.  Strahan at Islington,
one page and a half quarto,  from which the following extract is given : —

'Lichfield,  Oct.  19%  1784.

I have hitherto omitted to give you that account of myself which
the kindness with which you have treated me gives you a right to expect.

I went away feeble,  asthmatical,  and dropsical.  The asthma had
submitted  [?  remitted]  for a time,  but is now very troublesome,  the
weakness still continues,  but the dropsy has disappeared,  and has since,
in the summer,  yielded to medicine.  I hope to return with a body
somewhat,  however little,  relieved,  and with a mind less dejected.'

1024.

To THE RIGHT HON.  WILLIAM GERARD HAMILTON.
Lichfield,  October 20,  1784.     Published in the Life^  iv.  363.

1025.

To JOHN PARADISE.
Lichfield,  October 20,  1784.     Published in the Life^  iv.  364.

1026.

To JOHN NICHOLS.

Lichfield,  October 20,  1784.     Published in the Life^  iv.  369.

1027.

To FRANCESCO SASTRES 2.
SIR,  Lichfield,  October 20,  1784.

You have abundance of naughty tricks  ;  is this your way of
writing to a poor sick friend twice a week?  Post comes after
post,  and brings no letter from Mr.  Sastres.  If you know any
thing,  write and tell it ;  if you know nothing,  write and say that
you know nothing.

What comes of the specimen 3  ?  If the booksellers want a speci-
men, in which a keen critick can spy no faults,  they must wait for

1 In their Auction Catalogue of 420),  the date is given as Oct.  16.
March 22,    1869,   when the same z Piozzt Letters,  ii.  410.

Letter was a second time sold  (Lot 3 Ante,  ii.  415,  n.  2.

another

426

To the Reverend Dr.   Taylor.          [A.D.  rzs*.

another generation.  Had not the Crusca *  faults  ?  Did not the
Academicians of France commit many faults  ?  It is enough that
a dictionary is better than others of the same kind.  A perfect
performance of any kind is not to be expected,  and certainly not
a perfect dictionary 2.

Mrs.  Desmoulines never writes,  and I know not how things go
on at home ;  tell me,  dear Sir,  what you can.

If Mr.  Seward be in town tell me his direction,  for I ought to
write to him.

I am very weak,  and have bad nights.

I am,  dear Sir,

Your,  &c,

SAM:  JOHNSON.

1028.

To THE REVEREND DR.  TAYLOR 3.
DEAR SIR,

Coming down from a very restless night I found your letter
which made me a little angry.     You tell me that recovery is in

1 The Academia della Crusca at
Florence,  which had sent Johnson
their Vocabulario,  just as the French
Academy sent him their Dictionnaire.
Life,  i.  298.

2 In the Plan of an English Dic-
tionary,  Johnson,  writing of  'the
word perfection'  says: — 'Though in
its philosophical and exact sense it
can be of little use among human
beings,  it is often so much degraded
from its original signification,  that the
academicians have inserted in their
work,  the perfection of a language,
and,  with a little more licentiousness,
might have prevailed on themselves
to have added the perfection of a
Dictionary!     In the Preface to the
fourth edition he writes  : — '  He that
undertakes to compile a Dictionary
undertakes that,  which if it compre-
hends the full extent of his design,  he
knows himself unable to perform.'
Works,  v.  1 6,  52.

3 First published in the Catalogue

of Mr.  Alfred Morrison's Autographs,
volume ii,  page 343.  This letter is
endorsed by Dr.  Taylor :— *  This
is the last letter.  My answer,  which
were the words of advice he gave to
Mr.  Thrale the day he dyed,  he
resented extremely from me.'  The
substance of the advice which John-
son gave I found in the original MS.
of his Diary in Pembroke College
Library.  It is as follows  :  —  *  On
Sunday ist,  the physician warned
him against full meals,  on Monday I
pressed him to observance of his
rules,  but without effect,  and Tuesday
I was absent,  but his wife pressed
forbearance upon him again unsuc-
cessfully. At night I was called to
him,  and found him senseless in
strong convulsions.'  Mrs.  Piozzi had
heard of Taylor's letter,  for she
writes  :  —  '  Dr.  Johnson quarrelled
with his truest friend,  Dr.  Taylor,  for
recommending to him a degree of
temperance by which alone his life

my

Aetat.  75.]  To France sco Sastres.  427

my power.  This indeed I should be glad to hear,  if I could
once believe it.  But you mean to charge me with neglecting or
opposing my own health.  Tell me therefore what I do that
hurts me,  and what I neglect that would help me.  Tell it as
soon as you can  [Here a piece of the letter is torn off.]  I would
do it the sooner for your desires,  and I hope to do it now in no
long time,  but shall hardly do it here.  I hope soon to be at
London.  Answer the first part of this letter immediately.
I am,  dear Sir,

Your most humble servant,

Lichfield,  Oct.  23,  1784.  SAM :  JOHNSON.

To the Reverend Dr.  Taylor in Ashbourn,  Derbyshire.

1029.

To DR.  BROCKLESBY.
[Lichfield],  October 25,  1784.    Published in part in the Life,  iv.  358.

1030.

To DR.  BURNEY.
[Lichfield],  November i,  1784.    Published in part in the Life,  iv.  361.

1031.

To FRANCESCO SASTRES x.
DEAR SIR,  Lichfield,  Nov.  i,  1784.

I beg you to continue the frequency of your letters  ;  every
letter is a cordial ;  but you must not wonder that I do not
answer with exact punctuality.  You may always have something
to tell :  you live among the various orders of mankind,  and may
make a letter from the exploits,  sometimes of the philosopher,
and sometimes of the pickpocket 2.  You see some ballons succeed
and some miscarry,  and a thousand strange and a thousand foolish
things.  But I see nothing ;  I must make my letter from what I feel,
and what I feel with so little delight,  that I cannot love to talk of it.

could have been saved,  and recom-  ing of a balloon in St.  George's Fields
mending it in his own unaltered  '  a more ample harvest for the pick-
phrase too.'  Piozzi Letters,  ii.  381.  pockets never was presented.  Some

1 Piozzi Letters,  ii.  412.  noblemen and gentlemen lost their

2 The two orders sometimes met.  watches and many their purses.'
For instance,  this year at the launch-  Gentleman's Magazine,  1784,  p.  228.

I am

428 To John Ry land.  [A.D.  i?84.

I am certainly not T to come to town,  but do not omit to write  ;
for I know not when I shall come,  and the loss of a letter is not
much.  I am,  dear Sir,

Your,  &c.,

SAM  :  JOHNSON.

1032.

To JOHN RvLAND2.

DEAR SIR,

I have just received a letter in which you tell me that you
love to hear from me,  and I value such a declaration too much
to neglect it.  To have a friend,  and a friend like you,  may be
numbered amongst the first felicities of life ;  at a time when
weakness either of body or mind loses the pride and the con-
fidence of self-sufficiency,  and looks round for that help which
perhaps human kindness cannot give,  and which we yet are
willing to expect from one another.

I am at this time very much dejected.  The water gains fast
upon me,  but it has invaded me twice in this last half year,  and
has been twice expelled :  it will,  I hope,  give way to the same
remedies.

My Breath is tolerably easy,  and since the remission of asthma
about two months ago,  have  \sic\  never been so strait and so
much obstructed as it once was.

I took this day a very uncommon dose of squills,  but hitherto
without effect,  but I will continue their use very diligently.  Let
me have your prayers.

I am now preparing myself for my return,  and do not despair
of some more monthly meetings 3.  To hear that dear Payne is
better gives me great delight.

1 Not is either a misprint or was  '  The town is my element ;  there are
inserted by mistake.  my friends,  there are my books,  to

2 First published in the Catalogue which I have not yet bid farewell,
of Mr.  Alfred Morrison's Autographs,  and there are my amusements.'  Life,
volume ii,  page 344.  iv.  358.      '  The town is my element '

The handwriting shows great is perhaps an adaptation of    '  his

feebleness in the writer.  shop is his element '    in South's

3 Of the old Ivy Lane Club.  Ante,  Sermons,  ed.  1823,  i.  20.
ii.  358.     On October 25 he wrote  : —

I saw

Aetat.  75.]  To Sir John Hawkins.  429

I saw the draught of the stone.  I am 'afraid the date is wrong.
I think it should be 52  *.  We will have it rectified.  You say
nothing of the cash but that you have paid it.  My intention
was the  \sic\  Mr.  Payne should have put into your hands fifteen
pounds which he received for me at Midsummer2.  If he has not
done it,  I will order you the money which is in his hands.

Shall I ever be able to bear the sight of this stone  ?  In your
company I hope I shall.  You will not wonder that I write no
more.  God bless you for Christ's sake.

I am,  dear Sir,

Your most humble servant,
Lichfield,  Nov.  4,  1784.  SAM  :  JOHNSON.

1033.

To JAMES BOSWELL.
Lichfield,  November 5,  1784.     Published in the Life,  iv.  380.

1034.

To SIR JOHN HAWKINS 3.

Lichfield,  November 7,  1784.

I am relapsing into the dropsy very fast,  and shall make such
haste to town that it will be useless to write to me  ;  but when I
come,  let me have the benefit of your advice,  and the consolation

of your company.

1035.

To MRS.  ASTON AND MRS.  GASTRELL4.

[Lichfield,  ?  November,  1784.]
Mr.  Johnson sends his compliments to the Ladies at Stowhill,

1 The gravestone on his wife.     He says that Johnson wrote to him
had given the wrong date in his several letters from Lichfield.      Of
Letter to Mr.    Bagshaw.       Ante,  the last of these the above is the con-
ii.  410,  n.  I.  eluding paragraph.

2 No doubt the half-year's dividend 4 From the original in Pembroke
on  '  the one thousand pounds,  three College Library.

percent,  annuities in the public funds'  On the back of the Letter is the

mentioned in Johnson's will.     Life,  following note : — '  Probably written

iv.  402,  n.  2.     Mr.  Payne was the in 1784 on his departure from Lich-

Chief Accountant of the Bank of field.'

England.  Johnson on his way to London

3 First published in Hawkins's passed through Birmingham and
Life of Johnson,  page 576.     Hawkins Oxford,  making a brief stay at both

of

430 To the Reverend Dr.  Vyse.  [A.D.  i?84.

of whom he would have taken a more formal leave,  but that he
was willing to spare a ceremony,  which he hopes would have
been no pleasure to them,  and would have been painful to him-
self.

1036.

To DR.  BURNEY.
London,  November 16,  1784.     Published in the Life,  iv.  377.

1037.

To EDMUND HECTOR.
London,  November 17,  1784.     Published in the Life,  iv.  378.

1038.

[?  November,  1784.]

In Messrs.  Puttick and Simpson's Auction Catalogue of March 14,
1866,  Lot 181 is a Letter of Johnson  *  ordering a parcel of books to be
sent to Dr.  Adams,  written after his return from a visit to the doctor
(the last he paid),  1784.'  The last visit paid by Dr.  Johnson to Dr.
Adams was towards the middle of November,  1784.  It is not unlikely
however that this letter was written after his previous visit,  and should
follow the Letter of July n,  ante,  p.  410.

1039.

SIR          ^°  THE REVEREND DR.  VYSE  ',  in Lambeth.

I am desirous to know whether Charles Scrimshaw,  of

places.     William Hutton,  the book-  courage ;  said that he could protect

seller and antiquary,  not three weeks a coach when others could not  ;  had

later took the same road from Bir-  saved his own when another was

mingham to London.     He started at robbed  ;  had often driven the rogues

seven o'clock on the night of the to a distance,  now and then sent one

first of December,  and reached his to the shades.'     Hutton's/vurney to

journey's end at two in the afternoon London,  ed.  1818,  p.  6.     If Johnson

of the following day.     He was drawn,  went by the same coach to London

he says,  by thirty-six horses,  so that all this talk was no doubt poured

there must have been nine changes in into the ears of black Frank as he sat

the 120 miles.      He was the only outside.

passenger,  and as the cold was very  '  First published in Malone's Bos-

severe the guard asked permission to well.

ride inside.     '  He was armed with a Malone states  : — '  In conformity to

brace of pistols and a blunderbuss,  the wish expressed in the preceding

and he dwelt largely on his own letter,  an inquiry was made ;  but no

Woodsease

Aetat.  75.]

To John Nichols.

Woodsease  (I think),  in your father's'  neighbourhood,  be now
living ;  what is his condition and where he may be found.  If
you can conveniently make any inquiry about him,  and can do
it without delay,  it will be an act of great kindness to me,  he being
very nearly related to me.  I beg  [you]  to pardon this trouble.

I am,  Sir,

Your most humble servant,
Bolt-court,  Fleet-street,  Nov.  29,  1784.  SAM  :  JOHNSON.

1040.

To RICHARD GREEN.
[London],  December 2,  1784.     Published in the Life,  iv.  393.

1041.

To MRS.  PORTER.
[London],  December 2,  1784.    Published in the Life,  iv.  394.

1042.

To JOHN NICHOLS z.
The late learned Mr.  Swinton2,  having one day remarked

descendants of Charles Scrimshaw or
of his sisters were discovered to be
living.  Dr.  Vyse informs me,  that
Dr.  Johnson told him,  "  he was dis-
appointed in the inquiries he had
made after his relations."  There is
therefore no ground whatsoever for
supposing that he was unmindful of
them,  or neglected them.'

Hawkins says that Johnson had
executed a will so far as to secure an
annuity for his servant,  Frank Barber.
'  I found,'  writes Hawkins,  '  that the
residue of his estate would be some-
thing considerable,  and I told him
that he would do well to bequeath it
to his relations.  His answer was,
"I care not what becomes of the
residue." '  Hawkins's Johnson,  p.
576.  See also ib.,  p.  599.

1 First published in Malone's Bos-
well.

In the Register of Books in the
Gentlemaris Magazine tor July,  1740,

p.  360,  is  '  An Universal History from
the earlier Account of Time to the
present.  In five volumes in folio.
Price  £\v los.  6</.'  In the Register
of Books for March,  1749,  p.  144,  is
'  Universal History in 8vo.,  vol.  20,
and last.  Price  $s.  in boards/

Gibbon,  writing of his youth,
says  : — '  My indiscriminate appetite
[in reading]  subsided by degrees in
the historic line  ;  and since philo-
sophy has exploded all innate ideas
and natural propensities,  I must
ascribe this choice to the assiduous
perusal of the Universal History
as the octavo volumes successively
appeared.  This unequal work,  and
a treatise of Hearne,  the Ductor
historicus,  referred and introduced
me to the Greek and Roman histo-
rians, to as many at least as were
accessible to an English reader.'  Gib-
bon's Misc.  Works,  i.  41.

2 Thomas Warton in his account

that

432 To John Nichols.  [A.D.  1734.

that one man,  meaning,  I suppose,  no man but himself,  could
assign all the parts of the Ancient Universal History to their
proper authors,  at the request of Sir Robert Chambers,  or of
myself,  gave the account which I now transmit to you in his
own hand  ;  being willing that of so great a work the history
should be known,  and that each writer should receive his due
proportion of praise from posterity.

I recommend to you to preserve this scrap of literary intelli-
gence in Mr.  Swinton's own hand,  or to deposit it in the Museum,
that the veracity of this account may never be doubted.

I am,  Sir,

Your most humble servant,

Dec.  6,  1784.  SAM  :  JOHNSON.

MR.  S N.

The History of the Carthaginians.  Numidians.  Mauritanians.
Gsetulians.  Garamanthes.  Melano Gaetulians.  Nigritae.  Cyrenaica.
Marmarica.  Regio Syrtica.  Turks,  Tartars,  and Moguls.  Indians.
Chinese.

Dissertation on the peopling of America.

-  independency of the Arabs I.

The Cosmogony,  and a small part of the History immediately fol-
lowing ;  by Mr.  Sale 2.

To the birth of Abraham  ;  chiefly by Mr.  Shelvock.

of Johnson's visit to Oxford in 1754 offering an apology for Mr.  Swinton,
says  : — '  About this time there had gravely remarked,  that he had prob-
been an execution of two or three ably preached the same sermon
criminals at Oxford on a Monday,  before the University:  "Yes,  Sir,
Soon afterwards,  one day at dinner,  (says Johnson)  but the University
I was saying that Mr.  Swinton the were not to be hanged the next morn-
chaplain of the gaol,  and also a fre-  ing." '  Life,  i.  273.  John Swinton
quent preacher before the University,  died in 1777,  and is buried in
a learned man,  but often thoughtless the chapel of Wadham College,
and absent,  preached the condemna-  Chalmers's Biog.  Diet.,  xxix.  70.
tion-sermon on repentance,  before x  'A nameless doctor  (Universal
the convicts,  on the preceding day,  History,  vol.  xx,  octavo edition)  has
Sunday  ;  and that in the close he formally demonstrated the truth of
told his audience,  that he should give Christianity by the independence of
them the remainder of what he had to the Arabs.3 Decline and Fall of
say on the subject,  the next Lord's the Roman Empire,  ed.  1807,  ix.
Day.  Upon which,  one of our com-  202,  n.  21.

pany,  a Doctor of Divinity,  and a 2 George Sale,  the translator of the

plain matter-of-fact man,  by way of Koran.

History

Aetat.  75.]  To Mrs.  Strahan.

433

History of the Jews,  Gauls,  and Spaniards  ;  by Mr.  Psalmanazar T,
Xenophon's Retreat ;  by the same.

History of the Persians and the Constantinopolitan Empire ;  by Dr.
Campbell.

History of the Romans ;  by Mr.  Bower.

1043.

(Two undated Letters?)

To MRS.  STRAHAN.

In Messrs.  Sotheby and Co.'s Auction Catalogue of August 21,  1872,
Lot 113 is a Letter of Johnson to Mrs.  Strahan.  'Sept.  20.  Postponing
an invitation,  "  I had forgotten that I had myself invited a friend to
dine with."  &c.'

To .

In the Catalogue of the same firm of May 10,  1875,  Lot 104 is a
Letter of Johnson,  'one page quarto,  dated Nov.  29,  respecting a proof
sheet in which he wished to alter one word only.'  It was sold for
g*Ss.

Bolt Court,  December 13,  1784.

In Messrs.  Puttick and Simpson's Auction Catalogue of July 8,  1859,
Lot 225 is  'an autograph of Johnson to a receipt for  £75,  being one
quarter's pension,  Dec.  13,  1784.'  If the date is correctly given we
have here in all likelihood the last words written by Johnson,  for about
seven o'clock in the evening of that day he died.

'  He died,'  writes J.  T.  Smith,  *  in the back-room of the first floor of
his house in Bolt Court,  of which room I made a drawing,  just before
Mr.  Bensley the printer pulled that part of the house down,  to make
way for a staircase.  There is not a vestige of the original house now
remaining.'  Nollekens and his Times,  ed.  1828,  i.  132.

In Murray's Johnsoniana,  ed.  1836,  p.  82,  is a print from a sketch by
Smith of '  Dr.  Johnson's sitting-room in Bolt Court.'  It is possible that
in his last illness his bed was moved into this room.

William Hutton,  who left London for Birmingham on the night of
December 12,  describes how  'our bill of lading being completed we
began to roll over one-hundred-and-twenty miles of snow without any
noise but that of the wheels2.'  As the coach went silently on through a
wintry world Johnson's spirit passed away.

Among the manuscripts of the British Museum are the following
documents relating to the funeral : —

1 See Life,  iii.  443.

2 W.  Button's Journey to London,  ed.  1818,  p.  133.

VOL.  II.  F f Sir

434

Documents relating

[A.D.  1784.

I.

'  Sir, — The Executors of the late Dr.  Samuel Johnson request the
favor of your attendance on Monday next,  the 2oth of December inst,
at 10 o'clock in the forenoon,  at the Doctor's late Dwelling-house in Bolt
Court,  Fleet Street,  to accompany the corpse from thence to West-
minster Abbey.

1 8th December,  1784*.'

II.

List of those present at the Funeral"2 : —

Dr.  Burney.

Sir J.  Hawkins.

Sir J.  Reynolds.

Dr.  Scott.         i.

Sir J.  Banks.

Colman.

Dr.  Broklesbury  [Brocklesby.]

Hoole.         ii.

Nicholls.  [Nichols.]

Seward.

Frank  [Francis Barber.]

Lowe.         iii.

Du Moulins  [Desmoulins.]

Burke.

Burke,  jr.

Wyndham.         iv.  [Windham.]

Holder.

Cooke.

G.  Strahan.

Rev.  Mr.  Butt.         v.

Paradise.

Langton.

Steevens.

vn.

vni.

Sastres.         vi.
Dr.  Wright.
Ryland.
Malone.
Dr.  Farmer.
Gen.  Paoli.
Horsley.
Count Zenobia.
Sir Charles Bunbury.
Cruickshank USruikshank],
Medcalf  [Metcalfe.]
Dr.  Butter.         ix.
Mr.  Nicol.
Rev.  S.  Hoole.
Mr.  Mickle.

C.  B.  [?  Charles Burney.]         xi.
Mr.  Henderson.
Rev.  Mr.  East.
Rev.  Mr.  Shanvelle.  [?]
Mr.  Sharp.         xii.
Fifteen Gentlemen.
Coaches   [?   Fifteen Gentlemen's
coaches.]

Pall Bearers : —

Sir J.  Banks.
Sir C.  Bunbury.
E.  Burke.

W.  Wyndham  [Windham.]

Langton.

G.  Colman.

1 Nichols MSS.      The card no
doubt was the one sent to John

Nichols,  the editor of the Gentleman's
Magazine.        2 Add.  MSS.  33,498.
Extract

Aetat.  75.]  to Dr.  Johnson s Funeral.  435

'  Extract from St.  James'  Chronicle the day after Johnson's funeral1 : —

"  The Procession consisted of a Hearse and six,  with the corpse and

twelve mourning coaches and four.     It set out from Bolt Court a few

minutes after twelve o'clock,  followed by several gentlemen's carriages.

At one o'clock the corpse arrived at the Abbey.'"

Among all the mourners there was only one man of hereditary title —
Sir Charles Bunbury.  '  The great lords and great ladies who did not
love to have their mouths stopped2'  neglected him to the last.  Far
different had been the scene at Garrick's funeral.

'  Through weeping London's crowded streets,

As Garrick's funeral passed,
Contending wits and nobles strove,

Who should forsake him last V

But he who was followed to his last resting-place by Reynolds and
Burke did not go unhonoured to his grave.

1 Add.  MSS.  33,498.  2 Life,  iv.  116.

3 Bishop George Home's Essays and Thoughts^  ed.  1808,  p.  283.

F f 2

APPENDIX A.

(Page 179.)

To the kindness of Sir E.  H.  Bunbury,  of Barton Hall,  Bury St.
Edmunds,  I owe the following copy of a document in his possession
endorsed by Sir H.  E.  Bunbury who died in 1860  : —

'  Autograph of Dr.  Samuel Johnson.  Draft of a Petition sketched at
the desire of my Grandmother for a poor woman at Plymouth.'

To THE KINGS most EXCELLENT MAJESTY the HUMBLE PETITION
of HUNT.

Your Majestys Petitioner begs leave with all humility to inform you that
she is the Widow of Edward Hunt of your Majestys yard Plymouth who
died nineteen years ago,  and left her with eight young children whom she
has maintained and educated.

That being now advanced in years,  she has been for some time supported
by her son Joseph Hunt late Captain of your Majestys ship Unicorn.

That her son was killed January the eighth in an Engagement with the
Vestal a noted Frigate of superior force,  which he live  \sic\  to take and then
expired,  leaving his Mother without any provision for her declining years.

She therefore humbly applies herself to the known goodness of your
Majesty,  hoping for such relief of her distress as to your Majesty shall seem
proper.

APPENDIX B.

(Page 261.)

Dr.  William Hunter died on March 30 of the following year.  Bos-
well writing of that day says  : —

*  I found him at home in the evening,  and had the pleasure to meet with
Dr.  Brocklesby,  whose reading,  and knowledge of life,  and good spirits,
supply him with a never-failing source of conversation.  He mentioned
a respectable gentleman,  who became extremely penurious near the close of
his life.  Johnson said there must have been a degree of madness about him.
"  Not at all,  Sir,  (said Dr.  Brocklesby,)  his judgement was entire."  Unluckily,

however,

Appendix B.  437

however,  he mentioned that although he had a fortune of twenty-seven
thousand pounds,  he denied himself many comforts,  from an apprehension
that he could not afford them.  "  Nay,  Sir,  (cried Johnson,)  when the judge-
ment is so disturbed that a man cannot count,  that is pretty well." '  Life,
iv.  176.

The following curious manuscript note in my possession,  which is,
no doubt,  Dr.  Brocklesby's record of the conversation of this evening,
shows that the respectable but penurious gentleman was the famous
physician,  William Hunter.

'At Dr.  Johnson's,  with J.  Boswell,  Esq.,  3oth March,  1783,  when Dr.
Hunter dyed.

'  S.  J.  born in 1709,  his mother in 1665 the daughter of a little Warwick-
shire Gent.  [?]  the oldest people in her childhood had seldom learnt to read*.
— Dr.  Hunter fell a sacrifice to his last Lecture— spent  ,£100,000 on his
Collection,  nothing on Himself — advised by S.  J.  to leave it to Glasgow where
he was born and bred — proposed to have built his Anatomy of an Elephant
in the Centre of his Museum which would have fixed the place unalterably.
— Opiate never destructive of S.  J's.  Readiness in Conversation this very
circumstance I have observed — ought to beware from Hunter's Death of
trifling with his Gout as that Author's  [?]  ended by pertinaciously giving his
last Lecture in a paroxysm of that Disease.

'  S.  J.  maintained against Boswell that knowledge should be universally
taught,  because no man was sorry that he had acquired knowledge,  or wished
to unbare  [?]  the Genius given Him and the Ground must be always tilled,
and the Conveniencies of Life be manufactured,  but it was not fair to restrict
any Sett of Men to tilling the Ground and making Clothes  &c. — Genius
should have a fair Chance whenever it was born — it was not born Every Day
— yet Solomon says  "he that encreaseth Knowledge encreaseth Sorrow,"
and Johnson has put many Syllables of Sadness together in a like strain
formerly.

*  'Only 3 or 4 public Schools before Ed.  6 and Eliz. — no free Schools royally
endowed or chartered afterwards  — Only I Bp.  of Westminster and he spent the
Revenues — Fakenham,  Abbot of Westmr appointed afterwards by Q.  Mary preached
her funeral Sermon arid sat in the first parls.  of Elizabeth — another preacher of Mary's
funeral Sermon comforted his audience on the virtues of her Successor by observing
that  "  a living dog was better than a dead Lion."  '

Dr.  Brocklesby met Lord Mansfield one night at supper.  '  They inter-
changed some stories a little trenching on decorum.  It so happened that
the Doctor had to appear next morning before Lord Mansfield in the witness
box  ;  when,  on the strength of last night's doings,  the witness nodded with
offensive familiarity to the Chief Justice as to a boon companion.  His Lord-
ship, taking no notice of his salutation,  but writing down his evidence,  when
he came to summing it up to the jury,  thus proceeded  : — "  The next witness
is one Rocklesby or Brocklesby,  Brocklesby or Rocklesby,— I am not sure
which, — and first,  he swears that he is a Physician.'"  Campbell's Lives of
the Chief Justices^  ed.  1849,  "•  57°-

APPENDIX

438 Appendix C.

APPENDIX C

(Page 413.)

The following anecdotes I owe to the kindness of Mr.  Falconer
Madan,  Fellow of Erasenose College and Sub-Librarian of the Bodleian,
who found them in Dr.  Philip Bliss's manuscript note book preserved
in that Library  ;  Vol.  X,  MS.  Eng.  Misc.  e.  8.  p.  4.

*  Anecdotes of Samuel Johnson never published.

*  When engaged on some literary research the Dr.  was very anxious to
procure some information relative to one of the fathers,  and failing himself,
commissioned his friend Nicol,  the King's bookseller,  to continue the enquiry,
and if possible provide him with the account of which he stood in need.
Meeting George Nicol shortly after in a party at dinner,  where was some
man of Pembroke  (his own college)  no great favourite with Johnson,  the Dr.
cried out,  "  Well,  Sir,"  to Nicol,  "  and what success have you had in your
searches after Petrus de Maximis?"     "None,  Dr.,"  said Nicol,  "I have
hunted high and low,  looked in every book I can find,  and can make nothing
of it."     "  Petrus Maximus  !  "  said the Pembroke divine,  "  I never heard of
him before."   "  I dare say not,  Sir,"  said Johnson with his accustomed rough-
ness ;  "  his name is not on your college buttery book."  '

Mr.  G.  K.  Fortescue,  the Superintendent of the Reading Room of
the British Museum,  in reply to my inquiry about Petrus de Maximis
has sent me the following note  :—

*  The only person I can find in the whole range of literature named Peter
de Maximis  (I suppose the name really is Pietro dei Massimi;  a great Roman
family)  is one of two brothers De Maximis,  who gave a home to the printers
Sweynheym and Pannartz in Rome in 1467.'

Mr.  Fortescue sends me an extract from Panzer's Annales Typog.,
Norimb.,  1794,  ii.  413,  in which are given the following verses in an
edition of Strabo printed in 1469  :  —

'Aspicis illustris lector quicunque libellos

Si cupis artificum nomina nosse  :   lege  &c.
Conrardus suueynheym  :   Arnoldus pannartzque magistri

Rome impresserunt talia multa simul.
Petrus cum fratre Francisco maximus ambo
Huic operi aptatam contribuere domum.'

Johnson

Appendix D.  439

II.

'Johnson was famous for an assertion that no man ever laboured for
labour's sake,  but that all,  whatever were their pursuits,  followed them from
motives of interest,  however they might disguise the real end from themselves
or others.  Sir Joshua Reynolds knowing that this was a favourite subject,
and much wishing to draw the Dr.  out before a large party of ladies,  com-
menced his address to him with  : — "  Well,  Dr.,  I have been the whole day
engaged on a picture which has delighted me  ;  I never laboured so long with
so great and unmingled pleasure."  "  I beg your pardon,  Sir,"  retorted
Johnson  ;  "  your pleasure was not derived from your labour,  but from
the reward you expect to derive from it.  It was your interest made you
pleased with your occupation," — and a great deal more to the same effect,
completely falling into Sir Joshua's scheme,  and amusing the whole company
with his declamation.  At last turning to the ladies he expressed himself
fearful they must have been tired by so long a discourse on so dry a subject,
but added he,  "  Ladies,  I can at once illustrate all I have been saying to Sir
Joshua,  and render my meaning perfectly intelligible to you,  by remarking
that when Leander swam the Hellespont he did not do so from a love of
swimming." '

For labouring for labour's sake,  see the Life,  ii.  98 ;  iii.  19  ;  iv.  219.  South
had said : — '  Men do not, use to run,  only that they may run,  but that they
may obtain  ;  labour itself being certainly one of the worst rewards ot
a man's pains.' — SOUTH'S Sermons,  ed.  1823,  iii.  137.  Burke,  in his Essay
on the Sublime and Beautiful ",  part iv.  sect.  6,  maintains that  'Providence has
so ordered it that a state of rest and inaction,  however it may flatter our
indolence,  should be productive of many inconveniencies  ;  that it should
generate such disorders as may force us to have recourse to some labour,  as
a thing absolutely requisite to make us pass our lives with tolerable satisfac-
tion.' In the next section he describes  '  common labour '  as  '  a mode of
pain.'

APPENDIX D.

(Page 420.)

From the Diary of the Right Hon.  William Windham  (p.  17)  I have
selected the following notes among those which he made of Dr.  Johnson's
conversation at Ashbourne at the end of August 1 784.

The principle of all amusements is to beguile time and fill the interval
between active thought and perfect vacuity.

The

440 Appendix D.

The source of every thing,  in or out of nature,  that can serve the pur-
pose of poetry,  is to be found in Homer ; — every species of distress,  every
modification of heroic character,  battles,  storms,  ghosts,  incantations,  &c.
Dr.  Johnson said he had never read through the Odyssey completely in the
original.

Anecdote of his first declamation at College  ;  that having neglected
to write it till the morning of his being to repeat it,  and having only one copy,
he got part of it by heart,  while he was walking into the Hall,  and the rest he
supplied as well as he could extempore.

Description of himself as very idle and neglectful of his studies.

His opinion,  that I could not name above five of my college acquaintances
who read Latin with sufficient ease to make it pleasurable  ;  the difficulty of
the language overpowers the desire to read the author ;  that he read Latin
with as much ease when he went to college as at present.  Attention to the
language overpowers the regard to the matter ;  rather not know the contents
than dig them out of Latin.

That a year or two elapsed between his quitting school and going to
College.

Commended Ovid's description of the death of Hercules  —  doubted
whether Virgil would not have loaded the description with too many fine
words  ;  that Virgil would sometimes dare verba.

Opinion that there were three ways in which writing may be unnatural ;  by
being bombastic and above nature,  affected and beside it,  fringing every event
with ornaments which nature did not afford,  or weak and below nature.  That
neither of the first would please long.  That the third might indeed please a
good while,  or at least many  ;  because imbecility,  and consequently a love of
imbecility,  might be found in many.

Baretti had told him of some Italian author,  who said that a good work
must be that with which the vulgar were pleased,  and of which the learned
could tell why it pleased — that it must be able to employ the learned,  and
detain the idle.  Chevy Chase pleased the vulgar,  but did not satisfy the
learned  ;  it did not fill a mind capable of thinking strongly.  The merit of
Shakspeare was such as the ignorant could take in,  and the learned add
nothing to.

Tepyrojuei/os re voov 6 irXeiora ei§o>?  x — the offer of the Syren to Ulysses.
Any man will preserve his respect who can promise this to another ;  applied
to a college tutor.

Vast change of the Latin language from the time of Lucretius to Virgil ;
greater than known in any other,  even the French.

Suspicion that the old grammarians have given us from an analogy more
modifications of tenses than were ever used.  Remember but one instance of
second future,  viz.  eupco in Josephus  ;  and three of the optative,  if I recollect,
of the preterite and middle,  one of them in Hesiod.

Great advantage of a University,  that a person lives in a place where his
reputation depends on his learning.

Argument about that feel which persons on great heights suppose them-
selves to have of a wish to throw themselves down.

1  'AAA*  076 rfpifsaftcvos veirai  «ai irXeiova flSus. — Odyssey,  XII.  iS8.

The

Appendix D.  441

The idea of delitescence one of those that please the mind in a hilly
country.  Torpescence,  much of the faculties of the mind lost in them.

Qui stupet in statuis  \  applied to Joseph Warton's admiration of fine
passages.  His taste is amazement2.

The pretensions of the English to the reputation of writing Latin founded
not so much on the specimens in that way which they have produced,  as on
the quantity of talent diffused through the country.

Erasmus appears to be totally ignorant of science and natural knowledge.
But one Italian writer is mentioned in Erasmus.

Opinion about the effect of turnpike roads.  Every place communicating
with every other.  Before,  there were cheap places and dear places.  Now
all refuges destroyed for elegant or genteel poverty.  Want of such a last
hope to support men in their struggle through life,  however seldom it might
be resorted to.  Disunion of families by furnishing a market to each man's
abilities,  and destroying the dependence of one man on another.

September  \st. — Left Ashbourne at half-past one,  having gone with Dr.
Johnson,  in the morning,  to prayers.  Regretted,  upon reflection,  that I had
not staid another day.

1    '  Qui stupet in titulis et imaginibus.'  Mr.    Croker prints    '  Qui stupet,   in

'  And rapt,  with awe-struck admira-  Statins.''

tion gaze,  2 In the text amusement.     I have fol-

When the long race its images dis-  lowed Mr.  Croker's rending,
plays.'  FRANCIS.  HoR.^.vi.  17.

INDEX.

A.

ABBESS,  Mrs.,  ii.  158.
ABERBROTHICK,  i.  232.
ABERDEEN,  i.  233,  301 n.
ABERSHAW,  Louis Jeremiah,  ii.  30 n.
ABINGTON,  Mrs.,  i.  316.
ACCOMMODATION,  i.  264  «. ;  ii.  367  «.,

394-

ADAIR,  James,  i.  321.

ADAM,  the brothers,  i.  8 n.

ADAMS,  Rev.  William,  D.D.,  ii.  39,  227,
258-9,  400,  430  ;  Johnson's letters,  i.
402 ;  ii.  409.

ADAMS,  Miss,  ii.  259 n.,  260,  410.

ADDENBROKE,  Dean,  i.  185,  301 n.

ADDISON,  Joseph,  Life,  ii.  132,  138  ;  in-
fluence of the Spectator,  ii.  352 n.  •
quoted,  i.  175,  207  ».,  273 n.,  277 n.,
403 n. ;  ii.  149,  321  ».,  329,  352 n.

ADEY,  Mrs.,  i.  139;  ii.  17,  87.

ADEY,  Miss,  i.  331 ;  ii.  382.

Adventurer,  i.  36.

ADVICE,  ii.  162.

Agnes,  playing,  ii.  51.

AIR,  new kinds of,  ii.  333,  342,  362.

Airy,  ii.  116 n.,  361 n.

AKENSIDE,  Mark,  M.D.,ii.  21,  198.

AKERMAN,  — ,  ii.  173 n.

ALBEMARLE,  Lady,  ii.  173 n.

ALE,  price of,  i.  194.

ALLEN,  Edmund,  i.  73 n.,  75 n.,  121  ;  ii.
61,  226,  301,  332,  392,  395,  417-9;
Johnson's letter,  ii.  239.

ALLEN,  Mrs.,  ii.  295,  309.

ALMANACS,  ii.  76 n.

ALNWICK,  i.  228.

ALTHORPE,  Viscount,  ii.  in n.

AMERICA,  Conciliatory Propositions,  i.
311 n. ;  fierceness,!.  318;  Johnson's
violence,  i.  360 ;  lost to England,  ii.
375;  'shining talents'  on the side of
the Colonies,  i.  390 n. ;  war — Cop's

Hill,  i.  161 n. ;  Bunker's Hill,  i.  318 n. ;
332 n.,  360 n.  ;  Lexington,  i.  325 n. ;
country to be wasted,  i.  360  ;  expenses,
i.  386 n. ;  effects of war,  see under
ENGLAND;  Wesley's Calm Address,
i-  373-

AMUSEMENTS,  ii.  25 n.,  439.

Amusing,  i.  283 n.

ANDREWS,  Dr.  Francis,  i.  123.

ANOCH,  i.  243,  246.

ANSPACH,  Margrave of,  ii.  143 n.

APPERLEY,  — ,  Johnson's letter,  i.  135.

APPETITE,  ii.  391.

APPROBATION,  ii.  369.

Archaeological Dictionary,  ii.  224.

ARCHBISHOP of St.  Andrews,  ii.  408.

ARCHBISHOP of York,  i.  138 n.,  313,
327.  See also under MARKHAM,  Dr.
William.

ARGYLE,  John,  fifth Duke of,  i.  284-5 ;
ii.  40,  176.

ARISTOTLE,  quoted,  ii.  67.

ARITHMETIC,  ii.  321,  361.

ARKWRIGHT,  Sir Richard,  i.  6 n.

ASCHAM,  Roger,  i.  225.

ASHE,  Miss,  i.  211 n.

ASPASIA,  ii.  390 n.

ASTON,  Elizabeth,  house,  i.  160 n. ;  Lives
of the Poets partly written in it,  ii.  46
n.-,  ill,  ii.  20,  26,  49,  54,  60,  97,  229,
23!-3;  Johnson's letters,  i.  131,  155,
368;  ii.  2,  3,  30,  58,  82,  85,  90,  114,
119,  247-8,  382,429;  — regard for her,
ii.  17,  227;  mentioned,  i.  173,  201,  310,
329,  335,  38i 5  "•  93,  185,  240,  314.

ASTON,  Sir Thomas,  Bart,  i.  16 n.

ASTON,  — ,  i.  16,  29.

At the close,  ii.  374.

Atlantic,  i.  146 n.

Attend,  i.  404  «.

AUCHINLECK,  Lord,  i.  244  «.,  292  «.,  320
n. ;  ii.  271.

AUCHINLECK PLACE,  i.  287,  292.

444

Index to

Austin,  Mary Ann Beauclerk,  Topham.

AUSTIN,  Mary Ann,  ii.  334  ».
AUTHORS,   attacks on them,   i.  315  ;  ii.

148  ;  early pieces,  ii.  7  ;  schemes,  i.  74 ;

sought Johnson's aid,  ii.  313 n, ;  third

nights,  ii.  252.
AYLESBURY,  Lady,  ii.  166 n.

B.

BACON,   Francis,  quoted,  i.  252 n. ;  ii.

115 n->  331  «•
BAGOT,  Sir Walter,  i.  137.
BAGSHAW,  Rev.  Mr.,  ii.  411.
BAILLET,  Adrien,  i.  146.
BAILLIE,  Dr.,  ii.  339 n.
BAINES,  Edward,  i.  6 n.
BAKER,  Thomas,  ii.  13.
BALLARD,  — ,  i.  40.  ^

BALLOONS,  ii.  333,  342,  347-8,  354  ».,

365,  372,  419,  427.
BANKS,  Sir Joseph,  i.  233,  293  ;  ii.  36.;  «.,

434-

Bantling,  i.  178 n.

BARBAULD,  Mrs.,  ii.  109  «.,  354 n.

BARBER,  Francis,  service with Johnson,
i.  66 n. ;  wants to read Evelina,  ii.  77  ;
child born to him,  239  ;  Johnson's
letter,  331 ;  —  funeral,  434;  mentioned,
i.  99,  173;  ii.  i,  28,  30,  227,  249  ».,
3810.

BARBER,  Mrs.,  ii.  239.

BARCLAYS,  Quakers and brewers,  ii.
216 n.,  222.

BARDSEY ISLAND,  i.  290.

BARETTI,  Joseph,  blessings of being rich,
ii.  164 n. ;  Boswell described,  i.  317 n. ;
ii.  39 n. ;  Bruce the traveller,  i.  313 n. ;
Carmen Seculare,  ii.  80,  87  ;  described,
i.  351 n. ;  Footeana,  ii.  55 n. ;  Gordon
riots,  ii.  169 n.  ;  Introduction to Lan-
guages, i.  324 n. ;  Italian local histories,
i.  145 n. ;  Italian author quoted,  ii.
440  ;  Johnson's bigotry,  ii.  167 n. ;  —
dinner-table,  ii.  125 n.  ;  —  French,  i.
324 n. ;  ii.  179  «. ;  —  as an Inquisitor,
i.  319  «. ;  —  introduced to the Cot-
terells,  i.  44 n.  ;  —  mention of him in
the Letters,  i.  350,  354-5  ;  —  musings,
i-  359  «•>  388 n. ;  ii.  32  ». ;  —  pay-
ments, i.  79 n. ;  —  '  true-born English-
man/ i.  238 n. ;  Journey,  i.  165  ;  ii.
329  «. ;  Piozzi attacked,  ii.  34  «.,

239 n.  ;  '  plague and darling,'  i.  326  ;
quits Streatham,  i.  403 n. ;  Rasselas,  i.
324 n. ;  reviewed,  i.  403 ;  Smollett
described,  i.  286 n.  ;  teacher of Italian,
i.  294 n. ;  Thrale's sons,  death of,  i.
381 n.,  383  «.,  384  ».,  386  «.,  388 n. ;
Thrale,  Mrs.,  treatment of her children,
i.  205,  294  «.,  338  ».,  350 n. ;  —  ac-
cused of poisoning them,  i.  381 n. ;  —
of forging a letter,  ii.  405 n.  ;  —  she
accuses him,  ii.  408 n. ;  —  her jealousy,
i.  344 n. ;  —  Jewish notions,  ii.  57 n.\
—  wicked house,  ii.  351  ;  Tromba
Marino man,  ii.  251 n. ;  mentioned,  i.
163 n.,  347,  393 ;  ii.  183  ».,  318  ».

BARKER,  Dr.  Edmund,  ii.  364 n.

BARKER,  — ,  i.  70.

BARNARD,  Sir Frederick Augusta,  John-
son's letter,  i.  142.

BARNARD,  Rev.  Dr.  (Dean of Deny),  i.
362  ».

BARNARD,  Rev.  Dr.  (Provost of Eton),  ii.
136-7,  164  ».

BARRET,  William,  i.  400,  404.

BARRINGTON,  Admiral,  ii.  251 n.

BARRY,  Dr.  (Sir Edward Barry,  Bart.),
ii.  369.

BARRY,  James,  ii.  293,  305.

BARWELL,  — ,  i.  410 n.

BASKERVILLE,  John,  i.  42.

BASKETT,  Mark,  i.  115  «.

BATE,  James,  i.  84 n.

BATES,  — ,  i.  206  «.

BATH,  i.  391 ;  ii.  146,  175-6,  404  ».

BATH,  Earl of,  i.  93 n.

BATHURST,  Dr.  Richard,  i.  32  ;  ii.  209 n.,
364  ».

BEATNIFFE,  Richard,  Johnson's letter ii.
243-

BEATOUN,  Cardinal,  i.  231.

BEATTIE,  Dr.  James,  Highland scenery,
i.  251 n. ;  pension,  287 ;  lodged at
Lambeth,  321  «.;  Goldsmith's epitaph,
407 n. ;  Scotticisms,  ii.  120 n. ;  John-
son hated by Monboddo,  150 n. ',  —
appetite,  389 n.

BEAUCLERK,  Lady Diana,  i.  49 n.

BEAUCLERK,  Topham,  Johnson and the
orange-peel,  i.  49 n. ;  story about
Johnson,  ii.  44 n. ;  ill,  54 ;  death,
209 n.

Letters of Dr.  Johnson.

445

*  Beauties of Johnson.' Boswell,  James.

Beatifies of Johnson,  ii.  254.

BEAUVOIR,  Rev.  Dr.  Osmund,  ii.  251 n.

BEDDOES,  Dr.,  ii.  77 n.

BEDFORD,  fourth Duke of,  i.  7  ».,  417.

Bedrider,  ii.  48.

BEIGHTON,  — ,  i.  117  ».

BELCHER,  William,  i.  137 n.

BELIN DE BALLU,  ii.  410 n.

BELL,  Rev.  Dr.,  i.  118;  ii.  63;?.,  146,  371.

BEMBO,  ii.  417.

BEMBRIDGE,  — ,  ii.  298  «.

BENEDICTINES,  i.  401-2  ;  ii.  410.

BENSLEY,  Thomas,  ii.  433.

BENTHAM,  Jeremy,  balloons,  ii.  420 n. ;
Elphinston's house,  i.  17 n. ;  Johnson's
City Club,  ii.  363 n.  ;  Mansfield's
MSS.,  ii.  169  ».;  Markham,  Arch-
bishop, ii.  150 n.  •  'Omniscient Jack-
son,' ii.  349 n. ;  Oxford University elec-
tion, i.  138 n. ;  Queen's College,  i.  114
n.  ;  —  Dr.  Fothergill,  i.  324 n.  ;  —
monotonous life,  i.  330 n.

BENTLEY,  Rev.  Richard,  D.D.,  ii.  276 n.

BENTLEY,  Rev.  Richard,  D.D.  (the
nephew),  i.  190.

BERKELEY,  fourth Earl of,  ii.  143  ».

BERKELEY of Stratton,  Lord,  ii.  169 n.

BERRY,  — ,  ii.  396 n.

BESSELSLEIGH,  ii.  260 n.

BEWLY,  William,  ii.  222 n.

BIBLE,  early editions,  i.  147.

BIGGINS,  — ,  ii.  419 n.

BINGHAM,  Hon.  Miss.  See SPENCER,
Countess.

Biographia Britannica,  ii.  40.

BIRCH,  Rev.  Thomas,  D.D.,  account of
him,  i.  53  «. ;  Johnson's letters,  i.  30,
32,  35,  44,  53,  62,  64.

BIRMINGHAM,  Johnson's residence there,
i.  69;  ii.  289 n,  ;  seat of the mechanic
arts,  ii.  53;  boobies,  ib.  n.  See also
under JOHNSON.

BISHOPS,  ii.  149 n.

BLACK,  Joseph,  ii.  362 n.

Black dog,  ii.  73.

RLACKLOCK,  Dr.  Thomas,  i.  229.

BLACKMORE,  Sir Richard,  ii.  159,  185,
198,  275 n.

BLACKSTONE,  Sir William,  Lectures on
Law,  i.  114 n. ;  Principal of New Inn
Hall,  132 n. ;  University election of

1768,  138  ».;  Old Bailey Sessions,  ii.
65 n.  ;  law about married women,  218
n. ;  law of settlement,  297 n.

BLACKWOOD,  Adam,  ii.  408 n.

BLAIR,  Rev.  Dr.  Hugh,  i.  404 n.

BLANTIRE,  Lord,  ii.  169 n.

BLEEDING,  ii.  198,  253,  401.

BLISS,  Dr.  Philip,  ii.  438.

BLOUNT,  Sir Thomas Pope,  i.  32.

BLUE-STOCKING CLUB,  ii.  136 n.,  151 n.

BODENS,  George,  ii.  164 n.

BOOTHBY,  Sir Brooke,  Bart.,  i.  45 n.

BOOTHBY,  Hill,  Johnson's letters,  i.  45-
52,  64.

BOSVILLE,  Godfrey,  ii.  16 n.

BOSWELL,  James,  Ashbourne,  visits,  ii.
J5  »..  31,  36,  38-9,  435 Baltic expe-
dition, ii.  30;  'bends a keen eye on
vacancy,'  i.  279 n.;  bet with Lady D.
Beauclerk,  i.  49 n. ;  bodily activity,  i.
233J  '  Bos,'  i.  276  ;  '  Branghton,  a,'  ii.
137 n. ;  Brocklesby and Hunter,  ii.  436 ;
brother David,  ii.  182 n.  •  Gator's guest,
ii.  312 n. ;  Cecilia,  ii.  354 n  ;  chambers
in the Temple,  i.  90 n.  ;  Chester,  visits,
ii.  116 n. ;  City Club,  ii.  212 n. ;  clan,
his,  ii.  16;  debts,  ii.  271 ;  described by
Baretti,  i.  317 n.  ;  ii.  39 n.  ;  Doxy,
Miss,  ii.  129 n. ;  equitation,  ii.  178 n. ;
Essex Head Club,  ii.  396 n. ;  exe-
cution, present at an,  ii.  402 n. ;  father,
i.  292,  320 n. ;  ii.  271 ;  fees,  i.  317 n.,
320;  gentlemen by birth,  ii.  160 n. ;
hereditary possessions,  ii.  370 n.\  house,
i.  229;  Johnson allots him a room,  i.
317  ». ;  ii.  42  ». ;  —  appetite,  ii.  389  «. ;

—  associates,  ii.  414 n. ;  —  attacks him,
ii.  65 n. ;   — ,  caricature of,  ii.  295 n. ;

—  describes him,  i.  223  ;  —  and Gar-
rick,  i.  54 n, ;  —  and Hawkins,  ii.  371
n. ;  —  letter,  i.  299  ;  —  letters to Miss
Burney,  ii.  354 n. ;  —  love of cold air,
ii.  385 n. ;    —   monument,  ii.  33 n. ;
— ,  pamphlet sent to,  ii.  278 n. ;   —
pleasure in his company,  i.  291 ;  ii.  33,
39,  403  ;  —  relief from dropsy,  ii.  380
n. ;  —  society,  i.  316  ;  — ,  '  spy'  on,  i.
330;  —,  visits  (1779),  "•   103-5;  —
and Wilkes,  ii.  295 n. ;  Journal,  i.  271,
320,  330,  355,  392  ». ;  ii.  43,  103  «.,
104  «.,  396 n. ;  'led by a bear,'  ii.  43

446

Index to

Boswell,  James Burnet,  Gilbert.

n. ;  Lichfield,  visits,  i.  380;  ii.  119;
—  theatre,  i.  385 n. ;  Literary Club,  i.
215;  ii.  65 n.,  402 n. ;  Lives of the
Poets,  ii.  197 n.,  208  ;  married,  i.  331 ;
Mickle,  letter to,  i.  422;  omissions in
the Life,  i.  56 n. ;  ii.  40 n.,  137 n.,
296 n. ;  '  Omniscient Jackson,'  ii.  349
n.  ;  Oxford,  visits,  ii.  398,  400 n. ;
Paoli,  lives with,  i.  316  ;  place-hunter,
i.  396 ;  Rudd,  Mrs.,  i.  395 n.,  399 n. ;
Scotland his native place,  i.  130 n.  ;
Seward,  liked,  ii.  35 ;  step-mother,  i.
320,  396;  superstitious,  i.  231,  268,
281 ;  takes tea with Miss Williams,  ii.
335 n. ;  Temple,  enters at the,  i.  316  ;
ii.  399;  Thrale,  visits,  i.  313,  318;  —
health,  ii.  103  ;  —  death,  ii.  209  ;
Thrale,  Mrs.,  letter to,  i.  383 n. ;  -
studied letters,  ii.  147  ».;  tour to the
Hebrides,  i.  230-292,  337 n. ;  trouble-
some kindness,  i.  249  ;  Wart on,  letter
to,  ii.  155.

BOSWELL,  Mrs.,  i.  229  «.,  252,  287;
ii.  16,43,  208.

BOSWELL,  Thomas David,  i.  317  ;  ii.  181.

BOSWELL,  Veronica,  i.  287.

BOTTARELLI,  F.,  ii.  415 n.

Bottom,  ii.  30.

BOWEN,  J.,  ii.  106 n.,  111-2.

BOWER,  Archibald,  ii.  433.

BOWLES,  William,  ii.  146,  328,  341,  342
n.,  396 n.

BOX-CLUBS,  i.  331.

BOYD,  Hon.  Charles,  i.  236.

Branghton,  a,  ii.  137.

BREWER,  Father,  i.  401.

BREWERS,  ii.  160 n.

BREWOOD SCHOOL,  ii.  161.

BRIGHT,  Rev.  Henry,  Johnson's letter,
i.  157  ;  mentioned,  i.  95,  108,  326.

BRIGHTHELMSTONE  (Brighton),  descrip-
tion of it,  i.  120 ;  remoteness,  i.  395 n.;
ii.  41 n.,  45, 56  ;  journey to it,  ii.  91 n. ;
the Rooms,  ii.  46,  105 n. ;  the Steyne,
ii.  79;  Thomas's shop,  ii.  79 n.,  106 ;
Bowen's shop,  ii.  106 n.

BRISTOL,  second Earl of,  i.  133 n.

BROCKLESBY,Dr.,  house,  ii.  302;  quotes
Juvenal,  304 ;  Johnson,  attends,  308-9,
313.  315,  339,  392»  423;  —.letters to,
331,  417 n. ;  —  dines with him,  396,

402  ;  —  funeral,  434 ;  —  conversation,
436;  met Lord Mansfield,  437.

BRODHURST,  — ,  ii.  92.

BROGLIO,  Marshal,  i.  12.

BROMFIELD,  Robert,  M.D.,  i.  178  ;  ii.  94.

BROOKE,  Francis,  ii.  23.

BROOME,  William,  ii.  156,  180.

BROOME,  — ,  ii.  315 n.

BROTHERS and sisters,  ii.  237.

BROWN,  Dr.  John,  i.  1 1 n.

BROWNE,  Isaac Hawkins,  ii.  324 n.

BROWNE,  Sir Thomas,  Life,  i.  62.

BROWNE,  Mrs.,  ii.  137.

BRUCE,  James,  i.  313.

BRYDONE,  Patrick,  ii.  325 n.

BRYLSTON,  George,  i.  125.

Budget,  ii.  320.

Bugle,  ii.  112 n.

BUILDING,  i.  99  ;  ii.  350.

BULLER,  Mrs.,  ii.  149.

BULLERS of Buchan,  i.  237.

Bumbo,  ii.  329 n.

BUNBURY,  Sir Charles,  ii.  434-5.

BUNBURY,  Sir H.  E.,  ii.  436.

BUNBURY,  Henry William,  i.  344 n.,
ii.  179 n.

BUNBURY,  Mrs.,  ii.  179.

BURKARTI,  i.  17 n.

BURKE,  Edmund,  American war,  i.  390 n, ;
Beaconsfield,  i.  266  «.;  Bishop Shipley's
house,  ii.  157  ;  companions of our softer
hours,  ii.  20 n. ;  Crabbe's patron,  ii.
287 n.,  288 ;  Croft's Life of Young,  ii.
189 n. ;  Fowke's pension,  i.  409 n. ;
games,  i.  330 n. ;  Gordon riots,  ii.
i66n.;  influence,  i.  107 n. ;  Jenkinson,
attacks,  ii.  18 n. ;  Johnson's funeral,
ii.  434-5;  labour needful,  ii.  439;
'  live pleasant,'  ii.  99 n. ;  '  Ned/  i.
123 n. ;  Paymaster-general,  ii.  261 n.,
263;  portrait,  ii.  108;-  reform of
Parliament,  ii.  286 n.  ;  Shelburne,
Earl of,  ii.  263 n. ;  Speech on India,
ii-  375  ;  Stonehenge,ii.  340 ;  mentioned,
i.  167 ;  ii.  5 n.,  335 n.

BURKE,  Richard,  ii.  5 n.

BURKE,  Richard  (junior),  ii.  227,  263 n.,

434-

BURKE,  William,  i.  123 n.  ;  ii.  5 n.
BURNET,  Gilbert,  Bishop of Salisbury,  ii.

321 n.

Letters of Dr.  Johnson.

447

Burney family Ca?n Wood.

BURNEY FAMILY,  Johnson's love for it,
ii.  237.

BURNEY,  Captain  (afterwards Admiral),
ii.  237,  240,  353 n.

BURNEY,  Dr.  Charles,  B^iretti's scheme,
ii.  80  ;  Chaulnes,  Duke of,  ii.  362 n. ;
Gordon riots,  ii.  172  «. ;  History of
Music,  ii.  77,  112  ».,  118;  Johnson
at his house,  ii.  183,  281 n. ;  — ,  to
bring,  ii.  78 ;  —  funeral,  ii.  434 ;

—  hearth -broom,  ii.  223 n. ;   —  ill-
ness, ii.  310     — letter,  ii.  144;  Latin
for misses,   ii.   98 n.  ;    music-lessons,
ii.  140 n. ;    Musical Journey,  i.  206;
robbed,  ii.  70 ;   Sunday evening con-
certs, ii.  146 n. ;  mentioned,  ii.  5,  72,
T46,  325,  332  »•

BURNEY,  Dr.  Charles  (junior),  ii.  325 n.,
396 n.,  434.

BURNEY,  Charlotte,  ii.  154 n.,  353.

BURNEY,  Frances  (Mme.  D'Arblay),
Baretti described,  i.  351 n. ;  Bath,
visits,  ii.  132  ;  Boswell's application to
her,  ii.  354/2. ;  Brighton,  ii.  46/2.,  91 n.,
106 n. ;  brother's ship,  ii.  237 n.;  Bruce
the traveller,  i.  313 n. ;  Buller,  Mrs.,
ii.  149 n. ;  Carter,  Mrs.,  ii.  163 n. ;
Cecilia,  ii.  279 n.,  280,  354;  compli-
ments paid to her,  ii.  318 n.;  Con-
tractors' Bill,  ii.  142 n. ;  Crutchley,  ii.
236 n. ;  Cumberland,  hated by,  ii.  112,
122 n.  •  description of her,  ii.  133 n.,
354 n. ;  diary and letters altered,  ii.
6 n. ;  Dobson,  Mrs.,  ii.  299 n. ;  Evelina,
"•  77>  J37>  234;  'Fanny's trade is
fiction/  ii.  325;  Garrick,  Mrs.,  ii.
252 n. ;  George III at Weymouth,
ii.  318 n. ;  Gordon riots,  ii.  164  «.,
169 n.,  171 n.,  173 n.\  Herschel's
discoveries,  ii.  386 n.  ;  inaccuracy,
ii.  237 n.  ;  Jebb,  Sir R.,  ii.  148 n. ;
Johnson's admiration of her,  i.  55 n.;
-  at a ball,  ii.  232 n. ;  —  at Dr.
Burney's,  ii.  183  «.,  281 n. ;  —  at Mrs.
Garrick's,  ii.  396^.;  —  death,  ii.  332 n.,
414 n.  ;  —  described,  ii.  6 n. ;  —  diet,
ii.  101 n.  ;  —  to be drawn out,  ii.
392 n. ;  —  ill in 1 783,  ii.  366  ».,  369 n. ;

—  Latin lessons,  ii.  98 n.,  182  ;  —  let-
ters, ii.  222,  353-4;  — ,  letters to,  ii.
1 1 8,  136,  353 w.;  — Letters to Mrs.

Thrale,  ii.  5 n.  ;  —  burns Mrs.  Thrale's
letters,  ii.  407 n.  ;  —  Lives,  ii.  186  ».,
197 n.  ;  —  and Mrs.  Montagu,  ii.
I39 n-t 336 n. ;  —  palsy,  ii.  310 n.,
312 n.\  —  strange discipline,  ii.  165 n. ;
— ,  Mrs.  Thrale and Piozzi,  ii.  368 n.  ;
Langton's children,  ii.  317 n. ;  Mus-
grave,  Sir R.,ii.  295 n. ;  Pennick,  Mr.,
i.  133 n.;  praised by Hutton,  ii.  175;
salary at Court,  i.  159 n.;  sea-bathing,
ii.  277 n. ;  Southwark election,  ii.
157 n. ;  Thrale's illness,  ii.  94 n.,
101 n. ;  —  death,  ii.  209  «.,  211 n. ;
Thrale,  Mrs.,  described,  ii.  5 n. ;

—  slanders Miss Burney,  ii.  408 n. ;

—  and Metcalfe,   ii.  345  ». ;   —  and
Piozzi,  ii.  6 n.,  351  «.,  386 n.,  394 n. ;

—  sale of the brewery,   ii.    217  ».,
222 n. ;  Thrale,  Miss,  ii.  5 n.,  394 n. ;
Young,    Professor,   ii.   315 n. ;    men-
tioned, ii.  129,  152,  229.

BURNEY,  Richard,  ii.  310.

BURNEY,   Susan,  i.  350 n. ;   ii.  109 n.,

310 n.,  390 n.
BURNING GLASS,  ii.  311.
BURNS,  Robert,  Elphinston's Martial,  i.

17 n. ;  Bullers of Buchan,  237 n.
BURTON,  Robert,  Anatomy of Melancholy

quoted,  i.  257  «.,  293,  383  ;  ii.  22  «.,

202 n.,  253 n.
Bustle,  i.  196 n.
BUTE,  third Earl of,  i.  92,  137 n. ;  ii.

401 n.

BUTLER,  Mr.  A.  J.,  i.  61 n.
BUTLER,  Rev.  — ,  i.  157 n.
BUTLER,  Samuel,  i.  218 n.
BUTT,  Rev.  Mr.,  ii.  434.
BUTTER,  Dr.,  i.  189 n. ;  ii.  434.
BYRON,  Admiral,  ii.  79^.,  121 n.,  235 n.
BYRON,  Augusta,  ii.  79.
BYRON,  Lord,  ii.  79  «.,  235 n.
BYRON,  Mrs.,  ii.  79,  117,  121 n.,  140 n.,

142 n.,  235  «.,  360.

C.

C ,  Sir James,  ii.  164 n.

CADELL,  Thomas,  i.  25 n. ;  ii.  275 n.;

Johnson's letters,  i.  188  ;  ii.  61,  71,89,

208.
CAEN WOOD,  ii.  168.

448

Index to

Calder,  Rev.  Dr.  John Chesterfield,  Earl of.

CALDER,  Rev.  Dr.  John,  i.  374;  John-
son's letter,  376.
Calling in the country,  ii.  24 n.
CALMET,  Augustin,  i.  147;  ii.  391.
CALVERT,  Felix,  ii.  23 n.
CALVERT,  Mrs.,  i.  122.
CALVERT and Seward,  i.  346.
CAMBRIDGE,  Richard Owen,  ii.  317  ».
CAMDEN,  Lord Chancellor,  i.  421.
CAMDEN,  William,  ii.  341.
CAMPBELL,  Dr.  John,  ii.  433.
CAMPBELL,  — ,  i.  292.
CAMPS,  ii.  71.
Canal,  ii.  78 n.
CANALS,  i.  175.
CAR,  — ,  i.  ii.
CARELESS,  Mrs.,  i.  41  ».,  164,  202,  378 ;

ii.  17,  228.

CARLISLE,  fifth Earl of,  ii.  38 n.,  109 n.
CARLISLE,  Countess of,  ii.  368.
CARLYLE,  Rev.  Alexander,  D.D.,  i.  272 n.
CARLYLE,  Thomas,  Battle of Chotusitz,

i.  13 n. ;  like Johnson,  20 n.  ;  Watson's

Philip II,  413 n. ;  brothers and friends,

ii.  23772.

CARMICHAEL,  Miss,  ii.  42 n.,  75,  77.
CARTE,  Rev.  Samuel,  ii.  281.
CARTE,  Thomas,  i.  17 n.,  170 n.
CARTER,  Elizabeth,  Johnson's letter,  i.

55  ;  described by Miss Burney,  ii.i63 n. ;

mentioned,  ii.  24,  251.
CARTER,  — ,  a riding-school master,i.  309,

312,  321,  327,  329,  338,36i,377.
CARTERET,  John,  Lord  (Earl Granville),

i.  12.

CARWITHEN,  Miss,  i.  94.
CASTIGLIONE,  Prince Gonzaga di,  ii.  6.
CASTLES,  the,  ii.  183 n.
Catalogus Bibliotheca Thuance,  i.  30 n.
Catamaran,  ii.  122.
Catch,  ii.  108.
CATCOT,  George,  i.  404.
CATHERINE the Second,  ii.  377.
CATOR,  John,  i.  355  ;  ii.  128 n,,  210 n.,

212-3,  216 n.,  217,  222,  312,  373-4,

381  «.,  389,  391-
CAVE,  Edward,  Johnson impransus,  i.  3  ;

—  Irene,  5 n. ;  —  and Lewis Paul,  7  ;

—  Rambler,  29 n. ;  death,   55 ;  sister,
67 n. ;    Collins's Fidele,    37 n. ;    ii.
131 n.

CAVE,  Richard,  or William,  i.  58,  60,
66,  69;  Johnson's letter,  i.  57.

CAVENDISH,  the Lords,  ii.  10.

CAVENDISH,  Lord Frederick,  ii.  167 n.

CAVENDISH,  Lord John,  ii.  261 n.

CAWDOR,  i.  240.

CELSUS,  i.  220.

Cephalick,  ii.  356 n.

CHAMBERS,  Catherine,  i.  76,  82-6,  91,
93,99,  in,  125,  131.

CHAMBERS,  Ephraim,  i.  374 n.

CHAMBERS,  Sir Robert,  at University
College,  i.  113 n. ;  Principal of New
Inn Hall,  132 n.,  141 n.,  152 n. ;  John-
son's companion to Newcastle,  222,
224;  Judge in Bengal,  341  ;  ii.  65 n.
263,  288  ;  Universal History,  ii.  432.

CHAMBERS,   Mrs.   (Lady Chambers),  i.

34i,  347-

CHAMIER,  Andrew,  ii.  109 n,  121 n.
CHANDLER,  Dr.  Richard,  i.  321.
CHANGE of place,  ii.  329.
CHAPLIN,  — ,  ii.  49.
CHAPONE,  Mrs.  (Miss Mulso),  ii.    141,

353-

CHARLES II,  i.  59 n.,  302 n.

Charles of Sweden,  i.  n.

CHARLETON,  Dr.  Walter,  ii.  341.

CHARLOTTE,  Queen,  i.  184  ».,  258 n.;  ii.
5  «.,  318 n.  '

CHARTER-HOUSE,  ii.  14 n.,  207,  213.

CHATHAM,  William Pitt,  first Earl of,
influence,  i.  107  «. ;  Duke of Northum-
berland, 228 n.  ;  Highland regiments,
274 n. ;  Jacobite song at Oxford,  ii.
227  «.;  son,  ib. ;  reform of Parliament,
286 n.

CHATSWORTH,  i.  201 ;  ii.  43.

CHATTERTON,  Thomas,  i.  398,  400,  404  ;
ii.  250 n.

CHAULNES,  Duke of,  ii.  362 n.

CHEMICAL sect,  ii.  253.

CHENEVIX,  Rev.  Dr.  R.  (Bishop of
Waterford),  i.  u n.

CHESTERFIELD,  fourth Earl of,  Courts
and Camps,  ii.  71 n. ;  effects of old age,
ii.  212 n.  \  hoc age,  i.  337 n. ;  Johnson's
Dictionary,  i.  409 n. ;  Lord-Lieutenant
of Ireland,  i.  10;  men's weaknesses,  ii.
314 n. ;  Ranelagh,  i.  306 n. ;  mentioned,
i-  13 n.,  352 n. ;  ii.  38 n.

Letters of Dr.  Johnson.

449

Chesterfield,  Earl of. Cottenham,  Earl of.

CHESTERFIELD,  fifth Earl of,  ii.  n n.
CHETWOOD,  William Rufus,  i.  5.
CHEVY CHASE,  ii.  440.
CHEYNE,  George,  M.D.,  i.  293,  358  ;  ii.

198 n.,  235 n.

CHILDREN,  treatment of,  ii.  no,  183.
CHINA-WARE,  ii.  35.
Chiriirgeon,  ii.  i.
CHOLMONDELEY,  G.  J.,  ii.  50.
CHOLMONDELEY,  Hon.  and Rev.  Robert,

ii.  1 86 n.
CHOLMONDELEY,  Hon.  Mrs.,  ii.  ii6w.,

186 n.,  324  ».,  339.
CHRIST'S HOSPITAL,  i.  303-4.
CHRONOLOGY,  ii.  27.
CHURCHILL,  Charles,  ii.  332 n.
CICERO,  quoted,  i.  374 n. ;  ii.  201.
Civilization,  i.  264 n.
CLARENDON,  first Earl of,  i.  309 n.
CLARENDON PRESS,  see under OXFORD.
CLARKE,  John,  i.  95,  208.
CLARKE,  Alderman Richard,  ii.  65 n.,

363 n.

CLAUDE LORAINE,  ii.  299.
CLERGYMAN,  letter of one at Bath,  ii.

254  ;  petition of a poor curate,  278 n.
CLERK,  Sir Philip Jennings,  ii.  6 n.,  94,

in,   119,   142,   153,    171 n.,    239   »;,

3io,  3i3-

CLIMATE,  ii.  182 n.

CLINK,  The,  ii.  178.

CLOTHES,  cost of,  ii.  278.

CLUBS:  City,  ii.  212 n.,  363 n. ;  Essex
Head,  ii.  367,  377  «.,  390,  396 n.,  402,
411,  415,  417,  419,  422  ;  Hum-drum,
ii.  359  «.;  Ivy Lane,  ii.  359,  363-4,
388,  390;  Literary,  i.  121,  215  ;  ii.  65,
88 n.,  312-4,  402;  Rambler,  ii.  364 n.

COACHES,  fares and speed,!.  78 n.,  142 n.,
173  ».,.  191,  320  «.,  392 n. ;  ii.  328  ».,
339,  430 n. ;  mail-coaches,  i.  392 n. ;
vacant places,  i.  183,  324,  326-7,  357 ;
ii.  228 n.

COAL,  scarcity of,  ii.  251 n.,  260.

Coarse,  i.  248 n.

COBB,  Mrs.,  i.  139,  164,  173,  331  ;  ii.  92,
230,  382.

COCK LANE GHOST,  ii.  291 n.

Cockers Arithmetic,  i.  243.

COFFEY,  — ,  i.  256 n.

COLE,  Robert,  F.S.A.,  i.  6 n.

VOL.  II.  G

COLE,  Rev.  William,  ii.  189 n.

COLEBROOK,  Sir George,  i.  170.

COLERIDGE,  S,  T.,  i.  303 n.

COLL,  Isle of,  i.  276-8.

COLL,  Laird of,  i.  267,  269,  277,  279,  331,

371-

COLLEGE TUTOR,  ii.  440.
COLLIER,  Dr.  Arthur,  ii.  69.
COLLIER,  Sir George,  i.  no n.
COLLIER,    Misses,    ii.    262-4,    269-70,

278,  280,  282.

COLLINGTON,  — ,  i.   132 n.

COLLINGWOOD,  Admiral,  ii.  in n.

COLLINS,  William,  melancholy,  i.  36,  39,
63  ;  Life and poems,  ii.  130-1,  198.

COLMAN,  George,  i.  133 n.,  214;  ii.
115  «.,434.

COLQUHOUN,  Sir James,  i.  286.

COMAUL UDDIEN KHAN,  i.  410 n.

COMET,  ii.  339 n.

COMMON EVILS,  ii.  326.

COMPLIMENTS,  i.  329.

COMPTON,  Rev.  James,  ii.  290;  John-
son's letter,  ii.  271.

Condolent,  i.  96.

CONGREVE,  Rev.  Charles,  i.  304,  307,

3i5>  378-9.
CONGREVE,    William,    quoted,  i.    181 ;

Old Bachelor,  ii.  38 n. ;  Life,  ii.  154,

1 60.

Contemplation,  ii.  21.
CONTRACTORS'  BILL,  ii.  142.
CONVERSATION,  ii.  19 n.,  403.
Conversation     (conversazione),    ii.    105,

179.

CONWAY,  Hon.  Captain,  ii.  237 n.
CONWAY,  — ,  ii.  167 n.
COOK,  Captain,  i.  233  «. ;  ii.  19,  77  «.
COOKE,  William,  ii.  434.
COOPER,  Grey,  i.  311.
COOTE,  Sir Eyre,  i.  240.
Cop,  i.  161 n.
COPYRIGHT,  i,  297.
CORN,  price of,  i.  193.
CORN-MILL,  i.  155.
CORNBURY,  Viscount  (Baron Hyde),  i.

309 n.

CORNELYS,  Madame,  i.  88 n.
CORNWALLIS,  Lady Mary,  ii.  23  «.
CORREGGIO,  ii.  52  «.
COTTENHAM,  first Earl of,  ii.  136 n.

450

Index to

Cotterell,  Admiral Descriptions.

COTTERELL,  Admiral,  i.  43 n.

COTTERELL,  Miss,  i.  43  «. ;  ii.  393.

COTTON,  Henry,  ii.  394 n.

COTTON,  Mrs.,  ii.  132,  138.

COTTON,  Sir Lynch Salusbury,  ii.  44  «.,

351-

COTTON,  Sir Robert,  i.  201 n.  ;  ii.  44 n.
COTTON,  Robert,  ii.  151 n.
COTTON,  Sir Thomas,  i.  128 n.
COULSON,  Rev.  John,  i.  113 n.,  323,  325,

327,  366  ;  ii.  16.
COUNTRY TOWNS,  i.  107.
COURTNEY,  Right Hon.  Leonard H.,  i.

333 n.

COVENTRY,  ii.  92.
COWLEY,  Abraham,  quoted,  i.   181  ;    ii.

201  ;  Life,  ii.  68.
COWLEY,  Father,  i.  401.
COWPER,  William,  balloons,  ii.  333 n. ;

Gray's Letters,  i.  317 n. ;  Heberden,  ii.

95 n. ;  James's powder,  i.  23 n. ;  John-
son's religious state,  i.  49 n. ;  ii.  385 n. ;

Lord Dartmouth,  ii.  291 n.  ;  meteors,

ii.  334 n. ;   transmission of money,  i.

77*.

COXETER,  Thomas,  i.  170 n.,  414.
COXETER,  Thomas,  the younger,  i.  170,

414.
CRABBE,  George,  Gordon riots,  ii.  167  «.,

1 68 n.,    174 n. ;    Johnson reads his

poem,  287  ;  meteor of 1783,  334 n.
CRADOCK,  Joseph,  ii.  74 n, ;  Johnson's

letter,  284.

CRANBOURNE,  Lady,  ii.  157.
CRANE,  Dr.,  i.  400.

CRAVEN,  Lady,  ii.  143,  153,  157,  414 n.
CRISP,  Samuel,  ii.  101  «.,  109 n.
CRITICISM,  ii.  148.
CROFT,  Rev.  Herbert,  ii.  189 n.
CROFT,  — ,  ii.  294.
CROKER,  John Wilson,   i.    241 n.;    ii.

138  »-,  336 n.,  441 n.
CROMPTON,  Samuel,  i.  6 n.
CROMWELL,  Oliver,  i.  235;  ii.  261 n.,

321 n.

CROSSE,  John,  i.  135 n.
CROW,  Mrs.,  i.  6.
CROWN-BIRDS,  ii.  187.
CRUIKSHANK,  William Cumberland,  ii.

339>  342-3,  346>  434-
CRUTCHLEY,  Jeremiah,  ii.  128,  210 n.,

216 n.,  219 n.,   222,  236,  298,   3S8,

39i  «•

CUMBERLAND,  Duke of,  ii.  339 n.

CUMBERLAND,  Richard,  '  past compute,'
i.  387  ;  Garrick's funeral,  ii.  84 n. ;  '  is
a million,'  in  ;  jealousy,  112,  115 n.,
122 n.  ;  loss of money,  118  «.,  12;,  ;
Walloons,  252 n. ;  mentioned,  117.

CUMINS,  Mrs.,  ii.  181,  232.

CUMMINS,  — ,  ii.  231.

CUNNING PEOPLE,  ii.  270.

CUXON,  — .  i.  70.

D.

D  ,  Mrs.,  ii.  74.

D'AGUILAR,  Baron,  ii.  173  ».

DALE,  Mrs.,  i.  348.

DARLINGTON,  i.  225.

DARTMOUTH,  second Earl of,  i.  373  «.  ;
Johnson's letter,  ii.  291.

DARWIN,  Charles,  i.  82 n.

DARWIN,  Charles Robert,  i.  82 n.

DARWIN,  Erasmus,  marriage,  i.  82 n. ;
Lichfield apothecaries,  162 n. ;  Loves
of the Plants,  ii.  235 n. ;  quoted,  365 n.,

394  «•

DARWIN,  Robert WTaring,  i.  82 n.
DAVENANT,  Mrs.,  i.  333 n.  ;  ii.  350,  393,

394  »•

DAVENPORT,  WTILLIAM,  i.  303  «.,  314.
DAVENTRY,  ii.  92.
DAVIES,  Thomas,  ii.  28, 56,64,  86».,  260.

308 n.

DAVIES,  Mrs.,  ii.  308  «.,  332  ».
DAVIS,  Mrs.,  ii.  332.
DAY,  Thomas,  i.  160 n.
DAYS,  bright and cloudy,  i.  346.
DE FOE,  Daniel,  i.  120 n.
DE GROOT,  Isaac,  ii.  14.
DEAD,  commending the,  i.  79 n.
DEATH  :  facing it,  i.  77  ;  thinking on it,

134;    condition of one's nature,   138,

212 n. ;  mors omnibus com munis,  180.
DELAP,  Rev.  Dr.,  i.  332 n. ;  ii.  112,  n8».
Delitescence,  i.  401 ;  ii.  441.
DENMARK,  Queen of,  i.  319,  340 n.
DERBY,  ii.  35.
DERBY,  Rev.  John,  ii.  73.
Dereliction,  ii.  307.
DESCARTES,  i.  48.
DESCRIPTIONS,  ii.  331.

Letters of Dr.  Johnson.

Desmoulins,  John . .  Elgin.

DESMOULINS,  John,  ii.  73,  75-6,  79,  291,

297,  434-

DESMOULINS,  Mrs.,  i.  4 n.,  6 n.,  54 n. ;
ii.  42,  74,  107,  122,  152,  187,  191,  193,
207,  240,  242 n.,  295,  297,  309  «.,  332,
426  ;  Johnson's letter,  i.  365.

DEVIZES,  ii.  132 n.

DEVON,  Earl of,  i.  224 n.

DEVONSHIRE,  third Duke of,  i.  12.

DEVONSHIRE,  fourth Duke of,  i.  117  ».

DEVONSHIRE,  fifth Duke of,  ii.  10,  262.

DEVONSHIRE,  Duchess of,  ii.  252.

DICEY,  — ,  i.  66.

DICKENS,  Charles,  i.  392 n.

DICTIONARIES,  ii.  415,  417,  426.

Dictionary,  Johnson's,  i.  25-8,  34,  42,
324 n. ;  fourth edition,  190-1 ;  abridg-
ment, ii.  35 n.  ;  plan,  38 n

DIDEROT,  ii.  80 n.

DILLY,  Messieurs,  i.  314,  320 n.,  360 n.,
384 n.,  397 n.  ;  ii.  208 n.,  396.

DIOT,  Mr.  and Mrs.,  i.  342,  348 ;  ii.  30.

DIRTY LANE,  i.  196 n.

DISCOVERIES,  i.  210.

DISTANCE,  effect of,  i.  386 n.

DIXEY  (DixiE\  Beaumont,  i.  14 n.

DIXEY,  Sir Wolstan,  i.  2  ;  ii.  264 n.

DIXEY  (DIXIE),  — ,  ii.  264.

DOBSON,  Dr.  Matthew,  ii.  299 n.

DOBSON,  Susanna,  ii.  299.

DODD,  Rev.  William,  D.D.,  trial and
execution,  ii.  1 1 ;  Johnson  's petitions,
&c.,  17,  1 8  ;  'prattling on paper,'  71;
Chapel,  291 n.

DODSLEY,  James and Robert,  i.  5 n.,  25
n.,  28,  62 n.,  79 n.,  89 n.

DOGE OF GENOA,  i.  270;  ii.  393.

DOLBEN,  Sir William,  i.  137 n. ;  ii.
155  ».

DONCASTER,  i.  224.

DOUGHTY,  WTilliam,  i.  399 n.

DOUGLAS,  Duchess of,  i.  229.

DOUGLAS,  John,  D.D.,  Bishop of Carlisle
and afterwards of Salisbury,  Johnson's
letter,  i.  377 ;  —  Letters to Mrs.
Thrale,  ii.  5.

DOUTHWAITE,  Mr.  W.  R,,  i.  88 n.

Down,  to,  ii.  73.

DOXY,  Miss,  ii.  i29«.

DOXY,  — ,  a medical man,  ii.  362.

Dozeners,  i.  162  ;  ii.  92 n.

DRAKE,  Sir Francis,  i.  166.

DRINKING,  i.  223,  368,  408  ;  ii.  87,  266.

DRUMMOND of Blair,  i.  277 n.

DRUMMOND,  William,  i.  227.

DRYDEN,  John,  poetry in Oxford,  ii.  22 n. ;
Life,  68-9;  writing with a hat,  128;
Miscellany,  195 w. ;  lines to Charleton,
341 n. ;  quoted  :  Absalom and Achito-
phel,  ii.  43  ;  Alexander's Feast,  i.  337
n. ;  ii.  53  ;  Character of a Good Parson,
ii.  397 n.  ;  Conquest of Granada,  ii.
373;  Lines to John Driden,  ii.  117;
from other poems,  i.  182 n.  ;  ii.  45.

Du FRESNOY,  ii.  286 n.

DUNBAR,  Dr.,  ii.  183.

DUN BAR,  Sir James,  ii.  183 n.

DUNBUYS,  i.  236.

DUNCAN,  Sir W'illiam,  ii.  401 n.

DUNDEE,  i.  232.

DUNN,  — ,  ii.  270.

DUNNING,  John  (first Lord Ashburton),
ii.  145 n.

DUNTON,  John,  ii.  141 n.

DUNVEGAN CASTLE,  i.  245,  267.

DURHAM,  i.  226.

DUTCH SERVICE,  regiments in the,  i.
268.

DUTIES OF LIFE,  i.  101.

DYER,  John,  ii.  108 n.

DYER,  Samuel,  ii.  108,  364,  390.

EAST,  Rev.  Mr.,  ii.  434.

EAST INDIA COMPANY,  i.  170;  ii.  358,

375-
ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF ENGLAND,

i.  74.
EDGEWORTH,  Richard Lovell,  i.  346 n. ;

ii.  235 n.

EDINBURGH,  i.  228,  292.
Edinburgh Dispensatory,  ii.  303.
EDUCATION,  i.  334,  394  ;  ii.  124,  437.
EDWARD THE CONFESSOR,  i.  74.
EDWARDS,  Rev.  Dr.  Edward,  ii.  257,  260,

398,  410.

EDWARDS,  Oliver,  ii.  296 n.
EGLINTON,  Earl of.  i.  277 n. ;  Countess,

292.

ELD,  — ,  i.  ii.

ELDON,  first Earl of.     See SCOTT,  John.
ELGIN,  i.  239,  240 n.,  301 n.

452

Index to

Eliot,  Edward France.

ELIOT,  Edward  (first Lord Eliot),  ii.  113,
326 n.

ELIZABETH,  Queen,  ii.  437.

ELLIOT,  Sir Gilbert,  i.  420.

ELPHINSTON,  James,  i.  17 n.,  214;  ii.
212 n. ;  Johnson's letters,  i.  17;  ii.  67.

EMERSON,  R.  W.,  ii.  237 n.

EMPIRES,  how broken down,  ii.  375.

Engineer,  ii.  164 n.

ENGLAND,  (1779)  all trade dead,  ii.  120;
(1780)  poverty and degradation,  150  «.;
(1782)  sinking,  264;  (1783)  fear of a
civil war,  286  ;  (1784)  times dismal
and gloomy,  370;  a broken down
empire,  375.  See also INVASIONS.

ENGLISH,  writing verses,  i.  97.

ENGRAVING,  i.  145.

Enthusiasm,  ii.  306 n.

Epistolick,  ii.  52 n.

ERASMUS,  ii.  45,  441.

ERROL,  Earl and Countess of,  i.  236.

ERSE,  i.  255,  260.

ERSKINE,  Hon.  Thomas  (afterwards Lord
Chancellor Erskine),  ii.  76 n.

Eruption of Krakatoa,  ii.  320 n.

Eugh,  i.  286 n.

EVANS,  Rev.  Mr.,  i.  393 ;  ii.  145 n.,  154.

EVELYN,  John,  i.  154.

EVIL,  apprehensions of,  i.  262,  327.

EXECUTIONS,  ii.  332 n.,  347,  402 n.

Exemplification,  ii.  270.

EXERCISE,  ii.  99,  102,  254,  355.

EXETER EXCHANGE,  i.  396.

EXHIBITION.    See ROYAL ACADEMY.

Extenuation,  ii.  159.

EYRE,  Baron,  ii.  65 n.

EYRE,  George,  i.  25 n.,  115 n.\  ii.  272 n.

F.

Factory,  ii.  377 n.

FAKENHAM  [Feckenham],  Abbot,  ii.  437.

FALCONER,  Dr.,  ii.  249.

Falkland's Islands,  i.  167 n.

FAME,  ii.  116.

FARMER,  Rev.  Richard,  D.D.,  Johnson's
letters,  i.  169 ;  ii.  13, 180 n. ;  — funeral,
ii.  434  ;  Ruggle's Ignoramus,  ii.  388 n. ;
mentioned,  i.  204.

FAULKNER,  George,  i.  13,  316.

FEELERS,  ii.  124,  126.

Feeling,  i.  187.

FENTON,  Elijah,  ii.  156,  195-6.
FEUDAL CONSTITUTION,  i.  144.
Feudist,  i.  145 n.
FIELDING,    Henry,   James's powder,   i.

23 n. ;    anonymous writings,    80 n.  ;

Dr.   Cheney,    359 n. ;    his successor,

396 n.  •  brother,  ii.  168 n.
FIELDING,  Sir John,  ii.  168,  170 n.
FITZHERBERT,  Elizabeth,  i.  45 n.
FITZHERBERT,  William,  i.  17 n.,  46  «.,

48.
FITZMAURICE,  Hon.  Thomas,  Johnson's

letter,  ii.  81  ;  —  dines with him,  151.
Fitzosborne 's Letters,  ii.  148.
FITZROY,  Lord Charles,  i.  10 n.
FIXED AIR,  ii.  362.
FLATTERY,  i.  221 ;  ii.  308.
FLEETWOOD,  Charles,  i.  5.
FLETCHER,  Mrs.,  ii.  262.
FLEURY,  Cardinal,  i.  12.
FLINT,  Miss,  Johnson's letter,  i.  150.
FLINT,  — ,  i.  349 ;  ii.  263 n.,  269 n.,

270,  278,  282.
FLYING MAN,  ii.  419.
FOOTE,  Samuel,  i.  4 n.,  258 n. ;  ii.  55.
FORD,  Rev.  Cornelius,  i.  177.
FORDYCE,  Miss,  i.  226.
FORDYCE'S BANK,  i.  192 n.,  226.
Formulary,  i.  330 n.
FORRESTER,  Colonel,  ii.  414 n.
FORT AUGUSTUS,  i.  242.
FORT GEORGE,  i.  240.
FORTESCUE,  Mr.  G.  K.,  ii.  438.
Foss,  Edward,  ii.  325 n.
FOTHERGILL,    Rev.    Thomas,   D.D.,   i.

323 n.,  324 n.

FOUNDLING HOSPITAL,  i.  417.
FOWKE,  Francis,  Johnson's letter,  i.  409.
FOWKE,  Joseph,  i.  409 ;  Johnson's letter,

ii.  288.
FOWLER,  Mr.  J.  Coke,   i.   342 n. ;    ii.

400 n.
Fox,  Charles James,  Westminster election,

ii.  172 n. ;  superior to his father,  227^. ;

Rockingham ministry,  261  ;  reform of

Parliament,  286 n.  ;   East India Bill,

358 n. ;  Reynolds's portrait,  393 n.
FOX-HUNTING,  ii.  96.
FRANCE,  rebellion imminent,  i.  12 n.  ;

Johnson's visit,  369,  378  ;   transports,

ii.  251  ;  wolves,  382 n.

Letters of Dr.  Johnson.

453

Franklin,  Benjamin Gordpn,  Sir Alexander.

FRANKLIN,  Benjamin,  journeyman printer,
i.  67 n. ;  advice about parsons,  ii.
283 n.  ;  balloons,  365 n.

FRANKS.    See POST.

FRASER of Strichen,  i.  239 n.

FREDERICK I],  King of Prussia,  i.  12.

Free,  to,  i.  309 n.

FREETH,  S.  and S.,  i.  156 n.

FRENCH,  Gilbert,  i.  6 n.

FRIENDSHIP  :  its form varies,  i.  68 ;
friends of one's youth,  71,  73;  its
duties,  100-1  ;  born friends,  ii.  237 n,,
292  ;  old friends,  350  ;  comforts of
friendship,  357,  428.

Frizz,  ii.  57  «.

FROME,  ii.  194.

FUST,  John,  i.  144.

FUTURE LIFE,  ii.  380.

G ,  Mrs.,  ii.  73.

GALENISTS,  ii.  253  ».

GALLICISMS,  i.  61.

GALWAY,  Lady,  ii.  151  «.

GAMES,  i.  330 n.

GARDINER,  Mrs.,  i.  156 n.;  ii.  2,  174,

332,  399>  4J4  »•

GARLICK,  — ,  i.  70.

GARNETT,  Dr.  T.,  i.  249 n.

GARRICK,  David,  benefit to Miss Wil-
liams, i.  53  ;  ii.  334 n. ;  club forfeits,
ii.  415 n. ;  compared with Mrs.  Porter,
ii.  344 n. ;  Cumberland's plays,  ii.  ill
n. ;  death,  ii.  55 n.,  84,  86,  220 n.\
funeral,  ii.  252,  435  ;  Drury Lane
Theatre,  ii.  252 n. ;  generosity,  ii.  66  ;
Goldsmith and Hawkesworth,  i.  365
n. ;  Johnson attacks him,  i.  75 n.,  118
n. ;  —  Irene,  i.  4 n.,  5  ;  —  letters,  i.
1 1 6-8, 127, 150, 1 86;  London Cuckolds,
i.  185 n. ;  Mickle quarrels with him,
i.  214,  422  ;  niece,  ii.  129 n. ;  verses,
i.  421  ;  will,  ii.  230;  wine-merchant,
ii.  20 n. ;  mentioned,  i.  49 n.,  211 n.

GARRICK,  Mrs.,  ii.  62,  150  ».,  230  «.,
250-1,  294 n,,  396;  Johnson's letter,
ii.  84.

GARRICK,  Peter,  i.  4  «. ;  ii.  20,  93,  230.

GASTRELL,  Mrs.,  i.  160 n. ;  ii.  3,  25,  46
n.,  58,  82-3,  85,  90, 114,  120,  229,  248 ;
Johnson's letters,ii.  60, 248,368,382,429.

GAWLER,  Mrs.,  ii.  186 n.

GAY,  John,  ii.  195  «.,  198,  275.

CELL,  Philip,  i.  348.

GELL,  Sir William,  i.  348 n.

GENIUS,  ii.  55,  437.

GENOA,  i.  270;  ii.  35 n.,  393.

GEORGE III,  Bas Bleu,  ii.  390 n. ;
Coronation,  i.  91  ;  Gordon riots,  ii.
170/2.,  177;  Johnson,  interview with,
i.  115 n.;  ii.  289 n. ;  — sends him
his Lives,  ii.  87 ;  —  a Papist and a
Jacobite,  ib.  n,  ;  Library,  i.  143 n. ;
London Cuckolds,  i.  185 n.  ;  Pitt's
ministry in 1783-4,  ii.  374  ».;  visits
Weymouth,  ii.  318 n.

GERMAN LANGUAGE,  i.  324 n.

GIBBON,  Edward,  American war,  i.  386
n.,  390 n. ;  epitaph on Earl of Devon,
i.  224 n. ;  Gordon riots,  ii.  166 n.
lucid interval,  ii.  377 n. ;  Oxford in
the Long Vacation,  i.  361 n.  ;  reform
of Parliament,  ii.  286 n. ;  remedy for
sorrow,  ii.  210 n. ;  Saint Martin,  ii.
192 n. ;  Sheffield,  Lady,  ii.  252 n. ;
Spencer,  Countess,  ii.  in n,,  369 n.\
Universal History,  ii.  431  ».,  432 n.

GILL,  Alderman,  i.  n6n.

GISBORNE,  a banker,  i.  14 n.

GLASGOW,  i.  291.

GLENELG,  i.  251.

GLOUCESTER,  Duke of,  ii.  167  ».

GLUTTONY,  ii.  323.

GOETHE,  i.  355 n.

GOLDSMITH,  Oliver  :  Beatlie,  i.  287 n. ;
Collins,  i.  37 n.  ;  Cumberland the
dramatist,  ii.  in n. ;  death,  ii.  191 n.,
209 n.',  Douglas,  i.  377 n. ;  Garrick,
i.  365 n.  ;  Good-Natured Man,  i.  ii  ».;
Hornecks,  Miss,  i.  221 n.,  344  ».;  ii.
318 n. ;  Hum-drum Club,  ii.  359 n. ;
Johnson defends him,  ii.  326 n. ;  —
letter,  i.  215  ;  Lennox,  Mrs.,  ii.  115 n. ;
letter-writing,  i.  65  «.,  215 n. ;  Literary
Club,  ii.  50 n. ;  Newbery,  i.  23 n. ;
posterity,  ii.  51 n. ;  print of him,  ii.
1 08  ;  Scotch scenery,  i.  251 n. ;  She
Stoops to Conqtier,  i.  214;  sufferings
of authors,  ii.  149 n. ;  suit of clothes,
ii.  279 n. ;  takes tea with Miss Wil-
liams, ii.  335 n.

GORDON,  Sir Alexander,  i.  235  «.

454

Index to

Gordon,  Duke of. Hawkins,  Sir John.

GORDON,  Duke of,  ii.  176.

GORDON,  Lord George,  ii.  166 n.,  167,

172,  174 n.
GORDON RIOTS,  i.  402 n. ;   ii.  164  «.,

166-178-
Got hick,  i.  246 n.
GOUGH,  Richard,  i.  301 n.
GOUT,  i.  367,  403 ;  ii.  108,  338.
GRAEVIUS,  i.  144.
GRAFTON,  first Duke of,  i.  59 n.
GRAINGER,  Dr.  James,  i.  215 n. ;  ii.  70 n.
GRAMMARIANS,  ii.  440.
GRANGER,  Rev.  James,  Johnson's letter,

i.  203.

GRANT,  Colonel,  i.  240 n.
GRANT,  Rev.  Mr.,  i.  240 n.,  241 n.
GRANVILLE,  George  ^Lord Lansdowne),

ii.  130  ».,  131,  190.
Gravedo,  ii.  229,  245 n.
GRAVESEND,  ii.  319 n.,  322.
GRAY,  John,  bookseller,  i.  5 n.
GRAY,  Thomas,  Letters,  i.  317  ;  Life,  ii.

180 n.,  189  ».,  315;  quoted,  i.  250 n. ;

ii.  356 n.

GREAVES,  Samuel,  ii.  390 n.
GREEN,  Richard,  account of him,  i.  161

n. ;   his Museum,   186,  208,  331  ;    ii.

91 ;  Johnson's letter,  i.  340;  mentioned,

"•  i?»  55-

Greens,  ii.  22 n.

GREEVES,  — ,  ii.  90.

GRENVILLE,  Right Hon.  George,  John-
son's letter,  i.  98.

GREVIL,  Dr.,  i.  178.

GREVILLE,  Richard Fulke,  i.  60 n. ;  ii.
7  «.,  146.

GRIEF,  i.  171 n.,  212,  382-5;  \\.^n.,
67,  71,  209-12,  214-5.

GRIMM,  Baron,  i.  79 n. ;  ii.  365 n.

GROTIUS,  ii.  14.

GUNNINGS,  the Miss,  ii.  122  «.

GWATKIN,  Mrs.,  ii.  85 n.

GWYNN,  Colonel,  i.  344  «. ;  ii.  318  «.

GWYNN,  John,  ii.  15,  61.

GWYNNE,  Nell,  ii.  302 n.

H.

H ,  Miss,  ii.  298-9,  317.

RACKET,  Bishop,  ii.  99 n.
HACKNEY-COACHES,  ii.  322.

HADLEY,  John,  ii.  117 n.

HAGLEY,  i.  177.

HAILES,  Lord  (Sir David Dairy mple)t ii.

15°  n

HALL,  Mrs.,  i.  372 ;  ii.  57  ».,  392.

HAMILTON,  Archibald,  i.  30,  376  ;  John-
son's letter,  i.  374.

HAMILTON,  William Gerard,  Johnson's
letter,  ii.  248  ;  kindness to Johnson,
352,  368  ;  mentioned,  i.  314  ;  ii.  124  «.,
127  ».,  146.

HAMILTON,  Rev.  Dr.,  Johnson's letters,
ii.  296,  378,  399.

HAMMOND,  Rev.  Henry,  D.D.,  i.  357;
ii.  225.

HAMMOND,  James,  ii.  159.

HAMPSTEAD,  ii.  311.

HANMER,  Sir Thomas,  ii.  131 n.

HARBOROUGH,  Earl of,  ii.  284 n.

HARCOURT,  Earl of,  ii.  37.

HARDING,  Caleb,  i.  375.

HARDY,  Rev.  Dr.  Samuel,  Johnson's
letter,  ii.  204.

HARINGTON,  Sir John,  ii.  138 n.

HARINGTON,  Dr.,  i.  401 n. ;  ii.  138  ».

HARLEY,  Alderman,  i.  304.

HARRIS,  James,  ii.  4.

HARRIS,  Mrs.,  ii.  5 n.

HARRIS,  Thomas,  ii.  17 n.

HARRISON,  Rev.  Cornelius,!.  225.

HARRISON,  —  (Johnson's uncle),  i.
225 n.

HARTLEY,  H.  W.,  i.  386 n.

HARVESTS,  (1772)  i.  192,  201 n.,  (1775)
342,  (1777)  ii.  38.

HASLANG,  Count,  ii.  167 n.

HASTINGS,  Warren,  i.  298  ».,  410.

HATHERTON,  Baron,  ii.  161 n.

HAWES,  L.,  i.  25 n.

HAWKESWORTH,  John,  LL.D.,  Adven-
turer, i.  36  ;  effrontery,  56 n. ;  John-
son's letter,  60 ;  — ,  correspondence
with,  365  ;  Collected Works,  412 n.  ;
ii.  7-8 ;  Life of Swift,  ii.  196 ;  Ivy
Lane Club,  364 n.,  390.

HAWKESWORTH,  Mrs.,  i.  61 ;  ii.  7.

HAWKINS,  Sir John,  Ivy Lane Club,  ii.
359>  3^3-4 ;  Johnson's dread of death,
ii.  380 n. ;  —  preparing himself to die,
ii.  381 n. ;  —  executor,  ii.  407 n. ;  —
funeral,  ii.  434  ;  —  letters,  ii.  358,  363,

Letters of Dr.  Johnson.

455

Hawkins,  John Sidney.  v  . . .  Humm.

412,  429;  —  letter on Mrs.  Piozzi's
marriage,  ii.  406 n. ;  —  relations,  i.
306 n. ;  ii.  371 n  ,  431 n.  ;  Taylor's
preaching,  ii.  403.

HAWKINS,  John Sidney,  ii.  387 n.

HAY,  Sir George,  i.  137.

HAY-MAKING,  i.  352.

HAYWARD,  Abraham,  ii.  27 n.,  292  «.,
407 n.

HEAD-DRESS,  i.  258;  ii.  25,  57.

HEALE,  ii.  328.

HEALTH,  duty to preserve it,  i.  171.

Hearken after,  ii.  353 n,

HEARNE,  Thomas,  i.  132 n. ;  ii.  431 n.

HEARTWELL,  — ,  i.  164.

HEBERDEN,  William,  M.D.,  account of
him,  ii.  95 n. ;  quoted,  229;  timidis-
simus,  247 n. ;  house,  302 n. ;  John-
son's physician,  302,  304,  307-8,  315,
343,  367,  369,  37r>  373-4,  380,  382-4,
391;  — letters,  376,  423;  mentioned,
ii.  97-8,  101-3.

HECTOR,  Edmund,  Johnson's letters,  i.
41,  67,  72,  124,  202-3,  369,  377  ;
—  early friendship with him,  i.  71  ».,
73;  ii.  227 n. ;  —  health,  ii.  228;
name,  i.  164,  370 n. ;  niece ill,  ii.  78 ;
mentioned,  i.  305,  328;  ii.  17.

HECTOR,  George,  i.  41 n.

HEELY,  Humphrey,  i.  306;  ii.  371.

HEIGHTS,  desire to cast oneself down,  ii.
440.

HELSHAM,  Richard,  i.  31.

HENDERSON,  John,  ii.  434.

HENRY,  David,  i.  67,  69.

HENRY,  Patrick,  i.  67 n.

HERNE,  Elizabeth  (Phoebe),  ii.  194,  206,
256 n.,  378.

HERRINGS,  take of,  ii.  277.

HERSCHEL,  William,  ii.  385.

HERTFORD,  Earl  (afterwards Marquis)
of,  Johnson's letter,  i.  389.

HERVEY,  Hon.  Henry,  i.  182 n.

HERVEY,  Mrs.,  i.  182  ;  ii.  49,  91.

HESIOD,  i.  152.

HICKMAN,  Gregory,  Johnson's letter,
i.  i.

HIGHWAYMEN,  i.  316 n.  \  ii.  70,  312 n.,

347-

HILL,  Professor,  i.  232 n.
HILL,  Mr.  Joseph,  i.  15  «.

HINCHLIFFE,    John,   D.D.,    Bishop of

Peterborough,  ii.  148 n.,  157  «.,  163.
HINCKLEY,  Mrs.,  i.  132.
HITCH,  C.,  i.  25 n.,  58-9.
HOADLEY,  Rev.  Dr.  John,  i.  186 n.
HOARE,  Henry Merrick,  ii.  361 n.
Hoc age,  i.  337.
Hock,  i.  52 n.
HOCKLEY-IN-THE-HOLE,  ii.  30.

HODGSON,  Brian,  ii.  234  ».
HOGARTH,  William,  i.  186 n.
HOLDER,  — ,  ii.  434.
HOLDERNESSE,  fourth Earl of,  i.  408.
HOLLAND,  first Lord,  ii.  227 n.
HOLLOWAY,  Mr.  M.  M.,  i.  10 n.
HOLLYER,  — ,  Johnson's letter,  i.  302.
HOME,  John,  1.422.
HOMER,  ii.  440.
HOOLE,  John,  i.  314;  ii.  65,  85  «.,  183,

25o-T>  363  »-,  39°,  392,  396>  434-
HOOLE,   Rev.   Samuel,   ii.  349  ».,  350,

396 n.,  414 n.,  434.
HOOPER,  — ,  i.  80 n.
HOPKINS,  Benjamin,  i.  408.
HORACE,  quoted,   Odes,  i.  186,  277;  ii.

78>  79,  255>  377  »• ;  Sat.t ii.  441  ;  Epis.,

i.   246;    ii.  17,    116,  329 n. ;   Ars,  i.

176.

HORNECK,  Mrs.,  ii.  5,  178-9,  221.
HORNECKS,  the,  i.  221 n.,  344;  ii.  318  «.
HORSEMAN,  — ,  ii.  359,  363.
HORSLEY,  Dr.  (Bishop of Rochester),  ii.

434-

HOTHAM,  Sir Richard,  ii.  154,  178.
HOUSE OF COMMONS,  election of 1768,

i.  132-4,   137  ;   purchase of seats,  ii.

161,  203-4;  reform,  285.
HOWARD,  Charles,  i.  82,  104,  107.
HOWARD,  John,  Lichfield Gaol,  i.  162 n. ;

York Gaol,  225 n. ;  calls on Johnson,

ii.  394.

HOWARD,  Mary,  i.  82 n.
HOWELL,  James,  quoted,  i.  257 n. ;  ii.  37,

52 n.
HUME,  David,  prime minister,  i.  92 n. ;

prices of corn,  193 n. ;  at Northaller-

ton,  225 n. ;  house,   229 n. ;  Scottish

poets,  230 w.;  Strahan an M.P.,  300 n. ;

at Bath,  393 n. ;  letter from A.  Mac-

donald,  418;  China-ware,  ii.  35 n.
Htimm,  ii.  75.

456

Index to

Hunt,  Edward and Joseph Johnson,  Samuel.

HUNT,  Edward and Joseph,  ii.  436.
HUNTER,  Dr.  William,  ii.  261,  339,  436.
HUNTER,  Mrs.,  i.  87,  138 n.
HUTTON,  James,  ii.  175.
HUTTON,  William,  Baskerville's life,  i.

42 n. ;    London pavement,    234 n. ;

coaches,  324 n.;  workhouses,  ii.  21 n.;

silk-mills,  35 n. ;  Journey to London,

430  «-,  433-

HYDE,  Justice,  ii.  170^.
HYDER ALI,  i.  241 n.
HYMERS,  William,  i.  39  ».
HYPOCHONDRIA,  i.  358  «.

I.

ICELAND,  ii.  320 n.
Idea,  i.  297.
IDLENESS,  i.  71.
Idler,  i.  24 n.
Ignoramus,  ii.  387.
ILAM,  ii.  38.
ILLNESS,  i.  141 n.
Ill-wilier,  ii.  182 n.
IMPEY,  Sir Elijah,  ii.  264 n.
IMPROVEMENT,  in the mind,  i.  362-5.
Inappetence,  ii.  327 n.
INCHKEITH,  i.  230.
INCH KENNETH,  i.  279.
INDIA.    See EAST INDIA COMPANY.
Influence,  i.  107 n. ;  ii.  145 n.
INGE,  Mrs.,  ii.  325.
INGE,  William,  ii.  325 n.
Inimical,  ii.  314.
Initiatory,  ii.  403 n.
INVASION,  fears of,  ii.  71 n.,  103,  109,

114,  1 20.

INVERNESS,  i.  241.
IONA  (Icolmkill),  i.  282.
IRELAND,  i.  399 n. ;  ii.  264,  340.
Irene,  i.  4,  n,  19 n.;  ii.  252 n.
ISA,  i.  246 n.,  290.
ISLAND,  a prison,  i.  256.
ISLINGTON,  ii.  88.
ITALY,  i.  145;  ii.  192 n.,  389 n.

J.

JACKSON,  Cyril  (Dean of Christ Church),

i.  408.

JACKSON,  Henry,  i.  376,  378  ;  ii.  20.
JACKSON,  Humphrey,  i.  192 n.,  213.
JACKSON,  Richard, Johnson's letter,  ii.  349.

JACOBITES,  English,  i.  259 n.

JAMAICA,  ii.  113,  125.

JAMES V,  i.  265.

JAMES,  John,  i.  114 n.,  323 n.,  361 n.\
ii.  227 n.

JAMES,  Robert,  M.D.,  Paul's spinning
machine,  i.  6,  7 n->  5 8 n. ;  pills and
powder,  8 n.,  23 n.,  52 n. ;  Johnson's
instructor,  49 n. ;  '  strange fellow,'  58  ;
deep in wine,  210;  anecdotes of him,
211 n. ;  Medical Dictionary,  338 n.

JEBB,  Sir Richard,  M.D.,  ii.  148,  245-6,

255,  315  »•

JENKINSON,  Charles  (first Earl of Liver-
pool), i.  137  ;  ii.  1 8 n.

JENNENS,  Charles,  i.  214.

JENNINGS,  Colonel,  ii.  174  «.

JEWS,  i.  331 n.

JODRELL,  Richard Paul,  ii.    133,    294,

396.

JOHNSON,  D.,  i.  83 n.

JOHNSON,  Elizabeth  (Dr.  Johnson's wife),
Johnson's letter,  i.  3 ;  property,  14 ;
lodgings,  20 n. ;  grave,  61 n. ;  ii.  411,
429;  death,  i.  81  «. ;  ii.  209,  248 n.;
Johnson's regret for her,  i.  369 n.

JOHNSON,  Mr.  G.  H.,  i.  19 n.

JOHNSON,  Michael  (Dr.  Johnson's father),
i.  83  ». ;  ii.  49 n.

JOHNSON,  Nathanael  (Dr.  Johnson's
brother),  i.  83 n. ;  ii.  237 n.

JOHNSON,  Samuel,  absence of mind,  i.
342 n. ;  actors,  i.  44 n. ;  s£gri Ephe-
meris,  ii.  424 n. ;  air,  love of fresh,  ii.
385 n. ;  ancestors,  i.  268 ;  anonymous
publications,  i.  63 n.,  80 n. ;  appear-
ance, i.  295 n. ;  ii.  6 n.,  328 n. ;  appe-
tite, ii.  389 ;  Ashbourne,  visits,  i.  164,
J75>  T95>  34°>  382  ».;  ii.  26,  93,  233,
412  ;  associates of all ranks,  ii.  414 n. ;
attendance required,  i.  142 n. ;  ii.  259
n. ;  attention shown him,  ii.  369 ;
autograph letters,  prices paid for them,
i.  2,  3,  6,  8,  26,  40,  52,  54,  66,
69,  70,  91,  118,  148,  168,  207,  215,
222,  284,  307,  322,  387,  412,  413;
ii.  7,  71,  208,  246,  254,  287,  370,  409,
433 ;  autographic memoranda,  ii.  399
n. ;  ball,  goes to a,  ii.  232;  Baltic
expedition,  ii.  30 ;  Baretti's Journey to
Spain,  i.  165  «. ;  Bath,  visits,  i.  391  ;

Letters of Dr.  Johnson.

457

Johnson,  Samuel.

belabours his confessor,  ii.  314 n. ;
Bible,  reads through the,  ii.  271;  biogra-
phers, i.  410 n.\  ii.  6 n.;  Birmingham,
visits,  i.  125,  164,  202,  225 n.,  328;
ii.  17,  55,  228,  241;  birth,  i.  41 n. ;
birthday,  i.  250 ;  ii.  33,  202,  332,  420
n. ;  bitter speeches,  i.  72 ;  bleeding,
see below,  health ;  books bound by
him,  ii-.  89 n. ;  Boswell attacked by
him,  ii.  65 n. ;  —  security at the
Temple,i.  316  ;  bow to an archbishop,
ii.  150 n. ;  breakfasting in splendour,
ii.  103 n. ;  bred a bookseller,  ii.  89  ;
Brighthelmstone,  visits,  i.  120,  155;
ii.  58,  206,  273;  brothers and sisters,
no,  i-  71,  378;  "•  237 J bust,  ii.  59,
62-3 ;  calculation,  love of,  i.  243 n. ;
ii-  45 >  321  >  Cambridge,  visits,  i.  183
n. ;  ii.  13 n.\  candidate for a master-
ship, i.  1-3  ;  ii.  161 n. ;  carelessness,
i.  204 n. ;  ii.  284 n. ;  character drawn
by himself,  ii.  314;  chemistry,  i.  179,
183;  children,  indulgent to,  ii.  183 n.',
church attendance,  ii.  227 n. ;  clothes,
i.  321,  322  ;  ii.  39,  145 n.,  220;  college
life,  anecdotes of his,  ii.  440;  collo-
quial barbarisms,  ii.  36  ;  composition,
facility of,  ii.  197 n. ;  confesses his
rudeness,  i.  35 1 ;  contraction of names,
i.  276 n. ;  conversation,  hungry for,
ii.  419 n. ;  '  conversion,'  ii.  385 n. ;
Cordelia's death,  i.  1 1 n. ;  corrects
Robertson,  i.  412;  dates to letters,  ii.
139 n. ;  death-bed,  ii.  327 n.,  332 n.,
339 n.,  414 n.,  433 ;  death,  dread of,
ii.  231,  327,  351,  369,  380,  384,  404;
—  mind calmer,  ii.  423 ;  debts,  i.  19,
20,  22-4,  28,  61,  75 n. ;  delicacies
sent him,  ii.  391 ;  dictionary-making,
i.  42 n.,  191 n.,  374 n.  ;  diet,  i.  52  ;
ii.  101 n.,  104,  113,  128,  135,  143,
146-7,  164,  181,  184,  189,  242,  248 n.y
255,  314,  389,  424 n. ;  dinner-table,  ii.
125 n. ;  drawn out,  needs to be,  ii.  392
n. ;  dreams felicities,  ii.  32 n. ;  driving
the world about,  ii.  397 n. ;  Dublin
degree,  i.  123;  etymology,  i.  178 n. ;
eye-sight,  i.  57  ;  first love,  i.  202 n. ;
fox-htmting,  i.  349 n.;  ii.  25,  127 n.\
France,  trip to,  i.  147 n.,  368-9,  378,
401 n.,  402;  ii.  272 n.;  freeman of

Aberdeen,  i.  235  ;  French phrases and
letters,  i.  50 n.,  150,  324,  355  «.;  ii.
179;  friends,  judging them,  i.  218 n. ;
-  of his youth,  i.  41,  369,  376,  388 n. ;
ii.  227 n.\  fruit,  ii.  34,  no,  400 ;  funeral,
"•  433-5  >  '  gang,'  i.  163  ;  garden,  ii.
J93>  3°7>  3io  ;  Garrick's funeral,  ii.
84 n.  ;  genius,  his,  ii.  184;  gloomy
lessons,  i.  339 n.  \  godfather to Lucy
Thrale,  i.  140 n.,  153 ;  '  good and
clubable,'  ii.  148 n. ;  good-breeding,
ii.  136 n. ;  good-humour,  ii.  183 n. ;
Gordon riots not mentioned,  ii.  164
n. ;  great coat,  i.  208 ;  great chair,  ii.
78 ;  green pease,  ii.  400 n. ;  HABITA-
TIONS, Edial Hall,  i.  139 n. ;  Castle
Street,  6;  Strand,  8;  Holborn,  16 ;
Gough Square,  18,  41 n. ;  Staple Inn,
86,  88 n.\  Gray's Inn,  88;  Inner
Temple Lane,  90;  Johnson's Court,
124;  Bolt Court,  390;  Hampton
Court,  i.  389 n. ;  handwriting,  i.  61
n.;  HEALTH,  ill,  (1755),  i.  45  ;  (1768),
140;  (1769),  152  ;  (1770),  158  ;  (1771),
171,  182;  (1773),  205,  208,  219;
(1774),  298;  (1775),  faintness,  322,
35i;  (i776),  4°3;  (m8),  "•  76>  82;
(1779),  101 ;  remission of convulsions,
143  «.;  (1780),  better than for twenty
years past,  162  ;  (1781),  ill,  229,  233  ;
(1782),  279,  281;  (\*i%i},genualabant,
289 ;  paralytic stroke,  300 ;  sarcocele,
3355 gout,  338;  (i 784),  ill,  365;  relief
from dropsy,  384;  129 days confined,
392;  ill,  423,  429;  death,  433;  —  bled,
i.  45,  91,  298;  ii.  1-2,  88,  135,  177,
242,  246,  251  «.,  265,  403 n. ;  —  strong
physic taken,  ii.  22,  76,  89,  93,  101,
1 1 6,  255,  294,  300;  — dread of opiates,
ii-  367>  376>  383 ;  effect of them,  ii.
437 5  —  did not yield to illness,  i.  378 ;
hearth-broom,  ii.  223 n. ;  home,  i.  129,
141 n. ;  hundred pounds made,  ii.  99  ;
ignorance of character,  i.  383 n. ;  —
of natural history,  ii.  325 n. ;  illiberal,
ii.  167 n.\  Impransus,  i.  3  ;  inmates
of his house,  ii.  42 n. ;  their quarrels,
ii.  70,  74-5,  77,  107,  122,  128;  Italian,
studies,  ii.  417;  Italy,  proposed tour,
i-  33°  *•»  379>  384 n->  388;  ii.  192,
199;  Jack the Giant-killer,  i.  135;

Index to

Johnson,  Samuel Johnson,  Sarah.

Johnsonese,  i.  251  «. ;  judge of poetry,
ii.  390 n. ;  kangaroo imitated,  i.  241 n, ;
Latin lessons,  ii.  98 n. ;  '  leans to some-
body,' i.  51  «.,  82;  letter of reproof,
ii.  306 n. ;  letter written for Miss Rey-
nolds, ii.  84 n. ;  letter-writing,  i.  64 ;
ii.  52,  374;  Lichfield,  visits,  (1739),  i.
3»-;  (!767),  128;  (1769),  154;  (1770),
160;  (1771),  173,  183;  (1772),  I91*

201 ;  (1775),  328;  (1776),  380;  (1777),

ii.  17,  48;  (1779),  92;  (1781),  228,
240;  (1784),  421;  —  house,  i.  19  ».,
85,  99,  126,  162  «.;  —theatre,  i.  385
n. ;  life,  unhappy,  i.  250;  —  clings
to it,  ii.  335,  339 n. ;  —  radically
wretched,  ii.  407  ;  light and airy,  ii.
116;  Lives of him to be suppressed,
ii.  6 n. ;  '  Master of the Sentences,'  ii.
224 n. ;  melancholy,  i.  39,  69,  332 n. ;
ii.  309;  memory,  ii.  132 n. ;  mind,
command over his,  i.  190 ;  —  not
travelled over,  ii.  50 n. ;  mother,  love
for his,  i.  20 ;  —  her death,  75-86 ;

—  burns her letters,  ii.  414 n. ;    '  Mr.
Vagabond,'  ii.  7 n. ;  musing,  i.  359 n.,
388 n. ;  ii.  97 n. ;  neighbours,  ii.  295,
309 ;    night-cap,  i.   245 n.  \    nurse,   i.
129  «.,   154 n.;    'Oddity,'  ii.  43 n.;
Odyssey never read through,  ii.  440;
old age vigorous,  i.  305  ;   '  old love/
i.    164;     opiates,    see above,    under
health ;  orange-peel,  i.  49 n. ;  Othello,
\.\\n.\  Oxford degrees,  i.  138  ».,  313 ;
Oxford,  visits,  (1754),  i.   37;   (1755),
38    ».;    (1763),     no;    (1764),    113;
(1766),     127;    (1767),     131;    (1768),

132;  (1769),  152 ;  (1770),  158;  (i775\
3",  323;  (1777),  ii.  15;  0780>  226;
(1782),  257;  (1784),  398-400,  430;
parentheses,  disapproved of,  ii.  419 n. ;
Passion Week,  i.  188  ;  ii.  214 n. ;  pay-
ments as an author,  i.  79 n. ;  pension,
i.  93,  98 ;  ii.  433  ;  physic,  dabbles in,
i-  49  »•>  75>  219 n. ;  ii.  103,  165,  187,
198,  201,  235,  303  ;  piety slumbering,
ii.  102 n. ;  Political Tracts,  i.  390 n.,
392  ;  portrait,  at South wark,  i.  399 n. ;

—  by Reynolds,  ii.  62 n.,  70,  74,  259
n. ;  —  by Miss Reynolds,  ii.  179,  300,
327 ;  —  by Opie,  ii.  330  ;  prayers,  ii.
370  ».,  420 n. ;  prints of his friends,  ii.

70  «.,  1 08  ;  proud to have his com-
pany desired,  i.  316;  Punic War,  i.
343 ;  read hard in his youth,  i.  364 n. ;
—  like a Turk,  375 n. ;  —  in his old
age,  ii.  289 ;  reading books through,
i.  61 n. ;  relations,  i.  225,  302;  ii.
430 ;  religion not to be received from
another,  i.  48,  49  «. ;  resolutions,  i.  47 n.,
250;  Rochester,  visits,  ii.  319;  rumour
of his death,  i.  48 ;  ii.  63 n. ;  schemes
of life,  ii.  300,  361  ;  school-fellows,  i.
180;  Scotch professors afraid of him,
i.  236,  291 n. ;  Scotland,  visits,  i.  222-
96 ;  setting sun,  ii.  294 n. ;  silver
coffee-pot,  ii.  262 ;  sleepless nights,  ii.
391;  solitary,  ii.  281,  289,  295,  297,
300,  309,  326-7,  336-7,  344,  348,  357,
363 n.,  367-8,  377  ;  South wark elec-
tion, ii.  153 n.,  157  «.,  160 ;  style,  i.
251  ».,  258 n.  ;  swimming,  i.  357  ».;
talk,  ii.  157,  400 n. ;  tea-spoons,  i.
156 n. ;  ii.  335 n. ;  Thrales,  friendship
for the,  see under THRALE,  HENRY,
and THRALE,  HESTER LYNCH;  tolera-
tion, against,  i.  319  ;  touchy,  ii.  78 n. ;
town his element,  ii.  428  «. ;  travelling,
love of,  i.  347,  369;  'true-born English-
man,' i.  238 n. ;  tutor at Hey wood,  i.
301 n. ;  urns and monuments,  ii.  33 n. ;
useful knowledge,  ii.  321 n. ;  Vanity
of Human Wishes,  ii.  5 1 n. ;  VERSES,  on
Mrs.  Carter,  i.  55 n. ;  —  Stow Brook,
161 n. ;  —  Taylor's house,  165 n. ;  —
Mrs.  Thrale,  284 ;  ii.  192 n. ;  —  Miss
Thrale,  ii.  46 n. ;  —  Miss Reynolds,
113 n. ;  —  on being paralysed,  301 n. ;

—  translations from the Anthologia,
391 n. ;  walking-stick,  i.  278 n. ;  watch,
i.  401 n. ;    weather,  i.  208;    ii.  233,
373 n;  4T6 n. ;  wife's property,  i.  14  ;

—  death,  ii.  67  ;  will,  ii.  115  «.,  378  ;
Winchester,  visits,  ii.  156;    wine,  use
of,  i.   114 n.,    223 n.,   408;    writing
easily,  i.  230  ;z. ;  youthful years,  i.  129  ;
ii.  185.

JOHNSON,  Sarah  (Dr.  Johnson's mother),
threat of ejectment,  i.  19 n. ;  Johnson's
dread of her death,  i.  20  ;  ii.  209 n ;  —
letters to her,  i.  75,  77-9  ;  —  infancy,
i.  1 54  «. ;  book-trade,  i.  68,  83 n. ;
death,  i.  75-87  ;  birth,  ii.  437.

Letters of Dr.  Johnson.

459

Johnson,  Thomas Jjee,  Arthur.

JOHNSON,  Thomas  (Dr.  Johnson's cousin),

i.  154,  158-9,  302;  ii.  92.
JOHNSON,  Rev.  William Samuel,  LL.D.,

Johnson's letter,  i.  209.
JOHNSON,  Mrs.  (of Torrington),  i.  94.
JOHNSON,  —  (Dr.  Johnson's cousin),  ii.

194,  206.
JOHNSON,  —  (Reynolds's brother-in-law),

i.  94 n.

JOHNSTON,  W.,  i.  79  ».,  80 n.
JONES,  Sir William,  at University College,

i.  113 n.,  118 n. ;  election of 1780,  ii.

155,  164;  Ode,  369 n.
JORTIN,  Rev.  John,  D.D.,  ii.  275.
JOURNALS,  i.  362  ;  ii.  27.
Journey to the Western Islands of Scot-
land^ i.  248 n.,  300;  ii.  207.
JOWETT,  Rev.  Professor,  ii.  257 n.
Junius,  ii.  108 n.
JUVENAL,   quoted,   ii.   no n.,    226   «.,

304  «•

K.

KANGAROO,  i.  241 n.
KEARSLEY,  George,  ii.  226,  254.
KEDDLESTONE,  ii.  35.
KEITH,  Admiral Lord,  ii.  394 n.
KELLY,  Hugh,  ii.  17.
KEMBLE,  John,  ii.  345.
KENNEDY,  Mrs.,  ii.  96.
KENNEDY,  — ,  ii.  234.
KENNICOTT,    Rev.   Benjamin,    D.D.,  ii.

77  «.

KENT,  Edward,  Duke of,  i.  414 n.
KEPPEL,  Mrs.,  ii.  173 n.
KILBY,  — ,  ii.  276 n.
KILMOREY,  Lord,  ii.  351.
KING,  William,  D.C.L.,  i.  265 n.
KING,  Hon.  Mrs.,  i.  289 n.
'  KING'S FRIENDS,'  i.  137 n.

KlNGSBURGH,  i.  265.

KINGSTON,  Duchess of  (Elizabeth Chud-

leigh),  i.  390 n.
KINSDERLEY,  Mrs.,  ii.  340.
KIRWANS,  the Miss,  ii.  173 n.
KNAPTON,  J.  and P.,  i.  25 n.
KNOWLEDGE,  ii.  386.
KNOWLES,  Mrs.,  i.  397 ;  ii.  403 n.
KNOX,  John,  i.  231.

L.

LA BRUYERE,  i.  184.

LABOUR,  ii.  439.

Lacerate,  i.  212 n.

LADE,  Lady,  i.  219  «.,  348 n. ;  ii.  28-9.

LADE,  Sir John,  i.  275 n. ;  ii.  28-9,  34,

38,  191  ^.,321  *.,  372 n.
LADIES'  CHARITY SCHOOL,  i.  156;    ii.

334  »•

Lady,  i.  244 n.

LAMB,  Charles,  Inner Temple Lane,  i.  91
n. ;  Christ's Hospital,  303 n. ;  Isling-
ton, ii.  88 n. ;  '  Omniscient Jackson,'
349 n. ;  the wind,  416 n.

LANDOR,  W7alter Savage,  Needwood
Forest,  i.  165;  contemplate,  ii.  21 n. ;
iinder the circumstances,  37 n.

LANGDON,  — ,  ii.  45.

LANGLEY,  Rev.  W.,  i.  189,  336,  347,
352  ;  ii.  34,  269  ».,  280 n.,  282.

LANGTON,  Bennet,  Captain of Militia,  ii.
71  ».,  164;  children,  i.  393;  ii.  32,
251,  317  ;  domestic economy,!.  393-4;
Drawing-room,  at the,  ii.  6 n. ;  John-
son, attends,  ii.  305  ;  —  confessor,  ii.
314 n.  ;  —  death,  ii.  332 n. ;  —  visits
him,  ii.  315,  317,  319-20, 322  ;  —  Latin
verses,  ii.  391 n. ;  —  funeral,  ii.  434  ;
mentioned,  i.  319 n.,  320,  414;  ii.  2,
146,  156 n.

LANGTON,  old Mr.,  i.  171 n.

LANGTON,  Mrs.,  ii.  40.

LANGTON,  Miss,  Johnson's letter,  i.  171.

LAST,  the,  ii.  48.

LATIN,  study of,  i.  96 7,  108  ;  few read it
with ease,  ii.  440 ;  change in it,  ib. ;
English writers of it,  441.

LAURENCE,  — ,  i.  396.

LAW,  William,  i.  31,  52  ».

LAWRENCE,  Mr.  H.  W.,  i.  91 ».,  316  ».

LAWRENCE,  Miss,  ii.  141.

LAWRENCE,  Thomas,  M.D.,  ancestry,  i.
48 n. ;  dying,  ii.  265  ;  death,  ii.  299,
301  ;  Johnson's instructor,  i.  49 n.  ;
—  physician,  i.  52,  298,  367 ;  ii.  i,  70,
73,  76>  245 w.,  246,  251 w.  5255;  — com-
panion,ii.  135  ».,  295,  309 ;  medical trea-
tises, ii.  304 ;  Thrale's illness,  ii.  159  ;
mentioned,  i.  51,  208,  219,  318;  ii.  22,
67  ».,  102,  134,  137,  1 86,  189.

LAWRENCE,  Sir Thomas,  ii.  132  «.

LEANDER,  ii.  439.

LEE,  Arthur,  i.  397.

460

Index to

Lee,  Nathanael Lyttelton,  William Henry.

LEE,  Nathanael,  i.  207.

LEE,  Robert E.,  i.  397 n.

LEE,  Thomas,  i.  397 n.

LEE,  Alderman William,  i.  397.

LEEK,  ii.  49.

LELAND,  Rev.  Thomas,  D.D.,  Johnson's
letters,  i.  123,  316.

LENNOX,  Charlotte,  i.  26,  55 n. ;  ii.  115.

LENTHALL,  William,  ii.  261 n.

LETTER-WRITING,  ii.  52,  138,  193,  197,
316,  427.

LEVETT,  John,  Johnson's letters,  i.  14,
15,  16,  20 n.,  28;  —  debt,  19.

LEVETT,  Robert,  account of him,  ii.  243-
4  ;  death,  ii.  33 n.,  290,  326  ;  heirs,  ii.
243  ;  Johnson's doctor,  ii.  i ;  —  com-
panion, ii.  295,  309,  357 n.,  368,  414
n. ;  old age,  ii.  187,  193;  prudential
intoxication,  i.  406  «. ;  quarrels,  ii.  70,
75,  77,  107,  122  ;  register of birth,  ii.
39;  mentioned,  i.  276,  284.

LEVY,  — ,  ii.  151.

LEWIS XIV,  i.  270 n.

LEWIS,  Dean John,  ii.  310  «.,  383 n.

LEWIS,  Dr.,  ii.  33,  107.

LEWIS,  Mrs.,  ii.  310,  317 n.,  383,  393.

LEWIS,  W.,  M.B.,  ii.  303 n.

LEWIS,  — ,  ii.  196.

LIBRARIES,  i.  142-7.

LICHFIELD,  Amicable Society,  i.  331,
336 ;  bills,  i.  162 n. ;  Borowcop Hill,
i.  161 ;  cathedral,  i.  301 n. ;  changes,
i.  154,  162  ;  city of philosophers,  ii.
53 n. ;  conversation,  i.  335 ;  curfew,  i.
358 ;  Evelina not heard of,  ii.  234 ;
gaol,  i.  162 n.  ;  Green Hill,  i.  363 ;
Green Hill Bower,  ii.  92;  Jacobite,
i.  259 n. ;  Johnson's house,  i.  19 n. ;
Palace,  i.  100;  races,  ii.  24,  25  ;  rates,
i.  162  ;  Stow Hill,  i.  160,  363 ;  ii.  46 n. ;
Three Crowns,  i.  99.

LIFE,  its tediousness,  i.  271;  consists of
little things,  ii.  19  ;  schemes,  361.

Lilly lolly,  ii.  44.

LISGOW,  Tom,  i.  206.

LITERATURE IN 1773,  i.  210.

LITTLETON,  Sir Edward,  ii.  161.

Lives of the Poets,  undertaken,  ii.  13  ;  ma-
terials, ii.  13,  15,  156;  progress of the
work,  ii.  68,  130,  132,  154, 175, 185-6,
188-9, 19I5 assistance sought,  ii.  188-9  ;

finished,  ii.  207;   copies sold,  ii.  in;

—  given away,  ii.  89,  220,   222,  287  ;

—  sent to the king,  ii.  87 ;  copy and
proof-sheets,  ii.i97 ;  dirty silver scoured,
ii.  46 n. ;  index,  ii.  80-1 ;  Johnson not
editor of the Poets,   ii.   158,  275 n. ;

—  kept in town,  ii.  163;  —  payment,
ii.  99 n.,  208,  275 n. ;   —  writes part
at Lichfield,  ii.  46 n. ;  new edition,  ii.
275;  octa vo edition,  ii.  218;  parodied,

«.  315-

LLEWENEY HALL,  ii.  81  «.

LOCH LOMOND,  i.  286.

LOCH NESS,  i.  241.

LOCKE,  John,  i.  131  ;  ii.  306 n.

LONDON,  extent,  i.  53 n. ;  pavement,  234  ;
London Bridge,  ii.  117  ;  ii.  319  ;z.

London Cuckolds,  i.  185 n.

LONDON SHOPKEEPER,  i.  233.

LONGMAN,  T.  and T.,  i.  25 n.

LORD MAYORS,  ii.  57 n.

LORT,  Rev.  Dr.,  i.  397 n.;  ii.  388 n.

LOUDOUN,  Earl of,  i.  291 ;  Countess,  ib.

Lovelace,  i.  22 n.

LOWE,  Mauritius,  Johnson's letters,  ii.
66,  226,  242,  274,  305  ;  mentioned,  ii.
203,  293,  338,  434.

LOWTH,  Miss,  ii.  327 n.

LOWTH,  Robert,  D.D.,  Bishop of Lon-
don, i.  226 n. ;  ii.  187,  327 n.

LUCAN,  Countess of,  ii.  65, 105,  in,  113,
121,  141,  146,  155,  160.

LUCAN,  first Earl of,  ii.  65, 105, 151, 153,

369.

LUCAS,  Charles,  M.D.,  ii.  10 n.

LUCAS,  Henry,  ii.  9.

Lucid interval,  ii.  377.

LUCY,  Thomas,  i.  24.

LUMLEY,  James,  i.  205 n.

LUNARDI,  ii.  419.

LYE,  Rev.  Edward,  Johnson's letter,  i.
121.

LYSONS,  Samuel,  ii.  403.

LYTTELTON,  George,  first Lord,  Miss
Boothby and Johnson,  i.  46 n. ;  death,
288;  Life,  ii.  188,  196-8,  217 n.

LYTTELTON,  Thomas,  second Lord,  i.
288.

LYTTELTON,  William Henry  (Lord West-
cote),!.  177  ;  ii.  20.  See under WEST-
COTE,  Lord.

Letters of Dr.  Johnson.

461

Macartney,  Earl of. Melmoth,  William.

M.

MACARTNEY,  Earl of,  ii.  143  «.

MACAULAY,  Mrs.,  ii.  397 n.

MACAULAY,  Thomas Babington  (Lord
Macaulay),  Baskerville's editions,  i.  42
n. ;  Coote,  Sir Eyre,  i.  241 n. ;  Fowke
and Warren Hastings,  i.  410 n. ;  Fox's
East India Bill,  ii.  358 n. ;  Great-uncle,
i.  240 n. ;  Johnsonese,  i.  251 n. ;  Pitt's
Ministry,  ii.  370 n.,  375 n. ;  Sir Charles
Grandison,  i.  22 n.

MACBEAN,  Alexander,  wager,  i.  30 ;
starving,  319;  no business,  ii.  f6 ;
index to the Lives,  81 ;  admitted to
the Charter-house,  213;  death,  404.

MACBETH,  i.  239,  241.

MACCULLOCH,  Dr.,  ii.  349 n.

MACDONALD,  Sir Alexander  (first Lord
Macdonald),  i.  238,  244,  252,  264,  285
n.,  290.

MACDONALD,  Sir Archibald,  i.  418.

MACDONALD,  Flora,  i.  265.

MACDONALD of Kingsburgh,  i.  274 n.

MACKENZIE,  Lady Caroline,  i.  59 n.

MACKENZY,  Mrs.,  i.  205 n.

MACKINNON,  Lachlan,  i.  255 n.

MACLEAN,  Sir Allan,  i.  280.

MACLEAN,  Dr.,  i.  275 n.

MACLEAN,  Miss,  i.  260 n.

MACLEOD,  Colonel,  i.  257,  268.

MACLEOD,  Flora,  i.  257.

MACLEOD,  John.    See RAASAY.

MACLEOD,  Lady,  i.  244-6,  267 ;  ii.  235 n.

MACLEOD,  old Laird of,  i.  249,  266.

MACLEOD,  Laird of,  i.  244,  246,  259,
262,  264,  266;  Johnson's letter,  260.

MACLEOD,  Malcolm,  i.  255,  259,  262,
265.

MACLEOD of Macleod,  Miss,  i.  245 n.,
289.

MACMILLAN,  Mr.  Alexander,  ii.  134 n.

MACPHERSON,  James,  Johnson's letter,
i.  307.

MACPHERSON,  Sir John,  ii.  170 n.

MACQUARRY of Ulva,  i.  279.

MACQUEEN,  Rev.  Donald,  i.  269 n.

MACRAES,  The,  i.  249.

MADOX,  — ,  ii.  270.

MAINTENON,  Madame de,  ii.  179.

MAISONFORT,  De la,  Madame,  ii.  1 79 n.

MALMESBURY,  first Earl of,  i.  336 n.

MALONE,  Edmond,  Boswell's security,
i-  3J7>  Johnson's payment for the
Lives,  ii.  208 n. ;  —  roasting apples,  ii.
2 89 72. ;  —  relations,  ii.  430 n. ;  —  funeral,
ii.  434 ;  Piozzi's marriage,  ii.  407 n. ;
Spence's Anecdotes,  ii.  133 n. ;  Supple-
ment to Shakespeare,  ii.  141 n.

MALT,  price of,  i.  194,  291.

MALTSTERS,  i.  174.

MANNING,  Rev.  Owen,  i.  121 n.

MANSFIELD,  first Earl of,  Clarendon
trustee,  i.  313  ;  under all the circum-
stances, ii.  37 n. ;  judge at Foote's
trial,  56 n. ;  Gordon riots,  167-8;
meets Dr.  Brocklesby,  437.

MANUCCI,  Count,  i.  392-3,  395,  398.

Manufactory,  ii.  377 n.

MARCLEW,  — ,  i.  154 n.

MARIE ANTOINETTE,  i.  369.

MARKHAM,  William,  D.D.  (Dean of
Christ Church,  afterwards Bishop of
Chester and Archbishop of York),  i.

313,  323,  377>  409  *•»  4i8 5  ».  150-
MARKLAND,  Jeremiah,  ii.  276.
MARLBOBOUGH,  i.  385.
MARRIAGE,  i.  102,  217.
MARRIED WOMEN'S PROPERTY ACT,

ii.  218 n.

MARSHALL,  William,  i.  165-6 n.
MARSHALSEA,  i.  306.
MARSIGLI,  Dr.,  ii.  94.
MARTIAL,  quoted,  ii.  55 n.
MARY I,  ii.  437.

MARY,  Queen of Scots,  i.  104 n. ;  ii.  408.
MARYLEBONE GARDENS,  ii.  74 n.
MASON,  Rev.  William,  i.  317,  318  «.  ;

ii.  286 n.

Mass-house,  ii.  167 n.
MATHIAS,  — ,  i.  159;  ii.  134.
MATLOCK,  i.  165.
Matter of ,  i.  176 n.

MAWBEY,  Sir Joseph,  i.  137 n.,  333-4.
MAXWELL,  Dr.,  ii.  298.
MAYOR,  Professor John E.  B.,  i.  10  «.
Meagre,  i.  403 n.
Measures not men,  \.\\n.
MEAT,  prices of,  i.  193 n.
Mediterranean,  i.  237 n.
MEI,  Cavalier,  i.  294 n.
MELMOTH,  William,  ii.  148 n.

462

Index to

Mercers,  Company of. Myddelton,  Colonel.

MERCERS,  Company of,  Johnson's letter,

ii.  290.

Merry doings,  ii.  116,  230.
METAPHYSICAL DISTRESSES,  ii.  252 n.
METCALFE,  Philip,  ii.  345,  388,  434.
METEORS,  ii.  334.
METHODISTS,  i.  136 n. ;  ii.  138 n.
MEYER,  Doctor,  i.  319.
MEYNELL,  Miss,  i.  46 n.
M'GHIE,  Dr.  William,  ii.  364 n.
MiCKLE,   William Julius,  i.    214,  422  ;

ii.  400 n.,  434.

MlDDLETON,  Earl of,  i.  236 n.
MIDDLETON,  Lady Diana,  i.  236.
MIDDLETON,    Rev.   Conyers,    D.D.,   ii.

95  »•

MIDDLETON,  — ,  ii.  181.

MILBOURNE,  Luke,  ii.  69.

MILL,  Sir Thomas,  ii.  123  «.

Mill,  ii.  35 n.

MILLAR,  Andrew,  i.  25 n.,  27,  37 n.,  62,

89 ;  ii.  61 n. ;  Johnson's letter,  i.  30.
MILLER,  Lady,  ii.  138 n.
MILLER,  Miss,  i.  133  ».
MILLIKEN,  Mr.  W.  E.,  i.  59 n.
MILTON,  John,  'Me miserable,' i.  185  «.;

early pieces,  ii.  8 n. ;    Life,  68,   1 14  ;

quoted,  Paradise Lost,  i.  279 n. ;  ii.  75,

126,  329  ;  Sonnets,  ii.  233.
MIND,  its management,  i.  105,  112,  189,

293.  294,  375 J  «.  99.  IO2,  X44>  165,

265-6,  317  ;    knowledge of it,  i.  353  ;

history of it,  i.  362 ;    improvement in

it,  i.  362-5  ;  concentrated,  ii.  278.
Mind of  ,  i.  314,  343  ;  ii.  191.
MINISTRY,   Lord North's,  i.  311,   344;

ii.  177,  249;    Coalition,  ii.  358,  370;

Pitt's,  374.

Miscellany Poems,  ii.  224 n.
MODENA,  Duke of,  ii.  339 n.
MOLIERE,  quoted,  ii.  51.
MONBODDO,    Lord   (James Burnet),    i.

233 ;  ii.  149,  396 n.
MONCKTON,    Hon.    Miss    (Countess of

Corke),  ii.  151,  157,  252.
MONEY,  transmission of it,  i.  77 n. ;  tied

up in trade,  218  ;  great effect of it,  272

n. ;  scarce,  ii.  87,  100,  120.
MONTAGU,  Mrs.,  charity,  i.  87 n.,  371

n. ;   ii.  64,  190;   compared with Mrs.

Thrale,   ii.    153;    described by Miss

Burney,  ii.   132 n.  ;    Essay on Shake-
speare, ii.  138;  Johnson's letters,  i.  87-

8»  295»  370-1  ;  »•  63-4>  33°"  J  -
dropped,  i.  372 n. ;  ii.  139 n.,  353 n.;
—  reconciled,  ii.  336,  340  ;  parpluribus,
ii.  149;  print,  ii.  70,  88;  mentioned,
i-  383,  391 5  »•  24>  H0-**  J48  »-,
157  »•>  295.

MONTROSE,  i.  233.

MOORE,  Edward,  ii.  149.

MOORE,  Dr.  Norman,  ii.  159,  229 n.

MOORE,  Thomas,  ii.  252 n.

MORE,  Hannah,  Bas Bleu,  ii.  390 ;  Bas
Bleu Society,  ii.  136 n. ;  best of the
female versifiers,  ii.  328  «. ;  Johnson's
admiration of her,  i.  55 n.  ;  —  drawn
out,  ii.  250 n.;  —  at Mrs.  Garrick's,
ii.  251,  294 n. ;  —  at Oxford,  ii.  257-
260;  Ord,  Mrs.,  ii.  144 n.,  146 n. ;
Vesey,  Mrs.,  ii.  88 n. ;  Wheeler's death,
ii.  327 n. ;  mentioned,  i.  239 n.,  392
n. ;  ii.  396 n.

MORETON,  John,  i.  132 n.

MORGAN,  Rev.  Mr.,  ii.  404 n.

MORICE,  Peter,  ii.  117 n.

MORISON,  Dr.,  i.  94.

MORLANDS,  ii.  49.

Moss-trooper,  i.  248.

MOSTYN,  John Meredith,  ii.  51 n.

MOUNTSTUART,  Lord,  i.  396  ».

MOYSEY,  Abel,  M.D.,  ii.  133,  135.

MUCK,  Isle of,  i.  267.

MUDGE,    John,   i.  93 n. ;    ii.   338,   343,

346.

MUDGE,  Thomas,  i.  93 n.
MUDGE,  William,  i.  93 n.
MUDGE,  Rev.  Zachariah,  i.  93 n.
MULL,  Isle of,  i.  278.
MULSO,  Miss.     See CHAPONE.
Mumrn,  ii.  87,  385.
MURPHY,  Arthur,  Thrale's friend,  i.  12?,

344;    letter to Mrs.  Thrale,  387 n.  ;

Foote's Life,  ii.    55;    visits Johnson,

313 ;  mentioned,  i.  31 3 n.  ;  ii.  77,  396 n.
MURRAY,  John,  ii.  18 n.
MURRAY,  —  (Lord Henderland),  i.  365 n.
MUSGRAVE,  Mr.  (afterwards Sir)  Richard,

i.  399 n.-,  ii.  294,  298,  373.
Music LESSONS,  ii.  148 n.
MUTINY ACT,  i.  194 n.
MYDDELTON,  Colonel,  ii.  33  ».

Letters of Dr.  Johnson.

463

Nairn Oxfprd.

N.

NAIRN,  i.  240.

NATIONAL DEBT,  i.  386 n.

NEAL,  FORDYCE  &  Co.,  i.  192 n.

Neat,  i.  233 n.

NEEDWOOD FOREST,  i.  165.

NELSON,  Admiral,  ii.  in n.

NELSON,  Robert,  ii.  89.

Nervous,  ii.  359.

NESBITT,  Mrs.,  i.  219 n.,  221  ;  ii.  94 n.,

160.

NEWARK,  i.  224.
NEWBERY,  John,  Johnson's letters,  i.  22-

4;  mentioned,  69.
NEWCASTLE,  i.  227,  320 n.
NEWDIGATE,  Sir Roger,  i.  137  ;  ii.  155.
NEWGATE,  ii.  168-9.
NEWTON,  Sir Isaac,  ii.  325 n,
NEWTON,  Rev.  John,  ii.  385 n.
NEWTON,    Thomas,     D.D.,    Bishop of

Bristol,  i.  94 n.,  206 n.  ;  ii.  20 n.
NEWTON,  — ,  i.  84 n. ;  ii.  20.
NICHOLLS,  Frank,  M.D.,  ii.  401.
NICHOLS,  John,  Johnson's letters,  ii.  68,

80,  81,  130-1,  158-9,  180,  195-7,  205,

218,     220,     24I,     273,     275,     28l,     387,

431;  —  Lives,  ii.  132  «.,  138;  —
Rambler in Russian,  ii.  377 n. ;  —
funeral,  ii.  434 ;  Anecdotes,  ii.  274  ;
History of Hinckley,  ii.  281.

NICHOLSON,  Miss,  ii.  405 n.

NICOL,  George,  ii.  434,  438.

NITIKIN,  Basilius,  ii.  377 n.

NOAH'S ARK,  ii.  322.

NOLLEKENS,  Joseph,  ii.  59,  62 n.,  69.

NORRIS,  — ,  ii.  218.

NORTH,  Frederick,  Lord  (second Earl of
Guilford),  Conciliatory Propositions,
i.  311 n.  ;  expenses of war,  386 n. ;
Almanac Bill,  ii.  76 n. ;  Gordon riots,
166 n.,  167.  n.,  170 n. ;  Ireland,  264 n.

NORTH POLE,  i.  210.

NORTHALLERTON,  i.  225.

NORTHCOTE,  James,  Abington,  Mrs.,  i.
316 n.  ;  Cumberland the dramatist,  ii.
ii I n.  ;  Jack the Giant-killer,  i.  135 n. ;
'  Jessamy Bride,'  i.  344 n, ;  Lowe's
picture,  ii.  293 n. ;  Opie,  ii.  330 n.  ;
Reynolds,  introduced to,  i.  93 n.  ;  —
difference with his sister,  ii.  84 n.  ;

Reynolds's,     Miss,     oil paintings,    ii.

327  ».
NORTHUMBERLAND,   first Duke of,    i.

157 n.,  228,  414.
NORTON,  Sir Fletcher  (Baron Grantley\

i.  116 n.

NORTON,  — ,  i.  333,  406.
NUNCOMAR,  1.410 n.  ;  ii.  263 n.,  289 n.

O.

Odyssey,  quoted,  ii.  440.

Officiousness,  ii.  357.

OFFLEY PLACE,  i.  292  «.

OGLE,  Mrs.,  i.  88.

OGLETHORPE,  General,  i.  243 n.,  392.

OLD AGE,  i.  401 n. ;  ii.  212.

OLD BAILEY,  ii.  65.

OMONT,  Mr.  H.,  ii.  410 n.

OPIE,  John,  ii.  330.

OPINIONS,  i.  364.

OPPIAN,  ii.  410.

ORCHARDS,  ii.  20 n.

ORD,  Lord Chief Baron,  i.  229.

ORD,  Mrs.,  ii.  144,  146,  149,  179,  183.

ORKNEY,  Countess of,  ii.  81  «.

ORRERY,  fourth Earl of,  ii.  196 n.

ORRERY,  fifth Earl of,  i.  26  ;  ii.  196.

OSBORN,  Mrs.,  i.  206 n.,  258 n.

OTHO,  i.  361.

O'TooLE,  Arthur,  i.  204.

OTWAY,  —  (a schoolboy  \  i.  214.

OUGHTON,  Sir Adolphus,  i.  229.

OVERSTONE,  Lord,  i.  10 n.

OVID,  quoted  \.Ars Amat.,  ii.  34 n.,  181 ;
Fast.,  i.  162  ;  Her.,  i.  130  ;  ii.  79  ;

,  Meta.  i.  197,  226  ;  ii.  48,  96 n.,  329,
367  ;  Trist.i.  1 30,  the uniformity of the
sun  (?  sea),  ii.  325  ;  compared with
Virgil,  ii.  440.

OWEN,  Henry,  ii.  410 n.

OWEN,  Miss,  ii.  4,  5 n.,  124  ».,  183 n.,
184,  189.

OXFORD,  amusements,  i.  330 ;  Angel
Inn,  ii.  226 ;  Balliol College,  i.  132
n.  ;  Bodleian,  i.  42 n.  ;  ii.  77,  423  ;
caution,  i.  114 n. ;  Christ Church,
i.  418-420;  Clarendon Laboratory,
i.  309  «.;  Clarendon Press,  i.  115 n.,
309 n. ;  ii.  131 «. ;  climate,  ii.  258 n. ;
coaches,  i.  142 n.  ;  coffee-houses,  i.
419;  degrees by diploma,  i.  138 n.,

464

Index to

Oxford Physic.

313 n. ;  election of 1768,  i.  137  ;  —  of
1780,  ii.  155  ;  expenses of an under-
graduate, i.  114,  418;  Gentlemen
Commoners,  i.  418  ;  Jesus College,  ii.
257 n.,  261 n.  ;  Lincoln College,  ii.
1 6 n.  -  Long Vacation,!. 361  ;  ii.  227  ;
mansion of the liberal arts,  ii.  53  ;
morning chapel,  i.  323,  420  ;  New Inn
Hall,  i.  132  ;  Oriel College,  i.  135  ;
Pembroke College,  Johnson's caution-
money,  i.  114 n.  ;  —  studied there,  i.
402  ;  —  and H.  More visit it in 1/82,
ii.  258  ;  —  visits it in 1784,  ii.  400 n. ;
—  portrait,  ii.  259 n.  ;  —  Buttery books,
ii.  438  ;  Queen's College,  i.  114  ».,  323
n. ;  ii.  227 n.,  377 n.  ;  Radcliffe Library,
ii.  77 n.  •  Riding-School,  i.  309  «.,  323,
327>  329>  349>  377 5 scholastic ignorance,
ii.  16  ;  '  thirds]  i.  114;  University Col-
lege, i.  113,  323,  420;  Workhouse,  ii.
21 n.

P.

PAGE,  Francis,  i.  137;  ii.  155 n.

PAGE,  Miss,  i.  95.

PAIN,  i.  141.

PALGRAVE,  — ,  ii.  256 n.

PALLADIO,  Andrew,  ii.  325 n.

PALMERS,  the Miss,  ii.  85  ».

PALMERSTON,  second Viscount,  ii.  313 n.

PANNARTZ,  ii.  438.

PANTHEON,  i.  337 n.

PAOLI,  General Pascal,  Johnson dines
with him,  i.  315,  392  ;  ii.  65,  107,
389 n.  ;  —  loves to dine with him,
ii.  292  ;  —  funeral,  ii.  434 ;  Boswell
lodges at his house,  i.  317.

PARACELSUS,  ii.  53.

PARADISE,  John,  i.  314;  ii.  2,  183,  250,

305,  325-6,  396>  434-
PARADISE,  Mrs.,  i.  314 n.
PARENTS,  i.  217,  336 n.
PARKER,  Rev.  Mr.,  ii.  46 n.
PARKER,  Sackville,  ii.  228,  258.
PARNELL,  Thomas,  i.  248.
Parterre,  ii.  22 n,
PARTICIPLE PRESENT,  i.  384 n.
Passage,  ii.  257.
PATRIOTS,  ii.  363 n.
PATTEN,  Rev.   Dr.   Thomas,   Johnson's

letter,  ii.  224.

PAUL,  Dr.,  i.  6 n.

PAUL,  Lewis,  Johnson's letters,  i.  6,  8,

45,  52,  54,  58-9,  65-7,  69-70  ;  death,

125;  letter to the Duke of Bedford,  41 7.
Pay mistress,  ii.  419.
PAYNE,  Mr.  E.  J.,  i.  n n.
PAYNE,  John,  ii.  363 n.,  364  ».,  411,

421-2,428-9.
PEARCE,  Zachary,  Bishop of Rochester,

i.  34 n.

PEARSON,  George,  i.  85 n.
PEARSON,  Rev.  John B.,  i.  85 n. ;  ii.  86,

382.

Pease,  ii.  181 n.
PELLE,  Mrs.,  ii.  378,  399.
PEMBROKE,  tenth Earl of,  i.  396 n.
PENNICK,  Rev.  Richard,  Johnson's letter,

i-  133.

PEPYS,  Sir Lucas,  ii.  106,  184,  209  «.,
315 n.,  386 n.

PEPYS,  Samuel,  ii.  136 n.;  341 n.

PEPYS,  William Weller,  ii.  136,  157, 183,
306.

PERCY,  Mrs.,  i.  90,  414 n.

PERCY,  Thomas,  D.D.,  Dean of Carlisle,
afterwards Bishop of Dromore,  Johnson's
letters,  i.  89,  91,  156,  414  ;  Reliques,  i.
89 n.  ;  ii.  328 n.  ;  Vicarage,  i.  121 n.  ;
sermon,  157  «.;  Johnson in Sky,  285 n. ;
Chaplain to George III,  414 n.  •  men-
tioned, i.  227  ;  ii.  70 n.,  399 n.

Perequitate,  ii.  178.

PERKINS,  — ,  superintendent of Thrale's
Brewery,  i.  398,  401 n.  ;  ii.  199  ;  aims
at a partnership,  ii.  213-4,  216,  219,
222  ;  Gordon riots,  ii.  171  ».,  178  ;
robbery,  ii.  347  ;  health,  ii.  48 n.,  238,
254 n. ;  Johnson's letter,  ii.  222  ;  men-
tioned, i.  211 n.  ;  ii.  100,  145  ».,  151 n.,

152  ».,   212,  352.

PERKS,  Thomas,  i.  14.
PERO GRULLA,  i.  180 n.
Persius,  quoted,  i.  64 n.  ;  ii.  226 n,
PETRUS DE MAXIMIS,  ii.  438.
PETTICOAT GOVERNMENT,  ii.  141.
PEYTON,  — ,  i.  319,  385.
PHILIPS,  Ambrose,  ii.  180,  325.
PHILLIDOR,  F.  A.  D.,  ii.  80 n.
PHIPPS,    Captain Constantine     (Baron

Mulgrave),  i.  210,  293.
PHYSIC,  profession of,  ii.  2 1 n.

Letters of Dr.  Johnson.

465

Physical Printing House Square.

Physical,  i.  75 n.

Physiognomy,  ii.  343.

PIOZZI,  Gabriele,  death,  ii.  27 n.  ;  gentle-
man by birth,  160  ». ;  Johnson's
mention of him,  238,  240,  251,  368 n.,
406-7  ;  hastens to England,  401 n.,
405 n. ;  charges against him,  408 n.
See also under MRS.  THRALE,  husband.

PIRATES,  case of two,  ii.  173-

PITT,  R.,  i.  403 n.

PITT,  William.    See CHATHAM,  Earl of.

PITT,  William  (the son),  motion for
Reform,  ii.  285 n.  ;  ministry,  370  «.,

374-

PLATO,  i.  374  ;  ii.  88.

PLEASURE,  preconceived,  i.  339.

PLEIADES,  i.  166.

PLUMB,  Fanny,  i.  219 n,

PLUNKETT,  — ,  ii.  122 n.

POCOCK,  Lewis,  i.  307.

POLH ILL,  Nathaniel,  ii.  154.

POLISH OATS,  i.  352,  354.

Political Pamphlets,  ii.  208.

POLWHELE,  Rev.  Richard,  ii.  330 n.

POLYBIUS,  i.  115 n.

POMFRET,  John,  ii.  185 n.

Pompadour,  i.  80.

Pompous,  i.  236 n.

POPE,  Alexander,  coadjutors in his Homer,
ii.  156 ;  Miscellanies,  158 n.,  Life,
196-7  ;  quoted :  Dunciad,  ii.  93 n.  ;
Elegy, &c., ii.  327  ;  Eloisa,&cc.,  i.  281  ;
Epitaphs,  ii.  195 n.  ;  Essay on Man,
ii.  224 n.,  238,  244,  393  ;  Moral Essays,
ii.  303  ;  Odyssey,  ii.  50 n. ;  Rape of the
Lock,  ii.  320 n. ;  Sat.  and Epist.,  i.
248 n.  ;  ii.  51 n.,  157 n.,  178 n.

PORSON,  Richard,  Posterity,  ii.  52 n.  ;
Markland's house,  276 n. ;  Charles
Burney,  396 n.

PORT-WINE,  i.  50 n.

PORTA,  Baptista,  ii.  388 n.

PORTEOUS,  Captain,  i.  25 n.

PORTER,  Captain,  i.  96.

PORTER,  Harry,  i.  15  «.

PORTER,  Lucy,  elder brother's heir,  i.
98  ;  younger brother's death,  ii.  348,
351  ;  Hammond on the Psalms,  i.  357  ;
ii.  225 n.  ;  'hoary virginity,'  i.  129;
house,  i.  85 n.,  96  ».,  99,  358 ;  ill,
i.  328-9,  331  ;  ii.  230,  233  ;  Johnson's

VOL.  II.  H

affection for her,  i.  51 n. ;  —  improved,
i.  176  ;  — mother,  i.  75-87  ;  — presents
to her,  i.  in  ;  ii.  135  ;  — Prologue,
ii.  17  ;  — reception,  i.  154, 173,  180-1,
184,  191,  341,  359  ;  ii.  228,  232  ;
—  letters,  i.  18,  76,  78,  81-7,  90,  92,
96,  98-9,  in,  125,  127,  138,  148,
J58-9,  367 J  "•  59>  62»  83,  86,  129,
134,  308,  348,  381,  395 ;  '  Mrs.'
Porter,  i.  367 n. ;  present from Mrs.
Thrale,  i.  358  ;  temper,  i.  335  ;  men-
tioned, i.  5,  13,  15  ;  ii.  92,  185.

PORTER,  —  (Lucy Porter's second
brother),  i.  139 n.,  159  ;  ii.  134,  348.

PORTER,  Mrs.  (the actress),  i.  44 ;  ii.  344.

PORTEUS,  Beilby  (Bishop of Chester and
of London),  i.  321 n. ;  ii.  234,  250,
278 n.

POST,  general post,  i.  76 n. ;  Aberdeen,
233  ». ;  Sky,  244  ;  Mull,  278  ;  Oxford,
310,  312,  325  ;  Lichfield,  332 n.,  359  ;
Brighton,  ii.  41 n.,  126,  211 n. ;  Bath,
211 ;  postage,  i.  71,  78 n.,  137 n.,
161 n.  ;  franks,  ii.  19,  94 n.,  123 n,,

389-

POST-CHAISE,  i.  328  ;  ii.  100.
POSTERITY,  ii.  51.
POTT,   — ,   a surgeon,    ii.   339,    342~4>

34<5-7-

POWELL,  — ,  ii.  298 n.
PRACTISING and teaching,  ii.  235  «.
PRAYERS,  ii.  290.
Premier,  i.  92 n.
Pretender,  ii.  161 n,
PRETENDER,  the Old,  i.  13 n.
PRETENDER,    the Young,    invasion of

England,   i.   227 n.,  247;    ii.   50 n. ;

joined by Laird of Raasay,  i.   258 ;

wanderings,    i.    255,    265 ;    meanness,

265 n.  ;    designation proper for him,

ii.  161 n.

PRICE,  Rev.  John,  ii.  77  ».
PRIESTLEY,  Dr.  Joseph,  ii.  362 n.
PRIJEAN,  Mrs.,  i.  205 n.
Prime Minister,  i.  92 n.
PRINCE OF WALES  (afterwards George

IV),  his preceptors,  i.  408  ;  ii.  149 n.  ;

Mrs.  Sheridan,  ii.  252  ;  Royal Academy

dinner,  393.
PRINTING,  i.  146.
PRINTING HOUSE SQUARE,  ii.  272 n.

h

466

Index to

Prior,  Sir James Richard I.

PRIOR,  Sir James,  i.  350 n,

PRIOR,    Matthew,    Life,  ii.    130,   132  ;

quoted,  i.  352  ;  ii.  31.
PRISONS,  Lichfield,  i.  162  ». ;  York,  225  ;

Marshalsea,  306 ;  London prisons burnt,

ii.  168-170.
Problematical,  ii.  57.
PROBY,  Dean,  ii.  24.
PROMETHEUS,  i.  201.
PROPHECY by action,  ii.  204.
PROWSE,  Miss  (afterwards Mrs.  Rogers),

Johnson's letters,  ii.  193,  206,  219,  256,

378  ;  her answer,  379 n.
PRUJEAN,  — ,  ii.  83.
PSALMANAZAR,  George,  ii.  433.
PUGET,  — ,  ii.  274 n.
PULSATION,  ii.  369.
PURSE,  — ,  ii.  173  ».
Put by,  i.  149 n.

Q.

QUEENSBERRY,  Dowager Duchess of,  i.
309*-

R.

R — ,  Mr.,  ii.  199.

RAASAY,  Isle of,  i.  244,  254,  257,  263-4.
R A AS AY,  Lady,  i.  257.
RAASAY,   Laird of,  (John Macleod),  i.

256-9,  318.
Rambler,  i.  17  «.,  29  «.,  63 n. ;  ii.  296,

377-

RAMSAY,  Allan,  ii.  65,  106-7,  J46,  J49-
RAMSAY,  John,  of Ochtertyre,  i.  234  «.,

244 n.,  277 n.
RANBY,  John,  i.  4 n.
RANELAGH,  i.  306 n.
RANN,  John,  ii.  63 n.
Rasselas,  i.  79,  87 n. ;  ii.  372 n.,  408 n. ;

in Italian,  i.  294;   French,  i.  324  «.;

Russian,  ii.  377 n.
RAVENSCROFT,  Edward,  i.  185 n.
RAWLINSON,  Dr.,  ii.  274.
READING and writing,  ii.  294 n.
REED,  Isaac,  ii.  363 n.
REES,  Rev.  Abraham,  D.D.,  i.  374 n.
REFORMATION,  i.  74.
REGATTA,  i.  336-9,  343.
Rejuvenescency,  ii.  56.
Relation,  ii.  371  «.
Reliques,  i.  253 n.

REMEMBERED,    pleasure of being,    i.

209.

Reprehensory,  ii.  232.
Resolution,  ii.  99 n.
Resits,  i.  401.
Review,  ii.  236 n.
REVOLUTION CLUB,  i.  229 n.
REYNAULT,  Francis,  i.  191 n.
REYNOLDS,   Frances,    conversatione,   ii.

179;   difference with her brother,   ii.

84 n->  397 ;  Johnson's letters,  i.  93,  no,
389,  391,  407,  411 ;  ii.  84,  100,  107,
179,  221,  223,  249,  337,  346,  366,  395,
397 J  — ,  letter to,  i.  407 n. ;  —  por-
trait, ii.  179,  300,   327;  lodgings,  ii.
85;   'Mrs.'  Reynolds,  i.  411 n. ;  oil-
paintings,  ii.  327 n.;  Paris,  visits,  i.
150  «.;   —  pictures bought there,  ii.
221  ;   portrait of Miss Williams,    ii.
335 n. ;  'Renny,'  ii.  113 n.,  121,  201;
voyage proposed,  i.  now.;  writings,
ii.  180,  223,  249,  395,  398  ;  mentioned,
i.  206;  ii.  62,  251.

REYNOLDS,  Sir Joshua,  Barry's attack,  ii.
293  ;  chariot,  ii.  85 n. ;  Crabbe,  the
poet,  ii.  287 n.,  288  ;  Dyer's portrait,
ii.  108 n. ;  Goldsmith's epitaph,  i.  407  ;
Gordon Riots,  ii.  167  «.,  168 n. ;  house
at Richmond,  i.  400 ;  ii.  201 n.  ;
Johnson's executor,  ii.  407 n.  ;  —
dines with him,  ii.  325-6  ;  —  drawn
out,  ii.  439 ;  —  funeral,  ii.  434-5  ;

—  indebted to him,  i.  76 n. ;  —  let-
ters, ii.   280,  286-7 i  —  Lives of the
Poets,  ii.    189,   287  ;    —  portraits,  ii.
62 n.,    70,    74,    259 n. ;    Lawrence,
Thomas,  ii.  132 n. ;  Literary Club,  ii.
312 n. ;    Lowe's picture,   ii.    293  «. ;
Mason's Epistle,   ii.    286 ;   nieces,    ii.

85 n. ;  portrait of Archbishop of Tuam,
ii.  326 n.  •   Rasselas,  i.  79 n.  ;   Royal
Academy,    ii.    250 n.,   294,   393 n. ;
sister,  difference with his,  ii.  84 n.,  397  ;

—  oil-paintings,  ii.  327 n. ;  Streatham
portraits,  i.  232  «.;  voyage,  i.  no n, ;
mentioned,  i.  94,  122 n.,  206  ;  ii.  i,  4,
65,  66,  inw.,  113,  116,  146,  149,186,

3l8  »•>  335  «•>  369-
Rhenish,  i.  52 n.
RICE,  Mrs.,  i.  219 n.
RICHARD I,  i.  74.

Letters of Dr.  Johnson.

467

Richardson,  Samuel Scotland and the Scotch.

RICHARDSON,  Samuel,  Clarissa,  i.  21 n.,
22 n.,  35,  395 n.  •  Sir Charles Grandi-
son,  i.  22 n.,  34 n.  ;  Dartmouth,  Lord,
ii.  291 n.]  Dublin  '  pirates,'  i.  13  «.;  flat-
tery, love of,  ii.  43 n. ;  *  honest Joseph,'
ii.  75  ;  Johnson's letters,  i.  21,  33-4,
57,  61  ;  —  neighbour,  ii.  295,  309  ;
Mulso,  Miss,  ii.  141  ;  '  winding,'  ii.  43.

RICHES,  effect of,  ii.  394 n.

Rider's British Merlin,  ii.  76.

RITCHIE,  D.,  i.  258 n.

RITTER,  Joseph,  i.  241 n.,  285 n.

RlVAROL,  i.  150  ».

RIVINGTON,   John,   Johnson's letter,   i.

168.

Rizzio,  David,  i.  228.
ROBERT of Doncaster,  i.  224.
ROBERTS,  G.,  i.  145 n.
ROBERTSON,  Rev.  William,  D.D.,  John-
son at Edinburgh,!.  228 ;  —  corrections,

412  ;  downed,  ii.  73 n*
ROBINSON,  Rev.  Hastings,  ii.  18 n.
ROBINSON,  Henry Crabb,  ii.  149 n.
ROBINSON,  Rev.  R.  G.,  ii.  18 n.
ROBSON,  — ,  ii.  217-8.
ROCHEFOUCAULD,  ii.  54,  421.
ROCHESTER,  ii.  319.
ROCKINGHAM,   Marquis of,   ii.    261  «.,

26472.

ROGERS,  Dr.  John,  ii.  353 n.
ROGERS,  Rev.  J.  M.,  ii.  194  «.,  378  «.,

379 n.

ROGERS,  Mrs.    See PROWSE.
ROGERS,  Samuel,  i.  288 n.
Rolliad,  i.  333 n.
ROMAN CATHOLICS,    i.    264,   401 n. ;

ii.  166-8.
ROME,  i.  343  ».
ROMILLY,  Sir Samuel,  i.  226 n.
ROONEY,  John,  i.  123 n.
ROSE,  Dr.,  ii.  325.
ROTHES,   Lady   (B.  Langton's wife),   i.

172  ;  ii.  32 n.,  36 n.,  251.
ROTHES,  Lady  (wife of Sir Lucas Pepys),

ii.  36  «.,25i.
ROUSSEAU,  i.  263 n.
Rout,  ii.  59 n.
Row,  ii.  239.
ROWE,  Nicholas,  quoted,  ii.  32,  136,  139  ;

Life,  132  ».,  140  ;  poems,  158.
ROYAL ACADEMY,  Cadell printer to it,

H

ii.  6 1 n. ;  Johnson at the dinner  (i78o\

146,  150  ;  (1782),  250  ;  (1783),  292-4  ;

(1784),  392-3,  423.
RUDD,  Mrs.,  i.  395,  399 n.
RUFFHEAD,  Owen,  ii.  196.
RUFFLES,  ii.  6 n.
RUGGLE,  George,  ii.  387.
RUSSIA,  ii.  377.
Rustication,  ii.  320.
RYLAND,  John,  Johnson's letters,  i.  56,

412,  413 ;  ii.  7,  411,  419,  421-2,  428  ;

—  funeral,  ii.  434  ;  Ivy Lane Club,  ii.

358,  363-
RYMER,  Thomas,  ii.  69,  248.

SAINT-FOND,  Faujas,  i.  223 n.

SAINT MARTIN,  ii.  192.

SALE,  George,  ii.  149 n,,  432.

SALISBURY,  ii.  328,  342.

SALISBURY,  first Marquis of,  ii.  157  ».

SALTER,  Rev.  Dr.  Samuel,  ii.  364 n.

SALUSBURY,  Rev.  G.  A.,  ii.  27 n.

SALUSBURY,  John,  i.  128  «.

SALUSBURY,  Lady,  ii.  391 n.

SALUSBURY,  Mrs.,  Thrale's letter,  i.  98 n. ;
Johnson's letter,  128;  —  feelings to-
wards her,  196 n. ;  house robbed,  163,
165  ;  loan to Thrale,  192 n.  ;  ill,  149,
172,  180,  195,  199,  200,  203,  211-4,
216-8,  220-1;  epitaph,  323,  327,  328.

SALUSBURY,  Miss  (Mrs.  Thrale),  i.  98 n.

SALUSBURY,  Sir Thomas,  i.  193, 195,  198,
277,  289,  292  ;  ii.  391 n.

Salute,  i.  265 n.

SANDYS,  George,  i.  367.

SASTRES,  Francesco,  ii.  246,  279,  434;
Johnson's letters,  ii.  414,  416, 418,  425,
427.

SAVAGE LIFE,  i.  233,  263.

SAVILE,  Sir George,  ii.  168.

SAXBY,  — ,  ii.  21 n.

SAYER,  — ,  i.  406.

SCARSDALE,  first Baron,  i.  189  ».,  347  ;  ii.

35  *•>  394 n-

SCHOLARS,  dedications to,  ii.  225.

SCHWELLENBERG,  Mrs.,  ii.  5 n.

SCOTLAND AND THE SCOTCH,  abused,  i.
224 n. ;  beggars,  i.  240;  cabbages,  i.
235  ;  expense of travelling,  i.  271  ;  fees,
i.  235;  Gordon riots,  ii.  166,  176;

468

Index to

Scotland and the Scotch Shelburne,  Earl of.

green pease,  ii.  400 n. ;  knives and
forks,  i.  272 n. ;  names of gentlemen,
i.  256;  plaids,  i.  234;  scenery,  i.  250  ;
shoes,  i.  235,  239 ;  trees,  i.  238,  242  ;
turnips,  i.  277;  worse England,  i.  317
n.  HIGHLANDS:  bag-pipes,  i.  270;
boats,  264;  books,  255,  267;  bread,
249,  259,  272  ;  cattle,  275  ;  clans,  order
of,  280;  crops,  274;  custom-houses,
271;  dress,  274;  emigration,  263;
estates,  266  ;  —  rents raised,  247  ;  fu-
nerals, 282 n. ;  houses,  251,  260,  273;
knives,  272;  meals,  271-3;  ministry,
269  ;  roads,  242  ;  sea,  254;  silver,  257  ;
singing-birds,  251  ;  snuff,  249  ;  uniform,
250;  weather,  274,  286;  whisky,  273;
wild looks of natives,  249.

Scots Magazine,  i.  25 n.

SCOTT,  John  (first Earl of Eldon),  Univer-
sity College,  i.  113 n.,  312 n. ;  spelling
of his name,  366 n. ;  Gordon riots,
ii.  169 n. ;  house in Gower Street,

193  »•

SCOTT,  Mrs.,  i.  219 n.

SCOTT,  Sir Walter,  Miss Seward,  i.  10 n. ;
Scotch houses,  260 n.  \  smuggling,  271
n. ;  clans,  280 n. ;  Miss Burney,  ii.

355  «•

SCOTT,  Dr.  William  (Lord Stowell),  Uni-
versity College,  i.  113 n.,  311 n.,  420;
election of 1780,  ii.  155,  164;  Gordon
riots,  169 ;  Johnson's letter,  288 ;  —
executor,  407 n. ;  — funeral,  434 ;  men-
tioned, i.  138 n.,  366.

SCRASE,  — ,  i.  348 n.,  395 ;  ii.  56,  78,  1 1 1,
115,  119,  127,  129,  176, 183,  185, 189,
217-9.

SCRIMSHAW,  Charles,  ii.  430.

Scrupulosity,  ii.  144 n.

Sculptures,  i.  145 n.

SEAFORTH,  last Earl of,  i.  59 n.

SECKER,  Archbishop,  i.  121 n.

Security,  ii.  162 n.

SEDGWICK,  — ,  i.  376.

SEIGNELAI,  Marquis of,  i.  270 n.

SELWIN,  — ,  ii.  106 n,

SELWYN,  George,  i.  313 n. ;  ii.  168 n.

SENECA,  ii.  93 n.

Sensibility,  i.  385 n.

SERVANTS,  i.  391 n.

SETON,  Sir Henry Wilmot,  ii.  84 n.

SETTLEMENT,  law of,  ii.  297.

SEWARD,  Anna,  account of her,  i.  10 n.,
139 n.,  340 n. ;  Johnson and Dodd,  ii.
1 8 n. ;  —  Lives,  46 n. ;  mentioned,
ii.  232,  397 n.

SEWARD,  Sarah,  i.  139 n.

SEWARD,  Rev.  Thomas,  i.  10 n.,  68 n.,
185.

SEWARD,  William,  valetudinarian,  i.  346  ;
ill,  ii.  33 ;  visits Edinburgh,  35 n. ;
Johnson's bow,  150 n. ;  goes abroad,
298  ;  attacks Piozzi,  352 n. ;  Johnson's
funeral,  434;  mentioned,  i.  398;  ii.  94,
133,  137  »•»  426.

SHAFTESBURY,  third Earl of,  i.  6 n.

SHAKESPEARE,  William,  cast of his face,
i.  331 ;  Henry VIII,  ii.  345 n. ;  John-
son's edition  :  subscribers,  i.  64,  68,  73,
117 n.,  123-4 5  —  Proposals,  i.  68 n. ;

—  Garrick's suffrage sought,   i.    117;

—  French translation,  i.  150 n. ;  — ad-
ditions, i.  168-9;  Merchant of Venice,
ii.  346 n.  j his merit,  ii.  440 ;  quoted  :
Cymbeline,  ii.  334 ;  Hamlet,  i.  186,  334,
398 ;  ii.  29,  255  ;  i Henry IV,  ii.  42,
92 n.,  125,  140;  2 Henry IV,  \.  iSon. ;
ii.  41;   3 Henry VI,  i.  177;    Henry
VIII,  i.  271 ;    King John,  i.  353 n. ;

Julius Casar,  ii.  41 ;  Love's Labour s
Lost,  ii.iS ;  Macbeth,  ii.  414 n.;  Measure
for Measure,  ii.  368 n.  •  Merry Wives,
&c.,  ii.  55 ;  Midsummer Nighfs Dream,
ii.  276  ».;  Much Ado,  &c.,  i.  348;
Richard II,  ii.  140 n.,  217 w. ;  Richard
HI,  ii-  353  »•  J Twelfth Night,  ii.  201 ;
Winter's Tale,  ii.  176 n.

SHAKESPEARE,  a racehorse,  i.  341  ;  ii.  43.

SHANVELLE  [?],  Rev.  Mr.,  ii.  434.

SHARP,  Samuel,  ii.  329 n.

SHARP,  — ,  ii.  434.

SHARPE,  Mrs.,  i.  229 n.

SHARPE,  Miss,  ii.  351.

SHAW,  Rev.  William,  i.  412 n.

SHAW,  — ,  i.  397;  ii.  193.

SHEFFIELD,  Lord and Lady,  ii.  210 n.,
252.

SHELBURNF,,  second Earl of,  account of
persecution of Catholic priests,  i.  402
n. ;  prime minister,  ii.  261 n.,  269;
attacks Burke,  263  ;  knew Johnson,  ib. ;
mentioned,  ii.  81 n.,  349 n.

Letters of Dr.  Johnson.

469

Shelburne,  Dowager Countess of. Stonehenge.

SHELBURNE,   Dowager Countess of,  ii.

81 n.
SHELLEY,  Sir John,  Bart.,  ii.  44 n.,  73,

202.

SHELVOCK,  — ,  ii.  432.
SHENSTONE,  William,  i.  89 n. ;  ii.  217  ».,

259 n-

SHERIDAN,  Mrs.,  ii.  252.
SHERIDAN,  Richard Brinsley,  ii.  161 n.,

252 n.

SHEWARD,  Mrs.,  ii.  310,  314.
SHIPLEY,  Jonathan,  D.D.,  Bishop of St.

Asaph,  i.  400;  ii.  146,  149,  157,  250.
SHREWSBURY,  Duchess of,  i.  151 n.
SIBBALD,  Sir Robert,  i.  362 n.
SIBERIAN BARLEY,  i.  352.
SIDDONS,  Mrs.,  ii.  345,  393 n.
SIDNEY,  Sir Philip,  i.  166;  ii.  331.
SIDNEY,  Sabrina,  i.  160 n.
SIMEON,  Sir John,  Bart.,  i.  10 n.
SIMPSON,  Joseph,  i.  29.
SINCLAIR,  Rev.  John,  i.  267 n.

SlXTEEN-STRING JACK,  ii.  63 n.

Skrimage,  ii.  164.

SKY,  Isle of,  i.  244,  253,  274.

SLAINS CASTLE,  i.  236.

SMALLBROKE,  Dr.,  i.  106.

SMELT,  Leonard,  ii.  146 n.,  149.

SMITH,  Adam,  Glasgow and Brentford,

i.  291 n. ;  importation of fruit,  ii.  20 n. ;

life at Kirkaldy,  i.   230 n.\    London

pavement,  i.  234 n,  ;  malt,  i.   174 n. ;

opinions of others,  ii.  369 n. ;  prices of

corn,  i.  193 n. ;  scrupulosity,  ii.  144  ».;

sympathy,  i.  141  «. ;   Wealth of Nations

reviewed,  i.  413 n.

SMITH,  Henry,  ii.  210 n.,  216 n.,  219 n.
SMITH,  John Thomas,  ii.  63 n.,  433.
SMITH,  Lady,  i.  329,  335,  336 n. ;  ii.  93.
SMITH,  Mrs.,  i.  298.
SMITH,  — ,  Johnson's letter,  i.  167.
SMOLLETT,  Commissary,  i.  286,  323.
SMOLLETT,  Tobias,  Baretti's account of

him,    i.    286 n.  ;    Humphry Clinker

quoted,  i.  224 n.,  385 n. ;  Jacobites,  i.

259 n. ;  monument,  i.  286.
SOHO SQUARE,  i.  88.
SOLITUDE,  i.  131,  337.
SOLOMON,  Nathan,  ii.  340 n.
SOROCOLD,  —  ii.  117 n.
Sortes Virgilianae,  ii.  169 n.,  239 n.

SOUTH,  Rev.  Robert,  D.D.,  ii.  183  «.,  428

n.,  439.
SOUTH WARK,  elections,  i.  133-4,   J37 5

ii.    145,    151-4,    160,    203;    Thrale's

house,   i.    195 n.;   —  The Tower,  i.

314  ».;    —  Johnson's places,  i.  398  ;

—  robbery,  ii.  347  ;  Gordon Riots,  ii.
177-8.

SOUTHWELL,  Edmund,  i.  206 n.

SOUTHWELL,  Frances,  i.  205.

SOUTHWELL,  second Lord,  i.  205 n.

SOUTHWELL,  Lucy,  i.  205.

SOUTHWELL,  Mrs.,  i.  316;  ii.  151,  153.

SOUTHWELL,  Viscount,  ii.  202 n.

SOUTHWELL,  Viscountess,  Johnson's let-
ter, ii.  202.

SPAIN,  prejudice against Jews,  i.  317 n.  ;
language,  ii.  37  ;  prisons,  394.

SPALDING SOCIETY,  ii.  275 n.

SPEKE,  Captain,  i.  240 n.

SPENCE,  Rev.  Joseph,  ii.  133,  156.

SPENCER,  Countess,  ii.  65,  in,  369.

SPENCER,  second Earl,  ii.  in n.,  369 n.

Spiritual Quixote,  i.  46 n.

Sporting Magazine,  ii.  30 n.,  400 n.

SPOTTISWOODE,  Andrew,  ii.  259 n.

ST.  ANDREWS,  i.  231.

ST.  CROSS,  i.  122.

ST.  HELENS,  Lord,  i.  46 n.

ST.  JOHN'S GATE,  i.  66.

ST.  MARGARET'S HILL,  ii.  171 n.

STAFFORDSHIRE,  i.  397  ;  ii.  20 n.

STANHOPE,  Philip,  ii.  113 n.

STATIONERS'  COMPANY,  ii.  76 n.

STEELE,  Sir Richard,  i.  154.

STEEVENS,  George,  Chatterton's poems,
i«  398 5 Johnson's carelessness,  i.  204
n.  ;  ii.  284  «.;  —  at Marylebone
Gardens,  ii.  74 n.  ;  —  Lives,  ii.  221;

—  intimate with him,   ii.    242  ;    —
funeral,  ii.  434;  Shakespeare,  i.  117 n.,
168-9,  215 n.  ;  mentioned,  ii.  294,  315.

STEPHEN,  Sir Fitzjames,  i.  410 n.
STERNE,  Lawrence,  Tristram Shandy,  i.

STEVENSON,  —  ,  i.  108.

STEWART  (or Stuart),  Francis,  i.  25,  28.

STOCKDALE,  Rev.  Percival,  i.  42  ».,  191

n.,  374 n.
STOCKS,  ii.  340.
STONEHENGE,  ii.  340.

470

Index to

Stonhewer,  Richard Taylor,  Rev.  John.

STONHEWER,  Richard,  ii.  256 n.

STRACHAN-DAVIDSON,  Mr.  J.  L.,  i.  115 n.

STRAHAN,  Rev.  George,  Abingdon School,
i-  95,  J58;  character,  i.  95,  115 n. ;
difference with his father,  ii.  267,  272,
278,  283  ;  Franklin's advice,  ii.  283 n.\
Johnson's letters,  i.  95,  97,  100,  108,
118;  ii.  267,  272,  283-4,  425 '»  —
funeral,  ii.  434 ;  Macleod's tutor,  i.
262;  University College,  i.  113;  Vicar
of Islington,  ii.  88,  267 n.

STRAHAN,  Mrs.,  i.  31;  ii.  134,  211 n. ;
Johnson's letter,  ii.  433.

STRAHAN,  William,  Cadell's partner,  ii.
61 n.;  corrects Hume and Robertson,
i.  413 n.;  difference with his son,  ii.
267,  272,  278,  283  ;  Franklin's letter,
ii.  283 n.',  Gordon Riots,  ii.  167,  170;
Johnson's letters,  i.  25,  27,  28,  32,
37,  79,  "3,  297,  300,  303,  309-12,
412  ;  ii.  203,  207,  276,  278,  318  ;  King's
Printer,  i.  115 n. ;  ii.  272 n.;  member
of Parliament,  i.  300 ;  franks Johnson's
letters,  ii.  274;  mentioned,  i.  17  «.,
67 n. ;  ii.  116-7,  255.

STREATFIELD,  Miss,  ii.  69 n.,  72.

STREATHAM,  Johnson's home,  i.  129,
141 n. ;  coterie,  166 n.\  library,  232;
blue-room,  257 ;  improvements,  332,
346,  360 ;  described by S.  Burney and
Prior,  350  «.;  picture of it,  396;
island,  ii.  310.

STREATHAM VILLAGE,  spring of water,
i.  178 n. ;  habits of depredation,  ii.
312.

STRICKLAND,  Mrs.,  i.  401.

STRICKLAND,  —  i.  206 n.

STYLE,  new,  i.  6 n.,  76 n.

SULPICIUS SEVERUS,  ii.  192.

SUMNER,  Rev.  Dr.,  i.  394 n.

SURGEONS,  i.  162 n.

Survivance,  i.  216 n.

SUSSEX,  i.  395 n.

SUTILE PICTURES,  i.  397.

SUTTON,  —  i.  331 n.

SUVOROFF,  Prochore,  ii.  377  «.

SWAN,  Dr.,  ii.  130  «.

SWEYNHEYM,  ii.  438.

SWIFT,  Jonathan,  Baucis and Philemon,
ii.  96 n.\  Faulkner,  George,  i.  13 n.,
316 n. ;  flattered,  i.  221 n. ;  giddiness,

ii.  no n.;  Journal to Stella,  i.  151  «.;

Letters,  i.  317 n.\  Life,  ii.  196;    On

the death of Dr.  Swift,  ii.  54  «.,  147,

192,  302,  404 n.,  421 n. ;  Presto,  i.  151  ;

run out,  ii.  229 n.;    Stella,  i.  6 n. ;

ji.  192 n.  ;  Tale of a Tub,  i.  178 n.
SWINFEN,  Mrs.,  i.  54 n.
SWINFEN,  Samuel,  M.D.,  i.  6 n.,  54 n, ;

ii.  73 n.,  207.
SWINTON,  John,  ii.  431.
SYDENHAM,  Thomas,  M.D.,  ii.  131.
SYMPATHY,  i.  141,  170 n. ;  ii.  28,  124,

215,  237.

T.

TACITUS,  quoted,  ii.  297.

TALBOT,  Dr.,  i.  322.

TALISKER,  i.  268.

TALK,  ii.  19.

Tatler,  ii.  352.

Taxation no Tyranny,  i.  308-11,  314,

329-

TAXES,  i.  202 n.

TAYLOR,  John  (the Water Poet),  i.  204 n.

TAYLOR,  Rev.  John,  D.D.,  bleeding,  ii.
1 60,  401-3  ;  Boswell laughs at him,  ii.
31  ;  bull-dog,  i.  340 ;  cattle,  i.  160,
166,  175,  178,  182,  197,  341,  347;  ii.
43,  45,  47,  49 ;  chaise,  i.  180;  Devon-
shire family,  i.  12;  ii.  10;  growing
old,  ii.  95  ;  heir,  i.  379 n. ;  house and
grounds,  i.  165,  179,  346;  ill,  i.  175;
ii.  97,  101,  355,  357,  362  ;  Johnson,
feelings towards,  and Johnson's feelings
towards him,  i.  184,  350,  353,  356-7,
369  ;  ii.  240;  —  letters,  i.  10,  40,  64,
70,  101-7, I09»  1I2,  119, 122, 156, 160,

188-91,    207,    222,   296,  304,  307,  314,

368,  372,  375,  379-8°,  387,  39°,  4°8 ;
ii.  9,  10,  101,  108,  143,  165,  247,  261-
6,  269-71,  277,  280,  282,  285,  301 n.,
322,  33°,  337,  342,  355,  357,  362,  365,
37°,  374,  401-3,  426;  —  paralytic
stroke,  ii.  301  ;  —  resents his advice,
ii.  426 n. ;  —  serious talk with him,  ii.
227 n.\  law-suits,  i.  375,  379,  390,
393,  395,  400,  408;  ii.  158,  160,  163,
190;  milk diet,  ii.  234,  236;  mind
unsettled,  i.  189-90;  Passion Week,
i.  1 88  ;  phraseology,  ii.  160 ;  prefer-

Letters of Dr.  Johnson.

47'

Taylor,  Rev.  John Thrale,  Hester Lynch.

ments,  i.  12  «.,  13  «.,  65  «.,  156,  396;
ii.  108,  158,  238,  261 n.,  262,  397 ;
robbed,  ii.  265  ;  sister,  i.  71  ;  tithes,
i.  166 n.;  variance with Langley,  i.
347;  ii.  34;  venison,  11.32,  34;  water-
fall, i.  198,  342  ;  wife separated from
him,  i.  101-7, 109,  112  ;  will,  i.  166 n.,
379 n.

TAYLOR,  John  (of Birmingham),  i.  124.

Tea-table,  i.  273 n.

TEMPLE,  second Earl,  ii.  370 n.

TEMPLE,  Sir Richard,  ii.  1 88 n.

TEMPLE,  Sir William,  ii.  128,  400 n.

TEMPLE,  Rev.  William Johnson,  ii.  182 n.

TEMPLE,  The,  i.  90  ».,  316  ;  the Reader,
ii.  349.

TERENCE,  quoted,  ii.  i.

THACKERAY,  William Makepeace,  i.
389  «.

THANET,  Earl of,  ii.  402 n.

THEOBALD,  Lewis,  ii.  93,  276 n.

THIRLBY,  Dr.  Styan,  ii.  276.

THOMOND,  Marchioness of,  ii.  85 n.

THOMSON,  James,  quoted,  i.  107 n.;  ii.
142.

THRALE,  Anna Maria,  i.  140 n.

THRALE,  Cecilia,  ii.  51,  291-2,  373.

THRALE,  Frances Anna,  i.  315 n.,  354.

THRALE,  Henrietta Sophia  (Harriet),  ii.
238,  240,  291 n.

THRALE,  Henry,  Abingdon election,  i.
132 n.  ;  ambition,  ii.  72,  127;  Bath
waters,  ii.  140,  146  ;  *  black dog,'  ii.  73,
76,  78-9  ;  brewery,  i.  192,  194,  346 n.  ;
ii.  34,  127;  — difficulties in business,
i.  192  «.,  198-9,  213,  217 n.\  ii.  74;
—  profits,  i.  199,  346  ;  ii.  22,  32 n.,
72  ;  Brighton,  journey to,  ii.  91 n.  ;
character by his wife,  i.  192 n. ;  ii.
95 n.,  199 n. ;  Contractors'  Bill,  ii.  142
n. ;  death,  ii.  209  ;  Derby,  visits,  i.

350,  353,  355  ;  diet>  "•  95  «•»  97  »•»
133,  140  «.,  162,  164,  184,  187,  189,
426 n. ;  election,  dinners,  i.  204 n.,
206 n.,  307  ;  —  address,  ii.  145  ;  gen-
tleman, how far a,  ii.  160 n.  ;  Gor-
don riots,  ii.  170-1,  176;  grief for
his son,  i.  384  ».,  386,  391 ;  ii.  71  ».,
95 n.,  97 n. ;  house in Grosvenor
Square,  ii.  127 n.  ;  illness,  ii.  93-106,
1 08,  132 n.,  143 n.}  159,  164 n.,  183

n.,  198,  200  ;  '  impracticable interest,'
i.  329  ;  improvements at Streatham,  ii.
45>  5J>  78 J Italy,  proposed tour,  i.  387  ;
ii.  192 n. ;  Johnson's clothes,  i.  322  ;  ii.
39  ;  —  company,  i.  347 n. ;  —  invest-
ments, ii.  99 ;  — letters,  i.  153, 167, 169,
183,  275,  283,  284,  306,  308,  403;  ii.  6,
14,  96,  98, 162  ;  —  love for him and his
wife,  i.  142,  294,  388  ;  ii.  47,  54,  100,
209,  211,  213-4;  —  <mY home?  i.  129,
141 n. ;  ii.  40 n. ;  —  '  our'  i.  194  ;  ii.
203>'  —  grief at his death,  ii.  209,
351 ;  —  executor,  ii.  210,  214,  216 n. ;
—  guardian to his children,  ii.  292,
303;  marriage,  i.  98 n. ;  ii.  127 n. ;
Murphy and the Miss Gunnings,  ii.  122
n.;  'My master,'  i.  196 n.;  pillar of
the house,  i.  405;  ii.  119;  sisters,  i.
219 n. ;  sleep,  ii.  97-8,  199;  South-
wark elections,  i.  132,  136-7;  ii.  145,
151-4, 158,  160,  203  ;  '  take him for all
in all,  &c.,'  i.  334  ;  '  takes up his restes?
1.401,  404;  Thraliana,  ii.  27 n. ;  will,
executors and trustees,  ii.  115,  119,
126,  129,  210,  216 n.,  219.

THRALE,  Henry Salusbury,  birth,  i.  128
n. ;  reads Milton,  214;  life put in a
lease,  288 ;  loved by Johnson,  294,
344,  383;  entail,  351;  death,  330 n.,
381 ;  ii.  220 n.

THRALE,  Hester Lynch  (Miss Salusbury,
afterwards Mrs.  Piozzi),  ancestry and
birth,  i.  201 n.,  355 n. ;  Anecdotes,  sum
paid her,  ii.  403 n. ;  aunt,  ii.  38,  47  ;
bad taste,  ii.  200 n. ;  Bath,  visits,  i.  383
n.,  387 n. ;  ii.  132,  404 n. ;  Blackmore's
Life,  ii.  185 n. ;  Boswell's brother,  ii.
182 n. ;  —Journal,  i.  320,  330,  344,
355  ;  brewery on her husband's death,
ii.  23 n.,  126 n.,  210 n.,  213,  216-8,
222 n. ;  British Synonomy,  i.  212  «.,
384  ». ;  ii.  36  ».,  357 n. ;  Chambers,
Sir R.,  ii.  263  ;  children,  born,  i.  140,
153,  183,  315  ;  —  subject to a malady,
i.  349 ;  ii.  74,  356 n. ;  —  treatment of
them,  i.  205 n.,  294 n.,  338 n.,  350 n.,
351,  381 n. ;  — feelings towards them,
i.  353  ».,  384 n.  ;  ii.  291 n. ;  —  attacks
her daughters,  ii.  210  «.,  387 n.,  394
n.,  405 n.,  408 n. ;  —  borrows money
from them,  ii.  391 n.  ;  — separation on

472

Index to

Thrale,  Hester Lynch Thrale,  Hester Maria.

her marriage,  ii.  405  ».,  412 ;  coarseness,
ii.  304 n. ;  compared with Mrs.  Mon-
tagu, ii.  153;  'contour,'  ii.  150 n, ;
courted,  ii.  140 ;  debts,  ii.  391 ;  de-
jection, ii.  394 ;  described,  by Miss
Burney,  ii.  6  «.,  132 n.,  153 n.;  —
by Boswell,  ii.  228 n. ;  describes Miss
Burney,  ii.  133^.,  408 n. ;  'despicable
dread,'  i.  196 n.  ;  ii.  127,  129  ;  dress,
i.  338  «.,  340 n.  ;  election-dinners,  i.
204,  206  ;  election of 1780,  ii.  152-4,
157  «.;  flattery,  i.  200,  220-1,313,329;
ii.  43 n.,  308 ;  Foote,  slanders,  ii.  56
n. ;  forgetfulness,  i.  367;  franked letters,
ii.  94 n. ;  Garrick's club- forfeits,  ii.  415
n. ;  Gordon riots,  ii.  171 n. ;  Hawkes-
worth's play,  i.  412;  husband  (first),
married to her,  i.  98 n.  ;  ii.  127 n. ;
his good character,  ii.  95 n. ;  —  their
happiness,  ii.  210  ;  —  attacked by her,
i.  192  ».,  217 n. ;  ii.  96 n.,  140 n.,
160 n.,  199 n.,  210 n. ;  —  his money
difficulties,  i.  192 n.,  195-9;  "•  J99 n-  >
—  apoplexy,  ii.  94 n. ;  —  death,  ii.
209;  —  money left her,  ii.  210  ».,
221,  229,  231 ;  husband  (second),  first
acquaintance,  ii.  57 ft.  ;  —  'enchanting
society,'  198 n.  ;  —  love for him,  351
n.,  368 n.,  386 n.  ;  —  his complaints,
387 n.;  —  attacks on her about him,
352 n. ;  —  marriage,  ii.  6 n.,  198  «.,
404-9 ;  —  sent for from Milan,  401
n.  ;  —  Circular to the Executors,  and
Johnson's replies,  404-9  ;  —  her two
husbands compared,  406 n.,  407 n. ;  in-
accuracy, ii.  118,  237 n. ;  inattention,
ii.  343-4 ;  jealousy,  i.  344 n.  ;  Jewish
notions,  ii.  57 n. ;  Johnson's advice to
her,  ii.  394,  406 ;  —  affection for her,
"•  3°3>  311,  35°  J  —  >  she attacks him,
ii.  387  ».,  391 n. ;  —  attendance re-
quired, i.  142 n. ;  —  excellence,  i.  196
n. ;  ii.  406 ;  —  expostulates with her,  ii.
292  ».,  405  ;  —  says that she is to be
forgotten or pitied,  412  ;  — ,  her kind-
ness to him,  ii.  212,  236,  238,  244,  249,
307,  407 ;  —  his high opinion of her,
ii.  406 ;  see also under THRALE,  Henry ;
-  letters to her described,  i.  361 ;
pleasure in her letters,  i.  216,  327,  332,
3355  »•  28,  5°>  75>  I235 complains

that they are not dated,  ii.  27 n.,  139,
162 ;  burns them,  i.  355 n. ;  ii.  407
n. ;  —  Lives,  ii.  198 n. ;  —  love of
useful knowledge,  ii.  321 n.\  —  melan-
choly, i.  332 n. ;  —  '  My mistress,'  i.
196  ;  — ,  her neglect of him,  ii.  241,
245,  250,  258,  292,  297,  300,  302-3,

327.  35i,  368,  381  «.,  384>  396  »•»
404 ;  — ,  her  *  unfeeling irony,'  ii.  257  ;

—  Ode and verses,  i.  284  ;   ii.  192 n. ;

—  her present to him,   ii.    392  ;    -
trustee,  i.  355  ;  —  quarrel with Taylor,
ii.  426 n. ;  —  revises her poem,  ii.  403
n. ;  —  she writes him a serious letter,
ii.  380 n.,  384 ;   Journey,  ii.  318 n. ;
Ladies'    Charity School,   i.    156 n.  ;
learning,  i.  130 n.;   ii.  34 n.  ;   Letters
to and from Dr.  J'ohnson,  letters mis-
placed, i.  163  «.,  308 n. ;  ii.  55 n.,  96,
131,    218,    242,   256   ».,    257 n.  •    -
altered or wrong,  i.  240  «.,  288 n.,  336
».,  388 n. ;    ii.  29  «.,   245 n.,  258  «.,
404 n. ;  —  '  studied,'  ii.  147 n.,  175 n.  ;
marriage,  see above under husband  ;
Metcalfe's dislike of her,  ii.   345 n. ;
Musgrave,  Mr.,  i.  399  «. ;  nerves ruined,
ii.  198 n. ;  Nollekens'  studio,  ii.  62 n.  ;
Opera,  at the,  ii.  279  ;  parts with her
money,  ii.    106 n. ;    reconciled easily,
i-  355  >  reduction in her table,  ii.  389 ;
regaled with Greek and Latin,  ii.  201 ;
Regatta,  at the,  i.   336-9,  343;    sea-
bathing, ii.  277 n.  \   suitors,  ii.  69 n. ;
'  sunny little thing,'  ii.  100 ;  Thraliana,
ii.    26 n.  ;     uncle,    see SALUSBURY,
Sir Thomas ;    verses,    ii.    141 ;   Welsh
estates,  i.  290 n. ;  Whitbread's offer of
marriage,  ii.  23  ».;  wig,  ii.  57.

THRALE,  Hester Maria  (afterwards Vis-
countess Keith),  accomplished,  ii.  155,
160 ;  Baretti's pupil,  i.  326,  354,  403
n.;  birthday,  i.  250;  ii.  33,  35,  405
n. ;  cabinet,  i.  196,  287,  294 ;  children,
management of,  ii.  183 ;  dancing,  ii.
47 n.,  48,  127;  described by Miss
Burney,  ii.  5 n.,  154 n.;  —  by Baretti,
ii.  356 n. ;  eyes sore,  ii.  148 n. ;
father,  watches over her,  ii.  191,  200 ;
—  his death,  ii.  213 n.;  gloomy,  i.
339 n. ;  Gordon riots,  ii.  175;  health,
1.385;  ii.  28-9,  258;  Johnson,  held

Letters of Dr.  Johnson.

473

Thrale,  Hester Mariar Voltaire.

by,  ii.  79  ;  —  his affection for her,  ii.
229,  234;  — Latin lessons,  ii.  98 n.,
154,  182,  189;  —  letters,  ii.  72 n.,
1 86  ;  — ,  her letters to him,  i.  356 ;  ii.
78,  118,  129,  136,  191,  193,  230-2,
303,  308,  389,  397  ;  —  her neglect of
him,  ii.  279,  316,  384,  404  ;  —  verses,
ii.  46 n. ;  Marie Antoinette notices her,
i.  369  ;  marriage,  i.  133 n. ;  memoirs,
i.  320;  mother,  conduct towards her,
ii.  394 n. ;  —  marriage,  ii.  405 n. ;
offer of marriage,  ii.  394 n, ;  poultry,
i-  3345  *  Queeney,'  i.  180 n. ;  regatta,  i.
339  ;  watch,  i.  401  ;  womanly,  ii.  59.

THRALE,  Lucy Elizabeth,  i.  140 n.,  153
n.,  196,  290,  294.

THRALE,  Ralph,  i.  294 n.,  319,  328,  344,

348,  351,  353-
THRALE,  Sophia  (afterwards Mrs.Hoare),

i.  183  ».,  365,  393;   ii.  91,  190,  316,

364,   397 ;    Johnson's letter,   ii.    320 ;

proficience in arithmetic,  ii.  321,  361 ;

ill,  ii.  356,  360,  383,  385-6.
THRALE,  Susanna A.,  i.  349,  393;  ii.  78,

91,  190,  232,  280,  298,  303,  320,  348,

364,  397 ;    Johnson's letters,    ii.    316,

323>    331,    351*    385;    —    'always a

Susy,'  i.  354 ;  ii.  44.
THUANUS,  i.  30 n.
THURLOE,  John,  i.  13.
THURLOW,  Lord Chancellor,  i.  390;  ii.

213  ».,  414 n.
THURLOW,  Thomas,  Bishop of Lincoln,

ii.  349 n.

TILNEY,  Lord,  i.  206 n.
TIMMINS,  Mr.  Samuel,  i.  15 n.
Timor some,  ii.  246.
TOLCHER,  Alderman,  i.  93.
TOMKESON,  —  Johnson's letter,  ii.  338.
TONSON,  Jacob  (the younger),  i.  62 n.,

124,  127 n.

TOOKE,  Rev.  William,  ii.  377 n.
TORIES,  i.  u n.
Torpescence,  ii.  441.
Touj ours per drix,  i.  178 n.
TOWN MALLING,  ii.  23 n.
Toys,  i.  294 n.

TRADE,  ii.  126.

Translation,  i.  381 n.

TRAVEL,  Books of,  i.  166,  227.

TRAVELLING,  i.  254,  270.

Traverse,  i.  242 n,

TRINITY COLLEGE,  Cambridge,  i.  323 n.

TRISSINO,  G.  G.,  ii.  240 n.

TRUTH,  i.  365 n.

TUAM,  Archbishop of,  ii.  326.

Tumid,  ii.  372 n.

TURBULENT  *,  Mr.,  ii.  5 n.

TURNPIKE ROADS,  ii.  441.

TURTON,  Dr.,  ii.  191,  193.

TURTON,  Miss,  i.  132,  173  ».;  ii.  20.

Twiss,  Richard,  i.  316,  321,  35 1 n.,  399.

TYBURN,  ii.  63  «.

TYRANNY,  ii.  no.

TYRWHITT,  Thomas,  i.  398,  404.

TYSON,  — ,  ii.  171.

U.

ULINISH,  i.  268.
Under the circumstances,  ii.  36.
Universal History,  ii.  432.
UNIVERSITY,  its advantages,  ii.  440.
URQUHART,  James,  ii.  50 n.
Utensils,  i.  257.

V.

VALETUDINARIANS,  i.  305,  378.

Vanity of Human Wishes,  i.  n  «.

VANSITTART,  Dr.,  i.  289.

Veracious,  ii.  52 n.

VESEY,  Mrs.,  ii.  88,  105,  134,  136,  155  «.,
164,  178.

VEZY,  Miss,  ii.  312.

VICTOR AMADEUS,  i.  146.

VILLETTE,  — ,  ii.  311 n.

Vinteniers,  i.  162 n.

VIRGIL,  quoted:  ALneid,  i.  130,  182,
221,  335;  ii.  27,  41,  289,  345,  373,
408 n.\  Eclogues,  i.  154,  266 n.,  334
n. ;  ii.  41 ;  pieces ascribed to him,  ii.
417  ;  compared with Ovid,  ii.  440.

VOLTAIRE,  Drury Lane Theatre,  i.  5 n. ;
Cardinal Fleury,  12 n. ;  Baskerville's

1  '  The gentleman whom Miss Burney held up to ridicule as Mr.  Turbulent was the
Rev.  Charles de Guiffardiere.'— C.  Knight's Passages of a Working Life,  i.  45  ;  ed.
1864

474

Index to

Voltaire Warton,  Rev.  Thomas.

types,  42 n.;  Candide,  79 n.\  English-
men visiting Italy,  316 n.

Vows,  i.  217.

VYSE,  Rev.  Dr.,  ii.  271,  395  ;  Johnson's
letters,  ii.  14,  207,  213,  430.

VYSE,  Rev.  Mr.  (of Lichfield),  i.  148.

VYSE,  Miss,  i.  148,  334 ;  ii.  93.

W.

W ,  Mr.,  i.  132,  134.

W ,  Mrs.,  ii.  141.

WADE,  General,  i.  242  «.

WADE,  —  ii.  127 n.

WAKEFIELD,  — ,  i.  104.

WALES,  i.  317;  ii.  30.

WALKER,  William,  B.D.,  i.  97 n.

WALL,  John,  M.D.,  i.  172,  179.

WALL,  Martin,  M.D.,  172;  ii.  257 n.

WALL,  Mrs.,  ii.  257 n.

WALLER,  Edmund,  Life,  ii.  68,  372  «.

WALMSLEY,  Gilbert,  i.  1 1 n.,8^n.;  ii-49«.

WALMSLEY,  Mrs.,  ii.  49,  54.

WALNUT-TREES,  i.  131.

WALPOLE,  Horace  (fourth Earl of Or-
ford),  America,  war with,  i.  311 n.,  318
»•>  325  »•,  S^o n. ;  ii.  57  «. ;  Baker
the antiquary,  ii.  13 n.  ;  balloons,  ii.
365 n.,  420 n. ;  Barry,  James,  ii.  293
». ;  Bas Bleu,  ii.  390 n. ;  Bath-Easton,
ii.  138  «.;  Beauclerk and Bolingbroke,
ii.  54 n. ;  Birch,  Dr.,  i.  53 n. ;  Bruce
the traveller,  i.  313 n.  ;  Burney,  Miss,
ii.  354 n. ;  Chandler's Travels,  i.  321
n. ;  Chatterton,  i.  404 n. ;  Colman and
Pennick,  i.  133  ». ;  commercial bank-
ruptcy, i.  192 n. ;  Cornelys,  Madame,
i.  88 n.  ;  coronation,  i.  91 n.;  Dart-
mouth, Lord,  ii.  291 n. ;  debates in
1784,  ii.  375 n. ;  Dettingen,  i.  4 n. ;
dissatisfaction general,  ii.  120 n. ;
Dodd's execution,  ii.  1 1 ;  election of
1768,  i.  132 n.,  137 n.\  England
ruined,  ii.  114  ».,  264 n.  •  Fox and
Pitt,  ii.  358 n.  ;  Garrick and Mrs.
Porter,  ii.  344  ». ;  George III and
Johnson,  ii.  87 n. ;  Gordon riots,  ii.
166-70 nn.,  172-6 nn.,  178 n.  ;  gout,
ii.  108 n.\  Grenada,  ii.  121 n.;  Har-
court,  Earl of,  ii.  37 n. ;  Harley,  Alder-
man, i.  304 n. ;  hay-making,  i.  352 n. ;
Herschel's discoveries,  ii.  386 n. ;  high-

waymen, ii.  312 n.  ;  Howard,  John,  ii.
394 n. ;  Ireland in 1782,  ii.  264 n. ;  in
1783,  ii.  340 n. ;  James's powder,  i.
23 n. ;  Jebb,  Sir R.,  ii.  148 n.  ;  Jones
the orientalist,  ii.  155  «. ;  —  his Ode,
ii.  369 n. ;  Lyttelton,  Lord,  i.  288 n. ;
mail-coaches,  i.  392 n. ;  Mason's
version of Du Fresnoy,  ii.  286  ». ;
nephew's marriage,  ii.  186 n.  ;  Pre-
tender's birthday,  i.  13 n.  ;  prophets,
ii.  145 n. ;  Prussia and Hungary,  i.  12 n. ;
Queen of Denmark's death,  i.  319 n.  ;
Ranelagh,  i.  306 n.  ;  reform of Parlia-
ment, ii.  285 n.  ;  regatta,  i.  336 n.,
339 n.  ;  revolution in the Penetralia,  i.
408 n. ;  Royal Academy,  ii.  150 n.  ;
September weather,  ii.  25 n.  ;  Seward,
Rev.  T.,  i.  10 n.  ;  She Stoops to
Conquer,  i.  214 n. ;  Shelburne,  Lady,
ii.  8 1 n. ;  Siddons,  Mrs.,  ii.  345 n.,  346
#. ;  Southwells,  the,  i.  205  «-  ;  specula-
tion, i.  170 n.  ;  Spence,  Joseph,  ii.  133
n.  ;  spring of 1782,  ii.  251 n.,  256  «.,
260 w. ;  summer of 1772,  i.  192 n.  •  —
of 1783,  ii.  320 n.,  326 n.;  —  of 1784,
ii.  416 n.  •  Whitbread the brewer,  ii.  23
n. ;  Wilson,  Dr.,  ii.  397 n.

WALPOLE,  Sir Robert,  i.  4,  10 n. ;  ii.
186 n.

WALSH,  William,  ii.  178.

WARBURTON,  William,  D.D.,  Bishop of
Gloucester,  Prebendary of Durham,  i.
226 n. ;  Spence 's Anecdotes,  ii.  133 n. ;
'warm language,'  156 n. ;  contempt of
mankind,  397  «.

WARD,  Mr.  T.  Humphry,  ii.  330 n.

WARD,  William,  i.  15.

WARNER,  Dr.,  ii.  169 n.

WARNER,  Rebecca,  i.  409  «.

WARREN,  Thomas,  i.  6,  9,  41-2,  125.

WARREN,  — ,  i.  164.

WARTON,  Rev.  Joseph,  D D.,  Collins's
poems,  ii.  130 ;  Essay on Pope,  i.  62 n.  ;
Johnson's letters,  i.  36,  38,  62,  122  ;  ii.
156  ;  Spence's Anecdotes,  ii.  133 n.  ;
his taste amazement,  ii.  441  ;  Theobald
and Seneca,  ii.  93 n. ;  Winchester
School,  i.  63.

WARTON,  Mrs.,  i.  122.

WARTON,  Rev.  Thomas,  Collins visits
him,  i.  39 n. ;  Johnson's degree,  i.  62

Letters of Dr.  Johnson.

475

Warton,  Rev.  Thomas ,. .  Woodward,  Dr.

«.;  —  letters,  i.  73;  ii.  155;  Mr.
Swinton's sermon,  ii.  432 n.  ;  men-
tioned, i.  38 n  •  ii.  257 n.

Was to see,  i.  353 n. ;  ii.  186.

WASHINGTON,  George,  ii.  57 n.

WATERMEN'S COMPANY,  ii.  319 n.

WATSON,  Richard,  Bishop of Llandaff,  i.
183 n. ;  ii.  313 n.

WATSON,  Professor Robert,  i.  231 n.,  412 ;
ii.  91.

WATTS,  Rev.  Isaac,  D.D.,  ii.  185 n.,  232
«.,  275 n.

WAY,  Mrs.,  ii.  252,  339.

WEBSTER,  — ,  i.  379 n.

WEDDERBURNE,  Alexander  (Lord Lough-
borough and Earl of Rosslyn),  i.  356

»-,  395-

WELCH,  Saunders,  i.  149 n.,  396 ;  ii.
63 n.

WELLINGTON,  Duke of,  i.  241 n.

WELLS,  Mrs.,  i.  301 n.

WELSH GRAMMAR,  i.  145.

WESLEY,  Rev.  John,  causes of scarcity,  i.
201 n.  ;  '  consorted with,'  i.  305  ;  free-
man of Perth,  i.  236 n.  ;  gout,  ii.
logn.  ;  Inverness,  i.  251 n.  •  Johnson's
letter,  i.  372  ;  Marshalsea,  i.  306 n. ;
Newcastle in 1745,  i.  227 n.  ;  Oxford
Methodists,  i.  136  «. ;  sisters,  ii.  57  ».,
392  ;  sound sleeper,  ii.  335 n.

WESLEY,  Kezia,  ii.  57 n.

WESLEY,  Miss,  ii.  57.

WEST,  Gilbert,  ii.  188.

WESTCOTE,  Lord  (William Henry Lyttel-
ton),  i.  177;  ii.  20,  189;  Johnson's
letters,  ii.  187-8.

WESTMINSTER ABBEY,  ii.  163,  434.

WETHERELL,  Rev.  Dr.  Nathan,  i.  113 n.,
H5  »•»  3i3>  323>  338,  349>  420;  ii.
16,  183,  259.

WEYMOUTH,  ii.  318,  325.

WHEELER,  Rev.  Benjamin,  D.D.,  ii.  260,

327,  398-
Whelk,  i.  268 n.
WHIGS,  i.   ii n.,  185  ».,  266;   ii.  87,

400  ».

WHITBREAD,  Samuel,  ii.  23  «.,  72 n.
WHITBY,  Thomas,  i.  301 n.
WHITELAMB,  Mrs.,  ii.  57 n.
WICHER'S ALMSHOUSES,  ii.  371.
WIGAN,  George,  i.  132  «.

WTILBRAHAM,  — ,

WILCOCKS,  John,  i.  403.

WILKES,  John,  opposed by Harley,  i.
304 n. ;  dinner at Dilly's,  397 ;  poll
for Chamberlain,  408 ;  Gordon riots,
ii.  172,  174-5  »  Johnson's letter,  295.

WILKES,  Miss,  ii.  295.

WILKINS,  John,  Bishop of Chester,  ii.
321.

WILKS,  Father,  i.  401,  406;  ii.  39.

WILL-MAKING,  ii.  115.

WILLIAMS,  Anna,  annuity,  i.  371 n.;  ii.
i9°>  336,  34°;  benefit,  i.  53,  55-6,  59
n.,  150 ;  carving,  ii.  125 n. ;  character,
ii.  334,  336 ;  compared with Desmou-
lins,  ii.  42  ;  dying,  ii.  326,  328  ;  death,
ii.  331  ;  ill,  i.  314;  ii.33,  107,  193,  242
n.,  290  ;  Irish cloth,  i.  168  ;  Johnson's
care for her,  i.  37,  349  ;  —  companion,
ii.  295,  309,  344,  348,  357,  368;  —
sends a letter to her,  ii.  318  ;  Mis-
cellanies, i.  87  ;  portrait,  ii.  335 n. ;
quarrels,  ii.  74-5,  77>  1I&>  295>  visited
by Mrs.Thrale,  i.  360;  will,  i.  156 n. ;
ii.  334;  mentioned,  i.  94,  276,  284,
311,394;  ii.  70,  117,  187,  255,332.

WILMOT,  Henry,  i.  421.

WILMOT,  Robert,  i.  421.

WILMOT,  Valentine Henry,  i.  421.

WILSON,  Rev.  Christopher,  i.  40 n.

WILSON,  Rev.  Thomas,  D.D.,  i.  40 n. ;
ii.  158,  163,  397.

WILSON,  Rev.  Thomas  (of Clitheroe),  ii.
224 n.

WILTON,  Miss,  i.  341 n.

WILTON,  — ,  i.  327.

WINDHAM,  Right Hon.  William,  trans-
lates Thuanus,  i.  30 n.  •  at University
College,  113 n, ;  visits Johnson,  ii.
373 n.,  420;  Essex Head Club,  396
n. ;  sees a balloon,  420 n. ;  Johnson's
funeral,  434 ;  —  anecdotes,  439.

WINGS OF IRON,  ii.  372.

WOFFINGTON,  Margaret,  ii.  186 n.

WOLCOT,  Dr.  John,  ii.  330 n.

WOLFE,  General James,  i.  240 n.

WOMEN,  power given them by nature,  i.
104  ;  portrait painting,  ii.  179 n.

WOOD,  Anthony,  ii.  274.

WOODCOCK,  — ,  i.  103-4,  106-7.

WOODWARD,  Dr.,  ii.  138-9.

Index to Letters of Dr.  Johnson.

Woodward,  — Zoffany.

WOODWARD,  — ,  i.  397 n.,  400.

WORDSWORTH,  William,  letter- writing,
i.  65 n. ;  personal talk,  ii.  19 n.

WORKHOUSES,  ii.  21.

WORLD,  the,  not to be despised,  i.  337 ;
not unkind,  ii.  215.

WORTHINGTON,RCV.  Dr.  William,  11.73.

WRAXALL,  Sir Nathaniel W.,  Queen of
Denmark,  i.  319 n. ;  Cursory Remarks,
321;  American war,  390 n. ;  buckles
and ruffles,  ii.  6 n. ;  Johnson described,
136 n.  \  Gordon riots,  174  «;  Om-
niscient Jackson,  349 n.

WRAY,  D.,  i.  365 n.

WRIGHT,  Alderman,  i.  116 n.

WRIGHT,  Dr.,  ii.  434.

WRIGHT,  Mrs.,  ii.  57 n.

WRITING,  unnatural in three ways,  ii.
440.

WTROTTESLEY,  Sir John,  ii.  325  «.
WTYATT,  John,  i.  6 n.
WYNN,  Sir W.  W.,  i.  135.

X.

XENOPHON,  ii.  409.

Y.

YALDEN,  Rev.  Thomas,  ii.  185  «.

YORK,  i.  224.

YORK,  Duke of,  i.  409 n.

YOUNG,  Rev.  Edward,  D.C.L.,  quoted,

i.  173  ;  ii.  44 ;  Life,  ii.  189-90.
YOUNG,  George,  M.D.,  i.  31.
YOUNG,  Professor John,  ii.  315  «.

Z.

ZOFFANY,  i.  261 n.

THE END.

JOHNSON,  SAMUEL

PR

Letters .

3533
,A2

DATE

1892

v-2

ISSUED TO

JOHNSON,  SAMUEL
Letters .

PR
3533
0A2
1892
v.2
